O Faithfull ſeruaunt of mine auncient ſire,
Though vnto thée, ſufficiently be knowne
The whole diſcourſe of my recureleſſe griefe
By ſeing me from Princes royall ſtate
Thus baſely brought into ſo great cōtempt,
As mine own ſonnes repine to heare my plaint,
Now of a Quéene but barely bearing name,
Seyng this towne, ſeing my fleſhe and bloude,
Againſt it ſelfe to leuie threatning armes,
(Whereof to talke my heart it rendes in twaine)
Yet once againe, I muſt to thee recompte
The wailefull thing that is already ſpred,
Bicauſe I know, that pitie will compell
Thy tender hart, more than my naturall childe,
With ruthfull teares to mone my mourning caſe.
My gracious Quéene, as no man might ſurmount
The conſtant faith I beare my ſouraine Lorde,
So doe I thinke, for loue and truſtie zeale,
No Sonne you haue, doth owe you more than I:
For hereunto I am by dutie bounde,
With ſeruice méete no leſſe to honor you,
Than that renoumed Prince your déere father.
And as my duties be moſt infinite,
So infinite, muſt alſo be my loue:
Then if my life or ſpending of my bloude
May be employde to doe your highneſſe good,
Commaunde (O Quéene) commaund this carcaſſe here,
In ſpite of death to ſatiſfie thy will,
So, though I die, yet ſhall my willing ghoſt
Contentedly forſake this withered corps,
For ioy to thinke I neuer ſhewde my ſelfe
Ingratefull once to ſuch a worthy Quéene.
Thou knowſt what care my carefull father tooke,
In wedlockes ſacred ſtate to ſettle me
With Laius, king of this vnhappie Thebs,
That moſt vnhappie now our Citie is:
Thou knowſt, how he, deſirous ſtill to ſearche
The hidden ſecrets of ſupernall powers,
Vnto Diuines did make his ofte recourſe,
Of them to learne when he ſhould haue a ſonne,
That in his Realme might after him ſuccéede:
Of whom receiuing anſwere ſharpe and ſowre,
That his owne ſonne ſhould worke his wailfull ende,
The wretched king (though all in vayne) did ſéeke
For to eſchew that could not be eſchewed:
And ſo, forgetting lawes of natures loue,
No ſooner had this paynfull wombe brought foorth
His eldeſt ſonne to this deſired light,
But ſtraight he chargde a truſtie man of his
To beare the childe into a deſert wood,
And leaue it there, for Tigers to deuoure.
O luckleſſe babe, begot in wofull houre.
His ſeruant thus obedient to his heſt,
Vp by the héeles did hang this faultleſſe Impe,
And percing with a knife his tender féete,
Through both the wounds did drawe the ſlender twigs,
Which being bound about his féeble limmes,
Were ſtrong inough to holde the little ſoule.
Thus did he leaue this infant ſcarcely borne,
That in ſhort time muſt néedes haue loſt his life,
If deſtenie (that for our greater gréefes
Decréede before to kéepe it ſtill aliue)
Had not vnto this childe ſent preſent helpe:
For ſo it chaunſt, a ſhepheard paſſing by,
With pitie moude, did ſtay his giltleſſe death:
He tooke him home, and gaue him to his wife,
With homelie fare to féede and foſter vp:
Now harken how the heauens haue wrought the way
To Laius death, and to mine owne decay.
Experience proues, and daily is it ſéene,
"In vaine (too vaine) man ſtriues againſt the heauens.
Not farre fro thence, the mightie Polibus,
Of Corinth King, did kéepe his princely court,
Vnto whoſe wofull wife (lamenting muche
Shée had no ofſpring by hir noble phéere)
The curteous ſhepherd gaue my little ſonne:
Which gratefull gift, the Quéene did ſo accept,
As nothing ſéemde more precious in hir ſight:
Partly, for that, his faitures were ſo fine,
Partly, for that, he was ſo beautifull,
And partly, for bicauſe his comely grace
Gaue great ſuſpicion of his royall bloude.
The infant grewe, and many yeares was demde
Polibus ſonne, till time, that Oedipus
(For ſo he named was) did vnderſtande
That Polibus was not his ſire in déede,
Whereby forſaking frendes and countrie there,
He did returne to ſeeke his natiue ſtocke:
And being come into Phocides lande,
Toke notice of the curſed oracle,
How firſt he ſhoulde his father doe to death,
And then become his mothers wedded mate.
O fierce aſpect of cruell planets all,
That can decrée ſuch ſeas of heynous faultes.
Then Oedipus, fraight full of chilling feare,
By all meanes ſought t' auoyde this furious fate,
But whiles he wéende to ſhunne the ſhameful déede,
Vnluckly guided by his owne miſhappe,
He fell into the ſnare that moſt he feared:
For loe, in Phocides did Laius lye,
To ende the broyles that ciuill diſcorde then
Had rayſed vp in that vnquiet lande,
By meanes whereof my wofull Oedipus,
Affording ayde vnto the other ſide,
With murdring blade vnwares his father ſlewe.
Thus heauenly doome, thus fate, thus powers diuine,
Thus wicked reade of Prophets tooke effect:
Now onely reſtes to ende the bitter happe
Of me, of me his miſerable mother.
Alas, how colde I féele the quaking bloud
Paſſe too and fro within my trembling breſt?
Oedipus, when this bloudy déede was doone,
Forſt foorth by fatall doome, to Thebes came,
Where as full ſoone with glory he atchieude
The crowne and ſcepter of this noble lande,
By conquering Sphinx that cruell monſter loe,
That earſt deſtroyde this goodly flouring ſoyle:
And thus did I (O hatefull thing to heare)
To my owne ſonne become a wretched wife.
No meruayle, though the golden Sunne withdrew
His glittering beames from ſuche a ſinfull facte.
And ſo by him that from this belly ſprang,
I brought to light (O curſed that I am)
Aſwell two ſonnes, as daughters alſo twaine:
But when this monſtrous mariage was diſcloſde,
So ſore began the rage of boyling wrath
To ſwell within the furious breſt of him,
As he him ſelfe by ſtreſſe of his owne nayles,
Out of his head did teare his griefull eyne,
Vnworthy more to ſée the ſhining light.
How could it be, that knowing he had done
So foule a blot, he would remayne aliue?
So déepely faulteth none, the which vnwares
"Doth fall into the crime he can not ſhunne:
And he (alas) vnto his greater gréefe,
Prolongs the date of his accurſed dayes,
Knowing that life doth more and more increaſe
The cruell plages of his deteſted gilte,
"Where ſtroke of griefly death dothe ſet an ende
"Vnto the pangs of mans increaſing payne.
Of others all, moſte cauſe haue we to mone
Thy wofull ſmarte (O miſerable Quéene)
Such and ſo many are thy gréeuous harmes.
Now to the ende this blinde outrageous ſire.
Should reape no ioye of his vnnaturall fruite,
His wretched ſons, prickt foorth by furious ſpight,
Adiudge their father to perpetuall priſon:
There buried in the depthe of dungeon darke,
(Alas) he leades his diſcontented life,
Accurſing ſtill his ſtony harted ſonnes,
And wiſhing all th'infernall ſprites of hell,
To breathe ſuche poyſned hate into their breſtes,
As eche with other fall to bloudy warres,
And ſo with pricking poynt of piercing blade,
To rippe their bowels out, that eche of them
With others bloud might ſtrayne his giltie hands,
And bothe at once by ſtroke of ſpéedie death
Be foorthwith throwne into the Stigian lake.
The mightie Gods preuent ſo fowle a déede,
They to auoyde the wicked blaſphemies,
And ſinfull prayer of their angrie ſire,
Agréed thus, that of this noble realme,
Vntill the courſe of one ful yere was runne,
Eteocles ſhould ſway the kingly mace,
And Polynice as exul ſhould departe,
Till time expyrde: and then to Polynice
Eteocles ſhould yéelde the ſcepter vp:
Thus yere by yere the one ſuccéeding other,
This royall crowne ſhould vnto bothe remayne.
Oh thunbridled mindes of ambicious men.
Etocles thus plaſt in princely ſeate,
Drunke with the ſugred taſte of kingly raigne,
Not onely ſhut his brother from the crowne,
But alſo from his natiue country ſoyle.
Alas poore Polynice, what might he doe,
Vniuſtly by his brother thus betrayed?
To Argos he, with ſad and heauie cheere
Forthwith conuayde him ſelfe, on whom at length
With fauning face good fortune ſmyled ſo,
As with Adraſtus king of Argiues there,
He founde ſuch fauour and affinitie,
As (to reſtore my ſonne vnto his raigne,)
He hath beſiedge this noble citie Thebes,
And hence procéedes my moſt extreme annoye:
For, of my ſonnes, who euer doe preuaile,
The victorie will turne vnto my griefe:
Alas, I feare (ſuch is the chaunce of warre)
That one, or both ſhall purchaſe death therby.
Wherfore, to ſhunne the worſt that may befall,
Thoughe comfortleſſe, yet as a pitifull mother
Whom nature binds to loue hir louing ſonnes,
And to prouide the beſt for their auaile,
I haue thought good by prayers to entreate
The two brethren (nay rather cruel foes)
A while to ſtaie their fierce and furious fight,
Till I haue tried by meanes for to apeaſe
The ſwelling wrath of their outraging willes,
And ſo with much to doe, at my requeſt
They haue forborne vnto this onely houre.
Small ſpace good wot, to ſtint ſo great a ſtrife.
And euen right now, a truſtie man of mine,
Returned from the campe, enforming me
That Polynice will ſtraight to Thebes come,
Thus of my woe, this is the wailefull ſūme.
And for bycauſe, in vaine and booteleſſe plainte
I haue ſmall néede to ſpend this litle time,
Here will I ceaſe, in wordes more to be wray
The reſtleſſe ſtate of my afflicted minde,
Deſiring thée, thou goe to Eteocles,
Hartly on my behalfe beſeching him,
That out of hand according to his promiſe,
He will vouchſafe to come vnto my courte,
I know he loues thée well, and to thy wordes
I thinke thou knowſt he will giue willing eare.
(O noble Quéene) ſith vnto ſuch affayres
My ſpedie diligence is requiſite,
I will applie effectually to doe
What ſo your highneſſe hath commaunded me.
I will goe in, and pray the Gods therwhile,
With tender pitie to appeaſe my griefe.
"THe ſimple man, whoſe meruaile is ſo great
"At ſtately courts, and princes regall ſeate,
"With gaſing eye but onely doth regarde
"The golden gloſſe that outwardly appeares,
"The crownes bedeckt with pearle and precious ſtones,
"The riche attire imboſt with beaten golde,
"The glittering mace, the pompe of ſwarming traine,
"The mightie halles heapt full of flattering frendes,
"The chambers huge, the goodly gorgeous beddes,
"The gilted roofes embowde with curious worke,
"The faces ſwéete of fine diſdayning dames,
"The vaine ſuppoſe of wanton raigne at luſte:
"But neuer viewes with eye of inward thought,
"The painefull toile, the great and greuous cares,
"The troubles ſtill, the newe increaſing feares,
"That princes nouriſh in their iealous breſtes:
"He wayeth not the charge that Ioue hath laid
"On princes, how for themſelues they raigne not:
"He wéenes, the law muſt ſtoope to princely will,
"But princes frame their noble wills to lawe:
"He knoweth not, that as the boyſtrous winde
"Doth ſhake the toppes of higheſt reared towres,
"So doth the force of frowarde fortune ſtrike
"The wight that higheſt ſits in haughtie ſtate.
Lo Oedipus, that ſometime raigned king
Of Thebane ſoyle, that wonted to ſuppreſſe
The mighteſt Prince, and kepe him vnder checke,
That fearefull was vnto his forraine foes,
Now like a poore afflicted priſoner,
In dungeon darke, ſhut vp from chéerefull light,
In euery part ſo plagued with annoy,
As he abhorrs to leade a longer life,
By meanes wherof, the one againſt the other
His wrathfull ſonnes haue planted all their force,
And Thebes here, this auncient worthy towne,
With threatning ſiege girt in on euerie ſide,
In daunger lyes to be ſubuerted quite,
If helpe of heuenly Ioue vpholde it not,
But as darke night ſuccedes the ſhining day,
So lowring griefe comes after pleaſant ioy.
Well now the charge hir highneſſe did commaund
I muſt fulfill, though haply all in vaine.
O Gentle daughter of King Oedipus,
O ſiſter deare to that vnhappie wight
Whom brothers rage hath reaued of his right,
To whom, thou knowſt, in yong and tender yeares
I was a friend and faithfull gouenour,
Come forth, ſith that hir grace hath graunted leaue,
And let me knowe what cauſe hath moued nowe
So chaſte a maide to ſet hir daintie foote
Ouer the threſholde of hir ſecrete lodge?
Since that the towne is furniſhte euery where
With men of armes and warlike inſtrumentes,
Vnto our eares there cōmes no other noyſe,
But ſounde of trumpe, and neigh of trampling ſtedes,
Which running vp and downe from place to place,
With hideous cries betoken bloude and death:
The blaſing ſunne ne ſhineth halfe ſo brighte,
As it was wont to doe at dawne of day:
The wretched dames throughout the wofull towne,
Together cluſtring to the temples goe,
Beſeching Ioue by way of humble plainte,
With tender ruthe to pitie their diſtreſſe.
The loue I beare to my ſwéete Polynice,
My deare brother, is onely cauſe hereof.
Why daughter, knowſt thou any remedie
How to defend thy fathers citie here
From that outrage and fierce repyning wrathe,
Which he againſt it, iuſtly hath conceiued?
Oh gouernour might this my faultleſſe bloude
Suffiſe to ſtay my brethrens dyre debate,
With glad content I coulde afford my life
Betwixte them both to plant a perfect peace.
But ſince (alas) I cannot as I woulde,
A hote deſire enflames my feruent mind
To haue a ſight of my ſwéete Polynice.
Wherfore (good guide) vouchſafe to guide me vp
Into ſome tower about this hugie court,
From whence I may behold our enemies campe,
Therby at leaſt to féede my hungry eyes
But with the ſight of my beloued brother:
Then if I die, contented ſhall I die.
O princly dame, the tender care thou takſte
Of thy deare brother, deſerueth double praiſe:
Yet crau'ſt thou that, which cannot be obtainde,
By reaſon of the diſtance from the towne
Vnto the plaine, where tharmie lies incampte:
And furthermore, beſemeth not a maide
To ſhew hir ſelfe in ſuch vnſéemly place,
Whereas among ſuch yong and luſtie troupes
Of harebrainde ſouldiers marching to and fro,
Both honeſt name and honour is empairde:
But yet reioyce, ſith this thy great deſire,
Without long let, or yet without thy paine,
At wiſhe and will ſhortly may be fulfillde.
For Polynice forthwith will hither come,
Euen I my ſelfe was lately at the campe,
Commaunded by the Quéene to bid him come,
Who laboureth ſtill to linke in frendly league,
Hir iarring ſonnes (which happe ſo hoped for,
Eftſones I pray the gracious gods to graunt)
And ſure I am, that ere this hour paſſe,
Thou ſhalt him here in perſon ſafely ſée.
O louing frend, doeſt thou then warrant me,
That Polynice will come vnto this court?
Ere thou he ware thou ſhalt him here beholde.
And who (alas) doth warrant his aduenture,
That of Eteocles he take no harme?
For conſtant pledge, he hath his brothers faith,
He hath alſo the truce that yet endures.
I feare alas, alas I greatly feare,
Some truſtleſſe ſnare his cruell brother layes
To trappe him in.
Daughter, god knowes how willing I would be
With ſwéete reliefe to comforte thy diſtreſſe,
But I cannot impart to thée, the good
Which I my ſelfe doe not as yet enioye.
The wailefull cauſe that moues Eteocles
With Polynice to enter ciuil warres
Is ouergreat, and for this onely cauſe
Full many men haue broke the lawes of truth,
And topſie turuie turned many townes,
"To gredie (daughter) too too gredie is
"Deſire to rule and raigne in kingly ſtate.
Ne can he bide, that ſwaiſe a realme alone
To haue another ioynde with him therin:
Yet muſt we hope for helpe of heauenly powers,
Sith they be iuſte, their mercy is at hand,
To helpe the weake when worldly force doth faile.
As both my brethren be, ſo both I beare
As much good will as any ſiſter may,
But yet the wrong that vnto Polynice
This trothleſſe tyrant hath vniuſtlie ſhewd,
Doth lead me more, to wiſhe the proſperous life
Of Polynice, than of that cruell wretch,
Beſides that, Polynice whiles he remainde
In Thebes here, did euer loue me more,
Than did Eteocles, whoſe ſwelling hate
Is towards me increaſed more and more:
Wherof I partely may aſſure my ſelfe,
Conſidering he diſdaynes to viſite me,
Yea, happly he intends to reaue my life,
And hauing power he will not ſticke to doe it.
This therefore makes me earneſtly deſire
Oft tymes to ſee him: yet euer as I thinke
For to diſcharge the duetie of a ſiſter,
The feare I haue of hurt, doth chaunge as faſt
My doubtfull loue into diſdainefull ſpight.
Yet daughter, muſt ye truſt in mightie Ioue,
His will is not, that for thoffence of one
So many ſuffer vndeſerued ſmarte:
I meane of thée, I meane of Polynice,
Of Iocaſta thy wofull aged mother,
And of Iſmena thy beloued ſiſter,
Who though for this ſhe doth not outwardly
For drearie eyen diſtill lamenting teares,
Yet do I thinke, no leſſe aflicting griefe
Doth inwardly torment hir tender breſt.
Beſides all this, a certaine ielouſie,
Lately conceyude (I know not whence it ſprings)
Of Creon, my mothers brother, appaules me much,
Him doubt I more than any danger elſe.
Deare daughter, leaue this fooliſhe ielouſie,
And ſéeing that thou ſhalt héere ſhortly finde
Thy brother Polynice, go in agayne.
O ioyfull would it be to me therwhile,
To vnderſtande the order of the hoſte,
Whether it be ſuch as haue ſufficient power
To ouerthrowe this mightie towne of Thebes.
What place ſupplies my brother Polynice?
Where founde ye him? what anſwere did he giue?
And though ſo great a care perteineth not
Vnto a mayde of my vnſkill yeres,
Yet, forbicauſe my ſelfe partaker am
Of good and euill with this my countrey ſoyle,
I long to heare thée tell thoſe fearefull newes,
Which otherwiſe I cannot vnderſtand.
So noble a deſire (O worthy dame)
I much commende: and briefly as I can,
Will ſatiſfie thy hungry minde herein.
The power of men that Polynice hath brought,
(Wherof he, (being Adraſtus ſonne in lawe)
Takes chiefeſt charge) is euen the floure of Grece,
Whoſe hugie traine ſo mightie ſéemes to be,
As I ſée not, how this our drouping towne
Is able to withſtand ſo ſtrong a ſiege.
Entring the fielde their armie did I finde
So orderly in forme of battaile ſet,
As though they would forthwith haue giuen the charge:
In battailes ſeauen the hoſt deuided is,
To eche of which, by order of the king,
A valiant knight for captaine is aſſignde:
And as you know this citie hath ſeuen gates,
So euerie captaine hath his gate preſcribde,
With fierce aſſault to make his entrie at.
And further, paſſing through our frouning foes
(That gaue me countnaunce of a meſſanger)
Harde by the King I ſpied Polynice,
In golden gliſtring armes moſt richely cladde,
Whoſe perſon many a ſtately prince enpalde,
And many a comely crowned head encloſde:
At ſight of me his colour ſtraight he chaungde,
And like a louing childe, in claſped armes
He caught me vp, and frendly kiſt my cheke,
Then hearing what his mother did demaunde
With glad conſent according to hir heſt
Gaue me his hand, to come vnto the court,
Of mutuall truce deſirous ſo he ſéemde,
He aſkt me of Antygone and Iſmena,
But chiefelie vnto thée aboue the reſt
He gaue me charge moſt heartly to commend him.
The gods giue grace he may at length poſſeſſe
His kingly right, and I his wiſhed ſight.
Daughter no more, t'is time ye nowe returne:
It ſtandes not with the honor of your ſtate
Thus to be ſeene ſuſpiciouſly abrode:
"For vulgar tongues are armed euermore
"With ſlaunderous brute to bleamiſhe the renoume
"Of vertues dames, which though at firſt it ſpring
"Of ſlender cauſe, yet doth it ſwell ſo faſt,
"As in ſhort ſpace it filleth euerie eare
"With ſwifte reporte of vndeſerued blame:
"You cannot be to curious of your name:
"Fond ſhewe of euill (though ſtill the minde be chaſt)
"Decayes the credite oft, that Ladies had,
"Sometimes the place preſumes a wanton mynde:
"Repayre ſometymes of ſome, doth hurt their honor:
"Sometimes the light and gariſhe proude attire
"Perſuades a yelding bent of pleaſing youthes.
The voyce that goeth of your vnſpotted fame,
Is like a tender floure, that with the blaſt
Of euerie litle winde doth fade away.
Goe in déere childe, this way will I goe ſée
If I can méete thy brother Polynice.
IF gréedie luſt of mans ambitious eye
(That thriſteth ſo for ſwaye of earthly things)
Would eke foreſee, what miſchefes growe therby,
What carefull toyle to quiet ſtate it brings,
What endleſſe griefe from ſuch a fountaine ſprings:
Then ſhould he ſwimme in ſeas of ſwéete delight,
That nowe complaines of fortunes cruell ſpight.
For then he would ſo ſafely ſhielde himſelfe
With ſacred rules of wiſdomes ſage aduiſe,
As no alluring trayne of truſtles pelfe,
To fonde affectes his fancie ſhould entiſe,
Then warie héede would quickly make him wiſe:
Where contrary (ſuch is our ſkilleſſe kind)
We moſt doe ſéeke, that moſt may hurt the minde.
Amid the troupe of theſe vnſtable toyes,
Some fancies loe to beautie muſt be bent,
Some hunt for wealth, and ſome ſet all their ioyes,
In regall power of princely gouernement,
Yet none of theſe from care are cleane exempt:
For either they be got with grieuous toyle,
Or in the end forgone with ſhamefull foyle.
This flitting world doth firmely nought retaine,
Wherin a man may boldly reſt his truſt,
Such fickle chaunce in fortune doth remaine,
As when ſhe luſt, ſhe threatneth whom ſhe luſt,
From high renoume to throwe him in the duſt:
Thus may we ſée that eche triumphing ioye
By fortunes froune is turned to annoye.
Thoſe elder heades may well be thought to erre,
The which for eaſie life and quiet dayes,
The vulgar ſorte would ſéeme for to preferre,
If glorious Phoebe with-holde his gliſtring rayes,
From ſuch a péere as crowne and ſcepter ſwayes,
No meruaile though he hide his heauenly face,
From vs that come of leſſe renoumed race.
Selde ſhall you ſée the ruine of a Prince,
But that the people eke like brunt doe beare,
And olde recordes of auncient time long ſince,
From age to age, yea almoſt euerie where,
With proofe herof hath glutted euery eare:
Thus by the follies of the princes hart,
The bounden ſubiect ſtill receiueth ſmart.
Loe, how vnbrideled luſt of priuat raigne,
Hath pricked both the brethren vnto warre:
Yet Polynice, with ſigne of leſſe diſdaine,
Againſt this lande hath brought from countries farre,
A forraine power, to end this cruell iarre,
Forgetting quite the dutie, loue, and zeale,
He ought to beare vnto this common weale.
But whoſoeuer gets the victorie,
We wretched dames, and thou O noble towne,
Shall féele therof the wofull miſerie,
Thy gorgeous pompe, thy glorious high renoume,
Thy ſtately towers, and all ſhal fall a downe,
Sith raging Mars will eache of them aſſiſt
In others breſt to bathe his bloudie fiſt.
But thou O ſonne of Semel, and of Ioue,
(That tamde the proude attempt of giaunts ſtrong)
Doe thou defende, euen of thy tender loue,
Thy humble thralls from this afflicting wrong,
Whom waſt of warre hath now tormented long:
So ſhall we neuer faile ne day ne night
With reuerence due thy prayſes to reſight.
LOe here mine owne citie and natiue ſoyle,
Loe here the neſt I ought to neſtle in,
Yet being thus entrencht with mine owne towres,
And that, from him the ſafeconduct is giuen
Which doth enioye as much as mine ſhould be,
My féete can treade no ſtep without ſuſpect:
For where my brother bides, euen there behoues
More warie ſcout than in an enmies campe.
Yet while I may wthin this right hand holde
This bronde, this blade, (vnyeldē euer yet)
My life ſhall not be lefte without reuenge.
But here beholde the holy ſancturie,
Of Baccus eke the worthie Image, loe
The aultars where the ſacred flames haue ſhone,
And where of yore theſe giltleſſe hands of mine
Full oft haue offered to our mightie gods:
I ſée alſo a worthie companie
Of Thebane dames, reſembling vnto me
The traine of Iocaſta my deare mother:
Beholde them clad in clothes of grieſly blacke,
That helliſhe hewe that nay for other harmes
So well beſemed wretched wightes to weare:
For why, ere long their ſelues, themſelues ſhall ſée
(Gramercy to their princes tyrannie)
Some ſpoyled of their ſwéete and ſucking babes,
Some leſe their huſband, other ſome their ſire,
And ſome their friends that were to them full dere.
But now tis time to lay the ſworde aſide.
And eke of them to knowe where is the Quéene:
O woorthie dames, heauie, vnhappie ye,
Where reſteth now the reſtleſſe quéene of Thebes?
O woorthie impe ſprong out of worthie race,
Renoumed Prince, whom wée haue lookt for long,
And nowe in happie houre arte come to vs,
Some quiet bring to this vnquiet realme.
O quéene, O quéene, come foorth and ſée thy ſonne,
The gentle frute of all thy ioyfull ſéede.
My faithfull frends, my deare beloued maydes,
I come at call, and at your wordes I moue
My féebled féete with age and agonie:
Where is my ſonne? O tell me where is he,
For whome I ſighed haue ſo often ſyth,
For whom I ſpende both nightes and dayes in teares?
Here noble mother, here, not as the king,
Nor as a Citizen of ſtately Thebes,
But as a ſtraunger nowe, I thanke my brother.
O ſonne, O ſwéete and my deſyred ſonne,
Theſe eyes they ſée, theſe handes of myne thée touche,
Yet ſcarſly can this mynde beléeue the ſame,
And ſcarſly can this bruſed breaſt ſuſteyne
The ſodeyne ioye that is incloſde therein:
O gladſome glaſſe, wherein I ſée my ſelfe.
So graunt the Gods, for our common good,
You frendly may your ſonnes both frendes beholde.
At thy departe, O louely chylde, thou lefte
My houſe in teares, and mée thy wretched dame,
Myrrour of martirdome, waymenting ſtill
Th'vnworthie exile thy brother to thée gaue:
Ne was there euer ſonne or friende farre off,
Of his deare frendes or mother ſo deſyred,
As thy returne, in all the towne of Thebes.
And of my ſelfe more than the reſt to ſpeake,
I haue as thou mayſte ſée, cleane caſt aſyde
My princely roabes, and thus in wofull wéede,
Bewrapped haue theſe luſtleſſe limmes of myne:
Naught elſe but teares haue trickled from myne eyes,
And eke thy wretched blynde and aged ſyre,
Since firſt he hearde what warre twéene you there was,
As one that did his bitter curſſe repent,
Or that he prayed to Ioue for your decaye,
With ſtretching ſtring, or elſe with bloudie knyfe
Hath ſought full ofte to ende his loathed lyfe.
Thou this meane whyle my ſonne, haſt lingred long
In farre and forreyn coaſtes, and wedded eke,
By whome thou mayſte, (when heauens appoyntes it ſo)
Straunge iſſue haue by one a ſtranger borne,
Whiche greeues me ſore, and much the more deare chylde,
Bicauſe I was not preſent at the ſame,
There to performe thy louing mothers due.
But for I fynde thy noble matche ſo méete,
And woorthie bothe for thy degrée and byrthe,
I ſéeke to comforte thée by myne aduiſe,
That thou returne this citie to inhabite,
Whiche beſt of all may ſéeme to be the bowre,
Bothe for thy ſelfe and for thy noble ſpouſe.
Forget thou then thy brothers iniuries,
And knowe deare chylde, the harme of all miſſehap
That happes twixt you, muſt happe likewiſe to mée:
Ne can the cruell ſworde ſo ſlightly touche
Your tender fleſhe, but that the ſelfe ſame wounde
Shall déepely bruſe this aged breſt of myne.
"There is no loue may be comparde to that,
"The tender mother beares vnto hir chyld:
"For euen ſomuche the more it dothe encreaſe,
"As their griefe growes, or contentations ceaſe.
I knowe not mother, if I prayſe deſerue,
(That you to pleaſe, whome I ought not diſpleaſe)
Haue traynde my ſelfe among my truſtleſſe foes:
But Nature drawes (whether he will or nill)
Eche man to loue his natiue countrey ſoyle:
And who ſhoulde ſay, that otherwiſe it were,
His toung ſhould neuer with his hearte agrée.
This hath me drawne beſyde my bounden due,
To ſet full light this luckleſſe lyfe of myne:
For of my brother, what may I elſe hope,
But traynes of treaſon, force and falſhoode bothe?
Yet neyther perill preſent, nor to come,
Can holde me from my due obedience:
I graunte I can not griefleſſe, wel beholde
My fathers pallace, the holie aultars,
Ne louely lodge wherin I foſtred was:
From whence driuen out, and chaſte vnworthily,
I haue to long aboade in forreyn coaſtes:
And as the growing gréene and pleaſant plante,
Dothe beare freſhe braunches one aboue another,
Euen ſo amidde the huge heape of my woes,
Doth growe one grudge more gréeuous than the reſt,
To ſée my deare and dolefull mother, cladde
In mourning tyre, to tyre hir mourning minde,
Wretched alonely for my wretchedneſſe,
So lykes that enimie my brother beſt:
Soone ſhall you ſée that in this wandring worlde,
No enmitie is equall vnto that
That dark diſdayne (the cauſe of euery euill)
Dooth bréede full ofte in conſanguinitie.
But Ioue, he knowes what dole I doe endure,
For you and for my fathers wretched woe,
And eke how déepely I deſire to knowe
What wearie lyfe my louing ſiſters leade,
And what anoye myne abſence them hath giuen.
Alas, alas, howe wrekefull wrath of Gods
Doth ſtill afflicte Oedipus progenie:
The fyrſte cauſe was thy fathers wicked bedde,
And then (oh why doe I my plagues recompte?)
My burden borne, and your vnhappie birth:
"But néedes we muſt with pacient heartes abyde,
"What ſo from high the heauens doe prouide.
With thée my chylde, fayne would I queſtion yet
Of certaine things me woulde I that my wordes
Might thée anoye, ne yet renewe thy griefe.
Saye on, deare mother, ſay what ſo you pleaſe:
What pleaſeth you, ſhall neuer mée diſeaſe.
And ſéemes it not a heauie happe my ſonne,
To be depriued of thy countrey coaſtes?
So heauie happe as toung can not expreſſe.
And what may moſte moleſt the mynde of man
This is exiled from his natiue ſoyle?
The libertie hée with his countrey loſte,
"And that he lacketh fréedome for to ſpeake,
"What ſéemeth beſt, without controll or checke.
Why ſo? eche ſeruant lacketh libertie
To ſpeake his minde, without his maiſters leaue.
"In exile, euery man, or bonde or free,
"Of noble race, or meaner parentage,
"Is not in this vnlike vnto the ſlaue,
"That muſte of force obey to eche mans will,
"And prayſe the péeuiſhneſſe of eche mans pryde.
And ſéemed this ſo grieuous vnto thée?
What griefe can greater be, than ſo conſtraynde
Slauelike to ſerue gaynſt right and reaſon bothe,
Yea muche the more, to him that noble is,
By ſtately lyne, or yet by vertuous lyfe,
And hath a heart lyke to his noble mynde.
What helpeth moſte in ſuche aduerſitie?
Hope helpeth moſte to comfort miſerie.
Hope to returne from whence he fyrſt was driuen?
Yea, hope that happeneth oftentymes to late,
And many die before ſuch hap may fall.
And howe didſt thou before thy mariage ſonne,
Mainteyne thy lyfe, a ſtraunger ſo beſtad?
Sometyme I founde (though ſeldome ſo it were)
Some gentle heart, that coulde for curteſye,
Contente himſelfe to ſuccour myne eſtate.
Thy fathers friends and thyne, did they not helpe
For to reléeue that naked néede of thyne?
"Mother, he hath a fooliſhe fantaſie,
"That thinkes to fynd a frende in miſerie.
Thou mighteſt haue helpe by thy nobilitie.
"Couered alas, in cloake of pouertie?
"Wel ought we then that are but mortall héere,
"Aboue all treaſure counte our countrey deare:
Yea let me knowe my ſonne, what cauſe thée moued
To goe to Grece?
The flying fame that thundred in myne eares,
How king Adraſtus, gouernour of Greece,
Was anſwered by Oracle, that he
Shoulde knitte in linkes of lawfull mariage,
His two faire daughters, and his onely heires,
One to a Lyon, th'other to a Boare:
An anſwere ſuche as eche man wondred at.
And how belongs this anſwere now to thée?
I toke my geſſe euen by this enſigne héere,
A Lyon loe, which I did alwayes beare:
Yet thinke I not, but Ioue alonely brought
Theſe handes of myne to ſuche an high exploite.
And howe yet came it to this ſtraunge effect?
The ſhining day had runne his haſted courſe,
And deawie night beſpread hir mantell darke,
When I that wandred after wearie toyle,
To ſeke ſome harbrough for myne irked limmes,
Gan fynde at laſt a little cabbin, cloſe
Adioyned faſte vnto the ſtately walles,
Where king Adraſtus held his royall towres.
Scarce was I there in quiet well ycought,
But thither came another exile eke,
Named Tydeus, who ſtraue perforce to driue
Mée from this ſorie ſeate, and ſo at laſte,
We ſettled vs to fell and bloudie fight,
Whereof the rumour grewe ſo great foorthwith,
That ſtraight the king enformed was therof,
Who ſéeing then the enſignes that wée bare,
To be euen ſuch as were to him foreſayde,
Choſe eche of vs to be his ſonne by lawe,
And ſithens did ſolemnize eke the ſame.
Yet woulde I know, if that thy wyfe be ſuche
As thou canſt ioy in hir? or what ſhe is?
O mother deare, fayrer ne wyſer dame
Is none in Greece, Argia is hir name.
Howe couldſt thou to this doubtfull enterpriſe,
So many bring, thus armed all at once?
Adraſtus ſware, that he woulde ſoone reſtore
Vnto our right both Tydeus, and me:
And fyrſt for mée, that had the greater néede,
Whereby the beſt and boldeſt blouds in Greece,
Haue followed me vnto this enterpryſe.
A thing both iuſt and grieuous vnto me,
Gréeuous I ſaye, for that I doe lament
To be conſtrayned by ſuch open wrong,
To warre agaynſt myne owne deare countrey féeres.
But vnto you (O mother) dothe pertain
To ſtinte this ſtryfe, and both deliuer mée
From exile now, and eke the towne from ſiege:
For otherwiſe, I ſweare you here by heauens,
Eteocles, who now doth me diſdayne
For brother, ſhortly ſhall ſée me his lorde▪
I aſke the ſeate, wherof I ought of right
Poſſeſſe the halfe, I am Oedipus ſonne,
And yours, ſo am I true ſonne to you both.
Wherfore I hope that as in my defence,
The worlde will weygh, ſo Ioue wil me aſſiſte.
Beholde O quéene, beholde O woorthie quéene,
Vnwoorthie he, Eteocles here cōmes,
So, woulde the Gods, that in this noble realme
Shoulde neuer long vnnoble tyrant reigne,
Or that with wrong the right and doutleſſe heire,
Shoulde baniſht be out of his princely ſeate.
Yet thou O quéene, ſo fyle thy ſugred toung.
And with ſuch counſell decke thy mothers tale,
That peace may both the brothers hartes inflame,
And rancour yelde, that erſt poſſeſſe the ſame.
Mother, beholde, your heſtes for to obey,
In perſon nowe am I reſorted hither:
In haſte therefore, fayne woulde I knowe what cauſe
With haſtie ſpéede, ſo moued hath your minde
To call me nowe ſo cauſeleſſe out of time,
When common wealth moſte craues my onely ayde:
Fayne woulde I knowe what quent commoditie
Perſwades you thus to take a truce for tyme,
And yeld the gates wide open to my foe,
The gates that myght our ſtately ſtate defende,
And now are made the path of our decay.
"Repreſſe deare ſon, thoſe raging ſtormes of wrath,
"That ſo bedimme the eyes of thine intent,
"As when the tongue (a redy Inſtrument)
"Would fayne pronounce the meaning of the minde,
"It cannot ſpeake one honeſt ſéemely worde.
"But when diſdayne is ſhrunke, or ſette aſyde,
"And mynde of man with leyſure can diſcourſe
"What ſéemely wordes his tale may beſt beſéeme,
"And that the toung vnfoldes without affectes
"Then may procéede an anſwere ſage and graue,
"And euery ſentence ſawſt with ſoberneſſe:
Wherefore vnbende thine angrie browes deare childe,
And caſte thy rolling eyes none other waye,
That here doeſt not Meduſaes (a) face beholde,
But him, euen him, thy bloud and brother deare.
And thou behold, my Polinices eke,
Thy brothers face, wherein when thou mayſt ſée
Thine owne image, remember therewithall,
That what offence thou wouldſt to him were done,
The blowes thereof rebounde vnto thy ſelfe.
And hereof eke, I would you both forewarne,
When frendes or brethren, kinſfolke or allies,
(Whoſe haſtie hearts ſome angrie moode had moued)
Be face to face by ſome of pitie brought,
Who ſeekes to ende their diſcorde and debate:
They onely ought conſider well the cauſe
For which they come, and caſt out of their minde
For euermore the olde offences paſt:
So ſhall ſwéete peace driue pleading out of place.
Wherfore the firſt ſhall Polinices be,
To tell what reaſon firſt his minde did rule,
That thus our walles with forrein foes encloſde
In ſharpe reuenge of cauſeleſſe wronge receiu'd,
As he alledgeth by his brothers doome:
And of this wicked woe and dire debate,
Some God of pitie be the equall iudge,
Whome I beſeeche, to breath in both your breaſts
A yelding heart to deepe deſire of peace.
"My woorthie dame, I finde that tried truthe
"Doth beſte beſeeme a ſimple naked tale,
"Ne néedes to be with painted proces prickt,
"That in hir ſelfe hath no diuerſitie,
"But alwayes ſhewes one vndiſguiſed face,
"Where déepe deceipt and lies muſt ſéeke the ſhade,
"And wrap their wordes in guilefull eloquence,
"As euer fraught with contrarietie:
So haue I often ſayde, and ſay againe,
That to auoide our fathers foule reproche
And bitter curſe, I parted from this lande
With right good will, yet thus with him agréed,
That while the whirling wings of flying time
Might roll one yeare aboute the heauenly ſpheare,
So long alone he might with peace poſſeſſe
Our fathers ſeate in princely Diademe,
And when the yeare ſhould eke his courſe renue,
Might I ſucceede to rule againe as long.
And that this lawe might ſtill be kept for aye,
He bound him ſelfe by vowe of ſolemne othe
By Gods, by men, by heauen, and eke by earth:
Yet that forgot, without all reuerence
Vnto the Gods, without reſpect to right,
Without reſpect that reaſon ought to rule,
His faith and troth both troden vnder foote,
He ſtill vſurps moſt tyrantlike with wrong
The right that doth of right to me belong.
But if he can with equall doome conſent,
That I retourne into my natiue ſoyle
To ſway with him alike the kingly ſeate
And euenly beare the bridle both in hand,
Deare mother mine I ſweare by all the Gods
To raiſe with ſpeede the ſiege from theſe our walles,
And ſend the ſouldiers home from whence they came:
Which if he graunt me not, then muſt I do
(Though loth) as much as right and reaſon would,
To venge my cauſe that is both good and iuſt.
Yet this in heauen the Gods my records be,
And here in earth each mortall man may know,
That neuer yet my giltleſſe heart did fayle
Brotherly duetie to Eteocles,
And that cauſleſſe he holdes me from mine owne.
Thus haue I ſaid O mother, euen as much
As néedefull is, wherein I me aſſure:
That in the iudgement both of good and badde,
My words may ſéeme of reaſon to procéede,
Conſtrained thus in my defence to ſpeake.
None may denie, O pere of princely race,
But that thy words, are honeſt, good and iuſt,
And ſuch as well beſéeme that tong of thine.
"If what to ſome ſéemes honeſt good and iuſt,
"Could ſéeme euen ſo in euery doubtfull mind,
"No darke debate nor quarell could ariſe:
"But looke, how many men ſo many minds,
"And that, that one man iudgeth good and iuſt,
"Some other déemes as déepely to be wrong.
To ſay the truth (mother) this minde of mine
Doth fléete full farre from that farfetch of his,
Ne will I longer couer my conceit:
If I could rule or reigne in heauen aboue,
And eke commaund in depth of darkſome hell,
No toile ne trauell ſhould my ſprites abaſhe,
To take the way vnto my reſtleſſe will,
To climbe aloft, nor downe for to deſcend.
Then thinke you not, that I can giue conſent
To yeld a part of my poſſeſſion,
Wherin I liue and lead the monarchie.
"A witleſſe foole may euery man him geſſe,
"That leaues the more and takes him to the leſſe.
With this, reproch might to my name redound,
If he, that hath with forren power ſpoilde
Our pleaſaunt fields, might reaue from me perforce,
What ſo he liſt by force of armes demand.
No leſſe reproofe the citizens enſewes,
If I, for dread of Gréekiſh hoſts, ſhould graunt
That he might climbe to heigth of his deſire.
In fine, he ought not thus of me to craue
Accord, or peace, with bloudy ſword in hand,
But with humilitie and prayer both,
For often is it ſéene, and proofe doth teach,
"Swete words preuaile, where ſword and fire do faile.
Yet this, if here within theſe ſtately walles
He liſt to liue, the ſonne of Oedipus,
And not as king of Thebes, I ſtand content.
But let him thinke, ſince now I can commaunde,
This necke of mine ſhall neuer yeld to yoke
Of ſeruitude: let bring his banners ſplayde,
Let ſpeare and ſhield, ſharpe ſworde, and cyndring flames
Procure the parte that he ſo vainely claimes:
As long as life within this breſt doth laſt,
I nill conſent that he ſhould reigne with me.
If lawe of right may any way be broke,
"Deſire of rule within a climbing breſt
"To breake a vow may beare the buckler beſt.
"Who once hath paſt the bounds of honeſtie
"In erneſt déedes, may paſſe it well in words.
O ſonne, amongſt ſo many miſeries
This benefite hath croked age, I find,
That as the tracke of truſtleſſe time hath taught,
"It ſéeth much, and many things diſcernes,
"Which reckleſſe youth can neuer rightly iudge,
Oh, caſt aſide that vaine ambition,
That coroſiue, that cruell peſtilence,
That moſt infects the minds of mortall men:
"In princely palace and in ſtately townes
"It crepeth ofte, and cloſe with it conuayes,
"(To leaue behind it) damage and decayes:
"By it be loue and amitie deſtroyde,
"It breakes the lawes and common concord beates,
"Kingdomes and realmes it topſie turuie turnes,
And now, euen thée, hir gall ſo poiſoned hath,
That the weake eies of thine affection
Are blinded quite, and ſée not to them ſelfe
But worthy childe, driue from thy doubtfull breſt
This monſtrous mate, in ſteade wherof embrace
"Equalitie, which ſtately ſtates defends
"And binds the minde with true and truſtie knots
"Of frendly faith which neuer can be broke,
"This man, of right ſhould properly poſſeſſe,
And who that other doth the more embrace,
Shall purchaſe paine to be his iuſt reward
By wrathfull wo, or elſe by cruell death.
"This, firſt deuided all by equall bonds
"What ſo the earth did yeld for our auaile?
"This, did deuide the nightes and dayes alike,
"And that the vaile of darke and dreadfull night)
"(Which ſhrowds in miſty clouds the pleaſaunt light,
"Ne yet the golden beames of Phoebus rayes
"(Which cleares the dimmed ayre with gladſome gleams)
"Can yet heape hate in either of them both.
If then the dayes and nightes to ſerue our turne
Content themſelues to yeld each other place,
Well oughteſt thou with waightie dome to graunt
Thy brothers right to rule the reigne with thée,
Which heauens ordeyned common to you both:
If ſo thou nill O ſonne, O cruell ſonne,
"In whoſe high breſt may iuſtice builde hir houre
"When princes harts wide open lye to wrong?
Why likes thée ſo the tipe of tyrannie
With others loſſe to gather gréedy gaine?
"Alas how farre he wanders from the truth
"That compts a pompe, all other to command,
"Yet can not rule his owne vnbridled will,
"A vaine deſire much riches to poſſeſſe
"Whereby the breſt is bruſde and battered ſtill,
"With dread, with daunger, care and cold ſuſpecte.
"Who ſéekes to haue the thing we call inough,
"Acquainte him firſt with contentation,
"For plenteouſneſſe is but a naked name.
"And what ſuffiſeth vſe of mortall men,
"Shall beſt apay the meane and modeſt hearts.
"Theſe hoorded heapes of golde and worldly wealth
"Are not the proper goods of any one,
"But pawnes which Ioue powres out aboundantly
"That we likewiſe might vſe them equally,
"And as he ſeemes to lend them for a time,
"Euen ſo in time he takes them home agayne,
"And would that we acknowledge euery houre,
"That from his handes we did the ſame receiue:
"There nothing is ſo firme and ſtayde to man,
"But whyrles about with whéeles of reſtleſſe time.
Now if I ſhould this one thing thée demaunde,
Which of theſe two thou wouldeſt chuſe to kéepe,
The towne quiet or vnquiet tyrannie?
And wouldeſt thou ſay I chuſe my kingly chayre?
O witleſſe anſwere ſent from wicked heart,
For if ſo fall (which mightie God defende)
Thine enimies hand ſhould ouercome thy might,
And thou ſhouldeſt ſée them ſacke the towne of Thebes,
The chaſteſt virgins rauiſhed for wrecke,
The worthy children in captiuitie,
"Then ſhouldeſt thou féele that ſcepter, crowne, & wealth
"Yéelde deeper care to ſée them tane away,
"Than to poſſeſſe them yeldeth déepe content.
Now to conclude my ſonne, Ambition
Is it that moſt offends thy blynded thought,
Blame not thy brother, blame ambition
From whome if ſo thou not redéeme thy ſelfe,
I feare to ſée thée buy repentance deare.
Yea deare, too deare when it ſhal come too late.
And now to thée my Polinices deare,
I ſay that ſillie was Adraſtus reade,
And thou God knowes a ſimple ſillie ſoule,
He to be ruled by thy heady wil,
And thou, to warre againſt the Thebane walls,
Theſe walls I ſay whoſe gates thy ſelfe ſhould garde:
Tell me I pray thée, if the Citie yéelde,
Or thou it take by force in bloudie fight,
(Which neuer graunt the Gods I them beſéeke)
What ſpoyles? what Palmes? what ſigne of victorie
Canſt thou ſet vp to haue thy countrie woonne?
What title worthie of immortall fame,
Shall blaſed be in honor of thy name?
O ſonne, deare ſonne, beléeue thy truſtie dame,
The name of glorie ſhall thy name refuſe,
And flie full farre from all thy fonde attemptes.
But if ſo fall thou ſhouldſt be ouercome,
Then with what face canſt thou returne to Greece,
That here haſt lefte ſo many Greekes on grounde▪
Eache one ſhall curſe and blame thée to thy face,
As him that onely cauſed their decaye,
And eke condemne Adraſtus ſimple heade,
That ſuch a phéere had choſen for his childe.
So may it fall, in one accurſed houre,
That thou mayſt looſe thy wife and countrie both,
Both which thou mayſt with little toyle attaine,
If thou canſt leaue high minde and darke diſdaine.
O mightie Gods of goodneſſe, neuer graunt
Vnto theſe euilles, but ſet deſired peace
Betwene the hearts of theſe two friendly foes.
The queſtion that betwixt vs two is growen,
Beléeue me mother, can not ende with words:
You waſte your breath, and I but looſe my time,
And all your trauell loſt and ſpent in vaine:
For this I ſweare, that peace you neuer get
Betwéene vs two, but with condition,
That whilſt I liue, I will be Lord of Thebes.
Then ſet aſide theſe vaine forwaſted wordes,
And yéelde me leaue to go where néede doth preſſe:
And now good ſir, get you out of theſe walles,
Vnleſſe you meane to buy abode with bloude.
And who is he that ſéekes to haue my bloude,
And ſhall not ſhed his owne as faſt as myne?
By thée he ſtandes, and thou ſtandſt him before:
Loe here the ſworde that ſhall perfourme his worde.
And this ſhall eke mainteine my rightfull cauſe.
O ſonnes, dear ſonnes, away with glittring armes:
And firſt, before you touch eache others fleſh,
With doubled blowes come pierce this breſt of mine.
Ah wretch, thou art both vile and cowarde like,
Thy high eſtate eſteemes thy life to deare.
If with a wretch or coward ſhouldſt thou fighte,
Oh daſtard villaine, what firſt moued thée
With ſwarmes of Gréekes to take this enterpriſe?
For well I wiſt, that cankred heart of thine
Coulde ſafely kepe thy heade within theſe walles,
And flée the fielde when combate ſhould be callde.
This truce aſſureth thée Polynices,
And makes thée bolde to giue ſuch boſting wordes:
So be thou ſure, that had this truce not bene,
Then long erethis, theſe handes had bene embrude,
And eke this ſoyle beſprinkled with thy bloude.
Not one ſmall drop of my bloude ſhalt thou ſpill,
But buy it deare againſt thy cankred will.
O ſonnes, my ſonnes, for pittie yet refrayne.
Good Gods, who euer ſawe ſo ſtrange a ſight?
True loue and frindſhip both be put to flight.
Yelde villein, yelde my right which thou witholdſt.
Cut of thy hope to reigne in Thebane walles,
Nought haſt thou here, nor nought ſhal euer haue,
Away.
O aultars of my countrie ſoyle.
Whome thou art come to ſpoyle and to deface.
O Gods, giue eare vnto my honeſt cauſe.
With forreine power his countrie to inuade.
O holy temples of the heauenly Gods.
That for thy wicked déedes do hate thy name
Out of my kingdome am I driuen by force.
Out of the which thou camſt me for to driue.
Puniſh O Gods this wicked tyrant here.
Pray to the Gods in Greece and not in Thebes.
No ſauage beaſt ſo cruell nor vniuſt.
Not cruel to my countrie like to thée.
Since from my right I am with wrong depriued.
Eke from thy life if long thou tarie here.
O father heare what iniuries I take.
As though thy diueliſhe déedes were hid from him.
And you mother.
Haue done thou not deſerueſt
With that falſe tong thy mother once to name.
O deare Citie.
When thou ariueſt in Greece,
Chuſe out thy dwelling in ſome muſtie Moores.
I muſt departe, and parting muſt I prayſe
Oh deare mother the depth of your good will.
O ſonne.
Away I ſay out of theſe walls.
I can not chuſe but muſt thy will obey,
Yet graunt me once my father for to ſée.
I heare no prayers of my enemie.
Where be my ſwéete ſiſters?
And canſt thou yet
With ſhameleſſe tong once name thy noble race
That art become a common foe to Thebes?
Be ſure thou ſhall them neuer ſée againe,
Nor other friend that in theſe walls remaine.
Reſt you in peace, O worthy mother myne.
Howe can that be and thou my ioye in warre?
Hence forth n'am I your ioyne yet your ſonne.
Alas the heauens me whelme with all miſhap.
Lo here the cauſe that ſtirreth me by wrong.
Much more is that he profereth vnto me.
Well, ſpeake, dareſt thou come armed to the fielde?
So dare I come, wherfore doſt thou demaunde?
For néeds or thou muſt ende this life of mine,
Or quenche my thirſt with pouring out thy bloud.
Ah wretch, my thirſt is all as drie as thine.
Alas and welaway, what heare I ſonnes?
How can it be? deare children can it be
That brethrens heartes ſuch rancour ſhould enrage?
And that right ſoone the proofe ſhall playnely ſhew.
Oh ſay not ſo, yet ſay not ſo deare ſonnes.
O royall race of Thebes now take thine ende.
God ſhield.
O ſlow & ſluggiſh heart of mine,
Why do I ſtay t'embrew theſe ſlothfull hands?
But for his greater griefe I will departe,
And at returne if here I finde my foe,
This haſtie hande ſhall ende our hote debate.
Deare Citizens, and you eternall Gods,
Beare witneſſe with me here before the worlde,
How this my fierce and cruell enimie,
Whom cauſeleſſe now my brother I do call,
With threates of death my lingring ſteps doth driue
Both from my right and from my countrey ſoyle,
Not as beſéemes the ſonne of Oedipus,
But as a ſlaue, an abiect, or a wretche:
And ſince you be both pitifull and iuſte,
Vouchſafe O Gods, that as I part with griefe,
So may I yet returne with ioyfull ſpoyle
Of this accurſed tyraunt and (he ſlayne)
I may recouer quietly mine owne.
O wretched wretch Iocaſta, wher is founde
The miſerie that may compare to thine?
O would I had nor gaſing eyes to ſée,
Nor liſtning eares to heare that now I dread:
But what remaines, ſaue onely to entreate
That cruell dole wold yet ſo curteous be
To reaue the breath out of this wofull breſt,
Before I harken to ſome wofull newes.
Reſt you here dames, and pray vnto the Gods
For our redreſſe, and I in that meane while
Will ſhut my ſelfe from ſight of lothſome light.
O mightie God, the gouernour of Thebes
Pitie with ſpéede the payne Iocaſta bydes,
And eke our néedes O mightie Bacchus helpe,
Bende willing eare vnto our iuſt complaint:
Leaue them not comfortleſſe that truſt in thee,
We haue no golde nor ſiluer thée to giue,
Ne ſacrifice to thoſe thine aultars due,
In ſtéede wherof we conſecrate our harts
To ſerue thy will, and heſtes for to obey.
SInce I haue ridde mine enmie out of ſight,
The beſt ſhall be for Creon now to ſende,
(My mothers brother) that with him I may
Reaſon, conſulte, conferre, and counſell bothe,
What ſhall be beſt to vſe in our defence,
Before we venter forth into the fielde.
But of this trauayle, loe, he me acquites
That comes in haſte towards theſe royall towres.
O mightie king, not cauſeleſſe nowe I come,
To finde, that long haue ſought your maiſtie.
So to diſcharge the duetie that I owe
To you, by comforte and by counſell bothe.
No leſſe deſire this harte of mine did preſſe,
To ſend for thée Creon, ſince that in vaine
My mother hath hir words and trauayle ſpent,
To reconcile Polynices and me:
For he (ſo dull was his caparitie)
Did thinke, he could by dread of daunger, winne
My princely heart to yéeld to him his realme.
I vnderſtande, the armie that he brings
Agaynſt theſe walles, is ſuch, that I me doubte
Our cities force may ſcarce the ſame reſiſt.
Yet true it is, that right and reaſon both
Are on our ſide, which bring the victorie
Oftetimes: for we our countrey to defend,
They to ſubdue the ſame in armes are come.
But what I would vnto your highneſſe ſhewe,
Is of more weight, and more behoues to know.
And what is that? oh quickly tell it me.
A Gréeke priſner is come vnto my hands.
And what ſayth he that doth ſo much importe?
That euen alredy by their ranks in raye,
And ſtreight will giue aſſault to theſe our walles.
Then muſt I ſtreight prepare our Citizens
In glittring arms to march into the fielde.
O Prince (and pardon me) thy youthfull yers
Nor ſée them ſelfe, ne let thée once diſcerne,
What beſt behoueth in this doubtfull caſe.
"For Prudence, ſhe that is the mightie quéene
"Of all good workes, growes by experience,
"Which is not founde with fewe dayes ſéeking for.
And were not this both ſounde and wiſe aduiſe,
Boldly to looke our foemen in the face,
Before they ſpred our fields with hugie hoſte,
And all the towne beſet by ſiege at once?
We be but few, and they in number great.
Our men haue yet more courage farre than they.
That know I not, nor am I ſure to ſay.
Thoſe eyes of thine in little ſpace ſhall ſée
How many I my ſelfe can bring to grounde.
That would I like, but harde it is to doe.
I nill penne vp our men within the walles.
In counſell yet the victorie conſiſtes.
And wilt thou then I vſe ſome other reade?
What elſe? be ſtill a while, for haſt makes waſt.
By night I will the Cammaſſado giue.
So may you do and take the ouerthrowe.
The vauntage is to him that doth aſſaulte.
Yet ſkirmiſhe giuen by night is perillous.
Let ſet vpon them as they ſit at meat.
Sodayne aſſaults affray the minde no doubt,
But we had néede to ouercome.
So ſhall we do.
No ſure, vnleſſe ſome other counſell helpe.
Amid their trenches ſhall we them inuade?
As who ſhould ſay, were none to make defence.
Should I then yéeld the Citie to my foes?
No, but aduiſe you well if you be wiſe.
That were thy parte, that knoweſt more than I.
Then ſhall I ſay that beſt doth ſéeme to me?
Yea Creon yea, thy counſell holde I deare.
Seuen men of courage haue they choſen out.
A ſlender number for ſo great empriſe.
But they them choſe for guides and capitaynes.
To ſuch an hoſte? why they may not ſuffiſe.
Nay, to aſſault the ſeuen gates of the citie.
What then behoueth ſo beſtad to done?
With equall number ſée you do them match.
And then commit our men in charge to them?
Chuſing the beſt and boldeſt blouds in Thebes.
And how ſhall I the Citie then defende?
Well-with the reſt,, for one man ſées not all.
And ſhall I chuſe the boldeſt or the wiſeſt?
Nay both, for one without that other fayles.
Force without wiſedome then is little worth.
"That one muſt be faſt to that other ioynde.
Creon I will thy counſell follow ſtill,
For why, I hold it wiſe and truſty both,
And out of hand for now I will departe
That I in time the better may prouide
Before occaſion ſlip out of my hands,
And that I may this Polynices quell:
For well may I with bloudy knife him ſlea
That comes in armes my countrie for to ſpoyle.
But if ſo pleaſe to fortune and to fate
That other ende than I do thinke may fall,
To thée my frend it reſteth to procure
The mariage twixt my ſiſter Antygone
And thy deare ſonne Haemone, to whom for dowre
At parting thus I promiſe to performe
As much as late I did beheſte to thée:
My mothers bloude and brother deare thou arte,
Ne néede I craue of thée to gard hir well,
As for my father care I not, for if
So chaunce I dye, it may full well be ſayd
His bitter curſes brought me to my bane.
The Lord defend, for that vnworthy were.
Of Thebes towne the rule and ſcepter loe
I néede nor ought it otherwiſe diſpoſe
Than vnto thée, if I dye without heyre.
Yet longs my lingring mynde to vnderſtand,
The doubtfull ende of this vnhappie warre:
Wherfore I will thou ſend thy ſonne to ſeke
Tyreſias the deuine, and learne of him,
For at my call I knowe he will not come
That often haue his artes and him reprovde.
As you commaund, ſo ought I to performe.
And laſt, I thée and citie both commaund,
If fortune frendly fauour our attemptes,
And make our men triumphant victors all,
That none there be ſo hardie ne ſo bolde
For Polynices bones to giue a graue:
And who preſumes to breake my beſte herein,
Shall dye the death in penaunce of his paine:
For though I were by bloud to him conioynde
I pat it now, and iuſtice goeth with me
To guide my ſteppes victoriouſly before.
Pray you to Ioue he deigne for to defende,
Our Citie ſafe both now and euermore.
Gramercie worthie prince, for all thy loue
And faithfull truſt thou doeſt in me repoſe,
And if ſhould hap, that I hope neuer ſhall,
I promiſe yet to doe what beſt behoues,
But chieflie this I ſweare and make a vowe,
For Polynices nowe our cruell foe,
To holde the heſt that thou doeſt me commaunde.
O Fierce and furious Mars, whoſe harmefull harte,
Reioyceth moſt to ſhed the giltleſſe blood,
Whoſe headie wil doth all the world ſubuert,
And doth enuie the pleaſant mery moode,
Of our eſtate that erſt in quiet ſtoode.
Why doeſt thou thus our harmeleſſe towne annoye,
Which mightie Bacchus gouerned in ioye?
Father of warre and death, that doſt remoue
With wrathfull wrecke from wofull mothers breaſt,
The truſtie pledges of their tender loue,
So graunt the Gods, that for our finall reſt,
Dame Venus pleaſant lookes may pleaſe thée beſt,
Wherby when thou ſhalt all amazed ſtand,
The ſword may fall out of thy trembling hand.
And thou maiſt proue ſome other way full well
The bloudie proweſſe of thy mightie ſpeare,
Wherwith thou raiſeſt from the depth of hell,
The wrathfull ſprites of all the furies there,
Who when the weake, doe wander euery where,
And neuer reſt to range about the coaſtes,
Tenriche that pit with ſpoile of damned ghoſtes.
And when thou haſt our fieldes forſaken thus,
Let cruell diſcorde beare thée companie,
Engirt with ſnakes and ſerpents venemous,
Euen ſhe that can with red virmilion dye
The gladſome gréene that floriſht pleaſantly,
And make the gréedie ground a drinking cup,
To ſup the bloud of murdered bodyes vp.
Yet thou returne O ioye and pleaſant peace,
From whence thou didſt againſt our wil depart,
Ne let thy worthie minde from trauell ceaſe,
To chaſe diſdaine out of the poyſned harte,
That raiſed warre to all our paynes and ſmarte,
Euen from the breſt of Oedipus his ſonne,
Whoſe ſwelling pride hath all this iarre begonne.
And thou great God, that doeſt all things decrée,
And ſitſt on highe aboue the ſtarrie ſkies,
Thou chiefeſt cauſe of cauſes all that bée,
Regard not his offence but heare our cries,
And ſpedily redreſſe our miſeries,
For what cauſe we poore wofull wretches doe
But craue thy aide, and onely cleaue therto?
THou truſtie guide of my ſo truſtleſſe ſteppes
Déer daughter mine go we, lead thou ye way,
For ſince the day I firſt did léeſe this light
Thou only art the light of theſe mine eyes:
And for thou knowſt I am both old & weake
And euer longing after louely reſt,
Direct my ſteppes amyd the playneſt pathes,
That ſo my febled féete may féele leſſe paine.
Meneceus thou gentle childe, tell me,
Is it farre hence, the place where we muſt goe,
Where as thy father for my comming ſtayes?
For like vnto the ſlouthfull ſnayle I drawe,
(Deare ſonne) with paine theſe aged legges of mine,
And though my minde be quicke, ſcarce can I moue.
Comfort thy ſelfe deuine, Creon thy frend
Loe ſtandeth here, and came to méete with thée
To eaſe the paine that thou mightſt elſe ſuſtaine,
"For vnto elde eche trauell yeldes annoy
And thou his daughter and his faithfull guide,
Loe reſt him here, and reſt thou there withall
Thy virgins hands, that in ſuſtayning him
Doeſt well acquite the duetie of a childe.
"For crooked age and hory ſiluer heares
"Still craueth helpe of luſtie youthfull yeares.
Gramercie Lorde what is your noble will?
What I would haue of thée Tyreſias
Is not a thing ſo ſoone for to be ſayde.
But reſt a whyle thy weake and weary limmes
And take ſome breath now after wearie walke,
And tell I pray thée, what this crowne doth meane,
That ſits ſo kingly on thy ſkilfull heade?
Know this, that for I did with graue aduiſe,
Foretell the Citizens of Athens towne,
How they might beſt with loſſe of litle bloude,
Haue victories againſt their enimies,
Hath bene the cauſe why I doe weare this Crowne,
As right rewarde and not vnméete for me.
So take I then this thy victorious crowne,
For our auaile in token of good lucke,
That knoweſt, how the diſcord and debate
Which late is fallen betwene theſe brethren twaine,
Hath brought all Thebes in daunger and in dreade.
Eteocles our king, with threatning armes,
Is gone againſt his greekiſh enimies,
Commaunding me to learne of thée (who arte
A true diuine of things that be to come)
What were for vs the ſafeſt to be done,
From perill now our countrey to preſerue.
Long haue I bene within the towne of Thebes,
Since that I tyed this truſtie toung of mine
From telling truth, fearing Eteocles:
Yet, ſince thou doeſt in ſo great néede deſire
I ſhould reueale things hidden vnto thée,
For common cauſe of this our common weale,
I ſtand content to pleaſure thée herein.
But firſt (that to this mightie God of yours
There might ſome worthie ſacrifice be made)
Let kill the faireſt goate that is in Thebes
Within whoſe bowelles when the Préeſt ſhall loke,
And tell to me what he hath there eſpyed,
I truſt t'aduiſe thée what is beſt to doen.
Lo here the temple, and ere long I looke
To ſée the holy préeſt that hither cōmes,
Bringing with him the pure and faire offrings,
Which thou requireſt: for not long ſince, I ſent
For him, as one that am not ignorant
Of all your rytes and ſacred ceremonyes:
He went to chooſe amid our herd of goates,
The fatteſt there: and loke where now he commes.
O famous Citizens, that holde full deare
Your quiet country: Loe where I doe come
Moſt ioyfully, with wonted ſacrifice,
So to beſéeche the ſupreme Citizens,
To ſtay our ſtate that ſtaggringly doth ſtand,
And plant vs peace where warre and diſcord growes:
Wherfore, with hart deuoute and humble chéere,
Whiles I breake vp the bowels of this beaſt,
(That oft thy veneyarde Bacchus hath deſtroyed,)
Let euery wight craue pardon for his faults,
With bending knee about his aultars here.
Take here the ſalt, and ſprincle therwithall
About the necke: that done, caſt all the reſt
Into the ſacred fire, and then annoynte
The knife prepared for the ſacrifice.
O mightie Ioue, preſerue the precious gifte
That thou me gaue, when firſt thine angrie Quéene,
For deepe diſdayne did both mine eyes do out,
Graunt me, I may foretell the truth in this,
For, but by thée, I know that I ne may,
Ne wil, ne can, one truſtie ſentence ſay.
This due is done.
With knife then ſtick ye kid,
Thou daughter of deuine Tyreſias,
With thoſe vnſpotted virgins hands of thine
Receiue the bloude within this veſſell here,
And then deuoutly it to Bacchus yelde.
O holy God of Thebes, that doeſt both praiſe
Swete peace, and doeſt in hart alſo diſdayne
The noyſome noyſe, the furies and the fight
Of bloudie Mars and of Bellona both:
O thou the giuer both of ioy and health,
Receiue in grée and with well willing hand
Theſe holy whole brunt offrings vnto thée:
And as this towne doth wholy thée a dore,
So by thy helpe do graunt that it may ſtand
Safe from the enimies outrage euermore.
Now in thy ſacred name I bowell here
This ſacrifice.
And what entralls hath it?
Faire and welformed all in euery poynt,
The liuer cleane, the hart is not infect,
Saue loe, I finde but onely one hart ſtring
By which I finde ſomething I wote nere what,
That ſéemes corrupt, and were not onely that,
In all the reſt, they are both ſound and hole.
Now caſt at once into the holy flame
The ſwete incenſe, and then aduertiſe mée
What hew it beares, and euery other ryte
That ought may helpe the truth for to coniecte.
I ſée the flames doe ſundrie coulours caſt,
Now bloudy ſanguine, ſtraight way purple, blew,
Some partes ſéeme blacke, ſome gray, and ſome be gréene.
Stay there, ſuffyſeth this for to haue ſéene.
Know Creon, that theſe outward ſéemely ſignes
(By that the Gods haue let me vnderſtand
Who know the truth of euery ſecrete thing)
Betoken that the Citie great of Thebes
Shall Victor be againſt the Gréekiſh hoſt,
If ſo conſent be giuen: but more than this
I lyſt not ſay.
Alas, for curteſie
Say on Tyreſias, neuer haue reſpect
To any liuing man, but tell the truth.
In this meane while I will returne with ſpéede
From whence I came: for lawfull is it not,
That ſuche as I ſhould heare your ſecreſies.
Contrary then to that which I haue ſayde,
The inceſt foule, and childbirth monſtruous
Of Iocaſta, ſo ſtirres the wrath of Ioue,
This citie ſhall with bloudy channels ſwimme,
And angry Mars ſhall ouercome it all
With famine, flame, rape, murther, dole and death:
Theſe luſtie towres ſhall haue a headlong fall,
Theſe houſes burnde, and all the reſt be razde,
And ſoone be ſayde, here whilome Thebes ſtoode.
One onely way I finde for to eſcape,
Which bothe would thée diſpleaſe to heare it tolde,
And me to tell percaſe were perillous.
Thée therfore with my trauell I commende
To Ioue, and with the reſt I will endure,
What ſo ſhall chaunce for our aduerſitie.
Yet ſtay a whyle,
Creon make me not ſtay
By force.
Why fléeſt thou?
Syr tis not from thée
I flée, but from this fortune foule and fell.
Yet tell me what behoues the citie doe?
Thou Creon ſéemeſt now deſirous ſtill
It to preſerue: but if as well as I
Thou kneweſt that which is to thée vnknowne,
Then wouldſt thou not ſo ſoone conſent thereto.
And would not I with eagre minde deſire
The thing that may for Thebes ought auayle?
And doſt thou then ſo inſtantly requeſt
To know which way thou mayeſt the ſame preſerue?
For nothing elſe I ſent my ſonne of late
To ſéeke for thée.
Then will I ſatiſfie
Thy gréedie minde in this: but firſt tell me,
Menetius where is he?
Not farre from me.
I pray thée ſende him out ſome other where.
Why wouldeſt thou that he ſhould not be here?
I would not haue him heare what I ſhould ſay.
He is my ſonne, ne will he it reueale.
And ſhall I then while he is preſent ſpeake?
Yea, be thou ſure that he no leſſe than I,
Doth wiſhe full well vnto this common weale.
Then Creon ſhalt thou knowe: the meane to ſaue
This Citie, is, that thou ſhalt flea thy ſonne,
And of his bodie make a ſacrifice
For his countrey: lo héere is all you ſéeke
So much to knowe, and ſince you haue me forſt
To tell the thing that I would not haue tolde,
If I haue you offended with my words,
Blame then your ſelfe, and eke your frowarde fate.
Oh cruel words, oh, oh, what haſt thou ſayde,
Thou cruell ſothſayer?
Euen that, that heauen
Hath ordeined once, and néedes it muſt enſue.
How many euils haſt thou knit vp in one?
Though euill for thée, yet for thy countrey good.
And let my countrey periſhe, what care I?
Aboue all things we ought to holde it deare.
Cruell were he, that would not loue his childe.
For cōmō weale, were well, that one man waile.
To looſe mine owne, I liſte none other ſaue.
Beſt Citizens care leaſt for priuat gayne.
Depart, for nowe, with all thy prophecies.
Lo, thus the truth doth alwayes hatred get.
Yet pray I thée by theſe thy ſiluer heares,
The harme that cōmes from heauen can not be ſcapt.
And by thy holy ſpirite of prophecie,
What heauen hath done, that cannot I vndoe.
That to no moe this ſecrete thou reueale.
And wouldſt thou haue me learne to make a lye?
I pray thée hold thy peace.
That will I not:
But in thy woe to yéelde thée ſome reliefe,
I tell thée once, thou ſhalt be Lorde of Thebes,
Which happe of thine this ſtring did well declare,
Which from the heart doth out alonely growe.
So did the péece corrupted playnly ſhewe,
An argument moſt euident to proue
Thy ſonne his death.
Well, yet be thou content
To kéepe full cloſe this ſecrete hidden griefe.
I neither ought, ne will kéepe it ſo cloſe.
Shall I be then the murtherer of mine owne?
Ne blame not me, but blame the ſtarres for this.
Can heauens condemne but him alone to dye?
We ought beléeue the cauſe is good and iuſt.
Vniuſt is he condemnes the innocent.
A foole is he accuſeth heauens of wrongs.
There can no ill thing come from heauēs aboue.
Then this that heauen commaunds can not be ill.
I not beléeue that thou haſt talkt with God.
Bicauſe I tell thée that doth thée diſpleaſe.
Out of my ſight accurſed lying wretch.
Go daughter go, oh what foole is he
That puts in vre to publiſh prophecies?
"For if he do fore tell a froward fate,
"Though it be true, yet ſhall he purchaſe hate:
"And if he ſilence kéepe, or hide the truth,
"The heauy wrath of mightie Gods enſuth.
Appollo he might well tell things to come,
That had no dread the angry to offende.
But hye we daughter hence ſome other way.
OH my deare childe, well haſt thou heard with eare
Theſe wéery newes, or rather wicked tales
That this deuine of thée deuined hath:
Yet will thy father neuer be thy foe,
With cruell doome thy death for to conſent.
You rather ought, O father, to conſent
Vnto my death, ſince that my death may bring
Vnto this towne both peace and victorie.
"Ne can I purchaſe more prayſe worthy death
"Than for my countries wealth to loſe my breath
I cannot prayſe this witleſſe will of thine.
"You know deare father, that this life of ours
"Is brittle, ſhort, and nothing elſe in déede
"But tedious toyle and pangs of endleſſe payne:
"And death, whoſe darte to ſome men ſéemes ſo fell,
"Brings quiet ende to this vnquiet life.
"Vnto which ende who ſooneſt doth arriue,
"Fis ſooneſt reſt of all his reſtleſſe griefe.
"And were it ſo, that here on earth we felte
"No pricke of paine, nor that our flattring dayes
"Were neuer daſht by froward fortunes frowne,
"Yet béeing borne (as all men are) to dye,
"Were not this worthy glory and renowne,
"To yéelde the countrey ſoyle where I was borne,
"For ſo long time, ſo ſhorte a time as mine?
I can not thinke that this can be denied.
Then if to ſhunne this haughtie high beheſt,
Mine onely cauſe, O father, doth you moue,
Be ſure, you ſéeke to take from me your ſonne,
The greateſt honor that I can attayne:
But if your owne commoditie you moue,
So much the leſſe you ought the ſame allowe:
For looke, how much the more you haue in Thebes,
So much the more you ought to loue the ſame:
Here haue you Hemone, he that in my ſteade
(O my deare father) may with you remaine,
So that, although you be depriued of me
Yet ſhall you not be quite depriued of heires.
I can not chuſe, deare ſonne, but diſalowe
This thy too haſtie, hote deſire of death:
For if thy life thou ſetteſt all ſo lighte,
Yet oughteſt thou thy father me reſpect,
Who as I drawe the more to lumpiſhe age,
So much more néede haue I to craue thine ayde:
Ne will I yet, with ſtubborne tong denye,
"That for his common weale to ſpende his life,
"Doth win the ſubiect high renoumed name.
"But howe? in armour to defende the ſtate,
"Not like a beaſt to bléede in ſacrifice:
And therwithal, if any ſhoulde conſent
To ſuch a death, then ſhould the ſame be I,
That haue prolonged life euen long enough,
Nay many dayes haue I nowe to drawe on.
And more auaile might to the countrie come,
Deare ſonne, to hold that luſtie life of thine,
That art both yong and eke of courage ſtout.
Than may by me that féeble am and olde.
Then liue deare ſonne in high proſperitie,
And giue me leaue that worthy am to dye.
Yet worthy were not that vnworthy chaunge.
If ſuch a death bring glorie, giue it me.
Not you, but me, the heauens cal to die.
We be but one in fleſh and body both.
I father ought, ſo ought not you, to die.
If thou ſonne die, thinke not that I can liue:
Then let me die, and ſo ſhall he firſt die,
That ought to die, and yet but one ſhal die.
Although I, father, ought t'obey your beſtes,
Yet euill it were in this to yelde your will.
Thy wit is wylie for to worke thy wo.
Oh, tender pitie moueth me thereto.
A beaſt is he, that kils himſelfe with a knife,
"Of pitie to preſerue an others life.
Yet wiſe is he, that doth obey the Gods
The Gods will not the death of any wight.
Whoſe life they take, they giue him life alſo.
But thou doſt ſtriue to take thy life thy ſelfe.
Nay them to obey, that will I ſhall not liue.
What fault, O ſonne, condemneth thée to death?
Who liueth (father) here without a fault?
I ſée no gylte in thée that death deſerues.
But God it ſéeth that euery ſecrete ſéeth.
How ſhoulde we knowe what is the will of God?
We knowe it then, when he reueales the ſame.
As though he would come doune to tell it vs,
By diuers meanes his ſecrets he diſcloſeth.
Oh, fonde is he, whothinkes to vnderſtand
The myſteries of Ioue his ſecrete mynde:
And for to ende this controuerſie here,
Loe thus I ſay, I will we both liue yet:
Prepare thée then, my (*) heſtes to holde and kéepe,
And pull a downe that ſtubborne heart of thyne,
You may of me, as of your ſelfe diſpoſe,
And ſince my life doth ſéeme ſo deare to you,
I will preſerue the ſame to your auaile,
That I may ſpende it alwayes to your wil.
Then, thée behoues out of this towne to flie:
Before the bold and blinde Tyreſias
Doe publiſh this that is as yet vnknowne.
And where, or in what place ſhall I become?
Where thou mayſte be hence furtheſt out of ſight.
You may commaunde, and I ought to obey.
Go to the lande of Theſbeoita.
Where Dodona doth ſit in ſacred chaire?
Euen there my childe.
And who ſhall guide my wandring ſteps?
high Ioue.
Who ſhal giue ſuſtenance for my reliefe?
There will I ſend thée heapes of gliſtring golde.
But when ſhall I efteſoones my father ſée?
Ere long I hope: but now, for now depart.
For euery lingring let or little ſtay,
May purchaſe payne and torment both to me.
Firſt would I take my conge of the Quéene,
That ſince the day my mother loſt hir life,
Hath nouriſht me as if I were hir owne.
Oh, tarry not my deare ſonne, tarry not.
Beholde father, I goe. You dames of Thebes,
Pray to almightie Ioue for my retourne:
You ſée how mine vnhappie ſtarres me driue
To go my countrie fro: and if ſo chaunce,
I ende in woe my pryme and luſtie yeares
Before the courſe of Nature do them call,
Honor my death yet with your drery plaints:
And I ſhall eke, where ſo this carkas come,
Pray to the Gods that they preſerue this towne.
WHen ſhe that rules the rolling whéele of chaunce,
Doth turne aſide hir angrie frowning face,
On him, whom erſt ſhe deigned to aduance,
She neuer leaues to gaulde him with diſgrace,
To toſſe and turne his ſtate in euery place,
Till at the laſt the hurle him from on high
And yeld him ſubiect vnto miſerie:
And as the braunche that from the roote is reſt,
He neuer winnes like life to that he lefte:
Yea though he do, yet can not taſt of ioy
Compare with pangs that paſt in his annoy.
Well did the heauens ordeine for our behoofe
Neceſſitie, and fates by them alowde,
That when we ſée our high miſhappes aloofe
(As though our eyes were mufled with a cloude)
Our froward will doth ſhrinke it ſelfe and ſhrowde
From our auaile wherwith we runne ſo faree:
As none amends can make that we do marre:
Then drawes euill happe & ſtriues to ſhew his ſtrēgth,
And ſuch as yeld vnto his might, at length
He leades them by neceſſitie the way
That deſtinie preparde for our decay.
The Mariner amidde the ſwelling ſeas
Who ſéeth his barke with many a billowe beaten,
Now here, now there, as wind and waues beſt pleaſe,
When thundring Ioue with tempeſt liſt to threaten,
And dreades in depeſt gulfe for to be eaten,
Yet learnes a meane by mere neceſſitie
To ſaue himſelfe in ſuch extremitie:
For when he ſéeth no man hath witte nor powre
To flie from fate when fortune liſt to lowre,
His only hope on mightie Ioue doth caſte,
Whereby he winnes the wiſhed heauen at laſt.
How fond is that man in his fantaſie,
Who thinks that Ioue the maker of vs al,
And he that tempers all in heauen on high,
The ſunne, the mone, the ſtarres celeſtiall,
So that no leafe without his leaue can fall,
Hath not in him omnipotence alſo
To guide and gouerne all things here below?
O blinded eies, O wretched mortall wights,
O ſubiect ſlaues to euery ill that lights,
To ſcape ſuch woe, ſuch paine, ſuch ſhame and ſcorne,
Happie were he that neuer had bin borne.
Well might duke Creon driuen by deſtinie,
(If true it be that olde Tyreſias ſaith)
Redeme our citie from this miſerie,
By his conſent vnto Meneceus death,
Who of himſelfe wold faine haue loſt his breth:
"But euery man is loth for to fulfill
"The heauenly heſt that pleaſeth not his will.
"That publique weale muſt néedes to ruine g
"Where priuate profite is preferred ſo.
Yet mightie God, thy only aide we craue,
This towne from ſiege, and vs from ſorowe ſaue.
O Sage and ſober dames, O ſhamefaſt maids,
O faithful ſeruants of our aged Quéene,
Come leade hir forth, fith vnto hir I bring
Such ſecrete newes as are of great importe.
Come forth, O Quéene, ſurceaſſe thy wofull plaint,
And to my words vouchſafe a willing eare.
My ſeruant deare, doeſt thou yet bring me newes
Of more miſhappe? ah werie wretch, alas,
How doth Eteocles? whom heretofore
In his encreaſing yeares, I wonted ay
From daungerous happe with fauoure to defend,
Doth he yet liue? or hath vntimely death
In cruell fight herefte his flowring life?
He liues (O Quéene) hereof haue ye no doubt,
From ſuch ſuſpecte my ſelfe will quit you ſoone.
The vētrous Gréekes haue haply tane the towne?
The Gods forbid.
Our ſouldiers then, perchance,
Diſperſed bene and yelden to the ſword.
Not ſo, they were at firſt in daunger ſure,
But in the end obteined victorie.
Alas, what then becomes of Polynice?
Oh canſt thou tell? is he dead or aliue?
You haue (O Quéene) yet both your ſonnes aliue
Oh, how my harte is eaſed of his paine.
Well, then procéede, and briefly let me heare,
How ye repulſt your proud preſuming foes,
That thereby yet at leaſt I may aſſuage
The ſwelling ſorrowes in my dolefull breſt,
In that the towne is hitherto preſerude:
And for the reſt, I truſt that might Ioue
Will yeld vs ayde.
No ſoner had your worthy valiant ſonne,
Seuerde the Dukes into ſeauen ſeuerall partes,
And ſet them to defence of ſeuerall gates,
And brought in braue arraye his horſſemen out,
Firſt to encounter with their mightie foen,
And likewiſe pitcht, the footemen face to face
Againſt the footemen of their enimies,
But fiercely ſtraight, the armies did approche,
Swarming ſo thicke, as couerde cleane the fielde,
When dreadfull blaſt of braying trumpets ſounds,
Of dolefull drummes, and thundring cannon ſhot,
Gaue hideous ſigne of horrour of the fight,
Then gan the Greekes to giue their ſharpe aſſaulte,
Then from the walls our ſtout couragious men,
With rolling ſtones, with paiſſe of hugie beames,
With flying dartes, with flakes of burning fire,
And deadly blowes, did beate them backe againe:
Thus ſtriuing long, with ſtout and bloudie fighte,
(Whereby full many thouſande ſlaughtered were)
The hardie Greeks came vnderneath the walls:
Of whome, firſt Capaney (a luſtie Knight)
Did ſcale the walls, and on the top thereof
Did vaunt himſelfe, when many hundred moe,
With fierce aſſaultes did follow him as faſt.
Then loe, the Captaines ſeauen beſtirrde themſelues,
(Whoſe names ye haue alreadie vnderſtoode)
Some here, ſome there, nought dreading loſſe of life,
With newe reliefe to féede the fainting breach:
And Polynice, he bended all the force
Of his whole charge, againſt the greateſt gate,
When ſodenly a flaſhe of lightning flame
From angrie ſkies ſtrake captaine Capaney
That there downe dead he fell: at ſight whereof
The gazers on were fraught with ſoden feare.
The reſt, that ſtroue to mount the walles ſo faſt,
From ladders toppe did headlong tumble downe.
Herewith our men encouragde by good happe,
Toke hardy harts, and ſo repulſt the Grekes.
Ther was Eteocles, and I with him,
Who ſetting firſt thoſe ſouldiers to their charge,
Ranne ſtreight to thother gates: vnto the weake
He manly comforte gaue: vnto the bold
His luſty words encreaſed courage ſtill:
In ſo much as th'amaſed Grecian king
When he did heare of Capaney his death,
Fearing thereby the Gods became his foen,
Out from the trench withdrewe his wearie hoſt.
But raſhe Eteocles (preſuming too too much
Vppon their flight) did iſſue out of Thebes,
And forwarde ſtraight with ſtrength of chiualrie,
His flying foes couragiouſly purſude.
Too long it were to make recompt of all
That wounded bene, or ſlaine, or captiue now:
The cloudy ayre was filled round aboute
With houling cries and wofull wayling plaints:
So great a ſlaughter (O renowmed Quéene)
Before this day I thinke was neuer ſéene.
Thus haue we now cut of the fruitleſſe hope
The Grecians had, to ſacke this noble towne.
What ioyfull end will happen herevnto
Yet know I not: the gods tourne all to good.
"To conquere, lo, is doubtleſſe worthy praiſe,
"But wiſely for to vſe the conqueſt gotte,
"Hath euer wonne immortall ſound of fame.
Well, yet therewhile in this we may reioyce,
Sith heauen and heauenly powers are pleaſde therewith.
This good ſucceſſe was luckie ſure, and ſuch,
As for my parte I little loked for:
To ſaue the towne and eke to haue my ſonnes
(As you report) preſerued yet aliue.
But yet procéede, and further let me know
The finall ende that they agréed vpon.
No more (O quéene) let this for now ſuffiſe,
Sith hitherto your ſtate is ſafe inough.
Theſe words of tdine, do whelme my iealous mind
With great ſuſpecte of other miſchiefes hidde.
What would you more, alredy being ſure
That both your ſonnes in ſafetie do remaine?
I long to know the reſt, or good or bad.
O let me now retourne to Eteocles,
That of my ſeruice greatly ſtands in néede.
Right well I ſée, thou doeſt conceale the woorſt.
Oh force me not, the good now béeing paſt,
To tell the yll.
Tell it I ſay, on paine of our diſpleaſure.
Since thus ye ſéeke to heare a dolefull tale,
I will no longer ſtay: witte ye therefore,
Your deſperate ſonnes togither be agréed
For to attempt a wicked enterpriſe:
To priuate fight they haue betroutht themſelues,
Of which conflicte, the ende muſt néedes be this,
That one do liue, that other die the death.
Alas, alas, this did I euer feare.
Now, ſith in ſumme I haue reuealed that,
Which you haue heard with great remorſe of mind,
I will procéede, at large to tell the whole.
When your victorious ſonne, with valiant force
Had chaſt his foes into their ioyning tents,
Euen there he ſtaide, and ſtraight at ſound of trumpe
With ſtretched voice the herault thus proclaimde:
You princely Gréekes, that hither be arriued
To ſpoile the fruite of theſe our fertile fields,
And vs to driue from this our Natiue ſoile,
O ſuffer not ſo many giltleſſe ſoules
By this debate deſcend in Stygian lake,
For priuate cauſe of wicked Polynice,
But rather let the brethren, hand to hand,
By mutuall blowes appeaſe their furious rage,
And ſo to ceaſe from ſheding further bloud:
And, to the end you all might vnderſtand
The profite that to euery ſide may fall,
Thus much my Lord thought good to profer you,
This is his will, if he be ouercome,
Then Polynice to rule this kingly realme:
If ſo it happe (as reaſon would it ſhould)
Our rightfull prince to conquere Polynice,
That then no one of you make more adoo,
But ſtraight to Argos Ile haſt home againe.
This, thus pronounſt vnto the noble Gréeks,
No ſoner did the ſound of trumpet ceaſe,
But Polynice ſtept forth before the hoſt,
And to theſe words this anſwere did he make:
O thou, (not brother) but my mortall foe,
Thy profer here hath pleaſed me ſo well,
As preſently, without more long delay,
I yeld my ſelfe prepared to the field.
Our noble King no ſoner heard this vaunt,
But forth as faſt he preſt his princely ſteppes,
With eger mind, as hoouering falcon woonts
To make hir ſtoope, when pray appeares in ſight:
At all aſſayes they both were brauely armed,
To eithers ſide his ſword faſt being girt,
In eithers hand was put a ſturdy launce:
About Eteocles our ſouldiers cloong,
To comforte him, and put him then in mind,
He fought for ſafetie of his country ſoile,
And that in him conſiſted all their hope.
To Polynice the king Adraſtus ſwore,
If he eſcaped victor from the fielde,
At his returne he would in Greece erecte
A golden Image vnto mightie Ioue
In ſigne of his triumphing victorie.
But all this while ſéeke you (O noble quéene)
To hinder this your furious ſonnes attempte:
Intreat the Gods it may not take effecte,
Els muſt you néedes ere long depriued be
Of both your ſonnes, or of the one at leaſt.
ANtigone my ſwete daughter, come forth
Out of this houſe, that nought but woe retaines,
Come forth I ſay, not for to ſing or daunce,
But to preuent (if in our powers it lie)
That thy malicious brethren (ſwolne with ire)
And I alas, their miſerable mother,
Be not deſtroide by ſtroke of dreadfull death.
Ah ſwete mother, ah my beloued mother,
Alas alas, what cauſe doth moue ye now
From trembling voice to ſend ſuch carefull cries?
What painefull pang? what griefe doth gripe you now?
O deare daughter, thy moſt vnhappie brethren
That ſometimes lodgde within theſe wretched loynes
Shall die this day, if Ioue preuent it not.
Alas what ſay you? alas what do you ſay?
Can I (alas) endure to ſée him dead,
Whom I thus long haue ſought to ſée aliue?
They both haue vowde (I quake alas to tell)
With trenchant blade to ſpill eche others blood.
O cruell Eteocles, ah ruthleſſe wretch,
Of this outrage thou only art the cauſe,
Not Polynice, whom thou with hatefull ſpight
Haſt reaued firſt of crowne and countrie ſoyle,
And now doeſt ſéeke to reaue him of his life.
Daughter no more delay, lets go, lets go.
Ah my ſwéete mother, whither ſhall I go?
With me, déere daughter, to the gréekiſh hoſt.
Alas how can I go? vnles I go
In daunger of my life, or of good name?
Time ſerues not now (my well beloued childe)
To way the loſſe of life or honeſt name,
But rather to preuent (if ſo we may)
That wicked déede, which only but to thinke,
Doth hale my hart out of my heauie breſt.
Come then, lets go, good mother let vs go.
But what ſhall we be able for to doe,
You a weake old woman forworne with yeares,
And I God knowes a ſilly ſimple mayde?
Our wofull wordes, our prayers & our plaintes,
Pourde out with ſtreames of ouerflowing teares,
(Where Nature rules) may happen to preuayle,
When reaſon, power, and force of armes do fayle.
But if the glowing heate of boyling wrath
So furious be, as it may not relent,
Then I atwixt them both will throw my ſelfe,
And this my breſt ſhal beare the deadly blowes,
That otherwiſe ſhould light vpon my ſonnes:
So ſhall they ſhead my bloud and not their owne.
Well now déere daughter, let vs haſten hence,
For if in time we ſtay this raging ſtrife,
Then haply may my life prolonged be:
If ere we come the bloudy déede be done,
Then muſt my ghoſt forſake this féeble corps:
And thou, deare childe, with dolour ſhalt bewaile,
Thy brothers death and mothers all at once.
WHo ſo hath felt, what faith and feruent loue
A mother beares vnto hir tender ſonnes,
She and none other ſure, can comprehende
The dolefull griefe, the pangs and ſecret paine,
That preſently doth pierce the princely breſt
Of our afflicted Quéene: alas, I thinke
No martyrdome might well compare with hirs.
So ofte as I recorde hir reſtleſſe ſtate,
Alas me thinkes I féele a ſhiuering feare
Flit to and fro along my fluſhing vaines.
Alas for ruth, that thus two brethren ſhoulde,
Enforce themſelues to ſhed each others bloud.
Where are the lawes of nature nowe become?
Can fleſhe of fleſhe, alas can bloud of bloud,
So far forget it ſelfe, as ſlay it ſelfe?
O lowring ſtarres, O dimme and angrie ſkies,
O geltie fate, ſuche miſchiefe ſet aſide.
But if ſupernall powers decréed haue,
That death muſt be the ende of this debate,
Alas what floudes of teares ſhall then ſuffiſe,
To wéepe and waile the néere approching death.
I meane the death of ſonnes and mother both,
And with their death the ruine and decay,
Of Oedipus and his princely race:
But loe, here Creon cōmes with carefull cheare:
Tis time that now I ende my iuſt complaint.
ALthough I ſtraightly charge my tender childe
To flée from Thebes for ſafegarde of him ſelfe,
And that long ſince he parted from my ſight,
Yet doe I greatly hang in lingring doubt,
Leaſt paſſing through the gates, the priuie watch
Hath ſtayed him by ſome ſuſpect of treaſon.
And ſo therewhile, the prophets hauing ſkride
His hidden fate, he purchaſt haue the death
Which I by all meanes ſought he might eſchewe:
And this miſchaunce ſo much I feare the more,
How much the wiſhed conqueſt at the firſt,
Fell happily vnto the towne of Thebes,
"But wiſe men ought with patience to ſuſtaine
"The ſundrie haps that ſlipperie fortune frames.
Alas, who can direct my haſtie ſteppes
Vnto the brother of our wofull Quéene?
But loe where carefully he ſtandeth here.
If ſo the minde may dread his owne miſhap,
Then dread I much, this man that ſéekes me thus,
Hath brought the death of my beloued ſonne.
My Lorde, the thing you feare is very true,
Your ſonne Meneceus no longer liues.
Alas who can withſtand the heauenly powers?
Well, it beſéemes not me, ne yet my yeares,
In booteleſſe plaint to waſt my wailefull teares:
Do thou recount to me his luckleſſe deathe,
The order, forme, and manner of the ſame.
Your ſonne (my Lorde) came to Eteocles,
And tolde him this in preſence of the reſt:
Renoumed King, neither your victorie,
Ne yet the ſafetie of this princely Realme
In armour doth conſiſt, but in the death
Of me, of me, (O moſt victorious King)
So heauenly dome of mightie Ioue commaunds.
I (knowing what auayle my death ſhould yéeld
Vnto your grace, and vnto natiue land)
Might well be déemde a moſt vngratefull ſonne
Vnto this worthy towne, if I would ſhunne
The ſharpeſt death to do my countrie good:
In mourning wéede now let the veſtall Nimphes,
With fainyng tunes commend my faultleſſe ghoſt
To higheſt heauens, while I deſpoyle my ſelfe,
That afterwarde (ſith Ioue will haue it ſo)
To ſaue your liues, I may receyue my death,
Of you I craue, O curteous Citizens,
To ſhrine my corps in tombe of marble ſtone:
Whereon graue this: Meneceus here doth lie,
For countries cauſe that was content to die.
This ſaide, alas, he made no more a doe,
But drewe his ſword, and ſheathde it in his breſt.
No more, I haue inough, returne ye nowe
From whence ye came.
Well, ſince the bloud of my beloued ſonne,
Muſt ſerue to ſlake the wrath of angrie Ioue,
And ſince his onely death muſt bring to Thebes
A quiet ende of hir vnquiet ſtate,
Me thinkes good reaſon would, that I henceforth
Of Thebane ſoyle ſhould beare the kingly ſwaye:
Yea ſure, and ſo I will ere it belong,
Either by right, or elſe by force of armes.
Of al miſhap loe here the wicked broode,
My ſiſter firſt eſpouſed hath hir ſonne
That ſlewe his fire, of whoſe accurſed ſéede
Two brethren ſprang, whoſe raging hatefull hearts,
By force of boyling yre are bolne ſo ſore
As each do thyrſt to ſucke the others bloude:
But why do I ſuſtaine the ſmart hereof?
Why ſhould my bloud be ſpilt for others gilte?
Oh welcome were that meſſenger to me
That brought me word of both my nephewes deathes:
Then ſhould it ſoone be ſene in euery eye,
Twixt prince and prince what difference would appeare,
Then ſhould experience ſhewe what griefe it is
To ſerue the humours of vnbridled youth.
Now will I goe for to prepare with ſpéede
The funerals of my yong giltleſſe ſonne,
The which perhaps may be accompanyed
With th'obſequies of proude Eteocles.
O Bliſful concord, bredde in ſacred breſt
Of him that guides the reſtleſſe rolling ſky,
That to the earth for mans aſſured reſt
From heigth of heauens vouchſafeſt downe to flie,
In thée alone the mightie power doth lie,
With ſwete accorde to kepe the frouning ſtarres
And euery planet elſe from hurtfull warres.
In thée, in thée ſuch noble vertue bydes,
As may commaund the mightieſt Gods to bend,
From thée alone ſuch ſugred frendſhip ſlydes
As mortall wightes can ſcarcely comprehend,
To greateſt ſtrife thou ſetſt delightfull ende,
O holy peace, by thée are onely founde
The paſſing ioyes that euery where abound.
Thou onely thou, through thy celeſtiall might,
Didſt firſt of al, the heauenly pole deuide
From th'olde confuſed heape that Chaos hight:
Thou madſte the Sunne, the Moone, and ſtarres to glide,
With ordred courſe about this world ſo wide:
Thou haſt ordainde Dan Tytans ſhining light,
By dawne of day to chaſe the darkeſome night.
When tract of time returnes the luſtie Ver.
By thée alone, the buddes and bloſſomes ſpring,
The fieldes with floures be garniſht euery where,
The blooming trées, aboundant fruite do bring,
The cherefull birds melodiouſly do ſing,
Thou doſt appoint, the crop of ſommers ſéede
For mans reliefe, to ſerue the winters néede.
Thou doeſt inſpire the heartes of princely péeres
By prouidence, procéeding from aboue,
In flowring youth to chooſe their worthie féeres,
With whome they liue in league of laſting loue,
Till fearefull death doth flitting life remoue,
And loke how faſt, to death man payes his due,
So faſt againe, doſte thou his ſtocke renue.
By thée, the baſeſt thing aduaunced is,
Thou euerie where, doſt graffe ſuch golden peace,
As filleth man, with more than earthly bliſſe,
The earth by thée, doth yelde hir ſwete increaſe
At becke of thée, all bloudy diſcords ceaſe,
And mightieſt Realmes in quiet do remaine,
Wheras thy hand doth holde the royall raine.
But if thou faile, then al things gone to wracke,
The mother then, doth dread hir naturall childe,
Then euery towne is ſubiect to the ſacke,
Then ſpotleſſe maids, the virgins be defilde,
Then rigor rules, then reaſon is exilde:
And this, thou wofull Thebes, to our great paine,
With preſent ſpoile, art likely to ſuſtaine.
Me thinke I heare the wailfull wéeping cries
Of wretched dames, in euerie coaſt reſound,
Me thinkes I ſée, how vp to heauenly ſkies
From battred walls, the thundring clappes rebound,
Me thinke I heare, how all things go to ground,
Me thinke I ſée, how ſouldiers wounded lye
With gaſping breath, and yet they can not dye.
By meanes wherof, oh ſwete Meneceus he,
That giues for countries cauſe his guiltleſſe life,
Of others all, moſt happy ſhall he be:
His ghoſt ſhall flit from broiles of bloudy ſtrife,
To heauenly bliſſe, where pleaſing ioyes be rife:
And would to God, that this his fatall ende
From further plagues, our citie might defend.
O ſacred God, giue eare vnto thy thrall,
That humbly here vpon thy name doth call,
O let not now, our faultleſſe bloud be ſpilt,
For hote reuenge of any others gilt.
ALas what ſhall I do? bemone my ſelfe?
Or rue the ruine of my Natiue lande,
About the which ſuch cloudes I ſée encloſde,
As darker cannot couer dreadfull hell.
With mine own eyes I ſaw my own deare ſonne
All gorde with bloud of his too bloudy breſt,
Which he hath ſhed full like a friend, too deare
To his countrey, and yet a cruell foe
To me, that was his friend and father both.
Thus to him ſelfe he gaynde a famous name,
And glory great, to me redoubled payne:
Whoſe hapleſſe death in my afflicted houſe,
Hath put ſuche playnt, as I ne can eſpie
What comfort might acquiet their diſtreſſe.
I hither come my ſiſter for to ſéeke,
Iocaſta, ſhe that might in wofull wiſe
Amid hir high and ouer pining cares,
Prepare the baynes for his ſo wretched corps,
And eke for him that nowe is not in life,
May pay the due that to the dead pertaynes,
And for the honor he did well deſerue,
To giue ſome giftes vnto infernall Gods.
My Lorde, your ſiſter is gone forth long ſince,
Into the campe, and with hir Antigone,
Hir daughter deare.
Into the campe? alas and what to do?
She vnderſtoode, that for this realme foorthwith
Hir ſonnes were gréed in combate for to ioyne.
Alas, the funerals of my deare ſonne
Diſmayed me ſo, that I ne did receiue,
Ne ſéeke to knowe theſe newe vnwelcome newes.
But loe, beholde a playne apparant ſigne
Of further feares: the furious troubled lookes
Of him that commeth heere ſo haſtilye.
ALas, alas, what ſhall I doe? alas,
What ſhriching voyce may ſerue my wofull wordes?
O wretched I, ten thouſande times a wretch,
The meſſanger of dread and cruell death
Yet more miſhap? and what vnhappie newes:
My Lord, your nephues both haue loſt their liues.
Out and alas, to me and to this towne,
Thou doeſt accompt great ruine and decay,
You royall familie of Oedipus:
And heare you this? your liege and ſoueraigne Lordes
The brethren both are ſlayne and done to death.
O cruell newes, moſt cruell that can come,
O newes that might theſe ſtony walles prouoke
For tender ruthe to bruſt in bitter teares,
And ſo they would, had they the ſenſe of man.
O worthy yong Lordes, that vnworthy were
Of ſuch vnworthy death, O me moſte wretch.
More wretched ſhall ye déeme your ſelfe, my lord,
When you ſhall heare of further miſerie.
And can there be more miſerie than this?
With hir deare ſonnes the quéene hir ſelf is ſlaine.
Bewayle ladies, alas good ladies waile,
This harde miſchaunce, this cruell common euill,
Ne hencefoorth hope for euer to reioyce.
O Iocaſta, miſerable mother,
What hapleſſe ende thy life alas hath hent?
Percaſe the heauens purueyed had the ſame,
Moued therto by the wicked wedlocke
Of Oedipus thy ſonne yet might thy ſcuſe
But iuſtly made, that knewe not of the crime.
But tell me meſſanger, oh tell me yet
The death of theſe two brethren, driuen therto,
Not thus all onely by their drearie fate,
But by the banning and the bitter curſſe
Of their cruell ſire, borne for our annoy,
And here on earth the onely ſourſſe of euill.
Then know my Lorde, the battell that begonne
Vnder the walles, was brought to luckie ende.
Eteocles had made his fotemen flée
Within their trenches, to their foule reproche:
But herewithall the brethren both ſtraightway
Eche other chalenge foorth into the fielde,
By combate ſo to ſtinte their cruell ſtrife,
Who armed thus amid the fielde appeard,
Firſt Polynice turning toward Gréece
His louely lookes, gan Iuno thus beſéeche:
O heauenly quéene, thou ſéeſt, that ſince the day
I firſt did wedde Adraſtus daughter deare,
And ſtayde in Gréece, thy ſeruaunt haue I bene:
Then (be it not for mine vnworthineſſe)
Graunt me this grace, the victorie to winne,
Graunt me, that I with high triumphant hande,
May bathe this blade within my brothers breſt:
I know I craue vnworthy victorie,
Vnworthy triumphes, and vnworthy ſpoyles,
Lo he the cauſe, my cruell enimie.
The people wept to beare the wofull wordes
Of Polynice, foreſéeing eke the ende
Of this outrage and cruell combate tane,
Eche man gan looke vpon his drouping mate,
With mindes amazed, and trembling hearts for dread,
Whom pitie perced for theſe youthfull knightes.
Eteocles with eyes vp caſt to heauen,
Thus ſayde:
O mightie loue his daughter graunt to me,
That this right hande with this ſharpe armed launce
(Paſſing amid my brothers cankred breſt,)
It may eke pierce that cowarde hart of his,
And ſo him ſlea that thus vnworthily
Diſturbes the quiet of our common weale.
So ſayde Eteocles, and trumpets blowne,
To ſende the ſummons of their bloudy fighte,
That one the other fiercely did encounter,
Like Lions two yfraught with boyling wrath,
Bothe coucht their launces full agaynſt the face,
But heauen it nolde that there they ſhould them teinte:
Vpon the battred ſhields the mightie ſpeares
Are bothe ybroke, and in a thouſande ſhiuers
Amid the ayre flowne vp into the heauens:
Beholde agayne, with naked ſworde in hande,
Eche one the other furiouſly aſſaultes.
Here they of Thebes, there ſtoode the Greekes in doubt,
Of whom doth eche man féele more chilling dread,
Leaſt any of the twayne ſhould loſe his life,
Than any of the twayne did féele in fight.
Their angry lookes, their deadly daunting blowes.
Might witneſſe well, that in their heartes remaynde
As cankred hate, diſdayne, and furious moode,
As euer bred in beare or tygers breſt.
The firſt that hapt to hurt was Polinice,
Who ſmote the righte thighe of Eteocles:
But as we déeme, the blow was nothing déepe,
Then cryed the Gréekes, and lepte with lightned harts,
But ſtreight agayne they helde their peace, for why?
Eteocles gan thruſt his wicked ſworde
In the lefte arme of vnarmed Pollinice,
And let the bloud from bare vnfenced fleſhe.
With falling drops diſtill vpon the ground,
Ne long he ſtayes, but with an other thruſt
His brothers belly boweld with his blade,
Then wretched he, with bridle left at large,
From of his horſſe fell pale vpon the ground,
Ne long it was, but downe our duke diſmountes
From of his ſtartling ſteede, and runnes in haſt,
His brothers hapleſſe helme for to vnlace,
And with ſuch hungry minde deſired ſpoyle,
(As one that thought the fielde already woonne)
That at vnwares, his brothers dagger drawne,
And griped faſt within the dying hand,
Vnder his ſide he reckleſſe doth receiue,
That made the way to his wyde open hart.
Thus falles Eteocles his brother by,
From both whoſe breaſts the bloud faſt bubling, gaue
A ſory ſhewe to Greekes and Thebanes both.
Oh wretched ende of our vnhappie Lordes.
Oh Oedipus, I muſt bewaile the death
Of thy deare ſonnes, that were my nephewes both,
But of theſe blowes thou oughteſt féele the ſmarte,
That with thy wonted prayers, thus haſt brought
Such noble blouds to this vnnoble end.
But now tell on, what followed of the Quéene?
Whē thus with piecced harts, by their owne hands
The brothers fell and wallowed in their bloud,
(That one ſtill tumbling on the others gore)
Came their afflicted mother, then to late,
And eke with hir, chaſt childe Antygone,
Who ſaw no ſooner how their fates had falne,
But with the doubled echo of alas,
She dymmde the ayre with loude complaints and cryes:
Oh ſonnes (quod ſhe) too late came all my helpe,
And all to late haue I my ſuccour ſent:
And with theſe wordes, vpon their carcas colde
She ſhriched ſo, as might haue ſtayed the Sunne
To mourne with hir: the wofull ſiſter eke,
(That both hir chekes did bathe in flowing teares)
Out from the depth of hir tormented breſt,
With ſcalding ſighes gan draw thefe weary words,
O my deare brethren, why abandon ye
Our mother deare, when theſe hir aged yeares,
(That of themſelues are weake and growne with griefe,)
Stoode moſt in neede of your ſuſtaining helpe?
Why doe you leaue hir thus diſconſolate?
At ſounde of ſuch hir wéeping long lament,
Eteocles our king helde vp his hand,
And ſent from bottome of his wofull breſt
A doubled ſighe, deuided with his griefe,
In faithfull token of his feeble will
To recomfort his mother and ſiſter both:
And in ſteade of ſwéete contenting words,
The trickling teares raynde downe his paled chekes:
Then claſpt his hands, and ſhut his dying eyes.
But Polynice, that turned his rolling eyen
Vnto his mother and his ſiſter deare,
With hollow voyce and fumbling toung, thus ſpake:
Mother, you ſee how I am now arryued
Vnto the heauen of mine vnhappie ende:
Now nothing doth remaine to me, but this,
That I lament my ſiſters life and yours,
Left thus in euerlaſting woe and griefe:
So am I ſory for Eteocles,
Who though he were my cruell enimie,
He was your ſonne, and brother yet to me:
But ſince theſe ghoſtes of ours muſt néedes go downe
With ſtaggring ſteppes into the Stigian reigne,
I you beſech, mother and ſiſter bothe,
Of pitie yet, that you will me procure
A royall tombe within my natiue realme:
And now ſhut vp with thoſe your tender bandes,
Theſe grieffull eyes of mine, whoſe dazeled light
Shadowes of dreadfull death be come to cloſe.
Now reſt in peace, this ſayde, he yéelded vp
His fainting ghoſt, that ready was to part.
The mother thus beholding both hir ſonnes
Ydone to death, and ouercome with dole,
Drewe out the dagger of hir Pollinice,
From brothers breſt, and gorde therewyth her throt,
Falling bet wéene hir ſonnes:
Then with hir féebled armes, ſhe doth vnfolde
Their bodies both, as if for company
Hir vncontented corps were yet content
To paſſe with them in Charons ferrie boate.
When cruell fate had thus with force bereft
The wofull mother and hir two deare ſonnes,
All ſodenly allarme, allarme, they crye,
And hote conflict began for to aryſe
Betwene our armie and our enemyes:
For either part would haue the victorye.
A while they did with equall force maintaine
The bloudy fight, at laſt the Gréekes do flie,
Of whom could hardly any one eſcape,
For in ſuch hugie heapes our men them ſlew.
The ground was couerde all with carcaſes:
And of our ſouldiers, ſome gan ſpoyle the dead,
Some other were that parted out the pray,
And ſome purſuing. Antigone toke vp
The Queene Iocaſta, and the brethren both,
Whom in a chariot hither they will bring
Ere long: and thus, although we gotten haue
The victory ouer our enemies,
Yet haue we loſt much more than we haue wonne.
O hard miſhap, we doe not onely heare
The wearie newes of their vntimely death,
But eke we muſt with wayling eyes beholde
Their bodies deade, for loke where they be brought.
MOſt bitter plaint, O ladyes, vs behoues
Behoueth eke not onely bitter plainte,
But that our heares dyſheuylde from our heades
About our ſhoulders hang, and that our breſts
With bouncing blowes be all be battered,
Our gaſtly faces with our nayles defaced:
Behold, your Quéene twixt both hir ſonnes lyes ſlayne,
The Quéene whom you did loue and honour both,
The Quéene that did ſo tenderly bring vp
And nouriſhe you, eche one like to hir owne,
Now hath ſhe left you all (O cruell hap)
With hir too cruell death in dying dreade,
Pyning with penſifeneſſe without all helpe.
O weary life, why bydſte thou in my breaſt
And I contented be that theſe mine eyes
Should ſée hir dye that gaue to me this life,
And I not venge hir death by loſſe of life?
Who can me giue a fountaine made of mone,
That I may weepe as muche as is my will,
To ſowſſe this ſorow vp in ſwelling teares?
What ſtony hart could leaue for to lament?
O Polinice, now haſt thou with thy bloud
Bought all too deare the title to this realme,
That cruell he Eteocles thée refte,
And now alſo hath reſt thée of thy life,
Alas, what wicked dede can wrath not doe?
And out alas for mee.
Whyle thou yet liuedſt, I had a liuely hope
To haue ſome noble wight to be my phéere,
By whome I might be crownde a royall Quéene:
But now, thy haſtie death hath done to dye
This dying hope of mine, that hope hencefoorth
None other wedlocke, but tormenting woe,
If ſo theſe trembling hands for cowarde dread
Dare not preſume to ende this wretched life.
Alas deare dame, let not thy raging griefe
Heape one miſhap vpon anothers head.
O dolefull day, wherein my ſory ſire
Was borne, and yet O more vnhappie houre
When he was crowned king of ſtately Thebes
The Hymenei in vnhappie bed,
And wicked wedlocke, wittingly did ioyne,
The giltleſſe mother with hir giltie ſonne,
Out of which roote we be the braunches borne,
To beare the ſcourge of their ſo foule offence:
And thou, O father, thou that for this facte,
Haſte torne thine eyes from thy tormented head,
Giue eare to this, come foorth, and bende thine eare
To bloudie newes, that canſt not them beholde:
Happie in that, for if thine eyes could ſée
Thy ſonnes bothe ſlayne, and euen betwéene them bothe
Thy wife and mother dead, bathed and imbrude
All in one bloud, then wouldſt thou dye for dole,
And ſo might ende all our vnluckie ſtocke.
But moſt vnhappie nowe, that lacke of ſighte
Shall linger life within thy luckleſſe breſt,
And ſtill tormented in ſuche miſerie,
Shall alwayes dye, bicauſe thou canſt not dye.
WHy doſt thou call out of this darkeſome denne,
(The luſtleſte lodge of my lamenting yeres,)
(O daughter deare) thy fathers blinded eyes,
Into the light I was not worthy of?
Or what ſuche ſight (O cruell deſtenie)
Without tormenting cares might I beholde,
That image am of deathe and not of man?
O father mine, I bring vnluckie newes
Vnto your eares, your ſonnes are nowe both ſlayne,
Ne doth your wife (that wonted was to guyde
So piteouſly your ſtayleſſe ſtumbling ſteppes)
Now ſée this light, alas and welaway.
O heape of infinite calamities,
And canſt thou yet encreaſe when I thought leaſt
That any griefe more great could grow in thée?
But tell me yet, what kinde of cruell death
Had theſe thrée ſory ſoules?
Without offence to ſpeake, deare father mine,
The luckleſſe lotte, the frowarde frowning fate
That gaue you life to ende your fathers life,
Haue ledde your ſonnes to reaue eche others life.
Of them I thought no leſſe, but tell me yet
What cauſeleſſe death hath caught from me my deare,
(What ſhall I call hir) mother or my wife?
When as my mother ſawe hir deare ſonnes dead,
As penſiue pangs had preſt hir tender heart,
With bloudleſſe chéekes and gaſtly lookes ſhe fell,
Drawing the dagger from Eteocles ſide,
She gorde hirſelfe with wide recureleſſe wounde:
And thus, without mo words, gaue vp the ghoſt,
Embracing both hir ſonnes with both hir armes.
In theſe affrightes this froſen heart of mine,
By feare of death maynteines my dying life.
This drearie day is cauſe of many euils,
Poore Oedipus, vnto thy progenie,
The Gods yet graunt it may become the cauſe
Of better happe to this afflicted realme.
GOod Ladies leaue your booteleſſe vayne complaynt,
Leaue to lament, cut off your wofull cryes,
High time it is as now for to prouide
The funerals for the renowmed king:
And thou Oedipus hearken to my wordes,
And know thus muche, that for thy daughters dower,
Antigone with Hemone ſhall be wedde.
Thy ſonne our king not long before his death
Aſſigned hath the kingdome ſhould deſcende
To me, that am his mothers brother borne,
And ſo the ſame might to my ſonne ſuccéede.
Now I that am the lorde and king of Thebes,
Will not permit that thou abide therein:
Ne maruell yet of this my heady will,
Ne blame thou me, for why, the heauens aboue
(Which onely rule the rolling life of man,)
Haue ſo ordeynde, and that my words be true,
Tyreſias he that knoweth things to come,
By truſtie tokens hath foretolde the towne,
That while thou didſt within the walles remayne,
It ſhould be plagned ſtill with penurie:
Wherfore departe, and thinke not that I ſpeake
Theſe wofull wordes for hate I beare to thée,
But for the weale of this afflicted realme.
O foule accurſed fate, that haſt me bredde
To beare the burthen of the miſerie
Of this colde death, which we accompt for life:
Before my birth my father vnderſtoode
I ſhould him ſlea, and ſcarcely was I borne,
When he me made a pray for ſauage beaſtes.
But what? I ſlew him yet, then caught the crowne,
And laſt of all defilde my mothers bedde,
By whom I haue this wicked ofſpring got:
And to this heinous crime and filthy facte
The heauens haue from highe enforced me,
Agaynſt whoſe doome no counſell can preuayle.
Thus hate I now my life, and laſt of all,
Lo by the newes of this ſo cruell death
Of bothe my ſonnes and deare beloued wife,
Mine angrie conſtellation me commaundes
Withouten eyes to wander in mine age,
When theſe my wéery, weake, and crooked limme:
Haue greateſt néede to craue their quiet reſt.
O cruell Creon, wilt thou ſlea me ſo,
For cruelly thou doſte but murther me,
Out of my kingdome now to chaſe me thus:
Yet can I not with humble minde beſéeche
Thy curteſie, ne fall before thy féete.
Let fortune take from me theſe worldly giftes,
She can not conquere this courageous heart,
That neuer yet could well be ouercome,
To force me yéelde for feare to villanie:
Do what thou canſt I will be Oedipus.
So haſt thou reaſon Oedipus, to ſay,
And for my parte I would thée counſell eke,
Still to maynteine the high and hawtie minde,
That hath bene euer in thy noble heart:
For this be ſure, if thou wouldſt kiſſe theſe knées,
And practiſe eke by prayer to preuayle,
No pitie coulde perſuade me to conſent
That thou remayne one onely houre in Thebes.
And nowe, prepare you worthie Citizens,
The funeralls that duely doe pertayne
Vnto the Quéene, and to Eteocles,
And eke for them prouide their ſtately tombes.
But Pollynice, as common enimie
Vnto his countrey, carrie foorth his corps
Out of the walles, ne none ſo hardie be
On peine of death his bodie to engraue,
But in the fieldes let him vnburied lye,
Without his honour, and without complaynte,
An open praie for ſauage beaſtes to ſpoyle.
And thou Antigone, drie vp thy teares,
Plucke vp thy ſprites, and chéere thy harmeleſſe hearte
To mariage: for ere theſe two dayes paſſe,
Thou ſhalt eſpouſe Hemone myne onely heire.
Father, I ſée vs wrapt in endleſſe woe,
And nowe muche more doe I your ſtate lamente,
Than theſe that nowe be dead, not that I thinke
Theyr greate miſſehappes too little to bewayle,
But this, that you (you onely) doe ſurpaſſe
All wretched wightes that in this worlde remayne.
But you my Lorde, why baniſhe you with wrong
My father thus out of his owne perforce?
And why will you denye theſe guiltleſſe bones
Of Polinice, theyr graue in countrey ſoyle?
So would not I, ſo woulde Eteocles.
He cruel was, you fonde to hold his heſtes.
Is then a fault to doe a kings cōmaund?
When his cōmaunde is cruell and vniuſt.
Is it vniuſt that he vnburied be?
He not deſeru'd ſo cruel puniſhment.
He was his countreys cruell enimie.
Or elſe was he that helde him from his right.
Bare he not armes againſt his natiue land?
Offendeth he that ſekes to winne his owne?
In ſpite of thée he ſhall vnburied be.
In ſpite of thée theſe hands ſhall burie him.
And with him eke then will I burie thée.
So graunt the gods, I get none other graue,
Then with my Polinices deare to reſt.
Go ſirs, lay holde on hir, and take hir in.
I will not leaue this corps vnburied.
Canſt thou vndoe the thing that is decréed?
A wicked foule decrée to wrong the dead.
The ground ne ſhall ne ought to couer him.
Creon, yet I beſeche thée for the loue,
Away I ſay, thy prayers not preuaile.
That thou didſt beare Iocaſta in hir life,
Thou doſt but waſte thy words amid the wind.
Yet graunt me leaue to waſhe his wounded corps.
It can not be that I ſhould graunt thée ſo.
O my deare Polinice, this tirant yet
With all his worongfull force can not fordoe,
But I will kiſſe theſe colde pale lippes of thine,
And waſhe thy wounds with my waymenting teares.
O ſimple wench, O fonde and fooliſhe girle,
Beware, beware, thy teares do not foretell
Some ſigne of hard miſhap vnto thy mariage.
No, no, for Hemone will I neuer wed.
Doſt thou refuſe the mariage of my ſonne?
I will nor him, nor any other wed.
Againſt thy will then muſt I thée conſtraine.
If thou me force, I ſweare thou ſhalt repent.
What canſt thou cauſe that I ſhould once repent?
With bloudy knife I can this knot vnknit.
And what a foole were thou to kill thy ſelfe?
I will enſue ſome worthie womans ſteppes.
Speake out Antigone, that I may heare.
This hardie hande ſhall ſoone diſpatch his life.
O ſimple foole, and darſte thou be ſo bolde?
Why ſhould I dread to do ſo doughtie déed?
And wherfore doſt thou wedlocke ſo deſpiſe?
In cruel exile for to folow him.
What others might beſéeme, beſéemes not thée.
If néede require with him eke will I die.
Departe, departe, and with thy father die,
Rather than kill my childe with bloudie knife:
Go helliſh monſter, go out of the towne.
Daughter, I muſt commende thy noble heart.
Father, I will not liue in companie
And you alone wander in wilderneſſe.
O yes deare daughter, leaue thou me alone
Amid my plagues: be merrie while thou maiſt.
And who ſhal guide theſe aged féete of yours,
That baniſht bene, in blinde neceſſitie?
I will endure, as fatal lot me driues:
Reſting theſe crooked ſorie ſides of mine
Where ſo the heauens ſhall lend me harborough.
And in exchange of rich and ſtately towers,
The woodes, the wilderneſſe, the darkeſome dennes,
Shall be the bowre of mine vnhappie bones.
O father now where is your glorie gone?
"One happie day did raiſe me to renoune,
"One hapleſſe day hath throwne mine honour doune.
Yet will I beare a part of your miſhappes.
That ſitteth not amid thy pleaſant yeares.
Deare father yes, let youth giue place to age.
Where is thy moother? let me touch hir face,
That with theſe handes I may yet féele the harme
That theſe blinde eyes forbid me to beholde.
Here father, here hir corps, here put your hande.
O wife, O moother, O both wofull names,
O wofull mother, and O wofull wyfe,
O woulde to God, alas, O woulde to God
Thou nere had bene my mother, nor my wyfe.
But where lye nowe the paled bodies two,
Of myne vnluckie ſonnes, Oh where be they?
Lo here they lye one by an other deade.
Stretch out this hand, dere daughter, ſtretch this hande
Vpon their faces.
Loe father, here, lo, nowe you touche them both.
O bodies deare, O bodies dearely boughte
Vnto your father, bought with high miſſehap.
O louely name of my deare Pollinice,
Why can I not of cruell Creon craue,
Ne with my death nowe purchaſe thée a graue?
Nowe commes Apollos oracle to paſſe,
That I in Athens towne ſhould end my dayes:
And ſince thou doeſt, O daughter myne, deſire
In this exile to be my wofull mate,
Lende mée thy hande, and let vs goe togither.
Loe, here all preſt my deare beloued father,
A féeble guyde, and eke a ſimple ſcowte,
To paſſe the perills in a doubtfull waye.
Vnto the wretched, be a wretched guyde.
In this all onely equall to my father.
And where ſhall I ſette foorth my trembling féete?
O reache mée yet ſome ſurer ſtaffe, to ſteye
My ſtaggryng pace amidde theſe wayes vnknowne.
Here father here, and here ſet forth your féete.
Nowe can I blame none other for my harmes
But ſecrete ſpight of foredecréed fate,
Thou arte the cauſe, that crooked, olde and blynde,
I am exilde farre from my countrey ſoyle,
And ſuffer dole that I ought not endure.
O father, father, Iuſtice lyes on ſléepe,
"Ne doth regarde the wrongs of wretchedneſſe,
"Ne princes ſwelling pryde it doth redreſſe.
O carefull raytife, howe am I nowe changd
From that I was? I am that Oedipus,
That whylome had triumphant victorie,
And was bothe dread and honored eke in Thebes:
But nowe (ſo pleaſeth you my frowarde ſtarres)
Downe headlong hurlde in depth of myſerie,
So that remaynes of Oedipus no more
As nowe in mée, but euen the naked name,
And lo, this image, that reſembles more
Shadowes of death, than ſhape of Oedipus.
O father, nowe forgette the pleaſaunt dayes
And happie lyfe that you did whylom leade,
The muſe whereof redoubleth but you griefe:
Suſteyne the ſmarte of theſe your preſent paynes
With pacience, that beſt may you preſerue.
Lo where I come, to liue and die with you,
Not (as ſometymes) the daughter of a king,
But as an abiect nowe in pouertie,
That you, by preſence of ſuche faithfull guide,
May better beare the wrecke of miſerie.
O onely comforte of my cruell happe.
Your daughters pitie is but due to you?
Woulde God I might as well ingraue the corps
Of my deare Pollinice, but I ne maye,
And that I can not, doubleth all my doe.
This thy deſire, that is both good and iuſte,
Imparte to ſome that be thy truſtie frendes,
Who movde with pitie, maye procure the ſame.
Beléeue me father, when dame fortune frownes,
"Be fewe that fynde truſtie companions.
And of thoſe fewe, yet one of thoſe am I:
Wherefore, goe we nowe daughter, leade the waye
Into the ſtonie rockes and higheſt hilles,
Where feweſt trackes of ſteppings may be ſpyde.
"Who once hath ſit in chaire of dignitie,
"May ſhame to ſhewe himſelf in miſerie.
From thée, O countrey, am I forſt to parte,
Deſpoiled thus in flower of my youth,
And yet I leaue within my enimies rule,
Iſmene my infortunate ſiſter.
Deare citizens, beholde your Lord and King
That Thebes ſet in quiet gouernment,
Now as you ſée, neglected of you all,
And in theſe ragged ruthfull wéedes bewrapt,
Ychaſed from his natiue countrey ſoyle,
Betakes himſelf (for ſo this tirant will)
To euerlaſting baniſhment: but why
Do I lament my luckleſſe lot in vaine?
"Since euery man muſt beare with quiet minde,
"The fate that heauens haue earſt to him aſſignde.
EXample here, loe take by Oedipus,
You Kings and Princes in proſperitie,
And euery one that is deſirous
To ſway the ſeate of worldlie dignitie,
How fickle tis to truſt in Fortunes whele:
For him whome now ſhe hoyſeth vp on hie,
If ſo he chaunce on any ſide to réele,
She hurles him downe in twinkling of an eye:
And him againe, that grovleth nowe on ground,
And lieth lowe in dungeon of diſpaire,
Hir whirling whéele can heaue vp at a bounde,
And place aloft in ſtay of ſtatelie chaire.
As from the Sunne the Moone withdrawes hir face,
So might of man doth yéelde dame Fortune place.
LO here the fruit of high aſpiring minde,
Who wéenes to mount aboue the moouing Skies:
Lo here the trap that titles proud do finde,
Sée, ruine growes, when moſt we reach to riſe:
Sweete is the name, and ſtatelie is the raigne
Of kinglie rule, and ſwey of royall ſeate,
But bitter is the taſt of Princes gaine,
When climbing heades do hunte for to be great.
Who would forecaſt the banke of reſtleſſe toyle,
Ambitious wightes do freight their breſtes withall,
The growing cares, the feares of dreadfull foyle,
To yll ſucceſſe that on ſuch flightes doth fall,
He would not ſtreyne his practize to atchieue
The largeſt limits of the mightieſt ſtates.
But oh, what fanſies ſwéete do ſtill relieue
The hungrie humor of theſe ſwelling hates?
What poyſon ſwéet inflameth high deſire?
Howe ſoone the hautie heart is pufft with pride?
Howe ſoone is thirſt of ſceptre ſet on fire?
Howe ſoone in riſing mindes doth miſchief ſlide?
What bloudie ſturres doth glut of honor bréede?
Thambitious ſonne doth oft ſurpreſſe his ſire:
Where natures power vnfained loue ſhould ſpread,
There malice raignes and reacheth to be higher.
O blinde vnbridled ſearch of Souereintie,
O tickle traine of euill attayned ſtate,
O fonde deſire of princelie dignitie,
Who climbes too ſoone, he ofte repentes too late.
The golden meane, the happie doth ſuffiſe,
They leade the poſting day in rare delight,
They fill (not féede) their vncontented eyes,
They reape ſuch reſt as doth beguile the might,
They not enuie the pompe of haughtie traine,
Ne dreade the dinte of proude vſurping ſwoorde,
But plaſte alowe, more ſugred ioyes attaine,
Than ſwaye of loftie Scepter can afoorde.
Ceaſe to aſpire then, ceaſe to ſoare ſo hie,
And ſhunne the plague that pierceth noble breaſtes.
To glittring courtes what fondneſſe is to flie,
When better ſtate in baſer Towers reſts?
THe hatefull man that heapeth in his mynde,
Cruell reuenge of wronges forepaſt and done,
May not (with eaſe) ye pleaſaunt pathway finde,
Of friendly verſe which I haue now begone,
Vnleſſe at firſt his angry breſt vntwinde,
The crooked knot which canckred choller knit,
And then recule with reconciled grace.
Likewiſe I finde it ſayde in holy write,
If thou entend to turne thy fearefull face,
To God aboue: make thyne agréement yet,
Firſt with thy Brother whom thou didſt abuſe,
Confeſſe thy faultes, thy frowardneſſe and all,
So that the Lord thy prayer not refuſe.
When I conſider this, and then the brall,
Which raging youth (I will not me excuſe)
Did whilome breede in mine vnmellowed brayne,
I thought it méete before I did aſſay,
To write in ryme the double golden gayne,
Of amitie: firſt yet to take away
The grutch of grief, as thou doeſt me conſtrayne.
By due deſert whereto I now muſt yéeld,
And drowne for aye in depth of Lethes lake,
Diſdaynefull moodes whom frendſhip cannot wéelde:
Pleading for peace which for my parte I make
Of former ſtrife, and henceforth let vs write
The pleaſant fruites of faythfull friends delight.
THis vaine auaile which thou by Mars haſt woonne,
Should not allure thy flitting minde to feelde,
Where ſturdie ſtéeds in depth of dangers roonne,
By guttes welgnawen by clappes that Canons yéelde.
Where faithleſſe friendes by warrefare waxen ware,
And runne to him that giueth beſt rewarde:
No feare of lawes can cauſe them for to care,
But robbe and reaue, and ſteale without regarde,
The fathers coate, the brothers ſtéede from ſtall:
The deare friendes purſe ſhall picked be for pence,
The natiue ſoile, the parentes left and all,
With Tant tra tant, the Campe is marching hence.
But when bare beggrie bidds them to beware,
And late repentance rules them to retire,
Like hiueleſſe Bées they wander here and there,
And hang on them who (earſt) did dreade their ire.
This cut throto life (me ſéemes) thou ſhouldſt not like,
And ſhunne the happie hauen of meane eſtate:
High Ioue (perdy) may ſende what thou doeſt ſéeke,
And heape vp poundes within thy quiet gate.
Nor yet I would that thou ſhouldſt ſpende thy dayes
In idleneſſe to teare a golden time:
Like countrey loutes, which compt none other praiſe,
But greaſe a ſheepe, and learne to ſerue the ſwine.
In vaine were then the giftes which nature lent,
If Pan ſo preſſe to paſſe dame Pallas lore:
But my good friende, let thus thy youth be ſpent,
Serue God thy Lord, and prayſe him euermore.
Search out the ſkill which learned bookes do teach,
And ſerue in féeld when ſhadowes make thée ſure:
Hold with the head, and row not paſt thy reach.
But plead for peace which plenty may procure.
And (for my life) if thou canſt run this race,
Thy bagges of coyne will multiply apace.
THe féeble thred which Lacheſis hath ſponne,
To drawe my dayes in ſhort abode with thée,
Hath wrought a webbe which now (welneare) is donne,
The wale is worne: and (all to late) I ſée
That lingring life doth dally but in vaine,
For Atropos will cut the twiſt in twaine.
I not diſcerne what life but lothſome were,
When faithfull friends are kept in twayne by want:
Nor yet perceiue what pleaſure doth appéere,
To déepe deſires where good ſucceſſe is ſkant.
Such ſpight yet ſhowes dame fortune (if ſhe frowne,)
The haughty harts in high miſhaps to drowne.
Hot be the flames which boyle in friendly mindes,
Cruell the care and dreadfull is the doome:
Slipper the knot which tract of time vntwynds,
Hatefull the life and welcome were the toome.
Bleſt were the day which might deuoure ſuch youth,
And curſt the want that ſéekes to choke ſuch trueth.
This wayling verſe I bathe in flowing teares,
And would my life might end with theſe my lines:
Yer ſtriue I not to force into thine eares,
Such fayned plaints as fickell faith reſignes.
But high forſight in dreames hath ſtopt my breath,
And cauſde the Swanne to ſing before his death.
For lo theſe naked walles do well declare,
My lateſt leaue of thée I taken haue:
And vnknowen coaſtes which I muſt ſéeke with care
Do well diuine that there ſhalbe my graue:
There ſhall my death make many for to mone,
Skarce knowne to them, well knowne to thee alone.
This bowne of thée (as laſt requeſt) I craue,
When true report ſhall ſounde my death with fame:
Vouchſafe yet then to go vnto my graue,
And there firſt write my byrth and then my name:
And how my life was ſhortned many yeares,
By womens wyles as to the world appeares.
And in reward of graunt to this requeſt,
Permit O God my toung theſe woordes to tell:
(When as his pen ſhall write vpon my cheſt)
With ſhriking voyce mine owne deare friend farewell:
No care on earth did ſéeme ſo much to me,
As when my corps was forſt to part from thée.
A Hundreth ſonnes (in courſe but not in kind)
Can witneſſe well that I poſſeſſe no ioye:
The feare of death which fretteth in my mind
Conſumes my hart with dread of darke anoye.
And for eche ſonne a thouſand broken ſléepes
Deuide my dreames with freſh recourſe of cares:
The youngeſt ſiſter ſharpe hir ſheare ſhe kéepes,
To cut my thred, and thus my life it weares.
Yet let ſuch daies, ſuch thouſand reſtleſſe nights,
Spit forth their ſpite, let fates eke ſhowe their force:
Deathes daunting dart where ſo his buffet lights,
Shall ſhape no change within my friendly corſe:
But dead or liue, in heauen, in earth, in hell
I wilbe thine where ſo my carkaſe dwell.
NOt ſtately Troye though Priam yet did liue,
Could now compare Founteine bel'eaü to paſſe:
Nor Syrian towers, whoſe loftie ſteppes did ſtriue,
To climbe the throne where angry Saturne was.
For outward ſhew the ports are of ſuch price,
As ſkorne the coſt which Ceſar ſpilt in Roome:
Such works within as ſtayne the rare deuiſe,
Which whilome he Apelles wrought on toome.
Swift Tiber floud which fed the Romayne pooles,
Puddle to this where Chriſtall melts in ſtreames,
The pleaſaunt place where Muſes kept their ſchooles,
(Not parcht with Phoebe, nor baniſht from his beames)
Yeeld to thoſe Dames, nor ſight, nor fruite, nor ſmell,
Which may be thought theſe gardens to excell.
LAdy receyue, receiue in gracious wiſe,
This ragged verſe, theſe rude ill ſkribled lines:
Too baſe an obiect for your heauenly eyes,
For he that writes his fréedome (lo) reſignes
Into your handes: and fréely yéelds as thrall
His ſturdy necke (earſt ſubiect to no yoke)
But bending now, and headlong preſt to fall,
Before your féete, ſuch force hath beauties ſtroke.
Since then mine eyes (which ſkornd our Engliſh) dames
In forrayne courtes haue choſen you for fayre,
Let be this verſe true token of my flames,
And do not drench your owne in déepe diſpayre.
Onely I craue (as I nill change for new)
That you vouchſafe to thinke your ſeruaunt trew.
THe thriſtles thred which pampred beauty ſpinnes,
In thraldom binds the fooliſh gazing eyes:
As cruell Spiders with their crafty ginnes,
In worthleſſe webbes doe ſnare the ſimple Flies.
The garments gay, the glittring golden gite,
The tyſing talk which flowes from Pallas pooles:
The painted pale, the (too much) red made white,
Are ſmiling baytes to fiſhe for louing fooles.
But lo, when eld in toothleſſe mouth appeares,
And hoary heares in ſtéede of beauties blaze:
Than had I wiſt, doth teach repenting yeares,
The tickle track of craftie Cupides maze.
Twixt faire and foule therfore, twixt great and ſmall,
A louely nuthrowne face is beſt of all.
THe Partridge in the pretie Mertines foote,
Who féeles hir force ſuppreſt with fearfulneſſe,
And findes that ſtrength nor ſtrife can do hir boote,
To ſcape the danger of hir déepe diſtreſſe:
Theſe wofull wordes may ſéeme for to reherſe
Which I muſt write in this waymenting verſe.
What helpeth now (ſayeth ſhe) dame natures ſkill,
To die my feathers like the duſtie ground?
Or what preuayles to lend me winges at will
Which in the ayre can make my bodie bound?
Since from the earth the dogges me draue perforce,
And now aloft the Hauke hath caught my corſe.
If chaunge of colours, could not me conuey,
Yet mought my wings haue ſcapt the dogges deſpite:
And if my wings did fayle to flie away,
Yet mought my ſtrength reſiſt the Merlines might.
But nature made the Merline mée to kill,
And me to yéeld vnto the Merlines will.
My lot is like (déere Dame) beleue me well,
The quiet life which I full cloſely kept.
Was not content in happie ſtate to dwell,
But forth in haſt to gaze on thée it lept.
Deſire thy dogge did ſpring me vp in haſt,
Thou wert the Hauke, whoſe tallents caught me faſt.
What ſhould I then, ſéeke meanes to flie away?
Or ſtriue by force, to breake out of thy féete?
No, no, perdie, I may no ſtrength aſſay,
To ſtriue with thée ywis, it were not méete.
Thou art that Hauke, whom nature made to hent me,
And I the Byrd, that muſt therewith content me.
And ſince Dame nature hath ordayned ſo,
Hir happie heſt I gladly ſhall embrace:
I yéeld my will, although it were to wo,
I ſtand content to take my griefe for grace:
And ſeale it vp within my ſecrete hart,
Which ſeale receiue, as token of my ſmart.
THis tenth of March when Aries receyud
Dame Phoebus rayes, into his horned head:
And I my ſelfe, by learned lore perceyu'd,
That Ver approcht, and froſtie winter fled.
I croſt the Thames, to take the cherefull ayre,
In open féeldes, the weather was ſo fayre.
And as I rowed, faſt by the further ſhore,
I heard a voyce, which ſéemed to lament:
Whereat I ſtay'd, and by a ſtately dore,
I left my Boate, and vp on land I went:
Till at the laſt by laſting paine I found,
The wofull wight, which made this dolefull ſound.
In pleaſant garden (placed all alone)
I ſawe a Dame, who ſat in weary wiſe,
With ſcalding ſighes, ſhe vttred all hir mone,
The ruefull teares, downe rayned from hir eyes:
Hir lowring head, full lowe on hand ſhe layed,
On knée hir arme: and thus this Lady ſayed.
Alas (quod ſhe) behold eche pleaſaunt gréene,
Will now renew, his ſommers liuery,
The fragrant flowers, which haue not long bene ſéene,
Will floriſh now, (ere long) in brauery:
The tender buddes, whom colde hath long kept in,
Will ſpring and ſproute, as they do now begin.
But I (alas) within whoſe mourning minde,
The graffes of grief, are onely giuen to growe,
Cannot enioy the ſpring which others finde,
But ſtill my will, muſt wither all in woe:
The cold of care, ſo nippes my ioyes at roote,
No ſunne doth ſhine, that well can do them boote.
The luſtie Ver, which whilome might exchange
My griefe to ioy, and then my ioyes encreaſe,
Springs now elſe where, and ſhowes to me but ſtrange,
My winters woe, therefore can neuer ceaſe:
In other coaſts, his ſunne full cleare doth ſhine,
And comforts lends to eu'ry mould but mine.
What plant can ſpring, that féeles no force of Ver?
What floure can floriſh, where no ſunne doth ſhine?
Theſe Bales (quod ſhe) within my breaſt I beare,
To breake my barke, and make my pith to pine:
Néedes muſt I fall, I fade both roote and rinde,
My braunches bowe at blaſt of eu'ry winde.
This ſayed: ſhée caſt a glance and ſpied my face,
By ſight whereof, Lord how ſhe chaunged hew?
So that for ſhame, I turned backe a pace
And to my home, my ſelfe in haſt I drew:
And as I could hir woofull wordes reherſe,
I ſet them downe in this waymenting verſe.
Now Ladies you, that know by whom I ſing,
And feele the winter, of ſuch frozen wills:
Of curteſie, yet cauſe this noble ſpring,
To ſend his ſunne, aboue the higheſt hilles:
And ſo to ſhyne, vppon hir fading ſprayes,
Which now in woe, do wyther thus alwayes.
MVch like the ſéely Byrd, which cloſe in Cage is pent,
So ſing I now, not notes of ioye, but layes of déepe lament.
And as the hooded Hauke, which heares the Partrich ſpring,
Who though ſhe féele hir ſelf faſt tied, yet beats hir bating wing:
So ſtriue I now to ſhewe, my feeble forward will,
Although I know my labour loſt, to hop againſt the Hill.
The droppes of darke diſdayne, did neuer drench my hart,
For well I know I am belou'd, if that might eaſe my ſmart.
Ne yet the priuy coales, of glowing ielloſie,
Could euer kindle néedleſſe feare, within my fantaſie.
The rigor of repulſe, doth not renew my playnt,
Nor choyce of change doth moue my mone, nor force me thus to faint.
Onely that pang of payne, which paſſeth all the reſt,
And cankerlike doth fret the hart, within the giltleſſe breſt.
Which is if any bee, moſt like the panges of death,
That preſent grief now gripeth me, & ſtriues to ſtop my breath.
When friendes in mind may méete, and hart in hart embrace,
And abſent yet are faine to playne, for lacke of time and place:
Then may I compt, their loue like ſéede, that ſoone is ſowen,
Yet lacking droppes of heauēly dew, with wéedes is ouergrowē.
The Greyhound is agréeu'd, although he ſée his game,
If ſtil in ſlippe he muſt be ſtayde, when he would chaſe the ſame.
So fares it now by me, who know my ſelfe belou'd
Of one the beſt, in eche reſpect, that euer yet was prou'd.
But ſince my luckleſſe lot, forbids me now to taſte,
The dulcet fruites of my delight, therfore in woes I waſt.
And Swallow like I ſing, as one enforced ſo,
Since others reape the gaineful crop, which I with pain did ſow.
Yet you that marke my ſong, excuſe my Swallowes voyce,
And beare with hir vnpleaſant tunes, which cannot wel reioyce.
Had I or lucke in loue, or leaſe of libertie,
Then ſhould you heare ſome ſwéeter notes, ſo cléere my throte would be.
But take it thus in grée, and marke my playnſong well,
No hart féeles ſo much hurt, as that, which doth in abſence dwell.
DEſire of Fame would force my féeble ſkill,
To prayſe a Counteſſe by hir dew deſert:
But dread of blame holds backe my forward will,
And quencht the coales which kindled in my hart.
Thus am I plongd twene dread and déepe deſire,
To pay the dew which dutie doth require.
And when I call the mighty Gods in ayd
To further forth ſome fine inuention:
My baſhefull ſpirits be full ill afrayd
To purchaſe payne by my preſumption.
Such malice reignes (ſometimes) in heauenly minds,
To puniſh him that prayſeth as he finds.
For Pallas firſt, whoſe filed flowing ſkill,
Should guyde my pen ſome pleaſant words to write,
With angry mood hath fram'd a froward will,
To daſhe deuiſe as oft as I endite.
For why? if once my Ladies gifts were knowne,
Pallas ſhould looſe the prayſes of hir owne.
And bloudy Mars by chaunge of his delight
Hath made Ioues daughter now mine enemie:
In whoſe conceipt my Counteſſe ſhines ſo bright,
That Venus pines for burning ielouſie:
She may go home to Vulcane now agayne,
For Mars is ſworne to be my Ladies ſwayne.
Of hir bright beames Dan Phoebus ſtands in dread,
And ſhames to ſhine within our Horizon:
Dame Cynthia holds in hir horned head,
For feare to looſe by like compariſon:
Lo thus ſhée liues, and laughes them all to ſkorne,
Counteſſe on earth, in heauen a Goddeſſe borne.
And I ſometimes hir ſeruaunt, now hir friend,
Whom heauen and earth for hir (thus) hate and blame:
Haue yet preſume in friendly wiſe to ſpend,
This ragged verſe, in honor of hir name:
A ſimple gift compared by the ſkill,
Yet what may ſéeme ſo déere as ſuch good will.
WHen firſt I thée beheld in colours black and white,
Thy face in forme wel framde wt fauor blooming ſtil:
My burning breſt in cares did chooſe his chief delight,
With pen to painte thy prayſe, contrary to my ſkill:
Whoſe worthineſſe compar'd with this my rude deuiſe,
I bluſh and am abaſht, this worke to enterpriſe.
But when I call to mind thy ſundry gifts of grace,
Full fraught with maners méeke in happy quiet mind:
My haſty hand forthwith doth ſcribble on apace,
Leaſt willing hart might thinke, it ment to come behind:
Thus do both hand and hart theſe carefull méetres vſe,
Twixt hope and trembling feare, my duetie to excuſe.
Wherfore accept theſe lines, and baniſh darke diſdayne,
Be ſure they come from one that loueth thée in chief:
And guerdon me thy friend in like with loue agayne,
So ſhalt thou well be ſure to yéeld me ſuch relief,
As onely may redreſſe my ſorrowes and my ſmart:
For proofe whereof I pledge (deare Dame) to thée my hart.
GIue me my Lute in bed now as I lie,
And lock the doores of mine vnluckie bower:
So ſhall my voyce in mournefull verſe diſcrie
The ſecrete ſmart which cauſeth me to lower:
Reſound you walles an Eccho to my mone,
And thou cold bed wherein I lie alone,
Beare witneſſe yet what reſt thy Lady takes,
When other ſléepe which may enioy their makes.
In prime of youth when Cupide kindled fire,
And warmd my will with flames of feruent loue:
To further forth the fruite of my deſire,
My fréends deuiſde this meane for my behoue.
They made a match according to my mind,
And caſt a ſnare my fanſie for to blind:
Short tale to make: the déede was almoſt donne,
Before I knew which way the worke begonne.
And with this lot I did my ſelfe content,
I lent a liking to my parents choyſe:
With hand and hart I gaue my frée conſent,
And hung in hope for euer to reioyce.
I liu'd and lou'd long time in greater ioy,
Than ſhée which held king Priams ſonne of Troy:
But thrée lewd lots haue chang'd my heauen to hell
And thoſe be theſe, giue eare and marke them well.
Firſt ſlaunder he, which alwayes beareth hate,
To happy harts in heauenly ſtate that bide:
Gan play his part to ſtirre vp ſome debate,
Whereby ſuſpect into my choyſe might glide.
And by his meanes the ſlime of falſe ſuſpect,
Did (as I feare) my deareſt friend infect.
Thus by theſe twayn long was I plungd in paine,
Yet in good hope my hart did ſtill remaine.
But now (aye me) the greateſt grief of all,
(Sound loud my Lute, and tell it out my toong)
The hardeſt hap that euer might befall,
The onely cauſe wherfore this ſong is ſoong,
Is this alas: my loue, my Lord, my Roy,
My choſen pheare, my gemme, and all my ioye,
Is kept perforce out of my dayly ſight,
Whereby I lacke the ſtay of my delight.
In loftie walles, in ſtrong and ſtately towers,
(With troubled minde in ſolitary ſorte,)
My louely Lord doth ſpend his dayes and howers,
A weary life deuoyde of all diſport.
And I poore ſoule muſt lie here all alone,
To tyre my trueth, and wound my will with mone:
Such is my hap to ſhake my blooming time,
With winters blaſtes before it paſſe the prime.
Now haue you heard the ſumme of all my grief,
Whereof to tell my hart (oh) rends in twayne:
Good Ladies yet lend you me ſome relief,
And beare a parte to eaſe me of my payne.
My ſortes are ſuch, that waying well my trueth,
They might prouoke the craggy rocks to rueth,
And moue theſe walles with teares for to lament,
The lothſome life wherein my youth is ſpent.
But thou my Lute, be ſtill, now take thy reſt,
Repoſe thy bones vppon this bed of downe:
Thou haſt diſchargd ſome burden from my breſt,
Wherefore take thou my place, herelie thée downe.
And let me walke to tyre my reſtleſſe minde,
Vntill I may entreate ſome curteous winde
To blow theſe wordes vnto my noble make,
That he may ſée I ſorow for his ſake.
A Lady once did aſke of me,
This preatie thing in priuitie:
Good ſir (quod ſhe) faine would I craue,
One thing which you your ſelfe not haue:
Nor neuer had yet in times paſt,
Nor neuer ſhall while life doth laſt.
And if you ſéeke to find it out,
You looſe your labour out of doubt:
Yet if you loue me as you ſay,
Then giue it me, for ſure you may.
L'Eſcü d'amour, the ſhield of perfect loue,
The ſhield of loue, the force of ſtedfaſt faith,
The force of faith which neuer will remoue,
But ſtandeth faſt, to bide the brunts of death:
That truſtie targe, hath long borne off the blowes,
And broke the thruſts, which abſence at me throwes.
In dolefull dayes I lead an abſent life,
And wound my will with many a weary thought:
I plead for peace, yet ſterue in ſtormes of ſtrife,
I find debate, where quiet reſt was ſought.
Theſe panges with mo, vnto my paine I proue,
Yet beare I all vppon my ſhield of loue.
In colder cares are my conceipts conſumd,
Than Dido felt when falſe Aeneas fled:
In farre more heat, than truſty Troylus fumde,
When craftie Creſsyde dwelt with Diomed:
My hope ſuch froſt, my hot deſire ſuch flame,
That I both fryſe, and ſmoulder in the ſame.
So that I liue, and die in one degrée,
Healed by hope, and hurt againe with dread:
Faſt bound by faith when fanſie would be frée,
Vntied by truſt, though thoughts enthrall my head:
Reuiu'd by ioyes, when hope doth moſt abound,
And yet with grief, in depth of dolors drownd.
In theſe aſſaultes I féele my féebled force
Begins to faint, thus weried ſtill in woes:
And ſcarcely can my thus conſumed corſe,
Hold vp this Buckler to beare of theſe blowes:
So that I craue, or preſence for relief,
Or ſome ſupplie, to eaſe mine abſent grief.
To you (deare Dame) this dolefull plaint I make,
Whoſe onely ſight may ſoone redreſſe my ſmart:
Then ſhew your ſelfe, and for your ſeruaunts ſake,
Make haſt poſt haſt, to helpe a faithfull harte:
Mine owne poore ſhield hath me defended long,
Now lend me yours, for elles you do me wrong.
MY reckleſſe race is runne, gréene youth and pride be paſt,
My riper mellowed yeares beginne to follow on as faſt.
My glancing lookes are gone, which wonted were to prie
In euery gorgeous gariſh glaſſe that gliſtred in mine eie.
My ſight is now ſo dimme, it can behold none ſuch,
No mirrour but the merrie meane, can pleaſe my fanſie muche.
And in that noble glaſſe, I take delight to view,
The faſhions of the wonted worlde, compared by the new.
For marke who liſt to looke, each man is for him ſelfe,
And beates his braine to hord & heape this traſh & worldly pelfe.
Our hands are cloſed vp, great gifts go not abroade,
Few men will lend a locke of heye, but for to gaine a loade.
Giue gaue is a good man, what néede we laſh it out,
The world is wōdrous fearfull now, for danger bids men doubt.
And aſke how chanceth this? or what meanes all this méede?
Forſooth the common anſwer is, becauſe the Lord hath neede.
A noble ieſt by giſſe, I find it in my glaſſe,
The ſame fréehold our Sauiour Chriſt conueyed to his aſſe.
A text to trie the truth, and for this time full fitte,
For where ſhould we our leſſons learne, but out of holy writte?
Firſt marke our only God, which ruleth all the roſt,
He ſets aſide all pompe and pride, wherein fond wordlings boaſt.
His traine is not ſo great, as filthy Sathans band,
A ſmaller heard may ſerue to féede, at our great maſters hand.
Next marke the heathens Gods, and by them ſhall we ſée,
They be not now ſo good fellowes, as they were woont to be.
Ioue, Mars, and Mercurie, Dame Venus and the reſt,
They bāquet not as they were wont, they know it were not beſt:
So kings and Princes both, haue lefte their halles at large,
Their priuie chambers coſt enough, they cut off euery charge:
And when an office falles, as chance ſometimes may be,
Firſt kéepe it cloſe a yeare or twaine, then geld it by the fée.
And giue it out at laſt, but yet with this prouiſo,
(A bridle for a brainſicke Iade) durante bene placito.
Some thinke theſe ladders low, to climbe alofte with ſpéede:
Well let them créepe at leiſure then, for ſure the Lord hath neede.
Dukes Earles and Barons bold, haue learnt like leſſon nowe,
They breake vp houſe & come to court, they liue not by the plow.
Percaſe their roomes be ſkant, not like their ſtately houre,
A field bed in a corner coucht, a pallad on the floure.
But what for that? no force, they make thereof no boaſt,
They féede themſelues with delycates, and at the princes coſt.
And as for all their men, their pages and their ſwaynes,
They choke thē vp with chynes of béefe, to multiply their gaines.
Thēſelues lie néere to looke, when any leaſe doth fall,
Such croomes were wont to feede poore groomes, but now ye Lords licke al.
And why? oh ſir, bicauſe, both Dukes and Lords haue néede,
I mocke not I, my text is true, beleeue it as your creede.
Our Prelates and our Prieſts, can tell this text with mée,
They can hold faſt their fatteſt fermes, and let no leaſe go frée.
They haue both wife and childe, which may not be forgot,
The ſcriptures ſay the Lord hath neede, & therfore blame them not.
Then come a litle lower, vnto the countrey knight,
The Squier and the Gentleman, they leaue the countrey quite,
Their halles were all to large, their tables were to long,
The clouted ſhoes came in ſo faſt, they kepte to great a throng,
And at the porters lodge, where lubbers wont to feede,
The porter learnes to anſwere now, hence hence the Lorde hath neede.
His geſts came in too thicke, their diet was to great,
Their horſes eate vp all the hey, which ſhould haue fed his neate:
Their téeth were farre to fine, to féede on porke and ſouſe,
Fiue flocks of ſhéepe coulde ſcarce mainteine good mutton for his houſe.
And when this count was caſt, it was no biding here,
Vnto the good towne is he gone, to make his friends good chéere.
And welcome there that will, but ſhall I tell you how?
At his owne diſh he féedeth them, that is the faſhion now:
Side bords be laid aſide, the tables end is gone,
His cooke ſhall make you noble chéere, but oſtler hath he none.
The chargers now be changde, wherein he wont to eate,
An olde frute diſh is bigge enough to holde a ioynt of meate,
A ſallad or a ſauce, to taſt your cates withall,
Some ſtrāge deuiſe to feede mēs eies, mēs ſtomacks now be ſmal.
And when the tenauntes come to pay a quarters rent,
They bring ſome fowle at Midſommer, & a diſh of fiſh in Lent,
At Chriſtmaſſe a capon, at Mighelmaſſe a gooſe:
And ſomwhat elſe at Newyeres tide, for feare their leaſe flie looſe.
Good reaſon by my trouth, when Gentlemen lacke groates,
Let Plowmen pinch it out for pens, and patch their ruſſet coates:
For better Formers faſt, than Manour houſes fall,
The Lord hath néede, then ſays the text, bring old Aſſe, colt & all.
Wel, loweſt now at laſte, let ſee the countrey loute,
And marke how he doth ſwink & ſweat to bring this geare about:
His feaſtings be but fewe, caſt whipſtockes, cloute his ſhoone,
The wheaten loafe is locked vp, as ſoone as dinners doone:
And where he wonte to keepe a lubber, two or thrée,
Now hath he learnd to kéepe no more but Sim his ſonne and he,
His wife and Mawde his mayde, a boy to pitche the carte,
And turne him vp at Hallontide, to féele the winters ſmarte:
Dame Alyſon his wife doth know the pryce of meale,
Hir bridecakes be not halfe ſo bigge as ſhe was wont to ſteale:
She weares no ſiluer hookes, ſhe is content with wſſe,
Hir pendants and hir ſiluer pinnes ſhe putteth in hir purſſe.
Thus learne I by my glaſſe, that merrie meane is beſt,
And he moſt wiſe that finds the meane to kéepe himſelfe at reſt.
Perchaunce ſome open mouth will mutter now and than,
And at the market tell his mate, our landlords a zore man:
He racketh vp our rentes, and kéepes the beſt in hand,
He makes a wondrous deale of good out of his owne meaſne land:
Yea let ſuch pelters prate, ſaint Needam be their ſpéede,
We néede no text to anſwer them, but this, The Lord hath neede.
TO binde a buſhe of thornes amongſt ſwéete ſmelling floures,
May make the poſie ſeeme the worſe, and yet the fault is ours:
For throw away the thorne, and marke what will enſew?
The poſie then will ſhew it ſelfe, ſweete, faire, and freſhe of hew.
A puttocke ſet on pearch, faſt by a falcons ſide,
Will quickly ſhew it ſelfe a kight, as time hath often tride.
And in my muſing minde, I feare to finde like fall,
As iuſt reward to recompence my raſh attempts withall.
Thou bidſt, and I muſt bowe, thou wilt that I ſhall write,
Thou canſt commaund my wery muſe ſome verſes to endite.
And yet perdie, thy booke is fraught with learned verſe,
Such ſkill as in my muſing minde I can none like reherſe.
What followes then for me? but if I muſt néedes write,
To ſet downe by the falcons ſide, my ſelfe a ſillie kight.
And yet the fillie kight, well woyde in each degrée,
May ſerue ſometimes (as in his kinde) for mans commoditie.
The kight can wéede the worme, from corne and coſtly ſeedes,
The kight cā kill the mowldiwarpe, in pleaſant meads ye bréeds:
Out of the ſtately ſtréetes, the kight can clenſe the filth,
As mē can clēſe the worthleſſe wéedes, frō fruteful fallowed tilth.
And onely ſet aſide the hennes poore progenie,
I cannot ſee who can accuſe the kight for fellonie.
The falcon, ſhe muſt feede on partritch, and on quayle,
On pigeon, plouer, ducke & drake, hearne, lapwing, teale, & raile,
Hir hungrie throte deuours both foode and deintie fare,
Whereby I take occaſion, thus boldly to compare.
And as a ſillie kight, (not falcon like that flie,
Nor yet preſume to houer by mount Hellycon on hie)
I frendly yet preſume, vpon my frends requeſt,
In barreine verſe to ſhew my ſkill, then take it for the beſt.
And Douty Douglaſſe thou, that art of faulcons kinde,
Giue willing eare yet to the kight, and beare his words in minde,
Serue thou firſt God thy Lord, and prayſe him euermore,
Obey thy Prince and loue thy make, by him ſet greateſt ſtore.
Thy Parents follow next, for honor and for awe,
Thy frends vſe alwaies faithfully, for ſo commands the lawe.
Thy ſéemely ſelfe at laſt, thou ſhalte likewiſe regard,
And of thy ſelfe this leſſon learne, and take it as reward:
That looke how farre deſerts, may ſéeme in thée to ſhine,
So farre thou maiſt ſet out thy ſelfe, without empeach or crime.
For this I dare auow, without ſelfe loue (alight)
It can ſcarce be that vertue dwell, in any earthly wight.
But if in ſuch ſelfe loue, thou ſéeme to wade ſo farre,
As fall to foule preſumption, and iudge thy ſelfe a ſtarre,
Beware betimes and thinke in our Etymologie,
Such faults are plainly called pryde, and in french Surcüydrye,
Lo thus can I pore kight, aduenture for to teach
The falcon flie, and yet forewarne, ſhe row not paſt hir reach.
Thus can I wéede the worme, which ſeeketh to deuoure
The ſéeds of vertue, which might grow within thée euery houre.
Thus can I kill the mowle, which elſe would ouerthrow
The good foundacion of thy fame, with euery litle blowe.
And thus can I conuey, out of thy comely breſt,
The ſluttiſh heapes of péeuiſh pride, which might defile the reſt.
Perchance ſome falcons flie, which will not greatly grutch,
To learne thée firſt to loue thy ſelfe, and then to loue to mutch,
But I am none of thoſe, I liſt not ſo to range,
I haue mās meate enough at home, what néed I thē ſéeke change.
I am no peacocke I: my feathers be not gay,
And though they were, I ſée my feete ſuch fonde affectes to ſtay,
I liſt not ſet to ſale a thing ſo litle worth,
I rather could kepe cloſe my creaſt, than ſéeke to ſet it forth.
Wherefore if in this verſe, which thou commandſt to flowe,
Thou chaunce to fall on conſtruing, whereby ſome doubtes may grow,
Yet grant this onely boone, peruſe it twice or thrice,
Diſgeſt it well ere thou condemne the depth of my deuiſe.
And vſe it like the nut, firſt cracke the outward ſhell,
Then trie the kirnell by the taſt, and it may pleaſe thée well.
Do not as barbers do, which waſh beards curiouſly,
Then cut them off, then caſt them out, in open ſtréetes to lie.
Remember therewithall, my muze is tied in chaines,
The goonſhot of calamitie hath battred all my braynes.
And though this verſe ſcape out, take thou thereat no marke,
It is but like a hedleſſe flie, that tumbleth in the darke.
It was thine owne requeſt, remember ſo it was,
Wherefore if thou diſlike the ſame, then licence it to paſſe
Into my breſt againe, from whence it flew in haſt,
Full like a kight which not deſerues by falcons to be plaſt:
And like a ſtubbed thorne, which may not ſéeme to ſerue,
To ſtād with ſuch ſwéete ſmelling floures, like praiſes to deſerue.
Yet take this harmeleſſe thorne, to picke thy téeth withall,
A tooth picke ſerues ſome vſe perdie, although it be but ſmall.
And when they téeth therewith, be piked faire and cleane,
Then bend thy tong no worſe to me, than mine to thee hath bene.
MIne owne good Bat, before thou hoyſe vp ſaile,
To make a furrowe in the foming ſeas,
Content thy ſelfe to heare for thine auaile,
Such harmeleſſe words, as ought thée not diſpleaſe.
Firſt in thy iourney, iape not ouer much,
What? laugheſt thou Batte, bicauſe I write ſo plaine?
Beléeue me now it is a friendly touch,
To vſe fewe words where friendſhip doth remaine.
And for I finde, that fault hath runne to faſt,
Both in thy fleſh, and fancie too ſometime,
Me thinks plaine dealing biddeth me to caſt
This bone at firſt amid my dogrell rime.
But ſhall I ſay, to giue thée graue aduiſe?
(Which in my head is (God he knowes) full geazon)?
Then marke me well, and though I be not wiſe,
Yet in my rime, thou maiſt perhaps find reaſon.
Firſt euery day, beſéech thy God on knée,
So to direct thy ſtaggring ſteppes alway,
That he which euery ſecrete thought doth ſée
May holde thée in, when thou wouldſt goe aſtray:
And that he deigne to ſende thée ſafe retoure,
And quicke diſpatche of that whiche is thy due:
Lette this (my Batte) be bothe thy prime and houre,
Wherin alſo commend to Noſtre Dieu,
Thy good Companion and my verie frend,
To whom I ſhoulde (but time woulde not permitte)
Haue taken paine ſome ragged ryme to ſende
In truſtie token, that I not forget
His curteſie: but this is debte to thée,
I promyſde it, and now I meane to pay:
What was I ſaying? ſirra, will you ſée
How ſoone my wittes were wandering aſtraye?
I ſaye, praye thou for thée and for thy mate,
So ſhipmen ſing, and though the note be playne,
Yet ſure the muſike is in heauenly ſtate,
When frends ſing ſo, and know not how to fayne.
The nexte to GOD, thy Prince haue ſtill in mynde
Thy countreys honor, and the common wealth:
And flee from them, which fled with euery wynde
From natiue ſoyle, to forraine coaſtes by ſtealth:
Theyr traynes are truſtleſſe, tending ſtill to treaſon,
Theyr ſmoothed tongues are lyned all with guyle,
Their power ſlender, ſcarſly woorthe two peaſon,
Their malice much, their wittes are full of wyle:
Eſchue them then, and when thou ſéeſt them, ſay,
Da, da, ſir K, I may not come at you,
You caſt a ſnare your countrey to betraye,
And woulde you haue me truſt you now for true?
Remembre Batte the fooliſh blink eyed boye
Which was at Rome, thou knoweſt whome I meane,
Remember eke the preatie beardleſſe toye,
Whereby thou foundſt a ſafe returne to Geane,
Doe ſo againe: (God ſhielde thou ſhouldſt haue néede,)
But rather ſo, than to forſweare thy ſelfe:
A loyall hearte, (beleeue this as thy Creede)
Is euermore more woorth than worldly pelfe.
And for one leſſon, take this more of mée,
There are thrée Ps almoſt in euery place,
From whiche I counſell thee alwayes to flée,
And take good hede of them in any caſe,
The firſt is poyſon, perillous in déede
To ſuch as trauayle with a heauie purſſe:
And thou my Batte beware, for thou haſt néede,
Thy purſſe is lynde with paper, which is wurſſe:
Thy billes of credite wil not they thinkſt thou,
Be bayte to ſette Italyan hands on woorke?
Yes by my faye, and neuer worſe than nowe,
When euery knaue hath leyſure for to lurke,
And knoweth thou commeſt for the ſhelles of Chriſte:
Beware therefore where euer that thou go,
It may fall out that thou ſhalte be entiſte
To ſuppe ſometimes with a Magnifico,
And haue a Fico foyſted in thy diſhe,
Bycauſe thou ſhouldeſt diſgeſte thy meate the better:
Beware therefore, and rather féede on fiſhe,
Than learne to ſpell fyne fleſhe with ſuch a Letter.
Some may preſent thée with a pounde or twaine
Of Spaniſhe ſoape to waſhe thy lynnen white:
Beware therefore, and thynke it were ſmall gayne,
To ſaue thy ſhirte, and caſt thy ſkinne off quite:
Some cunning man maye teache thée for to ryde,
And ſtuffe thy ſaddle all with Spaniſhe wooll,
Or in thy ſtirrops haue a toye ſo tyde,
As both thy legges may ſwell thy buſkins full:
Beware therfore, and beare a noble porte,
Drynke not for thyrſte before an other taſte:
Lette none outlandiſhe Taylour take diſporte
To ſtuffe thy doublet full of ſuch Bumbaſte,
As it may caſt thée in vnkindely ſweate,
And cauſe thy haire per companie to glyde,
Straungers are fyne in many a propre feate:
Beware therefore: the ſeconde P. is Pryde,
More perillous than was the firſt by farre,
For that infects but bloud and leaues the bones,
This poyſons all, and mindes of men doth marre,
It findeth nookes to creepe in for the nones:
Firſt from the minde it makes the heart to ſwell,
From thence the fleſh is pampred euery parte,
The ſkinne is taught in Dyers ſhoppes to dwell,
The haire is curlde or frilled vp by arte:
Beléeue mée Batte, our Countreymen of late
Haue caughte ſuch knackes abroade in forayne lande,
That moſt men call them Deuils incarnate,
So ſingular in theyr conceites they ſtande:
Nowe ſir, if I ſhall ſée your maiſterſhippe
Come home diſguyſde and cladde in queynt araye,
As with a piketoothe byting on your lippe,
Your braue Muſtachyos turnde the Turky waye,
A Coptanckt hatte made on a Flemmiſh blocke,
A nightgowne cloake downe trayling to your toes,
A ſlender ſloppe cloſe couched to your docke.
A curtold ſlipper, and a ſhorte ſilke hoſe:
Bearing your Rapier pointe aboue the hilte,
And looking bigge like Marquiſe of all Beefe,
Then ſhall I coumpte your toyle and trauayle ſpilte,
Bycauſe my ſeconde P, with you is chéefe.
But forwardes nowe, although I ſtayde a while,
My hindmoſt P, is worſſe than bothe theſe two,
For it both bones and bodie doth defile,
With fouler blots than bothe thoſe other doo.
Shorte tale to make, this P, can beare no blockes,
(God ſhielde me Batte, ſhould beare it in his breaſt)
And with a daſhe it ſpelleth piles and pockes
A perlous P, and woorſſe than bothe the reſte:
Now though I finde no cauſe for to ſuſpect
My Batte in this, bycauſe he hath bene tryde,
Yet ſince ſuch Spaniſh buttons can infect
Kings, Emperours, Princes and the world ſo wide.
And ſince thoſe ſunnes do mellowe men ſo faſt
As moſt that trauayle come home very ripe
Although (by ſweate) they learne to liue and laſt
When they haue daunced after Guydoes pype:
Therfore I thought it méete to warne my frende
Of this foule P, and ſo an ende of Ps.
Now for thy diet marke my tale to ende,
And thanke me then, for that is all my fees.
Sée thou excéede not in thrée double Vs,
The firſt is Wine, which may enflame thy bloud,
The ſecond Women, ſuch as haunte the ſtewes,
The thirde is Wilfulneſſe, which dooth no good.
Theſe thrée eſchue, or temper them alwayes:
So ſhall my Batte prolong his youthfull yéeres,
And ſée long George againe, with happie dayes,
Who if he bée as faithfull to his féeres,
As hée was wonte, will dayly pray for Batte,
And for Pencoyde: and if it fall out ſo,
That Iames a Parrye doo but make good that,
Which he hath ſayde: and if he bée (no, no)
The beſt companion that long George can finde,
Then at the Spawe I promiſe for to bée
In Auguſte nexte, if God turne not my minde,
Where as I would bée glad thyſelfe to ſée:
Till then farewell, and thus I ende my ſong,
Take it in grée, for elſe thou doeſt mée wrong.
MY woorthy Lord, I pray you wonder not,
To ſée your woodman ſhoote ſo ofte awrie,
Nor that he ſtands amaſed like a ſot,
And lets the harmleſſe deare (vnhurt) go by.
Or if he ſtrike a Doe which is but carren,
Laugh not good Lord, but fauoure ſuch a fault,
Take will in worth, he would faine hit the barren,
But though his harte be good, his happe is naught:
And therefore now I craue your Lordſhips leaue,
To tell you plaine what is the cauſe of this:
Firſt if it pleaſe your honour to perceyue,
What makes your woodman ſhoote ſo ofte amiſſe,
Beléeue me L. the caſe is nothing ſtrange,
He ſhootes awrie almoſt at euery marke,
His eyes haue bene ſo vſed for to raunge,
That now God knowes they be both dimme and darke.
For proofe he beares the note of follie now,
Who ſhotte ſometimes to hit Philoſophie,
And aſke you why? forſooth I make auow,
Bicauſe his wanton wittes went all awrie.
Next that, he ſhot to be a man of lawe,
And ſpent ſometime with learned Litleton,
Yet in the end, he proued but a daw,
For lawe was darke and he had quickly done.
Then could he wiſh Fitzharbert ſuch a braine,
As Tully had, to write the lawe by arte,
So that with pleaſure, or with litle paine,
He might perhaps, haue caught a trewants parte.
But all to late, he moſt miſlikte the thing,
Which moſt might helpe to guide his arrow ſtreight▪
He winked wrong, and ſo let ſlippe the ſtring,
Which caſt him wide, for all his queint conceit.
From thence he ſhotte to catch a courtly grace,
And thought euen there to wield the world at will,
But out alas he much miſtooke the place,
And ſhot awrie at euery rouer ſtill.
The blaſing baits which drawe the gazing eye,
Vnfethered there his firſt affection,
No wonder then although he ſhot awrie,
Wanting the feathers of diſcretion.
Yet more than them, the marks of dignitie,
He much miſtooke and ſhot the wronger way,
Thinking the purſe of prodigalitie,
Had bene beſt meane to purchaſe ſuch a pray.
He thought the flattring face which fleareth ſtill,
Had bene full fraught with all fidelitie,
And that ſuch wordes as courtiers vſe at will.
Could not haue varied from the veritie.
But when his bonet buttened with gold,
His comelie cape begarded all with gay,
His bumbaſt hoſe, with linings manifold,
His knit ſilke ſtocks and all his queint aray,
Had pickt his purſe of all the Peter pence,
Which might haue paide for his promotion,
Then (all to late) he found that light expence,
Had quite quencht out the courts deuotion.
So that ſince then the taſt of miſerie,
Hath bene alwayes full bitter in his bit,
And why? forſooth bicauſe he ſhot awrie,
Miſtaking ſtill the markes which others hit,
But now behold what marke the man doth find,
He ſhootes to be a ſouldier in his age,
Miſtruſting all the vertues of the minde,
He truſts the power of his perſonage.
As though long limmes led by a luſty hart,
Might yet ſuffice to make him rich againe,
But Fluſhyng fraies haue taught him ſuch a parte,
That now he thinks the warres yéeld no ſuch gaine.
And ſure I feare, vnleſſe your lordſhip deigne,
To traine him yet into ſome better trade,
It will be long before he hit the veine,
Whereby he may a richer man be made.
He cannot climbe as other catchers can.
To leade a charge before himſelfe be led,
He cannot ſpoile the ſimple ſakeles man,
Which is content to feede him with his bread.
He cannot pinch the painefull ſouldiers pay,
And ſheare him out his ſhare in ragged ſhéetes,
He cannot ſtoupe to take a gréedy pray
Vpon his fellowes groueling in the ſtréetes,
He cannot pull the ſpoyle from ſuch as pill,
And ſéeme full angrie at ſuch foule offence,
Although the gayne content his gréedie will,
Vnder the cloake of contrarie pretence:
And now adayes, the man that ſhootes not ſo,
May ſhoote amiſſe, euen as your Woodman dothe:
But then you maruell why I lette them go,
And neuer ſhoote, but ſaye farewell forſooth:
Alas my Lord, while I doe muze hereon,
And call to minde my youthfull yeares myſpente,
They giue mee ſuche a boane to gnawe vpon,
That all my ſenſes are in ſilence pente.
My minde is rapte in contemplation,
Wherein my dazeled eyes onely beholde,
The blacke houre of my conſtellation,
Which framed mée ſo luckleſſe on the molde:
Yet therewithall I can not but confeſſe,
That vayne preſumption makes my heart to ſwell,
For thus I thinke, not all the worlde (I gueſſe,)
Shootes bet than I, nay ſome ſhootes not ſo well.
In Ariſtotle ſomewhat did I learne,
To guyde my manners all by comelyneſſe,
And Tullie taught me ſomewhat to diſcerne
Betwéene ſwéete ſpéeche and barbarous rudeneſſe.
Olde Parkyns, Raſtall, and Dan Bractens bookes,
Did lende mée ſomewhat of the lawleſſe Lawe,
The craftie Courtiers with their guylefull lookes,
Muſt néedes put ſome experience in my mawe:
Yet can not theſe with many mayſtries mo,
Make me ſhoote ſtreyght at any gaynfull pricke,
Where ſome that neuer handled ſuch a bow,
Can hit the white, or touch it neare the quicke,
Who can nor ſpeake, nor write in pleaſant wiſe,
Nor leade their life by Ariſtotles rule,
Nor argue well on queſtions that ariſe,
Nor pleade a caſe more than my Lord Mairs mule,
Yet can they hit the marks that I do miſſe,
And winne the meane which may the man mainteyne.
Now when my minde doth mumble vpon this,
No wonder then although I pine for payne:
And whiles mine eyes beholde this mirrour thus,
The hearde goeth by, and farewell gentle does:
So that your Lordſhip quickely may diſcuſſe
What blindes mine eyes ſo ofte (as I ſuppoſe.)
But ſince my Muſe can to my Lorde reherſe
What makes me miſſe, and why I doe not ſhoote,
Let me imagine in this woorthleſſe verſe,
If right before mée, at my ſtandings foote
There ſtoode a Doe, and I ſhould ſtrike hir deade,
And then ſhée proue a carrian carkas too,
What figure might I finde within my head,
To ſcuſe the rage whiche rulde mée ſo to doo?
Some myght interprete by playne paraphraſe,
That lacke of ſkill or fortune ledde the chaunce,
But I muſt otherwiſe expounde the caſe,
I ſay Iehoua did this Doe aduaunce,
And made hir bolde to ſtande before mée ſo,
Till I had thruſt mine arrowe to hir harte,
That by the ſodaine of hir ouerthrowe,
I myght endeuour to amende my parte,
And turne myne eyes that they no more beholde,
Such guylefull markes as ſéeme more than they be:
And though they gliſter outwardely like golde,
Are inwardly but braſſe, as men may ſée:
And when I ſée the milke hang in hir teate,
Me thinkes it ſayth, olde babe now learne to ſucke,
Who in thy youth couldſt neuer learne the feate
To hitte the whytes whiche liue with all good lucke.
Thus haue I tolde my Lorde, (God graunt in ſeaſon)
A tedious tale in rime, but little reaſon.
THe figure of this world I can compare,
To Garden plots, and ſuch like pleaſaunt places,
The world bréedes men of ſundry ſhape and ſhare,
As hearbes in gardens, grow of ſundry graces:
Some good, ſome bad, ſome amiable faces,
Some foule, ſome gentle, ſome of froward mind,
Subiect like bloome, to blaſt of euery wind.
And as you ſée the floures moſt freſh of hew,
That they proue not alwayes the holeſomeſt,
So fayreſt men are not alwayes found true:
But euen as withred wéedes fall from the reſt,
So flatterers fall naked from their neaſt:
When truth hath tried, their painting tiſing tale,
They looſe their gloſſe, and all their ieſts ſéeme ſtale.
Yet ſome do preſent pleaſure moſt eſtéeme,
Till beames of brauerie wither all their welth,
And ſome agayne there be can rightly déeme,
Thoſe herbes for beſt, which may mainteine their helth.
Conſidering well, that age drawes on by ſtelth,
And when the fayreſt floure is ſhronke and gone,
A well growne roote, will ſtand and ſhifte for one.
Then thus the reſtleſſe life which men here leade,
May be reſembled to the tender plant,
In ſpring it ſprouts, as babes in cradle bréede,
Floriſh in May, like youthes that wiſdome want,
In Autumne ripes and rootes, leaſt ſtore waxe ſkante
In winter ſhrinks and ſhrowdes from euery blaſt,
Like crooked age when luſty youth is paſt.
And as the grounde or grace whereon it grewe,
Was fatte or leane, euen ſo by it appeares▪
If barreyn ſoyle, why then it chaungeth hewe,
It fadeth faſte, it flits to fumbling yeares,
But if he gathered roote amongſt his féeres,
And light on lande that was well muckte in déede,
Then ſtandes it ſtill, or leaues increaſe of ſéede.
As for the reſte, fall ſundrie wayes (God wot)
Some faynt lyke froathe at euery little puffe,
Some ſmarte by ſwoorde, like hearbes that ſerue the pot,
And ſome be wéeded from the finer ſtuffe,
Some ſtande by proppes to maynteyne all their ruffe:
And thus (vnder correction bée it tolde)
Hath Gaſcoigne gathered in his Garden molde.
IF any floure that here is growne,
Or any hearbe may eaſe your payne,
Take and accompte it as your owne,
But recompence the lyke agayne:
For ſome and ſome is honeſt playe,
And ſo my wyfe taughte me to ſaye.
If here to walke you take delight,
Why come, and welcome when you will:
If I bidde you ſuppe here this night,
Bidde me an other time, and ſtill
Thinke ſome and ſome is honeſt playe,
For ſo my wife taught me to ſaye.
Thus if you ſuppe or dine with mée,
If you walke here, or fitte at eaſe,
If you deſire the thing you ſée,
And haue the ſame your minde to pleaſe,
Thinke ſome and ſome is honeſt playe,
And ſo my wife taught me to ſaye.
IF thou ſitte here to viewe this pleaſant garden place,
Think thus: at laſt will come a froſt, & all theſe floures deface:
But if thou ſitte at eaſe to reſt thy wearie bones,
Remember death brings finall reſt to all oure gréeuous grones.
So whether for delight, or here thou ſitte for eaſe,
Thinke ſtill vpon the latter day, ſo ſhalt thou God beſt pleaſe.
Quoniam etiam humiliatos, amoena delectant.
A Straunge conceyte, a vayne of newe delight,
Twixt weale and woe, twixte ioy and bitter griefe,
Hath pricked foorth my haſtie penne to write
This woorthleſſe verſe in hazarde of repréefe:
And to mine Alderlieuest Lorde I muſt endite
A wofull caſe, a chippe of ſorie chaunce,
A tipe of heauen, a liuely hew of hell,
A feare to fall, a hope of high aduance,
A life, a death, a drearie tale to tell.
But ſince I know the pith of my paſtaunce
Shall moſt conſiſt in telling of a truth,
Vouchſafe my Lord (en bon gré) for to take
This truſtie tale the ſtorie of my youth,
This Chronicle which of my ſelfe I make,
To ſhew my Lord what healpleſſe happe enſewth,
When heddy youth will gad without a guide,
And raunge vntide in leas of libertie,
Or when bare néede a ſtarting hole hath ſpide
To péepe abroade from mother Miſerie,
And buildeth Caſtels in the Welkin wide,
In hope thereby to dwell with wealth and eaſe.
But he the Lord (whome my good Lord doth know)
Can bind or loſe, as beſt to him ſhall pleaſe,
Can ſaue or ſpill, rayſe vp or ouerthrowe,
Can gauld with griefe, and yet the payne appeaſe.
Which thing to proue if ſo my L. take time,
(When greater cares his head ſhall not poſſeſſe)
To ſitte and reade this raunging ragged rime,
I doubt not then but that he will confeſſe,
What falles I found when laſt I leapt to clime.
In March it was, that cannot I forget,
In this laſt March vpon the nintenth day,
When from Graueſend in boate I gan to iette
To boorde our ſhippe in Quinborough that lay,
From whence the very twentith day we ſet
Our ſayles abrode to ſlice the Salt ſea fome,
And ancors weyde gan truſt the truſtleſſe floud:
That day and night amid the waues we rome
To ſeeke the coaſt of Holland where it ſtoode.
And on the next when we were farre from home,
And neare the hauen whereto we ſought to ſayle,
A fearly chaunce: (whereon alone to thinke)
My hande now quakes, and all my ſenſes fayle)
Gan vs befall: the Pylot gan to ſhrinke,
And all agaſte his courage ſéemde to quayle.
Whereat amazed, the Maiſter and his mate
Gan aſke the cauſe of his ſo ſodeyne chaunge.
And from alofte the Stewarde of our ſtate,
(The ſounding plumbe) in haſte poſte haſt muſt raunge,
To trye the depth and goodneſſe of our gate.
Mée thinkes (euen yet) I heare his heauie voyce,
Fadome thrée, foure, foote more, foote leſſe, that cride:
Mée thinkes I heare the fearefull whiſpring noyſe,
Of ſuch as ſayde full ſoftely (me beſide)
God graunte this iourney cauſe vs to reioyce.
When I poore ſoule, which cloſe in caban laye,
And there had reacht till gaule was welneare burſt,
With giddie head, my ſtumbling ſteppes muſt ſtay
To looke abroade as boldly as I durſt.
And whyles I hearken what the Saylers ſaye,
The ſownder ſings, fadame two full no more.
Aloofe, aloofe, then cried the Maiſter out,
The Steareſmate ſtriues to ſende vs from the ſhore,
And truſtes the ſtreame, whereof wée earſt had doubt,
Twéene two extréeme thus were we toſſed ſore,
And went to Hull, vntill we leyzure had
To talke at large, and eke to know the cauſe
What moode had made our Pylot looke ſo ſad.
At laſt the Dutche with butterbitten iawes,
(For ſo he was a Dutche, a Deuill, a ſwadde,
A foole, a drunkarde, or a traytour tone)
Gan aunſwere thus: Ghy zijt te vroegh here come,
Tuniet goet tijt and ſtanding all alone,
Gan preache to vs, which fooles were all and ſome
To truſt him foole, in whom there ſkill was none.
Or what knew wee if Albaes ſubtill brayne
(So to preuent our enterpryſe by treazon)
Had him ſubornde to tice vs to this trayne
And ſo him ſelfe (per Companye and ſeazon)
For ſpite, for hate, or elſe for hope of gayne.
This muſt we thinke that Alba would not ſpare
To giue out gold for ſuch a ſinfull déede:
And gliſtring gold can oftentimes enſnare,
More perfect wits than Holland ſoyle doth bréede.
But let that paſſe, and let vs now compare
Our owne fond fact with this his foule offence.
We knew him not, nor where he wond that time,
Nor if he had Pylots experience,
Or Pylats crafte, to cleare him ſelfe from crime.
Yea more than that (how voyde were we of ſenſe)
We had ſmall ſmacke of any tale he tolde,
He powrde out Dutch to drowne vs all in drinke,
And we (wiſe men) vppon his words were bolde,
To runne on head: but let me now bethinke
The maſters ſpéech: and let me ſo vnfold
The depth of all this fooliſh ouerſight.
The maſter ſpake euen like a ſkilfull man,
And ſayde I ſayle the Seas both day and night,
I know the tides as well as other can,
From pole to pole I can the courſes plight:
I know France, Spaine, Gréece, Denmarke, Daſiſk & all,
Frize, Flaunders, Holland, euery coaſt I know,
But truth to tell, it ſeldome doth befall,
That Engliſh merchants euer bend their bowe
To ſhoote at Breyll, where now our flight ſhould fall,
They ſend their ſhafts farder for greater gayne.
So that this hauen is yet (quoth he) vnkouth,
And God graunt now that England may attayne
Such gaines by Breyll, (a goſpell on that mouth)
As is deſired: thus ſpake the maſter playne.
And ſince (ſaide he) my ſelfe knew not the ſowne,
How could I well a better Pylot fynde,
Than this (which firſt) did ſaye he dwelt in towne,
And knew the way where euer ſat the wynde?
While we thus talke, all ſayles are taken downe,
And we to Hull (as earſt I ſayd) gan wend,
Till full two houres and ſomewhat more were paſt,
Our guyde then ſpake in Dutch and bad vs bend
All ſayles againe: for now quod he (at laſt)
Die tijt is goet, dat heb ick weell bekend.
Why ſtaye I long to ende a wofull tale?
We truſt his Dutch, and vp the foreſayle goes,
We fall on knées amyd the happy gale,
(Which by Gods will full kynd and calmely blowes)
And vnto him we there vnfolde our bale,
Whereon to thinke I wryte and wéepe for ioye,
That pleaſant ſong the hundreth and ſeuenth Pſalme,
There dyd we reade to comfort our annoye,
Which to my ſoule (me thought) was ſwéete as balme,
Yea farre more ſwéete than any worldly ioye.
And when he had with prayers prayſd the Lord,
Our Edell Bloetts, gan fall to eate and drinke,
And for their ſauce, at takyng vp the borde
The ſhippe ſo ſtrake (as all we thought to ſinke)
Againſt the ground. Then all with one accorde
We fell againe on knées to pray apace,
And therewithall euen at the ſecond blowe,
(The number cannot from my minde outpace)
Our helme ſtrake of, and we muſt fléete and flowe,
Where winde and waues would guide vs by their grace.
The winde waxt calme as I haue ſayde before,
(O mightie God ſo didſt thou ſwage our woes)
The ſelly ſhippe was ſowſt and ſmitten ſore,
With counter buffetts, blowes and double blowes.
At laſt the kéele which might endure no more,
Gan rende in twayne and ſuckt the water in:
Then might you ſée pale lookes and wofull cheare,
Then might you heare loude cries and deadly dinne:
Well noble minds in perils beſt appeare,
And boldeſt harts in bale will neuer blinne.
For there were ſome (of whome I will not ſay
That I was one) which neuer changed hew,
But pumpt apace, and labord euery way
To ſaue themſelues, and all their louely crew,
Which caſt the beſt fraight ouerboorde away,
Both corne and cloth, and all that was of weight.
Which halde and pulde at euery helping corde,
Which prayed to God and made their conſcience ſtreight.
As for my ſelf: I here proteſt my Lorde,
My words were theſe: O God in heauen on height,
Behold me not as now a wicked wight,
A ſacke of ſinne, a wretch ywrapt in wroth,
Let no fault paſt (O Lord) offende thy ſight,
But weye my will which now thoſe faults doth lothe,
And of thy mercy pittie this our plight.
Euen thou good God which of thy grace didſt ſaye
That for one good, thou wouldſt all Sodome ſaue,
Behold vs all: thy ſhyning beames diſplaye,
Some here (I truſt) thy goodneſſe ſhall engraue,
To be chaſt veſſels vnto thée alwaye,
And ſo to liue in honour of thy name:
Beleue me Lord, thus to the Lord I ſayde.
But there were ſome (alas the more their blame)
Which in the pumpe their onely comfort layde,
And truſted that to turne our griefe to game.
Alas (quod I) our pumpe good God muſt be,
Our ſayle, our ſterne, our tackling, and our truſt.
Some other cried to cleare the ſhipboate frée,
To ſaue the chiefe and leaue the reſt in duſt.
Which word once ſpoke (a wondrous thing to ſée)
All haſt poſt haſt, was made to haue it done:
And vp it commes in haſt much more than ſpéede.
There did I ſee a wofull worke begonne,
Which now (euen now) doth make my hart to bléede.
Some made ſuch haſt that in the boate they wonne,
Before it was aboue the hatches brought.
Straunge tale to tell, what haſt ſome men ſhall make
To find their death before the ſame be ſought.
Some twixt the boate and ſhippe their bane do take,
Both drownd and ſlayne with braynes for haſt cruſht out.
At laſt the boat halfe fraighted in the aire
Is hoyſt alofte, and on the ſeas downe ſet,
When I that yet in God could not diſpaire,
Still plide the pumpe, and patiently did let
All ſuch take boate as thither made repaire.
And herewithall I ſafely may proteſt
I might haue wonne the boate as wel as one,
And had that ſéemed a ſafetie for the reſt
I ſhould percaſe euen with the firſt haue gone.
But when I ſaw the boate was ouer preſt
And peſtred full with moe than it might beare,
And therwithall with cherefull looke might ſée
My chiefe companions whome I held moſt deare
(Whofe companie had thither trained me)
Abiding ſtill aboorde our ſhippe yfeare:
Nay then (quoth I) good God thy will be done,
For with my feeres I will both liue and dye.
And eare the boate farre from our ſight was gon
The waue ſo wrought, that they (which thought to flée
And ſo to ſcape) with waues were ouer ronne.
Lo how he ſtriues in vaine that ſtriues with God
For there we loſt the flowre of the band,
And of our crew full twentie ſoules and odde,
The Sea ſucks vp, whils we on hatches ſtand
In ſmarting feare to feele that ſelfe ſame rodde.
Well on (as yet) our battred barke did paſſe,
And brought the reſt within a myle of lande,
Then thought I ſure now néede not I to paſſe,
For I can ſwymme and ſo eſcape this ſande.
Thus dyd I déeme all careleſſe like an Aſſe,
When ſodaynely the wynde our foreſayle tooke,
And turnd about and brought vs eft to Seas.
Then cryed we all, caſt out the ancor hooke,
And here let byde ſuch helpe as god may pleaſe:
Which ancor caſt, we ſoone the ſame forſooke,
And cut it off, for feare leaſt therevpon
Our ſhippe ſhould bowge, then callde we faſt for fire,
And ſo diſchargde our great gunnes euerychone,
To warne the towne thereby of our deſire:
But all in vayne, for ſuccor ſent they none.
At laſt a Hoy from Sea came flinging faſt,
And towards vs helde courſe as ſtreight as lyne.
Then might you ſée our hands to heauen vp caſt
To render thanks vnto the power deuine,
That ſo vouchſafte to ſaue vs yet at laſt:
But when this Hoy gan (welnéere) boorde our barke,
And might perceiue what peryll we were in,
It turnd away and left vs ſtill in carke,
This tale is true (for now to lie were ſin)
It lefte vs there in dreade and daungers darke.
It lefte vs ſo, and that within the ſight
And hearing both of all the peare at Breyll.
Now ply thee pen, and paint the foule deſpite
Of drunken Dutchmen ſtanding there euen ſtill,
For whom we came in their cauſe for to fight,
For whom we came their ſtate for to defende,
For whom we came as friends to grieue their foes,
They now diſdaynd (in this diſtreſſe) to lend
One helping boate for to aſſwage our woes:
They ſawe our harmes the which they would not mend,
And had not bene that God euen then did rayſe
Some inſtruments to ſuccor vs at néede,
We had bene ſunk and ſwallowed all in Seas.
But Gods will was (in way of our good ſpéede)
That on the peare (lamenting our myſeaſe)
Some engliſhe were, whoſe naked ſwordes did force
The drunken dutch, the cankred churles to come,
And ſo at laſt (not moued by remorce,
But forſt by feare) they ſent vs ſuccor ſome:
Some muſt I ſay: and for to tell the courſe,
They ſent vs ſuccor ſauſt with ſowre deſpite,
They ſaued our liues and ſpoylde vs of the reſt,
They ſtale our goods by day and eke by night,
They ſhewed the worſt and cloſely kept the beſt.
And in this time (this treaſon muſt I wryte)
Our Pylot fled, but how? not emptie handed:
He fled from vs, and with him did conueye
A Hoy full fraught (whiles we meane while were landed)
With pouder, ſhotte, and all our beſt araye:
This ſkill he had, for all he ſet vs ſanded.
And now my Lord, declare your noble mynde,
Was this a Pylot, or a Pilate iudge?
Or rather was he not of Iudas kynde:
Which left vs thus and cloſe away could trudge?
Well, at the Bryell to tell you what we finde,
The Gouernour was all bedewed with drinke,
His truls and he were all layde downe to ſléepe,
And we muſt ſhift, and of our ſelues muſt thinke
What meane was beſt, and how we beſt might kéepe
That yet remaynd: the reſt was cloſe in clinke.
Well, on our knées with trickling teares of ioye,
We gaue God thanks: and as we might, did learne
What might be founde in euery pynke and hoye.
And thus my Lord, your honour may deſcerne
Our perils paſt, and how in our anoye
God ſaued me (your Lordſhippes bound for euer)
Who elſe ſhould not be able now to tell,
The ſtate wherein this countrey doth perſeuer,
Ne how they ſéeme in careleſſe mindes to dwell.
(So did they earſt and ſo they will do euer)
And to my Lord for to bewray my minde
Me thinkes they be a race of Bulbéefe borne,
Whoſe hartes their Butter mollyfieth by kinde,
And ſo the force of béefe is cleane outworne:
And eke their braines with double béere are lynd:
So that they march bumbaſt with buttred béere,
Like ſoppes of broweſſe puffed vp with froth,
Where inwardely they be but hollowe géere,
As weake as winde, which with one puffe vp goeth:
And yet they bragge, and thinke they haue no péere,
Bicauſe Harlem hath hitherto helde out,
Although in déed (as they haue ſuffred Spayne)
The ende thereof euen now doth reſt in doubt.
Well, as for that, let it (for me) remaine
In God his hands, whoſe hand hath brought me out,
To tell my Lord this tale nowe tane in hande,
As howe they traine their trezons all in drinke,
And when them ſelues for drunk can ſcarcely ſtande,
Yet ſucke out ſecretes (as them ſelues do thinke)
From gueſts. The beſt (almoſt) in all their lande,
(I name no man, for that were brode before)
Will (as men ſay) enure the ſame ſometime,
But ſurely this (or I miſtake him ſore)
Or elſe he can (but let it paſſe in rime)
Diſſemble déepe, and mocke ſometimes the more:
Well, drunkenneſſe is here good companie,
And therewithall per conſequens it falles
That whordome is accompted iollitie:
A gentle ſtate, where two ſuche Teniſballes
Are toſſed ſtill and better bowles let lie.
I cannot herewith from my Lord conceale,
How God and Mammon here do dwell yfeare,
And how the Maſſe is cloked vnder veale
Of pollicie, till all the coaſt be cleare.
Ne can I chuſe, but I muſt ring a peale,
To tell what hypocrytes the Nunnes here be:
And how the olde Nunnes be content to go,
Before a man in ſtreates like mother B,
Vntill they come wheras there dwels a Ho,
(Re: ceyue that halfe, and let the reſt go frée)
There can they poynt with finger as they paſſe,
Yea ſir, ſometimes they can come in themſelfe,
To ſtrike the bergaine twéene a wanton laſſe,
And Edel bloets: nowe is not this good pelfe?
As for the yong Nunnes, they be bright as glaſſe,
And chaſte forſooth, met v: and anders niet:
What ſayde I? what? that is a miſterie,
I may no verſe of ſuch a theame endite,
Yong Rowlande Yorke may tell it bet than I:
Yet to my Lorde this little will I write,
That though I haue (my ſelfe) no ſkill at all,
To take the countnance of a Colonel,
Had I a good Lieutenant general,
As good Iohn Zuche whereuer that he dwel,
Or elſe Ned Dennye (faire mought him befal)
I coulde haue brought a noble regiment
Of ſmugſkinnde Nunnes into my countrey ſoyle:
But farewell they as things impertinent,
Let them (for me) go dwell with maſter Moyle,
Who hath behight to place them well in Kent.
And I ſhall well my ſillie ſelfe content,
To come alone vnto my louely Lorde,
And vnto him (when riming ſporte is ſpent)
To tel ſome ſadde and reaſonable worde,
Of Hollandes ſtate, the which I will preſent,
In Cartes, in Mappes, and eke in Models made,
If God of heauen my purpoſe not preuent.
And in meane while although my wits do wade
In ranging rime, and fling ſome follie foorth,
I truſt my Lorde will take it well in woorth.