PRoteus of all the Marine gods the prime,
And held the noblest both for Birth and Time:
From him who with his Trident swayes the Maine,
And ploughs the waves in curles, or makes them plaine:
Neptune, both Lord of Ebbe, and Inundation▪
I come to greete your great Inauguration.
They call me Versi-pellis, and 'tis true,
No figure, for me, no shape to me is new;
For I appeare what Creature I desire,
Sometimes a Bull, a Serpent, sometimes Fire:
" The first denotes my strength; strong must he be,
" And powerfull, who aspire to your Degree.
" You must be wise as Serpents, to decide
" Such doubts as Errour or Misprision hide.
" And next, like Fire, (of th'Elements most pure)
" Whose nature can no sordid stuffe endure,
" As in Calcining Metalls we behold,
" It sunders and divides the drosse from Gold,
And such are the Decorements that still waite
Vpon so grave, so great a Magistrate.
This Tortois, double-natur'd, doth imply
(By the two Elements of moist and dry)
So much as gives the world to understand,
Your noble Trading both by Sea and Land.
Of Porposes the vast Heards Proteus keepes,
And I am styl'd the Prophet of the Deepes,
Sent to praedict good Omen: May that Fleete
Which makes th'East Indies with our England meete,
Prosper to all your hearts desires: Their sayles
Be to and fro swell'd with auspicious gales:
May You (who of this City now take charge)
With all the Scarlet Senate in your Barge,
The Fame thereof so heighten, future Story
Above all other States may crowne her glory.
To hinder what's more weighty, I am loath,
Passe therefore freely on, to take your Oath.
BY what rare frame, or in what curious Vorse
Can the rich profits of your Trades commerce
Be to the full exprest? which to explaine,
Lyes not in Poets Pen, or Artists braine.
What Beast, or Bird, for Hyde, or Feather rare,
(For mans use made, can with the Sheepe compare?
The Horse of strength or swiftnesse may be proud,
But yet his flesh is not for food allow'd.
The Heards yeeld Milke and Meate (commodious both)
Yet none of all their skins make Wooll for Cloth.
The Sheepe doth all: The Parrot and the Jay,
The Peacock, Estridge, all in colours gay,
Delight the Eye, some with their Notes, the Eare,
But what are these unto the Cloth we weare?
Search Forrests, Desarts for Beasts wilde or tame,
The Mountaines or the Vales, search the vast frame
Of the wide Universe, the Earth, and Skie,
Nor Beast nor Bird can with the Sheepe comply:
No Creature under Heaven, bee't small or great,
But some way usefull, one affords us meate,
Another Ornament: Shee more than this,
" Of Patience, and of Profit th'embleme is,
In former Ages by the Heroes sought:
After, from Greece into Hesperia brought:
She's cloath'd in plenteous riches, and being shorne,
" Her Fleece an Order, and by Emperours worne,
All these are knowne, yet further understand,
In twelve divide the profits of this Land,
As Hydes, Tinne, Lead; or what else you can name,
Tenne of those twelve the Fleece may justly claime:
Then how can that amongst the rest be mist,
By which all States, all Common Weales subsist?
Great honour then belongs unto this trade,
And you, great Lord, for whom this triumph's made.
THe dignity of Merchants who can tell?
Or how much they all Traders ante-cell?
When others here at home securely sleepe,
He plowes the bosome of each unknowne deepe,
And in them sees heavens wonders; for he can
Take a full view of the Leviathan,
Whose strength all Marine Monsters doth surpasse,
His Ribs as Iron, his Fins and skales as brasse.
His Ship like to the feather'd Fowle he wings,
And from all Coasts hee rich materialls brings,
For ornament or profit; those by which
Inferiour Arts subsist, and become rich;
By Land he makes discovery of all Nations,
Their Manners, and their Countries scituations,
And with those savage natures so complies,
That there's no rarity from thence can rise
But he makes frequent with us, and yet these
Not without dangers, both on shores and seas:
The Land he pierceth, and the Ocean skowers,
To make them all by free transportage ours.
You (honourd Sir) amongst the chiefe are nam'd,
By whose commerce our Nation hath beene fam'd.
The Romans in their triumphes had before
Their Chariots borne or lead, (to grace the more
The sumptuous Show) the prime and choisest things,
VVhich they had taken from the Captive, Kings:
VVhat curious Statue▪ what strange bird, or beast
That Clime did yeeld (if rare above the rest)
Was there expos'd: Entring your civill state,
VVhom better may we strive to imitate?
This huge Rinoceros (not 'mongst us seene,
Yet frequent wheresome Factors oft have beene)
Is embleme of the Praetorship you beare,
Who to all Beasts of prey, who rend and teare
The innocent heards and flocks, is foe profest,
But in all just defences armes his crest.
You of this wildernesse are Lord, so sway,
The weake may be upheld, the proud obey.
SHipping to our first Fathers was not knowne;
(Though now amongst all Nations common growne)
Nor trade by Sea: we read the first choise peece,
Was th'Argo, built to fetch the golden Fleece,
In which brave voyage, sixty Princes, all
Heroës, such as we Semones call:
In that new Vessell to attaine the shore.
Where such a prize was, each tugg'd at the Oare:
On one bench Hercules and Hilas sate,
Beauty and Strength; and siding iust with that
Daunaus and Lynceus of so quicke a sight
No interposer, or large distance might
Dull his cleare Opticks: those that had the charge,
And the chiefe stearadge of that Princely Barge,
Zethes and Calais, whose judgements meet,
Being said t'have feathers on their heads and feete:
We spare the rest: Grave Sir, the Merchants trade
Is that, for which all Shipping first was made;
And through an Hellespont who would but pull,
Steere, and hoise saile, to bring home golden Wooll?
For wee by that are cloath'd: In the first place
Sate strength and beauty: oh what a sweete grace
Have those united; both now yours, great Lord,
Your beauty is your robe, your strength the sword.
You must have Lynceus eyes, and further see
Than either you before have done, or he
Could ever: having now a true inspection
Into each strife, each cause without affection
To this or that party: some are sed,
To have had feathers on their feete and head.
(As those whom I late nam'd) you must have more,
And in your place be feather'd now all o're:
You must have feathers in your thoughts, your eyes,
Your hands, your feete; for he that's truely wise
Must still be of a winged apprehension
As well for execution, as prevention.
You know (Right honourd Sir) delayes and pauses,
In judicature, dull, if not dampe, good causes:
That we presume t'advise, we pardon crave,
It being confest, all these, and more you have.
THis Structure is a Citadell, or Tower,
Where Piety, plac't in her heavenly bower,
Poynts out the way to blisse, guirt with a ring
Of all those Graces that may glory bring.
Here sits Religion firme, (though else where torne
By Schismaticks, and made the Atheists scorne)
Shining in her pure truth, nor need she quake,
Affrighted with the Faggot and the stake:
Shee's to you deare, you unto her are tender,
Vnder the Scepter of the Faiths defender.
How am I extasi'de when I behold
You build new Temples, and repaire the old!
There's not a stone that's laid in such foundation,
But is a step degreeing to Salvation:
And not a Scaffold rear'd to that intent,
But mounts a Soule above the Firmament:
Of Merchants, we know Magistrates are made,
And they (of those) most happy that so Trade.
Your Virgin-Saint sits next Religion crown'd,
With her owne Hand-maids (see) inviron'd round,
And these are they the learned Schoole-men call,
The three prime Vertues Theologicall,
Faith, Hope, and Love; Zeale all inflam'd with fire
Of devout acts, doth a sixt place aspire.
The seventh Humility, and we commend
The Eight to Constancy, which crownes the end.
A Triple Crowne's th'Emblazon of your Crest,
But to gaine one, is to be ever blest.
Proceede in that faire course you have begun,
So when your Annuall Glasse of State is run,
(Nay, that of Life) Ours, but the Gate to blisse
Shall let you in to yon Metropolis.
NOw bright Hiperion hath unloos'd his Teame,
And washt his Coach-Steeds in cold Isters streame:
Day doth to Night give place, yet e're You sleepe,
Remember what the Prophet of the Deepe,
Proteus fore-told: All such as State aspire,
Must be as Bulls, as Serpents, and like Fire.
The Shepheard grazing of his Flocks, displayes
The use and profit from the Fleece we raise.
That Indian Beast, (had he a tongue to speake)
Would say, Suppresse the proud, support the weake,
That Ship the Merchants honour loudly tells,
And how all other Trades it antecells:
But Piety doth point You to that Starre,
By which good Merchants steere: too bold we are
To keepe you from your rest; To-morrows Sunne
Will raise You to new cares, not yet begun.