NOw Phillip Chabot, Admirall of France,
The great, and onely famous Favorite
To Francis firſt of that Imperiall name,
Hath found a freſh competitor in glory,
(Duke Montmorancie, Conſtable of France)
Who drinkes as deepe as he of the ſtreame Royall,
And may in little time convert the ſtrength
To raiſe his ſpring, and blow the others fall.
The world would wiſh it ſo, that will not patiently
Endure the due riſe of a vertuous man.
If he be vertuous, what is the reaſon
That men affect him not, why is he loſt
Toth' generall opinion, and become
Rather their hate than love?
I wonder you
Will queſtion it, aske a ground or reaſon
Of men bred in this vile degenerate age;
The moſt men are not good, and it agrees not
With impious natures to allow whats honeſt,
Tis an offence enough to be exalted
To regall favours, great men are not ſafe
In their owne vice, where good men by the hand
Of Kings are planted to ſurvey their workings;
What man was ever fixt 'ith Sphere of honour,
And precious to his Soveraigne, whoſe actions,
Nay very ſoule was not expos'd to every
Common and baſe diſſection? and not onely
That which in Nature hath excuſe, and in
Themſelves is priviledg'd by name of frailtie,
But even Vertues are made crimes, and doom'd
Toth' fate of Treaſon.
A bad age the while,
I aske your pardon Sir, but thinkes your judgement,
His love to Juſtice, and Corruptions hate
Are true and hearty?
Iudge your ſelfe by this
One argument, his hearty truth to all,
For in the heart hath anger his wiſeſt ſeate,
And gainſt unjuſt ſuites ſuch brave anger fires him,
That when they ſeeke to paſſe his place and power,
Though mov'd, and urg'd by the other minion,
Or by his greateſt friends, and even the King
Leade them to his allowance with his hand,
Firſt given in Bill, aſſign'd, even then his ſpirit,
(In nature calme as any Summers evening)
Puts up his Whole powers like a Winters ſea,
His bloud boyles over, and his heart even cracks
At the injuſtice, and he teares the Bill,
And would doe, were he for't to be torne in peces.
Tis brave I ſweare.
Nay it is worthy your wonder
That I muſt tell you further, there no Needle
In a Sunne Diall plac'd upon his ſteele
In ſuch a tender poſture, that doth tremble
The timely Diall being held amiſſe,
And will ſhake ever, till you hold it right
More tender than himſefe in any thing
That he concludes in Iuſtice for the State:
For as a fever held him, hee will ſhake
When he is ſigning any things of weight,
Leaſt humane frailty ſhould miſguide his juſtice.
You have declar'd him a moſt noble uſticer.
He truely weighes and feeles Sir, what a charge
The ſubjects livings are (being even their lives
Laid on the hand of power,) which abus'd
Though ſeene, blood flow not from the juſtice ſeate,
Tis in true ſence as grievous, and horrid.
It argues nothing leſſe, but ſince your Lord
Is diverſly reported for his parts,
Whats your true cnſure of his generall worth,
Vertue and Iudgement.
As of a Picture wrought to opticke reaſon,
That to all paſſers by, ſeemes as they move
Now woman, now a Monſter, now a Divell,
And till you ſtand, and in a right line view it,
You cannot well judge what the maine forme is,
So men that view him but in vulgar paſſes
Caſting but laterall, or partiall glances,
At what he is, ſuppoſe him weake, unjuſt,
Bloody, and monſtrous, but ſtand free and faſt,
And judge him by no more than what you know
Ingenuouſly, and by the right laid line
Of truth, he truely, will all ſtiles deſerve
Of wiſe, juſt, good, a man both ſoule and nerve.
Sir, I muſt joyne in juſt beleefe with you,
But whats his rivall the Lord high Conſtable?
As juſt, and well inclin'd when hee's himſelfe,
(Not wrought on with the counſells, and opinions
Of other men) and the maine difference is,
The Admirall is not flexible nor wonne
To move one ſcruple, when he comprehends
The honeſt tract and juſtneſſe of a cauſe,
The Conſtable explores not ſo ſincerely
The courſe hee runnes, but takes the minde of others
(By name Iudiciall) for what his owne
Iudgement, and knowledge ſhould conclude.
A fault
In my apprehenſion, anothers knowledge
Applied to my inſtruction, cannot equall
My owne ſoules knowledge, how to informe Acts;
The Sunnes rich radiance ſhot through waves moſt faire,
Is but a ſhaddow to his beames ith' ayre,
His beames that in the ayre we ſo admire,
Is but a darkeneſſe to his flame in fire,
In fire his fervour but as vapour flies
To what his owne pure boſome rarifies:
And the Almighty wiſedom, having given
Each man within himſelfe an apter light
To guide his acts, than any light without him
(Creating nothing not in all things equall)
It ſeems a fault in any that depend
On others knowledge, and exile their owne.
Tis nobly argued, and exemplified,
But now I heare my Lord, and his young rivall
Are to be reconcil'd, and then one light
May ſerve to guide them both.
I wiſh it may, the King being made firſt mover
To forme their reconcilement, and enflame it
With all the ſweetneſſe of his praiſe and honour.
See, tis diſpatch'd I hope, the King doth grace it.
This doth expreſſe the nobleſt fruit of peace.
Which when the great begin, the humble end
In joyfull imitation, all combining
A gardian beyond the Thrigian knot
Paſt wit to loſe it, or the ſword, be ſtill ſo.
Tis certaine Sir, by concord leaſt things grow
Moſt great, and flouriſhing like trees that wrap
Their forehead in the skies, may theſe doe ſo.
You heare my Lord, all that is ſpoke contends
To celebrate with pious vote the attonement
So lately, and ſo nobly made betweene you.
Which for it ſelfe Sir, reſolve to keepe
Pure, and inviolable, needing none
To encourage or confirme it, but my owne
Love and allegiance to your ſacred counſell.
Tis good, and pleaſes, like my deareſt health,
Stand you firme on that ſweete ſimplicitie.
Paſt all earth pollicie that would infringe it.
Tis well, and anſwers all the doubts ſuſpected▪
And what moves this cloſe meſſage Phillip?
My wives Father Sir, is cloſely come to Court.
Is he come to the Court, whoſe averſation
So much affects him, that he ſhunnes and flies it,
What's the ſtrange reaſon that he will not riſe
Above the middle region he was borne in?
He ſaith Sir, tis becauſe the extreame of height
Makes a man leſſe ſeeme to the imperfect eye
Then he is truely, his acts envied more,
And though he nothing cares for ſeeming, ſo
His being juſt ſtand firme twixt heaven and him,
Yet ſince in his ſoules jealouſie, hee feares
That he himſelfe advanced, would undervalue
Men placed beneath him, and their buſineſſe with him,
Since height of place oft dazles height of judgement,
He takes his toppe▪ ſaile downe in ſuch rough ſtormes,
And apts his ſailes to ayres more temperate.
A moſt wiſe ſoule he has, how long ſhall King
Raiſe men that are not wiſe till they be high▪
You haue our leave, but tell him Phillip wee
Would have him neerer.
Your deſires attend you.
We know from whence you come, ſay to the Queene▪
We were comming to her, tis a day of love
And ſhe ſeales all perfection.
My Lord,
We muſt beſeech your ſtay.
My ſtay?
Our Counſells
Have led you thus farre to your reconcilement,
And muſt remember you, to obſerve the end
At which in plaine I told you then wee aim'd at,
You know we all urg'd the attonement, rather
To enforce the broader difference betweene you,
Then to conclude your friendſhippe, which wiſe men
Know to be faſhionable, and priviledg'd pollicie▪
And will ſucceede betwixt you, and the Admirall
As ſure as fate, if you pleaſe to get ſign'd
A ſute now to the King with all our hands,
Which will ſo much increaſe his preciſe juſtice,
That weighing not circumſtances of politicke State,
He will inſtantly oppoſe it, and complaine,
And urge in paſſion, what the King will ſooner
Puniſh than yeeld too, and ſo render you
In the Kings frowne on him, the onely darling▪
And mediate power of France.
My good Lord Chancellor,
Shall I ſo late atton'd, and by the Kings
Hearty and earneſt motion, fall in peeces?
Tis he, not you that breake.
Ha not you patience
To let him burne himſelfe in the Kings flame?
Come, be not Sir infected with a ſpice
Of that too ſervile equitie, that renders
Men free borne ſlaves, and rid with bits like horſes,
When you muſt know my Lord, that even in nature
A man is Animall politicum,
So that when he informes his actions ſimply
He does in both 'gainſt pollicie and nature,
And therefore our ſoule motion is affirm'd
To be like heavenly natures circular▪
And circles being call'd ambitious lines,
We muſt like them become ambitious ever,
And endles in our circumventions;
No tough hides limiting our cheverill mindes.
Tis learnedly, and paſt all anſwer argued,
Yare great, and muſt grow greater ſtill, and greater,
And not be like a dull and ſtanding lake,
That ſettles, putrifies, and chokes with mudde,
But like a river guſhing from the head,
That windes through the undervalles, what checkes ore flowing
Gets ſtrength ſtill of his courſe,
Till with the Ocean meeting, even with him
In ſway, and title, his brave billowes move.
You ſpeake a rae affection, and high ſoules,
But give me leave great Lords, ſtill my juſt thankes
Remembred▪ o your counſells and direction,
I ſeeking this way to confirme my ſelfe
I undermine the columnes that ſupport
My hopefull glorious fortune, and at once
Provoke the tempeſt▪ though did drowne my envie,
With what aſſurance ſhall the King expect
My faith to him, that breake it for another,
He has engag'd our peace, and my revenge
Forfits my truſt with him, whoſe narrow ight
Will penetrate through all our miſts, could we
Vaile our deſigne with clouds blacker than night;
But grant this danger over, with what Iuſtice,
Or ſatisfaction to the inward Iudge,
Shall I be gultie of this good mans ruine,
Though I may ſtill the murmuring tongues without me,
Loud conſcience has a voyce to ſhadder greatneſſe▪
A name to fright, and terrifie young ſtatiſts,
There is neceſſitie my Lord, that you
Muſt loſe your light, if you ecclipſe not him,
Two ſtarres ſo Lucide cannot ſhine at once
In ſuch a firmament, and better you
Extinguiſh his fires, then be made his fuell,
And in your aſhes give his ſlame a Trophy.
My Lord, the league that you have vow'd of friendſhip,
In a true underſtanding not confines you,
But makes you boundleſſe, turne not edge at ſuch
A liberty, but looke to your owne fortune;
Secure your honour, a Preciſian,
In ſtate, is a rideculous miracle
Friendſhip is but a viſor, beneath which
A wiſe man laughes to ſee whole families
Ruinde, upon whoſe miſerable pile
He mounts to glory, Sir you muſt reſolve
To uſe any advantage.
Miſery
Of riſing Stateſmen I muſt on, I ſee
That 'gainſt the politicke, and priviledg'd fſhion,
All juſtice taſts but affectation.
Why ſo? we ſhall do good on him ith' end.
You are moſt welcome.
I wiſh your Lordſhips ſafetie▪
Which whilſt I pray for, I muſt not forget
To urge agen the wayes to fixe you where
No danger has acceſſe to threaten you.
Still your old argument, I owe your love fort.
But fortified with new and pregnant reaſons,
That you ſhould leave the Court.
I dare not Sir.
You dare be undone then.
I ſhould be ingratefull
To ſuch a maſter, as no ſubject boaſted
To leave his ſervice when they exact
My chiefeſt dutie, and attendance Sir.
Would thou wet leſſe degraded from thy titles,
And ſwelling offices, that will ith' end
Engulfe thee paſt a reſcue, I had not come
So farre to trouble you at this time, but that
I doe not like the loud tongues o'the world,
That ſay the King has tane another favorite,
The Conſtable a gay man, and a great,
With a hugh traine of faction too, the Queene,
Chancellor, Treaſurer, Secretary, and
An army of ſtate warriers▪ whoſe diſcipline
Is ſure, and ſubtile to confuſion,
I hope the rumour's falſe, thou art ſo calme.
Report has not abus'd you Sir.
It has not,
And you are pleas'd, then you doe meane to mixe
With unjuſt courſes, the great Conſtable
And you combining, that no ſuite may paſſe
One of the graples of your eithers rape,
I that abhorr'd, muſt I now entertaine
A thought, that your ſo ſtraight, and ſimple cuſtome
To render Iuſtice, and the common good,
Should now be patch'd with pollicy, and wreſted
From the ingenious ſtep you tooke,
And hang
Vpon the ſhoulders of your enemy
To beare you out in what you ſhame to act▪
Sir, We both are reconciled.
It followes then that both the acts muſt beare
Like reconcilement, and if hee will now
Maligne and mallice you for croſſing him
Or any of his faction in their ſuites,
Being now atton'd, you muſt be one in all,
One in corruption, and twixt you two millſtones
New pickt, and put together, muſt the graine
Of good mens needfull meanes to live, be ground
Into your choking ſuperfluities;
You both too rich, they ruinde.
I conceive Sir
Wee both may be enrich'd, and raiſe our fortunes
Even with our places in our Soveraignes favour:
Though paſt the height of others, yet within
The rules of Law and Iuſtice, and approove
Our actions white and innocent.
I doubt it
While inforc'd ſhew perhaps, which will I feare
Prove in true ſubſtance but a Millers whiteneſſe,
More ſticking in your clothes then conſcience.
Your cenſure herein taſts ſome paſſion Sir,
And I beſeech you nouriſh better thoughts,
Then to imagine that the Kings meere grace
Suſtaines ſuch prejudice by thoſe it honours;
That of neceſſitie we muſt pervert it
With paſſionate enemies, and ambitious boundleſſe
Avarice, and every licence incident
To fortunate greatneſſe, and that all abuſe it
For the moſt impious avarice of ſome.
As if the totall ſumme of favorites frailties
Affected not the full rule of their Kings
In their owne partially diſpoſed ambitions,
And that Kings doe no hazard infinitely
In their free realties of rights and honours,
Where they leave much for favourites powers to order.
But wee have ſuch a maſter of our King
In the Imperiall art, that no power flies
Out of his favour, but his policie ties
A criance to it, to containe it ſtill;
And for the reconcilement of us Sir,
Never were two in favour, that were more,
One in all love of Iuſtice, and true honour,
Though in the act and proecution
Pehaps we differ. Howſoever yet
One beame us both creating, what ſhould let
That both our ſoules ſhould both one metle beare,
And that one ſtampe, one word, one character.
I could almoſt be won to be a Courtier,
Theres ſome thing more in's compoſition,
Then ever yet was favourites.
Whats hee?
I bring your Lordſhip a ſign'd bill, to ave
The addition of your honor'd hand, the counſell
Have all before ſubſcribed, and full prepar'd it.
It ſeemes then they have weigh'd the importance of it,
And know the grant is juſt.
No doubt my Lord,
Or elſe they take therein the Conſtables word,
It being his ſuite, and his power having wrought
The King already to appoſe his hand.
I doe not like his working of the King,
For if it be a ſuite made knowne to him,
And fit to paſſe, he wrought himſelfe to it,
However my hand goes to no ſuch grant,
But firſt I'le know and cenſure it my ſelfe.
A he, if thou beeſt goddeſſe of contention▪
That Iove tooke by the haire, and hurl'd from heaven
Aſſume in earth thy empire, and this bill
Thy firebrand make to turne his love, thus tempted
Into a hate, as horrid as thy furies.
Does this beare title of his Lordſhips ſuite?
It does my Lord, and therefore he beſeech'd
The rather your diſpatch.
No thought the rather,
But now the rather all powers againſt it,
The ſuite being moſt injuſt, and he pretending
In all his actions juſtice, on the ſudden
After his ſo late vow not to violate it,
Is ſtrange and vile, and if the King himſelfe
Should owne and urge it, I would ſtay▪ and croſſe it,
For tis within the free power of my office,
And I ſhould ſtraine his kingdome if I paſt it,
I ſee their poore attempts, and giddy malice;
Is this the reconcilement that ſo lately
He vow'd in ſacred witneſſe of the King?
Aſſuring me, he never more would offer
To paſſe a ſuite unjuſt, which I well know
This is, above all, and have often beene urg'd
To give it paſſage, be you Sir the Judge.
I wonot meddle
With any thing of ſtate, you knew long ſince.
Yet you may heare it Sir.
You wonot urge
My opinion then, go to.
An honeſt merchant
Preſuming on our league of France with Spaine,
Brought into Spaine a wealthy ſhip, to vent
Her fit commodities to ſerve the country,
Which, in the place of ſuffering their ſaile
Were ſeas'd to recompence a Spaniſh ſhip
Priz'd by a French man, ere the league was made,
No ſuites, no letters of our Kings could gaine
Our merchants firſt right in it, but his letters
Vnreverently received, the Kings ſelfe ſcandall,
Beſide the leagues breach, and the foule injuſtice
Done to our honeſt merchant, who endured all,
Till ſome ſmall time ſince (authoris'd by our counſell,
Though not in open Court▪) he made a ſhip out,
And tooke a Spaniard, brings all home, and ſues
To gaine his full prov'd loſſe, full recompence
Of his juſt prize, his prize is ſtaid and ceaz'd,
Yet for the Kings diſpoſure, and the Spaniard
Makes ſuite to be reſtor'd her, which this bill
Would fine get granted, faining (as they hop'd)
With my allowance, and way given to make
Our Countrey mans in Spaine their abſolute prize.
I were abſolute injuſtice.
Should I paſſe it.
Paſſe life, and ſtate before.
If this would ſeeme
His Lordſhips ſuite, his love to me, and juſtice
Including plots upon me, while my ſimpleneſſe
Is ſeriouſly vow'd to reconcilement;
Love him good vulgars, and abhorre me ſtill,
For if I court your ſlatterie with my crimes,
Heavens love before me fly, till in my tombe
I ſticke purſuing it, and for this bill,
Thus ſay twas ſhiver'd, bleſſe us equall heaven!
This could I cheriſh, now above his loſſe,
You may report as much, the bill diſcharg'd Sir.
IS it en ▪ſo.
Good heaven how tame you are?
Doe Kings of France reward foule Traitors thus?
No Traitor, y'are too loude▪ Chabots no Traitor,
He has the paſſions of a man about him,
And multiplicitie of cares may make
Wiſe men forget themſelves, come be you patient.
Can you be ſo, and ſee your ſelfe thus torne.
Our ſelfe.
There is ſome left, if yo dare owne,
Your royall character, is not this your name?
Tis Francis I confeſſe.
Be but a name
If this ſtaine live upon't, affronted, by
Your ſubject, ſhall the ſacred name of King,
A word to make your nation bow and tremble,
Be thus profain'd, are lawes eſtabliſh'd
To puniſh the defacers of your image,
But dully ſet by the rude hand of others
Vpon your coine, and ſhall the character
That doth include the bleſſing of all France,
Your name, thus written by your royall hand
Deſign'd for Juſtice, and your Kingdomes honour,
Not call up equall anger to reward it?
Your Counſellors of ſtate contemn'd, and ſlighted
As in this braine more circumſcrib'd all wiſedome,
And pollicy of Empire, and your power,
Subordinate and ſubject to his paſſion.
Come, it concernes you not.
Is this the conſequence
Of an attonement made ſo lately betweene▪
The hopefull Mountmorencie, and his Lordſhip
Vrge by your ſelfe with ſuch a precious ſanction;
Come, he that dares doe this, wants not a heart,
But opportunitie.
To doe what?
To teare your crowne off.
Come your language doth taſte more
Of rage and womaniſh flame than ſolid reaſon
Againſt the Admirall, what commands of yours
Not to your expectation▪ obey'd
By him, is ground of your ſo keene diſpleaſure?
Commands of mine? he is too great, and powerfull
To ſtoope to my employment, a Coloſſus,
And can ſtride from one Province to another
By the aſſiſtance o thoſe offices
You have moſt confidently impos'd upon him,
Tis he, not you take up the peoples eyes
And admiration, while his Princely wiſe.
Nay then I reach the ſpring of your diſtaſte,
He has a wife,—
Whom for her pride I love not,
And I but in her husbands ruine
Can triumph ore her greatneſſe.
Well, well, Ile thinke on't?
He beginnes to incline,
Madam you are the ſoule of our great worke.
Ile follow, and imploy my powers upon him.
We are confident you will prevaile at laſt,
And for the pious worke oblige the King to you.
And us your humbleſt creatures.
Preſſe no further.
Lets ſeeke out my Lord Conſtable.
And inflame him.
To expoſtulate with Chabot, ſomething may
Ariſe from thence, ▪to pull more weight upon him.
How ſorts the buſineſſe? how tooke the King
The tearing of his bill?
Exceeding well,
And ſeem'd to ſmile at all their grimme complaints,
Gainſt all that outrage to his highneſſe hand,
And ſaid in plaine, he ſign'd it but to try
My Lords firme Iuſtice
What a ſweete King tis?
But how his rivall the Lord Conſtable
Is labour'd by the Chancellor, and others to retort
His wrong with ten parts more upon my Lord,
Is monſtrous?
Neede hee their ſpurres?
I Sir, for hees afraid
To beare himſelfe too boldly in his braves
Vpon the King (being newly entred Mynion)
Since tis but patience ſometime they thinke;
Becauſe the favor ſpending in two ſtreames,
One muſt runne low at length, till when he dare
Take fire in ſuch flame, as his faction wiſhes,
But with wiſe feare containes himſelfe, and ſo
Like a greene faggot in his kindling ſmoakes,
And where the Chancellor his chiefe Cyclops findes
The fire within him apt to take, he blowes,
And then the faggot flames, as never more
The bellowes needed, till the too ſoft greeneneſſe
Of his ſtate habit, ſhewes his ſappe ſtill flowes,
Above the ſolid timber, with which, then
His blaze ſhrinkes head, he cooles, and ſmoakes agen.
Good man he would be, wod the bad not ſpoile him.
True ſir, but they ſtill ply him with their arts,
And as I heard have wrought him, perſonally
To queſtion my Lord with all the bitterneſſe
The galls of all their faction can powre in,
And ſuch an expectation hangs upon't,
Though all the Court as twere with child, and long'd
To make a mirror of my Lords cleare blood,
And therein ſee the full ebbe of his flood,
And therefore if you pleaſe to counſell him
You ſhall performe a fathers part.
Nay ſince
Hees gone ſo farre, I wod not have him feare
But dare e'm, and yet ile not meddle int.
Hoes here, if he have wit to like his cauſe,
His ſpiri wonot be aſham'd to die int.
My Lord retire, y'are way-laid in your walkes,
Your friendes are all fallen from you, all your ſervants
Suborn'd by all advantage to report
Each word you whiſper out, and to ſerve you
With hat and knee, while other have their hearts.
Much profit may my foes make of ſuch ſervants,
I love no enemy I have ſo well,
To take ſo ill a bargaine from his hands.
Their other oddes yet ſhun, all being combinde,
And lodg'd in ambuſh ariv'd to doe you miſchiefe
By any meanes paſt feare of law, or ſoveraigne.
I wake no deſart, yet goe arm'd with that,
That would give wildeſt beaſts inſtincts to reſcue,
Rather then offer any force to hurt me;
My innocence is, which is a conquering juſtice,
As weares a ſhield, that both defends and fights.
One againſt all the world.
The more the oddes,
The leſſe the conqueſt, or if all the world
Be thought an army fit to employ gainſt one,
That one is argued fit to fight gainſt all;
If I fall under them, this breaſt ſhall beare
Their heape digeſted in my ſepulchre,
Death is the life of good men, let e'm come.
I thought my Lord our reconcilement perfect,
You have expreſt what ſea of gall flow'd in you,
In tearing of the bill I ſent to allow.
Dare you confeſſe the ſending of that bill.
Dare, why not?
Becauſe it breake your oath
Made in our reconcilement, and betrayes
The honour, and the chiefe life of the King
Which is his juſtice.
Betraies?
No leſſe, and that Ile prove to him.
You cannot.
I would not wiſh you offer at an action
So moſt impoſſibly, and much againſt
The judgement, and favour of the King.
His judgement nor his favour I reſpect,
So I preſerve his Iuſtice.
Tis not Iuſtice,
Which I'le prove by law, and abſolute learning.
All your great law, and learning are but words,
When I plead plainely, naked truth, and deedes,
Which though you ſeeke to fray with ſtate, and glory,
I'le ſhoote a ſhaft at all your globe of light,
If lightning ſplit it, yet twas high and right.
Brave reſolution ſo his acts be juſt,
He cares for gaine not honour.
How came he then
By all his infinite honour and his gaine?
Well ſaid my Lord.
Anſwer but onely that.
By doing juſtice ſtill in all his actions.
But if this action prove unjuſt, will you
Say all his other may be ſo as well,
And thinke your owne courſe fitter farre than his.
I will—
He cooles, we muſt not leave him, we have no
Such engine to remove the Admirall.
I prethee Philip be not ſo ſevere
To him I favour, tis an argument
That may ſerve one day to availe your ſelfe,
Nor Does it ſquare with your ſo gentle nature,
To give ſuch fires of envie to your bloud;
For howſoeuer out of love to Iuſtice,
Your Iealouſie of that doth ſo incenſe you,
Yet they that cenſure it will ſay tis envy.
I ſerve not you for them, but for your ſelfe,
And that good in your Rule, that Iuſtice does you,
And care not this what others ſay, ſo you
Pleaſe but to doe me right for what you know.
You will not doe your ſelfe right, why ſhould I
Exceede you to your ſelfe?
My ſelfe am nothing
Compar'd to what I ſeeke, tis juſtice onely
The fount and flood, both of your ſtrength and kingdomes.
But who knowes not, that extreame juſtice is
(by all ruld lawes) the extreame of injurie,
And muſt to you be ſo, the perſons that
Your paſſionate heate calls into queſtion
Are great, and many, and may wrong in you
Your rights of kinde, and dignities of fortune,
And I advanc'd you not to heape on you
Honours, and fortunes, that by ſtrong hand now
Held up, and over you, when heaven takes off
That powerfull hand' ſhould thunder on your head,
And after you cruſh your ſurviving ſeedes.
Sir, your regards to both are great, and ſacred,
But if the innocence, and right that rais'd me
And meanes for mine, can finde no friend hereafter
Of him that ever lives, and ever ſeconds
All Kings juſt bounties with defence, and refuge
In juſt mens races, let my fabricke ruine,
My ſtocke want ſap, my branches by the roote
Be orne to death, and ſwept with whirlewindes out.
For my love no relenting.
No my leige,
Tis for your love, and right that I ſtand out.
Be better yet advis'd.
I cannot Sir
Should any Oracle become my counſell,
For that I ſtand not out, thus of ſet will,
Or pride of any ſingular conceite,
My ēnēmies, and the world may clearely know,
I taſte no ſweetes to drowne in others gall,
And to affect in that which makes me lothed,
To leave my ſelfe and mine expos'd to all
The dangers you propos'd, my purchas'd honours,
And all my fortunes in an inſtant loſt,
That mony, cares, and paines, and yeares have gather'd,
How mad were I to rave thus in my wounds,
Vnleſſe my knowne health felt in theſe forc'd iſſues
Were ſound, and fit, and that I did not know
By moſt true proofes, that to become ſincere
With all mens hates, doth farre excëede their loves,
To be as they are, mixtures of corruption?
And that thoſe envies that I ſee purſue me
Of all true actions are the naturall conſequents
Which being my object, and my reſolute choiſe
Not for my good but yours, I will have juſtice.
You will have juſtice, is your will ſo ſtrong
Now againſt mine? your power being ſo weake
Before my favour gave them both their forces
Of all that ever ſhar'd in my free graces,
You Philip Chabot a meane Gentleman
Have not I-rais'd you to a ſupremeſt Lord,
And given you greater dignities than any?
You have ſo.
Well ſed, and to ſpurre your dulineſſe
With the particulars to which I rais'd you,
Have not I made you firſt a Knight of the Order
Then Admirall of France, then Count Byzanges,
Lord, and Livetenant generall of all
My country, and command of Burgady;
Livetenant generall likewiſe of my ſonne
Daulphine, and heire, and of all Normandy,
And of my chiefely honor'd privy Counſell,
And cannot all theſe powers weigh downe your will?
No Sir, they were not given me to that end,
But to uphold my will, my will being juſt.
And who ſhall judge that Juſtice, you or I?
I Sir, in this caſe your royall thoughts are fitly
Exempt from every curious ſearch of one,
You have the generall charge with care of all.
And doe not generalls include particulars?
May not I Iudge of any thing compriz'd
In your particular as well as you?
Farre be the miſery from you, that you may,
My cares, paines, broken ſleepe therein made more
Then yours ſhould make me ſee more, and my forces
Render of better judgement.
Well Sir, grant
Your force in this my odds in benefits
Paid for your paines, put in the other ſcale,
And any equall holder of the ballance
Will ſhew my merits hoiſt up yours to aire
In rule of any doubt or deed betwixt us.
You merit not of me for benefits
More than my ſelfe of you for ſervices.
Iſt poſſible.
Tis true.
Stand you on that?
I to the death and will approve to all men.
I am deceiv'd, but I ſhall finde good Judges
That will finde difference.
Finde them being good.
Still ſo? what if conferring
My bounties, and your ſervices to ſound them,
We fall foule on ſome licences of yours,
Nay, give me therein ſome advantage of you.
They cannot.
Not in ſiſting their ſevere diſcharges
Of all your offices?
The more you ſift
The more you ſhall refine mee.
What if I
Grant out againſt you a commiſſion
Ioyn'd with an extraordinary proceſſe
To arreſt, and put you in lawes hands for triall.
Not with lawes uttermoſt.
Ile throw the dice.
And Ile endure the chance,
The dice being ſquare.
Repos'd in dreadleſſe confidence, and conſcience,
That all your moſt extreames ſhall never reach,
Or to my life, my goodes or honours breach.
Was ever heard ſo fine a confidence?
Muſt it not pove preſumption, and can that
Scape bracks and errors in your ſearch of law,
I prethee weigh yet, with more ſoule than danger,
And ſome leſſe paſſion.
Witneſſe heaven, I cannot.
Were I diſſolv'd, and nothing elſe but ſoule.
Be ſhrew my blood, but his reſolves amaze me;
Was ever ſuch a Iuſtice in a ſubject▪
Of ſo much office left to his owne ſwinge
That left to law thus, and his Soveraignes wrath,
Could ſtand cleare ſpight of both? let reaſon rule it
Before it come at law, a man ſo rare
In one thing cannot in the reſt be vulgar,
And who ſees you not in the broad high-way
The common duſt up in your owne eyes, beating
In queſt of riches, honours, offices,
As heartily in ſhew as moſt beleeve,
And he that can uſe actions with the vulgar,
Muſt needes embrace the ſame effects & cannot informe him
Whatſoever he pretends, uſe them with ſuch
Free equitie, as fits one juſt and reall▪
Even in the eyes of men, nor ſtand at all parts
So truly circular, ſo ſound, and ſolid,
But have his ſwellings out, his crackes and crannies,
And therefore in this reaſon, before law
Take you to hr, leaſt you affect and flatter
Your ſelfe with mad opinions.
I were mad
Directly Sir, if I were yet to know
Not the ſure danger, but the certaine ruine
Of men ſhot into law from Kings bent brow,
There being no dreame from the moſt muddie braine
Vpon the fouleſt facie, that can forge
More horrour in the ſhaddowes of meere fame,
Then can ſome Lawyer in a man expos'd
To his interpretation by the King,
But theſe grave toyes I ſhall deſpiſe in death,
And while I live will lay them open ſo
(My inocence laid by them) that like foiles
They ſhall ſticke of my merits tenne times more,
And make your bounties nothing, for who gives
And hits ith teeth, himſelfe payes with the glory
For which he gave, as being his end of giving,
Not to crowne merits, or doe any good,
And ſo no thankes is due but to his glory.
Tis brave I ſweare.
No Sir, tis plaine, and rude
But true, and ſpotleſſe, and where you object
My hearty, and groſſe vulgar love of riches,
Titles, and honours, I did never ſeeke them
For any love to them, but to that juſtice
You ought to uſe in their due gift to merits,
To ſhew you royall, and moſt open handed,
Not uſing for hands talons, pincers, grapples;
In whoſe gripes, and upon whoſe gord point,
Deſerts hang ſprawling out their vertuous limbs,
Better and better.
This your glory is
My deſerts wrought upon no wretched matter,
But ſhew'd your royall palmes as free, and moiſt,
As Ida, all enchaſt with ſilver ſprings,
And yet my merit ſtill their equall ſings.
Sing till thou ſigh thy ſoule out hence, and leave us.
My perſon ſhall, my love and faith ſhall never.
Periſh thy love, and faith, and thee for ever;
Whoſe there?
Let one goe for the Chancellor.
He's here in Court Sir.
Haſte and ſend him hither,
This is an inſolence I never met with,
Can one ſo high as his degrees aſcend,
Clime all ſo free, and without ſtaine?
My Lord
Chancellor, I ſend for you about a ſervice
Of equall price to me, as if againe
My ranſome came to me from Pavian thraldome,
And more, as if from forth a ſubjects fetters,
The worſt of ſervitudes my life were reſcued.
You fright me with a Prologue of much trouble▪
Me thinkes it might be, tell me out of all
Your famous learning, was there ever ſubject
Rais'd by his Soveraignes free hand from the duſt,
Vp to a height above Ayres upper region,
That might compare with him in any merit
That ſo advanc'd him? and not ſhew in that
Groſſe over-weening worthy cauſe to thinke
There might be other over-ſights excepted
Of capitall nature in his ſifted greatneſſe.
And paſt queſtion Sir, for one abſur'd thing granted,
A thouſand follow.
You muſt then employ
Your moſt exact, and curious art to explore
A man in place of greateſt truſt, and charge,
Whom I ſuſpect to have abus'd them all,
And in whom you may give ſuch proud veines vent,
As will bewray their boyling bloud corrupted
Both gainſt my crowne and life.
And may my life
Be cruſt in every act,
If I explore him not to every finer.
It is my Admirall.
Oh my good Leige
You tempt, not charge me with ſuch ſearch of him.
Doubt not my heartieſt meaning, all the troubles
That ever mov'd in a diſtracted King,
Put in juſt feare of his aſſaulted life
Are not above my ſufferings for Chabot.
Then I am glad, and proud that I can cure you,
For he's a man that I am ſtudied in,
And all his offices, and if you pleaſe
To give authoritie.
You ſhall not want it.
If I diſcharge you not of that diſeaſe,
About your necke growne, by your ſtrange truſt in him,
With full diſcovery of the fouleſt treaſons.
But I muſt have all prov'd with that free juſtice.
Beſeech your Majeſtie doe not queſtion it.
About it inſtantly, and take me wholly
Vpon your ſelfe.
How much you grace your ſervant?
Let it be fiery quicke.
It ſhall have wings,
And every feather ſhew the ſlight of Kings.
ANd have they put my faithfull ſervant to the racke,
Heaven arme the honeſt man.
Allegre feeles the malice of the Chancellor.
Many upon the torture have confeſt
Things againſt truth, and yet his paine ſits neerer
Than all my other feares, come don't weepe.
My Lord, I doe not grive out of a thought,
Or poore ſuſpition, they with all their malice
Can ſtaine your honour, but it troubles me,
The King ſhould grant this licence to your enemies,
As he were willing to heare Chabot guilty.
No more, the King is juſt, and by expoſing me
To this triall, meanes to render me
More happy to his ſubjects, and himſelfe
His ſacred will be obey'd, take thy owne ſpirit,
And let no thought in fringe thy peace for me,
I goe to have my honours all confirm'd;
Farewell thy lip, my cauſe has ſo much innocence,
It ſhanot neede thy prayer, I leave her yours
Till my returne; oh let me be a ſonne
Still in your thoughts, now Gentlemen ſet forward.
See you that truſt in greatneſſe, what ſuſtaines you,
Theſe hazards you muſt looke for, you that thruſt
Your heads into a cloud, where lie in ambuſh
The ſouldiers of ſtate in privy armes
Of yellow fire jealous, and mad at all
That ſhoote their foreheads up into their forges,
And pry into their gloomy Cabbinets;
You like vaine Citizens that muſt goe ſee
Thoſe ever burning furnaces, wherein
Your brittle glaſſes of eſtate are blowne;
Who knowes not you are all but puffe, and bubble
Of breath, and fume forg'd, your vile brittle natures
Cauſe of your deareneſſe? were you tough and laſting,
You would be cheape, and not worth halfe your face,
Now daughter Plannet ſtrooke.
I am conſidering
What forme I ſhall put on, as beſt agreeing
With my Lords fortune.
Habit doe you meane,
Of minde or body?
Both wod be apparell'd.
In neither you have reaſon yet to mourne.
Ile not accuſe my heart of ſo much weakeneſſe▪
Twere a confeſſion gainſt my Lord. The Queene!
She has expreſt 'gainſt me ſome diſpleaſure.
Lets this way through the Gallery.
Tis ſhe,
Doe you my Lord ſay I wo ſpeake with her?
And has Allegre, one of chiefeſt truſt with him
Suffred the racke▪ the Chancellor is violent;
And whats cnfeſt?
Nothing, he contemn'd all
That could with any cruelſt paine explore him,
As if his mind▪ had rob'd his nerves of ſence,
And through them diffusd fiery ſpirits above
All fleſh and blood; for as his limbs were ſtretch'd,
His contempts too extended.
A ſtrange fortitude▪
But we ſhall loſe th' arraignement.
The ſucceſſe
Will ſoone arrive.
Youle not appeare, my Lord then?
I deſire
Your Lordſhip wod excuſe me.
We are your ſervants.
She attends you Madam.
This humbleneſſe proceedes not from your heart,
Why, you are a Queene your ſelfe in your owne thoughts,
The Admiralls wife of France cannot be leſſe,
You have not ſtate enough, you ſhold not move
Without a traine of friends and ſervants.
There is ſome myſtery
Within your language Madam, I woud hope
You have more charitie than to imagine
My preſent condition worth your triumph,
In which I am not ſo loſt, but I have
Some friends and ſervants with proportion
To my Lords fortune, but none within the liſt
Of thoſe that obey mee can be more ready
To expreſſe their duties, than my heart to ſerve
Your juſt commands.
Then pride will ebbe I ſee,
There is no conſtant flood of ſtate, and greatneſſe,
The prodigie is ceaſing when your Lord
Comes to the ballance, hee whoſe blazing fires,
Shot wonders through the Kingdome, will diſcover
What ſlying and corrupted matter ſed him.
My Lord?
Your high and mighty Juſticer,
The man of conſcience, the Oracle
Of State, whoſe honorable titles
Would cracke an Elephants backe, is now turn'd mortall,
Muſt paſſe examination, and the teſt
Of Law, have all his offices rip▪d up,
And his corrupt ſoule laid open to the ſubjects,
His bribes, oppreſſions, and cloſe ſinnes that made
So many grone, and curſe him, now ſhall finde
Their juſt reward, and all that love their country,
Bleſſe heaven, and the Kings Iuſtice, for removing
Such a devouring monſter.
Sir your pardon
Madam you are the Queene, ſhe is my daughter,
And he that you have character'd ſo monſtrous,
My ſonne in Law, now gon to be arraign'd,
The King is juſt, and a good man, but't does not
Adde to the graces of your royall perſon
To tread upon a Lady thus dejected
By her owne griefe, her Lord's not yet found guilty,
Much leſſe condemn'd, though you have pleas'd to execute him.
What ſawy fellow's this?
I muſt confeſſe
I am a man out of this element
No Courtier, yet I am a gentleman
That dare ſpeake honeſt truth to the Queenes care,
(A duty every ſubject wonot pay you)
And juſtifie it to all the world, there's nothing
Doth more ecclipſe the honours of our ſoule,
Than an ill grounded, and ill followed paſſion,
Let ſlie with noiſe, and licenſe againſt thoſe▪
Whoſe hearts before are bleeding.
Brave old man.
Cauſe▪ you are a Queene to trample ore a woman,
tongue and faculties are all tied up,
out a Lyons teeth, and pare his clawes,
And then a dwarfe may plucke him by the beard,
Tis a gay victory.
Did you hëare my Lord?
I ha done.
And it concernes me to beginne,
I have not made this pauſe through ſervile feare
Or guiltie apprehenſion of your rage,
But with juſt wonder of the heates, and wildneſſe
Has prepoſſeſt your nature gainſt our innocence,
You are my Queene, unto that title bowes
The humbleſt knee in France, my heart made lower
With my obedience, and proſtrate duty,
Nor have I powers created for my uſe,
When juſt commands of you expect their ſervice;
But were you Queene of all the world, or ſomething
To be thought greater, betwixt heaven and us
That I could reach you with my eyes and voyce,
I would ſhoote both up in defence of my
Abuſed honour, and ſtand all your lightning.
So brave.
So juſt and boldly innocent,
I cannot feare arm'd with a noble conſcience
The tempeſt of your frowne, were it more frightfull
Then every fury made a womans anger,
Prepar'd to kill with deaths moſt horrid ceremony,
Yet with what freedome of my ſoule I can
Forgive your accuſation of my pride.
Forgive? what inſolence is like this language?
Can any action of ours be capable
Of thy forgiveneſſe? duſt! how I diſpiſe thee?
Can we ſinne to be object of thy mercie?
Yes, and have dont already, and no ſtaine
To your greatneſſe Madam, tis my charity
I can remit, when ſoveraigne Princes dare
Doe injury to thoſe that live beneath them,
They turne worth pitty, and their prayrs, and tis
In the free power of thoſe whom they oppreſſe
To pardon e'm, each ſoule has a prerogative,
And priviledge royall that was ſign'd by heaven,
But though ith knowledge of my diſpoſition
Stranger to pride, and what you charge me with,
I can forgive the injuſtice done to me,
And ſtriking at my perſon, I have no
Commiſſion from my Lord to cleere you for
The wrongs you have done him, and ſtill he pardon
The wounding of his loyaltie, with which life
Can hold no ballance, I muſt talke juſt boldneſſe
To ſay—
No more, now I muſt tell you daughter
Leaſt you forget your ſelfe, ſhe is the Queene,
And it becomes not you to vie with her
Paſſion for paſſion, if your Lord ſtand faſt
To the full ſearch of Law, Heaven will revenge him,
And give him up precious to good mens loves
If you attempt by theſe unruly wayes
To vindicate his juſtice, I me againſt you,
Deere as I wiſh your husbands life and fame,
Suffer are bound to ſuffer, not conteſt
With Princes, ſince their Will and Acts muſt be
Accounted one day to a Judge ſupreme.
I ha done, if the devotion to my Lord,
Or pietie to his innocence have led me
Beyond the awfull limits to be obſerv'd
By one ſo much beneath your ſacred perſon,
I thus low crave your royall pardon Madam;
I know you will remember in your goodneſſe,
My life blood is concern'd while his leaſt veine
Shall runne blacke and polluted, my heart fed
With what keepes him alive, nor can there be
A greater wound than that which ſtrikes the life
Of our good name, ſo much above the bleeding
Of this rude pile wee carry, as the ſoule
Hath excellence above this earth-borne frailty:
My Lord, by the Kings will is lead already
To a ſevere arraignement, and to Iudges,
Will make no tender ſearch into his tract
Of life and ſtate, ſtay but a little while,
And ranc ſhall ho to his ſhame or innocence,
This ſuit I begge with teares, I ſhall have ſorrow
Enough to heare him cenſur'd foule and monſtrous,
Should you forbeare to antidate my ſufferings.
Your conſcience comes about, and you incline
To feare he may be worth the lawes condemning.
I ſooner will ſuſpect the ſtarres may loſe
Their way, and criſtall heaven returne to Chaos;
Truth its not on her ſquare more firme than he;
Yet let me tell you Madam, were his life
And action ſo foule as you have character'd,
And the bad world expects, though as a wife
Twere duty I ſhould weepe my ſelfe to death,
To know him falne from vertue, yet ſo much
I a fraile woman love my King and Country,
I ſhould condemne him too, and think all honours
The price of his loſt faith more fatall to me,
Than Cleopatra's aſpes warme in my boſome,
And as much boaſt their killing.
This declares
Another ſoule than was deliver'd me,
My anger melts, and I beginne to pitty her,
How much a Princes eare may be abus'd?
Enjoy your happie confidence, at more leaſure
You may heare from us.
Heaven preſerve the Queene,
And may her heart be charitable.
You bleſſe and honour your unworthy ſervant.
My Lord, did you obſerve this?
Yes great Madam,
And read a noble ſpirit, which becomes
The wife of Chabot, their great ti of mrriage
I not more ſtrong upon em, than their vertues.
That your opinion? I thought your judgement
Againſt the Admiall, doe you thinke him honeſt?
Religiouſly, a true, moſt zealous Patrior,
And worth all royall favour.
You amaze me,
Can you be juſt your ſelfe then, and advance
Your powers againſt him?
Such a will be farre
From Montmoranzie, Pioners of ſtate
Have left no art to gaine me to their faction,
And tis my miſery to be plac'd in ſuch
A ſphere where I am whirl'd by violence
Of a fierce raging motion, and not what
My owne will would encline me. I ſhall make
This appeare Madam, if you pleaſe to ſecond
My free ſpeech with the King.
Good heaven protect all,
Haſte to the King, Iuſtice her ſwift wing needes,
Tis high time to be good, when vertue bleedes.
Good Mr. Proctor generall begin.
It is not unknowne to you my very good Lords the Iudges, and indeed to all the world, for I will make ſhort worke, ſince your honourable eares neede not to be enlarged, I ſpeake by a figure with prolixe ennumeration how infinitly the King hath favoured this ill favoured Traitor; and yet I may worthily too inſiſt and prove that no grace hath beene ſo large and voluminous, as this, that he hath appointed ſuch upright Iudges at this time, and the chiefe of this Triumvirie, our Chancellor by name Poyet, which deriveth from the Greeke his Etymology from Poyeni, which is to make, to create, to invent matter that was never extant in nature, from whence alſo is the name and dignitie of Poeta, which I will not inſiſt upon, in this place, although I am confident his Lordſhippe wanteth no facultie in making of Verſes: but what addition I ſay is it to the honour of this Delinquent, that he hath ſuch a Iudge, a man ſo learned, ſo full of equity, ſo noble, ſo notable in the progreſſe of his life, ſo innocent, in the manage of his office ſo incorrupt; in the paſſages of State ſo wiſe, in affection to his country ſo religious, in all his ſervices to the King ſo fortunate, and exploring, as envie it ſelfe cannot accuſe, or malice vitiate, whom all lippes will open to commend, but thoſe of Philip; and in their hearts will erect Altars, and Statues, Columnes, and Obeliſhes, Pillars and Pyramids, to the perpetuitie of his name and memory. What ſhall I ſay but conclude for his ſo great and ſacred ſervice, both to our King and Kingdome, and for their everlaſting benefit, there may everlaſtingly be left here one of his loynes, one of his loynes ever remaine I ſay, and ſtay upon this Bench, to be the example of all Iuſtice, even while the North and South Starre ſhall continue.
You expreſſe your Oratory Mr. Proctor,
I ray come preſenly to the matter.
Thus with your Lordſhips pardon, I proceede; and the firſt thing I ſhall glance at, will be worth your Lordſhips reflection, his ingratitude, and to whom? to no leſſe perſon than a King, and to what King, his owne, and our generall Soveraigne Proh deum atque hominum fidem; a King, and ſuch a King, the health, life, and ſoule of us all, whoſe very mention drawes this ſlt water from my eyes; for hee indeede is our eye, who wakes and watches for us when we ſleepe, and who will not ſleep for him, I meane not ſleepe, which the Philoſophers call, a naturall cſſation of the common and conſequently▪ of all the exterior ſences, cauſed firſt and immediatly by a detenſion of ſpirits, which can have no communication, ſince the way is obſtructed, by which thēſe ſpirits ſhould commearce, by vapours aſcending from the ſtomacke to the head, by which evaporation the rootes of the nerves are filled, through which the annuall ſpirits, to be powred into the dwellings of the externall ſences; but ſleepe I takē for death, which all know to be Ʋltima linea, who will not ſleepe eternally for ſuch a King as wee enjoy? If therefore in generall as hee is King of us all, all ſharing and dividing the benefits of this our Soveraigne: none ſhould be ſo ingratefull as once to murmre againſt him, what ſhall be ſaid of the ingratitude more monſtrous in this Chabot, for our Francis hath loved, not in generall in the croud with other ſubjects, but particularly this Phlp advanc'd him to the ſupreme dignitie of a Statſman, lodg'd him in his very heart, yet Monſtrum horrendum; even to this Francis hath Philip beene ingratefull. Brutus the loved ſonne hath ſtabbed Caeſar with a Bodkin: Oh what brute may be compared to him? and in what particulars may this crime be exemplified; hee hath, as wee ſay, chopt Logicke with the King, nay to the very teeth of his Soveraigne advance his owne Gnat-like merits, and juſtified with Luciferous pride, that his ſervices have deſerved more than all the bounty of our Munificent King hath paid him.
Oſerve that my Lords.
Nay he hath gone further, and moſt traitaerouſly hath commitred outrage and impiety to the Kings owne hand, and royall character, which preſented to him in a bill from the whole counſell, hee moſt violently did teare in peeces, and will doe the very body and perſon of your King, if our Juſtice make no timely prevention, and ſtrike out the Serpentine teeth of th high and more than horible monſter.
This was eforced home.
In the next place I will relate to your honours his moſt cruell exactions upon the ſubject, the old vantcurriers of rebellions. In the yeare 15. 6. and 37. This oppreſſour, and this extortioner, under pretext of his due taxation, being Admirall impo'd upon certaine Fiſhermen, (obſerve I beſeech you the circumſtance of their perſons, Fiſhermen) who poore Iohns were embarqued upon the coſt of Normandy, and fiſhing there for Herrings (which ſome ſy is the king of Fiſhes) he impos'd I ſay twenty ſouſe, and upon every boate ſixe liuers, oh intollerable exaction! enough not onely to alienate the hearts of theſe miſerable people from their King, which Ipſo facto is high treaſon, but an occaſion of a greater inconvenience, for want of due proviſion of fiſh among the ſubjects, for by this might enſue a neceſſitie of mortall ſins, by breaking the religious faſt upon Vigils, Embers, and other dayes commanded by ſacred authority, beſides the miſerable rut that would follow, and perhaps contagion, when feaſting and fleſh ſhould be licenced for every carnall appetite.—I could urge many more particulars of his dangerous inſatiate and boundleſſe Avarice, but the improvement of his eſtate in ſo few yeares, from a private Gentlemans fortune, to a great Dukes revenewes, might ſave our ſoveraigne therein an Orator to enforce and prove faulty even to gyantiſme againſt heaven.
This is but a noiſe of words.
To the foule outrages ſo violent, let us adde his Commiſſions granted out of his owne preſum'd authoritie, his Majeſtie neither infround or reſpected his diſloyalties, infidelities, contempts, oppreſſions, extortions, with innumerable abuſes, offences, and forfeits, both to his Majeſties moſt royall perſon, crowne, and dignitie, yet notwithſtanding all theſe injuſtices, this unmatchable, ujuſt delinquent affecteth to be thought inculpable, and incomparable juſt; but alas my moſt learned Lord, none knowes better than your ſelves, how eaſie the ſinceritie of Iuſtice is pretended, how hard it is to be performed, and how common it is for him that hath leaſt colour of title to it, to be thought the very ſubſtance and ſoule of it, he that was never true ſcholler in the leaſt degree, longs as a woman with child to be great with ſcholler ſhe that was never with child longs Omnibus vijs modis to be got with child, and will weare a cuſhion to ſeeme with child, and hee that was never juſt, will fly in the Kings face to be counted juſt, though for all he be nothing, but juſt, a Traytor.
The Admirall ſmils.
Anſwer your ſelfe my Lord.
I ſhall, and briefely,
The furious eloquence of my accuſer hath
Branch'd my offences hainous to the King,
And then his ſubject, a moſt vaſt indictment,
That to the King I have juſtified my merit,
And ſervices; which conſcience of that truth,
That gave my actions life when they are queſtioned,
I ought to urge agen, and doe without
The leaſt part of injuſtice; for the Bill
A foule, and moſt unjuſt one, and prefer'd
Gainſt the Kings honour, and his ſubjects priviledge,
And with a policie to betray my office,
And faith to both, I doe confeſſe I tore it,
It being preſt immodeſtly, but without
A thought of diſobedience to his name,
To whoſe mention I bow, with humble reverence,
And dare appeale to the Kings knowledge of me,
How farre I am in ſoule from ſuch a rebell,
For the reſt my Lord, and you my honour'd Iudges,
Since all this mountaine all this time in labour
With more than mortall fury gainſt my life,
Hath brought forth nought but ſome ridiculous vermine,
I will not wrong my right, and innocence,
With any ſerious plea in my reply,
To fruſtrate breath, and fight with terrible ſhaddow
That have beene forg'd, and forc'd againſt my ſtate,
But leave all, with my life to your free cenſures;
Onely beſeeching all your learned judgements
Equall and pious conſcience to weigh.
And how this great and mighty fortune hath exalted him to pride is apparant, not onely in his baves and bearings to the King, the fountaine of all this increaſe, but in his contempt and ſcorne of the ſubject, his vaſt expences in buildings, his private bounties, above royall to ſouldiers and ſchollers, that he may be the Generall and Patron, and protector of armes and arts; the number of domeſticke attendants, an army of Graſhoppers and gay Butterflies able to devoure the Spring; his glorious wardrobes, his ſtable of horſes that are prick'd with provender, and will enforce us to weede up our Vineyards to ſow Oates for ſupply of their proviſion, his caroches ſhining with gold, and more bright than the chariot of the Sunne, wearing out the pavements; nay, he is of late ſo tranſcendently proud, that men muſt be his Mules, and carry him up and downe as it were in a Proceſſion for men to gaze at him till their chines crackes with the weight of his inſupportable pride, and who knowes but this may prove a faſhion? But who grones for this? the ſubject, who murmure, and are ready to beginne a rebellion, but the tumultuous ſaylers, and water-rats, who tunne up and downe the citie, like an overbearing tempeſt, curſing the Admirall, who in duty ought to undoe himſelf for the generall ſatisfaction of his countrymen.
The varietie, and wonder now preſented
To your moſt noble notice, and the worlds,
That all my life and actions, and offices,
Explor'd with all the hundred eyes of Law
Lighted with lightning, ſhot out of the wrath
Of an incenſt, and commanding King,
And blowne with foes, with farre more bitter windes,
Then Winter from his Eaſterne cave exhailes,
Yeh nothing found, but what you all have heard,
And then conſider if a peere of State,
Should be expos'd to ſuch a wild arraignement
For poore complaints, his fame, faith, life, and honours
Rackt for no more.
No more? good heaven, what ſay
My learned aſſiſtants.
My Lord, the crimes urg'd here for us to cenſure
As capitall, and worth this high arraignement
To me ſeeme ſtrange, becauſe they doe not fall
In force of Law, to arraigne a Peere of State,
For all that Law can take into her power
To ſentence, is the exaction of the Fiſhermen.
Here is no majeſty violated, I conſent to what my Brother has expreſt.
Breake then in wonder,
My frighted words out of their forming powers,
That you no more collect, from all theſe forfeits
That Mr. Proctor generall hath opened,
With ſo apparant, and impulſive learning,
Againſt the rage and madneſſe of the offender,
And violate Majeſtie (my learned aſſiſtants)
When Majeſties affronted and deſied,
It being compar'd with? and in ſuch an onſet
As leap'd into his throate? his life affrighting?
Be juſtified in all inſolence, all ſubjects
If this be ſo conſidered, and inſult
Vpon your priviledg'd malice, is not Majeſtie
Poyſon'd in this wonder! and no felony ſet
Where royaltie is rob'd, and
Fie how it fights with Law, and grates upon
Her braine and ſoule, and all the powers of Reaſon,
Reporter of the proceſſe, ſhew the ſedule.
Here my good Lord.
1. No altering it in us.
2. Farre be it from us Sir.
Heres ſilken Iuſtice,
It might be altered, mend your ſentences.
Not wee my Lord.
Not you? The King ſhall know
You ſlight a duty to his will, and ſafety,
Give me your pen, it muſt be capitall.
1. Make what you pleaſe my Lord, our doome ſhall ſtand.
Thus I ſubſcribe, now at your perills follow.
Perills my Lord? threates in the Kings free juſtice?
I am amaz'd they can be ſo remiſſe.
Mercifull men, pittifull Iudges certaine.
1. Subſcribe, it matters nothing being conſtrain'd
On this ſide, and on this ſide, this capitall I,
Both which together put, import plaine Vi;
And witneſſe we are forc'd.
2. Enough,
It will acquit us when we make it knowne,
Our names are forc'd.
If traiterous pride
Vpon the royall perſon of a King
Were ſentenc'd unfelloniouſly before,
Ile burne my Bookes and be a Iudge no more.
Here are our hands ſubſcrib'd.
Why ſo, it joyes me,
You have reform'd your juſtice and your judgement,
Now have you done like Iudges and learned Lawyers,
The King ſhall thanke, and honour you for this.
Notary read.
We by his ſacred Majeſtie appointed
Judges, upon due triall, and examination
Of Philip Chabot Admirall of France
Declare him guiltie of high treaſons, &c.
Now Captaine of the gaurd, ſecure his perſon,
Till the King ſignifie
His pleaſure for his death, this day is happy
To France, thus reskued from the vile devourer.
Harke how the votes applaud their bleſt deliverance,
You that ſo late did right and conſcience boaſt,
Heavens mercy now implore, the Kings is loſt.
YOu raiſe my thoughrs to wonder, that you Madam,
And you my Lord, unite your force to pleade
Ith' Admiralls behalfe, this is not that
Language you did expreſſe, when the torne Bill
Was late pretended to us, it was then
Defiance to our high prerogative,
The act of him whoſe proud heart would rebell
And arm'd with faction, too ſoone attempt
To teare my crowne off.
I was ignorant
Then of his worth, and heard but the report
Of his accuſers, and his enemies,
Who never mention in his character
Shadowes of any vertue in thoſe men,
They would depreſſe like Crowes, and carrion birds,
They ſly ore ſlowrie Meades, cleare Springs, faire Gardens,
And ſtoope at carcaſſes; for your owne honour
Pitty poore Chabot.
Poore and a Coloſſus?
What could ſo lately ſtraddle ore a Province,
Can he be fallen ſo low, and miſerable,
To want my pitty, who breakes forth like day,
Takes up all peoples eyes, and admiration?
It cannot be, he hath a Princely wife too.
I interpoſe not often Sir, or preſſe you
With unbecomming importunitie,
To ſerve the profitable ends of others
Conſcience, and duty to your ſelfe inforce
My preſent mediation, you have given
The health of your owne ſtate away, unleſſe
Wiſedome in time recover him.
If he proove
No adulterate gold, triall confirmes his value.
Although it hold in mettle gracious Sir,
Such fiery examination, and the furnace
May waſt a heart thats faithfull, and together
With that you call the feces, ſomething of
The precious ſubſtance may be hazarded.
Why, you are the chiefe engine rais'd againſt him,
And in the worlds Creede labour moſt to ſinke him,
That in his fall, and abſence every beame
May ſhine on you, and onely guild your fortune,
Your difference is the ground of his arraignement,
Nor were we unſollicited by you,
To have your bill confirm'd, from that that ſpring
Came all theſe mighty and impetuous waves,
With which he now muſt wraſtle, if the ſtrength
Of his owne innocence can breake the ſtorme,
Truth wonot loſe her ſervant, her wings cover him,
He muſt obey his fate.
I would not have
It lie upon my fame, that I ſhould be
Mentioned in Story his unjuſt ſupplanter
For your whole Kingdome, I have beene abuſed,
And made beleeve my ſuite was juſt and neceſſary,
My walkes have not beene ſafe, my cloſet prayers,
But ſome plot has purſued me, by ſome great ones
Againſt your noble Admirall, they have frighted
My fancy into my dreames with their cloſe whiſpers,
How to uncement your affections,
And reder him the fable, and the ſcorne
Of France.
Brave Montmorancie.
Are you ſerious.
Have I a ſoule? or gratitude, to acknowledge
My ſelfe your creature, dignified and honor'd
By your high favours with an equall truth,
I muſt declare the juſtice of your Admirall
(In what my thoughts are conſcious) and will rather
Give up my claime to birth, title, and offices,
Be throwne from your warme ſmile, the top and crowne
Of ſubjects happineſſe, then be brib'd with all
Their glories to the guilt of Chabots ruine.
Come, come, you over act this paſſion,
And if it be not pollicie it taſts
Too greene, and wants ſome counſell to mature it,
His fall prepares your triumph.
It confirmes
My ſhame alive, and buried will corrupt
My very duſt, make our houſe-genious grone,
And fright the honeſt marble from my aſhes:
His fall prepare my triumph? turne me firſt
A naked exile to the world.
No more,
Take heede you baniſh not your ſelfe, be wiſe,
And let not too much zeale devoure your reaſon,
Your Admirall
Is condemn'd Sir?
Ha? ſtrange! no matter,
Leave us, a great man I ſee may be
As ſoone diſpatch'd, as a common ſubject▪
No mercy then for Chabot.
From whence came
That ſound of Chabot? then we are all undone:
Oh doe not heare the Queene, ſhe is no friend
To my poore Lord, but made againſt his life,
Which hath too many enemies already.
Poore ſoule, ſhee thinkes the Queene is ſtill againſt him,
Who employeth all her powers to preſerve him.
Say you ſo my Lord? daughter the Queen's our friend.
Why doe you mocke my ſorrow! can you flatter
Your owne griefe ſo, be juſt, and heare me ſir,
And doe not ſacrifice a ſubjects blood
To appeaſe a wrathfull Queene, let mercy ſhine
Vpon your brow, and heaven will pay it backe
Vpon your ſoule, be deafe to all her prayers.
Poore heart, ſhe knowes not what ſhe has deſir'd.
I begge my Chabts life, my ſorrowes yet
Have not deſtroid my reaſon.
He is in the power of my Lawes, not mine.
Then you have no power,
And are but the emptie ſhadow of a King,
To whom is it reſign'd? where ſhall I begge
The forfeit life of one condemnd by Lawes
To partiall doome?
You heare he is condemn'd then?
My ſonne is condemn'd fit.
You know for what too.
What the Iudges pleaſe to call it,
But they have given t a name, Treaſon they ſay.
I muſt not be denied.
I muſt deny you.
Beleſt for ever fort.
Grant then to her.
Chabot condemn'd by law?
But you have power
To change the rigor, in our breaſt there is
A Chancellor above it, I nere had
A ſuite before, but my knees joyne with hers
To implore your royall mercy to her Lord,
And take his cauſe to your examination,
It cannot wrong your Iudges, if they have
Beene ſteer'd by conſcience.
It will fame your Iuſtice.
I cannot be preſcrib'd, you kneele in vaine,
You labour to betray me with your teares
To a treaſon above his, gainſt my owne Lawes,
Looke to the Lady—
Sir the Chancellor.
Admit him, leave us all.
How now my Lord?
You have loſt no time, and how thrive the proceedings.
Twas ſit my gracious Soveraigne, time ſhould leave
His motion made in all affaires beſide,
And ſpend his wings onely in ſpeed of this.
You have ſhew'd diligence, and whats become
Of our moſt curious Iuſticer, the Admirall?
Condemn'd ſir utterly, and all hands ſet
To his conviction.
And for faults moſt foule?
More than moſt impious, but the applauſive iſſue
Strooke by the concourſe of your raviſh'd ſubjects
For joy of your free Iuſtice, if there were
No other cauſe to aſſure the ſentence juſt
Were proofe convincing.
Now then he ſees cleerely
That men perceive how vaine his Iuſtice was,
And ſcorne him for the fooliſh net he wore
To hide his nakedneſſe; iſt not a wonder
That mens ambitions ſhould ſo blinde their reaſon
To affect ſhapes of honeſty, and take pride
Rather in ſeeming, then in being juſt.
Seeming has better fortune to attend it
Then being ſound at heart, and vertuous.
Profeſſe all? nothing doe, like thoſe that live
By looking to the Lamps of holy Temples,
Who ſtill are buſie taking off their ſnuffes,
But for their profit ſake will adde no oyle;
So theſe will checke and ſentence every fame,
The blaze of riotous blood doth caſt in others,
And in themſelves leave the ſume moſt offenſive,
But he to doe this? more deceives my judgement
Than all the reſt whoſe nature I have ſounded.
I know Sir, and have prov'd it.
Well my Lord
To omit circumſtance, I highly thanke you
For this late ſervice you have done me here,
Which is ſo great and meritorious
That with my ableſt power I ſcarce can quit you.
Your ſole acceptance (my dread ſoveraigne)
I more rejoyce in, than in all the fortunes
That ever chanc'd me, but when may it pleaſe
Your Highneſſe to order the execution?
The haſte thus farre hath ſpar'd no pinions.
No my Lord, your care
Hath therein much deſerv'd.
But where proportion
Is kept toth' end in things, at ſtart ſo happy
That end ſet on the crowne.
Ile ſpeede it therefore.
Your thoughts direct it, they are wing'd.
I joy this boldneſſe is condemn'd, that I may pardon,
And terein get ſome ground in his opinion
By ſo much bounty as ſave his life,
And me thinks that weigh'd more, ſhould ſway the ballance
Twixt me and him, held by his owne free Iuſtice,
For I could never finde him obſtinate
In any minde he held, when once he ſaw
Th' error with which he laboured, and ſince now
He needs muſt feele it, I admit no doubt,
But that his alteration will beget
Another ſence of things twixt him and me;
Whoſe there?
Goe to the Captaine of my uard, and will him
To attend his condemn'd priſoner to me inſtantly.
I ſhall ſir
My Lords, you were ſpectators of our Admirall.
And hearers too of his moſt juſt conviction,
In which we witneſt over-weight enough
In your great bounties, and as they there were weigh'd
With all the feathers of his boaſted merits.
Has felt a ſcorching triall, and the teſt
(That holds fires utmoſt force) we muſt give mettalls
That will not with the hammer, and the melting
Confeſſe their truth, and this ſame ſence of feeling
(Being ground to all the ſences) hath one key
More than the reſt to let in through them all
The mindes true apprehenſion, that thence takes
Her firſt convey'd intelligence. I long
To ſee this man of conſidence agen:
How thinke you Lords, will Chabot looke on mee,
Now ſpild of the integrity, he boaſted?
It were too much honour to vouchſafe your ſight.
No doubt my Leigh, but he that hath offended
In ſuch a height againſt your crowne and perſon,
Will want no impudence to looke upon you.
Sir, I had charge given me by this Gentleman
To bring your condemn'd priſoner to your preſence.
You have done well, and tell the Queene, and our
Lord Conſtable we deſire their preſence, bid
Our Admiralls Lady, and her father too
Attend us here, they are but new withdrawne.
I ſhall ſir!
Doe you ſerve this confidence?
He ſtands as all his triall were a dreame.
Hele finde the horrour waking the King's troubled;
Now for thuder-clap: the Queene and Conſtable.
I doe not like their mixtue.
My Lod Admirall,
You made it your deſire to have this triall
That late hath paſt upon you;
And now you feele how vaine is too much faith
And flattery of your ſelfe, as if your breſt
Were proofe gainſt all invaſion, tis ſo ſlight
You ſee it lets in death, whats paſt, hath beene
To ſatisfie your inſolence, there remaines
That now we ſerve our owne free pleaſure, therefore
By tht moſt abſolute power, with which all right
Puts in my hands, theſe iſſues turnes, and changes,
I here in eare of all theſe, pardon all
Your faults and forfeits, whatſoever ſenſur'd,
Againe advancing, and eſtabliſhing
Your perſon in all fulneſſe of that ſtate
That ever you enjoy'd before th' attainder▪
Wonderfull, pardon'd!
Heaven preſerve the King.
Who for this will deſerve all time to honour him.
And live Kings beſt example.
Sonne yare pardon'd,
Be ſure you looke hereafter well about you.
Vouchſafe great Sir to aſſure me what you ſaid,
You nam'd my pardon.
And agen declare it,
For all crimes paſt, of what nature ſoever.
You cannot pardon me Sir.
How's that Philip?
It is a word carries too much relation
To an offence, of which I am not guilty,
And I muſt ſtill be bold where truth ſtill armes,
In ſpight of all thoſe frownes that would deject me
To ſay I neede no pardon.
Ha, howes this?
Hees mad with over-joy, and anſwers nonſence.
Why, tell me Chabot, are not you condemn'd?
Yes, and that juſtifies me much the more,
For whatſoever falſe report hath brought you,
I was condemn'd for nothing that could reach
To prejudice my life, my goods or honour,
As firſt in firmeneſſe of my conſcience,
I confidently told you, not alas
Preſuming on your ſlender thred of favour,
Or pride of fortunate and courtly boldneſſe,
But what my faith and juſtice bade me truſt too,
For none of all your learned aſſiſtant Judges,
With all the malice of my crimes could urge,
Or felny or hurt of ſacred power.
Doe any heare this, but my ſelfe? My Lords,
This man ſtill juſtifies his innocence,
What prodigies are theſe? have not our Lawes
Paſt on his actions, have not equall Iudges
Certified his arraignement, and him guilty
Of capitall Treaſon? and yet doe I heare
Chabot accuſe all theſe, and quit himſelfe.
It does appeare diſtraction ſir.
Did we
Seeme ſo indulgent to propoſe our free
And royall pardon without ſuite or prayer,
To meete with his contempt?
Vnhea'd of impudence!
I were malicious to my ſelfe, and deſperate
To force untruths upon my ſoule, and when
Tis cleare, to confeſſe a ſhame to exerciſe
Your pardon ſir, were I ſo foule and monſtrous
As I am given to you, you would commit
A ſinne next mine, by wronging your owne mercy
To let me draw out impious breath, it will
Releaſe your wonder, if you give command
To ſee your proceſſe, and if it prove other
Tha I preſume to Informe, teare me in peeces.
Goe for the Proceſſe, and the Chancellor,
With the aſſiſtant Iudges. I thanke heaven
That with all theſe inforcements of diſtraction
My reaſon ſtayes ſo cleare to heare, and anſwer,
And direct a meſſage. This inverſion
Of all the loyalties, and true deſerts
That I beleev'd I govern'd with, till now
In my choice Lawyers, and chiefe Counſellors
Is able to ſhake all my frame of reaſon.
I am much griv'd.
No more, I doe incline
To thinke I am abus'd, my Lawes betrai'd
And wreſted to the purpoſe of my Judges,
This confidence in Chabot turnes my judgement,
This was too wilde away▪ to make his merits
Stoope and acknowledge my ſuperior bounties,
That it doth raiſe, and ſixe e'm paſt my art,
To ſhadow all the ſhame and forfeits mine.
The Chancellor and Judges Sir.
I like not
This paſſion in the King, the Queene and Conſtable
Are of that ſide.
My Lord, you dare appeare then?
Dare Sir, I hope.
Well done, hope ſtill, and tell me,
Is not this man condemn'd?
Strange queſtion Sir,
The proceſſe will declare it, ſign'd with all
Theſe my aſſiſtant brothers reverend hands
To his conviction in a publike triall.
You ſaid for foule and monſtrous facts prov'd by
The very words are there ſir.
But the deedes
I looke for ſir, name me but one thats monſtrous?
His foule compariſons, and affronts of you,
To me ſeem'd monſtrous.
I told you them ſir,
Nor were they any that your ſo vaſt knowledge,
Being a man ſtudied in him, could produce
And prove as cleare as heaven, you warranted
To make appeare ſuch treaſons in the Admirall,
As never all Lawes, Volumes yet had ſentenc'd,
And France ſhould looke on, having ſcap'd with wonder
What in this nature hath beene cleerely prov'd
In his arraignement.
1. Nothing that we heard
In ſlendreſt touch urg'd by your Advocate.
Dare you affirme this too?
2. Moſt conſidently.
No baſe corruptions charg'd upon him.
1. None ſir.
This argues Chabot has corrupted him.
I doe not like this.
1. The ſumme of all
Was urg'd to prove your Admirall corrupt,
Was an exaction of his officers,
Of twenty ſouſe taken from the Fiſhermen
For every boate, and that fiſh'd the Normand coaſt.
And was this all
The mountaines, and the marvells promiſt me,
To be in cleere proofe made againſt the life.
Of our ſo hated Admirall.
All ſir,
Vpon our lives and conſciences.
I am blaſted.
How durſt you then ſubſcribe to his conviction.
1. For threats by my Lord Chancellor on the Bench,
Affirming that your Majeſtie would have it
Made capitall treaſon, or account us traitors.
2. Yet ſir, we did put to our names with this
Interpoſition of a note in ſecret
In theſe two letters Ʋ, and I, to ſhew
Wee were enforc'd to what we did, which then
In Law is nothing.
How doe you feele your Lordſhip,
Did you not finde ſome ſtuffing in your head,
Your braine ſhould have beene purg'd,
I fall to peeces,
Would they had rotted on the Bench.
And ſo you ſav'd the peace of that high Court.
Which otherwiſe his impious rage had broken,
But thus am I by his malicious arts
A parly rendred, and moſt tyrannous ſpurre
To all the open courſe of his baſe envies,
A forcer of my Iudges, and a thirſt
Of my nobilities blood, and all by one,
I truſted to make cleere my love of Iuſtice.
I beſeech your Majeſtie, let all my zeale
To ſerve your vertues, with a ſacred value
Made of your royall ſtate, to which each leaſt
But ſhade of violence in any ſubject
Doth provoke certaine death.
Death on thy name
And memory for ever, one command
Our Advocate attend us preſently.
He waites here.
But ſingle death ſhall not excuſe, thy skinne
Torne ore thine eares, and what elſe can be inflicted
If thy life with the ſame ſeverity
Diſſected cannot ſtand ſo many fires.
Tre. Be mercifull great Sir.
Yet more amaze?
Is there a knee in all the world beſide
That any humane conſcience can let bow
For him, yare traitors all that pitty him.
This is no time to move.
Yet twas my fault
To truſt this wretch, whom I knew fierce and proud
With formes of tongue and learning, what a priſoner
Is pride of the whole ſlood of man? for as
A humane ſeede is ſaid to be a mixture
And faire contemperature extracted from
All our beſt faculties, ſo the ſeede of all
Mans ſenſuall frailty, may be ſaid to abide,
And have their confluence in onely pride,
It ſtupifies mans reaſon ſo, and dulls
True ſence of any thing, but what may fall
In his owne glory, quenches all the ſpirits
That light a man to honour and true goodneſſe.
Your Advocate.
Come hither.
My moſt gracious Soveraigne.
Madam you infinitely oblige our duty.
I was too long ignorant of your worth my Lord,
And this ſweete Ladies vertue.
Both your ſervants.
I never had a feare of the Kings Iuſtice,
And yet I Know not what creepes ore my heart,
And leaves an ice beneath it, my Lord Chancellor,
You have my forgiveneſſe, but implore heavens pardon
For wrongs to equall juſtice, you ſhall want
No charitie of mine to mediate
To the King for you.
Horrour of my ſoule
Confounds my gratitude.
To me now moſt welcome.
It was my allegiance ſir, I did enforce,
But by directions of your Chancellor,
It was my office to advance your cauſe
Gainſt all the world, which when I leave to execute,
Flea me, and turne me out a moſt raw Advocate.
You ſee my Chancellor.
He has an ill looke with him.
It ſhall be your province now, on our behalfe
To urge what can in juſtice be againſt him,
His riot on our Lawes, and corrupt actions
Will give you ſcope and field enough.
And I
Will play my law prize, never feare it ſir.
He ſhall be guilty of what you pleaſe, I am ſtudied
In him ſir, I will ſqueeze his villanes,
And urge his acts ſo whom into his bowells,
The force of it ſhall make him hang himſelfe,
And ſave the Lawes a labour.
Iudges, for all
The poiſonous outrage, that this viper ſpile
On all my royall freedome and my Empire,
As making all but ſervants to his malice,
I will have you reviſe the late arraignement,
And for thoſe worthy reaſons, that already
Affect you for my Admiralls acquitall
Employ your juſtice on this Chancellor, away with him,
Arreſt him Captaine of my guard to anſwer
All that due courſe of Law againſt him can
Charge both his Acts and life.
I doe arreſt thee
Lord Chancellor in his Highneſſe name,
To anſwer all that equall courſe of Law
Can charge thy acts and life with.
I Obey.
How falſe a heart corruption has, how baſe
Without true worth are all theſe earth-bred glories?
Oh bleſſed juſtice, by which all things ſtand,
That ſtills the thunder, and makes lightning finke
Twixt earth and heaven amaz'd, and cannot ſtrike,
Being prov'd ſo now in wonder of this man,
The object of mens hate, and heavens bright love;
And as in cloudy dayes, we ſee the Sunne
Glide over turrets, temples, richeſt fields,
All thoſe left darke, and ſlighted in his way,
And on the wretched plight of ſome poore ſhed,
Powres all the glories of his golden head;
So heavenly vertue, on this envied Lord,
Points all his graces, that I may dinſtinguiſh
Him better from the world.
You doe him right.
But away Iudges, and purſue the afraignement
Of this polluted Chancellor with that ſwiftneſſe,
His fury wing'd againſt my Admirall,
And be you all, that ſate on him compurgators
Of me againſt this falſe Iudge.
We are ſo.
Be you two joyn'd in the commiſſion,
And nothing urg'd but juſtly, of me learning
This one more leſſon out of the events
Of theſe affaires now paſt, that whatſoever
Charge or Commiſſion Iudges have from us,
They ever make their ayme ingenuous Iuſtice,
Not partiall for reward, or ſwelling favour,
To which if your King ſteere you, ſpare to obey;
For when his troubled blood is cleere, and calme,
He will repent that he purſued his rage,
Before his pious Law, and hold that Iudge
Vnworthy of his place, that lets his cenſure
Flote in the waves of an imagin'd favour,
This ſhipwracks in the haven, and but wounds
Their conſciences that ſooth the ſoone ebb'd humours
Of their incenſed King.
Royall and ſacred.
Come Philip, ſhine thy honour now for ever,
For this ſhort temporall ecclipſe it ſuffer'd
By th' interpos'd deſire I had to try thee,
Nor let the thought of what is paſt afflict thee,
For my unkindneſſe, live ſtill circled here,
The bright intelligence of our royall ſpheere.
THe Admirall ſicke?
Fa. With danger at the hrt,
I came to tell the King.
He never had
More reaſon in his ſoule, to entertaine
All the delights of health.
I feare my Lord,
Some apprehenſion of the Kings unkindneſſe,
By giving up his perſon, and his offices
To the Lawes gripe and ſearch, is ground of his
Sad change, the greateſt foules are thus oft wounded,
If he vouchſafe his preſence, it may quicken
His faſt decaying ſpirits, and prevent
The haſty ebbe of life.
The King is now
Fraught with the joy of his freſh preſervation,
The newes ſo violent, let into his eare,
May have ſome dangerous effect in him,
I wod not counſell ſir to that.
With greater reaſon
I may ſuſpect they'le ſpread my Lord, and as
A river left his curl'd and impetuous waves
Over the bankes, by confluence of ſtreames
That fill and ſwell her channell, for by this time
He has the addition of Allegres ſuffering,
His honeſt ſervant, whom I met though feeble
And worne with torture, going to congratulatë
His Maſters ſafetie.
It ſeemes he much
Affected that Allegre.
There will be
But a ſad interview and dialogue.
Does he keepe his bed?
In that alone
He ſhewes a fortitude, he will move, and walke
He ſayes while his owne ſtrength or others can
Support him, wiſhing he might ſtand and looke
His deſtiny in the face at the laſt ſummon,
Not ſluggiſhly exhaile his ſoule in bed,
With indulgence, and nice flattery of his limbs.
Can he in this ſhew ſpirit, and want force
To wraſtle with a thought?
Oh Madam, Madam,
We may have proofe againſt thë ſword, and tyranny
Of boyſterous warre that threatens us, but when
Kings froune, a Cannon mounted in each eye,
Shoote death to apprehenſion, ere their fire
And force approach us.
Here's the King.
No words
To interrupt his quiet,
Ile begon then.
Our Admiralls father! call him backe.
I wnot ſtay to heare e'm.
Sir, be prudent,
And doe not for your ſonne fright the Kings health.
What, ha they left us? how does my Admirall?
I am forbid to tell you ſir.
By whom.
The Queene and my Lord Conſtable.
Are there
Remaining ſeedes of faction? have they ſoules
Not yet convinc'd ith truth of Chabots honour,
Cleare as the chriſtall heaven, and bove the reach
Of imitation.
Tis their care of you,
And no thought prejudiciall to my ſonne.
Their care of me?
How can the knowledge of my Admiralls ſtate
Concerne their feares of me, I ſee their envie
Of Chabots happineſſe, whoſe joy to be
Rendr'd ſo pure and genuine to the world
Doth grate upon their conſcience and affright 'em;
But let 'em vexe, and bid my Chabot ſtill
Exalt his heart, and triumph, he ſhall havë
The acceſſe of ours, the kingdome ſhall put on
Such joyes for him as ſhe would boſt to celebratë
Her owne eſcape from ruine.
He is not in ſtate to heare my ſad newes
I perceive.
That countenance is not right, it does not anſwë
What I expect,
Say, how is my Admirall?
The truth upon thy life.
To ſecure his, I would you had.
Ha? Who durſt oppoſe him?
One that hath power enough hath practiſed on him
And made his great heart ſtoope.
I will revenge it
With cruſhing, cruſhing that rebellious power to nothing.
Name him.
He was his friend.
A friend to malice, his owne blacke impoſtume
Burne his blood up, what miſchiefe hath ingendred
New ſtormes?
Tis the old tempeſt.
Did not we
Appeaſe all horrors that look'd wilde upon him?
You dreſt his wounds I muſt confeſſe, but made
No cure, they bleede a freſh, pardon me ſir,
Although your conſcience have clos'd too ſoone,
He is in danger, and doth want new ſurgerie
Though he be right in fame, and your opinion,
He thinkes you were unkinde.
Alas poore Chabot,
Doth that afflict him.
So much, though he ſtrive
With moſt reſolv'd and Adamantine nerves,
As ever humane fire in fleſh and blood,
Forg'd for example, to beare all, ſo killing
The arrowes that you ſhot were (ſtill your pardon)
No Centaures blood could rancle ſo.
If this
Be all, ile cure him, Kings retaine
More Balſome in their ſoule them hurt in anger.
Farre ſhort ſir, with one breath they uncreate,
And Kings with onely words more wounds can make
Then all their kingdome made in balme can heale,
Tis dangerous to play to wilde a deſcant
On numerous vertue, though it become Princes
To aſſure their adventures made in every thing,
Goodneſſe confin'd within poore fleſh and blood,
Hath but a queazie and ſtill ſickly ſtate,
A muſicall hand ſhould onely play on her
Fluent as ayre, yet every touch command.
No more,
Commend us to the Admirall, and ſay,
The King will viſite him, and bring health.
I will not doubt that bleſſing, and ſhall move
Nimbly with this command.
Did you beleeve the Chancellor had beene
So foule?
Hee's loſt toth' people, what contempts
They throw upon him? but we muſt be wiſe.
Were there no other guilt, his malice ſhëw'd
Vpon the Admirall, in orebearing juſtice,
Would well deſerve a ſentence.
And a deepe one.
If pleaſe your Lordſhips to remember that
Was ſpecially commended by the King,
As being moſt blemiſh to his royall perſon,
And the free juſtice of his ſtate.
Already
He has confeſt upon his examinations
Enough for ſenſure, yet to obey forme—
Mr. Advocate if you pleaſe—
I am ready for your Lordſhips: It hath beene ſaid, and will be ſaid agen, and may truely be juſtified, Omnia ex lite fieri. It was the poſition of Philoſophers, and now proved by a more Phyloſophycall ſect, the Lawyers, that Omnia ex lite fiant, we are all made by Law, made I ſay, and worthily if we be juſt, if we be un juſt, marr'd, though in marring ſome, there is neceſſitie of making others, for if one ſall by the Law, tenne to one but another is exalted by the execution of the Law, ſince the corruption of one muſt conclude the generation of another, though not alwayes in the ſame profeſſion; the corruption of an Apothecary, may be the generation of a Doctor of Phyſicke; the corruption of a Citizen may beget a Courtier, & a Courtier may very well beget an Alderman, the corruption of an Alderman may be the generation of a Country Iuſtice, whoſe corrupt ignorance eaſily may beget a tumult, a tumult may beget a Captaine, and the corruption of a Captaine may beget a Gentleman-Vſher, and a Gentleman-Vſher may beget a Lord, whoſe wit may beget a Poet, and a Poet may get a thouſand pound a yeare, but nothing without corruption.
Good Mr. Advocate be pleaſed to leave all digreſſions, and ſpeake of the Chancellor.
Your Lordſhip doth very ſeaſonably premoniſh, and I ſhall not neede to leave my ſubject corruption, while I diſcourſe of him, who is the very fenne and ſtigian abiſſe of it, five thouſand and odde hundred foule and impious corruptions, for I will be briefe; have beene found by ſeverall examinations, and by oathes prov'd againſt this odious and polluted Chancelor, a man of ſo tainted, and contagious a life, that it is a miracle any man enjoyeth his noſtrills, that hath lived within the ſent of his offices; he was borne with teeth in his head, by an affidavit of his Midwife, to note his devouring, and hath one toe on his left foote crooked, and in the forme of an Eagles talon, to foretell his rapacitie: What ſhall I ſay? branded, mark'd, and deſign'd in his birth for ſhame and obloquie, which appeareth further by a mole under his right eare, with only three Witches haires int, ſtrange and ominous predictions of nature.
You have acquainted your ſelfe but very lately
With this intelligence, for as I remember
Your tongue was guilty of no ſuch character,
When hee ſat Iudge upon the Admirall,
A pious incorrupt man, a faithfull and fortunate
Servant to his King, and one of the greateſt
Honours that ever the Admirall received, was
That he had ſo noble and juſt a Iudge, this muſt
Imply a ſtrange volubilitie in your tongue, or
Conſcience, I ſpeake not to diſcountenance any
Evidence for the King, but to put you in minde,
Mr. Advocate that you had then a better opinion
Of my Lord Chancellor.
Your Lordſhip hath moſt aptly interpos'd, and with a word I ſhall eaſily ſatisfie all your judgements; He was then a Judge, and in Cathedra, in which he could not erre; it may be your Lordſhips caſes, out of the chaire and ſeate of Iuſtice, he hath his frailties, is loos'ed and expos'd to the conditions of other humane natures; ſo every Iudge, your Lordſhips are not ignorant hath a kinde of priviledge while he is in his ſtate, office and being, and although hee may quoad ſe, internally and privately be guilty of bribery of Iuſtice, yet quoad nos, and in publike he is an upright and innocent Iudge, we are to take no notice, nay, we deſerved to ſuffer, if wee ſhould detect or ſtaine him; for in that we diſparage the Office, which is the Kings, and may be our owne, but once remov'd from his place by juſt diſhonour of the King, he is no more a Iudge but a common perſon, whom the law takes hold on, and wee are then to forget what hee hath beene, and without partialitie to ſtrip and lay him open to the world, a counterfeit and corrupt Iudge, as for example, hee may and ought to flouriſh in his greatneſſe, and breake any mans necke, with as much facilitie as a jeaſt, but the caſe being altered, and hee downe, every ſubject ſhall be heard, a Wolfe may be appareld in a Lambskinne; and if every man ſhould be afraid to ſpeake truth, nay and more than truth, if the good of the ſubject which are clients ſometime require it, there would be no remove of Officers, if no remove no motions▪ if no motion in Court no heate, and by conſequence but cold Termes; take away this moving, this removing of Iudges, the Law may bury it ſelfe in Buckram, and the kingdome ſuffer for want of a due execution; and now I hope your Lordſhips are ſatisfied.
Moſt learnedly concluded to acquity our ſelfe.
Mr. Advocate, pleaſe you to urge for ſatisfaction
Of the world, and clearing the Kings honour, how
In juſtly he proceeded againſt the Admirall.
I ſhall obey your Lordſhip—So vſt ſo infinite hath beene the impudence of this Chancellor▪ not onely toward the ſubject, but even the ſacred perſon of the King, that I tremble as with a Palſie to remember it. This man, or rather this monſter, having power and commiſſion truſted for the examination of the Lord Admirall, a man perfect in all honour and juſtice; indeede the very ornament and ſecond flower of France, for the Flower de lis, is ſacred and above all flowers, and indeede the beſt flower in our garden. Having uſed all wayes to circumvent his innocence by ſuborning and promiſing rewards to his betrayers, by compelling others by the cruelty of tortures, as namely Mounſieur Allegre a moſt honeſt and faithfull ſervant to his Lord, tearing and extending his ſinewes upon the acke to force a confeſſion to his purpoſe, and finding nothing prevaile upon the invincible vertue of the Admirall.
How he would flatter him?
Yet moſt maliciouſly proceeded to arraigne him; to be ſhort againſt all colour of Iuſtice condemn'd him of high treaſons; oh thinke what the life of man is, that can never be recompenced; but the life of a juſt man, a man that is the vigour and glory of our life and nation to be torne to death, and ſacrifis'd beyond the mallice of common perſecution. What Tiger of Hercanian breede could have beene ſo cruell? but this is not all? he was not guilty onely of murder, guilty I may ſay In foro cōſctieniae, though our good Admirall was miraculouſly preſerv'd, but unto this he added a moſt prodigious & fearefull rape, a rape even upon Iuſtice it ſelf, the very ſoule of our ſtate, for the reſt of the Iudges upon the Bench, venerable images of Auſtria, he moſt tyranouſly compel'd to ſet their hands to his moſt unjuſt ſentence; did ever ſtory remember the like outrge and injuſtice; what forfeit, what penalty can be enough to ſatisfie this tranſcendent offence? and yet my good Lords, this is but veniall to the ſacriledge which now followes, and by him committed, not content with this ſentence, not ſatisfied with horrid violence upon the ſacred Tribunall, but hee proceedes and blaſphemes the very name and honour of the King himſelfe, obſerve that, making him the author and impulſive cauſe of all theſe rapines, juſtifying that he mov'd onely by his ſpeciall command to the death, nay the murder of his moſt faithfull ſubject, tranſlating all his owne blacke and damnable guilt upon the Kings heires, a traytor to his Country, firſt, he conſpires the death of one whom the King loves, and whom every ſubject ought to honour, and then makes it no conſcience to proclaime it the Kings act, & by conſequnce declares him a murderer of his owne, and of his beſt ſubjects.
An Advocate, an Advocate, teare him in peeces,
Teare the Chancellor in peeces.
The people have deepe ſence of the Chancellors injuſtice.
We muſt be carefull to prevent their mutiny.
It will become our wiſedomes to ſecure the court
And priſoner.
Captaine of the guard.
2. What can you ſay for your ſelfe Lord Chancellor.
Againe, I confeſſe all, and humbly fly to
The royall mercy of the King.
And this ſubmiſſion is the way to purchaſe it.
Heare me great Iudges, if you have not loſt
For my ſake all your charities, I beſeech you,
Let the King know my heart is full of penitence,
Calme his high-going ſea, or in that tempeſt
I ruine to eternitie, oh my Lords,
Conſider your owne places, and the helmes
You ſit at, while with all your providence
You ſteere, looke forth and ſee devouring quickſands,
My ambition now is puniſh'd, and my pride
Of ſtate and greatneſſe falling into nothing,
I that had never time through vaſt employments
To thinke of heaven, feele his revengefull wrath,
Boyling my blood, and ſcorching up my entrills,
There doomeſday is my conſcience blacke and horrid,
For my abuſe of Iuſtice, but no ſtings
Prickt with that terrour as the wounds I made
Vpon the pious Admirall, ſome good man
Beare my repentance thither, he is mercifull,
And may encline the King to ſtay his lightning
Which threatens my confuſion, that my free
Reſigne of title, office, and what elſe
My pride look'd at, would buy my poore lives ſafety,
For ever baniſh me the court, and let
Me waſte my life farre off in ſome Village.
How? Did your Lordſhips note his requeſt to you, he would direct your ſentence to puniſh him with confining him to live in the country, like the Mouſe in the Fable, that having offended to deſerve death, beg'd he might be baniſhed into a Parmiſan. I hope your Lordſhips will be more juſt to the nature of his offences.
I could have wiſh'd him fall on ſofter ground
For his good parts.
My Lord, this is your ſentence for you high miſdemeanours againſt his Majeſties Iudges, for your unjuſt ſentence of the moſt equall Lord Admirall, for many and foule corruptions and abuſe of your office, and that infinite ſtaine of the Kings perſon, and honour, we in his Majeſties name, deprive you of your eſtate of Chancellor, & declare you uncapeable of any judiciall office, & beſides condemne you in the ſum of two hundred thouſand crownes; whereof one hundred thouſand to the King, and one hundred thouſand to the Lord Admirall, and what remaineth of your eſtate to goe to the reſtitution of thoſe you have injur'd, and to ſuffer perpetuall impriſonment in the Caſtle, ſo take him to your cuſtody. Your Lordſhips have beene mercifull in his ſentence.
They have ſpar'd my life then, that ſome cure may bring,
I ſpend it in my prayers for the King.
Allegre I am glad he hath ſo much ſtrength,
I prethee let me ſee him.
It will but
Enlarge a paſſion—my Lord hee'le come
Another time and tender you his ſervice.
Nay then—
Although I like it not, I muſt obey.
Welcome my injur'd ſervant, what a miſery
Ha they made on thee?
Though ſome change appeare
Vpon my body, whoſe ſevere affliction
Hath brought it thus to be ſuſtained by others,
My hurt is ſtill the ſame in faith to you,
Not broken with their rage.
Alas poore man!
Were all my joyes eſſentiall, and ſo mighty
As the affected world beleeves I taſte,
This object were enough to unſweeten all,
Though in thy abſence I had ſuffering,
And felt within me a ſtrong ſympathy,
While for my ſake their cruelty did vexe,
And fright thy nerves with horrour of thy ſence,
Yet in this ſpectacle I apprehend
More griefe than all my imagination
Could let before into me; didſt not curſe me
Vpon the torture?
Good my Lord, let not
The thought of what I ſuffer'd dwell upon
Your memory, they could not puniſh more
Then what my duty did oblige to beare
For you and Iuſtice, but theres ſome thing in
Your lookes, preſents more feare than all the mallice
Of my tormentors could affect my ſoule with,
That paleneſſe, and the other formes you weare,
Would well become a guilty Admirall, and one
Loſt to his hopes and honour, not the man
Vpon whoſe life the fury of unjuſtice
Arm'd with fierce lightning, and the power of thunder,
Can make no breach, I was not rack'd till now,
Theres more death in that falling eye, than all
Rage ever yet brought forth, what accident ſir can blaſt,
Can be ſo blacke and fatall to diſtract
The calme? the triumph that ſhould ſit upon
Your noble brow, mifortune could have no
Time to conſpire with fate, ſince you were reſcued
By the great arme of providence, nor can
Thoſe garlands that now grow about your forehead
With all the poyſon of the world be blaſted.
Allegre, thou doſt beare thy wounds upon thee,
In wide and ſpacious characters, but in
The volumne of my ſadneſſe thou doſt want
An eye to reade an open force, hath torne
Thy manly ſinewes which ſometime may cure
The engine is not ſeene that wounds thy Maſter,
Paſt all the remedy of art or time,
The flatteries of Court, of fame or honours,
Thus in the Sommer a tall flouriſhing tree,
Tranſplanted by ſtrong hand, with all her leaves
And blooming pride upon her makes a ſhew
Of Spring, tempting the eye with wanton bloſſome,
But not the Sunne with all her amorous ſmiles,
The dewes of mornings, or the teares of night,
Can roote her fibers in the earth agen,
Or make her boſome kinde, to growth and bearing,
But the tree withers, and thoſe very beames
That once were naturall warmth to her ſoft verdure
Dry up her ſap and ſhoote a feaver through
The barke and rinde, till ſhe becomes a burthen
To that which gave her life: ſo Chabot, Chabot.
Wonder in apprehenſion, I muſt
Suſpect your health indeede.
No no, thou ſhanot
Be troubled, I but ſtirr'd thee with a morrall,
Thats empty containes nothing, I am well,
See I can walke poore man, thou haſt not ſtrength yet.
What accident is ground of this diſtraction?
Thou haſt not heard yet whats become oth' Chancellor?
Not yet my Lord.
Poore gentleman, when I thinke
Vpon the King, I've balme enough to cure
A thouſand wounds, have I not Allegre?
Was ever bountious mercy read in ſtory,
Like his upon my life, condemn'd for ſacrifice
By Law, and ſnatch'd out of the flame unlooked for,
And unpetitioned? but his juſtice then
That wod not ſpare whom his owne love made great,
But give me up to the moſt cruell teſt
Of Iudges, for ſome boldneſſe in defence
Of my owne merits, and my honeſt faith to him
Was rare, paſt example.
Sir, the King
Is comming hither.
It will
Become my duty ſir to leave you now.
Stay by all meanes Allegre, 'tſhall concernē you,
I'me infinitely honor'd in his preſence.
Madam be comforted, Ile be his Phiſitian.
Pray heaven you may.
No ceremoniall knees,
Give me thy heart, my deare, my honeſt Chabot,
And yet in vaine I chalenge that tis here
Already in my owne, and ſhall be cheriſh'd
With care of my beſt life, violence
Shall raviſh it from my poſſeſſion,
Not thoſe diſtempers that infirme my blood
And ſpirits ſhall betray it to a feare,
When time and nature joyne to diſpoſſeſſe
My body of a cold and languiſhing breath,
No ſtroake in all my arteries, but ſilence
In every faculty, yet diſſect me then,
And in my heart, the world ſhall read thee living,
And by the vertue of thy name write there,
That part of me ſhall never putrifie,
When I am loſt in all my other duſt.
You too much honour your poore ſervant ſir,
My heart diſpares ſo rich a monument;
But when it dies—
I wonot heare a ſound
Of any thing that trenched upon death,
He ſpeakes the funerall of my crowne that propheſies
So unkinde a fate, weele live and die together,
And by that duty which hath taught you hitherto,
All loyall and juſt ſervices I charge thee,
Preſerve thy heart for me and thy reward,
Which now ſhall crowne thy merits.
I have found
A glorious harveſt in your ſavour ſir,
And by this overſlow of royall grace,
All my deſerts are ſhadowes and ſlie from mee,
I have not in the wealth of my deſires,
Enough to pay you now, yet you encourage me
To make one ſuite.
So ſoone as nam'd poſſeſſe it.
You would be pleas'd take notice of this Gentleman,
A Secretary of mine.
Mounſieur Allegre,
He that was rack'd ſir for your Admirall.
His limbs want ſtrength to tender their full duty,
An honeſt man that ſuffers for my ſake.
He ſhall be deare to us, for what has paſt ſir
By the unjuſtice of our Chancellors power,
Weele ſtudy to recompence, ith' meane time that office
You exercis'd for Chabot we tranſlate
To our ſelfe, you ſhall be our Secretary.
This is
An honour above my weake deſert, and ſhall
Oblige the ſervice of my life to ſatisfie it.
You are gracious, and in this act have put
All our complaints to ſilence, you Allegre,
Cheriſh your health, and feeble limbs which cannot
Without much prejudice be thus employ'd;
All my beſt wiſhes with thee.
All my prayers
Are duties to your Lordſhip—
Tis too little,
Can forfeit of his place, wealth, and a laſting
Impriſonment purge his offences to
Our honeſt Admirall, had our perſon beene
Exempted from his mallice, he did perſecute
The life of Chabot with an equall wrath,
You ſhould have powr'd death on his treacherous head,
I revoke all your ſentences, and make
Him that was wrong'd full Maſter of his deſtiny,
Be thou his judge.
O farre be ſuch injuſtice,
I know his doome is heavie, and I begge
Where mercy may be let into his ſentence
For my ſake you would ſoften it, I have
Glory enough to be ſet right in yours,
And my deare countries thought, and by an act
With ſuch apparent notice to the world.
Expreſſe it in ſome joy then.
I will ſtrive
To ſhew that pious gratitude to you but—
But what
My frame hath lately ſir beene tane a peecs,
And but now put together, the leaſt force
Of mirth will ſhake and unjoynt all my reaſon,
Your patience royall ſir.
Ile have no patience,
If thou forget the courage of a man.
My ſtrength would latter me.
Phiſitian
Now I begin to feare his apprehenſion,
Why how is Chabots ſpirit falne?
Twere beſt
He were conveid to his bed.
How ſoone turn'd widdow.
Who would not wiſh to live to ſerve your goodnes.
Stand from me, you betray me with your feares,
The plummets may fall off that hang upon
My heart, they were but thoughts at firſt, or if
They weigh me downe to death let not my eyes
Cloſe with another object then the King,
Let him be laſt I looke on.
I would not have him loſt for my whole Kingdome.
He may recover ſir.
I ſee it fall,
For Iuſtice being the proppe of every Kingdome
And mine broke, violating him that was
The knot and contract of it all in him,
It already falling in my eate,
Pompey could heare it thunder, when the Senate
And Capitoll were deafe, ſo heavens loud chiding,
Ile have another ſentence for my Chancellor,
Vnleſſe my Chabot live,
In a Prince
What a ſwift executioner is a frowne,
Eſpecially of great and noble ſoules;
How is it with my Philip?
I muſt begge
One other boone.
Vpon condition
My Chabot will collect his ſcatter'd ſpirits,
And be himſelfe agen, he ſhall divide
My Kingdome with me.
Sweete King.
I obſerve
A fierce and killing wrath engendred in you;
For my ſake, as you wiſh me ſtrength to ſerve you,
Forgive your Chancellor, let not the ſtory
Of Philip Chabot read hereafter draw
A teare from any family, I beſeech
Your royall mercy on his life, and free
Remiſſion of all ſeaſure upon his ſtate,
I have no comfort elſe.
Endeavour
But thy owne health, and pronounce generall pardon
To all through France.
Sir I muſt kneele to thanke you,
It is not ſeal'd elſe, your bleſt hand live happy,
May all you truſt have no leſſe faith then Chabot,
Oh.
His heart is broken.
And kneeling ſir,
As his ambition were in death to ſhew
The truth of his obedience.
I feard this iſſue.
Hees paſt hope.
He has a victory ins death, this world
Deſerv'd him not, how ſoone he was tranſlated
To glorious eternitie, tis too late
To fright the ayre with words, my teare embalme him.
What can become of me?
Ile be your husband Madam, and with care
Supply your childrens father, to your father
Ile be a ſonne, in what ou love or power
Can ſerve his friends, Chabot ſhall nere be wanting,
The greateſt loſſe is mine, paſt ſcale or recompence,
We will proceede no further gainſt the Chancellor,
To the charitie of our Admirall he owes
His life which ever baniſh'd to a priſon,
Shall not beget in us, or in the ſubject
Nw feares of his injuſtice, for his fortunes
Great and acquir'd corruptly, tis our will
They make juſt reſtitution for all wrongs
That ſhall within a yeare be prov'd againſt him;
O Chabot that ſhall boaſt as many monuments
As there be hearts in France, which as they grow,
Shall with more love enſhrine thee, Kings they ſay,
Die not, or ſtarve ſucceſſion, oh why
Should that ſtand firme, and Kings themſelves deſpaire,
To finde their ſubject ſtill in the next heire▪