SHame and diſhonour to the Roman name
A triumph held at Alexandria
Only to honour Cleopatraes pride?
Ah Marcus, this Aegyptian Queen was made
be the ruine of Antonius.
be the pleaſure of Antonius.
ow can you jeſt Canidius, on a theame
ſad?
Plancus can you prophecie
ſadly on ſo merry an occaſion,
As is the love of Ladies?
Let Canidius
Have his own way, Munatius, tis in vain
To talk to him.
Would you could let me have
Antonius his way, upon condition
I ſuffer'd you to cenſure gravely of it,
And prophecie my ruine. But my Lords,
You were as good be merry too, and take
Your ſhare of pleaſure in th'Aegyptian Court.
You'l do no good with theſe perſwaſions.
He loves the Queen, and will do ſo in ſpite.
Of our morality.
Tis too too true,
That face of hers, that beauty in the bud
Not fully blown, in yeers of innocence
(If any yeers of hers were innocent)
Set off with no adulteriſme of art,
Nor cloath'd with ſtate and pompous Majeſtie,
But in a fortune clouded and diſtreſt
A wretched priſoner in her brother's Court,
Yet then I ſay that charming face could move
The manly temper of wiſe Julius Caeſar,
That Ma in heat of all his active warre,
When he purſu'd the flying Pompey hither,
His ſword yet reeking in Pharſaies ſlaughter
At ſight of her became a dotng Lover:
And could we think that our Antonius
A man not maſter of that temperance
That Caeſar had, could finde a ſtrength to guard
His ſoul againſt that beauty now ſet off
With ſo much wealth and majeſty?
No ſurely.
I did not think Antonius was an Eunuch.
Nor could I have believ'd he had been worthy
To be a ſucceſſour in Caeſa power,
Unleſſe he had ſucceeded him in her.
Great Julius noble acts in warre and ſtate
Aſſur'd the world that he was wiſe and valiant:
But if he had not falne in love with her
I ſhould have much ſuſpected his good nature.
Nay then, Canidius, it ſhall be yours.
Or what indeed were greatneſſe in the world
If he that did poſſeſſe it, might not play
The wanton with t? this Aegyptian Queen
Is a ſtate beauty, and ordain'd by fate
To be poſſeſt by them that rule the world.
Great Pompey's ſonne enjoy'd her firſt, and pluck'd
Her Virgin bloſſome. When that Family,
Whoſe ruine fill'd the World, was overthrown,
Great Iulus next came in as conquerour
To have his ſhare, and as he did in power,
Succeeded him in Cleopatrae, love.
Now our Antonius takes his turn, and thinks
That all the legions▪ all the ſwords, that came
To make his greatneſſe up when Julius dy'd,
Could give no greater priviledge to him
Then pwer to be the ſervant to this Queen.
Thus whoſoere in Rome be conquerour
His laurell wreath is Cleopatraes love.
And to ſpeak juſtly of her, Nature teem'd
To build this woman for no meaner height.
Her ſoule is full of greatneſſe, and her wit
Has charms as many as her beauty has.
With Majeſtie beyond her ſex ſhe rules
Her ſpatious Kingdomes, and all neighbour Princes
Admire her parts. How many languages
Speaks ſhe with elegance? Embaſſadors
From th' Aethiopians, Arabs, Troglodites,
From th' Hebrews, Syrians, Medes, and Parthians
Have in amazement heard this learned Queen
Without the aid of an interpreter
In all their ſeverall tongues returne their anſwers;
When moſt of her dull predeceſſor Kings
Since Ptolemaeus Philadelphus time
Scarce underſtood th' Aegyptian tongue, and ſome
Had quite forgot the Macedonian.
How well Canidius deſcants on this theame!
I'll lay my life it pleaſes him; the man
Is deep in love, and pity tis he has
So great a rivall as Antonius.
Well uſe your wit upon me; but I doubt
If any man could ſearch your ſecret thoughts,
Tis envy, not morality that makes
You taxe his love, how gravely ere you talke.
But can Canidius think it ſhould be juſt
In our Antonius to forſake for her
His lawfull wife the good Octavia?
Then like a Roman let me anſwer, Marcus.
Is it become a care worthy of us
What woman Antony enjoys? have we
Time to diſpute his matrimoniall faults,
That have already ſeen the breach of all
Romes ſacred laws, by which the world was bound?
Have we endur'd our Conſuls ſtate and power
To be ſubjected by the lawleſſe arms
Of private men, or Senators proſcrib'd,
And can we now conſider whether they
That did all this, may keep a wench or no?
It was the crime of us, and Fate it ſelf
That Antony and Caeſar could uſurpe
A power ſo great; beyond which we can ſuffer
No more worth thinking of. Nor were't to us
Any great fortune if Antonius
Were honeſt of his body.
Have we then,
Who have been greateſt Magiſtrates, quite loſt
All ſhew of liberty, and now not dare
To counſell him?
A ſhew of liberty
When we have loſt the ſubſtance, is beſt kept
By ſeeming not to underſtand thoſe faults
Which we want power to mend. For mine own pa
I love the perſon of Antonius;
And through his greateſt looſeneſſe can diſcern
A nature here, honeſter then Caeſars.
And if a warre do grow twixt them (as ſurely
Ambition would ere long finde out a cauſe
Although Octavia had not been neglected)
Rather then Rome ſhould ſtill obey two Lords,
Could wiſh that all were Anthony's alone.
Who would, I think, be brought more eaſily
Then Caeſar, to reſigne the government.
Would I could think that either would do ſo.
Here comes her ſervant Mardio.
Noble Lords,
The Queen by mee entreats your company
At ſupper with the Lord Antonius.
Marcio return our humble ſervices,
Wee 'll inſtantly attend her. Now my friends,
Can you a while put off auſterity,
And rigid cenſures, to be freely merry?
It may be ſo. Wee'll try what wine can do.
Glaucus, let more of this perfume be got.
I have enough in readineſſe; or elſe
'Twould be too late to think on't now, the Queen
Is upon entrance.
Charmio, art thou ſure
Thoſe tapers ſtand juſt as the Queen commanded?
Tis the ſame order that Antonius
When laſt he feaſted here, ſo much admir'd;
And ſaid 'mongſt all the curioſities
That he had ſeen, the placing of thoſe lights.
Did not the leaſt affect him.
Though the Romans
In power and warlke ſtate exceed us farre,
Yet in our Court of Aegypt they may learn
Pleaſure and bravery, but art thou ſure
That all things here are well?
As exquiſite
As the Queens wiſh would have it. Hark they come.
To ſay, my Lord, that you are welcome hither
Were to diſparage you, who have the power
To make your ſelf ſo, what ere you ſee
In Aegypt is your own.
What Aegypt holds
If I be judge, not all the world beſides
Can equalize.
Will't pleaſe you take
Your place, and theſe your noble Roman friends?
Father Achoreus, ſit you neer to mee.
Your holy Orders, and great age, which ſhews
The Gods have lov'd you well, may juſtly challenge
A reverence from us.
Great Julius Caeſar
Did love my father well; he oft was pleas'd
At houres of leiſure to conferre with him
About the nature of our Nile, of all
The myſteries of Religion, and the wonders
That Aegypt breeds.
He had a knowing ſoule,
And was a maſter of Philoſophy
As well as Warre.
How like the ſpangled sky
Theſe tapers make the high-arch'd roofe to ſhow?
While Cleopatra like bright Cynthia
In her full orbe more guilds the cheerfull night.
Shee's ſtill at full; yet ſtill me thinks ſhe vexes,
And grows more fair and more majeſticall.
My Lords, you Romans, whoſe victorious arms
Have made you Maſters of the world, poſſeſſe
Such full and high delights in Italy,
That our poor Aegypt can preſent no pleaſure
Worth your acceptance: but let me entreat
You would be freely merry, and forgive
Your entertainment.
'Tis an entertainment
That might invite and pleaſe the Gods. Me thinks,
Jove ſhould deſcend, while Clepatra's here,
Diſguis'd for love, as once for fear he was,
When bold Typhus ſcal'd the ſtarry sky,
And all the Gods diſguis'd in Aegypt lurk'd.
Love were a nobler cauſe then fear to bring him,
And ſuch a love as thine.
If I could think
That ere great Jove did play ſuch feats as thoſe,
I'de now beleeve that he were here diſguis'd,
And took the noble ſhape of Anthony
This complement ſo farre tranſcends, it leaves
No anſwer for a wit ſo dull as mine.
NOt hee, that knows how to acquire
But to enjoy, is bleſt.
Nor does our happineſſe conſiſt
In motion, but in reſt.
The Gods paſſe man in bliſſe, becauſe
They toile not for more height;
But can enjoy, and in their own
Eternall reſt delight.
Then, Princes, do not toile, nor care;
Enjoy what you poſſeſſe.
Which whileſt you do, you equallize
The Gods in happineſſe.
Minutius Plancus, I was thinking now
How Hannibal was charm'd at Capua,
When that delicious place had mollifi'd
His rough and cruell ſoul, and made him learn
The leſſons of ſoft love, and luxury.
There was no cauſe, Marcus, for ſuch a thought.
For our Antonius in the heat of all
His active life knew how to revell well.
Let this ſoft Muſique ceaſe, and louder ſound.
This ſecond courſe is mine. Call in Lucilius.
Fair Cleopatra, for addition
To what thou hold'ſt, the world-commanding Rome
Preſents theſe Crowns, and by my hand inveſts
Thee, Cleopatra Queen of wealthy Cyprus,
Of Coeloſyria, and Phoenicia.
Bluſh no, my Love, nor let Romes bounty force
Thy modeſty▪ theſe Crowns from thy fair brow
Receive more luſtre then they can beſtow.
I think he need not greatly fear her bluſhing.
No Marcus no; alas theſe petty Kingdomes
(Though too too great to be ſo ill beſtow'd)
Are not the ſcope of her ambitious aymes!
My Lord, I dare not make excuſe, or plead
Unworthineſſe, where once Antonius wiſdome
Has made election to conferre his favours.
Admire not, friends; the God-like power of Rome
Is more declar'd by what it gives away
Then what it holds. But theſe are ſtill our owne
And Cleopatra Romes deſerving friend.
I cannot chooſe but think how fit a ſtate
For Cleopatra Cyprus Kingdome is;
And ſhall believe that it was ominous
That noble Julius Caeſar after all
Thoſe foure rich triumphs which he held at Rome
When he reſolv'd with like magnificence
To build a Temple to the Goddeſſe Venus,
From whom his houſe derive their pedigree
Within his ſtately Temple, to expreſſe
The Image of that Goddeſſe, he ſet up
Fair Cleopatraes figure in the place
Suppoſing her to be the Queen of Love.
You know my Lord Antonius, this is true,
And Cyprus ever was fair Venus Ile.
'Twas well obſerv'd noble Canidius.
Fill me ſome wine. Health to the Cyprian Queen.
Drink it to me Canidius; and I thank thee.
Let it go round, my ftiends.
I ever thought
My ſelf much bound to brave Canidius
Since I was happy in his company.
How fit it is, no other Cyprian Queen,
But Cleopatra ſhall the Poëts know,
Whoſe fancies now ſhall raiſe that Kingdome higher.
More amorous now will Paphos mountains ſhow,
And all thoſe flowery Meads▪ the Fields of love,
Ore which no windes but Weſtern ever blow.
The aire it ſelf will yield a ſweeter breath
While Cleopatra reignes the Cyprian Queen.
How amorous in his language he is grown.
The times, I fear Minutius, will require
A rougher language ſhortly. We ſhall heare
Aſſoon as any news can come from Rome.
But long ago was I enforc'd to know
That Cleopatra was the Queen of love,
When firſt I met thee in Cilicia,
And down the ſilver ſtream of Cydnus, thou
In Venus ſhape cam'ſt ſayling, while the aire
Was raviſh'd with thy Muſick, and the windes
In amorous gales did kiſſe thy ſilken ſayls.
Thy maids in Graces habits did attend,
And boys, like Cupids, painted quivers bore,
While thouſand Cupids in thoſe ſtarry eyes
Stood ready drawn to wound the ſtouteſt hearts.
You came like Mars himſelf in threatning arm
To ruine me, and my poor Country then.
I took that ſhape, becauſe I knew no ſtrength
No power on earth was able to reſiſt
The conquering fury of Antonius.
That face of thine reſiſted me, and did
So ſweetly conquer, I was proud to yield;
And more rejoyc'd in that captivity,
Then any Roman in a triumph did.
How now, what news with thee?
Letters from Rome, my Lord.
From whom?
Geminius.
To morrow wee'll peruſe them. No affairs
Of what import or height ſo ere, ſhall have
Power to diſturbe the pleaſures of this night.
Our theam to night is love, which oft has made
The Thunderer himſelf a while lay by
The weary burden of his government.
Come lead away.
'Twere fit to read them now.
None knows what gain a little time may be
You may peruſe them Titius; lead away.
Can no affairs of what import ſo ere
Break one nights pleaſure? well Antonius,
The tottering ſtate thou holdſt, muſt be ſupported
By nobler vertues, or it cannot ſtand.
Cyprus, Phoenice, Coeloſyria,
Three wealthy Kingdoms got with Roman bloud,
And our forefathers valour, given away
As the baſe hire of an adulterous bed.
Was Cyprus conquer'd by the ſober vertue
Of Marus Cato, to be thus beſtow'd?
This act will pleaſe yong Caeſar.
'Twill diſpleaſe
The Senate, Marcus, and Antonius friends.
Alas, he knows not what true friendſhip means,
But makes his friends his ſlaves, and which is worſe
Slaves to his luſts and vices; could he elſe
Slight our adviſe ſo? men, whom Rome has ſeen
Wearing her higheſt honours, and of birth
As great as his. Unleſſe he change his minde
I ſhall believe my friendſhip was ill plac'd,
And ſtrive to place it better.
This laſt act
Will quickly be at Rome.
They have enough
Already, noble Plancus; think you not
It will be cenſur'd that the Roman name
Was much diſhonour'd by that baſe ſurprize
Of Artuvaſes the Armenian King?
Whom through the ſtreets of Alexandria
He led in triumph bound with golden chains
Forcing the captive King, (if all his threats
Could have enforc'd ſo much) proſtrate t' adore
Proud Cleopatra, as if all his acts,
And all the honour of his armes were due
To her and not to Rome. Calviſius too
In Senate late accus'd him for beſtowing
On Cleopatra that ſo farre renown'd
And famous Library of Pergamus,
In which there were two hundred thouſand Books.
How many ſuch wilde actions have her charms
Enforc'd his weakneſſe to?
His Teſtament,
Which now at Rome the Veſtall Virgins keep,
Of which we two are privy to the ſealing,
Should it be known, would ſtirre all Romans hate,
Willing his bodie, though he dy'd at Rome,
To be interr'd at Alexandria.
But if a warre 'twixt him and Caeſar grow
(As needs it muſt, although not yet declar'd)
For Caeſar now is levying men and money
Through Italy, Spain, France and Germany,
Againſt what foe can his deſigne be bent
But our Antonius? if a warre I ſay
Twixt them ſhould happen, tell me, noble Titius,
What ſhould we do?
Fight for Antonius.
True friend, were he himſelf, or were there hope,
Or poſſibility he could be ſo.
But ſhall our valour toile in ſweat and bloud
Only to gain a Roman Monarchy
For Cleopatra, and th'effminate rout
Of baſe Canop? ſhall her timbrels fright
Romes Cp toll, and her advanced pride
Tread on the neks of captive Senators?
Or, which more, ſhall th' earths Imperiall ſeat
Remove from Rome to Aegypts ſwarthy ſands?
For who can tell if mad Antonius
Have promis'd her, as Cus Marius once
Promisd the Samnites, to transferre the ſtate?
It may be ſo, his dotage is enough
To grant it her, her pride enough to aske it.
Manutius Planus, in this whole diſcourſe
Thou ſpeak'ſt my very thoughts no more, here comes
ucilius, whither ſo faſt?
My Lords,
own to the Fort to wait upon the Conſuls,
he Roman Conſuls both, Titus Domitius,
nd Caius Sſſius are from Rome arriv'd
ere at Peluſium, what the matter is
s not yet known.
Wee'll go along with thee;
This now begins to look like buſineſſe, Marcus.
TIs not the place, nor marble wals that make
A Senate lawfull, or decrees of power,
But convocation of the men themſelves
The ſacred order by true Magiſtrates.
Then Rome is here; here both her Conſuls are,
Here are her axes, and her falces born,
And no ſmall number of that ſacred order
Are here aſſiſting, when the barbarous Gaules
Had taken Rome, when all the Senate fled,
And with Camllus their Dictator then
At Veii liv'd, Rome then at Veii was,
As now in Aegypt. Fathers, know the face,
Of your aſſembly, know your lawfull power.
Conſult, decree, and act what ere may be
Happy, and proſperous tor the Common-wealth.
Whilſt power of laws, whilſt reverence of the Senate,
And due reſpect t' a Conſuls dignity
Could give protection to the Conſuls perſons
We did maintain thy cauſe Antonius
Againſt proud Caeſars faction. Now ſince laws
Are put to ſilence, and the Senate forc'd,
The Conſuls ſacred priviledge infring'd
By rage and lawleſſe armes, we are expell'd,
And ſuffer baniſhment to be reſtor'd,
And re-indeniz'd by thy conquering ſword.
Now juſtly draw it. Fate approves thy cauſe,
And on thy conqueſt ſets a glorious prize,
Greater then all thy former wars could give▪
Sextus Pompeius, Marcus Lepidus
Are ruin'd both, and all competitors
Are tane away; Fortune has left but one
To ſhare the world with thee; nor canſt thou ſhare
The world with him, his pride would barre thy right▪
And Caeſar's glory dim Antonius light.
Thou canſt not ſhine unleſſe alone thou ſhine.
Or all the world, or nothing muſt be thine.
The Conſulſhip, that was deſign'd to thee,
The Senate have revoked, and decree
'Gainſt Cleopatra warre, but meant 'gainſt thee.
What would their malice dare Antonius,
Had Fortune frown'd, thy Kings and Provinces
Revolted from thee, that dare now povoke
Thy growing fortunes and aſſiſting Gods?
Their injury has made thy quarrell juſt.
Be ſpeedy then, and loſe no time of action:
Caeſar is needy; his Italian ſouldiers
Are apt to mutiny for want of pay,
And might with eaſe be tempted to revolt.
We need them not; our ſtrengths are greater farre
Then Caeſar's are; our praeparations readier.
Nought but delay can queſtion our ſucceſſe.
Shall we decree the warre?
tay noble Romans;
efore we publiſh a Decree, or ſhew
he reaſon our arms ſo juſtly tane;
eigh but with me the means and ſtrength we have.
now worthy friends it is no deſperate warre
our valours are engag'd in; briefly thus:
ur Roman ſtrength is nineteen Legions.
en Kings in perſon will attend our Camp,
he Kings of Africk, Comagena, Thrace,
pper Cilicia, Paphlagonia,
f Cappadocia, Pontus, Palaeſtine,
f rich Arabia, and Galatia.
ur ſtrength at Sea five hundred fighting ſhips
ell rigg'd and mann'd: our treaſuries are full;
nd twenty thouſand talents to the warre
oes Cleopatra freely contribute.
hy ſpeak I more? the Crown of all my ſtrength,
ur loves and ſpirits are. The injuries
which we ground our juſt and lawfull warre,
briefly theſe. Caeſar unjuſtly holds
hoſe Provinces, and armies all, that late
long'd to Pompey and to Lepidus
fuſing to divide them, or deliver
he moity which appertains to me
ough oft demanded by my friends at Rome,
And letters from my ſelf▪ beſides he levies
Both men and money ore all Italy,
Which country, as you know, by our agreement
Belongs to both, and ſhould be held in common.
Moſt true.
Theſe wrongs are paſt all ſufferance.
Thy warre is but defenſive, to regain
Thine own unjuſtly taken.
The warre's juſt.
And Caeſar the beginner of theſe broyls
From whom the wrong firſt ſprung, moſt juſtly may
Be judg'd an enemy to the peace of Rome.
If Fortune aid us in a cauſe ſo juſt,
And we return victorious, noble Romans,
I make a vow, and let it be recorded,
Within two moneths after the warre is ended,
I will lay down the government I hold,
And freely then reſigne my power again
Unto the Senate and the people of Rome.
Let it be ſix moneths rather; for two moneths
Will be too ſhort a time to ſettle it.
Sſſius ſpeaks well, my Lord.
Let it be ſo,
And all the Gods aſſiſt me as I mean
A juſt and true performance.
All the Gods
Preſerve Antonius father of his Country.
Author and Champion of our liberty.
et them believe that liſt; for me, I think
The reſignation of a power ſo great
ill be a temperance too great for him
re to expreſſe.
r if he would, he muſt
ke leave of Cleopatra, and her pride
ill hardly grant him that.
or will I fight
To make her Miſtris of the world and him▪
ave you conſider'd, noble friend of what
e lately ſpake?
nd am reſolved Marcus.
he friends and followers we ſhall bring with us
ill make us welcome gueſts to Caeſars ſide.
ſeems the City favours Caeſar much
hat both the Conſuls fled from Rome for fear.
or is our action baſe; the ſcorns and wrongs
have endur'd at Cleopatraes hands
ould tempt a moyle to fury, and both ſides
tand equall yet.
ome let's away; tis time.
gypt farewell.
arewell Antonius.
How ſuddenly the Scene is changed here
From love and banquets to the rough alarms
And threatning noiſe of warre!
The change, Seleucus
Is not ſo ſuddain as you ſpeak; this ſtorm
Has been expected long; the two great Lords
Of all the Roman world, Antonius
And Caeſar have in heart been enemies
Theſe many yeers; and every man has wonder'd
'T has been withheld ſo long, conſidering
How much complaining has been daily made
By them, their friends, and factions 'gainſt each other
Whoſe cauſe is juſteſt let the Gods determine.
No other juſtice then ambition
Makes them to draw their ſwords; no other cauſe
Then that the world cannot endure two Suns.
The thing that troubles me, Seleucus ▪ is
I hear it ſpoken in the Court, the Queen
Her ſelf in perſon will aſſociate
Antonius to the warre.
I hear that rumour;
But hope it is not true, how nakedly
And in what great confuſion would this land
Be left! and what addition can her perſon
Among ſo many Roman Legions
Bring to Antonius?
Let us enquire
The certainty; I fain would be reſolv'd.
neceſſity muſt know, before
he Queen can go, that order may be taken
bout the Fort I keep, what ſtrength ſhe means
o leave within it in her abſence.
rue,
hat reaſon will excuſe thee for enquiring.
oble Canidius, I'll entruſt no more,
or uſe more circumſtances; for I know
o whom I have referr'd my buſineſſe,
nd truſt your wiſdome.
oyall Cleopatra.
ſo fortify'd with reaſons now
hat maugre Soſſius and Domitius
ith all their beſt perſwaſions, I'll prevaile
ſhall not ſtay behinde; fear it not Madam.
ave Roman, wear this jewell for my ſake;
nd be poſſeſt of Cleopatraes love.
cond my ſuit, there lies not in my power
thing to grant I ſhould deny Canidius.
he favours, Madam, you can give, have power
oblige the greateſt Monarchs of the World.
ready, worthy friend; he'll ſtraight be here.
one but Canidius has the power to work
ntonius in this action, which the reſt
ll all oppoſe, I know; a thing on which
y ſtate, my hopes, and fortunes all depend.
He muſt perſwade Antonius to take
Me with him to the warre; for if I ſtay
Behinde him here, I run a deſperate hazard;
For ſhould Octavia enterpoſe her ſelf
In this great warre (as once before ſhe did)
And make her brother, and her husband friends
Wher's Cleopatra then? but here he comes.
Sweet Cleopatra, I ſhould plead excuſe
For leaving thee awhile, but that the cauſe
Is of a nature ſo immenſe and high,
And brings effects of ſuch advantage home,
That thou I know art pleas'd it ſhould be ſo;
And with a patience canſt reſolve to bear
So ſmall an abſence, that my wiſh'd return
May call thee miſtris of the ſubject world.
Cannot Antonius then be fortunate
If Cleopatra go? s there in me
So bad an Omen? did I think there were,
Not for the world would I deſire to bear
You company but rather die at home.
Farre are my thoughts from giving entertainment
To ſuch fond dreams. I would not venture thee.
My life and fortunes both depend on yours.
As much in Aegypt will my danger be,
As in your army, and my torment more,
To die each houre for feare: and to remain
In ſad ſuſpence till meſſengers can bring
The news ſo farre: but if my company
Diſtaſt my Lord, I cannot wiſh his grief.
Can Cleopatra think her heavenly preſence,
Can be diſtaſtfull, or not valued more
Then all joys elſe; parted from thee I think,
All places ſad, all lands diſconſolate,
Before this life I prize thy company,
But muſt not have it now, do not entreat;
have deny'd it to my ſelf already.
nd in the Camp ſhould be aſham'd to riſe
rom Cleopatraes arms, when wars ough noiſe
Shakes all the world, when Kings and Senators
Are venturing lives and fortunes in my ſervice.
Oh ſtay behinde! and let thy preſence make
Egypt a place, to which I would deſire
f Caeſar's fortune conquer, to retire.
f that ſhould happen (which the Gods avert)
What land, alas! could comfort me, or lend
A ſafe retreat to vanquiſh'd Antony?
Thou would'ſt diſdain to draw a wretched breath,
And I as much ſhould ſcorn captivity.
But I had thought the Roman Antony
Had lov'd ſo great a Queen with nobler love;
Not as the pleaſure of his wanton bed
Or miſtris only of ſome looſer houres,
But as a partner in his higheſt cares,
And one whoſe ſoul he thought were fit to ſhare
In all his dangers, all his deeds of honour.
Without that love I ſhould diſdain the other.
Do not miſtake me, noble Queen, I know
Thy breſt is full of high heroike worth.
How can you think it ſo, that could ſo long
n times of peace and pleaſure recreate
Your ſelf with me in Aegypt Court; yet now
When honour calls, reject my company?
I ſhould deſire it rather then my life;
But that my Roman friends are all againſt it.
See here they come, if they agree tis done.
Now noble friends on whoſe oraculous counſels
And matchleſſe valour my whole fate depends,
Speak what you think, ſhould Cleopatra go
In perſon to the warre, or ſtay behinde?
I have delivered my opinion,
And ſo has my Colleague.
What thinks Canidius?
I think tis fit, my Lord, the Queen, whoſe bounty
Has brought ſo great aſſiſtance to the warre,
Should not be left behinde, beſides her preſence
Will much encourage her Aegyptian ſouldiers,
Of which a great part of the fleet conſiſts.
Tis true Canidius.
Let not my ſex
Diſparage me, for which of all thoſe Kings
That now in perſon ſerve Antonius
Have more experience in affairs of weight
Then I, my Lord, which have ſo long been privy
To your high counſels, and in love to you
And your deſignes who ſhould compare with me?
What think you friends? you heare Canidius.
If you be pleas'd, I will ſubſcribe.
I,
things go ſo.
wiſhes are effected.
, and Plancus are both fled to Caeſar.
ſhall not need their help my Lord, at all.
me, let's away.
ſtrengths are ready all,
wait but your command.
oke like Bellona.
idius, return you to your charge
bring thoſe ſixteen Cohorts down to ſea; Plutarch.
me at Samos with them, both the Conſuls
go along with me. Great Father Mars,
all you Gods, that from the skies behold
Roman labours, whoſe propitious aid
vanc'd my fortunes to ſo great an height,
ke perfect that, which you your ſelves begun.
is the ſwords laſt work, the judging houre
Nations fates, of mine and Caeſar's power.
which the ſtars and deſtinies attend,
all the fortunes of Mankinde depend.
hat dire portents ſent from the wrathfull Gods?
hreaten th'aſtoniſh'd world? What plagues are thoſe
hich in the skies prodigious face I read?
umultuous Nature teems with monſtrous births,
if the throws would break her labouring wombe.
What ruine leſſe then Chaos ſhall involve
The mourning face of Nature? what great fate,
What kinde of miſchief is it? oh ye Gods,
Why did you adde to wretched men a care
So paſt their ſtrength to bear, to let them know
By ſad preſages their enſuing woe?
Unknown and ſecet let your vengeance be,
And none foreſee their following miſery;
But hope as well as fear. Jove hide thy dooms;
Keep ſhut, oh fates, your adamantine books!
Let not the bainfull curioſity
Of humane knowledge ſearch your ſecret counſels,
And read your purpoſes, to nouriſh ſo
A killing fear before the danger grow.
That Comet's gone.
It mov'd directly upward,
And did not vaniſh till it ſeem'd to reach
The firmament.
What talk you of my ſonnes?
That Comet, father, ore the Graecian Sea.
It was a ſtrange one both for form and greatneſſe,
And bodes ſome miſchief wherſoere it light.
The Gods avert it from our Aegypts coaſt.
Pinnarius Scarpus had received news
That Italy and Rome it ſelf are fill'd
With prodigies: an ugly Owle of late
Did fly into the houſe of Concord firſt,
Thence being driven away it pearch'd again
Within the Temple of the peoples Genius.
There, though all ſtriv'd, it neither could be caught,
Nor driven away, but flew at leiſure out.
A ſacred Trophey on Mount Aventine,
Victoriaes Image on the Theater
By ſuddain tempeſts were thrown down and broken.
In Rome and other parts of Italy
Sudden and ſtrangely kindled fires have done
Exceeding waſte; and we are certifi'd
That now Sicilian Aetna nouriſhes
More horrid flames then uſually it does,
And farther caſts his ſcorching entrails forth,
Blaſting the fields and burning up the corn.
A two-legg'd Dragon in Etruria
Full fourſcore foot in length was lately ſeen,
Which after much annoyance of the Country
t ſelf with lightning was conſum'd at laſt.
But theſe portents do threaten Italy.
Alas, my ſonne, there need no prodigies
To ſhew the certain loſſe of Italy.
For on both ſides do Roman Eagles ſtand,
And Rome muſt bleed who ere be conquerour,
Beſides her liberty for ever loſt
When this ſad field is fought: but that's not all,
What clime ſo farre, what region ſo remote,
But that the Roman fortune reaches thither?
All nations ſhare in this.
What haſt thou got
By all thy conqueſt Rome, by all the bloud
Which thy ambition through the world has ſhed,
But rais'd a power, which now thou canſt not rule,
Nouriſh'd a Lion to devoure thy ſelf?
Would none but Roman bloud might quench the fire
Of Romes diſſentions, and no land beſide
Be forc'd to pay the forfeit of their pride.
With evill Omen did Aeneas firſt
Tranſport the reliques of Troyes fatall fire
To Italy, that kindled greater there
It might at laſt like lightning through the world
Rend every Nation. Was it not enough,
That firſt your conqueſts ſtrew'd the earth with ſlaughter
And dy'd all Regions with their natives blouds,
But your diſſentions ſtill muſt tear the world?
I'll go within, and make an offering
To great Oſiris.
Well may it ſucceed.
Aegypt will flouriſh if Antonius conquer.
If he ſhould fall, the fury of the warre
Would light on Aegypt moſt, and we ſhould rue
That ere Antonius lov'd this hapleſſe land.
Oh Gentlemen, the ſtrongeſt news, that ere
Was ſeen in Aegypt.
What's that Mardio?
Thouſands of people with aſtoniſhment
And fear beheld it: on thoſe fruitfull plains
That Southward ly from Alexandria,
Where never rain was known to fall before,
whole ſhowers of blod, whoſe colour ſet
A purple die upon thoſe verdant fields;
And in the clouds that horrid noiſe was heard
That meeting armies make, beating of drums.
Shrill trumpets ſound, armor againſt armor claſhing,
As if the bloud that fell, dropp'd from the wounds
Thoſe aëry battails made.
This is more ſtrange
Then all the reſt: this is our own Seleucus.
Well Gentlemen, I'll to Peluſium,
And fortifie the town to keep our foes,
f foes be conquerours, from entring there.
Yes, and our friends, if they be vanquiſhed,
Keep out our friends, Seleucus, if their preſence
May pluck a warre, and ruine on our heads.
As there's occaſion wee'll determine that.
Avert your ange, Gods, if all too late
Our prayers came not now.
What is it father?
our looks, I ſee, are full of ruth and wo.
wretched Aegypt, ah unhappy land
what haſt thou ſo ſtor'd the wrath of heaven?
he grieved God refus'd his offering
ellowing aloud that all the Temple rung,
nd from his ſacred eys the tears run down.
ould I could contradict, or not beleeve
he skill which ſureſt obſervations teach.
his ſignifies a change of government.
What heaven is pleas'd to ſend, we much endure.
True ſonne; and let a wiſe man place his ſtrengths
Within himſelf, nor truſt to outward aids.
That whatſoever from the Gods can come
May finde him ready to receive their doom.
TIs not Antonius, worthy ſouldiers,
But Rome herſelf to whom you owe your valours
What he could claim, you have perform'd already;
And ſerv'd him truly, whilſt he was to you
A Generall, to Rome a Magiſtrate.
You are diſcharg'd from all obedience
You ow'd to him, by fate it ſelf, and may
Nay, ought to follow him, whom Roman fates
Appoint your Generall, the noble Caeſar
Great Julius heir, not to his name alone
But ſpirit and fortunes, which have both appear'd
In this ſo great and finall a defeat
Given to Antonius. Before we knew not
o whom the Gods and Fortune had aſſign'd
Our ſervice ſouldiers; now they have declar'd.
nd let us follow where they pleaſe to lead.
or faith is impious ſtriving to ſuſtain
That ſide, whoſe fall the Gods themſelves ordain.
eſar, Caeſar, Caeſar.
our judgments guide you right; for could you think
o ſmall a ſtrength as ours could raiſe again
The deſperate ſtate of faln Antonius,
nder whoſe ruine all thoſe legions ſunk?
hat madneſſe were it, ſouldiers to preferre
A hopeleſſe civill warre before the weal
And peace of Rome? and deſperatly provoke
The proſperous fortunes of victorious Caeſar?
have already to Cornelius Galus
By letter ſignify'd our purpoſes.
Who ſent from Caeſar now is marching hither,
To joyn his ſtrength with ours: but hak his Drum
Give notice of his comming.
Hail Pinnarius.
Ah hail Cornelius Gallus,
Moſt wiſh'd for, an moſt happily arriv'd
At Paraetonium.
Victorious Caeſar
With love and favour greets Pinnarius Scarpus,
Caeſar, then whom the world acknowledges
No other power; whom Fortune now has made
ole Lord of all.
I, and my ſouldiers
With Paraetonium are at Caeſar's ſervice.
Whither's Antonius fled?
Hither to Aegypt
With Cleopatra? 'Twas a victory
So ſtrangely given away, as not the like
In former times I think has ere been heard;
On which eſpecially ſo great a price
As the ſole ſway of all the world depended.
The Fleets encountred both, while with the Camps
On either ſhore ſtood to behold the fight,
Heer the Caeſarian, there the Antonian Fleet
With equall hopes came on, with fury equall.
And long maintain'd a ſharpe and cruell fight,
With mutuall ſlaughter, while the Oceans face▪
Was forc'd to loſe his colour, and rceive
A crimſon die. The ſhips Antonius had
Were tall, and ſlowly did like Caſtles move.
But Caeſar's ſmall, yet quick and active, ſtirr'd
On every ſide with all advantages.
Long fortune doubted, and bright victory
Knew not which way to lean, but kept them both
In equall ballance; till Antonius
Himſelf at laſt betray'd his glorious hopes.
For when his Miſtris Cleopatra fled,
Although a while within his manly breaſt
The Roman honour ſtrove 'gainſt wanton love,
Love got the conqueſt, and Antonius
Fled after her, leaving his ſouldiers there
To ſell their lives in vain; who many houres
Though he were fled, made good the navall fight.
And had Antonius ſtay'd, it may be fear'd
Caeſar had not prevail'd: at laſt the Fleet
Wanting their Admirall, though not without
Much ſlaughter, fled, or yielded all to Caeſar.
But what became of all his ſtrength on land?
Nay, there's the wonder, there's Antonius madneſſe,
And ſuch a madneſſe as will ſtrike amazement
To all that heare it told: after his flight
He nere return'd, though in the campe he had
Under the conduct of Canidius
And other Captains nineteen legions
Freſh and unfought, which might with reaſon hope
Had he been there, to have recover'd all.
They ſtill remayn'd encamped, and though oft
ollicited by Caeſar to revolt
Were kept from yielding, by Canidius
n hope of Antony's return. Untill
anidius fearing his own ſouldiers minds
nd Caeſar's anger fled away by night,
They then deſpairing yielded all to Caeſar.
Who by this time I think's arriv'd in Aegypt.
About Peluſium.
Will you view the town?
With all my heart, noble Pinnarius.
ntonius then with Cleopatra's fled
To Alexandria.
Tis certain, Caeſar.
They ſay the vanquiſh'd Queen moſt cunningly:
(Fearing it ſeems, to be excluded elſe
From her own Kingdome) fain'd her ſelf victorious,
Landing in Aegypt with triumphant ſongs
Her ſhips all crown'd with laurell, to deceive
The credulous people: where being enter'd once
She leaves unpractis'd no ſtrange tyranny;
And, as we hear, to win the Parthan King
Unto her ſide, beheaded Artavaſdes
King of Armenia, and the Parthians o,
Who was her priſoner, that Artavaſdes,
Whom Anthony ſo baſely had ſurpris'd.
Caeſar, 'twere fit to take Peluſium
Before we march to Alexandria.
'Twas our intent, good Titius, not to leaue
A town of that import behinde our backs.
Go Proculeius, ſummon it, and know
We her the Governour will yield or no.
What news with thee?
Caeſar, a meſſenger
From Cleopatra craves admittance.
Bring him.
Queen Cleopatra to great Caeſar wiſhes
All health and victory; and humbly proffers
Her ſelf and all her fortunes to his ſervice:
In token of which ſhe here preſents by mee
This Crown and Scepter.
rave and ominous.
umbly entreating Caeſar's noble favour
To her and hers; the reſt of her deſires
o pleaſe it Caeſar to peruſe the ſame,
This letter holds.
warrant a love-lettet.
But tell me firſt, where is Antonius?
ll truly tell (though it may ſeem to ſome
ncredible) that great Antonius
A man of late in converſation
o free, and full of jollity, in a ſtrange
Deep melancholly has retir'd himſelf
To Pharos Ile; where like Athenian Timon,
Who did profeſſe a hatred to mankinde,
And fled all company, he lives alone;
And on the ſolitary ſhore has built
A little houſe to feed his frantike humour,
And imitate that Timon's life, whoſe name
He takes unto himſelf: no friends at all
Nor ſervants are admitted to his preſence,
But only two, Roman Lucilius
And Ariſtocrates the Graecian.
Not Cleopatra? then I doubt the man
Grows weary of theſe worldly vanities.
never heard of ſuch a change as this.
Give me the letter. I'll peruſe it now
Here the woman writes
That for her liberty, and to confirme
The Crown of Aegypt to her ſelf and children
To gratifie my favour ſhe has hid
Within her pallace a great maſſe of gold.
Unknown t' Antonius.
'Tis like ennough,
For Cleoptraea's rich, and long has been,
Beſides the ſacriledge ſhe lately did
In robbing all the Temples of the Gods
About theſe parts.
I would not loſe this gold,
Nor willingly let Cleopatra die
Before her perſon have adorn'd my triumph.
That will be hard to bring to paſſe, and muſt
Be wrought with ſubtilty: you muſt not ſend
A threatning meſſage back; for if you do,
All's loſt, her life, her gold and all are vaniſh'd.
For Cleopatra, as in all her acts
It has appear'd, is of a wondrous ſpirit,
Of an ambition greater then her fortunes
Have ever been, though ſhe ſo long have ſway'd
A ſoveraignty ore half the Roman world,
Trod on the necks of humbled Kings, and rul'd
Antonius as her ſlave: her haughty ſpirit
Will never ſtoop ſo much as to a thought
Of ſuch captivity.
I do not mean
To let her know my minde, or once ſuſpect
I can help it, but I have it now.
hyreus come hither; I muſt now rely
pon thy wiſdome, care, and diligence
an employment that concerns me neerly.
ut I am confident: go with this fellow
To Alexandria; uſe to the Queen
Thy beſt and moſt perſwaſive Oratory.
Tell her I love her, and extremly dote
On her admired beauty, thou art wiſe
nd need'ſt no great inſtructions; the ſucceſſe
do not doubt, the woman's credulous,
nd thinks all men are bound to be in love
With that inſnaring face; if thou perceive
he will be wrought on, winne her to betray
ntonius to my hand: the way to woo her
leave good Thyreus to thy eloquence
And cunning working of it: ſpare thy reply
id him come hither. Commend my hearty love
To Cleopatra; bid her fear no ill
From me at all. What I deſire from her
My freed man Thyreus has commiſſion
To utter to her ſelf. Epaphroditus,
So ſee him well rewarded.
Health to Caeſar.
The Governour is ſtout, and does reſolve
To ſtand th' extremeſt hazard of the warre
Before he yield Peluſium.
Let him rue
His ſtubborn loyalty, ſouldiers make ready
For the aſſault; 'tis ſhame ſo ſmall a town▪
Should ſtay our fortune in the full carreer.
Here bury'd do I lie; thou gentle wave
Keep hatefull man from treading Timons grave.
Reader be gone; enquire no more of me,
A curſe upon thee whatſoere thou be.
Good, good; oh Timon, Athens nere could boaſt
A wiſe philoſoher but thee. Thou knew'ſt
The nature of all men, that all were falſe;
True Timon, true, they are all Knaves indeed.
Thou wiſely hat'ſt that wicked thing call'd man,
Whom other forced Philoſophers admire,
And call a noble creature, and partaker
Of divine nature: they were fools, fools Timon,
All other Sects were fools, and I will follow
No ſect but thine; I am a Timoniſt.
That's not enough, Timon himſelf I am.
Yonder he ſits, ſee Ariſtocrates
How much unlike that great Antonius,
Whoſe perſon late ſo many legions guarded,
So many Kings attended as their Lord.
Antonius, where? thou art deceiv'd Lucilius,
That's Timon man.
How canſt thou jeſt at this
This wofull paſſion, which alone's enough
To melt his foes and Caeſar into tears.
We feed this fooliſh paſſion, to give way,
nd keep aloof thus. I'll go to him. Timon.
a! what art thou? be gone I ſay from me.
et you to Caeſar man: I hate you all.
hate thee, Timon; doſt thou think 'tis love
as brought me hither? I am come to vex thee.
Oh welcome, what's thy name? i'ſt Alcibides?
Haſt thou forgot me?
Doſt thou hate all men?
Why doſt thou think me ſo unnaturall
To love a man? but may we not love women?
Yes, they may be belov'd; provided always
That they be falſe.
True Timon, wicked women
May be belov'd, becauſe they ruine men.
Right, right; and now I better think upon't
I'll ſet no gallowſes or gibbets up
As I entended once, for men to come
And hang themſelves, I'll keep a bawdy houſe.
A better way by farre, 'twill ruine moe,
I wonder, Timon, at that fooliſh plot
That I have heard, that in thy gardens once
In Athens thou did'ſt ſet up gallowſes
For men in diſcontent to hang themſelves.
How few think'ſt thou would be ſo mad to do it?
But to a wench they'll come, and then the office
That thou ſhalt have will be of more account.
For where have you a man of any faſhion
That now adays turnes hangman; but a Pandar
Is on employment that befits a Stateſman,
A thing requires good parts and gravity.
I'de try that courſe; but tis too ſlow a plot.
Oh for a ſpeedy way to kill the world
I have done ſomewhat in my days; my wars
And bloudy battels were not made in vain.
For I was once Antonius, and a Roman,
As in the wars of Troy Pythagoras
Before that tranſmigration of his ſoul,
Had been Euphorbus.
Thou art like him ſtill.
And when I was Triumvir firſt at Rome,
That was a time indeed, then I could heare
Of thoſe good deeds, which muſt be ſtill a comfort
To your good conſciences, though they be paſt.
When Rome was fill'd with ſlaughter, flow'd with bloud.
But they perchance were Knaves that were proſcrib'd▪
And might have done more miſchief had they liv'd.
No, they were honeſt men; I look'd to that.
'Twas well, and carefully.
Behold the liſt.
But one among the reſt moſt comforts me,
That talking fellow Cicero, that us'd
To taxe the vicious times, and was forſoeth
A lover of his Country.
Out upon him,
Then he was rightly ſerv'd: for is it fit
In a well govern'd ſtate ſuch men ſhould live
As love their Country? had 't not been for him
Catiline's plot had thriv'd.
Tis true, I'm ſure
Caeſar was on that ſide, he favour'd it.
Yes, Caeſar underſtood himſelf; ther's hope
That this young Caeſar too will prove as good
A Patriot as ere his father was.
He will do reaſon man: he is of nature
Cruell enough; in that proſcription
t did appear; but now he'll reigne alone.
Oh for ſuch factions as were then a foot
To rend the ſtate, and fill the world with ſlaughter.
Oh, let me hug thee Alcibiade.
s that he yonder? wt ſtrange ſhape is that?
None talks with him but Ariſtocrates,
Who following his own way, and ſuiting juſt
With his conceit thinks to reclaim him ſo.
The news, that I ſhall bring, will make him worſe,
And fright that little reaſon that is left
Quite from his breſt.
It cannot ſo Canidius;
Perchance to hear th'extremity of all
Will cure his fit; it cannot make him worſe.
For death it ſelf were better and more noble.
How weak a thing is man that ſeats his hopes
In fortunes ſlippery, and unconſtant favours,
And ſeeks no ſurer ſtrengths to guard his ſoul?
Wanting a ſtrong foundation, he is ſhaken
With every winde, orethrown by every ſtorm.
And what ſo frequent as thoſe ſtorms in fortune?
Whoſe faireſt weather never brings aſſurance
Of perpetuity but come what will
I'll tell him all.
Do, good Canidius.
Well Alcibiades, I am reſolv'd
I'll to the wars again, and either conquer
Mine enemies, or take a courſe to ſtarve
And kill up my own ſouldiers, and ſo be
Reveng'd on ſome body: One of theſe two
May eaſily be brought to paſſe. How think'ſt thou?
Yes, yes: but lets to Court, and there conſult.
See who comes here, now for our bawdy project▪
Here is a ſervant I muſt needs preferre
Well vers'd in bawdry, Maſter of the art.
Come neer brave Mardio, come.
My buſineſſe
Is not to you;
Mark him but well, and tell me
How he would execute the place.
My Lord,
The Queen entreats your preſence at the Palace,
The grieved Queen, who in your abſence pines,
Who ſuffers in your grief.
Well urg'd old Eunuch.
Ha! what of her? will ſhe revolt to Caeſar?
She's farre from that, my Lord.
What i'ſt he ſays?
He ſays the conſtitution of her body
Cannot hold out unleſſe you viſit her.
The Queen ſhall know it, Ariſtocrates.
Did you not ſay ſhe pin'd and languiſh'd Sir,
And what's the difference? tell your tale yourſelf.
What does ſhe ſay? does ſhe not hate me man?
Oh no my Lord, ſhe loves you as her life.
No ſpite of fortune that ſhe has endur'd,
Or can hereafter fear, grieves her ſo much
As does your abſence and ſtrange melancholy.
Well Mardio, thou art fitteſt for the place.
My Lord Antonius?
Ha! mo men upon us?
I come to bring thee heavy news Antonius.
The forces all, which thou didſt leave encamp'd
At Actium, horſe and foot are gone to Caeſar.
And all th' auxiliary Kings; no ſtrength
At all is left thee, but what here thou haſt
At Alexandria.
Ha!
This ſinks into him.
It makes a deep impreſſion in his paſſion.
And may perchance expell his other fit.
All you here yet! then I have friends I ſee.
But tell me, can you be ſo mercifull
As to forgive that moſt unmanly fit
I have been in? oh, I am all in bluſhes.
My Lord, take better comfort.
Deareſt friends.
I will be proof 'gainſt any fortune now.
Come let's together to the Court, and there
Drown ſadneſſe in rich cups of Meroë wine,
And laugh at Fortunes malice, for your ſight
More cheers my ſpirits, then her frowns can dull them.
MAdam, all drugs with pain and torment kill
That kill with ſpeed. No eaſie way to death
Is wrought but by a ſlow and lingring courſe,
Where Natures ſtrength is by degrees ſubdu'd,
And yielding ſo decayes inſenſibly.
No art at all can make a drug that's quick
And gentle too. No poyſon but the Aſpe
Of all the mortall brood of Libyaes Snakes
Kils with a ſuddain, and yet eaſie death
As if brought forth to contradict our skill
By envious Nature, who diſdains frail man
Should hope to finde her ſecrets wholly out.
None but that Serpent, Madam, can effect
What you deſire; of which I here have brought.
Leave it good Glaucus; leave the potion too.
Tis quick, thou ſayſt.
Yes Madam; but too painfull
And violent.
Well leave them both with me.
Let none adventure on proſperity
But with a ſpirit ſtill prepar'd to die.
Let them keep certain death ſtill in their power
That dare be great and happy, nought but that
Frees ſtates when they are fall'n. Well did wiſe
And liberall Nature on mankinde beſtow
A gift ſo ſoveraigne as power to die,
An Antidote 'gainſt Fortunes cruelty,
That is the deere preſervative, that muſt
Controll the ſpite of Fortune, and redeem
A wofull life from lothed ſervitude.
One venome's gentle; tother rough and cruell.
But tis not ſafe to truſt mine honour ſo,
On doubtfull props: the poyſons both may fail▪
Or differ farre from what vain fame reports
Their operation. Tis experience
That muſt confirme me. Mardio is return'd.
Here are two men, Madam, condemn'd for murder
To cruell death, and are to die to morrow.
Come neerer both, and tell me, dare you die?
Great Queen, neceſſities ſtrict law impoſes
That doom upon us; in forc'd actions
Courage can have no triall.
Dare you die
A leſſe diſhonorable way, to ſcape
The common hangman's hand, and from a Queen
Receive your death, and that an eaſier death?
Moſt willingly, great Queen; we are prepar'd.
Give them their lots, Mardio; the ſhorteſt lot
Is to die firſt.
That lot is mine.
The Aſpe ſhall be thy fate: now Aſpe confirme
What fame reports of thee; ſtay thou thy draught
Till he be dead: feel'ſt thou no pain?
A faintneſſe ſeizes me, and I would ſleep.
How gently he lies down? and ſcarcely ſtrives
Againſt his death at all.
I think he's dead
Already. Sure he feels but little pain.
I am confirm'd.
He's dead and ſtiffe already.
Wee'll try no more, as for thy draught of poyſon
Thus we diſcharge thee of it, and from death
Doom'd by the law our royall pardon frees thee.
Publiſh it Mardio.
The Gods preſerve
Royall and gracious Cleoptrae's life.
I am reſolvd'; nought but the Libyan Aſpe
Shall be renown'd for Cleopatraes death.
Thou precious worme, that canſt redeem alone
The loſſe of honour at a rate ſo eaſie,
That kill'ſt as gently as the hand of age,
And art miſcall'd a plague of Africa,
Since thou alone mak'ſt barren Afrike envy'd,
By other lands, though fruitfull, wanting thee.
Who croſſe the Seas, and hence at higheſt price
Tranſporr the Aſpe as choiſeſt Merchandiſe.
On thee I truſt, one gentle touch of thine
Can free this life from lothed ſervitude,
From Caeſar's triumph, the baſe peoples mocks,
Proud Liviaes ſcorn, and mad Octaviaes ſpight.
But why are all my thoughts turn'd to deſpair?
Why think I now of death? me thinks my Genius
Checks this cold fear, and Fortune chiding tels me
I am ungratefull to diſtruſt, her now.
My race of life and glory is not run,
Nor Clepatraes fortunes yet arriv'd
At that great height that muſt eternize her,
And fix her glorious name aboue the ſtars.
I long to hear what anſwer Caeſar ſends.
I do not know his temper, but he's young;
And why ſhould I deſpir? are Cupid's fires
Extinguiſh'd quite? are all his arrows ſpent?
Or is this beauty, that can boaſt the conqueſt
Of Julius Caeſar; and great Antony,
So waned now, it cannot move the temper
Of one, whom youth makes fit for Cupid's conqueſt?
Madam, your gifts were more graciouſly receiv'd,
And Caeſar with a ſmiling brow return'd
All ſeeming love and friendſhip; he has ſent
His free'dman Thyreus to attend your highneſſe,
And to impart his counſels to your eae.
He's welcome to us. What's great Caeſar's will.
Caeſar's beſt wiſhes, royall Cleopatra,
None but your faireſt ſelf can ratifie.
No power on earth can give what Caeſar wants
But you, great Queen. For let your Majeſty
Give credit to poor Thyreus though the meaneſt
Of all the ſervants that attend on Caeſar,
Ther's none about him is more neer in truſt
To whom he's pleaſed to impart his thoughts▪
And ſecret wiſhes: nothing but your love
Can crown his happineſſe.
We are no ſubject
For Caeſar's mocks though in our worſt of fortune
You are the Queen of Fortune, and ſtill ho
A laſting Scepter ore that fickle Goddeſſe
(Fickle to others, to you true and conſtant)
Your radiant light lends that blinde Goddeſſe eyes▪
And guides her to your ſervice, making all
Actions, nay loſſes ſteps to greater honour.
The late defeat at Actium, which your errour
Perchance miſcals a loſſe, was Fortunes labour
To make you greater, and remove your brightneſſe
Which was ill plac'd (as Diamonds courſly ſet)
From old Antonius to yong Caeſar's love,
A fitter ſphere for thoſe fair eys to ſhine in.
Without theſe courtings, Thyreus, if great Caeſar
Pleaſe to embrace our friendſhip, we and Aegypt
Shall do him faithfull ſervice.
Mighty Queen,
If my rude ſpeech have err'd, I humbly beg
That you would pleaſe to think it zeal in me
To do my maſter ſervice, and ſuch ſervice
As he eſteems the beſt, to gain your love,
I oft have heard him (let your Majeſty
Not be offended with that truth I utter)
Raviſh'd with fame of your perfections,
And noble ſpirit; call Antonius happy,
Whom fortune brought to Aegypt, to behold
That Queen, whom he ſo much deſir'd to ſee.
But when his ey beheld your portraiture
Drawn by a skilfull, and a faithfull hand;
He oft would ſay it was a likely ſeat
To hold thoſe Graces. Such perfections
Were fit for none but Caeſar's to admire.
There was a Caeſar, lov'd me once; but I
Am not ſo proud to think it was my merit,
Though he would ſay I did deſerve farre more
Then he could utter, that great Julius,
Whoſe name and actions fill'd the triple world.
Though all in him were great, yet nothing greater
Then his adopting ſo divine an heire.
This Caeſar, Madam, for your deareſt love,
Beſides that power and greatneſſe, which the world
Both knows and fears, brings ſuch a youth and beautie
To plead for him, as in a mean eſtate
Might move a Princeſſe love: which that your eys
may better read, I here from him preſent
His true, and moſt unflatter'd portrairure.
The faireſt form that ere theſe eys beheld.
Where all the beſt of each beſt modell meets,
Cupid's ſweet ſmiles, lodg'd in the eye of Mars,
Gaymed's chek th' Imperiall brow of Jove
Where love and majeſty are proud to dwell.
His age, great Queen, is yet not thirty yeers.
I nere till now ſaw beautie: but Thyreus
May we repoſe a confidence in thee
As our true friend? we will deſerve thy love.
To do divineſt Cleopatra ſervice
Is all poor Thyreus pride: in ſerving you
I beſt diſcharge my dutie to my maſter.
Then briefly thus; becauſe I would not have
Any take notice of long privacie
Twixt thee and me, and inſtantly w'expect
Antonius here, I will deviſe ſome means
How to deſerve great Caeſar's love, and act
What he ſhall thank us for: mean while ſtay here
With us, good Thyreus, for we cannot yet
Diſpatch thee with that meſſage we entend.
I will attend your highneſſe.
Till anone
Farewell, good Thyreus: but be neer about us.
What more then this could all the fates contrive?
What more then Caeſars love could I have wiſh'd
On which all power, all ſtate, and Glories wait.
But oh the weak and fluctuating ſtate
Of humane frailty ſtill too much depreſt
Or rais'd too much 'twixt fears and flattring hopes!
But hence baſe fear; a Princely confidence
Fits Cleopatraes minde and beautie better.
My deareſt Lord.
Ah ſweeteſt Cleopatra,
In this embrace, and this Ambroſiake kiſſe
I am again poſſeſt of all my wealth,
Of all my fortunes. Had the angry Gods
Purpos'd to wreak their fury fully on me
They had not left my life ſo ſweet a comfort.
Poſſeſt of you I ſtand above the reach
Of Fortunes threatning, or proud Caeſar's power.
Nought but your grief, and melancholly had
Power to deject my ſpirits.
Thy true worth
Deſerves a happier friend, that could beſtow
Not take alone his happineſſe from thee.
In thy ſweet love, and theſe my faithfull friends
I ſtill am happy, I have loſt no friends.
All that are gone from me to Caeſar's ſide,
Ingratefull Titius and Domitius.
Plancus, Silanus, Dellius and Hipparchus,
Were Fortunes friends not mine.
Let's in and feaſ ▪
This day we'll dedicate to mirth and freedome:
To crown your welcome hither.
Sweetly ſpoken.
Let not a woman teach us ſouldier
To be magnanimous.
Thi? feaſt we'll ſtile
The feaſt of fellow-dyers: for no band
No tie of friendſhip is ſo firme as that
They live in love that mean to die together.
Grave Arius, in thy troubled looks I read
Fear for thy native Alexandria;
But baniſh fear, and know thy power with Caeſar,
If they obey our ſummons, none ſhall die.
But though to th' utmoſt they reſiſt, thy will
Shall rule our Juſtice.
Humble Arius.
Is too much honour'd in great Caeſar's favour.
We give but what we owe, a debt ſo great
As mine to thee can nere be overpay'd.
Great Alexander, whoſe victorious hand
Founded that City, whoſe eterniz'd name
For ever honours it, though in great deeds
He paſt our glory farre, ſhall not exceed
Caeſar in piety: he oft would ſay
He ought a better being to his Maſter
Then to father; one meer naturall,
The other mentall, and diviner farre.
Who's that?
Ferguſiu the Philoſopher
Condemn'd to death by you.
Diſpatch him then.
He craves a word with Arius ere he die.
What is it brother?
Ah good Arius,
Wiſemen, if truly wiſe, ſave wiſe men ſtill.
Moſt mighty Caeſar.
Arius, no more,
I know what thou deſir'ſt; Ferguſius live;
That thou know'ſt him has ſav'd thee.
Victorie,
And fame ſtill wait on Caeſar.
Let's away
And march with ſpeed to Alexandria.
Caeſar, your horſe are weary: 'tis not fit
Too much to toil them, for I fear a ſally
From Alexandria.
They dare not man.
Antonius is ſtrong in well-provided
And skilfull horſemen; and deſpair of favor
(Since twice you have refus'd his propoſitions)
Will put another valour into him.
What conqueſt can Antonius hope for here?
His hopes (as nere as I conjecture them)
Are to break through your troops, and get to Sea.
For yet he has a Flet, that may tranſport him
To other lands, to gather new ſupplyes.
But any fortune would prove higher farre
To him, then ſtaying here, without all hope
To be ſhut up in a beſieged town.
In my opinion let your march be ▪
And gentle; that the horſe may be refreſh'd.
And we prevent the worſt.
Let it be ſo.
How formleſſe is the forme of man the ſoul,
How various ſtill how different from it ſelf?
How falſly call'd Queen of this little world?
When ſhe's a ſlave, and ſubject not alone
Unto the bodies temperature, but all
The ſtorms of Fortune.
What occaſion
Make thee thus offer at Philoſophy?
Where haſt thou liv'd thou ſhouldſt not know th' occaſion?
The fits and changes of Antonius
Are theam enough: how ſtrange a loving ſoule
Is the late hater of mankinde become!
That is not ſtrange, he's out of breath with curſing
And now 'tis time to ſtop his mouth with kiſſing.
But what can he conceive of this ſame Thyreus
That holds ſuch ſecret conference with her?
He cannot chooſe but ſee it.
Unleſſe love
Have blinded him, ſhe carries it ſo plainly.
Well, I ſhall think if there be knavery in't,
(As knavery there muſt be) that Cleopatra
Is not ſo ſubtle as we took her for.
He muſt be told it, if he will not ſee
Upon my life there is ſome plot of treaſon
Which yet may be diſcover'd.
Heer they come
Let us go fetch Antonius if we can.
Peluſium ſhall be rendred up to Caeſar
By our command to our Lievtenant there
Seleucus, whoſe obedience we not doubt.
Nobleſt of Queens, you make Imperiall Caeſar
As much a debtor to your courteſie
As he's already captive to your beauty.
Nor do we wrong Antonius at all
In giving up a town which is our own▪
It may be thought tis done to weaken him▪
Alas, Antonius is already fall'n
So low, that nothing can redeem him now
Nor make him able to conteſt with Caeſar.
He has not only loſt his armies ſtrength
But loſt the ſtrength of his own ſoul, and is not
That Antony he was when firſt I knew him.
I can do Caeſar now no greater ſervice.
Though I ſhall never want a hear to do it.
But we ſhall quickly ſee th' event of things;
Antonius now is deſperate, and puts
His hopes upon the fortune of one ſally,
Which will be ſuddenly perform'd, before
That thou canſt bear a meſſage back to Caeſar.
Hands on that Thyreus there, to priſon with him.
To priſon!
Yes; away with him I ſay.
Caeſar would not have us'd your meſſenger
So ill.
Thou wert no Meſſenger to me.
For my ſake deareſt Lord.
Oh for your ſake?
I cry you mercy Lady, bear him hence.
I had forgot that Thyreus was your ſervant.
But what ſtrange act ſhould he perform for you?
Is it to help you to a happier friend?
Can you ſuſpect it? was my trueſt love
So ill beſtow'd? Can he, for whoſe dear ſake
A Queen ſo highly born as I preferr'd
Love before fame, and fondly did neglect
All names of honour when falſe Fulvia,
And proud Octavia had the name of wives,
Requite me thus? ungratefull Anthony;
For now the fury of a wronged love
Juſtly provokes my ſpeech.
Oh Cleopatra,
It is not Thyreus but this heart of mine
That ſuffers now, deep wounded with the thought
Of thy unconſtancie: did Fortune leave
One only comfort to my wretched ſtate
And that a falſe one? for what conference
Couldſt thou ſo oft, and in ſuch privacie
With Caeſar's ſervant hold, if true to me?
Which with the rack I could enforce from him.
But that I ſcorn to do.
You do not ſcorn
To wrong with baſe unworthy jealouſies
A faithfull heart: but if you think me falſe
Heer ſheath your ſword: make me the ſubject rather
Of manly rage then childiſh jealouſie.
It is a nobler crime, and fitter farre
For you to act, eaſier for me to ſuffer.
For live ſuſpected I nor can nor will.
The lovely Aſpe, which I with care have kept▪
And was intended a preſervative
'Gainſt Caeſar's crueltie, I now muſt uſe
Againſt Antonius baſeneſſe a worſe fo
Then Caeſur is: farewell, till death approve
That I was true, and you unjuſt in love.
Stay Cleopatra, deareſt Love, forgive me
Let not ſo ſmall a winde have power to ſhake
A love ſo grown as ours: I did not think
That thou wert falſe: my heart gave no conſent
To what my tongue ſo raſhly uttered.
Nor could I have out-liv'd ſo ſad a thought.
Let Thyreus be releaſt, and ſent to Caeſar.
Now is the time to ſally forth, my Lord,
The fo is tir'd with marching, and your horſe
Are readie all, and wait the ſignall only.
The leaſt delay loſes the action.
I come Canidius; deareſt Love farewell.
Few houres will tell thee what Antonius is.
How timorous is guilt? how are my thoughts
Diſtracted ſadly now? on every ſide
My dangers grow: for ſhould Antonius
Return in ſafety home, and know what paſt
'Twixt me and Thyreus, I have loſt his heart,
And cannot chooſe but fear him: if he die
I am not confident of Caeſar's love.
'Twas but a ſervants tongue I built upon.
'Tis beſt to make all ſure: within there, Eia.
Madam!
Are all things readie in the tombe?
Yes, Madam; Carmi's there and Mario.
Then thither will I go, if fate contrive
A future ſtate of happineſſe for me,
It is my caſtle: if my death they doom,
I am poſſeſt already of a tombe.
DEfeated are my troops, my fleet revolted,
The Seas and Lands are loſt; and nothing now
Is left Antonius but a Roman hand,
A ſword and heart to die. You trueſt ſervants,
Whoſe faith and manly conſtancie upbraids
This wicked age, and ſhall inſtruct the next,
Take from a wretched hand this legacie.
Fortune has made my will, and nought but this
Can I bequeath you. Carry it to Caeſar;
If he be noble, it contains enough
To make you happier then Antonius can.
My glaſſe of life and Empire now is run,
And from this hand expects a period.
My Lord, take fairer hopes.
Fie, fie, Lucilius;
Loſe not thy former merits in perſwading
A man, whom once thou lov'dſt to ſuch a ſhame
As to preferre a loath'd captivity
Before a noble death.
Thy looks ſpeak grief
Speak Eros, wher's the Queen?
She's dead my Lord.
When thoſe unhappy tydings came to her
Of your defeat, ſhe ſtraight ſhut up her ſelf
Within her tombe, and dy'd.
Oh Cleopatra,
Why have I lingred thus, that thou a woman
Should'ſt teach ſo old a ſouldier how to die?
Fortune, I blame not thee; I have enjoy'd
What thou could'ſt give, and on the envy'd top
Of thy proud wheel have long unſhaken ſtood.
Whom Kings have ſerv'd, and Rome her ſelf obey'd;
Whom all the Zones of earths diffuſed Globe,
That know inhabitants, have known, and fear'd.
Nor is my fall ſo much degenerate.
My ſtrength no arms but Roman arms ſubdue, Plutarch.
And none, but Monarch of the world ſucceeds.
Glutted with life and Empire now I go
Free and undaunted to the ſhades below.
Here Eros, take this ſword, perform the promiſe
Which thou haſt made, to kill me whenſoere
I ſhould command: make no reply in words.
I will be true or die. Stand fair; your Eros
Will be your Uſher to th'Elizian fields.
What haſt thou done unfaithfull faithfull Eros
Too kindly cruell, falſly vertuous?
I'll truſt no more, to be no more directed
By ſuch examples: but we muſt be ſpeedie.
The gates ere this time are ſet ope to Caeſar.
Fair Cleopatra, I am comming now
To dwell with thee, and ever to behold
Thy heavenly figure, where nor time nor death
Shall make divorce of our eternall loves.
Thus, thus I come to thee: unfaithfull ſword▪
I never knew thee ſlow in giving death
Till this ſad houre, ſome friendly hand lend aid▪
And with another wound releaſe my ſoule.
Where is my Lord Antonius? Oh ſad ſight
The Queen encloſed in her tombe deſir'd
To take her laſt leave of you.
Is ſhe living?
Tis welcome news, convey me quickly, friends,
Oh quickly thither, that I may expire
That breath that's left in Cleopatrae's arms.
Go you, Epaphroditus, and beſiege
The Palace, to ſurprize Antonius;
You Proculeius, and Cornelius Gallus,
Go preſently to Cleopatraes tombe,
Wo her with all your art and eloquence
With all aſſurances of Caeſar's love
To leave that place, and yield her perſon to him.
Spare no attempts of force or policy
To draw her thence: for you the Citizens
Of Alexandria, cheer your fainting hearts,
I'll mediate in your behalf to Caeſar,
To ſpare the City.
Thanks to the moſt noble
And good Agrippa.
Heer he comes himſelf.
The paleneſſe of your fear declares your guilt.
But that, though nere ſo great, ſhall not exceed
Our clemencie, to let you know it was
Your happineſſe to be ſubdu'd by us.
Mercy ſhall rule our juſt ſeveritie.
Firſt for your founder Alexanders ſake,
Next for the love of reverent Arius
Our Maſter heer whoſe goodneſſe far out-weighs
All your offences and rebellions.
Caeſar in goodneſſe, as in greatneſſe, bears
Equalitie with Jove.
Hail mighty Caeſar.
What's he?
Achorus, Oſiris Prieſt,
A good and holy man.
We dare believe thee,
And therfore welcom him.
Pleaſe it great Caeſar,
To give Achoreus leave to wait on him
Into the ancient Temples of our Gods
To ſhew th' Aegyptian rites and myſteries,
And all the Deities that we adore.
Moſt willingly Achoreus, I would ſee
Gods, but not Oxen.
He has blank'd the Prieſt.
I fain would ſee great Alexander's herſe
The manſion once of ſo divine a ſoul
A ſpirit greater then the world it ſelf,
Whom the world fear'd but could not ſatisfie.
Within the vault of our Pyramides
His bodie yet all whole may Caeſar ſee.
And all the bodies of our Ptolomeys.
I'd ſee Kings only, not dead carcaſſes.
But ſee, Epaphroditus is return'd.
Speak man, where is Antonius?
Slain, my Lord.
How? ſlain? what hand durſt do it?
His own hand.
That was our fear: cruell Antonius.
Too cruell to thy ſelf, to Rome, and me
How white a day have all the people loſt?
How great might Caeſar's happineſſe have been
Had but the fates permitted me to lay
Theſe conquering arms aſide, and once again
Embrace thee, dear Antonius, as a friend
Thou worthy aider of my infant fortunes,
Thou brave revenger of great Julius death,
Witneſſe theſe tears, though I were forc'd to warre
(Whilſt thou preferring forreigne love before
Caeſar's alliance, did'ſt reject my kindred,
And ſcorn my love) I ſtill could honour thee.
But ſince too cruell fate denies to me
So great an happineſſe as to expreſſe
This love to thee alive, let thy dear ghoſt
Behold my Pietie, and ſee the honours
Caeſar will do to thy ſad funerall.
Moſt royall Caeſar-like diſſimulation.
I hope how ere 'twill ſerve our turns Lucilius.
Now is the fitteſt time.
What men are theſe?
Two of Antonius trueſt ſervants, Caeſar,
Who bring a letter from their dying Lord.
Let me peruſe it well, it ſhall be granted.
Your lives and fortunes both are ſafe, and ſince
We ever lov'd fidelitie, you ſhall
If ſo you like, be welcome to our ſervice,
'Tis our deſire; our lives and fortunes ever
Shall do great Caeſar true and faithfull ſervice
As they before did to Antonius.
Where did he die?
In Cleopatraes arms
By her with ropes let up into the tombe,
After his deadly wound.
Is ſhe there ſtill?
Now I ſhall know; ſpeak Gallus, what's the news?
We came and call'd at Cleopatraes tombe,
Who from above made anſwer, and deny'd
To yield herſelf, but upon Caeſar's word.
When I with beſt perſuaſions ſtrove to winne her,
And held her talk awhile, whilſt Proculeius
On tother ſide the tombe eſpy'd a place
That open ſtood, by which the Queen receiv'd
Dying Antonius, which he ſcaling enter'd
Behinde the Queen: but had he not been ſpeedy
She there had ſlain herſelf: a maid of hers
Spy'd Proculeius entring, and aloud
Cry'd out oh Queen thou art ſurpriz'd alive.
She drawing a ſhort poniard was reſtrain'd
By Proculeius, who both held her hand
And ſpake her fair; at laſt obtain'd ſo much
By ſtrong perſuaſions of your clemencie
He drew her thence, and got her to the Palace.
Where now ſhe is, and Proculeius ſtays.
But her deſire is ſtill to ſpeak with you.
Till when from us ſhe will admit no comfort.
We will in perſon preſently go ſee her.
Protect me Pallas 'gainſt falſe Venus charms.
Known miſchiefs have their cure; but doubts have none,
And better is deſpair then fruitleſſe hope
Mixt with a killing fear: my thoughts are now
More black and balefull then this ſad attire.
If Caeſar come, I do not fear his chiding
I have a certain Antidote 'gainſt that.
'Tis not his anger, but his love afflicts
My doubting ſoul, whether that love will prove
Fained or true, yet may ſtraight apppear.
He's not ſo old, nor I ſo ignorant
But that his actions, geſtures, words, and looks
Will make his heart lie open to my view.
How ſweet a ſorrow dwels upon that brow!
How would ſhe look in ſmiling dalliance?
Oh pardon me thou powerfull God of love,
That durſt preſume to tempt thy Deitie.
Forgive my confidence. I now excuſe
Antonius weakneſſe, but ſtay there my heart,
My vertuous Livia is more fair then ſhe,
Hail mighty Prince; for that high name the Gods.
Who reft me of it, have beſtow'd on thee.
Riſe Cleopatra, Caeſar's victory
Takes nought from you.
Oh let me never riſe
Till Caeſar grant my ſuit.
Good Queen ſtand up,
And freely ſpeak what you deſire:
I beg
A boon but ſmall, which Caeſar nere deni'd
His greateſt enemies.
And can you think
I ſhould deny it you? Do but expreſſe it▪
That thou would'ſt kill me Caeſar; I have liv'd
Theſe many yeers too long: I ſhould have dy'd
When that great Worthy, that renowmed Caeſar
Was baſely murther'd in Romes Capitoll.
Surviving him was my unhappineſſe.
But I have liv'd to ſee his ſonne inherit
His ſtate and Empire, and controll the world.
Be cheery Cleopatra, fear no wrong
At Caeſar's hands.
Death is no wrong at all.
I have deſerv'd it, Sir.
But can you think
That we, whoſe clemencie ſo many men
And ſtubborn enemies ſo oft have prov'd,
Should now at laſt be cruell to a Queen?
But we muſt chide you, that ſo long together
Have ſided with Antonius, and with him
Conſpir'd the wrack of Rome.
That's ſoon excus'd.
If 'twere a crime to love Antonius
(Which I confeſſe I did, and his large favours
Truly deſerv'd it) think it was not mine
But fates own crime, that firſt allotted me
To his protection: had your ſhare of rule
In Egypt lyen, I had been Caeſars friend.
Beſides with men and money you give aid
To Caius Caſſius in Philippi field
Who murther'd Caeſar in the Capitoll.
Caeſar, as falſe as truth it ſelf is true.
I was accuſed to Antonius
For that before; but in Cilicia
I quickly cleer'd thoſe cauſeleſſe jealouſies,
Witneſſe thou glorious ſtarre, which the great ſoule
Of noble Julius, when he left the earth,
Added to heaven, how innocent I am
From any fault in that: but Caeſar know
Againſt thy father not the act alone,
But even ſuſpition ſhall be purg'd with death.
I can no longer live.
What have I done?
I fear my raſhneſſe has too far betray'd
My thoughts to Cleopatra: gentle Queen
Be comforted; expect at Caeſar's hand
Nothing but love and friendſhip: do not wrong
My goodneſſe with unjuſt ſuſpition
All former grievances are quite forgot.
Your port and ſtate ſhall be maintain'd at full.
Your houſhold ſervants not diminiſhed.
Epaphroditus, ſee the Queen attended
As fits her ſtare and honour; and till next
We viſit you, reſt with a full aſſurance
Of our beſt love and friendſhip.
All the payment
That my poor fortunes can return to Caeſar
Is thanks and ſervice.
Epaphroditus.
Caeſar.
Yes. whiſper on; you cannot over-reach
My jealouſies: no ſignes of love at all,
No ſmile, nor amorous glance, I was deceiv'd,
And meerly cooſen'd by baſe Thyreus.
But I muſt hide my fears, and cleer this brow
The better to effect my purpoſes.
How fares your Majeſty?
Never ſo well
As now I am, I did not think great Caeſar
Had been ſo full of love and courteſie.
Oh Madam, Caeſar's th' unexampled mirrour
Of royaltie, and does as far exceed
All petie Kings in goodneſſe as in power.
And if my humbleſt ſervices in ought
May give content to royall Cleopatra
I ſhall be proud to be commanded ſtill.
Thanks good Epaphroditus.
That love is true that's ſhew'd in miſry.
But what have I forgot? I had a note
Of ſome particulars I meant to give
To Caeſar's hand and quite forgot it here.
Nor would I truſt the cariage of a thing
Of ſo great conſequence to every hand.
Will you command my ſervice?
I ſhall reſt
Indebted to your love; Caeſar will thank you.
It much concerns both his eſtate and mine.
Be ſpeedy good Epaphroditus, for
I long to heare his anſwer.
Fear not Madam.
A quick performance, it rejoyces me
To ſee her look ſo cheerily again.
So now my trouble is remov'd, I come,
I come my deareſt Lord Antonius,
Never till now thy true and faithfull love.
My much abuſed Lord, do not diſdain
Or bluſh t'acknowlege Cleopatra's name
When tears and bloud have waſh'd her ſpotted ſoul▪
Wert thou alive again, not all the world
Should ſhake my conſtancie, or make divorce
Twixt thee and mee: but ſince too late, alas,
My tears of ſorrow come, I'll follow thee,
And beg thy pardon in the other world.
All crimes are there for evermore forgot.
There Ariadne pardons Theſeus falſhood.
Dido forgives the perjur'd Prince of Troy,
And Troilus repentant Creſſida.
Though falſe to thee alive, I now am come
A faithfull lover of thy duſt and combe.
Marcus Agrippa, I have here provided
As Caeſar gave in charge two Libyan Pſyls.
All Afrik yields not fitter for his purpoſe.
They look like likely ones.
They have been prov'd,
And have already on my ſouldiers,
When they were bit by Serpents, done ſtrange cures,
Paſt all belief or hope, recall'd fled life
Back to his manſion, and beyond the power
Of Aeſculapius have ſuck'd and charm'd
The mortall venome from their dying limbs.
Theſe two, Agrippa in their infancy
Their doubting ſires to try their lawfull births
(As Eagles try their Eaglets 'gainſt the Sun)
Expos'd to mortall Serpents, and were ſo
Confirm'd in what they ſought, the trembling Snakes
Durſt not aſſault the Infants.
Here he comes.
Are thoſe the men?
Yes, Caeſar.
Carry them
To Cleopatraes Palace; let them wa
Neer to Epaphroditus. What's the news?
How fares the Queen?
Never more cheery Sir.
Her looks expreſſe her hopes; nor in her words
Can ſhe conceal her inward cheerfulneſſe.
But one thing, Sir, ſhe ſai'd ſhe had forgot,
Which neerly did concern both you and her;
And that in ſuch a cauſe ſhe durſt not truſt
A common meſſenger, requeſting me
To give it to your hands.
She has deceiv'd thee,
And all of us; the worſt that I could fear
Is come to paſſe: oh run Epaphroditus,
I'll follow thee with all the ſpeed I can.
But all too late, I fear, our ſpeed will come.
This is my ſecond Coronation day;
But nobler then the firſt, and fuller farre
Of reall honour, and magnificence.
Nor till this pompous houre was Cleopatra
A perfect Queen, alas, I did not ſway
A Scepter over fortune, or command
As now I do, the deſtinies themſelves.
I wore a painted honour, a meer ſhadow
Of Royall ſtate, and ſuch a feeble Crown
As warre could threaten, treaſon undermine,
And every puffe of Fortune blow it off.
My ſtate is conſtant now, my thoughts above
The fear of dangers or oppoſing foes.
What new addition has ſhe got off ſtate?
I cannot tell, nor can I gueſſe her meaning.
Glaucus and Mardio, leave the room a while.
Come hither Girles, I will no longer hide
My joys from you; in ſuch attire as this
I go to meet my dear Antonius.
Madam, he's dead.
Alas, thou art deceiv'd.
He lives my Charmio in the other world,
And ſtays for me; I have been too too ſlack
In comming to him: this that here lies dead
Was but the houſe that lodg'd my deareſt Lord,
That earthly Manſion, that did once contain
The kindeſt, nobleſt, and the trueſt ſoule
That ever liv'd; and this our ſecond meeting
Is farre more ſweet, and full of noble love
Then when we firſt met in Cilicia,
When our magnificence and pomp did fill
The world with wonder and aſtoniſhment.
Why weep you girles? is it to ſee your Miſtris
Greater then ere in Glory? if you lov'd me,
You'd weep to ſee great Cleopatra led
A wretched captive through the ſtreets of Rome
Before proud Caeſar's chariot, mock'd and flowted,
And from a Queen become Octaviaes drudge.
No, no, my girles, I will be ſtill my ſelf
And from this ſeat of ſtate look down in ſcorn
On Rome, and Caeſar's threats as things below me.
Nor heer ſhall my attendance leave you, Madam,
I'll wait upon you to th'Eliſian ſhades.
Nor will poor Charmi be left behinde.
My earthly race is run, and I deſcend
As great a ghoſt as Theban Semele,
When her ambitious love had ſought and met
The Thunderers embraces, when no Pile
Of earthly wood, but Jove's celeſtiall fire
Conſum'd her beauties reliques, and ſent down
Her ſoul from that Majeſtick funerall.
Farewell thou fading remnant of my Love.
When I am gone, I'll leave theſe earthly parts
To keep thee company: never to part,
But dwell together, and diſſolve together.
Come Aſpe, poſſeſſe thy manſion; freely feed
On theſe two hils, upon whoſe ſnowy tops
The winged Cupid oft has taken ſtand,
And ſhot from thence the proudeſt hearts on earth.
Corruption now, and rottenneſſe muſt ſeize
This once admired fabrick, and diſſolve
This fleſh to common elements again▪
When skilfull nature, were ſhe ſtrictly bound
To ſearch through all her ſtore-houſe would be pos'd
To tell which piece was Cleopatra once.
Sweet Aſpe, I feel thy▪ touch, and life begins
From theſe cold limbs to take her gentle flight.
A ſlumber ſeizes me; farewell my girles.
Thus let the Romans finde me dead, and know
Maugre the power of Rome, and Caeſar's ſpleen
That Cleopatra liv'd, and di'd a Queen.
She's dead, and Eira too. I heare a noiſe.
There is no dallying now; I muſt beſpeedy,
And uſe the common and ſure way to death.
We come too late, and all in vain I fea
Our care has been.
Here lies her ſervant bleeding,
Not dead: ſpeak Charmio, how dy'd the Queen?
A death that well beſeem'd her royall birth.
See Caeſar, ſee; the mark upon her breſt,
And here the fatall authour.
'Twas the Aſpe.
Be ſpeedie now, and uſe your utmoſt power
You skilfull Pſyls, call back this royall ſoul
To her fair ſeat, and take from Caeſar's bounty
Above your wiſh: ſuck thou the wounded place,
And mutter thou thy ſtrongeſt charms to fright
Pale death from thence, and you inernall Gods,
If ere to humane prayers you could lend
An exorable eare, 'tis Caeſar begs,
Caeſar, whoſe ſword has ſent to your black ſhades
A hundred thouſand ſouls, and ſtill has power
T'enlarge your Empire, begs in lieu of all
But reſtitution of one ſoul alone.
How royally ſhe dy'd?
No conquer'd Prince.
Did ever finde a nobler way to death.
Had feeble Perſeus known ſo brave a courſe,
He had redeem'd his captive life from ſhame.
And not depriv'd the Conquerour of fame.
Is there no hope?
She's gone paſt all recoverie.
We will no longer ſtrive 'gainſt deſtiny.
Though thou art dead, yet live renowm'd for ever;
And let this action ſpeak thee to the world
A fo not ſhaming Caeſar's victory.
No other Crown or Scepter after thine
Shall Aegypt honour: thou ſhalt be the laſt
Of all the raigning race of Ptolomey:
And all, and more then what thy letter crav'd
Will Caeſar grant with dead Antonius
In richer ſtate then ere proud Memphis ſaw
Her Kings inter'd ſhall Cleopatra lye.
Thy dying figure carv'd in faireſt ſtone
Shall my triumphant chariot wear, for all
To gaze and wonder at thy form and worth.
Aegypt no more a Kingdome, now a Province
Cornelius Gallus, is thy government.
And here let Caeſar ſheath the civill ſword,
Whoſe fatall edge theſe twenty years has ripp'd
The bleeding ntrails of afflicted Rome.
Heer let our labours end: advance brave friends
Our proſperous Eagles home to Italy,
To reap the fruit of all our wars and toils,
And fill great Rome with conquer'd Aegypts ſpoils.