HOw dearely welcome you are!
I know it,
And my beſt ſiſter, you as deer to my ſight,
And pray let this confirm it, how you have govern'd
My poore ſtate in my abſence, how my ſervants,
I dare and muſt beleeve, elſe I ſhould wrong ye,
The beſt and worthieſt.
As my womans wit Sir,
Which is but weake and crazie.
But good Alice
Tell me how fares the gentle Cellide,
The life of my affection, ſince my travell,
My long, and lazie travell? is her love ſtill
Vpon the growing hand? do's it not ſtop
And wither at my yeares? has ſhe not view'd
And entertain'd ſome yonger ſmooth behaviour
Some youth but in his bloſſome, as her ſelfe is?
There lyes my feares.
They need not, for beleeve me
So well you have manag'd her, and won her minde,
Even from her houres of childehood, to this ripeneſſe,
And in your abſence, that by me inforced ſtil,
So well diſtill'd your gentleneſſe into her,
Obſerv'd her, fed her fancy, liv'd ſtill in her,
And though Love be a boy, and ever youthfull,
And young, and beauteous objects ever aym'd at,
Yet here yee have gone beyond love, better'd nature,
Made him appeare in yeares, in gray yeares fiery,
His bow at full bent ever: feare not brother,
For though your body has been farre off from her,
Yet every houre your heart, which is your goodneſſe,
I have forc'd into her, won a place prepar'd too,
And willingly to give it ever harbour:
Beleeve ſhe is ſo much yours, and won by miracle,
(Which is by age) ſo deep a ſtamp ſet on her
By your obſervances, ſhe cannot alter,
Were the childe living now ye loſt at ſea
Among the Genoway Gallies, what a happineſſe,
What a maine bleſſing?
O no more good ſiſter,
Touch no more that ſtring, 'tis too harſh and jarring.
With that childe all my hopes went, and you know
The root of all thoſe hopes, the mother too
Within few dayes.
'Tis too true, and too fatall,
But peace be with their ſoules.
For her loſſe
I hope, the beauteous Cellide.
You may Sir,
For all ſhe is, is yours.
For the poore boyes loſſe,
I have brought a noble friend, I found in travell
A worthier minde, and a more temperate ſpirit
If J have ſo much judgement to diſcerne 'em,
Man yet was never maſter of.
What is he?
A Gentleman, I doe aſſure my ſelfe,
And of a worthy breeding, though he hide it:
I found him at Valentia, poore and needy,
Onely his minde the maſter of a treaſure.
I ſought his friendſhip, wonne him by much violence,
His honeſty and modeſty ſtill fearing
To thruſt a charge upon me; how I love him,
He ſhall now know, where want and he hereafter
Shall be no more companions: uſe him nobly,
It is my will, good ſiſter, all I have
J make him free companion in, and part er,
But onely
I obſerve ye, hold your right there,
Love and high rule allowes no rivals, brother,
He ſhall have faire regard, and all obſervance.
Ye are welcome noble Sir.
What, Monſieur Hylas,
I'me glad to ſee your merry body well yet.
Yf'aith y'are welcome home; what news beyond ſeas?
None, but new men expected, ſuch as you are
To breed new admirations: 'tis my ſiſter,
Pray ye know her ſir.
With all my heart, your leave Lady.
Ye have it ſir.
A ſhrewd ſmart touch, which do's prognoſticate
A body keene and active, ſomewhat old,
But that's all one: age brings experience
And knowledge to diſpatch. I muſt be better
And neerer in my ſervice, with your leave ſir,
To this faire Lady.
What, the old ſquire of dames ſtill?
Still the admirer of their goodneſſe with all my heart now
I love a woman of her yeares, a pacer
That lay the bridle in her neck will travell
Forty, and ſomewhat fulſome is a fine diſh,
Theſe yong colts; are too sketiſh.
My coſin Mary
In all her joy Sir to congratulate
Your faire returne.
My loving, and kind coſin,
A thouſand welcomes.
A thouſand thanks to heaven Sir
For your ſafe, voyage, and returne.
I thanke e:
But wher's my bleſſed Cellide? her ſlackneſſe
In viſitation.
Thinke not ſo deere Vncle,
I left her on her knees, thanking the gods
With teares and prayers.
Ye have given me too much comfort.
She will not belong from ye.
Your faire coſin?
It is ſo, and a bait you cannot balke ſir,
If your old rule raigne in you, ye may know her.
A happy ſtocke ye have, right worthy Lady,
The pooreſt of your ſervants, vowes his duty
And obliged faith.
O 'tis a kiſſe you would ſir,
Take it, and tye your tongue up.
I am an aſſe
I doe perceive now: a blinde aſſe, a blockhead:
For this is handſomneſſe, this that that drawes us,
Body and bones: oh what a mounted forehead,
What eyes and lips, what every thing about her?
How like a Swan ſhe ſwims her pace, and beares
Her ſilver breaſts? this is the woman, ſhe,
And onely ſhe, that I will ſo much honour
As to thinke worthy of my love, all older Idols
I heartily abhorre, and give to gunpowder,
And all complexions beſides hers, to Gypſies.
O my deere life, my better heart, all dangers,
Diſtreſſes in my travell, all misfortunes,
Had they been endleſſe like the houres upon me,
In this kiſſe, had been buried in oblivion:
How happy have ye made me, truely happy?
My joy has ſo much overmaſtered me,
That in my teares for your returne.
O deereſt:
My noble friend too: what a bleſſedneſſe
Have I about me now? how full my wiſhes
Are come agen, a thouſand hearty welcomes
I once more lay upon ye: all I have,
The faire and liberall uſe of all my ſervants
To be at your command, and all the uſes
Of al within my power.
Ye are too munificent,
Nor am I able to conceive thoſe thanks ſir.
Ye wrong my tender love now, even my ſervice,
Nothing accepted, nothing ſtuck between us
And our intire affections, but this woman,
This I beſeech ye friend.
It is a jewell
I doe confeſſe would make a thiefe, but never
Of him that's ſo much yours, and bound your ſervant,
That were a baſe ingratitude.
Ye are noble,
Pray be acquainted with her, keep your way ſir,
My coſin and my ſiſter.
Ye are moſt welcome:
If any thing in our poore powers faire ſir
To render ye content, and liberall welcome
May but appeare, command it.
Ye ſhall find us
Happy in our performance.
The poore ſervant
Of both your goodneſſes preſents his ſervice.
Come no more complement: cuſtome has made it
Dull, old, and tedious: ye are once more welcome,
As your owne thoughts can make ye, and the ſame ever.
And ſo wee'l in to ratifie it.
Harke ye Valentine,
Is wild oates yet come over?
Yes: with me Sir.
How do's he beare himſelf?
A great deale better:
Why doe you bluſh? the Gentleman will doe well.
I ſhould be glad on't Sir.
How do's his Father?
As mad a worme as ere he was.
I lookt for't:
Shall we enjoy your companie?
Ile wayt on ye:
Only a thought, or two.
We bar all prayers.
This laſt wench, I this laſt wench was a faire one:
A dainty wench, a right one: a devill take it,
What doe I ayle; to have fifteene now in liking
Enough a man would thinke to ſtay my ſtomack,
But what's fifteene, or fifteene ſcore to my thoughts?
And wherefore are mine eyes made, and have lights,
But to encreaſe my objects? this laſt wench
Sticks plaguy cloſe unto me: a hundred pound
I were as cloſe to her: if I lov'd now
As many fooliſh men doe, I ſhould run mad.
SIrha, no more of your French ſhrugs J adviſe you,
If you be lowzie, ſhift your ſelfe.
May it pleaſe your worſhip:
Onely to ſee my ſonne, my ſonne good Launcelot
Your Maſter, and my ſonne: body O me ſir,
No money, no more money Monſieur Launcelot,
Not a deneere, ſweet Signior: bring the perſon,
The perſon of my boy, my boy Tom: Monſieur Thomas,
Or get you gone agen, du gata whee ſir,
Baſſa mi cu, good Launcelot, valetote.
My boy, or nothing.
Then to anſwer punctually.
I ſay to 'th purpoſe.
Then J ſay to'th purpoſe,
Becauſe your Worſhips vulgar underſtanding
May meet me at the neereſt: your ſonne, my maſter,
Or Monſieur Thomas, (for ſo his travell ſtiles him)
Through many forraigne plots that vertue meets with,
And dangers (I beſeech ye give attention)
Is at the laſt ariv'd
To aske your (as the French man cals it ſweetly)
Benediction, ae jour en jour.
Sirha, do not conjure me with your French furies.
Che ditt'a vou, Monſieur.
Che doga vou, Raſcall:
Leave me your rotten language, and tell me plainely
And quickly ſirha, left I crack your French crowne,
What your good Maſter meanes: I have maintain'd
You and your Monſieur, as I take it Launcelot
Theſe two yeeres at your ditty vous, your jours:
Jour me no more, for not another penny
Shall paſſe my purſe.
Your Worſhip is erroneous,
For as I told you, your Sonne Tom, or Thomas,
My Maſter, and your ſonne is now arriv'd
To aske ye, as our language beares it neereſt
Your quotidian bleſſing, and here he is in perſon.
What Tom, boy, welcome with all my heart boy,
Welcome 'faith, thou haſt gladded me at ſoule boy,
Infinite glad I am, I have praied too, Thomas
For you wilde Thomas, Tom, I thank thee hartily
For comming home.
Sir, I doe finde your prayers
Have much much prevail'd above my ſins.
How's this?
Elſe certaine I had periſh'd with my rudeneſſe,
Ere J had won my ſelfe to that diſcretion
I hope you ſhall hereafter finde.
Humh, humh,
Diſcretion? is it come to that? the boy's ſpoild.
Sirah, you rogue, look for't, for I will make thee
Ten times more miſerable then thou thoughtſt thy ſelfe
Before thou travelledſt: thou haſt told my father
I know it, and I finde it, all my rogueries
By meere way of prevention to undoe me.
Sir, as J ſpeake eight languages, I onely
Told him you came to aske his benediction,
De jour enjour.
But that I muſt be civill,
I would beat thee like a dog: ſir, howſoever
The time I have miſpent may make you doubtfull,
Nay, harden your beliefe 'gainſt my converſion,
A pox o' travell, I ſay.
Yet deere father
Your owne experience in my after courſes.
Prethee no more; t'is ſcurvy; ther's thy ſiſter
Vndon without redemption: he eates with picks
Vtterly ſpoyld, his ſpirit baffell'd in him.
How have I find that this affliction
Should light ſo heavie on me. I have no more ſonnes;
And this no more mine owne, no ſpark of nature
Allows him mine now, he's growne tame: my grand curſe
Hang ore his head that thus transform'd thee: travell?
Ile ſend my horſe to travell next: we monſieur,
Now will my moſt canonicall deere neighbours
Say I have found my ſonne, and rejoyce with me
Becauſe he has mew'd his mad tricks off. I know not,
But I am ſure; this Monſieur, this fine gentleman
Will never be in my books like mad Thomas,
I muſt goe ſeeke an heire, for my inheritance
Muſt not turne ſecretary: my name and quality
Has kept my land three hundred yeers in madneſſe,
And it ſlip now, may it ſinke.
Excellent ſiſter,
I am glad to ſee thee well: but wher's my father?
Gone diſcontent, it ſeemes.
He did ill in it
As he dos all: for I was uttering
A handſome ſpeech or two, I have been ſtudying
Ere ſince I came from Paris: how glad to ſee thee?
I am gladder to ſee you, with more love too
I dare maintaine it, then my fathers ſorry
To ſee (as he ſuppoſes) your converſion:
And I am ſure he is vext, nay more I know it,
He has prai'd againſt it mainely: but it appeares ſir
Ye had rather blinde him with that poore opinion,
Then in your ſelfe correct it, deereſt brother,
Since there is in our uniforme reſemblance,
No more to make us two, but our bare ſexes:
And ſince one happy birth produced us hither,
Let one more happy minde.
Ir ſhallbe ſiſter,
For I can doe it when I liſt: ad yet wench
Be mad too when I pleaſe: I have the trick on't.
Beware a traveller.
Leave that trick too,
Not for the world: but wher's my Miſtreſſe
And prethee ſay how do's ſhe? I melt to ſee her,
And preſently: I muſt a way.
Then doe ſo.
For o' my fath ſhe will not ſee your brother.
Not ſee me? I'le.
Now you play your true ſelf;
How would my father love this! I'le aſſure ye
She will not ſee you: ſhe has heard, (and lowdly)
The gambolls that you plaid ſince your departure,
In every Towne ye came, your ſeverall miſcheifes.
Your rowſes, and your wenches: all your quarrells,
And the no cauſes of 'em: theſe I take it
Although ſhe love ye well, to modeſt eares,
To one that waited for your reformation,
To which end travell was propounded by her Vncle,
Muſt needs, and reaſon for it, be examined,
And by her modeſty, and fear'd too light too
To fyle with her affections: ye have loſt her
For any thing I ſee, exil'd your ſelfe.
No more of that ſweet Doll, I will be civill.
But how long?
Wouldſt thou have me loſe my birth-right?
For yond old thing will diſinherit me
If I grow too demure: good ſweet Doll, prethee:
Prethee deere ſiſter, let me ſee her.
No.
Nay, I beſeech thee: by this light.
I: ſwagger.
Kiſſe me, and be my friend, we two were twins.
And ſhall we now grow ſtrangers?
'Tis not my fault,
Well, there be other women, and remember
You, you were the cauſe of this: there be more lands too,
And better people in 'em: fare ye well,
And other loves: what ſhall become of me
And of my vanities, becauſe they grieve ye.
Come hither, come, do you ſee that clowd that flyes there?
So light are you, and blown with every fancy:
Will ye but make me hope ye may be civill?
I know your nature's ſweet enough, and tender,
Not grated on, nor curb'd: doe you love your Miſtreſſe?
He lyes, that ſayes I doe not.
Would ye ſee her?
If you pleaſe: for it muſt be ſo.
And appeare to her
A thing to be belov'd?
Yes.
Change then
A little of your wildeneſſe into wiſedome,
And put on a more ſmoothneſſe:
I'le doe the beſt I can to helpe ye, yet
I doe proteſt ſhe ſwore, and ſwore it deeply,
She would never ſee you more: where's your mans heart now?
What doe you faint at this?
She is a woman:
But he ſhe entertaines next for a ſervant,
I ſhall be bold to quarter.
No thought of fighting:
Goe in, and there wee'l talke more: be but rul'd,
And what lyes in my power, ye ſhall be ſure of.
HEe cannot be ſo wilde ſtill.
'Tis moſt certaine
I have now heard all, and all the truth.
Grant all that:
Is he the firſt, that h'as bin giv'n a loſt man,
And yet come fairely home? he is yong, and tender
And fit for that impreſſion; your affections
Shall ſtamp upon him, age brings on diſcretion,
A yeere hence, theſe mad toyes that now poſſeſſe him
Will ſhew like bugbeares to him, ſhapes to fright him;
Marriage diſſolves all theſe like miſts.
They are grounded
Hereditary in him, from his father
And to his grave they will haunt him.
'Tis your feare
Which is a wiſe part in you; yet your love
However you may ſeeme to leſſen it
with theſe diſlikes, and choake it with theſe errors,
Do what you can will break out to excuſe him,
Ye have him in your hart, and planted, Coſin,
From whence the power of reaſon, nor diſcretion
Can ever roote him.
Planted in my heart Aunt?
Beleeve it no, I never was ſo liberall:
What though he ſhew a ſo ſo comely fellow
Which we call pretty? or ſay it may be hanſom?
What though his promiſes may ſtumble at
The power of goodneſſe in him, ſometimes uſe too?
How willingly thy heart betrayes thee coſin?
Cozen thy ſelfe no more: thou haſt no more power
To leave off loving him, then he that's thirſty
Has to abſtaine from drinke ſtanding before him.
His mind is not ſo monſtrous for his ſhape
If I have eyes; I have not ſeene his better.
A hanſom browne complexion
Reaſonable
Inclining to a tawney.
Had I ſaid ſo
You would have wiſh'd my tongue out: then his making.
Which may be mended: I have ſeene leggs ſtraiter.
And cleaner made.
A body too,
Far neater,
And better ſet together.
God forgive thee,
For againſt thy conſcience thou lyeſt ſtubbornely.
I grant 'tis neat enough.
'Tis excellent,
And where the outward parts are faire and lovely,
(Which are but molds o'th minde) what muſt the ſoule be?
Put caſe youth has his ſwinge, and fyery nature
Flames to mad uſes many times.
All this
You onely uſe, to make me ſay I love him:
I doe confeſſe I doe, but that my fondneſſe
Should fling it ſelfe upon his deſperate follies.
I doe not counſell that, ſee him reclaim'd firſt,
Which will not prove a miracle, yet Mary
I am afraid 'twill vexe thee horribly
To ſtay ſo long.
No, no Aunt, no beleeve me.
What was your dreame to night? for I obſerv'd ye
Hugging of me; with good, deere, ſweet Tom.
Fye Aunt,
Vpon my conſcience.
On my word 'tis true wench:
And then ye kiſs'd me Mary, more then once too,
And ſigh'd, and O ſweet Tom againe: nay, doe not bluſh,
Ye have it at the heart wench.
I'le be hang'd firſt,
But you muſt have your way.
And ſo will you too,
Or breake down hedges for it: Dorothea,
The welcom'ſt woman living: how do's thy brother?
I heare he's turn'd a wondrous civill gentleman
Since his ſhort travell.
Pray heaven he make it good Alice.
How doe ye friend, I have a quarrell to ye,
Ye ſtole away, and left my company.
O pardon me, deere friend, it was to welcome
A brother, that I have ſome cauſe to love well.
Prethee how is he? thou ſpeakſt truth.
Not perfect:
I hope he will be.
Never: ha's forgot me,
I heare wench, and his hot love too:
Thou wouldſt howle then.
And I am glad it ſhould be ſo; his travels
Have yeelded him variety of Miſtreſſes,
Fairer in his eye farre.
O cogging raſcall.
I was a foole, but better thoughts I thank heaven.
Pray do not think ſo, for he loves you deerely,
Vpon my troth moſt firmely: would faine ſee you.
See me friend? doe you thinke it fit?
It may be,
Without the loſſe of credit too: he's not
Such a prodigious thing, ſo monſtrous,
To fling from all ſociety.
His ſo much contrary
To my deſires, ſuch an antipathy
That I muſt ſooner ſee my grave.
Deere friend,
He was not ſo before he went.
I grant it,
For then I daily hop'd his faire converſion.
Come, do not maske your ſelfe, but ſee him freely,
Ye have a minde.
That minde I'le maſter then.
And is your hate ſo mortall?
Not to his perſon,
But to his qualities, his mad-cap follies,
Which ſtill like Hydras heads grow thicker on him.
I have a credit friend, and maids of my ſort,
Love where their modeſties may live untainted.
I give up that hope then: pray, for your friends ſake,
If I have any intereſt within ye,
Doe but this courteſie, accept this Letter.
From him?
The ſame: 'tis but a minutes reading,
And as we looke on ſhapes of painted divels,
Which for the preſent may diſturb our fancy,
But with the next new object looſe 'em, ſo
If this be foule, ye may forget it, 'pray:
Have ye ſeene it friend?
I will not lye: I have not,
But I preſume, ſo much he honours you,
The worſt part of himſelfe was caſt away
When to his beſt part he writ this.
For your ſake,
Not that I any way ſhall like his ſcribling.
A ſhrewd diſſembling queane.
J thanke ye deere friend,
I know ſhe loves him.
Yes, and will not looſe him,
Vnleſſe he leap into the Moone, beleeve that,
And then ſhee'l ſcramble too: yong wenches loves
Are like the courſe of quarterns, they may ſhift
And ſeeme to ceaſe ſometimes, and yet we ſee
The leaſt diſtemper puls 'em backe againe,
And ſeats 'em in their old courſe: feare her not,
Vnleſſe he be a devill.
Now heaven bleſſe me.
What has he writ?
Out, out upon him.
Ha, what has the mad man done?
Worſe, worſe, and worſe ſtill,
Some northerne toy, a little broad.
Still fowler?
Hay, hay boyes: goodneſſe keep me: oh:
What ayle ye?
Here, take your ſpell againe, it burnes my fingers.
Was ever Lover writ ſo ſweet a Letter,
So elegant a ſtile? pray looke upon't:
The rareſt inventory of ranke oathes
That ever cut-purſe caſt.
What a mad boy is this?
Onely i'th bottome
A little julip gently ſprinckled over
To coole his mouth, leſt it breake out in bliſters,
Indeed law. Yours for ever.
I am ſorry.
You ſhall be welcome to me, eome when you pleaſe,
And ever may command me vertuouſly,
But for your brother, you muſt pardon me,
Till I am of his nature, no acceſſe friend,
No word of viſitation, as ye love me,
And ſo for now Ile leave ye.
What a letter
Has this thing written, how it roares like thunder?
With what a ſtate he enters into ſtile.
Deere Miſtreſſe.
Out upon him bedlam.
Well, there be waies to reach her yet: ſuch likeneſſe
As you two carry me thinkes.
I am mad too,
And yet can apprehend ye: fare ye well,
The foole ſhall now fiſh for himſelfe.
Be ſure then
His tewgh be tith and ſtrong: and next no ſwearing,
He'l catch no fiſh elſe. Farewell Doll.
Farewell Alice.
INdeed he's much chang'd, extreamely alter'd,
His colour faded ſtrangely too.
The ayre,
The ſharpe and nipping ayre of our new clymat
I hope is all, which will as well reſtore
To health againe th'affected body by it,
And make it ſtronger far, as leave it dangerous;
How do's my ſweet, our bleſſed houre comes on now
Apace my Cellide, (it knocks at dore)
In which our loves, and long deſires like rivers
Riſing aſunder far, ſhall fall together,
Within theſe too daies deere.
When heaven, and you ſir
Shall thinke it fit: for by your wils I am govern'd,
'Twere good ſome preparation.
All that may be:
It ſhall be no blinde wedding: and all the joy
Of all our friends I hope: he lookes worſe hourely:
How do's my friend, my ſelfe? he ſweats too coldly,
His pulſe, like the ſlow dropping of a ſpowt,
Scarce gives his function: how i'st man, alas ſir,
You looke extreme ill: is it any old griefe,
The weight of which?
None, gentle ſir, that I feele
Your love is too too tender.
Nay beleeve ſir,
You cannot be the maſter of your health,
Either ſome feaver lyes in wait to catch ye,
Whoſe harbinger's already in your face
We ſee preparing: or ſome diſcontent,
Which if it lye in this houſe, I dare ſay
Both for this noble Gentleman, and all
That live within it, ſhall as readily
Be purg'd away, and with as much care ſoften'd,
And where the cauſe is.
'Tis a joy to be ill,
Where ſuch a vertuous faire Phyſitian
Is ready to releeve: your noble cares
I muſt, and ever ſhall be thankfull for,
And would my ſervice (I dare not looke upon her)
But be not fearefull, I feele nothing dangerous,
A grudging caus'd by th' alteration
Of ayre, may hang upon me: my heart's whole,
(I would it were)
I knew the cauſe to be ſo.
No, you ſhall never know it.
Some warme broths
To purge the bloud, and keep your bed a day Sir,
And ſweat it out.
I have ſuch cordials,
That if you will but promiſe me to take 'em,
Indeed you ſhall be well, and very quickly,
I'le be your Doctor, you ſhall ſee how finely
I'le fetch ye up againe.
He ſweats extreamely:
Hot, very hot: his pulſe beats like a drum now,
Feele ſiſter, feele, feele ſweet.
How that touch ſtung me?
My gowne there.
And thoſe julips in the window.
Some ſee his bed made.
This is moſt unhappy,
Take courage man, 'tis nothing but an ague.
And this ſhall be the laſt fit.
Not by thouſands:
Now what 'tis to be truely miſerable,
I feele at full experience.
He growes fainter.
Come, leade him in, he ſhall to bed: a vomit,
I'le have a vomit for him.
A purge firſt,
And if he breath'd a veyne.
No, no, no bleeding,
A Clyſter will coole all.
Be of good cheere Sir.
He's loth to ſpeake.
How hard he holds my hand Aunt?
I doe not like that ſigne.
Away to's chamber,
Softly, he's full of paine, be diligent
With all the care ye have: would I had ſcus'd him.
VVHy do you raile at me? do I dwell in her
To force her to do this or that? your Letter,
A wilde-fire on your Letter; our ſweet Letter;
You are ſo learned in your writs: ye ſtand now
As if ye had worried ſheepe: you muſt tutne tippet,
And ſuddenly, and truely, and diſcreetly
Put on the ſhape of order and humanity,
Or you muſt marry Malkyn the May Lady:
You muſt, deere brother: doe you make me carrier
Of your confound-mee's, and your culverings?
Am I a ſeemely agent for your othes?
Who would have writ ſuch a deboſh'd?
Your patience,
May not a man profeſſe his Love?
In blaſphemies?
Rack a maids tender cares, with dam's and divels?
Out, out upon thee.
how would you have me write?
Begin with my love premiſed? ſurely,
And by my truly Miſtreſſe
Take your owne courſe
For I ſee all perſwaſion's loſt upon ye:
Humanitie, all drownd: from this howre fayrely
Ile waſh my hands of all ye do: farewell Sir.
Thou art not mad?
No, if I were, deere brother
I would keep you company: get a new Miſtreſſe
Som ſuburb Sant, that ſix pence, and ſom others
Will draw to parley: carowſe her health in Cans
And candles ends, and quarrell for her beauty,
Such a ſweet hart muſt ſerve your turne: your old love
Releaſes ye of all your tyes; diſclaimes ye
And utterly abjures your memory
Till time has better mannag'd ye, will ye comand me
What bobd of all ſides?
Any worthy ſervice
Vnto my father ſir, that I may tell him
Even to his peace of heart, and much rejoycing
Ye are his true ſon Thom ſtill? will it pleaſe ye
To beat ſome halfe a dozen of his ſervants preſently
That I may teſtifie you have brought the ſame faith
Vnblemiſhd home, ye carried out? or if it like you
There be two chambermaids within, yong wenches,
Handſom and apt for exerciſe: you have bin good, ſir,
And charitable though I ſay it Signiour
To ſuch poore orphans: and now, by th' way I think on't
Your yong reare Admirall, I meane your laſt baſtard
Don Iohn, ye had by Lady Blanch the Dairy Maid,
Is by an Academy of learned Gypſies,
Foreſeeing ſome ſtrange wonder in the infant
Stolne from the Nurſe, and wanders with thoſe Prophets.
There is plate in the parlour, and good ſtore ſir,
When your wants ſhall ſupply it. So moſt humbly
(Firſt rendring my due ſervice) I take leave ſir.
Why Doll, why Doll I ſay: my letter ſubd too,
And no acceſſe without I mend my manners?
All my deſignes in Limbo? I will have her,
Yes, I will have her, though the divell rore,
I am reſolv'd that, if ſhe live above ground,
I'le not be bobd i'th noſe with every bobtaile:
I will be civill too: now I thinke better,
Exceeding civill, wondrous finely carried:
And yet be mad upon occaſion,
And ſtarke mad too, and ſave my land: my father:
I'le have my will of him, how ere my wench goes.
Sirha, I ſay ſtill you have ſpoild your Maſter: leave your ſtiches:
I ſay thou haſt ſpoild thy maſter.
I ſay how ſir?
Marry thou haſt taught him like an arrant raſcall,
Firſt to reade perfectly: which on my bleſſing
I warn'd him from: for I knew if he read once,
He was a loſt man. Secondly, ſir Launcelot,
Sir lowſie Launcelot, ye have ſuffer'd him
Againſt my power firſt, then againſt my precept,
To keepe that ſimpring ſort of people company,
That ſober men call civill: marke ye that Sir?
And't pleaſe your worſhip.
It does not pleaſe my worſhip,
Nor ſhall not pleaſe my worſhip: third and laſtly,
Which if the law were here, I would hang thee for,
(However I will lame thee) like a villaine,
Thou haſt wrought him
Cleane to forget what 'tis to doe a miſchiefe,
A handſome miſchiefe, ſuch as thou knew'ſt I lov'd well.
My ſervants all are ſound now, my drink ſowrd,
Not a horſe pawnd, nor plaid away: no warrants
Come for the breach of peace.
Men travell with their money, and nothing meets 'em:
I was accurs'd to ſend thee, thou wert ever
Leaning to lazineſſe, and loſſe of ſpirit,
Thou ſlept'ſt ſtill like a corke upon the water,
Your worſhip knowes, I ever was accounted
The moſt deboſh'd, and pleaſe you to remember,
Every day drunke too, for your worſhips credit,
I broke the Butlers head too.
No baſe Palliard
J doe remember yet that anſlaight, thou waſt beaten,
And fledſt before the Butler: a blacke jacke
Playing vpon thee furiouſly, J ſaw it:
I ſaw thee ſcatter'd rogue, behold thy Maſter.
What ſweet content dwels here?
Put up your booke ſir,
We are all undone elſe.
Tom, when is the horſe-race?
I know not ſir.
You will be there?
Not I ſir,
I have forgot thoſe journeyes.
Spoild for ever,
The cocking holds at Derby, and there will be
Iacke Wild-oats, and Will Purſer.
I am ſorry ſir,
They ſhould employ their time ſo ſlenderly,
Their underſtandings will beare better courſes.
Yes, I will marry agen: but Monſieur Thomas,
What ſay ye to the gentleman that challenged ye
Before he went, and the fellow ye fell out with?
O good Sir,
Remember not thoſe follies: where I have wronged ſir,
(So much I have now learn'd to diſcern my ſelfe)
My meanes, and my repentance ſhall make even,
Nor doe I thinke it any imputation
To let the law prſwade me.
Any woman:
I care not of what colour, or complexion,
Any that can beare children: reſt ye merry.
Ye have utterly undone: cleane diſcharg'd me,
I am for the ragged regiment.
Eight languages,
And wither at an old mans words?
O pardon me.
I know him but too well: eight ſcore I take it
Will not keepe me from beating, if not killing:
I'le give him leave to breake a leg, and thank him:
You might have ſav'd all this, and ſworn a little.
What had an oath or two bin? or a head broke,
Though t'had been mine, to have ſatisſied the old man?
I'le breake it yet.
Now 'tis too late, I take it:
Will ye be drunk to night, (a leſſe intreaty
Has ſerv'd your turne) and ſave all yet? not mad drunk,
For then ye are the divell, yet the drunker,
The better for your father ſtill: your ſtate is deſperate,
And with a deſperate cure ye muſt recover it:
Doe ſomething, doe ſir: doe ſome drunken thing,
Some mad thing, or ſome any thing to help us.
Goe for a Fidler then: the poore old Fidler
That ſayes his ſongs: but firſt where lyes my Miſtreſſe,
Did ye enquire out that?
I'th Lodge, alone ſir,
None but her owne attendants.
'Tis the happier:
Away then, finde this Fidler, and doe not miſſe me
By nine a clocke.
Via.
My father's mad now,
And ten to one will diſinherite me:
I'le put him to his plunge, and yet be merry,
What Rybabalde?
Don Thomaſio.
De bene venew.
I doe embrace your body:
How do'ſt thou Sam.
The ſame Sam ſtill: your friend ſir.
And how is't bouncing boyes?
Thou art not alter'd,
They ſaid thou wert all Monſieur.
O beleeve it,
I am much alter'd, much another way:
The civil'ſt Gentleman in all your Country:
Doe not ye ſee me alter'd? ye, and nay Gentlemen,
A much converted man: wher's the beſt wine boyes?
A ſound Convertite.
What haſt thou made up twenty yet?
By'r Lady,
I have giv'n a ſhrewd puſh at it, for as I take it,
The laſt I fell in love with, ſcor'd ſixteene.
Look to your skin, Rambaldo the ſleeping Gyant
Will rowze, and rent thee piece-meale.
He nev'r perceives 'em
Longer then looking on.
Thou never meaneſt then
To marry any that thou lov'ſt?
No ſurely,
Nor any wiſe man I thinke; marriage?
Would you have me now begin to be prentize,
And learne to cobble other mens old boots?
Why you may take a Maid.
Where? can you tell me?
Or if 'twere poſſible I might get a Maid,
To what uſe ſhould I put her? looke upon her,
Dandle her upon my knee, and give her ſuger ſops?
All the new gowns i'th pariſh will not pleaſe her,
If ſhe be high bred, for ther's the ſport ſhe aymes at,
Nor all the feathers in the Fryars.
Then take a widow,
A good ſtanch wench, that tith,
And begin a new order,
Live in a dead mans monument, not I ſir,
I'le keep mine old road, a true mendicant:
What pleaſure this day yeelds me, I never covet
To lay up for the morrow: and me thinks ever
Another mans cooke dreſſes my dyet neateſt.
Thou waſt wont to love old women, fat, and flat noſed,
And thou wouldſt ſay they kiſt like Flounders, flat
All the face over.
J have had ſuch damſels
J muſt confeſſe.
Thou haſt been a pretious rogue.
Onely his eyes: and O my conſcience
They lye with half the kingdome.
What's the matter?
Whither goe all theſe men-menders, theſe Phyſitians?
Whoſe dog lyes ſicke o'th mulligrubs?
O the Gentleman,
The yong ſmug Signiour, Maſter Ʋalentine,
Brought out of travell with him, as J heare
Is falne ſick o'th ſudden, deſperate ſicke,
And likely they goe thither.
Who? yong Frank?
The onely temper'd ſpirit, Scholler, Souldier,
Courtier: and all in one piece? 'tis not poſſible.
Ther's one can better ſatisfie you.
Miſtreſſe Alice,
I joy to ſee you Lady.
Good Monſieur Thomas,
You'r welcome from your travell: I am haſty,
A Gentleman lies ſicke ſir.
And how do'ſt thou?
I muſt know, and I will know.
Excellent well,
As well as may be, thank ye.
I am glad on't,
And prethee harke.
I cannot ſtay.
A while Alice.
Never looke ſo narrowly, the mark's in her mouth ſtill,
I am looking at her legs, prethee be quiet.
I cannot ſtay.
O ſweete Alice.
A cleane inſtep,
And that I love a life: I did not marke
This woman halfe ſo well before, how quicke
And nimble like a ſhadow, there her leg ſhew'd:
By th' mas a neat one, the colour of her ſtocking,
A much inviting colour.
My good Monſieur,
I have no time to talke now,
Pretty breeches,
Finely becomming too.
By heaven.
She will not,
I can aſſure you that, and ſo
But this word.
I cannot, nor I will not: good Lord.
Well you ſhall heare more from me.
Wee'll goe viſite
'Tis charity: beſides I know ſhe is there:
And under viſitation I ſhall ſee hir
Will ye along?
By any meanes.
Be ſure then
I be a civill man: J have ſport in hand boyes
Shall make mirth for a marriage day.
Away then.
A Pluriſie. I ſee it.
I rather hold it
For tremor cordis.
Doe you marke the Pheſes?
'Tis a moſt peſtilent contagious feaver,
A ſurfet, a plaguy ſurfet: he muſt bleed.
By no meanes.
I ſay bleed.
I ſay 'tis dangerous:
The perſon being ſpent ſo much before hand,
And nature drawne ſo low, clyſters, coole clyſters.
Now with your favours, J ſhould think a vomit:
For take away the cauſe, the effect muſt follow,
The ſtomack's foule and fur'd, the pot's unflam'd yet.
No, no, wee'l rectifie that part by milde meanes,
Nature ſo ſunke, muſt finde no violence.
Wilt pleaſe ye draw neere? the weake gentleman
Growes worſe and worſe ſtill.
Come, we will attend him.
He ſhall doe well my friend.
My maſters love ſir.
Excellent well I warrant thee, right and ſtraight friend.
Ther's no doubt in him, none at all, nev'r feare him.
THat he is deſprate ſick, I do beleeve well,
And that without a ſpedy cure, it kils him,
But that it lyes within the help of phyſicke,
Now to reſtore his health, or art to cure him:
Beleeve it you are coſened: cleane beſide it.
I would tell ye the true cauſe too, but 'twould vexe ye,
Nay, run ye mad.
May all I have reſtore him?
So deerely and ſo tenderly I love him,
I doe not know the cauſe why, yea my life too.
Now I perceive ye ſo well ſet, I'le tell you,
Hei mihi quod nullis amor, eſt medicabilis herbis.
'Twas that I onely fear'd: good friend go from me,
I finde my heart too full for further conference:
You are aſſur'd of this?
'Twill prove too certaine,
But beare it nobly ſir, youth hath his errors.
I ſhall do, and I thank ye: pray ye no words on't,
I doe not uſe to talke ſir.
Ye are welcome:
Is there no conſtancy in earthly things:
No happineſſe in us, but what muſt alter,
No life without the heavy load of fortune?
What miſeries we are, and to our ſelves,
Even then when full content ſeemes to ſit by us,
What daily ſores, and ſorrowes?
O deere brother,
The Gentleman if evr you will ſee him
Alive as I think.
O he faints, for heaven ſake,
For heaven ſake ſir.
Goe comfort him deere ſiſter.
And one word ſweet, with you: then we'l go to him.
What think you of this Gentleman?
My pity thinks ſir,
'Tis great misfortune, that he ſhould thus periſh.
It is indeed: but Cellide, he muſt dye.
That were a cruelty, when care may cure him,
Why doe you weep ſo ſir, he may recover?
He may, but with much danger: my ſweet Cellide
You have a powerfull tongue.
To doe you ſervice.
J will betray his griefe: he loves a gentlewoman,
A friend of yours, whoſe heart another holds,
He knowes it too: yet ſuch a ſway blinde fancy,
And his not daring to deliver it,
Have won upon him, that they muſt undoe him:
Never ſo hopefull and ſo ſweet a ſpirit,
Misfortune fell ſo foule on.
Sure ſhe's hard hearted,
That can looke on, and not relent, and deeply
At ſuch a miſery: ſhe is not married?
Not yet.
Nor neere it?
When ſhe pleaſe.
And pray ſir,
Do's he deſerve her truely, that ſhe loves ſo?
His love may merit much: his perſon little,
For there the match lyes mangled.
Is he your friend?
He ſhould be, for he is neere me.
Will not he dye then?
When th'other ſhall recover?
Ye have pos'd me.
Me thinks he ſhould goe neere it, if he love her;
If ſhe love him
She do's, and would doe equall:
'Tis A hard taske you put me: yet for your ſake
I will ſpeake to her: all the art I have:
My beſt endevors: all his youth, and perſon,
His mind more full of beautis: all his hopes,
The memory of ſuch a ſad example,
Ill ſpoken of, and never old: the curſes
Of loving maids, and what may be alleag'd
Ile lay before her: what's her name? I am ready
But will you deale effectually?
Moſt truly:
Nay were it my ſelfe, at your entreaty.
And could ye be ſo pittifull?
So dutifull;
Becauſe you urge it ſir,
It may be then
It is your ſelfe
It is in deed, I know it.
And now know how ye love me.
O my deareſt,
Let but your goodneſſe judge: your owne part: pitiy:
Set but your eyes on his afflictions:
He is mine, and ſo becomes your charge: but thinke
What ruine nature ſuffers in this yong man,
What loſſe humanity, and noble manhood:
Take to your better judgement my declining,
My age, hung full of impotence, and ils,
My body budding now no more: ſeere winter
Hath ſeal'd that ſap up, at the beſt and happieſt
I can but be your infant: you my nurſe,
And how unequall deereſt: where his yeeres,
His ſweetneſſe, and his ever ſpring of goodneſſe,
My fortunes growing in him, and my ſelfe too,
Which makes him all your old love: miſconceive not,
I ſay not this, as weary of my bondage,
Or ready to infringe my faith: beare witneſſe,
Thoſe eyes that I adore ſtill, thoſe lamps that light me
To all the joy I have.
You have ſaid enough ſir,
And more then ere I thought that tongue could utter,
But ye are a man, a falſe man too.
Deere Cellide.
And now, to ſhew you that I am a woman
Rob'd of her reſt, and fool'd out of her fondneſſe,
The Gentleman ſhall live: and if he love me,
Ye ſhall be both my triumphs: I will to him,
And as you careleſly fling off your fortune,
And now grow weary of my eaſie winning,
So will I loſe the name of Valentine,
From henceforth all his flatteries, and beleeve it,
Since ye have ſo ſo ſlightly parted with affection,
And that affection you have pawn'd your faith for:
From this houre, no repentance, vowes, nor prayers
Shall plucke me backe agen: what I ſhall doe,
Yet I will undertake his cure, expect it,
Shall miniſter no comfort, no content
To either of ye, but hourely more vexations.
Why let him dye then.
No, ſo much I have loved
To be commanded by you, that even now,
Even in my hate I will obey your wiſhes.
What ſhall I doe?
Dye like a foole unſorrow'd?
A bankrupt foole, that flings away his treaſure?
I muſt begin my cure.
And I my croſſes.
CLap on the Cataplaſme.
Good Gentlemen,
Good learned Gentlemen.
And ſee thoſe brothe there,
Ready within this houre, pray keep your armes in,
The ayre is raw, and miniſters much evill.
Pray leave me: I beſeech ye leave me gentlemen.
I have no other ſickneſſe but your preſence,
Convey your Cataplaſmes to thoſe that need 'em,
Your Vomits, and your Clyſters.
Pray be rul'd ſir.
Bring in the Lettice cap: you muſt be ſhaved ſir,
And then how ſuddenly wee'l make you ſleep.
Till doomeſ-day: what unneceſſary nothings
Are theſe about a wounded minde?
How doe ye?
What queſtions they propound too: how do you ſir?
I am glad to ſee you well.
A great diſtemper, it growes hotter ſtill.
Open your mouth I pray ſir.
And can you tell me
How old I am then? there's my hand, pray ſhew me
How many broken ſhins within this two yeare.
Who would be thus in fetters, good maſter Doctor,
And you deere Doctor, and the third ſweet Doctor
And pretious maſter Apothecary, I doe pray ye
To give me leave to live a little longer,
Ye ſtand before me like my blacks.
'Tis dangerous,
For now his fancy turnes too.
By your leave Gentlemen:
And pray ye your leave a while too, I have ſomething
Of ſecret to imparr unto the patient.
Withall our hearts.
I mary ſuch a Phyſicke
May chance to find the humour: be not long Lady
For we muſt miniſter within this halfe houre.
You ſhall not ſtay for me.
Would you were all rotten
That ye might only intend one anothers itches:
Or would the Gentlemen with one conſent
Would drinke ſmall Beere but ſeven yeare, and aboliſh
That wildfire of the bloud, unſatiate wenching
That your too Indies, ſprings and fals might faile ye
What torments theſe intruders into bodies.
How do you worthy Sir?
Bleſſe me, what beames
Flew from theſe angell eyes: O what a miſery
What a moſt ſtuddied torment tis to me now
To be an honeſt man: dare ye ſit by me?
Yes; and do more then that too: comfort ye
I ſee ye have need.
You are a faire Phyſitian:
You bring no bitterneſſe gilt ore, to gull us
No danger in your lookes, yet there my death lyes.
I would be ſorry ſir, my charity
And my good wiſhes for your health ſhould merit
So ſtubborn a conſtruction: will it pleaſe ye
To taſte a little of this Cordiall
For this I thinke muſt cure ye.
Of which Lady?
Sure ſhe has found my griefe? why do you bluſh ſo?
Do you not underſtand? of this, this Cordiall.
Of my afflicted heart: ſhe is gon for ever.
What heaven ye have brought me Lady?
Do not wonder:
For tis not impudence, nor want of honour
Makes me do this: but love to ſave your life ſir
Your life, too excellent to looſe in wiſhes
Love, virtuous love.
A vertuous bleſſing crowne ye
O goodly ſweet, can there be ſo much charity
So noble a compaſſion in that heart
That's filled up with anothers faire affections?
Can mercy drop from thoſe eyes.
Can miracles be wrought upon a dead man,
When all the power ye have, and perfect object
Lyes in anothers light: and his deſerves it?
Do not diſpaire: nor do not thinke to boldly
I dare abuſe my promiſe, t'was your friends
And ſo faſt tyde, I thought no time could ruine:
But ſo much has your danger, and that ſpell
The powerfull name of friend, prevail'd above him
To whom I ever owe obedience,
That here I am, by his command to cure ye,
Nay more for ever, by his full reſignement
And willingly I ratefie it.
Hold for heaven ſake,
Muſt my friends miſery make me a triumph?
Beare I that noble name, to be a Traitor?
O vertuous goodnes, keepe thy ſelfe untainted:
You have no power to yeeld, nor he to render
Nor I to take: I am reſolv'd to die firſt.
Ha; ſaiſt thou ſo? nay then thou ſhalt not periſh.
And though I love ye above the light ſhines on me,
Beyond the wealth of Kingdomes, free content,
Sooner would ſnatch at ſuch a bleſſing offer'd
Then at my pardon'd life by the law forfeited,
Yet, yet O noble beauty, yet O paradiſe
For you are all the wonder reveal'd of it,
Yet is a gratitude to be preſerv'd
A worthy gratitude to one moſt worthy.
The name, and noblenes of friends.
Pray tell me
If I had never knowne that gentleman
Would you not willingly embrace my offer?
Do you make a doubt?
And can ye be unwilling
He being old and impotent: his aime too
Levell'd at you, for your good? not conſtrain'd,
But out of cure, and councell? alas conſider
Play but the woman with me, and conſider
As he himſelfe do's, and I now dare ſee it
Truly conſider ſir, what miſery.
For vertues ſake take heed.
What loſſe of youth,
What everlaſting baniſhment from that
Our yeares doe only covet to arive at
Equall affections and ſhot together:
What living name can dead age leave behind him
What art of memory but fruitleſſe doating?
This cannot be.
To you unleſſe ye apply it
With more and firmer faith, and ſo digeſt it
I ſpeake but of things poſſible, not done
Nor like to be, a poſſet cures your ſickneſſe
And yet I know ye grieve this; and howſoever
The worthines of Friend may make ye ſtagger
Which is a faire thing in ye, yet my Patient,
My gentle Patient, I would faine ſay more
If you would underſtand.
O cruell Woman.
Yet ſure your ſickneſſe is not ſo forgetfull
Nor you ſo willing to be loſt.
Pray ſtay there:
Me thinks you are not faire now; me thinks more
That modeſt, vertue, men delivered of you
Shewes but like ſhadow to me, thin, and fading.
Excellent Friend.
Ye have no ſhare in goodneſſe:
Ye are belyde; you are not Cellide,
The modeſt, unaculate: who are ye?
For I will know: what devill to do miſchiefe
Vnto my vertuous Friend, hath ſhifted ſhapes
With that unblemiſhed beauty.
Do not rave Sir,
Nor let the violence of thoughts diſtract ye,
You ſhall enjoy me: I am yours: I pitty
By thoſe faire eyes I do.
O double hearted,
O woman, perfect woman: what diſtraction
Was meant to mankind when thou was't made a devill,
What an invyting hell invented? tell me,
And if you yet remember what i goodneſſe,
Tell me by that, and truth, can one ſo cheriſh'd
So ſainted in the ſoule of him, whoſe ſervice
Is almoſt turn'd to ſupperſtition,
Whoſe every day endeavours, and deſires
Offer themſelves like incenſe on your altar,
Whoſe heart holds no intlligence, but holy
And moſt religious with his love; whoſe life
(And let it ever be remembred Lady)
Is drawne out only for your ends.
O miracle.
Whoſe all, and every part of man: pray make me
Like ready Pages wait upon yur pleaſures;
Whoſe breath is but your bubble. Can ye, dare ye,
Muſt ye caſt of this man, though he were willing,
Though in a noblenes, ſo croſſe my danger
His friendſhip durſt confirme it, without baſeneſſe,
Without the ſtaine of honour? ſhall not people
Say liberally hereafter, ther's the Lady
That loſt her Father, Friend, herſelfe, her faith too,
To fawne upon a ſtranger, for ought you know
As faithleſſe as your ſelfe, in love as fruitleſſe?
Take her withall my heart, thou art ſo honeſt
That tis moſt neceſſary I be undone.
With all my ſoule poſſeſſe her.
Till this minut.
I ſcorn'd, and hated ye, and came to coſen ye:
Vtter'd thoſe things might draw a wonder on me,
To make ye mad.
Good heaven, what is this woman?
Nor did your danger, but in charity.
Move me a whit: nor you appeare unto me
More then a common object, yet, now truely,
Truely, and nobly I doe love ye deerely,
And from this houre, ye are the man I honour,
You are the man, the excellence, the honeſty,
The onely friend, and I am glad your ſickneſſe
Fell ſo moſt happily at this time on ye,
To make this truth the worlds.
Whether doe you drive me?
Backe to your honeſty, make that good ever,
'Tis like a ſtrong built Caſtle, ſeated high,
That drawes on all ambitions, ſtill repaire it,
Still fortifie it: there are thouſand foes
Beſides the tyrant beauty, will aſſaile it:
Looke to your Centin is that watch it hourely,
Your eyes, let them not wander.
Is this ſerious?
Or do's ſhe play ſtill with me?
Keep your eares,
The two maine ports that may betray ye ſtrongly
From light beliefe firſt, then from flattery,
Eſpecially where woman beats the parley:
The body of your ſtrength, your noble heart
From ever yeelding ro diſhoneſt ends,
Rigd round about with vertue, that no breaches,
No ſubtle mynes may meet ye.
How like the Sun
Labouring in his eclipſe, darke, and prodigious,
She ſhew'd till now? when having won her way,
How full of wonder he breakes out againe,
And ſheds his vertuous beames: excellent Angell,
For no leſſe can that heavenly minde proclaime thee,
Honour of all thy ſexe, let it be lawfull,
And like a pilgrim thus I kneele to beg it,
Not with prophane lips now, nor burnt affections,
But, reconcil'd to faith, with holy wiſhes,
To kiſſe that virgin hand.
Take your deſire ſir,
And in a nobler way, for I dare truſt ye,
No other fruit my love muſt ever yeeld yee,
I feare no more: yet your moſt conſtant memory
(So much I am wedded to that worthineſſe)
Shall ever be my friend, companion, husband,
Farewell, and fairely governe your affections,
Stand, and deceive me not: O noble yong man,
I love thee with my ſoule, but dare not ſay it:
Once more farewell, and proſper.
Goodneſſe guide thee:
My wonder like to fearefull ſhapes in dreames,
Has wakened me out of my fit of folly,
But not to ſhake it off: a ſpell dwels in me,
A hidden charme ſhot from this beauteous woman,
That fate can ne'r avoid, nor phyſicke finde,
And by her counſell ſtrengthen'd: onely this
Is all the helpe I have, I love faire vertue.
Well, ſomething I muſt doe, to be a friend,
Yet I am poore, and tardy: ſomething for her too,
Though I can never reach her excellence,
Yet but to give an offer at a greatneſſe.
Be not uncivill Tom, and take your pleaſure.
Doe you think I am mad? you'l give me leave
To try her fairely?
Doe your beſt.
Why there boy,
But wher's the ſicke man?
Where are the gentlewomen
That ſhould attend him, ther's the patent
Me thinks theſe women.
Thou thinkſt nothing elſe.
Goe to him friend, and comfort him: Ile leade ye:
O my beſt joy, my worthieſt friend, ptay pardon me,
I am ſo over-joy'd I want expreſſion:
I may live to be thankfull: bid your friends welcome.
How do'ſt thou Frank? how do'ſt thou boy, beare up man:
What, ſhrink i'th ſinewes for a little ſickneſſe?
Deavolo morte.
I am o'th mending hand.
How like a Flute thou ſpeak'ſt: o'th mending hand man
Gogs bores, I am well, ſpeake like a man of worſhip.
Thou art a mad companion: never ſtaid Tom?
Let rogues be ſtaid that have no habitation,
A gentleman may wander: ſit thee down Frank,
And ſee what I have brought thee: come diſcover,
Open the ſceane, and let the work appeare,
A friend at need you rogue is worth a million.
What haſt thou there, a julip?
He muſt not touch it,
'Tis preſent death.
Ye are an Aſſe, a twirepipe,
A Ieffrey John bo peepe, thou mimiſter,
Thou mend a left-handed pack-ſaddle, out puppey,
My friend Frank, but a very fooliſh fellow:
Do'ſt thou ſee that bottle? view it well.
I doe Tom.
There be as many lives in't, as a Cat carries,
'Tis everlaſting liquor.
What?
Old Sack boy,
Old reverend Sack, which for ought that I can reade yet,
Was that Philoſophers Stone the wiſe King Ptolomeus
Did all his wonders by.
I ſee no harme Tom,
Drinke with a moderation.
Drinke with ſuger;
Which I have ready here, and here a glaſſe boy,
Take me without my tooles.
Pray ſir be temperate,
You know your owne ſtate beſt.
Sir, I much thanke ye,
And ſhall be carefull: yet a glaſſe or two
So fit I finde my body, and that ſo needfull.
Fill it, and leave your fooling: thou ſay'ſt true Frank.
Where are theſe women I ſay?
Tis moſt neceſſary,
Hang up your julips, and your portugall poſſets,
Your barly brothes, and ſorrell ſops, they are mangy,
And breed the ſcratches onely: give me Sack:
I wonder where this wench is though: have at thee:
So long, and yet no bolting.
Doe, I'le pledge thee.
Take it off thrice, and then cry heigh like a Huntſman
With a cleere heart, and no more fits I warrant thee.
The onely Cordiall Frank.
Are the things ready?
And is the Barber come?
An houre agoe ſir.
Bring out the oyles then.
Now or never gentlemen,
Doe me a kindeneſſe and deliver me.
From whom boy?
From theſe things, that talke within there,
Phyſitians, Tom, Phyſitians, ſcowring-ſticks,
They meane to reade upon me.
Let 'em enter.
And be thou confident, we will deliver thee:
For looke ye Doctor, ſay the divell were ſicke now,
His hornes ſaw'd off and his head bound with a Biggin,
Sicke of a calenture takn by a ſurfet
Of ſtinking ſoules at his nephews, and S. Dunſtans,
What would you miniſter upon the ſudden?
Your judgement ſhort and ſound.
A fooles head.
No ſir,
It muſt be a Phyſitians for three cauſes,
The firſt becauſe it is a bald head likely,
Which will down eaſily without apple-pap.
A maine cauſe.
So it is, and well conſider'd,
The ſecond, for 'tis fil'd with broken Greek ſir,
Which will ſo tumble in his ſtomacke, Doctor,
And worke upon the crudities, conceive me
The feares, and the fidle ſtrings within it,
That thoſe damn'd ſoules muſt diſembogue againe.
Or meeting with the ſtygian humour.
Right ſir.
Forc'd with a cataplaſme of crackers.
Ever.
Scowre all before him, like a Scavenger.
Satis feciſti domine: my laſt cauſe,
My laſt is, and not leaſt, moſt learned Doctors,
Becauſe in moſt Phyſitians heads (I meane thoſe
That are moſt excellent, and old withall,
And angry, though a patient ſay his prayers,
And Paracelſians that doe trade with poyſons,
We have it by tradition of great writers)
There is a kinde of toad-ſtone bread, whoſe vertue
The Doctor being dri'd.
We are abus'd ſirs.
I take it ſo, or ſhall be, for ſay the belly-ake
Caus'd by an inundation of Peaſe-porridge,
Are we therefore to open the port veyne,
Or the port Eſquiline?
A learned queſtion:
Or grant the diaphragm by a rupture,
The ſigne being then in the head of Capricorne.
Meet with the paſſion Hupercondriaca,
And ſo cauſe a carnoſitie in the kidneyes.
Muſt not the brains being butter'd with this humour
Anſwer me that.
Moſt excellently argued.
The next fit you will have, my moſt fine ſchol
Bedlam ſhall finde a ſalve for: fare ye well ſir,
We came to do you good, burtheſe yong Doctors
It ſemes have boar'd our noſes.
Drinke hard Gentlemen,
And get unwholeſome drabs: 'tis ten to one then
We ſhall heare further from ye; your note alter'd.
And wilt thou be gone ſaies one?
And wilt thou be gone ſaies to'ther?
Then take the odde crowne
To mend thy old gowne.
And we'l be gone all together.
My learned Tom.
Sir, the yong Gentlewomen
Sent me to ſee what company ye had with ye
They much deſire to viſite ye.
Pray ye thanke 'em,
And tell 'em my moſt ſickneſſe is their abſence:
Ye ſee my company.
Come hither Crab,
What gentlewomen are theſe? my Miſtreſſe?
Yes ſir.
And who elſe?
Miſtreſſe Alice.
Oh.
Harke ye ſirha.
No word of my being here, unleſſe ſhe know it.
I doe not thinke ſhe do's.
Take that, and mum, then
You have ty'd my tongue up.
Sit you downe good Francis,
And not a word of me till ye heare from me,
And as you finde my humour, follow it:
You two come hither, and ſtand cloſe, unſeen boyes,
And doe as I ſhall tutor ye.
What, new worke?
Prethee no more, but helpe me now,
I would faine
Talke with the gentlewomen.
Talke with the gentlewomen?
Of what forſooth? whoſe maiden-head the laſt maske
Suffer'd impreſſion, or whoſe clyſter wrought beſt:
Take me as I ſhall tell thee.
To what end?
What other end came we along?
Be rul'd though.
Your wee zell face muſt needs be ferretting
About the farthing-ale,
Doe as I bid ye,
Or by this light.
Come then,
Stand cloſe and marke me,
All this forc'd foolery will never doe it.
I hope we bring ye health ſir: how is't with ye?
You look far better truſt me, the freſh colour
Creeps now againe into his cheeks.
Your enemy
I ſee has done his worſt. Come, we muſt have ye
Luſty againe, and frolicke man; leave thinking
Indeed it do's ye harme ſir.
My beſt viſitants,
I ſhall be govern'd by ye.
You ſhall be well then,
And ſuddenly, and ſoundly well.
This ayre ſir
laying now ſeaſon'd ye: will keep ye ever.
No, no, I have no hope, nor is it fit friends,
My life has bin ſo lewd, my looſe condition,
Which I repent too late, ſo lamentable,
That any thing but curſes light upon me,
Exorbitant in all my waies.
Who's that ſir,
Another ſicke man.
Sure, I know that voyce well.
In all my courſes, cureleſſe diſobedience.
What a ſtrange fellow's this?
No counſell friends,
No looke before I leapt.
Doe yo' know the voyce ſir?
Yes, 'tis a gentlemans that's much afflicted
In's minde: great pitty Ladies.
Now heaven help him.
He came to me, to aske free pardon of me,
For ſome things done long ſince, which his diſtemper
Made to appeare like wrong, but 'twas not ſo.
O that this could be truth.
Perſwade your ſelfe.
To what end gentlemen, when all is periſh'd
Vpon a wrack, is there a hope remaining?
The ſea, that nev'r knew ſorrow, may be pittifull,
My credit's ſpilt, and ſunke, nor is it poſſible,
Were my life lengthened out as long as.
I like this well.
Your minde is too miſtruſtfull.
I have a vertuous ſiſter, but I ſcorn'd her,
A Miſtreſſe too, a noble gentlewoman,
For goodneſſe all out-going.
Now I know him.
With theſe eyes friends, my eyes muſt nev'r ſee more.
This is for your ſake Mary: take heed coſen,
A man is not ſo ſoone made.
O my fortune,
But it is juſt, I be deſpis'd and hated.
Deſpaire not, 'tis not manly: one houres goodneſſe
Strikes off an infinite of ils.
Weepe truly
And with compaſſion Coſin.
How exactly
This cunning yong theefe plaies his part.
Well Tom
My Tom againe, if this be truth.
She weepes boy.
O I ſhall die.
Now heaven defend.
Thou haſt her.
Come lead me to my Friend to take his farewell,
And then what fortune ſhall befall me, welcome.
How do's it ſhow?
O rarely well.
Say you ſo Sir.
O ye grand Aſſe.
And are ye there my Iuggler
Away we are abus'd Alice.
Foole be with thee.
Where is ſhe.
Gon; ſhe found you out, and finely,
In your own nooze ſhe halter'd ye: you muſt be whiſpering
To know how things ſhowd: not content to fare well
But you muſt roare out roſt meate; till that ſuſpition
You carried it moſt neately, ſhe beleeved too
And wept moſt tenderly; had you continew'd,
Without doubt you had brought her off.
This was thy Rouging.
For thou wert ever whiſpering: fye upon thee
Now could I breeks thy head.
You ſpoke to me firſt.
Do not anger me,
For by this hand ile beate the buzard blind then
She ſhall not ſcape me thus: farewell for this time,
Good night, tis almoſt bed time: yet no ſleepe
Muſt enter theſe eyes, till I worke a wonder.
Thou ſhalt along too, for I meane to plague thee
For this nights ſins, I will nev'r leave walking of thee
Till I have worne thee out.
Your will be done Sir.
You will not leave me Sam.
Not I.
Away then: ile be your guid now, if my man be truſty
My ſpightfull Dame, ile pipe ye ſuch a huntſup
Shall make ye daunce a tipvaes: keepe cloſe to me.
NEver perſwade me, I will marry againe
What ſhould I leave my ſtate to, pins & poaking ſticks
To Farthingals, and frownces, to fore-horſes
And a old leather bawdy houſe behind'en
To thee?
You have a ſonne Sir.
Where, what is he?
Who is he like?
Your ſelfe.
Thou lyeſt, thou haſt mard him,
Thou, and thy praier bookes: I do diſclaime him:
Did not I take him ſinging yeſternight
A godly Ballad, to a godly tune too,
And had a catechizme in's pocket Damſell,
One of your deare diſciples, I perceive it?
When did he ride abroad ſince he came over?
What Taverne hs he us'd to? what hings done
That ſhewes a man, and mettle? when was my houſe
At ſuch a ſhame before, to creep to bed
At ten a clocke, and twelve, for want of company?
No ſinging, nor no dauncing, nor no drinking?
Thou think'ſt not of theſe ſcandals; when, and where
Has he but ſhewd his ſword of late.
Diſpaire not
I do beſeech you Sir, nor tempt your weakneſſe,
For if you like it ſo, I can aſſure you
He is the ſame man ſtill.
Would thou wert aſhes
On that condition; but beleeve it goſſip
You ſhall know you have wrong.
You never Sir,
So will I know my duty: and for heaven ſake,
Take but this councell with ye ere you marry,
You were wont to beare me: take him, and confeſſe him
Search him toth' quicke, and if you find him faile
Do as pleaſe you; a Mothers name I honour.
He is loſt, and ſpoil'd I am reſolv'd my rooffe
Shall never harbour him: and for your Minion
Ile keepe you cloſe enough, leaſt you breake looſe
And do more michiefe; get ye in: who waits.
Do you call Sir?
Seeke the Boy: and bid him wait
My pleaſure in the morning: marke what houſe
He is in, and what he do's: and truly tell me.
I will not faile Sir.
If ye do, ile hang ye.
KEepe you the backe doore there, and be ſure
None of her ſervants enter, or goe out,
If any woman paſſe, ſhe is lawfull prize, boyes
Cut off all convoyes.
Who ſhall anſwere this?
Why, I ſhall anſwere it, you fearefull widgen,
I ſhall appeare toth' action.
May we diſcourſe too
On honourable tearmes?
With any gentlewoman
That ſhall appeare at window: ye may rehearſe too
By your commiſſion ſafely, ſome ſweet parcels
Of poetry to a Chambermaid.
May we ſing too?
For ther's my maſter-piece.
By no meanes, no boyes,
I am the man reſerv'd for ayre, 'tis my part,
And if ſhe be not rock, my voyce ſhall reach her:
Ye may record a little, or ye may whiſtle,
As time ſhall miniſter, but for maine ſinging,
Pray ye ſatisfie your ſelves: away, be carefull.
But hark ye one word Tom, we may be beaten.
That's as ye think good your ſelves: if you deſerve it,
Why 'tis the eaſieſt thing to compaſſe: beaten?
What bugbeares dwell in thy brains? who ſhould beat thee?
She has men enough,
Art not thou man enough too?
Thou haſt fleſh enough about thee: if all that maſſe
Will not maintaine a little ſpirit, hang it,
And dry it too for dogs meat: get you gone;
I have things of moment in my minde: that doore,
Keep it as thou would'ſt keep thy wife from a Servingman.
No more I ſay: away Sam.
At your will ſir.
I have him here, a rare rogue, good ſweet maſter,
Doe ſomething of ſome ſavour ſuddenly,
That we may eat, and live: I am almoſt ſtarv'd,
No point manieur, no point devein, no Signieur,
Not by the vertue of my languages,
Nothing at my old maſters to be hoped for,
O Signieur du, nothing to line my life with,
But cold Pyes with a cudgell, till you help us.
Nothing but famine frights thee: come hither Fidler,
Whad Ballads are you ſeen in beſt: be ſhort ſir.
Vnder your maſterſhips correction, I can ſing
The Duke of Norfolke, or the merry Ballad
Of Diverus and Lazarus, the Roſe of England,
In Creet when Dedimus firſt began,
Jonas his crying out againſt Coventry,
Excellent,
Rare matters all.
Mawdlin the Merchants daughter,
The Divell, and ye dainty Dames.
Rare ſtill.
The landing of the Spaniards at Bow,
With the bloudy battell at Mile-end.
All excellent:
No tuning as ye love me; let thy Fidle
Speake welch, or any thing that's out of all tune,
The vilder ſtill the better, like thy ſelfe,
For I preſume thy voyce will make no trees dance.
Nay truely, ye ſhall have it ev'n as homely.
Keep ye to that key, are they all abed trow?
I heare no ſtirring any where, no light
In any window, 'tis a night for the nonce Sir.
Come ſtrike up then: and ſay the Merchants daughter,
We'l beare the burthen: proceed to inciſion Fidler.
Who's there? what noyſe is this? what rogue
At theſe houres?
O what is that to you my foole?
O what is that to you,
Plucke in your face you bawling Aſſe,
Or I will breake your brow.
A new Ballad, a new, a new.
The twelfth of Aprill, on May day,
My houſe and goods were burnt away, &c.
Why who is this?
O damſell deere,
Open the doore, and it ſhall appeare,
Open the doore,
O gentle ſquire.
I'le ſee thee hang firſt: farewell my deere,
'Tis maſter Thomas, there he ſtands.
'Tis ſtrange
That nothing can redeeme him: raile him hence,
Or ſing him out in's owne way, any thing
To be deliver'd of him.
Then have at him:
My man Thomas did me promiſe.
He would viſite me this night.
I am here Love, tell me deere Love,
How I may obtaine thy ſight.
Come up to my window love, come, come, come,
Come to my window my deere,
The winde, nor the raine, ſhall trouble thee againe,
But thou ſhalt be lodged here.
And art thou ſtrong enough?
Vp, up, I warrant ye.
What do'ſt thou meane to doe?
Good Miſtreſſe peace,
I'le warrant ye wee'l coole him: Madge,
I am ready.
The loue of Greece and it tickled him ſo,
That he deviſed a way to goe.
Now ſing the Duke of Northumberland.
And climbing to promotion,
He fell down ſuddenly,
Farewell ſir.
What haſt thou done? thou haſt broke his neck.
Not hurt him,
He pitcht upon his legs like a Cat,
O woman:
O miſerable woman, I am ſpoil'd,
My leg, my leg, my leg, oh both my legs.
I told thee what thou hadſt done, miſchiefe go with thee,
O I am lam'd for ever: O my leg,
Broken in twenty places: O take heed,
Take heed of women, Fidler: oh a Surgeon,
A Surgeon, or I dye: oh my good people,
No charitable people, all deſpightfull,
Oh what a miſery am I in: oh my leg.
Be patient ſir, be patient: let me binde it.
Oh doe not touch it rogue.
My head, my head,
Oh my head's kil'd.
You muſt be courting wenches
Through key-holes, Captain Hylas, come and be comforted,
The skin is ſcarce broke.
O my leg.
How doe ye ſir?
Oh maim'd for ever with a fall, he's ſpoil'd too,
I ſee his braines.
Away with me for Gods ſake,
A Surgeon.
Here's a night indeed.
A Surgeon.
Goe run for helpe.
Oh,
Run all, and all too little,
O curſed beaſt that hurt him, run, run, flye,
He will be dead elſe.
Oh.
Good friend goe you too.
Who payes me for my Muſicke?
Pox o'your Muſicke,
Ther's twelve pence for ye.
Ther's two groates againe forſooth,
I never take above, and reſt ye merry.
A greaſe pot guild your fidle ſtrings: how do you,
How is my deere?
Why well I thank ye ſweet heart,
Shall we walke in, for now ther's none to trouble us?
Are ye ſo crafty ſir? I ſhall meet with ye,
I knew your tricke, and I was willing: my Tom,
Mine owne Tom, now to ſatisfie thee, welcome, welcome,
Welcome my beſt friend to me, all my deereſt.
Now ye are my noble Miſtreſſe: we looſe time ſweet.
I thinke they are all gone.
All, ye did wiſely.
And you as craftily.
We are well met Miſtreſſe.
Come, let's goe in then lovingly: O my Skarfe Tom.
I loſt it thereabout, finde it, and weare it
As your poore Miſtreſſe favour.
I am made now,
I ſee no venture is in no hand: I have it,
How now? the doore lock't, and ſhe in before?
Am I ſo trim'd?
One parting word ſweet Thomas,
Though to ſave your credit, I diſcharg'd your Fidler,
I muſt not ſatisfie your folly too ſir,
Ye'are ſubtle, but beleeve it Foxe, i'le finde ye,
The Surgeons will be here ſtrait, rore againe boy,
And breake thy legs for ſhame, thou wilt be ſport elſe,
Good night.
She ſaies moſt true, I muſt not ſtay: ſhe has bobd me,
Which if I live, I'le recompence, and ſhortly,
Now for a Ballad to bring me off againe.
All yong men be warn'd by me, how you do goe a wooing.
Seek not to climb, for feare ye fall thereby, comes your undoing, &
HE cannot goe and take no farewell of me,
Can he be ſo vnkinde? he's but retir'd
Into the Garden or the Orchard: ſee ſirs.
He would not ride there certain, thoſe were planted
Onely for walkes I take it.
Ride, nay then,
Had he horſe out?
So the Groome delivers
Somewhat before the breake of day.
He's gone,
My beſtfriends gone Alice? I have loſt the nobleſt,,
The trueſt, and the moſt man I ere found yet.
Inded ſir, he deſerves all praiſe.
All ſiſter,
All, all, and all too little: O that honeſty,
That ermine honeſty, unſpotted ever,
That perfect goodneſſe.
Sure he will returne ſir,
He cannot be ſo harſh.
O never, never,
Never returne, thou know'ſt not where the cauſe lyes.
He was the worthieſt welcome.
He deſerv'd it.
Nor wanted, to our knowledge.
I will tell thee,
Within this houre, things that ſhall ſtartle thee.
He never muſt returne.
Good morrow Signieur.
Good morrow maſter Michael.
My good neighbour,
Me thinks you are ſtirring early ſince your travell,
You have learn'd the rule of health ſir, where's your miſtres?
She keeps her warme I warrant ye, a bed yet?
I thinke ſhe do's.
T'is not her houre of waking.
Did you lye with her Lady?
Not to night ſir.
Nor any night this weeke elſe.
When laſt ſaw ye her?
Late yeſter night.
Was ſhe abed then?
No ſir,
I left her at her prayers: why doe ye aske me?
I have been ſtrangely haunted with a dreame
All this long night, and after many wakings,
The ſame dreame ſtill; me thought I met yong Cellide
Iuſt at S. Katherines gate the Nunnery.
Ha?
Her face ſlubber'd o're with teares, and troubles,
Me thought ſhe cry'd unto the Lady Abbeſſe,
For charity receive me holy woman,
A Maid that has forgot the worlds affections,
Into thy virgin order: me thought ſhe tooke her,
Put on a Stole, and ſacred robe upon her,
And there I left her.
Dreame?
Good Miſtreſſe Alice
Doe me the favour (yet to ſatisfie me)
To ſtep but up, and ſee.
I know ſhe's there ſir,
And all this but a dreame?
You know not my dreames,
They are unhappy ones, and often truths,
But this I hope, yet
I will ſatisfie ye,
Neighbours, how do's the gentleman?
I know not,
Dreame of a Nunnery?
How found ye my words
About the nature of his ſickneſſe Valentine?
Did ſhe not cry out, 'twas my folly too
That forc'd her to this Nunnery? did ſhe not curſe me?
For God ſake ſpeake: did you not dreame of me too,
How baſely, poorely, tamely, like a foole,
Tir'd wih his joyes?
Alas poore gentleman.
Ye promis'd me ſir to beare all theſe croſſes.
I beare 'em till I breake againe.
But nobly,
Truely to weigh,
Good neighbours, no more of it,
Ye doe but fling flaxe on my fire: where is ſhe?
Not yonder ſir, nor has not this night certaine
Bin in her bed.
It muſt be truth ſhe tels ye,
And now I'le ſhew ye why I came: this morning
A man of mine being employed about buſineſſe,
Came early home, who at S. Katherines Nunnery,
About day peep told me he met your Miſtreſſe,
And as I ſpoke it in a dreame, ſo troubled
And ſo received by the bbeſſe, did he ſee her?
The wonder made me riſe, and haſte unto ye
To know the cauſe.
Farewell, I cannot ſpeake it.
For heaven take leave him not.
I will not Lady.
Alas, he's much afflicted,
We ſhall know ſhortly more, apply your own care
At home good Alice, ad truſt him to my counſell.
Nay, doe not weep, all ſhall be well, deſpaire not.
AT Valentines houſe ſo merry?
As a pie Sir:
So gameſon doſt thou ſay?
I am ſure I heard it.
Ballads, and Fidles too?
No, but one Fidle;
But twenty noyces.
Did he do deviſes?
The beſt deviſes ſir: her's my fellow Launcelet
He can informe ye all: he was among 'em,
A mad thing too: I ſtood but in a corner.
Come ſir, what can you ſay? is there any hope yet
You Maſter may returne?
He went far elſe
I will aſſure your worſhip on my credit
By the faith of a Travellor, and a Gentleman,
Your ſonne in found againe, the ſonne, the Tom.
Is he the old Tom?
The old Tom.
Goe forward.
Next, to conſider how he is the old Tom.
Handle me that.
I would ye had ſeene it handled
Laſt night ſir, as we handled it: cap à pe,
Footte for leers, and learings; O the noyſe
The noyſe we made.
Good, good.
The windowes clattring
And all the Chambermaides, in ſuch a whobub,
One with her ſmocke halfe off; another in haſt
Wih a ſerving mans hoſe upon her head.
Good ſtill.
A fellow rayling out of a loop hole there
And his mouth ſtopt with durt.
y'faith a fine Boy.
Here one of our heads broke.
Excellent good ſtill.
The gentleman himſelfe yong M. Thomas,
Invirond with his furious Mermidons
The fiery Fidler, and my ſelfe; now ſinging,
Now beating at the doore, there parlying,
Courting at that window, at the other ſcalling
And all theſe ſeverall noyſes to two Trenchers,
Strung with a bottome of browne thred, which ſhowd admirable.
There eate, and grow againe, I am pleas'd.
Nor here ſir.
Gave we the frolicke over: though at length
We quit the Ladies Skonce on compoſition
But to the ſilent ſtreetes we turn'd our furies:
A fleeping watchman here we ſtole the ſhooes from,
There made a noyſe, at which he wakes, and followes:
The ſtreetes are durty, takes a queene hith cold,
Hard cheeſe, and that choakes him o' Munday next:
Windowes, and ſignes we ſent to Erebus;
A crue of bawling curs we entertain'd laſt,
When having let the pigs looſe in out pariſhes,
O the brave cry we made as high as Algate!
Downe comes a Conſtable, and the Sow his Siſter
Moſt trayterouſly tramples upon Authority,
There a whole ſtand of rug gownes rowted manly
And the Kings peace put flight: a purblind pig here
Runs me his head into the Admirable Lanthorne,
Out goes the light, and all turnes to confuſion:
A Potter riſes, to enquire this paſſion
A Boare imboſt takes ſanctuary in his ſhop.
When twenty dogs ruſh after, we ſtill cheering
Down goes the pots, and pipkins, down the pudding pans,
The creame bols cry revenge here, there the candleſticks.
If this be true, thou little tyny page
This tale that thou tell'ſt me
Then on thy backe will I preſently hang
A handſon new Levery:
But if this be falſe, thou little tyney page
As falſe it well may be
Then with a cudgell of foure foote long
Ile beate thee from head to toe.
Will the boy come.
He will ſir.
Time tries all ther.
Here he comes now himſelfe ſir.
To be ſhort Thomas
Becauſe I feele a ſcruple in my conſcience
Concerning the demeanour, and a maine one
And therefore like a Father would be ſatisfi'd,
Get up to that window there, and preſently
Like a moſt compleat Gentleman, come from Tripoly.
Good Lord ſir, how are you miſled: what fancies
(Fitter for idle boyes, and drunkards, let me ſpeak't
And with a little wonder I beſeech you)
Choake up your noble judgement?
You Rogue Launcelet,
You lying raſcall.
Will ye ſpoile all agen ſir.
Why, what a devill do you meane?
Away knave,
Ye keepe a company of ſawcy fellowes
Deboſh'd, & daiy drunkards, to deavoure ye,
Things, whoſe dull ſoules, tend to the Celler only,
Ye are ill advis'd ſir, to commit your credit.
Sirha, ſirha.
Let me never eate againe ſir,
Nor feele the bleſſing of another blew-coate
If this yong Gentleman, ſweet Maſter Thomas
Be not as mad as heart can wiſh: your heart ſir,
If yeſternights diſcourſe: ſpeake fellow Robin
And if thou ſpeakeſt leſſe then truth.
Tis ſtrange theſe varlets.
By theſe ten bones ſir, if theſe eies, and eares
Can heare and ſee.
Extreame ſtrange, ſhould thus boldly
Bud in your ſight, unto your ſonne.
O deu guin
Can ye deny, ye beat a Conſtable
Laſt night.
I touch Authoritie ye raſcall?
I violate the Law?
Good M. Thomas.
Did you not take two Wenches from the Watch too
And put 'em into pudding lane?
We meane not
Thoſe civill things you did at M. Valentines
The Fidle, and the fa'las,
O ſtrange impudence?
I do beſeech you ſir give no ſuch licence
To knaves and drunkards, to abuſe your ſonne thus:
Be wiſe in time, and turne'em off: we live ſir
In a State govern'd civilly, and ſoberly
Where each mans actions ſhould confirme the Law,
Not cracke, and canzell it.
Lancelot du Lake
Get you upon adventers: caſt your coate
And make your exit.
Pur la mour de dieu
Pur me no purs: but pur at that doore, out ſirha
Ile beate ye purblind elſe, out ye eight languages,
My bloud upon your head.
Purge me'em all ſir.
And you too preſently.
Even as you pleaſe ſir.
Bid my maid ſervant come: and bring my daughter
I will have one ſhall pleaſe me.
Tis moſt fit ſir.
Bring me the money there: here M. Thomas,
I pray ſit downe, ye are no more my ſonne now,
Good gentleman be cover'd
At your pleaſure.
This money I do give ye, becauſe of whilom
You have bin thought my ſonne, and by myſelfe too,
And ſome things done like me: ye are now another
There is two hundred pound, a civill ſome
For a yong civill man: much land and Lordſhip
Will as I take it now, but prove temptation
To dread ye from your ſetled, and ſweet carriage.
You ſay right ſir.
Nay I beſeech ye cover.
At your diſpoſe: and I beſeech ye too ſir,
Fot the word civill, and more ſetled courſe
It may be put to uſe, that on the intereſt
Like a poore Gentleman.
It ſhall, to my uſe
To mine againe: do you ſee ſir: good fine gentleman,
I give no brooding money for a Scrivener,
Mine is for preſent trafficke, and ſo ile uſe it.
So much for that then.
For the maine cauſe Mounſieur
I ſent to treat with you about, behold it;
Behold that peice of ſtory worke, and view it
I want a right heire to inherir me,
Not my eſtate alone, but my conditions,
From which you are revolted, therefore dead,
And I will breake my backe, but I will get one.
Will you chooſe there ſir?
There, among thoſe Damſels,
In mine owne tribe: I know their quallities
Which cannot faile to pleaſe me: for their beauties
A matter of a three farthings, makes all perfect,
A little beere, and beeffe broth: they are ſound too.
Stand all a breaſt: now gentle M. Thomas
Before I chooſe, you having liv'd long with me,
And happely ſometimes with ſome of theſe too,
Which fault I never frown'd upon: pray ſhew me
(For feare we confound our Genealogies)
Which have you laid aboord? ſpeake your mind freely
Have you had copulation with that Damſell?
I have.
Stand you a ſide then: how with her ſir?
How, is not ſeemely here to ſay.
Heer's fine ſport.
Retyre you too: ſpeake forward M. Thomas.
I will: and to the purpoſe; even with all ſir.
With all that's ſomewhat large.
And yet you like it
Was ever ſinne ſo glorious?
With all Thomas.
All ſurely ſir.
A ſigne thou art mine owne yet,
In againe all: and to your ſeverall functions.
What ſay you to yong Luce, my neighbours daughter,
She was too yong I take it, when you travelled;
Some twelve yeare old?
Her will was fifteene ſir,
A pretty anſwere, to cut of long diſcourſe,
For I have many yet to aske ye of,
Where I can chooſe, and nobly, hold up your finger
When ye are right: what ſay ye to Valeria;
Whoſe husband lies a dying now? why two,
And in that forme?
Her husband is recover'd.
A witty morall: have at ye once more Thomas,
The ſiſters of St. Albones, all five; dat boy,
Dat's mine owne boy.
Now our upon thee Monſter.
Still hoping of your pardon.
There needes none man:
A ſtraw on pardon: prethee need no pardon:
Ile aske no more, nor thinke no more of marriage,
For O my conſcience I ſhalbe thy Cuckold:
Ther's ſome good yet left in him: beare your ſelfe well,
You may recover me, ther's twenty pound ſir,
I ſee ſome ſparkles which may flame againe,
You may eat with me when you pleaſe, you know me.
Why do you lye ſo damnably, ſo fooliſhly?
Do'ſt thou long to have thy head broke? hold thy peace
And doe as I would have thee, or by this hand
I'le kill thy Parrat, hang up thy ſmall hand,
And drinke away thy dowry to a penny.
Was ever ſuch a wilde Aſſe?
Prethee be quiet,
And do'ſt thou think men will not beat thee monſtrouſly
For abuſing their wives and children?
And do'ſt thou thinke
Mens wives and children can be abus'd too much?
I wonder at thee.
Nay, thou ſhalt adjure me
Before I have done.
How ſtand ye with your miſtreſſe?
I ſhall ſtand neerer
Ere I be twelve houres older: ther's my buſineſſe,
She is monſtrous ſubtile Doll.
The divell I thinke
Cannot out ſubtle thee.
If he play faire play,
Come, you muſt helpe me preſently.
I diſcard ye.
Thou ſhalt not ſleep nor eate.
I'le no hand with ye,
No bawd to your abuſes.
By this light Doll,
Nothing but in the way of honeſty.
Thou never knew'ſt that road: I heare your vigile
Sweet honey Doll, if I doe not marry her,
Honeſtly marry her, if I meane not honourably,
Come, thou ſhalt help me, take heed how you vex me,
I'le help thee to a husband too, a fine gentleman,
I know thou art mad, a tall yong man, a brown man,
I ſweare he has his maidenhead, a rich man.
You may come in to dinner, and I'le anſwere ye.
Nay I'le goe with thee Doll: four hundred a yeere wench.
GOod ſir go back again, and take my counſell,
Sores are not cur'd by ſorrows, nor time broke from us,
Pul'd back again by ſighes.
What ſhould I doe friend?
Doe that that may redeeme ye, goe back quickly,
Sebaſtians daughter can prevaile much with her,
The Abbeſſe is her Aunt too.
But my friend then
Whoſe love and loſſe is equall ty'd.
Content ye,
That ſhall be my taske if he be alive,
Or where my travell and my care may reach him,
I'le bring him backe againe.
Say he come backe
To piece his poor friends life out? and my miſtreſſe
Be vow'd for ever a recluſe?
So ſuddenly
She cannot, haſte ye therefore inſtantly away ſir,
To put that daughter by firſt as to a father,
Then as a friend ſhe was committed to ye,
And all the care ſhe now has: by which priviledge
She cannot doe her this violence,
But you may breake it, and the law allowes ye.
O but I forc'd her to it.
Leave diſputing
Againſt your ſelfe, if you will needs be miſerable
Spight of her goodneſſe, and your friends perſwaſions,
Thinke on, and thrive thereafter.
I will home then,
And follow your adviſe, and good, good Michael.
No more, I know your ſoul's divided Valentine,
Cure but that part at home with ſpeedy marriage
Ere my returne, for then thoſe thoughts that vext her,
While there ran any ſtreame for looſe affections,
Will be ſtopt up, and chaſte ey'd honour guide her
Away, and hope the beſt ſtill: I'le worke for ye,
And pray too heartily, away, no more words
I Care not for my broken head,
But that it ſhould be his plot, and a wench too,
A lowzie, lazie wench prepar'd to doe it.
Thou hadſt as good be quiet, for o' my conſcience
He'l put another on thee elſe.
I am reſolv'd
To call him to account, was it not manifeſt
He meant a miſchiefe to me, and laughed at me,
When he lay roaring out, his leg was broken,
And no ſuch matter: had he broke his necke,
Indeed 'twould ne'r ha griev'd me: gallowes gall him,
Why ſhould he chooſe out me?
Thou art ever ready
To thruſt thy ſelfe into theſe ſhe occaſions,
And he as full of knavery to accept it.
Well, if I live, I'le have a new tricke for him.
That will not be amiſſe, but to fight with him
Is to no purpoſe: beſides, he's truely valiant,
And a moſt deadly hand: thou never foughtſt yet,
Not o' my conſcience haſt no faith in fighting.
No, no, I will not fight.
Bſide the quarrell,
Which has a woman in't, to make it ſcurvy,
Who would lye ſtinking in a Surgeons hands
A moneth or two this weather; for beleeve it,
He never hurts under a quarters healing.
No upon better thought, I will not fight Sam,
But watch my time
To pay him with a project:
Watch him too, I would wiſh ye: prethee tell me,
Do'ſt thou affect theſe women ſtill?
Yes faith Sam,
I love 'em ev'n as well as ev'r I did,
Nay, if my braines were beaten out, I muſt to 'em.
Doſt thou love any woman?
Any woman
Of what degree or calling.
Of any age too?
Of any age, from fourſcore to fourteen boy,
Of any faſhion.
And defect too?
Right.
For thoſe I love to leade me to repentance:
A woman with no noſe, after my ſurquedry,
Shewes like King Philips morall, memento mori,
And ſhe that has a wodden leg, demonſtrates
Like Hypocrites, we halt before the gallowes:
An old one with one tooth, ſeemes to ſay to us
Sweet meats have ſowre ſawce: ſhe that's full of aches,
Crum not your bread before you taſte your porridge,
And many morals we may finde.
'Tis well ſir,
Ye make ſo worthy uſes: but quid igitur,
What ſhall we now determine?
Let's conſider,
An houre or two, how I may fit this fellow.
Let's finde him firſt, he'l quickly give occaſion,
But take heed to your ſelfe, and ſay I warn'd ye:
He has a plaguy pate.
That at my danger.
ABoard, aboard, the winde ſtands faire.
Theſe call for paſſengers, I'le ſtay, & ſee
What men they take aboard.
A boat, a boat, a boat.
Away then.
Whether are ye bound friends?
Downe to the Straytes.
Ha, 'tis not much unlike him.
May I have paſſage for my money?
And welcome too.
'Tis he, I know 'tis he now.
Then merrily aboard, and noble friend
Heauens goodneſſe keep thee ever, and all vertue
Dwell in thy boſome Cellide, my laſt teares
J leave behinde me thus, a ſacrifice,
For I dare ſtay no longer to betray ye.
Be not ſo quicke ſit: Saylors I here charge ye
By vertue of this warrant, as you will anſwer it,
For both your ſhip and Merchant I know perfectly:
Lay hold upon this fellow.
Fellow?
J ſir.
No hand to ſword ſir, we ſhall maſter ye,
Fetch out the manacles.
I doe obey ye:
But I beſeech ye ſir, informe me truely
How I am guilty.
Ye have rob'd a gentleman,
One that ye are bound to for your life and being:
Money and horſe unjuſtly ye tooke from him,
And ſomething of more note, but for y'are a gentleman.
It ſhall be ſo, and here I'le end all miſeries,
Since friendſhip is ſo cruell, I confeſſe it,
And which is more, a hundred of theſe robberies:
This Ring I ſtole too from him: and this jewell
The firſt and laſt of all my wealth: forgive me
My innocence and truth, for ſaying I ſtole 'em,
And may they prove of value but to recompence
The thouſand part of his love, and bread I have eaten.
Pray ſee 'em render'd noble ſir, and ſo
I yeeld me to your power.
Guard him to'th water,
I charge you Saylors, there I will receive him,
And backe convey him to a Iuſtice.
Come ſir,
Look to your neck, you are like to ſayle i'th ayre now.
COme quickly, quickly, quickly, paint me handſomly
Take heed my noſe be not in graine too,
Come Doll, Doll, diſen me.
If you ſhould play now
Your divels parts againe.
Yea and nay Dorothy.
If ye doe any thing, but that ye have ſworne to,
Which onely is acceſſe.
As I am a gentleman:
Out with this hayre Doll, handſomely.
You have your breeches?
I prethee away, thou know'ſt I am monſtrous tickliſh,
What do'ſt thou think I love to blaſt my buttocks?
I'le plague ye for this roguery: for I know well
What ye intend ſir.
On with my Muffler.
Ye are a ſweet Lady: come let's ſee you curtſie:
What broke i'th bum, hold up your head.
Plague on't
I ſhall he piſſe my breeches if I cowre thus,
Come, am I ready.
At all points, as like ſir
As if you were my Miſtris.
Who goes with ye.
None but my fortune, and my ſelfe.
Bleſſe ye
Now run thou for thy life, and get before him,
Take the by way, and tell my Coſin Marie
In what ſhape he intends to come to coz n her
Ile follow at thy heeles my ſelfe: flie wench
Ile do it.
My Father has met him: this goes excellent
And ile away in time: looke to your skin Thomas.
What, are you growne ſo corne ſed gooddy
You will not know your Father: what vaga'res
Have you in hand, what out leapes, durty heeles
That at theſ houres of night ye muſt be gadding,
And through the Orchard take your private paſſage;
What, is the breeze in your breech, or has your brother
Appointed you an houre of meditation
How to demeane himſelfe: get ye to bed, drab
Or ile ſo crab your ſhoulders: ye demure ſlut
Ye civill diſh of ſliced beefe get ye in.
I wy' not, that I wy' not.
Is't ev'n ſo Dame
Have at ye with a night ſpell then.
Pray hold ſir.
St. Geoge, St. George, our Ladies knight
He walkes by day, ſo do's he by night,
And when he had her found
He her beat, and her bound,
Vntill to him her troth ſhe plight,
She would not ſtir from him that night.
Nay then have at ye with a counter-ſpell,
From Elves, Hobs and Fayries, that trouble our Dayries,
From Fire-drakes and fiends, and ſuch as the divell ſends,
Defend us heaven.
Bleſſe my Maſter: looke up ſir I beſeech ye,
Vp with your eyes to heaven.
Vp with your noſe ſir,
I doe not bleed, 'twas a ſound knock ſhe gave me,
A plaguy mankinde gile, how my braines totters?
Well, go thy waies, thou haſt got one thouſand pound more
With this dog tricke,
Mine owne true ſpirit in her too,
In her, alas ſir,
Alas poore gentlewoman, ſhe a hand ſo heavy
To knocke ye like a Calfe down, or ſo brave a courage
To beat her father? if you could beleeve ſir.
Who wouldſt thou make me beleeve it was, the divell?
One that ſpits fire as faſt as he ſometimes ſir,
And changes ſhapes as often: your ſonne Thomas:
Never wonder, if it be not he, ſtraight hang me.
He? if it be ſo,
I'le put thee in my Will, and ther's an end on't.
J ſaw his legs, has Boots on like a Player,
Vnder his wenches cloaths: 'tis he, 'tis Thomas
In his own ſiſters cloaths, ſir, and I can waſt him.
No more words then, we'l watch him: thou'lt not beleeve Lance,
How heartily glad I am.
May ye be gladder,
But not this way ſir.
No more words, but watch him.
VVHen comes he?
Preſently.
Then get you up Doll,
Away, I'le ſtrait come to you: is all ready?
All.
Let the light ſtand far enough.
'Tis placed ſo.
Stay you to entertaine him to his chamber,
But keep cloſe wench, he flyes at all.
I warrant ye.
You need no more inſtruction?
I am perfect.
MOre ſtops yet? ſure the fiend's my ghoſtly father,
Old Ʋalentine: what wind's in his poope?
Lady,
You are met moſt happily: O gentle Doll,
You muſt now doe me an eſpeciall favour.
What is it Maſter Valentine? I am ſorely troubled
With a ſalt rheume falne i'my gums.
I'le tell ye,
And let it move you equally: my bleſt Miſtreſſe
Vpon a ſlight occaſion taking anger,
Tooke alſo (to undoe me) your Aunts Nunnery,
From whence by my perſwaſion to redeeme her,
Will be impoſſible: nor have I liberty
To come, and viſite her: my good, good Dorothy,
You are moſt powerfull with her, and your Aunt too,
And have acceſſe at all houres liberally,
Speake now, or never for me.
In a Nunnery?
That courſe muſt not be ſuffered Maſter Ʋalentine,
Her mother never knew it: rare ſport for me:
Sport upon ſport, by th' breake of day I'le meet ye,
And feare not man, wee'l have her out I warrant ye,
I cannot ſtay now.
You will not breake?
By no meanes.
Good night.
Good night kinde Miſtreſſe Doll.
This thrives well,
Every one takes me for my ſiſter, excellent:
This Nunnerys fal ſo pat too, to my figure,
Where there be handſome wenches, and they ſhall know it
If once I creep in, ere they get me out againe:
Stay, her's the houſe and one of her Maids.
Who's there?
O Miſtreſſe Dorothy you are a ſtranger.
Still Miſtreſſe Dorothy? this geere will cotton.
Will you walke in forſooth?
Where is your Miſtreſſe?
Not very well: ſhe's gone to bed, I am glad
You are come ſo fit to comfort her.
Yes, I'le comfort her.
Pray make not much noiſe, for ſhe is ſure aſleep,
You know your ſide, creep ſoftly in, your company
Will warme her well.
I warrant thee I'le warme her.
Your brother has been here, the ſtrangeſt fellow.
A very rogue, a ranke rogue.
I'le conduct ye
Even to her chamber door, and there commit ye.
COme ſir, for this night I ſhall entertaine ye,
And like a gentleman, how ere your fortune
Hath caſt ye on the worſt part.
How you pleaſe ſir,
I am reſolv'd, nor can a joy or miſery
Much move me now.
I am angry with my ſelfe now
For putting this forc'd way upon his patience,
Yet any other courſe had been too ſlender:
Yet what to thinke I know not, for moſt liberally
He hath confeſs'd ſtrange wronge, which if they prove ſo,
How ere the others long love may forget all,
Yet 'twas moſt fit he ſhould come back, and this way
Drinke that: and now to my care leave your priſoner,
I'le be his guard for this night.
Good night to your worſhip.
Good night my honeſt friends: Come ſir, I hope
There ſhall be no ſuch cauſe of ſuch a ſadneſſe
As you put on.
Faith ſir, my reſt is up,
And what I now pull, ſhall no more afflict me
Then if I plaid at ſpan-counter, nor is my face
The map of any thing I ſeeme to ſuffer,
Lighter affections ſeldome dwell in me ſir.
A conſtant gentleman: would I had taken
A feaver when I took this harſh way to diſturb him,
Come walke with me ſir, ere to morrow night
I doubt not but to ſee all this blown over.
I Have dog'd his ſiſter, ſure 'twas ſhe,
And I hope ſhe will come back again this night too:
I have loſt of purpoſe: now if I can
With all the art I have, as ſhe comes backe,
But win a parley for my broken pate,
Off goes her maiden-head, and there's vindicta.
They ſtir about the houſe, I'le ſtand at diſtance.
Is he come in?
Speake ſoftly,
He is, and there he goes.
Good night, good night wench.
As ſoftly as you can.
I'le play the Mouſe Nan,
How cloſe the little thiefe lyes.
How he itches?
What would you give now to be there, and I
At home Mall?
Peace for ſhame.
In what a figure
The little foole has pull'd it ſelfe together:
Anone you will lye ſtreighter:
Ha, ther's rare circumſtance
Belongs to ſuch a treatiſe: doe ye tumble,
I'le tumble with ye ſtraight wench: ſhe ſleeps ſoundly,
Full little thinkſt thou of thy joy that's comming,
The ſweet, ſweet joy, full little of the kiſſes,
But thoſe unthought of things come ever happieſt.
How ſoft the rogue feeles? Oye little villaine,
Ye delicate coy thiefe, how I ſhall thrum ye?
Your fy away, good ſervant, as ye are a gentleman.
Prethee leave laughing.
Out upon ye Thomas
What do ye meane to do? ile call the houſe up,
O god, I am ſure ye will not, ſhall not ſerve ye,
For up ye goe now, and ye were my Father.
Your courage wilbe cold anon.
If it do hang for'
Yet ile be quarterd here firſt.
O feirce villaine.
What would he do indeed Doll?
You had beſt try him.
Ile kiſſe thee ere I come to bed: ſweet Mary.
Prethee leave laughing.
O, for gentle Nicholas.
And view that ſtormy face, that has ſo thundered me,
A coldne's crept over't now; by your leave, candle,
And next doore by yours too, ſo, a pretty, pretty
Shall I now looke upon ye: by this light it moves me.
Much good may it do you ſir.
Holy ſaints, defend me.
The devill, devill, devill, devill, O the devill.
Dor. Ha, ha, ha, ha, the devill O the devill.
I am abus'd moſt damnedly: moſt beaſtly,
Yet if it be a ſhe devill: But the houſe is up,
And here's no ſtaying longer in this Caſſock,
Woman, I here diſclaime thee; and in vengeance
Ile marry with that devill, but ile vex thee.
Byr' Lady, but you ſhall not ſir, ile watch ye.
Plague O your ſpaniſh leather hide; ile waken ye:
Devill, good night: good night good devill.
Oh.
Rore againe, devill, rore againe.
O, O, ſir.
Open the doores before him: let him vaniſh.
Now, let him come againe, ile uſe him kinder
How now Wench.
Pray lye here your ſelf, next Miſtris
And entertaine your ſweet heart.
What ſaid he to thee.
I had a ſoft bed: and I ſlept out all,
But his kind farewell: ye may bake me now
For O my conſcience, he has made me veniſon.
Alas poore Kate; ile give thee a new Petticoate,
And I a Waſtcoate, Wench.
Draw in the bed Maides,
And ſee it made againe; put freſh ſheetes on too,
For Doll. and I: come Wench, lets laugh an houre now,
To morrow earely, will wee ſee yong Cellide
They ſay ſhe has taken Sanctuary: love, & they
Are thicke ſowne, but come up ſo full of thiſtles.
They muſt needs Mall: for 'tis a pricking age grown
Prethee to bed, for I am monſtrous ſleepy.
A match, but art not thou thy brother?
Would I were Wench,
You ſhould heare further.
Come, no more of that Doll.
I Heard the doores clap: now, and't be thy will, wench
By th' mas ſhe comes: you are ſurely melt faire gentlewoman,
I take it Miſtris Doll, Sebaſtians daughter.
I take right ſir: Hylas, are you feretting
Ile fit you with a pennyworth preſently.
How dare you walk ſo late ſo ſweet: ſo weak guarded?
Faith ſir, I do no harme, nor none I looke for
Yet I am glad, I have met ſo good a gentleman,
Againſt all chances: for though I never knew ye
Yet I have heard much good ſpoke of ye,
Harke ye.
What if a man ſhould kiſſe ye?
That's no harme ſir,
Pray God he ſcapes my heard, there lyes the miſchiefe.
Her lips are monſtrous rugged, but that ſurely
Is but the ſharpneſſe of the weather: harke ye once more,
And in your eare, ſweet Miſtreſſe, for ye are ſo,
And ever ſhall be from this houre: I have vow'd it.
Why that's my daughter, rogue, do'ſt thou not ſee her
Kiſſing that fellow there, there in that corner?
Kiſſing?
Now, now, now they agree o'th match too.
Nay then ye love me not.
By this white hand Doll.
I muſt confeſſe, I have long deſir'd your ſight ſir.
Why ther's the Boots ſtill ſir.
Hang Boots ſir,
Why they'l weare breeches too.
Diſhoneſt me
Not for the world.
Why now they kiſſe againe, there
I knew 'twas ſhe, and that her crafty ſtealing
Out the back way muſt needs have ſuch a meaning.
I am at my ſmall wits end.
If ye meane honourably.
Did ſhe nev'r beat ye before ſir?
Why do'ſt thou follow me?
Thou raſcall ſlave haſt thou not twice abus'd me?
Haſt thou not ſpoil'd the boy? by thine owne covenant,
Would'ſt thou not now be hang'd?
I thinke I would ſir,
But you are ſo impatient: do's not this ſhew ſir,
(I do beſeech ye ſpeake, and ſpeake with judgement,
And let the caſe be equally conſidered)
Far braver in your daughter? in a ſon now
'Tis nothing, of no marke: every man do's it,
But, to beget a daughter, a man maiden
That reaches at theſe high exploits, is admirable:
Nay ſhe goes far beyond him: for when durſt he,
But when he was drunke, doe any thing to ſpeake of?
This is Sebaſtian truely.
Thou ſayeſt right Lance,
And ther's my hand once more.
Not without marriage.
Didſt thou heare that?
I thinke ſhe ſpoke of marriage,
And he ſhall marry her, for it ſeems ſhe likes him,
And their firſt boy ſhall be my heire.
I marry
Now ye goe right to worke.
Fye, fye ſir,
Now I have promis'd ye this night to marry,
Would ye be ſo intemperate? are ye a gentleman?
I have no maw to marriage, yet this raſcall
Tempts me extreamely: will ye marry preſently?
Get you afore, and ſtay me at the Chappell,
Cloſe by the Nunnery, there you ſhall finde a night Prie
Little ſir Hugh, and he can ſay the Matrimony
Over without booke, for we muſt have no company
Nor light, for feare my father know, which muſt not yet
And then to morrow night.
Nothing to night ſweet?
No, not a bit, I am ſent of buſineſſe
About my dowry, ſweet, doe not you ſpoile all now,
'Tis of muh haſte. I can ſcarce ſtay the marriage,
Now if you love me, get you gone.
You'l follow?
Within this houre, my ſweet chicke.
Kiſſe.
A rope kiſſe ye,
Come, come, I ſtand o'thornee.
Me thinkes her mouth ſtill
Is monſtrous rough, but they have waies to mend it,
Farewell.
Farewell, I'le fit ye with a wife, ſir.
Come, follow cloſe, I'le ſee the end ſhe aymes at,
And if he be a handſome fellow Launcelot,
iat, 'tis done, and all my ſtate is ſetled.
COme, to your Mattins Maids: theſe early houres
My gentle daughter, will diſturb a while,
Your faire eyes, nurterd in eaſe.
No vertuous mother,
Tis for my holy health, to purchaſe which
They ſhall forget the childe of eaſe, ſoft ſlumbers,
O my afflicted heart, how thou art tortur'd,
And Love, how like a tyrant, thou raign'ſt in me,
Commanding and forbidding at one inſtant:
Why came I hither that deſire to have
Onely all liberty, to make me happy?
Why didſt thou bring that yong man home, O Ʋalentine,
That vertuous youth, why didſt thou ſpeake his goodneſſe
In ſuch a phraſe, as if all tongues, all praiſes
Were made for him? O fond and ignorant,
Why didſt thou foſter my affection
Till it grew up, to know no other father,
And then betray it?
Can ye ſing?
Yes, Mother,
My ſorrowes onely.
Be gone, and to the Quire then.
HA'ſt thou inquir'd him out?
He's not at home ſir,
His ſiſter thinks he's gone to th' Nunnery,
Moſt likely: I'le away, an houre hence ſirha,
Come you along with this yong gentleman,
Doe him all ſervice, and faire office.
Yes ſir.
VVHere haſt thou been man?
Is there nev'r a ſhop open?
I'le give thee a paire of gloves Sam.
What's the matter?
What do'ſt thou thinke?
Thou art not married?
By th' maſſe but I am, all to be married,
I am i'th order now Sam.
To whom prethee?
I thought there was ſome ſuch trick in't, you ſtole from me
But who, for heaven ſake?
Ev'n the ſweeteſt woman,
The rareſt woman Samuel, and the luſtieſt,
But wondrous honeſt, honeſt as the ice boy,
Not a bit before hand, for my life, ſirha,
And of a luſty kindred.
But who Hylas?
The yong gentleman and I are like to be friends againe,
The fates will have it ſo.
Who, Monſieur Thomas?
All wrongs forgot.
O now I ſmell ye Hylas.
Do's he know of it?
No, ther's the tricke I owe hi
Tis done boy, we are faſt faith, my youth now
Shall know I am aforehand, for his qualities.
Is there no tricke in't?
None, but up and ride boy:
I have made her no joynture neither, there I have paid him.
She's a brave wench.
She ſhall be, as I'le uſe her,
And if ſhe anger me, all his abuſes
I'le clap upon her Caſſocke.
Take heed Hylas,
'Tis paſt that Sam, come, J muſt meet her preſently,
And now ſhalt ſee me, a moſt glorious husband.
IN troth ſir, you never ſpoke to me.
Can ye forget me?
Did not you promiſe all your helpe and cunning
In my behalfe, but for one houre to ſee her,
Did you not ſweare it? by this hand, no ſtrictneſſe
Nor rule this houſe holds, ſhall by me, be broken.
I ſaw ye not theſe two dayes.
Doe not wrong me,
I met ye, by my life, juſt as you entred
This gentle Ladies Lodge laſt night, thus ſuited
About eleven a clocke.
'Tis true I was there,
But that I ſaw or ſpoke to you.
I have found it,
Your brothor Thomas, Doll.
Pray ſir be ſatisfi'd,
And wherein I can doe you good, command me,
What a mad foole is this? ſtay here a while ſir,
Whilſt we walke in, and make your peace.
I thanke ye.
Why, what's the matter there among theſe Maids?
Now benedicite, have ye got the breeze there?
Give me my holly ſprinckle.
O Madam, ther's a ſtrange thing like a gentlewoman,
Like Miſtreſſe Dorothy, I think the fiend
Crept in to th' Nunnery we know not which way,
Playes revell rowt among us.
Give me my holy water pot.
Here Madam.
Spirit of earth or ayre, I do conjure thee,
Of water or of fire.
Harke Madam, hark.
Be thou ghoſt that cannot reſt: or a ſhadow of the bleſt,
Be thou black, or white, or green, be thou heard, or to be ſeen
It comes, it comes.
What are ye? ſpeake, ſpeake gently,
And next, what would ye with me?
Any thing you'l let me.
You are no woman certaine.
Nor you no Nun, nor ſhall not be.
What make ye here?
I am a holy Fryer.
Is this the Spirit?
Nothing but ſpirit Aunt.
Now out upon thee.
Peace, or I'le conjure too Aunt.
Why come you thus?
That's all one, her's my purpoſe:
Out with this Nun, ſhe is too handſome for ye,
I'le tell thee (Aunt) and I ſpeake it with teares to thee,
If thou keptſt her here, as yet I hope thou art wiſer,
Mark but the miſchiefe followes.
She is a Votreſſe.
Let her be what ſhe will, ſhe will undoe thee,
Let her but one houre out, as I direct ye,
Or have among your Nuns againe.
You have no project
But faire and honeſt?
As thine eyes, ſweet Abbeſſe,
I will be ruld then.
Thus then and perſwade her
But do not iuggle with me, if ye do Aunt.
I muſt be there my ſelfe.
Away and fit her.
Come daughter, you muſt now be rull'd, or never.
I muſt obey your will.
That's my good daughter.
VVHat a coyle has this Fellow kept i'th' Nunnery
Sure he has run the Abbeſſe out of her wits.
Out of the Nunnery I think, for we can neither ſee her
Nor the yong Cellide.
Pray heavens he be not teaſing.
Nay you may thanke your ſelfe, 'twas your owne ſtructures.
Why there's the gentlewoman,
Mas tis ſhe indeed
How ſmart the pretty theefe lookes? 'morrow Miſtreſſe.
Good morrow to you ſir.
How ſtrange ſhe beares it?
Maids muſt do ſo, at firſt.
Would ye ought with us, gentlemen?
Yes marry would I
A little with your Ladiſhip.
Your will ſir.
Doll, I would have ye preſently prepare your ſelfe
And thoſe things you would have with you,
For my houſe is ready.
How ſir?
And this night not to faile, you muſt come to me,
My Friends will all be there too: For Trunks, & thoſe things
And houſhold ſtuffe, and clothes you would have carried
To morrow, or the next day, ile take order:
Onely, What money you have, bring away with ye,
And Iewels:
Iewels ſir?
I, for adornement
There's a bed up, to play the game in, Dorothy,
And now come kiſſe me heartily.
Who are you?
This Lady ſhalbe welcome too.
To what ſir?
Your neighbour can reſolve ye.
The man's fooliſh
Sir, you looke ſoberly: who is this fellow,
And where's his buſineſſe?
By heaven, thou art abus'd ſtill.
It may be ſo: Come, ye may ſpeake now boldly
There's none but friends, Wench.
Came ye out of Bedlam?
Alas, tis ill ſir, that ye ſuffer him
To walke in th' open ayre thus: 'twill undoe hlm.
A pretty hanſome gentleman: great pitty.
Let me not live more if thou be'ſt not cozens,
Are not you my Wife? did not I marry you laſt night
At St. Michaels Chappell?
Did not I ſay he was mad?
Are not you Miſtreſſe Dorothy, Thomas ſiſter?
There he ſpeakes ſence, but ile aſſure ye gentleman,
I think no Wife of yours: at what houre was it?
S' pretious; you'll make me mad; did not the Prieſt
Sir Hugh that you appointed, about twelve a clocke
Tye our hands faſt? did not you ſweare you lov'd me?
Did not I court ye, comming from this gentlewomans?
Good ſir, goe ſleepe: for if I credit have
She was in my armes, then, abed.
I told ye.
Be not ſo confident.
By th' mas, ſhe muſt ſir.
For ile no husband here, before I know him:
And ſo good morrow to ye: Come, let's goe ſeeke'em.
I told ye what ye had done.
Is the devill ſtirring?
Well, goe with me: for now I wilbe married.
I Have brought him backe againe.
You have don a friendſhip
Worthy the love you beare me.
Would he had ſo too.
O he's a worthy yong man.
When al's tryde
I feare you'l change your faith: bring in the gentleman.
My happy Miſtreſſe too: now Fortune helpe me,
And all you ſtarres, that governe chaſt deſires
Shinne faire, and lovely.
But one houre, deere Daughter,
To heare your Guardian, what he can deliver
In Loves defence, and his: and then your pleaſure.
Though much unwilling, you have made me yeeld,
More for his ſake I ſee: how full of ſorrow
Sweet catching ſorrow, he appeares? O love,
That thou but knew'ſt to heale, as well as hurt us.
Be ruld by me: I ſee her eye faſt on him:
And what ye heard, beleeve, for tis ſo certaine
He neither dar'd, nor muſt oppoſe my evidence;
And be you wiſe, yong Lady, and beleeve too.
This man you love, Sir?
As I love my ſoule, Sir.
This man you put into a free poſſeſſion
Of what his wants could aske: or your ſelfe render?
And ſhall do ſtill.
Nothing was bard his libertie
But this faire Maide; that friendſhip firſt was broken,
And you, and ſhe abus'd; next, (to my ſorrow
So faire a forme ſhould hide ſo darke intentions,)
He hath himſelfe confes'd (my purpoſe being
Only to ſtop his Iourney, by that pollicy
Of laying fellony to his charge, to fright the Saylors)
Divers abuſes, done, thefts often practis'd,
Moneys, and Iewels too, and thoſe no trifles.
O where have I beſtrew'd my faith: in neither:
Let's in for ever now, there is vertue.
Nay do not wonder at it, he ſhall ſay it,
Are ye not guiltie thus?
Yes: O my Fortune.
To give a proofe I ſpeake not enviouſly
Looke here: do you know theſe Iewels.
In, good Mother.
Theſe Iewels; I have knowne.
You have made brave ſport.
Ile make more, if I live Wench
Nay doe not looke on me: I care not for ye.
Do you ſee now plaine? that's Miſtris Dorothy,
And that's his Miſtris.
Peace, let my joy worke eaſely
Ha, boy: art there my boy: mine owne boy, Tom. boy,
Home Lance, and ſtrike a freſh peece, of wine, the townes ours,
Sure, I have knowne theſe Iewels.
They are they, certaine.
Good heaven, that they were.
Ile pawne my life on't
And this is he; Come hither Miſtris Dorothy,
And Miſtris Mary: who do's that face looke like:
And view my brother well?
In truth like him.
Vpon my troth exceeding like,
Beſhrew me,
But much: and maine reſemblance, both of face
And lineaments of body: now heaven grant it.
My brother's full of paſſion, I'le ſpeake to him.
Now, as you are a gentleman, reſolve me,
Where did you get theſe jewels?
Now I'le tell ye,
Becauſe blinde fortune yet may make me happy,
Of whom I had 'em, I have never heard yet,
But from my infancy, upon this arme
I ever wore'em.
'Tis Franciſco brother,
By heaven I ty'd 'em on: a little more ſir,
A little, little more, what parents have ye?
None
That J know yet: the more my ſtubborne fortune,
But as J heard a Merchant ſay that bred me,
Who, to my more affliction, di'de a poore man,
When J reach'd eighteen yeers.
What ſaid that Merchant?
He ſaid, an infant, in the Genoway Galleyes.
But from what place he never could direct me.
I was taken in a ſea-fight, and from a Marriner,
Out of his manly pitty he redeem'd me.
He told me of a Nurſe that waited on me,
But ſhe, poore ſoule, he ſaid was killed.
A letter too, I had enclos'd within me,
To one Caſtructio a Venetian Merchant,
To bring me up: the man, when yeers allow'd me,
And want of friends compell'd, I ſought, but found him
Long dead before, and all my hopes gone with him.
The wars was my retreat then, and my travell
In which I found this gentlemans free bounty,
For which, heaven recompenc'd him: now ye have all.
And all the worldly bliſſe that heaven can ſend me,
And all my prayers and thanks.
Down o' your knees, ſir,
For now you have found a father, and that father
That will not venture ye againe in Gallyes.
'Tis true, beleeve her ſir, and we all joy with ye.
My beſt friend ſtill: my deereſt: now heaven bleſſe thee
And make me worthy of this benefit.
Now my beſt Miſtreſſe.
Now ſir, I come to ye.
No, no, let's in wench.
Not for the world, now, Mother,
And thus ſir, all my ſerviee I pay to you,
And all my love to him.
And may it proſper,
Take her Franciſco: now no more yong Callidon,
And love her deerely, for thy father do's ſo.
May all hate ſeek me elſe, and thus I ſeale it.
Nothing but mirth now, friends.
Nay, I will finde him.
What doe all theſe here?
You are a truſty husband,
And a hot lover too.
Nay then, good morrow,
Now J perceive the knavery.
J ſtill told ye.
Stay, or I'le make ye ſtay: come hither ſiſter,
Why how now Miſtreſſe Thomas?
Peace a little,
Thou would'ſt faine have a wife?
Not I, by no meanes.
Thou ſhalt have a wife, & a fruitful wife, for I find Hylas known ſon agen.
That I ſhall never be able to bring thee children.
A notable brave boy.
I am very well ſir.
Thou ſhalt be better Hylas, thou haſt 7 hundred pound a yeer,
And thou ſhalt make her 3 hundred joynture.
No.
Thou ſhalt boy, and ſhalt beſtow
Two hundred pound in clothes, looke on her,
A delicate luſty wench, ſhe has fifteen hundred,
And ſeaſible: ſtrike hands, or I'le ſtrike firſt.
You'l let me like?
He's a good handſome fellow,
Play not the foole.
Strike, brother, Hylas quickly,
If you can love me, well.
If you can pleaſe me.
Try that out ſoon, I ſay, my brother Hylas.
Take her, and uſe her well, ſhe's a brave gentlewoman.
You muſt allow me another Miſtreſſe.
Then you muſt allow me another ſervant.
Well, let's together then, a luſty kindred.
I'le give thee five hundred pound more for that word.
Now ſir, for you & I to make the feaſt full.
No, not a bit, you are a vertuous Lady,
And love to live in contemplation.
Come foole, I am friends now.
The foole ſhall not ride ye,
There lye my woman, now my man againe,
And now for travell once more.
I'le bar that firſt.
And I next.
Hold your ſelfe contented: for I ſay I will travell,
And ſo long I will travell, till I finde a father
That I never knew, and a wife that I never look'd for,
And a ſtate without expectation,
So reſt you merry gentlemen.
You ſhall not
Vpon my faith, I love you now extremely,
And now J'le kiſſe ye.
This will not doe it, Miſtreſſe,
Why when we are married, we'l doe more,
Ther's all boy,
The keyes of all I have, come, let's be merry,
For now I ſee thou art right.
Shall we to Church ſtraight?
Now preſently, and there with nuptiall.
The holy Prieſt ſhall make ye happy all.
Away then, faire afore.