WHat wōder you my Lords? why gaze you gentlemen?
And wherefore maruaile you Mez Dames, I praye you tell mée then
Is it ſo rare a ſight, or yet ſo ſtraunge a toye,
Amongſt ſo many nooble péeres, to ſée one Pouer Boye?
Why? boyes haue bene allowed in euerye kinde of age.
As Ganymede that pretye boye, in Heauen is Ioue his page.
Cupid that mighty God although his force be fearſe,
Yet is he but a naked Boye, as Poets doe rehearſe.
And many a préetye boye a mightye man hath proued,
And ſerued his Prince at all aſſayes deſeruing to bée loued.
Percaſe my ſtrange attire my glittering golden gite,
Doth eyther make you maruaile thus, or moue you with delite.
Yet wonder not my Lordes for if your honours pleaſe,
But euen to giue me eare a while, I wyll your doubtes appeaſe.
And you ſhall knowe the cauſe, wherefore theſe roabes are worne,
And why I goe outlandiſhe lyke, yet being Engliſhe borne.
And why I thus preſume to preſſe into this place,
And why I (ſimple boye) am bolde to looke ſuch men in face.
Fyrſt then you muſt perſtande, I am no ſtraunger I,
But Engliſh boye, in England borne, and bred but euen hereby.
My father was a Knight, Mount Hermer was his name,
My mother of the Mountacutes, a houſe of worthy fame.
My father from his youth was trained vp in field,
And alwayes toke his chiefe delight, in helmet ſpeare and ſhielde.
Soldado for his life, and in his happie dayes,
Soldado like hath loſt his life, to his immortall prayſe.
The thundering fame which blewe about the worlde ſo wyde,
Howe that the Chriſtian enemye, the Turke that Prince of pride,
Addreſſed had his power, to ſwarme vppon the Seas,
With Gallies, foiſts, and ſuch liks ſhips, well armde at al aſſaies.
And that he made his vaunt, the gréedy fiſhe to glut,
With gobs of Chriſtian carkaſſes, in eruell péeces cut.
Theſe newes of this report, did pearce my fathers eares,
But neuer touched his noble heart, with any ſparke of feares.
For well he knewe the trade of all the Turkishe warres,
And had amongſt them ſhed his blood, at many cruell iarres.
In Rhodes his race begonne, a ſlender tale yong man,
Where he by many martiall feats, his ſpurres of knighthood wan.
Yea though the péece was loſt, yet won he honour ſtyll,
And euermore againſt the Turkes he warred by his wyll.
At Chios many knowe, how hardily he fought,
And howe with ſtreames of ſtryuing blood, his honoure deare hée bought.
At length enforſt to yéeld with many captaines mo,
He bought his libertie with Landes, and let his goodes ago.
Zechines of gliſtering golde, two thouſand was his price,
The which to paye his landes muſt leape, for elſe he were vnwiſe,
Beléeue me nowe my Lordes although the loſſe be mine,
Yet I confeſſe them better ſolde, than lyke a ſlaue to pine.
"For landes maye come againe, but lybertie once loſt,
"Can neuer finde ſuch recompence, as counteruailes the coſt.
My ſelfe now know the caſe, who lyke my fathers lot,
Was lyke of late for to haue loſt my libertie God wot.
My father (as I ſaye) enforſte to leaue his lande,
In mortgage to my mothers kinne, for ready coyne in hande,
Gan nowe vpon theſe newes, which earſt I dyd rehearſe,
Prepare himſelfe to ſaue his pawne, or elſe to léeſe his phearce.
And firſt his raunſome payde, with that which dyd remaine,
He rigged vp a proper Barke, was called Leffort Brittaine.
And lyke a venturer (beſides him ſéemely ſelfe)
Determined for to venture me and all his worldly pelfe.
Perhappes ſome hope of gaine perſwaded ſo his minde,
For ſure his hauty heart was bent, ſome greate exploite to finde.
Howe ſo it were, the windes nowe hoyſted vp our ſailes,
Wée furrowing in the foming flooddes, to take our beſt auailes.
Now hearken to my wordes, and marke you well the ſame,
For nowe I wyll declare the cauſe, wherefore I hyther came.
My father (as I ſaye) had ſet vp all his reſt,
And toſt on ſeas both daye and night, diſdayning ydle reſt,
We left our forelandes ende, we paſt the coaſt of Fraunce,
We reacht the cape of Finis Terre our courſe for to aduaunce.
We paſt Marrocchus ſtreightes, and at the laſt deſcried,
The fertile coaſtes of Cyprus ſoile, whicch I my ſelfe firſt ſpyed.
My ſelfe (a foreward boye) on higheſt top was plaſt,
And there I ſaw the Cyprian ſhoare, whereto we ſayld in haſte.
Which when I had declared vnto the maſters mate,
He lepte for ioye and thanked God, of that our happy ſtate.
"But what remaines to man, that can continue long?
"What ſunne can ſhine ſo cleare & bright but cloudes may ryſe among?
Which ſentence ſoone was proued, by our vnhappy hap,
We thought our ſelues full néere our friendes, & light in enemies lap.
The Turke yt Tirant he, with ſiege had girte the walles,
Of famous Famagoſta then and ſought to make them thralles.
And as he laye by lande, in ſtrong and ſtately trenche,
So was his power preſt by Sea, his Chriſtian foes to drenche.
Vpon the waltring waues, his Foiſtes and Gallies fléete,
More forreſt like than orderly, for ſuch a man moſt méete.
This heauy ſight once ſeene, we turnde our courſe apace,
And ſet vp al our ſailes in haſte, to giue ſuche furie place.
But out alas, our willes, and windes were contrarie,
For raging blaſtes did blowe vs ſtill vppon our enimie.
My father ſéeing then, whereto he néedes muſt go,
And that the mighty hand of God, had it appointed ſo.
Moſt like a worthy knight (though certaine of his death)
Gan cleane forget all wayling wordes, as lauiſhe of his breath.
And to his Chriſtian crewe, this (too ſhorte) tale he told,
To comfort them which ſéemde to faint, & make the coward bold,
"Fellowes in armes, quod hée, although I beare the charge,
"And take vpon mée chieftaines name, of this vnhappy barge,
"Yet are you all my pheares, and as one companie,
"Wée muſt like true companions, togeather liue and die,
"You ſée quod hée our foes, with furious force at hand,
"And in whoſe handes our handfull heere, vnable is to ſtand,
"What reſteth then to doe, ſhould we vnto them yéeld?
"And wifully receiue that yoke, which Chriſtians cannot weld.
"No ſure, hereof be ſure, our liues were ſo vnſure,
"And though we liue, yet ſo to liue, as better death endure.
"To heare thoſe helliſhe fiendes in raging blaſphemie,
"Defye our onely Sauiour, were this no miſerie?
"To ſée the fowle abuſe of boyes in tender yéeres,
"The which I knowe muſt néedes abhorre all honeſt Chriſtians eares.
"To ſée maides rauiſhed, Wiues, Women forſt by feare,
"And much more miſchiefe than this time can let me vtter here.
"Alas, quod he, I tell not all, my tongue is tyde,
"But all the ſlaueries on the earth, we ſhould with them abide.
"How much were better than, to dye in worthy wiſe,
"And ſo to make our carkaſſes, a wylling Sacrifice.
"So ſhall we paye the debt, which vnto God is due,
"So ſhall you die in his defence, who deind to die for you.
"And who with hardy hand, moſt Turkiſh tikes can quell,
"Let him accompt in conſcience, to pleaſe his maker well.
"You ſée, quod he, my ſonne, wherewith hée lookt on mée,
"Whome but a babe, yet haue I brought, my partner here to bée.
"For, him I muſt confeſſe, my heart is penſiue nowe,
"To leaue him lyuing thus in youth, to die I know not how.
"But ſince it pleaſeth God, I may not murmure I,
"If God had pleaſed we both ſhould liue, and as God wyll we dye.
Thus with a braying ſigh, his noble tongue he ſtayde,
Commaunding all the ordinaunce, in order to be laide.
And placing all his men in order for to fight,
Fell groueling ſtyll vpon his face, before them all in ſight.
And when in ſecréete ſo, he whiſpered had a while,
He raiſde his head with chéerefull looke, his ſorrowes to beguile:
And with the reſt he prayde, to God in heauen on hie,
Which ended thus, Thou onely Lord, canſt helpe in miſerie.
This ſayd (behold) the Turkes encloſde vs round about,
And ſéemde to wonder that we durſt reſiſt ſo great a rout.
Wherat they doubt not long, for though our power was ſlender,
We ſent them ſignes by Canon ſhot, that we ment not to render.
Then might we ſée them chafe, then might we heare them rage,
And all at once they bent their force, about our ſilly cage.
Our ordinaunce beſtowed, our men them ſelues defend,
On euery ſide ſo thicke beſet, they might not long contend.
But as their captaine wilde, eche man his force did ſtrayne,
To ſend a Turke (ſome two or thrée) vnto the helliſhe trayne,
And he himſelfe which ſawe, he might no more abide,
Did thruſt a mide the thickeſt throng, and ſo with honour died.
With him there dyed like wiſe, his beſt aproued men,
The reſt did yéeld as men amazd, they had no courage then.
Amongeſt the which my ſelfe, was tane by Turkes alas,
And with the Turkes a turkiſh life, in Turkie muſt I paſſe.
I was not done to death for ſo I often craude,
But like a ſlaue before the Gattes, of Famagoſta ſaude.
That péece once put to ſacke, I thither was conueyed,
And vnder ſauegard euermore, I ſilly boye was ſtayed.
There dyd I ſée ſuch ſightes, as yet my heart do pricke,
I ſawe the noble Bragadine, when he was fleyd quicke.
Firſt like a ſlaue enforſt to beare to euery breach,
Two baſkets laden full with earth Muſtaffa dyd him teach.
By whome he might not paſſe before he kyſt the grounde,
Theſe cruell tormentes (yet with mo) that worthy ſouldior found.
His eares cut from his head, they ſet him in a chayre,
And from a maine yard hoiſted him aloft into the ayre,
That ſo he might be ſhewed with crueltie and ſpight,
Vnto vs all, whoſe wéeping eyes dyd much abhorre the ſight.
Alas why do I thus with woefull wordes rehearſe,
Theſe werye newes which all our heartes with pittie néedes muſt pearce?
Well then to tell you forth, I ſtyll a ſlaue remaind,
To one, which Prelybaſſa hight, who held me ſtyll enchaind.
With him I went to Seas into the gulfe of Pant,
With many chriſtians captiues mo, which dyd their fréedom wāt.
There with the Turkiſhe traine we were enforſt to ſtaye,
With waltring ſtyll vpon the waues, dyd waite for furder praye.
For why? they had aduiſe, that the Venetian fléete,
Dyd floote in Argoſtelly then, with whome they hopte to méete.
And as they waltered thus with tides and billowes toſt,
Their hope had hap, for at the laſt they met them to their coſt.
As in October laſt vppon the ſeuenth daye,
They found the force of chriſtian knightes addreſt in good aray.
And ſhall I trie my tong to tell the whole diſcourſe,
And howe they did encounter firſt, and howe they ioynd in force?
Then harken nowe my lords, for ſure my memorye,
Doth yet recorde the very plot of all this victorye,
The chriſtian crew came on, in forme of battayle pight,
And like a creſſent caſt them ſelues preparing for to fight.
On other ſide the Turkes, which truſted power to much,
Diſorderly did ſpread their force, the will of God was ſuch.
Well at the laſt they met, and firſt with cannones thunder,
Eache other ſought with furious force to ſlit their ſhips in ſunder.
The barkes are battered ſore, the gallies gald with ſhot,
The hulks are hit, and euery man muſt ſtand vnto his lot.
The powder ſendes his ſmoke into the cruddy ſkies,
The ſmoulder ſtops our noſe with ſtench, the fume offends our eies.
The pots of lime vnſteakt, from higheſt top are caſt,
The parched peaſe are not for got to make them ſlip as faſt.
The wilde fire works are wrought and caſt in foemens face,
The grappling hooks are ſtreched foorth, ye pikes are puſht a pace.
The halbert hewe on hed, the browne billes bruſe the bones,
The harquebuſh doth ſpit his ſpight, with prety perſing ſtones.
The drummes crie dub a dub, the braying trumpets blow,
The whiſtling fifes are ſeldom herd, theſe ſounds do drowne thē ſo.
The voyce of warlike wights, to comfort them that faynt,
The pitious plaints of golden harts, which were with feares attaint.
The groning of ſuch ghoſts as gaſped nowe for breath,
The praiers of the better ſort, prepared vnto death.
And to be ſhort, eache griefe which on the earth maye growe,
Was eath and eaſie to be found, vpon theſe floudes to flowe.
If any ſight on earth, maye vnto hell reſemble,
Then ſure this was a helliſhe ſighte, it makes me yet to tremble:
And in this bloudie fight, when halfe the daye was ſpent,
It pleazed God to helpe his flocke, which thus in poūd was pent.
The generall of Spayne, gan gald that galley ſore,
Where in my Prely Baſſa was, and grieude it more and more:
Vpon that other ſide, with force of ſworde and flame,
The good Venetian Generall dyd charge vpon the ſame.
At leength they came aboorde, and in his raging pride,
Stroke of this Turkiſh captains head, which blaſphemd as it dide:
Oh howe I féele the bloud now trickle in my breſt,
To thinke what ioye then pierſt my heart, and how I thought me bleſt.
To ſée that cruell Turke which held me as his ſlaue,
By happie hand of Chriſtians, his paiment thus to haue:
His head from ſhoulders cut, vpon a Pike dyd ſtand,
The which Don Iohn of Auſtrye, helde in his triumphant hand.
The boldeſt Baſſa then, that dyd in life remaine,
Gan tremble at the ſight hereof, for priuy griefe and paine.
Thus when theſe fierce had fought, from morning vntyl night,
Chriſt gaue his flocke the victory, and put his foes to flight:
And of the Turkiſhe traine, were eyght ſcore Galleys tane,
Fiftéene ſunke, fiue and twenty burnt, & brought vnto their bane,
Of Chriſtians ſet at large were fouretéene thouſand ſoules,
Turkes twentie thouſand regiſtred in Belzebub his rolles.
Thus haue you nowe my Lordes, the ſumme of all their fight,
And truſt it all for true I tell, for I was ſtyll in ſight:
But when the Seas were calme, and ſkies began to cleare,
When foes were all or dead or fled, and victors dyd appeare.
Then euery Chriſtian ſought amongſt vs for his friende,
His kinſman or companion, ſome ſuccour them to lende:
And as they ranſakte ſo, loe God his wyll it was,
A noble wiſe Venetian, by me dyd chaunce to paſſe:
Who gazing on my face, dyd ſéeme to lyke me well,
And what my name, and whence I was, commaunded me to tel:
I now which waxed bolde, as one that ſcaped had,
From déepeſt hell to higheſt heauen, began for to be glad:
And with a liuely ſprite, began to plead my caſe,
And hid not from this worthy man, myne auntient worthy race:
And tolde my fathers name, and howe I dyd deſcende,
From Mountacutes by Mothers ſide, nor there my tale dyd ende.
But furthermore I tolde my Fathers late exployte,
And how he left his lands, goodes & life, to pay ſon Dieu ſon droit.
Nor of my ſelfe I craued ſo credited to bée,
For lo there were remaining yet, Theſe foure whom here you ſee.
Which all were Engliſhe borne, and knewe I had not lyed,
And were my Fathers ſouldiors eke, and ſawe him how he dyed.
This graue Venetian who heard the famous name,
Of Mountacutes reherſed there, which long had bene of fame.
In Italy, and he of ſelfe ſame worthy race,
Gan ſtraight with many curteous words, in arms me to imbrace.
And kyſſed me on chéeke, and bad me make good chéere,
And thank the mighty hand of God, for that which hapned there,
Confeſſing that he was him ſelfe a Mountacute,
And bare the ſelfe ſame armes that I dyd quarter in my ſcute:
And for a further proofe, he ſhewed in his hat,
This token which the Mountacutes dyd beare alwaies, for that.
They couet to be knowne from Capels where they paſſe,
For auncient grutch which lōg ago, twene theſe two houſes was.
Then tooke me by the hand, and ledde me ſo aboorde,
His Galley: where there were yféere, full many a comely Lorde:
Of whome eyght Mountacutes dyd ſitte in higheſt place,
To whome this firſt declared firſt my name, and then my race:
Lo Lordings here (quod he) a babe of our owne bloods,
Whō Turks had tane, his father ſlaine, with loſſe of lands & goods:
Sée how God fauours vs, that I ſhould find him nowe,
I ſtraunge to him, he ſtraunge to mée, we met I know not howe.
But ſure when I him ſaw, and gazed in his face,
Me thought he was a Mountacute, I choſe him by his grace.
Herewith he dyd rehearſe my Fathers valiaunt deede,
For loſſe of whome eche Mountacute, did ſéeme in heart to bléede.
They all embraſt me then, and ſtraight as you may ſée,
In comely garments trimde me vp, as braue as braue may bée:
I was in ſackcloath I, nowe am I cladde in Golde,
And weare ſuch roabes, as I my ſelfe take pleaſure to beholde.
Amongſt their other giftes, this token they me gaue,
And had me lyke a Mountacute, my ſelfe alway behaue.
Nowe hearken then my Lordes, I ſtaying on the Seas.
In conſort of theſe louely Lordes, with comfort and with eaſe.
Determined with them in Italie to dwell,
And there by traine of youthfull yéeres in knowledge to excell.
That ſo I might at laſt réedifye the walles,
Which my good father had decaide by toſſing fortunes balles.
And while they ſlice the Seas to their deſired ſhore,
Beholde a lytle gale began, encreaſing more and more.
At laſt with raging blaſt, which from Southeaſt dyd blowe,
Gan ſende our ſailes vpon theſe ſhores, which I ful wel did know.
I ſpyed the Chalkie Clyues vpon the Kentiſhe coaſt,
Whereby our Lande hight Albyon, as Brutus once dyd boaſt.
Which I no ſooner ſawe, but to the reſt I ſayde,
Siate di buona voglta, My Lordes be well apaide:
I ſée by certaine ſignes theſe Tempeſtes haue vs caſt,
Vpon my natiue countrey coaſtes with happy hap at laſt:
And if your honours pleaſe this honour me to doo,
In Engliſhe hauens to harbour you, and ſée our Citties too:
Lo London is not farre, whereas my friendes would bée,
Right glad, with fauour to requite your fauour ſhewed to mée:
Vouchſafe my Lordes (quod I) to ſtay vpon this ſtrand,
And whiles your Barks be rigged new, remaine with me on land,
Who though I bée a Boye, my Father dead and ſlaine,
Yet ſhall you ſee I haue ſome friendes which wyll you entertaine.
Theſe Noble men which are, the flowre of curteſie,
Dyd not diſdaine this my requeſt, but tooke it thankfullie.
And from their battered Barkes commaunded to be caſt,
Some Gondalaes, wherin vpon our pleaſant ſtreames they paſt.
Into the month of Thames, thus dyd I them tranſport,
And to London at the laſt, whereas I heard report.
Euen as we landed firſt, of this twiſe happie day,
To thinke whereon I leapt for ioye, as I both muſt and may.
And to theſe louely Lordes, which are Magnificoes,
I dyd declare the whole diſcourſe in order as it roſe:
That you my Lorde who are the chiefeſt Mountacute,
And he whome Engliſhe Mountacutes their onely ſtaye impute,
Had found the meanes this daye to match your ſonne and heire,
In marriage with a worthy dame, which is both freſh and faire,
And (as reportes are ſpread) of goodly quallyties,
A virgin trayned from hir youth in godly exerciſe,
Whoſe brother had like wiſe your daughter tane to wife,
And ſo by double lynkes enchaynde themſelues in louers life:
Theſe noble Mountacutes which were from Venice drouen.
By tempeſt (as I tolde before) wherewith they long had ſtrouen.
Gan nowe giue thankes to God which ſo did them conuay,
To ſée ſuch honours of their kinne in ſuch a happie day.
And ſtraight they mée intreat, whom they might wel commaund.
That I ſhould come to you my Lord, firſt them to recommaund.
And then this boone to craue, that vnder your protection,
They might be bolde to enter here, deuoyd of all ſuſpection.
And ſo in friendly wiſe for to conſelebrate,
This happie match ſolemnized, according to your ſtate.
Lo this is all they craue, the which I can not doubt,
But that your Lordſhip ſoone will graunt, with more, if more ye mought:
Yea were it for no more, but for the Curteſie,
Which as I ſaye they ſhewde to me in greate extremitye:
They are Venetians, and though from Venice reft,
They come in ſuch Venecian robes, as they on ſeas had left:
And ſince they be your friendes, and kinſmen too by blood,
I truſt your entretainement will be to them right good:
They will not tarry long, lo nowe I heare their drumme,
Behold, lo nowe I ſée them here, in order howe they come,
Receiue them well my lord, ſo ſhall I praye all wayes,
That God vouchſafe to bleſſe this houſe with many happie days.
GVardate Signori my louely Lords behold,
This is another Mountacute, hereof you may bee bold.
Of ſuch our patrone here, The viſcont Mountacute,
Hath many comely ſequences, well ſorted all in ſute.
But as I ſpied him firſt, I could not let him paſſe,
I tooke the carde that likt me beſt, in order as it was.
And here to you my lords, I do preſent the ſame,
Make much of him, I pray you then, for he is of your name.
For whome I dare aduante, he may your Trounchman bée,
Your herald and ambaſſadour, let him play all for me.
BRother, theſe noblemen to you nowe haue me ſent,
As for their Trounchman to expound the effect of their intent
They bid me tell you then, they like your worthy choyce.
And that they cannot chooſe therin but triumph and reioyce.
As farre as geſſe may giue, they ſéeme to praiſe it well,
They ſaye betwéene your Ladyes eyes, doth Gentilezza dwell.
I terme it as they doe, their engliſh is but weake,
And I (God knowes) am al to yong, beyond ſea ſpeach to ſpeake.
And you my ſiſter-eke they ſéeme for to commend,
With ſuch good workes as may beſéeme a coſin and a friend.
They lyke your choſen pheare, ſo praye they for your ſake,
That he maye alwayes be to you, a faythfull louing make.
This in effect is all, but that they craue aboone,
That you will giue them licence yet, to come and ſée you ſoone.
Then will they ſpeake them ſelues, ſuch engliſh as they can,
I feare much better then I ſpeake, that am an engliſh man.
Lo nowe they take their leaues of you and of your dames,
Here after ſhal you ſée their face and knowe them by their nams.
And I your Seruidore, vibaſcio le mani,
Theſe wordes I learnt amongſt them yet, although I learnt not many