NIlus an ancient River, knowne to excell
Amongst those foure, (which before Adam fell
Watred the earthly Paradise) now claimes
A new alliance with his brother Thames.
Martia, so cald of Marsius, who to win
The praise from great Apollo, lost his skin:
Amphrisus, who his name shall ever keepe,
Since there Apollo kept Admetus Sheepe.
Nor yet Cremera, by whose firtile side
Three hundred and sixe Fabij at once dide.
Xantus, and Simois, those too famous floods,
So often stain'd in Greeke and Trojan bloods:
Nor let Pharsalian Enepeus boast
In Caesars triumph, o're great Pompies hoast:
Deucalion bragge not of Cephisus for'd,
Because neere it lost man-kind he restor'd:
Caister of her Swans, Permessus cleere,
Proud that the Muses were delighted there.
Pactolus, nor Idaspes, fam'd of old
For glittering Channells, pav'd with pearle and gold.
Let none of these compare with aged Nile,
Who onely breeds the weeping Crocodile.
Who drew we hither to the Celebration,
Of this your great loud voyc'd inauguration.
Grave and judicious Praetor, O make me
Your happy Embleame; since as I foresee
By reason, that in Aegypt falls no raine,
There needs must be a dearth of grasse and graine;
Therefore, by frequent Inundations, I
In my great care, that needfull want supply:
So Magistrates (of which you prime and best
We must acknowledge) ought to the distrest:
In your known gravity and goodnesse cast
The future to provide for, salve what's past.
My seven-fold Scepters Hierogliphick, tels
Seven heads, from which (my mighty river swels,
Seven liberall arts (by you maintaind) expresse
Your Cities magnitude and worthinesse.
And as you see my Crocodiles I sway,
(Monsters, which both by land and water prey)
If any such here breed? as some no doubt,
In place and Office may be; search them out:
And then, what greater honour can you claime,
Then such rude beasts like me to curbe and tame?
But y'are too long detain'd; I next commend you,
Vnto those Triumphs that on Land attend you.
I Janus, the yeares Father, in my prime
Almost as soone as either light, or time;
Hither my servants the foure Seasons bring
Cold Winter, Autumne, Summer, and the Spring.
Eleven Moneths are my Sonnes, my Daughter May
Makes up the twelft: her Sisters Night, and Day
Acknowledge me their Father: Girles of spleene
So oppos'd, they never will at once bee seene.
The Houres my Hand-maids are, which imploy'd well,
Shall make you in your Praetor-ship excell
(As all the rest fore-nam'd:) Behold this Key,
With which I o'pe the gates of Land and Sea
To the time future; being made by me
To all your Trade, commerce, and Trafficke free.
Proceede and prosper, whilst the yeare fore-past
(As never more to come) I shut up fast;
One face still looking backe, least good Acts done
Might be obscur'd in darke oblivion:
As th'other forward, to see what's to doe;
Both for Gods Honour, and your Countryes to.
From Janus this use may it please you gather,
You for one yeare are made the Cities Father;
These foure succeeding Seasons, I resigne
Vnto your charge; (which I before cald mine:
To the twelue Moneths, most aptly may comply
Your twelue chiefe Companies: who can deny
My Daughter Day for your imployment prest?
The blacke-brow'd Night, sequestred for your rest?
So spend the Houres to inrich future story,
Both for your owne grace and the Cities glory.
My golden Key make use off, to set wide
Those Prison gates, where many a soule hath dide,
Starv'd by th'Oppressors cruelty; those Gaild
For Capitall crimes, unpittied, and unbaild,
Reserve for publicke Triall: Iustice is bound
To cut of Gangreenes, to preserue the sound:
But none knowes better than your selfe (Grave Lord)
What Mercy is; or when to use the Sword.
I Nquire from all antiquity, 'tis said
That when Apolloes Son, (I Orpheus) plaid
Vpon my Harpe: the rivers if they swel'd
Above their bankes or Torrents that rebeld;
Grew smooth to heare my musicke: and forbore
To vexe the Channels, or molest the Shore.
The Panther, Tyger, the wild Boare, the Beare,
Forget their rage, to give me attentive eare,
Lions with Lambs together coucht in love,
As dreadlesse by the Falcon pearcht the Dove:
The Hounds their pursuite did leave off, and there
Sate Hart, and Hare, close by them without feare:
The sad predicting Raven, from the Oake
(Hollowed with age) was not once heard to croake,
Nor any Bird of harsh throate: onely then
The Nightingale, the Robin, and the Wren
With all their musicall quire, in silent groanes,
(Affraide to sing out) cherrupt to my Tones.
The very Trees I did so much intrance,
They shooke their bowes because they could not dance:
But, Stones not rooted, but above the ground
Mov'd in rare postures to my Harps sweet sound:
I the foure blustering Brothers rage make calme,
And'stead of violent gusts to breath soft balme.
Yet there's an Harmony which doth rejoyce
Mans heart, more than the Jnstrument, or Voyce;
The Gitterne, Harpe, the Viol, and the Lute,
When that is heard to sound may all stand mute;
Whose happy Symptoms more contentment brings
Than any Consort, made by breatb or strings:
And sends a sweeter rapture to the eares
Than that above; made by th'orbicular Spheares.
May it your grave Pretorian wisedome please,
You are that Orpheus who can doe all these:
If any streame beyond its bounds shall swell,
You beare the Trident that such rage can quell.
When beasts of Rapine (trusting to their power)
Would any of your harmelesse stocks devoure:
Yours is the sword that can such violence stay,
To keepe the Rich from rigour, Poore from prey;
Neither from any harshall-boading beake,
Least discord shall be heard, when you but speake;
Whilst in Harmonious quire the rest contend,
Which in your praise each other shall transcend.
Trees rooted in selfe-will, and (which seemes strange)
Even sencelesse stones you into life may change.
This Wisedome can; yet there's a more Devine
Concordancy, which farre exceedeth mine:
That's of unanimous hearts; plenty, increase;
With all Terrestriall blessings waite on peace:
Which whilst maintain'd in your Commerce and Trade,
Proves sweeter Musicke than e're Orpheus made.
THus doth the daughter of the Colchian King,
Her Husband Jason home in Triumph bring,
After his mighty Conquest of the Fleece;
The Aureum vellus brought from thence to Greece.
And wast not a brave prise? for who so dull
Cannot conceive the worth of golden wooll?
The mornings Sun upon their Fleeces shines,
Making the fields appeare like richest Mines.
One of the first we reade of was the Ram,
Vpon whose back Phrixus and Helle swam
The Hellespont: she to her lasting fame
(By being drown'd there, gave the Sea that name:)
But Phrixus safely did to Colchos steere,
And on Joves Alter sacrificed there
The golden Beast, whose faithfull service done,
With the Celestiall gods such favour won;
That striving 'mongst themselves to have him grac'd,
Him first of all the Zodiak signes they plac'd.
And worthily, search the vast earth or deep,
No beast to man, so usefull as the sheep:
How many poore men doth it keepe in pay,
Of several Trades and faculties; else they
Might starve for want of lively-hood: but their charge bearing
By Carding, Spinning, Weaving, Fulling, Shearing.
How with her flesh we are satisfi'd within,
Cloath'd with her Wooll without; in whose shorne skin
Those reverent antiquities are kept,
Which else long since had in oblivion slept:
And for the Fleece it selfe, it is an honour;
First Nature, and since Time, hath cast upon her,
So great, so eminent, so meriting praise,
Even Emperours were it on their Feastivall dayes:
And none that ever her true vertue knew,
But rated her with Ophir, and Peru.
These Cammels though amongst us rarely seene,
Yet frequent where your Lordship oft hath beene
In your long Travells: may the world perswade
The rich Commerce and noblenesse of your Trade.
Time so contracts us, that we cannot dwell
On all in which you Merchants most excell:
Yet honor'd Sir, what's in this place deny'd
Shall in Pacatus Status bee supply'd.
VV Ar, to the unexperienc'd, pleasant showes,
But they who in the Progresse and the Close
Shall trace it, know it horrid; 'Tis a time
Destin'd, to the revenge, and scourge of Crime:
A time, when numerous armies, with the stresse
Of mailed men, and harnest Horses, presse
Grones from the trembling Earth (with feare assounded)
And with the reeking gore of slaine and wounded
Drencht her in stead of Raine: when like shooting Comets.
It's lightning bolts the thundring Cannon vomets;
Quaking the bellowing Ayre: when shrill alarmes,
Rushing of rowted Troopes, clashing of Armes
Render a noise; as hidious and as loude,
As a tumultuous sea in Tempest plow'd:
When slaughter strowes the crimson plaine with Courses,
Men combat men, inraged Horses Horses:
When Massacre, (all quarter quite denying)
Revells amidst the flying, crying, dying.
It is a Time when Stratagem surrounds,
And the beleagured City close impounds:
When mounted Ordnance with their streporous peale
(Warrs Dialect) on both sides raile; and deale
Death at each dire discharge: When pinching need
Of food, hath forc'd the famish'd Motherfeed
On her 'fore-starved Babe; and Hunger raves
So fiercely, Men eate men out of their Graves:
When Plague makes friend, the friend; brother, the brother;
The Harmlesse, armelesse; murder one another:
When in the Husbands and sad Parents sight,
The Wife, and Virgins ravisht, in despight
Of helpelesse succour; when without all ruth,
The Honourable Aged, lovely Youth
And Infant, in promiscuous heapes are throwne
(By indifferent havock) like a medow mowne.
It is a time, when forrage, pillage, strage,
What witty cruelty, or barbarous rage
Can or invent or execute; designe
To utter desolation: when in fine
Whole Troy is but one Bone-fire, that devours
House, Pallace, Temple, and kicks downe those Towers
That with the Clouds did late alliance boast;
Which in aspiring smoke give up the ghost.
(who Exit, in these Tragick Scenes,
Of sword, fire, famine, plagues find; thraldome gleanes.
And such a time is War, and such the throwes
Our neighbour Nations travell now in; woes
Quite desperate of delivery: whilst calme Peace,
Prosperity, and Plenty, with increase
Of all concatinated Blessings smile
With cheerefull face on this sole-happy Isle.
Let then our gratitudes and Pious cares
Strive to entaile them to Us, and our Heires:
Lest that too late, (having sterne Warre accited)
We wish that Peace; which (whilst we had) we slighted.
THe Sun is set, Day doth not now appeare
(As some few houres late) in our Hemisphere;
Hesperus the Captaine of the Watch, hath tane
Charge of the Starrs; and now about Charles-waine
Hath plac'd his Centinels to 'attend the Moone,
If possible to make of mid-night noone.
May't ple you to remember from old Nile,
The dang Amphibian Crocadile;
How from , you this yeare have power
Over each seasons Moneth, each houre.
From Orpheus, that sweet musick parts,
The civil Harmony of tongues .
The Fleece of Aries Trumpets to eternity,
The Drapers Honour, due to that Fraternity.
We by the Sheep and Camels understand,
Your Lordships Travells both by Sea and Land:
Status Pacatus last doth intimate,
The happinesse of this your peacefull state.
Long may it last (of all Earths blessings best,)
Whilst we this night commend you to your rest.