BLow winds! untill you raiſe the Seas ſo high,
That waves may hang like Teares in the Sunnes eye,
That we (when in vaſt Cataracts they fall)
May thinke he weepes at Natures Funerall.
Blow winds! and from the troubled wombe of Earth
(Where you receive your undiſcover'd birth)
Breake out in wild diſorders, till you make
ATLAS, beneath his ſhaking Load to ſhake.
How am I griev'd, the world ſhould every where
Be vext into a ſtorme, ſave only here?
Thou over-lucky too much happy Ile!
Grow more deſirous of this flatt'ring ſtile!
For thy long health can never alter'd be,
But by thy ſurfets on Felicitie:
And I to ſtir the humors that increaſe
In thy full Body (over-growne with peace)
Will call thoſe Furies hither, who incenſe.
The guilty, and diſorder Innocence.
Aſcend! Aſcend! you horrid ſullen brood
Of evill ſpirits, and diſplace the good!
The great, make only wiſer, to ſuſpect
Whom they have wrong'd by falſhood, or neglect;
The Rich, make full of avarice as pride,
Like Graves, or ſwallowing Seas, unſatisfi'd;
Buſie to help the State (when needy growne)
From poore mens fortunes, never from their owne.
The Poore, ambitious make, apt to obey
The Falſe in hope to rule whom they betray:
And make Religion to become their vice,
Nam'd, to diſguiſe ambitious Avarice:
WHy ſhould I haſten hither, ſince the good I bring to men is ſlowly underſtood? I know it is the Peoples vice, To lay too meane, too cheape a price On ev'ry bleſsing they poſſeſſe Th'injoying makes them thinke it leſſe. If then, the need of what is good, Doth make it lov'd, or underſtood, Or tis by abſence better knowne I ſhall be valew'd, when I'm gonne. Yet ſtay! O ſtay! if but to pleaſe The great and wiſe Philogenes. Should dewes not fall, the Sunne forbeare His courſe, or I my viſits here; Alike from theſe defects would ceaſe The power and hope, of all increaſe. Stay then! O ſtay! If but to eaſe The cares of wiſe Philogenes. I will! and much I grieve, that though the beſt Of Kingly ſcience, harbours in his breſt, Yet tis his fate, to rule in adverſe times, When wiſedome muſt awhile give place to crimes.
O who but he, could thus endure
To live, and governe in a ſulleine age,
When it is harder far to cure,
The Peoples folly than reſiſt their rage?
WHen with inſtructed eies, we looke upon
Our bleſsings that diſcend ſo faſt,
From the faire Partner of our Monarchs Throne,
We grieve, they are too great to laſt.
But when thoſe groweing comforts we ſurvay,
By whom our hopes are longer liv'd,
Then gladly we our vows, and prayſes pay
To her, from whom they are deriv'd.
And ſince (great Queene) ſhee is deriv'd from you;
We heere beginne our offerings,
For thoſe who ſacrific'd to Rivers, knew,
Their firſt rights due, unto their Springs.
The Streame, from whence our bleſsings flow, you bred;
You in whoſe boſome, e'ven the chife, and beſt
Of Moderne Victors lay'd his weary head,
when he rewarded Victorys with reſt.
Your Beauty kept his vallor's flame alive;
Your Tuſcane wiſedome taught it how to thrive.
WHy are our joyes detain'd by this delay?
Vnleſſe (as in a morning Overcaſt)
We finde it long, ere we can finde out day;
So whilſt our hopes increaſe, our time doth waſte.
Or are you ſlow 'cauſe th'way to Honor's Throne
(In which you travaile now) is ſo uneven,
Hilly, and craggy, or as much unknowne,
As that uncertaine path which leads to Heaven?
O that Philoſophers (who through thoſe miſts
Low nature caſts, doe upper knowledge ſpie)
Or thoſe that ſmile at them (o're-weening Prieſts)
Could with ſuch ſure ſuch an undoubted eye,
Reach diſtant Heaven, as you can Honors' Throne,
Then we ſhould ſhift our fleſh t'inhabite there,
Where we are taught, the Heroes are gone;
Though now content with Earth, 'cauſe you are heere.
THoſe quar'ling winds (that deafned unto death
The living, and did wake men dead before)
Seeme now to pant ſmall guſts, as out of breath,
And flie, to reconcile themſelves on ſhore.
If it be Kingly patience to out laſt
Thoſe ſtormes the peoples giddy fury rayſe,
Till like, fantaſtick windes themſelves they waſte,
The wiſedome of that patience is thy prayſe.
Murmur's a ſickneſſe epidemicall;
'Tis catching, and infects weake common eares;
For through thoſe crooked, narrow Alleys, all
Invaded are, and kil'd by Whiſperers.
This you diſcern'd, and by your mercy taught,
Would not (like Monarchs that ſevere have bin)
Invent, Imperiall Arts, to queſtion thought;
Nor puniſh vulgar ſickneſſe as a ſin.
Nor would your valour, (when it might ſubdue)
Be hinder'd of the pleaſure to forgive;
Th'are worſe than overcome (your wiſedome knew)
That needed mercy to have leave to live.
Since ſtrength of virtues, gain'd you Honours throne;
Accept our wonder, and enjoy your praiſe!
Hee's fit to governe there, and rule alone,
Whom inward helps, not outward force doth raiſe.
YOu that ſo wiſely ſtudious are,
To meaſure, and to trace each Starr,
How ſwift they travaile, and how farr,
Now number your celeſtiall ſtore,
Planets, or leſſer lights, and trie,
If in the face of all the skie,
You count ſo many as before?
If you would practiſe how to know
The chiefe for influence, or ſhow;
Levell your perſpectives below!
For in this neather Orb they move!
Each here (when loſt in's doubtfull Art)
May by his Eyes, advance his Heart,
And through his Opticke learne to love!
But what is ſhe that rules the night?
That kindles Ladies with her light,
And gives to Men the power of ſight?
All thoſe who can her virtue doubt,
Her Minde, will in her face adviſe,
For through the Caſements of her Eyes,
Her Soule is ever looking out.
And with its beames, ſhe doth ſurvay
Our growth in Virtue▪ or decay;
Still lighting us in Honours way!
All that are good, ſhe did inſpire!
Lovers are chaſte, becauſe they know
It is her will, they ſhould be ſo;
The valiant take from her their Fire!
WHy ſtand you ſtill, and at theſe Beauties gaze,
As if you were afraid,
Or they were made,
Much more for wonder than delight?
Sure thoſe whom firſt their virtue did amaze,
Their feature muſt at laſt invite.
Time never knew, the miſchiefs of his haſte!
Nor can you force him ſtay
To keepe off day:
Make then fit uſe of Tiumphs heere;
It were a crime 'gainſt pleaſant youth, to waſte
This night, in overcivill feare.
Move then like Time, for Love (as well as he)
Hath got a Kalender,
Where muſt appeare,
How evenly you theſe meaſures tred;
And when they end, we far more griev'd ſhall be,
Than for his Howers when they are fled.
SO muſicall as to all Eares,
Doth ſeeme the muſick of the Sphears,
Are you, unto each other ſtill;
Tuning your thoughts to eithers will.
All that are harſh, all that are rude,
Are by your harmony ſubdu'd;
Yet ſo, into obedience wrought,
As if not forc'd to it, but taught.
Live ſtill, the pleaſure of our ſight;
Both our examples and delight.
So long, untill you finde, the good ſucceſſe
Of all your virtues, in one happineſſe.
Till we ſo kinde, ſo wiſe, and carefull be,
In the behalfe of our Poſteritie,
That we may wiſh your Scepters ruling heere,
(Lov'd even by thoſe, who ſhould your juſtice feare)
When we are gone, when to our laſt remove
We are diſpatch'd, to ſing your prayſe above.