REmember where you are,
That ever man
Should be so dull of soule to love a woman.
What in the name of fury hath made you
An enemy to that sexe, upon what Lady
False beyond Cressida, didst thou loose thy patience?
Finde it againe for shame, thou wert not borne
A woman hater.
No, I thanke heaven
My mothers dead, and all my sisters, I
Had a contention in my nature, when
They were alive, but tye of blood prevail'd
Against my disposition, I confesse
I never wish'd them dead.
How hadst thou beene
Alive, but for thy mother?
Thats one reason
Should make our love the lesse to e'm, they doe
But bring's acquainted with the world, which at
Our birth we are afraid of, and grow old
But to repent we are not embrois still,
Or things lost in conception.
We may
As well condemne our fathers, and declaime
'Gainst them for our begetting, come Orseollo,
Desist to be a Satire, I hope you wod not
The Dutchesse should heare this; collect your selfe
You are ith presence, put on a smooth face
And speake Court language, let me counsell you
To softnesse; what a Courtier and so rugged?
Princes they say have many cares, and tis
not lesse then treason, in a womans court
To be so violent against e'm, these
Hangings may eveldrop us.
Let em, let em,
May be 'twould move the Dutchesse to exempt me
From my attendance; and she knew my minde
She would allow me a writ of ease, least I
Infect her Court with railing gainst her sexe:
I'de rather heare a mandrake, then let in
The noise of women; heaven that I might never
Converse with any.
Thou wilt never marry.
Marry? Ile first engender with a Viper,
Were there but one woman alive, and but
By knowing her, no hope to stocke the world
Agen, Ide geld my selfe.
Pitty thou shouldst
Marry, to get a sonne that should bē like thee;
Take heed least women for this bitternesse
Make thee not first an Eunuch, but we ha lost
Our first discourse, thy passion like a storme
Hath quite transported us, from the Duke Foscari,
That hath now left us, let's
A cold sute with the Dutchesse.
If I stay
I shall talke treason, a cold sute? for ever
Ice dwell within their marrowes can affect em,
He was too worthy on her.
He deserved,
I know not what to thinke out, tis the third
Prince, that our duties have commended,
In hope to be made happy with her issue:
Nay, nay, have truce a little with thy spleene,
And lets talke wisely, we shall be observed;
I wonder.
So doe I.
At what?
At nothing,
At a woman, how tis possible a man
Should court and love em so, but now I thinke one,
I doe not wonder.
How is this?
They are
All Circes, and do steale away our soules;
They juggle us into shapes and puppets lovers.
They ha not juggled you me thinkes.
Volterre and Orseollo, morrow to ye,
You heare the newes.
Foscari is departed.
In a mist, is he not? here's but we three,
The Dutchesse is a strange woman.
Contarini hast any other faith,
Are they not all so Volterre?
Thou hast beene a travailer, and converst
with the Antipodes, almost put a girdle
about the world, taken dimensions
Of every nature, tasted all aires, and canst
Distinguish em to an atome, tell me Signiour
And be not partiall to the Sex, didst ever
Vpon thy honour meete with such a creature,
We here call vertuous woman, are not all
The stocke of em inconstant?
Nay let's ha
No morē invēctives Signiour Orseollo
Traduce not all for some, it must be granted.
They are an excellent creation, though
Some few decline from vertue, I've a wife,
I'm but new married neither, yet I dare
Boast my opinion.
Doe not, the Moone
Is yet but ith' first quarter Contarini,
I would endeere my thoughts to thee, and thou
Wert not marryed, boast thy opinion.
Goe sacrifice to sleepe, why these are womēn
Will cosen a strong faith, cuckold their husbands,
Yet taken in the act perswade em into
A beleefe they doe but dreame so.
Signiour
Y'are pleasant.
Pleasant
As his gall will suffer him,
He has beene casting out up this halfe hourē,
Yet there is some behind still, if you name
A woman, he takes fire like touchwood, but
To the Duke Foscari.
I have it,
What?
Ye talke
We doe.
I ha the cause hē went away so soone.
Prethee enrich our knowledge, why?
I honour him.
So we doe all.
He is a brave Duke, a man,
And in that, more then all his titles make him,
Some easie natures would ha languished for her,
And ha beene paler then ye meane, with watching
Distilled their braine, tyred, yea some to seeme
Comit Idolatry, given her their soules,
And changed em to her motion; in each window
Bescratching with some Diamond her name,
And warme it so with kisses till it thaw
The very glasse, which weepes it selfe away
In pitty of the dotage, beene content
To ha worne their youth away in expectation;
This Prince was wiser, he left Parma to
Behold a creaturē was cride up, the miracle
Of nature, a new starre like Cassiopeia
That drew the eyes of Italy, and left em
Fixt in the admiration, but he needing
No Iacobs staffe to take the height, and looking
With a true eye upon this wounder, found
She was a woman, nothing but a woman,
His wisdome quickely taught him to returne
A sham'd of his credulity.
He's mad,
What a wild passion like a torrent, beares him
Against the women, 'tis well your hate
Points at the gēnerall, one womans anger
Would checke your forward—else
Contarini.
I darē not hēare him talke morē, wē shall be
Held cherishers of his railing humour, in, in,
Prethee lets leave him.
Why Signiour, are you so transported
You have not power enough to seeme calme,
What dost at Court?
Not cringe as you, and adore the nods
Of painted Ladies, weary my hammes to answer
Madams halfe cursies, I neere come to Court
But to defend me from it.
Ha?
The truth is,
I would be faine discharged, tis a hell to me,
There are so many wormed in't: would the Dutchesse
Would banish me into some Wildernesse,
I should indure the beasts though they devour'd mē,
I hate no monsters but the Harpies.
Why?
Harpies have womens faces Contarini,
Yet now I thinke Volterre I have heard
There's another feminine murderer
Cald the Hiena, that invites men forth
To be devourd; y'ave heard how the Egyptian
Crocadile weepes, when death it selfe lies bathing
Within her teares, thinke but upon women
And tell me which I should avoide-first.
I seē a merit nigh, and I hope
You will deserve the favour, we are not
Wont to admit of servants neere their person,
Without more caution.
It makes my bond
Of duty and observance greater.
My Lord Comachio.
Let me employ some of your carē upon
My Nephew, something you may adde
To improve him, you shall till no barren ground,
Though he reward you not with fruitefulnesse,
I shall have power to make you thinke your studies
Well plac'd.
Your compasse I shall saile by.
Contarini hows the day?
Not early.
Signior Orseollo, I know what cloud
Muffles your thoughts.
He is constant to his humour.
Not the Dutchesse, come faith yēt Orseollo,
We shall intreate you joyne with us to the Dutchesse.
Yes, hey!—
So, so, he would but trouble us.
My Lords, we must be circumspect,
We are not to negotiate a designe
That lookes but at the profit of one man:
The Dutchy calls to owne it, all our cares
You know have met, that we might move the Dutchesse
To exchange her dull Virginity for Marriage;
Foscari whom our ambition pointed at, is lost
And he in some disgust gone hence.
I feare so.
His violent departure gives us more
Then jealousie, we must sollicite her,
But so as shall become our duties, and
Expresse our knowledge of her great soulē
And pregnant wit.
She enters signior Comachia, tis refer'd
To your delivery.
Comachio! we have no knowledge of thy agē,
But what thy wisdome and experience doth
Discover, i'st not troublesome, t'attend
A young Court?
Your grace so desires my duty, that I
Delight in service.
Contarini i'th mornings eyē, reveales
More youth, then he did by Hymens tapers;
Lookes younger then when we call him Bridegroome.
Censure him Laura.
Your Highnesse knowes he hath a young wife.
All my use of time, is but to perfect
My obedience to your excellence.
We cherish both your loves, and you Volterre
Are great too within our memory.
I shall endevour new merits.
The cause of your attendance now, is knowne
Ere you deliver it. The departure
Of the young Duke (our Lover) from our Court
In so obscure a way, without your notice;
Our consent publish'd gives you just cause
Of wonder: yet so much y'are skil'd both in
Our soule and nature, that no immediate
Motive of his anger shall be laid to
Our charge; but what you thinke, makes our person
Safe, and great.
We come with humble modesty t'require
So much, as shall concerne our care, both
Of your gracious selfe, and our good Country.
Foscari, Duke of Parma is a great Prince;
Feature; a Lady, like your excellence,
His youth and strength may promise issue even
To a matron.
We know he merits all his praise. Proceede
To what you call your businesse.
His Catholicke Majesty did lately by
His Liger, urge a title to this Duchy,
And desire your Counsell, he might be nam'd
Your Highnesse next, and lawfull heire, unlesse
From your owne person, were deriv'd a Prince
To intercept his hopes, with ease, you may
Consider, how unkinde our fate will be,
Beyond his owne naturall soile, doth make
Obedience bondage.
You have yet hope, tis in my power
To prevent what you suspect.
We have, but Time (the enemy to lie,
And to increase) may scorne, destroy that hope.
If not for propitious love to us;
Yet for your owne sake, your glory, hasten
The cure of these our feares: Time is the moth
Of nature, devouers all beauty, when those
Bright eyes, that governe now with Phoebus-like
Predominance, shall yeeld no light unto
That darkened sky (your face) some aged mother
Pround of her fertill wombe, will shew you then
Her off-spring. Behold (quoth she) I neede no
Marble house for my fame to dwell in, these
Are my living monuments, but your sullaine
Chastetie, will not permit your fame t' outlive
Your breath.
No more Comachio! these are my owne thoughts:
Shortly you shall see I am art, prevention
Of all danger.
You are my gracious Mistresse.
Yea you shall much divulge your clemency
If to stifle publike noyse you reveale
The reason; why Foscari was not made
Your choyse.
Foscari is a forraigner: borne in
A climate not so temperate as ours,
And I am yet to know, whether his minde
Be different from such as please me here
At home: forraigne alliance is an old
Disguise for Sunices hatred: It charmes the
Peacefull into a dull security;
Vntill the furious finde best advantage
To make his anger knowne: then both are more
Ingag'd t'inflame, what erst th' one did kindle.
I should sinne my good Lords, if I did thinke
My humillity disgrac'd my honour,
When I suppos'd my owne Court able to
Breede a man, fit to mingle blood, even with
A Princesse; should I say with mine: what amaz'd,
Why does it want example, I should not
Thinke my choyce would much accuse my eyes, if
I elect a Lover here: unlesse some
Are more desert-lesse then I am guilty of, Laura!
Ioyne to us Oedipus, yet we shall want
Helpe t'expound this Riddle—
A Lover here from her owne Court, sure it
Must be from this number, Signiour Volterre!
My very good Lord.
You are the man, the starres dance to. The spheares
Doe practise musicke, only to make you
Merry, you are he signiour.
Who, I my Lord?
Doe not conceale your hopes: they'le be worthy
Your acknowledgement; you would be install'd
Ith' darke, steale titles, without the notice
Of the Heralds, but noyse attends honour.
I neede a Comment to your words.
Come, you young men are all temptation;
You have the purple veines (signiour) that swell
With wanton pride, and Ladies judgements are
Much govern'd by their eyes; what grace, what favour,
Did the Dutchesse lately shew you, the more
T'indeere your duty? hah?
I want a soule (signiour) if she ever
Honour'd me with any phrase; but what is
Vsuall in her Complement t'other Lords.
Ist possible—
He has discoverd somewhat that concernes
My joy. Nature needes no excuse why a
Dutchesse should affect a travail'd Lord;
You are great too, within our memory.
These were her words. hum!—
Signiour Contarini.
My Lord.
You observ'd the Dutchesse language?
Am I not thinking on't? heart, why doe ye
Interupt me?—
How's this my Lord Volterre?
Your pleasure signiour!
You have a fortunate skill in translation
Of misterious language: I pray lend me
Your censure upon the last words the Dutchesse
Vttered.
Hah signiour? they concerne not me, I am
Forgotten by my starres, I, Volterre
Is lost to all Eyesight, but his owne.
Doe our braines melt this hot weather. These men
Were heretofore discreete, and now they talke
A if they had no Eyelids, like things that
Never slept. I finde the cause.
Quoth she, he lookes younger, then when he stood
By Hymens tapers, good, very good, I have
O were I single now; my wife, my wife;
She ruines all this hope.—
Since I have travel'd, brought from France, the nice
Amorous cringe, that so inchants Ladies:
Tis fit I use it often, the tongue is
Powerfull too, and I inrich in languages,
It shall be knowne—
Signiour Volterre.
To bring Revel▪ in the Court, that's the way,
I have my selfe an able chine, and I
Can friske like a Goate: which females call
A lucky symptome—Signiour Contarini,
Your lop. must excuse me, I'm a little
Serious.
O for a sight of Iupiters wardrobe
That I might immetate the shape, in which
He courted Diana!
Signiour Volterre.
I my Lord that's my name, Ile goe write
It downe, least this businesse make me forget it.
Rebellious blood! must I neëds marry? had
I but delaid my lust a month, I might
Have wasted then my strength and nature, to
A nobler purpose: beget Princes, now
I am in bondage to my marriage vow.
MY Wife must do't and then I may effect
My hope with the great Dutchesse as soone as he
Most proud of demerits. Dandalo
Wheres your Lady.
Your Lordship may heare both her voyce and Lute,
Shees in the garden with Reollo your
Musitian.
Heare, does she so much dispaire of long life,
That she need flatter her soule to tarry here
With soft Ayres, and wanton Musicke.
My Lord.
Conduct her hither.
I saw your entrance, you bring newes from Court,
Let me share in't.
I must worke her to it with art and leisure.
What does your lop say?
Sweete lend me thy eare in private—can I
Demand a thing from her that slumbred in
My bosome, and she be so unkind
To give my sute a hard repulse.
My Lord I am not guilty of a cause
That can warrant your suspect either of
My love or duty.
I beleeve thee (deere Carintha) but this
Injunction is so severe and strange, 'twill
Puzle thy consent at first.
Sir make it knowne, I cannot be so slow
In any performance of your will, as you
Are to reveale it.
Thy breath is sweeter then the smoke ascending
From the Phoenix funerall pile, I could
Kisse thee, even engender on thy lips.
You were not wont to be thus pleasd, shew me
Which way I may requite your passion, speake
The sute you talke on.
Now I know the strength of thy affection,
I slight my sute the grave will prove to easie.
What is it.
Ile have thee onely kill thy selfe, cruch, thou
Shat doe it, hah—
Sir I suspect your health, you were not wont
To shew your speech so much estrang'd from reason.
Is this your love, your forward kindnesse?
Scarse has the Moone expir'd a change since you
Received me in your bed a cold Virgin;
Are you so soone tyred with sacred marriage,
Desirous to motive my eternall
Absence and by a meanes so cruell sir,
How have I deserved your hatred, or please
But to reveale the profit which by death
Can bring you.
I have not leasure to reply to your
Demands, will you do't.
You fright my soule.
Orseollo happy you, whose frozen nature
Will not permit a closure with a woman.
The sex doe quite degenerate from those
Great patternes which the former age produced.
Portia swallowed fire to please her husbands ghost,
Who inticed him to Elisium; Lucresse,
To purchase life unto her memory,
Noyse at her funerall such as might cleave
Her fame, priced her deare heart, and dyed
We have a certaine faith, a faith
That can assure reward, or punishment
For deeds, we know our dwelling after death,
Which Roman soules unlawfully did seeke,
And found too soone, we are prescrib'd those act
That makes us Angels.
She has bin gossipping with the holy
Sisters, zeale, and purity.
It were safer for my soule; if your selfe
Would be my Executioner.
I thanke you Lop. I am exposed
To the justice of the law, he whose rich
And his Prince become his heire cannot live long;
Besides my hopes to enjoy the Duchesse,
Are then quite frustrate.
What said your Lop.
I did not thinke Carintha thou hadst beene
So sterne of nature, t'hast a stubborne heart;
Deny my first request.
Should I kill my selfe.
Why must we not all dye, 'tis a thrifty
Conscience that perswades the soule to hasten
Her departure hence to avoid future guilt.
You counsell strangely, I have deserv'd more
Kindenesse from your tongue.
If thou suspect'st thou hast not fortitude
Enough, t'attempt thy death by violence:
Expire with leasure: refraine from meate, till
Th' orifice of thy stomacke close, and grow
Together; or when thou feedst, eate Arsnicke,
Dye any way, so the law call not me
Thy murderer.
Heaven secure me, have you the use of all
Your sences, ye speake thus?
But if youle choose an easier way, each morning
Fetch a tedious sigh or two, twill make your
Heart to cleave, Ile give you cause enough to doe't.
You have a bloody mind.
Or as some Country Virgins doe scratch morter
From an aged wall and eate it up in
Private, so die on the greene disease, but now
I thinke upon't thats to perplex away,
Vnto the Grave.
I dare not hate the thought y'have tempted me,
Beyond mortall patience, oh unkind
Destiny.
Doe, fret, gall thy heart strings till they breake,
Ive the engine of a babe, any man
That had arrived at halfe my yeares, would soone
Invent a safe way to shift that trifle
From him. Hum, who shall I get to doe't.
Happy fancy, 'tis mature I will
Above it strait.
I sent you a Letter Maddam.
My Lord I received it.
How did you taste it?
Excellently.
I have twenty as good as that lying by me, have I not
Oh my good Lord. (Crispino
They shall be all at your service.
Yare too much a Courtier, I must chide you
Signiour, I never did deserve the Epithets
Your paper throws upon me.
Epithets I beseech you Madam to impute
That to the fretfullnesse of my braine,
If any thing have slipt my pen whereby I may incurre
Your Ladiships indignation Ile recant
It publickely.
I enjoyne no such pennance,
But tis an injury easily remitted,
Tis the glory they say of Lovers to Hiperbolise.
Hiperbolize, whats that? I ha not that word
Yet in my Alphabet, I hope Madam you
Hold a better opinion of me then to imagine
I would hiperbolize with your Lady-ship;
That were immodest.
Not so Signiour.
By my faith Madam but it is, de thinke
I know not what hiperbolizing is,
That were simplicity, if any thing
Within my Letter may be drawne within
Construction of hiperbolizing, condemne
Not me for't, by service Madam, I
Had no intention to stretch so farre
To your dishonour, it shall teach me wit
To write my Letters hereafter.
A haire in your honours locke is disordered,
Tis rectified,
Signiour,
You doe me much too much satisfaction,
Your errour being a small one.
Tis your favour,
Yet when I commit a peccadillo
Against your brightnesse, I deserve to be
Extinguished your presence for't, I did love
You Madam, as I remember when I was an Infant,
How.
We are Infants you will grant
When we cannot speake, and I loved full eight moneths
And a halfe ere I had power to tell you on't
Ime certaine.
I was not worth so much.
Nay for that Madam
Ile shew my selfe deserving, were you worthy
Twere the lesse act of mine to love you,
That were a poore thing, I doe not stand on worth.
Madam I would not have you thinke so ignobly of me,
That I affect you for your worth, Ide rather
Vpon my honour have you in your smocke,
Than all the Ladies in the world starke naked.
Now your language is course.
You shall pardon me for that.
Your Lordships fether waves to much toward the
Tis now in true point. (East,
My love is pure and like the Sun transparent.
Now you Complement, I know
Y'are excellent at it.
Troth not I Lady,
I cannot Complement, I doe but
Refulgent your beauty, whose mellifluous voice
Peirces the eare—faith Madam credit me
I nere could complement in my life: Most faire,
Whom young Apollo courted for her haire.
There are poeticall furies in the City,
But I converse not with em.
Were ever cheekes of roses, locks of amber
Ordain'd to be imprison'd in a chamber,
Laura I doe but piddle, a pretender,
I know not how to Complement.
You now doe.
Alas not I, I cannot make verses neither;
Thy dainty seale of Virgin wax,
That nothing but impression lackes.
Your Lordships cloake discovers not sufficiently the riches of the inside.
An excellent Poet.
Ile tell you Madam a strange thing, you see
These trifles; before I was in love, I could
Not ha made an Acrosticke in a day,
Sometimes two.
Now you can make Chronograms.
I thinke I can, and Anagrams for a need.
Signiour you are wonderfull improv'd,
Love has inspir'd you richly. I perceive
Cupid is a mute too.
Oh now I cannot sleepe for the multitude,
Of Verses that are capring in my skull.
I wonder you are not mad.
You may.
A haire in your honours locke is disordered.
But I've a gift to helpe it, I allow
My selfe set times to vent em, they would blow
Me up else.
As how pray.
Why thus ith' morning
When I have said my prayers in Verse, which fall
From me, and I nere thinke on em, next my heart
I scrible out an ode, after my breakefast
I fall upon a Satire, when I've rail'd
My selfe into a fresh stomacke, I dine,
Which done, because it is not good to study
Vpon repletion or full stomacke, you
Vnderstand me; for a matter of two houres
I dreame as it comports with our Italian
To sleepe, then I say, I dreame familiarly
An Heroicke Poem.
Dreame.
Madam while you live,
Your dreaming Poets are the best, and have
Distilled raptures, spirits that converse with em,
And teach em what to write; this I set downe
Before I eate againe, after I walke
Vpon the strength of Supper into th' parke,
And ruminate an Elegy at returne,
I doe discourse of Epigrams, and an Epitaph
Vpon some one or other of my kindred.
I ha made a rare one on my Vncle, and
He would dye shortly to deserve it.
Whats that?
If you so methodise your study Signiour
I shall but sinne against your muse, tis now
Your houre by course, for your heroicke Poem:
Twere best you sleepe my Lord, Ile take my leave.
Nay Madam, tis not every day I study
So hard, on some I whet my muse
Your Lordships weapon hangs to much a fore.
Thou hast my bosome, treasure up my secrets
Faithfully, and deserve I should be thine;
Giotto, the first opportunity
Commends thee to the Dutchesse, then's the time,
To shew thy gratitude, if she still looke on me
With lucky eyes.
My Lord y'ave made
Your selfe the creditour of what I am;
If I returne you not the interrest
Of all my service, I should justly forfeit
To be unmade againe.
Sweete Laura, world confounding beauty.
Againe Hyperbolizing, then you Lordship
Must pardon me.
What's the signification of this word? hum.
I have heard some say, to hyperbolize
Is to lye, and it may be she would not have
Your Lordship lye with her.
Signiour de patri, what part of your discourse
Concerned my death, I heard with Madam Laura
You name your Vncles dying.
Twas with griefe then,
I had no cause to name you else my Lord.
Apply your selfe Nephew to this Gentleman,
And make him precious to you.
I shall study his honours service.
Giotto.
My Lord.
You are a Scholler.
I have lost time in Padua.
Ile tell you a jst a Gentleman ith Court
Writing a Letter to his Mistresse could not
Containe himselfe from hyperbolizing with her.
Is your Lordship serious?
True upon my honour, what a gull twas
To make himselfe ridiculous, I laugh'd at him,
Then he asked me what that word meant, Giotto
What doe you thinke on't?
I my Lord,
Your honour needes no comment to informe you,
Much lesse my translation.
Yes I knowt, but what sayes your Dictionarie.
Your Lordship shal pardon me, for that hyperbolizing
It is some baudy word, he is so modest,
Wherein did I hyperbolize with her Ladyship:
My Lord Volterre.
Signiour de Pazzi Comesta.
I am transported to see your Lordship well.
Io soy il uvestra servadore.
Whats this?
Betweene Goth and Vaundell, Spanish.
And Giotto were not here now, I would aske him
What were hyperbolizing by your Lordships favour.
Women are taken with the presence of
A man, the garbe, and ornaments of state
Endeere him to their senses, I would faine
Appeare in glorious habit can you dance?
I were no Lord else, I was a French mans Scholler,
For twenty crownes a moneth, you may guesse by that
My abilities.
Tis the best fooling, and the safest for
The body, your French glide away like Rivers,
Without a noise, and turning with Meanders,
Out move ye, your lofty trickes, are tude,
And doe to much examine.
May we not rise,
I ha knowne good dancers rise at Court, what say you to
A cosse caper.
Ride the Cannon, and you ha
No care to preserve your bonds, but I forget,
Adtos signiour, I must attend the Dutchesse.
Doe not hyperbolize with her my Lord.
Pardonate Signior mio.
Tis so, tis baudy, that shrug tells me so, Giotto.
Your honours servant.
Were you never a Courtier before.
I onely hitherto have spent my eyesight.
In observation, now I grow proud to write
My selfe dependant.
Signiour Comachio my Vncle, lends you.
But Ime not to learne
To adore the rising Sun, I looke on him
As in his West, but I've ambition
To merit your grace.
I see then thou wot be a Courtier.
Comachio, shew me your Nephew!
Y'are welcome to Court my Lord.
It is your highnesse pleasure I should presume so,
And I am confident I may.
He has not onely profited in growth
Of person, but in's judgement too: talkes well,
Our Court wants such Comachio, your Nephewes
Contemplation ends here. Padua must
Loose him, he shall be our servant.
Shee jeeres him, and I gaine no credit by 't.
Keepe your tongue quiet, cease your abortive
Language, or Ile cut your throate.
This is the tricke of all Courtiers,
They would engrosse Princes e'n to
Themselves, I must not speake to her.
This is the Gentleman, your grace was pleas'd
T'accept from my commends.
You are a Florentine.
I am proud to owne my Country.
We have heard so much of your demerits,
That 'twere injustice not to cherish you,
Be confident, to gaine our best favour.
I've often pray'd for this blessed houre, and thought
I did not sinne in my ambition.
It is a vertue to covet honour
From your excellence: which I shall ever
Study to deserve.
Laura begin your triall.
This is a rude kinde of duty, speake your
Intention.
Twice have I kneel'd to gaine your kindnesse in
My sute, now grant it, or ile turne Traitour.
Make your sute knowne.
I have beene bred in rugged warres,
A womans governement is soft and fit
For Babes to bow to, dismisse streight your Court.
Orseollo, did not your offence breed mirth,
You should perceiv't more difficult to finde
A pardon fort.
Send me streight to Sea, if but t'incounter
A fleet of fiends rigg'd by witches, or with
A colony to settle a Plantation
In the desarts of Barbary, Ile choose
Any employment rather then to heare a
Lady utter perfum'd breath, or see her
Advance in her masculine garbe, in her
New mimicke posture.
Leave us▪ but so, that in an houres space
We may command your presence here, to move
Our laughter, when leisure will permit it,
Or you shall never live to weare gray haires.
Ile conspire with a constable, that commits
Iustice in's sleepe, ere Ile want treachery
To revenge this constraint of service.
Your grace will beget charity in
Other Ladies, if you pardon this his
Bold behaviour, for he offends all women.
How Comachio.
Does not your excellence know, he is cald
The woman hater.
Deserves he that Epithite?
Ile shew your highnesse the reall cause, why
He hates all women; he was ever bred
In the campe, where there are no females, but
Sutlers wives: fit drudges, to make fiers
Ith' devils kitchin, whose very lookes
Disparage the complexion of all their sex;
He nere converst with an Italian
Bona Koba, a plumpe Lady, that fils
Her growne, or with a French Bruvette,
A Spanish Muser umbrada, or a
Germane Yefrow, the Dutch.—
Or with a Welsh—
Parrot! will ye be prating?
What should a man doe withs tongue, an ye
Won't let him talke.
My Lord Volterre, is a copious linguist.
I still desire to be enabled for
Your graces service.
Are all the sluces stop'd, that we may see
Your Cormorants dive for their prey?
We onely want your highnesse presence there,
And the sport beginnes.
Comachio—
Signiour? these are your Cormorants, you still
Provide the Dutchesse new game, and pleasure:
She did you publicke grace, this morning too
Before the French leiger; but you ha travaild Sir.
My Lord, the French conceive things with justice
Ime but an isorit du moude, and as
The Spaniard saies, Altera, estrabajo
Del hombre, but Ive observ'd her grace names
Contarini often, lookes on you with
A smooth brow.
On me my Lord?
Lead forward to the River.
My hopes doe still encrease, fate smiles on me.
Signiour De Patri, be you neere us.
Y'ave heard her graces will, this is the first
Imployment. She knowes you Florentines
Insinuate with great subtlety in
Humane natures.
She shall receive each man in's just character,
Sir I congratulate your new fortune,
Youle finde her excellence a noble mistresse.
You are a gentle Lady, and adde much
Credit to her Court.
We shall lose the sport unlesse we hasten
To the River.
You have use of my attendance, and I am
Happy in't.
YOu now shall stay at Court Carintha, see
Her very lips looke blacke. Saturnes issue.
Were not so dull and sullen.
Madam sh'as great motives unto sadnesse
Which I've beene earnest with her to reveale,
But she conceales em as the vsurer doth
His treasure: striving to beguile noyse,
And lessen the number of his bagges with
His report.
Lady, too soone you will deprive the world
Of your deere presence, if thus early you
Consume your houres in pensive thoughts!
Carintha, have I not power to increase
Your griefe; if you conceale the cause of it
From me?
I am not sad, my faculties preserve
Their wonted harmony: your excellence
Will not inforce me to belie my passion.
There's my Lord Volterre, ist your gracēs
Pleasure to retire till we have ended
Our discovery.
Is he come? Carintha, follow me!
She gave the game high applause, and begg'd two
Of my Cormorants: I must invent new
Sports to delight her fancy.
The day afford your Lop much profit.
If your Lop be in good health, ye owe
Some thankes unto my prayers.
Laura, the Dutchesse great favourite
Giotto, is eminent in Court too.
If these afford me such respect Ive cause
To thinke my starres faithfull? Madam I would
Kisse your left hand—
I beseech your lp enforce me not
To be unmannerly you are now above
My conversation.
How bright Laura. Signior Giotto.
Pray cleere this mistery.
My Lord, be more particular, for my
Owne part I know my distance, but you greete
Your Fortunes with too much humility,
You want state to converse with me.
I me all wonder and amazement Signiour,
Pray give your meaning more perspicuous
Vtterance.
Will you forget to be reserved, know your
Station, you make me bold against my owne
Desire.
Howes this?
I implore your Lordship leave I may be
Cover'd, 'twould much assist my health.
Why, dost keepe thy head bare in reverence
To me? Madam, shall I intreate?—
Tis in your power to command, in my
Duty to obey.
Your duty—
It seemes he hath not yet; how much thē
Dutchesse favours him—Volterre listenes.
I conjecture so for e's differs much
From that which he must practise when he's Dukē
I heare ye—
How my Lord?
Laura, faith be publiquē! Giotto, why
Dost thou conceale the meanes to make thee
Happy?—
My Lord I know little, onely those that
Waite neere the Dutchesse, heare her often praise
Your nimble tongue, your skill in languages.
Phse questo mionto, what would you say,
There me interpret the inorticulate
Voyces of birds, and beasts, that skill deserv'd
A fame.
Your Lordship might then (with great ease) beene
Interpreter to the builders of Babel.
Something I've heard her grace speake too, in praise
Of your French gesture, your sublime friske, and
Odde conveyance of your body.
Tis when your Lordship wreathes your hams in thus.
Ta da rum, ta da rum, te re re, ra da rum.
These are the postures that inchant your sex.
Lady—
I cannot blame the Dutchesse to be fond.
But does not your lop grow weary with
Continuance of this motion?
It is my vulgar exercise ta da rum, ta da rum.
Enough, enough, my good Lord, sure your swim
Within your doublet.
Giotto, now I am fit for a race,
Never tyr'd. It has beene thought by some (skild
In th' ability of my person) that
Ime mortall.
Indeed sir tis not fit you should ēxpect
Much in heaven, having such joy on earth.
You are more than happy, this Lady knowes it.
Do'st ifaith Laura—
Sir, I hope when you shall sit invested
With Royall ornaments, you'le not disdaine
Laura for your humble servant.
And Giotto knowes that your Religion
Will not permit you slight industry.
I tooke part o' my breeding ith' French Court▪
And there I learnt to be familiar
With my Nobles.
Did not I say he would govērne gently,
Now can't my tongue be quiet, I must tell him all.
Nay Madam—
Giotto, dost concerne you to hinder
This her kindnesse? speake deare Lady.
My Lord I affect truth and brevity,
I am commanded by her grace to make
Your visits private to her.
Hah, forward deere Laura.
Why sir, it is her highnesse will that you
Conceale these visits.
And let no encouragement neither from
Her eyes nor speech imboldne ye to thinke
Vnlawfull, her favours you must take
With silent observation.
Here comes my Lord Comachio. Away signiour
He must not see you.
Yo soy mug juoderose.
My noble Patron.—
I greete thee as my best genius, th'art now
Mixt ith' number with such as weare my title,
Thou climb'st apace, yet safely too; they strive
At Court, who first shall be the flatterer:
What female wast that left thee now? I saw
Part of her gowne.
The Lady Laura.
Thou art most happy, skilfull in thy choyse
Of conversation: why she governes
Her highnesse heart. Didst question her
About my businesse?
I know all, she cannot hide a single
Thought from me.
Thart strangely powerfull o're Ladies,
But what said shee? have I no Rivall in
The Dutches love.
Sir, she ownes none but you, with a publike
Confidence, onely there is owne impediment.
What ist? prethee give't relation?
A spirit not tam'd by his religion
Would hazard much rather then suffer it
Indanger such a hope.
Make it no morē a secrēt.
Could ye thinke she has observ'd your Nephew
With an amorous eye.
De pazzi, my Nephēw?
Thats the man sir, who is so much oblig'd
Vnto her memory.
Sdeath this inclines so neere miracle
T'would taxe my judgement to beleeve it;
Conferre her love upon a foole.
Pardon me sir! I doe not positively
Say she loves him. I make it (for your sake)
A cautulous suspect your jealous men
Strive against danger.
I doe affect thy discipline.
This morning she desir'd to speake with him.
To speake with him - good our braines are nere us,
Ere thou admitst him to her presence, weele
Furnish him with discourse, preposterous
Vnto sence, and her demands; so make him
More cheape in her conception, here he comes.
Assist my prayers.
Signiour Vncle,
Nephew oppertunely
Signiour Giotto hath taken paines
To bring us knowledge of new graces, which
Our Dutches stores up for you, I am proud
To thinke what honour all our blood receives
From you, the toppe bough of our family:
I never hop'd there could be starres in heaven
So auspitious, as I behold now shining,
And pointing all their golden beames on you,
The Dutchesse loves you—
Not carelessely, and with that common favour,
She does divide among the Courtiers,
They doe but gleane her scattered graces,
For you the harvest's reserv'd and brought
Home to your bosome.
Other with much labour.
Clime this high rocke, upon whose swelling top,
The Dutches smiles are placed, yet obtaine not
One to reward their sweate.
But her owne hand
Reaches you up, and tempts you to enjoying
The Perimids height, you may ascend by stayres,
And mount with ease unto that happinesse,
Others adore afarre off.
Does the Dutchesse
Affect me honourably, and for marriage otherwise?
That makes the Musicke high, it were not else
So ravishing, you are the man mark'd out
To be the Duke Depazzi.
Thats her desire,
She would not like a theife steale joyes, but make
The pleasures lawfull, nuptiall holy rites,
Vshering your felicity, you must be
Her Husband Signiour, and all we your subjects,
Obsequious to your nod, when you have breath
To raise t'unlimitted height, and uncreate
Whom you would frowne upon.
I see shee is wise,
How will Comachio thinke his age blest, to see
Princes borne to his Nephew, and with breath
Covetous to expire in prayers for them.
Kneele there great Vncle,
I have an ambition
If you thinke not the honour over great,
To beg tuition of your second sonne,
Whom I should study to bring up, with such
Choyce education, as shall become
The greatnesse of his soule and birth.
Tis granted, my second sonne is thine, but are you sure
I am ordain'd to be the man you talke of;
Must I be cran'd up to that altitude.
My Lord
You may be confident, Giotto dares not
Play with your greatnesse, and my dare was never
Yet so incertaine, when I heare your name
So sweetened by your Dutchesse breath.
No more, I have a strong faith, tis so, for my Vncle
Doth practise already his observance, I
Purpose to visit our loving Dutchesse.
Nay you will be sent for and be courted to
That was intimated.
But my honoured Nephew
Would you admit instructions, for I see
With how much envy of the Court you rise
To this high sphere of soveraignety, be prudent,
Arme your selfe with some excellent discourses (thoughts.
For your first parly, you shall knit her soule to your owne
If my abilities may doe you service.
Giotto, you are furnished to read Lectures
To us both of Courtship, and I know my Nephew
Will gratefully remember, what you adde
To raise him to our wishes.
I desire to be a banquerout of knowledge, when
My portion may enrich you.
Should you lose
Your braine signiour in my service, you
Should finde I would requite you.
At his first entrance to her graces presence
Something new and sublime, t'insinuate
How much she hath consulted with her best
Wisedome, when she elected one so meriting,
To be her husband.
So with one argument
He magnifies her judgement, and his worth.
I like that well, if you doe pen that speech
Commend me pray unreasonable, I shall study it.
That must be, to this we may guesse she will
Reply, my Lord, I could misse in such a troope
Of Deservers to choose out the ablest.
Meaning my Nephew.
I know that, who else?
Hence take you fresh occasions to extoll
Your selfe, and be not nice to let her know
Your active blood, and spirit to get Princes,
How much the people will be bound to blesse
Her race in choosing you, whose promising body
Is able to incite them to make bonfires
For Dukes unborne.
Great reason, proceed.
It will be necessary you disparage all men
That are about her, though your Vncle, he
Will suffer to advance you.
Who my Nephew?
Let me alone to disgrace him.
It gives you lustre principally remember
To raile against her Ladies, call em hags,
You cannot be too bitter, this secures
Your love toth' Dutchesse, beats of jealousie
When you appeare to love her onely of
All the sex.
It will be a good occasion to beate off
Laura, to whom I did pretend my selfe
A Lover excellent, pray let me have all these
Directions in manuscripts, Ile not see her
Till they be rotten in my head.
Giotto, bindus both to you, this will do't,
Art cannot shape him more ridiculous,
These are rare principles. Here's Contarini.
Remove your selfes: tis not fit he see ye.
Signiour Contarini, your minute is expir'd.
I crave your pardon signiour, have you learnt
From Laura ought that concernes my knowledge.
I have cause to intreate my intelligence.
I am your pensioner, you have enriched
My stable with a Barbary Roane.
A gift I am ignorant to requite;
I must returne great thankes too, from the
Lady Laura, for the wealthy Carbanet
You sent her last night.
I me yet indebted to you both: Signiour
You are skilled in my affaire: the noyse still
Continue, our great Dutchesse will elect
A husband from her owne Court, Ile onely
Know the man; that so I may direct my
Observance the right way, you will call this
An honest pollicy.
Your contemplations are too humble.
You Signiour?
Ere I would thinke another worthier then
My selfe, to bearē a soveraigne title;
I would disclaime my judgement and runnē madde.
But there's a crosse barre to your ambition,
(Heaven excuse my sorrow for it?) you are
Marryed, you have a wife.
Sir, I beseech you give your meaning more expression
Has the Dutchesse any name within her memory,
So much as Contarinies?
Are not you he whose feature she admires?
Nay Sir, it is not long since Laura heard
Her wish you were unmarryed: Interpret
My relation as you please;
But you know Princes are reserved. Whats he?
My servant Signiour, he has modest eares
And a quiet tongue. Dandalo, you may
Stay here, I shall use thy consent in a businesse.
I waite your pleasure.
But did her grace wish I werē unmarryēd?
By no itteration that breedes noyse.
Well, I allow of her graces wish.
How my Lord?
If my marriage discontent her highnēsse:
I wish I had no wife—
He has a noble soule! is there no way
To avoid this trifle called a wife.
Yes Signiour, there are waies, but—
O sir, discharge your minde, it concernes my
Prēferment to be faithfull.
Troth, were all impediments cleared, I thinke
We two should rule equally;
Ime strangely fond to those I love.
Signiour you have given me cause to know it.
If I could sue out a divorse——
I signiour, but the judge grants nonē without a
lawfull cause.
Shēe shall commit adultery.
With whom?
Giotto, that I am comē to tell thee.
Shees a beautious Lady, soft and buxsome?
Thou shalt lye with her.
I, my Lord?
T'were an indeerement too great for my rēquitall.
Tis decreed, come, it must be so.
Signiour, I shall beg your pardon.
I keepe my mercy for another use,
Suspect no danger, you shall come disguis'd
When you wooe her too't, which done, the Dutchesse
Shall helpe my procurement of a divorce:
Why, I knew before, her highnesse lov'd me!
I have received favours from her lookes and and speech.
Does not your man listen?
No matter, hees our confederate.
Dandalo know this Gentlemans hands
And kisse em often.
Ime his humble crēature.
I shall be glad to shew you kindenēsse.
Lets perfect our designe, good signiour
I have no leasure now to ruminate,
I affect action.
Madam, I ha signified to my Lord
What you commanded, but I hope your Ladiship
Hath heard his disposition.
He's not reconciled to our sex,
He has proclaim'd that.
This place breedes no Ladies,
No not for civill entertainement, we
Have not a woman in the house, their pictures
Which adorne other gallaries, you see
Tempt not the eye here, all his offices
Discharged by men, he saies where he commands
He must not see a woman.
What not strangers?
Such is his will.
How then?
If you desire his presence and discourse,
You must be vail'd here Madam, his owne eye
Must not be witnesse to what face he speakes,
Ime but his servant.
Tell him Ile expect him in that forme hē
Prescribes.
The other Lady too
Must be clouded, then Ile let his Lordship
Know y'are prepared.
Pray doe Madam, I hope
Your discontent will give you leave to smile
At this, her grace found you but this employment,
With me, to beate your melancholly off,
Apply to the occasion.
My gratitude will teach me to conforme.
Now Ladies whats your pleasures, that you summon
My appearance, I know ye ha supple joynts,
What mistery of state sends you to me?
I cannot revell in long stockings, friske
To please your wanton eye-sight; I nere bosted
'My ribs, or largenesse of my thighs, t' invite you;
I make no Sonnets of your anticke dressings,
Cry up your colour of your face, and sweare
Y'are divine peeces, for I know you are not:
I will not draw heavens curse upon me, for
Flattering into pride; say that the Lillies,
Are pale, for envy of your white, and the Roses
Blush, to see better in your cheekes, your haire
Beames, rather drawne up to a net, might catch
Iove when he plaid the Eagle; that your brests
Raise up themselves like two faire Mountainers
Ith' pleasant vale of temptation, I hate this
I will not dam my selfe to make you proud,
Doe not, I know your faces?
Ours, we are not ashamed to shew em.
Doe not unvaile.
Good Madam.
Will you not see what you condemne?
Ime gone, if you attempt to let me seē
A peece of any countenance; while I thus
Looke on ye, I can helpe my selfe t'imagine
Ye are some other creatures.
Troth my Lord, for pitty to your selfe
End your invectives;
Madam I told you of this mirth.
Can he be serious?
Wracke me not with your stay,
Whats the designe hath brought you hither?
This Signiour; tis the Dutchesse pleasurē
You make suddaine repaire to Court.
I?
That's our Embassie.
I am no Court physitian, I but vexē
Your female constitutions, you know
All my receipts are bitter, and her excellēncē
Hath plenty of those, she gives a pension to
Can flatter; why does she send for me am so
Vnwelcome?
My Lord, her grace employes
Not me to any so unhappy:
And though you have not liv'd so neere the favour,
Ith' eye of the Court, which your owne humour too
May have beene the cause, I have no honour, if
You finde your selfe unwelcome,
Tis a mistery.
I could instruct you further with a secret,
Your soule would dance to know, but I confesse
Tis more then my commission:
Is there in nature any happinesse for mē?
And from a woman: you will come my Lord?
Stay, from a woman, ha? the Dutchesse—
Heard a noyse she would chuse a Lover from
Her owne Court, can it be that? death I havē
Beene boundlesse in my railing. I begin
To curse my selfe fort.
Be all silence,
Thou hast a knowledge will be dangerous
To any hope, perhaps, I could be pleased
To see the tip o' your nose Lady,
Or the mole upon your chinne.
You will have cause to blesse the occasion
Of this dayes message.
I could see your cheeke,
Nay halfe your face for tother sillable.
Lady you can say more,
I dare not signiour, already we have exceeded.
I know such creatures cannot mocke, sweete Lady.
Have you not heard her graces resolution,
Touching a husband?
Your are o're darke still, enrich me,
I hope your honour will remember this poore service when tis done.
What? one Letter of your meaning.
My Lord the Dutchesse loves you.
Ha?
Come Madam, I shall say you will waite.
Shall I not see the faces,
To which I owe my blessednesse.
No words of those loose creatures in your custody,
Seale up the doores, still the aire least that
Creepe out too soone, and kill my growing fate.
VVAs not Orseollo's humour, recreation
To thee Carintha?
I spent all my thoughts
In wonder Madam.
He began to soften—
We tam'd his Tiger violence, not Magicke
Could force him like the charme you sent.
Giotto? What speakes your hast?
Comachio Madam, and signiour Depazzi.
Vsher em in.
Something in such a plenty may delight
Your dulled fancy.
Laura, remoove your selfe,
Doe not ecclipse the splendor of that Sunne.
My Eagles eye must gaze at. Vncle know
Your distance.
Signiour Depazzi.
Giotto, my hand agen, be proud, now Madam
I addresse my selfe to you, wonderfull Princesse,
Not so much for your beauty as your wisdome,
Your carnall wisdome.
Wherein Signiour.
Good.
Right you answer, right it is my qu:
Your carnall wisdome Madam, you proclaime
In choosing out a husband, and that man
Whose memory your subjects shall have cause
To curse, is I.
To curse?
Perfect still, have cause to curse,
You did no sooner choose him, which of all
Your faire Lords, though you looke a squint upon
My merit, could your eye picke out more able?
Heroicke, compleat, tempting? I am flesht,
Nothing shall put me out.
Observe.
Your grace saies right, I doe acknowledge it.
You are too hasty, her grace saies nothing.
Did your grace say nothing? speake it againe,
I know you meant to say something to th' purpose.
What purpose signiour?
Now she has put me quite out.
Then raile upon your Vncle.
Looke on him Madam, there he stands, you may
Perhaps imagine him for his gray beard
And a starched face, that he is wise a statist:
Ile bring ye a justice, thats but newly pack'd
Into commission, oth' peace, shall make
An asse on him.
Nephew, this will make you odious.
A very gull in mistery of state,
A most egregious—in comparison
Of one that I could name, but he may serve
To fright the pages, muster the blacke guard,
Or keepe the doore at maskes, his face will doe
More then a hundred others; yet now I thinke on't,
Your grace shall magnifie your favour to me,
And let me begge him.
Ha, ha.
I hope your grace will pardon him, these fits
Are ever at full Moone.
Begge your Vncle Signiour?
Yes I would furnish him with an
Houreglasse and a sithe;
And sell him to the Masons for the picture
Of time, Madam, would he not shew well?
This is witty, what detractour
Gave out Signiour Comachio, your Nephew
Had no rich braine, Carintha, doe you nold him
Laura, Comachio, ha?
Giotto, she has put me out agen,
Then raile upon her Ladies,
Hum, when I contemplate on your highnesse face
I hate all others.
Can your excellence.
Why, is mine so bad?
I beseech your grace, speake your part right,
Oblivion is my qu. I doe remember.
Madam Carintha, speake to her grace.
Has Madam Laura such I lip or eye?
I doe confesse she has a nose, but I
Passe over it.
He makes a bridge of that,
Her cheekes,—
Nephew—Madam I humbly pray I may remove
This rudenesse, tis a discord must needes grate
Your soft eare,
Vncle you are out now, her cheekes.
Well Signiour, what of my cheekes.
Why your cheekes are, as they are, death, I ha forgot.
This tis when you won't come t'rehearsall.
My cheekes are
Such as creation fram'd em, and the colour
Is natures gift.
It had need be gift, I know none so prodigall
To be at charge to buy em, yet you thought
I was in love w'ye, I confesse I did
Once cherish an opinion you were something
About a gipsie, and might serve in Lent
When flesh was rare, but you must take into
Your thoughts, I meant not honestly, you see
For whom fate hath reserv'd me, be as patient
As such a losse will suffer you, doe not marre
Your face, cause I condemne it, it may serve
Some hungry signiour, or some City heire
That would be dabled in nobility,
And pay for his cornuting.
He is most witty Carintha.
Giotto, she is taken with this imprudence,
What dulnesse hangs upon her soule? some fatall
Appoplexy seise him, that which we
Plotted to make him hatefull does inchant her.
Madam, you see I have a body, ponderous
And full of marrow, Ile not get an heire
Lesse hopefull then my selfe, my first sonne shall be
An Emperour borne, may I doe things to purpose
When I am in once.
Will not this startle her?
Sure Madam, he will put downe Hercules.
Hercules, Hercules, what, a Pedlar.
Pedler, my Lord you would say pidler.
He shall be what I please, doe not I know Hercules,
He got but fifty in a night, but I—
Madam your eare.
My duty to your grace, makes me forget
He is my kinsman.
Signior Depazzi,
We have leasure to heare you finish your discourse
With Laura and Carintha.
He's courted to her privacy, her soule is
In a deepe Lethargie.
Ha?
What was intended to destroy his hope,
Hath raisd him to assurance, she applauds
That which to all understanding but her owne,
Appeares prodigious, did you suspect
She would heare this prate?
He had committed sinne enough to have had
His lips sow'd up eternally, death, I could
Grow into death with wonder.
She check'd you for interrupting.
A fury revels in my braine, shee's mad,
And so am I, but—
What for prevention,
If she have such a poverty in her reason,
Ith' humour she may marry him, and then
Beside the mighty fortune lost, you grone
Vnder his tyranny.
In his blood Ile bathe
My feares, a ship lanch'd forth with all her wings,
Be calmed thus.
Ile digge the remora
That hangs upon the barke, this foole wo'd not
Be mised among the living, rather then—
Th'art my genious sacred directour
To my blisse.
I ha so much suffering
In your ungentle starres, that I would purchase
Their better influence with my danger.
How I feele my heart incorporate with thine,
What doe I owe to heaven for sending me
Thy friendship, say, shall this thing be removed,
Giotto, that so ruines me.
Shall: there is
A most severe necessity, you must not
Be conscionable now; and charity
Vnto your selfe, will drowne the sinne:
Retort disgrace t'your hate.
I shall extend my favour, where I see
Merit invite, perhaps commend you to
Some other Lord; Vncle, you shall continue
Your place; Giotto finde out a monopoly,
It shall besign'd.
I congratulate your high fortune,
I knew t'wod take.
Here's a pretty front,
Signiour Orseollo, stay till I am valid.—
Nay, good Madam, I can indure to see
Your face, without danger to my eyes—Signiour
Giotto, I joy in your great fortunes.
They shall inable me to doe you service.
My Lord, you cherish my instructions,
Y'are come earlier then your houre.
I'd faine know my destiny; Madam Ime rough.
The warres have spoilt my Courtship; I cannot
Flatter kindnesse from you; but I affect
Gratitude. What newes Lady, hah? has there
Beene no mention of my name or person
Since I receiv'd your last intelligence?
I know nothing but what I am enjoyn'd
To make a secret.
How deere Lady.
Giotto, shall I tell him that?
Not for both the Indies.
But she shall Giotto, she and wee be kinde,—
Madam,—we three will share in all atchievements.
I cannot hide it from him.
Are you weary of your life Lady?
My hopes are finished.
The Dutchesse has commanded him to get
Your picture for her.
Who'ld trust a secret in a womans brest?
My Lord, as you esteeme our loves usefull
Let no eare enjoy this but your owne.
I will forget I heard it; I, I me a souldier
Signiour, and shall deserve your faith. Sancho!
My Lord!
Theres a famous Painter sojornes here
In Mantua, a Germane!
Shadan wierex.
The same, you are to seeke him out, I have
Vse for him.
Already you begin to make it publike.
Doe not suspect my servants silence, I
Trust him with a secret of weightier
Consequence then this, my creature! hunk▪
Your hopes increase Signiour.
Give me thy hand, Giotto, thine too:
Weele governe like the Triumveri—
But sir, there is one obstacle—
What ist?
Ile loose a Thumbe to have it cleer'd.
Heart, let me but know't?
Y'have heretofore appeared so boysterous
And sullen to that sex, that the Dutchesse
Partly thinkes—
What does she thinke?
Y'are insufficient.
How? a metophrase upon that word.
Sir t'would impeach her modesty t'expresse
Her meaning, ith' blunt dialect, however
Twill become my tongue; there's a noise amongst
The Ladies, y'are insufficient: that is
Your genitalls want the perfect helpe in
Procreation.
Horror, horror, name the authour of this
Calumny.
Be not so loud signiour, were it a truth
Twould not proclaime nature, or your parents
Guilty, you are a soldier, perhaps in
A skirmish at Lepauto, some Turke
Circumcised you with his semiler;
Or being at push a pike, you might be
Drill'd below the navell, nay I ha knowne
The breath of a bullet snatch a remnant
Of loose flesh.
Sdeath insufficient! you shall know a secret
Which I have fear'd, even ith' keeping o' my owne heart.
Twill trouble me to know a thing, so full
Of danger.
Tis onely dangerous to me, but sir,
It must out, for Ile stifle now this dam'd
Aspersion. It reveales the cause, why I
Was still a satire against women.
I, that I would faine know.
Know what Lady? we are in a discourse, meerely,
Concernes us two, walke aside, she must not heare't.
Sancho, I now release off the Oath,
Which did oblige your secresie about
My continence, nay good Madam, troth we
desire to be particuler.
Hereafter I shall grow reserved too.
A personall secret, as Ime a souldier.
You shall beleeve him Lady for my sake.
How many whores hast thou in keeping for my use?
Some ten my Lord!
You passe my beleefe.
'Las, Ime insufficient! a meere Eunuch, I.
But what urged your invectives gainst the Sex,
Since you thus cherish them in private!
The Dutchesse has a chast court: 'twas safty
To disguise m'incontinence, least she should
Punish it.
Y'are not so ravinous (my Lord) but when
Your friend desires a taste, he may be furnished, hah?
You shall visit my seragho, and chose your whore.
May I presume—
That's the medicinall pimpe; who prescribes
Plaisters for my belly.
You maintaine him in a gaudy outside.
His sinnes mainetaine him; those of his function.
Grow mighty now adayes.
Lady you shall share in our secret,
Are you mad Signiour?
My Lord you are to modest: theres no errour
So readily excused by Ladies as this
O'th blood. Fame has abused our noble friend:
Not Hercules was more inabled for
Increase; then he.
Indeed Signiour?
Indeed? why Madam, doe you doubt that I
Bely him, Ime sure he keepes tenne whores.
Slight, you are treacherous.
She cries indeed, as if she did suspect
You can proffer like a Goate, and performe
Like an Elephant.
This was you that railed against women.
Fye my Lord.
Troth Madam, my constitution is to blame.
But a young sinner deserves mercy.
Your lustinesse redresse you more hopefull
To the state. Give me a Prince from whose loynes
We may expect issue.
Howsoever I would not have the Dutchesse know
Of this; till I am more indeere unto
Her heart.
Does not her happinesse, and mine depend
Vpon your fate?
My Lord, be confident of my silence.
Her grace is now in the privy garden.
Walke you thither, and receive those favours,
Her lookes administer: without reply
Of gratitude, she would not have it knowne
She loves you.
Enough I shall be polliticke.
Was there ever such a wanton Hipocrite?
He Neighs like a horse. I am not cosend
In him, I still thought he was a lecher.
Signiour Giotto.
My good Lord?—
Tis my chiefe blessing to see your Lordship
In good health—
I thanke you noble Lady.
Ile goe pray to have it still continued.
What meanes this great observance, tis beyond
My merit. Dost not admire her graces
Favorite should use me thus?
These female Courtiers ha the tricke on't.
What signiour?
Tis safe Idolatry to bow unto
The rising sonne, shee sees your fortune smile,
And therefore flatters ye.
Heaven knowes, I neare
Shall gaine by Courtship, I
Though all the Heraulds
Called thee Duke, Ile not kisse your hand
Vnlesse 'twere cleane.
Thou hast heard some newes.
Declare, come, declare,
And prosper.
My Lord, I first should chide your tardinesse
In action. First now I saw your wife at Court,
Attending on the Dutches: Onely she
Defeates your hope; yet her removall from
Your bed is not design'd.
I have sent her to my house, provided you
A rare disguise which you shall weare, and wooe
Her body to the darke deed, my man shall
Witnesse her adultery; and Ile sue out
A divorce; whilst you remaine safe from law,
Because not knowne to her.
Why this I like, it tastes of sublime wit.
I will be active in my reigne, in large
My Dutchy. Genon is proud, it shall
Grow humble I have a long arme, 'twill reach
Florence. Or if I chance to lay my hand on Parma
I shall gripe it till my fist ake, ere I
For sake my tenure.
Orseollo.
Your greeting's too familiar!
From whence this pride, Ile anger him.
My Lord, though I am growne above the use
Of Poetry, there still remaines in my
Remembrance a Sonnet, made in praise of
Women; Which if youle please to heare—
He had a bold Muse, that durst undertake
So high an argument, sure a woman
Was the object, strucke old Homer blinde;
And for his eyes left him a Muse. I've lost
My businesse.
He was not wont to speake so well of women.
No humorist is constant to dislike,
Or commendation.
Nay lead the way my Lord:
Ime part of your attendance.
Signiour my affaires hither require haste,
The Dutchesse (on some sudden cause) hath sent for me.
I beleeve tis to take's advise about
A Masine for my wedding, hee's excellent
At Revels. On my good Lord.—
You come lately from her, and I would know,
How you approve her present lookes. Tis the Art
Of forraigne Courtiers to visite Princes,
In lucky minutes; when their gesture shewes
Em pleasant. How lookes her grace to day: Is,
She not physicall, but high and jocond?
You may without danger of your fortune
Choose this minute for conference with her grace.
Signiour th'as cause to cleare her lookes; Her thoughts
Grow easie to her, she had found out the man;
The man, that must: more might be said: but then
More must be spoke—
Slight; why this to me; how comes he to know
That I am he, her highnesse aimes at? True
The man is knowne: nor is his worth concealed.
Worth Signiour!—None but Laura gave him
Notice, Ime the man, I neare spoke of it
My selfe. My Lord, the man may with safety
Boast, he is the best deserver in the Court. hum.
Your Lordship does him too much right, tis certaine,
He has beene told that I am he.
He hath a glorious feature too.
Nay good signiour, comely; but not glorious.
How not glorious, speake that agen.
This is a pretty kinde of flattery,
He will not suffer me to abuse my selfe.
Ile admit he charmes the Ladies? or so—
That's I; for I charme the Ladies. He knowes
I shall be Duke, it cannot be conceal'd.
The man has travaild too.
Never I. But it seemes the Dutchesse gives
It out so: the more to honour her choyse
Signiour; I must doe you justice▪ the Court
Speakes you most accurate, ith' Spanish garbe.
The Spaniards (signiour) reserves all passion,
To expresse his feeling in accurences
Of statē, when in discourse; his Tooth-picke still
Is his parinthasis: which he doth manage
Subtly thus—Par les santos sennor—
Lo conosco portierto—porque es
Trabaso (conlicenzia diuvestra alteza)
Hablas muchas palabeas—
No puedo en veridad—
But why those things Signiour?
This elevation oth' shoulders is a
Polliticke gesture, declares a meaning hid;
Which you may finde out if you can: and is
Often used in triviall circumstances.
I question this your Man——
Your Lordship must speak my mothers tongue then.
Is Don Diego within?
Stay slave, weele be as politicke as he—
Which don Diego doe you meane? he that plaide
The sloven in the great Church. The English
Have a Proverbe on him.
Why not he of Valder, or any other Diego?
Be not inraged (my Lord) those grave shrugs appēare
Vnmannerly, and would before Ladies,
Ingender a suspect of vermine.
Then Ile prefer (sir) the French to your
Dislike or praise: whom though a surly Don,
Calls an impertinent people; giddy
Trifles? yet in my esteeme they merit
Highly. They are active even in discourse
Let us beginne cheerely, No matter
On what slight or triviall subject; Be it
On that single melancholly haire upon
Your chinne. Rise and fall by my example.
I am prepaired.
Mounsier, sil adirent que ete cheveil la sera brusle; que farions nous
Avec vostre menton: poucce que le Roy.
Mounsieur be not troubled! banish your feare,
For Ile tosse th' Antarticke pole
With like ease as Hercules could a bulrush.
Make it a secret.
O vy da', Ie slay bien que la volente, doit esere est eme pour facit: mais quond
Ie vous donneray an cheque naude prenez lamanie, que celus, que tombe
Gaigneray un pas; pour reu, que ce veleve—
Troth, I know not, may be it was a mistake in Plato, for those pinnes and feathers which you talke of, are usefull unto Ladies. Besides tis well knowne, the man ith' Moone will not permit excuse in businesse of this kinde: Tis dangerous to law, and reason.
Ie ne le croy pas, cesee un chanson dumonde.
So I was told by one that knowes the Kings heart? he came hither to cheapen Ginger bread, for the Mogols daughter.
Est i' possibile? Il in a aucun chose ci dificile, mais je le prenderay tant tose.
Do'st ifaith, know then all the Lyons in Barbary shall not contrary me in this way.
How doe you like it Signiour?
T'as put me into a heate, and French heates arē not
Very wholesome. But I've heard how nimbly
You dispose your person in a French Curvet!
I know your minde; but my body is now prepaired
For a high visit. My joynts moves by screwes,
Ime so starched together; a dance would
Loosen me, and make me fall in rumples.
Your man is well build for such a motion,
Marke tis onely thus—and thus—
I ha seene your Lordship doe it ta da rum, ta da rum.
Good, very good, signiour Depazzi you owe
Heaven much thankes, for lending you this servant;
I ha not seene a Gentleman in all France
Move with so much regard, and vigour.
Your Lordship is my patterne.
M'affaires call me to Court, serviteur tres humble.
Ist possible? This Lord must rise when I am Dukē:
Ile prefer none but such as can speake French and dance;
Crispino, prepare my Bath, Ile distill and grow amorous.
My Lord twill become me to receive
Whom you give up so noble, I should sinne
Against obedience; you are most welcome signiour.
My best Carintha.
Madam you incouragē me
To serve your goodnesse, my Lord you undoe me,
With too much honour.
Signiour, if your eye take delight in prospect
There's a roome will feede it richly,
Shew him Carintha, some
Affaires call me to Court. Cherish him
With my best care, please you walke.
So Dandalo, be faithful to your trust, no intērruption,
Giotto prosper in thy sinne, thy deed
Will make me happy, though my honour bleed.
Y'Are very jocund on the suddaine.
Thanke your love for't, that provided
Such a cure for melancholly;
To my selfe I seeme not to goe but dance,
When shall we have a maske
My Lord?
You'd be revelling againe.
I am all for sport, your honour is much bound
To the Gentleman your friend, trust me my Lord
He is a rare physitian.
He's well skild in womens pulces.
Theres no feare my Lord,
But heele recover me, I doe like him infinitely
For my body, the best in Padua.
Good, good he gave you gentle phisicke,
But you hope twill worke.
No Esculapius
Could ha behaved him more judicially
Did our Court Ladyes know his skill
They would be all his Patients, and be sicke a purpose.
You hold him then sufficient.
He has a way
So easie to doe good upon's.
Vpon ye ith' name of lust, you see
I had a care.
Twas more compassion, and I am bound
To acknowledge it, I was all heavinesse;
A thousand plummets hung upon my heart,
Tis by your meanes I am made light.
I thinke so, very light, ha, is she not quicke already,
She moves so nimbly, Giotto has don't,
I have it here, I feele it spread, hake you:
Y'are a whore.
Does your Lordship love bastard next your heart,
Though some hold wine unholesome, it may thaw
Your congealed blood; oh the difference of constitutions.
Hey, she jeeres me, how now?
My Lord, her grace hath sent a strict command
You waite to night at Court.
Ha?
The messenger seemēd full of hast, he onēly
Tooke time to say her highnesse had resolv'd,
This Night, to cleere all doubts, and from her Court
Make happy one, with title of a Duke.
Be dumbe, thou bringst destruction to night,
Pray you may be mistaken, I am undone else.
It is my unhappinesse then my Lord, to bring unwelcome truth.
To night, why tis impossible
To sue out a divorce, Ime lost, my plots
Rebound and strike me dead.
My Lord, you seeme
Troubled, does your head ake, Ile into th' garden
And gather a few simples.
Madam a word w'e,
You magnified but now a courtesie
I did you, you were ever gratefull, I
Know't, you shall not doe the benefit
If you will yet kill your selfe.
That's a small matter.
I know tis, considering th'art stained,
Lost in thine honour, held but a disease
That growes upon thy sex, a tumour; prethee
Lance thy selfe tis soone done.
That's a poore favour,
Well, Ile thinke on't to morrow.
'T must be done to night, and earely to, for else twill
Doe me no pleasure deare Carintha, make thy memory
Religious.
I am thinking where the signe is,
Hah, tis in Capricornus, Ile goe let
My selfe blood ith' knees, and dye praying,
That your Lordship may recover your wits againe.
A fury lend me curses, make me all
An execration, I ha plotted fairely,
And made my selfe a fine rediculus thing
To no purpose, I am deepe in shame, I must on
Giotto, have a nimble braine; you must sinke too
Or boy me up againe.
Make no words Crispino, for the Dutchesse
Would not have it published that she meanes to chuse me.
Did she promise you?
Not by word of mouth, but I know her meaning,
As well as I were in her, I must be Duke man.
Tis certaine, every body knowes it, but say nothing
Least it breake out, hast done.
A little with this locke, and Ile adone your Lordship
With a powder; I hope your honour will
Not forget Crispino's faithfull service when you are Duke.
Why I am Duke already,
But for the ceremony, my raign's begun, Depazzi the first.
But that Ile not shew my selfe unto my people,
Because the Dutchesse did intreate me, let me
See what place th'art fit for: oh I have it,
Thou shalt be judge.
A judge my Lord
A Iudge my Lord, at least, thou canst discharge it,
Tis nothing to sit upon life and death, tis not
Required you should speake much, thy trade has halfe
Prepared thee, thou canst pole the commons, Ime sure,
And cut off capitall offenders.
Very good be it so, be a judge.
Where my good Lord?
Why thou shalt be a Iudge in potentia.
I humbly thanke your grace.
Oh my true friend, I have no happinesse
But thou dost make me clime too't, twill be thy owne
Instructer, and oblige me everlastingly.
Ile soone remoove your feares, I cannot doubt
You will make good your promise Sir, to pardon
When y'are Duke.
Pardon, reward and honour thee as my preserver,
Be not observed, I am your creature.
My Lord, I have assaid which you require privacy,
Send off Crispino,
I ha made him a Iudge.
Tis very trimly done of you, I cry you mercy my very
Good Lord, I humbly desire your honourable absence.
It shall be granted.
Now Signiour what bring you.
Why some tokens for your Lordship, looke you.
Th'are no tokens of love as I take it.
Yes but they are, and you must take em so,
But make your choyse, which best affecteth you,
For one you must accept.
O what doe you meane Signiour.
Not too loud, lest I chuse for you, heres a ball,
Better then any ere Crispino washt
Your honours face with 'twill scoure you.
Hold, are you in earnest.
A bullet will quickely sing my errand to you,
Will you choose.
I beseech declare your meaning Signiour.
In short, I me sent to kill you, if you like
Any death better then another, briefely
Resolve and have it, nay without long studdy.
Every man should consider his end Signiour, alas!
The Dutchesse loves you, and there must be order
Taken to stay your raysing, say your prayers.
I ha not the heart to say my prayers,
Ah, if I must needes, I would dye
Another death, you ha not brought me.
What ist?
I would choose my gallowes, ah, stay tis very
Short warning, and I am not halfe prepared:
What is this, Ratsbane; alas thats to kill
Vermine, I would be loath to be sent out of
The world like a Rat.
What say you to a halter?
Indeed Signiour I never loved swinging
In my life, and the halter is a dogges death,
I would dye like a man.
What say you to a sword?
Alas I have a sword of my owne, and I had a mind to't
But my stomacke will never disgest it.
Then this pistoll.
But that I have a weake constitution,
I have alwayes beene given to loosenesse,
And I doubt your pellet will put me into such a scowring.
Why, would you live then?
Alas every thing would live Signiour, but I should be
Sorry to enjoy a life, that stood not with your liking signior.
But if I live to be a Duke.—
Duke thats the sluce open'd this torrent.
I am abused deare Signiour, Ile renounce it,
Ile be first a dog-killer.
This is but aire, your not to be trusted,
I ha sworne to send you into another world,
You must not more be seene.
I wo'not; doe but trust me,
And as I am honourable Ile goe
Into the wildernesse, and live with Beares;
Any whether, hide me in a Well, and there be no
Water in't, Ile feed on gravell;
By this hand, this seaven yeares, none shall know
But I am dead.
If they should find you living.
Never, Ile indure pinching to death
Ere Ile confesse it.
Were I certaine
You would be buryed to all mens sight, but till
To morrow.
See me put into the ground your selfe,
So you'le not smother me, and it be seven nights
Ile feede on moles sweete Signiour.
The Dutchesse doth purpose this night her election,
Your Vncle envying your hope, must ha
Security for non appearance; had I
A faith you'ld creepe into obscurity,
But for twelve houres I should have one
Sinne lesse to answer for.
Noble Signiour, Ile wrigle my selfe into a
Wormehole, or creepe into a Molehill, and live
Vpon Emmits egges.
Be sure you do't then, poore sicke nobility,
How thinne he lookes already.
Signiour Giotto.
Now the tide comes.
This is the night Signiour, t'inclines a pace.
Doe I remaine unshaken in her opinion
Have I any square still.
O my good Lord.
Signiour a word,
Does this night then conclude—
Your happinesse.
Be not tempted from me, I have writ
Pamphlets in praise of women, I have a volume
Of Recantations.
They are fruitlesse,
You are fixt already in her thoughts, away
You make your person cheape, meete, and
Be happy.
Giotto.
Deere Signiour.
What make they flattering here, ha they all hope
To enjoy her; all, onely Contarini
Could gnaw his heartstrings now to be excluded,
When he expected his fate ripe, and all his
Hopes fit for gathering.
Be high and answer your great hopes;
Meete confidence.
Sha't be my fellow Caesar in the Empire.
Noble Contarini.
Y'ave store of clients signiour, I am come
To know my fortune too.
Alas my Lord.
You'ld say tis plaine writ in my forehead, yes
In capitall letters; you are knowne to th' secretary,
That taught my wife this Text hand, but you must
Doe something, sure the marriage is decreed
To night to rid me of Carintha, or
Ile ha thee punish'd for adultery.
Are you mad?
As hornes can make a man, it is no time
For patience, heare me carefully and have
Your best braines.
Adultery? was it not by your consent,
The very sinfull act yours, I but mov'd
By your direction, will this published
Exempt you from the Law?
Ile laugh at thee
With my mans helpe, and oath against thee, Ile
Returne thy calumny ith' face, I am
A Lord, and shall out weigh thee, couldst thou give
Thy truth a body, that even men might see
As well as heare it.
This is strange and violent ha,
Doe, harrow thy skull, I am resolved.
This is but course reward for my last office,
No remedy but killing before supper;
Did my starres owe me this? you will pardon me
When y'are Duke, thats but reason.
And reward thee.
I am in, and must wade through, she goes to bed
Supperlesse.
Oh happinesse, may I trust too't?
Ile put her granam to the charge of wormes
To entertaine her, meete, and be Duke, Ile make
Your wife immortall.
Wo't thou be speedy, for Ile tell thee Giotto,
I cannot hope this night to have all perfect.
The noyse of this her sudden death, must needes
Marre this nights revelling, and pretract the choyse
That is expected; then a little time
Presents me capable of the mighty favour:
I have incouragement to hope for marriage
With our great Dutchesse, ha.
Excellent braines,
Your wife is already carrying commendations.
To your friends ith' tother world.
Oh let me hugge thee.
I have your pardon.
And my heart too, on, be swift in thy great worke
Beleeve it done.
This pleasantnesse becomes you well Carintha,
And you shew duty in it, this night we dedicate
To our owne delights.
Madam, I ha more wonder
To tell your grace, when you are pleased to heare me.
You'le finde our disposition meete it, but
Laura, dost thou not smile to thinke upon
The event, we shall be censur'd humorous.
But your grace shall publish your reasons,
You will appeare just.
That ambition
Should have such feare in humane natures, but
Court hath beene long sicke; they are my humours
And I must phisicke em.
Treason, treason, wheres the Dutchesse, O Madam
Never was heard of such a horrid treason.
Our guard.
Nay I discovered and prevented it
Already.
You amaze us, whats the treason, who is
The conspirator?
My Vncle, but I thinke most o' the Lords
Had their hand in't:
Be briefe.
There was a plot of treason to ha kild.
Whom? defend us heaven.
Nay I ha defended my selfe, they wod a kild.
Me, that shall be Duke, because they saw
You were inclin'd to marry me.
Is this the treason?
And who should be the villaine thinke you, but
Giotto.
Giotto.
I Giotto, but like an honest rascall
Vpon my promise, to goe hide my selfe
For twelve houres, he sav'd my life, did y'ever
Heare of such a cunning traitour, but it is
Your destiny to ha me, you have cause
To pray heartily.
And so I have, here was a peece of treason,
But be reserv'd you are here safe; Ile take
My time to know and punish all; what bold
Entruders this?
My Lord, I heard your voyce in fearefull manner
Crying treason, are you in preservation.
One of my loving subjects; yes Crispino:
'Tis Crispino Madam, one that I ha promised
To make a judge, he was my Barber, and
Will fit the Common wealth to a haire.
He must deserve that place then.
'Tis confirm'd.
I humbly thanke your excellence.
Signiour Depazzi, you shall be neere our person,
Here's mirth more then's expected; Laura, bid
Some waiter command Giotto's presence;
Carintha, weele retire and heare your wonder.
My Lord, weele sift the treason.
And let the traitors be bolted Madam I beseech you.
Quicke, set things in order. The Gentlemen
That come to see this great preparation,
Must please to make roome for't, so, so.
What are you Sir.
I am the terrour of the Law.
What's that, a hangman?
When I looke leane, and frowne, thou dy'st, I am
A Iudge, I say, a Iudge in Potentia.
Have we a Towne called Potentia, in our Dutchy.
He's some forraigner, he comes to use his eyes,
Let him passe.
Cease your clamors Villaines: sure the devils
Are singing a catch. Give order the outward
Doores be locked. Let none approach the presence;
The Lords must come hither up the backe staires,
And through the Privy gallery, beare backe:
More noyse yet, 'twere lesse troublesome living
In a drumme then at Court, in nights of
Entertainement.
My Lord Comachio's voyce.
The Lords are not yet met.
I hate this overgrowne thing, tis high time
He should intend's affaires in Heaven, yet still
He hath some businesse upon earth,
Save you my good Lord, signiour Orseollo,
I hope you have an able faith.
Why do ye hope so?
That ye may be sav'd too.
The groome is witty.
Who makes that noyse?
Why was Contarini warn'd, he has a wife,
His hope have no incouragement.
My Lord Volterre, I congratulate
Your safety, and your health signiour Contarini?
Is not this Depazzies Barber?
I wish he had more manners.
There are certaine Iudges in the darke
And thats the reason Iustice is blinde.
And those Iudges shall come to light too, when
They shall thinke convenience proper—
His fingers speake his profession
Beare backe Gentlemen, what doe you meane,
Pray beare backe?
Musicke then.
Attendants.
My Nephew still alive, Giotto, you
Trifle with me, I am dangerous when
My wrath is.
You mistooke your Nephew, I proffered him
Foure or five severall deaths, and could not get him
To accept of one. Come signiour there's great hope,
The Dutchesse but pretends a care o're him,
The more to disguise her love of you.
This is but a weake comfort.
Ist done? softly in my eare?
It is not done.
Hell, and damnation!
Your wife is invisible: the Sunne can hardly
Finde her out.
Secure thy selfe, my wayes are hidden.
Diable prend e'te Droll la! parles doucement.
Doe not trust the Arch-Duke, he cosend me at
Blow-point.
Abien, ce'te unchose'ci dificile. Iene scay que faire.
Right, why thats the cause I lent the Emperour my
Combecase.
Ma foy loblie! mais nous le voyerous tontastine grandement esbahy.
With like ease may I—hand saw, and invite the
Moone to supper.
Hah, who is the cause of this fury.
Tis onely a French heate, an't like your excellence.
My Lord the time is now arriv'd wherein
We are to gaine your thankes, and strive to oblige
Posterity, your care oth' publike weale,
Incourag'd your continuall sute to heaven,
And us, that we would make an earthy choyce
Of a good husband. Even from this number,
Weele performe your wishes, envy is the sinne
Of Cowards: therefore no Lord of high birth,
And temperate breeding will maligne his destiny
Whom we shall thinke most worthy our esteeme:
Nay, 'twould shew decay of duty
Ith' greatest of our Court, to thinke that we
Want skill to make a safe election, such
A bold thought, in one we call our subject
Would soone corrupt our nature, and make our
Iustice cruell; we doe expect (my Lords)
No verball satisfaction in this point;
But as we single out our choyce, weele make
A private tryall of each heart, Contarini:
I can perceive no cause of feare from him,
Hee's marryed,
How does your wife Signiour?
She has too much health Madam: but had I knowne
Your excellences purpose, to hasten thus
Your favour towards your humble subject:
Shee had ere this arriv'd in heaven: however
If your care finde your blood so violent
You are not able to delay the use
Of this my person; she shall not live long
To finde your desire.
O my good Lord you still increase my obligation
'Tis great pitty custome should make Princes
So reserv'd in wooing, had ye told me
But two dayes since of this meeting, I had
Casheer'd my wife; a nimbler way then by
Contriving a divorce.
Then you have practised a divorce already?
'Las, no designe seemes difficult, that makes
Me capable of your highnesse love.
What an Iron impudence rules in thy
Nature? thou seemest to boast of crimes the devill
Would in modesty conceale.
How Madam?
Canst thou expect kindnesse from a Lady,
That art so cruell to thy owne: a soule
So much ith' tongue of fame, as is Carintha:
You are one oth' religious faction,
Whose care meerely did reflect upon the
Generall good; the safety of your Country,
Ile not publish thy disgrace: kneele old man?
And thanke the priviledge of this great day;
Thou hast thy pardon.
Horred torture, foyl'd in my hopes, and made
An argument for popular scorne, I feare
My owne shadow, my hornes are growne so ugly.
Orseollo.
She knowes him a woman hater, his fate
Cannot hinder me.
How thrives your charity toward our sex,
What thinke you of a woman now my Lord?
A woman is the pride of nature: her
Husbands best Gaurius, made to credit
Heaven, to justifie the first creation good:
She is the destiny of time, her wombe
Containes the hope of our succession,
The power to adde new life unto the world.
Stay signiour, this is a kin to flattery,
Doe you appeare at this our summons, with
Hope to gaine by it: you that have professed
Your selfe a naturall enemy to all our sex?
Madam I recanted that heresie,
Giotto is my witnesse: there are creatures—
Heele tell me all I neede not tempt it from him,
Bold Mounsier, I've heard of your Goattish trickes
Of your Seragho, and your Concubines;
Dare you be so much a Traitor, to thinke
I'ld marry with a publicke stallious,
A Towne Bull.
Your Highnesse—
No more? for the honour of this day I doe
Conceale your faults and pardon em.
Giotto, I shall pricke your veines.
Volterre.
What meanes these severall parlies?
I am to give you thankes (my Lord) for your
Great care oth' publicke weale. You did implore
My haste to marriage, meerely for your
Countries good, you your selfe not guilty of,
Any hope to profit by it.
Your excellence does me too much right.
And can your nature suffer you to doe
Me wrong: you under value me, my birth
And title, for else a little forraigne
Vanity, shew in corrupted mixture
Of unknowne tongues; would not incourage thēē
T'attempt our person, and so become our equall.
Your highnesse will hold me in excuse.
Yes y'ave more deserved our mercy thēn
The rest—walke aside.
Comachio▪
Hey, I begin to prosper!
You are your Countries fathēr, chiefe of those
Whose zealous interrest ith' common wealth,
Vrg'd to intreate my first indeavours,
To helpe posterity with issue; yet
Prescribed your selfe no share ith' benefit:
Fye my Lord! how sinnefull has ambition
Made you? tis strange, that he, whom we have held
Our Oracle, should conspire the death of
One so harmelesse as your Nephew.
My gracious Mistresse:
We know all; but in hope you'le not maligne
Our next election, you taste our mercy.
False Giotto, thou shalt suffer.
Signiour de Pazzi.
Hom! now I begin my raignē: Dutchēsse,
We know thy minde: thou wouldst protest thy great
Love unto our royall person. Contarini,
Thy speech and lets to bed, weele have our subjects
Know our prompt desire to furnish them
With a lusty hire.
Your Lordship will please to hearē me speake.
First we would know thy lips. I say it is
Our will to busse thy highnesse.
The fellowes sawcy, Take him away.
How now Nephew?—
Tis fine ifaith—
Beehold (Lords) your Prince Foscari, Duke of
Parma, and of Mantua, now our Lover,
Whom lately you supposed dismissed our Court.
Indeed we see the Golden Fleece his order,
And a face like his, but yet his chinne wants
Part of his beard.
I left that naked, more to disguise me
From your knowledge. And that our fame, (which must
Out live our person) may give reply to those,
Who shall hereafter question it; know, we
Vndertake this shape, to helpe us in discovery
Of all your soules and hearts; the better to
Inable us; how to dispose of each
Beneath our governement.
And I made secret promise, to bring you
To a Court purged, and in cleare health: your Lords
Have all tane physicke from my prescription.
Here I present em to you, penitent
And wise; for now they know themselves; which is
The best knowledge, and chiefe part of wisdome.
You are to grant their pardons for my sake.
With great alatrity, and I banish
All their crimes from my remembrance.
Deprived of my revenge too!
Then I am no Iudge now.
Tis a new tricke of state, continually
To shift great offices.
Eare I've made my cushion warme!
No remedy, If I'me his favourite,
Thou shalt be my Pimpe, then th'art sure to rise.
Must we not be reconcil'd to my Lord
Depazzi too?
I forgive your highnesse, I.
And I you, your love is soone requited:
I hope your excellence will pardon my
Rude intrusion into your acqu: intance.
Her grace conceal'd this part of her designe
From me. I never knew till now, that you
Were more then Giotto, the Florentine.
Madam, you are truely noble: you have
Merited our best assistance.
Long Foscari, Duke of Mantua, and Parma.
This noyse brings in Carintha.
Vneasie thoughts perplex her husband.
Make not rumour acquainted with
Your griefe: as yet tis contained ith' knowledgē
Of us foure, I forgive his excellence
His sinne 'gainst me. Make me your good example,
And forgive your wife her error.
Heaven has punished my ambition, it was
My owne seeking. Ime content to suffer.
Then take your wife, and with assurance from
The faith of a true Knight and Prince, she doth
Retaine that chaslity she had, when first
I saw her. Now each wrinkled brow growes smooth;
And I begin my soveraignty: with hope
To give succession cause, still to prefer
This Day, as chiefe within their Kallender.