WHy how now Puſs, what ayles my Monkie to chatter out of tune thus?
A whoreſon ſenceleſſe Coxcombe— but I am glad th'art come, I long for a pottle of wine and a Capon.
Good proviſion for the preſent Monkie, but viderit futuritas, in the meane time, who layes up for futurity? Come you raiſe foure hundred per annum, out of pottles of Wine and Capons?
Yes my Granado, in this qualitie: they that come ſhort of my breeding have don't. The firſt credit I wonne was in a Garriſon.
In Holland.
No; and yet in the low Countries: I never ſate foot in a leaguer yet.
The reaſon of that?
My hard fate nothing elſe, having as much impudence, and as many wayes to manage it, receiving weekly Corantoes from Paris, Roterdam, and Fluſhing, and having trade too in Middleborough, I have beene houſe Lecturer three yeares together, and read Aretine, both in print and picture, and that is much for one of my yeares.
'T may be thou wantſt acquaintance.
No ſuch matter, the old Exchange, the new Burſe, and new Town, afford plenty; not a Prentice that can cry Bawd, nor a Butchers Dog that can ſay bow wow, but is of my acquaintance.
Yet it may be they are preciſe, and will not be ſeen in't.
That I know not, but moſt ſure, I have feaſted the Liberty twice at mine owne charge, and helpt their wives and daughters to the earning of many a fair pound: they will be ſeen in that.
Well, I am ſure I have furniſh'd thy Library with all books of behaviour, and tables of entertainment.
And I have cull'd out all my phraſes as curiouſly & ſtuck my language with ſuch inticing conveniences: and for intellicence, all the lawn women, lace women, box women, and to come nearer to the buſineſſe, very haire women, perriwig women, and candied Elicumpany lick halbars, come in twice a week like decoy Ducks, with whole ſholes at the aile of them.
Why, then there's a fault in your company.
I, I, that villanous company undoes all, Ther's Lodowick Tomaſo Vallentine, high talkers, and deepe drinkers, but they have wit in their wine, and too much honeſty in their actions at all time, there's only on Gentleman—
Stultiſſimo of a plain cut and ſquare ſize, he runs juſt as you throw him; rub him a little againſt the grain now, and he will come off a great deal the ſmoother. You would not thinke, what charitable benefactours three or foure ſuch pluſh Colonels would be to the founding of a new honour.
But haſt thou ſuch a purpoſe, indeed?
Why ſhould not I have purpoſe and effect as much as any: A leager, yes, ſo it lay in the Ile of plentie; Ide dig through the Alpes with Haniball, and fetch Theſeus from Hell, with Hercules purpoſe and practice, my precious Monkie, tis done.
And ſhall I come to the honour to write Miſtris of the Leaguer.
Shall not bate an accent of that title my Catamptiall Monky, but you muſt look out for Spiders Monky, and the Sprall of all foure Puzz: I have laid the foundation in gold already.
Haſt had a good return of thy Rings chuck?
Rings hangum, they are as ſtale as Scotch Lanſon, Or as your Decoy,
No, I have ſent um out in a deſperat venture to Cape.
No Monkie, my old friend Franciſcus hath repaired my Jacket already, & has promiſed to new thatch my outſide too.
One of theſe boxes has 100 pieces of new gold,
With chains and keyes correſpondent.
For what uſe Chick?
For a dead lift Monkie: a Leaguer cannot be planted, mann'd, victuall'd and munition'd with a ſmall Magazine: to work Monkie, a mouzing Puſs, make choice of your company, admit no parley with the popular, be high and proud of thy ſelfe, and let thoſe that will needs buy thee, pay ſoundly for thee with a pox to um, Puſs a wink to the wiſe, you know my minde, let's have no more midnight catterwowlings under Sale-mens ſhop windows, Vintners dark cellers, no Juſtices long Entries, but beare up your ſelfe ſo civill and ſo meager▪
You may be ſtilde a ſiſter of the Leaguer.
Away you Rogue.
As I am a Gentleman body and ſoule Ile break your windowes.
Maſter, as you are a man ſtand and tickle her.
Will you, you Raſcall.
Ah, ſweet heart, prethee good woman.
Nay, let her come Ile give her hert belly full.
Let her alone Fub: let her alone, by this hand, Ile make the boyes maule her Ruffs.
Fie how I am tyred a whorſon ſtinking ſhamleg'd, Fie, fie, fie, uſe a Gentlewoman thus in her own lodging.
How does your back, O the Fucas, out alas, here's half a Crown in Complexion utterly caſt away.
If I be not even with the Rutter—
If hee come where you have to doe, let him pay ſoundly.
A plague upon his Aſſes eares, by my Virginity, Ile ſend his beard into New-found-land for this.
And ſo I would, to make lines to catch Cods: out, out, out, a Gentleman, and uſe a woman no otherwiſe; yfaith, yfath, it ſtands not with his reputation.
A whorſon ſmelt: Miſtris Durable, I would I had ſome of your aqua vitae, I'me ſick after the conflict.
And ſhall good woman, come, come, pray keep your ſelf warme.
Forſake me honour, when I doe forget the bond of friendſhip, let not poverty, no, nor your fathers haviour Julio: though our Venetian law proved him a Traitor: come plucke away your intereſt from my breaſt: when we were pupills in the Academy, I was Franciſcus and your fellow then; I am Franciſcus and your fellow ſtill, nor can be altered: I have now a heart as free from pride, as when I clipt thee thus, before thou knew'ſt the taſte of poverty, or I proſperity. Thinke not ancient friend I can forget thee, though thy need were ſuch as beggery deſpis'd.
The liberall hand of heaven reward your love, or lend my wiſhes that ability to thank you in requitall.
Amen to that and more.
I tell thee Iulio, I am not happier in my vertuous wife: and yet that's greater than yielding thee reliefe tis all that good men wiſh: Why have we wealth beſtow'd on us, but to returne the ſame, where ſtern neceſſity pinches the ribs of him or her that wants? it has no other worth, no more eſteeme of me. Heap it together while the, maſſie weight e'ne crack, what bears it leſſe than duſt? on duſt deſerves no more regard. I have a Wife, Nurſe, and mother, all ſhe is in one; yet one deſerves more Titles, beſides her feature, which may make compare with thoſe that boaſt of parts: ſhe is ſo kinde, that many millions may be ſtampt againe, ere one ſo perfect currant. She is worth more than the earth is: but ſhe is my wife, and I will ceaſe her praiſe: you know her father when you have his name: hee is called Chriſippus, many ſtile him good, and wiſh all Venice ſuch.
Ere I was baniſh'd for my fathers fact, my knowledge coated, and all Italy, ſpoke of a Damoſell called Cornelia, this good Chriſippus daughter.
She is that jewell, that unmatched, thing I made my boaſt of: That Cornelia is none but mine, I dare boldly ſay, and eke affirme it: See my Julio, ſhe meets us unexpected, and comes to hinder what I would ſpeake more, in cauſe of her demerit, modeſty, and ſweetneſſe.
Franciſcus: ſonne!
My Love and duty make me ever ſuch.
To all this company a happy houre.
You have bin miſt Franciſcus.
You have beene miſt Cornelia.
Where?
Where ere I have bin, this is my friend, tender him your welcome with as good reſpects as I my ſelfe where he.
Sir, bid your own welcome, and command as much as all we have, were yours.
Your courteſies to one ſo throng'd in miſery As my ſelfe, dulls my behaviour, that I know not how Enough to laud or thanke you.
You ſhall exchange your habit:
Phemone, ſiſter, Anthonio—
We miſt you yeſter night.
I durſt not come believe it:
Vallentius for ſayes rowſes are too great,
They make me quake to ſee 'em.
How fares my couſen Lodwick?
He ſpoyld our ſport: he was not well he ſaid:
I would you had beene there: Tomaſo pledg'd you twice.
I thank his love.
It is not worth it Sir.
Yfaith Nephew I was extream drunke, aske my man Fub elſe, he'le tell you what a coyle he had with me: the rareſt leſt yfaith: prethee tell 'em how thou foundſt me underneath the ſtaires.
By no meanes, 'twill make 'em drunk to heare it.
Signior Arbaces you are the man I wiſht for.
Well met Gentlemen: are you here Antonio?
Cornelia.
Sir.
No, tis no matter. Tomaſo you ſhall do't,
Goe ſee nothing want; you are all my gueſts, you dine with
Me that's certaine: Nay, I will not be deny'd:
Moſt welcome Sir to you: will you walke?
Ever, ever welcome.
Will you walk ſir? will you munch?
Sirrah Fub, thou wouldſt not think how ſore my head is, ever ſince I had the knock with the Ladle?
I believe you: will you feed ſir?
No more i'th' Ladle. Me thinkes I am pocky melancholy here of late.
So I gheſt, ever ſince you knew the Gentlewoman that beate you.
Thou ſayeſt true, ever ſince yfaith.
Why ſhe is able to make any body pocky melancholy. But would you would ſnap a bit ſir.
I love her I cannot tell how: yfaith and I were well ſearch'd, I think I am little kin to a Spannell, the more I am beaten, the better I affect.
Would I were ſure of that.
Well, ſhe ſhall heare from me in ſome Sonnet or Ditty; ſome rare thing of mine owne invention, and that ſpeedily: Let me ſee to what tune ſhall I have it?
And if you pleaſe, let it goe to the Punkes delight; 'tis your onely ſweet tune: for women doe love the Punks delight.
By this hand gramercy; they doe indeed, thou canſt ſing if need be.
I can make a ſcurvy ſhift: But to ſay truth I am no good Queriſter.
But canſt thou doe well and ſcurvily?
After my manner.
Would I might be hang'd preſently, but methinkes I am a piece of a Poet already, there's ſuch a whiſtling in my pate.
That's nothing but your conceit ſir.
Conceit merrily: O that my love were any thing but woman.
O that your love were any thing but Common: then might ſhe be.—
What might ſhe be.
Nay what you wil yfaith.
Ile to't while tis hot, I know I'me in an excellent vein.
Pricke it quickly then:
But Harke you Signior, ſhall you not need my helpe?
I defie't, It ſhall be all mine own, I cannot abide, tis the ſcurvieſt thing to rob others of their wit, good or bad, it ſhall flow from mine own ſweet brain.
I believe youle finde the tyde turn'd, tis ebbing water there, would I might be begg'd, as hee had like to have been, if his foolery do not vex my diſcretion, but hee gives me means, and I could do little if I could not ſmile.
Well Vallentius, and you be caught ith' purlues: and you be not ſtung for't Ile forſweare privacie, and all that belongs too, I have a Girle, the very ſpirit of what ſhe was made for, and ſhe were honeſt, ſhe might crave ſupremacie of Hellen, and make her ride behinde.
And I love one were ſhe not honeſt, that's her only fault, ſhee were a Paragon unparalleld, mingle all beautie that our Venice yields, and ſet her ſelf aſide, ſhe would ſtand peerleſſe, over-ſhine them all, and dimme the Artiſts cunning.
Is ſhe a woman?
Yes, but ſuch a one no voluntary habit, nor ſlie drift with all accommodations that beſeemes, unblemiſht truth it ſelfe can bring to ſpeech or give my thoughts acceſſe.
What is ſhe for a Saint, that ſtands in the how faire and beautifull: may one of my birth intreat her name and knowledge?
Vow your aſſiſtance to my purpoſes, and I a Traitour to my ſelfe reveale the treaſon of my minde.
Give me your hand, I am yours for better or worſe, in all cauſes, all adventures, my ſword and ſelfe vow fealty: Is ſhe a wife?
I, would ſhe were not.
Know you Vanderman our great Phyſician.
What, my fretfull Doctour? the only curer of mad folks; Know I my ſelfe?
You know hee's married.
Yes, and what of this (oh would you be miniſtring therein.) I have you my deare Flora, well take my word ſhee's thine.
I would that I were hers.
Why it lyes in thine own choice.
But ſetting all this pleaſantneſſe aſide, in earneſt Lodowick I affect her ſo, no motive mean nor yet dire accident can change my ſtedfaſt will, I muſt enjoy her, or I muſt not live.
Thou ſhalt enjoy her, or I will not live.
You ſpeak like a friend.
I ſpeak like what I am, a Chriſtian, and by that Epethite, I meant as much as I ſpeake, nor could I thinke, Vallentius, you of all the men alive, would have miſtaken mee.
In any kinde but this I never had: pardon me Lodowick this doting loves beares ſuch a jealous ſway, the leaſt ſuſpition puts us on the wracke, and breaks all chaines of duty: You may perſwade me to believe, but yet he that never ſaw a Veſſell under ſayle, cannot imagine what the Seaman brooks, the Merchant ſleeping on his downey Cowch, nere dreams what danger the bold Souldier dures, and he that never felt the pangs of Hell, cannot report the torments: aſſure thee Lodowick ſo be ſatisfied, ſince I knew her, I have not known my ſelfe, ſo mighty is loves extreams.
Tis ſtrange.
She troth plight was to me, and had been mine, had not deſire of pelfe alter'd her friends, and I dare well vow ſhe loved me once, what ere her minde be now.
Come be rul'd by mee, thou ſhalt ſet thy toe in the Doctors ſtirrop, ride and go a foot at thy pleaſure: did ſhee love thee once?
I had her oath.
Go to, renew thy ſuite, the fire is not all out, ſtir up the aſhes, and thou doſt not finde ſome embers, that will both glow and warme, pawn me for butter'd Sack, and let me never be worthy redemption.
I want the means.
Think not of that, tis here my Flora, what man? he's not the firſt Doctor has worn a corner Cap: come, will you be merry Vallentius, and youle forſake not this mood, I renounce ſociety.
I am yours, obedient as your hand.
Follow me then, and I drive not this melancholly fit out of thee, Ile never truſt my conceit: what, ho Damazella? Knocks, and Clariſlona looks out at the window.
Whoſe there?
He's here that ſhould be here, come down?
Lodowick.
Yes.
What's ſhe.
The commodity I told you of, there's a Gentleman a friend of yours in love with her.
Not your ſelfe.
No faith, though you ſhall heare her ſweare as much, tis our rich heire Signior Stultiſſimo.
What, the Foole?
That mor ſell of mans fleſh, ſhee cannot beat him away, he haunts the Eves like a Sparrow in March, you may hunt flies from honey ſooner then him out of her company: now Miſtris how ſtands things with you, when did you play with your fools bable?
Youle never leave this.
Bid my friend welcome.
I thank you Lady.
Come kiſſe me?
Will you ſtay all night?
Yes, when I am weary of ſtrength, and foes with my back.
Yfaith Lodowick, you muſt leave this?
So I will▪
When?
When thou leav'ſt thy trade?
Will you ſup here?
Yes drink, nothing elſe.
Lord, how wiſe your grown?
So I were, if I could keep out of your company.
Fie, your'e to uncourteous Lodwick: nay, he's ever thus, but tis my fault.
Marry mend it then for ſhame.
Where's my Bracelet, which of your Truls has that?
Shall I be true to thee?
Your'e nere true to me.
I mean honeſt.
I care not for your honeſty.
I believe that too, but in plain verity. Your bracelet embraces my horſes main.
Come, you jeſt.
No good troth.
Sweare you, I hope you make a difference between your horſe and me.
Faith but little: and yet your'e both good bearers.
By the bright Sun you wrong her: weepe not faire one.
What, ſhall we have tricks?
You are too blame beſhrow me.
Now, when, what needs all this, nay, and you powt farewell.
As I am a Gentleman you part not ſo.
Sweet, Lodwick.
Hum, why was not this before, I have ſeene the Beares.
Do not I know your woman?
Hiſt, hiſt, Are you the man of War?
Nay, you muſt draw neerer, if youle have your Embaſſie anſwered: how iſt Miſtris Durable?
How do you Maſter Lodowick?
The worſe for you, and your creatures.
It's a good hearing.
Shall I have three or foure words in private?
Not with her unleſſe I participate.
Whats the matter?
Yonder's Fub, the parties man you wot on has ſomthing under hand and ſeale.
For me.
So he gives out.
You may admit him.
Reſt you merry Gentlemen.
Whoſe this ſecret party, this conceal'd Champion▪ What have ye here, Signior Stuliiſſimoes man?
All haile.
This fellow would keep a vilde coyle if hee were a top ath' tiles.
Gentiles, good ſpeed.
What, the Plough?
No, you, and you pleaſe, Marona to your ſelf.
This fellows diſcreet.
To me.
So ſayes his backſide.
You the man of War, or more properly Pirat, that gave ſummons to the leaguer.
Leager, Sir.
Leager, Sir, the report of your Pot-guns cannot make us hang up a white flag.
The skirt of a clean ſmock's more proper ath' two.
Wee come not to learne whats proper of you, Monkie, and catch flies.
Play at his foolery, come hither Punck.
Sir, y'are uncivill, ſhe's none; nor this a Bawdy houſe; but a Leaguer of gentle entertainment.
The fellow dreames: Come wake and be thy ſelfe.
My ſelfe? Would you were as ſure your ſelves as I am.
A what?
I'de faine know that of you:
But I adviſe you to take councell of your beſt judgment firſt,
Your words will be queſtioned.
Queſtion that dares, th'art an arrant Cheater.
Tis not your pare royall of pluſh Coxecombes can ſecure you in't.
Valiant a the ſuddaine too.
Not ſuddainly neither:
The growth has both time and ſufficient temper.
Why I a Cheater? let any impartiall—
Ride Circuit, and ſit in judgement of us all,
And ſhew any reaſon either in Art or Nature,
Why I a Cheater more than any of you.
Thou haſt nothing but a little wit to live upon.
That's endowment enough for a Gentleman:
I ever ſhall count him the nobler gentleman
That makes himſelfe a fortune in the world, than he
That brings it into the world with him.
Suppoſe this granted: yet why this a Leaguer?
I want words for you: onely for concluſion, one out of a ſtrange affected carriage has gathered an admirable method of drilling, and training men from the flying of Cranes: Another rare order and government of Common-wealths, from the poore labour of the Bee: And I out of this Leaguer—
Will extract certaine wayes and carriages for Cheaters and Libertines.
Twere not from my purpoſe if I granted that to. Lycurgus was the firſt Law-maker; and the beſt Law that ever he made, was a proviſion or maintenance for Cheats, as you call em, and Fellons (viz.) That he (without exception of age, quality, or condition) which could doe the moſt high dainty, and dangerous peece of Felony, and come cleare off, ſhould be preferred to the moſt eminent place of office in the State; but if he failed, he was then to receive Martiall Law.
Strange courſe, pick Officers out of Fellons.
'Tis a kind of Meſlin or mingled graine ſtill. How much of the poores money was found in one of the Churchwardens purchaſe laſt day?
None I thinke.
How many theeves horſes have bin watered at the High Conſtable of the hundreds watring trough within this tenne yeares?
I think not any.
It may be ſo: But I am ſure, I have heard, or read▪ or ſomething, that a new Chiefe Juſtice of ſome place, or a better man wo'd not ha made very nice to bid a fat purſe to breakfaſt with him if he light upon it ſoundly: ſo that it is not ſo much the Art to know, as the government to diſpoſe: that quallifies the man.
He ſayes true: all times ha' bin guilty of good fellowſhip, why not this? I like the Leaguer now ſo well, I care not if I buy a place of command in it my ſelfe.
Why now you come to me,
That's the Pearle I ha div'd for all this while:
I have a catalogue of names, places, and prizes.
A cup of entertainment for my friend.
Welcome to the new Leaguer.
We'le pledge, we'le pledge:
Victual'd and Win'd already?
To the Society at the Swan two pottles and a halfe: Monkey the health; theſe are my noble & prime viſi tants; the boxes I gave you to lay up.
How now Iulio, gold?
By this light, and the moſt curious.
A poore Grannams gift gentlemen: 300 peeces, or ſuch a taſte, parly induction to a buſineſſe, or ſo. There's a Burdeaux Merchant in Towne now, would lay me between wind and water this twelve month, but the ſpite is, I am tyed not to part with this gold for ever: if I knew where to borrow but halfe the worth on't—
Halfe the worth?
Ile vow to lend the full worth,
If that will pleaſure thee.
You ſhall keepe the gold under locke and key for your pawne.
Thou ſhalt not want for ſuch a courteſie to doe thee good: Ime glad th'art ſo thriving.
Lock up the boxe, and keep the key; there's the full ſumme.
To a Piece I aſſure you: you ſhall ſee elſe agen.
No more, no more trouble:
Let me ſee for how long?
Three Moneths, not a day longer:
Nay ſooner if mony chance to come in afore:
I have offices in my Leaguer ſtand upon Fortunes hill.
'Vds me Signior Stultiſſimo promied
Me a courteſie laſt night:
Aſſure thee ſweet chuck he'le not faile thee.
I believe thee without an oath:
Make my friend welcome to the Leaguer Monkey:
As ſoone as I have diſpatch'd my voyage
To the Canaries, I am for you agen Lads.
Gentlemen, who can read?
Who cannot?
I can reſolve you:
She cannot.
What's here?
Opprobrious Saint, and moſt Angellicke fiend,
Ere I begin, thus doe I make an end.
I ſhould have beene ſorry elſe:
Nay ſilence, or the Proclamation's loſt.
And if thy heart be not patcht up in Marble,
Harke how my pen does in thy prayſes warble.
O deare Apollo, how art thou abus'd, Is there more?
Sweet ſtinging Waſpe, and well conceited Dove▪
For beauty nice, intituled Queen of love
Of me; Sir reverence; that doe's thee adore;
Which art eſteem'd a good one and no more:
Let reaſon rule thy Amazonian ſiſt▪
Let ladle rude be thrown at hady wiſt,
So ſhall I love thee, take it for no fable
Better then well, and more then I am able.
Aſſe, Aſſe.
The Authours name.
Cannot you get her Signior Stultiſſimo?
O, lamentable complaint!
As ever poore man heard.
Will he take no warning.
Is this a Challenge?
Fie no, they are too violent to come in rime.
Lodowick, is not this your practice?
Why, doſt thou think me ſo ſimple, ſo ridiculous.
No, Ile aſſure you, It's a token of good will of my Maſters, there's no brain guilty ont but his own: if you like it you may, and you will not, the laws in your own hands, you may chooſe.
Good Gentlemen return the Carrier.
What? a cuffe or a knock.
Hee has penn'd a Song too, which I ſhould have tickled, if I had not been hoarſe with drinking Flap-Dragons laſt night.
Whats thy name?
Fub.
Prethee honeſt Fub, tickle thy ſelfe out of our companies, weele be Fubb'd no longer.
Will not you be Fubb'd Sir.
Thou knoweſt my reſolution.
Nay, but will ye not indeed?
No faith▪
I am glad I know't,—be with you.
Have you any wine ith' houſe?
Yes deareſt.
Come, a pox a theſe devices, hang off: will you drink Vallentius?
Will I live?
Where's the Matron?
The Matron, Lord, you're the ſtrangeſt man.—
Your Matron Grandum, what will you have it, your Bawd?
I muſt be quiet.
Nay, enter, enter.
The eaſie time, and ſuch as thrive in it, favour my wiſhes, the ignorant whoſe ſole dependance is on veritie, and carry conſcience in their timorous breſts, are not aſſociates meet for Iulio. Thoſe that neere knew the ſtraine of Policie, nor ayme at more, then what may well content, draw not my length, the way to proſper, the directeſt courſe ſuch are my ſore neceſſities, is to get liking of this lovely Maid Franciſcus ſiſter, bright Phemone, the Virgin's modeſt, chaſt, and debonaire, beſides her brother's rich, there hang my hopes, but ſhee affects not mee, all her deſires are on young Anthonios, rich Arbaces ſonne, my friend (ſuppos'd) at leaſt, but that is breath; by what man has, or can have, he's my foe that hinders my deſigne, where hee my next of bloud, that ſhall he finde: the meane to purchaſe what I reach at now, there is but only one, one only meane that can ſupplant him, here it lies ſhall doo't, were hee as deare in eſtimation as Niſus to Eurialus.
I love my ſelfe, I count him ſtill moſt wiſe,
That cares not who's thrown down ſo he ariſe.
THou haſt to ſay ſomthing, yet nothing I hope triviall, by our known affection I beſeech thee, ſpeak what thou canſt.
I would I had embraced my povertie, while the pale Moone has reſidence in heaven, would I had beene deafe.
Whereto tends this ſpeech if I thought my fault, or any ones pertain'd to mee, through wilfull negligence, or otherwiſe, to breed the occaſion of this paſſionate mood, I ſhould condemne the cauſe of the offence, and deeme my ſelf unhappy.
Can heaven ſuffer it?
What, what does heaven ſuffer, ſpeak my Iulio?
Too much of ill.
Let me know that ill, and I reſt ſatisfied.
Pray no more, the malady is mortall, unſanctified, monſtrous. Anthonio is there ſuch a man?
Many that weare that name in Italy: but one amongſt that many known to me.
Hate all the name.
Pardon Iulio, Ile hate my ſelfe firſt.
Anthonio is a Villain.
Blot not the reputation of his youth with ſuch calumnie, he is no way ſuch, but as unblemiſht, as the ſnow before it touch the Mountains.
He's a Villain.
Villain never had ſo faire an out-ſide, nor yet heart ſo juſt as that he carries.
He's a Villain.
I have ſome buſineſſe at the Port, youle ſup with me to night.
Doe you love your ſelfe, do you love honour, do you love your wife?
I do.
Then hate that Anthonio.
Give me to underſtand, ſince you will force me to endure your report, wherein hee's culpable, or does deſerve theſe ignominious titles.
He loves not you.
Tis not my fault.
He wrongs your ſiſter.
Therein, he's too blame.
He loves your wife.
That amends, quits all his former wrongs.
Can you beare it thus, wink Vulcan then,
And let the god of Warre, throw up her skirts agen.
How's this?
You will not underſtand; Ile ſpeak no further.
Come, come, my wife is honeſt.
Yes.
If ſhe be, tis nothing you have ſaid, Ile heare no more; begon.
Will you liſt a word, Anthonio wongs you.
Wrong me, and if he would he cannot.
He playes the Paraſite, the officious Aſſe to vaile his ſinne.
Would I might underſtand you?
The Serpent tempts your wife, theſe eares and eyes can teſtifie; for your ſiſter, ſhe's ſtale: his excuſe, whereby hee cloakes his vice.
I wiſh you Iulio, to know what you ſpeak.
I am not mad, I love you, tis my love, you are my father.
I pray be adviſed, conſider what you do? ſpeak not this no report, be certain; do not abuſe my patience. Tempt my wife, rent earth, and ſwallow falſhood.
Will you be moved Pernaſſus, the two topt, forked Mount?
My bloud is not mine own, I want command of all that now obeyed me, how different are my fits? I am now a congealed, kneaded cake of ice, bound from all motion, now again (mee thinks) a flaming Iland, a Veſunius Hill, meerly combuſtion.
Forget not, ſir, your patience.
Tell me of patience when I am my ſelfe: how did he tempt her, how did ſhe accord on thy reputation?
I would I had been dumbe?
Hang not ith' winde, (delay does torture) anſwer me as how?
Kinde, ſir, recall your wonted manhood?
Anſwer me how.
I pray pardon me.
What? ſtrike and cry mercie, I muſt be reſolved, thou haſt flung me ith' fire, even in the Oven, the mouth of Aetna, nothing thou coulſt have ſaid, nothing have done, could have aſſured like torture.
Would, when I ſaw him kiſſe her, cruſh her hand, wink and laugh out, uſe his undecent language: Fie, fie.
Cornelia falſe, the floud may come agen, nothing impoſſible, kiſſe, and cruſh hands, wink, wink heaven and all above.
Kind, ſir.
Beare witneſſe, all that good are, how deare, how deare, I held that moſt falſe man: ſet him here, here, even on the ſpire and pinacle of my heart; my life was his, and all that I call mine, but her he has abuſed?
Deare friend, do not forget your name, theſe are but likelihoods, farre from the thing it ſelfe, and ſay he be a Villaine, as no doubt he's little better in his rude expoſures: ſhe may be honeſt.
No Julio, no, had ſhe meant well,
She would have warnd me of his foule attempts,
Said ſuch, and ſo's his haviour.
When ſhe was loyall, as ſure one ſhee was,
(If ever any was) no accident how vaine
So e're it ſeemed, but ſhe a woman, would unfold
Her ſexe, and ſay 'twas thus, and thus.
I have ſtroke him through.
Treble abuſe:
Deflowred my wife, abuſed me,
Diſgraced my ſiſter; throwne infamy
On all our heads at once: What beaſt uncivill bred,
Amongſt careleſſe Monſters (but thee Antonio)
Would have beene kickt on to that damned enterpriſe?
That I had patience; me thinks thou ſhouldſt not
Be the Villaine yet, report does ſpeake thee.
Nay gentle friend.
Tis true, 'tis true.
Had any 'twixt the North and Southerne Pole
Spoke theſe words but hee, it had not beene,
And he had falſely lyed.
This is a Creature I have rais'd, reviv'd,
Snatch'd from deſtructions teeth,
Incorporated to me, ſo deare and juſt, as not
A thing in all the world can be more truer to it ſelfe
And certaine: but his modeſty conceales it,
Could write a Volume of their loath'd deſignes,
And curſe the ſtories cauſe. O falſe Cornelia!
Remember what you are.
Remembrance burſt!
There's no contemplation, nothing what ere can
Drive the thought of ſhame out of my mind:
Would I had never knowne diſcretion,
Could never have made diſtinctions of perſons,
And harmleſſe Creatures; hence forth be ignorance:
Mother of Nations and Vnderſtanding periſh:
Faire, foule Cornelia. The blue fac'd
Occan, nor her fertile wombe, that yields
Vs all increaſe, nouriſhes none ſo falſe as woman:
Traytors have they been ſince their firſt being,
And betray'd poore man e're he beheld himſelfe.
Cornelia can it be thou art a Strumpet?
Oh, oh, fury finiſh that, burnes thee to Cynders.
Worke on, worke on:
Fate lifts me to the ſeat of my deſires;
And I am proſperous and happy.
This Devill jealouſie, my preſent friend,
Cannot at leaſt but quite ſupplant Anthonio:
Beſides this ſeeming honeſty of mine, begets me good
Opinion of Franſcicus, as ſhall inſtall my wiſh;
All addes to my availe: what need I curſes feare
For the debate my policy ſhall raiſe betwixt theſe Turtles▪
I hold with Machievel, for fame or profit
To breake oath or league with friend,
Or Brother: there's nothing gainfull bad:
I ha my wiſh, Advancement now
Is what I aime at, preſent glory here:
He's true religious, that does nothing feare.
And how? and how?
Was it not patheticall and pretty?
Y faith I never heard the like.
Nor I.
I thanke the Muſes, I have as ſharpe a conceite of mine owne when I liſt.
Sir I take you to be a great devourer of Verjuyce.
Now and then; but 'tis not altogether that; every one has his gift.
Tis ſo.
Some has two or three.
You ſay true Signior, ſome has twenty: for which they may thanke impudency and the art of begging.
The art of begging: pray you how long has begging beene an art?
Ever ſince in rid in a foote-cloath, and wore the badge of authority.
How long's that agoe?
Ever ſince you Grannams daughter had a Calfe of your age.
Is't poſſible?
Yes, and will continue till hee's a Bull and horne mad.
Moſt miraculous: would I were mercinary, and had no more in me than an ordinary man: Signior, I crye you mercy. How doe you ſince you powred the pottle of wine in my neck, and threw the pot at my head, becauſe I would not pay my part o'th ſhot?
Was there ſuch a time?
Was there? Why have you forgot how you kickt me, and I crept under the Table: Ile be ſworne this Hip's as lame ever ſince, as if I had the Cyatica.
Abſurd and groſſe.
We muſt leave you Signior.
I thanke you with all my heart: I am going to the foreſaid place: here's my ſervant Fub can tell you if I lye in my throat.
I will aſſure you he's wandring to Puſſe, or as a man would ſay, to deale with Miſtris Clariflora.
Yes faith am I: ſhe beat me tother day, and I am now going to make her amends. I thinke I endure more beating than any three in Venice.
Than a Stock-fiſh.
'Tis a ſigne you are offenſive.
So they ſay that do't. Yeſter night a ſcurvy boy did ſo joule my head and the wall together, for holding opinion that Cheeſe was unwholſome.
No more good Signior: farewell.
At your ſervice:
Shall we expect you at the old houſe?
If you pleaſe:
Have you heard the like?
Theſe are Aſſes ſo tedious—
They're kin to Burs, they will not off with ſhaking.
Now my Thomaſo what I have to ſay:
The chiefe occaſion made me ſummon you,
Is to entreate your knowledge and aſſiſtance
In ſuch a project, (as your ſelfe ſet by) and him that muſt
Partake in the attempt, Venice in Italy
Conceales the man that I durſt credit.
Let it not touch confuſion of the State,
Treaſon, and Murther: whatſoe're it be,
Command my will and ſufferance.
Defend that ever I ſhould be ſuch:
Vallentius never had ſo foule a thought,
To infect himſelfe, and others.
Thus, in briefe, I love a woman; fairer
Than her ſelfe ne're wore the Epethite:
You have ſeene her ſure, and know her:
She's wife to Vanderman.
Correma's daughter?
That ſame onely wight, is the moſt precious
Beauty I adore, and would faine call mine own.
Knew you her husband?
By his name, no further;
By that knowledge you underſtand his courſe.
Yes he's a Phyſitian: and beſides,
What elſe report ſpeaks of him.
Liſten then my purpoſe,
The ſevere ſir, whoſe high ſtretcht phraſes
Galls the eares of Patience, and wiſedom would fain ſhun,
Beares ſuch a jealous and obſervant eye
Over the prey I aime at, all conference is debar'd,
And you may ſooner whiſper with the Saint
Argos had charge of, than converſe with her,
Vnſeene, and unſuſpected.
Is there no device to compaſſe her?
But one, and this is it;
Your ſelfe and Lodwicke (harken I beſeech you)
Shall to this skilfull Vanderman preſent me
As one diſtracted: nay ſmile anon,
And with a kinde of ſober modeſty, as if you liſt you can,
Report ſome probable poſſibility, how
And which way I got my extaſie:
Let me alone to make your words ſeeme truth,
And ſo poſſeſſe my prating Mountebanke,
That he ſhall ſay and ſweare I'me mad at leaſt.
If not paſt all recovery.
Will this doe?
This, or none.
Then none.
Why this is the ſhalloweſt, indirecteſt courſe to win a woman that ever was compos'd, in my opinion.
In your opinion: why ſir?
Why, hope you to gaine her thus with a mad fit: marke the event, this is a courſe as wide: Are you ſo ſimple to imagine, ſhe a timerous woman, will endure your preſence, ſeeming poſſeſt? for ſhame believe it not, invent ſome other meanes.
I verily thinke ſo too, but he will never bee perſwaded.
This were a way to ſcare her, and to make her ſhun you.
Leav't off, leav't off, and ſtudy ſome other new paſſage.
Doe, doe; this is the groſſeſt: fie Vallentius:
Come, you ſhall pardon him once: wee all miſſe ſometimes.
Good gallants doe not ride me, leſt I gall you: Ile aſſure you I trot hard: why my brace of conceits, my wits; what does your abundance of wit runne at waſte: for ſhame, have you ſo poore a braine, and you my moſt exquiſite excellent, for ſhame take off your ſpectacles and ſee better: are you ſuch a dunce: are you ſo rare a Coxcombe, to deeme I will appeare alwaies the ſame: are you the men you promiſt? will you be Maſters of your words and oaths, tender your vow'd aſſiſtances?
I am Lodwicke ſtill.
And I Tomaſo.
Continue ſo: what ſhall redound upon this adventure, falls upon my head, be it no ſhame to yours: onely preferment and your ſmooth apologies.
Leave that to us.
But can you act the mad-man bravely?
Tut, I have play'd Ajax, and perform'd the part wel, to make boaſt of imitation, better than he that Lucian writes of, who ſo digeſted what he plaid, that he run mad indeed.
Can you do't?
So well, as Aeſop could diſcharge his Scene, whereby he won moſt laud.
This praiſe were well in me.
Miſtruſt not my behaviour, and if it prove not correſpondent to my word, thinke me an idle vanter, and no meet aſſociate for you.
When put we this in practice?
There's no deferring weekes, nor dayes, this houre, this very evening does my fit begin.
Shall we about it then?
What elſe, what elſe? Remember gentlemen you fall not upon the ſcandall of Ignorance: but in any caſe keep your countenances.
Make no doubt of that.
Come then, and fortune friend us.
Draw your ſword.
'Gainſt whom?
'Gainſt me.
'Gainſt any living man thats your enemy:
What ailes my deare Franciſco?
By your face you ſhould not be in health.
Draw your ſword.
What meane you?
Draw your ſword.
'Gainſt you never in anger:
Are you well Franciſcus? me thinkes your cheeke
Carries a paler hue than wont to be his Livery.
I muſt fight with you.
With me.
With thee perfideous monſter, with thee thou Iudas.
Are you your ſelfe?
Thou haſt abuſed me, wronged me.
I wrong'd and abus'd you?
Franciſcus, can you think ſo of me?
Doe not enquire; yonder he ſits knowes all:
Look yonder, thou art to him tranſparent, and ſeen through,
As eaſie as the aire: doe not cloak thy vice, doe not:
See'ſt thou this? ſee'ſt thou the place we tread on?
Marke my ſpeech, one of us twaine, or both (never ſtart)
On this cold earth, this very Champion, ſhall
Offer up a crimſon ſacrifice of his moſt precious blood:
For that cauſe drew I to this ſilent ſhade,
Remote from all ſuſpition, where
Revenge might glut with ſatisfaction:
Draw thy ſword, or elſe thou never ſhalt.
Did not my love prohibit,
Thinke, Franciſco, I could not be a Coward,
Nor endure the opprobrious taunts the malice
Of your heart has made your tongue throw on me;
Why I know not: believe me, and receive it for a truth,
Were you ſome other, in this wide vaſt world,
And not Franciſcus, you had beene a dogge
That I had kickt long ſince; but you are my friend,
And my diſgrace is buried: yet if you carry honour
In your breaſt, and beare your wonted venerable mind,
Make me to underſtand from whence, or why your
Comminations & undecent language point thus at me alone?
Will you draw?
Do you thirſt for bloud? if ſo, and mine, hide to the hilts your naked inſtrument, my boſome is your mark: thruſt home and take your fill.
Will you draw?
You had mine anſwer, never▪ never.
Do you not love my wife?
Yes, by Heaven.
Confeſſe, ô impudence! my wrong cryes out, no more expoſtulation, remember Iulio.
Wherefore him, he is a Toad more virulent, oh, oh!
Bathe there, adulterate fiend, and thy red drops waſh off thy guilty ſtains.
Oh, ſome charitable creaure!
Franciſco, dear Franciſco.
No pittie, no remorſe, I bleed, and much effuſion robs me of my breath, ſomething of ſence relieve me, help, ô help.
That dying tune, was ſure a mans, where art thou friend, ſpeak thou that cryd'ſt for help, if thou wouldſt have thy wiſh, ſpeak once again: where art thou?
Here.
To one in thy caſe could I nere leſſe wiſh, then health and mercy, how fare you ſir?
Oh! Oh!
His utterance is decayed, and life begins to creep out of his wounds: let me ſee, ſo many, and ſo mortall! can I but ſtay the courſe I wiſh no more: have I nothing left, to ſtay this paſſage: well, yet ſtill hee breathes, that I had here ſome help. Thy aid Omnipotent, yet his pulſes beat, life is not quite diſcharged,—no ſuccour! keep he but motion, till I can beare him to my Cell, I doubt not, his recovery: this winde, this winde, that my Balmes were here: for my youthfull dayes heaven lend ability.
Run to all brief confuſion.
Good, ſir, be pacified.
Even in the pride, and noon time of his fortunes, brought to deſtruction thus: a milder, better tempered Gentleman, Venice nor Europe yielded; his knowledge made me proude, and I was rich in his adoption.
O my Franciſcus, ô my gentle Lord!
My brother, my deare brother.
My ſonne, my ſonne, ſo noble, valiant, wiſe, dearer to me then him I call mine owne by true ſucceſſion, doe you weep?
I am not bleſt, all things doe ſort contrary; 'twill not do, my projects thrive not, would I had been ſilent, wee know the firſt, but not the laſt, I begin to perceive our policies of times whets the Axe, cuts off our own necks; I have and one my ſelfe, that it ſhould come to this, wee ſeeke to mend ſo long, that we marre all: for mine own part, would I could have been content: but who would have dreamt the courſe would have proved ſo violent: well this I am ſure on, I may ſtarve ere I get ſuch another friend.
Siſter, if it be true, as ſo the rumour goes, you have playd falſe, and wronged your deareſt friend: you are not worthy ſuch another man, you ſole Queene of Africk; had you to live as many ample yeares as our firſt fathers, or their ages thrice: you might ſpend all thoſe tedious houſes twice told, ere you finde a Mate ſo worthy, were you equivalent, in birth and beauty, and had no paralell: Neptunes gems to boot, you want worth and excellencie both, to weigh down his demerit; Vertue and Honour ſtampt him for their own, at his firſt being, and the Graces ſtrove to increaſe his plenitude. More perfection then he has, hee needs not, where ere he's betook.
Somthing that's mighty, ſtain me Leopard like, if ere I gave offence.
I ſhould be loath to wiſh ſo.
Not you offend? look here,
This letter left he as a teſtimony,
Who is there here 'mongſt all this company,
That knew Franciſcus, knew not he affected,
And highly priz'd the ſlain Antonio?
What could have rais'd ſuch deadly enmity?
But this, but this, thou ſtrumpet,
Between ſuch twinlike friends?
Thy miſdemeanour, thy approved falſneſſe;
Which too, too well he knew▪
Thou haſt und one him,
Fled he is and gone;
His goods already ſeiz'd are for the State:
And die he ſhall if ever he be took,
Oh, fie upon thee my perpetuall ſhame!
Can you this behold, you upright Juſtices?
Thou art not mine, I here deny thy claime,
And warn thee hence-forth,
Come not neere my roofe:
Pine, ſtarve and die, reliefe and comfort
Never more expect from him that was thy father.
'Tis nothing I ſee, to work the diſſolution of a houſe,
How eaſily this is done?
I muſt weep, to deeme
I ſhould be forc'd to be ſo cruell;
More I have to ſay, if teares would let me;
(Me thinks) I could both kiſſe and curſe her:
If ſhe be wrong'd, and through ſome make-ſtrife,
Theſe foule ills prove a greater plague,
Then fell in Egypt, light on the Authors head,
The maws of Dogs be his Tombe:
Help me to curſe him Iulio.
Ten thouſand ſwords ſtrook me together.
Liv'd there ſuch a wretch,
And that I knew him,
Let my faith not ſave me,
But I would teare the Viper with my teeth,
And like a rude and ſavage Caniball,
Eate out his treacherous heart.
Now the foule Devill, ſtuffe thy glutnous paunch,
I am no viand for thee?
Who's this comes here, Arbaces?
Diſgrace and woe ſmite all this company, and make them feele my griefe.
Diſgrace, contagion, and what can be worſe,
Smite thee and all thy tribe.
Undone, undone, where is Anthonio?
Where's my ſonne Criſippus?
Anſwer thine own words;
Where's mine Arbaces?
Where ſuch a Villain—
And fell murtherer ſhould.
More charity for ſhame.
Sorrow gripe my heart till it be bloud leſſe,
But what thou ſpeak'ſt is falſe:
A more ſlanderous lye never left the lips of any.
Lye?
Sir, be perſwaded.
Tell not me, Ile prove it on him, Arbaces, boy—
That we were alone.
Well ſaid, old Lad.
Shew thy ſelf a man, meet me to morrow.
Good, ſir, forbeare.
Not meet him.
Will you be entreated?
Give me leave.
Will you be pacified?
Meet thee, yes I will meet thee;
I dare meet a man: Arbaces thou ſhalt finde it.
Come, you are a prater.
Prate; ye ſhall heare from me.
With reverence of your age, good ſir,
You want of that diſcretion and ſtayd judgement;
Your yeares and place requires: It is not well,
One of your reputation and report,
Should ſo forget your ſelf: to be plain,
You lack advice; and this ſame cavillation,
Meerly provok'd by you.
Proclaymes a loud your inconſiderate folly.
Sir, ſir; check your own:—
You never loſt a ſonne, and cannot
Ayme at my affections and paternall care:
You have undone me—
Robb'd me of my joy.
You are not right conſiderate,
Who has undone you ſir?
You, you, and ſhee, and every one of you;
The puniſhment for murder fall on all your heads,
And blaſt your terrene hopes:
Cruell, cruell, butchery.
Waſt not ſufficient that he took his life,
As by his own confeſſion:
Undid his wofull mother and my ſelf,
But he muſt practice more
Immanly, more dire auſterity;
Throwing his breathleſſe trunk
In ſome obſcure night-ſhaded Manſion,
A prey for ravenous beaſts;
Where never eye of creature rationall,
Shall more behold him: unchriſtian part,
If there be juſtice, above or here;
As certainly there's both: Ile petition,
My lowd complaints ſhall pierce both ſides o'the globe,
And ſtrike a ſorrow in the rudeſt thing,
Nature for mans uſe moulded:
O! my Antonio? my joy, my life;
My deare, my deare Antonio.
There's cauſe for this.
Sure, ſure, how fond was I
That could not weigh this before;
Having his proper cauſe,
If for ſome not ſlaughtred,
Nor mine own, but by ſelection,
I could ſigh my age, ſhed flouds of teares,
Meet dangers in my ſhirt, bid conquering
Death defiance, if all this and more I durſt attempt,
For one no otherwiſe, then mine by law;
Needs muſt he rave paſt rules of Manhood,
And forget all precepts that ſupport his ſuffrance:
See you this? What think you of your ſelf?
Have you not done well? account thou ſcandall,
That like the Whore of Greece,
Was teem'd for mans deſtruction;
Thy ſin upon thy ſelf, my doore is ſhut;
That hoſpitality I ſhew a ſtranger,
Shall be reſtrained from thee.
Moſt courteous ſir,—expect more.
Keep your Oriſons to charm relenting beggers.
Such in need, as may thy wants relieve;
Or at leaſt ſympathy thy mournfull tale,
When fierce diſtreſſe ſmiles,
Expect more comfort from the bluſtring North,
When he does blow the higheſt Acorn head
Down to the Medow, and there dips his cup;
Then leaſt relief from me, for thee;
For thee chaſt Maid, all beniſons,
And goodneſſe, that I can, command and have.
Your liberality was ever ſuch,
As merits more then thanks; yet thus far,
Truth emboldens me to ſay you are too cruell kinde,
Not all the proofs,
What ere incenſt my brother to his rage;
Can wean me to that vain opinion,
To think it her deſert: I dare proteſt for her,
No perſwaſion can drive belief in me,
To call Antonio falſe; if you prove ſo cruell,
So unnaturall as you ſpeak, there is no pitty in you:
Nor are you ſuch as a father ought to be,
Thruſt her out, then turn me off;
If you ſupplant one, you extirp us both,
And her extreams are mine.
Since you diſdain my proffer'd courteſie,
Together ſhelter your neceſſities;
Take up your habour with the hardy beaſt;
Theſe gates are lockt to her and her relievers
Hence-forth I will forget her,
Blot her name forth of the Bed roule
Where my children ſtand,
And vow I had none ſuch:
Hence, hence, thou ſcandall.
Thus guilt leſſe ones, ſuffer the guilties blame,
While they triumph in fraude, thus the ſtrict Judge
Condemnes th'innocent for the thieves offence;
Whilſt partiality allows his wrong,
And greatneſſe makes it good;
Will equity never take place again?
Has truſt left ſwaying here? that I but knew my crime:
Or that Franciſco but beheld my heart!
Let mine eyes rain a river of ſalt drops,
And my tears drown me, if any foule ſin of mine,
Deſerve Franciſcoes hate:
I had rather heaven had made me any thing,
Then one ſo much unhappy,
When ere thou bideſt on the plenteous ſhore,
Or labouring floud,
Proſperity adhere to thy proceedings,
And fame conclude thy deeds,
For me deſpiſed, ſuch be my fortune as my loyalty,
And I requeſt no more,
My ſweet, my ſweet Franciſco.
Heaven do thee right.
And if thou beeſt not honeſt,
There's neither pride nor coozenage in this Citie:
If every conſcience were well ſearcht,
And you did not finde
Some dainty fine conceited Rogue
Has been tempering,
Let me return to my Cradle,
And be hang'd in my ſwadling clouts.
THink you it ſo?
Yes, and verily believe't.
Tis ſtrangly carried.
Mark the end, marke the end;
Why do you ſigh, Signior?
Are you troubled with the Crampe?
O, blame him not, he has good cauſe to ſigh,
Franciſco ſet by him precious: How fare you, Signior?
Never worſe, my Friend's undone.
I, a miſchiefe and a vengeance oth' cauſe, by this ſword, nay, feare not man, I am not angry, and I could not judge, well, I ſay no more: but if hee did not walke on Stilts, I do deteſt eating and drinking, and thoſe are two neceſſaries, a man can hardly live well without them.
The very Paragon, mirrour of the time.
If I could not have wept when I beheld her, and that was more then I did at the death of my father, I have no beliefe in me.
Who but ſhe, the wonder of our age.
No more words, mark the end, marke the end; I ſay, ſtill mark the end.
I muſt leave you.
Not as the wench left the Frenchman in the ſuds, there's neither mettle nor ſociety in thee; if thou abandon'ſt my company, till we have viſited Valentius.
I wonder how he ſpeeds?
Did he not act the madman to the life, was't not wel? could ever a Dunſticall Doctor in this Towne, have pickt falſhood out of his behaviour: he was ſo mutable, ſo full of varying tricks (me thinks) I ſee him yet.
Defer your viſitation till to morrow, or late ſometime to night: I am yet unfit, this ſudden trouble has made me not my ſelfe.
Nay, you muſt goe; I have ſworne you ſhall, and (that preſently.
I pray you pardon me,
I will not be deny'd, refuſe me now and ever.
Youle have your humour ſtill?
What, eſchew acquaintanceſhip? forget, After my moſt hearty commendations, my very truſty friend, 'Twere ſin and ſhame Tomaſo.
But ſome other time.
This time, ſometime, other times, and all times, this day, yeſterſtay, tother day, and every day; no houre amiſſe, march on, march on.
I could launch my Dagger through my ſide, at one eaſie throw: begger my friend; ſubvert mine owne eſtate, and undo her, by whom I hope to climbe, accurſed, brainles ſlave: could the damn'd Devill with all his fire-brands, beat into my pate no ſounder ſubtilty. I had, I had reliefe, Foole vaunt of that?▪ boaſt what thou hadſt? or might have? tis paſt, 'tis gone, my villaine ſelfe, confounded has my ſelfe, and him that did ſuſtaine me:
What choaks Corne ſooner than ſide-fed weeds,
Who ofter does man wrong than he afeeds:
Let me ponder; have I no other invention?
No trick to take away my life, after my meanes:
Study upon't, I'me ſtrooke upon a ſand,
Swallow'd, devowr'd, through wilfull ignorance,
Never to riſe againe: 'tis a villaines caſt,
Firſt to ſinke others, them himſelfe at laſt.
You cannot blame me neither:
For love himſelfe undertooke more for love;
Had you been tangled in a Labyrinth more intricate
Than held the Minataure, or have beene
By Inchantments bound to ſervitude,
My life's adventure had my love expreſt,
And offered the releaſe.
Our plighted amities will dwell in me
While life endures; the many winters, & the tedious hours
We two have ſpent alone, alone Vallentius,
When nothing but what was not fit the Sunne
Should look upon,—Alacke my Husband.
It muſt not be denyed, Ile maintaine't before the Synod, here's my witneſſe: was't not well done of brave Caligula to make his horſe a Senator? deny't, deny't, would not a good horſe ſhew well among a teame of Aſſes: ha, what thinke you: give me another ſword: O noble Hector, looke, Achilles flyes, and bloody Pyrrhus ſhrinkes.
Alas, alas.
What newes, what newes?
Gentlemen he takes me for a Carrier:
You are deceived ſir, I am not the party.
Will Pluto keep his word, ſhall all extortioners, engrocers, uſurers, be finely damn'd, of what kind ſoe're? will he ſpare none?
Wondrouſly ſpent.
Let me ſee, let me ſee, the ſonne of Panace, a ſprightly Lad; Hercules, a luſty youth, a very luſty youth; Sampſon, a tall young man, a very tall young man.
Does he not do't well?
Ile make thee proov't, Ile make thee proov't.
I thinke you are mad:
What ſhall I prove?
Why greateſt generalls, that command whole Legions, and traine, and keepe in order every man, cannot keepe in a woman.
That's an eaſie queſtion, becauſe moſt of them get Follies wings, and grow ſo light there's no ho with them: they muſt flye out.
Hang them, they are naught all: Tell not me learned Ovidius Naſo, what's your name.
Good ſir.
That bloody villaine: Treaſon gentlemen, call up a Guard, the traytor's diſcovered: binde him ſure, ſure: are you tooke napping ſirrah: Downe with him, downe with him, downe.
Helpe, helpe, helpe Gentlemen.
I doe not like this.
Now my ſweet I have ſent him off in poſt,
Let us retire the while.
Who in affection will not his wits prove,
Was never loyall, nor did ever love.
Paſt, paſt cure, I doubt. Give me leave, I finde by my Art 'tis no Vertiga, no whirling, but a meere ſetled frenzy: Nay I pray you give me leave: for as both Hypocrates, and Gallen, Avicen, Podalirius, Rucis, Cornelius, Celſus, Corannus, Augustino, and Rombart, doe you conceive mee? beſides a dozen or two of Engliſh-men, moſt learned and worthy phyſitians (if I knew what they were) have demonſtrated paraphraſtically, both it and the cauſe, ſtyling the malady the digeſtion of the braine, or Irrevocabilis ignis, the irrevocable fire: Nay, will you underſtand me?
Would we could.
I pray you give me leave.
Who hinders him?
Sir if you can ſpeake our tongue, I would very faine be beholding to you.
Art thou mad?
Not altogether mad, though I confeſſe I have beene prickt with the thornes of Love: I have beene over ſhooes in my dayes.
Avoydance, for charity avoydance.
Yes marry ſhall you: I would deſire you to helpe me to a pill, or a potion that could make one honeſt, that I doubt is a little gone aſtray.
Avaunt, avaunt.
No ſir, ſhe is none of my naunts: ſhee's one that muſt be my wife.
Turbulant fiend: avaunt, avaunt I charge thee.
I would have it applyed ſir.
Illiterate dunce, abandon my houſe, avaunt I ſay againe.
Nay, I pray you be quiet, for though I have endured many hard words at your hands, I ſhall hardly brooke blowes.
Good gentlemen give me leave to laugh: ha, ha, ha, the Doctors wife, and the Mad-man: the mad-man, and the Doctors wife.
Why, what's the matter?
Why ſir, the fits upon him, and he's upon her, and younder's ſuch ſport, ha, ha, ha.
Fire and Thunder.
Runne: ware hornes.
Is this true ſirrah?
Follow the Doctor, believe your eyes.
Beware the trap Valentius.
Pray heaven he be not tane with nibbing.
Why are you melancholy Signior?
Faith ſir I' me troubled with cornes, and ever againſt raine they make me ſo melancholy—
Is that it, for the thing you ſpake on, you ſhall not be beholding to the ſcald peremptory Doctor: Come to my Chamber anon, and Ile give you a powder ſhall fulfill your requeſt, as well as all the potions or Pills he can deviſe.
Nay, but will you be conſtant.
Say no more:
And you doe take my word, while I live: She and I will be at your ſervice: when ſhall I come for't?
Any time after noone. Will you walk Tomaſo?
This is good newes withall my heart: Fub we are all made; thou ſhalt have a new Livery out of the bargaine.
I thanke you ſir, I would I had it.
Thou ſhalt, thats as good: would I were whipt but I could be monſtrous merry now.
No I pray you bee not monſtrous merry till you are married.
Ile goe give thee a pottle of Sack.
And ever he gave her a bob,
And ever he gave her a blow:
But where he knockt her once above,
He thumpt her thrice below.
What wil't not doe? prethee-let's be luſty.
As a Crow in a Gutter. Run there ſhe goes.
Father, for ſo I muſt ſtile you,
Your care and paines in my recovery,
Deſerves a recompence more than I am able to performe:
Now I conſider with my ſelfe, had we compaſſionate ſoules,
Or were men but good, they would baniſh beggery
The World quite over, and every one have ſufficient.
As hitherto you have conceald my courſe,
Continue ſtill your wonted ſecreſie,
Call me your ſonne, and ſuch appoyntments as a father
Should command me to endure I ſhall performe:
Bleſſed, bleſſed be you: effectuall be my prayers.
The longer time you ſo journe here with me
The more welcome: nothing more I crave;
But if I dye while you recide i'th' grove,
Out of your charity you'le take the paines
To lay me in the grave I have prepar'd, and with your hand,
Your foote, or any thing, caſt duſt upon my body,
And ſpend a little Ceremony.
More than this I will, and more than I will ſpeak.
Franciſco, wherſoe're thou bideſt, abide in quiet,
And have my pardon ever. If thou be'ſt fled
For any cauſe of mine, and I thy ruine prove,
Defend it heaveu, were't not for triall of Phemone's love,
And promis'd conſtancy, how ſoone would I renounce
My habitatiation, uncloath thy feare, & ſet all even againe?
Nothing 'mazes, nor drives me into that ſerious
Contemplation, as whence his wrath ſhould proceed.
Perchance Franciſcus thinkes me unfit to call him brother,
And his ſud daine rage proceeded from advice.
If it be ſo for ever will I keep this ſhady bower,
And never hold companionſhip with man,
More than is preſent, forget Arbaces ever
Cal'd me his, or that I was his ſonne.
Circle me ſafety, what are theſe come here
Where never neighbourd welt?
Calamity could not inflict ſo much as I could beare
With patienee, did Franciſcus imagine but the truth:
No lenity, but all extreames that may
Attend me with their ſharpeſt violence,
If e're I broke my vow: this ſorrow,
Nor the haviour I ſuſtaine are for mine owne endurings,
Witneſſe you that know all ſecrets, 'tis for him
I wiſh thrice better than my ſelfe.
Yes, and that Cornelia; as ſure as the black Ouſell
Has a yellow mouth, that whiſtles me awake.
Tis ſhe, or I am fond.
O my Franciſcus! O my deareſt Lord!
There needs no more for confirmation:
What make they here? Doe not undoe me wonder.
Ne're had two ragged coats more orient pearles,
Than you two ſhells doe hide: 'tis ſhe, or I am fond,
Leap not forth with joy, ſuch needy robes
Should wrap the ſhoulders of neceſſity,
When winter falls the Leafe: happy Antonio,
I am diſguiſed, and ſo, if that my ſpeech reveale not,
Without ſuſpect I may obtaine my wiſh,
And have all doubts reſolv'd: Ile greet 'em.
Bonny wight, what e're you be,
Lucke be in your company:
Are you Sylvanus, ſay to me?
None ſuch, good Shepheard.
Deft and trim ones mickle glee,
Be you what you pleaſe to be,
Some diſaſter tend by yee,
Never, never more.
A me unfortunate.
Welladay, now by my Creed,
And my merry Oaten Reed,
Sike another rouſing ſigh
Would well ſplit me gay and blith:
Let a loutiſh Clowne partake,
Why this ſobbing dole you make?
O inconſtant world.
A me unfortunate.
Wonderment of woe relate
If ſimpleneſſe you might not ſcorne,
How you hapt to be forlorne.
The ſtory would be too tedious for the time,
And would undoe the ſpeaker: Friend no more,
You ſhall doe well to leave us.
Be not all too keene, bright ſtarre,
If my pertneſſe went too farre,
Mercy is the doome I ſue,
Good things never meant more true,
Than the ſilly ſhepheard did,
Late wen he your ſorrow bid:
Diſcourſe the meanes merry Pan,
And the ſageſt gods doe ſcan;
Wherefore was it? well a neare,
You foule mucky cloud I feare
Will be ſprint us, Poebus twaine,
If ſo liſt you but to daine
A poore ſhepheards entertaine,
Welcome ſhould you be, I wiſſe,
Nor thing comely ſhould you miſſe,
Though not courtly: anſwer make,
Will you my ſmall feaſting take?
The raine begins to fall;
Siſter accept the Shepheards courteſie,
His ſimpleneſſe cannot but meane well ſure.
Even what you pleaſe:
Whither I goe, or whereſoe're I reſt,
Sorrow with me, and I with ſorrow feaſt.
Welcome, welcome, welcome ſtill,
Never with a freer will
Was welcome ſpoken, by the skie;
Welcome, welcome heartily.
Alacke, alacke, the rotten ſouth
'Gins to ope his dewy mouth,
Time to hide you: Father meeke
Give kind welcome, I beſeeke,
To theſe white ones, bonny girles,
Welcommer than heaps of Pearles.
You ſee our Cave, and make as bold as welcome.
Receive my adorations Queene of chance, Thou never gav'ſt that jewell to that man, was halfe ſo wel eſteem'd; my hopes have their deſires, Phemone, bleſt ſucceſſe; nothing that's amiſſe, but I ſhall underſtand: diſguiſe I thanke thee, joy ties up my tongue, and will not let mee ſpeake; they part not ſoone.
What Angle of the Earth muſt be my grave?
The Sea and Sunne have bounds, and know their courſe,
The ſonnes of men have none:
Limitleſſe he wanders the forraigne deſarts,
And begets more wonders every houre:
The Chime that tells the laſt minuite of the night,
Chides but in vaine when every thing's a ſleepe;
So I in the relation of my woe, when no man hearkens,
Spend but idle breath, and never finde reliefe.
But for increaſe ſake, I could wiſh devoutly,
I never had knowne woman:
What comfort ever others reapt from them,
They have beene plagues to me: to note the difference,
They are ſuch things, nothing's more worſe, nor better;
To ſay truth, they are Angels, and Devils;
I will not curſe 'em, leſt I make them worſe
That needs no badneſſe, nor rip up their defects,
Leſt I ſpend all my after time of life in nothing elſe but that.
Iulio, the profit of my Oriſona be thine,
Where e're I ſpend 'em, upright conſtant man:
Yet I am eas'd, in that I doe not beare my ſlaviſh yoake,
Cocker mine infamy, as many doe within our Venice gates:
Thanks to thee Iulio; Chaſtity, honour of women,
Whither art thou fled? that they are all ſo falſe
I muſt forget 'em, they will make me mad
To thinke of their abuſe: would I could learne
What inquiſition is made after me;
Some ſpeech of my concealement will report blab out,
That I may heare the danger does purſue me,
Though I adventure life, I will know more,
Or dye in the preſumption: I'le nearer to the City.
That's a good jeſt yfaith; Drawer, gives more Wine.
What's a good jeſt Signior?
That none ſhould be honeſt but the valiant.
How's that? how's that?
Why my beetle-brow'd Hoſt ſweares 'tis impoſſible for any to be honeſt, that is not valiant.
What ſaid he? What ſaid he?
That none could be honeſt, that were not valiant.
O very good, very good: more Wine here, hee's packing, ſet out his hand.
And his foote too, ere I have done: where's this fellow? another Pottle ſirrah.
Sir I thanke you for my powder, it gave her halfe a dozen of tickling ſtooles, ſhe has beene looſe ever ſince.
Give me your hand, here's even now to all the inviſible hornes i'th' City.
Forget not the Countrey, let it go round I pray you.
A health.
You'le have reaſon to pledge this ſhortly.
Will you come? to morrow is the day Ile aſſure you, for better or worſe.
To morrow from better to worſe?
Yes faith he has ſaid it, and I ſweare it, from better to worſe indeed.
Married to morrow Signior?
You have ſaid we ſhall be doing.
Vndoing he meanes.
So neare marrying Clariflora, and not acquaint your friend? yfaith I thought Miſtris you would have let me underſtood what had paſt.
'Tis my part to conceale.
She were no good Bawd elſe.
Come, ſit round, ſit round, to morrow the day?
Pardon me, Ile not ſit next this louſie fellow: gentlemen, what doe you with this poore rogue in your companies? Does he come to make mirth, can hee play the foole wittingly?
I know him not.
Would he were ſet downe ſtaires, I never could endure him from the firſt: Franciſcus made me know him.
Sirra, if you meane to depart in peace, begon ſuddainly.
Would the Aſſe could rid this intruding Copeſmate.
Let me beſeech you.
You ſhall goe, your prayers cannot ſave you; Fub, ſhew him the way downe.
Shall I be your Vſher? will you follow your leader ſir?
Thus poverty's deſpis'd at home, abroad, and in all companies.
A whorſon Tatred-demallion, come amongſt Gentlemen of ſort. What, is't no more but up and ride? How now Fub, is he vaniſht?
The Drawers have drawne him out Sir.
Clinke boyes.
Drinke boyes.
And let the Cannikin clinke boyes.
Stultus.
Yes Lodwick.
Tomaſo, ſhall's make a night on't mad lads?
And a mad night too Bullies: where ſhall's ſtrike faile?
The Leaguer, where but a'th' new Leaguer: there's generous entertainment for Gallants of ſort at all times: and for entrance truſt me my mates.
But money grows low, and expences will flye high.
Fly hye, let it, I have a jacke in a boxe ſhall pay for all one day.
I am as full as a Spunge, I cannot ſinke up a drop more.
No matter, we can ſqueeze ſome more out thus: we can wake the Conſtable, trouble the neighbours, diſquiet the Maſter and whole family, ſpill his Wine, puffe his Tobacco, foule his roomes, practiſe who ſhall breake moſt holes, and cleanlieſt, in the bottome of quart-pots, with a piece of a Tobacco-pipe: cry good morrow mine Hoſt, we ha' made a madde night on't I vow, and ſo trance; wee are no Gallants and we cannot doe this.
But this courſe is either conſcionable, or commendable.
Faith 'tis the courſe, moſt of the corke-headed Candle-ſnuffes walke in theſe latter daies, late at nights.
Well, let them reſt: So, ho, the Leaguer.
Chi-va-lah.
Amice.
The word.
Pecima largienda.
Let 'em paſſe: downe with the Percullis:
Lights and attendance, welcome Gentlemen.
I ever ſaid, it might come in a night, that came not in an age, Et ecce noctem faelicem; ſee, that joviall night is come: They have beene playing high, and potting deepe: Lights, Wine, and more ſtooles for theſe Gentlemen; welcome.
Tomaſo when's the day?
Aſſure's this the night before to morrow, I have brought in my Eſtate a matter of 400 pound per annum, in Deeds, Leaſes, Fee-ſimple, and Coppy-hold already: and that's no ſimple Eſtate youle ſay: I meane to bid you welcome to a Leaguer of mine own ſhortly Gentlemen; ſome wine you Scondrils.
I'me pleas'd to here't, whoſe faults this, yours Tomaſo?
What's this Leaguer rayſed yet, Par la ho boy, I thought we ſhould have had a ſecond ſiege of Troy on't, is their Reckoning paid? not a penny, they call'd for one, but in ſuch a drunken key; I bad em ſleep upon't, and I would tell em more on't when they were ſober.
Beſt of all, and whats to pay then?
Nine and ſix pence, Sir, allowance for lights, linnen, coals to light faggots: and ſix pence for one journymans ſleep only deducted, and yet they grumbled too.
But nine and ſix pence, and grumble; my friend the reckoning's not payd you ſay.
Not a penny.
The reckoning but nine and ſix pence, how poorely this ſhews, in a Leaguer too, and friends that pretended me a courteſie too? How many joynts of meat to ſupper?
Only a couple of clean Pipes, ſome three times fild I thinke.
No meat, come to hanſell a Leaguer, what no meat? Are they abed at Anthonies Ordinary yet?
Two houres ago.
Step down, and ſee, nine and ſix pence, they muſt and ſhall heare more of this: we may go beg, or buy up all the, refuſe, broken bread and meat, ſcraps, offall, and garbage that Cooks ſhops, Shambles, Ordinaries, Entries, and Richmens dores afford; nine and ſix pence, if they do not heare more of this—
Tis paſt that time of night; Charitie's bed, ſir, but if not.—
Bread and meat for poore priſoners, Bread & meat.
What doth that fellow cry?
Bread and meat for the poor priſoners, bread & meat.
For poore priſoners? as fit for my purpoſe, as a Conny for a Purſnet; here, take mony, buy his proviſion by the lumpe: if I had ſtudied for a fortune to fall upon me, I could not have had a fairer.
Wilt thou victuall thy Leager with ſcraps, ſweet Chuck?
No, my ſweet Monkie, I have further aymes then ſo, this broken meat and baggage offall, will I ſtrew in my Kitchin, Dreſſers, Hall, Entries, and every doore and drawwindow, and perſpicous places about the houſe: foule all the veſſell, three or foure times over, all to beſmeere the ruſtie ſpits and dripping-pans; breake all my broken glaſſes, beat the bottom out of my Cans: beat all my foul Tobacco-pipes, into fractions
And to what end all this?
Perlahay, My friends ſhall heare more of that in the reckoning: My ſweet Monkie, when the Drunkards ſhall wake, and ſee all theſe ruines, or rather remayns of a plentifull Leager: Oh, haſt thou no apprehenſion? Why, I tell thee, they cannot chooſe out of their generous bounties, but ſee all diſcharg'd?
Within. A cup of ſix, Drawer.
Oh, the Leager begins to riſe! Come Monkie a few directions for you in private, give you attendance on the Leager; let em call for what they will, and want nothing they call for: only I will tell em no more of nine and ſixe pence in the reckoning.
But for the nine and ſix pence.
Monkie, you ſhall heare more of that anon, when they are ſober? why Drawer, Dog, Dunghil-raker; is the Leaguer dry? By and by, a cup of ſix into the low Leaguer, there.
So, ho, the Leaguer.
What do ye lack? by and by, do ye call Gentlemen?
No, and I call'd a Gentleman, he would anſwer me, I call a Drawer goodman Raſcall, art thou one?
For fault of a better, ſir.
Couldſt not ha ſaid ſo then? where's the Maſter of the Leaguet?
Parlahey Monkie, bene venu Gallants, com a ſtato Sigiores mio com I ſtato.
Marry the better for your entertainment; thanks, ſir.
Thank him, I ſcorn to thank him, Ile pay him, and be out of his debt: come, to pay? A reckoning Drawer.
You Raſcall, who takes away here? here's a houſe beſtrewed with garbage and offall, as if the great Inqueſt had been feaſted, &c.
As good men, to no mans diſprayſe be it ſpoken, where's a Bill?
Prethee knock us not down, afore our time; was this certain feaſt of our making? what a ſpoyle of Poultery has here been? Tomſo, I muſt be beholding to thee for this ordinary.
Some ſmall trifle Stultiſſimo, the Reckoning is thought to be.
The Reckoning's very high, nine pound ſix ſhillings.
Nine pound ſix ſhillings, Parlahey, and yet I uſe you like Chriſtians too boyes.
Nine pound ſix ſhillings, how could wee foure devoure ſo much being halfe drunk when we came in?
Why there's the miſtery? you fall aſleep with meat in your mouthes, my Miſtris and I ſtood it out.
Waſt not an excellent Swan-pie? Servant.
As ere ſwam in Mil-dam.
Nine pound ſix ſhillings, one lay out for all,
Come, your purſes Gentlemen.
And you love me, let me have the credit at this time there's: ten pounds, give me the reſt again (ah, wee had the braveſt Marchpane, and Sugar-candy Cuſtard) or do not, let it run on towards fouling of linnen, and paying for ſawee: the reſt agen, or do—
I do not think but you are ſawſt pretty well already, for the Devill a bit of meat ſaw I, and yet all theſe ſcraps could not come of nothing.
The Reckoning's paid to a haire, come let's withdraw (but while the Room be a little finificald.
Parlahey, welcome Gallants to the Leaguer ſtill: pleaſe you withdraw.
We accept it thankfully.
Whoſe fault's this yours Tomaſo?
There wants lap.
Throw downe the pottle pot, let's have a gallon more.
Wilt pleaſe you Gentlemen, to heare any Muſicke▪ and a good Song?
Very fain, a good one.
What's your fellows, whoſe noyſe are you?
Ruberts noyſe, and pleaſe you?
Call your fellows, and ſtrip your tools.
Here's to you Signior.
A brace of them if you love me.
Marry and ſhall.
Score a gallon of Claret in the Pomegranat.
What Tim?
Maſter Fub I rejoyce to ſee you well.
You are not merry Gentlewomen, Miſtris Durable what, no mirth?
And how iſt, how have you done this ſeven yeares, welcome again.
As you ſee, in perfect memory, when ſhall wee ride the hogſheads?
Ha, do you remember that night, Ancient Thumps health overthrew mee, my Maſter goes out of Towne next weeke; yfaith and youle come, there's halfe a dozen good boys, weele be ſwingeing merry, will give him a craſh, old Will, Will be here?
What Will?
Little Will of the Mitre. Oh, Maſter Fub, Sir, out Maid, that gave us the Neats Tongue is gone.
See, ſee.
Some Sugar there?
Ha, ha, hum.
In ample ſtories written tis,
Who list but for to minde it;
How loved Narciſſus?
Go look and you ſhall finde it.
This Eccho was a Nymph moſt chaſte,
A lack, the more the pitty▪
She ſhould be ſo, and ſhould not reape▪
What follows in my Ditty?
Narciſſus was but young, I wiſſe,
But yet of perfect feature,
And had enough to ſatisfie
A reaſonable creature.
His brawny limbes became his parts,
No one of ſence could blame them:
And ſo did ſomething elſe I trow,
Eccho knew how to name them.
A vertuous piece of matter, Gentlemen, wee'le no more on't.
Nay, hold up, Signior.
Bid her hold up, feare not me.
Come Gentlewomen, ſhall we have a dance? Tomaſo what ſay you?
You prevented me.
I thought it ſhould have been my motion?
Wherefore ring thoſe bels?
Bels, you are deceived, it is the clincking of pots.
I would have ſworn, it had been Coronation day.
Maſters, can you play us Gaſcoynes Whibling?
Yes, ſir.
Let's ha't.
Here lacks a couple, we cannot dance it.
Lack a couple, what ſerve Tim and I for?
Tis true, well remembred.
Truly, Maſter Fub, I cannot dance.
Truly, you ſhall learn then.
I ſhall be willing to endevour.
Strike.
Ile throw the pot at his head that ſtrikes heere,
Whoſe that will ſtrike?
Rare yfaith, give's more wine.
What, Timothy?
By and by.
Look to the Lion.
Ile have my Galliard too
You ſpoyle all.
How does your head, ſweet heart?
Yes faith, and thank you too, what Rogue's he that turns the Room round? ſhall we not quench our thirſts before we part?
What elſe my ſweet Signior, this is your ſervant?
Good enough for a property, he will ſerve my turn, as well as a better, I ſhall but uſe his name: do you think I would marry the Coxcombe, but only for colour and feare of the Law? I'de ſee him bak'd firſt.
Tis wiſely done of you? and ſo my Goſſip Slight could ſay I warrant you.
Boy, another quart, and bring a Reckoning. Here ſir.
Heaven keep your Worſhip.
In honeſter company.
Fub, call for a Looking-glaſſe.
Did you go the right way?
It's a cup of neat wine, Ile aſſure—
Miſtris to your ſelf, and to our next meeting?
What's to pay?
Nine and ſix pence, and you're welcome.
How comes that to paſſe?
Here's ſeven groats Glaſſes.
How?
No leſſe, Ile aſſure your Worſhip.
Come your mony, Signior—
Fub, diſcharge it Fub.
Some lights, ſhew the Gentlemen.
Fub, I am ene as full as a Toad.
Yes, ſir, but do not ſpit your venome.
Prethee give mee another ſip. I am as dry as a Cook.
So I think.
A pox a this Megrum.
What's here, I prethee marke Tomaſo: Lodwick, I have my deſire: fetch mee off ſpeedily, leſt I cure the Doctour? yours Vallentius, leſt I cure the Doctour.
What ſhould he mean by this?
Why, belike he has infuſed his fit into him, and the Phyſician's turn'd Patient?
That's impoſſible?
But for Ʋallentius.
We muſt redeem him.
What elſe.
Heyda, is the winde in that door?
A link good Tim, a link.
Here's one ready, ſir.
Signior, good night.
Not a drop more yfaith.
Wee'le take our leaves.
When ſhall we ſee you?
Somtime to morrow, if my father ſend not.
Good night Maſter Lodwick, good night good, ſir.
Good night Tim, remember Friday.
I warrant you, forget not to bring Hugh, Welcome Gentlemen.
I Speak't in thunder once again, no more: thou Babylonian Strumpet, in thunder I command thee thou lump of ſinne, no more.
Have patience, ſir.
I rore it in thy eares, once more aloud, no more: cannot I deale, but you muſt be applying, you muſt be tampering, you muſt miniſter: have you not Pils for Potions? do you not traffique? do not you exchange Merchant?
Good Vanderman.
Sorcereſſe, I defie thee, and thy deeds of darknes.
Heare me, ſir.
I have heard and ſeen too much, has hee not paid you ſoundly for your pains: no, has he popt you.
You are deceiv'd.
You ſay very true, I am deceived indeed, and Fub'd, and Guld, and Rid, and you are Rid too.
What meane you?
Here blow it abroad, there's horns enow to do't.
Why are you thus impatient?
Dainty fine y faith, very dainty. Whore thou haſt made me monſtrous, and I may challenge Gyants: Yes, he ſhall be your mad-man; Doe you not like his fits, doe you not, doe you not?
God morrow to you both.
Why ſhould this be?
How doe you ſir? how does your patient?
Are you not ſatisfied? am I a ſtale? muſt you have new-found Crochets?
Doe you heare me ſir: is he recovered▪
Homo Armatus, a man armed.
Have you heard the like?
Me thinks 'tis excellent.
And when, when ſhall he plant againe?
I wiſh you would underſtand me, ſir.
Here's a fruitfull ſoyle.
Ha, ha.
Sir, I will be heard, and underſtood:
Save you Lady:
More furies, might, and ſecreſie, whoredome and The every bring all to confuſion.
Would we had more of this: we'le ſee what will come of all.
I perceive Vallentius was i'th' right, he's madde indeede:
Good Morrow Gentlemen: I have good newes for you; your friend is well.
Your tidings makes us happy, and gives us a moyetie of that content which nothing can doe more.
I ſhall rejoyce to ſee him what hee was, and Maſter of that temper he commanded, when he did dare the vaunting Bajeſet for taxing his beliefe.
Tomaſo, Lodwick.
Valentius.
I am glad to ſee you once again your ſelf.
You're welcome to your wits.
When time and place ſhall ſerve, my wit ſhall thanke you I am ever bound to you ſweet Lady.
Harke you Lodwick, are not we partly Bawds?
Faith in one kinde, we have a ſnatch that way.
So I ſay partly.
I muſt confeſſe, partly.
Not remember you, have not that bad opinion, doe not think I can be one ſo falſe by this kiſſe.
Sibylla.
Ay me, my husband.
Once again and part.
Sibylla.
Farewell, Valentius.
A thouſand take with thee.
What, hungry ſtill Vallentius, that you caſt ſuch a greedy eye that way?
How iſt man? what in a trance?
And kinder far then faire.
What, ſhall we have a Pamphlet; that he begins to ſtudy? doe you heare Ʋalentiuss: here's a friend of yours would ſpeak with you, when you are at leiſure.
I crave your pardon Gentlemen, as I live ſhe is—
What's this to the purpoſe?
You know my price: for the fineneſſe of the ſilke, the working of the ſtuffe, and the pleaſantneſſe of the colour, the whole ſtreet ſhall not afford you a better, Ile aſſure you tis died in grain.
The better for him that ſhall wear it, nothing but what's in grain can pleaſe him: let mee ſee, I know not how my mony will reach: the Silkman hath emptied my pocket this morning, but you will bate nothing of your price?
I proteſt ſir, I cannot, and ſave by it, and I know you would not wiſh me to be a loſer.
By no means, I would have every man to live & thrive by what he profeſſeth, it is mine owne caſe: let me ſee, I cannot make up the ſum, I pray you let one of your men ſtep over to the next lane: I lie there at the Barbers, Ile diſpatch him preſently.
My ſervants are all buſie for the preſent, you ſee my ſhop is full of Cuſtomers, and every one ſtriveth who ſhall be firſt ſerved.
And I am in haſte too, for I have ſent for my Tailor to meet me at my lodging, and I am loth to diſappoint him, becauſe I would have his opinion in the ſtuffe.
I pray you, ſir, be expeditious, and my man ſhall be with you by that time you have told out the mony.
I am much obliged to you as a ſtranger, I care not if I accept—
Diſpatch me that Cuſtomer quickly, and follow this Gentleman to his lodging: you heare where he lies.
Yes, at the next turning?
Ile but fold up this boult of Sattin, and be with him inſtantly.
Turne by the next lane, and thou ſhalt be ſure not to miſſe it, though thou findeſt not me, I have took ſufficient order and you ſhall be ſure to be ſatisfied.
We have many cheapners, but few buyers, many ſuch cuſtomers as this would make quick riddance.
What comes the ſumme to, ſir.
Three yards of Sattin and a halfe at ſeventeene, eight yards of Pluſh at foure and twenty; nay, there are divers other parcels, the ſumme is ſoon caſt up: thou ſhalt have a note of all.
And Ile but fold up theſe few boults lie looſe, and cleere the counter and be gone.
Be quick there.
But thou muſt be ſecret.
As your ſelf, Sir.
A pretty handſome youth, and will be loath to diſcover himſelfe, being extreamly baſhfull, and will make it ſtrange.
Leave him to me, Ile perſwade him that I knew him, ere I ſaw him.
Hee's my Kinſman, next Couſin German's by the Mothers ſide; now playing the Wag, as many youths will doe, you know it Barber.
Very well, it hath been many a good mans caſe.
He hath got a clap.
Theſe claps are got by clapping.
But for one thing, never ſhould it grieve mee, I feare it might go nere to ſpoile his marriage, which I would not for more than Ile ſpeak.
You ſhew your ſelf a Kinſman.
Now his exuſe will be (as I told thee he's extreamly baſhfull) to enquire for a Gentleman that owes his Maſter mony, to comply with the old Proverbe, Though his excuſe be draff, yet drinks his errand.
And lotion muſt be uſed.
As it ſhall ſeem beſt: but thinkſt thou hee'l endure it.
'Twill put him to ſome pain.
Which Ile not heare, my heart's ſo tender ore him: when he comes (as long hee will not ſtay) take him in charge, Thy pains ſhall be well paid, for doubt not but Ile come to the concluſion.
Very good, ſir?
My hope is it will ſucceed according to my wiſhes.
Make no doubt of that, ſir.
If I had, I had not made choice of thee above any other.
You are my friend indeed: and ſo I hope to keep you.
I will withdraw for the preſent, and inſtantly return.
Now good ſpeed with you, good cuſtomers are thicke ſowed, and come up but thin. It is good to make much of them, when we have them. This ſhould be the patient, that he talked off.
I come to ſeek a Gentleman.
You do: that owes your Maſters mony.
Very true, ſir, you know my errand then.
Before you came.
The Gentleman belike hath told it you.
He hath indeed.
Is he within?
But before he went, left order with me, you ſhould be diſpatcht.
Then I ſhall find him as good as his word: he hath acquainted you with my occaſions.
Ile aſſure you that, and intends well towards you, I pray come neer into the withdrawing Room.
Ile wait on you, pray know you what it comes too.
Yes youth, I know, wherfore you come: pray reſt you in that chaire, and Ile be for you preſently; be not aſhamed, you are not the firſt, nor ſhall be the laſt, that meet with theſe diſaſters: and now come, pray ſhew me your commodity.
The commodity belongs, ſir, to my Maſter, 'twas not mine.
Are his in danger too? let him not feare, but if hee have not let it run too far, there may be helpe found: nay, come, will you ſhew?
Mean you the note: there are the parcels ſent.
Theſe parcels may in time grow great, come, will you be ruled, the Gentleman your Kinſman, told mee before, how baſhfull you would be; and it becomes you well: but for your parcels, ſhew them in time: for if delay be long, that little which perhaps you ſhall have left, in time will come to nothing: your Kinſman's loth that you ſhould ſpoile your Marriage?
Spoile my Marriage, ſpoile not my Maſters debt, Neither draw theſe fearfull tricks on me: I need them not, pay mee the mony that your friend hath left, Diſpatch mee ſo, for Kinſman I have none; And honeſt Barber finde ſome elſe to ſport with, make me none of your Guls?
But I pray ſay.
I ſay, pay me ſir, what's my due, & what by your confeſſion, your friend left, or bring me to the party, or commodity he late had of my Maſter, or Coine for't: you have confeſt him to be your friend, therfore for him muſt anſwer.
By your favour, no more friend of mine, then you found him, to claime Kinred: my acquaintance with him, yet is ſcarce a full houre.
You are Confederates, and ſo I feare that I ſhall finde you: You know my errand, & promiſt mee diſpatch: Why am I not diſpatched then?
My meaning was to give you a Sering, or an inciſion Knife, Of which he told me you did ſtand in need: Indeed I deal in ſuch cōmodities, And am acquainted what ſuch parcels mean: For other wares or mony due for them, I know not what belongs to't.
Satisfie my Maſter ſo, quit me, and cleer thy ſelf; or 'twill fall foule upon thee.
Willingly: my cloak boy, Ile along, yet am affraid That hee who had profeſt himſelfe thy Kinſman, and my deare friend, will prove thy Maſters Coſin.
Give you joy Maſter Stultiſſimo; give you joy.
You talk like Gentlemen, and I like your talk the better, becauſe you talke to a Gentlemen; you call mee Stultiſſimo, and I ſay, Stultorum plena ſunt omnia: and now I talk to you like a Gentleman and a Scholer.
All health and joy betyde you.
Gramercy Gentlemen, I am not now the man, I was in the morning; I did riſe ſingle, I return double: in the Meridian but Worſhipfull, in the afternoon Honorable before Sun-ſet, and who knows but Majeſticall before mid-night: nay I perſwade my ſelf I am ſo: am I not ſweet Monkie?
Thou art my deare Baboon.
Very pretty names in faith: I prethee let's enterchange them ſtill betwixt us: or Marmoſet, or Apes face.
Yes, yes, by any means.
All thy goods and chattels, thy moveables, and the ſtuff that belongs thereto, thy utenſils and implements; now are all mine.
They are, to have and to hold.
Yes, as long as yee can keep them.
I have purchaſed thee in thy proper perſon by my word, but all thy other omnium gathrum, beforenamed, by my deeds, I think thou haſt them to ſhew.
The minde gives ſometimes words unto the tongue, and makes it ſpeak perforce, beare with him Lodwick.
Let the Doctors wife beare with him, for mine own part, without he renounce this mood, and become ſociable, as hee had wont, I defie his fellowſhip.
Will you dine with me Vallentius?
Yes, ſhall we be merry?
O is the tide turn'd, is the winde come about, by this good day, and I were not curſing my ſelfe, for being acceſſary to this melancholy, I have no faith in me; if women can tranſmute men thus ſuddenly, hang me, if I keep not out of their clutches.
Gallants, ſhall wee walk? I have a ſtory for ye: prethee Lodwick frown not, be a friend indeed, and ſee not my defects, I have a tale ſhall make you laugh anon, and will excuſe my blame; prethe be thy ſelfe, be jocund man.
Nay, I am ſoon perſwaded.
Where ſhall we be?
At the old houſe.
Come then, I'le make you laugh I ſweare.
Thus by degrees, with hazard of my life, have I attain'd unto my wiſhes reſt; and boldly gaze thee Venice in the face: the time has beene, Oh, but that time is paſt, when I was more familiar with thy pompe, but all that bliſſe is gone: And murther now, has with a crimſon ſtain ſeal'd mee accurſt, and like a condemn'd guilty Fugitive; I wander in deſpaire; fearing the rule of the harmleſſe bird, and the flies clamor, the Ant, the Waſpe, and every leſſer thing, Dreadleſſe of danger, ſtrayes abroad for food; Not caring who behold them, But I, alas, of all; am moſt unhappy: Would I were dead, and paſt the feare of that, Makes mee thus Cowiſh. Who art thou comm'ſt here, more needy then my ſelf?
Where might I run to meet deſtruction, And ſet a period on my wretchedneſſe? Stern miſery I know, and feele thee now: Yet is the earth content to beare my weight, And ſuffer what proud man diſdains to know, Unleſſe to ſpit upon, or add to that, Which wanteth no extream.
I cannot hold: his voice, his humour, I dare ſweare as much, 'tis he; 'Tis he by heaven, my Iulio.
Franciſcus, preſerver of my life; O let mee kiſſe the ground whereon thou treadeſt, then riſe to thank thee.
That I could ſpend my ſelf to teares for joy, beare witneſſe you that know it: Iulio, for ever dwell within theſe arms of mine, thou trueſt among men, I have not power to queſtion thee, my danger, my joy is ſo exceſſive; runne all to ſpoyle, & terrour meet with terrour; I feare none my Julio.
Strike when thou wilt proud death, I dare thee now; For having what I wiſht, I wiſh no more, nor would entreate time to deferre a minuite to have him reſt an age, ſince all things muſt have end, end it at once, my prayer is confirm'd, I have ſeene you e're I die.
And if you love me wiſh me not that wrong by praying for your end: doe not quite undoe me, if you but knew my heart, my Julio, you would not crav't againe: I could have comfort now, and cleane forget the dangers I have paſt, and thoſe purſue me ſtill: nothing to come can halfe ſo much diſmay, as thou doſt comfort; be it ſuddaine death or torture worſe than it: but for your ſake, would in my wombe I had bin ſtrangled, and never drawne this aire.
Where art thou Conſcience? whither haſt thou tooke Since thou didſt leave mans breaſt? that wee ſhould all have mothers; VViſedome all, yet all contemne her precepts: when you firſt fled, and by command'ment from the Senate houſe, your ſhips and lands were ſiez'd on for the State, thoſe that which ſtaid them did appeare ſo neare, as if their blood had ty'd them to your ſervice, grew ſo forgetfull in a moments ſpace, that neither argument, nor extreame ſignes could winne them to beliefe there had beene ſuch, as what you were to them: I (as no leſſe I could) bound to't by duty, ſpoke your merits ſtill, and did maintaine your right, on the Allyes of your inconſtant wife: but I am poore for't, truth was ſtill deſpis'd, and leſſe I could not be.
Take all I have▪ had I my former wealth,
My bounty could not recompence thy worth,
And powre it all before thee (my deare Iulio:)
Be not impatient with thy ſufferance, he's above wil pay thee all
My debts, though I ſhould periſh now.
Contemn'd for me? alack, alack, if there be ſuch
A thing in Charity, be charitable: doe not curſe the cauſe
Of this thy preſent want, I doe beſeech thee doe not thou Iulio?
I prethee anſwer me, and either doe what I have wiſht,
Or cure the wound thou haſt made.
Good ſir no more: doe not call all the teares out of mine eyes; think who I am: would you did but know.
I will not urge thee further:
Shall we here combine, and ſhape our courſe alike,
And never, never part; yet pardon me,
I will not wiſh thee ſo much injury
To be unknowne of woman.
You wiſh me not ſo well, how e're you wiſh, if you wiſh otherwiſe: your miſery be mine, and my enduring yours; one grave receive our bones; and hee that ſayes this Sepulcher is mine, call it Franciſco's Tombe.
I have a habite for thee yet unknowne, or worne,
But by my ſelfe: 'tis not a Furlong from the Antique Beech,
Whoſe hollow ſides conceales it: bide but here,
Till I can reach it from the hidden place,
And take it for thine owne: though homely,
Yet the courſeneſſe will keep warme,
And ward the ſharpeſt blaſt.
You binde me to my prayers.
Ile be with thee ſtraight.
Ignorant honeſty, ſhallow Italian, yes, live a wretch: Canſt thou be ſo fond to thinke me of that mettle? haſt thou eyes, and mayſt, yet will not ſee how thou art o're-recht: yes, doe continue innocent, doe, and die a foole, my friend, my friend, my very loyall friend, all friendſhip I forſweare, ſave outward ſignes, which with my garment J caſt nightly off. The father of the ſlaine Antonio promiſes liberally by Proclamation to any that can bring Franciſco forth. I will betray him, I will be the man ſhall purchaſe the reward: What way I curſes, or care for the report the multitude ſhall clamour therein. Ile imitate the Lawyer, making bad words my gaine. Franciſcus thou waſt born for my advancement: he's ſunke himſelfe, and fruitleſſe is the hope depends on that which was, and not which is; give me the preſent, not precedent man. Let me not hanker for emergency, but take the inſtant ſway, the publiſh't recompence is mine, 'tis ſayd, 'tis mine.
That any ſhould be falſe—But were there no droſſe, gold could not be eſteem'd, nor nothing precious rare. Cornelia let me forget that name and nothing elſe.
It is a month and more ſince ſhe left Venice.
Would I had left the world when I firſt ſaw her.
And the ſame minuite did Phemone forſake her friends and kindred: but where or whither they have betook themſelves the moſt knowing but conjecture.
How eaſie could wee make our miſeries, if wee might live and dye when't pleas'd our ſelves?
Theſe ſtrange additions to my newes I add, Antonio's Carkaſſe never could be found ſince yours and his contention.
I left him dead: thou art ſtill juſt; ſome beaſt has made that fouler beaſt his prey, and made up my revenge: but come with me, let us withdraw unto you thicket by, and ſpeake at large that woefull hiſtory commixt of my proceedings, and purſuith; wilſt time's our owne.
I would provide me of ſome neceſſaries, ſmall in expence, which make a mighty miſſe, and health cryes out to have: ſo if you pleaſe but let me fit my preſent want, at my returne enjoyne me to your will, though it continue to the lateſt date, and I am ſerviceable.
Speake no more ſuch words, but make your owne content: yet good Iulio be not abſent long, make me not long to ſee thee.
Such ſhall be my ſpeed, you will not wiſh me ſooner to returne.
Not wiſh thee? yes, though thou ſhouldſt make return e're thou depart.
Marke the end.
Be briefe, and goodneſſe take with thee. This Iulio, if deſert might purchaſe Fame, deſerves ſufficient: but thou art partiall Fortune in cramming Buzzards, whilſt the Eagle ſterves: How many in this fertile Italy, whom Nature moulded when ſhe loath'd her taske, and blew her ſeed among the ignorant, haſt thou adorn'd with plenty? whilſt ſeemely vertue, wrackt with poverty, jets under baſe controule: There's no felicity, nor true content here upon earth: The Spider builds his Webbe in Barnes and Palaces: and the Prince himſelfe taſtes gall as hony: Happineſſe there's none, for leaſt or greateſt: Here my griefe ſo parches me, that it does paine me to relate my woes, and make my feelings knowne. Beneath this Hill a cleare and pleaſant fountaine curles along, whoſe ſhallowneſſe makes the ſmall pibbles 'peare above like Rocks, and murmure as ſhee runnes downe to the ſilver Current, thither will I high, and borrow ſo much of her watry ſtore, as will aſſwage my thirſt:
All things are kinde,
And feed our wants when they themſelves are pin'd.
Now my Catter-whauling Puſſe, how didſt thou like my laſt Cheat? did I not foole them finely?
Thou art the very meere Mephostophelus, and I perſwade my ſelfe thou haſt new vampt thy wits.
Tuſh theſe are nothing: I have cheated one of the braveſt Stats-men of the world; the very quinteſſence of Spaine: Nay, I have fool'd him who boaſted in his Country, he had guld all our Nation A Guelding is not rid in the horſe-faire, but hee is mine to ride, maugre his Maſters teeth. I have out-fac'd a fellow of his horſe in the open Market, ſold him before his face; & but making a queſtion whether he trots or ambles, ride away both with the horſe and mony, my Puſſe. Sweet Munkey looke to the houſe at home, I muſt abroad againe, to fetch in a new purchaſe.
Maiſt thou thrive according to thy will, and to my wiſhes.
And what's your Action?
Three hundred pound: bee you ready to ſnappe him, and not to eſcape you without good baile: he's as ſlippery as an Eele.
Therefore we'le take him by the ſhoulder, and not by the taile; and ſo we ſhall be ſure to hold him. But can you ſhew us the man?
This is his walk, and without waiting long you may ſpye him.
Say but that's he, and 'tis enough.
Stand as cloſe as you can: If he have but the leaſt ſuſpition of an arreſt, he's gone in a twinkling.
But will not you ſtay and aſſiſt us?
By no meunes; Ile but ſee him in huckſters handling, and be gone. Are you not paid your Fees afore-hand, and— That's he now: Now let him ſcape upon your owne perrill. Farewell.
If he doe, ſay no more: Yeo man ſtand to me.
Now let me ſee: whom ſhall I next encounter?
Marry the Counter ſir: for we arreſt you.
Ha, Counterfeits ſo nigh?
Yet currant enough to carry you to priſon.
And yet your Counter-tenour ſounds but like ſcurvy Muſicke: am I catcht then? I pray you at whoſe fuite?
At three mens ſuite.
Then three merry men, and three merry men be we, are we not honeſt Serjeants? well, there's a peece to begin withall: lets talke further of the buſineſſe.
You ſpeake well ſir, if you hold on as you beginne: and if you can finde good baile, tenne to one but we ſhall prove as you late cald us (Honeſt Serjeants.)
Me thinks you doe not ſpeak like Varlets:
May it pleaſe you, ſir, to imploy mine induſtry For any further ſervice?
Something more,
Which in my former Letter I forgot,
I would entreat you beare in memory:
And that's but this—
And in good time: Know you that reverend man?
Know him ſir, yes, for a worthy Doctor.
He's mine owne Vncle: will you take his word.
And make it to me as a free diſcharge?
If he but ſay (nay there's another peece)
Ile ſee you ſatisfied?
Yes could we heare him ſay ſo: for hee's one whoſe word will not be queſtioned.
'Tis enough:
Give me but ſo much leaue as ſpeake unto him,
All Ile keep in faire diſtance: on my life,
If he ay not Ile ſee you ſatisfied,
I will returne your priſoner.
'Tis enough: for ſo farre we dare truſt you: you have paid for't well: but we will watch him at an inch.
I know he will not ſuffer mee to lye
For ſuch a petty ſumme: Now braine or never.
Excuſe my boldneſſe Sir: though it be ſcarce manners,
To interrupt your ſerious conference.
With me ſir is your buſineſſe?
Such a buſineſſe,
Which as it toucheth me in Charity,
So ſhould it you in Conſcience.
Speake it pray.
Look well on theſe two men.
He poynts at us.
The one is an arch Browniſt, and the other
Cannot endure to ſee a Surpleſſe worne:
Subject indeed to no conformity;
Yet both ſo well perſwaded of your learning,
And ſpotleſſe life, that what you ſhall propoſe
Th'are willing to ſubſcribe too.
I am as ready to give them my inſtructions.
And pleaſe you ſay ſo, that they may heare you ſir.
Well I will:
My honeſt friends, and pleaſe you to have the patience
Till I have ended with this gentleman,
And inſtantly Ile ſee you ſatisfied.
It is enough grave ſir.
Now honeſt Serjeants: what deſire you more?
Nothing from you ſir.
I hope ſo honeſt Serjeant: you ſee I deale fairely.
Farewell my honeſt Serjeants.
I have told you all: only remember me to theſe my noble friends.
With all the art
My weake tongue can deliver.
So, he is now at leiſure.
And now I come to you.
Moſt welcome, ſir, we ſtay for the ſame purpoſe.
Now, tell me briefly, which of you is the Browniſt?
which the other, cannot indure a Surplice?
You are pleaſant, ſir,
We waite here, hoping to be ſatisfied.
And to that end I ſtay, for theſe opinions
So erroneons and ſo groſſe.
Sir, all the opinion that we hold is that you will pay us the mony.
Still obſtinate in errour; 'tis this mony,
And worldly care on which ſo much you doate:
Breeds in you theſe diſtractions.
Pleaſe you to pay the mony, you ſhall finde us conformable in all things.
Mony my friends, are not you Sectaries?
Sectaries; no, ſir, we are Sergeants.
Sergeants; and waite for me? I owe you mony?
Yes, ſir, for your Nephew that was with you but now, and told you of it; & we heard you ſay, you would ſee us ſatisfied.
The man's to me a ſtranger I proteſt,
And his requeſt was I ſhould ſatisfie you
In ſome points of Religion.
Religion, ſir, 'tis a theam we ſeldome think of,
But three hundred pound is mony.
But I tell you,
I paſt my word for counſell not for coine,
And this is all that you from me can have:
Endure a Surplice, and beware a Knave.
Had we not warning ſufficient of this before?
Well, howſoever, we have had good counſell,
If we had the grace to follow it.
ASſure me of the promiſt recompence, I'le bring you to his preſence.
Heare me a word.
Now Signior, how do you feele you ſelfe? How like you marriage?
Faith it's a pretty quaint thing, and there's much good ſport belongs to't, would I were unmarried again?
Why? are you weary of Clariflora already?
Weary no, but I would have ſtore.
Harke you, ſir, take my counſell; though ſtore be no ſore, meddle with no more of them, leſt you make me a Prophet, and get many a ſore head by the match: have you not heard the ancient ſaying, No man can ſerve two maſters?
That's true, but any man may ſerve two Miſtreſſes.
And ſerve their turns well.
Nay, i'le leave that to the performer.
Hark you Maſter Lodwick, you or any man may thinke he does well, and yet come ſhort.
Briefly, directly, and learnedly ſpoken, ſweet Fub.
I ſpeak by proof.
Go to, your are a Knave Fub.
Hold your peace, there's more in the company.
Well ſaid, yfaith, thank him Lodwick.
It's not worth it, though I ſhould ſay as much by you.
This fellow flows with wit.
Gallants, when were you at Court? I have been deſired thether fortie times, my wife (I thinke) has a hundred friends there: beſides Cooks and Pantlers, that ſhe has had many a good thing of, and they have ſworn to bid me welcome for her ſake.
You may ſee what comes by marriage?
If we might ſee all that comes by marriage, there would be old butting abroad?
Here's the ſumme, perform thy word, and claime it.
Good morrow, good Arbaces.
Make me not known to theſe?
Vallentius.
Hee?
Are you not mad, I heard no leſſe of late.
Report's a calumnious quean, and will abuſe vertue it ſelf you ſee, both what he is, and what he was?
I am not ſorrie, that I am deceiv'd: heare you not of Franciſcus.
Upon my credit nothing.
Faire be your companie, come Gentlemen.
What's he that throws his Cloake about his noſe?
Is it not Iulio?
By all exterior ſeeming?
My life 'tis he?
What ſhould this mean?
I was asking that.
Mark't you Arbaces: he hath ſome drift in hand.
Did you not note his followers?
Yes, and the Arms they carried.
Shall we trace them, firs? and leave our wonder: I dare gage my life, the knowledge will deſerve the induſtry?
You ſpeake my words.
Hee named Franciſcus.
Yes, and queſtion'd me.
Withall, obſerv'd you but his ſpeed.
Come, wee will purſue him.
La, la, la, la: nay, I pray take me with you Gentlemen.
If not for company, for mirth's ſake, take heed before there.
In mightie men how great appears the vertue nere ſo ſmall; how ſmall the vice, though mighty Philoſophie, they rules bridles my cogitations, and prolongs, what manhood would diſdain, the time to come appales my courage and ſtrikes inſtant feares through every nerve and artery: might wee like beaſts end when wee die, and never make account in no other place then heer: what heart ſo baſe would feare the threatning Law? Flatter the Judge to ſave him: I would not ſure: but there is bliſſe and torment much to come, wee cannot thinke on't yet the Reſurrection aws me, I am much diſtempered, and want of companie, begets in me millions of terrours: Iulio tarries long, my Oriſons ſecure him, could the teares waſh the bloud but of my hands, my minde were ſomething free.
This is the place, and there Franciſcus walks.
Where?
That's he: apprehend him, i'le not be ſeen in't.
Your office, ſir.
What are theſe for men.
Lay hands upon him.
What mean you friends?
This we mean to attach you, as a murderer.
Arbaces, I am betray'd.
Look to the homicide, ſuch mercie as a Tiger yields his prey, when he's pincht for want of what's his booty, expect from me thou murtherer.
None I have deſerv'd, or am about to crave, I know the worſt, my life thou canſt but have, 'Tis thine; I make a tender of it ere the ſentence come, & give thy labour eaſe, alas, poor Iulio: thou wilt unfriended, run thy future race without ſocietie, I pitty thee my friend more then my ſelfe, danger to me is ſuch, I do expect and dread not. Fare thee well, my breach of promiſe, is not with my will, but meerly on conſtraint.
Lead him hence.
Here they are.
Who have we here bound to the good behaviour? Franciſcus!
My deare friend.
My brother.
Officers, why doe you linger thus, away with him?
How fare you, ſir?
Sicke, ſicke to death Vallentius: ſhall wee hence?
I now behold my feare, when I did heare Arbaces ſpeak of him.
Something of badneſſe ſhoot me inſtantly, but hee does pierce me through.
Good Gentleman.
Has he recided here ſince he firſt fled?
I thought him now in Millain, where hee did trafficke much.
I wonder how he came to be diſcovered?
Beſhrew my bloud, I pitty his eſtate.
Will you accord with mee, ſhew that reſpect you once did tender him, and withall willingnes ſtrive to invent a means may do him eaſe.
What, my ſword, my word, or wealth can doe is his, command it for him?
Let us petition to his rough adverſary, and like true Suppliants in our own behalfs, draw mercy from Arbaces.
Agreed.
About it then, and our intentions thrive. Manet Julio.
The gold is mine, his certain bondage does aſſure mee it, why ſhould I be an Aſſe, and nicely ſtand on that no Tradeſman does: no thrifty one, what conſcience, any thing but ſuch a word: our wiſe divines that preach an't, know it not, nor make good uſe of that, or ought they ſay, but of good mony: this I daily ſee, and ſometime make my daily meditation, all's Ceremonie compos'd for purpoſe:
But be it what it will, this is my grace,
If not for one, I'me for the othe place.
Bring the offender forth.
Have mercie, good my Lord.
Believe't thou mayſt ſooner move a rock, which neither bluſtring winde, nor boiſterous Sea could ſhake or ſwallow, then beget remorſe or ſmalleſt favour in ſo foule a caſe: I were unjuſt, and much unmeet to be the man I am, ſhould wee ſhew mercie where the crime deſerves, beyond the laws extent. He that ſhall pardon murder, take't from me, is acceſſary to the guilty deed, and ſtands in ſelf predicament: Heaven defend we ſhould be ſuch, were he my Nephew, nay, my firſt-borne ſonne, or one more neere: let me not be bleſt in my proceedings, if our Authoritie ſhould blinde his ſinne, or alter juſtice courſe, ſet him forth: what favour equitie can yield be his, no more expect Criſippus.
Read the indictment.
Save that pains, guilty, nor do repent, that in my wrath I did, whereof I ſtand convict.
Art thou not ſorrie for thy hainous crime?
No mighty ſir, but rather joy the more, in that it breviats my paſſage here, which I would willingly leave.
Impudent homicide: juſtice good my Lord, with that ſeveritie which they deſerve, which wilfully commit—
Ariſe, thou needſt not kneele, nor beg for juſtice, be aſſured Arbaces: ſuch his deſervings, ſuch his puniſhment, and cruell as the cauſe, thou moſt bruitiſh man, nay, beaſt or ſomething worſe: hadſt thou no humanitie, no ſparke of reaſon then, nor ſence, to thinke thy treſpaſſe foule and ugly? do'ſt not repent thy tyranny in death, though not the deed it ſelf: fie on thee monſter, haſt thou a foule and dreadſt not her perdition: what heathen ſavage, nay, what ruder thing, having the life thou ſoughtſt, would have enacted ſuch a deed of ruth, as thou, thou worſt of creatures, on the image and liveleſſe carcaſſe of thy loving friend.
'Twas moſt uncivill, moſt unchriſtianly.
An act, a Tigre would not have perform'd, on one that had ſlain his brood.
Heare me good my Lord.
My poore Antonio.
That I did take his life, I have confeſt, what further accuſations laid on mee, is meerly malice, and proceed from ſome, could wiſh my torment worſe.
Out on thee butcher: give me leave my Lord.
Silence.
Canſt thou deny thy wrathfull crueltie, impetuous tyranny, and fell revenge upon his bleeding trunk?
Unleſſe I ſhould belie my ſelfe, and ſpeake like a vaine boaſter, more then what I did, I muſt ſay this is falſe, and hee's from truth, as farre as I am from hope of life, begot this ſlander.
Produce your proofe Arbaces, ſtrike bluſhes through the cheeks of this falſe man, and let him ſee his ſhame.
What Devill ſhould be rais'd from the loweſt hell, to juſtifie this wrong?
This is ſtrange.
I never thought Franciſcus one ſo foule, as I behold him now.
Not thought, I durſt have ſworn him of a purer mettle▪ and better temper farre.
Proſperitie to the Venetian State.
Iulio: he's not his proof I hope.
Is this the Gentleman?
This is he my Lord.
Make room, give way there.
How comes this about?
The fact's confeſt, my Lord, what need we further wade into the Law, or heap on troubles which we may eſchew, upon ſo plain a caſe? the crime is Murder, Murder is confeſt, then as you finde the guilt, proceed to judgement, and make no further queſtion.
We ſhall be ſuddain.
My ſentence, good my Lord.
Speake, ſir, can you report any thing more touching this buſineſſe then what already is delivered here in the open Court.
No more or leſſe, then what his owne tongue uttered, can I or have to ſay.
How's that?
We were once friends: once had I ſuch opinion of his vertues, my life and eſtimation were both his, hee might command them, much it were to ſpeake of all that paſt between us: thus in ſhort, I would ſome other were compell'd to this, which you have tied me too, my neereſt friend alive.
Arbaces: was this the man gave you firſt notice where this Murderer kept?
The ſame my Lord.
Did he betray me? can this be.
Forward.
Speake.
Muſt we be enforc'd, what ſhould I ſpeak, hee flue him, ript his bowels, mangled him, and in his wrath, as man will any thing: tumbled his reeking quarters downe a Vault moſt ſteep and lothſome: what of this, hee might deſerve much worſe auſteritie, yet this was bad enough?
Ha?
Juſtice, gracious Prince, juſtice, juſtice, ſir.
Is this truth?
Let me be depos'd—
The moſt erronious, execrable part that ever was perform'd.
Were hee my father, ſhould forget himſelfe, and match this outrage, mercy quite forſake me if I would ſue his pardon.
It was ruthleſſe, fell, and bloudie.
Look not up for ſhame, thou haſt no intereſt there.
I have done wrong, mightie, mightie wrong.
Canſt thou behold it now?
Pardon me father, pardon good Arbaces: that villaine, that foule villaine.
'Twas time to come.
Shew mercie, mercie, Duke.
Pittie our complaints, have ſome compaſſion.
What are theſe that make this earneſt deprecation, with ſuch a heartie zeale; are they well known to this aſſembly?
Cornelia, ſiſter.
Faire Phemone.
When will theſe humid fountains be dried up, and yield no more warme drops?
My ſweet Franciſcus.
Some good or bad thing fell mee ſuddenly, let mee behold no more.
Is that his wife?
She was my Lord, while ſome hard fate diſ-joyn'd their mutuall league, and burſt the holy concord.
Wilt thou pardon me and live a happie one, when I am dead, and lapt in this cold earth.
Franciſcus I was ever true to you.
I ſee it, and believe: that villaine, oh, that villaine!
Harken thy ſentence.
Heare mee my good Lord, little I have to ſay, yet to much grief tend my few words, this traitor, nay, 'tis title all too good for one ſo hainous foule, that he is perjur'd, by the death I owe his lateſt words do witneſſe what hee is more, and worſe: with pardon Lords, I ſhall delate at large, that all hereafter may example take, and ſhun a villaines ſnare; I tooke him up, when like an Adder in the froſty dew, the cold had ſtarved him: that I had ſet my foot upon his head, when to my boſome I did take the Serpent, not cheriſht, comforted long had he been, but hee both bit and ſtung mee: fooliſh man I was to be ſo fond, not many months, nor happy days I had with this moſt trueſt, moſt immaculate piece, but that perfidious Caitiffe, that blacke fiend by ſtrange ſuggeſtions, and invented projects, draws mee into a confirm'd jealouſie, that ſhe had ſtained her honour, falſly playd with young Antonio.
O forgive me heaven, what is this?
I from my wrong conceiv'd, leaſt could I not, Drew him apart into a ſilent Grove, Having before vow'd ſolemnly revenge, Where I made ſome repetition of my griefe: he ſtill (I ſee him) innnocent gentleman, taking my words For ſuch as Lovers uſe, when they are wanton, Smiles me in the face, and would not thing 'twas anger.
Tis truth he ſpeakes.
This inkindled me, and as Boare,
When he does chaw his foame, predicts ſome miſchiefe,
So my bended front fore-told his ruine,
Forth I drew my ſword, and ſheathed it
Within his breaſt, what elſe is added,
He's a Jew averres, and falſer than a whore.
See, ſee the Ages wickedneſſe: can it be poſſible?
O miſerable time, when men make no more reckoning of their ſoules! Fye, fye, Franciſco, thinke upon your end, and whither you muſt goe. Moſt reverend Fathers, obſerve you this his contumacy: I ſhall I feare be forc'd to ſpeak what in my heart till now I cheſted, and rib'd in, becauſe mine oath, 'twas not my wil hath heare conſtrained me to expoſe his blame, my ſoule had vowed to hide; Note into malice how he throwes himſelfe, and would ſtaine my reputation with a calumnious lye.
Art thou a man, or ſomething elſe; oh foole, foole.
Is this poſſible?
Give eare unto thy ſentece.
I muſt, in—
Did not I ſay he's mad, ſtarke raving mad, away with him. The man's alive that's dead.
Yes, they ſupt together: I love this fellow.
Your Grace ſhall doe well to puniſh this ſaucy groom.
You are a moſt pernicious damn'd villaine, and your ſoule knowes it.
Come, ſir, depart, & rave not, or I ſhall ſee you whipt.
Good Father pardon; pardon mighty Duke, pardon Antonio, cauſe of this diſquiet. Lod. Antonio?
By this light he ſupt with him indeed.
It is not ſo, this cannot be.
Is there no mountaine nigh to fall on me, no roten houſe?
I know not whether I may call thee ſonne, or reſt in doubt for ever.
I am Antonio, and I was your ſon, when I left Venice laſt.
Is no man here amaz'd but onely I?
My deare Phemone!
Were you the Shepheard?
You ſee chaſte Cornelia.
Was ever man ſo bleſt?
Nay, come Franciſco, I muſt have your hand: I can as well forgive, as I can love; and nothing more than both: good Criſſippus, my old friend.
You have bin a ſtranger Signior; but I'me glad 'tis thus.
Whither away: ſtay him officers; wee have not done with you.
Wither ſhall I runne to hide my ſelfe?
What Climate, or what Region? Pardon greateſt Prince.
Pardon grave Fathers.
Againſt that prayer kneele I:
No pardon Prince, as thou doſt hope for bliſſe.
Grant him a halter; nothing elſe good Duke.
Give him his liberty: Art thou ſo impudent to pleade for mercy, and beg of me, having committed ſuch a capitall treſpaſſe here in my view?
Though what I ſpeake, with ſome additions, I have done and more, and he more falſe has plaid, than I have ſaid, blot his offences: be propitious Sir.
Though the greateſt ſufferance fell on my part, I here acquit him, and beſeech for mercy.
Yet be compendious, and poſſeſſe this preſence, what cauſe thou hadſt that tempted thee ſo badly to ſeek my ruine.
The Devill and his Angels.
O fie Ioretzo.
How Ioretzo? not the ſonne of that pernitious traytor, had plotted with Lamunes for ſummes of gold to burn our City?
He's dead, and ſuffered for the ſame offence.
When brought the toad forth other than himſelfe, unleſſe 'twere ſomething worſe?
Forget his Fathers faults: be pittifull.
He that prayes next in his behalfe, by heaven friends not himſelf, and is mine enemy: We have too long ſuffered ſuch Weeds as theſe to flouriſh in our ſoyle: No more the boſome of this earth of ours, ſhall (like a mother) lend her fruitleſſe encreaſe, to cheriſh thoſe would bane her: The ſword of juſtice cut the juſtice off that keeps it ſheath'd to ſuch: His deeds were ſhamefull, his rewards be ſo, and quittance his deſert: Sare on his brow in letters cappitall, the name of knave, that all behold may reade him what he is, and hate him in the ſight: His next doome is this; after three daies we charge thee on thy life, never ſet foote more in thy Native Climate.
So, beare him to his torture, ſpeech is vaine:
For what is ſaid there's nothing can reſtraine.
Moſt worthy Prince.
Ile be honeſter while I live for this trick.
Can you forgive mine injury, Antonio?
As freely as I hope to be forgiven; and crave no more amends, but onely this you'le call me brother, and make Phemone mine.
I need not make what's made, take and enjoy her that hath vow'd to be none but yours.
Thy hand Arbaces, our quarrell's or'e, we'le no fighting.
Fight, yes: I hope we ſhall find ſomething elſe to doe.
Daughter I have done thee wrong too; but Ile ſeeke forgiveneſſe when we have more leaſure.
This day breeds wonders: by what accident ſcapt you of your wounds?
Here ſtands the meanes, whom I muſt ever tender with reſpect, as with my full proceedings you ſhall heare, when none can interrupt.
Franciſco, henceforth know your vertuous wife, & prize her as a jewell: I have heard the world ſpeake well of her, and thoſe unmatch'd wiſh they may have your fortunes. Lodwicke where's the dumbe ſhew you promis'd me.
Even ready my Lord; but may be cald a motion: for puppits wil ſpeak but ſuch corrupt language, you'le never underſtand without an interpreter, or a ſhort plot; which I have drawn thus—Now the motion followes.
What not divulge: yes, yes, I will divulge.
The jealous Doctor: I have him.
Doe me right, ſweet Duke, doe me right.
What art?
A foole, a phyſitian, a maintainer of whoredome, with a poxe to me.
Then Medice cura teipſum; more knave than foole, the plot's falſe drawne elſe: away with em.
Come ſir, depart.
Purge mee Duke, purge me, or let my wife take out my corrupted braines, and rince them in a Cucking-ſtoole: I come Skimmington, I come.
Vallentius you muſt take ſome order for the Doctors cure: he befriended you in as great a courteſie.
Trot on afore: is the Corne-cutter come yet?
The Horne-cutter is come, ſir.
On, on to the Leaguer then: I am aſhamed to ſhow my head amongſt Animalls: on to the Leaguer.
This is a Monſter of your making, Lodwicke, buy him a Cap-caſe to hide up his hornes in, for ſhame o'th' world.
Come we are both—
He comes, he comes.
Where doth he come? hee is rather drawne hither like a Bare to a ſtake.
What in a Coach?
Nay, rather in an open Charriot: and yet it cannot bee properly called a Chariot, becauſe it runnes but on two Wheeles.
Roome for him there: for I am ſure hee had rather any here had his roome than his company.
Silence there; you in the Docket there, let but one ſpeake in the Court at once.
Noverint univerſi,
It is the Dukes mercy;
And the condition of my Obligation,
To make my recantation,
That I within bound,
Should give reaſons profound,
Why (much againſt my heart)
I thus ride in a Cart.
Nay, gentlemen, no egges I beſeech you: for I love them at this time, neither raw, roaſted, nor rotten. For ſhould they hit me on the breaſt, they would goe cleane againſt my ſtomacke.
You Phaeton.
Is that your Father Phoebus his Chariot, and will he allow you never a Boxe to ſit in?
No juglers Boxe, Ile aſſure thee friend: for here's neither paſſe, nor repaſſe, I ſtand here you ſee for an example, And could wiſh all theſe good people to follow it.
Who's that, Bootes mounted in his Charles waine? doth he cry Pippings, Carrets, or Turneps?
You are deceived, Signior: rather Bread, and Meate, as Pye-cruſt, bones, and fragments out of the Ludgate mans basket: Nay, hold your hands, I beſeech you Gentlemen, and uſe your tongues and ſpare not.
Well, he ſtands heare but for a ſhew, and I am ſure I ſuffered for it really and indeed.
Beare witneſſe my Maſters, that is the maine malefactor indeed, and I ſtand here for a ſhow: Ile goe no further than his owne confeſſion.
They talke of Cheaters, here is a twenty ſhillings peece that I put into my mouth, let any Cheater in Chriſtendome couſen me of this, and carry it away cleanly, and Ile not only forgive him, but hugge him and imbrace him for it, and ſay he is a very Hocus Pocus indeed.
What ſaid that fellow?
He ſaith he hath a peece in his mouth, that all Europe ſhall not cheate him of.
I have markt him, 'tis mine owne: and notwithſtanding all this melancholy we'le ſpend it at night in Wine and Muſicke.
Hee that can plucke this peece out of my jawes, ſpight of my teeth, and I keepe my mouth faſt ſhut, Ile ſay hee is more than a Cheater, and a Doctor Fauſtus, or Mephoſtophilus at leaſt.
Doſt heare how he brags?
'Tis mine own I warrant thee.
But what's become of my horſe?
And what's become of my load of hay?
May I eate hay with your horſe, if they were not both done neatly and cleanly. But Gentlemen, and the reſt, you ſee I am at this preſent your pittifull ſpectacle. I lookt once within this twelve month, not to have been mounted in ſuch ſtate: but no man knows what preferment hee is born to. You ſee I have hitherto ſayled through this great ſtorme without ſoyling my Suite, ſpoyling my Ruffe, or ſpattering my Beaver: thanks to theſe kinde ſpectators.
But Maſter Faſt and Looſe; doe you remember what a ſlippery trick you ſerved Maſter Doctor and us?
And was it not fairely done Maſter Sergeant, to teach you how to diſgeſt the wearing of a Surplice, before you came to ſtand in a white ſheet.
Well now you are at your journies end: May it pleaſe you to alight for your eaſe?
Withall my heart: and if either you or any of my accuſers be weary with following me on foot, the Room is now empty, I will give him leave to ride in my place. Yet when I doe but think of this diſaſter, it draws teares from mine eyes.
He draws his handkerchiefe (as to wipe his eyes) juſt before the Country fellow, and ſcatters ſome ſmall mony.
Sir, you have (I think) let fall ſome mony.
Thanks honeſt friend.
What do you look for? I can aſſure you here is all that fell.
Nay, ſure I had more mony? 'tis not in my handkerchief, nor in my pockets, I have examined them both.
Why, what do you want ſir?
A piece, a piece, and had it now, juſt now; ſure whilſt I was ſo high pearcht none could dive ſo low into my pocket, it was ſure as I lighted, and dropt from mee, juſt as I drew my handkerchief.
Some ſuch thing I ſaw fall.
Pray who were they that ſtoopt?
I ſaw none ſtoop but this Country fellow.
Then ſir, I muſt demand this piece of you.
Of me? I profeſſe I tooke up but two ſhillings and ſix pence, and that I gave into your hand.
But I profeſſe that one of them was a piece, and never came into my hand, and that I muſt demand of you: ſay did no body ſtoop but hee?
None I aſſure you.
Thou art ſtill my honeſt Sergeant.
That fellow hath ſomething in his mouth.
Yes my tongue and my teeth, and what of all that.
Nay, ſomething elſe ſure, for hee is not troubled with the Mumps, and yet ſee how one ſide of his cheeks bumps out.
I am afraid, we ſhall finde him a Cheater.
Sirrah know I am an Officer, I charge you open your mouth, and let us ſee what you have in it, &c.
Well ſir, I have a twenty ſhillings piece, what then?
And this man miſſeth a twenty ſhilling piece out of his pocket.
Plead well Sergeant and thou ſhalt have thy ſee.
Well, there it is, what can you make of it?
Marry twenty ſhillings good and lawfull currant mony, Puſs, was not this the piece that I put in my pocket this morning?
I know it by that mark.
And ſhe's witneſſe ſufficient in conſcience.
Doe you ſee Gentlemen. I am here brought to publike penance for a Cheater, and here's a plain fellow that (it ſeems) in his ſimplicity would out-doe me: if I be thus cenſured meerly for ſuſpicion; ſhall hee ſcape free that is taken in the very action?
No, no, mount him, mount him.
Nay, by your favour Gentlemen, I have driven a Cart often for my pleaſure, and would bee loth to ride in one now for my puniſhment. It is penance enough for mee to part with my peece, which cannot be more currant of Coine, then his is Arrant for Knavery.
He's gone, I am ſtill here, now Gentlemen,
If heretofore there hath been any Doll,
Any bold Beachum, and any Cut-purſe Moll.
Any Bawd fat with wealth, or with care meager,
That ſpends her time in Garriſon or Leager,
Grace me ſo farre to ſay, that of a Cheater
Though ſome have been more grave; ſcarce any greater,
But Gentlemen; what need we more repeating?
Knowing, that even in all Trades there is cheating?
Tis common both in buying and in ſelling,
In all Commerce; nay, even in mony telling.
Tis frequent 'twixt the Pander and the Whore,
We our ſelves finde it at the Play-houſe doore.
And though (for an example) here I ſtand,
I am not all the Cheaters in the land.
Some here (no queſtion) know it but I vow,
(They what they pleaſe) I will cheat none of you.
We underſtand their humours,
And the cauſe of their diſtempers;
And have too long ſuffered ſuch weeds
As theſe to flouriſh in our ſoyle,
But now no longer ſhall this earth of ours,
Like a inde Mother lend her fruits increaſe,
To cheriſh thoſe would eclipſe her worth.
But thoſe whoſe aymes and acts are imitable,
Crown with green Garlands, and with Bowls brim'd full.
Muſique proclaime a generall Feſtivall,
A Jubile of joy and mirth to all:
May love and truth, never like comfort miſſe,
Nor Knave in Grain, ſcape a reward like this.