AS many bleſſings as there be bones
In Ptolome's fingers and all at ones,
Held up in Andrewes Croſſe for the nones.
Light on you good Maſter,
I dare be no waſter
Of time, or of ſpeech
Where you are in place:
I onely beſeech
You take in good grace,
Our following the Court,
Since 'tis for your ſport
To have you ſtill merrie,
And not make you wearie.
We may ſtrive to pleaſe,
So long (ſome will ſay) till we grow a diſeaſe
But you Sir, that twice
Have grac't us alreadie, encourage to thrice;
Wherein if our boldneſſe your patience invade,
Forgive us the fault that your favour hath made.
IF for our thoughts there could but ſpeech be found,
And all that ſpeech be uttered in one ſound;
So that ſome power above us would afford
The meanes to make a language of a word,
It ſhould be welcome: In that onely voyce
We would receive, retaine, enjoy, rejoyce;
And all effects of love, and life diſpence,
Till it were call'd a copious eloquence:
For ſhould we vent our ſpirits (now you are come,)
In other ſillables, were as to be dumbe.
Welcome, ô welcome then, and enter here,
The Houſe your bounty hath built, and ſtill doth reere
With thoſe high favovrs, and thoſe heap't increaſes,
Which ſhewes a hand not greev'd, but when it ceaſes.
The Maſter is your creature, as the place;
And every good about him is your grace:
Whom though he ſtand by ſilent, thinke not rude,
But as a man turn'd all to gratitude.
For what he never can hope, how to reſtore,
Since while he meditates one, you heape on more.
Vouchſafe to thinke, he onely is oppreſt
With their aboundance, not that in his breaſt
His pow'res are ſtupid growne; for pleaſe you enter
Him, and his houſe, and ſearch them to the center:
You'll finde within no thankes, or vowes there ſhorter,
For having truſted thus much to his Porter.
ROome for the five Princes of Aegipt, mounted all upon the Horſe like the foure Sonnes of Aymon, to make the miracle the more, by a head, if it may be: gaze upon them, as on the Off-ſpring of Ptolomie, begotten upon ſeverall Cleopatraes, in their ſeverall Countries; eſpecially on this brave Sparke ſtrooke out of Flint-ſhire, upon Juſtice Jugges Daughter then Sheriffe of the County; who running away with a kinſman of our Captaines, and her Father purſuing her to the Marſhes, Hee great with Juſtice, She great with Juggling, they were both for the time turn'd ſtone upon the fight each of other, in Cheſter: Till at laſt (ſee the Wonder) A Jugge of the Towne Ale reconciling them; the memoriall of both their gravities, his in beard, and hers in bellie, hath remain'd ever ſince preſerv'd in picture upon the moſt ſtone Jugs of the Kingdome. The famous impe yet grew a wretchcocke, and though for ſeven yeares together, he were very carefully carried at his mothers backe, rock'd in a cradle of Welch-cheeſe, like a Maggot, and there fed with broken beere, and blowne wine o'the beſt dayly; yet lookes he, as if he never ſaw his Guinquennium. Tis true, he can thread needles o'horſe-backe, to draw a yard of inckle through his noſe: But what's that to a growne Gipſie, one of the bloud, and of his time if he had thriv'd: Therefore, till with his painefull Progenitors, he be able to beat it on the hard hoofe, or the bene Bawſe, or the Starling, Ken to nip a Jan, and Cly the Jack; tis thought fit he march in the Infants equipage.
With the Convoy, Cheats, and peckage,
Out of Clutch of Harman Beckage,
To their libkins at the Crackmans,
Or ſome skipper of the Blackmans.
WHere the Cacklers, but no Grunters,
Shall uncas'd be for the Hunters,
Thoſe we ſtill muſt keepe alive;
I, and put them out to thrive
In the Parkes, and in the Chaſes,
And the finer walled places;
As Saint James-es, Greenwich, Tibballs,
Where the Acornes plumpe as Chibballs,
Soone ſhall change both kinde and name,
And proclaime'em the Kings game.
So the act no harme may be
Unto their keeper Barnabee;
It will prove as good a ſervice,
As did ever Gipſie Jervice,
To our Captaine Charles the tall man,
And a part too of our Salmon.
IF we here be a little obſcure, it is our pleaſure; for rather than wee will offer to be our owne interpreters, we are reſolv'd not to be underſtood: yet if any man doubt of the ſignificancie of the language, wee referre him to the third vollume of reports, ſet forth by the learned in the lawes of Canting, and publiſhed in the Gipſies tongue: Give me my Guittarra, and roome for our Chiefe.
FRom the famous Peacke of Darby,
And the Devills arſe there hard-by,
Where we yearely keepe our muſters,
Thus the Aegiptians throng in cluſters,
Be not frighted with our faſhion,
Though we ſeeme a tattered Nation;
We account our ragges, our riches,
So our tricks exceed our ſtitches.
Give us Bacon, rindes of Walnuts,
Shells of Cockels, and of Smalnuts;
Ribands, bells, and Safrond lynnen,
All the World is ours to winne in.
Knackes we have that will delight you,
ſlight of hand that will invite you,
To endure our tawny faces.
WO. Quit your places, and not cauſe you cut your laces.
All your fortunes we can tell yee,
Be they for the backe or bellie;
In the Moodes too, and the Tenſes,
That may fit your fine five ſenſes.
Draw but then your gloves we pray you,
And ſit ſtill, we will not fray you;
For though we be here at Burley,
Wee'd be loth to make a hurly.
STay my ſweet Singer,
The touch of thy finger,
A little, and linger;
For me that am bringer
Of bound to the border,
The rule and Recorder,
And mouth of the order,
As Prieſt of the game,
And Prelate of the ſame.
THer's a Gentry Cove here,
Is the top of the Shiere,
Of the Bever Ken,
A man among men;
You need not to feare,
I have an eye, and an eare
That turnes here and there,
To looke to our geare.
Some ſay that there be
One or two, if not three,
That are greater then he.
ANd for the Roome-Morts,
I know by their ports,
And their jollie reſorts,
They are of the ſorts
That love the true ſports
Of King Ptolomeus,
Or great Coriphaeus,
And Queene Cleopatra,
The Gipſies grand Matra.
Then if we ſhall ſharke it,
Here Fayre is, and Market.
Leave Pig by, and Gooſe,
And play faſt, and looſe,
A ſhort cut, and long,
Some inch of a ſong,
Pythagoras lot,
Drawne out of a pot;
With what ſayes Alchindus?
And Pharaotes Indus,
John de Indagine
With all their Pagine
Of faces and Palmiſtrie,
And this is Almiſtrie.
Lay by your wimbles,
Your boring for thimbles,
Or uſing your nimbles,
In diving the pockets,
And ſounding the ſockets
Of Simper-the Cockets;
Or angling the purſes,
Of ſuch as will curſe us;
But in the ſtrict duell
Be merry, and cruell,
Strike faire at ſome jewell,
That mine may accrue well,
For that is the fuell,
To make the Town brew well,
And the pot wring well,
And the braine ſing well,
Which we may bring well
About by a ſtring well,
And doe the thing well.
It is but a ſtraine
Of true legerdemaine,
Once twice and againe.
Or what will you ſay now
If with our fine play now,
Our feates, and our fingring,
Here without lingring;
Coſening the ſights
Of the Lords, and the knights.
Some one of their Georges
Come off to ſave charges.
Or what will you ſay now?
If with our fine play now,
Our knackes, and our dances,
We worke on the fancies
Of ſome of theſe Nancies.
Theſe trinckets, and tripſies,
And make'em turne Gipſies.
Heer's no Juſtice Lippus
Will ſeeke for to nip us,
In Crampring, or Cippus,
And then for to ſtrip us,
And after to whip us.
His juſtice to vary,
While here we doe tarry,
But be wiſe, and wary,
And we may both carry,
The Kate, and the Mary,
And all the bright ae'ry,
A way to the quarry.
The George and the Garter,
Into our owne quarter;
Or durſt I goe further
In methood and order:
Ther's a purſe and a Seale,
I have a great minde to ſteale.
That when our tricks are done,
We might ſeale our owne pardon;
All this we may doe,
And a great deale more too,
If our brave Ptolomee,
Will but ſay follow mee.
CAptaine, if ever at the Bozing Ken,
You have in draught of Darby drill'd your men;
And we have ſeru'd there armed all in Ale,
With the browne bowle, and charg'd in bragget ſtale:
If muſter'd thus, and diſciplin'd in drinke,
In our long watches we did never ſhrinke,
But ſo commanded by you kept our ſtation,
As we preſerv'd our ſelves a royall Nation;
And never yet did branch of Statute breake,
Made in your famous Pallas of the Peake.
If we have deem'd, that Mutton, Lambe, or Veale,
Chicke, Capon, Turkey, ſweeteſt we did ſteale;
As being by our Magna Charta taught
To judge no urands wholeſome that are bought.
If for our Linnen we ſtill uſ'd the lift,
And with the hedge (our trades increaſe) made ſhift;
And ever at your ſolemne feaſt, and calls,
We have beene readie with the Aegyptian bralls;
To ſet Kit Callot forth in Proſe or Rhime,
Or who was Cleopatra for the time.
If we have done this, that, more, ſuch, or ſo;
Now lend your eare but to the Patrico.
Well, Dance another ſtraine, and wee'l thinke how
THe faery beame upon you,
The ſtarres to gliſter on you;
A Moone of light,
In the noone of night,
Till the Fire-drake hath or'e gon you.
The wheele of fortune guide you,
The Boy with the bow beſide you;
Runne aye in the way,
Till the bird of day,
And the luckier lot beſide you.
BLeſſe my ſweet Maſters, the old, and the young,
From the gall of the heart, and the ſtroke of the tongue.
With you luckie Bird I begin, let me ſee,
I ayme at the beſt, and I trow you are he,
Heer's ſome lucke alreadie, if I underſtand
The grounds of mine Art; here's a Gentlemans hand.
Il'e kiſſe it for lucks ſake, you ſhall by this line
Love a Horſe, and a Hound; but no part of a ſwine.
To hunt the brave Stagge, not ſo much for the food,
As the weale of your bodie, and the health o'your blood.
Your a man of good meanes, and have Territories ſtore
Both by Sea, and by Land; and were borne Sir to more,
Which you like a Lord, and the Prince of your peace,
Content with your havings, diſpiſe to increaſe:
You are no great Wencher, I ſee by your table,
Although your Mons Veneris ſayes you are able;
You live chaſte, and ſingle, and have buried your Wife,
And meane not to marrie, by the line of your life.
Whence he that conjectures, your qualitie learnes,
You are an honeſt good man, and care of your Barnes.
Your Mercuries hill too, a wit doth betoken,
Some booke-craft you have, and are pretty well ſpoken.
But ſtay, in your Jupiters mount, what's here?
A King, a Monarch; what wonders appeare!
High, Bountifull, Juſt: a Jove for your parts,
A Maſter of men, and that Reigne in their hearts.
Ile tell it my trayne,
And come to you againe.
TO the old, long life and treaſure,
To the young, all health and pleaſure;
To the faire, their face
With eternall grace,
And the foule to be lov'd at leiſure.
To the witty, all cleare mirrors,
To the fooliſh, their darke errors;
To the loving ſprite,
A ſecure delight,
To the jealous his owne falſe terrors.
After which the Kings fortune is purſued by the
COuld any doubt that ſaw this hand,
Or who you are, or what command
You have upon the fate of things,
Or would not ſay you were let downe
From Heaven, on earth to be the Crowne,
And top of all your neighbour Kings?
To ſee the wayes of truth you take,
To ſallance buſineſſe, and to make
All Chriſtian differences ceaſe.
Or till the quarrell, and the cauſe
You can compoſe, to give them lawes,
As arbitor of Warre, and Peace.
For this, of all the world you ſhall
Be ſtiled James, the juſt, and all
Their ſtates diſpoſe, their Sons and daughters,
And for your fortune you alone,
Among them all ſhall worke your owne,
By peace, not by humaine ſlaughters.
But why doe I preſume, though true,
To tell a Fortune, Sir, to you,
Who are the maker here of all;
Where none doe ſtand, or ſit in view,
But owe their fortune unto you,
At leaſt what they good fortunes call?
My ſelfe a Gipſie here doe ſhine,
Yet are you maker, Sir, of mine.
Oh that confeſſion could content
So high a bounty, that doth know
No part of motion, but to flow,
and giving never to repent.
May ſtill the matter wayte your hand,
That it not feele, or ſtay, or ſtand;
but all deſert ſtill over charge.
And may your goodneſſe ever finde
In me whom you have made, a minde,
As thankefull as your owne is large.
AS my Captaine hath begun
With the Sire, I take the Sonne,
Your hand Sir.
Of your fortune be ſecure,
Love, and ſhe, are both at your
Command Sir.
See what States are here at ſtrife,
Who ſhall tender you a Wife,
A brave one;
And a fitter for a man,
Then is offer'd here, you can
Not have one.
She is Siſter of a ſtarre,
One the nobleſt now that are,
Bright Heſper.
Whom the Indians in the Eaſt,
Phoſphore call, and in the Weſt,
Hight Veſper.
Courſes even with the Sunne,
Doth her mighty brother runne,
For ſplendor.
What can to the marriage night,
More then morne, and evening light
Attend her?
Save the promiſe before day,
Of a little James to play
Hereafter.
Twixt his Grandſiers knees, and move
All the pretty wayes of love,
And laughter.
Whil'ſt with care you ſtrive to pleaſe,
In your giving his cares eaſe,
And labours;
And by being long the ayd
Of the Empire, make afrayd
III Neighbours.
Till your ſelfe ſhall come to ſee
What we wiſh, yet farre to be
Attending:
For it skills not when, or where
That begins, which cannot feare
An ending.
Since your name in peace, or warres,
Nought ſhall bound untill the ſtarres
up take you.
HUrle after an old ſhooe,
Ile be merrie what ever I doe,
Though I keepe no time,
My words ſhall chyme,
Ile over-take the ſenſe with a ryme.
Face of a roſe
I pray thee depoſe
Some ſmall piece of ſilver: It ſhall be no loſſe,
But onely to make the ſigne of the croſſe;
If your hand you hallow,
Good fortune will follow.
I ſweare by theſe ten,
You ſhall have it agen,
I doe not ſay when.
But Ladie, either I am tipſie,
Or you are to fall in love with a Gipſie;
Bluſh not Dame Kate,
For early, or late,
I doe aſſure you it will be your fate;
Nor need you be once aſham'd of it Madam,
Hee's as handſome a man, as ever was Adam.
A man out of waxe,
As a Ladie would axe;
Yet hee's not to wed yee:
H'has enjoyd you alreadie,
And I hope he has ſped yee.
A dainty yong fellow,
And though he looke yellow,
He never will be jealous,
But love you moſt zealous.
Ther's never a line in your hand but doth tell us.
And you are a foule ſo white, and ſo chaſte,
A table ſo ſmooth, and ſo newly ra'ſte,
As nothing cald foule,
Dare approach with a blot,
Or any leaſt ſpot;
But ſtill you controule,
Or make your owne lot,
Preſerving love pure as it firſt was begot:
But Dame I muſt tell yee,
The fruit of your bellie,
Is that you muſt tender,
And care ſo to render;
That as your ſelfe came
In blood, and in name,
From one houſe of fame,
So that may remaine
The glory of twaine.
YOu ſweet Ladie have a hand too,
And a fortune you may ſtand too;
Both your brav'ry, and your bounty
Stile you Miſtris of the County;
You will finde it from this night,
Fortune ſhall forget her ſpight,
And heape all the bleſſings on you,
That ſhe can poure out upon you;
To be lov'd, where moſt you love,
Is the worſt that you ſhall prove;
And by him to be imbrac't,
Who ſo long hath knowne you chaſte,
Wiſe, and faire; whil'ſt you renew
Joyes to him, and he to you:
And when both your yeares are told,
Neither thinke the other old.
MAdam we know of your comming ſo late,
We could not well fit you a nobler fate
Then what you have readie made;
An old mans wife,
Is the light of his life,
A young one is but his ſhade.
You will not importune,
The change of your fortune;
For if you dare truſt to my forecaſting,
T'is preſently good, and will be laſting.
YOur pardon Ladie, here you ſtand,
If ſome ſhould judge you by your hand
The greateſt fellon in the Land
Detected:
I cannot tell you by what Arts,
But you have ſtolne ſo many hearts,
As they would make you at all parts
Suſpected.
Your very face firſt, ſuch a one
As being view'd it was alone,
Too ſlipperie to be lookt upon;
And threw men.
But then your graces they were ſuch,
As none could er'e behold too much;
Both ev'ry taſte, and ev'ry touch
So drew men.
Still bleſt in all you thinke, or doe,
Two of your Sons are Gipſies too,
You ſhall our Queene be, and ſee who
Importunes
The heart of either yours, or you;
And doth not wiſh both George, and Sue,
And every Barne beſides, all new
Good fortunes.
HElpe me wonder, her's a booke,
Where I would for ever looke;
Never yet did Gipſie trace,
Smoother lines in hands, or face:
Venus here doth Saturne move
That you ſhould be Queene of love;
And the other Starres conſent,
Onely Cupid not content;
For though you the theft diſguiſe,
You have told him of his eyes:
And to ſhew his envie further,
Here he chargeth you with murther;
Sayes, although that at your ſight,
He muſt all his troches light;
Though your either cheeks diſcloſes,
Mingled bathes of milke and Roſes,
Though your lips be bankes of bliſſes,
Where he plants, and gathers kiſſes;
And your ſelfe the reaſon why,
Wiſeſt men for love may dye,
You will turne all hearts to tinder,
And ſhall make the World one cinder.
MIſtris, of a fayrer table
Hath not hiſtory, nor ſable;
Others fortunes may be ſhowne,
You are builder of your owne.
And what ever Heav'n hath given you,
You preſerve the ſtate ſtill in you,
That which time would have depart,
Youth without the helpe of Art,
You doe keepe ſtill, and the glory
Of your Sexe, is but your ſtory.
THough you Sir be Chamberlaine, I have a key
To open your fortune a little by the way;
You are a good man,
Deny it that can;
And faithfull you are,
Deny it that dare.
You know how to uſe your ſword and your Pen,
And you love not alone the Arts, but the men;
The graces and Muſes ev'ry where follow
You, as you were their ſecond Apollo;
Onely your hand here tells you to your face,
You have wanted one grace,
To performe, what has beene a right of your place;
For by this line which is Mars his Trench,
You never yet help'd your Maſter to a Wench:
Tis well for your honour hee's pious, and chaſte,
Or you had moſt certainly beene diſplaſte.
AS happie a Palme Sir, as moſt i' the Land,
It ſhould be a pure, and an innocent hand;
And worthie the truſt,
For it ſayes youle be juſt,
And carry that Purſe,
Without any curſe
Of the Publique-weale,
When you take out the Seale,
You doe not appeare,
A Judge of a yeare.
Ile venter my life
You never had wife,
But ile venter my skill,
You may when you will.
You have the Kings conſcience too in your breſt,
And that's a good gueſt;
Which you will have true touch of,
And yet not make much of;
More then by truth your ſelfe forth to bring,
The man that you are, for God, and the King.
I Come to borrow, and you'le grant my demand Sir,
Since tis for no money, pray lend me your hand Sir;
And yet this good hand if you pleaſe to ſtretch it,
Had the Errant beene money, could eaſily fetch it;
You command the Kings treaſure, and yet on my ſoule
You handle not much, for your palme is not foule:
Your fortune is good, and will be to ſet
The Office upright, and the King out of debt;
To put all that have Penſions ſoone out of their paine,
By bringing th' Exchequer in credit againe.
HOneſt, and old,
In thoſe the good part of a fortune is told;
God ſend you your health,
The reſt is provided, honour, and wealth;
All which you poſſeſſe,
Without the making of any man leſſe,
Nor need you my warrant, enjoy it you ſhall,
For you have a good Privie-Seale for it all.
NExt the great Maſter, who is the Donor,
I reade you here the preſerver of honour,
And ſpie it in all your ſingular parts,
What a father you are, and a nurſe of the Arts.
By cheriſhing which, a way you have found,
How the free to all, to one may be bound,
And they againe love their bonds; for to bee
Obliged to you, is the way to be free:
But this is their fortune; Hearke to your owne,
Yours ſhall be to make true Gentry knowne
From the fictitious, not to prize blood
So much by the greatneſſe, as by the good:
To ſhew, and to open cleere vertue the way,
Both whether ſhe ſhould, and how farre ſhe may;
And whilſt you doe judge twixt valour, and noyſe
To'extinguiſh the race of the roaring boyes.
I finde by this hand
You have the command
Of the very beſt mans houſe i'the land:
Our Captaine, and wee,
Ere long will ſee
If you keepe a good table;
Your Maſter's able.
And here be bountifull lines that ſay
You'le keepe no part of his bounty away.
Thus written to Franke
On your Venus banke;
To prove a falſe ſteward you'le find much adoe,
Being a true one by blood, and by office too.
ONely your hand, and welcome to Court,
Here is a man both for earneſt, and ſport.
You were lately employ'd
And your Maſter is joy'd
To have ſuch in his traine
So well can ſuſtaine
His perſon abroad,
And not ſhrinke for the load.
But had you beene here,
You ſhould have beene a Gipſie I ſweare,
Our Captaine had ſummond you by a doxie,
To whom you would not have anſwer'd by proxie,
One, had ſhe come in the way of your Scepter,
Tis ods, you had layd it by to have leapt her.
A Hunter you have beene heretofore,
And had game good ſtore;
But ever you went
Upon a new ſent,
And ſhifted your loves
As often as they did their ſmockes, or their gloves:
But ſince that your brave intendments are
Now bent for the warre,
The world ſhall ſee
You can conſtant be,
One Miſtris to prove,
And court her for your love.
Pallas, ſhall be both your Sword, and your Gage;
Truth, beare your Shield, and fortune your Page,
WHy this is a ſport,
See it North, ſee it South,
For the taſte of the Court,
For the Courts own mouth.
Come Windſor, the Towne,
With the Maior, and oppoſe,
Weell put them all downe,
Do—do—downe like my hoſe.
A Gipſie in his ſhape
More calls the beholder,
Then the fellow with the Ape,
Or the Ape on his ſhoulder.
H'is a ſight that will take
An old Judge from his Wench,
I, and keepe him awake,
Yes, awake on the Bench.
And has ſo much worth,
Though he ſit i'the ſtocks,
He will draw the Girles forth,
I, forth i'their ſmocks.
Tut, a man's a man;
Let the Clownes with their Sluts
Come mend us if they can,
If they can, for their guts.
Come mend us, come lend us, their ſhouts, and their noyſe,
Like thunder, and wonder at Ptolomies boyes.
OH the Lord! what be theſe? Tom doſt thou know? Come hither, come hither Dick, didſt thou ever ſee ſuch? the fineſt Olive-colour'd ſpirits, they have ſo danc'd, and gingled here, as if they had beene a ſett of over-growne Fayries.
They ſhould be Morris-dancers by their gingle, but they have no napkins:
No, nor a Hobby-horſe.
Oh, hees often forgotten, that's no rule; but there is no Maydmarian, nor Friar amongſt them, which is the ſurer marke.
Nor a Foole that I ſee.
Unleſſe they be all fooles.
Well ſed Tom foole; why thou ſimple piſh Aſſe thou! didſt thou never ſee any Gipſies? theſe are a covie of Gipſies, and the braveſt new-come, that ever Conſtable flew at; goodly game Gipſies, they are Gipſies o'this yeare, o'this Moone in my conſcience.
Oh they are called the Moone men I remember now!
One ſhall hardly ſee ſuch gentleman-like-Gipſies, though under a hedge in a whole Summers day, if they be Gipſies.
Male Gipſies all, not a Mort among them.
Where? where? I could never endure the ſight of theſe Rogue-Gipſies, which be they: I would faine ſee'em.
Yonder they are.
Can they Cant, or Mill? are they maſters of their Arts?
No bachelours theſe, they cannot have proceeded ſo farre; they have ſcarce had their time to be lowſie yet.
All the better; I would be acquainted with them while they are in cleane life, the 'ile doe their tricks the cleanlier.
We muſt have ſome muſick then, and take out the Wenches.
Muſick, wee'll have a whole poverty of pipers, call cheeks upon the Bagpipe, and Tom Ticklefoot with his Tabor; ſee where he comes!
I, and all the good wenches of Windſor; after him, yonder is Prue o'the Parke,
And Frances o'the Caſtle;
And long Meg of Eaton;
And Chriſtian o' Dorny.
See the miracle of a Minſtrell.
Hees able to muſter up the ſmocks of the two Shieres;
And ſet the Codpeeces and they by th'eares at pleaſure.
I cannot hold now, ther's my groat, let's have a fit for mirth ſake.
Yes, and the'ile come about us for lucke ſake.
But looke to our pockets, and purſes, for our owne ſake.
I, I have the greateſt charge; gather the money.
Come Girles, here be Gipſies come to town, let's dance'em down.
Sweet Doxies, and Dells,
My Roſes, and Knells,
Scarce out of the ſhells,
Your hands nothing ells.
We ring you no knells
With our Ptolomies bells,
Though we come from the fells,
But bring you good ſpells,
And tell you ſome chances,
In midſt of your dances,
That fortune advances,
To Prudence, or Frances;
To Siſly, or Harry,
To Roger, or Mary,
Or Pegge of the Dary;
To Maudlin, or Thomas,
Then do not runne from us,
Although we looke tawny,
We are healthie, and brawny,
What ere your demand is,
Weell give you no jaundis.
Say you ſo old Gipſie? 'ſlid theſe go too't in rymes; this is better then canting by tone halfe.
Nay, you ſhall heare'em; peace, they begin with Prudence, mark that.
The wiſer Gipſie's the Marry.
Are you adviſ'd?
Yes, and ile ſtand too't, that a wiſe Gipſie (take him at time o'year) is as pollique a peece of fleſh, as moſt Juſtices in the County where hee ſtalkes.
To love a Keeper, your fortune will bee;
But the Doucets better then him, or his fee.
Ha Prue, has he hit you it'h teeth with a ſweet bit?
Let her alone, ſhee'll ſwallow well enough; A learned Gipſie.
You'le heare more hereafter.
Marry, and ile liſten; who ſtands next? Jack Cockrell.
You'le ha' good lucke to horſe-fleſh o' my life,
You plow'd ſo late with the Vicars wife.
A Prophet, a prophet, no Gipſie; or if he be a Gipſie, a divine Gipſie.
Mark Frances, now ſhee's going too't, the virginitie o' the Pariſh.
Feare not, in hell you'le never lead Apes;
A mortifi'd mayden, of five ſcapes.
Birlady he toucht the virgin ſtring there a little too hard, they are arrant learned men all I ſee; what ſay they upon Tom, Clod, Liſt.
Clods feet will in Chriſtmas goe neere to be bare,
When he has loſt all his hob nayles at Poſt and paire.
Has hit the right nayle o'th head, his owne game.
And the very mettall he deales in at play if you marke it.
Peace, who's this? Long Meg?
Long, and foule Meg, if ſhe be a Meg, as ever I ſaw of her inches; pray God they fit her with a faire fortune.
They ſlip her, and treat upon Tickle-foot.
On Sundayes you robbe the poores boxe with your tabor,
The Collectors would doe it, you ſave them a labor.
Faith but a little, they'le doe it non upſtant.
Heer's my little Chriſtian, forget, ha you any fortune left for her; a ſtraight-lac'd Chriſtian of ſixteene.
Chriſtian ſhall get her a looſe bodide-gowne,
In tri'mge, how a Gentleman differs from a Clowne.
Is that a fortune for a Chriſtian; a Turke, or a Gipſie could not have told her a worſe.
Come, Ile ſtand my ſelfe, and once venter the poore head o'the Towne, doe your worſt, my name's Townſhead, and heers my hand Ile not be angry.
A Cuckold you muſt be, and that for three lives;
Your owne, the Parſons, and your Wives.
I ſweare Ile never marry for that, an't be but to give fortune my foe the lye; Com Pan Puppie you muſt in too:
No, I'me well enough, I would ha'no good fortune an I might;
Yet looke to your ſelfe, you'le ha ſome ill luck,
And ſhortly, for I have his purſe at a plucke.
Away birds Mum,
I heare by the Hum,
If Beck-harman come,
Hee'le ſtrike us all dumbe,
With a noyſe like a Drum,
Let's give him our roome,
Here, this way ſome,
And that way others,
We are not all brothers;
Leave me to the cheats,
Ile ſhew 'em ſome feates.
What! are they gone? flowne all of a ſudden? this is fine i'faith? a covie call y'em, they are a covie ſoone ſcatter'd mee thinke, who ſprung 'em I marle?
Marry your ſelfe Puppie for ought I know, you queſted laſt.
Would he had queſted firſt, and ſprung y'em an 'owre agoe, for mee.
Why! what's the matter man?
'Slid, they ha' ſprung my purſe, and all I had about me.
They ha' not, ha' they?
As I am true Clod, ha' they, and ranſacled me of every penny, outcept I were with child with an owle (as they ſay) I never ſaw ſuch lucke, it's enough to make a man a whore.
Hold thy peace, thou talk'ſt as if thou had'ſt a licenſe to loſe thy purſe alone in this company; 'ſlid here be thoſe can loſe a purſe in honour of the Gipſies, as well as thou for thy heart, and never make word of it: I ha' loſt my purſe too.
What was there i'thy purſe, thou keep'ſt ſuch a whining; was the leaſe of thy houſe in it.
Or thy Grannams ſilver ring.
No, but a Mill ſixe-pence I lov'd as dearely, and a 2 pence I had to ſpend over and above; beſides; the Harper that was gathered amongſt us, to pay the Piper.
Our whole ſtocke, is that gone? how will Tom Tickle-foot doe to wet his whiſtle then?
Marry, a new collection, ther's no muſicke elſe maſters, hee can ill pipe that wants his upper lippe; Money.
They have robb'd me too of a dainty race of ginger, and a jetring I had, to draw Jacke ſtraw hether a holy dayes.
Is't poſſible? fine finger'd Gipſies i'faith.
And I have loſt an inchanted Nutmegge, all guilded over, was inchanted at Oxford for mee, to put i'my ſweet-hearts Ale a mornings; with a row of white-pins that pricke me to the very heart, the loſſe of them.
And I have loſt, beſides my purſe, my beſt bride-lace I had at Joane Turners wedding, and a halpeworth of hobnayles: Francis Addle-breech has loſt ſomewhat too, beſides her Mayden-head.
I have loſt my thimble, and a skeine of Coventry-blew I had to worke Gregory Lichfield a handkercheife.
And I unhappie Chriſtian as I am, have loſt my Practice of Pietie, with a bowed groat; and the ballet of Whoope Barnibie, which grieves me ten times worſe.
And Tickle-foot h'as loſt his cloute he ſayes, with a three pence and foure tokens in't; beſides his Tabouring-ſticke ev'n now.
And I my knife and ſheath, and my fine Dogs-leather gloves.
H'a we loſt never a dogge amongſt us, wher's Puppie.
Here goodman Townſhead, you have nothing to loſe it ſeemes, but the Towne-braines you are truſted with.
OH my deare marrowes!
No ſhooting of arrowes,
Or ſhafts of your wit,
Each other to hit,
In your skirmiſhing fit?
Your ſtore is but ſmall,
Then venter not all.
Remember each mocke,
Doth ſpend o' the ſtocke;
And what was here done,
Being under the Moone,
And at afternoone,
Will prove right ſoone
Diſceptio viſus,
Done Gratia riſus.
Ther's no ſuch thing,
As the loſſe of a ring,
Or what you count worſe,
The miſſe of a purſe.
But haye for the maine,
And paſſe of the ſtraine,
Heer's both come againe.
And ther's an old twinger,
Can ſhow yet the ginger;
The Pinnes, and the Nutmegge
Are ſafe here with Slut-megge;
Then ſtrike up your Tabour,
And ther's for your labour;
The ſheath, and the knife, Ile venter my life,
Shall breed you no ſtrife,
But like man, and wife,
Or Siſter, and brother, keepe one with another,
And light as a feather,
Make haſte to come hither.
THe Coventry-blew,
Hangs there upon Prue,
And heer's one opens
The Clout, and the Tokens;
Denie the bow'd groat,
And you lie i'your throat.
Or the Tabourers nine pence,
Or the ſixe fine pence.
As for the ballet,
Or the booke what you call it;
Alas our ſocietie,
Mell's not with pietie,
Himſelfe hath forſooke it,
That firſt undertooke it;
For thimble, or bride-lace
Search yonder ſide laſſe.
All's to be found,
If you looke your ſelves round;
We ſcorne to take from yee,
We had rather ſpend on yee,
If any man wrong yee,
The Theef's among yee.
EXcellent i'faith, a moſt reſtorative Gipſie, all's here agen; and yet by his learning of Legier-demaine, he would make us beleeve we had robb'd our ſelves.
A Gipſie of qualitie beleeve it, and one of the Kings Gipſies; this a Drinke-alian, or a Drinke-braggatan?
Aske him.
The King has his noyſe of Gipſies, as well as of Bearwards, and other Minſtrells.
What ſort or order of Gipſies, I pray ſir.
A Flagon-fekian,
A Devils-arſe-a Pekian;
Borne firſt at Niglington,
Bred up at Filchington,
Boarded at Tappington,
Bedded at Wappington.
Fore me, a dainty deriv'd Gipſie.
But I pray ſir, if a man might aske on you, how came your Captaines place firſt to be call'd the Devills-arſe.
For that take my word,
We have a record,
That doth it afford,
And ſayes our firſt Lord,
Cocklorrell he hight,
On a time did invite
The Devill to a feaſt;
The tayle of the jeaſt,
Though ſince it be long,
Lives yet in a ſong;
Which if you would heare,
Shall plainly appeare.
Ile call in my Clarke
Shall ſing like a Larke,
Come in my long ſharke,
With thy face browne and darke;
With thy tricks, and thy toyes,
Make a merry merry noyſe,
To thoſe mad Country boyes,
And chant out the fart of the Grand-devils arſe.
COck-lorrell, would needs have the Devill his gueſt,
And bad him once into the Peake to dinner,
Where never the Fiend had ſuch a feaſt,
Provided him yet at the charge of a ſinner.
His ſtomacke was queaſie (for comming there Coacht),
The jogging had cauſ'd ſome crudities riſe;
To helpe it he call'd for a Puritan poacht,
That uſed to turne up the egg's of his eyes.
And ſo recover'd unto his wiſh,
He ſate him downe, and he fell to eate;
Promooter in plum-broth was the firſt diſh,
His owne privie kitchin had no ſuch meate.
Yet though with this he much were taken
Vpon a ſudden he ſhifted his trencher
As ſoone as he ſpi'd the Bawd, and bacon,
By which you may note the devill's a wencher.
Sixe pickl'd Taylors ſliced and cut,
Sempſters, Tyrewomen, fit for his pallat;
With Feathermen, and perfumes put,
Some twelve in a Charger to make a grand ſallet:
A rich fat Vſurer ſtu'd in his marrow,
And by him a Lawyers head and green-ſawce;
Both which his belly tooke in like a barrow,
As if till then he had never ſeene ſawce.
Then Carbonadoed, and Cook't with paines,
Was brought up a cloven Serjants face;
The ſauce was made of his Yeamans braines,
That had beene beaten out with his owne mace.
Two roaſted Sheriffes came whole to the board;
(The feaſt had nothing beene without 'em)
Both living, and dead, they were foxt, and fu'rd,
Their chaines like ſawſages hung about 'em.
The very next diſh, was the Mayor of a Towne,
With a pudding of maintenance thruſt in his belly;
Like a Gooſe in the feathers dreſt in his gowne,
And his couple of Hinch-boyes boyld to a jelly.
A London Cuckold, hot from the ſpit,
And when the Carver up had broke him;
The Devill chopt up his head at a bit,
But the hornes were very neere like to have choakt him.
The chine of a Lecher too there was roaſted,
With a plumpe Harlots haunch and garlicke;
A Panders pettitoes that had boaſted
Himſelfe for a Captaine, yet never was warlicke.
A large fat paſtie of a Mid-wife hot;
And for a cold bak't meat into the ſtory,
A reverend painted Ladie was brought,
And coffin'd in cruſt, till now ſhe was hoary.
To theſe, an over-growne-juſtice of peace,
With a Clarke like a gizzard thruſt under each arme;
And warrants for ſippets, layd in his owne greaſe,
Set o're a chaffing diſh to be kept warme.
The joule of a Jaylor, ſerv'd for fiſh,
A Conſtable ſouſ'd with vineger by;
Two Aldermen lobſters aſleepe in a diſh,
A Deputy tart, a Churchwarden pye.
All which devovr'd; He then for a cloſe,
Did for a full draught of Derby call;
He heav'd the huge veſſell up to his noſe,
And left not till he had drunke up all.
Then from the table he gave a ſtart,
Where banquet, and wine were nothing ſcarce;
All which he ſlirted away with a fart,
From whence it was call'd the Devils Arſe.
And there he made ſuch a breach with the winde,
The hole too ſtanding open the while,
That the ſent of the vapour, before, and behinde,
Hath fouly perfumed moſt part of the Iſle.
And this was Tobacco, the learned ſuppoſe;
Which ſince in Countrey, Court, and Towne,
In the Devills gliſter-pipe ſmoaks at the noſe
Of Polle at, and Madam, of Gallant, and Clowne.
From which wicked weed, with Swines-fleſh, and Ling;
Or any thing elſe thats feaſt for the Fiend:
Our Captaine, and wee, cry God ſave the King,
And ſend him good meate, and mirth without end.
AN excellent ſong, and a ſweet Songſter, and would have done rarely in a Cage, with a diſh of water, and hempſeed; a fine breaſt of his owne: Sir you are a Prelate of the Order, I underſtand, and I have a terrible grudging now upon mee to bee one of your company; will your Captaine take a Prentiſe Sir? I would binde my ſelfe to him bodie and ſoule, either for one and twenty yeares, or as manie lives as he would.
I, and put in my life for one, for I am come about too; I am ſorry I had no more money i' my purſe when you came firſt upon us Sir; If I had knowne you would have pickt my pocket ſo like a Gentleman, I would have beene better provided; I ſhall bee glad to venter a purſe with your Worſhippe at any time you'll appoint, ſo you would preferre mee to your Captaine; Ile put in ſecurity for my truth, and ſerve out my time, though I dye to morrow.
I, upon thoſe termes Sir, and in hope your Captaine keepes better cheere then he made the Devill, for my ſtomacke will nere agree with that dyet, wee'll be all his followers; Ile goe home and fetch a little money Sir, all I have, and you ſhall picke my pocket to my face, and i'le avouch it; A man would not deſire to have his pocket pick't in better company.
Tut, they have other manner of gifts then picking of pockets, or telling fortunes; if they would but pleaſe to ſhew 'em, or thought us poore Countrey mortalls worthy of them; what might a man doe to be a Gentleman of your company Sir?
I, a Gipſie in ord'nary, or nothing.
FReinds not to refell yee,
Or any way quell ye,
To buy or to ſell ye,
I onely muſt tell ye;
Ye ayme at a myſtery,
Worthie a Hiſtory;
Ther's much to be done,
E're you can be a Sonne,
Or brother of the Moone.
Tis not ſo ſoone
Acquir'd, as deſir'd.
You muſt be Ben-bowſie,
And ſleepy, and drowſie,
And laſie, and lowſie,
Before ye can rowſe yee,
In ſhape that arowſe yee.
And then you may ſtalke
The Gipſies walke;
To the Coopes, and the Pennes,
And bring in the Hennes,
Though the Cocke be ſullen
For loſſe of the Pullen:
Take Turkie, or Capon,
And Gammons of Bacon,
Let nought be forſaken;
Wee'll let you go looſe,
Like a Foxe to a Gooſe,
And ſhew you the ſtie
Where the little Pigs lie;
Whence if you can take
One or two, and not wake
The Sow in her dreames,
But by the Moone beames;
So warily hye,
As neither doe cry.
You ſhall the next day
Have licenſe to play
At the hedge a flirt,
For a ſheet, or a ſhirt;
If your hand be light,
Ile ſhew you the ſlight
Of our Ptolomies knot,
It is, and 'tis not,
To change your complexion,
With the noble confection
Of Wall-nuts, and Hogs-greaſe,
Better then Dogs-greaſe:
And to milke the Kine,
Ere the Milke-mayd fine
Hath open'd her eine.
Or if you deſire
To ſpit, or fart fire,
Ile teach you the knacks,
Of eating of flaxe;
And out of their noſes,
Draw Ribbands, and poſies,
As for example,
Mine owne is as ample,
And fruitfull a noſe,
As a wit can ſuppoſe;
Yet it ſhall goe hard,
But there will be ſpar'd,
Each of you a yard,
And worth your regard.
When they collour, and ſize
Arrive at your eyes.
And if you encline
To a cup of good wine,
When you ſuppe, or dine;
If you chance it to lacke,
Be it Clarret, or Sacke;
Ile make this ſnout,
To deale it about,
Or this to runne out,
As it were from a ſpout.
Admirable tricks, and he does 'em all ſe defendendo, as if he would not be taken in the trappe of authority, by a fraile fleſhly Conſtable.
Without the ayd of a Cheeſe,
Or helpe of a flitch of bacon.
Oh, he would chirp in a paire of ſtockes ſumptuouſly; I'de give any thing to ſee him play looſe with his hands, when his feet were faſt.
O' my conſcience he feares not that, and the Marſhall himſelfe were here; I proteſt I admire him.
IS this worth your wonder,
Nay then you ſhall under-
Stand more of my skill.
I can (for I will)
Here at Burley o'th Hill,
Give you all your fill,
Each Jacke with his Gill,
And ſhew you the King,
The Prince too and bring;
The Gipſies were here,
Like Lords to appeare,
With ſuch there attenders,
As you thought offenders,
Who now become new men,
Youle know them for true men;
For he we call cheife,
Ile tell 't ye in breife,
Is ſo farre from a theife,
As he gives ye releife
With his bread, beare, and beife
And tis not long ſince
Ye dranke of his Wine,
And it made you fine;
Both Clarret, and Sherrie,
Then let us be merrie;
And helpe with your call,
For a Hall, a Hall.
Stand up to the wall,
Both good men, and tall,
We are one mans all.
THe fiſt of Auguſt,
Will not let ſaw-duſt
Lie in your throats,
Or cobwebs, or Oates;
But helpe to ſcoure ye.
This is no Gowrie,
Has drawne James hither,
But the goodman of Bever,
Our Buckinghams Father;
Then ſo much the rather
Make it a jolly night,
For tis a holy night,
Spight of the Conſtable,
Or Mas Deane of Dunſtable.
A Hall, a hall, a hall.
WHy now ye behold,
Twas truth that I told,
And no deviſe;
They are chang'd in a trice,
And ſo will I,
Be my ſelfe, by and by.
I onely now
Muſt ſtudie now
To come off with a grace,
With my Patrico's place:
Some ſhort kind of bleſſing,
It ſelfe addreſſing
Unto my good Maſter,
Which light on him faſter,
Then wiſhes can flye.
And you that ſtand by
Be as jocund as I;
Each man with his voyce,
Give his heart to rejoyce,
Which I'le requite,
If my Art hit right,
Though late now at night,
Each Clowne here in ſight,
Before day light,
Shall prove a good Knight;
And your Laſſes Pages
Worthie their wages,
Where fancie engages
Girles to their ages.
Oh any thing for the Patrico, what iſt? what iſt?
Nothing, but beare the bob of the cloſe,
It will be no bruthen you well may ſuppoſe.
But bleſſe the Sov'raine, and his ſences,
An to wiſh away offences,
Let us alone, bleſſe the Sov'raine, and his ſences.
Wee'll take them in order, as they have being,
And firſt of ſeeing.
FRom a Gipſie, in the morning,
Or a paire of ſquint-eyes turning:
From the Coblin, and the ſpectre,
Or a Drunkard, though with Nectar;
From a woman true to no man,
Which is ougly, beſides common;
A ſmocke rampant, and the itches,
To be putting on the breeches:
Wher ſo 'ere they ha' their being,
Bleſſe the Sov'raine, and his ſeeing.
FRom a foole, and ſerious oyes;
From a Lawyer, three parts noyſe;
From impertinence, like a Drum
Beate at dinner in his roome;
From a tongue without a file,
Heapes of Phraſes, and no ſtile.
From a Fiddle out of tune,
As the Cuckow is in June.
From the candleſticks of Lothbury,
And the lowd pure wives of Banbury:
Or a long pretended fit;
Meant for mirth, but is not it:
Onely time, and eares out-wearing,
Bleſſe the Sov'raine, and his hearing.
FRom a ſtrolling Tinkers ſheete,
Or a payre of Carriers feet:
From a Ladie that doth breath,
Worſe above, then underneath.
From the Diet, and the knowledge
Of the ſtudents in Beares-colledge.
From Tobacco, with the tipe
Of the Devills gliſter-pipe;
Or a ſtincke all ſtincks excelling,
A Fiſhmongers dwelling,
Bleſſe the Sov'raigne, and his ſmelling.
FRom an Oyſter, and fry'd fiſh
A Sowes babye in a diſh:
From any portion of a Swine,
From bad Veniſon, and worſe wine.
Ling, what Cooke ſo'ere it boyle,
Though with muſtard fawc'd and oyle,
Or what elſe would keepe man faſting,
Bleſſe the Sov'raigne, and his taſting.
BOth from birdlime, and from pitch,
From a Doxie, and her itch.
From the briſles of a Hogge,
Or the ring-worme in a Dogge.
From the courtſhippe of a brier,
Or St. Anthonies old fier.
From a needle, or a thorne;
I'the bed at Ev'n, or Morne.
Or from any Gowtes leaſt grutching.
Bleſſe the Sov'raigne, and his touching.
BLeſſe him too from all offences,
In his ſports, as in his fences.
From a Boy to croſſe his way,
From a fall, or a foule day.
BLeſſe him, ô bleſſe him Heav'n, and lend him long
to be the ſacred burthen of all ſong;
The Acts, and yeares, of all our Kings t' out go;
And while hee's mortall, we not thinke him ſo.
THe ſports are done, yet doe not let
Your joyes in ſudden ſilence ſett;
Delight, and dumbneſſe never met
In one ſelfe ſubject yet.
If things oppos'd muſt mixt appeare,
Then adde a boldneſſe to your feare,
And ſpeake a hymne to him,
Where all your duties do of right belong,
Which I will ſweeten with an under ſong.
GLory of ours, and grace of all the Eath;
How well your figure doth become your birth,
As if your forme, and fortune equall ſtood,
And onely vertue got above your blood.
Vertue; his Kingly vertue which did merrit
This Iſle entire, and you are to inherit.
HOw right he doth confeſſe him in his face,
His browe, his eye, and ev'ry marke of State;
As if he were the iſſue of each Grace,
And bore about him both his fame, and fate.
LOoke, looke, is hee not faire,
And freſh, fragrant too
As Summer skie, or purged Aire,
And lookes as Lillies doe,
That were this morning blowne.
Oh more! that more of him were knowne.
LOoke how the Windes upon the Waves growne tame,
Take up Land ſounds upon their purple wings;
And catching each from other, beare the fame
To ev'ry angle of their ſacred ſprings.
So will we take his praiſe, and hurle his name
About the Globe, in thouſand Ay'ry rings,
If his great vertue be in lore with fame,
For that contem'd, both are neglected things.
GOod Princes ſoare above their fame,
And in their worth,
Come greater forth,
Then in their name.
Such, ſuch the Father is,
Whom ev'ry title ſtrives to kiſſe;
Who on his Royall grounds unto himſelfe doth raiſe,
The worke to trouble fame, and to aſtoniſh praiſe.
INdeed hee's not Lord alone of all the State,
But of the love of men, and of the Empires fate.
The Muſes Arts, the Schooles commerce, our honours lawes,
And Vertues hang on him, as on their working cauſe.
His Hand-mayd Juſtice is,
Wiſedome, his Wife;
His Miſtreſſe, Mercie;
Temperance, his life.
His Pages bounty, and grace which many prove,
His Guards are Magnanimitie, and love.
His Uſhers, Councell, Truth, and Pietie,
And all that followes him, Felicitie.
OH that we underſtood
Our good;
Ther's happineſſe indeed in blood,
And ſtore,
But how much more,
When vertu's flood
In the ſame ſtreame doth hit?
As that growes high with yeares, ſo happineſſe with it.
LOve, love his fortune then, and vertues knowne,
Who is the toppe of men,
But makes the happineſſe our owne;
Since where the Prince, for goodneſſe is renownd,
The Subject with Felicitie is Crownd.
AT Burley, Bever, and now laſt at Windſor,
Which ſhewes we are Gipſies of no common kinde Sir.
You have behold (and with delight) their change,
And how they came transform'd, may thinke it ſtrange.
It being a thing not touch't at by our Poet,
Good Ben ſlept there, or elſe forgot to ſhew it;
But leaſt it prove like wonder to the ſight,
To ſee a Gipſie, as an Aethiope, white.
Know, that what dy'd our faces, was an oyntment
Made, and layd on by Mr. Woolfes appointment,
The Court Licanthropos; yet without ſpells,
By a meere Barber, and no Magicke ells:
It was fetcht off with water, and a ball,
And to our transformation, this is all,
Save what the Maſter Faſhioner calls his,
For to Gipſies Metamorphoſis;
Who doth diſguiſe his habit, and his face,
And takes on a falſe perſon by his place:
The power of Poetrie can never faile her;
Aſſiſted by a Barber, and a Taylor.