TEll me Cimena and deal truly with me,
What makes you thus diſdain to be a Queen,
Are the allurements of a Kingdome ſuch
As they can hardly touch, leſſe charm your heart?
No, I ſhall nere believe it, but muſt wonder
At your refuſall: do you think your Cid
With all his fortune, and the beſt effects
Of his great valour, can at any time
Impale this faire head with a Diadem?
That from the King alone you muſt expect
Cid is as much a ſubject as thy ſelfe,
And though he lift thy fortune to a height
As great as any ſubjects, yet a thouſand
Will ſide with thee, when this my brother offers
Will ſet thy beauties in a point to ſtrike
The gazers eyes with envy, or amazement.
Madam, tis true ſo great a Princes love
Might take another, though it cannot me,
And the falſe luſtre of a Soveraigne greatneſſe
May dazell any fond young Virgins eyes,
But for my own direction ile take leſſe
Of their ambition, more of modeſty,
And truly Madam, I ſhall never envy
Her who enjoyes the happineſſe you offer,
The pomp of Thrones ſeems troubleſome to me,
My deſires draw themſelves within their compaſſe,
And look no higher then their proper reach:
Equality does make the perfect match,
Unequall perſons render the link ſo weak
That love can hardly make it hold together.
I know Cimena thy great modeſty,
But let it not divert thee from a good
Sent from the hand of Heaven, and a King.
That power, which gave thee ſuch rare parts, would never
They ſhould be ſtreightned in a narrow fortune
It knows this fore head's deſtin'd for a Crown
Which to confirme, it makes a Monarch know
That nought leſſe then himſelfe can ſuite thy merit
Though Cid have heretofore made thee his Idoll.
Doſt think his love's not ſubject unto change
And that he muſt continue in his abſence
As a great ſouldier, ſo a faithfull lover▪
Perhaps thy love may trouble him at preſent,
Whilſt his ambition grows up with his fortune▪
If ere he gain'd his glorious name of Cid,
He thought himſelf already worthy thee,
Doſt think his heart will ſtay in the ſame bounds,
Now that all Spain, and other Nations
Admire and feare his valour? ah Cimena
Some thing perſwades me that his hopes fly higher,
A throne will be the certain rock whereon
Thy ſo much boaſted faith muſt finde its Tombe.
Oh heavens, how handſomely ſhe would ſurprize me
And raviſh that from me her ſelf would have!
I without doubt ſhe loves him; and I know
She ſpeaks more for herſelf then for the King:
Madam, if Roder go leave Cimena
To give his heart unto a nobler love,
You ſhall perceive that ſhe is one can ſuffer
With as much eaſe his lightneſſe, as his abſence.
But ſince thou haſt the very ſame advantage
Serve thy ſelfe of it, and as his great honours
Alter his paſſions, ſo let thine Cimena
Take the ſame flight, and do not thinke thou ſhalt
For that, be calld inconſtant or leſſe faithfull,
Or that thy change ſhould ſtick a crime upon thee,
The wils of Kings can render all things lawfull.
Beſides thy fathers death may well excuſe thee,
And I remember with how much conſtraint
Thou mad'ſt a promiſe of thy love to him
Which was no more then hope; the King has power
To cancell that, nor muſt thy vertue ſuffer
So great a ſtain as to preferre the man
Who kild thy father to the King.
But Madam.
You know how ſtrong a conflict I had in me
Before I gave conſent, whilſt his great love
Did leſſe then my obedience, I reſiſted
Yill in the end I ſaw I muſt obey
What the King will'd, he faid, I muſt forget
His Crime and my revenge: your father Madam
Gave me into his hands, and ſince I am
His priſoner▪ the ſame bonds ſhall end my life
And fortune both at once.
But heare my reaſons.
To what purpoſe.
Should we diſpute of what's reſolv'd already?
Well you may think of it at better leaſure.
Yes: and I know the object of my Choice:
If the Cids glory do put out his flame;
And that's great luſtre quench the heat of this
I ſhall not ſtay the progreſſe of his fortune,
Let him be on a Throne, me in my grave,
Yet if this head muſt ever weare a Crown
From none but Cid himſelfe ſhall I accept it.
But what's the reaſon that he writes not to me?
I had ſome letters from him at the firſt,
When the ſame hand which was bedewd in bloud
Dry'd up my teares, but yet (alas) I feare
Leaſt diſtance of our eyes eſtrange our hearts:
For of late (ſave the conqueſt of the Rebels)
I can heare nothing from him, he deſtroyes
His enemies and my hopes both at one time,
His glory makes him to forget his dutie;
But yet deare heart excuſe my ſad complaint
True love was never yet without ſome feare
Thou canſt not be ſo generous and inconſtant,
And I ſhould feare leſſe, lov'd I not ſo much.
Come then my foule and make no longer triall
Both of my paſſion and my patience:
Come to deliver me from thoſe my doubts
Or know that here I cannot live without thee.
WHo's this Don Sancho? what may his buſineſſe be?
The beſt of news unto the beſt of women.
What news? Is Cid return'd?
Not yet ſweet Madam,
He's ſtill expected, but a greater joy
Attends you, which will ſoon diſpell theſe clouds,
How glorious is your fortune like to be?
What? has he overcome his enemies?
Is he come home laden with Palmes and Lawrels?
I heare his valor has aſſur'd our ſtate,
But that is not the cauſe of this my viſit.
What's then my happineſſe, pray let me know it.
Madam adviſe but with your own perfections
And you will know the good provided for you,
Aske counſell of your eyes; and they will tell you
Gainſt whom their quick & burning darts are thrown
They'l tell you that a King ſprightly and young
Chooſes to be a ſlave before himſelf:
And that he findes his chains ſo ſweet and pleaſant
He ſeems to have no will to reigne without you,
And I am ſent to aske what he implores,
Be not then rigorous to your ſelf and him,
But think what baits a Scepter carries in it,
And that 'twill ill become you to be cruell
When a Crown, and title of a Queen is offerd.
I me ſure it leſſe becomes thee to afflict me
With a diſcourſe ſo hatefull, perjur'd man
Haſt thou ſo little ſhame, and courage in thee
To ſpeake this and not bluſh; haſt thou forgot
The glory of thy bonds; and that my ſelf
Permitted thee to weare em, whilſt my pitty
Made my looks gracious to thee, couldſt thou then
Having been once a Lover, proud to be ſo,
Speak for another now, and that I ſhould
For thy ſake take his love into my heart.
Thou ſhewſt by this thy baſeneſſe, how unworthy
Was Roderigoes rivall, ſince thou canſt not
Preſerve the honour which thou hadſt, for once
To have been his Competitor.
Did I think
That you bore any thoughts of love to me,
Or that th' impreſſion of my former flame
Were not quite worn out of your heart, I ſhould not
Speak for the King a word, but for my ſelf,
And you ſhould ſee by my great conſtancie,
How much I de cheriſh ſuch a hope.
What traitour
Should I love thee? canſt thou imagine it?
Or tempt thy ſelf with ſuch a vanity;
I never yet receiv'd a flame ſo hatefull
And if I thought my heart could entertain it,
Ide pull it out my ſelf: but canſt thou have
The confidence, Don Sancho to pretend
To what thou wert not able to defend;
Haſt thou forgot the Duell where thou wert
Forc'd to bring me the ſword thou vainly hadſt
Imploy'd againſt the Cid, is it for that
Thou lay'ſt thy clayme to my affection?
For that muſt I preferre thee to the man
Whom the Moores feare, and Spaine does reverence?
Come let me heare thy actions; were our enemies
Defeated by thy valour? Did the Moores
Yield themſelves at the hearing of thy name?
Does thy arme hold our tottering Kingdome up?
Art thou the glory of it? prove it true
And I will run into thy deare embraces.
Madam, I have not ſo much arrogance
To challenge to my ſelf ſuch mighty deeds.
My actions bound themſelves more narrowly:
I never did defeat the Moores, my arme
Could nere do any thing worth your acceptance,
And yet it reak, not with your fathers bloud.
Knows thy fierce rage no bounds, tak'ſt thou delight
To perſecute me ſtill, art thou not weary
To ſee my teares run? thou mightſt eaſier draw
My bloud, and kill me with leſſe cruelty.
Come make it perfect, and revenge thy ſhame
Upon my lives loſſe; yet let thy rage forbeare
To wrong that goodneſſe, which has ſpar'd thy life.
In telling truth I offer no man wrong,
Nor did my rage ſuggeſt my words unto me
Your Deſigne's fair indeed, but your hope vain;
You care not how y'affront a Monarchs will;
Nor can you think that your Cid will be faithleſſe,
You are the only ſhe in all the Court
To whom his love's unknown, you have not heard
That Cordubas Infanta is his Miſtris;
But he himſelf avows it in his letters,
Which he has done ſo to the life, that all
Believe he's leſſe their enemy, then her lover.
Well let th' Infanta come, let her inſtead
Of being captive be a conquereſſe,
Let Cid that ſhould be victor, be her ſlave,
It matters not, ſo I may have thy abſence:
Ile wait th'effects of his inconſtancie
With more aſſurance, and farre leſſe diſquiet,
Pray leave▪me, I demand it as a favour
And finde ſome better office when you next
Addreſſe your ſelfe to any▪ 'tis no ſhame
Not to have well diſcharg'd ſuch an employment
As being done muſt needs betray thy honour.
'Long as I ſerve my King, I feare no blame
But here's an end of this; I leave you Madam,
Till time ſhall make you to digeſt my counſaile.
In the mean while I' me ſilent, and obay.
DO not believe Don Diego, though I ſhare
My heart and Crown with the belov'd Cimena,
That ile uſurpe by my authority
A treaſure which thy ſonne deſerv'd ſo well.
No, his great ſervices do live too freſh
In my remembrance to be ſo requited:
Rather I mean t'augment his happineſſe,
And his reward ſhall paralell his valour,
A nobler Miſtris I deſigne for him
To whom Cimena without bluſhing may
Give place unto; nor ſhould thy ſonne complain
Of this my affection, or of that his change.
But we have never ſir deſerv'd this honour,
Nor dare my ſonne pretend to ſuch a fortune,
A higher happineſſe attends the Princeſſe,
Who is too generous to deſcend ſo low.
His actions tell me that he merits more
Which to reward according to his value
A Scepter is too little; I will ſhare
With him in his deſires, he in my power.
Love may content us both, if as my ſiſter
Is willing to receive him for her ſervant,
So will the fair Cimena me for hers.
Don Sancho from me is gone to ſee her,
He knows her ſpirit, and ſhould, how to tame it:
I hope well of his fair tongues good ſucceſſe.
But why is he ſo ſlow in his return?
Since he is conſcious of my neereſt ſecrets
He muſt needs know that I burn all this while
And that his ſlowneſſe cauſes me to languiſh.
YOur Majeſty has no cauſe of further trouble,
See where he is.
Oh Don Sancho welcome,
What ſays Cimena?
All that rigour can
All that diſdain and ſcorn does uſually
Inſpire proud ſpirits with, that cruell faire
Permitted to her tongue, my gentle words
Were ſpent in vain; the Northern wind would ſooner
Have given them hearing, Roderigoes love
Has made her to all elſe inexorable
Nor can we hope to treat with her again.
As for a Crown, Scepter, or any greatneſſe
They ſeem but to ſtirre up her anger more.
What? will ſhe be ſo cruell to her King?
I muſt abate the pride of that fierce humour,
And my reſentment of t ſhall make her ſee
That Princes muſt be treated otherwiſe:
But theſe ſcorns her, Ile turn into her ſhame:
And Cid whom ſhe believes her own already,
Shall as well fail her hopes, as ſhe has mine
When a more worthy object ſhall invite him
To change his love, and his diſdains of her
Shall revenge hers of me.
Don Arias,
What news is it you bring?
Of Cids good fortune,
And of the Rebels fate, he is hard by
Victorious and in health.
I long to ſee him
He is not farre ſir from the City walls,
Mean-while this Letter will confirme your Majeſty,
Ith' truth of what I ſaid.
How am I raviſh'd
And my ſoule burns with hot impatience
After this object which ſhe ſo deſires,
Go tell him that my thoughts are ſwift to ſee him,
Don Diego ſee that he be well received.
IT ſeems Cimena, you have no room left
In this hard heart of yours for him that loves you,
Muſt a King live and die in the ſame fetters?
Were I a private man you'd be ingratefull
To hate me, 'cauſe I love you, howſoever
You were too blame to uſe Don Sancho ſo.
Comming from me, and offering my ſervice
He might deſerve a kinder entertainment
Civility would require ſo much; and though
He had diſpleas'd you, courting you for me
Duty ſhould have made good your want of love.
I cannot tell, ſir, what has raiſd your anger,
Nor how Don Sancho has deſcrib'd me to you:
But certainly, no vanity of mine
Did make me to forget my duty to you:
And my refuſall of the ſoveraigne title
Shew'd my reſpect, and not my cruelty,
Don Sancho perhaps might be diſpleas'd,
But his diſcourſe mov'd me to what I ſaid,
Since he durſt call to minde my fathers murder
(A wound ſtill bleeding in my memory.)
If thou haſt yet a feeling of this grief
Both for thy honour, and content Cimena
Tis fit thou baniſh from thy kinder thoughts
The Author of it, nor does he now beare
The ſame affection to thee which he did;
When he left thee hee left his firſt intentions
And having chang'd his climate, chang'd his love,
Seriffas beauty is the mark he aymes at,
Who once thy enemy, is now thy rivall.
I'me ſure he's much engag'd to this Jnfanta,
But if he were not, yet the ſervices
My father had from all his Family
Deſigne for him the Infanta of Caſtile.
SIr.
What wouldſt thou?
Roderigo is without.
Admit him then: now you ſhall ſee Cimena
This glorious Conquerour, I know hele come
Triumphantly, leading his Miſtris with him,
You'l eaſily perceive in this encounter
Either his love or his ingratitude.
Make your beſt uſe then of this time, compare
Your Graces with your Rivals, and by them
Gueſſe what your fortune's like to be.
Oh Heavens!
With what eyes can I ſee this his approach?
GReat King, then whom the Sun ſees nothing happier,
(Joy of your ſubjects terror of your foes)
At length the warre reſpiring, gives me leave
To have the honour to kneele here before you,
But as unto the Deity▪ of which
You are the Image, none ſhould dare to come
Without an offering, ſo nor could I
Hope to deſerve the happineſſe to ſee you
Without a preſent: Then be pleas'd, great ſir,
T'accept from my hand what Heavens bounty gives you
This Crown, and theſe two Princes, ſo far happy
That they are falne your priſoners, under whom
To be commanded is to live with freedom:
This was the King of Corduba, and this
The heire apparent of Toledos Kingdome.
He heare thy full relation, but before it
Let me embrace thee, and behold this forehead
Where Love and Mars do ſit enthron'd, and make thee
Victorious in either of their wars.
Oh ſir, how can I anſwer this diſcourſe
To ſpare my modeſty, ſir, ſpare your favours
And ſhare the honours, as y'have done the labours
Your ſouldiers as much as I procur'd
This victory, tis juſt they ſhould receive
Part of the honour from your Majeſty
Both for their valour and fidelity.
Their merit can be eaſily ſatisfied
But for thy deeds there can be no rewards:
Sure thou wert born to make all men ungratefull,
Thy tongue's no leſſe a conquerour then thine arme,
But for my ſake ſpare thy ſweet eloquence,
Elſe I ſhall be thy captive as are theſe
But now recite the fortune of thy armes;
No entertainment can be halfe ſo pleaſant.
Sir (what ſoere it be) ſince you command it,
T is fit that I obey: Your rebels ſlain
Or taken, and thoſe Darers that oppos'd
The current of your fortune quite defeated
To make your name more glorious, I advanc'd
My Army towards Corduba, which even then
I had made ſure of, if ſome timely ſuccours
Had not prevented me. This noble Prince
Seeing it beleaguerd ſtraitly; by his forces
Thought to relieve it, but that hope being vain
He like a wiſe Commander chang'd his purpoſe,
And meant to try no valour but his owne:
Then by a Herald ſent he me a challenge
Which eaſily my ſpirit gave conſent to
I named the place, where when we both were mt,
Many fierce blows were dealt, and ſure the heavens
Look'd pale to ſee the ſtorms our anger made,
Shine more in our wilde looks than in their lightning
Whilſt men durſt do, that which they durſt not ſee
T was equally between us fought, untill
At length your fortune gave me th'advantage,
Here, ſir, your modeſty betrayes your valour,
I ſuffered by your ſtrength not my miſhap,
You may vaunt freely what I cann't deny.
This was the blow made Corduba to fall,
After this Princes yielding their great thoughts
A bated of their pride, and this fair Princeſſe
To whom I owe for her intelligence,
Made the Town yours almoſt without reſiſtance,
T is true great King, this woman, Natures monſter,
By her baſe treachery betray'd my ſtate,
You have my goods, my ſcepter and my perſon;
But look, ſir, who it is that gives them you,
See from what hand you do receive theſe preſents,
The ſame put her brother in theſe fetters,
It is my ſiſter, or ſome Devill rather,
That took that name upon her to betray me.
Leave to upbraid me thus, that name of ſiſter
Has bin the greateſt ſtain upon my life:
But you that ſtand ſo on the point of honour
Was I us'd as a ſiſter by you, rather
Was I not treated as a ſlave? the name
Away, I felt the thing▪ pray ſir, believe not
That out of any womaniſh impudence▪
I gave th' intelligence I am accuſed of;
But when I captiv'd him, I freed my ſelf
From thoſe more cruell chains, where in his rage
Shut up my will and free election,
Deſigning me the object of my hate:
Which when I ſaw, and that this haughty Prince
Came from his country to my raviſhment,
Arm'd not with fair deſerts, but ſouldiers
I thought I juſtly might to his violence
Oppoſe my artifice, which was to render
Unto his enemies his place of refuge,
Which my deſigne I kept long in ſuſpence,
Till this more noble object took my heart,
And made me perfect my intentions.
I without doubt, his falſe heart does adore her.
Can I then ſee my rivall, and yet I live?
When the wit's nimble, and the courage ready,
A good ſucceſſe ſtill follows the deſigne,
The buſineſſe that halts forward is half loſt.
Sir, to neglect the execution,
My courage, and my love were too important,
I quickly was reſolv'd, when love came in
To finiſh up the plot my hate begun,
This valiant Cid whoſe fame prevented him
In my good thoughts, was of my enemy
Become the object of my beſt deſires;
His vertue conquered me, and had I not
Been overcome I had not been ſo happy:
For giving up my arms to ſuch a conqueſt,
'Steed of my own loſſe I have got a prize,
The honour of all ſouldiers: Roderigo.
Alas, what canſt thou hope poor Lady now.
Canſt thou doubt yet whether he be engag'd.
Madam, you put a double tye upon me,
That having done me a courteſie ſo happy,
You adde to it, ſo much of kinde reſpect,
And believe, Madam, that occaſion
Will make me bleſt, which points out my obedience,
What may I do to ſerve you, pray command me.
What has ſhe to deſire, ſhe has thy heart?
Ah ſir, you can do all, and Ide have all.
Madam, the King is here ſole ſoveraigne,
He only can give all.
Which thou mayſt promiſe,
Such is thy merit as does challenge all,
Freely diſpoſe of my authority,
And think I have done leſſe then thou deſerv'ſt.
So great a favour, ſir, I not deſire
The good I wiſh (great Cid) is in thy ſelf,
Which is the object my deſires ayme at,
And that ſweet hope, which only makes me live.
I know not, Madam, upon what apparence
You have conceiv'd this hope, I'me ſure Roderigo
Nere ſpoke to you about it.
Oh, how finely!
He carries it.
Tis prettily diſſembled.
Have you then, ſir, forgot your promiſes,
Is this the love, and are theſe the indearments
You promis'd to the action I perform'd.
Who gave you that falſe hope.
Your ſelf.
Who I,
I doubt it much.
Oh Heavens, do you know
This Letter?
Yes.
Pray read it ſir, and there
You ſhall perceive the reaſons of my hope.
I know well what I owe, and what I promis'd,
You ſhall ſee Madam, I am not ungratefull.
Oh then excuſe my anger, my diſdain
Caus'd it, and not my will, I can be calme,
Having my fear abated by thoſe comforts
You promis'd to my paſſion.
Your deſires,
Madam, exceed my power, but from me
Expect all duty, and all courteſie
That you could hope for, from a Gentleman,
Or I know how to give.
How faithleſſe man?
Do you fall back unto your firſt diſcourſe?
Thou paper which betraydſt my heart at firſt
Diſcover to his infamy thy ſecrets,
And ſhew his breach of faith.
Let it be read
Ile nere oppoſe it, and I ſweare t'obſerve
What ever that enjoyns.
The thing you offer
Seems reaſonable, thou art juſt Roderigo
By it we ſhall perceive your intereſt.
Sir, if you pleaſe, I will be judg'd by it.
And ſo will I.
Then I ſhall do you juſtice.
Here muſt I ſtand with patience to heare
The ſentence of my puniſhment.
From this,
I muſt expect either to live or die.
IF your brother have ſo little ſence both of his own blond and your beautie, that he had rather pleaſe himſelfe in your afflictions, then his own duty, let mee entreat you to make good that bravery of Spirit which you mentioned to mee in your Letters; which is to leave him to his crueltie, letting him firſt know that you were ſenſible of it, by the revenge you take. And then enter into the Victors Campe, where you ſhall make your owne conditions▪ and finde an entertainment to your content by
You underſtand the ſence, ſir, of theſe words,
Theſe are not terms that ſhould make void a promiſe
Am not I that Seriffa; you the victor,
Did not I give you entrance into Corduba,
And my own heart at once, and will you now
Bereave me of the hope your ſelf has rais'd
Is this the great content you promis'd me:
What iſt you can complain of Madam? who
Durſt be ſo inſolent to do you hurt?
Are you not heer in covert of that ſtorm
Which your fierce brother mean ſhould overtake you?
What could you hope more then this noble uſage
Did you ſuppoſe your eyes could conquer me,
Alas, I am anothers; and when ere
I change that object, I muſt think my ſelf
Led into blindneſſe, and miſtake of beauty.
Oh do not change, but end my miſery,
Let my bloud quite deface this character,
As it looks black already with thy crime,
So let it bluſh to puniſh me for mine,
Why ſtay'ſt thou? ſatisfie thy hate in me,
Teare from my breſt my love and heart together.
How am I raviſh'd with this ſweet revenge,
What pleaſure tis to ſee thee in this caſe
Where thy beſt hope is to ſit down with nothing,
Now Lady you may triumph, though you weare not
Theſe fetters, you're no leſſe a ſlave then I.
What villain?
Fie, Madam, calme your anger.
In the word of a King to both of you
I promiſe a fair treatment, I am one
That know to uſe a victory. Take you care
That in their ſeverall lodgings they want nothing
That their ſtate may requires how ere they be
My priſoners, I'le not bate their due reſpect
Go Roderigo home unto thy father,
I know he longs to ſee thee.
I obay,
Pray, Madam, give me leave to do the duty
I owe unto Cimena.
To me ſir?
Pray ſpare the labour, for you owe me none.
Beſides Seriffa, being vext already
Has too much reaſon to complain of you,
Though you commited not this laſt offence.
What may the reaſon be ſhe quits me ſo?
What crime have I committed? whats my fault?
I know not, but you ſee her cruelty,
And what a little makes her to fly off;
Perhaps y'are pleas'd well with your puniſhment,
Thou ſhouldſt ſhew more of courage Roderigo
And let her ſee that he who comes home victor
Should receive better welcome▪ ſhe is (me thinks)
Some what too full of vanity.
Ah, Madam,
I muſt not murmur though ſhe be ungratefull,
She is Cimena, and I cannot hate her.
But this thy too much goodneſſe will betray thee,
Thou mak'ſt thy conſtancie unhappy to thee.
Madam, you know where tis my duty calls me,
Pray give me leave to wait upon my father.
Go; this was a pretext I know to leave mee,
But I ſhall be reveng'd of this neglect
When againſt all thy hopes of future joy
The rigor of Cimena I employ.
HEnce-forth Cimena live for euer quiet,
Roderigo ſhall no more be ſo unhappy
As to diſturbe your peace, ſince you deny him
The ſight of you he is content to ſuffer,
Not only want of that but all things elſe
You being all to him, that he deſir'd:
Good heaven was there ever ſo much rigour
Practiz'd on any as on wretched me?
Did I hope any other recompence
Of all my ſervices, my labours, watchings,
To bring home victory? but that ſhe ſhould
Crown um with her acceptance; and muſt I
(Courted by all elſe) be by her deſpis'd
Into whoſe arms I look'd to have bin receiv'd?
Nor is her anger more apparant then
The cauſe of it conceal'd, I am not worthy
To know the reaſon of my baniſhment.
Therefore farewell for ever cruell Miſtris,
Ile ſeek ſome place unhabited by women,
Where I may never ſee ſuch ſhining eyes,
As only light us to our miſeries.
BUt, Madam, ſpare Roderigos innocence,
His vertues, and your worth are both too great
To ſuffer ſuch a ſtain.
Think of it Madam,
And call not him a traitour, but your heart
Which entertain'd a love that was not ſent
You were too credulous, not he perfidious,
What you deſir'd you were willing to believe,
And knowing the command of your own beauty
With the advantage of your birth and fortune,
I cannot blame you if you thought that love
Which was but civill application:
But now you have found your errour, let your courage
Finde ſcorn for him that has not love for you.
How eaſily the whole Counſail the ſick,
And yet they have not hit my true diſeaſe.
My ſiſter Madam, tels you right, deſires
That are not honorable ought to be ſhort,
Your quality which your beauty only equals,
Invites a higher match then Roderigo.
A conquerour is next unto a King,
Since hees deny'd me, how can my hopes look higher?
Don Sancho wait the Princeſſe to her lodgings,
And ſee that ſhe command▪ my Court as freely
As I my ſelf.
Your Graces humble creature.
Don Diego, is the Cid contented with
The offer which I make him of my ſiſter?
You are the King ſir; he your humble vaſſall,
He could not be my ſonne if diſobedient
To you that are his maſter, and I finde
His inclination ready only feare
And modeſty keeps in his ſtrong deſires.
Tis not his feare but Miſtris which reſtrains him▪
He will forget her ſooner then his duty
Of which the Count can give you the beſt proof,
For though at that time he ador'd Cimena,
Yet ventur'd he to loſe her for my ſake
(His honour and his duty ſo commanding)
He can love well tis true, but obay better.
I never doubled his obedience
Of which his excellent vertue does aſſure me:
Ide have (you ſiſter) to accept the Courtſhip
Which he ſhall make to you, and if you aske
A reaſon why, know I will have it ſo;
Though fortune have not bleſt him with a Crown,
And though his greatneſſe be within himſelf,
Yet there propitious heaven has ſhew'd its power,
Heaping its richeſt treaſures on his perſon,
Hi heart is valours proper ſpheare, his ſoule
The throne of vertue where ſhe ſits and governs
Directing all his actions to honour;
Theſe rare perfections muſt be the objects
Siſter, of your deſires.
Such a command
Makes my obedience ready to love vertue,
When you that are my King requires it of me
I not to give conſent to hard conditions,
Tis your part to command, mine to obay.
Tis well, it only reſt now that Cimena
Comply with my deſires I will no onger
Burn to ſo little purpoſe, my affection
Haftes to its end, there can be no content
T' approach a fire that will conſume, not cheriſh,
I am reſolv'd to have her, as for love
Which to the Cid ſhe promis'd, I have power
T' abſolve her of it; Princes render lawfull
What ever pleaſes them: reſpects become
The people, not a King: ſend for her ſiſter
And tell her I would ſee her in your lodgings,
To treat of ſomthing that concerns her neerly,
Tis weariſome to live thus in deſire,
This day enjoying her, Ile quench my fire.
BEauty is loves object, Madam and twere hard
T approach ſuch flames and keep a frozen heart,
Dull fouls have eyes lent 'em to ſee their way,
But men of courage to behold what's faire.
Pardon divineſt Lady if my ſpirit
Made me to love where I ſhould have ador'd
And though you do eſtrange me from your heart
Envy me not the glory of my ſufferings.
Don Sancho cannot be ſo young a Courtier
To think that any Lady can deſpiſe
A noble love bounded with due reſpects,
We have no other witneſſe of our beauty
And heaven defend that we ſhould hate our lovers.
Accept my vowes then, Madam, with the temper
Of one that ſeem'd to love; and let my ſervice
Be entertain'd at leaſt with faire acceptance.
How can I do that without injury
Either to you or my own modeſty?
To cheriſh you in what you cannot have
Were to augment your puniſhment: to give
A heart which is not mine, in me were falſhood,
And no leſſe wrong to you ſhould you receive it
Then to its proper owner.
But he ſeems
(As one that does not know his happineſſe)
To be inſenſible of what your goodneſſe
Has offerd him: why ſhould you caſt away
That whereof Kings would be ambitious?
Ay me!
That ſigh the greateſt Monarch ſcarce deſerves
Much leſſe, a ſubject, thruſt him from your thoughts
And let ſome nobler love take up his room.
Take heed Don Sancho, you begin to forfeit
Your firſt pretentions, I muſt not think,
You can love one whom you believe to have
The eaſie power to diſlodge a love
Which ſhe had once receiv d, but hence-forth know
My flame runs up into a point ſo ſmall
As cannot be divided into parts.
Not though there be diviſion of your hearts
The Cid I ſhame to ſay't, neglects you Madam:
If he did not I were more miſerable
This now ſeems ſtrange to you, but when I ſhall
Relate that to you which in part concerns you,
As you are Favourite to the King your Maſter,
And one that ſhould adviſe him to be juſt,
You will perceive, that what I utterd of
Love to the Cid was to ſecure my ſelf.
But heres my brother, lets withdraw a little.
IS not this fight enough deare Celimant,
To choak that fire up within my breſt
Which I too long have nouriſh'd to my ruine
For an ungratefull, and perfidious woma,
Was it too little to diſdain a Prince,
And run into the hands of one ſhe knew not
Unleſſe having quitted him, for whom his worth
And valour pleaded ſhe become the prey
Of a y that will-ſeize her, ſee Don Sancho
Has made her his already▪ and ſhall I
Love where I am ſo rivall'd, no my heart
If thou muſt be a captive, let thy fetters
Be ſuch as need not ſhame the wearer.
Friend,
Which name I rather chuſe to call you by
Then brother, (ſince you cannot be her husband
With ſafety of your honour) could you think
That ſhe can ſpare her modeſty, whoſe falſhood
Spar'd not her brother, and her Country too,
No ſir, believe, ſhe that is baſe her ſelf
Cannot love vertue in an other perſon:
For how ſhould ſhe love that ſhe never knew;
Heer then put out your flame, and think Spheranti
That this conformity of our lives and fortune
Which makes me ſhare in all your paſſions
May link our hearts ſo faſt we ſhall not need
Such an alliance to confirme the knot.
J know not friend whether I be more happy
In loſing of my love, then in the finding
Th'aſſurance of thy friendſhip; now let fortune
Look well or ill upon me in thy love
Ile ſumme up all my bliffe, nor can I think
Brave Celimant, will profeſſe leſſe to me.
Which to confirme, no ceremonious oath
The band of doubtfull, and inconſtant ſouls
Shall I now take; thee friendſhip, I invoke,
When I do leave this Prince, let me be left
Without a friend, I and without a name.
J know my father at this time endevours
My liberty, (if at leaſt I can call
This thraldom, where I am ſo well receiv'd)
But I'me reſolv'd to run your courſe of fortune,
My freedom joyn'd with yours is welcome to me
Elſe a worſe torment then that bondage was
Your ſiſters rigour did impoſe.
No more
Deare friend of her; come, come forget her name.
Since ſhe could be ſo thankleſſe to diſdain,
The man that quit his liberty for her,
Which when the Cid did offer, I refus'd
To follow her, who follow all men elſe
And that her crime has merited my hate▪
I have ſhook off that chain; but finde my ſelf
Caught in another which thou doſt not know
Tis ſuch as makes me feare my liberty
I cannot go from hence, and think I'me free.
You are in love it ſeems.
Yes Celimant.
I am in love, and as much in deſpaire.
Is there a beauty can oppoſe your Courtſhip,
What quality is higher then your own?
Why ſhould you then deſpaire?
I but the horrcur
Of being vanquiſh'd makes me think my ſelf
Unworthy to look up to ſuch a height.
Conſider that your fortune was to yield
His to orecome, yet did you long diſpute it
And bravely too; what can you feare Spheranti?
To be too raſh▪
To be too raſh, let hope
Remove thoſe thoughts, and you will not diſpleaſe her,
A vertuous love was never odious.
But tell me ſir, what name has this your Miſtris,
Honour my freedome with this truſt.
Th' Infanta,
Deere Celimant has ſnatcht my heart, and though
My eyes were caught in their firſt motion to her,
Yet durſt I not diſcover it till now;
But ſuch force has my flame, it will not be
Contain'd within the limits of my heart
But muſt break out to thee and ſuddainly
To her, which if diſpleaſing is my death.
Hope better ſir, I am your caution
She ſhall receive the offer of your vowes.
BUt here's Don Arias.
The King ſir askes for you.
Ile wait him ſir.
Tis ſtrange he ſhould be ſent for and not I.
WHat, all alone?
I Madam, Celimant,
Is ſent for to the King.
Oh, I know why
His liberty is now in propoſition,
And yours too ſhortly, if you deſire it.
That Madam, is the leaſt part of my care
J am ſo farre from wiſhing it, I feare it.
This is a Courtſhip ſir, I underſtand not
Were not Toledo better than Sivill to you.
Madam, th' effect will make you ſee it is not.
Well, we ſhall hope to ſee it then; adiew.
My duty, Madam, will not give me leave
To let you go alone, do not deny me
The honour to wait on you▪
WHat ſaid Roderigo, boy? when he departed.
Nothing, but in his looks one might diſcover,
Amazement joyn'd with grief to be excluded.
Excluded, whence? not from my heart I'me ſure
There he makes good the place he ever had,
Were it a eaſie to remove him thence
As from my preſence, I ſhould feare no rivall,
Take your Lute boy, and ſing the ſong I gave you,
It ſutes my preſent ſtate.
'TWas not his perſon nor his parts,
Though nere ſo fam'd that wonne me,
He lov'd, he ſaid, which I believ'd;
And that faith has undone me.
His vertues were alike to all,
Nor were they more to me,
I honor'd them, but lov'd the man▪
Becauſe that he was he.
Who ſince he has his love forgon,
And is himſelf no more:
I love him not as he is now,
But as he was before.
Tis true I muſt ſtill love him, the remembrance
That I was once Roderigo's only object,
Is that I cheriſh now.
MAdam, the King
Stayes for you to come to him.
The King! where?
Why would he ſpeake with me?
J cannot tell,
But he expects you on the Infantas ſide.
Tell him I come, I know what he would have
But all his power ſhall not ſhake my firmeneſſe,
In vain he tryes to winne me by his greatneſſe.
What is a throne to me that ſeek a grave?
Ime ſure he has no power ore my will,
He that firſt took my heart ſhall keep it ſtill. Exeunt.
MAdam, tis true, I may have bin too raſh
To offer you a heart unworthy of you
But yet my fault is ſuch as cannot give
Conſent to any low thoughts of repentance;
And if my ſervice find no other grace,
Let me have leave to cheriſh my attempt,
And let me love my ſelf for loving you,
Then if you ſhall deny your preſence to me,
My ſoule may do the office of mine eyes
Which may contemplate what theſe cannot ſee,
And if my love cannot appeare from thence,
From this you ſhall perceive my obedience.
Though I am better read in my own faults,
Then to believe I could charm any man;
Yet for your ſake, becauſe you▪le have it ſo.
J am content to think you love me ſir,
And I am ſenſible of what I owe you,
But you muſt know that I depend upon
A brother to whoſe will I am confin'de,
So that I am not Miſtris of my heart,
Nor dare I hazard it without his leave,
Therefore to warrant your pretenſions
Make your addreſſe to him, till then I dare not
Be known to entertain you for a ſuitor.
Tis fit I be obedient to this law
Which is moſt reaſonable, but may I be
As ſure of your favour, as his leave.
Your vertue, ſir, will be your beſt aſſurance,
My love proceeds not freely, but deſerts
Muſt challenge it.
Kiſſing your faire hands, Madam,
J go to make my way to bliſſe or ruine.
What ſhall I do, my heart, this Prince is lovely,
So is the Cid, but he leſſe tractable,
Spheranti is more ſoft and courteous,
And yet not of leſſe ſpirit then the other,
Let Roderigo then endeare his Miſtris,
And ſince that love is th' only price of love,
Let him that offers his, have his reward.
Alas, what did I ſay? how can I leave
That object, which rules all within my heart?
Roderigo's free poſſeſſor there, and yet
Me thinks, there is a room left for Spheranti.
What ſhall I do then in this labyrinth?
Shall I to oblige Cimena, quit the Cid.
No Ile not leave him, but with patience wait
The pleaſure of my brother and my fate.
DOn Sancho, ſir, and Arias do wait you
Wi h the conditions of your liberty,
They are but gentle ones, that you forgive
Your ſiſter, in the recompence of which
Your ranſome is remitted.
Greateſt Monarch,
Who may diſpoſe my life, you know that here,
I am no leſſe without a will then power
I muſt obay, what ever you impoſe,
But yet her crime joyn'd with the inſolence
In facing it is ſuch, that giving me
My Kingdome back with her, is worſe to me
Then to live here your captive, with what pleaſure
Can I behold that power re-deliver'd
Which with my enemies I muſt receive.
Ile quit you of that feare, in taking care
To keep Seriffa in the terms of duty
You ſhall command her wholy, but at preſent
Till you be better ſatisfied, her fight
Shall not offend you, ſince her love has caus'd
The treaſon which you blame her for, I mean
To keep her faſt in fetters, untill love
And Hymen be the executioners
Of the ſweet ſentence which I will pronounce.
Such is her want of worth, the Prince you meant
To Joyne her to, deſpiſes her, and truly
I ſhould believe him to be worth my pity,
Of whom ſo baſe an object were conſider'd.
Sir, your too quick reſentment makes you ſpeak ſo,
But leave that care to me, there is a Lord
Within my Court, of birth as great as any,
But vertue much beyond his quality,
Which does a done your ſiſter, though it be true
That he has mingled with his love ſome boldneſſe,
Since he can't plead any deſcent from Kings,
Yet if our ſpirit bids us deſpaire nothing,
This noble Lover muſt obtain his wiſhes,
In a word tis Don Sancho that I mean.
Sir, I beſeech you think how great the diſtance
Is between their conditions▪ Don Sancho
Has much worth in him, but he is no Prince,
And though Seriffa has diſgrac'd her birth,
She's nere the leſſe diſcended from a King.
Don Sancho, ſir, is all you can deſire
Being my Favourite, I will advance
His fortune to that height as ſhall deſerve,
Seriffa's and your love: but did you know
How much he has employ'd his favour with me
For your advantage, you would recompence
His care with this alliance, but if all
That he has done, cann't make you flexible,
Yet heare me that am King, and do conjure you
To love your ſiſter, and confirme this match,
A Kings entreaties muſt have no deniall.
Sir, I am yours, and ſince this marriage
Is welcome to your thoughts: Don Sancho may
In Celimant meet a brother, and Seriffa
Being look'd on by me, through you and him,
Shall ſee I can forget what ſhe has done.
Now you oblige me, and this clemencie
Shews whence you are deſcended: how I love
This ſweetneſſe in you, truſt me your ſiſter
(Now I may tell you ſo) will well deſerve
This favour of you; ſuch a beautie, ſir,
Ought not to dwell clouded in your diſlikes:
But you are for your buſineſſe: Arias,
See he finde no delay, and call Roderigo▪
My ſiſter too; I know they are without,
So good ſucceſſe when I ſpeak for another
Makes me hope all things in my own behalf:
But I muſt change my countenance: Roderigo.
ALL Spain from thy brave hand has felt that peace
And quiet, which thy Prince cannot obtain,
This work is wanting to fill up thy glory,
Therefore to make thy victory more perfect,
For my ſake undertake this enemy,
That would cut from thy valor half thy conqueſt.
How ſir? dares any, who may be ſo bleſt
As to live under your juſt laws, ſhake off
Their due obedience? what vain inſolence
Dares lift it ſelf againſt ſo ſweet a power:
Name him ſir, to me, that I may deſtroy him.
There's none can do't Roderigo.
None ſir, Why?
Tis love that little tyrant which rules all,
The enemy which makes this warre upon me,
Regards not majeſty, but as a victor
Triumphs already in my captiv'd heart,
Which has conſented to its own defeat
So much that I am on the brink of ruine,
If Roderigo's hand ſuſtain me not.
If your eaſe ſir, depend upon my ſervice,
You may be ſure of my readineſſe,
Only ſir, let me know what you deſire?
Oh, Roderigo!
Why do you ſigh, ſir?
Iſt that you doubt of my obedience?
Or that my power is leſſe then your deſires.
By no means Roderigo, but I feare
Leſt ſome ill fortune, ſtead of putting me
Into the haven, caſt me further from't,
And leſt the difficulty ſhould change thy courage,
And leave me to my ſelf in this fierce ſtorm.
My courage is exempted from ſuch feare.
I'me well aſſur'd of thy faith and valour,
And yet in this I feare, becauſe thou muſt
Combat thy ſelf, ſubdue thy own deſires,
Conquer thy own deare paſſions to make
Thy ſelf a ſacrifice to my affections.
Your Majeſty may diſpoſe then of my life.
Tis not my purpoſe, nor for all Caſtile
Shall it be ſaid that I wiſh'd any good
Which muſt be purchaſt at ſo deare a rate.
What can I do then for you.
Thou mayſt put
An end to all my pain in quitting of
Cimena: do not ſtart, they are her charms
By which I'me caught and ſuffer, nor can I
Believe though now ſhe ſlight my offerd love
Any thing elſe withholds her, but the thought
Of being thine.
Oh ſir, aſſure your ſelfe,
If that be all, and that your Majeſtie
Vouchſafe to caſt your eyes upon this beautie,
I ſhall not be ſo raſh to hope that good,
Which has the honour to pleaſe you my Prince.
In this ſir, you may free me from ſuſpect,
My love is (much indeed) more my reſpect,
And howſoere my heart be link'd to hers,
J owe more to my Maſter then my Miſtris.
Oh royall ſoule, and truly generous,
Great Cid, this inſtant thou haſt made me happie:
Now I am King indeed, for what thou giv'ſt me,
I prize above the value of a Crown,
In liew of which I mean to give thee one,
Behold th' Infanta, whom I freely offer:
Tis fit, the ſtate, which owes all to thy valour,
Should make thee a great ſharer in her fortune.
Every thing ſmiles upon me, bleſt effects
O're take my wiſhes, what could I hope more?
Love is made for me to my hand, Cimena
Ingag'd, to which Roderigo gives conſent.
Thou doſt not anſwer me.
Excuſe me ſir,
I am your ſubject, and you are my King,
Tis not a Kingdome, which I wiſh or hope for
To ſerve you is the honour I aſpire to,
Obaying you, I learn how to command,
And ſince—But ſee Cimena.
OH, Madam,
The date now of your crueltie is out,
Your coldneſſe, and your hate no more in ſeaſon▪
Roderigo for my ſake has quitted you,
And if he had an intereſt in your perſon,
He has now put me in full poſſeſſion of it.
Sir, Roderigo's free and may renounce me,
I have no ſcepters to beſtow upon him,
But yet I think my birth is not ſo mean,
As to live under his command; A ſlave
I am not yet, and my affections
Are not to be inclin'd and rule by his,
Since greatneſſe is the thing, not love he aymes at,
Let him have his deſires, I ſhan't be jealous
Though love do wound him with more pleaſing darts
So that the tyrant which ſhall end his ſufferings,
Do not put me on new, nor that his great
Felicitie be purchaſt at the rate
Of my loſt honour, or my libertie.
Madam, think better of the man which loves you▪
To get you happineſſe I quit mine own:
And to obtain the ſovereigne power for you,
I make my affection ſtoop unto my duty,
If when I ſee a Crown is offered you,
I ſhould come in, to croſſe your better fortune,
I muſt believe my love did then betray you,
And had relation to my ſelf not you.
This Roderigo were a faire pretext,
If both our thoughts were levell'd at one height,
But let not any right that I can plead
Divert your deare ambition, mount upon
A throne, and taſte its ſweetneſſe, as for me
I am ſo farre from blaming this your change,
You cannot finde more pleaſure then I praiſe,
T'applaud your act; you ſee ſir, I ſubmit
To the ſame laws your ſelf has made.
Oh, heavens!
How am I faln from all my hopes at once,
He is Roderigo ſtill, and ſhe Cimena.
You are reſolv'd then Madam, to continue
In the ſame cruelty? my love I ſee
Is uſeleſſe, and my vowes ſuperfluous:
Yet think I am a King, and can command.
What you deny my love, you'l give my power,
And ſince I can't perſwade, I muſt conſtrain.
Sir ſince my preſence does but move your anger
Suffer me to retire I beſeech you.
See Roderigo, how my love is anſwered,
She flies my preſent; leaving not ſo much
As a kinde look behinde her; if by this
She thinks to coole the fire which burns my heart,
She is deceiv'd; for this her ſuddainneſſe
Does not reſtrain but quicken more my flame,
Tell me was ever King ſo rudely treated?
This her judicious and wiſe retreat,
Being no effect of ſpight or arrogance,
Should not excite your anger: ſir you know
A modeſt feare keeps ſubjects in reſtraint,
When they are neer their King, and in that ſex
The dazling luſtre of a Princes perſon,
Strikes more reſpect into their hearts then love.
Why, was I made a King then? if my quality
Muſt croſſe my deareſt wiſhes, let me be
A ſubject, any thing, ſo I have her:
Some kinde fare rob me of my crown and ſcepter,
And you ſhall ſee that I will bleſſe your rigour,
If in exchange you'le give me but one heart:
Cimena limits my ambition,
On her depends either my life or death,
Then if thou ever hadſt a thought to pleaſe me,
Roderigo winne Cimena to my love,
Accompliſh what thou haſt begun, and try
To melt the ice which circles in her heart,
Or if it be a fire, oh turn it this way,
From thee I muſt expect all my content:
And I from you ſir, all my puniſhment:
Did ever any miſchief equall this,
I'me made the confident of my own rivall,
To my ſelf faithleſſe, true to him that wrongs me,
My duty and my love run contraries,
One bindes me to obay a wilfull Prince,
Th'other my Miſtris, whom my heart adores,
If I obay my love, I get his hate,
And if my dutie, I muſt loſe her love,
But that I may however, ſince the King
Has power to take her from me when he will:
Then let me ſerve my King which I have promis'd,
But that Cimena claims as well as he;
On both ſides thus engag'd, and thus diſtracted.
Roderigo, what canſt thou reſolve to do,
Since with thy love or dutie thou muſt part
Give him thy life, and let her have thy heart.
TH' Infanta's lodgings are that way.
Madam.
You are miſtaken, ſir, I am Cimena,
He that courts titles muſt forget a name
That ſounds not Princeſſe, nor would I divert
The full ſtream of your hopes: here lies my way.
Madam, Cimena, ſtay and heare.
My ruine.
One word.
Pray let me go.
The laſt I mean
To ſpeak to any of your ſex: what rigor
Is this you uſe, did ever any yet
Refuſe to be a witneſſe to a Will?
Was ever any cruelty like this?
Ah Roderigo, is it not enough,
Firſt to betray me to your love, and then
Leave me, unleſſe to ſhake my reſolution:
You ſet upon me with new batterie,
I cannot heare and live.
I do not come
To urge ought in my own behalf, my dutie
And promiſe made to him, who may command me,
Forces this from me, can you love the King?
Can you be Roderigo, and demand it.
I have no more to ſay then, but to take
My laſt farewell, perhaps when I'me remov'd
Your dutie or ambition will perſwade
What from your ſervant is not credited,
And when by this your obſtinacie (as ſure
It muſt fall out ſo) my poore life grows forfeit,
You will too late repent the loſſe of both.
A lover and a Crown.
Tis vainly urg'd.
How can I loſe a Lover, when he firſt
Renounces me? a Crown I never had,
And if I never ſeek it, as I ſhall not,
Where is my loſſe? but rather where's thy courage
Ah Roderigo muſt the feare of death
Only come in to make ſome ſmall pretence
For leaving me, you did not uſe to be
Frighted at ſuch a name.
Nor muſt you think
That I am now, yet would I live to ſee
Cimena in that luſtre with her vertues
Ever deſign'd her to, for me I think
Nothing can adde unto my preſent ſtate
More happineſſe then to have been the ground
Where on my Miſtris would erect her glory.
And can you think Cimena will go leſſe,
While you diſcourſe thus, you but teach my duty,
The honour of our love muſt not be yours
More then mine own, I have as great a ſhare
In it as you, and ſhould it come to ſuffering
I can as well expect to ſee you great
As my ſelf miſerable; which muſt be ſo
If fortune once divide us.
Can our faith
Be ſo rewarded? heavens, where is your juſtice?
If we muſt needs be ſever'd; why to both
Gave you an equall minde, and thoughts alike?
That being parted, we might be more neere,
For they that love alike are always one,
Since but the ſight nought can diſtinguiſh them.
Theſe myſteries Cimena, are not ſtrange
Unto our loves, in which there has not been
Any thing known, or eaſie, yet me thinks,
We might finde out a way for intercourſe.
Thy love is too materiall Roderigo,
I could be ſatisfied with thy Idea.
And I with thine, but is it not ſome pleaſure
To ſtand thus, and to gaze on one another?
Go Roderigo, for I feel within me
Since this thy ſtay, ſome thing, that prompts me to
Deſire thy company, which muſt be fatall
To both of us; adiew, and think we may
Be ſever'd yet continue ſtill our ſelves.
Our ſelves! am I Roderigo, or has ſhe
Bereft me of my ſpirit, can ſhe brave
The majeſty of Kings ſecur'd within
Her own firme conſtancy, and muſt I tremble,
If the Kings will have not the wiſh'd ſucceſſe?
I ought him duty, and I have perform'd it,
I've offerd with my life all my deſires,
Yet though I give, I may refuſe to take,
He cannot force me to a new affection,
Or make me love her leſſe, then ſhe does mee,
In other things he rules, in this I'me free.
MAdam believe, I could not juſtifie
The love I did pretend, if in this buſineſſe
I ſhould preferre my paſſion before
Your honour and content, I heare your brother
The King has reconcil'd to you, it reſts
I let him know how much he owes to juſtice.
But as you do it, ſpare my modeſty,
I would not be an offer, but his choice.
As you have given credit to my faith,
In this diſtruſt not my diſcretion,
It is your honour which I ſeek, to which
I made my love ſubmit, and can you think
I will not now preſerve it, I am here
T'attend the King as ſent for, and ſhall uſe
All opportunities to do you ſervice,
Pleaſe but your Highneſſe to retire.
Bequeathing to thy care, the hopes of all
My future happineſſe.
Your Highneſſe ſervant.
IN this ſir, I confeſſe, Spheranti has
Oblig'd our Family, the Prince is noble,
And I could wiſh my ſiſter would embrace
The love he offers, what I can conferre,
He may be ſure of: but you know th' Jnfanta
Is promis'd Roderigo, to whoſe valour
She has been long a debt, and yet this buſineſſe
Is not arrived ſo farre as to cut off
This noble Rivals hopes, ſometimes a moment
Alters the ſtate of things; a Ladies minde
Is not leſſe changable: tell him from me
He ſhall have all aſſiſtance.
T is the ſumme
Of his deſires, your Majeſtie will pardon
Th' abruptneſſe of my parting, he's my friend
And ſuch a happineſſe he longs to heare
As much as I to tell him.
Your own time
You may command brave Celimant: Don Sancbo
This Prince has royall thoughts & more your friend,
Then you could hope.
Your Majeſty ſtill puts
Freſh obligations on your humble vaſſall,
I am your creature, and the Prince through you,
Looking on me, may happily beſtow
His grace upon me as I am your ſervant,
Though otherwiſe I be not worth his thought.
This modeſty becomes thee, and ſets off
Thy vertues which I cheriſh; in reward
Of which, and for thou haſt been ſtill an aid
To my deſires, I have aſſiſted thine,
The love thou mad'st to Corduba's Infanta,
I have tane notice of, and though another
Might ſuffer in the like attempt, in thee
I've not diſlik'd it, but commend thy choice,
She is as great, in beauty as in birth.
She is an object for which mighty Kings
Being rivals ſhould take arms, ſuch excellence
Was never meant to be attain'd with eaſe.
You ſpeak ſir, like a lover, but Don Sancho
What would he ſay, that ſhould be made the owner
Of this rare beauty by conſent of all?
That fortune had left nothing to confer,
Being undone in this, hope cannot look
So high.
She ſhall be thine, nay more, ſhe is.
Leave me not now my faith and honeſty.
For I had nere more need of your aſſiſtance.
Thou doſt not anſwer, has thy ſuddain joy
Surpriz'd thy ſences, and ſhut up thy ſpeech?
I muſt confeſſe, I'me raviſh'd with this offer;
And on my knees in ſigne of gratitude
I here reſtore her to you.
Doſt thou mock,
My courteſie, or is it madneſſe in thee?
Return unto thy ſelf.
Your favours, ſir,
Have come ſo thick upon me, that my thanks
Are ſtill ore taken, only now my fortune,
Has given me leave to ſhew my gratitude,
This Princeſſe whom you offer I adore,
But dare not love, nor any but your ſelf.
Thou mak'ſt me wonder, how can ſhe concern me?
In juſtice, ſir, ſhe is your wife, if contracts
Can ſtand in force with Princes, by your father,
In your minority, with her a match
Was made and ratifide, of which Don Diego
Cannot be ignorant, nor Don Arias,
Who did tranſact the buſineſſe.
Some ſuch thing
I heard, but have forgotten, my Cimena
Cals back my thoughts and fixes them on her;
Beſide ſhe lov'd the Cid, and for his ſake
Betray'd her Country and her brother.
True,
She did, but not for him: had you great ſir,
But heard the ſtory of her love, and how
It grew up in her fancy, ſince the time
The King her father mention'd firſt your name
To her yet infant apprehenſion,
And gave your picture to her, you would ſay
Love entring by degrees, gathers his ſtrength
From ſmall beginnings, but makes ſure his hold.
In fine, your Majeſtie has been the object,
For whom ſhe has deſpis'd the Prince Spheranti.
Endur'd her brothers fury, and at length
To colour her deſires, made the occaſion
Of Roderigo's being there, the means
To bring her to your Court, and acted that
Unto the Cid, ſhe truly meant to you:
Feigned love is often better ſhew'd then true.
I muſt confeſſe my ſelf a debtor to her,
But yet Cimena is my choice, the Princeſſe
Conſulted well for her own modeſtie,
And no leſſe for her good, when ſhe made you
Her ſpeaker, I ſhall think on't: call Don Diego,
My ſiſter and Seriffa, to them all
I have to ſay, Intreat the faire but cruell.
Cimena come, and Roderigo too.
I ſhall diſpoſe of them: how unhappy
Are Princes that muſt love by others reaſon,
And not their own affections, this Princeſſe
Is faire and loves me, ſo is my Cimena,
But ſhe abhors me; ſhould I ſacrifice
To fame, Seriffa muſt be mine, but if
To love, Cimena; one of theſe I'me led to
By reaſon, to the other forc'd by love:
Muſt a Prince ſuffer violence? he muſt
Or elſe impriſon them that offer it,
(His wilde deſires) there being no other courſe,
But to ſubmit to reaſon or to force.
BUt here they are▪ ſiſter, I am reſolv'd
This day to ſee you married, and to make
Your joy more perfect, I ſhall give you leave
To chooſe your husband: the Prince of Toledo
Courts you with ſuch a love as nought can equall
But his perfections, which you muſt honour,
As well as he your beauty: yet Roderigo
Is for himſelf ſo much to be conſidered,
That we can hardly finde a Miſtris for him,
Which may deſerve his vertues; both of them
Out-weigh your merits, yet ſince equally
They make an offer of their ſervice to you,
Declare which is the object of your choice.
I cannot, ſir, believe my ſelf ſo happy,
As to have either of em for my husband:
But if they do ſubmit to my deſires,
Being both equall, I have no election.
They both adore you, and on this aſſurance
You may diſtingiſh of their love.
How, both.
I doubt it much.
If you do not believe me,
From their own voice I ſhall confirme it to you.
Yes divine beauty from my heart I ſpeak,
That heart which your fair eyes have ſet on fire,
The light of which may ſhew you how I love.
And if I loſe my hope, I loſe my life.
Can you doubt yet of his affection?
And Roderigo ſure will ſay as much.
Tis true great King, all men adore the Princeſſe▪
She has ſuch univerſall power ore harts,
She cann't be ſeen by any, and not lov'd,
But here's the difference between my love
And theirs, they live with hope, I with deſpaire.
What robs thee of thy hope?
Love.
Speak more cleerly,
Tis without reaſon that thou ſayſt: can love
Take thy hope from thee, when it gives it thee?
Then when I love, my hope forſakes me quite.
But now it does reſtore what then it took.
In doing ſo it keeps me further from't.
Theſe terms are too obſcure, I cann't conceive em.
Time and my conſtancie will make it plain▪
But I would know their meaning at this preſent.
Th' effect will quickly tell you.
What effect.
My death.
Thy death, who can cauſe it?
Cimena, ſir.
Cimena, thou haſt yielded her to me.
It was your will preſcrib'd that Law unto me,
I am your ſubject ſir, and you my King.
Though you be ſo, I never had intent
To do you wrong, to do my ſelf a pleaſure:
Thou knowſt how deare thy perſon is to me,
And that my ſiſter is thy valours prize,
Will you refuſe her your affection.
I have not, ſir, ambition enough
To look ſo high: pray ſir, regard not me,
But leave me to my ſelf, poſſeſſe Cimena;
In your love let her drown the memory
Of mine, I am your ſubject, you my King.
Well then ſince you refuſe my profferd honours,
And that my ſiſter cannot touch your heart,
My promiſes are diſingag'd for me,
I ſhall accept Cimena, and this Princeſſe
You are content to part with, are you not?
What do you fix upon?
On what I ought,
I am your ſubject ſir, and you my King.
Spheranti, if my ſiſter be your choice,
So that your father will give his conſent,
I freely ſhall give mine.
Your Majeſtie
Shall quickly ſee that cleerd, I know my father
Will be well ſatisfied, when he ſhall heare
That I have joyn'd the Kingdoms of Toledo
And Sevill by a match: but may I Madam
Receive this happineſſe from your conſent?
The King has made you, ſir, diſpoſer of me,
And what he chooſes anſwers my deſires.
Th'art ſilent Roderigo, what doſt think?
That ſhe could hardly have a braver Prince,
Nor he hope more then her.
And you Cimena,
Will you not put an end unto my ſufferings,
Will you be ſtill obdurate to your King?
Sir, I have no other faith then what I have given,
You know your father made me weare theſe bonds,
Which only death can break.
My conſtancie
Shall overcome thy ſtubborneſſe, I know
The ground and cauſe of thy averſion,
Thou haſt ſome feeble hope t'enjoy the Cid,
But that's without apparance; his own mouth
Has ruin'd it, ſpeak it again Roderigo,
Aſſure her that her hopes but flatter her,
Or if thou doft repent thy courteſie,
Deal freely with me, ſay thy minde is chang'd,
And that thou lov'ſt her ſpight of all her rigors.
Great ſir, my duty here reſtrains my tongue,
It is enough for me that I have told you,
You are my King, and I your humble vaſſall.
Though I am ſo, I will not force my ſubject
To ſuffer for concealing his deſires.
Ah ſir, caſt off all thoughts that may retard
The courſe of your contentments, when a buſineſſe
Concerns the good of ſuch a gracious King,
What is the death of one unhappy man?
Twill be a faire employment for my arme,
To puniſh him thats troubleſome to his Prince.
Well thou haſt overcome, thy extream vertue
Shall ſerve for an example to thy King.
See where I am oblig'd, Madam, Don Sancho,
I hope has tane theſe bluſhes off, I know
What right you have to me, and I to you.
This ſhould have been your work Don Diego rather
Then his that did it, you were privy to
All paſſages between our fathers; but
You I ſay, as all elſe do, 'tis dangerous
To turn the ſtream of Kings affections.
Your majeſtie is gracious, and prevents
Excuſes from your ſubjects, I could ſay
No more in my own defence.
Here I reſtore to thee thine own Cimena,
(Moſt perfect lover) Madam, I hope your rigour
Is not habituall, he's Roderigo,
Who ſpight of my deſires, has always lov'd
And honour'd you, do not defer then longer,
His and your own contentment, let his love
Wrack'd with ſo many ſtorms, finde here its harbour,
He has conquer'd ſtill abroad, let him not loſe
At home, but adde thy Mirtles to his Lawrels,
And ſo confirming to him the ſame faith,
Thou gav'ſt him once, receive him for thy husband.
On what ſhall I reſolve?
To take my life,
If you denie the price of my deare love,
For ſince the hope of that has yet preſerv'd it,
They both muſt fall together, and twill be
Some ſatisfaction to have dy'd your lover.
Riſe, tis enough, I am Cimena ever,
Thou Roderigo, and I wholy thine.
Live happy Loversthen, and taſte the pleaſures,
Which with ſo many croſſes you have purchaſt:
Quit all your cares, and celebrate this day,
My Court ſhall be Loves Palace, come faire Princeſſe:
Y are mine by a double tie of love and dutie,
Which I ſhall ſtill preſerve, ſince I am taught
To do not what I would; but what I ought.