THere, take your orders, and diſpatch;
Your known faiths will not let me doubt th'obſervance
Of the leaſt circumſtance.
Yet give me leave (moſt noble Generall
To aske the reaſon, ſince his Highneſſe leſt
A free diſpoſe at his departure, why
You ſhould uſe ſo much ſeverity in your commands?
Not a man enter the citty in forfeiture of his life? their's ſomewhat hard conditions; I've enter'd a Kingdome, and help't to winne it too, on farre eaſier termes; this o'th ſudden, and ſo unexpected too may meete with a harſh conſtruction.
For mine owne part, I've bin ſo long abſent,
Eſpecially being a poore ſervant to the ſtate too,
I dare conclude I'me loſt to all their memories;
Nor do I love the Campe ſo ill, to part with it
To win upon their faiths; urge a tedious catalogue
Of my dead anceſtours, and then ſearch records
To ſhew I was their country-man; all this
For a cold welcome, or an annuall penſion;
To ſhew my ſcores of wounds, that tally up
So many months pay behind hand: which
After ſeven yeares miſery in an hoſpitall,
Shall be both wip't off together: yet all
Are not of my humour.
What though your dull fat Senators, thoſe land-Porpices
That skip, and friske i'th ſtorme they n'ere are hurt with,
Thoſe heavy lubbers, lapt in ſweaty furres,
Batning on ſleepe and eaſe, lie ſnorting out
The peace poore Souldiers purchaſe,
And not ſo much as dreame of toyle, or danger,
Sleight what they are ignorant of: yet you (my Lord)
May know, if cold lazy recompences injure
Our high deſerts ſuch uſage kils outright:
True Contareno, that is their intent.
L'as we bring no diſeaſes home with us, unleſſe valour be one; no meager troopes of thinne ſtarvelings, that they ſhould feare a famine from our commerce, we have fed high, though ſomewhat irreverently: nor returne wee in our old skins, blew coats, thrum'd cappes, that harbour ſo much vermine, they might feare we'de ſcatter one of Egypts plagues among them; and make e'm all lowſie.
Enjoy the freedome of your ſpeech; yet know
That they are ignorant of theſe in junctions,
And for a teſtimony of their loves
Unto your faire deſervings, are all ready
To meete their Countries patriots, (ſo they terme you)
After their ancient cuſtome, with proceſſion;
Shew us an enemy then, or danger that is reall,
And not the birth of feare, and we'le returne:
Nay, you may ſtay at home too:
At home?
'Tis ſo:
Our ſons of peace have caught a ſurfeit, & would be phyſick't
for't. ha! doe they mutiny? doe the fierce rammes advance
their hornes, to batter downe the walls that kept them ſafe?
Be more compos'd and heare me, though you hate
Treaſon as ill as cowardice, yet I muſt
Tell you, you're the men have brought
The enemy home to Naples, I meane the army▪
For what leſſe can I terme ſuch a vaſt body,
Conſiſting of ſuch diſproportion'd members;
Fleſh't with the ſpoyles of fertile Sicily,
Enrich't with what a happy ſoyle can yeeld
To an inſulting conquerour; fed too
With glorious hopes of eaſe, and plenty?
You know how hard a taske you underwent
To governe them abroad, when tam'd by want,
Thirſt, hunger, heate, and cold; judge then what ſway
Authority can beare, when by this change
They are growne mad, and mutinous; who ſhall
Compoſe their private jarres, and quarrels, when
Their full cups adde fury to their pride?
Enough: this ſpeech hath cut of all reply,
Beſides, you know Sicily is now in Naples;
The Prince a captive to his Priſoner:
How farre his eaſie nature may be wrought upon
Is yet uncertaine, his yeares though they have outdone
Hiſtory, are not yet grown up to the ripeneſſe of experience
For my ſeverity; (I'de gladly have
You call it by another name;) it is
My duty, (if not yours) I take it, to be vigilant.
My Lord, thinke what I ſpake was but to gaine
Satisfaction, which you have amply given.
And what ſhould I doe i'th City? that retaine
No more of my education there, than what I gain'd
In the Artillery yard: my company
Would be ſhun'd there more than poverty,
Or a diſeaſe; I ſhould be interdicted
The Court, meerly becauſe I'me out of faſhion,
Or for feare of challenges — Troth for the Ladies,
The homelieſt pleaſe mee beſt; I am as much
Too rough hewen for them, as they're to poliſht for me:
My conſtitution requires a diſpatch
I'th vaulting buſineſſe, beyond that of tedious
Niceties, and wittie prologues.
Gongales, and Petrucchio's regiment
I've left aboard to guard the fleete, your's muſt
Make ſafe the Caſtle, and the land forts; you
Cannot endeare mee more than by your circumſpection;
The Citty will be all in triumphat
Theſe nuptials, twixt our divided houſes;
Thinke theſe Sicilian's, though you have wonne
And forc't them to groane beneath your ſword, may yet
At heart be traitours; if not, oportunitie
May make them ſo; at ſuch a time as this
Surprize is eaſie; hiſtory hath ſuch examples,
Unfortunate ones; and you'de be loath to adde
Unto the number.
You have chalk't out a way
That leads to honour, and we are haſtie
To purſue it:
I ſhall report you noble.
And Generall, de'e heare, if you meet with
Ere a maſculine feminine, that has impudence
Enough, to follow an army, a wench of twagging hanches,
And full things, fend her to mee, ſhe ſhall be my laundreſſe.
Good Captaine be leſſe wild, and uſe mee,
To the loſſe of honour.
Didſt meet with him?—he's here already.
— why this diſtance?
Is't in the power of ſeverall climes to breake
Our ſympathies in nature? true, I have
Bin long eſtrang'd from you, not from your vertue;
Why then ſhould you deny your ſtrict embraces?
Valenzo! you are growne too great, and glorious
For my friendſhip; become a theame for Princes,
Whoſe worthy acts inrich their high diſcourſe:
The greedy multitude, ſnatching each word,
As it falls from 'em, weare your praiſe
As their beſt ornament!
How have I loſt my friend,
And ſee Piero, for being ſo thou would'ſt
Nor mocke, nor flatter me!
Alas Valenzo!
You prejudice your Princes wiſdome, and
Your owne juſt merits, thoſe favours yet
Were never worne by them, that had not firſt
Deſerv'd them.
You meane theſe titles, vaine and emptie names;
Let mee enjoy thee ſtill, I'le diſinveſt
My ſelfe of all additions, can but ſwell
Our pride, not vertue up; my Anceſtours
Have left mee rich enough in title to
Your friendſhip, and fore I forfeit that! —
That wee could mingle ſoules. —
Though you be prodigall of your affections,
Yet be not cruell to your Charintha,
Who muſt needs ſuffer in this wilfull ſcorne,
You throw on that your valour dearly purchaſt.
Charintha mine! I hold all worth in her.
Were you as monſtrous for impiety, as now
You are fam'd for vertue, ſuch was her pious thrift,
In treaſuring up her cleane and humble prayers,
You could not die unpardon'd, every houre
(As you are alwaies lyable to danger,)
Can witneſſe, with what forward zeale ſhe begg'd
Heaven, to avert the ſtroake before it came:
We have taken ſo much pleaſure in her orizons,
That even prophane men to have heard her pray,
Would turne devout, were there no merit in't.
No more; my reaſon yeelds unto my paſſion.
And 'tis a joy requires mee meete it with
My beſt temper; I would not ſurfeit
Nor ſwallow it too greedily; ſome light mixture
Of griefe would give a reliſh to't; tell me, come—
What face weares the Court? how lookes it
On our new dignities? Envie (like the Sunne)
Darts her beames hotteſt on the riſing bankes:
Ʋrſini the grand favorite, is at Court,
And has his Princes boſome?
That's his ſanctuary,
His ſafety lies there, yet (though I profeſſe
No augury) I foreſee, and read
His fall, all theſe vaſt glories which he boaſts,
Are built upon the ruines of Alberto,
His tombe-ſtone is the baſis of that building,
Which we admire, but thinke not ſafe.
There was a noble houſe ſoone loſt.
Sooner (I beleeve) than t' will be forgotten;
But what was that Frederico, Albert's ſonne?
One that with his father's vertues
Inherited his unhappy fate, young he was,
And valiant; receiv'd and knowne ſo.
Had hee beene leſſe fam'd, he had not yet
Beene number'd with the dead; (you are my friend▪
My Lord▪) I ſpeake my thoughts, and freely;—
Ʋrſini endures no rivall.
I've maintain'd
Faire correſpondencie with him at diſtance,
But like not his embracements.
T' is dangerous to be neere him;
There's ſuch an Antipathy, twixt him, and vertue,
He weares it's ruine in his lookes.
'Tis ſtrange,
A Prince ſo wiſe and vertuours ſhould not deſcry
His falſhood through his vifour; or at leaſt
Lend eare to the loud cries of wronged Innocents.
He hath no uſe of either eare, or eye,
But what his lov'd Ʋrſini lends him; hee
Onely rules, and limits his affections;
Suffers him not to caſt a frowne or ſmile,
But where he pleaſes; his next indearement, is
His care o'th Princeſſe, our Sicilian captive:
Whom ſorrow for her fathers death, (ſlaine in
The warre, by him that was deſign'd her lover;
Our fam'd Prince Ferrando,) has brought
Into a deſperate melancholy; what reward
He expects, I cannot tell, unleſſe it be
The Crowne: you have heard of her ſtrange diſtemper?
And wonder at the ſudden change:
I've ſeene her, maugre all thoſe ſudden feares,
Her tender age, and womanhood could urge;
Stand in the head of troopes, that we ev'n fear'd
They had engag'd ſome Goddeſſe in their quarrell;
Beare up againſt the enemy, when her men
Lay ſcatter'd in the plaines, like the ripe eares
The wealthy harveſt yeelds into the Grange.
I know not how, but ſure ſh'as made the King
Wilde; he has ſuch divers fits, as he had learn'd
To be myſterious in's paſſion; I have ſeene him weepe,
Like a fond mother o're her tender babe,
Whom too rude fate has raviſh't unripe from her:
Then rave, and curſe, talke as he wanted reaſon
To guide his ſpeeches Organ: or ſoft ſleepe
To recall his ſtragling ſenſes:
Mutter diſtracted thoughts in broken words,
Untill he lights upon her name, and then
He bowes at the recitall; bleſſes himſelfe
In th' often repetition of Calantha.
There's ſomewhat in't, her paſſion ſhould lye hid
So long, and now breake out ſo violently.
She rather ſeem'd too thrifty, than too prodigall
Of teares, when ſhe left Sicily; and taught us
To call't our chiefeſt happineſſe, we ſhould have
A Queene, that raign'd at home, that bore more ſway
Over the people of her breſt, than country.
Alas poore maid! why now ſhe's a true captive
To paſſion, and to Naples: had ſhee beene ſtill
Queene over ber great ſelfe, none could have ſaid
She'd had beene unhappy; now, and not till now
She's truly miſerable.
'Tis holineſſe to pittie her.
Our teares are better ſpent upon her ſorrowes,
Than our owne ſinnes, ſhe talkes ſo prettily,
Clothes griefe in ſuch a ſad, and pious garbe,
So void of any rudeneſſe, that wee ſee
Compoſedneſſe in diſtraction, reaſon in madneſſe;
She never walkes but when ſhe's led along,
And that ſo faintly, as ſhe had not ſpirits
Enough to actuate her tender limbes:
Want of meate and ſleepe have made her ſeeme
A living coarſe; to ſee her weepe, you'de feare
That every drop were her owne funerall teare.
—Hell, and furies!—
Oh! oh! oh!
A Moore! a divell! a meere divell! his very lookes ſpake him ſo, but for his club-foote, his damnable club-foote, (Aſſe that I was not to ſee it, I'me ſure I feele it now,) 'tis an infallible ſigne: This damn'd Divell did I bring to Court, and preferr'd him; but I'me ſerv'd well enough, he that doe's the Divell a good turne ſhall be ſure to bee thus rewarded. If I ſhould chance to die a ſinner (as 'tis ten to one but I ſhall,) hee'le know mee againe, for I ſhall carry his markes to my grave: becauſe my Lord Ʋrſini was pleas'd to exchange ſome few words with him in private, he grew ſo inſolent, that I going to ſtrike him (in paſſion, in choller I confeſſe) he falls a kicking me in'th open Court.
And looks, as if he would, have ſpet fire; but had I not knowne him to be a divell indeed, I'de ſpet fire with him.
How? ſo hot Signiour?
Men in anger may do anything.
Anything? with your leave Sir,
And you're a foole, and an aſſe.—
Do'e find it ſo by my eares?—
And I'le try what you are—
Draw i'th Court? I muſt ſee the peace kept.
Gentlemen, you know I'me paſſionate, cholericke, ſomewhat cholericke.
And I intend to phyſicke you for't; here's that will allay your heat.
'Tis downe already.
I won't be jeer'd.
Wee intend no abuſe, Signiour, wee onely come to gratulate your good fortune, you are turn'd favourite of late.
It has pleas'd his Majeſty to take ſome ſmall notice of mee.
Yes, and the Ladies ſpeake high, & gloriouſly of you.
Of mee?
You could not but obſerve it as you walk't the ſtreets: you are the onely object they gaze at.
In troth I did not thinke—
Come you are modeſt now.
Who was't you bleſs't to'ther day with a favour?
I give a favour?
Why man? you meant it ſhould be ſeene.
I ſlip't a point indeed in a Counteſſes chamber.
Slip't a point?
Drop't it, drop't it, but t' was not worth the taking up.
And yet I've heard her boaſt it as a ſpeciall gift from your owne hands.
Indeed I flung it ſomewhat ſcornfully, becauſe ſhee was very importunate; troth I was angry, ſhee would have none but that.
Wer't not for this filthy fretting humour of yours, I could tell you—
What good Grutti?
Of a Lady.
By my beſt hopes in love with me, is ſhe not?
I'me not ſo happy as to be acquainted with her intents, but I have heard her in my Lord Ʋrſini's preſence commend you highly.
Prithee who is't?
The Lady Charintha.
The Lady Charintha; what ſhould I do with her? ſhe's honeſt, the onely preciſe Madame of the Court.
They that drop the moſt beads, may commit the moſt ſinnes, but wer't not ſo, you have a kind of tempting preſence, and beſides—
Oh! I underſtand you, ſhe's his Lordſhip's reverſion.
St, not a word.
I'le to her preſently.
This is my Lord Ʋrſini's plot, to ſlander that Ladies chaſtitie.
And he has charg'd me, to whiſper't about Court, that he has enjoy'd her.
I wonder much, fince he ſeekes her himſelfe in marriage, why hee ſhould thus traduce her.
On my conſcience ſhe's vertuous.
His plots are darke, and myſtie, but come, prithee let's leave this talke, we have ſtate knowledge enough already to make us melancholy: I'le ſhew thee a ſcene of mirth—
Where lies it?
This Phyſitian that was ſent for hither from the Univerſitie to our melancholy Princeſſe, they ſay, indures no muſicke, and I've prepar'd a whole conſort of theſe gut-ſcrapers this morning to ſalute him; no doubt but hee'le bee be very bountifull.
If the varlets can make good uſe of his charity.
I wonder much the Court endures him here; he's an odde humerſome fellow.
His art priviledges him.
My Lord.—
Conduct that Moore hither, and ſee wee have all privacie that may be.
Hee ſhall weare my life upon his ſword that enters without my leave.
See, he comes: here's one that's fit to kill a King,
A thing, whoſe ſoule is nothing but a ſpot
Tranſmitted from foule parricides, whoſe thoughts
Weare a more deepe and horrid blacke, than that
Which ſpreads upon his body—
My Ziſco welcome.
This day my Lord —
No more, I know what thou would'ſt ſay: I promiſ'd
To endeare thee to Ferrando's love, and knowledge,
Are you according to my inſtructions ready
To meete all his demands?
Perfect.
With a forg'd Commendamus from his holineſſe?
—Of my ſtout ſervice done againſt the Turkes
In the Lepanto battle, where I turn'd Chriſtian,
And was baptiz'd in mine owne blood.
'Tis well, but how ſtands't thou reſolv'd for our deſigne?
Unmov'd as deſtiny.
—Could you have told me of it in that minute
I ſhould have acted it, I'de owe you for
The glory of a ſinne, I might have boaſted of;
What we intend, nere riſes to that height
As what we act, becauſe t'may prove abottive,
And periſh in the thought, and for ſuch crimes,
I onely have repentance.
But he's a Prince —
Why there's the honour on't,
Killing the head, I kill the body too,
And at one blow lay a whole Kingdome gaſping.
—One upon whom attends a guard of men,
And Angels, on whoſe brow divinity
Sits character'd, a Majeſtie that darts
Fork't arrows into the guilty ſoule, and ſtrikes
A palſied feare through every limbe and joynt
Of the murderer.
Fancie, fancie this,
I'me proofe againſt it; Ile take him in's cups
When he's drunke, betray him to a rape,
Or fowler ſinne, then kill him in the act.
Whom?
The King.
Traytour.
'Tis as ſoone done as thought of.
He never lov'd thee Ziſco, nor was knowne
By ſpeciall favours to deſerve thee to him;
But he has made me great, worne me in's ſoule;
His father tooke mee up, when I was nothing,
Bequeath'd me to him, as a care hereditary,
Belonging to the Crowne, plac't mee ſo neere him,
I've growne, and ſpread like a tall mountaine Cedar.
And dare encounter lightning, ſtand a thunder-bolt,
Or enrag'd winds; contend with that high influence
By which you flouriſh, yet nere feare a blaſting:
His favour is a tyranny; it is
The pride of Princes, to be thought Gods here
On earth, daring to mocke omnipotence,
To create them favourites, ſet them aloft
In their owne ſpheare, till remote Kingdomes gaze
At their prodigious height, then in an inſtant
Shoote them from thence, like falling meteors:
Had he not lov'd you firſt, you could not be
The object of his hate, you were too poore,
And ſafe, when 'twas, to have him glory in
Your ruines: innocence below enjoyes
Security, and quiet ſleepes, murder's not heard of,
Treachery is a ſtranger there, they enjoy
Their friends, and loves, without raviſhment,
They are all equall, every one's a Prince,
And rules himſelfe, they ſpeake not with their eyes,
Or browes, but with the tongue, & that too dwells i'th heart:
Were it but thus at Court,
your fam'd Marqueſſe had not fallen.—
Alberto: ha.
Why ſtart you Sir?
'Tis he: Frederico.
Oh that man! he was unhappie in his Princes love.
Your honours are no more your owne than his:
'Twas the ſame favour that conferr'd them both,
And the ſame frowne may take 'em both away:
He lets you onely grow till you are envy'd,
And then you'le fall unpittied.
I have learn'd cruelty from him:
Ziſco, thou ſhalt applaud the myſteries,
The rare contrivances of my revenge;
My fate lyes in his breſt, but this, this arme
Shall raviſh't thence.
Now your rage becomes you:
When Princes put off their humanity,
Murders, a holy ſinne, you may be good,
And fall like him, whoſe aged head lies low,
Low in the duſt.
Againe? this confirmes it.
The groanes of whoſe ſunke houſe, are heard
To affright ſtrangers; whilſt Naples yet
Stain'd with the purple tyde, his ſoule ſwam forth in,
Do's bluſh at it's owne guilt: his ſonne Frederico
(You know) was loſt at Sicily in a croud.
'Tis ſo reported, yet I beleeve—
My Lord.
That he was ſlaine at Ferrando's command.
Perhaps and by a ſlave.
Felicia too, unhappy maid —
Your ſiſter, —I there,
Now thou ſtrik'ſt home.
Firſt wonne to his embraces
By vollies of falſe oathes, her virgin honour
Rifled, her chaſt wombe ſwolne with the impoſthume
Of his ſalt luſt, then torne with ſpight from's boſome,
Raviſh't, murder'd, and by whom? (I could hate my ſelfe,
For taking birth amongſt ſuch,) curſed Moores:
Were ſhee your enemy, her cauſe, and ſex
Would challenge pitty; but you lov'd her dearly,
The Miſtreſſe you ador'd; who then can thinke
But that your ſoule is blacke, and ſtain'd as his,
That are thus tame?
Ziſco, th'aſt raiſ'd a flame within this breaſt,
Nought but his blood can quench:—thanks to my brame;—
It ſhall be ſo;— The fatall raven croakes;
'Tis ominous, if he outlive this night
We are no more: —Come we'le goe plot within.
Here's his, ſtudie,
Is he there?
Yet do but obſerve his poſture:
How he ſits like a reverend Ape painted upon a Gally-pot, with an Urinall in's hand.
Faith Signior, in my judgement y'have wrong'd your ſimile.
He's caſting the Princeſſe's water.
Not upon his beard I hope.
Reading in't—
The colour of's copper-noſe.
All the plots of Sicily; I warrant the poore Lady has not a thought eſcapes him.
The Sex has beene allwayes accounted open, yet I neere knew a State betray'd that way; ſome Ladies would be in a pittifull caſe, if their ſecrets could be read in their Gentlewomans—
Foh, they're mere ſives.
—Come, come, theſe are his Lordſhips Lodgings,
He came home late yeſternight, and I beleeve
Is ſcarce ſtirring yet. — Your laſt new tune,
This muſicke ſure will make him dance antick.
Not yet? poxe on him, he's a ſleepe in's ſtudie: ha you noe loud muſicke? perhaps his Lordſhip likes that better.
So, ho, oh, ho, ho, murder, murder, murder,
Enter Hieronymo from his naked bed.
Hieronymo was drunke then laſt night, he lay in's clothes.
Rogues baſe rogues, ſcabby rogues, pockie rogues, out, our raſcals, abuſe his Majeſties Phyſitian, offer to play under my noſe, foh, how the rogues ſtinke: farts, poyſon'd farts, foh, theſe meager-chapt raſcalls eate ſo much brimſtone, and ſalt butter, that they outſtinke hell: had theſe farts beene let in Wales, they would have bred the plague there, — let mee ſee— who ſhould this bee. that ſhould abuſe mee thus, let mee but finde him out, and be he the beſt i'th Court, it ſhall goe hard but I'le have a quaint poiſon for him, ſhall worke a little otherwiſe with him than this has done with me.
The beſt i'th Court?
A quaint poyſon for him.
Do's your retiredneſſe lead you to treaſon? let's apprehend him:
For a Traytour.
Nay good Gentlemen, what ſhall I do? I'me undone.
A quaint poyſon!— ſo it was.
And for the beſt i'th Court.
In troth, Signiours, I meant it not.
'Twas too much you ſaid it, Sir.
Doe but conceale mee.—
Then you'le confeſſe, and bring us in as parties.
May I be hang'd if I doe; beſides, what ever ſecret diſeaſe you have about you, I'le cure you gratis.
And thinke no more of poyſoning them, that brought the muſitians to your window; 'twas our plot Sir.
I forgive you, and pray Gentlemen uſe mee for your Phyſitian when ever the ſtate of your bodies requires it. I'le learne ſecrecie of you.
Agreed.
Faith Grutty, this plot was well thought on; I could finde in my heart to truſt him.
You may; and hence forward I'le ſinne with leſſe ſcruple.
'Tis hee— I am confirm'd: Frederico, Albert's
Sonne— I'le let him live conceal'd, he's a ſure
Inſtrument, and will ſerve mee for all turnes.
—humph, —could he thinke his puling ſiſters,
Or his Fathers, wrongs, ſate ſo heavy on my heart-ſtrings,
That I could be mov'd to kill my Prince
In their revenge? Indeed I lov'd her once,
Till I enjoy'd her, but ſhe's loſt, ſo is her memory;
I've higher thoughts now; Charintha is my aime,
Ferrando's niece; next heire to the Crowne;
Mine by his promiſe: can I but divorce
Valenzo from her love, together with
His life, I'me ſafe; 'tis that I am contriving:
He is my rivall both in a Miſtreſſe, and
A Princes favour.—Who waits within there? ho.
My Lord.
Have you perform'd what I commanded you concerning the Lady?
Charintha? 'tis done Sir; Fungoſo ſtreight intends a viſit there.
Leave mee— 'Tis well, if this ſlander can but pull on murder upon him, or any of my ſervants, from Valenzo's hand, his head ſhall anſwer for't; I am his judge,
(My power over the King makes mee ſo:)
And he ſhall find mee cruell; then the fort is mine,
In which his ſouldiers are in garriſon;
This night the French, and Genowayes intend
To ceize our emptie fleete, that rides i'th harbour;
Thoſe men I have indear'd, —
Mount, mount my ſoule, let no feare weigh thee downe.
He ſtakes his life that thus caſts at a Crowne.
This muſick'd dull, ſtrike higher, higher yet.
Oh! oh! oh! I can hold no longer, furies, divels, oh! oh!
What ailes our Phyſitian there?
'Tis an odde humour my Lord: any kinde of muſicke is leſſe pleaſing to him, than the voice of Mandrakes.
Ceaſe there, your accents are diſtaſtfull.
I am abus'd, groſſely abuſ'd, but i'le be reveng'd — Sir Your pardon.
Riſe and proceed.
As I was telling you, you muſt in every thing humour her; in each word, each action, the nature of her diſeaſe requires it, which yeelds not unto cure, till it be wrought up to'th height.
Still ſuch a ſadneſſe Ladies dwell on your browes? truſt mee, it misbecomes you: ſhall's tread a luſty meaſure? I'me light, and active.
But griefe is heavy.
Thus wee'le ſhake it off, and thus.
Pray, why de'e uſe mee ſo? you bind my armes,
As if I meant to ſight, an they were looſe,
Indeed I wo'not, truſt me, I'le kill no body.
Pray unbind her.
I never kill'd the pooreſt worme, or fly,
Though 'twere againſt my will, but that I wept for't,
And begg'd a pardon too, for ſure 'twas murder.
Marry was it.
Poore Lady, ſhe's diſtracted!
Death on my fury, this ſight brands my beſt actions with a ſtaine too deepe for penitence to waſh away.
This exceeds cruelty, they will not let mee eate;
Looke I am pin'd almoſt to nothing.
A meere skeleton.
Had I but ſtrength enough to ſtruggle with heaven
By prayer, I'de expiate their ſinnes, though they
Continu'd to be cruell.
Good Lady weepe not, for if you continue
Theſe teares, my eyes will drop.
Yes, yes, they will drop out, oh happineſſe!
Would mine would do ſo too; they ſmart extreamly;
Wer't not a curteſie, I thinke ere this
y'had pull'd 'em forth.
Lady, I ſay weepe not.
I ſay, ben't you a coxcombe.
Take away the foole, we are much indiſpos'd
To laugh to day, good heaven, they flour my miſeries:
'Tis not well done, you may be ſicke your ſelves,
Before you die; want one to bid God comfort,
When I am dead.
My Lord, a word— you are not priviledg'd
To do men wrong: you have done me one,
Pray take notice —
Of what?
S'life he won't challenge him.
The old Lord's afraid on't.
—How patient I am.
'Tis worth the noting, vertue is rare in you.
You Sir, do'e heare? they ſay you'le put
Poyſon in my drinke; do, do, plot on, and be
A politicke foole, I ſee into your thoughts,
My eye-ſight's cleare, thanke heaven, and yet l've liv'd
A long long while.
Did you heare that?
'Twas ſhrewd.
Foureſcore, and ten, you cannot be leſſe Madame.
Some ere this would have us'd ſpectacles, but I Muſt ſuffer all.
View all the monuments, and tombes in Naples,
And if you find griefe carv'd there in ſuch varietie of poſtures
As theſe women ſtand in, ſell mee for a ſtatue.
This ſpectacle hath made mee one.
Good heavens, have you a curſe beyond this?
Throw it on me; my guilt deſerves it, and
Somewhat beyond your vengeance: afflict not Innocence,
It will be call'd your crime, not mine, that ſhee
Is miſerable.
Looke ye, now I thinke on't, I've a fine deviſe
Come in my head, what thinke you of a play?
Wee'le act a play, a tragedy, wilt not be well?
Wee'le have a King in't, and he, (do'e underſtand?) he ſhall be
Kill'd, methinkes you'd act it handſomely.
My Lord, you'd play the foole in't, an old doating foole rarely.
Now the curre bites.
If you'd lend mee your gowne, and cap, I ſhould do't better; then, a noyſe of Muſitians would be excellent.
Well, remember this.
Faith ſo I ſhall, as often as I am diſpos'd to laugh.
No matter though, Ferrando, now I conſider better on't, you ſhall not, you'd not do it well; do't to'th life, I'le not give a pin for't elſe: let me alone for one, I'de act that ſame Kings daughter, I can command a teare or two: if need bee, perhaps a ſigh; if 'twere to rave, or grow ſtarke mad, I ſhould learne too: alas theſe playes are pretty moralls of our lives; fine, harmeleſſe, innocent ſports.
Her madneſſe growes ſtrongly upon her.
But Madame, pray what part ſhall I act?
Thou Sylvio? — th'art a pretty boy, but that thou weep'ſt ſo much; I feare th'aſt ſpoyl'd thy face; with a little paint 'twould ſerve turn: thou ſhalt act ſome Lady in diſguiſe.
How truly do I doe it?
One that has beene in love.
I ſhould do that ſcurvily.
Why?
Becauſe I can love none but you, and would be loath to diſſemble, though but in jeſt.
Come, thou ſhal't not then; thou ſhalt be my page ſtill.
Indeed Madame I ſhould dye if I were otherwiſe: But pray, when will you be well? you have bin ſicke a great while.
Yes, and ſhall be ſo till I am dead; ſay nothing Sylvio,
I'le ſteale away from them, when they ſhall not know of't.
Not alone, I'le dye with you, and be buried with you if you will give mee leave.
Ferrando, you will ſee it done?
What Madame?
See us both buried, laid by my Father, he was a good, good King: build us a tombe as laſting as our names.
A very rich one Madame; I'le enſure you they're about it, with ſtately columnes, curious antickes, & glorious imagery.
There, let us both be cut in ſpotleſſe marble,
It never ſhall upbraid us, we were innocent as that;
But innocence is no guard, it could not keepe
The tyrant out: my father's, let his be cut
Juſt as he fell, make a ſword pierce his heart,
And let it bleed too, yet don't hurt the Statua,
I would not have you wound it, when 'tis like
My Father, like a King, leſt hee that do's it,
Learne thence to be a traitour, and in time
Wound you ſo too, Ferrando.
Mercy good heavens!
Pray why do'e weepe? wee ſhall all ſleepe quietly
When we are dead, there is no noyſe of chaines,
We ſhall not dreame of priſons, rackes or whips:
But every night ſhall ſee the Gods deſcend
On our ſoft ſlumbers, and kiſſe away our miſeries.
Ladies, you'le ſee mee ſhrowded decently,
When I am dead, downe in the meade you, where
Grimme Pluto ſtole his Proſerpine, are ſtill
The flowers ſhe ſcatter'd: goe, bring 'em hither,
And ſtrew me ore with 'em; ſhe was a virgin chaſt,
And I have heard that flowers of their gathering,
Will never dye; quickly make haſt, 'tis ſaid
we're very noyſome after death, I would not
Offend then, cauſe I can't aske forgiveneſſe:
Before I die I'le breake my heart, and give
A piece to every one to weare in's boſome,
And you ſhall have it whole, Ferrando: pray
Uſe it as you would her you lov'd, while I
To quit theſe miſeries will go pray, and die.
Now let me alone with her.
Die? and let her, what ſhould wee do with her here an ſhee be mad? I hope Ladies you have more wit than to die o'th ſullens.
Griefe dares not be ſo rude, did you but checke it.
Las Sir, our miſeries have taught it inſolence,
Rather your owne indulgence, Madame.
Pleaſure's the ſame in Naples as in Sicily.
So are our loſſes too.
The eyes ſad flux is tributary due
Unto your dead Lords memories, I confeſſe it,
It carries vertue in't, but how? whilſt it is moderate
Piſh, let the dead care for themſelves:
Did you but ſee how ugly ſorrow lookes.—
And then how fruitleſſe.
Yes, where 'tis falſe, but wee
Have griefe as reall as our miſery.
Fun, thy judgement Fun, what think'ſt thou of theſe Ladies?
In my judgement, (ſince your Lordſhip is pleas'd to make uſe of my judgement,) which indeed (my good Lord) is very ſmall.
I perceive thou haſt one good qualitie, thou wilt ſpeake truth.
Truth (my Lord) is precious; but I ſay in that little judgement I have: (judgement, (ſince your Lordſhip was pleas'd to terme it ſo) but that's all one,) in my minde they'r mightily taken; —
With what?
A paſſion (my good Lord,) which the learned call griefe.
Thy judgement againſt any mans in Naples.
My Lord, I praiſe not my ſelfe, yet I can prove by this that they are in love.
As how?
Griefe alwayes followes love; if griefe follow love, love go's before, ergo, they're in love.
So, ſuppoſe now—
(My good Lord) I doe ſuppoſe.
What?
Even what your Lordſhip pleaſes.
Suppoſe then, any of 'em ſhould be in love with mee, would you? —
Yes my Lord.
What?
Any thing.—
Bring her to my chamber.
— But pimpe, it will contaminate.—
A fooles head, will it not? I ſay you ſhall bring her.
Nay then I will not bring her; ſlid, ſhall bring her? ſhall bring her?
Nay but Fun.—Pox on him, he'le diſcover mee.
Bid me forſake heaven, my vertue, honour,
And all that's good —
Fie, fie.
You doe not ſee mee weepe,
Diſtill mine eyes into a dew,
I will not ſhed one teare, not vent a ſigh,
No not in private.
So, this becomes you —
I have ſhooke off all
Thoſe weights that clogg'd my boſome— Wee can ſmile,
Shewes it not hand ſome?
Such a ſmile nere bleſt
The cheekes of Peace.
How art thou loſt Ʋrſini!
Diſcredited to truth by this vile flattery!
Thou ſhouldſt have ſaid, heaven ſmil'd, when ſet with clouds
Blacke as nights ſwarthy mantle, when the aire
Breakes out in hideous crackes, that cleave the Temple,
And ſtrike dead the devout Prieſt at the Altar:
For this an eaſie faith would have beleev'd,
As having leſſe of contradiction in't:
My ſoule is rapt with furies, here they gnaw,
Like knotted Adders wrapt about my heart.
Oh! my ſides ſwell as they would breake, they want
A hoope, lend mee your arme, —
Circled in theſe.
Embraces, you are ſafe: collect your ſelfe
(Deare Prince;) and let not paſſion triumph in
The conqueſt of your reaſon; thinke of your honour,
Your name, and ſpreading glories; how they dye.
I'me blacke and ugly; all
A whole ſtaine already: Oh Calantha,
Thou goeſt to heaven, to tell Ferrando kill'd thee;
And thoſe bleſt troopes of Saints will wreake thy murder,
There's not one but ſuffers in't.
—The King!
Helpe here — Oh! Bentivoglio, come,
Come practice here, and raiſe your ſelfe a trophey
In his recovery.
Whence this ſudden fit? — My Lord Ferrando:
Oh Calantha.
She lives,
Calantha lives.
What breath is that, that mockes us
With a falſe ſound of our Calantha's life?
She lives; yet let old time adde to his age
But one ſhort paire of minutes, ſhee ſhall be
No more:
No more diſtracted: next houre ſhall render
Calantha to your boſome faire, and well;
As rich in all the ornaments of minde,
As when ſhe firſt bleſt Naples with her preſence.
Truth's but a name: 'tis falſe, by heaven 'tis falſe;
Did not I leave her ſunke upon her bed,
Into a ſoft, but everlaſting ſleepe?
So you ſuppos'd; and I have caus'd her women
To wrap her in her ſhrowd, then ſit downe by her,
To weepe, and pray, as if 'twere for the dead.
As if? — abuſe mee not, thy art
Shall be no priviledge; ſhe's gone, ſhe's gone.
Ben't ſo paſſionate; but heare him.
Ʋrſini, I have done.
After a ſtrict enquiry into the nature
Of her diſeaſe, I finde it by each ſymptome,
A melancholy deepe, not dangerous:
The parents which produc't it, griefe and abſtinence
From meate, and ſleepe; which as it hath encrea'ſt.
Has brought her now to ſuch an extreame dotage,
That ſhe do's verily ſuppoſe her ſelfe,
While living dead: In which falſe ſuppoſition
I've caus'd her women to continue her,
By ſhrowding her to her owne deſire,
Strewing her o're with flowers, then weeping o're her
What helpe from this?
Much Sir, this will worke her
Into a ſtrong opinion, that ſhee's dead
Indeed, to confirme which I have prepar'd
Some two or three, trick't up in the ſame faſhion
With ſhrowdes, and chaplets, who ſhall ſit downe by her,
Walke, talke, eate, drinke, ſleepe, in all which actions
Calantha will ſtreight imitate them: Now I have prepar'd
A potion which they ſhall give her,
To make her ſleepe, the onely remedy
Of her diſeaſe; this I lately practis'd in the French Court,
Yet loſt no credit by the experiment.
You may beleeve him Sir, he's one of the skilfulleſt Phyſitians our age has boaſted of, Padua is proud of ſuch an ornament.
Thus my Virginio.
My beſt, my dear'ſt Virginio: thou doſt breath
A muſicke to my ſoule, cures my diſtemper:
Thou art an honeſt man, we'le found a Colledge,
With a large penſion to maintaine the Students
In thy rare ſcience; thou ſhalt governe there,
And when thou dyeſt, we'le build a monument
Unto thy name, taller than Aegypts Pyramides.
Theſe o're your Court promiſes,
I'le onely ſtudie ſome revenge, for you old Lord,
Then I'le returne to'th Univerſitie, & dream on 'em.
For thee Ʋrſini, we will onely live
To do thee honour, that ſhall be our glory;
The world ſhall know thee great, and envie thee
Thy ſhare, both in our kingdome, and our ſoule.
Your goodneſſe, my Lord, is as unlimited
As heavens.
You're ſad Ʋrſini: has our Niece
Given you no cauſe of joy, by her ſoft anſwer?
None, —
The obſtacle? tell mee; ift' be any in Court ſhe affects, by my honour I'le remove him.
None but this, that ſhe's too much wedded to Heaven, and her devotions.
If that be all, ſhee's thine.
A bliſſe, I would for ever live t'enjoy.—
With mee?—
What would that Moore?
He has letters here from his holineſſe,
In which I'me certifi'd, that he lately turn'd Chriſtian,
And has well deſerv'd i'th warres,
Againſt the Turke;— The King admits you to
His hand.
I am in heaven too ſoone.
We'le view his holineſſe commendations,
Then heare this Moore, diſcourſe the fight at large;
My griefes begin to vaniſh; they'r much lighter
Than of late they were, I know not why,
But 'tis a good preſage.
Be neere us.
Thus farre I'me ſafe, heaven is juſt, and ſmiles
On my deſigne, now all that's powerfull
To move my ſpirits, to incite revenge
Appeare, if not to ſight, to memory;
Alberto: father: and my deare, deare ſiſter,
Poore loſt Felicia! — Ha! he groanes, I heare him;
Shee ſighs poore maid, wrings her hands, cries alas,
Looke looke I ſee 'em, there, there, ſacred ſhades —
Vaniſh't, and I'me deluded; no they'r angry
At my delay:
I'le haſt,—for that revenge muſt needs be juſt
Which puniſhes two ſinnes, murder, and luſt.
Happy ſoules that hither come
To enjoy Elizium;
Rob'd of bodies though you be,
Y'are richer by ſuch poverty;
For with them y'have put off paine,
Making of your loſſe, your gaine:
Now your ſoules may meete and kiſſe,
Bathing in eternall bliſſe;
Nor can you ſurfeit, each delight
Whets, and quiets appetite;
Yet the joyes you feed upon
Ne're encreaſe, nor ere are done;
Freely you may taſte, and spend 'em,
Yet nor you, nor time can end 'em:
Where without a fading ray.
Yee enjoy eternall day,
Trace theſe groves, whoſe every path
Myriads of true lovers hath;
Where disporting, you may prove
A new, but happier, purer love:
Such, whoſe flames, though th'ever ſhine
Yet conſume not, but refine.
I am too tame Piero, hold mee not,
Leſt in deferring of a puniſhment,
I make the ſinne mine owne; had all malice
Dwel't in one tongue, all ſlander too beene hous'd
Under the ſame roofe with it, and both buſie
To plot the ruine of my owne faire name;
I could have ſtood unmov'd: but my Charintha!
Heavens! ye ought t'inſpire me with revenge,
Such as you'd call a Synode to contrive,
That I may meete this hell-borne raviſher
Of my Charintha's ſpotleſſe fame, with vengeance
As mighty as his crime.
Her vertue is
It ſelfe an antidote againſt all ſuch poyſons;
His breath no more can ſtaine that innocent whiteneſſe,
Which ever dwell't upon her ſoule, than hee,
That in a ſond maliciouſneſſe would throw
Dirt at the Sunne, could ſulley the leaſt ray;
Her memory, when hee, and's lying marble
Conſume to duſt, and rottenneſſe, ſhall dwell
On earth like a perfume, after the ſacrifice,
Pleaſing to God, and men.
If I have us'd
Any immodeſt braveries, appear'd
In wanton gaudineſſe, a hot temptation
To'th youthfull flowings of the blood;
If I have entertain'd one looſer thought
But ſuch as Chaſtitie's cold votaries,
When they breath out a ſoule into her boſome,
Might ſafely nouriſh; if I've miſemploy'd
One houre, in which with ſtrict endeavour, I
Might have gain'd ſomewhat to my ſtocke of vertue,
(The onely dower I'de meete your love withall,)
May I be guilty of that ſinne, my honour,
My virgin honour's blaſted with, and die
A loath'd Apoſtate.
Now you grieve, I ſuffer double;
Forgive mee Lady, I have wrong'd you, and
Onely I.
Mocke not my teares, they are holy.
I, that to purchaſe fame, and idle breath,
Could venter forth abroad into the world,
And leave thee here a prey to ravenous wolves;
Expoſe thee tender yeares of a weake virgin
To labour' gainſt the furious tyde of luſt
That has aſſaulted thee; that my low birth
Should ſtand in need of ſuch additions,
To raiſe mee to a height, might equall yours:
That vertue and not blood ennobled us,
This then had never hap'ned.
Greatneſſe tranſmitted
Has leſſer of Divinity; your honours
Are vertues purchaſe, and your owne deſervings.
Valenzo thou return'ſt in glorious triumph,
Rich, from the conqueſt of a noble foe,
And yet not laden with the gaudy ſpoyle
So much, as with the valour of the enemy:
As if th'ad'ſt envy'd them their vertue onely,
And ſought'ſt to rob 'em of it; all for mee:—
I've wav'd a plume, dight mee i'th warlike garbe,
Manag'd a ſword, or ſhooke a dreaded ſpeare,
Look't terrible, bin pittileſſe to thoſe
That begg'd a life, revell'd in citties ſack't,
And rifled tents: too poore and triviall matters
To point at ſuch rich ends as thee, (my love.)
Thy blood runnes high, there's not one purple ſtreame
Cas'd in theſe a zure veines, but is deriv'd
From'th ſpring of Princely anceſtry, and th'art
The wealthy ſtorehouſe of their fortunes too.
'Las! what are theſe, but what the owner makes them?
Of themſelves nothing, only as we uſe them,
Are good or bad, a bleſſing or a curſe:
But then their vertues, by a thriftie providence,
Are all ſumm'd up in thy bleſt ſelfe, and make thee
A happineſſe which if injoy'd muſt bee
Beſtow'd by gift, becauſe above all purchaſe.
No (my Valenzo,) vertue's raviſh't hence,
Charintha's ſtrumpetted, her name is rank't
I'th vulgar breath, 'mongſt common proſtitutes;
Pardon, (my love) ſhall't never wed thy ſhame,
Thy jealouſie.
Charintha, thou art cruell, and haſt learn'd
An art to wound to'th death, yet keepe alive
Whom thou haſt kill'd, Obe but ſpeedy in
Thy execution, and when I come below:
And walke thoſe fields, that hapleſſe lovers trace,
I will report thee milde, ſoft as the Turtle in her downe▪
What meanes Valenzo?
Perhaps report has injur'd mee, and noys'd
That I was jealous of Charintha's love;
And you contriv'd this plot to make mee hate you;
Or, if you ſhould repent, (as well you may,)
Your favours ſo ill plac't, upon a ſubject
So poore and worthleſſe; take 'em backe againe,
Live happy in a better choyce, Charintha.
Farre, farre be ſuch a thought!
Your both abus'd,
Groſſely abus'd: Ʋrſini's politicke plots
May meete an eye, that can diſcerne of objects
Farre ſubtler than they are; come, come,
'Way with this paſſion, Love has ſomething elſe
To employ you in:
Th'aſt rob'd mee of a ſoule:—
Take in this kiſſe mine in exchange againe.
That's my Lady Sir,
There,—take it I ſay;
My office will ſcarce deſerve it.
Fungoſo, as I wiſh't; he is Ʋrſini's agent, this will confirm my relation; let's ſtep aſide.
Ha! What are theſe? Praeſto, be gone; they are vaniſh't: men of office theſe, — and muſt be rewarded. — Madame—
Come, to your buſineſſe.
S'life the Ladie's rampant: ſoft and faire, two words to a bargaine, now will I ſeeme to neglect her, and ſhe'le ſtreight court mee.
Sure the man's mad.
Not with love, ſweete Lady; I can hold diſcourſe with your Ladiſhip, under the loſſe of my little wits.
A bleſt ſecurity; but your errand, your errand, Sir.
What do'e take mee for? a foote-poſt.
Some ſuch thing.
Goe, y'are a —
What?
A merrily diſpos'd Lady: but faith, what doe you thinke ſweete, I have a grant of his Lordſhips reverſion.
Of caſt ſuits.
La you now, you would make me angry; pretty piece of ingenuity; you underſtand mee, was his Lordſhip wholſome?
Stop his mouth, he breathes infection.
Traytour.
Devill.
Oh! oh! I'me dead, I'me dead, I'me dead.
Dares he abuſe me to my face?—Piero
Thou haſt prevented me; t'ſhall nere be ſaid,
That thou wer't forwarder to vindicate
Charintha's fame than I, then her Valenzo.
Nor ſhall the cauſe, but the revenge be mine;
I'le ſhew my rage can flow as well as thine.
Th'aſt told a pretty ſtory; — weepe no more,
I ſee the Cupids angry in thine eyes,
That with thy teares, th'aſt quench't their burning arrowes;
Spare 'em untill th'art old, and ſpend 'em then
On thy whole ſtocke of ſinnes: thou play'ſt the tyrant;
And rob'ſt thy ſelfe of all that beauteous treaſure.
Nature inſtructed thee withall.
Ah mee!
Would I had never had it, that alone
Has onely caus'd my griefe:
Thou art paſſionate.
The virgins lov'd my innocence, and it
When I was yet a child.
So thou told'ſt mee boy:
But after thou arriv'd'ſt in Sicily,
How far'd it with thee?
Judge Sir, by theſe teares.
Did thy friend leave thee?
Yes, and the world too; I know hee would not have beene ſo unkind elſe.
Then went'ſt thou to the Princeſſe.
Begg'd reliefe from her.
Why did'ſt not returne?
'Twas told mee there, my Parents ſtreightway dyed.
Thou ſhalt have new ones, royall ones my boy;
A Princely payre, that pride them in their youth,
And innocent ſweetneſſe; whoſe Majeſties ſhall ſhed
As vigorous rayes on thee, as on the iſſue,
Th'enſuing nuptiall promiſes to ſpring
From their owne loynes.
Thoſe are favours Sir,
That become them to give, not me to take.
Thou haſt deſerv'd them boy, Calantha ſpeakes thee
A miracle of love and piety;
Is paſſionate in thy praiſe, all to win
Affection from the Prince to thee, dry up
Thoſe teares; which till this time did never flow
Offenſive unto any:
This day is conſecrate to mirth and Hymen,
'Tis ſinne to weare a frowne, or folded brow,
For every ſmile, thou lend'ſt them now, they'l pay
A thouſand backe againe:
A large requitall! —
A ſmile from my Ferrando? oh 'twas heaven,
Felicia, whilſt thou wiſh'ſt it! now thou haſt
Obtain'd it, 'tis a hell; the antidote
Is now become my poyſon: Tyrant love
That ſport'ſt thee at the paines, thy Martyrs feele
And mak'ſt thy ſalve apply'd, wound when t'ſhould heale.
Come my Calantha, to conſummate that joy,
By mutuall vowes before the Altar made,
Which thy returne to life, to health, and reaſon,
Hath begun in me; thoſe minutes which bring
Us any good, are ſwift and fleeting, and
Once paſt not to be recall'd, who knowes
Whether heaven will ſtill be bountifull;
Or ſmile upon this haſty Union:
Yes royall mayde, they have prepar'd thee for it.
By the addition of new warmth and ſtrength:
For more ſorrowes; pray let's backe, this day
(There's ſomething whiſpers to me) will prove fatall.
Ʋrſini, ſee ſhe weepes!
I've tooke thee from a ſea of teares, (my Venus)
And thou art dropping wet yet.
'Tis ominous, this might have bin my marriage day;
But heaven forgive, and proſper him.
Create a Sun-ſhine,
With thine owne ſmiles thou mayſt, and dry thee in't:
Let the dull Negro dive to fetch thee Jewells,
Theſe ſcatter'd ſeedes of pearle, are all too rich
And pompous for ornament; the leaſt of theſe
Thy fond neglect has dropt, would purchaſe heaven.
Blame not my pious thrift, I ſhed them for't;
Thither my journey tends, I ſhortly ſhall arrive there.
Thou yeeldſt too much to paſſion!
Theſe rites,
(If we may credit what our dreames fore-tell,)
Will turne to funerall obſequies, for ſuch
This morning, (when your carefull art had bound
My ſenſes up.) fancy preſented 'em.
Methought I ſaw,
Aurora from the Eaſt come weeping up,
Wrapt in nights ſables, and the following day
Pac't ſlowly on, in griefes ſad livery;
The penſive windes ſigh'd forth a ſolemne dirge,
And ſtrove to blow our marriage tapers out;
When you Ʋrſini joyn'd in the ſolemnitie,
I ſaw you looke, like Sicily's pale ghoſt,
Broke from the hollow Caverns of the earth;
This hand Ferrando, at each gentle touch
Mouldred to aſhes; on your lip there ſate
A froſt, which when I taſted ſtraight convey'd
An icy chilneſſe thorough every joynt;
The ſtammering Prieſt methought miſtooke the rites,
And ſtead of thoſe are uſ'd at nuptialls,
Sung a ſhort requiem to our ſoules, committed
All that was left of us, to the earth, our laſt
Cold bed.
I warrant you Ladies, this was becauſe ſhe lay alone; you ſhould adviſe her better.
'Twas the intemperance of your diſeaſe
Suggeſted theſe Chimaera's.
And with it they are fled.
No, no Ferrando;
I've ſinn'd againſt my fathers ghoſt; ere yet
His royall corps had ſlept two ſilent Moones
I'th' peacefull earth, or ere I had payd downe
Juſt tribute of my teares, I've chang'd my ſables
For a gay nuptiall garment, whoſe light out-ſide
Denotes the looſeneſſe of a lighter minde,
To which griefe ſhould have bin perpetuall gueſt.
Urge it no more, thy miſery's Virgin Queene
Are powerfull with me, and have taught this breaſt
A ſad repentance.
Canſt thou Ferrando then repent?
I can, that I have wrong'd thy innocence, Kill'd thy father.
O take me to thy ſoule, wee'l mingle ſighs,
And teares, which ſtill ſhall flow together from us,
As if the motion were but one; and thoſe
So frequent, that the ſtones, which cloth his duſt,
Shall ſoften into turfe, from whence ſhall ſpring
A bed of flowers, creeping about the grave,
As if they'd ſtrew themſelves upon him, then
Whither, that men might thinke we wept for them.
Yet pardon Love, when ever I remember
He was a Prince, a Prince of equall power,
And ſtrength with him he wrong'd; that he once ſtood
A barre betwixt our loves, or rather mockt
Our hopes of mutuall enjoyment; that
For his owne peeviſh humour, he would ruine
The edifice, that we had built to honour,
I glory in the act.
Take pitty on me courteous death!
My thoughts are growne more terrible then thou!
I am monſtrous, a prodigy in nature, one with
Him, that was my fathers murderer.
Royall my Queene!
'Tis the exceſſe of pietie,
The errour of your duty, that thus wrongs
The juſtice of my cauſe.
Yet you might have ſpar'd
His life, and made it your juſt praiſe, that you
Could conquer, and not kill:
He was ſo eager in the purſuite of the foe,
When firſt he routed us, that willingly
He ran upon my ſword, that ſtood t'oppoſe
His haſte, and met a death inſtead of victory.
Nay rather we may ſay, that he met both
Who triumphs over life, and all the miſery's
That too officiouſly attend upon it;
Crowne his pale ſtatua, with victorious wreaths,
And call his unkinde fate, his happineſſe!
His fall was honourable, Kings like other men
Travell to death, they goe i'th' common roade,
Are in their end as ſenſible of paine
As the baſe peaſants, whom they by and by
I'th' grave are equall with; their only priviledge
Is in their executioner, who would not rather
Fall under a Kings hand, than yeeld his life
Up to a weake diſeaſe, a Feaver, Gout,
Or grating Stone, which had he miſt this ſtroke,
Might ſtreight have ſeiz'd him; and have rob'd him of
The glory of his end?
I cannot yeeld
So farre to reaſon, but I ſtill muſt looke
Upon you, as an enemy to Sicily;
As him that kill'd my father, and ſo hate you;
Yet I muſt love you too: when firſt we met
Together in your Tent, both arm'd (you know)
I would have fought, nay, and have kill'd you too,
(Could skill or ſtrength have done it, ſome I had
Of both;) yet I meant not to ſurvive you,
Nor ſhould I neede t'have made another wound
To let mine owne life out, l'de dyed with yours.
Ʋrſini thou muſt quit ſome intereſt in my love, Calantha —
Deſerves it all;
'Twere a ſinne no leſſe than ſacriledge,
To rob her o'th leaſt part of your affections.
My faculties are growne
All to one power, call'd love, and you engroſſe it
Whole to your ſelfe; yet have it ſtill entire
To my Calantha, 'tis a divers flame,
That burnes mee, yet but one, each takes it's difference,
And being from the object, be you ſtill
My friend, & thou my love, whom when we have once joyn'd
Unto our amorous folds, thus we will move
And of our armes make a new ſpheare for love.
This way? to'th Temple ſaiſt?
Married by this:
The Prince is fierce and eager in's deſires,
Impatient of delay.
But ſeem'd not ſhe unwilling?
There appear'd ſomewhat more in her, than in a virgin niceneſſe,
They are here: —
The Prieſt has done his office, all delights
The married have a priviledge in, are yours:
Be bold in the enjoyment, what ere while
Was term'd a looſeneſſe in deſire, is now
A vertuous thought: thoſe flames which cloth your Soules
Are chaſt and holy, dalliance is your devotion.
Yet you my Royall faire, can weare mee at
A carefull diſtance, tremble at each touch
Of hand or lip, as if you fear'd a rape:
— Diſplay this beauteous treaſure, lovely ſweete
And let theſe flowers which dwell upon thy cheeke,
Like thoſe proud Maja weares, i'th ſmiling ides
Blaze wild and open— ſee! they are freſh and lively,
Their odour flies to heaven in ſacrifice!
Jove I'me thy rivall;— and will ſhare thy incenſe:
Sweete as the purple ſmoake ariſing from
The Phoenix funerall pile, or Southerne breath
Perfum'd with all Arabia's ſpiceries.
Good my Lord! you will too much indeare us to you with your courteſies.
And being ſtrangers we are apt to betraduc't:
Our good names are precious, they are all we have left
Unconquer'd.
Hymen applaud's this early piety:
The doves that drive the chariot of loves Queene.
Are ſwift in motion, and thoſe happy troopes,
Which waite upon her triumphs, mak't their ſtrife
Which ſhall out-runne the other, thoſe that lagge
Cupid will whip with roſes to the Altar.
Henceforth (my Lord) I muſt attend your will,
Let me but drop a teare or two upon
My father's duſt, and with his memory
I'le bid farewell to griefe.
This vault containes it.
Let us pay our laſt duties.
The Quire attends without.
Nobleſt bodies are but guilded clay;
put away
But the precious ſhining rinde;
The inmoſt rottenneſſe remaines behind.
Kings, on earth though gods they be,
Yet in death are vile as we;
He, a thouſands King before,
Now is vaſſall unto more.
Vermine now inſulting lye,
And dig for Diamonds in each eye;
Whil'ſt the ſcepter bearing hand
Cannot their inroades withſtand.
Here doth one in odours wade
By the regall unction made,
While another dares to gnaw
On that tongue, his peoples law.
Fooles! ah fooles are we, who ſo contrive,
And do ſtrive,
In each gaudy ornament,
Who ſhall his corps in the beſt diſh preſent.
'Tis well; enough is wept for Sicily; cheare up,
We have other vowes to pay, and as religious ones
As theſe: we made them at the Altar; and
If we performe them not, ſhall forfeit all
Our after joyes:— remove thoſe objects there;
We have no uſe of fables now; they breed
Melancholy thoughts; we will be loud,
And big in mirth, as full of pride as noyſe,
Till wee draw envie on our revels; which
Nor fate, nor the dull ſtoicke ſhall controule,
Whoſe ſullen faith is the diſeaſe of's ſoule.
Revenge! wer't thou more ugly than ere Painter
Limb'd witch or fury, I could kiſſe thee now,
For thy ſo opportunely prompting mee;
Theſe brace of Courtiers here, my trim complotters,
Have try'd my skill upon their bodies; and now
I'me dearer to them, then their confeſſour,
Both theſe have ſworne to further my deſigne,
I have againſt this Lord, this dotard; who
Hath heat his blood ſo with carouſing healths,
That he's growne wild and furious; beleeves
His ſtrength more able in theſe love-firkes,
Than when he was i'th pride, and prime of youth;
Him are theſe two according to inſtructions
Leading into the ſnares, that I've ſpread for him;
Into which, if they, and blind fortune conduct him,
I'le uſe him leſſe gently, than I would a noyſe
Of gowty-cheek't trumpetters:—They'r here.
I'le be with you ſtreight.—
Hymen is now predominant; the Starres
Will have it ſo; I muſt and will be married.
Married?
Yes, yes, you ſhall have favours, favours, Gentlemen: bring mee but to the ſight of a woman, I'le clap up a match with her, and to bed ſtreight; and if I don't outdoe Hercules at his thirteenth labour, cut of my dainty dowſets, and feed dogs with 'em.
Hee deflour'd fifty virgins in one night, I hope you won't marry ſo many.
Yes, and thou wilt get ſo many i'th Kingdome, fifty? what's fifty? I'le have a monopoly of 'em, get 'em all with child with males, and they ſhall be borne with beards on.
There might have bin ſome likelyhood of this once, but now you are old.
Old? ha! ha! he! Grutti, Grutti, doſt heare him? ha! ha! he! prithee how old? how old doſt thinke? have I not a warm moiſt palme? do's not my pulſe beat ſtrong, and healthy?
The flowings of your blood, that downy chin, and theſe full veines, ſpeake you — ſome twenty, Sir.
And of complexion ſanguine, I know it by my dreams.
The roſe-buds now are blooming on your cheekes,
And ope themſelves into a crimſon bluſh;
This haire curles up like wire, and and ſpeakes you luſty,
Your ſtrength is bold, and daring.
Belleeve it, I'me a wanton.
Come let's to a wench then.
Hang marrying, t'is a ſlavery!
A meere purgatory!
An hell to be bounde to one, and ſhee prove falſe, ugly, or loude, when wee may enjoy our liberties, to take or leave 'em, as our ſtomack ſerves us; have the choice beautyes runne into our armes, and every night a freſh one.
Hey! to a Wench; to a Wench! now an I were King it ſhould bee treaſon for any ſubject to marry.
Allow 'em but Wenches, and t'will be well enough.
Or to lye with a Woman.
How would you doe for ſubjects then?
Perhaps an I had a minde to't, Ide get all my ſubjects my ſelfe, ha! what ſayſt thou to't, Grutti?
I ſay t'is fit, you have a minde.
Bentivoglio! wee are friends, come thou ſhalt along with us, to a wench, old trangdido, to a wench, and thou ſhalt ſo bumfiddle her.
Nay, good my Lord, touch no more upon that ſtring; but d'ee heare? I came to carry you to one.
Art right? art right? old boy! theſe Phyſitians are notable jerkers, come, where's their rendez-vous?
In my Lodgings.
Ha? how many?—how many?—whats that there?
A draught to provoke.
—Sleepe.
Nay good Bentivoglio give it mee, a whole one, a whole one!
Be moderate; you'le take the next beggar you meete elſe; & then the Ladyes expectation yonder will be fruſtrate.
Ha! ha! he! Super naculum! my old bully lively, my authentick Don, ſoule of pleaſure; line of life; let's too't; ſuch a violent fit o'th ſudden! a dozen Calentures are an ague to't; twenty Juleps will not coole one wiſh.
Let's have him to bed quickly, and b'ele him warme; Bonum erit ſi ſudaverit,
Foh! his breath ſtinkes oth Univerſity.
Signior tis not perfum'd: —now will I goe fetch theſe Ladyes to him; & if he have courage enough but to ſpeak to 'em; I'le forfeit my art, and turne tooth-drawer.
My Lord! —
Villaine!
The injury! I am not any way conſcious.—
Traytor thou lyeſt;
Hell, and thy ſelfe the greater miſchiefe, has
Conſpir'd to ruine goodneſſe. —
Madame! y'have view'd theſe gardens;—has not art
Sweetely conſpir'd with nature, to make up
A pleaſure of variety?
It takes exceedingly.—
What do's?
Pretty indeede,
To have theſe flowers reade morall lectures to us.
Yet Madame, you can finde in your heart to treade
Them underfoote, ſcorning as much the beauty,
As the rare ſenſe they cary.
Yes I can,
Yet ſtreight I turne, and plucke 'em; —binde 'em up,
In one faire volume, thus —
And what reade you, pray?
The emblemes of true vertues in each leafe,
Imprinted there, at natures proper charges.
What thinke you of this Lilly?
It figures innocence.
Weare it in your boſome.
Innocence indeed
Should be the breaſts faire individuall mate.
It will become you well.
So will this crowne Imperiall your head,
Pray ſtick it there.
I ſhould be the envie of the Court then,
T'is a pretty flower, what think you if I carry it to the Princeſſe?
Fit, very apt and fit, lady, — as fit
A gift, as this were for a Lord, an hony-ſuckle,
The amorous woodbindes off-ſpring; it emblemes love;
You would not have us make love?
This myſticke way has bin allow'd of;
And practis'd?
Yes, and practis'd.
Sure I ſhould never do't.
No Madame? why are not men creatures
As worthy Courtſhip, as wee?
Oh! but we are women!
Oh! but we are proud.
Shall I take't on your experience?
Or your owne:— hal whoſe voyce is that?
Hence my delight! thou art turn'd traytour to mee:
Thy ſtrings convey'd a poyſon to my eares,
And they dranke deeply of it;— yet forbeare,
Alas it was my ſelfe, my inward griefe,
Throwne from the ſoule in often ſighs, that made
Thy ſound infectious; 'tis with that as guilt,
It growes ſtill greater as 'tis borne about,
And poyſons every thing ſhould worke it's cure.
Is not this Sylvio, Calantha's Page?
A lover growne? las pretty innocence.
How finely ſorrow ſhewes there — ! That, that paſſion
Is well expreſl't; now ſigh, then knock the breaſt. Excellent.
Let's uſe the benefit of this ſhade, to hide
Our ſelves, and ſecretly acquainted grow
With the blacke ſtorie of his ſad miſhap.
Felicia.
How has thy name, thy ſelfe, thy friend deceiv'd thee!
That onely wert acquainted with the ſound
Of happineſſe; mock't with a falſe report,
Into a reall miſery; whoſe eaſie nature
(The greateſt foe unto it ſelfe, was flatter'd)
Out of a virgin treaſure; and then left
Rifled of all; but (what griefe now is preying on)
A hapleſſe life — yet cruell theefe, th'aſt left
So much of thee behind, as ſhall hereafter
Tell to the world a darke and gloomy tale
Of thy blacke perjury.
Ha! do's he riddle,
Or play with griefe?
No 'tis too like a truth.
Me thinkes each thing
I meete withall upbraids my fond credulity;
The ſoaring larke hovers aloft i'th aire,
At diſtance from th'inchanting glaſſe, that Courts
Her to her ruine! the fearefull Quaile
Suſpects and ſhuns the muſicke of the pipe
That ſings her into fetters.
Onely poore I am ſillier than theſe;
Witneſſe th'untimely ſwelling of this wombe
Pregnant to my diſgrace;— As I lay hid
In yonder thicket, the brambles gently ſwell'd,
And hid my ſhame, which yet each triviall winde
But dallying with, perſwaded from my covert!
And left mee naked to heaven's eye; the boughs
Of the next willow clung about my head,
As if they'd knit themſelves into a garland,
Which I ſhould weare for my forſaken lover,—
Very pretty!
Wer't not ſo ſad.
Oh you the weake ſupporters of my woes,
Why do'e faile mee now at greateſt need?
Beare mee at leaſt into ſome hollow cave
Where I may die, free from an after ſcorne;
And not when I am dead, be found the ſhame
Of our fraile ſex;— Oh! I faint, and fall,
Juſt like the early branches of ſome tree,
Whoſe haſty ſap ſhootes into early fruit,
Till the o're laden boughs cracke with the weight,
Ere yet they bee full ripe —
I am amaz'd, a woman!
Some Lady here o'th Court, I'le lay my life on't;
Let's to the Princeſſe and informe her of it.
—Let mee eternally periſh to honour,
If their heads anſwer not for this foule inſolence.
Though't be a ſin of that portentous bulke,
That 'tſtartles all the gods, and juſtice ſelfe
Wakes from a long dead lethargie to meete it:
Yet Kings are great as they, and ſpight of fate
Or rigorous lawes, may triumph in their mercy.
Away with 'em to execution;
Him, and his fellow murderer, away:
—Pardon a Traytour?
Though you might urge, 'twere treaſon of that height,
That none but they could thinke of, much leſſe act:
That murder cries for murder, blood for blood:
That he whoſe innocence they ſacrific'd
To their mad fury, was your loyall ſubject;
This on your marriage day — to affront Hymen.
And when your nuptiall torch burnt brighteſt, dead it
With bloud, into a ſickly glimmmering taper:
That they ſhould dare aſſault me! — i'th' Court —
One whom your goodneſſe has bin pleaſ'd to looke
Into a life, and honours, plac't i'th' ſtate,
Only to interpoſe my ſelfe betweene,
And meet all dangers that are ſhot at you.
'Twas a murder
Intended on our perſon, but that Heaven —
Was juſt in the prevention; True it might be ſo,
And were it, yet upon ſubmiſſion
Such faults have beene remitted.
Away with 'em, I'le heare no more.
Downe holy anger! —
One word, and I'me gone— you are my Soveraigne,
And there's divinitie worne in that title,
Which I adore, and thinke my ſelfe as happy
In this ſo early doome, ſince you are pleaſ'd with't,
As heaven had ſpoke it; though not till old age,
When nature claim'd it as a due! Yet Sir
Be gentle to my memory; and if
At any time my crimes appeare before you,
Freſh in your thought, to ſtaine my Heraldrie,
The happy mention of my vertuous acts,
From ſome that love my duſt, ſhall riſe to pleade
My innocence—; and may you never live
To curſe th' untimely hand; or houre that rob'd you
Of ſo much loyaltie!— for you Ʋrſini—
If ere your name ſhall fall in mention, when
I come i'th other world, expect me not
Your friend; I feare me, I ſhall tell ſad tales
In th'eares of heaven;—Farewell —
Impudent Traytour!
Yet ſtill I dare be good; and ſpight of all
His hate, or malice to me, thus ſtand up
To begge his life.
Not after ſo much injury?
Yes, if Valenzo dare be ſinfull ſtill
In wrongs, it ſhall be call'd my piety
To ſuffer.
Th'art all goodneſſe;—for thy ſake
Wee'le mixe ſome mercy with our doome,
He that ſubmits firſt to thee, has his pardon,
See juſtice done on th'other; this ſentence
Shall ſtand irrevocable;—
This ſentence ſtand irrevocable?
Plague to your eaſie nature! —
Ha! this 'tis to over-act; how have I almoſt fool'd my ſelf, out
Of my owne plots;
I were in a fine caſe now, if Piero
Should not accepta life on this condition.
I'le ſend to him—Caſſio! Grutti! who waites there? —
Ladies, pray abſent your ſelves a while; —
— With child? impudent whore! to what curſ'd lumpe
Have thy ſinnes ſwolne thee?
Oh, me miſerable!
Hence ingrate wretch! that haſt abuſ'd my favours
So farre, till thou haſt made a ſin of charitie:
— Ha! doſt weepe? —
My rare diſſembler! thoſe teares which art hath taught
To flow, carry more ſinfull cunning in 'em,
Then thoſe the flattering Syrens weare upon
Their cheekes, when they court man to ruine:
Yet tell me ere you goe, whom have thoſe lookes
Beguil'd, and train'd into your ſinfull armes.
You muſt prepare your ſelfe for a ſad ſtory then:
Yes, like enough, a tale as ſad, and diſmall
As that of Troy, and as much truth in't too!
Quickly, diſpatch, before my anger prove
Too maſculine!—and be modeſt in'th relation.
You'le wiſh't untold.
Undone I doe! but why
This tedious circumſtance? it do's involve
Your guilt.
Know then, that when I was my ſelfe
My name was—
What?
Felicia
Alberto's daughter?
Yes his—that was once Alberto
Durazzo's farre-fam'd Marqueſſe; till
His cruell Maſter ſeiz'd on's life, and honours,
At his returne from Sicily i'th firſt warres;
Where he receiv'd a fatall overthrow.
He was in action bold, and valiant!
However fortune wrought him this diſgrace;
Here! here began my miſery.
Proceede, truſt me I now begin to pitty thee.
Then let me die without your farther knowledge
Of my miſhap; t'will be injurious
Unto my aſhes, and diſturbe their quiet;
I know it will;
Nay, prithee tell me, come, and I'le weepe with thee.
You'le have cauſe enough ere I've done;
Therefore don't hear't;
Is there ought in't concernes me?
Too much
Nay, then I muſt, and will have all the ſtory,
Or thinke thee a foule proſtitute.
'Tis thus then!
—Yet do'nt beleeve me, ſay that I was mad,
Diſtracted with my ſorrowes, that my words
Fell ſo uneven from me, you miſtooke
The ſenſe; ſay any thing.—
Come, come, I know thou wilt tell truth!
Or may I never finde peace hereafter!
How I feare
Whether this ſtory tends?
The King Madame.
Ferrando;—(Seize me Courteous death,
Or I ſhall poyſon all her joyes;)
Ha! what of him?
Be ſudden, or, I ſweare by my juſt anger,
I'le ſtreight rip up the cradle of thy luſt,
The den where all thy looſe adultery's
Were acted; ſearch each corner of thy wombe.
That keepes a record of thy villanyes!
Ferrando was the author of my fall:
More lying then that evill Genius
That wrought the firſt mans fall!
Ferrando! oh! oh! (Swoons)
Thou rebell paſſion jealouſy! what mean'ſt thou
To tumult in my breaſt?—ha! yet why not?
Why may not he be falſe?
Oh! oh! oh!
T'is ſo!—Felicia!—ſhe's gone, ſhe's gone!
Helpe there, Florinda! Violetta! Ladyes!
Soe—ſhe begins to breath;—looke up Felicia!
Where am I?
Here,—a medall? this confirmes it;
Ferrando and Felicia!
Ha! the Princeſſe!
Beſhrew me but I've had a fearefull dreame!
I hope t'was but a dreame;
No; I know all,
Ferrando's falſe, as ſtayn'd with ſin, and perjury
As howling-Ghoſts.
Good Madame don't affright me;
Your fancy's darke and gloomy.
Yes all hell
Is there at worke contriving a revenge;
Revenge? for whom?
No matter whom;—But tell me
How, and with what falſe othes, he won thee firſt
To his looſe ſheets.
I'le tell you; but you firſt
Shall promiſe me, to breade no other way
To your revenge and mine, then I ſhall leade you in.
I doe:
Let's ſir, and heare it all.
Whilſt yet Alberto liv'd
As great in favour as in bloud, the glory
O'th Court of Naples, honour'd with dayly viſits
From his Prince; t'was my unhappy deſtiny,
(Foole that I was to be ſo credulous!)
To receive many favours from Ferrando;
Which I interpreted i'th way of love;
Meane while, this match was treated of betweene
Him, and your ſelfe; your Father (Sicily's King)
After your plighted troths, and formall ceremonyes
Us'd betwixt Prince, and Prince, would breake it off,
Which caus'd a ſudden warre upon his Country;
In which expedition Alberto
Was ſent chiefe generall: the King being fore't
Now to withdraw his publick viſits, imploy'd
Ʋrſini in the buſineſſe; gets acceſſe
Privately to me i'th might, and that too
Allwayes i'th darke, leſt happily he might
Be knowne to any of my ſervants; Briefly
After his many oathes, and proteſtations
Of his faire meaning, I at laſt conſented
To let him ſteale the fruit, he durſt not owne:
When ere I urg'd, he was ingug'd to you,
He anſwer'd, that was but a tricke of ſtate,
A faire pretence to colour his deſigne;
And mak't ſeeme glorious, in the eye o'th world;
That he warr'd for a Kingdome, not a Queene;
Onely intreated me, that I'de be ſilent,
And not ſo much as in a ſigne betray
To'th day, what onely night was conſcious of.
You condiſcended?
Willingly.
My father i'th meane while returnes defeated,
For which the King led on by paſſion, ſeiz'd
His life and honours, theſe conferr'd on his
Now favourite Ʋrſini: the fleete re inforc't,
He himſelfe the ſecond time in perſon
Went generall of the forces, conquer'd Sicily,
And ſlew your father on Meſſina's plaines,
Laſt brought you away captive.
But how cam'ſt thou to Court in Sicily?
Thou told'ſt another ſtory then:
For that
I crave your pardon, 'twas all the untruths
My life has ere bin charg'd with; but 'twas thus:
Led partly by a jealous feare, to ſee
What he intended; partly to find out
My brother Frederico, who was left there
Commander in Mazara, which was tooke
In the firſt expedition, in this diſguiſe,
'Mongſt others whom deſire of fame, or profit
Led to your ſhore, I croſſ't the ſeas; but failing
In queſt of him I ſought, I came to Court,
Where ſince I have remain'd.
But why Felicia
Did'ſt not diſcloſe thy ſelfe before this time,
Now things are growne ſo bad?
When firſt I ſaw
Your perſon, and how mutually you lov'd,
Knowing how farre I was beneath your worth,
So deare I held you both, that I determin'd
For ever to be loſt to memory;
And ſerve you thus in this diſguiſe: which I
Had done, but that this hapleſſe chance
Betray'd mee to your knowledge.
Alas! thy piety has undone us both!
'Twas my too cruell deſtinies!
Methinkes wee two now ſeeme to be ſet copies
Of griefes, to which wrong'd virgins will repaire,
To take out patternes by.
Our wrongs and ſorrowes
Have made us juſt ſo like to one another,
That each ſeemes th'o others counterfeit.
We'le ſit, and deſcant on our miſeries,
Count the extent of each, proportion teares,
And ſighs unto them.
Her's that doth ſurmount,
Shall borrow griefe of t'other.
H'as robb'd mee of a father cruell Tyrant,
H'as robb'd mee of a father cruell Tyrant,
Bereav'd mee of my friends, and loving ſubjects,
Bereav'd mee of my Brother, and my friends.
Tane away all my honours, and my dower.
Taken my virgin honour, all my dower.
H'as mock't mee with the title of a Queene.
H'as mock't mee with the title of a Queene.
—But I am loſt in Paſſion.
And I am loſt in Paſſion.
Felicia come, and as our wrongs are equall,
So let our revenge be; we'le hand in hand
Aſſault this Tyrant; and in bloody Characters
Print on his body the ſtory of our ſufferings:
Yet this cannot cure our griefe.
What though, wrong'd innocence?
In death it will intitle us to honours;
And though our bodies moulder to corruption,
Our better part ſhall ſurvive fame; our names,
Free from decay, ſhall ſwell up numerous volumes;
Whil'ſt our ſad legends ſhall be made a pillow,
To every ſleeping virgin.
O yet for my ſake have ſome pitty on him,
And for that part of him, that's cradled here,
'Las he may live to make us faire amends.
For thy ſake I could ſpare him, but my wrongs
Sit heavy here, and urge mee to revenge.
But ſay l've thought a way, how we may yet
Be both reſtor'd to happineſſe, would you not
Accept, and follow't?
Speake it (gentle ſoule.)
As yet (you know) your virgin treaſure ſtands
Free from his ruder touch: thoſe Ceremonies,
Which link't you in one Hymeneall knot,
Religion will make void, the praecontract
'Twixt him and mee being knowne, ſo that you then,
On this part are free from him; enjoy him thus
You cannot, neither would you (I ſuppoſe)
After theſe wrongs, (if you might be permitted:)
What hinders then, but that I take your place
This night? and ſhew him, to what height his perjury
Has wrought our wrongs, whilſt you in ſome diſguiſe
May quit the Court, and e're next Sun appeare,
From hence towards France, to whom you are allyed
In blood, and wrongs. —
Content, — I'le in, and haſte mee to be gone,
To goe there is ſome hope.
To ſtay there's none.
—To mee this?
Out of particular reſpect
Hee ſtood ingag'd to repay your merits.
Dare you
Promiſe ſo much for's Lordſhip?
The Contents
Of that will ſpeake, how much he tenders goodneſſe
In every noble breaſt.
No doubt Sir, but
You are familiar with the ſenſe it carries,
And can informe mee, better than the darke Character.
'Tis that you'd be pleas'd t'accept
A life, for which to's Piety you ſhall owe,
Onely a faire acknowledgement.
Wondrous good!
'Tis a becomming charity this, and hee
Weares it amongſt the chiefeſt of his vertues.
Sir, it muſt needs be eminent in's Lordſhip,
Since exercis'd upon ſo noble a ſubject
As your ſelfe
But ſtay? — now I thinke on't,
This is a benefit of that nature, it ſeldome comes
Alone, are there not honours too? preferments
That wait upon this gift? ſpeake, ſhall I be
His Lordſhips creature?
He's paſſionately yours.
Are we not for deſigne? — ba, what darke tricke
Is there i'th State, that doth imply danger
Enough for us to mannage, doth he thinke
Us fit to temper poyſons, or uſe the benefit
O'th night to ſeize on his State-rivals, are we
Potent enough for faction, or intended
Intelligencer to ſome forraine Prince?
What meane you?
Ingagements of this nature urge a returne
Of thankes proportionable to themſelves,
And what we have of ſuch rich values,
I cannot tell, leſt t'be our ſoules forfeited
To'th next occaſion his Lordſhip has to uſe 'em.
This is ſtrange language Sir, my underſtanding
Has not yet arriv'd at what it meanes.
Go home and ſtudy it then:—and do'e heare,
Entreat my Lord, t'employ his favours to
Some further profit, he'le ſcarce be gainer by 'em elſe.
I ſhall acquaint him with your humour.
Do maggot, wriggle, wriggle, do:—
Piero.
Madame! I am all joy, life, honours,
Preferment, and what not?
Then I'me undone!
Piero! didſt not promiſe me to ſtand
The utmoſt of's temptations? didſt thou boaſt
Thy vertuous ſtrength, and fall'ſt at the firſt onſet?
Life Madame is ſweet.
If hitherto
It hath bin ſo, hereafter t'will be all
Bitterneſſe, thou haſt betray'd thy friend to death;
The thought of which will ſoure all thy content,
Make thy beſt pleaſures relliſh worſe then gall.
Life, with the worſt that can befall us, is
A good exchange for death; but here are honours
Annex't to't Lady! I ſhall be great in favour.
Thou wilt grow big in ſinne too! thou muſt barter
Thy vertue for preferment; which being gone,
At beſt thou't be but painted ruines,
A glorious miſery; thou muſt owe life
To him, that will infect and kill thy ſoule.
Yet you would be content, Valenzo ſhould
Accept a life, on this condition.
Yet he may live, and ſtill be vertuous.
Why? ſo may I.
Yet he's thy friend.
Am not I his too?
T'will be a glory to thee after death
That thou wert friendſhips martyr, a title
Will ſit upon thy tombe, richer than all
Thy Heraldry; more laſting than thy marble.
To ſhew how farre, I can preferre him to
My ſelfe, I am content this honour ſhould be his.
Falſe to thy friend, and vertue! that onely cam'ſt
To mocke calamitie, and midſt our wrongs
Remaine our greateſt in jurie.
Miſtake mee not,
I onely did prepare you for a joy,
Which now you're ripe for:—know then, 'T return'd
Him ſcorne for all his flattering promiſes;
And ſtood reſolv'd t'incounter with his fury,
Made hot by my diſdaine.
Miracle of friendſhip.
Since 'tis decreed that one of us muſt fall,
And onely one, my death ſhall free us both
From the lawes rigour, enjoy your beſt Valenzo,
Enjoy him long, may you (a happy paire)
Grow like two neighbouring roſes on one ſtalke,
Partaking mutually each others ſweetes;
Whence no rude hand approach to raviſh you,
But when you are full blowne, and ripe for heaven,
May you fall gently both into one grave,
There lye intomb'd in your owne odours.
Piero, thou go'ſt
To heaven, to be the envy of the Saints;
For when thou com'ſt where thoſe bleſt troopes reſide,
No man ſhall ere direct a vow, or prayer,
But unto thee! — Valenzo take thy friend,
Take him unto thy boſome, he has ſo much
Of heaven in him, I feare he can ſcarce die.
Is it your feare, Madame? can he deſerve leſſe in
Your faire opinion, than to be thought immortall?
That death at length ſhould boaſt a victory
O're ſo much goodneſſe. — Methinkes (Piero)
Thou ſhould'ſt for ever ſtand a rich example,
To all mankind, who in thy fall will ſicken,
And dye to vertue; injoy the happineſſe
Of thine owne fate; I will not rob thee of
One precious minute; live till time has powr'd
A reverend ſnow upon thy head.—
But juſtice muſt be ſatisfied.
I'le bow my ſelfe beneath the ſtroake.
To ſlay
The innocent, is not to expiate,
But make a crime, preſerve thy ſelfe entire
To thy Charintha, King, and Country.
What!
And betray my friend to death?
To what
I have deſerv'd.
T'was thy too forward zeale, and a ripe ſpirit.
That ſpur'd thee on to action, thou didſt it for
Thy friend, for mee, and had not juſtice bin
Wrong'd in't, the honour had bin mine, why not
The ſhame?
You muſt not, ſhall not die.
No more!
'Twill prove a breach of friendſhip elſe, I muſt not,
Shall not die: my honour ſuffers double,
Thou wouldſt foyle mee both in love, and valour.
Pitty theſe teares.
Or in thy ruine I
Am loſt.
Juſtice requires but one, her fate
Is ſo involv'd in yours, you cannot fall,
But in it ſhee muſt finde a certaine death;
Thinke then, how can you ſatisfie the law?
Farre eaſier than you, in whoſe ſad loſſe
The whole world ſuffers, and in thy untipe fall
Looſes all goodneſſe.
Stint this pious ſtrife,
I have bin too much woman, and betrai'd
My name to infamy, in this tame paſſion:
Poſſeſſe mee a juſt anger, a ſpirit great
And noble as my birth; that I may ſhake,
And rowze this ſleepy Prince, from his dull lethargie;
Who's wholy loſt, in the bewitching flatteries
Of that bad man;— alas this is a danger
Too potent for your ſtarres to free you from;
Henceforth I'le be your deſtinies: for ſince
This calme brings nothing but a certaine fall,
A ſtorme ſhall either ſave, or ruine all.
Contemne our pardon.
Returne your favours too
With ſo much ſcorne.
Better they'd play'd with lightning,
Or hugg'd a thunderbolt.
Juſtice is ſlow
Of pace, and if not led by furie,
Seldome o'retakes the crime, let your returne
Of puniſhment be quicke, and active, delay is worſe
Than pitty, and more dangerous: Valenzo
Is popular, and who knowes, but hee had rather,
Owe his life to the peoples mutiny, than your pardon,
And therefore ſlighted it.
Oh the ſtate of Princes!
How farre are we from that ſecuritie,
Wee dream't of in th'en pectance of our crowne?
Were forraine dangers nothing, yet we nouriſh
Our ruine in our boſome: Valenzo is a traytour,
So is Piero too; and who is not in this age?
It is unſafe not to ſuſpect our ſelfe.
To torture with 'em; be noble in thy juſtice:—
Here draw a warrant for their execution; —
We'le ſign't with our owne ſigner;—hence pitty,
Poſt from our breaſt; we baniſh thee our boſome
Th'art a diſeaſe bred there to ruine Majeſtie:
And ſink us below our ſubjects ſcotue.—
Our Princely couſin, welcome to Court; thou haſt
Beene too long abſent, (I muſt chide thee for't,)
And envy'd us the boaſt of vertue.
Vertue!
Some malicious devill now, or other,
Has intic'd her from her beads;
To undoe mee, and my plots, ſhee carries anger
In her brow: — this I muſt mitigate, or I am
Loſt. —
Thou art ſo eager after heaven,
Thou woo't o're-buy thy happineſſe.
Never fear't Sir.
But thy devotion's ſeaſon'd with ſo much charity,
Thou pil'ſt a ſtocke of merit up for us
At Court.
I beleeve y'had need on't.
As long as we live here we ſhall; —
So wicked!
Ha! what frowne's that, whence theſe clouds, Charintha?
So riſes the bluſhing morne, as thou wert wont
To ſmile, when thou appear'dſt, we owe
Our day unto thy eyes; and if thou think'ſt
Thy beautie's worne too cheape, we'le become tributaries
To thee for light; chaſe hence this ſullen darkneſſe,
Thy abſence has already made too long
A night.
No Sir; 'twas your blacke deeds▪
How's this?
Do'e know mee, who I am?
Not well.
Your King.
A Tyrant
Of bigge, and grorious impietic's,
A regall monſter, the true head of that
Beaſt you rule, the multitude: more cruell
Than enrag'd lyons, or robb'd beares; who both
Will ſpare the innocent, and humble.
Looke to'th Lady there, ſure ſhe's diſtracted.
My wrongs indeed would make mee ſo.
What wrongs? whence? or from whom?
Raiſe not my auger higher with your ſcorne;—
By all that's.—
Or if't be ignorance of my ſufferings,
It but betrayes your want of reaſon, and
How farre you're loſt to man, by your fond dotage.
Grow more particular, or wonder ruines mee.
Good God! I've ſuffer'd ſo long, till patience
Grew my greateſt crime.—
Now, now the ſtorme is coming this way,
But I'me prepar'd to meete it.
Whence? or from whom?
Aske this good man how often he has mourn'd
Over the ruines of my fame? how often
His eares have met with the report of my
Diſgrace? how I was noys'd a ſtrumpet? when
Each talking thing at Court, might freely act
A rape upon my vertue, till I was left
All a whole ſtaine, blacke as the front of perjur'd
Sinners? while you, (as if I'de bin a trifle
Caſt from your blood, and kindred, or ſome darke thing,
Whoſe actions were ſo ſowly bad.
That report better'd 'em in the expreſſion:)
Could ſit as ſilent as the night; as calme
As ſeas, when the windes ſleepe; yet at laſt be juſt;
And ſay, how have I appear'd to you, or him,
That calumnie has thus bin priviledg'd,
To violate my honour?
Madame,
I have allwayes ſpoke you, chaſtities beſt example.
Innocence it ſelfe is not ſo white.
Yet he that would confirme this with his ſword,
Muſt meete, with priſons, wrackes, and tortures,
As a reward of ſo much vertue!
Ha!
Sweeteſt Princeſſe! —
And ere he die, muſt ſuffer in's honour,
Be proclaim'd traytor to the ſtate:
Ʋrſini, thou haſt abus'd our truſt.
My Lord.—
Too weake pretence, for your ingratitude
To ſo large merit; Naples call's him
Her chiefe preſerver; he brought home victory,
By his owne arme atchiev'd, when the proud foe,
Threatned your Kingdome with a fatall downefall.
He, to whoſe arme you owe your life, your crowne,
To whom in warre, you'd ſooner flie for helpe
Then to the Altar; now in peace muſt have
His temples robb'd; his garlands from his brow
Tranſplanted. to adorne this uſeleſſe ſtatua.
Madame, I have not ſo appear'd in managing theſe affaires of yours.
Would thou had'ſt,
Or ſomewhat that carries leſſe reſemblance
Of man: Oh thou art bravely wicked.
I have not us'd the art to boaſt the vertue
Of mine owne actions; yet heaven knowes
They were all good, and aim'd at ends as honourable
As your deſires.
Ʋrſini leave, till there is hope of pardon,
This impudence in ſinne,
Bid's a defiance to all mercy; did we not,
At your perſwaſion, give order for Valenzo's
Quicke diſpatch?
How ere I ſeem'd () to runne downe with the ſtreame of your violent paſſion, yet my intents ſtill bore up againſt it; witneſſe this paper.
Ha! What's here a pardon?
Which you had ſeal'd ere this, had not this Lady here interrupted it.
How?
your paſſion would not have permitted you,
To have o're view'd what you conſented too;
This I knew, as likewiſe how dangerous it
Would have beene to the ſtate, if he had fall'n.
Againe my owne Ʋrſini:—
Charintha, pardon our errours, we will deſerve it,
By the future love, and honours we will throw
On our Valenzo, — here take my ſigner
Fetch 'em to Court.
You are noble.
Ʋrſini Waite on her to the Caſtle.
You honour mee.
Oh how neere were we deſtruction.
Reaſon ſit ſtill enthron'd in thine owne ſtate,
T'is paſſion onely ruines Kings, not fate.
Hold up, hold up Sir, the Ladies are comming this way,— for ſhame,—God's mee, they'r here; why do'e tremble ſo Sir?
A violent fit o'th ague; oh! oh! oh! have mee to bed gently, gently, or I ſhall ſcatter all my limbes;
Diſcredited for ever, (here take this ſtaffe Sir)— have I boaſted your ſtrength to them? — fortifi'd you forth' incounter, and you faile me thus? — undone, undone!
Oh! oh! oh! for halfe a dozen of night caps.
Here Sir, on with 'em; they'r ſomewhat durty, they'll keepe you the warmer; — now ſhall I be call'd Mountebanke; Quackeſalver, Piſpot-peeper: and all the ugly mangy names can be invented.— come in, come in.—
'Twill be a Scene of modeſt mirth, Ladies.
The Phyſitian has cool'd him.
Why Sir, you won't diſgrace mee? go towards 'em.
Some fire, ſome fire; —cold, cold, cold, cold.
Here, here, on with my gowne: —this cap, ſo, ſo.
Ladies, we'le take leave to be bold here to vexe him.
How do'e my Lord?
We are come here to await your pleaſure.
The very thought on't has caſt him into a cold ſweat.
Oh! oh!
Now for fifty virgins.
A monopoly of women.
Hey, for a wench, for a wench, to bumfiddle now; Ah! ha!
Oh! ho! oh!
Do'e remember you'd play the foole in my gowne, and cap excellently.
Well ſaid Doctour.
To him Doctour.
Then a noyſe of Muſitians would do rarely.
Looke he's nodding.
My Lord you intend no abuſe to us?
Make us hazzard our credits for nothing?
More clothes; — why hoe there, on my feete I ſay.
He's dreaming.
Faſt, faſt a ſleepe, ſo, ſo, this charme laſt's till Midnight, and then hee wakes.
'Twill be good ſport to ſee him then—
Dance up and downe the Court like the ghoſt of old Hippocrates.
You muſt not expoſe him to the publike view.
Mr Doctour you're ſufficiently reveng'd, this is enough for you to boaſt on when you come i'th Univerſity.
This, and the rare cures I've done upon you two ſhall be my theame.—Good night.— Ladies I'me your ſervant. — My doughty placket-hunter lye thee there, and e'ne awake when thy ſtomacke ſerves thee; to morrow morning I'me for Padua. —
The night comes on apace, ſtreight every thing
Will be as blacke as I, and alike terrible,
Nay out-doe mee too: each leafe that ſtirres
Affrights the fearfull, makes the guilty tremble,
And yet this night, what is it but a ſhadow?
Yet I am leſſe than that, for I do leſſe:
I that have purpos'd ſo much, act nothing!
Horrour! could but my thoughts be ſeene, they'd owne
Murders, more than the baſiliske could commit,
Were he all eye, more than revenge has acted,
Or than the triviall ſpight of plague, and warre
Produce, in their full heate. — Ʋrſini be ſpeedy
Or I'le outrunne deſigne. —
Ziſco.
My Lord.
The houres are favourable
And have brought opportunitie along with 'em,
We muſt reſolve for action.
I'me prepar'd.
But Ziſco, art thou ſure Felicia was.—
Sure? puh! would you know? I my ſelfe
Am the Moore he caus'd to raviſh her.
And canſt thou do't againe?
Bravely.
This night then thou ſhalt—raviſh his Miſtris,
Calantha! this night! I've prepar'd all things ready
For thy conveyance into her chamber—thou wilt doe't
Reſolv'd.
And kill her too?
An ſhee were my mother.
Obſcure your ſelfe a while.—how now?
My Lord, the French have kept their word,
And uneſpied have ſtolne from Genoa,
Enter'd our haven, and this night have ſet
Upon our fleete, the bold Sicilians too
I'th towne are up in armes.
There ſpoke my Genius.
My Lord! the Cittie's in a mutinie,
The Court in wild diſtraction.
Well, beyond my hopes: excellent well; Grutti, Caſſio, be nere us, we muſt uſe your helpe to night.
Valenzo playes from the Caſtle with his Canons,
And ſtrikes both parties without diſtinction:
He's now marching up with a well ord'red troope,
T'is thought he had intelligence of your intents.
O my fate! that man undoe's mee.
Thus early ſins are blaſted in the bud,
There is no ſafety but in being good.
—'Tis late.
Each man retire to his quarter: Captaines,
We entertaine your merit with a ſerious welcome.
Our deſerts, my Lord,
Are ſo ſlender, that wer't not to prejudice
Your judgement, we would bluſh to owne any.
Hang this flattery, merit quotha? is't ſuch a piece of merit to cut a ſcore or two of throats; knocke downe an hundred o'th citty herd? a gallant could do ſo much for's Cockatrice.
The King ſhall give you each particular thinkes: He owes you both a trophey,
His acknowledgement
Of our duty, would raiſe our pride to ſinne,
We ſhould forget to let heaven ſhare i'th victory.
Victories, by Mars's creſt it deſerves not to come i'th Chronicle, though Hollinſhead or Hall, thoſe voluminous forreiners ſhould write our annals, 'twill ne're make us juſtle in among the Caeſars, or owne a name i'th liſt o'th worthies.
No Contareno, wee will not have thee painted in vile ugly colours, and clapt upon chimneies, thou ſhalt be cut—
In braſſe? mine would make an excellent brazen face?
In Parian marble, wee'le rob the Quarries
To reare thee up a glorious monument.
A glorious loame to ſet lazie ſpiders a worke in, an office for birds to mute in, if theſe be your glorious monumēts for men of armes, I'le e'en live to ſin out my merit (as you call it) then when I die, the world and I will ſhake hands, and cry quit of all ſides.
Hee that ſhould heare thee talke thus, and not know thee well, would doubt thy valour.
Hercules! an hee did he ſhould try it.
T'were puniſhment enough.
Gonçales— I gratulate thy navall victory;
France will have cauſe hereafter to mention thee in ſad ſtory,
Thou giv'ſt them but a churliſh ſalutation.
Such as they deſerv'd,
It ſeemes they came rather to ſteale than fight,
They were as ill prepar'd, as they had meant
To beare our empty hulkes away unqueſtion'd;
For ſoone as they perceived we deſcri'd 'em,
Pale, as the lillies in their trembling flagges,
They turn'd their ſailes, and fled; we made after 'em,
With ſwift wing'd lightning from our Canons mouth,
Which ſunke and fir'd 'em all, ere they could quit
The channell, or gaine the wider Ocean;
Beleeve mee, noble Souldier, thou art deare
To fame; as old in victory, as in yeares,
Yet ſtill thou toyl'ſt t'undoe thy ſelfe, and benefit
Thy ingratefull ſoyle, which never will be able
To requite thy meaneſt ſervice.
Yet you for the ſame cauſe, i'th pride of youth,
Oppos'd your ſelfe betwixt the ſtate and danger,
When their ſicke hopes, were as their fortunes, deſperate;
Reduc'd a Kingdome to your ſway, in whoſe
Rich ſpoyles, your gawdie Souldier triumphs;
Whilſt boaſting of their rifled plumes, they drinke
Health's to victory; yet thoſe ſo moderate,
Their bowles encreaſe their fury, not their ſurfeits.
How theſe tall men o'th ſword claw one another?
They have an itch of pride runnes through 'em.
The Hero's, when thou com'ſt into Elyzium,
To give thee place, ſhall ſhift their bleſſed manſions.
And load thee with their lawrells.
How my feares betray mee! ſhunning
One toyle, I runne into another.
Che va la?
Oh mee! I'me ſurpriz'd.
Spirit of valour th'art my priſoner.
Ha! whom have you there?
(Valenzo! my voyce betrayes mee.)
A young Sicilian, ſhall I draw my ſteele,
And give him a gentle ſtroke?
Lend mee my ſword — and be thou what thou wilt I dare thee to thy worſt.
Bravely ſpoke,—ſet forward then.—
Traytour! the Princeſſe! Calantha!
All the better; ſhe's skilfull at her weapon,
We'le but exchange a thruſt in ſport.
Ha! what meanes this flight?
Dare none of you fight?
Deare Lady, not with you.
Then you are cowards, they ſpeake you ſo i'th Citty,
And I came out thus purpoſely to try you.
If you pleaſe, you ſhall quickly ſee that,
Command us ſheath our ſwords in one anothers
Boſomes— we'le fly like lightning to execute your
Commands; — you're our Princeſſe.
No, I'me your Prince's murthreſſe.
How?
I've kill'd your King: will none
Diſpatch mee yet?
Sure ſhe's diſtracted.
We muſt diſarme you Lady; — t'is a duty to our Prince
Was never till now unwillingly perform'd!
You muſt backe to'th Court, whither we'le waite upon you.
Villaines, cowards,
The Princeſſe! what made ſhee abroad ſo late?
Did ſhe not ſay that ſhee had kill'd the King too?
Come let's walke the round; things are yet unſetled.
'Tis ſo darke now, an the divell ſhould lye perdieu I ſhould go neere to ſtumble on's hornes.
Too much of this ſad ſtory, Oh theſe men
How are they degenerate from the goodneſſe
Of their creation! they have beene alwaies falſe —
Silly as we are,
We know it; their vowes and othes are traytours
To us, and yet we hugge them, let them into our boſomes,
Into our hearts, till they undoe us?
But Madame, why do'e deſire us to leave you?
Fear you not his fury, what it may prompt him too,
When he ſhall ſee you are not his Calantha.
He never was acquainted with that paſſion,
He's violent in nothing, — But in love.
And yet he may diſſemble that too
As well as his vowes.
Should hee? were his hand
Lift up to ſtrike mee, I can charme it there!
Who can looke on a Ladies bended knees,
Wet cheekes, ſwolne eyes, heare her ſighs, her prayers,
And yet be cruell: If there be one that can,
That one is not Ferrando; his boſome is
Paſſable to every grone; it ſtrikes his heart:
He would tell mee (when he was abſent)
If I ſigh't, or wept, for then he ſaid
He wept and ſigh'd by ſympathy.
Yet now he loves you not.
Can hee not love himſelfe? here, here I beare him,
Himſelfe in a leſſe modell, this I'le ſhew him,
If he miſtruſt t'is none of his; let him
But rip mee up, there he ſhall ſee each limbe
As like to his, as his one hand, one eye,
One cheeke is like the other: beſides there lyes
Folded by his owne name, he told mee hee
Would call it ſo, (Ferrando,) and leſt I
Should chance forget, I wrote it in my heart,
There he will finde it.
Good Lady!
T'is a ſad nuptiall night, this,
I'le tell him too how hee
Would grieve if I were dead, goe hanging downe
His head, vailing his eyes from heaven, aſham'd
To looke up to the place, where his Felicia is:
Or poring on the ground, as he would finde
Where my neglected aſhes lay a ſport
To th' windes; where ſome rude blaſt might blow mee up
Into his eyes, and then hee'd weepe to finde,
Mee there; weepe till the fretting brine had burn'd
His eye-bals out.
He told mee of his dreames, what pleaſure hee
Had to finde me in 'em: alas they will
Be terrible now: I ſhall affright him, appeare
A thin pale ghoſt, make him ſtart out in his ſleepe;
(Alas! I will not) yet he'le dreame he heard mee.
Cry out, Ferrando! revenge upon Ferrando:
This cannot chuſe but ſtartle him. —
Heaven grant it may.
Madame all joy that we can hope, or wiſh,
Be with you.
I'le goe alone into the bed-chamber.
There expect him,—pray leave mee.
Good night, I heare him coming.
Our Navie victour.
The City quiet too I thoſe clouds
Which threatned ruine to your Kingdome, all
Blowne o're; the skie ſerene and calme, as if
It laugh't at your vaine feares; the lampes of heaven
That now ſeem'd all blowne out, are trimm'd a new
And brighter ſhine, to lead you to Elyzium.
To Heaven, Elyzium's poore to what wee ſhall
Enjoy to night.
The land of ſome dull villager
Or doughty Poëts dreames.
The birth of fancie,
A thin, fantaſticke, aierie paradiſe;
With which they flatter their weake hopes, but mine
Is knowne to ſenſe; we gather odours there; wealthy
In their native ſweeteneſſe, flowers of a hew
As bright as laſting, roſes and lillies
Blowne from their ſtalkes, meete here, and dwell upon
Her cheekes, as if there onely they were priviledg'd
To enjoy an everlaſting ſpring. Ʋrſ. Let your
Imaginations ſeed even to a ſurfet, your ſenſes
Are too too weake, and narrow t'entertaine
The bounteous flowing of her pleaſures:
You'le let ſo much paſſe by unknowne,
As if you tooke but tribute of her bleſſings:
When the whole ſtocke is yours.
We'le be her Mars, and meete her in ſoft skirmiſh,
In amorous duell, where we'le ſoftly yeeld
And let her winne: (to raiſe her to the pride
Of a new victory, as much upon our ſelves
As we have done upon her Country,
Then ſhall ſhee binde us gently in her haire
Fetters for Captive lovers, and in ſcorne
Of our trimme youth, and temperate blood, when we
Begin to faint within her armes, ſhall then
Supply us with new ſtrength from her own eyes;
Whence ſhe will dart a ſoule at every glance
Rich as her ſelfe, and the bleſt ſmiles t'is made of;
Create an active flame within our breaſt
Able to give old ſtatua's life and motion,
Make their ſtiffe marble feete ſupple as the joynts
Of love: — oh I'me loſt! my Venus
Come; lead to my Venus.
Your Cynthia, —your Moone
With a man in her—there there's
Your way, why move you not?
How you ſtand.
Ʋrſini, Ha! Se'ſt thou that blacke thing there?
That ugly fiend, I'le out ſtare thee, devill.
Where are you Sir?
'Tis done.
Raviſh't! Calantha's raviſh't—oh torment!
Grim fury poſt to hell.
Pardon mee Sir,
I've a little bufineſſe to diſpatch firſt —
This for Felicia, thus Alberto fell.
Oh I'me wounded.
Ha! do'e know mee Prince?
Frederico! juſt heavens.
Stay your hand—be innocent in your revenge,
Let me beare all the guilt.
Could'ſt thou thinke, dull Prince, that heaven ſo
Doated on thy royaltie, thy crowne, thy ſcepter,
Or regall pall could beare thee out in ſin?
Or the weake ſhine of triviall ſtate dazle
Their eyes that looke upon the bleſſed ſunne!
Could'ſt thou flatter thy ſelfe into ſuch a Security,
That vengeance would not finde thee out?
When thou had'ſt forfeited thy luxurious palate
With all the dainties of Felicia's body
Thirſted her blood, quaff'd off whole bowles of it,
Till thou wer't drunke, and wild with fury
Of thy intemperate draughts —Am not I a rare villaine now?
Mad, ſtarke mad, beſides himſelfe,
Sure this is but a dreame, and I aſleepe.
Thus, thus I'le wake you:—
Oh my blood ſcalds, h'has ſhot wild fire into my heart,
Ah traytour, thy ſteele is poyſon'd.
Frederico, let mee embrace thee:
Now our revenge is perfect.
Your paſſage lyes this way.
Thorough us.
Treaſon, treaſon, raiſe the Court.
Breake ope the doores.
We are betray'd.
Villaine I greete thy heart.
Where tends your buſineſſe?
Slave to hell, and thou ſhalt carry't thither.
Fire, fire, the poyſon boyles my entrals.
The Prince wounded!
Where are the traitours?
Here I am his murtherer.
Frederico.
Valenzo, I am o'recome. —
New miracles, Calantha, my beſt my deareſt love: — Oh I am ſicke, ſtand off Calantha, my breath's ſo hot, 'twill ſinge thee elſe; and licke thy beauty's up, like nimble flames; But doſt thou live?
To curſe thee falſe and perjur'd.
The ſpheares are out of tune; nature's diſtraught;
The orbes celeſtiall have turn'd round ſo long
That they are giddie: the ſtarres are in a mutiny,
The Intelligences are altogether by'th eares.
Heaven! I bleſſe your juſtice:
Sterne tyrant! that triumph'ſt o're the memory
Of my father, mock'ſt mee with love,
Till like a foole I doated on my fetters,
'Cauſe they were golden ones, that thus
Thy devilliſh art might make my ſoule a captive,
With my body.
Aenigmaticall.
Yet then a Lady mourn'd thy perjur'd vowes.
Whom thou betrayd'ſt to looſe adultery.
Thy ſpeech, Calantha, is darker than an Oracle.
Truer it is, and dar'ſt thou yet diſſemble it?
'Tis a truth precious to time, who will preſerv't
To blaſt thy memory, and derive a ſtaine
On all thy ſucceſſours.
How? or when arriv'd this your knowledge Madame?
How? or when arriv'd this your knowledge Madame?
Felicia told mee all her ſelfe
Confirm'd it by religious oathes; beſides
This medall which ſhe gave mee from her necke,
A pledge of his broke faith, with the ſad fruits
Of his ſate luſt, within her wombe.
She's a blacke whore: ſhee lies; beleeve her not.
Thou wilt be damn'd:
So may I; and houle eternally
In thoſe blew flames the devils bath in,
If ever my vowes were made to any other
Then thee; and thoſe, as ſpotleſſe as thy ſoule.—
But whom have wee here?
Felicia! Sad Lady ſhe intreated
This night's exchange of place; that ſhe might ſhew him
What an untimely mother he had made her,
And this 'twas caus'd my flight,
Felicia!
Ha! murder'd.
My love.
My ſiſter! raviſh't:
And murder'd by! mee, inceſtuous villaine!
Didſt thou not tell mee that Ferrando raviſh't her,
And caſt her to his ſlaves, a prey to their
Bold appetites and furies.
To incenſe you the more againſt him; I told you
What I onely did imagine, becauſe at my returne
From Sicily, report whiſper'd her loſt,
Loſt in the ruines of my Father,
Which made mee thinke her murder'd.
Ye Gods! I now acknowledge you ſupreame:
Your power is mighty over our fond arts.
Silly projectours we enſnare our ſelves!
Whilſt we ſpread nets for others.
This braine has wrought all theſe ſad plots,
Calantha, take your Lord; who is as true,
And holy in his vo wes, as thoſe bleſt Saints
He invok't.
And yet Felicia wrong'd?
'Twas I by whom ſhe ſwell'd, and not Ferrando,
As 'twas ſuppos'd.
Suppos'd! ſhe ſwore 'twas hee.
Ʋrſini, farewell; I'le heare the reſt anon—
That aggravates my crime, who wrought her into
This falſe beliefe, for having long lov'd her,
Without returne of mutuall flames, and at length
Finding that the impediment was her fond
Dotage upon the Prince; I determin'd,
Rather than not to be poſſeſt of her,
To part with faith and loyaltie, feign'd all
My viſits for him, courted her acceptation
Of his love, which I ſo darkly brought about
That ſhe conſenting to private meetings
As oft as ſhe expected the Prince,
I my ſelfe fill'd her armes.—
Then you conclude Ferrando innocent▪
In act, or thought.
Felicia! ſiſter! your brother Frederico call's,
She's gon, cold, cold! and pale, and yet methinkes
She ſmiles, looke up, Felicia—
But how came it to paſſe ſhe nere diſcry'd you?
For reaſons I then gave her: all our meetings
Were in the night, and that i'th darke too, where I
Diſſembled ſo the Prince in voyce and geſture.—
This agrees right with her relation: villaine thou haſte undone mee.
And my ſelfe too.
Death hangs upon her lids, 'tis eternall night with her. hoa, ſiſter, ſtay, take mee along with you; I'le follow you.
Pernicious traytour.
Rage choakes my utterance: — give mee your fword.
Our hearts and hands are yours:
Our hearts and hands are yours:
Ile be an age in killing thee, do'ſt tremble?
Thou look'ſt like one of thoſe thin frozen ghoſts,
That chattering lye on hils of thicke-ribb'd Ice,
Come meete my fury.
Here, here's my heart.
I: I'le dig it out,
And caſt it to the hungry fiends.
My ſtrength decayes, I reele and totter like a crack't reed that leanes againſt the windes.
Take your ſword.—
Madame.
Take it I ſay.
You do him too much honour.
Manag't with skill and ſtrength, or thou affront'ſt
My honour,—faint-hearted! coward, I'le follow thee to hell.
Mercy heavens!
Ho! Charon, more company, lye farther there jolt-head, what quarrelling you dogs? thy oare, thy oare ferriman: clap 'em o'th ſconce with't, there, there.
The Gods are juſt.
You wore their cauſe upon your ſword.
'Tis poore revenge this, can he not live againe?
Start up from th'earth with life, and double ſtrength?
Wer't centupled I'de meete him: —but oh my eyes!
Looke here Valenzo: which is Prince, which ſubject,
Which is my lov'd Ferrando? I ſee there is
No ceremonious ſtate, no pompe in death;
They all lye levell, all quiet, the bad as well
As the good, why ſhould this traytour here
This divelliſh arch, arch-traytour lye as ſilent
As his Lord? ſhould he not ſtare, and foame,
Start up and howle, till he wakes all the dead?
Lady:
Her old paſſion returnes againe.
—Roare, and curſe heavens,
But they too have forgot to puniſh ſinners,
And reward vertue, here's an example on't;
We were both vertuous, and deſerv'd not this
Bad uſage; let mee embrace thee: —
Cold as the earth he lyes on, and as dull too:
Where is the ſoule, that buſie flame that lent
Him life and motion? affected ſuch vaine pompe
And glorious noyſe: whither is't fled? poore liveleſſe trunke,
It was unkindly done to leave thee thus,
A prey to wormes and rottenneſſe.
Are you there fury, Megaera, Tiſiphone, Alecto,
Howle, howle, furies, I'le laſh you.
Kind death th'art welcome; I kiſſe thy dart.
The Princeſſe! ſhe's ſlaine, unluckie hand.
Spight of our ſtarres, and all rude oppoſition,
We are one in death: Valenzo ſee us interr'd,
Both in one tombe, that we may mingle aſhes
And be ſecurely lodg'd, you know our ſoules
Were one; our hearts were long united.
A FATALL UNION.
Draw, draw the curteines there, my love and I
Muſt ſleepe; — uncivill I proteſt, put out the lights,
We ſhall ſleepe beſt i'th darke; pray don't diſturbe us,
You may fright him from mine armes, —but — I'le — hold — him — faſt.
The ruin'd treaſure of two Kingdomes
In one heape.
In the bed-chamber! this way!
Yes Lady, the cry was full of horrour.
'Twas the Phyſitians potion this my Lord.
Done in revenge.
Would 'thad bin poyſon.
Bleſſe mee! whence all theſe tragedies.
Aſtoniſhment ceizes mee.
The King:
Ʋrſini dead. ha! whom have we here, Frederico,
Yes, and Felicia too.
All ſlaine; by what dire hand?
I'le tell you that within.—
Charintha is your Queene.
May you be happy in her love.
Remove the bodies, i'th morning we will take order for the ſtate, and funerall rites.
Of theſe; the laſting ſtory of whoſe wrongs
Shall be all royall lovers evening ſongs.
AFter theſe ruines, thus your Poët ſtands,
Expecting his owne deſtiny from your hands,
By them he lives or dies; if it ſhould hap
That ſtead of a mild doome, applauſe or clap.
(Your triviall allowance) his liſtening eares
Meete with harſh whiſpers, or halfe ſtifled jeeres,
Such unkinde cenſure kils him; his ſad Muſe
Ʋnleſſe you give her bay, has vow'd to uſe
The Cypreſſe wreathes, her pietie did allow
Thoſe onely to incircle her owne brow:
Your candid acceptation will be
New life and ſoule to his loſt Poeſie;
His flame's but ſicklie yet, your breath no doubt
Will either blow't up higher, or quite out.