WHy Gentlemen, doe you know what you doe? ha! would you ha' kept me out? Chriſtmas, old Chriſtmas? Chriſtmas of London, and Captaine Chriſtmas? Pray you let me be brought before my Lord Chamberlaine, i'le not be anſwer'd elſe: 'tis merrie in hall when beards wag all: I ha' ſeene the time you ha' wiſh'd for me, for a merry Chriſtmas, and now you ha' me; they would not let me in: I muſt come another time! a good jeaſt, as if I could come more then once a yeare; why, I am no dangerous perſon, and ſo I told my friends, o' the Guard. I am old Gregorie Chriſtmas ſtill, and though I come out of Popes-head-alley as good a Proteſtant, as any i' my Pariſh. The troth is, I ha' brought a Maſque here, out o' the Citie, o' my owne making, and doe preſent it by a ſett of my Sonnes, that come out of the Lanes of London, good dancing boyes all: It was intended I confeſſe for Curryers Hall, but becauſe the weather has beene open, and the Livory were not at leiſure to ſee it till a froſt came that they cannot worke. I thought it convenient, with ſome little alterations, and the Groome of the Revells hand to 't, to fit it for a higher place, which I have done; and though I ſay it, another manner of deviſe then your New yeares night. Bones o' bread, the King! Sonne Rowland, Son Clem, be ready there in a trice; quicke, Boyes.
NOw God preſerve, as you well doe deſerve,
your Majeſties all, two there;
Your Highneſſe ſmall, with my good Lords all,
and Ladies, how doe you do there?
Gi'me leave to aske, for I bring you a Maſque
from little little little little London;
Which ſay the KING likes, I ha'paſſed the Pikes,
if not, old Chriſtmas is undone.
A' peace, whats the matter there?
Here's one, o' Friday ſtreet would come in.
By no meanes, nor out of neither of the Fiſhſtreets, admit not a man; they are not Chriſtmas creatures: Fiſh, and faſting dayes, foh! Sonnes, ſayd I well? looke too't.
No bodie out o' Friday-ſtreet, nor the two Fiſh-ſtreets there; doe yo heare?
Shall John Butter o' Milke-ſtreet come in? aske him.
Yes, he may ſlip in for a Torch-bearer, ſo he melt not too faſt, that he will laſt till the Maſque be done.
Right Sonne.
OVr Dances freight, is a matter of eight,
and two, the which are Wenches;
In all they be ten, foure Cockes to a Hen,
and will ſwim to the tune like Tenches.
Each hath his knight, for to carry his light,
which ſome would ſay are Torches;
To bring them here, and to lead them there,
and home againe to their owne porches.
Now their intent —
Now, all the Lords bleſſe me, where am I tro? where is Cupid: ſerve the King? they may ſerve the Cobler well enough, ſome of 'em, for any courteſie they have y'wiſſe; they ha' need o' mending: unrude people they are, your Courtiers, here was thruſt upon thruſt indeed! was it ever ſo hard to get in before, tro?
How now? what's the matter?
A place forſooth, I do want a place; I would have a good place to ſee my Child act in before the KING, and QUENES Majeſties (God bleſſe 'em) to night.
Why, here is no place for you.
Right forſooth, I am Cupids Mother, Cupids owne Mother: forſooth; yes forſooth: I dwell in pudding-lane; I forſooth, he is Prentiſe in Love-lane with a Bugle-maker, that makes of your Bobs, and Bird-bolts for Ladies,
Good Lady Venus of Pudding-lane, you muſt go out for all this.
Yes forſooth, I can ſit any where, ſo I may ſee Cupid act; hee is a pretty Child, though I ſay it that perhaps ſhould not, you will ſay: I had him by my firſt Husband, he was a Smith forſooth, we dwelt in Doe-little lane then, he came a moneth before his time, and that may make him ſomewhat imperfect: But I was a Fiſhmongers daughter.
No matter for your Pedigree, your houſe; good Venus will you depart?
I forſooth, he'le ſay his part I warrant him, as well as ere a Play boy of 'em all: I could ha' had money enough for him, an I would ha beene tempted, and ha' let him out by the weeke, to the Kings Players: Maſter Burbadge has beene about and about with me; and ſo has old Mr. Hemings too, they ha' need of him, where is he tro'a? I would faine ſee him, pray God they have given him ſome drinke ſince he came.
Are you readie Boyes? ſtrike up, nothing will drown this noiſe but a Drum: a' peace, yet, I ha' not done
Why? here be halfe of the properties forgotten, Father.
Poſt and Paire wants his pur-chops, and his pur-dogs.
Ha' you nere a Son at the Groom-Porters to beg, or borrow a paire of Cards quickly?
It ſhall not need, heer's your Son Chrater without; has Cards in his pocket.
Odds ſo; ſpeake to the Guard to let him in, under the name of a propertie.
And heer's New-yeares-gift h'as an Orenge, and Roſmarie, but not a clove to ſticke in't.
Why, let one go to the Spicery.
Fie, fie, fie; it's naught, it's naught boyes.
Why, I have cloves, if it be cloves you want, I have cloves in my purſe, I never goe without one in my mouth.
And Mumming, has not his vizard neither.
No matter, his owne face ſhall ſerve for a puniſhment, and 'tis bad enough; has Waſſell her boule, and Mince-pie her ſpoones?
I, I; but Miſ-rule doth not like his ſuite: he ſaies the Players have lent him one too little, on purpoſe to diſgrace him.
Let him hold his peace, and his diſgrace will bee the leſſe: what? ſhall wee proclaime where wee were furniſht? Mum! Mum! a' peace, be readie good Boyes.
Now their intent, is above to preſent
with all the appurtenances
A right Chriſtmas, as of old it was,
to be gathered out of the Dances.
Which they doe bring, and afore the King,
the Queene, and Prince, as it were now
Drawne here by Love; who, over and above,
doth draw himſelfe i'the geere too.
Hum drum, ſauce for a Coney;
no more of your Martiall muſicke:
Even for the ſake, o' the next new ſtake,
for there I doe meane to uſe it.
And now to yee, who in place are to ſee,
with Roll and Farthingale hooped:
I pray you know, though he want his bow
by the wings, that this is Cupid.
He might goe backe, for to cry what you lack,
but that were not ſo wittie:
His Cap, and Coat, are enough to note
that he is the Love o' the Cittie.
And he leades on, though he now begon,
for that was onely his-rule:
But now comes in, Tom of Boſomes Inne,
and he preſenteth Miſ-rule.
Which you may know, by the very ſhow,
albeit you never aske it:
For there you may ſee what his Enſignes bee,
the Rope, the Cheeſe, and the Basket.
This Carol plaies, and has beene in his dayes
a chirping boy, and a kill pot:
Kit Cobler it is, I'me a Father of his,
and he dwells in the lane, cal'd Fil-pot.
But who is this? O' my daughter Sis
Mince-pie, with her doe not dally
On paine o' your life: She's an honeſt Cooks wife,
and comes out of Scalding-Alley.
Next in the trace, comes Gambol in place,
and to make my tale the ſhorter:
My Sonne Hercules, tane, out of Diſtaffe-lane
but an active man, and a Porter.
Now Poſt and Paire, old Chriſtmaſses heire
doth make, and a gingling Sally:
And wott you who, t'is one of my two
Sons, Cardmakers in Pur-alley.
Next in a trice, with his boxe and his Dice,
Mac-pippin my Son, but younger,
Brings Mumming in; and the knave will win,
for a' is a Coſtermonger.
But New-yeares-gift, of himſelfe makes ſhift
to tell you what his name is:
With Orenge on head, and his Gingerbread,
Clem Waſpe of Honey-lane 'tis.
This I you tell, is our jolly Waſſell,
and for Twelfe-night more meet too:
She workes by the Ell, and her name is Nell,
and ſhe dwells in Thred-needle-ſtreet too.
Then Offering he, with his Diſh, and his Tree,
that in every great houſe keepeth;
Is by my Sonne, young Little-worth done,
and in Penny-rich-ſtreet he ſleepeth.
Laſt, Baby-cake, that an end doth make
of Chriſtmas merrie, merrie vaine a
Is Child Rowlan, and a ſtraight young man,
though he come out of Crooked-lane' a.
There ſhould have beene, and a dozen I wene,
but I could finde but one more;
Child of Chriſtmas, and a Logge it was,
when I them all had gone ore.
I pray'd him, in a time ſo trim,
that he would make one to praunce it:
And I my ſelfe, would have beene the twelfe,
o' hut Log was to heavie to dance it.
You worthie wights, King, Lords, and Knights,
or Queene, and Ladies bright:
Cupid invites, you to the ſights
he ſhall preſent to night.
Tis a good child, ſpeake out, hold up your head Love.
And which Cupid—and which Cupid, &c.
Do not ſhake ſo Robin, if thou beeſt a'cold, I ha' ſome warme waters for thee, here.
Come, you put Robin Cupid out with your waters, and your fiſling; will you be gone?
I forſooth; hee's a child, you muſt conceive, and muſt be uſ'd tenderly; he was never in ſuch an aſſembly before forſooth, but once at Warmoll Queſt, forſooth, where he ſayd grace as prettily as any of the Sheriffes Hinch-boyes forſooth.
Will you peace, forſooth?
And which Cupid, and which Cupid, &c.
I that's a good boy, ſpeake plaine, Robin: how does his Majeſtie like him, I pray? will he give eight pence a day thinke you? ſpeak out Robin.
Nay, he is out enough, you may take him away, and begin your Dance; this it is to have ſpeeches.
You wrong the Child, you doe wrong the Infant; I' peale to his Majeſtie.
Well done Boyes, my fine Boyes, my bully Boyes.
NOr doe you thinke that their legges is all
the commendation of my Sons,
For at the Artillery-Garden they ſhall
as well (forſooth) uſe their Guns.
And march as fine, as the Muſes nine,
along the ſtreets of London:
And i'their brave tires, to gi'their falſe fires,
eſpecially Tom my Son.
Now if the Lanes and the Allyes afford,
ſuch an ac-ativitie as this:
At Chriſtmas next, if they keepe their word,
can the children of Cheapſide miſſe?
Though, put the caſe, when they come in place,
they ſhould not dance, but hop:
Their very gold lace, with their ſilke would'em grace,
having ſo many knights, o'the Shop!
But were I ſo wiſe, I might ſeeme to adviſe
ſo great a Potentate as your ſelfe:
They ſhould Sir, I tell yee, ſpar't out o' their bellie,
and this way ſpend ſome of their pelfe.
I, and come to the Court, for to make you ſome ſport,
at the leaſt once every yeare:
As Chriſtmas hath done, with his ſeventh or eigth Son,
and his couple of Daughters deare.