Is ſeene to come as afarre off, accompanied with
Grace, Love, Harmonie, Revell, Sport, Laughter.
Let us play, and dance, and ſing,
let us now turne every ſort;
O' the pleaſures of the Spring,
to the graces of a Court.
From ayre, from cloud, from dreams, from toyes,
to ſounds, to ſence, to love to joyes;
Let your ſhewes be new, as ſtrange,
let them oft and ſweetly varie;
Let them haſte ſo to their change,
as the Seers may not tarrie;
Too long t' expect the pleaſing't ſight
doth take away from the delight.
Yet heare what your delight doth pray
all ſowre and ſullen looks away,
that are the ſervants of the day,
Our ſports are of the humorous night,
Who feeds the ſtars that give her light,
and uſeth (then her wont) more bright,
to help the viſion of DELIGHT.
See, ſee her Scepter, and her Crowne
are all of flame, and from her gowne
a traine of light comes waving down.
This night in dew ſhe will not ſteepe
The braine, nor locke the ſence in ſleepe;
but all awake, with Phantomes keepe,
and thoſe to make DELIGHT more deep.
Breake Phant'ſie from thy cave of cloud,
and ſpread thy purple wings;
Now all thy figures are allow'd,
and various ſhapes of things;
Create of ayrie formes, a ſtreame;
it muſt have bloud, and naught of fleame,
And though it be a waking dreame;
Yet let it like an odour riſe
to all the Sences here,
And fall like ſleep upon their eies,
or muſick in their eare.
Bright Night, I obey thee, and am come at thy call
But it is no one dreame that can pleaſe theſe all;
Wherefore I would know what Dreames would delight'em;
For never was Phant'ſie more loth to affright'em.
And Phant'ſie I tell you has dreams that have wings,
And dreams that have honey, and dreams that have ſtings;
Dreames of the maker, and Dreames of the teller,
Dreames of the kitchin, and Dreames of the Cellar:
Some that are tall, and ſome that are Dwarffes,
Some that were halter'd, and ſome that weare ſcarffes;
Some that are proper, and ſignifie o' thing,
And ſome another, and ſome that are nothing:
For ſay the French Verdingale, and the French hood
Were here to diſpute; muſt it be underſtood
A feather, for a wiſpe were a fit moderator?
Your Oſtritch beleeve it's no faithfull tranſlator
Of perfect Utopian; And then it were an od-piece
To ſee the concluſion peepe forth at a cod-piece.
The politique pudding hath ſtill his two ends,
Tho the bellows, and the bag-pipe were nev'r ſo good friends:
And who can report what offence it would be
For the Squirrell to ſee a Dog clime a tree?
If a Dreame ſhould come in now to make you afeard,
With a Windmill on his head, and bells at his beard;
Would you ſtreight weare your ſpectacles, here, at your toes,
And your boots o' your browes, and your ſpurs o' your noſe?
Your Whale he will ſwallow, a hogs-head for a pill;
But the maker o' the mouſe-trap, is he that hath skill.
And the nature of the Onion, is to draw teares,
As well as the Muſtard; peace, pitchers have eares,
And Shitlecocks wings, theſe things doe not mind'em,
If the Bell have any ſides, the clapper will find'em:
There's twice ſo much muſicke in beating the tabor,
As i'the Stock-fiſh, and ſomewhat leſſe labour.
Yet all this while, no proportion is boaſted
T'wixt an egge, and an Oxe, though both have been roſted,
For grant the moſt Barbers can play o' the Citterne,
Is it requiſite a Lawyer ſhould plead to a Ghitterne?
You will ſay now, the Morris-bells were but bribes
To make the heele forget that ev'r it had kibes;
I ſay let the wine make nev'r ſo good jelly,
The conſcience o' the bottle, is much i'the belly:
For why? doe but take common Councell i'your way,
And tell me who'le then ſet a bottle of hay
Before the old Uſurer, and to his horſe
A ſlice of ſalt-butter, perverting the courſe
Of civill ſocietie? open that gap,
And out skip your fleas, foure and twenty at a clap,
With a chaine and a trundle-bed following at th'heeles,
And will they not cry then, the world runs a wheeles:
As for example, a belly, and no face,
With the bill of a Shoveler, may here come in place;
The haunches of a Drum, with the feet of a pot,
And the tayle of a Kentiſhman to it; why not?
Yet would I take the ſtars to be cruell,
If the Crab, and the Ropemaker ever fight duell,
On any dependance, be it right, be it wrong,
But mum; a thread may be drawne out too long.
Why? this you will ſay was phantaſticall now,
As the Cocke, and the Bull, the Whale, and the Cow;
But vaniſh away, I have change to preſent you,
And ſuch as I hope will more truly content you:
Behold the gold-haird Houre deſcending here,
That keepes the gate of Heaven, and turnes the yeare,
Alreadie with her ſight, how ſhe doth cheare,
And makes another face of things appeare.
Why looke you ſo, and all turne dumbe!
to ſee the opener of the New-yeare come?
My preſence rather ſhould invite,
and ayd, and urge, and call to your delight,
The many pleaſures that I bring
are all of youth, of heate, of life, and ſpring,
And were prepard to warme your blood,
not fixe it thus as if your Statutes ſtood.
we ſee, we heare, we feele, we taſte,
we ſmell the change in every flowre,
we onely wiſh that all could laſt,
and be as new ſtill as the houre.
WONDER muſt ſpeake, or breake; what is this? growes
The wealth of Nature here, or Art? it ſhowes
As if Favonius, father of the Spring,
Who, in the verdant Meads doth reigne ſole king,
Had rowſd him here, and ſhooke his feathers, wet
With purple ſwelling Nectar? and had let
The ſweet and fruitfull dew fall on the ground
To force out all the flowers that might be found?
Or a Minerva with her needle had
Th'enamourd earth with all her riches clad,
And made the downie Zephire as he flew
Still to be followd with the Springs beſt hue?
The gaudie Peacocke boaſts not in his traine,
So many lights and ſhadowes, nor the raine▪
Reſolving Iris, when the Sun doth court ber,
Nor purple Pheſant while his Aunt doth ſporther
To heare him crow; and with a pearched pride
Wave his diſ-coloured necke, and purple ſide?
I have not ſeene the place could more ſurprize,
It looks (me thinkes) like one of natures eyes,
Or her whole bodie ſet in art? behold!
How the Blew-binde weed doth it ſelfe infold
With Honey-ſuckle, and both theſe intwine
Themſelves with Bryonie, and Jeſſamine,
To caſt a kinde and odoriferous ſhade?
How better then they are, are all things made
By WONDER? But a while refreſh thine eye,
Ile put thee to thy oftner, what, and why?
Thou wilt indeed; what better change appeares?
Whence is it that the ayre ſo ſudden cleares,
And all things in a moment turne ſo milde,
Whoſe breath or beams, have got proud earth with child,
Of all the treaſure that great Natur's worth,
And makes her every minute to bring forth?
How comes it Winter is ſo quite forc't hence,
And lockt up under ground? that every ſence
Hath ſeverall objects? Trees have got their heads,
The fields their coats? that now the ſhining Meads
Doe boaſt the Paunce, the Lillie, and the Roſe;
And every flower doth laugh as Zephire blowes?
That Seas are now more even then the Land?
The Rivers runne as ſmoothed by his hand;
Onely their heads are criſped by his ſtroake:
How plaies the Yeareling with his brow ſcarce broke
Now in the open Graſſe? and frisking Lambs
Make wanton Salts about their drie-ſuckt Dams;
Who to repaire their bags doe rob the fields?
How is't each bough a ſeverall muſicke yeilds?
The luſty Throſtle, early Nightingale
Accord in tune, though varie in their tale?
The chirping Swallow cald forth by the Sun,
And creſted Larke doth his diviſion run?
The yellow Bees, the ayre with murmure fill?
The Finches caroll, and the Turtles bill?
Whoſe power is this? what God?
Behold a King
Whoſe preſence maketh this perpetuall Spring,
The glories of which Spring grow in that Bower,
And are the marks and beauties of his power.
Tis he, tis he, and no power els
That makes all this what Phant'ſie tels;
The founts, the flowers, the birds, the Bees,
The heards, the flocks, the graſſe, the trees,
Do all confeſſe him; but moſt Theſe
Who call him lord of the foure Seas,
King of the leſſe and greater Iles,
And all thoſe happy when he ſmiles.
Advance, his favour calls you to advance,
And do your (this nights) homage in a'dance.
Againe, againe; you cannot be
Of ſuch a true delight too free,
Which who once ſaw would ever ſee;
And if they could the object prize,
Would while it laſts not thinke to riſe,
But wiſh their bodies all were eyes.
In curious knots and mazes ſo
The Spring at firſt was taught to go;
And Zephire, when he came to wooe
His Flora, had their motions too,
And thence did Venus learne to lead
Th' Idalian Braules, and ſo tread
As if the wind, not ſhe did walke;
Nor preſt a flower, nor bow'd a ſtalke.
I was not wearier where I lay
By frozen Tythons ſide to night,
Then I am willing now to ſtay,
And be a part of your delight.
But I am urged by the Day,
Againſt my will to bid you come away.
They yeild to Time, and ſo muſt all.
As Night to ſport, Day doth to action call,
Which they the rather doe obey,
Becauſe the Morne, with Roſes ſtrew's the way.