ROome, roome, make roome for the bouncing bellie,
Firſt father of ſauce, and deviſer of jellie;
Prime maſter of Arts, and the giver of wit,
That found out the excellent Engine, the ſpit;
The plough, and the flaile, the mill, and the hopper,
The hutch, and the boulter, the furnace and copper,
The oven, the baven, the mawkin, the peele,
The harth, and the range, the dogge, and the wheele,
He, he firſt invented the hogſhead and tun,
The gimlet and vice too, and taught 'em to run,
And ſince with the funnell, and Hippocras bag,
H'as made of himſelfe, that now he cries ſwag;
Which ſhowes though the pleaſure be but of foure inches,
Yet he is a Weeſell, the gullet that pinches
Of any delight, and not ſpares from this backe,
What ever to make of the bellie a ſacke!
Haile, haile plump paunch, ô the founder of taſte,
For freſh-meats, or powlder'd, or pickle, or paſte,
Devourer of broyl'd, back'd, roaſted, or ſod;
And emptier of cups, be they even or odd;
All which have now made thee ſo wide i'the waſte,
As ſcarce with no pudding thou art to be lac'd,
But eating and drinking untill thou doſt nod,
Thou break'ſt all thy girdles, and breakſt forth a god.
DOE you heare my friends? to whom did you ſing all this now? pardon me onely that I aske you, for I doe not looke for an anſwere; He anſwer my ſelfe, I know it is now ſuch a time as the Saturnalls for all the World, that every man ſtands under the eaves of his own hat, and ſings what pleaſe him; that's the right, and the liberty of it. Now you ſing of god Comus here the bellie-god; I ſay it is well, and I ſay it is not well: It is well as it is a ballad, and the bellie worthie of it; I muſt needes ſay, and 'twere forty yards of ballad more, as much ballad as tripe. But when the bellie is not edyfied by it, it is not well; for where did you ever read or heare, that the bellie had any eares? Come never pumpe for an anſwer, for you are defeated; Our fellow Hunger there that was as ancient a reteiner to the bellie as any of us, was turned away for being unſeaſonable, not unreaſonable, but unſeaſonable; and now is he poore thin-gut, faine to get his living with teaching of Starlings, Mag-pies, Parrots, and Jacke-dawes, thoſe things he would have taught the bellie. Beware of dealing with the bellie, the bellie will not bee talk'd too, eſpecially when he is full; then there is no venturing upon Venter, he will blow you all up, he will thunder indeed-la: Some in diriſion call him the father of farts; but I ſay he was the firſt inventor of great Ordnance, and taught us to diſcharge them on Feſtivall dayes, would we had a fit feaſt for him y'faith, to ſhew his activity; I would have ſomething now fetcht in to pleaſe his five ſences, the throat, or the two ſences the eyes: Pardon mee for my two ſences, for I that carry Hercules Boule i'the ſervice, may ſee double by my place; for I have drunke like a frog to day: I would have a Tun now brought in to dance, and ſo many bottles about him. Ha! you looke as if you would make a probleme of this; doe you ſee? do you ſee? a probleme: why bottles? and why a tun? and why a tun? and why bottles to dance? I ſay that men that drinke hard, and ſerve the bellie in any place of qualitie (as the joviall Tinkers, or the luſty kindred) are living meaſures of drinke, and can transforme themſelves, and doe every day to bottles, or tuns when they pleaſe: And when they ha' done all they can, they are as I ſay againe, (for I thinke I ſaid ſomewhat like it afore) but moving meaſures of drink, and there is a peece i'the Cellar can hold more than all they. This will I make good, if it pleaſe our new god but to give a nod, for the bellie doe's all by ſignes; and I am all for the bellie, the trueſt clocke i'the world to goe by.
VVHat Rites are theſe? breeds earth more monſters yet?
Antaeus ſcarce is cold: what can beget
This ſtore? (and ſtay) ſuch contraries upon her,
Is earth ſo fruitfull of her owne diſhonour?
Or'cauſe his vice was inhumanitie,
Hopes ſhe by vicious hoſpitalitie
To worke an expiation firſt? and then
(Helpe vertue) theſe are ſponges, and not men:
Bottles? meere veſſels? halfe a tun of paunch?
How? and the other halfe thruſt forth in haunch?
Whoſe feaſt? the bellies? Comus? and my cup
Brought in to fill the drunken Orgies up?
And here abuſ'd? that was the crownd reward,
Of thirſtie Heroes, after labour hard?
Burdens, and ſhames of nature, periſh, die;
(For yet you never liv'd) but in the ſtie
Of vice have wallow'd, and in that ſwines ſtrife
Beene buried under the offence of life:
Goe reele and fall under the load you make,
Till your ſwollen bowells burſt with what you take.
Can this be pleaſure, to extinguiſh man?
Or ſo quite change him in his figure? can
The bellie love his paine? and be content
With no delight but what's a puniſhment?
Theſe monſters plague themſelves, and fitly too,
For they doe ſuffer; what, and all the doe,
But here muſt be no ſhelter, nor no ſhrowd
For ſuch: Sincke Grove, or vaniſh into cloud.
GReat friend and ſervant of the good,
Let coole a while thy heated blood,
And from thy mighty labour ceaſe.
Lie downe, lie downe,
And give thy troubled ſpirits peace,
Whilſt vertue, for whoſe ſake
Thou doſt this god-like travaile take,
May of the choyſeſt herbage make
(Here on this Mountaine bred,)
A crowne, a crowne
For thy immortall head.
ANtaeus dead! and Hercules yet live!
Where is this Hercules? what would I give
To meet him now? meet him? nay, three ſuch other,
If they had hand in murther of our brother?
With three? with foure? with ten? nay with as many
As the name yeelds? pray anger there be any
Whereon to feed my juſt revenge, and ſoone:
How ſhall I kill him? hurle him 'gainſt the Moone,
And breake him in ſmall portions? give to Greece
His braine? and every tract of earth a peece.
2 PIG. He is yonder.
1 Where?
3 At the hill foot, aſleepe.
1 Let one goe ſteale his club.
2 My charge, Ile creepe.
4 He's ours.
1 Yes, peace.
3 Triumph, we have him boy.
4 Sure, ſure, he is ſure.
1 Come, let us dance for joy.
Wake Hercules, awake; but heave up thy blacke eye,
'Tis onely ask'd from thee to looke, and theſe will die,
Or flie:
Already they are fled,
Whom ſcorne had elſe left dead.
REſt ſtill thou active friend of vertue; Theſe
Should not diſturbe the peace of Hercules.
Earths wormes, and Honors dwarfes (at too great ods)
Prove, or provoke the iſſue of the gods.
See, here a Crowne the aged Hill hath ſent thee,
My Grand-ſire Atlas, he that did preſent thee
With the beſt ſheepe that in his fold were found,
Or golden fruit in the Heſperian ground,
For reſcuing his faire Daughters, then the prey
Of a rude Pirate as thou cam'ſt this way;
And taught thee all the learning of the Sphere,
And how like him thou might'ſt the heavens up-beare;
As that thy labours vertuous recompence
He, though a Mountaine now, hath yet the ſence
Of thanking thee for more, thou being ſtill
Conſtant to goodneſſe, guardian of the hill;
Antaeus by thee ſuffocated here,
And the voluptuous Comus god of cheere
Beate from his Grove, and that defac'd, but now
The time's arriv'd that Atlas told thee of, how
B'unalterd law, and working of the Stars,
There ſhould be a ceſſation of all jars,
Twixt Vertue and her noted oppoſite
Pleaſure; that both ſhould meet here in the ſight
Of Heſperus, the glory of the Weſt,
The brighteſt ſtarre that from his burning creſt
Lights all on this ſide the Atlanticke-Seas,
As farre as to thy Pillars, Hercules,
See where he ſhines, Juſtice, and Wiſedome plac'd
about his throne, and thoſe with honour grac'd
Beauty, and Love: It is not with his Brother
Bearing the world, but ruling ſuch another
Is his renowne, Pleaſure, for his delight
Is reconcil'd to Vertue, and this night
Vertue brings forth, twelve Princes have beene bred
In this rough mountaine, and neere Atlas head
The hill of knowledge; one, and chiefe of whom
Of the bright race of Heſperus is come,
Who ſhall in time, the ſame that he is be,
And now is onely a leſſe light then he;
Theſe now ſhe truſts with Pleaſure, and to theſe
She gives an entrance to the Heſperides
Faire beauties garden; neither can ſhe feare
They ſhould grow ſoft, or waxe effeminate here;
Since in her ſight, and by her charge all's done,
Pleaſure the ſervant, Vertue looking on.
OPE aged Atlas, open then thy lappe,
And from thy beamy boſome ſtrike a light,
That men may read in the myſterious mappe
All lines
And ſignes
Of royall education, and the right,
See how they come and ſhow,
That are but borne to know.
Deſcend
Deſcend
Though pleaſure lead,
Feare not to follow:
They who are bred
Within the Hill
Of skill,
May ſafely tread
What path they will,
No ground of good is hollow.
BUT Hermes ſtay, a little let me pauſe,
Who's this that leads?
A guide that gives them lawes
To all their motions, Dedalus the wiſe;
And doth in ſacred harmonie compriſe
His precepts?
Yes.
they may ſecurely prove
Then any laborinth, though it be of love.
COme on, come on; and where you go,
ſo interweave the curious knot,
As ev'n th'obſerver ſcarce may know
which lines are Pleaſures, and which not:
Firſt figure out the doubtfull way,
at which a while all youth ſhould ſtay,
Where ſhe and Vertue did contend,
which ſhould have Hercules to friend.
Then as all actions of mankinde,
are but a laborinth, or maze:
So let your Dances be entwin'd,
yet not perplex men unto gaze;
But meaſur'd, and ſo numerous too,
as men may read each act they doe;
And when they ſee the graces meet,
admire the wiſedome of your feet:
For dancing is an exerciſe,
not onely ſhowes the movers wit,
But maketh the beholders wiſe,
as he hath power to riſe to it.
O More, and more, this was ſo well,
As praiſe wants halfe his voyce to tell,
againe your ſelves compoſe,
And now put all the aptneſſe on,
Of figure, that proportion,
or colour can diſcloſe.
That if thoſe ſilent Arts were loſt,
Deſigne, and picture, they might boaſt,
from you a newer ground,
Inſtructed by the heightning ſence
Of dignitie and reverence,
in their true motions found.
Begin, begin; for looke, the faire
Do longing, liſten to what ayre
you forme your ſecond touch;
That they may vent their murmuring hymnes,
Juſt to the — you move your limbs,
and wiſh their owne were ſuch.
Make haſte, make haſt, for this
The laborinth of beautie is.
IT followes now you are to prove
The ſubt'leſt maze of all, that's Love,
and if you ſtay too long,
The faire will thinke you do'em wrong:
Goe chooſe among—But with a minde
as gentle as the ſtroaking winde
runs ore the gentler flowers.
And ſo let all your actions ſmile,
As if they meant not to beguile,
the Ladies but the houres.
Grace, laughter, and diſcourſe may meet,
and yet the beauty not goe leſſe:
For what is noble ſhould be ſweet,
But not diſſolv'd in wantoneſſe.
Will you that I give the law
to all your ſport and ſome-it,
It ſhould be ſuch ſhould envie draw,
but—overcome it.
AN eye of looking backe were well,
Or any murmure that would tell
Your thoughts, how you were ſent,
and went
To walke with Pleaſure, not to dwell.
Theſe, theſe are houres by vertue ſpar'd
Her ſelfe, ſhe being her owne reward:
But ſhe will have you know,
that though
Her ſports be ſoft, her life is hard:
You muſt returne unto the Hill
and their advance
With labour, and inhabit ſtill
that height and Crowne,
From whence you ever may looke downe
upon triumphed chance.
She, ſhe it is in darkneſſe ſhines,
'Tis ſhe that ſtill her ſelfe refines,
by her owne light to every eye:
More ſeene, more knowne when vice ſtands by.
And though a ſtranger here on earth,
In Heaven ſhe hath her right of birth:
There, there is Vertues ſeate,
Strive to keepe her your own,
Tis onely ſhe can make you great,
Though place here make you knowne.
This pleaſ'd the KING ſo well, as he would ſee it againe, when it was preſented with theſe additions.