COſſin, I know what belongs to this place ſym what petter then you; and therefore give mee leave to be pold to adviſe you. 'Is not a ſmall matter to offer your ſelfe into preſence of a king, and aull his Court? Be not too byſſie and forward, till you be caulld, I tauke reaſon to you.
Cym, never tauke any taukes: if the King of gread Prittaine keepe it Aſſizes here, I will cym into Court: Loog yow, doe you ſee now, and pleaſe Got.
Taw, d yn ynbhyd, y, dhwyti-n abl i anabhy, pob peth oth folineb, âgy tyny gwatwar ar dy wlac.
Gad vynl Lonyth. I ſay I will appeare in Court.
Appeare as yow ſ'ud doe then, Dab Jenkin in good ſort; do not diſcredit the nation, and pyt wrong upon us aull by your raſſnes.
What doe yow caull raſſneſſe Evan y Gynrn, is not aull the Cyntrie, and aull Welſe, and the Prince of Wales too abuſ'd in him? by this hand, I will tell it the Kings owne eares every 'oord, doe you ſee him now? Bleſſe your urſip, pray God is in Heaven bleſſe ever ince of your urſip; and Wales is comend it to your urſip, from top to toe, with aull his hearts aull over, by got'utch me, and would bee glad as a ſilling to ſee yow in him. Come it downe once a day and trie; I tell yow now, yow ſ'all be as welcomely there, as where you were in your owne Cyntries laſt two Symmers, and perſhance wee'll made yow as good ſ'eere too; weele promiſe your urſip as good a peece of Seeze, as yow need pit in your head, and pleaſ'yow ſ'all bee toaſted too. Goe too, ſee him once upon a time your owne ſellive, is more good meane you, then is aware of: By got' is very hard, but ſ'all make yow a Sheſtice of Peace the firſt daies yow come; and perſhance (ſay nothing) Knight o'the S'ire too: 'Is not Worſters, nor Pembrokes, nor Mongymeries ſ'all carry him from yow. But aull this while ſ'all I tell you a liddell now? 'is a great huge deale of anger upon yow, from aull Wales and the Nation; that your urſippe would ſuffer our yong Maſter Sarles your 'urſips Sonne and Heire, and Prince of Wales, the firſt time he ever play Dance, to be pit up in a Mountaine (got knowes where) by a palterly Poet, how doe you ſay him Evan?
Libia.
Vellhy! Libia. And how doe you caull him the Mountaine; his name is
Adlas.
Hynno, hynno. Adlas? I pleaſe your urſip is a Welſſe Atturney, and a preddilie ſchollers, a weare him his long coat, line with Seepes skin, as yow ſee every daies o'the weeke. A very ſufficient litigious fellow's in the Termes, and a finely Poets out o'the Termes, hee has a ſprig of Lawrell already towards his girlonds. He was get in here at Twelfe-night and ſee aull; what doe you call it, your matters, and ſayes is naught, naught, ſtarke naught.
I doe ſay'and't pleaſe his Madeſtee, I doe not like him with aull his heart; h'is plugd in by the eares, without all piddies, or mercies of propriedies or decorums. I will doe injuries to no man before his Madeſtee; but 'is a very vile and abſurd as a man would wiſſe, that I doe ſay, to pyt the Prince of Wales in an outlandis Mountaine; when hee is knowne, his Highneſſe has as goodly Mountaines and as tawll a Hills of his owne (looke yow, do you ſee now) and of as good ſtanding, and as good diſcent, as the prowdeſt Adlas chriſtned.
I good Evan, I pray you reckon his Madeſtee ſome of the Welſe Hills, the Mountaines.
Why there is Talgar.
Well ſayd.
Eliennieth.
Well ſayd Evan.
Cadier Arthur.
Toudge him, toudge him.
Pen-maen-maur.
Is good boyes, Evan.
And Craig-eriri.
Aw? vellhy? why law you now? 'Is not Pen-maen-maur, and Craig-Eriri as good ſound, as Adlas every whit of him.
'Is caulld the Britiſh Aulpes, Craig-Eririri, a very ſufficient Hills.
By got we will play with him Hills for Hills, for ſixteene and forty ſ'illings when he dares.
I pray you let it alone your wachers a liddle while Coſſin Davy ap Jenkin, and give it leave I may give his Madeſtee, and the Court informations toudging now the Reformations.
Why? cannot yow and I tauke too Coſſin? the Haull (God bleſſe it) is big inough to hold both our taukes, and we were twice as much as we are.
Why, tauke it aull then, if you think is reaſon in you.
No; I know is no reaſon, Evan, I confes him; but every man would ſhew himſelve a good ſubject as he can to his meanes; I am a ſubject by my place, and two heads is better then one I imagine under correction.
Got's ownes, here is no corrections man; imagine what yow pleaſe, doe in got's name, imagine, imagine, why doe you not imagine? here is no pennyrths of corrections.
Aw dgwin Tawſon.
'Is ſo invincibles, ſo in mercifullys ignorant, a man knowes not upon what inces of ground to ſtand to him; doe's conceive it no more as I am a true Welſe chriſtian, then (ſirreverence 'o the cympany) the-hilts of his dagger.
Go too, I will make the hilts conceive a knocke upon your pate, and perſhance a bumpe to if yow tauke.
How! upon my pate?
Yes upon your pate; your Poetlie pate, and your Law pate too.
Tawſon, Tawſon. Fore'got yow will goe nere to hazard a thumbe, and a fowre finger of your beſt hand; if you knocke him here, you may knocke him better ſ'eape at Ludlow a great deale: do you know the place where it is?
Well, I can be patient, I truſt, I truſt it is in a preſence I preſume that loves no quarrells, nor replies, nor the lies, nor the ſhallenge, nor the Duells: but—I will doe my byſſineſſe now, and make this a byſſineſſe for another daies hereafter: Pleaſ' your Madeſtee—By got I am out of my tempers terribly well, got forgive me, and pyt me in my ſelive againe. How doe's your Highnes—I know not a 'oord or a ſillable what I ſay; 'is doe me that vexations.
O Evan; for the honour of Wales.
I remember him now, 'is inough, bleſſings upon me 'is out o'my head againe; loſt, quite loſt: this knocke, o'my pate has knock aull my wits out o'my braines I thinke, and turne my reaſons out of doores. Beleive it I will rub, and breake your ſ'ins for this, I will not come ſo high as your head, but I will take your noſe in my way, very ſufficiently.
Hang your ſufficiencie.
'Tis well, very well; tis better, better, exceedingly well.
What? —you meane (hough) to make us ſo long tarrie here, ha?
Marrie, here is aull undone with diſtempers me thinkes, and angers, and paſſions.
Who is angry?
Why it is I is angry, and hungry too, if you marke me; I could eate his Flint-ſeere face now, offer to knock my pate in the hearing of aull theſe, and more too? well, before his Madeſtee I doe yet forgive him now with aull my heart, and will be reveng'd another time.
Why that is good Evan, honeſt brave Evan.
Ha' yow told the Kings Madeſtee of the alterations.
I am now once againe about him: peace; pleaſe your Madeſtee, the Welſe Nation hearing that the Prince of Wales was to come into the Hills againe, afore your Madeſtee have a deſire of his Highneſſe for the honour of Wales, to make him a Welſe hills, which is done without any manner of ſharſheſe to your Madeſtee, onely ſhanging his name: He is caull now Craig-Eriri, a Mountaine in Carnarvan-Seere; has as gray beard, and as much ſnow upon his head aull the yeare long,
As Adlas for his gutts.
He tells your Madeſtee true, for aull he is a liddle out of ſeaſon: but cym every man tell as much as he cannow, my qualitie is I hope ſufficiently knowne to his Madeſtee, that I am Rector Chori is aull my ambitions, and that I would have it aull Welſe; that is the ſ'ort and the long of the Requeſts. The Prince of Wales we know is aull over Welſe.
And then my Lord Marquiſe.
Both my Lord Marquiſe is as good, noble, true Briton, as any ever is come out of Wales.
My Lord Mongymerie is as ſound Welſe too, as fleſe and blood can make him.
And the Howard's by got, is Welſe as ſtrait as any arrow.
Houghton is a Towne beare his name there by Pipidiauke.
And Erwin, his name is Wyn; but the Duts-men come here in Wales, and caull him Heer-win.
Then Car is plaine Welſe, Caerlton, Caermardin, Cardiffe.
And Palmer, his Anceſtors was call him Pen-maure.
And Acmooty, is Ap mouth-wye of Llanmouthwye.
And Abercromy, is aull one as Abermarlys.
Or Abertau.
Or Aberdugled haw.
Or Abes hodney.
Or Abergevenny.
Or Aber conway.
Aberconway is very like Abercromy, a liddell hard ſ'ifte has pit'em aull into Wales; but our deſires and petitions is, that the muiſiques be aull Welſe, and the dances, and no' Erculus brought in now with a gread ſtaffe, and a pudding upon him.
Aw; was his diſtaffe, was not his club.
What need of Ercules, when Cadwallader—
Or Lluellin, or Reeſe ap Griphin, or Cradock, or Owen Glendower, with a Welſe hooke, and a Goats skinne on his backe, had done very better, and twice as well?
Nay, and to pyt apparrell on a pottell of hay, and caull him Lantaeus.
The Bellie-gods too, was as proper a monſter as the beſt of'hem.
I, ſtand to it, there was neither Poetries, nor Architectures, nor deſignes in that bellie-god; nor a note of muſicks about him. Come, bring forth our muſickes, yow ſ'all heare the true Pritan ſtraines now, the ancient Welſe Harpe—yow tauke of their Pigmees too, here is a Pigmees of Wales now; ſet forth another Pigmees by him!
WO. Aw Dieſus! what a bravely companie is here? This's a finely Haull indeed!
What a deale of fine candle it is?
I, peace; let his Madeſtee heare the Muſicke.
Blémae yr Brenin.
Docko ve.
Dieſus bleſſe'him; Saint Davy bleſſe'him. I bring my boy o'my backe ten mile here to loog upon him: Loog Hullin, loog Hullin, ſpewch humma ven nayd Dumma braveris: yow ſ'all heare him play too.
Peace, no more pradling; begin ſet him downe.
I'Is not come here to tauke of Brut,
from whence the Welſe do's take his root;
Nor tell long pedegree of Prince Camber,
whoſe linage would fill aull this Chamber;
Nor ſing the deeds of old Saint Davy,
the urſip of which would fill a Navy.
But harke yow me now, for a liddell tales
ſ'all make a gread deale to the credit of Wales;
In which wee'll toudg your eares,
with the praiſe of her thirteen S'eeres;
And make yow as glad, and merrie
as fourteene pot of Perrie.
Still, ſtill wee'll toudg your eares with the praiſe, &c.
TIs true, was weare him Sherkin freize,
but what is that? we have ſtore of ſ'eize,
And Got his plenty of Goats milke
that ſell him well, will buy him ſilke
Inough to make him fine to quarrell
At Hereford-ſizes in new apparrell;
And get him as much greene Melmet perhap,
ſ'all give it a face to his Monmouth cap.
But then the ore of Lemſter,
By got is never a Sempſter;
That when he is ſpun, ore did,
Yet match him with hir thrid
Still, ſtill, &c.
AVll this's the backs now, let us tell yee,
of ſome proviſions for the bellie:
As Cid, and Goat, and great Goates mother,
and Runt, and Cow, and good Cowes Vther.
And once but taſte o'the Welſe-mutton,
your Englis-ſ'eep's not worth a button.
And then for your Fiſs, ſ'all ſhooſe it your diſs.
looke but about, and there is a Trout.
A Salmon, Cor, or Chevin,
Will feed you ſix, or ſeven,
As taull man as ever ſwagger,
With Welſe-hooke, or long dagger.
Still, ſtill, &c.
BVt aull this while was never thinke
a word in praiſe of our Welſe drinke,
Yet for aull that, is a cup of Bragat,
all England S'eere, may caſt his Cab-at.
And what you ſay to Ale of Webley,
toudge him as well, you'll praiſe him trebly,
As well as Metheglin, or Sidar, or Meath,
S'all S'ake it your dagger quite out o'the ſeath.
And Oat-cake of Guarthenion,
With a goodly Leeke, or Onion,
To give as ſweet a Rellis
As ere did Harper, Ellis.
Still, ſtill, &c.
ANd yet, is nothing now aull this,
if of our Muſiques we doe miſſe;
Both Harpes, and Pipes too; and the Crowd,
muſt aull come in and tauke alowd,
As lowd as Bangu, Davies bell,
of which is no doubt yow have here tell,
As well as our lowder Wrexham, Organ,
and rumbling Rocks in S'eere Glamorgan;
Where looke but in the ground there,
And you ſ'all ſee a ſound there,
That put him aull togedder,
Is ſweet as meaſure pedder.
Still, ſtill, &c.
AV, but what ſay yow ſhould it ſhance too,
that we ſhould leape it in a Dance too,
And make it you as great a pleaſure,
if but your eyes be now at leaſure;
As in your eares ſ'all leave a laughter,
to laſt upon you ſixe dayes after?
Ha! wella-goe too, let us try to do
as your old Britton, things to be writ on.
Come put on other lookes now,
And lay away your hookes too;
And though yet you ha' no pump ſirs,
Let'hem heare that yow can jump ſirs.
Still, ſtill, &c.
SPeake it your conſcience now; did your Urſip ever ſee ſuch a ſong in your daies; 'is not as finely a tunes as a man would wiſſe to put in his eares.
Come, his Madeſtee ſ'all heare better to your Dance.
Haw, well danc'd, verie well danc'd.
Well plaid Howell, well plaid Rheeſe: Dawharry vellhee; well danc'd y'faith.
Good boyes, good boyes; pold, and Prittan, pold, and Prittan.
Is not better this now then Pigmies? this is men, this is no monſters, and you marke him: Well caull forth you Goates now, your Urſip ſ'all ſee a properly naturall deviſe come from the Welſe Mountaines; Is no Tuns, nor no Bottils: Stand by there, ſ'ow his' Urſip the Hills, was dronkenry in his eies that make that deviſe in my minde. But now, marg, marg your Urſip I pray yow now, and yow ſ'all ſee natures and propriedies; the very beaſts of Wales ſ'all doe more then your men pyt in bottills, and barrills, there was a tale of a tub y'faith. 'Is the Goat-heard and his dog, and his ſonne, and his wife make muſiques to the Goates as they come from the Hills; give 'hem roomes, give 'hem roomes, now the cym: The elderly Goates is indifferently grave at firſt, becauſe of his beard, and onely tread it the meaſures; byt yow will ſee him pyt off his gravities by and by well inough, and friske it as fine as ere a Kid on'hem aull. The Welſe Goate is an excellent dancer by birth, that is written of him, and of as wiſely carriage, and comely behaviours a beaſt (for his footing eſpecially) as ſome one or two man, God bleſſe him.
A Haull, a haull; come a haull, Au vellhee.
Nay, and your Madeſtee bid the Welſe Goats welcome; The Welſe Wen-ces ſ'all ſing your praiſes, and dance your healths too.
AW, God bleſſe it our good King S'ames,
His Wife, and his S ildren, and aull his Reames,
And aull his 'urſipfull S'iſtice of peace about him,
And ſend that his Court be never without him.
Ow, that her would come downe into Wales,
Her ſ'ud be very welcome to Welſe Ales.
I have a Cow,
And I have a hen;
S'all give it milke,
And egs for aull his men.
'It ſelfe ſ'all have veniſon, and other Seere,
And may it be ſterved, that ſteale him his Deere,
there, there, and every where.
Cym dance now, let us heare your dance, dance.
Ha! well plaid Ales.
For the Honour of Wales.
DIggon. Inough, inough, Diggon, well now aull the abſurdities is remov'd and cleer'd; the reſt and'pleaſe your Grace ſ'all tarrie ſtill, and goe on as it was; Vertue, and Pleaſure was well inough, indifferently well inough: Onely we will intreat Pleaſure to cym out of Driffimdore, that is the Gilden Valley, or Gelthleedore, that is the Golden Grove, and is in Care Marden the Welſe Garden. 'Is a thouſand place in Wales as finely places as the Eſperides every crum of him: Merlin was borne there too, put wee would not make him riſe now and wake him, becauſe we have his Prophecies alreadie of your Madeſtee's name to as good purpoſe, as if he were here in preſence, Pod hy geller Evan?
You will ſtill pyt your ſelve to theſe plunſes, you meane his Madeſtees Anagrams of Charles James Stuart.
I that is Claimes Arthurs Seate, which is as much as to ſay, your Madeſtee ſ'ud be the firſt King of gread Prittan, and ſit in Cadier Arthur, which is Arthurs Chaire, as by Gods bleſſing you doe: And then your Sonne Maſter S'harles his, how doe you caull him? is Charles Stuart, cals true hearts, that is us, he cals us, the Welſe Nation to be ever at your ſervice, and love you, and honour you, which we pray you underſtand it his meaning. And that the Muſitians yonder, are ſo many Brittis bards that ſing o'pen the Hills to let out the Prince of Wales, and his Welſe freinds to you, and all is done.
Very homely done it is I am well aſſur'd, if not very rudely: But it is hop'd your Madeſtee will not interpret the honour, merits, love, and affection of ſo noble a portion of your people, by the povertie of theſe who have ſo imperfectly uttered it: Yow will rather for their ſaks, who are to come in the name of Wales, my Lord the Prince, and the others; pardon what is paſt, and remember the Cyntrie has alwaies been fruitfull of loyall hearts to your Majeſtie; a very garden and ſeed plot of honeſt mindes and men: What lights of learning hath Wales ſent forth for your Schooles? What induſtrious Studients of your Lawes? what able Miniſters of your Juſtice? whence hath the Crowne in all times better ſervitors, more liberall of their lives and fortunes? where hath your Court or Councell (for the preſent) more noble ornaments or better aydes? I am glad to ſee it, and to ſpeake it, and though the Nation bee ſayd to be unconquer'd,, and moſt loving liberty, yet it was never mutinous (and pleaſe your Majeſtie;) but ſtout, valiant, courteous, hoſpitable, temperate, ingenious, capable of all good Arts, moſt lovingly conſtant, charitable, great Antiquaries, Religious preſervers of their Gentry, and Genealogie, as they are zealous and knowing in Religion.
In a word, It is a Nation better'd by proſperitie ſo far, as to the preſent happineſſe it enjoyes under your moſt ſacred Majeſtie, it wiſhes nothing to be added, but to ſee it perpetuall in You, and your Iſſue.