NEwes, newes, newes.
Bold, and brave new!
Newe as the night they are borne in;
Or the Phant'ſie that begot'hem.
Excellent newes!
Will you heare any newes?
Yes, and thanke you too ſir; what's the price of'hem?
Price, Cocks-combe! what price, but the price o' your ears? As if any man uſed to pay for any thing here.
Come forward, you ſhould be ſome dull tradeſman by your pigheaded Sconce now, that thinke there's nothing good any where; but what's to be ſold.
Indeed I am all for ſale Gentlemen, you ſay true, I am a Printer, and a Printer of Newes; and I doe hearken after'hem, where ever they be at any rates; I'le give any thing for a good Copie now, be't true or falſe, ſo't be newes.
A fine youth!
And I am for matter of State Gentlemen, by conſequence, ſtory, my Chronicle, to fill up my great booke, which muſt bee three Reame of paper at leaſt; I have agreed with my Stationer aforehand to make it ſo big, and I want for ten quire yet. I ha' beene here ever ſince ſeven a clocke i'the morning to get matter for one page, and I thinke I have it compleate; for I have both noted the number, and the capacity of the degrees here; and told twice over how many candles there are i'th roome lighted, which I will ſet you downe to a ſnuffe preciſely, becauſe I love to give light to poſteritie in the truth of things.
This is a finer youth!
Gentlemen, I am neither Printer, nor Chronologer, but one that otherwiſe take pleaſure i'my Pen: A Factor of newes for all the Shieres of England; I doe write my thouſand Letters a weeke ordinary, ſometim twelve hundred, and maintaine the buſineſſe at ſome charge, both to hold up my reputation with mine owne miniſters in Towne, and my friends of correſpondence in the Countrey; I have friends of all rancks, and of all Religions, for which I keepe an anſwering Catalogue of diſpatch; wherein I have my Puritan newes, my Proteſtant newes, and my Pontificiall newes.
A Superlative this!
And I have hope to erect a Staple for newes ere long, whether all ſhall be brought, and thence againe vented under the name of Staple-newes; and not truſted to your printed Conundrums of the ſerpent in Suſſex, or the witches bidding the Devill to dinner at Derbie: Newes, that when a man ſends them downe to the Shieres where they are ſaid to be done, were never there to be found.
Sir that's all one, they were made for the common people; and why ſhould not they ha' their pleaſure in beleeving of lies are made for them, as you have in Paules that make'hem for your ſelves.
There he ſpeakes reaſon to you ſir.
I confeſſe it, but it is the Printing I am offended at, I would have no newes printed; for when they are printed they leave to bee newes; while they are written, though they be falſe, they remaine newes ſtill.
See mens divers opinions! It is the Printing of'hem makes 'hem news to a great many, who will indeed beleeve nothing but what's in Print. For thoſe I doe keepe my Preſſes, and ſo many Pens going to bring forth wholſome relations, which once in halfe a ſcore yeares (as the age growes forgetfull) I Print over againe with a new date, and they are of excellent uſe.
Excellent abuſe rather.
Mr. Chronicler doe not you talke, I ſhall—
Nay Gentlemen, bee at peace one with another; wee have enough for you all three, if you dare take upon truſt.
I dare, I aſſure you.
And I, as much as comes.
I dare too, but nothing ſo much as I ha'done; I have beene ſo cheated with falſe relations i'my time, as I ha' found it a far harder thing to correct my booke, then collect it.
Like enough; but to your newes Gentlemen, whence come they?
From the Moone, ours ſir.
From the Moone! which way? by ſea? or by Land?
By Moone-ſhine, a neerer way I take it.
Oh by a Trunck! I know it, a thing no bigger than a Flute-caſe; A neighbour of mine, a ſpectacle-maker, has drawn the Moone through it at the boare of a whiſtle, and made it as great as a Drum-head twentie times, and brought it within the length of this Roome to me, I know not how often.
Tut, that's no newes; your perplexive Glaſſes are common. No, it will fall out to be Pythagoras way I warrant you, by writing, and reading i'th Moone.
Right, and as well read of you, I'faith: for Cornelius Agrippa has it, In diſco Lunae, there tis found.
Sir, you are loſt I aſſure you; for ours came to you neither by the way of Cornelius Agrippa, nor Cornelius Drible.
Nor any glaſſe of—
No Philoſophers phantaſie.
Methematicians Perſpicill.
Or brother of the Roſie croſſes intilligence, no forc'd way, but by the neat and cleane power of Poetrie,
The Miſtris of all diſcovery.
Who after a world of theſe curious uncertainties, hath employed thither a ſervant of hers in ſearch of truth: who has been there—
In the Moone.
In perſon.
And is this night return'd.
Where? which is he? I muſt ſee his Dog at his girdle, and the buſh of thornes at his backe, ere I beleeve it.
Doe not trouble your faith then, for if that buſh of thornes ſhould prove a goodly Grove of Okes; in what caſe were you, and your expectation.
Thoſe are ſtale Enſignes o'the Stages, man i'th Moone, deliverd downe to you by muſty Antiquitie, and are of as doubtfull credit as the makers.
Sir, nothing againe Antiquitie I pray you, I muſt not heare ill of Antiquitie.
Oh! you have an old Wife belike, or your venerable Jerkin there, make much of'hem: Our relation I tell you ſtill is newes.
Certaine, and ſure newes.
Of a new World,
And new creatures in that World.
In the Orbe of the Moone.
Which is now found to be an Earth inhabited!
With navigable Seas, and Rivers.
Varietie of Nations, Polities, Lawes.
With Havens in't, Caſtles, and Port-Townes!
In-land Cities, Boroughes, Hamlets, Faires, and Markets!
Hundreds, and Weapontakes! Forreſts, Parks, Coney-ground, Meadow-paſture, what not?
But differing from ours.
And has your Poet brought all this?
Troth, here was enough; tis a pretty piece of Poetrie as'tis.
Would you could heare on, though.
Gi' your mindes to't a little.
What Innes, or Alehouſes are there there? does he tell you?
Truly I have not askt him that.
Nor were you beſt, I beleeve.
Why, in travaile a man knowes theſe things without offence; I am ſure if he be a good Poet, hee has diſcover'd a good Taverne in his time.
That he has, I ſhould thinke the worſe of his Verſe elſe.
And his Proſe too i'faith.
Is he a Mans Poet, or a Womans Poet I pray you?
Is there any ſuch difference?
Many, as betwixt your mans Taylor, and your womans Taylor.
How? may we beſeech you?
Ile ſhew you; your Mans Poet may break out ſtrong and deep i'th mouth, as he ſaid of Pindar, Monte decurrens velut amnis. But your Womans Poet muſt flow, and ſtroak the eare, and (as one of them ſayd of himſelfe ſweetly) Muſt write a Verſe as ſmooth, and calm as Creame, In which there is no torrent, nor ſcarce ſtreame.
Ha' you any more on't?
No, I could never arrive but to this Remnant.
Pittie! would you had had the whole piece for a patterne to all Poetrie.
How might we doe to ſee your Poet? did he undertake this journey (I pray you) to the Moone o'foot?
Why doe you aske?
Becauſe one of our greateſt Poets (I know not how good a one) went to Endenburgh o' foot, and came backe; marry he has beene reſtive they ſay ever ſince, for we have had nothing from him; he has ſet out nothing I am ſure.
Like enough, perhaps he has not all in, when he has all in, he he will ſet out (I warrant you) at leaſt thoſe from whom he had it, it is the very ſame party that has beene i'th Moone now.
Indeed! has he beene there ſince? belike he rid thither then.
Yes Poſt, upon the Poets horſe for a wager.
No I aſſure you, he rather flew upon the wings of his Muſe. There are in all but three wayes of going thither; one is Endymions way, by rapture in ſleepe, or a dreame. The other Minipus his way, by wing, which the Poet tooke. The the third, old Empedocles way; who when he leapt into Aetna, having a drie ſeare bodie, and light, the ſmoake took him and whift him up into the Moone, where he lives yet waving up and downe like a feather, all ſoot and embers comming out of that cole-pit; our Poet met him, and talkt with him.
In what language good ſir?
Onely by ſignes and geſtures, for they have no articulate voyces there, but certaine motions to muſicke: all the diſcourſe there is harmonie.
A fine Lunatique language i'faith; how doe their Lawyers then?
They are Pythagorians, all dumbe as fiſhes, for they have no controverſies to exerciſe themſelves in.
How doe they live then?
O'th deaw o'th Moone like Graſhoppers, and conferre with the Doppers.
Ha' you Doppers?
A world of Doppers! but they are there as lunatick perſons, walkers onely; that have leave onely to hum, and ha, not daring to prophecie, or ſtart up upon ſtooles to raiſe doctrine.
The brethren of the Roſie-Croſſe have their Colledge within a mile o'the Moone; a Caſtle i'th ayre that runs upon wheeles with a wing'd lanthorne—
Tha' ſeen't in print.
All the phantaſticall creatures you can thinke of, are there.
'Tis to be hop'd there are women there then?
And zealous women, that will out-grone, the groning wives of Edinburgh.
And Lovers as phantaſticke as ours?
But none that will hang themſelves for Love, or eate candles ends, or drinke to their Miſtreſſe-eyes, till their owne bid'hem good night, as the Sublunary Lovers doe.
No ſir?
No, ſome few you ſhall have, that ſigh or whiſtle themſelves away; and thoſe are preſently hung up by the heeles like Meteors, with Squibs i' their tayles, to give the wiſer ſort warning.
Excellent!
Are there no ſelfe-Lovers there?
There were, but they are all dead of late for want of Taylors.
S'light what lucke is that? we could have ſpar'd them a Colonie from hence.
I thinke ſome two or three of them live yet, but they are turn'd Moone-Calves by this.
O, I, Moone-Calves! what Monſter is that I pray you?
Monſter? none at all; a very familiar thing, like our foole here on earth.
The Ladyes there, play with them inſtead of little Dogges.
Then there are Ladies?
And Knights, and Squires.
And ſervants, and Coaches?
Yes, but the Coaches are much o'the nature of the Ladies, for they goe onely with wind.
Prittie, like China-waggons.
Ha' they any places of meeting with their Coaches, and takeing the freſh open aire, and then covert when they pleaſe, as in our Hide-Parke, or ſo?
Above all the Hide-parkes in Chriſtendome, farre more hiding and private, they doe all in clouds there; they walke i'the clouds, they ſit i'the clouds, they lie i'the clouds, they ride and tumble i'the clouds, their very Coaches are clouds.
But ha' they no Carmen to meet and breake their Coaches?
Alas! Carmen, they will over a Carman there, as hee will doe a Child here; you ſhall have a Coachman with cheekes like a trumpeter, and a wind in his mouth blow him afore him as farre as he can ſee him; or skirre over him with his batts wings a mile and a halfe, ere hee can ſteere his wry necke to looke where he is.
And they ha' their new Wells too, and phiſicall waters I hope to viſit all time of yeare?
Your Tunbridge, or the Spaw it ſelfe are meere puddle to'em: When the pleaſant moneths o'the yeare come, they all flocke to certaine broken Iſlands which are called there, the Iſles of delight:
By clouds ſtill?
What elſe? Their Boates are clouds too.
Or in a miſt; the miſts are ordinary i'the Moone, a man that owes money there, needs no other protection; onely buy a miſt and walk in't, hee's never diſcern'd, a matter of a Baubee doe's it.
Onely one Iſland they have, is call'd the Iſle of the Epecaenes, becauſe there under one Article both kindes are ſignified, for they are faſhioned alike, male and female the ſame, not heads and broad hats, ſhort doublets, and long points; neither do they ever untruſſe for diſtinction, but laugh and lie downe in Moone-ſhine, and ſtab with their ponyards; you doe not know the delight of the Epicaenes in Moon-ſhine.
And when they ha' taſted the ſprings of pleaſure enough, and bild, and kiſt,, and are readie to come away; the ſhee's only lay certain egges (for they are never with Child there,) and of thoſe egges are diſcloſed a race of Creatures like men, but are indeed a ſort of Fowle, in part covered with feathers (they call 'hem Volatees), that hop from Iſland to Iſland, you ſhall ſee a covey of'hen if you pleaſe preſently.
Yes faith, tis time to exerciſe their eies, for their eares begin to be wearie.
Then know, we doe not move theſe wings ſo ſoone,
On which our Poet mounted to the Moone
Menippus-like; but all twixt it and us,
Thus cleares and helpes to the preſentment, thus.
VVE have all this while (though the Muſes Heralds) adventured to tell your Majeſtie no newes; for hitherto we have mov'd rather to your delight, than your beleife. But now be pleaſed to expect a more noble diſcovery worthie of your eare, as the object will be your eye; A race of your owne, form'd, animated, lightned, and heightned by you, who rapt above the Moone far in ſpeculation of your vertues, have remain'd their intranc'd certaine houres, with wonder of the pietie, wiſedome, Majeſty reflected by you, on them, from the Divine light, to which onely you are leſſe. Theſe by how much higher they have beene carried from earth to contemplate your greatneſſe, have now conceiv'd the more haſte and hope in this their returne home to approach your goodneſſe; and led by that excellent likeneſſe of your ſelfe, the truth, imitating Procritus endeavour, that all their motions be form'd to the muſicke of your peace, and have their ends in your favour, which alone is able to reſolve and thaw the cold they have preſently contracted in comming through the colder Region.
HOw ere the brightneſſe may amaze,
Move you, and ſtand not ſtill at gaze,
As dazeled with the light;
But with your motions fill the place,
And let their fulneſſe win your Grace,
Till you collect your ſight.
So while the warmth you doe confeſſe,
And temper of theſe Raies no leſſe,
To quicken then refine:
You may by knowledge grow more bold,
And ſo more able to behold
The bodie whence they ſhine.
NOw looke and ſee in yonder throne,
How all thoſe beames are caſt from one.
This is that Orbe ſo bright,
Has kept your wonder ſo awake;
Whence you as from a mirrour take
The Suns reflected light.
Read him as you would doe the booke
Of all perfection, and but looke
What his proportions be;
No meaſure that is thence contriv'd,
Or any motion thence deriv'd,
But is pure harmonie.
NOt that we thinke you wearie be,
for he
That did this motion give,
And made it ſo long live,
Could likewiſe give it perpetuitie.
Nor that we doubt you have not more,
and ſtore
Of changes to delight,
For they are infinite,
As is the power that brought forth thoſe before.
But ſince the earth is of his name,
and fame
So full you cannot adde,
Be both the firſt, and glad
To ſpeake him to the Region whence you came.
LOoke, looke alreadie where I am,
bright fame,
Got up unto the skie,
thus high,
Vpon my better wing,
to ſing
The knowing King,
And make the muſicke here,
With yours on earth the ſame.
Joyne then to tell his name,
and ſay but JAMES is he;
All eares will take the voyce,
And in the tune rejoyce,
Or truth hath left to breath, and fame hath left to be.
See, what is that this muſicke brings,
And is ſo carried in the ayre about?
Fame that doth nouriſh the renowne of Kings,
And keepes that fayre, which envie would blot out.