What doe you lack, Gentlemen? what is't you lack? any fine Phanſies, Figures, Humors, Characters, Idaeas, Definitions of Lords, and Ladies? Waiting-women, Paraſites, Knights, Captaines, Courtiers, Lawyers? what doe you lack?
A pretty prompt Boy for the Poëtique Shop.
And a bold! where's one o' your Maſters, Sirrah, the Poet?
Which of 'hem? Sir wee have divers that drive that trade, now: Poëts, Poet'accios, Poetaſters, Poetito's—
And all Haberdaſhers of ſmall wit, I preſume: wee would ſpeake with the Poët o' the day, Boy.
Sir, hee is not here. But, I have the dominion of the Shop, for this time, under him, and can ſhew you all the variety the Stage will afford for the preſent.
Therein you will expreſſe your owne good parts, Boy.
And tye us two, to you, for the gentle office.
Wee are a paire of publique perſons (this Gentleman, and my ſelfe) that are ſent, thus coupled unto you upon ſtate-buſines.
It concernes but the ſtate of the Stage I hope!
O, you ſhall know that by degrees,
No man leaps into a buſines of ſtate, without fourding firſt the ſtate of the buſines.
Wee are ſent unto you, indeed from the people.
The people! which ſide of the people?
The Veniſon ſide, if you know it, Boy.
That's the left ſide. I had rather they had beene the right.
So they are. Not the Paces, or grounds of your people, that in the oblique caves and wedges of your houſe, your ſinfull ſixe-penny Mechanicks—
But the better, and braver ſort of your people! Pluſh and Velvet-outſides! that ſtick your houſe round like ſo many eminences—
Of clothes, not underſtandings? They are at pawne. Well, I take theſe as a part of your people though; what bring you to me from theſe people?
You have heard, Boy, the ancient Poets had it in their purpoſe, ſtill to pleaſe this people.
I, their chiefe aime was—
Populo ut placerent: (if hee underſtands ſo much.)
Quas feciſſent fabulas.) I underſtand that, ſin' I learn'd Terence, i'the third forme at Westminſter: go on Sir.
Now, theſe people have imployed us to you, in all their names, to intreat an excellent Play from you.
For they have had very meane ones, from this ſhop of late, the Stage as you call it.
Troth, Gentlemen, I have no wares, which I dare thruſt upon the people with praiſe. But this, ſuch as it is, I will venter with your people, your gay gallant people: ſo as you, againe, will undertake for them, that they ſhall know a good Play when they heare it; and will have the conſcience, and ingenuity beſide, to confeſſe it.
Wee'll paſſe our words for that: you ſhall have a brace of us to ingage our ſelves.
You'l tender your names, Gentlemen, to our booke then?
Yes, here's Mr. Probee; A man of moſt powerfull ſpeech, and parts to perſwade.
And Mr. Damplay, will make good all hee undertakes.
Good Mr. Probee, and Mr. Damplay! I like your ſecurities: whence doe you write yourſelves?
Of London, Gentlemen: but Knights brothers, and Knights friends, I aſſure you.
And Knights fellow's too. Every Poët writes Squire now.
You are good names! very good men, both of you! I accept you.
And what is the Title of your Play, here? The Magnetick Lady?
Yes, Sir, an attractive title the Author has given it.
A Magnete, I warrant you.
O, no, from Magnus, Magna, Magnum.
This Gentleman, hath found the true magnitude—
Of his portall, or entry to the worke, according to Vitruvius.
Sir all our worke is done without a Portall— or Vitruvius. In Foro, as a true Comoedy ſhould bee. And what is conceald within, is brought out, and made preſent by report.
Wee ſee not that alwayes obſerv'd, by your Authors of theſe times: or ſcarce any other.
Where it is not at all knowne, how ſhould it be obſerv'd? The moſt of thoſe your people call Authors, never dreamt of any Decorum, or what was proper in the Scene; but grope at it, i'the darke, and feele, or fumble for it; I ſpeake it, both with their leave, and the leave o'your people.
But, why Humors reconcil'd? I would faine know?
I can ſatisfie you there, too: if you will. But, perhaps you deſire not to be ſatisfied.
No? why ſhould you conceive ſo, Boy?
My conceit is not ripe, yet: Ile tell you that anon. The Author, beginning his ſtudies of this kind, with every man in his Humour; and after, every man out of his Humour; and ſince, continuing in all his Playes, eſpecially thoſe of the Comick thred, whereof the New-Inne was the laſt, ſome recent humours ſtill, or manners of men, that went along with the times, finding himſelfe now neare the cloſe, or ſhutting up of his Circle, hath phant'ſied to himſelfe, in Idaea, this Magnetick Miſtris. A Lady a brave bountifull Houſe-keeper, and a vertuous Widow: who having a young Neice, ripe for a man and marriageable, hee makes that his Center attractive, to draw thither a diverſity of Gueſts, all perſons of different humours to make up his Perimiter. And this hee hath call'd Humors reconcil'd.
A bold undertaking! and farre greater, then the reconciliation of both Churches, the quarrell betweene humours having beene much the ancienter, and, in my poore opinion, the root of all Schiſme, and Faction, both in Church and Common-wealth.
Such is the opinion of many wiſemen, that meet at this ſhop ſtill; but how hee will ſpeed in it, wee cannot tell, and hee himſelfe (it ſeems) leſſecares. For hee will not be intreated by us, to give it a Prologue. He has loſt too much that way already, hee ſayes. Hee will not woo the gentile ignorance ſo much. But careleſſe of all vulgar cenſure, as not depending on common approbation, hee is confident it ſhall ſuper-pleaſe judicious Spectators, and to them he leaves it to worke, with the reſt by example, or otherwiſe.
Hee may be deceived in that, Boy: Few follow examples now, eſpecially, if they be good.
The Play is ready to begin, Gentlemen, I tell you, leſt you might defraud the expectation of the people, for whom you are Delegates! Pleaſe you take a couple of Seates, and plant your ſelves, here, as neere my ſtanding as you can: Fly every thing (you ſee) to the marke, and cenſure it; freely. So, you interrupt not the Series, or thred of the Argument, to breake or pucker it, with unneceſſary queſtions. For, I muſt tell you, (not out of mine owne Dictamen, but the Authors,) A good Play, is like a skeene of ſilke: which, if you take by the right end, you may wind off, at pleaſure, on the bottome, or card of your diſcourſe, in a tale, or ſo; how you will: But if you light on the wrong end, you will pull all into a knot, or elſe-lock; which nothing but the ſheers, or a candle will undoe, or ſeparate.
Stay! who be theſe, I pray you?
Becauſe it is your firſt queſtion, and (theſe be the prime perſons) it would in civility require an anſwer: but I have heard the Poët affirme, that to be the moſt unlucky Scene in a Play, which needs an Interpreter; eſpecially, when the Auditory are awake: and ſuch are you, hee preſumes. Ergo.
Welcome good Captaine Ironſide, and brother;
You ſhall along with me. I'm lodg'd hard by,
Here at a noble Ladies houſe i'th' ſtreet,
The Lady Loadſtones (one will bid us welcome)
Where there are Gentlewomen, and male Gueſts,
Of ſeverall humors, cariage, conſtitution,
Profeſſion too: but ſo diametrall
One to another, and ſo much oppos'd,
As if I can but hold them all together,
And draw 'hem to a ſufferance of themſelves,
But till the Diſſolution of the Dinner;
I ſhall have juſt occaſion to beleeve
My wit is magiſteriall; and our ſelves
Take infinite delight, i'the ſucceſſe.
Troth, brother Compaſſe, you ſhall pardon me;
I love not ſo to multiply acquaintance
At a meales coſt, 'twill take off o'my freedome
So much: or bind me to the leaſt obſervance.
Why Ironſide, you know I am a Scholler,
And part a Souldier; I have beene imployed,
By ſome the greateſt Stateſ-men o'the kingdome,
Theſe many yeares: and in my time convers'd
With ſundry humors, ſuiting ſo my ſelfe
To company, as honeſt men, and knaves,
Good-fellowes, Hypocrites, all ſorts of people,
Though never ſo divided in themſelves,
Have ſtudied to agree ſtill in the uſage,
And handling of me (which hath beene faire too.)
Sir I confeſſe you to be one well read
In men, and manners; and that, uſually,
The moſt ungovern'd perſons, you being preſent,
Rather ſubject themſelves unto your cenſure,
Then give you leaſt occaſion of diſtaſte,
By making you the ſubject of their mirth:
But (to deale plainely with you, as a brother)
When ever I diſtruſt i'my owne valour:
Ile never beare me on anothers wit,
Or offer to bring off, or ſave my ſelfe
On the opinion of your Iudgement, gravitie,
Diſcretion, or what elſe. But (being away)
You'are ſure to have leſſe-wit-worke, gentle brother,
My humour being as ſtubborne, as the reſt,
And as unmannageable.
You doe miſtake
My Caract of your friendſhip, all this while!
Or at what rate I reckon your aſſiſtance
Knowing by long experience, to ſuch Animals,
Halfe-hearted Creatures, as theſe are, your Foxe, there,
Vnkenneld with a Cholerick, ghaſtly aſpect,
Or two or three comminatory Termes,
Would run their feares to any hole of ſhelter,
Worth a dayes laughter! I am for the ſport:
For nothing elſe.
But, brother, I ha' ſeene
A Coward, meeting with a man as valiant
As our St. George (not knowing him to be ſuch,
Or having leaſt opinion that hee was ſo)
Set to him roundly, I, and ſwindge him ſoundly:
And i'the vertue of that errour, having
Once overcome, reſolv'd for ever after
To erre; and thinke no perſon, nor no creature
More valiant then himſelfe.
I thinke that too.
But, Brother, (could I over intreat you)
I have ſome little plot upon the reſt
If you would be contented, to endure
A ſliding reprehenſion, at my hands,
To heare your ſelfe, or your profeſſion glanc'd at
In a few ſleighting termes: It would beget
Me ſuch a maine Authority, o'the by:
And doe your ſelfe no diſ-repute at all!
Compaſſe, I know that univerſall cauſes
In nature produce nothing; but as meeting
Particular cauſes, to determine thoſe,
And ſpecifie their acts. This is a piece
Of Oxford Science, ſtaies with me ere ſince
I left that place; and I have often found
The truth thereof, in my private paſſions:
For I doe never feele my ſelfe perturb'd
With any generall words 'gainſt my profeſſion,
Vnleſſe by ſome ſmart ſtroke upon my ſelfe
They doe awake, and ſtirre me: Elſe, to wiſe
And well experienc'd men, words doe but ſignifie;
They have no power; ſave with dull Grammarians,
Whoſe ſoules are nought, but a Syntaxis of them.
Here comes our Parſon, Parſon Palate here
A venerable youth! I muſt ſalute him,
And a great Clerke! hee's going to the Ladies,
And though you ſee him thus, without his Cope,
I dare aſſure you, hee's our Pariſh Pope!
God ſave my reverend Clergy, Parſon Palate.
The witty Mr. Compaſſe! how is't, with you?
My Lady ſtaies for you, and for your Councell,
Touching her Neice Mrs. Placentia Steele!
Who ſtrikes the fire of full fourteene, to day,
Ripe for a husband.
I, ſhe chimes, ſhee chimes,
Saw you the Doctor Rut, the houſe Phyſician?
He's ſent for too.
To Councell? 'time yo' were there.
Make haſte, and give it a round quick diſpatch:
That wee may goe to dinner betimes, Parſon:
And drinke a health, or two more, to the buſines.
This is a ſtrange put-off! a reverend youth,
You uſe him moſt ſurreverently me thinkes!
What? call you him? Palate Pleaſe? or Parſon Palate?
All's one, but ſhorter! I can gi'you his Character.
Hee, is the Prelate of the Pariſh, here;
And governes all the Dames; appoints the cheere;
Writes downe the bils of fare; pricks all the Gueſts;
Makes all the matches and the marriage feaſts
Within the ward; drawes all the pariſh wils;
Deſignes the Legacies; and ſtrokes the Gills
Of the chiefe Mourners; And (who ever lacks)
Of all the kindred, hee hath firſt his blacks.
Thus holds hee weddings up, and burials,
As his maine tithing; with the Goſſips ſtals,
Their pewes; He's top ſtill, at the publique meſſe;
Comforts the widow, and the fatherleſſe,
In funerall Sack! Sits 'bove the Alderman!
For of the Ward-mote Queſt, he better can,
The myſterie, then the Levitick Law:
That peece of Clark-ſhip doth his Veſtry awe
Hee is as he conceives himſelfe, a fine
Well furniſh'd, and apparaled Divine.
Who made this EPIGRAMME, you?
No, a great Clarke
As any'is of his bulke. (Ben: Ionſon) made it.
But what's the other Character, DOCTOR Rut?
The ſame man made 'hem both: but his is ſhorter,
And not in rime, but blancks. Ile tell you that, too.
Rut is a young Phyſician to the family:
That, letting God alone, aſcribes to nature
More then her ſhare; licentious in diſcourſe,
And in his life a profeſt Voluptary;
The ſlave of money, a Buffon in manners;
Obſcene in language; which he vents for wit;
Is ſawcy in his Logicks, and diſputing,
Is any thing but civill, or a man.
See here they are! and walking with my Lady,
In conſultation, afore the doore;
Wee will ſlip in, as if we ſaw 'hem not.
I, tis his fault, ſhe's not beſtow'd,
My brother Intereſts.
Who, old Sir Moath?
Hee keeps off all her Suitors, keepes the portion,
Still in his hands: and will not part withall,
On any termes.
Hinc illae lachrymae;
Thence flowes the cauſe o'the maine grievance.
That
It is a maine one! how much is the portion?
No petty ſumme.
But ſixteene thouſand pound.
He ſhould be forc'd, Madam, to lay it downe.
When is it payable?
When ſhe is married.
Marry her, marry her, Madam.
Get her married.
Looſe not a day, an houre—
Not a minute.
Purſue your project reall. Mr. Compaſſe,
Advis'd you, too. He is the perfect Inſtrument,
Your Ladiſhip ſhould ſaile by.
Now, Mr. Compaſſe
Is a fine witty man; I ſaw him goe in, now.
Is hee gone in?
Yes, and a Fether with him,
He ſeemes a Souldier.
Some new Sutor, Madam.
I am beholden to him: hee brings ever
Variety of good perſons to my table,
And I muſt thanke him, though my brother Intereſt
Diſlike of it a little.
Hee likes nothing
That runs your way.
Troth, and the other cares not.
Hee'll goe his owne way, if he thinke it right.
Hee's a true friend! and ther's Mr. Practiſe,
The fine young man of Law comes to the houſe:
My brother brooks him not, becauſe he thinkes
He is by me aſſigned for my Neice:
Hee will not heare of it.
Not of that eare:
But yet your Ladiſhip doth wiſely in it—
'Twill make him to lay downe the portion ſooner,
If he but dreame you'l march her with a Lawyer.
So Mr. Compaſſe ſayes. It is betweene
The Lawyer, and the Courtier, which ſhall have her.
Who, Sir Diaphanous Silke-worme?
A fine Gentle-man.
Old Mr. Silke-wormes Heire.
And a near Courtier,
Of a moſt elegant thred
And ſo my Goſſip
Poliſh aſſures me. Here ſhe comes! good Poliſh
Welcome in troth! How do'ſt thou gentle Poliſh?
Who's this?
Dame Poliſh, her ſhee-Paraſite,
Her talking, ſoothing, ſometime governing Goſſip.
Your Ladiſhip is ſtill the Lady Loadſtone
That drawes, and drawes unto you, Gueſts of all ſorts:
The Courtiers, and the Souldiers, and the Schollers,
The Travellers, Phyſicians, and Divines,
As Doctor Ridley writ, and Doctor Barlow?
They both have wrote of you, and Mr. Compaſſe.
Wee meane, they ſhall write more, ere it be long.
Alas, they are both dead, and 't pleaſe you; But,
Your Ladiſhip meanes well, and ſhall meane well,
So long as I live. How does your fine Neice?
My charge, Miſtris Placentia Steele?
Shee is not well.
Not well?
Her Doctor ſayes for
Not very well; ſhee cannot ſhoot at Buts.
Or manage a great Horſe, but ſhee can cranch
A ſack of ſmall coale! eat you lime, and haire,
Soap-aſhes, Loame, and has a dainty ſpice
O' the greene ſickneſſe!
'Od ſheild!
Or the Dropſie!
A toy, a thing of nothing. But my Lady, here
Her noble Aunt.
Shee is a noble Aunt!
And a right worſhipfull Lady, and a vertuous;
I know it well!
Well, if you know it, peace.
Good ſiſter Poliſh heare your betters ſpeake.
Sir I will ſpeake, with my good Ladies leave,
And ſpeake, and ſpeake againe; I did bring up
My Ladies Neice, Mrs. Placentia Steele,
With my owne Daughter (who's Placentia too)
And waits upon my Lady, is her woman:
Her Ladiſhip well knowes Mrs. Placentia
Steele (as I ſaid) her curious Neice, was left
A Legacie to me; by Father, and Mother
With the Nurſe, Keepe, that tended her: her Mother
Shee died in Child-bed of her, and her Father
Liv'd not long after: for he lov'd her Mother!
They were a godly couple! yet both di'd,
(As wee muſt all.) No creature is immortall;
I have heard our Paſtor ſay; no, not the faithfull!
And they did die (as I ſaid) both in one moneth.
Sure ſhee is not long liv'd, if ſhe ſpend breath thus.
And did bequeath her, to my care, and hand,
To poliſh, and bring up. I moulded her,
And faſhion'd her, and form'd her; ſhe had the ſweat
Both of my browes and braines. My Lady knowes it
Since ſhe could write a quarter old.
I know not
That ſhe could write ſo early, my good Goſſip.
But I doe know ſhe was ſo long your care,
Till ſhe was twelve yeare old; that I call'd for her,
And tooke her home, for which I thanke you Poliſh,
And am beholden to you.
I ſure thought
She had a Leaſe of talking, for nine lives—
It may be ſhe has.
Sir ſixteene thouſand pound
Was then her portion! for ſhe was, indeed,
Their only child! and this was to be paid
Vpon her marriage, ſo ſhe married ſtill
With my good Ladies liking here, her Aunt:
(I heard the Will read) Mr. Steele her father,
The world condemn'd him to be very rich,
And very hard, and he did ſtand condemn'd
With that vaine world, till, as 'twas 'prov'd, after,
He left almoſt as much more to good uſes
In Sir Moath Intereſts hands, my Ladies brother,
Whoſe ſiſter he had married: He holds all
In his cloſe gripe. But Mr. Steele, was liberall,
And a fine man; and ſhe a dainty Dame,
And a religious, and a bountifull—
You knew her Mr. Compaſſe?
Spare the torture,
I doe confeſſe without it.
And her husband,
What a fine couple they were? and how they liv'd?
Yes.
And lov'd together, like a paire of Turtles?
Yes.
And feaſted all the Neighbours?
Take her off
Some body that hath mercy.
O he knowes her,
It ſeemes!
Or any meaſure of compaſſion:
Doctors, if you be Chriſtians, undertake
One for the ſoule, the other for the body!
She would diſpute with the Doctors of Divinity
At her owne table! and the Spitle Preachers!
And find out the Armenians.
The Armenians?
I ſay the Armenians.
Nay, I ſay ſo too!
So Mr. Poliſh calld 'hem, the Armenians!
And Medes, and Perſians, did he not?
Yes, he knew 'hem,
And ſo did Miſtris Steele! ſhe was his Pupill!
The Armenians, he would ſay, were worſe then Papiſts!
And then the Perſians, were our Puritanes,
Had the fine piercing wits!
And who, the Medes?
The midle men, the Luke-warme Proteſtants?
Out, out.
Sir ſhe would find them by their branching▪
Their branching ſleeves, brancht caſſocks, and brancht doctrine,
Beſide their Texts.
Stint Karlin: Ile not heare,
Confute her Parſon.
I reſpect no Perſons,
Chaplins, or Doctors, I will ſpeake.
Yes, ſo't be reaſon,
Let her.
Death, ſhe cannot ſpeake reaſon.
Nor ſenſe, if we be Maſters of our ſenſes!
What mad woman ha' they got, here, to bate?
Sir I am mad, in truth, and to the purpoſe;
And cannot but be mad; to heare my Ladies
Dead ſiſter ſleighted, witty Mrs. Steele!
If ſhee had a wit, Death has gone neere to ſpoile it,
Aſſure your ſelfe.
She was both witty, and zealous,
And lighted all the Tinder o' the truth,
(As one ſaid) of Religion, in our Pariſh:
Shee was too learn'd to live long with us!
She could the Bible in the holy tongue:
And reade it without pricks: had all her Maſoreth;
Knew Burton, and his Bull; and ſcribe Prin-Gent!
Fraeſto-be-gon: and all the Phariſees.
Deare Goſſip,
Be you gone, at this time, too, and vouchſafe
To ſee your charge, my Neice.
I ſhall obey
If your wiſe Ladiſhip thinke fit: I know,
To yeild to my Superiors.
A good woman!
But when ſhe is impertinent, growes earneſt,
A litle troubleſome, and out of ſeaſon:
Her love, and zeale tranſport her.
I am glad,
That any thing could port her hence. Wee now
Have hope of dinner, after her long grace.
I have brought your Ladiſhip a hungry Gueſt, here,
A Souldier, and my brother Captaine Ironſide:
Who being by cuſtome growne a Sanguinarie,
The ſolemne, and adopted ſonne of ſlaughter:
Is more delighted i' the chaſe of an enemy,
An execution of three daies, and nights;
Then all the hope of numerous ſucceſſion,
Or happineſſe of Iſſue could bring to him.
Hee is no Suitor then?
So't ſhould ſeeme.
And, if hee can get pardon at heavens hand,
For all his murthers, is in as good caſe
As a new chriſtned Infant: (his imployments
Continu'd to him, without Interruption;
And not allowing him, or time, or place
To commit any other ſinne, but thoſe)
Pleaſe you to make him welcome for a meale, Madam.
The nobleneſſe of his profeſſion makes
His welcome perfect: though your courſe deſcription
Would ſeeme to fully it.
Never, where a beame
Of ſo much favour doth illuſtrate it,
Right knowing Lady.
She hath cur'd all well.
And hee hath fitted well the Complement.
No; here they come! the prime Magnetick Gueſts
Our Lady Loadſtone ſo reſpects: the Artick!
And th' Antartick! Sir Diaphanous Silke-worme!
A Courtier extraordinary; who by diet
Of meates, and drinkes; his temperate exerciſe;
Choiſe muſick; frequent bathes; his horary ſhifts
Of Shirts and Waſt-coats; meanes to immortalize
Mortality it ſelfe; and makes the eſſence
Of his whole happineſſe the trim of Court.
I thanke you Mr. Compaſſe, for your ſhort Encomiaſtick.
It is much in little, Sir.
Conciſe, and quick: the true ſtile of an Orator.
But Mr. Practiſe here, my Ladies Lawyer!
Or man of Law: (for that's the true writing)
A man ſo dedicate to his profeſſion,
And the preferments goe along with it;
As ſcarce the thundring bruit of an invaſion,
Another eighty eight, threatning his Countrey
With ruine; would no more worke upon him,
Then Syracuſa's Sack, on Archimede:
So much he loves that Night-cap! the Bench-gowne!
With the broad Guard o'th back! Theſe ſhew
A man betroth'd unto the ſtudy of our Lawes!
Which you but thinke the crafty impoſitions,
Of ſubtile Clerks, feats of fine underſtanding,
To abuſe Clots, and Clownes with, Mr. Compaſſe,
Having no ground in nature, to ſuſtaine it
Or light, from thoſe cleare cauſes: to the inquiry
And ſearch of which, your Mathematicall head,
Hath ſo devow'd it ſelfe.
Tut, all men are
Philoſophers, to their inches. There's within,
Sir Intereſt, as able a Philoſopher,
In buying, and ſelling! has reduc'd his thrifte,
To certaine principles, and i'that method!
As hee will tell you inſtantly, by Logorythmes,
The utmoſt profit of a ſtock imployed:
(Be the Commoditie what it will) the place,
Or time, but cauſing very, very little,
Or, I may ſay, no paralaxe at all,
In his pecuniary obſervations!
He has brought your Neices portion with him, Madam;
At leaſt the man that muſt receive it; Here
They come negotiating the affaire;
You may perceive the Contract in their faces;
And read th'indenture: If you'ld ſigne 'hem. So.
What is he, Mr. Compaſſe?
A Vi-politique!
Or a ſub-aiding Inſtrument of State!
A kind of a laborious Secretary
To a great man! (and likely to come on)
Full of attendance! and of ſuch a ſtride
In buſines politique, or oeconomick,
As, well, his Lord may ſtoope t'adviſe with him,
And be preſcribed by him, in affaires
Of higheſt conſequence, when hee is dull'd,
Or wearied with the leſſe.
'Tis Mr. Bias,
Lord Whach'um's Politique.
You know the man?
I ha' ſeene him waite at Court, there, with his Maniples
Of papers, and petitions.
Hee is one
That over-rules tho', by his authority
Of living there; and cares for no man elſe:
Neglects the ſacred letter of the Law;
And holds it all to be but a dead heape,
Of civill inſtitutions: the reſt only
Of common men, and their cauſes, a farragoe,
Or a made diſh in Court; a thing of nothing:
And that's your quarrell at him? a juſt plea.
I tell you ſiſter Loadſtone—
(Hang your eares
This way: and heare his praiſes, now Moath opens)
I ha' brought you here the very man! the Jewell
Of all the Court! cloſe Mr. Bias! Siſter,
Apply him to your ſide! or you may weare him
Here o' your breſt! or hang him in your eare!
He's a fit Pendant for a Ladies tip!
A Chriſolite, a Gemme: the very Agat
Of State, and Politie: cut from the Quar
Of Macchiavel, a true Cornelian,
As Tacitus himſelfe! and to be made
The brooch to any true State-cap in Europe!
You praiſe him brother, as you had hope to ſell him.
No Madam, as hee had hope to ſell your Neice
Vnto him.
'Ware your true jeſts, Mr. Compaſſe;
They will not reliſh.
I will tell you, ſiſter,
I cannot cry his Carract up enough:
He is unvaluable: All the Lords
Have him in that eſteeme, for his relations,
Corrant's, Aviſes, Correſpondences
With this Ambaſſadour, and that Agent! Hee
Will ſcrew you out a Secret from a Statiſt—.
So eaſie, as ſome Cobler wormes a Dog.
And lock it in the Cabinet of his memory—.
Till 't turne a politique inſect, or a Fly!
Thus long.
You may be merry Mr. Compaſſe,
But though you have the reverſion of an office,
You are not in't Sir.
Remember that.
Why, ſhould that fright me; Mr. Bi—, from telling
Whoſe as you are?
Sir he's one, can doe
His turnes there: and deliver too his letters,
As punctually, and in as good a faſhion,
As ere a Secretary can in Court.
Why, is it any matter in what faſhion
A man deliver his letters, ſo he not open 'hem?
Yes, we have certaine precedents in Court,
From which wee never ſwerve, once in an age:
And (whatſoere he thinkes) I know the Arts,
And Sciences doe not directlier make
A Graduate in our Vniverſities;
Then an habituall gravitie prefers
A man in Court.
Which by the truer ſtile,
Some call a formall, flat ſervility.
Sir you may call it what you pleaſe. But wee
(That tread the path of publike buſineſſes)
Know what a tacit ſhrug is, or a ſhrinke;
The wearing the Callott; the politique hood:
And twenty other parerga, o' the by,
You Seculars underſtand not: I ſhall trick him,
If his reverſion came, i' my Lords way.
What is that Mr. Practiſe? you ſure know?
Mas' Compaſſes reverſion?
A fine place
(Survey or of the Projects generall)
I would I had it.
What is't worth?
O Sir,
A Nemo ſcit.
Wee'l thinke on't afore dinner.
Now, Gentlemen, what cenſure you of our Protaſis, or firſt Act?
Well, Boy, it is a faire Preſentment of your Actors. And a handſome promiſe of ſomewhat to come hereafter.
But, there is nothing done in it, or concluded: Therefore I ſay, no Act.
A fine peice of Logick! Doe you looke, Mr. Damplay, for concluſions in a Proteſis? I thought the Law of Comedy had reſerv'd to the Cataſtrophe: and that the Epitaſis, (as wee are taught) and the Cataſtaſis, had beene interveening parts, to have beene expected. But you would have all come together it ſeemes: The Clock ſhould ſtrike five, at once, with the Acts.
Why, if it could doe ſo, it were well, Boy.
Yes, if the nature of a Clock were to ſpeake, not ſtrike. So, if a Child could be borne, in a Play, and grow up to a man, i'the firſt Scene, before hee went off the Stage: and then after to come forth a Squire, and bee made a Knight: and that Knight to travell betweene the Acts, and doe wonders i'the holy land or elſe where; kill Paynims wild Boores, dun Cowes, and other Monſters; beget him a reputation, and marry an Emperours Daughter: for his Mrs. Convert her Fathers Countrey; and at laſt come home, lame and all to be laden with miracles.
Theſe miracles would pleaſe, I aſſure you: and take the People! For there be of the People, that will expect miracles, and more then miracles from this Pen.
Doe they thinke this Pen can juggle? I would we had Hokospokos for 'hem then; your People, or Travitanto Tudesko.
Who's that Boy?
Another Juggler, with a long name. Or that your expectors would be gone hence, now, at the firſt Act; or expect no more hereafter, then they underſtand.
Why ſo my peremptory Jack?
My name is Iohn, indeed— Becauſe, who expect what is impoſſible, or beyond nature, defraud themſelves.
Nay, there the Boy ſaid well: They doe defraud themſelves indeed.
And therefore, Mr. Damplay, unleſſe like a ſolemne Juſtice of wit, you will damne our Play, unheard, or unexamin'd; I ſhall intreat your Mrs. Madam Expectation, if ſhee be among theſe Ladies, to have patience, but a piſſing while: give our Springs leave to open a little, by degrees: A Source of ridiculous matter may breake forth anon, that ſhall ſteepe their temples, and bathe their braines in laughter, to the fomenting of Stupiditie it ſelfe, and the awaking any velvet Lethargy in the Houſe.
Why doe you maintaine your Poëts quarrell ſo with velvet, and good clothes, Boy? wee have ſeene him in indifferent good clothes, ere now.
And may doe in better, if it pleaſe the King (his Maſter) to ſay Amen to it, and allow it, to whom hee acknowledgeth all. But his clothes ſhall never be the beſt thing about him, though; hee will have ſomewhat beſide, either of humane letters, or ſevere honeſty, ſhall ſpeak him a man though he went naked.
Hee is beholden to you, if you can make this good, Boy.
Himſelfe hath done that, already, againſt Envy.
What's your name Sir? or your Countrey?
Iohn Try-guſt my name: A Corniſh youth, and the Poëts Servant.
Weſt-countrey breed, I thought, you were ſo bold.
Or rather ſawcy: to find out your palate, Mr. Damplay, Faith we doe call a Spade, a Spade, in Cornewall. If you dare damne our Play, i'the wrong place, we ſhall take heart to tell you ſo.
Good Boy.
SWeet Miſtris, pray you be merry: you are ſure
To have a husband now.
I, if the ſtore
Hurt not the choiſe.
Store is no ſore, young Miſtris,
My mother is wont to ſay.
And ſhee'l ſay wiſely,
As any mouth i' the Pariſh. Fixe on one,
Fixe upon one, good Miſtris.
At this call, too,
Here's Mr. Practiſe, who is call'd to the Bench
Of purpoſe.
Yes, and by my Ladies meanes—
'Tis thought to be the man.
A Lawyers wife.
And a fine Lawyers wife.
Is a brave calling.
Sweet Miſtris Practiſe!
Gentle Miſtris Practiſe!
Faire, open Miſtris Practiſe!
I, and cloſe,
And cunning Mrs. Practiſe!
I not like that,
The Courtiers is the neater calling.
Yes,
My Lady Silke-worme.
And to ſhine in Pluſh.
Like a young night Crow, a Diaphanous Silkeworme.
Lady Diaphanous ſounds moſt delicate!
Which would you chooſe, now Miſtris?
Cannot tell.
The copie does confound one.
Here's my Mother.
How now, my dainty charge, and diligent Nurſe?
What were you chanting on? ( God bleſſe you Maiden.)
Wee were inchanting all; wiſhing a husband
For my young Miſtris here. A man to pleaſe her.
Shee ſhall have a man, good Nurſe, and muſt have a man:
A man, and a halfe, if wee can chooſe him out:
We are all in Counſell within, and ſit about it:
The Doctors, and the Schollers, and my Lady;
Who's wiſer then all us—. Where's Mr. Needle?
Her Ladiſhip ſo lacks him to prick out
The man? How does my ſweet young Miſtris?
You looke not well, me thinkes! how doe you, deare charge?
You muſt have a husband, and you ſhall have a husband;
There's two put out to making for you: A third,
Your Vncle promiſes: But you muſt ſtill
Be rul'd by your Aunt: according to the will
Of your dead father, and mother (who are in heaven.)
Your Lady-Aunt has choiſe i'the houſe for you:
Wee doe not truſt your Vncle; hee would keepe you
A Batchler ſtill, by keeping of your portion:
And keepe you not alone without a husband,
But in a ſickneſſe: I, and the greene ſickneſſe,
The Maidens malady; which is a ſickneſſe:
A kind of a diſeaſe, I can aſſure you,
And like the Fiſh our Mariners call remora—.
A remora Miſtris!
How now goody Nurſe?
Dame Keepe of Katernes? what? have you an oare
I' the Cockboat, 'cauſe you are a Saylors wife?
And come from Shadwell? I ſay a remora:
For it will ſtay a Ship, that's under Saile!
And ſtaies are long, and tedious things to Maids!
And maidens are young ſhips, that would be ſailing,
When they be rigg'd: wherefore is all their trim elſe?
True; and for them to be ſtaid—.
The ſtay is dangerous:
You know it Mrs. Needle.
I know ſomewhat:
And can aſſure you, from the Doctors mouth,
Shee has a Dropſie; and muſt change the ayre,
Before ſhe can recover.
Say you ſo, Sir?
The Doctor ſaies ſo.
Sayes his worſhip ſo?
I warrant 'hem he ſayes true, then; they ſometimes
Are Sooth-ſayers, and alwayes cunning men.
Which Doctor was it?
Eeene my Ladies Doctor:
The neat houſe-Doctor: But a true ſtone-Doctor.
Why? heare you, Nurſe? How comes this geare to paſſe?
This is your fault in truth: It ſhall be your fault,
And muſt be your fault: why is your Miſtris ſicke?
Shee had her health, the while ſhee was with me.
Alas good Miſtris Poliſh, I am no Saint,
Much leſſe, my Lady, to be urg'd give health,
Or ſickneſſe at my will: but to awaite
The ſtarres good pleaſure, and to doe my duty.
You muſt doe more then your dutie, fooliſh Nurſe:
You muſt doe all you can; and more then you can,
More then is poſſible: when folkes are ſick,
Eſpecially, a Miſtris; a young Miſtris.
Here's Mr. Doctor himſelfe, cannot doe that
Doctor Doo-all can doe it. Thence he's call'd ſo.
Whence? what's hee call'd?
Doctor, doe all you can,
I pray you, and beſeech you, for my charge, here.
She's my tendring Goſſip, loves my Neice.
I know you can doe all things, what you pleaſe, Sir,
For a young Damſel, my good Ladies Neice, here!
You can doe what you liſt.
Peace Tiffany.
Eſpecially in this new caſe, o' the Dropſie.
The Gentlewoman (I doe feare) is leven'd.
Leven'd? what's that?
Puft, blowne, and't pleaſe your worſhip.
What! Darke, by darker? What is blowne? puff'd? ſpeake
Engliſh—
Tainted (and't pleaſe you) ſome doe call it.
She ſwels, and ſwels ſo with it.—
Give her vent,
If ſhee doe ſwell. A Gimblet muſt be had:
It is a Tympanites ſhe is troubled with;
There are three kinds: The firſt is Ana-ſarca
Vnder the Fleſh, a Tumor: that's not hers.
The ſecond is Aſcites, or Aquoſus,
A watry humour: that's not hers neither.
But Tympanites (which we call the Drum)
A wind bombes in her belly, muſt be unbrac'd,
And with a Faucet, or a Peg, let out,
And ſhe'll doe well: get her a husband.
Yes,
I ſay ſo Mr. Doctor, and betimes too.
As
Soone as wee can: let her beare up to day,
Laugh, and keepe company, at Gleeke, or Crimpe.
Your Ladiſhip ſayes right, Crimpe, ſure, will cure her.
Yes, and Gleeke too; peace Goſſip Tittle-Tattle,
Shee muſt to morrow, downe into the Countrey,
Some twenty mile; A Coach, and ſix brave Horſes:
Take the freſh aire, a moneth there, or five weekes:
And then returne a Bride, up to the Towne,
For any husband i'the Hemiſphere,
To chuck at; when ſhe has dropt her Timpane.
Muſt ſhe then drop it?
Thence, 'tis call'd a Dropſie.
The Timpanites is one ſpice of it;
A toy, a thing of nothing, a meere vapour:
Ile blow't away.
Needle, get you the Coach
Ready, againſt to morrow morning.
Yes Madam.
Ile downe with her my ſelfe, and thanke the Doctor.
Wee all ſhall thanke him. But, deare Madam, thinke,
Reſolve upon a man, this day.
I ha' done't.
To tell you true, (ſweet Goſſip;) here is none
But Maſter Doctor, hee ſhall be o' the Counſell:
The man I have deſign'd her to, indeed,
Is Maſter Practiſe: he's a neat young man,
Forward, and growing up, in a profeſſion!
Like to be ſome body, if the Hall ſtand!
And Pleading hold! A prime young Lawyers wife,
Is a right happy fortune.
And ſhee bringing
So plentifull a portion, they may live
Like King, and Queene, at common Law together!
Sway Judges; guide the Courts; command the Clarkes,
And fright the Evidence; rule at their pleaſures,
Like petty Soveraignes in all caſes.
O, that
Will be a worke of time; ſhe may be old
Before her husband riſe to a chiefe Judge;
And all her flower be gone: No, no, a Lady
O' the firſt head I'ld have her; and in Court:
The Lady Silk-worme, a Diaphanous Lady:
And be a Vi-counteſſe to carry all
Before her (as wee ſay) her Gentleman-uſher:
And caſt off Pages, bare, to bid her Aunt
Welcome unto her honour, at her lodgings.
You ſay well, Ladies Goſſip; if my Lady
Could admit that, to have her Neice precede her.
For that, I muſt conſult mine owne Ambition,
My zealous Goſſip.
O, you ſhall precede her:
You ſhall be a Counteſſe! Sir Diaphanous,
Shall get you made a Counteſſe! Here he comes;
Has my voice certaine: O fine Courtier!
O bleſſed man! the bravery prick't out,
To make my dainty charge, a Vi-counteſſe!
And my good Lady, her Aunt, Counteſſe at large!
I tell thee Parſon, if I get her, reckon
Thou haſt a friend in Court; and ſhalt command
A thouſand pound, to goe on any errand,
For any Church preferment thou haſt a mind too.
I thanke your worſhip: I will ſo worke for you,
As you ſhall ſtudy all the wayes to thanke me:
Ile worke my Lady, and my Ladies friends;
Her Goſſip, and this Doctor; and Squire Needle,
And Mr. Compaſſe, who is all in all:
The very Fly ſhee moves by: Hee is one
That went to Sea with her husband, Sir Iohn Loadſtone,
And brought home the rich prizes: all that wealth
Is left her; for which ſervice ſhe reſpects him:
A dainty Scholler in the Mathematicks;
And one ſhee wholly imployes. Now Dominus Practiſe
Is yet the man (appointed by her Ladiſhip)
But there's a trick to ſet his cap awry:
If I know any thing; hee hath confeſt
To me in private, that hee loves another,
My Ladies woman, Mrs. Pleaſance: therefore
Secure you of Rivalſhip.
I thanke thee
My noble Parſon: There's five hundred pound
Waites on thee more for that.
Accoaſt the Neice:
Yonder ſhee walkes alone: Ile move the Aunt:
But here's the Goſſip: ſhee expects a morſell.
Ha' you nere a Ring, or toy to throw away?
Yes, here's a Diamont of ſome threeſcore pound,
I pray you give her that.
If ſhee will take it.
And there's an Emerauld, for the Doctor too:
Thou Parſon, thou ſhalt coine me: I am thine.
Here Mr. Compaſſe comes: Doe you ſee my Lady?
And all the reſt? how they doe flutter about him!
Hee is the Oracle of the houſe, and family!
Now, is your time: goe nick it with the Neice:
I will walke by; and hearken how the Chimes goe.
Nay Parſon, ſtand not off; you may approach:
This is no ſuch hid point of State, wee handle,
But you may heare it: for wee are all of Counſell.
The gentle Mr. Practiſe, hath dealt clearly,
And nobly with you, Madam.
Ha' you talk'd with him?
And made the overture?
Yes, firſt I mov'd
The buſines truſted to me, by your Ladiſhip,
I' your owne words, almoſt your very Sillabes:
Save where my Memory treſpaſſ'd 'gainſt their elegance:
For which I hope your pardon. Then I inlarg'd
In my owne homely ſtile, the ſpeciall goodneſſe,
And greatneſſe, of your bounty, in your choice,
And free conferring of a benefit,
So without ends, conditions, any tye
But his meere vertue, and the value of it,
To call him to your kindred, to your veines,
Inſert him in your family, and to make him
A Nephew, by the offer of a Neice,
With ſuch a portion; which when hee had heard,
And moſt maturely acknowledg'd (as his calling
Tends all unto maturity) he return'd
A thankes, as ample as the Curteſie,
(In my opinion) ſaid it was a Grace,
Too great to be rejected, or accepted
By him! But as the termes ſtood with his fortune,
Hee was not to prevaricate, with your Ladiſhip,
But rather to require ingenious leave,
He might with the ſame love, that it was offer'd
Refuſe it, ſince he could not with his honeſty,
(Being he was ingag'd before) receive it.
The ſame he ſaid to me.
And name the party.
He did, and he did not.
Come, leave your Schemes,
And fine Amphibolies, Parſon.
You'l heare more.
Why, now your Ladiſhip is free to chooſe,
The Courtier Sir Diaphanous: he ſhall doe it,
Ile move it to him my ſelfe.
What will you move to him?
The making you a Counteſſe.
Stint, fond woman.
Know you the partie Mr. Practiſe meanes?
No, but your Parſon ſayes he knowes, Madam.
I feare he fables; Parſon doe you know
Where Mr. Practiſe is ingag'd?
Ile tell you!
But under ſeale, her Mother muſt not know:
'Tis with your Ladiſhips woman, Mrs. Pleaſance.
How!
Hee is not mad.
O hide the hideous ſecret
From her, ſhee'l trouble all elſe. You doe hold
A Cricket by the wing.
Did he name Pleaſance?
Are you ſure Parſon?
O 'tis true, your Mrs!
I find where your ſhooe wrings you, Mr. Compaſſe:
But, you'l looke to him there.
Yes, here's Sir Moath,
Your brother, with his Bias, and the Partie
Deepe in diſcourſe: 'twill be a bargaine, and ſale;
I ſee by their cloſe working of their heads,
And running them together ſo in Councell.
Will Mr. Practiſe be of Councell againſt us?
He is a Lawyer, and muſt ſpeake for his Fee,
Againſt his Father, and Mother, all his kindred;
His brothers, or his ſiſters: no exception
Lies at the Common-Law. He muſt not alter
Nature for forme, but goe on in his path—
It may be he will be for us. Doe not you
Offer to meddle, let them take their courſe:
Diſpatch, and marry her off to any husband;
Be not you ſcrupulous; let who can have her:
So he lay downe the portion, though he gueld it:
It will maintaine the ſuit againſt him: ſomewhat,
Something in hand is better, then no birds.
He ſhall at laſt accompt, for the utmoſt farthing,
If you can keepe your hand from a diſcharge.
Sir, doe but make her worſhipfull Aunt a Counteſſe,
And ſhe is yours: her Aunt has worlds to leave you!
The wealth of ſix Eaſt Indian Fleets at leaſt!
Her Husband, Sir Iohn Loadſtone, was the Governour
O' the Company. ſeven yeares.
And came there home,
Six Fleets in ſeven yeares?
I cannot tell,
I muſt attend my Goſſip, her good Ladiſhip.
And will you make me a Vi-counteſſe too? For,
How doe they make a Counteſſe? in a Chaire?
Or 'pon a bed?
Both wayes, ſweet bird, Ile ſhew you.
The truth is, Mr. Practiſe, now wee are ſure
That you are off, we dare come on the bolder:
The portion left, was ſixteene thouſand pound,
I doe confeſſe it, as a juſt man ſhould.
And call here Mr. Compaſſe, with theſe Gentlemen,
To the relation: I will ſtill be juſt.
Now for the profits every way ariſing,
It was the Donors wiſedome, thoſe ſhould pay
Me for my watch, and breaking of my ſleepes;
It is no petty charge, you know, that ſumme;
To keepe a man awake, for fourteene yeare.
But (as you knew to uſe it i' that time)
It would reward your waking.
That's my induſtry;
As it might be your reading, ſtudie, and counſell;
And now your pleading, who denies it you?
I have my calling too. Well, Sir, the Contract
Is with this Gentleman, ten thouſand pound.
(An ample portion, for a younger brother,
With a ſoft, tender, delicate rib of mans fleſh,
That he may worke like waxe, and print upon.)
He expects no more then that ſumme to be tendred,
And hee receive it: Thoſe are the conditions.
A direct bargaine, and ſale in open market.
And what I have furniſh'd him with all o' the by,
To appeare, or ſo: A matter of foure hundred,
To be deduc'd upo' the payment—.
Right.
You deale like a juſt man ſtill.
Draw up this
Good Mr. Practiſe, for us, and be ſpeedy.
But here's a mighty gaine Sir, you have made
Of this one ſtock! the principall firſt doubled,
In the firſt ſeven yeare; and that redoubled
I'the next ſeven! beſide ſixe thouſand pound,
There's threeſcore thouſand got in fourteene yeare,
After the uſuall rate of ten i'the hundred,
And the ten thouſand paid.
I thinke it be!
How will you ſcape the clamour, and the envie?
Let 'hem exclaime, and envie: what care I?
Their murmurs raiſe no bliſters i'my fleſh.
My monies are my blood, my parents, kindred:
And he that loves not thoſe, he is unnaturall:
I am perſwaded that the love of monie
Is not a vertue, only in a Subject,
But might befit a Prince. And (were there need)
I find me able to make good the Aſſertion.
To any reaſonable mans underſtanding.
And make him to confeſſe it.
Gentlemen,
Doctors, and Schollers, yo'll heare this, and looke for
As much true ſecular wit, and deepe Lay-ſenſe,
As can be ſhowne on ſuch a common place.
Firſt, wee all know the ſoule of man is infinite
I what it covets. Who deſireth knowledge,
Deſires it infinitely. Who covets honour,
Covets it infinitely, It will be then
No hard thing, for a coveting man, to prove
Or to confeſſe, hee aimes at infinite wealth.
His ſoule lying that way.
Next, every man
Is i'the hope, or poſſibility
Of a whole world: this preſent world being nothing,
But the diſperſed iſſue of firſt one:
And therefore I not ſee, but a juſt man
May with juſt reaſon, and in office ought
Propound unto himſelfe.
An infinite wealth!
He beare the burden: Goe you on Sir Moath.
Thirdly, if wee conſider man a member,
But of the body politique, we know,
By juſt experience, that the Prince hath need
More of one wealthy, then ten fighting men.
There you went out o' the road, a little from us.
And therefore, if the Princes aimes be infinite,
It muſt be in that, which makes all.
Infinite wealth.
Fourthly, 'tis naturall to all good ſubjects,
To ſet a price on money; more then fooles
Ought on their Mrs. Picture; every piece
Fro' the penny to the twelve pence, being the Hieroglyphick,
And ſacred Sculpture of the Soveraigne.
A manifeſt concluſion, and a ſafe one.
Fiftly, wealth gives a man the leading voice,
At all conventions; and diſplaceth worth,
With generall allowance to all parties:
It makes a trade to take the wall of vertue;
And the mere iſſue of a ſhop, right Honourable.
Sixtly, it doth inable him that hath it
To the performance of all reall actions,
Referring him to himſelfe ſtill: and not binding
His will to any circumſtance; without him;
It gives him preciſe knowledge of himſelfe;
For, be he rich, he ſtraight with evidence knowes
Whether he have any compaſſion,
Or inclination unto vertue, or no;
Where the poore knave erroniouſly beleeves,
If he were rich, he would build Churches, or
Doe ſuch mad things. Seventhly, your wiſe poore men
Have ever beene contented to obſerve
Rich Fooles, and ſo to ſerve their turnes upon them:
Subjecting all their wit to the others wealth.
And become Gentlemen Paraſites, Squire Bauds,
To feed their Patrons honorable humors.
Eightly, 'tis certaine that a man may leave
His wealth, or to his Children, or his friends;
His wit hee cannot ſo diſpoſe, by Legacie?
As they ſhall be a Harrington the better for't.
He may intaile a Jeſt upon his houſe, though:
Or leave a tale to his poſteritie,
To be told after him.
As you have done here?
T'invite your friend, and brother to a feaſt,
Where all the Gueſts are ſo mere heterogene,
And ſtrangers, no man knowes another, or cares
If they be Chriſtians, or Mahumetans!
That here are met.
Is't any thing to you brother,
To know Religions more then thoſe you fight for?
Yes, and with whom I eat. I may diſpute,
And how ſhall I hold argument with ſuch,
I neither know their humors, nor their hereſies;
Which are religions now, and ſo receiv'd?
Here's no man among theſe that keepes a ſervant,
To'inquire his Maſter of: yet i'the houſe,
I heare it buzz'd, there are a brace of Doctors;
A Foole, and a Phyſician: with a Courtier,
That feeds on mulbery leaves, like a true Silkeworme:
A Lawyer, and a mighty Money-Baud,
Sir Moath! has brought his politique Bias with him:
A man of a moſt animadverting humor:
Who, to indeare himſelfe unto his Lord,
Will tell him, you and I, or any of us,
That here are met, are all pernitious ſpirits,
And men of peſtilent purpoſe, meanely affected
Vnto the State wee live in: and beget
Himſelfe a thankes, with the great men o' the time,
By breeding Jealouſes in them of us,
Shall croſſe our fortunes, fruſtrate our endeavours,
Twice ſeven yeares after: And this trick be call'd
Cutting of throats, with a whiſpering, or a pen-knife.
I muſt cut his throat now: I'am bound in honour,
And by the Law of armes, to ſee it done;
I dare to doe it; and I dare profeſſe
The doing of it: being to ſuch a Raskall,
Who is the common offence growne of man-kind;
And worthy to be torne up from ſociety.
You ſhall not doe it here, Sir.
Why? will you
Intreat your ſelfe, into a beating for him,
My courteous brother? If you will, have at you,
No man deſerves it better (now I thinke on't)
Then you: that will keepe conſort with ſuch Fidlers,
Pragmatick Flies, Fooles, Publicanes, and Moathes:
And leave your honeſt, and adopted brother.
'Beſt raiſe the houſe upon him, to ſecure us;
Hee'll kill us all!
I love no blades in belts.
Nor I.
Would I were at my ſhop againe,
In Court, ſafe ſtow'd up, with my politique bundels.
How they are ſcatter'd!
Run away like Cimici,
Into the cranies of a rotten bed-ſtead.
I told you ſuch a paſſage would diſperſe 'hem,
Although the houſe were their Fee-ſimple in Law,
And they poſſeſt of all the bleſſings in it.
Pray heaven they be not frighted from their ſtomacks:
That ſo my Ladies Table be disfurniſh'd
Of the proviſions!
No, the Parſons calling
By this time, all the covey againe, together.
Here comes good tydings! Dinners o' the boord.
Stay Mrs. Pleaſance, I muſt aske you a queſtion:
Ha' you any ſuites in Law?
I, Mr. Compaſſe?
Anſwer me briefly, it is dinner time.
They ſay you have retain'd brisk Mr. Practiſe
Here, of your Councell; and are to be joyn'd
A Patentee with him.
In what? who ſayes ſo?
You are diſpos'd to jeſt.
No, I am in earneſt.
It is given out i'the houſe ſo, I aſſure you;
But keepe your right to your ſelfe, and not acquaint
A common Lawyer with your caſe. If hee
Once find the gap; a thouſand will leape after.
Ile tell you more anone.
This Riddle ſhewes
A little like a Love-trick, o' one face,
If I could underſtand it. I will ſtudie it.
But whom doth your Poët meane now by this— Mr. Bias? what Lords Secretary, doth hee purpoſe to perſonate, or perſtringe?
You might as well aske mee, what Alderman, or Aldermans Mate, hee meant by Sir Moath Intereſt? or what eminent Lawyer, by the ridiculous Mr. Practiſe? who hath rather his name invented for laughter, then any offence, or injury it can ſtick on the reverend Profeſſors of the Law: And ſo the wiſe ones will thinke.
It is an inſidious Queſtion, Brother Damplay! Iniquity it ſelfe would not have urg'd it. It is picking the Lock of the Scene; not opening it the faire way with a Key. A Play, though it apparell, and preſent vices in generall, flies from all particularities in perſons. Would you aske of Plantus, and Terence, (if they both liv'd now) who were Davus, or Pſeudolus in the Scene? who Pyrgopolinices, or Thraſo? who Euclio or Menedemus?
Yes, he would: And inquire of Martial, or any other Epigrammatiſt, whom he meant by Titius, or Seius (the common John à Noke, or Iohn à Style) under whom they note all vices, and errors taxable to the Times? As if there could not bee a name for a Folly fitted to the Stage, but there muſt be a perſon in nature, found out to owne it.
Why, I can phant'ſie a perſon to my ſelfe Boy, who ſhall hinder me?
And, in not publiſhing him, you doe no man an injury. But if you will utter your owne ill meaning on that perſon, under the Authors words, you make a Libell of his Comoedy.
O, hee told us that in a Prologue, long ſince.
If you doe the ſame reprehenſible ill things, ſtill the ſame reprehenſion will ſerve you, though you heard it afore: They are his owne words. I can invent no better, nor he.
It is the ſolemne vice of interpretation, that deformes the figure of many a faire Scene, by drawing it awry; and indeed is the civill murder of moſt good Playes: If I ſee a thing vively preſented on the Stage, that the Glaſſe of cuſtome (which is Comedy) is ſo held up to me, by the Poet, as I can therein view the daily examples of mens lives, and images of Truth, in their manners, ſo drawne for my delight, or profit, as I may (either way) uſe them: and will I, rather (then make that true uſe) hunt out the Perſons to defame, by my malice of miſapplying? and imperill the innocence, and candor of the Author, by his calumnie? It is an unjuſt way of hearing, and beholding Playes, this, and moſt unbecomming a Gentleman to appeare malignantly witty in anothers Worke.
They are no other but narrow, and ſhrunke natures; ſhriveld up, poore things, that cannot thinke well of themſelves, who dare to detract others. That Signature is upon them, and it will laſt. A halfe-witted Barbariſme! which no Barbers art, or his bals, will ever expunge or take out.
Why, Boy? This were a ſtrange Empire, or rather a Tyrannie, you would entitle your Poet to, over Gentlemen, that they ſhould come to heare, and ſee Playes, and ſay nothing for their money.
O, yes; ſay what you will: ſo it be to purpoſe, and in place.
Can any thing be out of purpoſe at a Play? I ſee no reaſon, if I come here, and give my eighteene pence, or two ſhillings for my Seat, but I ſhould take it out in cenſure, on the Stage.
Your two ſhilling worth is allow'd you: but you will take your ten, ſhilling worth, your twenty ſhilling worth, and more: And teach others (about you) to doe the like, that follow your leading face; as if you were to cry up or downe every Scene, by confederacy, be it right or wrong.
Who ſhould teach us the right, or wrong at a Play?
If your owne ſcience can not doe it, or the love of Modeſty, and Truth; all other intreaties, or attempts—are vaine. You are fitter Spectators for the Beares, then us, or the Puppets. This is a popular ignorance indeed, ſomewhat better appareld in you, then the People: but a hard handed, and ſtiffe ignorance, worthy a Trewel, or a Hammer-man; and not onely fit to be ſcorn'd, but to be triumph'd ore.
By whom, Boy?
No particular, but the generall neglect, and ſilence. Good Maſter Damplay, be your ſelfe ſtill, without a ſecond: Few here are of your opinion to day, I hope; to morrow, I am ſure there will bee none, when they have ruminated this.
Let us mind what you come for, the lay, which will draw on to the Epitaſis now.
VVHere's Mr. Doctor?
O Mr. Tim Item,
His learned Pothecary! you are welcome:
He is within at dinner.
Dinner! Death!
That hee will eat now, having ſuch a buſines,
That ſo concernes him!
Why, can any buſines
Concerne a man like his meat?
O twenty millions,
To a Phyſician, that's in practiſe: I
Doe bring him newes, from all the points o' the Compaſſe,
(That's all the parts of the ſublunary Globe.)
Of times, and double times.
In, in, ſweet Item,
And furniſh forth the Table with your newes:
Deſerve your dinner: Sow out your whole bag full:
The Gueſts will heare it.
I heard they were out.
But they are piec'd, and put together againe,
You may goe in, you'l find them at high eating:
The Parſon has an edifying ſtomack,
And a perſwading Palate (like his name:)
Hee hath begun three draughts of ſack in Doctrines,
And fower in Uſes.
And they follow him.
No, Sir Diaphanous is a Recuſant
In ſack. He onely takes it in French wine,
With an allay of water. In in, Item,
And leave your peeping.
I have a moneths mind,
To peepe a little too. Sweet Mas' Needle,
How are they ſet?
At the boords end my Lady—.
And my young Mrs. by her?
Yes, the Parſon
On the right hand (as hee'l not loſe his place
For thruſting) and 'gainſt him Mrs. Poliſh:
Next, Sir Diaphanous, againſt Sir Moath;
Knights, one againe another: Then the Souldier,
The man of warre, and man of peace the Lawyer:
Then the port Doctor, and the politique Bias,
And Mr. Compaſſe circumſcribeth all.
Nurſe Keepe, nurſe Keepe!
What noiſe is that within?
Come to my Miſtris, all their weapons are out.
Miſchiefe of men! what day, what houre is this?
Run for the cellar of ſtrong waters, quickly.
Were you a mad man to doe this at table?
And trouble all the Gueſts, to affright the Ladies,
And Gentlewomen?
Pox upo' your women,
And your halfe man there, Court-Sir Amber-gris:
A perfum'd braggart: He muſt drinke his wine
With three parts water; and have Amber in that too.
And you muſt therefore breake his face with a Glaſſe,
And waſh his noſe in wine.
Cannot he drinke
In Orthodoxe, but he muſt have his Gums,
And Panym Drugs?
You ſhould have us'd the Glaſſe
Rather as ballance, then the ſword of Juſtice:
But you have cut his face with it, he bleeds.
Come you ſhall take your Sanctuary with me;
The whole houſe will be up in armes 'gainſt you elſe,
Within this halfe houre; this way to my lodging.
A moſt rude action! carry her to her bed;
And uſe the Fricace to her, with thoſe oyles.
Keepe your newes Item now, and tend this buſines.
Good Goſſip looke to her.
How doe you ſweet charge?
She's in a ſweat.
I, and a faint ſweat mary.
Let her alone to Tim: he has directions,
Ile heare your newes Tim Item, when you ha' done.
Was ever ſuch a Gueſt brought to my table?
Theſe boiſtrous Souldiers ha' no better breeding.
Here Mr. Compaſſe comes: where's your Captaine,
Rudhudibr as de Ironſide?
Gone out of doores.
Would he had nere come in them, I may wiſh.
He has diſcredited my houſe, and boord,
With his rude ſwaggering manners, and endanger'd
My Neices health (by drawing of his weapon)
God knowes how farre; for Mr. Doctor does not.
The Doctor is an Aſſe then, if hee ſay ſo,
And cannot with his conjuring names, Hippocrates;
Galen or Raſis, Avicen. Averroes,
Cure a poore wenches falling in a ſwoune:
Which a poore Farthing chang'd in Roſa ſolis,
Or Cynnamon water would.
How now? how does ſhe?
Shee's ſomewhat better. Mr. Item has brought her
A little about.
But there's Sir Moath your brother
Is falne into a fit o' the happyplexe,
It were a happy place for him, and us,
If he could ſteale to heaven thus: All the houſe
Are calling Mr. Doctor, Mr. Doctor.
The Parſon he has gi'n him gone, this halfe houre;
Hee's pale in the mouth already, for the feare
O' the fierce Captaine.
Helpe me to my Chamber,
Nurſe Keepe: Would I could ſee the day no more,
But night hung over me, like ſome darke cloud;
That, buried with this loſſe of my good name,
I, and my houſe might periſh, thus forgotten—
Her taking it to heart thus, more afflicts me
Then all theſe accidents, for they'll blow over.
It was a barbarous Injury, I confeſſe:
But if you will be counſell'd, Sir, by me,
The reverend Law lies open to repaire
Your reputation. That will gi' you damages;
Five thouſand pound for a finger, I have knowne
Given in Court: And let me pack your Jury.
There's nothing vexes me, but that he has ſtaind
My new white ſattin Doublet; and beſpatter'd
My ſpick and ſpan ſilke Stockings, o'the day
They were drawne on: And here's a ſpot i' my hoſe too.
Shrewd maimes! your Clothes are wounded deſperately,
And that (I thinke) troubles a Courtier more,
An exact Courtier, then a gaſh in his fleſh.
My fleſh? I ſweare had he giv'n me twice ſo much,
I never ſhould ha' reckon'd it. But my clothes
To be de defac'd, and ſtigmatiz'd ſo foulely!
I take it as a contumely done me
Above the wiſedome of our Lawes to right.
Why then you'l challenge him?
I will adviſe,
Though Mr. Practiſe here doth urge the Law;
And reputation it will make me of credit,
Beſide great damages (let him pack my Jury.)
He ſpeakes like Mr. Practiſe, one, that is
The Child of a Profeſſion he's vow'd too,
And ſervant to the ſtudie he hath taken,
A pure Apprentice at Law! But you muſt have
The Counſell o'the Sword; and ſquare your action
Vnto their Cannons, and that brother-hood,
If you doe right.
I tell you Mr. Compaſſe,
You ſpeake not like a friend unto the Lawes,
Nor ſcarce a ſubject, to perſwade him thus,
Vnto the breach o'the peace: Sir you forget
There is a Court above, o'the Starre-Chamber,
To puniſh Routs and Riots.
No, young Maſter,
Although your name be Practiſe there in Terme time,
I doe remember it. But you'l not heare
What I was bound to ſay; but like a wild
Young haggard Juſtice, fly at breach o' the Peace,
Before you know, whether the amorous Knight
Dares break the peace of conſcience in a Duell.
Troth Mr. Compaſſe, I take you my friend;
You ſhall appoint of me in any matter
That's reaſonable, ſo wee may meet faire,
On even termes.
I ſhall perſwade no other,
(And take your learned Counſell to adviſe you)
Ile run along with him. You ſay you'l meet him,
On even termes. I doe not ſee indeed
How that can be, 'twixt Ironſide and you,
Now I conſider it. Hee is my brother.
I doe confeſſe (wee ha' call'd ſo twenty yeare:)
But you are, Sir, a Knight in Court, allied there,
And ſo befriended, you may eaſily anſwer
The worſt ſucceſſe: He a knowne, noted, bold
Boy o' the Sword, hath all mens eyes upon him;
And there's no London-Iury, but are led
In evidence, as farre by common fame,
As they are by preſent depoſition.
Then you have many brethren, and neer kinſmen.
If he kill you, it will be a laſting Quarrell
T'wixt them, and him. Whereas Rud: Ironſide,
Although he ha' got his head into a Beaver,
With a huge feather, 's but a Corriers ſonne,
And has not two old Cordov'an skins, to leave
In Leather Caps to mourne him in, if he die.
Againe, you are generally belov'd, he hated
So much, that all the hearts, and votes of men
Goe with you, in the wiſhing all proſperity
Vnto your purpoſe; hee's a fat, corpulent,
Vnweildy fellow: you, a dieted Sparke,
Fit for the Combat. He has kild ſo many;
As it is ten to one his turne is next;
You never fought with any; leſſe, ſlew any:
And therefore have the hopes before you.
I hope theſe things thus ſpecified unto you,
Are faire advantages: you cannot encounter
Him upon equall termes. Beſide, Sir Silkworme,
He hath done you wrong in a moſt high degree:
And ſenſe of ſuch an Injury receiv'd,
Should ſo exacuate, and whet your choller,
As you ſhould count your ſelfe an hoſt of men,
Compar'd to him. And therefore you, brave Sir,
Have no more reaſon to provoke, or challenge
Him, then the huge great Porter has to try
His ſtrength upon an Infant.
Mr. Compaſſe,
You rather ſpur me on, then any way
Abate my courage to the Enterpriſe.
All Counſell's as it's taken. If you ſtand
On point of honour, not t'have any odds,
I have rather then diſſwaded you, then otherwiſe:
If upon termes of humour and revenge,
I have encourag'd you. So that I thinke,
I have done the part of a friend on either ſide:
In furniſhing your feare with matter firſt,
If you have any: Or, if you dare fight,
To heighten, and confirme your reſolution.
I now doe crave your pardon, Mr. Compaſſe:
I did not apprehend your way before,
The true Perimiter of it: you have Circles,
And ſuch fine draughts about!
Sir I doe thanke you,
I thanke you Mr. Compaſſe heartily;
I muſt confeſſe, I never fought before,
And I'll be glad to doe things orderly,
In the right place: I pray you inſtruct me.
Is't beſt I fight ambitiouſly, or malitiouſly?
Sir, if you never fought before, be wary,
Truſt not your ſelfe too much.
Why? I aſſure you,
I'am very angry.
Doe not ſuffer, though,
The flatuous, windy choller of your heart,
To move the clapper of your underſtanding,
Which is the guiding faculty, your reaſon:
You know not, if you'l fight, or no, being brought
Vpo' the place.
O yes, I have imagin'd
Him treble arm'd, provok'd too, and as furious
As Homer makes Achilles; and I find
My ſelfe not frighted with his ſame one jot.
Well, yet take heed. Theſe fights imaginary,
Are leſſe then skirmiſhes; the fight of ſhadowes:
For ſhadowes have their figure, motion
And their umbratile action from the reall
Poſture, and motion of the bodies act
Whereas (imaginarily) many times,
Thoſe men may fight, dare ſcarce eye one another,
And much leſſe meet. But if there be no helpe,
Faith I would wiſh you, ſend him a faire Challenge.
I will goe pen it preſently.
But word it
In the moſt generous termes.
Let me alone.
And ſilken phraſe: the courtlieſt kind of Quarrell.
He'l make it a petition for his peace.
O, yes, of right, and hee may doe it by Lau.
Come, bring him out into the aire a little:
There ſet him downe. Bow him, yet bow him more,
Daſh that ſame Glaſſe of water in his face:
Now tweak him by the noſe. Hard, harder yet:
If it but call the blood up from the heart,
I aske no more. See, what a feare can doe!
Pinch him in the nape of the neck now; nip him, nip him.
He feeles, there's life in him.
He graones, and ſtirres.
Tell him the Captaine's gone.
Ha!
He's gone Sir.
Gi' him a box, hard, hard, on his left care.
O!
How doe you feele your ſelfe?
Sore, ſore.
But where?
I'my neck.
I nipt him there.
And i' my head.
I box'd him twice, or thrice, to move thoſe Sinewes.
I ſweare you did.
What a brave man's a Doctor,
To beat one into health! I thought his blowes
Would eene ha' kild him: hee did feele no more
Then a great horſe.
Is the wild Captaine gone?
That man of murther?
All is calme and quiet.
Say you ſo, Coſen Bias? Then all's well.
How quickly a man is loſt!
And ſoone recover'd!
Where there are meanes, and Doctors, learned men,
And their Apothecaries, who are not now,
(As Chawcer ſayes) their friendſhip to begin.
Well, could they teach each other how to win
I'their ſwath bands—.
Leave your Poetry good Goſſip.
Your Chawcers clouts, and waſh your diſhes with 'hem,
Wee muſt rub up the roots of his diſeaſe,
And crave your peace a while, or elſe your abſence.
Nay, I know when to hold my peace.
Then do it.
Gi' me your hand Sir Moath. Let's feele your pulſe.
It is a Purſineſſe, a kind of Stoppage,
Or tumor o'the Purſe, for want of exerciſe,
That you are troubled with: ſome ligatures
I'th neck of your Veſica, or Marſupium,
Are ſo cloſe knit, that you cannot evaporate;
And therefore you muſt uſe relaxatives.
Beſide, they ſay, you are ſo reſtive growne,
You cannot but with trouble put your hand
Into your pocket, to diſcharge a reckoning.
And this we ſonnes of Phyſick doe call chiragra
A kind of Crampe, or Hand-Gout. You ſhall purge for't.
Indeed your worſhip ſhould doe well to adviſe him,
To clenſe his body, all the three high wayes;
That is, by Sweat, Purge, and Phlebatomy.
You ſay well learned Tim, Ile firſt preſcribe him,
To give his purſe a purge once, twice a weeke
At Dice, or Cards: And when the weather is open,
Sweat at a bowling Alley; or be let blood
I' the lending veine, and bleed a matter of fifty,
Or threeſcore ounces at a time. Then put
Your thumbs under your Girdle, and have ſome body
Elſe, pull out your purſe for you, till with more eaſe,
And a good habit, you can doe it your ſelfe.
And then be ſure alwayes to keepe good diet;
And h'your table furniſh'd from one end,
Vnto the tother: It is good for the eyes,
But feed you on one diſh ſtill, ha' your Diet-drinke,
Ever in Bottles ready, which muſt come
From the Kings-head: I will preſcribe you nothing;
But what Ile take before you mine owne ſelfe:
That is my courſe with all my Patients.
Very methodicall, Secundùm Artem.
And very ſafe pro captu recipientis.
All errant learned men, how they 'ſpute Latine.
I had it of a Jew, and a great Rabbi,
Who every morning caſt his cup of White-wine
With ſugar, and by the reſidence i' the bottome,
Would make report of any Chronick malady,
Such as Sir Moath's is, being an oppilation,
In that you call the neck o'the money bladder,
Moſt anatomicall, and by diſſection.
O Mr. Doctor, and his Pothecary
Good Mr. Item, and my Miſtris Poliſh!
Wee need you all above! Shee's falne againe,
In a worſe fit then ever.
Who?
Your charge.
Come away Gentlemen.
This fit with the Doctor,
Hath mended me paſt expectation.
O Sir Diaphanous, ha' you done?
I ha' brought it.
That's well.
But who ſhall carry it now?
A friend:
Ile find a friend to carry it; Mr. Bias here
Will not deny me that.
What is't?
To carry
A Challenge I have writ unto the Captaine.
Faith but I will Sir, you ſhall pardon me
For a twi-reaſon of State: Ile heren Challenges;
I will not hazard my Lords favour ſo;
Or forfeit mine owne Judgement with his honour,
To turne a Ruſſian: I have to commend me
Nought but his Lordſhips good opinion;
And to't my Kallygraphy, a faire hand,
Fit for a Secretary: Now you know, a mans hand
Being his executing part in fight,
Is more obnoxious to the common perill—
You ſhall not fight Sir, you ſhall onely ſearch
My Antagoniſt; commit us fairely there
Vpo' the ground on equall termes.
O Sir!
But if my Lord ſhould heare I ſtood at end
Of any quarrell, 'twere an end of me
In a ſtate courſe! I ha'read the Politiques;
And heard th'opinions of our beſt Divines.
The Gentleman has reaſon! Where was firſt
The birth of your acquaintance? or the Cradle
Of your ſtrickt friend ſhipmade?
We met in France, Sir.
In France! that Garden of humanity,
The very ſeed-plot of all courteſies:
I wonder that your friendſhip ſuck'd that aliment,
The milke of France; and ſee this ſower effect
It doth produce, 'gainſt all the ſweets of travell:
There, every Gentleman profeſſing armes,
Thinkes he is bound in honour to imbrace
The bearing of a Challenge for another,
Without or queſtioning the cauſe, or asking
Leaſt colour of a reaſon. There's no Cowardize,
No Poultrounerie, like urging why? wherefore?
But carry a Challenge, die, and doe the thing.
Why, heare you Mr. Compaſſe, I but crave
Your eare in private? I would carry his Challenge,
If I but hop'd your Captaine angry enough
To kill him: For (to tell you truth) this Knight,
Is an impertinent in Court, (wee thinke him:)
And troubles my Lords Lodgings, and his Table
With frequent, and unneceſſary viſits,
Which wee (the better ſort of Servants) like not:
Being his Fellowes in all other places,
But at our Maſters boord; and we disdaine
To doe thoſe ſervile offices, oft times,
His fooliſh pride, and Empire will exact,
Againſt the heart, or humour of a Gentleman.
Truth Mr. Bias, I'ld not ha' you thinke
I ſpeake to flatter you: but you are one
O' the deepeſt Politiques I ever met,
And the moſt ſubtily rationall. I admire you.
But doe not you conceive in ſuch a caſe,
That you are acceſſary to his death,
From whom you carry a Challenge with ſuch purpoſe.
Sir the corruption of one thing in nature,
Is held the Generation of another;
And therefore, I had as leive be acceſſory
Vnto his death, as to his life.
A new
Morall Philoſophy too! you'l carry't then.
If I were ſure, 't would not incenſe his choller
To beat the Meſſenger.
O' Ile ſecure you,
You ſhall deliver it in my lodging; ſafely,
And doe your friend a ſervice worthy thankes.
Ile venture it, upon ſo good Induction,
To rid the Court of an Impediment,
This baggage Knight.
Peace to you all Gentlemen,
Save to this Muſhrome; who I heare is menacing
Me with a Challenge: which I come to anticipate,
And ſave the Law a labour: Will you fight Sir?
Yes, in my ſhirt.
O, that's to ſave your doublet;
I know it a Court trick! you had rather have
An Vlcer in your body, then a Pinke
More i' your clothes.
Captaine, you are a Coward,
If you not fight i' your ſhirt.
Sir I not meane
To put it off for that, nor yet my doublet:
Yo' have cauſe to call me Coward, that more feare
The ſtroke of the common, and life giving aire,
Then all your fury, and the Panoplie.
(Which is at beſt, but a thin linnen armour.)
I thinke a cup of generous wine were better,
Then fighting i' your ſhirts.
Sir, Sir, my valour,
It is a valour of another nature,
Then to be mended by a cup of wine.
I ſhould be glad to heare of any valours,
Differing in kind; who have knowne hitherto,
Only one vertue, they call Fortitude,
Worthy the name of valour.
Which, who hath not,
Is juſtly thought a Coward: And he is ſuch.
O, you ha' read the Play there, the New Inne,
Of Ionſons, that decries all other valour
But what is for the publike.
I doe that too,
But did not learne it there; I thinke no valour
Lies for a private cauſe.
Sir, Ile redargue you,
By diſputation.
O let's heare this!
I long to heare a man diſpute in his ſhirt
Of valour, and his ſword drawne in his hand.
His valour will take cold; put on your doublet.
His valour will keepe cold, you are deceiv'd;
And reliſh much the ſweter in our eares:
It may be too, i' the ordinance of nature.
Their valours are not yet ſo combatant,
Or truly antagoniſtick, as to fight;
But may admit to heare of ſome diviſions,
Of Fortitude, may put 'hem off their Quarrell.
I would have no man thinke me ſo ungovern'd,
Or ſubject to my paſſion, but I can
Reade him a Lecture 'twixt my undertakings,
And executions: I doe know all kinds
Of doing the buſines, which the Towne cals valour.
Yes, he has read the Towne, Towne-top's his Author!
Your firſt?
Is a raſh head-long unexperience.
Which is in Children, Fooles, or your ſtreet Gallants
O' the firſt head.
A pretty kind of valour!
Commend him, he will ſpin it out in's ſhirt,
Fine, as that thred.
The next, an indiſcreet
Preſumption, grounded upon often ſcapes.
Or th' inſufficiencie of Adverſaries,
And this is in your common fighting Brothers.
Your old Perdu's, who (after a time) doe thinke,
The one, that they are ſhot free; the other, ſword free.
Your third?
Is nought but an exceſſe of choller,
That raignes in reſty old men—.
Noble mens Porters,
And ſelfe conceited Poëts.
And is rather
A peeviſhneſſe, then any part of valour.
He but reherſes, he concludes no valour.
A hiſtory of diſtempers, as they are practiz'd,
His Harangue undertaketh, and no more.
Your next?
Is a dull deſperate reſolving.
In caſe of ſome neceſſitous miſery, or
Incumbent miſchiefe.
Narrowneſſe of mind,
Or ignorance being the root of it.
Which ſhou ſhall find in Gameſters, quite blowne up.
Banckrupt Merchants, undiſcovered Traytors.
Or your exemplified Malefactors,
That have ſurviv'd their infamy, and puniſhment.
One that hath loſt his eares, by a juſt ſentence
O' the Starre-Chamber, a right valiant Knave—
And is a Hiſtrionicall Contempt,
Of what a man feares moſt; it being a miſchiefe
In his owne apprehenſion unavoidable.
Which is in Cowards wounded mortally,
Or Theeves adjudg'd to die.
This is a valour,
I ſhould deſire much to ſee incourag'd:
As being a ſpeciall entertainment
For our rogue People; and make oft good ſport
Vnto 'hem, from the Gallowes to the ground.
But mine is a Judiciall reſolving,
Or liberall undertaking of a danger—.
That might be avoided.
I, and with aſſurance,
That it is found in Noble-men, and Gentlemen,
Of the beſt ſheafe.
Who having lives to loſe,
Like private men, have yet a world of honour,
And publike reputation to defend—.
Which in the brave hiſtorified Greeks,
And Romans you ſhall reade of.
And (no doubt)
May in our Alder-men meet it, and their Deputies,
The Souldiers of the Citie, valiant blades,
Who (rather then their houſes ſhould be ranſack'd)
Would fight it out, like ſo many wild beaſts;
Not for the fury they are commonly arm'd with:
But the cloſe manner of their ſight, and cuſtome,
Of joyning head to head, and foot to foot.
And which of theſe ſo well-preſt reſolutions
Am I to encounter now? For commonly,
Men that have ſo much choiſe before 'hem, have
Some trouble to reſolve of any one.
There are three valours yet, which Sir Diaphanous,
Hath (with his leave) not touch'd.
Yea? which are thoſe?
He perks at that!
Nay, he does more, he chatters.
A Philoſophicall contempt of death,
Is one: Then an infuſed kind of valour,
Wrought in us by our Genii, or good ſpirits;
Of which the gallant Ethnicks had deepe ſenſe:
Who generally held, that no great Stateſ-man,
Scholler, or Souldier, ere did any thing
Sine divino aliquo afflatu.
But there's a Chriſtian valour, 'bove theſe too.
Which is a quiet patient toleration,
Of whatſoever the malitious world
With Injury doth unto you; and conſiſts
In paſſion, more then action, Sir Diaphanous.
Sure, I doe take mine to be Chriſtian valour—.
You may miſtake though. Can you juſtifie
On any cauſe, this ſeeking to deface,
The divine Image in a man?
O Sir!
Let 'hem alone: Is not Diaphanous
As much a divine Image, as is Ironſide?
Let Images fight, if they will fight, a God's name.
Where's Mr. Needle? Saw you Mr. Needle?
Wee are undone.
What ailes the frantick Nurſe?
My Miſtris is undone, ſhee's crying out!
Where is this man trow? Mr. Needle?
Here.
Run for the party, Mrs. Chaire the Mid-wife.
Nay, looke how the man ſtands, as he were gok't!
Shee's loſt, if you not haſte away the party.
Where is the Doctor?
Where a ſcoffing man is.
And his Apothecary, little better;
They laugh, and geere at all: will you diſpatch?
And fetch the party quickly to our Miſtris:
Wee are all undone! The Timpanie will out elſe.
Newes, newes, good newes, better then butter'd newes!
My Neice is found with Child, the Doctor tels me,
And falne in labour.
How?
The portion's paid!
The portion—o'the Captaine! Is he here?
H'has ſpi'd your ſwords out! put 'hem up, put up,
Yo' have driven him hence; and yet your quarrell's ended.
In a moſt ſtrange diſcovery.
Of light gold.
And crack't within the Ring. I take the Omen,
As a good Omen.
Then put up your Sword,
And on your Doublet. Give the Captaine thankes.
I had beene ſlur'd elſe. Thanke you noble Captaine!
Your quarrelling caus'd all this.
Where's Compaſſe?
Gone,
Shrunke hence,! contracted to his Center, I feare.
The ſlip is his then.
I had like t'have beene
Abus'd i' the buſines, had the ſlip ſlur'd on me,
A Counterfeit.
Sir, we are all abus'd:
As many as were brought on to be Suitors;
And we will joyne in thankes, all to the Captaine,
And to his fortune that ſo brought us off.
This was a pittifull poore ſhift o' your Poët, Boy, to make his prime woman with child, and fall in labour, juſt to compoſe a quarrell.
With whoſe borrowed eares, have you heard, Sir, all this while, that you can miſtake the current of our Scene ſo? The ſtreame of the Argument, threatned her being with child from the very beginning, for it preſented her in the firſt of the ſecond Act, with ſome apparent note of infirmity, or defect: from knowledge of which, the Auditory were rightly to bee ſuſpended by the Author, till the quarrell, which was but the accidentall cauſe, haſtned on the diſcovery of it, in occaſioning her affright; which made her fall into her throwes preſently, and within that compaſſe of time allow'd to the Comedy, wherein the Poët expreſt his prime Artifice, rather then any errour, that the detection of her being with child, ſhould determine the quarrell, which had produc'd it.
The Boy is too hard for you. Brother Damplay, beſt marke the Play, and let him alone.
I care not for marking the Play: Ile damne it, talke, and doe that I come for. I will not have Gentlemen loſe their priviledge, nor I my ſelfe my prerogative, for neere an overgrowne, or ſuperannuated Poët of 'hem all. Hee ſhall not give me the Law; I will cenſure, and be witty, and take my Tobacco, and enjoy my Magna Charta of reprehenſion, as my Predeceſſors have done before me.
Even to licenſe, and abſurdity.
Not now, becauſe the Gentlewoman is in travell: and the Midwife may come on the ſooner, to put her and us out of our paine.
Well, looke to your buſines afterward, Boy, that all things bee cleare, and come properly forth, ſuited, and ſet together; for I will ſearch what followes ſeverely and to the naile.
Let your naile run ſmooth then, and not ſcratch: leſt the Author be bold to pare it to the quick, and make it ſmart: you'l find him as ſevere as your ſelfe.
A ſhrewd Boy! and has mee every where. The Mid-wife is come, ſhe has made haſte.
Stay Mr. Needle, you doe prick too faſt
Vpo' the buſines: I muſt take ſome breath:
Lend me my ſtoole, you ha' drawne a ſtitch upon me,
In faith, ſonne Needle, with your haſte.
Good Mother, peice up this breach; Ile gi' you a new Gowne,
A new ſilke-Grogoran Gowne. Ile do't Mother.
What'll you doe? you ha' done too much already
With your prick-ſeame, and through-ſtitch. Mr. Needle,
I pray you ſit not fabling here old tales,
Good Mother Chaire, the Mid-wife, but come up.
How now Nurſe, where's my Lady?
In her Chamber
Lock'd up, I thinke: ſhee'll ſpeake with no body.
Knowes ſhee o' this accident?
Alas Sir, no;
Would ſhe might never know it.
I thinke her Ladiſhip
Too vertuous, and too nobly innocent,
To have a hand in ſo ill-form'd a buſines.
Your thought Sir is a brave thought, and a ſafe one,
The child now to be borne is not more free,
From the aſperſion of all ſpot, then ſhe?
She have her hand in plot, gainſt Mr. Practiſe.
If there were nothing elſe, whom ſhe ſo loves?
Cries up, and values? knowes to be a man
Mark'd out, for a chiefe Juſtice in his cradle?
Or a Lord Paramount; the head o' the Hall?
The Top or the Top-gallant of our Law?
Aſſure your ſelfe, ſhe could not ſo deprave,
The rectitude of her Judgement, to wiſh you
Vnto a wife, might prove your Infamy,
Whom ſhe eſteem'd that part o' the Common-wealth,
And had up for honour to her blood.
I muſt confeſſe a great beholdingneſſe
Vnto her Ladiſhips offer, and good wiſhes.
But the truth is, I never had affection,
Or any liking to this Neice of hers.
You fore-ſaw ſomewhat then?
I had my notes,
And my Prognoſticks.
You read Almanacks,
And ſtudy 'hem to ſome purpoſe, I beleeve?
I doe confeſſe, I doe beleeve, and pray too:
According to the Planets at ſometimes.
And doe obſerve the ſigne in making Love?
As in Phlebotomy.
And chooſe your Miſtris
By the good dayes, and leave her by the bad?
I doe, and I doe not.
A little more
Would fetch all his Aſtronomie from Alleſtree.
I tell you Mr. Compaſſe, as my friend,
And under ſeale, I caſt mine eye long ſince,
Vpo' the other wench, my Ladies woman,
Another manner of peice for handſomneſſe,
Then is the Neice (but that is ſub ſigillo,
And as I give it you) in hope o' your aid,
And counſell in the buſines.
You need counſell?
The only famous Counſell, o' the kingdome,
And in all Courts? That is a Jeere in faith,
Worthy your name, and your profeſſion too,
Sharpe Mr. Practiſe.
No, upo' my Law,
As I am a Bencher, and now double Reader,
I meant in meere ſimplicity of requeſt.
If you meant ſo. Th'affaires are now perplex'd,
And full of trouble, give 'hem breath, and ſetling,
Ile doe my beſt. But in meane time doe you
Prepare the Parſon. (I am glad to know
This; for my ſelfe lik'd the young Maid before,
And lov'd her too.) Ha' you a Licence?
No;
But I can fetch one ſtraight.
Doe, doe, and mind
The Parſons pint t'ingage him—the buſines;
A knitting Cup there muſt be.
I ſhall doe it.
Tis an affront, from you Sir; you here brought me,
Vnto my Ladies, and to wooe a wife,
Which ſince is prov'd a crack'd commoditie;
Shee hath broke bulke too ſoone.
No fault of mine,
If ſhe be crack'd in peeces, or broke round;
It was my ſiſters fault, that ownes the houſe,
Where ſhe hath got her clap, makes all this noiſe.
I keepe her portion ſafe, that is not ſcatter'd:
The money's rattle not; nor are they throwne,
To make a Muſſe, yet 'mong the game ſome Suitors.
Can you endure that flout, cloſe Mr. Bias,
And have beene ſo bred in the Politiques?
The injury is done you, and by him only;
He lent you impreſt money, and upbraids it:
Furniſh'd you for the wooing, and now waves you.
That makes me to expoſtulate the wrong
So with him, and reſent it as I doe.
But doe it home then,
Sir, my Lord ſhall know it.
And all the Lords o' the Court too.
What a Moath
You are Sir Intereſt!
Wherein I intreat you,
Sweet Maſter Bias?
To draw in young Stateſ-men,
And heires of policie into the nooſe
Of an infamous matrimonie.
Yes,
Infamous, quaſi in communem famam:
And Matrimony, quaſi, matter of Money.
Learnedly urg'd, my cunning Mr. Bias.
With his lewd, knowne, and proſtituted Neice.
My knowne, and proſtitute: how you miſtake,
And run upon a falſe ground, Mr. Bias!
(Your Lords will doe me right.) Now, ſhe is proſtitute,
And that I know it (pleaſe you underſtand me.)
I meane to keepe the portion in my hands:
And pay no monies.
Marke you that Don Bias?
And you ſhall ſtill remaine in bonds to him,
For wooing furniture, and impreſt charges.
Good Mr. Compaſſe, for the ſummes he has had
Of me, I doe acquit him: They are his owne.
Here, before you, I doe releaſe him.
Good!
O Sir.
'Slid take it: I doe witneſſe it:
Hee cannot hurle away his money better.
He ſhall get ſo much Sir, by my acquaintance,
To be my friend: And now report to his Lords
As I deſerve no otherwiſe.
But well:
And I will witneſſe it, and to the value;
Foure hundred is the price, if I miſtake not,
Of your true friend in Court. Take hands, you ha' bought him,
And bought him cheap.
I am his worſhips ſervant.
And you his ſlave, Sir Moath. Seal'd, and deliver'd.
Ha' you not ſtudied the Court Complement?
Here are a paire of Humours, reconcil'd now,
That money held at diſtance: or their thoughts,
Baſer then money.
Out thou catife witch!
Baud, Beggar, Gipſey: Any thing indeed,
But honeſt woman.
What you pleaſe, Dame Poliſh,
My Ladies Stroaker.
What is here to doe?
The Goſſips out!
Thou art a Traytor to me,
An Eve, the Apul, and the Serpent too:
A Viper, that haſt eat a paſſage through me,
Through mine owne bowels, by thy retchleſneſſe.
What frantick fit is this? Ile ſtep aſide
And hearken to it.
Did I truſt thee, wretch,
With ſuch a ſecret, of that conſequence,
Did ſo concerne me, and my child, our livelihood,
And reputation? And haſt thou undone us?
By thy connivence, nodding in a corner,
And ſuffering her begot with child ſo baſely?
Sleepie unlucky Hag! Thou bird of night,
And all miſchance to me.
Good Lady Empreſſe!
Had I the keeping of your Daughters clicket
In charge? was that committed to my truſt?
Her Daughter.
Softly Divell, not ſo low'd,
You'ld ha' the houſe heare, and be witneſſe, would you?
Let all the world be witneſſe. Afore Ile
Endure the Tyrannie of ſuch a tongue—
And ſuch a pride—.
What will you doe?
Tell truth,
And ſhame the She-man-Divell in puff'd ſleeves;
Run any hazzard, by revealing all
Vnto my Lady: how you chang'd the cradles,
And chang'd the children in 'hem.
Not ſo high!
Calling your Daughter Pleaſance, there Placentia,
And my true Miſtris by the name of Pleaſance.
A horrid ſecret, this! worth the diſcovery;
And muſt you be thus lowd?
I will be lowder:
And cry it through the houſe, through every roome,
And every office of the Lawndry-maids:
Till it be borne hot to my Ladies eares.
Ere I will live in ſuch a ſlavery,
Ile doe away my ſelfe.
Didſt thou not ſweare
To keepe it ſecret? and upon what booke?
(I doe remember now) The Practice of Piety.
It was a practice of impiety,
Out of your wicked forge, I know it now,
My conſcience tels me. Firſt, againſt the Infants,
To rob them o' their names, and their true parents;
T' abuſe the neighbour-hood, keepe them in errour;
But moſt my Lady: Shee has the maine wrong:
And I wil let her know it inſtantly.
Repentance, (if it be true) nere comes too late.
What have I done? Conjur'd a ſpirit up
I ſha' not lay againe? drawne on a danger,
And ruine on my ſelfe thus, by provoking
A peeviſh foole, whom nothing will pray of,
Or ſatisfie I feare? Her patience ſtirr'd,
Is turn'd to fury. I have run my Barke,
On a ſweet Rock, by mine owne arts, and truſt:
And muſt get off againe, or daſh in peeces.
This was a buſines, worth the liſtning after.
O Mr. Compaſſe, did you ſee my Mother?
Miſtris Placentia, my Ladies Neice;
Is newly brought to bed o'the braveſt boy!
Will you goe ſee it?
Firſt, Ile know the father,
Ere I approach theſe hazards.
Miſtris Midwife
Has promis'd to find out a father for it,
If there be need.
Shee may the ſafelier do't,
By vertue of her place. But pretty Pleaſance,
I have a newes for you, I thinke will pleaſe you.
What is't Mr. Compaſſe?
Stay, you muſt
Deſerve it ere you know it. Where's my Lady?
Retir'd unto her Chamber, and ſhut up.
She heares o' none o' this yet? well, doe you
Command the Coach; and fit your ſelfe to travell?
A little way with me.
Whither, for Gods ſake.
Where Ile intreat you not to your loſſe, beleeve it.
If you dare truſt your ſelfe.
With you the world ore.
The newes will well requite the paines, I aſſure you.
And i' this tumult you will not be miſt.
Command the Coach, it is an inſtant buſines,
Wu' not be done without you. Parſon Palate
Moſt opportunely met, ſtep to my Chamber:
Ile come to you preſently. There is a friend,
Or two, will entertaine you, Mr. Practiſe.
Ha' you the Licence?
Here it is.
Let's ſee it:
Your name's not in't.
Ile fill that preſently;
It has the Seale, which is the maine: And reſtgiſtred,
The Clarke knowes me, and truſts me.
Ha' you the Parſon?
They ſay hee's here, he' pointed to come hither.
I would not have him ſeene here for a world,
To breed ſupition. Doe you intercept him,
And prevent that. But take your Licence with you,
And fill the blanke: or leave it here with me,
Ile doe it for you, ſtay you with us at his Church,
Behind the old Exchange, wee'll come i'th Coach,
And meet you there within this Quarter at leaſt.
I am much bound unto you, Mr. Compaſſe,
You have all the Law, and parts of Squire Practiſe
For ever at your uſe. Ile tell you newes, too:
Sir, your Reverſion's fall'n: Thin-wits dead,
Surveyor of the Projects generall.
When died he?
Een this morning, I receiv'd it
From a right hand.
Conceale it Mr. Practiſe,
And mind the maine affaire, you are in hand with.
The Coach is ready Sir.
'Tis well faire Pleaſance,
Though now wee ſhall not uſe it, bid the Coach-man
Drive to the Pariſh Church, and ſtay about there,
Till Mr. Practiſe come to him, and imploy him:
I have a Licence now, which muſt have entry
Before my Lawyers. Noble Parſon Palate,
Thou ſhalt be a marke advanc't: here's a peece,
And doe a feat for me.
What, Mr. Compaſſe?
But run the words of Matrimony, over
My head, and Mrs. Pleaſances in my Chamber:
There's Captaine Ironſide to be a witneſſe:
And here's a Licence to ſecure thee. Parſon!
What doe you ſtick at?
It is after-noone Sir,
Directly againſt the Canon of the Church;
You know it Mr. Compaſſe: and beſide,
I am ingag'd unto our worſhipfull friend,
The learned Mr. Practiſe in that buſines.
Come on, ingage yourſelfe: Who ſhall be able
To ſay you married us, but i'the morning,
The moſt canonicall minute o'the day,
If you affirme it? That's a ſpic'd excuſe,
And ſhewes you have ſet the Common Law, before
Any profeſſion elſe, of love, or friendſhip.
Come Mrs. Pleaſance, wee cannot prevaile
With th' rigid Parſon here; but Sir, Ile keepe you
Lock'd in my lodging, 'till't be done elſewhere,
And under feare of Ironſide.
Doe you heare, Sir?
No, no, it matters not.
Can you thinke Sir
I would deny you my thing? not to loſſe
Of both my Livings: I will doe it for you,
Ha' you a wedding Ring?
I and a Poeſie:
Annulus hic nobis, quod ſcit uter que dabit.
Good!
This Ring will give you what you both deſire.
Ile make the whole houſe chant it, and the Pariſh.
Why, well ſaid Parſon. Now to you my newes,
That comprehend my reaſons, Mrs. Pleaſance.
Goe, get a Nurſe, procure her at what rate
You can: and out o'th'houſe with it, ſonne Needle.
It is a bad Commoditie.
Good Mother,
I know it, but the beſt would now be made on't.
And ſhall: you ſhould not fret ſo, Mrs. Poliſh,
Nor you Dame Keepe; my Daughter ſhall doe well,
When ſhe has tane my Cawdle. I ha' knowne
Twenty ſuch breaches piec'd up, and made whole,
Without a bum of noiſe. You two fall out?
And teare up one another?
Bleſſed woman?
Bleſt be the Peace-maker.
The Peaſe-dreſſer!
Ile heare no peace from her. I have beene wrong'd,
So has my Lady, my good Ladies worſhip,
And I will right her, hoping ſhee'll right me.
Good gentle Keepe, I pray thee Miſtris Nurſe,
Pardon my paſſion, I was miſadvis'd,
Be thou yet better, by this grave ſage woman,
Who is the Mother of Matrons, and great perſons,
And knowes the world.
I doe confeſſe, ſhe knowes
Something—and I know ſomething—.
Put your ſomethings.
Together then.
I, here's a chance falne out
You cannot helpe; leſſe can this Gentlewoman;
I can and will, for both. Firſt, I have ſent
By-chop away; the cauſe gone, the fame ceaſeth.
Then by my Cawdle, and my Cullice, I ſet
My Daughter on her feet, about the houſe here:
Shee's young, and muſt ſtirre ſomewhat for neceſſity,
Her youth will beare it out. She ſhall pretend,
T'have had a fit o'the Mother: there is all.
If you have but a Secretary Landreſſe,
To blanch the Linnen—Take the former counſels
Into you; keepe them ſafe i' your owne breſts;
And make your Merkat of 'hem at the higheſt.
Will you goe peach, and cry yourſelfe a foole
At Granam's Croſſe? be laugh'd at, and diſpis'd▪
Betray a purpoſe, which the Deputie
Of a double Ward, or ſcarce his Alderman,
With twelve of the wiſeſt Queſtmen could find out,
Imployed by the Authority of the Citie?
Come, come, be friends: and keepe theſe women-matters,
Smock-ſecrets to our ſelves, in our owne verge.
Wee ſhall marre all, if once we ope the myſteries
O' the Tyring-houſe, and tell what's done within:
No Theaters are more cheated with apparances,
Or theſe ſhop-lights, then th' Ages, and folke in them,
That ſeeme moſt curious.
Breath of an Oracle!
You ſhall be my deare Mother; wiſeſt woman
That ever tip'd her tongue, with point of reaſons,
To turne her hearers! Miſtris Keepe, relent,
I did abuſe thee; I confeſſe to pennance:
And on my knees aske thee forgiveneſſe.
Riſe,
She doth begin to melt, I ſee it—.
Nothing
Griev'd me ſo much, as when you call'd me Baud:
Witch did not trouble me, nor Gipſie; no
Nor Beggar. But a Baud, was ſuch a name!
No more rehearſals; Repetitions
Make things the worſe: The more wee ſtirre (you know
The Proverbe, and it ſignifies a) ſtink.
What's done, and dead, let it be buried.
New houres will fit freſh handles, to new thoughts.
Run to the Church, Sirrah. Get all the Drunkards
To ring the Bels, and jangle them for joy
My Neice hath brought an Heire unto the houſe,
A luſty boy. Where's my ſiſter Loadſtone?
A ſleepe at afternoones! It is not wholeſome;
Againſt all rules of Phyſick, Lady ſiſter.
The little Doctor will not like it. Our Neice
Is new deliver'd of a chopping Child,
Can call the Father by the name already,
If it but ope the mouth round. Mr. Compaſſe,
He is the man, they ſay, fame gives it out,
Hath done that Act of honour to our houſe,
And friendſhip to pompe out a Sonne, and Heire,
That ſhall inherit nothing, ſurely nothing
From me at leaſt. I come t' invite your Ladiſhip
To be a witneſſe; I will be your Partner,
And give it a horne-ſpoone, and a treene diſh;
Baſtard, and Beggars badges, with a blanket
For Dame the Doxey to march round the Circuit,
With bag, and baggage.
Thou malitious Knight,
Envious Sir Moath, that eates on that which feeds thee,
And frets her goodneſſe, that ſuſtaines thy being;
What company of Mankind would owne thy brother-hood,
But as thou haſt a title to her blood,
Whom thy ill nature hath choſe out t'inſult on,
And vexe thus, for an Accident in her houſe,
As if it were her crime! Good innocent Lady,
Thou ſhew'ſt thy ſelfe a true corroding Vermine,
Such as thou art.
Why, gentle Mr. Compaſſe?
Becauſe I wiſh you joy of your young Sonne,
And Heire to the houſe, you ha' ſent us?
I ha' ſent you?
I know not what I ſhall doe. Come in friends:
Madam, I pray you be pleas'd to truſt your ſelfe
Vnto our company.
I did that too late;
Which brought on this calamity upon me,
With all the infamy I heare; your Souldier,
That ſwaggering Gueſt.
Who is return'd here to you,
Your vowed friend, and ſervant; comes to ſup with you,
So wee doe all; and 'll prove he hath deſerv'd,
That ſpeciall reſpect, and favour from you,
As not your fortunes, with your ſelfe to boote,
Caſt on a Feather-bed, and ſpread o'th' ſheets
Vnder a brace of your beſt Perſian Carpets,
Were ſcarce a price to thanke his happy merit.
What impudence is this? can you indure
To heare it ſiſter?
Yes, and you ſhall heare it;
Who will indure it worſe. What deſerves he
In your opinion, Madam, or weigh'd Judgement,
That, things thus hanging (as they doe in doubt)
Suſpended, and ſuſpected, all involv'd,
And wrapt in errour, can reſolve the knot?
Redintigrate the fame, firſt of your houſe?
Reſtore your Ladiſhips quiet? render then
Your Neice a Virgin, and unvitiated?
And make all plaine, and perfect (as it was)
A practiſe to betray you, and your name?
Hee ſpeakes impoſſibilities.
Here he ſtands,
Whoſe fortune hath done this, and you muſt thanke him:
To what you call his ſwaggering, wee owe all this.
And that it may have credit with you Madam,
Here is your Neice, whom I have married, witneſſe
Theſe Gentlemen, the Knight, Captaine, and Parſon,
And this grave Politique Tell-troth of the Court.
What's ſhe that I call Neice then?
Poliſhes Daugh
Her Mother Good wy' Poliſh hath confeſs'd it
To Granam Keepe, the Nurſe, how they did change
The children in their Cradles.
To what purpoſe?
To get the portion, or ſome part of it,
Which you muſt now disburſe intire to me, Sir,
If I but gaine her Ladiſhips conſent.
I bid God give you joy, if this be true.
As true it is, Lady, Lady, i'th' ſong.
The portion's mine, with intereſt Sir Mouth;
I will not 'bate you a ſingle Harrington,
Of intereſt upon intereſt. In meane time,
I doe commit you to the Guard of Ironſide.
My brother here, Captaine Rudhudibras:
From whom I will expect you, or your Ranſome.
Sir you muſt prove it, and the poſſibility,
Ere I beleeve it.
For the poſſibility,
I leave to triall. Truth ſhall ſpeake it ſelfe.
O Mr. Practiſe, did you meet the Coach?
Yes Sir, but empty.
Why, I ſent it for you.
The buſines is diſpatch'd here, ere you come;
Come in, Ile tell you how: you are a man
Will looke for ſatisfaction, and muſt have it.
So doe wee all, and long to heare the right.
Troth, I am one of thoſe that labour with the ſame longing, for it is almoſt pucker'd, and pull'd into that knot, by your Poët, which I cannot eaſily, with all the ſtrength of my imagination, untie.
Like enough, nor is it in your office to be troubled or perplexed with it, but to ſit ſtill, and expect. The more your imagination buſies it ſelfe, the more it is intangled, eſpecially if (as I told, in the beginning) you happen on the wrong end.
He hath ſaid ſufficient, Brother Damplay; our parts that are the Spectators, or ſhould heare a Comedy, are to await the proceſſe, and events of things, as the Poet preſents them, not as wee would corruptly faſhion them. Wee come here to behold Playes, and cenſure them, as they are made, and fitted for us; not to beſlave our owne thoughts, with cenſorious ſpitle tempering the Poets clay, as wee were to mould every Scene anew: That were a meere Plaſtick, or Potters ambition, moſt unbecomming the name of a Gentleman. No, let us marke, and not loſe the buſines on foot, by talking. Follow the right thred, or find it.
Why, here his Play might have ended, if hee would ha' let it; and have ſpar'd us the vexation of a fift Act yet to come, which every one here knowes the iſſue of already, or may in part conjecture.
That conjecture is a kind of Figure-flinging, or throwing the Dice, for a meaning was never in the Poets purpoſe perhaps. Stay, and ſee his laſt Act, his Cataſtrophe, how hee will perplexe that, or ſpring ſome freſh cheat, to entertaine the Spectators, with a convenient delight, till ſome unexpected, and new encounter breake out to rectifie all, and make good the Concluſion.
Which, ending here, would have ſhowne dull, flat, and unpointed; without any ſhape, or ſharpeneſſe, Brother Damplay.
Well, let us expect then: And wit be with us, o'the Poets part.
TRoth Mr. Item, here's a houſe divided,
And quarter'd into parts, by your Doctors ingine.
H'has caſt out ſuch aſperſions on my Ladies
Neice here, of having had a Child; as hardly
Will be wip'd off, I doubt.
Why, is't not true?
True! did you thinke it?
Was ſhee not in labour?
The Mid-wife ſent for?
There's your errour now!
Yo' ha' drunke o' the ſame water.
I beleev'd it,
And gave it out too.
More you wrong'd the party;
She had no ſuch thing about her, innocent creature!
What had ſhe then? only a fit o'the Mother,
They burnt old ſhoes, Gooſe-feathers, Aſſafoetida,
A few horne ſhavings, with a bone, or two,
And ſhe is well againe, about the houſe;—
Is't poſſible?
See it, and then report it.
Our Doctors Vrinall-Judgement is halfe-crack'd then.
Crack't i' the caſe, moſt hugely, with my Lady,
And ſad Sir Moath, her brother; who is now
Vnder a cloud a little.
Of what? Diſgrace?
He is committed to Rud-hudibras,
The Captaine Ironſide, upon diſpleaſure,
From Mr. Compaſſe, but it will blow off.
The Doctor ſhall reverſe his, inſtantly,
And ſet all right againe: if you'll aſſiſt
But in a toy; Squire Needle, comes i' my nodle now.
Good, Needle and Nodle! what may't be? I long for't.
Why, but to goe to bed: faine a diſtemper
Of walking i'your ſleepe, or talking in't
A little idly, but ſo much, as on' it,
The Doctor may have ground, to raiſe a cure
For's reputation.
Any thing, to ſerve
The worſhip o' the man I love and honour.
O! gi' you joy Madamoiſelle Compaſſe!
You are his Whirle-poole now: all to be married,
Againſt your Mothers leave, and without counſell!
H' has fiſh'd faire, and caught a Frog, I feare it.
What fortune ha' you to bring him in dower?
You can tell ſtories now: you know a world
Of ſecrets to diſcover.
I know nothing
But what is told me; nor can I diſcover
Anything.
No, you ſhall not, Ile take order.
Goe, get you in there: It is Ember-weeke!
Ile keepe you faſting from his fleſh a while.
See, who's here? ſhe 'has beene with my Lady; who kiſt her, all to kiſt her, twice or thrice.
And call'd her Neice againe, and view'd her Linnen.
You ha' done a Miracle, Mother Chaire.
Not I,
My Cawdle has done it. Thanke my Cawdle heartily.
It ſhall be thank'd, and you too, wiſeſt Mother;
You ſhall have a new, brave, foure-pound Beaver hat,
Set with enamell'd ſtuds, as mine is here:
And a right paire of Criſtall Spectacles,
Criſtall o' th' Rock, thou mighty Mother of Dames,
Hung in an Ivory Caſe, at a gold Belt,
And ſilver Bels to gingle, as you paſe
Before your fiftie Daughters in proceſſion
To Church, or from the Church.
Thankes Mrs. Poliſh.
She does deſerve as many penſions,
As there be peeces in a—Maiden-head;
Were I a Prince to give 'hem.
Come ſweet Charge,
You ſhall preſent your ſelfe about the houſe, be confident, and beare up;
you ſhall be ſeene.
What? I can make you amends, my learned Counſell,
And ſatisfie a greater Injury
To chafed Mr. Practiſe. Who would thinke
That you could be thus teſtie?
A grave head!
Gi'n over to the ſtudy of our Lawes.
And the prime honours of the Common-wealth.
And you to mind a wiſe.
What ſhould you doe
With ſuch a toy as a wife, that might diſtract you,
Or hinder you i' your Courſe?
He ſhall not thinke on't.
I will make over to you my Poſſeſſion,
Of that ſame place is falne (you know) to ſatisfie
Surveyor of the Projects generall.
And that's an office, you know how to ſtirre in.
And make your profits of.
Which are (indeed)
The ends of a gown'd man: Shew your activity,
And how you are built for buſines.
I accept it
As a Pſſeſsion, be't but a Reverſion.
You firſt told me 'twas a Poſſeſſion.
I,
I told you that I heard ſo.
All is one,
Hee'll make Reverſion a Poſſeſsion quickly.
But I muſt have a generall Releaſe from you.
Doe one, He doe the other.
It's a match
Before my brother Ironſide.
'Tis done.
Wee two are reconcil'd then.
To a Lawyer,
That can make uſe of a place, any halfe title,
Is better then a wife.
And will ſave charges
Of Coaches, Vellute Gownes, and cut-worke Smocks.
Hee is to occupie an office wholly.
True, I muſt talke with you neerer, Mr. Practiſe,
About recovery o' my wives portion,
What way I were beſt to take.
The plaineſt way.
What's that, for plaineneſſe?
Sue him at Common-Law:
Arreſt him on an Action of Choke-baile,
Five hundred thouſand pound; it will affright him,
And all his ſureties. You can prove your marriage?
Yes.
Wee'll talke of it within, and heare my Lady.
I'am ſure, the Rogue o' the houſe went all that way;
She was with Child, and Mr. Compaſſe got it.
Why, that you ſee, is manifeſtly falſe,
H' has married the other; our true Neice he ſayes:
He would not wooe 'hem both: hee is not ſuch
A Stallion, to leape all. Againe, no Child
Appeares, that I can find with all my ſearch,
And ſtricteſt way of Inquiry, I have made
Through all my family. A fit o' the Mother,
The women ſay ſhe had, which the Mid-wife our'd,
With burning bones and feathers: Here's the Doctor.
O noble Doctor, did not you, and your Item,
Tell me our Neice was in labour?
If I did,
What followes?
And that Mother Mid-night
Was ſent for?
So ſhe was; and is i'the houſe ſtill.
But here has a noiſe beene ſince, ſhe was deliver'd
Of a brave boy, and Mr. Compaſſe's getting.
I know no rattle of Goſſips, nor their noyſes.
I hope you take not me for a Pimpe errant,
To deale in ſmock Affaires? Where's the Patient?
The infirme man, I was ſent for, Squire Needle?
Is Needle ſick?
My 'Pothecary tels me
Hee is in danger; how is't Tim? where is he?
I cannot hold him downe. Hee's up, and walkes,
And talkes in his perfect ſleepe, with his eyes ſhut,
As ſenſibly, as he were broad awake.
See, here becomes, Hee's faſt aſleepe, obſerve him.
Hee'll tell us wonders: What doe theſe women here?
Hunting a man halfe naked? you are fine beagles!
You'd have his douſets.
I ha' linnen breeks on.
He heares, but hee ſees nothing.
Yes, I ſee
Who hides the treaſure yonder.
Ha? what treaſure?
If you aske queſtions, he 'wakes preſently:
And then you'l heare no more, till his next fit.
And whom ſhe hides it for.
Doe you marke Sir? Int.
A fine ſhe ſpirit it is, an Indian Mag-pie.
She was an Aldermans Widow, and fell in love
With our Sir Moath, my Ladies brother.
(Heare you?)
And ſhe has hid an Aldermans eſtate;
Dropt through her bill in little holes, i' the Garden,
And ſcrapes earth over 'hem; where none can ſpy
But I, who ſee all by the Glowormes light,
That creeps before.
I knew the Gentlewoman;
Alderman Parrots Widow, a fine Speaker,
As any was i' the Clothing, or the Bevy;
She did become her ſcarlet, and black Velvet,
Her greene, and purple—
Save thy colours, Rainebow,
Or ſhe will run thee over, and all thy lights.
She dwelt in Doo-little Lane, a top o'the hill there;
I' the round Cage, was after Sir Chime Squirrell's.
Shee would eate nought but Almonds, I aſſure you.
Would thou had'ſt a doſe of pilles, a double doſe,
O' the beſt purge, to make thee turne tale, tother way.
You are a foule mouth'd, purging, abſurd Doctor;
I tell you true, and I did long to tell it you.
You ha'ſpread a ſcandall i' my Ladies houſe here,
On her ſweet Neice, you never can take off
With all your purges, or your plaiſter of Oathes;
Though you diſtill your Dam-me, drop by drop,
I' your defence. That ſhe hath had a Child,
Here ſhe doth ſpit upon thee, and defie thee;
Or I do't for her.
Madam, pray you bind her
To her behaviour. Tye your Goſſip up,
Or ſend her unto Bet'lem.
Goe thou thither,
That better haſt deſerv'd it, ſhame of Doctors:
Where could ſhe be deliver'd? by what charme?
Reſtor'd to her ſtrength ſo ſoone? who is the Father?
Or where the Infant? Aske your Oracle,
That walkes, and talkes in his ſleepe.
Where is he? gone?
You ha' loſt a fortune liſtning to her, to her Tabour.
Good Madam lock her up.
You muſt give looſers
Their leave to ſpeake, good Doctor.
Follow his footing
Before he get to his bed: This reſt is loſt elſe.
Where is my wife? what ha' you done with my wife,
Goſſip o' the Counſels?
I, ſweet Mr. Compaſſe?
I honour you, and your wife.
Well, doe ſo ſtill.
I will not call you Mother tho', but Poliſh.
Good Goſſip Poliſh, where ha' you hid my wife?
I hide your wife?
Or ſhe's run away.
That would make all ſuſpected, Sir, a freſh.
Come we will find her, if ſhe be i' the houſe.
Why ſhould I hide your wife, good Mr. Compaſſe?
I know no cauſe, but that you are goo'dy Poliſh,
That's good at malice; good at miſchiefe; all
That can perplexe, or trouble a buſines, throughly.
You may ſay what you will: yo' are Mr. Compaſſe,
And carry a large ſweep, Sir, i' your Circle.
Ile ſweep all corners, Goſſip, to ſpring this.
If't be above ground, I will have her cry'd,
By the Common-cryer, through all the Ward,
But I will find her.
It will be an Act
Worthy your juſtice, Madam.
And become
The integrity, and worſhip of her name.
'Tis ſuch a Fly, this Goſſip, with her buz,
Shee blowes on every thing, in every place!
A buſie woman, is a fearefull grievance!
Will hee not ſleepe againe?
Yet inſtantly,
As ſoone as he is warme. It is the nature
Of the diſeaſe, and all theſe cold dry fumes,
That are melancholicke, to worke at firſt,
Slow, and inſenſibly in their aſcent,
Till being got up, and then diſtilling downe
Vpo' the braine; they have a pricking quality
That breeds this reſtleſſe reſt, which we, the ſonnes
Of Phyſick, call a walking in the ſleepe,
And telling myſteries, that muſt be heard.
Softly, with art, as we were ſowing pillowes
Vnder the Patients elbowes, elſe they'd fly
Into a phrenſie, run into the Woods,
Where there are Noiſes, huntings, ſhoutings, hallowings,
Amidſt the brakes, and furzes, over bridges
Fall into waters: Scratch their fleſh: Sometimes
Drop downe a praecipice, and there be loſt.
How now! what does her?
He is up againe,
And 'gins to talke.
O' the former matter, Item?
The treaſure, and the Lady: That's his argument.
O mee, happy man! he cannot off it.
I ſhall know all then.
With what appetite
Our owne deſires delude us! Heare you Tim?
Let no man interrupt us.
Sir Diaphanous,
And Mr. Bias, his Court-friend's, deſire
To kiſſe his Neices hands, and gratulate
The firme recovery of her good fame,
And honour—
Good, ſay to 'hem, Mr. Item,
My Neice is on my Ladies ſide: they'll find her there.
I pray to be but ſpar'd, for halfe an houre:
Ile ſee 'hem preſently.
Doe, put 'hem off, Tim.
And tell 'hem the importance of the buſines.
Here, he is come! ſooth; and have all out of him.
How doe you Lady-bird? ſo hard at worke, ſtill?
What's that you ſay? Doe you bid me walke, ſweet Bird?
And tell our Knight? I will. How? walke knave, walke?
I thinke y' are angry with me
Fine Pol!
Pol's a fine bird! O fine Lady Pol!
Almond for Parrat; Parrat's a brave bird:
Three hundred thouſand peeces ha' you ſtuck,
Edge-long into the ground, within the Garden?
O'bounteous Bird!
And me, moſt happy creature.
Smother your joy.
How? and drop'd twice ſo many—
Ha! where?
Containe your ſelfe.
I' the old Well?
I cannot, I am a man of fleſh, and blood:
Who can containe himſelfe, to heare the Ghoſt
Of a dead Lady, doe ſuch workes as theſe?
And a Citie Lady too, o'the ſtreight waſte?
Hee's gone.
I will goe try the truth of it.
Follow him,
See what he does; if he bring you
A'ſſay of it now.
Ile ſay hee's a rare fellow:
And has a rare diſeaſe.
And I will worke
As rare a cure upon him.
How, good Doctor?
When he hath utter'd all, that you would know of him;
Ile clenſe him with a pill (as ſmall as a peaſe)
And ſtop his mouth: for there his iſſue lies,
Betweene the Muſcles o'the tongue.
Hee's come.
What did he, Item?
The firſt ſtep he ſtept
Into the Garden, he pull'd theſe five peices
Vp, in a fingers breath one of another.
The durt ſticks on 'hem ſtill.
I know enough.
Doctor, proceed with your Cure, Ile make thee famous,
Famous among the ſonnes of the Phyſicians,
Machaon, Podalirius, Eſculapius.
Thou ſhalt have a golden beard, as well as he had;
And thy Tim Item here, have one of ſilver:
A livery beard. And all thy 'Pothecaries
Belong to thee. Where's Squire Needle? gone?
Hee's prick'd away, now he has done the worke.
Prepare his pill, and gi' it him afore Supper.
Ile ſend for a dozen o'labourers to morrow,
To turne the ſurface o'the Garden up.
In mould? bruiſe every clod?
And have all ſifted;
For Ile not looſe a peice o'the Birds bounty,
And take an Inventory of all.
And then,
I would goe downe into the Well—
My ſelfe;
No truſting other hands: Sixe hundred thouſand,
To the firſt three; nine hundred thouſand pound—
'Twill purchaſe the whole Bench of Aldermanity,
Stript to their ſhirts.
There never did accrew,
So great a gift to man, and from a Lady,
I never ſaw but once; now I remember,
Wee met at Merchants▪ Taylors-hall, at dinner,
In Thred-needle ſtreet,
Which was a ſigne Squire Needle
Should have the thredding of this thred.
'Tis true;
I ſhall love Parrots better, while I know him.
Il'd have her ſtatue cut, now in white marble.
And have it painted in moſt orient colours.
That's right! all Citie ſtatues muſt be painted:
Elſe, they be worth nought i' their ſubtile Judgements.
My trueſt friend in Court, deare Mr. Bias;
You heare o'the recovery of our Neice
In fame, and credit?
Yes, I have beene with her,
And gratulated to her; but I am ſory
To find the Author o' the fowle aſperſion
Here i' your company, this inſolent Doctor.
You doe miſtake him: He is cleare got off on't.
A Goſſips Jealouſie firſt gave the hint.
He drives another way, now, as I would have him.
Hee's a rare man, the Doctor, in his way.
H' has done the nobleſt cure here, i' the houſe,
On a poore Squire, my ſiſters Taylor, Needle
That talk'd in's ſleepe; would walke to Saint Iohn's wood,
And Waltham Forreſt, ſcape by all the ponds,
And pits i'the way; run over two-inch bridges;
With his eyes faſt, and i'the dead of night!
Ile ha' you better acquainted with him. Doctor,
Here is my deare, deare, deareſt friend in Court,
Wiſe, powerfull Mr. Bias; pray you ſalute
Each other, not as ſtrangers, but true friends.
This is the Gentleman you brought to day,
A Suitor to your Neice?
Yes.
You were
Agreed, I heard; the writings drawne betweene you?
And ſeald.
What broke you off?
This rumour of her?
Was it not Mr. Bias?
Which I find
Now falſe, and therefore come to make amends
I' the firſt place. I ſtand to the old conditions.
Faith give 'hem him, Sir Moath, what ere they were.
You have a brave occaſion now, to croſſe
The flanting Mr. Compaſſe, who pretends
Right to the portion, by th'other Intaile.
And claimes it. You doe heare he's married?
We heare his wife is run away from him,
Within: She is not to be found i'the houſe,
With all the Hue, and Cry is made for her,
Through every roome; the Larders ha' beene ſearch'd,
The Bak-houſes, and Boulting-tub, the Ovens,
Waſh-houſe, and Brew-houſe, nay the very Fornace,
And yet ſhe is not heard of.
Be ſhe nere heard of,
The ſafety of Great Brittaine lyes not on't.
You are concent with the ten thouſand pound,
Defalking the foure hundred garniſh money?
That's the condition here, afore the Doctor,
And your demand, friend Bias.
It is Sir Moath.
Here comes the Parſon then, ſhall make all ſure.
Goe you with my friend Bias, Parſon Palate,
Vnto my Neice; aſſure them wee are agreed.
And Mrs. Compaſſe too, is found within.
Where was ſhe hid?
In an old Botle-houſe,
Where they ſcrap'd trenchers; there her mother had thruſt her.
You ſhall have time, Sir, to triumph on him,
When this fine feate is done, and his Rud-Ironſide.
Was ever any Gentlewoman us'd
So barbarouſly by a malitious Goſſip,
Pretending to be Mother to her too?
Pretending! Sir, I am her Mother, and challenge
A right, and power for what I have done.
Out, Hag.
Thou that haſt put all nature off, and woman:
For ſordid gaine, betray'd the truſt committed
Vnto thee by the dead, as from the living:
Chang'd the poore innocent Infants in their Cradles:
Defrauded them o' their parents, chang'd their names,
Calling Placentia, Pleaſance; Pleaſance, Placentia.
How knowes he this?
Abus'd the neighbour-hond,
But moſt this Lady. Did'ſt enforce an oath,
To this poore woman, on a pious booke,
To keepe cloſe thy impiety.
Ha' you told this?
I told it? no, he knowes it, and much more,
As he's a cunning man.
A cunning foole,
If that be all.
But now to your true daughter,
That had the Child, and is the proper Pleaſance,
Wee muſt have an account of that too, Goſſip;
This's like all the reſt of Mr. Compaſſe.
Helpe, helpe for Charity; Sir Moath Intereſt
Is falne into the Well.
Where? where?
I' the Garden.
A rope to ſave his life.
How came be there?
He thought to take poſſeſſion of a fortune,
There newly drop't him, and the old Chaine broke,
And downe fell hee i' the Bucket.
Is it deepe?
We cannot tell. A rope: helpe with a rope.
He is got out againe. The Knight is ſav'd.
A little ſows'd i' the water: Needle ſav'd him.
The water ſav'd him, 'twas a faire eſcape.
Ha' you no hurt?
A little wet.
That's nothing.
I wiſh'd you ſtay Sir till to morrow: And told you,
It was no lucky houre: ſince ſixe a Clock
All ſtarres were retrograde.
I' the name
Of fate, or folly how came you i' the Bucket?
That is a Quere of another time, ſiſter,
The Doctor will reſolve you—who hath done
The admirable'ſt cure upon your Needle!
Gi' me thy hand good Needle: thou cam'ſt timely.
Take off my hood and coat. And let me ſhake
My ſelfe a little. I have a world of buſines.
Where is my Nephew Bias? and his wife?
Who bids God gi'hem joy? Here they both ſtand
As ſure affianced, as the Parſon, or words
Can tie 'hem.
Wee all wiſh 'hem joy, and happineſſe.
I ſaw the Contract, and can witneſſe it.
He ſhall receive ten thouſand pounds to morrow.
You look'd for't, Compaſſe, or a greater ſumme,
But 'tis diſpos'd of, this, another way.
I have but one Neice, verely Compaſſe.
Ile find another. Varlet, doe your office.
I doe arreſt your body, Sir Moath Intereſt,
In the Kings name: At ſuite of Mr. Compaſſe,
And Dame Placentia his wife. The Action sentred,
Five hundred thouſand pound.
Heare you this, ſiſter?
And hath your houſe the eares, to heare it too?
And to reſound the affront?
I cannot ſtop
The Lawes, or hinder Juſtice. I can be
Your Baile, if't may betaken,
With the Captaines,
I aske no better.
Here are better men,
Will give their Baile.
But yours will not be taken,
Worſhipfull Doctor; you are good ſecurity
For a ſuit of clothes, to th' Taylor, that dares truſt you:
But not for ſuch a ſumme, as is this Action.
Varlet, You know my mind.
You muſt to priſon, Sir,
Vnleſſe you can find Baile the Creditor likes.
I would faine find it, if you'd ſhew me where.
It is a terrible Action; more indeed,
Then many a man is worth. And is call'd Fright-Baile.
Faith I will baile him, at mine owne apperill.
Varlet, be gone: Ile once ha'the reputation,
To be ſecurity for ſuch a ſumme.
Beare up Sir Moath.
He is not worth the Buckles
About his Belt, and yet this Ironſide claſhes.
Peace, leſt he heare you Doctor; wee'll make uſe of him.
What doth your brother Compaſſe, Captaine Ironſide,
Demand of us, by way of challenge, thus?
Your Neices portion; in the right of his wife.
I have aſſur'd one portion, to one Neice,
And have no more t'account for, that I know of:
What I may doe in charity—if my ſiſter,
Will bid an Offring for her maid, and him,
As a Benevolence to 'hem, after Supper,
Ile ſpit into the Baſon, and intreat
My friends to doe the like.
Spit out thy gall,
And heart, thou Viper: I will now no mercy,
No pitty of thee, thy falſe Neice, and Needle;
Bring forth your Child, or I appeale you of murder,
You, and this Goſſip here, and Mother Chaire.
The Gentleman's falne mad!
No, Mrs. Midwife.
I ſaw the Child, and you did give it me,
And put it i' my armes, by this ill token,
You wiſh'd me ſuch another; and it cry'd.
The Law is plaine; if it were heard to cry,
And you produce it not, hee may indict
All that conceale 't, of Felony, and Murder.
And I will take the boldneſſe, Sir, to doe it:
Beginning with Sir Moath here, and his Doctor.
Good faith this ſame is like to turne a buſines.
And a ſhrewd buſines, marry: they all ſtart at't.
I ha' the right thred now, and I will keepe it.
You good'y Keepe, confeſſe the truth to my Lady,
The truth, the whole truth, nothing but the truth.
I ſcorne to be prevented of my glories.
I plotted the deceit, and I will owne it.
Love to my Child, and lucre of the portion
Provok'd me; wherein though th'event hath fail'd
In part, I will make uſe of the beſt ſide.
This is my Daughter, and ſhe hath had a Child
This day, unto her ſhame, I now profeſſe it.)
By this meere falſe-ſtick Squire Needle, but
Since this wiſe Knight, hath thought it good to change
The fooliſh Father of it, by aſſuring
Her to his deare friend, Mr. Bias; and him
Againe to her, by clapping of him on
With his free promiſe of ten thouſand pound,
Afore ſo many witneſſes.
Whereof I
Am one.
And I another.
I ſhould be unnaturall
To my owne fleſh, and blood, would I not thanke him.
I thanke you Sir: and I have reaſon for it.
For here your true Neice ſtands, fine Mrs. Compaſſe.
(Ile tell you truth, you have deſerv'd it from me.)
To whom you are by bond engag'd to pay
The ſixteene thouſand pound, which is her portion,
Due to her husband, on her marriage-day.
I ſpeake the truth, and nothing but the truth.
You'll pay it now, Sir Moath, with intereſt?
You ſee the truth breaks out on every ſide of you.
Into what nets of cous'nage am I caſt
On ev'ry ſide? each thred is growne a noofe:
A very meſh: I have run my ſelfe into
A double breake, of paying twice the money.
You ſhall be releas'd of paying me a penny,
With theſe conditions.
Will you leave her then?
Yes, and the ſumme, twice told, ere take a wife,
To pick out Mounſieur Needles baſting threds.
Goſſip you are paid: though he be a fit nature,
Worthy to have a Whore juſtly put on him;
He is not bad enough to take your Daughter,
On ſuch a cheat. Will you yet pay the portion?
What will you 'bate?
No penny the Law gives.
Yes, Bias's money.
What? your friend in Court?
I will not rob you of him, nor the purchaſe,
Nor your deare Doctor here, ſtand altogether.
Birds of a nature all, and of a feather.
Well, wee are all now reconcil'd to truth.
There reſts yet a Gratuitie from me,
To be conferr'd upon this Gentleman;
Who (as my Nephew Compaſſe ſayes) was cauſe,
Firſt of th' offence, but ſince of all th' amends,
The Quarrell caus'd th' affright; that fright brought on
The travell, which made peace; the peace drew on
This new diſcovery, which endeth all
In reconcilement.
When the portion
Is tender'd, and receiv'd.
Well, you muſt have it,
As good at firſt as laſt. 'Tis well ſaid brother.
And I, if this good Captaine will accept me,
Give him my ſelfe, endow him with my eſtate,
And make him Lord of me, and all my fortunes:
He that hath ſav'd my houre, though by chance,
Ile really ſtudy his, and how to thanke him.
And imbrace you, Lady, and your goodneſſe,
And vow to quit all thought of warre hereafter;
Save what is fought under your colours, Madam.
More worke then for the Parſon; I ſhall cap
The Loadſtone with an Ironſide, I ſee.
And take in theſe, the forlorne Couple, with us,
Needle, and's Thred, whoſe portion I will thinke on;
As being a buſines, waiting on my bounty:
Thus I doe take poſſeſſion of you, Madam,
My true Magnetick Miſtris, and my Lady.
WEll, Gentlemen, I now muſt under ſeale,
And th' Authors charge, waive you, and make my 'appeale
To the ſupremeſt power, my LORD, the KING;
Who beſt can judge of what wee humbly bring.
Hee knowes our weakneſſe, and the Poets faults;
Where he doth ſtand upright, goe firme, or halts;
And hee will doome him. To which voice he ſtands,
And prefers that, 'fore all the Peoples hands.