HE that hath feaſted you theſe forty yeares,
And fitted Fables, for your finer eares,
Although at firſt, he ſcarce could hit the bore;
Yet you, with patience harkning more and more,
At length have growne up to him, and made knowne,
The Working of his Pen is now your owne:
He pray's you would vouchſafe, for your owne ſake,
To heare him this once more, but, ſit awake.
And though hee now preſent you with ſuch wooll,
As from meere Engliſh Flocks his Muſe can pull,
He hopes when it is made up into Cloath;
Not the moſt curious head here will be loath
To weare a Hood of it; it being a Fleece,
To match, or thoſe of Sicily, or Greece.
His Scene is Sherwood: i And his Play a Tale
Of Robin-hood's inviting from the Vale
Of Be'voir, all the Shep'ards to a Feaſt:
Where, by the caſuall abſence of one Gueſt,
The Mirth is troubled much, and in one Man
As much of ſadneſſe ſhowne, as Paſsion can.
The ſad young Shep'ard, whom wee here preſent,
Like his woes Figure, darke and diſcontent,
For his loſt Love; who in the Trent is ſaid,
To have miſcarried; 'laſſe! what knowes the head
Of a calme River, whom the feet have drown'd?
Heare what his ſorrowes are; and, if they wound
Your gentle breſts, ſo that the End crowne all,
Which in the Scope of one dayes chance may fall:
Old Trent will ſend you more ſuch Tales as theſe,
And ſhall grow young againe, as one doth pleaſe.
But here's an Hereſie of late let fall;
That Mirth by no meanes fits a Paſtorall;
Such ſay ſo, who can make none, he preſumes:
Elſe, there's no Scene, more properly aſſumes
The Sock. For whence can ſport in kind ariſe,
But from the Rurall Routs and Families?
Safe on this ground then, wee not feare to day,
To tempt your laughter by our ruſtick Play.
Wherein if we diſtaſte, or be cry'd downe,
Wee thinke wee therefore ſhall not leave the Towne;
Nor that the Fore-wits, that would draw the reſt
Vnto their liking, alwayes like the beſt.
The wiſe, and knowing Critick will not ſay,
This worſt, or better is, before he weigh;
Where every piece be perfect in the kind:
And then, though in themſelves he difference find,
Yet if the place require it where they ſtood,
The equall fitting makes them equall good.
You ſhall have Love and Hate, and Iealouſie,
As well as Mirth, and Rage, and Melancholy:
Or whatſoever elſe may either move,
Or ſtirre affections, and your likings prove.
But that no ſtile for Paſtorall ſhould goe
Current, but what is ſtamp'd with Ah, and O;
Who judgeth ſo, may ſingularly erre;
As if all Poeſie had one Character:
In which what were not written, were not right,
Or that the man who made ſuch one poore flight,
In his whole life, had with his winged skill
Advanc'd him upmoſt on the Muſes hill.
When he like Poet yet remaines, as thoſe
Are Painters who can only make a Roſe.
From ſuch your wits redeeme you, or your chance,
Leſt to a greater height you doe advance
Of Folly, to contemne thoſe that are knowne
Artificers, and truſt ſuch as are none.
HEre! ſhe was wont to goe! and here! and here!
Juſt where thoſe Daiſies, Pincks, and Violets grow:
The world may find the Spring by following her;
For other print her aerie ſteps neere left:
Her treading would not bend a blade of graſſe!
Or ſhake the downie Blow-ball from his ſtalke!
But like the ſoft Weſt-wind, ſhe ſhot along,
And where ſhe went, the Flowers tooke thickeſt root,
As ſhe had ſow'd 'hem with her odorous foot.
Know you, or can you gueſſe, my merry men,
What 'tis that keepes your Maſter Robin-hood
So long both from his Marian, and the Wood?
Forſooth, Madam, hee will be here by noone,
And prayes it of your bounty as a boone,
That you by then have kild him Veniſon ſome,
To feaſt his jolly friends, who hether come
In threaves to frolick with him, and make cheare;
Here's Little Iohn hath harbord you a Deere,
I ſee by his tackling.
And a Hart of ten,
I trow hee be, Madam, or blame your men:
For by his Slot, his Entries, and his Port,
His Frayings, Fewmets, he doth promiſe ſport,
And ſtanding 'fore the Dogs; hee beares a head,
Large, and well beam'd: with all rights ſomm'd, and ſpred.
Let's rowſe him quickly, and lay on the Hounds.
Scathlock is ready with them on the grounds;
So is his brother Scarlet: now they'ave found
His Layre, they have him ſure within the pound.
Away then, when my Robin bids a Feaſt,
'Twere ſinne in Marian to defraud a Gueſt.
And I, the Chaplaine, here am left to be
Steward to day, and charge you all in fee,
To d'on your Liveries; ſee the Bowerdreſt;
And fit the fine deviſes for the Feaſt:
You George muſt care to make the Baldrick trim,
And Garland that muſt crowne, or her, or him;
Whoſe Flock this yeare, hath brought the earlieſt Lambe!
Good Father Tuck, at your Commands I am
To cut the Table out O the greene ſword,
Or any other ſervice for my Lord;
To carve the Gueſts large ſeats; and theſe laid in
With turfe (as ſoft and ſmooth as the Moles skin:)
And hang the bulled Noſe-gaies 'bove their heads,
The Pipers banck, whereon to ſit and play;
And a faire Dyall to meete out the day.
Our Maſters Feaſt ſhall want no juſt delights:
His entertainments muſt have all the rites.
I, and all choiſe that plenty can ſend in;
Bread, Wine, Acates, Fowle, Feather, Fiſh, or Fin,
For which my Fathers Nets have ſwept the Trent.
And ha' you found her?
Whom?
My drowned Love.
Earine! the ſweet Earine!
The bright, and beautifull Earine!
Have you not heard of my Earine?
Juſt by your Fathers Mills (I thinke I am right)
Are not you Much the Millers ſonne?
I am.
And Baily to brave Robin-hood?
The ſame.
Cloſe by your Fathers Mills, Earine!
Earine was drown'd! O my Earine!
(Old Maudlin tells me ſo, and Douce her Daughter)
Ha' you ſwept the River ſay you? and not found her?
For Fowle, and Fiſh wee have.
O not for her?
You'are goodly friends! right charitable men!
Nay, keepe your way, and leave me: make your toyes,
Your tales, your poeſies, that you talk'd of; all
Your entertainments: you not injure me:
Onely if I may enjoy my Cipreſſe wreath!
And you will let me weepe! ('tis all I aske;)
Till I be turn'd to water, as was ſhe!
And troth what leſſe ſuit can you grant a man?
His Phantaſie is hurt, let us now leave him:
The wound is yet too freſh, to admit ſearching.
Searching? where ſhould I ſearch? or on what track?
Can my ſlow drop of teares, or this darke ſhade
About my browes, enough deſcribe her loſſe!
Earine, O my Earine's loſſe!
No, no, no, no; this heart will breake firſt.
How will this ſad diſaſter ſtrike the eares
Of bounteous Robin-hood, our gentle Maſter?
How will it marre his mirth, abate his feaſt;
And ſtrike a horror into every gueſt!
If I could knit whole clouds about my browes,
And weepe like Swithen, or thoſe watry ſignes,
The Kids that riſe then, and drowne all the Flocks
Of thoſe rich Shepherds, dwelling in this Vale;
Thoſe careleſſe Shepherds, that did let her drowne!
Then I did ſomething or could make old Trent
Drunke with my ſorrow, to ſtart out in breaches
To drowne their Herds, their cattle, and their corne,
Breake downe their Mils, their Dams, ore-turne their weeres,
And ſee their houſes, and whole lively-hood
Wrought into water, with her, all were good:
I'ld kiſſe the torrent, and thoſe whirles of Trent,
That ſuck'd her in, my ſweet Earine!
When they have caſt their body on the ſhore,
And it comes up, as tainted as themſelves,
All pale and bloodleſſe, I will love it ſtill,
For all that they can doe, and make 'hem mad,
To ſee how I will hugge it in mine armes!
And hang upon the lookes, dwell on her eyes:
Feed round about her lips, and eate her kiſſes!
Suck of her drowned fleſh! and where's their malice?
Not all their envious ſouſing can change that:
But I will ſtudy ſome revenge paſt this!
I pray you give me leave, for I will ſtudy.
Though all the Bels, Pipes, Tabors, Timburines ring
That you can plant about me: I will ſtudy.
Welcome bright Clarion, and ſweet Mellifleur,
The courteous Lionel, faire Amie; all
My friends and neighbours, to the Jolly Bower
Of Robin-hood, and to the greene-wood Walkes:
Now that the ſhearing of your ſheepe is done,
And the waſh'd Flocks are lighted of their wooll,
The ſmoother Ewes are ready to receive.
The mounting Rams againe; and both doe feed,
As either promiſt to increaſe your breed
At eaning time; and bring you luſty twins.
Why ſhould, or you, or wee ſo much forget
The ſeaſon in our ſelves: as not to make
Vſe of our youth, and ſpirits, to awake
The nimble Horne-pipe, and the Timburine,
And mixe our Songs, and Dances in the Wood,
And each of us cut downe a Triumph-bough.
Such were the Rites, the youthfull Iune allow.
They were, gay Robin, but the ſowrer ſort
Of Shepherds now diſclaime in all ſuch ſport:
And ſay, our Flocks the while, are poorely fed,
When with ſuch vanities the Swaines are led.
Would they, wiſe Clarion, were not hurried more
With Covetiſe and Rage, when to their ſtore
They adde the poore mans Eaneling, and dare ſell
Both Fleece, and Carkaſſe, not gi'ing him the Fell.
When to one Goat, they reach that prickly weed,
Which maketh all the reſt forbeare to feed;
Or ſtrew Tods haires, or with their tailes doe ſweepe
The dewy graſſe, to d'off the ſimpler ſheepe;
Or digge deepe pits, their Neighbours Neat to vexe,
To drowne the Calves, and crack the Heifers necks.
Or with pretence of chaſing thence the Brock,
Send in a curre to worrie the whole Flock.
O Friar, thoſe are faults that are not ſeene,
Ours open, and of worſt example beene.
They call ours, Pagan paſtimes, that infect
Our blood with eaſe, our youth with all neglect;
Our tongues with wantonneſſe, our thoughts with luſt,
And what they cenſure ill, all others muſt.
I doe not know, what their ſharpe ſight may ſee
Of late, but I ſhould thinke it ſtill might be
(As 'twas) a happy age, when on the Plaines,
The Wood-men met the Damſells, and the Swaines
The Neat'ards, Plow-men, and the Pipers loud,
And each did dance, ſome to the Kit, or Crowd,
Some to the Bag-pipe, ſome the Tabret-mov'd,
And all did either love, or were belov'd.
The dextrous Shepherd then would try his ſling,
Then dart his Hooke at Dayſies, then would ſing.
Sometimes would wraſtle.
I, and with a Laſſe:
And give her a new garment on the graſſe;
After a courſe at Barley-breake, or Baſe.
And all theſe deeds were ſeene without offence,
Or the leaſt hazard o' their innocence.
Thoſe charitable times had no miſtruſt.
Shepherds knew how to love, and not to luſt.
Each minute that wee loſe thus, I confeſſe,
Deſerves a cenſure on us, more or leſſe;
But that a ſadder chance hath given allay,
Both to the Mirth, and Muſicke of this day.
Our faireſt Shepherdeſſe wee had of late,
Here upon Trent, is drown'd; for whom her mate
Young Aeglamour, a Swaine, who beſt could tread
Our countrey dances, and our games did lead,
Lives like the melancholy Turtle, drown'd
Deeper in woe, then ſhe in water: crown'd
With Yewgh and Cypreſſa, and will ſcarce admit
The Phyſick of our preſence to his fit.
Sometimes he ſits, and thinkes all day, then walkes,
Then thinkes againe; and ſighes, weeps, laughs, and talkes,
And, 'twixt his pleaſing frenzie, and ſad griefe,
Is ſo diſtracted; as no ſought reliefe,
By all our ſtudies can procure his peace.
The paſſion finds in him that large increaſe,
As wee doubt hourely wee ſhall loſe him too.
You ſhould not croſſe him then what ere you doe:
For Phant'ſie ſtop'd, will ſoone take fire, and burne
Into an anger, or to a Phrenſie turne.
Nay, ſo wee are advis'd by Alhen here,
A good ſage Shepherd, who all-tho' he weare
An old worne hat and cloake, can tell us more
Then all the forward Fry, that boaſt their Lore.
See, yonder comes the brother of the Maid,
Young Karolin! how curious, and afraid
Hee is at once! willing to find him out,
And loath to'offend him.
Sure hee's here about.
See where hee ſits.
It will be rare, rare, rare!
An exquiſite revenge: but peace, no words!
Not for the faireſt fleece of all the Flock;
If it be knowne afore, 'tis all worth nothing!
Ile carve it on the trees, and in the turfe,
On every greene ſworth, and in every path,
Juſt to the Margin of the cruell Trent;
There will I knock the ſtory in the ground,
In ſmooth great peble, and moſſe fill it round,
Till the whole Countrey read how ſhe was drown'd,
And with the plenty of ſalt teares thereſhed,
Quite alter the complexion of the Spring.
Or I will get ſome old, old Grandam, thither,
Whoſe rigid foot but dip'd into the water,
Shall ſtrike that ſharpe and ſuddaine cold, throughout,
As it ſhall looſe all vertue; and thoſe Nimphs,
Thoſe treacherous Nimphs pull'd in Earine;
Shall ſtand curl'd up, like Images of Ice;
And never thaw! marke, never! a ſharpe Juſtice:
Or ſtay, a better! when the yeares at hotteſt,
And that the Dog-ſtarre fomes, and the ſtreames boiles,
And curles, and workes, and ſwells ready to ſparkle:
To fling a fellow with a Fever in,
To ſet it all on fire, till it burne,
Blew as Scamander, 'fore the walls of Troy;
When Vulcan leap'd in to him, to conſume him.
A deepe hurt Phant'ſie.
Doe you not approve it?
Yes gentle Aeglamour, wee all approve,
And come to gratulate your juſt revenge:
Which ſince it is ſo perfect, we now hope,
You'l leave all care thereof, and mixe with us,
In all the profer'd ſolace of the Spring.
A Spring, now ſhe is dead: of what, of thornes?
Briars, and Brambles? Thiſtles? Burs, and Dorks?
Cold Hemlock? Yewgh? the Mandrake, or the Boxe?
Theſe may grow ſtill; but what can ſpring beſide?
Did not the whole Earth ſicken, when ſhe died?
As if there ſince did fall one drop of dew,
But what was wept for her! or any ſtalke
Did beare a Flower! or any branch a bloome;
After her wreath was made: In faith, in faith
You doe not faire, to put theſe things upon me.
Which can in no ſort be: Earine,
Who had her very being, and her name,
With the firſt knots, or buddings of the Spring,
Borne with the Prim roſe, and the Violet,
Or earlieſt Roſes blowne: when Cupid ſmil'd,
And Venus led the Graces out to dance,
And all the Flowers, and Sweets in Natures lap,
Leap'd out and made their ſolemne Conjuration,
To laſt, but while ſhee liv'd: Doe not I know,
How the Vale wither'd the ſame Day? How Dove,
Deane, Eye, and Erwaſh, Idell, Snite, and Soare,
Each broke his Vrne, and twenty waters more,
That ſwell'd proud Trent, ſhrunke themſelves dry; that ſince,
No Sun, or Moone, or other cheerfull Starre
Look'd out of heaven! but all the Cope was darke,
As it were hung ſo for her Exequies!
And not a voice or ſound, to ring her knell:
But of that diſmall paire, the ſcritching Owle;
And buzzing Hornet! harke, harke, harke the foule
Bird! how ſhee flutters with her wicker wings!
Peace you ſhall heare her ſcritch.
Good Karolin ſing,
Helpe to divert this Phant'ſie.
All I can.
Though I am young, and cannot tell,
Either what Death, or Love is well,
Yet I have heard, they both beare darts,
And both doe ayme at humane hearts:
And then againe, I have beene told
Love wounds with heart, as Death with cold;
So that I feare, they doe but bring
Extreames to touch, and meane one thing.
As in a ruine, we it call
One thing to be blowne up, or fall;
Or to our end, like way may have,
By a flaſh of lightning, or a wave:
So Loves inflamed ſhaft, or brand,
May kill as ſoone as Deaths cold hand;
Except Loves fires the vertue have
To fright the froſt out of the grave.
Doe you thinke ſo? are you in that good hereſie?
I meane opinion? If you be, ſay nothing:
I'll ſtudy it, as a new Philoſophy,
But by my ſelfe alone: Now you ſhall leave me I
Some of theſe Nimphs, here will reward you; this
This pretty Maid, although but with a kiſſe,
Liv'd my Earine, you ſhould have twenty:
For every line here, one I would allow 'hem
From mine owne ſtore, the treaſure I had in her:
Now I am poore as you.
And I a wretch!
Yet keepe an eye upon him, Karoline.
Alas that ever ſuch a generous ſpirit,
As Aeglamours, ſhould ſinke by ſuch a loſſe.
The trueſt Lovers are leaſt fortunate,
Lookes all their Lives, and Legends; what they call
The Lovers Scriptures: Heliodores, or Tatij!
Longi! Euſtathij! Prodomi! you'l find it!
What thinke you Father?
I have knowne ſome few,
And read of more; wh'have had their doſe, and deepe,
Of theſe ſharpe bitter-ſweets.
But what is this
To jolly Robin? who the Story is,
Of all beatitude in Love?
And told
Here every day, with wonder on the world.
And with fames voice.
Save that ſome folke delight
To blend all good of others, with ſome ſpight.
Hee, and his Marian, are the Summe and Talke
Of all, that breath here in the Greene-wood Walke.
Or Be'voir Vale?
The Turtles of the Wood.
The billing Paire.
And ſo are underſtood
For ſimple loves, and ſampled lives beſide.
Faith, ſo much vertue ſhould not be envi'd.
Better be ſo, then pittied Mellifleur!
For' gainſt all envy, vertue is a cure;
But wretched pitty ever cals on ſcornes.
The Deeres brought home: I heare it by their hornes.
My Marian, and my Miſtris!
My lov'd Robin!
The Moones at full, the happy paire are met!
How hath this morning paid me, for my riſing!
Firſt, with my ſports; but moſt with meeting you!
I did not halfe ſo ſo well reward my hounds,
As ſhe hath me to day: although I gave them
All the ſweet morſels, call'd Tongue, Eares, and Dowcets!
What? and the inch-pin?
Yes.
Your ſports then pleas'd you?
You are a wanton.
One I doe confeſſe
I wanted till you came, but now I have you,
Ile grow to your embraces, till two ſoules
Diſtilled into kiſſes, through our lips
Doe make one ſpirit of love.
O Robin! Robin!
Breathe, breathe a while, what ſayes my gentle Marian?
Could you ſo long be abſent?
What a weeke?
Was that ſo long?
How long are Lovers weekes!
Doe you think Robin, when they are aſunder?
Are they not Priſ'ners yeares?
To ſome they ſeem ſo;
But being met againe, they'are Schoole-boyes houres.
That have got leave to play, and ſo wee uſe them.
Had you good ſport i' your chaſe to day?
O prime!
A luſty Stagge?
And hunted yee at force?
In a full cry.
And never hunted change!
You had ſtanch Hounds then?
Old and ſure, I love
No young raſh dogs, no more then changing friends.
What relayes ſet you?
None at all; we laid not
In one freſh dog.
Hee ſtood not long then?
Yes,
Five houres and more. A great, large Deere!
What head?
Forked! A Hart of ten.
Hee is good Veniſon,
According to the ſeaſon i' the blood,
I'll promiſe all your friends, for whom he fell.
But at his fall there hap't a chance.
Worth marke?
I! what was that ſweet Marian
You'll not heare?
I love theſe interruptions in a Story;
They make it ſweeter.
You doe know, as ſoone
As the Aſſay is taken.
On my Marian.
I did but take the Aſſay.
You ſtop ones mouth,
And yet you bid 'hem ſpeake—when the Arbors made.
Puld downe, and paunch turn'd out.
Hee that undoes him;
Doth cleave the brisket-bone, upon the ſpoone
Of which, a little griſtle growes, you call it—
the Ravenſ-bone.
Now, ore head ſate a Raven!
On a ſere bough! a growne great Bird! and Hoarſe!
Who, all the while the Deere was breaking up,
So crok'd and cry'd for't, as all the huntſ-men,
(Eſpecially old Scathlocke) thought it ominous!
Swore it was Mother Maudlin; whom he met,
At the Day-dawne; juſt as hee rows'd the Deere,
Out of his Laire: but wee made ſhift to run him
Off his foure leggs, and ſunke him e're wee left.
Is the Deere come?
Hee lies within ô the dreſſer!
Will you goe ſee him Mellifleur?
I attend you.
Come Amie, you'll goe with us?
I am not well.
Shee's ſick o' the yong Shep'ard that be kiſt her.
Friend, cheare your friends up, wee will eate him merrily,
Saw you the Raven, Friend?
I, qu'ha ſuld let me?
I ſuld be afraid ô you ſir ſuld I?
Huntſ-man!
A Dram more of Civilitie would not hurt you?
Nay, you muſt give them all their rudeneſſes;
They are not elſe themſelves, without their language.
And what do you thinke of her?
As of a Witch.
They call her a Wiſe-woman, but I thinke her
An arrant Witch.
And wherefore think you ſo?
Becauſe, I ſaw her ſince, broiling the bone
Was caſt her at the Quarrie.
Where ſaw you her?
I' the Chimley nuik, within: ſhee's there, now.
Your Hunt holds in his tale, ſtill; and tells more!
My Hunt? what tale?
How! cloudie, Marian!
What looke is this?
A fit one, Sir, for you.
Hand off rude Ranger! Sirrah, get you in
And beare the Veniſon hence. It is too good
For theſe courſe ruſtick mouthes that cannot open,
Or ſpend a thanke for't. A ſtarv'd Muttons carkaſſe
Would better fit their palates. See it carried
To Mother Maudlins, whom you call the Witch, Sir.
Tell her I ſent it to make merrie with,
Shee'll turne us thanks at leaſt! why ſtand'ſt thou, Groome?
I wonder he can move! that hee's not fix'd!
If that his feeling be the ſame with mine!
I dare not truſt the faith of mine owne ſenſes.
I feare mine eyes, and eares! this is not Marian!
Nor am I Robin-hood! I pray you aske her!
Aske her good Shep'ards! aske her all for me;
Or rather aske yourſelves, if ſhee be ſhee;
Or I, be I.
Yes, and you are the ſpie:
And the ſpi'd Spie, that watch upon my walkes,
To informe what Deere I kill, or give away!
Where! when! to whom! but ſpie your worſt, good Spie!
I will diſpoſe of this where leaſt you like!
Fall to your cheeſe-cakes, curdes, and clawted creame,
Your fooles, your flaunes; and of ale a ſtreame
To waſh it from your livers: ſtraine ewes milke
Into your Cider ſillabubs, and be drunke
To him, whoſe Fleece hath brought the earlieſt Lambe
This yeare; and weares the Baudrick at your bord!
Where you may all goe whiſtle; and record
This i' your dance: and foot it luſtily.
I pray you friends, doe you heare? and ſee, as I doe?
Did the ſame accents ſtrike your eares? and objects?
Your eyes, as mine?
Wee taſte the ſame reproches!
Have ſeen the changes!
Are wee not all chang'd,
Transformed from our ſelves?
I do not know!
The beſt is ſilence!
And to await the iſſue.
The dead, or lazie wait for't: I will find it.
HAve I not left 'em in a brave confuſion?
Amaz'd their expectation? got their Veniſon?
Troubled their mirth, and meeting? made them doubtfull,
And jealous of each other? all diſtracted?
And, i' the cloſe, uncertaine of themſelves?
This can your Mother doe my daintie Douce!
Take anie ſhape upon her! and delude
The ſenſes, beſt acquainted with their Owners!
The jolly Robin, who' hath bid this feaſt,
And made this ſolemne invitation;
I ha' poſſeſſed ſo, with ſyke dislikes
Of his owne Marian, that all-bee 'he know her,
As doth the vauting hart, his venting hind,
Hee nêre fra' hence, ſall neis her i' the wind,
To his firſt liking.
Did you ſo diſtate him?
As farre as her proud ſcorning him, could 'bate
Or blunt the edge of any Lovers temper.
But were yee like her mother?
So like Douce,
As had ſhee ſeen me her ſel', her ſel 'had doubted
Whether had been the liker off the twâ!
This can your Mother doe, I tell you Daughter!
I ha' but dight yee, yet; i'the out-dreſſe;
And 'parraile of Earine! but this raiment,
Theſe very weeds, ſall make yee, as but comming
In view or ken of Aeglamour, your forme
Shall ſhow too ſlipperie to be look'd upon!
And all the Forreſt ſweare you to be ſhee!
They ſhall rin after yee, and wage the odds,
Upo' their owne deceived ſights, yee' are her!
Whilſt ſhee (poore Laſſe) is ſtock'd up in a tree:
Your brother Lorells prize! For ſo my largeſſe,
Hath lotted her, to be your brothers Miſtreſſe;
Gif ſhee can be reclaim'd: gif not, his Prey!
And here he comes, new claithed, like a Prince
Of Swine ards! ſike he ſeemes! dight i'the ſpoiles
Of thoſe he feedes! A mightie Lord of Swine!
He is command now, to woo. Lets ſtep aſide,
And heare his love-craft! See, he opes the dore!
And takes her by the hand, and helpes her forth!
This is true court-ſhip, and becomes his ray.
Yee kind to others, but yee coy to mee
Deft Miſtres! whiter then the cheeſe, new preſt!
Smoother then creame! and ſofter then the curds!
Why ſtart yee from mee, ere yee heare me tell
My wooing errand; and what rents I have?
Large heards, and paſtures! Swine, and Kie, mine owne!
And though my na'ſe be camus'd, my lipps thick,
And my chin briſtled! Pan, great Pan, was ſuch!
Who was the chiefe of Heardſ-men, and our Sire!
I am na' Fay! na' Incubus! na' Changlin!
But a good man, that lives o' my awne geere.
This houſe! theſe grounds! this ſtock is all mine awne!
How better 'twere to mee, this were not knowne!
Shee likes it not: but it is boaſted well!
An hundred Udders for the payle I have,
That gi' mee Milke and Curds, that make mee Cheeſe
To cloy the Mercatts! twentie ſwarme of Bees,
Whilke (all the Summer) hum about the hive,
And bring mee Waxe, and Honey in by live.
An aged Oake the King of all the field,
With a broad Beech there growes afore my dur,
That mickell Maſt unto the ferme doth yeild.
A Cheſtnut, whilk hath larded money a Swine,
Whoſe skins I weare, to fend me fra the Cold.
A Pop greene, and with a kerved Seat,
Under whoſe ſhade I ſolace in the heat;
And thence can ſee gang out, and in, my neat.
Twa trilland brookes, each (from his ſpring) doth meet,
And make a river, to refreſh my feet:
In which, each morning ere the Sun doth riſe,
I look my ſelfe, and cleare my pleaſant eyes,
Before I pipe; For, therein I have skill
'Bove other Swine'ards. Bid mee, and I will
Straight play to you, and make you melodie.
By no meanes. Ah! to me all minſtrelſie
Is irkſome, as are you.
Why ſcorne you mee?
Becauſe I am a Heardſ-man, and feed Swine!
I am a Lord of other geere! this ſine
Smooth Bawſons Cub, the young Grice of a Gray;
Twa tynie Urſhins, and this Ferret gay.
Out on 'hem! what are theſe?
I give 'hem yee;
As preſents Mrs.
O, the feind, and thee!
Gar take them hence: they few mand all the claithes,
And prick my Coates: hence with 'hem, limmer lowne,
Thy vermin, and thy ſelfe, thy felfe art one;
I lock me up. All's well when thou art gone.
Did you heare this? ſhee wiſh'd mee at the feind,
With all my preſents!
A tu luckie end
Shee wiſhend thee, fowle Limmer! drittie Lowne!
Gud faith, it duills mee that I am thy Mother!
And ſee, thy Siſter ſcornes thee, for her Brother!
Thou woo thy Love? thy Miſtreſſe? with twa Hedge-hoggs?
A ſtinkand brock? a polcat? out thou houlet!
Thou ſhoul'dſt ha'given her, a Madge-Owle! and then
Tho' hadſt made a preſent o' thy ſelfe, Owle-ſpiegle!
Why, Mother, I have heard yee bid to give;
And often, as the Cauſe calls.
I know well,
It is a wittie part, ſum-times, to give.
But what? to whame? no monſters! nor to maidens!
Hee ſuld preſent them with mare pleaſand things,
Things naturall, and what all woemen covet
To ſee: the common Parent of us all!
Which Maids will twire at, 'tween their fingers, thus!
With which his Sire gat him! Hee's gett another!
And ſo beget poſteritie upon her!
This he ſhould do! (falſe Gelden) gang thy gait
And du thy turnes, betimes: or, I'is gar take
Thy new breikes fra' thee, and thy duib let tu.
The Talleur, and the Sowter ſall undu'
All they ha' made; except thou manlier woo!
Gud Mother, gif yow chide him, hee'll du wairs.
Hang him: I geif him to the Devills eirs.
But, yee my Douce, I charge yee, ſhew your ſell,
Tu all the Sheep'ards, baudly: gaing amang'hem.
Be mickell i' their eye, frequent, and fuge and.
And, gif they aske yee of Earine,
Or of theſe claithes; ſay, that I ga' hem yee,
And ſay no more. I ha' that wark in hand,
That web upo' the Luime, ſall gar 'hem thinke
By then, they feelin their owne frights, and feares,
I'is pu' the world, or Nature, bout their eares.
But, heare yee Douce, bycauſe, yee may meet mee
In mony ſhapes tu day; where ere you ſpie
This browdred belt, with Characters, tis I.
A Gypſan Ladie, and a right Beldame,
Wrought it by Moone-ſhine for mee, and Star-light,
Upo' your Granams grave, that verie night
Wee earth'd her, in the ſhades; when our Dame Hecat,
Made it her gaing-night, over the Kirk-yard,
Withall the barke and pariſh tykes ſet at her,
While I ſate whyrland, of my braſen ſpindle:
At every twiſted thrid my rock let flie
Unto the ſew'ſter, who did ſit me nigh,
Under the towne-turne-pike; which ran each ſpell
She ſtitched in the worke, and knit it well.
See, yee take tent to this, and ken 'your Mother.
How do you ſweet Amie? yet?
Shee cannot tell,
If ſhee could ſleepe, ſhee ſaies, ſhee ſhould do well.
Shee feeles a hurt, but where, ſhee cannot ſhow
Any leaſt ſigne, that ſhee is hurt or no.
Her paine's not doubtfull to her; but the ſeat
Of her paine is. Her thoughts too work, and beat,
Oppreſt with Cares: but why, ſhee cannot ſay.
All matter of her care is quite away.
Hath any Vermin broke into your Fold?
Or any rott ſeiz'd on your flock? or cold?
Or hath your feighting Ram, burſt his hard horne?
Or any Ewe her fleece? or bag hath torne,
My gentle Amie? Am. Marian, none of theſe.
Ha' you been ſtung by Waſpes, or angry Bees?
Or raz'd with ſome rude bramble, or rough briar?
No Marian; my diſeaſe is ſomewhat nigher.
I weep, and boile away my Selfe, in teares;
And then my panting heart would dry thoſe feares:
I burne, though all the Forreſt lend a ſhade;
And freize, though the whole Wood one fire were made.
Alas!
I often have been torne with thorne and briar;
Both in the Leg, and Foot, and ſomewhat higher:
Yet gave not then ſuch fearfull ſhreikes as theſe. Ah!
I often have been ſtung too, with curſt Bees,
Yet not remember that I then did quit
Either my Companie, or Mirth for it. Ah!
And therefore, what it is that I feele now,
And know no cauſe of it, nor where, nor how,
It entred in mee, nor leaſt print can ſee,
I feele afflicts mee more, then Briar, or Bee. Oh!
How often, when the Sun heavens brighteſt birth
Hath with his burning fervour cleft the earth,
Under a ſpreading Elme, or Oake, hard by
A coole cleare fountaine, could I ſleeping lie
Safe from the heate? but now, no ſhadie tree,
Nor purling brook, can my refreſhing bee?
Oft when the medowes, were growne rough with froſt,
The rivers ice-bound, and their currents loſt,
My thick warme fleece I wore, was my defence
Or large good fires, I made, drave winter thence.
But now, my whole flocks fells, nor this thick grove,
Enflam'd to aſhes, can my cold remove.
It is a cold, and heat, that doth out goe
All ſenſe of Winters, and of Summers ſo.
O', are you here, my Miſtreſſe?
I my Love!
Where ſhould I be, but in my Robins armes?
The Sphere which I delight in, ſo to move?
What the rude Ranger? and ſpied Spie? hand off:
You are for no ſuch ruſticks.
What meanes this,
Thrice worthy Clarion? or wiſe Alken? know yee?
'Las no, not they! a poore ſterv'd Muttons carkaſſe
Would better fit their palat's, then your Veniſon.
What riddle is this! unfold your ſelfe, deare Robin.
You ha' not ſent your Veniſon hence by Scathlock,
To Mother Maudlin?
I to Mother Maudlin?
Will Scathlock ſay ſo?
Nay, wee will all ſweare ſo.
For all did heare it, when you gave the charge ſo.
Both Clarion, Alken, Lionel, my ſelfe.
Good honeſt Shep'ards, Maſters of your flocks,
Simple, and vertuous men, no others hirelings;
Be not you made to ſpeake againſt your Conſcience,
That which may ſoile the truth. I ſend the Veniſon
Away? by Scathlock? and to mother Maudlin?
I came to ſhew it here, to Mellifleur,
I doe confeſſe; but Amies falling ill,
Did put us of it: Since wee imploied our ſelves
In comforting of her. O', here he is!
Did I, Sir, bid you beare away the Veniſon,
To mother Maudlin?
I gud faith, Madam,
Did you, and I ha' done it.
What ha' you done?
Obey'd your heſts, Madam; done your Commaunds.
Done my Commaunds, dull groome? Fetch it againe
Or kennel with the hounds. Are theſe the Arts
Robin, you read your rude ones o' the wood,
To countenance your quarrells, and miſtakings?
Or are the ſports to entertaine your friends
Thoſe formed jealouſies? Aske of Mellifleur,
If I were ever from her, here, or Amie,
Since I came in with them; or ſaw this Scathlock,
Since I related to you his tale, o' the Raven?
I, ſay you ſo?
Shee never left my ſide
Since I came in, here, nor I hers.
This's ſtrange!
Our beſt of Senſes were deceiv'd, our eyes, then!
And eares too.
What you have concluded on,
Make good I pray you.
O' my heart, my heart!
My heart it is, is wounded prettie Amie;
Report not you your greifes: I'll tell for all.
Some body is to blame, there is a fault.
Try if you can take reſt. A little ſlumber
Will much refreſh you (Amie).
What's her greif?
Shee does not know: and therein ſhee is happie.
Here's Mother Maudlin come to give you thanks,
Madam, for ſome late guift, ſhee hath receiv'd—
Which ſhee's not worthie of, ſhee ſaies, but crakes,
And wonders of it; hoppes about the houſe;
Tranſported with the joy.
Send mee a Stagge!
A whole Stagge, Madam! and ſo fat a Deere!
So fairelie hunted, and at ſuch a time too!
When all your freinds were here!
Do you mark this, Clarion?
Her owne acknowledgement?
'Twas ſuch a bountie
And honour done to your poore Bedeſ-woman,
I know not how to owe it, but to thanke you.
And that I come to du: I ſhall goe round,
And giddie with the toy of the good turne.
Looke out, looke out, gay folke about,
And ſee mee ſpin; the ring I' am in
Of mirth, & glee, with thanks for fee
The heart putts on, for th' Veniſon
My Lady ſent, which ſhall be ſpent
In draughts of Wine, to fume up fine
Into the braine, and downe againe
Fall in a Swoune, upo' the growne.
Look to her, ſhee is mad.
My Son hath ſent you
A pott of Strawberries, gather'd i' the wood
(His Hoggs would els have rooted up, or trod)
With a choice diſh of wildings here, to ſcald
And mingle with your Creame.
Thank you good Maudlin,
And thanke your Sonne. Go, beare 'hem into Much
Th' Acater, let him thanke her. Surelie, Mother
You were miſtaken, or my Woodmen more,
Or moſt my ſelfe, to ſend you all our ſtore
Of Veniſon, hunted for our ſelves, this day!
You will not take it, Mother, I dare ſay,
If wee'lld intreat you; whan you know our gheſts:
Red Deere is head ſtill of the forreſt feaſts.
But I knaw yee, a right free-hearted Ladie,
Can ſpare it out of ſuperfluitie:
I have departit it 'mong my poore Neighbours
To ſpeake your Largeſſe.
I not gave it, Mother;
You have done wrong. then; I know how to place
My guifts, and where; and when to find my ſeaſons
To give, not throw away my Curteſies.
Count you this thrown away?
What's raviſh'd from mee
I count it worſe; as ſtolne: I looſe my thanks.
But leave this queſt: they fit not you, not mee,
Maudlin, Contentions of this qualitie.
How now?
Your Stag's return'd upon my ſhoulders,
Hee has found his way into the Kitchin againe:
With his two Leggs, If now your Cooke can dreſſe him;
Slid, I thought the Swine'ard would ha' be at mee,
Hee lookes ſo big! the ſturdie Karle, lewd Lorel!
There Scathlock, for thy plines, thou haſt deſerv'd it.
Do you give a thing, and take a thing, Madam?
No, Maudlin, you had imparted to your Neighbours;
As much good doo't them: I ha' done no wrong.
The Spit ſtand ſtill, no Broches turne
Before the fire, but let it burne
Both ſides, and haunches, till the whole
Converted be into one Cole.
What Devills Pater noſter mumbles ſhee?
Stay, you will heare more of her witcherie
The Swilland Dropſie enter in
The Lazie Cuke, and ſwell his skin;
And the old Mort-malon his ſhin
Now prick, and itch, withouten blin.
Speake out Hagge, wee may heare your Devills Mattens.
The Paene, wee call S. Antons fire
The Gout, or what wee can deſire,
To crampe a Cuke, in every lim,
Before they dine, yet; ſeize on him.
A ſoule ill Spirit hath poſſeſſed her.
O Karol, Karol, call him back againe.
Her thoughts do worke upon her, in her ſlumber.
And may expreſſe ſome part of her diſeaſe.
Obſerve, and marke, but trouble not her eaſe.
O', ô.
How is't Amie?
Wherfore ſtart you?
O' Karol, he is faire, and ſweet.
What then?
Are there not flowers as ſweet, and faire, as men?
The Lillie is faire! and Roſe is ſweet!
I', ſo!
Let all the Roſes, and the Lillies goe:
Karol is only faire to mee!
And why?
Alas for Karol, Marian, I could die.
He ſingeth ſweetly too!
What then?
Are there not Birds ſing ſweeter farre, then Men?
I grant the Linet, Larke, and Bul-finchſing,
But beſt, the deare, good Angell of the Spring,
The Nightingale.
Then why? then why, alone,
Should his notes pleaſe you?
I not long agone
Tooke a delight, with wanton kidds to play,
And ſport with little Lambes a Summers Day!
And view their friskes! me thought it was a ſight
Of joy, to ſee my two brave Rammes to fight!
Now Karol, onely, all delight doth move!
All that is Karol, Karol I approve!
This verie morning, but— (I did beſtow
(It was a little 'gainſt my will, I know)
A ſingle kiſſe, upon the ſeelie Swaine,
And now I wiſh that verie kiſſe againe.
His lip is ſofter, ſweeter then the Roſe
His mouth, and tongue with dropping honey flowes.
The reliſh of it was a pleaſing thing.
Yet like the Bees it had a little ſting.
And ſunke, and ſticks yet in my marrow deepe
And what doth hurt me, I now wiſh to keepe.
Alas, how innocent her Storie is!
I doe remember, Marian, I have oft
With pleaſure kiſt my Lambes, and Puppies, ſoft,
And once a daintie fine Roe-fawne I had,
Of whoſe out-skipping bounds, I was as glad
As of my health; and him I oft would kiſſe:
Yet had his, no ſuch ſting, or paine, as this.
They never prick't or hurt my heart. And, for
They were ſo blunt, and dull, I wiſh no more.
But this, that hurtes, and prickes doth pleaſe; This ſweet,
Mingled with ſower, I wiſh againe to meet:
And that delay, mee thinks, moſt tedious is
That keepes, or hinders mee of Karols kiſſe.
Wee'll ſend for him ſweet Amie, to come to you.
But, I will keepe him of if Charmes will doe it.
Doe you marke the murmuring hagge, how ſhee doth mutter?
I like her not. And leſſe her manners now.
Shee is a ſhrewd deformed peice, I vow.
As crooked as her bodie.
I beleeve
Shee can take any Shape; as Scathlock ſaies.
Shee may deceive the Senſe, but really
Shee cannot change her ſelfe.
Would I could ſee her,
Once more in Marians forme! for I am certaine
Now, it was ſhee abus'd us; as I think
My Marian, and my Love, now, innocent:
Which faith I ſeale unto her, with this kiſſe,
And call you all to witneſſe of my pennance.
It was beleiv'd before, but now confirm'd,
That wee have ſeen the Monſter.
Heare you how
Poore Tom, the Cooke, is taken! All his joynts
Do crack, as if his Limbes were tied with points:
His whole frame ſlackens; and a kind of rack
Runs downe along the Spondylls of his back;
A Gowt, or Crampe, now ſeizeth on his head,
Then falls into his feet; his knees are lead;
And he can ſtirre his either hand, no more
Then a dead ſtumpe, to his office, as before.
Hee is bewitched.
This is an Argument
Both of her malice, and her power, wee ſee.
Shee muſt by ſome device reſtrained bee,
Or ſhee'll goe farre in miſchiefe.
Adviſe how,
Sage Shep'ard, wee ſhall put it ſtraight in practice.
Send forth your woodmen, then, into the walkes,
Or let'em prick her footing hence; A Witch
Is ſure a Creature of Melancholy,
And will be found, or ſitting in her fourme,
Or els, at releife, like a Hare.
You ſpeake
Alken, as if you knew the ſport of Witch-hunting,
Or ſtarting of a Hag.
Go ſirs about it,
Take George here with you, he can helpe to find her;
Leave Tuck, and Much behind to dreſſe the Dinner,
I' the Cookes ſtead.
Wee'll care to get that done.
Come Marian, lets withdraw into the bowre.
Rare ſport I ſweare! this hunting of the Witch
Will make us.
Let's adviſe upon't, like huntſmen.
And wee can ſpie her once, ſhee is our owne.
Firſt, think which way ſhee fourmeth, on what wind:
Or North, or South.
For, as the Shep'ard ſaid,
A Witch is a kind of Hare.
And markes the weather,
As the hare does.
Where ſhall wee hope to find her?
I have ask'd leave to aſſiſt you, jollie huntſmen,
If an old Shep'herd may be heard among you;
Not jear'd or laugh'd at.
Father, you will ſee
Robin-hoods houſe-hold, know more Curteſie.
Who ſcornes at eld, peeles of his owne young haires.
Yee ſay right well. Know yee the Witches Dell?
No more then I do know the walkes of Hell.
Within a gloomie dimble, ſhee doth dwell
Downe in a pitt, ore-growne with brakes and briars.
Cloſe by the ruines of a ſhaken Abbey
Torne, with an Earth-quake, down unto the ground,
'Mongſt graves, and grotts, neare an old Charnell houſe,
Where you ſhall find her ſitting in her fourme,
As fearfull, and melancholique, as that
Shee is about; with Caterpillers kells,
And knottie Cobwebs, rounded in with ſpells;
Thence ſhee ſteales forth to releif, in the foggs,
And rotten Miſtes, upon the fens, and boggs,
Downe to the drowned Lands of Lincolneſhire;
To make Ewes caſt their Lambs! Swine eate their Farrow!
The Houſe-wifes Tun not worke! Nor the Milk churne!
Writhe Childrens wriſts! and ſuck their breath in ſleepe!
Get Vialls of their blood! And where the Sea
Caſts up his ſlimie Owze, ſearch for a weed
To open locks with, and to rivet Charmes,
Planted about her, in the wicked feat,
Of all her miſchiefes, which are manifold.
I wonder ſuch a ſtorie could be told,
Of her dire deeds.
I thought a Witches bankes
Had inclos'd nothing, but the merrie prankes
Of ſome old woman.
Yes, her malice more!
As it would quickly appeare, had wee the Store
Of his Collects.
I, this gud learned Man
Can ſpeake her right.
He knowes, her ſhifts, and haunts!
And all her wiles, and turnes. The venom'd Plants
Wherewith ſhee kill's! where the ſad Mandrake growes,
Whoſe grones are deathfull! the dead-numming Night-ſhade!
The ſtupifying Hemlock! Adders tongue!
And Martagan! the ſhreikes of luckleſſe Owles,
Wee heare! and croaking Night-Crowes in the aire!
Greene-bellied Snakes! blew fire-drakes in the skie!
And giddie Flitter-mice, with lether wings!
The ſcalie Beetles, with their habergeons,
That make a humming Murmur as they flie!
There, in the ſtocks of trees, white Faies doe dwell,
And ſpan-long Elves, that dance about a poole!
With each a little Changeling, in their armes!
The airie ſpirits play with falling ſtarres!
And mount the Sphere of fire, to kiſſe the Moone!
While, ſhee fitts reading by the Glow-wormes light,
Or rotten wood (o're which the worme hath crept)
The banefull ſcedule of her nocent charmes,
And binding Characters, through which ſhee wounds
Her Puppetts, the Sigilla of her witch-craft.
All this I know, and I will find her for you;
And ſhew you'her ſitting in her fourme; I'le lay
My hand upon her; make her throw her skutt
Along her back, when ſhee doth ſtart before us.
But you muſt give her Law: and you ſhall ſee her
Make twentie leapes, and doubles; croſſe the pathes,
And then ſquatt downe beſide us.
Craftie Croane!
I long to be at the ſport, and to report it.
Wee'll make this hunting of the Witch, as famous, As any other blaſt of Venerie.
Hang her foule hagge, ſhee'll be a ſtinking Chaſe!
I had rather ha' the hunting of heir heyre.
If wee could come to ſee her, cry, ſo haw, once!
That I doe promiſe, or I'am no good Hag-finder.
THe Feind hath much to doe, that keepes a Schoole;
Or is the Father of a familie;
Or governes but a country Academie:
His labours muſt be great, as are his cares,
To watch all turnes, and caſt how to prevent 'hem.
This Dame of mine here,
growes high in evill,
And thinkes ſhee doe's all, when 'tis I, her Divell,
That both delude her, and muſt yet protect her:
Shee's confident in miſcheife, and preſumes
The changing of her ſhape will ſtill ſecure her.
But that may faile, and diverſe hazards meete
Of other conſequence, which I muſt looke to.
Not let her be ſurpriz'd on the firſt catch.
I muſt goe daunce about the Forreſt, now,
And firke it like a Goblin, till I find her.
Then will my ſervice come worth acceptation;
When not expected of her, when the helpe
Meetes the neceſſity, and both doe kiſſe
'Tis call'd the timing of a dutie, this.
Sure, you are very like her! I conceiv'd
You had been ſhee, ſeeing you run afore mee:
For ſuch a ſuite ſhee made her 'gainſt this Feaſt;
In all reſemblance, or the verie ame;
I ſaw her in it; had ſhee liv'd t' enjoy it
Shee had been there an acceptable Gueſt
To Marian, and the gentle Robin-hood,
Who are the Crowne, and Ghirland of the Wood.
I cannot tell: my Mother gave it mee,
And bad mee weare it.
Who, the wiſe good Woman?
Old Maud. of Pappelwicke?
Yes, this ſullen Man.
I cannot like him. I muſt take my leave
What ſaid ſhee to you?
Who? Aegl. Earine,
I ſaw her talking with you, or her Ghoſt;
For ſhee indeed is drown'd in old Trents bottome.
Did ſhee not tell who would ha' pull'd her in?
And had her Maiden-head upon the place?
The rivers brim, the margin of the Flood?
No ground is holie enough, (you know my meaning)
Luſt is committed in Kings Palaces,
And yet their Majeſties not violated!
No words!
How ſad, and wild his thoughts are! gone?
But ſhee, as chaſte, as was her name, Earine,
Dy'd undeflowr'd; and now her ſweet ſoule hovers,
Here, in the Aire, above us; and doth haſte
To get up to the Moone, and Mercury;
And whiſper Venus in her Orbe, then ſpring
Up to old Saturne, and come downe by Mars,
Conſulting Jupiter; and ſeate her ſelfe
Juſt in the midſt with Phoebus; tempring all
The jarring Spheeres, and giving to the World
Againe, his firſt and tunefull planetting!
O' what an age will here be of new concords!
Delightfull harmonie! to rock old Sages,
Twice infants, in the Cradle o'Speculation,
And throw a ſilence upon all the creatures!
A Cogitation of the higheſt rapture!
The loudeſt Seas, and moſt enraged Windes
Shall loſe their clangor; Tempeſt ſhall grow hoarſe;
Loud Thunder dumbe; and every ſpeece of ſtorme
Laid in the lap of liſtning Nature, huſht;
To heare the changed chime of this eighth ſpheere!
Take tent, and harken for it, looſe it not.
O', here is Karol! was not that the ſad
Shep'erd, ſlip'd from him?
Yes, I gheſſe it was:
Who was that left you, Karol?
The laſt man!
Whom, wee ſhall never ſee himſelfe againe;
Or ours, I feare! He ſtarts away from hand, ſo,
And all the touches, or ſoft ſtroke of reaſon!
Yee can applie. No Colt is ſo unbroken!
Or hawke yet halfe ſo haggard, or unmann'd!
He takes all toies that his wild phantſy proffers,
And flies away with them. He now conceives
That my loſt Siſter, his Earine,
Is lately turn'd a Sphere amid the ſeven:
And reades a Muſique-Lecture to the Planets!
And with this thought, hee's run to cal 'hem, Hearers▪
Alas, this is a ſtrayn'd, but innocent phant'ſie!
Ile follow him, and find him, if I can:
Meane time, goe you with Lionell, ſweet Karol,
Hee will acquaint you with an accident
Which much deſires your preſence, on the place!
What is it, Lionell, wherein I may ſerve you?
Why doe you ſo ſurvey, and circumſcribe mee?
As if you ſtuck one Eye into my breſt,
And with the other took my whole dimenſions?
I wiſh you had a windo' i' your boſome
Or 'i your back: I might look thorough you,
And ſee your in-parts, Karol, liver, heart;
For there the ſeat of Love is. Whence the Boy
(The winged Archer) hath ſhott home a ſhaft
Into my ſiſters breſt, the innocent Amie,
Who now cries out, upon her bed, on Karol,
Sweet ſinging Karol! the delicious Karol!
That kiſt her like a Cupid! In your eyes,
Shee ſaies, his ſtand is! and between your lipp's
He runs forth his diviſions, to her eares,
But will not bide there, leſſe your ſelfe do bring him
Goe with me Karol, and beſtow a viſit
In charitie, upon the afflicted Maid,
Who pineth with the languor of your love.
Whither intend you? Amy is recover'd,
Feeles no ſuch griefe as ſhee complain'd of, lately:
This Maiden hath been with her from her Mother
Maudlin, the cunning Woman, who hath ſent her
Herbes for her head, and Simples of that nature,
Have wrought upon her a miraculous Cure;
Setled her braine, to all our wiſh, and wonder!
So inſtantly? you know, I now but left her.
Poſſeſs'd with ſuch a fit, almoſt to 'a phrenſie;
Your ſelfe too fear'd her, Marian; and did urge
My haſte, to ſeeke out Karol, and to bring him.
I did ſo. But the skill of that wiſe woeman
And her great charitie of doeing good
Hath by the readie hand of this deft laſſe
Her daughter, wrought effects, beyond beleife,
And to aſtoniſhment; wee can but thanke
And praiſe, and be amazed, while wee tell it.
'Tis ſtrange, that any art ſhould ſo helpe nature
In her extremes.
Then, it appeares moſt reall
When th'other is deficient.
Wherefore, ſtay you
Diſcourſing here, and haſte not with your ſuccours
To poore afflicted Amie, that ſo needes them?
Shee is recover'd well, your Marian told us
But now here: See, ſhee is return'd t' affirme it!
My Marian?
Robin-hood? Is hee here?
Stay!
What was't you ha' told my friend?
Helpe, murder, helpe.
You will not rob me Out-law? Theife, reſtore
My belt that yee have broken!
Yes, come neere,
Not i' your gripe.
Was this the charmed circle?
The Copy that ſo couzen'd, and deceiv'd us?
I'le carry hence the trophie of your ſpoiles.
My men ſhall hunt you too upon the ſtart,
And courſe you ſoundly.
I ſhall make 'hem ſport
And ſend ſome home, without their leggs, or armes.
I'le teach 'hem to climbe Stiles, leape Ditches, Ponds,
And lie i' the Waters, if they follow mee.
Out murmuring Hagge.
I muſt uſe all my powers,
Lay all my witts to piecing of this loſſe.
Things run unluckily, Where's my Puck-hairy?
Hath he forſooke mee?
At your beck, Madame.
O Puck, my Goblin! I have loſt my belt,
The ſtrong theife, Robin Out-law, forc'd it from mee.
They are other Cloudes and blacker threat you, Dame;
You muſt be wary, and pull in your ſailes,
And yeeld unto the wether of the tempeſt.
You thinke your power's infinite as your malice;
And would do all your anger prompts you to:
But you muſt wait occaſions, and obey them:
Saile in an egg-ſhell, make a ſtraw your maſt,
A Cobweb all your Cloth, and paſſe, unſeen,
Till you have ſcap'd the rockes that are about you.
What rock's about mee?
I do love, Madam,
To ſhew you all your dangers, when you are paſt 'hem.
Come, follow mee, I'll once more be your pilot,
And you ſhall thanke mee.
Lucky, my lov'd Goblin!
Where are you gaang, now?
Unto my tree,
To ſee my Maiſtres.
Gang thy gait, and try
Thy turnes, with better luck, or hang thy ſel'.