YOu Officers which now in Iulio ſtaye,
Know you our leadge, the King of Hungarie:
Sent me Promos, to ioyne with you in ſway:
That ſtyll we may to Iuſtice haue an eye.
And now to ſhow, my rule & power at lardge,
Attentiuelie, his Letters Pattents heare:
Phallax, reade out my Soueraines chardge.
As you commaunde, I wyll: giue héedefull eare.
Loe, here you ſée what is our Soueraignes wyl,
Loe, beare his wiſh, that right, not might, beare ſwaye:
Loe, heare his care, to weede from good the yll,
To ſcoorge the wights, good Lawes that diſobay.
Such zeale he beares, vnto the Common weale,
(How ſo he byds, the ignoraunt to ſaue)
As he commaundes, the lewde doo rigor féele.
Such is his wiſh, ſuch is my wyll to haue:
And ſuch a Iudge, here Promos vowes to be.
No wylfull wrong, ſharpe puniſhment ſhall myſſe,
The ſimple thrall, ſhalbe iudgde with mercie,
Each ſhall be doombde, euen as his merite is:
Loue ſhall not ſtaye, nor hate reuenge procure,
Ne yet ſhall Coyne, corrupt or feſter wrong:
I doo proteſt, whylſte that my charge indure,
For friende nor foe, to ſinge a partiall ſong.
Thus haue you heard, howe my Commiſſion goes,
He abſent, I preſent our Soueraigne ſtyll:
It aunſweres then, each one his dutie ſhowes,
To mee, as him, what I commaunde and wyll.
Worthy Deputie, at thy chardge we ioye,
We doe ſubmitte our ſelues, to worke thy heaſt:
Receyue the ſword of Iuſtice to deſtroy,
The wicked impes, and to defend the reſt.
Our Citty keyes, take wiſht Liftenaunt heare,
We doe committe our ſafetie to thy head:
Thy wyſe foreſight, will kéepe vs voyde of feare,
Yet wyll we be aſſiſtant ſtill at néede.
Both Swoorde and Keies, vnto my Princes vſe,
I doo receyue and gladlie take my chardge.
It reſteth nowe, for to reforme abuſe,
We poynt a tyme, of Councell more at lardge,
To treate of which, a whyle we wyll depart.
To worke your wyll, we yéelde a wylling hart.
AL a flaunt now vaunt it, braue wenche caſt away care,
With Layes of Loue chaunt it, for no coſt ſee thou ſpare:
❧ Sith Nature hath made thee, with bewty moſt braue,
Sith Fortune doth lade thee, with what thou wouldſt haue.
Ere Pleaſure doth vade thee, thy ſelfe ſet to ſale:
All wantons wyll trade thee, and ſtowpe to thy ſtale.
All a flaunt, Ʋt Supra.
❧ Yong Ruflers maintaines thee, defends thee and thine,
Olde Dottrels retaines thee, thy Beuties ſo ſhine:
Though many diſdaynes thee, yet none maye thee tuch:
Thus Enuie refraynes thee, thy countenaunce is ſuch.
All a flaunt, Ʋt Supra:
TRiumphe fayre Lamia now, thy wanton flag aduaunce,
Set foorth thy ſelfe to braueſt ſhow, boſt thou of happy chaunce:
Gyrle, accompt thou thy ſelfe the chéefe, of Lady Pleaſures traine,
Thy face is faire, thy forme cōtent, thy Fortunes both doth ſtraine.
Euen as thou wouldſt, thy houſe doth ſtande, thy furniture is gay,
Thy wéedes are braue, thy face is fine, & who for this doth paye?
Thou thy ſelfe no, the ruſhing Youthes, ye bathe in wanton bliſſe,
Yea, olde and dooting fooles ſometimes, doo helpe to paye for this.
Frée coſt betwéene them both I haue, all this for my behoue,
I am the ſterne, yt gides their thoughts, looke what I like, they loue
Few of them ſturre, that I byd ſtaie, if I bid go, they flye:
If I on foe purſue reuenge, Alarme a hundred crye.
The braueſt I their harts, their handes, their purſes holde at wyl,
Ioynde with the credite of the beſt, to bowlſter mee in yll.
But ſee wher as my truſtie man, doth run, what newes brings he?
Good people, did none of you, my miſtreſſe Lamia ſee?
Rosko, what newes, that in ſuch haſte you come blowing?
Miſtreſſe, you muſt ſhut vp your ſhops, & leaue your occupying.
What ſo they be, fooliſh knaue, tell mee true?
Oh yll, for thirtie? beſydes you.
For mee good fellowe, I praye thee why ſo?
Be patient Miſtreſſe, and you ſhall knowe,
Go too, ſaye on:
Marrie, right nowe at the Seſſions I was,
And thirtie muſt to Truſſum corde go.
Among the which (I weepe to ſhowe) alas:
Why, what's the matter man?
O Andrugio,
For louing too kindlie, muſt looſe his heade,
And his ſweete hart, muſt we are the ſhamefull weedes:
Ordainde for Dames, that fall through fleſhly deedes.
Is this offence, in queſtion come againe?
Tell, tell, no more, 'tys tyme this tale were done:
See, ſée, howe ſoone, my triumphe turnes to paine.
Miſtreſſe, you promiſed to be quiet,
For Gods ſake, for your owne ſake, be ſo
Alas poore Rosko, our dayntie dyet,
Our brauerie and all we muſt forgo.
I am ſorie.
Yea, but out alas, ſorrowe wyll not ſerue:
thou muſt néedes prouide thée elſe where,
My gaynes are paſt, yea, I my ſelfe might ſtarue:
Saue that, I did prouide for a deare yeare.
They rewarde fayre (their harueſt in the ſtacke,)
When winter coms, that byd their ſeruaunts packe.
Alas Miſtreſſe, if you turne mée off now,
Better then a Roge, none wyll me allowe.
Thou ſhalt haue a Paſporte,
Yea, but after what ſorte?
Why, that thou wart my man.
O the Iudge, ſylde ſhowes the fauour,
To let one théefe, bayle another:
Tuſh I know, ere long you ſo wyll ſlyp awaye,
As you, for your ſelfe, muſt ſéeke ſome teſtimony
Of your good lyfe.
Neuer feare: honeſtly
Lamia nowe meanes to lyue, euen tyll ſhe dye.
As iumpe as Apes, in vewe of Nuttes to daunce,
Kytte wyll to kinde, of cuſtome, or by chaunce:
Well, howe ſo you ſtande vpon this holy poynt,
For the thing you knowe, you wyll ieobarde a ioynt.
Admitte I woulde, my hazarde were in vaine.
Perhappes I know, to turne the ſame to gaine.
Thou comforts mée, good Rosko, tell mée howe?
You wyl be honeſt, 'twere fyn to hinder you.
I dyd but ieaſt, good ſwéete ſeruaunt tell mée.
Swéete ſeruaunt now, and late, pack ſyr, god bwy ye.
Tuſh, to trye thy vnwillingneſſe. I dyd but ieaſt.
And I doo but trye, how long you woulde be honeſt.
I thought thy talke was too ſweete to be true.
Yea, but meant yon, to byd honeſtie adue?
No, I dyd ſo long ſince, but inforſte by neede,
To byd him welcome home againe, I was decréede.
Verie good, Miſtreſſe, I know your minde,
And for your eaſe, this remedie I finde:
Prying abroade, for playe fellowes and ſuch,
For you Miſtreſſe, I hearde of one Phallax,
A man eſtéemde, of Promos verie much:
Of whoſe Nature, I was ſo bolde to axe.
And I ſmealt, he lou'd laſe mutton well.
And what of this?
Marry of this, if you the waye can tell
To towle him home, he of you wyll be fayne:
Whoſe countenaunce, wyll ſo excuſe your faultes.
As none for life, dare of your lyfe complaine.
A good deuice, God graunt vs good ſucceſſe:
But I praye thee, what trade doth he profeſſe?
He is a paltrie petyfogger.
All the better, ſuſpition wyll be the leſſe.
Well, go thy wayes, and if thou him eſpye,
Tell him from mee, that I a cauſe or two.
Woulde put to him, at leyſure wyllinglie.
Hir caſe is ſo common, that ſmal pleading wyl ſerue,
I go (nay ronne) your commaundement to obſerue.
Aye me alas, leſſe Phallax helpe, poore wench vndone I am:
My foes nowe in the winde, wyll lye to worke my open ſhame:
Now enuious eyes will prie abroade, offenders to intrap,
Of force now Lamia, muſt be chaſte, to ſhun a more miſhap.
And wanton girle, how wilt thou ſhift, for garments fine and gay?
For dainty fare, can cruſts cōtent? who ſhal thy houſerent pay?
And that delights thee moſt of all, thou muſt thy daliaunce leaue?
And can then the force of lawe, or death, thy minde of loue bereaue?
In good faith, no: the wight that once, hath taſt the fruits of loue,
Vntill hir dying daye will long, Sir Chaucers ieſts to proue.
Forſooth Miſtris your thraule ſtayes for you at home,
Were you borne in a myll, curtole? you prate ſo hye:
The gentelman, that came the laſt day with Captain Prie:
What young Hipolito?
Euen he.
Leaſt he be gone, home hye:
And will Dalia pop him in the neather roome,
And kéepe the falling doore cloſe tyll I come
And tell my thraule his fortune wyll not ſtaye?
Wyll you ought elſe?
Pratyng vixen away.
Gallants adue. I venter muſt Hipolito to ſée.
He is both young and welthy yet, the better ſpoyle for mée.
My haſſard for his ſake I trewe, ſhall make him pray and pay:
He: he: ſhal pranck me in my plumes, and deck mee braue and gay,
Of Curtiſie, I praye you yet, if Phallax come this waye,
Report to put a caſe with him, heare Lamia long dyd ſtay.
Aye mee, vnhappy wenche that I muſt liue the day,
To ſee Andrugio tymeles dye, my brother and my ſtay.
The onely meane, God wot. that ſhould our houſe aduaunce,
Who in the hope of his good hap, muſt dy through wanton chance:
O blynde affectes in loue, whoſe tormentes none can tell,
Yet wantous wyll hyde fyre, and froſt, yea haſſard death, nay hell:
To taſte thy ſowre ſwéete frutes, digeſted ſtyll with care,
Fowle fall thee loue, thy lightning ioyes, hath blaſted my welfare
Thou fyerſt affection fyrſt, within my brothers breſt.
Thou mad'ſt Polina graūt him (earſt) euen what he would requeſt:
Thou mad'ſt him craue and haue, a proofe of Venus meede,
For which foule act he is adiudgd, eare long to loſe his heade.
The lawe is ſo ſeuere, in ſcourging fleſhly ſinne,
As marriage to worke after mends doth ſeldome fauor win.
A law firſt made of zeale, but wreſted much amis
Faults ſhould be meaſured by deſart, but all is one in this,
The lecher fyerd with luſt, is puniſhed no more,
Then he which fel through force of loue, whoſe mariage ſalues his ſore:
So that poore I diſpayre, of my Audrugios lyfe,
O would my dayes myght end with his, for to appeaſe my ſtryfe.
My good Syſter Caſſandra?
Who calleth Caſſandra?
Thy wofull brother Andrugio.
Andrugio, O diſmall day, what gréefes, doe mée aſſayle?
Condempned wretch to ſee thee here, faſt fettered now in Iayle,
Now haps thy wits were witched ſo, ye knowing death was meede
Thou wouldeſt commit (to ſtay vs both) this vile laciuious deede.
O good Caſſandra, leaue to check, and chide me thraule therfore
If late repentaunce, wrought me helpe I would doe ſo no more.
But out alas, I wretch, too late, doe ſorrowe my amys.
Vnles Lord Promos graunt me grace: in vayne is hady wiſt,
Wherfore ſweete ſiſter, whylſt in hope, my dāpned lyfe yet were,
Aſſaulte his hart, in my behalfe, with battering tyre of teares.
If thou by ſute doeſt ſaue my lyfe, it both our ioyes will be,
If not it may ſuffice thou ſoughſt, to ſet thy brother free:
Wherefore ſpeede to proroge my dayes, to morrowe elſe I dye.
I wyll not fayle to pleade and praye, to purchaſe the mercye,
Farewell a whyle, God graunte mee well to ſpeede.
Syſter adew, tyl thy returne, I lyue, twene, hope, and breede.
Oh happy tyme, ſee where Lord Promos coms?
Now tongue addreſſe thy ſelfe, my minde to wray.
And yet leaſt haſte worke waſte, I hold it beſt,
In couert, for ſome aduauntage, to ſtay.
Tis ſtrange to thinke, what ſwarms of vnthrifts liue,
Within this towne, by rapine ſpoyle and theft:
That were it not, that Iuſtice ofte them gréeue,
The iuſt mans goods, by Ruflers ſhould be reft.
At this our Syſe, are thirty iudgde to dye,
Whoſe falles I ſée, their fellowes ſmally feare:
So that the way, is by ſeuerity
Such wicked weedes, euen by the rootes to teare:
Wherefore Shriefe, execute with ſpéedy pace,
The dampned wightes, to cutte of hope of Grace.
It ſhalbe done.
O cruell words they make my hart to bleede,
Now, now, I muſt, this dome ſeeke to reuoke,
Leaſt grace come ſhort, when ſtarued is the ſteede:
Moſt mighty Lord, & worthy Iudge, thy iudgemēt ſharpe abate,
Vaile thou thine eares, to heare the plaint, that wretched I relate,
Behold the wofull Syſter here, of poore Andrugio,
Whom though that lawe awardeth death, yet mercy do him ſhow:
Way his yong yeares, the force of loue, which forced his amis,
Way, way, that Mariage, works amends, for what committed is,
He hath defilde no nuptial bed, nor forced rape hath mou'd,
He fel through loue, who neuer ment, but wiue ye wight he lou'd.
And wātons ſure, to keepe in awe, theſe ſtatutes firſt were made,
Or none but luſt full leachers, ſhould, with rygrous law be payd.
And yet to adde intent thereto, is farre from my pretence,
I ſue with teares, to wyn him grace, that ſorrows his offence.
Wherefore herein, renowned Lorde, Iuſtice with pitie payſe:
Which two in equal ballance waide, to heauē your fame will raiſe.
Caſſandra, leaue of thy bootleſſe ſute, by law he hath bene tride,
Lawe founde his faulte, Lawe iudgde him death:
Yet this maye be replide,
That law a miſchiefe oft permits, to keepe due forme of lawe,
That lawe ſmall faultes, with greateſt doomes, to keepe men ſtyl in axe:
Yet Kings, or ſuch as execute, regall authoritie:
If mends be made, may ouer rule, the force of lawe with mercie.
Here is no wylful murder wrought, which axeth blood againe,
Andrugios faulte may valued be, Mariage wipes out his ſtayne.
Faire Dame, I ſee ye naturall zeale, thou beareſt to Andrugio,
And for thy ſake (not his deſart) this fauour wyll I ſhowe:
I wyll repriue him yet a whyle, and on the matter pawſe,
To morrowe you ſhall lycence haue, a freſh to pleade his cauſe:
Shriefe execute my chardge, but ſtaye Andrugio,
Vntill that you in this behalfe, more of my pleaſure knowe.
I wyll performe your wyll:
O moſt worthy Magiſtrate, my ſelfe thy thrall I finde.
Euen for this lytle lightning hope, which at thy handes I finde.
Now wyl I go and comfort him, which hangs twixt death & life.
Happie is the man, that inioyes the loue of ſuch a wife,
I do proteſt, hir modeſt wordes, hath wrought in me a maze.
Though ſhe be farre, ſhe is not deackt, with gariſh ſhewes for gaze,
Hir bewtie lures, hir lookes cut off, fond ſutes with chaſt diſdain.
O God I feele a ſodaine change, that doth my fréedome chayne.
What didſt thou ſay? fie Promos fie: of hir auoide the thought,
And ſo I will, my other cares wyll cure what loue hath wrought,
Come awaye.
My truſty friendes about your buſineſſe ſtraight,
With ſymple ſhowes, your ſubtile meanings bayte:
Promote all faults, vp into my office,
Then turne me loſe, the offenders to fleece.
Tuſh, to finde lawe breakers let me alone,
I haue eyes, will looke into a Mylſtone.
God a mercy Gripax.
And I am ſo ſubtyll ſighted I trowe,
As I the very thoughts of men doo know:
I fayth Rapax, what thought thy wife when ſhe,
To lye with the preeſt, by night ſtole from thee?
Marry ſhe knew, you and I were at ſquare,
And leaſt we fell to blowes, ſhe did prepare.
To arme my head, to match thy horned browe.
Goe and a knaue with thée.
I ſtay for you:
No harme is done, here is but blow for blew,
Byrds of a fether, beſt flye together,
Then like partners, about your market goe,
Marrowes adew, God ſent you fayre wether.
Fare you well, for vs take no care,
With vs this brode ſpéeche ſildome breedeth ſquare.
Marry ſyr, welfare an office, what ſome euer it be,
The very countenaunce, is great, though ſlender be the ſée,
I thanke my good Lord Promos now, I am an officer made,
In ſooth more by hap then deſart, in ſecret be it ſayde:
No force for that, each ſhyft for one, for Phallax will doo ſo,
Well fare a head can take his tyme nay watch for time I trow.
I ſmyle to thinke of my fell▪ wes; how ſome braue it, ſome waight,
And thinke reward, there ſeruice iuſt, with offred ſhifts wyl bayght
When they (poore ſoules) in troth do falle a myle vpon account,
For flattery and feruent pleſing, are meanes to make men mount:
I ſpeake on proofe, Lord Promos, I haue pleaſed many a day,
Yet am I neither learned, true, nor honeſt any way.
What ſkyls for that, by wit or wyle, I haue an office got,
By force wherof euery lycence, warrant, pattent, paſport,
Leace, fyne, fee, et cetera, pas and repas, through Phallax hands,
Diſorored perſons brybe me wel, to eſcape from Iuſtice bands,
And welthy churles for to promote, I now haue ſet a worke,
Such hungry lads, as ſoone will ſmell, where ſtatute breakers lurk,
And if they come, within our Grype, we meane to ſtripe them ſo,
As (if they ſcape from open ſhame) their bagges with vs ſhall goe.
And truſt me this, we officers, of this mylde mould are wrought,
Agrée with vs, and ſure your ſhame by vs ſhal not be ſought:
But ſoft a whyle, I ſee my Lord what makes him lowre ſo▪
I wyll intrude into his ſight, perhaps his greefe to know.
Well mette Phallax. I long haue wyſht to ſhowe.
A cauſe to thee which none but I yet know.
Say on my Lord, a happy man weare I:
If any way, your wiſh I could ſupply:
Faine would I ſpeake, but oh, a chylling feare,
(The caſe is ſuch) makes mee from ſpeech forbeare.
Theſe wordes my Lord (whome euer haue bene iuſt)
Now makes, me thinke, that you my truth miſtruſt.
But ceaſe ſuſpect, my wyll with yours ſhall gree,
What ſo (or againſt whome) your dealing be.
Againſt a wight of ſmall account it is,
And yet I feare, I ſhall my purpoſe mys:
Feare not my Lorde, the olde Prouerbe doth ſaye.
Faynt harts doth ſteale fayre Ladyes ſeld away.
Fayre Ladyes O, no Lady is my loue,
And yet the ſure, as coye as they wyl proue.
I thought as much, loue dyd torment you ſo.
But what is ſhe that dare ſaye Promos noe?
Doe what one can. fyre wyll breake forth I ſée,
My words vnwares, hath ſhowen what gréeueth mee:
My wound is ſuch, as loue muſt be my leache.
Which cure wyll brynging Grauity in ſpéeche,
For what maye be, a folly of more note,
Then for to ſee, a man gray beard to dote.
No my Lorde, Amor omnia vincit.
And Ouid ſayth, Forma numen habet.
And for to proue, loues ſeruice ſéemes the wiſe,
Set Sallomon and Sampſon, before your eyes:
For wyt, and ſtrength, who wonne the cheefeſt priſe.
And both lyu'd by the lawes loue did deuiſe,
Which proues in loue, a certaine godhed lyes.
And Goddes rule yearely, by wiſdome from the ſkyes:
Whoſe wyls (thinke I) are wrought beſt by the wiſe.
In déede diuine, I thinke loues working is,
From reaſons vſe, in that my ſences ſwarue,
In pleaſure paine, in payne I fynde a blyſſe,
On woe I féede, in ſight of foode I ſtearue:
Theſe ſtrange effects, by loue are lodgd in mée,
My thoughts are bound, yet I my ſelfe am free.
Well my Good Lord, I axe (with pardon ſought)
Who ſhe may be, that hath your thrauldome wrought?
The example is ſuch, as I ſygh to ſhowe,
Syſter ſhe is, to dampned Andrugio.
All the better for you the game doth goe.
The prouerbe ſayth, that kyt wyll vnto kinde,
If it be true this comfort, then I fynde:
Caſſandras fleſh is as her brothers, frayle,
Then wyll ſhée ſtoupe, (in chéefe) when Lords aſſayle.
The contrary (through feare) doth worke my payne,
For in her face, ſuch modeſty doth raigne,
As cuttes of louing ſutes, with chaſte diſdayne.
What loue wyll not, neceſſity ſhall gayne,
Her brothers lyfe, will make her glad and fayne.
What is it beſt, Andrugio frée to ſet,
Ere I am ſure, his ſyſters loue to gette?
My louyng Lord, your ſeruaunt meanes not ſo.
But if you will, elſewhere in ſecret goe:
To worke your wyll aſſiſt I hope to ſhowe.
With ryght good wyll, for ſuch my ſicknes is.
As I ſhall dye, if her good will I mys.
THe wynd is yl, blowes no mans gaine, for cold I néede not care,
Here is nyne and twenty ſutes of apparell for my ſhare:
And ſome berlady very good, for ſo ſtandeth the caſe,
As neyther gentelman, nor other Lord, Promos ſheweth Grace.
But I maruell much poore ſlaues, that they are hanged ſo ſoone,
They were wont, to ſtaye a day or two, now ſcarce an after noone:
All the better for the hangman, I pardons dreaded ſore,
Would cutters ſaue, whoſe clothes are good, I neuer feard the poore:
Let mée ſee, I muſt be dapper in this my facultie,
Heare are new ropes, how are my knots, I ſaith fyr ſlippery.
At faſt or looſe, with my Giptian, I meane to haue a caſt:
Tenne to one I read his fortune by the Marymas faſt,
A way, what a ſtur is this, to ſée men goe to hanging?
Hark▪ god bwy ye, I muſt begone, the priſners are a cōming.
WIth harte and voyce to thee O Lorde,
At latter gaſpe, for grace we crie:
Vnto our ſutes, good God accorde,
VVhich thus appeale, to thy mercie.
Forſake vs not, in this diſtreſſe,
Which vnto thee, our ſinnes confeſſe:
Forſake vs not, in this diſtreſſe,
VVhich vnto thee, our ſinnes confeſſe.
Al ſorts of men beware by vs, whom preſēt death aſſaults,
Looke in your conſcience what you find, & ſorow for your faults:
Example take by our freſh harmes, ſee here the fruites of pride,
I for my part deſerued death, long ere my theft was ſpide.
O careles youth, lead, lead awrie, with euerie pleaſing toy,
Note well my words, they are of woorth, ye cauſe though my annoy.
Shun to be pranckt, in peacocks plumes, for gaze which only are.
Hate, hate, the dyce, euen as the diuell, of wanton Dames beware:
I was intiſt by lawles men, on theeuiſh ſpoyles to feede.
And nuſled once in wicked deedes, I feard not to offende,
From had, to worſe, and worſt I fell, I would at leyſure mende.
But oh preſuming ouer much, ſtyll to eſcape in hope,
My faultes were found, and I adiudgde, to totter in a rope:
To which I go with theſe my mates, likewiſe for breach of lawes.
For murder ſome, for theeuerie ſome, and ſome for litle cauſe.
¶ Bewared are frende of quarelling, thirſt ſpoile of no mās breaths
Blood, areth blood, I ſheeding blood, vntimelie catch: y death.
Maides & women, ſhun pride, & ſloth, the rootes of euery vice,
My death ere lōg, wil ſhew their ends, God graūt it make you wiſe.
How now Giptian? All a mort knaue, for want of company?
Be cruſtie man, ye Hangman ſtraight, wil reade Fortunes with thée.
With this thy ſcoffing ſpeach, good friend offend him not,
His faults are ſcorged, thine ſcape (perhaps) that do deſerue his lot?
Ieſus ſaue me, I am caſt, for a purſe with three halfepence.
Diſpatch prating knaue, and he hangd, yt we were iogging hēce.
❧ Our ſecrete thoughts, thou Chriſt doſt knowe,
VVhome the worlde, doth hate in thrall.
Yet hope we that, thou wilt not ſoe,
On whome alone, we thus do call.
Forſake vs not, in this diſtreſſe,
VVhich vnto thee, our ſinnes confeſſe,
Forſake vs not, &c.
Do what I can, no reaſon cooles deſire,
The more I ſtriue, my fonde affectes to fame:
The hotter (oh) I feele, a burning fire
Within my breaſt, vaine thoughts to forge and frame.
O ſtraying effectes, of blinde affected Loue,
From wiſdomes pathes, which doth aſtraye our wittes:
Which makes vs haunt, that which our harmes doth moue,
A ſickneſſe lyke, the Feuer Etticke fittes:
Which ſhakes with colde, when we do burne like fire.
Euen ſo in Loue, we freeſe, through chilling feare,
When as our hartes, doth frye with hote deſire:
What ſaide I? lyke to Etticke fittes, nothing neare:
In ſowreſt Loue, ſome ſweete is euer ſuckt.
The Louer findeth peace, in wrangling ſtrife,
So that if paine, were from his pleaſure pluckt,
There were no Heauen, like to the Louers life.
But why ſtande I to pleade, their ioye or woe?
And reſt vnſure of hir I wiſh to haue.
I knowe not if Caſſandra loue, or no?
But yet admytte, ſhe graunt not what I craue,
If I benyce, to hir brother lyfe to giue:
Hir brothers life, too much wyll make hir yeelde,
A promiſe then, to let hir brother lyue:
Hath force inough, to make hir flie the fielde.
Thus though ſute fayle, neceſſitie ſhall wyn,
Of Lordlie rule, the conquering power is ſuch:
But (oh ſweete ſight) ſee where ſhe enters in,
Both hope and dreade, at once my harte doth tuch.
I ſee two thralles, ſweete ſeemes a lytle ioye,
For fancies free, Andrugios breaſt hath ſcope:
But leaſt detract, doth rayſe a new annoye,
I nowe will ſeeke to turne, to happe his hope.
See, as I wiſht, Lord Promos is in place,
Nowe in my ſuts, God graunt I maye finde grace.
¶ Renowned Lorde, whylſt life in me doth laſt,
In homage bondes, I binde my ſelfe to thee:
And though I did thy goodneſſe latelie taſte,
Yet once againe, on knees I mercie ſeeke:
In his behalfe, that hanges twene death and life;
Who ſtyll is preaſt, if you the mendes do leeke:
His lawles loue, to make his lawfull wife.
Faire Dame, I wel haue wayd thy ſute, & wiſh to do thée good,
But all in vaine, al things conclude, to haue thy brothers blood:
The ſtricknes of the lawe condempnes, an ignoraunt abuſe,
Then wylfull faultes are hardlie helpt, or cloked with excuſe:
And what maye be more wylfull, then a Maide to violate.
The force was ſmal, when with hir wyl, he wretch ye conqueſt gate.
Lawe euer at the worſt, doth conſter euyl intent.
And lawe euen with the worſt, awardes them puniſhment:
And ſith that rigorous lawe adiudgd him to dye,
Your glorie will be much the more, in ſhowing him mercie.
The world wil think, how ye you do, but graūt him grace on cauſe,
And where cauſe is, there mercy ſhould abate the force of lawes.
Caſſandra in thy brothers halfe, thou haſt ſayde what may be
And for thy ſake, it is, if I doe ſet Andrugio frée:
Short tale to make, thy beauty hath, ſurpryſed mee with loue,
That maugre wit, I turne my thoughts, as blynd affections moue.
And quite ſubdude by Cupids might, néede makes mée ſue for grace
To thée Caſſandra, which doeſt holde, my fréedome in a lace.
Yéelde to my will, and then commaund, euen what thou wilt of mée,
Thy brothers life, and all that elſe, may with thy liking grée.
And may it be, a Iudge himſelf, the ſelfe ſame fault ſhould vſe:
For which he domes, an others death, O crime without excuſe.
Renowned Lorde, you vſe this ſpeach (I hope) your thrall to trye,
If otherwiſe, my brothers life, ſo deare I will not bye.
Faire Dame my outward looks, my inward thoughts bewray,
If you miſtruſt, to ſearch my harte, would God you had a kaye.
If that you loue (as ſo you ſaye) the force of loue you know,
Which fealt, in conſcience you ſhould, my brother fauour ſhow.
In doubtfull warre, one priſoner ſtill, doth ſet another frée.
VVhat ſo warre ſéekes, loue vnto warre, contrary is, you ſée.
Hate foſtreth warre, loue cannot hate, then maye it couet force.
The Louer ofte ſues to his foe, and findeth no remorſe:
Then if he hap to haue a helpe, to wyn his frowarde foe,
Too kinde a foole, I will him holde, that lets ſuch vantage goe.
Well, to be ſhort, my ſelfe wyll dye, ere I my honor ſtaine,
You know my minde, leaue off to tempt, your offers are in vaine.
Bethink your ſelf, at price inough I purchaſe ſweet your loue,
Andrugios life ſuffiſ'd alone, your ſtraungenes to remoue:
The which I graunt, with any wealth that elſe you wyll require,
Who buyeth loue at ſuch a rate, payes well for his deſire.
No Promos, no, honor neuer at value maye be ſolde,
Honor farre dearer is then life, which paſſeth price of golde:
To bnie this Iuell at the full, my wife I may thée make:
For vnſure hope, that péereles pearle, I neuer will forſake:
Theſe ſutes ſeemes ſtrange at firſt I ſee, wher modeſty beares ſway,
I therfore wil ſet down my wyll, & for hir anſwer ſtaye.
Fayre Caſſandra, the iuell of my ioye,
Howe ſo in showe, my tale, ſeemes ſtraunge to thee:
The ſame well waide, thou need'ſt not be ſo coye,
Yet for to giue thee reſpite to agree.
I wyll two daies hope ſtyll of thy conſent,
VVhich if thou graunt (to cleare my clowdes of care)
Cloth'd like a Page (ſuſpect for to preuent.)
Vnto my Court, ſome night, ſweet wenche repaire.
Tyl then adue, thou theſe my words, in works perform'd ſhalt find.
Farewel my Lord, but in this ſute, you bootles waſt your wind:
Caſſandra, O moſt vnhappy, ſubiect to euerie woe,
What tōgue can tel, what thought cōceiue, what pen thy griefe can ſhow?
Whom to ſcurge, Nature, heauē & earth, do heapes of thral ordain,
Whoſe words in waſte, whoſe works are loſt, whoſe wiſhes are in vain.
That which to others cōfort yéelds, doth cauſe my heuy chéer,
I meane my beautie bréedes my bale, which many hold ſo deere.
I woulde to God that kinde elſe where, beſtowed had this blaſe,
My vertues then had wrought regard, my ſhape now giues ye gaſe:
This forme ſo Promos fiers with Loue, as wiſdom can not quench,
His hote deſire, tyll he luſt, in Venus ſeas hath drencht.
Miſtres Caſſandra, my Maſter lōgs to heare of your good ſpéed,
Poore Ganio his death-alas, fierce Fortune hath decréed:
His death: God forbyd, all his hope ſhould turne to ſuch ſucceſſe,
For Gods ſake, go and comfort him, I ſorrowe his diſtreſſe.
I néedes muſt go, although with heauy chéere.
Sir, your ſyſter Caſſandra is here.
My Caſſandra what newes, good ſiſter ſhowe?
All thinges conclude thy death Andrugio:
Prepare thy ſelfe, to hope it ware in vaine.
My death, alas what rayſed this new diſdayne?
Not Iuſtice zeale, in wicked Promos ſure:
Swéete, ſhow the cauſe, I muſt this dome indure?
If thou doſt liue I muſt my honor loſe,
Thy raunſome is, to Promos fleſhly wyll
That I do yelde: then which I rather choſe,
With torments ſharpe, my ſelfe he firſt ſhould kyll:
Thus am I bent, thou ſéeſt thy death at hand,
O would my life, would ſatiſfie his yre,
Caſſandra then, would cancell ſoone thy band.
And may it be a Iudge of his account,
Can ſpot his minde, with lawles loue or luſt?
But more, may he doome any fault with death?
When in ſuch faute, he findes himſelfe iniuſt.
Syſter, that wiſe men loue we often ſée,
And where loue rules, gainſt thornes doth reaſon ſpurne.
But who ſo loues, if he reiected be,
His paſſing loue, to péeuiſh hate will turne.
Deare ſiſter then, note how my fortune ſtands,
That Promos loue, the like is oft in vſe:
And ſith he craue, this kindneſſe, at your hands,
Thinke this, if you his pleaſure do refuſe.
I in his rage (poore wretch) ſhall ſing Peccaui.
Here are two euyls, the beſt harde to digeſt,
But where as things are driuen vnto neceſſity,
There are we byd, of both euyls chooſe the leaſt:
And of theſe euils, the leaſt, I hold is death,
To ſhun whoſe dart, we can no meane deuiſe,
Yet honor lyues, when death tath done his worſt,
Thus fame then lyfe is of farre more empriſe:
Nay Caſſandra, if thou thy ſelfe ſubmyt,
To ſaue my life, to Promos fleaſhly wyll,
Iuſtice wyll ſay, thou doſt no cryme commit:
For in forſt faultes is no intent of yll.
How ſo th'intent, is conſtrued in offence,
The Prouerbe ſaies that tenne good turnes lye dead,
And one yll deede, tenne tymes beyonde pretence,
By enuious tounges, report abrode doth ſpread:
Andrugio ſo, my fame, ſhall vallewed bee,
Diſpite wyll blaſe my crime, but not the cauſe:
And thus although I fayne would ſet thée free,
Poore wench I feare, the grype of ſlaunders pawes.
Nay ſweete ſiſter more ſlaunder would inſawe,
Your ſpotles lyfe, to reaue your brothers breath:
When you haue powre, for to enlarge the ſame,
Once in your handes, doth lye my lyfe, and death,
Way that I am, the ſelfe ſame fleſh you are,
Thinke I once gone, our houſe will goe to wrack:
Knowe forced faultes, for ſlaunder neede not care:
Looke you for blame, if I quaile through your lack.
Conſider well, my great extremitie,
If other wiſe, this doome I could reuoke:
I would not ſpare, for any ieberdye:
To free thee wench, from this ſame heauy yoke.
But ah. I ſee, elſe, no way ſaues my life.
And yet his hope, may further thy conſent,
He ſayde, he maye percaſe make thee his wife,
And t'is likelie, he can not be content
With one nights ioye: if loue he after ſeekes,
And I diſchargd, if thou aloofe then be,
Before be loſe thy ſelfe, that ſo he leekes.
No dought but he, to marryage, wyll agree.
And ſhall I ſticke to ſtoupe, to Promos wyll,
Since my brother inioyeth lyfe thereby?
No, although it doth my credit kyll,
Ere that he ſhould, my ſelfe would chuſe to dye.
My Andrugio, take comfort in diſtreſſe,
Caſſandra is wonne, thy faunſome great to paye,
Such care ſhe hath, thy thraldome to releace:
As ſhe conſentes, her honor for to ſlay.
Farewell, I muſt, my virgins weedes forſake:
And lyke a page, to Promos lewde repayre.
My good ſiſter to God I thee betake,
To whome I pray, that comforte change thy care.
Tis more then ſtraunge to ſee Lord Promos plight,
He fryſkes abought, as byrdes ware in his breech.
Euen now he ſeemes (through hope) to taſte delight,
And ſtraight (through feare) where he clawes it doth not ytch.
He muſeth now, ſtrayght wayes the man doth ſing.
(A ſight in ſooth, vnſeemely for his age:)
He longing lookes, when any newes ſhal bring,
To ſpeake with him, without there waytes a page,
O worthy wit (fyt for a Iudges head)
Vnto a man to chaunge a ſhiftles mayde,
Wyncke not on me, twas his, and not my deede:
His, nay, his rule, this Metamorphos made,
But Holla tongue, no more of this I pray,
Non bonus eſt, ludere cum ſanctis.
The quieteſt, and the thryftieſt courſe they ſay,
Is, not to checke, but prayſe great mens amys,
I finde it true, for ſoothing Promos vaine:
None lyke my ſelfe, is lykte in his conceyte,
While fauour laſt, then good, I fiſt for gaine:
(For Grace wyll not byte alwayes at my bayte)
And as I wiſh, at hande, good Fortune, ſee:
Here coms Phallax, and Gripax, but what's this,
As good, as fayre handſell, God graunt it bee:
The knaues bring a Woman, Coram nobis.
Teare not my clothes my friends, they coſt more thē you are a ware,
Tuſh, ſoon you ſhal haue a blew gown. for theſe take you no care
If ſhe tooke thy offer poore knaue, thy wife would ſtarue we cold:
Well ſyr, whipping ſhall kéepe you warme.
What meanes theſe knaues to ſcolde.
Maiſter Phallax, we finde you in good time,
A VVoman here, we haue brought afore you:
One to be chargde with many a wanton crime.
Which tryall will, with proofe inough finde true:
A knaue of hirs, we haue ſtayed likewiſe,
Both to be vſ'd, as you ſhall vs aduiſe.
What call you hir name?
Lamia.
Faire Dame, hereto what do you ſaye?
Worſhipfull Sir, my ſelfe I happy reake,
VVith patience that my aunſwer you will heare:
Theſe naughtie men, theſe wordes on mallice ſpeake,
And for this cauſe, yll wyll to me they beare.
I ſcornde to kéepe, their mindes with money playe,
I meane to kéepe, my life from open ſhame,
Yea, if I lyu'd, as lewdlie as they ſaye:
But I that knewe, my ſelfe vnworthy ſhame:
Shrunk not, to come vnto my triall nowe.
My tale is tolde, conceyue as lyketh you.
My friends, what proofe haue you againſt this dame?
Speake on ſure ground, leaſt that you reape the ſhame:
The wrong is great, and craues great recompence.
To touch her honeſt name, without offence.
All Iulio Syr doth ryng of her lewd lyfe:
In deede ſhe is knowne for an ydle huſwife.
He lyes, ſhe is occupied day and night.
To ſweare againſt her is there any wight?
No, not preſent, but if you do detayne her.
There wilbe found by oth, ſome that wyll ſtayne her,
I ſee ſhe is then on ſuſpition ſtayde:
Whoſe fawltes to ſearch, vpon my charge is layde,
From charge of her I therfore will ſet you frée,
My ſelfe will ſearch her faultes if any be,
A Gods name you may depart.
God bwy Syr.
In ſuch ſhares as this, henceforth I will begin,
For all is his, in his clawes, that commeth in.
Fayre Lamia, ſince that we are alone,
I plainely wyll diſcourſe to you my minde,
I thinke you not to be ſo chaſt a one,
As that your lyfe, this fauor ought to fynde:
No force, for that, ſince that you ſcot free goe,
Vnpuniſhed, whoſe life is iudged yll:
Yet thinke (through loue) this grace the Iudge doth ſhow,
And loue with loue ought to be anſwered ſtyll.
Indeede I graunt (although I could reproue,
Their lewde Complayntes, with goodneſſe of my lyfe)
Your curteſy, your detter doth me proue,
In that you tooke▪ my honeſt fame in ſtryfe,)
My aunſwere for diſcharge of their report:
For which good turne, I at your pleaſure reſt,
To worke amends, in any honeſt ſort:
Away with honeſty your anſweare then in ſooth,
Fyts me as iumpe as a pudding a Friars mouth,
He is a craftie childe, dally, but do not.
Tuſh, I warrant thee, I am not ſo whot,
Your wordes are too harde Sir, for me to conſter.
Then to be ſhort, your rare bewtie my hart hath wounded ſo,
As (ſaue your loue, become my leach) I ſure ſhall die with woe.
I ſee no ſigne of death, in your face to appeare,
Tis but ſome vſuall qualme you haue, pitifull Dames to fears.
Faire Lamia, truſt me I faine not, betimes beſtow ſom grace.
Well, I admit it ſo, onelie to argue in your caſe.
I am maried, ſo that to ſet your loue on me were vaine:
It ſuffiſeth me, that I may your ſecrete friend remaine.
A holie Hoode, makes not a Frier deuoute,
He will playe at ſmall game, or he ſitte out.
Though for pleaſure, or to proue me, theſe profers you do moue,
You are to wiſe, to haſſarde life, vpon my yeelding loue:
The man is painde with preſent death, that vſeth wanton pleaſure.
To ſcape ſuch paine, wiſe men, theſe ioyes, without ſuſpect cā meaſure,
Furthermore, I haue ben (my Girle) a Lawier to too lōg:
If at a pinche, I cannot wreſt the Law from right to wrong.
If lawe you do profeſſe. I gladlie craue,
In a cauſe or two, your aduiſe to haue.
To reſolue you, you ſhall commaunde my ſkyll,
Wherfore like friendes, lets common in good wyll,
You are a merie man, but leaue to ieaſt,
To morrowe night, if you will be my Geaſt:
At my poore houſe, you ſhall my cauſes knowe,
For good cauſe, which I meane not here to ſhowe.
Willinglie, and for that, haſte calles me hence,
My ſute tyll then, ſhall remaine in ſuſpence:
Farewell Clyent, to morrow looke for me:
Your good welcome Sir, your beſt cheere will be.
I tolde you earſt, the nature of Phallax,
Money, or faire Women, workes him as waxe:
And yet I muſt commend your ſober cheere,
You tolde your tale, as if a Saint you were.
Well (in ſeeréete, be it ſayde) how ſo I ſéemd diuine,
I feared once, a blew gowne, would haue bene my ſhrine.
But nowe that paine is flead, and pleaſure kéepes his holde,
I knowe that Phallax will, my Fame henceforth vpholde:
To entertaine which Geaſt, I will ſome dayntie chéere prepare,
Yet ere I go, in pleaſant Song, I meane to purge my care.
❧ A due poore care, adue,
Go, cloye ſome helples wretche:
My life, to make me rue,
Thy forces do not ſtretche.
Thy harbor, is the harte,
Whom wrong, hath wrapt, in woe:
But wrong, doth take my parte,
VVith cloke of right in shoe.
My faultes, inquirie ſcape,
At them the Iudges winke:
Thoſe for my fall that gape,
To ſhowe my lewdneſſe ſhrinke.
Then ſilly care go packe,
Thou art no Geaſt for mee:
I haue, and haue, no lacke,
And lacke, is ſhrowde for thee.
Vnhappy wretche, I bluſh my ſelfe to ſée,
Apparelled thus monſtrous to my kinde:
But oh, my weedes, wyll with my fault agrée,
When I haue pleaſde, lewde Promos fleſhlie minde.
What ſhall I doo, go proffer what he ſought?
Or on more ſute, ſhall I giue my conſent?
The beſt is ſure, ſince this muſt néedes be wrought:
I go, and ſhowe, neede makes me to his bent.
My fluddes of teares, from true intent which floe.
Maye quenche his luſt, or ope his muſled eyen,
To ſée that I deſerue to be his wife:
Though now conſtrainde to be his Concubine.
But ſo, or no, I muſt the vent er giue,
No daunger feares the wight, prickt foorth by néede:
And thus lyke one more glad to dye, then lyue,
I forewarde ſet, God graunt me well to ſpeede.
With my Miſtreſſe, the worlde is chaunged well,
She fearde of late, of whipping cheere to ſmell:
And nowe againe, both gallant, freſh and gaye.
Who in Iulio flauntes it out, lyke Lamia?
A luckie friende (yea, one that beareth ſwaye)
Is nowe become, a proppe, of ſuch a ſtaye▪
To hir good name, as who is he dare ſaye:
That Lamia doeth offende, nowe any waye?
This, hir good friende, wyll be hir Geaſt this night,
And that he maye in his welcome delyght.
To market I. in haſte, am ſent to buye,
The beſt cheare, that, I faſten on my eye.
By proofe I finde, no reaſon cooles deſire,
Caſſandraes ſute, ſuffiſed to remoue
My lewde requeſt, but contrarie, the fire,
Hir teares inflam'd, of luſt, and filthy Loue.
And hauing thus, the conqueſt in my handes,
No prayer ſeru'de to worke reſtraint in mee:
But needes I woulde vntye the precious bandes,
Of this fayre Dames ſpotles Virginitie.
The ſpoyle was ſweete, and wonne euen as I woulde,
And yet vngainde, tyll I had giuen my trothe,
To marie hir, and that hir brother ſhoulde
Be free from death, all which I bounde with oathe:
It reſteth nowe (vnleſſe I wrong hir much)
I keepe my vowe: and ſhall Andrugio lyue?
Such grace woulde mee, with vnindifferencie tuch.
To pardon him, that dyd commit a Rape,
To ſet him free, I to Caſſandra ſware:
But no man elſe, is priuie to the ſame,
And rage of Loue, for thouſande oathes nyll ſpare,
More then are kept, when gotten is the game.
Well, what I ſayde, then Louer like I ſayde,
Nowe reaſon ſayes, vnto thy credite looke:
And hauing well, the circumſtaunces wayde,
I finde I muſt, vnſweare the oathe I tooke:
But double wrong, I ſo ſhould do Caſſandra.
No force for that, my might, commaundeth right,
Hir preuie manne, hir open cryes will ſtaye:
Or if not ſo, my frowning will hir fright,
And thus ſhall rule, conceale my filthy deede.
Nowe foorthwith, I wyll to the Gayler ſende,
That ſecretelie Andrugio he behead,
Whoſe head he ſhall, with theſe ſame wordes commend.
Andrugio, as you loue our liues, forthwith poſt you away.
For Gods ſake to no lyuing friend, your ſafety yet bewraye:
The prouerbe ſayth, two may kéepe counſell if that one be gone.
Aſſure thy ſelfe, moſt faithful friend, I wylbe knowne to none:
To none alas, I ſée my ſcape yéeldes mee but ſmall reléefe,
Caſſandra, and Polina wyll deſtroye themſelues, with greefe:
Through thought yt I am dead: they dead, to liue what helpeth me?
Leaue of theſe plaints of ſmal auaile, thank God yt you are free,
For God it was, within my mind, that did your ſafety moue,
And that ſame God, no doubt wyl worke for your and their behoue:
Moſt faithful friend, I hope that God, wyl worke as you do ſay,
And therfore, to ſome place vnknowne, I wyl my ſelfe conuaye.
Gayler, fare wel: for thy good deede, I muſt remayne thy debter,
In meane whyle yet receyue this gyft, tyll fortune ſends a better:
God bwy ſyr, but kepe your mony, your need you do not know.
I pas not now for fortuns threats, yea though hir force ſhe ſhow
And therefore ſtyck not to receyue this ſmale reward in part.
I wyll not ſure, ſuch proffers leaue, tys time you doe depart.
Since ſo thou wilt, I wylbe gone adue tyl fortune ſmile.
Syr, fare you wel, I wyl not fayle to pray for you the while.
Well. I am glad, that I haue ſent him gone,
For by my fayth, I lyu'd in perlous feare:
And yet God wot, to ſee his bytter mone,
When he ſhould dye, would force a man forbeare,
From harming him, if pitty might beare ſway:
But ſee how God hath wrought for his ſafety?
A dead mans head, that ſuffered th'other day,
Makes him thou'ht dead, through out the citie.
Such a iuſt, good and righted is God is he:
Although awhyle he let the wicked raygne,
Yet he releeues the wretch in miſery,
And in his pryde, he throwes the tyraunt downe.
I vſe theſe wordes, vpon this onely thought,
That Promos long his rod can not eſcape:
Who hath in thought, a wylfull murder wrought,
Who hath in act performd a wicked rape,
Gods wyll be done, who well Andrugio ſpeede,
Once well I hope, to heare of his good lucke,
For God thou knoweſt my conſcience dyd this déede,
And no deſire of any worldly muck,
In good ſweete ſooth, I feare I ſhalbe ſhent,
It is ſo long: ſince I to market went,
But truſt me, wyldfowle are ſuch coſtly geare,
Specially, woodcoks, out of reaſon deare,
That this houre, I haue the market bett,
To driue a bargayne to my moſt profyt:
And in the end I chaunſt to light on one,
Hyt me as pat as a pudding Pope Ione,
Other market maydes▪ pay downe for their meate,
But that I haue bought, on my ſcore is ſet.
Well fare credit when mony runneth low,
Marry yet, Butchers, the which do credit ſo.
(As much Good meate, as they kyll) may perchaunce,
Be glad and fayne at heryng cobs to daunce.
What force I that? euery man ſhyft for one,
For if I ſtarue, let none my fortune mone,
Softe Dalia, a woorde with you, I praye.
What friend, Grimbal, welcome as I maye ſaye:
Sayſt thou me ſo, then kyſſe me for acquaintaunce.
If I lyke your manhoode, I may do ſo perchaunce.
Bate me an aſe, quoth Boulton, Tuſh, your minde I know:
Ah ſyr, you would, be like, let my Cocke Sparrowes goe.
I warrant thee Grimball.
Laye off handes Dalia.
You powte me, if that you got, my Pudding awaye:
Nay good ſweete, honny Grimball, this Pudding giue mée.
Iche were as good geete hir, for ſhe wyll hate, I ſee.
Well, my nown good harte roote, I freelie giue thee this,
Vpon condition, that thou giue me a kys.
Nay, but firſt waſh your lippes, with ſweete water you ſhall,
Why ych was ryte now, for my Pudding, hony ſweet Grimbal:
Well Dalia, you will floute ſo long, tyll (though I ſaye)
With kindneſſe you wyll caſt a proper handſome man away,
VVherfore ſoote Conny, euen a lyttle ſpurte:
Laye off handes Sir:
Good do not byte, for ych meane thee no hurte:
Come off Pyggeſnie, prefarre me not a iote,
VVhat woulde the good foole haue,
VVhy, you woot whote.
Hearke in your eare:
You ſhall commaunde, ſo proper a man ye are.
That for your ſake, I wyll not ſticke to ware:
A blew Caſſocke, during my lyfe for ſoothe,
Mary for my ſake, I woulde be verie lothe:
So goodlie a handſome man, ſhould loſe his head.
Nay, for my head, care not a Tinkers torde,
For ſo God iudge me, and at one bare worde:
Yle loſe my death, yea, and my great browne Cowe,
I loue you ſo filthilie: law ye nowe.
Thou ſayeſt valiantlie, nowe ſing, aſwell too:
And thou ſhalt quicklie knowe, what I meane to doo.
Yes by Gogs foote, to pleaſure thee, ych ſhall,
Both ſyng, ſpring, fight and playe, the dewl and all.
O luſtilie:
Come ſmack me, come ſmack me, I long for a ſmouch,
Go pack thee, go pack thee, thou filthie fine ſlouch.
Leard howe I loue thee,
This can not moue mee:
Why pretie Pygſney, my harte, and my honny?
Becauſe goodman Hogsface, you woe without mony.
I lacke mony, chy graunt,
Then Grimball auaunt.
Cham yong ſweete hart, and feate, come kyſſe me for loue,
Crokeſhanke, your Iowle is to great, ſuch lyking to moue.
What meane you by this?
To leaue thee by gys.
Firſt ſmack me, firſt ſmack, I dye for a ſmouch,
Go pack thee, go pack thee, thou filthy fine ſlouch.
Dalia, arte thou gone? what wolt ſerue me ſoe?
O God, cham readie to raye my ſelfe for woe:
Be valiaunt Grimball, kyll thy ſelfe man?
Nay, hum Ladie, I will not by Saint Anne.
Ich haue bearde my great Grandſier ſaye:
Maide will ſaye naye, and take it: and ſo ſhe maye,
And therfore chyll, to Miſtreſſe Lamia,
With theſe Puddings, and Cock Sparowes, by and by:
And in the darke, againe, ych wyll hir trye.
I maruell much what worketh ſo my Lord Promos vnreſt,
He fares as if a thouſand Deuils, were gnawing in his breſt:
There is ſure ſome worme of griefe, that doth his conſcience nip,
For ſince Andrugio loſt his head, he hath hung downe the lippe.
And truth to ſay, his fault is ſuch as well may greue his mynd,
The Deuill himſelfe could not haue vſde, a practiſe more vnkind.
This is once. I loue a woman, for my life, as well as be,
But (fayre dames) with her that loues mée. I deale well with, truſt mée.
Well, leaue I now my Lord Promos, his owne deedes to aunſwere,
Lamia I know lookes, and double lookes, when I come to ſupper:
I thought as much: ſée, to ſéeke mée, heare coms her Aple ſquier.
O that I could find Maſter Phallax. the meat burnes at ye fire:
And by your leaue. Andrugios death, doth make my miſtris ſweate.
How now Rosko?
Iſt you ſyr? my Miſtris doth intreate,
That with all ſpeede, you worſhip will come away to ſupper:
The meate and all is ready to ſet vpon the borde ſyr.
Gramercy for thy paynes, I was euen. comming to her.
You are the welcomſt man alyue to her I know,
And truſt mee at your commaundement ren: ayneth poore Rosko.
It is honeſtly ſayd, but now tell mée,
What quality haſt, that I may vſe thee?
I am a Barbour, and when you pleaſe ſyr,
Call (and ſpare not) for a caſt of roſe water.
But heare me, canſt thou heale a gréene wound well?
Yea, gréene and ould.
Then thy beſt were to dwel,
In ſome vſuall place or ſtréete, where, through frayes,
Thou mayſt be ſet a worke with wounds alwayes.
I thanke my Miſtris I haue my hands full,
To trym gentelmen of her acquayntaunce:
And I truſt Syr, if that your worſhip chaunce.
To haue néede of my helpe, I ſhall earne your mony.
Afore an other.
That thou ſhalt truly:
But ſyrra, where dwels Lamia?
Euen heare ſyr, enter I pray.
That I wyl ſure, if that my way be cleare.
Yes ſir, her doores be open all the yeare.
Polina curſt, what dame a lyue hath cauſe of griefe lyke thée.
Who (wonne by loue) haſt yeeld the ſpoyle of thy virginity?
And he for to repayre thy fame, to marry thée, that vowde,
Is done to death for firſt offence, the ſecond mends not lowde.
Great ſhame redounds to thée, O Loue, in leauing vs in thrall:
Andrugio and Polina both, in honoryng thée did fall.
Thou ſo dydſt witch our wits, as we from reaſon ſtrayed quight,
Prouockt by thee, we dyd refuſe, no vauntage of delight:
Delight, what did I ſay? nay death, by raſh and fowle abuſe,
Alas I ſhame to tell thus much, though loue doe worke excuſe,
So that (fayre dames) from ſuch conſent, my accydents of barme,
Forewarneth you, to kéepe aloofe though loue your harts do arme,
But ah Polina, whether runnes thy words into aduiſe,
When others harmes, inforſt by loue, could neuer make thée wiſe.
The cauſe is plaine, for that in loue, no reaſon ſtands in ſtude,
And reaſon is the onely meane, that others harmes we dreade.
Then, that the world hereafter may, to loue inferre my yll,
Andrugios Tombe with dayly teares, Polina worſhip wyll.
And further more I vowde, whylſt life in mée doth foſter breth,
No one ſhall vaunt of conquered loue, by my Andrugios death,
Theſe ſhameful weedes, which forſt I were that men my fault may know:
Whilſt that I liue, ſhall ſhow I morne for my Andrugio,
I wyll not byde the ſharpe aſſaultes, from ſugred words I ſent.
I wyll not truſt to careles othes, which often wyn conſent:
I wyll cut off occaſions all, which hope of myrth may moue,
With ceaſeles teares yle quench each cauſe, ye kindleth coles of loue:
And thus tyl death Polina wyll eſtraunge her ſelfe from ioy,
Andrugio, to reward thy loue which dyd thy life deſtroy.
A Syr, in fayth, the caſe is altred quight,
My miſtris late that liued in wretched plight:
Byds care adue and euery cauſe of woe,
The fee is fled, which made her ſorrow ſo,
Maſ Phallax ſo vnder props her fame,
As none for lyfe dare now her lewdnes blame,
I feare (nay hope) ſhe hath bewicht him ſo,
As haulfe his brybes, vnto her ſhare will goe:
No force for that, who others doth deceyue,
Deſerues himſelfe, lyke meaſure to receyue.
Well, leaue I Lamia, for her ſelfe to pray,
Better then I can ſhowe, who knowes the way:
It ſtands me on, for my poore ſelfe to ſhyfte,
And I haue founde a helpe at a dead lyfte:
My ould friende Grimbals purce, with pence is full,
And if I empty it not, Dalia wull.
The ſlauering foole, what he can rap and rend,
(He loues her ſo) vpon the fylth wyll ſpend:
But bye your leaue, yle barre her of this match,
My net and all is ſet, the foole to catch.
Forſooth before his amorous ſute he moue,
He muſt be trimd to make her more to loue.
And in good ſooth, the world ſhal hardly fall,
But that he ſhalbe waſht, pould, ſhau'd and all:
And ſée the luck, the foole is faſt I know,
In that with Rowke he doth ſo ſadly goe.
God bores, as ſayſt, when ſomewhat handſome ch'am,
I fayth ſhe wyll come off for very ſhame:
Yea without doubt for I ſweare by ſaynt Anne:
My ſelfe loues you, you are ſo cleane a young man.
Nay, thou woult ſay ſo, when my face is fayre waſht,
Good luck a Gods name, the wodcocke is maſht.
And who Barbes ye Grimball.
A dapper knaue, one Rosko.
Well letherface, we ſhall haue you Aſſe ere you goe.
I know him not, is he a deaft barber?
O, yea, why he is Miſtris Lamias powler.
And looke ſyrra, yen is the lyttell knaue.
How doſt Rosko?
Whope, my eye ſight God ſaue,
What ould Grimball, welcome, ſit you downe heare, Boye?
Anon.
Bay leaues in warme water, quick, bring cleane geare,
Strayght.
As thou ſayd'ſt Grymball, this is a feate knaue indeede.
How ſay'ſyr? oyntments for a ſcab▪ do you neede?
Scab, ſcuruy Iack, ile ſet you a worke Syr.
Nay gogs foote, good nowe, no more of this ſtur.
I fayth Barber, I wyll pyck your teeth ſtraight.
Nay, to pick my purſe, I feare thou doſt wayght,
Yea, gogs hart,
Nay, gogs foote,
Nowe come Ruffen.
Leaue, if you be men,
Heare ye me nowe? be friendes, and by my trothe,
Chill ſpende a whole quarte of Ale on you bothe.
Well, maſſe Grimball, I lytle thought I wus,
You woulde a brought a knaue, to vie mee thus.
Why, knoweſt him not? why it is luſtie Rowke.
A ſtrong theefe, I warrant him by his looke.
Go to Barber, no more, leaſt Copper you catch.
What? wilt giue thy noſe awaye? beware that match.
For chy ſee no Copper, vnleſt be theare.
Maſter, here is delicate water, & cleane geare.
Well, to quiet my houſe, and for Grimbals ſake,
If it pleaſeth you, as friendes, we handes will ſhake.
I, I, do ſo:
And for his ſake I agrée.
Well then, that we may drinke, ſtraight wayes waſh mée.
Good ſyr, here's water as ſweete as a Roſe,
Nowe whyles I waſh, your eyes harde you muſt cloſe.
Thus?
Harder yet:
O, thus:
Yea marry, ſo.
Howe ſyrra, you knowe what you haue to doe:
Winke harde. Grimball.
Yes, yes, I ſhall.
Heare's the tooth pick, and all.
Departe then tyll I call?
Verie will ſyr, your face, is gayly cleane,
Were your teeth nowe pickt, you maye kiſſe a queane.
Sayſt thou mee ſo? Good nowe diſpatch and awaye?
I euen fyſſell, vntyll I ſmouch Dalia.
O doo you ſo? I am right glad you tell.
I elſe had thought, tad bene your teethe dyd ſmell.
O Lorde, gogs foote, you picke me to the quicke:
Quiet your ſelfe, your teeth are furred thicke.
O, oh no more, O God, I ſpattell blood.
I haue done, ſpyt out, this doth you much good: Boye?
Anon.
Bring the drinke in the Porringer.
To gargalis his teeth.
It is here ſyr.
Waſh your feeth with this, good maiſter Grimball.
I am poyſoned, ah, it is bytter gall:
Eate theſe Comfyts, to ſweeten your mouth with all.
Yea mary ſyr, theſe are gay ſugred geare.
Their ſweetneſſe ſtraight, wyll make you ſtinke I feare:
VVell nowe, what muſt I paye, that chy were gone?
VVhat you wyll.
Sayeſt me ſo? O cham vndone.
Howe nowe Grimball?
O Leard, my Purſe is cutte.
VVhen? where?
Nowe, here.
Boye, let the doore be ſhutte,
If it be here, we wyll ſtraight wayes ſee,
Where's he, that came with you?
I can not tell.
What is hee?
I knowe not.
Where doth he dwell?
O Leard, I ken not I.
You haue done well.
This knaue, your pence, in his pocket hath purſt:
Let's ſeeke him out.
Nay harke, I muſt neades firſt:
O Learde, Learde, cham ſicke, my belly akes, too, too:
Thou lookſt yll: well, yle tell thee what to doo.
Since thou art ſo ſicke, ſtraight wayes, get thée home,
To finde this Iacke, my ſelfe abroade wyll rome.
The rather, for that he playde the knaue with mée,
Cham ſicke in déede, and therfore ych thanke thée:
I ſée ſometime, the blinde man hits a Crowe,
He maye thanke me, that he is plagued ſoe:
Well, well, Dalia, the Lone ych bare to thée,
Hath made me ſicke, and pickt my purſe from mée.
A, is he gone? a foole company him,
In good ſoothe Sir, this match fadged frim:
Well, I wyll trudge, to finde my tellewe Rowke,
To ſhare the price, that my deuiſe hath tooke.
The heauy chardge, that Nature bindes me too,
I haue perform'd, ingrau'd my Brother is:
O woulde to God (to eaſe, my ceaſeles woo)
My wretched bones, intombed were with his.
But O in vaine, this booteleſſe wiſh, I vſe,
I, poore I muſt lyue in ſorrowe, ioynde with ſhame:
And ſhall he lyue? that dyd vs both abuſe?
And quench through rule, the coles of iuſt reuenge?
O: no, I wyll nowe hye me to the King:
To whome, I wyll, recount my wretched ſtate,
Lewde Promos rape, my Brothers death and all:
And (though with ſhame, I maye this tale relate)
To prooue that force, enforced me to fall:
When I haue ſhowne, Lorde Promos fowle miſdeedes,
This knife foorthwith, ſhall ende my woe and ſhame,
My gored harte, which at his feete then bleedes,
To ſcorge his faultes, the King wyll more inflame.
In déedes to doo, that I in woordes pretende,
I nowe aduiſe, my iourney, to the King:
Yet ere I go, as Swans ſing at their ende,
In ſolemne Song, I meane my knell to ryng.
SIth fortune thwart, doth croſſe my ioyes with care,
Sith that my bliſſe, is chaungde to bale by fate:
Sith frowarde chaunce, my dayes in woe doth weare,
Sith I alas, muſt mone without a mate.
I wretch haue vowde, to ſing both daye and night,
O ſorrowe ſlaye, all motions of delight.
¶ Come grieſlie griefe, torment this harte of mine,
Come deepe diſpaire, and ſtoppe my loathed breath.
Come wretched woe, my thought of hope to pine:
Come cruell care, preferre my ſute to death.
Death, ende my wo, which ſing both daye and night,
O ſorrowe ſlaye, all motions of delight.