PRomiſe is debt, and I my vowe haue paſt,
Andrugios Tombe, to waſh with daylie teares:
Which Sacrifice (although God wot in waſte)
I wyll performe, my Alter is of cares.
Of fuming ſighes, my offring incenſe is,
My pittious playntes, in ſteede of Prayers are:
Yea, woulde to God in penaunce of my mys.
I with the reſt, my loathed lyfe might ſhare.
But O in vaine, I wiſh this welcomde ende,
Death is to ſlowe, to ſlaye the wretched wight:
And all to ſoone, he doth his forces bende,
To wounde their hartes, which wallowe in delight.
Yet in my care, ſtyll goes, my paſſing Bell,
So ofte as I. Andrugios death doo minde:
So ofte as men, with poynted fingers tell,
Their friendes, my faultes, which by my weedes they finde.
But O the cauſe, with Death, which threates me moſt,
I wyſh to dye, I dye through wretched woe,
My dying harte, deſires to yéelde the ghoſt,
My traunces ſtraunge, a preſent death foreſhowe.
But as the reede doth bow at euery blaſt.
To breake the ſame, when rowgheſt ſtormes lackes might,
So wretched I, with euery woe doe waſte,
Yet care wants force, to kyll my hart out ryght.
O gratious God and is my gilt ſo great.
As you the ſame, with thouſand deathes muſt wreake?
You will it ſo, elſe care I could intreate?
With halfe theſe woes, my thryd of lyfe, to breake.
But what meanſt thou Polina, moſt accurſt,
To muſe, why God, this pennaunce ioynes thée to
Whoſe correction, although we take at worſt,
To our great good he doth the ſame beſtow.
So that, ſyth gréſe can not relyue my friend,
Syth ſcorching ſyghes my ſorrowes cannot drye:
Syth care himſelfe, lackes force my lyfe to ende.
Syth ſtyll I lyue that euery howre doe dye:
Syth mighty God appoyntes my pennaunce ſo,
In mornefull ſong I wyll my patience ſhow,
A Myd my bale, the lightning ioy, that pyning care doth bring,
VVith patience cheares my heauy hart, as in my vvoes I ſing,
I knovv my Gilt, I feele my ſcurge: my eaſe is death I ſee:
And care (I fynde) by peecemeale vveares, my hart to ſet mee free.
O care, my comfort and refuge, feare not to worke thy vvyll,
VVith patience I thy corfiues byde, feede on my life thy fyll.
Thy appetyte vvith ſyghes and teares, I dayly vvyl procure.
And wretched I, wil vaile to death, throw when thou wilt thy Lure.
I Haue at length (though wéery come in troth)
Obtaynd a fight of Iulios ſtately walles,
A Kings meſſage, can not be done with floth:
Whome he bids goé, muſt runne through myre and dyrt,
And I am ſent to Lord Promos in poſt.
To tel him that the king wyll ſée him ſtrayght.
But much I feare that Promos néedes not boſt:
Of any gayne by his ſoueraygnes receyte,
But Holla tongue of lauyſh ſpéeche beware,
Though ſubiects oft in Princes meaning prye,
They muſt their words, and not their myndes declare.
Vnto which courſe I wyll my tongue apply,
Lord Promos ſhall my princes comming know.
My prince himſelfe, the cauſe thereof ſhall ſhow.
Iſt poſſible that my Miſtris Lamia,
Ouer the ſhooes ſhould byn loue with Phallax?
Why by Ieſ as ſhe her ſelfe doth ſaye,)
With pure good ioyll, her harte doth melt lyke waxe:
And this I am ſure, euery howre they themſelues,
By their ſweete ſelues, or by their letters greete,
But the ſporte is to ſee the louing elues,
Byll together when they in ſecret meete.
She lowres, he lauffes ſhe ſyghes threwe pure loue.
Nay, nay, ſayes he (good pugges) no more of this:
Well, ſayes ſhee, and wéepes, my griefe you do not proue.
Then ſtrayght this ſtorme is cheared with a kys,
And then a both ſides, three wordes and a ſmouch:
Within hir eare, then whiſpereth this ſlouch,
And by the way he ſtumbleth on her lyppes,
Thus eyther ſtryues moſt louing ſignes to ſhow,
Much good doo it them, ſyth they are both content,
Once I am ſure, how ſo the game doth goe,
I haue no cauſe their lyking to repent:
I ſyldome doe betweene them meſſage beare,
But that I haue an Item in the hande,
Well, I muſt trudge to doe a certaine chare,
Which, take I tyme, cocke for my gayne doth ſtand.
Diſpatch Dowſon, vp with the frame quickly,
So ſpace your roomes, as the nyne worthyes may,
Be ſo inſtauld, as beſt may pleaſe the eye.
Very good, I ſhall:
Nay ſoft Dowſon, ſtay:
Let your man at ſaynt Annes croſſe, out of hande,
Ereckt a ſtage, that the Wayghts in ſight may ſtande.
Wyll you ought elſe?
Soft awhyle, let mée ſée,
On Ieſus gate, the fowre vertues I trow,
Appoynted are to ſtand:
I ſyr, they are ſo.
Wel, then about your charge, I wyll fore ſée,
The Confort of Muſick, well plaſt to be.
I am gone ſyr.
Heare you maiſter Phallax?
The Wardens of the Marchantaylers are.
Where (with themſelues) they ſhall their Pageaunt place?
With what ſtrange ſhowes, doo they their Pageaunt graces
They haue Hercules, of Monſters conqueryng,
Huge great Grants, in a foreſt fighting,
With Lyons, Beares, VVolues, Apes, Foxes, and Grayes,
Baiards, Brockes. &c.
O woudrons frayes,
Marry ſyr ſince they are prouided thus,
Out of their wayes, God kéepe Maiſter Pediculus.
You are pleſaunt ſyr, but with ſpéede I pray,
You aunſwere mée, I was charged not to ſtay.
Becauſe I know, you haue all things currant,
They ſhall ſtand where they ſhal no viewers want:
How ſay you to the ende of Ducke Alley?
There all the beggers in the towne wilbe.
O, moſt attendaunce is, where beggers are,
Farewell, away.
I wyll your wyll declare.
This geare fadgeth now, that theſe fellowes peare,
Friendes where waight you?
In Ieſus ſtréete to keepe a paſſadge cleare,
That the King and his trayne, may paſſe with eaſe.
O, very good,
Ought elſe Syr, do you pleaſe?
No, no: about your charge.
We are gone:
A ſyr, heare is ſhort knowledge, to entertayne a kyng,
But O, O, quid non pecunia? yea, at a dayes warning?
The king in prouiſion that thought to take vs tardy,
As if we had a yeare bene warnd, ſhall by his welcome ſée:
I haue yet one chare to do: but ſoft, heare is Rotko,
I muſt néedes delyuer him a meſſadge before I goe.
I ſayth, I haue noble newes for Lamia,
Nay ſoft, friend Rosko, take myne in your way.
Mayſter Phallax, Oſyd I cry you mercy.
Rosko with ſpeede tell thy Miſtris from mée,
The King ſtraight wayes wyll come to the Cytie:
In whoſe great trayne there is a company,
Within her houſe with moe ſhall mery be,
Therefore, for my ſake, wyll her to foreſée,
To welcome them, that nothing wanting be,
This is all I wyll, for want of leyſure.
I wyll not fayle ſyr, to ſhow your pleaſure:
Mary, in fayth, theſe newes falles iumpe with the reſt,
They ſhalbe welcome and fare of the beſt:
But although they well fyll their bodyes thus,
Their purſes will be dryuen to a non plus:
No force a whyt, each pleaſure hath his payne,
Better the purce then body ſtarue of wayne.
Well, I wyll trudge, my welcome newes to tell,
And then abroade, good company to ſmell.
Caſſandra, we draw neare vnto the Towne.
So that I wyll that you from vs depart:
Tyll further of our pleaſure you doe heare.
Yet reſt aſſur'd, that wycked Promos,
Shall abide ſuch puniſhment, as the world,
Shall hould mée iuſt, and cleare thee of offence.
Dread ſoueraigne, as you wyl, Caſſandra goeth hence.
I playnely ſee, it tendes to great behoue,
That Prynces oft doo vayle their eares to heare,
The Miſers playnt: for though they doe appoynt,
Such as they thynke will Iuſtice execute,
Aucthority is ſuch a commaunder,
As, where as men by office beareth ſway,
If they their rule by conſcience meaſure not,
The poore mans ryght is ouercome by might.
If loue or hate from Iuſtice leade the Iudge,
Then money ſure may ouer rule the caſe.
Thus one abuſe is cauſe of many moe:
And therefore none in Iudges ought to be,
How Rulers wrong, fewe tales are tould the King:
The reaſon is, their power keepes in awe
Such men as haue great cauſe for to complayne.
If Caſſandra her goodes, nay, lyfe preferd,
Before reuenge of Promos trechery:
I had not knowne, his deteſtable rape,
The which he forſt to ſaue her brothers lyfe.
And furthermore, Andrugios raunſome payde,
I had not knowne be put him vnto death:
For when (good ſoule) ſhe had this treaſon tould.
Through very ſhame her honour ſo was ſpoyld:
She drewe her knyfe to wound her ſelfe to death.
Whoſe pyſious plyght, my hart prouockt to wrath,
At Promos wyles:
So that to vſe undifferency to both,
Euen in the place where all theſe wronges were none:
My ſelfe am come, to ſyt vpon the cauſe.
But ſee where Promos and the Mayor waight,
To welcome mee with great ſolemnity:
With cheereful ſhowe I ſhadowe wyll the hate,
I beare to him for his inſolency:
Perhaps I may learne more of his abuſe,
Whereby the more his puniſhment may be.
Come my Lords to the Towne haſte we apace:
We all are preſt, to wayght vpon your Grace:
Renowned King, lo here your faithful ſubiects preaſt to ſhow
The loyall duetie, which (in ryght) they to your highneſſe owe.
Your preſence, cheares all ſorts of vs: yet ten times more we ioye,
You thinke vs ſtoarde, our warning ſhort, for to receyue a Roye.
Our wyll, is ſuch, as ſhall ſupplie, I truſt in vs all want,
And where good wyll the welcome geues, prouiſion ſyld is ſcant.
Loe, this is all: yea, for vs all, that I in wordes beſtowe,
Your Maieſtie, our further zeale, in ready deedes ſhall knowe.
And firſt, dreade King, I render you, the ſwoorde of Iuſtice heare,
Which as your Liuetenant I truſt, vprightlie I dyd heare.
Promos, the good report, of your good gouernment I heare,
Or at the leaſt, the good conceyte, that towards you I beare.
To incourage you the more, in Iuſtice to perſeauer,
Is the chéefe cauſe. I dyd addreſſe, my Progreſſe heather.
I thanke your Highneſſe.
Renowned King, our ready wylles to ſhowe,
In your behalfe, our goodes (nay lyues) to ſpende:
In all our names, I fréelie here beſtowe
On your Highnes, this Purſe: vnto this ende,
To po your moſt Royall Maieſtie,
In all our wealth, therto bounde by duetie.
Your great good wyls, and gyfts with thanks I take:
But kéepe you ſtyll, your goodes, to do you good.
It is inough, and all that I do craue,
If néedes compels for your and our ſafety,
That you in part your proffers large performe:
And for this time as outward ſhowes make proofe,
It is inough (and all that I deſire)
That your harts and tongues (alyke) byd me welcome.
Lord preſerue your Maieſty.
Forewards my Lordes.
The match goes harde, which rayſeth no mans gaine,
The vertue rare, that none to vice maye wreaſt:
And ſure, the Lawe, that made me late complaine:
Allureth me, many a wanton geaſt:
Dames of my Trade, ſhutte vp their ſhoppes for feare,
Their ſtuffe prou'd Contra formam Statuti,
Then I, which lycenſt am, to ſell fine ware:
Am lyke to be well cuſtomed perdy:
And nowe Tyme ſerues, leaſt cuſtome after fayle,
At hyeſt rate, my Toyes I vallue muſt:
Let me alone, to ſet my Toyes to ſale:
Yong Ruflers I, in faith, wyll ſerue of truſt.
Who wayes me not, him wyll I fayne to loue,
Who loues me once, is lymed to my heaſt:
My cullers ſome, and ſome ſhall weare my gloue,
And he my harte, whoſe payment lykes me beſt.
And here at hande are cuſtomers I trowe,
Theſe are the friendes, of Phallax, my ſwéete friende:
Nowe wyll I go, and ſet my wares to ſhowe,
But let them laugh, that wynneth in the ende.
Come on good friende: where dwels Lady Lamia?
Euen by Syr.
Well then, go thy waye,
Showe who ſent vs, and what our meaning is:
Leaſt ſhe not knowing vs, doo take amys.
That thus boldlye we come to viſite hir.
No bolder then welcome, I warrant you Sir.
Well, thy Meſſage doo:
I go.
JF pleaſure, be treaſure,
Harke.
The golden worlde is here, the golden worlds is here.
Refuſe you, or chuſe you:
But welcome who drawes neare, but welcome who drawes neare.
They be the Muſes ſure,
Naye, Syrens lure.
Here lyues delyght,
Here dyes deſpight:
Deſyre here, hath his wyll.
Here Loues reliefe,
Deſtroyeth griefe:
VVhich carefull hartes doth kyll.
Attende them ſtyll.
That, as you wyll.
Here wyſh in wyll, doth care deſtroye,
Playe here your fyll, we are not coye:
Which breedes much yll, we purge annoy,
Our lyues here ſtyll, we leade in ioye.
If pleaſure, be treaſure,
The golden worlde is here, the golden worlde is here:
Refuſe you, or chuſe you,
But welcome, who coms neare, but welcome, who coms neare.
VVantons drawe neare.
Taſte of our cheare:
Our Cates are fine and ſweete.
Come be not coye,
To worke your ioye:
We fall wyll at your feete.
A, good kinde wormes:
Harke.
Loe, here we be, good wyll which moue,
We lyue you ſee, for your behoue:
Come we agree, to let you proue.
VVithout a fee, the fruites of Loue.
If pleaſure, be treaſure, the golden worlde is here, &c.
Vpon this large warrant, we maye venter,
The doore opes alone, come, let vs enter.
Agreede.
Cryer, Make a noyſe.
O yes. And ſo thriſe.
All manner of perſonnes, here preſent,
All manner of perſonnes, here preſent.
Be ſylent, on payne, of impriſonment,
Be ſylent, on payne, of impriſonment.
Firſt, if any perſon, Officer, or other: hath wronged any of his true ſubiects, by the corruption of brybes, affecting or not fauoring, of the perſon: through Vſurie, extortion, wrong impriſonment: or with any other vniuſt practiſe: His Maieſtie wylles the partie ſo grieued, to repayre to Syr Vlrico, one of his highneſſe priuie Counſell: who (finding his, or their iniuries) is cōmaunded, to certifie them, and their proofe, vnto the Kings maieſtie: where incontinentlie, he wyll order the controuerſie, to the releaſe of the partie grieued, and the puniſhment of the offenders.
Further, if any of his faithfull ſubiectes, can charge any perſon, Officer, or other, with any notable or haynous offence as Treaſon, Murder, Sacriledge, ſedicion: or with any ſuch notorious cryme: for the ſafetie of his Royal perſon, benefyte and quiet of his Realme, and ſubiectes. On Fridaye next, his moſt excellent Maieſtie (with the aduiſe of his honorable Counſell) wyl in open Court ſyt, to heare and determine, all ſuch offences. Therfore he ſtrayghtlie chargeth all and euerie of his ſubiectes, that knowe any ſuch haynous offenders: one the forenamed daye, that he preſent, both the offender, and his faulte.
Sée howe we are croft: we thought the King for pleaſure,
Came to viſite vs: when to his paine,
And our plagues, I feare he beſtowes his leyſure.
To heare the wronges, of ſuch as wyll complaine
Of any man: But the ſport is to ſée
Vs Officers, one looke of another:
I at Lorde Promos, Lorde Promos at mée,
The Lawiers, at the Shriefe and Maior.
They gaſe aſmuch on the ruling Lawier.
For to be plaine, the cleareſt of all,
Peccaui ſyng, to heare the grieuous call,
Againſt Vſurie, brybrie, and barrating,
Suborning, extorcion, and boulſtring.
Some faultes are hearde, ſome by Proclamation ſtaye,
Before the King, to be hearde on Fridaye.
I yet haue ſcapte, and hope to go ſcotfrée:
But ſo, or no, whylſt leyſure ſerues mée.
To haue my a anſwers freſh if I be cauld,
Of merry mates, I haue a meetyng ſtauld,
To whome my ſences, to refreſh I wend,
Who gets a pace as meryly may ſpend.
As thou complaynſt, agaynſt all equity,
Houldes Phallax thy houſe, by this extremity?
Yea ſure, and he hath bound me ſo ſubtylly,
As leſſe you helpe, lawe yeeldes mee no remidy.
Well, what ſay you? is Phallax mony payd?
Saue fyue pound Syr:
For which your bend is ſtayde.
Nay mary, the ſame I would gladly pay,
But my bonde for the forfeyt he doth ſtay.
Summum Ius, I ſée, is Summa Imuria:
So theſe wronges muſt be ſalued ſome other way.
Yea, more then this, moſt men ſay:
What?
To be playne, he kéepes Miſtris Lamia.
Admyt be doe, what helpe haue you by this?
Yes mary, it prooues, a doudle knaue he is:
A couetous churle, and a lecher too.
Well, well, honeſt men, for your witneſſe go,
And as on proofe, I fynde your iniuries.
So I wyl moue, the king for remedyes.
We thanke your honour.
Tys more then ſtraunge, to ſée with honeſt ſhow,
What fowle deceytes, lewde officers can hyde:
In euery caſe, their crafte, they collour ſo,
As ſtyll they haue, ſtryckt lawe vpon their ſide.
Theſe cunning Théeues, with lawe, can Lordſhips ſteale,
When for a ſheepe, the ignoraunt are truſt:
Yea, who more rough, with ſmall offenders deale,
Then theſe falſe men, to make themſelues ſeeme iuſt?
The tirant Phallaris, was prayſed in this,
When Perillus the braſen torment made:
He founde the wretch, ſtrayght wayes in ſome amys,
And made him firſt, the ſcourge thereof taſte:
A iuſt reward for ſuch as doe preſent
An others fault, himſelfe, the guiltyeſt man.
Well, to our weale, our gratious king is bent,
To taſte theſe theeues, to vſe what meanes he can.
But as at Cheaſtes, though ſkylfull players play,
Skylleſſe vewers, may ſee, what they omyt:
So though our king, in ſearching Iudgement may,
Geſſe at their faultes, which ſecret wronges commit:
Yet for to iudge, by trueth, and not by ame,
My ſelfe in cheefe, his highneſſe doth auctoriſe,
On proofe for to returne who meryts blame,
And as I fynde, ſo he himſelfe will puniſh:
So that to vſe, my charge indyfferently,
My Clyents wronges, I wyll with wytneſſe trye.
Sir Vlrico, I humbly craue to know,
What good ſucceſſe: my honeſt ſute enſues?
Maſter Pimos, in breete, the ſame to ſhowe,
I feare, you both, my order wyll refuſe:
Lyros, that thinkes he geues more then he ſhould,
And you, for that, you haue not, what you would,
It ſhall goe hard, if that your award miſtikes mée.
Wel, goe with mee, and you the ſame ſhall ſee:
I waight on you.
My troubled hart with guiltyneſſe agreu'd,
Lyke fyre doth make my eares and cheekes to glow:
God Graunt I ſcape this blacke day vnrepreu'd,
I care not how the game goe to morrow.
Well, I wyll ſet a face of braſſe on it,
And with the reſt, vpon the King attend:
Who euen anon wyll heare in Iudgement ſyt,
To heauen or hel ſome officers to ſend.
But ſoft, a pryze, Gripax and Rapax I ſée,
A ſhare of their venture belonges to mée.
Nay, good honeſt Promoters let mée go.
Tuſh Iohn Adroines, we muſt not leaue you ſo:
What? an ould hobclunch a wanton knaue?
You ſhal to the King.
Marry Iohn Adroynes God ſaue:
The king? why he wyll not looke of poore men.
Yes, yes, and wyll ſpye a knaue in your face.
Wyll he ſo? then, good you he gone apace.
And why?
Leaſt in my face, he ſpye you too,
Haue you ſéene a dawe, bebob two crowes ſo?
Well, come awaye ſyr patch.
Leaue, or by God yle ſcratch.
What wilt thou ſo?
Yea, and byte too.
Helpe Rapax, play the man.
Nay, do both what you can.
If that in bobs, theyr bargayne be,
In fayth they ſhare alone for mee.
What byteſt thou hobclunch,
Yea, that chull, and punch.
O Lorde God, my hart.
Knaues, ile make you fart.
Hould thy hands Lob,
Fyrſt, take this bob.
To parte this fraye, it is bye time, I can tell, My Promoters elſe of the roſte wyll ſmell.
O, my neck thou wylt breake.
Yea, Gods ames, cryſt thou creake?
How now my friends? why what a ſtur is this?
Marry.
What?
Care they part, yle make them pys.
Houlde, no more blowes.
Knaues, this honeſt man thanke,
That you ſcape ſo well.
Friend be not to cranke,
I am an officer, and meane to know
The cauſe, why you brauld thus, before I goe:
Your bobs ſhow, that the ſame, you beſt can tell.
I would your worſhip, felt the ſame as well,
I then am ſure, this blockhedded ſlaue,
For both his faultes, double puniſhment ſhould haue.
What faultes?
Marry,
He wyll lye lyke a dogge.
How now you churle, your tongue, would haue a clog, Say on:
To ſhowe his firſt, and chiefeſt faughte:
His Fathers maide, and he are naught.
What I?
I.
By my Grandſires ſoule, you lye.
Peace: Friende, for this faulte, thou muſt dye.
Dye, Learde ſaue vs: you ſqawde knowe, yle yée: For reforming a lye, thus againſt mée.
Tuſh, tuſh, it helpeth not: if they can proue this.
For ſome proofe, I ſawe him and the Maide kys.
Can not foke kys: but they are naught by and by?
This preſumption friende, wyll touch thee ſhrowdlie:
If thou ſcape with life, be thou ſore of this,
Thou ſhalt be terriblie whypped, for this kys.
Whypt, mary God ſhielde, chy had rather be hangde
Growte nowle, come to the King.
Arte not well hangde.
Well, good fellowes, lets take vp this matter.
Nay, firſt Iohn Adroines, ſhalbe truſt in a halter.
Why? helpes it you, to ſée the poore man whypt?
I praye you friendes, for this tyme let him go.
Stande ſtyll, and chull, whether they wyll or no:
Nay, but we charge him, in the Kings name, ſtaye thée.
Harke honeſt man, I warrant thée ſet frée?
Greaſe them well, in their handes, and ſpeake them fayre:
O Leard God, our tallowe potte is not here.
Tuſh, clawe them with money:
Why ſo my nayles are ſharpe.
I ſee, for Clownes, Pans Pype, is méeter, thē Apolles Harpe. They can ſkyll of no Muſicke, but plaine Song.
I praye lets goe, we tryfle tyme too long:
Strayght. Cockes ſoule knaue, ſtoppe his mouth with money.
O, I ken you nowe ſyr, chy crie you mercie.
Come on ſlouch, wylt pleaſe you be iogging hence?
Here is all, tenne ſhyllinges, and thyrtene pence.
Harke ye my friendes.
We muſt not let him goe.
Harke once more.
Giue them the money.
It ſhall be ſo.
Well, although he deſerues great puniſhment,
For your ſake, for this tyme we are content:
farewell, henceforth be honeſt,
And for this faulte, wyll paſſe it ore in ieaſt.
Then giues our money.
Why?
Why, they dyd but ieaſt:
Yea, but they tooke thy money in earneſt.
Art gone, nowe the Dewle choake you all with it:
Howe chy kiſſe againe, the knaues hae taught me wyt.
But by Saint Anne, chy do ſee hur lady:
Men maye do what them woll, that haue money.
Ich ſurely had bene whipt, but for my golde,
But chull no more, with ſmouches be ſo bolde.
Yea, and ych wyſh all Louers to be wyſe,
There be learing knaues abroade, haue Cattes eyes:
Why, by Gods bores, they can bothe ſee and marke,
If a man ſteale, but a ſmouch in the darke.
And nowe the worlde is growne, to ſuch iollie ſpye:
As if foke doo kyſſe, the'are naught by and by.
Well, ych wyll home, and tell my Father Droyne:
Howe that, two theeues robd mee of my Coyne.
Sir Gonſago, if that we henceforth heare,
With will, or wealth, you doe our ſubiects wrong:
Looke not agayne, this fauour for to fynde,
We vſe thie grace, to wyn you to amende:
If not, our wrath ſhall feare you to offende.
God ſpade you.
I ſee by proofe, that true the prouer be is,
Myght maiſters right, wealth is ſuch a canker,
As woundes the conſcience, of his Maiſter,
And deuoures the hart of his poore neyghbour.
To cure which ſore, Iuſtice his pryde muſt pyue,
Which Iuſtice ought in Princes moſt to ſhine:
And ſyth ſubiects lyue by their princes law,
Whoſe lawes in cheefe, the rytch ſhould keepe in awe:
The poore in wrouges, but ſildome doth delyght,
They haue inuffe, for to deſende their right:
It much behoues the maker of theſe lawes,
(This mony findes in them, ſo many flawes)
To ſee his lawes, obſer'd as they are ment:
Or elſe good lawes, wyll turne to euyll intent.
Well, ere I leaue, my pooreſt ſubiects ſhall,
Both lyue, and lyke: and by the richeſt ſtawll.
Regarded and moſt mightie Prince, your clemency herein,
Thoſe harts, your rule, cōmands through feare to faithful loue ſhal win.
Renowmed king, I am for to complaine,
Of Phallax, Lord Promos ſecondary,
Whoſe hainous wrouges many poore men doth paine,
By me, who pray, your highnes remedy.
My Lord Promes, it ſeemes you rule at large,
When as your clarkes are officers vniuſt.
Dread king, I thinke, he can theſe wrong diſcharge.
Doe you but thinke ſyr: a ſure ſpeare to truſt?
A dum death, and blynde Iudge, can do as much:
Well, well, God graunt, your owne lyfe, byde the tutch.
Syr Vlrice, your complaynt continew:
Gratious King, his wrouges be theſe inſew:
Fyrſt Phallax, is a coumon Barriter,
In office, a lewd extortioner:
The crafty man, oft puts theſe wronges in vre,
If poore men haue, that lykes his ſearching eye,
He ſhoweth gould, the needy ſoules to lure:
Which if they take, ſo taſt he doth them tye,
That by ſome bonde, or couenaunt forfayted.
They are inforſt (farre beneath the vallew)
To let him haue what his eye coueyted:
And for to proue, that this report is true,
I ſhowe no more, then witneſſe prou'd by oth,
Whoſe names and handes, defends it heare as troth,
How now Promos? how thinke you of your man?
Vſe both your wyttes, to cleare him if you can.
Dread King, my hart to heare his faultes doth bleede.
Howe far'de it then, to ſuffer it indéede?
It dyde, I trowe, or now you ſpeake in ieſt:
Thy Maſter's mute Phallax, I hould it beſt
That thou ſpeake, for thy ſelfe.
I humbly craue,
Of your grace, for aunſwere, reſpyt to haue.
Why? to deuiſe a cloke to hyde a knaue?
Friend, veritas non querit angulos,
And if your ſelfe, you on your truth repoſe,
You may be bould, theſe faultes for to deny,
Some, lyttel care, vpon their othes to lye:
Sée if any in your behalfe will ſweare.
O Lord God, is there no knyghtes of the poſte heare?
Well, then of force, I muſt ſing Peccaui.
And crye out ryght, to the king for mercy.
O King, I am, in faulte, I muſt confeſſe,
The which I wyll with repentaunce redreſſe.
Thy confeſſion, doth meryt ſome fauour,
But repentaunce payes not thy poore neyghbour:
Wherefore, Syr Vlrico, his goods ſeaſe you,
And thoſe, he wrong'd, reſtore you, to their due.
Looke what he gettes, moſt thinke, he waſtes ſtraight waye,
Vpon a leawde harlot, named Lamia:
So that his goods, wyll ſcarſe pay euery wight.
Where naught is left, the king muſt loſe his right.
Pay as you may, I hould it no offence,
If eache pay ſomewhat for experience:
But by the way, you rule the citty well,
That ſuffer, by your noſe, ſuch dames to dwell.
And now Phallax, thy further pennaunce ys,
That forthwith, thou do reſigne thy office.
Vlrico, to his account lykewiſe, ſée.
It ſhalbe done.
Phallax, further heare mée:
Becauſe thou didſt, thy faultes at firſt confeſſe,
From puniſhment▪ thy perſon I releaſe:
I moſt humbly, do thanke your maieſty.
Ah, out alas, Caſſandra heare I ſee.
O would ye teares, myght tel my tale, I ſhame ſo much my fall,
Or elſe, Lord Promos lewdnes ſhowen, would death would ende my thrall.
Welcome my ſweete Caſſandra.
Murdrous varlet, away.
Renowmed King, I pardon craue, for this my hould attempt,
In preaſing thus ſo neare your grace, my ſorrow to preſent:
And leaſt my foe, falſe Promos heare, doe interrupt my tale,
Graunt gratious King, that vncontrould, I may report my bale,
How now Promos? how lyke you, of this ſong?
Say on fayre dame, I long to heare thy wrong.
Then knowe dread ſouerayne, that he this doome did gene,
That my Brother, for wantonneſſe ſhould loſe his head:
And that the mayde, which ſind, ſhould euer after lyue
In ſome religious houſe, to ſorrowe her miſdeede:
To ſaue my brother iug'd to dye, with teares I ſought to moue
Lord Promos hart, to ſhowe him grace but he with lawles loue,
Was fyred by and by▪ and knowing neceſſity,
To ſaue my brothers lyfe, would make me yéeld to much,
He cran'd this raunſome, to haue my virginitie:
No teares could worke reſtraynt, his wicked luſt was ſuch,
Two euils here were, one muſt I chuſe, though bad were very beſt,
To ſée my brother put to death, or graunt his lewde requeſt:
In fyne, ſubdude with naturall loue, I did agree,
Vpon theſe two poyntes: that marry mee he ſhould,
And that from priſon vyle, he ſhould my brother free.
All this with mouſtrous othes, he promiſed he would.
But O this periurd Promos, when he had wrought his wyll,
Fyrſt caſt me of: and after cauſd the Gailer for to kill
My brother, raunſomde, with the ſpoyle of my good name:
So that for companing, with ſuch a helliſh feende,
I haue condemnde my ſelfe to weare theſe weedes of ſhame:
Whoſe cogniſance doth ſhowe, that I haue (fleſhly) ſind.
Loe thus, hie and renowned king, Caſſandra endes her tale,
And this is wicked Promos that hath wrought her endles bale.
If this be true, ſo towle a deede, ſhall not vnpuniſht goe,
How ſayſt thou Promos, to her playnte? arte giltye? yea, or noe?
Why ſpeakſt thou not? a faulty harte, thy ſcilence ſure doth ſhowe.
My gilty hart commaunds my tongue. O king, to tell a truth,
I doe confeſſe this tale is true, and I deſerue thy wrath.
And is it ſo? this wicked deede, thou ſhalt ere long buy deare,
Caſſandra, take comfort in care, be of good cheere:
Thy forced fault, was free from euill intent,
So long, no ſhame, can blot thee any way.
And though at ful, I hardly can content thee,
Yet as I may, aſſure thy ſelfe I wyl.
Thou wycked man, might it not thee ſuffice,
By worſe then force, to ſpoyle her chaſtitie,
But heaping ſinne on ſinne againſt thy oth,
Haſte cruelly, her brother done to death.
This ouer proofe, ne can but make me thinke,
That many waies thou haſt my ſubiectes wrongd:
For how canſt thou with Iuſtice vſe thy ſwaie?
When thou thy ſelfe doſt make thy will a lawe?
Thy tyrranny made mee, this progreſſe make,
How ſo, for ſport tyll nowe I colloured it
Vnto this ende, that I might learne at large,
What other wronges by power, thou haſt wrought,
And héere, I heare: the Ritche ſuppreſſe the poore:
So that it ſéemes, the beſt and thou art friendes:
I plaſte thée not, to be a partiall Iudge.
Thy Offycers are couetous I finde,
By whoſe reportes, thou ouer culeſt ſutes.
Then who that geues, an Item in the hande,
In ryght, and wrong, is ſure of good ſucceſſe.
Well, Varlet, well: too ſlowe I hether came,
To ſcourge, thy faultes, and ſalue the ſores thou mad'ſt:
On thée vyle wretche, this ſentence I pronounce.
That foorth with, thou ſhalt marrie Caſsandra,
For to repayre hir honour, thou dydſt waſte:
The next daye thou ſhalt loſe thy hated lyfe.
In penaunce, that thou mad'ſt hir Brother dye.
My faultes were great, O King, yet graunt me mercie,
That nowe with bloody ſighes, lament my ſinnes too late.
Hac facias alteri, quod tibi vis fieri:
Pittie was no plée Syr, when you in iudgement ſate,
Prepare your ſelfe to dye, in vaine you hope for lyfe.
My Lordes, bring him with mée: Caſſandra come you in like caſe▪
My ſelfe wyll ſée, thy honour ſalu'd, in making thée his Wife,
The ſooner to ſhorten his dayes.
We wayte vpon your Grace.
Syr Vlrico, I wyld, Commiſſion ſhould be made,
To Syr Anthony Alberto, and Iustice Diron,
To heare and determine, all ſutes to be had
Betwene Maiſter Prostro, and this poore man: is it done?
Renowned King, it is ready:
Repayre to Syr Ʋlrico, for thy Commiſſion:
God preſerue your Maieſtie.
Bones of me, a mā were better ſpeak to great Lords chy ſée,
Then to our proude, Iuſtlers of peace, that byn in the cuntry:
He that is rytch, as my dame ſayth, goes away with the Hare.
This two yéere, they haue hard my matter, & yet cham nere ye néere.
And at firſt daſh, a good fatte Lorde, God in heauen ſaue his life.
Fayth, for nothing, teld the King of Mas Prostros, and my ſtrife.
O Leard, ych thought the King could not bide, on poore men to looke,
But God ſaue his Grace, at fyrſt daſh, my Supplycation he tooke:
And you hard, how gently, he calld mée poore man, and wild me goe,
For my Paſport, I kenne not what, to good ſyr Vlrico.
Well, chull goe fort, and hope to be with Maſter Prostros to bring:
But ere ych goe, chul my Ballat, of good King Coruine ſing.
YOu Barrons bolde, and luſtie Lads,
Prepare to welcome, our good King:
VVhoſe comming ſo, his Subiectes glads,
As they for ioye, the Belles doo ryng.
They fryske, and ſkippe, in euerie place,
And happy he, can ſee his face.
VVho checks the rytch, that wrong by might,
And helpes the poore, vnto his right.
¶The loue that rygour gettes through feare,
VVith grace and mercie, he doth wyn:
For which we praye thus, euerie where,
Good Lorde preſerue, our King Coruin.
His fauour raignes, in euerie place:
And happy he, can ſee his face.
Come loytring knaues, ſpéede about your buſineſſe.
Fetche mee in, all ydle vacaboundes.
Yes ſyr yes:
Searche Ducke alley, Cocke lane, and Sculdes corner,
About your charge, lets ſee, howe you can ſturre.
Yes, I haue winges in my heeles to flee.
Who giues two pence, a ſtraunge Monſter to ſée.
What Monſter?
A horned Beaſt, with winges vpon his heeles.
Out dronken dreule?
What? runnes your heades a wheeles?
Be packing bothe, and that betymes you are beſt.
We are gone Syr, we dyd but ſpeake in ieaſt.
The King, I ſayth, hath ſet vs all a worke,
To ſearche odde holes, where ydle varlettes lurke.
He ſo nypped, our Maior for yll rule:
As euer ſince, he hath bene lyke to whule.
And in a rage, the man is nowe ſo whotte,
As lewde perſonnes, tagge, and ragge, goes to potte.
But in chiefe, he ſtormes, at fine Miſtriſſe Lamia.
She drinkes, for all, come ſhe once in his waye.
And leaſt ſhe ſcape, my ſelfe forſooth he wylles,
Worſhipfullie to fetche hir, with fortie Bylles.
Well, I muſt goe, and worke our Maiors beaſt,
No force, for once, ſhe wyll neuer be honeſt.
This ſauage life, were hard to brooke, if hope no cōfort gaue:
But I (whoſe life, frō Tyrants wrath, Gods prouidēce did ſaue,
Do take in worth this miſery, as penaunce for my mys:
Stil fed with hope to chaūge this ſtate, when Gods good pleaſure is.
A hollow Caue for houſe, and bed, in worth Andrugio takes,
Such ſorie foode, as fortune ſendes, he ſyldome nowe forſakes.
I am my ſelfe forſoothe, nowe Butcher, Cooke, Cater and all:
Yea, often tymes I fall to ſléepe, with none, or ſupper ſmall.
Then in my Denne, I call to minde, the lyfe I lyu'de in bliſſe:
And by the want I fréedome iudge, the greateſt ioye that is.
The fréeman is in viewe of friendes, to haue releaſe in néede:
The exyle, though he haue no lacke, yet lyues he ſtyll in dréede
That his myſdéedes, wyll hardly ſcape, the puniſhment of lawe:
And lyuing, he were better dead, that lyueth in this awe,
Beſides this feare, which neuer fayles, the baniſht man in want,
As ofte he is, is ſure to finde his ſuccor's verie ſcant.
Then who is he ſo mad, that friendes, and fréedome doth enioye?
That wyll aduenture breach of lawe, to lyue in this annoye?
And not annoye to him alone, but to his friendes and kyn:
Great be the cares, Caſſandra, and Polina lyueth in.
Through thought, of me, whom long agone, beheaded they ſuppoſe,
For my offence, thus are they ſcorgde, yet dare I not diſcloſe
My ſafetie, for their helpe: but harke, who commeth here?
This chaunce ſéemes ſtrange: God graunt good newes, I hope, and yet I feare.
If che could finde my Mare, che would be ruſty by the rood,
And cham ſure the hoorechup, is peaking in this wood.
Thy wyl ſéeke euery corner, but che wyll find her.
This clowne can hardly mée bewray, and yet ſuch dunghyll churles,
Such newes, as is in market tounes, about the country whorles.
What ſéekes thou good fellow?
My ſqawde Mare, doſt her know?
No.
Then ſcummer mée not, in haſte ych goe,
Séeke my Mare, to ſée the ſport at Iulio.
What ſport?
A lyttel ſport.
What?
Nay ſkyl not a whit?
What meanes this Aſſe?
T'wyll teache the hoorecup wyt.
H'yll hang, handſome young men for the foote ſinne of loue,
When ſo his knauery, himſelfe, a bawdy iack doth proue.
His wordes ſéemeth ſtraunge, ſomwhat is a wry.
VVel, chyll ſée his ſhoulders, from's iowle to flye.
VVhoſe ſhoulders friend?
As though you dyd know.
VVhome?
Lord Promos.
Yes: my moſt accurſed foe: But what of him?
Thou kenſt.
No.
Sayſt not, yes,
Yes:
So,
But friend thou took'ſt my wordes amys,
I know nothing, in what ſtate Promos is.
Thou knowſt, and thou knoweſt not: out horſon foole,
Leaue ſtealing Cunnyes, and get thee to ſcoole,
Farewell.
Soft.
O to arte no foole good théefe:
Saue my mony take my life.
Tuſh be breefe.
Some newes, of lewde Lord Promos tell mée,
And wyth lyfe and mony, yle ſet thee free.
I wyll thou knowſt the King now at Iulio.
Very well.
Thou canſt tel as wel as I.
Let me goe:
Nay yle ſee if thou doſt lye.
If thou doſt yle whip thee, when thou haſt done.
Kiſſyng and lying, ich ſee is all one:
And chaue no mony, chul tell true therfore.
Diſpatch then.
Then, lying Promoter, this more:
Caſgandra ſcuſde, Promos of honeſtie:
And killyng Ramſtrugio for baudry.
What more?
The king at Promos, great pleaſure did take,
And Caſgandra, an honeſt woman to make:
The King maunded him, her ſtrayght to marry,
And for killyng her brother, he muſt dye.
Is this true?
Why? how ſay you? doe I lye?
Well, ſo or noe, for thy newes haue this connie.
Gods boores, geue it me, to be ſwete, tis to cheape,
But Lady yet, tyll ſunday it will keepe:
Well, now god bwye, Mas lying Promoter,
Wees ſee at the ſoort.
I peraduenture.
Since can not finde my Mare, on foote chull goe:
Ych thinke, each daye a nowre, to be at Iulio.
Straunge are the newes, the Clowne hath ſhowne to me:
Not ſtraunge a whyt, if they well ſcanned be.
For God we ſee, ſtyll throwes the Tyrant downe:
Euen in the heyght, and pride of his renowne,
Lorde Promos rule, nay, tyranny in deede,
For Iudges is a mirror, worthy héede.
The wretched man, with ſhowe of Iuſtice zeale,
Throughly dyd, with poore offenders deale.
The wicked man, both, knewe, and iudg'd, abuſe:
And none ſo much, as he her faultes dyd vſe.
He fellons hang'd, yet by extorcion, ſtoale:
He wantons plag'd, himſelfe a doating foole.
He others checkt, for ſuing for their right:
And he himſelfe, mayntained wrongs by might.
But ſée the rule of miſchiefe, in his pride:
He headlong falles, when leaſt, he thought to ſlide.
Well, by his fall, I maye perhaps aryſe:
Andrugio yet, in clyming be thou wyſe.
What? ſtyll vnknowne, ſhall I liue in this wood?
Not ſo.
Go wraye theſe newes, no doubt, vnto my good.
Yet ere I go, I wyll my ſelfe diſguiſe,
As in the Towne, in ſpyte of Linxes eyes.
I wyll vnknowne, learne howe the game doth go,
But ere I go, ſyth eaſed is my woe:
My thankes to God, I firſt in ſong wyll ſhoe.
TO thee O Lorde, with harte, and voyce I ſyng,
VVhoſe mercie great, from mone to ſweete delight▪
From griefe to ioye, my troubled ſoule doeſt bring,
Yea, more thy wrath, hath foylde my foe in ſyght.
VVho ſought my lyfe (which thou O God didſt ſaue)
Thy ſcorge hath brought, vntimelie to his graue.
VVhoſe griefe wyll gawle, a thouſande Iudges more,
And wyll them ſee, them ſelues, and ſentence iuſt:
When blacke reproche, this thundring ſhame ſhall ſhoe,
A Iudge condemde for murder, thefte, and luſte.
This ſcorge, O God, the lewde in feare wyll bring,
The iuſt for ioye, thy prayſes lowde wyll ſyng.
Come on faire Dame, ſince faire words, works no héede,
Now fowle meanes ſhall: in you repentaunce bréede.
Maiſter Greſco, where you maye helpe, hurt not.
And nothing but chaſtment, wyll helpe you to amende,
Well, I wyll not hurt you, your lewdnes to defende.
My lewdnes Syr: what is the difference,
Betwixt wantons, and hoorders of pence?
Thou haſt winde at wyll, but in thy eyes no water:
Tho' arte full of Grace, howe ſhe bluſheth at the matter.
Howe ſample I, your wyfe and daughter Syr?
Are mee, when whypping hath chaung'd thy Nature.
What whypping? why? am I a Horſe, or a Mare?
No, but a beaſt, that méetelie well wyll bare.
In déede (as) nowe, perforce, I beare this flowt:
But vſe me well, elſe I fayth, gette I out,
Looke for quittaunce.
Binde hir to the Peace Syr,
So maye your Worſhip be out of daunger.
Bring hir awaye, I knowe howe to tame hir.
Perhaps Syr, no: the worſt is but ſhame hir.
Come ye drab.
Howe nowe ſcab? bandes of my Gowne.
Care not for this, yuſe haue a blew one ſoone.
Vnhappy Wench, the more I ſéeke, for to abandone griefe,
The furder off, I wretched finde, both comfort and reliefe.
My Brother firſt, for wanton faultes, condempned was to dye:
To ſaue whoſe life, my ſute, wrought hope of Grace, but haples I.
By ſuch requeſt, my honor ſpoyld, and gayned not his breath:
For which deceyte, I haue purſude, Lorde Promos vnto death.
Who is my Huſbande nowe become, it pleaſd our Soueraigne ſo,
For to repayre, my craſed Fame: but that nowe workes my wo.
This day, he muſt (oh) léeſe his head, my Brothers death to quite,
And therin Fortune hath alas, ſhowne me hir greateſt ſpyte.
Nature wyld mée, my Brother loue, now dutie commaunds mée,
To preferre before kyn, or friend, my Huſbands ſafetie.
But O, aye mée, by Fortune, I, am made his chiefeſt foe:
T'was I als, euen onely I. that wrought his ouerthroe.
What ſhall I doo, to worke amends, for this my haynous déede?
The tyme is ſhort, my power ſmall, his ſuccors axeth ſpéede.
And ſhall I ſéeke, to ſaue his blood, that lately ſought his lyfe?
O, yea I then was ſworne his foe: but nowe as faithfull Wife,
I muſt and wyll, preferre his health, God ſende me good ſucceſſe:
For nowe vnto the King I wyll, my chaunged minde to expreſſe.
Was euer man, ſet more fréer then I?
Firſt went my goodes, then my Office dyd flye?
But had the King, ſet me frée from flattrie,
The next deare yeare, I might haue ſtaru'd, perdie.
But Lorde Promos, hath a farre more fréer chaunce:
He free from Landes, goodes, and Office doth daunce:
And ſhalbe free from life, ere long, with a Launce.
The Officers, and chiefe men of Iulio:
Vengeaunce lyberall, themſelues lykewiſe ſhoe.
Poore knaues, and queanes, that vp and downe do goe,
Theſe horeſen kinde cruſtes, in houſes beſtoe.
But yet, poore chéere, they haue: marry for heate,
They whyp them, vntyll verie blood they ſweate.
But ſee, their coſt beſtowde of fyne Lamia,
To ſaue hir féete, from harde ſtones, and colde waye,
Into a Carte, they dyd the queane conuaye.
Apparelled, in collours verie gaye:
Both Hoode, and Gowne, of greene, and yellowe Saye.
Hir Garde weare Typſtaues, all in blewe arraye.
Before hir a noyſe of Baſons dyd playe.
In this triumphe, ſhe ryd well nye a daye.
Fie, fie, the Citie is ſo purged nowe:
As they of none, but honeſt men allowe,
So that farewell my parte, of thriuing there:
But the beſt is, flattrers lyue euerie where.
Set cocke on hoope, Domini est terra.
If thou can not where thou wouldſt, lyue where thou maye.
Yes, yes Phallax, knoweth whether to go:
Nowe, God bwy ye all, boneſt men of Iulio
As the Deuilles lykes, the company of Friers,
So flattrers loues as lyfe, to ioyne with lyers.
Theſe two dayes, I haue bene in Court diſguiſ'd:
Where I haue learnd, the ſcorge that is deuiſ'd,
For Promos faulte, he my Syſter ſpowſed hath,
To ſalue hir Fame, crackt by his breache of fayth.
And ſhortlie he, muſt loſe his ſubtyll head:
For murdring me, whome no man thinkes but dead.
His wyll, was good: and therfore beſhrewe mee,
If (mou'd with ruthe) I ſeeke, to ſet him free.
But ſoftlie, with ſome newes, theſe fellowes come:
I wyll ſtande cloſe, and heare both all and ſome.
Marshall, heare you warrant is: with ſpéede,
The king commaundes, that Promos you behead.
Sir, his highneſſe wyll, ſhalbe forthwith done.
The king welnye to pardon him was wonne,
His heauy wyfe, ſuch ſtormes of teares did ſhowre,
As myght, with rueth, haue moyſt a ſtony hart.
But Promos guylt, dyd ſoone this grace deuoure.
Our gratious king, before hir wretched ſmart,
Preferd, the helth, of this our common weale:
But ſee againe, to ſue for him ſhe comes,
Her ruthfull lookes, her gréefe, doth force mée féele.
With hope, I muſt, hir ſorrowes néedes delay:
Tyll Promos be diſpacht out of the way.
Syr Vlrico, if that my vnknowne gréefe,
May moue good mindes, to helpe mee to releefe,
Or bytter ſyghes, of comfort cleane diſmayde,
May moue a man, a ſhiftleſſe dame to ayde:
Rue of my teares, from true intent which flowe,
Vnto the king, with me, yet once more goe.
Sée if his grace, my huſbands lyfe wyll ſaue,
If not, with his, death ſhall my corps ingraue.
What ſhall I doe, her ſorrowes to decreace?
Feede her, with hope: fayre dame, this mone ſurceaſe,
I ſee the king to grace is ſomewhat bent,
We once agayne thy ſorrowes wyll preſent:
Come we wyl wayght for tyme, thy ſute to ſhow.
Good knight, for time, doe not my ſute foreſlowe.
Whylſt graſſe, doth growe ofte ſterues the ſeely ſtéede.
Feare not, your Lorde, ſhal not dye with ſuch ſpéede.
Lord God, how am I tormented in thought?
My ſiſters woe, ſuch rueth in me doth graue:
As fayne I would (if ought ſaue death I caught)
Bewray my ſelfe, Lord Promos life to ſaue.
But lyfe is ſweete, and naught but death I eye,
If that I ſhould, my ſafety now diſcloſe:
So that I chuſe, of both the euels, he dye:
Time wyll appeaſe, no dought, Caſſandras woes,
And ſhal, I thus acquite Caſſandras loue?
To worke her ioy? and ſhall I feare to dye?
Whylſt, that ſhe lyue, no comforte may remoue
Care from her harte, if that hir huſband dye?
Then ſhall I ſtycke, to haſard lym? nay life?
To ſalue hir greefe, ſince in my cure it reſts.
Nay fyrſt, I wilbe ſpoyld, with blooddy knife,
Before, I fayle, her, plunged in diſtres.
Death, is but death, and all in fyne ſhall dye
Thus (being dead) my fame, ſhall liue alway:
Well, to the king, Andrugio now wyll hye,
Hap lyfe, hap death, his ſafety, to bewray.
Roome friends, what meane you thus to gaſe on vs,
A comes behinde, makes all the ſport I wus.
Farewell, my friendes, take warning by my fall,
Diſdaine my life, but lyſten to my ende,
Freſh harmes, they ſay, the viewers ſo apall,
As oft they win, the wicked to amend.
I neede not heare, my faultes at large reſyte,
Vntimely death, doth witneſſe what I was:
A wicked man, which made eache wrong ſeeme right,
Euen as I would, was wreſted euery caſe.
And thus long tyme, I liu'd and rule by wyl,
Where as I lou'd, their faultes, I would not ſée:
Thoſe I did hate, tenne tymes beyond there yll
I did perſue, vyle wretch, with cruelty.
Yea dayly I, from bad, to worſe did ſlyde,
The reaſon was, none durſt, controule my lyfe:
But ſée the fall, of miſcheeue, in his pride.
My faultes, were knowne, and loe with bloddy Axe,
The headſeman ſtrayght, my wronges with death wyll quite:
The which, in worth I take, acknowledging,
The doome, was geuen, on cauſe, and not on ſpyte,
Wiſhing my ende, might ſerue for a warning.
For ſuch as rule, and make their will a lawe,
If to ſuch good, my faynting tale might tend,
Wretched Promos, the ſame would lenger draw:
But if that wordes preuayle, my wofull ende
From my huge faultes, then tenne times more wyll warne.
Forgeueneſſe now, of all the world I craue,
Therewith that you, in zealous prayer, wyll
Beſeeche of God, that I the grace may haue:
At latter gaſpe, the feare of death to kyll.
Forwards my Lord, me thinkes you fayntly goe.
O ſyr, in my caſe, your ſelfe would be as ſlowe.
Aye me, alas: my hope is vntimely.
Whether goes my good Lord?
Swéete wife, to dye.
O wretched wench, where may I firſt complayne?
When heauen, and earth, agrees vpon my payne?
This mone good wife, for Chryſtes ſake, forſake:
I late reſolu'd, through feare of death, now quake.
Not ſo much, for my haynous ſinnes forepaſt:
As for the greefe that preſent thou doſt taſt.
Nay, I vile wretch, ſhould moſt agréeued be,
Before thy time, thy death which haſtened haue:
But (O ſwete huſband) my fault forgeue mée.
And for amends, Ile helpe to fyll thy graue:
Forgeue thee, ab: nay, for my ſoules reléefe,
Forget ſwéete wyfe, this thy moſt guyltles gréefe.
My Lord Promos, theſe playntes, but moue hir mone,
And your more gréefe, it is beſt you ware gone:
Good Maddame way, by lawe, your Lord doth dye,
Wherefore make vertue of neceſſity:
Delay, but workes your ſorrowes, and our blames,
So that now, to the comfort of theſe dames:
And your wiſdome, inforced, we leaue you:
My Lord Promos, byd your wife and friends adew.
Farewell, farewell, be of good cheare deare wyfe:
With ioy for woe, I ſhall exchange this life.
Andrugios death, Polina forgeue mée:
I doe, and pray the Lord, to reléeue yée.
Yet ere we part, ſweete huſband let vs kis,
O, at his lyppes, why fayleth not my breath?
Leaue mone, ſwete wife. I doe deſerue this death.
Farewell, farewell.
My louing Lorde, farewell,
I hope ere long, my ſoule with thine ſhall dwell.
Now, good Madame, leaue of this booteleſſe griefe.
O Polina, ſorrowe is my reliefe.
Wherfore, ſweete wenche, helpe me to rue my woe,
With me vyle wretche, thy bytter plaintes beſtowe:
To haſten lyngring death, who wanteth might:
I ſée, alone, to ſley, the wretched wight.
Nay, firſt powre foorth your playnts, to the powers Diuine,
When hate, doth clowde, all worldly grace, whoſe mercies ſtyll do ſhine.
O, ſo or no, thy motion doeth well,
Swan lyke, in ſong, to towle my paſſing Bell.
¶ Deare Dames diuorſe, your minds frō ioy, helpe to bewayle my wo,
Condole with me, whoſe heauy ſights, the pangs of death do shoe;
Rend heairs, shed teares, poore wēch diſtreſt, to haſt the means to dye,
VVhoſe ioye, annoy: reliefe, whoſe griefe, hath ſpoyld with crueltie.
My brother ſlaine, my huſband ah, at poynt to loſe his head,
VVhy lyue I then vnhappy wench, my ſuckers being dead?
O time, O cryme, O cauſe, O lawes, that Iudgd them thus to dye:
I blame, you all, my shame, my thrall, you hate that harmeleſſe trye.
This Tragidy they haue begun, conclude I vvretched muſt,
O vvelcome care, conſume the thread, thereto my life doth truſt:
Sound bell, my knell, avvay delaie, and geue mee leaue to dye,
Les hope, haue ſcope vnto my hart, a fresh for ayde to flye.
O ſwéete newes, for Polina and Caſsandra. Andrugio lyues:
What doth poore Ganie ſaye?
Andrugio lyues: and Promos is repriu'd.
Vaine is thy hope, I ſawe Andrugio dead.
Well, then from death, he is againe reuyu'd.
Euen nowe, I ſawe him, in the market ſtead.
His wordes are ſtraunge.
Too ſwéete, God wot, for true.
I praye you, who are theſe here in your view?
The King.
Who more?
O. I ſee Andrugio.
And I my Lorde Promos, adue ſorrowe.
My good Andrugio?
My ſwéete Polina:
Lyues Andrugio, welcome ſwéete brother.
Caſsandra?
I.
Howe fare, my deare Syſter?
Andrugio, you ſhall haue more leyſure.
To gréete one another: it is our pleaſure,
That you forthwith, your Fortunes here declare,
And by what meanes, you thus preſerued weare.
My faull, through loue, and iudgement for my faulte.
Lorde Promos wronges, vnto my Siſter done.
My death ſuppoſde, dreade King, were vaine to tell.
Caſſandra heare, thoſe dealinges all hath ſhowne.
The reſt are theſe.
When I ſhould dye, the Gayler mou'd to ruth,
Declard to mée, what Promos pleaſure was:
Amazde wherat, I tolde him all the trueth,
What, betwene Caſsandra, and him dyd paſſe.
He much agrieu'd, Lorde Promos guylt to heare,
Was verie lothe, mée (wofull man) to harme:
At length, iuſt God, to ſet me (wretched) cleare,
With this defence, his wylling minde dyd arme.
Two dayes afore, to death, were diuers done,
For ſeuerall faultes, by them committed:
So that of them, he tooke the head from one,
And to Caſsandra, the ſame preſented:
Affirming it, to be bir brothers head.
Which done, by night, he ſent me poſt away,
None but ſuppoſed, that I in déde was dead:
When as in trueth, in vncouth hauntes I laye.
In fine, a Clowne, came peaking through the wood,
Wherin I lyu'd, your Graces being here:
And Promos death, by whome I vnderſtood,
Glad of which newes, howe ſo I lyud in feare.
I ventured to ſée his wretched fall:
To free ſuſpect, yet ſtraunger lyke arayde,
I hether came: but loe, the inwarde thrall
Of Caſſandra, the hate, ſo ſore diſmayde.
Which I conceyued agaynſt my brother Promos,
That loe, I chewſ'd, to yeeld my ſelfe to death,
To ſet him free: for otherwyſe I knew,
His death ere long, would ſure haue ſtopt her breath.
Loe gratious king, in breefe I here haue ſhowne,
Such aduentures, as wretched I haue paſt:
Beſeeching you with grace to thinke vpon,
The wight that wayles, his follyes at the laſt.
A ſtrange diſcourſe, as ſtraungely come to light,
Gods pleaſure is, that thou ſhould'ſt pardoned be:
To ſalue the fault, thou with Polina mad'ſt,
But marry her, and heare I ſet thee frée.
Moſt gratious Prince, thereto I gladly grée:
Polina, the happieſt newes of all for thee.
Moſt gratious King, with theſe my ioye to match,
Vouchſafe, to geue my dampned huſbande lyfe.
If I doo ſo, let him thanke thée his Wife:
Caſſandra, I haue noted thy diſtreſſe,
Thy vertues eke, from firſt, vnto the laſt:
And glad I am, without offence it lyes,
In me to eaſe, thy griefe, and heauines.
Andrugio ſau'd, the iuell of thy ioye,
And for thy ſake, I pardon Promos faulte.
Yea let them both, thy vertues rare commende:
In that their woes, with this delyght doth ende.
God preſerue your Maieſtie.
Caſſandra, howe ſhall I diſcharge thy due?
I dyd, but what a Wife, ſhoulde do for you.
Well, fince all partes are pleaſed, as they woulde,
Before I parte, yet Promos, this to thee:
Henceforth, forethinke, of thy forepaſſed faultes,
And meaſure Grace, with Iuſtice euermore.
Vnto the poore, haue euermore an eye,
And let not might, out countenaunce their right:
Thy Officers, truſt not in euery tale.
In chiefe, when they are meanes, in ſtrifes and ſutes,
Though thou be iuſt, yet coyne maye them corrupt.
And if by them, thou doſt vniuſtice ſhowe,
Tys thou ſhalt beare, the burden of their faultes.
Be louing to good Caſsandra, thy Wife:
And friendlie to thy brother Andrugio,
Whome I commaund, as faythfull for to be
To thée, as beſeemes the duety of a brother.
And now agayne, thy gouernment receyue,
Inioye it ſo, as thou in Iuſtice ioye.
If thou be wyſe, thy fall maye make thee ryſe.
The loſt ſhéepe founde, for ioye, the feaſt was made.
Well, here an ende, of my aduiſe I make,
As I haue ſayde, be good vnto the poore.
And Iuſtice ioyne, with mercie enermore.
Moſt gratious King, I wyll not fayle my beſt,
In theſe preceptes, to followe your beheaſt.