IF our vvishe should be graunted vnto vs by the Almighty, vvhat humaine thing vve vvould chiefly desire: vve vvould account nothing more pretious (most Royall Prince) than that the bright beame of your most chast eye, vvhich doth so chere vs, might penetrate the secret strait corners of our hartes: then surely should you see hovv great ioyes are dispeised there, and hovve the spirite and liuely bloud tickle in our arteries and small veynes, in beholding thee the light of this Realme (as Dauid vvas of Israell) novv at length, after long hope and earnest petitions, to appeare in these coastes. Truely on mine ovvne part, vvhich by your highnesse authoritie and clemencie (vvith humble thankes be it spoken) do gouerne this famous Citie, and on the parte of these my brethren and all these people vvhich by your authoritie vve rule (speaking as they meane, and as I my selfe doe thinke) this onely vvith all our hartes and humble praiers vve desire, that vve may so finde your Maiestie gracious and fauourable vnto vs, as you for your part neuer came to any subiects better vvelcome thā to vs your poore subiectes here. For most manifest token vvherof, vve present vnto your Maiestie here, these signes of honour and office, vvhiche vvee receiued of the most mighty Prince Henry the fourth, in the fift yere of his raigne, then to vs granted in the name of Mayor, Aldermen, and Shirifs, vvhere as before tyme out of minde or mention, vve vvere gouerned by Bayliffes (as they terme them) vvhich euer since haue bene both established and encreased vvith continuall priuiledges of Kinges: And vvhich by your only clemencie (vvhich vvith immortall thankes vve shall neuer cease to declare) vve haue novv these. xx. yeres enioyed: and together vvith those signes, this treasure is a pledge of our good vvils and habilitie: vvhich all hovv great or little so euer they be, vve poure dovvn at your pleasure, that if vve haue neglected any thing in all this course of your most happy raigne, vvhich becommeth most louing, obedient, and vvell vvilling subiectes to performe, for the preseruation of your Crovvn, and aduancement of your highnes, you may then determine of vs and al ours, at your most gracious pleasure. But if vve haue (God being our guide) so ordered the gouernance of this citie, that vve haue kept the same in safetie to your Maiesties vse, and made the people therein (as much as in vs lieth) first, most studious of Gods glory and true religion, and next of your Maiesties health, honour, and pleasure, then aske vve nothing of you, for that the singular clemencie ingraffed in your highnes, vvil easily of it self graunt that vvhich is requisite for vs to obtaine. We only therefore desire, that God vvould aboundantly blesse your highnesse vvith al good gifts of minde and body.
LEaue of to muse most gracious Prince of English soile,
What sodaine wight in Martiall wise approcheth neare:
King Gurgunt I am hight, King Belins eldest sonne,
Whose syre Dunwallo first, the Brittish crowne did weare.
Whom truthlesse Gutlack forste to passe the surging seas,
His falshode to reuenge, and Denmarke land to spoile.
And finding in returne, this place a gallant vente,
This Castle faire I built, a forte from foraine soile:
To winne a Conquest, gets renowne and glorious name,
To keepe and vse it well, deserues eternall fame.
Whē brute through cities, townes, the woods and dales did soūd
ELIZABETH this country peerelesse Queene drew neare:
I was found out, my selfe in person noble Queene
Did hast, before thy face in presence to appeare.
Two thousand yeares welnye in silence lurking still:
Heare, why to thee alone this seruice I do yelde.
Besides that, at my Cities sute, their founder first
Should gratulate most this ioyfull sight in open field.
Foure speciall pointes and rare concurring in vs both
This speciall seruice haue reseru'd to thee alone:
The glory though of eche in thee doth farre surmount,
Yet great with small comparde, will like appeare anone.
When doubtfull warres the British princes long had wroong,
My grandsire first vniting all did weare the Crowne.
Of Yorke and Lancaster, who did conclude the broiles?
Thy grandsire Henry seuenth, a king of great renowne.
Myne vncle Brennus eke, my father ioyning handes,
Olde Rome did raze, and sacke, and halfe consume with fire:
Thy puissant father so, new Rome that purple whore
Did sacke, and spoile hir neare of all hir glittering tire.
Lo Cambridge scholes by myne assignment founded first,
By thee my Cambridge scholes are famous through the world,
I thirtie wandring ships of banisht men relieued.
The thronges of banisht soules that in this Citie dwell,
Do weepe for ioy, and pray for thee with teares vntold.
In all these thinges thou noble Queene doest farre excell.
But loe to thee I yeld as duety doth me binde
In open field my selfe, my Citie, Castle, Key,
Most happy fathers Kinges in such a daughter Queene,
Most happy England were, if thou shouldest neuer die.
Go on most noble Prince, for I must hast away,
My Citie gates do long, their Soueraigne to receyue:
More true thou neuer couldst, nor loyall subiects finde,
VVhose hartes ful fast with perfect loue to thee do cleaue.
Most gracious prince, vndoubted soueraigne Queene,
Our only ioy next God, and chiefe defence:
In this small shewe, our whole estate is seene.
The welth we haue, we finde proceede from thence,
The idle hande hath here no place to feede,
The painefull wight hath still to serue his neede.
Againe, our seate denyes our traffique heere,
The Sea too neare decydes vs from the rest,
So weake we were within this dozen yeare,
As care did quench the courage of the best:
But good aduise, hath taught these little handes
To rende in twayne the force of pining bandes.
From Combed wool we drawe this slender threede,
From thence the Loombes haue dealing with the same,
And thence againe in order do proceede,
These seueral workes, which skilful art doth frame:
And all to driue Dame neede into hir caue,
Our heades and hands togither labourde haue.
VVe bought before the things that now we sel,
These slender ympes, their workes do passe the waues,
Gods peace and thine we holde and prosper well,
Of euery mouth the hands the charges saues.
Thus through thy helpe and ayde of power deuine,
Doth NORVVICH liue, whose harts and goods are thine.
WHom Fame resounds with thundring Trump, which rends the ratling skeis,
And pierceth to the hautie heauens, and thence descending flies
Through flickering ayre: and so conioines the Sea and shoare togither,
In admiration of thy grace, good Queene thart welcome hither,
More welcome than Terpsicore, was to the town of Troy.
Sea-faring men by Gemini conceiue not halfe my ioy:
Strong Hercules to Theseus was neuer such delight
Nor Nisus to Eurialus as I haue in this sight,
Penelope did neuer thirst Vlisses more to see
Than I poore Norwich hungred haue to gaine the sight of thee.
And now that these my happy eyes beholde thy heauenly face,
The Lord of Lordes I humbly pray, to blisse thy noble grace
VVith Nastors life, with Sibilles helth, with Craesus stock and store,
VVith all good giftes of Salomon, and twice as many more.
VVhat should I say? thou art my ioy next God, I haue none other,
My princesse and my peerlesse Queene, my louing nurse and mother.
My goods and lands, my hands and hart, my limbes and life are thine,
VVhat is mine owne in right or thought, to thee I do resigne.
Graunt then (oh gracious soueraigne Queene) this only my request,
That that which shal be done in me, be construed to the best.
And take in part my slender shewes, wherin my whole pretence
Is for to please you Maiestie, and end without offence.
So shall I clap my hands for ioy, and hold my selfe as rich
As if I had the golde of Iude, and double twice as much.
WHere princes sitting in their thrones set god before their sight
And liue according to his lawe, and guide their people right,
There doth his blessed giftes abounde, there kingdomes firmely stand
There force of foes cannot preuayle, nor furie fret the lande.
My selfe (oh peerlesse Prince) do speake by proofe of matter past,
VVhich proofe by practise I perfourmde, and foylde his foes at last.
For Iabin king of Canaan, poore Israel did spight,
And ment by force of furious rage to ouerrun vs quite.
Nyne hundred Iron Chariots, he brought into the field.
VVith cruell captaine Sisera by force to make vs yeelde.
His force was great, his fraude was more, he fought, we did defende,
And twenty winters long did last this warre without an end.
But he that neyther sleepes nor slackes such furies to correct,
Appointed me Debora for the iudge of his elect:
And did deliuer Sisera into a womans hande.
I slewe them all, and so in rest his people helde the lande.
So mightie prince, that puisaunt Lord, hath plaste thee here to be,
The rule of this triumphant Realme alone belongth to thee.
Continue as thou hast begon, weede out the wicked route,
Vpholde the simple, meeke and good, pull downe the proud & stoute.
Thus shalt thou liue and raigne in rest, and mightie God shalt please.
Thy state be sure, thy subiectes safe, thy common welth at ease.
Thy God shal graunt thee length of life, to glorify his name,
Thy deedes shall be recorded, in the booke of lasting fame.
OH floure of Grace, oh prime of Gods elect,
Oh mighty Queene and finger of the Lord,
Did God sometime by me poore wight correct.
The Champion stoute that him and his abhord?
Then be thou sure thou art his mighty hand,
To conquere those which him and thee withstand.
The rage of foes Betbulia did besiege,
The people faint were redy for to yeeld:
God ayded me poore widow nerethelesse,
To enter into Holofernes field,
And with this sword by his directing hand,
To slay his foe, and quiet so the land.
If this his grace were giuen to me poore wight,
If widowes hand could vanquish such a foe:
Then to a Prince of thy surpassing might.
VVhat Tirant liues but thou mayest ouerthrow.
Perseuer then his seruant as thou art,
And hold for aye a noble victors part.
The fretting heads of furious foes haue skill,
As well by fraude as force to finde their pray:
In smiling lookes doth lurke a lot as ill,
As where both sterne and sturdy streames do sway,
Thy selfe oh Queene, a proofe hath seene of this,
So well as I poore Esther haue iwis.
As Iabins force did Israel perplex,
And Holofernes fierce Betbuliel besiege,
So Hamons slights sought me and mine to vex,
Yet shewde a face a subiect to his liege.
But Force nor Fraude, nor Tyrant strong can trap,
Those whiche the Lorde in his defence doth wrap.
The proofes I speake by vs haue erst bin seene,
The proofes I speake, to thee are not vnknowen.
Thy God thou knowest most dread and soueraigne Queen,
A world of foes of thine hath ouerthrowen,
And hither nowe triumphantly doth call
Thy noble Grace, the comforte of vs al.
Doste thou not see the ioy of all this flocke?
Vouchsafe to viewe their passing gladsome cheare,
Be still (good Queene) their refuge and their rocke,
As they are thine to serue in loue and feare:
So Fraude, nor Force, nor foraine Foe may stand
Againste the strength of thy moste puyssaunt hand.
WIth long discourse (oh puissant Prince) some tract of time we spend,
Vouchesafe yet nowe a little more, and then we make an ende.
The thundring blaste of Fame, whereof Dame Norwich first did speake,
Not only shooke the aire and skies, but all the earth did breake,
It rend vp graues, and bodies raisde, eche spirite tooke his place,
And this alonely worde was hearde: Here comth the pearle of Grace,
Here commes the Iewell of the worlde, hir peoples whole delight,
The Paragon of present time, and Prince of Earthly Might.
The voice was strange, the wonder more: For when we viewde the Earth
Eche Prince that erst had raigned here, receyvde againe his breath,
And with his breath, a libertie to holde againe his place,
If any one amongest vs all exceede your noble Grace.
Some comforte euery one conceyued to catche againe his owne,
His vtmost skill was trimly vsde, to haue his vertues knowne.
The playes surpasse my skill to tell, but when eche one had sayde,
Apollo did himselfe appeare and made vs all dismayed.
VVil you contende with hir (quoth he,) within whose sacred breast
Dame Pallas and my selfe haue framde our soueraigne seate of rest?
VVhose skill directs the Muses nine, whose grace doth Venus staine:
Hir eloquence like Mercurie: Like Iuno in hir traine?
VVhose God is that eternall loue which holds vs al in awe?
Beleeue me, you exceede the bounds of equitie and lawe.
Therewith they shronk themselues aside, not one I coulde espie,
They coutcht them in their caues agayne and there ful quiet lye,
Yet I that Martia hight, whiche sometime rulde this land,
As Queene for thirtie three yeares space, gate licence at his hande,
And so Gurguntius did, my husbands father deare,
VVhiche built this Towne and Castle both, to make oure homage here,
VVhiche homage mightie Queene accept: The Realme and right is thine:
The Crowne, the Scepter, and the sworde to thee we do resigne.
And wishe to God, that thou mayste raigne, twice Nestors yeares in peace,
Triumphing ouer all thy foes, to all our Ioyes encreace. Amen.
FRom slumber softe I fell a sleepe,
From slepe to dreame, from dreame to depe delight,
Eche Iem the Gods had giuen the world to keepe
In Princely wise came present to my sight:
Suche solace then did sincke into my minde,
As mortall man on molde coulde neuer finde.
The Gods did striue, and yet their striues were sweete,
Ech one woulde haue a Vertue of hir own,
Dame Iuno thought the highest place moste meete
For hir, bicause of riches was hir throne.
Dame Venus thought by reason of hir loue
That she might claime the highest place aboue.
The Virgins state DIANA still did prayse,
And CERES praysde the fruite of fertile soyle:
And PRVDENCE did dame PALLAS chiefly rayse.
MINERVA all for eloquence did striue,
They smylde to see their quarelling estate▪
And IOVE himselfe decided their debate.
My sweetes (ꝙ he) leaue of your sugred strife,
In equall place I haue assignde you all:
A soueraigne wight there is that heareth life,
In whose sweete hart I haue inclosde you all.
Of ENGLAND soyle she is the soueraigne Queene,
Your vigors there do florish fresh and greene.
They skipt for ioy and gaue their franke consent,
The noyse resounded to the hawtie skie:
With one lowd voyce they cryed al, content,
They clapt their handes, and therewith waked I.
The world and they concluded with a breath,
And wisht long raigne to Queene ELIZABETH.
THE Oratours (most gratious Queene) which liued in the age of them that won greatest renowme; were highly commended, for that they could transforme the Iudges mindes partly, by eloquence, and partly by setting downe before their eyes the calamitie of the thing and person they spake of, into what disposition them listed: the first part declareth vnto vs no common facilitie of men, in that they were so willing in folowing, and attentiue in hearing, as they would suffer themselues to be lead by eloquence: the last, obteined great fauour amongest all nations, whose common weale was gouerned in good order, and far greater amongest the Christians: but greatest of all with thee O most excellent Queene, the nourse of Christ his church, whose minde obedient to Gods worde, the spirite of Christ, and zeale of Godlinesse, and not this profane kinde of speech hath instructed: the verie calamitie of Godly men, and teares of the afflicted, the teares, I say, of faithfull Christians haue throughly moued thee to defende and protect the miserable and dispersed members of Christ obiecte to euerie kinde of iniurie, before beaten in peeces by a thousand deathes with the safetie and preseruation as well of minde as bodie: for these thy singuler benefits of Godlinesse towards vs, and that wee liue vnder so good a tutor beeing magistrate in this the Citie of Norwich, which thy maiestie hath of elemencie granted vnto vs for a mansion place, which were banished for Christ his religion, & moreouer that we finde the mindes of the people fauourable towards vs, first we geue immortall thanks, not suche as we ought, but such as we are able vnto God the father, and the Lorde our only sauiour Iesus Christ, and then vnto thee most mercifull Queene. Moreouer it is our humble and yet our only petition to shewe vnto your maiestie the thankfulnesse of our minde: behold therfore dedicated to your most excellent maiestie not any gifte but our minde, no princely iewell but a monument of godlinesse and posteritie, the which we hope will be so much the more acceptable to your maiestie, for because the goodnesse of God towardes your maiestie is liuely drawen out of the historie of the innocent & most godly Iosephus, whom neither pollicie, strength nor desire of bearing rule, but constant faith, godlinesse of a Christian heart, and heauenly vertue by Gods singular mercie, deliuered from the bloudie conspiracie of his brethren & feare of death, and brought vnto high dignitie and royal kingdome: to whose brethren that prouerbiall sentence of the Hebrewes is verie fitly alluded. Enuie being the desire of euill things, and couetousnesse of transitorie renowne, is often times the occasion of mans destruction: but touching the minde of Iosephus, the same was endued with suche temperance and fortitude, that he might be thought no lesse vniust then wicked, that would accuse him so much as with the least affection of reuengement: so wholly did he commit him self and all the gouernement of his life, his life, I say, put in hazard in a strange kingdom vnto the prouidence of God, that he seemed to hang of no other thing then the onely will of God. But to what ende speake I this? Are not these selfe same things, and others their like (ô most excellent Queene) by the eyes of all men cleerely beholden in thee, and the order of thy kingdome? What man (I say) hauing his wittes, can deny these thinges to be the most happie ioy, spirituall crowne, and cheefest ornament of Christes churche, and truely of this kingdome the princely beautie and perpetuall renowne? Thou surely doest followe moste hollily, the minde of Iosephus, by the singular goodnes of God, aswell in preseruing thy kingdome, as in amplifying the kingdome of Christe (ô thou most faithfull nourse of the churche of God:) for it is in God onely to destroy this man by prosperitie (as it seemeth vnto man) and aduaunce another by all kindes of aduersitie and humaine daunger: whome he acknowledgeth as the vessels of his mercie: and so by his goodnesse, together with the consolation and strength of his spirite, doth bring them to the happinesse of eternall life, which our petition that good and mercifull God graunt may be ratified in establishing your maiestie and gouernance of your kingdom with spirituall wisedome and vnderstanding, in preseruing the same for many yeres, and in induing your maiesties subiectes more and more with true knowledge of him, for his sonnes sake our Lorde Iesus Christ. Amen.
IT is reported (moste gracious Queene,) that Aegypt is watered with the yearely ouerflowing of Nilus, and Lidia with the golden streame of Pactolus, which thing is thought to bee the cause of the greate fertilitie of these countries: but vpon vs, & farther, ouer all Englande, euen in the vttermost borders many and maine riuers of godlinesse, iustice, humilitie, and other innumerable good things, in comparison of the which, golde is vile & nought worth, do most plentifully gush out, and those not from Tmolus, or other hilles I knowe not which, but from that continuall and moste aboundant welspring of your goodnesse. And that of those infinite goodnesses I may lightly touch one, for that neither place, time, nor my facultie doth permit to speake of many: with what praises shall wee extoll: with what magnificent wordes shall wee expresse that notable mercie of your highnesse, most renowmed Queene, & vncredible readinesse to releeue the neede of poore men, then the which of many vertues none can be more acceptable vnto God, as Homer writeth, neither any vertue in a mightie Prince more wondered at amongest men. This hospitall of poore men is moste famous, whiche will be a monument of princely vertue and beneficence amongest all posteritie, instituted by the moste mightie King Henry your highnesse father, confirmed with the great seale, by the moste noble King Edward your brother, but by your maiestie whiche deserueth no lesse praise, of late notably encreased and amplified by the landes & possessions of Cringleforde, that you may not nowe worthily reioyce so much in others ornamentes, as your owne vertues. For you are saide for your singular wisedome and learning, to haue studied that diuine lawe of the moste wise Plato, which he left written in the eleuenth booke of lawes. Such your great bountie therefore, so exceeding, and incredible mercie (O most vertuous Prince) in what books shall wee comprehende? with what dueties, or with what voice shall wee testifie the good will of a thankfull minde? For when wee diligently seeke all the moste exquisite and curious meanes of thankesgiuing: wee cannot so much as attaine vnto the greatnesse of this one benefite, by the which we acknowledge our selues bounde & streightly holden to your moste royall maiestie. We shalbe ouercome, euen with this one and singular benefite, so muche the lesse hope haue wee then in any point to counteruaile the huge Sea of the rest of thy benefites which ouerfloweth on euery side aswell publikely and generally ouer all thy Subiectes, as properly and particularly vppon this Citie. We certeinly nowe inhabite, and lead our liues in those most happie Ilands of the which Hesiodus maketh mention, which not only abounde with all manner of graine, woll, cattell, and other aydes of mans life, but much more with the moste precious treasure of true religion and the worde of God, in the which onely the mindes of men haue rest and peace. There be that call Englande another worlde, which I thinke may bee moste true in this our age: For whereas all landes on euery side of vs are afflicted with most greuous warres, & tossed with the floudes of dissention, we onely, your highnesse gouerning our sterne, do saile in a moste peaceable hauen, and seuered from the worlde of mischiefes, do seeme after a sorte to bee taken vp into a heauen of happinesse. We therefore, according to our bounden duetie, first giue thankes vnto God Almightie, vnto whose goodnesse only with thankes wee referre all this our happinesse, howe great soeuer it be, and pray that he woulde vouchesafe to make the same proper and perpetuall vnto vs. And afterwards, vnto your highnesse, (O most gratious Queene) by whose studie, care and diligence wee confesse this blessednes to be gotten, & so many yeares preserued vnto vs.
We are glad in this beholding you, and we reioyce with desire more than may be beleeued, which as I speake of mine owne thought, so also all these subiectes of Norwich desire me to say the same in their behalfe. And I would to God you coulde pearce these our breasts with your eyes, and throughly viewe the hidden and couered creekes of our mindes: then vndoubtedly shoulde you beholde an infinite heape of good will closely shutt vpp within, which cannot breake out of so narrowe straights. All the faith, studie, and obedience, which are due to so greate a Prince, as hitherto we haue most willingly imployed, so will we alwayes most diligently perfourme the same: and if at any time anie chaunce shall happen (which fortune God turne from vs) that the state of thy blessed maiestie or of this florishing realme shoulde come in daunger, or the worthinesse thereof be in hazarde, we doe not onely protest the effusion of all our goods and substaunce, but also the putting foorth and brunt of our strengthes and bodies therein. Finally we desire and beseech thy excellencie (most renowmed Queene) well to accepte of this our duetie, howe soeuer it be, proceeding from a singular good will, and a moste thankfull minde, and so to think of vs Citizens of Norwich, that perhaps you haue many times com to people more wealthie, but to more ioyfull neuer.
The good meaning Maior, and al his brethren, with the reste, haue not rested from praying vnto the Gods to prosper thy comming hither, and the Gods themselues moued by their vnfained prayers, are ready in person to bid thee worthily welcome, and I MERCVRIE the God of Merchantes and Merchandize, and therefore a fauourer of these Citizens, being thoughte meetest and chosen fittest to signifie the same. Gods there be also which cannot come, being tyed by the tyme of the yeare, as CERES in Haruest, BACCHVS in Wines, POMENA in Orchardes. Onely HIMINEVS denyeth his good wil, eyther in presence, or in person: notwithstanding, DIANA hath so countrechecked him therefore, as he shall euer hereafter be at your commaundement. For my part, as I am a reioycer at your comming, so am I a furtherer of your welcome hither, and for this tyme I bid you farewell.
FEare not oh Queene, thou arte beloued so,
As Subiectes true, will truely thee defende:
Feare not my power to ouerthrow thy wo,
I am the God that can eche misse amende.
Thou doest know, great IVPITER am I,
That gaue thee fyrst thy happy Soueraigntie.
I giue thee still, as euer thou haste had,
A peerelesse power, vnto thy dying daye:
I giue thee rule to ouercome the bad,
And loue, to loue thy louing Subiectes aye.
I giue thee heere this small and slender wande,
To shew, thou shalt in quyet rule the Lande.
IS IVNO rich? no sure she is not so
She wantes that wealth, that is not wanting heere,
Thy good gets thee friendes, my welth wins many a foe,
My riches rustes, thyne shyne passing cleere.
Thou art beloued of Subiectes farre and nye,
Which is such wealth as money cannot bye.
Farewell fayre Queene, I cannot giue thee aught,
Nor take away thy good that is so bound:
Thou canst not giue, that I so long haue sought,
Ne can I hold the riches thou hast found.
Yet take this gifte, though poore I seeme to be,
That thou thy selfe shalt neuer poorer be.
VVHere force doth fiercely seeke to foster wrong,
There MARS doth make him make a quick recoyle,
Nor can indure that he should harbour long,
Where naughty wights manure in goodly soyle,
This is the vse that aydes the force of Warre,
That MARS doth mend, that force doth seeke to marre.
And though oh Queene thou beest a Prince of peace,
Yet shalt thou haue me fastly sure at neede:
The stormes of stryfe, and blustering broyles to cease,
Which forraigne foes, or faythlesse friendes may breede.
To conquer, kill, to vanquish and subdue,
Such fayned folke, as loues to liue vntrue.
IN vayne (fayre Queene) from Heauen my comming was,
To seeke tamend that is no way amis:
For now I see thy fauour so doth passe,
That none but thou, thou onely she it is,
Whose bewty bids ech wight to looke on thee,
By view they may an other VENVS see.
Where bewty boastes, and fauour doth not fayle,
What may I giue to thee O worthy wight?
This is my gift, there shall no woe preuayle,
That seekes thy will, agaynst thy willes delight,
Not where they will, but where it likes thy minde,
Accept that friend, if loyall thou him finde.
IT seemeth straunge to see such strangers here,
Yet not so straunge, but straungers knows you well:
Your vertuous thoughts to Gods do plaine appeare,
Your acts on earth bewraies how you excell:
You cannot die, Loue here hath made your lease,
Whiche Gods haue sent, and God sayeth shal not cease.
Vertuous desire desired me to sing,
No Subiects sute, thoughe suters they were all,
APOLLOS gifts are subiects to no King,
Rare are thy gifts, that did APOLLO call,
Then still reioyce, sithens God and Man say so,
This is my gift, thou neuer shalt haue woe.
MOst worthy wight, what wouldste thou haue of me?
Thou haste so muche, thou canste enioy no more:
I cannot giue, that once I gaue to thee,
Nor take away thy good I gaue before.
I robbed was by Natures good consent
Againste my will, and yet I was content.
A PALLAS thou, a Princesse I will be:
I Queene of losse, thou Goddesse whiche haste got:
I sometime was, thou onely now arte she,
I take, thou gauest that lucke that was my lot,
I giue not thee this Booke to learne thee aught,
For that I knowe already thou arte taught.
WHat arte thou (Queene) that Gods do loue thee so?
Who woon their willes to be so at thy will?
How can the worlde become thy cruell foe?
How can DISDAINE or MALLICE seeke to kill?
Can Sea or Earth deuise to hurte thy hap,
Since thou by Gods doest sit in Fortunes lap.
As Heauen and Earth haue vowed to be thine,
So NEPTVNES Seas haue sworne to drench thy foes,
As I am God, and all the waters mine,
Still shalte thou get, but neuer shalt thou lose:
And since on Earth my wealth is nought at all,
Accept good will, the gifte is verye small.
WHo euer found on Earth a constant friend,
That may compare wyth this my Virgin Queene?
Who euer found a body and a mynde
So free from staine, so perfect to be seene,
Oh Heauenly hewe, that aptest is to soile,
And yet doste liue from blot of any foyle
Rare is thy gifte▪ and giuen to fewe or none,
Malist therefore of some that dare not saye,
More shines thy light, for that I know but one,
That any suche shew, to followe on their way.
Thou thou arte shee, take thou the onely praise,
For chastest Dame in these oure happy daies:
Accept my Bowe, since beste thou dost deserue,
Thoughe well I knowe thy mynde can thee preserue.
AH ha, I see my mother out of sight,
Then let the boy nowe play the wag a while,
I seeme but weake, yet weake is not my might,
My boyishe wit can oldest folke beguile.
Who so doth thinke, I speake this but in iest,
Let me but shoote, and I shall quench his reste,
Marke here my shafts: This all is made of woodde,
Whiche is but softe, and breedes but softe goodwill.
Nowe this is guilte, yet seemes it golde full good,
And doth deceiue blinde louing people still.
But here is one is seldome felte or seene:
This is of Golde, meete for the noblest Queene.
Wherefore Dame faire, take thou this gifte of me,
Thoughe some deserue, yet none deserue like you,
Shoote but this shafte at King or Caesar: He,
And he is thine, and if thou wilte allowe.
It is a gifte, that many here woulde craue,
Yet none, but thou, this golden Shafte maye haue.
TErrestriall Ioyes are tied with sclender ile,
Eche happy hap full hastily doth slyde,
As Sommer season lasteth but a while,
So Winter stormes do longer time abide:
Alas what blisse can any time endure?
Our Sunshine day is dashte with sodaine shoure.
Coulde tongue expresse our secreate ioyes of hart,
(Oh mighty Prince) when thou didst come in place?
No no God wot, nor can expresse the smarte
Thy Subiectes feele in this departing case.
But gratious Queene, let here thy Grace remaine
In gratious wise, till thy returne againe.
In lieu' whereof, receiue thy Subiects heartes,
In fixed Faith continually thine owne:
Who ready rest to lose their vitall parts
In thy defence, when any blaste is blowne.
Thou arte oure Queene, oure rocke and onely stay,
We are thine owne to serue by night and day.
Farewell oh Queene, farewell oh Mother deere,
Let IACOBS God thy sacred body guarde:
All is thine owne that is possessed here,
And all in all is but a small rewarde
For thy greate grace, God length thy life like NOE,
To gouerne vs, and eke thy Realme in Ioy. AMEN.
WHat vayleth life, where sorrowe soakes the harte?
Who feareth Death that is in deepe distresse?
Release of life doth best abate the smarte
Of him, whose woes are quite without redresse.
Lend me your teares, resigne your sighes to me,
Helpe all to waile the dolor whych you see.
What haue wee done, shee will no longer stay?
What may we do to holde hir with vs still?
Shee is oure Queene, wee subiectes muste obey.
Graunt, though with griefe to hir departing will.
Conclude wee then, and sing with sobbing breath,
God length thy life, (oh Queene ELIZABETH.)
THose thinges which at their comming are ioyfull, when they depart are the more sorowful. For what (ô mighty God) could this Sunne at any tyme behold more happy, than we did seeme to our selues, either whē first (ô most merciful Prince) the brightnesse of thy Maiestie did here shine out, or els in all the tyme we rested in your presence, as in a paradise or most happy abundance of all thinges. But woe to that chaungeable course of humaine thinges, which suffreth nothing vncorrupt, nor any thing eternall▪ so pleasure bringeth after it sadnesse, and griefe doth not onely sòdainly take away our delightes, but most bitterly cut of the same. So that we that lately receyued thee approching with all ioyes: should follow thee departing (if the renowne of your highnesse and trayne would suffer it) with mourning garments. If you demaund the cause of so great sorow, I know not what part of his Maiestie God hath indued your person withall, which doth stirre vp great reuerence of thee, but full of a certaine wonderfull loue, wherby it comes to passe that we hardely suffer our selues to be seuered from your presence. Adde moreouer, that we seeme after a sort vnto your highnesse (such is your clemencie) to haue satisfied euery pointe of gratefulnes: yet haue we not, nor euer shall we satisfie our selues in that behalfe. VVe would wishe a longer vse of tyme (if it were profitable) that we might expresse, if not a greater, yet a more continuall shew of our loue and obedience. But we must both yelde to your pleasure, and to the common wealth, for that we know assuredly to our great and singular aduuncement, you neuer cease to seeke out and afoord the same to all your subiectes. Go now therefore, go with luckie steppe thether, whether thy vertue calleth thee. And for vs, this shall comfort vs aboundantly (which deserueth both immortall thankes and perpetuall memory) that thou so renowmed a Prince, hast vouchsafed so curteously to visite our dwellinges. And finally, we here before thee, whom God hath annointed, and before all this famous assembly, take God (which now beholdeth vs) to our witnesse, that we will keepe our faith and obedience in him to thee onely for euer. Thou Nurce of religion, Mother of the Common VVealth, Beautie of Princes, Solace of thy Subiecte, most happily (oh how I rue to speake it) Farewell.
GEllius in his Noctibus Atticis (moste excellente Princesse) doth write, that it was the saying of Phaeuorinus the Philosopher, that the daye was one while a mother, another while a stepdame: and that hee vsed this verse, long time allowed, among men, in hys accustomed communication, . VVhich verse Gellius in this manner expoundeth: That of sorrows & pleasures there be changes, that it cannot be well euery daye with vs, but this day well, and that day yl. And surely, that nothing hath bin at any time more gallauntly or truely spoken, both the continuall course of mans vncertaine estate, and the often alterations wherto he is subiect, manifestly declare, beside that, this present day giueth euident proofe thereof. For, the most ioyfull comming of your highnesse, did not so muche recreate and comforte vs in our daylye desire and longing, as we are discouraged by this your departing, whereto we see preparation made on al hands. And as all ages and degrees receyued your Maiestie, with ioy and gladnes at your comming: so there is not one but lamenteth and mourneth at your graces going. And doubtlesse for my part, bycause myne owne hart is best knowne to my selfe, I protest that I neuer tooke vppon me a greater charge, then that, wherewyth at this present I am burthened: not onely to speake face to face with a most learned lady and princesse, which notwithstanding is, of it self, a harde and a busie matter: but, which is much more, that to me is befallē the sad and sorowful office of leaue taking. For, who woulde not be exceedingly greeued, to see the thing which he principallye desired, in a verye shorte time, and as it were , at an instant taken away, before he might haue therof full fruition? How lamentable a thing is it, to pul away sucking babes from the breastes and bosomes of their most louing mothers? That sonnes and fathers, through some miserable misfortune, shoulde be sundered? Yet I notwithstanding am of opinion, that nature hath not ingendered in any mā, such large loue, and so great good will, no not towarde them whom they haue begotten, or of whom they themselues haue bene begotten, as is the loue and good will wherewith we aduaunce, obey, and reuerence your Maiestie, being the mother and nurse of this whole Common welth, and Countrie. Great is the force of friendshippe and familiaritie, which oftentimes bringeth to passe, that they, which eyther by some kinde of fellowshippe, or by an accustomed condition of life, in tracte of time haue bin closely knitte, and so become both of one minde, and as it were growne togither, that hard and scant they may be seperated, & set in sunder. Hereof sprang the faithfulnesse of Theseus, commē ded by the mouth and monumentes of all men: and the entier friendshippe of innumerable more, whō no daungers, nor labours, eyther by sea or land, coulde sequester from their sweete society & comfortable company, with whom they long had liued. And what desires, or what delightes haue any where bin founde, that may be compared with the sincere affection, and vnfayned good wil, which we beare to your Highnesse, moste excellent Princesse? These are not sufficiente shewes of our fayth and beneuolence, which is much greater, than that the eloquence of any learned man, or that the slendernesse of my witte and capacitie maye make it manifest. Nature at no tyme tyed any thyng with a straighter knotte, or set seueral things at greater agreement, than the soule and the bodie: a declaration wherof is, the incredible consent and concorde of thē both, the mutual care and regard of succouring each other resting in thē both: and the grieuous departing, at the houre of death, the one frō the other remayning in them both. But we whiche professe Christian religion and godlynesse, haue learned this lesson, not only to loue our countrye, but also hir highnesse, in whom the health and safetie of our countrey consisteth, farre aboue the valiaunt Decij, the Scaeuolae the Curtij, which ventured their liues for the Common wealth of Rome: yea, to loue hir grace much better than our owne liues. For, what is he that woulde doubt to dye for hir sake, who if she were not, he should be constreyned to abide a bondage much more bitter than death? Neyther is this faithfull loue of vs your subiectes (most excellente Queene) lightly layde vp in our heartes, and scarcely couered as it were in the ground, but deepely rooted, so that by no stormes nor tempestes of Fortune it can be shaken, by no engines ouerthrowen, by no force or violence vndertroden. For how muche maketh it for the establishmente of faith and loue, in that we know your Maiestie hath obteyned regimente and rule, not at the pleasure and appoyntmente of wauering Fortune, but by right of inheritance, that is to say, : nor that the Homericall Iuppiter , but that the maker and Creator of all things delyuered it into your Highnesse handes? And therefore a singular necessitie of obedience is layde vpon vs, euen by God himselfe, least in Giant guise as it is feygned, we set shoulder against God, and being at defiance with him most wickedly, bidde him battell. When we beholde those excellent and diuine benefites, whiche youre grace hathe bestowed vpon the common wealthe, in so much that among manye, yea innumerable Countreys, and nations vnder the Sunne, none (I will not saye maye bee preferred before vs) but not so much as one may be compared with vs. Ought not then a singulare loue and good will to be lincked with that lawe, and necessitie of obediēce? For what should I make rehearsall of full twenty yeares, wherein we haue liued in such peace and tranquilitie, as not only this our age hath neuer seene the like, but as in olde recordes and aunciente Chronicles of all ages and people, is no where mentioned? What shoulde I call to memorie hurlyburlies foreseene a farre off, as from an espyall: exceeding great daungers, not only perceyued by wisedome, but also preuented by counsell: secrete snares, and priuie practises disappoynted, not to muche by violence, as by policie: finally, all Treacherous attemptes, and Rebellious enterprises, with great gladnesse and reioicing extinguished, without any tumult at all, or very little (doúbtlesse) insuing among the people? These things might make vs (although your Grace were otherwise than you are) performe all dutie of fayth and loue, with most willing mindes to your Maiestie. Nowe, for so muche as we haue your highnesse, our mercifull and bountifull Soueraigne, who possessing principalitie and royall regimente, doest not swarue an heares breadth from iustice and equitie, what is he for a man so sauage and obstinate, whome these so singulare and rare vertues may not allure to all loue and allegiance? Wherefore, if the surest safetie of Princes is the faith of their subiectes (as we haue heard very wise men holde opinion) what can be more safe, what can be more sure, than your excellencie, which the studies and endeauoures of your people, being so great, haue fenced and fortifyed? I haue made mine Oration the longer (most noble Queene) to the intent we might the longer enioy your comfortable presence, from the whiche, to oure great griefe and sorow, we shall depart. But bycause lucke must be borne, which can not be auoyded, least I might seeme more than is meete to delay youre Graces progresse, whiles I am in hand to please mine owne humour, I will make an ende. Concerning your Maiestie, whose presence this day will shutte from our sight, we will notwithstanding in your absence behold and reuerence, we will loue youre Highnesse with all oure heartes, mindes, and endeauoures: we will most dutyfully obey youre Graces Lawes and Commaundementes. Finally, your Maiesties good estate (wherevpon likewise our safetie dependeth) we will commende to Almightie God in oure dayly Prayers, that the same a long tyme may bee continued, and also preserued. Amen.