THe deavv of heauen droppes this day
on dry and barren ground,
Wherefore let frutefull heartes I saye
at Drumme and Trumpet sound
Yeelde that is due, shevv that is meete,
to make our ioy the more,
In our good hope, and hir great prayse,
vve neuer savv before.
The Sunne doth shine vvhere shade hath bin,
long darknesse brought vs day,
The Starre of comfort novv coms in,
and heere a vvhile vvill stay.
Ring out the belles, plucke vp your sprightes,
and dresse your houses gay,
Runne in for floures to stravv the streetes,
and make vvhat ioy you may.
The deaw of Heauen. &c.
Full many a Winter haue vve seene,
and many stormes vvithall,
Since heere vve savv a King or Queene
in pomp and Princely pall.
Wherefore make feast, and banket still,
and novv to triumph fall,
With dutie let vs shevv good vvill,
to gladde both great and small.
The deaw of Heauen. &c.
The Realme throughout vvill ring of this,
and sundry Regions moe
Will say, full great our fortune is,
vvhen our good hap they knoe.
O Norvvich, heere the vvell spring runnes,
vvhose vertue still doth floe,
And loe this day doth shine tvvo Sunnes
vvithin thy vvalles also.
The deaw of Heauen. &c.
GReat things were meant to welcome thee (ô Queene,)
If want of time had not cut off the same:
Great was our wish, but small is that was seene,
For vs to shew, before so great a Dame.
Great hope we haue it pleasd our Princes eye,
Great were the harmes that else our paynes should reape:
Our grace or foyle, doth in your iudgement lie,
If you mislike, our griefes do grow on heape:
If for small things, we do great fauour find,
Great is the ioy, that Norwich feeles this day:
If well we waid the greatnesse of your mind,
Few words would serue, we had but small to say.
But knowing that your goodnesse takes things well
That well are meant, we boldly did proceede:
And so good Queene, both welcome and farewell,
Thine owne we are, in heart, in word, and deede.
MVse not good Queene at me that message brings
From loue, or iust , Lord of might,
No earthly God, yet gouernes mortall things,
And sprites diuine, and shining Angels bright.
This Lord o late to shew his mightie power,
Hath wonders wrought, when world lookt least therefore:
For at his becke, this day, and present houre,
The Heauens shakt, the thunder boltes did rore.
The earth did mooue, the dead therein did rise,
And out of graue, the Ghostes of men are gone,
The wandring Sprites that houered in the Skyes
Dropt downe from ayre, for world to wonder on.
The Sainctes themslues, that sate in glory great,
VVere sent in hast, to worke Iehouas will,
And I that oft my restlesse wings do beate,
VVas cald, to vse my wings and office still.
A common post is Mercury you know,
VVhen he commaunds that made the world of nought,
And flyes as fast, as arrow out of bowe,
VVhen message may expresse Iehouas thought.
VVhose power deuine full long ere this hath seene,
That in this place should lodge a sacred Queene.
And waying well, the Princ whereof I speake,
Might weerie waxe of common pastimes heere,
(For that he knowes hir iudgement is not weake,)
Deuisd aboue, below there should appeare
(To welcome hir) some sights that rare should seeme,
And carelesse stoode, what world thereof did deeme:
So that good Queene, you take them well in worth.
No sooner had Iehoua meant these things,
But Cloudes clapt hands, and soules of men came foorth
Of Heauen gates, yea goodly crowned Kings
VVere flowen abroade, from blessed Abrams brest:
Some in the ayre, and toppes of trees did rest,
Some fell on houses high,
Some suncke in Seas, were drouned now,
And some did light on land where euery eye
May them behold, and note their manners throw.
And therewithall, the blacke infernall spreetes
Ranne out of Hell, the earth so trembling than,
And like yong laddes they hopt about the streetes.
The Satyres wilde, in forme and shape of man
Crept through the wooddes, and thickets full of breeres,
The water Nymphes, and Feyries streight appeares
In vncouth formes, and fashion strange to view:
The hagges of Hell that hatefull are of kind,
To please the time, had learnd a nature new,
And all those things that man can call to mind,
VVere gladde to come, and do their dutie throwe.
I seeing this, cald for my Coatch in hast,
Abide sir Boy, then sayd Iehou now,
Thou goest not yet, vntill Prince be plast
VVhere I appoynt, thou hast nothing to say.
Then still I stoode, to know what should be done.
VVith that, a swarme of people euery way
Like little Antes, about the fields gan runne,
Some to prouide for pomp and triumph great,
Some for good fare, yea household cates and meate,
And some they ranne to seeke where Poets dwell,
To penne foorth shewes, and paint out tries well,
Some halde and puld, to bring the carredge in,
Some ranne to gaze on triumph neere at hand,
And some stoode mute, as they amazde had bin
To see a Court, and Princely noble band
Come marching on, and make heere their abode:
But when I saw the carredge heere vnlode,
And well had wayd the wonders I haue tolde,
O mighty God (quoth I) now giue me leaue
To goe from thee, some message to vnfold,
That by my speech the hearers may conceiue
Thy Godhead great, hath brought this Princesse here.
It shall be so (quoth he) disptch and ,
And tell hir, that she is to me so .
That I appoynt by mans deuice and arte,
That euery day she shall see sundrie shoe,
If that she please to walke and take the ayr:
And that so soone as out of dore she goes
(If time do serue, and weather wareth fayre)
Some odde deuice shall meete hir highnesse streight,
To make hir smyle, and ease hir burthened brest,
And take away the cares and things of weight
That Princes feele, that findeth greatest rest.
VVhen I had thus receyvd my charge at full,
My golden rodde in liuely hand I tooke,
And badde in hast my flying Horses pull.
But eare I past, I gan about me looke
To see that Coatch, and each thing galln wer:
So downe I came, all winged as you see.
And since I haue espyde that Princesse there,
That greatest Kings do sue to by degree,
And many mo that sues no whit, do feare,
I kisse hir steppes, and shew my maisters will,
And leaue with hir such graces from aboue,
As alwayes shall commaund hir peoples loue,
(Vphold hir raigne, maynteyne hir regall state,
Find out false harts, and make of subiectes true,
Plant perfite peace, and roote vp all debate)
So with this grace, good Queene now heere ,
For I may now on earth no longer stey,
Than Seruants must to Maisters will obey.
Aas poore boy, where shalt thou wander no,
I am thrust out of Heauen in despight,
My Mother too beginnes to bend the brow,
For both we walke, as we were banisht quite.
She mournes and weepes, and blubbers like a child,
By which great griefe, in rage now may she fall,
And I haue leaue to walke the wood so wild,
To houle, to crye, and ore complayne withll.
For loe of late, where she and I did goe,
A man we met, a father graue and wise,
VVho you the troth will know)
VVe were the droe, of earth and
Fond ,
A leavvd delight, a flying fnsie light,
A shadow fond, that no shape, but name.
The whole abuse of each good witte or wight,
An ydle ground, whereon vayne Poets walke,
A cause of are, a spring where follie oes
A wicked meane, to nourish wanton talke,
And to conclude, sharp ettles vnder Rose
VVe were: thus sayd the Father that we me.
My Mother blsh, these thundering words to heare,
And from them both, away in hast get,
To see if I in Court find better cheer,
But if no friend, no fauore I may finde,
Nor aunswere haue of that which heere I speake,
Farewell, I seeke my fortune in the wind,
For Cupid hath in head .
If Heauen
In earth below, I to hide my face.
TO striue with boyes that standes on bragges and braue
I thought great scorne, till Cupid I espyde,
But that proude ladde, that makes so many ,
Must needes find one, to daunt his Peacocks pride.
Dame Chastite is she that winnes the field,
VVhose breast is armd with thoughtes of vertues ,
VVho to the fight doth bring no glittering shield,
But ceane conceytes, which pure and blssed are,
That strikes downe lust, and tames the wilfull mind,
Maynteynes the iust, and holds vp learning both;
And wisedome great, through me the Sages find,
Philosophers, the louers of the troth.
Yea Kings and Queenes by me worke wonders still,
Do conquere Realmes, and VVisedome do attayne.
The studious minds, whose knowledge, witte, and skill,
And all the world doth fame and glory gayne
That chastly liues, it talkes with God aboue,
It climbes the Cloudes from pomp and pleasures vayne.
It is a thing that shining Angels loue,
And in the world to come shall liue and raigne.
It triumph makes of fickle fond desire,
It breedes great force and courage still in men,
It quencheth sparkes and flames of fancies fire,
It quickes the wittes, and helpes the art of penne,
Yea all good giftes from Chastitie doth rise
That worthy are of honor vnder Skyes.
Then sith (ô Queene) chast life is thus thy choyce,
And that thy heart is free from bondage yoke,
Thou shalt (good Queene) by my consent and voyce,
Haue halfe the spoyle, take eyther bowe or cloke.
The bowe (I thinke) more fitte for such a one
In fleshly forme, that beares a heart of stone
That none can wound, nor pearce by any meane.
VVherefore take heere the bow, and learne to shoote
At whome thou wilt, thy heart it is so cleane,
Blind Cupids boltes therein can take no roote.
Now will I say in this poore Coatch of mine,
To mount the Skyes, and see the Gods deuine.
HOw now my friend, where hast thou other plight I trow
Thou wast, when lately I thee met, hath Cupid lost his bow?
His cloke? his Coatch his witte and all? and fled from mothers face?
Or else hath Cupid gone to Schole, to learne some prettie Grace?
To play the God, fye foolish boy, leaue of these toyes in time,
Thy Mother (as the Poets fayne,) when beautie was in prim
A stumpet was, it may be so, as well appeareth yet,
Thou art not of the race of Gods, thou art some Beggers chitte.
Nay doting foole, that still dost pore on Bookes,
Though Coatch be gone, and golden cloke be lost,
Yet like a God, I tell thee Cupid lookes,
VVhen old grey beard shewes like a rotten post.
It yll becommes an aged man to rayle
On women thus, that are not now in place,
But sure thy words are spent to small auayle,
They can not blot my mother, nor my race.
But dost thou thinke thou art God then shew some proofe thereof.
That can I do, but you old men, with boyes will iest and scoffe,
And either laugh to scorne our words, or taunt vs past the nick.
Beleeue not that, but when in deede we enter neere the quicke,
Ye wincke like Coltes, and fling away from witte and feeling seene,
VVel Cupid, prooue thou art a God, and shew some good defence,
To this thy talke, I will giue eare, and silence keepe a whyle,
Vntill thy wds haue gne so farre, thy folly makes me smyle.
The greatest Clarkes that earst haue bin, three thousand yeres agoe,
VVhen they on Venus talke or treate, takes Cupids part ye knowe.
Teir bokes, their scrolles, their pāphlets large, makes mētiō of my name,
You nede no furter search for proof, to try out Cupids fame.
Boast not of booke, for bookes they be, that plainely witnes beares
How Cupids arte infects good minds, and canckers honest eares.
And though fond men in liables shew on you a flourish fine,
Such geegawes grees not with good rules, nor holds on gifts deuine.
VVhy Sir, you will beleeue, that Ioue and many more
Of other Gods in Heauen are, where I haue bin before?
In Heauen? there you trippe, why boy how came you thence?
You went abroade to take the ayre, and haue bin walking senc
Like dawes along the coast, O boy, thy proofe is bare,
In Heauen is but one that rules, no other Gods there are.
And doth not Ioue and Mars beare sway? that is tru.
Then put in Tom and Tibbe, and all beares sway as much as yo.
I told you Sir before, your taunting tong would bite.
I come too neere the sore, and please not your deligh.
But since you for naught, and can not heare the truth,
I will not shame my hoarie heares, to striue with wanton youth.
This Cupid, Venus sonne, as men suppose to bee,
Is neyther God nor Man in forme, nor monster as you see,
But such a kind of shade, as can no substance shoe,
Begot by braynelesse blind delight, and nurst with natures foe.
Fed vp with faithlesse foode, and traynd in trifling toyes,
Awakt with vice, and luld asleepe agayne with yrkesome ioyes.
ARt thou so fond to talke with doting age,
This Man did bring thy mother in a rage,
And told hir playne, a Goddesse faynd she was,
Most leavvd of life, and brittle as the glasse,
I VVatonnesse knowe well that tale is true,
To this my friend now Rtte what say you?
I could say much, but I will hold my peace,
Foule is that bird that his owne neast defiles.
If Riot should not speake, that Ven knowes so well,
(VVith whom since Cupid bare a name, did wantō Ven dwel)
Much pitie were it sure, that Riot life should beare,
For I am father of delight and pleasure euery where.
VVithout the help of whome, Dame Ven can not liue,
For vnto Lust and Riot both, doth Venus honor giue.
And Lust is Riots ioy, a spright that pleades for place
In euery soyle, since world began to boast of Adams race.
And now to tell you playne, from me, or from my stocke,
(An endlesse swarme of ydle of folke, a merrie carelesse flocke)
As prating Poets fayne, at first did Vens spring,
But Venus was no strumpet sure; she was some finer thing
That alwayes furthers Loue, in French a playne,
A beter of good bargynes oft, and roote of fancyes vayne.
Though Goddesse were she not, yet faire and fine was she,
As I haue heard good Clarkes report, and you in Bookes shal
Of hir great Storyes made, and great accompt thys day
VVe make of Venus darlings still, wherefore in briefe to say,
Both I and thousands more, with needes must hold.
Twas she, to whome King Pris sonn did giue the apple of golde
That cost so many but rde the seege of Try,
And you shall see what prettie pranckes the mother and this boy
Hath playd in many partes, my knowledge is but small,
I tell by heeresay many things, but am not learnd at all
Good Wantonesse thou knowst, but psse ore that awhile
I could tell tales of Ven yet, would make the hearers smile.
O speake no more, come comfort Cupid now▪
Let Venus go, that ate and saw with eye
The order great, and all the manner how
Dame Castitie did mount to Starrie Skye
VVith such a Coatch, and such a noble spoyle,
As seldome hth in Heauen oft bin seene.
She sayd, when she had Cupid put to foyle,
She gaue his bowe and shaftes vnto a Queene.
And Cupid streight came running vnto me.
I saw him bare, ad sent him bare away,
And as we are in deede but bare all three,
So must we part as poorely as we may.
No reasoning heere with him that learned is,
Philosophers knowes more than wanton fooles,
If we had once bin beaten well eare this
And lovd our Bookes, and truely plyde our Scholes,
VVe had bin learnd, yea livd, and felt no lacke,
VVhere now our wealth is all vpon our backe.
By sweete Sainct Iohn we are in goodly weede,
To daunce with belles a Morric throuh the Streets.
If any heere, three ydle people needs,
Call vs in time, for we are finefor sheetes:
Yea, for a shift, to steale them from the hedge,
And lay both sheetes, and linnen all to gage.
VVe are best be gone, least some do heare alledge
VVe are but Roages, and clappe vs in the Cage.
Come Cupid come, if thou wilt heare a song,
Dame Chastti hath sent hir Coatch along,
To comfort those, that dayly liues in wo.
NAy Cupid will, go hang himselfe I tro.
Much better were, to fall on pynt of knife,
Than from rich state, to leade a beggers life.
NOw world may iudge what fables are, & what vain gods ther b,
VVhat names and titles fondlings giue, to thē, likewise you see,
And that one God alone doth rule, the rest no vertue showe,
Vayne Venus and blind Cpid both, and all the ragment rowe
And rabble of Gods, are fayned things, to make the season short,
As wisedome knowes that wel cā wey, the worth & weight of sport.
Through trifles light, sad things are sene, through vice is vertue foūd,
By hollow wayes, and crooked pathes, appres the playnest ground.
Thus leauing vnto wisedomes reach, the things that heere are done,
And fearing foyle, if heere vve should, in further folly runne,
VVe stay, saue that, some Musicke commes, to knitte in order due,
The substance of thys Shew, that we present to you.
DAme Chastitie we serue, and wayte vpon hir still,
Saue now, that she is cald to Cloudes, to know will.
She bad vs walke abroade, and searche, where might be seene
In stately troupe, and royall Court, a worthy noble Queene.
Salute hir in my name, and loke in secret sort
(Quoth she) you do with al your force, maynteyne hir princely port.
Good exercise as chiefe, thy humble dutie doo,
Let Shamefastnesse, and Modestie, and sober Temprance too,
Attend as handmaydes still, vpon that sacred dame.
VVe hearing what our mistresse sayd, & marking wel the same,
Did hast vs hither streight, but ere we went at large,
Iebus sent vs Graces great, and gaue vs powre and charge,
(VVhen pomp is most in place) to creepe in princely hart,
And gide the mind, & throughly serch, the soule & euery part.
That still the feare of God, be burning in hir brest,
Ther is the only house O Quene, wher we four maids wil rest,
There we will seruice shew, there shall our budde,
Ther is the plot, the seate, the soyle, and place to do most good.
Yea vnder richest roabes, we haue a powre to goe,
In fairst weedes are cleanest thoughts, & purest minds I know.
The earlish Countrey cloyne, yea clad in smeared cloke,
VVith cāckred hart, & currish lokes, sits grinning in the smoke.
The comely cleane attire, doth carrie mind aloft,
Makes mā think Seoe to stoupe to vice, & loke to Vertue oft.
The Sunne that sneth bright, hath vertues manifold,
A gallant floure hath pleasant smell, great goodnesse is in gold.
So gay and glittring Dame, thy graces are not small,
Thy heauenly gifts in greatest prease, in deede surmoūts thē all.
MOst royall Prince, speede on thy comely pace,
Make hast in time, to do thy subiects good,
Go rnne with me, to stay this heauie cace,
Take pynes good Queene, to gayne the giltlesse bloud.
In one mans life, saue liues of many moe,
Saue him in whome, the state of others stayes,
For I poore wretch, God knowes am minded so,
VVith him to liue, with him to end my dayes.
VVho now in force, of Tyrants hands doth lye,
And vaynely striues, to scape his helplesse fate,
VVho seeth his death, and dolefull date so nigh,
Go hast to help, and yet perhaps too late.
YEt were I best, to kill this peeuish Boy,
VVhome now she makes, hir chiefe and sole delight,
In whome she finds, such pleasure and such ioy,
That causelesse I, am cleane defaced quite.
Such gaudyes gay, are in his Peacocks face,
And skinne smooth vp, with shew of ydle hue,
That I do lodge, and languish in disgrace,
Though she of me, hath proofe of promise true.
VVell, make thy choyce▪ and see what likes thee best,
View he ere the death, of this thy darling now,
Or yeeld thy loue, to fancie my request,
VVhose manly force, shall winne the conquest throw.
NAught shalt thou winne, by that which I shall lose,
Thou gest no gaynes, though I be thus bereft,
And though that I, betweene two mischiefes goes,
VVhere naught but bale, and wretched woe is les ▪
Yet thy reward, which doest assault my friend,
(In whose delight, my heart was fedde long whyl)
Shall be disdeyne, and hatered in the ende,
A guerdo itte, for such a Tyrant vile.
THis wretch is he, by whome I am annoyde,
He hath thy heart, though I deserue the same,
If wisely then, I do my harmes auoyde,
VVhy stey I sword, I can not purchase blame,
By cutting off, the cause of my distresse,
VVhen he is gone, my lette shall be the lesse.
HOw canst thou say, thou doest dezerue my heart,
VVhich kilst my heart, and causest all my woe,
SInce that thou takest, my dealing in such part,
I will delight, to wreake my wrath on oe.
In greeuing thee, most glad to heare me grone,
And art most pleasd, when Manhode makes his moan.
O Gracious Prince, to thee my mone I make,
And prostrate fall, O Prince before thy foote,
VVith wonted grace, on me some pitie take,
O salue my sore, let sorrow find some boote.
I swelt in sighes, and sure shall dye to see
My friend dispatcht, and murthred in this wise,
O bid the wretch, come thrust his sword in me,
For from my loue, the cause of griefe doth rise.
I made the fault, then punish me therefore,
Shall silly Lamb, be ledde to slaughter thus?
Do eyther help, with death my endlesse sore,
Or with remorse, and ruth the case discusse,
If he do dye, by Mightie Iou I sweare
I will not liue, if sword or knife be found,
VVith scratched face, ▪
I know at first, my ,
And then ad, my , steale away
O Queene, in hast,
SInce O Prince, forbidst reuenge to take,
wilst that men▪ should lose their time in loue,
Then marke my case, and giue me leaue to make
Myn owne defence, and alleage and proue,
And I will shewe right and title good,
And that I do, desrue the .
Though this fond wretch, always my sute withstoode,
As one who long, ,
VVhome leavvd delight, hath ledde out of the way,
(VVhich good Aduise, and orded Iudgement keepe)
VVhome Beauties blast hath ounst against the ,
VVhere eraggy tockes, and sands lye idde in deepe,
A fond deuice to trust to payted face,
And fasten fayth vpon so fickle ly,
To whome Dme Hbe, lends often guiefull grace,
VVhich euery yeare and day doth plucke away,
VVhome sicknesse spoyles, and ,
VVhome time doth eate and age ,
VVhome ares of mind do shake and alter so,
As VVinter winds defaceth ▪
A snare for witte, a byte for wanton youth,
A false conceyte, an error of the mind,
A fond delight, wherein there is no truth,
A poysoned dish, th doth the reason blid▪
A colour cast on things that are but ,
A glorious shew, to shrowde a homely part,
A rule to runne, a leavvd and retchlesse ,
A deepe deceyte, which daunteth oft the heart.
In rage of youth, these pricking thitles growes,
VVhiles Riot aynes, and Folly bears the sway
In hoarie age, ,
VVhere .
The weaker exe, in
The infant hath, the, ▪
The hurtfull weede, which ,
To view of eye, doth .
In outward shower, in deed the trust in small,
They are but clokes, and ,
The vertuous mind, and ,
VVhich gaynes .
Dame Ven loues, the and warlike Knight,
Though once alas, she loud .
And Ladyes which, do loue ,
Loue such as can, their .
VVhat could thys ▪
VVhome could this
Iudge thou O Queene, which of vs two could make
The better shift, and force the worst to yeeld.
YEt let me pleade, my cause before my Queene
As thou hast done, and sentence after craue,
Then shall the truth, of our two be seene,
I craue no spoyle, but wish the thing I haue.
VVhy should my beautie, purchase my ▪
VVhy should my prayse, become ▪
VVhy should Dame Natures giftes be thought so bass,
VVhich heeretofore haue bin in greater name?
VVho euer could, enforce the Gods with might,
To yeeld themselues, as conqured with his strength?
Yet Beautie hath, subdude them with his sight,
And made them end, and bow to him at length.
VVhome force subdues, with sadde vnwilling heart,
Submittes themselues, and greeue at euery strok:
VVho beautie winnes, and gaynes vnto his part,
They gladly graunt, to take the pleasant yoke.
Thy strength thou mayst, full many a VVinter ide,
Till time doth serue, to shew the same in place,
Sweete Beautie can, no moment be vnspide,
But doth delight, each one with gladsome grace.
Dame Natures shew, and Ritches Beautie is,
A Heauenly gift, to rauish euery eye,
A perfite Peare, wherein is naught but blisse,
Delight of men, delight of Gods on high.
Apollo pleasd, himselfe with Golden heare,
Hae delightes, the Gods with comely ue,
God Venus oft, hir tender brest did teare,
VVhen she Adoi death was fayne to .
Pbus did mourne, when his delight was slayne,
VVith great mishappe, and error of his hand,
But Gannimed, aboue with Ioue doth raigne.
And wayting on, his Nectars cuppe doth stand.
VVhat should I speake, of him who at the brooke,
The wanton Nimphes, in loue supprisd away,
Or him whome Pheb, in to hir Charriot tooke,
Or him, whose beautie did the morning grey,
The Gods in beautie, passe each mortall wight,
And men surmount, in forme the fayrest beast,
And yet of them, some are more braue in sight,
VVhose natures are, more fined than the rest.
The vgly Tode, swel out his poyson cold,
A crabbed corpse, commes of a churlish kind,
No ragged mold, the vertue rare can hold,
A seemely face, declares a modest mind.
The fayrest Horse will swiftest runne his race,
The gallantst Hound, will soonest wind his game,
VVhat neede I more, to treate vpon this cace,
The hearers shall, be iudgers of the same,
If Beauties giftes, and fauoure you exile,
Then Manhode must, be heere preferd the while.
STay iudgement Prince, and let my cace be know
VVhose friendly toyle, deserues to reae his gayn
Mine earnest ute, may not be thus orethrowen,
So long employd, in hope and endlesse payne.
I see these men, prease boldly heere in place,
Vnfolds great words, and long debtes the cace:
And braues it out, with goodly gallant Shewes,
VVhich I will not, eclips nor blot at all,
My clayme is good, and that iust God he knowes,
VVhat neede I then, my right in question call.
I haue no force, nor skill in marshiall field,
I boast not of my fresh and flouring hue,
Nor yet neede not, in any poynt to yeeld,
That can alleadge, Dezarts and seruice true.
My trauell then, and truth may not be lst,
Nor my good will, be recompenst with wrong▪
Nor he that hath, with tempestes sore bin tost▪
And tasted griefes, and bitter torments long,
May not so soone, be shaken off for nought,
I take fine tearmes▪ to shew my secret thought:
The Gods accepts, our dutie in good part,
The Prince rewards, the billes of our request,
The greatest men, consider but the heart,
The friendly meanes, can ame the wildest beast.
And VVomen who, in softest mouldes be cast,
VVhose tender heartes, rues on our carefull cryes,
Must needes be wonne, with louing meanes at last,
To ease our playntes, and wipe our watered eyes.
True loue of right, must recompenced be,
Dezart must needes, flye farre beyond the rest,
Then graunt O Prince, this pretious prise to me,
VVhose loyall loue, claymes place aboue the bst.
MVch words are spent, where speech shall not preuayle,
Long time is lost, in threats and fond dispute,
Though I good Happe, haue borne but simple ayle,
And went aloofe, tis I must end thys sute,
And reason bring, as victor of the field,
Vnto whose troth, your weak discourse shall yeeld.
Faire Beautie heere, for whome you fondlings striue,
May moue, I graunt, a God to like hir well,
But though she wer, the fayrest thing aliue,
(As sure indeede, hir beautie doth excell)
Is that a proofe, that you in loue must fall,
VVith that which nought pertaynes to you at all?
Admitte hir mind, by meane of some consayte,
VVith sweete delight, of fancie may be ledde,
Your eagre eyes, most greedie of such bayte,
In forward hope, a season hath bin fedde.
Shall she be spoyld, for fauoure she bestowe
In friendly sort, and not in faithfull wise?
Nay sure, she shall, ne fame nor freedome lose,
For fraylties faultes, or vse of gracious eyes.
But to the poynt, and purpose of your strie,
One pleades good will, by shape and fauoure got,
(A gallant Boy, to please a pleasant wife)
Another tels a penned ale by rote,
Bedeckt and fylde with ynckone tearmes ynow.
The third commes in, and calles himselfe Dezart,
And each of them are seene in Storyes throw,
And finely seekes to conquere Loue by arte.
Great sleight is vsd, and Clarkly cunning both,
To force a right, and iudgement in this cace,
Dezart, e telles a trimme discourse of troth,
The wigge makes boast of shining face.
And Courage he, by Manhood claymeth all.
Great poynts they are, that pleaded are this day,
And vnto whome, the Lady now should fall,
Some doubts may rise, if reason bore the sway.
But to be briefe, fayre Shape and comely port,
The wise men hold, but outward blossoms vayne,
And Manhoods force, may heere be knitte vp short,
Stoute hearts may not, alone the glorie gayne:
Nor yet Dezat, that neerest goes the gole,
May winne the prise, and thrust his better backe,
For he it is, that hath the greatest dole,
That doth in deede, no peece of Fortune lacke.
Good Fortune still, a Lord of worldly chance
Is only iudge, himselfe, of all is done,
Bid Strength stand backe, good Fortune leades the Dance,
Fine shape likewise, with Fortune dare not runne.
Dezart is dead, where Fortune men aduance.
So heere I prooue, since I good Fortune haue,
This Dame is mine, hir destnie willes it so,
In Mothers wombe, the Gods this gift me gaue,
She ordeynd was, with me away to goe.
Each worldly grace, and rule with Fortune flyes,
A wife must needes, then stope to destnyes lot.
VVherefore I heere, possesse thys noble prize,
As Iewell rich, by happe and Fortune got.
VVho striues to take, hir now from me by force,
Shall haue withall, my breath and vitall corse.
ME thinkes most fond, and weakely commes bee heere
Alone to three, if we togither stoode:
And though in deede, we buy the quarrell deere,
And pay therefore, the sweetest of our bloud,
Yet let vs shew, the noble hearts of men,
For since he sayth, we all our labour lose,
Not one of vs, shall neede to sorow then,
Nor care a figge, how ere the matter goes.
A Gree, though I Dezart haue double wrong,
I will reuenge the same by dint of sword,
And you shall see, I will not dallie long
To do my best, sith I haue spoke the word.
Despayred men, dare fight with Fortune still,
And scratch for life, as long as breath will last,
VVhen hope is gone, I know no better skill,
But bide the brunt, till all the broyle be past.
Let loue and life, togither make an ende,
The heart shall feele, and hand shall head defend.
THough I speake last, that first found speciall grace,
In formost ight, looke you for tender yeares,
And iudge him not, a Milkesoppe by his face,
That stoutely like a Man at neede appeares.
Great skorne I thinke, good Fortune should haue all,
And reape the right, that laboure long hath sowen,
Yea, Fauoure hath perhappes more friends at call,
Than you would thinke, or to the world is knowen.
WE VVater Nimphs haue time to sport, & skip in euery place,
VVhē days are lōg, & nights be short, & Phoebus hides his face▪
And hearing that there came a Queene, along this water side,
So long as we poore silly Nimphes, on land dare well abide,
VVe daunce, we hop, and bounse it vp, in honor of hir name,
To whome Diana and hir trayne, doth giue immortall fame.
VVE shun the Sunne, yet loue the Mone, & hate the open light,
VVe hide our heads amid the Reedes, in blustring stormy night.
In calmest weather do we play, yet seldome seene we are,
VVe watch our times, and flee from those, that stil doe on vs stare.
VVe harme no wight, yet fearefull be, to those that haue no spreete,
VVe are some hold of VVomēs sexe, and gladde with mē to meete.
THe Phayris are another kind, of eles that daunce in darke,
Yet can light Candles in the night, and vanish like a sparke,
And make a noyse and rumbling great, among the dishes oft,
And wake the sleepie sluggish Maydes, that lyes in Kitchen loft.
And when in field, they treade the grasse, from water we repayre,
And hoppe and skippe, with thē sometime, as weather waxeth fayre▪
VVHat rule is this, what tales tel you, what bable do you make▪
VVill you tel secrets out of Schole? beware, if bugges awake
You will be shent, come hye you hence, can yee abide the viewe,
The gaze, and staring such a whyle, of all this noble crue?
Though that we came to honor hir, that Gods on high haue blest,
It is a shame for water Nimphes, on earth so long to rest.
THough cleane against the Phayries kind, we come in open view,
(And that the Queene of Phayries heere, presents hirselfe to you)
Some secret cause procures the same: the Gods at first, ye know,
In field to honour thee good Queene, did make a gallant shew:
Should we that are but sprites of thaire, refuse to do the same?
No sure, for Gods and mortall men, shall serue thee noble Dame.
VVHen Mercury came first in Coatch, a message to vnfolde,
(And Maske of Gods amid the night, in chāber secrets told)
VVe warned were to shape our selues, to do what Ioue assignd,
But water Nymphes stept in the while, and so exprest their mynd,
And thrust poore Phayries out of place, yet we: or feare of soyle,
VVatcht here our time, & for our sports, did chose this certain soyle.
YEa out of hedge we crept in deede, where close in caues we lay,
And knowing by the brute of fame, a Quene must passe this way,
To make hir laugh, we clapt on cotes, of Segges and Bulrush both,
That she shuld know, & world should say, lo there the Phayries goth,
Like Furies madde, and Satyres wild yet loe, we haue in store
Fine Timbrels, that the Auntients vse, to make the shew the more.
WHē saints & soules, & sprites of mē, frō Heauē downe did fling▪
(And Ieboua spake, and Cloudes did shake, & many a crowned King.
Crept out of graue, to honor thee, we ready were to wait,
But Hagges of Hell, & damned Feends, that feedes on false desayt
Did blush to see thy presence Queene, but we that harmelesse were,
Kept loue in store, to shew at length our dutie voyde of feare.
BVt when that Cupid was condemnd, and Venus fell in rage,
And VVantonnesse & Riot rude, for knackes were clapt in cage,
And all the ragment rowe of Gods, to one great God gaue place,
VVe sillie Phayries were afeard, therewith to shew our face.
Yet when we saw a Maske well likt, and Gods condemnd appeere,
VVe did consult, at last farewell, the Phayries should be heere.
BVt with Orations good and great, to wall the weake was thrust,
Yet whē the strongest did their best, of force yet speake we must.
For Ioue that all commands, and doth, bade vs to watch the howre,
And shew no more at this adue, than was in Phayries powre.
So keeping course of Ioues commaund, we speake that is in brest,
And leaue the Queene and all the trayne, with wit to iudge the rest.
WIth Gods, yea kings & Quenes, begās your entrie to this place,
VVith gētle Gosts & merrie sprites, we mind to end the cace.
So in good signe of happie chance, to thee O sacred Queene,
To knit vp all, we meane to daunce with Timbrels on this greene.
And then farewell, we can no more, salute thee in oure gise,
All that is done, by great good will, is offered to the wise.