O Lorde of Ghoſtes whoſe fyrye flaſhe
(that forth thy hand doth ſhake)
Doth cauſe the trembling Lodges twayne
of Phoebus Carre to quake,
Raygne reachleſſe nowe: in euery place
thy peace procurde I haue
Aloofe where Nereus lockes vp lande
Empalde in winding Waue.
Thwack not about with thunder thumpes, the rebell kinges bee downe,
The rauening tyrauntes Scepterleſſe, are pulled from their crowne:
By mee all daunted is whereon, thy boults thou ſhouldſt beſtowe.
And yet O Father, yet the Heauens are ſtill withhelde mee froe,
At all aſſayes I ſerue, as might an Impe of Ioue behoue,
And that thou ought to Father mee, my ſtepdame well doth proue.
Why doſt thou linger in delay, is Heauen of vs afraide?
Seeme wee ſo awfull, fell, and fierce? and wherefore are wee ſtaide?
And cannot Atlas boyſteous backe on ſtouping ſhoulder tough,
Vpholde the payſe of Hercules, and heauen well inough?
What is it ſier? what is it Ioue that thee ſo much detarres?
What may thee force keepe backe thy ſonne from ſcaling of the Starres
For death hath let me paſſe againe from dungeon darke to thee.
When miſchiefes fell and monſters all deſtroyde and ſpoyled bee
That eyther Lande, or Seas, or Ayre. Or hell engender coulde
Arcadian Lion none to raunge in ſaluage Nemea wolte.
The Stymphall Foule hath chaſed bin with Bowe, and Bruſell boulte.
No nimble heart of Menalus doth lye in hill nor houlte
The Dragon daunting with his bloud hath goarde the goulden groue.
And Hydra hath his courage coolde, and Diomedes droue
Whoſe puffed paunches pampred were with ſtoare of ſtraungers bloud
That ſcoarde the Coaſte and barren bankes of cruell Heber floud
I ſlaughterd them, and that the force of foe might well bee ſeene.
I prowlde away the boottes of the prowde Amazon Queene,
Of ſilent ſhades in glummy Goulphes the dreadfull doomes I ſaw.
On Cerber black the Tartar Tike the ſonne did ſhine with awe,
And he with ſteaming Goggle eyes hath glyed vpon the ſoone:
Anteus yawnes, and gapes no more whoſe gaſping breath to doone.
A front his alters Buſir fell was knockt vnto the grounde,
By him whoſe hande gaue Gerion his deepe and deadly wounde
And ſlew the mighty Bull that was to hundred heartes a dreade,
All noyous plagues I ſpoyled haue that euer Tellus bread,
And daunted by my hand they lye: the Gods now neede not free:
The worlde to aunſwere Iunoes yre, no monſters now can get.
Now ſhew thy valiaunt ſonne his ſire, or ſet him in the clowdes,
Thou ſhalt not neede to bee my guide, my ſelfe will climbe the ſhrowdes.
Doe thou my paſſage but allow, and I ſhall finde away,
But if thou dreade, that monſters more the earth engender may,
Haſt on eache monſter hideous, to ſhew it ſelfe in time,
Whyle Hercules hath his aboade beueath the heauenly Clyme.
For who encounter ſhall the fiendes? who iſt that Grecia hath,
That may be meete, to bide the brunt of mighty Iunoes wrath?
My prayſe burtes not my health: my fame doth fly, from land to land:
The yſy poale doth know mee, where the northerne beare doth ſtand:
The eaſterlings encombred with the gleede of ſcorching ſunne.
The ſouth, where Phoebe by crooked cleare of Tropick Crab doth rūne:
In euery coaſt O Titan where thou doſt thy ſelfe reueale.
How I haue met thee face to face, to thee I doe appeale.
Aloofe beyonde the compaſſe of thy light I ſet my foote,
And neuer coulde thy blaze ſo farre his glymſinge glory ſhoote.
As I haue forſt the honour of my triumphes for to ſtreatch,
The day it ſelfe hath had his ſtint, within my trauells reatch
Dame Nature faylde, the worlde was ſhogd beſide his center dew,
And ougſome night in ſhimmering ſhade, from dungeon darck I drew.
And cankred Chaos lodged aloafe encountred mee awayne:
Yet from the deepe I gat to ground, whence none returnes agayne.
Wee ſtraue againſt the Ocean ſtormes, I balaſen the keele
Fraught with my waight, that wreſtling waues could not cōpell it reele.
What heapes of hazardes tempted I through all the open ayre,
To qualify thy wedlocks wrath can miſchiefe none repayre
The earth would loath ſuch baggage bred as I would match by might,
Yea monſters none are to be founde, the fiendes doe ſhun my ſight.
And Hecules for want of fiendes agaynſt him ſelfe did rage
What eluiſhe creatures curſt did I with naked arme aſſwage.
Was euer any peuiſh thing ſo big vpon the ground
That coapt with mee, but that my hand alone did it confound.
Not hether to from vermin vyle through faynting feare I leapt
In babiſh yeares, not when to me in Cradell layde they leapt:
Eache thing that was commaunded me, at eaſe I did obay:
Thus free from paynefull toyle to me there neuer paſt a day.
What vermin haue I vanquiſhed, no king commaunding it?
My courage cloyes me more then all the wyles of Iunoes wit.
But what auayleth me to rid mankinde of fickle feare?
The Gods yet cannot raygne in reſt: while vp the world doth peare,
New rid of furious fiendes, it ſees a loft in ſtarry ſkies
The cruell creatures all, that earſt on earth did fore aggriſe.
Dame Iuno hath tranſport the elues The ſcorching Crab doth creepe
Abouth the burning zone, and loofe at Affrica doth keepe
The Tropick line: and Harueſt fat he feedes with parching heate:
To Virgo, Leo turnes the time, and in a reaking ſweate.
He buſkling vp his burning Mane, doth dry the dropping ſouth.
And ſwallowes vp the ſlabby cloudes in fyry foming mouth.
The Vrchins all are creapt to ſkies, and haue preuented mee:
I Conqueror from Earth to Heauen, my trauells all may ſee:
Theſe gargle Faces grim on heauen, Dawe Iuno firſt did ſet:
As though thereof the terrour might to ſkies my paſſage let:
Although ſhe ſcatter them in Skyes, or make the Heauens forlorne
More then y• Earth, or hellike Goulphes, (wherby y• Gods are ſworne)
Yet roome for Hercles ſhalbe made, if after monſters quelde,
Or battells fought, or hellike hound in Chaynes as captiue helde,
If all exploytes cannot preuayle, in ſkies a place to gayne,
Then ſoukt vp bee the midland Sea twixt Barbarie, and Spayne,
That eyther ſhore may ioyne in one, with channell none betweene
There will I dam the running ſtreame, that Sea ſhall none be ſeene▪
Or as for Corinth out ſhot land that tweene two ſeas doth lye,
It ſhall giue way to yther ſtreame, that through the ſame ſhall fly.
And when the ſeas on paſſage haue, the Fleete of Athens towne
May floate in Channell new: thus ſhall the world turne topſdowne:
Let Iſter turne his ſtreame, and Tanaus ſlow another way:
Graunt Ioue a placket, graunt, whereby the Gods vpholde I may.
Diſcharge thy thunder dint. where I ſhall keepe due watch, & warde,
If eyther to the yſy poale thou bid mee haue regarde,
Or burning zone, heere let the Gods full ſafe all force defy:
Prynce Paean purchaſt hath an houſe amid the criſtall ſky,
And well deſerued he the temples of Pernaſſus hill,
For ſlaughter of a Dragon made? how oft recouering ſtill
In Hydra poyſon Python lay? with Bacchus Perſeus ſtrong
By leſſe deſert then Hercules, haue crept the Gods among.
But all the Eaſt (a mighty coaſt) to bond is brought, by him.
Whom Iuno ſpightes, how ſtearne a bug was ſnaky Gorgon grim?
What Impe is he, begot betweene my ſtepdame dyre and thee,
Whoſe prayſed paynes haue purchaſte him a place in heauen to be?
The heauen that on my ſhoulders I haue hoiſterd vp I craue:
But Lycas, (partner of my paynes) diſpatch our triumph braue.
Diſplay in pomp the ruin of Euritus houſe, and Crowne:
And for the ſacrifice with ſpeede ſtrike yet the Bullocks downe,
Where as the Aare (that doth adnaunce the Church of Cenei Ioue.)
Lyes open to Euboca ſea: that wrackfull waue doth moue.
THe Gods in bliſſe that man doth coūteruaile,
That can at once both Graue, & glory gayne,
Death vpon death the whilſt doth him aſſaile
Whoſe wretched life is lingred on in payne,
With frowning fate in ſpurning ſpighte who ſhiues,
And ſets the Keele of gaping goulphe at nought,
Will not ſubmit his captiue handes to giues,
As diſhe of diſhonour in triumph to bee brought:
Like carefull caytife hee ſhall neuer droupe,
Whelmed in ſtorming thoughts of ſower annoy
Whoſe ſtomacke ſcornes, for dawnting death to ſtoupe,
Though ſeas amid the deepe in hoyſted hoy
Driue him aloofe, when as a ſouthern gale
Beates Boreas back, or eaſtern puffe agayne
Recoiles the weſtern winde, and ſeemes to hale
From deepeſt ſandes the ſurges torne in twayne.
Tht broken planckes to catche hee ſcrambles not
Of wracked barke, as one that hopes to haue
Amid the Channell deepe a landing plot,
When diſmall death appeares in euery waue
Hee cannot ſuffer ſhipwracke all alone:
With pined karrayne coarſe, and ſtreames of teares,
And with our countrey duſt our heades vpon,
Powldring our lockes, wee languiſhe out our yeares.
Neyther flaſhing flame, nor thumping thunder cracke
Will once dawnt vs: O death thou doſt purſew,
Where fortune fawnes: but where ſhee worketh wracke,
Thou ſhunneſt thoſe, that woulde thee not eſchew,
Wee ſtand not in our razed countrey wall,
Whoſe ground ſhall now bee ouergrowne (alas)
With bramble, and bryer, and down the temples fall:
While mucky ſheepecotes are planted in their place.
And now the froſtifaced Greeke (alas)
This way, this way, with all his droue of Neate
By ſo much of AEchalia muſt paſſe,
As heapt on aſhes gloweth ſtill with heate.
The Teſſayle ſheepherd ſitting by the way
On iarringe Pype ſhall play his countrey ryme,
Singing wyth ſighes alacke, and weladay,
Thus to bewayle the ſorrowes of our time.
Ere tyme ſhall roll the race of many a yeare,
It will be aſkt, where earſt the towne did ſtand?
O well was I, when as I liued a leare,
Not in the barren balkes of fallow land,
Nor in Theſſalia on the foodeleſſe cliues,
But now among rough Trachin craggy Rocks,
And ougly ſhrubs neceſſity mee driues,
Whoſe flaming toppes detarres the feeding Oxe.
And in the way leſſe woods vntrode before
All comfortleſſe, afright and in a maze
Needes muſt I trot alone, that would abhorre
The ſaluage beaſtes, that on the mountaynes graze
But better lot (if any Dames may haue)
They ouer Inach wambling ſtreame ſhall row,
Or ſhrowd in Dirce Walles, where Iſmen waue
With feeble force of ſhallow fourde doth flow.
The hawty Hercles mother heere was wed,
What Scythian crag, what ſtones engendred him?
What Rocky mountayne Rhodope thee bred,
Of Tyrant, Titans race a cuſed lim?
Stipe Athos hill, the brutiſh Caſpia land.
With teate vnkinde fed thee twixt rocke & ſtoane:
Falſe is the tale, wherewith thou bearſt in hande,
Two nights for thee thy Mother deare did groane.
While lingring ſtarres long lodged in purple ſky:
The ſhepherd ſtarre his courſe did enterchaunge
With the loade ſtarre, and vp the Moone doth ſty,
That couched Phoebe durſt not the Welkin raunge,
No Launce can pearce his monſters ruggy ſkin,
The blunted Iron tryed it with thumping thwack,
And Steele is not ſo tough: on naked ſkin
A ſwerd was braſt, and ſtones rebounded back.
The force of fate he vtterly defies,
And toughly timberd as he is of lim
Hee doth contriue, how quarrells may ariſe,
That death might proue his febled force in him
The quaries coulde not enter to his fleſh,
Nor yet the bowe with Scythian ſteule drawn deepe,
No nor the glaues, vvith vvhich Sarmacians freſh,
Hot ſkirmiſhes in th'yſy Clyme doe keepe.
No nor the Parthian better Archer farre,
Then Creete, who parcht with Phaētons ſoultring flame,
Vnder the Equinoctiall rayſeth werre,
Gaynſt th' eaſterling diſcomfetinge the ſame.
Hee with his body did batter downe the wall,
Of Oechalie: nothing may him withſtande:
By valiaunt proweſſe hee hath conquerd all:
Tis woon before, that hee doth take in hande:
The howgy Briar that fifty paunches had,
The hawty Giges with hundred armes likewiſe,
That clamb vp Thaſſayle hills as Gyant mad,
When rebells rage woulde take from loue the ſkyes,
Such ſteaming Eyes, ſuch gaſtly viſage foule,
Such Gargle face, ſuch countnaunce glaring grim,
Wherewith ſtearne Hercles glowningly doth ſcowle,
Thoſe Gyaunts had reſembling playnely him.
Thus greateſt bliſſe is prone to greateſt bale
There wants no woe whoſe cup wee haue not taſte
Wee wretched women haue with countnaunce pale.
BVt carefull caytiffe I
doe not bewayle forlorne
The ſweeping flames, nor Idolles, wyth
their taitred Temples torne:
Nor that the Fathers burne
together with theyr Sonnes,
That Gods, & men, that tombes & Church,
at once to ruin runnes.
Vpon the common care
wec doe not powre our playnt,
For Fortune wills vs turne our teares with other woes attaynt:
And thus my frowning face allotteth vnto mee
Another kinde of wretchednes, that muſt lamented bee:
What ſhall I firſt beweepe? Or chiefly what complayne?
And to bewayle them all at once, woulde mitigate my payne.
Alas that but on breaſt Dame Nature did mee frame,
That blowes agreeing to my griefe might bounce vpon the ſame.
With weeping Sipill rocke, brſe yee my balefull breaſt,
Or on Eridanus ſilent ſhore in ſorrowes let wee reſt,
Where as the mourning troupe of Nymphes doe hale theyr heares.
To wayle the death of Phaïron, with ſhowres of dropping teares.
Or els in Sicill rocke cauſe mee encoucht to dwell,
Where Scilla Hag with howling noyſe, and barking big doth yell.
Or elſe in Lynnets ſhape let me tell on my tale,
And weepe with Adon in the woods, or turnde to Nightingale
As Lady Philomele, recordes with weeping lay
In ſhade of hawly Iſmar hill vpon a tender ſpray,
With ſoking ſighes her griefe, O Gods: and mee addight
In ſhape, that may be ſuetable vnſo my playntiffe plight.
And of my piteous moane let craggy Trachin ſounde,
Sith Myrra ſawe the teares where in Dame Venus eyes were drownde,
That ſhee for Adopis with ſmoky ſighes did ſhed,
And Halcion might wayle at will her louing Ceyx dead:
The Lady Tastalis get life to weepe alone,
And Philomele did chaunge her ſhape, and earnefully did moue
Her tender Itis death: (alas) why are not yet
With flickering Fethers fit for wynges, my naked armes beſet?
O happy ſhall I bee, and happily bee bleaſt,
When in the woods as in an houſe I make my ſhrowding neaſt,
And ſitting like a birde vpon my countrey grounde
In dolefull harmony ſhall tune the cares, that me confounde.
That thus the people fond may talke how they haue ſeene
In piteous likeneſſe of a Byrde, the Daughter of a Queene.
I carefull caytiffe, I, behelde my Fathers fate,
When in the Courte a deadly club did Pale him on the pate,
And ſprawling on the floore with braynes paſht out hee laye,
Alas if fates would let thy Coarſe beſhrynde in pit of Claye,
What flowing teares (O Syer) would I on thee beſtowe?
And coulde I brooke it Toxeus, to ſee thy death with woe?
That wert vnwand in yeares, and take in pits vnpayſde,
Vpon whoſe naked Cheekes the pregu hayres had rayſor.
Why ſhould I parents deare your fates with teares deteſt,
Whom death with hand indfferent hath taken hence to reſt:
My Fortune ſeekes my teares, due is myne owne diſtreſſe,
Now as a captiue muſt I dawnce attendaunce more and leſſe,
Vpon my Ladyes rock: and twyſt her threde yſpoon,
Woe worth my beauty, for the which in dread of death I run.
And for thy ſake alone my ſtock hath loſt his lyfe,
Whyle that my ſyer Denyeth me to Hercles as his wyfe
And did for feare refuſe his ſtepfather to bee,
But to our Laydes balefull bower as Captiues hence goe wee:
WHat furious fits of ramping rage
doth boyle in Womens brayne,
When in one roofe both wedded wyfe
and Harlor doe remayne?
Both Scylla, and Charibdis gulfe
no daunger like it haue,
That raging roll on Sicill ſhore
by heapes the wraſtling waue.
Ne ſaluage beaſte ſo bad there is,
that betters not the ſame.
For bruite no ſooner blew abroade the captiue Harlots name,
And that the beauty of Iolas countnaunce ſhyned brym,
As doth the day, when marble ſkies, no filthy fog doth dim:
Or like the glimſe of twinckling ſtarre, that in the welkin bright
Diſplayes abroade his ſhooting beames amid the froſty mght:
But Deianira Hercles Wyfe all bedlem like doth ſtande,
And ſcowleth as the Tiger wilde which couched on the ſande
In ſhade of rocke doth ſhrowde his whelpes, and buſkells vp in heſſe,
Eſpying him that of his younge both come to make the waſte:
Or like as Menas ouercharg with Bacchus licour ſixeete
With Iuy bunche on thurled Darte from place to place doth fleete:
Shee makes a pawſe, in doubt where to ſhee might derect her pace,
Then frantickly as on beſtraught, ſhee from place to place
In Hercles douſe. thus was ſhee rayt in rage of flaming yre,
The houſe to narrow was, to coole the deſpret dames deſire.
Shee runneth in, ſhee rots about, ſhee makes a ſoddayne ſtay.
The mallady in frowning face it ſelfe doth playne diſplay.
No galling griefe remaynes at heart. The teares guſh from her Eyes,
Nor in on kinde of temper ſtill in frenly ſits ſhee fryes:
Her glowning lookes with fury fell doe chaunge her former hew,
Now glaring ſtande her ſteaming Eyes, and paleneſſe doth enſew
The ruddy colour in her Cheekes: the anguiſh of her heart
Driues out her dolors deepe, to ſhew them ſelues in euery part:
Shee languiſheth, ſhee moanes for helpe, ſhee wayles her froward fate,
And all the houſe an Echo makes reſounding her eſtate.
Loe headlong to and froe ſhee hies, and running ſtill about
Goes mumbling, and the ſecrets of her minde ſhee mutters out:
Oh Iuno Spouſe to Ioue, what part of heauen ſoeuer thou keepe,
Rayſe vp ſome ſaluage beaſt, agaynſt lewde Hercules to creepe,
That I ſhall thinke ſufficient: If any combrous ſnake
With breeding hee doe craule, more big in alt the ſlimy lake,
That may not take a foyle: or if that ought doe yet remayne,
So ougſome, griſely, curſt, and grim, ſo fraught with filthy bayne,
That hee may loathe to looke thereon, that may his ſight appaule.
Vndoe their Dennes, from hydeous hoales procure ſuch vermin craule.
Or if that flendes can none befounde, then couture thou my ghoſt
To what thou tſt: this ſoule of myne can welt abyde the moſt:
Some vucouth ſhape, ſome gaſtly face, ſuch one beſtow on mee,
Whereby the horrour of my pangues may counteruayled bee.
My boyling breaſt cannot conceaue the vengeaunce, I woulde trye:
Why ſercheſt thou the corners farre, of landes aloofe that lye?
And turnſt y• world thus vpſide downe? why ſeekſt thou harme of hell?
To traunce him, furious flirndes enough within this breaſt doe dwell:
Make me thyne inſtrument of hate: his ſtepdame I will bee,
And thou mayeſt worke the ouerthrow of Hercules by mee:
Appoynct my hand to any thing. Why doſt thou make delay?
Vſe thou my frenſy, as the meanes to compaſſe his decay.
The miſchiefe ſhall be brought to paſſe, what euer thou wilt craue:
Why ſtande yee muſing ſtill thereon? contriued all I haue:
Thou mayſt forbeare thy mallice now: thy rancour ſhall ſuffice,
To bryng this wretche vnto his ende, my ſelfe can well deuiſe.
My Foſter gyile, of rauing mynde, theſe dreary playnts aſſwage,
Forbeare this heate, and brydell yet the rigour of thy rage:
Behaue thy ſelfe for ſuch an one, as men may worthy iudge
The noble Spouſe of Hercules.
Shall Iole (ſlauiſh drudge)
Bring baſterd brethren to my Babes? of her that is a ſlaue
Shall Iupiter the God of heauen forſooth a daughter haue?
The flaſhing flames, and fighting floodes ſhall toyne togeather firſt.
The northern beare to Marble ſeas ſhall ſtoupe to quench his thyrſt.
Yea vengeounce, vengeance, will I haue, though on thy back thou wyeld
The boyſteous heauens, and all the worlde doe peace vnto thee yelde:
There is a thing ſhall ſtinge thee worſe then Hydra hiſſing Snake,
The corſey curſt of angry Wyfe. Doth any firy Flake
Vpthrowne from Etnas boyling Foarge, ſo ſowſe the beaten ſkyes?
More then all things that thou haſt daunt, my ghoſt ſhall thee aggryſe.
Shall thou prefer a ſeruill Trull before thy wedded Wyfe?
For feare of many monſters more I tendred ſtill thy lyfe,
And now for to encreaſe my care. I ſee no monſters lurke,
And now ſteps in an hateful whoore, (which more my minde doth vrke)
To cumber vs, as ill as fiendes. O Father thou of might,
The ſhielde of Gods: and Titan thou, that bearſt the Lamp of lyght,
I onely vnto Hercules a loyall wyfe abod,
And to an Harlots vſe are turnde my prayers made to God:
The fruite of my felticity a Strumpet doth obtayne,
And for an Harlots loue yee Gods haue harde my prayers vayne:
Is Hercules returnde for her? O griefe not yet content.
Deuiſe ſome tearing torments, ſeeke ſome pangues, and puniſhment.
Let Iuno learne of mee, what force a womans fury hath.
Shee knowes not how in deepe deſpight, to vſe her harming wrath.
For mee you did theſe batrtayles wage: for my ſake Acheloe
Did let his ſtreaming bloud amid his wamblinge waues to floe.
When ſnarling Adders ſhape hee tooke, and to the boyſteous Bull
Hee gieuing vp his ſloughy ſhape did bende his mallice full.
And thus thou foylde a thouſand foes by conqueſt of this one:
Yet preſently thou plunged art, and that by mee alone:
A pryſoner now muſt be prefer de before thy loyall wyfe.
Ile none of that: but euen the day that firſt begins the ſtrife,
And to our wedlock brings the breach, ſhalbe thy diſmall day,
And knap in twayne the fatall twiſt where on thy lyfe doth ſtay:
What meaneth this? my mynde relents. My mallice breakes his rage:
O wretched griefe why doſt thou faynte? thy ſpight wilt thou aſſwage?
With fealty of a faythfull Wyfe doſt thou thy conſcience charge?
Why lets thou not my boyling yre for to encreaſe at large?
Why doſt thou ſlake thy frying fits? this mallady ſtill ſuruiue.
Euen now I able was with him for maiſterſhip to ſtriue.
In deede I haue not craued ayde: yet Stepdame Iuno will,
To weilde my handes to worke his wracke, bee heere aſſiſtant ſtill:
What treachery entendeſt thou mad bedlem to commit?
Thy huſbād wilt thou murder wreatch? whoſe flickering fame doth flit:
From eaſt to weſt: whoſe bryght renowne the earth coulde not contayne
But rayſde aloft, from marble Skies it doth rebounde agayne:
The mother Earth ſhall ryfe in armes for to reuenge his graue.
His former Stepſiers ſtocke heereby the ouerthrow ſhall haue:
And all Aetolia royall bloud will feele an vtterfall:
In quarrell of thy Hercules the worlde conſpier ſhall.
Then ſilly wight how many plagues ſhalt thou alone abyde?
But bee't that from the face of man thou myght thy body hyde.
Yet Ioue the lightning leames of heauen doth holde in armed hand,
Beholde the flying fyry flakes in ranckes all ready ſtand:
And threatning thunders thumping thicke doe bounce out all the day.
Deathes dungeon (that thou doſt defy) full duely ſcaare thee may.
For there his Vncle vmpyre ſits: Myche where thou mayſt vnſpyde.
And euery where thou ſhalt perceaue the Gods to him .
I graunt it deſpert deede, whereto diſpayre now doth me driue.
Die ſure thou ſhall.
And die I will, (as preſently I liue)
The loyall ſpouſe of Hercules. And ere this night doe paſſe,
Day ſhall not ſee that Deianire a liuing Wydow was.
Nor of my ſpouſall hed an whoore ſhall get the intereſt.
The dawning day ſhall ſooner make the morning peere in Weſt,
Vnto the eaſtwarde Indians the yſy poale ſhall melt,
And freezing Scithian firſt ſhall fry with flames that hee hath felt
Of Phoebus feruent wheele: ere mee Theſſalia Trulls ſhall ſee
Diuorſt: my brydall blaſe ſhall with my bloud iquenched bee:
And eyther let him murdred bee, or take away my Lyfe.
So ſoothly let him count among the foyled flendes his Wyfe.
Among Alcides labours let mee reckned bee as on.
His loue in heart I holde, vntill the vtter gaſpe bee gon.
Thus vndiuorſt (not vureuengde) I will to Hercles tombe.
It Iole be with chylde by him, ile teare it from her wombe,
And rent it with theſe pawes of myne. Yea in the wedding place,
I flying at her fearce will ſet my tallantes in her face:
Let him not ſpare in raumping rage a ſacrifyce to make
Of me vppon his wedding day, when he his Trull doth take,
So that I fallyng downe may light on Iones ſenceles coarſe
He dyes a happy man, that firſt hath quelde his foes by force.
O wretched might why doſt thou thus increaſe thy fuming heate:
And feede thy fury wittingly leaſt hap ſhould thee defeate.
He loued Lady Iole, but whyle her fathers crowne
Stoode floriſhyng in royall ſtate and were not bartred downe,
And as vnto the daughter of a King bee ſuter was,
But when from type of hawty pompe ſhe did to thraldome paſſe
He ſhooke her of hot loue was coold, and now her bitter bale
Would not allow the wrack kele to beare to hie a ſale:
Vnleeful thinges that ſhould be ſhund we gredely deſyre.
But matters meeter for our ſtate we ſeldome do require.
The pytying of aduerſity doth oft enkindle more
The feruent fittes of loue, and this perhappe doth vrge him ſore,
To ſee her reaft of natyue ſoyle, it may his fancy touch,
Her hayre not tuct with treſſes trimme, nor dect with golden ouche
Perhap the man with pitty prickt doth loue her for her carc.
Vnto his noble hart to pitty priſoners tis not rare.
The ſiſter deare of Priamus (fayre Lady Heſyon) he
Did cauſe to Thelamon the Greeke in wedlocke knit to bee:
Account how many wyues before, and maydens did he loue,
And raung'd abroade to coole the rage that Venus brand did moue.
Fayre Auge mayde of Arcadye ententiue ſet to leade
Dianas drunce, by force of him did leeſe her mayden hed.
And yet no token could ſhe ſhew nor pledge of any ioue,
What ſhall I ſpeake of any more, or doth it mee behoue,
To prae what prankes he playd with fifty daughters in one night.
And yet how ſoone of ſuch a pange he ouer came the might,
He ſet much ſtore by Omphale of Lidia land the Queene,
When like a gueſt on Timolus the mount he hath bene ſeene.
He was ſo prict with Cupids dart, and caught in Venus trap,
That tucke in womans weede he ſat with diſtaf in his lap
And ſpoon the flaxe with ſombling fyſt, and rudely thumbde the threede
Aud flong from him the ſyons caſe the price of noble deede.
With treſſes tricke on plaited lockes he wayled as a mayde
With myrre his ftiſeled poale was ſmeard, and curied buſh was brayde,
Thus euery where as fancy flits, the fondling dotes in loue.
But in ſuch ſort as eaſely he can the ſame remoue.
But they whom fickle fanſies haue taynt, doe learne at laſt
In linke of loue by tract of time to fix affiaunce faſt.
Trow yee that hee this captiue queane, and on whom hee doe ſee
The daughter of his deadly foe, will more eſteeme then thee?
As gladſome groues at Prime of ſpring in beauties pride are ſeene
When freſſheſt warmth the naked twigges doth clad in pleaſant greene.
But when coulde Boreas boyſteous blaſt the pipling puffes doth ſtop
Of ſouth winde ſweete, rough wynter powles the naked buſſhes top:
The barewoode with miſſhapen ſtumpes doth ſhew a withered Face,
Euen ſo my beauty marching forth a ſeaſon on his Race
Still fades away, and euermore abates his glimſing gloſſe,
And what ſo euer was in mee, by care is come to loſſe.
And that which earſt by fanſy fed the greedy gazing eyes,
Is fallen away by bearing childe: ſo oft it droupes, and dyes.
And ſince I came to mothers ſtate. I faded faſt away.
And wrinckled age with furrowed face ſteps in with quick decay.
But yet this bondmaydes eauter freſh her ſorrow better brookes.
Her comely countnaunce crazied is with leane and wanny lookes.
And yet for all her kark and care amid her deepe iſtreſſe.
Shee beares a glimſe of beauty bryght, and fauour nothing leſſe.
Her heauy hap, and frowning rate can nothing from her plucke.
Saue Scepter from her royall hande by all this lowring lucke.
By meanes of this firſt faynting feare did lodge within my breaſt,
That makes mee wake the weary nightes, and leeſe my kindely reſt.
In all mens eyes at firſt I ſeemde to be a bleſſed Wyfe.
And Ladies all at our eſtate repining very ryfe
Did wyſhe my watch in ſpite of fate what Sepſer ſhall I hope
As match in maieſty to Ioue within the heauenly coape?
Deare foſterdame whom ſhall I make my feere in ſpowſall bed?
Although Euryſt that Hercules to all theſe toyles hath led,
Doe linke with mee in bridall bandes, my ſtate ſhalbe impayrde.
Tis ſmall worth to deſerue to bee to kingly wedlock rayrde.
But Iſſue is the thing that doth in marriage kindell loue.
And Iſſue is the thing that doth in marriage mallice moue.
This while the bondmayde to thee for preſent ſhalbe braught
Loe hee etreth vp and downe with pryncely pore full haught,
And buckles faſt about his Loynes the liuely Lyons caſe,
Who doth inueſt the wretched with the right of kingly mace,
Dpoſing thoſe from honoures type that late ſo lofty ſat.
And peſtereth his puiſſaunt pawes with huge dvnweildy bat,
Of whoſe exploytes, and maarciale actes the Seres ſing aloofe,
And all encloſde in Ocean ſea thereof haue perfit proofe
Is now became an amorous knight: the honour of his name
Doth nothing touch his conſcience, to tender once his ame.
Hee roueth through the worlde, as on that doth no whit eſteeme,
Although that men as ſoone to Ioue ſhall him vnworthy deeme.
Nor like the man whoſe credit through the townes of Greece is greate.
Hee ſeekes to compaſſe his deſer, to worke a Louers feate.
With ſingle Dames is his delight: If any him deny,
Then to attayne his lawleſſe luſt by rigour doth hee try.
With men hee fareth frantickly, to others ſmart and blame
Hee win his Wyes, his folly frayle is cloackt by vertues name.
The noble City Oechalie is made a razed towne.
The Sunne twixt morne and euen did ſet, in one day vp, and downe▪
One day did ſee it ſtand in ſtate, the ſame did ſee it fall.
Theſe bloudy broyles, and waſting warres of Loue proceeded all,
As oft as parents vnto him deny theyr daughters deare,
So oft I warrant them they neede his wrathfull fury feare.
So oft a man with Hercules ſhalbe at deadly foode:
As hee denies his ſtepfather to bee by ioyning bloude.
If hee may not be ſonne in law, then doth hee rage, and raue:
Why doe theſe guiltleſſe handes of myne ſtill keepe him from his graue,
Till hee diſſemble franticke fits, to bend his ayming bowe,
And deaths wounde on my chylde, and me with bloudy hands beſtowe?
Thus hawty Hercules was wont his wedlockes to deuorce.
Yet nought there is, that lawe of guilt on him might haue recorſe.
Hee makes the worlde blame Iuno, for the ills hee hath commit.
O rigour, of my rage why doſt thou quallify my fit?
Now muſt thou ſet thy hands on worke, too't whie thy hands bee hot.
Thy huſband wilt thou ſlay?
Him whō his Leman lewd hath got.
But yet, he is the ſonne of Ioue.
And ſo Alemenas ſonne.
With ſtroke of ſteele?
With ſtroke of ſteele if it cannot bee donne,
Then for to bring his death to paſſe, ile ſet for him a ſnare.
What kinde of madneſſe may it be that makes thee thus to fare?
Such as my huſband hath mee taught.
Wilt thou thy ſpouſe deſtroy,
On whom y• ſtepdames ſpite yet had no power to work annoy?
The wrathes of heauenly mindes do make thē bleſt on whō they light
So doth not ſpite of mortall men.
Oh ſilly wretched wight
For beare thy rage, and feare the worſt, mans force may not aſſayle
Him, that agaynſt the power of hell, and death coulde once preuayle.
Ile venter on the dint of ſwerd.
Thy wrath (deare foſter child)
Is greater then the crime, that hath thy Hercules defilde.
With egall mallice meaſure ſaultes. Alas why doſt thou bring
So great and ſore, a penalty vpon ſo ſwale a thinge?
Let not thy griefe be greater, then the ſorrow thou ſuſtaynes.
Set you it light that with our wedlocke linkt an harlot raygnes
Nay rather thinke it ſtill to much, that doth thy ſorrows breede.
And is the Ioue of Hercules reuolt from thee in deede?
T'is not reuolt, deare foſter Dame, faſt in my bones it ſtickes:
But yre boyles hoate in burning breaſt, when loue to anger prickes.
It is almoſt a common guiſe, that wedded wyues doe haunte,
Theyr huſbands hearts by magicke Arte, and witchcraft to enchaunte.
In winter coulde I charmed haue the woods, to make them ſprout.
And forſt the thunder dint recoyle, that hath bin boulting out.
With waltring ſurges I haue ſhooke the ſeas amid the calme.
I ſmoothed haue the wraſtling waues, and lade downe euery walme.
The dry groūd gaped hath like gulphs, & out new ſprings haue guſht.
The roring rocks haue quaking ſturd, & none therest hath puſht.
Hell glounimy gales I haue braſt cape, where griſly ghoſts all huſht
Haue ſtood & aunſwering at my charme the goblins grim haue ſcoulde.
The threefolde headed hounde of hell wt barking throates hath houlde.
Thus both the ſeas, the lande, the heauens, & hell bowe at my becke.
Noone day to midnight, to and froe turnes at my charming checke.
At my enchauntment euery thing declynes from natures lawe.
Our charme ſhall make his ſtomacke ſtoupe, & bring him more in awe.
What hearbes doe grow in Pontus ſea? Or els on Pindus hill?
To trownce this macheleſſe champton, where ſhall I finde the ill?
The magicke vearſe uchaunts the Moone from Starry ſkies to groūd,
And fruictfull harueſt is thereby in barren winter found.
The whiſking flames of lightning leames oft ſorcery doth ſtay.
And noonetyde ropſy tury oſt doth dim the duſky day.
And leaue the welkin to the ſtarres, and yet not cauſe him ſtxsoupe.
The Gods them ſelues by charme of loue haue forced bin to droupe.
Perhap hee ſhall be woon by one, and yeelde to her the ſpoyle.
So loue ſhall be to Hercules the laſt and lateſt toyle.
By all the hoſte of heauenly powers, and as thou ſeeſt mee feare,
The ſecrets that I ſhall attempt, in councell ſee thou beare:
What may it be, that thou woulde haue me keepe ſo ſecretly?
No broyle of blades, no priue cote, no fiery force perdye:
I you aſſure I can conceale, if miſchiefe none be ment.
For then the keeping cloſe of it is ſure a lewbe entent.
Then looke about, if none be heere, our councell to betray:
Looke rounde about, on all ſides caſt thy countnaunce euery way.
Beholde the place is ſafe inough from any liſtning eare.)
Beſide the place of our eſtate there is a ſecret nooke,
A couert corner for our talke, that ſonneſhyne neuer tooke.
Neyther at morne, nor euening tyde, when Titans blaze doth quench.
And hee in ruddy weſterne waue his iry wheeles doth drench.
There ſecret lyes the priuy proofe of Hercules amorous thought,
Ile tell thee all deare foſter dame: This witchcraft Neſſus taught,
Whom Ixion engendred of a myſty grouing clowde,
Where Pindus hauiy hill his top among the ſtarres doth ſhrowde,
And other ſtipe doth heaue his Creſt about the ryding rack
When Achelous ouer layde, with many a thumping thwack
Of Hercles club, did ſhift him ſelfe to euery kinde of ſhape,
And triall made of all his ſleights none ſerued to eſcape,
At length he turnde him ſelfe into the lykeneſſe of Bull.
And ſo was fowly vanquiſhed in forme of horny ſcull.
(While Hercules being Conquerour did me his Wyfe enioy.)
Returning home to Greece agayne, it hapned Euen lake
To ouerflow the drowned marſhe and channell to forſake,
And ſtrongly ſtreamde to ſeas hee runns, and ſwells aboue his bankes.
And Neſſu vſde to paſſe the poole, and ſearch the croking crankes
As Ferryman demaundes his fare, and bare mee on his backe,
And wading forward brake the Waues, and ſurges of the lake.
At length yet Neſſus waded out vnto the farther ſhore,
Yet Hercules had ſwam but halfe the riuer and no more:
And plyde it hard to cut the ſtreame: but when eſpied had hee,
That Hercules was farre behinde, Madam (quoth hee) to mee.
(Be thou my booty, and my wyfe, and claſping mee about)
Away he flings, and Hercules beſturres him mauger Waue:
Though Ganges gulph and Iſter ſtreame (quoth he) thou traytour ſlaue
Might roon in on, yet ſhi to ſcape them both, well coulde I make,
And in thy haſt a ſhaft ſhall ſoone they running ouer take:
And ere he ſpake the word, his arrow flew out of his bowe,
And wrought a wounde in Neſſus ribbs, hee coulde no farther goe.
It ſped him ſure, to looke for death. Hee cried, well away.
The baggage running from the wounde reſerued as hee lay,
And putting it into his hoofe the which vndoyng, hee
In cutting yt with his owne hand, did geue it vnto me.
And thus at latter gaſpe he ſayde, the witches haue me toulde,
That loue may charmed be by this, to haue and keepe his hould.
The conning witch dame Michale did teach Theſſalia dames,
Who onely forſt the Mone to ſtoupe to her from heauenly frames.
Therfore (quoth he) at any tyme when hateful whores abuſe
Thy ſpoufall bed, or waueryng man do haunt to any ſtewes
Then with this ſalue annoynt his ſhyrtes, and let it ſee no ſonne,
But kepe it cloſe in corners darke, the bloud then ſhall not ſhonne
His ſtrength: and thus ful ſodenly he left his talke with reſt:
And deadly ſleepe with ſenceles death his feeble lims oppreſt.
Thou Dame to whom in hope of truſt my ſecrets all bewray,
On, that the poyſon ſoakt into the veſture bright, it may
Preace through his limmes, vnto his hart, & ſinke through euery bone,
I wil diſpatch it all in haſt, make thou thy earneſt mone
Vnto the God, whoſe tender hand his ſtedfaſt dartes doth weild,
I thee beſeech that art of earth and heauen in honour helde.
And thou that ſhakeſt burning boltes, thou curſt and cruel boy,
Whoſe eluiſh weapons make thy mother feare thy ſharpe annoy.
Now arme thy hand with ſpeedy ſhaft not of the ſlender sort,
But biggeſt boultes, with which as yet thou haſt aſſault no fort,
We neede no litle ſhaft that may ſtyrre Hercules to loue
Bring cruel handes and force thy how his depeſt draught to prooue
Now, now draw forth thy ſhaft wherewith thou cauſed cruelly
The burning breaſt of Ioue by fytes of ſeruent loue to frye.
When as the God his thonder bolt and lightning layd aſſyde,
Gan boalne with bumpes on fo rehead big: and throught the waue he hid,
And ſwam with Europ on his backe in ſhape of horny Bull.
Now powre downe loue, and therwithall let Hecles hart be full.
If Ioles beauty kyndle heate and Hercles hart doth moue,
Quench thou theſe coales, and force him glow with vs in lawfull loue.
Ful oft the thunder thumping Ioue hath ſtouped to thy yoke:
And him that weildes the moary mace of blacke Auerne to ſmoake.
Thy flames enforce, and ake the Lord of glummy Stigian lake:
But onely match thou Hereules, and of him triumphe take
O Ioue, whoſe wrath more wrackful is then yreful Iunoes might.
The charme is made in perfecte force is al our medcine right,
Wherein the ſhirt ſhal ſteeped bee that wearyed many wighte.
Whoſe handes on Pallas diſtaſſe ſpoone the weary Web with payne.
And it for Hercules auayle ſhall brincke vp all the bane.
And with my charme Ile ſtrengthen it. But loe yee in the nick
Defte Lycas commeth heere at hand who will diſpatche it quick:
But tell him not what force it hath leaſt hee the guilt betray.
Alas that fayth to kinges dwells not in howſes of eſtate:
Haue Lycas heere this ſhirt, the which my handes haue spun of late,
Whyle Hercules at randon roues, and ouerſhot with wyne
Doth rudely dandle on his lap the Lidiane Lady fyne.
Now doates hee after Iole: but this his boyling rage
That burneth in his breaſt I will with curteſy aſſwage,
For curteſy conquers canckred churles. See thou my ſpouſe deſire,
Hee ſpare the Shirt, vntill hee ſet the Franckinfence on fire,
And offer vp his ſacrifice, and weare his Garlond gray
Of Popler boughes on wreathed ckes. And I will goe my way
To'th royall Gods, and will beſeeke the cruell Cupids dame.
Yee ladies and companions that with mee heather came,
Now force the fountaynes of your teares from watred eyes to roon,
To wayle our Countrey Calydon on euery ſide vndoon.
O DEIANIRE deare daughter of our King
OENEVS late, to ſee thy frowning fates
Woe after woe thus downe on thee to fling,
It irks our heartes, that were thy foſter mates.
O woefull wight it pitieth vs to ſee,
Thy wedlock in this tickle ſtate to bee.
Wee Lady, wee, that with thee wonted were
With flapping Oare on Acheloe to rowe,
When hauing paſt the ſpryng tyme of the yere,
With Channell ſmoth hee newely wexeth lowe,
And makes agayne his ſwelling ſurges calme,
And boobling runnes at Ebbe withouten walme.
Through weale and woe wee ſtill with thee remayne,
And now what griefe ſo euer thou feare in mynde,
Account thou vs as partners of thy payne,
For commonly when Fortune turnes the wynde.
And makes thee beare thy beaten Sayle but low,
Then friendſhip ebbes, where it before did flow.
And who ſo guydes the ſway of golden mace,
Though people thicke doe haunte his ſtately courte,
And in at hundred gates doe preace a pace,
Yea though that thou mayntaine ſo great a porte,
To gade thee with this garriſon, yet ſhall
Thou ſcarcely finde one faithfull hearte of all.
In paynted porche, and gates of guilded bowers
The lurcking hagge Eryn her tuſkes doth whet:
And ſturring ſrife with quarreling face ſhee lowers.
The portly doar es no ſner ope are ſet,
But treaſon black, pale enuy deepe deceight,
With priuy knyfe of murther ſtep in ſtreight.
And when the Prynce appeares in open place,
To ſhew him ſelfe before his ſubiects ſight,
Swelling deſpight attendeth on his grace:
As oft as dawning day remoues the nyght,
And euery time the ſunne at Weſt goes downe,
They looke another man ſhould clayme the Crowne.
Fewe heartes loue kinges, not few their kingly might:
The glorious ſhew of courtly countenaunce
Bewitcheth many: where one ſets his delight
How next the king hee may him ſelfe aduaunce.
That through high ſtreetes hee may as lorde of rule
With lofty lookes, ryde mounted on his Mule.
Ambitious heate enflames his hawty breaſt.
Another would his greedy hunger ſtaunch
With gubbes of goulde, (and though hee it poſſeſt)
Rich Arabie ſerues not his pyning paunch,
Nor weſtern India (aworlde for to behoulde)
Where Tagus flowes with ſtreames of glittring goulde.
The couetous charle, the greedy gnoffe in deede,
In whom from cradell nature ſo it plantes,
No hourded heapes his endleſſe hunger feede.
In plenty pines the wreatch, in wealth hee wantes.
Some other fondlings fanſy thus doth guyde,
To fawne on kings, and ſtill in courte to byde.
As one diſdayning lyke a Country mome
And crooked clowne, the plowe to follow ſtill:
Although the dingthryfte dayly keepe at home
A thouſand drudges, that his lande doe Tyll:
Yet wantes his will and wiſſheth wealth therefore,
Onely to waſte on other men the more.
Another claweth and flattreth faſt the King,
By clymbing vp to treade downe euery wyght:
And ſome at leaſt to blookam Feaſte to bryng.
And thus hee ſtriues to arme himſelfe with myght
In bloude: but of their ſhip doth Fortune fayle,
When ſafe they thinke to floate with higheſt ſayle.
Whom Moone at morne on top of Fortunes wheele
High ſwayed hath ſeene, at fulneſſe of renowne,
The glading ſunne hath ſeene his Scepter reele,
And him from high fall topſey turuey downe.
At morne full merry, blith, in happy plight,
But whelmde in woes and brought to bale ere nyght.
Theſe ſildome meete hoare hayres and happy dayes:
The Lord that lyes on ſtately crimſen bed
Sleepes more in feare, then ſnoring drudge, that layes
Vpon the countrey clod his drowſy head.
In goulden roofes, and hauty courtes they keepe,
Whoſe dreadfull dreames doe make them ſtarte in ſleepe.
The purple roabes lyeth waking many a night,
And ſlombers not, when homely ragges doe reſt.
O if as at a Grate eſpy wee might
The ſorrowes, ſhrined in a Prynces breaſt.
What pangues, what ſtormes, what terrour, O what hell
In ſighing heartes or prowde eſtates doth dwell?
The Iryſhe Seas doe nener roare ſo ruffe,
When wraſtling waues, and ſwelling ſurges ryfe,
That hoyſted are with ſturdy northern puffe,
As fearefull Fanſyes doe theyr myndes aggryſe.
But hee ſighes not, nor combred is with care,
Whom Fortune hath bequeath'de a ſlender ſhare.
In woodden diſhe and blacke beche Bole hee ſwills,
And heaues it not to mouth with quaking hand.
With homely fare his hungry Mawe hee fills,
And leares not backe for feare of thoſe that ſtand
With naked ſwerdes: but Kings in goulden cup
Wyne blent with bloude (moſt dreadfull draughts) do ſup.
In dainty diſhe the poyſon bayte is layde,
And treaſon lurkes amid the ſugred wyne
A euery bit they quake, and are a frayde,
The ſwerde will fall, that hanges but by a twyne,
And euer as hee liftes his head, and drynkes,
The rebelles Knyfe is at his throate hee thinkes.
Such flattring ioyes theſe happy worldlinges haue.
Their outwarde pomp pretendeth luſty liues.
When inwardly they drowpe, as doth the ſlaue
That pines in pangues faſt clogde in goulden guies.
Striue not in haſt, to climbe the whirling wheele,
For haſty climers oft in haſte doe reele.
Meane dames defy both peareles and glittring ſpanges,
And goulden chaynes with rubies ryche beſet,
Nor at theyr eares doe maſſy Iewelles hange
With turky ſtones: nor pranked prowde they iet
Iu murrey gownes: nor doth the wooll they weare
Of Crymſen dye the coſtly colour beare
Neyther in Tiſſew, nor ſilken garments wrought
With needle, nor embroadred Roabes they goe:
And yet this ſtate is free from Iealous thought,
Theyr wedding is not vnto them theyr woe.
When thouſand ſtormes in Ladyes hearts doe dwell
By wedlocke breach, that breedes their noyſom hell.
VVho ſo he is that ſhunnes the middle waye,
Shall neuer fynd faſt footing any where.
The wilful lad that needes would haue a day.
And wayghty charge of Fathers charyot beare:
VVhile he from wonted wayes his Iades doth iaunce,
Amonge ſtraunge ſtarres they pricking forward praunce,
Enforcing them with Phoebus flames to frye,
Whoſe roaming wheeles refuſe the beaten rutt:
Thus both himſelfe, and all the Criſtall ſkye
In peril of the ſoulthring fyre he put.
So hawty myndes that clymbe aboue their ſkill,
Do worke their owne decay, and others yll.
While Daedalus in flying through the ayre
Did keepe the midſt betweene the ſkie and grounde
He could in ſafe to Italy repayre,
And gaue no gulph his name by beyng dround.
But Icarus preſumes to mount on hie,
And ſtryues aboue the fethered foules to flye.
And ſcornes the guyding of his fathers trayne.
And in his flight wil coape to lofty ſonne:
Which molt his winges ſo downe he droppes agayne
Into the ſeas, whereby his name they woone
Thus proud attemptes of hauty clyming hier
Receiue ſhrewde falles to quit their fond deſyre.
Let other mount aloft let other ſore,
As happy men in great eſtate to ſitte.
By flattring name of Lord I ſet no ſtore:
For vnder ſhore my little keele ſhall flitt:
And from rough wyndes my ſayles fayne would I kepe,
Leaſt I be driuen into the daungerous deepe.
Prowde Fortunes rage doth neuer ſtoupe ſo low
As litle roades, but them ſhee ouerflyes
And ſeekes amid mayne ſeas her force to ſhew
On argoſies, whoſe toppes do reach the ſkyes
But lo, here comes our Lady Deianire,
Straught of her wits, and ful of furious yre,
ALas through all my quiueryng ioyntes
a running feare doth reſt,
My ſtaryng hayre ſtandes ſtiffe vpright
and in my quaking breaſt
Deepe terrour dwelles, and eake my hart,
with dread amazde doth pant,
With ſwelling vaynes my liuer beates,
as when the wynd doth want
Aſſwagd in calmy day, and yet
the raging Seas do rore
Whoſe wraſtling waues were raiſ'd aloft
by Southren blaſtes before.
So yet my wits be tockſicate, although my feare be gone:
Thus God turmoyles vs when he meanes to cloy th'unhappy one.
Thus prowd attempts bedaſht at length,
Oh wretch, O carefull wight,
What miſchiefe may it be wherwith thou art ſo ſore affright.
The ſhirt with Neſſus ban imbrewde no ſouer hence was ſnt,
And wretched woman that I am toth cloſet ſtrayght I went.
(My mynd miſtruſts I knowe not what, and treaſon dath ſurmyſe)
And Neſſus by the heate bewrayed, that faynted was the bloud:
The God foreſhewed that here the force of all the treaſon ſtoode:
For by good hap the fomy glede no foggy clowde doth dim.
But with ful power of burning beames he ſhyned blaſing brim.
Scant yet I can for feeble feare vnlocke my faſtned wes,
The ſcorching heate doth dye away, and vp by force it drawes
The ſoaked bloud that beyng layed amid the frying flame
And boyling heate of ſhyning ſonne did ſhrinke before the ſame:
Wherein the ſhyrt was ſteept, and all the royall robe imbrewde:
I cannot ſhew the villany wherwith it was indewde:
For as the Eaſterne wynd doth force the winter ſnow to melt,
Or lukewarme South when in the ſpring frō Mimas mount they ſwelt
As Lucas els that fronters on Ionian ſea, a land
Doth breake the waue the beaten ſurge lies foaming on the ſtrand
Or by the warmth of heauenly heat the frankinſence doth drop
So all the venim waſtes away, and melteth euery croppe.
And while I wonder ſtil hereon the wonder ſhrynkes away
But with a froath it ſpoes the ground, and there the poyſon lay,
It rotts the cloth: my woman boalne and ſweld doth follow me,
And ſhakes her head▪ my ſonne as one aſtoniſhed I ſee:
And hying hether all in haſt declare what newes ye bring.
GO mother goe, ſeeke out aloofe
yf place of bydyng dwell
Beyond the ground both goulfe and ſtarres
beyond both heauen and hell,
Flye mother far beyond the boundes
of Hercules his toyle
A miſchiefe great I know not what
within my breaſt doth boyle:
Unto the royall temples of dame Iunoes tryumph hie
Theſe will allow the ſanctuary though other it denye
What heauy hap is it that may annoy my guiltleſſe ghoſt
Oh mother, O that diamond of the world that piller poſt
Whom fate as Ioues lieuetenaunt heare haue placed for the nones
Is dead: and Neſſus burning bane deuouers Hercles boanes
The daunter of the brutiſh beaſtes he conquering knight before
Is conquerd now: he mournes, he walles, what aſke ye any more
We wretches loue the order of our wretchednes to heare,
Tell me the ſtate now of our ſtocke what countnance doth it beare:
O ſtock, O ſylly wretched ſtocke now ſhal I be eſteemd,
A widdow now, a coſt of now, and now a beggar deemd.
Thou doſt not languiſh all alone for Hercules yes dead:
For whom the eyes of all the world haue cauſe their teares to ſhed.
Count not thy fate allotted thee alone: now all our kind
Do howle and mourne for him whom thou beway leſt in thy minde,
Thou ſuffreſt greefe, the ſmart wherof belonges to euery land
Although the ſower aſt therof firſt happen to thy hade
Thou careful caytiffe doſt not wayle for Hercules alone.
Speake, ſpeake, how nigh to Deathward was my deare Alcides go?
Death whom in his owne empyre hee had conquered before,
Did ſhrinke from him and fate durſt not allow a deede ſo ſore,
And Clotho ſhe perhap put out her rocke with trembling arme
As one that haſtning Hercles death, did feare to do ſuch harme,
O day, O diſmall day, and ſhall euen Hercules the greate
Paſſe thus to death, and ſilent ſhades and to a worſer ſeate
Is he thinke you already dead or may I dye before)
Speake on, if yet he be not deade
Euboea that doth riſe,
With hauty creſt ringes euery where, and Caphar rocke likewyſe
Deuydeth Helleſpontus ſea and turnes that ſide to ſouth,
Wheras it bides the boyſteous blaſtes of Boreas wyndy mouth:
Euripus bendes his wandring ſtreame and windes in creakes about
His croked courſe ſeuentymes and doth as often breake it out:
While Phoebus drencht his wecye teame amid the Weſterne waue
(Here on a rocke aboue the reach of cloudes a temple braue)
Of Caenaei Ioue ſhew bright whyle all the beaſtes for ſacrifice
At th'alter ſtoode, and through the woode the noyſe began to riſe,
Of al the herd: then of he put he matterd Lyons caſe,
And likewyſe did diſcharge him of his houge and heauy mace
Ad eaſde his ſhoulder from the burthen of his quiuer light.
Then tuckt in your attyre he ſhone among the people bright
With ougly lockes, and on the alter made the fier flame
Receyue (quoth hee) theſe fruits (O ſyre) though fyer ſend the ſame
And not the harueſt Sithe: but let with frankinſence good ſtore
The fyer burne that far the riche Arabyan therfore
Doth gather out of Saba trees for Phoebus ſacrifyce
The earth (quoth he) is now at peace, ſo be both ſea and ſkies
All beaſtes be conquered, and I am victor come agayne.
Lay downe thy lightning leames (O Ioue) in feare thou nede not raign
In middeſt of his prayers thus wherat I was agaſt,
Hee fell to ſighes and grieuous groanes, and al the ſkyes at laſt
With dreadful crying lowde he filles Euen as the braynſick bull.
When with the axe in wounde he ſcapes doth fil the temples full
Of roaring noyſe.
Or as the thunder throwne from heauen doth rumble in the ſkyes,
Euen ſo the ſeas and ſtarres of heauen doth Hercles ſhake with cryes
Both Calpe clyue, and Cyclas yle wel hard his yellyng haue,
Here Caphat rockes there al the woods therof an Echo gaue.
Wee ſaw him weepe, the people thought his former franucke fyttes
Had now agayne as earſt they did bereaue him of his wites
His ſeruaunts ſcatter then for fecare, while he with flaming eyes,
Al ſtaryng ſtandes with tleaming lookes among them all he pryes
For Lyca: him alone he doth purſew, who in his arme
With trembling hand the alter held and ſcaped al the harme,
By dying firſt for faynting feare, and while Alcyde▪ helde
The quaking Carkas in his hand thou ſhalt (quoth he) be queld
And beaten with this fiſt of myne, O Gods eternall raygne▪
Wretch Licas killeth Hercules, and hath his conqueroure ſlayne,
But o another ſlaughter yet: for Hercules agayne
Killes Lycas: thus the ſacrifyce of Gods with bloud they ſtayne,
With Lycas thus his labours and throwne vp to heauen they ſay,
That with his dropping bloud the cloudes he ſtayned all the way.
Euen as the pitched dart of Gete with pith doth ſcore the ſkyes,
Or as the whirling ſting of Creete doth make the pller ryſe:
So ſwift he mounted vp to heauen, but downe his body dropte,
And as his Carkas fel, among the rockes his necke it chopt.
The graue prepared for their corps (quoth Hercules) beſtill,
I am no brainſteke franticke man, but loe this defpret ill
More noylome is theu rage or wrath, it caleth much my will
To wrecke my rage vppon my ſelfe, his mallady he ſcant
Bewryes: but fareth franttkly: and he himſelfe doth rent
His limmes, and ryflyng them, with mighty hand a ſunder teares,
And ſtriues to ſtrip him ſelfe of all th'apparell that he weares,
And onely this was it, of all the thinges that I do know,
That paſt the power of Hercules yet ſtandes he pulling ſo
And plucketh of his limmes withall the veſture doth not linne
To bring of lumpes of filthy fleſh the ſhyrt ſtickes to the ſkyne
But what ſhould ayl the poyon ranke none knoweth what, nor whye
And yet there is good cauſe it er of: now grouelyng doth he lye
And beates his face agaynſt the ground to water now he hyes,
But water cannot coole his heate, and now to ſhore he plyes.
And for his ſucoure ſeckes to ſeas, at lengri, his men him calth
We holding him (alas the whil'ſt were able him to match
Now in a keele amid the ſeas we launched were aloofe,
And Hercles payſe was hoſted with a litle ſoutherne puffe
My Ghoſt then left my careful coarſe and darkneſſe dimd my ſight
Why ſtay I wreche? why doth this dreary deede make mee afright.
Her coapefellow dame Iuno doth reclayme, and Ioue his ſonne,
The world muſt render him▪ then doe as much as may be donne,
And boare my body with a ſworde ſuch ſower ſauce is dew
To her, whoſe curſed caytiffe hand her loue ſo lightly ſlew.
O Ioue with fier and lightning flaſh deſtroy thy wretched Neece.
Let not thy mighty hand be armed with a ſlender peece.
Let braſt the boult from ſkies wherewith thou wouldeſt Hydra burne.
If Hercles had not bin thy ſonne thereof to ſerue the turne
Strike mee with vcouth peſtilence, and with ſuch weapon ſmite,
As may be farre more yrkeſome plague then all my ſtepdames ſpite.
Driue forth thoſe deadly dartes that earſt young Phaëthon ouerthrew
When be full crancke in firy carte, about the heauens flew:
For thus by ſlaying Hercules, eake Nations ſlaine I haue
What neede thou Deianire of Gods a toole of death to craue.
Now trouble not thy ſtepſter Ioue, thinke ſcorne may Hercles wyfe
To wiſhe for death, for to her heart her hand ſhall ſet the knyfe
Diſpatch then quickly with the blade, yet let thy blade alone,
For who with weapon endes their lyfe tis long ere they be gon
I wilbe headlong hurled from a rocke as hie as ſkies.
The Oeta hill this ſhalbe it, where firſt the ſonne doth ryſe,
Thence will I throwe my body downe, the edge of braſten rocke
Shal cleaue my corps, and euery crag ſhall geue a brooſing knock.
My hand ſhall hang torne by the way the rugged mountayne ſide
Shall with the guſhing bubbles of my dropping bloud be dyde
On death wre vengeaunce ſmall, though ſmall yet may it be delayde.
What deſpret death I ſhould attempt it makes my heart diſmayde:
Alas, alas that Hercles ſwerd within my chamber ſtucke
Then well were I if for to dye on that it were my lucke.
It is inough if one right hand doe bring vs both to graue.
Come neare, come neare yee Nations, now let all people haue
In redineſſe, both ſtone and fier the ſame to throw at mee,
Now holde your hands, and take yee to your tooles for I am ſhee
That of your ſuccour ſpoyled you now cruell Kayſars may
All vncontrolled tyrantlike, in kingdomes weilde the ſway,
Now euery miſchiefe may ſtart vp, and not rebuked bee.
The alters now ſhall vp agayne that wonted wers to ſee
A bloudy offring like him ſelfe in kinde that offer ſhould.
Thus haue I made the guilty gap to let in bloudſhed boulde
I render you to tyrants kings, bugges, beaſts, and gryſely diuells.
By taking him away that ſhould reuenge you of theſe euilles.
O ſpouſe thou of the thunderer and can you yet forbeare
Wilt thou not fling thy flames from heauen as did thy brother deare?
Diſpatch me hence ſent vp to Ioue, wilt thou not me deſtroye
The greateſt prayſe that thou might winne then ſhall thou not enioy
Nor luſty tryumphe: I am ſhe that beare the name to be
The daughter of the man that would in prowes caape with thee.
Why wilt thou ſtayne thy ſtocke which hath vntaynted bene before,
This il procedes of ygnorance although it be ful ſore:
Hee is not gylty that committes the gylte not with his will.
Wel may hee erre of ignorance that fauoreth his ill
And ſpares himſelfe: my ſelfe of death moſt worthy I do deeme.
He doth condemne himſelfe to dye that needes wil guylty ſeeme.
Death can deceiue no one but ſuch as innocentes may bee.
Wilt thou forſake the gloryous ſonne?
The ſonne forſaketh mee.
Wretch wil thou caſt away thy life.
Yea though it be to death,
I follow wil my Hercules
He hath both life and breath
When he perceaued him ouermatcht he haſtned his decay.
Wilt thou forgoe thy ſonne, and eake preuent thy dying day?
Her ſelfe hath liued long ynough who buryed hath her childe.
And wilt thou follow on to death thy ſpouſe
yea Ladies mild
Before their huſbandes vſe to dye.
Thy ſelfe thou doſt accuſe
Of guylt if thou cōdemne thy ſelfe.
No gylty one doth vſe
To take reuengemente of themſelues.
But thoſe are pardoned
That do oftend of ygnoraunce and not of peuiſh wil
Who wil condemne the deede hee doth?
Ech man doth ſeeke to ſhun
His lot when ſpite of frowning fate againſt him ſeemes to runne.
And he for whom thou languiſheſt, with arrow ſlow his wyfe
Hight Megara, and did deſtroy his tender childrens life.
When as a braynſicke beaſt in hand he toſt his knarrye mace,
That ſqueaſde the ſnake in Lerna lake before his fathers face.
He played thryſe the murtherer, himſelfe yet he forgaue
And for the haynous gylt hee did when frenzy made him raue
He purgde himſelfe in Cynips ſpring toward the Southerne poale
And in the water bath'd his hand againe to make him hoale.
Now whether wilt thou caytiffe wretch, why doſt thou dam thy handes
In condemnation of theſe the ghoſt of Hercles ſtandes.
I meane to plague the treachery.
Your Hercules wel I know,
Perhap he wil be heare agayne and mayſter al his woe:
Then ſhall your ſlaked greefe vnto yobr Hercules geue place.
They ſay the ſerpents poyſon doth deuowen him apace
The poyſon of his wicked Wyle his luſty lims deſtroyes.
And think yee it to bee the ſerpents bane that him annoyes,
That hee cannot eſcape who bare the brunt of it aliue,
And how to pare of Hydraes heads he coulde full well contryue
When as the victour ſtoode with grinning teath amid the moode,
And all his body ſlauerde fowle with venomous ſpit and bloude,
And ſhall the Centaur Neſſus goare agaynſt the man preuayle
That made thy pithy ſtrength it ſelfe of Neſſus for to quayle.
In vayne yee reſcue her that is of purpoſe ſet to dye
Therefore I haue determinde with my ſelfe this lyfe to flye
And long inough hee lyued hath that may with Hercles dye.
I doe beſeech thee humbly for this gray and hoary head,
And for theſe pappes that as thy Mother haue thee nouriſhed,
Remove the feruent ſits that cage within thy boyling breaſt,
And ſuffer not theſe deſpret thoughtes of death in thee to reſt.
Who woulde perſwade a wretch to liue. He hath a cruell heart?
And though that death be vnto me a great and grieuous ſmart:
Yet vnto other ſome it is an eſing of their payne.
O wreatch excuſe thy handy worke, and ſay at laſt agayne,
T'is ignoraunce that did the deede, and not the willfull Wyfe.
It wilt be quit whereas th'infernall endes ſhall ſtint the ſtryfe
And quit my guilty ghoſt: my conſcience doth my hands condem.
But Pluta Prince of glummy goulph ſhall purge from ſlaughter them:
Before thy bankes I will appeare forgetfull Lethes Lake,
And being then a dolefull ghoſt my huſband will I take.
But thou that wields the ſcepter blacke of darke internall ſkies
Apply thy toyle: the haynous guilt that nons durſt enterpryſe,
This ignoraunce hath ouercom, Dame Iuno neuer dare
To take away our Hercules. Thy plunging plagues prepare,
Let Siſiphs ſtone on my neck force my ſtouping ſhoulders ſhrynke,
And let the fleeting licour from my gaping gums to ſynke.
Yea let it mock my thyrſty throate when as I meane to drynke,
And thou that rackes Ixion King of Theſſayle O thou Wheele,
My haynous handes deſerued haue thy ſwinging ſway to feele,
And let the greedy gripe ſcratch out theſe guts on eyther ſide,
If Danaus pitchers ceaſe: by mee the rome ſhalbe ſupplide.
Set open hell, take mee Medea as of thy giult.
This hand of myne, then both of thyne more cruell bloud hath ſpilt
More then thou did as in reſpect of mother to thy thylde.
Or loking to thy brothers ghoſt whoſe gore hath thee defylde,
Haue with the Lady thou of Thrace for ſuch a cruel wyfe,
And the Althe that burnt the brand of Meleagers life.
Receyue thy daughter now, denye me not thy babe to bee:
Why ſuch a one ſhould quayle by you, ſome reaſon let vs ſee:
Ye honeſt matrons that enioy the groues of holy wood
Agaynſt me ſhut the heauens, or ſuch whoſe handes wt huſbandes blood
Haue bene imbrewde, if any of the fifty ſiſters dyre
Defying honeſt duty all that wedlocke did require:
But deſprat dames with goary blades ſtood armde: in me let them
See and allow theyr bloudy handes that other wil condem.
I wil go get my ſelfe among the troupe of cruel wyues
But they wil ſhunne ſuch gylty handes as ſhred their huſbandes liues.
O valiant ſpouſe, a guilſſe ghoſt, but gylty handes I haue
Ah ſilly woman, woe is me, that giuen light credite haue
O traytor Neſſus while I ment by Centaures ſubtil charme
To draw from Iole Hercles loue my ſelfe ſuſtayne the harme.
Hence Phoebus hence, and thou O ſlickring life of her that lackes
Her Hercules and giueſt day to wretches in their wrackes.
This is a diſmal day: to thee Small penaunce yeld I will
And life with all: my woeful fate ſhal I continue ſtil
Deferryng death, O ſpouſe that of thy hand I may be ſlayne,
And doth their any ſparke of life yet in thy breaſt remayne?
Or can thy hand yet draw the bow Sarmacian ſhaft to caſt,
Do weapons ceaſe, and haue thy feble handes giuen vp at laſt
Thy bow? but if thy hardy wyfe to thee a toole may reache
I long to peryſh of thy hand, myne hower yet wil I ſtretche
Like gyltleſſe Licas mangle me diſperſe in other townes
My corpes, and hurle me worlde beyond the trauayles bownes.
Trounce mee like monſter Arcadie or ought that did rebell,
And yet thou ſhalt do nought but that becommes an huſband wel.
I pray you mother ſpare your ſelfe, forgeue your fatal lot,
If ye offend of ygnoraunce, then blame deſerue yee not
If thou regard true honeſty, thy wretched mother ſlay.
Why trembleth thus thy feareful hand, why lokeſt thow away?
Such ſinne ſhalbe a ſacrifyce why daſtard doſt thou feare?
I ſpoylde thy father Hercules, this hand, this hand aleare
Hath murdred him wherby I haue done thee a more deſpyte,
Then ioy I did, in that my wobe did bring thee firſt to light.
If yet thou know not how to kill, then practiſe fyrſt on mee.
If as thou like within my throate thy blade ſhal ſheathed be
Or if to paunch thy mother ſoone thou meane to take in hand
To yeeld her dreadleſſe ghoſt to thee thy mother ſtill ſhall ſtande,
It ſhall not wholly be thy deede, by thee it ſhall be done,
And cauſed by my wil to be. Art thou Alcides ſoon
And all affrayd? ſo ſhal thou neuer great exployts atchieue
Nor paſſe the worlde ſuch feats of armes and ſleightes for to contriue.
If any monſter ſhould be bred thy fathers courage ſhew,
And to it with vnfeareful arme, loe ouerchargde with woe
My breaſt lies bare vnto thy hand. Stryke, I thy gylt forgeue
The fendes infernall for their ſinne thy ſoule ſhal neuer greeue.
What yerking noyſe is this we heare▪ what hagge here haue we fownd
That beares aboute her writhen lockes theſe vgly adders wound,
And one her yrkſome temples twayne her blackyſh innes do wagge.
Why chaſe ye mee with burning brandes Megera filthy hagge▪
Alcides can but vengeance aſke, and that I wil him get
But haue the iudges dyre of hell for yt in counſell ſet
But of the dreadful dongeon dores I ſee thunfoulding leaues
What auncient ſier is he that on his tatred ſhoulder heaues
Th'un weiloy ſtone that borne toth top agayne doth downward reele
Or what is e that ſpraules his lims vppon the whirling wheele
Lo heare ſtood ougly Tiſiphon with ſterne and ghaſtly face,
And did demaunde with ſteaming eies the manner of the caſe.
O ſpare thy ſtrypes Megera ſpare, and with thy brandes away,
Th'offence I did was ment in loue, but whether do I ſway
The groūd doth ſinke, the roofe doth cracke, whether went this raging route,
Now al the world with gaſing eyes ſtand ſtaring me about
On euery ſide the people grudge and call for their defence.
Be good to me O nations whither, ſhall I get mee hence?
Death onely is my loade of reſt there may my ſorrowes byde
I do proteſt the fiery wheeles that Phoebus charyot guide.
That heare I dye and leaue the worlde, thers Hercles yet behynde.
Away ſhe runnes agaſt: aye me, ſhee hath fullylde her mynd,
For purpoſed ſhe was to dye and now remaynes my wil
For to preuent her that by force her ſelfe ſhe ſhall not kill
O miſe rable prety, if I my mother aue.
I ſim a gaynſt my father then, but if vnto the graue
I let hr goe, then toward her a treſpas ſoule there lyes.
And thus (alas) on eyther ſyde great miſchiefe doth aries,
And needes her purpoſe muſt be ſtayde Ile hie and take in hand
To ſtop her deſpret enterpryſe and miſchiefy to withſtand.
FVll true the dytty is
That holy ORPHEVS ſang,
On Thracian harpe with ſounde whereof
the Rocks of Rodop rang,
That nothing is creat
For euer to endure.
Dame Natures byrdes each on muſt ſtoupe
when death throwes out the lure.
The head wyth Criſpen lockes,
or goulden hayres full:
In time hath borne an hoary bush,
or bin a naked ſcull.
And that which tract of time
doth bring out of the grayne,
Olde SATVRNE sharps his Syth at length
to reape it downe agayne.
Though PHOEBVS ryſe at morne,
with glistring rayes full proude,
Hee runnes his race, and ducketh downe
at length in foggy Clowde.
Toth Gaetans ORPHEVS ſang
ſuch kinde of melody.
And how the gods themſelues were bounde
to lawes of destiny.
The God that doth the yeare.
By egall partes diſpoſe,
Howe fatall webbe in euery clyme
are dayly ſpunne he showes.
For all thinges made of moulde
The grounde agayne will gape,
As Hercles preacheth playne by proofe
that nothing can eſcape.
For ſhortly shall enſue
Diſcarge of Natures Lawe
And out of hande the gloming daye
of doome shall onwarde drawe
Then all that lies within
The ſcorching Libicke clyme,
The poale antarticke of the South.
shall ouerwhelme in tyme.
Poale articke of the North
Shall iumble, all that lyes
VVithin the Axeltree, whereon,
drye BORES blaſinge flyes
The shiuerynge Sunne in Heauen
Shall leeſe his fadyng lighte
The Pallace of the frames of Heauens
shall runne to ruin quight.
And all theſe blockiſh Gods
Some kynd of Death ſhall quell,
And in confuſed CHAOS blynde
they ſhall for euer dwell,
And after ruin made
Of Goblin, Hegge, and Elfe,
Death shall bringe finall destenye,
at last vppon it ſelfe.
VVhere shall be then beſtowde
The world ſo huge a maſſe,
The beaten hye way vnto hell
is like away to paſſe,
To leade vnto the Heauens
That shall be layed flatt:
The ſpace betwene the Heauen and earth,
inough thinke ye is that?
Or is it not to much
For worldly miſeryes:
VVher may ſuch heaps of ſinnes be lodgd
what place aboue the ſkyes?
Remaynes, but that the ſea
VVith Heauen and lowest Hell,
Three Kingdomes caſt in one are like
within one roofe to dwell.
But hark what roaring crye,
Thus beates my fearefull eare
But lo its Hercules that yelles
tis Hercules I heare.
REtyre, retyre thy breathing breaſtes,
O Titan blaſing bright,
Vnfold thy myſty mantle blacke
of dim and darkeſome Night:
And daſh this dreary day wherin
I Hercules muſt die.
With blemiſhblack of filthy fogge defyle the grieſly ſkye:
Pre en my ſtepdames naughty mynd. Now ſhould I haue reſignde,
(O Father) my inheritaunce of Plutoes dungeon blynd
Heauen frames ſhould here & there be braſt, & eyther poale ſhould crack
Why ſpareſt thou the ſtarres and leſt thy Hercles go to wracke?
Now Ioue loke round aboute the heauens, and if thou can eſpye
On gyant heaue the Theſſaill cliues agaynſt thaſſalted ſkye
Vnburdned be Enceladus of hugye Oſir hill,
And hurled be on Hercules the mighty mountayne ſtill
Prowde Pluto ſhall vnbarre the gates of blacke and glummy caue
Yet maugre all their might (o Father Ioue) I wil thee ſaue
From fury of thy oes, and ſet thee vp agayne in ſkyes,
Yet lo Ioue, loe, her that on earth thy thunderdint ſupplies,
And for to be liuetenaunt of thy boultes on earth was borne,
Is ſent to burning Limbo lake in tormentes to be torne
The ſterne Enceladus agayne in ramping rage ſhal ryſe
And hurle the weighte (that now doth crode him downe) againſt the ſkies,
Thus by my death they ſhal preſume to conquer heauen all
But ere that day vppon my corſe compel the heauens to fall
Breake downe, breake downe, the welkin that thou ſuffreſt to decay,
O ſonne of thunder thumping Ioue no ſhadowes do thee fray,
Now Oſſa mount of Theſſalie ſhal Pelion hill downe cruſh
And Athos pilde on Pindus toppe his buſhy hed ſhall puſh
Among the ſtarry ſkes therby aboue the craggy rockes.
Typhoëus vp ſhal clyme, and thumpe with ſtore of batryng knockes
Iuarmen ſtone in Tyrren ſea from thence eake ſhall he beat
The ſmoaky forge of Aetna mount, that glowes with ſtewing heate
Enceladus not ouerthrowne yet with the thunder cracke
Shal hew the mountayne ſyde in twayne, and truſſe it on his backe
The ſignes of heauen ſhal follow thee▪ and goe with thee to wracke
I that returnde from dennes of death, and Stigian ſtreame defyed
And ferryed ouer Lethes lake, and dragd vp, chaind, and tyde
The tryple headded maſtiffe hownd, when Tytans teeme did ſtart
So at the ougly ſight that he fel almoſt from his cart.
Euen I whoſe pith the kingdomes three of Gods ful wel haue knowne
Lo yet myne end I daunted am by death and ouerthrowne
But yet no bloudy blade agaynſt my riued rybbes doth craſh
It is no rock that vnto death my bruſed bones doth paſh
Nor as it were with O ſir hill that clouen were in twayne,
Nor with the ſway o all the mountayne falling am I ſlayne.
The glaring eyed giant grym doth not now ſqueaze my coarſe
With paiſe of Pindus roch and thus not feling enmyes force
I conquerd am and yet alas this coarſie frets me more
O feeble force of man: he whom no might could match before
Withouten any conqueſt made doth end his latter day,
Without exployt or feat of armes my ſelfe I paſſe away.
O mighty vmpier of the world and all ye Ghoſtes aboue
That witnes how in quarell good my right hand euer ſtroue
O all ye landes, O earth alas, may it your mercy pleaſe
To ſpoyle the ſpiteful ſting of death that dauntes your Hercules
Fy fye, what ſhame is it to vs what filthy fate we haue?
A woman prowde ſhall boaſt her bane brought Hercles to his graue
Then what are they whoſe mortall mayme Alcides weapon gaue
If thus with ſway inuincible my fatal wheele do run
And neede muſt on this ſhameful rocke my fatall twiſt be ſpunne:
As by a womans curſed hand my bloud ſhould thus be ſhed
Yet Iunoes mallice migh haue powrd this vengeance on my head,
So might a womans deadly band have brought me to my beere:
But pet a woman wellding ſway amid the welkin cleare
But this ſeemde ouerprowde attempt for Gods to take in hand
The paples dame in Scithia borne where pight on hie oh s;tand
The Apeltree whereon the vnderpropped poales do ſway▪
It might as wel haue bene her hap to take my breath away,
What womans might may maiſter me Queene Iunoes hatefull foe
Fye ſtepdame fye the fowler ſhame by this to thee doth grow?
Why doſt thou triumph in this day? why did dame Tellus breede
Such parlous bugges thy humour ranck of colour hoate to feede?
A mortall womans peauiſhe ſpight doth paſſe thy rancour rough,
Thou ſayſt thou cannot haue reuenge on Hercules inough
Then are wee twayne y• paſſe thy power the Gods may bluſhe for ſham?
To ſee their mallice ouermacht by ſuch a mortall dame.
Would God the ramping Lyons pawe that noyed Neme woode,
Had fillde his greedy mounching Iawes with plenty of my bloude:
Or while the twining ſnakes had hembde mee in by hundreds thick,
Why might not Hydra ſwallow vp my wrinched body quick?
Why was it not the centaures hap my ſilly fleſh to gnawe?
Or that I bounde on Tantalls rocke ſhoulde gape with greedy Iawe?
In vayne to catch the fleeting foode when deepe from Tartar ſoyle,
Where at the Gods aggrized were, I did purloyne the ſpoyle.
And from the darck infernall Styx I got agayne to light,
Or Ditis dungeon all the ſtops and ſtayes I conquerde quight.
Death ſhranke from mee in euery place that I a noble knight
At length might ende my dayes in ſhame, and in diſhonour ſpoylde
Oh Ioue the creatures terrible thou knowſt that I haue foylde
The threefolde ſhapen maſtiffe curre whom vp I draggde in chayne,
Hee ſtarring from the ſunnewarde could not hale mee back agayne.
The ſheepherdes churliſhe rabble that aloofe in Iber hee
Vnder the Spaniſhe feruent clyme coulde neuer maiſter mee.
Nor ſerpents twayne that vnto mee in tender cradell creapt.
Aye woe is mee that valiant death ſo oft I ouerleapt:
What honour ſhall I dye withall?
Beholde how death and hell
Cannot appaule the verteous mynde that of deſeruing well.
By guiltleſſe conſcience warrant hath the death that doth him ſpoyle,
Irkes not as thus of ſuch an one to take this filthy foyle.
If with this torment life were loſt, his mynde ſhould much be aſde,
As with vnweldy Gyauntes ſway hee had his body ſqueaſde.
Or Titans burden with his monſters all he woulde abyde.
Or wiſhe of raging Gyants rent in pieces to haue dyde,
And if thy dlefull death becauſe that monſter none is left.
Who may be worthy thought by whom Alcides life bee reft?
But thine owne hand to doe the deede.
Aye me and wellaway,
What Scorpion ſcrapes within my Mawe? what cralling Crab I ſay
With crooking cleaze to comber mee, from ſcorching zone returnes,
And boat within my boyling bones the ſeathing Marowe burnes.
My Riuer whilom ranke of bloude my rotting Lunges it tawes,
And teareth them in ſhattred gubs, and filthy withered flawes.
And now my Gall is dryed vp my burning Lyuer glowes.
The ſtewing heate hath ſtulde away the bloude, and Ioue hee knowes
My vpper ſkin is ſcorcht away and thus the Cankar ſtronge
Doth eate an hole that get it may my wretched Limmes amonge,
And from my frying Ribs (alas) my Lyuer quite is rent.
It gnawes my fleſh, deuowers all, my Carkas quite is ſpent,
It ſoakes into the empty bones, and out the iuyce it ſuckes
The bones by lumps drop of while it the ioyntes a ſunder pluckes
My corpulent Carkes is conſumde of Hercules euery Iim
Yet ſtauncheth not the feſtring ot that feedeth faſt n him
O what a tingling ache it is that makes mee thus to ſmart,
O bitter plague, O peſtilence that gripeth to the heart.
Loe Cittes, loe what now remaynes of Hercules the great.
Are theſe the armes that did with ſtripes the roaring Lyon beate?
And in Nemea wood did teare him from his hary caſe
Might this hand bend y• bow from cloudes the Stimphall foule to chaſe?
Are theſe the ſhankes that coapt the heart who ſhifting pace full oft?
Did beare his braunched head ypranckt with garlond gay aloft?
Was Cale craggy cliue of theſe my feeble clowches broake?
To rayſe a dam in eas that did their foamy channell choake.
Had theſe armes pith the breath of Kings, of Beaſtes, and bugs to ſtop?
Or might theſe ſhoulders tough the payſe of heauen vnderprop?
Are theſe the luſty Lims and Neck that ſhrank not at the payſe?
Are theſe handes that I agaynſt the weltring heauens did rayſe?
Alas whoſe handes ſhall now perforce from hence hell Iaylo leade?
Alas the noble courage earſt that now in mee is deade.
Why call I Ioue my Father great of whom my ſtock ſhould ryſe?
Why by the Thunderer make I my challenge to the ſkyes?
Now, now Ampitrio is my ſter all men may it auouch.
Come out thou murreyn fowle that doſt within my bowells couch.
Why doſt thou thus with priuy wound my carefull Carkas foyle?
What gulph vnder the frozen Clyme in ſaluage Scithian ſoyle
Engendred the? what water Hag did ſpawne thee on the ſhore?
Or ſtony Clpe Rock in Spayne that borders on the Moare:
O yrkſome ill, and art thou not the Serpent that doth ſting
With creſt on ougly head, or els ſome other lothly thing,
Or ſpronge of Hydraës bloude, or left heere by the hellick hound.
Art thou no plague? and yet a plague in whom all plagues abound?
What gaſtly countnaunce carieſt thou (alas) yet let me know?
What kinde of miſchiefe may thou be that doſt torment mee ſo?
What ſaluage ſore, or murreyn ſtraunge, or vncouth plague thou bee?
With open combat face to face thou ſhould encounter mee.
And not thus ranckle in my fleſh, nor ſoake into the ſap.
By ſowltring heate within my bones thy boyling bane to wrap,
And in the mid thereof to fry the Maroe that doth melt.
My iagged ſkin is ript, and out my ſmoaky Bowells ſwelt.
From burſten Paunch my ſelfe doe flea the ſkin with graſping pawſe,
And from the naked boanes doe teare the mangled fleſh by flawes,
I ſearched for thee through my Mawe, yet further doſt thou creepe,
And feſtring farther in my fleſh haſt gnawne an hole more deepe.
O miſchiefe match to Hercules, what griefe coulde make mee greete?
Whēce flow theſe ſtreames of trillīg teares y• down my cheekes do fleete
The time hath bin no plunging pangues could cauſe our courage quaile,
That neuer vſe with criſtall teares our anguiſh to bewayle.
Ah, fy, I am aſhamde that I ſhould learne theſe teares to ſhed:
That Hercules in weeping wiſe his griefe hath languiſhed:
Who euer ſaw at any day in any time or place?
All bitter brunes I bare with dry, and eake vnreky face
The manhoode that ſo many ills hath maiſtred heretofore,
Hath yeelded onely vnto thee, to thee thou Cankar ſore.
Thou firſt of all haſt ſtraynde the teares out of my weeping eyes
Thy gargle face thy viſage man that doth mee ſore aggriſe.
More towgh then moſſy Rockes, more hard then Gads of ſturdy ſleele,
Or roaming ſtreame of Simplegade, whereby this ſmart I feele
Hath cruſht my cracking Iawes, & wronge the ſtreaming teares frō me.
O wielder of the Welkin ſwifte, loe, loe the Earth doth ſee
How Hercules doth weepe and wayle, and to my greater payne
My Stepdame Iuno ſees the ſame, beholde, beholde agayne
My Lunges doe fry, the ſcorching heate preuayleth more, and more.
Whence fell this thunder Boult on mee that burnes in mee ſo ſore?
Who ſtoupeth not whē griefe doth gal? more tough thē Aem of Thrace
Whas whilom hawty Hercules, and did no more gieue place
Then doth the marble axelltree, his Lims hee now doth yeelde
To paynefull pangues: and on his Neck his aking heade doth wielde,
And toſſing ſtill from ſide to ſide, hee bendes with hugy ſway,
And oft his noble heart doth force his trilling teares to ſtay.
O Father wyth thy heauenly Eyes,
Beholde my wretched plight,
For neuer HERCVLES till nowe
bid craue thy hande of might,
Not when as Hydraës fruictfull heads
about my Lyms were wounde,
Nor when I locke in Lakes alow
fought with th'inferdall hownde,
Theſe hideous fiends I foylde, with kings, & tyraunts prowde likewiſe.
Yet in theſe broyles I neuer lookt for ſuccour to the ſkyes.
This hand did ſtill auouch the vowe, no thunder for my ſake
Did glitter in the holy heauens, this day hath hid mee make
Some ſuite to thee, and of my boones yet heeres the firſt and laſt,
One onely Thunder boult I craue at mee O Ioue to caſt.
Count mee a Giaunt of my ſelfe, I can no leſſe deuiſe,
While Ioue I thought of promiſe true, I ſpaarde the ſtarry ſkies.
Bee thou eyther a cruell ſier, or pity if thou haue,
Yet lend thy ſonne thy help, and get the glory of my graue:
Preuenting this my dreary death, of this if thou doe ſkorne,
Or that thy hand abhorre the guilt, from Sicill cliue ſuborne
The ſoultring Giaunts that in hand high Pindus mount can weilde,
Or Oſſa that it hurlde on mee I may therewith bequielde,
Braſt vp hell Gates, and let Bellone ſcourge mee with Iron rod,
And let in armes encounter mee the mighty Martiall God,
My brother I acknowledge him but by my ſepdames ſide,
And Pallas thou my ſiſter take, let at thy brother ſlide
A thirling Darte. O ſtepdame myne with humble ſuite I craue
A wounde of thee that womans hand may bring mee to my graue.
Why doſt thou feede thy fury nowe as one whoſe wrath were ende
And ſatiſfied? what ſeeke yee more? I ſtoupe, I yeelde, I bende.
Thou ſeeſt Alcides humbly layde, where as vnto this day
That euer I entreated thee, no Land, no Beaſt can ſay,
Now doe I neede thy deadly wrath to rid mee of my payne,
And now thy rankour is appeaſde, thy hate is quencht agayne,
And thus thou ſpareſt mee my life, when as I wiſhe to dye:
O Earth will none make mee the fier wherein my bones may fry?
Nor reach a blade to Hercules, conuay yee all from mee?
So let no country Monſters breede when I ſhall buried be,
And let none wayle the loſſe of mee if more aryſe,
God ſend another Hercules to ſuccour Earth and ſkyes.
But as for mee on euery ſide ding out my brooſed brayne,
And craſh with ſturdy ſtroke of ſtones my curſed Scull in twayne
And rid my torments: wilt thou not? O worlde to mee vnkynde,
And are ſo ſoone our benefits forgotten in thy mynde.
Een to this bower with bugs and beaſts thou had ouer layde
Had not I bin: good people cauſe his torments to beſtayde
That ſuccored you: time giues you leaue to recompence my payne,
If yee with death will guerden mee, I aſke none other gayne.
Where ſhall I wretched mother of Alcides wiſhe to bee?
Where is my chylde? where is my ſonne? If ſight deceaue not mee
With gaſping mouth, and panting heart loe where hee ſprawling lyes.
Where as (alas) in raging heart of boyling fits hee fryes,
Hee groues, all is diſpacht, deare childe let mee Alcides myne
Embrace thy pining lims: with kiſſe enfoulde my armes in thyne
Where are the lims? where is the neck that bare the ſkies alone?
What thus hath mangled thee that all thy corps is waſte and gone?
I am your Hercles mother deare, whom thus yee ſee here loſt.
Acknowledge mee all though God knowes I ſeeme but as a ghoſt.
Why doe you turne your face away and mourning viſage mylde.
Are yee aſhamde that Hercules ſhould counted bee your chylde?
What world hath bred this vncouth bug? what land engendred it?
Or els what monſtrous miſchiefe may on thee triumphing ſit?
Who iſt that conquers Hercules?
By treaſon of his Wyfe
Thou ſeeſt how wretched Hercules do leeſe his lothed Lyfe.
To ouerthrow my Hercules, what treaſon hath the might?
That which a wrathfull Dame doth ſeeke to caſe her of her ſpight.
How hath this peſtilence gotten to thy Lims and bleeding bones?
Ito a Shyrt the woman had conuayde it for the nonce.
Where is the Shyrt for nothing but thy naked coips I ſee?
The veſture by the poyſon ranke deowred is with mee.
And can ſuch poyſon be contriued?
I thinke within my guts,
That hideous Hydra hiſſing Snake his ſlowghy body puts,
A thouſand plagues of Lerna Poole within my Bowelles rampes:
What raging deare is this that driues vp all Sicilia dampes?
What Eme of Hell forbids the day to paſſe the boyling one?
O Maes amid the greedy gulphes and pooles let me be throwne.
What Iſter can my Carkas coole? no not the Ocean mayne
Of theſe my ſtewing vapours may the raging quench agayne?
(Al moyſture of my limmes in theſe my fits are fryde away)
The iuyce wil ſone be ſoaked vp, what preſident of hel
Let me returne from vnder grounde agayne with Ioue to dwell
He ought to haue retaynd me ſtill, receiue me once agayne
Into thy dungeon darke that hel may in this pickle playne
Behold the man that conquerd yt, no booty bringe I will
Away with me: why doſt thou quake for feare of Hercles ſtill.
Set on me death coragiouſly for now I may be kilde
Now ſtint thy tender tears that down thy checkes ſo long haue trild,
And mayſter this thy mallady compell thy ſorrowes ſloupe.
And ſhew that in theſe plunging panges Alcides did not droupe,
And as it hath bene caſt thy guyſe force death and hel to ſhrike.
If ougly greſted Cauaſue. In chayne of yrone linke
Should bynd me as agoning pray the greedy grype to feede
Yet from myne eyes it ſhould not ſtrayne a brokē teare indeede
If wandring Symplegads would me wiſh eyther rocke aſſaile,
To byde the brunt of double wracke my courage would not quayle.
Let Pindus tumbled be on me, houge Aemus let me haue
Or Athos rocke in Thracian ſeas that breakes the weltring waue,
And bode the boultes of thondring Ioue although thunweildy maſſe▪
Of all the world ſhould fal on mee and might be brought to paſſe
That Phoebus flaming apeltree ſhould burne vppon my graue
No vncouth crye ſhould force the mynd of Hercles thus to raue.
Let meete a thouſand ſauage beaſtes and rent me al atonce
Let Stymphal oules with houling hoarſe lay ſtrokes vppon my bones
Or ſcrowling bul on thother ſyde ſtrike on with head and horne
Or els of other ſerpentes wilde let al my partes be orne
With roring earthquakes, hougy lumpes be puffed vppon me
With griping greefe let all my limmes to nothing pyned bee
Although I be to pouder cruſht I wil with pacience peace
In ſpite of beaſtes or bruſing blowes my ſighes and teares ſhal ſeace
It is not ſonne the womans bane that in thy bones doth boile
But feſtring teares and brooſing knockes of thy continual toyle
The wrinches old with aking panges begin to ſmart anew.
O where is death where is hee now? of all that I do rew:
Can any witnes what it is? let death now bend his bow
A naked hand is ſtronge ynough to make mee ſtowpe ful low
Let any wight in al the worlde attempt to ſet on mee
I warrant him, approch let him, Ah wretched might I bee
This wayward agony hath take his perfit wits away.
Haue hence his tooles, and eake his ſhaftes for daunger hence couay.
His ruddy gills that glow like fier ſome miſchiefe doe pretend.
To ſhrowde my ſelfe (alas) into what corner ſhall I wend?
This mallady a frenſy is, this onely is the meane
To conquer Hercules, why then doe I as doting quean
Thus fall to teares and ſeeke to ſhrynke, may bee that hee will haue,
Alcmenas hand to giue the ſtroke, to bring him to the graue.
But dye he in a Murreynes name, ere I for cowarde will
Such deadly penaunce bee enioynde, that on my doings ſtill,
His baynous hand may vaunt it ſelfe, loe how the pangues full deepe,
With ſtuggling ceaſt, doe hinde the purple vaynes with deadly ſleepe,
And beating ſore lift vp and downe his faynt and panting breaſt:
If I O Gods of this my noble Childe bee diſpoſſeſt:
Be gracious yet, and for the worlde ſome luſty champion ſaue.
Rid his annoy and let his limmes agayne theyr courage haue.
O Diſmall day, O anguiſhe, O
the heaper vp of ill.
Ioues Sonne is flayne, his Daughter dyes,
his Nephew lyueth ſtill.
Firſt by the Stepdames treaſon, is
the Sonne to ruin brought.
The Daughter likewyſe trapt in traynes,
and thereby come to nought.
What hoary head in chaunge of tunes, or teanour of his age
Hath ſeene, that Fortunes frowning Face hath ſturd ſuch ſtormy rage.
One dolefull day bereaueth mee (alas) of parents twayne.
But leaſt I ſpeake to ſpite the Gods, I will ſomewhat refrayne.
I loſt a Father, Hercules this onely I complayne.
O noble Impe of Hercules, (alas) my Nephew deare,
That doſt of wretched Alcmens Sonne the liuely feature beare.
Refrayne my chylde thy wayling woordes, this quiet ſleepe perhap
Will ouercome theſe plonging fits. But loe? loe in my lap.
Hee doth begin to ſtriue agayne, his fits begin a freſh.
Sleepe gieuing vp the feeble ghoſt to ranckle in the fleſh.
What meaneth Thrachin craggy creſt to ſhew before myne eyes?
Or now forſaking man am I aduaunſt aboue the ſkies.
Why do the heauens prouyde for me? the father Ioue I ſee,
And eake my ſtepdame Iuno dire appeaſed now with me.
What heauenly harmony is this that ſoundeth in myne eare.
Dame Iuno calles me ſonne in law, I ſe the pallace cleare
(Of chriſtal ſkies and beaten rakes of Phoebus flaming wheele)
I ſee the dumpiſh moary denne of glowming lady night
Here he commaundeth darknes dim to ſhew it ſelf in ſight.
What meaneth this, who is it that the heauens agaynſt me ſparres?
And am I thus O father myne brought downe againe from ſtarres.
Euen now Appolloës ſowltring car did fume about my face
So nie I paſt the pinch of Death, lo Thrachin top in place
Who brought me backe to ground agayne, beneath me earſt it lay
And al the world was vnder me, thou ſmart wert worne away,
Thou forceſt me confeſſe the ſame. Ah mercy, mercy now.
In ſtead of farther vengeance do theſe humble wordes allow.
Lo Hillus, lo thy mothers giftes ſuch preſentes ſhee preparde
Ah, might my trunchion punch her puddinges once as whilom farde
The haughty Ladye Amazon wel trounſed for her pride
On thedge of yſy Caucaſus afront the mountayne ſyde.
O noble lady Megara were thou my wretched wyfe,
When rapt in rage of franticke fittes, I reſt thee of thy life
Geue me my batt and bow in hand, my wreſtes I wil imbrew.
And force ye all your brages on me with blemiſh blacke to rue.
Thus let of Hercules exployts a woman be the laſt.
Forbeare O Syre thy hateful threates, ſhe hath it, all is paſt.
The vengeance that ye ſeke on her already hath her ſpedd.
With wound receiued at your hand my mother lieth dead
O blynded anquiſh: dye ſhe ſhould of Hercles furious hand)
Thus Licas hath his marrow loſt the heate of burning breſt
Wil haue me on the breathleſſe coarſe for to reuenge the reſt
Why doth ſhee not yet fele her force both let her want a graue
And on her curſed fleſh to feede let beaſtes her carkaſſe haue.
The ſilly woman was more woe then ye that bide the ſmart.
Ye wil releaſe ſome part hereof for pitty in your hart.
For greefe of you with her owne hande, alas her ſelfe ſhe ſlew
Thus more then ye do aſke of her, ſhe doth her doyng rewe
Yet is it not your Wyfes miſdeede that brought you to this plight.
No nor my mothers traytrous hand hath wrought this deepe deceit.
This treaſon Neſſus did contriue whom yee did pay his hire,
With arrow ſhot into his Ribs for rape of Deianire.
Thus father with the Centaures bloud your ſhyrt was ſore embrewde.
At Neſſus hand the vengeaunce of your deede thus haue yee rewde.
Hee hath his will: all is diſpacht, our Fates themſelues diſplay.
This is the day of death to mee. Thus earſt to mee did ſay,
A charmed Oake, and all the wood that range with yetling noyſe
Of Parnaſſ hill the Temples ſhooke, and thundred out this voyce.
The dead mans hand whom thou before haſt ſlayne,
O Hercules ſhall murther thee agayne.
Thou hauing mot the ſpace of gulph and grounde,
And deapth of hell, heare ſhall thou bee confounde.
I therefore doe bewayle no more, ſuch ſhould our ending bee.
That Hercles conquerde after him no man aliue may ſee.
Now let mee dye a manly death, a ſtout and excellent,
And meete for mee: this noble day ſhall valiauntly bee ſpent.
Fell all the Timber on the grounde hew down all OEta wood.
Let coales deuower Hercules, let fyer fry his blould.
But ere I dye thou noble Impe of Peans royall race.
This dolefull duety doe for mee: See that an whole day ſpace▪
My funerall fier flaming burne. And now my tender Hill,
The laſt peticion of my mouth make vnto thee I will.
Among the captiue Ladies, one there is, a noble Dame,
Of royall bloud, Euritus Chylde, Iole is her name:
Accept her to thy ſpouſall Bed, whom victour I vnkind
Haue trayned from her natiue home and but my heart, and mynde
Poore ſilly mayde I gaue her nought, and now ſhee ſhall mee loſe.
Loe thus the wretched woman walles her ſtill encreaſing woes.
But let her foſter that ſhe hath conceaued as Ioues ally,
And childe to mee, bee't thyne by her that earſt begot haue I:
And as for thee deare mother myne your dreary dole forgoe,
Your Hercules ſhall liue: doe not vayne teares on him beſtowe:
My manhoode made a ſtrumpet thought a Stepdame vnto thee,
But if that eyther Hercles byrth ſhewe her vnſure to bee,
Or be a man my ſter or els be falſified my kin.
Now let Ioues ceaſe, and let my mothers ſlaunder in,
I haue deſerued a father well that haue aduaunſt ſo hye
The glory of the rolling heauens, of nature tramde was I.
To worke the wondrous prayſe of Ioue, and Ioue him ſelfe doth Ioy,
To haue the name of Hercules, begetting ſuch a boy.
But pardon now my ſtrayned teares, but you as Ioue his niece.
Shall as a ſtately matrone bee among the Dames of Greece.
Though Iuno with the thunderer in ſpouſall chamber lyes
And in her heauenly hand doth weilde the ſcepter of the ſkies,
When euer bare ſhee ſuch a Babe, and yet though heauen ſhe hould
In heart agaynſt a mortall man ſhe foſters mallice oulde,
For ſpighte that borne of womans womb becounted thus I ſhould.
Goe Tican goe, run out thy Race, thee onely I forſake.
I that went with thee foote by foote nowe to th'infernall lake.
And Ghoſtes, I go yet with this prayſe to'ch pit down will I paſſe
That Hercules of open foe yet neuer foyled was.
But hee in open combats brought his conqueſts all to paſſe.
O Titan crownd with blaſing buſh whoſe morning moyſtures make
The Moone her foamy bridell from her tyred teame to take.
Declare to'th Eaſterlinges whereas the ruddy morne doth ryſe.
Declare vnto the Irishmen aloofe at weſtern Skies.
Make knowne vnto the Moores annoyed by flaming axentree.
Thoſe that with the yſy Wayne of Archas peſtred bee.
Diſplay to theſe that Hercules to th'eternall ghoſtes is gone
And to the bauling maſtriffes den from whence returneth none.
With duſky dampe of filthy fog O Titan choake thy blaze,
With lowring light of wanny Globe on wofull wordlings gaze,
And let thy head bee muffled vp with cloudes and darkneſſe dim.
For Hercles ſake, when ſhall thou finde, or where the like to him?
(O wretched worlde to whom wilt thou henceforth thy woes cōplaine,)
If any ſcattring peſtilence on earh ſhall be renewde,
By benom ranck, from poyſon mouth of ſcaly Dragon ſpewde:
If any Bore of Arcadie ſhall comber all a wood,
And teare the trauelers fleſh with tuſke embrewed in goary blood:
If any champion rough of Thrace with heart more hard in breaſt,
Then are the yſy rockes, where as the frozen Beare doth reſt,
Shall trample thicke his ſtables fowle with bloud of ſlaughterd men,
When people quake for feare of warre, who ſhall aſſiſt them then?
If wrathfull Gods for vengeaunce will fohe monſters to be bread?
Loe nowe enfebled all of force his Karkaſſe lyeth dead,
Whom Natures moulde had made a match to thūdring Ioue in ſtrēgth.
Hale out (alas) and let your playnt be hearde to townes at length.
Let women beat their naked armes, and wring their trembling handes,
Untruſse their hayre, and from theyr locks pluck of their binding bands.
Boult vp, and lock the Temple gates of Gods, and ape bee none,
But deſpret Iunoes Chapple doares. O Hercles thou art gone
To Lethes lake, and ſtreame of Stix, from whence no Keele agayne
Shall bring thee backe: O ſilly ſoule thou goeſt to remayne
Among the griſely goblins grymme: from whence thou whilom came
With triumph ſooner daunted death, and conqueſt of the ſame.
With gaſtly face, and karrayne armes, and neck that yeeldes to waight,
Thy ghoſt returnes, but Carons boate then ſhall not haue her fraight.
As balaſed with thy onely payſe, and yet ſhalt thou not byde
Among the raſcall ſprites, but ſit on bench by Eacus ſide,
And with the Iudges twayne of Creete as Umpier there to bee,
Appoynting paynes to ſoules that maye to their deſartes agree.
Frō ſlaughter hold your guiltleſse hands, bath not your blades in bloud.
Yee ſtates, that beare high ſayle on earth, and floae in worldly good:
It merits prayſe a mayden ſword vndipt in goare to beare,
And while thou rayne, to keepe thy realme from cruell doings cleare.
But vertue hath a pryuiledge to paſſe vnto the ſkies.
To'th top of froſen Apell tree O Hercules wilt thou ryſe?
Or where the ſunne with ſcorching blaze his burning beames doth reſt?
Or wilt thou bee a ſhyning ſtarre amid the lukewarme weſt?
Where Calpe Rocke is heard with roaring noyſe of wraſtling waue?
What place amid the azur ſkye entendeſt thou to haue?
What place ſhall be in all the heauens from hurley burley free?
When Hercules amid the ſtarres ſhall entertayned bee?
Let Ioue appoynt thy byding from the ougly Lion farre,
And burning Crab▪ leaſt thou with gryſely countnaunce do thē ſkarre.
And make the trembling ſtarres in heauen for feare to breake aray
And Titan quake: while ſpring doth prank with flowers y• tender ſpray.
Then haſty winter ſtrip the trees of all their braunches greene.
Or ſudden Summer deckt with leaues in buſſhy woods be ſeene.
And from the trees the Apples fall, the harueſt being doone:
No age on earth ſhall wipe away the fame that thou haſt woone.
As farre as Sun, or Stars can ſhyne, thy glorious name ſhall goe.
Amid the botome of the Sea firſt Corne ſhall ſprout, and grow,
And brackiſh Seas his waters ſalt to water freſh ſhall chaunge:
And fixed ſtarre of yſy beare from Clime to Clyme ſhall raunge,
And ſink into the frozen poole agaynſt his kindly ſway,
Ere people ceaſe the honour of thy triumphes to diſplay:
O ſoueraygne Ioue wee wretched wightes this boone of thee doe craue,
No monſtrous beaſtes, no noyſome plagues, hereafter let vs haue:
With bloudy champions let the earth encombred bee no more:
Caſt downe the hauty ſway of Courtes: if ought annoyaunce ſore
Shall cloy the earth, a champion to bee our ſhylde wee caue,
Whom as an honour of the Crowne his ruefull realme may haue.
(That ſtil will keepe his ſwerd from being taint with guiltleſſe bloud.)
But loe what meanes this rumbling noyſe? Ioe Hercles ſter doth grone,
And ſigheth for his ſonne: is it the Gods that wayle, and mone.
Or is it Iunoes fearefull ſhrike, whom Hercles doth aggriſe,
That ſeeing him for feare ſhee roares, and rnneth from the ſkyes.
Or els did Atlas faltring feete with feeble ſturring ſtumble?
And ſhrinking from his tottring waight thus force the Gods to rumble?
Or ſcared he the wauling ghoſtes, the which to feare he draue?
Or Cerberus braſt his gingling Chaynes with buſkling in his caue.
It is not ſo: but loe where Philoctetes doth appeare,
And Hercles famous ſhaftes to him bequeathed doth hee beare.
OF Hercules moſt heauy haps
Good youngman make reporte
How did hee beare it at his death?
In ſuch a chearefull ſorte
As no man liues.
And could he with
ſo ſweete and merry looke,
The ſcorching panges and torments of
his ending fier brooke?
That there was any heate at all his face did not bewray,
Who prou'de that power might force al things to ſtoupe and to obay,
That vnder ſonne vntamed be.
Where did the noble knight,
Among the wraſtling waues of ſea diſplay his matchleſſe might:
That miſchiefe witch all only yet the worlde knew not before,
Euen fier hath bin conquered as beaſtes, and monſters more
Among the toyles of Hercules the fier is crept in.
Declare vs how the flaming force of fier coulde hee win.
As ſoone as hee with ſmarting hand the Oeta hill had grypte,
And forthwith from ye braunched Beeche ye ſhrinking ſhade was wipte:
And felled from the ſtump it lyes, a Pyne tree hard hee bendes,
That crakes the clowdes, & down from ſkyes his hawty head he ſende
The Rocke did totter ready for to reele, and with the ſway
It tumbleth downe, a little groue withall it beares away.
A ſpreading Oake of Chaon big, whoſe leaues did euer ruſh,
And dimde the ſunne, and did beyonde the woode his braunches puſh.
It being hewde doth crack, and eake in twayne the wedges knappes:
The ſteele ſtartes back and thus the toole of Iron bides the rappes,
And flyes out of the Logge, at length at roore it ſhogde and ſhooke,
And falling downe full lythly the ouerthrow it tooke.
Forthwith the place loſt all his light, the byrds ſcaard fro their neſt
Doe foare about the cropped wood, and holes wherein to reſt,
And chirping with their weary winges about the plot they flicker
In euery tree the ringing ſtrokes were multiplied thicker.
The holy Oakes in hugy hand the Iron Axe did feele.
No timber on the ſtallen ſtocks might ſcape the hewing ſteele,
Thus all the wood vpon a pile is heapt, and one by one
The Logges are layde as hygh as heauen that Hercules thereon
Might haue a narrow roome: his burning bones for to beſtow.
On Pynetree top, and towgheſt Oake the fler begins to glowe.
And on the ſtumped willowe flamth, and thus the forreſt wyde
Doth make the Kill▪ the Popler wood all Hercles blocks doth hyde.
But as the puiſſaunt Lyon when his fits doe vexe him ſore,
Lies wallowing on his back, and through the forreſt lowde doth rore.
So fareth hee, who woulde haue thought hee had to burning gon?
As one that climbs to heauen, not fier, he was to looke vpon
When vp he ſtept on Oera mount and gazed on his Kill.
Being layde aloft he brake the blocke, ſo heauy was hee ſtill.
The ſhyues yet coulde not beare his wayght he calling for his bow
Did ſay to mee, haue Philocktet, on thee I it beſtow,
This ſame is it that Hydra with his ſwarming heads did know.
This did fetch downe the ſtimphall foules, and all that wee haue daunt,
Goe thou with this let victory, and happineſſe thee haunt,
For neuer ſhall thou ſhute agaynſt thy foes with theſe but ſpeede.
If at a byrde amid the clowdes thou aame ſhee dies indeede.
Theſe certayne ſhaftes ſhall bring thy marke down from the azur ſky,
Thys bow ſhall not deceaue thy hand, full oft I did it try,
And made it meete to beare a ſhaft, and caſt his leauell dew.
Thyne arrowes ſhall not fayle thyne aame if that thou nock them trew,
I aſke but only this of thee, put fier to the Stack,
Beſtow on mee my funerall flame to bryng me to my wrack.
This knarry Club (quoth hee) the which no hand ſhell euer loſſe
Shall onely with his Hercules in fier goe to loſſe,
This alſo (quoth hee) ſhouldſt thou haue if thou could weild the ſame,
Beſide his maiſter let it lye to help towarde the flame.
And then beſide him down hee layes the Lyons vayry ſkin
To burne with him: the ſhaggy caſe hid all the pyle within.
The people ſobde, and none there was but ſorrow ſtraynde his teares.
The mother mad for egar griefe her breaſt all bare ſhee beares,
And naked downe toth Nauill ſteade diſplayes her tender teates.
And languiſhing with wringed hands her naked dugges ſhee beares
And cryeth out vpon the Gods on Ioue himſelfe ſhee caes,
Her ſhriking rang through all place ſo womanlike ſhee yalles▪
Be ſtill (quoth hee) good mother: force your ſhowres of teares to ceaſe.
Your dreary dole disgraceth much the death of Hercules.
Wayle ſecretly vnto your ſelfe: why make ye Iuno glad,
To ſe that you a weeping day with ſtore of teares haue had?
(It doth her good to ſee her bawdes, to ſtand with weeping eyes.)
Forbeare, forbeare your malady, tis deadly ſinne for yee,
To teare the teares, and rent the wombe, that firſt did foſter me.
And as he bluſtred giuing gruntes when carſt he led in chayne
The hownd aboute the townes of Grece what tyme he came agayne
Tryumphing ouer conquerd hel defying Plutoës might,
And dreadful deſteny: ſo on the fyre he lay vpright.
What conquerour euer ſat in coatch with ſuch a chereful grace?
What tyrant did controll his folke by law with ſuch a face?
How huſht was al thing at his death? himſelfe he could not weepe
And alſo we had cleane forgot the wound of ſorrowes deepe
None doth lament him at his death now were it ſhame to wayle:
Alemen (whom nature ought to moue) her teares now do her fayle.
And thus as yll as was the ſonne the mother ſtoode almoſt.
But at his burning did hee not call on the heauenly hoſt,
Remembring Ioue to heare his ſuite.
As on in depe diſpayre
He lay, and ſtaryng vp ſo rould his eyes into the ayre
To ſpye if Ioue looke downe to him from any turret hye.
Then with his handes diſplayd to heauen (quoth he) where ſo thou lye,
And lokeſt downe to ſe thy ſonne, this ſame, this ſame is hee,
Whom one day eeked with a night engendred hath to thee
If Eaſt and Weſt if Scithia, and euery burning plot,
That parched is with glowing glede of Phoebus fier hot
Doth ſing my prayſe? and if the earth ful ſatiſfyde with peace
If languiſhing and wayling woords in euery towne doe ceaſe.
If none their alters do imbrew with any guiltles gore,
Then Ioue let my vncaged ſpirite haue heauen for euermore.
As for thinfernall dennes of death they do not me detarre?
Nor ſcouling Plutoes dungeon darck, but Ioue I do abhorre.
Vnto thoſe gaſtly Goblins as a ſtlly ſhade to goe.
Sith I am he whoſe conquering hand gaue them their ouerthrowe.
Withdraw theſe foggy clowdes of night, diſplay the glimſyng light
That Hercles broyld with flying flames the Gods may haue in ſight
And if thou do denye (O fyre) the ſtarres and heauen to mee
To geue me them agaynſt thy will thou ſhalt conſtrayned bee,
If glutting griefe do ſtop thy ſpeach, the Stygian goulphes ſet oape,
Aud let mee dye, but firſt declare within the heauenly coape,
That thou accepſt me as thy ſoone: this day it ſhal be wrought,
That to bee rayſd aloft to ſtarres, I may be worthy thought.
Thou haſt doone litle for me yet: it may be doubted well
Whether Ioue did firſt beget his ſonne, or damnd him firſt to hell.
And (quoth he) let my ſtepdame ſee, how wel I can abyde
The ſcorching heate of burning brandes: for fyer then he cride,
And ſayth to me O Philoctet in haſt vppon me throw
The burning logges, why quakeſt thou? doſt daſtard thow forſlow,
For feare to this wicked deede? O coward peaſant ſlaue,
Thou art to weake to bende my bow, vnmeete my ſhaftes to haue
What ayleſt thou to loke ſo pale? and as thou ſeeſt mee lye
With cherefull looke couragiouſly do thou the fier plye.
Behold me wretch that broyle and burne my father opes the Skyes
And vnto me ſonne Hercules come, come away he cryes.
O father Ioue (quoth he) I come: with that I waxed pale
And toward him a burning beame with might and mayne I hale:
But backe from him the billets flye and tumbling out they leape,
And from the limmes of Hercules downe falleth all the heape.
But he encrocheth on the fyre as it from him doth ſhrinke.
That many mountaynes whole were ſet on fyer a man would thinke
No noyſe was hard, and all was huſht, but that the fyer did hiſſe
In Hercles glowing paunch when as his liuer burning is.
It boyſteous gyant Typhus had amid this fire bene throwne,
Theſe torments would haue ſtraind his teares & forſt him ſigh & grone.
Or tough Euceladus that toſt a mountayne on his backe.
But Hercles lifted vp himſelfe amid his fyres all blacke,
With ſmoake beſmeard his corps halfe burnt in ſhiuers, gube & flawes,
And downe the throate his gaſping breath & flames at once he drawes
Then to Alemen he turnd himſelfe: O mother myne (quoth hee)
Should ye ſo ſtand at Hercles death? ſhould you thus wayle for me?
And thus betwene the fire and ſmoke, vpright and ſtiffe he ſtandes.
And neyther ſtoupes nor leanes awrye, but moues and ſtirs his hands,
With al his liuely geſtures ſtill, and thus he doth perſwade.
His mother leaue the languſſhing, and mourning that ſhe made.
And did encourage all his men t'encreaſe the fyre than
As though he were not burning, but would burne ſome other man.
The people ſtoode aſtoniſhed, and ſcant they would beleeue
That fire had any force on him, or that it did him greeue.
Becauſe his chereful looke had ſuch a maieſty and grace.
And neuer wilde vs meue the fyre that he might burne apace,
(And now when as he thought, he had endured pangues ynough,)
And ſtoutly bode the brunt of death, the blocks hee doth remoue,
That ſmothering lay, to make thē burne: then downward doth he ſhoue
And where the ſtewing heate did chiefely ſcorch, and burne moſt hot,
That way he thruſts his frying lims, and thether hath hee got.
(With ſteaming countnaunce vnapaulde his mouth now doth he fill)
With burning coales, his comely Bearde thē blazde about his cheekes:
And now when as the ſparkling fier vnto his viſage ſeekes,
The flame lickt vp his ſged hayre, and yet he did not winke:
But open kept his ſtaring eyes But what is this? my thinke
Alomene cometh yonder as a woefull wight forlorne,
With ſighes and ſobs, and all her hayre befrounced rent, and torne.
And beares the remnaunt in her Lap, of Hercules the great.
LEarne Lordings, learne to feare and dread
th'unwelldy fatall force.
This little duſt is all thats lef
of Hercles hugy coarſe.
That boyſteous Giaunt is conſumde
vnto theſe aſhes ſmall
O Titan what a mighty maſſe
is come to nought at all.
Aye me an aged womans lappe all Hercules doth ſhrowde,
her lap doth ſerue him for a graue, and yet the champion prowde,
With all his lumpe ſtils not the roome. Aye mee a burthen ſmall
I eele of him to whom whole heauen no burthen was at all.
O Hercules, beare chylde, O ſonne the ſeaſon whilom was,
That thou to Tartar pits, and ſluggiſh deus aloofe didſt paſſe
For to repaſſe: from deepe of hell when wilt thou come agayne?
For to put loyne the ſpoyles thereof, or bring from captiue chayne
To life thy friendly Theſeus. But when wilt thou returne
Alone: can flaming Phelegethon thy ghoſt in torments burne:
Or can the maſtie Dogge of hell keepe downe thy woefull ſprite?
Where then might I come ſee thy ſoule and leaue this loathed light?
When ſhall I rap at Tartar gate? what Iawes ſhall mee deuower?
What death ſhall dwnt mee: goeſt thou to hell, and haſt no power
To come agayne: alas why do I waſt, the day in teares and
O wretched lyfe why doſt thou laſt thou ſhouldeſt droupe and ſaynt,
And loath this dreary daye: how: can I beare to Ioue agaye
Another noble Hercules, what ſonne may I obtayne
So valiunt to call mee thus (Alcmena mother myne)
O happy ſpouſe Ampliterio twyſe happy haſt thou bene
In entring at the dennes of death, and through the noble ſonne
The Deutis arthy preſentes quake to ſee thee thether come.
Though thou but forged father were to Hercules of late
Whether ſhall old beldam goe whom many kinges do hate:
If any prince remayne with blody breaſt and murdring mynde
Then woe to mee: if groning babes be any left behynd,
That ſorrow for theyr parentes deathes now, now for Hercles ſake
Theyr mallice let them wrecke on mee, on mee dyre vengeance take
If any young Buſtris be, I feare the Perſians ſore
Wil come and take me captiue hence in chaynes for euermore.
If any tyrant feede his horce with gubbes of ſtraungers fleſh
Now let his pampred iades vnto my Carkſſe fall a freſh.
Perhap dame Iun coueteth on me to wrecke her yr.
And evs of her burning breaſt wil turne the flaming fire
Her wreckful hand doth loyter now ſith Hercules is ſlayne.
And now to feele her ſpurning ſpyte as harlot I remayne.
My valyant ſonne is cauſe of this my wombe ſhall barrayne be,
Leaſt I ſhoul beare another child as hardy as was hee.
Oh whether may Alcmena goe? or whether ſhal ſhe wend?
What countrey or what kingdomes may my careful hed defend
Where may I couch my wretched coarſe, that euery where am knownde
If I vnto my natiue ſoyle repayre among myne owne,
Euriſteus is of Argoe lord thus woefully forlorne.
I wil to Thebes where I was wed, and Hercules was borne:
And where with Ioue I did enioy dame Venus deare delight.
O bleſſed woman had I bene and in moſt happy plight,
It Ioue with flaſh of lightning leams and blaſing flakes of fyre
Had ſmolthred me as Semele was ſowſt at her deſyre.
Would God that Hercles whyle he was a babe had rypped bene
Out of my wombe, then wretchedly I ſhould not this haue ſeene
The pangues and tormentes of my ſonne, whoſe prayſe doth coūteruaile
Euen Ioue: then had I learnd that death at length might him aſſayle,
And take him from my ſight: O child, who wil remember thee?
For now vnthankfulnes is great in men of each degree:
, for thy I do not know where entertaynd to bee).
The word▪ of the Cleonies I will attempt and fyre
Whom from the Lyon reſcwde he and made the monſter dye,
Or ſhal I too th'Archadians go where thou didſt ſle the boare
Where thy renowne remaine of great exploytes before,
The parlous Hydra heare was ſlayue there fel he dead,
That with the fleſh of ſlaughtred men his greedy horſes fedde
And yondes were the Stimphall burdes compelde to leaue the ſaye
And tamed by the handy toyle, now doth the Lyon frie,
And belketh fumes in heauens whyle thou lieſt in thy groue
O if mankynd but any ſparke of thankful nature haue
Let all men prcace to ſuccour mee Alcmene thy mother deare.
What if among the Thracians I venter to appeare,
Or on the of Hebet floud? thy proweſſe euery where
Hath ſuccoured all theſe ſoylts: for earſt in Thrace thou did put downe
The fleſhy meangres of the King and put him from his crowne,
By ſlaughter of the saluage printe the people liue in peace,
Where diddeſt thou denye thy helpe to make tormoyling ceaſe?
Vnhappy mother that I am a ſhryne where may I haue
To ſhrowde thy coarſe: for all the world may ſtrine aboute thy graue
What temple may be meete to ſhryne thy reliques ſafe for aye,
And hallowed bones? what nations vnto the ghoſt ſhal pray?
O noble ſonne what ſepulchere what hearſe may ſerue for thee?
The world it ſelfe through flying flame thy fatal tombe ſhalbe:
Who taketh here this payſe from me his aſhes which I beare
Why loath I them? imbrace his bones keepe ſtil his aſhes here,
And they ſhal be a ſhield to thee his duſt that thee defend,
To ſee his ſhadow, princes prowde for feare ſhal ſtoupe and bend
O mother of noble Hercules forbeare your dreary playnt:
His valiant death thus ſhould not be with femal teares attaynt.
Ye ſhould not languiſh thus for him, nor count him wretched man
In dying, who by noble mynd preuent his deſtny can.
His cheuatry forbyddeth vs with teares him to bewayle:
The ſtately ſtomacke doth not ſloupe: they ſigh whoſe hartes do fayle.
(Ile mone no more: behold, behold. moſt wretched mother I)
Haue loſt the ſheild of land end ſead, where glittring Phoebe diſplayes
With whirling wheeles in foamy gulphes, and red and purple rayes
The loſſe of many ſonnes I may lament in him alone.
Through him I lifted Kings to frowne, when crown my ſelfe hadnone
Ayd neuer any mother liude, that neded leſſe to craue.
Of Gods, then I. I aſked naught while I my ſonne might haue.
What could not Hercles tender loue like on me to beſtow?
What God would once den to or what he held me froe,
I was in my powre to aſke and haue. If Ioue would ought denye,
My Hercules did bring to paſſe I had by.
What mortall mother euer bare and loſt ſo deare a ſonne?
Earſt downe the cheekes of Niobe the
When of her deare and tender brattes ſhe wholly was hereuen,
And did bewale with ſtrayned ſighes her children ſeuen and ſeue
And yet might I compare this one (my Hercles) vnto thoſe
And I in him as much as ſhee in all her imps die loſe.
The mothers that are mourning dames do lacke on hd and chefe,
And now Alcmene ſhalbe ſhee depriude of all releeſe,
Ceaſe woeful thers ceaſe, if that among you any are
Conſtrayne to ſhed your ſtreaming teares by force of peaſue care
Ye Lady whom lamenting ſong of women fourmed rockes,
Geue place vnto my gluttyng greefe, beat on with burning knockes
Ye handes vppon my riueled breaſt, alas am I alone
Enough for ſuch a funerall to languiſh and to moue,
Whom al the world ſhall ſhortly neede? yet ſteech thyfeble armes
To thumpe vppon thy ſounding breaſt thy griefe with boleful
And in deſpyte of al the gods powre put thy woeful erye
And to receiue thy flowing teares thy warry cheekes applye.
Bewayle Alcmenas woful ſtate: the ſonne of Ioue bewayle,
Whoſe byrth did cauſe the duay day in kindly courſe fayle.
The Eaſt compact two nightes in one: Lo, to, a greater thing
Then glorious day the world hath loſt now let your forrowes ring,
Yet people al whoſe lowryng lordes he draw to dennes of death
Theyr blades (that reckt with guiltles ) he into the ſheath.
Beſtow on hin your Chriſtall teares, which he deſerued wellt
Howle out ye heauens, ye mardle ſeas, and goulphes with gronings yell.
O Crete Deare darling vnto Ioue For Ioue of Hercles roe,
Ye hundred cityes beate yont armes: my ſonne, for euermore
Is gone among the grieſy ghoſtes, and ſhimmering ſhades of hell
Lament for him ye woeful mightes, that here on do dwell,
WHy Mother wayle you mee an
hot of hell?
Or of death, ſith I
among Spheares doe dwell?
Forbeare, forbeare, to moane for mee
for vertue opened hath
To mee the paſſage to the Starres:
and ſet mee in the path,
That guides to euerlaſting Lyfe,
whence cos this dreadfull ſounde?
Whence roares this thundring voyce. y• doth againſt mine eares reboſid,
And biddeth mee to ſhine my teares? I know it now I know,
The darkſome dunge daunied are, and Demies of Lakes alow.
O Sonne art thou retrnd to the from Stygian gulph agayne?
And can thou twiſe of ougly death the con queſt thus obtayne?
And braſt the balefull priſons twiſe, of glum and gaſtly night.
Agaſt thus by might?
May any ſcape from thou stape alone?
Hath hell no power to holde thy ſprite, when breath from breaſt is gone?
Or els hath Pluto baalde thee out, for feare leaſt thou alone
Should cloyne his Scepter from hand, & pluck him from his front?
For I am ſure I ſawe thee layde vpon the burning trees:
And from thy Corps the ſlame and ſparkes agaynſt the welkin flyes:
That ſure thou waſt to poldee burne, and feeble lyfe was loſt:
But ſure the deepes and pits of did not lock vp thy ghoſt.
Why were the deuills alrayde of thee? why quaked Ditis grim?
And did thy noble ghoſt ſeeme ſuch a gaſtly bug to him?
The dampy of Cocitas coulde not keepe me from light.
Nor Carons fuſty muſty Barge iramſported hath my ſprite,
Now Myther more once haue I ſeeme the of hell,
And all the that dwell.
That mortall moulde I tooke of you to nought the flames haue fryed:
Heauen hath the ſubſtaunce that I tooke of Ioue: in fier yours died.
And therefore rawſe your playntius teare, which parents vſe to ſhed,
When wretchedly they wayle their ſonnes, that daſtardly are dead.
Thus vulgar varlets weepe: Ioe vertue hopes the Starres to get:
But faynting feare on death, from heauen where I am ſet,
You heare my voyce: Euriſteus now ſhal byde the deadly puſh
With charyot ſway his cracked ſcull ye ſhal on ſunder cruſh
Now muſt I hence aduaunce my Ghoſt vp to the rolling skyes
Once more I daunt the deuilles, and do the goblins grim aggriſe
But ſtay awhile my ſonne: he fades and ſhrinketh from my ſight
Aduaunſt he is among the ſtarres: doth this my charmed Spirite
Dote in a traunce & or do I dreame that I haue ſeene my ſonne
A troubled mynd can ſcante beleue the thinges he ſeeth done.
But now I ſee thou art a God poſſeſſing heauen for aye.
I ſee it ſure. I wil to Thebes thy triumphes to diſplay.
LO vertue ſcapes the gaſtly ſhades of hell,
Ye noble peeres that ſhyne in vertue bright
Dire deſteny cannot conſtrayne you dwell
Among the glowming glades of ougly might,
Nor ſinke your fame in loathſome lakes of ſpyte.
But when deaths day drawes on the gaſping howre,
You purchaſt glory ſhall direct your right
To fynd the paſſage to the heauenly bower.
When fleſh doth fall, and breathing body dies
Then (Fame the child of Vertue) doth ariſe.
But ſluggiſh ſottes that ſleepe their dayes in ſloth,
Or geue their golden age to loath ſome luſt.
Them and their names the wretches bury both,
When as their bones ſhall ſhryned be in duſt:
The clay ſhall couer their carkaſes forlorne,
As though ſuch kaytiſſes neuer had bene borne.
But if that ought of memory they haue.
In thafter age it ſhalbe filthy ſhame.
The gnawing wormes torment not ſo in graue
Their rotten fleſh, as tounges do teare their name,
That dayly kild to further miſchiefe liues.
Lo both the fruites, that vice and virtue giues.