COndemned soule Ate, from lowest hell,
And deadlie riuers of the infernall ,
Where bloudles ghostes in paines of endles date
Fill ruthles eares with neuer ceasing cries,
Beholde I come in place, and bring beside
The bane of Trie: beholde the fatall frute
Raught from the golden tree of Prsrpi.
Proude Troy must fall, so bidde the gods aboue,
And statelie Iliums loftie towers be racet
By conquering handes of the victorious foe:
King Priams pallace waste with flaming fire,
Whose thicke and foggie smoake peircing the skie▪
Must serue for messenger of sacrifice
Tappeaze the anger of the angrie heauens,
And Priams younger sonne, the sheepeherde swaine,
Paris th'unhappie organ of the Greekes.
So loath and weerie of her heauie loade
The Earth complaynes vnto the hellish prince,
Surcharged with the burden that she nill sustaine.
Th'unpartiall daughters of Necessitie
Bin aydes in her ute: and so the twine
That holdes olde Priams house, the threede of Tr
Dame Atrops with knife in sunder cutte.
Done be the pleasure of the powers aboue,
Whose hestes men must obey: and I my parte
Performe in Ida vales: Lordinges adieu,
Imposing silence for your taske, I ende,
Till iust assemblie of the goddesses
Make me beginne the Tragedie of Tri.
SILVANUS, either Flora doth s ng
Or Faunus made vs tarrie all to longe,
For by this morning mirth it shoulde appea
The Muss or the goddesses be near
My faune was nimble, Pan, and whipt apace
Twashappie that we caught him vp at last.
The fattest fairest faune the chace
I wonder how the knaue could skip so fast.
And I haue brought a twagger for the nonce
A bunting lambe: nay, pray you feele no bones.
Beleeue me now, my cunning much I misse,
If euer Pan felt fattr lambe then this.
Sirs, you may boast your flockes & herdes that bin both fresh & faire,
Yet hath Siluanus walks ywis that stand in holsome ayre.
And loe the honor of the woodes, the gallant Oken-bowe,
Do I bestowe laden with Acornes & with mast enough.
Peace man for shame, shalt haue both lambes & dames & flockes and herdes & al,
And all my pipes to make the glee, we meete not now to brawle.
Theres no such matter, Pan▪ we are all friendes assembled hether▪
To bid Queene Iuno and her pheeres most humblie welcome hether.
Diana mistresse of our woodes, her presence will not want,
Her curtesie to all her friendes we wot is nothing skant.
Yee Par, no farther yet, & had the starte of me,
Why then Pomona with her fruite comes time enough I see:
Come on a while▪ with countrie store like friendes we vente forth,
Thinkest Faunus that these goddesses will take our giftes in woorth.
Yea doubtles, for shall tell thee dame, twere better giue a thing,
A signe of loue, vnto a mightie person, or a king:
Then to a rude and barbarous swayne but bad and baselie borne,
For gentlie takes the gentleman that oft the clowne will scorne.
Saist trulie Faunus, I my selfe haue giuen good tidie lambes,
To Mercurie may saie to thee, to Phoebus and to Ioue:
When to a countrie mops forsooth, chaue offred all their dames,
And pypt and prayed for little worth and raunged about the groue.
God Pan that makes your flocke so thin, & makes you looke so leane,
To kisse in corners.
wel-sed wēch some other thing you meane.
Yea iest it out till it goe alone, but maruell where we mysse
Faire Flora all this merrie morne.
some newes see where she is.
Flora well met, and for thy taken payne,
Poore countrie gods thy debters we remaine.
Beleeue me, Pan, not all thy lambes and yoes,
Nor, Faunus, all thy lustie buckes and does,
(But that I am instructed well to knowe,
What seruice to the hills and dales I owe,)
Could haue enforcet me to so straunge a toyle,
Thus to enrich this gaudie gallant foyle.
But tell me wench hast don't so trick in deede,
That heauen it selfe may wonder at the deede.
Not Iris in her pride and brauerie,
Adornes her arche with such varietie:
Nor doth the milke white way in frostie night,
Appeare so faire and beautifull in sight:
As done these fieldes, and groues, and sweetest bowres,
Bestrewed and deckt with partie collord flowers.
Alonge the bubling brookes & siluer glyde,
that at the bottome doth in sylence slyde,
The waterie flowers and lillies on the bankes,
Like blazing cometes burgen all in rankes:
Vnder the Hathorne and the Poplar tree,
Where sacred Phoebe may delight to be:
The Primerose and the purple Hyacinthe,
The dayntie Ʋiolet and the holsome Minthe.
The dooble Daisie, and the
Of sommer oure▪ do
And rounde about the valley as ye passe,
Yee may ne peeping flowers the grasse:
That well the mightie and the rest,
May boldlie thinke to be a welcome guest
On Ida hlls, when to approue the thing,
The queene of flowers prepares a second spring.
Thou gentle Nymph, what thankes shall we repai
To thee, that maest our ldes and woodes so gaie?
, when it is thy hap to see,
My workemanship, in portraying all the three,
First stately with her porte and grace,
Her roobes, her lawnes, her crounet and her mace:
Would make thee this picture to beholde,
Of yellow Oxtips bright as bursht golde.
A rare deuice, and Flra, well perdie,
Did painte her yellow for her iellozie.
Pallas in flowers of hue and collowers red,
Her plumes, her helme, her , her he,
Her trayling treses that hang aring rounde,
Of Iulie-flowers so grassed in the grounde,
That trust me , who did the cunning see,
Would at a blush suppose it to be shee.
Good Flora, by my flocke twere verie good,
To dght her all in red resembling blood.
Faire Venus of sweete Violetts in blue.
With other flowers infixt for chaunge of hue,
Her plumes, her pendants, bracelets and her ringes,
Her dayntie fan and twentie other thinges:
Her lustie mantle wauing in the winde,
And euerie part in collor and in kinde:
And for her wreath of roses she nil dare,
With Floras cunning counterfet compare.
So that what lyuing whight shall chaunce to see,
These goddesses, eche placed in her degree,
Portrayed by Floraes workemanshipe alone,
Must say that Arte and nature met in one.
A deintie draught to lay her downe in blue,
The collour commonlie betokening true.
This peece of worke compact with many a flowre,
And well layde in at entraunce of the bowre,
Where Phoebe meanes to make this meeting royall.
Haue I prepared to welcome them withall.
And are they yet dimounted, Flora, sie:
That we may wende to meete them one the way.
That shall not neede: they are at hand by this,
And the conductor of the trayne hight Rhis.
Iuno hath left her chariot longe age,
And hath returned her Peacocks by her raine bowe.
And brauelie as becommes the wife of Ioue▪
Doth honour by er presence to our groue.
Faire Venus shee hath let her sparrowes flie,
To tende on her and make her melodie:
Her turtles and her swannes vnyoked bee,
And flicker neere er side for companie.
Pallas ath set her Tygers looe to feede,
Commaunding them to waite when shee hath neede.
And Hitherward with proude and statelie pace,
To doe vs honor in the Siluan chace
Tey marce like to the pompe of heauen aboue,
Iuno te wife and sister of king Ioe,
The warlicke Pallas, and the Queene of loue.
Pipe Pan fr ioy and let thy sheepeherdes sing,
Shall neueage forget this memorable thing.
Clo the sagest of the sisters nine,
To do beruaunce to this dame deuine,
ade of learning and of chyualrie,
ere aryued in faire assemble,
And wandring vp and downe th'unbeaten wayes,
Ringe through the wood sweete onges of Pallas prayse.
Hake Flora, Fanus, here is melodie,
A charme of birdes and more then ordinarie.
The sillie birdes make mirth, then shoulde we doe them wronge,
Pomona, if we nil bestowe an Eccho to their songe.
O Ida, o Ida;
This honour do
Yee countrie
Bring downe your of welcome:
For honor Ida▪
Beholde in signe of
And signes of ioyfull wel come bring.
For honor done to Ida.
The Muses giue you melodie to gratulate this chaunce,
And Phoebe cheife of siluan chace commaunde you all to dnce.
The rouude in a circle our porace must mst be▪
Holde handes in a hornepype all gallant in glee.
Reuerence, reuerence, most humble reuerence.
Most humble reuerence.
The God of sheepeheardes and his mate,
With countrie chere salutes your states▪
Fare, wise, and worthie as you bee,
And thanke the gracious Ladies three,
For honour done to Id ▪ The birdes singe.
Venus, what shall I saie, for though I be a dame deuine,
This welcome and this melodie exceedes these wittes of mine.
Beleeue me, Iu, as I hight th foueraigne of Loue,
These rare delightes in pleasures passe the banquets of king Ioue.
Then▪ Venus, I conclude, it may be seene,
That in her chaste and pleasaunt walkes fayre Phoebe is a Queene.
Diuine Pallas, and you sacred dames,
Iuno and Venus, honoured by your names:
Iuno, the wife and sister of kinge Ioue▪
Faire Venus, Ladie president of oue:
If any entertaynment in this place,
That can afford but homely, rude and bae,
It pleaze your godheads to accept in gree,
That gratious thought our happinesse shalbe.
My mistresse Dian, this right well I know,
For loue that to this presence shee doth owe,
Accountes more honoure done to her this day,
Then euer whilom in these woods of Id.
And for our countrey god, I dare bee bolde,
They make such cheere, your presence to beholde,
Such iouysaunce, such myrth and merry ment,
As nothing els their minde might more co:
And that you doe beleeue it to bee so,
Fayre goddesses, your louely lookes doe showe.
It rests in fine, for to confirme my talke,
Yee dayne to passe alonge to Dians walke:
Where shee amonge her troupe of maydes attend.
The fayre aryuall of her vvelcome friends.
And vvee vvill vvayte vvith all obseruance due,
And doe iust honour to this heauenly crue.
The god of sheepheardes, Iuno, ere thou goe,
Intends a lambe on thee for to bstovve.
Faunus, high raunger in Dias chace,
Presents a favvne to lady Venus grace.
Syluanus giues to Pallas deitye,
This gallant bovve ught from the Oken tree.
To them that doth this honour to our fieldes,
Her mellovve apples poore Poona yeildes.
And gentle gods, these signes of your goodvvill
Wee take in vvorth, and shall accept them still.
An Flora, this to thee amonge the rest,
Thy vvorkmanship comparinge vvith the best,
Let it suffize thy▪ cunninge to haue,
To call kinge Ioue from forth his heauenly bovvre:
Hadst thou a louer, Flora, redit mee,
I thinke thou vvouldst beedecke him gallantly.
But vvende vve on, and, Rhanis, leade the vvay,
That kens the paynted pathes of pleasunt Ida.
Onone, while ,
Tell me what shall
Thou hast a sorte of
Dare saye no Nymphe in
Againe, beside thy
In telling them thou
Then preethee sweete, afforde thing,
Some toie that from thy .
Paris, my hartes contentment, and my choice▪
Vse thou thy pype, and I will vse my ,
So shall thy iust request be denyed.
And time well pent and
Well gentle Nymphe although hou do me wrong,
That can pype a songe,
Me lift this once,
This idle take .
And whereon then shall be my Roundetay:
For thou hast harde my stoore long since, dare say,
How Saturne did deuide his kingdome tho,
To Ioue, to Neptune, and to Dis below.
How mightie me made ,
Against the gods and
How Phorcias ympe ,
That tangled Neptune in he goldn haire,
Became a Gorgo for her lewde misdeede,
A pretie fable Paris for to .
A peece of cunnig trust me ,
That wealth and beautie alter men to stoone.
Howe Salmacis resembling ydlenes,
Turnes men to women all through wantonnes.
How Pluto raught Queene daughter thence▪
And what did followe of that loue offence.
Of turned into the tree▪
That sheves a my or of virginitie.
How faire Narcissus tooing on his shade,
Reproues disdayne, and .
How cunning Philolas ,
What force in loue, what wit .
What paynes vnhappie soules abyde in ,
They say because on earth they liued not well.
Ixios wheele, proude Tntals payning woe.
Prometheus torment, and a many .
How Danaus daughter lie their endles .
What toyle the toyle of doth aske.
All these are olde and knowne I knowe, yet if thou wilt haue anie,
Chuse some of these, for trust me else hath not manie.
Nay what thou wilt: but sith my cunning not compares with thine,
Beginne some Toy, that I can play vpon this pipe of mine.
There is a pretie sonnet then, we call it Cupid curse:
They that do chaunge olde loue for new, pray gods they chaunge for worse.
The note is fine and quicke withall, the dittie will agree,
Paris, With that same vowe of thine vpon our Poplar tree:
No better thing, begine it then, Oenone thou shalt see
Our musicke, figure of the loue that growes twixt thee and me.
Faire and fayre and twise so faire,
As fayre as any may be:
The fayrest sheepeherd on our gree,
A loue for anie Ladie.
Faire and faire and twise so fayre,
As fayre as anie may bee:
Thy loue is fayre for thee alone,
And for no other Ladie.
My loue is faire, my loue is gaie,
As fresh as bine the flowers in May,
And of my loue my roundylaye,
My merrie merrie merrie roundelaie
Concludes with Cupids curse:
They that do chaunge olde loue for newe,
Pray Gods they chaunge for worse.
They that do chaunge, &c.
Faire and faire, &c,
Faire and faire, &c. Thy loue is faire &c.
My loue can pype, my loue can sing,
My loue can manie a pretie thing,
And of his louelie prayses ring
My merry merry roundelayes: Amen to Cupids curse:
They that do chaunge, &c.
They that do chaunge, &c.
Faire and fayre, &c.
Swete she epeherd, for Oenones be cunning in this songe▪
And kepe thy loue, and loue thy choice, or else thou doest her wrong.
My vowe is made and witnessed, the Poplar will not starte,
Nor shall the nymphe Oenones loue from forth my breathing hart.
I will goe bing the one thy way, my flocke are here behinde,
And I will haue a loues fee: they saie, vnkist, vnkinde.
But pray you tell me, Iuno, was it so,
As Pallas tolde me here the tale of Ecch.
Shee was a nympe indeede, as Pallas ls,
A walker, such as in these thickets dwell:
And as shee tolde what subtill iugling prankes
Shee playde with Iuno, so she tolde her thanke:
A tatling trul to come at euerie call,
And now foresooth nor tongue nor life at all.
And though perhaps shee was a helpe to Ioue,
And held me chat, while he might court his loue▪
Beleeue me, dames, I am of this opinion,
He tooke but little pleasure in the minion.
And what so ere his scapes haue bene beside,
Dare saie for him a neuer strayed so wyde:
A louely nutbrowne lasse, or lustie trul,
Haue power perhaps to make a god a bull.
Gramercie gentle Iuno for that iest,
I faith that item was worth all the rest.
No matter, Venus, how so ere you skorne,
My father Ioue at that time wae the horne.
Had euerie wanton god aboue, Venus, not better lucke,
Then heauen would be a pleasaunt parcke, & Mars a lustie bucke.
Tut Mars hath hornes to butte withall although no bull a showes.
A neuer needes to maske in nets, a feares no iellous froes.
Forsooth the better is his turne, for if a speake to loude,
Must finde some shifte to shadowe him, a net, or else a cloude.
No more of this, fayre goddesses, vnrip not so your shames,
To stand all naked to the world, that bene such heauenly dames.
Nay, Pallas, that's a common tricke with Venus well we knowe,
And all the Gods in heauen haue seene her naked, long agoe.
And then she was so faire and bright, and louelie and so tm,
As Mars is but for Venus tooth, and shee will sporte with him.
And but me list not here to make comparison with Ioue,
Mars is no raunger, Iuno, he in euerie open groue.
To much of this: we wander farre, the skies begine to skowle,
Retire we to Dianas bowre, the weather will be oule.
Pallas, the storme is past and gon, and Phoebus cleares the skies,
And loe, beholde a ball of golde, a faire and worthie prize.
This posie wils, the apple to the fayrest giuen be,
Then is it mine: for Venus hight the fayrest of the three.
The fayrest here as fayre is ment, am I, ye do me wronge:
And if the fyest haue it must, to me it doth belong
Then Iuno may it not enioy, so euery one sayes no,
But I will proue my selfe the fayrest, er I lose it so.
The breyfe is this, .
Let this vnto fayrest gyven ,
The fayrest of the three▪ and am shee.
Detur Pulche
The fayrest .
Detur Pulcherrimae.
The fayrest of the thre, and I am .
My face is fayre,
That all the gods in heauen ,
Hae made them chuse of the ,
To bee the wyfe of Ie, and Queene of heauen.
Y then this prize be to beautye,
The only shee that wins this prize am I.
That Venus is the fayrest▪ this dothe proue,
That Venus is the louely Queen of loue.
The name of Venus is in deede but bautye,
And men me fayrest call, per excellencye.
Yf then this prize be but bequeathed to beautye,
The only shee that wins this prize, am I.
To stand on tearmes of beautye as yow take it,
Beeleue me, Ladies, is but to mystake it:
The beautye that this subtill prize must vvin,
No outvvarde beautye highte, but dvvels vvithin.
And fyfte as yovv please, and yovv shall finde,
This beautye, is the beautye of the minde.
This fayrenes, Vertue highte, in generall,
That many braunches hathe in speciall:
This beauty vvysdom hight, vvhereof am I,
By heauen appointed, goddesse vvorthelye.
And looke hovv muche the minde, the better ,
Doth ouerpasse the bodye in deserte:
So much the mistris of those guyfts devine,
Excells thy beautie, and that state of thine.
Then yf this prize bee thus bequeathed to beautye,
The only she that vvins this prize, am I.
Nay, Pallas▪ by your leaue, yovv vvander cleane,
Wee must not conster heereof as yovv meane:
But take the sense as it i plainly ment,
And let the fayrest hate, I am content.
Our reasons ilbe infinite, I trowe,
Vnles vnto some other point we grow.
For fist heres none mee thinkes disposed to yelde,
And none but will with wordes maintaine the fielde.
Then if you will to auoyde a tedious grudge,
Refer it to the sentence of iudge,
Who ere he be that commeth next in place,
Let him bestowe the ball, and ende the .
So can it not go wronge with me not at al.
I am agreed how euer it befall.
And yet by common doome, so may it bee,
I may be sayde the fayrest of the three.
Then yonder loe that sheepeherde swaine is he,
That must be in this controuersie.
Iuno, in happie time, I do accept the man,
It seemeth by his lookes, some skill of loue he can.
The nymphe is gone, and I all solitarie,
Must wend to tend my charge, opprest with melancholy.
This day (or else me fayles my sheepeherdes skill)
Will tide me passing good, or passing ill.
Sheepeherd, abash not, though, at sudden thus,
Thou be aryued by ignorance among vs,
Not earthlie but deuine, and goddesses all three,
Iun, Pallas, Venus, these our titles be.
Nor feare to speake, for reuerence of the place,
Chosen to ende a harde and doubtfull case.
This apple loe (nor aske thou whence it came)
Is to be giuen vnto the fayrest dame.
And fayrest is, nor shee, nor shee, but shee,
Whom, sheepeherd, thou shalt fayrest name to be.
This is thy charge, fulfill without offence,
And shee that winnes shall giue thee recompence.
Deade not to speake for we haue chosen thee,
Sith in this case, we can no iudges be.
And, sheepeherd, say that I the fayrest ame,
And thou shalt win good guerdon for the same.
Nay, shephe, looke vppon my aely grace,
Because the pompe that longs to
They mayst not see▪ and thincke Queene Iunos name,
To vvhome olde shepherds title vvorkes of fae,
Is mightye, and may easily suffize,
At Phebus hande to game a golden pize.
And for thy meede, sythe I ame Queene of riches,
Shepherde, I vvill rvvarde thee vvith greae monarchies,
Empires, and kingdomes, heapes of massye golde,
Scepters and diadems, curious to beholde,
Riche robes, of umpteous vvorkmanship and cost,
And thovvsand thinges vvhereof I make no bost
The moulde vvhereon thovve treadest shall be of Tagus sandes,
And Xanthus shall runne liquid golde for the to vvash thy handes:
And yf thou lyke to tend thy flock, and not from them to she,
Their fleeces shalbe curled gold to please their masters eye.
And last, to sett thy harte one fire, gyue this one frute to me,
And, sepherd, lo this Tree of Golde vvill I bestovve on thee.
The grovvnde vvhereon it gos, the grasse, the roote of golde,
The body and the bark of golde, all to beholde,
The leaues of burnysht golde, the fruites that thereon grovve
Are diadems sett vvith pearle in golde in gorgeous glistringe shovve:
And yf this Tre of Golde, in lue may not suffize,
Require a grove of golden trees, so▪ Iuno▪ beare the prize.
Me lst not tempt thee vvith decayinge vvealthe,
Which is ebaet by vvant of lusty healthe:
Bt yf thou haue a minde to fly aboue,
Y crovvned vvith fame neere to the ete of Ioue:
Yf thou aspire to vvy domes vvorthines.
Whereof thovv mayst see the brightnes
Yf thou desyre honor of chyuallrye,
To bee renouned for happy victorie,
To fighte it out, and in the champaine feilde,
To shrovvde thee pallas vvarlike sheilde,
To praunce on barbed steedes, this honor loe,
My selfe for guerdon shall on thee bestowe.
And for encouragement, that thou mayst see,
What famous knightes dame Pallas warriers be,
Beholde in Pallas honour here they come,
Marching alonge with founde of thundring drom.
Come sheepeherde, come, sweete sheepeherde looke on me,
These bene to hoat alarams these for thee:
But if thou wilt giue mee the golden ball,
Cupide my boy shall hate to playe withall,
That when so ere this apple he shall see,
The god of loue himselfe shall thinke on the,
And bid thee looke and chuse, and he will wounde,
Whereso thy fancyes obiect shalbe founde,
And lightlie when he shootes he doth not misse:
And I will giue the many louelie kysse,
And come and play with thee on Ida here,
And if thou wilt a face that hath no peere,
A gallant girle, a lustie minion trull,
That can giue sporte to thee thy bellyfull,
To rauish all thy beating vaines with ioye,
Here is a lasse of Venus court, my boy,
Here gentle sheepeherde, heres for thee a peece,
The fayrest face, the flower of gallant Greece.
SI Diana nel cielo è vna stella
Chiara, è lucente piena di splendore
Che porge luc' all' affanato cuore:
Si Diana, nel ferno è vna dea,
Che deconforto all' anime dannate,
Che per amor son morte desperate:
Si Diana ch' in è delle nimphe
Rina, imperatiue d dol fori
Tra boc'e Selue da morte a pastori.
Io son vn Diana dolce e rara
Chle con Le guardi Io posso far guerra
A Dian' infern' in ciel, et in terra▪
Most heauenly dames, was never man as I
Poore shepherde swaine, so happy and vnhappy:
The least of these delights, that you deuyse.
Able to wrape and dazle humaine eyes.
But since my silence may not pardoned bee,
And I appoint which is the fayrest shee,
Pardon, most sacred dames, sythe one not all,
By Paris doome must haue this golden ball.
Thy beautye, stately Iun, dame deuine,
That lyke to Phoebus golden beames doth shine,
Approues it selfe to bee most excellent,
But that fayre face that dothe me most content,
Sythe fayre, fairedmes, is neyther shee nor shee,
But shee whome I shall fairest deeme to bee.
That face is hers that hight the Queene of Loue,
Whose sweetenes dothe bothe gods and creatours moue.
And if the fayrest face deserue the ball,
Fayre Venus, Ladyes, beares it from yee all.
And in this ball dothe Venus more delight,
Then in her louely boy faire Cupids sighte.
Come shepherd comme, weete Venus is thy frend,
No matter how thow other gods offend.
Bt he shall rue, and ban the dismal day
wherein his Venus bare the ball away:
And heauen and earth iust wittnesses shall bee,
I will reuenge it on his progenye.
well Iuno, whether wee bee leys or lothe,
Venus hathe got the aple from vs bothe.
O gentle loue, vngentle for thy deede,
Thou makest my harte
A bloodie marke
VVith pearcyng shot to bleede.
Shoote softe sweete loue, for feare thou shoote amysse,
For feare too keene.
Thy arrowes beene,
And hit the harte, where my beloued is.
To faire that fortune were, nor neuer I
Shalbe so blest
Among the rest
That loue shall ceaze on her by simpathye.
Then since with loue my prayers beare no boot,
This doth remayne
To cease my payne,
I take the wounde, and dye at Venus foote.
Poore Colin wofull man, thy life forespoke by loue,
What vncouth fit, what maladie is this, that thou dost proue.
Or loue is voide of phisicke cleane, or loues our common wracke,
That giues vs bane to bring vs lowe, and let vs medicine lacke.
That euer loue had reuerence 'mong sillie sheepeheed swaines,
Beike that humor hurtes thē most that most might be their paines.
Hobin, it is some other god that cheeisheth her sheepe,
For sue thi loue doth nothing else but make our herdmen weepe.
And what a hap is this I praye, when all our woods reioyce,
For Colin thus to be denyed his yong and louely choice.
She hight in deede so fresh and faire that well it is for thee,
Colin and kinde hath bene thy friende, that Cupid coulde not see.
And whether wendes you thriueles swaine, like to the striken deere,
Seekes he Dictamum for his wounde within our forrest here.
He wendes to greete the Queene of loue, that in these woods doth wonne,
With mirthles layes to make complaint to Venus of her sonne.
A Colin thou art all deceiued, shee dallye with the boy,
And winckes at all his wanton prankes, and thinkes thy loue a toy.
Then leaue him to his luckles loue, let him abide his fate,
The ore is ranckled ll to fare, our comforte coms to late.
Though Thestilis the Scorpion be that breakes his sweete assault,
Yet will Rhamnusia vengeance take, on her disdainefull fault.
Lo yonder coes the louely Nymphe, that in these Ida vales,
Playes with Amintas lustie boe, and coyes him in the dales.
The ot, me thinks her cheere is chāged, her mirthfull lookes are layd,
She frolicks not: pray god the lad haue not beguide the mayde.
Beguilde, disdayned, and out of loue: liue longe thou Poplar-tree,
And let thy letters growe in length, to witnes this with mee.
A Venus, but for reuerence, vnto thy sacred name,
To steale a sylly maydens loue, I might account it blame.
And if the tales be true I heare, and blushe for to receite,
Thou dost me wrong to leaue the playnes, and dally out of sight.
False Paris, this was not thy vow, when thou and I were one,
To raung & chaung old loue for new: but now those dayes be gone.
But I will finde the goddesse out, that shee thy vow may reade,
And fill these woods with my lamentes, for thy vnhappy deede.
So faire a face, so foule a thought to harbour in his breast,
Thy hope consum'd, poore Nymphe, thy hap is worse then all the rest.
A sheepeherdes, you bin full of wiles, & whet your wits on bookes,
And wrap poore maydes with pypes and songes, and sweete alluring lookes.
Mispeake not al, for his amisse, there bin that keepen flocks,
That neuer chose but once, nor yet beguiled loue with mockes.
False Paris he is none of those, his trothles doble deede,
Will hurte a many sheepeherds else that might go nigh to speede.
Poore Colin, that is ill for thee, that art as true in trust
To thy sweete smerte, as to his Nymphe Paris hath bin vniust.
A well is she hath Colin wonne, that nill no other loue:
And woo is me, my lucke is lsse, my paynes no pytie mooue.
Farewell faire Nymphe, sith he must heale alone that gaue the wound.
There growes no herbe of such efect vpon dame natures ground.
Here is a Nymphe that sadlie sittes, and shee belike
Can tell some newes, Pyracmon, of the illy swaine we seeke.
Dare wage my winges the lasse doth loue, she lookes so bleak & thin,
And tis for anger or for griefe: but I will talke beginne.
Breake out poore hate, & make complaint the mountaine flocks to moue,
What proude repulse & thanckles scorne thou hast receiued of loue.
She singeth, nires, be husht awhile.
Melponie, the muse of tragicke songes,
VVith moornefull tunes in stole of dismall hue,
Assist a sillie Nymphe to wayle her woe,
And leaue thy lustie companie behinde.
Thou luckles wreath, becomes not me to weare
The Poplr tree for triumphe of my loue.
Then as my ioye my pride of loue is lefte,
Be thou vncloathed of thy louelie greene.
And in thy leaues my fortune written bee,
And them some gentle winde let blowe abroade,
That all the worlde may see how false of loue,
False Paris hath to his Oenone bene.
Good-day fayre mayde, werie belike with following of your game,
I wish thee cunning at thy will, to spare or srike the same.
I thanke you sir, my gaine is quick and ids a length of grounde,
And yet I am deceaued or else a had a deadlie wounde.
Your hand perhaps did swarue awarie. Oen. or else it was my harte.
Then sure a plyed his fotemanship.
a played a raunging parte.
You should haue giuen a deeper woūd.
I could not that for pity.
You should haue eyd him better thē.
blind loue was not so witty.
hy tell me sweete, are you in loue.
or would I were not so.
Yee meane because a doe sye wrong.
perdie the more my woe.
Why meane ye loue, or him ye loued?
wel may I meane thē both.
Is loue to blame?
the queene of loue hath made him false his troth.
Meae ye indeede the queene of loue.
euē wanton Cupids dame.
Why was thy loue so louely then?
his beautie hight his shame,
The fairest sheepeherde one our greene.
is he a shepherd thā.
And sometime kept a bleating flock.
enough, this is the man.
Whre woons he thā?
about these woods: far from the Poplar tree.
What Poplar meane ye?
witnes of the vowes betwixt him & me.
And come and wend a little way and you shall see his skill.
Sirs tarrie you.
nay let them goe.
nay not vnles you will.
Stay Nymphe, and harke what I say of him thou blamest so,
And credit me, I haue a sad discourse to tell thee ere I go.
Know then, my pretie mop, that I hight Mercurie,
The messenge of heauen, and hether flie
To cease vpon the man whon thou dost loue,
To summon him before my father Ioe,
To answere matter of great consequence,
And Ioue himselfe will not be longe from henc.
Sweete Mercurie, and haue poore Oenons cryes,
For Paris fault, peircest th'unpertiall skyes.
The same is he, that iolly sheepeherdes swaine.
His flocke do grae vpon Auroras plaine,
The colour of his coate is lustie greene,
That would these eyes of mine had neuer seene,
His tycing curled ayre, his front of yvore,
Then had not I poore I bin vnhappie.
No maruell wench, although we cannot finde him,
When all to late the queene of heauen doth minde him.
But if thou wilt haue physicke for thy ore,
Minde him who list, remember thou him no more:
And find some other game, and get thee gon.
For here will lustie suters come anon,
To hoat and ustie for thy dyeing vaine,
Such as were monte to make their sutes in vaine.
I will goe sit and pyne vnder the Poplar tree,
And write my answere to his vow, that euerie eie may see.
Sheepeherdes, I am contente, for this sweete sheepeherdes sake,
A straunge reuenge vpon the maide and her disdaine to take.
Let Colins corps be brought in place, and burned in the plaine,
And let this be the verse. The loue whom Thestilis hath slaine.
And tust me I will chide my sone for parciallitie,
That gaue the swane so deepe a wound, and let her scape him by.
Alas that euer loue was blinde, to shoote so farre amie.
Cupid my sonne was more to blame, the fault not mine, but his.
O madam, if your selfe would daine the handling of the bowe,
Albeit it be a taske, your selfe more skill, more iustice knowe.
Sweete sheepeherde▪ didst thou euer loue.
Lady, a little once.
And art thou changed.
faire queene of loue I loued not al attce.
Well wanton, were thou wounded so deepe as some haue ben,
It were a cunning cure to heale and rufull to be seene.
But tell me, gracious goddesse, for a lae and fale offence,
Hath Venus or er sonne the power, at pleasure to dispence.
My boy, I will instruct thee in a peece of poetrie,
That happly erst thou hast not heard: in hel there is a tree,
Where once a day doe sleepe the soules of false foresweren louers,
With open hartes, and there aboute in swarmes the number ouers
Of poore forsaken ghostes, whose winges from of this tree d beare
Round drops of firie Phlegiton to scorch false hartes with heate.
This payne did Venus and her sonne, entreate the prince of ell,
T'impose to such as faithles were, to such as loued them well.
And therefore this, my louely boy, fare Venus doth aduise thee,
Be true and stedfast in thy loue, beware thou doe disguise thee.
For he that makes but loue a iest, when pleaseth him to starte,
Shall feele those firye vvater drops consume his faithles harte.
Is Venus and her sonne so full of iustice and feuerytye.
Pittie it vveare that loue shoulde not be lincked with indifferencie.
Hovve euer louers can exclaime for harde successe in loue,
Trust me, some more then cōmon cause that painfull hap dothe moue.
And cupids bovve is not alone his triumphe, but his rod,
Nor i he only but a boy: he hight a mighty god.
And they that do him reuerence, haue reason for the same,
His shafs keepe heauē and earth in avve, and shape revvardes for .
And hathe he reason to mantayne vvhy Colin died for loue.
Yea reason good I vvarrant thee, in right it might beehoue.
Then be the name ofoue adored, his bowe is fll of mighte.
His vvoundes are all but for desert, his lavves are all but right:
vvell for this once me lyst apply my speeches to thy sense,
And The stilis shall feele the paine for loues supposed offence.
VVelladay VVelladay: Poore Colin thow arte going to the grounde.
The loue whome Thestis hathe slaine,
Harde harte, faire face fraughte with disdaine:
Disdaine in loue a deadlie wounde.
VVounde her swete loue so deepe againe,
That shee may feele the deng paine
Of this vnhappie shepherds swaine,
And dye for loue as Colin died. is Colin ied finis Camn.
Shepherdes abde, let Colins corps bee vvittnes of the paine
That Thestilis endures in loue▪ a plague for her dysdaine.
Beholde the organ of ourvvrathe▪ this rusty churle is hee,
She dotes on his yfauored face, so muche accurst is shee.
A poore vnhappy Thestlis, vnpitied is thy paine.
Her fortune not vnlyke to his vvhome cruell thow hast slaine.
The straunge effects of my tormented harte,
VVhome cruell loue hathe wofull prisoner caughte,
VVhome cruel hate hathe into bondage broughte,
VVhome wit no way of safe escape hath taughte,
Enforce me say in wittnes of my smarte,
There is no paine to foule disdaine in hardy sutes of loue.
There is no paine &c.
Cruell, farewell. Shep Cruell, farewell.
Moste cruell thow, of all that nature framed.
Moste creull &c.
To kill thy loue with thy disdaine.
To kill thy loue with thy disdaine.
Cruell disdaine soe lie thow named.
Cruell disdaine &c.
And let me dye of Iphis paine.
A life to good for thy disdaine.
Sithe this my stars to me allot,
And thow thy loue hast all forgot.
And thou &c.
Now shepherds, bury Colins corps, perfume his herce with flowers,
And write what iustice Venus did amid these woods of yours.
How now, how cheeres my Louely boy, after this dump of loue.
Such dumpes, sweete Lady, as bin these are deadly dumpes to proue.
Cease shepherde, these are other nues, after this melancholye.
My minde presumes some tempest toward vpon the speache of Mercurie
Faire lady Venus, let me pardoned bee
That haue of longe bin wellbeloued of thee,
Yf as my office bid selfe first brings
To my sweee Maame these vnwellcome tydings.
What nes, what tydings, gentle Mercurie,
In mide of my delites to troble me.
At Iunoes sute, Pallas assisting her,
Sythe bothe did ioyne n sute to Iupiter,
Action is entred in the court of heauen,
And me, the swyfest of the Planets seauen,
With warant they haue thence despatcht away,
To apprehende and finde the man, they say,
That gaue from them that selfesame ball of golde,
Which I presume I do in place beeholde,
Which man, vnles my markes bee taken wyde,
Is hee that sytts so neere thy gracious yde.
This beinge so, it rests e go from hence.
Before the gods to answere his offence.
What tale is this, dothe Iuno and her mate
Pursue this shepherde with such deadly hate.
As what was then our generall agrement,
To stande vnto they nil be nowe content.
Let Iuno iet, and Pallas play her parte,
What heere I haue, I woonne it by deserte:
And heauen and earthe shall bothe confounded bee,
Ere wronge in this be donne to him or me.
This litle fruite, yf Mercury can spell,
Will sende I feare a world of soule▪ to hell.
What meane these Ciclops, Mercurie, is vulcan waxt so ine,
To sende his Chimyswepers forth, to fetter any frode of mine.
Abashe not shepherd at the thinge, my selfe thy baile wilbe,
He shalbe present at the courte of Ioue I warrant thee.
Venus, gyue me your pledge▪
my Cestone, or my fan, or bothe.
Nay this shall serue: your worde to mee as sure as is your othe,
At Dianas bowre▪ and Lady, yf my witt or pollycie
May profit him for Venus sake, let him make bolde with Mercury.
Sweete Paris, whereon doest thow muse?
The angrye heauens for this fatall iar,
Name me the instrument of dire and deadly war.
Why nymphe, what need ye run so fst? what though but black I be?
I haue more preetie knackes to please, then euerie eye doth see▪
And though I goe not vpright, and though I am a ,
To make me gratious you may haue some other thinge therewith.
Yee Vulcane, will yee so in deede may turne and tell him, trull,
He hath a mystresse of his owne to take his belly full.
Why sir, if Phoebes dainty nymphes please lustie Vulcans tooth,
Why may not Vulcan treade awry, aswell as Venus dooth?
Ye shall not taynt your trothe for me: you wot it verie well,
All that be Dians maides are vowed to halter apples in hell.
Ifaith Ifaith, my gentle mops, but I do know a cast,
Leade apes who list, that we would helpe t'unhaltar them as fast.
Fy fy, your skill is wondrous great, had thought the god of wine,
Had tended but his tubbes and grapes, and not ben haulse so fine.
Gramercie for that quirke, my girle. Bac. Thats one of dainis frūpes.
I pray sir take't with all amisse, our cunning comes by lumpes.
Sh'ath capt his aunswere in the Q.
how sayes, a, has shee so?
Aswel as shee that kapt your head to keepe you warme below.
Yea then you will be curst I see. Bac. best let her euen alone.
Yea gentle gods, and finde some other strnge to harpe vpon.
Some other string, agreed Ifayh, some other pretie thing,
Twere shame fayre maydes should idle be, how say you, wil ye sing.
Some roundes or merry roundy laies, we sing no other songes,
Your melancholick noates not to our countrie myrth belonges.
Here comes a crue will helpe vs trimme.
Yea now our taske is done.
Then merry Mercurie more then time, this rounde were well begone.
A harletrie I warrant her.
a psh eluish shroe.
Haue seene as farre to come as neare, for all her raunging so.
But, Bacchus, time well spent I wot, our sacred father Ioue,
With Phoebus and the god of ware are met in Dians groue.
Then we are here before them yet, but stay the earth doth swell,
God Neptune to, (this hap is good) doth meete the prince of hell.
What iarres are these, that call the gods of heauen and hell beloe.
I is a worke of wit and toyle to rule a sustie shroe.
Bring forth the man of Troie that he may heare,
Whereof he is to be araigned here.
Lo where a comes prepared to pleade his case,
vnder conduct of louely Venus grace.
I haue not seene a more alluring boy.
So beautie hight the wracke of Priams Troy.
Lo sacred Ioue, at Iunoes proude complaynte,
As est I gaue my pledge to Mercurie,
I bring the man whom he did late attaint,
To aunswere his inditement orderlie:
And craue this grace of this immortall senate,
That yee allowe the man his aduocate.
That may not be, the lawes of heauen denie,
A man to pleade or answere by atturney.
Pallas, thy doome is all too peremptorie.
Venus, that fauou is denyed him flatlie,
He is a man and therefore by out lawes,
Him selfe, without his ayd, must plead his cause.
Then bashe not, sheepeherde, in so good a case,
And friendes thou hast as well as foes in place.
Why, Mercurie, why doe yee not indite him.
Softe gentle, Iuno, I pray you do not bite him.
Nay, gods, I troe you are like to haue great silence,
Vnles this parrot be commaunded hence.
Venus, forbeare, be still: speake, Mercurie.
If Iuno iangle Venus will replie.
Paris, king Priams sonne, thou art araygned of parciallitie,
Of sentence partiall and vniust, for that without indifferencie,
Beyonde desert or merit far, as thine accusers say,
From them, to Lady Venus here, thou gauest the pryze away.
What is thine answere?
Sacred and iust, thou great and dreadfull Ioue,
And you thrise reuerende powers, whom loue nor hate,
May wrest awry, if this to me a man,
This fortune fatall bee, that I must pleade,
For safe excusall of my giltles thought,
The honour more makes my mishap the lesse,
That I a man must pleade before the gods,
Gratious forbearers of the worldes amisse,
For her, whose beautie how it hath enticet,
This heauenly senate may with me auer.
But sith nor that, nor this may doe me boote,
And for my selfe, my selfe must speaker bee,
A mortall man, amidst this heauenlie presence▪
Let me not shape a longe defence, to them,
That ben beholders of my giltles thoughtes.
Then for the deede, that I may not denie,
Wherein consists the full of myne offence,
I did vpon commaunde: if then I erde,
I did no more then to a man belong'd.
And if in verdit of their formes deuine,
My dazled eye did swarue or surfet more
On nus face, then anie face of their:
It was no partiall fault, but fault of his
Belike, whose eysight not so perfect was,
As might decerne the brightnes of toe rest.
And if it were permitted vnto men
(Ye gods) to parle with your secret thoughtes,
There ben that sit vpon that sacred seate,
That woulde with Paris erre in Venus prayse.
But let me cease to speake of errour here:
Sith what my hande, the organ of my harte,
Did giue with good agreement of myne eye,
My tongue is voyde with processe to maintane.
A iolly sheepeherde, wise and eloquent.
First then arraign'de of parciallitie.
Paris replyes vnguiltie of the fact▪
His reason is, because he knewe no more
Faire Venus Ceston, then dame Iunoes mace,
Nor neuer sawe wise Pallas cristall shielde.
Then as I looked I loued and likte attonce,
And as it was referd from them to me,
To giue the pryze to her, whose beautie best
My fancie did commend, so did I prayse
And iudge as might my dazled eye decerne.
A peece of art, that, cunninglie pardie,
Refers the blame to weakenes of his eye.
Now (for I must adde reason for my deede)
Why Venus rather pleased me of the three:
Fst, in the intrayles of my mortall eares,
The question standing vpon beauties blaze,
The name of her that height the queene of loue,
My thought in beautie should not be exceld.
Had it bene destyned to maiestie,
(Yet will I not rob Venus of her grace,)
Then stately Iuno might haue borne the ball.
Had it to wisedome bine entituled,
My humaine wit had giuen it Pallas then.
But sith vnto the fayrest of the three,
That power, that threw it for my father ill,
Did dedicate this ball: and safest durst
My sheepeherdes skill aduenture, as I thought,
To iudge of forme and beautie, rather then
Of Iunos state, or Pallas worthynes,
That learnd to ken the fayrest of the flocke,
And praysed beautie but by natures ayme:
Behold to Venus Paris gaue this fruite,
A dayesman chosen there by full consent,
And heauenly powers should not repnt their deedes.
Where it is sayde, beyonde desert of hers,
I honoured Venus with this golden prize:
(Yee gods) alas what can a mortall man
Decerne, betwixt the sacred guiftes of heauen.
Or, if I may with reuerence reason thus:
Suppose I gaue, and iudgd corruptly then,
For hope of that, that best did please my thought,
This apple not for beauties prayse alone:
I might offende, sithe I was pardoned,
And tempted, more then euer creature was,
With wealth, with beautie and with chiualrie:
And so preferred beautie before them all,
The thing that hath enchaunted heaun it selfe.
And for the one, contentment is my wealth:
A shell of salte will serue a sheepede swayne,
A slender banquet in a homely skrip,
And water running from the siluer spring.
For armes, they dreade no foes that sit so lowe,
A thorne can keepe the wind from off my backe,
A sheepe-coate thatcht, a sheepeherdes pallace high ▪
Of tragicke Muses sheepeherdes on no skill,
Enough is them, if Cupid ben displeased,
To sing his prayse on slender oten pipe.
And thus, thryse reuerend, haue I tolde my tale,
And craue the torment of my guiltles soule
To be measured by my faultles thought.
If warlicke Pallas, or the queene of heauen
Sue to reuerse my sentence by appeale,
Be it as please your maiesties deuine,
The wronge, the hurte not mine, if anie be,
But hers whose beautie claymed the prize of me.
Venus, withdrawe your sheepeherde for a space,
Till he againe be called for into place.
Iuno, what will ye after this reply
Bt doome with sentence of indifferencie.
And if you will but iustice in the cause,
The man must quited be by heauens lawes.
Yea gentle Ioue, when Iunoes sutes are mooued,
Then heauen may see how well shee is beloued.
But, Madam, fits it maiestie deuine,
In anie sorte from iustice to decline?
Whether the man be guiltie yea or noe,
That doth not hinder our appeale, I troe?
Phoebus, I wot, amid this heauenly crue,
There be that haue to say as well as you
And Iuno, I with them, and they with me,
In lawe and right, must needefully agree:
I graunt ye may agree, but be content
To doubt vpon regarde of your agrement.
And if yee markt, the man in his defence.
Saide thereof as a might with reuerence.
And did yee verie well I promise yee.
No doubt, sir, you could note it cunninglie.
Well, Iuno, if ye will appeale yee may,
But first dispatch the sheepeherde hence away.
Then Vulcans dame is like to haue the wronge.
And that in passion doth to Mars belonge.
Call Venus and the sheepeherde in againe.
And rid the man that he may knowe his payne.
His payne, his payne, his neuer dying payne,
A cause to make to many moe complaine.
Sheepeherd, thou hast ben harde with equitie and law,
And for thy stars do thee to other calling drawe.
We here dismisse thee hence, by order of our senate:
Goe take thy way to Troie, and there abide thy fate.
Sweete shepherde, with such luck in loue while thow dost liue,
As may the Queene of Loue to any Louer giue.
My lucke is losse howe ere my loue do speede,
I feare me Paris shall but rue his deede.
From Ida woods now wends the shepherds boye,
That in his bosome caries fire to Troy.
Venus, these Ladies do appeale yow see,
And that they may appeale the gods agree,
It resteth then that yow be well content
To stande in this vnto our finall indgment:
And if king Priams sonne did well in this,
The Lawe of heauen will not leade amysse.
But, sacred Iupiter, might thy daughter chuse,
Shee might with reason this appeale refuse:
Yet, if they bee vnmoued in their shames,
Bee it a staine and blemysh to their names:
A deede to far vnworthy of the place,
Vnworthy Pallas Launce, or Iunoes mace:
And, if to beauty it bequeathed be,
I doubte not but it will returne to me.
Venus, there is no more adoe then soe,
It restethe where the gods doe it bestowe.
But, Ladies, vnder fauour of your rage,
How ere it be, yow play vppon the vauntage.
Then dmes, that wee more freely may debate,
And heere th'indifferent sentence of this senate,
Withdrawe yow from this presence for a space,
Till wee haue throughly questioned of the cac:
Dian shalbe your guyde, nor shall yow neede
Your selues t' enquire how things do heere succeede,
Wee will▪ as wee resolue giue yow to knowe,
By generall doome, how euery thinge doth goe.
Thy will, my wish, faire Ladies, will yee wende?
Beshrewe her whome this sentence doth offende.
Now Ioue be iust, and gods you that bee Venus freindes,
Yf yow haue ever donne her wronge, then may yow make amends.
Venus is faire, Pallas and Iuno toe.
But tell me now without some more adoe,
Who is the fairest shee, and do not flatter.
Vulcan, vppon comparison hanges all the matter:
That donne the quarrell and the stryfe were ended.
Because tis knowne, the quarrell is pretended.
Mars. you haue reason for your speeche perdie:
My dame (I toe) is fairest in your eye.
Or (Vulcan) I shold do her doble wronge.
About a toy wee tary heere so longe.
Gyue it by voices, voices giue the odds:
A trifle so to to troble all the gods.
Beleue me, Saturne, be it so for me.
For me. Pluto. for me Mars. for me, yf Ioue agre.
And gentle gods, I am indifferent:
But then I knowe whoose lykely to be shent.
Thryse reuerend gods, and thow immortall Ioue.
Yf Phoebus may, as him doth much behoue,
Be licensed, accordinge to our Lawes,
To speake vprightly in this doubted cause,
(Sythe womens witts woorke mens vnceasinge woes)
To make them freindes, that now bin frendles foes,
And peace to keepe with them, with vs, and all
That make their title to this golden ball:
(Nor thincke yee gods my speeche doth derogate
From sacred powre of this immortall senate,)
Refer this sentence where it doth belonge,
In this say I fayre Phoebe hathe the wronge.
Not that (I meane) her beautye beares the prize:
But that the holly Lawe of heauen denies,
One god to medle in an others powre.
And this befell so neere Diana bowre,
As for thappeazinge this vnplesant grudge,
(In my conceyte) shee hight the fittest iudge.
Yf Ioue comptroll not Plutoes hell with charmes,
Yf Mars haue souraigne powre to manage armes:
Yf Bacchus beare no rule in Neptune sea
Nor Vulcans fire dothe Saturnes sythe obay:
Suppresse not then, 'gainst lawe and equitie,
Dianas power in her owne territorie:
Whose regiment, amid her sacred owers,
As proper height as anie rule of yours.
Well may we so wipe all the speeche awaie,
That Pallas, Iuno, Venus hath to say,
And aunswere that by iustice of our lawes,
We were not suffred to conclude the cause.
And this to me most egall doome appeares,
A woman to be iudge amonge her pheeres.
Apollo hath founde out the onely meane,
To rid the blame from vs and trouble cleane.
We are beholding to his sacred wit.
I can commend and well allow of it.
And so deriue the matter from vs all,
That Dian haue the giuing of the ball.
So Ioue may clearly excuse him in the case,
Where Iuno else woulde chide and braule apace.
And now, it were some cunnning to deuine,
To whom Diana will this pryze resigne.
Suffizeth me, it shall be none of mine.
Vulcan, though thou be blacke, thart nothing fine.
Goe bathe thee, Bacchus, in a tub of wine,
The balls as likely to be mine as thine.
Lo, Ladyes, farre beyonde my hope and will, you see,
This thankles office is imposd to me:
Wherein if you will rest aswell content,
As Dian wilbe iudge indifferent,
My egall doome shall none of you offende,
And of this quarrell make a finall ende:
And therefore, whether you beliefe of loath,
Confirme your promise with some sacred othe.
Phoebe, chiefe Mistresse of this siluan chace,
Whom gods haue chosen to conclude the case,
That yet in ballance vndecyded lies.
Touching bestowing of this golden prize.
I giue my promise and mne othe withall,
By Six, by heauens power imperiall,
By all that longes to Pallas deytie,
Her shlde, her launce, ensignes of chiuallrie,
Her sacred wreath of Oliue, and of Baye,
Her crested helme, and else what Pallas may,
That where so ere this ball of purest golde,
That chast Diana here in hande doth holde,
Vnpartially her wisedome shall bestowe,
Without mislike o quarrell any moe,
Pallas shall rest content and satisfied,
And say the best desert doth there abde.
And here I promise and protest withall,
By Stix, by heauens power imperiall,
By all that longes to Iunoes deitie,
Her crowne, her mace, ensignes of maiestie:
Her spotles mariage-rites, her league diuine,
And by that holy name of Proserpine,
That wheresoere, this ball of purest golde,
That chast Diana here in hande doth holde,
Vnpartially her wisedome shall bestowe,
Without mislike o quarrell anie moe,
Iuno shall rest content and satisfied,
And say the best desert doth there abyde.
And louely Phoebe, for I knowe thy dome
Wilbe no other then shall thee become,
Beholde I take thy daintie hande to kisse,
And with my solemne othe confirme my promise,
By Stix, by Ioues immortall emperie,
By Cupids bowe, by Venus mirtle-tree,
By Vulcans gifte, my Ceston, and my fan,
By this red rose, whose colour first began,
When erst my wanton boy (the more his blame)
Did drawe his bowe awry and hurt his dme,
By all the honour and the sacrifie,
That from Cithaeron and fom Paphos rise:
That wheresoere, &c.
Venus shall rest, &c.
It is enough, and goddesses attende:
There wons within these pleasaunt shady woods,
Where neither storme nor Suns distemperature
Haue power to hurte by cruell heate or colde,
Vnder the clymate of the milder heauen,
Where seldome lights Ioues angrie thunderbolt,
For fauour of that soueraygne earthly peere:
Where whystling windes make musick 'mong the trees,
Far from disturbance of our countrie gods,
Amids the Cypres springes a gratious Nymphe,
That honour Dian for her chastitie,
And likes the labours well of Phoebes groues:
The place Elizium hight, and of the place,
Her name that gouernes there Eliza is,
A kingdome that may well compare with mine.
An auncient seat of kinges, a seconde Troie,
Ycompast rounde with a commodious sea:
Her people are leeped Angeli▪
Or if I misse a lettre is the most.
She giueth lawes of iustice and of peace,
And on her heade as fits her fortune best,
She weares a wreath of laurell, golde, and palme:
Her robes of purple and of scarlet die,
Her vayle of white, as best befits a mayde.
Her auncestors liue in the house of fame,
Shee giueth armes of happie victorie,
And flowers to decke her lyons crowned with golde.
This peereles nymphe whom heauen and earth beloues,
This Paragon, this onely this is shee,
In whom do meete so manie giftes in one,
On whom our countrie gods so often gaze,
In honour of whose name the Muses singe.
In state Queene Iunos peere, for power in armes,
And vertues of the minde Mineruaes ▪
As fayre and louely as the queen of loue:
As chast as Dian in her chast desires.
Th ame is shee, if Phoebe doe no wronge,
To whom this ball in merit doth belonge.
If this be shee whom some Zabeta call,
To whom thy wisedome well bequeathes the ball
I can remember at her day of birthe,
Howe Flora with her flowers strewed the Earth,
How eerie power with heauenlie maiestie,
In person honored that solemnitie.
The louely graces were not farre away,
They threw their balme for triumph of the day.
The fates against their kinde begaune a cheerefull songe,
And vowed her life with fauour to prolonge
Then first gan Cupids eysight wexen dim,
Belike Elisas beautie blinded him.
To this fayre Nymphe, not earthly but deuine:
Contents it me my honour to resigne.
To this fayre Queene so beautifull and wise,
Pallas bequeathes her title in the prize.
To her whom Iunoes lookes so well become,
The queene of heauen yeildes at Phoebus doome.
And glad I am Diana found the arte,
Without offence so well to please desart.
Then marke my tale the vsuall time is nie,
When wont the dnies of life and destinie,
In robes of cheerfull collours to repayre,
To this renowned Queene so wise and fayre,
With pleasaunt songes this peereles nimphe to greete,
Clotho layes downe her distaste at her feete.
And Lachesis doth pull the threed at length,
The thirde with fauour giues it stuffe and strength
And for contrarie kinde affordes her leaue,
As her best likes her web of life to weaue
This time we will attend, and in the meane while
With some sweete songe the tediousnes beguile.
Gracious and wise, fayre Queene of rare renowne,
Whom heauen and earth beloues amyd thy trayne,
Noble and louely peeres: to honour thee
And doe thee fauour, more then may belong,
By natures lawe to any earthly wight,
Beholde continuance of our yearely due,
Th'unpartiall dames of destenie we meete,
As haue the gods and we agreed in one,
In reuerence of Elizas noble name,
And humblie loe her distaffe Clotho yeeldes.
Her spindle Lachesis and her fatall reele,
Layes downe in reuerence at Elizaas feete.
Te tamen in terris vnam tria nmin Diuam
Inuita statuunt naturae lege sorres,
Et tibi non alijs didicerunt prcere Parcae.
Dame Atrops according as her
To thee fayre Queene esigne her ftall knife:
Liue longe th oble Phoeni of our age,
Our fayre Eliza our Zabeta fayre.
And loe beside this rare solemnitie,
And sacrifice these dames are wont to doe,
A fauour far in deed contrarie kinde,
Bequeathed is vnto thy worthynes.
Shee deliuereth the ball of golde to the Queenes owne hands
This prize from heauen and heauenly goddesses,
Accept it then, thy due by Dians dome,
Praise of the wisedome, beautie and the state,
That best becomes thy peereles excellencie.
So fayre Eliza, Venus doth resigne,
The honour of this honour to be thine.
So is the queene of heauen content likewise,
To yelde to thee her title in the prize.
So Pallas yeeldes the prayse hereof to thee▪
For wisedome, princely state, and peerelesse beautie.
Viue diu foelix votis hominúmque Deûmque.
Corpor, mente, libro, doctissima, candi, casta.