ATtend my Lord, and marke the tale I tell,
Whoſe forme you ſée is monſtrous, ſtrange and rare.
Before a manlike ſhape, behinde a fiſhes fell,
this ſtrange diſguiſe doth make full many ſtare,
And ſince they preaſe to know why I come here,
Let them be ſtill, the cauſe ſhall ſoone appeare.
WIthin this cōmon wealth (my Lord) all thoſe ye liue in awe
Do ſéeke each-daie for to performe & kéep the ſtabliſht law,
Yea ſuch do keep ye ſabboth day in reuerence as they ought
And fiſh dais too as wel as fleſh, which many ſet at naught
Yet if the ſame were well obſerude, fleſh ſeldome would be déere,
And fiſh abound at each mans boord more plentie in each yéere,
Then Englands ſtore would be increaſt with butter, chéeſe & béefo
And thouſands ſet to worke for fiſh, that now beg for reléefe.
This ſhape ſo ſtrange, ſhew they are ſtrange, & do digres frō reaſon
That ſhun in eating fiſh and fleſh, to kéepe both time and ſeaſon,
Which fault reformd, our cōmon wealth would floriſh in ſuch wiſe,
As neuer anie did beholde the like with mortall eies.
OH worthie Citie now reioyce in Chriſt,
for through his grace with peace he hath thée bleſſ
Hée ſends thée ſtill ſuch godly magiſtrates,
as dailie ſéekes to keepe thée from vnreſt.
Muſe not my Lord, to ſée the Sunne doth ſhine
on Englands peace, who ſits in princely throne,
It doth preſage her Sunne ſhine ſtill ſhall laſt,
and make her foes afeard at euerie blaſt.
So long as peace directed is by truth,
and Gods pure word receiued as it ought,
So long the Lord will bleſſe this little land,
and make it flow with plentie in each place.
Rule now my Lord and keepe this Citie well,
reforme abuſes crept into the ſame,
So ſhall your fame eternizde be for aie,
and London ſtill preſerued from decaie.
And I that do ſupport the Goldſmiths armes,
which long in loue to you haue bin vnited,
Will do my beſt to ſhadow you from harmes,
and finde the meanes your loues may be requighted.
THe bleſſed peace which England doth poſſeſſe,
and ſo hath done this thirtie two yeres ſpace.
I Fame am ſent and chargde to do no leſſe,
with trumpets ſound, but ſpread it in each place.
That all may wiſh with hearts which do not faine,
our roiall peace in England ſtill may raine.
I Repreſent your peace and chiefeſt good,
that euerie houre doth praie for your defence,
I ſit as ſhadow for that roiall bloud,
whoſe life is pure, and ſtill hath this pretence,
That whileſt ſhe liues euen with her heart and might,
ſhe ſeekes in peace for to defend your right.
VVIſedome ſupporteth ſtill the publike ſtate,
Wiſedome foreſeeth ere it be too late.
YEa pollicie preuents each traiterous fact,
And doth performe full many a famous act,
Both Pollicie and Wiſedome will not ceaſe,
Each night and daie for to preſerue this peace.
GOds ſacred truth loe here I repreſent,
whom Englands peace doth ſtil maintain in place,
I bring you comfort for your ſoules content,
which Englands peace doth willingly imbrace:
And for her ſake by whom Gods truth doth ſtand,
the God of heauen doth bleſſe this little land.
Prudence and vertue ſhades our peace each daie,
chaſt is her life, and therewith reſts content,
In vaine delights ſhe ſhuns to runne aſtraie,
her vertues are moſt rare and excellent.
Long may ſhe liue ſtill to preſerue this peace,
Lord ſtill I pray her health and ioyes increaſe.
THis famous fléece doth ſo adorne our land,
which daily doth with milke and honie flow,
That Fame doth make all nations vnderſtand,
like peace and plentie neuer man did know,
For wool and lead, for tin, corne, béere and béefe,
Of Chriſtian nations England is the chéefe.
Muſe not to ſée this famous fléece doth ſtand
vpon a wooll packe, fixt at peaces féete,
The reaſon is, as you may vnderſtand,
worthie Iohn Allot for his place moſt méete.
Is Maior of London and the Staple too,
And will performe in both what hée ſhould doo.
Faithfull and loyall are hir ſubiects ſeene,
Concord vnites them ſtill in loyall bands,
Their tender hearts is linked to our Queene,
and concord craues no other at their hands,
Thus loyaltie and concord doth agree,
That London ſtill therein ſhall famous bee,
AMbition ſtill pt vp with hate and pride,
Doth dailie ſéeke to worke ſwéete Englands fall,
He neuer reſts, but ſéekes each time and tide,
How Englands peace might ſoone be brought in thrall.
And common wealth plungde into ciuill broiles,
That forraine foes might triumph in our ſpoiles.
OUr Senates graue and worthie magiſtrates,
Shall ſtill indeuor to maintaine our peace,
By baniſhing ambition from our gates,
And ſeeking meanes this peace may neuer ceaſe:
Yea vertue ſo by him aduanſt ſhall be,
That vice ſhall flie and not be ſeene in me.
SCience ſtill ſéekes thoſe things we dailie wiſh,
and Labour toiles to bring vs fleſh and fiſh,
Yea Science ſure doth practiſe euerie daie,
that Labor might kéepe England from decaie,
Science and Labour ſtill preſerues mans health,
and are chiefe props of this our common wealth.
HElpe Walworth now to dant this rebels pride.
Aſke what thou wilt thou ſhalt not be denide.
IAcke Straw the rebell I preſent, Wat Tyler was my aide,
Hob Carter and Tom Miller too; we all were not afraid,
For to depriue our ſoueraigne king, Richard the ſecond namde,
Yet for our bad ambitious mindes by Walworth we were tamde,
He being Maior of London then, ſoone danted all our pride,
He ſlew me firſt, the reſt ſoone fled, and then like traitors dide.
I Repreſent ſir William Walworths place,
A fiſhmonger, and Maior of London twice,
I ſlew Iacke Straw, who ſought my kings diſgrace,
and for my act reapt honors of great price,
Firſt Knight was I of London you may reade,
and ſince each Maior gaines knighthood by my déede.
Yea for that déede to London I did gaine,
this dagger here in armes giuen as you ſée,
I won my companie this creaſt which doth remaine,
this to my ſelfe and my poſteritie.
Thus did the King with honors me adore,
and Fame her ſelfe ſtill laudeth me therefore.
Time ſerues for all things,
Time runneth faſt,
VVe craue your patience, for the time is paſt.