THe walles of Thebes were raiſed by Muſicke: by muſick theſe are kept from falling. It was a propheſie ſince the first ſtone was layde, that theſe walles ſhould ſhake, and the roofe totter, till the wiſest, the fairest and moſt fortunate of all creatures, ſhould by her firſt ſteppe make the foundation ſtaid: and by the glaunce of her eyes make the Turret ſteddie. I haue beene here a Porter manie yeeres, many Ladies haue entred paſsing amiable, many verie wiſe, none ſo happie. Theſe my fellow Porters thinking there could bee none ſuch, fell on ſleepe, and ſo incurde the ſeconde curſe of the propheſie, which is, neuer againe to awake: Marke how they looke more like poſtes then Porters, reteining onlie their ſhapes, but depriued of their ſences. I thought rather to cut off my eie liddes, then to winke till I ſaw the ende. And now it is: for the muſick is at an end, this houſe immoueable, your vertue immortall. O miracle of time, Natures glorie, Fortunes Empreſſe, the worlds wonder! Soft, this is the Poets part, and not the Porters. I haue nothing to preſent but the creſt of mine office, this keie: Enter, poſſeſſe all, to whom the PDF PAGE 119 heauens haue vouchſafed all. As for the owner of this houſe, mine honourable Lord, his tongue is the keie of his heart: and his heart the locke of his ſoule. Therefore what he ſpeakes you may conſtantlie beleeue: which is, that in duetie and ſeruice to your Maieſtie, he would be ſecond to none: in praieng for your happineſſe, equall to anie.
BEhold her lockes like wiers of beaten gold,
her eies like ſtarres that twinkle in the skie,
Her heauenly face not framd of earthly molde,
Her voice that founds Apollos melodie,
The miracle of time, the worlds ſtorie,
Fortunes Queen, Loues treaſure, Natures glory.
No flattering hope ſhe likes, blind Fortunes bait
nor ſhadowes of delight, fond fanſies glaſſe,
Nor charmes that do inchant, falſe artes deceit,
nor fading ioyes, which time makes ſwiftly pas
But chaſt deſires which beateth all theſe downe,
A Goddeſſe looke is worth a Monarchs crowne.
Goddeſſe and Monarch of his happie Ile,
vouchſafe this bow which is an huntreſſe part
Your eies are arrows though they ſeeme to ſmile
which neuer glanſt but gald the ſtatelieſt hart,
Strike one, ſtrike all, for none at all can flie,
They gaze you in the face although they die.
FAireſt of all creatures vouchſaf to heare the prayer of a Pilgrime, which ſhall be ſhort, and the petition PDF PAGE 120 which is but reaſonable. God graunt the worlde maie ende with your life, and your life more happie then anie in the world: that is my praier. I haue trauelled manie Countries, and in all Countries deſire antiquities. In this Iland (but a ſpanne in reſpect of the world) and in this Shire (but a finger in regard of your Realme) I haue heard great cauſe of wonder, ſome of complaint. Harde by, and ſo neere as your Maiestie ſhall almost paſſe by, I ſawe on Oke, whoſe ſtatelines nayled mine cies to the branches, and the ornamentes beguiled my thoughtes with astoniſhment. I thought it free, being in the fielde, but I found it not ſo. For at the verie entrie I mette I know not with what rough-hewed Ruffian, whoſe armes wer carued out of knotty box, for I could receue nothing of him but boxes, ſo haſtie was he to ſtrike, he had no leyſure to ſpeake. I thought there were more waies to the wood then one, and finding another paſſage, I found alſo a Ladie verie faire, but paſsing frowarde, whoſe words ſet mee in a greater heate then the blowes. I asked her name, ſhe ſaid it was Peace. I wondred that Peace could neuer holde her peace. I cannot perſwade my ſelfe ſince that time, but that there is a waſpes nest in mine eares. I returned diſcontent. But if it will pleaſe your Highneſſe to view it, that rude Champion at your faire feete will laie downe his foule head: and at your becke that Ladie will make her mouth her tongues mue. Happelie your Maiestie ſhall finde ſome content: I more antiquities.
MIghtie Princeſſe, whoſe happines is attended by the heauens, and whoſe gouernment is wondered at vpon the earth: vouchſafe to heare why this paſſage is kept, and this Oke honoured. The whole world is drawen in a mappe: the heauens in a Globe: and this Shire ſhrunke in a Tree: that what your Maieſtie hath oftē heard off with ſome comfort, you may now beholde with full content. This Oke, from whoſe bodie ſo many armes doe ſpread: and out of whoſe armes ſo many fingers ſpring: reſembles in parte your ſtrength & happineſſe. Strength, in the number and the honour: happineſſe, in the trueth and conſent. All heartes of Oke, then which nothing ſurer: nothing ſounder. All wouen in one roote, then which nothing more conſtant, nothing more naturall. The wall of this Shire is the ſea, ſtrong, but rampired with true hearts, inuincible: where euery priuate mans eie is a Beacon to diſcouer: euerie noble mans power a Bulwarke to defende. Here they are all differing ſomewhat in degrees, not in dutie: the greatnes of the branches, not the greeneſſe. Your majeſty they account the Oke, the tree of Iupiter, whoſe root PDF PAGE 121 is ſo deeplie faſtened, that treacherie, though ſhee vndermine to the centre, cannot finde the windings, and whoſe toppe is ſo highlie reared, that enuie, though ſhe ſhoote on copheigth, cannot reach her, vnder whoſe armes they haue both ſhade and ſhelter. Well not they that your enemies lightnings are but flaſhes, and their thunder which filles the whole world with a noiſe of conquest, ſhall end with a ſofte ſhower of Retreate. Be then as confident in your ſteppes, as Caeſar was in his Fortune. His proceedings but of conceit: yours of vertue. Abroad courage hath made you feared, at home honoured clemencie. Clemencie which the owner of this Groue hath tasted: in ſuch ſort, that his thoughts are become his hearts laberinth, ſurprized with ioie and loialtie. Ioy without meaſure, loyaltie without end, liuing in no other ayer, then that which breathes your Maiesties ſafetie.
For himſelfe, and all theſe honourable Lords, and Gentlemen, whoſe ſhieldes your Maiestie doeth here beholde, I can ſay this, that as the veines are diſperſed through all the bodie, yet when the heart feeleth any extreame paſsion, ſende all their bloud to the heart for comfort: ſo they being in diuers places, when your Maiestie ſhall but ſtande in feare of any daunger, will bring their bodies, their purſes, their ſoules, to your Highneſſe, being their heart, their head, and their Soueraigne. This paſſage is kept ſtraight, and the Pilgrime I feare hath complained: but ſuch a diſguiſed worlde it is that one can ſcarce know a Pilgrime from a Prieſt, a er from a Gentleman, nor a man from a woman PDF PAGE 122 Euerie one ſeeming to be that which they are not, onely do practiſe what they ſhould not. The heauens guide you, your Maieſtie gouernes vs: though our peace bee enuied, by you we hope it ſhall be eternall.
THere is a bird that builds her neaſt with ſpice, and built, the Sun to aſhes doth her burne,
Out of whoſe ſinders doth another riſe. & ſhe by ſcorching beames to duſt doth turne:
Thus life a death, and death a life doth proue,
The rareſt thing on earth except my loue.
My loue that makes his neaſt with high deſires, and is by beauties blaze to aſhes brought,
Out of the which do breake out greater fires, they quenched by diſdain conſume to nought,
And out of nought my cleereſt loue doth riſe,
True loue if often ſlaine but neuer dies.
True loue which ſprings, though Fortune on it tread as camomel by preſſing down doth grow
Or as the Palme that higher reares his head, whē men great burrhens on the branches throw
Loue fanſies birth, Fidelitie the wombe, the Nurſe Delight, Ingratitude the tombe.
NExt rowing in a Weſterne barge well fare Angling, I haue bin here this two houres and cannot catch an oyſter. It may he for lacke of a bait, & that were hard in this nibling world, where euerie man laies bait for another. In the Citie merchants bait their tongues with a lie and an oath, and ſo make ſimple men ſwallow deceitfull wares: and fiſhing for commoditie is growen ſo farre, that men are become fiſhes, for Lande lords put ſuch ſweete baits on rackt rents, that as good it were to be a perch in a pikes belly, as a Tenant in theyr farmes. All our trade is growen to trecherie, for now fiſh are caught with medicins: which are as vnwholſom as loue procured by withchcraft vnfortunate. We Anglers make our lines of diuers colours, according to the kindes of waters: ſo doe men their loues, aiming at the complexion of the faces. Thus Marchandize, Loue, and Lordſhips ſucke venom out of vertue. I think I ſhal PDF PAGE 123 fiſh all daie and catch a frog, the cauſe is neither in the line, the hooke, nor the bait, but ſome thing there is ouer beautifull which ſtayeth the verie Minow (of all fiſh the moſt eager) from biting. For this we Anglers obſerue, that the ſhadow of a man turneth backe the fiſh. What will then the ſight of a Goddeſſe? Tis beſt angling in a lowring daie, for here the Sunne ſo gliſters, that the fiſh ſee my hooke through my bait. But ſoft here be the Netters, theſe be they that cannot content them with a diſh of fiſh for their ſupper, but will draw a whole pond for the market.
Be there any maydes there?
Maydes foole, they be ſea fiſh.
Why?
Venus was borne of the Sea, and tis reaſon ſhe ſhould haue maydes to attend hir.
MADAME, it is an olde ſaying, There is no fiſhing to the ſea, nor ſeruice to the King: but it holdes when the ſea is calme & the king vertuous. PDF PAGE 123 Your vertue doth make Enuie bluſh, and Enuie ſtands amazed at your happines. I come not to tell the art of fiſhing, nor the natures of fiſh, nor their daintines, but with a poore Fiſher mans wiſhe, that all the hollowe heartes to your Maiestie were in my net, and if there bee more then it will holde, I woulde they were in the ſea till I went thether a fiſhing.
There bee ſome ſo muddie minded, that they can not liue in a cleere riuer but a ſtanding poole, as camells will not drinke till they haue troubled the water with their feet: ſo can they neuer ſtanch their thirſt, till they haue diſturbd the ſtate with their trecheries. Soft, theſe are no fancies for fiſher men. Yes true hearts are as good as full purſes, the one the ſinewes of war, the other the armes. A diſh of fiſh is an vnworthie preſent for a prince to accept: there be ſome carpes amongſt them, no carpers of ſtates, if there be, I would they might bee handled lyke carpes, their tongues pulled out. Some pearches there are I am ſure, and if anie pearch higher than in dutie they ought, I would they might ſodenly picke ouer the pearch for me. What ſo euer there is, if it be good it is all yours, moſt excellent Ladie, that are beſt worthie of the greateſt good.
THE fiſh that ſeeks for food in ſiluer ſtreame is vnawares beguiled with the hooke,
And tender harts when leſt of loue they dreame, do ſwallow beauties bait, a louely looke.
PDF PAGE 124 The fiſh that ſhuns to bite, in net doth hit,
The heart that ſcapes the eie is caught by wit.
The thing cald Loue, poore Fiſher men do feele rich pearles are found in hard & homely ſhels
Our habits baſe, but hearts as true as ſteele, ſad lookes deep ſighs, flat faith are all our ſpels,
And when to vs our loues ſeeme faire to bee.
We court them thus Loue me and Ile loue thee.
And if they ſaie our loue is fondly made, we neuer leaue till on their hearts we lite,
Anglers haue patience by their proper trade, and are content to tarrie till they bite,
Of all the fiſh that in the waters moue,
We count them lumps that will not bite at loue.