I Followed this ſounde, as enchanted; neither knowing the reaſon why, nor how to bee ridde of it: vnuſuall to theſe Woods, and (I feare) to our gods prodigious. Syluanus whom I honour, is runne into a Caue: Pan, whom I enuye, courting of the Shepheardeſſe: Enuie I thee Pan? No, pitty thee, an eie-ſore to chaſt Nymphes; yet ſtill importunate: Honour thee Syluanus? No, contemne thee: fearefull of Muſicke in the Woods, yet counted the god of the Woods. I, it may bee more ſtout, than wiſe, asked, who paſſed that way? what he or ſhee? none durſt anſwere, or would vouchſafe, but paſsionate Eccho, who ſaide Shee. And Shee it is, and you are Shee, whom in our dreames many yeares wee Satyres haue ſeene, but waking could neuer finde any ſuch. Euery one hath tolde his dreame and deſcribed your perſon, all agree in one, and ſet downe your vertues: in this onely did wee differ, that ſome ſaide your Pourtraiture might be drawen, other ſaide impoſsible: ſome thought your vertues might be numbred, moſt ſaide they were infinite: Infinite, and impoſsible, of that ſide was I: and firſt in humility to ſalute you moſt happy I: my vntamed thoughts waxe gentle, & I feele in my ſelfe ciuility, A thing hated, becauſe not knowen, and vnknowen, becauſe I knew not you. Thus Vertue tameth fierceneſſe, Beauty, madneſſe. Your Maieſty on my knees will I followe, bearing this Club, not as a Saluage, but to beate downe thoſe that are.
PRety ſoules and bodies too, faire ſhephardiſſe, or ſweete Miſtreſſe, you know my ſuite, loue, my vertue, Muſicke, my power, a godhead. I cannot tickle the ſheepes gutts of a Lute, bydd, bydd, bydd, like the calling of Chickins, but for a Pipe that ſqueeketh like a Pigg, I am he. How doe you burne time, & drowne beauty in pricking of clouts, when you ſhould bee penning of Sonnets? You are more ſimple then the ſheepe you keepe, but not ſo gentle. I loue you both, I know not which beſt, and you both ſcorne me, I know not which moſt. Sure I am, that you are not ſo young as not to vnderſtand loue, nor ſo wiſe as to withſtand it, vnleſſe you think your ſelues greater thā gods, whereof I am one. Howe often haue I brought you Cheſtnuts for a loue token, & deſired but acceptance for a fauour. Little did you knowe the miſterye, that as the huske was thornye and tough, yet the meate ſweete, ſo though my hyde were rough and vnkempt, yet my heart was ſmooth and louing: you are but the Farmers daughters of the Dale, I the god of the flocks that feede vpon the hils. Though I cannot force loue, I may obedience, or elſe ſende your ſheepe a wandring, with my fancies. Coyneſſe muſt be reuenged with curſtneſſe, but be not agaſte ſweet mice, my godhead cōmeth ſo faſt vpon me, that Maieſtye had almoſt ouerrūn affectiō, Can you loue? Wil you?
Alas poore Pan, looke how he looketh Siſter, fitter to drawe in a Harueſt wayne, then talke of loue to chaſte Virgins, would you haue vs both?
I, for oft I haue hearde, that two Pigeons may bee caught with one beane.
And two Woodcocks with one ſprindge.
And many Dotterels with one dance.
And all fooles with one faire worde.
Nay, this is his meaning; as he hath two ſhapes, ſo hath he two harts, the one of a man wherewith his tongue is tipped, diſſembling; the other of a beaſt, wherewith his thoughts are poyſoned, luſt. Men muſt haue as manie loues, as they haue hart-ſtrings, and ſtudie to make an Alphabet of miſtreſſes, from A. to Y. which maketh them in the end crie, Ay. Againſt this, experience hath prouided vs a remedy, to laugh at them when they know not what to ſaie, and when they ſpeake, not to beleeue them.
Not for want of matter, but to knowe the meaning, what is wrought in this ſampler?
The follies of the Gods, who became beaſtes, for their affections.
What in this?
The honour of Virgins who became Goddeſſes, for their chaſtity.
But what be theſe?
Mens tongues, wrought all with double ſtitch but not one true.
What theſe?
Roſes, Eglētine, harts-eaſe, wrought with Queenes ſtitch, and all right.
I neuer hard the odds betweene mens tongues, and weomens, therefore they may be both double, vnleſſe you tell mee how they differ.
Thus, weomens tongues are made of the ſame fleſh that their harts are, and ſpeake as they thinke: Mens harts of the fleſh that their tongues, and both diſſemble, But prythy Pan be packing, thy words are as odious as thy fight and we attend a fight which is more glorious, then the ſunne riſing.
What doth Iupiter come this waies?
No, but one that will make Iupiter bluſh as guilty of his vnchaſt iugglings, and Iuno diſmaide as wounded at her Maieſty. What our mother hath often tolde vs, and fame the whole world, cannot be concealed from thee; if it be, we wil tell thee, which may hereafter make thee ſurceaſe thy ſuite, for feare of her diſpleaſure, and honour virginitye, by wondering at her vertues.
Say on ſweete ſoule?
This way commeth the Queene of this Iſlande, the wonder of the world, and natures glory, leading affections in fetters, Virginities ſlaues: embracing mildnes with Iuſtice, Maieſties twinns. In whom nature hath imprinted beauty, not art paynted it; in whome wit hath bred learning, but not without labour; labour brought forth wiſedome, but not without wonder. By her it is (Pan) that all our Carttes that thou ſeeſt, are laden vvith Corne, when in other countries they are filled vvith Harneys, that our horſes are ledde vvith a whipp: theirs vvith a Launce, that our Riuers flow with fiſh, theirs with bloode: our cattel feede on paſtures, they feede on paſtures like cattel: One hande ſhe ſtretcheth to Fraunce, to weaken Rebels; the other to Flaunders, to ſtrengthen Religion; her heart to both Countries, her vertues to all. This is ſhee at whom Enuie hath ſhott all her arrowes, and now for anger broke her bow, on whom God hath laide all his bleſſinges, & we for ioy clappe our hands, heedleſſe treaſon goeth hedleſſe; and cloſe trechery reſtleſſe: Daunger looketh pale to beholde her Maieſty; & tyranny bluſheth to heare of her mercy. Iupiter came into the houſe of poore Baucis, & ſhe vouchſafeth to viſite the bare Farmes of her ſubiects. We vpō our knees, wil entreat her to come into the valley, that our houſes may be bleſſed with her preſence, whoſe hartes are filled with quietnes by her gouernement. To her wee wiſh as many yeares, as our fieldes haue eares of corne, both infinite: and to her enemies, as many troubles, as the Wood hath leaues, all intollerable. But whiſt, here ſhee is, run downe Pan the hill in all haſt, and though thou breake thy necke to giue our mother warning, it is no matter.
No, giue me leaue to die with wondring, & trippe you to your mother. Here I yeelde all the flockes of theſe fields to your highnes: greene be the graſſe where you treade: calme the water where you rowe: ſweete the aire, where you breathe: long the life that you liue, happy the people that you loue: this is all I can wiſh. During your abode, no theft ſhalbe in the woods: in the fielde no noiſe, in the vallies no ſpies, my ſelfe will keepe all ſafe: that is all I can offer. And heare I breake my pipe, which Apollo could neuer make me doe; and follow that ſounde which followes you.
Swel Ceres now for other Gods are ſhrinking,
Pomona pineth,
Fruitleſſe her tree;
Faire Phoebus ſhineth
Onely on mee.
Conceite doth make me ſmile whilſt I am thinking,
How euery one doth read my ſtory,
How euery bough on Ceres lowreth,
Cauſe heauens plenty on me powreth,
And they in leaues doe onely glory,
All other Gods of power bereuen,
Ceres only Queene of heauen.
With Robes and flowers let me be dreſſed.
Cynthia that ſhineth,
Is not ſo cleare,
Cynthia declineth,
When I appeere,
Yet in this Ile ſhee raignes as bleſſed,
And euery one at her doth wonder,
And in my eares ſtill fonde fame whiſpers,
Cynthia ſhalbe Ceres Miſtres,
But firſt my Carre ſhall riue aſunder,
Helpe Phoebus helpe my fall is ſuddaine,
Cynthia, Cynthia, muſt be ſoueraigne.
GReater then Ceres, receiue Ceres Crowne, the ornament of my plenty, the honour of your peace, heere at your highnes feete, I lay downe my feined deity, which Poets haue honoured, truth contemned. To your Maieſty whome the heauens haue crowned with happines, the world with vvonder, birth with dignitie, nature with perfection, vve doe all Homage, accounting nothing ours but what comes frō you. And this muche dare we promiſe for the Lady of the farme, that your preſence hath added many daies to her life, by the infinite ioies ſhee conceyues in her heart, who preſents your highneſſe with this toye and this ſhort praier, poured from her hart, that your daies may increaſe in happines, your happines haue no end till there be no more daies.
VOuchſafe to heare, a ſimple Shephard, ſhephards and ſimplicity cannot part, your highnes is cōe into Cotſhold, an vneuē coūtry, but a people, that carry their thoughtes leuell with their fortunes, lowe ſpirites, but true harts, vſing plaine dealinge, once counted a Iewell nowe beggery, theſe hills afoorde nothing but cottages, and nothing can we preſent to your highnes, but ſhephards. The country healthy, and harmeles, a freſh aier, where there are noe dampes, and where a black ſheepe is a perilous beaſt, no monſters, we carry our harts, at our tongues ends, being as farre from diſſembling, as our ſheepe from fierceneſſe, and if in any thing, we ſhall chance to diſcouer our leudnes, it wilbe in ouer boldneſſe, in gazinge at you, who fils our harts with ioye, and our eies with wonder, as for the honorable Lord and Lady of the Caſtle, what happines they conceiue, I would it were poſsible for them ſelues to expreſſe, then ſhould your Maieſtie ſee, that al outwarde enterteinment, were but a ſmoake riſing from their inward affections, which as they cannot be ſeene, being in the hart, ſo can they not be ſmoothred, appearing in their countenance, this lock of wooll Cotſholdes beſt fruite, and my poore gift, I offer to your highnes, in which nothing is to be eſteemed, but the whitenes, virginities colour, nor to be expected but duetye, ſhepards religion.
Neſcis temeraria; neſcis,
Quem fugias; idio que fugis.
A ſhort tale, but a ſorrowfull, a iuſt complaint, but remedeleſſe, I loued, (for ſhephardes haue their Saints) long I loued (for beauty bindeth prentices) a Nymph moſt faire & as chaſt as faire, yet not more faire, then I vnhappy, Apollo who calleth him ſelfe a god (a title among men, when they will commit iniuries) tearme themſelues gods, purſued my Daphne with booteleſſe loue, and me, with endleſſe hate, her he woed; with faire wordes, the flatteries of men, with great gifts, the ſorceries of gods, with cruell threates, the terrefiing of weake damoſels Néc prece néc pretio néc mouet ille minis. me; he terrified with a monſtrous word metamorphoſing, ſaying that he would turne me into a woolfe and of a ſhepheard make me a ſheepe-biter, or into a Cockatrice and cauſe mine eies which gazed on her, to blind hers which made mine dazell, or to a molde that I ſhould heare his flattering ſpeech, but neuer behold her faire face, tantaené animis caeleſtibus irae? ſometimes would he allure her with ſweete muſicke, but harmony is harſh when it is luſts broaker, often with promiſe of immortality, but chaſtetye is of it ſelfe immortall, euer purſuing her with ſwiftnes, but vertue tying wings to the thoughts of Virgins, ſwiftnes becommeth ſurbated; thus liued he twixt loue and ielouſy; I twixt loue and danger; ſhe twixt feare and vertue. At laſt and alas, this day I feare of all my ioyes the laſt, I cannot as a Poet (who deſcribing the morning, and before he tell what it is, make it night,) ſtand on the time, loue coyneth no circumloquutions, but by the ſunne, a Shepheardes Diall, which goeth as true as our harts, it was four of the clock, whē ſhe flying frō his treaſon was turned into a tree; which made me ſtand, as though I had bene turned into a ſtone, and Apollo ſo enchanted as wounded with her loſſe, or his owne crueltye, the fingers which were wonte to play on the Lute, found no other inſtrument then his owne face, the goulden haire the pride of his heade pulde off in lockes and ſtampt at his feete, his ſweete voice, turned to howling; and there ſitteth he, (long maie he ſorrowe,) wondring, and weeping, and kiſsing the lawrell, his late loue, and mine euer. Pleaſeth your Maieſtye to viewe the melancholy of Apollo, my diſtreſſe, and Daphnes miſchance, it may be the ſight of ſo rare perfectiō, will make him die for griefe, which I wiſh, or Daphne returne to her olde ſhape, which muſt be your wounder; if neither, it ſhal content me that I haue reuealed my griefes, and that you may beholde his.
SIng you, plaie you, but ſing and play my truth,
This tree my Lute, theſe ſighes my notes of ruth:
The Lawrell leafe for euer ſhall bee greene,
And chaſtety ſhalbe Apolloes Queene.
If gods maye dye, here ſhall my tombe be plaſte,
And this engrauen, fonde Phoebus, Daphne chaſte.
MY hart and tongue were twinnes, at once conceaued,
The eldeſt was my hart, borne dumbe by deſtenie,
The laſt my tongue, of all ſweete thoughts bereaued,
Yet ſtrung and tunde, to play harts harmonie.
Both knit in one, and yet aſunder placed,
What hart would speake, the tongue doeth ſtill diſcouer,
What tongue doth speake, is of the hart embraced,
And both are one to make a new found louer:
New founde, and onely founde in Gods and Kings,
Whoſe words are deedes, but deedes nor words regarded:
Chaſte thoughts doe mount and flie with ſwifteſt wings,
My loue with paine, my paine with loſſe rewarded:
Engraue vpon this tree, Daphnes perfection,
That neither men nor gods, can force affection.
NImpha mane, per me concordant carmina neruis.
Faire Daphne ſtaye, too chaſte becauſe too faire,
Yet fairer in mine eies, becauſe ſo chaſte,
And yet becauſe ſo chaſte, muſt I despaire?
And to despaire, I yeelded haue at laſt.
Shepheard poſſeſſe thy loue, for me too cruell,
Poſſeſſe thy loue, thou knoweſt not how to meaſure,
A dunghill cock doeth often finde a Iewell,
Enioying that, he knowes not to be treaſure.
When broomy bearde, to ſweepe thy lips preſume,
When on thy necke, his rough hewen armes ſhall moue,
And gloate on thee with eies that drizell reume,
When that his toothleſſe mouth ſhall call thee loue,
Noght will I ſaie of him, but pittie thee,
That btauty might, but would no wiſer bee.
I ſtay, for whether ſhould chaſtety fly for ſuccour, but to the Queene of chaſtety, by thee was I enterred in a tree, that by crafte, way might be made to luſt, by your highnes reſtored, that by vertue, there might be aſſurance in honor: theſe tables, to ſet downe your prayſes long ſince Sibillas propheſies I humbly preſent to your Maieſty, not thinking, that your vertues can be deciphered in ſo ſlight a volume, but noted; the whole world is drawen in a ſmall mappe, Homers Illiades in a nutſhel, and the riches of a Monarch, in a few cyphers, and ſo much ods, betwext explaining of your perfections, and the touching, as is betvvixt painting and thinking, the one, running ouer a little table in a vvhole day, the other ouer the whole world in a minute, vvith this vouchſafe a poore virgins wiſh, that often wiſh for good husbands, mine, only for the endleſſe proſperity of my ſoueraigne.