MAy it pleaſe your highnes, this is the great Conſtable and commandadore of Cotſholde, he ſpeaks no language, but the Rammiſh tongue, ſuch ſheepiſhe gouernours there are, that can ſay no more to a meſsenger then he, (Bea), this therfore, as ſignifying his duety to your Maieſtye, and al our deſires, I am commanded to be his interpreter, or ſhepheards ſtarre, pointing directly to Cotſhold, and in Cotſhold, to Sudley, made vs expect ſome wonder, and of the eldeſt, aske ſome counſel, it was reſolued by the ancientſt, that ſuch a one ſhould come, by whome all the ſhepheards ſhould haue their flocks in ſafety, & their own liues, all the coūtry quietnes, & the whole world aſtoniſhment: our Conſtable commaunds this day to be kept holliday, all our ſhepheards are aſſembled, and if ſhepheards paſtimes may pleaſe, how ioyful would they be if it would pleaſe you to ſee them; which if you vouchſafe not, as paſtimes too meane for your Maieſtie, they meane to call this day the ſhepheards blacke day; in all humilitie we entreat, that you would caſt an eie to their rude deuices, and an eare to their harſhe wordes, and if nothing happen to be pleaſing, the amends is, nothing ſhal be tedious.
CVT the Cake, who hath the beane; ſhalbe King, and where the peaze is, ſhee ſhalbe Queene.
I haue the peaze, and muſt be Queene.
I the beane and King, I muſt cammaunde.
Not ſo, the Queene, ſhall and muſt commaunde, for I haue often heard of a King that coulde not commaunde his ſubiects, and of a Queene that hath commaunded Kings.
I yeeld, yet is it within compaſſe of my authoritie to aske queſtions and firſt I will beginne with you in loue, I meane Shepheardes loue, for I will not meddle with Gentlefolkes loue, which is moſt conſtant, the man or the woman?
It is no queſtion, no more then if you ſhould aske whether on a ſteepe hill, a ſquare ſtone, or a globe ſtoode moſt ſteddye.
Both louing, which is moſt louing?
The woman if ſhe haue her right, the man, if he be his owne Iudge.
Why doth the man euer vvoe the vvoman, the woman neuer the man?
Becauſe men are moſt amorous and leaſt chaſte, women careleſſe of fonde affections, and vvhen they embrace them, fearefull. But vnleſſe your queſtions were vviſer, I commaunde you to ſilence. You ſirra, that ſit as though your wits were a vvoole-gathering vvill you haue a queſtion, or a commaundement?
No queſtion of a Queene, for they are harde to be anſwered, but anie commaundement, for that muſt be obeyed.
Then ſing, and you ſir, a queſtion, or commaundment?
A commaundment I, and glad that I am?
Then play:
I haue plaide ſo long with my fingers that I haue beaten out of play al my good fortunes
HEarbes, wordes, and ſtones, all maladies haue cured,
Hearbes, wordes, and ſtones, I vſed when I loued,
Hearbes ſmels, words, winde, ſtones hardnes haue procured,
By ſtones, nor wordes, nor hearbes her minde was moued;
I askt the cauſe, this was a womans reaſon,
Mongſt hearbes are weedes, and thereby are refuſed,
Deceite, as well as truth ſpeakes wordes in ſeaſon,
Falſe ſtones by foiles haue many one abuſed,
I ſight, and then ſhee ſaide my fancie ſmoaked,
I gaz'd, ſhee ſaide my lookes were follies glauncing,
I ſounded deade, ſhee ſaide my loue was choaked,
I ſtarted vp, ſhee ſaide my thoughtes were dauncing,
O ſacred loue if thou haue any Godhead,
Teach other rules to winne a maidenheade.
Well ſong, & wel plaide, ſeldome ſo well amonge ſhepheards, but call me the Cutter of Cotſholde, that lookes as though he onlie knew his leripoope, amorous he is, and vviſe, carying a ſheepes eie in a calfs heade.
Will you 3 queſtions, or 3 commaundments?
Halfe a dozen of eache. My wits worke like new beare, and they will breake my head, vnleſſe it vent at the mouthe.
Sing,
I haue forſworne that ſince cuckow-time, for I heard, one ſing all the ſommer, and in the winter was all balde.
Play on the Lute.
Taylers crafte, a knocke on the knuckles, wil make one faſte a fortnight, my belly and back ſhall not be retainers to my fingers.
What queſtion ſhall I aske?
Any ſo it be of loue.
Are youe amorous?
No, but fantaſticall.
But what is loue?
A ſingle Accidens. In loue there are eight partes. Ioy Hope Truth Cōſtācy all tolerable. Sorrow Anger Ielouſie Diſpaire all intolerable.
Theſe containe all, till you come to the rules, and then in loue, there are three concords. 1 The firſt, betwixt a Bacheler, and a maide, 2 The ſeconde, betwixt a man and his wife, 3 The thirde, betwixt any he and ſhe, that loueth ſtragling.
The foole bleeds, it is time to ſtopp his vaine, for hauing wet his foote, he careth not how deepe he wades. Let vs attēd that, which we moſt expect. the ſtarr, that directs vs hither, vvho hath in Almanacke?
What meane you, a ſtarmonger, the quipper of the firmament, here is one. I euer carrie it, to knowe the hye vvaies, to euerie good tovvne, the faires, and the faire weather.
Let me ſee it. The ſeuenth of September, happines was borne into the world, it may be the eleuenth is ſome wōder. The moone at the ful, tis true, for Cynthia neuer ſhined ſo bright, the twelfth the weather inclined to moiſture & ſhepheards deuiſes to dryenes, the thirteenth, ſommer, goeth from hence, the ſigne in virgo, viuat clariſſimae virgo. The diſeaſes ſhalbe melancholies, ſome proceeding of neceſſitie, ſome of ſuperfluity, many ſhalbe ſtudying how to ſpend what they haue, more, beating their braines to get what they want. Malice ſhalbe more infectious then the peſtilence, and Drones more fauoured then Ants, as for Bees, they ſhal haue but their laboure for their paines, and when their combes be ful, they ſhalbe ſtilde; the warre ſhal be, twixt hemlocke and honie. At foure of the clocke this day, ſhal appeare the worldes wonder that leades England into euery land, and brings all lands into England.
THis is the day, this the houre, this the ſtarre, pardon dread Soueraigne, poore ſhepheards paſtimes, and bolde ſhepheards preſumptions. We call our ſelues Kings and Queenes to make mirth, but when we ſee a King or Queene, we ſtand amazed. The ſunne warmes the earth, yet looſeth no brightnes; but ſheweth more force, & Kings names that fall vpon ſhepheards, looſe no dignity, but breede more feare. Their pictures are drawen in colours, and in braſſe their portraytures engrauen. At cheſts, there are Kings, and Queenes, & they of wood. Shepheards are no more, nor no leſſe, wooddē. In Theaters, artificers haue plaide Emperours, yet the next day forgottē, neither their dueties nor occupations. For our boldenes in borrowing their names, and in not ſeeing your Maieſty for our blindnes, we offer theſe ſhepheards weedes, which, if your Maieſtye vouchſafe at any time to weare, it ſhall bring to our hearts comfort, and happines to our labours.