VOVCHSAFE dread ſoueraigne, after ſo many ſmooth ſpeeches of Muſes, to heare a rough hewen tale of a ſouldier, wee vſe not with wordes, to amplifie our conconceites, and to pleade faith by figures, but by deedes, to ſhew the loyalty of our harts, and to make it good with our liues. I meane not to recount any ſeruice, all proceeding of duety, but to tell your Maieſty, that I am paſt al ſeruice, ſaue only deuotion. My horſe, mine armour, my ſhielde, my ſworde, the riches of a young ſouldier, and an olde ſouldiers reliques, I ſhould here offer to your highneſſe, but my foure boies haue ſtollen them from me, vowing themſelues to armes, and leauing mee to my prayers, fortune giueth ſucceſſe, fidelitye courage, chance cannot blemiſh faith, nor trueth preuēt deſtinye, whateuer happē, this is their reſolution, and my deſire, that their liues maye, be imployed wholy in your ſeruice, and their deathes, bee their vowes ſacrifice. Their deathes, the rumour of which, hath ſo often affrighted the Crowe my wife, that her hart, hath bene as blacke as her feathers. I know not whether it be affection, or fondnes, but the crowe thinketh her owne birds the faireſt, becauſe to her they are deareſt. What ioies we both conceiue, neither cā expreſſe, ſufficeth they be, as your vertues, infinite. And although, nothing be more vnfit to lodge your Maieſtye, then a crowes neſte, yet ſhall it be moſt happy to vs, that it is by your highneſſe, made a Phoenix neſte. Quicolor ater erat, nunc eſt contrarius atro. Vouchſafe this trifle, and with this my heart, the greateſt gift I can offer, and the chiefeſt, that I ought.
PArdon dread Soueraigne, the greatnes of my preſumption, who hauing nothing to ſay, muſt follow ſtil to wonder, but ſaft, ſome newes out of Irelande.
MY deuty humbly remembred. It is ſaide, the winde is vnconſtant, I am gladde it is, otherwiſe had not I heard that, which I moſt wiſhed, and leaſt looked for. The winde blowing ſtifly in the weſte, on the ſuddaine turned eaſterly, by which meanes I receiued letters, that her Maieſtie woulde bee at Rycort, nothing could happen to mee more happy, vnleſſe it were my ſelfe to be thereto doe my duety. But I am a ſtranger in mine owne countrye, and almoſt vnknowen to my beſtfrends, onely remembred by her Maieſtie, whoſe late fauours, haue made me more than fortunate. I ſhould accūot my ten years abſence a flatt baniſhment, were I not honoured in her Maieſties ſeruice, which hath bound all my affections, prentiſes to patience. In all humility, I deſire this Dart to be deliuered, an Iriſh weapon, and this wiſh of an Engliſh hearte, that in whoſe hart faith is not faſtned, a Darte may. I can ſcarce write for ioy, and it is likely, this lacque cannot ſpeak for wondring. If he doe not, this is all that I ſhould ſay, that my life is my dueties bondman, dutie my faiths ſoueraigne.
MY duety remēbred, The enemy of late hath made many braueadoes, euen to the gates of Oſtend, but the ſucceſſe was onely a floriſh. My ſelfe walking on the Rāparts, to ouer ſee the Sentenels, deſcryed a pink, of whome I enquired, where the Court was, hee ſaide hee knew not, but that the 28. of Septēber, her Maieſty would be at Rycort. I was ouer-ioyed, & in making haſte to remē ber my duety, I had almoſt forgot it, for I was ſhipping my ſelfe for England, with this Skipper, but to come without leaue, might be to returne without welcōe. To ſignifie that my hart is there, I moſt humbly entreat, that this Key may be preſēted, the Key of Oſtende, & Oſtend the Key of Flaunders, the wards are made of true harts, trechery canot counterfeit the Key, nor treaſon her ſelfe picke the locke. None ſhal turne it, but whō her Maieſty cōmands, none can. For my ſelfe, I can but wiſh, all happines to her highnes, & any occaſiō, that what my toung deliuers, my bloud may ſeale, the end of my ſeruice, that in her ſeruice, my life may end.
FAire Lady and ſweete Miſtris, I ſeldome write, becauſe I write not well, if I ſpeake, you ſay I chatter, becauſe I ſpeake ſo faſt, & when I am ſilent, you thinke me careleſſe. You ſay loue cannot be in ſoldiers, I ſweare it is, only this the differēce, that we proue it by the ſword, others, by their Sonets theirs inke, blacke for colde, ours bloud, redde for heate. Oftē haue you tolde me, that I know not what loue is, & oftē haue I tolde you, that this it is, that which makes the head ake, and the hart to; the eies ielous, and the eares to, the liuer blacke, & the Splen to, the vaines ſhrinke & the purſe to. Wit is but loues wier drawer, making of a ſhort paſſion an endleſſe perſwaſion, yet no more mettall. You obiect, that I haue many Miſtriſſes, I anſwere, you haue ten times as many ſeruants, and if you ſhould picke a quarrel, why ſhould not I bring my Miſtreſſes into the field againſt your ſeruants? But inconſtancy is a ſouldiers ſcarre, it is true, but the wound came by conſtancie; what a patient vertue is ſtaidnes? like a nail in a dore, ruſty, becauſe neuer remoued, I cannot be ſo ſuperſtitious as theſe nice louers, who make the pax of their miſtris hāds, tis flat popery. I would not purchaſe loue in fee ſimple, a leaſe of two years to me were tedious. I meane not, to haue my tongue ringed at my Miſtris eare like a Iewel, alwaies whiſpering of loue, I am no earewigg, nor can I endure ſtill to gaze on her face, as though my eies were bodkins to ſticke in her haire. Let me haue my loue anſwered, and you ſhall finde me faithfull, in which if you make delaies, I cannot be patient, the winde calls me away, and with the winde, awaie ſhall my affections.
MY duetie to your L. remembred &c. Being readie to take ſhipping, I heard that her Maieſty would honor Ricort, with her preſence, which wrought no ſmal cōtent, but to haue made it ful, I wiſhed I might haue ſeene it. In this place is no choiſe of anie thing, whereby I might ſignifie my dutifull affection, but that which a Souldier maketh his chiefeſt choiſe, a ſword, which moſt humblie I deſire to haue preſented to her highnes. With this proteſtation pourde from my hart, that in her ſeruice, I will ſpende the bloud of my hart. Eloquence & I, am vowde enemies, loialty & I, ſworne brothers, what my words cannot effect, my ſworde ſhall.
MY duetie humbly remembred, the ſame time that I receiued letters that her Maieſty would be at Ricort, the winde ſerued for Britaigne, I was ouer ioied with both, yet ſtoode in a mamering whether I ſhould take the opportunity of the winde, which I long expected or ride poſte to do my duetie, which I moſt deſired, neceſſitye cōtroled affection, that bid me vnleſſe I could kepe the winde in a bagge, to vſe the windes whē they blew, I obaide yet, wiſhing that they would turne for a while, to ſerue my turne, being vnfurniſhed, of al fit preſents. I would haue this my excuſe that cheapſide is not in my Shippe, & therefore haue nothing to offer but my Trunchiō the honour which I receiued of her Maieſtie, by whom I am only to be commaunded, & euer elſe let me be only miſerable and euer.
THat my ſonnes, haue remembred their dueties, it is my harts comfort, that your Maieſtie accepteth thē, their harts heauen. If fortune, & fidelitie had bin twinnes, they might haue beene as rich, as faithfull, but this is the Iubyle of my life, that their faithes, are without ſpot, and your Maieſty I hope, confident, without ſuſpition. Among my ioies, there is one griefe, that my daughter, the Miſtris of a Moole hil, hath ſo much forgottē; that moſt ſhe ſhould remember, duetie. I doubt not her excuſe, becauſe ſhee is a woman, but feare the truth, of it, becauſe it muſt be to her ſoueraigne. For my ſelfe, my crowe, and all our birds, this I promiſe, that they are all; as faithfull in their feathers, as they were in their ſhels.
AT length, though verie late, I am come, from the Ladie of the Moold hill, ſent long ſince, but the paſſage troubleſome, at euerie miles end, a louer, at euery ſentence end a lie, I ſtaide to heare, the concluſions, and found nutbrowne gyrles to be cheapned. But none to be bought, but the amyable. Thus much for my excuſe, now for my Miſtris, who hearing that your Maieſty would enter this cabbine, was aſtoniſhed, with ioie, and doubt, ioie, for ſo great honour done to her father. Doubt, by what meanes ſhee might ſhew her duety to your Maieſty. At the laſt, ſitting vpon the top of a moole hill, ſhe eſpied, a red Dayſie, the faireſt flower, that barren place doth yeeld, which, with all humilitie ſhe preſents to your Maieſtie, it hath no ſweetenes, yet manie vertues, her hart no tongue, but infinite affections, In you ſhe ſaith are all vertues, and towardes you all her affections.