AS by your high Imperiall Maieſty,
I had in charge at my depart for France,
As Procurator to your Excellence,
To marry Princes Margaret for your Grace;
So in the Famous Ancient City, Toures,
In preſence of the Kings of France, and Sicill,
The Dukes of Orleance, Calaber, Britaigne, and Alanſon,
Seuen Earles, twelue Barons, & twenty reuerend Biſhops
I haue perform'd my Taske, and was eſpous'd,
And humbly now vpon my bended knee,
In ſight of England, and her Lordly Peeres,
Deliuer vp my Title in the Queene
To your moſt gracious hands, that are the Subſtance
Of that great Shadow I did repreſent:
The happieſt Gift, that euer Marqueſſe gaue,
The Faireſt Queene, that euer King receiu'd.
Suffolke ariſe. Welcome Queene Margaret,
I can expreſſe no kinder ſigne of Loue
Then this kinde kiſſe: O Lord, that lends me life,
Lend me a heart repleate with thankfulneſſe:
For thou haſt giuen me in this beauteous Face
A world of earthly bleſſings to my ſoule,
If Simpathy of Loue vnite our thoughts.
Great King of England, & my gracious Lord,
The mutuall conference that my minde hath had,
By day, by night; waking, and in my dreames,
In Courtly company, or at my Beades,
With you mine Alder liefeſt Soueraigne,
Makes me the bolder to ſalute my King,
With ruder termes, ſuch as my wit affoords,
And ouer ioy of heart doth miniſter.
Her ſight did rauiſh, but her grace in Speech,
Her words yclad with wiſedomes Maieſty,
Makes me from Wondring, fall to Weeping ioyes,
Such is the Fulneſſe of my hearts content.
Lords, with one cheerefull voice, Welcome my Loue.
Long liue Qu. Margaret, Englands happines.
We thanke you all.
My Lord Protector, ſo it pleaſe your Grace,
Heere are the Articles of contracted peace,
Betweene our Soueraigne, and the French King Charles,
For eighteene moneths concluded by conſent.
Inprimis, It is agreed betweene the French K. Charles, and William de la Pole Marqueſſe of Suffolke, Ambaſſador for Henry King of England, That the ſaid Henry ſhal eſpouſe the Lady Margaret, daughter vnto Reignier King of Naples, Sicillia, and Ieruſalem, and Crowne her Queene of England, ere the thirtieth of May next enſuing.
Item, That the Dutchy of Aniou, and the County of Main, ſhall be releaſed and deliuered to the King her father.
Vnkle, how now?
Pardon me gracious Lord,
Some ſodaine qualme hath ſtrucke me at the heart,
And dim'd mine eyes, that I can reade no further.
Vnckle of Wincheſter, I pray read on.
Item, It is further agreed betweene them, That the Dutcheſſe of Aniou and Maine, ſhall be releaſed and deliuered ouer to the King her Father, and ſhee ſent ouer of the King of Englands owne proper Coſt and Charges, without hauing any Dowry.
They pleaſe vs well. Lord Marques kneel down,
We heere create thee the firſt Duke of Suffolke,
And girt thee with the Sword. Coſin of Yorke,
We heere diſcharge your Grace from being Regent
I' th parts of France, till terme of eighteene Moneths
Be full expyr'd. Thankes Vncle Wincheſter,
Gloſter, Yorke, Buckingham, Somerſet,
Salisburie, and Warwicke.
We thanke you all for this great fauour done,
In entertainment to my Princely Queene.
Come, let vs in, and with all ſpeede prouide
To ſee her Coronation be perform'd.
Braue Peeres of England, Pillars of the State,
To you Duke Humfrey muſt vnload his greefe:
Your greefe, the common greefe of all the Land.
What? did my brother Henry ſpend his youth,
His valour, coine, and people in the warres?
Did he ſo often lodge in open field:
In Winters cold, and Summers parching heate,
To conquer France, his true inheritance?
And did my brother Bedford toyle his wits,
To keepe by policy what Henrie got:
Haue you your ſelues, Somerſet, Buckingham,
Braue Yorke, Salisbury, and victorious Warwicke,
Receiud deepe ſcarres in France and Normandie:
Or hath mine Vnckle Beauford, and my ſelfe,
With all the Learned Counſell of the Realme,
Studied ſo long, ſat in the Councell houſe,
Early and late, debating too and fro
How France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe,
And hath his Highneſſe in his infancie,
Crowned in Paris in deſpight of foes,
And ſhall theſe Labours, and theſe Honours dye?
Shall Henries Conqueſt, Bedfords vigilance,
Your Deeds of Warre, and all our Counſell dye?
O Peeres of England, ſhamefull is this League,
Fatall this Marriage, cancelling your Fame,
Blotting your names from Bookes of memory,
Racing the Charracters of your Renowne,
Defacing Monuments of Conquer'd France,
Vndoing all as all had neuer bin.
Nephew, what meanes this paſſionate diſcourſe?
This preroration with ſuch circumſtance:
For France, 'tis ours; and we will keepe it ſtill.
I Vnckle, we will keepe it, if we can:
But now it is impoſsible we ſhould.
Suffolke, the new made Duke that rules the roſt,
Hath giuen the Dutchy of Aniou and Mayne,
Vnto the poore King Reignier, whoſe large ſtyle
Agrees not with the leanneſſe of his purſe.
Now by the death of him that dyed for all,
Theſe Counties were the Keyes of Normandie:
But wherefore weepes Warwicke, my valiant ſonne?
For greefe that they are paſt recouerie.
For were there hope to conquer them againe,
My ſword ſhould ſhed hot blood, mine eyes no teares.
Aniou and Maine? My ſelfe did win them both:
Thoſe Prouinces, theſe Armes of mine did conquer,
And are the Citties that I got with wounds,
Deliuer'd vp againe with peacefull words?
Mort Dieu.
For Suffolkes Duke, may he be ſuffocate,
That dims the Honor of this Warlike Iſle:
France ſhould haue torne and rent my very hart,
Before I would haue yeelded to this League.
I neuer read but Englands Kings haue had
Large ſummes of Gold, and Dowries with their wiues,
And our King Henry giues away his owne,
To match with her that brings no vantages.
A proper ieſt, and neuer heard before,
That Suffolke ſhould demand a whole Fifteenth,
For Coſts and Charges in tranſporting her:
She ſhould haue ſtaid in France, and ſteru'd in France
Before—
My Lord of Gloſter, now ye grow too hot,
It was the pleaſure of my Lord the King.
My Lord of Wincheſter I know your minde.
'Tis not my ſpeeches that you do miſlike:
But 'tis my preſence that doth trouble ye,
Rancour will out, proud Prelate, in thy face
I ſee thy furie: If I longer ſtay,
We ſhall begin our ancient bickerings:
Lordings farewell, and ſay when I am gone,
I propheſied, France will be loſt ere long.
So, there goes our Protector in a rage:
'Tis knowne to you he is mine enemy:
Nay more, an enemy vnto you all,
And no great friend, I feare me to the King;
Conſider Lords, he is the next of blood,
And heyre apparant to the Engliſh Crowne:
Had Henrie got an Empire by his marriage,
And all the wealthy Kingdomes of the Weſt,
There's reaſon he ſhould be diſpleas'd at it:
Looke to it Lords, let not his ſmoothing words
Bewitch your hearts, be wiſe and circumſpect.
What though the common people fauour him,
Calling him, Humfrey the good Duke of Gloſter,
Clapping their hands, and crying with loud voyce,
Ieſu maintaine your Royall Excellence,
With God preſerue the good Duke Humfrey:
I feare me Lords, for all this flattering gloſſe,
He will be found a dangerous Protector.
Why ſhould he then protect our Soueraigne?
He being of age to gouerne of himſelfe.
Coſin of Somerſet, ioyne you with me,
And altogether with the Duke of Suffolke,
Wee'l quickly hoyſe Duke Humfrey from his ſeat.
This weighty buſineſſe will not brooke delay,
Ile to the Duke of Suffolke preſently.
Coſin of Buckingham, though Humfries pride
And greatneſſe of his place be greefe to vs,
Yet let vs watch the haughtie Cardinall,
His inſolence is more intollerable
Then all the Princes in the Land beſide,
If Gloſter be diſplac'd, hee'l be Protector.
Or thou, or I Somerſet will be Protectors,
Deſpite Duke Humfrey, or the Cardinall.
Pride went before, Ambition followes him.
While theſe do labour for their owne preferment,
Behooues it vs to labor for the Realme.
I neuer ſaw but Humfrey Duke of Gloſter,
Did beare him like a Noble Gentleman:
Oft haue I ſeene the haughty Cardinall.
More like a Souldier then a man o' th' Church,
As ſtout and proud as he were Lord of all,
Sweare like a Ruffian, and demeane himſelfe
Vnlike the Ruler of a Common-weale.
Warwicke my ſonne, the comfort of my age,
Thy deeds, thy plainneſſe, and thy houſe-keeping,
Hath wonne the greateſt fauour of the Commons,
Excepting none but good Duke Humfrey.
And Brother Yorke, thy Acts in Ireland,
In bringing them to ciuill Diſcipline:
Thy late exploits done in the heart of France,
When thou wert Regent for our Soueraigne,
Haue made thee fear'd and honor'd of the people,
Ioyne we together for the publike good,
In what we can, to bridle and ſuppreſſe
The pride of Suffolke, and the Cardinall,
With Somerſets and Buckinghams Ambition,
And as we may, cheriſh Duke Humfries deeds,
While they do tend the profit of the Land.
So God helpe Warwicke, as he loues the Land,
And common profit of his Countrey.
And ſo ſayes Yorke,
For he hath greateſt cauſe.
Then lets make haſt away,
And looke vnto the maine.
Vnto the maine?
Oh Father, Maine is loſt,
That Maine, which by maine force Warwicke did winne,
And would haue kept, ſo long as breath did laſt:
Main-chance father you meant, but I meant Maine,
Which I will win from France, or elſe be ſlaine.
Aniou and Maine are giuen to the French,
Paris is loſt, the ſtate of Normandie
Stands on a tickle point, now they are gone:
Suffolke concluded on the Articles,
The Peeres agreed, and Henry was well pleas'd,
To change two Dukedomes for a Dukes faire daughter.
I cannot blame them all, what is't to them?
'Tis thine they giue away, and not their owne.
Pirates may make cheape penyworths of their pillage,
And purchaſe Friends, and giue to Curtezans,
Still reuelling like Lords till all be gone,
While as the ſilly Owner of the goods
Weepes ouer them, and wrings his hapleſſe hands,
And ſhakes his head, and trembling ſtands aloofe,
While all is ſhar'd, and all is borne away,
Ready to ſterue, and dare not touch his owne.
So Yorke muſt ſit▪ and fret, and bite his tongue,
While his owne Lands are bargain'd for, and ſold:
Me thinkes the Realmes of England, France, & Ireland,
Beare that proportion to my fleſh and blood,
As did the fatall brand Althaea burnt,
Vnto the Princes heart of Calidon:
Aniou and Maine both giuen vnto the French?
Cold newes for me: for I had hope of France,
Euen as I haue of fertile Englands ſoile.
A day will come, when Yorke ſhall claime his owne,
And therefore I will take the Neuils parts,
And make a ſhew of loue to proud Duke Humfrey,
And when I ſpy aduantage, claime the Crowne,
For that's the Golden marke I ſeeke to hit:
Nor ſhall proud Lancaſter vſurpe my right,
Nor hold the Scepter in his childiſh Fiſt,
Nor weare the Diadem vpon his head,
Whoſe Church-like humors fits not for a Crowne.
Then Yorke be ſtill a-while, till time do ſerue:
Watch thou, and wake when others be aſleepe,
To prie into the ſecrets of the State,
Till Henrie ſurfetting in ioyes of loue,
With his new Bride, & Englands deere bought Queen,
And Humfrey with the Peeres be falne at iarres:
Then will I raiſe aloft the Milke-white-Roſe,
With whoſe ſweet ſmell the Ayre ſhall be perfum'd,
And in in my Standard beare the Armes of Yorke,
To grapple with the houſe of Lancaſter,
And force perforce Ile make him yeeld the Crowne,
Whoſe bookiſh Rule, hath pull'd faire England downe.
Why droopes my Lord like ouer-ripen'd Corn,
Hanging the head at Ceres plenteous load?
Why doth the Great Duke Humfrey knit his browes,
As frowning at the Fauours of the world?
Why are thine eyes fixt to the ſullen earth,
Gazing on that which ſeemes to dimme thy ſight?
What ſeeſt thou there? King Henries Diadem,
Inchac'd with all the Honors of the world?
If ſo, Gaze on, and grouell on thy face,
Vntill thy head be circled with the ſame.
Put forth thy hand, reach at the glorious Gold.
What, is't too ſhort? Ile lengthen it with mine,
And hauing both together heau'd it vp,
Wee'l both together lift our heads to heauen,
And neuer more abaſe our ſight ſo low,
As to vouchſafe one glance vnto the ground.
O Nell, ſweet Nell, if thou doſt loue thy Lord,
Baniſh the Canker of ambitious thoughts:
And may that thought, when I imagine ill
Againſt my King and Nephew, vertuous Henry,
Be my laſt breathing in this mortall world.
My troublous dreames this night, doth make me ſad.
What dream'd my Lord, tell me, and Ile requite it
With ſweet rehearſall of my mornings dreame?
Me thought this ſtaffe mine Office-badge in Court
Was broke in twaine: by whom, I haue forgot,
But as I thinke, it was by 'th Cardinall,
And on the peeces of the broken Wand
Were plac'd the heads of Edmond Duke of Somerſet,
And William de la Pole firſt Duke of Suffolke.
This was my dreame, what it doth bode God knowes.
Tut, this was nothing but an argument,
That he that breakes a ſticke of Gloſters groue,
Shall looſe his head for his preſumption.
But liſt to me my Humfrey, my ſweete Duke:
Me thought I ſate in Seate of Maieſty,
In the Cathedrall Church of Weſtminſter,
And in that Chaire where Kings & Queens wer crownd,
Where Henrie and Dame Margaret kneel'd to me,
And on my head did ſet the Diadem.
Nay Elinor, then muſt I chide outright:
Preſumptuous Dame, ill-nurter'd Elianor,
Art thou not ſecond Woman in the Realme?
And the Protectors wife belou'd of him?
Haſt thou not worldly pleaſure at command,
Aboue the reach or compaſſe of thy thought?
And wilt thou ſtill be hammering Treachery,
To tumble downe thy husband, and thy ſelfe,
From top of Honor, to Diſgraces feete?
Away from me, and let me heare no more.
What, what, my Lord? Are you ſo chollericke
With Elianor, for telling but her dreame?
Next time Ile keepe my dreames vnto my ſelfe,
And not be check'd.
Nay be not angry, I am pleas'd againe.
My Lord Protector, 'tis his Highnes pleaſure,
You do prepare to ride vnto S. Albons,
Where as the King and Queene do meane to Hawke.
I go. Come Nel thou wilt ride with vs?
Yes my good Lord, Ile follow preſently.
Follow I muſt, I cannot go before,
While Gloſter beares this baſe and humble minde.
Were I a Man, a Duke, and next of blood,
I would remoue theſe tedious ſtumbling blockes,
And ſmooth my way vpon their headleſſe neckes.
And being a woman, I will not be ſlacke
To play my part in Fortunes Pageant.
Where are you there? Sir Iohn; nay feare not man,
We are alone, here's none but thee, & I.
Ieſus preſerue your Royall Maieſty.
What ſaiſt thou? Maieſty: I am but Grace.
But by the grace of God, and Humes aduice,
Your Graces Title ſhall be multiplied.
What ſaiſt thou man? Haſt thou as yet confer'd
With Margerie Iordane the cunning Witch,
With Roger Bollingbrooke the Coniuter?
And will they vndertake to do me good?
This they haue promiſed to ſhew your Highnes
A Spirit rais'd from depth of vnder ground,
That ſhall make anſwere to ſuch Queſtions,
As by your Grace ſhall be propounded him.
It is enough, Ile thinke vpon the Queſtions:
When from Saint Albones we doe make returne,
Wee'le ſee theſe things effected to the full.
Here Hume, take this reward, make merry man
With thy Confederates in this weightie cauſe.
Hume muſt make merry with the Ducheſſe Gold:
Marry and ſhall: but how now, Sir Iohn Hume?
Seale vp your Lips, and giue no words but Mum,
The buſineſſe asketh ſilent ſecrecie.
Dame Elianor giues Gold, to bring the Witch:
Gold cannot come amiſſe, were ſhe a Deuill.
Yet haue I Gold flyes from another Coaſt:
I dare not ſay, from the rich Cardinall,
And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolke;
Yet I doe finde it ſo: for to be plaine,
They (knowing Dame Elianors aſpiring humor)
Haue hyred me to vnder-mine the Ducheſſe,
And buzze theſe Coniurations in her brayne.
They ſay, A craftie Knaue do's need no Broker,
Yet am I Suffolke and the Cardinalls Broker.
Hume, if you take not heed, you ſhall goe neere
To call them both a payre of craftie Knaues.
Well, ſo it ſtands: and thus I feare at laſt,
Humes Knauerie will be the Ducheſſe Wracke,
And her Attainture, will be Humphreyes fall:
Sort how it will, I ſhall haue Gold for all.
My Maſters, let's ſtand cloſe, my Lord Protector will come this way by and by, and then wee may deliuer our Supplications in the Quill.
Marry the Lord protect him, for hee's a good man, Ieſu bleſſe him.
Here a comes me thinkes, and the Queene with him: Ile be the firſt ſure.
Come backe foole, this is the Duke of Suffolk, and not my Lord Protector.
How now fellow: would'ſt any thing with me?
I pray my Lord pardon me, I tooke ye for my Lord Protector.
To my Lord Protector? Are your Supplications to his Lordſhip? Let me ſee them: what is thine?
Mine is, and't pleaſe your Grace, againſt Iohn Goodman, my Lord Cardinals Man, for keeping my Houſe, and Lands, and Wife and all, from me.
Thy Wife too? that's ſome Wrong indeede. What's yours? What's heere? Againſt the Duke of Suffolke, for encloſing the Commons of Melforde. How now, Sir Knaue?
Alas Sir, I am but a poore Petitioner of our whole Towneſhip.
Againſt my Maſter Thomas Horner, for ſaying, That the Duke of Yorke was rightfull Heire to the Crowne.
What ſay'ſt thou? Did the Duke of Yorke ſay, hee was rightfull Heire to the Crowne?
That my Miſtreſſe was? No forſooth: my Maſter ſaid, That he was, and that the King was an Vſurper.
Who is there?
Take this fellow in, and ſend for his Maſter with a Purſeuant preſently: wee'le heare more of your matter before the King.
And as for you that loue to be protected
Vnder the Wings of our Protectors Grace,
Begin your Suites anew, and ſue to him.
Away, baſe Cullions: Suffolke let them goe.
Come, let's be gone.
My Lord of Suffolke, ſay, is this the guiſe?
Is this the Faſhions in the Court of England?
Is this the Gouernment of Britaines Ile?
And this the Royaltie of Albions King?
What, ſhall King Henry be a Pupill ſtill,
Vnder the ſurly Gloſters Gouernance?
Am I a Queene in Title and in Stile,
And muſt be made a Subiect to a Duke?
I tell thee Poole, when in the Citie Tours
Thou ran'ſt atilt in honor of my Loue,
And ſtol'ſt away the Ladies hearts of France;
I thought King Henry had reſembled thee,
In Courage, Courtſhip, and Proportion:
But all his minde is bent to Holineſſe,
To number Aue-Maries on his Beades:
His Champions, are the Prophets and Apoſtles,
His Weapons, holy Sawes of ſacred Writ,
His Studie is his Tilt-yard, and his Loues
Are brazen Images of Canonized Saints.
I would the Colledge of the Cardinalls
Would chuſe him Pope, and carry him to Rome,
And ſet the Triple Crowne vpon his Head;
That were a State fit for his Holineſſe.
Madame be patient: as I was cauſe
Your Highneſſe came to England, ſo will I
In England worke your Graces full content.
Beſide the haughtie Protector, haue we Beauford
The imperious Churchman; Somerſet, Buckingham,
And grumbling Yorke: and not the leaſt of theſe,
But can doe more in England then the King.
And he of theſe, that can doe moſt of all,
Cannot doe more in England then the Neuils:
Salisbury and Warwick are no ſimple Peeres.
Not all theſe Lords do vex me halfe ſo much,
As that prowd Dame, the Lord Protectors Wife:
She ſweepes it through the Court with troups of Ladies,
More like an Empreſſe, then Duke Humphreyes Wife:
Strangers in Court, doe take her for the Queene:
She beares a Dukes Reuenewes on her backe,
And in her heart ſhe ſcornes our Pouertie:
Shall I not liue to be aueng'd on her?
Contemptuous baſe-borne Callot as ſhe is,
She vaunted 'mongſt her Minions t' other day,
The very trayne of her worſt wearing Gowne,
Was better worth then all my Fathers Lands,
Till Suffolke gaue two Dukedomes for his Daughter.
Madame, my ſelfe haue lym'd a Buſh for her,
And plac't a Quier of ſuch enticing Birds,
That ſhe will light to liſten to the Layes,
And neuer mount to trouble you againe.
So let her reſt: and Madame liſt to me,
For I am bold to counſaile you in this;
Although we fancie not the Cardinall,
Yet muſt we ioyne with him and with the Lords,
Till we haue brought Duke Humphrey in diſgrace.
As for the Duke of Yorke, this late Complaint
Will make but little for his benefit:
So one by one wee'le weed them all at laſt,
And you your ſelfe ſhall ſteere the happy Helme.
For my part, Noble Lords, I care not which,
Or Somerſet, or Yorke, all's one to me.
If Yorke haue ill demean'd himſelfe in France,
Then let him be denay'd the Regent-ſhip.
If Somerſet be vnworthy of the Place,
Let Yorke be Regent, I will yeeld to him.
Whether your Grace be worthy, yea or no,
Diſpute not that, Yorke is the worthyer.
Ambitious Warwicke, let thy betters ſpeake.
The Cardinall's not my better in the field.
All in this preſence are thy betters, Warwicke.
Warwicke may liue to be the beſt of all.
Peace Sonne, and ſhew ſome reaſon Buckingham
Why Somerſet ſhould be preferr'd in this?
Becauſe the King forſooth will haue it ſo.
Madame, the King is old enough himſelfe
To giue his Cenſure: Theſe are no Womens matters.
If he be old enough, what needs your Grace
To be Protector of his Excellence?
Madame, I am Protector of the Realme,
And at his pleaſure will reſigne my Place.
Reſigne it then, and leaue thine inſolence.
Since thou wert King; as who is King, but thou?
The Common-wealth hath dayly run to wrack,
The Dolphin hath preuayl'd beyond the Seas,
And all the Peeres and Nobles of the Realme
Haue beene as Bond-men to thy Soueraigntie.
The Commons haſt thou rackt, the Clergies Bags
Are lanke and leane with thy Extortions.
Thy ſumptuous Buildings, and thy Wiues Attyre
Haue coſt a maſſe of publique Treaſurie.
Thy Crueltie in execution
Vpon Offendors, hath exceeded Law,
And left thee to the mercy of the Law.
Thy ſale of Offices and Townes in France,
If they were knowne, as the ſuſpect is great,
Would make thee quickly hop without thy Head.
Giue me my Fanne: what, Mynion, can ye not?
I cry you mercy, Madame: was it you?
Was't I? yea, I it was, prowd French-woman:
Could I come neere your Beautie with my Nayles,
I could ſet my ten Commandements in your face.
Sweet Aunt be quiet, 'twas againſt her will.
Againſt her will, good King? looke to't in time,
Shee'le hamper thee and dandle thee like a Baby:
Though in this place moſt Maſter weare no Breeches,
She ſhall not ſtrike, Dame Elianor vnreueng'd.
Lord Cardinall, I will follow Elianor,
And liſten after Humfrey, how he proceedes:
Shee's tickled now, her Fume needs no ſpurres,
Shee'le gallop farre enough to her deſtruction.
Now Lords, my Choller being ouer-blowne,
With walking once about the Quadrangle,
I come to talke of Common-wealth Affayres.
As for your ſpightfull falſe Obiections,
Proue them, and I lye open to the Law:
But God in mercie ſo deale with my Soule,
As I in dutie loue my King and Countrey.
But to the matter that we haue in hand:
I ſay, my Soueraigne, Yorke is meeteſt man
To be your Regent in the Realme of France.
Before we make election, giue me leaue
To ſhew ſome reaſon, of no little force,
That Yorke is moſt vnmeet of any man.
Ile tell thee, Suffolke, why I am vnmeet.
Firſt, for I cannot flatter thee in Pride:
Next, if I be appointed for the Place,
My Lord of Somerſet will keepe me here,
Without Diſcharge, Money, or Furniture,
Till France be wonne into the Dolphins hands:
Laſt time I danc't attendance on his will,
Till Paris was beſieg'd, famiſht, and loſt.
That can I witneſſe, and a fouler fact
Did neuer Traytor in the Land commit.
Peace head-ſtrong Warwicke.
Image of Pride, why ſhould I hold my peace?
Becauſe here is a man accuſed of Treaſon,
Pray God the Duke of Yorke excuſe himſelfe.
Doth any one accuſe Yorke for a Traytor?
What mean'ſt thou, Suffolke? tell me, what are theſe?
Pleaſe it your Maieſtie, this is the man
That doth accuſe his Maſter of High Treaſon;
His words were theſe: That Richard, Duke of Yorke,
Was rightfull Heire vnto the Engliſh Crowne,
And that your Maieſtie was an Vſurper.
Say man, were theſe thy words?
And't ſhall pleaſe your Maieſtie, I neuer ſayd nor thought any ſuch matter: God is my witneſſe, I am falſely accus'd by the Villaine.
By theſe tenne bones, my Lords, hee did ſpeake them to me in the Garret one Night, as wee were ſcowring my Lord of Yorkes Armor.
Baſe Dunghill Villaine, and Mechanicall,
Ile haue thy Head for this thy Traytors ſpeech:
I doe beſeech your Royall Maieſtie,
Let him haue all the rigor of the Law.
Alas, my Lord, hang me if euer I ſpake the words: my accuſer is my Prentice, and when I did correct him for his fault the other day, he did vow vpon his knees he would be euen with me: I haue good witneſſe of this; therefore I beſeech your Maieſtie, doe not caſt away an honeſt man for a Villaines accuſation.
Vnckle, what ſhall we ſay to this in law?
This doome, my Lord, if I may iudge:
Let Somerſet be Regent o're the French,
Becauſe in Yorke this breedes ſuſpition;
And let theſe haue a day appointed them
For ſingle Combat, in conuenient place,
For he hath witneſſe of his ſeruants malice:
This is the Law, and this Duke Humfreyes doome.
I humbly thanke your Royall Maieſtie.
And I accept the Combat willingly.
Alas, my Lord, I cannot fight; for Gods ſake pitty my caſe: the ſpight of man preuayleth againſt me. O Lord haue mercy vpon me, I ſhall neuer be able to fight a blow: O Lord my heart.
Sirrha, or you muſt fight, or elſe be hang'd.
Away with them to Priſon: and the day of Combat, ſhall be the laſt of the next moneth. Come Somerſet, wee'le ſee thee ſent away.
Come my Maſters, the Ducheſſe I tell you expects performance of your promiſes.
Maſter Hume, we are therefore prouided: will her Ladyſhip behold and heare our Exorciſmes?
I, what elſe? feare you not her courage.
I haue heard her reported to be a Woman of an inuincible ſpirit: but it ſhall be conuenient, Maſter Hume, that you be by her aloft, while wee be buſie below; and ſo I pray you goe in Gods Name, and leaue vs.
Mother Iordan, be you proſtrate, and grouell on the Earth; Iohn Southwell reade you, and let vs to our worke.
Well ſaid my Maſters, and welcome all: To this geere, the ſooner the better.
Patience, good Lady, Wizards know their times:
Deepe Night, darke Night, the ſilent of the Night,
The time of Night when Troy was ſet on fire,
The time when Screech-owles cry, and Bandogs howle,
And Spirits walke, and Ghoſts breake vp their Graues;
That time beſt fits the worke we haue in hand.
Madame, ſit you, and feare not: whom wee rayſe,
Wee will make faſt within a hallow'd Verge.
Ad ſum.
Aſmath, by the eternall God,
Whoſe name and power thou trembleſt at,
Anſwere that I ſhall aske: for till thou ſpeake,
Thou ſhalt not paſſe from hence.
Aske what thou wilt; that I had ſayd, and done.
Firſt of the King: What ſhall of him become?
The Duke yet liues, that Henry ſhall depoſe:
But him out-liue, and dye a violent death.
What fates await the Duke of Suffolke?
By Water ſhall he dye, and take his end.
What ſhall befall the Duke of Somerſet?
Let him ſhun Caſtles,
Safer ſhall he be vpon the ſandie Plaines,
Then where Caſtles mounted ſtand.
Haue done, for more I hardly can endure.
Diſcend to Darkneſſe, and the burning Lake:
Falſe Fiend auoide.
Lay hands vpon theſe Traytors, and their traſh:
Beldam I thinke we watcht you at an ynch.
What Madame, are you there? the King & Commonweale
Are deepely indebted for this peece of paines;
My Lord Protector will, I doubt it not,
See you well guerdon'd for theſe good deſerts.
Not halfe ſo bad as thine to Englands King,
Iniurious Duke, that threateſt where's no cauſe.
True Madame, none at all: what call you this?
Away with them, let them be clapt vp cloſe,
And kept aſunder: you Madame ſhall with vs.
Stafford take her to thee.
Wee'le ſee your Trinkets here all forth-comming.
All away.
Lord Buckingham, me thinks you watcht her well:
A pretty Plot, well choſen to build vpon.
Now pray my Lord, let's ſee the Deuils Writ.
What haue we here?
The Duke yet liues, that Henry ſhall depoſe:
But him out-line, and dye a violent death.
Why this is iuſt Aio Aeacida Romanos vincere poſſo.
Well, to the reſt:
Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of Suffolke?
By Water ſhall he dye, and take his end.
What ſhall betide the Duke of Somerſet?
Let him ſhunne Castles,
Safer ſhall he be vpon the ſandie Plaines,
Then where Caſtles mounted ſtand.
Come, come, my Lords,
Theſe Oracles are hardly attain'd,
And hardly vnderſtood.
The King is now in progreſſe towards Saint Albones,
With him, the Husband of this louely Lady:
Thither goes theſe Newes,
As faſt as Horſe can carry them:
A ſorry Breakfaſt for my Lord Protector.
Your Grace ſhal giue me leaue, my Lord of York,
To be the Poſte, in hope of his reward.
At your pleaſure, my good Lord.
Who's within there, hoe?
Inuite my Lords of Salisbury and Warwick
To ſuppe with me to morrow Night. Away.
Beleeue me Lords, for flying at the Brooke,
I ſaw not better ſport theſe ſeuen yeeres day:
Yet by your leaue, the Winde was very high,
And ten to one, old Ioane had not gone out.
But what a point, my Lord, your Faulcon made,
And what a pytch ſhe flew aboue the reſt:
To ſee how God in all his Creatures workes,
Yea Man and Birds are fayne of climbing high.
No maruell, and it like your Maieſtie,
My Lord Protectors Hawkes doe towre ſo well,
They know their Maſter loues to be aloft,
And beares his thoughts aboue his Faulcons Pitch.
My Lord, 'tis but a baſe ignoble minde,
That mounts no higher then a Bird can ſore:
I thought as much, hee would be aboue the Clouds.
I my Lord Cardinall, how thinke you by that?
Were it not good your Grace could flye to Heauen?
The Treaſurie of euerlaſting Ioy.
Thy Heauen is on Earth, thine Eyes & Thoughts
Beat on a Crowne, the Treaſure of thy Heart,
Pernitious Protector, dangerous Peere,
That ſmooth'ſt it ſo with King and Common-weale.
What, Cardinall?
Is your Prieſt-hood growne peremptorie?
Tantaene animis Coeleſtibus irae, Church-men ſo hot?
Good Vnckle hide ſuch mallice:
With ſuch Holyneſſe can you doe it?
No mallice Sir, no more then well becomes
So good a Quarrell, and ſo bad a Peere.
As who, my Lord?
Why, as you, my Lord,
An't like your Lordly Lords Protectorſhip.
Why Suffolke, England knowes thine inſolence.
And thy Ambition, Gloſter.
I prythee peace, good Queene,
And whet not on theſe furious Peeres,
For bl the Peace-makers on Earth.
me be bleſſed for the Peace I make
Againſt this prowd Protector with my Sword.
Faith holy Vnckle, would't were come to that.
Marry, when thou dar'ſt.
Make vp no factious numbers for the matter,
In thine owne perſon anſwere thy abuſe.
I, where thou dar'ſt not peepe:
And if thou dar'ſt, this Euening,
On the Eaſt ſide of the Groue.
How now, my Lords?
Beleeue me, Couſin Gloſter,
Had not your man put vp the Fowle ſo ſuddenly,
We had had more ſport.
Come with thy two-hand Sword.
True Vnckle, are ye aduis'd?
The Eaſt ſide of the Groue:
Cardinall, I am with you.
Why how now, Vnckle Gloſter?
Talking of Hawking; nothing elſe, my Lord.
Now by Gods Mother, Prieſt,
Ile ſhaue your Crowne for this,
Or all my Fence ſhall fayle.
Medice tepſum, Protector ſee to't well, protect your ſelfe.
The Windes grow high,
So doe your Stomacks, Lords:
How irkeſome is this Muſick to my heart?
When ſuch Strings iarre, what hope of Harmony?
I pray my Lords let me compound this ſtrife.
What meanes this noyſe?
Fellow, what Miracle do'ſt thou proclayme?
A Miracle, a Miracle.
Come to the King, and tell him what Miracle.
Forſooth, a blinde man at Saint Albones Shrine,
Within this halfe houre hath receiu'd his ſight,
A man that ne're ſaw in his life before.
Now God be prays'd, that to beleeuing Soules
Giues Light in Darkneſſe, Comfort in Deſpaire.
Here comes the Towneſ-men, on Proceſſion,
To preſent your Highneſſe with the man.
Great is his comfort in this Earthly Vale,
Although by his ſight his ſinne be multiplyed.
Stand by, my Maſters; bring him neere the King,
His Highneſſe pleaſure is to talke with him.
Good-fellow, tell vs here the circumſtance,
That we for thee may glorifie the Lord.
What, haſt thou beene long blinde, and now reſtor'd?
Borne blinde, and't pleaſe your Grace.
I indeede was he.
What Woman is this?
His Wife, and't like your Worſhip.
Hadſt thou been his Mother, thou could'ſt haue better told.
Where wert thou borne?
At Barwick in the North, and't like your Grace.
Poore Soule,
Gods goodneſſe hath beene great to thee:
Let neuer Day nor Night vnhallowed paſſe,
But ſtill remember what the Lord hath done.
Tell me, good-fellow,
Cam'ſt thou here by Chance, or of Deuotion,
To this holy Shrine?
God knowes of pure Deuotion,
Being call'd a hundred times, and oftner,
In my ſleepe, by good Saint Albon:
Who ſaid; Symon, come; come offer at my Shrine,
And I will helpe thee.
Moſt true, forſooth:
And many time and oft my ſelfe haue heard a Voyce,
To call him ſo.
What, art thou lame?
I, God Almightie helpe me.
How cam'ſt thou ſo?
A fall off of a Tree.
A Plum-tree, Maſter.
How long haſt thou beene blinde?
O borne ſo, Maſter.
What, and would'ſt climbe a Tree?
But that in all my life, when I was a youth.
Too true, and bought his climbing very deare.
'Maſſe, thou lou'dſt Plummes well, that would'ſt venture ſo.
Alas, good Maſter, my Wife deſired ſome Damſons, and made me climbe, with danger of my Life.
A ſubtill Knaue, but yet it ſhall not ſerue:
Let me ſee thine Eyes; winck now, now open them,
In my opinion, yet thou ſeeſt not well.
Yes Maſter, cleare as day, I thanke God and Saint Albones.
Say'ſt thou me ſo: what Colour is this Cloake of?
Red Maſter, Red as Blood.
Why that's well ſaid: What Colour is my Gowne of?
Black forſooth, Coale-Black, as Iet.
Why then, thou know'ſt what Colour Iet is of?
And yet I thinke, Iet did he neuer ſee.
But Cloakes and Gownes, before this day, a many.
Neuer before this day, in all his life.
Tell me Sirrha, what's my Name?
Alas Maſter, I know not.
What's his Name?
I know not.
Nor his?
No indeede, Maſter.
What's thine owne Name?
Saunder Simpcoxe, and if it pleaſe you, Maſter.
Then Saunder, ſit there,
The lying'ſt Knaue in Chriſtendome.
If thou hadſt beene borne blinde,
Thou might'ſt as well haue knowne all our Names,
As thus to name the ſeuerall Colours we doe weare.
Sight may diſtinguiſh of Colours:
But ſuddenly to nominate them all,
It is impoſſible.
My Lords, Saint Albone here hath done a Miracle:
And would ye not thinke it, Cunning to be great,
That could reſtore this Cripple to his Legges againe.
O Maſter, that you could?
My Maſters of Saint Albones,
Haue you not Beadles in your Towne,
And Things call'd Whippes?
Yes, my Lord, if it pleaſe your Grace.
Then ſend for one preſently.
Sirrha, goe fetch the Beadle hither ſtraight.
Now fetch me a Stoole hither by and by.
Now Sirrha, if you meane to ſaue your ſelfe from Whipping, leape me ouer this Stoole, and runne away.
Alas Maſter, I am not able to ſtand alone:
You goe about to torture me in vaine.
Well Sir, we muſt haue you finde your Legges.
Sirrha Beadle, whippe him till he leape ouer that ſame Stoole.
I will, my Lord.
Come on Sirrha, off with your Doublet, quickly.
Alas Maſter, what ſhall I doe? I am not able to ſtand.
O God, ſeeſt thou this, and beareſt ſo long?
It made me laugh, to ſee the Villaine runne.
Follow the Knaue, and take this Drab away.
Alas Sir, we did it for pure need.
Let thē be whipt through euery Market Towne,
Till they come to Barwick, from whence they came.
Duke Humfrey ha's done a Miracle to day.
True: made the Lame to leape and flye away.
But you haue done more Miracles then I:
You made in a day, my Lord, whole Townes to flye.
What Tidings with our Couſin Buckingham?
Such as my heart doth tremble to vnfold:
A ſort of naughtie perſons, lewdly bent,
Vnder the Countenance and Confederacie
Of Lady Elianor, the Protectors Wife,
The Ring-leader and Head of all this Rout,
Haue practis'd dangerouſly againſt your State,
Dealing with Witches and with Coniurers,
Whom we haue apprehended in the Fact,
Rayſing vp wicked Spirits from vnder ground,
Demanding of King Henries Life and Death,
And other of your Highneſſe Priuie Councell,
As more at large your Grace ſhall vnderſtand.
And ſo my Lord Protector, by this meanes
Your Lady is forth-comming, yet at London.
This Newes I thinke hath turn'd your Weapons edge;
'Tis like, my Lord, you will not keepe your houre.
Ambitious Church-man, leaue to afflict my heart:
Sorrow and griefe haue vanquiſht all my powers;
And vanquiſht as I am, I yeeld to thee,
Or to the meaneſt Groome.
O God, what miſchiefes work the wicked ones?
Heaping confuſion on their owne heads thereby.
Gloſter, ſee here the Taincture of thy Neſt,
And looke thy ſelfe be faultleſſe, thou wert beſt.
Madame, for my ſelfe, to Heauen I doe appeaſe,
How I haue lou'd my King, and Common-weale:
And for my Wife, I know not how it ſtands,
Sorry I am to heare what I haue heard.
Noble ſhee is: but if ſhee haue forgot
Honor and Vertue, and conuers't with ſuch,
As like to Pytch, defile Nobilitie;
I baniſh her my Bed, and Companie,
And giue her as a Prey to Law and Shame,
That hath dis-honored Gloſters honeſt Name.
Well, for this Night we will repoſe vs here:
To morrow toward London, back againe,
To looke into this Buſineſſe thorowly,
And call theſe foule Offendors to their Anſweres;
And poyſe the Cauſe in Iuſtice equall Scales,
Whoſe Beame ſtands ſure, whoſe rightful cauſe preuailes.
Now my good Lords of Salisbury & Warwick,
Our ſimple Supper ended, giue me leaue,
In this cloſe Walke, to ſatisfie my ſelfe,
In crauing your opinion of my Title,
Which is infallible, to Englands Crowne.
My Lord, I long to heare it at full.
Sweet Yorke begin: and if thy clayme be good,
The Neuills are thy Subiects to command.
Then thus:
Edward the third, my Lords, had ſeuen Sonnes:
The firſt, Edward the Black-Prince, Prince of Wales;
The ſecond, William of Hatfield; and the third,
Lionel, Duke of Clarence; next to whom,
Was Iohn of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaſter;
The fift, was Edmond Langley, Duke of Yorke;
The ſixt, was Thomas of Woodſtock, Duke of Gloſter;
William of Windſor was the ſeuenth, and laſt.
Edward the Black-Prince dyed before his Father,
And left behinde him Richard, his onely Sonne,
Who after Edward the third's death, raign'd as King,
Till Henry Bullingbrooke, Duke of Lancaſter,
The eldeſt Sonne and Heire of Iohn of Gaunt,
Crown'd by the Name of Henry the fourth,
Seiz'd on the Realme, depos'd the rightfull King,
Sent his poore Queene to France, from whence ſhe came,
And him to Pumfret; where, as all you know,
Harmeleſſe Richard was murthered traiterouſly.
Father, the Duke hath told the truth;
Thus got the Houſe of Lancaster the Crowne.
Which now they hold by force, and not by right:
For Richard, the firſt Sonnes Heire, being dead,
The Iſſue of the next Sonne ſhould haue reign'd.
But William of Hatfield dyed without an Heire.
The third Sonne Duke of Clarence,
From whoſe Line I clayme the Crowne,
Had Iſſue Phillip, a Daughter,
Who marryed Edmond Mortimer, Earle of March:
Edmond had Iſſue, Roger, Earle of March;
Roger had Iſſue, Edmond, Anne, and Elianor.
This Edmond, in the Reigne of Bullingbrooke,
As I haue read, layd clayme vnto the Crowne,
And but for Owen Glendour, had beene King;
Who kept him in Captiuitie, till he dyed.
But, to the reſt.
His eldeſt Siſter, Anne,
My Mother, being Heire vnto the Crowne,
Marryed Richard, Earle of Cambridge,
Who was to Edmond Langley,
Edward the thirds fift Sonnes Sonne;
By her I clayme the Kingdome:
She was Heire to Roger, Earle of March,
Who was the Sonne of Edmond Mortimer,
Who marryed Phillip, ſole Daughter
Vnto Lionel, Duke of Clarence.
So, if the Iſſue of the elder Sonne
Succeed before the younger, I am King.
What plaine proceedings is more plain then this?
Henry doth clayme the Crowne from Iohn of Gaunt,
The fourth Sonne, Yorke claymes it from the third:
Till Lionels Iſſue fayles, his ſhould not reigne.
It fayles not yet, but flouriſhes in thee,
And in thy Sonnes, faire ſlippes of ſuch a Stock.
Then Father Salisbury, kneele we together,
And in this priuate Plot be we the firſt,
That ſhall ſalute our rightfull Soueraigne
With honor of his Birth-right to the Crowne.
Long liue our Soueraigne Richard, Englands King.
We thanke you Lords:
But I am not your King, till I be Crown'd,
And that my Sword be ſtayn'd
With heart-blood of the Houſe of Lancaſter:
And that's not ſuddenly to be perform'd,
But with aduice and ſilent ſecrecie.
Doe you as I doe in theſe dangerous dayes,
Winke at the Duke of Saffolkes inſolence,
At Beaufords Pride, at Somerſets Ambition,
At Buckingham, and all the Crew of them,
Till they haue ſnar'd the Shepheard of the Flock,
That vertuous Prince, the good Duke Humfrey:
'Tis that they ſeeke; and they, in ſeeking that,
Shall finde their deaths, if Yorke an prophecie.
My Lord, breake we off; we know your minde at full.
My heart aſſures me, that the Earle of Warwick
Shall one day make the Duke of Yorke a King.
And Neuill, this I doe aſſure my ſelfe,
Richard ſhall liue to make the Earle of Warwick
The greateſt man in England, but the King.
Stand forth Dame Elianor Cobham, Glosters Wife:
In ſight of God, and vs, your guilt is great,
Receiue the Sentence of the Law for ſinne,
Such as by Gods Booke are adiudg'd to death.
You foure from hence to Priſon, back againe;
From thence, vnto the place of Execution:
The Witch in Smithfield ſhall be burnt to aſhes,
And you three ſhall be ſtrangled on the Gallowes.
You Madame, for you are more Nobly-borne,
Deſpoyled of your Honor in your Life,
Shall, after three dayes open Penance done,
Liue in your Countrey here, in Baniſhment,
With Sir Iohn Stanly, in the Ile of Man.
Welcome is Baniſhment, welcome were my Death.
Elianor, the Law thou ſeeſt hath iudged thee,
I cannot iuſtifie whom the Law condemnes:
Mine eyes are full of teares, my heart of griefe.
Ah Humfrey, this diſhonor in thine age,
Will bring thy head with ſorrow to the ground.
I beſeech your Maieſtie giue me leaue to goe;
Sorrow would ſollace, and mine Age would eaſe.
Stay Humfrey, Duke of Gloſter,
Ere thou goe, giue vp thy Staffe,
Henry will to himſelfe Protector be,
And God ſhall be my hope, my ſtay, my guide,
And Lanthorne to my feete:
And goe in peace, Humfrey, no leſſe belou'd,
Then when thou wert Protector to thy King.
I ſee no reaſon, why a King of yeeres
Should be to be protected like a Child,
God and King Henry gouerne Englands Realme:
Giue vp your Staffe, Sir, and the King his Realme.
My Staffe? Here, Noble Henry, is my Staffe:
As willingly doe I the ſame reſigne,
As ere thy Father Henry made it mine;
And euen as willingly at thy feete I leaue it,
As others would ambitiouſly receiue it.
Farewell good King: when I am dead, and gone,
May honorable Peace attend thy Throne.
Why now is Henry King, and Margaret Queen,
And Humfrey, Duke of Gloſter, ſcarce himſelfe,
That beares ſo ſhrewd a mayme: two Pulls at once;
His Lady baniſht, and a Limbe lopt off.
This Staffe of Honor raught, there let it ſtand,
Where it beſt fits to be, in Henries hand.
Thus droupes this loftie Pyne, & hangs his ſprayes,
Thus Elianors Pride dyes in her youngeſt dayes.
Lords, let him goe. Pleaſe it your Maieſtie,
This is the day appointed for the Combat,
And ready are the Appellant and Defendant,
The Armorer and his Man, to enter the Liſts,
So pleaſe your Highneſſe to behold the fight.
I, good my Lord: for purpoſely therefore
Left I the Court, to ſee this Quarrell try'de.
A Gods Name ſee the Lyfts and all things fit,
Here let them end it, and God defend the right.
I neuer ſaw a fellow worſe beſtead,
Or more afraid to fight, then is the Appellant,
The ſeruant of this Armorer, my Lords.
Here Neighbour Horner, I drinke to you in a Cup of Sack; and feare not Neighbor, you ſhall doe well enough.
And here Neighbour, here's a Cuppe of Charneco.
And here's a Pot of good Double-Beere Neighbor: drinke, and feare not your Man.
Let it come yfaith, and Ile pledge you all, and a figge for Peter.
Here Peter, I drinke to thee, and be not afraid.
Be merry Peter, and feare not thy Maſter,
Fight for credit of the Prentices.
I thanke you all: drinke, and pray for me, I pray you, for I thinke I haue taken my laſt Draught in this World. Here Robin, and if I dye, I giue thee my Aporne; and Will, thou ſhalt haue my Hammer: and here Tom, take all the Money that I haue. O Lord bleſſe me. I pray God, for I am neuer able to deale with my Maſter, hee hath learnt ſo much fence already.
Come, leaue your drinking, and fall to blowes.
Sirrha, what's thy Name?
Peter forſooth.
Peter? what more?
Thumpe.
Thumpe? Then ſee thou thumpe thy Maſter well.
Maſters, I am come hither as it were vpon my Mans inſtigation, to proue him a Knaue, and my ſelfe an honeſt man: and touching the Duke of Yorke, I will take my death, I neuer meant him any ill, nor the King, nor the Queene: and therefore Peter haue at thee with a downe-right blow.
Diſpatch, this Knaues tongue begins to double.
Sound Trumpets, Alarum to the Combattants.
Hold Peter, hold, I confeſſe, I confeſſe Treaſon.
Take away his Weapon: Fellow thanke God, and the good Wine in thy Maſters way.
O God, haue I ouercome mine Enemies in this preſence? O Peter, thou haſt preuayl'd in right.
Goe, take hence that Traytor from our ſight,
For by his death we doe perceiue his guilt,
And God in Iuſtice hath reueal'd to vs
The truth and innocence of this poore fellow,
Which he had thought to haue murther'd wrongfully.
Come fellow, follow vs for thy Reward.
Thus ſometimes hath the brighteſt day a Cloud:
And after Summer, euermore ſucceedes
Barren Winter, with his wrathfull nipping Cold;
So Cares and Ioyes abound, at Seaſons fleet.
Sirs, what's a Clock?
Tenne, my Lord.
Tenne is the houre that was appointed me,
To watch the comming of my puniſht Ducheſſe:
Vnneath may ſhee endure the Flintie Streets,
To treade them with her tender-feeling feet.
Sweet Nell, ill can thy Noble Minde abrooke
The abiect People, gazing on thy face,
With enuious Lookes laughing at thy ſhame,
That erſt did follow thy prowd Chariot-Wheeles,
When thou didſt ride in triumph through the ſtreets.
But ſoft, I thinke ſhe comes, and Ile prepare
My teare-ſtayn'd eyes, to ſee her Miſeries.
So pleaſe your Grace, wee'le take her from the Sherife.
No, ſtirre not for your liues, let her paſſe by.
Come you, my Lord, to ſee my open ſhame?
Now thou do'ſt Penance too. Looke how they gaze,
See how the giddy multitude doe point,
And nodde their heads, and throw their eyes on thee.
Ah Gloſter, hide thee from their hatefull lookes,
And in thy Cloſet pent vp, rue my ſhame,
And banne thine Enemies, both mine and thine.
Be patient, gentle Nell, forget this griefe.
Ah Gloster, teach me to forget my ſelfe:
For whileſt I thinke I am thy married Wife,
And thou a Prince, Protector of this Land,
Me thinkes I ſhould not thus be led along,
Mayl'd vp in ſhame, with Papers on my back,
And follow'd with a Rabble, that reioyce
To ſee my teares, and heare my deepe-fet groanes.
The ruthleſſe Flint doth cut my tender feet,
And when I ſtart, the enuious people laugh,
And bid me be aduiſed how I treade.
Ah Humfrey, can I beare this ſhamefull yoake?
Troweſt thou, that ere Ile looke vpon the World,
Or count them happy, that enioyes the Sunne?
No: Darke ſhall be my Light, and Night my Day.
To thinke vpon my Pompe, ſhall be my Hell.
Sometime Ile ſay, I am Duke Humfreyes Wife,
And he a Prince, and Ruler of the Land:
Yet ſo he rul'd, and ſuch a Prince he was,
As he ſtood by, whileſt I, his forlorne Ducheſſe,
Was made a wonder, and a pointing ſtock
To euery idle Raſcall follower.
But be thou milde, and bluſh not at my ſhame,
Nor ſtirre at nothing, till the Axe of Death
Hang ouer thee, as ſure it ſhortly will.
For Suffolke, he that can doe all in all
With her, that hateth thee and hates vs all,
And Yorke, and impious Beauford, that falſe Prieſt,
Haue all lym'd Buſhes to betray thy Wings,
And flye thou how thou canſt, they'le tangle thee.
But feare not thou, vntill thy foot be ſnar'd,
Nor neuer ſeeke preuention of thy foes.
Ah Nell, forbeare: thou aymeſt all awry.
I muſt offend, before I be attainted:
And had I twentie times ſo many foes,
And each of them had twentie times their power,
All theſe could not procure me any ſcathe,
So long as I am loyall, true, and crimeleſſe.
Would'ſt haue me reſcue thee from this reproach?
Why yet thy ſcandall were not wipt away,
But I in danger for the breach of Law.
Thy greateſt helpe is quiet, gentle Nell:
I pray thee ſort thy heart to patience,
Theſe few dayes wonder will be quickly worne:
I ſummon your Grace to his Maieſties Parliament,
Holden at Bury, the firſt of this next Moneth.
And my conſent ne're ask'd herein before?
This is cloſe dealing. Well, I will be there.
My Nell, I take my leaue: and Maſter Sherife,
Let not her Penance exceede the Kings Commiſſion.
And't pleaſe your Grace, here my Commiſſion ſtayes:
And Sir Iohn Stanly is appointed now,
To take her with him to the Ile of Man.
Muſt you, Sir Iohn, protect my Lady here?
So am I giuen in charge, may't pleaſe your Grace.
Entreat her not the worſe, in that I pray
You vſe her well: the World may laugh againe,
And I may liue to doe you kindneſſe, if you doe it her.
And ſo Sir Iohn, farewell.
What, gone my Lord, and bid me not farewell?
Witneſſe my teares, I cannot ſtay to ſpeake.
Art thou gone to? all comfort goe with thee,
For none abides with me: my Ioy, is Death;
Death, at whoſe Name I oft haue beene afear'd,
Becauſe I wiſh'd this Worlds eternitie.
Stanley, I prethee goe, and take me hence,
I care not whither, for I begge no fauor;
Onely conuey me where thou art commanded.
Why, Madame, that is to the Ile of Man,
There to be vs'd according to your State.
That's bad enough, for I am but reproach:
And ſhall I then be vs'd reproachfully?
Like to a Ducheſſe, and Duke Humfreyes Lady,
According to that State you ſhall be vs'd.
Sherife farewell, and better then I fare,
Although thou haſt beene Conduct of my ſhame.
It is my Office, and Madame pardon me.
I, I, farewell, thy Office is diſcharg'd:
Come Stanley, ſhall we goe?
Madame, your Penance done,
Throw off this Sheet,
And goe we to attyre you for our Iourney.
My ſhame will not be ſhifted with my Sheet:
No, it will hang vpon my richeſt Robes,
And ſhew it ſelfe, attyre me how I can.
Goe, leade the way, I long to ſee my Priſon.
I muſe my Lord of Gloſter is not come:
'Tis not his wont to be the hindmoſt man,
What e're occaſion keepes him from vs now.
Can you not ſee? or will ye not obſerue
The ſtrangeneſſe of his alter'd Countenance?
With what a Maieſtie he beares himſelfe,
How inſolent of late he is become,
How prowd, how peremptorie, and vnlike himſelfe.
We know the time ſince he was milde and affable,
And if we did but glance a farre-off Looke,
Immediately he was vpon his Knee,
That all the Court admir'd him for ſubmiſſion.
But meet him now, and be it in the Morne,
When euery one will giue the time of day,
He knits bis Brow, and ſhewes an angry Eye,
And paſſeth by with ſtiffe vnbowed Knee,
Diſdaining dutie that to vs belongs.
Small Curres are not regarded when they grynne,
But great men tremble when the Lyon rores,
And Humfrey is no little Man in England.
Firſt note, that he is neere you in diſcent,
And ſhould you fall, he is the next will mount.
Me ſeemeth then, it is no Pollicie,
Reſpecting what a rancorous minde he beares,
And his aduantage following your deceaſe,
That he ſhould come about your Royall Perſon,
Or be admitted to your Highneſſe Councell.
By flatterie hath he wonne the Commons hearts:
And when he pleaſe to make Commotion,
'Tis to be fear'd they all will follow him.
Now 'tis the Spring, and Weeds are ſhallow-rooted,
Suffer them now, and they'le o're-grow the Garden,
And choake the Herbes for want of Husbandry.
The reuerent care I beare vnto my Lord,
Made me collect theſe dangers in the Duke.
If it be fond, call it a Womans feare:
Which feare, if better Reaſons can ſupplant,
I will ſubſcribe; and ſay I wrong'd the Duke.
My Lord of Suffolke, Buckingham, and Yorke,
Reproue my allegation, if you can,
Or elſe conclude my words effectuall.
Well hath your Highneſſe ſeene into this Duke:
And had I firſt beene put to ſpeake my minde,
I thinke I ſhould haue told your Graces Tale.
The Ducheſſe, by his ſubornation,
Vpon my Life began her diuelliſh practiſes:
Or if he were not priuie to thoſe Faults,
Yet by reputing of his high diſcent,
As next the King, he was ſucceſſiue Heire,
And ſuch high vaunts of his Nobilitie,
Did inſtigate the Bedlam braine-ſick Ducheſſe,
By wicked meanes to frame our Soueraignes fall.
Smooth runnes the Water, where the Brooke is deepe,
And in his ſimple ſhew he harbours Treaſon.
The Fox barkes not, when he would ſteale the Lambe.
No, no, my Soueraigne, Glouſter is a man
Vnſounded yet, and full of deepe deceit.
Did he not, contrary to forme of Law,
Deuiſe ſtrange deaths, for ſmall offences done?
And did he not, in his Protectorſhip,
Leuie great ſummes of Money through the Realme,
For Souldiers pay in France, and neuer ſent it?
By meanes whereof, the Townes each day reuolted.
Tut, theſe are petty faults to faults vnknowne,
Which time will bring to light in ſmooth Duke Humfrey.
My Lords at once: the care you haue of vs,
To mowe downe Thornes that would annoy our Foot,
Is worthy prayſe: but ſhall I ſpeake my conſcience,
Our Kinſman Gloſter is as innocent,
From meaning Treaſon to our Royall Perſon,
As is the ſucking Lambe, or harmeleſſe Done:
The Duke is vertuous, milde, and too well giuen,
To dreame on euill, or to worke my downefall.
Ah what's more dangerous, then this fond affiance?
Seemes he a Doue? his feathers are but borrow'd,
For hee's diſpoſed as the hatefull Rauen.
Is he a Lambe? his Skinne is ſurely lent him,
For hee's enclin'd as is the rauenous▪ Wolues.
Who cannot ſteale a ſhape, that meanes deceit?
Take heed, my Lord, the welfare of vs all,
Hangs on the cutting ſhort that fraudfull man.
All health vnto my gracious Soueraigne.
Welcome Lord Somerſet: What Newes from France?
That all your Intereſt in thoſe Territories,
Is vtterly bereft you: all is loſt.
Cold Newes, Lord Somerſet: but Gods will be done.
Cold Newes for me: for I had hope of France,
As firmely as I hope for fertile England.
Thus are my Bloſſomes blaſted in the Bud,
And Caterpillers eate my Leaues away:
But I will remedie this geare ere long,
Or ſell my Title for a glorious Graue.
All happineſſe vnto my Lord the King:
Pardon, my Liege, that I haue ſtay'd ſo long.
Nay Gloſter, know that thou art come too ſoone,
Vnleſſe thou wert more loyall then thou art:
I doe arreſt thee of High Treaſon here.
Well Suffolke, thou ſhalt not ſee me bluſh,
Nor change my Countenance for this Arreſt:
A Heart vnſpotted, is not eaſily daunted.
The pureſt Spring is not ſo free from mudde,
As I am cleare from Treaſon to my Soueraigne.
Who can accuſe me? wherein am I guiltie?
'Tis thought, my Lord,
That you tooke Bribes of France,
And being Protector, ſtay'd the Souldiers pay,
By meanes whereof, his Highneſſe hath loſt France.
Is it but thought ſo?
What are they that thinke it?
I neuer rob'd the Souldiers of their pay,
Nor euer had one penny Bribe from France.
So helpe me God, as I haue watcht the Night,
I, Night by Night, in ſtudying good for England.
That Doyt that ere I wreſted from the King,
Or any Groat I hoorded to my vſe,
Be brought againſt me at my Tryall day.
No: many a Pound of mine owne proper ſtore,
Becauſe I would not taxe the needie Commons,
Haue I diſ-purſed to the Garriſons,
And neuer ask'd for reſtitution.
It ſerues you well, my Lord, to ſay ſo much.
I ſay no more then truth, ſo helpe me God.
In your Protectorſhip, you did deuiſe
Strange Tortures for Offendors, neuer heard of,
That England was defam'd by Tyrannie.
Why 'tis well known, that whiles I was Protector,
Pittie was all the fault that was in me:
For I ſhould melt at an Offendors teares,
And lowly words were Ranſome for their fault:
Vnleſſe it were a bloody Murtherer,
Or foule felonious Theefe, that fleec'd poore paſſengers,
I neuer gaue them condigne puniſhment.
Murther indeede, that bloodie ſinne, I tortur'd
Aboue the Felon, or what Treſpas elſe.
My Lord, theſe faults are eaſie, quickly anſwer'd:
But mightier Crimes are lay'd vnto your charge,
Whereof you cannot eaſily purge your ſelfe.
I doe arreſt you in his Highneſſe Name,
And here commit you to my Lord Cardinall
To keepe, vntill your further time of Tryall.
My Lord of Gloſter, 'tis my ſpeciall hope,
That you will cleare your ſelfe from all ſuſpence,
My Conſcience tells me you are innocent.
Ah gracious Lord, theſe dayes are dangerous:
Vertue is choakt with foule Ambition,
And Charitie chas'd hence by Rancours hand;
Foule Subornation is predominant,
And Equitie exil'd your Highneſſe Land.
I know, their Complot is to haue my Life:
And if my death might make this Iland happy,
And proue the Period of their Tyrannie,
I would expend it with all willingneſſe,
But mine is made the Prologue to their Play:
For thouſands more, that yet ſuſpect no perill,
Will not conclude their plotted Tragedie.
Beaufords red ſparkling eyes blab his hearts mallice,
And Suffolks cloudie Brow his ſtormie hate;
Sharpe Buckingham vnburthens with his tongue,
The enuious Load that lyes vpon his heart:
And dogged Yorke, that reaches at the Moone,
Whoſe ouer-weening Arme I haue pluckt-back,
By falſe accuſe doth leuell at my Life.
And you, my Soueraigne Lady, with the reſt,
Cauſeleſſe haue lay'd diſgraces on my head,
And with your beſt endeuour haue ſtirr'd vp
My liefeſt Liege to be mine Enemie:
I, all of you haue lay'd your heads together,
My ſelfe had notice of your Conuenticles,
And all to make away my guiltleſſe Life.
I ſhall not want falſe Witneſſe, to condemne me,
Nor ſtore of Treaſons, to augment my guilt:
The ancient Prouerbe will be well effected,
A Staffe is quickly found to beat a Dogge.
My Liege, his rayling is intollerable.
If thoſe that care to keepe your Royall Perſon
From Treaſons ſecret Knife, and Traytors Rage,
Be thus vpbrayded, chid, and rated at,
And the Offendor graunted ſcope of ſpeech,
'Twill make them coole in zeale vnto your Grace.
Hath he not twit our Soueraigne Lady here
With ignominious words, though Clarkely coucht?
As if ſhe had ſuborned ſome to ſweare
Falſe allegations, to o'rethrow his ſtate.
But I can giue the loſer leaue to chide.
Farre truer ſpoke then meant: I loſe indeede,
Beſhrew the winners, for they play'd me falſe,
And well ſuch loſers may haue leaue to ſpeake.
Hee'le wreſt the ſence, and hold vs here all day.
Lord Cardinall, he is your Priſoner.
Sirs, take away the Duke, and guard him ſure.
Ah, thus King Henry throwes away his Crutch,
Before his Legges be firme to beare his Body.
Thus is the Shepheard beaten from thy ſide,
And Wolues are gnarling, who ſhall gnaw thee firſt.
Ah that my feare were falſe, ah that it were;
For good King Henry, thy decay I feare.
My Lords, what to your wiſdomes ſeemeth beſt,
Doe, or vndoe, as if our ſelfe were here.
What, will your Highneſſe leaue the Parliament?
I Margaret: my heart is drown'd with griefe,
Whoſe floud begins to flowe within mine eyes;
My Body round engyrt with miſerie:
For what's more miſerable then Diſcontent?
Ah Vnckle Humfrey, in thy face I ſee
The Map of Honor, Truth, and Loyaltie:
And yet, good Humfrey, is the houre to come,
That ere I prou'd thee falſe, or fear'd thy faith.
What lowring Starre now enuies thy eſtate?
That theſe great Lords, and Margaret our Queene,
Doe ſeeke ſubuerſion of thy harmeleſſe Life.
Thou neuer didſt them wrong, nor no man wrong:
And as the Butcher takes away the Calfe,
And binds the Wretch, and beats it when it ſtrayes,
Bearing it to the bloody Slaughter-houſe;
Euen ſo remorſeleſſe haue they borne him hence:
And as the Damme runnes lowing vp and downe,
Looking the way her harmeleſſe young one went,
And can doe naught but wayle her Darlings loſſe;
Euen ſo my ſelfe bewayles good Gloſters caſe
With ſad vnhelpefull teares, and with dimn'd eyes;
Looke after him, and cannot doe him good:
So mightie are his vowed Enemies.
His fortunes I will weepe, and 'twixt each groane,
Say, who's a Traytor? Gloster he is none.
Free Lords:
Cold Snow melts with the Sunnes hot Beames:
Henry, my Lord, is cold in great Affaires,
Too full of fooliſh pittie: and Gloſters ſhew
Beguiles him, as the mournefull Crocodile
With ſorrow ſnares relenting paſſengers;
Or as the Snake, roll'd in a flowring Banke,
With ſhining checker'd ſlough doth ſting a Child,
That for the beautie thinkes it excellent.
Beleeue me Lords, were none more wiſe then I,
And yet herein I iudge mine owne Wit good;
This Gloſter ſhould be quickly rid the World,
To rid vs from the feare we haue of him.
That he ſhould dye, is worthie pollicie,
But yet we want a Colour for his death:
'Tis meet he be condemn'd by courſe of Law.
But in my minde, that were no pollicie:
The King will labour ſtill to ſaue his Life,
The Commons haply riſe, to ſaue his Life;
And yet we haue but triuiall argument,
More then miſtruſt, that ſhewes him worthy death.
So that by this, you would not haue him dye.
Ah Yorke, no man aliue, ſo faine as I.
'Tis Yorke that hath more reaſon for his death.
But my Lord Cardinall, and you my Lord of Suffolke,
Say as you thinke, and ſpeake it from your Soules:
Wer't not all one, an emptie Eagle were ſet,
To guard the Chicken from a hungry Kyte,
As place Duke Humfrey for the Kings Protector?
So the poore Chicken ſhould be ſure of death.
Madame 'tis true: and wer't not madneſſe then,
To make the Fox ſurueyor of the Fold?
Who being accus'd a craftie Murtherer,
His guilt ſhould be but idly poſted ouer,
Becauſe his purpoſe is not executed.
No: let him dye, in that he is a Fox,
By nature prou'd an Enemie to the Flock,
Before his Chaps be ſtayn'd with Crimſon blood,
As Humfrey prou'd by Reaſons to my Liege.
And doe not ſtand on Quillets how to ſlay him:
Be it by Gynnes, by Snares, by Subtletie,
Sleeping, or Waking, 'tis no matter how,
So he be dead; for that is good deceit,
Which mates him firſt, that firſt intends deceit,
Thrice Noble Suffolke, 'tis reſolutely ſpoke.
Not reſolute, except ſo much were done,
For things are often ſpoke, and ſeldome meant,
But that my heart accordeth with my tongue,
Seeing the deed is meritorious,
And to preſerue my Soueraigne from his Foe,
Say but the word, and I will be his Prieſt.
But I would haue him dead, my Lord of Suffolke,
Ere you can take due Orders for a Prieſt:
Say you conſent, and cenſure well the deed,
And Ile prouide his Executioner,
I tender ſo the ſafetie of my Liege.
Here is my Hand, the deed is worthy doing.
And ſo ſay I.
And I: and now we three haue ſpoke it,
It skills not greatly who impugnes our doome.
Great Lords, from Ireland am I come amaine,
To ſignifie, that Rebels there are vp,
And put the Engliſhmen vnto the Sword.
Send Succours (Lords) and ſtop the Rage betime,
Before the Wound doe grow vncurable;
For being greene, there is great hope of helpe.
A Breach that craues a quick expedient ſtoppe.
What counſaile giue you in this weightie cauſe?
That Somerſet be ſent as Regent thither:
'Tis meet that luckie Ruler be imploy'd,
Witneſſe the fortune he hath had in France.
If Yorke, with all his farre-fet pollicie,
Had beene the Regent there, in ſtead of me,
He neuer would haue ſtay'd in France ſo long.
No, not to loſe it all, as thou haſt done,
I rather would haue loſt my Life betimes,
Then bring a burthen of dis-honour home,
By ſtaying there ſo long, till all were loſt.
Shew me one skarre, character'd on thy Skinne,
Mens fleſh preſeru'd ſo whole, doe ſeldome winne.
Nay then, this ſparke will proue a raging fire,
If Wind and Fuell be brought, to feed it with:
No more, good Yorke; ſweet Somerſet be ſtill.
Thy fortune, Yorke, hadſt thou beene Regent there,
Might happily haue prou'd farre worſe then his.
What, worſe then naught? nay, then a ſhame take all.
And in the number, thee, that wiſheſt ſhame.
My Lord of Yorke, trie what your fortune is:
Th' vnciuill Kernes of Ireland are in Armes,
And temper Clay with blood of Engliſhmen.
To Ireland will you leade a Band of men,
Collected choycely, from each Countie ſome,
And trie your hap againſt the Iriſhmen▪
I will, my Lord, ſo pleaſe his Maieſtie.
Why, our Authoritie is his conſent,
And what we doe eſtabliſh, he confirmes:
Then, Noble Yorke, take thou this Taske in hand.
I am content: Prouide me Souldiers, Lords,
Whiles I take order for mine owne affaires.
A charge, Lord Yorke, that I will ſee perform'd.
But now returne we to the falſe Duke Humfrey.
No more of him: for I will deale with him,
That henceforth he ſhall trouble vs no more:
And ſo breake off, the day is almoſt ſpent,
Lord Suffolke, you and I muſt talke of that euent.
My Lord of Suffolke, within foureteene dayes
At Briſtow I expect my Souldiers,
For there Ile ſhippe them all for Ireland.
Ile ſee it truly done, my Lord of Yorke.
Now Yorke, or neuer, ſteele thy fearfull thoughts,
And change miſdoubt to reſolution;
Be that thou hop'ſt to be, or what thou art;
Reſigne to death, it is not worth th' enioying:
Let pale-fac't feare keepe with the meane-borne man,
And finde no harbor in a Royall heart.
Faſter thē Spring-time ſhowres, comes thoght on thoght,
And not a thought, but thinkes on Dignitie.
My Brayne, more buſie then the laboring Spider,
Weaues tedious Snares to trap mine Enemies.
Well Nobles, well: 'tis politikely done,
To ſend me packing with an Hoaſt of men:
I feare me, you but warme the ſtarued Snake,
Who cheriſht in your breaſts, will ſting your hearts.
'Twas men I lackt, and you will giue them me;
I take it kindly: yet be well aſſur'd,
You put ſharpe Weapons in a mad-mans hands.
Whiles I in Ireland nouriſh a mightie Band,
I will ſtirre vp in England ſome black Storme,
Shall blowe ten thouſand Soules to Heauen, or Hell:
And this fell Tempeſt ſhall not ceaſe to rage,
Vntill the Golden Circuit on my Head,
Like to the glorious Sunnes tranſparant Beames,
Doe calme the furie of this mad-bred Flawe.
And for a miniſter of my intent,
I haue ſeduc'd a head-ſtrong Kentiſhman,
Iohn Cade of Aſhford,
To make Commotion, as full well he can,
Vnder the Title of Iohn Mortimer.
In Ireland haue I ſeene this ſtubborne Cade
Oppoſe himſelfe againſt a Troupe of Kernes,
And fought ſo long, till that his thighes with Darts
Were almoſt like a ſharpe-quill'd Porpentine:
And in the end being reſcued, I haue ſeene
Him capre vpright, like a wilde Moriſco,
Shaking the bloody Darts, as he his Bells.
Full often, like a ſhag-hayr'd craftie Kerne,
Hath he conuerſed with the Enemie,
And vndiſcouer'd, come to me againe,
And giuen me notice of their Villanies.
This Deuill here ſhall be my ſubſtitute;
For that Iohn Mortimer, which now is dead,
In face, in gate, in ſpeech he doth reſemble.
By this, I ſhall perceiue the Commons minde,
How they affect the Houſe and Claye of Yorke.
Say he be taken, rackt, and tortured;
I know, no paine they can inflict vpon him,
Will make him ſay, I mou'd him to thoſe Armes.
Say that he thriue, as 'tis great like he will,
Why then from Ireland come I with my ſtrength,
And reape the Harueſt which that Raſcall ſow'd.
For Humfrey; being dead, as he ſhall be,
And Henry put apart: the next for me.
Runne to my Lord of Suffolke: let him know
We haue diſpatcht the Duke, as he commanded▪
Oh, that it were to doe: what haue we done?
Didſt euer heare a man ſo penitent?
Here comes my Lord.
Now Sirs, haue you diſpatcht this thing?
I, my good Lord, hee's dead.
Why that's well ſaid. Goe, get you to my Houſe,
I will reward you for this venturous deed:
The King and all the Peeres are here at hand.
Haue you layd faire the Bed? Is all things well,
According as I gaue directions?
'Tis, my good Lord.
Away, be gone.
Goe call our Vnckle to our preſence ſtraight:
Say, we intend to try his Grace to day,
If he be guiltie, as 'tis publiſhed.
Ile call him preſently, my Noble Lord.
Lords take your places: and I pray you all
Proceed no ſtraiter 'gainſt our Vnckle Gloſter,
Then from true euidence, of good eſteeme,
He be approu'd in practiſe culpable.
God forbid any Malice ſhould preuayle,
That faultleſſe may condemne a Noble man:
Pray God he may acquit him of ſuſpition.
I thanke thee Nell, theſe wordes content mee much.
How now? why look'ſt thou pale? why trembleſt thou?
Where is our Vnckle? what's the matter, Suffolke?
Dead in his Bed, my Lord: Gloſter is dead.
Marry God forfend.
Gods ſecret Iudgement: I did dreame to Night,
The Duke was dumbe, and could not ſpeake a word.
How fares my Lord? Helpe Lords, the King is dead.
Rere vp his Body, wring him by the Noſe.
Runne, goe, helpe, helpe: Oh Henry ope thine eyes.
He doth reuiue againe, Madame be patient.
Oh Heauenly God.
How fares my gracious Lord?
Comfort my Soueraigne, gracious Henry comfort.
What, doth my Lord of Suffolke comfort me?
Came he right now to ſing a Rauens Note,
Whoſe diſmall tune bereft my Vitall powres:
And thinkes he, that the chirping of a Wren,
By crying comfort from a hollow breaſt,
Can chaſe away the firſt-conceiued ſound?
Hide not thy poyſon with ſuch ſugred words,
Lay not thy hands on me: forbeare I ſay,
Their touch affrights me as a Serpents ſting.
Thou balefull Meſſenger, out of my ſight:
Vpon thy eye-balls, murderous Tyrannie
Sits in grim Maieſtie, to fright the World.
Looke not vpon me, for thine eyes are wounding;
Yet doe not goe away: come Baſiliske,
And kill the innocent gazer with thy ſight:
For in the ſhade of death, I ſhall finde ioy;
In life, but double death, now Gloſter's dead.
Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolke thus?
Although the Duke was enemie to him,
Yet he moſt Chriſtian-like laments his death:
And for my ſelfe, Foe as he was to me,
Might liquid teares, or heart-offending groanes,
Or blood-conſuming ſighes recall his Life;
I would be blinde with weeping, ſicke with grones,
Looke pale as Prim-roſe with blood-drinking ſighes,
And all to haue the Noble Duke aliue.
What know I how the world may deeme of me?
For it is knowne we were but hollow Friends:
It may be iudg'd I made the Duke away,
So ſhall my name with Slanders tongue be wounded,
And Princes Courts be fill'd with my reproach:
This get I by his death: Aye me vnhappie,
To be a Queene, and Crown'd with infamie.
Ah woe is me for Gloſter, wretched man.
Be woe for me, more wretched then he is.
What, Doſt thou turne away, and hide thy face?
I am no loathſome Leaper, looke on me.
What? Art thou like the Adder waxen deafe?
Be poyſonous too, and kill thy forlorne Queene.
Is all thy comfort ſhut in Gloſters Tombe?
Why then Dame Elianor was neere thy ioy.
Erect his Statue, and worſhip it,
And make my Image but an Ale-houſe ſigne.
Was I for this nye wrack'd vpon the Sea,
And twice by aukward winde from Englands banke
Droue backe againe vnto my Natiue Clime.
What boaded this? but well fore-warning winde
Did ſeeme to ſay, ſeeke not a Scorpions Neſt,
Nor ſet no footing on this vnkinde Shore.
What did I then? But curſt the gentle guſts,
And he that loos'd them forth their Brazen Caues,
And bid them blow towards Englands bleſſed ſhore,
Or turne our Sterne vpon a dreadfull Rocke:
Yet Aeolus would not be a murtherer,
But left that hatefull office vnto thee.
The pretty vaulting Sea refus'd to drowne me,
Knowing that thou wouldſt haue me drown'd on ſhore
With teares as ſalt as Sea, through thy vnkindneſſe.
The ſplitting Rockes cowr'd in the ſinking ſands,
And would not daſh me with their ragged ſides,
Becauſe thy flinty heart more hard then they,
Might in thy Pallace, periſh Elianor.
As farre as I could ken thy Chalky Cliffes,
When from thy Shore, the Tempeſt beate vs backe,
I ſtood vpon the Hatches in the ſtorme:
And when the duskie sky, began to rob
My earneſt-gaping-ſight of thy Lands view,
I tooke a coſtly Iewell from my necke,
A Hart it was bound in with Diamonds,
And threw it towards thy Land: The Sea receiu'd it,
And ſo I wiſh'd thy body might my Heart:
And euen with this, I loſt faire Englands view,
And bid mine eyes be packing with my Heart,
And call'd them blinde and duskie Spectacles,
For looſing ken of Albions wiſhed Coaſt.
How often haue I tempted Suffolkes tongue
(The agent of thy foule inconſtancie)
To ſit and watch me as Aſcanius did,
When he to madding Dido would vnfold
His Fathers Acts, commenc'd in burning Troy.
Am I not witcht like her? Or thou not falſe like him?
Aye me, I can no more: Dye Elinor,
For Henry weepes, that thou doſt liue ſo long.
It is reported, mighty Soueraigne,
That good Duke Humfrey Traiterouſly is murdred
By Suffolke, and the Cardinall Beaufords meanes:
The Commons like an angry Hiue of Bees
That want their Leader, ſcatter vp and downe,
And care not who they ſting in his reuenge.
My ſelfe haue calm'd their ſpleenfull mutinie,
Vntill they heare the order of his death.
That he is dead good Warwick, 'tis too true,
But how he dyed, God knowes, not Henry:
Enter his Chamber, view his breathleſſe Corpes,
And comment then vpon his ſodaine death.
That ſhall I do my Liege; Stay Salsburie
With the rude multitude, till I returne.
O thou that iudgeſt all things, ſtay my thoghts;
My thoughts, that labour to perſwade my ſoule,
Some violent hands were laid on Humfries life:
If my ſuſpect be falſe, forgiue me God,
For iudgement onely doth belong to thee:
Faine would I go to chafe his palie lips,
With twenty thouſand kiſſes, and to draine
Vpon his face an Ocean of ſalt teares,
To tell my loue vnto his dumbe deafe trunke,
And with my fingers feele his hand, vnfeeling:
But all in vaine are theſe meane Obſequies,
And to ſuruey his dead and earthy Image:
What were it but to make my ſorrow greater?
Come hither gracious Soueraigne, view this body.
That is to ſee how deepe my graue is made,
For with his ſoule fled all my worldly ſolace:
For ſeeing him, I ſee my life in death.
As ſurely as my ſoule intends to liue
With that dread King that tooke our ſtate vpon him,
To free vs from his Fathers wrathfull curſe,
I do beleeue that violent hands were laid
Vpon the life of this thrice-famed Duke.
A dreadfull Oath, ſworne with a ſolemn tongue:
What inſtance giues Lord Warwicke for his vow.
See how the blood is ſetled in his face.
Oft haue I ſeene a timely-parted Ghoſt,
Of aſhy ſemblance, meager, pale, and bloodleſſe,
Being all deſcended to the labouring heart,
Who in the Conflict that it holds with death,
Attracts the ſame for aydance 'gainſt the enemy,
Which with the heart there cooles, and ne're returneth,
To bluſh and beautifie the Cheeke againe.
But ſee, his face is blacke, and full of blood:
His eye-balles further out, than when he liued,
Staring full gaſtly, like a ſtrangled man:
His hayre vp rear'd, his noſtrils ſtretcht with ſtrugling:
His hands abroad diſplay'd, as one that graſpt
And tugg'd for Life, and was by ſtrength ſubdude.
Looke on the ſheets his haire (you ſee) is ſticking,
His well proportion'd Beard, made ruffe and rugged,
Like to the Summers Come by Tempeſt lodged:
It cannot be but he was murdred heere,
The leaſt of all theſe ſignes were probable.
Why Warwicke, who ſhould do the D. to death?
My ſelfe and Beauford had him in protection,
And we I hope ſir, are no murtherers.
But both of you were vowed D. Humfries foes,
And you (forſooth) had the good Duke to keepe:
Tis like you would not feaſt him like a friend,
And 'tis well ſeene, he found an enemy.
Than you belike ſuſpect theſe Noblemen,
As guilty of Duke Humfries timeleſſe death.
Who finds the Heyfer dead, and bleeding freſh,
And ſees faſt-by, a Butcher with an Axe,
But will ſuſpect, 'twas he that made the ſlaughter?
Who finds the Partridge in the Puttocks Neſt,
But may imagine how the Bird was dead,
Although the Kyte ſoare with vnbloudied Beake?
Euen ſo ſuſpitious is this Tragedie.
Are you the Butcher, Suffolk? where's your Knife?
Is Beauford tearm'd a Kyte? where are his Tallons?
I weare no Knife, to ſlaughter ſleeping men,
But here's a vengefull Sword, ruſted with eaſe,
That ſhall be ſcowred in his rancorous heart,
That ſlanders me with Murthers Crimſon Badge.
Say, if thou dar'ſt, prowd Lord of Warwickſhire,
That I am faultie in Duke Humfreyes death.
What dares not Warwick, if falſe Suffolke dare him?
He dares not calme his contumelious Spirit,
Nor ceaſe to be an arrogant Controller,
Though Suffolke dare him twentie thouſand times.
Madame be ſtill: with reuerence may I ſay,
For euery word you ſpeake in his behalfe,
Is ſlander to your Royall Dignitie.
Blunt-witted Lord, ignoble in demeanor,
If euer Lady wrong'd her Lord ſo much,
Thy Mother tooke into her blamefull Bed
Some ſterne vntutur'd Churle; and Noble Stock
Was graft with Crab-tree ſlippe, whoſe Fruit thou art,
And neuer of the Neuils Noble Race.
But that the guilt of Murther bucklers thee,
And I ſhould rob the Deaths-man of his Fee,
Quitting thee thereby of ten thouſand ſhames,
And that my Soueraignes preſence makes me milde,
I would, falſe murd'rous Coward, on thy Knee
Make thee begge pardon for thy paſſed ſpeech,
And ſay, it was thy Mother that thou meant'ſt,
That thou thy ſelfe waſt borne in Baſtardie;
And after all this fearefull Homage done,
Giue thee thy hyre, and ſend thy Soule to Hell,
Pernicious blood-ſucker of ſleeping men.
Thou ſhalt be waking, while I ſhed thy blood,
If from this preſence thou dar'ſt goe with me.
Away euen now, or I will drag thee hence:
Vnworthy though thou art, Ile cope with thee,
And doe ſome ſeruice to Duke Humfreyes Ghoſt.
What ſtronger Breſt-plate then a heart vntainted?
Thrice is he arm'd, that hath his Quarrell iuſt;
And he but naked, though lockt vp in Steele,
Whoſe Conſcience with Iniuſtice is corrupted.
What noyſe is this?
Why how now Lords?
Your wrathfull Weapons drawne,
Here in our preſence? Dare you be ſo bold?
Why what tumultuous clamor haue we here?
The trayt'rous Warwick, with the men of Bury,
Set all vpon me, mightie Soueraigne.
Sirs ſtand apart, the King ſhall know your minde.
Dread Lord, the Commons ſend you word by me,
Vnleſſe Lord Suffolke ſtraight be done to death,
Or baniſhed faire Englands Territories,
They will by violence teare him from your Pallace,
And torture him with grieuous lingring death.
They ſay, by him the good Duke Humfrey dy'de:
They ſay, in him they feare your Highneſſe death;
And meere inſtinct of Loue and Loyaltie,
Free from a ſtubborne oppoſite intent,
As being thought to contradict your liking,
Makes them thus forward in his Baniſhment.
They ſay, in care of your moſt Royall Perſon,
That if your Highneſſe ſhould intend to ſleepe,
And charge, that no man ſhould diſturbe your reſt,
In paine of your diſlike, or paine of death;
Yet notwithſtanding ſuch a ſtrait Edict,
Were there a Serpent ſeene, with forked Tongue,
That ſlyly glyded towards your Maieſtie,
It were but neceſſarie you were wak't:
Leaſt being ſuffer'd in that harmefull ſlumber,
The mortall Worme might make the ſleepe eternall.
And therefore doe they cry, though you forbid,
That they will guard you, where you will, or no,
From ſuch fell Serpents as falſe Suffolke is;
With whoſe inuenomed and fatall ſting,
Your louing Vnckle, twentie times his worth,
They ſay is ſhamefully bereft of life.
An anſwer from the King, my Lord of Salisbury.
'Tis like the Commons, rude vnpoliſht Hindes,
Could ſend ſuch Meſſage to their Soueraigne:
But you, my Lord, were glad to be imploy'd,
To ſhew how queint an Orator you are.
But all the Honor Salisbury hath wonne,
Is, that he was the Lord Embaſſador,
Sent from a ſort of Tinkers to the King.
An anſwer from the King, or wee will all breake in.
Goe Salisbury▪ and tell them all from me,
I thanke them for their tender louing care;
And had I not beene cited ſo by them,
Yet did I purpoſe as they doe entreat:
For ſure, my thoughts doe hourely prophecie,
Miſchance vnto my State by Suffolkes meanes.
And therefore by his Maieſtie I ſweare,
Whoſe farre-vnworthie Deputie I am,
He ſhall not breathe infection in this ayre,
But three dayes longer, on the paine of death.
Oh Henry, let me pleade for gentle Suffolke.
Vngentle Queene, to call him gentle Suffolke.
No more I ſay if thou do'ſt pleade for him,
Thou wilt but adde encreaſe vnto my Wrath.
Had I but ſayd, I would haue kept my Word;
But when I ſweare, it is irreuocable:
If after three dayes ſpace thou here bee'ſt found,
On any ground that I am Ruler of,
The World ſhall not be Ranſome for thy Life.
Come Warwicke▪ come good Warwicke, goe with mee,
I haue great matters to impart to thee.
Miſchance and Sorrow goe along with you,
Hearts Diſcontent, and ſowre Affliction,
Be play-fellowes to keepe you companie:
There's two of you, the Deuill make a third,
And three-fold Vengeance tend vpon your ſteps.
Ceaſe, gentle Queene, theſe Execrations,
And let thy Suffolke take his heauie leaue.
Fye Coward woman, and ſoft hared wretch,
Haſt thou not ſpirit to curſe thine enemy.
A plague vpon them: wherefore ſhould I curſſe them?
Would curſes kill, as doth the Mandrakes grone,
I would inuent as bitter ſearching termes,
As curſt, as harſh, and horrible to heare,
Deliuer'd ſtrongly through my fixed teeth,
With full as many fignes of deadly hate,
As leane-fac'd enuy in her loathſome caue.
My tongue ſhould ſtumble in mine earneſt words,
Mine eyes ſhould ſparkle like the beaten Flint,
Mine haire be fixt an end, as one diſtract:
I, euery ioynt ſhould ſeeme to curſe and ban,
And euen now my burthen'd heart would breake
Should I not curſe them. Poyſon be their drinke.
Gall, worſe then Gall, the daintieſt that they taſte:
Their ſweeteſt ſhade, a groue of Cypreſſe Trees:
Their cheefeſt Proſpect, murd'ring Baſiliskes:
Their ſofteſt Touch, as ſmart as Lyzards ſtings:
Their Muſicke, frightfull as the Serpents hiſſe,
And boading Screech-Owles, make the Conſort full.
All the foule terrors in darke ſeated hell—
Enough ſweet Suffolke, thou torment'ſt thy ſelfe,
And theſe dread curſes like the Sunne 'gainſt glaſſe,
Or like an ouer-charged Gun, recoile,
And turnes the force of them vpon thy ſelfe.
You bad me ban, and will you bid me leaue?
Now by the ground that I am baniſh'd from,
Well could I curſe away a Winters night,
Though ſtanding naked on a Mountaine top,
Where byting cold would neuer let graſſe grow,
And thinke it but a minute ſpent in ſport.
Oh, let me intreat thee ceaſe, giue me thy hand,
That I may dew it with my mournfull teaes:
Nor let the raine of heauen wet this place,
To waſh away my wofull Monuments.
Oh, could this kiſſe be printed in thy hand,
That thou might'ſt thinke vpon theſe by the Seale,
Through whom a thouſand ſighes are breath'd for thee.
So get thee gone, that I may know my greefe,
'Tis but ſurmiz'd, whiles thou art ſtanding by,
As one that ſurfets, thinking on a want:
I will repeale thee, or be well aſſur'd,
Aduenture to be baniſhed my ſelfe:
And baniſhed I am, if but from thee.
Go, ſpeake not to me; euen now be gone.
Oh go not yet. Euen thus, two Friends condemn'd,
Embrace, and kiſſe, and take ten thouſand leaues,
Loather a hundred times to part then dye;
Yet now farewell, and farewell Life with thee.
Thus is poore Suffolke ten times baniſhed,
Once by the King, and three times thrice by thee.
'Tis not the Land I care for, wer't thou thence,
A Wilderneſſe is populous enough,
So Suffolke had thy heauenly company:
For where thou art, there is the World it ſelfe,
With euery ſeuerall pleaſure in the World:
And where thou art not, Deſolation.
I can no more: Liue thou to ioy thy life;
My ſelfe no ioy in nought, but that thou liu'ſt.
Whether goes Vaux ſo faſt? What newes I prethee?
To ſignifie vnto his Maieſty,
That Cardinall Beauford is at point of death:
For ſodainly a greeuous ſickneſſe tooke him,
That makes him gaspe, and ſtare, and catch the aire,
Blaſpheming God, and curſing men on earth.
Sometime he talkes, as if Duke Humfries Ghoſt
Were by his ſide: Sometime, he calles the King,
And whiſpers to his pillow, as to him,
The ſecrets of his ouer-charged ſoule,
And I am ſent to tell his Maieſtie,
That euen now he cries alowd for him.
Go tell this heauy Meſſage to the King.
Aye me! What is this World? What newes are theſe?
But wherefore greeue I at an houres poore loſſe,
Omitting Suffolkes exile, my ſoules Treaſure?
Why onely Suffolke mourne I not for thee?
And with the Southerne clouds, contend in teares?
Theirs for the earths encreaſe, mine for my ſorrowes.
Now get thee hence, the King thou know'ſt is comming,
If thou be found by me, thou art but dead.
If I depart from thee, I cannot liue,
And in thy ſight to dye, what were it elſe,
But like a pleaſant ſlumber in thy lap?
Heere could I breath my ſoule into the ayre,
As milde and gentle as the Cradle-babe,
Dying with mothers dugge betweene it's lips.
Where from thy ſight, I ſhould be raging mad,
And cry out for thee to cloſe vp mine eyes:
To haue thee with thy lippes to ſtop my mouth:
So ſhould'ſt thou eyther turne my flying ſoule,
Or I ſhould breathe it ſo into thy body,
And then it liu'd in ſweete Elizium.
To dye by thee, were but to dye in ieſt,
From thee to dye, were torture more then death:
Oh let me ſtay, befall what may befall.
Away: Though parting be a fretfull coroſiue,
Ir is applyed to a deathfull wound.
To France ſweet Suffolke: Let me heare from thee:
For whereſoere thou art in this worlds Globe,
Ile haue an Iris that ſhall finde thee out.
I go.
And take my heart with thee.
A Iewell lockt into the wofulſt Caske,
That euer did containe a thing of worth,
Euen as a ſplitted Barke, ſo ſunder we:
This way fall I to death.
This way for me.
How fare's my Lord? Speake Beauford to thy Soueraigne.
If thou beeſt death, Ile giue thee Englands Treaſure,
Enough to purchaſe ſuch another Iſland,
So thou wilt let me liue, and feele no paine.
Ah, what a ſigne it is of euill life,
Where death's approach is ſeene ſo terrible.
Beauford, it is thy Soueraigne ſpeakes to thee.
Bring me vnto my Triall when you will.
Dy'de he not in his bed? Where ſhould he dye?
Can I make men liue where they will or no?
Oh torture me no more, I will confeſſe.
Aliue againe? Then ſhew me where he is,
Ile giue a thouſand pound to looke vpon him.
He hath no eyes, the duſt hath blinded them.
Combe downe his haire; looke, looke, it ſtands vpright,
Like Lime-twigs ſet to catch my winged ſoule:
Giue me ſome drinke, and bid the Apothecarie
Bring the ſtrong poyſon that I bought of him.
Oh thou eternall mouer of the heauens,
Looke with a gentle eye vpon this Wretch,
Oh beate away the buſie medling Fiend,
That layes ſtrong ſiege vnto this wretches ſoule,
And from his boſome purge this blacke diſpaire.
See how the pangs of death do make him grin.
Diſturbe him not, let him paſſe peaceably.
Peace to his ſoule, if Gods good pleaſure be.
Lord Card'nall, if thou think'ſt on heauens bliſſe,
Hold vp thy hand, make ſignall of thy hope.
He dies and makes no ſigne: Oh God forgiue him.
So bad a death, argues a monſtrous life.
Forbeare to iudge, for we are ſinners all.
Cloſe vp his eyes, and draw the Curtaine cloſe,
And let vs all to Meditation.
The gaudy blabbing and remorſefull day,
Is crept into the boſome of the Sea:
And now loud houling Wolues arouſe the Iades
That dragge the Tragicke melancholy night:
Who with their drowſie, ſlow, and flagging wings
Cleape dead-mens graues, and from their miſty Iawes,
Breath foule contagious darkneſſe in the ayre:
Therefore bring forth the Souldiers of our prize,
For whilſt our Pinnace Anchors in the Downes,
Heere ſhall they make their ranſome on the ſand,
Or with their blood ſtaine this diſcoloured ſhore.
Maiſter, this Priſoner freely giue I thee,
And thou that art his Mate, make boote of this:
The other Walter Whitmore is thy ſhare.
What is my ranſome Maſter, let me know.
A thouſand Crownes, or elſe lay down your head
And ſo much ſhall you giue, or oft goes yours.
What thinke you much to pay 2000. Crownes,
And beare the name and port of Gentlemen?
Cut both the Villaines throats, for dy you ſhall:
The liues of thoſe which we haue loſt in fight,
Be counter-poys'd with ſuch a pettie ſumme.
Ile giue it ſir, and therefore ſpare my life.
And ſo will I, and write home for it ſtraight.
I loſt mine eye in laying the prize aboord,
And therefore to reuenge it, ſhalt thou dye,
And ſo ſhould theſe, if I might haue my will.
Be not ſo raſh, take ranſome, let him liue.
Looke on my George, I am a Gentleman,
Rate me at what thou wilt, thou ſhalt be payed.
And ſo am I: my name is Walter Whitmore.
How now? why ſtarts thou? What doth death affright?
Thy name affrights me, in whoſe ſound is death:
A cunning man did calculate my birth,
And told me that by Water I ſhould dye:
Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded,
Thy name is Gualtier, being rightly ſounded.
Gualtier or Walter, which it is I care not,
Neuer yet did baſe diſhonour blurre our name,
But with our ſword we wip'd away the blot.
Therefore, when Merchant-like I ſell reuenge,
Broke be my ſword, my Armes torne and defac'd,
And I proclaim'd a Coward through the world.
Stay Whitmore, for thy Priſoner is a Prince,
The Duke of Suffolke, William de la Pole.
The Duke of Suffolke, muffled vp in ragges?
I, but theſe ragges are no part of the Duke.
But Ioue was neuer ſlaine as thou ſhalt be,
Obſcure and lowſie Swaine, King Henries blood.
The honourable blood of Lancaſter
Muſt not be ſhed by ſuch a iaded Groome:
Haſt thou not kiſt thy hand, and held my ſtirrop?
Bare-headed plodded by my foot-cloth Mule,
And thought thee happy when I ſhooke my head.
How often haſt thou waited at my cup,
Fed from my Trencher, kneel'd downe at the boord,
When I haue feaſted with Queene Margaret?
Remember it, and let it make thee Creſt-falne,
I, and alay this thy abortiue Pride:
How in our voyding Lobby haſt thou ſtood,
And duly wayted for my comming forth?
This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalfe,
And therefore ſhall it charme thy riotous tongue.
Speak Captaine, ſhall I ſtab the forlorn Swain.
Firſt let my words ſtab him, as he hath me.
Baſe ſlaue, thy words are blunt, and ſo art thou.
Conuey him hence, and on our long boats ſide,
Strike off his head.
Thou dar'ſt not for thy owne.
Poole, Sir Poole? Lord,
I kennell, puddle, ſinke, whoſe filth and dirt
Troubles the ſiluer Spring, where England drinkes:
Now will I dam vp this thy yawning mouth,
For ſwallowing the Treaſure of the Realme.
Thy lips that kiſt the Queene, ſhall ſweepe the ground:
And thou that ſmil'dſt at good Duke Humfries death,
Againſt the ſenſeleſſe windes ſhall grin in vaine,
Who in contempt ſhall hiſſe at thee againe.
And wedded be thou to the Hagges of hell,
For daring to affye a mighty Lord
Vnto the daughter of a worthleſſe King,
Hauing neyther Subiect, Wealth, nor Diadem:
By diuelliſh policy art thou growne great,
And like ambitious Sylla ouer-gorg'd,
With gobbets of thy Mother-bleeding heart.
By thee Aniou and Maine were ſold to France.
The falſe reuolting Normans thorough thee,
Diſdaine to call vs Lord, and Piccardie
Hath ſlaine their Gouernors, ſurpriz'd our Forts,
And ſent the ragged Souldiers wounded home.
The Princely Warwicke, and the Neuils all,
Whoſe dreadfull ſwords were neuer drawne in vaine,
As hating thee, and riſing vp in armes:
And now the Houſe of Yorke thruſt from the Crowne,
By ſhamefull murther of a guiltleſſe King,
And lofty proud incroaching tyranny,
Burnes with reuenging fire, whoſe hopefull colours
Aduance our halfe-fac'd Sunne, ſtriuing to ſhine;
Vnder the which is writ, Inuitis nubibus.
The Commons heere in Kent are vp in armes,
And to conclude, Reproach and Beggerie,
Is crept into the Pallace of our King,
And all by thee: away, conuey him hence.
O that I were a God, to ſhoot forth Thunder
Vpon theſe paltry, ſeruile, abiect Drudges:
Small things make baſe men proud. This Villaine heere,
Being Captaine of a Pinnace, threatens more
Then Bargulus the ſtrong Illyrian Pyrate.
Drones ſucke not Eagles blood, but rob Bee-hiues:
It is impoſſible that I ſhould dye
By ſuch a lowly Vaſſall as thy ſelfe.
Thy words moue Rage, and not remorſe in me:
I go of Meſſage from the Queene to France:
I charge thee waft me ſafely croſſe the Channell.
Water: W. Come Suffolke, I muſt waft thee to thy death.
Pine gelidus timor occupat artus, it is thee I feare.
Thou ſhalt haue cauſe to feare before I leaue thee.
What, are ye danted now? Now will ye ſtoope.
My gracious Lord intreat him, ſpeak him fair.
Suffolkes Imperiall tongue is ſterne and rough:
Vs'd to command, vntaught to pleade for fauour.
Farre be it, we ſhould honor ſuch as theſe
With humble ſuite: no, rather let my head
Stoope to the blocke, then theſe knees bow to any,
Saue to the God of heauen, and to my King:
And ſooner dance vpon a bloody pole,
Then ſtand vncouer'd to the Vulgar Groome.
True Nobility, is exempt from feare:
More can I beare, then you dare execute.
Hale him away, and let him talke no more:
Come Souldiers, ſhew what cruelty ye can.
That this my death may neuer be forgot.
Great men oft dye by vilde Bezonions.
A Romane Sworder, and Bandetto ſlaue
Murder'd ſweet Tully. Bruim Baſtard hand
Stab'd Iulius Caeſar. Sauage Iſlanders
Pompey the Great, and Suffolke dyes by Pyrats.
And as for theſe whoſe ranſome we haue ſet,
It is our pleaſure one of them depart:
Therefore come you with vs, and let him go.
There let his head, and liueleſſe bodie lye,
Vntill the Queene his Miſtris bury it.
O barbarous and bloudy ſpectacle,
His body will I beare vnto the King:
If he reuenge it not, yet will his Friends,
So will the Queene, that liuing, held him deere.
Come and get thee a ſword, though made of a Lath, they haue bene vp theſe two dayes.
They haue the more neede to ſleepe now then.
I tell thee, Iacke Cade the Cloathier, meanes to dreſſe the Common-wealth and turne it, and ſet a new nap vpon it.
So he had need, for 'tis thred-bare. Well, I ſay, it was neuer merrie world in England, ſince Gentlemen came vp.
O miſerable Age: Vertue is not regarded in Handy-crafts men.
The Nobilitie thinke ſcorne to goe in Leather Aprons.
Nay more, the Kings Councell are no good Workemen.
True: and yet it is ſaid, Labour in thy Vocation: which is as much to ſay, as let the Magiſtrates be labouring men, and therefore ſhould we be Magiſtrates.
Thou haſt hit it: for there's no better ſigne of a braue minde, then a hard hand.
I ſee them, I ſee them: There's Beſts Sonne, the Tanner of Wingham.
Hee ſhall haue the skinnes of our enemies, to make Dogges Leather of.
And Dicke the Butcher.
Then is ſin ſtrucke downe like an Oxe, and iniquities throate cut like a Calfe.
And Smith the Weauer.
Argo, their thred of life is ſpun.
Come, come, let's fall in with them.
Wee Iohn Cade, ſo tearm'd of our ſuppoſed Father.
Or rather of ſtealing a Cade of Herrings.
For our enemies ſhall faile before vs, inſpired with the ſpirit of putting down Kings and Princes. Command ſilence.
Silence.
My Father was a Mortimer.
He was an honeſt man, and a good Bricklayer.
My mother a Plantagenet.
I knew her well, ſhe was a Midwife.
My wife deſcended of the Lacies.
She was indeed a Pedlers daughter, & ſold many Laces.
But now of late, not able to trauell with her furr'd Packe, ſhe waſhes buckes here at home.
Therefore am I of an honorable houſe.
I by my faith, the field is honourable, and there was he borne, vnder a hedge: for his Father had neuer a houſe but the Cage.
Valiant I am.
A muſt needs, for beggery is valiant.
I am able to endure much.
No queſtion of that: for I haue ſeene him whipt three Market dayes together.
I feare neither ſword, nor fire.
He neede not feare the ſword, for his Coate is of proofe.
But me thinks he ſhould ſtand in feare of fire, being burnt i' th hand for ſtealing of Sheepe.
Be braue then, for your Captaine is Braue, and Vowes Reformation. There ſhall be in England, ſeuen halfe peny Loaues ſold for a peny: the three hoop'd pot, ſhall haue ten hoopes, and I wil make it Fellony to drink ſmall Beere. All the Realme ſhall be in Common, and in Cheapſide ſhall my Palfrey go to graſſe: and when I am King, as King I will be.
God ſaue your Maieſty.
I thanke you good people. There ſhall bee no mony, all ſhall eate and drinke on my ſcore, and I will apparrell them all in one Liuery, that they may agree like Brothers, and worſhip me their Lord.
The firſt thing we do, let's kill all the Lawyers.
Nay, that I meane to do. Is not this a lamentable thing, that of the skin of an innocent Lambe ſhould be made Parchment; that Parchment being ſcribeld ore, ſhould vndoe a man. Some ſay the Bee ſtings, but I ſay, 'tis the Bees waxe: for I did but ſeale once to a thing, and I was neuer mine owne man ſince. How now? Who's there?
The Clearke of Chartam: hee can write and reade, and caſt accompt.
O monſtrous.
We tooke him ſetting of boyes Copies.
Here's a Villaine.
Ha's a Booke in his pocket with red Letters in't
Nay then he is a Coniurer.
Nay, he can make Obligations, and write Court hand.
I am ſorry for't: The man is a proper man of mine Honour: vnleſſe I finde him guilty, he ſhall not die. Come hither ſirrah, I muſt examine thee: What is thy name?
Emanuell.
They vſe to writ it on the top of Letters: 'Twill go hard with you.
Let me alone: Doſt thou vſe to write thy name? Or haſt thou a marke to thy ſelfe, like a honeſt plain dealing man?
Sir I thanke God, I haue bin ſo well brought vp, that I can write my name.
He hath confeſt: away with him: he's a Villaine and a Traitor.
Away with him I ſay: Hang him with his Pen and Inke-horne about his necke.
Where's our Generall?
Heere I am thou particular fellow.
Fly, fly, fly, Sir Humfrey Stafford and his brother are hard by, with the Kings Forces.
Stand villaine, ſtand, or Ile fell thee downe: he ſhall be encountred with a man as good as himſelfe. He is but a Knight, is a?
No.
To equall him I will make my ſelfe a knight preſently; Riſe vp Sir Iohn Mortimer. Now haue at him.
Rebellious Hinds, the filth and ſcum of Kent,
Mark'd for the Gallowes: Lay your Weapons downe,
Home to your Cottages: forſake this Groome.
The King is mercifull, if you reuolt.
But angry, wrathfull, and inclin'd to blood,
If you go forward: therefore yeeld, or dye.
As for theſe ſilken-coated ſlaues I paſſe not,
It is to you good people, that I ſpeake,
Ouer whom (in time to come) I hope to raigne:
For I am rightfull heyre vnto the Crowne.
Villaine, thy Father was a Playſterer,
And thou thy ſelfe a Sheareman, art thou not?
And Adam was a Gardiner.
And what of that?
Marry, this Edmund Mortimer Earle of March, married the Duke of Clarence daughter, did he not?
I ſir.
By her he had two children at one birth.
That's falſe.
I, there's the queſtion; But I ſay, 'tis true:
The elder of them being put to nurſe,
Was by a begger-woman ſtolne away,
And ignorant of his birth and parentage,
Became a Bricklayer, when he came to age.
His ſonne am I, deny it if you can.
Nay, 'tis too true, therefore he ſhall be King.
Sir, he made a Chimney in my Fathers houſe, & the brickes are aliue at this day to teſtifie it: therefore deny it not.
And will you credit this baſe Drudges Wordes, that ſpeakes he knowes not what.
I marry will we: therefore get ye gone.
Iacke Cade, the D. of York hath taught you this.
He lyes, for I inuented it my ſelfe. Go too Sirrah, tell the King from me, that for his Fathers ſake Henry the fift, (in whoſe time, boyes went to Span-counter for French Crownes) I am content he ſhall raigne, but Ile be Protector ouer him:
And furthermore, wee'l haue the Lord Sayes head, for ſelling the Dukedome of Maine.
And good reaſon: for thereby is England main'd And faine to go with a ſtaffe, but that my puiſſance holds it vp. Fellow-Kings, I tell you, that that Lord Say hath gelded the Commonwealth, and made it an Eunuch: & more then that, he can ſpeake French, and therefore hee is a Traitor.
O groſſe and miſerable ignorance.
Nay anſwer if you can: The Frenchmen are our enemies: go too then, I ask but this: Can he that ſpeaks with the tongue of an enemy, be a good Councellour, or no?
No, no, and therefore wee'l haue his head.
Well, ſeeing gentle words will not preuayle,
Aſſaile them with the Army of the King.
Herald away, and throughout euery Towne,
Proclaime them Traitors that are vp with Cade,
That thoſe which flye before the battell ends,
May euen in their Wiues and Childrens ſight,
Be hang'd vp for example at their doores:
And you that be the Kings Friends follow me.
And you that loue the Commons, follow me:
Now ſhew your ſelues men, 'tis for Liberty.
We will not leaue one Lord, one Gentleman:
Spare none, but ſuch as go in clouted ſhooen,
For they are thrifty honeſt men, and ſuch
As would (but that they dare not) take our parts.
They are all in order, and march toward vs.
But then are we in order, when we are moſt out of order. Come, march forward.
Where's Dicke, the Butcher of Aſhford?
Heere ſir.
They fell before thee like Sheepe and Oxen, & thou behaued'ſt thy ſelfe, as if thou hadſt beene in thine owne Slaughter-houſe: Therfore thus will I reward thee, the Lent ſhall bee as long againe as it is, and thou ſhalt haue a Licenſe to kill for a hundred lacking one.
I deſire no more.
And to ſpeake truth, thou deſeru'ſt no leſſe. This Monument of the victory will I beare, and the bodies ſhall be dragg'd at my horſe heeles, till I do come to London, where we will haue the Maiors ſword born before vs.
If we meane to thriue, and do good, breake open the Gaoles, and let out the Priſoners.
Feare not that I warrant thee. Come, let's march towards London.
Oft haue I heard that greefe ſoftens the mind,
And makes it fearefull and degenerate,
Thinke therefore on reuenge, and ceaſe to weepe.
But who can ceaſe to weepe, and looke on this.
Heere may his head lye on my throbbing breſt:
But where's the body that I ſhould imbrace?
What anſwer makes your Grace to the Rebells Supplication?
Ile ſend ſome holy Biſhop to intreat:
For God forbid, ſo many ſimple ſoules
Should periſh by the Sword. And I my ſelfe,
Rather then bloody Warre ſhall cut them ſhort,
Will parley with Iacke Cade their Generall.
But ſtay, Ile read it ouer once againe.
Ah barbarous villaines: Hath this louely face,
Rul'd like a wandering Plannet ouer me,
And could it not inforce them to relent,
That were vnworthy to behold the ſame.
Lord Say, Iacke Cade hath ſworne to huae thy head.
I, but I hope your Highneſſe ſhall haue his.
How now Madam?
Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolkes death?
I feare me (Loue) if that I had beene dead,
Thou would'ſt not haue mourn'd ſo much for me.
No my Loue, I ſhould not mourne, but dye for thee.
How now? What newes? Why com'ſt thou in ſuch haſte?
The Rebels are in Southwarke: Fly my Lord:
Iacke Cade proclaimes himſelfe Lord Mortimer,
Deſcended from the Duke of Clarence houſe,
And calles your Grace Vſurper, openly,
And vowes to Crowne himſelfe in Weſtminſter.
His Army is a ragged multitude
Of Hindes and Pezants, rude and mercileſſe:
Sir Humfrey Stafford, and his Brothers death,
Hath giuen them heart and courage to proceede:
All Schollers, Lawyers, Courtiers, Gentlemen,
They call falſe Catterpillers, and intend their death.
Oh graceleſſe men: they know not what they do.
My gracious Lord, retire to Killingworth,
Vntill a power be rais'd to put them downe.
Ah were the Duke of Suffolke now aliue,
Theſe Kentiſh Rebels would be ſoone appeas'd.
Lord Say, the Traitors hateth thee,
Therefore away with vs to Killingworth.
So might your Graces perſon be in danger:
The ſight of me is odious in their eyes:
And therefore in this Citty will I ſtay,
And liue alone as ſecret as I may.
Iacke Cade hath gotten London-bridge.
The Citizens flye and forſake their houſes:
The Raſcall people, thirſting after prey,
Ioyne with the Traitor, and they ioyntly ſweare
To ſpoyle the City, and your Royall Court.
Then linger not my Lord, away, take horſe.
Come Margaret, God our hope will ſuccor vs.
My hope is gone, now Suffolke is deceaſt.
Farewell my Lord, truſt not the Kentiſh Rebels
Truſt no body for feare you betraid.
The truſt I haue, is in mine innocence,
And therefore am I bold and reſolute.
How now? Is Iacke Cade ſlaine?
No my Lord, nor likely to be ſlaine:
For they haue wonne the Bridge,
Killing all thoſe that withſtand them:
The L. Maior craues ayd of your Honor from the Tower
To defend the City from the Rebels.
Such ayd as I can ſpare you ſhall command,
But I am troubled heere with them my ſelfe,
The Rebels haue aſſay'd to win the Tower.
But get you to Smithfield, and gather head,
And thither I will ſend you Mathew Goffe.
Fight for your King, your Countrey, and your Liues,
And ſo farwell, for I muſt hence againe.
Now is Mortimer Lord of this City,
And heere ſitting vpon London Stone,
I charge and command, that of the Cities coſt
The piſſing Conduit run nothing but Clarret Wine
This firſt yeare of our raigne.
And now henceforward it ſhall be Treaſon for any,
That calles me other then Lord Mortimer.
Iacke Cade, Iacke Cade.
Knocke him downe there.
If this Fellow be wiſe, hee'l neuer call yee Iacke Cade more, I thinke he hath a very faire warning.
My Lord, there's an Army gathered together in Smithfield.
Come, then let's go fight with them:
But firſt, go and ſet London Bridge on fire,
And if you can, burne downe the Tower too.
Come, let's away.
So ſirs: now go ſome and pull down the Sauoy:
Others to' th Innes of Court, downe with them all.
I haue a ſuite vnto your Lordſhip.
Bee it a Lordſhippe, thou ſhalt haue it for that word.
Onely that the Lawes of England may come out of your mouth.
Maſſe 'twill be ſore Law then, for he was thruſt in the mouth with a Speare, and 'tis not whole yet.
Nay Iohn, it wil be ſtinking Law, for his breath ſtinkes with eating toaſted cheeſe.
I haue thought vpon it, it ſhall bee ſo. Away, burne all the Records of the Realme, my mouth ſhall be the Parliament of England.
Then we are like to haue biting Statutes
Vnleſſe his teeth be pull'd out.
And hence-forward all things ſhall be in Common.
My Lord, a prize, a prize, heeres the Lord Say, which ſold the Townes in France. He that made vs pay one and twenty Fifteenes, and one ſhilling to the pound, the laſt Subſidie.
Well, hee ſhall be beheaded for it ten times: Ah thou Say, thou Surge, nay thou Buckram Lord, now art thou within point-blanke of our Iuriſdiction Regall. What canſt thou anſwer to my Maieſty, for giuing vp of Normandie vnto Mounſieur Baſimecu, the Dolphine of France? Be it knowne vnto thee by theſe preſence, euen the preſence of Lord Mortimer, that I am the Beeſome that muſt ſweepe the Court cleane of ſuch filth as thou art: Thou haſt moſt traiterouſly corrupted the youth of the Realme, in erecting a Grammar Schoole: and whereas before, our Fore-fathers had no other Bookes but the Score and the Tally, thou haſt cauſed printing to be vs'd, and contrary to the King, his Crowne, and Dignity, thou haſt built a Paper-Mill. It will be prooued to thy Face, that thou haſt men about thee, that vſually talke of a Nowne and a Verbe, and ſuch abhominable wordes, as no Chriſtian eare can endure to heare. Thou haſt appointed Iuſtices of Peace, to call poore men before them, about matters they were not able to anſwer. Moreouer, thou haſt put them in priſon, and becauſe they could not reade, thou haſt hang'd them, when (indeede) onely for that cauſe they haue beene moſt worthy to liue. Thou doſt ride in a foot-cloth, doſt thou not?
What of that?
Marry, thou ought'ſt not to let thy horſe weare a Cloake, when honeſter men then thou go in their Hoſe and Doublets.
And worke in their ſhirt to, as my ſelfe for example, that am a butcher.
You men of Kent.
What ſay you of Kent.
Nothing but this: 'Tis bona terra, mala gens.
Away with him, away with him, he ſpeaks Latine.
Heare me but ſpeake, and beare mee wher'e you will:
Kent, in the Commentaries Caeſar writ,
Is term'd the ciuel'ſt place of all this Iſle:
Sweet is the Covntry, becauſe full of Riches,
The People Liberall, Valiant, Actiue, Wealthy,
Which makes me hope you are not void of pitty.
I ſold not Maine, I loſt not Normandie,
Yet to recouer them would looſe my life:
Iuſtice with fauour haue I alwayes done,
Prayres and Teares haue mou'd me, Gifts could neuer.
When haue I ought exacted at your hands?
Kent to maintaine, the King, the Realme and you,
Large gifts haue I beſtow'd on learned Clearkes,
Becauſe my Booke preferr'd me to the King.
And ſeeing Ignorance is the curſe of God,
Knowledge the Wing wherewith we flye to heauen.
Vnleſſe you be poſſeſt with diuelliſh ſpirits,
You cannot but forbeare to murther me:
This Tongue hath parlied vnto Forraigne Kings
For your behoofe.
Tut, when ſtruck'ſt thou one blow in the field?
Great men haue reaching hands: oft haue I ſtruck
Thoſe that I neuer ſaw, and ſtrucke them dead.
O monſtrous Coward! What, to come behinde Folkes?
Theſe cheekes are pale for watching for your good
Giue him a box o' th' eare, and that wil make 'em red againe.
Long ſitting to determine poore mens cauſes,
Hath made me full of ſickneſſe and diſeaſes.
Ye ſhall haue a hempen Candle then, & the help of hatchet.
Why doſt thou quiuer man?
The Palſie, and not feare prouokes me.
Nay, he noddes at vs, as who ſhould ſay, Ile be euen with you. Ile ſee if his head will ſtand ſteddier on a pole, or no: Take him away, and behead him.
Tell me: wherein haue I offended moſt?
Haue I affected wealth, or honor? Speake.
Are my Cheſts fill'd vp with extorted Gold?
Is my Apparrell ſumptuous to behold?
Whom haue I iniur'd, that ye ſeeke my death?
Theſe hands are free from guiltleſſe bloodſhedding,
This breaſt from harbouring foule deceitfull thoughts.
O let me liue.
I feele remorſe in my ſelfe with his words: but Ile bridle it: he ſhall dye, and it bee but for pleading ſo well for his life. Away with him, he ha's a Familiar vnder his Tongue, he ſpeakes not a Gods name. Goe, take him away I ſay, and ſtrike off his head preſently, and then breake into his Sonne in Lawes houſe, Sir Iames Cromer, and ſtrike off his head, and bring them both vppon two poles hither.
It ſhall be done.
Ah Countrimen: If when you make your prair's,
God ſhould be ſo obdurate as your ſelues:
How would it fare with your departed ſoules,
And therefore yet relent, and ſaue my life.
Away with him, and do as I command ye: the proudeſt Peere in the Realme, ſhall not weare a head on his ſhoulders, vnleſſe he pay me tribute: there ſhall not a maid be married, but ſhe ſhall pay to me her Mayden-head ere they haue it: Men ſhall hold of mee in Capite. And we charge and command, that their wiues be as free as heart can wiſh, or tongue can tell.
My Lord,
When ſhall we go to Cheapſide, and take vp commodities vpon our billes?
Marry preſently.
O braue.
But is not this brauer:
Let them kiſſe one another: For they lou'd well
When they were aliue. Now part them againe,
Leaſt they conſult about the giuing vp
Of ſome more Townes in France. Soldiers,
Deferre the ſpoile of the Citie vntill night:
For with theſe borne before vs, in ſteed of Maces,
Will we ride through the ſtreets, & at euery Corner
Haue them kiſſe. Away.
Vp Fiſh-ſtreete, downe Saint Magnes corner, kill and knocke downe, throw them into Thames:
What noiſe is this I heare?
Dare any be ſo bold to ſound Retreat or Parley
When I command them kill?
I heere they be, that dare and will diſturb thee:
Know Cade, we come Ambaſſadors from the King
Vnto the Commons, whom thou haſt miſled,
And heere pronounce free pardon to them all,
That will forſake thee, and go home in peace.
What ſay ye Countrimen, will ye relent
And yeeld to mercy, whil'ſt 'tis offered you,
Or let a rabble leade you to your deaths.
Who loues the King, and will imbrace his pardon,
Fling vp his cap, and ſay, God ſaue his Maieſty.
Who hateth him, and honors not his Father,
Henry the fift, that made all France to quake,
Shake he his weapon at vs, and paſſe by.
God ſaue the King, God ſaue the King.
What Buckingham and Clifford are ye ſo braue? And you baſe Pezants, do ye beleeue him, will you needs be hang'd with your Pardons about your neckes? Hath my ſword therefore broke through London gates, that you ſhould leaue me at the White-heart in Southwarke. I thought ye would neuer haue giuen out theſe Armes til you had recouered your ancient Freedome. But you are all Recreants and Daſtards, and delight to liue in ſlauerie to the Nobility. Let them breake your backes with burthens, take your houſes ouer your heads, rauiſh your Wiues and Daughters before your faces. For me, I will make ſhift for one, and ſo Gods Curſſe light vppon you all.
Wee'l follow Cade,
Wee'l follow Cade.
Is Cade the ſonne of Henry the fift,
That thus you do exclaime you'l go with him.
Will he conduct you through the heart of France,
And make the meaneſt of you Earles and Dukes?
Alas, he hath no home, no place to flye too:
Nor knowes he how to liue, but by the ſpoile,
Vnleſſe by robbing of your Friends, and vs.
Wer't not a ſhame, that whilſt you liue at iarre,
The fearfull French, whom you late vanquiſhed
Should make a ſtart ore-ſeas, and vanquiſh you?
Me thinkes alreadie in this ciuill broyle,
I ſee them Lording it in London ſtreets,
Crying Ʋilliago vnto all they meete.
Better ten thouſand baſe-borne Cades miſcarry,
Then you ſhould ſtoope vnto a Frenchmans mercy.
To France, to France, and get what you haue loſt:
Spare England, for it is your Natiue Coaſt:
Henry hath mony, you are ſtrong and manly:
God on our ſide, doubt not of Victorie.
A Clifford, a Clifford.
Wee'l follow the King, and Clifford.
Was euer Feather ſo lightly blowne too & fro, as this multitude? The name of Henry the fift, hales them to an hundred miſchiefes, and makes them leaue mee deſolate. I ſee them lay their heades together to ſurprize me. My ſword make way for me, for heere is no ſtaying: in deſpight of the diuels and hell, haue through the verie middeſt of you, and heauens and honor be witneſſe, that no want of reſolution in mee, but onely my Followers baſe and ignominious treaſons, makes me betake mee to my heles.
What, is he fled? Go ſome and follow him,
And he that brings his head vnto the King,
Shall haue a thouſand Crownes for his reward.
Follow me ſouldiers, wee'l deuiſe a meane,
To reconcile you all vnto the King.
Was euer King that ioy'd an earthly Throne,
And could command no more content then I?
No ſooner was I crept out of my Cradle,
But I was made a King, at nine months olde.
Was neuer Subiect long'd to be a King,
As I do long and wiſh to be a Subiect.
Health and glad tydings to your Maieſty.
Why Buckingham, is the Traitor Cade ſurpris'd?
Or is he but retir'd to make him ſtrong?
He is fled my Lord, and all his powers do yeeld,
And humbly thus with halters on their neckes,
Expect your Highneſſe doome of life, or death.
Then heauen ſet ope thy euerlaſting gates,
To entertaine my vowes of thankes and praiſe.
Souldiers, this day haue you redeem'd your liues,
And ſhew'd how well you loue your Prince & Countrey:
Continue ſtill in this ſo good a minde,
And Henry though he be infortunate,
Aſſure your ſelues will neuer be vnkinde:
And ſo with thankes, and pardon to you all,
I do diſmiſſe you to your ſeuerall Countries.
God ſaue the King, God ſaue the King.
Pleaſe it your Grace to be aduertiſed,
The Duke of Yorke is newly come from Ireland,
And with a puiſſant and a mighty power
Of Gallow-glaſſes and ſtout Kernes,
Is marching hitherward in proud array,
And ſtill proclaimeth as he comes along,
His Armes are onely to remoue from thee
The Duke of Somerſet, whom he tearmes a Traitor.
Thus ſtands my ſtate, 'twixt Cade and Yorke diſtreſt,
Like to a Ship, that hauing ſcap'd a Tempeſt,
Is ſtraight way calme, and boorded with a Pyrate.
But now is Cade driuen backe, his men diſpierc'd,
And now is Yorke in Armes, to ſecond him.
I pray thee Buckingham go and meete him,
And aske him what's the reaſon of theſe Armes:
Tell him, Ile ſend Duke Edmund to the Tower,
And Somerſet we will commit thee thither,
Vntill his Army be diſmiſt from him.
My Lord,
Ile yeelde my ſelfe to priſon willingly,
Or vnto death, to do my Countrey good.
In any caſe, be not to rough in termes,
For he is fierce, and cannot brooke hard Language.
I will my Lord, and doubt not ſo to deale,
As all things ſhall redound vnto your good.
Come wife, let's in, and learne to gouern better,
For yet may England curſe my wretched raigne.
Fye on Ambitions: fie on my ſelfe, that haue a ſword, and yet am ready to famiſh. Theſe fiue daies haue I hid me in theſe Woods, and durſt not peepe out, for all the Country is laid for me: but now am I ſo hungry, that if I might haue a Leaſe of my life for a thouſand yeares, I could ſtay no longer. Wherefore on a Bricke wall haue I climb'd into this Garden, to ſee if I can eate Graſſe, or picke a Sallet another while, which is not amiſſe to coole a mans ſtomacke this hot weather: and I think this word Sallet was borne to do me good: for many a time but for a Sallet, my braine-pan had bene cleft with a brown Bill; and many a time when I haue beene dry, & brauely marching, it hath ſeru'd me inſteede of a quart pot to drinke in: and now the word Sallet muſt ſerue me to feed on.
Lord, who would liue turmoyled in the Court,
And may enioy ſuch quiet walkes as theſe?
This ſmall inheritance my Father left me,
Contenteth me, and worth a Monarchy.
I ſeeke not to waxe great by others warning,
Or gather wealth I care not with what enuy:
Sufficeth, that I haue maintaines my ſtate,
And ſends the poore well pleaſed from my gate.
Heere's the Lord of the ſoile come to ſeize me for a ſtray, for entering his Fee-ſimple without leaue. A Villaine, thou wilt betray me, and get a 1000. Crownes of the King by carrying my head to him, but Ile make thee eate Iron like an Oſtridge, and ſwallow my Sword like a great pin ere thou and I part.
Why rude Companion, whatſoere thou be,
I know thee not, why then ſhould I betray thee?
Is't not enough to breake into my Garden,
And like a Theefe to come to rob my grounds:
Climbing my walles inſpight of me the Owner,
But thou wilt braue me with theſe ſawcie termes?
Braue thee? I by the beſt blood that euer was broach'd, and beard thee to. Looke on mee well, I haue eate no meate theſe fiue dayes, yet come thou and thy fiue men, and if I doe not leaue you all as dead as a doore naile, I pray God I may neuer eate graſſe more.
Nay, it ſhall nere be ſaid, while England ſtands,
That Alexander Iden an Eſquire of Kent,
Tooke oddes to combate a poore famiſht man.
Oppoſe thy ſtedfaſt gazing eyes to mine,
See if thou canſt out-face me with thy lookes:
Set limbe to limbe, and thou art farre the leſſer:
Thy hand is but a finger to my fiſt,
Thy legge a ſticke compared with this Truncheon,
My foote ſhall fight with all the ſtrength thou haſt,
And if mine arme be heaued in the Ayre,
Thy graue is digg'd already in the earth:
As for words, whoſe greatneſſe anſwer's words,
Let this my ſword report what ſpeech forbeares.
By my Valour: the moſt compleate Champion that euer I heard. Steele, if thou turne the edge, or cut not out the burly bon'd Clowne in chines of Beefe, ere thou ſleepe in thy Sheath, I beſeech Ioue on my knees thou mayſt be turn'd to Hobnailes.
O I am ſlaine, Famine and no other hath ſlaine me, let ten thouſand diuelles come againſt me, and giue me but the ten meales I haue loſt, and I'de defie them all. Wither Garden, and be henceforth a burying place to all that do dwell in this houſe, becauſe the vnconquered ſoule of Cade is fled.
Is't Cade that I haue ſlain, that monſtrous traitor?
Sword, I will hallow thee for this thy deede,
And hang thee o're my Tombe, when I am dead.
Ne're ſhall this blood be wiped from thy point,
But thou ſhalt weare it as a Heralds coate,
To emblaze the Honor that thy Maſter got.
Iden farewell, and be proud of thy victory: Tell Kent from me, ſhe hath loſt her beſt man, and exhort all the World to be Cowards: For I that neuer feared any, am vanquiſhed by Famine, not by Valour.
How much thou wrong'ſt me, heauen be my iudge;
Die damned Wretch, the curſe of her that bare thee:
And as I thruſt thy body in with my ſword,
So wiſh I, I might thruſt thy ſoule to hell.
Hence will I dragge thee headlong by the heeles
Vnto a dunghill, which ſhall be thy graue,
And there cut off thy moſt vngracious head,
Which I will beare in triumph to the King,
Leauing thy trunke for Crowes to feed vpon.
From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right,
And plucke the Crowne from feeble Henries head.
Ring Belles alowd, burne Bonfires cleare and bright
To entertaine great Englands lawfull King.
Ah Sancta Maieſtas! who would not buy thee deere?
Let them obey, that knowes not how to Rule.
This hand was made to handle nought but Gold.
I cannot giue due action to my words,
Except a Sword or Scepter ballance it.
A Scepter ſhall it haue, haue I a ſoule,
On which Ile toſſe the Fleure-de-Luce of France.
Whom haue we heere? Buckingham to diſturbe me?
The king hath ſent him ſure: I muſt diſſemble.
Yorke, if thou meaneſt wel, I greet thee well.
Humfrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting.
Art thou a Meſſenger, or come of pleaſure.
A Meſſenger from Henry, our dread Liege,
To know the reaſon of theſe Armes in peace.
Or why, thou being a Subiect, as I am,
Againſt thy Oath, and true Allegeance ſworne,
Should raiſe ſo great a power without his leaue?
Or dare to bring thy Force ſo neere the Court?
Scarſe can I ſpeake, my Choller is ſo great.
Oh I could hew vp Rockes, and fight with Flint,
I am ſo angry at theſe abiect tearmes.
And now like Aiax Telamonius,
On Sheepe or Oxen could I ſpend my furie.
I am farre better borne then is the king:
More like a King, more Kingly in my thoughts.
But I muſt make faire weather yet a while,
Till Henry be more weake, and I more ſtrong.
Buckingham, I prethee pardon me,
That I haue giuen no anſwer all this while:
My minde was troubled with deepe Melancholly.
The cauſe why I haue brought this Armie hither,
Is to remoue proud Somerſet from the King,
Seditious to his Grace, and to the State.
That is too much preſumption on thy part:
But if thy Armes be to no other end,
The King hath yeelded vnto thy demand:
The Duke of Somerſet is in the Tower.
Vpon thine Honor is he Priſoner?
Vpon mine Honor he is Priſoner.
Then Buckingham I do diſmiſſe my Powres.
Souldiers, I thanke you all: diſperſe your ſelues:
Meet me to morrow in S. Georges Field,
You ſhall haue pay, and euery thing you wiſh.
And let my Soueraigne, vertuous Henry,
Command my eldeſt ſonne, nay all my ſonnes,
As pledges of my Fealtie and Loue,
Ile ſend them all as willing as I liue:
Lands, Goods, Horſe, Armor, any thing I haue
Is his to vſe, ſo Somerſet may die.
Yorke, I commend this kinde ſubmiſſion,
We twaine will go into his Highneſſe Tent.
Buckingham, doth Yorke intend no harme to vs
That thus he marcheth with thee arme in arme?
In all ſubmiſſion and humility,
Yorke doth preſent himſelfe vnto your Highneſſe.
Then what intends theſe Forces thou doſt bring?
To heaue the Traitor Somerſet from hence,
And fight againſt that monſtrous Rebell Cade,
Who ſince I heard to be diſcomfited.
If one ſo rude, and of ſo meane condition
May paſſe into the preſence of a King:
Loe, I preſent your Grace a Traitors head,
The head of Cade, whom I in combat ſlew.
The head of Cade? Great God, how iuſt art thou?
Oh let me view his Viſage being dead,
That liuing wrought me ſuch exceeding trouble.
Tell me my Friend, art thou the man that ſlew him?
I was, an't like your Maieſty.
How art thou call'd? And what is thy degree?
Alexander Iden, that's my name,
A poore Eſquire of Kent, that loues his King.
So pleaſe it you my Lord, 'twere not amiſſe
He were created Knight for his good ſeruice.
Iden, kneele downe, riſe vp a Knight:
We giue thee for reward a thouſand Markes,
And will, that thou henceforth attend on vs.
May Iden liue to merit ſuch a bountie,
And neuer liue but true vnto his Liege.
See Buckingham, Somerſet comes with th' Queene,
Go bid her hide him quickly from the Duke.
For thouſand Yorkes he ſhall not hide his head,
But boldly ſtand, and front him to his face.
How now? is Somerſet at libertie?
Then Yorke vnlooſe thy long impriſoned thoughts,
And let thy tongue be equall with thy heart.
Shall I endure the ſight of Somerſet?
Falſe King, why haſt thou broken faith with me,
Knowing how hardly I can brooke abuſe?
King did I call thee? No: thou art not King:
Not fit to gouerne and rule multitudes,
Which darſt not, no nor canſt not rule a Traitor.
That Head of thine doth not become a Crowne:
Thy Hand is made to graspe a Palmers ſtaffe,
And not to grace an awefull Princely Scepter.
That Gold, muſt round engirt theſe browes of mine,
Whoſe Smile and Frowne, like to Achilles Speare
Is able with the change, to kill and cure.
Heere is a hand to hold a Scepter vp,
And with the ſame to acte controlling Lawes:
Giue place: by heauen thou ſhalt rule no more
O're him, whom heauen created for thy Ruler.
O monſtrous Traitor! I arreſt thee Yorke
Of Capitall Treaſon 'gainſt the King and Crowne:
Obey audacious Traitor, kneele for Grace.
Wold'ſt haue me kneele? Firſt let me ask of thee,
If they can brooke I bow a knee to man:
Sirrah, call in my ſonne to be my bale:
I know ere they will haue me go to Ward,
They'l pawne their ſwords of my infranchiſement.
Call hither Clifford, bid him come amaine,
To ſay, if that the Baſtard boyes of Yorke
Shall be the Surety for their Traitor Father.
O blood-beſpotted Neopolitan,
Out-caſt of Naples, Englands bloody Scourge,
The ſonnes of Yorke, thy betters in their birth,
Shall be their Fathers baile, and bane to thoſe
That for my Surety will refuſe the Boyes.
See where they come, Ile warrant they'l make it good.
And here comes Clifford to deny their baile.
Health, and all happineſſe to my Lord the King.
I thanke thee Clifford: Say, what newes with thee?
Nay, do not fright vs with an angry looke:
We are thy Soueraigne Clifford, kneele againe;
For thy miſtaking ſo, We pardon thee.
This is my King Yorke, I do not miſtake,
But thou miſtakes me much to thinke I do,
To Bedlem with him, is the man growne mad.
I Clifford, a Bedlem and ambitious humor
Makes him oppoſe himſelfe againſt his King.
He is a Traitor, let him to the Tower,
And chop away that factious pate of his.
He is atreſted, but will not obey:
His ſonnes (he ſayes) ſhall giue their words for him.
Will you not Sonnes?
I Noble Father, if our words will ſerue.
And if words will not, then our Weapons ſhal.
Why what a brood of Traitors haue we heere?
Looke in a Glaſſe, and call thy Image ſo.
I am thy King, and thou a falſe-heart Traitor:
Call hither to the ſtake my two braue Beares,
That with the very ſhaking of their Chaines,
They may aſtoniſh theſe fell-lurking Curres,
Bid Salsbury and Warwicke come to me.
Are theſe thy Beares? Wee'l bate thy Bears to death,
And manacle the Berard in their Chaines,
If thou dar'ſt bring them to the bayting place.
Oft haue I ſeene a hot ore-weening Curre,
Run backe and bite, becauſe he was with-held,
Who being ſuffer'd with the Beares fell paw,
Hath clapt his taile, betweene his legges and cride,
And ſuch a peece of ſeruice will you do,
If you oppoſe your ſelues to match Lord Warwicke.
Hence heape of wrath, foule indigeſted lumpe,
As crooked in thy manners, as thy ſhape.
Nay we ſhall heate you thorowly anon.
Take heede leaft by your heate you burne your ſelues:
Why Warwicke, hath thy knee forgot to bow?
Old Salsbury, ſhame to thy ſiluer haire,
Thou mad miſleader of thy brain-ſicke ſonne,
What wilt thou on thy death-bed play the Ruffian?
And ſeeke for ſorrow with thy Spectacles?
Oh where is Faith? Oh, where is Loyalty?
If it be baniſht from the froſtie head,
Where ſhall it finde a harbour in the earth?
Wilt thou go digge a graue to finde out Warre,
And ſhame thine honourable Age with blood?
Why art thou old, and want'ſt experience?
Or wherefore doeſt abuſe it, if thou haſt it?
For ſhame in dutie bend thy knee to me,
That bowes vnto the graue with mickle age.
My Lord, I haue conſidered with my ſelfe
The Title of this moſt renowned Duke,
And in my conſcience, do repute his grace
The rightfull heyre to Englands Royall ſeate.
Haſt thou not ſworne Allegeance vnto me?
I haue.
Canſt thou diſpenſe with heauen for ſuch an oath?
It is great ſinne, to ſweare vnto a ſinne:
But greater ſinne to keepe a ſinfull oath:
Who can be bound by any ſolemne Vow
To do a murd'rous deede, to rob a man,
To force a ſpotleſſe Virgins Chaſtitie,
To reaue the Orphan of his Patrimonie,
To wring the Widdow from her cuſtom'd right,
And haue no other reaſon for this wrong,
But that he was bound by a ſolemne Oath?
A ſubtle Traitor needs no Sophiſter.
Call Buckingham, and bid him arme himſelfe.
Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou haſt,
I am reſolu'd for death and dignitie.
The firſt I warrant thee, if dreames proue true
You were beſt to go to bed, and dreame againe,
To keepe thee from the Tempeſt of the field.
I am reſolu'd to beare a greater ſtorme,
Then any thou canſt coniure vp to day:
And that Ile write vpon thy Burgonet,
Might I but know thee by thy houſed Badge.
Now by my Fathers badge, old Neuils Creſt,
The rampant Beare chain'd to the ragged ſtaffe,
This day Ile weare aloft my Burgonet,
As on a Mountaine top, the Cedar ſhewes,
That keepes his leaues inſpight of any ſtorme,
Euen io affright thee with the view thereof.
And from thy Burgonet Ile rend thy Beare,
And tread it vnder foot with all contempt,
Deſpight the Bearard, that protects the Beare.
And ſo to Armes victorious Father,
To quell the Rebels, and their Complices.
Fie, Charitie for ſhame, ſpeake not in ſpight,
For you ſhall ſup with Ieſu Chriſt to night.
Foule ſtygmaticke that's more then thou canſt tell.
If not in heauen, you'l ſurely ſup in hell.
Clifford of Cumberland, 'tis Warwicke calles:
And if thou doſt not hide thee from the Beare,
Now when the angrie Trumpet ſounds alarum,
And dead mens cries do fill the emptie ayre,
Clifford I ſay, come forth and fight with me,
Proud Northerne Lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
Warwicke is hoarſe with calling thee to armes.
How now my Noble Lord? What all a-foot.
The deadly handed Clifford ſlew my Steed:
But match to match I haue encountred him,
And made a prey for Carrion Kytes and Crowes
Euen of the bonnie beaſt he loued ſo well.
Of one or both of vs the time is come.
Hold Warwick: ſeek thee out ſome other chace
For I my ſelfe muſt hunt this Deere to death.
Then nobly Yorke, 'tis for a Crown thou fightſt:
As I intend Clifford to thriue to day,
It greeues my ſoule to leaue theee vnaſſail'd.
What ſeeſt thou in me Yorke?
Why doſt thou pauſe?
With thy braue bearing ſhould I be in loue,
But that thou art ſo faſt mine enemie.
Nor ſhould thy proweſſe want praiſe & eſteeme,
But that 'tis ſhewne ignobly, and in Treaſon.
So let it helpe me now againſt thy ſword,
As I in iuſtice, and true right expreſſe it.
My ſoule and bodie on the action both.
A dreadfull lay, addreſſe thee inſtantly.
La fia Corrone les eumenes.
Thus Warre hath giuen thee peace, for yu art ſtill,
Peace with his ſoule, heauen if it be thy will.
Shame and Confuſion all is on the rout,
Feare frames diſorder, and diſorder wounds
Where it ſhould guard. O Warre, thou ſonne of hell,
Whom angry heauens do make their miniſter,
Throw in the frozen boſomes of our part,
Hot Coales of Vengeance. Let no Souldier flye.
He that is truly dedicate to Warre,
Hath no ſelfe-loue: nor he that loues himſelfe,
Hath not eſſentially, but by circumſtance
The name of Valour. O let the vile world end,
And the premiſed Flames of the Laſt day,
Knit earth and heauen together.
Now let the generall Trumpet blow his blaſt,
Particularities, and pettie ſounds
To ceaſe. Was't thou ordain'd (deere Father)
To looſe thy youth in peace, and to atcheeue
The Siluer Liuery of aduiſed Age,
And in thy Reuerence, and thy Chaire-dayes, thus
To die in Ruffian battell? Euen at this ſight,
My heart is turn'd to ſtone: and while 'tis mine,
It ſhall be ſtony. Yorke, not our old men ſpares:
No more will I their Babes, Teares Virginall,
Shall be to me, euen as the Dew to Fire,
And Beautie, that the Tyrant oft reclaimes,
Shall to my flaming wrath, be Oyle and Flax:
Henceforth, I will not haue to do with pitty.
Meet I an infant of the houſe of Yorke,
Into as many gobbits will I cut it
As wilde Medea yong Abſirtis did.
In cruelty, will I ſeeke out my Fame.
Come thou new ruine of olde Cliffords houſe:
As did Aeneas old Anchyſes beare,
So beare I thee vpon my manly ſhoulders:
But then, Aeneas bare a liuing loade;
Nothing ſo heauy as theſe woes of mine.
So lye thou there:
For vnderneath an Ale-houſe paltry ſigne,
The Caſtle in S. Albons, Somerſet
Hath made the Wizard famous in his death:
Sword, hold thy temper; Heart, be wrathfull ſtill:
Prieſts pray for enemies, but Princes kill.
Away my Lord, you are ſlow, for ſhame away.
Can we outrun the Heauens? Good Margaret ſtay.
What are you made of? You'l nor fight nor fly:
Now is it manhood, wiſedome, and defence,
To giue the enemy way, and to ſecure vs
By what we can, which can no more but flye.
If you be tane, we then ſhould ſee the bottome
Of all our Fortunes: but if we haply ſcape,
(As well we may, if not through your neglect)
We ſhall to London get, where you are lou'd,
And where this breach now in our Fortunes made
May readily be ſtopt.
But that my hearts on future miſcheefe ſet,
I would ſpeake blaſphemy ere bid you flye:
But flye you muſt: Vncureable diſcomfite
Reignes in the hearts of all our preſent parts.
Away for your releefe, and we will liue
To ſee their day, and them our Fortune giue.
Away my Lord, away.
Of Salsbury, who can report of him,
That Winter Lyon, who in rage forgets
Aged contuſions, and all bruſh of Time:
And like a Gallant, in the brow of youth,
Repaires him with Occaſion. This happy day
Is not it ſelfe, nor haue we wonne one foot,
If Salsbury be loſt.
My Noble Father:
Three times to day I holpe him to his horſe,
Three times beſtrid him: Thrice I led him off,
Perſwaded him from any further act:
But ſtill where danger was, ſtill there I met him,
And like rich hangings in a homely houſe,
So was his Will, in his old feeble body,
But Noble as he is, looke where he comes.
Now by my Sword, well haſt thou fought to day:
By 'th 'Maſſe ſo did we all. I thanke you Richard.
God knowes how long it is I haue to liue:
And it hath pleas'd him that three times to day
You haue defended me from imminent death.
Well Lords, we haue not got that which we haue,
'Tis not enough our foes are this time fled,
Being oppoſites of ſuch repayring Nature.
I know our ſafety is to follow them,
For (as I heare) the King is fled to London,
To call a preſent Court of Parliament:
Let vs purſue him ere the Writs go forth.
What ſayes Lord Warwicke, ſhall we after them?
After them: nay before them if we can:
Now by my hand (Lords) 'twas a glorious day.
Saint Albons battell wonne by famous Yorke,
Shall be eterniz'd in all Age to come.
Sound Drumme and Trumpets, and to London all,
And more ſuch dayes as theſe, to vs befall.