YOu whorſon droonken ſlaue, you had beſt be gone,
And empty your droonken panch ſome where elſe
For in this houſe thou ſhalt not reſt to night.
Tilly vally, by criſee Tapſter Ile feſe you anon.
Fils the tother pot and alls paid for, looke you
I doo drinke it of mine owne Inſtegation,
Heere Ile lie a while, why Tapſter I ſay,
Fils a freſh cuſhen heere.
Heigh ho, heers good warme lying.
Now that the gloomie ſhaddow of the night,
Longing to view Orions driſling lookes,
Leapes from th'antarticke World vnto the skie
And dims the Welkin with her pitchie breath,
And darkeſome night oreſhades the chriſtall heauens,
Here breake we off our hunting for to night,
Cupple vppe the hounds and let vs hie vs home,
And bid the huntſman ſee them meated well,
For they haue all deſeru'd it well to daie,
But ſoft, what ſleepie fellow is this lies heere?
Or is he dead, ſee one what he dooth lacke?
My lord, tis nothing but a drunken ſleepe,
His head is too heauie for his bodie,
And he hath drunke ſo much that he can go no furder.
Fie, how the ſlauiſh villaine ſtinkes of drinke.
Ho, ſirha ariſe. What ſo ſound aſleepe?
Go take him vppe and beare him to my houſe,
And beare him eaſilie for feare he wake,
And in my faireſt chamber make a fire,
And ſet a ſumptuous banquet on the boord,
And put my richeſt garmentes on his backe,
Then ſet him at the Table in a chaire:
When that is doone againſt he ſhall awake,
Let heauenlie muſicke play about him ſtill,
Go two of you awaie and beare him hence,
And then Ile tell you what I haue deuiſde,
But ſee in any caſe you wake him not.
Now take my cloake and giue me one of yours,
Al fellowes now, and ſee you take me ſo,
For we will waite vpon this droonken man,
To ſee his countnance when he dooth awake
And finde himſelfe clothed in ſuch attire,
With heauenlie muſicke ſounding in his eares,
And ſuch a banquet ſet before his eies,
The fellow ſure will thinke he is in heauen,
But we will be about him when he wakes,
And ſee you call him Lord, at euerie word,
And offer thou him his horſe to ride abroad,
And thou his hawkes and houndes to hunt the deere,
And I will aske what ſutes he meanes to weare,
And what ſo ere he ſaith, ſee you doo not laugh,
But ſtill perſwade him that he is a Lord.
And it pleaſe your honour your plaiers be com
And doo attend your honours pleaſure here.
The fitteſt time they could haue choſen out,
Bid one or two of them come hither ſtraight,
Now will I fit my ſelfe accordinglie,
For they ſhall play to him when he awakes.
Now ſirs, what ſtore of plaies haue you?
Marrie my lord you maie haue a Tragicall
Or a comoditie, or what you will.
A Comedie thou ſhouldſt ſay, ſouns thout ſhame vs all.
And whats the name of your Comedie?
Marrie my lord tis calde The taming of a ſhrew:
Tis a good leſſon for vs my lord, for vs y are maried men
The taming of a ſhrew, thats excellent ſure,
Go ſee that you make you readie ſtraight,
For you muſt play before a lord to night,
Say you are his men and I your fellow,
Hees ſomething fooliſh, but what ſo ere he ſaies,
See that you be not daſht out of countenance.
And ſirha go you make you ready ſtraight,
And dreſſe your ſelfe like ſome louelie ladie,
And when I call ſee that you come to me,
For I will ſay to him thou art his wife,
Dallie with him and hug him in thine armes,
And if he deſire to goe to bed with thee,
Then faine ſome ſcuſe and ſay thou wilt anon.
Be gone I ſay, and ſee thou dooſt it well.
Feare not my Lord, Ile dandell him well enough
And make him thinke I loue him mightilie.
Now ſirs go you and make you ready to,
For you muſt play aſſoone as he dooth wake.
O braue, ſirha Tom, we muſt play before
A fooliſh Lord, come lets go make vs ready,
Go get a diſhclout to make cleane your ſhooes,
And Ile ſpeake for the properties, My Lord, we muſt
Haue a ſhoulder of mutton for a propertie,
And a little vinegre to make our Diuell rore.
Very well: ſirha ſee that they want nothing.
So: ſirha now go call my Lord,
And tel him that all things is ready as he wild it.
Another. Set thou ſome wine vpon the boord
And then Ile go fetch my Lord preſentlie.
How now, what is all thinges readie?
I my Lord.
Then ſound the muſick, and Ile wake him ſtraight,
And ſee you doo as earſt I gaue in charge.
My lord, My lord, he ſleepes ſoundlie: My lord.
Tapſter, gis a little ſmall ale. Heigh ho,
Heers wine my lord, the pureſt of the grape.
For which Lord?
For your honour my Lord.
Who I, am I a Lord? Ieſus what fine apparell haue I got.
More richer farre your honour hath to weare,
And if it pleaſe you I will fetch them ſtraight.
And if your honour pleaſe to ride abroad,
Ile fetch you luſtie ſteedes more ſwift of pace
Then winged Pegaſus in all his pride,
That ran ſo ſwiftlie ouer the Perſian plaines.
And if your honour pleaſe to hunt the deere,
Your hounds ſtands readie cuppeld at the doore,
Who in running will oretake the Row,
And make the long breathde Tygre broken winded.
By the maſſe I thinke I am a Lord indeed,
Whats thy name?
Simon and it pleaſe your honour.
Simon, thats as much to ſay Simion or Simon
Put foorth thy hand and fill the pot.
Giue me thy hand, Sim. am I a lord indeed?
I my gratious Lord, and your louelie ladie
Long time hath moorned for your abſence heere,
And now with ioy behold where ſhe dooth come
To gratulate your honours ſafe returne.
Sim. Is this ſhe?
I my Lord.
Maſſe tis a prettie wench, whats her name?
Oh that my louelie Lord would once vouchſafe
To looke on me, and leaue theſe frantike fits,
Or were I now but halfe ſo eloquent,
To paint in words what ile performe in deedes,
I know your honour then would pittie me.
Harke you miſtreſſe, wil you eat a peece of bread,
Come ſit downe on my knee, Sim drinke to hir Sim,
For ſhe and I will go to bed anon.
May it pleaſe you, your honors plaiers be come
To offer your honour a plaie.
A plaie Sim, O braue, be they my plaiers?
I my Lord.
Is there not a foole in the plaie?
Yes my lord.
When wil they plaie Sim?
Euen when it pleaſe your honor, they be readie.
My lord Ile go bid them begin their plaie.
Doo, but looke that you come againe.
I warrant you my lord, I wil not leaue you thus.
Come Sim, where be the plaiers? Sim ſtand by
Me and weele flout the plaiers out of their cotes.
Ile cal them my lord. Hoe where are you there?
Welcome to Athens my beloued friend,
To Platoes ſchooles and Ariſtotles walkes,
Welcome from Ceſtus famous for the loue
Of good Leander and his Tragedie,
For whom the Heleſpont weepes briniſh teares,
The greateſt griefe is I cannot as I would
Giue entertainment to my deereſt friend.
Thankes noble Polidor my ſecond ſelfe,
The faithfull loue which I haue found in thee
Hath made me leaue my fathers princelie court,
The Duke of Ceſtus thriſe renowmed ſeate,
To come to Athens thus to find thee out,
Which ſince I haue ſo happilie attaind,
My fortune now I doo account as great
As earſt did Caeſar when he conquered moſt,
But tell me noble friend where ſhal we lodge,
For I am vnacquainted in this place.
My Lord if you vouchſafe of ſchollers fare,
My houſe, my ſelfe, and all is yours to vſe,
You and your men ſhall ſtaie and lodge with me.
With all my hart, I will requite thy loue,
But ſtaie; what dames are theſe ſo bright of hew
Whoſe eies are brighter then the lampes of heauen,
Fairer then rocks of pearle and pretious ſtone,
More louelie farre then is the morning ſunne,
When firſt ſhe opes hir orientall gates.
Daughters be gone, and hie you to ye church,
And I will hie me downe vnto the key,
To ſee what Marchandiſe is come a ſhore.
Why how now my Lord, what in a dumpe,
To ſee theſe damſels paſſe away ſo ſoone?
Truſt me my friend I muſt confeſſe to thee,
I tooke ſo much delight in theſe faire dames,
As I doo wiſh they had not gone ſo ſoone,
But if thou canſt, reſolue me what they be,
And what old man it was that went with them,
For I doo long to ſee them once againe.
I cannot blame your honor good my lord,
For they are both louely, wiſe, faire and yong,
And one of them the yoongeſt of the three
I long haue lou'd (ſweet friend) and ſhe lou'd me,
But neuer yet we could not find a meanes
How we might compaſſe our deſired ioyes.
Why, is not her father willing to the match?
Yes truſt me, but he hath ſolemnlie ſworne,
His eldeſt daughter firſt ſhall be eſpowſde,
Before he grauntes his yoongeſt leaue to loue,
And therefore he that meanes to get their loues,
Muſt firſt prouide for her if he will ſpeed,
And he that hath her ſhall be fettred ſo,
As good be wedded to the diuell himſelfe,
For ſuch a skould as ſhe did neuer liue,
And till that ſhe be ſped none elſe can ſpeed,
Which makes me thinke that all my labours loſt,
And whoſoere can get hir firme good will,
A large dowrie he ſhall be ſure to haue,
For her father is a man of mightie wealth,
And an ancient Cittizen of the towne,
And that was he that went along with them.
But he ſhall keepe hir ſtill by my aduiſe,
And yet I needs muſt loue his ſecond daughter
The image of honor and Nobilitie,
In whoſe ſweet perſon is compriſde the ſomme
Of natures skill and heauenlie maieſtie.
I like your choiſe, and glad you choſe not mine,
Then if you like to follow on your loue,
We muſt deuiſe a meanes and find ſome one
That will attempt to wed this deuiliſh skould,
And I doo know the man. Come hither boy,
Go your waies ſirha to Ferandoes houſe,
Deſire him take the paines to come to me,
For I muſt ſpeake with him immediatlie.
I will ſir, and fetch him preſentlie.
A man I thinke will fit hir humor right,
As blunt in ſpeech as ſhe is ſharpe of toong,
And he I thinke will match hir euerie waie,
And yet he is a man of wealth ſufficient,
And for his perſon worth as good as ſhe,
And if he compaſſe hir to be his wife,
Then may we freelie viſite both our loues.
O might I ſee the center of my ſoule
Whoſe ſacred beautie hath inchanted me,
More faire then was the Grecian Helena
For whoſe ſweet ſake ſo many princes dide,
That came with thouſand ſhippes to Tenedos,
But when we come vnto hir fathers houſe,
Tell him I am a Marchants ſonne of Ceſtus,
That comes for traffike vnto Athens heere,
And heere ſirha I will change with you for once,
And now be thou the Duke of Ceſtus ſonne,
Reuell and ſpend as if thou wert my ſelfe,
For I will court my loue in this diſguiſe.
My lord, how if the Duke your father ſhould
By ſome meanes come to Athens for to ſee
How you doo profit in theſe publike ſchooles,
And find me clothed thus in your attire,
How would he take it then thinke you my lord?
Tuſh feare not Valeria let me alone,
But ſtaie, heere comes ſome other companie.
Here comes the man that I did tel you of.
Good morrow gentlemen to all at once.
How now Polidor, what man ſtill in loue?
Euer wooing and canſt thou neuer ſpeed,
God ſend me better luck when I ſhall woo.
I warrant you maiſter and you take my councell.
Why ſirha, are you ſo cunning?
Who I, twere better for you by fiue marke
And you could tel how to doo it as well as I.
I would thy maiſter once were in the vaine,
To trie himſelfe how he could woe a wench.
Faith I am euen now a going.
I faith ſir, my maiſters going to this geere now.
Whither in faith Ferando, tell me true.
To bonie Kate, the patientſt wench aliue
The diuel himſelfe dares ſcarce venter to woo her,
Signior Alfonſos eldeſt daughter,
And he hath promiſde me ſix thouſand crownes
If I can win her once to be my wife,
And ſhe and I muſt woo with skoulding ſure,
And I will hold hir toot till ſhe be wearie,
Or elſe Ile make her yeeld to graunt me loue.
How like you this Aurelius, I thinke he knew
Our mindes before we ſent to him,
But tell me, when doo you meane to ſpeake with her?
Faith preſentlie, doo you but ſtand aſide,
And I will make her father bring hir hither,
And ſhe, and I, and he, will talke alone.
With al our heartes, Come Aurelius
Let vs be gone and leaue him heere alone.
Ho Signiour Alfonſo, whoſe within there?
Signiour Ferando your welcome hartilie,
You are a ſtranger ſir vnto my houſe.
Harke you ſir, looke what I did promiſe you
Ile performe, if you get my daughters loue.
Then when I haue talkt a word or two with hir,
Doo you ſtep in and giue her hand to me,
And tell her when the marriage daie ſhal be,
For I doo know ſhe would be married faine,
And when our nuptiall rites be once performde
Let me alone to tame hir well enough,
Now call her foorth that I may ſpeake with hir.
Ha Kate, Come hither wench & liſt to me,
Vſe this gentleman friendlie as thou canſt.
Twentie good morrowes to my louely Kate.
You ieſt I am ſure, is ſhe yours alreadie?
I tell thee Kate I know thou lou'ſt me well.
The deuill you doo, who told you ſo?
My mind ſweet Kate doth ſay I am the man,
Muſt wed, and bed, and marrie bonnie Kate.
Was euer ſeene ſo groſe an aſſe as this?
I, to ſtand ſo long and neuer get a kiſſe.
Hands off I ſay, and get you from this place;
Or I wil ſet my ten commandments in your face.
I prethe doo kate; they ſay thou art a ſhrew,
And I like thee the better for I would haue thee ſo.
Let go my hand, for feare it reach your eare.
No kate, this hand is mine and I thy loue.
In faith ſir no the woodcock wants his taile.
But yet his bil wil ſerue, if the other faile.
How now Ferando, what ſaies my daughter?
Shees willing ſir and loues me as hir life.
Tis for your skin then, but not to be your wife.
Come hither Kate and let me giue thy hand
To him that I haue choſen for thy loue,
And thou to morrow ſhalt be wed to him.
Why father, what do you meane to do with me,
To giue me thus vnto this brainſick man,
That in his mood cares not to murder me?
She turnes aſide and ſpeakes.
But yet I will conſent and marrie him,
For I methinkes haue liude too long a maid,
And match him to, or elſe his manhoods good.
Giue me thy hand Ferando loues thee wel,
And will with wealth and eaſe maintaine thy ſtate.
Here Ferando take her for thy wife,
And ſunday next ſhall be your wedding day.
Why ſo, did I not tell thee I ſhould be the man
Father, I leaue my louelie Kate with you,
Prouide your ſelues againſt our mariage daie,
For I muſt hie me to my countrie houſe
In haſt, to ſee prouiſion may be made,
To entertaine my Kate when ſhe dooth come.
Doo ſo, come Kate, why dooſt thou looke
So ſad, be merrie wench thy wedding daies at hand.
Sonne fare you well, and ſee you keepe your promiſe.
So, all thus farre goes well. Ho Saunder.
Sander, I faith your a beaſt, I crie God hartilie
Mercie, my harts readie to run out of my bellie with
Laughing, I ſtood behind the doore all this while,
And heard what you ſaid to hir.
Why didſt thou think that I did not ſpeake wel to hir?
You ſpoke like an aſſe to her, Ile tel you what,
And I had been there to haue woode hir, and had this
Cloke on that you haue, chud haue had her before ſhe
Had gone a foot furder, and you talke of Woodcocks
with her, and I cannot tell you what.
Wel ſirha, & yet thou ſeeſt I haue got her for all this.
I marry twas more by hap then any good cunning
I hope ſheele make you one of the head men of the pariſh ſhortly.
Wel ſirha leaue your ieſting and go to Polidors houſe,
The yong gentleman that was here with me,
And tell him the circumſtance of all thou knowſt,
Tell him on ſunday next we muſt be married,
And if he aske thee whither I am gone,
Tell him into the countrie to my houſe,
And vpon ſundaie Ile be heere againe.
I warrant you Maiſter feare not me
For dooing of my buſineſſe.
Now hang him that has not a liuerie cote
To ſlaſh it out and ſwaſh it out amongſt the proudeſt
On them. Why looke you now Ile ſcarce put vp
Plaine Saunder now at any of their handes, for and any
Bodie haue any thing to doo with my maiſter, ſtraight
They come crouching vpon me, I beſeech you good M.
Saunder ſpeake a good word for me, and then am I ſo
Stout and takes it vpon me, & ſtands vpon my pantoflles
To them out of all crie, why I haue a life like a giant
Now, but that my maiſter hath ſuch a peſtilent mind
To a woman now a late, and I haue a prettie wench
To my ſiſter, and I had thought to haue preferd my
Maiſter to her, and that would haue beene a good
Deale in my waie but that hees ſped alreadie.
Friend, well met.
Souns, friend well met. I hold my life he ſees
Not my maiſters liuerie coat,
Plaine friend hop of my thum, kno you who we are.
Truſt me ſir it is the vſe where I was borne,
To ſalute men after this manner, yet notwithſtanding
If you be angrie with me for calling of you friend,
I am the more ſorie for it, hoping the ſtile
Of a foole will make you amends for all.
The ſlaue is ſorie for his fault, now we cannot be
Angrie, wel whats the matter that you would do with vs.
Marry ſir, I heare you pertain to ſignior Ferando.
I and thou beeſt not blind thou maiſt ſee, Ecce ſignum, heere.
Shall I intreat you to doo me a meſſage to your Maiſter?
I, it may be, & you tel vs from whence you com.
Marrie ſir I ſerue yong Polidor your maiſters friend.
Do you ſerue him, and whats your name?
My name ſirha, I tell thee ſirha is cald Catapie.
Cake and pie, O my teeth waters to haue a peece of thee.
Why ſlaue wouldſt thou eate me?
Eate thee, who would not eate Cake and pie?
Why villaine my name is Catapie,
But wilt thou tell me where thy maiſter is.
Nay thou muſt firſt tell me where thy maiſter is,
For I haue good newes for him, I can tell thee.
Why ſee where he comes.
Come ſweet Aurelius my faithfull friend,
Now will we go to ſee thoſe louelie dames
Richer in beawtie then the orient pearle,
Whiter then is the Alpine Chriſtall mould,
And farre more louelie then the terean plant,
That bluſhing in the aire turnes to a ſtone.
What Sander, what newes with you?
Marry ſir my maiſter ſends you word
That you muſt come to his wedding to morrow.
What, ſhall he be married then?
Faith I, you thinke he ſtandes as long about it as you doo.
Whither is thy maiſter gone now?
Marrie hees gone to our houſe in the Countrie,
To make all thinges in a readineſſe againſt my new
Miſtreſſe comes thither, but heele come againe to morrowe.
This is ſuddainlie diſpatcht belike,
Well, ſirha boy, take Saunder in with you
And haue him to the buttrie preſentlie.
I will ſir: come Saunder.
Valeria as erſte we did deuiſe,
Take thou thy lute and go to Alfonſos houſe,
And ſay that Polidor ſent thee thither.
I Valeria for he ſpoke to me,
To helpe him to ſome cunning Muſition,
To teach his eldeſt daughter on the lute,
And thou I know will fit his turne ſo well
As thou ſhalt get great fauour at his handes,
Begon Valeria and ſay I ſent thee to him.
I will ſir and ſtay your comming at Alfonſos houſe.
Now ſweete Aurelius by this deuiſe
Shall we haue leiſure for to courte our loues,
For whilſt that ſhe is learning on the lute,
Hir ſiſters may take time to ſteele abrode,
For otherwiſe ſhele keep them both within,
And make them worke whilſt ſhe hir ſelfe doth play,
But come lets go vnto Alfonſos houſe,
And ſee how Valeria and Kate agreeſe,
I doute his Muſick skarſe will pleaſe his skoller,
But ſtay here comes Alfonſo.
What M. Polidor you are well mett,
I thanke you for the man you ſent to me,
A good Muſition I thinke he is,
I haue ſet my daughter and him togither,
But is this gentellman a frend of youres?
He is, I praie you ſir bid him welcome,
He's a wealthie Marchants ſonne of Ceſtus.
Your welcom ſir and if my houſe aforde
You any thing that may content your mind,
I pray you ſir make bold with me.
I thanke you ſir, and if what I haue got,
By marchandiſe or trauell on the ſeas,
Sattins or lawnes or azure colloured ſilke,
Or pretious firie pointed ſtones of Indie,
You ſhall command both them my ſelfe and all.
Thanks gentle ſir, Polidor take him in,
And bid him welcome to vnto my houſe,
For thou I thinke muſt be my ſecond ſonne,
Ferando, Polidor dooſt thou not know
Muſt marry Kate, and to morrow is the day.
Such newes I heard, and I came now to know.
Polidor tis true, goe let me alone,
For I muſt ſee againſt the bridegroome come,
That all thinges be according to his mind,
And ſo Ile leaue you for an houre or two.
Come then Aurcleus come in with me,
And weele go ſit a while and chat with them,
And after bring them foorth to take the aire.
Sim, when will the foole come againe?
Heele come againe my Lord anon.
Gis ſome more drinke here, ſouns wheres
The Tapſter, here Sim eate ſome of theſe things.
So I doo my Lord.
Here Sim, I drinke to thee.
My Lord heere comes the plaiers againe,
O braue, heers two fine gentlewomen.
The ſenceleſſe trees by muſick haue bin moou'd
And at the ſound of pleaſant tuned ſtrings,
Haue ſauage beaſtes hung downe their liſtning heads,
As though they had beene caſt into a trance.
Then it may be that ſhe whom nought can pleaſe,
With muſickes ſound in time may be ſurpriſde,
Come louely miſtreſſe will you take your lute,
And play the leſſon that I taught you laſt?
It is no matter whether I doo or no,
For truſt me I take no great delight in it.
I would ſweet miſtreſſe that it laie in me,
To helpe you to that thing thats your delight.
In you with a peſtlence, are you ſo kind?
Then make a night cap of your fiddles caſe,
To warme your head, and hide your filthie face.
If that ſweet miſtreſſe were your harts content,
You ſhould command a greater thing then that,
Although it were ten times to my diſgrace.
Your ſo kind twere pittie you ſhould be hang'd,
And yet methinkes the foole dooth looke aſquint.
Why miſtreſſe doo you mocke me?
No, but I meane to moue thee.
Well, will you plaie a little?
I, giue me the Lute.
That ſtop was falſe, play it againe.
Then mend it thou, thou filthy aſſe.
What, doo you bid me kiſſe your arſe?
How now iack ſauſe, your a iollie mate,
Your beſt be ſtill leaſt I croſſe your pate,
And make your muſicke flie about your eares,
Ile make it and your fooliſh coxcombe meet.
She offers to ſtrike him with the lute.
Hold miſtreſſe, ſouns wil you breake my lute?
I on thy head, and if thou ſpeake to me,
There take it vp and fiddle ſomewhere elſe,
She throwes it downe.
And ſee you come no more into this place,
Leaſt that I clap your fiddle on your face.
Souns, teach hir to play vpon the lute?
The deuill ſhal teach her firſt, I am glad ſhees gone,
For I was neare ſo fraid in all my life,
But that my lute ſhould flie about mine eares,
My maiſter ſhall teach her his ſelfe for me,
For Ile keepe me far enough without hir reach,
For he and Polydor ſent me before
To be with her and teach her on the lute,
Whilſt they did court the other gentlewomen,
And heere methinkes they come togither.
How now Valeria, whears your miſtreſſe?
At the vengeance I thinke and no where elſe.
Why Valeria, will ſhe not learne apace?
Yes berlady ſhe has learnt too much already,
And that I had felt had I not ſpoke hir faire,
But ſhe ſhall neare be learnt for me againe.
Well Valeria go to my chamber,
And beare him companie that came to daie
From Ceſtus, where our aged father dwels.
Come faire Emelia my louelie loue,
Brighter then the burniſht pallace of the ſunne,
The eie-ſight of the glorious firmament,
In whoſe bright lookes ſparkles the radiant fire,
Wilie Prometheus ſlilie ſtole from Ioue,
Infuſing breath, life, motion, ſoule,
To euerie obiect ſtriken by thine eies.
Oh faire Emelia I pine for thee,
And either muſt enioy thy loue, or die.
Fie man, I know you will not die for loue:
Ah Polidor thou needſt not to complaine,
Eternall heauen ſooner be diſſolude,
And all that pearſeth Phebus ſiluer eie,
Before ſuch hap befall to Polidor.
Thanks faire Emelia for theſe ſweet words,
But what ſaith Phylena to hir friend?
Why I am buying marchandiſe of him.
Miſtreſſe you ſhall not need to buie of me,
For when I croſt the bubling Canibey,
And ſailde along the Criſtall Heliſpont,
I filde my cofers of the wealthie mines,
Where I did cauſe Millions of labouring Moores
To vndermine the cauernes of the earth,
To ſeeke for ſtrange and new found pretious ſtones,
And diue into the ſea to gather pearle,
As faire as Iuno offered Priams ſonne,
And you ſhall take your liberall choice of all.
I thanke you ſir and would Phylena might
In any curteſie requite you ſo,
As ſhe with willing hart could well beſtow.
How now daughters, is Ferando come?
Not yet father, I wonder he ſtaies ſo long.
And wheres your ſiſter that ſhe is not heere?
She is making of hir readie father
To goe to church and if that he were come.
I warrant you heele not be long awaie.
Go daughters get you in, and bid your
Siſter prouide her ſelfe againſt that we doo come,
And ſee you goe to church along with vs.
I maruell that Ferando comes not away.
His Tailor it may be hath bin too ſlacke,
In his apparrell which he meanes to weare,
For no queſtion but ſome fantaſticke ſutes
He is determined to weare to day,
And richly powdered with pretious ſtones,
Spotted with liquid gold, thick ſet with pearle,
And ſuch he meanes ſhall be his wedding ſutes.
I carde not I what coſt he did beſtow,
In gold or ſilke, ſo he himſelfe were heere,
For I had rather loſe a thouſand crownes,
Then that he ſhould deceiue vs heere to daie,
But ſoft I thinke I ſee him come.
Godmorow father, Polidor well met,
You wonder I know that I haue ſtaid ſo long.
I marrie ſon, we were almoſt perſwaded,
That we ſhould ſcarſe haue had our bridegroome heere,
But ſay, why art thou thus baſely attired?
Thus richlie father you ſhould haue ſaid,
For when my wife and I am married once,
Shees ſuch a ſhrew, if we ſhould once fal out,
Sheele pul my coſtlie ſutes ouer mine eares,
And therefore am I thus attired awhile,
For manie thinges I tell you's in my head,
And none muſt know thereof but Kate and I,
For we ſhall liue like lammes and Lions ſure,
Nor lammes to Lions neuer was ſo tame,
If once they lie within the Lions pawes
As Kate to me if we were married once,
And therefore come let vs to church preſently.
Fie Ferando not thus atired for ſhame,
Come to my Chamber and there ſute thy ſelfe,
Of twentie ſutes that I did neuer were▪
Tuſh Polidor I haue as many ſutes
Fantaſticke made to fit my humor ſo
As any in Athens and as richlie wrought
As was the Maſſie Robe that late adornd,
The ſtately legate of the Perſian King,
And this from them haue I made choiſe to weare.
I prethie Ferando let me intreat
Before thou goſte vnto the church with vs,
To put ſome other ſute vpon thy backe.
Not for the world if I might gaine it ſo,
And therefore take me thus or not at all,
But ſoft ſe where my Kate doth come,
I muſt ſalute hir: how fares my louely Kate?
What art thou readie? ſhall we go to church?
Not I with one ſo mad, ſo baſely tirde,
To marrie ſuch a filthie ſlauiſh groome,
That as it ſeemes ſometimes is from his wits,
Or elſe he would not thus haue come to vs.
Tuſh Kate theſe words addes greater loue in me
And makes me thinke thee fairrer then before,
Sweete Kate the louelier then Dianas purple robe,
Whiter then are the ſnowie Apenis,
Or icie haire that groes on Boreas chin.
Father I ſweare by Ibis golden beake,
More faire and Radiente is my bonie Kate,
Then ſiluer Zanthus when he doth imbrace,
The ruddie Simies at Idas feete,
And care not thou ſwete Kate how I be clad,
Thou ſhalt haue garments wrought of Median ſilke,
Enchaſt with pretious Iewells fecht from far,
By Italian Marchants that with Ruſſian ſtemes,
Plous vp huge ſorrowes in the Terren Maine,
And better farre my louely Kate ſhall weare,
Then come ſweet loue and let vs to the church,
For this I ſweare ſhall be my wedding ſute.
Come gentlemen go along with vs,
For thus doo what we can he will be wed.
Come hither ſirha boy.
Boy; oh diſgrace to my perſon, ſouns boy
Of your face, you haue many boies with ſuch
Pickadeuantes I am ſure, ſouns would you
Not haue a bloudie noſe for this?
Come, come, I did but ieſt, where is that
Same peece of pie that I gaue thee to keepe.
The pie? I you haue more minde of your bellie
Then to go ſee what your maiſter dooes.
Tuſh tis no matter man I prethe giue it me,
I am verie hungry I promiſe thee.
Why you may take it and the deuill burſt
You with it, one cannot ſaue a bit after ſupper,
But you are alwaies readie to munch it vp.
Why come man, we ſhall haue good cheere
Anon at the bridehouſe, for your maiſters gone to
Church to be married alreadie, and thears
Such cheere as paſſeth.
O braue, I would I had eate no meat this week,
For I haue neuer a corner left in my bellie
To put a venſon paſtie in, I thinke I ſhall burſt my ſelfe
With eating, for Ile ſo cram me downe the tarts
And the marchpaines, out of all crie.
I, but how wilt thou doo now thy maiſters
Married, thy miſtreſſe is ſuch a deuill, as ſheele make
Thee forget thy eating quickly, ſheele beat thee ſo.
Let my maiſter alone with hir for that, for
Heele make hir tame wel inough ere longe I warent thee
For he's ſuch a churle waxen now of late that and he be
Neuer ſo little angry he thums me out of all crie,
But in my minde ſirra the yongeſt is a verie
Prettie wench, and if I thought thy maiſter would
Not haue hir Ide haue a flinge at hir
My ſelfe, Ile ſee ſoone whether twill be a match
Or no: and it will not Ile ſet the matter
Hard for my ſelfe I warrant thee.
Sounes you ſlaue will you be a Riuall with
My maiſter in his loue, ſpeake but ſuch
Another worde and Ile cut off one of thy legges.
Oh, cruell iudgement, nay then ſirra,
My tongue ſhall talke no more to you, marry my
Timber ſhall tell the truſtie meſſage of his maiſter,
Euen on the very forehead on thee, thou abuſious
Villaine, therefore prepare thy ſelfe.
Come hither thou Imperfeckſious ſlaue in
Regard of thy beggery, holde thee theres
Twoſhillings for thee? to pay for the
Healing of thy left legge which I meane
Furiouſly to inuade or to maime at the leaſt.
O ſupernodicall foule? well Ile take your
two ſhillinges but Ile barre ſtriking at legges.
Not I, for Ile ſtrike any where.
Here here take your two ſhillings again
Ile ſee thee hangd ere Ile fight with thee,
I gat a broken ſhin the other day,
Tis not, whole yet and therefore Ile not fight
Come come why ſhould we fall out?
Well ſirray your faire words hath ſomething
Alaied my Coller: I am content for this once
To put it vp and be frends with thee,
But ſoft ſee where they come all from church,
Belike they be Married allredy.
Father farwell, my Kate and I muſt home,
Sirra go make ready my horſe preſentlie.
Your horſe! what ſon I hope you doo but ieſt,
I am ſure you will not go ſo ſuddainly.
Let him go or tarry I am reſolu'de to ſtay,
And not to trauell on my wedding day.
Tut Kate I tell thee we muſt needes go home,
Villaine haſt thou ſaddled my horſe?
Which horſe, your curtall?
Sounes you ſlaue ſtand you prating here?
Saddell the bay gelding for your Miſtris.
Not for me: for Ile not go.
The oſtler will not let me haue him, you owe ten pence▪
For his meate, and 6 pence for ſtuffing my miſtris ſaddle.
Here villaine go pay him ſtraight.
Shall I giue them another pecke of lauender.
Out ſlaue and bring them preſently to the dore
Why ſon I hope at leaſt youle dine with vs.
I pray you maiſter lets ſtay till dinner be don.
Sounes villaine art thou here yet?
Come Kate our dinner is prouided at home.
But not for me, for here I meane to dine.
Ile haue my will in this as well as you,
Though you in madding mood would leaue your frends
Deſpite of you Ile tarry with them ſtill.
I Kate ſo thou ſhalt but at ſome other time,
When as thy ſiſters here ſhall be eſpouſd,
Then thou and I will keepe our wedding day,
In better ſort then now we can prouide,
For here I promiſe thee before them all,
We will ere long returne to them againe,
Come Kate ſtand not on termes we will awaie,
This is my day, to morrow thou ſhalt rule,
And I will doo what euer thou commandes.
Gentlemen farwell, wele take our leues,
It will be late before that we come home.
Farwell Ferando ſince you will be gone.
So mad a cupple did I neuer ſee.
They're euen as well macht as I would wiſh.
And yet I hardly thinke that he can tame her.
For when he has don ſhe will do what ſhe liſt.
Her manhood then is good I do beleeue.
Aurelius or elſe I miſſe my marke,
Her toung will walke if ſhe doth hold her handes,
I am in dout ere halfe a month be paſt
Hele curſe the prieſt that married him ſo ſoone,
And yet it may be ſhe will be reclaimde,
For ſhe is verie patient grone of late.
God hold it that it may continue ſtill,
I would be loth that they ſhould diſagree,
But he I hope will holde her in a while.
Within this two daies I will ride to him,
And ſee how louingly they do agree.
Now Aurelius what ſay you to this,
What haue you ſent to Ceſtus as you ſaid,
To certifie your father of your loue,
For I would gladlie he would like of it,
And if he be the man you tell to me,
I geſſe he is a Marchant of great wealth.
And I haue ſeene him oft at Athens here,
And for his ſake aſſure thee thou art welcome.
And ſo to me whileſt Polidor doth liue.
I find it ſo right worthie gentlemen,
And of what worth your frendſhip I eſteme,
I leue cenſure of your ſeuerall thoughts,
But for requitall of your fauours paſt,
Reſts yet behind, which when occaſion ſerues
I vow ſhalbe remembred to the full,
And for my fathers comming to this place,
I do expect within this weeke at moſt.
Inough Aurelieus? but we forget
Our Marriage dinner now the bride is gon,
Come let vs ſe what there they left behind.
Come ſirs prouide all thinges as faſt as you can,
For my Maſters hard at hand and my new Miſtris
And all, and he ſent me before to ſee all thinges redy.
Welcome home Sander ſirra how lookes our
New Miſtris they ſay ſhe's a plagie ſhrew.
I and that thou ſhalt find I can tell thee and thou
Doſt not pleaſe her well, why my Maiſter
Has ſuch a doo with hir as it paſſeth and he's euen
like a madman.
Why Sander what dos he ſay.
Why Ile tell you what: when they ſhould
Go to church to be maried he puts on an olde
Ierkin and a paire of canuas breeches downe to the
Small of his legge and a red cap on his head and he
Lookes as thou wilt burſt thy ſelfe with laffing
When thou ſeeſt him: he's ene as good as a
Foole for me: and then when they ſhould go to dinner
He made me Saddle the horſe and away he came.
And nere tarried for dinner and therefore you had beſt
Get ſupper reddy againſt they come, for
They be hard at hand I am ſure by this time.
Sounes ſee where they be all redy.
Now welcome Kate: wher'es theſe villains
Here, what? not ſupper yet vppon the borde:
Nor table ſpred nor nothing don at all,
Wheres that villaine that I ſent before.
Now, adſum, ſir.
Come hether you villaine Ile cut your noſe,
You Rogue: helpe me of with my bootes: wilt pleaſe
You to lay the cloth? ſounes the villaine
Hurts my foote? pull eaſely I ſay; yet againe.
Sounes? burnt and skorcht who dreſt this meate?
Forſouth Iohn cooke.
He throwes downe the table and meate
and all, and beates them.
Go you villaines bringe you me ſuch meate,
Out of my ſight I ſay and beare it hence,
Come Kate wele haue other meate prouided,
Is there a fire in my chamber ſir?
I forſooth.
Sounes? I thinke of my conſcience my Maſters
Mad ſince he was maried.
I laft what a boxe he gaue Sander
For pulling of his bootes.
I hurt his foote for the nonce man.
Did you ſo you damned villaine.
This humor muſt I holde me to a while,
To bridle and hold backe my headſtrong wife,
With curbes of hunger: eaſe: and want of ſleepe,
Nor ſleepe nor meate ſhall ſhe inioie to night,
Ile mew her vp as men do mew their hawkes,
And make her gentlie come vnto the lure,
Were ſhe as ſtuborne or as full of ſtrength
As were the Thracian horſe Alcides tamde,
That King Egeus fed with fleſh of men,
Yet would I pull her downe and make her come
As hungry hawkes do flie vnto there lure.
Valeria attend: I haue a louely loue,
As bright as is the heauen criſtalline,
As faire as is the milke white way of Ioue,
As chaſt as Phoebe in her ſommer ſportes,
As ſofte and tender as the aſure downe,
That circles Cithereas ſiluer doues.
Her do I meane to make my louely bride,
And in her bed to breath the ſweete content,
That I thou knowſt long time haue aimed at.
Now Valeria it reſts in thee to helpe
To compaſſe this, that I might gaine my loue,
Which eaſilie thou maiſt performe at will,
If that the marchant which thou toldſt me of,
Will as he ſayd go to Alfonſos houſe,
And ſay he is my father, and there with all
Pas ouer certaine deedes of land to me,
That I thereby may gaine my hearts deſire,
And he is promiſed reward of me.
Feare not my Lord Ile fetch him ſtraight to you,
For hele do any thing that you command,
But tell me my Lord, is Ferando married then?
He is: and Polidor ſhortly ſhall be wed,
And he meanes to tame his wife erelong.
He ſaies ſo.
Faith he's gon vnto the taming ſchoole.
The taming ſchoole▪ why is there ſuch a place?
I: and Ferando is the Maiſter of the ſchoole.
Thats rare: but what decorum dos he vſe?
Faith I know not: but by ſom odde deuiſe
Or other, but come Valeria I long to ſee the man,
By whome we muſt compriſe our plotted drift,
That I may tell him what we haue to doo.
Then come my Lord and I will bring you to him ſtraight.
Agreed, then lets go.
Come Miſtris.
Sander I prethe helpe me to ſome meate,
I am ſo faint that I can ſcarſely ſtande.
I marry miſtris but you know my maiſter
Has giuen me a charge that you muſt eate nothing,
But that which he himſelfe giueth you.
Why man thy Maiſter needs neuer know it.
You ſay true indede: why looke you Miſtris,
What ſay you to a peeſe of beeffe and muſtard now?
Why I ſay tis excellent meate, canſt thou helpe me to ſome?
I, I could helpe you to ſome but that
I doubt the muſtard is too collerick for you,
But what ſay you to a ſheepes head and garlick?
Why any thing, I care not what it be.
I but the garlike I doubt will make your breath
ſtincke, and then my Maiſter will courſe me for letting
You eate it: But what ſay you to a fat Capon?
Thats meate for a King ſweet Sander helpe
Me to ſome of it.
Nay berlady then tis too deere for vs, we muſt
Not meddle with the Kings meate.
Out villaine doſt thou mocke me,
Take that for thy ſawſineſſe.
Sounes are you ſo light fingerd with a murrin,
Ile keepe you faſting for it this two daies.
I tell thee villaine Ile tear the fleſh of
Thy face and eate it and thou prates to me thus.
Here comes my Maiſter now hele courſe you.
Se here Kate I haue prouided meate for thee,
Here take it: what iſt not worthie thankes,
Goe ſirra? take it awaie againe you ſhallbe
Thankefull for the next you haue.
Why I thanke you for it.
Nay now tis not worth a pin go ſirray and take
It hence I ſay.
Yes ſir Ile Carrie it hence: Maiſter let her
Haue none for ſhe can fight as hungrie as ſhe is.
I pray you ſir let it ſtand, for Ile eate
Some with her my ſelfe.
Well ſirra ſet it downe againe.
Nay nay I pray you let him take it hence,
And keepe it for your owne diete for Ile none,
Ile nere be beholding to you for your Meate,
I tell thee flatlie here vnto the thy teethe
Thou ſhalt not keepe me nor feede me as thou liſt,
For I will home againe vnto my fathers houſe.
I, when you'r meeke and gentell but not
Before, I know your ſtomack is not yet come downe,
Therefore no maruell thou canſte not eate,
And I will goe vnto your Fathers houſe,
Come Polidor let vs goe in againe,
And Kate come in with vs I know ere longe,
That thou and I ſhall louingly agree.
Now Senior Phylotus, we will go
Vnto Alfonſos houſe, and be ſure you ſay
As I did tell you, concerning the man
That dwells in Ceſtus, whoſe ſon I ſaid I was,
For you doo very much reſemble him,
And feare not: you may be bold to ſpeake your mind.
I warrant you ſir take you no care,
Ile vſe my ſelfe ſo cunning in the cauſe,
As you ſhall ſoone inioie your harts delight.
Thankes ſweet Phylotus, then ſtay you here,
And I will go and fetch him hither ſtraight.
Ho, Senior Alfonſo: a word with you.
Whoſe there? what Aurelius whats the matter
That you ſtand ſo like a ſtranger at the doore?
My father ſir is newly come to towne,
And I haue brought him here to ſpeake with you,
Concerning thoſe matters that I tolde you of,
And he can certefie you of the truth.
Is this your father? you are welcome ſir.
Thankes Alfonſo, for thats your name I geſſe,
I vnderſtand my ſon hath ſet his mind
And bent his liking to your daughters loue,
And for becauſe he is my only ſon,
And I would gladly that he ſhould doo well,
I tell you ſir, I not miſlike his choiſe,
If you agree to giue him your conſent,
He ſhall haue liuing to maintaine his ſtate,
Three hundred poundes a yeere I will aſſure
To him and to his heyres, and if they do ioyne,
And knit themſelues in holy wedlock bande,
A thouſand maſſie in gots of pure gold,
And twiſe as many bares of ſiluer plate,
I freely giue him, and in writing ſtraight,
I will confirme what I haue ſaid in wordes.
Truſt me I muſt commend your liberall mind,
And louing care you beare vnto your ſon,
And here I giue him freely my conſent,
As for my daughter I thinke he knowes her mind,
And I will in large her dowrie for your ſake.
And ſolemniſe with ioie your nuptiall rites,
But is this gentleman of Ceſtus too?
He is the Duke of Ceſtus thriſe renowned ſon,
Who for the loue his honour beares to me:
Hath thus accompanied me to this place.
You weare to blame you told me not before,
Pardon me my Lord, for if I had knowne
Your honour had bin here in place with me,
I would haue donne my dutie to your honour.
Thankes good Alfonſo: but I did come to ſee
When as theſe marriage rites ſhould be performed,
And if in theſe nuptialls you vouchſafe,
To honour thus the prince of Ceſtus frend,
In celebration of his ſpouſall rites,
He ſhall remaine a laſting friend to you,
What ſaies Aurelius father.
I humbly thanke your honour good my Lord,
And ere we parte before your honor here:
Shall articles of ſuch content be drawne,
As twixt our houſes and poſteities,
Eternallie this league of peace ſhall laſt,
Inuiolat and pure on either part:
With all my heart, and if your honour pleaſe,
To walke along with vs vnto my houſe,
We will confirme theſe leagues of laſting loue.
Come then Aurelius I will go with you.
Maſter the haberdaſher has brought my
Miſtreſſe home her cappe here.
Come hither ſirra: what haue you there?
A veluet cappe ſir and it pleaſe you.
Who ſpoake for it? didſt thou Kate?
What if I did, come hither ſirra, giue me
The cap, Ile ſee if it will fit me.
O monſtrous: why it becomes thee not,
Let me ſee it Kate: here ſirra take it hence,
This cappe is out of faſhion quite.
The faſhion is good inough: belike you,
Meane to make a foole of me.
Why true he meanes to make a foole of thee,
To haue thee put on ſuch a curtald cappe,
ſirra begon with it.
Here is the Taylor too with my Miſtris gowne.
Let me ſee it Taylor: what with cuts and iagges?
Sounes you villaine, thou haſt ſpoiled the gowne.
Why ſir I made it as your man gaue me direction,
You may reade the note here.
Come hither ſirra: Taylor reade the note.
Item a faire round compaſt cape.
I thats true.
And a large truncke ſleeue.
Thats a lie maiſter, I ſayd two truncke ſleeues.
Well ſir goe forward.
Item a looſe bodied gowne.
Maiſter if euer I ſayd looſe bodies gowne,
Sew me in a ſeame and beate me to death,
With a bottome of browne thred.
I made it as the note bad me.
I ſay the note lies in his throate and thou too,
And thou ſayſt it.
Nay nay nere be ſo hot ſirra, for I feare you not.
Dooſt thou heare Taylor, thou haſt braued
Many men: braue not me.
Thou'ſt faſte many men.
Well ſir.
Face not me Ile nether be faſte nor braued
At thy handes I can tell thee.
Come come I like the faſhion of it well enough,
Heres more a do then needs Ile haue it,
And if you do not like it hide your eies,
I thinke I ſhall haue nothing by your will.
Go I ſay and take it vp for your maiſters vſe.
Souns: villaine not for thy life touch it not,
Souns, take vp my miſtris gowne to his
Maiſters vſe?
Well ſir: whats your conceit of it.
I haue a deeper conceite in it then you
thinke for, take vp my Miſtris gowne
To his maiſters vſe?
Tailor come hether: for this time take it
Hence againe, and Ile content thee for thy paines.
I thanke you ſir.
Come Kate we now will go ſee thy fathers houſe
Euen in theſe honeſt meane abilliments,
Our purſes ſhallbe rich, our garments plaine,
To ſhrowd our bodies from the winter rage,
And thats inough, what ſhould we care for more.
Thy ſiſters Kate to morrow muſt be wed,
And I haue promiſed them thou ſhouldſt be there
The morning is well vp lets haſt away,
It will be nine a clocke ere we come there.
Nine a clock, why tis allreadie paſt two
In the after noone by all the clocks in the towne.
I ſay tis but nine a clock in the morning.
I ſay tis tow a clock in the after noone.
It ſhall be nine then ere we go to your fathers,
Come backe againe, we will not go to day.
Nothing but croſſing of me ſtill,
Ile haue you ſay as I doo ere you go.
Faire Emelia ſommers ſun bright Queene,
Brighter of hew then is the burning clime,
Where Phoebus in his bright aequator ſits,
Creating gold and preſſious minneralls,
What would Emelia doo? if I were forſt
To leaue faire Athens and to range the world.
Should thou aſſay to scale the ſeate of loue,
Mounting the ſuttle ayrie regions
Or be ſnacht vp as erſte was Ganimed,
Loue ſhould giue winges vnto my ſwift deſires,
And prune my thoughts that I would follow thee,
Or fall and periſh as did Icarus.
Sweetly reſolued faire Emelia,
But would Phylema ſay as much to me,
If I ſhould aske a queſtion now of thee,
What if the duke of Ceſtus only ſon,
Which came with me vnto your fathers houſe,
Should ſeeke to git Phylemas loue from me,
And make thee Duches of that ſtately towne,
Wouldſt thou not then forſake me for his loue?
Not for great Neptune, no nor Ioue himſelfe,
Will Phylema leaue Aurelius loue,
Could he inſtall me Empres of the world,
Or make me Queene and guidres of the heauens,
Yet would I not exchange thy loue for his,
Thy company is poore Philemas heauen,
And without thee, heauen were hell to me.
And ſhould my loue as erſte did Hercules
Attempt to paſſe the burning valtes of hell,
I would with piteous lookes and pleaſing wordes,
As once did Orpheus with his harmony,
And rauiſhing ſound of his melodious harpe,
Intreate grim Pluto and of him obtaine,
That thou mighteſt go and ſafe retourne againe.
And ſhould my loue as earſt Leander did,
Attempte to ſwimme the boyling heliſpont
For Heros loue: no towers of braſſe ſhould hold
But I would follow thee through thoſe raging flouds,
With lockes diſheuered and my breſt all bare,
With bended knees vpon Abidas ſhoore,
I would with ſmokie ſighes and briniſh teares,
Importune Neptune and the watry Gods,
To ſend a guard of ſiluer ſcaled Dolphyns,
With ſounding Tritons to be our conuoy,
And to tranſport vs ſafe vnto the ſhore,
Whilſt I would hang about thy louely necke,
Redoubling kiſſe on kiſſe vpon thy cheekes,
And with our paſtime ſtill the ſwelling waues.
Should Polidor as great Achilles did,
Onely imploy himſelfe to follow armes,
Like to the warlike Amazonian Queene,
Pentheſelea Hectors paramore,
Who foyld the bloudie Pirrhus murderous greeke,
Ile thruſt my ſelfe amongſt the thickeſt throngs,
And with my vtmoſt force aſſiſt my loue.
Let Eole ſtorme: be mild and quiet thou,
Let Neptune ſwell, be Aurelius calme and pleaſed,
I care not I, betide what may betide,
Let fates and fortune doo the worſt they can,
I recke them not: they not diſcord with me,
Whilſt that my loue and I do well agree▪
Sweet Phylema bewties mynerall,
From whence the ſun exhales his glorious ſhine,
And clad the heauen in thy reflected raies,
And now my liefeſt loue, the time drawes nie,
That Himen mounted in his ſaffron robe,
Muſt with his torches waight vpon thy traine,
As Hellens brothers on the horned Moone,
Now Iuno to thy number ſhall I adde,
The faireſt bride that euer Marchant had.
Come faire Emelia the preeſte is gon,
And at the church your father and the reſte,
Do ſtay to ſee our marriage rites performde,
And knit in ſight of heauen this Gordian knot.
That teeth of fretting time may nere vntwiſt,
Then come faire loue and gratulate with me,
This daies content and ſweet ſolemnity.
Sim muſt they be married now?
I my Lord.
Looke Sim the foole is come againe now.
Sirra go fetch our horſſes forth, and bring
Them to the backe gate preſentile.
I will ſir I warrant you,
Come Kate the Moone ſhines cleere to night methinkes.
The moone? why husband you are deceiud
It is the ſun.
Yet againe: come backe againe it ſhall be
The moone ere we come at your fathers.
Why Ile ſay as you ſay it is the moone.
Ieſus ſaue the glorious moone.
Ieſus ſaue the glorious moone.
I am glad Kate your ſtomack is come downe,
I know it well thou knoweſt it is the ſun,
But I did trie to ſee if thou wouldſt ſpeake,
And croſſe me now as thou haſt donne before,
And truſt me kate hadſt thou not named the moone,
We had gon back againe as ſure as death,
But ſoft whoſe this thats comming here.
Thus all alone from Ceſtus am I come,
And left my princelie courte and noble traine,
To come to Athens, and in this diſguiſe,
To ſee what courſe my ſon Aurelius takes,
But ſtay, heres ſome it may be Trauells thether,
Good ſir can you derect me the way to Athens?
Faire louely maide yoong and affable,
More cleere of hew and far more beautifull,
Then pretious Sardonix or purple rockes,
Of Amitheſts or gliſtering Hiaſinthe,
More amiable farre then is the plain,
Where gliſtring Cepherus in ſiluer boures,
Gaſeth vpon the Giant Andromede,
Sweet Kate entertaine this louely woman.
I thinke the man is mad he calles me a woman.
Faire louely lady, bright and Chriſtalline,
Bewteous and ſtately as the eie-traind bird,
As glorious as the morning waſht with dew,
Within whoſe eies ſhe takes her dawning beames,
And golden ſommer ſleepes vpon thy cheekes,
Wrap vp thy radiations in ſome cloud,
Leaſt that thy bewty make this ſtately towne,
Inhabitable like the burning Zone,
With ſweet reflections of thy louely face.
What is ſhe mad to? or is my ſhape transformd▪
That both of them perſwade me I am a woman,
But they are mad ſure, and therefore Ile begon,
And leaue their companies for fear of harme,
And vnto Athens haſt to ſeeke my ſon.
Why ſo Kate this was friendly done of thee,
And kindly too: why thus muſt we two liue,
One minde, one heart, and one content for both,
This good old man dos thinke that we are mad,
And glad he is I am ſure, that he is gonne,
But come ſweet Kate for we will after him,
And now perſwade him to his ſhape againe.
Come louely ſonnes your marriage rites performed,
Lets hie vs home to ſee what cheere we haue,
I wonder that Ferando and his wife
Comes not to ſee this great ſolemnitie.
No maruell if Ferando be away,
His wife I think hath troubled ſo his wits,
That he remaines at home to keepe them warme,
For forward wedlocke as the prouer be ſayes,
Hath brought him to his night cappe long agoe.
But Polidor let my ſon and you take heede,
That Ferando ſay not ere long as much to you,
And now Alfonſo more to ſhew my loue,
If vnto Ceſtus you do ſend your ſhips,
My ſelfe will fraught them with Arabian ſilkes,
Rich affrick ſpices Arras counter poines,
Muske Caſſia: ſweet ſmelling Ambergreece,
Pearle, curroll▪ chriſtall, iett, and iuorie,
To gratulate the fauors of my ſon,
And friendly loue that you haue ſhone to him.
And for to honour him and this faire bride,
Ile yerly ſend you from my fathers courte,
Cheſts of refind ſuger ſeuerally,
Ten tunne of tunis wine, ſucket ſweet druges,
To celibrate and ſolemniſe this day,
And cuſtome free your marchants ſhall conuerſe:
And interchange the profits of your land,
Sending you gold for braſſe, ſiluer for leade,
Caſſes of ſilke for packes of woll and cloth,
To binde this friendſhip and confirme this league.
I am glad ſir that you would be ſo franke,
Are you become the Duke of Ceſtus ſon,
And reuels with my treaſure in the towne,
Baſe villaine that thus diſhonoreſt me.
Sounes it is the Duke what ſhall I doo,
Diſhonour thee why, knowſt thou what thou ſaiſt?
Her's no villaine: he will not know me now,
But what ſay you? haue you forgot me too?
Why ſir, are you acquainted with my ſon?
With thyſon? no truſt me if he be thine,
I pray you ſir who am I?
Pardon me father: humblie on my knees,
I do intreat your grace to heare me ſpeake.
Peace villaine: lay handes on them,
And ſend them to priſon ſtraight.
I ſay wele haue no ſending to priſon.
My Lord this is but the play, theyr but in ieſt.
I tell thee Sim wele haue no ſending,
To priſon thats flat: why Sim am not I Don Chriſto Vary?
Therefore I ſay they ſhall not go to priſon.
No more they ſhall not my Lord,
They be run away.
Are they run away Sim? thats well,
Then gis ſome more drinke, and let them play againe.
Here my Lord.
Ah trecherous boy that durſt preſume,
To wed thy ſelfe without thy fathers leaue,
I ſweare by fayre Cintheas burning rayes,
By Merops head and by ſeauen mouthed Nile,
Had I but knowne ere thou hadſt wedded her,
Were in thy breſt the worlds immortall ſoule,
This angrie ſword ſhould rip thy hatefull cheſt,
And hewd thee ſmaller then the Libian ſandes,
Turne hence thy face: oh cruell impious boy,
Alfonſo I did not thinke you would preſume,
To mach your daughter with my princely houſe,
And nere make me acquainted with the cauſe▪
My Lord by heauens I ſweare vnto your grace,
I knew none other but Valeria your man,
Had bin the Duke of Ceſtus nobleſon,
Nor did my daughter I dare ſweare for her.
That damned villaine that hath deluded me▪
Whome I did ſend guide vnto my ſon,
Oh that my furious force could cleaue the earth,
That I might muſter bands of helliſh feendes,
To rack his heart and teare his impious ſoule.
The ceaſeleſſe turning of celeſtiall orbes,
Kindles not greater flames in flitting aire,
Then paſſionate anguiſh of my raging breſt,
Then let my death ſweet father end your griefe,
For I it is that thus haue wrought your woes,
Then be reuengd on me for here I ſweare,
That they are innocent of what I did,
Oh had I charge to cut of Hydraes hed,
To make the topleſſe Alpes a champion field,
To kill vntamed monſters with my ſword,
To trauell dayly in the hotteſt ſun,
And watch in winter when the nightes be colde,
I would with gladneſſe vndertake them all,
And thinke the paine but pleaſure that I felt,
So that my noble father at my returne,
Would but forget and pardon my offence,
Let me intreat your grace vpon my knees,
To pardon him and let my death diſcharge
The heauy wrath your grace hath vowd gainſt him.
And good my Lord let vs intreat your grace,
To purge your ſtomack of this Melancholy,
Taynt not your princely minde with griefe my Lord,
But pardon and forgiue theſe louers faults,
That kneeling craue your gratious fauor here.
Great prince of Ceſtus, let a womans wordes,
Intreat a pardon in your lordly breſt,
Both for your princely ſon, and vs my Lord.
Aurelius ſtand vp I pardon thee,
I ſee that vertue will haue enemies,
And fortune willbe thwarting honour ſtill,
And you faire virgin too I am content,
To accept you for my daughter ſince tis don,
And ſee you princely vsde in Ceſtus courte.
Thankes good my Lord and I no longer liue,
Then I obey and honour you in all:
Let me giue thankes vnto your royall grace,
For this great honor don to me and mine,
And if your grace will walke vnto my houſe,
I will in humbleſt maner I can, ſhow
The eternall ſeruice I doo owe your grace.
Thanks good Alfonſo: but I came alone,
And not as did beſeeme the Ceſtian Duke,
Nor would I haue it knowne within the towne,
That I was here and thus without my traine,
But as I came alone ſo will I go,
And leaue my ſon to ſolemniſe his feaſt,
And ere't belong Ile come againe to you,
And do him honour as beſeemes the ſon
Of mightie Ierobell the Ceſtian Duke,
Till when Ile leaue you, Farwell Aurelius.
Not yet my Lord, Ile bring you to your ſhip.
Whoſe within there? come hither ſirs my Lords
A ſleepe againe: go take him eaſily vp,
And put him in his one apparell againe,
And lay him in the place where we did find him,
Iuſt vnderneath the alehouſe ſide below,
But ſee you wake him not in any caſe.
It ſhall be don my Lord come helpe to beare him hence,
Come gentlemen now that ſuppers donne,
How ſhall we ſpend the time till we go to bed?
Faith if you will in triall of our wiues,
Who will come ſowneſt at their husbands call.
Nay then Ferando he muſt needes ſit out,
For he may call I thinke till he be weary,
Before his wife will come before ſhe liſt.
Tis well for you that haue ſuch gentle wiues,
Yet in this triall will I not ſit out,
It may be Kate will come as ſoone as yours.
My wife comes ſooneſt for a hundred pound.
I take it: Ile lay as much to youres,
That my wife comes as ſoone as I do ſend.
How now Ferando you dare not lay belike.
Why true I dare not lay indeede;
But how, ſo little mony on ſo ſure a thing,
A hundred pound: why I haue layd as much
Vpon my dogge, in running at a Deere,
She ſhall not come ſo farre for ſuch a trifle,
But will you lay fiue hundred markes with me,
And whoſe wife ſooneſt comes when he doth call,
And ſhewes her ſelfe moſt louing vnto him,
Let him inioye the wager I haue laid,
Now what ſay you? dare you aduenture thus?
I weare it a thouſand pounds I durſt preſume
On my wiues loue: and I will lay with thee.
How now ſons what in conference ſo hard,
May I without offence, know where abouts.
Faith father a waighty cauſe about our wiues
Fiue hundred markes already we haue layd,
And he whoſe wife doth ſhew moſt loue to him,
He muſt inioie the wager to himſelfe.
Why then Ferando he is ſure to loſe,
I promiſe thee ſon thy wife will hardly come,
And therefore I would not wiſh thee lay ſo much.
Tuſh father were it ten times more,
I durſt aduenture on my louely Kate,
But if I loſe Ile pay, and ſo ſhall you.
Vpon mine honour if I looſe Ile pay.
And ſo will I vpon my faith I vow.
Then ſit we downe and let vs ſend for them.
I promiſe thee Ferando I am afraid thou wilt loſe
Ile ſend for my wife firſt, Valeria
Go bid your Miſtris come to me.
I will my Lord.
Now for my hundred pound.
Would any lay ten hundred more with me,
I know I ſhould obtaine it by her loue.
I pray God you haue not laid too much already.
Truſt me Ferando I am ſure you haue,
For you I dare preſume haue loſt it all.
Now ſirra what ſaies your miſtris?
She is ſomething buſie but ſhele come anon.
Why ſo, did not I tell you this before,
She is buſie and cannot come.
I pray God your wife ſend you ſo good an anſwere
She may be buſie yet ſhe ſayes ſhele come.
Well well: Polidor ſend you for your wife.
Agreed Boy deſire your miſtris to come hither.
I will ſir
I ſo ſo he deſiers her to come.
Polidor I dare preſume for thee,
I thinke thy wife will not deny to come.
And I do maruell much Aurelius,
That your wife came not when you ſent for her.
Now wheres your Miſtris?
She bad me tell you that ſhe will not come,
And you haue any buſineſſe, you muſt come to her.
Oh monſtrous intollerable preſumption,
Worſe then a blaſing ſtarre, or ſnow at midſommer,
Earthquakes or any thing vnſeaſonable,
She will not come: but he muſt come to her.
Well ſir I pray you lets here what
Anſwere your wife will make.
Sirra, command your Miſtris to come
To me preſentlie.
I thinke my wife for all ſhe did not come,
Will proue moſt kinde for now I haue no feare,
For I am ſure Ferandos wife, ſhe will not come.
The mores the pittie: then I muſt loſe.
But I haue won for ſee where Kate doth come.
Sweet husband did you ſend for me?
I did my loue I ſent for thee to come,
Come hither Kate, whats that vpon thy head
Nothing husband but my cap I thinke.
Pull it of and treade it vnder thy feete,
Tis fooliſh I will not haue thee weare it.
Oh wonderfull metamorphoſis.
This is a wonder: almoſt paſt beleefe.
This is a token of her true loue to me,
And yet Ile trie her further you ſhall ſee,
Come hither Kate where are thy ſiſters.
They be ſitting in the bridall chamber.
Fetch them hither and if they will not come,
Bring them perforce and make them come with thee.
I will.
I promiſe thee Ferando I would haue ſworne,
Thy wife would nere haue donne ſo much for thee.
But you ſhall ſee ſhe will do more then this,
For ſee where ſhe brings her ſiſters forth by force.
See husband I haue brought them both.
Tis well don Kate.
I ſure and like a louing peece, your worthy
To haue great praiſe for this attempt.
I for making a foole of her ſelfe and vs.
Beſhrew thee Phylema, thou haſt
Loſt me a hundred pound to night.
For I did lay that thou wouldſt firſt haue come.
But thou Emelia haſt loſt me a great deale more.
You might haue kept it better then,
Who bad you lay?
Now louely Kate before there husbands here,
I prethe tell vnto theſe hedſtrong women,
What dutie wiues doo owe vnto their husbands.
Then you that liue thus by your pompered wills,
Now liſt to me and marke what I ſhall ſay,
Theternall power that with his only breath,
Shall cauſe this end and this beginning frame,
Not in time, nor before time, but with time, confusd,
For all the courſe of yeares, of ages, moneths,
Of ſeaſons temperate, of dayes and houres,
Are tund and ſtopt, by meaſure of his hand,
The firſt world was, a forme, without a forme,
A heape confusd a mixture all deformd,
A gulfe of gulfes, a body bodiles,
Where all the elements were orderles,
Before the great commander of the world▪
The King of Kings the glorious God of heauen▪
Who in ſix daies did frame his heauenly worke,
And made all things to ſtand in perfit courſe.
Then to his image he did make a man.
Olde Adam and from his ſide a ſleepe,
A rib was taken, of which the Lord did make,
The woe of man ſo termd by Adam then,
Woman for that, by her came ſinne to vs,
And for her ſin was Adam doomd to die,
As Sara to her husband, ſo ſhould we,
Obey them, loue them, keepe, and nouriſh them,
If they by any meanes doo want our helpes,
Laying our handes vnder theire feete to tread,
If that by that we, might procure there eaſe,
And for a preſident Ile firſt begin,
And lay my hand vnder my husbands feete
Inough ſweet, the wager thou haſt won,
And they I am ſure cannot denie the ſame.
I Ferando the wager thou haſt won,
And for to ſhew thee how I am pleaſd in this,
A hundred poundes I freely giue thee more,
Another dowry for another daughter,
For ſhe is not the ſame ſhe was before.
Thankes ſweet father, gentlemen godnight
For Kate and I will leaue you forto night,
Tis Kate and I am wed, and you are ſped.
And ſo farwell for we will to our beds.
Now Aurelius what ſay you to this?
Beleeue me father I reioice to ſee,
Ferando and his wife ſo louingly agree.
How now Polidor in a dump, what ſayſt thou man?
I ſay thou art a ſhrew.
Thats better then a ſheepe.
Well ſince tis don let it go, come lets in.
Now that the darkeſome night is ouerpaſt,
And dawning day apeares in criſtall sky,
Now muſt I haſt abroad: but ſoft whoſe this?
What Slie oh wondrous hath he laine here allnight,
Ile wake him, I thinke he's ſtarued by this,
But that his belly was ſo ſtuft with ale,
What how Slie, Awake for ſhame.
Sim gis ſome more wine: whats all the
Plaiers gon: am not I a Lord?
A Lord with a murrin: come art thou dronken ſtill?
Whoſe this? Tapſter, oh Lord ſirra, I haue had
The braueſt dreame to night, that euer thou
Hardeſt in all thy life.
I marry but you had beſt get you home,
For your wife will courſe you for dreming here to night,
Will ſhe? I know now how to tame a ſhrew,
I dreamt vpon it all this night till now,
And thou haſt wakt me out of the beſt dreame
That euer I had in my life, but Ile to my
Wife preſently and tame her too
And if ſhe anger me.
Nay tarry Slie for Ile go home with thee,
And heare the reſt that thou haſt dreamt to night.