YOu whoreſon drunken ſlaue you had beſt be gone,
And empty your drunken panch ſomewhere elſe,
For in this houſe thou ſhalt not reſt to night.
Tilly vally, by criſee Tapſter Ile feſe you anone,
Fills the tother pot, and all's paid for: looke you,
I doe drinke it of mine owne inſtigation,
Heere Ile lie awhile: why Tapſter I ſay,
Fills a freſh cuſhen heere,
Heigh ho, heere's good warme lying.
Now that the gloomy ſhadow of the night,
Longing to view Orions driſling lookes,
Leapes from th'antarticke world vnto the skie,
And dims the welkin with her pitchie breath,
And darkeſome night oreſhades the criſtall heauens,
Heere breake we off our hunting for to night.
Couple vppe the hounds and let vs
And bid the huntſman lee them
For they haue all deſeru'd it well to daie.
But ſoft, what ſleepie fellow is this res heere?
Or is he dead, ſee one what he
My Lord, tis nothing but a drunken ſleepe
His head is too heauie for his bodie,
And he hath drunke ſo much that he can go no furder.
Fie, how the ſlauiſh villaine ſtinkes of drinke.
Ho, ſirha ariſe. What ſo found aſleepe?
Goe take him vp, and beare him to my houſe,
And beare him eaſily for feare he wake,
And in my faireſt chamber make a fire,
And ſet a ſumptuous banquet on the boord,
And put my richeſt garments on his backe,
Then ſet him at the Table in a chaire:
When tha done, againſt he ſhall awake,
Let heauey muſicke play about him ſtill,
Go two of you away, and beare him hence,
And then Ile tell you what I haue deuiſde,
But ſee in any caſe you wake him not.
Now take my cloke, and giue me one of yours,
All fellowes now, and ſee you take me ſo:
For we will waite vpon this drunken man,
To ſee his countenance when he doth awake,
And find himſelfe clothed in ſuch attire,
With heauenly muſicke ſounding in his eares,
And ſuch a banquet ſet before his eyes,
The fellow ſure will thinke he is in heauen,
But we will about him when he wakes,
And ſee you call him Lord at euery word,
And offer thou him his horſe to ride abroad,
And thou his hawkes and houndes to hunt the deere▪
And I will aske what ſutes he meanes to weare,
And what ſo ere he ſaith ſee you doo not laugh,
But ſtill perſwade him that he is a Lord.
And it pleaſe your honour your plaiers be come
And doo attend your honours pleaſure here.
The fitteſt time they could haue choſen out,
Bid one or two of them come hither ſtraight,
Now will I fit my ſelfe accordinglie,
For they ſhall play to him when he awakes.
Now ſirs, what ſtore of plaies haue you?
Mary my lord you may haue a Tragicall,
Or acommoditie, or what you will.
And whats the name of your Comedie?
Marrie my lord tis calde The taming of a Shrew.
Tis a good leſſon for vs my L. for vs that are maried men
The taming of a ſhrew, thats excellent ſure,
Go ſee that you make you readie ſtraight,
For you muſt plaie before a lord to night,
Say you are his men and I your fellow,
Hee's ſomething fooliſh, but what ſo ere he ſaies,
See that you be not daſht out of countenance.
And ſirha, go you make you readie ſtraight,
And dreſſe your ſelfe like ſome louelie ladie,
And when I cal, ſee that you come to me,
For I will ſay to him thou art his wife,
Dally with him and hug him in thine armes,
And if he deſire to got to bed with thee,
Then faine ſome ſcuſe and ſay thou wilt anon.
Be gone I ſay, and ſee thou dooſt it well.
Feare not my Lord, Ile handle him well enough
And make him thinke I loue him mightilie.
Now ſirs, go you and make you ready too,
For you muſt play aſſoone as he doth wake.
O braue, ſirha Tom, we muſt play before
A fooliſh Lord, come lets go make vs ready▪
Go get a diſhclout to make cleane your ſhooes,
And Ile ſpeake for the properties, My Lord, we muſt
Haue a ſhoulder of mutton for a propertie,
And a little vinegre to make our Diuell rore.
Very well ſirha, ſee that they want nothing.
So ſirha, now go call my Lord,
And tell him that all things are ready as he willd it.
Set thou ſome wine vpon the boord,
And then Ile go fetch my Lord preſently.
How now, what is all things readie?
Yea my Lord.
Then ſound the muſicke and Ile wake him ſtrait,
And ſee you doe as earſt I gaue in charge.
My Lord, my Lord, he ſleepes ſoundly, my Lord.
Tapſter, giues alittle ſmal ale: Heigh ho.
Heere's wine, my Lord, the pureſt of the grape.
For which Lord?
For your honor, my Lord.
Who I, am I a Lord? Ieſus what fine apparell haue I got.
More richer far your honour hath to weare,
And if it pleaſe you I will fetch them ſtraight.
And if your honour pleaſe to ride abroad,
Ile fetch your luſtie ſteedes more ſwift of pace
Then winged Pegaſus in all his pride,
That ran ſo ſwiftlie ouer Perſian plaines.
And if your honour pleaſe to hunt the deere,
Your hounds ſtands readie cuppled at the doore,
Who in running will oretake the Row,
And make the long breathde Tygre broken winded.
By the maſſe I thinke I am a Lord indeed,
Whats thy name?
Simon and if it pleaſe your honour.
Sim, thats as much to ſay Simion or Simon
Put forth thy hand and fill the pot.
Giue me thy hand, Sim am I a lord indeed?
I my gracious Lord, and your louely ladie
Long time hath mourned for your abſence heere.
And now with ioy behold where ſhe dooth come
To gratulate your honours ſafe returne.
Sim. Is this ſhe?
I my Lord.
Maſſe tis a prettie wench, whats her name?
Oh that my louelie Lord would once vouchſafe
To looke on me, and leaue theſe frantike fits,
Or were I now but halfe ſo eloquent,
To paint in words what Ile performe in deedes,
I know your honour then would pittie me.
Harke you miſtreſſe, will you eate a peece of bread?
Come ſit downe on my knee, Sim drinke to hir Sim,
For ſhe and I will go to bed anon.
May it pleaſe you, your honors plaiers be come
To offer your honour a plaie.
A plaie Sim, O braue, be they my plaiers?
I my Lord.
Is there not a foole in the plaie?
Yes my Lord.
When will they plaie Sim?
Euen when it pleaſe your honor, they be readie.
My Lord, Ile go bid them begin their plaie.
Doo, but looke that you come againe.
I warrant you my lord, I will not leaue you thus.
Come Sim, where be the plaiers? Sim ſtand by me,
And weele flowt the plaiers out of their coates.
Ile cal them my lord. Ho where are you there?
Sound Trumpets.
Welcome to Athens my beloued friend,
To Platoes ſchoole and Ariſtotles walks,
Welcome from Ceſtus famous for the loue
Of good Leander and his Tragedie,
For whome the Heleſpont weepes briniſh teares,
The greateſt griefe is I cannot as I would
Giue entertainment to my deereſt friend.
Thankes noble Polidor my ſecond ſelfe,
The faithfull loue which I haue found in thee
Hath made me leaue my fathers princelie court,
The Duke of Ceſtus thriſe renowmed ſeate,
To come to Athens thus to find thee out,
Which, ſince I haue ſo happily attaind,
My fortune now I do account as great
As earſt did Caeſar when he conquered moſt,
But tel me noble friend, where ſhal we lodge,
For I am vnacquainted in this place.
My Lord, if you vouchſafe of ſchollers fare,
My houſe, my ſelfe, and al is yours to vſe,
You and your men ſhall ſtaie and lodge with me.
With all my heart, I wil requite thy loue.
But ſtaie; what dames are theſe ſo bright of hew
Whoſe eies are brighter than the lampes of heauen?
Fairer then rocks of pearle and pretious ſtone,
More louely far then is the morning ſunne,
When firſt ſhe opes hir oriental gates.
Daughters, be gone, and hie you to the church,
And I will hie me downe vnto the key
To ſee what marchandiſe is come aſhore.
Why how now my Lord, what, in adumpe,
To ſee theſe damſels paſſe away ſo ſoone?
Truſt me my friend I muſt confeſſe to thee,
I tooke ſo much delight in theſe faire dames
As I do wiſh they had not gone ſo ſoone:
But if thou canſt, reſolue me what they be,
And what old man it was that went with them,
For I do long to ſee them once againe.
I cannot blame your honor, good my Lorde,
For they are both louely, wiſe, faire, and yong,
And one of them, the yongeſt of the three
I long haue lou'd (ſweet frind) and ſhe lou'd me,
But neuer yet we could not find a meanes
How we might compaſſe our deſired ioyes.
Why, is not her father willing to the match?
Yes truſt me, but he hath ſolemnly ſworne,
His eldeſt daughter firſt ſhall be eſpowſde,
Before he grants his yongeſt leaue to loue:
And therefore he that meanes to get their loues▪
Muſt firſt provide for her, if he wil ſpeed,
And he that hath her ſhall be fretted ſo,
As good be wedded to the diuell himſelfe,
For ſuch a skould as ſhe did neuer liue,
And til that ſhe be ſped, none elſe can ſpeede:
Which makes me thinke, that all my labors loſt,
And who ſoere can get hir firme good will,
A large dowrie he ſhall be ſure to haue,
For hir father is a man of mightie wealth,
And an antient Citizen of the towne,
And that was he that went along with them.
But he ſhall keepe hir ſtil by my aduiſe,
And yet I needes muſt loue his ſecond daughter
The image of honor and nobility,
In whoſe ſweet perſon is compriſde the ſumme
Of Natures skill and heauenly maieſty.
I like your choiſe, and glad you choſe not mine,
Then if you like to follow on your loue,
We muſt deuiſe a meanes to find ſome one
That will attempt to wed this deuiliſh skould,
And I do know the man. Come hither boy,
Go your waies ſirha, to Ferandoes houſe,
Deſire him to take the paines to come to me,
For I muſt ſpeake with him immediatly.
I will ſir, and fetch him preſently.
A man I thinke will fit hir humour right,
As blunt in ſpeech as ſhe is ſharpe in tongue,
And he I thinke will match hir euery way,
And yet he is a man of wealth ſufficient,
And for his perſon worth as good as ſhe:
And if he compaſſe hir to be his wife,
Then may we freely viſit both our loues.
O might I ſee the cenſer of my loule
Whoſe ſacred beauty hath inchanted me,
More faire then was the Grecian Helena
For whoſe ſweet ſake ſo many princes dide;
That came with thouſand ſhips to Tenedos.
But when we come vnto hir fathers houſe,
Tel him I am a Merchants ſonne of Ceſtus,
That comes for trafficke vnto Athens here,
And here ſirha, I wil change with you for once,
And now be thou the Duke of Ceſtus ſonne,
Reuel and ſpend as if thou wert my felfe,
For I will court thy loue in this diſguiſe.
My Lord, how if the Duke your father ſhould
By ſome meanes come to Athens for to ſee
How you do profit in theſe publike ſchooles,
And find me clothed thus in your attire,
How would he take it then thinke you my Lord?
Tuſh feare not Valeria, let me alone,
But ſtay, here comes ſome other company.
Here comes them an that I did tel you of.
Good morrow gentleman to al at once.
How now Polidor, what man ſtill in loue?
Euer wooing and canſt thou neuer ſpeed?
God ſend me better lucke when I ſhal woo.
I warrant you maſter and you take my councel.
Why ſirha, are you ſo cunning?
Who I twere better for you by ſiue mae
And you could tel how to do it as wel os I.
I would thy ſter once were in the vaine,
To trie himſelfe how he could woo a wench.
Faith I am euen now a going.
I faith ſir, my maſter's going to this geere now
Whither in faith Ferando? tel me true.
To bonie Kate, the patientſt wench aliue,
The Diuel himſelfe dares ſcarce venture to woo her,
Seignior Alfonſos eldeſt daughter,
And he hath promiſde me ſix thouſand crownes
If I can win her once to be my wife,
And ſhe and I muſt woo with skoulding ſure,
And I will hold hir too't til ſhe be wearie,
Or elſe ile make her yeeld to grant me loue.
How like you this Aurelius, I thinke he knew
Our minds before we ſent to him,
But tell me, when do ye meane to ſpeake with hir?
Faith preſently, do you but ſtand aſide,
And I will make hir father bring hir hither:
And ſhe, and I, and he, will talke alone.
With all my heart, come Aurelius,
Let vs be gone and leaue him here alone.
Ho Seignior Alfonſo, who's within there?
Seignior Ferando y'are welcome hartily,
You are a ſtranger ſir vnto my houſe,
Harke you ſir, looke what I did promiſe you
Ile performe, if you get my daughters loue.
Then when I haue talke a word or two with hir,
Do you ſtep in and giue her hand to me,
And tell hir when the mariage day ſhall be,
For I do know ſhe would be maried faine,
And When our nuptiall rites be once performde
Let me alone to tame hir well inough,
Now ll her forth that I may ſpeake with hir.
Ha Kate, Come hither wench and liſt to me,
Vſe this gentleman friendly as thou canſt.
Twenty good morrows to my louely Kate.
You jeaſt I am ſure, is ſhe yours already?
I tel thee Kate I know thou lou'ſt me wel.
The Diuel you do, who told you ſo?
My mind ſweet Kate doth ſay I am the man,
Muſt wed, and bed, and marrie bonnie Kate.
Was euer ſeene ſo groſſe an aſſe as this.
I, to ſtand ſo long and neuer get a kiſſe.
Hands off I ſay, and get you from this place;
Or I will ſet my ten commandements in your face.
I prithy do Kate, they ſay thou art a ſhrew.
And I like thee the better, for I would haue thee ſo.
Let go my hand, for feare it reach your eare.
No Kate, this hand is mine, and I thy loue.
Y faith ſir no, the woodcoke wants his taile.
But yet his bil will ſerue, if the other faile,
How now Feranda, what, my daughter?
Shee's willing ſir, and loues me as hir life.
Tis for your skin then, but not to be your wife.
Come hither Kate, and let me giue thy hand
To him that I haue choſen for thy loue,
And thou to morrow ſhalt be wed to him.
Why father, what do you mean to do with me,
To giue me thus vnto this brainſicke man,
That in his mood cares not to murder me?
But yet I will conſent and marry him,
(For I me thinkes haue liu'de too long a maide,)
And match him too, or elſe his manhood a good.
Giue me thy hand, Ferando loues thee well,
And will with wealth and eaſe maintaine thy ſtate.
Here Ferando, take her for thy wiſe.
And ſunday next ſhall be our wedding day.
Why ſo, did I not tel thee I ſhould be the man?
Father, I leaue my louely Kate with you,
Prouide your ſelues againſt our mariage day,
For I muſt hie me to my country houſe
In haſte, to ſee prouiſion may be made,
To entertaine my Kate when ſhe doth come.
Do ſo, come Kate, why doſt thou looke
So ſad? be mery wench, thy wedding daie's at hand,
Sonne, fare you wel, and ſee you keepe your promiſe
So, al thus far goes well. Ho Sander.
Sander, I faith you are a beaſt, I crie God hartilie
mercy, my harts ready to run out of my belly with
laughing, I ſtood behinde the doore al this while,
And heard what you ſaid to hir.
Why, dooſt thou thinke that I did not ſpeake wel to hir?
You ſpoke like an aſſe to hir, ile tell you what,
And I had been there to haue woo'd hir, and had this
Cloke that you haue, chud haue had hir before ſhe
Had gone a foot furder, and you talke of Woodcoks for al this.
With hir, and I cannot tell you what.
Well ſirha, and yet thou ſeeſt I haue got hir
I mary, twas more by hap then any good cunning,
I hope ſheele make you one of the head men of the pariſh ſhortly.
Wel ſirha, leaue your ieaſting and go to Polidors houſe,
The yong gentleman that was here with me,
And tel him the circumſtance of al thou knowſt,
Tel him on ſunday next we muſt be married,
And if he aske thee whither I am gone,
Tel him into the countrey to my houſe,
And vpon Sunday ile be here againe.
I warrant you maiſter, feare not me▪
For doing of my buſineſſe.
Now hang him that has not a liuery cote
To ſlaſh it out and ſwaſh it out amongſt the prowdeſt
On them. Why looke you now, ile ſcarce put vp
Plaine Sander now at any of their hands, for and any
Body haue any thing to do with my maſter, ſtraight
They come crouching vpon me, I beſeech you good M.
Sander ſpeake a good word for me, and then I am ſo
Stowt and take it vpon me, and ſtand vpon my pantofles
To them out of all crie, why I haue a life like a giant
Now, but that my maſter hath ſuch a peſtilent mind
To a woman now of late, and I haue a prety wench
To my ſiſter, and I had thought to haue preferred my
Maſter to hir, and that would haue bin a good
Deale in my way, but that hees ſped already.
Friend, well met.
Souns friend, well met. I hold my life he ee
not my maſters liuery coate,
Plaine friend hop of my thum, know you who we are?
Truſt me ſir it is the vſe where I was borne,
To ſalute men after this manner, yet notwithſtanding
If you be angry with me for calling of you friend,
I am the more ſorry for it, hoping the ſtile
Of a Foole wil make you amends for all.
The ſlaue is ſorie for his fault, now we cannot be
angry, well whats the matter that you would do with vs?
Marry ſir, I heare you pertaine to ſeignior Ferando.
I and thou beeſt not blind thou maiſt ee,
Ecce ſignum, here.
Shal I intreat you to do me a meſſage to your Maſter?
I, it may be, & you tell vs from whence you come.
Marrie ſir I ſerue young Polidor your maiſters friend
Do you ſerue him, and whats your name?
My name ſirha? I tel the ſirha is cald Catapie.
Cake and pie, O my teeth waters to haue a peece of thee.
Why ſlaue, wouldſt thou eate me?
San Eate thee, who would not eate Cake and pie?
Why villaine my name is Catapie,
But wilt thou tel me where thy maiſter is.
Nay thou muſt firſt tel me where thy maiſter is.
For I haue good newes for him, I can tel thee.
Why ſee where he comes.
Come ſweet Aurelius my faithfull friend,
Now wil we go to ſee thoſe louely dames,
Richer in beauty then the orient pearle,
Whiter than is the Alpine Chriſtall mould,
And far more louely than the terrene plant,
That bluſhing in the aire turnes to a ſtone.
What Sander, what newes with you?
Marry ſir my maiſter ſends you word
That you muſt come to his wedding to morrow.
What, ſhal he be married then?
Faith I, you thinke he ſtandes as long about it as you do.
Whither is thy maiſter gone now?
Marry hee's gone to our houſe in the Countrey
To make al things in a readineſſe againſt my new
Miſtriſſe comes thither, but heele come againe to morrow.
This is ſuddainly diſpatcht belike:
Wel, ſirha boy, take Sander in with you,
And haue him to the buttrey preſentlie.
I will ſir: come Saunder.
Valeria, as erſt wee did deuiſe,
Take thou thy lute and go to Alfonſos houſe,
And ſay that Polidor ſent thee thither.
I Valeria, for he ſpoke to me,
To helpe him to ſome cunning Muſition,
To teach his eldeſt daughter on the lute,
And thou I know wilt fitte his turne ſo well,
As thou ſhalt get great fauour at his hands,
Be gone Valeria, and ſay I ſent thee to him.
I will ſir, and ſtay your comming at Alfonſos houſe.
Now ſweet Aurelius, by this deuiſe
Shal we haue leiſure for to court our loues,
For whilſt that ſhe is learning on the lute,
Hir ſiſters may take time to ſteale abrode,
For otherwiſe ſheele keepe them both within.
And make them worke whilſt ſhe herſelfe doth play.
But come, lets go vnto Alfonſos houſe,
And ſee how Valeria and Kate agrees
I doubt his muſicke ſcarce will pleaſe his skoller,
But ſtay, heere comes Alfonſo.
What M. Polidor! you are wel met,
I thanke you for the man you ſent to me,
A good Muſition I thinke he is;
I haue ſet my daughter and him togither,
But is this gentleman a friend of yours?
He is, I pray you ſir bid him welcome,
He's a wealthy Marchants ſon of Ceſtus.
Y'are welcome ſir, and if my houſe afforde
You any thing that may content your mind,
I pray you ſir make bold with me.
I thanke you ſir, and if what I haue got
By marchandiſe or trauel on the ſeas,
Sattins, or lawnes, or azure coloured ſilke,
Or pretious fiery pointed ſtones of Indy,
You ſhall command, both them, my ſelf, and all.
Thanks gentle ſir, Polidor take him in,
And bid him welcome vnto my houſe,
For thou I thinke muſt be my ſecond ſonne;
Ferando, Polidor dooſt thou not know
Muſt marry Kate, and to morrow is the day.
Such newes I heard, and I came now to know.
Polidor tis true, go let me alone,
For I muſt ſee againſt the bridegroome come,
That al things be according to his mind,
And ſo ile leaue you for an houre or two.
Come then Aurelius, come in with me,
And weele go ſit a while and chat with them,
And after bring them forth to take the aire.
Sim, when will the foole come againe?
Heele come againe my Lord anon.
Gis ſome more drinke here, ſouns where's
The Tapſter, here Sim, eate ſome of theſe things.
So I do my Lord.
Heere Sim, I drinke to thee.
My Lord heere comes the Plaiers againe.
O braue, heers two fine gentlewomen.
The ſenceleſſe trees by muſick haue bin mou'd,
And at the ſound of pleſant tuned ſtrings,
Haue ſauage beaſts hung downe their liſtning heads,
As though they had beene caſt into a traunce.
Then it may be, that ſhe to whome naught can pleaſe,
With Muſickes ſound, in time may be ſurpriſde.
Come louely Miſtris, will you take your lute,
And play the leſſon that I taught you laſt?
It is no matter whether I doe, or no,
For truſt me, I take no great delight in it.
I would, ſweete Miſtris, that it lay in me,
To helpe you to that thing that's your delight.
In you with a peſtlence, are you ſo kind?
Then make a night-cap of your fiddles caſe,
To warme your head, and hide your filthy face.
If that (ſweet Miſtris) were your harts content,
You ſhould commaund a greater thing than that,
Although it were ten times to my diſgrace.
Y'are ſo kind t'were pittie you ſhould be hang'd,
And yet me thinkes the foole doth looke aſquint.
Why Miſtris, doe you mocke me?
No, but I meane to mooue thee.
Well, will you play alittle?
Yea, giue me the Lute.
That ſtop was falſe, play it againe.
Then mend it thou, thou filthy aſſe.
What, doe you bid me kiſſe your arſe?
How now jacke ſawce? y'are a jolly mate,
Y'are beſt be ſtill leſt I croſſe your pate,
And make your muſicke flie about your cares▪
Ile make it and your coxcombe meet.
Hold Miſtris, ſowns will you breake my Lute?
Yea on thy head and if thou ſpeake to me,
There, take it vp, and fidle ſomewhere elſe,
And ſee you come no more into this place,
Leſt that I clap your fiddle on your face.
Sowns, teach her to play on the Lute?
The diuell ſhall teach her firſt, I am glad ſhee's gone,
For I was ne're ſo fraid in all my life,
But that my Lute ſhould flie about mine eares:
My maiſter ſhall teach her himſelfe for me,
For Ile keepe me farre enough without her reach,
For he and Polidor ſent me before,
To be with her, and teach her on the Lute,
Whilſt they did court the other gentle women,
And heere me thinkes they come together.
How now Valeria, where's your Miſtris?
At the vengeance, I thinke, and no where elſe.
Why Valeria, will ſhe not learne apace?
Yes berladie, ſhe haz learn'd too much alreadie,
And that I had felt, had I not ſpoke her faire,
But ſhe all ne're be learnt for me againe.
Well Valeria go to my chamber,
And beare him companie that came to daie
From Ceſtus, where our aged father dwelles.
Come faire Emelia, my louely loue,
Brighter than the burniſht pallace of the Sunne,
The eie-ight of the glorious firmament,
In whoſe bright lookes ſparkles the radiant fire.
Wilie Prometheus ſlily ſtole from Ioue,
Infuſing breath, life, motion, ſoul,
To euerie object ſtricken by thine eies.
Oh faire Emelia, I pine for thee,
And, either muſt enjoy thy loue, or die.
Fie man, I know you will not die for loue,
Ah Polider, thou need'ſt not to complaine,
Eternall heauen ſooner be diſſolu'd,
And all that pierceth Phoebus ſiluer eie,
Before ſuch hap befall to Polidor.
Thankes faire Emelia for theſe ſweet words:
But what ſaith Philena to her friend?
Why I am buying marchandiſe of him.
Miſtris, you ſhall not neede to buy of me:
For when I croſs'd the bubbling Canibey,
And ſailde along the criſtall Helliſpont,
I fill'd my coffers of the wealthy mines,
Where I did cauſe millions of labouring Moores
To vndermine the cauerns of the earth,
To ſeeke for ſtrange and new found pretious ſtones,
And diue into the Sea to gather pearle,
As faire as Iuno offred Priams ſonne,
And you ſhall take your liberall choice of all.
I thanke you ſir, and would Philena might
In any curteſie requite you ſo,
As ſhe with willing heart could well beſtow.
How now daughters, is Ferando come?
Not yet father, I wonder he ſtaies ſo long.
And where's your ſiſter that ſhe is not here?
She is making of her ready, father,
To goe to church, and if that he were come.
I warrant you hee'l not be long away.
Go daughters, get you in, and bid your
Siſter prouide her ſelfe againſt that we do come,
And ſee you goe to church along with vs.
I maruell that Ferando comes not away.
His Tailor, it may be, hath bin too ſlacke
In his apparrell which he meanes to weare:
For no queſtion but ſome fantaſtike ſutes
He is determined to weare to day,
And richly powdered with pretious ſtones,
Spotted with liquide golde, thicke ſet with pearle,
And ſuch he meanes ſhall be his wedding ſutes.
I car'd not I, what coſt he did beſtow,
In golde, or ſilke, ſo he himſelfe were here,
For I had rather loſe a thouſand crownes,
Than that he ſhould deceiue vs heere to day:
But ſoft, I thinke I ſee him come.
Good morrow father: Polidor well met,
You wonder, I know, that I haue ſtaide ſo long.
Yea mary ſonne, we were almoſt perſwaded,
That we ſhould ſcarce haue had our Bridegroome heere:
But ſay, why art thou thus baſely attired?
Thus richly father you ſhould haue ſaide,
For when my wife and I are married once,
Shee's ſuch a ſhrew, if we ſhould once fall out,
Sheele pull my coſtly ſutes ouer mine eares,
And therefore am I thus attir'd a while:
For many things I tell you's in my head,
And none muſt know thereof, but Kate and I:
For we ſhall liue like Lambes and Lions ſure,
Nor Lambs to Lions neuer were ſo tame,
If once they be within the Lions pawes,
As Kate to me, if we were married once,
And therefore, come, le to church preſently.
Fie Ferando, not thus attired for ſhame,
Come to my Chamber, and there thy ſelfe,
Of twenty ſutes that I did neuer weare.
Tuſh Polidor, I haue as many ſutes
Fantaſtike made to fit my humor ſo,
As any in Athens, and as richly wrought
As was the Maſsie Robe that late adorn'd
The ſtately legat of the Perſian King,
And this from them haue I made choiſe to weare.
I prethee Ferando let me intreat
Before thou go'ſt vnto the church with vs,
To put ſome other ſute vpon thy backe.
Not for the world, if I might gaine it ſo,
And therefore take me thus, or not at al.
But ſoft, ſee where my Kate doth come,
I muſt ſalute hir: how fares my louely Kate,
What, art thou ready? ſhal we go to church?
Not I with one ſo mad, ſo baſely tir'd,
To marry ſuch a filthy ſlauiſh groome,
That as it ſeemes ſometimes is from hi wits,
Or ele he would not thus haue come to vs.
Tuſh Kate theſe words adde greater loue in me,
And makes me thinke thee fairer then before:
Sweet Kate, thou louelier then Dianas purple to be,
Whiter then are the ſnowie Apenis,
Or icie haire that growes on Boreas chin.
Father, I ſweare by Ibis golden beale,
More faire and Radiant is my bony Kate,
Then ſiluer Zanthus when he doth imbrace
The ruddie Simies at Ids feete,
And care not thou, ſweet Kate, how I be clad,
Thou ſhalt haue garments wrought of Median ,
Enchac'd with pretious iewels fetcht from far,
By Italian marchants that with Ruſsian ſtemes,
Plowes vp huge furrowes in the Maie,
And better far my louely Kate ſhal weare:
Then come ſweet loue, and let vs to the church,
For this I ſweare ſhal be my wedding ſute.
Come gentlemen go along with vs,
For thus, do what we can, he will be wed.
Come hither ſirha, boy.
Boy, oh diſgrace to my perſon! ſounes, boy
Of your face, you haue many boyes with ſuch
Pickadenaunts I am ſure, ſouns would you
Not haue a bloudy noſe for this?
Come, come, I did but ieſt, where is that
Same peece of pie that I gaue thee to keepe?
The pie? I, you haue more mind of your belly
Then to go ſee what your maiſter dooes.
Tuſh, tis no matter man, I prethee giue it me,
I am very hungry I promiſe thee.
Why you may take it, and the diuel burſt
You with it, one cannot ſaue a bit after ſupper,
But you are alwaies ready to munch it vp.
Why come man, we ſhall haue good cheere
Anon at the bridehouſe, for your maiſter's gone to
Church to be married already, and theres
Such cheere as paſſeth.
O braue, I would I had eate no meate this weeke,
For I haue neuer a corner left in my belly
To put a venſon paſtie in, I thinke I ſhall burſt my ſelfe
With eating, for ile ſo cram me down the tarts
And the marchpanes out of all crie.
I, but how wilt thou do now thy maiſter's
Maried, thy miſtres is ſuch a diuel, as ſheele make
Thee forget thy eating quickely, ſhee'le beate thee ſo.
Let my maſter alone with her for that, for
Heele make hir tame wel inongh ere long I warrant thee,
For he's ſuch a churle waxen now of late, that and he be
Neuer ſo little angry he thums me out of all cry,
But in my mind ſirha, the yongeſt is a very
Prety wench, and if I thought thy maſter would
Not haue hir, Ide haue a fling at hir
My ſelfe, ile ſee ſoone whether twill be a match
Or no: and it will not, ile ſet the matter
Hard for my ſelfe I warrant thee.
Souns you ſlaue, wil you be a Riuall with
My maſter in his loue? ſpeake but ſuch
Another word and ile cut off one of thy legs.
Oh cruel iudgement, nay then ſirha,
My tongue ſhal talke no more to you, marry my
Timber ſhal tell the truſty meſſage of his maiſter
Euen on the very forehead on thee, thou abuſious
Villaine, therefore prepare thy ſelfe.
Come hither thou imperfectious ſlaue, in
Regard of thy beggery, hold thee, theres
Two ſhillings for thee, to pay for the
Healing of thy left leg which I meane
Furiouſly to inuade, or to maime at the leaſt.
O ſupernodical foole! wel, ile take your
Two ſhillings, but ile bar ſtriking at legs.
Not I, for ile ſtrike any where.
Here take your two ſhillings againe,
Ile ſee thee hangd ere ile fight with thee,
I gat a broken ſhin the other day,
Tis not whole yet, and therefore ile not fight.
Come, come, why ſhould we fal out?
Wel ſirha, your faire words haue ſomething
Alaid my choler: I am content for this once
To put it vp, and be friends with thee,
But ſoft, ſee where they come al from church,
Belike they be married already.
Father farewel, my Kate and I muſt home,
Sirha, go make ready my horſe preſently.
Your horſe! what ſon, I hope you do but ieſt,
I am ſure you wil o go ſo ſuddainely.
Let him go or tarry, I am reſolu'd to ſtay.
And not to trauel on my wedding day.
Tut Kate I tel thee we muſt needes go home,
Vilaine, haſt thou ſadled my horſe?
Which horſe, your call?
Souns you flaue, ſtand you prating here?
Saddle the bay gelding for your miſtris.
Not for me, for I wil not go.
The Oſtler wil not let me haue him, you owe ten pence
For his meate and 6 pence for ſtuffing my miſtris ſaddle.
Here villaine, goe pay him ſtrait.
Shal I giue them another pecke of lauender?
Out ſlaue, and bring them preſently to the dore.
Why ſon, I hope at leaſt youle dine with vs.
I pray you maſter lets ſtay til dinner be done.
Souns vilaine, art thou here yet?
Come Kate, our dinner is prouided at home.
But not for me, for here I meane to dine:
Ile haue my wil in this as wel as you,
Though you in madding mood would leaue your frinds,
Deſpite of you ile tarry with them ſtill.
I Kate ſo thou ſhalt, but at ſome other time,
Whenas thy ſiſters here ſhall be eſpouſd,
Then thou and I wil keepe our wedding day,
In better ſort then now we can prouide,
For heere I promiſe thee before them all,
We will ere long returne to them againe:
Come Kate, ſtand not on termes, we will away,
This is my day, to morrow thou ſhalt rule,
And I will doe what euer thou commandes.
Gentlemen, farewell, wee'l take our leaues,
It will be late before that we come home.
Farewell Ferando, ſince you will be gone.
So mad a couple did I neuer ſee.
Thei're euen aſwel matcht as I would wiſh.
And yet I hardly thinke that he can tame her:
For when he haz done, ſhe will do what ſhe liſt.
Her manhoode then is good I do beleeue.
Aurelius, or elſe I miſſe my marke:
Her tongue will walke, if ſhe doe holde her hands.
I am in doubt ere halfe a month be paſt
Hee'l curſe the Prieſt that married him ſo ſoone,
And yet it may be ſhe will be reclaimde,
For ſhe is very patient growne of late.
God hold it, that it may continue ſtill,
I would be loath that they ſhould diſagree,
But he (I hope) will hold her in a while.
Within theſe two daies I will ride to him,
And ſee how louingly they do agree.
Now Aurelius, what ſay you to this?
What, haue you ſent to Ceſtus as you ſaid?
To certifie your father of your loue,
For I would gladly he would like of it,
And if he be the man you tell to me,
I gheſſe he is a Merchant of great wealth:
And I haue ſeene him oft at Athens here,
And for his ſake aſſure thee thou art welcome.
And ſo to me whilſt Polidor doth liue.
I find it ſo, right worthy gentlemen,
And of that woorth your friendſhip I eſteeme,
I leaue cenſure of your ſeuerall thoughts,
But for requitall of your fauours paſt
Reſts yet behinde, which when occaſion ſerues,
I vow ſhal be remembred to the full,
And for my fathers comming to this place,
I do exſpect within this weeke at moſt.
Enough Aurelius: but we forget
Our marriage dinner now the Bride is gone,
Come, let vs ſee what there they left behind.
Come ſirs, prouide all things as faſt as you can,
For my maiſter's hard at hand, and my new miſtris
And all, and he ſent me before to ſee all things ready.
Welcome home Sander: ſirrha how lookes our new miſtris, they ſay ſhee's a plaguy ſhrew?
Yea and that thou ſhalt find, I can tell thee and if thou doſt not pleaſe her wel: why my maſter haz ſuch ado with her, as it paſſeth, and hee's euen like a mad man.
Why Sander, what doth he ſay?
Why Ile tell you what: when they ſhould
Goe to church to be married, he puts on an olde
Ierkin, and a paire of canuaſſe breeches downe to the
Small of his leg, and a red cap on his head, and he
Lookes as thou wouldſt burſt thy ſelfe with laughing
When thou ſeeſt him: hee's ee'n as good as a
Foole for me: and then when they ſhould goe to dinner,
He made me ſaddle the horſe, and away he came,
And ne'r tarried for dinner, and therefore you had beſt
Get ſupper ready againſt they come, for
They be hard at hand I am ſure by this time.
Sowns, ſee where they be already.
Now welcome Kate. Where's theſe villaines
Heere? what, not ſupper yet vpon the boord?
Nor table ſpread, nor nothing done at all,
Where's that villaine that I ſent before?
Now, adſum, ſir.
Come hither you villaine, Ile cut your noſe,
You rogue, help me off with my bootes: wil't pleaſe
You to lay the cloth? Sowns the villaine
Hurts my foote: pull eaſily I ſay, yet againe?
Sowns, burnt and ſcorch't, who dreſt this meate?
Forſooth Iohn Cooke.
Goe you villaines, bring me ſuch meate?
Out of my ſight I ſay, and beare it hence:
Come Kate, wee'l haue other meate prouided,
Is there a fire in my chamber ſir?
I forſooth.
Seruingmen and eate vp all the meate.
Sownes, I thinke of my conſcience my maiſter's madde ſince he was married.
I laft what a boxe he gaue Sander
For pulling off his bootes.
I hurt his foote for the nonce man.
Did you ſo, you damned villaine?
This humour muſt I holde me to a while,
To bridle and hold backe my head ſtrong wife,
With curbes of hunger, eaſe, and want of ſleepe:
Nor ſleepe, nor meate ſhall ſhe enjoy to night,
Ile mew her vp as men doe mew their Hawkes,
And make her gently come vnto the Lewre,
Were ſhe as ſtubborne, or as full of ſtrength,
As was the Thracian Horſe Alcides tamde,
That king Egeus fed with fleſh of men,
Yet would I pull her downe, and make her come,
As hungry Hawkes doe flie vnto their Lewre.
Valeria attend, I haue a louely loue,
As bright as is the heauen criſtalline,
As faire as is the milke white way of Ioue,
As chaſte as Phoebe, in her ſummer ſports,
As ſoft and tender as the azure dowlne,
That circles Cithereas ſiluer Doues.
Her doe I meane to make my louely Bride,
And in her bed to breathe the ſweete content,
That I, thou know'ſt, long time haue aimed at.
Now Valeria, it reſts in thee to helpe
To compaſſe this, that I might gaine my loue,
Which eaſily thou maiſt performe at will,
If that the merchant which thou told'ſt me of,
Will (as he ſaide) goe to Alfonſoes houſe,
And ſay he is my father, and therewithall
Paſſe ouer certaine deedes of land to me,
That I thereby may gaine my hearts deſire,
And he is promiſed reward of me.
Feare not my Lord, Ile fetch him ſtrait to you,
For hee'l doe any thing that you commaund,
But tell me, my Lord, is Ferando married then?
He is, and Polidor ſhortly ſhalbe wed,
And he meanes to tame his wife ere long.
Hee ſaies ſo.
Faith he's gon vnto the taming ſchoole.
The taming ſchoole! why is there ſuch a place?
I: and Ferando is the maiſter of the ſchoole.
That's rare: but what decorum doth he vſe?
Faith I know not: but by ſome odde deuiſe
Or other, but come Valeria I long to ſee the man,
By whom we muſt compriſe our plotted drift,
That I may tel him what we haue to do.
Then come my Lord and I will bring you to him ſtraight.
Agreede then, lets go.
Come miſtris.
Sander I prethee helpe me to ſome meat,
I am ſo faint that I can ſcarcely ſtand.
I marry miſtris, but you know my maiſter
Has giuen me a charge that you muſt eat nothing,
But that which he himſelfe giueth you.
Why man, thy maſter needs neuer know it.
You ſay true indeed. Why looke you miſtris,
What ſay you to a pece of bieffe and muſtard now?
Why I ſay tis excellent meat, canſt thou helpe me to ſome?
I, I could helpe you to ſome, but that
I doubt the muſtard is too chollerick for you.
But what ſay you to a ſheepes head and garlicke?
Why any thing, I care not what it be
I but the garlicke I doubt will make your breath
Stincke, and then my maſter wil courſe me for letting
You eate it But what ſay you to a fat Capon?
That's meat for a king, ſweete Sander help me to ſome of it.
Nay berlady then tis too deere for vs, we muſt
Not meddle with the Kings meate.
Our villaine, doſt thou mocke me,
Take that for thy ſawſineſſe.
Sounes are you ſo light fingred with a murrin,
Ile keepe you faſting for it theſe two daies.
I tel thee villaine, ile teare the fleſh off
Thy face and eate it, and thou prate to me thus.
Here comes my maſter now, heele courſe you.
Enter Ferando with a peece of meate vpon his. dagger point and Polidor with him.
See heere Kate, I haue prouided meat for thee,
Here take it: what, iſt not worthy thanks?
Go ſirha, take it away againe, you ſhall be
Thankful for the next you haue.
Why I thanke you for it.
Nay now tis not worth a pin, go ſirha and take it hence I ſay.
Yes ſir ile carrie it hence: Maſter let hir
Haue none, for ſhe can fight as Hungry as ſhe is.
I pray you ſir let it ſtand, for ile eate
Some with her my ſelfe.
Wel ſirha, ſet it downe againe.
Nay nay I pray you let him take it hence,
And keepe it for your owne diet, for ile none,
Ile ne're be beholding to you for your meat,
I tel thee flatly here vnto thy teeth,
Thou ſhalt not keepe me nor feed me as thou liſt,
For I will home againe vnto my fathers houſe.
I, when ya're meeke and gentle, but not
Before, I know your ſtomacke is not yet come downe.
Therefore, no maruel thou canſt not eat,
And I will go vnto your Fathers houſe,
Come Polidor let vs go in againe,
And Kate come in with vs, I know ere long,
That thou and I ſhall louingly agree.
Now Seignior Phylotus, we wil go
Vnto Alfonſos houſe, and be ſure you ſay
As I did tel you, concerning the man
That dwels at Ceſtus, whoſe ſon I ſaid I was,
For you do very much reſemble him,
And feare not: you may be bold to ſpeake your mind.
I warrant you ſir, take you no care,
Ile vſe my ſelfe ſo cunning in the cauſe,
As you ſhall ſoone inioy your harts delight.
Thanks ſweet Phylotus, then ſtay you here,
And I will go and fetch him hither ſtrait.
Ho, Seignior Alfonſo: a word with you.
Who's there? what Aurelius what's the matter
That you ſtand ſo like a ſtranger at the doore?
My father ſir is newly come to towne,
And I haue brought him here to ſpeake with you,
Concerning theſe matters that I told you of,
And he can certifie you of the truth.
is this your father? you are welcome ſir.
Thanks Alfonſo, for thats your name I geſſe,
I vnderſtand my ſon hath ſet his mind
And bent his liking to your daughters loue,
And for becauſe he is my only ſon,
And I would gladly that he ſhould do well,
I tel you ſir, I not miſlike his choiſe,
If you agree to giue him your conſent,
He ſhall haue liuing to maintaine his eſtate,
Three hundred pounds a yeare, I will aſſure
To him and to his heyres, and if they do ioyne,
And knit themſelues in holy wedlocke band,
A thouſand maſsie ingots of pure gold,
And twiſe as many bars of ſiluer plate,
I freely giue him, and in writing ſtraight
I wil confirme what I haue ſaid in words.
Truſt me, I muſt commend your liberal mind,
And louing care you beare vnto your ſon,
And here I giue him freely my conſent.
As for my daughter, I thinke he knowes her mind,
And I will inlarge her dowry for your ſake,
And ſolemniſe with ioy your nuptial rites.
But is this gentleman of Ceſtus too?
He is the Duke of Ceſtus thriſe renowmed ſon,
Who for the loue his honor beares to me,
Hath thus accompanied mee to this place.
You were too blame you tolde me not before,
Pardon me my Lord, for if I had knowne
Your honor had bin here in place with me,
I would haue don my duty to your honor.
Thanks good Alfonſo. but I did come to ſee
When theſe marriage rites ſhould be performed.
And if in theſe nuptials you vouchſafe,
To honor thus the prince of Ceſtus friend,
In celebration of his ſpouſal rites,
He ſhal remaine a laſting friend to you,
What ſaies Aurelius father?
I humbly thanke your honor, good my Lord,
And ere we part, before your honor here,
Shal articles of ſuch content be drawne,
As twixt our houſes and poſterities,
Eternally this league of peace ſhall laſt
Inuiolate and pure on either part.
With al my heart, and if your honor pleaſe
To walke along with vs vnto my houſe,
We wil confirme theſe leagues of laſting loue.
Come then Aurelius I wil go with you.
Maſter, the Haberdaſher has brought my
Miſtris home hir cap here.
Come hither ſirha: what haue you there?
A veluet cap ſir, and it pleaſe you.
Who ſpoke for it? didſt thou Kate?
What if I did? come hither ſirha, giue me
The cap, ile ſee if it wil fit me.
O monſtrous: why it becomes thee not,
Let me ſee it Kate: here ſirha take it hence,
This cap is out of faſhion quite.
The faſhion is good inough: belike you
Meane to make a foole of me.
Why true, he meanes to make a foole of thee,
To haue thee put on ſuch a curtald cap:
Sirha, be gone with it.
Here is the Taylor too with my miſtris gowne.
Let me ſee it Taylor: what, with cuts and jags?
Sounes thou vilaine, thou haſt ſpoil'd the gowne.
Why ſir, I made it as your man gaue me direction,
You may read the note here
Come hither ſirha: Taylor read the note.
Item a faire round compaſſd cape.
I thats true.
And a large truncke ſleeue.
That's a lie maiſter, I ſaid two truncke ſleeues.
Wel ſir, go forward.
Item a looſe bodied gowne,
Maiſter if euer I ſaid looſe bodies gowne,
Sew me in a ſeame, and beat me to death
With a bottome of browne thred.
I made it as the note bade me.
I ſay the note lies in his throate and thou too,
And thou ſaiſt it.
Nay, nay, ne'r be ſo hot ſirha, for I feare you not.
Dooſt thou heare Tailor, thou haſt braued
Many men: braue not me.
Th'aſt fac'd many men.
Wel ſir.
Face not me, i'le neither be fac'd nor braued
At thy hands I can tell thee.
Come, come, I like the faſhion of it wel inough,
Heere's more adoe than needes, I'le haue it, I,
And if you doe not like it, hide your eies,
I thinke I ſhall haue nothing by your will.
Go I ſay, and take it vp for your maiſters vſe.
Souns villaine, not for thy life, touch it not:
Souns, take vp my miſtris gowne to his
Maiſters vſe!
Well ſir, what's your conceit of it?
I haue a deeper conceit in it than you
Thinke for, take vp my miſtris gowne
To his maiſters vſe.
Tailer, come hither, for this time make it:
Hence againe, and Ile content thee for thy paines.
I thanke you ſir.
Come Kate, wee now will goe ſee thy fathers house,
Euen in theſe honeſt meane abiliments,
Our purſes ſhalbe rich, our garments plaine,
To ſhrowd our bodies from the winter rage,
And that's inough, what ſhould we care for more?
Thy ſiſters, Kate, to morrow muſt be wed.
And I haue promiſed them thou ſhould'ſt be there,
The morning is well, vp, lets haſte away,
It wil be nine aclocke ere we come there.
Nine aclocke, why tis already paſt two
In the afternoone by al the clockes in the towne.
I ſay tis but nine aclocke in the morning.
I ſay tis two aclocke in the afternoone.
It ſhal be nine then ere you go to your fathers:
Come backe againe, we will not goe to day:
Nothing but croſſing me ſtil?
Ile haue you ſay as I doe ere I goe.
Faire Emelia, ſummers bright ſun Queene,
Brighter of hew than is the burning clime,
Where Phoebus in his bright Aequator ſits,
Creating golde and pretious mineralls,
What would Emelia doe if I were forc'd
To leaue faire Athens, and to range the world?
Should thou aſſay to ſcale the feare of Ioue,
Mounting the ſuttle airie regions,
Or be ſnatcht vp as erſt was Ganimede,
Loue ſhould giue wings vnto my ſwift deſires,
And prune my thoughts that I would follow thee,
Or fall and periſh as did Icarus.
Sweetly reſolued, faire Emlia,
But would Philema ſay as much to me,
If I ſhould aske a queſtion now of thee?
What if the Duke of Ceſtus onely ſonne,
Which came with me vnto your fathers houſe,
Should ſeeke to get Philemas loue from me,
And make thee Dutcheſſe of that ſtately towne,
Would'ſt thou not then forſake me for his loue?
Not for great Neptune, no not Ioue himſelfe,
Will Philema leaue Aurelius loue,
Could he enſtall me Empreſſe of the world,
Or make me Queene and guidreſſe of the heauen,
Yet would I not exchange my loue for his,
Thy company is poore Phylemaes heauen,
And without thee, heauen were hell to me.
And ſhould my loue, as earſt did Hercules,
Attempt the burning vaults of hell,
I would with pitteous lookes, and pleaſing words,
As once did Orpheus with his harmony,
And rauiſhing ſound of his mellodious Harpe,
Intreate grimme Pluto, and of him obtaine
That thou might'ſt goe, and ſafe returne againe.
And ſhould my loue as erſt Leander did,
Attempt to ſwimme the boyling Hlliſpont
For Heros loue: no Towers of braſſe ſhould hold,
But I would follow thee through thoſe raging flouds,
With lockes diſ-ſheuered, and my breaſt all bare,
With bended knees vpon Abidaes ſhore,
I would with ſmokie ſighs and briniſh teares,
Importune Neptune and the warry gods,
To ſend a guard of ſiluer ſcaled Dolphins,
With ſounding Tritons to be our conuoy,
And to tranſport vs ſafe vnto the ſhore,
Whilſt I would hang about thy louely necke,
Redoubling kiſſe on kiſſe vpon thy cheekes,
And with our paſtime ſtill the ſwelling waues.
Should Polidor as Aehilles did,
Onely imploy himſelfe to follow Armes,
Like to the warlike Amazonian Queene,
Pentheſelea Hectors paramour,
Who foild the bloudy Pirrhus murd'rous Greeke,
Ile thruſt my ſelfe amongſt the thickeſt throngs,
And with my vtmoſt force aſſiſt my loue.
Let Eole ſtorme: be mild and quiet thou,
Let Neptune ſwel, be Aurelius calme and pleaſed,
I care not, I, betide what may betide,
Let fates and fortune do the worſt they can,
I recke them not: they not diſcord with me,
Whileſt that my loue and I do well agree.
Sweet Phylema bewties minerall,
From whence the ſun exhales his glorious ſhine,
And clad the heauen in thy reflected raies,
And now my liefeſt loue, the time drawes nie,
That Himen mounted in his ſaffron robe,
Muſt with his torches waite vpon thy traine,
As Hellens brothers on the horned moone.
Now Iuno to thy number ſhal I adde,
The faireſt bride that euer marchant had.
Come faire Emelia, the prieſt is gon,
And at the church your father and the reſt
Do ſtay to ſee our marriage rites perform'd,
And knit in ſight of heauen this Gordian knot,
That teeth of fretting Time may ne'r vntwiſt,
Then come faire loue and gratulate with me
This daies content and ſweet ſolemnity.
Sim, muſt they be married now?
I my Lord.
Looke Sim, the foole is come againe now.
Sirha, go fetch our horſes forth, and bring
Them to the backe gate preſently.
I will ſir I warrant you.
Come Kate, the moone ſhines cleere to night, me thinkes.
The moone? why husband you are deceiu'd,
It is the ſun.
Yet againe, come backe againe, it ſhal be
The moone ere we come at your fathers.
Why ile ſay as you ſay, it is the moone.
Ieſus, ſaueth glorious moone.
Ieſus, ſaue the glorious moone.
I am glad Kate your ſtomacke is come downe,
I know it well thou knowſt it is the ſun,
But I did trie to ſee if thou wouldſt ſpeake,
And croſſe me now as thou haſt done before,
And truſt me Kate hadſt thou not namde the moone,
We had gone backe againe as ſure as death.
But ſoft, who's this thats comming here?
Thus al alone from Ceſtus am I come,
And left my princely court and nobl traine,
To come to Athens, and in this diſguiſe,
To ſee what courſe my ſon Aurelius takes.
But ſtay, heres ſome it may be trauels thither,
Good ſir can you direct me the way to Athens?
Faire louely maide, yong and affable,
More cleere of hew and far more beautifull
Then pretious Sardonix or purple rockes,
Of Amitheſts or gliſtering Hiaſinth,
More amiable far then is the plain,
Where gliſtering Cepherus in ſiluer boures,
Gaſeth vpon the Giant Andromede,
Sweet Kate entertaine this louely woman.
I thinke the man is mad he cals me a woman.
Faire louely lady, bright and Chriſtaline,
Bewteous and ſtately as the eie-traind bird,
As glorious as the morning waſht with dew,
Within whoſe eies ſhe takes her dawning beames,
And golden ſommer ſleepes vpon thy cheekes,
Wrapt vp thy radiations in ſome cloud,
Leſt that thy bewty make this ſtately towne
Inhabitable like the burning Zone,
With ſweet reflections of thy louely face.
What is ſhe mad too? or is my ſhape transformd
That both of them perſwade me I am a woman,
But they are mad ſure, and therefore ile be gone,
And leaue their companies for feare of harme,
And vnto Athens haſte to ſeeke my ſon.
Why ſo, Kate, this was friendly done of thee,
And kindly too▪ why thus muſt we two liue,
One minde, one heart, and one content for both,
This good old man dos thinke that we are mad,
And glad is he I am ſure, that he is gone,
But come ſweet Kate, for we will after him,
And now perſwade him to his ſhape againe.
Come louely ſonnes, your marriage rites
Performed,
Lets hie vs home to ſee what cheere we haue,
I wonder that Ferando and his wife
Come not to ſee this great ſolemnity.
No maruel of Ferando be away,
His wife I thinke hath troubled ſo his wits,
That he remaines at home to keepe them warme,
For forward wedlocke as the prouerbe ſayes,
Hath brought him to his nightcap long ago.
But Polidor, let my ſon and you take heed,
That Ferando ſay not ere long as much to you.
And now Alfonſo, more to ſhew my loue,
If vnto Ceſtus you do ſend your ſhips,
My ſelfe wil fraught them with Arabian ſilkes,
Rich Affricke ſpices, Arras counter pointes,
Muske, Casſia, ſweet ſmelling Ambergreece,
Pearle, curtol, Chriſtal, jet, and iuory,
To gratulate the fauors of my ſon,
And friendly loue that you haue ſhewne to him.
And for to honor him and his faire bride.
Ile yeerely ſend you from your fathers court,
Cheſts of refind ſugar ſeuerally,
Ten tun of tunis wine, ſucket, ſweet drugs,
To celebrate and ſolemnize this day,
And cuſtom-free, your marchants ſhal commerce
And interchange the profits of your land,
Sending you gold for braſſe, ſiluer for lead,
Caſſes of ſilke for packes of wol and cloth,
To bind this friendſhip and confirme this league.
I am glad ſir that you would be ſo franke
Are you become the Duke of Ceſtus ſon,
And reuels with my treaſure in the towne,
Baſe villaine that thus diſhonereſt me?
Sounes it is the Duke, what ſhall I do?
Diſhonor thee? why knowſt thou what thou ſaiſt?
Her's no villaine: he will not know me now,
But what ſay you? haue you forgot me too?
Why ſir, are you acquainted with my ſon?
With thy ſon? no truſt me, if he be thine,
I pray you ſir, who am I?
Pardon me father, humbly on my knees
I do intreat your grace to heare me ſpeake.
Peace villaine, lay hands on th,
And ſend them to priſon ſtraight.
I ſay weele haue no nding to priſon.
My Lord this is but the play, the'yre but in ieſt.
I tel thee Sim weele haue no ſending,
To priſon thats flat: why Sim, am not I Don Chriſto Vari?
Therefore I ſay, they ſhal not goe to priſon.
No more they ſhal not, my Lord,
They be runne away.
Are they run away Sim? thats wel,
Then gis ſome more drinke, and let them play againe.
Here my Lord.
drinkes and then fals aſleepe.
Ah trecherous boy that durſt preſume,
To wed thy ſelfe without thy fathers leaue,
I ſweare by faire Cintheas burning raies,
By Merops head, and by ſeuen mouthed Nile,
Had I but known ere thou hadſt wedded her,
Were in thy breſt the worlds immortal ſoule,
This Angry ſworde ſhould rip thy hateful cheſt,
And hewd thee ſmaller then the Libian ſandes,
Turne hence thy face, oh cruel impious boy.
I did not thinke you would preſume,
To match your daughter with my princely houſe,
And ne'r make mee acquainted with the cauſe.
My Lord, by heauens I ſweare vnto your grace,
I knew none other but Valeria your man,
Had bin the Duke of Ceſtus noble ſon,
Nor did my daughter I dare ſware for her.
That damned villaine that hath deluded me,
Whom I did ſend for guide vnto my ſon,
Oh that my furious force could cleaue the earth,
That I might muſter bands of helliſh feends,
To racke his heart and teare his impious ſoule.
The ceaſeleſſe turning of celeſtial orbes,
Kindles not greater flames in flitting aire,
Then paſsionate anguiſh of my raging breſt.
Then let my death ſweet father end your griefe,
For I it is that thus haue wrought your woes,
Then be reuengd on me, for here I ſweare
That they are innocent of what I did,
Oh had I charge to cut off Hydraes head,
To make the to pleſſe Alpes a champaine field,
To kil vntamed monſters with my ſword,
To trauel daily in the hotteſt ſun,
And watch in winter when the nights be cold.
I would with gladnes vndertake them all,
And thinke the paine but pleaſure that I felt,
So that my noble father at my return,
Would but forget and pardon me my offence.
Let me intreat your grace vpon my knees,
To pardon him and let my death diſcharge
The heauy wrath your grace hath vowd againſt him.
And good my Lord, let vs intreat your grace
To purge your ſtomacke of this Melancoly,
Taint not your princely mind with griefe my Lord,
But pardon and forgiue theſe louers faults,
That kneeling craue your gratious fauor here.
Great prince of Ceſtus, let a womans words
Intreat a pardon in your Lordly breſt,
Both for your princely ſon, and vs my Lord.
Aurelius ſtand vp, I pardon thee,
I ſee that vertue wil haue enemies,
And fortune wil be thwarting honor ſtil.
And you faire virgin too, I am content
To accept you for my daughter ſince tis don,
And ſee you princely vſde in Ceſtus court.
Thanks good my Lord, and I no longer liue,
Then I obey and honor you in al.
Let me giue thanks vnto your royall grace,
For this great honor done to mee and mine,
And if your grace wil walke vnto my houſe,
I wil in humbleſt maner I can, ſhew
The eternall ſeruice I do owe your grace.
Thankes good Alfonſo: but I came alone,
And not as did beſeeme the Ceſtian Duke,
Nor would I haue it knowne within the towne,
That I was here, and thus, without my traine:
But as I came alone, ſo wil I go,
And leaue my ſon to ſolemniſe his feaſt,
And ere't be long Ile come againe to you,
And do him honor as beſeemes the ſon
Of mighty Ierobel the Ceſtian Duke,
Til when ile leaue you, farewel Aurelius.
Not yet my Lord, ile bring you to your ſhip.
Who's within there? come hither ſirs, my Lords
Aſleepe againe, go take him eaſily vp,
And put him in his own apparel againe,
And lay him in the place where we did find him,
Iuſt vnderneath the alehouſe ſide below,
But ſee you wake him not in any caſe.
It ſhalbe done my Lord, come help to beare him hence.
Come Gentlemen, nowe that ſupper's done,
How ſhall we ſpend the time til we go to bed?
Faith if you wil, in trial of our wiues
Who wil come ſooneſt at their husbands cal.
Nay then Ferando he muſt needes ſit out,
For he may cal I thinke til he be weary,
Before his wife wil come before ſhe liſt.
Tis wel for you that haue ſuch gentle wiues,
Yet in this trial wil I not ſit out,
It may be Kate wil come as ſoone as I do ſend.
My wife comes ſooneſt for a hundred pound.
I take it. Ile lay as much to yours,
That my wife comes as ſoone as I do ſend.
How now Ferando, you dare not lay belike.
Why true, I dare not lay indeed:
But how, ſo little mony on ſo ſure a thing,
A hundred pound: why I haue laid as much
Vpon my Dog, in running at a Deere,
She ſhal not come ſo far for ſuch a trifle,
But wil you lay fiue hundred markes with me,
And whoſe wife ſooneſt comes when he doth cal,
And ſhewes her ſelfe moſt louing vnto him,
Let him inioy the wager I haue laid,
Now what ſay you? dare you aduenture thus?
I, were it a thouſand pounds I durſt preſume
On my wiues loue: and I wil lay with thee.
How now ſons, what in conference ſo hard,
May I without offence, know where about?
Faith father a waighty cauſe, about our wiues,
Fiue hundred markes already we haue laid,
And he whoſe wife doth ſhew moſt loue to him,
He muſt inioy the wager to himſelfe.
Why then Ferando he is ſure to loſe it,
I promiſe thee ſon, thy wife wil hardly come,
And therefore I would not wiſh thee lay ſo much.
Tuſh father, were it ten times more
I durſt aduenture on my louely Kate,
But if I loſe ile pay, and ſo ſhal you.
Vpon mine honor, if I loſe Ile pay.
And ſo wil I vpon my faith I vow.
Then ſit we downe and let vs ſend for them:
I promiſe thee Ferando I am afraid thou wilt loſe.
Ile ſend for my wife firſt, Valeria,
Go bid your miſtris come to me.
I wil my Lord.
Now for my hundred pound,
Would any lay ten hundred more with me
I know I ſhould obtaine it by her loue.
I pray God you haue not laid too much already.
Truſt me Ferando I am ſure you haue,
For you I dare preſume haue loſt it al.
Now ſir ha, what ſaies your miſtris?
She is ſomthing buſie but ſheele come anone.
Why ſo, did not I tel you this before,
She was buſie and cannot come.
I pray God your wife ſend you ſo good an anſwere
She may be buſie, yet ſhe ſaies ſheele come.
Wel, wel: Polidor, ſend you for your wife.
Agreed, Boy deſire your miſtris to come hither.
I wil ſir.
I, ſo, ſo, he deſires hir to come.
Polidor, I dare preſume for thee,
I thinke thy wife wil not denie to come,
And I do maruel much Aurelius,
That your wife came not when you ſent for her.
Now, wher's your miſtris?
She bade mee tell you that ſhee will not come,
And you haue any buſineſſe, you muſt come to hir.
O monſtrous intollerable preſumption,
Worſe then a blaſing ſtar, or ſnow at Midſummer,
Earthquakes, or any thing vnſeaſonable,
She will not come: but he muſt come to hir.
Wel ſir, I pray you lets heare what
Anſwere your wife will make.
ſirha, command your miſtris to come
To me preſently.
I thinke my wife for all ſhe did not come,
Wil proue moſt kind, for now I haue no feare,
For I am ſure Ferandos wife, ſhe will not come.
The more's the pitty, then I muſt loſe.
But I haue won, for ſee where Kate doth come.
Sweete husband did you ſend for me.
I did my loue, I ſent for thee to come,
Come hither Kate, whats that vpon thy head?
Nothing husband but my cap I thinke.
Pul it off and tread it vnder thy feet,
Tis fooliſh, I wil not haue thee weare it.
She takes off her cap and treads on it.
Oh wonderful metamorphoſis.
This is a wonder, almoſt paſt beleefe.
This is a token of her true loue to
And yet Ile try her further you ſhall ſee,
Come hither Kate, where are thy ſiſters?
They be ſitting in the bridal chamber.
Fetch them hither, and if they wil not come,
Bring them perforce and make them come with thee.
I will.
I promiſe thee Ferando I would haue ſworne,
Thy wife would ne'r haue done ſo much for thee.
But you ſhal ſee ſhe wil do more then this,
For ſee where ſhe brings her ſiſters forth by force.
See husband, I haue brought them both.
Tis wel done Kate.
I ſure, and like a louing peece, your worthy
To haue great praiſe for this attempt.
I for making a foole of her ſelfe and vs,
Beſhrew thee Phylema thou haſt
Loſt me a hundred pound to night,
For I did lay that thou wouldſt firſt haue come.
But thou Emelia haſt loſt me a great deale more.
You might haue kept it better then,
Who bade you lay?
Now louely Kate, before their husbands here,
I prethee tel vnto theſe head-ſtrong women,
What dewty wiues do owe vnto their Husbands.
Then you that liue thus by your pampered wils,
Now liſt to me, and marke what I ſhal ſay,
Th'eternal power that with his only breath,
Shall cauſe this end, and this beginning frame,
Not in time, nor before time, but with time confus'd,
For al the courſe of yeares, of ages, months,
Of ſeaſons temperate, of dayes and houres,
Are tun'd and ſtopt by meaſure of his hand,
The firſt world was, a forme without a forme,
A heape confus'd, a mixture al deform'd,
A gulfe of gulfes, a body bodileſſe.
Where al the elements were orderleſſe,
Before the great Commander of the world.
The King of kings, the glorious God of heauen,
Who in ſix daies did frame his heauenly worke,
And made al things to ſtand in perfect courſe,
Then to his image he did make a man
Olde Adam, and from his ſide aſleepe
A rib was , of which the Lord did make
The woe of man ſo termd by Adam then,
Woman, for that by her ſinne to vs,
And for her ſinne was Adam doom to die.
As Sara to her husband ſo ſhould we,
Obey them, loue them, keepe and nouriſh them,
If they by any meanes do want our helpes,
Laying our hands vnder their feet to tread,
If that by that we might procure their eaſe,
And for a preſident Ile firſt begin;
And lay my hand vnder my husbands feet.
She laies her hand vnder her husbands feet.
Inough ſweet, the wager thou haſt won,
And they I am ſure cannot deny the ſame.
I Ferando, the wager thou haſt won,
And for to ſhew thee how I am pleaſd in this,
A hundred pounds I freely giue thee more.
Another dowry for another daughter,
For ſhe is not the ſame ſhe was before.
Thanks, ſweet father, gentlemen, good night,
For Kate and I will leaue you for to night,
Tis Kate and I am wed, and you are ſped:
And ſo farewell, for we will to our beds.
Now Aurelius, what ſay you to this?
Beleeue me father, I rejoyce to ſee
Ferando and his wife ſo louingly agree.
How now Polidor? in a dumpe? what ſaiſt thou man?
I ſay thou arte a ſhrew.
That's better than a ſheepe.
Well, ſince tis done, come, lets goe.
Now that the darkeſome night is ouerpaſt,
And dawning day appeares in criſtall skie,
Now muſt I haſte abroade: but ſoft, who's this?
What Slie, O wondrous! hath he laine heere all night?
Ile wake him, I thinke hee's ſtarued by this,
But that his belly was ſo ſtufft with ale:
What now Slie, awake for ſhame.
Sim, giues ſome more wine, what all the Players gone? am not I a Lord?
A Lord with a murrin: come, art thou drunken ſtill?
Who's this? Tapſter, O Lord ſirrha, I haue had the braueſt dreame to night, that euer thou heardeſt in all thy life.
Yea mary, but you had beſt get you home, For your wife will courſe you for dreaming heere to night.
Wil ſhe? I know now how to tame a ſhrew,
I dreamt vpon it all this night till now,
And thou haſt wakt me out of the beſt dreame
That euer I had in my life: but Ile to my wife preſently, and tame her too if ſhe anger me.
Nay tarry Slie, for Ile goe home with thee,
And heare the reſt that thou haſt dreamt to night.