ILe pheeze you infaith.
A paire of ſtockes you rogue.
Y'are a baggage, the Slies are no Rogues. Looke in the Chronicles, wee came in with Richard Conqueror: therefore Paucas pallabris, let the world ſlide: Seſſa.
You will not pay for the glaſſes you haue burſt?
No, not a deniere: goe by Ieronimie, goe to thy cold b d warme thee.
I know my remedie, I muſt goe fetch the Head-borough.
Third, or fourth, or fift Borough, Ile anſwere him by Law. He not budge an inch boy: Let him come and kindly.
Huntſman I charge thee, tender well my hounds,
Brach Meriman, the poore Curre is imboſt.
And couple Clowder with the deepe mouth'd brach,
Saw'ſt thou not boy how Siluer made it good.
At the hedge corner, in the coldeſt fault,
I would not looſe the dogge for twentie pound.
Why Belman is as good as he my Lord,
He cried vpon it at the meereſt loſſe,
And twice to day pick'd out the dulleſt ſent,
Truſt me, I take him for the dogge.
Thou art a foole, if Eccho were as fleete,
I would eſteeme him worth a dozen ſuch:
But ſup them well, and looke vnto them all.
To morrow I intend to hunt againe.
I will my Lord.
What's heere. One dead, or drunke? See doth he breath?
He breath's my Lord. Were he not warm'd with Ale, this were a bed but cold to ſleepe ſo ſoundly.
Oh mounſtrous beaſt how like a ſwine he lyes.
Grme death how foule and loathſome is thine image:
s, I will practiſe on this drunken man.
What thinke you, if he were conuey'd to bed,
Wrap'd in ſweet cloathes: Rings put vpon his fingers:
A moſt delicious banquet by his bed,
And braue attendants neere him when he wakes,
Would not the begger then forget himſelfe?
Beleeue me Lord, I thinke hee cannot chooſe.
It would ſeeme ſtrange vnto him when he wak'd,
Euen as a flat'ring dreame, or worthles fancie.
Then take him vp, and manage well the ieſt:
Carrie him gently to my faireſt Chamber,
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures.
Balme his foule head in warme diſtiled waters,
And burne ſweet Wood to make the lodging ſweete:
Procure me muſicke readie when he wakes,
To make a dulcet and a heauenly ſound:
And if he chance to ſpeake be ready ſtraight
(And with alow ſubmiſſiue reuerence)
Say what is it your honor will command:
Let one attend him with a ſiluer Baſon
Full of roſe-water, And beſtrew'd with flowers,
Another beare the Ewer: the third a Diaper,
And ſay wilt pleaſe your Lordſhip coole your hands.
Some one be readie with a coſtly ſuie,
And aske him what apparell he will weare:
Another tell him of his Hounds and Horſe,
And that his Lady mournes at his diſeaſe,
Perſwade him that he hath bin Lunaticke,
And when he ſayes he is, ſay that he dreames,
For he is nothing but a mightie Lord:
This do, and doe it kindly, gentle ſirs,
It will be paſtime paſſing excellent,
If it be huſbanded with modeſtie.
My Lord I warrant you we wil play our part
As he ſhall thinke by our true dilligence
He is no leſſe then what we ſay he is.
Take him vp gently, and to bed with him,
And each one to his office when he wakes.
Sirrah, go ſee what Trumpet 'tis that ſounds,
Belike ſome Noble Gentleman that meanes
(Trauelling ſome iourney) to repoſe him heere.
How now? who is it?
An't pleaſe your Honor, players
That offer ſeruice to your Lordſhip.
Bid them come neere;
Now fellowes, you are welcome.
We thanke your Honor.
Do you intend to ſtay with me to night?
So pleaſe your Lordſhippe to accept our dutie.
With all my heart. This fellow I remember,
Since once he plaide a Farmers eldeſt ſonne,
Twas where you woo'd the Gentlewoman ſo well:
I haue forgot your name: but ſure that part
Was aptly fitted, and naturally perform'd,
I thinke 'twas Soto that your Honor meanes.
'Tis verie true, thou didſt it excellent:
Well you are come to me in happie time,
The rather for I haue ſome ſport in hand,
Wherein your cunning can aſſiſt me much.
There is a Lord will heare you play to night;
But I am doubtfull of your modeſties,
Leaſt (ouer-eying of his odde behauiour,
For yet his honor neuer heard a play)
You breake into ſome merrie paſſion,
And ſo offend him: for I tell you ſirs,
If you ſhould ſmile, he growes impatient.
Feare not my Lord we can containe our ſelues,
Were he the verieſt anticke in the world.
Go ſirra, Take them to the Butterie,
And giue them friendly welcome euery one,
Let them want nothing that my houſe affoords.
Sirra go you to Bartholmew my page,
And ſee him dreſt in all ſuites like a Ladie:
That done, conduct him to the drunkards chamber,
And call him Madam, do him obeiſance:
Tell him from me (as he will win my loue)
He bare himſelfe with honorable action,
Such as he hath obſeru'd in noble Ladies
Vnto their Lords, by them accompliſhed,
Such dutie to the drunkard let him do:
With ſoft lowe tongue, and lowly curteſie,
And ſay: What is 't your Honor doth command,
Wherein your Ladie, and your humble wife,
May ſhew her dutie, and make knowne her loue.
And then with kinde imbracements, tempting kiſſes,
And with declining head into his boſome
Bid him ſhed teares, as being ouer-ioyed
To ſee her noble Lord reſtor'd to health,
Who for this ſeuen yeares hath eſteemed him
No better then a poore and loathſome begger:
And if the boy haue not a womans guift
To raine a ſhower of commanded teares,
An Onion will do well for ſuch a ſhift,
Which in a Napkin (being cloſe-conuei'd)
Shall in deſpight enforce a waterie eie:
See this diſpatch'd with all the haſt thou canſt,
Anon Ile giue thee more inſtructions.
I know the boy will wel vſurpe the grace,
Voice, gate, and action of a Gentlewoman:
I long to heare him call the drunkard huſband,
And how my men will ſtay themſelues from laughter,
When they do homage to this ſimple peaſant,
Ile in to counſell them: haply my preſence
May well abate the ouer-merrie ſpleene,
Which otherwiſe would grow into extreames.
For Gods ſake a pot of ſmall Ale.
Wilt pleaſe your Lordſhip drinke a cup of ſacke?
Wilt pleaſe your Honor taſte of theſe Conſerues?
What raiment will your honor weare to day.
I am Chriſtophero Sly, call not mee Honor nor Lordſhip: I ne're dranke ſacke in my life: and if you giue me any Conſerues, giue mee conſerues of Beefe: nere ask me what raiment Ile weare, for I haue no more doublets then Backes: no more ſtockings then legges: nor no more ſhooes then feet, nay ſomtime more feet then ſhooes, or ſuch ſhooes as my toes looke through the ouer leather.
Heauen ceaſe this idle humor in your Honor.
Oh that a mightie man of ſuch diſcent,
Of ſuch poſſeſſions, and ſo high eſteeme
Should be infuſed with ſo foule a ſpirit.
What would you make me mad? Am not I Chriſtopher Slie, old Slies ſonne of Burton-heath by byrth a Pedler, by education a Cardmaker, by tranſmutation a Beare-heard, and now by preſent profeſſion a Tinker. Aske Marrian Hacket the fat Alewife of Wincot, if ſhee know me not: if ſhe ſay I am not xiiii. d. on the ſcore for ſheere Ale; ſcore mee vp for the lyingſt knaue in Chriſtendome. What I am not beſtraught: here's
Oh this it is that makes your Ladie mourne.
Oh this is it that makes your ſeruants droop.
Hence comes it, that your kindred ſhuns your houſe
As beaten hence by your ſtrange Lunacie.
Oh Noble Lord, bethinke thee of thy birth,
Call home thy ancient thoughts from baniſhment,
And baniſh hence theſe abiect lowlie dreames:
Looke how thy ſeruants do attend on thee,
Each in his office readie at thy becke.
Wilt thou haue muſicke? Harke Apollo playes, Muſicke
And twentie caged Nightingales do ſing,
Or wilt thou ſleepe? Wee'l haue thee to a Couch,
Softer and ſweeter then the luſtfull bed
On purpoſe trim'd vp for Semiramis.
Say thou wilt walke: we will beſtrow the ground.
Or wilt thou ride? thy horſes ſhall be trap'd,
Their harneſſe ſtudded all with Gold and Pearle.
Doſt thou loue hawking? Thou haſt hawkes will ſoare
Aboue the Morning Larke. Or wilt thou hunt,
Thy bounds ſhall make the Welkin anſwer them
And fetch ſhrill ecchoes from the hollow earth.
Say thou wilt courſe, thy gray-hounds are as ſwift
As breathed Stags: I fleeter then the Roe.
Doſt thou loue pictures? we wil fetch thee ſtrait
Adonis painted by a running brooke,
And Citherea all in ſedges hid,
Which ſeeme to moue and wanton with her breath,
Euen as the wauing ſedges play with winde.
Wee'l ſhew thee Io, as ſhe was a Maid,
And how ſhe was beguiled and ſurpriz'd,
As liuelie painted, as the deede was done.
Or Daphne roming through a thornie wood,
Scratching her legs, that one ſhal ſweare ſhe bleeds,
And at that ſight ſhall ſad Apollo weepe,
So workmanlie the blood and teares are drawne.
Thou art a Lord and nothing but a Lord:
Thou haſt a Ladie farre more Beautifull,
Then any woman in this waining age.
And til the teares that ſhe hath ſhed for thee,
Like enuious flouds ore-run her louely face,
She was the faireſt creature in the world,
And yet ſhe is inferiour to none.
Am I a Lord and haue I ſuch a Ladie?
Or do I dreame? Or haue I dream'd till now?
I do not ſleepe: I ſee, I heare, I ſpeake:
I ſmel ſweet ſauors, and I feele ſoft things:
Vpon my life I am a Lord indeede,
And not a Tinker, nor Chriſtopher Slie.
Well, bring our ladie hither to our ſight,
And once againe a pot o'th ſmalleſt Ale.
Wilt pleaſe your mightineſſe to waſh your hands:
Oh how we ioy to ſee your wit reſto'd,
Oh that once more you knew but what you are:
Theſe fifteene yeeres you haue bin in a dreame,
Or when you wak'd, ſo wak'd as if you ſlept.
Theſe fifteene yeeres, by my ſay, a goodly nap,
But did I neuer ſpeake of all that time.
Oh yes my Lord, but verie idle words
For though you lay heere in this goodlie chamber,
Yet would you ſay, ye weare beaten out of doore,
And raile vpon the Hoſteſſe of the houſe,
And ſay you would preſent her at the Leete,
Becauſe ſhe brought ſtone-iugs, and no ſea'ld quarts:
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
I, the womans maid of the houſe.
Why ſir you konw no houſe, nor no ſuch maid
Nor no ſuch men as you haue reckon'd vp,
As Stephen Slie, and old Iohn Naps of Greece,
And Peter Turph, and Henry Pimpernell,
And twentie more ſuch names and men as theſe,
Which neuer were, nor no man euer ſaw.
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends.
Amen
I thanke thee, thou ſhalt not looſe by it.
How fares my noble Lord?
Marrie I fare well, for heereis cheere enough.
Where is my wife?
Heere noble Lord what is thy will with her
Are you my wife and will not call mee husband?
My men ſhould call mee Lord, I am your good-man.
My husband and my Lord, my Lord and husband I am your wife in all obedi nce.
I know it well, what muſt I call her?
Madam.
Alce Madam, or Ione Madam?
Madam, and nothing elſe, ſo Lords call Ladies
Madame wife, they ſay that I haue dream'd,
And ſlept aboue ſome fifteene yeare or more.
I, and the time ſeeme's thirty vnto me,
Being all this time abandon'd from your bed.
'Tis much, ſeruants leaue me and her alone:
Madam vndreſſe you, and come now to bed.
Thrice noble Lord, Let me intreate of you
To pardon me yet for a night or two;
Or if not ſo, vntill the Sun be ſet.
For your Phyſitions haue expreſſely charg'd,
In perill to incurre you former malady,
That I ſhould yet abſent me from your bed:
I hope this reaſon ſtands for my excuſe.
I, It ſtands ſo that I may hardly tarry ſo long:
But I would be loth to fall into my dreames againe: I will therefore tarrie in deſpight of the fleſh and the blood.
Your Honors Players hearing your amendment,
Are come to play a pleaſant Comedie,
For ſo your Doctors hold it verie meete,
Seeing too much ſadneſſe hath congeal'd your blood,
And melancholly is the Nurſe of frenzie,
Therefore they thought it good you heare a play,
And frame your minde to mirth and merriment,
Which barres a thouſand harmes, and lengthens life.
Marrie I will let them play, it is not a Commontie, a Chriſtmas gambold, or a tumbling tricke?
No my good Lord, it is more pleaſing ſtuffe.
What houſhold ſtuffe.
It is a kind of hiſtory.
Well, we'l ſee't:
Com Madam wife ſit by my ſide,
And let the world ſlip, wee ſhall nere be yonger.
Tranio, ſince for the great deſire I had
To ſee faire Padua, nurſerie of Arts,
I, am arriu'd for fruitfull Lumbardie,
The pleaſant garden of great Italy,
And by my fathers loue and leaue am arm'd
With his good will, and thy good companie.
My truſtie ſeruant well approu'd in all,
Heere let vs breath, and haply inſtitute
A courſe of Learning, and ingenious ſtudies.
Piſa renowned for graue Citizens
Gaue me my being, and my father firſt
A Merchant of great Trafficke through the world:
Vincentio's come of the Bentiuolij,
Ʋicentio's ſonne, brought vp in Florence,
It ſhall become to ſerue all hopes conceiu'd
To decke his fortune with his vertuous deedes:
And therefore Tranio, for the time I ſtudie,
Vertue and that part of Philoſophie
Will I applie, that treates of happineſſe,
By verue ſpecially to be atchieu'd.
Tell me thy minde, for I haue Piſa left,
And am to Padua come, as he that leaues
A ſhallow plaſh, to plunge him in the deepe,
And with ſacietie ſeekes to quench his thirſt.
Me Pardinato, gentle maiſter mine:
I am in all affected as your ſelfe,
Glad that you thus continue your reſolue,
To ſucke the ſweets of ſweete Philoſophie.
Onely (good maſter) while we do admire
This vertue and this morall diſcipline,
Let's be no Stoickes, nor no ſtockes I pray,
Or ſo deuote to Ariſtotles checkes
As Ouid; be an out-caſt quite abiur'd:
Balke Logicke with acquaintaince that you haue,
And practiſe Rhetoricke in your common talke,
Muſicke and poeſie vſe, to quicken you,
The Mathematickes and the Metaphyſickes
Fall to them as you finde your ſtomacke ſerues you:
No proit growes where is no pleaſure tane:
In briefe ſir, ſtudie what you moſt affect.
Gramercies Tranio, well doſt thou aduiſe,
If Biondello thou wert come aſhore,
We could at once put vs in readineſſe,
And take a Lodging fit to entertaine
Such friendes (as time) in Padua ſhall beget.
But ſtay a while, what companie is this?
Maſter ſome ſhew to welcome vs to Towne.
Gentlemen importune me no farther,
For how I firmly am reſolu'd you know:
That is not to beſtow my yongeſt daughter,
Before I haue a husband for the elder:
If either of you both loue Katherina,
Becauſe I know you well, and loue you well,
Leaue ſhall you haue to court her at your pleaſure.
To cart her rather. She's to rough for mee,
There, there Hortenſio, will you any Wife?
I pray you ſir, is it your will
To make a ſtale of me amongſt theſe mates?
Mates maid, how meane you that?
No mates for you,
Vnleſſe you were of Gentler milder mould.
I faith ſir, you ſhall neuer neede to feare,
I-wis it is not halfe way to her heart:
But if it were, doubt not, her care ſhould be,
To combe your noddle with a three-legg'd ſtoole,
And paint your fce, and vſe you like a foole.
From all ſuch diuels, good Lord deliuer vs.
And me too, good Lord.
Huſht maſter, heres ſome good paſtime toward;
That wench is ſtarke mad or wonderfull froward.
But in the others ſilence do I ſee,
Maids milde behauiour and ſobrietie.
Peace Tranio.
Well ſaid Mr, mum, and gaze your fill.
Gentlemen, that I may ſoone make good.
What I haue ſaid Bianca get you in,
And let it not diſpleaſe thee good Bianca,
For I will loue thee nere the leſſe my girle.
A pretty peate, it is beſt put finger in the eye, and ſhe knew why.
Siſter content you in my diſcontent.
Sir o your pleaſure humbly I ſubſcribe:
My bookes and inſtruments ſhall be my companie,
On them to looke, and practiſe by my ſelfe.
Harke Tranio, thou maiſt heare Minerua ſpeak.
Signior Baptiſta, will you be ſo ſtrange,
Sorrie am I that our good will effects
Bianca's greefe.
Why will you mew her vp
(Signior Baptiſta) for this fiend of hell,
And make her beare the pennance of her tongue.
Gentlemen content ye: I am reſolud:
Go in Bianca.
And for I know ſhe taketh moſt delight
In Muſicke, Inſtrumens, and Poetry,
Schoolemaſters will I keepe within my houſe,
Fit to inſtruct her youth. If you Hortenſio,
Or ſignior Gremio you know any ſuch,
Preferre them hither: for to cunning men,
I will be very kind and liberall,
To mine owne children, in good bringing vp,
And ſo farewell: Katherina you may ſtay,
For I haue more to commune with Bianca.
Why and I truſt I may go too, may I not?
What ſhall I be appointed houres, as though
(Belike) I knew not what to take,
And what to leaue? Ha.
You may go to the diuels dam: your gifts are ſo good heere's none will holde you: There loue is not ſo great Hortenſio, but we may blow our nailes together, and faſt it fairely out. Our cakes dough on both ſides. Farewell: yet for the loue I beare my ſweete Bianca, if I can by any meanes light on a fitt man to teach her that wherein ſhee delights, I will wiſh him to her father.
So will I ſigniour Gremio: but a word I pray: Though the nature of our quarrell yet neuer brook'd Parle, know now vpon aduice, it toucheth vs both: that we may yet againe haue acceſſe to to our faire Miſtris, and be happie riuals in Bianca's loue, to labour and effect one thing ſpecially.
What's that I pray?
Marrie ſir to get a husband for her Siſter.
A husband: a diuell.
I ſay a husband.
I ſay, a diuell: Think'ſt thou Horenſio, though her father be verie rich, any man is ſo verie a foole to be married to hell?
Tuſh Gremio: though it paſſe your patience & mine to endure her lowd alarums, why man there be good fellowes in the world, and a man could light on them, would take her with all faults, and mony enough.
I cannot tell: but I had as lief take her dowrie with this condition; To be whipt at the high croſſe euerie morning.
Faith (as you ſay) there's ſmall choice in rotten apples: but come, ſince this bar in law makes vs friends, it ſhall be ſo farr forth friendly maintain'd, till by helping Baptiſtas eldeſt daughter to a husband, wee ſet his yongeſt free for a huſband, and then haue too t'afreſh; Sweete Bianca, happy man be his dole: he that runnes faſteſt, gets the Ring: How ſay you ſignior Gremio?
I am agreed, and would I had giuen him the beſt horſe in Padua to begin his woing that would thoroughly woe her, wed her, and bed her, and ridde the houſe of her. Come on.
I pray ſir tel me, is it poſſible
That loue ſhould of a ſodaine take ſuch hold.
Oh Tranio till I found it to be true,
I neuer thought it poſſible or likely.
But ſee, while idely I ſtood looking on,
I found the effect of loue in idleneſſe,
And now in plaineſſe do confeſſe to thee
That art to mee as ſecret and as deere
As Anna to the Queene of Carthage was:
Tranio I burne, I pine, I periſh Tranio,
If I atchueieue not this yong modeſt gyrle:
Counſail me Tranio, for I know thou canſt:
Aſſiſt me Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
Maſter it is no time to chide you now,
Affection is not rated from the heart:
If loue haue touch'd you, naught remaines but ſo,
Redime te captam quam queas minimo.
Gramercies Lad: Go forward, this contents,
The reſt will comfort, for thy counſels ſound.
Maſter, you look'd ſo longly on the maide,
Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.
Oh yes, I ſaw ſweete beautie in her face,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Ioue to humble him to her hand,
When with his knees he kiſt the Cretan ſtrond.
Saw you no more? mark'd you not how her ſiſter
Began to ſcold, and raiſe vp ſuch a ſtorme,
That mortal eares might hardly indure the din.
Tranio, I ſaw her corrall lips to moue,
And with her breath ſhe did perfume the ayre,
Sacred and ſweete was all I ſaw in her.
Nay, then 'tis time to ſtirre him from his trance:
I pray you awake ſir: if you loue the Maide,
Bend thoughts and wits to atchieue her. Thus it ſtands:
Her elder ſiſter is ſo curſt and ſhrew'd,
That till the Father rid his hands of her,
Maſter, your loue muſt liue a maide at home,
And therefore has he cloſely meu'd her vp,
Becauſe ſhe will not be annoy'd with ſuiters.
Ah Tranio, what a cruell Fathers he:
But art thou not aduiſ'd, he tooke ſome care
To get her cuning Schoolemaſters to inſtruct her.
I marrie am I ſir, and now 'tis plotted.
I haue it Tranio.
Maſter, for my hand,
Both our inuentions meet and iumpe in one,
Tell me thine firſt.
You will be ſchoole-maſter,
And vndertake the teaching of the maid:
That's your deuice.
It is: May it be done?
Not poſſible: for who ſhall beare your part,
And be in Padua heere Vincentio's ſonne,
Keepe houſe and ply his booke, welcome his friends,
Viſit his Countriemen, and banquet them?
Baſta, content thee: for I haue it full.
We haue not yet bin ſeene in any houſe,
Nor can we be diſtinguiſh'd by our faces,
For man or maſter: then it followes thus;
Thou ſhalt be maſter, Tranio in my ſted:
Keepe houſe, and port, and ſeruants as I ſhould,
I will ſome other be, ſome Florentine,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Piſa.
'Tis hatch'd, and ſhall be ſoe: Tranio at once
Vncaſe thee: take my Conlord hat and cloake,
When Biondello comes, he waites on thee,
But I will charme him firſt to keepe his tongue.
So had you neede:
In breefe Sir, ſith it your pleaſure is,
And I am tied to be obedient,
For ſo your father charg'd me at our parting;
Be ſeruiceable to my ſonne (quoth he)
Although I thinke 'twas in another ſence,
I am content to be Lucentio,
Becauſe ſo well I loue Lucentio.
Tranio be ſo, becauſe Lucentio loues,
And let me be a ſlaue, t'atchieue that maide,
Whoſe ſodaine ſight hath thral'd my wounded eye.
Heere comes the rogue. Sirra, where haue you bin?
Where haue I beene? Nay how now, where are you?
Maſter ha's my fellow Tranio ſtolne your clothes, or you ſtolne his or both? Pray what's the newes?
Sirra come hither, 'tis no time to ieſt,
And therefore frame your manners to the time
Your fellow Tranio heere to ſaue my life,
Puts my apparell, and my countenance on,
And I for my eſcape haue put on his:
For in a quarrell ſince I came aſhore,
I kil'd a man, and feare I was deſcried:
Waite you on him, I charge you, as becomes:
While I make way from hence to ſaue my life:
You vnderſtand me?
I ſir ne're a whit.
And not a iot of Tranio in your mouth,
Tranio is chang'd into Lucentio.
The better for him, would I were ſo too.
So could I 'faith boy, to haue the next wiſh after, that Lucentio indeede had Baptiſtas yongeſt daughter. But ſirra not for my ſake, but your maſters, I aduiſe you vſe your manners diſcreetly in all kinde of companies: When I am alone, why then I am Tranio: but in all places elſe, you maſter Lucentio.
Tranio let's go:
One thing more reſts, that thy ſelfe execute,
To make one among theſe wooers: if thou aske mee why, Sufficeth: my reaſons are both good and waighty.
My Lord you nod, you do not minde the play.
Yes by Saint Anne do I, a good matter ſurely: Comes there any more of it?
My Lord, 'tis but begun.
'Tis a verie excellent peece of worke, Madame Ladie: would 'twere done.
Verona, for a while I take my leaue,
To ſee my friends in Padua; but of all
My beſt beloued and approued friend
Hortenſio: and I trow this is his houſe:
Heere ſirra Grumio, knocke I ſay,
Knocke ſir? whome ſhould I knocke? Is there any man ha's rebsu'd your worſhip?
Villaine I ſay, knocke me heere ſoundly.
Knocke you heere ſir? Why ſir, what am I ſir, that I ſhould knocke you heere ſir.
Villaine I ſay, knocke me at this gate,
And rap me well, or Ile knocke your knaues pate.
My Mr is growne quarrelſome:
I ſhould knocke you firſt,
And then I know after who comes by the worſt.
Will it not be?
Faith Sirrah, and you'l not knocke Ile ring it,
Ile trie how you can Sol, Fa, and ſing it.
Helpe miſtris helpe, my maſter is mad.
Now knocke when I bid you: ſirrrah villaine.
How now, what's the matter? my old friend Grumio, and my good friend Petruchio? How do you all at Ʋerona?
Signior Hortenſio come you to part the fray?
Contutti le core bene trobatto, may I ſay.
Alla noſtra caſa bene venuto multo honorata ſignior mo Petruchio.
Riſe Grumio riſe, we will compound this quarrell.
Nay 'tis no matter ſir, what he leges in Latine. If this be not a lawfull cauſe for me to leaue his ſeuice, looke you ſir: He bid me knocke him, and & rap him ſoundly ſir, Well, was it fit for a ſeruant to vſe his maſter ſo, being perhaps (for ought I ſee) two and thirty, a peepe out? Whome would to God I had well knockt at firſt then had not Grumio come by the worſt.
A ſenceleſſe villaine: good Hortenſio,
I bad the raſcall knocke vpon your gate,
And could not get him for my heart to do it.
Knocke at the gate? Oh heauens: ſpake you not theſe words plaine? Sirra, Knocke me heere: rappe me heere: knock me well, and knocke me ſoundly? And come you now with knocking at the gate?
Sirra begon, or talke not I aduiſe you.
Petruchio patience, I am Grumio's pledge:
Why this a heauie chance twixt him and you,
Your ancient truſtie pleaſant ſeruant Grumio:
And tell me now (ſweete friend) what happie gale
Blowes you to Padua heere, from old Verona?
Such winde as ſcatters yong men through the world,
To ſeeke their fortunes farther then at home,
Where ſmall experience growes but in a few.
Signior Hortenſio, thus it ſtands with me,
Antonio my father is deceaſt,
And I haue thruſt my ſelfe into this maze,
Happily to wiue and thriue, as beſt I may:
Crownes in my purſe I haue, and goods at home,
And ſo am come abroad to ſee the world.
Petruchio, ſhall I then come roundly to thee,
And wiſh thee to a ſhrew'd ill-fauor'd wife?
Thou'dſt thanke me but a little for my counſell:
And yet Ile promiſe thee ſhe ſhall be rich,
And verie rich: but th'art too much my friend,
And Ile not wiſh thee to her.
Hortenſio, 'twixt ſuch friends as wee,
Few words ſufice: and therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife:
▪As wealth is burthen of my woing dance)
Be ſhe as foule as was Florentius Loue,
As old as Sibell and as curſt and ſhrow'd
As Socrates Zentippe, or a worſe:
She moues me not, or not remoues at leaſt
Affections edge in me. Were ſhe as rough
As are the ſwelling Adriaticke ſeas.
I come to wiue it wealthily in Padua:
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
Nay looke you ſir, he tels you flatly what his minde is: Why giue him gold enough, and marrie him to a Puppet or an Aglet babie, or an old trot with ne're a tooth in her head, though ſhe haue as many diſeaſes as two and fiftie horſes. Why nothing comes amiſſe, ſo monie comes withall.
Petruchio, ſince we are ſtept thus farr in,
I will continue that I broach'd in ieſt,
I can Petruchio helpe thee to a wife
With wealth enough, and yong and beautious,
Brought vp as beſt becomes a Gentlewoman.
Her only fault and that is faults enough,
Is, that ſhe is intollerable curſt,
And ſhrow'd and froward, ſo beyond all meaſure,
That were my ſtate farre worſer then it is,
I would not wed her for a mine of Gold.
Hortenſio peace: thou knowſt not golds effect,
Tell mee her fathers name, and 'tis enough:
For I will boord her, though ſhe chide as loud
As thunder, when the clouds in Autumne cracke.
Her father Baptiſta Minola,
An affable and courteous Gentleman,
Her name is Katherina Minola,
Renown'd in Padua for her ſcolding tongue.
I know her father, though I know not her,
And he knew my deceaſed father well:
I will not ſleepe Hortenſio til I ſee her,
And therefore let me be thus bold with you,
To giue you ouer at this firſt encounter,
Vnleſſe you will accompanie mee thither.
I pray you Sir let him go while the humor laſts. A my word, and ſhe knew him as well as I do, ſhe would thinke ſcolding would do little good vpon him. Shee may perhaps call him halfe a ſcore Knaues, or ſo: Why that's nothing; and he begins once, hee'le raile in his rope trickes, Ile tell you what ſir, and ſhe ſtand him but a litle, he will throw a figure in her face, and ſo diſfigure hir with it, that ſhe ſhall haue no more eies to ſee withall then a Cat: you know him not ſir.
Tarrie Petruchio I muſt go with thee,
For in Baptiſtas keepe my treaſure is:
He hath the Iewel of my life in hold,
His yongeſt daughter, beautifull Bianca,
And her with-holds from me. Other more
Suters to her, and riuals in my Loue:
Suppoſing it a thing impoſſible,
For thoſe defects I haue before rehearſt,
That euer Katherina wil be woo'd
Therfore this order hath Baptiſta tane,
That none ſhall haue acceſſe vnto Bianca,
Til Katherine the Curſt, haue got a husband.
Katherine the curſt,
A title for a maide, of all titles the worſt.
Now ſhall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
And offer me diſguiſ'd in ſober robes,
To old Baptiſta as a ſchoole-maſter
Well ſeene in muſicke, to inſtruct Bianca,
That ſo I may by this deuice at leaſt
Haue leaue and leiſure to make loue to her,
And vnſuſpected court her by her ſelfe.
Heere's no knauerie. See, to beguile the olde folkes, how the young folkes lay their heads together. Maſter, maſter, looke about you: Who goes there?
Peace Grumio, it is the riuall of my Loue.
Petruchio ſtand by a while.
A propper ſtripling, and an amorous.
Oh very well, I haue perus'd the note:
Hearke you ſir, Ile haue them verie fairely bound,
All bookes of Loue, ſee that at any hand,
And ſee you reade no other Lectures to her:
You vnderſtand me. Ouer and beſide
Signior Baptiſtas liberalitie,
Ile mend it with a Largeſſe. Take your paper too,
And let me haue them verie well perfum'd;
For ſhe is ſweeter then Perfume it ſelfe
To whom they go to: what will you reade to her.
What ere I reade to her, Ile pleade for you,
As for my patron, ſtand you ſo aſſur'd,
As firmely as your ſelfe were ſtill in place,
Yea and perhaps with more ſucceſſefull words
Then you; vnleſſe you were a ſcholler ſir,
Oh this learning, what a thing it is,
Oh this Woodcocke, what an Aſſe it is.
Peace ſirra.
Grumio mum: God ſaue you ſignior Gremio.
And you are wel met, Signior Hortenſio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptiſta Minola,
I promiſt to enquire carefully
Aboute a ſchoolemaſter for the faire Bianca,
And by good fortune I haue lighted well
On this yong man: For learning and behauiour
Fit for her turne, well read in Poetrie
And other bookes, good ones, I warrant yee.
'Tis well: and I haue met a Gentleman
Hath promiſt me to helpe one to another,
A fine Muſitian to inſtruct our miſtris,
So ſhall I no whit be behind in dutie
To faire Bianca, ſo beloued of me.
Beloued of me, and that my deeds ſhall proue.
And that hs bags ſhall proue.
Gemio, 'tis now no time to vent our loue,
Liſten to me, and if you ſpeake me faire,
Ile tell you nees indifferent good for either.
Heere is a Gentleman whom by chance I met
Vpon agreement from vs to his liking,
Will vndertake to woo curſt Katherine,
Yea and to marrie her, if her dowrie pleaſe.
So ſaid, ſo done, is well:
Hortenſio, haue you told him all her faults?
I know ſhe is an irkeſome brawling ſcold:
If that be all Maſters, I heare no harme.
No, ſaſt me ſo, friend? what Countreyman?
Borne in Ʋerona, old Butonios ſonne:
My father dead, my fortune liues for me,
And I do hope good dayes and long, to ſee.
Oh ſir, ſuch a life with ſuch a wife, were ſtrange:
But if you haue ſtomacke, too't a Gods name,
You ſhall haue me aſſiſting you in all.
But will you woo this wild-cat?
Will I liue?
Wil he woo her? I: or Ile hang her.
Why came I hither, but to that intent?
Thinke you, a litle dinne can daunt mine cares?
Haue I not in my time heard Lyons rore?
Haue I not heard the ſea, puft vp with windes,
Rage like an angry Boare, chafed with ſweat?
Haue I not heard great Ordnance in the field?
And heauens Artillerie thunder in the Skies?
Haue I not in a pitched battell heard
Loud larums, neighing ſteeds, and trumpets clangue?
And do you tell me of a womans tongue?
That giues not halfe ſo great a blow to heare,
As wil a Cheſſe-nut in a Farmers fire.
Tuſh, tuſh, feare boyes with bugs.
For he feares none.
Hortenſio hearke:
This Gentleman is happily arriu'd,
My minde preſumes for his owne good, and yours.
I promiſt we would be Contributors,
And beare his charge of wooing what ſoere.
And ſo we will, prouided that he win her.
I would I were as ſure of a good dinner.
Gentlemen God ſaue you. If I may be bold
Tell me I beſeech you which is the readieſt way
To the houſe of Signior Baptiſta Minola?
He that ha's the two faire daughters: iſt he you meane?
Euen he Biondello.
Hearke you ſir, you meane not her to—
Perhaps him and her ſir, what haue you to do?
Not her that chides ſir, at any hand I pray.
I loue no chiders ſir: Biondello, let's away.
Well begun Tranio.
Sir a word ere you go:
Are you a ſutor to the Maid you talke of, yea or no?
And I be ſir, is it any offence?
No: If without more words you will get you hence.
Why ſir, I Pray you are not the ſtreets as free for me, as for you?
But ſo is not ſhe.
For what reaſon I beſeech you.
For this reaſon if you'l kno.
That ſhe's the choice loue of Signior Gremio.
That ſhe is the choſen of Signior Hortenſio,
Softly my Maſters: If you be Gentlemen
Do me this right: heare me patience,
Baptiſta is a noble Gentleman,
To whom my Father is not all vnknowne,
And were his daughter fairer then ſhe is,
She may more ſutors haue, and me for one,
Faire Laedaes daughter had a thouſand wooers,
Then well one more may faire Bianca haue;
And ſo ſhe ſhall: Lucentio ſhall make one,
Though Paris came, in hope to ſpeede alone.
What, this Gentleman will out-talke vs all.
Giue him head, I know hee'l proue a Iade.
Hortenſio, to what end are all theſe words?
Sir, let me be ſo bold as aske you,
Did you yet euer ſee Baptiſtas daughter?
No ſir, but heare I do that he hath two:
The one, as famous for a ſcolding tongue,
As is the other, for beautious modeſtie.
Sir, ſir, the firſt's for me, let her go by
Yea leaue that labour to great Hercules,
And let it be more then Alcides twelue.
Sir vnderſtand you this of me (inſooth)
The yongeſt daughter whom you hearken for,
Her father keepes from all acceſſe of ſutors
And will not promiſe her to any man,
Vntill the elder ſiſter firſt be wed.
The yonger then is free, and not before.
If it be ſo ſir, that you are the man
Muſt ſteed vs all, and me amongſt the reſt:
And if you breake the ice, and do this ſeeke,
Atchieue the elder, ſet the yonger free,
For our acceſſe, whoſe hap ſhall be to haue her,
Wil not ſo graceleſſe be, to be ingrate.
Sir you ſay wel, and well you do conceiue,
And ſince you do profeſſe to be a ſutor,
You muſt as we do, gratifie this Gentleman,
To whom we all reſt generally beholding.
Sir, I ſhall not be ſlacke, in ſigne whereof,
Pleaſe ye we may contriue this afternoone,
And quaffe carouſes to ou Miſtreſſe health,
And do as aduerſaries do in law,
Striue mightily, but eate and drinke as friends.
Oh excellent motion: fellowes le'ts be gon.
The motions good indeed, and be it ſo,
Petruchio, I ſhall be your Been venuto.
Good ſiſter wrong me not, nor wrong your ſelfe,
To make a bondmaide and a ſlaue of mee,
That I diſdaine: but for theſe other goods,
Vnbind my hands, Ile pull them off my ſelfe,
Yea all my rayment to my petticoate,
Or what you will commaund me, will I do,
So well I know my dutie to my elders.
Of all thy ſutors heere I charge tell
Whom thou lou'ſt beſt: ſee thou diſſemble not.
Beleeue me ſiſter, of all the men aliue,
I neuer yet beheld that ſpeciall face,
Which I could fancie, more then any other.
Minion thou lyeſt: It's not Hortenſio?
If thou affect him ſiſter, heere I ſweare
Ile plead for you my ſelfe, but you ſhall haue him.
Oh then belike you fancie riches more.
You will haue Gremio to keepe you faire.
Is it for him you do enuie me ſo?
Nay then you ieſt, and now I well perceiue
You haue but ieſted with me all this while:
I pre thee ſiſter Kate vnite my hands.
If that be ieſt, then all the reſt was ſo.
Why how now Dame, whence growes this inſolence?
Bianca, ſtand aſide, poore Gyrle ſhe weepes:
Go ply the needle, meddle not with her.
For ſhame thou hilding of a diuelliſh ſpirit,
Why doſt thou wrong her, that did nere wrong thee?
When did ſhee croſſe thee with a bitter word?
Her ſilence flouts me, and Ile be reueng'd.
What in my ſight? Bianca get thee in.
What will you not ſuffer me: Nay now I ſee
She is your treaſure, ſhe muſt haue a husband,
I muſt dance bare-foot on her wedding day,
And for your loue to her, lead Apes in hell.
Talke not to me, I will go ſit and weepe,
Till I can finde occaſion of reuenge.
Was euer Gentleman thus greeu'd as I?
But who comes heere.
Good morrow neighbour Baptiſta.
Good morrow neighbour Gremio: God ſaue you Gentlemen.
And you good ſir: pray haue you not a daughter cal'd Katerina, and vertuous.
I haue a daughter ſir, cal'd Katerina.
You are to blunt, go to it orderly.
You wrong me ſignior Gremio, giue me leaue?
I am a Gentleman of Ʋerona ſir,
That hearing of her beautie, and her wit,
Her affabilitie and baſhfull modeſtie:
Her wondrous qualities and mild behauiour,
Am bold to ſhew my ſelfe a forward gueſt
Within your houſe, to make mine eie the witneſſe
Of that report, Which I ſo oft haue heard,
And for an entrance to my entertainment,
I do preſent you with a man of mine
Cunning in muſicke, and the Mathematickes,
To inſtruct her fully in thoſe ſciences,
Whereof I know ſhe is not ignorant,
Accept of him, or elſe you do me wrong,
His name is Litio, borne in Mantua.
Y'are welcome ſir, and he for your good ſake
But for my daughter Katerine, this I know,
She is not for your turne the more my greife.
I ſee you doe not meane to part with her,
Or elſe you like not of my companie.
Miſtake me not, I ſpeake but as I finde,
Whence are you ſir? What may I call your name.
Petruchio is my name Antonio's ſonne
A man well knowne throughout all Italy.
I know him well: you are welcome for his ſake.
Sauing your tale Petruchio, I pray let vs that are poore petitioners ſpeake too? Bacare, you are meruaylous forward.
Oh, pardon me ſignior Gremio, I would faine be doing.
I doubt it not ſir. But you will curſe
Your wooing neighbors: this is a guift
Very gratefull, I am ſure of it, to expreſſe
The like kindneſſe my ſelfe, that haue beene
More kindely beholding to you then any
Freely giue vnto this yong ſcholler, that hath
Beene long ſtudying at Rhemes, as cunning
In Greeke, Latine, and other Languages,
As the other in muſicke and Mathematickes:
His name is Cambio: pray you accept his ſeruice.
A thouſand thankes ſignior Gremio:
Welcome good Cambio. But gentle ſir,
Me thinkes you walke like a ſtranger,
May I be ſo bold, to know the cauſe of your comming?
Pardon me ſir, the boldneſſe is mine owne,
That being a ſtranger in this Cittie heere,
Do make my ſelfe a ſutor to your daughter,
Vnto Bianca, faire and vertuous:
Nor is your firme reſolue, vnknowne to mee,
In the preferment of the eldeſt ſiſter.
This Libertie is all that I requeſt,
That vpon knowledge of my parentage,
I may haue welcome 'mongſt the reſt that woo,
And free acceſſe and fauour as the reſt.
And toward the education of your daughters:
I heere beſtow a ſimple inſtrument,
And this ſmall packet of Greeke and Latine bookes:
If you accept them, then their worth is great:
Lucentio is your name of whence I pray.
Of Piſa ſir, ſonne to Vincentio.
A mightie man of Piſa by report,
I know him well: you are verie welcome ſir:
Take you the Lute, and you the ſet of bookes,
You ſhall go ſee your pupils preſently.
Holla, within.
Sirrah, lead theſe Gentlemen
To my daughters, and tell them both
Theſe are their Tutors, bid them vſe them well,
We will go walke a litle in the Orchard,
And then to dinner: you are paſſing welcome,
And ſo I pray you all to thinke yourſelues.
Signior Baptiſta, my buſineſſe asketh haſte,
And euery day I cannot come to woo,
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left ſolie heire to all his Lands and goods,
Which I haue bettered rather then decreaſt.
Then tell me, If I get your daughters loue,
What dowrie ſhall I haue with her to wife.
After my death, the one halfe of my Lands,
And in poſſeſsion twentie thouſand Crownes.
And for that dowrie, Ile aſſure her of
Her widdow-hood, be it that ſhe ſuruiue me
In all my Lands and Leaſes whatſoeuer,
Let ſpecialties be therefore drawne betweene vs,
That couenants may be kept on either hand.
I, when the ſpeciall thing is well obtain'd,
That is her loue: for that is all in all.
Why that is nothing: for I tell you father,
I am as peremptorie as ſhe proud minded:
And where two raging fires meere together,
They do conſume the thing that feedes their furie.
Though litle fire growes great with litle winde,
Yet extreme guſts will blow out fire and all:
So I to her, and ſo ſhe yeelds to me,
For I am rough, and woo not like a babe.
Well maiſt thou woo, and happie be thy ſpeed;
But be thou arm'd for ſome vnhappie words.
I to the proofe, as Mountaines are for windes,
That ſhakes not, though they blow perpetually
How now my friend why doſt thou looke ſo pale?
For feare I promiſe you, if I looke pale.
What will my daughter proue a good Muſitian?
I thinke ſhe'l proue a ſouldier,
Iron may hold with her, but neuer Lutes.
Why then thou canſt not breake her to the Lute?
Why no for ſhe hath broke the Lute to me:
I did but tell her ſhe miſtooke her frets,
And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering,
When (with a moiſt impatient diuelliſh ſpirit)
Frets call you theſe? (quoth ſhe( Ile fume with them:
And with that word ſhe ſtroke me on the head,
And through the inſtrument my pate made way,
And there I ſtood amazed for a while,
As on a Pillorie, looking through the Lute,
While ſhe did call me Raſcall, Fidler,
And twangling Iacke, with twentie ſuch vilde tearmes,
As had ſhe ſtudied to miſuſe me ſo.
Now by the world, it is a luſtie Wench,
I loue her ten times more then ere I did,
Oh how I long to haue ſome chat with her.
Well go with me, and be not ſo diſcomfited.
Proceed in Practiſe with my yonger daughter,
She's apt to learne, and thankefull for good turnes:
Signior Petruchio, will you go with vs,
Or ſhall I ſend my daughter Kate to you.
I pray you do. Ile attend her heere,
And woo her with ſome ſpirit when ſhe comes,
Say that ſhe raile, why then Ile tell her plaine,
She ſings as ſweetly as a Nightinghale:
Say that ſhe frowne, Ile ſay ſhe lookes as cleare
As Morning Roſes newly waſht with dew:
Say ſhe be mute, and will not ſpeake a word,
Then Ile commend her volubility,
And ſay ſhe vttereth piercing eloquence:
If ſhe do bid me packe, Ile giue her thankes,
As though ſhe bid me ſtay by her a weeke:
If ſhe denie to wed, Ile craue the day
When I ſhall aske the banes, and when be married.
But heere ſhe comes, and now Petruchio ſpeake.
Good morrow Kate, for thats your name I heare.
Well haue you heard, but ſome thing hard of hearing:
They call me Katerine, that do talke of me.
You lye in faith, for you are call'd plaine Kate,
And bony Kate, and ſomtimes Kate the curſt:
But Kate, the prettieſt Kate in Chriſtendome,
Kate of Kate-hall, my ſuper-daintie Kate,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore Kate
Take this of me, Kate of my conſolation,
Hearing thy mildneſſe prais'd in euery Towne,
Thy vertues ſpoke of, and thy beautie ſounded,
Yet not ſo deepely as to thee belongs,
My ſelfe am mou'd to woo thee for my wife.
Mou'd in good time, let him that mou'd you hither
Remoue you hence: I Knew you at the firſt
You were a moueable.
Why, what's a moueable?
A ioyn'd ſtoole.
Thou haſt hit it: come ſit on me.
Aſſes are made to beare, and ſo are you,
Women are made to beare, and ſo are you
No ſuch Iade as you, if me you meane
Alas good Kate, I will not burden thee,
For knowing thee to be but yong and light.
Too light for ſuch a ſwaine as you to catch,
And yet as heauie as my waight ſhould be.
Shold be, ſhould: buzze.
Well tane, and like a buzzard.
Oh ſlow-wing'd Turtle ſhall a buzzard take thee?
I for a Turtle as he takes a buzzard.
Come, come you waſpe, y'ſaith you are too angrie.
If I be waſpiſh, beſt beware my ſting.
My remedy is then to plucke it out.
I, If the foole could finde it where it lies.
Who knowes not where a Waſpe does weare his ſting?
In his taile.
In his tongue?
Whoſe tongue.
Yours if you talke of tailes, and ſo farewell.
What with my tongue in your taile.
Nay, come againe, good Kate, I am a Gentleman,
That Ile trie.
I ſweare Ile cuffe you, if you ſtrike againe.
So may you looſe your armes.
If you ſtrike me, you are no Gentleman,
And if no Gentleman, why then no armes.
A Herald Kate? Oh put me in thy bookes.
What is your Creſt, a Coxcombe?
A combeleſſe Cocke, ſo Kate will be my Hen.
No Cocke of mine you crow too like a crauen.
Nay come Kate come: you muſt not looke ſo ſowre.
It is my faſhion when I ſee a Crab.
Why heere's no crab, and therefore looke not ſowre.
There is, there is.
Then ſhew it mee.
Had I a glaſſe, I would.
What, you meane my face.
Well aym'd of ſuch a yong one.
Now by S. George I am too yong for you.
Yet you are wither'd.
'Tis with cares.
I care not.
Nay heare you Kate. In ſooth you ſcape not ſo.
I chafe you if I tarrie. Let me go.
No, not a whit, I find you paſſing gentle:
'Twas told me you were rough, and coy, and ſullen,
And now I finde report a very lyar:
For thou art pleaſant, gameſome, paſſing courteous,
But ſlow in ſpeech: yet ſweete as ſpring-time flowers.
Thou canſt not frowne, thou canſt not looke a ſconce,
Nor bite the lip, as angrie wenches will,
Nor haſt thou pleaſure to be croſſe in talke:
But thou with mildneſſe entertain'ſt thy wooers,
With gentle conference, ſoft, and affable.
Why does the world report that Kate doth limpe?
Oh ſland'rous world: Kate like the hazle twig
Is ſtraight, and ſlender, and as browne in hue
As hazle nuts, and ſweeter then the kernels:
Oh let me ſee thee walke, thou doſt not halt.
Go foole, and whom thou keep'ſt command.
Did euer Dian ſo become a Groue
As Kate this chamber with her princely gate:
Oh be thou Dian, and let her be Kate,
And then let Kate be chaſt, and Dian ſportfull.
Where did you ſtudie all this goodly ſpeech?
It is extempore, from my mother wit.
A wittie mother, witleſſe elſe her ſonne.
Am I not wiſe?
Yes, keepe you warme.
Marry ſo I meane ſweete Katherine in thy bed:
And therefore ſetting all this chat aſide,
Thus in plaine termes: your father hath conſented
That you ſhall be my wife; your dowrie greed on,
And will you, nill you, I will marry you.
Now Kate, I am a husband for your turne,
For by this light, whereby I ſee thy beauty,
Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,
Thou muſt be married to no man but me,
For I am he am borne to tame you Kaue,
And bring you from a wilde Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other houſhold Kates:
Heere comes your father, neuer make deniall,
I muſt, and will haue Katherine to my wife.
Now Signior Petruchio, how ſpeed you with my daughter?
How but well ſir? how but well?
It were impoſſible I ſhould ſpeed amiſſe.
Why how now daughter Katherine, in your dumps?
Call you me daughter? now I promiſe you
You haue ſhewd a tender fatherly regard,
To wiſh me wed to one halfe Lunaticke,
A mad cap ruffian and a ſwearing Iacke,
That thinkes with oathes to face the matter out.
Father 'tis thus, your ſelfe and all the world
That talk'd of her, haue talk'd amiſſe of her:
If ſhe be curſt, it is for policie,
For ſhee's not froward, but modeſt as the Doue
Shee is not hot but temperate as the morne,
For patience, ſhe will proue a ſecond Griſſell,
And Roman Lucrece for her chaſtitie:
And to conclude, we haue greed ſo well together,
That vpon ſonday is the wedding day,
Ile ſee thee hang'd on ſonday firſt,
Hark Petruchio, ſhe ſayes ſhee'll ſee thee hang'd firſt
Is this your ſpeeding? nay then godnight our part.
Be patient Gentlemen, I chooſe her for my ſelfe,
If ſhe and I be pleas'd, what's that to you?
'Tis bargain'd twixt vs twaine being alone,
That ſhe ſhall ſtill be curſt in companie.
I tell you 'tis incredible to belieue
How much ſhe loues me: oh the kindeſt Kate,
Shee hung about my necke, and kiſſe on kiſſe
Shee vi'd ſo faſt, proteſting oath on oath,
That in a twinke ſhe won me to her loue.
Oh you are nouices, 'tis a world to ſee
How came when men and women are alone,
A meacocke wretch can make the curſteſt ſhrew:
Gue me thy hand Kate, I will vnto Ʋenice
To buy apparell 'gainſt the wedding day;
Prouide the feaſt father, and bid the gueſts,
I will be ſure my Katherine ſhall be fine.
I know not what to ſay, but giue me your hands,
God ſend you ioy Petruchio, 'tis a match.
Amen ſay we, we will be witneſſes.
Father and wife, and Gentlemen adieu,
I will to Venice, ſonday comes apace,
We will haue rings, and things and fine arrayr
And kiſſe me Kate, we will be married a ſonday.
Was euer match clapt vp ſo ſodainly?
Faith Gentlemen now I play a merchants part,
And venture madly on a deſperate Mart.
I was a commodity lay fretting by you,
'Twill bring you gaine, or periſh on the ſeas.
The game I ſeeke, is quiet me the match.
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch,
But now Baptiſta, to your yonger daughter,
Now is the day we long haue looked for,
I am your neighbour, and was ſutor firſt.
And I am one that loue Bianca more
Then words can witneſſe, or your thoughts can gueſſe.
Yongling thou canſt not loue ſo deare as I.
Gray-beard thy loue doth freeze.
But thine doth frie,
Skipper ſtand backe, 'tis age that nouriſheth.
But youth in Ladies eyes that flouriſheth.
Content you Gentlemen, I will compound this ſtrife
'Tis deeds muſt win the prize, and he of both
That can aſſure my daughter greateſt dower,
Shall haue my Biancas loue.
Say ſignior Gremio, what can you aſſure her?
Firſt, as you know, my houſe within the City
Is richly furniſhed with plate and gold,
Baſons and ewers to laue her dainty hands:
My hangings all of tirian tapeſtrie:
In Iuory coffers I haue ſtuft my Crownes:
In Cipres cheſts my arras counterpoints,
Coſtly apparell, tents, and Canopies,
Fine linnen, Turky cuſhions boſt with pearle,
Vallens of Venice gold, in needle worke:
Pewter and braſſe, and all things that belongs
To houſe or houſe-keeping: then at my farme
I haue a hundred milch-kine to the pale,
Sixe-ſcore fat Oxen ſtanding in my ſtalls,
And all things anſwerable to this portion.
My ſelfe am ſtrooke in yeeres I muſt confeſſe,
And if I die to morrow this is hers
If whil'ſt I liue ſhe will be only mine.
That only came welll in: ſir, liſt to me,
I am my fathers heyre and onely ſonne,
If I may haue your daughter to my wife,
Ile leaue her houſes three or foure as good
Within rich Piſa walls, as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua,
Beſides two thouſand, Duckets by the yeere
Of fruitfull Land, all which ſhall be her ioynter.
What, haue I pincht you Signior Gremio?
Two thouſand Duckets by the yeere of land,
My Land amounts not to ſo much in all:
That ſhe ſhall haue, beſides an Argoſie
That now is lying in Marcellus roade:
What, haue I choakt you with an Argoſie
Gremio, 'tis knowne my father hath no leſſe
Then three great Argoſies, beſides two Galliaſſes
And twelue tite Gallies, theſe I will aſſure her,
And twice as much what ere thou offreſt next.
Nay, I haue offred all, I haue no more,
And ſhe can haue no more then all I haue,
If you like me ſhe ſhall haue me and mine.
Why then the maid is mine from all the world
By your firme promiſe, Gremio is out-uied.
I muſt confeſſe your offer is the beſt,
And let your father make her the aſſurance,
She is your owne, elſe you muſt pardon me:
If you ſhould die before him where's her dower?
That's but a cauill: hee is olde, I yong.
And may not yong men die as well as old?
Well Gentlemen, I am thus reſolu'd,
On ſonday next, you know,
My daughter Katherine is to be married:
Now on the ſonday following ſhall Bianca
Be Bride to you, if you make this aſſurance:
If not to Signior Gremio:
And ſo I take my leaue, and thanke you both.
Adieu good neighbour: now I feare thee not:
Sirra, yong gameſter, your father were a foole
To giue thee all, and in his waining age
Set foot vnder thy table: tut, a toy,
An olde Italian foxe is not ſo kinde my boy.
A vengeance on your crafty withered hide,
Yet I haue fac'd it with a card often:
'Tis in my head to doe my maſter good:
I ſee no reaſon but ſuppos'd Lucentio
Muſt get a father, call'd ſuppos'd Vincentio,
And that's a wonders: fathers commonly
Doe get their children: but in this caſe of woing,
A childe ſhall get a ſire, if I faile not of my cunning.
Fidler forbeare you grow too forward Sir,
Haue you ſo ſoone forgot the entertainment
Her ſiſter Katherine welcom'd you withall.
But wrangling pedant this is
The patroneſſe of heauenly harmony:
Then giue me leaue to haue Prerogatiue,
And when in muſicke we haue ſpent an houre
Your Lecture ſhall haue leiſure for as much.
Prepoſterous Aſſe that neuer read ſo farre,
To know the cauſe why muſicke was ordain'd:
Was it not to refreſh the mind of man
After his ſtudies, or his vſuall paine?
Then giue me leaue to read Philoſophy
And while I pauſe, ſerue in your harmony.
Sirra, I will beare theſe braues of thine.
Why Gentlemen, you do me double wrong,
To ſtriue for that which reſteth in my choice:
I am no breeching ſcholler in the ſchooles,
Ile not be tied to houres nor pointed times,
But learne my Leſſons as I pleaſe my ſelfe,
And to cut off all ſtrife heere ſit we downe,
Take you the inſtrument play you the whiles,
His Lecture will be done ere you haue tun'd,
You'll leaue his Lecture when I am in tune?
That will be neuer, tune your inſtrument,
Where left we laſt?
Heere Madam: Hic Ibat Simois, hic eſt ſigeria telus, hic ſteterat Priami regia Celſa ſenis.
Conſter them.
Hic Ibat, as I told you before▪ Simois, I am Lucentio, hic eſt, ſonne vnto Vincentio of Piſa, Sigeria tellus, diſguiſed thus to get your loue, hic ſteterat, and that Lucentio that comes a wooing Priami, is my man Tranio, regia, bearing my port, celſa ſenis that we might beguile the old Pantalowne.
Madam my inſtrument's in tune.
Let's heare, oh fie the treble iarres.
Spit in the hole man, and tune againe.
Now let mee ſee if I can conſter it. hic ibat ſimois, I know you not, hic eſt ſigeria tellus, I truſt you not, hic ſtaterat Priami take heede he heare vs not, regia preſume not, Celſa ſenis diſpaire not.
Madam 'tis now in tune.
All but the baſe.
The baſe is right, 'tis the baſe knaue that iarres.
How fierie and forward our pedant is,
Now for my life the knaue doth court my loue,
Pedaſcule, Ile watch you better yet:
In time I may belieue yet I miſtruſt.
Miſtruſt it not, for ſure Aeacides.
Was Aiax cald ſo from his grandfather.
I muſt beleeue my maſter, elſe I promiſe you,
I ſhould be arguing ſtill vpon that doubt,
But let it reſt, now Litto to you:
Good maſter take it not vnkindly pray
That I haue beene thus pleaſant with you both.
You may go walke, and giue me leaue a while,
My Leſſons make no muſicke in three parts.
Are you ſo formall ſir, well I muſt waite
And watch withall, for but I be deceiu'd,
Our fine Muſition groweth amorous.
Madam, before you touch the inſtrument,
To learne the order of m fingering,
I muſt begin with rudiments of Art,
To teach you gamoth in a briefer ſort,
More pleaſant, pithy and effectuall,
Then hath beene taught by any of my trade,
And there it is in writing fairely drawne.
Why, I am paſt my gamouth long agoe.
Yet read the gamouth of Hortentio.
Gamouth I am the ground of all accord:
A re, to plead Hortenſio's paſſion:
Bee me, Bianca take him for thy Lord
C fa ut, that loues with all affection:
D ſol re, one Cliffe, two notes haue I,
E la mi, ſhow pitty or I die.
Call you this gamouth? tut I like it not,
Old faſhions pleaſe me beſt, I am not ſo nice
To charge true rules for old inuentions.
Miſtreſſe your father prayes you leaue your bookes,
And helpe to dreſſe your ſiſters chamber vp,
You know to morrow is the wedding day.
Farewell ſweete maſters both, I muſt be gon.
Faith Miſtreſſe then I haue no cauſe to ſtay.
But I haue cauſe to pry into this pedant,
Me thinkes he lookes as though he was in loue:
Yet if thy thoughts Bianca be ſo humble
To caſt thy wandring eies on euery ſtale:
Seize thee that Liſt, if once I finde thee ranging,
Hortenſio will be quit with thee by changing.
Signior Lucentio, this is the pointed day
That Katherine and Petruchio ſhould be married,
And yet we heare not of our ſonne in Law:
What will be ſaid, what mockery will it be?
To want the Bride-groome when the Prieſt attends
To ſpeake the ceremoniall rites of marriage?
What ſaies Lucentio to this ſhame of ours?
No ſhame but mine: I muſt forſooth be forſt
To giue my hand oppos'd againſt my heart
Vnto a mad-braine rudes by full of ſpleene,
Who woo'd in haſte, and meanes to wed at leiſure
I told you I, he was a franticke foole,
Hiding his bitter ieſts in blunt behauiour,
And to be noted for a merry man;
Hee'll wooe a thouſand, point the day of marriage,
Make friends, inuite, and proclaime the banes,
Yet neuer meanes to wed where he hath woo'd:
Now muſt the world point at poore Katherine,
And ſay, loe, there is mad Petruchio's wife
If it would pleaſe him come and marrie her.
Patience good Katherine and Baptiſta too,
Vpon my life Petruchio meanes but well,
What euer fortune ſtayes him from his word,
Though he be blunt, I knew him paſſing wiſe,
Though he be merry, yet withall he's honeſt.
Would Katherine had neuer ſeen though.
Go girle, I cannot blame thee now to weepe,
For ſuch an iniurie would vexe a verie Saint,
Much more a ſhrew of impatient humour.
Maſter, maſter, newes, and ſuch newes as you neuer heard of,
Is it new and old too? how may that be?
Why, is it not newes to heare of Petruchio's comming?
Is he come?
Why no ſir?
What then?
He is comming.
When will he be heere?
When he ſtands where I am, and ſees you there.
But ſay, what to thine olde newes?
Why Petruchio is comming, in a new hat and an olde ierkin, a paire of old breeches thrice turn'd; a paire of bootes that haue beene candle-caſes, one buckled, another lac'd: an old ruſty ſword tane out of the Towne Armory, with a broken hilt, and chapeleſſe: with two broken points: his horſe hip'd with an olde mothy ſaddle, and ſtirrops of no kindred: beſides poſſeſt with the glanders, and like to moſe in the chine, troubled with the Lampaſſe, infected with the faſhions, full of Windegalls, ſped with Spauins, raied with the Yellowes, paſt cure of the Fiues, ſtarke ſpoyl'd with the Staggers, begnawne with the Bots, Waid in the backe, and ſhoulder-ſhotten, neere leg'd before, and with a halfe-chekt Bitte, and a headſtall of ſheepes leather, which being reſtrained to keepe him from ſtumbling, hath been often burſt, and now repaired with knots: one girth ſixe times peec'd, and a womans Crupper of velure which hath two letters for her name, fairely ſet down in ſtuds, and heere and there peec'd with packthreed.
Who comes with him?
Oh ſir, his Lackey, for all the world Capariſon'd like the horſe: with a linnen ſtock on one leg and a kerſey boot-hoſe on the other, gartred with a red and blew liſt; an old hat, and the humor of fourty fancies prickt in't for a teacher: a monſter, a very monſter in apparell, and not like a Chriſtian foot-boy, or a Gentlemans Lacky.
'Tis ſome old humor pricks him to this faſhion, yet oftentimes he goes but meane apparel'd.
I am glad he's come, howſoere he comes.
Why ſir, he comes not.
Didſt thou not ſay he comes?
Who, that Petruchio came?
I, that Petruchio came.
No ſir, I ſay his horſe comes with him on his backe.
Why that's all one.
Nay by S. Iamy, I hold you a penny, a horſe and a man is more then one, and yet not many.
Come where be theſe gallants? who's at home?
You are welcome ſir.
And yet I come not well.
And yet you halt not.
Not ſo well apparel'd as I wiſh you were.
Were it better I ſhould ruſh in thus:
But where is Kate? where is is my louely bride?
How does my father? gentles me thinkes you frowne,
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they ſaw ſome wondrous monument,
Some Commet, or vnuſuall prodigie?
Why ſir, you know this is your wedding day
Firſt were we ſad, fearing you would not come,
Now ſadder that you come ſo vnprouided:
Fie, doff this habit, ſhame to your eſtate,
An eye-ſore to our ſolemne feſtiuall.
And tell vs what occaſion of import
Hath all ſo long detain'd you from your wife,
And ſent you hither ſo vnlike your ſelfe?
Tedious it were to tell, and harſh to heare,
Sufficeth I am come to keepe my word,
Though in ſome part inforced to digreſſe,
Which at more leiſure I will ſo excuſe,
As you ſhall well be ſatisfied withall.
But where is Kate? I ſtay too long from her,
The morning weares, 'tis time we were at Church.
See not your Bride in theſe vnreuerent robes,
Goe to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
Not, I belieue me, thus Ile viſit her.
But thus I truſt you will not marrie her.
Good ſooth euen thus: therefore ha done with words,
To me ſhe's married not vnto my clothes:
Could I repaire what ſhe will weare in me,
As I can change theſe poore accoutrements,
'Twere well for Kate, and better for my ſelfe.
But what a foole am I to chat with you,
When I ſhould bid good morrow to my Bride?
And ſeale the title with a louely kiſſe.
He hath ſome meaning in his mad attire,
We will perſwade him be it poſſible,
To put on better ere he go to Church.
Ile after him, and ſee the euent of this.
But ſir, Loue concerneth vs to adde
Her fathers liking, which to bring to paſſe
As before imparted to your worſhip,
I am to get a man what ere he be,
It skills not much, weele fit him to our turne,
And he ſhall be Vincentio of Piſa,
And make aſſurance heere in Padua
Of greater ſummes then I haue promiſed,
So ſhall you quietly enioy your hope.
And marrie ſweete Bianca with conſent.
Were it not that my fellow ſchoolmaſter
Doth watch Bianca's ſteps ſo narrowly:
Twere good me-thinkes to ſteale our marriage,
Which once perform'd, let all the world ſay no,
Ile keepe mine owne deſpite of all the world.
That by degrees wee meane to looke into,
And watch our vantage in this buſineſſe,
Wee'l ouer-reach the graybeard Gremio,
The narrow prying father Minola,
The quaint Muſitian, amorous Litio,
All for my maſters ſake Lucentio.
Signior Gremio, came you from the Church?
As willingly as ere I came from ſchoole.
And is the Bride and Bridegroom comming home?
A Bridegroome ſay you? 'tis a groome indeed,
A grumling groome, and that the girle ſhall finde.
Curſter then ſhe, why 'tis impoſſible.
Why he's a deuill, a deuill, a very fiend.
Why ſhe's a deuill, a deuill, the deuills damme.
Tut, ſhe's a Lambe, a Doue, a foole to him:
Ile tell you ſir Lucentio; when the Prieſt
Should aske if Katherine ſhould be his wife
I, by goggs woones quoth he, and ſwore ſo loud,
That allamaz'd, the Prieſt let fall the booke,
And as he ſtoop'd againe to take it vp,
This mad-brain'd Bridegroome tooke him ſuch a cuffe,
That down fell Prieſt and booke, and booke and Prieſt,
Now take them vp quoth he if any liſt.
What ſaid the wench when he roſe againe?
Trembled and ſhooke for why he ſtamp'd and ſwore, as if the Vicar ment to cozen him: but after many ceremonies done, he calls for wine, a health quoth he as if he had been aboord carowſing to his mates after a ſtorme, quaft off the Muſcadell, and threw the ſops all in the Sextons face: hauing no other reaſon but that his beard grew thinne and hungerly: and ſeem'd to aske him ſops as he was drinking This done, he tooke the Bride about the neck and kiſt her lips with ſuch a clamorous ſmacke, that at the parting all the Church did eccho: and I ſeeing this, came thence for very ſhame and after mee I know the rout is comming, ſuch a mad marriage neuer was before: harke harke I heare the minſtrels, play.
Gentlemen and friends I thanke you for your pains,
I know you thinke to dine with mee to day,
And haue prpar'd great ſtore of wedding cheere,
But ſo it is, my haſte doth call mee hence,
And therefore heere I meane to take my leaue.
Is't poſſible you will away to night?
I muſt away to day before night come,
Make it no wonder: If you knew my buſineſſe,
You would intreate me rather goe then ſtay:
And honeſt company, I thanke you all,
That haue beheld me giue away my ſelfe
To this moſt patient, ſweete, and vertuous wife,
Dine with my father, drinke a health to mee,
For I muſt hence, and farewell to you all.
Let vs intreate you ſtay till after dinner.
It may not be.
Let me intreate you.
It cannot be.
Let me intreate you.
I am content.
Are you content to ſtay?
I am content you ſhall intreate me ſtay,
But yet not ſtay, entreate me how you can.
Now if you loue me ſtay,
Grumio, my horſe,
I ſir they be ready, the Oates haue eaten the horſes.
Nay then,
Doe what thou canſt, I will not goe to day,
No nor to morrow, not till I pleaſe my ſelfe,
The dore is open ſir, there lies your way,
You may be iogging whiles your bootes are greene:
For mee, Ile not be gone till I pleaſe my ſelfe,
'Tis like you'll proue a iolly ſurly groome,
That take it on you at the firſt ſo roundly.
O Kate content thee prethee be not angrie,
I will be angry, what haſt thou to doe?
Father, be quiet, he ſhall ſtay my leiſure.
I marrie ſir, now it begins to worke.
Gentlemen, forward to the Bridall dinner,
I ſee a woman may be maide a foole
If ſhe had not a ſpirit to reſiſt,
They ſhall go forward Kate at thy command,
Obey the Bride you that attend on her,
Goe to the feaſt, reuell and domineere,
Carowſe full meaſure to her maiden-head,
Be madde and merry, or goe hang yourſelues:
But for my bonny Kate, ſhe muſt with me:
Nay, looke not big, nor ſtampe, nor ſtare, nor fret,
I will be maſter of what is mine owne,
Shee is my good, my chattels, ſhe is my houſe,
My houſhold-ſtuffe, my field my barne,
My horſe, my oxe, my aſſe, my any thing,
And heere ſhee ſtands, touch her who euer dare,
Ile bring mine action on the proudeſt he
That ſtops my way in Padua: Grumio
Draw forth thy weapon, wee are beſet with theeues,
Reſcue thy miſtreſſe if thou be a man:
Feare not ſweete wench, they ſhall not touch thee Kate,
Ile Buckler thee againſt a Million.
Nay, let them goe, a couple of quiet ones.
Went they not quickly, I ſhould die with laughing.
Of all mad matches neuer was the like.
Miſtreſſe, what's your opinion of your ſiſter?
That being mad her ſelfe, ſhe's madly mated.
I warrant him Petruchio is Kated.
Neighbours and friends, though Bride and Bridegroom wants
For to ſupply the places at the table,
You know there wants no iunckets at the feaſt:
Lucentio you ſhall ſupply the Bridegroomes place,
And let Bianca take her ſiſters roome.
Shall ſweete Bianca practiſe how to bride it?
She ſhall Lucentio: come Gentlemen let's goe.
Fie fie on all tired Iades, on all mad Maſters, and all foule waies: was euer man ſo beaten? was euer man ſo raied? was euer man ſo weary? I am ſent before to make a fire, and they are comming after to warme them: now were not I a litle pot, and ſoone hot; my very lippes might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roofe of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere I ſhould come by a fire to thaw mee, but I with blowing the fire ſhall warme my ſelfe: for conſidering the weather, a taller man then I will take cold: Holla, hoa Curtis.
Who is that calls ſo coldly?
A peece of Ice: if thou doubt it, thou maiſt ſlide from my ſhoulder to my heele, with no greater a run but my head and my necke. A fire good Curtis.
Is my maſter and his wife comming Grumio?
Oh I Burtis I, and therefore fire, fire, caſt on no water.
Is ſhe ſo hot a ſhrew as ſhe's reported:
She was good Curtis before this froſt: but thou know'ſt winter tames man, woman, and beaſt: for it hath tam'd my olde maſter, and my new miſtris, and my ſelfe fellow Curtis.
Away you three inch foole, I am no beaſt.
Am I but three inches? Why thy horne is a foot and ſo long am I at the leaſt. But wilt thou make a fire or ſhall I complaine on thee to our miſtris, whoſe hand (ſhe being now at hand) thou ſhalt ſoone feele, to thy cold comfort, for being ſlow in thy hot office.
I prethee good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?
A cold world Curtis in euery office but thine, and therefore fire: doe thy dutie, and haue thy dutie, for my Maſter and miſtris are allmoſt frozen to death.
There's fire readie, and therefore good Grumio the newes.
Why Iacke boy, ho boy, and as much newes as thou wilt.
Come, you are ſo full of conicatching.
Why therefore fire, for I haue caught extreme cold. Where's the Cooke, is ſupper readie, the houſe trim'd, ruſhes ſtrew'd, cobwebs ſwept, the ſeruingmen in their new fuſtion, the white ſtockings, and euery officer his wedding garment on? Be the Iackes faire wihin, he Gils faire without, the Capets laide, and euery thing in order?
All ready: and therefore I pray thee newes.
Firſt know my horſe is tired, my maſter and miſtris falne out.
How?
Out of their ſaddles into the durt, and thereby hangs a tale.
Let's ha't good Grumio.
Lend thine eare.
Heere.
There.
This 'tis to feele a tale, not to heare a tale.
And therefore 'tis cal'd a ſenſible tale: and this Cufte was but to knocke at your eare, and beſeech liſtning: now I begin Inprimis we came downe a foule hill, my Maſter riding behinde my Miſtris.
Both of one horſe?
What's that to thee?
Why a horſe.
Tell thou the tale: but hadſt thou not croſt me, thou ſhouldſt haue heard how her horſe fell, and ſhe vnder her horſe: thou ſhouldſt haue heard in how miery a place, how ſhe was bemoil'd, how he left her with the horſe vpon her, how he beate me becauſe her horſe ſtumbled, how ſhe waded through the durt to plucke him off me: how he ſwore, how ſhe prai'd, that neuer prai'd before: how I cried, how the horſes ranne away, how her bridle was burſt: how I loſt my crupper, with many thinges of worthy memorie, which now ſhall die in obliuion, and thou returne vnexperienc'd to the graue.
By this reckning he more ſhrew than ſhe.
I, and that thou and the proudeſt of you all ſhall finde when he comes home. But what talke I of this? Call forth Nathaniell, Ioſeph, Nicholas, Phillip, Walter, Sugerſop and the reſt: let their heads bee ſlickely comb'd, their blew coats bruſh'd, and their garters of an indifferent knit, let them curtſie with their left legges, and not preſume to touch a haire of my Maſters horſe-taile till they kiſſe their hands. Are they all readie?
They are.
Call them forth.
Doe you heare ho? you muſt meete my maiſter to countenance my miſtris.
Why ſhe hath a face of her owne.
Who knowes not that?
Thou it ſeemes, that calls for company to countenance her.
I call them forth to credit her.
Why ſhe comes to borrow nothing of them.
Welcome home Grumio.
How now Grumio.
What Grumio.
Fellow Grumio.
How now old lad,
Welcome you: how now you: what you: fellow you: and thus much for greeting. Now my ſpruce companions, is all readie, and all things neate?
All things is readie, how neere is our maſter?
E'ne at hand, alighted by this: and therefore be not—
Cockes paſſion, ſilence, I heere my maſter.
Where be theſe knaues? what no man at doore
To hold my ſtirrop, nor to take my horſe?
Where is Nathaniell, Gregory, Phillip.
Heere, heere ſir, heere ſir.
Heere ſir, heere ſir, heere ſir, heere ſir.
You logger-headed and vnplliſht groomes:
What? no attendants? no regard? no dutie?
Where is the fooliſh knaue I ſent before?
Heere ſir, as fooliſh as I was before.
You pezant, ſwaine, you horſon malt-horſe drudg
Did I not bid thee meete me in the Parke,
And bring along theſe raſcall knaues with thee?
Nathaniels coat ſir was not fully made,
And Gabriels pumpes, were all vnpinkt i'th heele:
There was no Linke to colour Peters hat,
And Walters dagger was not come from ſheathing:
There were none fine, but Adam, Rafe, and Gregorie,
The reſt were ragged, old, and beggerly,
Yet as they are, heere are they come to meete you.
Go raſcals, go, and fetch my ſupper in.
Where is the life that late I led?
Where are thoſe? Sit downe Kate,
And welcome. Soud, ſoud, ſoud, ſoud.
Why when I ſay? Nay good ſweete Kate be merrie.
Off with my boots, you rogues: you villaines, when?
It was the Friar of Orders gray,
As he forth walked on his way.
Out you rogue, you plucke my foot awrie,
Take that, and mend the plucking of the other
Be merrie Kate: Some water heere: what hoa.
Where's my Spaniel Troilus? Sirra, get you hence,
And bid my cozen Ferdinand come hither:
One Kate that you muſt kiſſe, and be acquainted with.
Where are my Slippers? ſhall I haue ſome water?
Come Kate and waſh, and welcome heartily:
You horſon villaine, will you let it fall?
Patience I pray you, 'twas a fault vnwilling.
A horſon beetle-headed flap-ear'd knaue:
Come Kate ſit downe, I know you haue a ſtomack,
Will you giue thankes, ſweete Kate, or elſe ſhall I?
What's this, Mutton?
I.
Who brought it?
I.
'Tis burnt, and ſo is all the meat
What dogges are theſe? Where is the raſcall Cooke?
How durſt you villaines bring it from the dreſſer
And ſerue it thus to me that loue it not?
There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all:
You heedleſſe iolt-heads and vnmanner'd ſlaues.
What, do you grumble? Ile be with you ſtraight.
I pray you husband be not ſo diſquiet,
The meat was well, if you were ſo contented.
I tell thee Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away,
And I expreſſeſly am forbid to touch it:
For it engenders choller, planteth anger,
And better 'twere that both of vs did faſt,
Since of our ſelues, our ſelues are chollericke,
Then feede it with ſuch ouer-roſted fleſh:
Be patient, to morrow 't ſhall be mended,
And for this night we'l faſt for companie.
Come I will bring thee to thy Bridall chamber.
Peter didſt euer ſee the like.
He kills her in her owne humor.
Where is he?
In her chamber, making a ſermon of continencie to her, and railes, and ſweares, and rates, that ſhe (poore ſoule) knowes not which way to ſtand, to looke, to ſpeake, and ſits as one new riſen from a dreame. Away, away, for he is comming hither.
Thus haue I politickely begun my reigne,
And 'tis my hope to end ſucceſſefully:
My Faulcon now is ſharpe, and paſſing emptie,
And till ſhee ſtoope, ſhe muſt not be full gorg'd,
For then ſhe neuer lookes vpon her lure,
Another way I haue to man my Haggard,
To make her come, and know her keepers call:
That is, to watch her, as we watch theſe Kites,
That baite, and beate, and will not be obedient:
She eate no meate to day, nor none ſhall eate.
Laſt night ſhe ſlept not, nor to night ſhe ſhall not:
As with the meat, ſome vndeſerued fault
Ile finde about the making of the bed,
And heere Ile fling the pillow, there the boulſter,
This way the Couerlet, another way the ſheetes:
I, and amid this hurly I intend,
That all is done in reuerend care of her,
And in concluſion, ſhe ſhall watch all night,
And if ſhe chance to nod, Ile raile and brawle,
And with the clamour keepe her ſtill awake:
This is a way to kill a Wife with kindneſſe,
And thus Ile curbe her mad and headſtrong humor:
He that knowes better how to tame a ſhrew,
Now let him ſpeake, 'tis charitie to ſhew.
Is't poſſible friend Liſio, that Miſtris Bianca
Doth fancie any other but Lucentio,
I tell you ſir, ſhe beares me faire in hand,
Sir, to ſatisfie you in what I haue ſaid,
Stand by, and marke the manner of his teaching.
Now Miſtris profit you in what you read?
What Maſter reade you firſt, reſolue me that?
I read, that I profeſſe the Art to loue.
And may you proue ſir Maſter of your Art.
While you ſweete deere proue Miſtreſſe of my heart.
Quicke proceeders marry, now tell me I pray,
You that durſt ſweare that your miſtris Bianca
Lou'd me in the world ſo well as Lucentio.
Oh deſpightfull Loue, vnconſtant womankind,
I tell thee Liſio this is wonderfull.
Miſtake no more, I am not Liſio,
Nor a Muſitian as I ſeeme to bee,
But one that ſcorne to liue in this diſguiſe,
For ſuch a one as leaues a Gentleman,
And makes a God of ſuch a Cullion;
Know ſir, that I am call'd Hortenſio.
Signior Hortenſio, I haue often heard
Of your intire affection to Bianca,
And ſince mine eyes are witneſſe of her lightneſſe,
I will with you, if you be ſo contented,
Forſweare Bianca, and her loue for euer.
See how they kiſſe and court: Signior, Lucentio,
Heere is my hand, and heere I firmly vow
Neuer to woo her more, but do forſweare her
As one vnworthy all the former fauors
That I haue fondly flatter'd them withall.
And heere I take the like vnfained oath,
Neuer to marrie with her, though ſhe would intreate,
Fie on her, ſee how beaſtly ſhe doth court him.
Would all the world but he had quite forſworne
For me, that I may ſurely keepe mine oath.
I will be married to a wealthy Widdow,
Ere three dayes paſſe, which hath as long lou'd me,
As I haue lou'd this proud diſdainfull Haggard,
And ſo farewell ſignior Lucentio,
Kindneſſe in women, not their beauteous lookes
Shall win my loue, and ſo I take my leaue,
In reſolution, as I ſwore before.
Miſtris Bianca, bleſſe you with ſuch grace,
As longeth to a Louers bleſſed caſe:
Nay I haue tane you napping gentle Loue,
And haue forſworne you with Hortenſio.
Tranio you ieſt, but haue you both forſworne me?
Miſtris we haue.
Then we are rid of Liſio.
I'faith hee'l haue a luſtie Widdow now,
That ſhall be woo'd, and wedded in a day.
God giue him ioy.
I, and hee'l tame her.
He ſayes ſo Tranio
Faith he is gon vnto the taming ſchoole.
The taming ſchoole: what is there ſuch a place?
I miſtris, and Petruchio is the maſter,
That teacheth trickes eleuen and twentie long,
To tame a ſhrew, and charme her chattering tongue.
Oh Maſter maſter I haue watcht ſo long,
That I am dogge wearie, but at laſt I ſpied
An antient Angell comming downe the hill,
Will ſerue the turne
What is he Biondello?
Maſter a Marcantant, or a pedant,
I know not what, but formall in apparell,
In gate and countenance ſurely like a Father.
And what of him Tranio?
If he be credulous, and truſt my tale,
Ile make him glad to ſeeme Vincentio,
And giue aſſurance to Baptiſta Minola,
As if he were the right Ʋincentio.
Take me your loue, and then let me alone.
God ſaue you ſir.
And you ſir, you are welcome,
Trauaile you farre on or are you at the fartheſt?
Sir at the fartheſt for a weeke or two,
But then vp farther, and as farre as Rome,
And ſo to Tripolie, if God lend me life,
What Countreyman I pray?
Of Mantua.
Of Mantua Sir, marrie God forbid,
And come to Padua careleſſe of your life.
My life ſir? how I pray? for that goes hard.
'Tis death for any one in Mantua
To come to Padua, know you not the cauſe?
Your ſhips are ſtaid at Venice, and the Duke
For priuate quarrell 'twixt your Duke and him,
Hath publiſh'd and proclaim'd it openly:
'Tis maruaile, but that you are but newly come,
You might haue heard it elſe proclaim'd about.
Alas ſir, it is worſe for me then ſo,
For I haue bills for monie by exchange
From Florence and muſt heere deliuer them.
Well ſir, to doe you courteſie,
This will I doe, and this I will aduiſe you.
Firſt tell me, haue you euer beene at Piſa?
I ſir, in Piſa haue I often bin,
Piſa renowned for graue Citizens.
Among them know you one Vincentio?
I know him not, but I haue heard of him:
A Merchant of incomparable wealth.
He is my father ſir, and ſooth to ſay,
In count'nance ſomewhat doth reſemble you.
As much as an apple doth an oyſter, and all one,
To ſaue your life in this extremitie,
This fauor will I doe you for his ſake,
And thinke it not the worſt of all your fortunes,
That you are like to Sir Ʋincentio.
His name and credit ſhall you vndertake,
And in my houſe you ſhall be friendly lodg'd,
Looke that you take vpon you as you ſhould,
You vnderſtand me ſir: ſo ſhall you ſtay
Till you haue done your buſineſſe in the Citie:
If this be court'ſie ſir, accept of it.
Oh ſir I doe, and will repute you euer
The patron of my life and libertie.
Then goe with me, to make the matter good,
This by the way I let you vnderſtand,
My father is heere look'd for euerie day,
To paſſe aſſurance of a dowre in marriage
'Twixt me, and one Baptiſtas daughter heere:
In all theſe circumſtances Ile inſtruct you,
Goe with me to cloath you as becomes you.
No, no forſooth I dare not for my life.
The more my wrong, the more his ſpite appeares.
What, did he marrie me to famiſh me?
Beggers that come vnto my fathers doore,
Vpon intreatie haue a preſent almes,
If not, elſewhere they meete with charitie:
But I, who neuer knew how to intreate,
Nor neuer needed that I ſhould intreate,
Am ſtaru'd for meate, giddie for lacke of ſleepe:
With oathes kept waking, and with brawling fed,
And that which ſpights me more then all theſe wants,
He does it vnder name of perfect loue:
As who ſhould ſay if I ſhould ſleepe or eate,
'Twere deadly ſickneſſe, or elſe preſent death.
I prethee goe, and get me ſome repaſt,
I care not what, ſo it be wholſome foode.
What ſay you to a Neats foote?
'Tis paſſing good, I prethee let me haue it.
I feare it is too chollericke a meate,
How ſay you to a fat Tripe finely broyl'd?
I like it well, good Grumio fetch it me.
I cannot tell, I feare 'tis chollericke.
What ſay you to a peece of Beefe and Muſtard?
A diſh that I do loue to feede vpon.
I but the Muſtard is too hot a little.
Why then the Beefe, and let the Muſtard reſt.
Nay then I will not, you ſhall haue the Muſtard
Or elſe you get no Beefe of Grumio.
Then both or one, or any thing thou wilt.
Why then the Muſtard without the beefe.
Go get thee gone, thou falſe deluding ſlaue,
That feed'ſt me with the verie name of meate.
Sorrow on thee, and all the packe of you
That triumph thus vpon my miſerie:
Go get thee gone I ſay.
How fares my Kate, what ſweeting all a-mort?
Miſtris, what cheere?
Faith as cold as can be.
Plucke vp thy ſpirits, looke cheerefully vpon me.
Heere Loue, thou ſeeſt how diligent I am,
To dreſſe thy meate my ſelfe, and bring it thee.
I am ſure ſweet Kate this kindneſſe merits thankes.
What, not a word? Nay then thou lou'ſt it not:
And all my paines is ſrted to no proofe.
Heere take away this diſh.
I pray you let it ſtand.
The pooreſt ſeruice is repaide with thankes,
And ſo ſhall mine before you touch the meate.
I thanke you ſir.
Signior Petruchio, fie you are to blame:
Come Miſtris Kate, Ile beare you companie.
Eate it vp all Hortenſio, if thou loueſt mee:
Much good do it vnto thy gentle heart:
Kate eate apace; and now my honie Loue,
Will we returne vnto thy Fathers houſe,
And reuell it as brauely as the beſt,
With ſilken coats and caps, and golden Rings,
With ruffes and Cuffes, and Fardingales, and thinges:
With Scarfes, and fannes, and double change of brau'ry,
With Amber Bracelets, Beads, and all this knau'ry.
What haſt thou din'd? The Tailor ſtayes thy leaſure,
To decke thy bodie with his ruffing treaſure,
Come Tailor, let vs ſee theſe ornaments
Lay forth the Gowne. What newes with you ſir?
Heere is the cap your Worſhip did beſpeake.
Why this was moulded on a porrenger,
A Veluet diſh: Fie, fie, 'tis lewd and filthy,
Why 'tis a cockle or a wallnut-ſhell,
A knack, a toy, a tricke, a babies cap:
Away with it come let me haue a bigger.
Ile haue no bigger, this doth fit the time,
And Gentlewomen weare ſuch caps as theſe.
When you are gentle, you ſhall haue one too,
And not till then.
That will not be in haſt.
Why ſir I truſt I may haue leaue to ſpeake,
And ſpeake I will. I am no childe, no babe,
Your betters haue indur'd me ſay my minde
And if you cannot, beſt you ſtop your eares,
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
Or elſe my heart concealing it will breake,
And rather then it ſhall, I will be free,
Euen to the vttermoſt as I pleaſe in words.
Why thou ſaieſt true, it is a paltrie cap.
A cuſtard coffen, a bauble, a ſilken pie,
I loue thee well in that thou lik'ſt it not.
Loue me, or loue me not, I like the cap,
And it I will haue, or I will haue none.
Thy gowne why I: come Tailor let vs ſee't.
Oh mercie God, what masking ſtuffe is heere?
Whats this? a ſleeue? 'tis like a demi-cannon,
What, vp and downe caru'd like an apple Tart?
Heers ſnip, and nip, and cut, and ſliſh and ſlaſh,
Like to a Cenſor in a barbers ſhoppe:
Why what a deuils name a Tailor cal'ſt thou this?
I ſee ſhees like to haue neither cap nor gowne.
You bid me make it orderlie and well,
According to the faſhion, and the time.
Marrie and did: but if you be remembred,
I did not bid you marre it to the time.
Goe hop me ouer euery kennell home,
For you ſhall hop without my cuſtome ſir:
Ile none of it; hence, make your beſt of it.
I neuer ſaw a better faſhion'd gowne,
More queint, more pleaſing, nor more commendable:
Belike you meane to make a puppet of me.
Why true, he meanes to make a puppet of thee.
She ſaies your Worſhip meanes to make a puppet of her
Oh monſtrous arrogance:
Then lyeſt, thou thred, thou thimble,
Thou yard three quarters, halfe yard, quarter, naile,
Thou Flea, thou Nit, thou winter cricket thou:
Brau'd in mine owne houſe with a skeine of thred:
Away thou Ragge, thou quantitie, thou remnant,
Or I ſhall ſo be-mete thee with thy yard,
As thou ſhalt thinke on prating whil'ſt thou liu'ſt:
I tell thee I, that thou haſt marr'd her gowne.
Your worſhip is deceiu'd, the gowne is made
Iuſt as my maſter had direction:
Grumio gaue order how it ſhould be done.
I gaue him no order, I gaue him the ſtuffe.
But how did you deſire it ſhould be made?
Marrie ſir with needle and thred.
But did you not requeſt to haue it cut?
Thou haſt fac'd many things.
I haue.
Face not mee: thou haſt brau'd many men, braue not me; I will neither bee fac'd nor brau'd. I ſay vnto thee, I bid thy Maſter cut out the gowne, but I did not bid him cut it to peeces; Ergo thou lieſt.
Why heere is the note of the faſhion to teſtifie.
Read it.
The note lies in's throate if he ſay I ſaid ſo.
Inprimis a looſe bodied gowne.
Maſter, if euer I ſaid looſe-bodied gowne, ſow me in the Skirts of it, and beate me to death with a bottome of browne thred: I ſaid a gowne.
Proceede.
With a ſmall compaſt cape.
I confeſſe the cape.
With a trunke ſleeue.
I confeſſe two ſleeues.
The ſleeues curiouſly cut.
I there's the villainie.
Error i'th bill ſir, error i'th bill? I commanded the ſleeues ſhould be cut out, and ſow'd vp againe, and that Ile proue vpon thee, though thy litle finger be armed in a thimble.
This is true that I ſay, and I had thee in place where, thou ſhouldſt know it.
I am for thee ſtraight: take thou the bill, giue me thy meate-yard, and ſpare not me.
God-a-mercy Grumio, then he ſhall haue no oddes.
Well ſir in breefe the gowne is not for me.
You are i'th right ſir, 'tis for my miſtris.
Go take it vp vnto thy maſters vſe.
Villaine, not for thy life: Take vp my Miſtreſſe gowne for thy maſters vſe.
Why ſir what's your conceit in that?
Oh ſir, the conceit is deeper then you thinke for:
Take vp my Miſtris gowne to his maſters vſe.
Oh fie, fie, fie.
Hortenſio, ſay thou wilt ſee the Tailor paide.
Go take it hence, be gone, and ſay no more.
Tailor, Ile pay thee for thy gowne to morrow,
Take no vnkindneſſe of his haſtie words:
Away I ſay, commend me to thy maſter.
Well come my Kate, we will vnto your fathers,
Euen in theſe honeſt meane habiliments:
Our purſes ſhall be proud, our garments poore:
For 'tis the minde that makes the bodie rich.
And as the Sunne breakes through the darkeſt clouds,
So honor peereth in the meaneſt habit.
What is the Iay more precious then the Larke?
Becauſe his feathers are more beautifull
Or is the Adder better then the Eele,
Becauſe his painted Skin contents the eye.
Oh no Kate: neither art thou the worſe
For this poore furniture, and meane array.
If thou accountedſt it ſhame, lay it on me,
And therefore frolike, we will hence forthwith,
To feaſt and ſport vs at thy fathers houſe,
Go call my men, and let vs ſtraight to him,
And bring our horſes vnto Long-lane end,
There will we mount, and thither walke on foote,
Let's ſee, I thinke 'tis now ſome ſeuen a clocke,
And well we may come there by dinner time.
I dare aſſure you ſir, 'tis almoſt two,
And 'twill be ſupper time ere you come there.
It ſhall be ſeuen ere I go to horſe:
Looke what I ſpeake, or do, or thinke to doe,
You are ſtill croſſing it, ſirs let 't alone,
I will not goe to day, and ere I doe,
It ſhall be what a clock I ſay it is.
Why ſo this Gallant will command the ſunne:
Sirs, this is the houſe, pleaſe it you that I call,
I what elſe, and but I be deceiued,
Signior Baptiſta may remember me
Neere twentie yeares a goe in Genoa.
Where wee were Lodgers, at the Pegaſus,
Tis well, and hold your owne in any caſe
With ſuch auſteritie as longeth to a father.
I warrant you: but ſir here comes your boy,
'Twere good he weere ſchool'd.
Feare you not him: ſirra Biondello,
Now doe your dutie throughlie I aduiſe you:
Imagine 'twere the righ Ʋincentio.
Tut, feare not me.
But haſt thou done thy errand to Baptiſta.
I told him that your father was at Ʋenice,
And that you look't for him this day in Padua.
Th'art a tall fellow, hold thee that to drinke,
Heere comes Baptiſta: ſet your countenance ſir.
Signior Baptiſta you are happilie met:
Sir, this is the Gentleman I told you of,
I pray you ſtand good father to me now,
Giue me Bianca for my Patrimony.
Soft ſon: ſir by your leaue, hauing come to Padua
To gather in ſome debts, my ſon Lucentio
Made me acquainted with a waightie cauſe
Of loue beteweene your daughter and himſelfe:
And for the good report I heare of you,
And for the loue he beareth to your daughter,
And ſhee to him: to ſtay him not too long,
I am content in a good fathers care.
To haue him matcht, and if you pleaſe to like
No worſe then I vpon ſome agreement
Me ſhall you finde readie and willing
With one conſent to haue her ſo beſtowed:
For curious I cannot be with you
Signior Baptiſta, of whom I heare ſo well.
Sir, pardon me in what I haue to ſay,
Your plainneſſe and your ſhortneſſe pleaſe me well
Right true it is your ſon Lucentio here
Doth loue my daughter and ſhe loueth him
Or both diſſemble deepely their affections:
And therefore if you ſay no more then this,
That like a father you will deale with him,
And paſſe my daughter a ſufficient dower,
The match is made and all is done,
Your ſonne ſhall haue my daughter with conſent.
I thanke you ſir, where then doe you know beſt
We be affied and ſuch aſſurance tane,
As ſhall with either parts agreement ſtand.
Not in my houſe Lucentio for you know
Pitchers haue eares, and I haue manie ſeruants,
Beſides old Gremio is harkning ſtill,
And happilie we may be interrupted.
Then at my lodging, and it like you,
There doth my father lie: and there this night
Weele paſſe the buſineſſe priuately and well:
Send for your daughter by your ſeruant here,
My boy ſhall fetch the Scriuener preſentlie,
The worſt is this that at ſo ſlender warning,
You are like to haue a thin and ſlender pittance.
It likes me well:
Cambio hie you home and bid Bianca make her readie ſtraight:
And if you will tell what hath hapned,
Lucentios father is arriued in Padua,
And how ſhe's like to be Lucentios wife.
I pray the Gods ſhe may with all my heart.
Dallie not with the Gods, but get thee gone.
Signior Baptiſta ſhall I leade the way,
Welcome, one meſſe is like to be your cheere,
Come ſir we will better it in Piſa.
I follow you.
Cambio.
What ſaiſt thou Biondello.
You ſaw my Maſter winke and laugh vpon you?
Biondello, what of that?
Faith nothing: but has left me here behinde to expound the meaning or morrall of his ſignes and tokens.
I pray thee moralize them.
Then thus: Baptiſta is ſafe talking with the deceiuing Father of a deceitfull ſonne.
And what of him?
His daughter is to be brought by you to the ſupper.
And then.
The old Prieſt at Saint Lukes Church is at your command at all houres.
And what of all this.
I cannot tell, expect they are buſied about a counterfeit aſſurance: take you aſſurance of her. Cum preuilegio ad Impremendum ſolem, to th' Church take the Prieſt, Clarke, and ſome ſufficient honeſt witneſſes:
If this bee not that you looke for, I haue no more to ſay,
But bid Bianca farewell for euer and a day.
Hear'ſt thou Biondello.
I cannot tarrie: I knew a wench married in an afternoone as ſhe went to the Garden for Parſeley to ſtuffe a Rabit, and ſo may you ſir: and ſo adew ſir, my Maſter hath appointed me to goe to Saint Lukes to bid the Prieſt be readie to come againſt you come with your appendix.
I may and will if ſhe be ſo contented:
She will be pleasd, then wherefore ſhould I doubt:
Hap what hap may, Ile roundly go about her:
It ſhall go hard if Cambio go without her.
Come on a Gods name, once more towards our fathers:
Good Lord how bright and goodly ſhines the Moone.
The Moone, the Sunne: it is not Moone-light now.
I ſay it is the Moone that ſhines ſo bright.
I know it is the Sunne that ſhine, ſo bright.
Now by my mothers ſonne, and that's my ſelfe,
It ſhall be moone, or ſtarre, or what I liſt,
Or ere I iourney to your Fathers houſe:
Goe on, and fetch our horſes backe againe
Euer more croſt and croſt nothing but croſt,
Say as he ſaies, or we ſhall neuer goe
Forward I pray, ſince we haue come ſo farr,
And be it moone, or Sunne, or what you pleaſe:
And if you pleaſe to call it a ruſh Candle:
Henceforth I vowe it ſhall be ſo for me.
I ſay it is the Moone.
I know it is the Moone.
Nay then you lye: it is the bleſſed Sunne.
Then God be bleſt, it is the bleſſed ſun,
But ſunne it is not, when you ſay it is not.
And the Moone changes euen as your minde:
What you will haue it nam'd, euen that it is,
And ſo it ſhall be ſo for Katherine.
Petruchio, goe thy wayes, the field is won.
Well, forward, forward thus the bowle ſhould run,
And not vnluckily againſt the Bias:
But ſoft: Company is comming here.
Good morrow gentle Miſtris, where away:
Tell mee ſweete Kate, and tell me truely too,
Haſt thou beheld a freſher Gentlewoman:
Such warre of white and red within her cheekes:
What ſtarrs do ſpangle heauen with ſuch beautie,
As thoſe two eyes become that heauenly face?
Faire louely Maide, once more good day to thee:
Sweete Kate embrace her for her beauties ſake.
A will make the man mad to make the woman of him.
Yong budding Virgin, faire, and freſh, and ſweete,
Whether away, or whether is thy aboade?
Happy the parents of ſo faire a childe;
Happier the man whom fauourable ſtars
Alots thee for his louely bedfellow.
Why how now Kate, I hope thou art not mad,
This is a man old, wrinckled, faded, withered,
And not a Maiden, as thou ſaiſt he is.
Pardon old father my miſtaking eyes,
That haue bin ſo bedazled with the ſunne,
That euery thing I look on ſeemeth greene:
Now I perceiue thou are a reuerent Father:
Pardon I pray thee for my mad miſtaking.
Do good old grandſire, and with all make known
Which way thou trauelleſt if along with vs,
Wee ſhall be ioyfull of thy company▪
Faire Sir, and you my merry Miſtris,
That with your ſtrange encounter much amaſde me:
My name is call'd Ʋincentio, my dwelling Piſa,
And bound I am to Padua, there to uiſite
A ſonne of mine, which long I haue not ſeene.
What is his name?
Lucentio Gentle ſir.
Happily met the happier for thy ſonne:
And now by Law, as well as reuerent age,
I may intitle thee my louing Father,
The ſiſter to my wife, this Gentlewoman,
Thy Sonne by this hath married: wonder not,
Nor be not grieued, ſhe is of good eſteeme,
Her dowrie wealthie, and of worthie birth;
Beſide, ſo qualified, as may be ſeeme
The Spouſe of any noble Gentlewoman:
Let me imbrace with old Vincentio,
And wander we to ſee thy honeſt ſonne,
Who will of thy arriuall be full ioyous.
But is this true, or is it elſe your pleaſure,
Like pleaſant trauailors to breake a ieſt
Vpon the companie you ouertake?
I do aſſure thee father ſo it is.
Come goe along and ſee the truth hereof,
For our firſt merriment hath made thee iealous.
Well Petruchio, this has put me in heart;
Haue to my Widdow, and if ſhe froward,
Then haſt thou taught Hortenſio to be vntoward.
Softly and ſwiftly ſir, for the Prieſt is ready.
I flie Biondello; but they may chance to neede thee at home therefore leaue vs.
Nay faith' Ile ſee the Church a your backe,
And then come backe to my miſtris as ſoone as I can.
I maruaile Cambio comes not all this while.
Sir heres the doore, this is Lucentios houſe,
My Fathers beares more toward the Market-place,
Thither muſt I and heere I leaue yu ſir.
You ſhall not chooſe but drinke before you go,
I thinke I ſhall command your welcome here;
And by all likelihood ſome cheere is toward.
They're buſie within, you were beſt knocke lowder.
What's he that knockes as he would beate downe the gate?
Is Signior Lucentio within ſir?
He's within ſir, but not to be ſpoken withall.
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make merrie withall.
Keepe your hundred pounds to your ſelfe, he ſhall neede none ſo long as I liue.
Nay, I told you your ſonne was beloued in Padua: doe you heare ſir, to leaue friuolous circumſtances, I pray you tell Signior Lucentio that his Father is come from Piſa, and is heere at the doore to ſpeake with him.
Thou lieſt his Father is come from Padua, and here looking out of the window.
Art thou his Father?
I ſir ſo his mother ſayes if I may beleeue her.
Why how now Gentleman: why this is flat knauerie to take vpon you an other mans name.
Lay hands on the villaine, I beleeue a meanes to cozen ſome bodie in this Citie vnder my countenance.
I haue ſeene them in the Church together, God ſend them good ſhpping: but who is heere? mine old Maſter Vincentio: now we are vndone and brought to nothing.
Come hither crackhempe.
I hope I may chooſe Sir.
Come hither you rogue, what haue you forgot mee?
Forgot you, no ſir: I could not forget you, for I neuer ſaw you before in all my life.
What, you notorius villaine, didſt thou neuer ſee thy Miſtris father, Ʋincentio;
What my worſhipfull old maſter? yet marrie ſir ſee where he lookes out of the window.
Iſt ſo indeede.
Helpe, helpe, helpe, here's a mad man will murder me.
Help, ſonne, helpe Signior Baptiſta.
Prethee, Kate let's ſtand aſide and ſee the end of this controuerſie.
Sir what are you that offer to beate my ſeruant?
What am I ſir: nay what are you ſir: oh immortall Gods▪ oh fine villaine, a ſilken doublet, a veluet hoſe, a ſcarlet cloak and a copataine hat: oh I am vndone, I am vndone: while I plaie the good husband at home, my ſonne and my ſeruant ſpend all at the vniuerſitie.
How now what's the matter?
What is the man lunaticke?
Sir, you ſeeme a ſober ancient Gentleman by your habit but your words ſhew you a mad man: why ſir, what cernes it you, if I weare Pearle and gold: I thanke my good father, I am able to maintaine it.
Thy father: oh villaine, he is a Saile-maker in Bergamo.
You Miſtake ſir, you miſtake ſir, praie what do you think is his name?
His name, as if I knew not his name: I haue brought him vp euer ſince he was three yeeres old, and his name is Tronio.
Awaie, away mad aſſe, his name is Lucentio, and he is mine onelie ſonne and heire to the lands of me ſignior Ʋincentio.
Lucentio, oh he hath murdred his Maſter; lay hold on him I charge you in the Dukes name: oh my ſonne, my ſonne: tell me thou villaine, where is my ſonne Lucentio?
Call forth an officer: Carrie this mad knaue to the Iaile: Father Baptiſta, I charge you ſee that he be forth comming.
Carrie mee to the Iaile?
Staie officer, he ſhall not go to priſon.
Talke not ſignior Gremio: I ſay he ſhall goe to priſon.
Take heede ſignior Baptiſta, leſt you be conicatcht in this buſineſſe: I dare ſweare this is the right Ʋincentio.
Sweare if thou dar'ſt,
Naie, I dare not ſweare it.
Then thou wert beſt ſay that I am not Lucentio.
Yes I know thee to be ſignior Lucentio.
Away with the dotard, to the Iaile with him.
Thus ſtrangers may be haild and abuſd: oh monſtrous villaine.
Oh we are ſpoil'd, and yonder he is, denie him, forſweare him, or elſe wee are all vndone.
Pardon ſweete father.
Liues my ſweete ſonne?
Pardon deere father.
How haſt thou offended, where is Lucentio?
Heere's Lucentio right ſonne to the right Ʋincentio,
That haue by marriage made thy daughter mine,
While counterfeit ſuppoſes bleer'd thine eine.
Heere's packing with a witneſſe to deceiue vs all.
Where is that damned villaine Tranio,
That fac'd and braued me in this matter ſo?
Why, tell me is not this my Cambio?
Cambio is chang'd into Lucentio.
Loue wrought theſe miracles. Biancas loue
Made me exchange my ſtate with Tranio,
While he did beare my countenance in the Towne,
And happilie I haue arriued at the laſt
Vnto the wiſhed hauen of my bliſſe:
What Tranio did, my ſelfe enforſt him to:
Then pardon him ſweete Father for my ſake.
Ile ſlit the villaines noſe that would haue ſent me to the Iaile.
But doe you heare ſir, haue you married my daughter without asking my good will?
Feare not Baptiſta, wee will content you go to: but I will in to be reueng'd for this villanie.
And I to ſound the depth of this knauerie.
Looke not pale Bianca, thy father will not frowne.
My cake is dough, but Ile in among the reſt,
Out of hope of all, but my ſhare of the feaſt.
Husband let's follow, to ſee the end of this adoe.
Firſt kiſſe me Kate, and wee will.
What in the midſt of the ſtreete?
What are thou aſham'd of me?
No ſir, God forbid, but aſham'd to kiſſe.
Why then let's home againe: Come Sirralet's away.
Nay, I will giue thee a kiſſe, now pray Loue ſtay.
Is not this well? come my ſweete Kate.
Better once then neuer, for neuer too late.
At laſt though long, our iarring notes agree,
And time it is when raging warre is come,
To ſmile at ſcapes and perils ouerblowne:
My faire Bianca bid my father welcome,
While I with ſelfe ſame kindneſſe welcome thine:
Brother Petruchio, ſiſter Katerina,
And thou Hortenſio with thy louing Widdow:
Feaſt with the beſt, and welcome to my houſe,
My banket is to cloſe our ſtomakes vp
After our great good cheere: pray you ſit downe,
For now wee ſit to chat as well as eate.
Nothing but ſit and ſit, and eate and eate.
Padua affoords this kindneſſe ſonne Petruchio.
Padua affords nothing but what is kinde.
For both our ſakes I would that word were true.
Now for my life Hortenſio feares his Widow.
Then neuer truſt me if I be affeard.
You are very ſenſible, and yet you miſſe my ſence:
I meane Hortentio is afeard of you.
He that is giddie thinkes the world turns round.
Roundly replied.
Miſtris how meane you that?
Thus I conceiue by him.
Conceiues by me, how likes Hortenſio that?
My Widdow ſayes, thus ſhe conceiues her tale.
Verie well mended: kiſſe him for that good Widdow.
He that is giddie thinkes the world turnes round,
I pray you tell me what you meant by that.
Your husband being troubled with a ſhrew,
Meaſures my husbands ſorrow, by his woe:
And now you know my meaning.
A verie meane meaning,
Right. I meane you.
And I am meane indeed, reſpecting you.
To her Kate.
To her Widdow.
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.
That's my office
Spoke like an Officer: ha to thee Lad.
How likes Gremio theſe quicke witted folkes?
Beleeue me ſir, they But together well.
Head, and But an haſtie witted bodie,
Would ſay your Head and But were head and horne.
I Miſtris Bride, hath that awakened you?
I, but not frighted me, therefore Ile ſleepe againe,
Nay that you ſhall not ſince you haue begun:
Haue at you for a better Ieſt or too.
Am I your Bird, I meane to ſhift my buſh,
And then purſue me as you draw my Bow.
You are welcome all.
She hath preuented me, here ſignior Tranio,
This bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not,
Therfore a health to all that ſhot and miſt.
Oh ſir, Lucentio ſlipt me like his Gray-hound,
Which runs himſelfe and catches for his Maſter.
A good ſwift ſimile, but ſomething curriſh.
'Tis well ſir that you hunted for your ſelfe:
'Tis thought your Deere does hold you at a baye.
Oh, oh Pretuchio, Tranio hits you now.
I thanke thee for that gird good Tranio.
Confeſſe, confeſſe, hath he not hit you here?
A has a litle gald me I confeſſe:
And as the Ieſt did glaunce away from me,
'Tis ten to one it maim'd you too out right.
Now in good ſadneſſe ſonne Petruchio,
I thinke thou haſt the verieſt ſhrew of all.
Well I ſay no: and therefore ſir, aſſurance,
Let's each one ſend vnto his wife,
And he whoſe wife is moſt obedient,
To come at firſt when he doth ſend for her,
Shall win the wager which we will propoſe.
Content what's the wager?
Twentie crownes.
Twentie crownes.
Ile venture ſo much of my Hawke or Hound,
But twentie times ſo much vpon my Wife.
A hundred then.
Content.
A match 'tis done.
Who ſhall begin?
That will I.
Goe Biondello, bid your Miſtris come to me.
I goe.
Sonne Ile be you halfe, Bianca comes.
Ile haue no halues: Ile beare it all my ſelfe.
How now, what newes?
Sir, my Miſtris ſends you word
That ſhe is buſie, and ſhee cannot come.
How? ſhe's buſie and ſhee cannot come: is that an anſwere?
I, and a kinde one too:
Praie God ſir your wife ſend you not a worſe.
I hope better.
Sirra Biondello, goe and intreate my wife to come to mee forthwith.
Oh ho intreate her, nay then ſhe muſt needes come.
I am affraid ſir, doe what you can
Yours will not be intreated: Now where's my wife?
She ſayes you haue ſome goodly Ieſt in hand,
She will not come: ſhe bids you come to her.
Worſe and worſe ſhe will not come:
Oh vild, intollerable, not to be indur'd:
Sirra Grumio, goe to your Miſtris,
Say I command her come to me.
I know her anſwere.
What?
She will not.
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
Now by my hollidam here comes Katerina.
What is your will ſir, that you ſend for me?
Where is your ſiſter, and Hortenſios wife?
They ſit conferring by the Parler fire.
Goe fetch them hither, if they denie to come,
Swinge me them foundly forth vnto their husbands:
Away I ſay, and bring them hither ſtraight.
Here is a wonder, if you talke of a wonder.
And ſo it is: I wonder what it boads
Marrie peace it boads, and loue, and quiet life,
An awfull rule, and right ſupremacie:
And to be ſhort, what not, that's ſweete and happie.
Now faire befall thee good Petruchio;
The wager thou haſt won, and I will adde
Vnto their loſſes twentie thouſand crownes,
Another dowrie to another daughter,
For ſhe is chang'd as ſhe had neuer bin.
Nay, I will win my wager better yet,
And ſhew more ſigne of her obedience,
Her new built vertue and obedience.
See where ſhe comes, and brings your froward Wiues
As priſoners to her womanlie perſwaſion:
Katerine, that Cap of yours becomes you not,
Off with that bable, throw it vnder foote.
Lord let me neuer haue a cauſe to ſigh,
Till I be brought to ſuch a ſillie paſſe.
Fie what a fooliſh dutie call you this?
I would your dutie were as fooliſh too:
The wiſdome of your dutie faire Bianca,
Hath coſt me fiue hundred crownes ſince ſupper time,
The more foole you for laying on my dutie.
Katherine I charge thee tell theſe head-ſtrong women, what dutie they doe owe their Lords and husbands.
Come, come, your mocking: we will haue no telling.
Come on I ſay, and firſt begin with her,
She ſhall not.
I ſay ſhe ſhall, and firſt begin with her.
Fie, fie, vnknit that threatning vnkind brow,
And dart not ſcornefull glances from thoſe eies,
To wound thy Lord, thy King, thy Gouernour.
It blots thy beautie, as froſts doe bite the Meades,
Confounds thy fame, as whirlewindes ſhake faire budds,
And in no ſence is meete or amiable.
A woman mou'd, is like a fountaine troubled,
Maddie, ill ſeeming thicke, bereft of beautie,
And while it is ſo, none ſo drie or thirſtie
Will daigne to ſip or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy Lord▪ thy life, thy Keeper,
Thy head, thy ſoueraigne: one that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance: Commits his bodie
To painfull labour, both by ſea and land:
To watch the night in ſtormes, the day in cold,
Whi'ſt thou ly'ſt warme at home, ſecure and ſafe,
And craues no other tribute at thy hands,
But loue, fare lookes, and true obedience;
Too litle payment for ſo great a debt.
Such dutie as the ſubiect owes the Prince,
Euen ſuch a woman oweth to her huſband:
And when ſhe is froward, peeuiſh, ſullen, ſower,
And not obedient to his honeſt will:
What is ſhe but a foule contending Rebell,
And graceleſſe Traitour to her louing Lord?
I am a ſham'd that women are ſo ſimple,
To offer warre, where they ſhould kneele for peace:
Or ſeeke for rule, ſupremacie, and ſway,
When they are bound to ſerue, loue, and obay.
Why are our bodies ſoft, and weake, and ſmooth,
Vnapt to toyle, and trouble in the world,
But that our ſoft conditions, and our harts.
Should well agree with our externall parts?
Come, come, you froward and vnable wormes
My minde hath bin as bigge as one of yours,
My heart as great, my reaſon haplie more,
To bandie word for word, and frowne for frowne;
But now I ſee our Launces are but ſtrawes:
Our ſtrength as weake, our weakeneſſe paſt compare,
That ſeeming to be moſt, which we indeed leaſt are.
Then vale your ſtomackes, for it is no boote,
And place your hands below your husbands foote:
In token of which dutie, if he pleaſe,
My hand is readie may it do him eaſe.
Why ther's a wench: come on, and kiſſe me Kate.
Well go thy wayes old Lad for thou ſhalt ha't.
'Tis a good hearing, when children are toward.
But a harſh hearing, when women are froward,
Come Kate, wee'l to bed,
We three are married, but you two are ſped.
'Twas I won the wager though you hit the white.
And being a winner, God giue you good night,
Now go thy wayes thou haſt tam'd a curſt Shrow.
'Tis a wonder by your leaue, ſhe will tam'd ſo.