FResh Mayas sonne, fine witcrafts greatest God,
Herrald of heauen, soule charming Mercurie:
Tell, for thou witst, why these celestiall powers
Are thus assembled in Boeotia.
Plentie srich Queene, cheerer of fainting souls,
VVhose Altars are adornde with ripend sheaues.
Know that securitie chiefe nurse of sinne,
Hath bred contempt in all Boeotia.
The old are scorned of the wanton yong,
Vnhallowed hands, and harts impurer farre,
Rend downe the Altars sacred to the Gods.
Heauen is long suffring, and eternall Powers
Are full of pitie to peruersest men:
which made the awful Ruler of the rest,
Summon this meeting of the heauenly States:
The first was Iupiter, Iuno with him,
Next Mars and Venus, him I know you knew not,
His Harnesse is conuerted to soft silke▪
His warres are onely wantonings with her,
That scandalizeth heauen and heapes worlds hate,
Apollo next, then Bacchus belly-God,
And horned Vulcan forger of heauens fire,
The last poore Cynthia making woful mone,
That she is left sweet virgin post alone.
I am but messenger, and must not denounce
Til the high senate of the Gods decreeit,
But sacred Ceres, if I may diuine,
In heauen shall Venus vaunt but little time.
So pleasde it mighty Ioue the doome were iust,
Amongst that holy traine what needs there lust.
I see a sort of wondring gazing eyes,
That doo await the end of this conceit,
whom Mercurie with wauing of his rod,
And holy spels inioines to sit and see,
th'effectuall working of a Prophesie.
And Ceres sheds her sweetest swetes in plentie,
That while ye stay their pleasure may content ye.
Now doo I leaue thee Mercury, and will into take my place,
Doo what thou canst in wanton lusts disgrace.
Ceres I will, and now I am alone
will I aduise me of a messenger
That will not faint: will not said I?
Nay shall not faint sent forth by Mercurie.
I am resolud, the next I meete with be it he or she,
To doo this message shall be sent by me.
Hey downe downe a downe a downe,
hey downe downe a downe a,
Our beauty is the brauest Lasse in all the towne a▪
For beauties sweete sake, I sleepe when I should wake,
shee is so nut browne a.
Her cheekes so red as a cherrie, do make my hart full merry▪
So that I cannot choose in cobling of my shooes,
but sing hey derrie derrie downe derrie.
Go too Raph youle still be singing loue songs its your fashion.
Content your selfe wife, tis my own recantation,
No loue song neither, but a carrol in beauties condemnatiō
well year best leaue singing and fall to work by & by
while I to buy meat for our dinner to market doo hie.
And you were best leaue your scolding to, & get you away.
And I come to you Raph, Ile course ye as I did a saterday
Course me snowns, I would thou durst come out of dore,
And thou dost Ile knock thee on the head thou arrant thou.
was not this lustily spoken? I warrant she dare not come out
Ile see what yeele doo, where are yee goodman Lout?
O no bodie tell her that I am vnder the stoole.
wheres this prating Asse, this dizzardly foole.
why here I am Dame, lets see what thou canst say,
Bestirre your Distaffe, doo the worst ye may.
Alas that euer I was borne to see this sight,
My Raph is transformed to a wicked spright.
Shee lies yfaith, I am here vnder the stoole.
Let me alone Raph, hold thy peace thou foole▪
I am a sprite indeede, a fiend which will pursue thee still,
Vntill I take a full reuenge of all thy proffered ill▪
And for thy former dealings to thy husband hath bin bad,
I charme thee and inchaunt thee queane,
Thou henceforth shalt be mad:
And neuer shall thy foolish brain cut off this franticke fit,
Till with thy hand vnwillinglie thou murder doe commit.
Nay she is mad enough alreadie,
For she will doe nothing with me but fight,
And ye make hir more mad, shele kill me out right.
Make me mad Raph, no faith Raph,
Though thou be a diuell and a spright,
Nere toll the bell, Ile not be gossippe,
The childe shall not be christned to night.
Goe to the back-house for the boy,
Bid the tankerd bring the conduit home.
Ile buy no plumme porredge,
Ile not be made such a mome.
And because thou hast a fine rod Raph,
Ile looke in thy purse by and by:
And if thou haue any money in it,
wele drinke the Diuell dry, Diuell dry, &c.
Out of doubt she is mad indeed,
See what a coyle she doth keepe,
Raph she shall trouble none of vs, Ile charme her fast a sleepe.
Come Raph, lets goe sleepe, for thou must mend
Queene Guiniuers shooes to morrow.
I haue a pillowe of my owne, Ile neither begge nor borrow.
So sleepe thy fill, now Raph come forth to mee.
Come forth quoth he marrie God blesse vs.
Now you haue made my wife mad what shal become of me?
Feare not come forth, I meane no hurt to thee.
VVell Ile trust you for once, what say yee.
Raph hie thee home, & thou shalt finde vpon thy bed
Attire that for a prophets sute shal stand thee in good stead
A prophet thou must be and leaue thy worke a while.
A Prophet speaker? Ha, ha, ha, heres a coyle.
What are you, I pray?
I am Mercurie the Messenger of the Gods.
And I am Raph Cobler, twixt vs there is some odds.
But heare ye God Markedy, haue you tetoritie
To take a free man of his companie,
And hinder him to be your Prophet speaker,
And when ye set him a worke giue him nothing for his labor.
I must charme him asleepe, or he will still be prating.
Ile please thee well, I pre thee Raph sit downe.
Now I am set, would I had a pot of ale.
We will haue twaine, but first attend my tale.
Not farre hence standeth Mars his Court,
to whom thus see thou say,
Mars though thou be a Cocke of the game,
that wontst to croe by day,
And with thy sharpned spurres
the crauen Cockes didst kill and slay:
Sith now thou dost but prune thy wings,
and make thy fethers gay:
A dunghill Cocke that croes by night,
shall slilie thee betray,
And tread thy Hen, and for a time
shall carrie her away.
And she by him shall hatch a Chicke,
this Countrey to decay.
And for this pretie Pullets name
thou shalt the better learne:
When thou shalt onelie letters fiue
within one name discerne,
Three vowels and two consonants,
vvhich vovvels if thou scan,
Doth sound that vvhich to euerie pa
conducteth euerie man.
Then call to minde this Prophecie,
for thats the bastards name:
Then rouse thy selfe, then reach thy sword,
and win thy wonted fame.
Now Raph awake, for I haue done
the taske for which I came.
Heigh ho, wake quoth you, I thinke tis time,
for I haue slept soundly:
And me thought in my sleep this was God Markedy,
that had chaunted my wife mad for good cause why.
Aboue me thought I saw God Shebiter,
that marlously did frowne,
VVith a dart of fier in his hand
readie to throw it downe.
Below me thought there were false knaues
walking like honest men verie craftely:
And few or none could be plainly seene
to thriue in the world by honestie.
Me thought I saw one that was wondrous fat,
Picke two mens purses while they were striuing for a gnat.
And some that dwelt in streetes were large and faire,
Kept backe shops to vtter their baddest ware.
VVhat meddle I with trades? Men masters and maids,
Yea and wiues too and all are too too bad,
Be iudgd by my wife, that was neuer well till she ran mad.
But O the Baker, how he plaid false with the ballance,
And ran away from the takers tallants.
The Bruer was as bad, the Butcher as ill,
For its their tricke to blow vp leane meate with a quill▪
And with the stroke a Butcher gaue an oxe
that lowd bellowing did make,
I lost sight of all the other trickes,
and so sodainly did wake.
But now must Raph trudge about his prophetation,
Faith ye shall heare me troll it out after my fashion.
Thus haue I serued in my Princes warres,
Against the Persian and the Asian Powers:
The cole-blacke Moore that reuels in the Straights
Haue I repelled with my losse of blood.
My scarres are witnes of my hard escapes:
My wrinckles in my face (made old by care,
VVhen yet my yeres are in their chiefest prime)
Are glasses of my griefe, lights of my languor,
That liue disgracde, and haue deserued honor.
I am the admiredst in Boeotia,
By honoring me thou shalt obtaine preferment.
Vnto the Gods and Prince doo souldiers honor,
And wert thou one of these, I would adore thee.
I am of power more than all the Gods
To sit and rule the harts of all degrees.
They haue in me content, as thou shalt see
A present instance in these entring men.
Haile to Contents diuinest exelence.
Content our sweetest good, we doo salute thee▪
Though last I am not least in duteous kindnes
To thee Content although thou be no God,
Yet greater in account than all of them.
But if ye knew his name wer Olygoros, which signifieth Contempt, you would not mistake him, and name him Content.
O Mas scholler be patient, for though you like not my name, you loue my nature: and therefore Gentlemen forward with the discourse intended at our last meeting: and in that conference this Gentleman a souldier, I presume will make one.
Being a soldier, his companie is fit for anie honest gentleman, and therefore welcome into our companie.
I thanke you sir.
may say to you with some surplusage: my wood they bring me home, my hay and corne in haruest: their cattell, seruants, sonnes, and selues, are at my commaund.
O iure, quaque iniuria.
Nay and you speake Latin, reach me my laste.
Harke ye mas Scholler, harkeye.
The time shall come not long before the doome,
That in despite of Roome,
Lat in shall lacke,
And Greeke shall beg with a wallet at his backe.
For all are not sober that goes in blacke.
Goe too scholler, theres a learning for your knacke.
At my list can I rack their rents, set them to fines, bind them to forfets, force them to what I please. If I build, they bee my labourers: if bargaine, on them I build: and for my good looke they are content to endure any trauell.
But for all this ill and wrong,
Marke the Coblers song.
The hie hill and the deepe ditch,
VVhich ye digd to make your selues rich,
The chimnies so manie, and almes not anie,
The widowes wofull cries,
And babes in streete that lies,
The bitter sweate and paine
That tenants poore sustaine,
Will turne to your bane I tell ye plaine,
When burning fire shall raine,
And fill with botch and blaine
The sinew and each vaine.
Then these poore that crie,
Being lifted vp on hie,
VVhen you are all forlorne,
Shall laugh you lowd to scorne.
Then where will be the schollers allegories,
VVhere the Lawier with his dilatories,
VVhere the Courtier with his brauerie,
And the money monging mate with all his knauerie▪
Bethinke me can I no where els,
But in hell where Diues dwels.
But I see ye care not yet,
And thinke these words for me vnfit,
And gesse I speake for lacke of wit:
Stand aside, stand aside, for I am disposed to spit.
Be quiet Cobler, lets heare the Scholler speake!
I giue him retoritie: to it.
VVhat the Courtier dreamingly possesses, the Countrey Gentleman with cursses, and the Souldiour with cares: I quietly enioy without controll. In my studie I contemplate what can be done in batels, & with my pen hurt more than thousands doo with pikes, I strike him that sees me not.
I thought you were a proper man of your hands to come behinde one.
I see the height of heauen.
But thou makest no hast thither.
I view the depth of hell.
Is there anie roome in hell for curst wiues and Coblers shops.
Content is my landlorde, peace and quiet are my companions, I am not with the Courtier bound to daunce attendance; nor with the Countriman binde I others to attende on mee. I possesse pleasure more than mortall, and my contemplation is onely of the life immortall.
But you would bee glad to creepe in credit in the Court Scholler, and not be curious of the meanes, for all your coynesse.
I will not acquaint you sir with my intent, for they are fooles that in secret affaires are too familiar, know this, that I intend to awaite occasion.
Faith Master Scholler yet it stands not with your protestation.
Nor with you Soldier to be thus blunt after your rude fashion.
Alas sir, you must needes be exelent: for Piers & Plaine your poore tenants pray for ye: their bread and cheese is seldom denied to anie, when your small beere is scarse common to manie. You know what wil be made of a fat oxe as well as the Grasier, of the tallowe as well as the Butcher, of a tod of wooll as well as the Stapler.
VVhat hath any man to doe what I doe with mine owne?
I alls thine owne that comes in thy hands.
Sir you would make enough of it in yours to.
I master Courtier, thats to deale as you doe.
This souldier is as rough as if he were in the field▪
VVhere you would be as tame.
Has a proud hart though a beggers habit.
Where I frequent this habit serues my turne: and as goodly a sight were it to see you there in your silkes, as the scholler skirmishing in his long gown, or the countrey Gentleman riding on a fat Oxe with a mole spade on his necke.
VVhat, riding running, brauing, bralling,
I see ye passe not for a Prophets calling:
Therefore I will not bee so mad,
To cast Pearles to swine so bad.
Prethee Raph stay a little.
Little little seeing God, I shall see you in a spittle.
Your disputation being done Gentlemen, which hath highly contented mee? what will ye now doo?
Marry we will all to the eighteene pence Ordinary, how say ye Gentlemen?
No sir, not I, tis too deere by my faith.
VVhy you shall be my guest for this once. How saye you master souldier?
No sir I must turne one of your meales into three.
And euerie one a sufficient banquet for me.
Faith and you had kept your newes vntill now, yee should haue bin my guest▪ for your talke would haue serud well for the table.
Thats a practise of thine owne arte: it makes thy companie borne withall, where otherwise thou wert no fit guest, for tales at some tables are as good as testerns.
Nay then I perceiue yee grow chollericke, come sirs,
VVhy Gentlemen, no farewell to your little God.
Suffice it without vaine Ceremonies we shew our selues dutifull.
Tis enough, fare yee well.
Now souldier, what wilt thou doe?
Faith sir as I may.
VVilt thou serue me, and doe as I will thee, and thou shalt not want.
No: for if thy name be Contempt as the Scholler said, I abhorre and defie thee.
Euen as the child doth wormeseed hid in Raisons, which of it selfe he cannot brooke: so thou canst not abide my name, but louest my nature: for proofe, wanting liuing rast on the City, greeust at the country, yea grudgest at the King himselfe: thou saist thou art going to thy Patron Mars with a suplication for bettring thy estate, and how, by war: wher how many rapes, wrongs and murders are committed, thy selfe be iudge, all which thou esteemest not off, so thy owne want be supplied.
Contempt herein thou reasonest like thy selfe,
Base minded men I know there are in field,
That doe delight in murder, rape and blood,
As there are tares in corne and weeds with flowers,
And enuious snakes among the fleeting fish:
But for the noble souldier, he is iust
To punnish wrongs, protect the innocent,
VVeaken the tyrant▪ and confirme the right,
VVant cannot make him basely mutinous,
VVealth cannot make him proudly insolent,
In honourable thoughts dwell his content,
And he is foe to all that loue contempt.
Then Sateros thou art no mate for mee
No, Vpstart scorners are fit slaues for thee.
Clio a pen.
Both pen and quill I misse.
One Estridge penne yet in my penner is,
Quickly take that and make a pen for me.
The feathers of a gluttonous bird shew what the werers be.
Melpomine lend me a pen.
Mine pierce too hard for your writing.
Quickly a pen, ha, ha, fond foolish men.
Foole? no foole neither though none of the wisest Dame,
But a Prophet one of Merlins kinde I am.
Art thou a Prophet, whats thy name?
Raph Cob.
er, speake out.
Ye ha it yfaith.
A pen a pen in hast,
That I may write this Pageant ere it be past.
Comes there a Pageant by, Ile stand out of the greene mens way for burning my vestment.
A pen good Clio, fie how ye make me stay.
Make shift awhile you shall haue this straight way.
If I had a pen as I haue none,
For I vse no such toole,
Thou shouldst haue none an it,
For at my first comming thou caldst me foole.
A pen a pen, it will be gone incontinent.
Hold theres thy pen.
But are you the Gods of the Scriueners, that you make pens so fast trow we.
O sisters shift we are betraid,
Another man I see.
A silly man at your commaund,
Be not afraid of me.
No, no, tis the souldier, heele doo yee no hurt I warrant yee.
To see a man come in this place,
It is so strange to vs,
As we are to be held excusde,
That are amazed thus.
But art thou a souldier?
Yea Lady.
The better welcome vnto me.
Not so to me.
And what am I?
Be whist a while, Ile tell thee by and by.
Thats some mends yet for calling of me foole.
Thanks Ladies for your curtesies, but the sight of three such Goddesses on the sodaine, hath driuen mee into certaine muses.
certaine muses.
Especially being alone so sollitarie in this wood.
In this wood.
Harke souldier some body mocks thee.
Mocs thee.
Mocks me much.
Much.
Hold thy peace good Raph.
Good Raph.
Raph, thats my name indeede,
But how shall I call thee?
I call thee.
Dost thou: Mas and Ile come to thee, and I knew where thou art.
Thou art.
Art: faith and thou be as pretty a wench as any of these three, my mad wife shall neuer know that I play a mad part.
Part.
Part: Ile come.
Come.
Faith and I will, haue at thee.
Thus are we well rid of one that would haue troubled our talke and this artificiall eccho, hath told thee what we are: certaine muses dwelling in this wood, in number twice so many more as we be here.
Your names good Ladies?
Mine Melpomine, hirs Clio, this that writes Thalia.
Might I without offence intreate three things,
I should be greatly bound.
VVe will not denie thee three things, that can participate to thee thousands.
First would I request of this Ladie, whether she write with this Estridge quill of purpose, or for want of other.
Somewhat for want, but especially of purpose: the men which now doe minister me matter to write, are nere of the nature of the Estridge: who hauing the bodie of a bird, hath the head of a beast: she is greedy, deuouring and disgesting al things, and builds hir neast in sand: so are my worldlings, bodied and feathered as birds to flie to heauen, but headed as beasts to imagine beastly thinges on earth: downe to the which their Cammels necks doe draw their verie noses: greedy are they deuouring the Orphanes right, and disgesting the widdowes wrongs, Foolish, forgetful and froward, building their nest on sand, which the winde of heauens wrath or water of worldly affliction doth scatter and wash away. Thus art thou answered for the first, demaund the rest.
Next Ladies why doo you twaine stand idle,
and let Thalia take the paine.
On geeres and gests the world is onely set,
For me there is no worke no tragicke sene,
Battailes are done, the people liue in rest,
They shed no teares but are secure past meane.
VVhy lend you not Thalia then some pens?
My pens are too too sharpe to fit hir stile,
I shall haue time to vse them in a while.
But gentle Clio, me thinks your inke is dry.
It may be well, I haue done writing I,
VVhat did you register when you did write?
The works of famous Kings, and sacred Priests,
The honourable Acts of eaders braue,
The deeds of Codri, and Horatij.
The loue Licurgus bore to Spartans state,
The liues of auncient Sages and their sawes,
Their memorable works, their worthy lawes.
Now there is no such thing for to indite
But toyes, that fits Thalia for to write.
A heauie tale good Lady you vnfold,
Are there no worthie things to write as were of old.
Yes diuers Princes make good lawes,
But most men ouer slip them.
And diuers dying giue good gifts,
But their executors nip them.
Tisiphone is stepping to the stage, and she hath sworne to whip them.
The third and last thing I require is if you can:
shew me the mightie Mats his court.
VValke hence a slight shoot vp the hill,
And thou shalt see his castle wall.
Ladies the gifts that I can giue,
Is humbly thrice to thanke you all.
Farewell pore souldier.
Thalia now wee are alone, tel vs what pageant twas you cald for pens euen now so hastely, to end?
Twas thus: You know the Gods long since sent downe,
Pleasure from heauen to comfort men on earth,
Pleasure abuzde in country Court and towne,
By speeches, gestures, and dishonest mirth,
Made humble sute that he to heauen might passe
Againe, from world where he so wronged was.
His sute obtaind, and ready he to clime,
Sorrow comes sneaking and performes his deede,
Snatches his Roabe, and euer since that time,
Tis paine that masks disguisde in pleasures weede▪
The Pageant's thus, with cost and cunning trim,
That worldlings welcome Paine in steede of him.
Loath was I that vnpend one iote of this should goe,
Because I smile to see for weale, how sweetly men swill woe.
Woe is the first word I must write, beginning where you end.
I haue incke inough and pens good store.
Perhaps the world will mend.
I would it would.
VVhy if it should you faile in your account.
Then you perhaps will haue some worke.
Tush come lets mount the Mount.
VVaha how, wa how, holla how whoop: Did no body see the mocking sprite, I am sure I haue followed her vp and downe all this day crying and calling while my throat is hoarse againe. Ile coniure her too but tis in vaine, for knowledge hath knockt that in the braine, but be it diuel or be it spright, Ile call againe to haue a sight. Ya ha how: Nay Ile call againe.
Againe, I and againe too, I trow,
VVhat night and day no rest but row?
Come if thou wilt goe ouer Styx,
For if thou stay a while I thinke,
There will come so many my boate will sinke,
Ouer stix I and ouer stones,
Heres a question for the nonce,
VVhy what art thou I pray thee tell?
VVhy Charon Ferriman of hell.
VVhy what a diuel doo I with thee?
Three or foure vvithin: A boate, a boate, a boate.
Harke what a coile they keepe, come if thou wilt to hell with mee.
A boate, a boate, a boate.
This should bee the voice of a woman, comes women thither too.
why men & women euery houre, I know not what to do.
A Boate, a Boate, a Boate.
This should be the voice of some great man.
VVhy Popes and Prelates, Princes and Iudges more than I number can,
But the couetous misers they fret me to the gall,
I thinke they bring their money to hell,
For they way the diuel and all.
Mas and may well be, for theres little money stirring on the earth.
Charon a boate, a boate, Ile pay thee well for thy hire.
VVhy what art thou that makst such hast?
The Ghost of a gray Frier.
So troubled with Nunnes as neuer Frier was,
Therefore good Charon let me be first,
That ouer the Foord shall pas.
Come sirra, thou hearst what a calling they keep wilt thou goe?
VVhy Charon this calling makes thee mad I gesse,
VVhy I am no spirite but liuing Raph,
And God Markedie sends me of busines.
Tush, if thou be sent of God, we cannot hold thee farewel.
Yet gentle Charon carrie mee?
Thee? VVhy what art thou, that liuing suest to go to hell?
The wretchedst man of wretches most that in this wretched world doth dwell:
Dispisde, disdainde, starude, whipt and scornd,
Prest through dispaire my sefe to quell,
I therefore couet to behold if greater torment be in hell:
All the voices, A bote, a bote, a bote.
I come, I come.
Nay I prethee let them tarrie and harken to the pore.
Codrus I cannot helpe thee now, and yet I wish thee wel,
Theres scarcely roome enough for rich,
So that no pore can come to hell.
But when the ditch is digged downe as cleane as is the wall
That parted hel and purgatorie, then if thou chaunce to cal:
Because I see as thou art pore thou art impatient,
To carry thee quickly vnto hell Codrus le be content.
And now the time will not bee long, for thers commission gone▪
For workemē, that haue power to make Elysium & Limbo one,
And there are shipwrights sent for too, to build me vp a bigger bote,
A bote said I? nay awhole hulke:
And that the same may safely flote,
Cocytus, Lethe, Phlegecon
Shal al be digged into Styx:
For where one wont to come to hell,
I tel thee now comes fiue or sixe.
For ignorance that wont to be,
Is wilful blindnes now become.
So thou must come when roome is made,
I tel thee yet there is no roome.
I pre thee tel me one thing.
That I wil Raph whats the matter?
Charon why doth thy face looke so black, and thou vse somuch the water?
O, night was my mother, this is hir marke,
I cannot wash it off. Codrus farewel.
Charon Adieu.
Botesman?
Hagh.
Theres a scoffe, thats a waterman indeed.
VVell I must to God Mars for all this,
I would I could meete my souldier agen.
Euen as the Eagle soares against the sunne,
And spite of Phoebus shine, pries in his face:
Euen as the swordfish meetes the mighty VVhale,
And puts the hugie monster to disgrace,
So Emnius thoughts intending to aspire
Sore gainst the sunne, and fleete in wrathfull yre:
The Duke the sunne that dazles Emnius eyes,
The Duke the hugie VVhale that ouer-beares mee,
But I will gaze and blinde him too ere long,
And play the swordfish though he little feares mee.
The lesse suspected sooner shall I strike him,
And this my reason is for I mislike him
His Daughter with inticing words is woone mine owne,
But I disdaine her were shee fairer farre:
Tush tis for rule I cast and Princely throne,
The state of Prince, brighter than brightest starre.
And who doth hinder Emnius but the Duke?
And therefore who should perish but the Duke?
Shortly a solemne hunting he entends,
And who but Is put in chieest trust?
VVell Ile be trustie if my Pistol hold,
In loue and kingdomes Ioue will prooue vniust.
He dead, I wed his Heire and onely Daughter,
And so shall winne a Crowne by one mans slaughter.
Suppose he haue beene kinde, liberall and free,
VVhy I confesse it, but its my desire,
To be as able to bestow as hee,
And till I can my hart consumes in fire.
O soueraigne glory, chiefest earthly good,
A Crowne! to which who would not wade through blood.
Then ruthles of his life doo I resolue.
To wait my time till I haue wrought his end,
He dies, the Duke shall die, and Emnius raigne,
VVere he my father or a dearer friend.
Teares shall not hinder, praiers shall not intreate mee,
But in his throne by blood I soone will seate mee.
Art thou one of God Mars his traine?
Alas good father thou art lame,
To be a souldier farre vnlustie,
Thy beard is gray thy armour rustie▪
Thy bill I thinke be broken too.
Friend make not thou so much ado,
My lamenes comes by warre,
My armours rustines comes by peace,
A maimed souldier made Mars his Porter,
Lo this am I: now questioning cease.
And what are you? A Painter with your pensill and your colours braue?
No Painter but a Herrald sirrha to decipher a Gentleman from a knaue.
Pray sir, can yee Gentleman and knaue it both in one man, and yee can sir, I pray you doo it in me.
Indeed I cannot in thy selfe,
For all is knaue that is in thee.
Sing one two and three, sing after mee,
And so shall we right well agree.
Sir take no heed what he doth say,
His foolish humor you doo see,
But tell me pray are you a Herrald.
I am.
I should haue rather tooke you to haue beene,
Appelles prentise, you were with colours so prouided.
In auntient times haue Heralds beene esteemd,
And held companions for the greatest Kings.
Augustus Caesar made a law, so did Antonius too,
That without Herralds graue aduice Princes shoulde nothing doo.
VVell then was then, these times are as they be.
VVe now are faine to wait who growes to wealth,
And come to beare some office in a towne.
And we for money help them vnto Armes,
For what cannot the golden tempter doe?
A lamentable thing it is, but tell vs I intreate,
VVhere might we finde adored Mars.
From hence sir you to Venus Court must passe,
Adowne the hill, the way is steepe, smooth, sleeke as any glasse▪
Goe by the dore of Dalliance, and if you there him mis
Aske Nicenes for she best can tell where hir faire Lady is?
Both day and night the dores are ope,
The strongest closet dore is but of fethers made,
Rush boldly in, stand not to aske and neuer be afraide.
At Venus Court sir doe you say that Mars is to be found?
Gentleman we haue told yee truth although vnto our harts it be a wound,
For searching as wee bid you sir,
No doubt a wondrous hap,
But you shall finde God Mars a sleepe,
On Lady Venus lap.
This one thing more, you cannot come
The way you thither passe:
Tis dangerous, the hills too sleepe and slipperie all as glasse.
Take this of me, the fairest way from Venus Court is beggerie.
There are more waies, but they are worse and threaten more extreamitie.
I thats for such as thither passe,
Of pleasure and of will:
But these for other purpose goe,
Doubt therefore sir no ill.
I thanke you both that haue vs warned by your skill.
I and Ile end with a Prophecie for your good will:
You thinke it is a pleasant iest,
To tell the times of peace and rest,
But hee that liues to ninetie nine,
Into the hundreds shall decline,
Then shall they speake of a strange time:
For it will be a woondrous thing,
To see a Carter lodge with a King.
Townes shall be vnpeopled seene,
And markets made vpon the greene:
This will be as true I tell yee all,
As Coblers vse the thred and nall.
And so because that all men are but morter,
I leaue the paltrie Herrald and the Porter.
I pre thee come away, Gentlemen with thankes I take my leaue.
Adiew good sit.
Farewell vnto you both.
Come Lady Loue, now bore we Mars, thou mine I thine beloude.
Ah my Contempt it will be spide too soone,
So shall our pleasures haue a bitter end.
Prouide some place for I am big with childe,
And cleane vndone if Mars my guilt espie.
Sweet Venus be assurde, I haue that care
But you perchaunce will coylie scorne the place.
What its some Abbie or a Munnerie?
No they abound with much hypocrisie.
Is it a Gentlemans or a Farmers house?
Too much resort would there bewray your being.
Some Husbandmands, some Inne, some cleanly ale-house.
Neither of these, a Spittle louely Loue.
What where foule Lazers and loathed Lepors lie,
Their stinke will chooke thy Venus and hir babe.
Why gentle Venus I intreat yee be not ouer nice,
What thinke ye as the Prouerb goes that beggers haue no lice?
Procters them selues in euerie Spittle house,
Haue things as neate, as men of more account.
But I haue seene euen verie meane mens wiues,
Against their child-birth so prouide for,
As all their husbands wealth was scarce the worth
Of the fine linnin vsed in that month.
And shall not Venus be as kindelie vsde.
It must be as we may, Ile goe prouided
And spie my time slylie to steale thee hence.
Awaie for Mars is come,
Welcome God Mars, where hath my loue bin all this while?
Walking about th garden time for to beguile.
VVheras between nisenes your maide & newfangle your man,
I heard such sport as for your part, would you had bin there than.
Quoth nicenes to new fangle thou art such a Iacke,
That thou deuisest fortie fashions for my Ladies backe.
And thou quoth he art so possest with euerie fantike toy,
That following of my Ladies humor thou dost make hir coy,
For once a day for fashion sake my Lady must be sicke,
No meat but mutton or at most the pinion of a chicke,
To day hir owne haire best becomes which yellow is as gold,
A perriwigs better for to morrow, blacker to behod.
To day in pumps and cheuerill gloues, to walke she wilbe bold.
To morrow cuffes and countenance for feare of catching cold.
Now is shee barefast to be seene, straight on hir muffler goes,
Now is shee hufft vp to the crowne, straight nulled to the nose.
These seuen yeares trust me better sport I heard not to my mind▪
The Dialogue done, then downe came I my Lady Loue to finde.
And thou hast found hir all alone, half sickly by ill hap
Sit for a while Mars and lay thy head vpon my lap,
I see my folks behinde my backe haue much good talke of mee.
And so they haue.
They are too Idle: soft Mars doe you see,
I see some sawcie mates presse in: Nowe sirs what would you haue?
Be not offended sir, we seeke God Mars.
VVhy and Mars haue you found sir, whats your will with him?
Are you he I cry you mercie, I promise you I tooke you for a morris dauncer you are so trim.
VVhat sayes the villaine?
If thou be Mars, the cause which makes me doubt, is that I see thy bodie lapt in soft silke which was wont to bee clad in hard steele, and thy head so childishlie laid on a womans lap. Pardon I humbly beseech thee, the plainnes of thy poore seruant, and vouchsafe to read my poore petition.
Rough shaped souldier enemie to loue,
VVhy dost thou thirst so much for bloody warre,
wherein the strong man by a stronger queld,
Or reacht far off by dastard darters arme,
Breathes forth his spirite with a booteles cry,
Leauing behinde is earths anatomie:
By warre the Infant trampled vnder steeds,
Holds to his mother out his feeble hand,
And she is rauisht while hir yongling bleeds.
Yet to abide deaths stroake doth quaking stand.
The twice forst virgin like the wounded lambe,
Deiected at the mercie of the woolfe,
Holds vp hir throat in vaine to bloody men,
That will not kill hir while hir beautie stayeth,
But stab her when her teares her faire decayeth:
Away thou bloody man, vex not my Lord,
By warre true loue is hindred and vndone,
And Ladies laps left emptie of their loues,
whose heads did beautifie their tender knees.
You need not plaine your laps full inough:
Faire Venus be propitious I will fight
To maintaine true loue and defend the right,
On that condition souldier I am won,
Receaue this fauour, Mars let it be done.
Sateros, I haue receiued thy supplication, and sorrow I cannot as I would giue thee immediat comfort. If I should oppose my selfe against the Gods, they would soone set fire on my seat, Sixe double vs there are, three at libertie, three imprisoned, and one their keeper: at libertie, wilines, wrong and wantonnes, in prison, are warre wreake and woe, their keeper is wonder; who once giuing way to libertie for those he holds; shall set thee and thy fellowes on worke: in meane time goe thou to the Duke of Booetia, commend vs to him, when he can he will imploy thee I am sure, let that be thy answere for this time, and so good Sateros be contented.
I humbly take my leaue adored Mars,
Proue a good night Rauen Venus I intreat.
Farewell pore souldier weare that for my sake▪
Of both your Godheads dutious leaue I take.
And when goe you sir?
VVho I? Good Lord there hangs a matter by.
why what are you? get gone or I will send thee gone▪
I pray you beare a while, gentle master mine,
And you shall heare my in speech I warrant?
Goe too sir foole, lets heare what you can say.
And shall I warrant yee to your cost my Lady do-little▪
Mars though thou be a Cocke of the game,
that wontst to croe by day,
And with thy sharpned spurres
the crauen Cockes didst kill and say:
Sith now thou dost but prune thy wings,
and make thy fethers gay:
A dunghill Cocke that croes by night,
shall slilie thee betray,
And tread thy Hen, and for a time
shall carrie her away.
And she by him shall hatch a Chicke,
this Countrey to decay.
And for this pretie Pullets name
thou shalt the better learne:
When thou shalt onelie letters fin
within one name discerne,
Three vowels and two consonants,
vvhich vovvels if thou scan,
Doth sound that vvhich to euerie place
conducteth euerie man.
Then call to minde this Prophecie,
for thats the bastards name:
Then rouse thy selfe, then reach thy sword,
and win thy wonted fame.
Now haue I done the taske for which I came,
And so farewell fine Master and nice Dame.
A dunghill cocke to tread my hen?
Breake forth yee hangrie powers,
And fill the world with bloodshed and with rage.
My Lord, my Loue.
Venus I am abusde.
VVhy will yee trust a foole when he shall speake,
And take his words to be as Oracles?
But hee hath tucht me neere, and Ile reuenge.
Aye mee!
Reuenge true Louers wrongs immortall powers,
And nere let Lady trust a souldiet.
VVhy faintst thou Venus? why art thou distrest?
Looke vp my loue, speake Venus, speake to me.
Nay let me die, sith Mars hath wronged me.
Thou hast not wrongd me, Mars beleeues it not.
Yes, yes, base Coblers vtter Oracles,
And al are sooth fast words against pore Loue,
I will beleeue no words, they are all false:
Onely my Venus is as bright as heauen,
And firmer than the poles that hold vp heauen.
Now comes your loue too late, first haue you slaine
Her whome your honny words cannot recure againe.
I will doe pennance on my knees to thee,
And beg a kisse, that haue bin so vnkinde,
And know you not, vnkindnes kills a woman?
I know it doth? sweet forgiue my fault:
I will forgiue ye now ye beg so hard,
But trust me next time Ile not be intreated.
Now hast thou cheard my drooping thoughts sweet loue,
Let me lay downe my head vpon thy knee,
Sing one sweet song, thy voice will rauish me.
Follie come forth.
Anone forsooth.
Bid Nicenes, New fangle, Dalliance and the rest bring forth their Musicke Mars intends to sleepe.
I will forsooth.
I thinke in deede that I shall quickly sleepe,
Especially with Musicke and with song.
Svveet are the thoughts that harbor full content,
Delight full be the ioyes that knovv no care:
The sleeps are sound that are from dreames exempt,
Yet in cheefe svveetes lies hid a secret snare,
Where loue is wacht by prying iealous eyes,
It fits the loued to be warie wise.
Peepe, peepe, Maddam he is a sleepe▪
Sleepe on secure, let care not tuch thy hart,
Leaue to loue hir, that longs to liue in change,
So wantons deale, when they their faires impart
Rome thou abroad for I intend to range:
Yet wantons learne to guide your rouling eies,
As no suspect by gazing may arise.
Hold on your Musicke, Follie leaue thy play,
Come hither lay his head vpon thy knee.
Fie what a loathed load was he to me.
Come my Content, lets daunce about the place,
And mocke God Mars vnto his sleepie face.
Venus agreed, play vs a Galliard.
Why sings not Venus? hir loue I to heare,
Sweet let the Fife be further from mine eare,
Nay let the Fife play, els the Musicke failes.
What still so nere my eare, sweet Venus sing.
Sing: where is she?
Out foole, what doos my head vpon thy knee?
Forsooth my Mistris bid me.
Wheres Venus, speake ye ribalds, harlots, fooles,
And neuer speake againe except I see hir:
Mars is impatient, finde out Venus soone.
Or perrish slaues, before my angrie wrath.
Nay a ladie, Follie will liue for all you.
Away yee foole, tell Venus of my rage.
And bid hir come to Mars that now begins,
To doubt the Coblers Prophecie.
My Lord we cannot finde hir any where.
Hence villaines, seeke the garden, search each place,
Mars will not suffer such abhord disgrace.
Wheres Venus Follie, prethee tell me foole?
Forsooth shees lun away wid a man called Contempt.
What hath Contempt robd mightie Mars of loue?
Hence fooles and flatterers, flie you from my sight.
Mars with a kindled fire begins to burne,
Away yee hel hounds, Ministers of shame,
Vanish like smoke, for you are lighter farre,
Gainst wantonnes proclaime I open warre.
Vnconstant women I accuse your sexe,
Of Follie, lightnes, trecherie and fraud,
You are the scum of ill, the scorne of good,
The plague of mankinde, and the wrath of heauen,
The cause of enuie, anger, murder, warre,
By you the peopled townes are deserts made:
The deserts fild with horror and distres.
You laugh Hiena like, weepe as the Crocodile,
One ruine brings your sorrow and your smile,
Hold on in lighnes, lust hath kindled fire,
The trumpets clang and roaring noise of Drums,
Shall drowne the ecchoes of your weeping cries,
And powders smoke dim your enticing eyes.
These wanton ornaments for maskers fit,
Will Mars leaue off, and sute himselfe in steele,
And strumpet Venus with that vile Contempt.
I will pursue vnto the depth of hell.
Away with pittie, welcome Ire and Rage,
VVhich nought but Venus ruine shall asswage.
Well doe I like your reasoning Gentlemen,
You for your learning, Saeros for Act,
The learned is preferrde, the souldier shall not want,
But Sateros, yee must forbeare a while,
I cannot yet imploy ye as I would:
Meane time attend the Court you shall haue pay
To my abillitie and your content.
Thankes to your highnes.
Scholler lead him in.
Be kinde to him he is a souldier.
Attend vpon vs to our hunting Sateros,
VVe must haue pleasant warre anon with beasts.
VVhen will these fellowes make an end.
Depart my frends, I haue a little busines
VVith this pore man that doth attend to speake with me.
Fellow what is it thou wilt now reueale?
You are the Duke of all this land,
And this I wish yee vnderstand;
That Princes giue to many bred
VVhich wish them shorter by the head.
You haue a Courtier Emnius namde, whose flattering tongue hath many blamde.
He lowteth low doth fawne and kneele,
Your worthy meaning for to feele.
And quaintly romes your person nie, willing to see it fall and die.
You haue a Daughter faire and trim,
He loueth her and she loues him.
Yet as the Fox doth win the Kid,
So are his secret treasons hid:
He dares not once his passions moue,
For feare your highnes should reproue.
Yet is it not your Daughter deare,
That he desires so faire and cleare:
He coueteth your dignitie,
And therefore this intendeth hee.
Today you meane to hunt in wood,
Aud for he doth pretend no good:
He hath with shot intended ill,
And meanes your noble Grace to kill:
I that desire for to explaine,
The manner of your Graces paine.
Giue counsell ere the deed be done,
That you may al deceiuing shun:
I see that Emnius commeth nie,
My protestation quickly trie.
And if you finde as I haue saide,
That you should be by him betraide:
Remember Raph the Cobling knaue,
You warning of this mischiefe gaue,
So leaue I you to search the slaue.
My honorable Lord, the traine attends,
All things are readie for your highnes sport:
And I am sent from other of estate.
To pray your Grace to hast your wonted presence.
Emnius they must attend a while,
For I haue secrets to impart with thee:
Say on my Honorable Lord to me.
Thou wit we must vnto the wood.
True my most Gratious Lord.
Suppose there were a traitrous foe of mine,
VVhat wouldst thou doe to rid me from my feare?
Dy on the traitor, and prepare his graue,
Before he should one thought of comfort haue.
But tell me Emnius, didst thou see a tree,
That bore faire fruite delighting to the eye,
And by the straightnes of the trunke they grow too hie▪
wouldst thou oppose thy selfe against the tree,
And worke the downefall ere the fall should be.
I would regard no hight to claime the fruite
That should content me, but attempt to clime
The highest top of hight, or fall to death,
Alone and naked to obtaine my will.
I am right ioyous you are so resolude,
Such Courtiers should become a noble Prince.
But tell me Emnius had I any foe,
That secretly attempted my distresse,
what secret weapon haue yee to preuent?
Onely my sword my Lord, that is my rest,
My resolution to defend your Grace.
And haue you not a Dag to help me too.
A Dag my Lord?
I mand ie it not,
I know ye haue a Dag preparde for mee.
I haue a Dag not for your Maiestie.
Yes Emnius poure thy selfe into thy selfe,
And let thy owne eies be thy harts true witnes.
wearst thou this Dag to iniure any beast?
Bearst thou these bullets for a foemans life?
Or art thou bent against thy loyall Lord,
o reaue his life that giues thee life and breath?
Gainst beasts my Lord doth Emnius like to deale,
He is not so beastlie and abhominate,
As he delights to ioy in trecherie,
So smiles Hiena, when she will be guile,
And so with teares deceiues the Crocodile.
Are not these tooles prepared for my end?
Speake ill intending man, Ah Emnius?
Haue I for this maintained thy estate,
Affoorded all the fauours I could yeeld,
To be rewarded with ingratitude,
with murder, trecherie, and these attempts?
And all in hope to win my realme and childe.
I will not shew thy sinne vnto the world,
But as thou didst intend, so shalt thou fall.
Receiue thy death, desertfull man of death,
And perrish all thy trecherous thoughts with thee.
welcome my death, desertfull I confesse,
Heauens Pardon my intent, your highnes blesse.
Heauens pardon thy intent, and so doe I,
Be true hereafter, now thou shalt not die.
Come follow vs Emnius, learne to know this lore,
Murder of meanest men brings shame, of Princes more.
O that same Cobling Rogue that rauing runs,
And madding aimes at euerie hid intent,
Reueald this practise, but Ile stab the slaue,
nd he once dead the Dukes death will I haue.
Be it knowne vnto all people, that whereas Venus alias lust, hath long challenged a preheminence in heauen, and been adored with the name of a Goddesse, the Sinode of the Gods being assembled, in regard of hir adulteries with Mars, discouered by Phoebus, when in the face of heauen, they hoth were taken in an yron net: wherein hir wrong to Vulcan was apparant; and since that, many other escapes considered. But lastly and most especially, her publike adulterie she hath committed with that base monster Contempt they haue all consented, and to this decree firmed; that no more shall Venus possesse the title of a Goddesse, but be vtterly excluded the compasse of heauen: and it shalbe taken as great indignitie to the Gods to giue Venus any other title than the detested name of lust, or strumpet Venus: And whosoeuer shall adore Contempt or intertaine him, shalbe reputed an enemie to the Gods. More, it is decreed that warre shalbe raysed against Booetia, and victorie shall not fall on their side, till the Cabbin of Contempt be consumde with fire. Giuen at Olimpus by Iupiter and the celestiall Synode.
Ill tidings for my Lady these.
Ill newes pore babe for thee.
VVhat who are these?
I take yee to bee two of Venus virgins, are yee not?
Faith she is a pure virgin indeed,
For the childe she had by Venus chaplin,
Is a big boy and followes the Father.
And so are you a maide too, are ye not?
For the girle you had by Mars his Captaine,
Shees dead, and troubles not the Mother.
Then I perceiue ye be both maids for the most part,
well for our maidenheads it skill not much.
For in the world I know are many such.
I Mercurie I pray let that goe,
wee are faire Venus maides, no more but so.
And in our Ladies cause we doe intreate
To know, if that be true thou didst proclaime?
Or was it spoken but of pollicie,
To fright vs whome thou knewst to be her maides.
As true as neither of you both are maides
So true it is, that I haue vttered.
The sentence is set downe, Venus exilde,
Ayme poore babe for thee.
Whose child is that you beare so tenderly?
My Ladies child, begotten by contempt.
O is it so, and whether beare you it?
To nurse.
To whom?
Vnto securitie.
Is it a boy or girle, I praie ye tell?
A girle it is.
Who were the godmothers?
We two are they.
Your names I craue.
Mine Ru and hers is Ina.
And whether name I praie yee beares the girle?
Both hers and mine.
And who is godfather?
Ingratitude that is likewise the grandfather.
Ruina otherwise called Ruine the child,
Contempt the father, Venus alias lust the mother,
Ru and Ina the godmother,
Ingratitude the Oodfather and grandfather,
And Securitie the nurse,
Heeres a brood that all Booetia shall curse.
Well damsels hie you hence, for one is comming nigh
Will treade your yong one vnder foot.
Tis Mars, O let vs flie.
Now Mars thou seemest lyke thy selfe,
Thy womens weeds cast off,
Which made thee be in heauen a scorne,
On earth a common scoffe.
O Mercurie how am I bound to thee,
That blazest forth this strumpets iust reproofe?
O could I finde the harlot or her broode,
I would reuenge me of indignities:
Now Mercurie, I minde a prophesie
A simple fellow brought me on a day,
When wantonning vpon her knee I lay,
How that a crauen cocke should tread mye,
And she should hatch a chicke this countrie to decy,
The bastards name he tolde me too,
But it was riddle-wise,
Helpe me to search it Mercurie,
I know thee quicke and wise,
When I should onely in a word
Fiue letters iust discerne
Three vowels and two consonants,
The name I soone should learne:
But those same vowels hee dyd bid▪
That I should duly scan,
And they would signifie the way
That guideth euery man.
Hast thou not heard of such a thing?
Yes, and dyd send that prophesie,
And euen as thou camest hether
The bastard and the godmothers
Were in this place together.
Were they in deed, where are they now?
Ile search, Ile follow them.
Be patient Mars, they will be quickly found▪
Ruina is the bastards name. R.N. the consonants,
V. . and A. the vowels be, and Via is the waye.
Now haue I found it Mercury, thou hast resolud
I wyll raise warre, I will aduenged bee,
Go with me Mercurie, thou my reuenge shalt see.
I will go and do my best for thee.
Tis true ô Duke, that I do say,
He still would make thy ly away,
He is too frolike and too lustie,
Thou too simple and too trustie,
Warres shall in thy lande begin,
For pride, contempt, and other sin,
Nothing shall appease heauens ire,
Til the cabin of Contēpt be set on fire
And wantonnes with lewd desire,
Be trampled vnder foot as mire,
The Cobler has no more to say,
But for the peoples sinnes, good princes oft are tae away.
Well, God a mercie fellow, go thou in.
He raues my Lord, its ill aduisd of you
To suffer him so neere your princely excellence.
His presence breeds me no offence.
What Raph, Raph, so fine you wil not know your wife
What a gilden sword and a siluer knife?
There, there Raph put it vp.
Why so?
What so? Why where am I?
Faith where ye ha made a fayre peece of worke.
Lay holde on them, what violence is this,
To haue one murdred euen before our presence?
What cause hadst thou to kill this Gentleman?
None in the world, I neuer knew him I.
No faith shees mad, & has beene euer since I was a prophet, and cause she sawe a dagger without a sheath, she euen put it vp in his belly.
Why what acquaintance hast thou with this womā?
O Lord sir, she has bin acquainted with me a great while, with mine eares, with euery part of me, why tis my wife.
The lykelyer may it like your grace of his consent,
Twere good they both did suffer punishment.
Commit them both, but she has long bin mad,
It may be heauen reserud her to this end.
Come sirra, you and your wise must goe to ward,
Till you be tride for cleerenes or conent.
O sir, whether you will I am content,
God Merkedy has serud me pretily,
Has made my wife mad, and sayd shee should not be well,
Till by her hand a traitor fell,
And I must euen be hangd for companie.
I doe not gesse the woman guiltie of this crime,
But the iust heauens in theyr seueritie,
Haue wrought this wreake for Ennius trecherie.
Here is a messenger my gracious Lord,
That brings ill tidings to your quiet state.
What are they felow, let vs heare thē speak. Spare not
The Argiues and the men of Thessaly,
With mightie powers are come vpon your coast,
They burne, wast, spoyle, kill, murther, make no spare,
Of feeble age, or harmlesse infant youth,
They vow to triumph in Booetia,
And make your Highnes vassall to their will,
They threaten mightily, their power is mightie,
The people fall before them as the flowring grasse
The mower with his syth cuts in the meade,
Helpe your poore people, and defend your state,
Else you, they, it, will soone be ruinate.
I will prouide as farre as heauenly powers,
And our abilities shall giue consents;
Ile to the temple and powre forth my prayers,
Meane while let Sateros be called for,
To muster vp the people with all speed,
Now see I that this simple witted man,
This poore plaine Cobler truly did diuine,
The Gods when we refuse the common meanes
Sent by their oracles and learned priests,
Raise vp some man contemptible and vile,
In whom they breath the purenes of theyr spirits,
And make him bolde to speake and prophesie.
Welcome friend Sateros, you are fitly come,
The Duke intends that you shall leade to field
The powers of Boaetia gainst his foes,
Are you prepard, and willingly resolud?
Why you s by your pen can do as well
I know tis nothing but Facsimile.
Souldier, stand not on that, discharge your duetie,
The countrie needs our seruice and our counsell,
Ile doo my best, and do you your indeuor,
For publike quiet and Booetias honor.
Well I forget your scornes giuen me in peace,
And rate all enuie at an humble price,
Ile doe my dutie, doe not you neglect,
Armes will not Art, Art should not armes reiect.
A blessed concord, I will to the Duke,
And leaue thee Sateros to thy glorious warre.
O sir, I haue bin seeking ye all day,
And greatly do I praise my fortune thus to meete yee.
In good time sir, be briefe I pray.
You do remember me I hope.
Not verie well I promise ye.
Lord sir, and you bee aduisde, I was one of them that reasoned before contempt, when you defended war, another ate, one the court, and I the countrie.
I remember in deede such a reasoning, before that vile monster Contempt, but you I haue forgot.
O Lord sir yes, by that token we went afterward to the Ordinarie.
True, true, now I call ye minde, by this token I was not able to reache commons, and so was cashierd out of your companie.
Twas against my will Ifaith: ye sawe I was another mans guest.
Its no great matter. But whats your busines wyth me now, that you seeke for me so hastily?
Marie sir there is warres toward, do ye not heare on it?
Thats to too sure.
And I feare by reason of my wealth I shall bee chosen for a Captaine ouer some Companies.
And what of that?
Why I haue no skill, and therefore woulde hyre you to serue in my place. Ile please ye well.
The Duke wantes men sir, and therefore must yee serue your selfe, though not as a captaine, yet in a place fitting your person. You offer me moneie, why man Ile deale kindly with ye, ye shal haue some of me, bere take it, be not nice. In the Dukes name I charge ye with horse and furnitue to be readie to morrow by breake of day, for the busines askes speed.
But I hope ye will not deale so with me?
But I am sure I will, therefore dispatch on perill of your life.
Why what alife is this, that such as I must serue? Ashame on warres for me that ere they were.
Why now fellowes, what are you?
What souldier, do not you know me?
Yes Raph but what are these?
Faith certaine pu-fellowes of mine, that haue bin mued vp, & now the exclamation goes we shal haue wars, we are all set at libertie, and sent to you to be traild vp.
Why wert in prison?
I faith I prophesied so long, that I had like to haue bin hangd. My wife kild the courtier man, that would haue kild me & the Duke to, but Ile be a prophet no longer thats flatte, after I haue done beeing a souldier, Ile to cobling againe.
So doest thou well: But fellowe tell mee why wert thou in.
Faith sir for nothing but riding another mans horse.
That was but a small matter.
A thing of nothing, for when he had stollen him, he were as good ride him as leade him in his hand.
Faith thats euen the truth on it.
I thinke you all haue bin of such condition▪
But now betake you to another course,
The Duke hath giuen you life and libertie,
Where otherwise your deed deserued death,
If now you doo offend vnder my charge,
Looke for no fauour but the martiall lawe,
Death on the next tree without all remission,
And if ye like not this I will returne yee
From whence ye came to bide the doome of law,
Speake, will ye liue and serue as true men should?
I, I, I.
I am sure ye take me for none of they number.
No Raph, thou shalt be still with mee,
I haue an hoast of worthie souldiers
Readie to march, to them now will I goe,
Heauens and good fortune quell our furious foe.
Awaie thou strumpet, scandall of the world,
Cause of my sorrow, author of thy shame,
Follow me not, but wander where thou wilt,
In vncouth places loathed of the light,
Fit shroude to hide thy lustfull bodie in,
Whose faire's distaind with foule adulterous sin.
Ah my Content, proue not so much vnkind,
To flie and leaue thy loue alone behind,
I will go with thee into hollow caues,
To desart to the dens of furious beasts,
I will descend with thee vnto the graue,
Looke on me loue let me some comfort haue.
Contempt still turnes from Venus.
What not a word to comfort me in wo?
No looke to giue my dying heart some life?
Nothing but frownes, but lowres, but scornes, disdaines?
Woe to my pleasures that haue brought these paines.
Haue I for this set light the God of warre,
Against whose frownes nor death nor heauen can stande,
Haue I for this procurde the angrie Gods
To make me exile from all blessednes.
Haue I for this lost honor and renowme,
Become a scandall to the vulgar world,
And thus to be repaide ah breake my hart,
Had all these euils falne vpon my head,
And millions of more harmes than heauen could heap,
Yet all were nothing, had not my Content,
Rewarded me thus vilie with Contempt.
Shape of colusion, mirrour of deceit,
Faire forme with foule deformities defilde.
Know that I am Contempt in nature scornefull,
Foe to thy good, and fatall to thy life▪
That while ioyde in glorie and account,
Disdainde all vertue, and contemnd all vice.
Good, bad▪ were held with me of equall price.
And now the waning of my greatnesse comes,
Occasiond by thy loue, whome Mars aspected,
And I that all despisde am now reiected.
For which I thee reiect, disdaine and hate,
VVishing thee die a death disconsolate.
Yet once regard me as a thing regardles,
Thou art the abiects wretch aliue esteemed,
I worse than vilenes in the world am deemed:
I scornd, thou hated, each like other beeing,
Liue we together void of other being.
Lightnes of lightest things that vaunt of life,
Sprung from the froathie bubbles of the sea:
Leaue to solicite him that loathes thy lookes,
Spitting vpon thy fces painted pride
I wil forsake thee, and in silence shrowd
This loathed trunke despised and abhord,
So flies the murderer from the mangled lims,
Left limles on the ground by his fell hand.
So runnes the Tyger from the bloodles pray,
VVhich when his fell stomacke is of hunger stancht.
Thou murdrer, Tyger, glutted with my faire,
Leaust me forsaken, map of griefe and car ▪
O what is beauty humbled to the base,
That neuer had a care of ciuill thought?
O what is fauor in an obscure place?
Like vnto Pearles that for the swine are bought:
Beauty and fauor where no vertue bides,
Proues foule, deformd, and like a shadow glides.
Ah that my woe could other women warne,
To loue true wedlocke or the virgins life:
For me too late, for them fit time to learne,
The honour of amaid and constant wife,
One is adorde by Gods with holy rites,
The last like Lampes both earth and heauen lights.
But the foule horror of a harlots name,
Euen of the Lecher counted as a scorne:
VVhose forhead beares the marke of hatefull shame,
Of the lust-louer hated and forlorne.
O such is Venus, so shall all such bee
As vse base lust, and foule adulterie.
Immortall mouer of this glorious frame,
That circles vs about with wonder great,
Receiue the offrings of our humble harts
And bodies prostrate on the lowly earth.
Our sinnes hath drawne the furie of thy wrath,
And turnd our peace to miserie and warre:
But if repentant soules may purchase grace,
VVe craue it humbly, and intend to liue,
Hereafter more reformd than wee haue done.
For pride, we entertaine humilitie:
For our presumption, due obedience:
Loue for Contempt, and chastitie for lust:
The Cabbin of Contempt doth burne with ire,
In which our sinnes are cast, and there consume.
Heare vs yee heauenly powers, helpe e require,
And be propitious to the penitent.
Rise from the humble earth my Noble Lord,
Rise vp yee Priests, Princes, and people rise,
And heare the gladsome tidings I vnfold,
Of happy peace and glorious victorie.
For that sweete voice offerd to vs by man,
Cast sweetest incense into holy fires,
And while they burne, tell on thy happy newes,
That wee may eare and honour heauenly Powers.
VVhen Sateros my Lord had brought your power,
In view of our presuming enemies:
And equall place was chosen for the field,
He sent a Herrald, willing them restore,
The wrongs that in Booetia they had done,
And leaue the Countrey, turning to their home,
Or els resolue on doubtfull chance of warre.
They proud, ambitious, couetous of gaine,
Returnd an answere filled with disdaine.
Then was the signall giuen, and stremarred,
Menacing blood on either side aduance.
Drums, Fifes, and rumpets drownd the cries of men,
That ech where fell before their Foe-mens swords,
Mars there showd ruthles rage on either part,
And murder ranged thorow euery ranke.
Dust dimd the sunnes light, and the powders smoke,
Seemd like thicke Clowds in ayre congluminate.
Thus was seauen houres consumde, and doubtfull chaunce
Sometime with vs, sometime with them abode:
Till at the length our Generall gaue charge
To found retreate, which made the hopefull Foe,
Pursue regardlesse our retyring bands,
That being knit together in firme ranke,
A fresh pursude their stragling followers.
Then fell their glory like the ripened corne,
Before the Cickle and the Reapers hand:
In briefe, some fled, most slaine, and many taken
Haue left the honour to Booetia.
To heauens and Sateros returne we thanks,
For thy reward receiue this recompence:
Our selues will forward to salute our friends,
That fought for honour of Booetia.
Sound Drum and Trumpet notes triumphantly,
Heauens haue the honour for this victorie.
Thus Sateros haue we assisted thee,
Our true sworne souldier, worthy man at Armes,
And the Booetian Duke hath heauen appeasde,
By firing false Contempt and loathed lust.
Mercurie the sonne and messenger of oue
VVith me shall passe vnto my warlike house.
Goe thou vnto the Duke with all thy traine,
That longs to see thee, and requie thy paine.
To mighty Mars and wary Mercurie
Poore Sateros giues thanks and vowes his duety.
Are yee here yfaith? heres two on yee,
Raph Cobler may curse the time that heere knew your cōpany▪
VVhat mine man?
I yours, what reason had you to make my wife mad? I and so mad to kill one? and then make me a Prophet?
It was the secret iudgement of the Gods, Sateros speak to the Duke to thinke on him, and to remit hir fault.
It shall be done.
Is this the Prophet?
I that it is, that told you your owne when twas.
Sateros vse him well.
Nere doubt you that: are yee bemembred since ye told him, if ye set your selfe against the Gods they would driue you out of heauen.
VVell what of that?
Faith at that time the world might well haue affoorded you a Cart to ride in.
Go too Rap▪ cease.
I, I, and great folke doo amisse,
Poore folke must hold their peace.
Mars shall we hence?
I, farewell Sateros.
VVelcome braue souldier, welcome to you all,
Ioy stops my words, I cannot speake my minde,
But in this triumph passe we to the Court,
VVhere you shall all receiue your due deeits.
Thanks Noble Lord.
VVhat shall I doo then, and my wife?
I will prouide for thee, and pardon her.
Faith then farewell the Court;
For now Ile not run and ride, nor no more abide,
But since my mad wife, has changde her mad life,
Ile euen leaue to be a Prophet speaker,
Take clouting leather and naule, and fall to my old trade of the gentle craft the Cobler.
I Raph that will be fittest for vs.
Come Sateros let me yet honour thee,
To whom the heauens haue giuen great victorie,
And tooke in worth our worthles sacrifice,
VVherein Contempt and Lst with old ingratitude,
Haue perished like Fume that flies from fire.
March forward braue and worthy man at Armes▪
Thy deedes shall be rewarded worthily:
Embrace the Scholler, liue you two as friends,
For Armes and Learning may not be at iarre,
Counsell preuents, counsell preuailes in warre.
My thoughts are free from hate, let me not liue,
VVhen souldiers faile good Letters to defend.
Let euery Scholler be a Souldiers friend,
As I am friend to thee and so will rest.
I so liue, and yee are blest.
How saist thou Zelote is not that life best.
Then with due praise to heauen let vs depart,
Our State supported both by Armes and Art.