YET doe I liue, and yet doth breath possesse
This hatefull prison of a loathsome soule:
Can no calamitie, nor no distresse
Breake hart and all, and end a life so soule?
Can Cleopatra liue, and with these eyes
Behold the deerest of her life bereft her?
Ah, can shee entertaine the least surmise
Of any hope, that hath but horror left her?
Why should I linger longer griefes to try?
These eyes that sawe what honor earth could giue mee,
Doe now behold the worst of misery:
The greatest wrack wherto Fortune could driue mee
Hee on whose shoulders all my rest relyde,
On whom the burthen of my ambition lay:
The Atlas and the Champion of my pride,
That did the world of my whole fortune sway;
Lyes falne, confounded, dead in shame and dolors,
Following th'vnlucky party of my loue.
Th' Ensigne of mine eyes, th'vnhappy collours,
That him to mischiefe, mee to ruine droue.
And now the modell made of misery,
Scorne to the world, borne but for Fortunes foile,
My lufts haue fram'd a Tombe for mee to lie,
Euen in the ashes of my Countries spoyle.
Ah, who would think that I were shee who late,
Clad with the glory of the worlds chiefe ritches,
Admir'd of all the earth, and wondred at,
Glittring in pompe that hart and eye bewitches:
Should thus distress'd, cast down from of that heigth
Leuell'd with low disgrac'd calamitie,
Vnder the waight of such affliction sigh,
Reduc'd vnto th'extreamest misery.
Am I the woman, whose inuentiue pride,
(A dorn'd like Isis,) scornd mortalitie?
Ist I that left my sence so without guide,
That flattery would not let him know twas I?
Ah, now I see, they scarce tell truth, that praise vs,
Crownes are beguild, prosperity betraies vs.
VVhat is become of all that statelie traine,
Those troopes that wont attend prosperitie?
See what is left, what number doth remaine,
A tombe, two maydes, and miserable I.
And I t'adorne their tryumphes, am reseru'd
A captiue kept to beautifie their spoyles:
VVhom Caesar labours, so to haue preseru'd,
And seekes to entertaine my life with wiles.
No Caesar no, it is not thou canst doe it.
Promise, flatter, threaten extreamitie,
Imploy thy wits, and all thy force vnto it,
I haue both hands, and will, and I can die.
Though thou of Country, kingdom, & my Crowne,
Though thou of all my glory dost bereaue me,
Though thou hast all my Egipt as thine owne,
Yet hast thou left me that which will deceiue thee.
That courage with my blood and birth innated,
Admir'd of all the earth, as thou art now:
Cannot by threates be vulgarly abated,
To be thy slaue, that rul'd as good as thou.
Consider Caesar that I am a Queene,
And scorne the basenes of a seruile thought:
The world and thou, dost know what I haue beene,
And neuer thinke I can be so low brought,
The Rome should see my scepter-bearing hands,
Behinde mee bounde, and glory in my teares.
That I should passe, whereas Octauia stands
To view my misery, that purchast hers.
No, I disdaine that head that wore a Crowne,
Should stoope to take vp that which others giue:
I must not be, vnlesse I be mine owne.
Tis sweet to die when we are forst to liue.
Nor had I troubled now the world thus long,
And beene indebted for this little breath,
But that I feare, Caesar would offer wrong
To my distressed seede after my death.
Tis that which dooth my deerest blood controule.
Tis that (alas) detaines mee from my Tombe,
Whilst Nature brings to contradict my soule,
The argument of mine vnhappy wombe.
O lucklesse issue of a wofull Mother,
Th' vngodly pledges of a wanton bed;
You Kings design'd, must now be slaues to other,
Or els not bee (I feare) when I am dead.
It is for you I temporise with Caesar,
And liue this while for to procure your safetie.
For you I fayne content, and soothe his pleasure,
Calamitie heerein hath made me crasty.
But tis not long, Ile see what may be done,
And come what will, this stands, I must die free.
Ile be my selfe, my thoughts doe rest thereon,
Blood, chyldren, nature, all must pardon mee.
My soule yeelds honour vp the victory,
And I must bee a Queene, forget a mother:
Yet mother would I be, were I not I,
And Queene would I not now be, were I other.
But what know I, if th'heauens haue decreed,
And that the sinnes of Egipt haue deseru'd,
The Ptolomeyes should faile, and none succeed,
And that my weakenes was thereto reseru'd.
That I should bring confusion to my state,
And fill the measure of iniquitie:
Licentiousnes in mee should end her date,
Begunne in ill-dispensed libertie.
If so it be, and that my heedles waies,
Haue this so great a dissolation rais'd,
Yet let a glorious end conclude my dayes,
Though life were bad, my death may yet be prais'd,
That I may write in letters of my blood,
A fit memoriall for the times to come:
To be example to such Princes good
That please themselues, and care not what become.
And Anthony, because the world doth know,
That my mis-fortune hath procured thine,
And my improuidence brought thee folow,
To lose thy glory, and to ruine mine:
By grapling in the Ocean of our pride,
To sinke each others greatnes both together,
Both equall shipwrack of our states t'abide,
And like destruction to procure to eyther:
If I should now (our common faulte) suruiue,
Then all the world must hate mee if I doe it,
Sith both our errors did occasion giue,
And both our faults haue brought vs both vnto it.
I beeing first inamour'd with thy greatnes,
Thou with my vanity bewitched wholy:
And both betrayd with th'outward pleasant sweetnes,
The one ambition spoyld, th'other folly.
For which, thou hast already duly paid,
The statute of thy errors dearest forfeit:
VVhereby thy gotten credite was decayd,
Procur'd thee by thy wanton deadly surfeit.
And next is my turne, now to sacrifize
To Death, and thee, the life that doth reproue mee,
Our like distresse I feele doth sympathize,
And euen affliction makes me truly loue thee.
VVhich Anthony, (I must confesse my fault,)
I neuer did sincerely vntill now;
Now I protest I doe, now am I taught,
In death to loue, in life that knew not how.
For whilst my glory in that greatnes stood,
And that I saw my state, and knew my beauty,
Saw how the world admir'd mee, how they woode,
I then thought all men, must loue me of dutie,
And I loue none: for my lasciuious Courte,
(Fertile in euer-fresh and new-choyce pleasure,)
Affoorded me so bountiful disport,
That I to thinke on loue had neuer leysure.
My vagabond desires no limits found,
For lust is endlesse, pleasure hath no bound.
Thou, comming from the strictnes of thy Citty,
The wanton pompe of Courts yet neuer learnedst:
Inur'd to wairs, in womans wiles vnwittie,
Whilst others fayn'd, thou fell'st to loue in earnest.
Not knowing women like them best that houer,
And make least reckning of a doting Louer.
And yet thou earn'st but in my beauties waine,
When new-appearing wrinkles of declining,
Wrought with the hand of yeeres, seem'd to detaine
My graces light, as now but dimly shining.
Euen in the confines of mine age, when I
Fayling of what I was, and was but thus:
VVhen such as wee, doe deeme in iealosie
That men loue for them-selues, and not for vs.
Then, and but thus, thou didst loue most sincerely,
(O Anthony,) that best deseru'dst it better
Thys Antumne of my beauty bought so deerely,
For which (in more then death) I stand thy debter.
VVhich I will pay thee with most faithfull zeale,
And that ere long, no Caesar shall detaine me;
My death, my loue and courage shall reueale,
The which is all the world hath left t'vnstaine me.
And to the end I may deceiue best, Caesar,
Who dooth so eagerly my life importune,
I must preuaile mee of this little leisure,
Seeming to sute my minde vnto my fortune.
Whereby I may the better mee prouide,
Of what my death and honor best shall fit:
A seeming base content, must warie hide
My last disseigne, till I accomplish it.
That heereby yet the world shall see that I,
Although vnwise to liue, had wit to die.
BEhold what Furtes still
Torment their tortur'd brest.
Who by their doing ill,
Haue wrought the worlds vnrest.
Which when being most distrest,
Yet more to vexe their sp'rit,
The hidious face of sinne,
(In formes they most detest)
Stands euer in their sight.
Their Conscience still within,
Theternall larum is,
That euer-barking dog that calls vppon theyr miss.
No meanes at all to hide
Man from himselfe can finde:
No way to start aside
Out from the hell of mind.
But in himselfe confin'd,
Hee still sees sinne before:
And winged-footed paine,
That swiftly comes behind,
The which is euer more,
The sure and certaie gaine
Impietie doth get,
And wanton loose respect, that dooth it selfe forget.
And CLEOPATRA now,
Well sees the dangerous way
Shee tooke, and car'd not bow,
Which led her to decay.
And likewise makes vs pay
For her disordred lust,
Th' int'rest of our blood:
Or liue a seruile pray,
Vnder a band vniust,
As others shall thinke good.
This hath her riot wonne.
And thus shee hath her state, her selfe and vs vndunne.
Now euery mouth can tell,
What close was muttered:
How that shee did not well,
To take the course shee did.
For now is nothing hid,
Of what feare did restraine.
No secrete closely done,
But now is vttered:
The text is made most plaine
That flattry glos'd vpon,
The bed of sinne reueal'd,
And all the luxurie that shame would haue concealed.
The scene is broken downe,
And all vncou'red lyes,
The purple Actors knowne
Scarce men, whom men despise.
The complots of the wise,
Proue imperfections smoake:
And all what wonder gaue
To pleasure-gazing eyes,
Lyes scattered, dasht, all broke.
Thus much beguiled haue
Poore vnconsider at wights,
These momentary pleasures, fugitiue delights.
KIngdoms I see we winne, we conquere Climates,
Yet cannot vanquish harts, nor force obedience,
Affections kept in close-concealed limits,
Stand farre without the reach of sword or violence.
Who forc'd doe pay vs duety, pay not loue:
Free is the hart, the temple of the minde,
The Sanctuarie sacred from aboue,
Where nature keepes the keyes that loose and bind.
No mortall hand force open can that doore,
So close shut vp, and lockt to all mankind:
I see mens bodies onely ours, no more,
The rest, anothers right, that rules the minde.
Behold, my forces vanquisht haue this Land,
Subdu'de that strong Competitor of mine:
All Egipt yeelds to my all-conquering hand,
And all theyr treasure and themselues resigne.
Onely this Queene, that hath lost all this all,
To whom is nothing left except a minde:
Cannot into a thought of yeelding fall,
To be dispos'd as chaunce hath her assign'd.
But Proculei, what hope doth shee now giue,
Will shee be brought to condiscend to liue?
My Lord, what time being sent from you to try,
To win her foorth aliue, (if that I might)
From out the Monument, where wofully
Shee liues inclos'd in most afflicted plight;
No way I found, no meanes how to surprize her,
But through a Grate at th'entry of the place,
Standing to treate, I labour'd to aduise her,
To come to Caesar, and to sue for grace.
Shee saide, shee crau'd not life, but leaue to die,
Yet for her children, prayd they might inherite,
That Caesar would vouchsafe (in clemency,)
To pitty them, though shee deseru'd no merite.
So leauing her for then; and since of late,
With Gallus sent to try another time,
The whilst hee entertaines her at the grate,
I found the meanes vp to the Tombe to climbe.
Where in discending in the closest wise,
And silent manner as I could contriue:
Her woman mee descri'd, and out shee cryes,
Poore Cleopatra, thou art tane aliue.
With that the Queene raught frō her side her knift,
And euen in acte to slab her martred brest,
I stept with speed, and held, and sau'd her life,
And forth her trembling hand the blade did wrest.
Ah Cleopatra, why should'is thou (said I,)
Both iniurie thy selfe and Caesar so?
Barre him the honour of his victory,
VVho euer deales most mildly with his foe?
Liue and relye on him, whose mercy will
To thy submission alwaies ready be.
With that (as all amaz'd) shee held her still,
Twixt maiestie confus'd and miserie.
Her proud grieu'd eyes, held sorrow and disdaine,
State and distresse warring within her soule:
Dying ambition dispossest her raigne,
So base affliction seemed to controule.
Like as a burning Lampe, whose liquor spent
With intermitted flames, when dead you deeme it,
Sendes foorth a dying flash, as discontent,
That so the matter failes that should redeeme it.
So shee (in spight) to see her low-brought state,
(When all her hopes were now consum'd to nought,)
Scornes yet to make an abiect league with Fate,
Or once discend into a seruile thought.
Th'imperious tongue vnused to beseech,
Authority confounds with prayers, so
Words of commaund conioyn'd wish humble speech,
Shew'd shee would liue, yet scorn'd to pray her foe.
Ah, what hath Caesar heere to doe, said shee,
In confines of the dead in darknes liuing?
Will hee not graunt our Sepulchers be free,
But violate the priuiledge of dying?
What, must hee stretch forth his ambitious hand
Into the right of Death, and force vs heere?
Hath misery no couert where to stand
Free from the storme of pryde, ist safe no where?
Cannot my land, my gold, my Crowne suffise,
And all what I held deere, to him made common,
But that he must in this sort tirannize,
Th'afflicted body of an wofull woman?
Tell him, my frailty, and the Gods haue giuen,
Sufficient glory, if hee could content him:
And let him now with his desires make euen,
And leaue mee to this horror, to lamenting.
Now hee hath taken all away from mee,
What must hee take mee from my selfe by force?
Ah, let him yet (in mercie) leaue mee free
The kingdom of this poore distressed corse.
No other crowne I seeke, no other good.
Yet wish that Caesar would vouchsafe this grace,
To fauour the poore of-spring of my blood.
Confused issue, yet of Roman race.
If blood and name be linkes of loue in Princes,
Not spurres of hate; my poore Caesario may
Finde fauour notwithstanding mine offences,
And Caesars blood, may Caesars raging stay.
But if that with the torrent of my fall,
All must bee rapt with furious violence,
And no respect, nor no regard at all,
Can ought with nature or with blood dispence:
Then be it so, if needes it must be so.
There stayes and shrinkes in horror of her state.
VVhen I began to mitigate her woe,
And thy great mercies vnto her relate;
Wishing her not dispaire, but rather come
And sue for grace, and shake off all vaine feares:
No doubt shee should obtaine as gentle doome
As shee desir'd, both for herselfe and hers.
And so with much a-doe, (well pacifide
Seeming to bee,) shee shew'd content to lyue,
Saying shee was resolu'd thy doome t'abide,
And to accept what fauour thou would'st giue.
And heere-withall, crau'd also that shee might
Performe her last rites to her lost belou'd.
To sacrifize to him that wrought her plight:
And that shee might not bee by force remou'd.
I graunting from thy part this her request,
Left her for then, seeming in better rest.
But doost thou thinke she will remaine so still?
I thinke, and doe assure my selfe shee will.
Ah, priuate men found not the harts of Princes,
VVhose actions oft beare contrarie pretences.
Why, tis her safety for to yeeld to thee.
But tis more honour for her to die free.
Shee may thereby procure her childrens good.
Princes respect theyr honour more then blood.
Can Princes powre dispence with nature than?
To be a Prince, is more then be a man.
There's none but haue in time perswaded beene.
And so might shee too, were shee not a Queene.
Diuers respects will force her be reclam'd.
Princes (like Lyons) neuer will be tam'd.
A priuate man may yeeld, and care not how,
But greater harts will breake before they bow.
And sure I thinke sh'will neuer condiscend,
To lyue to grace our spoyles with her disgrace:
But yet let still a warie watch attend,
To guard her person, and to watch the place.
And looke that none with her come to confer:
Shortly my selfe will goe to visite her.
OPINION, howe doost thou molest
Th affected minde of restles man?
Who following thee, neuer can,
Nor euer shall attaine to rest.
For getting what thou saist is best,
Yet loe, that best hee findes farre wide
Of what thou promisedst before:
For in the same hee lookt for more,
Which proues but small when once tis tride.
Then something els thou find'st beside,
To draw him still from thought to thought:
When in the end all proues but nought.
Farther from rest hee findes him than,
Then at the first when he began.
O malcontent seducing guest,
Contriuer of our greatest woes:
Which borne of winde, and fed with showes,
Doost nurse thy selfe in thine vnrest.
Iudging vngotten things the best,
Or what thou in conceite design'st.
And all things in the world doost deeme,
Not as they are, but as they seeme:
Which shewes, their state thou ill defin'st:
And liu'st to come, in present pin'st.
For what thou hast, thou still doost lacke:
O mindel tormentor, bodies wracke,
Vaine promiser of that sweet rest,
Which neuer any yet possest.
If wee vnto ambition tende,
Then doost thou draw our weakenes on,
With vaine imagination
Of that which neuer hath an end.
Or if that lust we apprehend,
How doth that pleasant plague infest?
O what strange formes of luxurie,
Thou straight doost cast t'intice vs by?
And tell'st vs that is euer best,
Which wee haue neuer yet possest.
And that more pleasure rests beside,
In something that we haue not tride.
And when the same likewise is had,
Then all is one, and all is bad.
This Anthony can say is true,
And Cleopatra knowes tis so,
By th'experience of their woe.
Shee can say, shee neuer knew
But that iust found pleasures new,
And was neuer satis-fide:
Hee can say by proofe of toyle,
Ambition is a Vulture vile,
That feedes vpon the hart of pride:
And findes no rest when all is tride.
For worlds cannot confine the one,
Th'other, listes and bounds hath none.
And both subuert the minde, the state,
Procure destruction, enuie, hate.
And now when all this is prou'd vaine,
Yet Opinion leaues not heere,
But sticks to Cleopatra neere.
Perswading now, how she shall gaine
Honour by death, and fame attaine.
And what a shame it were to liue,
Her kingdome lost, her Louer dead:
And so with this perswasion led,
Dispayre doth such a courage giue,
That naught els can her minde relieue.
Nor yet diuert her from that thought:
To this conclusion all is brought.
This is that rest this vaine world lends,
To end in death that all thing ends.
HOW deepely Arius am I bounde to thee,
That sau'dst frō death this wretched life of mine:
Obtayning Caesars gentle grace for mee,
When I of all helps els dispayr'd but thine?
Although I see in such a wofull state,
Life is not that which should be much desir'd:
Sith all out glories come to end theyr date,
Our Countries honour and our owne expir'd.
Now that the hand of wrath hath ouer-gone vs,
Liuing (as'twere) in th'armes of our dead mother,
With blood vnder our feete ruine vpon vs,
And in a Land most wretched of all other,
When yet we reckon life our deerest good.
And so we liue, we care not how we liue:
So deepe we seele impressed in our blood,
That touch which nature with our breath did giue.
And yet what blasts of words hath learning found,
To blow against the feare of death and dying?
What comforts vnsicke Eloquence can sound,
And yet all fayles vs in the poynt of trying.
For whilst we reason with the breath of safety,
VVithout the compasse of destruction liuing:
VVhat precepts shew wee then, what courage lofty
In taxing others feares in counsell giuing?
VVhen all thys ayre of sweet-contriued words,
Prooues but weake armour to defend the hart.
For when this lyfe, pale feare and terror boords,
Where are our precepts then, where is our arte?
O who is he that from himselfe can turne,
That beares about the body of a man?
Who doth not toyle and labour to adiorne
The day of death, by any meanes he can?
All this I speake to th'end my selfe t'excuse,
For my base begging of a seruile breath,
Wherein I graunt my selfe much t'abuse,
So shamefully to seeke t'auoyd my death.
Philostratus, that selfe same care to liue,
Possesseth all alike, and grieue not then
Nature dooth vs no more then others giue:
Though we speak more then men, we are but men.
And yet (in truth) these miseries to see,
VVherein we stand in most extreame distresse:
Might to our selues sufficient motiues be
To loathe this life, and weigh our death the lesse.
For neuer any age hath better taught,
VVhat feeble footing pride and greatnes hath.
How 'improuident prosperity is caught,
And cleane confounded in the day of wrath.
See how dismaid Confusion keepes those streetes,
That nought but mirth & Musique late resounded,
How nothing with our eye but horror meetes,
Our state, our wealth, our pride & all confounded.
Yet what weake sight did not discerne from far
This black-arysing tempest, all confounding?
Who did not see we should be what we are,
When pride and ryot grew to such abounding.
When dissolute impiety possest,
Th'vnrespectiue mindes of such a people:
VVhen insolent Security found rest
In wanton thoughts, with lust and ease made feeble.
Then when vnwary peace with fat-fed pleasure,
New-fresh inuented ryots still detected,
Purchac'd with all the Ptolomies ritch treasure,
Our lawes, our Gods, our misteries neglected.
Who saw not how this confluence of vice,
This innondation of disorders, must
At length of force pay back the bloody price
Of sad destruction, (a reward for lust.)
O thou and I haue heard, and read, and knowne
Of lyke proude states, as wofully incombred,
And fram'd by them, examples for our owne:
Which now among examples must be numbred.
For this decree a law from high is giuen,
An auncient Canon, of eternall date,
In Consistorie of the starres of heauen,
Entred the booke of vnauoyded Fate;
That no state can in heigth of happines,
In th'exaltation of theyr glory stand:
But thither once ariu'd, declyning lesse,
Ruine themselues, or fall by others hand.
Thus doth the euer-changing course of things,
Runne a perpetuall circle, euer turning:
And that same day that highest glory brings,
Brings vs vnto the poynt of back-returning.
For senceles sensualitie, doth euer
Accompany felicity and greatnes.
A fatall witch, whose charmes do leaue vs neuer,
Till we leaue all in sorrow for our sweetnes;
When yet our selues must be the cause we fall,
Although the same be first decreed on hie:
Our errors still must beare the blame of all,
This must it be, earth aske not heauen why.
Yet mighty men with wary iealous hand,
Striue to cut off all obstacles of feare:
All whatsoeuer seemes but to withstand
Theyr least conceite of quiet, held so deere;
And so intrench themselues with blood, wt crymes,
With all iniustice as theyr feares dispose:
Yet for all thys wee see, how oftentimes
The meanes they worke to keep, are means to lose.
And sure I cannot see, how this can stand
With great Augustus safety and his honor,
To cut off all succession from our land,
For her offence that puld the warrs vpon her.
Why must her issue pay the price of that?
The price is life that they are rated at.
Caesario to, issued of Caesars blood?
Pluralitie of Caesars are not good.
Alas what hurt procures his feeble arme?
Not for it dooth, but that it may doe harme.
Then when it offers hurt, represse the same,
Tis best to quench a sparke before it flame.
Tis in humane, an innocent to kill.
Such innocents, sildome remaine so still.
And sure his death may best procure our peace,
Competitors the subiect deerely buies:
And so that our affliction may surcease,
Let geat men be the peoples sacrifice.
But see where Caesar comes himselfe, to try
And worke the mind of our distressed Queene,
To apprehend some falsed hope: whereby
Shee might be drawne to haue her fortune seene.
But yet I thinke, Rome will not see that face
(That quel her chāpions,) blush in base disgrace.
WHat Cleopatrae, doost thou doubt so much
Of Caesars mercy, that thou hid'st thy face?
Or doost thou think, thy' offences can be such,
That they surmount the measure of our grace?
O Caesar, not for that I flye thy fight
My soule this sad retyre of sorrow chose:
But that my' oppressed thoughts ab horring light,
Like best in darknes, my disgrace t'inclose.
And heere to these close limmits of dispaire,
This solitary horror where I bide:
Caesar, I thought no Roman should repaire,
More after him, who heere oppressed dyde.
Yet now, heere at thy conquering feete I lye,
Poore captiue soule, that neuer thought to bow:
VVhose happy foote of rule and maiestie,
Stoode late on yt same ground thou standest now.
Rise Queene, none but thy selfe is cause of all.
And yet, would all were but thyne owne alone:
That others ruine had not with thy fall
Brought Rome her sorowes, to my tryumphs mone.
For breaking off the league of loue and blood.
Thou mak'st my winning ioy a gaine vnpleasing:
Sith th'eye of griefe must looke into our good,
Thorow the horror of our owne blood-shedding.
And all, we must attribute vnto thee.
To mee? Caesar what should a woman doe
Opprest with greatnes? What was it for mee
To contradict my Lord, beeing bent thereto?
I was by loue, by feare, by weakenes, made
An instrument to such disseignes as these.
For when the Lord of all the Orient bade,
Who but obeyd? who was not glad to please?
And how could I with-draw my succouring hand,
From him that had my hart, or what was mine?
Th'intrest of my faith in straightest band,
My loue to his most firmely did combine.
Loue? alas no, it was th'innated hatred
That thou and thine hast euer borne our people:
That made thee seeke al meanes to haue vs scattred,
To disvnite our strength, and makers feeble.
And therefore did that brest nurse our dissention,
VVith hope t'exalt thy selfe, t'augment thy state:
To pray vpon the wrack of our contention,
And (with the rest our foes,) to ioy thereat.
O Caesar, see how easie tis t'accuse
Whom fortune hath made faultie by their fall,
The wretched conquered may not refuse
The titles of reproch he's charg'd withall.
The conquering cause hath right, wherein yu art,
The vanquisht, still is iudg'd the worser part.
Which part is mine, because I lost my part.
No lesser then the portion of a Crowne.
Enough for mee, alas what needed arte
To gaine by others, but to keepe mine owne?
But heere let weaker powers note what it is,
To neighbour great Competitors too neere,
If we take part, we oft doe perrish thus,
If neutrall bide, both parties we must feare.
Alas, what shall the forst partakers doe,
When following none, yet must they perrish to?
But CAESAR. sith thy right and cause is such,
Bee not a heauie weight vpon calamitie:
Depresse not the afflicted ouer-much,
The chiefest glory is the Victors lenitie.
Th'inheritaunce of mercy from him take,
Of whom thou hast thy fortune and thy name:
Great Caesar mee a Queene at first did make,
And let not Caesar now confound the same.
Reade heere these lines which still I keep with me,
The witnes of his loue and fauours euer:
And God forbid this should be said of thee,
That Caesar wrong'd the fauoured of Caesar.
For looke what I haue beene to Anthony,
Thinke thou the same I might haue been to thee.
And heere I doe present thee with the note,
Of all the treasure, all the Iewels rare
That Egipt hath in many ages got;
And looke what Cleopatra hath, is there.
Nay there's not all set down within that roule,
I know some things shee hath reseru'd a part.
What vile vng greateful wretch, dar'st thou cōtroule
Thy Queene & soueraine? caitiue as thou art.
Hold, holde, a poore reuenge can worke so feeble
Ah Caesar, what a great indignitie hands.
Is this, that heere my vassale subiect stands,
T' accuse mee to my Lord of trechery?
If I reseru'd some certaine womens toyes,
Alas it was not for my selfe (God knowes,)
Poore miserable soule, that little ioyes
In trifling ornaments, in outward showes.
But what I kept, I kept to make my way
Vnto thy Liuia, and Octauias grace.
That thereby in compassion mooued, they
Might mediat thy fauour in my case.
Well Cleopatra, feare not, thou shalt finde
What fauour thou desir'st, or canst expect:
For Caesar neuer yet was found but kinde
To such as yeeld, and can themselues subiect.
And therefore giue thou comfort to thy minde;
Relieue thy soule thus ouer-charg'd with care,
How well I will intreate thee thou shalt find,
So soone as some affayres dispatched are.
Til whē farewel. Cl. Thanks thrise-renowned Caesar,
Poore Cleopatra rests thine owne for euer.
No meruaile Caesar though our greatest sp'rits,
Haue to the powre of such a charming beautie,
Beene brought to yeeld the honour of their merits:
Forgetting all respect of other dutie.
Then whilst the glory of her youth remain'd
The wondring obiect to each wanton eye:
Before her full of sweet (with sorrow wain'd,)
Came to the period of this misery.
If still, euen in the midst of death and horror,
Such beauty shines, thorow clowds of age & sorow,
If euen those sweet decayes seeme to plead for her,
Which from affliction, mouing graces borrow;
If in calamity shee could thus moue,
What could she do adorn'd with youth & loue?
VVhat could she do then, when as spreading wide
The pompe of beauty, in her glory dight?
When arm'd with wonder, shee could vse beside,
Th' engines of her loue, Hope and Delight?
Beauty daughter of Meruaile, ô see how
Thou canst disgracing sorrowes sweetly grace?
VVhat power thou shew'st in a distressed brow,
That mak'st affliction faire, giu'st teares their grace.
VVhat can vntressed locks, can torne rent haire,
A weeping eye, a wailing face be faire?
I see then, artlesse feature can content,
And that true beauty needes no ornament.
What in a passion Dolabella? what? take heede:
Let others fresh examples be thy warning;
What mischiefes these, so idle humors breed,
VVhilst error keepes vs from a true discerning.
Indeed, I saw shee labour'd to impart
Her sweetest graces in her saddest cheere:
Presuming on the face that knew the arte
To moue with what aspect so eu'r it were.
But all in vaine, shee takes her ayme amisse,
The ground and marke, her leuel much deceiues;
Time now hath altred all, for neither is
Shee as shee was, nor wee as shee conceiues.
And therefore now, twere best she left such badnes,
Folly in youth is sinne, in age, tis madnes.
And for my part, I seeke but t'entertaine
In her some feeding hope to draw her forth;
The greatest Trophey that my trauailes gaine,
Is to bring home a prizall of such worth.
And now, sith that shee seemes so well content
To be dispos'd by vs, without more stay
Shee with her chyldren shall to Rome be sent,
Whilst I by Syria thither take my way.
O Fearefull frowning NEMESIS,
Daughter of IVSTICE, most seuere,
That art the worlds great Arbitresse,
And Queene of causes raigning heere.
Whose swift-sure hand is euer neere
Eternill iustice, righting wrong:
Who neuer yet-deserrest long
The proudes decay, the weakes redresse.
But through thy powre euery where,
Doost raze the great, and raise the lesse.
The lesse made great, doost ruine to,
To shew the earth what heauen can doe.
Thou from dark-clos'd eternitie,
From thy black clowdy hidden seate,
The worlds disorders doost discry:
Which when they swell so proudly great,
Reuersing th'order nature set,
Thou giu'st thy all-confounding doome,
Which none can know before it come.
Th' ineuitable destinie,
Which neyther wit nor strength can let,
Fast chayn'd vnto necessitie,
In mortall things doth order so,
Th'alternate course of weale or wo.
O low the powres of heauen do play
With trauailed mortalitie:
And doth their weakenes still betray,
In theyr best prosperitie.
When beeing listed vp so hie,
They looke beyond themselues so sarre,
That to themselues they take no care:
Whilst swift confusion downe doth lay,
Theyr late proude mounting vanitie:
Bringing theyr glory to decay.
And with the ruine of theyr fall,
Extinguish people, state and all.
But is it iustice that all wee
Th'innocent poore multitude,
For great mens faults should punishs be,
And to destruction thus pursude.
O why should th'heauens vs include,
Within the compasse of theyr sall,
Who of themselues procured all?
Or doe the Gods (in close) decree,
Occasion take how to extrude
Man from the earth with crueltie?
Ah no, the Gods are euer iust,
Our faults excuse theyr rigor must.
This is the period Fate set downe,
To Egipts fat prosperity:
Which now vnto her greatest growne,
Must perrish thus, by course must die.
And some must be the causers why
This reuolution must be wrought:
As borne to bring theyr state to nought.
To change the people and the crowne,
And purge the worlds iniquitie:
Which vice so farre hath ouer-growne.
As wee, so they that treate vs thus,
Must one day perrish like to vs.
NEuer friend Rodon in a better howre,
Could I haue met thee then eu'en now I do
Hauing affliction in the greatest powre
Vpon my soule, and none to tell it to.
For tis some ease our sorrowes to reueale,
If they to whom wee shall impart our woes
Seeme but to feele a part of what wee feele,
And meete vs with a sigh but at a cloze.
And neuer (friend Seleucus) found'st thou one,
That better could beare such a part with thee:
Who by his owne, knowes others cares to mone,
And can in like accord of griefe agree.
And therefore tell th'oppression of thy hart,
Tell to an eare prepar'd and tun'd to care:
And I will likewise vnto thee impart
As sad a tale as what thou shalt declare.
So shal we both our mournful plaints combine,
Ile waile thy state, and thou shalt pitty mine.
Well then, thou know'st how I haue liu'd in grace
With Cleopatra, and esteem'd in Court
As one of Counsell, and of chiefest place,
And euer held my credite in that sort.
Tyll now in this confusion of our state,
When thinking to haue vs'd a meane to climbe,
And fled the wretched, slowne vnto the great,
(Follow'ing the fortune of the present time,)
Am come to be cast downe and ruin'd cleene.
And in the course of mine owne plot vndonne.
For hauing all the secretes of the Queene
Reueal'd to Cesar, to haue sauour wonne:
My trechery is quited with disgrace,
My falshood loath'd, and not without great reason
Though good for him, yet Princes in this case
Doe hate ye Traytor, though they loue the treason.
For how could hee imagine I would be
Faithfull to him, being false vnto mine owne?
And false to such a bountious Queene as shee,
That had me rais'd, and made mine honor known.
Hee saw twas not for zeale to him I bare,
But for base feare, or mine owne state to settle.
Weakenes is false, and faith in Cowards rare,
Feare findes out shyfts, timiditie is subtle.
And therefore scornd of him, scornd of mine own.
Hatefull to all that looke into my state:
Despis'd Seleucus now is onely growne
The marke of infamy, that's pointed at.
Tis much thou saist, and ô too much to feele,
And I doe grieue and doe lament thy fall:
But yet all this which thou doost heere reueale,
Cōpar'd with mine, wil make thine seem but smal.
Although my fault be in the selfe-same kind,
Yet in degree far greater, far more hatefull;
Mine sprong of myschiefe, thine from feeble mind,
I staind with blood, thou onely but'vngratefull.
For vnto mee did Cleopatra gyue
The best and deerest treasure of her blood.
Louely Casario, whom shee would should liue
Free from the dangers wherein Egipt stood.
And vnto mee with him this charge she gaue,
Heere Rodon, take, conuay from out thys Coast,
This precious Gem, the chiefest that I haue,
The iewell of my soule I value most.
Guide hym to INDIA, leade him farre from hence,
Safeguard him where secure he may remaine,
Till better fortune call him back from thence,
And Egipts peace be reconcil'd againe.
For this is hee that may our hopes bring back,
(The rysing Sunne of our declyning state:)
These be the hands that may restore our wrack,
And rayse the broken ruines made of late.
Hee may gyue limmits to the boundles pryde
Of fierce Octauius, and abate his might:
Great Iulius of-spring, hee may come to guide
The Empire of the world, as his by right.
O how hee seemes the modell of his Syre?
O how I gaze my Caesar in his face?
Such was his gate, so dyd his lookes aspyre;
Such was his threatning brow, such was his grace.
High shouldred, and his forehead euen as hie.
And ô, (if hee had not beene borne so late,)
He might haue rul'd the worlds great Monarchy,
And nowe haue beene the Champion of our state.
Then vnto him, ô my deere Sonne, (she sayes,)
Sonne of my youth, flye hence, ô flye, be gone:
Reserue thy selfe, ordain'd for better dayes,
For much thou hast to ground thy hopes vppon.
Leaue mee (thy wofull Mother) to endure,
The fury of thys tempest heere alone:
Who cares not for herselfe, so thou be sure,
Thou mayst reuenge, when others can but mone.
Rodon will see thee safe, Rodon will guide
Thee and thy waies, thou shalt not need to feare.
Rodon (my faithfull seruaunt) will prouide
What shall be best for thee, take thou no care.
And ô good Rodon, looke well to his youth,
The wayes are long, and daungers eu'ry where.
I vrge it not that I doe doubt thy truth,
Mothers will cast the worst, and alwaies feare.
The absent daunger greater still appeares,
Lesse feares he, who is neere the thing he feares.
And ô, I know not what presaging thought
My sp'rit suggests of luckles bad euent:
But yet it may be tis but loue doth dote,
Or idle shadowes which my feares present.
But yet the memory of myne owne fate,
Makes mee feare his. And yet why should I feare?
His fortune may recouer better state,
And hee may come in pompe to gouerne heere.
But yet I doubt the Genius of our Race
By some malignant spirit comes ouer-throwne:
Our blood must be extinct, in my disgrace,
Egypt must haue no more Kings of theyr owne.
Then let him stay, and let vs fall together,
Sith it is fore-decreed that we must fal.
Yet who knowes what may come? let him go thither,
What Merchaunt in one Vessell venters all?
Let vs deuide our starrs. Goe, goe my Sonne,
Let not the fate of Egypt find thee heere:
Try if so be thy destiny can shunne
The common wracke of vs, by beeing there.
But who is hee found euer yet defence
Against the heauens, or hyd him any where?
Then what neede I to send thee so far hence
To seeke thy death that mayst as well die heere?
And heere die with thy mother, die in rest,
Not trauayling to what will come to thee.
Why should wee leaue our blood vnto the East,
VVhen Egipt may a Tom be sufficient be?
O my deuided soule, what shall I doe?
VVhereon shall now my resolution rest?
What were I best resolue to yeeld vnto
When both are bad, how shall I know the best?
Stay; I may hap so worke with Caesar now,
That hee may yeeld him to restore thy right.
Goe; Caesar neuer will consent that thou
So neere in blood, shalt bee so great in might.
Then take him Roden, goe my sonne fare-well.
But stay; ther's something els that I would say:
Yet nothing now, but ô God speed thee well,
Least saying more, that more may make thee stay.
Yet let mee speake: It may be tis the last
That euer I shall speake to thee my Sonne.
Doe Mothers vse to parte in such post-hast?
VVhat, must I ende when I haue scarce begun?
Ah no (deere hart,) tis no such slender twine
VVhere-with the knot is tyde twixt thee and mee.
That blood within thy vaines came out of mine,
Parting from thee, I part from part of mee:
And therefore I must speake. Yet what? O sonne.
Here more she wold, whē more she could not say.
Sorrow rebounding backe whence it begun,
Fild vp the passage, and quite stopt the way:
VVhen sweet Caesario with a princely sp'rite,
(Though comfortlesse himselfe) did comfort giue;
VVith mildest words, perswading her to beare it.
And as for him, shee should not neede to grieue.
And I (with protestations of my part,)
Swore by that faith, (which sworne I did deceaue)
That I would vse all care, all wit and arte
To see hym safe; And so we tooke our leaue.
Scarce had wee trauail'd to our iourneyes end,
VVhen Caesar hauing knowledge of our way,
His Agents after vs with speed doth send
To labour mee, Caesario to betray.
VVho-with rewards, and promises so large.
Assaild mee then, that I grew soone content;
And backe to Rhodes dyd reconuay my charge,
Pretending that Octauius for him sent,
To make hym King of Egipt presently.
And thither come, seeing himselfe betrayd,
And in the hands of death through trecherie,
VVayling his state, thus to himselfe he sayd.
Loe heere brought back by subtile traine to death,
Betrayde by Tutors fayth, or Traytors rather:
My faulte my blood, and mine offence my birth,
For beeing sonne of such a mightie Father.
From INDIA, (whither sent by Mothers care,
To be reseru'd from Egypts common wracke,)
To Rhodes, (so long the armes of Tyrants are,)
I am by Caesars subtile reach brought back.
Heere to be made th' oblation for his feares, (him:
Who doubts the poore reuenge these handes may doe
Respecting neyther blood, nor youth, nor yeeres,
Or how small safety can my death be to him.
And is this all the good of beeing borne great?
Then wretched greatnes, proud ritch misery,
Pompous distresse, glittering calamity.
Is it for this th'ambitious Fathers sweat,
To purchase blood and death for them and theirs?
Is this the issue that theyr glories get,
To leaue a sure destruction to theyr heyres?
O how farre better had it beene for mee,
From low discent, deriu'd of humble birth,
To'haue eate the sweet-sowre bread of pouerty,
And drunke of Nilus streame in Nilus earth:
Vnder the cou'ring of some quiet Cottage,
Free from the wrath of heauen, secure in minde,
Vntoucht when sad euents of Princes dotage,
Confounds what euer mighty it dooth find.
And not t'haue stoode in theyr way, whose condition,
Is to haue all made deere, and all thing plaine,
Betweene them and the marke of theyr ambition,
That nothing let the full sight of theyr raigne.
Where nothing stands, that stands not in submission;
Where greatnes must all in it selfe containe.
Kings will be alone, Competitors must downe,
Neere death he stands, that stands too neer a Crowne.
Such is my case, for Caesar will haue all:
My blood must seale th'assurance of his state:
Yet ah weake state that blood assure him shall,
Whose wrongfull shedding, Gods and men do hate.
Iniustice neuer scapes vnpunisht still,
Though men reuenge not, yet the heauens will.
And thou Augustus that with bloody hand,
Curt'st off succession from anothers race,
Maist find the heauens thy vowes so to withstand.
That others may depriue thine in like case.
When rhou maist see thy proude contentious bed
Yeelding thee none of thine that may inherite:
Subuert thy blood, place others in theyr sted,
To pay this thy iniustice her due merite.
If it be true, (as who can that deny
VVhich sacred Priests of Memphis doe fore-say,)
Some of the of-spring yet of Anthony,
Shall all the rule of this whole Empire sway.
And then Augustus, what is it thou gainest
By poore Antillus blood, or this of mine?
Nothing but thys thy victory thou stainest,
And pull'st the wrath of heauen on thee and thine.
In vaine doth man contende against the starrs,
For what hee seekes to make, his wisdom marrs.
Yet in the mean-time we whom Fates reserue,
The bloody sacrifices of ambition,
VVe feele the smart what euer they deserue,
And wee indure the present times condition.
The iustice of the heauens reuenging thus,
Doth onely sacrifice it selfe, not vs.
Yet tis a pleasing comfort that dooth ease
Affliction in so great extreamitie.
To thinke theyr like destruction shall appease
Our ghostes, who did procure our misery.
But dead we are, vncertaine what shall bee,
And lyuing, wee are sure to feele the wrong:
Our certaine ruine wee our selues doe see.
They ioy the while, and wee know not how long.
But yet Caesario, thou must die content,
For men will mone, & God reuenge th'innocent.
Thus he cōplain'd, & thus thou hear'st my shame.
But how hath Caesar now rewarded thee?
As hee hath thee. And I expect the same
As fell to Theodor to fall to mee:
For he (one of my coate) hauing betrayd
The young Antillus, sonne of Anthony,
And at his death from of his necke conuayd
A iewell: which be'ing askt, he did deny:
Caesar occasion tooke to hang him straight.
Such instruments with Princes liue not long.
Although they neede vs, (actors of deceit,)
Yet still our sight seemes to vpbrayd their wrong;
And therefore we must needes this danger runne,
And in the net of our owne guile be caught:
Wee must not liue to bray what we haue done,
For what is done, must not appeare theyr fault.
But heere comes Cleopatra, wofull Queene,
And our shame will not that we should be seene.
WHat, hath my face yet powre to win a Louer?
Can this torne remnant serue to grace me so,
That it can Caesars secrete plots discouer
What he intends with mee and mine to do?
VVhy then poore Beautie thou hast doone thy last,
And best good seruice thou could'st doe vnto mee.
For now the time of death reueal'd thou hast,
Which in my life didst serue but to vndoe mee.
Heere Dolabella far forsooth in loue,
Writes, how that Caesar meanes forthwith, to send
Both mee and mine, th' ayre of Rome to proue:
There his Tryumphant Chariot to attend.
I thanke the man, both for his loue and letter;
Th'one comes fit to warne mee thus before,
But for th'other, I must die his debter,
For Cleopatra now can loue no more.
But hauing leaue, I must goe take my leaue
And last farewell of my dead Anthony:
Whose deerely honour'd Tom be must heere receaue
This sacrifice, the last before I dye.
O sacred euer-memorable Stone,
That hast without my teares, within my flame,
Receiue th'oblation of the wofull'st mone
That euer yet from sad affliction came.
And you deere reliques of my Lord and Loue,
(The sweetest parcells of the faithfull'st liuer,)
O let no impious hand dare to remoue
You out from hence, but rest you heere for euer.
Let Egypt now giue peace vnto you dead,
That lyuing, gaue you trouble and turmoyle:
Sleepe quiet in this euer-lasting bed,
In forraine land preferr'd before your soyle.
And ô, if that the sp'rits of men remaine
After their bodies, and doe neuer die,
Then heare thy Ghost thy captiue Spouse complaine,
And be attentiue to her misery.
But if that laborsome mortalitie,
Found this sweet error, onely to confine
The curious search of idle vanity,
That would the deapth of darknes vndermine:
Or rather, to giue rest vnto the thought
Of wretched man, with th'after-comming ioy
Of those conceiued fieldes whereon we dote,
To pacifie the present worlds anoy.
If it be so, why speake I then to th'ayre?
But tis not so, my Anthony doth heare:
His euer-liuing ghost attends my prayer,
And I doe know his houering sp'rite is neere.
And I will speake, and pray, and mourne to thee,
O pure immortall loue that daign'st to heare:
I feele thou aunswer'st my credulitie
VVith touch of comfort, finding none elswhere.
Thou know'st these hands entomb'd thee heer of late,
Free and vnforst, which now must seruile be,
Reseru'd for bands to grace proude Caesars state,
Who seekes in mee to tryumph ouer thee.
O if in life we could not seuerd be,
Shall Death deuide our bodies now a sunder?
Must thine in Egypt, mine in Italie,
Be kept the Monuments of Fortunes wonder?
If any powres be there where as thou art,
(Sith our owne Country Gods betray our case,)
O worke they may theyr gracious helpe impart,
To saue thy wofull wife from such disgrace.
Doe not permit shee should in tryumph shew
The blush of her reproch, ioyn'd with thy shame:
But (rather) let that hatefull Tyrant know,
That thou and I had powre t'auoyde the same.
But what doe I spend breath and idle winde,
In vaine invoking a conceiued ayde?
Why doe I not my selfe occasion find
To breake the bounds wherein my selfe am stayd?
VVords are for them that can complaine and lyue,
VVhose melting harts compos'd of baser frame,
Can to theyr sorrowes time and leysure gyue,
But Cleopatra may not doe the same.
No Anthony, thy loue requireth more.
A lingring death, with thee deserues no merit,
I must my selfe force open wide a dore
To let out life, and so vnhouse my spirit.
These hands must breake the prison of my soule
To come to thee, there to enioy like state,
As doth the long-pent solitary Foule,
That hath escapt her cage, and found her mate.
This Sacrifice to sacrifize my life,
Is that true incense that doth best beseeme:
These rites may serue a life-desiring wife,
Who dooing them, t'haue done enough doth deeme.
My hart blood should the purple flowers haue beene,
Which heere vpon thy Tombe to thee are offred,
No smoake but dying breath should heere been seene,
And this it had beene to, had I beene suffred.
But what haue I saue these bare hands to doe it?
And these weake fingers are not yron-poynted:
They cannot peirce the flesh be'ing put vnto it,
And I of all meanes els am disapoynted.
But yet I must a way and meanes seeke, how
To come vnto thee, what so ere I doo.
O Death, art thou so hard to come by now,
That wee must pray, intreate, and seeke thee too?
But I will finde thee where so ere thou lye,
For who can stay a minde resolu'd to die?
And now I goe to worke th'effect in deede,
Ile neuer send more words or sighes to thee:
Ile bring my soule my selfe, and that with speed,
My selfe will bring my soule to Anthony.
Come goe my Maydes, my fortunes sole attenders,
That minister to misery and sorrow:
Your Mistres you vnto your freedom renders,
And quits you from all charge yet ere to morrow.
And now by this, I thinke the man I sent,
Is neere return'd that brings mee my dispatch.
God graunt his cunning sort to good euent,
And that his skill may well beguile my watch.
So shall I shun disgrace, leaue to be sorie,
Fly to my loue, scape my foe, free my soule;
So shall I act the last act of my glory,
Dye like a Queene, and rest without controule.
Exit.
MIsterious Egipt, wonder breeder, strict religions strange obseruer,
State-ordrer Zeale, the best rule-keeper, fostring still in temprate feruor:
O how cam'st thou to lose so wholy all religion, law and order?
And thus become the most vnholy of all Lands that Nylus border?
How could confus'd Disorder enter where sterne Law sate so seuerely?
How durst weake lust and ryot venter th' eye of Iustice looking neerely?
Could not those means that made thee great, Be still the meanes to keepe thy state?
Ah no, the course of things requireth change and alteration euer:
That same continuaunce man desireth, th vnconstant world yeeldeth neuer.
Wee in our counsels must be blinded, and not see what dooth import vs:
And often-times the thing least minded, is the thing that most must hurt vs.
Yet they that haue the stearne in guiding, tis their fault that should preuent it,
For oft they seeing their Country slyding, take their ease, as though contented.
Wee imitate the greater powres,
The Princes manners fashion ours.
Th'example of their light regarding, vulgar loosenes much incences:
Vice vncontrould, growes wide inlarging,
Kings small faults, be great offences.
And this hath set the window open vnto lycence, lust and ryot:
This way Confusion first found broken, whereby entred our disquiet.
Those lawes that Zoroaster founded, and the Ptolomies obserued,
Heereby first came to be confounded, which our state so long preserued.
The wanton luxurie of Court,
Dyd forme the people of like sort.
For all (respecting priuate pleasure,) vniuersally consenting
To abuse theyr time, theyr treasure, in theyr owne delights contenting:
And future dangers nought respecting, whereby, (O howe easie matter
Made this so generall neglecting,
Confus'd weakenes to diseater?)
Caesar found th' effect true tryed, in his easie entrance making:
Who at the sight of armes, discryed all our people, all forsaking.
For ryot (worse then warre,) so sore
Had wasted all our strength before.
And thus is Egipt seruile rendred, to the insolent destroyer:
And all their sumptuous treasure tendred, all her wealth that did betray her.
Which poyson (O if heauens be rightfull,) may so far infect their sences,
That Egipts pleasures so delightfull, may breed them the like offences.
And Romans learne our way of weaknes, be instructed in our vices:
That our spoyles may spoyle your greatnes, ouercome with our deuises.
Fill full your hands, and carry home Inough from vs to ruine Rome.
COme tell mee Titius eu'ry circumstaunce
How Cleopatra did receiue my newes:
Tell eu'ry looke, each gesture, countenaunce,
That shee did in my Letters reading vse.
I shall my Lord so farre as I could note,
Or my conceite obserue in any wise.
It was the time when as shee hauing got
Leaue to her Deerest dead to sacrifize;
And now was issuing out the Monument,
With Odors, Incense, Garlands in her hand,
When I approcht (as one from Caesar sent,)
And did her close thy message t'vnderstand.
Shee turnes her backe, and with her takes mee in,
Reades in thy lynes thy strange vnlookt for tale:
And reades, and smyles, and stayes, and doth begin
Againe to reade, then blusht, and then was pale.
And hauing ended with a sigh, refoldes
Thy Letter vp: and with a fixed eye,
(Which stedfast her imagination holds)
Shee mus'd a while, standing confusedly.
At length. Ah friend, (saith shee,) tell thy good Lord,
How deere I hold his pittying of my case:
That out of his sweet nature can afford,
A miserable woman so much grace.
Tell him how much my heauy soule doth grieue
Mercilesse Caesar should so deale with mee:
Pray him that he would all the counsell giue,
That might diuert him from such crueltie.
As for my loue, say Anthony hath all,
Say that my hart is gone into the graue
With him, in whom it rests and euer shall:
I haue it not my selfe, nor cannot haue.
Yet tell him, he shall more commaund of mee
Then any, whosoeuer lyuing, can.
Hee that so friendly shewes himselfe to be
A right kind Roman, and a Gentleman.
Although his Nation (fatall vnto mee,)
Haue had mine age a spoyle, my youth a pray,
Yet his affection must accepted be,
That fauours one distrest in such decay.
Ah, hee was worthy then to haue been lou'd,
Of Cleopatra whiles her glory lasted;
Before shee had declyning fortune prou'd,
Or scene her honor wrackt, her flower blasted.
Now there is nothing left her but disgrace,
Nothing but her affliction that can moue:
Tell Dolabella, one that's in her case,
(Poore soule,) needes rather pitty now then loue.
But shortly shall thy Lord heare more of mee.
And ending so her speech, no longer stayd,
But hasted to the Tombe of Anthony.
And this was all shee did, and all shee said.
Ah sweet distressed Lady. What hard hart
Could chuse but pitty thee, and loue thee too?
Thy worthines, the state wherein thou art
Requireth both, and both I vow to doo.
Although ambition lets not Caesar see
The wrong hee doth thy Maiestie and sweetnes,
VVhich makes him now exact so much of thee,
To add vnto his pride, to grace his greatnes.
Hee knowes thou canst no hurt procure vs now,
Sith all thy strength is ceaz'd into our hands:
Nor feares hee that, but rather labours how
Hee might shew Rome so great a Queene in bands.
That our great Ladies (enuying thee so much
That stain'd thē all, & hell'd them in such wonder,)
Might ioy to see thee, and thy fortune such,
Thereby extolling him that brought thee vnder.
But I will seeke to stay it what I may;
I am but one, yet one that Caesar loues,
And ô if now I could doe more then pray,
Then should'st yu know how far affection moues.
But what my powre and prayer may preuaile,
Ile ioyne them both, to hinder thy disgrace:
And euen this present day I will not fayle
To doe my best with Caesar in this case.
And Sir, euen now her selfe hath Letters sent,
I met her messenger as I came hither,
With a dispatch as hee to Caesar went,
But knowes not what imports her sending thither.
Yet this hee told, how Cleopatra late
Was come from sacrifice. How ritchly clad
VVas seru'd to dinner in most sumptuous state,
VVith all the brauest ornaments shee had.
How hauing dyn'd, shee writes, and sends away
Him straight to Caesar, and commaunded than
All should depart the Tombe, and none to stay
But her two maides, and one poore Countryman.
Why then I know, she sends t'haue audience now,
And meanes t'experience what her state can doe:
To see if Maiestie will make him bow
To what affliction could not moue him to.
And ô, if now shee could but bring a view
Of that fresh beauty shee in youth possest,
(The argument where-with shee ouer-threw
The wit of Iulius Caesar, and the rest,)
Then happily Augustus might relent,
Whilst powrefull Loue, (far stronger thē ambition)
Might worke in him, a mind to be content
To graunt her asking, in the best condition.
But beeing as shee is, yet doth she merite
To be respected, for what shee hath been:
The wonder of her kinde, of rarest spirit,
A glorious Lady, and a mighty Queene.
And now, but by a little weakenes falling
To doe that which perhaps sh'was forst to doe:
Alas, an error past, is past recalling,
Take away weakenes, and take wemen too.
But now I goe to be thy Aduocate,
Sweet Cleopatra, now Ile vse mine arte.
Thy presence will mee greatly animate,
Thy face will teach my tongue, thy loue my hart.
AM I ordaind the carefull Messenger,
And sad newes-bringer of the strangest death,
VVhich selfe hand did vpon it selfe infer,
To free a captiue soule from seruile breath?
Must I the lamentable wonder shew,
VVhich all the world must grieue and meruaile at?
The rarest forme of death in earth below,
That euer pitty, glory, wonder gat.
What newes bring'st yu, can Egipt yet yeeld more
Of sorrow then it hath? what can it add
To th'already ouer-flowing store
Of sad affliction, matter yet more sad?
Haue wee not seene the worst of our calamitie?
Is there behind yet something of distresse
Vnseene, vnknowne? Tell if that greater misery
There be, that we waile not that which is lesse.
Tell vs what so it be, and tell at fyrst,
For sorrow euer longs to heare her worst.
VVell then, the strangest thing relate I will,
That euer eye of mortall man hath seene.
I (as you know) euen from my youth, haue stil
Attended on the person of the Queene.
And euer in all fortunes good or ill,
With her as one of chiefest trust haue beene.
And now in these so great extreamities,
That euer could to Maiestie befall,
I did my best in what I could deuise,
And left her not, till now shee left vs all.
VVhat is shee gone. Hath Caesar forst her so?
Yea, shee is gone, and hath deceiu'd him to.
What, fled to INDIA, to goe find her sonne?
No, not to INDIA, but to find her sonne.
Why thē there's hope she may her state recouer.
Her state? nay rather honor, and her Louer.
Her Louer? him shee cannot haue againe.
VVell, him shee hath, w him she doth remaine.
Why thē she's dead. Ist so? why speak'st not thou?
You gesse aright, and I will tell you how.
Whē she perceiu'd al hope was cleane berest her,
That Caesar meant to send her straight away,
And saw no meanes of reconcilement left her,
VVork what she could, she could not work to stay.
Shee calls mee to her, and she thus began.
O thou whose trust hath euer beene the same
And one in all my fortunes, faithfull man,
Alone content t'attend disgrace and shame.
Thou, whom the fearefull ruine of my fall,
Neuer deterrd to leaue calamitie:
As did those other smooth state-pleasers all,
VVho followed but my fortune, and not me.
Tis thou must doe a seruice for thy Queene,
VVherein thy faith and skill must doe their best:
Thy honest care and duty shall be seene
Performing this, more then in all the rest.
For all what thou hast done, may die with thee,
Although tis pitty that such faith should die.
But this shall euer-more remembred be,
A rare example to posterity.
And looke how long as Cleopatra shall
In after ages liue in memory,
So long shall thy cleere fame endure withall,
And therefore thou must not my sute deny;
Nor contradict my will. For what I will
I am resolu'd: and this tis thou must doe mee:
Goe finde mee out with all thy arte and skill
To Aspicqs, and conuay them close vnto mee.
I haue a worke to doe with them in hand,
Enquire not what, for thou shalt soone see what,
If the heauens doe not my disseignes withstand,
But doe thy charge, and let mee shyft with that.
Beeing thus coniur'd, by her t'whom I'had vow'd
My true perpetuall seruice, forth I went,
Deuising how my close attempt to shrowde,
So that there might no arte my arte preuent.
And so disguis'd in habite as you see,
Hauing foūnd out the thing for which I went,
I soone return'd againe, and brought with mee
The Aspicqs, in a basket closely pent.
Which I had fill'd with figges, and leaues vpon.
And comming to the Guarde that kept the dore,
What hast thou there? said they, and lookt thereon.
Seeing the figgs, they deem'd of nothing more,
But sayd, they were the fairest they had seene.
Taste some, said I, for they are good and pleasant.
No, no, sayd they, goe beare them to thy Queene.
Thinking mee some poore man yt brought a Present.
Well, in I went, where brighter then the Sunne,
Glittering in all her pompous ritch aray,
Great Cleopatra sate; as if she'had wonne
Caesar and all the world beside this day.
Euen as shee was when on thy cristall streames,
O CYDNOS shee did shew what earth could shew.
VVhen Asia all amaz'd in wonder, deemes
VENVS from heauen was come on earth below.
Euen as shee went at first to meete her Loue,
So goes shee now at last againe to finde him.
But that first, did her greatnes onely proue.
This last her loue, that could not liue behind him.
Yet as shee sate, the doubt of my good speed,
Detracts much from the sweetnes of her looke:
Cheere-marrer Care, did then such passions breed,
That made her eye bewray the care shee tooke.
But shee no sooner sees mee in the place,
But straight her sorrow-clowded brow shee cleeres,
Lightning a smile from out a stormy face,
Which all her tempest-beaten sences cheeres.
Looke how a stray'd perplexed trauailer,
When chas'd by thieues, and euen at poynt of taking,
Discrying suddainly some towne not far,
Or some vnlookt-for ayde to him-ward making;
Cheeres vp his tired sp'rits, thrusts forth his strength
To meete that good, that comes in so good houre:
Such was her ioy, perceiuing now at length,
Her honor was t'escape so proude a powre.
Foorth from her seate shee hastes to meet the present,
And as one ouer-ioyd, shee caught it straight.
And with a smyling cheere in action pleasant,
Looking among the figges, findes the deceite.
And seeing there the vgly venemous beast,
Nothing dismayde, shee stayes and viewes it well.
At length, th'extreamest of her passion ceast,
VVhen shee began with words her ioy to tell.
O rarest Beast (sayth shee) that Affrick breedes,
How deerely welcome art thou vnto mee?
The fayrest creature that faire Nylus feedes
Mee thinks I see, in now beholding thee.
VVhat though the euer-erring world doth deeme
That angred Nature fram'd thee but in spight:
Little they know what they so light esteeme,
That neuer learn'd the wonder of thy might.
Better then Death, Deathes office thou dischargest,
That with one gentle touch canst free our breath:
And in a pleasing sleepe our soule inlargest,
Making our selues not priuie to our death.
If Nature err'd, ô then how happy error,
Thinking to make thee worst, shee made thee best:
Sith thou best freest vs from our liues worst terror,
In sweetly bringing soules to quiet rest.
VVhen that inexorable Monster Death
That followes Fortune, flyes the poore distressed,
Tortures our bodies ere hee takes our breath,
And loades with paines th'already weake oppressed.
How oft haue I begg'd, prayd, intreated him
To take my life, and yet could neuer get him?
And when he comes, he comes so vgly grim,
That who is he (if he could chuse) would let him?
Therefore come thou, of wonders wonder chiefe,
That open canst with such an easie key
The dore of life, come gentle cunning thiefe,
That from our selues so steal'st our selues away.
VVell did our Priests discerne something diuine
Shadow'd in thee, and therefore first they did
Offrings and worshyps due to thee assigne,
In whom they found such misteries were hid.
Comparing thy sweet motion to the Sunne,
That mou'st without the instruments that moue:
And neuer waxing old, but alwaies one,
Doost sure thy strange diuinitie approue.
And therefore to, the rather vnto thee
In zeale I make the offring of my blood,
Calamitie confirming now in mee
A sure beliefe that pietie makes good.
Which happy men neglect, or hold ambiguous,
And onely the afflicted are religious.
And heere I sacrifize these armes to Death,
That Lust late dedicated to Delights:
Offling vp for my last, this last of breath,
The complement of my loues deerest rites.
With that shee bares her arme, and offer makes
To touch her death, yet at the touch with-drawes,
And seeming more to speake, occasion takes,
Willing to die, and willing to to pause.
Looke how a Mother at her sonnes departing
For some far voyage, bent to get him fame,
Doth intertaine him with an idle parling.
And still doth speake, and still speakes but the same;
Now bids farewell, and now recalls him back,
Tells what was told, and bids againe fare-well,
And yet againe recalls; for still doth lack
Something that loue would faine and cannot tell.
Pleas'd hee should goe, yet cannot let him goe.
So shee, although shee knew there was no way
But this, yet this shee could not handle so
But shee must shew that life desir'd delay.
Faine would shee entertaine the time as now,
And now would faine yt Death would seaze vpō her.
Whilst I might see presented in her brow,
The doubtfull combat tryde twixt Life and Honor.
Life bringing Legions of fresh hopes with her,
Arm'd with the proose of Time, which yeelds we say
Comfort and Help, to such as doe refer
All vnto him, and can admit delay.
But Honor scorning Life, loe forth leades he
Bright Immortalitie in shyning armour:
Thorow the rayes of whose cleere glory, shee
Might see Lifes basenes, how much it might harm her.
Besides, shee saw whole Armies of Reproches,
And base Disgraces, Furies fearefull sad,
Marching with Life, and Shame that still incroches
Vppon her face, in bloody collours clad.
Which representments seeing worse then death
Shee deem'd to yeeld to Life, and therfore chose
To render all to Honour, hart and breath;
And that with speede, least that her inward foes
False flesh and blood, ioyning with lyfe and hope,
Should mutinie againsther resolution.
And to the end shee would not giue them scope,
Shee presently proceeds to th'execution.
And sharply blaming of her rebell powres,
False flesh, (sayth shee,) and what dost thou cōspire
With Caesar to, as thou wert none of ours,
To worke my shame, and hinder my desire?
Wilt thou retaine in closure of thy vaines,
That enemy Base life, to let my good?
No, know there is a greater powre constraines
Then can be countercheckt with fearefull blood.
For to the minde that's great, nothing seemes great.
And seeing death to be the last of woes,
And life lasting disgrace, which I shall get,
What doe I lose, that haue but life to lose?
This hauing said, strengthned in her owne hart,
And vnion of her selfe sences in one
Charging together, shee performes that part
That hath so great a part of glory wonne.
And so receiues the deadly poysning touch.
That touch that tryde the gold of her loue pure,
And hath confirm'd her honor to be such,
As must a wonder to all worlds endure.
Now not an yeelding shrinke or touch of feare.
Consented to bewray least sence of paine:
But still in one same sweete vnaltred cheere,
Her honor did her dying thoughts retaine.
Well, now this work is done (saith she,) here ends
This act of life, that part of Fates assign'd mee:
What glory or disgrace heere this world lends,
Both haue I had, and both I leaue behinde mee.
And now ô Earth, the Theater where I
Haue acted this, witnes I dye vnforst.
Witnes my soule parts free to Anthony,
And now proude Tyrant Caesar doe thy worst.
This sayd, shee stayes, and makes a suddaine pause,
As twere to feele whither the poyson wrought:
Or rather els the working might be cause
That made her stay, as likewise may be thought.
For in that instant I might well perceiue,
The drowsie humor in her falling brow:
And how each powre, each part opprest did leaue
Theyr former office, and did sencelesse grow.
Looke how a new-pluckt branch against the Sunne,
Declynes his fading leaues in feeble sort,
So her disioyned ioyntures as vndonne.
Let fall her weake dissolued limmes support.
Yet loe that face the wonder of her life,
Retaines in death, a grace that graceth death,
Couller so liuely, cheere so louely rife,
That none wold think such beauty could want breath.
And in that cheere, th'impression of a smile
Did seeme to shew shee scorned Death and Caesar,
As glorying that shee could them both beguile,
And telling death how much her death did please her.
VVonder it was to see how soone shee went,
Shee went with such a will, and did so haste it,
That sure I thinke shee did her paine preuent,
Fore-going paine, or staying not to taste it.
And sencelesse, in her sinking downe shee wryes
The Diadem which on her head shee wore,
Which Charmion (poore weake feeble mayd) espyes,
And hastes to right it as it was before.
For Eras now was dead, and Charmion too
Euen at the poynt, for both would imitate
Theyr Mistres glory, striuing like to doo.
But Charmion would in this exceede her mate,
For shee would haue this honour to be last,
That should adorne that head that must be seene
To weare a Crowne in death, that life held fast,
That all the world might know shee dyde a Queene.
And as shee stood setting if fitly on,
Lo in rush Caesars Messengers in haste,
Thinking to haue preuented what was doone,
But yet they came too late, for all was past.
For there they found stretch'd on a bed of gold,
Dead Cleopatra, and that proudly dead,
In all the riche attyre procure shee could,
And dying Charmion trymming of her head.
And Eras at her feete, dead in like case.
Charmion, is this well doone? said one of them.
Yea, well sayd shee, and her that from the race
Of so great Kings discends, doth best become.
And with that word, yeelds too her faithful breath,
To passe th'assurance of her loue with death.
But how knew Caesar of her close intent?
By Letters which before to him shee sent.
For when shee had procur'd this meanes to die,
Shee writes, and earnestly intreates, shee might
Be buried in one Tombe with Anthony.
Whereby then Caesar gess'd all went not right.
And forth-with sends, yet ere the message came
Shee was dispatcht, he crost in his intent,
Her prouidence had ordred so the same
That shee was sure none should her plot preuent.
THen thus we haue beheld
Th'accomplishment of woes,
The full of rutne, and
The worst of worst of ills.
And seene all hope expeld,
That euer sweet repose
Shall re-possess: the Land
That Desolations fills,
And where Ambition spills
With vncontrouled hand,
All th'issue of all those,
That so long rule haue hell'd:
To make vs no more vs,
But cleane confound vs thus.
And canst O Nylus thou,
Father of floods indure,
That yellow Tyber should
With sandy streames rule thee?
Wilt thou be pleas'd to bow
To him those feete so pure,
Whose vnknowne head we hold
A powre diuine to bee?
Thou that didst euer see
Thy free banks vncontroul'd
Liue vnder thine owne care:
Ah wilt thou beare it now?
And now wilt yeeld thy streams
A pray to other Reames?
Draw backe thy waters floe
To thy concealed head:
Rockes strangle vp thy waues,
Stop Cataractes thy fall.
And turne thy courses so,
That sandy Dezarts dead,
(The world of dust that craues
To swallow thee vp all,)
May drinke so much as shall
Reuiue from vastie graues
A lyuing greene, which spredd
Far florshing, may gro
On that wide face of Death.
Where nothing now drawes breath.
Fatten somepeople there,
Euen as thou vs hast doone,
With plenties wanton store,
And feeble luxurie:
And them as vs prepare
Fit for the day of mone
Respected not before.
Leaue leuell'd Egipt dry,
A barraine pray to lye,
Wasted for euer-more.
Of plenties yeelding none
To recompence the care
Of Victors greedy lust,
And bring forth nought but dust.
And so O leaue to bee,
Sith thou art what thou art:
Let not our race possess
Th'inheritance of shame,
The see of sin, that wee
Haue left them for theyr part:
The yoke of whose distress
Must still vpbraid our blame,
Telling from whom it came.
Our weight of wantonnes,
Lyes heauy on their hart,
Who neuer-more shall see
The glory of that worth
They left who brought vs forth.
O thou all seeing light,
High President of heauen,
You Magistrates the starres
Of that eternall court
Of Prouidence and Right,
Are these the bounds y'haue giuen
Th'vntr anspassable barres,
That limit pride so short,
Is greatnes of this sort,
That greatnes greatnes marres,
And wracks it selfe, selfe driuen
On Rocks of her owne might?
Doth Order order so
Disorders ouer-thro?