I Wonder how the king eſcapt our hands.
Whilſt we purſude the horſemen of the North,
He ſlilie ſtole awaie and left his men:
Whereat the great Lord of Northumland,
Whoſe warlike eares could neuer brooke retrait,
Chargde our maine battels front, and therewith him
Lord Stafford and Lord Clifford all abrſt
Brake in and were by the hands o common Souldiers slain.
Lord Staffords father Duke of Buckhingham,
Is either ſlaine or wounded dangerouſlie,
I cleft his Beuer with a downe right blow:
Father that this is true behold his bloud.
And brother heeres the Earle of Wiltſhires
Bloud, whom I encountred as the battailes iod.
Speake thou for me and tell them what I did.
What is your grace dead my L▪ of Summerſet?
Such hope haue all the line of Iohn of Ga .
Thus doe I hope to ſhape king Henries head.
And ſo do I victorius prince of Yorke,
Before I ſee thee ſeated in that throne
Which now the houſe of Lancaſter vſurpes,
I vow by heauens theſe eies ſhal neuer cloſe.
This is the pallace of that fearefull king,
And that the regall chaire? Poſſeſſe it Yorke:
For this is thine and not king Henries heires.
Aſſiſt me then ſweet Warwike, and I wil:
For hither are we broken in by force.
Weele all aſſiſt thee, and he that flies ſhall die.
Thanks gentle Norffolke. Staie by me my Lords,
and ſouldiers ſtaie you heere and lodge this night:
And when the king comes offer him no
Violence, vnleſſe he ſeek to put vs out by force.
Armde as we be, lets ſtaie within this houſe?
The bloudie parlement ſhall this be calde,
Vnl e Plantagenet Duke of Yorke be king
And baſhfull Henrie be depoſde, whoſe cowardiſe
Hath made vs by words to our enemies.
Then leaue me not my Lords: for now I meane
To take poſſeſſion of my right.
Neither the king, nor him that loues him beſt,
The proudeſt burd that holds vp Lancaſter.
Dares ſtirre a wing if Warwike ſhake his bels.
Ile plant Plantagenet: and root him out who dares?
Reſolue thee Richard: Claime the Engliſh crowne.
Looke Lordings where the ſturdy rebel ſits,
Euen in the chaire of ſtate: belike he meanes
Backt by the power of Warwike that falſe peere,
To aſpire vnto the crowne, and raigne as king.
Earle of Northumberland▪ he ſlew thy father.
And thine Clifford: and you both haue vow'd reuenge,
On him, his ſonnes, his fauorites, and his friends.
And if I be not, heauens be reuengd on me.
The hope thereof, makes Clifford mourn in ſteel.
What? ſhall we ſuffer this, lets pull him downe.
My hart for anger breakes, I cannot ſpeake.
Be patient gentle Earle of Weſtmerland.
Patience is for pultrouns ſuch as he
He durſt not ſit there had your father liu'd?
My gratious Lord: here in the Parlement,
Let vs aſſaile the familie of Yorke.
Well haſt thou ſpoken coſen, be it ſo.
O know you not the Cittie fauours them,
And they haue troopes of ſoldiers at their becke?
But when the D. is ſlaine, theile quicklie ſlie.
Far be it from the thoughtes of Henries hart,
To make a ſhambles of the parlement houſe.
Coſ of Exeter, words, frownes, and threats,
Shall be the warres that Henrie meanes to vſe.
Thou factious duke of Yorke, deſcend my throne,
I am thy ſoueraigne.
Thou art deceiu'd: I am thine.
For ſhame come downe he made thee D. of York.
Twas mine inheritance as the kingdome is.
Thy father was a traytor to the crowne.
Exeter thou art a traitor to the crowne.
In following this vſurping Henry.
Whom ſhould he follow but his naturall king.
Tue Clif and that is Richard Duke of Yorke.
And ſhall I ſtande while thou ſitteſt in my throne?
Content thy ſelfe it muſt and ſhall be ſo.
Be Duke of Lancaſter, let him be king.
Why? he is both king & Duke of Lancaſter,
And that the Earle of Weſtmerland ſhall mainetaine.
And Warwike ſhall diſproue it. You forget
That we are thoſe that chaſte you from the field
And ſlew your father, and with colours ſpred,
Marcht through the Cittie to the pallas gates.
No Warwike I remember it to my griefe,
And by his ſoule thou and thy houſe ſhall rew it.
Plantagenet of thee and of thy ſonnes,
Thy kinſmen and thy friendes, Ile haue more liues,
Then drops of bloud were in my fathers vaines.
Vrge it no more, leaſt in reuenge thereof,
I ſend thee Warwike ſuch a meſſenger,
As ſhall reueng his death before I ſtirre.
Poore Clifford, how I skorn thy worthles threats
Wil ye we ſhew our title to the crowne,
Or elſe our ſwords ſhall plead it in the field?
What title haſte thou traitor to the Crowne?
Thy father was as thou art Duke of Yorke,
Thy grandfather Roger Mortmer earle of March,
I am the ſonne of Henrie the Fift who tamde the French,
And made the Dolphin ſtoope, and ſeazd vpon their
Townes and prouinces.
Talke not of France ſince thou haſt loſt it all.
he Lord protector loſt it and not I,
When I was crownd I was but nine months old.
You are olde enough now and yet me thinkes you loſe,
Father teare the Crowne from the Vſurpers head▪
Do ſo ſweet father, ſet it on your head.
Good brother as thou lou'ſt & honorſt armes,
Lets fight it out and not ſtand cauilling thus.
Sound drums and trumpets & the king will ſly.
Peace ſonnes:
Peace thou and giue king Henry leaue to ſpeake.
Ah Plantagenet, why ſeekeſt thou to depoſe me?
Are we not both both Plantagenets by birth,
And from two brothers line allie diſcent?
Suppoſe by right and equitie thou be king,
Thinkſt thou that I will leaue my kinglie ſeate
Wheren my father and my grandſire ſat?
No, firſt ſhall warre vnpeople this my realme,
I and our colours often borne in France,
And now in England to our harts great ſorrow
Shall be my winding ſheete, why ſaint you Lords?
My titles better farre than his.
Proue it Henrie and thou ſhalt be king?
Why Henrie the fourth by conqueſt got the Crowne.
T'was by rebellion gainſt his ſoueraigne.
I know not what to ſaie my titles weake,
Tell me maie not a king adopt an heire?
What then?
Then am I lawfull king For Richard
The ſecond in the view of maine Lords
Reſignde the Crowne to Henrie the fourth,
Whoſe heire my Father was, and I am his.
I tell thee he roſe againſt him being his
Soueraigne, & made him to reſigne the crown perforce.
Suppoſe my Lord he did it vnconſtrainde,
Thinke you that were preiudiciall to the Crowne?
No▪ for he could not ſo reſigne the Crowne,
But that the next heire muſt ſucceed and raigne.
Art thou againſt vs, Duke of Exceter?
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.
All will reuolt from me and turne to him.
Plantagenet for all the claime thou laiſt,
Thinke not king Henry ſhall be thus depoſde?
Depoſde he ſhall be in deſpight of thee.
Tuſh Warwike, Thou art deceiued? tis not thy
Southerne powers of Eſſex, Suffolke, Norffolke, and of
Kent that makes thee thus preſumptuous and proud,
Can ſet the Duke vp in deſpight of me.
King Henrie be thy title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vowes to fight in thy defence.
Maie that ground gape and ſwallow me aliue,
Where I do kneele to him that ſlew my father.
O Clifford, how thy words reiue my ſoule.
Henry of Lancaſter reſigne thy crowne.
What mutter you? or what conſpire you Lords?
Doe right vnto this princelie Duke of Yorke,
Or I will fill the houſe with armed men,
And ouer the chaire of ſtate where now he ſits,
Wright vp his title with thy vſurping bloud.
O Warwike, heare me ſpeake.
Let me but raigne in quiet whilſt I liue,
Confirme the crowne to me and to mine heires
And thou ſhalt raigne in quiet whilſt thou hu'ſt.
Conuey the ſouldiers hence, and then I will.
Captaine conduct them into Thill fieldes.
What wrong is this vnto the Prince your ſon?
What good is this for England and himſelfe?
Baſe, fearefull, and deſpairing Henry.
How haſt thou wronged both thy ſelfe and vs?
I cannot ſtaie to heare theſe Articles.
Nor I, Come coſen lets go tell the Queene.
Be thou a praie vnto the houſe of Yorke,
And die in bands for this vnkingly deed.
In dreadfull warre maiſt thou be ouercome,
Or liue in peace abandon'd and deſpiſde.
They ſeeke reuenge, and therefore will not yeeld my Lord.
Ah Exeter?
Why ſhould you ſigh my Lord?
Not for my ſelfe Lord Warwike, but my ſoone,
Whom I vnnaturallie ſhall diſinherit.
But be it as it maie: I heere intaile the Crowne
To thee and to thine heires, conditionallie,
That here thou take thine oath, to ceaſe theſe ciuill
Broiles, and whilſt I liue to honour me as thy king and Soueraigne.
That oath I willinglie take and will performe.
Long liue king Henry. Plantagenet embrace him?
And long liue thou and all thy forward ſonnes.
Now Yorke and Lancaſter are reconcilde.
Accuiſt be he that ſeekes to make them ſoes,
My Lord Ile take my leaue, for Ile to Wakefield
To my caſtell.
Exit Yorke and his ſonnes.
And Ile keepe London with my ſouldiers.
And Ile to Norffolke with my followers.
And I to the ſea from whence I came.
My Lord here comes the Queen, Ile ſteale away.
And ſo will I.
Naie ſtaie, or elſe I follow thee.
Be patient gentle Queene, and then Ile ſtaie.
What patience can there? ah timerous man,
Thou haſt vndoone thy ſelfe, thy ſonne, and me,
And giuen our rights vnto the houſe of Yorke.
Art thou a king and wilt be orſt to yeeld?
Had I beene there, the ſouldiers ſhould haue toſt
Me on their launces points, before I would haue
Granted to their wils. The Duke is made
Protector of the land: Sterne Fawconbridge
Commands the narrow ſeas. And thinkſt thou then
To ſleepe ſecure? I heere diuorce me Henry
From thy bed, vntll that Act of Parlement
Be recalde, wherein thou yeeldeſt to the houſe of Yorke.
The Northen Lords that haue forſworne thy colours,
Will follow mine if once they ſee them ſpred,
And ſpread they ſhall vnto thy deepe diſgrace.
Come ſonne, lets awaie and leaue him heere alone.
Staie gentle Margaret, and here me ſpeake.
Thou haſt ſpoke too much alreadie, therefore be ſtill.
Gentle ſonne Edwarde, wilt thou ſtaie with me?
I, to be murdred by his enemies.
When I returne with victorie from the field,
Ile ſee your Grace, till then Ile follow her.
Poore Queene, her loue to me and to the prince Her ſonne,
Makes hir in thus forget hir ſelfe.
Reuenged maie ſhe be on that accurſed Duke.
Come coſen of Exeter, ſtaie thou here,
For Clifford and thoſe Northern Lords be gone
I feare towards Wakefield, to diſturbe the Duke.
Brother and coſen Montague, giue mee leaue to speake.
Nay, I can better plaie the Orator.
But I haue reaſons ſtrong and forceable.
Howe nowe ſonnes what at a iarre amongſt your ſelues?
No father, but a ſweete contention, about that which concernes your ſelfe and vs, The crowne of England father.
The crowne boy, why Henries yet aliue,
And I haue ſworne that he ſhall raigne in quiet till
His death.
But I would breake an hundred othes to raigne one yeare.
And if it pleaſe your grace to giue me leaue,
Ile ſhew your grace the waie to ſaue your oath,
And diſpoſſeſſe king Henrie from the crowne.
I prethe Dicke let me heare thy deuiſe.
Then thus my Lord. An oath is of no moment
Being not ſworne before a lawfull magiſtrate.
Henry is none but doth vſurpe your right,
And yet your grace ſtands bound to him by oath.
Then noble father reſolue your ſelfe,
And once more claime the crowne.
I, ſaiſt thou ſo boie▪ why then it ſhall be ſo.
I am reſolude to win the crowne, or die.
Edward, thou ſhalt to Edmund Brooke Lord Cobham,
With vvhom the Kentiſhmen vvill vvillinglie riſe:
Thou coſen Montague, ſhalt to Norffolke ſtraight,
And bid the Duke to muſter vppe his ſouldiers,
And come to me to Wakefield preſentlie.
And Richard thou to London ſtrait ſhalt poſt,
And bid Richard Neuill Earle of Warwike
To leaue the cittie, and with his men of warre,
To meete me at Saint Albons ten daies hence.
My ſelfe heere in Sandall caſtell will prouide
Both men and monie to furder our attempts.
Now, what newes?
My Lord, the Queene with thirtie thouſand men,
Accompanied with the Earles of Cumberland,
Nrthumberland and Weſtmerland, and others of the
Houſe of Lancaſter, are marching towards Wakefield,
To beſiedge you in your caſtell heere.
A Gods name, let them come. Coſen Montague poſt you hence: and boies ſtaie you with me.
Sir Iohn and ſir Hugh Mortemers mine vncles,
Your welcome to Sandall in an happie houre,
The armie of the Queene meanes to beſiedge vs.
Shee ſhall not neede my Lorde, weele meete her in the field.
What with fiue thouſand ſouldiers vncle?
I father, with fiue hundred for a need,
A womans generall, what ſhould you feare?
Indeed, manie braue battels haue I woon
In Normandie, when as the enimie
Hath bin ten to one▪ and why ſhould I now doubt
Of the like ſucceſſe? I am reſolu'd Come lets goe.
Lets martch awaie, I heare their drums.
Oh flie my Lord, lets leaue the Caſtell,
And flie to Wakefield ſtraight.
O Tutor, looke where bloudie Clifford comes.
Chaplin awaie, thy Prieſthood ſaues thy life,
As for the brat of that accurſed Duke
Whoſe father ſlew my father, he ſhall die.
Oh Clifford ſpare this tender Lord, leaſt
Heauen reuenge it on thy head: Oh ſaue his life.
Soldiers awaie and drag him hence perforce:
Awaie with the villaine.
How now, what dead alreadie? or is it feare that
Makes him cloſe his eies? Ile open them.
So lookes the pent vp Lion on the lambe,
And ſo he walkes inſulting ouer his praie,
And ſo he turnes againe to rend his limmes in ſunder,
Oh Clifford, kill me with thy ſword, and
Not with ſuch a cruell threatning looke,
I am too meane a ſubiect for thy wrath,
Be thou reuengde on men, and let me liue.
In vaine thou ſpeakeſt poore boy: my fathers
Bloud hath ſtopt the paſſage where thy wordes ſhoulde enter.
Then let my fathers blood ope it againe? he is a Man, and Clifford cope with him.
Had I thy brethren here, their liues and thine
Were not reuenge ſufficient for me.
Or ſhould I dig vp thy forefathers graues,
And hang their rotten coffins vp in chaines,
It could not ſlake mine ire, nor caſe my hart.
The ſight of anie of the houſe of Yorke,
Is as a furie to torment my ſoule.
Therefore till I root out that curſſed line
And leaue not one on earth, I le liue in hell therefore.
Oh let me praie, before I take my death.
To thee I praie: Sweet Clifford pittie me.
I, ſuch pitti s my rapiers point affords.
I neuer did thee hurt, wherefore wilt thou kill mee?
Thy father hath.
But twas ere I was borne▪
Thou haſt one ſonne, for his ſake pittie me,
Leaſt in reuenge thereof, God is iuſt▪
He be as miſerablie ſlaine as I.
Oh, let me liue in priſon all my daies,
And when I giue occaſion of offence,
Then let me die, for now thou haſt no cauſe.
No cauſe? Thy Father ſlew my father, therefore Die.
Plantagenet I come Plantagenet,
And this thy ſonnes bloud cleauing to my blade,
Shall ruſt vpon my weapon, till thy bloud
Congeald with his, doe make me wipe off both.
Ah Yorke, poſt to thy caſtell, ſaue thy life,
The goale is loſt thou houſe of Lancaſter,
Thriſe happie chance is it for thee and thine,
That heauen abridgde my daies and cals me hence,
But God knowes what chance hath betide my ſonnes:
But this I know they haue demeand themſelues,
Like men borne to renowne by life or death:
Three times this daie came Richard to my ſight,
And cried courage Father: Victorie or death.
And twiſe ſo oft came Edward to my view,
With purple Faulchen painted to the hilts,
In bloud of thoſe whom he had ſlaghtered.
Oh harke, I heare the drums? No waie to flie:
No waie to ſaue my life? And heere I ſtaie:
And heere my life muſt end.
Come bloudie Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchleſſe rie to more bloud:
This is the But, and this abides your ſhot.
Yeeld to our mercies proud Plantagenet.
I, to ſuch mercie as his ruthfull arme
With downe right paiment lent vnto my father,
Now Phaeton hath tumbled from his carre,
And made an euening at the noone tide pricke.
My aſhes like the Phoenix maie bring forth
A bird that will reuenge it on you all,
And in that hope I caſt mine eies to heauen,
Skorning what ere you can afflict me with:
Why ſtaie you Lords? what, multitudes and feare?
So cowards fight when they can flie no longer:
So Doues doe pecke the Rauens pierſing tallents:
So deſperate theeues all hopeleſſe of their liues,
Breath out inuectiues gainſt the officers.
Oh Clifford, yet bethinke thee once againe,
And in thy minde orerun my former time:
And bite thy toung that ſlaunderſt him with cowardiſe,
Whoſe verie looke hath made thee quake re this.
I will not bandie with thee word for word,
But buckle with thee blowes twiſe two for one.
Hold valiant Clifford for a thouſand cauſes,
I would prolong the traitors life a while.
Wrath makes him death, ſpeake thou Northumberland.
Hold Clifford doe not honour him to much,
To pricke thy finger though to wound his hart:
What valure were it when a curre doth grin,
For one to thruſt his hand betweene his teeth,
When he might ſpurne him with his foote awaie?
Tis warres priſe to take all aduantages,
And ten to one, is no impeach in wanes.
I, I▪ ſo ſtriues the Woodcocke with the gin.
So doth the cunne ſtruggle with the net.
So triumphs theeues vpon their conquered
Bootie: So true men yeeld by robbers ouermatcht.
What will your grace haue done with him?
Braue warriors Clifford & Northumberland
Come make him ſtand vpon ths molehill here,
That amde at mountaines with outſtetched arme,
And parted but the ſhaddow with his hand.
Was it you that reuelde in our Parlement▪
And made a prechment of your high deſcent?
Where are your meſſe of ſonnes to backe you now?
The wanton Edward, and the lſtie George?
Or where is that valiant Crookbackt prodegie?
Dickey your boy, that with his grumbling voice,
Was wont to cheare his Dad in mutines?
Or amongſt the reſt▪ where is your daing Rutland?
Looke Yorke? I dipt this napkin in the bloud,
That valiant Clifford with his rapiers point,
Made iſue from the boſome of thy boy.
And if thine ees can water for his death,
I giue thee this to drie thy cheeks with all.
Alas poore Yorke: But that I hate thee much,
I ſhould lament thy miſerable ſtate?
I prethee greeue to make me merrie Yorke?
Stamp▪ raue and fret, that I maie ſing and dance.
What: hath thy fierie hart ſo parcht thine entrailes,
That not a teare can fall for Rutlands death?
Thou wouldſt be feede I ſee to make me ſport.
Yorke cannot ſpeake, vnleſle he weare a crowne.
A crowne for Yorke? and Lords bow low to him.
So: hold you his hands, whilſt I doe ſet it on.
I, now lookes he like a king?
This is he that tooke king Henries chaire,
And this is he was his adopted aire.
But how is it that great Plantagenet,
Is crownd ſo ſoone, and broke his holie oath,
As I bethinke me you ſhould not be king,
Till our Henry had ſhooke hands with death,
And will you impale your head with Henries glorie,
And rob his temples of the Diadem
Now in his life againſt your holie oath?
Oh tis a fault too too vnpardonable.
Off with the crowne, and with the crowne his head,
And whilſt we breath, tae time to doe him dead.
Thats my office for my fathers death.
Yet ſtay: & lets here the Oriſons he makes.
She wolfe of France, but worſe than Wolues of France:
Whoſe tongue more poiſon'd than the Adders tooth:
How ill beſeeming is it in thy sexe,
To triumph like an Amazonian trull
Vpon his woes, whom Fortune captiuates?
But that thy face is viſard like, vnchanging,
Made impudent by vſe of euill deeds:
I would aſſaie, proud Queene to make thee bluſh:
To tell thee of whence thou art, from whom deride,
Twere ſhame enough to ſhame thee, wert thou not ſhameleſſe.
Thy father beares the type of king of Naples,
Of both the Siſsles and Ieruſalem,
Yet not ſo wealthie as an Engliſh yeoman.
Hath that poore Monarch taught thee to inſult?
It needes not, or it bootes thee not proud Queene,
Vnleſſe the Adage muſt be ver de:
That beggers munted, run their horſe to death.
Tis beautie, that oft makes women proud,
But God he wots thy ſare thereof is ſmall.
Tis gouernmnt, that makes them moſt admirde,
The contrarie doth make thee wondred at.
Tis vertue that makes them ſeeme deuine.
The want thereof makes thee abhominable.
Thou art as oppoſite to euerie good,
As the Antipodes are vnto vs,
Or as the ſouth to the Septentrion.
Oh Tygers hart wrapt in a womans hide?
Hovv couldſt thou draine the life bloud of the childe,
To bid the father wie his eies withall,
And yet be ſeene to beare a womans face?
Women are milde, pittifull, and flexible.
Thou indurate, ſterne, rough, rmorceleſſe.
Bids thou me rage? why novv thou haſt thy vvill
Wouldſt haue me weepe? vvhy ſo thou haſt thy vviſh.
For raging windes blowes vp a ſtorme of teares,
And when the rage alie the raine begins.
Theſe teares are my ſweet Rutlands obſequies,
And euerie drop bgs vengeance as it fals,
On thee fell Clifford, and the falſe French woman.
Beſhrevv me but his paſſions moue me ſo,
As hardlie can I checke mine eies from teares.
That fac of his the hungrie Cannibals
Could not haue tucht, would not haue ſtaind with bloud
But you are more inhumaine, more inexorable,
O ten times more then Tvgers of Arcadia.
See ruthleſſe Queene a hapleſſe fathers teares.
This cloth thou dipts in bloud of my ſweet boy,
And loe with teares I waſh the bloud awaie.
Keepe thou the napkin and go boaſt of that,
And if thou tell the heauie ſtorie well,
Vpon my ſoule the hearers will ſheed teares,
I, euen my ſoes will ſheed faſt falling teares,
And ſaie, alas, it was a pitteous deed.
Here, take the crowne, and with the crowne my curſe,
And in thy need ſuch comfort come to thee,
As now I reape at thy tvvo cruell hands.
Hard-harted Clifford, take me from the world,
My ſoule to heauen, my bloud vpon your heads.
Had he bin ſlaughterman of all my kin,
I could not chuſe but weepe with him to ſee,
How inlie anger gripes his hart.
What weeping ripe, my Lorde Northumberland?
Thinke but vpon the wrong he did vs all.
And that will quicklie drie your melting tears.
Thears for my oath thears for my fathers death.
And thears to right our gentle harted kind.
Open thy gates of mercie gratious God,
My ſoule flies foorth to meet with thee.
Off with his head and ſet it on Yorke Gates,
So Yorke maie ouerlooke the towne of Yorke.
After this dangerous fight and hapleſſe warre,
Ho doth my noble brother Richard fare?
I cannot ioy vnil I be reſolu'de,
Where our ght valiant father is become.
H I ſee him beare himſelfe,
As idſt a heard of neat,
So our valiant father,
Me thinkes tis enough to be his ſonne.
the opes her golden gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious ſun,
Da doe I ſee three ſuns?
Three glorious suns, ſeperated by a racking
Cloud, but in a pale cleere ſhining skie.
they ioine, embrace, and ſeeme to kiſe.
vowde ſome league inuiolate:
are they but one lampe, one light, one ſun,
In this the heauens doth figure ſome euent.
I thinke it cites vs brother to the field,
That we the ſonnes of braue Plantagenet,
Alreadie each one ſhining by his meed,
May ioine in one and ouerpeere the world,
As this the earth, and therefore hence forward,
Ile beare vpon my Target, three faire ſhining ſuns.
But what art thou? that lookeſt ſo heauilie?
Oh one that was a wofull looker on,
When as the noble Duke of Yorke was ſlaine.
O ſpeake no more, for I can heare no more.
Tell on thy tale, for I will heare it all.
When as the noble Duke was put to ſlight,
And then purſu'de by Clifford and the Queene,
And manie ſouldiers m:, who all at once
Let driue at him and forſt the Duke to yeeld:
And then they ſet him on a molehill there,
And crownd the gratious Duke in high deſpite,
Who then with ares began to waile his fall.
The Queene euing he did weepe,
Gaue hm a handkercher to wipe his eies,
Dpt in the bloud of ſweet young Rutland
By rough Clifford ſline: who weeping tooke it vp.
Then through hs breſt they thruſt their bloudy ſwordes,
Who like a lmbe fell at the butchers feete.
Then on the gates of Yorke they ſet his head,
And there it doth remaine the piteous ſpectacle
That ere mine eies beheld.
Sweet Duke of Yorke our prop to leane vpon,
Now thou art gone there is no hope for vs:
Now my ſoules pallace is become a priſon.
Oh would ſhe breake from compaſe of my breaſt,
For neuer ſhall I haue more ioie.
I cannot weepe, for all my breaſts moiſture
Scarſe ſerues to quench my furnac burning hart:
I cannot ioie till this white roſe be dide,
Euen in the hart bloud of the houſe of Lancaſter.
Richard▪ I bare thy name, and Ile reuenge thy death,
Or die my ſelfe in ſeeking of reuenge.
His name that valiant Duke hath lft with thee,
His chaire and Dukedome that remaines for me.
Nay, if thou be that princely Eagles bird,
Shew thy deſcent by gazing gainſt the sunne.
For chaire, and dukedome, Throne and kingdome ſaie:
For ether that is thine, or elſe thou wert not his?
How now faire Lords: what ſare? what newes abroad?
Ah Warwike? ſhould we report the balefull
N, at each words deliuerance ſtab poinyardes
In our fleſh till all were told, the words would adde
More then the wounds,
Ah valiant Lord the Duke of Yorke is ſlaine.
Ah Warwike Warwike, that Plantagenet,
Which held thee deere: I, euen an his ſoules redemption,
Is by the ne L. Clifford, done to death.
Ten dais a go I drownd thoſe newes in teares.
And now to adde more meaſure to your woes,
I come to tell you things ſince then befalne.
After the bloudie fraie at Wakefield fought,
Where your braue father breath'd his lateſt gaſpe,
Tidings as ſwiflie as the poſt could runne,
Was brought me of your loſſe, and his departure.
I then in London keeper of the King,
Muſtred my ſoulders, gathered flockes of friends,
And verie vvell appointed as I thought,
Marcht to ſaint Albons to entercept the Queene,
Bearing the King in my behalfe along,
For by my ſcoutes I was aduertiſed,
That ſhe was comming, with a full intent
To daſh your late decree in parliament,
Touching king Henries heires and your ſucceſſion.
Short tale to make, we at Saint Albons met,
Our battels ioinde, and both ſides fiercelie fought.
But whether twas the coldneſſe of the king,
He lookt full gentlie on his warlike Queene,
That robde my ſouldiers of their heated ſpleene.
Or whether twas report of his ſucceſſe,
Or more then common feare of Cliffords rigor,
Who thunders to his captaines bloud and death,
I cannot tell. But to conclude with truth,
Their weapons like to lightnings went and came.
Our ſouldiers like the might Owles laſie flight,
Or like an idle threſher with a laile,
Fel gentlie downe as if they ſmote their friends.
I cheerd them vp with iuſtice of the cauſe,
With promiſe of hie paie and great rewardes,
But all in vaine, they had no harts to fight,
Nor we in them no hope to win the daie,
So that We fled. The king vnto the Queene,
Lord George your brother, Norffolke, and my ſelfe,
In haſt, poſt haſt, are come to ioine with you,
For in the marches here we heard you were,
Making another head to fight againe.
Thankes gentle Warwike.
How farre hence is the Duke with his power?
And when came George from Burgundie to England?
Some fiue miles off the Duke is with his power,
But as for your brother he was latelie ſent
From your kind Aunt, Duches of Burgundie,
With aide of ſouldiers gainſt this needfull warre.
Twas ods belike, when valiant Warwike fled.
Oft haue I heard thy praiſes in purſute,
But nere till now thy ſcandall of retire.
Nor now my ſcandall Richard doſt thou heare,
For thou ſhalt know that ths right hand of mine,
Can plucke the Diadem from aint Henries head,
And wring the awefull ſcepter from his fiſt:
Were he as famous and as bold in warre,
As he is famde for mildneſſe, peace and praier.
I know it well Lord Warwike blame me not,
Twas loue I bare thy glories made me ſpeake.
But in this troublous time, whats to be done?
Shall we gothrow away our coates of ſteele,
And clad our bodies in blacke mourning gownes,
Numbring our Auemaries with our beades?
Or ſhall we on the helmets of our foes,
Tell our deuotion with reuengefull armes?
If for the laſt ſaie I ▪ and to it Lords.
Why therefore Warwike came to find you out,
And therefore comes my brother Montague.
Attend me Lords, the proud inſulting Queene,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
And of their feather manie mo proud birdes,
Haue wrought th eaſie melting king like waxe.
He ſware conſent to your ſucceſsion,
His oath inrolled in the Parliament.
But now to London all the crew are gone,
To fruſtrate his oath or what beſides
May make againſt the houſe of Lancaſter.
Thi power I geſſe them fifty thouſand ſtrong.
Now if the helpe of Norffolke and my ſelfe,
Can but amount to 48. thouſand,
With all the friendes that thou braue earle of March,
Among the louing Welſhmen canſt procure,
Why via, To London will we march amaine,
And once againe beide our foming ſteedes,
And once againe crie charge vpon the foe,
But neuer once againe turne backe and fle.
I, now me thinkes I heare great Warwike ſpeake:
Nere maie he liue to ſee a ſunſhine daie,
That cries rtire, when Warwike bids him ſtay.
Lord Warwike, on thy ſhoulder will I leane,
And when thou faints, muſt Edward fall:
Which perill heauen forefend.
No longer Earle of March, but Duke of Yorke,
The next degree, is Englands royall king:
And king of England and ſhalt thou be proclaimde,
In euery burrough as we paſſe along:
And he that caſts not vp his cap for ioie,
Shall for the offence make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
Stay we no longer dreaming of renowne,
But forward to effect theſe reſolutions.
The Duke of Norffolke ſends you word by me,
The Queene is comming with a puiſſant power,
And craues your companie for ſpeedie councell.
Why then it ſorts braue Lordes. Lets march away.
Welcome my Lord to this braue town of York,
Yonders the head of that ambitious enemie,
That ſought to be impaled with your crowne.
Doth not the obiect pleaſe your eie my Lord?
Euen as the rockes pleaſe them that feare their wracke.
Withhold reuenge deare God tis not my fault,
Nor wittinglie haue I infringde my vow.
My gratious Lord, this too much lenitie,
And harmefull pittie muſt be laid aſide,
To whom do Lyons caſt their gentle lookes?
Not to the beaſt that would vſurpe his den.
Whoſe hand is that the ſauage Beare doth licke?
Not his that ſpoiles his young before his face.
Whoſe aps the lurking ſerpentes mortall ſting?
Not he that ſets his foot vpon her backe.
The ſmalleſt worme will turne being troden on,
And Doues will pecke, in reſcue of their broode.
Ambitious Yorke did leuell at thy Crowne,
Thou ſmiling, while he knit his angrie browes.
He but a Duke, would haue his ſonne a king,
And raiſe his iſſue like a louing ſire.
Thou being a king bleſt with a goodlie ſonne,
Didſt giue conſent to diſinherit him,
Which argude thee a moſt vnnaturall father.
Vnreaſonable creatures feed their yong.
And though mans face be fearefull to their eies,
Yet in protect on of their tender ones,
Who hath not ſeene them euen with thoſe ſame wings
Which they haue ſometime vſde in fearefull flight,
Make warre with him, that climes vnto their neſt,
Offring their owne liues in their yongs defence?
For ſhame my Lord, make them your preſident,
Were it not pittie that this goodlie boy,
ſhould loſe his birth right through his fathers fault?
And long hereafter ſaie vnto his child,
What my great grandfather and grandfire got,
My careleſſe father fondlie gaue awaie?
Looke on the boy and let his manlie face,
Which promiſeth ſucceſſefull fortune to vs all,
Steele thy melting thoughtes,
To keepe thine owne, and leaue thine owne with him.
Full wel hath Clifford plaid the Orator,
Inferring, arguments of mighty force.
But tell me, didſt thou neuer yet heare tell.
That things euill got had euer bad ſucceſſe,
And happie euer was it for that ſonne,
Whoſe father for his hoording went to hell?
I leaue my ſonne my vertuous deedes behind,
And would my father had left me no more,
For all the reſt is held at ſuch a rate,
As askes a thouſand times more care to keepe,
Then maie the preſent profit counteruaile.
Ah coſen Yorke, would thy beſt friendes did know,
How it doth greeue me that thy head ſtands there.
My Lord this harmefull pittie makes your followers faint.
You promiſde knighthood to your princelie ſone.
Vnſheath your ſword and ſtraight doe dub him knight.
Kneele downe Edward.
Edward Plantagenet knight,
And learne this leſſon boy▪ draw y ſword in right
My gratous father by your kingly leaue,
Ile draw it as apparant to the owne,
And in that to the death.
Why that is ſpoken like a toward prince.
Royall commaunders be in readineſſe,
For with a band of fiftie thouſand men,
Comes Warwike backing of the Duke of Yorke.
And in the townes whereas they paſſe along,
Proclaimes him king, and manie flies to him,
Prepare your battels, for they be at hand.
I would your highneſſe would depart the field,
The Queene hath beſt ſucceſſe when you are abſent.
Do good my Lord, and leaue vs to our fortunes.
Why thats my fortune, therefore Ile ſtay ſtill.
Be it with reſolution then to fight.
Good father cheere theſe noble Lords,
Vnſheath your ſword, ſweet father crie Saint George.
Pitch we our battell heere, for hence wee will not moue.
Now peue Henrie vvilt thou yeelde thy crovvne,
And kneele for mercie at thy ſoueraignes feete?
Go rate thy minions proud inſulting boy,
Becomes it thee to be thus malepert,
Before thy kng and lawfull ſoueraigne?
I am his king and he ſhould bend his knee,
I was adopted hee by his conſent.
Since when he hath broke his oath.
For as we heare you that are king
Though he de weare the Crowne,
Haue cauſde hm by new act of Parlement
To blot our brother out, and put his owne ſon in.
And reaſon George. Who ſhould ſucceede the father but the ſon?
Are you their butcher?
I Crookbacke, here I ſtand to anſwere thee, or any of your ſort.
Twas you that kild yong Rutland, was it not?
Yes, and old Yorke too, and yet not ſatisfide.
For Gds ſake Lords giue ſynald to the fight.
What ſaieſt thou Henry? wilt thou yeelde thy crowne?
What, long tongde War, dare you ſpeake?
When you and I met at ſaint Albones laſt,
Your legs did better ſeruice than your hands.
I, then twas my turne to flee, but now tis thine.
You ſaid ſo much before, and yet you fled.
Twas not your valour Clifford, that droue mee thence.
No nor your manhood Warwike, that could make you ſtaie.
Northumberland Northumberland, wee holde
Thee reuerentlie Breake off the pa e, fo ſcarſe
I can refraine the execution of my big ſwolne
Hart, againſt that Clifford there, that
Cruell child-killer.
Why I kild thy father, calſt thou him a child?
I like a villaine, and a trecherous coward,
As thou didſt kill our tnder brother Rutland.
But ere sunne ſet Ile make thee curſe the ded.
Haue doone with wordes great Lordes, and Hear me ſpeake.
Defie them then, or elſe hold cloſe thy lips.
I prethe giue no limits to my tongue,
I am a king and priuiledge to ſpeake.
My Lord the wound that bred this meeting here
Cannot be cru'd with words, therefore be ſtill.
Then executioner vnsheath thy ſword,
By him that made vs all I am reſolu'de,
That Cliffords manhood hangs vpon his tongue.
What ſaiſt thou Henry, ſhall I hue my right or no?
A thouſand men haue broke their faſt to daie,
That nere ſhall dine, vnleſſe thou yeeld the crowne.
If thou denie their blouds be on thy head,
For Yorke in iuſtice puts his armour on.
If all be right that Warwike ſaies is right,
There is no wrong but all things muſt be right.
Whoſoeuer got thee, there thy mother ſtands,
For well I wot thou haſt thy mothers tongue.
But thou art neither like thy ſire nor dam,
But like a ſoule miſhapen ſtygmaticke
Markt by the deſtinies to be auoided,
As venome Todes, or Lizards fainting lookes.
Iron of Naples, hid with Engliſh gilt,
Thy father beares the ttle of a king.
As if a channell ſhould be calde the Sea;
Shames thou not, knowing from whence thou art deRiu'de,
to parlie thus with Englands lawfull heires?
A wiſpe of ſtraw were worth a thouſand crowns,
To make that ſhameleſſe cllet know her ſelfe,
Thy husbands father reueld in the hart of France,
And tam'de the French, and made the Doiphin ſtoope:
And had he macht according to his ſtate,
He might haue kept that glorie till this daie.
But when he tooke a begger to his bed,
And gracſt thy poore ſire with his bridall daie,
Then that ſun-ſhine bred a ſhowre for him
Which waſht his fathers fortunes out of France,
And heapt ſeditions on his crowne at home.
For what hath mou'd theſe tumults but thy pride?
Hadſt thou beene meeke, our title yet had ſlept?
And we in pittie of the gentle king,
Had ſlipt our claime vntill an other age.
But when we ſaw our ſummer brought the gaine,
And that the harueſt brought vs no increaſe,
We ſet the axe to thy vſurping root,
And though the edge haue ſomething hit our ſelues,
Yet know thou we will neuer ceaſe to ſtrike,
Till we haue hewne thee downe,
Or bath'd thy growing with our heated blouds.
And in this reſolution, I defie thee,
Not willing anie longer conference,
Since thou denieſt the gentle king to ſpeake.
Sound trumpets, let our bloudie colours waue,
And either victorie or elſe a graue,
Staie Edward ſtaie.
Hence wrangling woman, Ile no longer ſtaie,
Thy words will coſt ten thouſand liues to daie.
Sore ſpent with toile as runners with the race,
I laie me downe a little while to breath,
For ſtrokes receiude, and manie blowes repaide,
Hath robd my ſtrong knit ſinnews of their ſtrength,
And force perforce needes muſt I reſt my ſelfe.
Smile gentle heauens or ſtrike vngentle death,
That we maie die vnleſſe we gaine the daie:
What fatall ſtarre malignant frownes from heauen
Vpon the harmeleſſe line of Yorkes tue houſe?
Come brother, come, lets to the field againe,
For yet theres hope inough to win the daie:
Then let vs backe to cheere our fainting Troupes,
Leſt they retire now we haue left the field.
How now my lords: what hap, what hope of good▪
Ah Warwike, why haſte thou withdrawne thy ſelfe?
Thy noble father in the thickeſt thronges,
Cride ſtill for Warwike his thriſe valiant ſon,
Vntill with thouſand ſwords he was beſet,
And manie wounds made in hs aged breſt,
And as he tottering ſate vpon his ſleede,
He wat his hand to me and cride aloud▪
Richard, commend me to my valiant ſonne,
And ſtll he cride Warwike reuenge my death,
And with thoſe words he tumbled off his horſe,
And ſo the noble Salsbury gaue vp the ghoſt.
hen let the earth be drunken with his bloud,
Ile kill my horſe becauſe I wil not ſhe:
And here to God of heauen I make a vow,
Neuer to paſſe from frth this bloudy field
Till I am full reuenged for his death.
Lord Warwike, Ide bend my knees with thine,
And in that vow now ioine my ſoule to thee,
Thou ſetter vp and puller downe of kings,
vouchſafe a gentle victorie to vs,
Or let vs die before we looſe the daie:
Then let vs haſte to cheere the ſouldiers hrts,
And call them pillers that will ſtand to vs,
And hiely promiſe to remunerate
Their truſtie ſeruice, in theſe dangerous warres.
Come, come awaie, and ſtand not to debate,
For yet is hope of fortune good enough.
Brothers, giue me your hands, and let vs part
And take our leaues vntill we meet againe,
Where ere it be in heauen or in earth.
Now I that neuer wept, now melt in wo,
To ſee theſe dire miſhaps continue ſo.
Warwike farewel.
Awaie awaie, once more ſweet Lords farewell.
A Clifford a Clifford.
A Richard a Richard.
Now Clifford, for Yorke & young Rutlands death,
This thirſty ſword that longs to drinke thy bloud,
Shall lop thy limmes, and ſliſe thy curſed hart,
For to reuenge the murders thou haſt made.
Now Richard, I am with thee here alone,
This is the hand that ſtabd thy father Yorke▪
And this the hand that ſlew thy brother Rutland,
And heres the heart that triumphs in the dthes,
And cheeres theſe hands that ſlew thy and brother,
To execute the like vpon thy ſelfe,
And ſo haue at thee.
Oh gratious God of heauen looke downe on vs,
And ſet ſome endes to theſe inceſſant griefes,
How like a maſtleſſe ſhip vpon the ſeas,
This woful battaile doth continue ſtill,
Now leaning this way, now to that ſide driue,
And none doth know to whom the daie will fall.
O would my death might ſtaie theſe ciuilliars!
Would I had neuer raind, nor nere bin king.
Margret and Clifford, chide me from the fielde,
Swearing they had beſt ſucceſſe when I was thence.
Would God that I were dead ſo all were well,
Or would my crowne ſuffice, I were content
To yeeld it them and liue a priuate life.
Il blowes the wind that profits no bodie,
This man that I haue ſlaine in fight to daie,
Maie be poſſeſſed of ſome ſtore of crownes,
And I will ſearch to find them if I can,
But ſtay. Me thinkes it is my fathers face,
Oh I tis he whom I haue ſlaine in fight,
From London was I preſt out by the king,
My father he came on the part of Yorke,
And in this conflict I haue ſlaine my father:
Oh pardon God, I knew not what I did,
And pardon father, for I knew thee not.
Lie there thou that foughtſt with me ſo ſtoutly,
Now let me ſee what ſtore of gold thou haſte,
But ſtaie, me thinkes this is no famous face:
Oh no it is my ſonne that I haue ſlaine in ſight,
O monſtrous times begetting ſuch euents,
How cruel bloudy, and ironious,
This deadlie quarrell dailie doth beget,
Poore boy thy fther gaue thee lif too late,
And hath breau'de thee of thy life too ſone.
Wo aboue wo, griefe more then common grieſe,
Whilſt Lyons warre and battaile for their dens,
Poore lambs do feele the rigor of their wraths:
The red roſe and the white are on his face,
The fatall colours of our ſtriuing houſes,
Wither one roſe, and let the other flouriſh,
For if you ſtriue, ten thouſand liues muſt periſh.
How will my mother for my fathers death,
Take on with me and nere be ſatisfide?
How will my wife for ſlaughter of my ſon,
Take on with me and nere be ſatisfide?
How will the people now miſdeeme their king,
Oh would my death their mindes could ſatisfie.
Was euer ſon ſo rude his fathers bloud to ſpil?
Was euer father ſo vnnaturall his ſon to kill?
Was euer king thus greeud and vexed ſtill?
Ile beare thee hence from this accurſed place,
For wo is me to ſee my fathers face.
Ile beare thee hence & let them fight that wil,
For I haue murdered where I ſhould not kill.
Weepe wretched man, Ile lay thee teare for tear,
Here ſits a king as woe begone as thee.
Awaie my Lord to Barwicke preſentlie,
The daie , our friends are murdered,
No hope is left for vs, therefore awaie▪
Oh father flie, our men haue left the field,
Take horſe ſweet father, let vs ſaue our ſelues.
Awaie my Lord for vengance comes along with him:
Nay ſtand not to expoſtulate make haſt,
Or elſe come after, Ile awaie before.
Naie ſtaie good Exeter, for Ile along with thee.
Heere burnes my candell ou,
That whilſt it laſted gaue king Henry light▪
Ah Lancaſter, I feare thine ouerthrow,
More then my bodies parting from my ſoule.
My loue and feare glude manie friendes to thee,
And now I die, that tough commixture melts.
Impairing Henry ſtrengthened miſproud Yorke,
The common people ſwarme like ſummer flies,
And whither flies the Gnats but to the ſun?
And who ſhines now but Henries enemie?
Oh Phbus hadſt thou neuer giuen conſent,
That Ph on ſhould checke thy fierie ſteedes,
Thy burning carre had neuer ſcorcht the earth.
And Henry hadſt thou liu'd as kings ſhould doe,
And as thy father and his father did,
Giuing no foot vnto the houſe of Yorke,
I and ten thouſand in this wofull land,
Had left no mourning Widdowes for our deathes,
And thou this daie hadſt kept thy throne in peace.
For what doth cheriſh weedes but gentle aire?
And what makes robbers bold but lenitie?
Bootleſſe are plaintes, and cureleſſe are my woundes,
No waie to flie, no ſtrength to hold our flight,
The foe is mercileſſe and will not pittie me,
And at their hands I haue deſerude no pittie.
The aire is got into my bleeding wounds,
And much effuſe of bloud doth make me faint,
Come Yorke and Richard, Warwike and the reſt,
I ſtabde your fathers, now come ſplit my breſt.
Thus farre our fortunes keepes an vpward
Courſe, and we are graſt with wreathes of victorie.
Some troopes purſue the bloudie minded Queene,
That now towards Barwike amae,
But thinke you that Clifford is ſled awaie with them?
No, tis impoſſible he ſhould eſcape,
For though before his face I ſpeake the words,
Your brother Richard markt him for the graue.
And where ſo ere he be I warrant him dead.
Harke what ſoule is this that takes his heauy leaue?
A deadlie grone, like life and deaths departure.
See who it is, and now the battailes ended,
Friend or foe, let him be friendlie vſed.
Reuerſe that doome of mercie, for tis Clifford.
Who kild our tender brother Rutland,
And ſtabd our princelie father Duke of Yorke.
From off the gates of Yorke fetch downe the
Head, Your fathers head which Clifford placed there,
Inſteed of that, let his ſupplie the roome.
Meaſure for meaſure muſt be anſwered.
Bring forth that fatall skrichowle to our houſe,
That nothing ſung to vs but bloud and death,
Now his euill boding tongue no more ſhall ſpeake.
I thinke his vnderſtanding is bereſt.
Say Clifford doeſt thou know who ſpeakes to thee?
Darke cloudie death oreſhades his beames of life,
And he nor ſees nor heares vs what we ſaie.
Oh would he did, and ſo perhaps he doth,
And tis his policie that in the time of death,
He might auoid ſuch bitter ſtormes as he
In his houre of death did giue vnto our father.
Richard if thou thinkeſt ſo, vex him with eagr words.
Clifford, aske mercie and obtaine no grace.
Clifford, repent in bootleſſe penitence.
Clifford deuiſe excuſes for thy fault.
Whilſt we deuiſe fell tortures for thy fault.
Thou pittiedſt Yorke, and I am ſonne to Yorke.
Thou pittiedſt Rutland, and I will pittie thee.
Wheres captaine Margaret to ence you now?
They mocke thee Clifford, ſweare as thou waſt wont.
What not an oth? Nay, then I know hees dead.
Tis hard, when Clifford cannot foord his friend an oath.
By this I know hees dead, and by my ſoule,
Would this right hand buy but an howres life,
That I in all contempt might raile at him.
Ide cut it off and with the iſſuing bloud,
Stifle the villaine whoſe inſt inched thirſt,
Yorke and young Rutland could not ſatisfie.
I, but he is dead, off with the traitors head,
And reare it in the place your fathers ſtands.
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned Englands lawfull king.
From thence ſhall Warwike croſſe the ſeas to France,
And aske the ladie Bona for thy Queene,
So ſhalt thou ſinew both theſe landes togither,
And hauing France thy friend thou needſt not dread,
The ſcattered foe that hopes to riſe againe.
And though they cannot greatly ſting to hurt,
Yet looke to haue them buſie to offend thine eares.
Firſt Ile ſee the coronation done,
And afterward Ile croſſe the ſeas to France,
To effect this marriage if it pleaſe my Lord.
Euen as thou wilt good Warwike let it be.
But firſt before we goe, George kneele downe.
We here create thee Duke of Clarence, and girt thee with the ſword.
Our younger brother Richard Duke of Glocester.
Warwike as my ſelfe ſhal do & vndo as him pleaſeth beſt.
Let me be Duke of Clarenco, George of Gloſter,
For Gloſters Duke dome is too ominous.
Tuſh thats a childiſh obſeruation.
Richard be Duke of Gloſter. Now to London.
To ſee theſe honors in poſſeſsion.
Come lets take our ſtands vpon this hill,
And by and by the deere will come this waie.
But ſtaie, heere come a man, lets liſten him a while.
From Scotland am I ſtolne euen of pure loue,
And thus diſguiſde to greet my natiue land.
No, Henrie no It is no land of thine,
No bending knee will call thee Caeſar now,
No humble ſus ſues to thee for right,
For how canſt thou helpe them and not thy ſelfe?
I marrie ſir, here is a deere, his skin is a
Keepers fee▪ Sirra ſtand cloſe, for as I thinke,
This is the king, king Edward hath depoſde.
My Queene and ſonne poore ſoules are gone to
France, and as I heare the great commanding Warwike,
To intreat a marriage with the ladie Bona,
If this be true, poore Queene and ſonne,
Your labour is but ſpent in vaine,
For Lewis is a prince ſoone wun with words,
And Warwike is a ſubtill Orator.
He laughes and ſaies, his Edward is inſtalde,
She weepes, and ſaies her Henry is depoſde,
He on his right hand asking a wiſe for Edward,
She on his left ſide crauing aide for Henry.
What art thou that talkes of kings and queens?
More then I ſeeme, for leſſe I ſhould not be.
A man at leaſt, and more I cannot be,
And men maie talke of kings, and why not I?
I but thou talkeſt as if thou wert a king thy ſelfe.
Why ſo I am in mind though not in ſhew.
And if thou be a king where is thy crowne?
My crowne is in my hart, not on my head.
My crowne is calde content, a crowne that
Kings doe ſeldome times enioy.
And if thou be a king crownd with content,
Your crowne content and you, muſt be content
To go with vs vnto the officer, for as we thinke
You are our quondam king, K. Edward hath depoſde,
And therefore we charge you in Gods name & the kings
To go along with vs vnto the officers.
Gods name be fulfild, your kings name be
Obaide, and be you kings, command and Ile obay.
Brothers of Clarence, and of Gloceſter,
This ladies husband heere ſir Rchard Gray,
At the battaile of ſaint Alkones did loſe his life,
His lands then were ſeazed on by the conqueror.
Her ſute is now to repoſſeſſe thoſe lands,
And ſith in quarrell of the houſe of Yorke,
The noble gentleman did loſe his life,
In honor we cannot denie her te.
Your highneſſe ſhall doe well to grant it then.
I, ſo I will, but yet Ile make a pauſe.
I is the wind in that doore?
Clarence, I ſee the Lady hath ſome thing to grant,
Before the king will grant her humble lute.
He knows the game, how well he keepes the wind.
Widow come ſome other time to know our mind.
May it pleaſe your grace I cannot brooke delaies,
I beſeech your highneſſe to diſpatch me now.
Lords giue vs leaue, wee meane to trie this widowes wit.
I, good leaue haue you.
For you will haue leaue till youth take leaue,
And leaue you to your crouch.
Come hither widdow, howe many children haſte thou?
I thinke he meanes to begge a child on her.
Nay whip me then, heele rather giue hir two.
Three my moſt gratious Lord.
You ſhall haue foure and you wil be rulde by him.
Were it not pittie they ſhoulde looſe their fathers lands?
Be pittifull then dread L. and grant it them.
Ile tell thee how theſe lands are to be got.
So ſhall you bind me to your highneſſe ſeruice.
What ſeruice wilt thou doe me if I grant it them?
Euen what your highneſſe ſhall command.
Naic then widow Ile warrant you all your
Husbands lands, if you grant to do what he
Commands, Fight cloſe or in good faith
You catch a clap.
Naie I ſeare her not vnleſſe ſhe fall.
Marie godsforbot man, for heele take vantage then.
Why ſtops my Lord, ſhall I not know my taske?
An eaſie taske, tis but to loue a king.
Thats ſoone perfounde, becauſe I am a ſubiect.
Why then thy hushandes landes I freelie giue thee.
I take my leaue with manie thouſand thankes.
The match is made, ſhee ſeales it with a curſie.
Staie widdow ſtare, what loue doſt thou thinke
I ſue ſo much to get?
My humble ſeruice, ſuch as ſubiects owes and the lawes commands.
No by my troth, I meant no ſuch loue,
But to tell thee the troth, I aime to lie with thee.
To tell you plaine my Lord, I had rather lie in priſon.
Why then thou canſt not get thy husbandes lands.
Then mine honeſtie ſhall be my dower,
For by that loſſe I will not purchaſe them.
Herein thou wrongſt thy children mightilie.
Heerein your highneſſe wrongs both them and
Me, but mightie Lord this merrie inclination
Agrees not with the ſadneſſe of my ſute.
Pleaſe it your highnes to diſmiſſe me either with I or no.
I, if thou ſaie I to my requeſt,
No, if thouſaie no to my demand.
Then no my Lord, my ſute is at an end.
The widdow likes him not, ſhee bends the brow.
Why he is the blunteſt woer in chriſtendome.
Her lookes are all repleat with maieſtie,
One waie or other ſhe is for a king,
And ſhe ſhall be my loue or elſe my Queene.
Saie that king Edward tooke thee for his Queene.
Tis better ſaid then done, my gratious Lord,
I am a ſubiect ſit to ieſt withall,
But far vnfit to be a Soueraigne.
Sweet widdow, by my ſtate I ſweare, I ſpeake
No more then what my hart intends,
And that is to enioie thee for my loue.
And that is more then I will yeeld vnto,
I know I am too bad to be your Queene,
And yet too good to be your Concubine.
You call widdow, I did meane my Queene.
Your grace would be loath my ſonnes ſhould call you father.
No more then when my daughters call thee
Mother. Thou art a widow and thou haſt ſome children,
And by Gods mother I being but a bacheler
Haue other ſome Why tis a happy thing
To be the father of manie children.
Argue no more, for thou ſhalt be my Queene.
The ghoſtlie father now hath done his ſhrift.
When he was made a ſhriuer twas for ſhift.
Brothers you muſe what talke the widdow
And I haue had, you would thinke it ſtrange
If I ſhould marrie her.
Marrie her my Lord, to whom?
Why Clarence to my ſelfe.
That would be ten daies wonder at the leaſt.
Why thats a daie longer then a wonder laſtes.
And ſo much more are the wonders in extreames.
Well, ieaſt on brothers, I can tell you, hir
Sute is granted for her husbands lands.
And it pleaſe your grace, Henry your foe is
Taken, and brought as priſoner to your pallace gates.
Awaie with him and ſend him to the Tower,
And let vs go queſtion with the man about
His apprehenſion. Lords along, and vſe this
Ladie honorablie.
I, Edward will vſe women honourablie,
Would he were waſted marrow, bones and all,
That from his loines no iſſue might ſucceed
To hinder me from the golden time I looke for,
For I am not yet lookt on in the world.
Firſt is there Edward, Clarence, and Henry
And his ſonne, and all they lookt for iſſue
Of their loines ere I can plant my ſelfe,
A cold premeditation for my purpoſe,
What other pleaſure is there in the world beſide?
I will go clad my bodie in gaie ornaments,
And lull my ſelfe within a ladies lap,
And with ſweet Ladies with my words and lookes.
Oh monſtrous man, to harbour ſuch a thought▪
Why loue did ſcorne me in my mothers wombe.
And for I ſhould not deale in hir aſtaires,
Shee did corrupt fraile nature in the fleſh,
And plaſle an enuious mountaine on my backe,
Where ſits deformity to mocke my bodie,
To drie mine arme vp like a withered ſhrimpe.
To make my legges of an vnequall ſize,
And am I then a man to be belou'd?
Eaſier for me to compaſſe twentie crownes.
Tut I can ſmile, and murder when I ſmile,
I crie content, to that that greeues me moſt.
I can adde colours to the Camelion,
And for a need change ſhapes with Protheus,
And ſet the aſpiring Catalin to ſchoole.
Can I doe this, and cannot get the crowne?
Tuſh were it ten times higher, Ile pull it downe.
Welcome Queene Margaret to the Court of France,
It ſits not Lewis to ſit while thou doſt ſtand,
Sit by my ſide, and here I vow to thee,
Thou ſhalt haue aide to repoſſeſſe thy right,
And be at proud Edward from his vſurped ſeat.
And place king Henry in his former rule.
I humblie thanke your royall maieſtie,
And pray the God of heauen to bleſſe thy ſtate,
Great king of France, that thus regards our wrongs.
How now, who is this?
Our Earle of Warwike Edwardes chiefeſt friend.
Welcome braue Warwike, what brings thee to France?
From worthy Edward king of England,
My Lord and Soueraigne and thy vowed friend,
I come in kindnes and vnfained loue,
Firſt to do greetings to thy royall perſon,
And then to craue a league of amitie,
And laſtlie to confirme that amitie
With nuptiall knot if thou vouchſafe to grant
That vertuous ladie Bona thy faire ſiſter,
To Englands king in lawfull marriage.
And if this go forward all our hope is done.
And gratious Madam, in our kings behalfe,
I am commanded with your loue and fauour,
Humblie to kiſſe your hand and with my tongue,
To tell the paſſions of my ſoueraines hart,
Where ſame late entring at his heedfull cares,
Hath plaſt thy glorious image and thy vertues.
King Lewes and Lady Bona heare me ſpeake,
Before you anſwere Warwike or his words,
For hee it is hath done vs all theſe wrongs.
Iniurious Margaret.
And why not Queene?
Becauſe thy father Henry did vſurpe,
And thou no more art Prince then ſhee is Queene.
Then Warwike diſanuls great Ioha of Gaunt,
That did ſubdue the greateſt part of Spaine,
And after Iohn of Gaunt wiſe Henry the fourth,
Whoſe wiſedome was a mirrour to the world.
And after this wiſe prince Henry the fift,
Who with his proweſſe conquered all France,
From theſe our Henries lincallie diſcent.
Oxford, how haps that in this ſmooth diſcourſe
You told not how Henry the ſixt had loſt
All that Henry the fift had gotten.
Me thinkes theſe peeres of France ſhould ſmile at that,
But for the reſt you tell a pettigree
Of three ſcore and two yeares a ſillie time,
To make preſcription for a kingdomes worth.
Why Warwike, canſt thou dene thy king,
Whom thou obeyedſt thirtie and eight yeeres,
And bewray thy treaſons with a bluh?
Can Oxford that did euer fence the right,
Now buckler falſhood with a pettigree?
For ſhme leaue Henry and call Edward king.
Call him my king by whom mine elder
Brother the Lord Aubray Vere was done to death,
And more than ſo, my father euen in the
Downefall of his mellowed yeares,
When age did call him to the dore of deat?
No Warwike no, whilſt life vpholds this arme,
This arme vpholds the houſe of Lancaſter.
And I the houſe of Yorke.
Queene Margaret, prince Edward and
Oxford, vochſafe to forbeare a while,
Till I doe talke a word with Warwike.
Now Warwike euen vpon thy honor tell me true;
Is Edward lawfull king or no?
For I were loath to linke with him, that is not lawful heir.
Thereon I pawne mine honour and my credit.
What is he gratious in the peoples eies?
The more, that Henry is vnfortunate.
What is his loue to our ſiſter Buna?
Such it ſeemes
As maie beſeeme a monarke like himſelfe.
My ſelfe haue often heard him ſe and ſweare,
That this his loue was an eternall plant,
The rot whereof was fixt in vertues ground,
The leaues and fruite maintainde with beautis ſun,
Exempt from enuie, but not from disdaine,
Vnleſſe the ladie Bona quite his paine.
Then ſiſter let vs heare your firme reſolue.
Your grant or your denial ſhall be mine,
But ere this daie I muſt confeſſe, when I
Haue heard your kings deſerts recounted,
Mine eares haue tempted iudgement to deſire.
Then draw neere Queene Margaret and be a
Witneſſe, that Bona ſhall be wife to the Engliſh king.
To Edward but not the Engliſh king.
Henry now liues in Scotland at his eaſe,
Where hauing nothing nothing can be loſe,
And as for you your ſeife our quondun Queene,
You haue a father able to mainetaine your ſtate,
And better twere to trouble him them France.
Here comes ſome poſt Warwike to thee orvs,
My Lord ambaſſador this letter is for you,
Sent from your brother Marquis Montague.
This from our king vnto your Maieſtie.
And theſe to you Madam, from whom I know not.
I like it well that our ſaire Queene and miſtreſſe,
Smiles at her newes when Warwike frets as his.
And marke how Lewes ſtamps as he were nettled.
Now Margaret & Warwike, what are your news?
Mine ſuch as fils my hart full of ioie.
Mine full of ſorrow and harts diſcontent.
What hath your king married the Ladie Gray,
And now to excuſe himſelfe ſends vs a poſt of papers?
How dares he preſume to vſe vs thus?
This proueth Edwards loue, & Warwiks honeſty.
King Lewis, I here proteſt in ſight of heauen,
And by the hope I haue of heauenlie bliſle,
That I am cleare from this miſdeed of Edwards.
No more my king, for h dionours me,
And moſt himſelfe▪ if he could ſee his ſhme.
Did I forget that by the houſe of Yorke.
My father came vntimelie to his death?
Did I let paſſe the abuſe done to my neece?
Did I impale him with the regall Crowne,
And thruſt king Henry from his natiue home,
And moſt vngratefull doth he vſe me thus?
My gratious Queene pardon what is paſt,
And henceforth I am thy true ſrutor.
I will reuenge the wrongs done to ladie Bona,
And replant Henry in his former ſtate.
Yes Warwike I doe quite forget thy former
Faults, if now thou wilt become king Henries friend.
So much his friend, I his vnfained friend,
That if king Lewes vouchſafe to furniſh vs
With ſome few bands of choſen ſouldiers,
Ile vndertake to land them on our coaſt,
And force the Tyrant from his ſeate by warre,
Tis not his new made bride ſhall ſuccour him.
Then at the laſt I fimlie am eſolu'd,
You ſhall haue aide: and Engliſh meſſenger returne
In poſt, and tell falſe Edward thy ſuppoſed kng,
That Lewis of France is ſending ouer Maskers
To reuell it with him and his new bride.
Tell him in hope heele be a Widower ſhortlie,
Ile weare the willow garland for hs ſake.
Tell him my mourning weedes be laidle aſide,
And I am readie to put armour on.
Tell him from me, that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore Ile vncrowne him er'e be long.
Thears thy reward, begone.
But now tell me Warwike, what aſſurance
I ſhall haue of thy true loyaltie?
This ſhall aſſure my conſtant loyaltie,
If that our Queene and this young prince agree,
Ile ioine mine eldeſt daughter and my ioie
To him forthwith in holie wedlockes bandes.
Withall my hart, that match I like full wel,
Loue her ſonne Edward, ſhee is faite and yong,
And giue thy hand to Warwike for thy loue.
It is enough, and now we will prepare,
To leuie for to go with you.
And you Lord Bourbon our high Admirall,
Shall waft them ſafelie to the Engliſh coaſt,
And chaſe proud Edward from his ſlumbring trance,
For mocking marriage with the name of France.
I cam from Edward as I mbaſſadour
But I returne his ſworne and mortall fo:
Matter of marriage was the charge he gaue me,
But dreadfull warre ſhall anſwere his demand.
Had he none elſe to make a ſtale but me?
Then none but I ſhall turne his ieſt to ſorrow.
I was the chife that raiſde him to the crowne,
And Ile be chiefe to bring him downe againe,
Not that I pittie Henries miſerie,
But ſeeke reuenge on Edwards mockerie.
Brothers of Clarence and of Gloceſter.
What thinke you of our marriage with the ladie Gray?
My Lord, we thinke as Warvvike and Levves
That are ſo ſlacke in iudgement▪ that theile take
No offence at this ſuddaine marriage.
Suppoſe they doe, they are but Levves and
Warvvike, and I am your king and Warvvikes,
And will be obaied.
And ſhall, becauſe our king but yet ſuch
Sudden marriages ſeldome proueth well.
Yea brother Richard are you againſt vs too?
Not I my Lord, no, God foreend that I ſhould
Once gaine ſe your highneſſe pleaſure,
& twere a pittie to ſunder them that yoake ſo wel togither.
your skornes and your diſlikes aſide,
Shew me ſome reaſons why the Ladie Gray,
Mare not be my loue and Englands Queene?
Speake freelie Clarence, Gloſter,
Montague and Haſtings.
My Lord then this is my opinion,
That Warwike beeing diſhonored in his embaſſage,
Doth ſeeke reuenge to quite his iniuries.
And Levves in regard of his ſiſters wrongs,
Doth oine with Warwike to ſupplant your ſtate.
Suppoſe that Lewi and Warwike be appeaſ,
By ſuch meanes as I can beſt deuiſe.
But yet to haue ioind with France in this
Alliance, would more haue ſtrengthened this out
Common wealth, gainſt orae ſtormes,
Then anie hme bred marriage.
Let England be true within it ſelfe,
We need not France not any alliance with them.
For this ſpeech the Lord Haſtings wel deſerues,
To haue the daughter and heire of the Lord Hungerford.
And what then? It was our will it ſhould be ſo?
I, and for ſuch a thing too the Lord Scales
Did well deſerue at your hands, to haue the
Daughter of the Lord Bonſield and left your
Brothers to go ſeeke elſewhere, but in
Your madnes, you butie brotherhood.
Alaſſe poore Clarence, is it for a wife,
That thou art mal-content,
Why man be of good cheere, I will prouide thee one.
Naie you plaide the broker ſoll for your ſelfe,
That you ſhall giue me leaue to make my
Choiſe as I thinke good, nd to that intent,
I ſhortlie meane to leaue you.
Leaue me or tarrie I am full reſolu'd.
Edward will not be tied to his brothers wils.
My Lords doe but right and you muſt
Confeſſe, before it pleaſd his highneſſe to aduance
My ſtate to title of a Queene,
That I was not ignoble in my birth.
Forthcare my loue to iwne vpon their frownes,
For thee they muſt obay, ſhall ob ,
And if they looke for fauour at my hands.
My Lord, heere is the meſſenger return from France.
Now ſa, What letters or what new
No letters my Lord, and ſuch without your highneſſe ſpeciall pardon I dare not late.
We pardon thee, and as neere as thou canſt
Tell me, What ſaid Lewis to our letters?
At my depatute theſe were his vetie words.
Go tell falſe Edward thy ſuppoſed king,
That Lewis of France is ſending ouer Maskers,
To reuill it with him and his new bride.
Is Lewis ſo braue, belike he thinkes me Henry.
But what ſaid Lady Bona to theſe wrongs?
Tel him quth ſhe, in hope heele proue a widdower ſhortly, Ile weare the willow garland for his ſake.
She had the wrong, indeed ſhe could ſaie
Little leſſe. But what ſaide Henries Queene, for as
I heare, ſhe was then in place?
Tell him quoth ſhee my mourning weeds be
Doone, and I am readie to put armour on.
Then be like ſhe meanes to plae the Amazon.
But what ſaid Warwike to theſe iniuries?
He more incenſed then the reſt my Lord,
Tell him quoth he, that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore Ile vncrowne him er be long.
Ha, Durſt the traytor breath out ſuch proude words?
But I will arme me to preuent the worſt.
But what is Warwike friendes with Margaret?
I my good Lord▪ theare ſo in friendſhip,
That young Prince Edward marries Warwikes daughter.
The elder, belike Clarence ſhall haue the
Yonger. All you that loue me and Warwike
Follo v me.
Clarence and Summerſet fled to Warwike.
What ſaie you brother Richard, will you ſtand to vs?
I my Lord in deſpight of all that ſhall
Withſtand you For why hath Nature
Made me halt downe right, but that I
Should be valiant and ſtand to it, for if
I would, I cannot runne awaie.
`Penbrooke, go raiſe an armie preſentlie,
Pitch vp my tent, for in the field this night
I meane to reſt, and on the morrow morne,
Ile march to meet proud Warwike ere he land
Thoſe ſtragling troopes which he hath got in France.
But ere I goe Montague and Haſtings,
You of all the reſt are neereſt allied
In bloud to Warwike, therefore tell me, if
You fauour him more then me or not:
Speake truelie, for I had rather haue you open
Enemies, then hollow friends.
So God helpe Montague as he proues true.
And Haſtings as hee fauours Edwards cauſe.
It ſhall ſuffice, come then lets march awaie.
Truſt me my Lords all hitherto goes well,
The common people by numbers ſwame to vs,
But ſee where Sommerſet and Clarence comes,
Speake ſuddenlie my Lords, are we all friends?
Feare not that my Lord.
Then gentle Clarence welcome vnto Warwike.
And welcome Summerſet, I hold it cowardiſe,
To reſt miſtruſtfull where a noble hart,
Hath pawnde an open hand in ſigne of loue,
Elſe might I thinke that Clarence▪ Edwards brother,
Were but a fained friend to our proceedings,
But welcome ſweet Clarence my daughter ſhal be thine.
And now what reſts but in nights couerture,
Thy brother being careleſlie encampt,
His ſouldiers lurking in the towne about,
And but attended by a ſimple guarde,
We maie ſurpriſe and take him at our pleaſure,
Our skouts haue found the aduenture verie eaſie,
Then crie king Henry with reſolued nundes,
And breake we preſentlie into his tent.
Why then lets on our waie in ſilent ſort,
For Warwike and his friends God and ſaint George.
This is his tent, and ſee where his guard doth
Stand, Courage my ſouldiers, now or neuer,
But follow me now, and Edward ſhall be ours.
All▪ A Warwike, a Warwike
Who goes there?
Richard and Haſtings let them go, heere is the Duke.
The Duke, why Warwike when we parted
Laſt, thou caldſt me king?
I, but the caſe is altred now.
When you diſgraſte me in my embaſſage,
Then I diſgraſte you rom being king,
And now am come to create yo Duke of Yorke,
Alaſe how ſhould you gouerne anie kingdome,
That knowes not how to vſe embaſſadors,
Nor how to vſe your brothers brotherlie,
Nohow to ſhowd your ſelfe from enimies.
Well Warwike, let fortune doe her worſt,
Edward in mind will beare himſelfe a king.
Then for his minde be Edward Englands king,
But Henry now ſhall weare the Engliſh crowne.
Go conuaie him to our brother archbiſhop of Yorke,
And when I haue fought with Penbrooke & his followers,
Ile come and tell thee what the ladie Bona ſaies,
And ſo for a while farewell good Duke of Yorke.
What followes now, all hithertoo goes well,
But we muſt diſpatch ſome letters to France,
To tell the Queene of our happy fortune,
And bid hir come with ſpeed to ioine with vs.
I thats the firſt thing that we haue to doe,
And free king Henry from impriſonment,
And ſee him ſeated in his regall throne,
Come let vs haſte awaie, and hauing paſt theſe cares,
Ile poſt to Yorke, and ſee how Edward fares.
Lord Haſtings▪ and VVilliam Stanly,
Know that the cauſe I ſent for you is this.
I looke my brother with a ſlender traine,
Should come a hunting in this forreſt heere.
The Biſhop of Yorke be friends him much,
And lets him vſe his pleaſure in the chaſe,
Now I haue priuilie ſent him word,
How I am come with you to reſcue him.
And ſee where the huntſman and he doth come.
This waie my Lord the deere is gone.
No this waie huntſman, ſee where the
Keepers ſtand. Now brother and the reſt,
What, are you prouided to depart?
I, I▪ the horſe ſtands at the parke corner,
Come, to Linne▪ and ſo take ſhipping into Flanders▪
Come then: Haſtings, and Stanlie, I will
Requite your loues. Biſhop farewell,
Sheeld thee from Warwikes frowne,
And praie that I maie repoſſeſſe the crowne.
Now huntſman what will you doe?
Marrie my Lord, I thinke I had as good
Goe with you, as tarrie heere to be hangde.
Come then lets awaie with ſpeed.
Tel me good maddam, why is your grace
So paonate of late?
Why brother Riuers, heare you not the newes,
Of that ſucceſſe king Edward had of late?
What loſſe of ſome pitcht battaile againſt Warwike,
Tuſh, feare not faire Queen, but caſt thoſe cares aſide.
King Edwards noble mind his honours doth diſplay▪
And Warwike maie looſe, though then he got the day.
If that were all, my griefes were at an end:
But greater troubles will I ar befall.
What, is he taken priſoner? by the foe,
To the danger of his royall perſon then:
I, thears my griefe, king Edward is ſurpriſde,
And led awaie, as priſoner vnto Yorke.
The newes is paſſing ſtrange. I muſt confeſſe:
Yet comfort your ſelfe, for Edward hath more friends,
Then Lancaſter at this time muſt perceiue,
That ſome will ſet him in his throne againe▪
God grant they maie, but gentle brother come,
And let me leane vpon thine arme a while,
Vntill I come vnto the ſanctuaie,
There to preſerue the fut within my wombe,
K. Edwards ſeed true heire to Englands crowne.
Thus far from Belgia haue we paſt the ſeas,
And marcht from Raunſpur hauen vnto Yorke:
But ſoft the gates are ſhut, I like not this.
Sound vp the drum and call them to the wals.
Enter the Lord Maire of Yorke vpon the wals.
My Lords we had notice of your comming,
And thats the cauſe we ſtand vpon our garde,
An I ſhut the gates for to preſerue the towne.
Henry now is king, and we are ſworne to him.
Why my Lord Maire, if Henry be your king,
Edward I am ſure at leaſt, is Duke of Yorke.
Truth my Lord, we know you for no leſſe.
I craue nothing but my Dukedome.
But when the Fox hath gotten in his head,
Heele quicklie make the boie follow after.
Why my Lord Maire, what ſtand you vpon points?
Open the gates, we are king Henries friends.
Saie you ſo, then Ile open them preſentlie.
So my Lord Maire, theſe gates muſt not be ſhut,
But in the time of warre, giue me the keies:
What, feare not man for Edward will defend
the towne and you, deſpight of all your foes.
How now Richard, who is this?
Brother, this is ſir Iohn Mountgommery,
A truſtie friend vnleſſe I be deceude.
Welcome ſir Iohn▪ Wherfore come you in armes?
To helpe king Edward in this time of ſtormes,
As euerie loyall ſubiect ought to doe.
Thankes braue Mountgommery,
But I onlie claime my Dukedom,
Vntil i pleaſe God to ſend the reſt.
Then ſae you wel▪ Drum ſtrike vp and let vs
March away, I came to ſerue a king and not a Duke.
Nay ſtae ſir Iohn, and let vs firſt debate,
With what ſecurity we maie doe this thing.
What ſtand you on debating to be briefe,
Except you preſently proclaime your ſelfe our king,
Ile hence againe, and keepe them backe that come to
Succour you, why ſhould we fight when
You pretend no title?
Fie brother, fie, ſtand you vpon tearmes?
Reſolue your ſelfe, and let vs claime the crowne.
I am reſolude once more to claime the crowne,
And win it too▪ or elſe to looſe my life.
I now my ſoueraigne ſpeaketh like himſelfe,
And now will I be Edwards Champion,
Sound Trumpets, for Edward ſhall be proclaimd.
Edward the fourth by the grace of God, king of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, and whoſoeuer gainſaes king Edwards ight: by this I challenge him to ſingle ſight, long liue Edward the fourth.
Long liue Edward the fourth.
We thanke you all. Lord Maire leade on the waie.
For this night weele habour here in Yorke,
And then s eae as the morning ſunne,
Lftes vp his beames aboue this hoiſon
Weele march to London, to meete with VVarwike:
And pull ſale Henry from the Regall throne.
Thus from the priſon to this prince lie ſeat,
By Gods great mercies am I brought
Againe, Clarence and VVarwike doe you
Keepe the crowne, and gouerue and protect
My realme in peace, and I will ſpend the
Remnant of my daies, to ſinnes rebuke
And my Creators praiſe.
What anſweres Clarence to his ſoueraignes will?
Clarenc agrees to what king Henry likes.
My Lord of Summerſet, what prettie
Boie is that you ſeeme to be ſo carefull of?
And it pleaſe your grace, it is youg Henry,
Earle of Richmond.
Henry of Richmond, Come hither pretie Ladde.
If heauenlie powers doe aime aright
To my diuining thoughts, thou pretie boy,
Shalt proue this Countries bliſſe,
Thy head is made to weare a princelie crowne,
Thy lookes are all repleat with Maieſtie,
Make much of him my Lords,
For this is he ſhall helpe you more,
Then you are hurt by me.
What Counſell Lords, Edward from Belgia,
With haſtie Germaines and blunt Hollanders,
Is paſt in ſafetie through the narrow ſeas,
And with his troopes doe march amaine towardes London,
And manie giddie people follow him.
Tis beſt to looke to this betimes,
For if this ue doe kindle any further,
It will be hard for vs to quench it out.
In Warwike ſhire I haue true harted friends,
Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in warre,
Them will I muſter vp, and thou ſonne Clarence ſhalt
In Eſſex, Sufflke, Norfolke, and in Kent,
Stir vp the knights and gentlemen to come with thee▪
And thou brother Montague, in Liſter ſhire,
Buckingham and Northampton ſhire ſhalt finde,
Men well inclinde to doe what thou commands,
And thou braue Oxford wondrous well belou'd,
Shalt in thy countries muſter vp thy friends.
My ſoueraigne with his louing Citizens,
Shall reſt in London till we come to him.
Faire Lords take leaue and ſtand not to replie,
Farewell my ſoueraigne.
Farewel my Hector, my Troyes true hope,
Farewell ſweet Lords, lets meet at Couentrie.
Agreed.
eaſe on the ſhamefaſt Henry,
And once againe conuaie him to the Tower,
Awaie with him, I will not heare him ſpeake.
And now towards Couentie let vs bend our courſe
To meet with Warwike and his confederates.
Where is the poſt that came from valiant Oxford?
How farre hence is thy Lord my honeſt fellow?
By this at Datrie marching hitherward.
Where is ou brother Montague?
Where is the poſt that came from Montague?
I left him at Donſmore with his troopes.
Say Summerfield where is my louing ſon?
And by thy geſſe, how farre is Clarence hence?
At Southham my Lord I let him with
His force, and doe expect him two houres hence.
Then Oxford is at hand, I heare his drum.
See brother, where the ſurlv Warwike mans the wal.
O vnbid ſpight, is ſpotfull Edward come!
Where ſlept our ſcouts or how are they ſeduſe,
That we could haue no newes of their repaire?
Now Warwike wilt thou be ſorrie for thy faults,
And call Edward king and he will pardon thee.
Naie rather wilt thou draw thy forces backe?
Confeſſe who ſet thee vp and puld thee downe?
Call Warwike patron and be pe ent,
And thou ſhalt ſtill remaine the Duke of Yorke.
I had thought at leaſt be would haue ſaid the king.
Or did he make the beſt againſt his will.
Twas Warwike gaue the kingdome to thy brother.
Why then tis mine, if but by Warwikes gift.
I but thou art no Atlas for ſo great a waight,
And weakling, Warwike takes his gift againe,
Henry is my king, Warwike his ſubiect▪
I prethe gallant Warwike tell me this,
What is the bodie when the head is off?
Alaſſe that Warwike had no more foreſight,
But whilſt he ſought to ſteale the ſingle ten,
The king was finelie fingerd from the decke?
You lef poore Henry in the Biſhops pallace,
And ten to one you'le meet him in the Tower.
Tis euen ſo, and yet you are olde Warwike ſtill.
O cheerefull colours, ſee where Oxford comes.
Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaſter. Exit.
The Gates are open, ſee they enter in,
Lets follow them and bid them battaile in the ſtreetes.
No, ſo ſome other might ſet vpon our backes,
Weele ſtaie till all be entered, and then follow them.
Summerſet, Summerſet for Lancaſter.
Two of thy name both Dukes of Summerſet,
Haue ſolde their liues vnto the houſe of Yorke,
And thou ſhalt be the third and my ſword hold.
Montague, Montague, for Lancaſter. Exit.
Traitorous Montague, thou and thy brother
Shall deerelie abie this rebellious act.
And loe where George of Clarence ſweepes
Along, of power enough to bid his brother battell.
Clarence, Clarence, for Lancaſter.
Et tu Brute, wilt thou ſtab Caeſar too?
A parlie ſirra to George of Clarence.
Cm Clarence come, thou wilt if Warwike call.
Father of Warwike, know you what this meanes▪
throw mine infamie at thee,
I will not ruinate my fathers houſe,
Who gaue his bloud to lime the ſtones togither,
And ſet vp Lancaſter. Thinkeſt thou
That Clarence is ſo harſh vnnaturall,
To lift his ſword againſt his brothers life,
And ſo proud harted Warwike I defie thee,
And to my brothers turne my bluſhing cheekes?
Pardon me Edward, for I hae doe amiſſe,
And Richard doe not frowne vpon me,
For hence forth I wil proue no mre vnconſtant.
Welcome Clarence, and tn times more welcome,
Then if thou neuer hadſt deſerud out hate.
Welcome good Clarence, this is bretherlie.
Oh paſſing traytor, peiurd and vniuſt.
Now Warwike, wilt thou leae
The towne and fight? or ſhall we beate the
Stones about thine eares?
Why I am not coopt vppe heere for defence,
I will awaie to Baret preſently,
And bid thee battaile Edward it thou dareſt.
Yes Warwike he dares, and leades the waie,
Lords to the field, ſaint George and victorie.
Alarmes, and ten enter Warwike wounded.
Ah, who is ? Come to m friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor Yrke or Warwike?
Why aske I that? my ma gld bodie ſhewes,
That I muſt yeeld my bodie to the earth.
And by my fall the conqueſt to my foes,
Thus yeelds the Cedar to the ax edge.
Whoſe armes gue ſhltr to the princelie Eagl,
Vnder whoſe ad the rampng ion ſlept,
Whoſe top branch ouerpeerd Ioues ſreading tree.
The wrinkles in my browes now ild with bloud,
Were likened oft to inglie ſepulchers.
For who liu'd king, but I could ig his graue?
And who durſt ſmile, when Warwike bent his brow?
Lo now my gloe ſmeerd in duſt and bloud,
My parkes my wales, my mannors that I had,
Euen now forſake me and of all my lands,
Is nothing left me but my bodies length.
Ah Warwike, Warwike, cheere vp thy ſelfe and lie,
For yt thears hope enough to win the daie.
Our warlike Queene with troops is come from Frace,
And at Southhmpton landed all hi traine,
And mightſt thou lue then would we neuer flie.
Which then I would not flie nor haue I now,
But Hercules himſelfe muſt yeeld to ods,
For me wounds receiu'd, and manie moe repaid,
Hath robd my ſtrong knit news of their ſtrength,
And ſpite of ſptes needes muſt I yeeld to death.
Thy brother Mntague hth breathd his laſt,
And at the pangs of death I heard hm crie
And ſaie, commend me to my valiant brother,
And more he would haue ſpoke and he ſaid,
Which ſounded like a a vault,
That could not b diſtinguiſht for the ſound,
And ſo the valant Montague gaue vp the ghoſt.
What is pompe, rule, rage, but earth and duſt▪
And liue we how we can, yet the w mſt.
Sweet reſt his ſoule, ſhe Lords and your ſelues,
For Warwike bids you all farewell to mee n Hauen.
Come noble Summerſet, lets take our horſe,
And cauſe retrait be ſounded through the campe,
That all our friends that yt remaine aliue▪,
Maie be awarn'd and aue themſelues by flight.
That done, with them weele poſt vnto the Queene,
And once moeui our fortune in th fild
Thus ſtill our fortune vs victorie,
And gts our temples with trumphant oies
The bigboond traytor Warwike hath breathde his laſt,
An I heauen this daie hath ſmde von vall,
But in this cleere and brightſome ae,
I ſee a blacke ſuſpitious cloud appeare
That will encunter with our glorious ſunne
Before he gaine his aſefull w ſtee be es,
I mean thoſe powers which the Queen hath got in Frāce
Are landed, and meane once more to menace vs.
Oxford and Summerſet are ſled to hi,
And likelie if ſhe haue time to breath,
Hr fact on will be full as ſtrong as ours.
We are aduertiſde by our louing friends,
That they doe hold their courſe towards Towburie.
Thther will we for willingnes rids waie,
And in euerie countie as we paſe along,
O ſtr engthes ſhall be augmented.
Come lets goe, for if we ſlacke this faire
Bght Summers daie, ſharpe winters
Shoers wll mae our hope for haie.
Welcome to England, my louing friends of Frāce,
And welcome Summerſet, and Oxford too.
One more haue we ſpread our ſailes abroad,
And though our tackling be almoſt conſumde,
And Warwike as our maine maſt ouerthrowne,
Yet walike Lords raiſe you that ſturdie poſt,
That beares the ſiles to bring vs vnto reſt,
And Ne and I as willing Plots ſhould
For once with carefull mindes guide on the ſterne,
To beare vs through that dangerous gulfe
That heretofore hath ſwallowed vp our friends.
And if there be, as God forbid there ſhould,
Amongſt vs a timorous or fearefull man,
Let him depart before the battels ioine,
eaſt he in time of need intiſe another,
And ſo withdraw the ſouldiers harts from vs.
I will not ſtand aloofe and bid you fight,
But with my ſword preſſe in the thickeſt thronges,
And ſingle Edward from his ſtrongeſt guard,
And hand to hand enforce him for to yeeld,
Or leaue my bodie as witneſſe of my thoughts.
Women and children of ſo high reſolue,
And Warriors faint, why twere perpetuall
Shame? Oh braue yong Prince, thy
Noble grandfather doth liue againe in thee,
Long maieſt thou liue to beare his image,
And to renew his glories.
And he that turnes and flies when ſuch do fight,
Let him to bed, and like the Owle by daie
Be hiſt, and wondered at if he ariſe.
My Lords, Duke Edward with a mighty power,
Is maching hitherwards to fight with you.
I thought it was his pollicie, to take vs vnprouided,
But here will we ſtand and fight it to the death.
See brothers, yonder ſtands the thornie wood,
Which by Gods aſſiſtance and your proweſſe,
Shall with our ſwords yer night be cleane cut downe.
Lords, Knights & gentlemen, what I ſhould ſay,
My teares gaineſaie, for as you ſee, I drinke
The water of mine eies. Then no more
But this. Henry your king is priſoner
In the tower, his land and all our friends
Are quite diſtreſt, and yonder ſtandes
The Wolfe that makes all this,
Then on Gods name Lords togither cry ſaint George.
All Saint George for Lancaſter.
Lo here a period of tumultuous broiles,
Awaie with Oxford to Hames caſtell ſtraight,
For Summerſet off with his guiltie head.
Awaie I wil not heare them ſpeake.
For my part Ile not trouble thee with words.
Not I, but ſtoope with patience to my death.
Now Edward what ſatisfaction canſt thou make,
or ſtirring vp my ſubiects to rebellion?
Speake like a ſubiect proud ambitious Yorke,
Suppoſe that I am now my fathers mouth,
Reſigne thy chaire▪ and where I ſtand kneele thou,
Whilſt I propoſe the ſelfeſame words to thee,
Which traytor thou woudſt haue me anſwere to.
Oh that thy father had bin ſo reſolud▪
That you might ſtill haue kept your
Peticote, and nere haue ſlolne the
Brh from Lancaſter.
Let Aeſop fable in a winters night.
His cſh Riddles ſorts not with this place.
By heauen brat Ile plague you for that word.
I▪ thou waſt borne to be a plague to men.
For Gods ſake take a waie this captiue ſcold.
Nay take away this skolding Crooktbacke rather.
Peace wilfull boy, or I will tame your tongue.
Vntuterd lad thou art too malepert.
I know my dutie, you are all vndutifull.
Laſciuious Edward, and thou periurd George,
And thou miſhapen Dicke, I tell you all,
I am your better, traytors as you be.
Take that, the litnes of this railer heere.
Oh kill me too.
Marrie and ſhall.
Hold Richard hold, for we haue doone too much alreadie.
Why ſhould ſhe liue to fill the world with words?
What doth ſhe ſwound: make meanes for Her recouerie?
Clarence, excuſe me to the king my brother,
I muſt to London on a ſerious matter,
Ere you come there▪ you ſhall heare more newes.
About what, prethe tell me?
The Towerman, the Tower, Ile root them out
Ah Ned, ſpeake to thy mother boy? ah
Thou canſt not ſpeake.
Traytors, Tyrants, bloudie Homicides,
They that ſtabd Caeſar ſhed no bloud at all,
For he was a man, this in reſpect a childe,
And men nere ſpend then furie on a child,
Whats worſe then tyrant that I maie name,
You haue no children Deuils, if you had,
The thought of them would then haue ſtopt your rage,
But if you euer hope to haue a ſonne,
Looke in his youth to haue him ſo cut off,
As Traitors you haue doone this ſweet young prine.
Awaie, and beare her hence.
Naie nere beare me hence, diſpatch
Me heere, heere ſheath thy ſword,
Ile pardon thee my death. Wilt thou not?
Then Clarence, doe thou doe it?
By Heauen I would not doe thee ſo much eaſe.
Good Clarence doe, ſweet Clarence kill me too.
Didſt thou not heare me ſweare I would not do it?
I, but thou vſeſt to forſweare thy ſelfe,
Twas ſinne before, but now tis charitie.
Wheas the Diuels butcher, hardfauored Richard,
Richard where art thou? He is not heere,
Murder is his almes deed, petitioners
For bloud he nere put backe.
Awaie I ſaie, and take her hence perforce.
So come to you and yours, as to this prince.
Clarence, whithers Gloſter gone?
Marrie my Lord to London, and as I geſſe, to
Make a bloudie ſupper in the Tower.
He is ſudden if a thing come in his head.
Well, diſcharge the common ſouldiers with paie
And thankes, and now let vs towards London,
To ſee our gentle Queene how ſhee doth fare,
For by this I hope ſhee hath a ſonne for vs.
Good day my Lord. What at your booke ſo hard?
I my good Lord. Lord I ſhould ſaie rather,
Tis ſinne to flatter, good was little better,
Good Gloſter, and good Diuell, were all alike,
What ſcene of Death hath Roſius now to act?
Suſpition alwaies haunts a guiltie mind.
The birde once limde doth feare the fatall buſh,
And I the hapleſſe maile to one poore birde,
Haue now the fatall obiect in mine eie,
Where my poore young was limde, was caught & kild.
Why, what a foole was that of Creee?
That taught his ſonne the office
Of a birde, and yet for all that the poore
Fowle was drownde.
I Dedalus, my poore ſonne Icarus,
Thy father Minos that denide our courſe,
Thy brother Edward, the ſunne that earde his wings,
And thou the enuios gulfe that ſwallowed him.
Oh better can my breſt abide thy daggers point,
Then can mine cares that tragike hiſtorie.
Why doſt thou thinke I am an executioner?
A perſecutor I am ſure thou art,
And if murdering innocents be executions,
Then I know thou art an executioner.
Thy ſonne I kild for his preſumption.
Hadſt thou bin kild when firſt thou didſt preſume,
Thou hadſt not liude to kill a ſonne of mine,
And thus I propheſie of theo.
That manie a Widdow for her husbands death,
And many an infants water ſtanding eie,
Widowes for their husbands, children for their fathers,
Shall curſe the time that euer thou wert borne.
The owle ſikt at thy birth, an euill ſigne,
The night Crow cride, aboding luckleſſe tune,
Dogs howld and hideous tempeſts ſhooke down trees,
The Rauen rookt her on the Chimnies top,
And chattering Pis in diſmall diſcord ſung,
Thy mother felt more then a mothers paine,
And yet brought orth leſſe then a mothers hope,
To wit▪ an vndigeſt created lumpe.
Not like the fruit of ſuch a goodly tree,
Teeth hadſt thou in thy head when thou waſt borne,
Thus haue we ſwept ſuſpition from our ſeat,
And made our footſtoole of ſecuritie.
Come hither Beſſe, and let me kiſſe my boie,
Young Ned, for thee, thine Vncles and my ſelfe,
Haue in our armors watcht the Winters night,
Marcht all a foote in ſummers skalding heat,
That thou mightſt epoſſeſſe the crowne in peace,
And of out labours thou ſhalt reape the gaine.
Ile blaſt his harueſt and your head were laid,
For yet I am not lookt on in the world.
This ſhoulder was ordaind ſo thicke to heaue,
And heaue it ſhall ſome waight or breake my backe,
Worke thou the waie, and thou ſhalt execute.
Edward, Clarence and Gloſter, loue my louelie Queene,
And kiſſe your princely nephew brothers both.
The dutie that I owe vnto your, Maieſtie,
I ſeale vpon the roſiate lips of this ſweet babe.
Thankes noble Clarence worthie brother thankes.
And that I loue the fruit from whence thou
Sprangſt, witneſſe the louing kiſſe I giue the child.
To ſaie the truth ſo Iudas kiſt his maiſter,
And ſo he cride all haile▪ and meant all hae.
Nowe am I ſeated as my ſoule delights,
Hauing my countries peace, and brothers loues.
What will your grace haue done with Margaret▪
Ranard her father to the king of France,
Hath pawnd the Cyſſels and Ieruſalem,
And hither haue they ſent it for her ranſome.
Awaie with her, and wate hir hence to France,
And now what reſts but that we ſpend the time,
With ſtately Triumphs and mirthfull comick ſhewes,
Such as befits the pleaſures of the Court.
Sound drums and Trumpets, farewell to ſower annoy,
For heere I hope begins our laſting ioie.