NOw is the Winter of our Diſcontent,
Made glorious Summer by this Son of Yorke:
And all the clouds that lowr'd vpon our houſe
In the deepe boſome of the Ocean buried.
Now are our browes bound with Victorious Wreathes,
Our bruiſed armes hung vp for Monuments;
Our ſterne Alarums chang'd to merry Meetings;
Our dreadfull Marches, to delightfull Meaſures.
Grim-viſag'd Warre, hath ſmooth'd his wrinkled Front:
And now, in ſtead of mounting Barbed Steeds,
To fright the Soules of fearfull Aduerſaries,
He capers nimbly in a Ladies Chamber,
To the laſciuious pleaſing of a Lute.
But I, that am not ſhap'd for ſportiue trickes,
Nor made to court an amorous Looking-glaſſe:
I, that am Rudely ſtampt, and want loues Maieſty,
To ſtrut before a wonton ambling Nymph:
I, that am curtail'd of this faire Proportion,
Cheated of Feature by diſſembling Nature,
Deform'd, vn-finiſh'd, ſent before my time
Into this breathing World, ſcarſe halfe made vp,
And that ſo lamely and vnfaſhionable,
That dogges barke at me, as I halt by them.
Why I (in this weake piping time of Peace)
Haue no delight to paſſe away the time,
Vnleſſe to ſee my Shadow in the Sunne,
And deſcant on mine owne Deformity.
And therefore, ſince I cannot proue a Louer,
To entertaine theſe faire well ſpoken dayes,
I am determined to proue a Villaine,
And hate the idle pleaſures of theſe dayes.
Plots haue I laide, Inductions dangerous,
By drunken Propheſies, Libels, and Dreames,
To ſet my Brother Clarence and the King
In deadly hate, the one againſt the other:
And if King Edward be as true and iuſt,
As I am Subtle, Falſe, and Treacherous,
This day ſhould Clarence cloſely be mew'd vp:
About a Propheſie, which ſayes that G,
Of Edwards heyres the murtherer ſhall be.
Diue thoughts downe to my ſoule, here Clarence comes.
Brother, good day: What meanes this armed guard
That waites vpon your Grace?
His Maieſty tendring my perſons ſafety,
Hath appointed this Conduct, to conuey me to th' Tower
Vpon what cauſe?
Becauſe my name is George.
Alacke my Lord, that fault is none of yours:
He ſhould for that commit your Godfathers.
O belike, his Maieſty hath ſome intent,
That you ſhould be new Chriſtned in the Tower.
But what's the matter Clarence, may I know?
Yea Richard, when I know: but I proteſt
As yet I do not: But as I can learne,
He hearkens after Propheſies and Dreames,
And from the Croſſe-row pluckes the letter G:
And ſayes, a Wizard told him, that by G,
His iſſue diſinherited ſhould be.
And for my name of George begins with G,
It followes in his thought, that I am he.
Theſe (as I learne) and ſuch like toyes as theſe,
Hath moou'd his Highneſſe to commit me now.
Why this it is, when men are rul'd by Women:
'Tis not the King that ſends you to the Tower,
My Lady Grey his Wife, Clarence 'tis ſhee.
That tempts him to this harſh Extremity.
Was it not ſhee, and that good man of Worſhip,
Anthony Woodeulle her Brother there,
That made him ſend Lord Haſtings to the Tower?
From whence this preſent day he is deliuered?
We are not ſafe Clarence, we are not ſafe.
By heauen, I thinke there is no man ſecure
But the Queenes Kindred, and night-walking Heralds,
That trudge betwixt the King, and Miſtris Shore.
Heard you not what an humble Suppliant
Lord Haſtings was, for her deliuery?
Humbly complaining to her Deitie,
Got my Lord Chamberlaine his libertie.
Ile tell you what, I thinke it is our way,
If we will keepe in fauour with the King,
To be her men, and weare her Liuery.
The iealous ore-worne Widdow, and her ſelfe,
Since that our Brother dub'd them Gentlewomen,
Are mighty Goſsips in our Monarchy.
I beſeech your Graces both to pardon me,
His Maieſty hath ſtraightly giuen in charge,
That no man ſhall haue priuate Conference
(Of what degree ſoeuer) with your Brother.
Euen ſo, and pleaſe your Worſhip Brakenbury,
You may partake of any thing we ſay:
We ſpeake no Treaſon man; We ſay the King
Is wiſe and vertuous, and his Noble Queene
Well ſtrooke in yeares, faire, and not iealious.
We ſay, that Shores Wife hath a pretty Foot,
A cherry Lip, a bonny Eye, a paſsing pleaſing tongue:
And that the Queenes Kindred are made gentle Folkes.
How ſay you ſir? can you deny all this?
With this (my Lord) my ſelfe haue nought to doo.
Naught to do with Miſtris Shore?
I tell thee Fellow, he that doth naught with her
(Excepting one) were beſt to do it ſecretly alone.
What one, my Lord?
Her Husband Knaue, would'ſt thou betray me?
I do beſeech your Grace
To pardon me, and withall forbeare
Your Conference with the Noble Duke.
We know thy charge Brakenbury, and wil obey.
We are the Queenes abiects, and muſt obey.
Brother farewell, I will vnto the King,
And whatſoe're you will imploy me in,
Were it to call King Edwards Widdow, Siſter,
I will performe it to infranchiſe you▪
Meane time, this deepe diſgrace in Brotherhood.
Touches me deeper then you can imagine.
I know it pleaſeth neither of vs well.
Well, your impriſonment ſhall not be long,
I will deliuer you, or elſe lye for you:
Meane time, haue patience.
I muſt perforce: Farewell.
Go treade the path that thou ſhalt ne're return:
Simple plaine Clarence, I do loue thee ſo,
That I will ſhortly ſend thy Soule to Heauen,
If Heauen will take the preſent at our hands.
But who comes heere? the new deliuered Haſtings?
Good time of day vnto my gracious Lord.
As much vnto my good Lord Chamberlaine:
Well are you welcome to this open Ayre,
How hath your Lordſhip brook'd impriſonment?
With patience (Noble Lord) as priſoners muſt:
But I ſhall liue (my Lord) to giue them thankes
That were the cauſe of my impriſonment.
No doubt, no doubt, and ſo ſhall Clarence too,
For they that were your Enemies, are his,
And haue preuail'd as much on him, as you,
More pitty, that the Eagles ſhould be mew'd,
Whiles Kites and Buzards play at liberty.
What newes abroad?
No newes ſo bad abroad, as this at home:
The King is ſickly, weake, and melancholly,
And his Phyſitians feare him mightily.
Now by S. Iohn, that Newes is bad indeed.
O he hath kept an euill Diet long,
And ouer-much conſum'd his Royall Perſon:
'Tis very greeuous to be thought vpon
Where is he, in his bed?
He is.
Go you before, and I will follow you.
He cannot liue I hope, and muſt not dye,
Till George be pack'd with poſt-horſe vp to Heauen.
Ile in to vrge his hatred more to Clarence,
With Lyes well ſteel'd with weighty Arguments,
And if I faile not in my deepe intent,
Clarence hath not another day to liue:
Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,
And leaue the world for me to bſsle in.
For then, Ile marry Warwickes yongeſt daughter.
What though I kill'd her Husband, and her Father,
The readieſt way to make the Wench amends,
Is to become her Husband, and her Father:
The which will I, not all ſo much for loue,
As for another ſecret cloſe intent,
By marrying her, which I muſt reach vnto▪
But yet I run before my horſe to Market:
Clarence ſtill breathes, Edward ſtill liues and raignes,
When they are gone, then muſt I count my gaines.
Set downe, ſet downe your honourable load,
If Honor may be ſhrowded in a Herſe;
Whil'ſt I a-while obſequiouſly lament
Th' vntimely fall of Vertuous Lancaſter.
Poore key-cold Figure of a holy King,
Pale Aſhes of the Houſe of Lancaſter;
Thou bloodleſſe Remnant of that Royall Blood,
Be it lawfull that I inuocate thy Ghoſt,
To heare the Lamentations of poore Anne,
Wife to thy Edward, to thy ſlaughtred Sonne,
Stab'd by the ſelfeſame hand that made theſe wounds.
Loe, in theſe windowes that let forth thy life,
I powre the helpleſſe Balme of my poore eyes.
O curſed be the hand that made theſe holes:
Curſed the Heart, that had the heart to do it:
Curſed the Blood, that let this blood from hence:
More direfull hap betide that hated Wretch
That makes vs wretched by the death of thee,
Then I can wiſh to Wolues, to Spiders, Toades,
Or any creeping venom'd thing that liues.
If euer he haue Childe, Abortiue be it,
Prodigeous, and vntimely brought to light,
Whoſe vgly and vnnaturall Aſpect
May fright the hopefull Mother at the view,
And that be Heyre to his vnhappineſſe.
If euer he haue Wife, let her be made
More miſerable by the death of him,
Then I am made by my young Lord, and thee.
Come now towards Chertſey with your holy Lode,
Taken from Paules, to be interred there.
And ſtill as you are weary of this waight,
Reſt you, whiles I lament King Henries Coarſe.
Stay you that beare the Coarſe, & ſet it down.
What blacke Magitian coniures vp this Fiend,
To ſtop deuoted charitable deeds?
Villaines ſet downe the Coarſe, or by S. Paul,
Ile make a Coarſe of him that diſobeyes.
My Lord ſtand backe, and let the Coffin paſſe.
Vnmanner'd Dogge,
Stand'ſt thou when I commaund:
Aduance thy Halbert higher then my breſt,
Or by S. Paul Ile ſtrike thee to my Foote,
And ſpurne vpon thee Begger for thy boldneſſe.
What do you tremble? are you all affraid?
Alas, I blame you not, for you are Mortall,
And Mortall eyes cannot endure the Diuell.
Auant thou dreadfull miniſter of Hell;
Thou had'ſt but power ouer his Mortall body,
His Soule thou canſt not haue: Therefore be gone.
Sweet Saint, for Charity, be not ſo curſt.
Foule Diuell,
For Gods ſake hence, and trouble vs not,
For thou haſt made the happy earth thy Hell:
Fill'd it with curſing cries, and deepe exclaimes:
If thou delight to view thy heynous deeds,
Behold this patterne of thy Butcheries.
Oh Gentlemen, ſee, ſee dead Henries wounds,
Open their congeal'd mouthes, and bleed afreſh.
Bluſh, bluſh, thou lumpe of fowle Deformitie:
For 'tis thy preſence that exhales this blood
From cold and empty Veines where no blood dwels.
Thy Deeds inhumane and vnnaturall,
Prouokes this Deluge moſt vnnaturall.
O God! which this Blood mad'ſt, reuenge his death:
O Earth! which this Blood drink'ſt, reuenge his death.
Either Heau'n with Lightning ſtrike the murth'rer dead:
Or Earth gape open wide, and eate him quicke,
As thou doſt ſwallow vp this good Kings blood,
Which his Hell-gouern'd arme hath butchered.
Lady, you know no Rules of Charity,
Which renders good for bad, Bleſſings for Curſes.
Villaine, thou know'ſt nor law of God nor Man,
No Beaſt ſo fierce, but knowes ſome touch of pitty.
But I know none, and therefore am no Beaſt.
O wonderfull, when diuels tell the truth!
More wonderfull, when Angels are ſo angry:
Vouchſafe (diuine perfection of a Woman)
Of theſe ſuppoſed Crimes, to giue me leaue
By circumſtance, but to acquit my ſelfe.
Vouchſafe (defus'd infection of man)
Of theſe knowne euils, but to giue me leaue
By circumſtance, to curſe thy curſed Selfe.
Fairer then tongue can name thee, let me haue
Some patient leyſure to excuſe my ſelfe.
Fouler then heart can thinke thee,
Thou can'ſt make no excuſe currant,
But to hang thy ſelfe.
By ſuch diſpaire, I ſhould accuſe my ſelfe.
And by diſpairing ſhalt thou ſtand excuſed,
For doing worthy Vengeance on thy ſelfe,
That did'ſt vnworthy ſlaughter vpon others.
Say that I ſlew them not.
Then ſay they were not ſlaine:
But dead they are, and diuelliſh ſlaue by thee.
I did not kill your Husband.
Why then he is aliue.
Nay, he is dead, and ſlaine by Edwards hands.
In thy foule throat thou Ly'ſt,
Queene Margaret ſaw
Thy murd'rous Faulchion ſmoaking in his blood:
The which, thou once didd'ſt bend againſt her breſt,
But that thy Brothers beate aſide the point.
I was prouoked by her ſland'rous tongue,
That laid their guilt, vpon my guiltleſſe Shoulders.
Thou was't prouoked by thy bloody minde,
That neuer dream'ſt on ought but Butcheries:
Did'ſt thou not kill this King?
I graunt ye.
Do'ſt grant me Hedge-hogge,
Then God graunt me too
Thou may'ſt be damned for that wicked deede,
O he was gentle, milde, and vertuous.
The better for the King of heauen that hath him.
He is in heauen, where thou ſhalt neuer come.
Let him thanke me, that holpe to ſend him thither:
For he was fitter for that place then earth.
And thou vnfit for any place, but hell.
Yes one place elſe, if you will heare me name it.
Some dungeon.
Your Bed-chamber.
Ill reſt betide the chamber where thou lyeſt.
So will it Madam, till I lye with you.
I hope ſo.
I know ſo. But gentle Lady Anne,
To leaue this keene encounter of our wittes,
And fall ſomething into a ſlower method.
Is not the cauſer of the timeleſſe deaths
Of theſe Plantagenets, Henrie and Edward,
As blamefull as the Executioner.
Thou was't the cauſe, and moſt accurſt effect.
Your beauty was the cauſe of that effect:
Your beauty, that did haunt me in my ſleepe,
To vndertake the death of all the world,
So I might liue one houre in your ſweet boſome.
If I thought that, I tell thee Homicide,
Theſe Nailes ſhould rent that beauty from my Cheekes.
Theſe eyes could not endure yt beauties wrack,
You ſhould not blemiſh it, if I ſtood by;
As all the world is cheared by the Sunne,
So I by that: It is my day, my life.
Blacke night ore-ſhade thy day, & death thy life.
Curſe not thy ſelfe faire Creature,
Thou art both.
I would I were, to be reueng'd on thee.
It is a quarrell moſt vnnaturall,
To be reueng'd on him that loueth thee.
It is a quarrell iuſt and reaſonable,
To be reueng'd on him that kill'd my Husband.
He that bereft the Lady of thy Husband,
Did it to helpe thee to a better Husband.
His better doth not breath vpon the earth.
He liues, that loues thee better then he could.
Name him.
Plantagenet.
Why that was he.
The ſelfeſame name, but one of better Nature.
Where is he?
Heere:
Why doſt thou ſpit at me.
Would it were mortall poyſon, for thy ſake.
Neuer came poyſon from ſo ſweet a place.
Neuer hung poyſon on a fowler Toade.
Out of my ſight, thou doſt infect mine eyes.
Thine eyes (ſweet Lady) haue infected mine.
Would they were Baſiliskes, to ſtrike thee dead.
I would they were, that I might dye at once:
For now they kill me with a liuing death.
Thoſe eyes of thine, from mine haue drawne ſalt Teares;
Sham'd their Aſpects with ſtore of childiſh drops:
Theſe eyes, which neuer ſhed remorſefull teare,
No, when my Father Yorke, and Edward wept,
To heare the pittious moane that Rutland made
When black-fac'd Clifford ſhooke his ſword at him.
Nor when thy warlike Father like a Childe,
Told the ſad ſtorie of my Fathers death,
And twenty times, made pauſe to ſob and weepe:
That all the ſtanders by had wet their cheekes
Like Trees bedaſh'd with raine. In that ſad time,
My manly eyes did ſcorne an humble teare:
And what theſe ſorrowes could not thence exhale,
Thy Beauty hath, and made them blinde with weeping.
I neuer ſued to Friend, nor Enemy:
My Tongue could neuer learne ſweet ſmoothing word.
But now thy Beauty is propos'd my Fee,
My proud heart ſues, and prompts my tongue to ſpeake.
Teach not thy lip ſuch Scorne; for it was made
For kiſſing Lady, not for ſuch contempt.
If thy reuengefull heart cannot forgiue,
Loe heere I lend thee this ſharpe-pointed Sword,
Which if thou pleaſe to hide in this true breſt,
And let the Soule forth that adoreth thee,
I lay it naked to the deadly ſtroke,
And humbly begge the death vpon my knee,
Nay do not pauſe: For I did kill King Henrie,
But 'twas thy Beauty that prouoked me.
Nay now diſpatch: 'Twas I that ſtabb'd yong Edward,
But 'twas thy Heauenly face that ſet me on.
Take vp the Sword againe, or take vp me.
Ariſe Diſſembler, though I wiſh thy death,
I will not be thy Executioner.
Then bid me kill my ſelfe, and I will do it.
I haue already.
That was in thy rage:
Speake it againe, and euen with the word,
This hand, which for thy loue, did kill thy Loue,
Shall for thy loue, kill a farre truer Loue,
To both their deaths ſhalt thou be acceſſary.
I would I knew thy heart.
'Tis figur'd in my tongue.
I feare me, both are falſe.
Then neuer Man was true.
Well, well, put vp your Sword.
Say then my Peace is made.
That ſhalt thou know heereafter.
But ſhall I liue in hope.
All men I hope liue ſo.
Vouchſafe to weare this Ring.
Looke how my Ring incompaſſeth thy Finger,
Euen ſo thy Breſt incloſeth my poore heart:
Weare both of them, for both of them are thine.
And if thy poore deuoted Seruant may
But beg one fauour at thy gracious hand,
Thou doſt confirme his happineſſe for euer.
What is it?
That it may pleaſe you leaue theſe ſad deſignes,
To him that hath moſt cauſe to be a Mourner,
And preſently repayre to Crosbie Houſe:
Where (after I haue ſolemnly interr'd
At Chertſey Monaſt'ry this Noble King,
And wet his Graue with my Repentant Teares)
I will with all expedient duty ſee you,
For diuers vnknowne Reaſons, I beſeech you,
Grant me this Boon.
With all my heart, and much it ioyes me too,
To ſee you are become ſo penitent.
Treſſel and Barkley, go along with me.
Bid me farwell.
'Tis more then you deſerue:
But ſince you teach me how to flatter you,
Imagine I haue ſaide farewell already.
Towards Chertſey, Noble Lord?
No: to White Friars, there attend my comming
Was euer woman in this humour woo'd?
Was euer woman in this humour wonne?
Ile haue her, but I will not keepe her long.
What? I that kill'd her Husband, and his Father,
To take her in her hearts extreameſt hate,
With curſes in her mouth, Teares in her eyes,
The bleeding witneſſe of my hatred by,
Hauing God, her Conſcience, and theſe bars againſt me,
And I, no Friends to backe my ſuite withall,
But the plaine Diuell, and diſſembling lookes?
And yet to winne her? All the world to nothing.
Hah!
Hath ſhe forgot alreadie that braue Prince,
Edward, her Lord, whom I (ſome three monthes ſince)
Stab'd in my angry mood, at Tewkesbury?
A ſweeter, and a louelier Gentleman,
Fram'd in the prodigallity of Nature:
Yong, Valiant, Wiſe, and (no doubt) right Royal,
The ſpacious World cannot againe affoord:
And will ſhe yet abaſe her eyes on me,
That cropt the Golden prime of this ſweet Prince,
And made her Widdow to a wofull Bed?
On me, whoſe All not equals Edwards Moytie?
On me, that halts, and am miſhapen thus?
My Dukedome, to a Beggerly denier!
I do miſtake my perſon all this while:
Vpon my life ſhe findes (although I cannot)
My ſelfe to be a maru'llous proper man.
Ile be at Charges for a Looking-glaſſe,
And entertaine a ſcore or two of Taylors,
To ſtudy faſhions to adorne my body:
Since I am crept in fauour with my ſelfe,
I will maintaine it with ſome little coſt.
But firſt Ile turne you Fellow in his Graue,
And then returne lamenting to my Loue.
Shine out faire Sunne, till I haue bought a glaſſe,
That I may ſee my Shadow as I paſſe.
Haue patience Madam, ther's no doubt his Maieſty
Will ſoone recouer his accuſtom'd health.
In that you brooke it ill, it makes him worſe,
Therefore for Gods ſake entertaine good comfort,
And cheere his Grace with quicke and merry eyes
If he were dead, what would betide on me?
No other harme, but loſſe of ſuch a Lord.
The loſſe of ſuch a Lord, includes all harmes.
The Heauens haue bleſt you with a goodly Son,
To be your Comforter, when he is gone.
Ah! he is yong; and his minority
Is put vnto the truſt of Richard Glouſter,
A man that loues not me, nor none of you.
Is it concluded he ſhall be Protector?
It is determin'd, not concluded yet:
But ſo it muſt be, if the King miſcarry.
Here comes the Lord of Buckingham & Derby.
Good time of day vnto your Royall Grace.
God make your Maieſty ioyful, as you haue bin
The Counteſſe Richmond, good my L. of Derby.
To your good prayer, will ſcarſely ſay, Amen.
Yet Derby, notwithſtanding ſhee's your wife,
And loues not me, be you good Lord aſſur'd,
I hate not you for her proud arrogance.
I do beſeech you, either not beleeue
The enuious ſlanders of her falſe Accuſers:
Or if ſhe be accus'd on true report,
Beare with her weakneſſe, which I thinke proceeds
From wayward ſickneſſe, and no grounded malice.
Saw you the King to day my Lord of Derby.
But now the Duke of Buckingham and I,
Are come from viſiting his Maieſty.
What likelyhood of his amendment Lords.
Madam good hope, his Grace ſpeaks chearfully.
God grant him health, did you confer with him?
I Madam, he deſires to make attonement▪
Betweene the Duke of Glouſter, and your Brothers,
And betweene them, and my Lord Chamberlaine,
And ſent to warne them to his Royall preſence.
Would all were well, but that will neuer be,
I feare our happineſſe is at the height.
They do me wrong, and I will not indure it,
Who is it that complaines vnto the King,
Thar I (forſooth) am ſterne, and loue them not?
By holy Paul, they loue his Grace but lightly,
That fill his eares with ſuch diſſentious Rumors.
Becauſe I cannot flatter, and looke faire,
Smile in mens faces, ſmooth, deceiue, and cogge,
Ducke with French nods, and Apiſh curteſie,
I muſt be held a rancorous Enemy.
Cannot a plaine man liue, and thinke no harme,
But thus his ſimple truth muſt be abus'd,
With ſilken, ſlye, inſinuating Iackes?
To who in all this preſence ſpeaks your Grace?
To thee, that haſt nor Honeſty, nor Grace:
When haue I iniur'd thee? When done thee wrong?
Or thee? or thee? or any of your Faction?
A plague vpon you all. His Royall Grace
(Whom God preſerue better then you would wiſh)
Cannot be quiet ſcarſe a breathing while,
But you muſt trouble him with lewd complaints.
Brother of Glouſter, you miſtake the matter:
The King on his owne Royall diſpoſition,
(And not prouok'd by any Sutor elſe)
Ayming (belike) at your interiour hatred,
That in your outward action ſhewes it ſelfe
Againſt my Children, Brothers, and my Selfe,
Makes him to ſend, that he may learne the ground.
I cannot tell, the world is growne ſo bad,
That Wrens make prey, where Eagles dare not pearch.
Since euerie Iacke became a Gentleman,
There's many a gentle perſon made a Iacke.
Come, come, we know your meaning Brother Gloſter
You enuy my aduancement, and my friends:
God grant we neuer may haue neede of you.
Meane time, God grants that I haue need of you.
Our Brother is impriſon'd by your meanes,
My ſelfe diſgrac'd, and the Nobilitie
Held in contempt, while great Promotions
Are daily giuen to ennoble thoſe
That ſcarſe ſome two dayes ſince were worth a Noble.
By him that rais'd me to this carefull height,
From that contented hap which I inioy'd,
I neuer did incenſe his Maieſtie
Againſt the Duke of Clarence, but haue bin
An earneſt aduocate to plead for him.
My Lord you do me ſhamefull iniurie,
Falſely to draw me in theſe vile ſuſpects.
You may deny that you were not the meane
Of my Lord Haſtings late impriſonment.
She may my Lord, for—
She may Lord Riuers, why who knowes not ſo?
She may do more ſir then denying that:
She may helpe you to many faire preferments,
And then deny her ayding hand therein,
And lay thoſe Honors on your high deſert.
What may ſhe not, ſhe may, I marry may ſhe.
What marry may ſhe?
What marrie may ſhe? Marrie with a King,
A Batcheller, and a handſome ſtripling too,
I wis your Grandam had a worſer match.
My Lord of Glouſter, I haue too long borne
Your blunt vpbraidings, and your bitter ſcoffes:
By heauen, I will acquaint his Maieſtie
Of thoſe groſſe taunts that oft I haue endur'd.
I had rather be a Countrie ſeruant maide
Then a great Queene, with this condition,
To be ſo baited, ſcorn'd, and ſtormed at,
Small ioy haue I in being Englands Queene.
And leſned be that ſmall, God I beſeech him,
Thy honor, ſtate, and ſeate, is due to me.
What? threat you me with telling of the King?
I will auouch't in preſence of the King:
I dare aduenture to be ſent to th' Towre.
'Tis time to ſpeake,
My paines are quite forgot.
Out Diuell,
I do remember them too well:
Thou killd'ſt my Husband Henrie in the Tower,
And Edward my poore Son, at Tewkesburie.
Ere you were Queene,
I, or your Husband King:
I was a packe-horſe in his great affaires:
A weeder out of his proud Aduerſaries,
A liberall rewarder of his Friends,
To royalize his blood, I ſpent mine owne.
I and much better blood
Then his, or thine.
In all which time, you and your Husband Grey
Were factious, for the Houſe of Lancaſter;
And Riuers, ſo were you: Was not your Husband,
In Margarets Battaile, at Saint Albons, ſlaine?
Let me put in your mindes, if you forget
What you haue beene ere this, and what you are:
Withall, what I haue beene, and what I am.
A murth'rous Villaine, and ſo ſtill thou art.
Poore Clarence did forſake his Father Warwicke,
I, and forſwore himſelfe (which Ieſu pardon.)
Which God reuenge.
To fight on Edwards partie, for the Crowne,
And for his meede, poore Lord, he is mewed vp:
I would to God my heart were Flint, like Edwards,
Or Edwards ſoft and pittifull, like mine;
I am too childiſh fooliſh for this World.
High thee to Hell for ſhame, & leaue this World
Thou Cacodemon, there thy Kingdome is.
My Lord of Gloſter: in thoſe buſie dayes,
Which here you vrge, to proue vs Enemies,
We follow'd then our Lord, our Soueraigne King,
So ſhould we you, if you ſhould be our King.
If I ſhould be? I had rather be a Pedler:
Farre be it from my heart, the thought thereof.
As little ioy (my Lord) as you ſuppoſe
You ſhould enioy, were you this Countries King,
As little ioy you may ſuppoſe in me,
That I enioy, being the Queene thereof.
A little ioy enioyes the Queene thereof,
For I am ſhee, and altogether ioyleſſe:
I can no longer hold me patient.
Heare me, you wrangling Pyrates, that fall out,
In ſharing that which you haue pill'd from me:
Which off you trembles not, that lookes on me?
If not, that I am Queene, you bow like Subiects;
Yet that by you depos'd, you quake like Rebells.
Ah gentle Villaine, doe not turne away.
Foule wrinckled Witch, what mak'ſt thou in my ſight?
But repetition of what thou haſt marr'd,
That will I make, before I let thee goe.
Wert thou not baniſhed, on paine of death?
I was: but I doe find more paine in baniſhment,
Then death can yeeld me here, by my abode.
A Husband and a Sonne thou ow'ſt to me,
And thou a Kingdome; all of you, allegeance:
This Sorrow that I haue, by right is yours,
And all the Pleaſures you vſurpe, are mine.
The Curſe my Noble Father layd on thee,
When thou didſt Crown his Warlike Brows with Paper,
And with thy ſcornes drew'ſt Riuers from his eyes,
And then to dry them, gan'ſt the Duke a Clowt,
Steep'd in the faultleſſe blood of prettie Rutland:
His Curſes then, from bitterneſſe of Soule,
Denounc'd againſt thee, are all falne vpon thee:
And God, not we, hath plagu'd thy bloody deed.
So iuſt is God, to right the innocent.
O, 'twas the fouleſt deed to ſlay that Babe,
And the moſt mercileſſe, that ere was heard of.
Tyrants themſelues wept when it was reported.
No man but prophecied reuenge for it.
Northumberland, then preſent, wept to ſee it.
What? were you ſnarling all before I came,
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
And turne you all your hatred now on me?
Did Yorkes dread Curſe preuaile ſo much with Heauen,
That Henries death, my louely Edwards death,
Their Kingdomes loſſe, my wofull Baniſhment,
Should all but anſwer for that peeuiſh Brat?
Can Curſes pierce the Clouds, and enter Heauen?
Why then giue way dull Clouds to my quick Curſes.
Though not by Warre, by Surfet dye your King,
As ours by Murther, to make him a King.
Edward thy Sonne, that now is Prince of Wales,
For Edward our Sonne, that was Prince of Wales,
Dye in his youth, by like vntimely violence.
Thy ſelfe a Queene, for me that was a Queene,
Out-liue thy glory, like my wretched ſelfe:
Long may'ſt thou liue, to wayle thy Childrens death,
And ſee another, as I ſee thee now,
Deck'd in thy Rights, as thou art ſtall'd in mine.
Long dye thy happie dayes, before thy death,
And after many length'ned howres of griefe,
Dye neyther Mother, Wife, nor Englands Queene.
Riuers and Dorſet, you were ſtanders by,
And ſo waſt thou, Lord Haſtings, when my Sonne
Was ſtab'd with bloody Daggers: God, I pray him,
That none of you may liue his naturall age,
But by ſome vnlook'd accident cut off.
Haue done thy Charme, yu hateful wither'd Hagge.
And leaue out thee? ſtay Dog, for yu ſhalt heare me.
If Heauen haue any grieuous plague in ſtore,
Exceeding thoſe that I can wiſh vpon thee,
O let them keepe it, till thy ſinnes be ripe,
And then hurle downe their indignation
On thee, the troubler of the poore Worlds peace.
The Worme of Conſcience ſtill begnaw thy Soule,
Thy Friends ſuſpect for Traytors while thou liu'ſt,
And take deepe Traytors for thy deareſt Friends:
No ſleepe cloſe vp that deadly Eye of thine,
Vnleſſe it be while ſome tormenting Dreame
Affrights thee with a Hell of ougly Deuills.
Thou eluiſh mark'd, abortiue rooting Hogge,
Thou that waſt ſeal'd in thy Natiuitie
The ſlaue of Nature, and the Sonne of Hell:
Thou ſlander of thy heauie Mothers Wombe,
Thou loathed Iſſue of thy Fathers Loynes,
Thou Ragge of Honor, thou deteſted—
Margaret.
Richard.
Ha.
I call thee not.
I cry thee mercie then: for I did thinke,
That thou hadſt call'd me all theſe bitter names.
Why ſo I did, but look'd for no reply.
Oh let me make the Period to my Curſe.
'Tis done by me, and ends in Margaret.
Thus haue you breath'd your Curſe againſt your ſelf.
Poore painted Queen, vain flouriſh of my fortune,
Why ſtrew'ſt thou Sugar on that Bottel'd Spider,
Whoſe deadly Web enſnareth thee about?
Foole, foole, thou whet'ſt a Knife to kill thy ſelfe:
The day will come, that thou ſhalt wiſh for me,
To helpe thee curſe this poyſonous Bunch-backt Toade.
Falſe boding Woman, end thy frantick Curſe,
Leaſt to thy harme, thou moue our patience.
Foule ſhame vpon you, you haue all mou'd mine.
Were you wel ſeru'd, you would be taught your duty.
To ſerue me well, you all ſhould do me duty,
Teach me to be your Queene, and you my Subiects:
O ſerue me well, and teach your ſelues that duty.
Diſpute not with her, ſhee is lunaticke.
Peace Maſter Marqueſſe, you are malapert,
Your fire-new ſtampe of Honor is ſcarce currant.
O that your yong Nobility could iudge
What 'twere to loſe it, and be miſerable.
They that ſtand high, haue many blaſts to ſhake them,
And if they fall, they daſh themſelues to peeces.
Good counſaile marry, learne it, learne it Marqueſſe.
It touches you my Lord, as much as me.
I, and much more: but I, was borne ſo high:
Our ayerie buildeth in the Cedars top,
And dallies with the winde, and ſcornes the Sunne.
And turnes the Sun to ſhade: alas, alas,
Witneſſe my Sonne, now in the ſhade of death,
Whoſe bright out-ſhining beames, thy cloudy wrath
Hath in eternall darkneſſe folded vp.
Your ayery buildeth in our ayeries Neſt:
O God that ſeeſt it, do not ſuffer it,
As it is wonne with blood, loſt be it ſo.
Peace, peace for ſhame: If not, for Charity.
Vrge neither charity, nor ſhame to me:
Vncharitably with me haue you dealt,
And ſhamefully my hopes (by you) are butcher'd.
My Charity is outrage, Life my ſhame,
And in that ſhame, ſtill liue my ſorrowes rage.
Haue done, haue done.
O Princely Buckingham, Ile kiſſe thy hand,
In ſigne of League and amity with thee:
Now faire befall thee, and thy Noble houſe:
Thy Garments are not ſpotted with our blood:
Nor thou within the compaſſe of my curſe.
Nor no one heere: for Curſes neuer paſſe
The lips of thoſe that breath them in the ayre.
I will not thinke but they aſcend the sky,
And there awake Gods gentle ſleeping peace.
O Buckingham, take heede of yonder dogge:
Looke when he fawnes, he bites; and when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death.
Haue not to do with him, beware of him,
Sinne, death, and hell haue ſet their markes on him,
And all their Miniſters attend on him.
What doth ſhe ſay, my Lord of Buckingham.
Nothing that I reſpect my gracious Lord.
What doſt thou ſcorne me
For my gentle counſell?
And ſooth the diuell that I warne thee from.
O but remember this another day:
When he ſhall ſplit thy very heart with ſorrow:
And ſay (poore Margaret) was a Propheteſſe:
Liue each of you the ſubiects to his hate,
And he to yours, and all of you to Gods.
My haire doth ſtand an end to heare her curſes.
And ſo doth mine, I muſe why ſhe's at libertie.
I cannot blame her, by Gods holy mother,
She hath had too much wrong, and I repent
My part thereof, that I haue done to her.
I neuer did her any to my knowledge.
Yet you haue all the vantage of her wrong:
I was too hot, to do ſomebody good,
That is too cold in thinking of it now:
Marry as for Clarence, he is well repayed:
He is frank'd vp to fatting for his paines,
God pardon them, that are the cauſe thereof.
A vertuous, and a Chriſtian-like concluſion
To pray for them that haue done ſcath to vs.
So do I euer, being well aduis'd.
For had I curſt now, I had curſt my ſelfe.
Madam, his Maieſty doth call for you,
And for your Grace, and yours my gracious Lord.
Catesby I come, Lords will you go with mee.
We wait vpon your Grace.
I do the wrong, and firſt begin to brawle.
The ſecret Miſcheefes that I ſet abroach,
I lay vnto the greeuous charge of others.
Clarence, who I indeede haue caſt in darkneſſe,
I do beweepe to many ſimple Gulles,
Namely to Derby, Haſtings, Buckingham,
And tell them 'tis the Queene, and her Allies,
That ſtirre the King againſt the Duke my Brother.
Now they beleeue it, and withall whet me
To be reueng'd on Riuers, Dorſet, Grey.
But then I ſigh, and with a peece of Scripture,
Tell them that God bids vs do good for euill:
And thus I cloath my naked Villanie
With odde old ends, ſtolne forth of holy Writ,
And ſeeme a Saint, when moſt I play the deuill.
But ſoft, heere come my Executioners,
How now my hardy ſtout reſolued Mates,
Are you now going to diſpatch this thing?
We are my Lord, and come to haue the Warrant,
That we may be admitted where he is.
Well thought vpon, I haue it heare about me:
When you haue done, repayre to Crosby place;
But ſirs be ſodaine in the execution,
Withall obdurate, do not heare him pleade;
For Clarence is well ſpoken, and perhappes
May moue your hearts to pitty, if you marke him.
Tut, tut, my Lord, we will not ſtand to prate,
Talkers are no good dooers, be aſſur'd:
We go to vſe our hands, and not our tongues.
Your eyes drop Mill-ſtones, when Fooles eyes fall Teares:
I like you Lads, about your buſineſſe ſtraight.
Go, go, diſpatch.
We will my Noble Lord.
Why lookes your Grace ſo heauily to day.
O, I haue paſt a miſerable night,
So full of fearefull Dreames, of vgly ſights,
That as I am a Chriſtian faithfull man,
I would not ſpend another ſuch a night
Though 'twere to buy a world of happy daies:
So full of diſmall terror was the time.
What was your dream my Lord, I pray you tel me
Me thoughts that I had broken from the Tower,
And was embark'd to croſſe to Burgundy,
And in my company my Brother Glouſter,
Who from my Cabin tempted me to walke,
Vpon the Hatches: There we look'd toward England,
And cited vp a thouſand heauy times,
During the warres of Yorke and Lancaſter
That had befalne vs. As we pac'd along
Vpon the giddy footing of the Hatches,
Me thought that Glouſter ſtumbled, and in falling
Strooke me (that thought to ſtay him) ouer-boord,
Into the tumbling billowes of the maine.
O Lord, me thought what paine it was to drowne,
What dreadfull noiſe of water in mine eares,
What ſights of vgly death within mine eyes.
Me thoughts, I ſaw a thouſand fearfull wrackes:
A thouſand men that Fiſhes gnaw'd vpon:
Wedges of Gold, great Anchors, heapes of Pearle,
Ineſtimable Stones, vnvalewed Iewels,
All ſcattred in the bottome of the Sea,
Some lay in dead-mens Sculles, and in the holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept
(As 'twere in ſcorne of eyes) reflecting Gemmes,
That woo'd the ſlimy bottome of the deepe,
And mock'd the dead bones that lay ſcattred by.
Had you ſuch leyſure in the time of death
To gaze vpon theſe ſecrets of the deepe?
Me thought I had, and often did I ſtriue
To yeeld the Ghoſt: but ſtill the enuious Flood
Stop'd in my ſoule, and would not let it forth
To find the empty, vaſt, and wand'ring ayre:
But ſmother'd it within my panting bulke,
Who almoſt burſt, to belch it in the Sea.
Awak'd you not in this ſore Agony?
No, no, my Dreame was lengthen'd after life.
O then, began the Tempeſt to my Soule▪
I paſt (me thought) the Melancholly Flood,
With that ſowre Ferry-man which Poets write of,
Vnto the Kingdome of perpetuall Night.
The firſt that there did greet my Stranger-ſoule,
Was my great Father-in-Law, renowned Warwicke,
Who ſpake alowd: What ſcourge for Periurie,
Can this darke Monarchy affoord falſe Clarence?
And ſo he vaniſh'd. Then came wand'ring by,
A Shadow like an Angell, with bright hayre
Dabbel'd in blood, and he ſhriek'd out alowd
Clarence is come, falſe, fleeting, periur'd Clarence,
That ſtabb'd me in the field by Tewkesbury:
Seize on him Furies, take him vnto Torment.
With that (me thought) a Legion of foule Fiends
Inuiron'd me, and howled in mine eares
Such hiddeous cries, that with the very Noiſe,
I (trembling) wak'd, and for a ſeaſon after,
Could not beleeue, but that I was in Hell,
Such terrible Impreſsion made my Dreame.
No maruell Lord, though it affrighted you,
I am affraid (me thinkes) to heare you tell it.
Ah Keeper, Keeper, I haue done theſe things
(That now giue euidence againſt my Soule)
For Edwards ſake, and ſee how he requits mee.
O God! if my deepe prayres cannot appeaſe thee,
But thou wilt be aueng'd on my miſdeeds,
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone:
O ſpare my guiltleſſe Wife, and my poore children.
Keeper, I prythee ſit by me a-while,
My Soule is heauy, and I faine would ſleepe.
I will my Lord, God giue your Grace good reſt.
Sorrow breakes Seaſons, and repoſing houres,
Makes the Night Morning, and the Noon-tide night:
Princes haue but their Titles for their Glories,
An outward Honor, for an inward Toyle,
And for vnfelt Imaginations
They often feele a world of reſtleſſe Cares:
So that betweene their Titles, and low Name,
There's nothing differs, but the outward fame.
Ho, who's heere?
What would'ſt thou Fellow? And how camm'ſt thou hither.
I would ſpeak with Clarence, and I came hither on my Legges.
What ſo breefe?
'Tis better (Sir) then to be tedious:
Let him ſee our Commiſſion, and talke no more.
I am in this, commanded to deliuer
The Noble Duke of Clarence to your hands.
I will not reaſon what is meant heereby,
Becauſe I will be guiltleſſe from the meaning.
There lies the Duke aſleepe, and there the Keyes.
Ile to the King, and ſignifie to him,
That thus I haue reſign'd to you my charge.
You may ſir, 'tis a point of wiſedome:
Far you well.
What, ſhall we ſtab him as he ſleepes.
No: hee'l ſay 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes
Why he ſhall neuer wake, vntill the great Iudgement day.
Why then hee'l ſay, we ſtab'd him ſleeping.
The vrging of that word Iudgement, hath bred a kinde of remorſe in me.
What? art thou affraid?
Not to kill him, hauing a Warrant,
But to be damn'd for killing him, from the which
No Warrant can defend me.
I thought thou had'ſt bin reſolute.
So I am, to let him liue.
Ile backe to the Duke of Glouſter, and tell him ſo.
Nay, I prythee ſtay a little:
I hope this paſſionate humor of mine, will change,
It was wont to hold me but while one tels twenty.
How do'ſt thou feele thy ſelfe now?
Some certaine dregges of conſcience are yet within mee.
Remember our Reward, when the deed's done.
Come, he dies: I had forgot the Reward.
Where's thy conſcience now.
O, in the Duke of Glouſters purſe.
When hee opens his purſe to giue vs our Reward, thy Conſcience flyes out.
'Tis no matter, let it goe: There's few or none will entertaine it.
What if it come to thee againe?
Ile not meddle with it, it makes a man a Coward: A man cannot ſteale, but it accuſeth him: A man cannot Sweare, but it Checkes him: A man cannot lye with his Neighbours Wife, but it detects him. 'Tis a bluſhing ſhamefac'd ſpirit, that mutinies in a mans boſome: It filles a man full of Obſtacles. It made me once reſtore a Purſſe of Gold that (by chance) I found: It beggars any man that keepes it: It is turn'd out of Townes and Citties for a dangerous thing, and euery man that means to liue well, endeuours to truſt to himſelfe, and liue vvithout it.
'Tis euen now at my elbow, perſwading me not to kill the Dkue.
Take the diuell in thy minde, and beleeue him not:
He would inſinuate with thee but to make thee ſigh.
I am ſtrong fram'd, he cannot preuaile with me.
Spoke like a tall man, that reſpects thy reputation.
Come, ſhall we fall to worke?
Take him on the Coſtard, with the hiltes of thy Sword, and then throw him into the Malmeſey-Butte in the next roome.
O excellent deuice; and make a ſop of him.
Soft, he wakes.
Strike.
No, wee'l reaſon with him.
Where art thou Keeper? Giue me a cup of wine.
You ſhall haue Wine enough my Lord anon.
In Gods name, what art thou?
A man, as you are.
But not as I am Royall.
Nor you as we are, Loyall.
Thy voice is Thunder, but thy looks are humble.
My voice is now the Kings, my lookes mine owne.
How darkly, and how deadly doſt thou ſpeake?
Your eyes do menace me: why looke you pale?
Who ſent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
To, to, to—
To murther me?
I, I.
You ſcarſely haue the hearts to tell me ſo,
And therefore cannot haue the hearts to do it.
Wherein my Friends haue I offended you?
Offended vs you haue not, but the King.
I ſhall be reconcil'd to him againe.
Neuer my Lord, therefore prepare to dye.
Are you drawne forth among a world of men
To ſlay the innocent? What is my offence?
Where is the Euidence that doth accuſe me?
What lawfull Queſt haue giuen their Verdict vp
Vnto the frowning Iudge? Or who pronounc'd
The bitter ſentence of poore Clarence death,
Before I be conuict by courſe of Law?
To threaten me with death, is moſt vnlawfull.
I charge you, as you hope for any goodneſſe,
That you depart, and lay no hands on me:
The deed you vndertake is damnable.
What we will do, we do vpon command.
And he that hath commanded, is our King.
Erroneous Vaſſals, the great King of Kings
Hath in the Table of his Law commanded
That thou ſhalt do no murther. Will you then
Spurne at his Edict, and fulfill a Mans?
Take heed: for he holds Vengeance in his hand,
To hurle vpon their heads that breake his Law.
And that ſame Vengeance doth he hurle on thee,
For falſe Forſwearing, and for murther too:
Thou did'ſt receiue the Sacrament, to fight
In quarrell of the Houſe of Lancaſter.
And like a Traitor to the name of God,
Did'ſt breake that Vow, and with thy treacherous blade,
Vnrip'ſt the Bowels of thy Sou'raignes Sonne.
Whom thou was't ſworne to cheriſh and defend.
How canſt thou vrge Gods dreadfull Law to vs,
When thou haſt broke it in ſuch deere degree?
Alas! for whoſe ſake did I that ill deede?
For Edward, for my Brother, for his ſake.
He ſends you not to murther me for this:
For in that ſinne, he is as deepe as I.
If God will be auenged for the deed,
O know you yet, he doth it publiquely,
Take not the quarrell from his powrefull arme:
He needs no indirect, or lawleſſe courſe,
To cut off thoſe that haue offended him.
Who made thee then a bloudy miniſter,
When gallant ſpringing braue Plantagenet,
That Princely Nouice was ſtrucke dead by thee?
My Brothers loue, the Diuell, and my Rage.
Thy Brothers Loue, our Duty, and thy Faults,
Prouoke vs hither now, to ſlaughter thee.
If you do loue my Brother, hate not me:
I am his Brother, and I loue him well.
If you are hyr'd for meed; go backe againe,
And I will ſend you to my Brother Glouſter:
Who ſhall reward you better for my life,
Then Edward will for tydings of my death.
You are deceiu'd,
Your Brother Glouſter hates you.
Oh no, he loues me, and he holds me deere;
Go you to him from me.
I ſo we will.
Tell him, when that our Princely Father Yorke,
Bleſt his three Sonnes with his victorious Arme,
He little thought of this diuided Friendſhip:
Bid Glouſter thinke on this, and he will weepe.
I Milſtones, as he leſſoned vs to weepe.
O do not ſlander him, for he is kinde.
Right, as Snow in Harueſt:
Come, you deceiue your ſelfe,
'Tis he that ſends vs to deſtroy you heere.
It cannot be, for he be wept my Fortune,
And hugg'd me in his armes, and ſwore with ſobs,
That he would labour my deliuery.
Why ſo he doth, when he deliuers you
From this earths thraldome, to the ioyes of heauen.
Make peace with God, for you muſt die my Lord.
Haue you that holy feeling in your ſoules,
To counſaile me to make my peace with God,
And are you yet to your owne ſoules ſo blinde,
That you will warre with God, by murd'ring me.
O ſirs conſider, they that ſet you on
To do this deede, will hate you for the deede.
What ſhall we do?
Relent, and ſaue your ſoules:
Which of you, if you were a Princes Sonne,
Being pent from Liberty, as I am now,
If two ſuch murtherers as your ſelues came to you,
Would not intreat for life, as you would begge
Were you in my diſtreſſe.
Relent? no: 'Tis cowardly and womaniſh.
Not to relent, is beaſtly, ſauage, diuelliſh:
My Friend, I ſpy ſome pitty in thy lookes:
O, if thine eye be not a Flatterer,
Come thou on my ſide, and intreate for mee,
A begging Prince, what begger pitties not.
Looke behinde you, my Lord.
Take that, and that, if all this will not do,
Ile drowne you in the Malmeſey-But within.
A bloody deed, and deſperately diſpatcht:
How faine (like Pilate) would I waſh my hands
Of this moſt greeuous murther.
How now? what mean'ſt thou that thou help'ſt me not? By Heauen the Duke ſhall know how ſlacke you haue beene.
I would he knew that I had ſau'd his brother,
Take thou the Fee, and tell him what I ſay,
For I repent me that the Duke is ſlaine.
So do not I: go Coward as thou art.
Well, Ile go hide the body in ſome hole,
Till that the Duke giue order for his buriall:
And when I haue my meede, I will away,
For this will out, and then I muſt not ſtay.
Why ſo: now haue I done a good daies work.
You Peeres, continue this vnited League:
I, euery day expect an Embaſſage
From my Redeemer, to redeeme me hence.
And more to peace my ſoule ſhall part to heauen,
Since I haue made my Friends at peace on earth.
Dorſet and Riuers, take each others hand,
Diſſemble not your hatred, Sweare your loue.
By heauen, my ſoule is purg'd from grudging hate
And with my hand I ſeale my true hearts Loue.
So thriue I, as I truly ſweare the like.
Take heed you dally not before your King,
Leſt he that is the ſupreme King of Kings
Confound your hidden falſhood, and award
Either of you to be the others end.
So proſper I, as I ſweare perfect loue.
And I, as I loue Haſtings with my heart,
Madam, your ſelfe is not exempt from this:
Nor you Sonne Dorſet, Buckingham nor you;
You haue bene factious one againſt the other.
Wife, loue Lord Haſtings, let him kiſſe your hand,
And what you do, do it vnfeignedly.
There Haſtings, I will neuer more remember
Our former hatred, ſo thriue I, and mine.
Dorſet, imbrace him:
Haſtings, loue Lord Marqueſſe.
This interchange of loue, I heere proteſt
Vpon my part, ſhall be inuiolable.
And ſo ſweare I.
Now Princely Buckingham, ſeale yu this league
With thy embracements to my wiues Allies,
And make me happy in your vnity.
When euer Buckingham doth turne his hate
Vpon your Grace, but with all dutious loue,
Doth cheriſh you, and yours, God puniſh me
With hate in thoſe where I expect moſt loue,
When I haue moſt need to imploy a Friend,
And moſt aſſured that he is a Friend,
Deepe, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile,
Be he vnto me: This do I begge of heauen,
When I am cold in loue, to you, or yours.
A pleaſing Cordiall, Princely Buckingham
Is this thy Vow, vnto my ſickely heart:
There wanteth now our Brother Gloſter heere,
To make the bleſſed period of this peace.
And in good time,
Heere comes Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and the Duke.
Good morrow to my Soueraigne King & Queen
And Princely Peeres, a happy time of day.
Happy indeed, as we haue ſpent the day:
Gloſter, we haue done deeds of Charity,
Made peace of enmity, faire loue of hate,
Betweene theſe ſwelling wrong incenſed Peeres.
A bleſſed labour my moſt Soueraigne Lord:
Among this Princely heape, if any heere
By falſe intelligence, or wrong ſurmize
Hold me a Foe: If I vnwillingly, or in my rage,
Haue ought committed that is hardly borne,
To any in this preſence, I deſire
To reconcile me to his Friendly peace:
'Tis death to me to be at enmitie:
I hate it, and deſire all good mens loue,
Firſt Madam, I intreate true peace of you,
Which I will purchaſe with my dutious ſeruice.
Of you my Noble Coſin Buckingham,
If euer any grudge were lodg'd betweene vs.
Of you and you, Lord Riuers and of Dorſet,
That all without deſert haue frown'd on me:
Of you Lord Wooduill, and Lord Scales of you,
Dukes, Earles, Lords, Gentlemen, indeed of all.
I do not know that Engliſhman aliue,
With whom my ſoule is any iot at oddes,
More then the Infant that is borne to night:
I thanke my God for my Humility.
A holy day ſhall this be kept heereafter:
I would to God all ſtrifes were well compounded.
My Soueraigne Lord, I do beſeech your Highneſſe
To take our Brother Clarence to your Grace.
Why Madam, haue I offred loue for this,
To be ſo flowted in this Royall preſence?
Who knowes not that the gentle Duke is dead?
You do him iniurie to ſcorne his Coarſe.
Who knowes not he is dead?
Who knowes he is?
All-ſeeing heauen, what a world is this?
Looke I ſo pale Lord Dorſet, as the reſt?
I my good Lord, and no man in the preſence,
But his red colour hath forſooke his cheekes.
Is Clarence dead? The Order was reuerſt.
But he (poore man) by your firſt order dyed,
And that a winged Mercurie did beare:
Some tardie Cripple bare the Countermand,
That came too lagge to ſee him buried.
God grant, that ſome leſſe Noble, and leſſe Loyall,
Neerer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood,
Deſerue not worſe then wretched Clarence did,
And yet go currant from Suſpition.
A boone my Soueraigne for my ſeruice done.
I prethee peace, my ſoule is full of ſorrow.
I will not riſe, vnleſſe your Highnes heare me.
Then ſay at once, what is it thou requeſts.
The forfeit (Soueraigne) of my ſeruants life,
Who ſlew to day a Riotous Gentleman,
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolke.
Haue I a tongue to doome my Brothers death?
And ſhall that tongue giue pardon to a ſlaue?
My Brother kill'd no man, his fault was Thought,
And yet his puniſhment was bitter death.
Who ſued to me for him? Who (in my wrath)
Kneel'd and my feet, and bid me be aduis'd?
Who ſpoke of Brother-hood? who ſpoke of loue?
Who told me how the poore ſoule did forſake
The mighty Warwicke, and did fight for me?
Who told me in the field at Tewkesbury,
When Oxford had me downe, he reſcued me:
And ſaid deare Brother liue, and be a King▪
Who told me, when we both lay in the Field,
Frozen (almoſt) to death, how he did lap me
Euen in his Garments, and did giue himſelfe
(All thin and naked) to the numbe cold night?
All this from my Remembrance, brutiſh wrath
Sinfully pluckt, and not a man of you
Had ſo much grace to put it in my minde.
But when your Carters, or your wayting Vaſſalls
Haue done a drunken Slaughter, and defac'd
The precious Image of our deere Redeemer,
You ſtraight are on your knees for Pardon, pardon,
And I (vniuſtly too) muſt grant it you.
But for my Brother, not a man would ſpeake,
Nor I (vngracious) ſpeake vnto my ſelfe
For him poore Soule. The proudeſt of you all,
Haue bin beholding to him in his life:
Yet none of you, would once begge for his life.
O God! I feare thy iuſtice will take hold
On me, and you; and mine, and yours for this.
Come Haſtings helpe me to my Cloſſet.
Ah poore Clarence.
This is the fruits of raſhnes: Markt you not,
How that the guilty Kindred of the Queene
Look'd pale, when they did heare of Clarence death.
O! they did vrge it ſtill vnto the King,
God will reuenge it. Come Lords will you go,
To comfort Edward with our company.
We wait vpon your Grace.
Good Grandam tell vs, is our Father dead?
No Boy.
Why do weepe ſo oft? And beate your Breſt?
And cry, O Clarence, my vnhappy Sonne.
Why do you looke on vs, and ſhake your head,
And call vs Orphans, Wretches, Caſtawayes,
If that our Noble Father were aliue?
My pretty Coſins, you miſtake me both,
I do lament the ſickneſſe of the King,
As loath to loſe him, not your Fathers death:
It were loſt ſorrow to waile one that's loſt.
Then you conclude, (my Grandam) he is dead:
The King mine Vnckle is too blame for it.
God will reuenge it, whom I will importune
With earneſt prayers, all to that effect.
And ſo will I.
Peace children peace, the King doth loue you wel.
Incapeable, and ſhallow Innocents,
You cannot gueſſe who caus'd your Fathers death.
Grandam we can: for my good Vnkle Gloſter
Told me, the King prouok'd to it by the Queene,
Deuis'd impeachments to impriſon him;
And when my Vnckle told me ſo, he wept,
And pittied me, and kindly kiſt my cheeke:
Bad me rely on him, as on my Father,
And he would loue me deerely as a childe.
Ah! that Deceit ſhould ſteale ſuch gentle ſhape,
And with a vertuous Vizor hide deepe vice,
He is my ſonne, I, and therein my ſhame,
Yet from my dugges, he drew not this deceit.
Thinke you my Vnkle did diſſemble Grandam?
I Boy.
I cannot thinke it. Hearke, what noiſe is this?
Ah! who ſhall hinder me to waile and weepe?
To chide my Fortune, and torment my Selfe.
Ile ioyne with blacke diſpaire againſt my Soule,
And to my ſelfe, become an enemie.
What meanes this Scene of rude impatience?
To make an act of Tragicke violence.
Edward my Lord, thy Sonne, our King is dead.
Why grow the Branches, when the Roote is gone?
Why wither not the leaues that want their ſap?
If you will liue, Lament: if dye, be breefe,
That our ſwift-winged Soules may catch the Kings,
Or like obedient Subiects follow him,
To his new Kingdome of nere-changing night.
Ah ſo much intereſt haue in thy ſorrow,
As I had Title in thy Noble Husband:
I haue be wept a worthy Husbands death,
And liu'd with looking on his Images:
But now two Mirrors of his Princely ſemblance,
Are crack'd in pieces, by malignant death,
And I for comfort, haue but one falſe Glaſſe,
That greeues me, when I ſee my ſhame in him.
Thou art a Widdow: yet thou art a Mother,
And haſt the comfort of thy Children left,
But death hath ſnatch'd my Husband from mine Armes,
And pluckt two Crutches from my feeble hands,
Clarence, and Edward. O, what cauſe haue I,
(Thine being but a moity of my moane)
To ouer-go thy woes, and drowne thy cries.
Ah Aunt! you wept not for our Fathers death:
How can we ayde you with our Kindred teares?
Our fatherleſſe diſtreſſe was left vnmoan'd,
Your widdow-dolour, likewiſe be vnwept.
Giue me no helpe in Lamentation,
I am not barren to bring forth complaints:
All Springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,
That I being gouern'd by the waterie Moone,
May ſend forth plenteous teares to drowne the World.
Ah, for my Husband, for my deere Lord Edward.
Ah for our Father, for our deere Lord Clarence.
Alas for both, both mine Edward and Clarence.
What ſtay had I but Edward, and hee's gone?
What ſtay had we but Clarence? and he's gone.
What ſtayes had I, but they? and they are gone.
Was neuer widdow had ſo deere a loſſe.
Were neuer Orphans had ſo deere a loſſe.
Was neuer Mother had ſo deere a loſſe.
Alas! I am the Mother of theſe Greefes▪
Their woes are parcell'd, mine is generall.
She for an Edward weepes, and ſo do I:
I for a Clarence weepes, ſo doth not ſhee:
Theſe Babes for Clarence weepe, ſo do not they.
Alas! you three, on me threefold diſtreſt:
Power all your teares, I am your ſorrowes Nurſe,
And I will pamper it with Lamentation.
Comfort deere Mother, God is much diſpleas'd,
That you take with vnthankfulneſſe his doing.
In common worldly things, 'tis call'd vngratefull,
With dull vnwillingneſſe to repay a debt,
Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent:
Much more to be thus oppoſite with heauen,
For it requires the Royall debt it lent you.
Madam, bethinke you like a carefull Mother
Of the young Prince your ſonne: ſend ſtraight for him,
Let him be Crown'd, in him your comfort liues.
Drowne deſperate ſorrow in dead Edwards graue,
And plant your ioyes in liuing Edwards Throne.
Siſter haue comfort, all of vs haue cauſe
To waile the dimming of our ſhining Starre:
But none can helpe our harmes by wayling them.
Madam, my Mother, I do cry you mercie,
I did not ſee your Grace. Humbly on my knee,
I craue your Bleſſing.
God bleſſe thee, and put meeknes in thy breaſt,
Loue Charity, Obedience, and true Dutie.
Amen, and make me die a good old man,
That is the butt-end of a Mothers bleſſing;
I maruell that her Grace did leaue it out.
You clowdy-Princes, & hart-ſorowing-Peeres▪
That beare this heauie mutuall loade of Moane,
Now cheere each other, in each others Loue:
Though we haue ſpent our Harueſt of this King,
We are to reape the Harueſt of his Sonne.
The broken rancour of your high-ſwolne hates,
But lately ſplinter'd, knit, and ioyn'd together,
Muſt gently be preſeru'd, cheriſht, and kept:
Me ſeemeth good, that with ſome little Traine,
Forthwith from Ludlow, the young Prince be ſet
Hither to London, to be crown'd our King.
Why with ſome little Traine,
My Lord of Buckingham?
Marrie my Lord, leaſt by a multitude,
The new-heal'd wound of Malice ſhould breake out,
Which would be ſo much the more dangerous,
By how much the eſtate is greene, and yet vngouern'd.
Where euery Horſe beares his commanding Reine,
And may direct his courſe as pleaſe himſelfe,
As well the feare of harme, as harme apparant,
In my opinion, ought to be preuented.
I hope the King made peace with all of vs,
And the compact is firme, and true in me.
And ſo in me, and ſo (I thinke) in all.
Yet ſince it is but greene, it ſhould be put
To no apparant likely-hood of breach,
Which haply by much company might be vrg'd:
Therefore I ſay with Noble Buckingham,
That it is meete ſo few ſhould fetch the Prince▪
And ſo ſay I.
Then be it ſo, and go we to determine
Who they ſhall be that ſtrait ſhall poſte to London.
Madam, and you my Siſter, will you go
To giue your cenſures in this buſineſſe.
My Lord, who euer iournies to the Prince,
For God ſake let not vs two ſtay at home:
For by the way, Ile ſort occaſion,
As Index to the ſtory we late talk'd of,
To part the Queenes proud Kindred from the Prince.
My other ſelfe, my Counſailes Conſiſtory,
My Oracle, My Prophet, my deere Coſin,
I, as a childe, will go by thy direction,
Toward London then, for wee'l not ſtay behinde.
Good morrow Neighbour, whether away ſo faſt?
I promiſe you, I ſcarſely know my ſelfe:
Heare you the newes abroad?
Yes, that the King is dead.
Ill newes byrlady, ſeldome comes the better:
I feare, I feare, 'twill proue a giddy world.
Neighbours, God ſpeed.
Giue you good morrow ſir.
Doth the newes hold of good king Edwards death?
I ſir, it is too true, God helpe the while.
Then Maſters looke to ſee a troublous world.
No, no, by Gods good grace, his Son ſhall reigne.
Woe to that Land that's gouern'd by a Childe.
In him there is a hope of Gouernment,
Which in his nonage, counſell vnder him,
And in his full and ripened yeares, himſelfe
No doubt ſhall then, and till then gouerne well.
So ſtood the State, when Henry the ſixt
Was crown'd in Paris, but at nine months old.
Stood the State ſo? No, no, good friends, God wot
For then this Land was famouſly enrich'd
With politike graue Counſell; then the King
Had vertuous Vnkles to protect his Grace.
Why ſo hath this, both by his Father and Mother.
Better it were they all came by his Father:
Or by his Father there were none at all:
For emulation, who ſhall now be neereſt,
Will touch vs all too neere, if God preuent not.
O full of danger is the Duke of Glouſter,
And the Queenes Sons, and Brothers, haught and proud:
And were they to be rul'd, and not to rule,
This ſickly Land, might ſolace as before.
Come, come, we feare the worſt: all will be well.
When Clouds are ſeen, wiſemen put on their clokes;
When great leaues fall, then Winter is at hand;
When the Sun ſets, who doth not looke for night?
Vntimely ſtormes, makes men expect a Dearth:
All may be well; but if God ſort it ſo,
'Tis more then we deſerue, or I expect.
Truly, the hearts of men are full of feare:
You cannot reaſon (almoſt) with a man,
That lookes not heauily, and full of dread.
Before the dayes of Change, ſtill is it ſo,
By a diuine inſtinct, mens mindes miſtruſt
Purſuing danger: as by proofe we ſee
The Water ſwell before a boyſt'rous ſtorme:
But leaue it all to God. Whither away?
Marry we were ſent for to the Iuſtices.
And ſo was I: Ile beare you company.
Laſt night I heard they lay at Stony Stratford,
And at Northampton they do reſt to night:
To morrow, or next day, they will be heere.
I long with all my heart to ſee the Prince:
I hope he is much growne ſince laſt I ſaw him.
But I heare no, they ſay my ſonne of Yorke
Ha's almoſt ouertane him in his growth.
I Mother, but I would not haue it ſo.
Why my good Coſin, it is good to grow.
Grandam, one night as we did ſit at Supper,
My Vnkle Riuers talk'd how I did grow
More then my Brother. I, quoth my Vnkle Glouſter,
Small Herbes haue grace, great Weeds do grow apace.
And ſince, me thinkes I would not grow ſo faſt,
Becauſe ſweet Flowres are ſlow, and Weeds make haſt.
Good faith, good faith, the ſaying did not hold
In him that did obiect the ſame to thee.
He was the wretched'ſt thing when he was yong,
So long a growing, and ſo leyſurely,
That if his rule were true, he ſhould be gracious.
And ſo no doubt he is, my gracious Madam.
I hope he is, but yet let Mothers doubt.
Now by my troth, if I had beene remembred,
I could haue giuen my Vnkles Grace, a flout,
To touch his growth, neerer then he toucht mine.
How my yong Yorke,
I prythee let me heare it.
Marry (they ſay) my Vnkle grew ſo faſt,
That he could gnaw a cruſt at two houres old,
'Twas full two yeares ere I could get a tooth.
Grandam, this would haue beene a byting Ieſt.
I prythee pretty Yorke, who told thee this?
Grandam, his Nurſſe.
His Nurſe? why ſhe was dead, ere yu waſt borne.
If 'twere not ſhe, I cannot tell who told me.
A parlous Boy: go too, you are too ſhrew'd.
Good Madam, be not angry with the Childe.
Pitchers haue eares.
Heere comes a Meſſenger: What Newes?
Such newes my Lord, as greeues me to report.
How doth the Prince?
Well Madam, and in health.
What is thy Newes?
Lord Riuers, and Lord Grey,
Are ſent to Pomfret, and with them,
Sir Thomas Ʋaughan, Priſoners.
Who hath committed them?
The mighty Dukes, Glouſter and Buckingham.
For what offence?
The ſumme of all I can, I haue diſclos'd:
Why, or for what, the Nobles were committed,
Is all vnknowne to me, my gracious Lord.
Aye me! I ſee the ruine of my Houſe:
The Tyger now hath ſeiz'd the gentle Hinde,
Inſulting Tiranny beginnes to Iutt
Vpon the innocent and aweleſſe Throne:
Welcome Deſtruction, Blood, and Maſſacre,
I ſee (as in a Map) the end of all.
Accurſed, and vnquiet wrangling dayes,
How many of you haue mine eyes beheld?
My Husband loſt his life, to get the Crowne,
And often vp and downe my ſonnes were toſt
For me to ioy, and weepe, their gaine and loſſe.
And being ſeated, and Domeſticke broyles
Cleane ouer-blowne, themſelues the Conquerors,
Make warre vpon themſelues, Brother to Brother;
Blood to blood, ſelfe againſt ſelfe: O prepoſtorous
And franticke outrage, nd thy damned ſpleene,
Or let me dye, to looke on earth no more.
Come, come my Boy, we will to Sanctuary▪
Madam, farwell.
Stay, I will go with you.
You haue no cauſe.
My gracious Lady go,
And thether beare your Treaſure and your Goodes,
For my part, Ile reſigne vnto your Grace
The Seale I keepe, and ſo betide to me,
As well I tender you, and all of yours.
Go, Ile conduct you to the Sanctuary.
Welcome ſweete Prince to London,
To your Chamber.
Welcome deere Coſin, my thoughts Soueraign
The wearie way hath made you Melancholly.
No Vnkle, but our croſſes on the way,
Haue made it tedious, weariſome, and heauie.
I want more Vnkles heere to welcome me.
Sweet Prince, the vntainted vertue of your yeers
Hath not yet diu'd into the Worlds deceit:
No more can you diſtinguiſh of a man,
Then of his outward ſhew, which God he knowes,
Seldome or neuer iumpeth with the heart.
Thoſe Vnkles which you want, were dangerous:
Your Grace attended to their Sugred words,
But look'd not on the poyſon of their hearts:
God keepe you from them, and from ſuch falſe Friends.
God keepe me from falſe Friends,
But they were none.
My Lord, the Maior of London comes to greet you.
God bleſſe your Grace, with health and happie dayes.
I thanke you, good my Lord, and thank you all:
I thought my Mother, and my Brother Yorke,
Would long, ere this, haue met vs on the way.
Fie, what a Slug is Haſtings, that he comes not
To tell vs, whether they will come, or no.
And in good time, heere comes the ſweating Lord.
Welcome, my Lord: what, will our Mother come?
On what occaſion God he knowes, not I;
The Queene your Mother, and your Brother Yorke,
Haue taken Sanctuarie: The tender Prince
Would faine haue come with me, to meet your Grace,
But by his Mother was perforce with-held.
Fie, what an indirect and peeuiſh courſe
Is this of hers? Lord Cardinall, will your Grace
Perſwade the Queene, to ſend the Duke of Yorke
Vnto his Princely Brother preſently?
If ſhe denie, Lord Hastings goe with him,
And from her iealous Armes pluck him perforce.
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weake Oratorie
Can from his Mother winne the Duke of Yorke,
Anon expect him here: but if ſhe be obdurate
To milde entreaties, God forbid
We ſhould infringe the holy Priuiledge
Of bleſſed Sanctuarie: not for all this Land,
Would I be guiltie of ſo great a ſinne.
You are too ſenceleſſe obſtinate, my Lord,
Too ceremonious, and traditionall.
Weigh it but with the groſſeneſſe of this Age,
You breake not Sanctuarie, in ſeizing him:
The benefit thereof is alwayes granted
To thoſe, whoſe dealings haue deſeru'd the place,
And thoſe who haue the wit to clayme the place:
This Prince hath neyther claym'd it, nor deſeru'd it,
And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot haue it.
Then taking him from thence, that is not there,
You breake no Priuiledge, nor Charter there:
Oft haue I heard of Sanctuarie men,
But Sanctuarie children, ne're till now.
My Lord, you ſhall o're-rule my mind for once.
Come on, Lord Haſtings, will you goe with me?
I goe, my Lord.
Good Lords, make all the ſpeedie haſt you may.
Say, Vnckle Gloceſter, if our Brother come,
Where ſhall we ſoiourne, till our Coronation?
Where it think'ſt beſt vnto your Royall ſelfe.
If I may counſaile you, ſome day or two
Your Highneſſe ſhall repoſe you at the Tower:
Then where you pleaſe, and ſhall be thought moſt fit
For your beſt health, and recreation.
I doe not like the Tower, of any place:
Did Iulius Caeſar build that place, my Lord?
He did, my gracious Lord, begin that place,
Which ſince, ſucceeding Ages haue re-edify'd.
Is it vpon record? or elſe reported
Succeſſiuely from age to age, he built it?
Vpon record, my gracious Lord.
But ſay, my Lord, it were not regiſtred,
Me thinkes the truth ſhould liue from age to age,
As 'twere retayl'd to all poſteritie,
Euen to the generall ending day.
So wiſe, ſo young, they ſay doe neuer liue long.
What ſay you, Vnckle?
I ſay, without Characters, Fame liues long.
Thus, like the formall Vice, Iniquitie,
I morallize two meanings in one word.
That Iulius Caeſar was a famous man,
With what his Valour did enrich his Wit,
His Wit ſet downe, to make his Valour liue:
Death makes no Conqueſt of his Conqueror,
For now he liues in Fame, though not in Life.
Ile tell you what, my Couſin Buckingham.
What, my gracious Lord?
And if I liue vntill I be a man,
Ile win our ancient Right in France againe,
Or dye a Souldier, as I liu'd a King.
Short Summers lightly haue a forward Spring.
Now in good time, heere comes the Duke of Yorke.
Richard of Yorke, how fares our Noble Brother?
Well, my deare Lord, ſo muſt I call you now.
I, Brother, to our griefe, as it is yours:
Too late he dy'd, that might haue kept that Title,
Which by his death hath loſt much Maieſtie.
How fares our Couſin, Noble Lord of Yorke?
I thanke you, gentle Vnckle. O my Lord,
You ſaid, that idle Weeds are faſt in growth:
The Prince, my Brother, hath out-growne me farre.
He hath, my Lord.
And therefore is he idle?
Oh my faire Couſin, I muſt not ſay ſo.
Then he is more beholding to you, then I.
He may command me as my Soueraigne,
But you haue power in me, as in a Kinſman.
I pray you, Vnckle, giue me this Dagger.
My Dagger, little Couſin? with all my heart.
A Begger, Brother?
Of my kind Vnckle, that I know will giue,
And being but a Toy, which is no griefe to giue.
A greater gift then that, Ile giue my Couſin.
A greater gift? O, that's the Sword to it.
I, gentle Couſin, were it light enough.
O then I ſee, you will part but with light gifts,
In weightier things you'le ſay a Begger nay.
It is too weightie for your Grace to weare.
I weigh it lightly, were it heauier.
What, would you haue my Weapon, little Lord?
I would that I might thanke you, as, as, you call me.
How?
Little.
My Lord of Yorke will ſtill be croſſe in talke:
Vnckle, your Grace knowes how to beare with him.
You meane to beare me, not to beare with me:
Vnckle, my Brother mockes both you and me,
Becauſe that I am little, like an Ape,
He thinkes that you ſhould beare me on your ſhoulders.
With what a ſharpe prouided wit he reaſons:
To mittigate the ſcorne he giues his Vnckle,
He prettily and aptly taunts himſelfe:
So cunning, and ſo young, is wonderfull.
My Lord, wilt pleaſe you paſſe along?
My ſelfe, and my good Couſin Buckingham,
Will to your Mother, to entreat of her
To meet you at the Tower, and welcome you.
What, will you goe vnto the Tower, my Lord?
My Lord Protector will haue it ſo.
I ſhall not ſleepe in quiet at the Tower.
Why, what ſhould you feare?
Marry, my Vnckle Clarence angry Ghoſt:
My Grandam told me he was murther'd there.
I feare no Vnckles dead.
Nor none that liue, I hope.
And if they liue, I hope I need not feare.
But come my Lord: and with a heauie heart,
Thinking on them, goe I vnto the Tower.
Thinke you, my Lord, this little prating Yorke
Was not incenſed by his ſubtile Mother,
To taunt and ſcorne you thus opprobriouſly?
No doubt, no doubt: Oh 'tis a perillous Boy,
Bold, quicke, ingenious, forward, capable:
Hee is all the Mothers, from the top to toe.
Well, let them reſt: Come hither Catesby,
Thou art ſworne as deepely to effect what we intend,
As cloſely to conceale what we impart:
Thou know'ſt our reaſons vrg'd vpon the way.
What think'ſt thou? is it not an eaſie matter,
To make William Lord Haſtings of our minde,
For the inſtallment of this Noble Duke
In the Seat Royall of this famous Ile?
He for his fathers ſake ſo loues the Prince,
That he will not be wonne to ought againſt him.
What think'ſt thou then of Stanley? Will not hee?
Hee will doe all in all as Haſtings doth.
Well then, no more but this:
Goe gentle Catesby, and as it were farre off,
Sound thou Lord Hastings,
How he doth ſtand affected to our purpoſe,
And ſummon him to morrow to the Tower,
To ſit about the Coronation.
If thou do'ſt finde him tractable to vs,
Encourage him, and tell him all our reaſons:
If he be leaden, ycie, cold, vnwilling,
Be thou ſo too, and ſo breake off the talke,
And giue vs notice of his inclination:
For we to morrow hold diuided Councels,
Wherein thy ſelfe ſhalt highly be employ'd.
Commend me to Lord William: tell him Catesby,
His ancient Knot of dangerous Aduerſaries
To morrow are let blood at Pomfret Caſtle,
And bid my Lord, for ioy of this good newes,
Giue Miſtreſſe Shore one gentle Kiſſe the more.
Good Catesby, goe effect this buſineſſe ſoundly.
My good Lords both, with all the heed I can.
Shall we heare from you, Catesby, ere we ſleepe?
You ſhall, my Lord.
At Crosby Houſe, there ſhall you find vs both.
Now, my Lord,
What ſhall wee doe, if wee perceiue
Lord Haſtings will not yeeld to our Complots?
Chop off his Head:
Something wee will determine:
And looke when I am King, clayme thou of me
The Earledome of Hereford, and all the moueables
Whereof the King, my Brother, was poſſeſt.
Ile clayme that promiſe at your Graces hand.
And looke to haue it yeelded with all kindneſſe▪
Come, let vs ſuppe betimes, that afterwards
Wee may digeſt our complots in ſome forme.
My Lord, my Lord.
Who knockes?
One from the Lord Stanley.
What is't a Clocke?
Vpon the ſtroke of foure.
Cannot my Lord Stanley ſleepe theſe tedious Nights?
So it appeares, by that I haue to ſay:
Firſt, he commends him to your Noble ſelfe.
What then?
Then certifies your Lordſhip, that this Night
He dreamt, the Bore had raſed off his Helme:
Beſides, he ſayes there are two Councels kept;
And that may be determin'd at the one,
Which may make you and him to rue at th' other.
Therefore he ſends to know your Lordſhips pleaſure,
If you will preſently take Horſe with him,
And with all ſpeed poſt with him toward the North,
To ſhun the danger that his Soule diuines.
Goe fellow, goe, returne vnto thy Lord,
Bid him not feare the ſeperated Councell:
His Honor and my ſelfe are at the one,
And at the other, is my good friend Catesby;
Where nothing can proceede, that toucheth vs,
Whereof I ſhall not haue intelligence:
Tell him his Feares are ſhallow, without inſtance.
And for his Dreames, I wonder hee's ſo ſimple,
To truſt the mock'ry of vnquiet ſlumbers.
To flye the Bore, before the Bore purſues,
Were to incenſe the Bore to follow vs,
And make purſuit, where he did meane no chaſe.
Goe, bid thy Maſter riſe, and come to me,
And we will both together to the Tower,
Where he ſhall ſee the Bore will vſe vs kindly.
Ile goe, my Lord, and tell him what you ſay.
Many good morrowes to my Noble Lord.
Good morrow Catesby, you are early ſtirring:
What newes, what newes, in this our tott'ring State?
It is a reeling World indeed, my Lord:
And I beleeue will neuer ſtand vpright,
Till Richard weare the Garland of the Realme.
How weare the Garland?
Doeſt thou meane the Crowne?
I, my good Lord.
Ile haue this Crown of mine cut frō my ſhoulders,
Before Ile ſee the Crowne ſo foule miſ-plac'd:
But canſt thou gueſſe, that he doth ayme at it?
I, on my life, and hopes to find you forward,
Vpon his partie, for the gaine thereof:
And thereupon he ſends you this good newes,
That this ſame very day your enemies.
The Kindred of the Queene, muſt dye at Pomfret.
Indeed I am no mourner for that newes,
Becauſe they haue beene ſtill my aduerſaries:
But, that Ile giue my voice on Richards ſide,
To barre my Maſters Heires in true Deſcent,
God knowes I will not doe it, to the death.
God keepe your Lordſhip in that gracious minde.
But I ſhall laugh at this a twelue-month hence,
That they which brought me in my Maſters hate,
I liue to looke vpon their Tragedie.
Well Catesby, ere a fort-night make me older,
Ile ſend ſome packing, that yet thinke not on't.
'Tis a vile thing to dye, my gracious Lord,
When men are vnprepar'd, and looke not for it.
O monſtrous, monſtrous! and ſo falls it out
With Riuers Ʋaughan, Grey: and ſo 'twill doe
With ſome men elſe, that thinke themſelues as ſafe
As thou and I, who (as thou know'ſt) are deare
To Princely Richard, and to Buckingham.
The Princes both make high account of you,
For they account his Head vpon the Bridge.
I know they doe, and I haue well deſeru'd it.
Come on, come on, where is your Bore-ſpeare man?
Feare you the Bore, and goe ſo vnprouided?
My Lord good morrow, good morrow Catesby:
You may ieaſt on, but by the holy Rood,
I doe not like theſe ſeuerall Councels, I.
My Lord, I hold my Life as deare as yours,
And neuer in my dayes, I doe proteſt,
Was it ſo precious to me, as 'tis now:
Thinke you, but that I know our ſtate ſecure,
I would be ſo triumphant as I am?
The Lords at Pomfret▪ whē they rode from London,
Were iocund, and ſuppos'd their ſtates were ſure,
And they indeed had no cauſe to miſtruſt:
But yet you ſee, how ſoone the Day o're-caſt.
This ſudden ſtab of Rancour I miſdoubt:
Pray God (I ſay) I proue a needleſſe Coward.
What, ſhall we toward the Tower? the day is ſpent.
Come, come, haue with you:
Wot you what, my Lord,
To day the Lords you talke of, are beheaded.
They, for their truth, might better wear their Heads,
Then ſome that haue accus'd them, weare their Hats.
But come, my Lord, let's away.
Goe on before, Ile talke with this good fellow.
How now, Sirrha? how goes the World with thee?
The better, that your Lordſhip pleaſe to aske.
I tell thee man, 'tis better with me now,
Then when thou met'ſt me laſt, where now we meet:
Then was I going Priſoner to the Tower,
By the ſuggeſtion of the Queenes Allyes.
But now I tell thee (keepe it to thy ſelfe)
This day thoſe Enemies are put to death,
And I in better ſtate then ere I was.
God hold it, to your Honors good content.
Gramercie fellow: there, drinke that for me.
I thanke your Honor.
Well met, my Lord, I am glad to ſee your Honor.
I thanke thee, good Sir Iohn, with all my heart.
I am in your debt, for your laſt Exerciſe:
Come the next Sabboth, and I will content you.
Ile wait vpon your Lordſhip.
What, talking with a Prieſt, Lord Chamberlaine?
Your friends at Pomfret, they doe need the Prieſt,
Your Honor hath no ſhriuing worke in hand.
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,
The men you talke of, came into my minde.
What, goe you toward the Tower?
I doe, my Lord, but long I cannot ſtay there:
I ſhall returne before your Lordſhip, thence.
Nay like enough, for I ſtay Dinner there.
And Supper too, although thou know'ſt it not.
Come, will you goe?
Ile wait vpon your Lordſhip.
Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell thee this,
To day ſhalt thou behold a Subiect die,
For Truth, for Dutie, and for Loyaltie.
God bleſſe the Prince from all the Pack of you,
A Knot you are, of damned Blood-ſuckers.
You liue, that ſhall cry woe for this heereafter.
Diſpatch, the limit of your Liues is out.
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody Priſon!
Fatall and ominous to Noble Peeres:
Within the guiltie Cloſure of thy Walls,
Richard the Second here was hackt to death:
And for more ſlander to thy diſmall Seat,
Wee giue to thee our guiltleſſe blood to drinke.
Now Margarets Curſe is falne vpon our Heads,
When ſhee exclaim'd on Hastings, you, and I,
For ſtanding by, when Richard ſtab'd her Sonne.
Then curs'd ſhee Richard,
Then curs'd ſhee Buckingham,
Then curs'd ſhee Hastings. Oh remember God,
To heare her prayer for them, as now for vs:
And for my Siſter, and her Princely Sonnes,
Be ſatisfy'd, deare God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou know'ſt, vniuſtly muſt be ſpilt.
Make haſte, the houre of death is expiate.
Come Grey, come Vaughan, let vs here embrace.
Farewell, vntill we meet againe in Heauen.
Now Noble Peeres, the cauſe why we are met,
Is to determine of the Coronation:
In Gods Name ſpeake, when is the Royall day?
Is all things ready for the Royall time?
It is, and wants but nomination.
To morrow then I iudge a happie day.
Who knowes the Lord Protectors mind herein?
Who is moſt inward with the Noble Duke?
Your Grace, we thinke, ſhould ſooneſt know his minde.
We know each others Faces: for our Hearts,
He knowes no more of mine, then I of yours,
Or I of his, my Lord, then you of mine:
Lord Haſtings, you and he are neere in loue.
I thanke his Grace, I know he loues me well:
But for his purpoſe in the Coronation,
I haue not ſounded him, nor he deliuer'd
His gracious pleaſure any way therein:
But you, my Honorable Lords, may name the time,
And in the Dukes behalfe Ile giue my Voice,
Which I preſume hee'le take in gentle part.
In happie time, here comes the Duke himſelfe.
My Noble Lords, and Couſins all, good morrow:
I haue beene long a ſleeper: but I truſt,
My abſence doth neglect no great deſigne,
Which by my preſence might haue beene concluded.
Had you not come vpon your O my Lord,
William, Lord Haſtings, had pronounc'd your part;
I meane your Voice, for Crowning of the King.
Then my Lord Haſtings, no man might be bolder,
His Lordſhip knowes me well, and loues me well.
My Lord of Ely, when I was laſt in Holborne,
I ſaw good Strawberries in your Garden there,
I doe beſeech you, ſend for ſome of them.
Mary and will, my Lord, with all my heart.
Couſin of Buckingham, a word with you.
Catesby hath ſounded Hastings in our buſineſſe,
And findes the teſtie Gentleman ſo hot,
That he will loſe his Head, ere giue conſent
His Maſters Child, as worſhipfully he tearmes it,
Shall loſe the Royaltie of Englands Throne.
Withdraw your ſelfe a while, Ile goe with you.
We haue not yet ſet downe this day of Triumph:
To morrow, in my iudgement, is too ſudden,
For I my ſelfe am not ſo well prouided,
As elſe I would be, were the day prolong'd.
Where is my Lord, the Duke of Gloſter?
I haue ſent for theſe Strawberries.
His Grace looks chearfully & ſmooth this morning,
There's ſome conceit or other likes him well,
When that he bids good morrow with ſuch ſpirit.
I thinke there's neuer a man in Chriſtendome
Can leſſer hide his loue, or hate, then hee,
For by his Face ſtraight ſhall you know his Heart.
What of his Heart perceiue you in his Face,
By any liuelyhood he ſhew'd to day?
Mary, that with no man here he is offended:
For were he, he had ſhewne it in his Lookes.
I pray you all, tell me what they deſerue,
That doe conſpire my death with diuelliſh Plots
Of damned Witchcraft, and that haue preuail'd
Vpon my Body with their Helliſh Charmes.
The tender loue I beare your Grace, my Lord,
Makes me moſt forward, in this Princely preſence,
To doome th' Offendors, whoſoe're they be:
I ſay, my Lord, they haue deſerued death.
Then be your eyes the witneſſe of their euill.
Looke how I am bewitch'd: behold, mine Arme
Is like a blaſted Sapling, wither'd vp:
And this is Edwards Wife, that monſtrous Witch,
Conſorted with that Harlot, Strumpet Shore,
That by their Witchcraft thus haue marked me.
If they haue done this deed, my Noble Lord.
If? thou Protector of this damned Strumpet,
Talk'ſt thou to me of Ifs: thou art a Traytor,
Off with his Head; now by Saint Paul I ſweare,
I will not dine, vntill I ſee the ſame.
Louell and Ratcliffe, looke that it be done:
The reſt that loue me, riſe, and follow me.
Woe, woe for England, not a whit for me,
For I, too fond, might haue preuented this:
Stanley did dreame, the Bore did rowſe our Helmes,
And I did ſcorne it, and diſdaine to flye:
Three times to day my Foot-Cloth-Horſe did ſtumble,
And ſtarted, when he look'd vpon the Tower,
As loth to beare me to the ſlaughter-houſe.
O now I need the Prieſt, that ſpake to me:
I now repent I told the Purſuiuant,
As too triumphing, how mine Enemies
To day at Pomfret bloodily were butcher'd,
And I my ſelfe ſecure, in grace and fauour.
Oh Margaret, Margaret, now thy heauie Curſe
Is lighted on poore Hastings wretched Head.
Come, come, diſpatch, the Duke would be at dinner:
Make a ſhort Shrift, he longs to ſee your Head.
O momentarie grace of mortall men,
Which we more hunt for, then the grace of God!
Who builds his hope in ayre of your good Lookes,
Liues like a drunken Sayler on a Maſt,
Readie with euery Nod to tumble downe,
Into the fatall Bowels of the Deepe.
Come, come, diſpatch, 'tis bootleſſe to exclaime.
O bloody Richard: miſerable England,
I prophecie the fearefull'ſt time to thee,
That euer wretched Age hath look'd vpon.
Come, lead me to the Block, beare him my Head,
They ſmile at me, who ſhortly ſhall be dead.
Come Couſin,
Canſt thou quake, and change thy colour,
Murther thy breath in middle of a word,
And then againe begin, and ſtop againe,
As if thou were diſtraught, and mad with terror?
Tut, I can counterfeit the deepe Tragedian,
Speake, and looke backe, and prie on euery ſide,
Tremble and ſtart at wagging of a Straw:
Intending deepe ſuſpition, gaſtly Lookes
Are at my ſeruice, like enforced Smiles;
And both are readie in their Offices,
At any time to grace my Stratagemes.
But what, is Catesby gone?
He is, and ſee he brings the Maior along.
Lord Maior.
Looke to the Draw-Bridge there.
Hearke, a Drumme.
Catesby, o're-looke the Walls.
Lord Maior, the reaſon we haue ſent.
Looke back, defend thee, here are Enemies.
God and our Innocencie defend, and guard vs.
Be patient, they are friends: Ratcliffe, and Louell.
Here is the Head of that ignoble Traytor,
The dangerous and vnſuſpected Haſtings.
So deare I lou'd the man, that I muſt weepe:
I tooke him for the plaineſt harmeleſſe Creature,
That breath'd vpon the Earth, a Chriſtian.
Made him my Booke, wherein my Soule recorded
The Hiſtorie of all her ſecret thoughts.
So ſmooth he dawb'd his Vice with ſhew of Vertue,
That his apparant open Guilt omitted,
I meane, his Conuerſation with Shores Wife,
He liu'd from all attainder of ſuſpects.
Well, well, he was the couertſt ſheltred Traytor
That euer liu'd.
Would you imagine, or almoſt beleeue,
Wert not, that by great preſeruation
We liue to tell it, that the ſubtill Traytor
This day had plotted, in the Councell-Houſe,
To murther me, and my good Lord of Gloſter.
Had he done ſo?
What? thinke you we are Turkes, or Infidels?
Or that we would, againſt the forme of Law,
Proceed thus raſhly in the Villaines death,
But that the extreme perill of the caſe,
The Peace of England, and our Perſons ſafetie,
Enforc'd vs to this Execution.
Now faire befall you, he deſeru'd his death,
And your good Graces both haue well proceeded,
To warne falſe Traytors from the like Attempts.
I neuer look'd for better at his hands,
After he once fell in with Miſtreſſe Shore:
Yet had we not determin'd he ſhould dye,
Vntill your Lordſhip came to ſee his end,
Which now the louing haſte of theſe our friends,
Something againſt our meanings, haue preuented;
Becauſe, my Lord, I would haue had you heard
The Traytor ſpeake, and timorouſly confeſſe
The manner and the purpoſe of his Treaſons:
That you might well haue ſignify'd the ſame
Vnto the Citizens, who haply may
Miſconſter vs in him, and wayle his death.
But, my good Lord, your Graces words ſhal ſerue,
As well as I had ſeene, and heard him ſpeake:
And doe not doubt, right Noble Princes both,
But Ile acquaint our dutious Citizens
With all your iuſt proceedings in this caſe.
And to that end we wiſh'd your Lordſhip here,
T' auoid the Cenſures of the carping World.
Which ſince you come too late of our intent,
Yet witneſſe what you heare we did intend:
And ſo, my good Lord Maior, we bid farwell.
Goe after, after, Couſin Buckingham.
The Maior towards Guild-Hall hyes him in all poſte:
There, at your meeteſt vantage of the time,
Inferre the Baſtardie of Edwards Children:
Tell them, how Edward put to death a Citizen,
Onely for ſaying, he would make his Sonne
Heire to the Crowne, meaning indeed his Houſe,
Which, by the Signe thereof, was tearmed ſo.
Moreouer, vrge his hatefull Luxurie,
And beaſtiall appetite in change of Luſt,
Which ſtretcht vnto their Seruants, Daughters, Wiues,
Euen where his raging eye, or ſauage heart,
Without controll, luſted to make a prey.
Nay, for a need, thus farre come neere my Perſon:
Tell them, when that my Mother went with Child
Of that inſatiate Edward; Noble Yorke,
My Princely Father, then had Warres in France,
And by true computation of the time,
Found, that the Iſſue was not his begot:
Which well appeared in his Lineaments,
Being nothing like the Noble Duke, my Father:
Yet touch this ſparingly, as 'twere farre off,
Becauſe, my Lord, you know my Mother liues.
Doubt not, my Lord, Ile play the Orator,
As if the Golden Fee, for which I plead,
Were for my ſelfe: and ſo, my Lord, adue.
If you thriue wel, bring them to Baynards Caſtle,
Where you ſhall finde me well accompanied
With reuerend Fathers, and well-learned Biſhops.
I goe, and towards three or foure a Clocke
Looke for the Newes that the Guild-Hall affoords.
Goe Louell with all ſpeed to Doctor Shaw,
Goe thou to Fryer Peuker, bid them both
Meet me within this houre at Baynards Caſtle.
Now will I goe to take ſome priuie order,
To draw the Brats of Clarence out of ſight,
And to giue order, that no manner perſon
Haue any time recourſe vnto the Princes.
Here is the Indictment of the good Lord Haſtings,
Which in a ſet Hand fairely is engroſs'd,
That it may be to day read o're in Paules.
And marke how well the ſequell hangs together:
Eleuen houres I haue ſpent to write it ouer,
For yeſter-night by Catesby was it ſent me,
The Precedent was full as long a doing,
And yet within theſe fiue houres Haſtings liu'd,
Vntainted, vnexamin'd, free, at libertie.
Here's a good World the while.
Who is ſo groſſe, that cannot ſee this palpable deuice?
Yet who ſo bold, but ſayes he ſees it not?
Bad is the World, and all will come to nought,
When ſuch ill dealing muſt be ſeene in thought.
How now, how now, what ſay the Citizens?
Now by the holy Mother of our Lord,
The Citizens are mum, ſay not a word.
Toucht you the Baſtardie of Edwards Children?
I did, with his Contract with Lady Lucy,
And his Contract by Deputie in France,
Th' vnſatiate greedineſſe of his deſire,
And his enforcement of the Citie Wiues,
His Tyrannie for Trifles, his owne Baſtardie,
As being got, your Father then in France,
And his reſemblance, being not like the Duke.
Withall, I did inferre your Lineaments,
Being the right Idea of your Father,
Both in your forme, and Nobleneſſe of Minde:
Layd open all your Victories in Scotland,
Your Diſcipline in Warre, Wiſdome in Peace,
Your Bountie, Vertue, faire Humilitie:
Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpoſe,
Vntoucht, or ſleightly handled in diſcourſe.
And when my Oratorie drew toward end,
I bid them that did loue their Countries good,
Cry, God ſaue Richard, Englands Royall King.
And did they ſo?
No, ſo God helpe me, they ſpake not a word,
But like dumbe Statues, or breathing Stones,
Star'd each on other, and look'd deadly pale:
Which when I ſaw, I reprehended them,
And ask'd the Maior, what meant this wilfull ſilence?
His anſwer was, the people were not vſed
To be ſpoke to, but by the Recorder.
Then he was vrg'd to tell my Tale againe:
Thus ſayth the Duke, thus hath the Duke inferr'd,
But nothing ſpoke, in warrant from himſelfe.
When he had done, ſome followers of mine owne,
At lower end of the Hall, hurld vp their Caps,
And ſome tenne voyces cry'd, God ſaue King Richard:
And thus I tooke the vantage of thoſe few.
Thankes gentle Citizens, and friends, quoth I,
This generall applauſe, and chearefull ſhowt,
Argues your wiſdome, and your loue to Richard:
And euen here brake off, and came away.
What tongue-leſſe Blockes were they,
Would they not ſpeake?
Will not the Maior then, and his Brethren, come?
The Maior is here at hand: intend ſome feare,
Be not you ſpoke with, but by mightie ſuit:
And looke you get a Prayer-Booke in your hand,
And ſtand betweene two Church-men, good my Lord,
For on that ground Ile make a holy Deſcant:
And be not eaſily wonne to our requeſts,
Play the Maids part, ſtill anſwer nay, and take it.
I goe: and if you plead as well for them,
As I can ſay nay to thee for my ſelfe,
No doubt we bring it to a happie iſſue.
Go, go vp to the Leads, the Lord Maior knocks.
Welcome, my Lord, I dance attendance here,
I thinke the Duke will not be ſpoke withall.
Now Catesby, what ſayes your Lord to my requeſt?
He doth entreat your Grace, my Noble Lord,
To viſit him to morrow, or next day:
He is within, with two right reuerend Fathers,
Diuinely bent to Meditation,
And in no Worldly ſuites would he be mou'd,
To draw him from his holy Exerciſe.
Returne, good Catesby, to the gracious Duke,
Tell him, my ſelfe, the Maior and Aldermen,
In deepe deſignes, in matter of great moment,
No leſſe importing then our generall good,
Are come to haue ſome conference with his Grace.
Ile ſignifie ſo much vnto him ſtraight.
Ah ha, my Lord, this Prince is not an Edward,
He is not lulling on a lewd Loue-Bed,
But on his Knees, at Meditation:
Not dallying with a Brace of Curtizans,
But meditating with two deepe Diuines:
Not ſleeping, to engroſſe his idle Body,
But praying, to enrich his watchfull Soule.
Happie were England, would this vertuous Prince
Take on his Grace the Soueraigntie thereof.
But ſure I feare we ſhall not winne him to it.
Marry God defend his Grace ſhould ſay vs nay.
I feare he will: here Catesby comes againe.
Now Catesby, what ſayes his Grace?
He wonders to what end you haue aſſembled
Such troopes of Citizens, to come to him,
His Grace not being warn'd thereof before:
He feares, my Lord, you meane no good to him.
Sorry I am, my Noble Couſin ſhould
Suſpect me, that I meane no good to him:
By Heauen, we come to him in perfit loue,
And ſo once more returne, and tell his Grace.
When holy and deuout Religious men
Are at their Beades, 'tis much to draw them thence,
So ſweet is zealous Contemplation.
See where his Grace ſtands, tweene two Clergie men.
Two Props of Vertue, for a Chriſtian Prince,
To ſtay him from the fall of Vanitie:
And ſee a Booke of Prayer in his hand,
True Ornaments to know a holy man.
Famous Plantagenet, moſt gracious Prince,
Lend fauourable eare to our requeſts,
And pardon vs the interruption
Of thy Deuotion, and right Chriſtian Zeale.
My Lord, there needes no ſuch Apologie:
I doe beſeech your Grace to pardon me,
Who earneſt in the ſeruice of my God,
Deferr'd the viſitation of my friends.
But leauing this, what is your Graces pleaſure?
Euen that (I hope) which pleaſeth God aboue,
And all good men, of this vngouern'd Ile.
I doe ſuſpect I haue done ſome offence,
That ſeemes diſgracious in the Cities eye,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
You haue, my Lord:
Would it might pleaſe your Grace,
On our entreaties, to amend your fault.
Elſe wherefore breathe I in a Chriſtian Land.
Know then, it is your fault, that you reſigne
The Supreme Seat, the Throne Maieſticall,
The Sceptred Office of your Anceſtors,
Your State of Fortune, and your Deaw of Birth,
The Lineall Glory of your Royall Houſe,
To the corruption of a blemiſht Stock;
Whiles in the mildneſſe of your ſleepie thoughts,
Which here we waken to our Countries good,
The Noble Ile doth want his proper Limmes:
His Face defac'd with skarres of Infamie,
His Royall Stock grafft with ignoble Plants,
And almoſt ſhouldred in the ſwallowing Gulfe
Of darke Forgetfulneſſe, and deepe Obliuion.
Which to recure, we heartily ſolicite
Your gracious ſelfe to take on you the charge
And Kingly Gouernment of this your Land:
Not as Protector, Steward, Subſtitute,
Or lowly Factor, for anothers gaine;
But as ſucceſſiuely, from Blood to Blood,
Your Right of Birth, your Empyrie, your owne.
For this, conſorted with the Citizens,
Your very Worſhipfull and louing friends,
And by their vehement inſtigation,
In this iuſt Cauſe come I to moue your Grace.
I cannot tell, if to depart in ſilence,
Or bitterly to ſpeake in your reproofe,
Beſt fitteth my Degree, or your Condition.
If not to anſwer, you might haply thinke,
Tongue-ty'd Ambition, not replying, yeelded
To beare the Golden Yoake of Soueraigntie,
Which fondly you would here impoſe on me.
If to reproue you for this ſuit of yours,
So ſeaſon'd with your faithfull loue to me,
Then on the other ſide I check'd my friends.
Therefore to ſpeake, and to auoid the firſt,
And then in ſpeaking, not to incurre the laſt,
Definitiuely thus I anſwer you.
Your loue deſerues my thankes, but my deſert
Vnmeritable, ſhunnes your high requeſt.
Firſt, if all Obſtacles were cut away,
And that my Path were euen to the Crowne,
As the ripe Reuenue, and due of Birth:
Yet ſo much is my pouertie of ſpirit,
So mightie, and ſo manie my defects,
That I would rather hide me from my Greatneſſe,
Being a Barke to brooke no mightie Sea;
Then in my Greatneſſe couet to be hid,
And in the vapour of my Glory ſmother'd.
But God be thank'd, there is no need of me,
And much I need to helpe you, were there need:
The Royall Tree hath left vs Royall Fruit,
Which mellow'd by the ſtealing howres of time,
Will well become the Seat of Maieſtie,
And make (no doubt) vs happy by his Reigne.
On him I lay that, you would lay on me,
The Right and Fortune of his happie Starres,
Which God defend that I ſhould wring from him.
My Lord, this argues Conſcience in your Grace,
But the reſpects thereof are nice, and triuiall,
All circumſtances well conſidered.
You ſay, that Edward is your Brothers Sonne,
So ſay we too, but not by Edwards Wife:
For firſt was be contract to Lady Lucie,
Your Mother liues a Witneſſe to his Vow;
And afterward by ſubſtitute betroth'd
To Bona, Siſter to the King of France.
Theſe both put off, a poore Petitioner,
A Care-cras'd Mother to a many Sonnes,
A Beautie-waining, and diſtreſſed Widow,
Euen in the after-noone of her beſt dayes,
Made prize and purchaſe of his wanton Eye,
Seduc'd the pitch, and height of his degree,
To baſe declenſion, and loath'd Bigamie.
By her, in his vnlawfull Bed, he got
This Edward, whom our Manners call the Prince.
More bitterly could I expoſtulate,
Saue that for reuerence to ſome aliue,
I giue a ſparing limit to my Tongue.
Then good, my Lord, take to your Royall ſelfe
This proffer'd benefit of Dignitie:
If not to bleſſe vs and the Land withall,
Yet to draw forth your Noble Anceſtrie
From the corruption of abuſing times,
Vnto a Lineall true deriued courſe.
Do good my Lord, your Citizens entreat you.
Refuſe not, mightie Lord, this proffer'd loue.
O make them ioyfull, grant their lawfull ſuit.
Alas, why would you heape this Care on me?
I am vnfit for State, and Maieſtie:
I doe beſeech you take it not amiſſe,
I cannot, nor I will not yeeld to you.
If you refuſe it, as in loue and zeale,
Loth to depoſe the Child, your Brothers Sonne,
As well we know your tenderneſſe of heart,
And gentle, kinde, effeminate remorſe,
Which we haue noted in you to your Kindred,
And egally indeede to all Eſtates;
Yet know, where you accept our ſuit, or no,
Your Brothers Sonne ſhall neuer reigne our King,
But we will plant ſome other in the Throne,
To the diſgrace and downe-fall of your Houſe:
And in this reſolution here we leaue you.
Come Citizens, we will entreat no more.
Call him againe, ſweet Prince, accept their ſuit:
If you denie them, all the Land will rue it.
Will you enforce me to a world of Cares.
Call them againe, I am not made of Stones,
But penetrable to your kinde entreaties,
Albeit againſt my Conſcience and my Soule.
Couſin of Buckingham, and ſage graue men,
Since you will buckle fortune on my back,
To beare her burthen, where I will or no.
I muſt haue patience to endure the Load:
But if black Scandall, or foule-fac'd Reproach,
Attend the ſequell of your Impoſition,
Your meere enforcement ſhall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and ſtaynes thereof;
For God doth know, and you may partly ſee,
How farre I am from the deſire of this.
God bleſſe your Grace, wee ſee it, and will ſay it.
In ſaying ſo, you ſhall but ſay the truth.
Then I ſalute you with this Royall Title,
Long liue King Richard, Englands worthie King.
Amen.
To morrow may it pleaſe you to be Crown'd.
Euen when you pleaſe, for you will haue it ſo.
To morrow then we will attend your Grace,
And ſo moſt ioyfully we take our leaue.
Come, let vs to our holy Worke againe.
Farewell my Couſins, farewell gentle friends.
Who meetes vs heere?
My Neece Plantagenet,
Led in the hand of her kind Aunt of Gloſter?
Now, for my Life, ſhee's wandring to the Tower,
On pure hearts loue, to greet the tender Prince.
Daughter, well met.
God giue your Graces both, a happie
And a ioyfull time of day.
As much to you, good Siſter: whither away?
No farther then the Tower, and as I gueſſe,
Vpon the like deuotion as your ſelues,
To gratulate the gentle Princes there.
Kind Siſter thankes, wee'le enter all together:
And in good time, here the Lieutenant comes.
Maſter Lieutenant, pray you, by your leaue,
How doth the Prince, and my young Sonne of Yorke?
Right well, deare Madame: by your patience,
I may not ſuffer you to viſit them,
The King hath ſtrictly charg'd the contrary.
The King? who's that?
I meane, the Lord Protector.
The Lord protect him from that Kingly Title.
Hath he ſet bounds betweene their loue, and me?
I am their Mother, who ſhall barre me from them?
I am their Fathers Mother, I will ſee them.
Their Aunt I am in law, in loue their Mother:
Then bring me to their ſights, Ile beare thy blame,
And take thy Office from thee, on my perill.
No, Madame, no; I may not leaue it ſo:
I am bound by Oath, and therefore pardon me.
Let me but meet you Ladies one howre hence,
And Ile ſalute your Grace of Yorke as Mother,
And reuerend looker on of two faire Queenes,
Come Madame, you muſt ſtraight to Weſtminſter,
There to be crowned Richards Royall Queene.
Ah, cut my Lace aſunder,
That my pent heart may haue ſome ſcope to beat,
Or elſe I ſwoone with this dead-killing newes.
Deſpightfull tidings, O vnpleaſing newes.
Be of good cheare: Mother, how fares your Grace?
O Dorſet, ſpeake not to me, get thee gone,
Death and Deſtruction dogges thee at thy heeles,
Thy Mothers Name is ominous to Children.
If thou wilt out-ſtrip Death, goe croſſe the Seas,
And liue with Richmond, from the reach of Hell.
Goe hye thee, hye thee from this ſlaughter-houſe,
Leſt thou encreaſe the number of the dead,
And make me dye the thrall of Margarets Curſe,
Nor Mother, Wife, nor Englands counted Queene.
Full of wiſe care, is this your counſaile, Madame:
Take all the ſwift aduantage of the howres:
You ſhall haue Letters from me to my Sonne,
In your behalfe, to meet you on the way:
Be not ta'ne tardie by vnwiſe delay.
O ill diſperſing▪ Winde of Miſerie,
O my accurſed Wombe, the Bed of Death:
A Cockatrice haſt thou hatcht to the World.
Whoſe vnauoided Eye is murtherous.
Come, Madame, come, I in all haſte was ſent.
And I with all vnwillingneſſe will goe.
O would to God, that the incluſiue Verge
Of Golden Mettall, that muſt round my Brow,
Were red hot Steele, to ſeare me to the Braines,
Anoynted let me be with deadly Venome,
And dye ere men can ſay, God ſaue the Queene.
Goe, goe, poore ſoule, I enuie not thy glory,
To feed my humor, wiſh thy ſelfe no harme.
No: why? When he that is my Husband now,
Came to me, as I follow'd Venries Corſe.
When ſcarce the blood was well waſht from his hands,
Which iſſued from my other Angell Husband,
And that deare Saint, which then I weeping follow'd:
O, when I ſay I look'd on Richards Face,
This was my Wiſh: Be thou (quoth I) accurſt,
For making me, ſo young, ſo old a Widow:
And when thou wed'ſt, let ſorrow haunt thy Bed;
And be thy Wife, if any be ſo mad,
More miſerable, by the Life of thee,
Then thou haſt made me, by my deare Lords death.
Loe, ere I can repeat this Curſe againe,
Within ſo ſmall a time, my Womans heart
Groſſely grew captiue to his honey words,
And prou'd the ſubiect of mine owne Soules Curſe,
Which hitherto hath held mine eyes from reſt:
For neuer yet one howre in his Bed
Did I enioy the golden deaw of ſleepe,
But with his timorous Dreames was ſtill awak'd.
Beſides, he hates me for my Father Warwicke,
And will (no doubt) ſhortly be rid of me.
Poore heart adieu, I pittie thy complaining.
No more, then with my ſoule I mourne for yours.
Farewell, thou wofull welcommer of glory.
Adieu, poore ſoule, that tak'ſt thy leaue of it.
Go thou to Richmond, & good fortune guide thee,
Go thou to Richard, and good Angels tend thee,
Go thou to Sanctuarie, and good thoughts poſſeſſe thee,
I to my Graue, where peace and reſt lye with mee.
Eightie odde yeeres of ſorrow haue I ſeene,
And each howres ioy wrackt with a weeke of teene.
Stay, yet looke backe with me vnto the Tower.
Pitty, you ancient Stones, thoſe tender Babes,
Whom Enuie hath immur'd within your Walls,
Rough Cradle for ſuch little prettie ones,
Rude ragged Nurſe, old ſullen Play-fellow,
For tender Princes: vſe my Babies well;
So fooliſh Sorrowes bids your Stones farewell.
Stand all apart. Couſin of Buckingham.
My gracious Soueraigne.
Giue me thy hand.
Thus high, by thy aduice, and thy aſſiſtance,
Is King Richard ſeated:
But ſhall we weare theſe Glories for a day?
Or ſhall they laſt, and we reioyce in them?
Still liue they, and for euer let them laſt.
Ah Buckingham, now doe I play the Touch,
To trie if thou be currant Gold indeed:
Young Edward liues, thinke now what I would ſpeake.
Say on my louing Lord.
Why Buckingham, I ſay I would be King.
Why ſo you are, my thrice-renowned Lord.
Ha? am I King? 'tis ſo: but Edward liues.
True, Noble Prince.
O bitter conſequence!
That Edward ſtill ſhould liue true Noble Prince.
Couſin, thou waſt not wont to be ſo dull.
Shall I be plaine? I wiſh the Baſtards dead,
And I would haue it ſuddenly perform'd.
What ſay'ſt thou now? ſpeake ſuddenly, be briefe.
Your Grace may doe your pleaſure.
Tut, tut, thou art all Ice, thy kindneſſe freezes:
Say, haue I thy conſent, that they ſhall dye?
Giue me ſome litle breath, ſome pawſe, deare Lord,
Before I poſitiuely ſpeake in this:
I will reſolue you herein preſently.
The King is angry, ſee he gnawes his Lippe.
I will conuerſe with Iron-witted Fooles,
And vnreſpectiue Boyes: none are for me,
That looke into me with conſiderate eyes,
High-reaching Buckingham growes circumſpect.
Boy.
My Lord.
Know'ſt thou not any, whom corrupting Gold
Will tempt vnto a cloſe exploit of Death?
I know a diſcontented Gentleman,
Whoſe humble meanes match not his haughtie ſpirit:
Gold were as good as twentie Orators,
And will (no doubt) tempt him to any thing.
What is his Name?
His Name, my Lord, is Tirrell.
I partly know the man: goe call him hither, Boy.
The deepe reuoluing wittie Buckingham,
No more ſhall be the neighbor to my counſailes.
Hath he ſo long held out with me, vntyr'd,
And ſtops he now for breath? Well, be it ſo.
How now, Lord Stanley, what's the newes?
Know my louing Lord, the Marqueſſe Dorſet
As I heare, is fled to Richmond,
In the parts where he abides.
Come hither Catesby, rumor it abroad,
That Anne my Wife is very grieuous ſicke,
I will take order for her keeping cloſe.
Inquire me out ſome meane poore Gentleman,
Whom I will marry ſtraight to Clarence Daughter:
The Boy is fooliſh, and I feare not him.
Looke how thou dream'ſt: I ſay againe, giue out,
That Anne, my Queene, is ſicke, and like to dye.
About it, for it ſtands me much vpon
To ſtop all hopes, whoſe growth may dammage me.
I muſt be marryed to my Brothers Daughter,
Or elſe my Kingdome ſtands on brittle Glaſſe:
Murther her Brothers, and then marry her,
Vncertaine way of gaine. But I am in
So farre in blood, that ſinne will pluck on ſinne,
Teare-falling Pittie dwells not in this Eye.
Is thy Name Tyrrel?
Iames Tyrrel, and your moſt obedient ſubiect.
Art thou indeed?
Proue me, my gracious Lord.
Dar'ſt thou reſolue to kill a friend of mine?
Pleaſe you:
But I had rather kill two enemies.
Why then thou haſt it: two deepe enemies.
Foes to my Reſt, and my ſweet ſleepes diſturbers,
Are they that I would haue thee deale vpon:
Tyrrel, I meane thoſe Baſtards in the Tower.
Let me haue open meanes to come to them,
And ſoone Ile rid you from the feare of them.
Thou ſing'ſt ſweet Muſique:
Hearke, come hither Tyrrel,
Goe by this token: riſe, and lend thine Eare,
There is no more but ſo: ſay it is done,
And I will loue thee, and preferre thee for it.
I will diſpatch it ſtraight.
My Lord, I haue conſider'd in my minde,
The late requeſt that you did ſound me in.
Well, let that reſt: Dorſet is fled to Richmond.
I heare the newes, my Lord.
Stanley, hee is your Wiues Sonne: well, looke vnto it.
My Lord, I clayme the gift, my due by promiſe,
For which your Honor and your Faith is pawn'd,
Th' Earledome of Hertford, and the moueables,
Which you haue promiſed I ſhall poſſeſſe.
Stanley looke to your Wife: if ſhe conuey
Letters to Richmond, you ſhall anſwer it.
What ſayes your Highneſſe to my iuſt requeſt?
I doe remember me, Henry the Sixt
Did prophecie, that Richmond ſhould be King,
When Richmond was a little peeuiſh Boy.
A King perhaps.
May it pleaſe you to reſolue me in my ſuit.
Thou troubleſt me, I am not in the vaine.
And is it thus? repayes he my deepe ſeruice
With ſuch contempt? made I him King for this?
O let me thinke on Haſtings, and be gone
To Brecnock, while my fearefull Head is on.
The tyrannous and bloodie Act is done,
The moſt arch deed of pittious maſſacre
That euer yet this Land was guilty of:
Dighton and Forreſt, who I did ſuborne
To do this peece of ruthfull Butchery,
Albeit they were fleſht Villaines, bloody Dogges,
Melted with tenderneſſe, and milde compaſſion,
Wept like to Children, in their deaths ſad Story.
O thus (quoth Dighton) lay the gentle Babes:
Thus, thus (quoth Forreſt) girdling one another
Within their Alablaſter innocent Armes:
Their lips were foure red Roſes on a ſtalke,
And in their Summer Beauty kiſt each other.
A Booke of Prayers on their pillow lay,
Which one (quoth Forrest) almoſt chang'd my minde:
But oh the Diuell, there the Villaine ſtopt:
When Dighton thus told on, we ſmothered
The moſt repleniſhed ſweet worke of Nature,
That from the prime Creation ere ſhe framed.
Hence both are gone with Conſcience and Remorſe,
They could not ſpeake, and ſo I left them both,
To beare this tydings to the bloody King.
And heere he comes. All health my Soueraigne Lord.
Kinde Tirrell, am I happy in thy Newes.
If to haue done the thing you gaue in charge,
Be get your happineſſe, be happy then,
For it is done.
But did'ſt thou ſee them dead.
I did my Lord.
And buried gentle Tirrell.
The Chaplaine of the Tower hath buried them,
But where (to ſay the truth) I do not know.
Come to me Tirrel ſoone, and after Supper,
When thou ſhalt tell the proceſſe of their death.
Meane time, but thinke how I may do the good,
And be inheritor of thy deſire.
Farewell till then.
I humbly take my leaue.
The Sonne of Clarence haue I pent vp cloſe,
His daughter meanly haue I matcht in marriage,
The Sonnes of Edward ſleepe in Abrahams boſome,
And Anne my wife hath bid this world good night,
Now for I know the Britaine Richmond aymes
At yong Elizabeth my brothers daughter,
And by that knot lookes proudly on the Crowne,
To her go I, a iolly thriuing wooer.
My Lord.
Good or bad newes, that thou com'ſt in ſo bluntly?
Bad news my Lord, Mourton is fled to Richmond,
And Buckingham backt with the hardy Welſhmen
Is in the field, and ſtill his power encreaſeth.
Ely with Richmond troubles me more neere,
Then Buckingham and his raſh leuied Strength.
Come, I haue learn'd, that fearfull commenting
Is leaden ſeruitor to dull delay.
Delay leds impotent and Snaile-pac'd Beggery:
Then fierie expedition be my wing,
Ioues Mercury, and Herald for a King:
Go muſter men: My counſaile is my Sheeld,
We muſt be breefe, when Traitors braue the Field.
So now proſperity begins to mellow,
And drop into the rotten mouth of death:
Heere in theſe Confines ſlily haue I lurkt,
To watch the waining of mine enemies.
A dire induction, am I witneſſe to,
And will to France, hoping the conſequence
Will proue as bitter, blacke, and Tragicall.
Withdraw thee wretched Margaret, who comes heere?
Ah my poore Princes! ah my tender Babes:
My vnblowed Flowres, new appearing ſweets:
If yet your gentle ſoules flye in the Ayre,
And be not fixt in doome perpetuall,
Houer about me with your ayery wings,
And heare your mothers Lamentation.
Houer about her, ſay that right for right
Hath dim'd your Infant morne, to Aged night.
So many miſeries haue craz'd my voyce,
That my woe-wearied tongue is ſtill and mute.
Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet,
Edward for Edward, payes a dying debt.
Wilt thou, O God, flye from ſuch gentle Lambs,
And throw them in the intrailes of the Wolfe?
When didſt thou ſleepe, when ſuch a deed was done?
When holy Harry dyed, and my ſweet Sonne.
Dead life, blind ſight, poore mortall liuing ghoſt,
Woes Scene, Worlds ſhame, Graues due, by life vſurpt,
Breefe abſtract and record of tedious dayes,
Reſt thy vnreſt on Englands lawfull earth,
Vnlawfully made drunke with innocent blood.
Ah that thou would'ſt aſſoone affoord a Graue,
As thou canſt yeeld a melancholly ſeare:
Then would I hide my bones, not reſt them heere,
Ah who hath any cauſe to mourne but wee?
If ancient ſorrow be moſt reuerent,
Giue mine the benefit of ſigneurie,
And let my greefes frowne on the vpper hand
If ſorrow can admit Society.
I had an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him:
I had a Husband, till a Richard kill'd him:
Thou had'ſt an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him:
Thou had'ſt a Richard, till a Richard kill'd him.
I had a Richard too, and thou did'ſt kill him;
I had a Rutland too, thou hop'ſt to kill him.
Thou had'ſt a Clarence too,
And Richard kill'd him.
From forth the kennell of thy wombe hath crept
A Hell-hound that doth hunt vs all to death:
That Dogge, that had his teeth before his eyes,
To wory Lambes, and lap their gentle blood:
That foule defacer of Gods handy worke:
That reignes in gauled eyes of weeping ſoules:
That excellent grand Tyrant of the earth,
Thy wombe let looſe to chaſe vs to our graues.
O vpright, iuſt, and true-diſpoſing God,
How do I thanke thee, that this carnall Curre
Prayes on the iſſue of his Mothers body,
And makes her Pue-fellow with others mone.
Oh Harries wife, triumph not in my woes:
God witneſſe with me, I haue wept for thine.
Beare with me: I am hungry for reuenge,
And now I cloy me with beholding it.
Thy Edward he is dead, that kill'd my Edward,
The other Edward dead, to quit my Edward:
Yong Yorke, he is but boote, becauſe both they
Matcht not the high perfection of my loſſe.
Thy Clarence he is dead, that ſtab'd my Edward,
And the beholders of this franticke play,
Th' adulterate Haſtings, Riuers, Ʋaughan, Gray,
Vntimely ſmother'd in their dusky Graues.
Richard yet liues, Hels blacke Intelligencer,
Onely reſeru'd their Factor, to buy ſoules,
And ſend them thither: But at hand, at hand
Inſues his pittious and vnpittied end.
Earth gapes, Hell burnes, Fiends roare, Saints pray,
To haue him ſodainly conuey'd from hence:
Cancell his bond of life, deere God I pray,
That I may liue and ſay, The Dogge is dead.
O thou did'ſt propheſie, the time would come,
That I ſhould wiſh for thee to helpe me curſe
That bottel'd Spider, that foule bunch-back'd Toad.
I call'd thee then, vaine flouriſh of my fortune:
I call'd thee then, poore Shadow, painted Queen,
The preſentation of but what I was;
The flattering Index of a direfull Pageant;
One heau'd a high, to be hurl'd downe below:
A Mother onely mockt with two faire Babes;
A dreame of what thou waſt, a gariſh Flagge
To be the ayme of euery dangerous Shot;
A ſigne of Dignity, a Breath, a Bubble;
A Queene in ieaſt, onely to fill the Scene.
Where is thy Husband now? Where be thy Brothers?
Where be thy two Sonnes? Wherein doſt thou Ioy?
Who ſues, and kneeles, and ſayes, God ſaue the Queene?
Where be the bending Peeres that flattered thee?
Where be the thronging Troopes that followed thee?
Decline all this, and ſee what now thou art.
For happy Wife, a moſt diſtreſſed Widdow:
For ioyfull Mother, one that wailes the name:
For one being ſued too, one that humbly ſues:
For Queene, a very Caytiffe, crown'd with care:
For ſhe that ſcorn'd at me, now ſcorn'd of me:
For ſhe being feared of all, now fearing one:
For ſhe commanding all, obey'd of none.
Thus hath the courſe of Iuſtice whirl'd about,
And left thee but a very prey to time,
Hauing no more but Thought of what thou waſt.
To torture thee the more, being what thou art,
Thou didſt vſurpe my place, and doſt thou not
Vſurpe the iuſt proportion of my Sorrow?
Now thy proud Necke, beares halfe my burthen'd yoke,
From which, euen heere I ſlip my wearied head,
And leaue the burthen of it all, on thee.
Farwell Yorkes wife, and Queene of ſad miſchance,
Theſe Engliſh woes, ſhall make me ſmile in France.
O thou well skill'd in Curſes, ſtay a-while,
And teach me how to curſe mine enemies.
Forbeare to ſleepe the night, and faſt the day:
Compare dead happineſſe, with liuing woe:
Thinke that thy Babes were ſweeter then they were,
And he that ſlew them fowler then he is:
Bett'ring thy loſſe, makes the bad cauſer worſe,
Reuoluing this, will teach thee how to Curſe.
My words are dull, O quicken them with thine.
Thy woes will make them ſharpe,
And pierce like mine.
Why ſhould calamity be full of words?
Windy Atturnies to their Clients Woes,
Ayery ſucceeders of inteſtine ioyes,
Poore breathing Orators of miſeries,
Let them haue ſcope, though what they will impart,
Helpe nothing els, yet do they eaſe the hart.
If ſo then, be not Tongue-ty'd: go with me,
And in the breath of bitter words, let's ſmother
My damned Son, that thy two ſweet Sonnes ſmother'd.
The Trumpet ſounds, be copious in exclaimes.
Who intercepts me in my Expedition?
O ſhe, that might haue intercepted thee
By ſtrangling thee in her accurſed wombe,
From all the ſlaughters (Wretch) that thou haſt done.
Hid'ſt thou that Forhead with a Golden Crowne
Where't ſhould be branded, if that right were right?
The ſlaughter of the Prince that ow'd that Crowne,
And the dyre death of my poore Sonnes, and Brothers.
Tell me thou Villaine-flaue, where are my Children?
Thou Toad, thou Toade,
Where is thy Brother Clarence?
And little Ned Plantagenet his Sonne?
Where is the gentle Riuers, Ʋaughan, Gray?
Where is kinde Haſtings?
A flouriſh Trumpets, ſtrike Alarum Drummes:
Let not the Heauens heare theſe Tell-tale women
Raile on the Lords Annointed. Strike I ſay.
Either be patient, and intreat me fayre,
Or with the clamorous report of Warre,
Thus will I drowne your exclamations.
Art thou my Sonne?
I, I thanke God, my Father, and your ſelfe.
Then patiently heare my impatience.
Madam, I haue a touch of your condition,
That cannot brooke the accent of reproofe.
O let me ſpeake.
Do then, but Ile not heare.
I will be milde, and gentle in my words.
And breefe (good Mother) for I am in haſt.
Art thou ſo haſty? I haue ſtaid for thee
(God knowes) in torment and in agony.
And came I not at laſt to comfort you?
No by the holy Rood, thou know'ſt it well,
Thou cam'ſt on earth, to make the earth my Hell.
A greeuous burthen was thy Birth to me,
Tetchy and wayward was thy Infancie.
Thy School-daies frightfull, deſp'rate, wilde, and furious,
Thy prime of Manhood, daring, bold, and venturous:
Thy Age confirm'd, proud, ſubtle, ſlye, and bloody,
More milde, but yet more harmfull; Kinde in hatred:
What comfortable houre canſt thou name,
That euer grac'd me with thy company?
Faith none, but Humfrey Hower,
That call'd your Grace
To Breakefaſt once, forth of my company.
If I be ſo diſgracious in your eye,
Let me march on, and not offend you Madam.
Strike vp the Drumme.
I prythee heare me ſpeake.
You ſpeake too bitterly.
Heare me a word:
For I ſhall neuer ſpeake to thee againe.
So.
Either thou wilt dye, by Gods iuſt ordinance
Ere from this warre thou turne a Conqueror:
Or I with greefe and extreame Age ſhall periſh,
And neuer more behold thy face againe.
Therefore take with thee my moſt greeuous Curſe,
Which in the day of Battell tyre thee more
Then all the compleat Armour that thou wear'ſt.
My Prayers on the aduerſe party fight,
And there the little ſoules of Edwards Children,
Whiſper the Spirits of thine Enemies,
And promiſe them Succeſſe and Victory:
Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end:
Shame ſerues thy life, and doth thy death attend.
Though far more cauſe, yet much leſſe ſpirit to curſe
Abides in me, I ſay Amen to her.
Stay Madam, I muſt talke a word with you.
I haue no more ſonnes of the Royall Blood
For thee to ſlaughter. For my Daughters (Richard)
They ſhall be praying Nunnes, not weeping Queenes:
And therefore leuell not to hit their liues.
You haue a daughter call'd Elizabeth,
Vertuous and Faire, Royall and Gracious?
And muſt ſhe dye for this? O let her liue,
And Ile corrupt her Manners, ſtaine her Beauty,
Slander my Selfe, as falſe to Edwards bed:
Throw ouer her the vaile of Infamy,
So ſhe may liue vnſcarr'd of bleeding ſlaughter,
I will confeſſe ſhe was not Edwards daughter.
Wrong not her Byrth, ſhe is a Royall Princeſſe.
To ſaue her life, Ile ſay ſhe is not ſo.
Her life is ſafeſt onely in her byrth.
And onely in that ſafety, dyed her Brothers.
Loe at their Birth, good ſtarres were oppoſite.
No, to their liues, ill friends were contrary.
All vnauoyded is the doome of Deſtiny.
True: when auoyded grace makes Deſtiny.
My Babes were deſtin'd to a fairer death,
If grace had bleſt thee with a fairer life.
You ſpeake as if that I had ſlaine my Coſins?
Coſins indeed, and by their Vnckle couzend,
Of Comfort, Kingdome, Kindred, Freedome, Life,
Whoſe hand ſoeuer lanch'd their tender hearts,
Thy head (all indirectly) gaue direction.
No doubt the murd'rous Knife was dull and blunt,
Till it was whetted on thy ſtone-hard heart,
To reuell in the Intrailes of my Lambes.
But that ſtill vſe of greefe, makes wilde greefe tame,
My tongue ſhould to thy eares not name my Boyes,
Till that my Nayles were anchor'd in thine eyes:
And I in ſuch a deſp'rate Bay of death,
Like a poore Barke, of ſailes and tackling roſe,
Ruſh all to peeces on thy Rocky boſome.
Madam, ſo thriue I in my enterprize
And dangerous ſucceſſe of bloody warres,
As I intend more good to you and yours,
Then euer you and yours by me were harm'd.
What good is couer'd with the face of heauen,
To be diſcouered, that can do me good.
Th' aduancement of your children, gentle Lady
Vp to ſome Scaffold, there to loſe their heads.
Vnto the dignity and height of Fortune,
The high Imperiall Type of this earths glory.
Flatter my ſorrow with report of it:
Tell me, what State, what Dignity, what Honor,
Canſt thou demiſe to any childe of mine.
Euen all I haue; I, and my ſelfe and all,
Will I withall indow a childe of thine:
So in the Lethe of thy angry ſoule,
Thou drowne the ſad remembrance of thoſe wrongs,
Which thou ſuppoſeſt I haue done to thee.
Be breefe, leaſt that the proceſſe of thy kindneſſe
Laſt longer telling then thy kindneſſe date.
Then know,
That from my Soule, I loue thy Daughter.
My daughters Mother thinkes it with her ſoule.
What do you thinke?
That thou doſt loue my daughter from thy ſoule
So from thy Soules loue didſt thou loue her Brothers,
And from my hearts loue, I do thanke thee for it.
Be not ſo haſty to confound my meaning:
I meane that with my Soule I loue thy daughter,
And do intend to make her Queene of England.
Well then, who doſt yu meane ſhallbe her King.
Euen he that makes her Queene:
Who elſe ſhould bee?
What, thou?
Euen ſo: How thinke you of it?
How canſt thou woo her?
That I would learne of you,
As one being beſt acquainted with her humour.
And wilt thou learne of me?
Madam, with all my heart.
Send to her by the man that ſlew her Brothers,
A paire of bleeding hearts: thereon ingraue
Edward and Yorke, then haply will ſhe weepe:
Therefore preſent to her, as ſometime Margaret
Did to thy Father, ſteept in Rutlands blood,
A hand-kercheefe, which ſay to her did dreyne
The purple ſappe from her ſweet Brothers body,
And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withall.
If this inducement moue her not to loue,
Send her a Letter of thy Noble deeds:
Tell her, thou mad'ſt away her Vnckle Clarence,
Her Vnckle Riuers, I (and for her ſake)
Mad'ſt quicke conueyance with her good Aunt Anne.
You mocke me Madam, this not the way
To win your daughter.
There is no other way,
Vnleſſe thou could'ſt put on ſome other ſhape,
And not be Richard, that hath done all this.
Say that I did all this for loue of her.
Nay then indeed ſhe cannot chooſe but hate thee
Hauing bought loue, with ſuch a bloody ſpoyle.
Looke what is done, cannot be now amended:
Men ſhall deale vnaduiſedly ſometimes,
Which after-houres giues leyſure to repent.
If I did take the Kingdome from your Sonnes,
To make amends, Ile giue it to your daughter:
If I haue kill'd the iſſue of your wombe,
To quicken your encreaſe, I will beget
Mine yſſue of your blood, vpon your Daughter:
A Grandams name is little leſſe in loue,
Then is the doting Title of a Mother;
They are as Children but one ſteppe below,
Euen of your mettall, of your very blood:
Of all one paine, ſaue for a night of groanes
Endur'd of her, for whom you bid like ſorrow.
Your Children were vexation to your youth,
But mine ſhall be a comfort to your Age,
The loſſe you haue, is but a Sonne being King,
And by that loſſe, your Daughter is made Queene.
I cannot make you what amends I would,
Therefore accept ſuch kindneſſe as I can.
Dorſet your Sonne, that with a fearfull ſoule
Leads diſcontented ſteppes in Forraine ſoyle,
This faire Alliance, quickly ſhall call home
To high Promotions, and great Dignity.
The King that calles your beauteous Daughter Wife,
Familiarly ſhall call thy Dorſet, Brother:
Againe ſhall you be Mother to a King:
And all the Ruines of diſtreſſefull Times,
Repayr'd with double Riches of Content.
What? we haue many goodly dayes to ſee:
The liquid drops of Teares that you haue ſhed,
Shall come againe, transform'd to Orient Pearle,
Aduantaging their Loue, with intereſt
Often-times double gaine of happineſſe.
Go then (my Mother) to thy Daughter go,
Make bold her baſhfull yeares, with your experience,
Prepare her eares to heare a Woers Tale.
Put in her tender heart, th' aſpiring Flame
Of Golden Soueraignty: Acquaint the Princeſſe
With the ſweet ſilent houres of Marriage ioyes:
And when this Arme of mine hath chaſtiſed
The petty Rebell, dull-brain'd Buckingham,
Bound with Triumphant Garlands will I come,
And leade thy daughter to a Conquerors bed:
To whom I will retaile my Conqueſt wonne,
And ſhe ſhalbe ſole Victoreſſe, Caeſars Caeſar.
What were I beſt to ſay, her Fathers Brother
Would be her Lord? Or ſhall I ſay her Vnkle?
Or he that ſlew her Brothers, and her Vnkles?
Vnder what Title ſhall I woo for thee,
That God, the Law, my Honor, and her Loue,
Can make ſeeme pleaſing to her tender yeares?
Inferre faire Englands peace by this Alliance.
Which ſhe ſhall purchaſe with ſtil laſting warre.
Tell her, the King that may command, intreats.
That at her hands, which the kings King forbids.
Say ſhe ſhall be a High and Mighty Queene.
To vaile the Title, as her Mother doth.
Say I will loue her euerlaſtingly.
But how long ſhall that title euer laſt?
Sweetly in force, vnto her faire liues end.
But how long fairely ſhall her ſweet life laſt?
As long as Heauen and Nature lengthens it.
As long as Hell and Richard likes of it.
Say, I her Soueraigne, am her Subiect low.
But ſhe your Subiect, lothes ſuch Soueraignty.
Be eloquent in my behalfe to her.
An honeſt tale ſpeeds beſt, being plainly told.
Then plainly to her, tell my louing tale.
Plaine and not honeſt, is too harſh a ſtyle.
Your Reaſons are too ſhallow, and to quicke.
O no, my Reaſons are too deepe and dead,
Too deepe and dead (poore Infants) in their graues,
Harpe on it ſtill ſhall I, till heart-ſtrings breake.
Harpe not on that ſtring Madam, that is paſt.
Now by my George, my Garter, and my Crowne.
Prophan'd, diſhonor'd, and the third vſurpt.
I ſweare.
By nothing, for this is no Oath:
Thy George prophan'd, hath loſt his Lordly Honor;
Thy Garter blemiſh'd, pawn'd his Knightly Vertue;
Thy Crowne vſurp'd, diſgrac'd his Kingly Glory:
If ſomething thou would'ſt ſweare to be beleeu'd,
Sweare then by ſomething, that thou haſt not wrong'd.
Then by my Selfe.
Thy Selfe, is ſelfe-miſvs'd.
Now by the World.
'Tis full of thy foule wrongs.
My Fathers death.
Thy life hath it diſhonor'd.
Why then, by Heauen.
Heauens wrong is moſt of all:
If thou didd'ſt feare to breake an Oath with him,
The vnity the King my husband made,
Thou had'ſt not broken, nor my Brothers died.
If thou had'ſt fear'd to breake an oath by him,
Th' Imperiall mettall, circling now thy head,
Had grac'd the tender temples of my Child,
And both the Princes had bene breathing heere,
Which now two tender Bed-fellowes for duſt,
Thy broken Faith hath made the prey for Wormes.
What can'ſt thou ſweare by now.
The time to come.
That thou haſt wronged in the time ore-paſt:
For I my ſelfe haue many teares to waſh
Heereafter time, for time paſt, wrong'd by thee.
The Children liue, whoſe Fathers thou haſt ſlaughter'd,
Vngouern'd youth, to waile it with their age:
The Parents liue, whoſe Children thou haſt butcher'd,
Old barren Plants, to waile it with their Age.
Sweare not by time to come, for that thou haſt
Miſvs'd ere vs'd, by times ill-vs'd repaſt.
As I entend to proſper, and repent:
So thriue I in my dangerous Affayres
Of hoſtile Armes: My ſelfe, my ſelfe confound:
Heauen, and Fortune barre me happy houres:
Day, yeeld me not thy light; nor Night, thy reſt.
Be oppoſite all Planets of good lucke
To my proceeding, if with deere hearts loue,
Immaculate deuotion, holy thoughts,
I tender not thy beautious Princely daughter.
In her, conſiſts my Happineſſe, and thine:
Without her, followes to my ſelfe, and thee;
Her ſelfe, the Land, and many a Chriſtian ſoule,
Death, Deſolation, Ruine, and Decay:
It cannot be auoyded, but by this:
It will not be auoyded, but by this.
Therefore deare Mother (I muſt call you ſo)
Be the Atturney of my loue to her:
Pleade what I will be, not what I haue beene;
Not my deſerts, but what I will deſerue:
Vrge the Neceſſity and ſtate of times,
And be not peeuiſh found, in great Deſignes.
Shall I be tempted of the Diuel thus?
I, if the Diuell tempt you to do good.
Shall I forget my ſelfe, to be my ſelfe.
I, if your ſelfes remembrance wrong your ſelfe.
Yet thou didſt kil my Children.
But in your daughters wombe I bury them.
Where in that Neſt of Spicery they will breed
Selues of themſelues, to your recomforture.
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
And be a happy Mother by the deed.
I go, write to me very ſhortly,
And you ſhal vnderſtand from me her mind.
Beare her my true loues kiſſe, and ſo farewell.
Relenting Foole, and ſhallow-changing Woman.
How now, what newes?
Moſt mightie Soueraigne, on the Weſterne Coaſt
Rideth a puiſſant Nauie: to our Shores
Throng many doubtfull hollow-hearted friends,
Vnarm'd, and vnreſolu'd to beat them backe.
'Tis thought, that Richmond is their Admirall:
And there they hull, expecting but the aide
Of Buckingham, to welcome them aſhore.
Some light-foot friend poſt to ye Duke of Norfolk:
Ratcliffe thy ſelfe, or Catesby, where is hee?
Here, my good Lord.
Catesby, flye to the Duke.
I will, my Lord, with all conuenient haſte.
Catesby come hither, poſte to Salisbury:
When thou com'ſt thither: Dull vnmindfull Villaine,
Why ſtay'ſt thou here, and go'ſt not to the Duke?
Firſt, mighty Liege, tell me your Highneſſe pleaſure,
What from your Grace I ſhall deliuer to him.
O true, good Catesby, bid him leuie ſtraight
The greateſt ſtrength and power that he can make,
And meet me ſuddenly at Salisbury.
I goe.
What, may it pleaſe you, ſhall I doe at Salisbury?
Why, what would'ſt thou doe there, before I goe?
Your Highneſſe told me I ſhould poſte before.
My minde is chang'd:
Stanley, what newes with you?
None, good my Liege, to pleaſe you with ye hearing,
Nor none ſo bad, but well may be reported.
Hoyday, a Riddle, neither good nor bad:
What need'ſt thou runne ſo many miles about,
When thou mayeſt tell thy Tale the neereſt way?
Once more, what newes?
Richmond is on the Seas.
There let him ſinke, and be the Seas on him,
White-liuer'd Runnagate, what doth he there?
I know not, mightie Soueraigne, but by gueſſe.
Well, as you gueſſe.
Stirr'd vp by Dorſet, Buckingham, and Morton,
He makes for England, here to clayme the Crowne.
Is the Chayre emptie? is the Sword vnſway'd?
Is the King dead? the Empire vnpoſſeſt?
What Heire of Yorke is there aliue, but wee?
And who is Englands King, but great Yorkes Heire?
Then tell me, what makes he vpon the Seas?
Vnleſſe for that, my Liege, I cannot gueſſe.
Vnleſſe for that he comes to be your Liege,
You cannot gueſſe wherefore the Welchman comes.
Thou wilt reuolt, and flye to him, I feare.
No, my good Lord, therefore miſtruſt me not.
Where is thy Power then, to beat him back?
Where be thy Tenants, and thy followers?
Are they not now vpon the Weſterne Shore,
Safe-conducting the Rebels from their Shippes?
No, my good Lord, my friends are in the North.
Cold friends to me: what do they in the North,
When they ſhould ſerue their Soueraigne in the Weſt?
They haue not been commanded, mighty King:
Pleaſeth your Maieſtie to giue me leaue,
Ile muſter vp my friends, and meet your Grace,
Where, and what time your Maieſtie ſhall pleaſe.
I, thou would'ſt be gone, to ioyne with Richmond:
But Ile not truſt thee.
Moſt mightie Soueraigne,
You haue no cauſe to hold my friendſhip doubtfull,
I neuer was, nor neuer will be falſe.
Goe then, and muſter men: but leaue behind
Your Sonne George Stanley: looke your heart be firme,
Or elſe his Heads aſſurance is but fraile.
So deale with him, as I proue true to you.
My gracious Soueraigne, now in Deuonſhire,
As I by friends am well aduertiſed,
Sir Edward Courtney, and the haughtie Prelate,
Biſhop of Exeter, his elder Brother,
With many moe Confederates, are in Armes.
In Kent, my Liege, the Guilfords are in Armes,
And euery houre more Competitors
Flocke to the Rebels, and their power growes ſtrong.
My Lord, the Armie of great Buckingham.
Out on ye, Owles, nothing but Songs of Death,
There, take thou that, till thou bring better newes.
The newes I haue to tell your Maieſtie,
Is, that by ſudden Floods, and fall of Waters,
Buckinghams Armie is diſpers'd and ſcatter'd,
And he himſelfe wandred away alone,
No man knowes whither.
I cry thee mercie:
There is my Purſe, to cure that Blow of thine.
Hath any well-aduiſed friend proclaym'd
Reward to him that brings the Traytor in?
Such Proclamation hath been made, my Lord.
Sir Thomas Louell, and Lord Marqueſſe Dorſet,
'Tis ſaid, my Liege, in Yorkeſhire are in Armes:
But this good comfort bring I to your Highneſſe,
The Brittaine Nauie is diſpers'd by Tempeſt.
Richmond in Dorſetſhire ſent out a Boat
Vnto the ſhore, to aske thoſe on the Banks,
If they were his Aſſiſtants, yea, or no?
Who anſwer'd him, they came from Buckingham,
Vpon his partie: he miſtruſting them,
Hoys'd ſayle, and made his courſe againe for Brittaine.
March on, march on, ſince we are vp in Armes,
If not to fight with forraine Enemies,
Yet to beat downe theſe Rebels here at home.
My Liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken,
That is the beſt newes: that the Earle of Richmond
Is with a mighty power Landed at Milford,
Is colder Newes, but yet they muſt be told.
Away towards Salsbury, while we reaſon here,
A Royall batteil might be wonne and loſt:
Some one take order Buckingham be brought
To Salsbury, the reſt march on with me.
Sir Chriſtopher, tell Richmond this from me,
That in the ſtye of the moſt deadly Bore,
My Sonne George Stanley is frankt vp in hold:
If I reuolt, off goes yong Georges head,
The feare of that, holds off my preſent ayde.
So get thee gone: commend me to thy Lord.
Withall ſay, that the Queene hath heartily conſented
He ſhould eſpouſe Elizabeth hir daughter.
But tell me, where is Princely Richmond now?
At Penbroke, or at Hertford Weſt in Wales.
What men of Name reſort to him.
Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned Souldier,
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley,
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir Iames Blunt,
And Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant Crew,
And many other of great name and worth:
And towards London do they bend their power,
If by the way they be not fought withall.
Well hye thee to thy Lord: I kiſſe his hand,
My Letter will reſolue him of my minde.
Farewell.
Will not King Richard let me ſpeake with him?
No my good Lord, therefore be patient.
Haſtings, and Edwards children, Gray & Riuers,
Holy King Henry, and thy faire Sonne Edward,
Ʋaughan, and all that haue miſcarried
By vnder-hand corrupted foule iniuſtice,
If that your moody diſcontented ſoules,
Do through the clowds behold this preſent houre,
Euen for reuenge mocke my deſtruction.
This is All-ſoules day (Fellow) is it not?
It is.
Why then Al-ſoules day, is my bodies doomſday
This is the day, which in King Edwards time
I wiſh'd might fall on me, when I was found
Falſe to his Children, and his Wiues Allies.
This is the day, wherein I wiſht to fall
By the falſe Faith of him whom moſt I truſted.
This, this All-ſoules day to my fearfull Soule,
Is the determin'd reſpit of my wrongs:
That high All-ſeer, which I dallied with,
Hath turn'd my fained Prayer on my head,
And giuen in earneſt, what I begg'd in ieſt.
Thus doth he force the ſwords of wicked men
To turne their owne points in their Maſters boſomes.
Thus Margarets curſe falles heauy on my necke:
When he (quoth ſhe) ſhall ſplit thy heart with ſorrow,
Remember Margaret was a Propheteſſe:
Come leade me Officers to the blocke of ſhame,
Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
Fellowes in Armes, and my moſt louing Frends
Bruis'd vnderneath the yoake of Tyranny,
Thus farre into the bowels of the Land,
Haue we marcht on without impediment;
And heere receiue we from our Father Stanley
Lines of faire comfort and encouragement:
The wretched, bloody, and vſurping Boare,
(That ſpoyl'd your Summer Fields, and fruitfull Vines)
Swilles your warm blood like waſh, & makes his trough
In your embowel'd boſomes: This foule Swine
Is now euen in the Centry of this Iſle,
Ne're to the Towne of Leiceſter, as we learne:
From Tamworth thither, is but one dayes march.
In Gods name cheerely on, couragious Friends,
To reape the Harueſt of perpetuall peace,
By this one bloody tryall of ſharpe Warre.
Euery mans Conſcience is a thouſand men,
To ſight againſt this guilty Homicide.
I doubt not but his Friends will turne to vs.
He hath no friends, but what are friends for fear,
Which in his deereſt neede will flye from him.
All for our vantage, then in Gods name march,
True Hope is ſwift, and flyes with Swallowes wings,
Kings it makes Gods, and meaner creatures Kings.
Here pitch our Tent, euen here in Boſworth field,
My Lord of Surrey, why looke you ſo ſad?
My heart is ten times lighter then my lookes.
My Lord of Norfolke.
Heere moſt gracious Liege.
Norfolke, we muſt haue knockes:
Ha, muſt we not?
We muſt both giue and take my louing Lord.
Vp with my Tent, heere wil I lye to night,
But where to morrow? Well, all's one for that
Who hath deſcried the number of the Traitors?
Six or ſeuen thouſand is their vtmoſt power.
Why our Battalia trebbles that account:
Beſides, the Kings name is a Tower of ſtrength,
Which they vpon the aduerſe Faction want.
Vp with the Tent: Come Noble Gentlemen,
Let vs ſuruey the vantage of the ground.
Call for ſome men of found direction:
Let's lacke no Diſcipline, make no delay,
For Lords, to morrow is a buſie day.
The weary Sunne, hath made a Golden ſet,
And by the bright Tract of his fiery Carre,
Giues token of a goodly day to morrow.
Sir William Brandon, you ſhall beare my Standard:
Giue me ſome Inke and Paper in my Tent:
Ile draw the Forme and Modell of our Battaile,
Limit each Leader to his ſeuerall Charge,
And part in iuſt proportion our ſmall Power.
My Lord of Oxford, you Sir William Brandon,
And your Sir Walter Herbert ſtay with me:
The Earle of Pembroke keepes his Regiment;
Good Captaine Blunt, beare my goodnight to him.
And by the ſecond houre in the Morning,
Deſire the Earle to ſee me in my Tent:
Yet one thing more (good Captaine) do for me:
Where is Lord Stanley quarter'd, do you know?
Vnleſſe I haue miſtane his Colours much,
(Which well I am aſſur'd I haue not done)
His Regiment lies halfe a Mile at leaſt
South, from the mighty Power of the King.
If without perill it be poſſible,
Sweet Blunt, make ſome good meanes to ſpeak with him
And giue him from me, this moſt needfull Note.
Vpon my life, my Lord, Ile vndertake it,
And ſo God giue you quiet reſt to night.
Good night good Captaine Blunt:
Come Gentlemen,
Let vs conſult vpon to morrowes Buſineſſe;
Into my Tent, the Dew is rawe and cold.
What is't a Clocke?
It's Supper time my Lord, it's nine a clocke.
I will not ſup to night,
Giue me ſome Inke and Paper:
What, is my Beauer eaſier then it was?
And all my Armour laid into my Tent?
It is my Liege: and all things are in readineſſe.
Good Norfolke, hye thee to thy charge,
Vſe carefull Watch, chooſe truſty Centinels,
I go my Lord.
Sir with the Larke to morrow, gentle Norfolk.
I warrant you my Lord.
Ratcliffe.
My Lord.
Send out a Purſuiuant at Armes
To Stanleys Regiment: bid him bring his power
Before Sun-riſing, leaſt his Sonne George fall
Into the blinde Caue of eternall night.
Fill me a Bowle of Wine: Giue me a Watch,
Saddle white Surrey for the Field to morrow:
Look that my Staues be ſound, & not too heauy.
My Lord.
Saw'ſt the melancholly Lord Northumberland?
Thomas the Earle of Surrey, and himſelfe,
Much about Cockſhut time, from Troope to Troope
Went through the Army, chearing vp the Souldiers.
So, I am ſatisfied: Giue me a Bowle of Wine,
I haue not that Alacrity of Spirit,
Nor cheere of Minde that I was wont to haue.
Set it downe. Is Inke and Paper ready?
It is my Lord.
Bid my Guard watch. Leaue me.
Ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my Tent
And helpe to arme me. Leaue me I ſay.
Fortune, and Victory ſit on thy Helme.
All comfort that the darke night can affoord,
Be to thy Perſon, Noble Father in Law.
Tell me, how fares our Noble Mother?
I by Attourney, bleſſe thee from thy Mother,
Who prayes continually for Richmonds good:
So much for that. The ſilent houres ſteale on,
And flakie darkeneſſe breakes within the Eaſt.
In breefe, for ſo the ſeaſon bids vs be,
Prepare thy Battell early in the Morning,
And put thy Fortune to th' Arbitrement
Of bloody ſtroakes, and mortall ſtaring Warre:
I, as I may, that which I would I cannot,
With beſt aduantage will deceiue the time,
And ayde thee in this doubtfull ſhocke of Armes.
But on thy ſide I may not be too forward,
Leaſt being ſeene, thy Brother, tender George
Be executed in his Fathers ſight.
Farewell: the leyſure, and the fearfull time
Cuts off the ceremonious Vowes of Loue,
And ample enterchange of ſweet Diſcourſe,
Which ſo long ſundred Friends ſhould dwell vpon:
God giue vs leyſure for theſe rites of Loue.
Once more Adieu, be valiant, and ſpeed well.
Good Lords conduct him to his Regiment:
Ile ſtriue with troubled noiſe, to take a Nap,
Leſt leaden ſlumber peize me downe to morrow,
When I ſhould mount with wings of Victory:
Once more, good night kinde Lords and Gentlemen.
O thou, whoſe Captaine I account my ſelfe,
Looke on my Forces with a gracious eye:
Put in their hands thy bruiſing Irons of wrath,
That they may cruſh downe with a heauy fall,
Th' vſurping Helmets of our Aduerſaries:
Make vs thy miniſters of Chaſticement,
That we may praiſe thee in thy victory:
To thee I do commend my watchfull ſoule,
Ere I let fall the windowes of mine eves:
Sleeping, and waking, oh defend me ſtill.
Let me ſit heauy on thy ſoule to morrow:
Thinke how thou ſtab'ſt me in my prime of youth
At Teukesbury: Diſpaire therefore, and dye.
Be chearefull Richmond,
For the wronged Soules
Of butcher'd Princes, fight in thy behalfe:
King Henries iſſue Richmond comforts thee.
When I was mortall, my Annointed body
By thee was punched full of holes;
Thinke on the Tower, and me: Diſpaire, and dye,
Harry the ſixt, bids thee diſpaire, and dye.
Vertuous and holy be thou Conqueror:
Harry that propheſied thou ſhould'ſt be King,
Doth comfort thee in ſleepe: Liue, and flouriſh.
Let me ſit heauy in thy ſoule to morrow.
I that was waſh'd to death with Fulſome Wine:
Poore Clarence by thy gule betray'd to death:
To morrow in the battell thinke on me,
And fall thy edgeleſſe Sword, diſpaire and dye.
Thou off-ſpring of the houſe of Lancaſter
The wronged heyres of Yorke do pray for thee,
Good Angels guard thy battell, Liue and Flouriſh.
Let me ſit heauy in thy ſoule to morrow,
Riuers, that dy'de at Pomfret: diſpaire, and dye.
Thinke vpon Grey, and let thy ſoule diſpaire.
Thinke vpon Vaughan, and with guilty feare
Let fall thy Lance, diſpaire and dye.
Awake,
And thinke our wrongs in Richards Boſome,
Will conquer him. Awake, and win the day.
Bloody and guilty: guiltily awake,
And in a bloody Battell end thy dayes.
Thinke on Lord Haſtings: diſpaire, and dye.
Quiet vntroubled ſoule,
Awake, awake:
Arme, fight, and conquer, for faire Englands ſake.
Dreame on thy Couſins
Smothered in the Tower:
Let vs be laid within thy boſome Richard,
And weigh thee downe to ruine, ſhame, and death,
Thy Nephewes ſoule bids thee diſpaire and dye.
Sleepe Richmond,
Sleepe in Peace, and wake in Ioy,
Good Angels guard thee from the Boares annoy,
Liue, and be get a happy race of Kings,
Edwards vnhappy Sonnes, do bid thee flouriſh.
Richard, thy Wife,
That wretched Anne thy Wife,
That neuer ſlept a quiet houre with thee,
Now filles thy ſleepe with perturbations,
To morrow in the Battaile, thinke on me,
And fall thy edgeleſſe Sword, diſpaire and dye.
Thou quiet ſoule,
Sleepe thou a quiet ſleepe:
Dreame of Succeſſe, and Happy Victory,
Thy Aduerſaries Wife doth pray for thee.
The firſt was I
That help'd thee to the Crowne:
The laſt was I that felt thy Tyranny.
O, in the Battaile think on Buckingham,
And dye in terror of thy guiltineſſe.
Dreame on, dreame on, of bloody deeds and death,
Fainting diſpaire; diſpairing yeeld thy breath.
I dyed for hope
Ere I could lend thee Ayde;
But cheere thy heart, and be thou not diſmayde:
God, and good Angels fight on Richmonds ſide,
And Richard fall in height of all his pride.
Giue me another Horſe, bind vp my Wounds:
Haue mercy Ieſu. Soft, I did but dreame.
O coward Conſcience! how doſt thou afflict me?
The Lights burne blew. It is not dead midnight.
Cold fearefull drops ſtand on my trembling fleſh.
What? do I feare my Selfe? There's none elſe by,
Richard loues Richard, that is I am I.
Is there a Murtherer heere? No; Yes, I am:
Then flye; What from my Selfe? Great reaſon: why?
Leſt I Reuenge. What? my Selfe vpon my Selfe?
Alacke, I loue my Selfe. Wherefore? For any good
That I my Selfe, haue done vnto my Selfe?
O no. Alas, I rather hate my Selfe,
For hatefull Deeds committed by my Selfe.
I am a Villaine: yet I Lye, I am not.
Foole, of thy Selfe ſpeake well: Foole, do not flatter.
My Conſcience hath a thouſand ſeuerall Tongues,
And euery Tongue brings in a ſeuerall Tale,
And euerie Tale condemnes me for a Villaine;
Periurie, in the high'ſt Degree,
Murther, ſterne murther, in the dyr'ſt degree,
All ſeuerall ſinnes, all vs d in each degree,
Throng all to 'th Barre, crying all, Guilty, Guilty.
I ſhall diſpaire, there is no Creature loues me;
And if I die, no ſoule ſhall pittie me.
Nay, wherefore ſhould they? Since that I my Selfe,
Finde in my Selfe, no pittie to my Selfe.
Me thought, the Soules of all that I had murther'd
Came to my Tent, and euery one did threat
To morrowes vengeance on the head of Richard.
My Lord.
Who's there?
Ratcliffe my Lord, 'tis I: the early Village Cock
Hath twice done ſalutation to the Morne,
Your Friends are vp, and buckle on their Armour.
O Ratcliffe, I feare, I feare.
Nay good my Lord, be not affraid of Shadows.
By the Apoſtle Paul, ſhadowes to night
Haue ſtroke more terror to the ſoule of Richard,
Then can the ſubſtance of ten thouſand Souldiers
Armed in proofe, and led by ſhallow Richmond▪
'Tis not yet neere day. Come go with me,
Vnder our Tents Ile play the Eaſe-dropper,
To heare if any meane to ſhrinke from me.
Good morrow Richmond.
Cry mercy Lords▪ and watchfull Gentlemen,
That you haue tane a tardie ſluggard heere?
How haue you ſlept my Lord?
The ſweeteſt ſleepe,
And faireſt boading Dreames,
That euer entred in a drowſie head,
Haue I ſince your departure had my Lords.
Me thought their Soules, whoſe bodies Rich. murther'd,
Came to my Tent, and cried on Victory:
I promiſe you my Heart is very iocond,
In the remembrance of ſo faire a dreame,
How farre into the Morning is it Lords?
Vpon the ſtroke of foure.
Why then 'tis time to Arme, and giue direction.
More then I haue ſaid, louing Countrymen,
The leyſure and inforcement of the time
Forbids to dwell vpon: yet remember this,
God, and our good cauſe, fight vpon our ſide,
The Prayers of holy Saints and wronged ſoules,
Like high rear'd Bulwarkes, ſtand before our Faces,
(Richard except) thoſe whom we fight againſt,
Had rather haue vs win, then him they follow.
For, what is he they follow? Truly Gentlemen,
A bloudy Tyrant, and a Homicide:
One rais'd in blood, and one in blood eſtabliſh'd;
One that made meanes to come by what he hath,
And ſlaughter'd thoſe that were the meanes to help him:
A baſe foule Stone, made precious by the ſoyle
Of Englands Chaire, where he is falely ſet:
One that hath euer beene Gods Enemy.
Then if you fight againſt Gods Enemy,
God will in iuſtice ward you as his Soldiers.
If you do ſweare to put a Tyrant downe,
You ſleepe in peace, the Tyrant being ſlaine:
If you do fight againſt your Countries Foes,
Your Countries Fat ſhall pay your paines the hyre.
If you do fight in ſafegard of your wiues,
Your wiues ſhall welcome home the Conquerors.
If you do free your Children from the Sword,
Your Childrens Children quits it in your Age.
Then in the name of God and all theſe rights,
Aduance your Standards, draw your willing Swords.
For me, the ranſome of my bold attempt,
Shall be this cold Corpes on the earth's cold face.
But if I thriue, the gaine of my attempt,
The leaſt of you ſhall ſhare his part thereof.
Sound Drummes and Trumpets boldly, and cheerefully,
God, and Saint George, Richmond, and Victory.
What ſaid Northumberland as touching Richmond?
That he was neuer trained vp in Armes.
He ſaid the truth: and what ſaid Surrey then?
He ſmil'd and ſaid, the beter for our purpoſe.
He was in the right, and ſo indeed it is.
Tell the clocke there.
Giue me a Kalender: Who ſaw the Sunne to day?
Not I my Lord.
Then he diſdaines to ſhine: for by the Booke
He ſhould haue brau'd the Eaſt an houre ago,
A blacke day will it be to ſomebody. Ratcliffe.
My Lord.
The Sun will not be ſeene to day,
The sky doth frowne, and lowre vpon our Army.
I would theſe dewy teares were from the ground.
Not ſhine to day? Why, what is that to me
More then to Richmond? For the ſelfe-ſame Heauen
That frownes on me, lookes ſadly vpon him.
Arme, arme, my Lord: the foe vaunts in the field.
Come, buſtle, buſtle. Capariſon my horſe.
Call vp Lord Stanley, bid him bring his power,
I will leade forth my Soldiers to the plaine,
And thus my Battell ſhal be ordred.
My Foreward ſhall be drawne in length,
Conſiſting equally of Horſe and Foot:
Our Archers ſhall be placed in the mid'ſt;
Iohn Duke of Norfolke, Thomas Earle of Surrey,
Shall haue the leading of the Foot and Horſe.
They thus directed, we will fllow
In the maine Battell, whoſe puiſſance on either ſide
Shall be well-winged with our cheefeſt Horſe:
This, and Saint George to boote.
What think'ſt thou Norfolke.
A good direction warlike Soueraigne,
This found I on my Tent this Morning.
Iockey of Norfolke, be not ſo bold,
For Dickon thy maiſter is bought and ſold.
A thing deuiſed by the Enemy.
Go Gentlemen, euery man to his Charge,
Let not our babling Dreames affright our ſoules:
For Conſcience is a word that Cowards vſe,
Deuis'd at firſt to keepe the ſtrong in awe,
Our ſtrong armes be our Conſcience, Swords our Law.
March on, ioyne brauely, let vs too't pell mell,
If not to heauen, then hand in hand to Hell.
What ſhall I ſay more then I haue inferr'd?
Remember whom you are to cope withall,
A ſort of Vagabonds, Raſcals, and Run-awayes,
A ſcum of Brittaines, and baſe Lackey Pezants,
Whom their o're-cloyed Country vomits forth
To deſperate Aduentures, and aſſur'd Deſtruction.
You ſleeping ſafe, they bring you to vnreſt:
You hauing Lands, and bleſt with beauteous wiues,
They would reſtraine the one, diſtaine the other,
And who doth leade them, but a patry Fellow?
Long kept in Britaine at our Mothers coſt,
A Milke-ſop, one that neuer in his life
Felt ſo much cold, as ouer ſhooes in Snow:
Let's whip theſe ſtraglers o're the Seas againe,
Laſh hence theſe ouer-weening Ragges of France,
Theſe famiſh'd Beggers, weary of their liues,
Who (but for dreaming on this fond exploit)
For want of meanes (poore Rats) had hang'd themſelues.
If we be conquered, let men conquer vs,
And not theſe baſtard Britaines, whom our Fathers
Haue in their owne Land beaten, bobb'd, and thump'd,
And on Record, left them the heires of ſhame.
Shall theſe enioy our Lands? lye with our Wiues?
Rauiſh our daughters?
Hearke, I heare their Drumme,
Right Gentlemen of England, fight boldly yeomen,
Draw Archers draw your Arrowes to the head,
Spurre your proud Horſes hard, and ide in blood,
Amaze the welkin with your broken ſtaues.
What ſayes Lord Stanley, will he bring his power?
My Lord, he doth deny to come.
Off with his ſonne Georges head.
My Lord, the Enemy is paſt the Marſ:
After the battaile, let George Stanley dye.
A thouſand hearts are great within my boſom.
Aduance our Standards, ſet vpon our Foes,
Our Ancient word of Courage, faire S. George
Inſpire vs with the ſpleene of fiery Dragons:
Vpon them, Victorie ſits on our helpes.
Reſcue my Lord of Norfolke,
Reſcue, Reſcue:
The King enacts more wonders then a man,
Daring an oppoſite to euery danger:
His horſe is ſlaine, and all on foot he fights,
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death:
Reſcue faire Lord, or elſe the day is loſt.
A Horſe, a Horſe, my Kingdome for a Horſe.
Withdraw my Lord, Ile helpe you to a Horſe
Slaue, I haue ſet my life vpon a caſt,
And I will ſtand the hazard of the Dye:
I thinke there be ſixe Richmonds in the field,
Fiue haue I ſlaine to day, in ſtead of him.
A Horſe, a Horſe, my Kingdome for a Horſe.
God, and your Armes
Be prais'd Victorious Friends;
The day is ours, the bloudy Dogge is dead.
Couragious Richmond,
Well haſt thou acquit thee: Loe,
Heere theſe long vſurped Royalties,
From the dead Temples of this bloudy Wretch,
Haue I pluck'd off, to grace thy Browes withall.
Weare it, and make much of it.
Great God of Heauen, ſay Amen to all.
But tell me, is yong George Stanley liuing?
He is my Lord, and ſafe in Leiceſter Towne,
Whither (if you pleaſe) we may withdraw vs.
What men of name are ſlaine on either ſide?
Iohn Duke of Norfolke, Walter Lord Ferris, Sir Robert Brokenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
Interre their Bodies, as become their Births,
Proclaime a pardon to the Soldiers fled,
That in ſubmiſsion will returne to vs,
And then as we haue tane the Sacrament,
We will vnite the White Roſe, and the Red.
Smile Heauen vpon this faire Coniunction,
That long haue frown'd vpon their Enmity:
What Traitor heares me, and ſayes not Amen?
England hath long beene mad, and ſcarr'd her ſelfe;
The Brother blindely ſhed the Brothers blood;
The Father, raſhly ſlaughtered his owne Sonne;
The Sonne compell'd, beene Butcher to the Sire;
All this diuided Yorke and Lancaſter,
Diuided, in their dire Diuiſion.
O now, let Richmond and Elizabeth,
The true Succeeders of each Royall Houſe,
By Gods faire ordinance, conioyne together:
And let thy Heires (God if thy will be ſo)
Enrich the time to come, with Smooth-fac'd Peace,
With ſmiling Plenty, and faire Proſperous dayes.
Abate the edge of Traitors, Gracious Lord,
That would reduce theſe bloudy dayes againe,
And make poore England weepe in Streames of Blood;
Let them not liue to taſte this Lands increaſe,
That would with Treaſon, wound this faire Lands peace.
Now Ciuill wounds are ſtopp'd, Peace liues agen;
That ſhe may long liue heere, God ſay, Amen.