GRegory: A my word wee'l not carry coales.
No, for then we ſhould be Colliars.
I mean, if we be in choller, wee'l draw.
I, While you liue, draw your necke out o' th Collar.
I ſtrike quickly, being mou'd.
But thou art not quickly mou'd to ſtrike.
A dog of the houſe of Mountague, moues me.
To moue, is to ſtir: and to be valiant, is to ſtand:
Therefore, if thou art mou'd, thou runſt away.
A dogge of that houſe ſhall moue me to ſtand.
I will take the wall of any Man or Maid of Mountagues.
That ſhewes thee a weake ſlaue, for the weakeſt goes to the wall.
True, and therefore women being the weaker Veſſels, are euer thruſt to the wall: therefore I will puſh Mountagues men from the wall, and thruſt his Maides to the wall.
The Quarrell is betweene our Maſters, and vs their men.
'Tis all one, I will ſhew my ſelfe a tyrant: when I haue fought with the men, I will bee ciuill with the Maids, and cut off their heads.
The heads of the Maids?
I, the heads of the Maids, or their Maiden-heads,
Take it in what ſence thou wilt.
They muſt take it ſence, that feele it▪
Me they ſhall feele while I am able to ſtand:
And 'tis knowne I am a pretty peece of fleſh.
'Tis well thou art not Fiſh: If thou had'ſt, thou had'ſt beene poore Iohn. Draw thy Toole, here comes of the Houſe of the Mountagues.
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I wil back thee
How? Turne thy backe, and run.
Feare me not.
No marry: I feare thee.
Let vs take the Law of our ſides▪ let them begin.
I wil frown as I paſſe by, & let thē take it as they liſt
Nay, as they dare. I wil bite my Thumb at them, which is a diſgrace to them, if they beare it.
Do you bite your Thumbe at vs ſir?
I do bite my Thumbe, ſir.
Do you bite your Thumb at vs, ſir?
Is the Law of our ſide, if I ſay I?
No.
No ſir, I do not bite my Thumbe at you ſir: but I bite my Thumbe ſir.
Do you quarrell ſir?
Quarrell ſir? no ſir.
If you do ſir, I am for you, I ſerue as good a man as you
No better?
Well ſir.
Say better: here comes one of my maſters kinſmen.
Yes, better.
You Lye.
Draw if you be men. Gregory, remember thy waſhing blow.
Part Fooles, put vp your Swords, you know not what you do.
What art thou drawne, among theſe heartleſſe Hindes? Turne thee Benuolio, looke vpon thy death.
I do but keepe the peace, put vp thy Sword,
Or manage it to part theſe men with me.
What draw, and talke of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Mountagues, and thee:
Haue at thee Coward.
Clubs, Bils, and Partiſons, ſtrike, beat them down
Downe with the Capulets, downe with the Mountagues.
What noiſe is this? Giue me my long Sword ho.
A crutch, a crutch: why call you for a Sword?
My Sword I ſay: Old Mountague is come,
And flouriſhes his Blade in ſpight of me.
Thou villaine▪ Capulet. Hold me not, let me go
Thou ſhalt not ſtir a foote to ſeeke a Foe.
Rebellious Subiects, Enemies to peace,
Prophaners of this Neighbor-ſtained Steele,
Will they not heare? What hoe, you Men, you Beaſts,
That quench the fire of your pernitious Rage,
With purple Fountaines iſſuing from your Veines:
On paine of Torture, from thoſe bloody hands
Throw your miſtemper'd Weapons to the ground,
And heare the Sentence of your mooued Prince.
Three ciuill Broyles, bred of an Ayery word,
By thee old Capulet and Mountague,
Haue thrice diſturb'd the quiet of our ſtreets,
And made Verona's ancient Citizens
Caſt by their Graue beſeeming Ornaments,
To wield old Partizans, in hands as old,
Cankred with peace, to part your Cankred hate,
If euer you diſturbe our ſtreets againe,
Your liues ſhall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the reſt depart away:
You Capulet ſhall goe along with me,
And Mountague come you this afternoone,
To know our Fathers pleaſure in this caſe:
To old Free-towne, our common iudgement place:
Once more on paine of death, all men depart.
Who ſet this auncient quarrell new abroach?
Speake Nephew, were you by, when it began:
Heere were the ſeruants of your aduerſarie,
And yours cloſe fighting ere I did approach,
I drew to part them, in the inſtant came
The fiery Tibalt, with his ſword prepar'd,
Which as he breath'd defiance to my eares,
He ſwong about his head, and cut the windes,
Who nothing hurt withall, hiſt him in ſcorne.
While we were enterchanging thruſts and blowes,
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
O where is Romeo, ſaw you him to day?
Right glad am I, he was not at this fray.
Madam, an houre before the worſhipt Sun
Peer'd forth the golden window of the Eaſt,
A troubled mind draue me to walke abroad,
Where vnderneath the groue of Sycamour,
That Weſt-ward rooteth from this City ſide:
So earely walking did I ſee your Sonne:
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me,
And ſtole into the couert of the wood,
I meaſuring his affections by my owne,
Which then moſt ſought, wher moſt might not be found:
Being one too many by my weary ſelfe,
Purſued my Honour, not purſuing his
And gladly ſhunn'd, who gladly fled from me.
Many a morning hath he there beene ſeene,
With teares augmenting the freſh mornings deaw,
Adding to cloudes, more cloudes with his deepe ſighes,
But all ſo ſoone as the all-cheering Sunne,
Should in the fartheſt Eaſt begin to draw
The ſhadie Curtaines from Auroras bed,
Away from light-ſteales home my heauy Sonne,
And priuate in his Chamber pennes himſelfe,
Shuts vp his windowes, lockes faire day-light out,
And makes himſelfe an artificiall night:
Blacke and portendous muſt this humour proue,
Vnleſſe good counſell may the cauſe remoue.
My Noble Vncle doe you know the cauſe?
I neither know it, nor can learne of him.
Haue you importun'd him by any meanes?
Both by my ſelfe and many others Friends,
But he his owne affections counſeller,
Is to himſelfe (I will not ſay how true)
But to himſelfe ſo ſecret and ſo cloſe,
So farre from ſounding and diſcouery,
As is the bud bit with an enuious worme,
Ere he can ſpread his ſweete leaues to the ayre,
Or dedicate his beauty to the ſame.
Could we but learne from whence his ſorrowes grow,
We would as willingly giue cure, as know.
See where he comes, ſo pleaſe you ſtep aſide,
Ile know his greeuance, or be much denide.
I would thou wert ſo happy by thy ſtay,
To heare true ſhrift. Come Madam let's away.
Good morrow Couſin.
Is the day ſo young?
But new ſtrooke nine.
Aye me, ſad houres ſeeme long:
Was that my Father that went henec ſo faſt?
It was: what ſadnes lengthens Romeo's houres?
Not hauing that, which hauing, makes them ſhort
In loue.
Out.
Of loue.
Out of her fauour where I am in loue.
Alas that loue ſo gentle in his view,
Should be ſo tyrannous and rough in proofe.
Alas that loue, whoſe view is muffled ſtill,
Should without eyes, ſee path-wayes to his will:
Where ſhall we dine? O me: what fray was heere?
Yet tell me not, for I haue heard it all:
Heere's much to do with hate, but more with loue:
Why then, O brawling loue, O louing hate,
O any thing, of nothing firſt created:
O heauie lightneſſe, ſerious vanity,
Miſhapen Chaos of welſeeing formes,
Feather of lead, bright ſmoake, cold fire, ſicke health,
Still waking ſleepe, that is not what it is:
This loue feele I, that feele no loue in this.
Doeſt thou not laugh?
No Coze, I rather weepe.
Good heart, at what?
At thy good hearts oppreſsion.
Why ſuch is loues tranſgreſsion.
Griefes of mine owne lie heauie in my breaſt,
Which thou wilt propagate to haue it preaſt
With more of thine, this loue that thou haſt ſhowne,
Doth adde more griefe, to too much of mine owne.
Loue, is a ſmoake made with the fume of ſighes,
Being purg'd, a fire ſparkling in Louers eyes,
Being vext, a Sea nouriſht with louing teares,
What is it elſe? a madneſſe, moſt diſcreet,
A choking gall, and a preſeruing ſweet:
Farewell my Coze.
Soft I will goe along.
And if you leaue me ſo, you do me wrong.
Tut I haue loſt my ſelfe, I am not here,
This is not Romeo, hee's ſome other where.
Tell me in ſadneſſe, who is that you loue?
What ſhall I grone and tell thee?
Grone, why no: but ſadly tell me who.
A ſicke man in ſadneſſe makes his will:
A word ill vrg'd to one that is ſo ill:
In ſadneſſe Cozin, I do loue a woman.
I aym'd ſo neare, when I ſuppoſ'd you lou'd.
A right good marke man, and ſhee's faire I loue
A right faire marke, faire Coze, is ſooneſt hit.
Well in that hit you miſſe, ſheel not be hit
With Cupids arrow, ſhe hath Dians wit:
And in ſtrong proofe of chaſtity well arm'd:
From loues weake childiſh Bow, ſhe liues vncharm'd.
Shee will not ſtay the ſiege of louing tearmes,
Nor bid th' incounter of aſſailing eyes.
Nor open her lap to Sainct-ſeducing Gold:
O ſhe is rich in beautie, onely poore,
That when ſhe dies, with beautie dies her ſtore.
Then ſhe hath ſworne, that ſhe will ſtill liue chaſt?
She hath, and in that ſparing make huge waſt?
For beauty ſteru'd with her ſeuerity,
Cuts beauty off from all poſteritie.
She is too faire, too wiſewi: ſely too faire,
To merit bliſſe by making me diſpaire:
She hath forſworne to loue, and in that vow
Do I liue dead, that liue to tell it now.
Be rul'd by me, forget to thinke of her.
O teach me how I ſhould forget to thinke.
By giuing liberty vnto thine eyes,
Examine other beauties,
'Tis the way to cal hers (exquiſit) in queſtion more,
Theſe happy maskes that kiſſe faire Ladies browes,
Being blacke, puts vs in mind they hide the faire:
He that is ſtrooken blind, cannot forget
The precious treaſure of his eye-ſight loſt:
Shew me a Miſtreſſe that is paſſing faire,
What doth her beauty ſerue but as a note,
Where I may read who paſt that paſſing faire.
Farewell thou can'ſt not teach me to forget,
Ile pay that doctrine, or elſe die in debt.
Mountague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike, and 'tis not hard I thinke,
For men ſo old as wee, to keepe the peace.
Of Honourable reckoning are you both,
And pittie 'tis you liu'd at ods ſo long:
But now my Lord, what ſay you to my ſute?
But ſaying ore what I haue ſaid before,
My Child is yet a ſtranger in the world,
Shee hath not ſeene the change of fourteene yeares,
Let two more Summers wither in their pride,
Ere we may thinke her ripe to be a Bride.
Younger then ſhe, are happy mothers made.
And too ſoone mar'd are thoſe ſo early made:
Earth hath ſwallowed all my hopes but ſhe,
Shee's the hopefull Lady of my earth:
But wooe her gentle Paris, get her heart,
My will to her conſent, is but a part,
And ſhee agree, within her ſcope of choiſe,
Lyes my conſent, and faire according voice:
This night I hold an old accuſtom'd Feaſt,
Whereto I haue inuited many a Gueſt,
Such as I loue, and you among the ſtore,
One more, moſt welcome makes my number more:
At my poore houſe, looke to behold this night,
Earth-treading ſtarres, that make darke heauen light,
Such comfort as do luſty young men feele,
When well apparrel'd Aprill on the heele
Of limping Winter treads, euen ſuch delight
Among freſh Fennell buds ſhall you this night
Inherit at my houſe: heare all, all ſee:
And like her moſt, whoſe merit moſt ſhall be:
Which one more veiw, of many, mine being one,
May ſtand in number, though in reckning none.
Come, goe with me: goe ſirrah trudge about,
Through faire Verona, find thoſe perſons out,
Whoſe names are written there, and to them ſay,
My houſe and welcome, on their pleaſure ſtay.
Find them out whoſe names are written. Heere it is written, that the Shoo-maker ſhould meddle with his Yard, and the Tayler with his Laſt, the Fiſher with his Penſill, and the Painter with his Nets. But I am ſent to find thoſe perſons whoſe names are writ, & can neuer find what names the writing perſon hath here writ (I muſt to the learned) in good time.
Tut man, one fire burnes out anothers burning,
One paie is leſned by anothers anguiſh:
Turne giddie, and be holpe by backward turning:
One deſparate greefe, cures with anothers languiſh:
Take thou ſome new infection to the eye,
And the rank poyſon of the old wil die.
Your Plantan leafe is excellent for that.
For what I pray thee?
For your broken ſhin.
Why Romeo art thou mad?
Not mad, but bound more then a mad man is:
Shut vp in priſon, kept without my foode,
Whipt and tormented: and Godden good fellow,
Godgigoden, I pray ſir can you read?
I mine owne fortune in my miſerie.
Perhaps you haue learn'd it without booke:
But I pray can you read any thing you ſee?
I, if I know the Letters and the Language.
Ye ſay honeſtly, reſt you merry.
Stay fellow, I can read.
A faire aſſembly, whither ſhould they come?
Vp.
Whither? to ſupper?
To our houſe.
Whoſe houſe?
My Maiſters.
Indeed I ſhould haue askt you that before.
Now Ile tell you without asking. My maiſter is the great rich Capulet, and if you be not of the houſe of Mountagues I pray come and cruſh a cup of wine. Reſt you merry.
At this ſame auncient Feaſt of Capulets
Sups the faire Roſaline, whom thou ſo loues:
With all the admired Beauties of Verona,
Go thither and with vnattainted eye,
Compare her face with ſome that I ſhall ſhow,
And I will make thee thinke thy Swan a Crow.
When the deuout religion of mine eye
Maintaines ſuch falſhood, then turne teares to fire:
And theſe who often drown'd could neuer die,
Tranſparent Heretiques be burnt for liers.
One fairer then my loue: the all-ſeeing Sun
Nere ſaw her match, ſince firſt the world begun.
Tut, you ſaw her faire, none elſe being by,
Herſelfe poyſ'd with herſelfe in either eye:
But in that Chriſtall ſcales, let there be waid,
Your Ladies loue againſt ſome other Maid
That I will ſhow you, ſhining at this Feaſt,
And ſhe ſhew ſcant ſhell, well, that now ſhewes beſt.
Ile goe along, no ſuch ſight to be ſhowne,
But to reioyce in ſplendor of mine owne.
Nurſe wher's my daughter? call her forth to me.
Now by my Maidenhead, at twelue yeare old
I bad her come, what Lamb: what Ladi-bird, God forbid,
Where's this Girle? what Iuliet?
How now, who calls?
Your Mother.
Madam I am heere, what is your will?
This is the matter: Nurſe giue leaue awhile, we muſt talke in ſecret. Nurſe come backe againe, I haue remembred me, thou'ſe heare our counſell. Thou knoweſt my daughter's of a prety age.
Faith I can tell her age vnto an houre.
Shee's not fourteene.
Ile lay fourteene of my teeth,
And yet to my teene be it ſpoken,
I haue but foure, ſhee's not fourteene.
How long is it now to Lammas tide?
A fortnight and odde dayes.
Euen or odde, of all daies in the yeare come Lammas Eue at night ſhall ſhe be fourteene. Suſan & ſhe, God reſt all Chriſtian ſoules, were of an age. Well Suſan is with God, ſhe was too good for me. But as I ſaid, on Lamas Eue at night ſhall ſhe be fourteene, that ſhall ſhe marie, I remember it well. 'Tis ſince the Earth-quake now eleuen yeares, and ſhe was wean'd I neuer ſhall forget it, of all the daies of the yeare, vpon that day: for I had then laid Worme-wood to my Dug ſitting in the Sunne vnder the Douehouſe wall, my Lord and you were then at Mantua, nay I doe beare a braine. But as I ſaid, when it did taſt the Worme-wood on the nipple of my Dugge, and felt it bitter, pretty foole, to ſee it teachie, and fall out with the Dugge, Shake quoth the Doue-houſe, 'twas no neede I trow to bid mee trudge: and ſince that time it is a eleuen yeares, for then ſhe could ſtand alone, nay bi' th' roode ſhe could haue runne, & wadled all about: for euen the day before ſhe broke her brow, & then my Husband God be with his ſoule, a was a merrie man, tooke vp the Child, yea quoth hee, doeſt thou fall vpon thy face? thou wilt fall backeward when thou haſt more wit, wilt thou not Iule? And by my holy-dam, the pretty wretch lefte crying, & ſaid I: to ſee now how a Ieſt ſhall come about. I warrant, & I ſhall liue a thouſand yeares, I neuer ſhould forget it: wilt thou not Iulet quoth he? and pretty foole it ſtinted, and ſaid I.
Inough of this, I pray thee hold thy peace.
Yes Madam, yet I cannot chuſe but laugh, to thinke it ſhould leaue crying, & ſay I: and yet I warrant it had vpon it brow, a bumpe as big as a young Cockrels ſtone? A perilous knock, and it cryed bitterly. Yea quoth my husband, fall'ſt vpon thy face, thou wilt fall backward when thou commeſt to age: wilt thou not Iule? It ſtinted: and ſaid I.
And ſtint thou too. I pray thee Nurſe, ſay I.
Peace I haue done: God marke thee too his grace thou waſt the prettieſt Babe that ere I nurſt, and I might liue to ſee thee married once, I haue my wiſh.
Marry that marry is the very theame
I came to talke of, tell me daughter Iuliet,
How ſtands your diſpoſition to be Married?
It is an houre that I dreame not of.
An houre, were not I thine onely Nurſe, I would ſay thou had'ſt ſuckt wiſedome from thy teat.
Well thinke of marriage now, yonger then you
Heere in Verona, Ladies of eſteeme,
Are made already Mothers. By my count
I was your Mother, much vpon theſe yeares
That you are now a Maide, thus then in briefe:
The valiant Paris ſeekes you for his loue.
A man young Lady, Lady, ſuch a man as all the world. Why hee's a man of waxe.
Veronas Summer hath not ſuch a flower.
Nay hee's a flower, infaith a very flower.
What ſay you, can you loue the Gentleman?
This night you ſhall behold him at our Feaſt,
Read ore the volume of young Paris face,
And find delight, writ there with Beauties pen:
Examine euery ſeuerall liniament,
And ſee how one another lends content:
And what obſcur'd in this faire volume lies,
Find written in the Margent of his eyes▪
This precious Booke of Loue, this vnbound Louer,
To Beautifie him, onely lacks a Couer.
The fiſh liues in the Sea, and 'tis much pride
For faire without, the faire within to hide:
That Booke in manies eyes doth ſhare the glorie,
That in Gold claſpes, Lockes in the Golden ſtorie:
So ſhall you ſhare all that he doth poſſeſſe,
By hauing him, making your ſelfe no leſſe.
No leſſe, nay bigger: women grow by men.
Speake briefly, can you like of Paris loue?
Ile looke to like, if looking liking moue.
But no more deepe will I endart mine eye,
Then your conſent giues ſtrength to make flye.
Madam, the gueſts are come, ſupper ſeru'd vp, you cal'd, my young Lady askt for, the Nurſe cur'ſt in the Pantery, and euery thing in extremitie: I muſt hence to wait, I beſeech you follow ſtraight.
We follow thee, Iuliet, the Countie ſtaies.
Goe Gyrle, ſeeke happe nights to happy daies.
What ſhall this ſpeeh be ſpoke for our excuſe?
Or ſhall we on without Apologie?
The date is out of ſuch prolixitie,
Weele haue no Cupid, hood winkt with a skarfe,
Bearing a Tartars painted Bow of lath,
Skaring the Ladies like a Crow-keeper.
But let them meaſure vs by what they will,
Weele meaſure them a Meaſure, and be gone.
Giue me a Torch, I am not for this ambling.
Being but heauy I will beare the light.
Nay gentle Romeo, we muſt haue you dance.
Not I beleeue me, you haue dancing ſhooes
With nimble ſoles, I haue a ſoale of Lead
So ſtakes me to the ground, I cannot moue.
You are a Louer, borrow Cupids wings,
And ſoare with them aboue a common bound.
I am too ſore enpearced with his ſhaft,
To ſoare with his light feathers, and to bound:
I cannot bound a pitch aboue dull woe,
Vnder loues heauy burthen doe I ſinke.
And to ſinke in it ſhould you burthen loue,
Too great oppreſſion for a tender thing.
Is loue a tender thing? it is too rough,
Too rude, too boyſterous, and it pricks like thorne.
If loue be rough with you, be rough with loue,
Pricke loue for pricking, and you beat loue downe,
Giue me a Caſe to put my viſage in,
A Viſor for a Viſor, what care I
What curious eye doth quote deformities:
Here are the Beetle-browes ſhall bluſh for me.
Come knocke and enter, and no ſooner in,
But euery man betake him to his legs.
A Torch for me, let wantons light of heart
Tickle the ſenceleſſe ruſhes with their heeles:
For I am prouerb'd with a Grandſier Phraſe,
Ile be a Candle-holder and looke on,
The game was nere ſo faire, and I am done.
Tut, duns the Mouſe, the Conſtables owne word,
If thou art dun, weele draw thee from the mire.
Or ſaue your reuerence loue, wherein thou ſtickeſt
Vp to the eares, come we burne day-light ho.
Nay that's not ſo.
I meane ſir I delay,
We waſt our lights in vaine, lights, lights, by day;
Take our good meaning, for our Iudgement ſits
Fiue times in that, ere once in our fine wits.
And we meane well in going to this Maske,
But 'tis no wit to go.
Why may one aske?
I dreampt a dreame to night.
And ſo did I.
Well what was yours?
That dreamers often lye.
In bed a ſleepe while they do dreame things true.
O then I ſee Queene Mab hath beene with you: She is the Fairies Midwife, & ſhe comes in ſhape no bigger then Agat-ſtone, on the fore-finger of an Alderman, drawne with a teeme of little Atomies, ouer mens noſes as they lie aſleepe: her Waggon Spokes made of long Spinners legs: the Couer of the wings of Graſhoppers, her Traces of the ſmalleſt Spiders web, her coullers of the Moonſhines watry Beames, her Whip of Crickets bone, the Laſh of Philome, her Waggoner, a ſmall gray-coated Gnat, not halfe ſo bigge as a round little Worme, prickt from the Lazie-finger of a man. Her Chariot is an emptie Haſelnut, made by the Ioyner Squirrel or old Grub, time out a mind, the Faries Coach-makers: & in this ſtate ſhe gallops night by night, through Louers braines: and then they dreame of Loue. On Courtiers knees, that dreame on Curſies ſtrait: ore Lawyers fingers, who ſtrait dreamt on Fees, ore Ladies lips, who ſtrait on kiſſes dreame, which oft athe angry Mab with bliſters plagues, becauſe their breath with Sweet meats tainted are. Sometime ſhe gallops ore a Courtiers noſe, & then dreames he of ſmelling out aſute: & ſomtime comes ſhe with Tith pigs tale, tickling a Parſons noſe as a lies aſleepe, then he dreames of another Benefice. Sometime ſhe driueth ore a Souldiers necke, & then dreames he of cutting Forraine throats, of Breaches, Ambuſcados, Spaniſh Blades: Of Healths fiue Fadome deepe, and then anon drums in his eares, at which he ſtartes and wakes; and being thus frighted, ſweares a prayer or two & ſleepes againe: this is that very Mab that plats the manes of Horſes in the night: & bakes the Elk-locks in foule ſluttiſh haires, which once vntangled, much misfortune bodes,
This is the hag, when Maides lie on their backs,
That preſſes them, and learnes them firſt to beare,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is ſhe.
Peace, peace, Mercutio peace,
Thou talk'ſt of nothing.
True, I talke of dreames:
Which are the children of an idle braine,
Begot of nothing, but vaine phantaſie,
Which is as thin of ſubſtance as the ayre,
And more inconſtant then the wind, who wooes
Euen now the frozen boſome of the North:
And being anger'd, puffes away from thence,
Turning his ſide to the dew dropping South.
This wind you talke of blowes vs from our ſelues,
Supper is done, and we ſhall come too late.
I feare too early, for my mind miſgiues,
Some conſequence yet hanging in the ſtarres,
Shall bitterly begin his fearefull date
With this nights reuels, and expire the tearme
Of a deſpiſed life cloſ'd in my breſt:
By ſome vile forfeit of vntimely death▪
But he that hath the ſtirrage of my courſe,
Direct my ſute: on luſtie Gentlemen.
Strike Drum.
Where's Potpan, that he helpes not to take away?
He ſhift a Trencher? he ſcrape a Trencher?
When good manners, ſhall lie in one or two mens hands, and they vnwaſht too, 'tis a foule thing.
Away with the Ioynſtooles, remoue the Courtcubbord, looke to the Plate: good thou, ſaue mee a piece of Marchpane, and as thou loueſt me, let the Porter let in Suſan Grindſtone, and Nell, Anthonie and Potpan.
I Boy readie.
You are lookt for, and cal'd for, askt for, & ſought for, in the great Chamber.
We cannot be here and there too, chearly Boyes,
Be brisk awhile, and the longer liuer take all.
Welcome Gentlemen,
Ladies that haue their toes
Vnplagu'd with Cornes, will walke about with you:
Ah my Miſtreſſes, which of you all
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
She Ile ſweare hath Cornes: am I come neare ye now?
Welcome Gentlemen, I haue ſeene the day
That I haue worne a Viſor, and could tell
A whiſpering tale in a faire Ladies eare:
Such as would pleaſe: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone,
You are welcome Gentlemen, come Muſitians play:
A Hall, Hall, giue roome, and foote it Girles,
More light you knaues, and turne the Tables vp:
And quench the fire, the Roome is growne too hot.
Ah ſirrah, this vnlookt for ſport comes well:
Nay ſit, nay ſit, good Cozin Capulet,
For you and I are paſt our dauncing daies:
How long 'iſt now ſince laſt your ſelfe and I
Were in a Maske?
Berlady thirty yeares.
What man: 'tis not ſo much, 'tis not ſo much,
'Tis ſince the Nuptiall of Lucentio,
Come Pentycoſt as quickely as it will,
Some fiue and twenty yeares, and then we Maskt.
'Tis more, 'tis more, his Sonne is elder ſir:
His Sonne is thirty.
Will you tell me that?
His Sonne was but a Ward two yeares agoe.
What Ladie is that which dothni rich the hand
Of yonder Knight?
I know not ſir.
O ſhe doth teach the Torches to burne bright:
It ſeemes ſhe hangs vpon the cheeke of night,
As a rich Iewel in an Aethiops eare:
Beauty too rich for vſe, for earth too deare:
So ſhewes a Snowy Doue trooping with Crowes,
As yonder Lady ore her fellowes ſhowes;
The meaſure done, Ile watch her place of ſtand,
And touching hers, make bleſſed my rude hand.
Did my heart loue till now, forſweare it ſight,
For I neuer ſaw true Beauty till this night.
This by his voice, ſhould be a Mountague.
Fetch me my Rapier Boy, what dares the ſlaue
Come hither couer'd with an antique face,
To fleere and ſcorne at our Solemnitie?
Now by the ſtocke and Honour of my kin,
To ſtrike him dead I hold it not a ſin.
Why how now kinſman,
Wherefore ſtorme you ſo?
Vncle this is a Mountague, our foe:
A Villaine that is hither come in ſpight,
To ſcorne at our Solemnitie this night.
Young Romeo is it?
'Tis he, that Villaine Romeo.
Content thee gentle Coz, let him alone,
A beares him like a portly Gentleman:
And to ſay truth, Verona brags of him,
To be a vertuous and well gouern'd youth:
I would not for the wealth of all the towne,
Here in my houſe do him diſparagement:
Therfore be patient, take no note of him,
It is my will, the which if thou reſpect,
Shew a faire preſence, and put off theſe frownes,
An ill beſeeming ſemblance for a Feaſt.
It fits when ſuch a Villaine is a gueſt,
Ile not endure him.
He ſhall be endu'rd.
What goodman boy, I ſay he ſhall, go too,
Am I the Maiſter here or you? go too,
Youle not endure him, God ſhall mend my ſoule,
Youle make a Mutinie among the Gueſts:
You will ſet cocke a hoope, youle be the man.
Why Vncle, 'tis a ſhame.
Go too, go too,
You are a ſawcy Boy, 'iſt ſo indeed?
This tricke may chance to ſcath you, I know what,
You muſt contrary me, marry 'tis time.
Well ſaid my hearts, you are a Princox, goe,
Be quiet, or more light, more light for ſhame,
Ile make you quiet. What, chearely my hearts.
Patience perforce, with wilfull choler meeting,
Makes my fleſh tremble in their different greeting:
I will withdraw, but this intruſion ſhall
Now ſeeming ſweet, conuert to bitter gall.
If I prophane with my vnworthieſt hand,
This holy ſhrine, the gentle ſin is this,
My lips to bluſhing Pilgrims did ready ſtand,
To ſmooth that rough touch, with a tender kiſſe.
Good Pilgrime,
You do wrong your hand too much.
Which mannerly deuotion ſhewes in this,
For Saints haue hands, that Pilgrims hands do tuch,
And palme to palme, is holy Palmers kiſſe.
Haue not Saints lips, and holy Palmers too?
I Pilgrim, lips that they muſt vſe in prayer.
O then deare Saint, let lips do what hands do,
They pray (grant thou) leaſt faith turne to diſpaire.
Saints do not moue,
Though grant for prayers ſake.
Then moue not while my prayers effect I take:
Thus from my lips, by thine my ſin is purg'd.
Then haue my lips the ſin that they haue tooke.
Sin from my lips? O treſpaſſe ſweetly vrg'd:
Giue me my ſin againe.
You kiſſe by' th' booke.
Madam your Mother craues a word with you.
What is her Mother?
Marrie Batcheler,
Her Mother is the Lady of the houſe,
And a good Lady, and a wiſe, and Vertuous,
I Nur'ſt her Daughter that you talkt withall:
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her,
Shall haue the chincks.
Is ſhe a Capulet?
O deare account! My life is my foes debt.
Away, be gone, the ſport is at the beſt.
I ſo I feare, the more is my vnreſt.
Nay Gentlemen prepare not to be gone,
We haue a trifling fooliſh Banquet towards:
Is it e'ne ſo? why then I thanke you all.
I thanke you honeſt Gentlemen, good night:
More Torches here: come on, then let's to bed.
Ah ſirrah, by my faie it waxes late,
Ile to my reſt.
Come hither Nurſe,
What is yond Gentleman:
The Sonne and Heire of old Tyberio.
What's he that now is going out of doore?
Marrie that I thinke be young Petruchio.
What's he that follows here that would not dance?
I know not.
Go aske his name: if he be married,
My graue is like to be my wedded bed.
His name is Romeo, and a Mountague,
The onely Sonne of your great Enemie.
My onely Loue ſprung from my onely hate,
Too early ſeene, vnknowne, and knowne too late,
Prodigious birth of Loue it is to me,
That I muſt loue a loathed Enemie.
What's this? whats this?
A rime, I learne euen now
Of one I dan'ſt withall.
Anon, anon:
Come let's away, the ſtrangers all are gone.
Now old deſire doth in his death bed lie,
And yong affection gapes to be his Heire,
That faire, for which Loue gron'd for and would die,
With tender Iuliet matcht, is now not faire.
Now Romeo is beloued, and Loues againe,
A like bewitched by the charme of lookes:
But to his foe ſuppos'd he muſt complaine,
And ſhe ſteale Loues ſweet bait from fearefull hookes:
Being held a foe, he may not haue acceſſe
To breath ſuch vowes as Louers vſe to ſweare,
And ſhe as much in Loue, her meanes much leſſe,
To meete her new Beloued any where:
But paſſion lends them Power, time, meanes to meete,
Temp'ring extremities with extreame ſweete.
Can I goe forward when my heart is here?
Turne backe dull earth, and find thy Center out.
Romeo, my Cozen Romeo, Romeo.
He is wiſe,
And on my life hath ſtolne him home to bed.
He ran this way and leapt this Orchard wall.
Call good Mercutio:
Nay, Ile coniure too.
Romeo, Humours, Madman, Paſſion, Louer,
Appeare thou in the likeneſſe of a ſigh,
Speake but one rime, and I am ſatisfied:
Cry me but ay me, Prouant, but Loue and day,
Speake to my goſhip Venus one faire word,
One Nickname for her purblind Sonne and her,
Young Abraham Cupid he that ſhot ſo true,
When King Copheta lou'd the begger Maid,
He heareth not, he ſtirreth not, he moueth not,
The Ape is dead, I muſt coniure him,
I coniure thee by Roſalines bright eyes,
By her High forehead, and her Scarlet lip,
By her Fine foote, Straight leg, and Quiuering thigh,
And the Demeanes, that there Adiacent lie,
That in thy likeneſſe thou appeare to vs.
And if he heare thee thou wilt anger him.
This cannot anger him, t' would anger him
To raiſe a ſpirit in his Miſtreſſe circle,
Of ſome ſtrange nature, letting it ſtand
Till ſhe had laid it, and coniured it downe,
That were ſome ſpight.
My inuocation is faire and honeſt, & in his Miſtris name,
I coniure onely but to raiſe vp him.
Come, he hath hid himſelfe among theſe Trees
To be conſorted with the Humerous night:
Blind is his Loue, and beſt befits the darke.
If Loue be blind, Loue cannot hit the marke,
Now will he ſit vnder a Medler tree,
And wiſh his Miſtreſſe were that kind of Fruite,
As Maides call Medlers when they laugh alone,
O Romeo that ſhe were, O that ſhe were
An open, or thou a Poprin Peare,
Romeo goodnight, Ile to my Truckle bed,
This Field-bed is to cold for me to ſleepe,
Come ſhall we go?
Go then, for 'tis in vaine to ſeeke him here
That meanes not to be found.
He ieaſts at Scarres that neuer felt a wound,
But ſoft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the Eaſt, and Iuliet is the Sunne,
Ariſe faire Sun and kill the enuious Moone,
Who is already ſicke and pale with griefe,
That thou her Maid art far more faire then ſhe:
Be not her Maid ſince ſhe is enuious,
Her Veſtal liuery is but ſicke and greene,
And none but fooles do weare it, caſt it off:
It is my Lady, O it is my Loue, O that ſhe knew ſhe were,
She ſpeakes, yet ſhe ſayes nothing, what of that?
Her eye diſcourſes, I will anſwere it:
I am too bold 'tis not to me ſhe ſpeakes:
Two of the faireſt ſtarres in all the Heauen,
Hauing ſome buſineſſe do entreat her eyes,
To twinckle in their Spheres till they returne.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head,
The brightneſſe of her cheeke would ſhame thoſe ſtarres,
As day-light doth a Lampe, her eye in heauen,
Would through the ayrie Region ſtreame ſo bright,
That Birds would ſing, and thinke it were not night:
See how ſhe leanes her cheeke vpon her hand.
O that I were a Gloue vpon that hand,
That I might touch that cheeke.
Ay me.
She ſpeakes.
Oh ſpeake againe bright Angell, for thou art
As glorious to this night being ore my head,
As is a winged meſſenger of heauen
Vnto the white vpturned wondring eyes
Of mortalls that fall backe to gaze on him,
When he beſtrides the lazie puffing Cloudes,
And ſailes vpon the boſome of the ayre.
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Denie thy Father and refuſe thy name:
Or if thou wilt not, be but ſworne my Loue,
And Ile no longer be a Capulet.
Shall I heare more, or ſhall I ſpeake at this?
'Tis but thy name that is my Enemy:
Thou art thy ſelfe, though not a Mountague,
What's Mountague? it is nor hand nor foote,
Nor arme, nor face, O be ſome other name
Belonging to a man.
What? in a names that which we call a Roſe,
By any other word would ſmell as ſweete,
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo cal'd,
Retaine that deare perfection which he owes,
Without that title Romeo, doffe thy name,
And for thy name which is no part of thee,
Take all my ſelfe.
I take thee at thy word:
Call me but Loue, and Ile be new baptiz'd,
Hence foorth I neuer will be Romeo.
What man art thou, that thus beſcreen'd in night
So ſtumbleſt on my counſell?
By a name,
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name deare Saint, is hatefull to my ſelfe,
Becauſe it is an Enemy to thee,
Had I it written, I would teare the word.
My eares haue yet not drunke a hundred words
Of thy tongues vttering, yet I know the ſound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Neither faire Maid, if either thee diſlike.
How cam'ſt thou hither.
Tell me, and wherefore?
The Orchard walls are high, and hard to climbe,
And the place death, conſidering who thou art,
If any of my kinſmen find thee here,
With Loues light wings
Did I ore-perch theſe Walls,
For ſtony limits cannot hold Loue out,
And what Loue can do, that dares Loue attempt:
Therefore thy kinſmen are no ſtop to me.
If they do ſee thee, they will murther thee.
Alacke there lies more perill in thine eye,
Then twenty of their Swords, looke thou but ſweete,
And I am proofe againſt their enmity.
I would not for the world they ſaw thee here.
I haue nights cloake to hide me from their eyes
And but thou loue me, let them finde me here,
My life were better ended by their hate,
Then death proroged wanting of thy Loue.
By whoſe direction found'ſt thou out this place?
By Loue that firſt did promp me to enquire,
He lent me counſell, and I lent him eyes,
I am no Pylot, yet wert thou as far
As that vaſt-ſhore-waſhet with the fartheſt Sea,
I ſhould aduenture for ſuch Marchandiſe.
Thou knoweſt the maske of night is on my face,
Elſe would a Maiden bluſh be paint my cheeke,
For that which thou haſt heard me ſpeake to night,
Faine would I dwell on forme, faine, faine, denie
What I haue ſpoke, but farewell Complement,
Doeſt thou Loue? I know thou wilt ſay I,
And I will take thy word, yet if thou ſwear'ſt,
Thou maieſt proue falſe: at Louers periuries
They ſay Ioue laught, oh gentle Romeo,
If thou doſt Loue, pronounce it faithfully:
Or if thou thinkeſt I am too quickly wonne,
Ile frowne and be peruerſe, and ſay thee nay,
So thou wilt wooe: But elſe not for the world.
In truth ſaire Mountague I am too fond:
And therefore thou maieſt thinke my behauiour light,
But truſt me Gentleman, Ile proue more true,
Then thoſe that haue coying to be ſtrange,
I ſhould haue beene more ſtrange, I muſt confeſſe,
But that thou ouer heard'ſt ere I was ware
My true Loues paſſion, therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yeelding to light Loue,
Which the darke night hath ſo diſcouered.
Lady, by yonder Moone I vow,
That tips with ſiluer all theſe Fruite ree tops.
O ſweare not by the Moone, th' inconſtant Moone,
That monethly changes in her circled Orbe,
Leaſt that thy Loue proue likewiſe variable.
What ſhall I ſweare by?
Do not ſweare at all:
Or if thou wilt ſweare by thy gratious ſelfe,
Which is the God of my Idolatry,
And Ile beleeue thee.
If my hearts deare loue.
Well do not ſweare, although I ioy in thee:
I haue no ioy of this contract to night,
It is too raſh, too vnaduiſ'd, too ſudden,
Too like the lightning which doth ceaſe to be
Ere, one can ſay, it lightens, Sweete good night:
This bud of Loue by Summers ripening breath,
May proue a beautious Flower when next we meete:
Goodnight, goodnight, as ſweete repoſe and reſt,
Come to thy heart, as that within my breſt.
O wilt thou leaue me ſo vnſatisfied?
What ſatisfaction can'ſt thou haue to night?
Th' exchange of thy Loues faithfull vow for mine.
I gaue thee mine before thou did'ſt requeſt it:
And yet I would it were to giue againe.
Would'ſt thou withdraw it,
For what purpoſe Loue?
But to be franke and giue it thee againe,
And yet I wiſh but for the thing I haue,
My bounty is as boundleſſe as the Sea,
My Loue as deepe, the more I giue to thee
The more I haue, for both are Infinite:
I heare ſome noyſe within deare Loue adue:
Anon good Nurſe, ſweet Mountague be true:
Stay but a little, I will come againe.
O bleſſed bleſſed night, I am afear'd
Being in night, all this is but a dreame,
Too flattering ſweet to be ſubſtantiall.
Three words deare Romeo,
And goodnight indeed,
If that thy bent of Loue be Honourable,
Thy purpoſe marriage, ſend me word to morrow,
By one that Ile procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt performe the right,
And all my Fortunes at thy foote Ile lay,
And follow thee my Lord throughout the world.
I come, anon: but if thou meaneſt not well,
I do beſeech theee
(By and by I come)
To ceaſe thy ſtrife, and leaue me to my griefe,
To morrow will I ſend.
So thriue my ſoule.
A thouſand times goodnight.
A thouſand times the worſe to want thy light,
Loue goes toward Loue as ſchool-boyes frō thier books
But Loue frō Loue, towards ſchoole with heauie lookes.
Hiſt Romeo hiſt: O for a Falkners voice,
To lure this Taſſell gentle backe againe,
Bondage is hoarſe, and may not ſpeake aloud,
Elſe would I teare the Caue where Eccho lies,
And make her ayrie tongue more hoarſe, then
With repetition of my Romeo.
It is my ſoule that calls vpon my name.
How ſiluer ſweet, ſound Louers tongues by night,
Like ſofteſt Muſicke to attending eares.
Romeo.
My Neece.
What a clock to morrow
Shall I ſend to thee?
By the houre of nine.
I will not faile, 'tis twenty yeares till then,
I haue forgot why I did call thee backe.
Let me ſtand here till thou remember it.
I ſhall forget, to haue thee ſtill ſtand there,
Remembring how I Loue thy company.
And Ile ſtill ſtay, to haue thee ſtill forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.
'Tis almoſt morning, I would haue thee gone,
And yet no further then a wantons Bird,
That let's it hop a little from his hand,
Like a poore priſoner in his twiſted Gyues,
And with a ſilken thred plucks it backe againe,
So louing Iealous of his liberty.
I would I were thy Bird.
Sweet ſo would I,
Yet I ſhould kill thee with much cheriſhing:
Good night, good night.
Parting is ſuch ſweete ſorrow,
That I ſhall ſay goodnight, till it be morrow.
Sleepe dwell vpon thine eyes, peace in thy breſt.
Would I were ſleepe and peace ſo ſweet to reſt,
The gray ey'd morne ſmiles on the frowning night,
Checkring the Eaſterne Clouds with ſtreakes of light,
And darkneſſe fleckel'd like a drunkard reeles,
From forth dayes pathway, made by Titans wheeles.
Hence will I to my ghoſtly Fries cloſe Cell,
His helpe to craue, and my deare hap to tell.
The gray ey'd morne ſmiles on the frowning night,
Checkring the Eaſterne Cloudes with ſtreaks of light.
And fleckled darkneſſe like a drunkard reeles,
From forth daies path, and Titans burning wheeles:
Now ere the Sun aduance his burning eye,
The day to cheere, and nights danke dew to dry,
I muſt vpfill this Oſier Cage of ours,
With balefull weedes, and precious Iuiced flowers,
The earth that's Natures mother, is her Tombe,
What is her burying graue that is her wombe:
And from her wombe children of diuers kind
We ſucking on her naturall boſome find:
Many for many vertues excellent:
None but for ſome, and yet all different.
Omickle is the powerfull grace that lies
In Plants, Hearbs, ſtones, and their true qualities:
For nought ſo vile, that on the earth doth liue,
But to the earth ſome ſpeciall good doth giue.
Nor ought ſo good, but ſtrain'd from that faire vſe,
Reuolts from true birth, ſtumbling on abuſe.
Vertue it ſelfe turnes vice being miſapplied,
And vice ſometime by action dignified.
Within the infant rin'd of this weake flower,
Poyſon hath reſidence, and medicine power:
For this being ſmelt, with that part cheares each part,
Being taſted ſlayes all ſences with the heart.
Two ſuch oppoſed Kings encampe them ſtill,
In man as well as Hearbes, grace and rude will:
And where the worſer is predominant,
Full ſoone the Canker death eates vp that Plant.
Good morrow Father.
Benedecite.
What early tongue ſo ſweet ſaluteth me?
Young Sonne, it argues a diſtempered head,
So ſoone to bid goodmorrow to thy bed;
Care keepes his watch in euery old mans eye,
And where Care lodges, ſleepe will neuer lye:
But where vnbruſed youh with vnſtuft braine
Doth couch his lims, there, golden ſleepe doth raigne;
Therefore thy earlineſſe doth me aſſure,
Thou art vprous'd with ſome diftemprature;
Or if not ſo, then here I hit it right.
Our Romeo hath not beene in bed to night.
That laſt is true, the ſweeter reſt was mine.
God pardon ſin: waſt thou with Roſaline?
With Roſaline, my ghoſtly Father? No,
I haue forgot that name, and that names woe.
That's my good Son, but wher haſt thou bin then?
Ile tell thee ere thou aske it me agen:
I haue beene feaſting with mine enemie,
Where on a ſdden one hath wounded me,
That's by me wounded: both our remedies
Within thy helpe and holy phiſicke lies:
I beare no hatred, bleſſed man: for loe
My interceſſion likewiſe ſteads my foe.
Be plaine good Son, reſt homely in thy drift,
Ridling confeſſion, findes but ridling ſhrift.
Then plainly know my hearts deare Loue is ſet,
On the faire daughter of rich Capulet:
As mine on hers, ſo hers is ſet on mine;
And all combin'd, ſaue what thou muſt combine
By holy marriage: when and where, and how,
We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vow:
Ile tell thee as we paſſe, but this I pray,
That thou conſent to marrie vs to day.
Holy S. Francis, what a change is heere?
Is Roſaline that thou didſt Loue ſo deare
So ſoone forſaken? young mens Loue then lies
Not truely in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Ieſu Maria, what a deale of brine
Hath waſht thy ſallow cheekes for Roſaline?
How much ſalt water throwne away in waſt,
To ſeaſon Loue that of it doth not taſt.
The Sun not yet thy ſighes, from heauen cleares,
Thy old grones yet ringing in my auncient eares:
Lo here vpon thy cheeke the ſtaine doth ſit,
Of an old teare that is not waſht off yet.
If ere thou waſt thy ſelfe, and theſe woes thine,
Thou and theſe woes, were all for Roſaline.
And art thou chang'd? pronounce this ſentence then,
Women may fall, when there's no ſtrength in men.
Thou chid'ſt me oft for louing Roſaline.
For doting not for louing pupill mine.
And bad'ſt me bury Loue.
Not in a graue,
To lay one in, another out to haue.
I pray thee chide me not, her I Loue now
Doth grace for grace, and Loue for Loue allow:
The other did not ſo.
O ſhe knew well,
Thy Loue did read by rote, that could not ſpell:
But come young wauerer, come goe with me,
In one reſpect, Ile thy aſſiſtant be:
For this alliance may ſo happy proue,
To turne your houſhould rancor to pure Loue.
O let vs hence, I ſtand on ſudden haſt.
Wiſely and ſlow, they ſtumble that run faſt.
Where the deule ſhould this Romeo be? came he not home to night?
Not to his Fathers, I ſpoke with his man.
Why that ſame pale hard-harted wench, that Roſaline torments him ſo, that he will ſure run mad.
Tibalt, the kinſman to old Capulet, hath ſent a Letter to his Fathers houſe.
A challenge on my life.
Romeo will anſwere it.
Any man that can write, may anſwere a Letter.
Nay, he will anſwere the Letters Maiſter how he dares, being dared.
Alas poore Romeo, he is already dead ſtab'd with a white wenche blacke eye, runne through the eare with a Loue ſong, the very pinne of his heart, cleft with the blind Bowe-boyes but-ſhaft, and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
Why what is Tibalt?
More then Prince of Cats. Oh hee's the Couragious Captaine of Complements: he fights as you ſing prickſong, keeps time, diſtance, and proportion, he reſts his minum, one, two, and the third in your boſom: the very butcher of a ſilk button, a Dualiſt, a Dualiſt: a Gentleman of the very firſt houſe of the firſt and ſecond cauſe: ah the immortall Paſſado, the Punto reuerſo, the Hay.
The what?
The Pox of ſuch antique liſping affecting phantacies, theſe new tuners of accent: Ieſu a very good blade, a very tall man, a very good whore. Why is not this a lamentable thing Grandſire, that we ſhould be thus afflicted with theſe ſtrange flies: theſe faſhion Mongers, theſe pardon-mee's, who ſtand ſo much on the new form, that they cannot ſit at eaſe on the old bench. O their bones, their bones.
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.
Without his Roe, like a dryed Hering. O fleſh, fleſh, how art thou fiſhified? Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his Lady, was a kitchen wench, marrie ſhe had a better Loue to be rime her: Dido a dowdie, Cleopatra a Gipſie, Hellen and Hero, hildinſgs and Harlots: Thisbie a gray eie or ſo, but not to the purpoſe. Signior Romeo, Bon iour, there's a French ſalutation to your French ſlop: you gaue vs the the counterfait fairely laſt night.
Good morrow to you both, what counterfeit did I giue you?
The ſlip ſir, the ſlip, can you not conceiue?
Pardon Mercutio, my buſineſſe was great, and in ſuch a caſe as mine, a man may ſtraine curteſie.
That's as much as to ſay, ſuch a caſe as yours conſtrains a man to bow in the hams.
Meaning to curſie.
Thou haſt moſt kindly hit it.
A moſt curteous expoſition.
Nay, I am the very pinck of curteſie.
Pinke for flower.
Right.
Why then is my Pump well flowr'd.
Sure wit, follow me this ieaſt, now till thou haſt worne out thy Pump, that when the ſingle ſole of it is worne, the ieaſt may remaine after the wearing, ſole-ſingular.
O ſingle ſol'd ieaſt,
Soly ſingular for the ſingleneſſe.
Come betweene vs good Benuolio, my wits faints.
Swits and ſpurs,
Swits and ſpurs, or Ile crie a match.
Nay, if our wits run the Wild-Gooſe chaſe, I am done: For thou haſt more of the Wild-Gooſe in one of thy wits, then I am ſure I haue in my whole fiue. Was I with you there for the Gooſe?
Thou waſt neuer with mee for any thing, when thou waſt not there for the Gooſe.
I will bite thee by the eare for that ieſt.
Nay, good Gooſe bite not.
Thy wit is a very Bitter-ſweeting,
It is a moſt ſharpe ſawce.
And is it not well ſeru'd into a Sweet-Gooſe?
Oh here's a wit of Cheuerell, that ſtretches from an ynch narrow, to an ell broad.
I ſtretch it out for that word, broad, which added to the Gooſe, proues thee farre and wide, abroad Gooſe.
Why is not this better now, then groning for Loue, now art thou ſociable, now art thou Romeo: now art thou what thou art, by Art as well as by Nature, for this driueling Loue is like a great Naturall, that runs lolling vp and downe to hid his bable in a hole.
Stop there, ſtop there.
Thou deſir'ſt me to ſtop in my tale againſt the haire.
Thou would'ſt elſe haue made thy tale large.
O thou art deceiu'd, I would haue made it ſhort, or I was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupie the argument no longer.
Here's goodly geare.
A ſayle, a ſayle.
Two, two: a Shirt and a Smocke.
Peter?
Anon.
My Fan Peter?
Good Peter to hide her face?
For her Fans the fairer face?
God ye good morrow Gentlemen.
God ye gooden faire Gentlewoman.
Is it gooden?
'Tis no leſſe I tell you: for the bawdy hand of the Dyall is now vpon the pricke of Noone.
Out vpon you: what a man are you?
One Gentlewoman,
That God hath made, himſelfe to mar.
By my troth it is ſaid, for himſelfe to, mar quatha: Gentlemen, can any of you tel me where I may find the young Romeo?
I can tell you: but young Romeo will be older when you haue found him, then he was when you ſought him: I am the youngeſt of that name, for fault of a worſe.
You ſay well.
Yea is the worſt well,
Very well tooke: I faith, wiſely, wiſely.
If you be he ſir,
I deſire ſome confidence with you?
She will endite him to ſome Supper.
A baud, a baud, a baud. So no.
What haſt thou found?
No Hare ſir, vnleſſe a Hare ſir in a Lenten pie, that is ſomething ſtale and hoare ere it be ſpent.
An old Hare hoare, and an old Hare hoare is very good meat in Lent.
But a Hare that is hoare is too much for a ſcore▪ when it hoares ere it be ſpent,
Romeo will you come to your Fathers? Weele to dinner thither.
I will follow you.
Farewell auncient Lady:
Farewell Lady, Lady, Lady.
I pray you ſir, what ſawcie Merchant was this that was ſo full of his roperie?
A Gentleman Nurſe, that loues to heare himſelfe talke, and will ſpeake more in a minute, then he will ſtand to in a Moneth.
And a ſpeake any thing againſt me, Ile take him downe, & a were luſtier then he is, and twentie ſuch Iacks: and if I cannot, Ile finde thoſe that ſhall: ſcuruie knaue, I am none of his flurt-gils, I am none of his skaines mates, and thou muſt ſtand by too and ſuffer euery knaue to vſe me at his pleaſure.
I ſaw no man vſe you at his pleaſure: if I had, my weapon ſhould quickly haue beene out, I warrant you, I dare draw aſſoone as another man, if I ſee occaſion in a good quarrell, and the law on my ſide.
Now afore God, I am ſo vext, that euery part about me quiuers, skuruy knaue: pray you ſir a word: and as I told you, my young Lady bid me enquire you out, what ſhe bid me ſay, I will keepe to my ſelfe: but firſt let me tell ye, if ye ſhould leade her in a fooles paradiſe, as they ſay, it were a very groſſe kind of behauiour, as they ſay: for the Gentlewoman is yong: & therefore, if you ſhould deale double with her, truely it were an ill thing to be offered to any Gentlewoman, and very weake dealing.
Nurſe commend me to thy Lady and Miſtreſſe, I proteſt vnto thee.
Good heart, and yfaith I will tell her as much:
Lord, Lord ſhe will be a ioyfull woman.
What wilt thou tell her Nurſe? thou doeſt not marke me?
I will tell her ſir, that you do proteſt, which as I take it, is a Gentleman-like offer.
Bid her deuiſe ſome meanes to come to ſhrift this afternoone,
And there ſhe ſhall at Frier Lawrence Cell
Beſhriu'd and married: here is for thy paines.
No truly ſir not a penny.
Go too, I ſay you ſhall.
This afternoone ſir? well ſhe ſhall be there.
And ſtay thou good Nurſe behind the Abbey wall,
Within this houre my man ſhall be with thee,
And bring thee Cords made like a tackled ſtaire▪
Which to the high top gallant of my ioy,
Muſt be my conuoy in the ſecret night.
Farewell, be truſtie and Ile quite thy paines:
Farewell, commend me to thy Miſtreſſe.
Now God in heauen bleſſe thee: harke you ſir,
What ſaiſt thou my deare Nurſe?
Is your man ſecret, did you nere heare ſay two may keepe counſell putting one away.
Warrant thee my man as true as ſteele.
Well ſir, my Miſtreſſe is the ſweeteſt Lady, Lord, Lord, when 'twas a little praing thing. O there is a Noble man in Towne one Paris, that would faine lay knife aboard: but ſhe good ſoule had as leeue a ſee Toade, a very Toade as ſee him: I anger her ſometimes, and tell her that Paris is the propere man, but Ile warrant you, when I ſay ſo, ſhee lookes as pale as any clout in the verſall world. Doth not Roſemarie and Romeo begin both with a letter?
I Nurſe, what of that? Both with an R
A mocker that's the dogs name, R. is for the no, I know it begins with ſome other letter, and ſhe hath the prettieſt ſententious of it, of you and Roſemary, that it would do you good to heare it.
Commend me to thy Lady.
I a thouſand times. Peter?
Anon.
Before and apace.
The clocke ſtrook nine, when I did ſend the Nurſe,
In halfe an houre ſhe promiſed to returne,
Perchance ſhe cannot meete him: that's not ſo:
Oh ſhe is lame, Loues Herauld ſhould be thoughts,
Which ten times faſter glides then the Sunnes beames,
Driuing backe ſhadowes ouer lowring hils.
Therefore do nimble Pinion'd Doues draw Loue,
And therefore hath the wind-ſwift Cupid wings:
Now is the Sun vpon the highmoſt hill
Of this daies iourney, and from nine till twelue,
I three long houres, yet ſhe is not come.
Had ſhe affections and warme youthfull blood,
She would be as ſwift in motion as a ball,
My words would bandy her to my ſweete Loue,
And his to me, but old folkes,
Many faine as they were dead,
Vnwieldie, ſlow, heauy, and pale as lead.
O God ſhe comes, O hony Nurſe what newes?
Haſt thou met with him? ſend thy man away.
Peter ſtay at the gate.
Now good ſweet Nurſe:
O Lord, why lookeſt thou ſad?
Though newes, be ſad, yet tell them merrily.
If good thou ſham'ſt the muſicke of ſweet newes,
By playing it to me, with ſo ſower a face.
I am a weary, giue me leaue awhile,
Fie how my bones ake, what a iaunt haue I had?
I would thou had'ſt my bones, and I thy newes:
Nay come I pray thee ſpeake, good good Nurſe ſpeake.
Ieſu what haſt? can you not ſtay a while?
Do you not ſee that I am out of breath?
How art thou out of breath, when thou haſt breth
To ſay to me, that thou art out of breath?
The excuſe that thou doſt make in this delay,
Is longer then the tale thou doſt excuſe.
Is thy newes good or bad? anſwere to that,
Say either, and Ile ſtay the circuſtance:
Let me be ſatisfied, iſt good or bad?
Well, you haue made a ſimple choice, you know not how to chuſe a man: Romeo, no not he though his face be better then any mans, yet his legs excels all mens, and for a hand, and a foote, and a body, though they be not to be talkt on, yet they are paſt compare: he is not the flower of curteſie, but Ile warrant him as gentle a Lambe: go thy waies wench, ſerue God. What haue you din'd at home?
No no: but all this this did I know before
What ſaies he of our marriage? what of that?
Lord how my head akes, what a head haue I?
It beates as it would fall in twenty peeces.
My backe at other ſide: o my backe, my backe:
Beſhrew your heart for ſending me about
To catch my death with iaunting vp and downe.
Ifaith: I am ſorrie that that thou art ſo well.
Sweet ſweet, ſweet Nurſe, tell me what ſaies my Loue?
Your Loue ſaies like an honeſt Gentleman,
And a courteous, and a kind, and a handſome,
And I warrant a vertuous: where is your Mother?
Where is my Mother?
Why ſhe is within, where ſhould ſhe be?
How odly thou repli'ſt:
Your Loue ſaies like an honeſt Gentleman
Where is your Mother?
O Gods Lady deare,
Are you ſo hot? marrie come vp I trow,
Is this the Poultis for my aking bones?
Henceforward do your meſſages your ſelfe.
Heere's ſuch a coile, come what ſaies Romeo?
Haue you got leaue to go to ſhrift to day?
I haue.
Then high you hence to Frier Lawrence Cell,
There ſtaies a Husband to make you a wife:
Now comes the wanton bloud vp in your cheekes,
The'le be in Scarlet ſtraight at any newes:
Hie you to Church, I muſt an other way,
To fetch a Ladder by the which your Loue
Muſt climde a birds neſt Soone when it is darke:
I am the drudge, and toile in your delight:
But you ſhall beare the burthen ſoone at night.
Go Ile to dinner, hie you to the Cell.
Hie to high Fortune, honeſt Nurſe, farewell.
So ſmile the heauens vpon this holy act,
That after houres, with ſorrow chide vs not.
Amen, amen, but come what ſorrow can,
It cannot counteruaile the exchange of ioy
That one ſhort minute giues me in her ſight:
Do thou but cloſe our hands with holy words,
Then Loue-deuouring death do what he dare,
It is inough. I may but call her mine.
Theſe violent delights haue violent endes,
And in their triumph: die like fire and powder;
Which as they kiſſe conſume. The ſweeteſt honey
Is loathſome in his owne deliciouſneſſe,
And in the taſte confoundes the appetite.
Therefore Loue moderately, long Loue doth ſo,
Too ſwift arriues as tardie as too ſlow.
Here comes the Lady. Oh ſo light a foot
Will nere weare out the euerlaſting flint,
A Louer may beſtride the Goſſamours,
That ydles in the wanton Summer ayre,
And yet not fall, ſo light is vanitie.
Good euen to my ghoſtly Confeſſor.
Romeo ſhall thanke thee Daughter for vs both.
As much to him, elſe in his thanks too much.
Ah Iuliet, if the meaſure of thy ioy
Be heapt like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blaſon it, then ſweeten with thy breath
This neighbour ayre, and let rich muſickes tongue.
Vnfold the imagin'd happineſſe that both
Receiue in either, by this deere encounter.
Conceit more rich in matter then in words,
Brags of his subſtance, not of Ornament:
They are but beggers that can count their worth,
But my true Loue is growne to ſuch ſuch exceſſe,
I cannot ſum vp ſome of halfe my wealth.
Come, come with me, & we will make ſhort worke,
For by your leaues, you ſhall not ſtay alone,
Till holy Church incorporate two in one.
I pray thee good Mercutio lets retire,
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad:
And if we meet, we ſhal not ſcape a brawle, for now theſe hot dayes, is the mad blood ſtirring.
Thou art like one of theſe fellowes, that when he enters the confines of a Tauerne, claps me his Sword vpon the Table, and ſayes, God ſend me no need of thee: and by the operation of the ſecond cup, drawe him on the Drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Am I like ſuch a Fellow?
Come, come, thou art as hot a Iacke in thy mood, as any in Italie: and aſſoone moued to be moodie, and aſſoone moodie to be mou'd.
And what too?
Nay, and there were two ſuch, we ſhould haue none ſhortly, for one would kill the other: thou, why thou wilt quarrell with a man that hath a haire more, or a haire leſſe in his beard, then thou haſt: thou wilt quarrell with a man for cracking Nuts, hauing no other reaſon, but becauſe thou haſt haſell eyes: what eye, but ſuch an eye, would ſpie out ſuch a quarrell? thy head is as full of quarrels, as an egge is full of meat, and yet thy head hath bin beaten as addle as an egge for quarreling: thou haſt quarrel'd with a man for coffing in the ſtreet, becauſe he hath wakened thy Dog that hath laine aſleepe in the Sun. Did'ſt thou not fall out with a Tailor for wearing his new Doublet before Eaſter? with another, for tying his new ſhooes with old Riband, and yet thou wilt Tutor me from quarrelling?
And I were ſo apt to quarell as thou art, any man ſhould buy the Fee-ſimple of my life, for an houre and a quarter.
The Fee-ſimple? O ſimple.
By my head here comes the Capulets.
By my heele I care not.
Follow me cloſe, for I will ſpeake to them.
Gentlemen, Good den, a word with one of you.
And but one word with one of vs? couple it with ſomething, make it a word and a blow.
You ſhall find me apt inough to that ſir, and you will giue me occaſion.
Could you not take ſome occaſion without giuing?
Mercutio thou conſort'ſt with Romeo.
Conſort? what doſt thou make vs Minſtrels? & thou make Minſtrels of vs, looke to heare nothing but diſcords: heere's my fiddleſticke, heere's that ſhall make you daunce. Come conſort.
We talke here in the publike haunt of men:
Either withdraw vnto ſome priuate place,
Or reaſon coldly of your greeuances:
Or elſe depart, here all eies gaze on vs.
Mens eyes were made to looke, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no mans pleaſure I.
Well peace be with you ſir, here comes my man.
But Ile be hang'd ſir if he weare your Liuery.
Marry go before to field, heele be your follower,
Your worſhip in that ſenſe, may call him man.
Romeo, the loue I beare thee, can affoord
No better terme then this: Thou art a Villaine.
Tibalt, the reaſon that I haue to loue thee,
Doth much excuſe the appertaining rage
To ſuch a greeting: Villaine am I none;
Therefore farewell, I ſee thou know'ſt me not.
Boy, this ſhall not excuſe the iniuries
That thou haſt done me, therefore turne and draw.
I do proteſt I neuer iniur'd thee,
But lou'd thee better then thou can'ſt deuiſe:
Till thou ſhalt know the reaſon of my loue,
And ſo good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearely as my owne, be ſatisfied.
O calme, diſhonourable, vile ſubmiſſion:
Alla stucatho carries it away.
Tybalt, you Rat-catcher, will you walke?
What woulds thou haue with me?
Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine liues, that I meane to make bold withall, and as you ſhall vſe me hereafter dry beate the reſt of the eight. Will you pluck your Sword out of his Pilcher by the eares? Make haſt, leaſt mine be about your eares ere it be out.
I am for you.
Gentle Mercutio, put thy Rapier vp.
Come ſir, your Paſſado.
Draw Benuolio, beat downe their weapons:
Gentlemen, for ſhame forbeare this outrage,
Tibalt, Mercutio, the Prince expreſly hath
Forbidden bandying in Verona ſtreetes.
Hold Tybalt, good Mercutio.
I am hurt.
A plague a both the Houſes, I am ſped:
Is he gone and hath nothing?
What art thou hurt?
I, I, a ſcratch, a ſcratch, marry 'tis inough,
Where is my Page? go Villaine fetch a Surgeon.
Courage man, the hurt cannot be much.
No: 'tis not ſo deepe as a well, nor ſo wide as a Church doore, but 'tis inough, 'twill ſerue: aske for me to morrow, and you ſhall find me a graue man. I am pepper'd I warrant, for this world: a plague a both your houſes. What, a Dog, a Rat, a Mouſe, a Cat to ſcratch a man to death: a Braggart, a Rogue, a Villaine, that fights by the booke of Arithmeticke, why the deu'le came you betweene vs? I was hurt vnder your arme.
I thought all for the beſt.
Helpe me into ſome houſe Benuolio,
Or I ſhall faint: a plague a both your houſes.
They haue made wormes meat of me,
I haue it, and ſoundly to your Houſes.
This Gentleman the Princes neere Alie,
My very Friend hath got his mortall hurt
In my behalfe, my reputation ſtain'd
With Tibalts ſlaunder, Tybalt that an houre
Hath beene my Cozin: O Sweet Iuliet,
Thy Beauty hath made me Effeminate,
And in my temper ſoftned Valours ſteele.
O Romeo, Romeo, braue Mercutio's is dead,
That Gallant ſpirit hath aſpir'd the Cloudes,
Which too vntimely here did ſcorne the earth.
This daies blacke Fate, on mo daies doth depend,
This but begins, the wo others muſt end.
Here comes the Furious Tybalt backe againe.
He gon in triumph, and Mercutio ſlaine?
Away to heauen reſpectiue Lenitie,
And fire and Fury, be my conduct now.
Now Tybalt take the Villaine backe againe
That late thou gau'ſt me, for Mercutios ſoule
Is but a little way aboue our heads,
Staying for thine to keepe him companie:
Either thou or I, or both, muſt goe with him.
Thou wretched Boy that didſt conſort him here,
Shalt with him hence.
This ſhall determine that.
Romeo, away be gone:
The Citizens are vp, and Tybalt ſlaine,
Stand not amaz'd, the Prince will Doome thee death
If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away.
O! I am Fortunes foole.
Why doſt thou ſtay?
Which way ran he that kild Mercutio?
Tibalt that Murtherer, which way ran he?
There lies that Tybalt.
Vp ſir go with me:
I charge thee in the Princes names obey.
Where are the vile beginners of this Fray?
O Noble Prince, I can diſcouer all
The vnluckie Mannage of this fatall brall:
There lies the man ſlaine by young Romeo,
That ſlew thy kinſman braue Mercutio.
Tybalt, my Cozin? O my Brothers Child,
O Prince, O Cozin, Husband, O the blood is ſpild
Of my deare kinſman. Prince as thou art true,
For bloud of ours, ſhed bloud of Mountague.
O Cozin, Cozin.
Benuolio, who began this Fray?
Tybalt here ſlaine, whom Romeo's hand did ſlay,
Romeo that ſpoke him faire, bid him bethinke
How nice the Quarrell was, and vrg'd withall
Your high diſpleaſure: all this vttered,
With gentle breath, calme looke, knees humbly bow'd
Could not take truce with the vnruly ſpleene
Of Tybalts deafe to peace, but that he Tilts
With Peircing ſteele at bold Mercutio's breaſt,
Who all as hot, turnes deadly point to point,
And with a Martiall ſcorne, with one hand beates
Cold death aſide, and with the other ſends
It back to Tybalt, whoſe dexterity
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
Hold Friends, Friends part, and ſwifter then his tongue,
His aged arme beats downe their fatall points,
And twixt them ruſhes, vnderneath whoſe arme,
An enuious thruſt from Tybalt, hit the life
Of ſtout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But by and by comes backe to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertained Reuenge,
And too't they goe like lightning, for ere I
Could draw to part them, was ſtout Tybalt ſlaine:
And as he fell, did Romeo turne and flie:
This is the truth, or let Benuolio die.
He is a kinſman to the Mountague,
Affection makes him falſe, he ſpeakes not true
Some twenty of them fought in this blacke ſtrife,
And all thoſe twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for Iuſtice, which thou Prince muſt giue:
Romeo ſlew Tybalt, Romeo muſt not liue.
Romeo ſlew him, he ſlew Mercutio,
Who now the price of his deare blood doth owe.
Not Romeo Prince, he was Mercutios Friend,
His fault concludes, but what the law ſhould end,
The life of Tybalt.
And for that offence,
Immediately we doe exile him hence:
I haue an intereſt in your hearts proceeding:
My bloud for your rude brawles doth lie a bleeding.
But Ile Amerce you with ſo ſtrong a fine,
That you ſhall all repent the loſſe of mine.
It will be deafe to pleading and excuſes,
Nor teares, nor prayers ſhall purchaſe our abuſes.
Therefore vſe none, let Romeo hence in haſt,
Elſe when he is found, that houre is his laſt.
Beare hence this body, and attend our will:
Mercy not Murders, pardoning thoſe that kill.
Gallop apace, you fiery footed fleedes,
Towards Phaebus lodging, ſuch a Wagoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the weſt,
And bring in Cloudie night immediately.
Spred thy cloſe Curtaine Loue-performing night,
That run-awayes eyes may wincke and Romeo
Leape to theſe armes, vntalkt of and vnſeene,
Louers can ſee to doe their Amorous rights,
And by their owne Beauties: or if Loue be blind,
It beſt agrees with night: come ciuill night,
Thou ſober ſuted Matron all in blacke,
And learne me how to looſe a winning match,
Plaid for a paire of ſtainleſſe Maidenhoods,
Hood my vnman'd blood bayting in my Cheekes,
With thy Blacke mantle, till ſtrange Loue grow bold,
Thinke true Loue acted ſimple modeſtie:
Come night, come Romeo, come thou day in night,
For thou wilt lie vpon the wings of night
Whiter then new Snow vpon a Rauens backe:
Come gentle night, come louing blackebrow'd night.
Giue me my Romeo, and when I ſhall die,
Take him and cut him out in little ſtarres,
And he will make the Face of heauen ſo fine,
That all the world will be in Loue with night,
And pay no worſhip to the Gariſh Sun.
O I haue bought the Manſion of a Loue,
But not poſſeſt it, and though I am ſold,
Not yet enioy'd, ſo tedious is this day,
As is the night before ſome Feſtiuall,
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not weare them, O here comes my Nurſe:
And ſhe brings newes and euery tongue that ſpeaks
But Romeos, name, ſpeakes heauenly eloquence:
Now Nurſe, what newes? what haſt thou there?
The Cords that Romeo bid thee fetch?
I, I, the Cords.
Ay me, what newes?
Why doſt thou wring thy hands.
A welady, hee's dead, hee's dead,
We are vndone Lady, we are vndone.
Alacke the day, hee's gone, hee's kil'd, he's dead.
Can heauen be ſo enuious?
Romeo can,
Though heauen cannot. O Romeo, Romeo.
Who euer would haue thought it Romeo.
What diuell art thou,
That doſt torment me thus?
This torture ſhould be roar'd in diſmall hell,
Hath Romeo ſlaine himſelfe? ſay thou but I,
And that bare vowell I ſhall poyſon more
Then the death-darting eye of Cockatrice,
I am not I, if there be ſuch an I.
Or thoſe eyes ſhot, that makes thee anſwere I:
If he be ſlaine ſay I, or if not, no.
Briefe, ſounds, determine of my weale or wo.
I ſaw the wound, I ſaw it with mine eyes,
God ſaue the marke, here on his manly breſt,
A pitteous Coarſe, a bloody piteous Coarſe:
Pale, pale as aſhes, all bedawb'd in blood,
All in gore blood, I ſounded at the ſight-
O breake my heart,
Poore Banckrout breake at once,
To priſon eyes, nere looke on libertie.
Vile earth to earth reſigne, end motion here,
And thou and Romeo preſſe on heauie beere.
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the beſt Friend I had:
O curteous Tybalt honeſt Gentleman,
That euer I ſhould liue to ſee thee dead.
What ſtorme is this that blowes ſo contrarie?
Is Romeo ſlaughtred? and is Tybalt dead?
My deareſt Cozen, and my dearer Lord:
Then dreadfull Trumpet ſound the generall doome,
For who is liuing, if thoſe two are gone:
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo baniſhed,
Romeo that kil'd him, he is baniſhed.
O God!
Did Rom'os hand ſhed Tybalts blood
It did, it did, alas the day, it did.
O Serpent heart, hid with a flowring face.
Did euer Dragon keepe ſo faire a Caue?
Beautifull Tyrant, fiend Angelicall:
Rauenous Doue-feather'd Rauen,
Woluiſh-rauening Lambe,
Diſpiſed ſubſtance of Diuineſt ſhow:
Iuſt oppoſite to what thou iuſtly ſeem'ſt,
A dimne Saint, an Honourable Villaine:
O Nature! what had'ſt thou to doe in hell,
When thou did'ſt bower the ſpirit of a fiend
In mortall paradiſe of ſuch ſweet fleſh?
Was euer booke containing ſuch vile matter
So fairely bound? O that deceit ſhould dwell
In ſuch a gorgeous Pallace.
There's no truſt, no faith, no honeſtie in men,
All periu'rd, all forſworne, all naught, all diſſemblers,
Ah where's my man? giue me ſome Aqua-vitae?
Theſe griefes, theſe woes, theſe ſorrowes make me old:
Shame come to Romeo.
Bliſter'd be thy tongue
For ſuch a wiſh, he was not borne to ſhame:
Vpon his brow ſhame is aſham'd to ſit;
For 'tis a throane where Honour may be Grown'd
Sole Monarch of the vniuerſall earth:
O what a beaſt was I to chide him?
Will you ſpeake well of him,
That kil'd your Cozen?
Shall I ſpeake ill of him that is my husband?
Ah poore my Lord, what tongue ſhall ſmooth thy name,
When I thy three houres wife haue mangled it.
But wherefore Villaine did'ſt thou kill my Cozin?
That Villaine Cozin would haue kil'd my husband:
Backe fooliſh teares, backe to your natiue ſpring,
Your tributarie drops belong to woe,
Which you miſtaking offer vp to ioy:
My husband liues that Tibalt would haue ſlaine,
And Tibalt dead that would haue ſlaine my husband:
All this is comfort, wherefore weepe I then?
Some words there was worſer then Tybalts death
That murdered me, I would forget it feine,
But oh, it preſſes to my memory,
Like damned guilty deedes to ſinners minds,
Tybalt is dead and Romeo baniſhed:
That baniſhed, that one word baniſhed,
Hath ſlaine ten thouſand Tibalts: Tibalts death
Was woe inough if it had ended there:
Or if ſower woe delights in fellowſhip,
And needly will be rankt with other griefes,
Why followed not when ſhe ſaid Tibalts dead,
Thy Father or thy Mother, nay or both,
Which moderne lamentation might haue mou'd.
But which a rere-ward following Tybalts death
Romeo is baniſhed to ſpeake that word,
Is Father, Mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Iuliet,
All ſlaine, all dead: Romeo is baniſhed,
There is no end, no limit, meaſure, bound,
In that words death, no words can that woe ſound.
Where is my Father and my Mother Nurſe?
Weeping and wailing ouer Tybalts Coarſe,
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Waſh they his wounds with tears: mine ſhal be ſpent
When theirs are drie for Romeo's baniſhment.
Take vp thoſe Cordes, poore ropes you are beguil'd,
Both you and I for Romeo is exild:
He made you for a high-way to my bed,
But I a Maid, die Maiden widowed.
Come Cord, come Nurſe, Ile to my wedding bed,
And death not Romeo, take my Maiden head.
Hie to your Chamber, Ile find Romeo
To comfort you, I wot well where he is:
Harke ye your Romeo will be heere at night,
Ile to him, he is hid at Lawrence Cell.
O find him, giue this Ring to my true Knight,
And bid him come, to take his laſt farewell.
Romeo come forth,
Come forth thou fearfull man,
Affliction is enamor'd of thy parts:
And thou art wedded to calamitie.
Father what newes?
What is the Princes Doome?
What ſorrow craues acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?
Too familiar
Is my deare Sonne with ſuch ſowre Company:
I bring thee tydings of the Princes Doome.
What leſſe then Doomeſday,
Is the Princes Doome?
A gentler iudgement vaniſht from his lips,
Not bodies death, but bodies baniſhment.
Ha, baniſhment? be mercifull, ſay death:
For exile hath more terror in his looke,
Much more then death: do not ſay baniſhment.
Here from Verona art thou baniſhed:
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
There is no world without Ʋerona walles,
But Purgatorie, Torture, hell it ſelfe:
Hence baniſhed, is baniſht from the world,
And worlds exile is death. Then baniſhed,
Is death, miſtearm'd, calling death baniſhed,
Thou cut'ſt my head off with a golden Axe,
And ſmileſt vpon the ſtroke that murders me.
O deadly ſin, O rude vnthankefulneſſe!
Thy falt our Law calles death, but the kind Prince
Taking thy part, hath ruſht aſide the Law,
And turn'd that blacke word death, to baniſhment.
This is deare mercy, and thou ſeeſt it not.
'Tis Torture and not mercy, heauen is here
Where Iuliet liues, and euery Cat and Dog,
And little Mouſe, euery vnworthy thing
Liue here in Heauen and may looke on her,
But Romeo may not. More Validitie,
More Honourable ſtate, more Courtſhip liues
In carrion Flies, then Romeo: they may ſeaze
On the white wonder of deare Iuliets hand.
And ſteale immortall bleſſing from her lips,
Who euen in pure and veſtall modeſtie
Still bluſh, as thinking their owne kiſſes ſin.
This may Flies doe, when I from this muſt flie,
And ſaiſt thou yet, that exile is not death?
But Romeo may not, hee is baniſhed.
Had'ſt thou no poyſon mixt, no ſharpe ground knife,
No ſudden meane of death, though nere ſo meane,
But baniſhed to kill me? Baniſhed?
O Frier, the damned vſe that word in hell:
Howlings attends it, how haſt thou the hart
Being a Diuine, a Ghoſtly Confeſſor,
A Sin-Abſoluer, and my Friend profeſt:
To mangle me with that word, baniſhed?
Then fond Mad man, heare me ſpeake.
O thou wilt ſpeake againe of baniſhment.
Ile giue thee Armour to keepe off that word,
Aduerſities ſweete milke, Philoſophie,
To comfort thee, though thou art baniſhed.
Yet baniſhed? hang vp Philoſophie:
Vnleſſe Philoſohpie can make a Iuliet,
Diſplant a Towne, reuerſe a Princes Doome,
It helpes not, it preuailes not, talke no more.
O then I ſee, that Mad men haue no eares.
How ſhould they,
When wiſemen haue no eyes?
Let me diſpaire with thee of thy eſtate,
Thou can'ſt not ſpeake of that yu doſt not feele,
Wert thou as young as Iuliet my Loue:
An houre but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me baniſhed,
Then mighteſt thou ſpeake,
Then mighteſt thou teare thy hayre,
And fall vpon the ground as I doe now,
Taking the meaſure of an vnmade graue.
Ariſe one knockes,
Good Romeo hide thy ſelfe.
Not I,
Vnleſſe the breath of Hartſicke groanes
Miſt-like infold me from the ſearch of eyes.
Harke how they knocke:
(Who's there) Romeo ariſe,
Thou wilt be taken, ſtay a while, ſtand vp:
Run to my ſtudy: by and by, Gods will
What ſimpleneſſe is this: I come, I come.
Who knocks ſo hard?
Whence come you? what's your will?
Let me come in,
And you ſhall know my errand:
I come from Lady Iuliet.
Welcome then.
O holy Frier, O tell me holy Frier,
Where's my Ladies Lord? where's Romeo?
There on the ground,
With his owne teares made drunke.
O he is euen in my Miſtreſſe caſe,
Iuſt in her caſe. O wofull ſimpathy:
Pittious predicament, euen ſo lies ſhe,
Blubbring and weeping, weeping and blubbring,
Stand vp, ſtand vp, ſtand and you be a man,
For Iuliets ſake, for her ſake riſe and ſtand:
Why ſhould you fall into ſo deepe an O.
Nurſe.
Ah ſir, ah ſir, deaths the end of all.
Speak'ſt thou of Iuliet? how is it with her?
Doth not ſhe thinke me an old Murtherer,
Now I haue ſtain'd the Childhood of our ioy,
With blood remoued, but little from her owne?
Where is ſhe? and how doth ſhe? and what ſayes
My conceal'd Lady to our conceal'd Loue?
Oh ſhe ſayes nothing ſir, but weeps and weeps,
And now fals on her bed, and then ſtarts vp,
And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then downe falls againe.
As if that name ſhot from the dead leuell of a Gun,
Did murder her, as that names curſed hand
Murdred her kinſman. Oh tell me Frier, tell me,
In what vile part of this Anatomie
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may ſacke
The hatefull Manſion.
Hold thy deſperate hand:
Art thou a man? thy forme cries out thou art:
Thy teares are womaniſh, thy wild acts denote
The vnreaſonable Furie of a beaſt.
Vnſeemely woman, in a ſeeming man,
And ill beſeeming beaſt in ſeeming both,
Thou haſt amaz'd me. By my holy order,
I thought thy diſpoſition better temper'd.
Haſt thou ſlaine Tybalt? wilt thou ſlay thy ſelfe?
And ſlay thy Lady, that in thy life lies,
By doing damned hate vpon thy ſelfe?
Why rayl'ſt thou on thy birth? the heauen and earth?
Since birth, and heauen and earth, all three do meete
In thee at once, which thou at once would'ſt looſe.
Fie, fie, thou ſham'ſt thy ſhape, thy loue, thy wit,
Which like a Vſurer abound'ſt in all:
And vſeſt none in that true vſe indeed,
Which ſhould bedecke thy ſhape, thy loue, thy wit:
Thy Noble ſhape, is but a forme of waxe,
Digreſſing from the Valour of a man,
Thy deare Loue ſworne but hollow periurie,
Killing that Loue which thou haſt vow'd to cheriſh.
Thy wit, that Ornament, to ſhape and Loue,
Miſhapen in the conduct of them both:
Like powder in a skilleſſe Souldiers flaske,
Is ſet a fire by thine owne ignorance,
And thou diſmembred with thine owne defence.
What, rowſe thee man, thy Iuliet is aliue,
For whoſe deare ſake thou waſt but lately dead.
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou ſlew'ſt Tybalt, there art thou happie.
The law that threatned death became thy Friend,
And turn'd it to exile, there art thou happy.
A packe or bleſſing light vpon thy backe,
Happineſſe Courts thee in her beſt array,
But like a miſhaped and ſullen wench,
Thou putteſt vp thy Fortune and thy Loue:
Take heed, take heed, for ſuch die miſerable.
Goe get thee to thy Loue as was decreed,
Aſcend her Chamber, hence and comfort her:
But looke thou ſtay not till the watch be ſet,
For then thou canſt not paſſe to Mantua,
Where thou ſhalt liue till we can finde a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your Friends,
Beg pardon of thy Prince, and call thee backe,
With twenty hundred thouſand times more ioy
Then thou went'ſt forth in lamentation.
Goe before Nurſe, commend me to thy Lady,
And bid her haſten all the houſe to bed,
Which heauy ſorrow makes them apt vnto.
Romeo is comming.
O Lord, I could haue ſtaid here all night,
To heare good counſell: oh what learning is!
My Lord Ile tell my Lady you will come.
Do ſo, and bid my Sweete prepare to chide.
Heere ſir, a Ring ſhe bid me giue you ſir:
Hie you, make haſt, for it growes very late.
How well my comfort is reuiu'd by this.
Go hence,
Goodnight, and here ſtands all your ſtate:
Either be gone before the watch be ſet,
Or by the breake of day diſguis'd from hence,
Soiourne in Mantua, Ile find out your man,
And he ſhall ſignifie from time to time,
Euery good hap to you, that chaunces heere:
Giue me thy hand, 'tis late, farewell, goodnight.
But that a ioy paſt ioy, calls out on me,
It were a griefe, ſo briefe to part with thee:
Farewell.
Things haue falne ou ſir ſo vnluckily,
That we haue had no time to moue our Daughter:
Looke you, ſhe Lou'd her kinſman Tybalt dearely,
And ſo did I. Well, we were borne to die.
'Tis very late, ſhe'l not come downe to night:
I promiſe you, but for your company,
I would haue bin a bed an houre ago.
Theſe times of wo, affoord no times to wooe:
Madam goodnight, commend me to your Daughter.
I will, and know her mind early to morrow,
To night, ſhe is mewed vp to her heauineſſe.
Sir Paris, I will make a deſperate tender
Of my Childes loue: I thinke ſhe will be rul'd
In all reſpects by me: nay more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed,
Acquaint her here, of my Sonne Paris Loue,
And bid her, marke you me, on Wendſday next,
But ſoft, what day is this?
Monday my Lord.
Monday, ha ha: well Wendſday is too ſoone,
A Thurſday let it be: a Thurſday tell her,
She ſhall be married to this Noble Earle:
Will you be ready? do you like this haſt?
Weele keepe no great adoe, a Friend or two,
For harke you, Tybalt being ſlaine ſo late,
It may be thought we held him careleſly,
Being our kinſman, if we reuell much:
Therefore weele haue ſome halfe a dozen Friends,
And there an end. But what ſay you to Thurſday?
My Lord,
I would that Thurſday were to morrow.
Well, get you gone, a Thurſday, be it then:
Go you to Iuliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her wife, againſt this wedding day.
Farewell my Lord, light to my Chamber hoa,
Afore me, it is ſo late, that we may call ir early by and by,
Goodnight.
Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet neere day:
It was the Nightingale, and not the Larke,
That pier'ſt the fearefull hollow of thine eare,
Nightly ſhe ſings on yond Pomgranet tree,
Beleeue me Loue, it was the Nightingale.
It was the Larke the Herauld of the Morne:
No Nightingale: looke Loue what enuious ſtreakes
Do lace the ſeuering Cloudes in yonder Eaſt:
Nights Candles are burnt out, and Iocond day
Stands tip to on the miſtie Mountaines tops,
I muſt be gone and liue, or ſtay and die.
Yond light is not daylight, I know it I:
It is ſome Meteor that the Sun exhales,
To be to thee this night a Torch-bearer,
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore ſtay yet, thou need'ſt not to be gone,
Let me be tane, let me be put to death,
I am content, ſo thou wilt haue it ſo.
Ile ſay you gray is not the mornings eye,
'Tis but the pale reflexe of Cinthias brow.
Nor that is not Larke whoſe noates do beate
The vaulty heauen ſo high aboue our heads,
I haue more care to ſtay, then will to go:
Come death and welcome, Iuliet wills it ſo.
How iſt my ſoule, lets talke, it is not day.
It is, it is, hie hence be gone away:
It is the Larke that ſings ſo out of tune,
Straining harſh Diſcords, and vnpleaſing Sharpes.
Some ſay the Larke makes ſweete Diuiſion;
This doth not ſo: for ſhe diuideth vs.
Some ſay, the Larke and loathed Toad change eyes,
O now I would they had chang'd voyces too:
Since arme from arme that voyce doth vs affray,
Hunting thee hence, with Huntſ-vp to the day,
O now be gone, more light and it light growes.
More light & light, more darke & darke our woes.
Madam.
Nurſe.
Your Lady Mother is comming to your chamber,
The day is broke, be wary, looke about.
Then window let day in, and let life out.
Farewell, farewell, one kiſſe and Ile deſcend.
Art thou gone ſo? Loue, Lord, ay Husband, Friend,
I muſt heare from thee euery day in the houre,
For in a minute there are many dayes,
O by this count I ſhall be much in yeares,
Ere I againe behold my Romeo.
Farewell:
I will omit no oportunitie,
That may conuey my greetings Loue, to thee.
O thinkeſt thou we ſhall euer meet againe?
I doubt it not, and all theſe woes ſhall ſerue
For ſweet diſcourſes in our time to come.
O God! I haue an ill Diuining ſoule,
Me thinkes I ſee thee now, thou art ſo lowe,
As one dead in the bottome of a Tombe,
Either my eye-ſight failes, or thou look'ſt pale.
And truſt me Loue, in my eye ſo do you:
Drie ſorrow drinkes our blood. Adue, adue.
O Fortune, Fortune, all men call thee fickle,
If thou art fickle, what doſt thou with him
That is renown'd for faith? be fickle Fortune:
For then I hope thou wilt not keepe him long,
But ſend him backe.
Ho Daughter, are you vp?
Who iſt that calls? Is it my Lady Mother.
Is ſhe not downe ſo late, or vp ſo early?
What vnaccuſtom'd cauſe procures her hither?
Why how now Iuliet?
Madam I am not well.
Euermore weeping for your Cozins death?
What wilt thou waſh him from his graue with teares?
And if thou could'ſt, thou could'ſt not make him liue:
Therefore haue done, ſome griefe ſhewes much of Loue,
But much of griefe, ſhewes ſtill ſome want of wit.
Yet let me weepe, for ſuch a feeling loſſe.
So ſhall you feele the loſſe, but not the Friend
Which you weepe for.
Feeling ſo the loſſe,
I cannot chuſe but euer weepe the Friend.
Well Girle, thou weep'ſt not ſo much for his death,
As that the Villaine liues which ſlaughter'd him.
What Villaine, Madam?
That ſame Villaine Romeo.
Villaine and he, be many Miles aſſunder:
God pardon, I doe with all my heart:
And yet no man like he, doth grieue my heart.
That is becauſe the Traitor liues.
I Madam from the reach of theſe my hands:
Would none but I might venge my Cozins death.
We will haue vengeance for it, feare thou not.
Then weepe no more, Ile ſend to one in Mantua,
Where that ſame baniſht Run-agte doth liue,
Shall giue him ſuch an vnaccuſtom'd dram,
That he ſhall ſoone keepe Tybalt company:
And then I hope thou wilt be ſatisfied.
Indeed I neuer ſhall be ſatisfied
With Romeo, till I behold him. Dead
Is my poore heart ſo for a kinſman vext:
Madam if you could find out but a man
To beare a poyſon, I would temper it;
That Romeo ſhould vpon receit thereof,
Soone ſleepe in quiet. O how my heart abhors
To heare him nam'd, and cannot come to him,
To wreake the Loue I bore my Cozin,
Vpon his body that hath ſlaughter'd him.
Find thou the meanes, and Ile find ſuch a man.
But now Ile tell thee ioyfull tidings Gyrle.
And ioy comes well, in ſuch a needy time,
What are they, beſeech your Ladyſhip?
Well, well, thou haſt a carefull Father Child?
One who to put thee from thy heauineſſe,
Hath ſorted out a ſudden day of ioy,
That thou expects not, nor I lookt not for.
Madam in happy time, what day is this?
Marry my Child, early next Thurſday morne,
The gallant, young, and Noble Gentleman,
The Countie Paris at Saint Peters Church,
Shall happily make thee a ioyfull Bride.
Now by Saint Peters Church, and Peter too,
He ſhall not make me there a ioyfull Bride.
I wonder at this haſt, that I muſt wed
Ere he that ſhould be Husband comes to woe:
I pray you tell my Lord and Father Madam,
I will not marrie yet, and when I doe, I ſweare
It ſhall be Romeo, whom you know I hate
Rather then Paris. Theſe are newes indeed.
Here comes your Father, tell him ſo your ſelfe,
And ſee how he will take it at your hands.
When the Sun ſets, the earth doth drizzle daew
But for the Sunſet of my Brothers Sonne,
It raines downright.
How now? A Conduit Gyrle, what ſtill in teares?
Euermore ſhowring in one little body?
Thou counterfaits a Barke, a Sea, a Wind:
For ſtill thy eyes, which I may call the Sea,
Do ebbe and flow with teares, the Barke thy body is
Sayling in this falt floud, the windes thy ſighes,
Who raging with the teares and they with them,
Without a ſudden calme will ouer ſet
Thy tempeſt toſſed body. How now wife?
Haue you deliuered to her our decree?
I ſir:
But ſhe will none, ſhe giues you thankes,
I would the foole were married to her graue.
Soft, take me with you, take me with you wife,
How, will ſhe none? doth ſhe not giue vs thanks?
Is ſhe not proud? doth ſhe not count her bleſt,
Vnworthy as ſhe is, that we haue wrought
So worthy a Gentleman, to be her Bridegroome
Not proud you haue,
But thankfull that you haue:
Proud can I neuer be of what I haue,
But thankfull euen for hate, that is meant Loue.
How now?
How now? Chopt Logicke? what is this?
Proud, and I thanke you: and I thanke you not.
Thanke me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine ioints 'gainſt Thurſday next,
To go with Paris to Saint Peters Church:
Or I will drag thee, on a Hurdle thither.
Out you greene ſickneſſe carrion, out you baggage,
You tallow face.
Fie, fie, what are you mad?
Good Father, I beſeech you on my knees
Heare me with patience, but to ſpeake a word.
Hang thee young baggage, diſobedient wretch,
I tell thee what, get thee to Church a Thurſday,
Or neuer after looke me in the face.
Speake not, reply not, do not anſwere me.
My fingers itch, wife: we ſcarce thought vs bleſt,
That God had lent vs but this onely Child,
But now I ſee this one is one too much,
And that we haue a curſe in hauing her:
Out on her Hilding.
God in heauen bleſſe her,
You are too blame my Lord to rate her ſo.
And why my Lady wiſedome? hold your tongue,
Good Prudence, ſmatter with your goſſip, go.
I ſpeake no treaſon,
Father, O Godigoden,
May not one ſpeake?
Peace you mumbling foole,
Vtter your grauitie ore a Goſſips bowles
For here we need it not.
You are too hot.
Gods bread, it makes me mad:
Day, night, houre, ride, time, worke, play,
Alone in companie, ſtill my care hath bin
To haue her matcht, and hauing now prouided
A Gentleman of Noble Parentage,
Of faire Demeanes, Youthfull, and Nobly Allied,
Stuft as they ſay with Honourable parts,
Proportion'd as ones thought would wiſh a man,
And then to haue a wretched puling foole,
A whining mammet, in her Fortunes tender,
To anſwer, Ile no wed, I cannot Loue:
I am too young, I pray you pardon me.
But, and you will not wed, Ile pardon you.
Graze where you will, you ſhall not houſe with me:
Looke too't, thinke on't, I do not vſe to ieſt.
Thurſday is neere, lay hand on heart, aduiſe,
And you be mine, Ile giue you to my Friend:
And you be not, hang, beg, ſtraue, die in the ſtreets,
For by my ſoule, Ile nere acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine ſhall neuer do thee good:
Truſt too't, bethinke you, Ile not be forſworne
Is there no pittie ſitting in the Cloudes,
That ſees into the bottome of my griefe?
O ſweet my Mother caſt me not away,
Delay this marriage, for a month, a weeke,
Or if you do not, make the Bridall bed
In that dim Monument where Tybalt lies.
Talke not to me, for Ile not ſpeake a word,
Do as thou wilt, for I haue done with thee.
O God!
O Nurſe, how ſhall this be preuented?
My Husband is on earth, my faith in heauen,
How ſhall that faith returne againe to earth,
Vnleſſe that Husband ſend it me from heauen,
By leauing earth? Comfort me, counſaile me:
Hlacke, alacke▪ that heauen ſhould practiſe ſtratagems
Vpon ſo ſoft a ſubiect as my ſelfe.
What ſaiſt thou? haſt thou not a word of ioy?
Some comfort Nurſe.
Faith here it is,
Romeo is baniſhed, and all the world to nothing,
That he dares nere come backe to challenge you:
Or if he do, it needs muſt be by ſtealth.
Then ſince the caſe ſo ſtands as now it doth,
I thinke it beſt you married with the Countie,
O hee's a Louely Gentleman:
Romeos a diſh-clout to him: an Eagle Madam
Hath not ſo greene, ſo quicke, ſo faire an eye
As Paris hath, beſhrow my very heart,
I thinke you are happy in this ſecond match,
For it excels your firſt: or if it did not,
Your firſt is dead, or 'twere as good he were,
As liuing here and you no vſe of him.
Speakeſt thou from thy heart?
And from my ſoule too,
Or elſe beſhrew them both.
Amen.
What?
Well, thou haſt comforted me marue'lous much,
Go in, and tell my Lady I am gone,
Hauing diſpleaſ'd my Father, to Lawrence Cell,
To make confeſſion, and to be abſolu'd.
Marrie I will, and this is wiſely done.
Auncient damnation, O moſt wicked fiend!
It is more ſin to wiſh me thus forſworne,
Or to diſpraiſe my Lord with that ſame tongue
Which ſhe hath praiſ'd him with aboue compare,
So many thouſand times? Go Counſellor,
Thou and my boſome henchforth ſhall be twaine:
Ile to the Frier to know his remedie,
If all elſe faile, my ſelfe haue power to die.
On Thurſday ſir? the time is very ſhort.
My Father Capulet will haue it ſo,
And I am nothing ſlow to ſlack his haſt.
You ſay you do not know the Ladies mind?
Vneuen is the courſe, I like it not.
Immoderately ſhe weepes for Tybalis death,
And therfore haue I little talke of Loue,
For Venus ſmiles not in a houſe of teares.
Now ſir, her Father counts it dangerous
That ſhe doth giue her ſorrow ſo much ſway:
And in his wiſedome, haſts our marriage,
To ſtop the inundation of her teares,
Which too much minded by her ſelfe alone,
May be put from her by ſocietie.
Now doe you know the reaſon of this haſt?
I would I knew not why it ſhould be ſlow'd.
Looke ſir, here comes the Lady towards my Cell.
Happily met, my Lady and my wife.
That may be ſir, when I may be a wife.
That may be, muſt be Loue, on Thurſday next.
What muſt be ſhall be.
That's a certaine text.
Come you to make confeſſion to this Father?
To anſwere that, I ſhould confeſſe to you.
Do not denie to him, that you Loue me.
I will confeſſe to you that I Loue him.
So will ye, I am ſure that you Loue me.
If I do ſo, it will be of more price,
Benig ſpoke behind your backe, then to your face.
Poore ſoule, thy face is much abuſ'd with teares.
The teares haue got ſmall victorie by that:
For it was bad inough before their ſpight.
Thou wrong'ſt it more then teares with that report.
That is no ſlaunder ſir, which is a truth,
And what I ſpake, I ſpake it to thy face.
Thy face is mine, and thou haſt ſlaundred it.
It may be ſo, for it is not mine owne.
Are you at leiſure, Holy Father now,
Or ſhall I come to you at euening Maſſe?
My leiſure ſerues me penſiue daughter now.
My Lord you muſt intreat the time alone.
Godſheild: I ſhould diſturbe Deuotion,
Iuliet, on Thurſday early will I rowſe yee,
Till then adue, and keepe this holy kiſſe.
O ſhut the doore, and when thou haſt done ſo,
Come weepe with me, paſt hope, paſt care, paſt helpe.
O Iuliet, I alreadie know thy griefe,
It ſtreames me paſt the compaſſe of my wits:
I heare thou muſt and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thurſday next be married to this Countie.
Tell me not Frier that thou heareſt of this,
Vnleſſe thou tell me how I may preuent it:
If in thy wiſedome, thou canſt giue no helpe,
Do thou but call my reſolution wiſe,
And with' his knife, Ile helpe it preſently.
God ioyn'd my heart, and Romeos, thou our hands,
And ere this hand by thee to Romeo ſeal'd:
Shall be the Labell to another Deede,
Or my true heart with trecherous reuolt,
Turne to another, this ſhall ſlay them both:
Therefore out of thy long expetien'ſt time,
Giue me ſome preſent counſell, or behold
Twixt my extreames and me, this bloody knife
Shall play the vmpeere, arbitrating that,
Which the commiſſion of thy yeares and art,
Could to no iſſue of true honour bring:
Be not ſo long to ſpeak, I long to die,
If what thou ſpeak'ſt, ſpeake not of remedy.
Hold Daughter, I doe ſpie a kind of hope,
Which craues as deſperate an execution,
As that is deſperate which we would preuent.
If rather then to marrie Countie Paris
Thou haſt the ſtrength of will to ſtay thy ſelfe,
Then is it likely thou wilt vndertake
A thinglike death to chide away this ſhame,
That coap'ſt with death himſelfe, to ſcape fro it:
And if thou dar'ſt, Ile giue thee remedie.
Oh bid me leape, rather then marrie Paris,
From of the Battlements of any Tower,
Or walke in theeuiſh waies, or bid me lurke
Where Serpents are: chaine me with roaring Beares
Or hide me nightly in a Charnell houſe,
Orecouered quite with dead mens ratling bones,
With reckie ſhankes and yellow chappels ſculls:
Or bid me go into a new made graue,
And hide me with a dead man in his graue,
Things that to heare them told, haue made me tremble,
And I will doe it without feare or doubt,
To liue an vnſtained wife to my ſweet Loue.
Hold then: goe home, be merrie▪ giue conſent,
To marrie Paris: wenſday is to morrow,
To morrow night looke that thou lie alone,
Let not thy Nurſe lie with thee in thy Chamber:
Take thou this Violl being then in bed,
And this diſtilling liquor drinke thou off,
When preſently through all thy veines ſhall run,
A cold and drowſie humour: for no pulſe
Shall keepe his natiue progreſſe, but ſurceaſe:
No warmth, no breath ſhall teſtifie thou liueſt,
The Roſes in thy lips and cheekes ſhall fade
To many aſhes, the eyes windowes fall
Like death when he ſhut vp the day of life:
Each part depriu'd of ſupple gouernment,
Shall ſtiffe and ſtarke, and cold appeare like death,
And in this borrowed likeneſſe of ſhrunke death
Thou ſhalt continue two and forty houres,
And then awake, as from a pleaſant ſleepe.
Now when the Bridegroome in the morning comes,
To rowſe thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:
Then as the manner of our country is,
In thy beſt Robes vncouer'd on the Beere,
Be borne to buriall in thy kindreds graue:
Thou ſhalt be borne to that ſame ancient vault,
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie,
In the meane time againſt thou ſhalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my Letters know our drift,
And hither ſhall he come, and that very night
Shall Romeo beare thee hence to Mantua.
And this ſhall free thee from this preſent ſhame,
If no inconſtant toy nor womaniſh feare,
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
Giue me, giue me, O tell not me ofcare.
Hold get you gone, be ſtrong and proſperous:
In this reſolue, Ile ſend a Frier with ſpeed
To Mantua with my Letters to thy Lord.
Loue giue me ſtrength,
And ſtrength ſhall helpe afford:
Farewell deare father.
So many gueſts inuite as here are writ,
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning Cookes.
You ſhall haue none ill ſir, for Ile trie if they can licke their fingers.
How canſt thou trie them ſo?
Marrie ſir, 'tis an ill Cooke that cannot licke his owne fingers: therefore he that cannot licke his fingers goes not with me.
Go be gone, we ſhall be much vnfurniſht for this time: what is my Daughter gone to Frier Lawrence?
I forſooth.
Well he may chance to do ſome good on her,
A peeuiſh ſelfe-wild harlotry it is.
See where ſhe comes from ſhrift
With merrie looke.
How now my headſtrong,
Where haue you bin gadding?
Where I haue learnt me to repent the ſin
Of diſobedient oppoſition:
To you and your beheſts, and am enioyn'd
By holy Lawrence, to fall proſtrate here,
To beg your pardon: pardon I beſeech you,
Henceforward I am euer rul'd by you.
Send for the Countie, goe tell him of this,
Ile haue this knot knit vp to morrow morning.
I met the youthfull Lord at Lawrence Cell,
And gaue him what becomed Loue I might,
Not ſtepping ore the bounds of modeſtie.
Why I am glad on't, this is well, ſtand vp,
This is as't ſhould be, let me ſee the County:
I marrie go I ſay, and fetch him hither.
Now afore God, this reueren'd holy Frier,
All our whole Cittie is much bound to him.
Nurſe will you goe with me into my Cloſet,
To helpe me ſort ſuch needfull ornaments,
As you thinke fit to furniſh me to morrow?
No not till Thurſday, there's time inough.
Go Nurſe, go with her,
Weele to Church to morrow.
We ſhall be ſhort in our prouiſion,
'Tis now neere night.
Tuſh, I will ſtirre about,
And all things ſhall be well, I warrant thee wife:
Go thou to Iuliet, helpe to deckevp her,
Ile not to bed to night, let me alone:
Ile play the huſwife for this once. What ho?
They are all forth, well I will walke my ſelfe
To Countie Paris, to prepare him vp
Againſt to morrow, my heart is wondrous light,
Since this ſame way-ward Gyrle is ſo reclaim'd.
I thoſe attires are beſt, but gentle Nurſe
I pray thee leaue me to my ſelfe to night:
For I haue need of many Oryſons,
To moue the heauens to ſmile vpon my ſtate,
Which well thou know'ſt, is croſſe and full of ſin.
What are you buſie ho? need you my help?
No Madam, we haue cul'd ſuch neceſſaries
As are behoouefull for our ſtate to morrow:
So pleaſe you, let me now be left alone;
And let the Nurſe this night ſit vp with you,
For I am ſure, you haue your hands full all,
In this ſo ſudden buſineſſe.
Goodnight.
Get thee to bed and reſt, for thou haſt need.
Farewell:
God knowes when we ſhall meete againe.
I haue a faint cold feare thrills through my veines,
That almoſt freezes vp the heate of fire:
Ile call them backe againe to comfort me.
Nurſe, what ſhould ſhe do here?
My diſmall Sceane, I needs muſt act alone:
Come Viall, what if this mixture do not worke at all?
Shall I be married then to morrow morning?
No, no, this ſhall forbid it. Lie thou there,
What if it be a poyſon which the Frier
Subtilly hath miniſtred to haue me dead,
Leaſt in this marriage he ſhould be diſhonour'd,
Becauſe he married me before to Romeo?
I feare it is, and yet me thinkes it ſhould not,
For he hath ſtill beene tried a holy man.
How, if when I am laid into the Tombe,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeeme me? There's a fearefull point:
Shall I not then be ſtifled in the Vault?
To whoſe foule mouth no health ſome ayre breaths in,
And there die ſtrangled ere my Romeo comes.
Or if I liue, is it not very like,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place,
As in a Vaulte, an ancient receptacle,
Where for theſe many hundred yeeres the bones
Of all my buried Aunceſtors are packt,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but greene in earth,
Lies feſtring in his ſhrow'd, where as they ſay,
At ſome houres in the night, Spirits reſort:
Alacke, alacke, is it not like that I
So early waking, what with loathſome ſmels,
And ſhrikes like Mandrakes torne out of the earth,
That liuing mortalls hearing them, run mad.
O if I walke, ſhall I not be diſtraught,
Inuironed with all theſe hidious feares,
And madly play with my forefathers ioynts?
And plucke the mangled Tybalt from his ſhrow'd?
And in this rage, with ſome great kinſmans bone,
As (with a club) daſh out my deſperate braines.
O looke, me thinks I ſee my Cozins Ghoſt,
Seeking out Romeo that did ſpit his body
Vpon my Rapiers point: ſtay Tybalt, ſtay;
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo, here's drinke: I drinke to thee.
Hold,
Take theſe keies, and fetch more ſpices Nurſe.
They call for Dates and Quinces in the Paſtrie.
Come, ſtir, ſtir, ſtir,
The ſecond Cocke hath Crow'd,
The Curphew Bell hath rung, 'tis three a clocke:
Looke to the bakte meates, good Angelica,
Spare not for coſt.
Go you Cot-queane, go,
Get you to bed, faith youle be ſicke to morrow
For this nights watching.
No not a whit: what? I haue watcht ere now
All night for leſſe cauſe, and nere beene ſicke.
I you haue bin a Mouſe-hunt in your time,
But I will watch you from ſuch watching now.
A iealous hood, a iealous hood,
Now fellow, what there?
Things for the Cooke ſir, but I know not what.
Make haſt, make haſt, ſirrah, fetch drier Logs.
Call Peter, he will ſhew thee where they are.
I haue a head ſir, that will find out logs,
And neuer trouble Peter for the matter.
Maſſe and well ſaid, a merrie horſon, ha,
Thou ſhalt be loggerhead; good Father, 'tis day.
The Countie will be here with Muſicke ſtraight,
For ſo he ſaid he would, I heare him neere,
Nurſe, wife, what ho? what Nurſe I ſay?
Go waken Iuliet, go and trim her vp,
Ile go and chat with Paris: hie, make haſt,
Make haſt, the Bridegroome, he is come already:
Make haſt I ſay.
Miſtris, what Miſtris? Iuliet? Faſt I warrant her ſhe.
Why Lambe, why Lady? fie you ſluggabed,
Why Loue I ſay? Madam, ſweet heart: why Bride?
What not a word? You take your peniworths now.
Sleepe for a weeke, for the next night I warrant
The Countie Paris hath ſet vp his reſt,
That you ſhall reſt but little, God forgiue me:
Marrie and Amen: how ſound is ſhe a ſleepe?
I muſt needs wake her: Madam, Madam, Madam,
I, let the Countie take you in your bed,
Heele fright you vp yfaith. Will it not be?
What dreſt, and in your clothes, and downe againe?
I muſt needs wake you: Lady, Lady, Lady?
Alas, alas, helpe, helpe, my Ladyes dead,
Oh weladay, that euer I was borne,
Some Aqua-vitae ho, my Lord, my Lady?
What noiſe is heere?
O lamentable day.
What is the matter?
Looke, looke, oh heauie day.
O me, O me, my Child, my onely life:
Reuiue, looke vp, or I will die with thee:
Helpe, helpe, call helpe.
For ſhame bring Iuliet forth, her Lord is come.
Shee's dead: deceaſt, ſhee's dead: alacke the day.
Alacke the day, ſhee's dead, ſhee's dead, ſhee's dead.
Ha? Let me ſee her: out alas ſhee's cold,
Her blood is ſetled and her ioynts are ſtiffe:
Life and theſe lips haue long bene ſep erated:
Death lies on her like an vntimely froſt
Vpon the ſweteſt flower of all the field.
O Lamentable day!
O wofull time.
Death that hath tane her hence to make me waile,
Ties vp my tongue, and will not let me ſpeake.
Come, is the Bride ready to go to Church?
Ready to go, but neuer to returne.
O Sonne, the night before thy wedding day,
Hath death laine with thy wife: there ſhe lies,
Flower as ſhe was, deflowred by him.
Death is my Sonne in-law, death is my Heire,
My Daughter he hath wedded, I will die,
And leaue him all life liuing, all is deaths.
Haue I thought long to ſee this mornings face,
And doth it giue me ſuch a ſight as this?
Accur'ſt, vnhappie, wretched hatefull day,
Moſt miſerable houre, that ere time ſaw
In laſting labour of his Pilgrimage.
But one poore one, one poore and louing Child,
But one thing to reioyce and ſolace in,
And cruell death hath catcht it from my ſight.
O wo, O wofull, wofull, wofull day,
Moſt lamentable day, moſt wofull day,
That euer, euer, I did yet behold.
O day, O day, O day, O hatefull day,
Neuer was ſeene ſo blacke a day as this:
O wofull day, O wofull day.
Beguild, diuorced, wronged, ſpighted, ſlaine,
Moſt deteſtable death by thee beguil'd,
By cruell, cruell thee, quite ouerthrowne:
O loue▪ O life; not life, but loue in death.
Deſpis'd, diſtreſſed, hated, martir'd, kil'd,
Vncomfortable time, why cam'ſt thou now
To murther, murther, our ſolemnitie?
O Child, O Child; my ſoule, and not my Child,
Dead art thou, alacke my Child is dead,
And with my Child, my ioyes are buried.
Peace ho for ſhame, confuſions: Care liues not
In theſe confuſions, heauen and your ſelfe
Had part in this faire Maid, now heauen hath all,
And all the better is it for the Maid:
Your part in her, you could not keepe from death,
But heauen keepes his part in eternall life:
The moſt you ſought was her promotion,
For 'twas your heauen, ſhe ſhouldſt be aduan'ſt,
And weepe ye now, ſeeing ſhe is aduan'ſt,
Aboue the Cloudes, as high as Heauen it ſelfe?
O in this loue, you loue your Child ſo ill,
That you run mad, ſeeing that ſhe is well:
Shee's not well married, that liues married long,
But ſhee's beſt married, that dies married yong.
Drie vp your teares, and ſticke your Roſemarie
On this faire Coarſe, and as the cuſtome is,
And in her beſt array beare her to Church:
For though ſome Nature bids all vs lament,
Yet Natures teares are Reaſons merriment.
All things that we ordained Feſtiuall,
Turne from their office to blacke Funerall:
Our inſtruments to melancholy Bells,
Our wedding cheare, to a ſad buriall Feaſt:
Our ſolemne Hymnes, to ſullen Dyrges change:
Our Bridall flowers ſerue for a buried Coarſe:
And all things change them to the contrarie.
Sir go you in; and Madam, go with him,
And go ſir Paris, euery one prepare
To follow this faire Coarſe vnto her graue:
The heauens do lowre vpon you, for ſome ill:
Moue them no more, by croſſing their high will.
Faith we may put vp our Pipes and be gone.
Honeſt good fellowes▪ Ah put vp, put vp,
For well you know, this is a pitifull caſe.
I by my troth, the caſe may be amended.
Muſitions, oh Muſitions,
Hearts eaſe, hearts eaſe,
O, and you will haue me liue, play hearts eaſe.
Why hearts eaſe;
O Muſitions,
Becauſe my heart it ſelfe plaies, my heart is full.
Not a dump we, 'tis no time to play now.
You will not then?
No.
I will then giue it you ſoundly.
What will you giue vs?
No money on my faith, but the gleeke.
I will giue you the Minſtrell.
Then will I giue you the Seruing creature.
Then will I lay the ſeruing Creatures Dagger on your pate. I will carie no Crochets, Ile Re you, Ile Fa you, do you note me?
And you Re vs, and Fa vs, you Note vs.
Pray you put vp your Dagger,
And put out your wit.
Then haue at you with my wit.
I will drie-beate you with an yron wit,
And put vp my yron Dagger.
Anſwere me like men:
When griping, griefes the heart doth wound, then Muſicke with her ſiluer ſound.
Why ſiluer ſound? why Muſicke with her ſiluer ſound? what ſay you Simon Catling?
Mary ſir, becauſe ſiluer hath a ſweet ſound.
Prateſt, what ſay you Hugh Rebicke?
I ſay ſiluer ſound, becauſe Muſitions ſound for ſiluer
Prateſt to, what ſay you Iames Sound-Poſt?
Faith I know not what to ſay.
O I cry you mercy, you are the Singer.
I will ſay for you; it is Muſicke with her ſiluer ſound,
Becauſe Muſitions haue no gold for ſounding:
Then Muſicke with her ſiluer ſound, with ſpeedy helpe doth lend redreſſe.
What a peſtilent knaue is this ſame?
Hang him Iacke, come weele in here, tarrie for the Mourners, and ſtay dinner.
If I may truſt the flattering truth of ſleepe,
My dreames preſage ſome ioyfull newes at hand:
My boſomes Lſits lightly in his throne:
And all thisan day an vccuſtom'd ſpirit,
Lifts me aboue the ground with cheerefull thoughts.
I dreamt my Lady came and found me dead,
(Strange dreame that giues a dead man leaue to thinke,)
And breath'd ſuch life with kiſſes in my lips,
That I reuiu'd and was an Emperour.
Ah me, how ſweet is loue it ſelfe poſſeſt,
When but loues ſhadowes are ſo rich in ioy.
Newes from Ʋerona, how now Balthazer?
Doſt thou not bring me Letters from the Frier?
How doth my Lady? Is my Father well?
How doth my Lady Iuliet? that I aske againe,
For nothing can be ill, if ſhe be well.
Then ſhe is well, and nothing can be ill.
Her body ſleepes in Capels Monument,
And her immortall part with Angels liue,
I ſaw her laid low in her kindreds Vault,
And preſently tooke Poſte to tell it you:
O pardon me for bringing theſe ill newes,
Since you did leaue it for my office Sir.
Is it euen ſo?
Then I denie you Starre.
Thou knoweſt my lodging, get me inke and paper,
And hire Poſt-Horſes, I will hence to night.
I do beſeech you ſir, haue patience:
Your lookes are pale and wild, and do import
Some miſaduenture.
Tuſh, thou art deceiu'd,
Leaue me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Haſt thou no Letters to me from the Frier?
No my good Lord.
Mo matter: Get thee gone,
And hyre thoſe Horſes, Ile be with thee ſtraight.
Well Iuliet, I will lie with thee to night:
Lets ſee for meanes: O miſchiefe thou art ſwift,
To enter in the thoughts of deſperate men:
I do remember an Appothecarie,
And here abouts dwells, which late I noted
In tattred weeds, with ouerwhelming browes,
Culling of Simples, meager were hi lookes,
Sharpe miſerie had worne him to the bones:
And in his needie ſhop a Tortoyrs hung,
An Allegater ſtuft, and other skins
Of ill ſhap'd fiſhes, and about his ſhelues,
A beggerly account of emptie boxes,
Greene earthen pots, Bladders, and muſtie ſeedes,
Remnants of packthred, and old cakes of Roſes
Were thinly ſcattered, to make vp a ſhew.
Noting this penury, to my ſelfe I ſaid,
An if a man did need a poyſon now,
Whoſe ſale is perſent death in Mantua,
Here liues a Caitiffe wretch would ſell it him.
O this ſame thought did but fore-run my need,
And this ſame needie man muſt ſell it me.
As I remember, this ſhould be the houſe,
Being holy day, the beggers ſhop is ſhut.
What ho? Appothecarie?
Who call's ſo low'd?
Come hither man, I ſee that thou are poore,
Hold, there is fortie Duckets, let me haue
A dram of poyſon, ſuch ſoone ſpeeding geare,
As will diſperſe it ſelfe through all the veines,
That the life-wearie-taker may fall dead,
And that the Trunke may be diſcharg'd of breath,
As violently, as haſtie powder fier'd
Doth hurry from the fatall Canons wombe.
Such mortall drugs I haue, but Mantuas law
Is death to any he, that vtters them.
Art thou ſo bare and full of wretchedneſſe,
And fear'ſt to die? Famine is in thy cheekes,
Need and opreſſion ſtarueth in thy eyes,
Contempt and beggery hangs vpon thy backe:
The world is not thy friend, not the worlds law:
The world affords no law to make thee rich.
Then be not poore, but breake it, and take this.
My pouerty, but not my will conſents.
I pray thy pouerty, and not thy will.
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drinke it off, and if you had the ſtrength
Of twenty men, it would diſpatch you ſtraight.
There's thy Gold,
Worſe poyſon to mens ſoules,
Doing more murther in this loathſome world,
Then theſe poore compounds that thou maieſt not ſell.
I ſell thee poyſon, thou haſt ſold me none,
Farewell, buy food, and get thy ſelfe in fleſh.
Come Cordiall, and not poyſon, go with me
To Iuliets graue, for there muſt I vſe thee.
Holy Franciſcan Frier, Brother, ho?
This ſame ſhould be the voice of Frier Iohn.
Welcome from Mantua, what ſayes Romeo?
Or if his mind be writ, giue me his Letter.
Going to find a bare-foote Brother out,
One of our order to aſſociate me,
Here in this Citie viſiting the ſick,
And finding him, the Searchers of the Towne
Suſpecting that we both were in a houſe
Where the infectious peſtilence did raigne,
Seal'd vp the doores, and would not let vs forth,
So that my ſpeed to Mantua there was ſtaid.
Who bare my Letter then to Romeo?
I could not ſend it, here it is againe,
Nor get a meſſenger to bring it thee,
So fearefull were they of infection.
Vnhappie Fortune: by my Brotherhood
The Letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Of deare import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger: Frier Iohn go hence,
Get me an Iron Crow, and bring it ſtraight
Vnto my Cell.
Brother Ile go and bring it thee.
Now muſt I to the Monument alone,
Within this three houres will faire Iuliet wake,
Shee will be ſhrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of theſe accidents:
But I will write againe to Mantua,
And keepe her at my Cell till Romeo come,
Poore liuing Coarſe, clos'd in a dead mans Tombe,
Giue me thy Torch Boy, hence and ſtand aloft,
Yet put it out, for I would not be ſeene:
Vnder yond young Trees lay thee all along,
Holding thy eare cloſe to the hollow ground,
So ſhall no foot vpon the Churchyard tread,
Being looſe, vnfirme with digging vp of Graues,
But thou ſhalt heare it: whiſtle then to me,
As ſignall that thou heareſt ſome thing approach,
Giue me thoſe flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
I am almoſt afraid to ſtand alone
Here in the Churchyard, yet I will aduenture.
Sweet Flower with flowers thy Bridall bed I ſtrew:
O woe, thy Canopie is duſt and ſtones,
Which with ſweet water nightly I will dewe,
Or wanting that, with teares deſtil'd by mones;
The obſequies that I for thee will keepe,
Nightly ſhall be, to ſtrew thy graue, and weepe.
The Boy giues warning, ſomething doth approach,
What curſed foot wanders this wayes to night,
To croſſe my obſequies, and true loues right?
What with a Torch? Muffle me night a while.
Giue me that Mattocke, & the wrenching Iron,
Hold take this Letter, early in the morning
See thou deliuer it to my Lord and Father,
Giue me the light; vpon thy life I charge thee,
What ere thou hear'ſt or ſeeſt, ſtand all aloofe,
And do not interrupt me in my courſe.
Why I deſcend into this bed of death,
Is partly to behold my Ladies face:
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger,
A precious Ring: a Ring that I muſt vſe,
In deare employment, therefore hence be gone:
But if thou iealous doſt returne to prie
In what I further ſhall intend to do,
By heauen I will teare thee ioynt by ioynt,
And ſtrew this hungry Churchyard with thy limbs:
The time, and my intents are ſauage wilde:
More fierce and more inexorable farre,
Then emptie Tygers, or the roaring Sea.
I will be gone ſir, and not trouble you
So ſhalt thou ſhew me friendſhip: take thou that,
Liue and be proſperous, and farewell good fellow.
For all this faine, Ile hide me here about,
His lookes I feare, and his intents I doubt.
Thou deteſtable mawe▪ thou wombe of death,
Gorg'd with the deareſt morſell of the earth:
Thus I enforce thy rotten Iawes to open,
And in deſpight, Ile cram thee with more food.
This is that baniſht haughtie Mountague,
That murdred my Loues Cozin; with which griefe,
It is ſuppoſed the faire Creature died,
And here is come to do ſome villanous ſhame
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
Stop thy vnhallowed toyle, vile Mountague:
Can vengeance be purſued further then death?
Condemned vallaine, I do apprehend thee.
Obey and go with me, for thou muſt die,
I muſt indeed, and therfore came I hither:
Good gentle youth, tempt not a deſperate man,
Flie hence and leaue me, thinke vpon thoſe gone,
Let them affright thee. I beſeech thee Youth,
Put not an other ſin vpon my head,
By vrging me to furie. O be gone,
By heauen I loue thee better then my ſelfe,
For I come hither arm'd againſt my ſelfe:
Stay not, be gone, liue, and hereafter ſay,
A mad mans mercy bid thee run away.
I do defie thy commiſſeration,
And apprehend thee for a Fellon here.
Wilt thou prouoke me? Then haue at thee Boy.
O Lord they fight, I will go call the Watch.
O I am ſlaine, if thou be mercifull,
Open the Tombe, lay me with Iuliet.
In faith I will, let me peruſe this face:
Mercutius kinſman, Noble Countie Paris,
What ſaid my man, when my betoſſed ſoule
Did not attend him as we rode? I thinke
He told me Paris ſhould haue married Iuliet.
Said he not ſo? Or did I dreame it ſo?
Or am I mad, hearing him talke of Iuliet,
To thinke it was ſo? O giue me thy hand,
One, writ with me in ſowre misfortunes booke.
Ile burie thee in a triumphant graue.
A Graue; O no, a Lanthorne; ſlaughtred Youth:
For here lies Iuliet, and her beautie makes
This Vault a feaſting preſence full of light.
Death lie thou there, by a dead man inter'd.
How oft when men are at the point of death,
Haue they beene merrie? Which their Keepers call
A lightning before death? Oh how may I
Call this a lightning? O my Loue, my Wife,
Death that hath ſuckt the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet vpon thy Beautie:
Thou are not conquer'd: Beauties enſigne yet
Is Crymſon in thy lips, and in thy cheekes,
And Deaths pale flag is not aduanced there.
Tybalt, ly'ſt thou there in thy bloudy ſheet?
O what more fauour can I do to thee,
Then with that hand that cut thy youth in twaine,
To ſunder his that was thy enemie?
Forgiue me Cozen. Ah deare Iuliet:
Why art thou yet ſo faire? I will beleeue,
Shall I beleeue, that vnſubſtantiall death is amorous?
And that the leane abhorred Monſter keepes
Thee here in darke to be his Paramour?
For feare of that, I ſtill will ſtay with thee,
And neuer from this Pallace of dym night
Depart againe: come lie thou in my armes,
Heere's to thy health, where ere thou tumbleſt in.
O true Appothecarie!
Thy drugs are quicke. Thus with a kiſſe I die.
Depart againe; here, here will I remaine,
With Wormes that are thy Chambermaides: O here
Will I ſet vp my euerlaſting reſt:
And ſhake the yoke of inauſpicious ſtarres
From this world wearied fleſh: Eyes looke your laſt:
Armes take your laſt embrace: And lips, O you
The doores of breath, ſeale with a righteous kiſſe
A dateleſſe bargaine to ingroſſing death:
Come bitter conduct, come vnſauoury guide,
Thou deſperate Pilot, now at once run on
The daſhing Rocks, thy Sea-ſicke wearie Barke:
Heere's to my Loue. O true Appothecary:
Thy drugs are quicke. Thus with a kiſſe I die.
St. Francis be my ſpeed, how oft to night
Haue my old feet ſtumbled at graues? Who's there?
Here's one, a Friend, & one that knowes you well.
Bliſſe be vpon you. Tell me good my Friend
What Torch is yond that vainely lends his light
To grubs, and eyeleſſe Sculle? As I diſcerne,
It burneth in the Capels Monument.
It doth ſo holy ſir,
And there's my Maſter, one that you loue.
Who is it?
Romeo.
How long hath he bin there?
Full halfe an houre.
Go with me to the Vault.
I dare not Sir.
My Maſter knowes not but I am gone hence,
And fearefully did menace me with death,
If I did ſtay to looke on his entents.
Stay, then Ile go alone, feares comes vpon me.
O much I feare ſome ill vnluckie thing.
As I did ſleepe vnder this young tree here,
I dreamt my maiſter and another fought,
And that my Maiſter ſlew him.
Romeo.
Alacke, alacke, what blood is this which ſtaines
The ſtony entrance of this Sepulcher?
What meane theſe Maſterleſſe, and goarie Swords
To lie diſcolour'd by this place of peace?
Romeo, oh pale: who elſe? what Paris too?
And ſteept in blood? Ah what an vnknd houre
Is guiltie of this lamentable chance?
The Lady ſtirs.
O comfortable Frier, where's my Lord?
I do remember well where I ſhould be:
And there I am, where is my Romeo?
I heare ſome noyſe Lady, come from that neſt
Of death, contagion, and vnnaturall ſleepe,
A greater power then we can contradict
Hath thwarted our entents, come, come away,
Thy husband in thy boſome there lies dead:
And Paris too: come Ile diſpoſe of thee,
Among a Siſterhood of holy Nunnes:
Stay not to queſtion, for the watch is comming.
Come, go good Iuliet, I dare no longer ſtay.
Go get thee hence, for I will notuaway,
What's here? A cup clos'd in my true loes hand?
Poyſon I ſee hath bin his timeleſſe end
O churle, drinke all? and leſt no friendly drop,
To helpe me after, I will kiſſe thy lips,
Happlie ſome poyſon yet doth hang on them,
To make me die wth a reſtoratiue.
Thy lips are warme.
Lead Boy, which way?
Yea noiſe?
Then Ile be briefe. O happy Dagger.
'Tis in thy ſheath, there ruſt and let me die.
This is the place,
There where the Torch doth burne
The ground is bloody,
Search about the Churchyard.
Go ſome of you, who ere you find attach▪
Pittifull ſight, here lies the Countie ſlaine,
And Iuliet bleeding, warme and newly dead
Who here hath laine theſe two dayes buried.
Go tell the Prince, runne to the Capulets,
Raiſe vp the Mountagues, ſome others ſearch,
We ſee the ground whereon theſe woes do lye,
But the true ground of all theſe piteous woes,
We cannot without circumſtance deſcry.
Here's Romeo'r man,
We found him in the Churchyard.
Hold him in ſafety, till the Prince come hither.
Here is a Frier that trembles, ſighes, and weepes
We tooke this Mattocke and this Spade from him,
As he was comming from this Church-yard ſide.
A great ſuſpition, ſtay the Frier too.
What miſaduenture is ſo earely vp,
That calls our perſon from our mornings reſt?
What ſhould it be that they ſo ſhrike abroad?
O the people in the ſtreete crie Romeo.
Some Iuliet, and ſome Paris, and all runne
With open outcry toward out Monument.
What feare is this which ſtartles in your eares?
Soueraigne, here lies the Countie Paris ſlaine,
And Romeo dead, and Iuliet dead before,
Warme and new kil'd.
Search,
Seeke, and know how, this foule murder comes.
Here is a Frier, and Slaughter'd Romes man,
With Inſtruments ypon them fit to open
Theſe dead mens Tombes.
O heauen!
O wife looke how our Daughter bleedes!
This Dagger hath miſtaine, for loe his houſe
Is empty on the backe of Mountague,
And is miſheathed in my Daughters boſome.
O me, this ſight of death, is as a Bell
That wanes my old age to a Sepulcher.
Come Mountague, for thou art early vp
To ſee thy Sonne and Heire, now early downe.
Alas my liege, my wife is dead to night,
Griefe of my Sonnes exile hath ſtopt her breath:
What further woe conſpires againſt my age?
Looke: and thou ſhalt ſee.
O thou vntaught, what manners in is this,
To preſſe before thy Father to a graue?
Seale vp the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can cleare theſe ambiguities,
And know their ſpring, their head, their true deſcent,
And then will I be generall of your woes,
And lead you euen to death? meane time forbeare,
And let miſchance be ſlaue to patience,
Bring forth the parties of ſuſpition.
I am the greateſt, able to doe leaſt,
Yet moſt ſuſpected as the time and place
Doth make againſt me of this direfull murther:
And heere I ſtand both to impeach and purge
My ſelfe condemned, and my ſelfe excus'd.
Then ſay at once, what thou doſt know in this?
I will be briefe, for my ſhort date of breath
Is not ſo long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo there dead, was husband to that Iuliet,
And ſhe there dead, that's Romeos faithfull wife:
I married them; and their ſtolne marriage day
Was Tybalts Doomeſday: whoſe vntimely death
Baniſh'd the new-made Bridegroome from this Citie:
For whom (and not for Tybalt) Iuliet pinde.
You, to remoue that ſiege of Greefe from her,
Betroth'd, and would haue married her perforce
To Countie Paris. Then comes ſhe to me,
And (with wilde lookes) bid me deuiſe ſome meanes
To rid her from this ſecond Marriage,
Or in my Cell there would ſhe kill her ſelfe.
Then gaue I her (ſo Tutor'd by my Art)
A ſleeping Potion, which ſo tooke effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The forme of death. Meane time, I writ to Romeo,
That he ſhould hither come, as this dyre night,
To helpe to take her from her borrowed graue,
Being the time the Potions force ſhould ceaſe.
But he which bore my Letter, Frier Iohn,
Was ſtay'd by accident; and yeſternight
Return'd my Letter backe. Then all alone,
At the prefixed houre of her waking,
Came I to take her from her Kindreds vault,
Meaning to keepe her cloſely at my Cell,
Till I conueniently could ſend to Romeo.
But when I came (ſome Minute ere the time
Of her awaking) heere vntimely lay
The Noble Paris, and true Romeo dead.
Shee wakes, and I intreated her come foorth,
And beare this worke of Heauen, with patience:
But then, a noyſe did ſcarre me from the Tombe,
And ſhe (too deſperate) would not go with me,
But (as it ſeemes) did violence on her ſelfe.
All this I know, and to the Marriage her Nurſe is priuy:
And if ought in this miſcarried by my fault,
Let my old life be ſacrific'd, ſome houre before the time,
Vnto the rigour of ſeuereſt Law.
We ſtill haue knowne thee for a Holy man.
Where's Romeo's man? What can he ſay to this?
I brought my Maſter newes of Iuliets death,
And then in poſte he came from Mantua
To this ſame place, to this ſame Monument.
This Letter he early bid me giue his Father,
And threatned me with death, going in the Vault,
If I departed not, and left him there.
Giue me the Letter, I will look on it.
Where is the Counties Page that rais'd the Watch?
Sirra, what made your Maſter in this place?
He came with flowres to ſtrew his Ladies graue,
And bid me ſtand aloofe, and ſo I did:
Anon comes one with light to ope the Tombe,
And by and by my Maiſter drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the Watch.
This Letter doth make good the Friers words,
Their courſe of Loue, the tydings of her death:
And heere he writes, that he did buy a poyſon
Of a poore Pothecarie, and therewithall
Came to this Vault to dye, and lye with Iuliet.
Where be theſe Enemies? Capulet, Mountague,
See what a ſcourge is laide vpon your hate,
That Heauen finds meanes to kill your ioyes with Loue;
And I, for winking at your diſcords too,
Haue loſt a brace of Kinſmen: All are puniſh'd.
O Brother Mountague, giue me thy hand,
This is my Daughters ioynture, for no more
Can I demand.
But I can giue thee more:
For I will raiſe her Statue in pure Gold,
That whiles Ʋerona by that name is knowne,
There ſhall no figure at that Rate be ſet,
As that of True and Faithfull Iuliet.
As rich ſhall Romeo by his Lady ly,
Poore ſacrifices of our enmity.
A glooming peace this morning with it brings,
The Sunne for ſorrow will not ſhew his head;
Go hence, to haue more talke of theſe ſad things,
Some ſhall be pardon'd, and ſome puniſhed.
For neuer was a Storie of more Wo,
Then this of Iuliet, and her Romeo.