OVr Poet slumbring in the Muses laps,
Hath seene a Woman seated in the Moone,
A point beyond the auncient Theorique:
And as it was so he presents his dreame.
Here in the bounds of fayre Vtopia,
Where louely Nature being onely Queene,
Bestowes such workmanship on earthly mould:
That Heauens themselues enuy her glorious worke.
But all in vaine: for (malice being spent)
They yeeld themselues to follow Natures doome,
And fayre Pandora sits in Cynthias orbe.
This but the shadow of our Authors dreame,
Argues the substance to be neere at hand:
At whose appearance I most humbly craue,
That in your forehead she may read content.
If many faults escape in her discourse,
Remember all is but a Poets dreame,
The first he had in Phoebus holy bowre,
But not the last, vnlesse the first displease.
NAture descends from farre aboue the spheeres,
To frolicke heere in fayre Vtopia,
VVheremy chiefe workes do florish in their prime,
And wanton in their first simplicitie.
Heere I suruey the pictured firmament,
VVith hurtlesse flames in concaue of the Moone,
The liquid substance of the welkins waste:
VVhere moystures treasurie is clouded vp,
The mutuall Ioynter of all swelling seas,
And all the creatures which their waues conteine,
Lastly the rundle of this Massiue earth,
From vtmost face vnto the Centers point,
All these, and all their endlesse circumstance,
Heere I suruey, and glory in my selfe.
But what meanes Discord so to knit the browes,
VVith sorrowes clowde ecclipsing our delights?
It grieues my hart, that still in euery worke,
My fellow Concorde frustrates my desire,
VVhen I to perfect vp some wondrous deed,
Do bring forth good and bad, or light and darke,
Pleasant and sad, moouing and fixed things,
Fraile and immortall, or like contraries:
She with her hand vnites them all in one,
And so makes voide the end of mine attempt.
I tell thee Discord while you twaine attend
On Natures traine, your worke must prooue but one,
And in your selues though you be different,
Yet in my seruice must you well agree.
For Nature workes her will from contraries,
But see where our Utopian Shepheards come.
Thou Soueraigne Queene and Author of the world,
Of all that was, or is, or shall be framde.
To finish vp the heape of thy great gifts,
Vouchsafe thy simple seruants one request.
Stand vp, and tell the sum of your desire,
The boone were great that Nature would not graunt:
It euer was and shall be still my ioy,
VVith wholesome gifts to blesse my workemanship.
VVe craue fayre goddesse at thy heauenly hands,
To haue as euery other creature hath,
A sure and certaine meanes among our selues,
To propagate the issue of our kinde:
As it were comfort to our sole estate,
So were it ease vnto thy working hand.
Each Fish that swimmeth in the floating sea,
Each winged fowle that soareth in the ayre,
And euery beast that feedeth on the ground,
Haue mates of pleasure to vpholde their broode:
But thy Utopians, poore and simple men,
As yet bewaile their want of female sex.
A female shall you haue my louely swaines,
Like to your selues, but of a purer moulde:
Meane while go hence, and tend your tender flocks,
And when I send her, see you holde her deare.
Now Virgins put your hands to holy worke,
That we may frame new wonders to the world.
VVhen I arayde this lifelesse Image thus,
It was decreed in my deepe prouidence,
To make it such as our Utopians craue,
A merror of the earth, and heauens dispight,
The matter first when it was voyde of forme,
Was purest water, earth, and ayre, and fyre,
And when I shapt it in a matchlesle mould,
(VVhereof the lyke was neuer seene before)
It grew to this impression that you see,
And wanteth nothing now but life and sowle.
But life and soule I shall inspire from heauen.
So hold it fast, till with my quickning breath,
I kindle inward seeds of sence and minde.
Now fire be turnd to choler, ayre to bloud,
VVater to humor purer then it selfe,
And earth to flesh more cleare then Christall rock.
And Discord stand aloofe, that Concords hands,
May ioyne the spirit with the flesh in league.
Now do I feele how life and inward sence,
Imparteth motion vnto euery limme.
Then let her stand or moue or walke alone.
Herein hath Nature gone beyond her selfe,
And heauen will grudge at beautie of the earth,
VVhen it espies a second sonne belowe.
Now euerie part performes her functions dew,
Except the tongue whose strings are yet vntyed.
Discorde, vnlose her tongue, to serue her turne,
For in distresse that must be her defence:
And from that roote will many mischiefes growe,
If once she spot her state of innocence.
Haile heauenly Queene, the author of all good,
VVhose wil hath wrought in me the fruits of life,
And fild me with an vnderstanding soule,
To know the difference twixt good and bad.
I make thee for a solace vnto men,
And see thou follow our commaunding will.
Now art thou Natures glory and delight,
Compact of euery heauenly excellence:
Thou art indowd with Saturns deepe conceit▪
Thy minde as hawte as Iupiters high thoughts,
Thy stomack Lion-like, like Mauors hart,
Thine eyes bright beamde, like Sol in his array,
Thy cheekes more fayre, then are faire Uenus cheekes,
Thy tongue more eloquent then Mercuries,
Thy forehead whiter then the siluer Moones:
Thus haue I robd the Planets for thy sake.
Besides all this, thou hast proud Iunoes armes,
Auroraes hands, and louely Thetis foote:
Vse all these well, and Nature is thy friend,
But vse them ill, and Nature is thy foe.
Now that thy name may suite thy qualities,
I giue to thee Pandora for thy name.
VVhat creature haue we heere? a new found gawde?
A second man, lesse perfect then the first?
A woman this forsooth, but made in hast,
To robbe vs Planets of our ornaments.
Is this the Saint, that steales my Iunoes armes?
Mine eyes? then gouerne thou my daylight carre.
My cheekes? then Cupid be at thy commaund.
My tongue? thou pretty Parrat speake a while,
My forehead? then faire Cynthia shine by night,
VVhat foule contempt is this you Planets vse▪
Against the glory of my words and worke?
It was my will, and that shall stand for lawe,
And she is framd to darken all your prides.
Ordeynd not I your motions, and your selues?
And dare you check the author of your liues?
VVere not your lights contriude in Natures shop?
But I haue meanes to end what I begun.
And make Death triumphe in your liues decay:
If thus you crosse the meede of my deserts,
Be sure I will dissolue your harmonie,
VVhen once you touche the fixed period:
Meane while I leaue my worthy workmanship▪
Here to obscure the pride of your disdaine.
Then in reuenge of Nature and her worke,
Let vs conclude to shew our Emperie:
And bend our forces gainst this earthly starre.
Each one in course shall signorize awhile,
That she may feele the influence of her beames,
And rue that she was formde in our dispight:
My turne is first, and Saturne will begin.
And Ile begin where Saturne makes an end,
And when I end, then Mars shall tyrrannize,
And after Mars then Sol shall marshall her.
And after Sol each other in his course:
Come let vs go, that Saturne may begin.
I shall instill such melancholy moode,
As by corrupting of her purest bloud,
Shall first with sullen sorrowes clowde her braine,
And then surround her heart with froward care:
She shalbe sick with passions of the hart,
Selfwild, and toungtide, but full fraught with teares▪
Gratious Pandora: Nature thy good friend
Hath sent Gunophilus to waite on thee,
For honors due that appertaines her will,
And for the graces of thy louely selfe,
Gunophilus will serue in humble sorte,
And is resolud to liue and die with thee.
If Nature wild, then do attend on me,
But little seruice haue I to commaund,
If I my selfe might choose my kinde of life,
Nor thou, nor any else should stay vvith me,
I finde my selfe vnfit for company.
Hovv so faire Mistres in your flouring youth,
VVhen pleasures ioy should sit in euery thought?
Auaunt sir sawce, play you the Questionest?
VVhats that to thee, if I be sick or sad?
Eyther demeane thy selfe in better sort,
Or get thee hence and serue some other where.
A sowre beginning: but no remedy,
Nature hath bound me, and I must obey:
I see that seruants must haue Marchants eares,
To beare the blast and brunt of euery winde.
VVhat throbs are these that labour in my brest?
VVhat swelling clouds, that ouercast my braine?
I burst, vnlesse by teares they turne to raine.
I grudge and grieue, but know not well whereat:
And rather choose to weepe then speake my minde,
For fretfull sorrow captiuates my tongue.
See where she sits, in whom we must delight,
Beware she sleepes: no noyse for waking her.
A sleepe? why see how her alluring eyes,
VVith open lookes do glaunce on euery side.
O eyes more fayre then is the morning starre.
Nature her selfe is not so louely fayre.
Let vs with reuerence kisse her Lillie hands,
And by deserts in seruice win her loue.
Sweete Dame, if Stesias may content thine eye,
Commaund my Neate, my flock, and tender Kids:
VVhereof great store do ouerspred our plaines,
Graunt me sweet Mistresse but to kisse thy hand.
No Stesias no, Learchus is the man:
Thou myrror of Dame Natures cunning worke,
Let me but hold thee by that sacred hand▪
And I shall make thee our Utopian Queene,
And set a guilded Chapplet on thy head,
That Nymphes and Satyrs may admyre thy pompe.
These twaine and I haue fortunes all alyke.
Sweet Natures pride, let me but see thy hand,
And seruant lyke, shall Melos waite on thee:
And beare thy traine: as in the glorious heauens,
Perseus supports his loue Andromeda:
VVhose thirty starres, whether they rise or fall.
He falles or ryseth, hanging at her heeles.
O then to blesse the loue of Iphicles,
VVhose heart dooth hold thee deerer then himselfe▪
Do but behold me with a louing looke,
And I will leade thee in our sollemne daunce,
Teaching thee tunes, and pleasant layes of loue.
No kisse? nor touche? nor friendly looke?
VVhat churlish influence depriues her minde?
For Nature sayd, that she was innocent,
And fully fraught with vertuous qualities:
But speake sweete loue: thou canst not speake but well.
She is not tongue tyde, that I know by proofe.
Speake once Pandora to thy louing friends.
Rude knaues, what meane you thus to trouble me?
She spake to you my maisters, I am none of your company.
Alas she weeping sounds: Gunophilus
O helpe to reare thy Mistresse from the ground.
This is the very passion of the heart,
And melancholy is the ground thereof.
O then to sift that humor from her heart,
Let vs with Rundelayes delight her eare:
For I haue heard that Musick is a meane,
To calme the rage of melancholy moode.
What songs? what pipes? & fidling haue we here?
VVill you not suffer me to take my rest?
VVhat shal we do to vanquish her disease?
The death of that were life to our desires:
But let vs go, we must not leaue her thus.
Saturne hath layd foundation to the rest:
VVhereon to build the ruine of this dame:
And spot her innocence with vicious thoughts,
My turne is past, and Iupiter is next.
A Ioue principium, sunt & Iouis omnia plena.
Now Iupiter shall rule Pandoraes thoughts,
And fill her with Ambition and Disdaine:
I will inforce my influence to the worst,
Least other Planets blame my regiment.
Though rancor now be rooted from my hart▪
I feele it burdened in an other sort:
By day I thinke of nothing but of rule,
By night my dreames are all of Empery.
Mine eares delight to heare of Soueraingtie,
My tongue desires to speake of princely sway,
My eye would euery obiect were a crowne.
Danae was fayre, and Laeda pleasd me well,
Louely Calisco set my hart on fyre:
And in mine eye Europa was a gemme,
But in the beauty of this Paragon,
Dame Nature far hath gone beyond her selfe,
And in this one are all my loues conteind.
And come what can come, Iupiter shall prooue,
If fayre Pandora will accept his loue:
But first I must discusse this heauenly clowde:
That hydes me from the sight of mortall eyes.
Behold Pandora where thy louer sits,
High Ioue himselfe, who rauisht with thy blaze,
Receiues more influence then he powers on thee▪
And humbly sues for succour at thy hands.
VVhy what art thou? more then Vtopian swaines?
The king of Gods, one of immortall race,
And he that with a beck controules the heauens.
VVhy then Pandora dooth exceed the heauens,
VVho neither feares nor loueth Iupiter.
Thy beauty will excuse what ere thou say,
And in thy lookes thy words are priuiledgd.
But if Pandora did conceiue those gifts,
That Ioue can giue, she would esteeme his loue,
For I can make thee Empresse of the world,
And seate thee in the glorious firmament.
The words of Empresse and of firmament,
More please mine eares then Iupiter mine eyes:
Yet if thy loue be lyke to thy protest:
Giue me thy golden scepter in my hand.
But not as purchase of my precious loue,
For that is more then heauen it selfe is worthe.
There, hold the scepter of Eternall Ioue,
But let not Maiestie encrease thy pride.
VVhat lack I now but an imperiall throne,
And Ariadnaes star-lyght Diadem.
False periurd Iupiter and full of guile,
Are these the fruites of thy new gouernment ▪
Is Iunoes beauty and thy wedlock vowe,
And all my kindnesse troden vnder foote?
VVast not enough to fancie such a trull.
But thou must yeeld thy sceptet to her hand?
I thought that Ganimede had wened thy hart,
From lawlesse lust of any womans loue:
But well I see that euery time thou strayest,
Thy lust but lookes for strumpet stars belowe.
VVhy know, Pandora scornes both Ioue and thee,
And there she layes his scepter on the ground.
This shall with me to our Celestiall court,
VVhere gods (fond Iupiter) shall see thy shame:
And laugh at Loue for tainting Maiestie,
And when you please, you will repaire to vs,
But as for thee, thou shamelesse counterfet:
Thy pride shall quickly loose her painted plumes,
And feele the heauy weight of Iunoes wrath.
Let Iuno fret, and mooue the powers of heauen,
Yet in her selfe Pandora stands secure:
Am I not Natures darling and hir pride?
Hath she not spent her treasure all on me?
Yet be thou wise (I counsell thee for loue)
And feare displeasure at a goddesse hand.
I tell thee Iupiter, Pandoras worth
Is farre exceeding all your goddesses:
And since in her thou dost obscure my prayse,
Here (to be short) I do abiure thy loue.
I may not blame thee for my beames are cause,
Of all this insolence and proud disdaine:
But to preuent a second raging storme,
If iealious Iuno should by chaunce returne,
Here ends my loue: Pandora now farewell.
And art thou clouded vp? fare as thou list,
Pandoraes hart shall neuer stoope to Ioue:
Gunophilus, base vassaile as thou art,
How haps when Iuno was in presence here,
Thou didst not honor me with kneele and crowche,
And lay thy hands vnder my precious foote?
To make her know the height of my desart.
Base pesaunt, humbly watch my stately lookes,
And yeeld applause to euery word I speake:
Or from my seruice Ile discarde thee quite.
Fayre and dread Soueraigne, Lady of the world,
Euen then when iealous Iuno was in place:
As I behold the glory of thy face,
My feeble eyes admiring maiestie,
Did sinke into my hart such holly feare,
That very feare amazing euery sence,
VVithheld my tongue from saying what I would:
And freezd my ioynts from bowing when they should.
I now Gunophilus thou pleasest me,
These words and cursies prooue thee dutifull.
Now Stesias speake.
Learchus, plead for loue.
Now Cyprian Queene, guider of louing thoughts, Helpe Iphicles.
Melos must speed, or dye.
VVhether now my maisters in such post hast?
Her excellence is not at leisure now.
O sweet Gunophilus further our attempts.
And we shall make thee riche with our rewards.
Stay heere vntill I know her further pleasure:
Stesias & his felows humbly craue accesse to your excellēce.
I now thou fittest my humor: Let them come.
Come on maisters.
Tel on my deare, when comes that happy houre,
VVhereon thy loue shall guerden my desire.
How long shall sorows winter pinche my hart?
And luke warme hopes be child with freezing feare,
Before my suite obteyne thy sweete consent?
How long shall death, incroching by delayes,
A bridge the course of my decaying life:
Before Pandora loue poore Iphicles?
How long shall cares cut off my flowring prime,
Before the haruest of my loue be in?
O speake sweete loue.
Some gentle words sweet loue.
O let thy tongue first salue Learchus wound,
That first was made with those immortall eyes
The only promise of thy future loue,
VVill drowne the secret heapes of my dispayre,
In endlesse Ocean of expected ioyes.
Although my brest, yet neuer harbored loue,
Yet should my bountie free your seruitude:
If loue might well consort our Maiestie,
And not debase our matchlesse dignitie.
Sweet hony words, but sawst with bitter gawle.
They drawe me on, and yet they put me back.
They hold me vp, and yet they let me fall.
They giue me life, and yet they let me dye.
But as thou wilt, so giue me sweet or sowre:
For in thy pleasure must be my content.
VVhether thou drawe me on, or put me back,
I must admyre thy beauties wildernesse.
And as thou wilt, so let me stand or fall:
Loue hath decreed thy word must gouerne me.
And as thou wilt, so let me liue or dye,
In life or death I must obey thy wyll.
I please my selfe in your humility,
Yet will I make some triall of your faith,
Before I stoope to fauour your complaints:
For wot ye well Pandora knowes her worth,
He that will purchase things of greatest prize,
Must conquer by his deeds, and not by words:
Go then all foure, and slay the sauadge Boare,
VVhich roauing vp and downe with ceaselesse rage,
Destroyes the fruit of our Vtopian fields,
And he that first presents me with his head,
Shall weare my gloue in fauour of the deed.
VVe go Pandora.
Nay we runne.
VVe flye.
Thus must Pandora exercise these swaines,
Commaunding them to daungerous exploits:
And were they kings my beautie should commaund,
Sirra Gunophilus beare vp my traine.
Mars comes intreated by the Queene of heauen,
To summon Ioue from this his regiment:
Such iealious humor croweth in her braine,
That she is mad till he returne from hence.
Now Soueraigne Ioue king of immortal kings,
Thy louely Iuno long hath lookt for thee,
And till thou come thinkes euery howre a yeere.
And Ioue will go the sooner to asswage,
Her franticke, idle, and suspitious thoughts,
For well I know Pandora troubles her,
Nor will she calme the tempest of her minde,
Til with a whirlwinde of outragious words,
She beat mine eares, and weep curst hart away.
Yet will I go, for words are but a blast,
And sun-shine wil insue when stormes are past.
Now bloudy Mars begins to play his part,
Ile worke such warre within Pandoraes brest,
(And somewhat more for Iunoes fayre request)
That after all her churlishnesse and pride:
She shall become a vixen Martialist.
Heere let vs stay till fayre Pandora come,
And then shal Stesias haue his due rewarde.
And why not Iphicles as well as you?
The prize is mine, my sword cut off his head.
But first my speare did wound him to the death.
He fell not downe till I had goard his side.
Content you all, Learchus did the deed,
And I will make it good who eare sayes nay.
Melos will dye before he lose his right.
Nay then tis time to snatch, the head is mine.
Lay downe, or I shal lay thee on the earth.
I, so, fayre and far off, for feare of hurt,
See how the cowards counterfet a fray:
Strike home you dastard swaines, strike home I say,
Fight you in iest? let me bestur me then,
And see if I can cudgel yee all foure.
VVhat? is my mistresse mankinde on the sudden?
Alas why strikes Pandora her best frends?
My friends, base pesants,
My friends would fight like men:
Auaunt, or I shall lay you all for dead.
See cruell fayre, how thou hast wrongd thy friend.
To spill his blood that kept it but for thee,
Thers my desart: And here is my rewarde,
I dare not say of an ingratefull minde:
But if Pandora had been well aduisd,
This dare I say, that Stesias had been sparde.
Begon I say, before I strike againe.
O stay sweete mistresse and be satisfied.
Base vassall how darst thou presume to speake?
VVilt thou incounter any deed of mine,
How long haue you beene made a counseller?
Here strike thy fill make lauish of my life,
That in my death my loue may finde reliefe:
Launce vp my side, that when my heart leapes out,
Thou maist behold how it is scorcht with loue,
And euery way croswounded with desire,
There shalt thou read my passions deepe ingrauen,
And in the midst onely Pandoraes name.
VVhat telst thou me of loue and fancies fire?
Fyre of debate is kindled in my hart,
And were it not that thou art all vnarmd,
Be sure I should make tryall of thy strength,
But now the death of some fierce sauadge beast:
In bloud shall end my furies tragedie,
For fight I must, or else my gall will burst.
Ah ruthlesse hart, harder then Adamant,
VVhose eares are deafe against affections plaints.
And eyes are blinde, when sorrow sheds her teares:
Neither contented that I liue nor dye.
But fondling as I am, why grieue I thus?
Is not Pandora mistris of my life?
Yes, yes, and euery act of hers is iust.
Her hardest words are but a gentle winde:
Her greatest wound is but a pleasing harme,
Death at her hands is but a second life.
Mars hath inforst Pandora gainst her kinde,
To manage armes and quarrell with her friends:
And thus I leaue her, all incenst with yre:
Let Sol coole that which I haue set on fire.
In looking downe vpon this baser worlde,
I long haue seene and rude Pandoraes harmes,
But as my selfe by nature am inclinde,
So shall she now become, gentle and kinde,
Abandoning all rancour, pride, and rage,
And changing from a Lion to a Lambe,
She shalbe louing liberall and chaste,
Discreete and patient, mercifull and milde,
Inspired with poetry and prophesie,
And vertues apperteyning womanhoode.
Tell me Gunophilus how doth Stesias now?
How fares he with his wound? vnhappy me,
That so vnkindely hurt so kind a friende,
But Stesias if thou pardon what is past,
I shall rewarde thy sufferaunce with loue,
These eyes that were like two malignant starres,
Shall yeeld their comfort with their sweet aspect.
And these my lippes that did blaspheme thy loue,
Shall speake thee fayre and blesse thee with a kisse,
And this my hand that hurt thy tender side,
Shall first with herbes recure the wound it made,
Then plight my fayth to thee in recompence.
And thou Gunophilus I pray thee pardon me,
That I misdid thee in my witles rage,
As time shall yeelde occasion be thou sure,
I will not fayle to make thee some amends.
I so content me in this pleasaunt calme.
That former stormes are vtterly forgot.
We follow still in hope of grace to come,
O sweete Pandora deigne our humble suites.
O graunt me loue or wound me to the death.
Stand vp: Pandora is no longer proud,
But shames at folly of her former deedes,
But why standes Stesias like a man dismayde?
Draw neare I say and thou with all the rest.
Forgiue the rigour of Pandoraes hand,
And quite forget the faultes of my disdayne.
Now is the time if you consent all foure,
VVherein Ile make amends for olde offence.
One of you foure shalbe my wedlocke mate,
And all the rest my welbeloued friendes:
But vowe you here in presence of the Gods,
That when I choose, my choyse shall please you all.
Then make I vowe, by Pallas shepherds Queene,
That Stesias will alowe Pandoraes choyse.
But if he speede that lesse deserues then I,
Ile rather dye, then grudge or make complaynt.
I sweare the like by all our country gods,
And I by our Dianes holy head.
And I by Ceres and her sacred Nymphes.
Then loue and Hymen blesse me in my choyse.
You all are young and all are louely fayre,
All kinde, and curteous and of sweete demeane,
All right and valiaunt, all in flowring prime,
But since you graunt my will his libertie,
Come Stesias take Pandora by the hand,
And with my hand I plight my spotles fayth.
The word hath almost slayne me with delight.
The worde with sorowe killeth me outright.
O happy Stesias, but vnhappy me,
Come let vs goe and weepe our want els where
Stesias hath got Pandora from vs all.
Their sad depart would make my hart to earne,
VVere not the ioyes that I conceaue in thee:
Go, go, Gunophilus without delay,
Gather me balme and cooling Violets,
And of our holly hearbe Nicotian,
And bring with all pure hunny from the hyue,
That I may heere compound a wholsome salue,
To heale the wound of my vnhappy hand.
I goe.
Blest be the hand that made so happy wound,
For in my sufferance haue I wonne thy loue,
And blessed thou, that hauing tryed my faith,
Hast giuen admittance to my harts desert,
Now all is well, and all my hurt is whole,
And I in paradise of my delight.
Come louely spouse, let vs go walke the woods,
VVhere warbling birds recorde our happines:
And whisling leaues make musick to our myrthe,
And Flora strews her bowre to welcome thee.
But first sweet husband, be thou ruld by me,
Go make prouision for some holy rytes:
That zeale may prosper our new ioyned loue,
And by and by my selfe will follw thee.
Stay not my decre, for in thy lookes I liue.
I feele my selfe inspyrd, but wot not how,
Nor what it is, vnlesse some holy powre:
My heart foretels me many things to come,
And I am full of vnacquainted skil:
Yet such as wil not issue from my tongue,
But like Siballaes goulden prophesies,
Affecting rather to be clad in verse,
(The certaine badge of great Apolloes gift)
Then to be spred and soyld in vulgar words,
And now to ease the burden of my bulke,
Like Sibill, thus Pandora must begin,
Come my Pandora, Stesias stayes for thee.
Peace man, with reuerence here & note my words,
For from Pandora speakes the Lawreat God.
Utopiae Stesias Phoenici soluit amorem,
Numina caelorum dum pia praecipiunt.
And backward thus the same, but double sence.
Praecipiunt pia dum celorum Numina, amorem
Soluit Phoenici Stesias Utopiae.
He soberly repeating these verses, first forward and then▪ backward, sayeth.
If soluere amorem signifie to loue,
Then meanes this prophesie good to Stesias:
But if it signisie to withdrawe loue,
Then is it ill aboadement to vs both:
But speake Pandora while the God inspyres.
Idaliis prior hic pueris est: aequoris Alt ▪
Pulchrior hec nymphis, & prior Aoniis.
And backward thus, but still all one in sense.
Aoniis prior, & nymphis hec pulchrior alti
Aequoris est: pueris hic prior Idaliis.
He soberly repeating these also, backward and forward, sayeth:
Forward and back, these also are alike
And sence all one, the pointing only changd:
They but import Pandoraes praise and mine.
Euen now beginneth my furie to retyre,
And now with Stesias hence wil I retyre.
Phoebus away, thou makst her too precise,
Ile haue her wittie, quick, and amorous,
Delight in reuels and in banqueting,
VVanton discourses, musicke and merrie songes.
Bright Cyprian Queene intreate Pandora fayre.
For though at first Phoebus enuied her lookes,
Yet now doth he admire her glorious hew.
And sweares that neyther Daphne in the spring,
Nor glistering Thetis in her orient robe,
Nor shamefast morning gert in siluer cloudes.
Are halfe so louely as this earthly sainte.
And being so fayre my beames shall make her light,
For Lenety is Beauties wayting mayde.
Make Chastity Pandoraes wayting mayde,
For modest thoughtes beseemes a woman best.
Away with chastity and modest thoughts,
Quo mihi fortuna si non conceditur vti?
Is she not young? then let her to the worlde,
All those are strumpets that are ouer chaste,
Defying such as keepe their company,
Tis not the touching of a womans hand,
Kissing her lips, hanging about her necke.
A speaking looke, no nor a yeelding worde,
That men expect, beleeue me Sol tis more,
And were Mars here he would protest as much.
But what is more then this is worse then nought,
I dare not stay least she infect me too.
what is he gone, then light foote Ioculus,
Set me Pandora in a dauncing vayne,
Fayre mother I will make Pandora blyth,
And like a Satyre hop vpon these playnes.
Go Cupid giue her all the golden shafts.
And she will take thee for a forrester.
I will and you shall see her streight in loue.
Here Uenus sit, and with thy influence,
Gouerne Pandora, Natures miracle.
Prethee be quiet wherefore should I daunce?
Thus daunce the Satyrs on the euen lawnes.
Thus prety Satyr will Pandora daunce.
And thus will Cupid make her melody.
VVere I a man I could loue thee.
I am a mayden wilt thou haue me?
But Stesias saith you are not.
VVhat then? I care not.
Nor I.
Nor I,
Then merely farewell my mayden head.
These be all the teares Ile shed,
Turne about and tryppe it.
Uenus. Cupid and Ioculus, come leaue her now.
The boyes are gone and I will follow them.
I will not follow them they are to young.
VVhat hony thoughts are in Pandoraes brayne?
Hospitis est tepedo nocte recepta sui.
Ah I enuie her, why was not I so?
And so will I be, where is Iphicles,
Melos, Learchus? any of the three?
I cure the sicke? I study Poetry?
I thinke of honour and of chastitie?
No: loue is fitter then Pandoraes thoughts,
Yet not the loue of Stesias alone,
Learchus is as fayre as Stesias,
And Melos loulier then Learchus farre.
But might I chose, I would haue Iphicles,
And of them all Stesias deserues the least.
Must I be tyde to him? no Ile be loose,
As loose as Helen, for I am as fayre.
Mistresse, here be the hearbs for my maisters wound▪
Prety Gunophilus, giue me the hearbs:
VVhere didst thou gather them my louely boye?
Vpon Learchus plaine.
I feare me Cupid daunst vpon the plaine,
I see his arrow head vpon the leaues.
And I his golden quiuer and his bowe.
Thou doost dissemble, but I meane good sooth,
These hearbes haue wrought some wondrous effect,
Had they this vertue from thy Lilly hands?
Lets see thy hands my fayre Gunophilus.
It may be they had, for I haue not washt them this many a day.
Such slender fingers hath Ioues Ganymede,
Gunophilus, I am loue sick for thee.
O that I were worthy you should be sick for me.
I languish for thee, therefore be my loue.
Better you languish then I be beaten,
Pardon me, I dare not loue, because of my Maister.
Ile hide thee in a wood, and keepe thee close.
But what if he come a hunting that way.
Ile say thou art a Satyre of the woods.
Then I must haue hornes.
I so thou shalt, Ile giue thee Stesias hornes.
VVhy he hath none,
But he may haue shortly,
Yee say true, and of that condition I am yours.
I may not speake of loue, for I haue vowd,
Nere to sollicit her, but rest content.
Therefore onely gaze eyes to please your selues,
Let not my inward sence know what you see,
Least that my fancie do ate vpon her still.
Pandora is diuine, but say not so,
Least that thy heart heare thee and breake in tawine,
I may not court her, what a hell is this?
Gunopilus: Ile haue a banquet streight,
Goe thou prouide it, and then meete me here.
I will? but by your leaue Ile stay a while.
Happy are those that be Pandoraes guestes,
Then happy is Learchus, he is my guest.
And greater ioy doe I conceaue therein,
Then Tantalus that feasted with the Gods.
Mistres, the banquet.
VVhat of the banquet?
You haue bid no body to it,
VVhats that to you? Goe and prepare it.
And in the meane time you will be in loue with him.
I pray let me stay and bid him prepare the bauquet.
A way ye peasant.
Now she begins to loue me.
Learchus had I markt this golden hayre,
I had not chosen Stesias for my loue,
But now.
Louely Pandora, if a shepherds teares,
May moue thee vnto rueth, pity my state,
Make me thy loue, though Stesias be thy choyse,
And I in steade of loue will honour thee.
Had he not spoke I should haue courted him:
VVilt thou not say Pandora is to light,
If she take thee insteede of Stesias?
Rather ile dye then haue but such a thought.
Then shepheard this kisse shalbe our nuptials.
This kisse hath made me welthier then Pan.
Then come agayne: Now be as great as Ioue.
Let Stesias neuer touch these lippes agayne.
None but Learchus: Now sweete loue begone,
Least Stesias take thee in this amarous vayne,
But go no farther then thy bower my loue,
Ile steale from Stesias and meete thee streight.
I will Pandora, and agaynst thou comst.
strew all my bower with flagges and water mints.
A husband? what a folish word is that?
Giue me a louer, let the husband goe.
O Iphicles, behold▪ the heauenly Nymphe.
VVe may beholde her but she scornes our loue.
Are these the shepherds that made loue to me?
Yea and the shepherds that yet loue thee still.
O that Pandora would regard my suite.
They looke like water Nymphes, but speake like men,
Thou should be Nature in a mans attire,
And thou young Ganimayde Minion to Ioue.
Then would I make a worlde and giue it thee.
Then would I leaue great Ioue, to follow thee.
Melos is loueliest, Melos is my loue,
Come hether Melos I must tell thee newes,
Newes tragicall to thee and to thy flock.
Melos I loue thee, meete me in the vale,
I saw him in the VVolues mouth, Melos flye.
O that so fayre a Lambe should be deuoured:
Ile goe and rescue him.
Could Iphicles goe from thee for a Lambe,
The wolfe take all my flocke, so I haue thee,
VVill me to diue for pearle into the sea,
To fetch the fethers of the Arabian bird,
The Golden Apples from the Hesperian wood,
Maremaydes glasse, Floras abbiliment,
So I may haue Pandora for my loue.
He that would do all this, must loue me well,
And why should he loue me and I not him?
VVilt thou for my sake goe into yon groue?
And we will sing vnto the wilde birdes notes.
And be as pleasant as the Western winde,
That kisses flowers and wantons with their leaues.
VVill I? O that Pandora would.
I will and therefore followe Iphicles.
Did base Learchus court my heauenly loue?
Pardon me Pan if to reuenge this deed,
I shed the blood of that desembling swaine,
VVith Iealous fire my heart begins to burne.
Ah bring me where he is Gunophilus,
Least he intice Pandora from my bower.
I know not where he is, but here heele be:
I must prouide the banquet, and be gone.
VVhat will the shepherds banquet with my wife.
O light Pandora canst thou be thus false?
Tell me where is this wanton banquet kept?
That I may hurle the dishes at their heades,
Mingle the wine with blood and end the feast,
VVith Tragicke outcries like the Theban Lord,
VVhere fayre Hippodamia was espousd.
Here in this place, for so she poynted me.
VVhere might I hide me to hehold the same.
O in this caue for ouer this theyle sitte.
But then I shall not see them when they kisse,
Yet you may here what they say, if they kisse ile hollow,
But do so then my sweete Gunophilus
And as a stronge winde brusing from the earth,
So will I rise out of this hollow vault:
making the woods shake with my furious wordes.
But if they come not at all, or when they come do vse themselues honestly, then come not out, least you seeming Iealious make her ouer hate you.
Not for the worlde vnles I heare thee call,
Or els their wanton speech prouoke me forth.
VVell in then, wert not a prety iest to bury him quicke, I warrant it would be a good while eare she would scratch him out of his graue with her nayles, and yet shee might too, for she hath digd such vaults in my face that ye may go from my chinne to my eyebrowes betwixt the skin and the flesh, wonder not at it good people I can proue there hath bene two or three marchantes with me to hire romes to lay in wine, but that they doe not stand so conueniently as they wold wish, for indeed they are euery one too neare my mouth, and I am a great drinker, I had had a quarters rent before hand. VVel be it knowne vnto all men that I haue done this to cornute my mayster, for yet I could neuer haue opportunitie. You would litle thinke my necke is growne away with loking back as I haue been a kissing, for feare he should come, and yet it is a fayre example, beware of kissing bretheren. VVhat doth the caue open? ere she and he haue done heele picke the lock with his horne.
Now haue I playde with wanton Iphicles.
Yea and kept touch with Melos, both are pleased,
Now were Learchus here? but stay me thinkes
here is Gunophilus Ile goe with him.
Mistres my mayster is in this caue thinking to meete you and Learchus here.
VVhat is he Iealious? come Gunophilus
In spite of him Ile kisse thee twenty times.
O looke how my lippes quiuer for feare.
VVhere is my husband speake Gunophilus.
He is in the woods and will be here anon.
I but he shall not.
His fellow swaines will meet me in this bower,
VVho for his sake I meane to entertayne,
If he knew of it he would meete them here.
Ah where so ere he be, safe may he be,
Thus hold I vp my hands to heauen for him,
Thus weepe I for my deere loue Stesias.
VVhen will the shepheards come?
Imediately, prepare the banquet streight,
Meane time Ile pray that Stesias may be here,
Bring Iphicles and Melos with thee and tell them
Of my husband. Descendit ad inferos.
Youle loue them then▪
No, onely thee, yet let them sitte with me,
Content, so you but sit with them.
VVhy hath Pandora thus deluded me?
Learchus whist my husbands in this caue,
Thinking to take vs together here.
Shall I slay him, and enioy thee still?
No, let him liue but had he Argos eyes,
He should not keepe me from Learchus loue,
Thus will I hang about Learchus necke:
And sucke out happinesse from forth his lippes.
And this shalbe the heauen that Ile ayme at.
Sic vos non vobis, sic vos non vobis.
what meanst thou by that?
Here is a coment vpon my wordes,
VVherefore doest thou breake the glasse.
Ile answere it, shall I prouide a banquet and be co send of the best dish? I hope syr you haue sayde grace, and now may I fall too.
Away base swayne.
Sir as base as I am Ile goe for currant here.
VVhat? will Pandora be thus light?
O you stand vpon the weight, wel if she were twenty graines lighter I would not refuse her prouided alwayes, she be not clipt within the ringe.
Gunophilus thou art too malepert.
Thinke nothimg, for I can not shift him off,
Sirra prouide the banquet you are best.
I will and that incontinently for indeed I cannot abstein.
Here take thou Melos fauours, keep it close,
For he and Iphicles will streight be here,
I loue them not, they both importune me,
Yet must I make as if I loue them both.
Here they come.
VVelcome Learchus to Pandoraes feast.
VVhat makes Learchus here?
wherefore should Melos banquet with my loue?
My heart ryseth agaynst this Iphicles.
Melos my loue. Sit downe sweete Iphicles.
She daunts Learchus with a strange aspect.
I like not that she whispers vnto him.
I warrant you.
Hers to the health of Stesias my loue,
VVould he were here to welcome you all three.
I will go seeke him in the busky groues.
You lose your labour then, he is at his flocke.
I he wayes more his flocke then me. she weepes.
weepe not Pandora for he loues thee well.
And I loue him.
But why is Melos sad?
For thee I am sad, thou hast iniured me,
Knowes not Melos I loue him.
Thou iniurest me and I wilbe reuenged.
Hath Iphicles forgot my wordes.
If I should hollow they were all vndone.
They both are lealious yet mistrust me not.
Here Melos.
I pledge thee Iphicles.
Learchus goe thou knowst my minde.
Shall I sit here thus to be made a stale.
Louely Pandora meanes to follow me:
Farewell this feast, my bauquet comes not yet.
Let him goe.
Pandora go with me to Stesias.
No, rather goe with me.
Away base Iphieles.
Coward hand of, or els Ile strike thee downe,
My husband heres you, will you striue for wine▪
Giue vs a fresh cup, I will haue ye friends.
I defie thee Iphicles.
I thee Melos.
Both of them are drunke.
Is this thy loue to me?
Nay if you fall out farewell,
Now will I goe meet Learchus.
I see thy Iugling, thou shalt want thy will.
Follow me if thou darst, and fight it out.
If I dare, Yes I dare and will? Come thou.
Hollow, hollovv.
vvhere is the villayne that hath kist my loue
No body mayster.
vvhy striue they then?
Tvvas for a cup of vvine, they vvere all drunke.
vvhither is my vvife gone?
To seeke you.
Ah Pandora pardon me thou art chaste,
Thou madst me to suspect her, take thou that.
O mayster I did for good vvill to you.
And I beat thee for good vvill to her.
VVhat hast thou to doe betvvixt man and vvife.?
Too much vvith the man, too litle vvith the vvife.
Empresse of loue giue Hermes leaue to reigne,
My course comes next therefore resigne to me.
Ascend thou winged purseuant of Ioue.
Now shall Pandora be no more in loue,
And all these swaines that were her fauorits,
Shall vnderstand there mistres hath playde false,
And lothing her blab all to Stesias.
Now is Pandora in my regiment,
And I will make her false and full of slights,
Theeuish, lying, suttle, eloquent.
For these alone belong to Mercury.
Vnkind Pandora to delude me thus.
Too kinde Learchus that hath loude her thus.
Too foolish Melos that yet dotes on her.
Blacke be the Iuory of her tysing face,
Dimde be the sun-shine of her rauishing eyes.
Fayre may her face be, beautifull her eyes,
O Iphicles abiure her, she is false.
To thee Learchus and to Melos false,
Nay to vs all too false and full of guile,
How many thousand kisses gaue she me.
And euery kisse mixt with an amorous glaunce.
How oft haue I leand on her siluer breast,
She singing on her Lute, and Melos being the note.
But waking, what sweete pastime haue I had,
For loue is watchfull, and can neuer sleepe.
But ere I slept.
VVhen I had list.
VVhat then?
Caetera quis nescit?
Melos preuents me that I should haue sayd.
Blush Iphicles and in thy Rosie cheekes.
Let all the heat that feeds thy heart appeare.
Droope not fayre Iphicles for her misdeeds:
But to reuenge it hast to Stesias.
Yea he shall know she is lasciuious.
In this complaint Ile ioyne with thee, let vs go.
Stay heere he comes.
O Stesias what a heauenly loue hast thou?
A loue as chaste as is Apolloes tree:
As modest as a vestall Virgins eye,
And yet as bright as Glow wormes in the night:
VVith which the morning decks her louers hayre.
O fayre Pandora, blessed Stesias.
O foule Pandora, cursed Stesias.
VVhat meanst thou Iphicles?
Ah is she fayre that is lasciuious?
Or that swaine blest that she makes but a stale.
He means thy loue vnhappy Stesias.
My loue? no Shepheards this is but a stale,
To make me hate Pandora whom I loue,
So whispered late the false Gunophilus,
Let it suffice that I beleeue you not.
Loue is deafe, blinde, and incredulous,
I neuer hung about Pandoraes neck,
She neuer termd me fayre and thee black swaine.
She playd not vnto Melos in her bowre,
Nor is his greene bowre strewd with Primrose leaues.
I kist her not, nor did she terme me loue,
Pandora is the loue of Stesias.
Sirra, bid your Mistres come hether.
I shall syr.
I neuer hung about Pandoraes neck,
She playde not vnto Melos in her bower,
I kill her not, nor did she terme me loue.
These wordes argue Pandora to be light.
She playde the wanton with these amarous swaines,
By all these streames that interlaced these floodes.
VVhich may be venom to her thirstie soule.
Ile be reuenged as neuer shepherd was,
Now foule Pandora, wicked Stesias.
Mistres tis true I hard them, venter not.
Fence with her tongue, and garded with her wit.
Thus goeth Pandora vnto Stesias.
Detested falsor that to Stesias eyes.
Art more insestious then the Basiliske
Gunophilus, Pandora is vndone,
Her loue, her ioy, her life hath lost his wits,
Offer a Kyd in Esculapias fane,
That he may cure him, least I dye outright,
Ile offer it Esculapius, but he shall not haue him, for when he comes to him selfe I must answer it.
Go I say.
Stay I am well tis thou that makst me raue,
Thou playdst the wanton with my fellow swaynes.
Then dye Pandora: art thou in thy wits.
And calste me wanton?
O Maister what haue you done.
Diuine Pandora rise and pardon me.
I cannot but forgiue thee Stesias,
But by this light, if.
Looke how she winkes.
O stay my loue I know twas their deuise
He that will winne me must haue Stesias shape.
Such golden hayre, such Alabaster lookes,
VVilt thou know why I loued not Iupiter?
Because he was vnlike my Stesias.
VVas euer silly shepherd thus abusd?
All three afirmd Pandora held them deare.
It was to bring me in disgrace with thee,
That they might haue some hope I would be theirs.
I cannot walke but they importune me.
How many amarous letters haue they sent.
VVhat giftes? yet all in vayne to proue which true,
Ile beare this slaunder with a patient minde,
Speeke them all fayre and ere the sunne go downe,
Ile bring thee where they vse to lie in weight,
To robbe me of my honour in the groues,
Do so sweete wife, and they shall buy it deare
I cannot stay my sheepe must to the fould.
Go Stesias as simple as a sheepe,
And now Pandora summon all thy wits,
To be reuenged vpon these long toungd swaynes,
Gunophilus beare Iphicles this ring:
Tell him I raue and language for his loue.
VVill him to meete me in this meade alone,
And sweare his fellowes haue deluded him,
Beare this to Melos say that for his sake,
I stabd my selfe, and hadst not thou been neare,
I had bene dead, but yet I am aliue.
Calling for Melos whom I onely loue,
And to Learchus beare these passionate lines,
VVhich if he be not flint will make him come.
I will, and you shall see how cunningly Ile vse them stay here and I will send them to you one after another, and then vse them as your wisdome shall thinke good.
That letter did I pen doubting the worst,
And dipt the Napking in the Lambkins blood.
For Iphicles were he compact of Iron,
My ring is Adamant to drawe him foorth,
Let women learne by me to be reuengd.
Ile make them bite their tongues and eate their wordes,
Yea sweare vnto my husband all is false.
My wit is plyant and inuention sharpe,
To make these nouises that iniure me.
Young Iphicles must boast I fauourd him,
Here I protest as Helen to her loue:
Oscula luctanti tantummodo pauca proternus
abstulit: vlterius, nil habet ille mei.
And whats a kisse? too much for Iphicles?
Melos is wily, and Learchus false,
Here is Pandoraes ring, and she is mine:
It was a stratagem layde for my loue,
O foolish Iphicles what hast thou done?
Must thou betray her vnto Stesias.
Here will I sit till I see Iphicles,
Sighing my breath, out weeping my heart bloud,
Go soule and flye vnto my leefest loue,
A fayrer subiect then Elysium.
Can I heare this? can I view her? O no.
But I will view thee my sweet Iphicles,
Thy lookes are physicke, suffer me to gaze,
That for thy sake am thus distempered.
Pale be my lookes to witnesse my amisse.
And mine to shew my loue: louers are pale.
And so is Iphicles.
And so Pandora let me kisse my loue,
And adde a better couler to his cheekes.
O bury all thy anger in this kisse,
And mate me not with vttering my offence.
VVho can be angrie with one whom she loues?
Rather had I to haue no thoughts at all.
Then but one ill thought of my Iphicles:
Go vnto Stesias and deny thy words,
For he hath thrust me from his cabanet.
And as I haue done, I will loue thee still,
Delay no time, hast gentle Iphicles,
And meete me on Enepeus sedgy bankes.
VVhen shall I meet thee, tell me my bright loue.
At midnight Iphicles, till then farewell.
Farewell Pandora, Ile to Stesias.
Thus will I serue them all, now Melos come,
I loue thee too, as much as Iphicles.
This is Pandoraes blood, hast Melos hast,
And in her presence launce thy flesh as deepe:
VVicked Learchus, subtill Iphicles:
You haue vndone me by your reaching wit.
Gunophilus, where is Gunophilus?
Giue me the knife thou pulledst from my brest:
Melos is gone, and left Pandora here,
VVitnesse yee wounds, witnesse yee siluer streames,
That I am true, to Melos onely true,
And he betrayde me vnto Stesias.
Forgiue me loue, it was not I alone,
It was Learchus, and false Iphicles.
Tis not Learchus, nor that Iphicles,
That greeues me, but that Melos is vnkinde,
Melos for whom Pandora straynd her voyce,
Playing with euery letter of his name:
Melos, for whom Pandora made this wounde,
Melos, for whom Pandora now will dye.
Diuine Pandora, stay thy desperat hand,
May summers lightning burne our Autumne crop,
The thunders teeth plowe vp our fayrest groues,
The scorching sun-beames, dry vp all our springs,
And ruffe windes blast the beauty of our plaines,
If Melos loue not thee, more then his heart.
So Melos sweares, but tis a louers othe.
Once guiltie, and suspected euermore,
Ile nere be guiltie more, suspect me not.
Nor I suspect thee more, mistrust me not,
Learchus neuer toucht Pandoraes lips,
Nor Iphicles receaud a friendly word:
Melos hath al my fauours and for all,
Doe onely this and Ile be onely thine,
Go vnto Stesias and deny thy wordes,
And as the sunne goes downe Ile meete thee heare.
I will Pandora, and to cure thy wound,
Receiue these vertuous hearbes which I haue found.
A prety swayne worthy Pandoraes loue,
But I haue written to Learchus I,
And I will keepe my promise though I dye,
which is to cozen him as he did me,
Learchus my loue Learchus,
O the iteration of my name argues her affection,
VVas it my desert? thine alas Pandora,
It was my destiny to be credulous to these miscreants.
Looke, looke she is writing to you agayne.
VVhat is he come then shall my tongue declayme,
Yet am I bashfull and afeard to speake.
Blush not Pandora who hath made most fault?
I that sollicit thee which loues me not.
I that betrayd thee, which offended not.
Learchus pardon me.
Pandora pardon mee.
All friendes and so they kist.
I can but smile to thinke thou wast deceiud,
Learchus thou must to my husband streight,
And say that thou art sory for thy wordes,
And in the euening ile meete thee agayne,
Vnder the same groue where we both sat last.
I will Pandora, but looke where he comes.
Then giue me leaue to desemble.
Tis not thy sorrow that can make amends,
Were I aman thou shouldst repent thy wordes.
Learchus will you stand vnto your wordes.
O Stesias pardon me twas their deceite.
I am sory that I iniurd her,
They lay the fault on thee, and thou on them,
But take thee that.
Ah Stesias leaue: you shall not fight for me,
Go, goe Learchus I am Stesiasses.
Art thou?
No no Learchus, she doth but say so.
Out of my ground Learchus, from my land,
And from hence forward come not neare my lawnes,
Pandora come: Gunophilus away.
Learchus meete me straight, the time drawes nigh.
The time drawes nigh, O that the time were now,
I go to meete Pandora at the groue.
VVhen will the sun go downe? flye Phoebus flye,
O that thy steeds were wingd with my swift thoughts:
Now shouldst thou fall in Thetis azure armes,
And now would I fall in Pandoraes lap.
VVherefore did Iupiter create the day?
Sweete is the night when euery creature sleepes,
Come night, come gentle night, for thee I stay.
VVherefore dooth Iphicles desire the night?
VVhose that Melos? thy words did make me afeard,
I wish for midnight but to take the VVolfe,
VVhich kils my sheepe, for which I made a snare:
Melos farewell, I must go watch my flocks.
And I my loue? here she will meet me streight,
See where she comes hiding her blushing eyes.
My loue Pandora for whose sake I liue?
Hide not thy beauty which is Melos sunne.
Here is none but vs too, lay aside thy vale.
Here is Stesias, Melos you are deceaud.
Pandora hath deceaud me I am vndone.
So will not I syr, I meane simply.
Come hast thou all his Iewels and his pearles?
I all, but tell me which way shall we go?
Vnto the sea side, and take shipping streight.
VVell I am reuengd at last of my Maister, I pray God I may be thus euen with all mine enemyes: onely to runne away with their wiues.
Gunophilus, for thee I haue done this.
I and for your selfe too, I am sure you wil not beg by the way.
For thee Ile beg and dye Gunophilus.
I so I thinke, the world is so hard, that if yee beg yee may be sure to be starud.
I prythee be not so churlish.
O this is but myrthe, do you not know
Comes facetus est tanquam vehiculus in via:
A merry companion is as good as a VVagon,
For you shalbe sure to ryde though yee go a foote.
Gunophilus, setting this mirth aside,
Dost thou not loue me more then all the world?
Be you as stedfast to me as Ile be to you, and we two wil goe to the worlds end, and yet we cannot, for the world is round, and seeing tys round, lets daunce in the circle, come turne about.
VVhen I forsake thee, then heauen it selfe shal fall.
No, God forbid, then perhaps we should haue Larkes.
This is Enip, here she should be,
VVhat is it midnight? time hath bene my friend,
Come sweete Pandora all is safe and whist,
VVhither flyes my loue.
Follow me, follow me, here comes Stesias.
She hath betrayd me whither shall I flye?
Eyther to the riuer, or els to thy graue.
The euenings past, yea midnight is at hand.
And yet Pandora comes not at the groue.
But Stesias is her deputy he comes.
And with his shephooke greetes Learchus thus.
Pardon me Stesias, twas Pandoraes wiles,
That hath betrayd me, trust her not, she is false.
VVhy doest thou tell me the contrary take that,
She is honest but thou wouldst seduce her.
Away from my groue, out of my land,
Did I not giue thee warning?
Now other planets▪ influence is done,
To Cynthia lowest of the erring starres,
Is beautious Pandora giuen in charge.
And as I am so shall Pandora bee,
New fangled, fyckle, slothfull, foolish, mad,
Inspight of nature that enuies vs all.
Come, come Pandora, we must make more hast,
Or Stesias will ouertake vs both.
I cannot go no faster, I must rest.
VVe are almost at the the sea side I pray thee ryse.
O I am faynt and weary, let me sleepe.
Pandora if thou loue me let vs goe.
VVhy doest thou waken me ile remember this.
VVhat are you angry with me.
No with my selfe for louing such a swayne,
VVhat fury made me doate vpon these lookes,
Like winters picture are his withered cheekes,
His hayre as rauens plumes, ah touch me not.
His handes are like the sinnes of some foule fish,
Look ehow he mowes like to an aged ape,
Ouer the chayne Iacke, or ile make thee leape.
What a suddayne change is here?
Now he sweares by his ten bones, downe I say.
Did I not tell you I should haue Larkes,
where is the larks, come weel go catch some streight?
No let vs go a fishing with a net?
VVith a net? no, an angle is enough:
An angle, a net, no none of both.
Ile wade into the water, water is fayre,
And stroke the fishes vnder neath the gilles.
But first Ile go a hunting in the wood,
I like not hunting, let me haue a hawke
VVhat wilt thou say and if I loue thee still?
Any thing, what you will.
But shall I haue a gowne of oken leaues,
A chaplet of red berries, and a faune.
Made of the morning dewe to coole my face.
How often will you kisse me in an houre,
And where shall me sit till the sunne be downe,
For Nocte latent mendae.
what then?
I will not kisse thee till the sunne be downe,
Thou art deformd, the nyght vvill couer thee,
VVe vvomen must be modest in the day,
O tempt me not vntill the euening come.
Lucretia tota sis licet vsque die. Thaida nocte volo.
Hate me a dayes, and loue me in the nyght,
Calst thou me Thais? goe and loue not me,
I am not Thais Ile be Lucretia I,
Giue me a knife and for my chastety,
Ile dye to be canonized a saynt.
But you will loue me vvhen the sun is downe▪
No but I will not.
Did you not promise me.
No I, I saw thee not till now.
Do you see me now.
I and loth thee.
Belike I was a spirit all this vvhile?
A spirit, a spirit, vvhither may I flye.
I see Pandora and Gunophilus.
And I see Stesias welcome Stesias.
Gunophilus thou hast inveigled her,
And robd me of my treasure and my wife.
Ile strippe thee to the skinne for this offence,
And put thee in a wood to be deuourd,
Of emptie Tygres, and of hungry VVolues,
Nor shall thy sad lookes moue me vnto rueth,
Pardon me mayster she is Lunaticke,
Foolish and franticke, and I followed her.
Onely to saue the goods and bring her backe:
VVhy thinke you I would runne away with her?
He neede not for Ile runne away with him,
And yet I will go home with Stesias,
So I shall haue a white lambe coloured blacke,
Two little sparrowes, and a spotted fawne.
I feare it is too true that he reportes.
Nay stay a while and you shall see her daunce.
No, no, I will not daunce, but I will sing,
Stesias hath a white hand, but his nayles are blacke,
His fingers are long and small, shall I make them cracke.
One two and three, I loue him, and he loues me.
Beware of the shephooke,
Ile tell you one thing,
If you aske me why I sing,
I say yee may go looke.
Pandora speake, louest thou Gunophilus?
I, if he be a fish, for fish is fine,
Sweete Stesias helpe me to a whiting moppe.
Now I perceiue that she is lunaticke,
VVhat may I do to bring her to her wits?
Speake gentle maister and intreat her fayre▪
Pandora, my loue Pandora.
Ile not be fayre▪ why call you me your loue.
Loue is a little boy, so am not I.
I will allure her with fayre promises,
And when I haue her in my leauie bower,
Pray to our water Nimphes and Siluane gods,
To cure her of this piteous lunacye,
Giue me a running streame in both my hands,
A blew kings fisher, and a pible stone,
And Ile catch butter flies vpon the sand,
And thou Gunophilus shalt clippe their wings.
Ile giue thee streames vvhose pibble shalbe pearle,
Loue birdes whose feathers shalbe beaten gold.
Muskflyes vvith amber berries in their mouthes,
Milke white Squirrels, singing Popiniayes,
A boat of deare skins, and a fleeting Ile,
A sugar cane, and line of twisted silke.
VVhere be all these.
I haue them in my bower, come follow me?
Streames with pearle? birdes with golden feathers?
Musk flyes, and amber berries? white Squirrels,
And singing Popiniayes? a boat of deare skins?
Come Ile goe, Ile go.
I was nere in loue with her till now, O absolute Pandora, because folish, for folly is womens perfection. To talke Idely, to loke wildly, to laugh at euery breach and play with a feather, is that would make a Stoyke in loue, yea thou thy selfe.
O Marcifili annum iam audientem Cratippum idque Athaenis. Grauity in a vvoman, is like to a gray beard vpon a breaching boies chinne, vvhich a good Scholemaister would cause to be clipt, and the vvise husband to be avoyded.
Gunophilus, vvhere is thy Mistresse?
A ketching a blew kings fisher.
Tell vs where is she?
A gathering little pibles.
VVhat dost thou mocke vs.
No: but if she were here she vvould make mowes at the proudest of you.
VVhat meanest thou by this.
I meane my mistres is become folish.
A iust reward for one so false as shee.
Such hap betide those that intend vs ill.
Neuer vvere simple shepherdes so abusd.
Gunopholus thou hast betrayd vs all.
Thou broughtest this ring from her which made me come▪
And thou this bloody napkin vnto me.
And thou this flattering letter vnto me.
VVhy I brought you the ring thinking you and shee should be maried togeather. And being hurt as she told me. I had thought she had sent for you as a surgeon.
But why broughtest thou me this letter?
Onely to certifie you that she was in health,
As I was at the bringing hereof.
And thus being loth to trouble you, I commit you to God.
Yours as his owne Gunophilus.
The wicked youngling flouteth vs, let him goe.
Immortall Pan where ere this lad remaynes,
Reuenge the wrong that he hath done thy swaines.
O that a creature so diuine as she,
VVhose beauty might inforce the heauens to blush,
And make fayre Nature angry at the hart,
That she hath made her to obscure her selfe,
Should be so fickle and so full of slightes,
And fayning loue to all, loue none at all.
Had she been constant vnto Iphicles,
I would haue clad her in sweete Floraes roabes:
Haue set Dianaes garland on her head,
Made her sole mistres of my wanton flocke,
And sing in honour of her diety,
where now with teares I curse Pandoraes name.
The springs that smild to see Pandoraes face,
And leapt aboue the bankes to touch her lippes▪
The proud playnes dauncing with Pandoraes weight,
The Iocund trees that vald when she came neare
And in the murmur of their whispering leaues,
Did seeme to say Pandora is our Queene,
witnesse how fayre and beautifull she was,
But now alone how false and treacherous.
Here I abiure Pandora, and protest,
To liue for euer in a single life.
The like vow makes Learchus to great Pan.
And Iphicles though soare agaynst his will.
In witnesse of my vow I rend these lines,
O thus be my loue disperst into the ayre.
Here lie the bloody Napkin which she sent,
And with it my affection, and my loue.
Breake, breake, Pandoraes ring, and with it breake,
Pandoraes loue, that almost burst my heart.
Ah whither runnes my loue Pandora? stay,
Gentle Pandora stay, runne not so fast.
Shall I not stamp vpon the ground? I will,
VVho sayth Pandora shall not rend her hayre?
VVhere is the groue that askt me how I did?
Giue me an angle for the fish will bite.
Looke how Pandora raues, now she is starke mad.
For you she raues, that meant to rauish her,
Helpe to recouer her or els yee dye.
May she with rauing dye? do what thou darst.
She ouer reacht vs with deceitfull guile▪
And Pan, to whom we prayd hath wrought reuenge.
Ile haue the Ocean put into a glasse,
And drinke it to the health of Stesias.
Thy head is full of hediockes Iphicles,
So shake them of, now let me see thy hand,
Looke where a blasing starre is in this line,
And in the other two and twenty sonnes.
Come come Pandora sleepe within my armes,
Thine armes are firebrandes, whers Gunophilus,
Go kisse the eccho, and bid loue vntrusse,
Go fetch the blacke Goat with the brazen heele,
And tell the Bell-wether I heare him not.
Not, not, not, that you should not come vnto me
This night, not at all, at all, at all.
She is a sleepe, mayster shall I vvake her?
O no Gunophilus there let her sleepe,
And let vs pray that she may be recurd.
Stesias thou pittiest her that loues thee not
The vvordes we told thee Stesias vvere too true.
Neuer did Iphicles desemble yet,
Beleeue me Stesias she hath been vntrue.
Yet vvill you slay me with your slaunderous words
Did you not all svveare for her chastety.
It was her subtle vvit that made vs sweare,
For Stesias know she shevved loue to vs all,
And seuerally sent for vs by this svvayne,
And vnto me he brought such hony lines,
As ouercomd, I flevv vnto her bower.
VVho vvhen I came, svvore she loud me a lone.
VVil'ing me to deny the vvordes I spoke,
And she at night vvould meete me in the groue.
Thus meaning simply, lo I vvas betrayd,
Gunophilus brought me a bloody cloth,
Saying for my loue she vvas almost slayne,
And vvhen I came she vsed me as this svvaine,
Protesting loue, and poynting me this place,
And by this bearer I receiued a ring,
And many a louing vvord that drevv me foorth,
O that a vvoman should desemble so.
She then for svvore Learehus and this svvaine,
Saying that Iphicles vvas onely hers,
VVhereat I promised to deny my vvordes.
And she to meete me at Enepius bankes,
VVert thou the messenger vnto them all.
I vvas, and all that they haue fayde is true,
She loe not you, not them, but me alone,
Hovv oft hath she runne vp and dovvne the lavvnes.
Calling aloud where is Gunophilus.
Ah how my hart swels at these miscreants wordes.
Come let vs leaue him in this pensiue mood.
Fret, Stesias fret, while we daunce on the playne.
Such fortune happen to incredulus swaines.
Sweete is a single life, Stesias farewell.
Go life, flye soule, go wretched Stesias,
Curst be Utopia for Pandoraes sake,
Let wild bores with their tuskes plow vp my lawnes,
Deuouring VVoules come shake my tender lambes,
Driue vp my goates vnto some steepy rocke,
And let them fall downe headlong in the sea,
She shall not liue, nor thou Gunophilus,
To triumph in poore Stesias ouerthrow.
Stay shepherd, stay.
Hurt not Pandora louely Stesias.
VVhat meanes my loue to looke so pale and wan.
For thee base strumpet am I pale and wanne.
Speake mildly, or Ile make thee crabbed swaine.
Take her agayne, and loue her Stesias.
Not for Vtopia, no, not for the world.
Ah canst thou frowne on her that lookes so sweet▪
Haue I offended thee? Ile make amends.
And what canst thou demaund more at her hand?
To slay her selfe that I may liue alone.
Flint harted shepherd thou deseruest her not.
If thou be Ioue conuey her from the earth,
And punish this Gunophilus her man.
O Ioue, let this be my punishment, to liue still with Pandora.
Enuious planets you haue done your worst.
Yet in despight of you Pandora liues,
And seeing the shepherds haue abiurd her loue,
She shalbe placed in one of your seauen orbs.
But thou that hast not serud her as I wild,
Vanish into a Haythorne as thou standst▪
Neare shalt thou wait vpon Pandora more.
O Nature place Pandora in my sphere,
For I am old, and she will make me young.
VVith me, and I will leaue the Queene of heauen.
VVith me, and Uenus shall no more be mine.
VVith me, and Ile forget fayre Daphnes loue.
VVith me, and ile turne Cupid out of doores.
with me, and ile forsake Aglauros loue.
No fayre Pandora stay with Cynthia,
And I will loue thee more then all the rest:
Rule thou my starre, while I stay in the woods,
Or keepe with Pluto in the infernall shades.
Go where thou wilt so I be rid of thee,
Speake my Pandora where wilt thou be?
Not with old Saturne for he lookes like death.
Nor yet with Iupiter least Iuno storme.
Nor vvith thee Mars, for Venus is thy loue,
Nor vvith thee Sol, thou hast two Parramours.
The sea borne Thetis and the rudy morne.
Nor vvith thee Uenus least I be in loue,
VVith blindfold Cupid or young Ioculus
Nor vvith thee Hermes, thou art full of slightes,
And vvhen I need thee Ioue will send thee foorth.
Say Cynthia, shall Pandora rule thy starre,
And vvilt thou play Diana in the woods?
Or Hecate in Plutos regiment?
I Pandora.
Fayre Nature let thy hand mayd dwe'l with her,
For know that change is my felicity,
And ficklenesse Pandoraes proper forme,
Thou madst me sullen first, and thou Ioue proud,
Thou bloody minded, he a Puritan.
Thou Venus madst me loue all that I saw,
And Hermes to deceiue all that I loue,
But Cynthia made me idle, mutable, forgetfull,
Foolish, fickle, franticke, madde,
These be the humors that content me best,
And therefore will I stay with Cynthia.
And Stesias since thou setst so light on her,
Be thou her slaue, and follow her in the Moone.
Ile rather dye then beare her company,
Nature will haue it so attend on her.
Ile haue thee be her vassaile, murmur not.
Then to reuenge me of Gunophilus,
Ile rend this hathorne with my furious hands▪
And beare this bush, if eare she looke but backe,
Ile scratch her face that was so false to me.
Now rule Pandora in fayre Cynthias steede,
And make the moone inconstant like thy selfe,
Raigne thou at womens nuptials, and their birth,
Let them be mutable in all their loues.
Fantasticall, childish, and folish, in their desires,
Demaunding toyes: and starke madde
VVhen they cannot haue their will.
Now follow me ye wandring lightes of heauen,
And greiue not, that she is not plast with you,
All you shall glaunce at her in your aspects,
And in coniunction dwell with her a space.
O that they had my roome.
I charge thee follow her, but hurt her not.