LEaue e a while my Lordes and waite for me,
At the blacke fountayne, by Osis groue,
le walke alone to holy Irus caue,
Talking a little while with him and then returne.
Ianthe begone.
Now Irus Let thy mindes eternall eye,
Extend the vertue of it past the Sunne.
Ah my Cleanthes where art thou become,
But since I saued thy guiltlesse life from death,
And turnd it onelyinto banishment,
Forgiue me loue, mee pittie comfort mee.
Maister.
Pego.
VVipe your eyes and you had them.
VVhy Pego.
The Queene is here to see your blindnes.
Her Maiestie is wel come, Heauens preserue,
And send her highnes an immortall rayne.
Thankes reuerent Irus for thy gentle prayer,
Dismisse thy man a while and I will lead thee,
For I haue waightie secretes to impart.
Would I were blind that she might lead mee.
Irus thy skill to tell the driftes of fate,
Our fortunes and thinges hid from sensuall eyes,
Hath sent mee to thee for aduertisment.
VVhere Duke Clenthes liues that was exilde,
This kingdome for attempting mee with loue,
And offering stayne to Aeipts royall bed.
I hope your maiestie will pardon mee,
I Conscience make me vtter what I thinke,
Of that hye loue affayres twixt him and you.
I will sweete Jrus being well assurd,
That whatsoeuer thy sharpe wisdomes sees,
In my sad frailtie thou wllt hue regard,
To my estate and name and keepe clo ▪
Of that your highnes may be well assurde,
Then I am bound madam to tell you this,
That you your selfe did seeke Clnthes loue,
And to aspire it, made away his Dutches,
VVhich he well knowing and affecting her,
Deare as his life denyed to satisfie,
That kindenesse offered twixt our selfe and him.
Therefore did ou in rage informe the Duke,
He sought our loue, and so he him.
To true it is graue Irus hou hat tould,
But for my loues sake which not Gods can rule,
Strike me no more of that wound yet too greene,
But onely tell me where Cleanthes is,
That I may follow him in some disguise,
And make him recompence for all his wrong.
Cleanthes is about this Cittie off,
VVith whom yor maiestie shall meete ere long:
And speake with him, if you will vs such meanes,
As you may vse for his discouery.
VVhat shall I vse then what is in my power,
I will not vse for his discouery,
Ile bind the winges of loue vnto myne armes,
And like a Eagle prying for her pray,
VVill ouerlooke the earthes round face for him,
VVere this sufficient.
Or I will Moorelike learne to swimme and diue.
Into the bottome of the Sea for him.
Least beeing the sonne of Aegyp and now set,
Thetis in rage with loue would rauish him.
VVere this sufficient.
But Maddam this must be the liklist meane
To seeke him out, and haue him at your will
Let his true picture through your land be sent.
Opposing great rewardes to him that findes him,
And threaten death to them that succour him,
So Ile assure your grace shall meete with him eare long.
Happie and blest be Irus for his skill
He sweetely plantes in my contentious mind,
For which most reuerent and religious man,
I giue this Iewell to thee richly worth.
A kentall or an hndreth waight of gold,
Bestow it as thou list on some good worke,
For well I know thou nothing doost reserue,
Of all thy riches men bestow on thee,
But wouldst thou leaue this place and poore mans life,
The count of Aegipt should imbrace thy feete,
And Toples honors be bestowed on thee,
I thanke your highnes for thus raysing mee,
But in this barrennesse I am most renound.
For wisdome and the sight of heauenly thinges,
Shines not so cleare as eathlye vanities.
Most rich is Irus in his pouertie
Oh that to finde his skill my crowne were lost.
None but poore Irus can of riches boast,
Now my Cleathes I will straight aduance
Thy louely pictures on each monument
About the Cittie and within the land.
Proposing twise fiue thousand Crownes to him,
That findes him to be tendered by my handes,
And a kind kisse at my imperiall lipes,
To him that succours him, Ile threaten death,
But he that doth not threaten him shall die,
For who is worthy, life will see him want.
To all his pictures when they be disperst.
VVill I continuall pilgrimages make,
As to the saintes and Idols I adore,
VVhere I will offer sighes, and vowes, and teares.
And sacifice a hecatombe of beast,
On seuerall alters built where they are plast,
By them shal Isis stature gently stand,
And Ile pretend my Iealous rites to her
But my Cleanthes shall the obiect bee,
And I will kneele and pray to none but he.
See Earth and Heauen where her Cleanthes is▪
I am Cleanthes and blind Iru too,
And more then these, as you shall soone perceaue,
Yet but a shepheardes sonne at Memphis borne,
And I will tell you how I got that name,
My Father was a fortune teller and from him I learnt his art,
And knowing to grow great, was to grow riche,
Such mony as I got by palmestrie,
I put to vse and by that meanes became
To take the shape of Leon. by which name,
I am well knowne a wealthie Vsurer,
And more then this I am two noble men,
Count Hermes is another of my names,
And Duke Cleanthes whom the Queene so loues,
For till the time that I may claime the crowne,
I meane to spend my tyme in sportes of loue,
VVhich in the sequell you shal playnely see,
And Ioy I hope in this my pollicie.
Oh maister heere comes the three wenches now strike it deade for a ortune.
These are the nymphes of Alexandria.
So called because there beauties are so rare.
VVith two of them at once am I in loue
Deepely and Equally the third of them,
My silly brother heere asmuch affectes,
VVhom I haue made the Burgomaister of this rich towne,
VVith the great wealth, I haue bestowed on him,
All three are maides kept pssing warilye,
Yet lately beeing at their athers house as I was Leon the rich vserer
I fell in loue with them, and there my brother too,
This fitly chaunceth that they haue liberty,
To visit me alone: now will I tell their fortunes so,
As may make way to both their loues at once,
The one as I am Leon the rich vserer,
The other as I am the mad brayne Count,
And do the best too, for my brothers loue,
Thanks good maister brother, but what are they that
Talke with themso long are they wooers trow,
I do not like it, would they would come neare.
O those are three seruantes that attend on them,
Let them alone, let them talke a while.
Tell vs Mnippus, Druso, and Plydor,
VVhy all our parentes gaue you three such charge,
To waite on vs and ouer see vs still,
VVhat do they feare, thinke you that we would do.
There feare is least you should accompanie,
Such as loue wanton talke, and dalliance,
VVhy what is wanton talke.
To ell you that were to offend our selues,
And those that haue forbidden you should heare it.
VVhy what is dalliance sayes my seruant then,
You must not know because you must not dally.
How say you by that, well do you keepe it from vs, as much as you can, weele desire it neuerlesse I can tell ye,
Lord what straite keepers of poore maides are you,
You are so chast you are the worse agayne:
Pray you good seruantes will you do vs the seruice,
To leaue vs alone a while.
VVe are commaunded not to be from you,
And therefore to leane you alone,
Were to wrong the trust your parentes put in vs.
I cry you mercy sir, yet do not stand all on the
Trust our parentes puts in you, but put vs in a litell to I pray.
Trust vs good seruantes by our selues a while.
Lets my mastrs and you say the woord,
Theyle but to Irus for to know theire fortunes,
And hees a holy man all Egypt knowes.
Stay not to long, then mistris and content,
Thats my good seruant we will straight returne.
And you mistris.
And I trustie seruant.
Faith then Ile venter my charge among the rest.
A mightie venture you shall be cronicled in Abrahams asses,
Catalog of cockscombes for your resolution.
Now the great foole take them all who could haue,
Pickt out three such liuelesse puppies,
Neuer to venter on their mistrisses.
One may see by them it is not meete choise men should haue offices,
A prettie morrall work it in the samplar of your hart,
But are we by our selues.
I thinke so vnlesse you haue alone in your belly.
Not I God knowes I neuer camewhere they grew yet,
Since we are alone lets talke a little merrily,
Mee thinkes I long to know what wanton talke and dalliance is
Ile lay my life tis that my mother vses when she and others,
Do beginne to talke and that she sayes to me mayde,
Get ye hence fall to your needle: what a mayd and Idle.
A mayd and Idle why maydes must be Idle but not an other thing.
then do not name it for I feare tis naught.
For esterday I hard Menippus as he was talking,
VVith my mothers maide and I stoode harkning at the chamber doore,
Sayde that, with that woord a mayd was got with childe.
How with the very woord.
I meane with that the woord seemes to expresse.
Nay if you be so fine you will not name it now,
VVe are all alone, you are much too nice.
VVhy let her chuse, let vs two name it,
Do then Elimine.
Nay doe you Martia.
VVhy woman I dare.
Do then I warrant thee.
Ile warrant my selfe if I list, but come let it alone,
Let vs to Irus for our fortunes.
God saue graue Irus.
VVelcome beautious Nymphes.
How know you Irus we are beautifull and cannot see.
Homr was blinde yet could he best dicerne,
The shapes of euery thing and so may I,
Indeede wee heare your skill can beautifie,
Beautie it selfe, and teach dames how to decke,
Their heades and bodies fittest to their formes,
To their complexions and their countenances.
So can I beateuous Nimphes, and make all eyes,
Sparkle with loue fire from your excellence.
How thinke you we are tyred to tempte mens lookes,
Beeing thus Nimphlike is it not too strange,
It is the better so it doth become.
But that I may disclose to you your fortunes
Tell me first Pego their true faces formes.
Mary r this that speakes to you has a face thinne like vnto water grewell, but yet it would do your hart good if you could see it
I know and see it better then thy selfe,
The blaze whereof doth turne me to a fyre.
Burning mine Intrailes with a strong desire.
VVhy turnst thou from vs Irus tell my fortune.
I wonder at the glorie it presentes,
To my soules health that sees vppon your heade,
Acorronet, and at your gratious feete,
Nobles and princes in their highest state,
VVhich state shal crowne your fortune eare you die,
And eare the hart of Heauen, the glorious sunne,
Shall quench his rosiat fires within the west.
You shall a husband haue noble and rich.
Happie Elimine, oh that I myght too.
Thankes for this news good Irus but disclose,
The meanes to this, if it be possible.
VVhen you come home ascend your Fathers tower
If you see a man come walking by,
And looking vp to you, descend,
And Issue, for you shall haue leaue,
And if he woe, you chuse him from the world,
Though he seeme humorous and want an eye,
VVearing a veluet patch vpon the same,
Chuse him your husband, and be blst in him,
Ile doe as thou adusest gentle Irus,
And prouing this Ile loue thee I liue.
My fortune now sweete Irus.
VVhat face hath this Nimph Peg.
Mary sir a face mde in forme like the ace of hartes.
And well compard for she commaundes al hartes,
Equall in beautie with that other Nimph,
And equally she burnes my hart with loue,
Say, sy sweete Irus what my fortune is,
Thou turnst from me, as when thou didest admire.
The happe fortune of Elimine.
So might I well, admiring yours no lesse.
Then when the light cround monarch of the hea-
Shal quench his fire within the Oceans brest (ues
Rise you and to your fathers garden hie,
There in an arbour doe a banquet s,
And if there come a man that of him selfe,
Sits downe and bis you welcome to your feast,
Accept him for he is the richest man,
That Alexandria or Aegypt hath,
And soone possessing him with all his wealth,
In little tyme you shall be of him,
Making your seconde choyse mongst mightie kinges.
Blest be thy ppes sweete Irus, and that light,
That guides thy bosome with such deepe fore sight,
Sleepe shall not make a closet for these eyes,
All this succeeding night for hast to rise.
My fortune now sweete Irus, but I fayth,
I haue some wrong to be the last of all,
For I am olde as they, and big enough,
To beare as great a fortune as the best of them,
VVhat face hath this Nimph Pego.
Oh maister what face hath she not, if I should beg a face I would haue her face.
But is it rond, and hath it neare a blemmish,
A mouth to wide a looke too impudent.
Oh mayster tis without all these, and without al crie.
Round faces and thinne skinde are hapieest still.
And vnto you fayre Nimph.
Shall fortune be exceeding gratious too,
VVhen the next morning therefore you shal rise,
Put in your bosome rosemary time and rue.
And presently stand at your fathers doore,
He that shall come offering kindenesse there,
And craue for fauour those same holsome hearbes,
bestowe them on him, and if meeting him,
He keepe the nuptiall Rosemary and time,
And tread the bitter rue beneath his feete,
Chuse him your husband ad be blest in him.
I wil sweete Irus nothing greeues me now,
But that Elimine this nyght shall haue,
Her happie husband, and I say till morning.
Nought grues me Irus but that we are maides.
Kept short of all thinges and haue nought to giue thee,
But take our loues and in the wished proofe,
Of these high frtunes thou foretellest vs.
Nothing we haue shall bee to deare for thee.
we that are sisters Irus by our vow,
VVill be of one selfe blood and thankefull minde,
To adore so cleare a sight in one so blinde.
farewell most beautious Nimphes your loues to mee.
Shall ore then gold or any treasure bee,
Now to my wardroppe for my veluet gowne, now doth the sport beginne,
Come gird this pistole closely to my side,
By which I make men feare my humor still,
And haue slayne two or three as twere my
VVhen I haue done it most aduisedly (mood
To rid them as they were my heauie foes,
Now am I knowne to be the mad braine Count,
VVhose humours twise, fiue summers I haue held,
And sayde at first I came from stately Rome,
Calling my selfe Count Hermes and assuming
The humour of a wild and franticke man,
Carelesse of what I say or what I doe,
And so such faultes as I of purpose doe,
Is buried in my humor and this gowne I weare,
In rayne or snowe or in the hottest sommer,
And neuer goe nor ride without a gowne,
which humor doth not fit my frencie wel,
But hides my persons forme from beeing knowne,
VVhen I Cleanthes am to be discried,
How now maister brother.
Oh sir you are very well suted. Now M. Burgomaister.
I pray you remember to seaze on all Aleantisthenes his goods
His landes and cattels to my propper vse,
As I am Leon the rich vsurer.
The sunne is downe and all is forfeited.
It shlbe doone my noble Count.
And withal sir I pray you forget not your loue,
To morrow morning at her fathers doore.
Ah my good Count I cannot that forget,
For still to keepe my memorie in order,
As I am Burgomaister, so loue is my recorder.
Now see a morning in an euening rise.
The morning of my loue and of my ioy,
I will not say of beautie, that were pride,
VVith in this tower I would I had a torch,
To light like hero my leander heater,
VVho shall be my leader let me see,
Reherse my fortune.
When you see one clad in a veluet gowne
And a blacke patch vpon his eye,
A patch, patch that I am, why that may be a patch of cloth,
Of Buckrome, or a fustian cloth, say with a veluet patch,
Vpon his eye & so my thoughts may patch vp loue the better
See where he comes, the Count, what girle a countesse,
See, see, he lookes as Irus said he should go not away my loue,
Ile meete thee straight.
Oh I thanke you I am much beholding to you,
I sawe her in the tower and now she is come downe,
Lucke to this patch and to this veluet gowne.
How now shall I be troubled with this rude spaniard now,
One worde sweet nimph.
How now sirra what are you,
I am sgneor Braggadino the Martiall spaniardo the aide of Aegypt in her present wars, but lesu what art thou that hast the guts of thy braines gript with such famine of knowledge not to know me.
How now sir Ile trie the proofe of your guts with my pistoll if you be so saucie sir.
Oh I know him well it is the rude Count the vnciuill Count, the vnstayed Count, the bloody Count, the Count of all Countes, better I were to hazard the dissolution of my braue soule agaynst an host of grantes then with this loose Count, otherwise I could tickle the Count, I fayth my noble Count, I doe descend to the crauing of pardon, loue blinded me I knewe thee not.
Oh sir you are but bonaventure not right spanish I perceaue but doe you heare sir are you in loue.
Surely the sodayne glaunce of this lady Nymph hath suppled my spanish disposition with loue that neuer before drempt of a womans concauitie.
womans concuitie, sblood whats that,
Her hollow dispositon which you see sweete nature will supplye or otherwise stop vp in her with solid or firme fayth.
Giue me thy hand wear louers both, shall we haue her both
No good sweete Count pardon me.
VVhy then thus it shalbe weele strike vp a drumme, set vp a tent, call people together, put crownes a peece lets rise or her.
Nor that my honest Count.
VVhy then thus it shalbe, weele wooe her both and him she likes best shall lead her home thorow streetes holding her by both her handes, with his face towardes her, the other shall follow with his backe towards her biting of his thumbes, how sayest thou by this.
It is ridiculous, but I am pleasd for vpon my life I do knw this the shame wil light on the neck of the Count.
VVell to it lets heare thee.
Sweete Nimph a spaniard is compard to the to the great elixar or golden medicine.
VVhat dost thou come vpon her with medicines dst thou thinke she is sore.
Nay by thy sweete fauour do not interrupt mee.
VVell sir goe forward.
I say a spaniard is like the Philosophers stone.
And I say an other mans stone may bee as good as a Philosophers at all tymes.
By thy sweete fauour.
VVell sir goe on.
Sweet nimph I loue few wordes you know my intent my humor is in sophistical & plaine I am borne, my byrth speakes for my nature, my nature for your grace, and should you see a whole Battaile ranged by my skil you would commit your whole selfe to my affection, and so sweet nimph I kisse your hand.
To see a whole battaile ha ha ha what a iest is that, thou shlt se a whle battaile come forth presently of me sa sa sa.
ut vp thy pistol tis a most dangerous humor in thee.
Oh is that all why see tis vp agayne, now thou shalt lee Ile come to her in thy humor, sweete lady I loue swee wordes, but sweete deedes are the noble sowndes of a noble spaniard, noble by countrie, noble by valour, noble by byrth, my very foote is nobler then the head of another man, vppon my life I loue, and vpon my loue iue liue, and so sweete Nph I kisse your hand, why loe heere we are both, I am in this hand, and hee is in that handy dandy pickly prandy, which hand will you haue.
This hand my Lord if I may haue my choyce
Come spaniard to your pennance bite your thumbes.
Oh base woman.
Sblood no base woman but bite your thumbes quickly.
Honor commaundes I must do it.
Come on sweete lady giue me your handes if you are mine, I am yours, if you take me now at the worst I am the more beholding to you, if I bee not good enough, Ile nd what would you more.
It is nough my Lord and I am youres.
Since I wel know my fortune is to haue you
Now must I leaue the leasant maiden chase,
In hunting sauage beasts with Iss nimphes,
And take me to a life which I God knowes,
Do know no more then how to scale the heauens.
VVell Ile teach you feare not you, what signior ot bite your thumbes,
Pardon me sir, pardon me.
By Gods blood I will not pardon you therefore bite your thumbes.
By thy sweete let me speake one worde with thee, I do not like this humor in thee in pistoling men in this sort, it is a most dangerous and stigmaticall humor, for by thy fauour tis the most sinest thing of the world for a man to haue a most gentlemanlike cariage of himselfe, for otherwise I doe hold thee for the most tall resolute and accomplisht gentleman on the face of the earth, harke yee weele meete at Corrucus and weele haue a pipe of Tobacco adew adew.
Do you heare sir, put your thumbes in your mouth with out any more adoe, by the heauens Ile shoote thee through the mouth.
It is base and ridiculous.
VVell thou shalt not do it, lend me thy thumbes Ile bite them for thee
Pardon mee.
Swounes and you had I would haue made such a wofull parting betwixt your fingers and your thumbe that your spanish fistes should neuer meete againe, in this world wil you doit sir.
I will, I will presto and I wil follow thee.
VVhy so oh that we had a noyse of musitions to play to this anticke as we goe, come on sweete lady giue me your to Church and be married straight, beare with , Ile be slow enough another tyme I warrant you, come questo, questo, spaniola questo.
Aduance that picture on this fatall spring,
And Herald speake vttering the kinges edict.
Ptolomie the most sacred king of Aegypt first of that nme, desiring peace and amitie with his neighbour princes hath caused this picture of Cleanthes to be set vp in all places, proposing great rewardes to him that findes him, and threatning death to him that sucours him.
VVhich Gods forbid, and put it in his minde.
Not so to stomacke his vniust exile.
That he conuert the furie of his arme,
Agaynst fosaken Aegypt taking part,
VVith those foure neighbour kinges that threaten him,
And haue beseiged his most Imperiall towne.
Now may it please your hignesse to leaue your discontented passions, and take this mornings pride to hunt the Bore.
We haue attended on our grace thus farre,
Out of the Cittie beeing glad to heare,
Your highnesse had abandoned discontent.
And now will bend your selfe to meriment,
So will I louely Ianthe come then.
Let vs goe call foorth sacred Isis Nimphes,
To helpe vs keepe the game in cealesse vew,
That to the busie brightnesse of his eyes.
VVe may so interuent his shiftes to scape.
That giddie with his turning he may fall,
Slayne with our beauties more then sworde on dartes.
Now am I Leon The rich vsurer and here according
To the kinges commaund and mine owne promise.
I haue brought my swoord and fix it by the statue,
She set vp, by this am I knowne to be Cleanthes,
VVhose sodayne sight I now will take vpon mee,
And cause the nobles to pursue my shadowe,
As for my subsnce they shall neuer finde,
Till I my selfe, do bring my selfe to light.
Cleanthes, Cleanthes, stop Cleanthes, see Cleanthes,
Pursue Cleanthes, follow Cleanthes.
where is Cleanthes, Leon sawest thou him.
I why should I els haue thus cried out on him,
I saw him euen now heere did he fix his sworde
And not for dastard feare or cowardize,
For know all Aegypt inges of his renowne.
But fearing for his noble seruice done,
To be rewarded with ingratitude, he fled
From hence fearing to be pursued,
Come on my Lordes then let follow him
And pursue him to the death.
Oh do not hurt him gentle Citizens,
See how they flye from him whom they pursue.
I am Cleanthes, and whilest I am heare,
In vayne they follow for to finde him out,
But here comes my loue Bright Psamathis,
VVhom I loue Equally with fayre Elimine,
See here she comes as I apoynted her.
But I fayth mistris is this for a woer.
Not for a woer onely my Jaquine,
But a quicke speeder girle for this is he,
That all my tune runnes vpon I tell thee,
O daintie mistris send for some more banquet.
No my fine wench this and my selfe is well.
And let him not sit downe like the oxe and the asse,
But giue God thanks for we are worthie of it though we faite.
Mistris tis true.
And that he may be good,
I coniure him by these three things a crosse,
Now let him come he shalbe good I warrant ye,
Nay do not flye me gentle Samathis,
Pardon me sir for if I see a man,
I shall so blush still that I warrant you,
I could make white wine claret with my lookes,
But do not blush and flie an old mans sight.
From whom if no from old men should I flie
From young men rather that can swift pursue,
And then it is some credit to out goe them,
Yet though my yeeres would haue me old I am not,
But haue the gentle Ierke of youth in mee,
As fresh as he that hath a maidens chinne.
Thus can I bend the stiffnes of my limbes,
Thus can I turne and leape and hoyse my gate,
Thus can I lift my loue as light as ayre,
Now say my Samathis am I old or yog.
I would haue my loue nether old nor young
But in the middle Iust betweene them both.
Fit am I then for matchlesse Samathis.
And will be bould to sit. For batchlers
Must not be shamefast when they meet with maids,
Sweete loue now let me intreate you sit,
And welcome you to your owne banquet heere,
Euen thus did rsu say that he should say,
Then by your leaue sir I will sit with you,
VVelcome as gold into my tresurie,
And now will I drinke vnto my loue.
VViththe same mind that drinking fist began to one another.
And what was that I pray sir.
Ile tell my loue the first kind cause of it.
And why tis vsd as kindnesse still amongst vs,
If it be vsda right tis to this end,
VVhen I doe say I drinke this loue to you,
I meane I drinke this to your proper good,
As if I sayde what health this wine doth worke in mee,
Shalbe imploied for you at your commande & to your proper vse
And this was first thentent of drinking to you.
Tis very prettie is it not Jaquine.
Oh excellent Mistris hees a daintie man.
Now to your vse sweete loue I drinke this wine,
And with a merrie hart that makes long life,
Ouer the cup Ile sing for my loues sake.
Health, fortune, mirth, and wine,
To thee my loue deuine.
I drinke to my dareling,
Giue mee thy hand sweeting.
UUith cuppe full euer plyed,
And artes fullneuer dryed.
Mine owne, mine owne dearest sweeting.
Oh oh myne owne dearest sweeting.
VVhat frollicke loue mirth makes the banquet sweete.
I loue it sir aswell as you loue me.
That is aswell as I do loue my selfe,
I will not Ioy my treasure but in thee,
And in thy lookes Ile count it euery hower,
And thy white armes shalbe as bandes to me,
Wherein are mightie Lordshippes forfeited,
And all the dames of Alexandria,
For their attire shall take there light from thee,
VVel sir I drinke to you & pray you thinke
You are as welcome to me as this wine,
Thankes gentle Samathis, but delitious loe,
Hath beene the figge I eate before this wine,
VVhich kills the taste of these delitious cates,
VVill you bestowe that banquet loue on me,
Nay gentle Leon talke no more of loue
If you loue God or a good countenance,
For I shal quite be out of countenance then,
Loue deckes the countenance, speriteth the eye,
And tunes the soule in sweetest harmony,
Loue then sweete Samathis.
VVhat shall I doe Iaquine.
Fayth Mistris take him.
Oh but he hath a great nose.
Tis no matter for his nose, for he is rich.
Leon I loue and since tis foorth farewell.
Then triumph Leon icher in thy loue.
Then all the heapes of treasure I possesse,
Neuer was happie Leon rich before,
Nor euer was I couetous till now,
That I see gold so fined in thy haire.
Impart it to my Parentes gentle Leon,
And till we meete agayne at home farewell.
Soone will I talke with them and follow thee,
So now is my desire accomplished.
Now was there euer man so fortunate.
To haue his loue so sorted to his wish,
The ioyes of many I one enioy.
Now do I meane to woe them crossely
The one as I am Leon the rich vsurer. (both,
The other as I am the mad brayne Count.
VVhich if it take effect, and rightly proue,
Twill be a sporte for any emperours loue.
Prince of Arcadia louely Doricles,
Be not discouraged that my daughter heere,
Like a well fortified and loftie tower,
I so repulsiue and vnapt to yeelde,
The royall siege of your heoycke partes,
In her acheeuement will be more renound,
And with the greater merite is imployde.
The bewtious queene my wife her mother here
VVas so well mand and yet had neuer man,
So mayne a rocke of chast and cold disdayne.
My Lord what meane ye, go Aspasia,
Send for some Ladeis to goe play with you,
At chesse, at Billiardes, and at other game,
Ianthe attend her.
You take a course my Lord to make her coy,
To vrge so much the loue of Dricles,
And frame a vertue of her wanton hate,
VVe must perswade her that he loues her not,
But that his seruices and vowes of loue,
Are but the gentle complimentes of court,
So would shee thinke that if she would haue loud,
Shee might haue wonne him.
And with that conceite of hardnesse to be wonne,
His merites grace will shine more clearely,
In her turning eyes,
Thinges hard to win with ease makes loue ited,
And fauours wonne with ease are hardly quited,
Then make as If you loud her not my Lord.
Loue that hath built his temple on my browes
Out of his Battlementes into my hart,
And seeing me to burne in my desire,
VVill be I hope appeased at the last.
Be ruld by me yet, and I warrant you,
She quickly shall beleeue you loue her not,
VVhat shall I doe Madam.
Looke not on her so much.
I cannot chuse my neck standes neuer right,
Till it be turnd asside and I behold her.
Now trust me such a wrie neck loue was neuer sene,
But come with me my Lord and Ile instruct you better
So maddam I leaue you now from our loue sportes,
To Antistenes and his great ute with Len,
See the Burgomaister Antistenes and Leon.
Comes togeather stay maister Burgomaister.
VVhat reason made you vse your office on the
Lord Antistenes seazing on al his moueables,
And goodes at the sute of Leon.
I will tell your grace the reason of it or any
Thinge els for I know you are a wise prince,
And apt to learne.
I thanke you for you good opinion sir,
But the reason of your office done vpon this noble man
And his landes.
The reason why I haue put in office or execution,
My authoritie vpon this nobleman consisteth,
in three principall poyntes or members,
VVhich indeede are three goodly matters.
I pray you lets heare them.
The first is the credit of this honest man because he is rich.
VVhy is he honest because he is rich.
Oh I learne that in any case, the next is the forfaite of his assurance and the last I will not trouble your grace with all.
But this it is whereof I most complaine vnto your grace,
That haung occasion in your graces seruice,
To borow mony of this Leon heere,
For which I morgagd al my landes and goods
He onely did agree that paying him foure
thousand pound at the day I should receiue
safely, in which now not onely falsely he denies▪ (my statute
But that he hath receiued one penny due,
VVhich this my friend can wittnes I repay de,
Vpon the stone of Irus the blindeman,
Foure thousand pound in Iewels and in golde,
And therefore craue I iustice in this case,
Voutchsafe dre soueraigne an vnpartiall are.
To that I haue to say for my ,
He pleades the paynt of foure thousand pounde,
Vpon the stone before blinde Irus caue,
To which I answere and do sweare by heauen,
He spake with me at the foresayde place,
And promist payment offoure thousand pound,
If I would let him haue his statues in,
And take other assurance for another thousand,
Some three monthes to come or thereaboutes.
VVhich I refusing he repayde me none,
But parted in a rage and card not for me.
Oh monstrous who euer hard the like.
My Lord I will be sworne he payde him,
On poore Irus stone foure thousand pound,
VVhich I did helpe to tender and hast thou
A hellish conscience and such a brasen forhead,
To denye it agaynst my wittnesse,
And his noble woorde.
Sir agaynst your witnesse and his noble worde,
I plead myne owne and one as good as his,
That then was present at our whole conference.
My Lord there was not any but our selues,
But who was it that thou affirmst was there,
Count Hermes good my Lord a man
VVell knowne though he be humorous to be hoorable,
And will he saie it.
He will my gratious Lord I am well assurd,
And him will I send hether presently,
Intreating your grious fauour if the impediment,
Of a late sickenesse cause me not returne,
For I am passing ill.
Well send him hether and it shall suffi.
I will my gratious Lord nd stand
To any censure passing willingly,
Your highnesse shall set downe or commaund,
VVorshipfull maister Burgmaister your officer,
To see performd betwixt vs.
VVe Thanke you hartely, alas poore soule,
How sicke he is.
Truly I cannot chuse but pittie him,
In that he loues your gratious officers,
Oh I thanke you sir.
King by your leaue, and yet I neede not aske leaue,
Because I am sent for if not Ile begone agayne.
without leaue, say am I sent for yea or no,
You are to witnesse twixt Antistenes and welthy Leon.
I know the matter and I come from that old miser
Leon, who is sodainely fallen sicke of a knaues euill,
Which of you are troubled with that disease maisters.
VVel say what you know of the matter, betwixt them.
Then thus I say my Lord, Antistenes came,
To the stone of the blinde foole Irus,
That day when foure thousand pounds were to be payde,
VVhere he made proffer of so much mony if Leon would returne the morgage of his lands, and take assurance for another thousand to be paide I trow some three monthes to come or there about, which Leon like an olde churle as hee was most vncourteously refused: my Lord Antistenes as he might very well departed in a rage but if it had beene to me I would haue pistoled him I fayth.
But you are wonderously deceiued my Lord.
And was not by when he and we did talke.
Swounes thn I say you are deceiued my Lord,
For I was by now by my honor and by all the gods.
Then you stoode close my Lord vnseene to any,
VVhy I stood close to you and seene of all, and if You thinke I am too mad a fellow to witnes such a waightie peece of worke the holy begger shall performe as much, For he was by at our whole conference.
But say Count Hermes was the begger by.
I say he was and he shall say he was.
But he is now they say lockt in his cae,
Fasting and praying talking with the Gods,
And hath an Iron doore twixt him and you,
How will you then come at him,
Ile fetch him from his caue in spight of all his Gods and Iron does, or beate him blide when as I doe catch him next, farwell my Lordes you haue done with mee, Ile send the begger presently for I am now ryding to Corrucus.
I know not what to thinke in these affaires
I cannot well condemne you my Lord,
And your sfficient witnesse beeing a gentleman,
Nor yet the other two, both men of credit,
Though in his kinde this Count be humorous,
But stay we shall here straight what Irus wil depose,
Oh who disturbes me in my holy prayers,
Oh that the king were by that he might heere,
VVhat thundring there is at my farther doore,
Oh how the good of Aegipt is disturbd in my deuotion.
I am here Irus and it was Count Hemes.
That was so rude to Interrupt thy prayers,
But I suppose the end of thy repayre,
Beeing so waightie could not haue displeasd,
For on thy witnesse doth dpend the liuing
Of Lord Antistenes, who doth affirme,
That three dayes past he tendered at thy stone,
Foure thousand poundes to Leon, and desired
His morgage quited which he promising
On such assurance, more as he proposed,
Receiued at that tyme his foure thousand pounds.
I then was in the hearing of them both.
Bnt hard noe penny tendred, onely proposed
By Lord Antistenes, if he would bring him in,
His morgage and take assurance for another thousand
Some three monthes to come or there aboutes,
VVhich Leon most vncourteously refused,
My Lord was angrye and I hard no more,
And thus must I craue pardon of your grace.
Farewell graue Is.
Gods are become oppressors of the right.
Neuer had right so violent a wrong.
For let the thunder strike me into hell.
If what I haue reported be not true,
This holy man no doubt speakes what he hard
And I am sory for Antistenes.
But Ile releeue your lowe estate my Lord,
And for your seruice done me gwerdon you,
Maister Burgomaster let the Lord haue libertie,
And I will answere Leon what is due.
Soft Mistris Burgomaister, pray you stay, your hart is
greater then your parson farre or your state eyther, doe we not
know ye trow, what woman you are but a Burgomaisters wife,
And he no wiser then his neighbours neyher,
Giue me the place acording to my calling.
VVhat skill for places, do we not all call sisters,
Noe by my fayth I am a countesse now,
I should haue one to goe before me bare,
And say stand by there to the best of them,
And one to come behinde and beare my trayne,
Because my handes must not be put vnto it.
My husbaud is a Lord and past a Lord,
And past a Lord what is that past I pray,
VVhy hees a what you calt.
A what you call it can you not name it.
I thinke I must not name it.
And why so I pray.
because it comes so neare a thing that I knowe,
Oh he is a Count that is an Earle.
And yet he is not knowne to haue much land.
VVhy therefore he is an vnknowne man.
I but my husband is the kings officer.
I but my husband is able to yours,
You say husband, I may saie Lord.
And me thinkes husband is worth ten o Lord.
Indeede I loue my Lord to call mee ,
Better then Maddam yet doe I not mean,
To lose my Ladies, titles at your handes,
I may for courtesie and to be termd,
A gentle Ladie call you sisters still,
But you must say and please your Ladishippe,
Tis thus and so, and as your honor ,
Yet shall my husband call me wife lik youres,
For why made god the husband and the wife,
But that those tearmes should please vs more then others
New fashion tearmes I like not for a man,
To call his wife cony, forsooth, and Lambe,
And Porke, and Mutton, he as well may say,
VVell Madam then and please your Ladishippe,
VVhat gownes and head tyres will your honor weare.
Twentie are making for me head tyres and gownes,
Head tyres enchast in order like the starres,
VVhich perfit great and fine cut pretious stones,
One hath bright Ariadnes Crowne in it,
Euen in the figure it presentes in heauen,
Another hath the fingers of Diana,
And Berenices euer burning haire,
An other hath the bright Andrmica,
VVith both her siluer wristes bound to a rocke,
And Perseus that did lose her and saue her life,
All set in number and in perfect forme,
Euen like the Asterismes fixt in heauen,
And euen as you may see in Moone shine nightes,
The Moone and Starres reflecting on their streames
So from my head shall you see starres take beames,
Oh braue God willing I will haue the like.
And so will I by Gods grace if I liue.
Come vp to supper it will become the house wonderfull well
Well if my husband will not, let him not loke for one good looke of me.
Nor mine I sweare.
Ile aske my husband when I am with child,
And then I know I shall be sped I fayth.
But euery pleasure hath a payne they say
My husband lies each other nyght abrode,
and so dth mine which I like but little,
VVell time I hope and change of companie,
VVill teach vs somewhat to beare out the absence,
I know not what to say,
My husband makes as if each other nyght he had occasion,
To ride from home at home serues not his turne,
To mygood turne it, cupid I beseech you,
Now will I trie to make my selfe the Count.
An arrant Cuckold and a witto too.
Now may I chance to proue a cunning man,
And tell my mistris where mymaister hauntes,
Bright Nimph I come in name of all the worlde,
That now sustaines dead winter in the spring,
To haue a graces from thy summer darted,
Thy loue sweetsoule is all that I desire,
To make a generall sommer in this hart,
VVhere winters duble wrath hath tnisde.
How dare you Leon thus solicit mee,
VVhere if the Count my husband should come now,
And see you courting you were sure to die.
Oh but he is safe, for at my house,
Booted and spurd and in his veluet gowne,
He tooke his horse and rode vnto Corrucus,
And therefore beautious Ladie mak not strange,
To take a nd and adde vn to thy Ioyes,
O happ wedlocke: the end of euery acte,
Is to incse connt and renowne,
Both which my loue: shall amplye ioy in you,
How can owne ensue an ct of shame,
No ac hath any shame within itselfe,
But in the knowledge and ascription.
Of the base world from whom shall this be kept,
As in a laborinth or a brasen tower.
But vertues sole regard must hold me backe.
The vertue of each thing is in the prayse,
And I will rea thy prayses to the skyes,
Out of my tresurie chuse the choyse of gold,
Till thou finde some matching thy hayre in brightnesse,
But that will neuer, be so chuse thou euer.
Out of my Iewelrye chuse thy choyse of Diamondes▪
Till thou finde some as bright some as thyne eyes,
But that will neuer be, so chuse thou euer,
Chuse Rubies out vntill thou match thy lippes,
Pearle till thy teeth, and Iuorie till thy skinne,
Be matcht in whitnesse but that wil neuer bee.
Nor neuer shall my tresurie haue end,
Till on there beauties Ladies loth to spend,
But that will neuer be so chuse thou euer.
Now what a gods name would this vayne man haue,
Do you not shame to tempt a woman thus,
I know not what to saye nor what to doe,
He would haue me doe that I feare I should not,
Some thing it is he seekes that he thinkes good,
And me thinkes he should be more wise then I,
I am a foolish girle though I be married
And know not what to doe, the Gods doe know.
Are you content sweete loue to graunt me loue,
and what then sir.
To grant me lodging in your house this night,
I thinke the man be wearie of his life,
Know you the Count my husband.
Marueilous well and amassurd of him,
Faith that you re as sure as I my selfe,
So you did talke of gold and Diamonds,
I and gold and Diamondes shal my sweet loue haue,
VVell Ile not bid you sir but if you come,
At your owne perill for Ile wash my handes.
A plague of all sanguine simpliciti
But do you heare sir pray you do not thinke that I granted you.
No I warrant you, Ile haue no such thought. (in any case
Oh this is olde excellent.
Now who can desire better sporte.
This nyght my other wife must lie alone,
And next night this wife must doe the like.
Now will I woe the other as the Count▪
VVhich if she graunt and they do breake their troth,
Ile make my selfe a cuckolde twixt them both.
Ile follow him vntill he take the earth, and then ile leaue him.
Now if my husband be not all alone,
He is from home and hath left me alone,
So I must learne to lie, as children goe,
All alone, all alone, which lesson now.
I am able to beare a childe is worsse to me then when I was a child
The morall this strength without a health a disaduantage is.
Mistris what will you say if I can tel you where my maister is,
VVhere Druso I pray thee.
Euen close with the young countesse I fayth.
Out on her strumpet doth she bragge so much,
Of her great Count, and glad to take my husband
Hence comes her head tyres and her fay gownes,
Her trayne borne vp and a man bare before her,
VVas this my fortune that should be so good,
I fayth you begger you, you old false knaue,
You holy ve you propheticke asse,
Know you noe better what shall come to passe,
Ile be reuenged I fayth, I fayth Ile be reuenged.
Oh Irus shall thy long approued skill,
Fayle in my fortunes onely, when shall I meete,
VVith my Cleanthes what a worlde of tyme,
Is it for me to lie as in a sounde,
VVithout my life Cleanthes, can it be,
That I shall euer entertayne agayne,
Hauing the habit of colde death in me,
My life Cleanthes.
Let me come in you knaues, I say let me come in,
Sir, we are set to gard this place as our liues and None without a warrant from the King or the Queene must enter heere.
Swoundes tell not me of your warrantes, let me come in I say,
My Lord we are commaunded to keepe out all comers, because of the branch wherein the kings life remaynes,
Let me come in you knaues, how dare you keepe meout, twas my gowne to a mantle of rugge, I had not put you all to the pistoll.
Shall we be troubled now with this rude Count
How now Queene what art thou doing, passioning ouer the picture of Cleant I am sure for I know thou louest him,
VVhats that you traytor.
No traytor neyther bnt a true freind to you, for had Ibene otherwise I should haue dislosed the secret talke thou hadst with Cleanthes in the arbour, the night before he was banished, whilest I stoode close and hard all.
The man is mad chaines and a whippe for him.
Be patient my wench and Ile tell th the very words, oh my Cleanthes, loue me, pittie me, hate me not for loue, and it is not lust hath made me thus importunate, for then there are men enough besides Cles, go to tel me were not these your woords, & I like no traytor to you but a truie freend now by this pistol which is Gods angell I neuer vttered them till now
I spake them not but had you beene so bad,
As some men are you might haue saide as much,
By fis onely therefore I must needes,
Thinke much the better of you to conceale it,
Oh your a cunning wench and am not I mad slaue to haue such vertue as sresic in me and none neuer lookt or any such thing at my handes, and heres a branch forsooth of your little sonne turnd to a Mandracke tree, by Hella the sorceresse.
Tis true and kils me to remember it.
Tut tut remember it and be wise thou wouldst haue Cleanthes, come agayne wouldst thou not,
The king is so aduisd to giue him death.
The King, come come tis you rule the King now would any wise woman in the worlde be so hungerstarued for a mn and not vse the meanes to haue him, thinkst thou Cleanthes will come agayne to haue his head chopt of so soone as he comes, but had you pluckt vp this branch wherein the King thy husbandes life consistes and burnt it in the fyre, his olde beard would haue stunckefort in the graue ere this, and then thou shouldst haue seene whether Cleanthes would haue come vnto thee or no.
Oh excreable counsaile.
Go to tis good counsaile, take the grace of God before your eyes, and follow it to it wench corragio, I know I haue gotten thee with childe of a desire, and thou longst but for a knife to let it out, hold there tis serue God and be thankfull, now you knaues will you let mee come out trow.
Please your Lordshippe to bestow something on vs for we are poore knaues.
Harke you be euen knaues still, and if you be poore long your foolish knaues, and so Ile leaue you.
Nay swounes my Lord no knaues neyther.
Then he was a knane that told me so, what doost thou tell mee that.
This serpentes counsell stinges mee to the hart.
Mountes to my braine and bindes my prince of sence.
My voluntarie motion and my life,
Sitting it selfe triumphing in there thrones,
And that doth force my hand to take this knife,
That bowes my knees and sets me by thy branch,
Oh my diones oh my onely sonne,
Canst thou now feele the rigour of a knife,
Noe thou art senslesse and Ile cut thee vp,
Ile shroude thee in my bosome safe from stormes,
And trust no more my trustlesse gard with thee,
Come then returne vnto thy mothers armes, and when I pull thee foorth to scrue the fire, turne thy selfe wholy into a burning tounge, in voking furies and infernall death, to coole thy tormentes with thy fathers breth.
Now madam countesse do you make account.
To take vp husbandes by your countishippe.
Haue you the broade seale for i, are you so hye, and stoope,
To one so lowe as is my husband,
Hence come your headtyres and your costly gownes,
Your trayne borne vp and a man bare before you,
Now sye on pride when woman goe thous naked.
I euer thoug that pride would haue a fall
But little thought it would haue such a fall.
VVhat fall I pray you.
There you lay last, forsooth there you lay last.
Be not so angry woman you are deceiued
I know I am deceiued for thou deceiuedst me,
Thou mightest aswell haue pict my pursse I tell thee,
Oh would my mother say, when you haue a husband.
Keepe to him onely but now one may see,
How horible a thing it is to change,
Because it angers one so hobly,
You must haue Vshers to make way bee you,
The dame is madde, Ile stay no longer with her.
VVell mad shorte heeles Ile be euen withyou,
See where the mad brayne Count her husband comes▪
I will begone.
Heare you Vsurers wife stay, a plague on you stay, whither go you so fa, why did I euer hurt any of your sex yet.
VVhy no my Lord.
VVhy no my Lorde, why the deuill do you tu tayle when you should not, when you should you will not be halfe so hastie, a n must loue you, woe you, spend vpon you and the dll of one of you is worthy to kisse the he of my riding gowne heere.
Is this your riding gowne my Lord.
Tis no matter what it is, talke not to me, what the dll did I meane to call thee backe agayne,
VVhy, my Lord I meane not to trouble you,
Goe to stay I say, tis agaynst my will that I vse you so kindly I can tell you.
Why you may chse my Lord.
I but I cannot chuse, there you lie now, tis loue forsoth that Intailes me to you, for i it had not beene for loue, I had not beene heere now, for the Gods do know I hold thee dearer then the Poungranet of mine eye, and thats better by three pence then the aple of mine eye.
My Lord I am sory for your heauinesse.
Nay tis no matter I am not the first asse that hath borne Cupides tresurie.
My Lord tis enough to make an asse wise to beare tres.
VVhy then be you tat wi asse, and beare me for
I haue some treasure ut me will you loue me.
Loue you my Lord it is strange you wil aske it.
I am not the first hath desired you▪
Nor you shall not be the last I wi refuse.
Nor are you the fayrest I haue seene,
Nor the foulest you hau loud.
Nor the fittest to be beloued.
Nor the vnfittest to hate.
Doe and you dare but sirra and thou wilt not loue,
I pray thee be proud
VVhy so my Lord.
Because I would haue thee fall, for pride must haue a fall.
Do you delight in my fall so much.
As much as in mine owne rysing I fayth, but do not you thinke it strange that I doe loue you, for before I did loue you, Cupid pinkt me a spanish lether Ierkin with shooting at me, and made it so ull of holes that I was fayne to leaue it of, and this losse haue I had for your sake.
My Lord Ile bestowe an old Ierkin on you,
Nay that shall not serue your turne, for I haue had a greater losse then that, I lost my left eye or your sake.
I do not thinke so.
I but Ile tell you how as I was hunting in the parke, I saw Cupid shooting a cockhye into your face, and gazing after his arrow it fell into mine eye.
A prettie fiction.
I but I finde this no fiction, and you shall make me amends with loue or by this patch of mine eye, and the patch thou wotest where I will sweare to all the Cittie I haue layne with thee▪
I hope your Lordshippe will not doe me that wrong.
Then do you me right and let me lie with you, I haue made the botle nosd knaue your husband so drunke that he is not able to stand goe get you home Ile follow you.
VVhy my Lord what will you do there.
Goe to make no more questions but say I shall bee welcome or by mine honor Ile doe as I say, otherwise be as secret as death.
Twentie to one he will, well my Lord if you come you come.
Oh I thanke you hartely, oh exellent or neuer trust mee.
Madam your honor is come somewhat to soone.
VVhy so Menippus.
Had you stayed neuer so little longer you should haue met my Lord comming out of Leons use and out of his moueables,
How out of his moueables.
Euen in playne troth, I see him woe her, winne her, and went in with her.
Now of mine honor I will be reuenged fetch me the Burgomaister Menippus Ile haue them both whipt about the towne.
Nay madam you must not dshonor him so,
VVhat shall mine honor doe then.
Do but tongu whip him madam and care not,
And so I leaue him to the mercie of your tongue,
My tongue shall haue hell and no mercie in it
Excellent musicke exellent msicke.
And the Deuill take the Instrument,
VVhat art thou so nye.
I and it were a good deede to be a little nier too, you make a Count asse of me indeede, as if I were too little for you, but bignesse is my fault vnlesse I were a little better vsd at your handes.
VVhy thou wilt be to perfit if I should vse thee much for vse makes perfitnesse.
I but I cannot be too perfit and thefore Ile spoyle her perfections that helpes to spoyle mine I warrant her.
VVhy may not I lie with her aswell as thou layest with her husband.
I defie you and all the world that can say blacke is mine eye.
I thinke so indeede, for thine eye is gray, but thou didst lye with him by that same token he gaue thee a carknet, and thou toldst me that thy mother sent it thee, thou didst promise to banquet him when I was next abroade, thou didst say he could not be so old as he made himselfe to be, thou ddst say twas pittie of his nose, for he would haue bene a fine man els, and that God did well to make him a rich man, for a was a good man too, and these tokens I thinke are sufficient, or these a told me with his owne mouth.
He lyed like an old knaue as he was and that he shall knowe the next time these lippes open in fayth, oh wicked periurd man would a dsclose my secretes I fayth what woman would trust any man a liue with her honestie.
Ha ha ha, I haue snt her in a pelting chfe,
But Ile follow her and make her madde with anger.
Thus haue we trode the sandy vales of Aegypt,
Adioyning to the plaines of Alexanria,
VVhere proud king ` keepes his refidence,
Securely trusting to his prophesies,
VVhich hath foretold him many yeares agoe,
That if the young Archadian Doricles,
Should linke in marriage with his louely daughter.
He then should conquere all our bordering ,
And make vs subiect to his tirrannie.
Trusting to his fond fantasticke dreames,
He hath exild the warlicke Duke Cleanthes.
VVhose name was terror to our valiant troopes.
Cleanthes exild giues vs easy way,
To our attemptes where had he stayed,
Aud beene afreind to him, yet should he not
Escape subiection.
VVe will deuide his kingdome twixt vs foure,
And reaue from him his foure cheife ornamentes,
And for to greeue his aged mind the more,
He shall b kept in lasting seruitude.
So to fulfill what fates to him assignde,
Come let vs march and braue him at the walles,
If Porus liue to weild his martiall sworde,
His Citty walles shall not preserue him safe,
But he shall dye by Porus and his freindes.
Sweet madam grant me once a chearful looke
To glad my dying hart with sorow kild,
Your father hath resignd his free consent.
You bound by dutie to obey his will,
Nay rather let him hayle me to my deth
Then gaynst my will constraine me match my selfe.
Dye thou vile wretch and liue Aspatia,
now I hard thy father
VVith wordes that still do tingle in mine ,
him heyre to Alexandria,
Tis time or me to stirre when such young boyes,
Shal haue their weake neckes ouer poisd with crownes
VVhich must become resolued champions,
That for a crownes exchange will sel their soules, He kils hi.
Wicked Count Hermes for this monsterous ,
Aegypt will hate thee. and thou sure must dye,
Then hye thee to the hils beyond the Aipes,
Flye tovnknowne and vnfrequented climes,
Some des ert place that neuer sawe the sunne,
For if the king or any of his friendes,
Shall finde Count Hermes thou art surely dead.
Ile flye no more then doth a setled rocke,
No more then mountaines or the steadfast powles,
But come sweete loue if thou wilt come with me,
We two will liue amongst the shadowy groues,
And we will sit like shepherdes on a hill,
And with our heauenly voyces tice the trees,
To eccho sweetely to our tunes.
Fls will I angle in the running brookes,
Seasoning our toyles with kisse, on the bankes,
Sometime Ile diue into the murmerrng springes,
And fetch thee stones to hang about thy necke,
VVhich by thy splendor will be turnd to pearle,
Say fayre Aspasia wilt thou walke with me.
No bloody Count but I will cleare my selfe,
And tell thy murders to the amased court.
Nay if thou wilt not chuse you peeuish girle
Thou canst not say but thou wert offered fayre,
But here mst end Count strange disguise,
My veluet gowne my pistoll and this patch,
No more must hide me in the countes attire,
Now will I turne my gowne to Vsurers Cotes,
And thus appeare vnto the worlde no more,
arewell Aspasia.
Goe wretched villayne hide thy hated head,
VVhere neuer heauens light may shine on thee,
VVhose there, Come forth for here is murder done,
Murder Murder of good prince Doricles.
VVho cals out murther Lady was it you.
As I was walking in the pleasant weedes,
VVith Doricles the young Archadian prince,
rusht in Count Hermes and in desperate wordes,
Hath slayne this prince.
A balefull deede pursue the murderer,
And tell the King of this foule accident
Oh tell no more in stead of teares,
M beating hart dissolues in droppes of blood,
And from mine eyes that stares vpon this corse.
Leapes out my soule and on it I will die,
Oh Doricles oh deare Arca prince,
The bulwarke and supporter of my life.
That by decree of fates was promised,
To adde foure neighbour kingdomes to my crowne,
And shield me rom a most abhorred death,
Now shall my kingdome leaue me with my life,
And sodainly looke for some monsterous fate,
Shall fall like thunder on my wretched state.
Arme arme my Lord, my Lords to instant armes,
Foure mightie kinges are landed in thy coast,
And threaten death and ruine to thy land,
Blacke the king,
Comes marching first with twentie thousand men,
Next Rhesus king of sweete Arabia,
In warlicke manner marcheth after him,
In equall number and in battaile ray,
Next Bn king of rich Phasiaca,
And sterne Bebritius of Bebritia,
VVith each of them ful twentie thousand strong
All which hath vowd the death, of Ptolomy, and thus they hether bend their speedie feete.
How sodaynely is weather ouer cast,
How is the face of peacefull Aegypt changd,
Like as the smiling flowers aboue the ground,
By keenest edge of Eras breath is cut.
To armes my Lord and gather vp your strength,
Your bandes in Memphis and in Caspia,
Ioynd with your power of Alexandria,
VVill double all the forces of these kinges,
All shalbe done we may meane while,
Bury the body of this slaughtered prince,
Least with the vew my senses follow his,
Curst be his hand that wrought the damned deede,
Cold and vncouered may his body lye.
Let stotmie hayle and thunder beate on him
And euery bird and beast runne ouer him,
That robd poore Ptolomy of such a hope,
Pursue the desperate Count that murdered him,
A thousand kingdomes shall not saue his life
A miracle a miracle, a dreadfull miracle.
VVhat miracle, oh what will heauens do more,
To punish Aegypt and her haplesse king,
As I was walking through the Serian groues
I sawe the desperate Count the murderer,
Of good prince Doicles as I heare say,
Fly through the desarts to the mimphick shades
VVhere hell to interrupt his passage thether,
Rauing beneath the ground worke of the earth
As if ten thousand vapours burst in her,
Seuered her wombe and swallowed quicke,
The miserable Count.
Iust are the heauens in his most dreadfull end,
But come my Lords let vs to instant armes,
To driue away more mischeiefes from our land.
So get you gone and pish all with him,
Now shall you know what want you haue of mee,
Now will I gather vp my sommes of money,
And of my creditors borow what I can,
Because as Leon Ile be seene no more,
This day they promisd for to meete me heere,
And here comes some of them.
My mayster sir your friend Calatius, Hath sent you sir your fiue hundreth crownes for the rich Iewell that he bought of you. I thanke him hartely, this Iewell of so many thousand crownes The Queene of Aegypt did bestowe on mee, when that I told her in poore Jrus shape where her Cleanthes was, but soft who hau we here.
Druso the Italian Marchant here by mee,
Hath sent you sir in Diamonds and in Pearles,
So much as mounteth to fiue thousand crownes,
Ad craues no more assurance but your woord,
Theres my bill and thanke thy maister he shall haue more then woord.
Neuer shall he nor they see this agayne,
Nor me neyther as I am this present man,
This with the rest I haue wil make a prettie somme
VVith this will I imploye e in these warres,
Now will I take on me the forme and shape,
Of Duke Cleanthes, but what intendes this alarum▪
VVhere may I seeke to finde Clethes out,
That martiall prince whom Ptolomy vnkinde,
Hath banished from out the Aegyptian Land,
Our warlike troopes are scatered and ouer throne,
And his deare freindes Acatos and Acanthes,
Lie in the field besmired in their loodes,
Ile run through al these groues to find him out.
My sweete Acates and Acanthes slayne,
Greife to my hart and sorrow to my soule,
Then rouse thy selfe Cleanthes and reuenge.
Their guiltlesse blood on these base miscreantes
Oh let the cankred trumpet of the deepe,
Be ratled out and ring into their eares,
The dire reuenge Cleanthes will inflicte,
One these foure Kings and all there complices,
Thus haue you stroue in vayne agaynst those Gods,
That rescues Aegypt in Cleanthes armes,
Come yeeld your crownes and homages to mee,
Though Ptolomie is dead yet I suruiue,
Elect and chosen by the peares to scourge,
The vile persumption of your hated liues,
Then yeeld as vanquisht vnto Aegypts king.
First by thy valoure and the strength of armes,
Porus the welthie Aethiopian king,
Doth yeeld his crowne and homage vnto thee,
Swearing by all my Gods whom I adore,
To honor Duke Cleanthes whilst he liue,
And in his ayde with twentie thousand men,
VVill alwayes march gaynst whom thou meanst to fyght,
Bion whose necke was neuer forct to bow
Doth yeeld him captiue to thy warlike sworde,
Command what so thou list, we will performe,
And all my power shall march at thy commaund.
Rhesus doth yeeld his crowne and dignitie,
To great Cleanthes Aegyptes onely strength,
For if Cleanthes liues, who euer liued,
More likelier to be monarke of the world,
Then here accept my vow allegiance,
VVhich as the rest I render nto thee.
So sayth Bebritius of .
And layes his crowne and homage at thy feete,
Hold take your crownes agayne and kepe your othe and fealties to mee,
So shal you liue as free as here to foe
And neare hereafter stoupe to conquest more.
Here comes the two widowes of the begger and the king, little know they that both their husbandes are turnd into one king, there would be olde stiuing who should bee Queene I fayth.
Pittie dread soueraigne.
Pittie gratious Lord.
VVhat are your sutes.
I the poore countesse and the widdow left,
Of late Count Hermes hauing all my goodes,
seazd to our late kings vse for murder done,
Of young prince Dorules humbly pray your grace,
I may haue somewhat to mainetayne my state,
And this poore bu then which I goe withall.
The haplesse Infant of a haplesse father.
And I my Lord humbly intreate your grace.
That where my husband Leon is deceast,
And left me much in debt, his creditors
Hauing seased all I haue into their handes,
And turnd me with this haplesse burthen heere,
Into the streetes your highnesse will descend,
To my reliefe by some conuenient order.
Poore soules I most extreamely pittie them,
But say is Leon deade,
Men say my Lord he cast his desperate body,
From Thalexandrian tower into the sea.
VVho saw the sight, or gaue out this reporte,
You maister Burgomaister.
I did my gratious Lord.
So I deuisd indeede that he should say,
That none should neuer looke for Leon more
But these my widowes here must not be left,
vnto the mercie of the needy world,
Nor mine owne Issue that they goe withall,
Haue such base fortunes and there fire so great,
VVidowes in pittie of your widowhood,
And vntymely endes of both your husbandes,
The slaughter of the Count your husband madam,
Shalbe remitted▪ and your selfe enioy,
The vtmost of the liuing he possest,
So will I pay your husband Leons debt,
And both shall liue fitting there wonted states,
Kinges in there mercie come most neare the Goddes,
And can no better shew it then in ruth,
Of widowes and of children fatherlesse,
My selfe will therefore be to both your birthes,
A carefull father in there bringing vp.
The Gods for euer blesse your maiestie,
But tell me were your husbandes such bad men,
That euery way they did deserue such endes,
Myne was a husband to my hartes content.
But that he vsd the priuiledge of men.
VVhat priuiledge of men,
To take some other loue besides his wife
VVhich men think by their custome they may do,
Although their wiues be strictly bound to them.
VVith whom suspectyou he was great with all.
VVith this poore widow here the worlde supposeth.
So thinkes the world my husband was with you.
Fayre dames what will you say to me,
If I can tell you where your husoandes bee.
VVhat can you sir.
Nay nothing sir I did but ieast with you, I feard him
I yth but Ile be secret thats flat.
VVell maister Burgomaister see that you restore,
The goodes and landes you ceasd.
Both of the countesse ad rich Leons wife,
Not pie of their wido odes alone,
But their rare beauties moue me to this good.
Oh Maister Burgomaster see heres your wife come to
welcome you home from war.
Oh husband huand will you goe to re, and leaue me in this taking.
This taking why this is a very good taking how say you is it not and like your Maiestie.
Tis very wel Maister Burgster.
But Shall I intreat one boone of your Maiestie.
VVhats that Maister Burgomaister.
Mary euen to be god father to my young Burgomaister here.
VVithall my hart sir.
Come on sweete husband fot my time drawes neare.
Feare not thou shalt be a ioyfull mother I warrant thee.
How say you my Lordes is not our Burgomaister a tall man euery way, did you not marke how manfully he be haued himselfe in our late Battayle,
We did my Lord and wonder at his courage
His merit doth deserue a better place.
Then to be Burgomaister of Alexandria.
Then say my Lordes how shall we deale with him.
Had he beene widower he might haue wedded with this countesse heere.
Oh I haue one of mine owne I thanke you sir, heres one has the sweete of them I fayth:
My Lord the offer had beene to hye a grace for him
For neare did eye behold a fayrer face.
So sayth mine eye that hath my hart incenst.
And Rhesus me thinkes this exceedes her farre,
No question of it as the sonne a starre.
As sodaynely as lightning beautie woundes.
None euer loud but at first sight they loud▪
Loues dartes are swift as is the lightning fier.
See he shootes arrowes buring from her eyes.
VVhy which loues Rhesus.
This coelestiall dame.
And which loues Bion▪
Euen the very same.
Then may I freely Ioy the countesse heere.
No Porus for Bitins loues her too
Are they in loue oh Gods would that were true
My louing ioy the fresh desire of kinges.
How now my Lords doth beauty startle you▪
More then dead stockes would startle at such beauty,
In vayne do I resist my passions,
Mightie Cleanthes to annex y hart,
In loue to thee aswell as victorie,
Grant this fayre countesse here may be my queene.
No great Cleanthes giue her to my hand,
VVhose hart was first the subiect of her graces.
Then let the Arabian king make this his queene.
Nay this eanthes let my loue inioy.
How fatall are these loues now I perceaue,
Their fortunes that I told as I was Irus.
VVill now in force I see be come to passe.
Oh holy Irus blessed be thy tongue,
That like an orator hath told our fortunes.
He told vs we should soone lose our first loues,
Making our second choise mongst greatest kinges.
I did indeede, but God knowes knew not how.
How say you maister brother, am not I secret now▪
Thou art and be so still for not the worlde,
Shall euer know the mad prankes I haue played,
Now stand sayre my Lordes and let these Ladies view you,
In my eye now the blackest is the fayrest,
For euery woman chooseth white and red,
Come martiall Perus thou shalt haue my loue.
Out on thee foolish woman thou hast chose a deuill.
Not yet sir til he haue hornes.
Tis not the face and colour I regard,
But fresh and louely youth allures my choyse.
And thee most beautious Bion I affecte.
Haplesse is Rhesus.
Accurst britius.
Haue patience gentle Lordes I will prouide,
Other Aegyptian Ladies for your tne,
So will we linke in perfit league of lou
So shall the victorie you lost to me,
Set double glorie on your conquered hedes.
So let vs goe to frolicke in our Court.
Carousing free whole boules of greekish win ▪
In honor of the conquest we haue made,
That at our banquet all the Gods may tend,
Plauding our victorie and this happie end.