LEt Fame, that all hunt after in their liues,
Liue regiſtred vpon our brazen Tombes,
And then grace vs in the diſgrace of death:
when ſpight of cormorant deuouring Time,
Th' endeuour of this preſent breath may buy:
That honour which ſhall bate his ſythes keene edge,
And make vs heyres of all eternitie:
Therefore braue Conquerours, for ſo you are,
That warre againſt your owne affections,
And the huge Armie of the worlds deſires.
Our late edict ſhall ſtrongly ſtand in force,
Nauar ſhall be the wonder of the world.
Our Court ſhall be a little Achademe,
Still and contemplatiue in liuing Art.
You three, Berowne, Dumaine, and Longauill,
Haue ſworne for three yeeres terme, to liue with me:
My fellow Schollers, and to keepe thoſe ſtatutes
That are recorded in this ſcedule heere.
Your oathes are paſt, and now ſubſcribe your names:
That his owne hand may ſtrike his honour downe,
That violates the ſmalleſt branch heerein:
If you are arm'd to doe, as ſworne to do,
Subſcribe to your deepe oathes, and keepe it to.
I am reſolu'd, 'tis but a three yeeres faſt:
The minde ſhall banquet, though the body pine,
Fat paunches haue leane pates: and dainty bits,
Make rich the ribs, but bankerout the wits.
My louing Lord, Dumane is mortified,
The groſſer manner of theſe worlds delights,
He throwes vpon the groſſe worlds baſer ſlaues:
To loue, to wealth, to pompe, I pine and die,
With all theſe liuing in Philoſophie.
I can but ſay their proteſtation ouer,
So much, deare Liege, I haue already ſworne,
That is, to liue and ſtudy heere three yeeres.
But there are other ſtrict obſeruances:
As not to ſee a woman in that terme,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
And one day in a weeke to touch no foode:
And but one meale on euery day beſide:
The which I hope is not enrolled there.
And then to ſleepe but three houres in the night,
And not be ſeene to winke of all the day.
When I was wont to thinke no harme all night,
And make a darke night too of halfe the day:
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
O, theſe are barren taskes, too hard to keepe,
Not to ſee Ladies, ſtudy, faſt, not ſleepe.
Your oath is paſt, to paſſe away from theſe.
Let me ſay no my Liedge, and if you pleaſe,
I onely ſwore to ſtudy with your grace,
And ſtay heere in your Court for three yeeres ſpace.
You ſwore to that Berowne, and to the reſt.
By yea and nay ſir, than I ſwore in ieſt.
What is the end of ſtudy, let me know?
Why that to know which elſe wee ſhould not know.
Things hid & bard (you meane) frō cōmon ſenſe.
I, that is ſtudies god-like recompence.
Come on then, I will ſweare to ſtudie ſo,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus, to ſtudy where I well may dine,
When I to faſt expreſſely am forbid.
Or ſtudie where to meet ſome Miſtreſſe fine,
When Miſtreſſes from common ſenſe are hid.
Or hauing ſworne too hard a keeping oath,
Studie to breake it, and not breake my troth.
If ſtudies gaine be thus, and this be ſo,
Studie knowes that which yet it doth not know,
Sweare me to this, and I will nere ſay no.
Theſe be the ſtops that hinder ſtudie quite,
And traine our intellects to vaine delight.
Why? all delights are vaine, and that moſt vaine
Which with paine purchas'd, doth inherit paine,
As painefully to poare vpon a Booke,
To ſeeke the light of truth, while truth the while
Doth falſely blinde the eye-ſight of his looke:
Light ſeeeking light, doth light of light beguile:
So ere you finde where light in darkeneſſe lies,
Your light growes darke by loſing of your eyes.
Studie me how to pleaſe the eye indeede,
By fixing it vpon a fairer eye,
Who dazling ſo, that eye ſhall be his heed,
And giue him light that it was blinded by.
Studie is like the heauens glorious Sunne,
That will not be deepe ſearch'd with ſawcy lookes:
Small haue continuall plodders euer wonne,
Saue baſe authoritie from others Bookes.
Theſe earthly Godfathers of heauens lights,
That giue a name to euery fixed Starre,
Haue no more profit of their ſhining nights,
Then thoſe that walke and wot not what they are.
Too much to know, is to know nought but fame▪
And euery Godfather can giue a name.
How well hee's read, to reaſon againſt reading.
Proceeded well, to ſtop all good proceeding.
Hee weedes the corne, and ſtill lets grow the weeding.
The Spring is neare when greene geeſſe are a breeding.
How followes that?
Fit in his place and time.
In reaſon nothing.
Something then in rime.
Berowne is like an enuious ſneaping Froſt,
That bites the firſt borne infants of the Spring.
Wel, ſay I am, why ſhould proud Summer boaſt,
Before the Birds haue any cauſe to ſing?
Why ſhould I ioy in any abortiue birth?
At Chriſtmas I no more deſire a Roſe,
Then wiſh a Snow in Mayes new fangled ſhowes:
But like of each thing that in ſeaſon growes.
So you to ſtudie now it is too late,
That were to clymbe ore the houſe to vnlocke the gate.
Well, fit you out: go home Berowne: adue.
No my good Lord, I haue ſworn to ſtay with you.
And though I haue for barbariſme ſpoke more,
Then for that Angell knowledge you can ſay,
Yet confident Ile keepe what I haue ſworne,
And bide the pennance of each three yeares day.
Giue me the paper, let me reade the ſame,
And to the ſtricteſt decrees Ile write my name.
How well this yeelding reſcues thee from ſhame.
Item. That no woman ſhall come within a mile of my Court.
Hath this bin proclaimed?
Foure dayes agoe.
Let's ſee the penaltie.
On paine of looſing her tongue.
Who deuis'd this penaltie?
Marry that did I.
Sweete Lord, and why?
To fright them hence with that dread penaltie, A dangerous law againſt gentilitie. Item, If any man be ſeene to talke with a woman within the tearme of three yeares, hee ſhall indure ſuch publique ſhame as the reſt of the Court ſhall poſſibly deuiſe.
This Article my Liedge your ſelfe muſt breake,
For well you know here comes is Embaſſie
The French Kings daughter, with your ſelfe to ſpeake:
A Maide of grace and compleate maieſtie,
About ſurrender vp of Aquitaine:
To her decrepit, ſicke, and bed-rid Father.
Therefore this Article is made in vaine,
Or vainly comes th' admired Princeſſe hither.
What ſay you Lords?
Why, this was quite forgot.
So Studie euermore is ouerſhot,
While it doth ſtudy to haue what it would,
It doth forget to doe the thing it ſhould:
And when it hath the thing it hunteth moſt,
'Tis won as townes with fire, ſo won, ſo loſt.
We muſt of force diſpence with this Decree,
She muſt lye here on meere neceſſitie.
Neceſſity will make vs all forſworne
Three thouſand times within this three yeeres ſpace:
For euery man with his affects is borne,
Not by might maſtred, but by ſpeciall grace.
If I breake faith, this word ſhall breake for me,
I am forſworne on meere neceſſitie.
So to the Lawes at large I write my name,
And he that breakes them in the leaſt degree,
Stands in attainder of eternall ſhame.
Suggeſtions are to others as to me:
But I beleeue although I ſeeme ſo loth,
I am the laſt that will laſt keepe his oth.
But is there no quicke recreation granted?
I that there is, our Court you know is hanted
With a refined trauailer of Spaine,
A man in all the worlds new faſhion planted,
That hath a mint of phraſes in his braine:
One, who the muſicke of his owne vaine tongue,
Doth rauiſh like inchanting harmonie:
A man of complements whom right and wrong
Haue choſe as vmpire of their mutinie.
This childe of fancie that Armado hight,
For interim to our ſtudies ſhall relate,
In high-borne words the worth of many a Knight:
From tawnie Spaine loſt in the worlds debate.
How you delight my Lords, I know not I,
But I proteſt I loue to heare him lie,
And I will vſe him for my Minſtrelſie.
Armado is a moſt illuſtrious wight,
A man of fire, new words, faſhions owne Knight.
Coſtard the ſwaine and he, ſhall be our ſport,
And ſo to ſtudie, three yeeres is but ſhort.
Which is the Dukes owne perſon.
This fellow, What would'ſt?
I my ſelfe reprehend his owne perſon, for I am his graces Tharborough: But I would ſee his own perſon in fleſh and blood.
This is he.
Signeor Arme, Arme commends you:
Ther's villanie abroad, this letter will tell you more.
Sir the Contempts thereof are as touching mee.
A letter from the magnificent Armado.
How low ſoeuer the matter, I hope in God for high words.
A high hope for a low heauen, God grant vs patience.
To heare, or forbeare hearing.
To heare meekely ſir, and to laugh moderately, or to forbeare both.
Well ſir, be it as the ſtile ſhall giue vs cauſe to clime in the merrineſſe.
The matter is to me ſir, as concerning Iaquenetta.
The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.
In what manner?
In manner and forme following ſir all thoſe three. I was ſeene with her in the Mannor houſe, ſitting with her vpon the Forme, and taken following her into the Parke: which put to gether, is in manner and forme following. Now ſir for the manner; It is the manner of a man to ſpeake to a woman, for the forme in ſome forme.
For the following ſir.
As it ſhall follow in my correction, and God defend the right.
Will you heare this Letter with attention?
As we would heare an Oracle.
Such is the ſimplicitie of man to harken after the fleſh.
GReat Deputie, the Welkns Vicegerent, and ſole dominator of Nauar, my ſoules earths God, and bodies foſtring patrone:
Not a vvord of Coſtard yet.
So it is.
It may be ſo: but if he ſay it is ſo, he is in telling true: but ſo.
Peace,
Be to me, and euery man that dares not fight.
No words,
Of other mens ſecrets I beſeech you.
So it is beſieged with ſable coloured melancholie, I did commend the blacke oppreſſing humour to the moſt wholeſome Phyſicke of thy health-giuing ayre: And as I am a Gentleman, betooke my ſelfe to walke: the time When? about the ſixt houre, When beaſts moſt graſe, birds beſt pecke, and men ſit downe to that nouriſhment which is called ſupper: So much for the time When. Now for the ground Which? which I meane I walkt vpon, it is ycliped, Thy Parke. Then for the place Where? where I meane I did encounter that obſcene and moſt prepoſterous euent that draweth from my ſnow-white pen the ebon coloured Inke, which heere thou vieweſt, beholdeſt, ſuruayeſt, or ſeeſt. But to the place Where? It standeth North North-eaſt and by Eaſt from the Weſt corner of thy curious knotted garden; There did I ſee that low ſpirited Swaine, that baſe Minow of thy myrth, (Clown. Mee?) that vnletered ſmall knowing ſoule, (Clow Me?) that ſhallow vaſſall (Clow. Still mee?) which as I remember, hight Coſtard, (Clow. O me) ſorted and conſorted contrary to thy eſtabliſhed proclaymed Edict and Continet, Cannon: Which with, ô with, but with this I paſſion to ſay wherewith:
With a Wench.
With a childe of our Grandmother Ee, a female; or for thy more ſweet vnderſtanding a woman: him, I (as my euer eſteemed dutie prickes me on) haue ſent to thee, to receiue the meed of puniſhment by thy ſweet Graces Officer Anthony Dull, a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, & estimation.
Me, an't ſhall pleaſe you? I am Anthony Dull.
For Iaquenetta (ſo is the weaker veſſell called) which I apprehended with the aforeſaid Swaine, I keeper her as a veſſell of thy Lawes furie, and ſhall at the leaſt of thy ſweet notice, bring her to triall. Thine in all complements of deuoted and heart-burning heat of dutie.
Don Adriana de Armado.
This is not ſo well as I looked for, but the beſt that euer I heard.
I the beſt, for the worſt. But ſirra, What ſay you to this?
Sir I confeſſe the Wench.
Did you heare the Proclamation?
I doe confeſſe much of the hearing it, but little of the marking of it.
It was proclaimed a yeeres impriſonment to bee taken with a Wench.
I was taken with none ſir, I was taken vvith a Damoſell.
Well, it was proclaimed Damoſell.
This was no Damoſell neyther ſir, ſhee was a Virgin.
It is ſo varried to, for it was proclaimed Virgin.
If it were, I denie her Virginitie: I was taken with a Maide.
This Maid will not ſerue your turne ſir.
This Maide will ſerue my turne ſir.
Sir I will pronounce your ſentence: You ſhall faſt a Weeke with Branne and water.
I had rather pray a Moneth with Mutton and Porridge.
And Don Armado ſhall be your keeper.
My Lord Berowne, ſee him deliuer'd ore,
And goe we Lords to put in practice that,
Which each to other hath ſo ſtrongly ſworne.
Ile lay my head to any good mans hat,
Theſe oathes and lawes will proue an idle ſcorne.
Sirra, come on.
I ſuffer for the truth ſir: for true it is, I was taken with Iaquenetta, and Iaquenetta is a true girle, and therefore welcome the ſowre cup of proſperitie, affliction may one day ſmile againe, and vntill then ſit downe ſorrow.
Boy, What ſigne is it when a man of great ſpirit growes melancholy?
A great ſigne ſir, that he will looke ſad.
Why? ſadneſſe is one and the ſelfe-ſame thing deare impe.
No no, O Lord ſir no.
How canſt thou part ſadneſſe and melancholy my tender Iuuenall?
By a familiar demonſtration of the working, my tough ſigneur.
Why tough ſigneur? Why tough ſigneur?
Why tender Iuuenall? Why tender Iuuenall?
I ſpoke it tender Iuuenall, as a congruent apathaton, appertaining to thy young daies, which we may nominate tender.
And I tough ſigneur, as an appertinent title to your olde time, which we may name tough.
Pretty and apt.
How meane you ſir, I pretty, and my ſaying apt? or I apt, and my ſaying prettie?
Thou pretty becauſe little.
Little pretty, becauſe little: wherefore apt?
And therefore apt, becauſe quicke.
Speake you this in my praiſe Maſter?
In thy condigne praiſe.
I will praiſe an Eele with the ſame praiſe.
What? that an Eele is ingenuous.
That an Eele is quicke.
I doe ſay thou art quicke in anſweres. Thou heat'ſt my bloud.
I am anſwer'd ſir.
I loue not to be croſt.
He ſpeakes the meere contrary, croſſes loue not him.
I haue promis'd to ſtudy iij. yeres with the Duke.
You may doe it in an houre ſir.
Impoſſible.
How many is one thrice told?
I am ill at reckning, it fits the ſpirit of a Tapſter.
You are a gentleman and a gameſter fir.
I confeſſe both, they are both the varniſh of a compleat man.
Then I am ſure you know how much the groſſe ſumme of deuſ-ace amounts to.
It doth amount to one more then two.
Which the baſe vulgar call three.
True.
Why ſir is this ſuch a peece of ſtudy? Now here's three ſtudied, ere you'll thrice wink, & how eaſie it is to put yeres to the word three, and ſtudy three yeeres in two words, the dancing horſe will tell you.
A moſt fine Figure.
To proue you a Cypher.
I will heereupon confeſſe I am in loue: and as it is baſe for a Souldier to loue; ſo am I in loue with a baſe wench. If drawing my ſword againſt the humour of affection, would deliuer mee from the reprobate thought of it, I would take Deſire priſo, and ranſome him to any French Courtier for a n deuis'd curtſie. I thinke ſcorne to ſigh, me thinkes I ſhould out-ſweare Cupid. Comfort me Boy, What great men haue beene in loue?
Hercules Maſter.
Moſt ſweete Hercules: more authority deare Boy, name more; and ſweet my childe let them be men of good repute and carriage.
Sampſon Maſter, he was a man of good carriage, great carriage: for hee carried the Towne-gates on his backe like a Porter: and he was in loue.
O well-knit Sampſon, ſtrong ioynted Sampſon; I doe excell thee in my rapier, as much as thou didſt mee in carrying gates. I am in loue too. Who was Sampſons loue my deare Moth?
A Woman, Maſter.
Of what complexion?
Of all the foure, or the three, or the two, or one of the foure.
Tell me preciſely of what complexion?
Of the ſea-water Greene ſir.
Is that one of the foure complexions?
As I haue read ſir, and the beſt of them too.
Greene indeed is the colour of Louers: but to haue a Loue of that colour, methinkes Sampſon had ſmall reaſon for it. He ſurely affected her for her wit.
It was ſo ſir, for ſhe had a greene wit.
My Loue is moſt immaculate white and red.
Moſt immaculate thoughts Maſter, are mask'd vnder ſuch colours.
Define, define, well educated infant.
My fathers witte, and my mothers tongue aſſiſt mee.
Sweet inuocation of a childe, moſt pretty and patheticall.
If ſhee be made of white and red,
Her faults will nere be knowne:
For bluſh-in cheekes by faults are bred,
And feares by pale white ſhowne:
Then if ſhe feare, or be to blame,
By this you ſhall not know,
For ſtill her cheekes poſſeſſe the ſame,
Which natiue ſhe doth owe:
A dangerous rime maſter againſt the reaſon of white and redde.
Is there not a ballet Boy, of the King and the Begger?
The world was very guilty of ſuch a Ballet ſome three ages ſince, but I thinke now 'tis not to be found: or if it were, it would neither ſerue for the writing, nor the tune.
I will haue that ſubiect newly writ ore, that I may example my digreſſion by ſome mighty preſident. Boy, I doe loue that Countrey girle that I tooke in the Parke with the rationall hinde Coſtard: ſhe deſerues well.
To bee whip'd: and yet a better loue then my Maſter.
Sing Boy, my ſpirit grows heauy in ioue.
And that's great maruell, louing a light wench.
I ſay ſing.
Forbeare till this company be paſt.
Sir, the Dukes pleaſure, is that you keepe Coſtard ſafe, and you muſt let him take no delight, nor no penance, but hee muſt faſt three daies a weeke: for this Damſell, I muſt keepe her at the Parke, ſhee is alowd for the Day-woman. Fare you well.
I do betray my ſelfe with bluſhing: Maide.
Man.
I wil viſit thee at the Lodge.
That's here by.
I know where it is ſituate.
Lord how wiſe you are!
I will tell thee wonders.
With what face?
I loue thee.
So I heard you ſay.
And ſo farewell.
Faire weather after you.
Come Iaquenetta, away.
Villaine, thou ſhalt faſt for thy offences ere thou be pardoned.
Well ſir, I hope when I doe it, I ſhall doe it on a full ſtomacke.
Thou ſhalt be heauily puniſhed.
I am more bound to you then your fellowes, for they are but lightly rewarded.
Take away this villaine, ſhut him vp.
Come you tranſgreſſing ſlaue, away.
Let mee not bee pent vp ſir, I will faſt being looſe.
No ſir, that were faſt and looſe: thou ſhalt to priſon.
Well, if euer I do ſee the merry dayes of deſolation that I haue ſeene, ſome ſhall ſee.
What ſhall ſome ſee?
Nay nothing, Maſter Moth, but what they looke vpon. It is not for priſoners to be ſilent in then words, and therefore I will ſay nothing: I thanke God, I haue as little patience as another man, and therefore I can be quiet.
I doe affect the very ground (which is baſe) where her ſhooe (which is baſer) guided by her foote (which is baſeſt) doth tread. I ſhall be forſworn (which ia a great argument of falſhood) if I loue. And how can that be true loue, which is falſly attempted? Loue is a familiar, Loue is a Diuell. There is no euill Angell but Loue, yet Sampſon was ſo tempted, and he had an excellent ſtrength: Yet was Salomon ſo ſeduced, and hee had a very good witte. Cupids But ſhaft is too hard for Hercules Clubbe, and therefore too much ods for a Spaniards Rapier: The firſt and ſecond cauſe will not ſerue my turne: the Paſſado hee reſpects not, the Duello he regards not; his diſgrace is to be called Boy, but his glorie is to ſubdue men. Adue Valour, ruſt Rapier, bee ſtill Drum, for your manager is in loue; yea hee loueth. Aſſiſt me ſome extemporall god of Rime, for I am ſure I ſhall turne Sonnet. Deuiſe Wit, write Pen, for I am for whole volumes in folio.
Now Madam ſummon vp your deareſt ſpirits,
Conſider who the King your father ſends:
To whom he ſends, and what's his Embaſſie.
Your ſelfe, held precious in the worlds eſteeme,
To parlee with the ſole inheritour
Of all perfections that a man may owe,
Matchleſſe Nauarre, the plea of no leſſe weight
Then Aquitaine, a Dowrie for a Queene.
Be now as prodigall of all deare grace,
As Nature was in making Graces deare,
When ſhe did ſtarue the generall world beſide,
And prodigally gaue them all to you.
Good L. Boyet, my beauty though but mean,
Needs not the painted flouriſh of your praiſe:
Beauty is bought by iudgement of the eye,
Not vttred by baſe ſale of chapmens tongues:
I am leſſe proud to heare you tell my worth,
Then you much wiling to be counted wiſe,
In ſpending your wit in the praiſe of mine.
But now to taske the tasker, good Boyet,
You are not ignorant all-telling fame
Doth noyſe abroad Nauar hath made a vow,
Till painefull ſtudie ſhall out-weare three yeares,
No woman may approach his ſilent Court:
Therefore to's ſeemeth it a needfull courſe,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
To know his pleaſure, and in that behalfe
Bold of your worthineſſe, we ſingle you,
As our beſt mouing faire ſoliciter:
Tell him, the daughter of the King of France,
On ſerious buſineſſe crauing quicke diſpatch,
Importunes perſonall conference with his grace.
Haſte, ſignifie ſo much while we attend,
Like humble viſag'd ſuters his high will.
Proud of imployment, willingly I goe.
All pride is willing pride, and yours is ſo:
Who are the Votaries my louing Lords, that are vow-fellowes with this vertuous Duke?
Longauill is one.
Know you the man?
I know him Madame at a marriage feaſt,
Betweene L. Perigort and the beautious heire
Of Iaques Fauconbridge ſolemnized.
In Normandie ſaw I this Longauill,
A man of ſoueraigne parts he is eſteem'd:
Well fitted in Arts, glorious in Armes:
Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
The onely ſoyle of his faire vertues gloſſe,
If vertues gloſſe will ſtaine with any ſoile,
Is a ſharp wit match'd with too blunt a Will:
Whoſe edge hath power to cut whoſe will ſtill wills,
It ſhould none ſpare that come within his power.
Some merry mocking Lord belike, iſt ſo?
They ſay ſo moſt, that moſt his humors know.
Such ſhort liu'd wits do wither as they grow.
Who are the reſt?
The yong Dumaine, a well accompliſht youth,
Of all that Vertue loue, for Vertue loued.
Moſt power to doe moſt harme, leaſt knowing ill:
For he hath wit to make an ill ſhape good,
And ſhape to win grace though ſhe had no wit.
I ſaw him at the Duke Alanſoes once,
And much too little of that good I ſaw,
Is my report to his great worthineſſe.
Another of theſe Students at that time,
Was there with him, as I haue heard a truth.
Berowne they call him, but a merrier man,
Within the limit of becomming mirth,
I neuer ſpent an houres talke withall.
His eye begets occaſion for his wit,
For euery obiect that the one doth catch,
The other turnes to a mirth-mouing ieſt.
Which his faire tongue (conceits expoſitor)
Deliuers in ſuch apt and gracious words,
That aged eares play treuant at his tales,
And yonger hearings are quite rauiſhed.
So ſweet and voluble is his diſcourſe.
God bleſſe my Ladies, are they all in loue?
That euery one her owne hath garniſhed,
With ſuch bedecking ornaments of praiſe.
Heere comes Boyet.
Now, what admittance Lord?
Nauar had notice of your faire approach,
And he and his competitors in oath,
Were all addreſt to meete you gentle Lady
Before I came: Marrie thus much I haue learnt,
He rather meanes to lodge you in the field,
Like one that comes heere to beſiege his Court,
Then ſeeke a diſpenſation for his oath:
To let you enter his vnpeopled houſe.
Heere comes Nauar.
Faire Princeſſe, welcom to the Court of Nauar.
Faire I giue you backe againe, and welcome I haue not yet: the roofe of this Court is too high to bee yours, and welcome to the wide fields, too baſe to be mine.
You ſhall be welcome Madam to my Court.
I wil be welcome then, Conduct me thither.
Heare me deare Lady, I haue ſworne an oath.
Our Lady helpe my Lord, he'll be forſworne.
Not for the world faire Madam, by my will.
Why, will ſhall breake it will, and nothing els.
Your Ladiſhip is ignorant what it is.
Were my Lord ſo, his ignorance were wiſe,
Where now his knowledge muſt proue ignorance.
I heare your grace hath ſworne out Houſeekeeping:
'Tis deadly ſinne to keepe that oath my Lord,
And ſinne to breake it:
But pardon me, I am too ſodaine bold,
To teach a Teacher ill beſeemeth me.
Vouchſafe to read the purpoſe of my comming,
And ſodainly reſolue me in my ſuite.
Madam, I will, if ſodainly I may.
You will the ſooner that I were away,
For you'll proue periur'd if you make me ſtay.
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
I know you did.
How needleſſe was it then to ask the queſtion?
You muſt not be ſo quicke.
'Tis long of you yt ſpur me with ſuch queſtions.
Your wit's too hot, it ſpeeds too faſt, 'twill tire.
Not till it leaue the Rider in the mire.
What time a day?
The howre that fooles ſhould aske.
Now faire befall your maske.
Faire fall the face it couers.
And ſend you many louers.
Amen, ſo you be none.
Nay then will I be gone.
Madame, your father heere doth intimate,
The paiment of a hundred thouſand Crownes,
Being but th' one halfe, of an intire ſumme,
Disburſed by my father in his warres.
But ſay that he, or we, as neither haue
Receiu'd that ſumme; yet there remaines vnpaid
A hundred thouſand more: in ſurety of the which,
One part of Aquitaine is bound to vs,
Although not valued to the moneys worth.
If then the King your father will reſtore
But that one halfe which is vnſatisfied,
We will giue vp our right in Aquitaine,
And hold faire friendſhip with his Maieſtie:
But that it ſeemes he little purpoſeth,
For here he doth demand to haue repaie,
An hundred thouſand Crownes, and not demands
One paiment of a hundred thouſand Crownes,
To haue his title liue in Aquitaine.
Which we much rather had depart withall,
And haue the money by our father lent,
Then Aquitane, ſo guelded as it is.
Deare Princeſſe, were not his requeſts ſo farre
From reaſons yeelding, your faire ſelfe ſhould make
A yeelding 'gainſt ſome reaſon in my breſt,
And goe well ſatisfied to France againe.
You doe the King my Father too much wrong,
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In ſo vnſeeming to confeſſe receyt
Of that which hath ſo faithfully beene paid.
I doe proteſt I neuer heard of it,
And if you proue it, Ile repay it backe,
Or yeeld vp Aquitaine.
We arreſt your word:
Boyet, you can produce acquittances
For ſuch a ſumme, from ſpeciall Officers,
Of Charles his Father.
Satisfie me ſo.
So pleaſe your Grace, the packet is not come
Where that and other ſpecialties are bound,
To morrow you ſhall haue a ſight of them.
It ſhall ſuffice me; at which enterview,
All liberall reaſon would I yeeld vnto:
Meane time, receiue ſuch welcome at my hand,
As Honour, without breach of Honour may
Make tender of, to thy true worthineſſe.
You may not come faire Princeſſe in my gates,
But heere without you ſhall be ſo receiu'd,
As you ſhall deeme your ſelfe lodg'd in my heart,
Though ſo deni'd farther harbour in my houſe:
Your owne good thoughts excuſe me, and farewell,
To morrow we ſhall viſit you againe.
Sweet health & faire deſires conſort your grace.
Thy own wiſh wiſh I thee, in euery place.
Lady, I will commend you to my owne heart.
Pray you doe my commendations,
I would be glad to ſee it.
I would you heard it grone.
Is the ſoule ſicke?.
Sicke at the heart.
Alacke, let it bloud.
Would that doe it good?
My Phiſicke ſaies I.
Will you prick't with your eye.
No poynt, with my knife.
Now God ſaue thy life.
And yours from long liuing.
I cannot ſtay thankſ-giuing.
Sir, I pray you a word: What Lady is that ſame?
The heire of Alanſon, Roſalin her name.
A gallant Lady, Mounſier fare you well.
I beſeech you a word: what is ſhe in the white?
A woman ſomtimes, if you ſaw her in the light.
Perchance light in the light: I deſire her name.
Shee hath but one for her ſelfe,
To deſire that were a ſhame.
Pray you ſir, whoſe daughter?
Her Mothers, I haue heard.
Gods bleſſing a your beard.
Good ſir be not offended,
Shee is an heyre of Faulconbridge.
Nay, my choller is ended:
Shee is a moſt ſweet Lady.
Not vnlike ſir, that may be.
What's her name in the cap.
Katherine by good hap.
Is ſhe wedded, or no.
To her will ſir, or ſo.
You are welcome ſir, adiew.
Fare well to me ſir, and welcome to you.
That laſt is Beroune, the mery mad-cap Lord.
Not a word with him, but a ieſt.
And euery ieſt but a word.
It was well done of you to take him at his word.
I was as willing to grapple, as he was to boord.
Two hot Sheepes marie:
And wherefore not Ships?
No Sheepe (ſweet Lamb) vnleſſe we feed on your lips.
You Sheep & I paſture: ſhall that finiſh the ieſt?
So you grant paſture for me.
Not ſo gentle beaſt.
My lips are no Common, though ſeuerall they be.
Belonging to whom?
To my fortunes and me.
Good wits wil be iangling, but gentles agree.
This ciuill warre of wits were much better vſed
On Nauar and his bookemen, for heere 'tis abus'd.
If my obſeruation (which very ſeldome lies
By the hearts ſtill rhetoricke, diſcloſed with eyes)
Deceiue me not now, Nauar is infected.
With what?
With that which we Louers intitle affected.
Your reaſon.
Why all his behauiours doe make their retire,
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough deſire.
His hart like an Agot with your print impreſſed,
Proud with his forme, in his eie pride expreſſed.
His tongue all impatient to ſpeake and not ſee,
Did ſtumble with haſte in his eie-ſight to be,
All ſences to that ſence did make their repaire,
To feele onely looking on faireſt of faire:
Me thought all his ſences were lockt in his eye,
As Iewels in Chriſtall for ſome Prince to buy.
Who tendring their own worth from whence they were glaſt,
Did point out to buy them along as you paſt.
His faces owne margent did coate ſuch amazes,
That all eyes ſaw his eies inchanted with gazes.
Ile giue you Aquitaine, and all that is his,
And you giue him for my ſake, but one louing Kiſſe.
Come to our Pauillion, Boyet is diſpoſde.
But to ſpeak that in words, which his eie hath diſclos'd.
I onelie haue made a mouth of his eie,
By adding a tongue, which I know will not lie.
Thou art an old Loue-monger, and ſpeakeſt skilfully.
He is Cupids Grandfather, and learnes news of him.
Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim.
Do you heare my mad wenches?
No.
What then, do you ſee?
I, our way to be gone.
You are too hard for me.
Warble childe, make paſſionate my ſenſe of hearing.
Concolinel.
Sweete Ayer, go tenderneſſe of yeares: take this Key, giue enlargement to the ſwaine, bring him feſtinatly hither: I muſt imploy him in a letter to my Loue.
Will you win your loue with a French braule?
How meaneſt thou, brauling in French?
No my compleat maſter, but to Iigge off a tune at the tongues end, canarie to it with the feete, humour it with turning vp your eie: ſigh a note and ſing a note, ſometime through the throate: if you ſwallowed loue with ſinging, loue ſometime through: noſe as if you ſnuft vp loue by ſmelling loue with your hat penthouſe-like ore the ſhop of your eies, with your armes croſt on your thinbellie doublet, like a Rabbet on a ſpit, or your hands in your pocket, like a man after the old painting, and keepe not too long in one tune, but a ſnip and away: theſe are complements, theſe are humours, theſe betraie nice wenches that would be betraied without theſe, and make them men of note: do you note men that moſt are affected to theſe?
How haſt thou purchaſed this experience?
By my penne of obſeruation.
But O, but O.
The Hobbie-horſe is forgot.
Cal'ſt thou my loue Hobbi-horſe.
No Maſter, the Hobbie-horſe is but a Colt, and and your Loue perhaps, a Hacknie:
But haue you forgot your Loue?
Almoſt I had.
Negligent ſtudent, learne her by heart.
By heart, and in heart Boy.
And out of heart Maſter: all thoſe three I will proue.
What wilt thou proue?
A man, if I liue (and this) by, in, and without, vpon the inſtant: by heart you loue her, becauſe your heart cannot come by her: in heart you loue her, becauſe your heart is in loue with her: and out of heart you loue her, being out of heart that you cannot enioy her.
I am all theſe three.
And three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.
Fetch hither the Swaine, he muſt carrie mee a letter.
A meſſage well ſimpathis'd, a Horſe to be embaſſadour for an Aſſe.
Ha, ha, What ſaieſt thou?
Marrie ſir, you muſt ſend the Aſſe vpon the Horſe for he is verie ſlow gated: but I goe.
The way is but ſhort, away.
As ſwift as Lead ſir.
Thy meaning prettie ingenious, is not Lead a mettall heauie, dull, and ſlow?
Minnime honeſt Maſter, or rather Maſter no.
I ſay Lead is ſlow.
You are too ſwift ſir to ſay ſo.
Is that Lead ſlow which is fir'd from a Gunne?
Sweete ſmoke of Rhetorike,
He reputes me a Cannon, and the Bullet that's he:
I ſhoote thee at the Swaine.
Thump then, and I flee.
A moſt acute iuuenall, voluble and free of grace,
By thy fauour ſweet Welkin, I muſt ſigh in thy face.
Moſt rude melancholie, Valour giues thee place.
My Herald is return'd.
A wonder Maſter, here's a Coſtard broken in a ſhin.
Some enigma, ſome riddle, come, thy Lenuoy begin.
No egma, no riddle, no lenuoy, no ſalue, in thee male ſir. Or ſir, Plantan, a plaine Plantan: no lenuoy, no lenuoy, no Salue ſir, but a Plantan.
By vertue thou inforceſt laughter, thy ſillie thought, my ſpleene, the heauing of my lunges prouokes me to rediculous ſmyling: O pardon me my ſtars, doth the inconſiderate take ſalue for lenuoy, and the word lenuoy for a ſalue?
Doe the wiſe thinke them other, is not lenuoy a ſalue?
No Page, it is an epilogue or diſcourſe to make plaine,
Some obſcure precedence that hath to fore bin faine.
Now will I begin your morrall, and do you follow with my lenuoy.
The Foxe, the Ape, and the Humble-Bee,
Were ſtill at oddes, being but three.
Vntill the Gooſe came out of doore,
Staying the oddes by adding foure.
A good Lenuoy, ending in the Gooſe: would you deſire more?
The Boy hath ſold him a bargaine, a Gooſe, that's flat
Sir, your penny-worth is good, and your Gooſe be fat▪
To ſell a bargaine well is as cunning as faſt and looſe:
Let me ſee a fat Lenuoy, I that's a fat Gooſe.
Come hither, come hither:
How did this argument begin?
By ſaying that a Coſtard was broken in a ſhin.
Then cal'd you for the Lenuoy.
True, and I for a Plantan:
Thus came your argument in:
Then the Boyes fat Lenuoy, the Gooſe that you bought,
And he ended the market.
But tell me: How was there a Coſtard broken in a ſhin?
I will tell you ſencibly.
Thou haſt no feeling of it Moth,
I will ſpeake that Lenuoy.
I Coſtard running out, that was ſafely within,
Fell ouer the threſhold, and broke my ſhin.
We will talke no more of this matter.
Till there be more matter in the ſhin.
Sirra Coſtard, I will infranchiſe thee.
O, marrie me to one Francis, I ſmell ſome Lenuoy, ſome Gooſe in this.
By my ſweete ſoule, I meane, ſetting thee at libertie. Enfreedoming thy perſon: thou wert emured, reſtrained, captiuated, bound.
True, true, and now you will be my purgation, and let me looſe.
I giue thee thy libertie, ſet thee from durance, and in lieu thereof, impoſe on thee nothing but this: Beare this ſignificant to the countrey Maide Iaquenetta: there is remuneration, for the beſt ward of mine honours is rewarding my dependants. Moth, follow.
Like the ſequell I.
Signeur Coſtard adew.
My ſweete ounce of mans fleſh, my in-conie Iew: Now will I looke to his remuneration. Remuneration, O, that's the Latine word for three-farthings: Three-farthings remuneration, What's the price of this yncle? i.d. no, Ile giue you a remuneration: Why? It carries it remuneration: Why? It is a fairer name then a French-Crowne. I will neuer buy and ſell out of this word.
O my good knaue Coſtard, exceedingly well met.
Pray you ſir, How much Carnation Ribbon may a man buy for a remuneration?
What is a remuneration?
Marrie ſir, halfe pennie farthing.
O, Why then three farthings worth of Silke.
I thanke your worſhip, God be wy you.
O ſtay ſlaue, I muſt employ thee:
As thou wilt win my fauour, good my knaue,
Doe one thing for me that I ſhall intreate.
When would you haue it done ſir?
O this after-noone.
Well, I will doe it ſir: Fare you well.
O thou knoweſt not what it is.
I ſhall know ſir, when I haue done it.
Why villaine thou muſt know firſt.
I wil come to your worſhip to morrow morning.
It muſt be done this after-noone,
Harke ſlaue, it is but this:
The Princeſſe comes to hunt here in the Parke,
And in her traine there is a gentle Ladie:
When tongues ſpeak ſweetly, then they name her name,
And Roſaline they call her, aske for her:
And to her white hand ſee thou do commend
This ſeal'd vp counſaile. Ther's thy guerdon: goe.
Gardon, O ſweete gardon, better then remuneration, a leuenpence-farthing better: moſt ſweete gardon. I will doe it ſir in print: gardon, remuneration.
O, and I forſooth in loue,
I that haue beene loues whip?
A verie Beadle to a humerous ſigh: A Criticke,
Nay, a night-watch Conſtable.
A domineering pedant ore the Boy,
Then whom no mortall ſo magnificent.
This wimpled, whyning, purblinde waiward Boy,
This ſignior Iunios gyant drawfe, don Cupid,
Regent of Loue-rimes, Lord of folded armes,
Th' annointed ſoueraigne of ſighes and groanes:
Liedge of all loyterers and male contents:
Dread Prince of Placcats, King of Codpeeces.
Sole Emperator and great generall
Of trotting Parrators (O my little heart.)
And I to be a Corporall of his field,
And weare his colours like a Tumblers hoope.
What? I loue, I ſue, I ſeeke a wife,
A woman that is like a Germane Cloake,
Still a repairing: euer out of frame,
And neuer going a right, being a Watch:
But being watcht, that it may ſtill goe right.
Nay, to be periurde, which is worſt of all:
And among three, to loue the worſt of all,
A whitly wanton, with a veluet brow.
With two pitch bals ſtucke in her face for eyes.
I, and by heauen, one that will doe the deede,
Though Argus were her Eunuch and her garde.
And I to ſigh for her, to watch for her,
To pray for her, go to: it is a plague
That Cupid will impoſe for my neglect,
Of his almighty dreadfull little might.
Well, I will loue, write, ſigh, pray, ſhue, grone,
Some men muſt loue my Lady, and ſome lone.
Was that the King that ſpurd his horſe ſo hard,
Againſt the ſteepe vpriſing of the hill?
I know not, but I thinke it was not he.
Who ere a was, a ſhew'd a mounting minde:
Well Lords, to day we ſhall haue our diſpatch,
On Saterday we will returne to France.
Then Forreſter my friend, Where is the Buſh
That we muſt ſtand and play the murtherer in?
Hereby vpon the edge of yonder Coppice,
A Stand where you may make the faireſt ſhoote.
I thanke my beautie, I am faire that ſhoote,
And thereupon thou ſpeak'ſt the faireſt ſhoote.
Pardon me Madam, for I meant not ſo.
What, what? Firſt praiſe me, & then again ſay no.
O ſhort liu'd pride. Not faire? alacke for woe.
Yes Madam faire.
Nay, neuer paint me now,
Where faire is not, praiſe cannot mend the brow.
Here (good my glaſſe) take this for telling true:
Faire paiment for foule words, is more then due.
Nothing but faire is that which you inherit.
See, ſee, my beautie will be ſau'd by merit.
O hereſie in faire, fit for theſe dayes,
A giuing hand, though foule, ſhall haue faire praiſe.
But come, the Bow: Now Mercie goes to kill,
And ſhooting well, is then accounted ill:
Thus will I ſaue my credit in the ſhoote,
Not wounding, pittie would not let me do't:
If wounding, then it was to ſhew my skill,
That more for praiſe, then purpoſe meant to kill.
And out of queſtion, ſo it is ſometimes:
Glory growes guiltie of deteſted crimes,
When for Fames ſake, for praiſe an outward part,
We bend to that, the working of the hart.
As I for praiſe alone now ſeeke to ſpill
The poore Deeres blood, that my heart meanes no ill.
Do not curſt wiues hold that ſelfe-ſoueraigntie
Onely for praiſe ſake, when they ſtriue to be
Lords ore their Lords?
Onely for praiſe and praiſe we may afford,
To any Lady that ſubdewes a Lord.
Here comes a member of the common-wealth.
God dig-you-den all, pray you which is the head Lady?
Thou ſhalt know her fellow, by the reſt that haue no heads.
Which is the greateſt Lady, the higheſt?
The thickeſt, and the talleſt.
The thickeſt, & the talleſt: it is ſo, truth is truth.
And your waſte Miſtris, were as ſlender as my wit,
One a theſe Maides girdles for your waſte ſhould be fit.
Are not you the chiefe womā? You are the thickeſt here?
What's your will ſir? What's your will?
I haue a Letter from Monſier Berowne,
To one Lady Roſaline.
O thy letter, thy letter: He's a good friend of mine.
Stand a ſide good bearer.
Boyet, you can carue,
Breake vp this Capon.
I am bound to ſerue.
This Letter is miſtooke: it importeth none here:
It is writ to Iaquenetta.
We will reade it, I ſweare.
Breake the necke of the Waxe, and euery one giue eare.
BY heauen, that thou art faire, is moſt infallible: true that thou art beauteous, truth it ſelfe that thou art louely: more fairer then faire, beautifull then beautious, truer then truth it ſelfe: haue comiſeration on thy heroicall Vaſſall. The magnanimous and moſt illuſtrate King Cophetua ſet eie vpon the pernicious and indubitate Begger Zenelophon: and he it was that might rightly ſay, Veni, vidi, vici: Which to annothanize in the vulgar, O baſe and obſcure vulgar; videliſet, He came, See, and ouercame: hee came one; ſee, two; couercame three: Who came? the King. Why did he come? to ſee. Why did he ſee? to ouercome. To whom came he? to the Begger. What ſaw he? the Begger. Who ouercame he? the Begger. The concluſion is victorie: On whoſe ſide? the King: the captiue is inricht: On whoſe ſide? the Beggers. The cataſtrophe is a Nuptiall: on whoſe ſide? the Kings: no, on both in one, or one in both. I am the King (for ſo ſtands the compariſon) thou the Begger, for ſo witneſſeth thy lowlineſſe. Shall I command thy loue? I may. Shall I enforce thy loue? I could. Shall I entreate thy loue? I will. What, ſhalt thou exchange for ragges, roabes: for tittles titles, for thy ſelfe mee. Thus expecting thy reply, I prophane my lips on thy foote, my eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy euerie part.
Thus doſt thou heare the Nemean Lion roare,
Gainſt thee thou Lambe, that ſtandeſt as his pray:
Submiſſiue fall his princely feete before,
And he from forrage will incline to play.
But if thou ſtriue (poore ſoule) what art thou then?
Foode for his rage, repaſture for his den.
What plume of feathers is hee that indited this Letter? What veine? What Wethercocke? Did you euer heare better?
I am much deceiued, but I remember the ſtile.
Elſe your memorie is bad, going ore it erewhile.
This Armando is a Spaniard that keeps here in court
A Phantaſime, a Monarcho, and one that makes ſport
To the Prince and his Booke-mates.
Thou fellow, a word.
Who gaue thee this Letter?
I told you, my Lord.
To whom ſhould'ſt thou giue it?
From my Lord to my Lady.
From which Lord, to which Lady?
From my Lord Berowne, a good maſter of mine,
To a Lady of France, that he call'd Roſaline.
Thou haſt miſtaken his letter. Come Lords away.
Here ſweete, put vp this, 'twill be thine another day.
Who is the ſhooter? Who is the ſhooter?
Shall I teach you to know.
I my continent of beautie.
Why ſhe that beares the Bow. Finely put off.
My Lady goes to kill hornes, but if thou marrie,
Hang me by the necke, if hornes that yeare miſcarrie.
Finely put on.
Well then, I am the ſhooter.
And who is your Deare?
If we chooſe by the hornes, your ſelfe come not neare. Finely put on indeede.
You ſtill wrangle with her Boyet, and ſhee ſtrikes at the brow.
But ſhe her ſelfe is hit lower:
Haue I hit her now.
Shall I come vpon thee with an old ſaying, that was a man when King Pippin of France was a little boy, as touching the hit it.
So I may anſwere thee with one as old that was a woman when Queene Guinouer of Brittaine was a little wench, as touching the hit it.
Thou canſt not hit it, hit it, hit it,
Thou canſt not hit it my good man.
I cannot, cannot, cannot:
And I cannot, another can.
By my troth moſt pleaſant, how both did fit it.
A marke marueilous well ſhot, for they both did hit.
A mark, O marke but that marke: a marke ſaies my Lady.
Let the mark haue a pricke in't, to meat at, if it may be.
Wide a' th bow hand. yfaith your hand is out.
Indeede a' muſt ſhoote nearer, or heele ne're hit the clout.
And if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
Then will ſhee get the vpſhoot by cleauing the is in.
Come, come, you talke greaſely, your lips grow foule,
She's too hard for you at pricks, ſir challenge her to boule.
I feare too much rubbing: good night my good Oule.
By my ſoule a Swaine, a moſt ſimple Clowne.
Lord, Lord, how the Ladies and I haue put him downe.
O my troth moſt ſweete ieſts, moſt inconie vulgar wit,
When it comes ſo ſmoothly off, ſo obſcenely, as it were, ſo fit.
Armathor ath to the ſide, O a moſt dainty man.
To ſee him walke before a Lady, and to beare her Fan.
To ſee him kiſſe his hand, and how moſt ſweetly a will ſweare:
And his Page at other ſide, that handfull of wit,
Ah heauens, it is moſt patheticall nit.
Sowla, ſowla.
Very reuerent ſport truely, and done in the teſtimony of a good conſcience.
The Deare was (as you know) ſanguis in blood, ripe as a Pomwater, who now hangeth like a Iewell in the eare of Celo the ſkie; the welken the heauen, and anon falleth like a Crab on the face of Terra, the ſoyle, the land, the earth.
Truely M. Holofernes, the epythithes are ſweetly varied like a ſcholler at the leaſt: but ſir I aſſure ye, it was a Bucke of the firſt head.
Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.
'Twas not a haud credo, 'twas a Pricket.
Moſt barbarous intimation: yet a kinde of inſinuation, as it were in via, in way of explication facere: as it were replication, or rather oſtentare, to ſhow as it were his inclination after his vndreſſed, vnpoliſhed, vneducated, vnpruned, vntrained, or rather vnlettered, or rathereſt vnconfirmed faſhion, to inſert againe my haud credo for a Deare.
I ſaid the Deare was not a haud credo, 'twas a Pricket.
Twice ſod ſimplicitie, his coctus, O thou monſter Ignorance, how deformed dooſt thou looke.
Sir hee hath neuer fed of the dainties that are bred in a booke.
He hath not eate paper as it were:
He hath not drunke inke.
His intellect is not repleniſhed, hee is onely an animall, onely ſenſible in the duller parts: and ſuch barren plants are ſet before vs, that we thankfull ſhould be: which we taſte and feeling, are for thoſe parts that doe fructifie in vs more then he.
For as it would ill become me to be vaine, indiſcreet, or a foole;
So were there a patch ſet on Learning, to ſee him in a Schoole.
But omne bene ſay I, being of an old Fathers minde,
Many can brooke the weather, that loue not the winde.
You two are book-men: Can you tell by your wit, What was a month old at Cains birth, that's not fiue weekes old as yet?
Dictiſima goodman Dull, dictiſima goodman Dull.
What is dictima?
A title to Phebe, to Luna, to the Moone.
The Moone was a month old when Adam was no more.
And wrought not to fiue-weekes when he came to fiueſcore.
Th' alluſion holds in the Exchange.
'Tis true indeede, the Colluſion holds in the Exchange.
God comfort thy capacity, I ſay th' alluſion holds in the Exchange.
And I ſay the poluſion holds in the Exchange: for the Moone is neuer but a month old: and I ſay beſide that, 'twas a Pricket that the Princeſſe kill'd.
Sir Nathaniel, will you heare an extemporall Epytaph on the death of the Deare, and to humour the ignorant call'd the Deare, the Princeſſe kill'd a Pricket.
Perge, good M. Holofernes, perge, ſo it ſhall pleaſe you to abrogate ſcurilitie.
I will ſomething affect the letter, for it argues facilitie.
The prayfull Princeſſe pearſt and prickt a prettie pleaſing Pricket,
Some ſay a Sore, but not a ſore, till now made ſore with ſhooting.
The Dogges did yell, put ell to Sore, then Sorell iumps from thicket:
Or Pricket-ſore, or elſe Sorell, the people fall a hooting.
If Sore be ſore, then ell to Sore, makes fiftie ſores O ſorell:
Of one ſore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.
A rare talent.
If a talent be a claw, looke how he clawes him with a talent.
This is a gift that I haue ſimple: ſimple, a fooliſh extrauagant ſpirit, full of formes, figures, ſhapes, obiects, Ideas, apprehenſions, motions, reuolutions. Theſe are begot in the ventricle of memorie, nouriſht in the wombe of primater, and deliuered vpon the mellowing of occaſion: but the gift is good in thoſe in whom it is acute, and I am thankfull for it.
Sir, I praiſe the Lord for you, and ſo may my pariſhioners, for their Sonnes are well tutor'd by you, and their Daughters profit very greatly vnder you: you are a good member of the common-wealth.
Mehercle, If their Sonnes be ingennous, they ſhall want no inſtruction: If their Daughters be capable, I will put it to them. But Vir ſapis qui pauca loquitur, a ſoule Feminine ſaluteth vs.
God giue you good morrow M. Perſon.
Maſter Perſon, quaſi Perſon? And if one ſhould be perſt, Which is the one?
Marry M. Schoolemaſter, hee that is likeſt to a hogſhead.
Of perſing a Hogshead, a good luſter of conceit in a curph of Earth, Fire enough for a Flint, Pearle enough for a Swine: 'tis prettie, it is well.
Good Maſter Parſon be ſo good as reade mee this Letter, it was giuen mee by Coſtard, and ſent mee from Don Armatho: I beſeech you reade it.
Facile procor gellida, quando pecas omnia ſub vmbraruminat, and ſo forth. Ah good old Mantuan, I may ſpeake of thee as the traueiler doth of Venice, vemchie, vencha, que non te vnde, que non te perreche. Old Mantuam, old Mantuan. Who vnderſtandeth thee not, vt re ſol la mi fa: Vnder pardon ſir, What are the contents? or rather as Horrace ſayes in his, What my ſoule verſes.
I ſir, and very learned.
Let me heare a ſtaffe, a ſtanze, a verſe, Lege domine.
If Loue make me forſworne, how ſhall I ſweare to loue?
Ah neuer faith could hold, if not to beautie vowed.
Though to my ſelfe forſworn, to thee Ile faithfull proue.
Thoſe thoughts to mee were Okes, to thee like Oſiers bowed.
Studie his byas leaues, and makes his booke thine eyes.
Where all thoſe pleaſures liue, that Art would comprehend.
If knowledge be the marke, to know thee ſhall ſuffice.
Well learned is that tongue, that well can thee cōmend.
All ignorant that ſoule, that ſees thee without wonder.
Which is to me ſome praiſe, that I thy parts admire;
Thy eye Ioues lightning beares, thy voyce his dreadfull thunder.
Which not to anger bent, is muſique, and ſweet fire.
Celeſtiall as thou art, Oh pardon loue this wrong,
That ſings heauens praiſe, with ſuch an earthly tongue.
You finde not the apoſtraphas, and ſo miſſe the accent. Let me ſuperuiſe the cangenet.
Here are onely numbers ratified, but for the elegancy, facility, & golden cadence of poeſie caret: Ouiddius Naſo was the man. And why in deed Naſo, but for ſmelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy? the ierkes of inuention imitarie is nothing: So doth the Hound his maſter, the Ape his keeper, the tyred Horſe his rider: But Damoſella virgin, Was this directed to you?
I ſir from one mounſier Berowne, one of the ſtrange Queenes Lords.
I will ouerglance the ſuperſcript.
I will looke againe on the intellect of the Letter, for the nomination of the partie written to the perſon written vnto.
Sir Holofernes, this Berowne is one of the Votaries with the King, and here he hath framed a Letter to a ſequent of the ſtranger Queenes: which accidentally, or by the way of progreſſion, hath miſcarried. Trip and goe my ſweete, deliuer this Paper into the hand of the King, it may concerne much: ſtay not thy complement, I forgiue thy duetie, adue.
Good Coſtard go with me:
Sir God ſaue your life.
Haue with thee my girle.
Sir you haue done this in the feare of God very religiouſly: and as a certaine Father ſaith
Sir tell not me of the Father, I do feare colourable colours. But to returne to the Verſes, Did they pleaſe you ſir Nathaniel?
Marueilous well for the pen.
I do dine to day at the fathers of a certaine Pupill of mine, where if (being repaſt) it ſhall pleaſe you to gratifie the table with a Grace, I will on my priuiledge I haue with the parents of the foreſaid Childe or Pupill, vndertake your bien vonuto, where I will proue thoſe Verſes to be very vnlearned, neither ſauouring of Poetrie, Wit, nor Inuention. I beſeech your Societie.
And thanke you to: for ſocietie (ſaith the text) is the happineſſe of life.
And certes the text moſt infallibly concludes it.
Sir I do inuite you too, you ſhall not ſay me nay: pauca verba.
Away, the gentles are at their game, and we will to our recreation.
The King he is hunting the Deare,
I am courſing my ſelfe.
They haue pitcht a Toyle, I am toyling in a pytch, pitch that defiles; defile, a foule word: Well, ſet thee downe ſorrow; for ſo they ſay the foole ſaid, and ſo ſay I, and I the foole: Well proued wit. By the Lord this Loue is as mad as Aiax, it kils ſheepe, it kils mee, I a ſheepe: Well proued againe a my ſide. I will not loue; if I do hang me: yfaith I will not. O but her eye: by this light, but for her eye, I would not loue her; yes, for her two eyes. Well, I doe nothing in the world but lye, and lye in my throate. By heauen I doe loue, and it hath taught mee to Rime, and to be mallicholie: and here is part of my Rime, and heere my mallicholie. Well, ſhe hath one a' my Sonnets already, the Clowne bore it, the Foole ſent it, and the Lady hath it: ſweet Clowne, ſweeter Foole, ſweeteſt Lady. By the world, I would not care a pin, if the other three were in. Here comes one with a paper, God giue him grace to grone.
Ay mee!
Shot by heauen: proceede ſweet Cupid, thou haſt thumpt him with thy Birdbolt vnder the left pap: in faith ſecrets.
So ſweete a kiſſe the golden Sunne giues not,
To thoſe freſh morning drops vpon the Roſe,
As thy eye beames, when their freſh rayſe haue ſmot.
The night of dew that on my cheekes downe flowes.
Nor ſhines the ſiluer Moone one halfe ſo bright,
Through the tranſparent boſome of the deepe,
As doth thy face through teares of mine giue light:
Thou ſhin'ſt in euery teare that I doe weepe,
No drop, but as a Coach doth carry thee:
So rideſt thou triumphing in my woe.
Do but behold the teares that ſwell in me,
And they thy glory through my griefe will ſhow:
But doe not loue thy ſelfe, then thou wilt keepe
My teares for glaſſes, and ſtill make me weepe.
O Queene of Queenes, how farre doſt thou excell,
No thought can thinke, nor tongue of mortall tell.
How ſhall ſhe know my griefes? Ile drop the paper.
Sweet leaues ſhade folly. Who is he comes heere?
What Longauill, and reading: liſten eare.
Now in thy likeneſſe, one more foole appeare.
Ay me, I am forſworne.
Why he comes in like a periure, wearing papers.
In loue I hope, ſweet fellowſhip in ſhame.
One drunkard loues another of the name.
Am I the firſt yt haue been periur'd ſo?
I could put thee in comfort, not by two that I know,
Thou makeſt the triumphery, the corner cap of ſocietie,
The ſhape of Loues Tiburne, that hangs vp ſimplicitie.
I feare theſe ſtubborn lines lack power to moue.
O ſweet Maria, Empreſſe of my Loue,
Theſe numbers will I teare, and write in proſe.
O Rimes are gards on wanton Cupids hoſe,
Disfigure not his Shop.
This ſame ſhall goe.
Did not the heauenly Rhetoricke of thine eye,
'Gainſt whom the world cannot hold argument,
Perſwade my heart to this falſe periurie?
Vowes for thee broke deſerue not puniſhment.
A woman I forſwore, but I will proue,
Thou being a Goddeſſe, I forſwore not thee.
My Vow was earthly, thou a heauenly Loue.
Thy grace being gain'd, cures all diſgrace in me.
Vowes are but breath; and breath a vapour is.
Then thou faire Sun, which on my earth doeſt ſhine,
Exhalest this vapor-vow, in thee it is:
If broken then, it is no fault of mine:
If by me broke, What foole is not ſo wiſe,
To looſe an oath, to win a Paradiſe?
This is the liuer veine, which makes fleſh a deity.
A greene Gooſe, a Coddeſſe, pure pure Idolatry.
God amend vs, God amend, we are much out o' th' way.
By whom ſhall I ſend this (company?) Stay.
All hid, all hid, an old infant play,
Like a demie God, here ſit I in the skie,
And wretched fooles ſecrets heedfully ore-eye.
More Sacks to the myll. O heauens I haue my wiſh,
Dumaine transform'd, foure Woodcocks in a diſh.
O moſt diuine Kate.
O moſt prophane coxcombe.
By heauen the wonder of a mortall eye.
By earth ſhe is not, corporall, there you lye.
Her Amber haires for foule hath amber coted.
An Amber coloured Rauen was well noted.
As vpright as the Cedar.
Stoope I ſay her ſhoulder is with-child.
As faire as day.
I as ſome daies, but then no ſunne muſt ſhine.
O that I had my wiſh?
And I had mine.
And mine too good Lord.
Amen, ſo I had mine: Is not that a good word?
I would forget her, but a Feuer ſhe
Raignes in my bloud, and will remembred be.
A Feuer in your bloud, why then inciſion
Would let her out in Sawcers, ſweet miſpriſion.
Once more Ile read the Ode that I haue writ.
Once more Ile marke how Loue can varry Wit.
On a day, alack the day:
Loue, whoſe Month is euery May,
Spied a bloſſome paſſing faire,
Playing in the wanton ayre:
Through the Veluet, leaues the winde,
All vnſeene, can paſſage finde.
That the Louer ſicke to death,
Wiſh himſelfe the heauens breath.
Ayre (quoth he) thy cheekes may blowe,
Ayre, would I might triumph ſo.
But alacke my hand is ſworne,
Nere to plucke thee from thy throne:
Vow alacke for youth vnmeete,
Youth ſo apt to plucke a ſweet.
Doe not call it ſinne in me,
That I am forſworne for thee.
Thou for whom loue would ſweare,
Iuno but an Aethiop were,
And denie himſelfe for Ioue.
Turning mortall for thy Loue.
This will I ſend, and ſomething elſe more plaine.
That ſhall expreſſe my true-loues faſting paine.
O would the King, Berowne and Longauill,
Were Louers too, ill to example ill,
Would from my forehead wipe a periur'd note:
For none offend, where all alike doe dote.
Dumaine, thy Loue is farre from charitie,
That in Loues griefe deſir'ſt ſocietie:
You may looke pale, but I ſhould bluſh I know,
To be ore-heard, and taken napping ſo.
Come ſir, you bluſh: as his, your caſe is ſuch,
You chide at him, offending twice as much.
You doe not loue Maria? Longauile,
Did neuer Sonnet for her ſake compile;
Nor neuer lay his wreathed armes athwart
His louing boſome, to keepe downe his heart.
I haue beene cloſely ſhrowded in this buſh,
And markt you both, and for you both did bluſh.
I heard your guilty Rimes, obſeru'd your faſhion:
Saw ſighes reeke from you, noted well your paſſion.
Aye me, ſayes one! O Ioue, the other cries!
On her haires were Gold, Chriſtall the others eyes.
You would for Paradiſe breake Faith and troth,
And Ioue for your Loue would infringe an oath.
What will Berowne ſay when that he ſhall heare
Faith infringed, which ſuch zeale did ſweare.
How will he ſcorne? how will he ſpend his wit?
How will he triumph, leape, and laugh at it?
For all the wealth that euer I did ſee,
I would not haue him know ſo much by me.
Now ſtep I forth to whip hypocriſie.
Ah good my Liedge, I pray thee pardon me.
Good heart, What grace haſt thou thus to reproue
Theſe wormes for louing, that art moſt in loue?
Your eyes doe make no couches in your teares.
There is no certaine Princeſſe that appeares.
You'll not be periur'd, 'tis a hatefull thing:
Tuſh, none but Minſtrels like of Sonnetting.
But are you not aſham'd? nay, are you not
All three of you, to be thus much ore'ſhot?
You found his Moth, the King your Moth did ſee:
But I a Beame doe finde in each of three.
O what a Scene of fool'ry haue I ſeene.
Of ſighes, of grones, of ſorrow, and of teene:
O me, with what ſtrict patience haue I ſat,
To ſee a King transformed to a Gnat?
To ſee great Hercules whipping a Gigge,
And profound Salomon tuning a Iygge?
And Neſtor play at puſh-pin with the boyes,
And Critticke Tymon laugh at idle toyes.
Where lies thy griefe? O tell me good Dumaine;
And gentle Longauill, where lies thy paine?
And where my Liedges? all about the breſt:
A Candle hoa!
Too bitter is thy ieſt.
Are wee betrayed thus to thy ouer-view?
Not you by me, but I betrayed to you.
I that am honeſt, I that hold it ſinne
To breake the vow I am ingaged in.
I am betrayed by keeping company
With men, like men of inconſtancie.
When ſhall you ſee me write a thing in rime?
Or grone for Ioane? or ſpend a minutes time,
In pruning mee, when ſhall you heare that I will praiſe a hand, a foot, a face, an eye: a gate, a ſtate, a brow, a breſt, a waſte, a legge, a limme.
Soft, Whither a-way ſo faſt?
A true man, or a theefe, that gallops ſo.
I poſt from Loue, good Louer let me go.
God bleſſe the King.
What Preſent haſt thou there?
Some certaine treaſon.
What makes treaſon heere?
Nay it makes nothing ſir.
If it marre nothing neither,
The treaſon and you goe in peace away together.
I beſeech your Grace let this Letter be read,
Our perſon miſ-doubts it: it was treaſon he ſaid.
Berowne, read it ouer.
Where hadſt thou it?
Of Coſtard.
Where hadſt thou it?
Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.
How now, what is in you? why doſt thou tear it?
A toy my Liedge, a toy: your grace needes not feare it.
It did moue him to paſſion, and therefore let's heare it.
It is Berowns writing, and heere is his name.
Ah you whoreſon loggerhead, you were borne to doe me ſhame.
Guilty my Lord, guilty: I confeſſe, I confeſſe.
What?
That you three fooles, lackt mee foole, to make vp the meſſe.
He, he, and you: and you my Liedge, and I,
Are picke-purſes in Loue, and we deſerue to die.
O diſmiſſe this audience, and I ſhall tell you more.
Now the number is euen.
True true, we are fowre: will theſe Turtles be gone?
Hence ſirs, away.
Walk aſide the true folke, & let the traytors ſtay.
Sweet Lords, ſweet Louers, O let vs imbrace,
As true we are as fleſh and bloud can be,
The Sea will ebbe and flow, heauen will ſhew his face:
Young bloud doth not obey an old decree.
We cannot croſſe the cauſe why we are borne:
Therefore of all hands muſt we be forſworne.
What, did theſe rent lines ſhew ſome loue of thine?
Did they, quoth you? Who ſees the heauenly Roſaline,
That (like a rude and ſauage man of Inde.)
At the firſt opening of the gorgeous Eaſt,
Bowes not his vaſſall head, and ſtrooken blinde,
Kiſſes the baſe ground with obedient breaſt?
What peremptory Eagle-ſighted eye
Dares looke vpon the heauen of her brow,
That is not blinded by her maieſtie?
What zeale, what furie, hath inſpir'd thee now?
My Loue (her Miſtres) is a gracious Moone,
Shee (an attending Starre) ſcarce ſeene a light.
My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne.
O, but for my Loue, day would turne to night,
Of all complexions the cul'd ſoueraignty,
Doe meet as at a faire in her faire cheeke,
Where ſeuerall Worthies make one dignity,
Where nothing wants, that want it ſelfe doth ſeeke.
Lend me the flouriſh of all gentle tongues,
Fie painted Rethoricke, O ſhe needs it not,
To things of ſale, a ſellers praiſe belongs:
She paſſes prayſe, then prayſe too ſhort doth blot.
A withered Hermite, fiueſcore winters worne,
Might ſhake off fiftie, looking in her eye:
Beauty doth varniſh Age, as if new borne,
And giues the Crutch the Cradles infancie.
O 'tis the Sunne that maketh all things ſhine.
By heauen, thy Loue is blacke as Ebonie.
Is Ebonie like her? O word diuine?
A wife of ſuch wood were felicitie.
O who can giue an oth? Where is a booke?
That I may ſweare Beauty doth beauty lacke,
If that ſhe learne not of her eye to looke:
No face is faire that is not full ſo blacke.
O paradoxe, Blacke is the badge of hell,
The hue of dungeons, and the Schoole of night:
And beauties creſt becomes the heauens well.
Diuels ſooneſt tempt reſembling ſpirits of light.
O if in blacke my Ladies browes be deckt,
It mournes, that painting vſurping haire
Should rauiſh doters with a falſe aſpect:
And therfore is ſhe borne to make blacke, faire.
Her fauour turnes the faſhion of the dayes,
For natiue bloud is counted painting now:
And therefore red that would auoyd diſpraiſe,
Paints it ſelfe blacke, to imitate her brow.
To look like her are Chimny-ſweepers blacke.
And ſince her time, are Colliers counted bright.
And Aethiops of their ſweet complexion crake.
Dark needs no Candles now, for dark is light.
Your miſtreſſes dare neuer come in raine,
For feare their colours ſhould be waſht away.
'Twere good yours did: for ſir to tell you plaine,
Ile finde a fairer face not waſht to day.
Ile proue her faire, or talke till dooms-day here.
No Diuell will fright thee then ſo much as ſhee.
I neuer knew man hold vile ſtuffe ſo deere.
Looke, heer's thy loue, my foot and her face ſee.
O if the ſtreets were paued with thine eyes,
Her feet were much too dainty for ſuch tread.
O vile, then as ſhe goes what vpward lyes?
The ſtreet ſhould ſee as ſhe walk'd ouer head.
But what of this, are we not all in loue?
O nothing ſo ſure, and thereby all forſworne.
Then leaue this chat, & good Berown now proue
Our louing lawfull, and our fayth not torne.
I marie there, ſome flattery for this euill.
O ſome authority how to proceed,
Some tricks, ſome quillets, how to cheat the diuell.
Some ſalue for periurie.
O 'tis more then neede.
Haue at you then affections men at armes,
Conſider what you firſt did ſweare vnto:
To faſt, to ſtudy, and to ſee no woman:
Flat treaſon againſt the Kingly ſtate of youth.
Say, Can you faſt? your ſtomacks are too young:
And abſtinence ingenders maladies.
And where that you haue vow'd to ſtudie (Lords)
In that each of you haue forſworne his Booke
Can you ſtill dreame and pore, and thereon looke.
For when would you my Lord, or you, or you,
Haue found the ground of ſtudies excellence,
Without the beauty of a womans face;
From womens eyes this doctrine I deriue,
They are the Ground, the Bookes, the Achadems,
From whence doth ſpring the true Promethean fire.
Why, vniuerſall plodding poyſons vp
The nimble ſpirits in the arteries,
As motion and long during action tyres
The ſinnowy vigour of the trauailer.
Now for not looking on a womans face,
You haue in that forſworne the vſe of eyes:
And ſtudie too, the cauſer of your vow.
For where is any Author in the world,
Teaches ſuch beauty as a womans eye:
Learning is but an adiunct to our ſelfe,
And where we are, our Learning likewiſe is.
Then when our ſelues we ſee in Ladies eyes,
With our ſelues.
Doe we not likewiſe ſee our learning there?
O we haue made a Vow to ſtudie, Lords,
And in that vow we haue forſworne our Bookes:
For when would you (my Leege) or you, or you?
In leaden contemplation haue found out
Such fiery Numbers as the prompting eyes,
Of beauties tutors haue inrich'd you with:
Other ſlow Arts intirely keepe the braine:
And therefore finding barraine practizers,
Scarce ſhew a harueſt of their heauy toyle.
But Loue firſt learned in a Ladies eyes,
Liues not alone emured in the braine:
But with the motion of all elements,
Courſes as ſwift as thought in euery power,
And giues to euery power a double power,
Aboue their functions and their offices.
It addes a precious ſeeing to the eye:
A Louers eyes will gaze an Eagle blinde.
A Louers eare will heare the loweſt ſound.
When the ſuſpicious head of theft is ſtopt.
Loues feeling is more ſoft and ſenſible,
Then are the tender hornes of Cockled Snayles.
Loues tongue proues dainty, Bachus groſſe in taſte,
For Valour, is not Loue a Hercules?
Still climing trees in the Heſporides.
Subtill as Sphinx, as ſweet and muſicall,
As bright Apollo's Lute, ſtrung with his haire.
And when Loue ſpeakes, the voyce of all the Gods,
Make heauen drowſie with the harmonie.
Neuer durſt Poet touch a pen to write,
Vntill his Inke were tempred with Loues ſighes:
O then his lines would rauiſh ſauage eares,
And plant in Tyrants milde humilitie.
From womens eyes this doctrine I deriue.
They ſparcle ſtill the right promethean fire,
They are the Bookes, the Arts, the Achademes,
That ſhew, containe, and nouriſh all the world.
Elſe none at all in ought proues excellent.
Then fooles you were theſe women to forſweare:
Or keeping what is ſworne, you will proue fooles,
For Wiſedomes ſake, a word that all men loue:
Or for Loues ſake, a word that loues all men.
Or for Mens ſake, the author of theſe Women:
Or Womens ſake, by whom we men are Men.
Let's once looſe our oathes to finde our ſelues,
Or elſe we looſe our ſelues, to keepe our oathes▪
It is religion to be thus forſworne.
For Charity it ſelfe fulfills the Law:
And who can ſeuer loue from Charity.
Saint Cupid then, and Souldiers to the field.
Aduance your ſtandards, & vpon them Lords.
Pell, mell, downe with them: but be firſt aduis'd,
In conflict that you get the Sunne of them.
Now to plaine dealing, Lay theſe glozes by,
Shall we reſolue to woe theſe girles of France?
And winne them too, therefore let vs deuiſe,
Some entertainment for them in their Tents.
Firſt from the Park let vs conduct them thither,
Then homeward euery man attach the hand
Of his faire Miſtreſſe, in the afternoone
We will with ſome ſtrange paſtime ſolace them:
Such as the ſhortneſſe of the time can ſhape,
For Reuels, Dances, Maskes, and merry houres,
Fore-runne faire Loue, ſtrewing her way with flowres.
Away, away, no time ſhall be omitted,
That will be time, and may by vs be fitted.
Alone, alone ſowed Cockell, reap'd no Corne,
And Iuſtice alwaies whirles in equall meaſure:
Light Wenches may proue plagues to men forſworne,
If ſo, our Copper buyes no better treaſure.
Satis quid ſufficit.
I praiſe God for you ſir, your reaſons at dinner haue beene ſharpe & ſententious: pleaſant without ſcurrillity, witty without affection, audacious without impudency, learned without opinion, and ſtrange without hereſie: I did conuerſe this quondam day with a companion of the Kings, who is intituled, nominated, or called, Don Adriano de Armatho.
Noui hominum tanquam te, His humour is lofty, his diſcourſe peremptorie: his tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his gate maieſticall, and his generall behauiour vaine, ridiculous, and thraſonicall. He is too picked, too ſpruce, too affected, too odde, as it were, too peregrinat, as I may call it.
A moſt ſingular and choiſe Epithat,
He draweth out the thred of his verboſitie, finer then the ſtaple of his argument. I abhor ſuch phanaticall phantaſims, ſuch inſociable and poynt deuiſe companions, ſuch rackers of ortagriphie, as to ſpeake dout fine, when he ſhould ſay doubt; det, when he ſhold pronounce debt; det, not det: he clepeth a Calf, Caufe: halfe, haufe: neighbour vocatur nebour; neigh abreuiated ne: this is abhominable, which he would call abhominable: it inſinuateth me of infamie: ne inteligis domine, to make frantike, lunaticke?
Laus deo, bene intelligo.
Bome boon for boon preſcian, a little ſcratcht, 'twil ſerue.
Vides ne quis venit?
Video, & gaudio.
Chirra.
Quar Chirra, not Sirra?
Men of peace well incountred.
Moſt millitarie ſir ſalutation▪
They haue beene at a great feaſt of Languages, and ſtolne the ſcraps.
O they haue liu'd long on the almes-basket of words. I maruell thy M. hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou art not ſo long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus: Thou art eaſier ſwallowed then a flap dragon.
Peace, the peale begins.
Mounſier, are you not lettred?
Yes, yes, he eaches boyes the Horne-booke:
What is Abſpeld backward with the horn on his head?
Ba, puericia with a horne added.
Ba moſt ſeely Sheepe, with a horne: you heare his learning.
Quis quis, thou Conſonant?
The laſt of the fiue Vowels if You repeat them, or the fift if I.
I will repeat them: a e I.
The Shepe, the other two concludes it o u.
Now by the ſalt waue of the mediteranium, a ſweet tutch, a quicke vene we of wit, ſnip ſnap, quick & home, it reioyceth my intellect, true wit.
Offered by a childe to an olde man: which is wit-old.
What is the figure? What is the figure?
Hornes.
Thou diſputes like an Infant: goe whip thy Gigge.
Lend me your Horne to make one, and I will whip about your Infamie vnum cita a gigge of a Cuckolds horne.
And I had but one penny in the world, thou ſhouldſt haue it to buy Ginger bread: Hold, there is the very Remuneration I had of thy Maiſter, thou halfpenny purſe of wit, thou Pidgeon-egge of diſcretion. O & the heauens were ſo pleaſed, that thou wert but my Baſtard; What a ioyfull father wouldſt thou make mee? Goe to, thou haſt it ad dungil, at the fingers ends, as they ſay.
Oh I ſmell falſe Latine, dunghel for vnguem.
Artſ-man preambulat, we will bee ſingled from the barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the Charghouſe on the top of the Mountaine?
Or Mons the hill.
At your ſweet pleaſure, for the Mountaine.
I doe ſans queſtion.
Sir, it is the Kings moſt ſweet pleaſure and affection, to congratulate the Princeſſe at her Pauilion, in the poſteriors of this day, which the rude multitude call the after-noone.
The poſterior of the day, moſt generous ſir, is liable, congruent, and meaſurable for the after-noone: the word is well culd, choſe, ſweet, and apt I doe aſſure you ſir, I doe aſſure.
Sir, the King is a noble Gentleman, and my familiar, I doe aſſure ye very good friend: for what is inward betweene vs, let it paſſe. I doe beſeech thee remember thy curteſie. I beſeech thee apparell thy head: and among other importunate & moſt ſerious deſignes, and of great import indeed too: but let that paſſe, for I muſt tell thee it will pleaſe his Grace (by the world) ſometime to leane vpon my poore ſhoulder, and with his royall finger thus dallie with my excrement, with my muſtachio: but ſweet heart let that paſſe. By the world I recount no fable, ſome certaine ſpeciall honours it pleaſeth his greatneſſe to impart to Armado a Souldier, a man of trauell, that hath ſeene the world: but let that paſſe; the very all of all is: but ſweet heart, I do implore ſecrecie, that the King would haue mee preſent the Princeſſe (ſweet chucke) with ſome delightfull oſtentation, or ſhow, or pageant, or anticke, or fire-worke: Now, vnderſtanding that the Curate and your ſweet ſelf are good at ſuch eruptions, and ſodaine breaking out of myrth . i were) I haue acquainted you withall, to the end to craue your aſſiſtance.
Sir, you ſhall preſent before her the Nine Worthies. Sir Holofernes, as concerning ſome entertainment of time, ſome ſhow in the poſterior of this day, to bee rendred by our aſſiſtants the Kings command: and this moſt gallant, illuſtrate and learned Gentleman, before the Princeſſe: I ſay none ſo ſit as to preſent the Nine Worthies.
Where will you finde men worthy enough to preſent them?
Ioſua, your ſelfe: my ſelfe, and this gallant gentleman Iudas Machabeus; this Swaine (becauſe of his great limme or oynt) ſhall paſſe Pompey the great, the Page Hercules.
Pardon ſir, error: He is not quantitie enough for that Worthies thumb, hee is not ſo big as the end of his Club.
Shall I haue audience? he ſhall preſent Hercules in minoritie: his enter and exit ſhall bee ſtrangling a Snake; and I will haue an Apologie for that purpoſe.
An excellent deuice: ſo if any of the audience hiſſe, you may cry, Well done Hercules, now thou cruſheſt the Snake; that is the way to make an offence gracious, though few haue the grace to doe it.
For the reſt of the Worthies?
I will play three my ſelfe.
Thrice worthy Gentleman.
Shall I tell you a thing?
We attend.
We will haue, if this fadge not, an Antique. I beſeech you follow.
Via good-man Dull, thou haſt ſpoken no word all this while.
Nor vnderſtood none neither ſir.
Alone, we will employ thee.
Ile make one in a dance, or ſo: or I will play on the taber to the Worthies, & let them dance the hey.
Moſt Dull, honeſt Dull, to our ſport away.
Sweet hearts we ſhall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in.
A Lady wal'd about with Diamonds: Look you, what I haue from the louing King.
Madam, came nothing elſe along with that?
Nothing but this yes as much loue in Rime,
As would be cram'd vp in a ſheet of paper
Writ on both ſides the leaſe, margent and all,
That he was faine to ſeale on Cupids name.
That was the way to make his god-head wax:
For he hath beene fiue thouſand yeeres a Boy.
I, and a ſhrewd vnhappy gallowes too.
You'll nere be friends with him, a kild your ſiſter.
He made her melancholy, ſad, and heauy, and ſo ſhe died: had ſhe beene Light like you, of ſuch a merrie nimble ſtirring ſpirit, ſhe might a bin a Grandam ere ſhe died. And ſo may you: For a light heart liues long.
What's your darke meaning mouſe, of this light word?
A light condition in a beauty darke.
We need more light to finde your meaning out.
You'll marre the light by taking it in ſnuffe:
Therefore Ile darkely end the argument.
Look what you doe, you doe it ſtil i' th darke.
So do not you, for you are a light Wench.
Indeed I waigh not you, and therefore light.
You waigh me not, O that's you care not for me.
Great reaſon: for paſt care, is ſtill paſt cure.
Well bandied both, a ſet of Wit well played.
But Roſaline, you haue a Fauour too?
Who ſent it? and what is it?
I would you knew.
And if my face were but as faire as yours.
My Fauour were as great, be witneſſe this.
Nay, I haue Verſes too, I thanke Berowne,
The numbers true, and were the numbring too,
I were the faireſt goddeſſe on the ground.
I am compar'd to twenty thouſand fairs.
O he hath drawne my picture in his letter.
Any thing like?
Much in the letters, nothing in the praiſe.
Beauteous as Incke: a good concluſion.
Faire as a text B. in a Coppie booke.
Ware penſals. How? Let me not die your debtor,
My red Dominicall, my golden letter.
O that your face were full of Ocs.
A Pox of that ieſt, and I beſhrew all Shrowes:
But Katherine, what was ſent to you
From faire Dumaine?
Madame, this Gloue.
Did he not ſend you twaine?
Yes Madame: and moreouer,
Some thouſand Verſes of a faithfull Louer.
A huge tranſlation of hypocriſie,
Vildly compiled, profound ſimplicitie.
This, and theſe Pearls, to me ſent Longauile.
The Letter is too long by halfe a mile.
I thinke no leſſe: Doſt thou wiſh in heart
The Chaine were longer, and the Letter ſhort.
I, or I would theſe hands might neuer part.
We are wiſe girles to mocke our Louers ſo.
They are worſe fooles to purchaſe mocking ſo.
That ſame Berowne ile torture ere I goe.
O that I knew he were but in by th' weeke,
How I would make him fawne, and begge, and ſeeke,
And wait the ſeaſon, and obſerue the times,
And ſpend his prodigall wits in booteles rimes.
And ſhape his ſeruice wholly to my deuice,
And make him proud to make me proud that ieſts.
So pertaunt like would I o' reſway his ſtate,
That he ſhold be my foole, and I his fate.
None are ſo ſurely caught▪ when they are catcht,
As Wit turn'd foole, follie in Wiſedome hatch'd:
Hath wiſedoms warrant, and the helpe of Schoole,
And Wits owne grace to grace a learned Foole?
The bloud of youth burns not with ſuch exceſſe,
As grauities reuolt to wantons be.
Follie in Fooles beares not ſo ſtrong a note,
As fool'ry in the Wiſe, when Wit doth dote:
Since all the power thereof it doth apply,
To proue by Wit, worth in ſimplicitie.
Heere comes Boyet, and mirth in his face.
O I am ſtab'd with laughter, Wher's her Grace?
Thy newes Boyet?
Prepare Madame, prepare.
Arme Wenches arme, incounters mounted are,
Againſt your Peace, Loue doth approach, diſguis'd:
Armed in arguments, you'll be ſurpriz'd.
Muſter your Wits, ſtand in your owne defence,
Or hide your heads like Cowards, and flie hence.
Saint Dennis to S. Cupid: What are they,
That charge their breath againſt vs? Say ſcout ſay.
Vnder the coole ſhade of a Siccamore,
I thought to cloſe mine eyes ſome halfe an houre:
When lo to interrupt my purpos'd reſt,
Toward that ſhade I might behold addreſt,
The King and his companions: warely
I ſtole into a neighbour thicket by,
And ouer-heard, what you ſhall ouer-heare:
That by and by diſguis'd they will be heere.
Their Herald is a pretty knauiſh Page:
That well by heart hath con'd his embaſſage,
Action and accent did they teach him there.
Thus muſt thou ſpeake, and thus thy body beare.
And euer and anon they made a doubt,
Preſence maieſticall would put him out:
For quoth the King, an Angell ſhalt thou ſee:
Yet feare not thou, but ſpeake audaciouſly.
The Boy reply'd, An Angell is not euill:
I ſhould haue fear'd her, had ſhe beene a deuill▪
With that all laugh'd, and clap'd him on the ſhoulder,
Making the bold wagg by their praiſes bolder.
One rub'd his elboe thus, and fleer'd, and ſwore,
A better ſpeech was neuer ſpoke before.
Another with his finger and his thumb,
Cry'd via, we will doo't, come what will come.
The third he caper'd and cried, All goes well.
The fourth turn'd on the toe, and downe he fell:
With that they all did tumble on the ground,
With ſuch a zelous laughter ſo profound,
That in this ſpleene ridiculous appeares,
To checke their folly paſſions ſolemne teares.
But what, but what, come they to viſit vs?
They do, they do; and are apparel'd thus,
Like Muſcouites, or Ruſſians, as I geſſe.
Their purpoſe is to parlee, to court, and dance,
And euery one his Loue-feat will aduance,
Vnto his ſeuerall Miſtreſſe: which they'll know
By fauours ſeuerall, which they did beſtow.
And will they ſo? the Gallants ſhall be taskt:
For Ladies; we will euery one be maskt,
And not a man of them ſhall haue the grace
Deſpight of ſute, to ſee a Ladies face.
Hold Roſaline, this Fauour thou ſhalt weare,
And then the King will court thee for his Deare:
Hold, take thou this my ſweet, and giue me thine,
So ſhall Berowne take me for Roſaline.
And change your Fauours too, ſo ſhall your Loues
Woo contrary, deceiu'd by theſe remoues.
Come on then, weare the fauours moſt in ſight.
But in this changing, What is your intent?
The effect of my intent is to croſſe theirs:
They doe it but in mocking merriment,
And mocke for mocke is onely my intent.
Their ſeuerall counſels they vnboſome ſhall,
To Loues miſtooke, and ſo be mockt withall.
Vpon the next occaſion that we meete,
With Viſages diſplayd to talke and greete.
But ſhall we dance, if they deſire vs too't?
No, to the death we will not moue a foot,
Nor to their pen'd ſpeech render we no grace:
But while 'tis ſpoke, each turne away his face.
Why that contempt will kill the keepers heart,
And quite diuorce his memory from his part.
Therefore I doe it, and I make no doubt,
The reſt will ere come in, if he be out.
Theres no ſuch ſport, as ſport by ſport orethrowne:
To make theirs ours, and ours none but our owne.
So ſhall we ſtay mocking entended game,
And they well mockt, depart away with ſhame.
The Trompet ſounds, be maskt, the maskers come.
All haile, the richeſt Beauties on the earth.
Beauties no richer then rich Taffata.
A holy parcell of the faireſt dames that euer turn'd their backes to mortall viewes.
Their eyes villaine, their eyes.
That euer turn'd their eyes to mortall viewes.
Out
True, out indeed.
Out of your fauours heauenly ſpirits vouchſafe
Not to beholde.
Once to behold, rogue.
Once to behold with your Sunne beamed eyes,
With your Sunne beamed eyes.
They will not anſwer to that Epythite,
You were beſt call it Daughter beamed eyes.
They do not marke me, and that brings me out.
Is this your perfectneſſe? be gon you rogue.
What would theſe ſtrangers?
Know their mindes Boyet.
If they doe ſpeake our language, 'tis our will
That ſome plaine man recount their purpoſes.
Know what they would?
What would you with the Princes?
Nothing but peace, and gentle viſitation.
What would they, ſay they?
Nothing but peace, and gentle viſitation.
Why that they haue, and bid them ſo be gon.
She ſaies you haue it, and you may be gon.
Say to her we haue meaſur'd many miles,
To tread a Meaſure with you on the graſſe.
They ſay that they haue meaſur'd many a mile,
To tread a Meaſure with you on this graſſe.
It is not ſo. Aske them how many inches
Is in one mile? If they haue meaſur'd manie,
The meaſure then of one is eaſlie told:
If to come hither, you haue meaſur'd miles,
And many miles: the Princeſſe bids you tell,
How many inches doth fill vp one mile?
Tell her we meaſure them by weary ſteps.
She heares her ſelfe.
How manie wearie ſteps,
Of many wearie miles you haue ore-gone,
Are numbred in the trauell of one mile?
We number nothing that we ſpend for you,
Our dutie is ſo rich, ſo infinite,
That we may doe it ſtill without accompt.
Vouchſafe to ſhew the ſunſhine of your face,
That we (like ſauages) may worſhip it.
My face is but a Moone, and clouded too.
Bleſſed are clouds, to doe as ſuch clouds do.
Vouchſafe bright Moone, and theſe thy ſtars to ſhine,
(Thoſe clouds remooued) vpon our waterie eyne.
O vaine peticioner, beg a greater matter,
Thou now requeſts but Mooneſhine in the water.
Then in our meaſure, vouchſafe but one change.
Thou bidſt me begge, this begging is not ſtrange.
Play muſicke then: nay you muſt doe it ſoone.
Not yet no dance: thus change I like the Moone.
Will you not dance? How come you thus eſtranged?
You tooke the Moone at full, but now ſhee's changed?
Yet ſtill ſhe is the Moone, and I the Man.
The muſick playes, vouchſafe ſome motion to it: Our eares vouchſafe it.
But your legges ſhould doe it.
Since you are ſtrangers, & come here by chance,
Wee'll not be nice, take hands, we will not dance.
Why take you hands then?
Onelie to part friends.
Curtſie ſweet hearts, and ſo the Meaſure ends.
More meaſure of this meaſure, be not nice.
We can afford no more at ſuch a price.
Priſe your ſelues: What buyes your companie?
Your abſence onelie.
That can neuer be.
Then cannot we be bought: and ſo adue,
Twice to your Viſore, and halfe once to you.
If you denie to dance, let's hold more chat.
In priuate then.
I am beſt pleas'd with that.
White handed Miſtris, one ſweet word with thee.
Hony, and Milke, and Suger: there is three.
Nay then two treyes, an if you grow ſo nice
Methegline, Wort, and Malmſey; well runne dice:
There's halfe a dozen ſweets.
Seuenth ſweet adue, ſince you can cogg,
Ile play no more with you.
One word in ſecret.
Let it not be ſweet.
Thou greeu'ſt my gall.
Gall, bitter.
Therefore meete.
Will you vouchſafe with me to change a word?
Name it.
Faire Ladie.
Say you ſo? Faire Lord:
Take you that for your faire Lady.
Pleaſe it you,
As much in priuate, and Ile bid adieu.
What, was your vizard made without a tong?
I know the reaſon Ladie why you aske.
O for your reaſon, quickly ſir, I long.
You haue a double tongue within your mask.
And would affoord my ſpeechleſſe vizard halfe.
Veale quoth the Dutch-man: is not Veale a Calfe?
A Calfe faire Ladie?
No, a faire Lord Calfe.
Let's part the word.
No, Ile not be your halfe:
Take all and weane it, it may proue an Oxe.
Looke how you but your ſelfe in thoſe ſharpe mockes.
Will you giue hornes chaſt Ladie? Do not ſo.
Then die a Calfe before your horns do grow.
One word in priuate with you ere I die.
Bleat ſoftly then, the Butcher heares you cry.
The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
As is the Razors edge, inuiſible:
Cutting a ſmaller haire then may be ſeene,
Aboue the ſenſe of ſence ſo ſenſible:
Seemeth their conference, their conceits haue wings,
Fleeter then arrows, bullets wind, thoght, ſwifter things
Not one word more my maides, breake off, breake off.
By heauen, all drie beaten with pure ſcoffe.
Farewell madde Wenches, you haue ſimple wits.
Twentie adieus my frozen Muſcouits.
Are theſe the breed of wits ſo wondred at?
Tapers they are, with your ſweete breathes puft out.
Wel-liking wits they haue, groſſe, groſſe, fat, fat.
O pouertie in wit, Kingly poore flout.
Will they not (thinke you) hang themſelues to night?
Or euer but in vizards ſhew their faces:
This pert Berowne was out of count'nance quite.
They were all in lamentable caſes.
The King was vveeping ripe for a good word.
Berowne did ſweare himſelfe out of all ſuite.
Dumaine was at my ſeruice, and his ſword:
No point (quoth I:) my ſeruant ſtraight vvas mute.
Lord Longauill ſaid I came ore his hart:
And trow you vvhat he call'd me?
Qualme perhaps.
Yes in good faith.
Go ſickneſſe as thou art.
Well, better wits haue worne plain ſtatute caps,
But vvil you heare; the King is my loue ſworne.
And quicke Berowne hath plighted faith to me.
And Longauill was for my ſeruice borne.
Dumaine is mine as ſure as barke on tree.
Madam, and prettie miſtreſſes giue care,
Immediately they will againe be heere
In their owne ſhapes: for it can neuer be,
They will digeſt this harſh indignitie.
Will they returne?
They will they will, God knowes,
And leape for ioy, though they are lame with blowes:
Therefore change Fauours, and when they repaire,
Blow like ſweet Roſes, in this ſummer aire.
How blovv? how blovv? Speake to bee vnderſtood.
Faire Ladies maskt, are Roſes in their bud:
Diſmaskt, their damaske ſweet commixture ſhowne,
Are Angels vailing clouds, or Roſes blowne.
Auant perplexitie: What ſhall vve do,
If they returne in their owne ſhapes to wo?
Good Madam, if by me you'l be aduis'd,
Let's mocke them ſtill as well knowne as diſguis'd:
Let vs complaine to them vvhat fooles were heare,
Diſguis'd like Muſcouites in ſhapeleſſe geare:
And wonder what they were, and to what end
Their ſhallow ſhowes, and Prologue vildely pen'd:
And their rough carriage ſo ridiculous,
Should be preſented at our Tent to vs.
Ladies, withdraw: the gallants are at hand.
Whip to our Tents, as Roes runnes ore Land.
Faire ſir, God ſaue you. Wher's the Princeſſe?
Gone to her Tent.
Pleaſe it your Maieſtie command me any ſeruice to her?
That ſhe vouchſafe me audience for one word.
I will, and ſo will ſhe, I know my Lord.
This fellow pickes vp wit as Pigeons peaſe,
And vtters it againe, when Ioue doth pleaſe.
He is Wits Pedler, and retailes his Wares,
At Wakes, and Waſſels, Meetings, Mkets, Faires.
And we that ſell by groſſe, the Lord doth know,
Haue not the grace to grace it with ſuch ſhow.
This Gallant pins the Wenches on his ſleeue.
Had he bin Adam, he had tempted Eue.
He can carue too, and liſpe: Why this is he,
That kiſt away his hand in courteſie.
This is the Ape of Forme, Monſieur the nice,
That when he plaies at Tables, chides the Dice
In honorable tearmes: Nay he can ſing
A meane moſt meanly, and in Vſhering
Mend him who can: the Ladies call him ſweete.
The ſtaires as he treads on them kiſſe his feete.
This is the flower that ſmiles on euerie one,
To ſhew his teeth as white as Whales bone.
And conſciences that wil not die in debt,
Pay him the dutie of honie-tongued Boyet.
A bliſter on his ſweet tongue with my hart,
That put Armathoes Page out of his part.
See where it comes. Behauiour what wer't thou,
Till this madman ſhew'd thee? And what art thou now?
All haile ſweet Madame, and faire time of day.
Faire in all Haile is foule, as I conceiue.
Conſtrue my ſpeeches better, if you may.
Then wiſh me better, I wil giue you leaue.
We came to viſit you, and purpoſe now
To leade you to our Court, vouchſafe it then.
This field ſhal hold me, and ſo hold your vow:
Nor God, nor I, delights in periur'd men.
Rebuke me not for that which you prouoke:
The vertue of your eie muſt breake my oth.
You nickname vertue: vice you ſhould haue ſpoke:
For vertues office neuer breakes men troth.
Now by my maiden honor, yet as pure
As the vnſallied Lilly, I proteſt,
A world of torments though I ſhould endure,
I would not yeeld to be your houſes gueſt:
So much I hate a breaking cauſe to be
Of heauenly oaths, vow'd with integritie.
O you haue liu'd in deſolation heere,
Vnſeene, vnuiſited, much to our ſhame.
Not ſo my Lord, it is not ſo I ſweare,
We haue had paſtimes heere, and pleaſant game,
A meſſe of Ruſſians left vs but of late.
How Madam? Ruſsians?
I in truth, my Lord.
Trim gallants, full of Courtſhip and of ſtate.
Madam ſpeake true. It is not ſo my Lord:
My Ladie (to the manner of the daies)
In curteſie giues vndeſeruing praiſe.
We foure indeed confronted were with foure
In Ruſsia habit: Heere they ſtayed an houre,
And talk'd apace: and in that houre (my Lord)
They did not bleſſe vs with one happy word.
I dare not call them fooles; but this I thinke,
When they are thirſtie, fooles would faine haue drinke.
This ieſt is drie to me. Gentle ſweete,
Your wits makes wiſe things fooliſh when we greete
With eies beſt ſeeing, heauens fierie eie:
By light we looſe light; your capacitie
Is of that nature, that to your huge ſtoore,
Wiſe things ſeeme fooliſh, and rich things but poore.
This proues you wiſe and rich: for in my eie
I am a foole, and full of pouertie.
But that you take what doth to you belong,
It were a fault to ſnatch words from my tongue.
O, I am yours and all that I poſſeſſe.
All the foole mine.
I cannot giue you leſſe.
Which of the Vizards what it that you wore?
Where? when? What Vizard?
Why demand you this?
There, then, that vizard, that ſuperfluous caſe,
That hid the worſe, and ſhew'd the better face.
We are diſcried,
They'l mocke vs now downeright.
Let vs confeſſe, and turne it to a ieſt.
Amaz'd my Lord? Why lookes your Highnes ſadde?
Helpe hold his browes, hee'l ſound: why looke you pale?
Sea-ſicke I thinke comming from Muſcouie.
Thus poure the ſtars down plagues for periury.
Can any face of braſſe hold longer out?
Heere ſtand I Ladie dart thy skill at me,
Bruiſe me with ſcorne, confound me with a flout.
Thruſt thy ſharpe wit quite through my ignorance.
Cut me to peeces with thy keene conceit:
And I will wiſh thee neuer more to dance,
Nor neuer more in Ruſsian habit waite.
O! neuer will I truſt to ſpeeches pen'd,
Nor to the motion of a Schoole-boies tongue
Nor neuer come in vizard to my friend,
Nor woo in rime like a blind-harpers ſongue,
Taffata phraſes, ſilken tearmes preciſe,
Three-pil'd Hyperboles, ſpruce affection;
Figures pedanticall, theſe ſummer flies,
Haue blowne me full of maggot oſtentation.
I do forſweare them, and I heere proteſt,
By this white Gloue (how white the hand God knows)
Henceforth my woing minde ſhall be expreſt
In ruſſet yeas, and honeſt kerſie noes.
And to begin Wench, ſo God helpe me law,
My loue to thee is ſound, ſans cracke or flaw.
Sans, ſans, I pray you.
Yet I haue a tricke
Of the old rage: beare with me, I am ſicke.
Ile leaue it by degrees: ſoft, let vs ſee,
Write Lord haue mercie on vs, on thoſe three,
They are infected, in their hearts it lies:
They haue the plague, and caught it of your eyes:
Theſe Lords are viſited, you are not free:
For the Lords tokens on you do I ſee.
No, they are free that gaue theſe tokens to vs.
Our ſtates are forfeit, ſeeke not to vndo vs.
It is not ſo; for how can this be true,
That you ſtand forfeit, being thoſe that ſue.
Peace, for I will not haue to do with you.
Nor ſhall not, if I do as I intend.
Speake for your ſelues, my wit is at an end.
Teach vs ſweete Madame, for our rude tranſgreſsion, ſome faire excuſe.
The faireſt is confeſsion.
Were you not heere but euen now, diſguis'd?
Madam, I was.
And were you well aduis'd?
I was faire Madam.
When you then were heere,
What did you whiſper in your Ladies eare?
That more then all the world I did reſpect her
When ſhee ſhall challenge this, you will reiect her.
Vpon mine Honor no.
Peace, peace, forbeare: your oath once broke, you force not to forſweare.
Deſpiſe me when I breake this oath of mine.
I will, and therefore keepe it. Roſaline,
What did the Ruſsian whiſper in your eare?
Madam, he ſwore that he did hold me deare
As precious eye-ſight, and did value me
Aboue this World: adding thereto moreouer,
That he vvould Wed me, or elſe die my Louer.
God giue thee ioy of him: the Noble Lord Moſt honorably doth vphold his word.
What meane you Madame?
By my life, my troth,
I neuer ſwore this Ladie ſuch an oth.
By heauen you did; and to confirme it plaine, you gaue me this: But take it ſir againe.
My faith and this, the Princeſſe I did giue,
I knew her by this Iewell on her ſleeue.
Pardon me ſir, this Iewell did ſhe weare,
And Lord Berowne (I thanke him) is my deare.
What? Will you haue me, or your Pearle againe?
Neither of either, I remit both twaine.
I ſee the tricke on't: Heere was a conſent,
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
To daſh it like a Chriſtmas Comedie.
Some carry-tale, ſome pleaſe-man, ſome ſlight Zanie,
Some mumble-newes, ſome trencher-knight, ſom Dick
That ſmiles his cheeke in yeares, and knowes the trick
To make my Lady laugh, when ſhe's diſpos'd;
Told our intents before: which once diſclos'd,
The Ladies did change Fauours, and then we
Following the ſignes, woo'd but the ſigne of ſhe.
Now to our periurie, to adde more terror,
We are againe forſworne in will and error.
Much vpon this tis: and might not you
Foreſtall our ſport, to make vs thus vntrue?
Do not you know my Ladies foot by 'th ſquier?
And laugh vpon the apple of her eie?
And ſtand betweene her backe ſir, and the fire,
Holding a trencher, ieſting merrilie?
You put our Page out: go, you are alowd.
Die when you will, a ſmocke ſhall be your ſhrowd.
You leere vpon me, do you? There's an eie
Wounds like a Leaden ſword.
Full merrily hath this braue manager, this carreere bene run.
Loe, he is tilting ſtraight. Peace, I haue don.
Welcome pure wit, thou part'ſt a faire fray.
O Lord ſir, they would kno,
Whether the three worthies ſhall come in, or no.
What, are there but three?
No ſir, but it is var fine,
For euerie one purſents three.
And three times thrice is nine.
Not ſo ſir, vnder correction ſir, I hope it is not ſo. You cannot beg vs ſir, I can aſſure you ſir, we know what we know: I hope ſir three times thrice ſir.
Is not nine.
Vnder correction ſir, wee know where-vntill it doth amount.
By Ioue, I alwaies tooke three threes for nine.
O Lord ſir, it were pittie you ſhould get your liuing by reckning ſir.
How much is it?
O Lord ſir, the parties themſelues, the actors ſir will ſhew where-vntill it doth amount: for mine owne part, I am (as they ſay, but to perfect one man in one poore man) Pompion the great ſir.
Art thou one of the Worthies?
It pleaſed them to thinke me worthie of Pompey the great: for mine owne part, I know not the degree of the Worthie, but I am to ſtand for him.
Go, bid them prepare.
We will turne it finely off ſir, we wil take ſome care.
Berowne, they will ſhame vs:
Let them not approach.
We are ſhame-proofe my Lord: and 'tis ſome policie, to haue one ſhew worſe then the Kings and his companie.
I ſay they ſhall not come.
Nay my good Lord, let me ore-rule you now;
That ſport beſt pleaſes, that doth leaſt know how.
Where Zeale ſtriues to content, and the contents
Dies in the Zeale of that which it preſents:
Their forme confounded, makes moſt forme in mirth,
When great things labouring periſh in their birth.
A right deſcription of our ſport my Lord.
Annointed, I implore ſo much expence of thy royall ſweet breath, as will vtter a brace of words.
Doth this man ſerue God?
Why aske you?
He ſpeak's not like a man of God's making.
That's all one my faire ſweet honie Monarch: For I proteſt, the Schoolmaſter is exceeding fantaſticall: Too too vain, too too vaine. But we wil put it (as they ſay) to Fortuna delaguar, I wiſh you the peace of minde moſt royall cupplement.
Here is like to be a good preſence of Worthies; He preſents Hector of Troy, the Swaine Pompey ye great, the Pariſh Curate Alexander, Armadoes Page Hercules, the Pedant Iudas Machabeus: And if theſe foure Worthies in their firſt ſhew thriue, theſe foure will change habites, and preſent the other fiue.
There is fiue in the firſt ſhew.
You are deceiued, tis not ſo.
The Pedant, the Braggart, the Hedge-Prieſt, the Foole, and the Boy,
Abate throw at Novum, and the whole world againe,
Cannot pricke out fiue ſuch, take each one in's vaine.
The ſhip is vnder ſaile, and here ſhe coms amain.
I Pompey am.
You lie, you are not he.
I Pompey am.
With Libbards head on knee.
Well ſaid old mocker,
I muſt needs be friends with thee.
I Pompey am, Pompey ſurnam'd the big.
The great.
It is great ſir: Pompey ſurnam'd the great:
That oft in field, with Targe and Shield, did make my foe to ſweat:
And trauailing along this coaſt, I heere am come by chance,
And lay my Armes before the legs of this ſweet Laſſe of France.
If your Ladiſhip would ſay thankes Pompey, I had done.
Great thankes great Pompey.
Tis not ſo much worth: but I hope I was perfect. I made a little fault in great.
My hat to a halfe-penie, Pompey prooues the beſt Worthie.
When in the world I liu'd, I was the worldes Commander:
By Eaſt, Weſt, North, & South, I ſpred my conquering might
My Scutcheon plaine declares that I am Aliſander.
Your noſe ſaies no, you are not:
For it ſtands too right.
Your noſe ſmels no, in this moſt tender ſmelling Knight.
The Conqueror is diſmaid:
Proceede good Alexander.
When in the world I liued, I was the worldes Commander.
Moſt true, 'tis right: you were ſo Aliſander.
Pompey the great.
your ſeruant and Coſtard.
Take away the Conqueror, take away Aliſander
O ſir, you haue ouerthrowne Aliſander the conqueror: you will be ſcrap'd out of the painted cloth for this: your Lion that holds his Pollax ſitting on a cloſe ſtoole, will be giuen to Aiax. He will be the ninth worthie. A Conqueror, and affraid to ſpeake? Runne away for ſhame Aliſander. There an't ſhall pleaſe you: a fooliſh milde man, an honeſt man, looke you, & ſoon daſht. He is a maruellous good neighbour inſooth, and a verie good Bowler: but for Aliſander, alas you ſee, how 'tis a little ore-parted. But there are Worthies a comming, will ſpeake their minde in ſome other ſort.
Stand aſide good Pompey.
Great Hercules is preſented by this Impe,
Whoſe Club kil'd Cerberus that three-headed Canus,
And when he was a babe, a childe, a ſhrimpe,
Thus did he ſtrangle Serpents in his Manus:
Quoniam, he ſeemeth in minoritie,
Ergo, I come with this Apologie.
Keepe ſome ſtate in thy exit, and vaniſh.
Iudas I am.
A Iudas?
Not Iſcariot ſir.
Iudas I am, ycliped Machabeus.
Iudas Machabeus clipt, is plaine Iudas.
A kiſsing traitor. How art thou prou'd Iudas?
Iudas I am.
The more ſhame for you Iudas.
What meane you ſir?
To make Iudas hang himſelfe.
Begin ſir, you are my elder.
Well follow'd, Iudas was hang'd on an Elder.
I will not be put out of countenance.
Becauſe thou haſt no face.
What is this?
A Citterne head.
The head of a bodkin.
A deaths face in a ring.
The face of an old Roman coine, ſcarce ſeene.
The pummell of Caeſars Faulchion.
The caru'd-bone face on a Flaske.
S. Georges halfe cheeke in a brooch.
I, and in a brooch of Lead.
I, and worne in the cap of a Tooth-drawer.
And now forward, for we haue put thee in countenance
You haue put me out of countenance.
Falſe, we haue giuen thee faces.
But you haue out-fac'd them all.
And thou wer't a Lion, we would do ſo.
Therefore as he is, an Aſſe, let him go:
And ſo adieu ſweet Iude. Nay, why doſt thou ſtay?
For the latter end of his name.
For the Aſſe to the Iude: giue it him. Iud-as away.
This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
A light for monſieur Iudas, it growes darke, he may ſtumble.
Alas poore Machabeus, how hath hee beene baited.
Hide thy head Achilles, heere comes Hector in Armes.
Though my mockes come home by me, I will now be merrie.
Hector was but a Troyan in reſpect of this.
But is this Hector?
I thinke Hector was not ſo leane timber'd.
His legge is too big for Hector.
More Calfe certaine.
No, he is beſt indued in the ſmall.
This cannot be Hector.
He's a God or a Painter, for he makes faces.
The Armipotent Mars, of Launces the almighty, gaue Hector a gift.
A gilt Nutmegge.
A Lemmon.
Stucke with Cloues.
No clouen.
The Armipotent Mars of Launces the almighty,
Gaue Hector a gift, the heire of Illion;
A man ſo breathed, that certaine he would fight: yea
From morne till night, out of his Pauillion.
I am that Flower.
That Mint.
That Cullambine.
Sweet Lord Longauill reine thy tongue.
I muſt rather giue it the reine: for it runnes againſt Hector.
I, and Hector's a Grey-hound.
The ſweet War-man is dead and rotten,
Sweet chuckes, beat not the bones of the buried:
But I will forward with my deuice;
Sweet Royaltie beſtow on me the ſence of hearing.
Speake braue Hector, we are much delighted.
I do adore thy ſweet Graces ſlipper.
Loues her by the foot.
He may not by the yard.
This Hector farre ſurmounted Hanniball.
Fellow Hector, ſhe is gone; ſhe is two moneths on her way.
What meaneſt thou?
Faith vnleſſe you play the honeſt Troyan, the poore Wench is caſt away: ſhe's quick, the child brags in her belly alreadie: tis yours.
Doſt thou infamonize me among Potentates? Thou ſhalt die.
Then ſhall Hector be whipt for Iaquenetta that is quicke by him, and hang'd for Pompey, that is dead by him.
Moſt rare Pompey.
Renowned Pompey.
Greater then great, great, great, great Pompey: Pompey the huge.
Hector trembles.
Pompey is moued, more Atees more Atees ſtirre them, or ſtirre them on.
Hector will challenge him.
I, if a' haue no more mans blood in's belly, then will ſup a Flea.
By the North-pole I do challenge thee.
I wil not fight with a pole like a Northern man; Ile flaſh, Ile do it by the ſword: I pray you let mee borrow my Armes againe.
Roome for the incenſed Worthies.
Ile do it in my ſhirt.
Moſt reſolute Pompey.
Maſter, let me take you a button hole lower:
Do you not ſee Pompey is vncaſing for the combat: what meane you? you will loſe your reputation.
Gentlemen and Souldiers pardon me, I will not combat in my ſhirt.
You may not denie it, Pompey hath made the challenge.
Sweet bloods, I both may, and will.
What reaſon haue you for't?
The naked truth of it is, I haue no ſhirt,
I go woolward for penance.
True, and it was inioyned him in Rome for want of Linnen: ſince when, Ile be ſworne he wore none, but a diſhclout of Iaquenettas, and that hee weares next his heart for a fauour.
God ſaue you Madame.
Welcome Marcade, but that thou interrupteſt our merriment.
I am ſorrie Madam, for the newes I bring is heauie in my tongue. The King your father
Dead for my life.
Euen ſo: My tale is told.
Worthies away, the Scene begins to cloud.
For mine owne part, I breath free breath: I haue ſeene the day of wrong, through the little hole of diſcretion, and I will right my ſelfe like a Souldier.
How fare's your Maieſtie?
Boyet prepare, I will away to night.
Madame not ſo, I do beſeech you ſtay.
Prepare I ſay. I thanke you gracious Lords
For all your faire endeuours and entreats:
Out of a new ſad-ſoule, that you vouchſafe,
In your rich wiſedome to excuſe, or hide,
The liberall oppoſition of our ſpirits,
If ouer-boldly we haue borne our ſelues,
In the conuerſe of breath (your gentleneſſe
Was guiltie of it.) Farewell worthie Lord:
A heauie heart beares not a humble tongue.
Excuſe me ſo, comming ſo ſhort of thankes,
For my great ſuite, ſo eaſily obtain'd.
The extreme parts of time, extremelie formes
All cauſes to the purpoſe of his ſpeed:
And often at his verie looſe-decides
That, which long proceſſe could not arbitrate.
And though the mourning brow of progenie
Forbid the ſmiling curteſie of Loue:
The holy ſuite which faine it would conuince,
Yet ſince loues argument was firſt on foote,
Let not the cloud of ſorrow iuſtle it
From what it purpos'd: ſince to waile friends loſt,
Is not by much ſo wholſome profitable,
As to reioyce at friends but newly found,
I vnderſtand you not, my greefes are double.
Honeſt plain words, beſt pierce the ears of griefe
And by theſe badges vnderſtand the King,
For your faire ſakes haue we neglected time,
Plaid foule play with our oaths: your beautie Ladies
Hath much deformed vs, faſhioning our humors
Euen to the oppoſed end of our intents.
And what in vs hath ſeem'd ridiculous:
As Loue is full of vnbefitting ſtraines,
All wanton as a childe, skipping and vaine.
Form'd by the eie, and therefore like the eie.
Full of ſtraying ſhapes, of habits, and of formes
Varying in ſubiects as the eie doth roule,
To euerie varied obiect in his glance:
Which partie-coated preſence of looſe loue
Put on by vs, if in your heauenly eies,
Haue misbecom'd our oathes and grauities.
Thoſe heauenlie eies that looke into theſe faults,
Suggeſted vs to make: therefore Ladies
Our loue being yours, the error that Loue makes
Is likewiſe yours. We to our ſelues proue falſe,
By being once falſe, for euer to be true
To thoſe that make vs both, faire Ladies you.
And euen that falſhood in it ſelfe a ſinne,
Thus purifies it ſelfe, and turnes to grace.
We haue receiu'd your Letters, full of Loue:
Your Fauours, the Ambaſſadors of Loue.
And in our maiden counſaile rated them,
At courtſhip, pleaſantieſt, and curteſie,
As bumbaſt and as lining to the time:
But more deuout then theſe are our reſpects
Haue we not bene, and therefore met your loues
In their owne faſhion, like a merriment.
Our letters Madam, ſhew'd much more then ieſt.
So did our lookes.
We did not coat them ſo.
Now at the lateſt minute of the houre,
Grant vs your loues.
A time me thinkes too ſhort,
To make a world-without-end bargaine in;
No, no my Lord, your Grace is periur'd much,
Full of deare guiltineſſe, and therefore this:
If for my Loue (as there is no ſuch cauſe)
You will do ought, this ſhall you do for me.
Your oth I will not truſt: but go with ſpeed
To ſome forlorne and naked Hermitage,
Remote from all the pleaſures of the world:
There ſtay, vntill the twelue Celeſtiall Signes
Haue brought about their annuall reckoning.
If this auſtere inſociable life,
Change not your offer made in heate of blood:
If froſts, and faſts, hard lodging, and thin weeds
Nip not the gaudie bloſſomes of your Loue,
But that it beare this triall, and laſt loue:
Then at the expiration of the yeare,
Come challenge me, challenge me by theſe deſerts,
And by this Virgin palme, now kiſſing thine,
I will be thine: and till that inſtant ſhut
My wofull ſelfe vp in a mourning houſe,
Raining the teares of lamentation,
For the remembrance of my Fathers death.
If this thou do denie, let our hands part,
Neither intitled in the others hart.
If this, or more then this, I would denie,
To flatter vp theſe powers of mine with reſt,
The ſodaine hand of death cloſe vp mine eie.
Hence euer then, my heart is in thy breſt.
And what to me my Loue? and what to me?
You muſt be purged too, your ſins are rack'd.
You are attaint with faults and periurie:
Therefore if you my fauor meane to get,
A tweluemonth ſhall you ſpend, and neuer reſt,
But ſeeke the wearie beds of people ſicke.
But what to me my loue? but what to me?
A wife? a beard, faire health, and honeſtie,
With three-fold loue, I wiſh you all theſe three.
O ſhall I ſay, I thanke you gentle wife?
Not ſo my Lord, a tweluemonth and a day,
Ile marke no words that ſmoothfac'd wooers ſay.
Come when the King doth to my Ladie come:
Then if I haue much loue, Ile giue you ſome.
Ile ſerue thee true and faithfully till then.
Yet ſweare not, leaſt ye be forſworne agen▪
What ſaies Maria?
At the tweluemonths end,
Ile change my blacke Gowne, for a faithfull friend.
Ile ſtay with patience: but the time is long.
The liker you, few taller are ſo yong.
Studies my Ladie? Miſtreſſe, looke on me,
Behold the window of my heart, mine eie:
What humble ſuite attends thy anſwer there,
Impoſe ſome ſeruice on me for my loue.
Oft haue I heard of you my Lord Berowne,
Before I ſaw you: and the worlds large tongue
Proclaimes you for a man repleate with mockes,
Full of compariſons, and wounding floutes:
Which you on all eſtates will execute,
That lie within the mercie of your wit.
To weed this Wormewood from your fruitfull braine,
And therewithall to win me, if you pleaſe,
Without the which I am not to be won:
You ſhall this tweluemonth terme from day to day,
Viſite the ſpeechleſſe ſicke, and ſtill conuerſe
With groaning wretches: and your taske ſhall be,
With all the fierce endeuour of your wit,
To enforce the pained impotent to ſmile.
To moue wilde laughter in the throate of death?
It cannot be, it is impoſſible.
Mirth cannot moue a ſoule in agonie.
Why that's the way to choke a gibing ſpirit,
Whoſe influence is begot of that looſe grace,
Which ſhallow laughing hearers giue to fooles:
A ieſts proſperitie, lies in the eare
Of him that heares it, neuer in the tongue
Of him that makes it: then, if ſickly eares,
Deaft with the clamors of their owne deare grones,
Will heare your idle ſcornes; continue then,
And I will haue you, and that fault withall.
But if they will not, throw away that ſpirit,
And I ſhal finde you emptie of that fault,
Right ioyfull of your reformation.
A tweluemonth? Well: befall what will befall,
Ile ieſt a tweluemonth in an Hoſpitall.
I ſweet my Lord, and ſo I take my leaue.
No Madam, we will bring you on your way.
Our woing doth not end like an old Play:
Iacke hath not Gill: theſe Ladies courteſie
Might wel haue made our ſport a Comedie.
Come ſir, it wants a tweluemonth and a day,
And then 'twil end.
That's too long for a play.
Sweet Maieſty vouchſafe me.
Was not that Hector?
The worthie Knight of Troy.
I wil kiſſe thy royal finger, and take leaue. I am a Votarie, I haue vow'd to Iaquenetta to holde the Plough for her ſweet loue three yeares. But moſt eſteemed greatneſſe, wil you heare the Dialogue that the two Learned men haue compiled, in praiſe of the Owle and the Cuckow? It ſhould haue followed in the end of our ſhew.
Call them forth quickely, we will do ſo.
Holla, Approach.
This ſide is Hiems, Winter.
This Ver, the Spring: the one maintained by the Owle,
Th' other by the Cuckow.
Ver, begin.
When Daſies pied, and Violets blew,
And Cuckow-buds of yellow hew:
And Ladie-ſmockes all ſiluer white,
Do paint the Medowes with delight.
The Cuckow then on euerie tree,
Mockes married men, for thus ſings he,
Cuckow.
Cuckow, Cuckow: O word of feare,
Vnpleaſing to a married eare.
When Shepheards pipe on Oaten ſtrawes,
And merrie Larkes are Ploughmens clockes:
When Turtles tread, and Rookes and Dawes,
And Maidens bleach their ſummer ſmockes:
The Cuckow then on euerie tree
Mockes married men; for thus ſings he,
Cuckow.
Cuckow, Cuckow: O word of feare,
Vnpleaſing to a married eare.
When Iſicles hang by the wall,
And Dicke the Sphepheard blowes his naile;
And Tom beares Logges into the hall,
And Milke comes frozen home in paile:
When blood is nipt, and waies be fowle,
Then nightly ſings the ſtaring Owle
Tu-whit to-who.
A merrie note,
While greaſie Ione doth keele the pot.
When all aloud the winde doth blow,
And coſſing drownes the Parſons ſaw:
And birds ſit brooding in the ſnow,
And Marrians noſe lookes red and raw:
When roaſted Crabs hiſſe in the bowle,
Then nightly ſings the ſtaring Owle,
Tu-whit to who:
A merrie note,
While greaſie Ione doth keele the pot.
The Words of Mercurie,
Are harſh after the ſongs of Apollo:
You that way; we this way.