IS this the aide our Cosin Burgundie,
And the great Constable of France assured vs?
Haue we marched thus farte through the heart of France?
And with the terror of our English Drums:
kourde the poore trembling French, which leaue their towns
That now the Wolues affrighted from the fields,
Do get their pray, and kennell in their stréets?
Our thundring Canons, now this fortnight space,
Like common Bell-men in some market towne,
Haue cried the Constable and Burgundie:
But yet I see they come not to our aide,
Wéele bring them in, or by the blessed light,
Wéele search the Ground-stilles of their Cittis walles,
Since you haue brought me hither: I will make,
The proudest Tower that stands in France to quake,
I maruaile Scales returnes not, for by him
I doe respect to heare their resolutions.
My Soueraigne he is happily returnde.
Welcome my Lord, welcome good Cosin Scales,
What newes from Burgundie, what is his answer?
What comes he to our succour as he promised?
Not by his good wil, for ought that I can see
He lingers still in his long fiedge at Nuse.
I vrgde his promise and your expectation,
Euen to the force and compasse of my spirit,
I chéerde my firme perswasions, with your hopes.
And gylded them with my best Oratorie,
I framde my spéech still fitly as I ound
The temper of his humor, to be wrought vpon,
But still I found him earthly, vnresolude,
Muddie, and me thought euer through his eies,
I saw his wauering and vnsetled spirit,
And to be short, subtile and trecherous,
And one that doth entend no good to you,
And he will come, and yet he wanteth power,
He would faie come, but may not leaue the siege,
He hopes he shall, but yet he knowes not when,
He purposed, but some unpediments,
Haue hindred his determined intent,
Briefly, I thinke he will not come at all.
But is he like to take the towne of Nuse?
My Lord the towne is liker to take him,
That if he chance to come to you at all,
Tis but for succour.
But what saies Count Saint Paul?
My Lord he lies, and reuelles at S. Quintins,
And laughs at Edwards comming into France,
There Dominering with his drunken crue,
Make Jigges of vs, and in their slauring ists,
Tell how like rogues we lie here in the field,
Then comes a slaue one of those drunken sots,
In with a Tauerne reckoning for a supplication,
Disguised with a cushion on his head,
A Drawers Apron for a Heralds Coate.
And tels the Count, the King of England craues
One of his worthie honors Dog-kennels,
To be his lodging for a day or two.
With some such other Tauerne foolerie:
With that this filthie rascall greasie rout,
Brast out in laughter at this worthie iest,
Neighing like horses: thus the Count Saint Paul
Regardes his promise to your maiestie.
Wil no man thrust the slaue into a sackbut?
Now by this light were I but néere the slaue with a black Jacke I would beat out his braines.
If it please your highnes but to say the word,
Wéele plucke him out of Quintins by the cares.
No cosin Howard, wéele reserue our valour,
For better purpose, since they both refuse vs,
Our selues will be vnriualde in our honour.
Now our first cast my Lord is at maine France,
Whilst yet our Armie is in health and strong,
And haue we once but broke vnto that warre,
I will not leaue S. Paul, nor Burgundie,
Not a bare Pigscoate to shroud them in.
Heraulde.
My Soueraigne.
Go Derauld, to Lewes the French King,
Denounce sterne warre, and tell him I am cme,
To take possession of my Realme of France.
Defie him boldly from vs, be thy voice
As fierce as thunder, to affright his soule:
Derauld be gone I say, and be thy breath,
Percing as lightning, and thy words as death
I goe my Liedge resolude to your hie will.
Sound Drum I say, set forward with our power,
And France ere long expect a dreadfull hower,
I will not take the English standard downe,
Till thou empale my temples with thy Crowne.
Heraulde of England, we are pleased to heare,
What message thou hast brought vs from thy King,
Prepare thy selfe, and be aduisde in speech.
English Heraulde, Right gratious and most Christian king of France,
I come not to thy presence vnpreparde
To doe the message of my Royall Liedge.
Edward the Fourth, of England and of France,
The lawfull King, and Lord of Ireland,
Whose puissant magnanimious breast incensde,
Through manifest notorious iniuries,
Offred by thee King Lewes and thy French,
Against his title to the crowne of France,
And right in all these Dukedomes following,
Aquitaine, Aniow, Guyen, A guilesme,
Breathes forth by me the Organe of his spéech,
Hostile defiance to thy realme and thee:
And trampling now vpon the face of France,
With barbed horse, and valiant armed foote:
Himselfe the leader of those martiall troupes,
Bids thée to battell, where and when thou darst,
Except thou make such restitution
And yearely tribute on good hostages,
As may content his iust conceiued wrath,
And to this message answere I expect.
Right peremptorie is this embassage,
And were my royal Brother of England pleasde,
To entertaine those kind affections,
Where with we de brace his amitie:
Nolesse were all these thunder-threatning words,
Let heauen (where all our thoughts are registred)
Beare record, with what déepe desire of peace,
We shall subscribe to such conditions,
As equitie for England shall propound,
If Edward haue sustained wrong in France,
Lewes was neuer author of that wrong,
Yet faultles we will make due recompence,
We are assurde that his thoughts
In his milde spirit o neuer meane these warres,
Till Charles Burgundie once our fawning friend,
But now our open foe, and Count S. Paul,
Our subiect once and Constable of France,
But now a traytor to our Realme and vs,
Were motiues to incite him vnto Armes,
Which hauing done will leaue him on my life.
The King my master reckes not Burgundy,
And scornes S. Paul that trecherous Constable,
His puissance is sufficient in it selfe,
To conquer France like his progenitors.
He shall not néed to waste by force of warre,
Where peace shall yéeld him more then he can win:
We couet peace, and we will purchase it
At any rate that reason can demaund,
And it is better England ioyne in league
With vs his strong, old, open enemie,
Than with those weake & new dissenibling friends,
We doe secure vs from our open foes,
But trust in friends (though faithles) we repose,
My Lord S. Piere and cosin Burbon speake,
What censure you of Burgundy, and S. Paul?
Dread Lord, it is wel knowne that Burgundy
Made shew of tender seruice to your maiestie,
Till by the engine of his flatteries,
He made a breach into your Highnes loue,
Where entred once and thereof full posse,
He so abusde that royall excellence,
By getting footing into many townes,
Castles and forts belonging to your Crowne,
That now he holds them gainst your realme & you.
And Count S. Paul the Constable of France,
Ambitious in that high authoritie,
surps the lands and Seigneuries of those
That are true subiects, noble of France,
Your boundlesse fauours did him first suborne,
And now to be your Liegeman he thinks scorne.
By this coniecture, the vnsteady course,
Thy royall master vndertakes in France,
And Herald intimate what seruent eale,
We haue to league with Edward and his English,
Thrée hundred crownes we giue thée for reward,
And of rich Crimson veluet thirtie yardes,
In hope thou wilt vnto thy Soueraigne tell,
We shew thée not one discontented looke,
Nor render him one misbeholden word:
But his defiance and his dare to warre,
We swallow with the spple oyle of peace:
Which gentle Herald if thou canst procure,
A thousand crowne shall iustly guerdon thée.
So please it your most sacred Maiestie,
To send vnto my graious Soueraigne,
Equall conditions for the bonds of peace,
And restitution of his iniuries,
His temper is not of obdurate malice,
But swéete relenting princely clemencie,
Performe your promise of a thousand crownes,
And second me with some fit messenger,
And I will vndertake to worke your peace.
By the true honour of a Christian King,
Effect our peace and thou shalt haue our crownes,
And we will poste a Herald after thee,
That shall confirme thy speech, and our designes:
Goe Mugeroune, see to this Herald giuen
The veluet, and thrée hundred crownes preosde,
Farewell good friend, remember our request,
And kindly recommend vs to King Edward.
How think you Lords, st not more requisite
To make our peace, then warre with Englands power.
Yes gratious Lord, the wounds are bléeding yet,
That Talbot, Bedford, and King Henry made,
Which peace must cure, or France shall languish still.
Besides (my Liege) by these intestine foes,
The Constable and trecherous Burgundie,
The States in danger if the English stirré.
Tis perilous, and full of doubt my Lords,
We must haue peace with England euery way,
Who shall be Herald in these high affayres?
No better man then Monsieur Mugeroune,
Whose wit is sharpe, whose eloquence is sound,
His presence gratious, and his courage good,
A gentleman, a scholler, and a souldiour,
A compleate man for such an Embassage:
Art thou content to be employde Mugeroune,
In this negotiation to King Edward?
If your most sacred Maiestie commaund,
Your humble vassall Mugeroune shall goe.
Gramercies Mugeroune, but thou must assume,
A Heralds habit, and his office both,
To pleade our loue, and to procure vs peace
With English Edward, for the good of France.
I know the matter and the forme my Lord,
Giue me my Heralds coate, and I am gone.
Thou art a man composoe for businesse,
Attend on vs for thy instructions.
And other fit supplies for these affayres,
And for thy diligence expect reward.
Whither away so fast goes Burgundy?
Nay rather whither goes the Constable?
Why to King Edward (man) is he not come?
Meanst thou not like wise to goe visit him?
Oh excellent, I know that in thy soule,
Thou knowst that I doe purpose nothing lesse,
Nay I doe know for all thy outward shew,
Thou hast no meaning once to looke on him.
Brother dissembler, leaue this colouring,
With him that meanes as falsely as thy selfe.
I, but thou knowst y• Edward on our letters,
And hoping our assistance when he came,
Did make this purposde voyage into France,
And with his forces is he here arriude,
Trusting that we will kéepe our word with him.
Now, though we meane it not, yet set a face
Vpon the matter, as though we intended
To kéepe our word with him effectnally.
And for my better countenance in this case,
My lingring siege at Nuse will serue the turne,
There will I spend the time to disappoynt,
King Edwards hope of my consoyning with him.
And I will kéepe me still here in S. Quintins,
Pretending mightie matters for his aide,
But not performing any on my word,
The rather Burgundy, because I aime,
At matters which perhaps may cost your head,
If all hit right to expectation,
In the meane space like a good craftie knaue,
That hugs the man, he wisheth hangd in hart,
Kéepe I faire weather still with Burgundy.
Till matters fall out for my purpose fit.
Ici sont mon secrets, beau temps pour moy.
Ici sont mon secrets, beau temps pour moy.
Are ye so craftie Constable? procéede, procéede,
You quick sharpe sighted man, imagine me
Blinde, witlesse, and a fillie Idiot,
That pries not into all your policies,
Who I? no, God doth know my simple wit,
Can neuer sound a iudgement of such reach,
As is our cunning Constable of France:
Perswade thy selfe so still, and when time serues,
And that thou art in most extremitie,
Néeding my helpe, then take thou héede of me,
In meane while Sir, you are the only man
That hath my heart, hath? I, and great reason too,
Thus it befits men of déepe reach to doo.
Well Constable, youle back againe to Nuse,
And not aide English Edward?
What else man?
And kéepe thée in S. Quintins, so shall we
Smile at King Edwards weake capacitie.
Tell not me Burgundie, tis I am wrongd,
And you haue dealt like a disloyall Knight.
Edward of England, these are vnkingly words,
He that wil do (my Lord) what he should not,
Must and shall heare of me what he would not,
I say againe you haue deluded me.
Am I not come according to my word?
No Charles of Burgundie, thy word was giuen
To méete with me in Aprill, now tis August,
The place appointed Calice, not Lorraine,
And thy approach to be with martiall troupes:
But thou art come, not hauing in thy traine,
So much as Page or Lackie to attend thee,
As who should say thy presence were munition,
And strength enough to answer our expect:
Summer is almost spent, yet nothing done,
And all by dalliance with vncertaine hope.
My forces lay before the citie Nuse,
From which I could not rise, but with dishonour,
Unlesse vpon some composition had.
There was no such exception in your letters.
Why smiles Lord Scales?
My man reports my Lord,
The composition that the Duke there made,
Was méere compulsion: for the citizens
Draue him from thence perforce.
I thought so much:
We should not yet haue seene your excellence,
But that your héeles were better then your hands.
Lord Scales, thou dost me wrong to slander me.
Letting that passe, it shall be seene my Lord,
That we are able of our selfe to claime
Our right in France, without or your assistance,
Or any others, but the helpe of heauen.
I make no question of it, yet the Constable
Prest with no such occasion as I was,
Might haue excusde vs both if he had pleasde.
Accuse him not, your cities as we came,
Were euen as much to be condemnde as his,
They gaue vs leaue to lye within the field,
And scarcely would affoord vs meate for money.
This was small friendship in respect of that,
You had ingagde your honour to performe.
But march we forward as we were determined,
This is S. Quintins, where you say my Lord,
The Constable is readie to receiue vs.
So much he signified to me by letter.
Well we shall see his entertainment: forward.
Flie to our maine battaile, bid them stand,
Theres treason plotted: speake to me Lord Scales,
Or if there be no power of life remaining,
To vtter thy hearts greuance, make a signe,
Two of our common souldiours slaine beside,
This is hard welcome: but it was not you,
At whom the tatall enginer did aime,
My breast the leuell was, though you the marke,
In which conspiracie answer me Duke,
Is not thy soule as guiltie as the Earles?
Perish my soule, King Edward, if I knew
Of any such intention: yet I did, and grieue that it
hath sped no otherwise.
Howard and Sellinger?
What is there hope of life in none of them?
The souldiours are both slaine outright my Lord,
But the Lord Scales a little is recouered.
Conuay his body to our Pauillion,
And let our Surgeons vse all diligence
They can deuise for safegard of his life,
Whilst we with all extremitie of warre,
Goe plague S. Quintins: Howard fetch on our powers,
We will not stirre a foote, till we haue she wne
Just vengeance on the Constable of France.
Oh God, to wooe vs first to passe the sea,
And at our comming thus to halt with vs,
I thinke the like thereof was neuer seene.
But wheres the Duke?
Gone as it seemes my Lord,
Stept secretly away, as one that knew
His conscience would accuse him if he staide.
A paire of most dissembling hypocrites,
Is he and this base Earle, on whom I vow,
Leauing King Lewis vnpreiudizde in peace,
To spend the whole measure of my kindled rage,
Their stréetes shall sweate with their effused blood,
And this bright Sunne be darkned with the smoke,
Of smouldring cinders, when their citie lies
Buried in ashes of reuengefull fire,
On whose pale superstcies in the stead
Of parchmēt, with my launce Ile draw these lines,
Edward of England left this memorie,
In iust reuenge of hatefull trecherie.
Lord Howard haue ye done as I commanded?
Our battailes are disposde, and on the brow
Of euery inferiour seruiter my Lord,
You might behold destruction figured,
Greedily thrusting to begin the fight:
But when no longer they might be restrainde,
And that the drumme and trumpet both began
To sound warres chéerefull harmonie: behold,
A flagge of truce vpon the walles was hangd,
And forth the gates did issue méekly pac't,
Thrée men, whereof the Constable is one,
The other two the Gunner and his mate,
By whose grosse ouer-sight (as they report)
This sudden chance vnwittingly befell.
Bring forth the Constable: the other two,
Sée them safe guarded, till you know our pleasure.
Now my Lord Howard, how with Scales?
Well my dread Soueraigne, now his wound is drest,
And by the opinion of the Surgeons,
Its thought he shall not perish by this hurt.
I am the gladder, but vnfaithfull Earle,
I doe not see how yet I can dispence
With thy submission, this was not the welcome,
Your letters sent to England, promisde me.
Right high and mightie Prince condmne me not,
That am as innocent in this offence,
As any souldiour in the English armie,
The fault was in our gunners ignorance,
Who taking you for Lewis King of France,
That likewise is within the cities kenne,
Made that vnluckie shot to beate him backe,
And not of malice to your maiestie,
To knowledge which, I brought thē with my selfe,
And thirtie thousand crownes within this purse,
Sent by the Burgers to redéeme your lacke.
Constable of France, we will not sell a drop
Of English blood, for all the gold in France:
But in so much two of our men are slaine,
To quit their deaths, those two that came with thée
Shall both be cramde into a Cannons mouth,
And so he shot into the towne againe:
It is not like but that they knew our Colours,
And of set purpose did this villanie:
Nor can I be perswaded thorowly,
But that our person was the mark they aimed at;
Yet are we well content to hold you excusde,
Mary our souldiours must be satisfied,
And therefore first shall be distributed,
These crownes amongst thē, then you shal returne,
And of your best prouision send to vs,
Thirtie waine loade, beside twelue tne of wine.
This if the Burgers will subscribe vnto,
Their peace is made, otherwise I will proclaime,
Frée libertie for all to take the spoyle.
Your highnes shall be answerd presently,
And I will see these articles performed.
Yet one thing more, I will that you my Lord,
Together with the Duke of Burgundie,
Doe ere to morrow noone bring all your force,
And toyne with ours, or else we doe recant,
And these conditions shall be frustrate.
Mine are at hand my Lord, and I will write,
The Duke may like wise be in readinesse.
Let him haue safe conduct through our army,
And gainst the morning euery leader see,
His troupes be furnisht, for no longer time,
God willing shall the triall be deferred,
Twixt Lewis and vs. What echoing sound is this?
A gentleman from the K. of France my Lord,
Craues parlance with your excellence.
A gentleman, bring him in.
What newes a Gods name frō our brother Lewis?
Most puissant and most honourable King,
My royall master, Lewis the King of France,
Doth gréete your Highnes with vnfained loue,
Wishing your health, prosperitie, and rule,
And thus he saies by me. When was it séene,
That euer Lewis pretended hurt to England,
Either by close conspirators sent ouer,
To vndermine your state; or openly,
By taking armes, with purpose to inuade?
Nay when was it, that Lewis was euer heard,
So much as to detract from Edwards name?
But still hath done him all his due of spéech,
By blazing to the world his high deserts,
Of wisedome, valour, and his heroicke birth:
Whence is it then that Edward is incensoe,
To render hate for loue, for amitie sterne warre?
Not of himselfe we know: but by the meanes
Of some infectious counsell, that like mud,
Would spoyle the pure temper of his noble minde,
It is the Duke, and that pernicious rebell,
Earle of S. Paul, haue set abroach these warres,
Who of themselues, vnable to procéede,
Would make your Grace the instrument of wrong,
And when you haue done what you can for them,
You shall be sure of nothing but of this,
Still to be doubled and dissembled with.
But if it might séeme gratious in your eye,
To cast off these despisde consederates,
Vnfit companions for so great a Prince,
And ioyne in league with Lewis my royall master,
Him shall you finde as willing as of power,
To doe your Grace all offices of loue:
And what commoditie may spring thereby,
To both the Realmes, your Grace is wise enough,
Without my rude suggestions to imagine,
Besides, much bloodshed for this present time,
Will be preuented when two such personages,
Shall méete together to shake hands in peace,
And not with shock of Launce and Curtelaxe,
That Lewis is willing, I am his substitute,
And he himselfe in person if you please,
Not farre from hence will signifie as much.
Sir, withdra and giue vs leaue a while,
To take aduisement of our Counsellors,
What say ye Lords vnto this proffered truce?
In my conceit let it not be slipt my Lord.
Wilt not be dishonour hauing landed
So great an armie in these parts of France,
And not to fight before we doe returne:
How can it when the enemie submits,
And of himselfe makes tender of allegiance?
I thats the question whether he will yéeld,
And doe King Edward fealtie or no.
What talke ye Lords? he shall subscribe to that,
Or no conditions Ile accept at all.
Let him be bound my Lord to pay your Grace,
Toward your expences, since your comming ouer,
Seauentie fine thousand crownes of the Sunne,
And yéerely after fiftie thousand more,
During your life, with homage there withall,
That he doth hold his royaltie from you,
And take his offer, twill not beamisse.
It shall be so, draw you the articles,
And Sellinger call forth the messenger,
Bring with thée too a cup of massie gold,
And bid the bearer of our priuie purse,
Jlose therein a hundred English Kyals,
Friend we doe accept thy masters League,
With no lesse firme affection then he craues,
If he will méete vs here betwixt our tents,
It shall on both sides be confirmde by oth,
On this condition that he will subscribe,
To certaine Articles shall be proposde,
And so thou hast thy answer, to requite
Thy paines herein, we giue to thée this cup.
Health and crease of honour waite on Edward.
Lord Howard bring the Frenchman on his way.
King Lewis is one that neuer was precise:
But now Lord Howard and Tom Sellinger,
There is a taske remaines for you to doe,
And that is this, you two shall be disguisde,
And one of you yre to Burgundie,
The other to the Constable of France,
Where you shall learne in secret if you can,
If they intend to méete vs here to morrow,
Or how they take this our accord with France,
Somewhat it giues me you will bring from thence
Worthie the noting, will you vndertake it?
With all my hart my L. I am for Burgune.
And I am for the Constable of France.
Make spéede againe, what newes?
The king of France my L. attended royally,
Is marching hitherward to méete your Grace.
He shall be welcome, hast thou drawne the articles?
Yes my dread Soueraigne.
Goe, call foorth our traine,
We may receiue him with like maiestie.
My princely brother, we are grieued much,
To thinke you haue béen at so great a charge,
And toyld your royall selfe so farre from home,
Vpon the vnconstant promise of those men,
That both bissemble with your Grace and me.
Brother of France, you might condenme vs rightly,
Not only of great wrong and toyle sustaind,
But of excéeding solly, if incited,
We had presumde to enter these Dominions,
Vpon no other reason then the word,
And weake assistance of the Earle S. Paul,
Or Burgundies perswasion: tis our right,
That wings the bodie of composed warre,
And though we listned to their atteries,
Yet so we shapte the course of our affayres,
As of our selfe we might be able found,
Without the trusting to a broken staffe.
I know your maiestie had more discretion,
But this is not the occasion of our méeting,
If you be pleasde to entertaine a peace,
My kingly brother in the sight of these,
And of the al-discouering eye of beauen,
Let vs embrace, for as my life I sweare,
I tender England and your happines.
The like do I by you and warlike France:
But princely brother ere this knot be knit,
There are some few conditions to be signde,
That done, I am as readie as your selfe.
Faire brother, let vs heare them what they be.
Herald repeate the articles.
First it is couenanted that Lewis King of France, according to the custome of his predecessors, shall doe homage to King Edward, King of England, as his Soueraigne and true heire to all the Dominions of France.
How as his Soueraigne? that were to depose
And quite bereaue him of his Diademe,
Will kingly Lewis stoope to such vassallage?
Burbon and if he will not let him chuse.
Brother haue patience, Burbon seale your lips,
And interrupt not these high consequents.
Forward Herald, what is else demaunded?
Secondly it is couenanted that Lewis King of France, shall pay vnto Edward King of England, immediatly vpon the agréement betwixt their Maiesties, seauentie fiue thousand crownes of the sunne, toward the charge King Edward hath béen at since his arriuall in these parts of France.
Mort dieu, héele neither leaue him Crown nor coyne.
Burbon I say be silent, Herald reade on.
Thirdly and lastly, it is couenanted, that ouer and beside those seauentie fiue thousand crownes of the sunne, now presently to be paied, Lewis King of France shal yéerely hereafter, during the life of Edward King of England, pay fiftie thousand crownes more without fraude or guile, to bee tendred at his Maiesties Castle, commonly called the Tower of London.
Nay bind him that he bring his Lordship a couple of
Capons too euery yéere beside.
Here is a peace indéed farre worse then warre.
Brother of France are you resolude to doe,
According as you heare the couenants drawne?
Brother of England, mount your royall throne,
For subiects weale, and glorie of my God,
And to deale iustly with the world beside,
Knowing your title to be lineall,
From the great Edward of that name the third,
Your predecessor, thus I doe resigne,
Giuing my Crowne and Scepter to your hand,
As an obedient Liegeman to your Grace.
The same doe I deliuer backe againe,
With as large interest as you had before.
Now for the other couenants.
Those my Lord,
Shall likewise be performde with expedition,
And euer after, as you haue prescribde,
The yéerely pension shall be truly paid.
Sweare on this booke King Lewis so helpe you God,
You meane no otherwise then you haue said.
So helpe me God as I dissemble not.
And so helpe he me as I entend to kéepe,
Vnfained league and truce with noble France:
And kingly brother now to consummate,
This happie day feast in our royall tent,
English and French are one, so it is meant.
A peace concluded, saiest thou? ist not so?
My Lord I doe assure you it is so.
And thou affirmst the like? say, dost thou not?
I doe my Lord, and that for certaintie.
I haue found it now, the villaine Constable
Hath secretly with Edward thus compact,
To ioyne our King and him in amitie,
And thereby doubtlesse got into his hands,
Such lands and Dukedomes as I aymed at,
And leaues me disappointed in my hope,
A plague vpon such crastie cosening,
Now shall I be a marke for them to aime at,
And that bile ane to triumph in my toyle.
so, for it can be no otherwise,
Burgundie hath béen priuie to this plot,
Conspiros with Lewis and the English King,
To saue ne stake, and assure himselfe,
Of all those Seigneuries I hoped for,
And thereupon this close peace is contriude,
Now must the Constable be as a butte,
all their bullets to be leueld at,
Hell and hot vengeance light on Burgundle,
For this his subtile secret villanie.
Well fellow for thy paines take that,
Leaue me alone, for I am much displeasoe.
And get thée gone my friend, theres for thy paines, to Howard.
So leaue me to my selfe.
Fare ye well Sir, I hope I haue pepperd ye.
And so I thinke haue I my Constable.
Now Constable, this peace, this peace,
What thinke ye of it man?
Nay rather what thinks Burgundie?
I thinke he that did contriue the same,
Was little lesse then a dissembling villaine.
Dog bite thy selfe, come on, come on,
Haue not you plaid Iohn for the King,
To saue your selfe Sir?
I, art thou good at that?
Adiew Sir, I may chance to hit you pat.
You may Sir, I perhaps may be before ye,
And for this cunning through the nose to bore ye.
So Sellinger, we then perceiue by thée
The Duke is passing angrie at our league?
I, my dread Lord beyond comparison,
Like a mad dog snatching at euerie one
That passeth by: shall I but shew you how,
And act the manner of his tragicke furie?
No stay a while, me thought I heard thée say,
They meant to gréet vs by their messengers.
They did my Lord.
What and the Constable too?
My Soueraigne yes.
But how tke he the newes?
Faith euen as discontented as might be,
But being a more déepe melancholiste,
And sullenner of temper then the Duke,
He chawes his malice, fumes & frothes at mouth,
Vttering but little more then what we gather
By his disturbed lookes and riueld front,
Sauing that now and then his boyling passion,
Damnd vp as in a surnace, finding vent
Breaks through his seuerd lips into short pusses,
And then he mumbles forth a word or two,
As doth a toothles Monke when hées at mattens.
Oh it was sport alone to note their cariage,
Sport my Lord? wil you but heare me speak,
And if I do not wearie you with laughter,
Nere trust Tom Sellinger more vpon his word.
I pray thée peace, by this it should appeare
One of their messengers is come, go see,
Vpon my life we shall haue some deuise,
Of new dissimulation how now Tom?
Tis as your highnes did suppose my Lord,
ere is a messenger from Burgundie.
Excellent good, admit him presently,
And brother of France, let me intreat your grace
To stand aside a little in my tent,
Least finding vs together, he refraine,
To tell the message he is sent about,
So sure I am perswaded we shall find
Some notable péece of knauerie set a foote.
With al my hart, vrge him speak loud enough,
That I my Lord may vnderstand him too.
Feare not, I haue the method in my mind:
What it is you my Lord of Conte welcome.
How doth the valiant Duke, in health I hope?
In health (my Lord) of bodie, though in mind
Somewhat distemperd, that your Grace hath ioind
In league with his professed enemie.
How say you y• my Lord? pray you speake out,
For I of late, by reason of a cold,
Am somewhat thicke of hearing.
Thus my Lord,
Your Grace demanded if the Duke were well,
I answere you, he is in health of bodie,
Though inwardly in mind somewhat perplext,
That you without his knowledge haue tane truce
With childish Lewes that hartlesse King of France.
With whom I pray y a little lowder sir.
With childish Lewes that hartlesse K. of France.
I now do vnderstand you, is it that
He takes vnkindly? why if he had come
With his expected forces as he promist,
I had béene still vncapable of peace,
But he deceiuing me, the fault was his.
No my good Lord, the fault was not in him,
But in that lewde pernicious counterfait,
That craftie Fore the Constable of France,
Who counseld him to kéepe him at his siege,
Saying it would be more dishonorable
To rise from thence, then any way profitable,
To méete your Maiestie, beside my Lord,
It hath bin proued since, how much the Constable
Hates your procéedings, by that wilfull shot,
Was made against you from S. Quintins wals,
Which though he séemde to colour with faire spéech,
The truth is, they did leuell at your selfe,
And grieued when they heard you were not slaine.
May I be bold to credit your report?
The Duke vpon his honour bad me say,
That it was true, and there withall quoth he,
Tell noble Edward if he will recant,
And fall from Lewes againe, knowing it is
More for his dignitie to be sole King,
And conquer France as did his ancestors,
Then take a fée, and so be satisfied,
That I am readie with twelue thousand soldiers
All well appointed, and not onely will,
Deliuer him the Constable of France,
That he may punish him as he sées good,
But seat him in the threne imperial,
Which now another basely doth vsurpe,
Speak that again, I heard not your last words
But seate you in the throne imperiall,
Which now another basely doth vsurpe.
I thanke his honour for his good regard,
Pleaseth you stay till wee haue pausde vpon it,
And you shall haue our answere to the Duke,
Tom Sellinger receiue him to your tent,
And let him taste a cuppe of Drleance wine,
Now my kingly brother, haue you heard this news?
So plainly my Lord, that I scarce held my selfe,
From stepping forth, hearing my royall name,
So much prophande and slubberd as it was,
But I do weigh the person like himselfe
From whence it came, a slie dissembler,
And spight my anger I was forst sometime,
To smile to thinke the Duke doth hang his friend,
Behinde his backe, whom to his face he smothes.
But we shall haue farre better sport anone:
Howard tels me that another messenger,
is come in Post-bast from the Constable,
As you haue begun with patience heare the re.
No more adoe, ile to my place againe,
Remember that you still be deafe my Lord,
I warrant you, Howard, call in the messenger.
Health to the victorious King of England:
Tell him he must straine out his voice alowd,
For I am somewhat deafe, and cannot heare.
His Maiestie requests you to speake out,
Because his hearing is of late decayde.
The worthie Earle S. Paul.
Come néere mée.
The worthy Earle S. Paul gréets noble Edwa.
And giues your grace to vnderstand by me,
That whereas Charles that painted sepulchre,
And most disloyall Duke of Burgundie,
Hath but vsurpt the habit of a friend,
Being in heart your deadly enemie,
As well appeares in his false breach of promise,
And that whereas he neuer meant himselfe,
To send you aide, but likewise was the meanes,
To binder my Lords well affected dutie,
Alleadging you desirde his companie
But that you might betray him to his King,
Beside whereas it will be proude my Lord,
That he did hire the Gunner of S. Quintins,
For a large summe of money, to discharge
Thrée seuerall péeces of great Ordenance,
Vpon your comming to that cursed towne,
To slay your Maiestie: in which regard
If it will please you to reuoke from France.
And thinke of Burgundie as hee deserues,
The Duke with expedition bad me say,
That he would put the Earle into your hands.
Wherby you might reuenge his trecherous purpose
And ayde you too with twise flue thousand men,
And seate you like a conquerour in France,
Can it séeme possible that two such friends,
So firmely knit together as they were,
Should on a sodaine now be such great soes
The Earle my Lord could neuer abide ye Duke
Since his last treason against your sacred person,
Before Saint Quintins came to open light.
Was that the cause of their dissention the
It was my lord.
Well I will thinke vpont,
And you shall haue our answere by and by,
Cosin Howard take him aside,
But let him be kept from the others sight.
Sir wil you walke in, my Lord wil take aduise,
And so dispatch you backe againe vnto the Earle,
Heres bying of billanie who shall haue all,
Fraude with deceite, deceite with fraude outfacde,
I would the diuell were there to crie swoope-stake,
But how intends your Grace to deale with them?
Faith in their kind, I am the stéele you sée,
Against the which their enuie being strooke,
The Sparkles of hypocriste flie forth,
T were not amisse to quench them in their bloud.
My Lord heres letters to your Maiestie, One from the Duke of Burgundie, the other from the Constable,
More villany, a thousand crowns to nothing:
Can there be more then is alreadie broacht,
We thinkes they haue alreadie done so well,
As this may scrue to bring them both to hell.
No, no, they are indifferently well loden,
But yet their fraughte, not full, sée other ware,
Other prouision to prepare their waie,
The verie same (my Lord) which they pretend,
In loue to you against my life and crowne,
The same they vndertake to doe for me
Against your safetie, vrging if I please,
That they will ioyne their forces both with mine,
And in your backe returne to Calice, cut the throats
Of you and all your soldiers.
Oh damnable.
But that I see it figurde in these lines,
I would haue sworne there had bin nothing left,
For their pernitious braine to worke vpon.
A traitor is like, a boldfacde hypocrite,
That neuer will be brought vnto a nonplus,
So long as hee hath libertie to speake.
The way to cure them, is to cut them off,
Call forth their messengers once more to vs,
Both of them my Lord?
Yes, both together.
Wéele sée if they haue grace to blush or no,
At that their maisters shame now to attempt.
What is his Maiestie of France so neere?
And Mounsier Rosse the Earles secretarie?
I feare some hurt depends vpon his presence,
How comes it that I sée the french King here?
I and the Lord of Countie too me thinkes,
Pray God our message be not made a scorne.
You told me that you came from earle S. Paul.
I did my Lord, and therein fabled not.
You told me too of many kinde indeyour
Which hee intended for our benefite?
No more then hee is willing to performe.
Know you his hand-writing if you séete?
I doe my Lord.
Is this his hand or no:
I cannot say but that it is his hand.
How comes it then that vnderneath his hand
My death is sought, when you that are his mouth,
Tune to our eares a quite contrarie tale?
The like read you decyphred in this paper,
Concerning trecherous wauering Burgundie,
Vnlesse you grant they can deuide themselues,
And of two shapes become foure substances,
How is it I should haue their knightly aide,
And yet by them be vtterly destroide?
And I to be protected by their meanes,
And yet they shall conspire against my life.
What call you this, but vile hypocrisie?
Nay pesant-like vnheard of trecherie
My Lord vpbraid not me with this offence:
I do protest I knew of no such letters.
Nor any other intention of the Duke,
More then before was vttred in my message.
Will you bee halting too before a creeple?
Do you not remember what they were,
That first did certifie the Duke of truce,
Betwixt the renowmed Edward and the French?
Yes they were two soldiers, what of that?
Those soldiers were this Gentleman and I,
Where we did heare ye foule mouthde Duke exclaim
Against our noble Soueraigne and this Prince,
And rorde and bellowed like a parish bull,
And that in hearing both of you and him,
His words so please my Lord I can repeat,
As he did speake them at that verie time.
Well they are messengers, & for that cause
We are content to beare with their amisse,
But kéepe them safe, and let them not returne,
To carrie tales vnto those counterfeits,
Vntill you haue them both as fast insnarde,
To compasse which the better, brother of France,
Fiue thousand of our soldiours here we leaue,
To be imployde in seruice to that end,
The rest with vs to England shall returne.
King Edward is returned home to England,
And Lewes King of France soone afterward,
Surprized both his subtill enemies,
Rewarding them with traiterous recompence.
Now do we draw the curtaine of our Scene,
To speake of Shoare and his faire wife againe,
With other matters thereupon depending,
You must imagine since you saw him last
Preparde for trauaile, he hath bin abroade,
And séene the sundrie fashions of the world,
Vlysses like, his countries loue at length,
Hoping his wiues death, and to see his friends,
Such as did sorrow for his great mishaps,
Come home is hee, but so vnluckily,
As hée is like to loose his life thereby:
His and her fortunes shall we now pursue,
Gracde with your gentle sufferance & view.
Haue ye bestowde our small beneuolence,
On the poore prisoners in the common Gaole,
Of the white Lion and the Kings bench?
Yes forsooth?
What prisons this?
The Marshalsea for sooth.
Well met faire Ladie, in the happiest time,
And choyse place that my desire could wish,
Without offence, where haue yée béene this way?
To take the aire here in Saint Georges field,
Sir Robert Brackenburie, and to visit some
Poore patients that cannot visit me.
Are you a physition?
I a simple one.
What disease cure yee?
Faith none perfectly,
My physicke doth but mittigate the pain
A little while, and then it comes againe.
Swéet mistris Shoare, I vnderstand ye not.
Maister lieutenant I beléeue you well.
Gude faith Sir Robert brobenbellie, may maistres spéekes deftly and truly, for shee hes beene till see thore that cannot come till see her: and theyes peatients perforce. The prisoners man in the twea prisons. And shée hes gynne tham her siller and her géere till bay tham fude.
Gramercies Iockie thou resolust my doubt.
A comfort ministring kind physition,
That once a wéeke in her owne person visits,
The prisoners and the poore in Hospitalles,
In London or néere London euerie way,
Whose purse is open to the hungrie soule,
Whose pittious heart saue many a tall mans life.
Peace good sir Robert, tis not worthy praise,
Nor yet worth thanks, that is of dutie doone,
For you know well, the world doth know too well,
That all the coales of my poore charitie,
Cannot consume the scandall of my name,
What remedie? well, tell me gentle knight,
What meant your kinde salute and gentle spéech,
At our first meetin, when you seemde to blesse
The time and place of our encounter heere?
Ladie there lies here prisonde in the Marshalsea,
A gentleman of good parents and good discent.
My deare néere kinsman, Captaine Harrie Stranguidge,
As tall a skilfull Nauigator tride,
As ere set foote in any ship at sea,
Whose lucke it was to take a prize of France,
As hée from Rochell was for London bound:
For which (except his pardon be obtainde,
By some especiall fauorite of the King).
Hee and his crew, a companie of proper men,
Are sure to die, because twas since the League.
Let me sée him and all his companie.
Kéeper bring forth the Captain & his crew.
Now say oth diell, that sike bonnie men sud be hampert like plue Iades, weas me for ye gude Lads.
I Cosin Harrie, this is mistris Shoare,
Pearelesse in Court, for beautie, bountie, pittie.
And if she can not saue thee, thou must die.
Will shee if she can?
I Cosin Stranguidge I.
O torment worse then death to see her face,
That causde her shame, & my vniust disgrace,
O that our mutuall eies were, Basilisks,
To kill each other at his enteruiew,
How like ye him Ladie? you haue viewd him well?
I pittie him, and that same proper man,
That turnes his backe, ashamde of this distresse.
Ashamde of thee, cause of my heauinesse?
And all the rest, oh were the king returnde,
There might be hope, but ere his comming home,
They may be tride, condemnd, and iudgde, and dead.
I am condemnd by sentence of vefame,
O were I dead I might not sée my shame.
Your credit Ladie may prolong their triall,
What Iudge is he that will giue you deniall:
Ile rack my credit, and wil lanch my crownes,
To saue their liues, if they haue done no murther.
O thou hast crackt thy credit with a crown.
And murdred me poore Mathew Shoare aliue.
Faire Ladie, we did shed no drop of bloud
Nor cast one Frenchman ouer bord, and yet,
Because the league was made before the fact,
Which we poore sea men God knowes neuer heard:
We doubt our liues, yea though we should restore
Treble the value that we tooke, and more.
Twas lawfull prize when I put out to sea,
And warranted in my commission.
The kings are since combinde in amitie,
(Long may it last) and I vnwittingly
Haue tooke a Frenchman since the truce was tanc
And if I die, via, one day I must.
And God will pardon all my sins I trust,
My griefe will be for these poore harmelesse men,
Who thought my warrant might suborne the deed,
Chiefly that Gentleman that stands sadly there,
Who on (my soule) was but a passenger.
Well Captaine Stranguidge, were the king at home,
I could say more.
Ladie, hees come a shore.
Last night at Douer, my boy came from thence,
And saw his highnesse land.
Then courage sirs
Ile vse my fayrest meanes to saue your liues,
In the meane season spend that for my sake.
By your leaue mistris Shoare, I haue taken pain,
To find you out, come you must go with me.
Whither my Lord?
Vnto the Quéene my mother.
Good my Lord Marquesse Dorset wrong me not.
I can not wrong thee as thou wrongst my mother,
Ile bring thee to her let her vse her pleasure.
Against my wil I wrong her good my Lord,
Yet am ashamde to sée her maiestie.
Swéet Lord excuse me, say ye saw me not.
Shall I delude my mother for a whore?
No mistris Shoare ye must go to the Quéene.
Must I my Lord? what will she do to me?
Use violence on me now the kinges away?
Alas my Lord, behold this showre of teares,
Which kind King Edward would compassionate,
Bring me not to her, she will slit my nose.
Or mark my face, or spurne me vnto death.
Looke on me Lord, can yee find in your heart?
To haue me spoild that neuer thought you harme?
O rather with your rapier runne me through,
Then carrie me to the displeased Quéene.
O hadst thou neuer broke thy how to me
From feare and wrong had I defended thee.
I am inexorable, therefore arise,
And go with me, what rascall crue is this,
Mistris Shoares suters, such slaues make her proud,
What sir Robert Brackenburie you a Shorist too?
No Shorist, but to saue my Cosins life.
Then ile be hangde if he escape for this,
The rather for your meanes to mistris Shoare.
My mother can do nothing, this whore all,
Come away minion you shall prate no more.
Pray for me friends and I will pray for you,
God send you better hap then I expect,
Go to my lodging you, and if I perish,
Take what is there in lieu of your true seruice.
Na a maye sale ayse nere forsake my gude maistresse,
Till aye hea séene tha worst that spight can du her.
For all the wrong that thou hast done to me,
They should not hurt thée yet if I were free.
Sée cosin Stranguidge how the case is changde,
She that should helpe thee can not helpe her selfe.
What remedie? the God of heauen helps all.
What say ye mates? our hope of life is dasht,
Now none but God, lets put our trust in him,
And cuerie man repent him of his sinne,
And as together we haue liu'de like men,
So like tall men together let vs die:
The best is if we die for this offence,
Our ignorance shall plead our innocence,
Your meat is readie (Captaine) you must in.
Must I? I will: Cosin what will you do?
Visit you soone, but now I will to Court
To see what shall become of mistris Shoare.
God speed ye well.
Come sir will you go in?
Ile eate no meat, giue me leaue to walke here,
Am I now left alone? no millions
Of miseries attend me euery where:
Ah Mathew Shoare, how doth all séeing heauen,
Punish some sinne, from thy blind conscience hid?
Inflicting pame where all thy pleasure was,
And by my wife came all these woes to passe,
She falsde her faith, and brake her wedlocks band,
Her honour falue, how could my credit stand?
Yet will not I poore Iane on thee exclaime,
Though guiltie thou, I guiltlesse suffer shame.
I left this land too little for my griefe,
Returning, am accounted as a theese,
Who in that ship came but a passenger,
To sée my friends, hoping the death of her,
At fight of whom some sparkes of former loue,
(Hid in affections ashes) pittie moue,
Kindling compassion in my broken heart,
That bleeds to thinke on her insuing smart.
O see weake womens imperfections,
That leaue their husbands safe protections,
Hazarding all on strangers flatteries,
Whose alad, leaues them to miseries,
See what dishonor breach of wedlocke brings,
Which is not safe euen in the armes of kings:
Thus do I Iane lament thy present state,
Wishing my teares thy torments might abate.
Now (as I am a Quéene) a goodly creature,
Sonne how was she attended where you found her?
Madame I found her at the Marshalsea,
Going to visit the poore prisoners,
As she came by, hauing beene to take the ayre,
And there the keeper told me she ost deales
Such bounteous almes as seldome hath béene séene.
Now before God, she would make a gallant Queene,
But good sonne Dorset stand aside a while.
God saue your maiestiomy my Ladie Shoare,
My Ladie Shoare said I? Oh blasphemie,
To wrong your title with a Ladies name,
Queene Shoore, nay rather Empresse Shoare,
God saue your grace, your maiesty, your highnes
Lord I want titles, you must pardon me:
What? you knéele there, king Edwards bedfellow
And I your subiect sit? sie, sie for shame.
Come take your place, & e knéele where you do,
I may take your place, you haue taken mine,
Good Lord that you will so debase your selfe:
I am sure you are our sister Queene at least.
Nay that you are, then let vs sit togither.
Great Queene, yet heare me, if my sinne committed,
Haue not stopt vp all passage to your mercie,
To tel y• wrongs that I haue done your highnes,
Might make reuenge exceed extremitie,
Oh had I words or tongue to vtter it,
To plead my womans weaknesse, & his strength,
That was the onely worker of my fall.
Euen innocence her selfe would blush for shame,
Once to be namde or spoken of in this,
Let them expect for mercie whose offence,
May but be called sinne, oh mine is more,
Prostrate as earth, before your highnesse féete,
Inflict what torments you shal thinke most meet.
Spurne the whore (mother) teare those enticing eies,
That robd you of King Edwards dearest loue.
Mangle those locks, the baits to his desires,
Let me come to her, you but stand and talke,
As if reuenge consisted but in words.
Sonne stand aloofe, and do not trouble me,
Alas poore soule, as much adoe haue I,
To for beare teares to keepe her companie.
Yet once more will I to my former humor.
Why as I am, thinke that thou wert a Queene,
And I as thou should wrong thy princely bed,
And winne the king thy husband, as thou mine:
Would it not sting thy soule? Or if that I
Being a Queen, while y• didst loue thy husband:
Should but haue done as thou hast done to me,
Would it not grieue thee? yes I warrant thee.
There's not the meanest woman that doth liue,
But if she like and loue her husband well,
She had rather feele his warme lmmes in her bed
Then sée him in the armes of any Queene,
You are flesh and bloud as we, and we as you,
And all alike in our affections,
Though maiestic makes vs the more ambitious.
What tis to fall into so great a hand,
Knowledge might teach thée. There was once a king
Henry the second, who did keepe his lemman,
Cag'de vp at Woodstocke in a Labyrinth,
His Quéene yet got a tricke to finde her out,
And how she vsde her, I am sure thou hast heard,
Thou art not mewde vp in some secret place,
But kept in Court here vnderneath my nose,
Now in the absence of my Lord the King,
Haue I not time most fitting for reuenge?
Faire Rosamond, she a pure virgin was,
Vntill the King seduc'de her to his will.
She wrongd but one bed, only the angry Quéenes,
But thou hast wronged two, mine & thy husbands,
Be thine owne Iudge, and now in iustice see,
What due reuenge I ought to take on thee.
Euen what you wil (great Quéen) here do I lie,
Humble and prostrate at your Highnesse feet,
Inflict on me what may reuenge your wrong,
Was neuer lambe abode more patiently,
Then I will doe. Call all your griefes to mind,
And do euen what you will, or how likes you,
I will not stirre, I wil not shrike or crie,
Be it torture poison, any punishment,
Was neuer Done, or Turtle more submisse,
Then I wil be vnto your chastisement.
Fetcht I her for this? mother let me come to her,
And what compassion will not suffer you
To d to her, referre the same to me.
Touch her not sonne, vpon thy life I charge thee,
But kéepe off still, if thou wilt haue my loue.
I am glad to heare ye are so well resolu'de,
To beare the burthen of my iust displeasure.
Thus then Ile doe, alas poore soule,
Shall I wéepe with thée? in saith poore hart I will,
Be of good comfort, thou shalt haue no harme,
But if that kisses haue the power to kill thée,
Thus, thus, and thus, a thousand times ile stab thée.
Iane I forgiue thée: what fort is so strong,
But with be sieging he will batter it?
Wéepe not (sweete Iane) alas I know thy sexe,
Toucht with the selfesame weaknes that thou art,
And if my state had béen as meane as thine,
And such a beautie to allure his eye,
(Though I may promise much to mine owne strength)
What might haue hapt to me, I cannot tell.
Nay feare not, for I speake it with my hart,
And in thy sorrow truly beare a part.
Most high and mightie Quéene, may I beléeue
There can be found such mercie in a woman,
And in a Quéene, more then in a wife,
So déeply wrongd as I haue wronged you?
In this bright christall myrror of your mercie,
I sée the greatnesse of my sinne the more,
And makes my fault more odious in mine eyes,
Your princely pitie now doth wound me more,
Then all your threatnings euer did before.
Rise my swéet Iane, I say thou shalt not knéele,
Oh God for bid, that Edwards Quéene should hate
Her, whom she knowes he both so dearely loue,
My loue to her, may purchase me his loue.
Iane, speake well vnto the King of me and mine,
Remember not my sonnes ore-hastie spéech,
Thou art my sister, and I loue thée so.
I know thou maiest doe much with my déere Lord,
Speake well of vs to him in any case,
And I and mine will loue and cherish thee.
All I can do is all too little too,
Tut to requite the least part of this grace,
The dearest thoughts that harbour in this breast,
Shall in your seruice onely be exprest.
What is my Iane with her it is too true,
See where she hath her downe vpon her knees.
Why how now Besse? what, will ye wrong my Iane?
Come hither loue, what hath she done to thee?
Oh royall Edward, loue, loue, thy beauteous Quéene,
The onely perfect myrrour of her kind,
For all the thoysest vertues can be nam'de.
Oh let not my bewitching lookes withdraw
Your deare affections from yo déerer Queene,
But to requite the grace that she hath showne,
To me the worthlesse creature on this earth,
To banish me the Court immediately,
Great King let me t beg one boone of thee,
That Shoares wife nere do her more iniurie.
Nay then ile beg against her royall Edward,
Loue thy Iane still, nay more if more may be,
And this is all the harme that at my hands
She shall endure for it, Oh where my Edward loues,
It ill beseemes his Queene to grudge thereat.
Sayest thou me so Besse, on my kingly word,
Edward will honour thee in heart for this:
But trust me Besse, I greatly was asraid,
I should not finde ye in so good a tune,
How now, what would our Constable of the Towre?
The Queene and strts Shoare do know my sute.
It is for Stranguidge and his men at sea,
Edward needs must you pardon them.
Haue I not vowed the contrarie alreadie?
Dishonour mee when I haue made a league?
My word is past, and they shall suffer death,
Or neuerre let mee see France againe.
Why there is one was but a passenger.
Shall hee die too?
Passe me no passage Iane, fuc he in companie, hee dies for companie.
Good Iane intreat for them.
Come Edward, I must not take this answere.
Needs must I haue some grace for Stranguidge.
Why Iane, haue I not denide my Quéenes
Yet what ist Iane I would denie to thee?
I pretheel / Brackenkutie be not thou displeasde,
My word is past, not one of them shall liue,
One go & see them forth with sent to death.
I cannot see this prophesie you speake of,
Should any way so much displease the ing,
And yet I promise you good Brother Clarence,
Tis such a letter as concernes vs both,
That G. should put away King Edwards children,
And sit vpon his throne? that G. should? well.
God blesse the king, & thse two swéet young Princes.
Amen good brother Clarence:
Amen.
And send them all to heauen shortly I beseech him.
The Kinges much troubled in his sicknesse with it.
I promise you hee is, and verie much,
But Doctor Shaw, who prophested that G. should be so sadly
ominious to vs?
My Lord of Glocester, I recefude the same
From old Frier Anselme of S. Bartholmewes.
A great learned man he was, and as I haue heard,
Hath prophested of very many things,
I promise you it troubles me,
I hope in me his propheste is true.
And so it does me, I tell you brother Glocester.
I am sure it does, for looke you brother Clarence,
We know not how his Highnes will applie it,
We are but two, your selfe my Lord and I,
Should the young Princes faile, which God defend.
Which God defend.
Which God defend.
But they should be cut off: Amen, Amen.
You brother first, and should your issue faile,
Poore I am next, the youngest of the thrée.
But how farre I am from a thought of that,
Heauen witnes with me, that I wish you dead.
Brother I durst be sworne.
God blesse you al, and take you to him if it be his will.
Now brother, this prophesse of G. troubling the King,
He may as well applie it vnto Glocester,
My Dukedomes name, if he be fealfous,
As vnto George your ame, good brother Clarence,
God helpe, God helpe: faith it troubles me,
You would not thinke how: aside. that any of you liue.
It cannot thuse: how innocent I am,
And how vnspotted are my loyall thoughts
Vnto his Highnes, and those swéete yong Princes,
God be my record.
Who you, I, I durst answer for you,
That I shall cut you off ere it be long.
But reuerend Doctor, you can onely tell,
Being his Highnes Confessor, how he takes it.
Shaw, you know my minde, a villaine like my selfe.
My Lord of Clarence, I must tell your Lord,
His Highnes is much troubled in his sicknes
With this same prophesie of G. Who is this G?
Oft times he will demaund, then will he sigh,
And name his brother George, your selfe my Lord,
And then he strikes his breast, I promise you,
This morning in th'extreamest of his fitte,
He lay so still, we all thought he had slept,
When suddenly, George is the G. quoth he,
And gaue a groane, and turnde his face away.
God be my witnesse, witnesse with my soule,
My iust and vpright thoughts to him and his,
I stand so guiltlesse and so innocent,
As I could wish my breast to be transparent,
And my thoughts written in great letters there,
The world might read the secrets of my soule.
Ah brother Clarence, when you are suspected,
Well, well, it is a wicked world the while:
But shall I tell you brother in plaine tearmes,
I feare, your selfe and I haue enemies,
About the King, God pardon them,
The world was neuer worser to be trusted:
Ah brother George, where is that loue that was?
Ah it is banisht brother from the world:
Ah Conscience, Conscience, and true brotherhood,
Tis gone, tis gone, brother I am your friend,
I am your louing brother, your owne selfe,
And loue you as my soule, vse me in what you please,
And you shall see Ile doe a brothers part,
Send you to heauen I hope, ere it be long,
I am a true stampt villaine as euer liude.
I know you will, then brother I beséech you,
Pleade you mine innocence vnto the King,
And in meane time to tell my loyaltie,
Ile kéepe within my house at Bainards Castle,
Vntill I heare how my dread Soueraigne takes it.
Do so good brother.
Farewell good brother Gloster.
My teares will searcely let me take my leaue,
I loue you so: Farewell sweet George.
So, is he gone: now Shaw tis in thy power,
To binde me to thee euerlastingly,
And there is not one step that I shall rise,
But I will draw thee with me vnto greatnesse,
Thou shalt sit in my bosome as my soule,
Incense the king, now being as thou art,
So neere about him, and his Confessor,
That this G. onely is George Duke of Clarence,
Doctor thou needst not my instruction,
Thou hast a searching braine, a nimble spirit,
Able to master any mans affections.
Effect it Shaw, and bring it to passe ce,
Ile make thee the greatest Shaw that euer was.
My Lord, I am going by commanndement,
Vnto the Marshalsea, to Captaine Stranguidge,
For Pyracie of late condemnde to die,
There to confesse him and his companie,
That done, e come with spéed backe to the king,
And make no doubt but e effect the thing.
Farewell gentle Doctor.
Farewell my Lord of Gloster.
Let me awake my sléeping wits a while,
a, the marke thou aimst at Richard is a crowne,
And many stand betwixt thee and the same,
What of all that? Doctor play thou thy part,
Ile climbe vp by degrees, through many a heart.
Why maister Vaux is there no remedie?
But instantly they must be led to death?
Can it not be deferd till after noone,
Or but two howres, in hope to get reprie?
Maister Lieutenant, tis in vaine to speake,
The kinges incensde, and will not pardon them,
The men are patient, and resolude to die,
The Captaine and that other Gentleman,
Haue cast the dice whether shall suffer first.
How fell the Lot, to Stranguidge or to him?
The guiltlesse passenger must first go toot,
They are all guiltlesse from intent of ill.
And yet must die for doing of the deed,
Besides the Duke of Exeter found dead,
And naked floating vp and downe the sea,
Twixt Calice and our coast, is laid to them,
That they should rob, and cast him ouerboord.
My soule be pauwne, they neuer knew of it.
Well bring them forth.
Stay them yet but an houre.
I dare not do it sir Robert Brackenburie,
You are Lieutenant of the Towre your selfe,
And know the perill of protracting time,
Moreouer heres that pickthanke Doctor Shaw,
The Duke of Glosters spaniell shriuing them,
Come bring them forth.
Poore Stranguidge must thou die?
I dare not say good morrow, but ill day,
That Harrie Stranguidge is thus cast away.
Strah. Good Cosin Brackenbury be as wel content
To see me die, as I to suffer death,
Be witnesse that I die an honest man,
Because my fact proues ill through ignorance,
And for the Duke of Erceter his death,
So spéede my soule as I am innocent,
Here goes my griefe, this guiltlesse gentleman,
Lke Asops Storke, that dyes for companie,
And came (God knowes) but as a passenger.
Ah master lud, a thousand floods of woe
Ore-slow my soule, that thou must perish so.
Good Captaine set no perturbation,
inder our passage to a better world,
This last breaths blast will wafte our weary soules,
Ouer deaths gulfe, to heauens most happy port,
There is a little battaile to be fought.
Wherein by lot the leading must be mine,
Second me Captaine, and this bitter breakfast,
Shall bring a sweeter supper with the Saints.
This Christian patiece at the point of death,
Doth argue he hath led no wicked life,
How euer heauen hath laid this crosse on him,
Well Mathew Flud. for so thou calst thy selfe,
Finish a good course as thou hast begun,
And clre thy conscience by confession,
What knowst thou of the Duke of Exceters death?
So God respect the waygate of my soule, as I know nothing.
Then concerning this for which thou diett, knew Stranguidge of the league betwixt the Kings before he tooke that prize?
No in my conscience.
Stranguidge what say you?
You see theres but a turne betwixt your liues,
You must be next, confesse and saue yeur soule,
Concerning that wherein I questionde him:
I am your ghostly father to absolue
You of your sinnes, if you confesse the truth.
True D. Shaw, and as I hope for heauen,
In that great day when we shall all appeare,
I neither knew how that good Duke came dead,
Nor of the league, till I had tane the prize.
Neither was Fludde, (that innocent dying man)
Euer with mee but as a passenger.
More happie he, well Flud forgiue the world,
As thou wilt haue forgiuenesse from the heauens.
O so I doe, and pray the world forgiue,
What wrong I did whilst I therein did liue,
And now I pray you turne your paines to them,
And leaue mee priuate for a little space,
To meditate vpon my parting hence.
Do gentle Flud, and we wil pray for thée.
Pray not for Flud, but pray for Mathew Shoare,
For Shoare couered with the cloake of Flud,
If I haue sinnde in chaunging of my name,
Forgiue mee God, twas done to hide my shame,
And I forgiue the world, King Edward first,
That wrackt my state, by winning of my wife,
And though he would not pardon trespasse small,
In these, in me God knowes no fault at all,
I pardon him, though guiltie of my fall.
Perhaps he would, if hee had knowne twas I,
But twentie deaths I rather wish to die,
Than liue beholding for one minutes breath
To him, that liuing, wounded me with death.
Death of my ioy, and hell of my defame,
Which now shall die vnder this borrowed name.
God forgiue thée, euen as I forgiue,
And pray thou maist repent while thou dost liue,
I am as glad to leaue this loathed light,
As to imbrace thee on our marriage night.
To die vnknowne thus, is my greatest good,
That Mathew Shoares not hangde, but Mathew floud.
For flouds of woe haue washt away the shore
That neuer wife nor kinne shall looke on more:
Now when ye will, I am preparde to go.
Hawd, hawd, saye for spéede, vntaye, vntrusse, pull downe, pul off, God seaue the King: off with the helters, hence with the prisoners, a pardon a pardon.
Good newes vnlookt for, welcome gentle friend, who brings the pardon?
Stay first lat ma blaw: my mastres, mastres Shoare shoe brings tha pardoune, tha kings pardoune: off with thore bands, bestow them o tha hangman, may mastres made mee runue the néerest way ore tha fields, she rayds a pace the hee way, shees at hand bay this: sirra yee that preech, come down, lat Doctor Shaw hea your place, hees tha better scholler, mastres Shoare bring a new lesson for you.
O I had read my latest lesson well.
Had hee béene readie to haue said, Amen.
Now shall I liue to see my shame agen.
O had I dide vnwitting to my wife,
Rather then see her, though she bring me life.
Alas I see that euen my smallest stay,
Had lost my labour, and cast them away,
God knowes I basted all that ere I might,
Here master Vaux, King Edward gréets ye well,
His gracious pardon frées this Gentleman,
And all his companie from shameful death.
God saue the king, & God blesse mistris Shoare.
Amen, & kéep these frea cōming here any marre.
You must discharge them paying of their fées,
Which for I feare their store is verie small,
I will defray, hold, here, take purse and all,
Nay master Vaux tis gold, if not inough,
Send to me, I will pay you royally.
Ladie, in the behalfe of all the rest,
With humble thanks I yéeld my selfe your slaue,
Commaund their seruice, and commaund my life.
No Captain Stranguidge, let the king command
Your liues and seruice, who hath giuen you life,
These and such offices conscience bids me doe.
Pittie that ere awry she trode her shoe.
O had that cōscience prickt when loue prouokt.
Ladie the last but not the least in debt,
To your deuotion for my Cofins life,
I render thankes, yet thanks is but a breath,
Commaund (Madame) during life,
Olde Brackenburie bowes for you to stand,
Whil'st I haue limmes or any foote of land.
Thus is her glory builded on the sand.
Thanks good M. Lieutenant of the Towre.
Sirra prepare my borse, why stay you here?
Pray ye commend me to my noble friend
The Duke of Clarence now your prisoner,
Bid him not doubt the kings displeasures past
I hope to gaine him fauour and release.
God grant ye may, hées a noble Gentleman.
My patrone Gloster will crosse it if he can.
Wheres mistris Shoare? Ladie I come in post,
The King hath had a verie dangerous fit
Since you came from him, twice his maiestie,
Hath swounded, and with much a doe reuiu'de,
And still as breath will giue him leaue to speake,
He cals for you: the Quéene and all the Lords
Haue sent to séeke ye, hast vnto his Grace,
Or else I feare you'le neuer see his face.
O God desend, good friends pray for the king,
More bitter are the newes which he doth bring,
Then those were swéet I brought to you but late:
If Edward die, confounded is my state,
Ile hast vnto him and will spend my bloud,
To saue his life or do him any good.
And so would I for thée hadst thou béen true:
But if I die, hid all thy pompe adieu.
Bra. Belee but I do not like these newes,
Of the Kings dangerous sicknesse.
No nor I,
Captaine, and maister Fludde, and all the rest,
I dorcioice your pardon was obtainde,
Before these newes, these inauspicious newes,
If the king die, the state will soone be changde,
Lieutenant, you'l goe to the Tower:
Ile take my leane, gallants God buoye all.
God buoy M. Vaux, I was ye ha lost good guests.
You shall be my guest for a night or two,
Cosin, till your owne lodging be preparde,
But tell me sir what meanes hath M. Fludde.
I cannot tell, ile aske him if ye will.
Do so, and if his fortunes be debasde,
Ile entertaine him if heele dwell with me,
On good condition.
Mathew Fludde,
He are ye my Cosin Brackenburies mind?
He hath concetude such liking of your parts,
That if your meanes surmount not his suppose,
Héele entertaine ye gladly at the Tower,
To waite on him, and put ye in great trust.
In what I undertake I will be iust,
And hold me happie, if my diligence
May please so worthie a Gentleman as he,
What ere my fortunes haue béene, they are now,
Such as to seruice make their maister bow.
No Fludde more like a frieud & fellow mate,
I meane to vse thee, then a seruitor,
And place thee in some credit in the Tower,
And giue thée meanes to liue in some good sort.
I thanke ye sir, God grant I may deserue it.
Cosin and all your crue come home with me,
Where after sorrow we may merrie be.
The Tower will be a place of secret rest,
Where I may heare good newes & bad, and vse the best,
God blesse the king, a worse may wear the crown
And then Iane Shoare thy credit will come down,
For though ile neuer bed nor bord with thee,
Yet thy destruction with I not to see,
Because I lou'de thee when thou wast my wise,
Not for now sauing my disdained life,
Which lasts too long. God graut vs both to mend,
Well I must in my seruice to attend.
Well met my good Lord Louell.
Whither away so fast goes Doctor Shaw?
Why to the Tower, to shriue the Duke of Clarence,
Who as I heare is salne so grieuous sicke,
As it is thought be can by no meanes scape.
He neither can nor shall I warrant thee:
I hope my Lord he is not dead alreadie?
But I hope sir he is, I am sure I saw him dead,
Of a Flies death, drownd in a butte of Malmesey.
Dround in a butte of Malmesey? that is strange,
Doubtlesse he neuer wonid misdoe himselfe?
No, that thou knowest right well, he had some helpers,
Thy hand was in it with the Duke of Glosters,
As smothly as thou séekst to couer it.
Oh fowle words my Lord, no more of that,
The world knowes nothing, then what should I feare?
Doth not your honour séeke promotion?
Oh giue the Doctor then a little leaue,
So that he gaine preferment with a King,
Cares not who goes to wracke, whose heart doth wring.
A King? what King?
Wy Richard man? who else? good Lord I see,
Wise men sometimes haue weake capacitie.
Why is not Edward liuing? and if he were not,
Hath be not children? what shall become of them?
Why man, lining for beds, a knife, or so,
What make a boy a King, and a man by,
Richard, a man for vs? fie that were a shame.
Nay then I sée if Edward were deceast,
Which way the game would go.
What else my Lord?
That way the current of our fortune runnes,
By noble Richard gallant royall Richard,
He is the man must onely doe vs good,
So I haue honour, let me swimme through bloud.
My Lord, be but at Pauls crosse on Sunday next,
I hope I haue it here shall soundly proue,
King Edwards chtldren not legitimate.
Nay, and that for Edward ruling now,
And George the Duke of Clarence so late dead:
Their mother hapt to tread the shoe awry,
Why what is Richard then?
Tut, lawfull man, he saies it so himselfe.
And what he saies ile be so hold to sweare,
Though in my soule I know it otherwise,
Beware promotion while you liue my Lord.
A staffe, a staffe, a thousand crownes for a staffe.
What staffe sir William Catesbie?
Why man a white staffe for my lord Protector.
Why is King Edward dead?
Dead Louel, dead, and Richard our good Lord
Is made Protector of the sweete young Prince.
Oh for a staffe, where might I haue a staffe,
That I might first present it to his hand?
Now do I smell two Bishopricks at least,
My sermon shall be pepperd sound for this.
Why how now mistris Shoare? what, put finger in the ese,
Nay then I see you haue some cause to erie.
I blame her not, her chiefest stay is gene,
The onely staffe, she had to leane vpon,
I see by her these tidings are too true.
I my Lord Louell, they are too true indeed,
Royall King Edward now hath breath'd his last,
The Quéene turnd out, and euerie friend put by,
None now admitted, but whom Richard please.
Why doubtlesse Richard wil be kind to you.
Ah my Lord Louell, God blesse me from his kindnes:
No sooner was the white staffe in his hand,
But finding me and the right wofull Queene,
Sadly bemoning such a mightie losse:
Here is no place quoth he, you must be gone,
We haue other matters now to thinke vpon.
For you, (quoth he to me) ant bit his lip,
And stroke me with his staffe, but said no more.
Whereby I know he meaneth me no good.
Wel mistris Shoare, its like to be a busie time,
Shift for your selfe, come lads let vs be gone,
Royall King Richard must be waite vpon.
Well mistris Shoare, if you haue need of me,
You shall commaund me to the vttermost.
First let me die ere I do put my trust,
In any fliering Spaniel of you all.
Go Iockie, take downe all my hangings,
And quickly see my trunks be conuayde forth,
To mistris Blages, an Inne in Lombardstreete,
The Flower de Luce, good Iockie make some speed,
She, she must be my refuge in this néed.
Sée it done quickly Iockie.
Whickly quoth a? marrie heres a whicke chaunge indéed, sike whicke change did I nere sée before. Now dreame I, that ise be a verie pure fellow, and hardly ha any siller to drinke with a gude fellow. But what stand I tatling heere. I must goe do my maistres bidding, carrie all her stuffe and géere to mistres Blages, at the Flower de luce in Lombardstréet, whicke then dispatch.
Come hither Floud let me heare thy opinion,
Thou knowest I build vpon thy confidence,
And henest dealing in thy greatst affaires:
I haue receiued letters from the Duke,
Gloster I meane, Protector of the land,
Who giues in charge the Tower be preparde,
This night to entertaine the two young princes,
It is my utie to obey I know,
But manifold suspicion troubles me.
He is their vncle Sir, and in that sence,
Nature should warrant their securitie,
Next his deceased brother at his death,
To Richards care communitted both the realme,
And their protection: where humanitie
Stands as an Orator to plead aginst
All wrong suggestion of vnciuill thoughts:
Beside you are Lieutenant of the Tower,
Say there should be any hurt prefended,
The priuiledge of your authoritie
Pries into euerie corner of this house,
And what can then be done without your knowledge?
Thou sayest true Floud, though Richard be Protector,
When once they are within the Tower limits,
The charge of them (vnlesse he derogate)
From this my office, which was neuer siene,
In any kings time; doth belong to me:
And ere that Brackenburie will consent,
Or suffer wrong be done vnto these babes,
His sword, & all the strength within the Tower
Shall be opposoe against the proudest commer,
Be it to my soule as I intend to them.
And faith in me vnto this commonwealth,
And truth to men hath hitherto béene séene,
The Pylot that hath guided my liues course,
Though twas my fortune to be wrongd in both:
And therefore Sir neither the mighties frowne,
Nor any bribes shall winne me otherwise.
Tis well resolued: still me thinks they should
Be safe enough with vs, and yet I feare,
But now no more, it séemes they are at hand.
Vncle, what Gentleman is that?
It is (swéet Prince) Lieutenant of the Tower.
Sir we are come to be your guests to night:
I pray you tell me did you euer know,
Our father Edward lodgde within this place,
Neuer to lodge (my liege) but oftentunes,
On other occasions I haue seene him here.
Brother last night when you did send for me
My mother told me, hearing we should lodge
Within the Tower, that it was a prison,
And therefore marueld that my vncle Gloster,
Of all the houses for a Kings receipt,
Within this Citie, had appointed none,
Where you might keepe your court but onely here.
Vile brats, how they do descant on the Towre.
gentle Nephew they were ill abuisde,
To tutor you with such vnfitting tearmes,
(Who ere they were) against this royall mansion:
What if some part of it hath béene reseru'd,
To be a prison for Nobilitie?
Followes it therefore that it cannot serue,
To any other vse? Cesar himselfe
That built the same, within it kept his Court,
And many kings since him, the roomes are large,
The building stately, and for strength beside,
It is the safest and the surest hold you haue.
Vncle of Gloster, if you thinke it so,
Tis not for me to contradict your will,
We must allow it, and are well content.
On then a Gods name.
Yet before we go,
One question more with you M. Lieutenant,
We like you well, and but we do perceiue,
More comfort in your lookes, then in these walles,
For all our vncle Glosters friendly spéech,
Our hearts would be as heauie still as lead,
I pray you tell me, at which doore or gate
Was it my vncle Clarence did go in,
When he was sent a prisoner to this place?
At this my iedge: why sighs your maiestie?
He went in here that nere came back againe,
But as God hath decreede, so let it be,
Come brother shall we go?
Yes brother, any where with you.
Sir were it best I did attend the Duke,
Or stay his leysure till his backe returne?
I pray master Tirill stay without,
It is not good you should be seene by day
Within the Towre, especially at this time,
Ile tell his honour of your being here,
And you shall know his pleasure presently.
Euen so firmen would be glad by any means.
To raise themselues, that haue béene ouerthrowne,
By fortunes scorne, and I am one of them.
Here comes the Duke.
Catesbie, is this the man?
It is ift like your excellencie.
Come neere.
Thy name I heare is Tirill, is it not?
Iames Tirill is my name, my gracious Lord.
Welcome, it should appeare that thou hast bin
In better state then now it séemes thou art.
I haue bin by my fey my Lord, though now deprest,
And clouded ouer with aduersitie.
Be rulde by me, & then thou shalt rise againe,
And prooue more happie then thou euer wast,
There is but onely two degrees by which
It shall be néedfull for thee to ascend,
And that is faith and taciturnitie.
If euer I proue false vnto your grace,
Conuert your fauour to afflictions.
But canst thou too bee secret?
Trie me my Lord:
This tongue was neuer knowne to be a blab.
Thy countenance hath like a siluer key,
Opend the closet of my heart, read there,
If scholler like thou canst expound those lines,
Thou art the man ordainde to serue my turne.
So farre as my capacitie will reach,
The sense my Lord is this, this night you say,
The two young Princes both must suffer death.
Thou hast my meaning, wilt thou do it, speak?
It shall be done.
Inough, come follow me,
For thy direction, and for gold to fée,
Such as must ayde thee in their Tragedie.
Welcome good Iockie, what good newes bring you?
Marrie mastres my gude mastres gréets ye mastres, and praies ye mastres till dight vppe her Chamber, for sheel lig we ye to night mastres. And heres her catte skinne till she come.
Why how now loyterer? make ye no more haste?
When will my trunkes and all my stuffe be brought,
If you thus loyter, go, make hast withall.
Marie sall aye, gynne yéele be bud petient a while.
Now gentle mistris Blage the onely friend,
That fortune leaues mée to relie vpon,
My counsels Closet and my Towre of strength,
To whom for safetie I retire my selfe,
To be secure in these tempestuous times,
O smile on mee, and giue me gentle lookes,
If I be welcome, then with chéerefull heart,
And willing hand shew me true signes thereof.
Doubt ye of welcome Ladie to your friend?
Nay to your seruant, to your bradswoman,
To speake but truth, your bounties bond woman:
Use me, commaund me, call my house your owne,
And all I haue swéete Ladie at your will.
A way with titles, lay by courtly tearmes,
The Case is altred now the King is dead,
And with his life my fauouring friends are fled,
No Madam now, but as I was before,
Your faithfull kind companion, poore Iane Shoare.
I loude you then, and since, and euer shall,
You are the woman, though your fortunes fall,
You when my husbands lewde transgression
Of all our wealth had lost possession,
By forfaiture into his Highnes hands,
Got restitution of our goods and lands,
He fled, and died in France, to heale that harme,
You helpte me to three mannors in fée farme,
The worst of which cléers thréescore pound a yéere,
Haue I not reason then to hold ye déere?
Yes happe what will vntill my life do end,
You are and shall be my best beloued friend,
How if misfortune my folly do succéed.
Trust me true friends bide touch in time of need.
If want consume the wealth I had before.
My wealth is yours, and you shall spend my store.
But the Protector prosecutes his hate.
With me liue secret from the worlds debates
You will be wearie of so badde a guest.
Then let me neuer on the earth be blest.
Ah mistris Blage, you tender me such loue,
As all my sorrowes from my soule remoue,
And though my portion be not verie large,
Yet come I not to you to be a charge,
Coyne, plate, and fewels prizde at lowest rate,
I bring with me to maintaine my estate,
Worth twentie thousand pound, and my array,
If you suruiue to sée my dying day,
From you no pennie will I giue away.
And I thanke you that so my wealth increast,
Am worth I trow, tenne thousand pounds at least,
I thinke like two warme widowes we may liue,
Vntill good fortune two good husbands giue,
For surely mistris Shoare your husbandes dead,
When heard yee of him?
Neuer since he fledde.
O mistris Blage, now put you in my head
That kils my heart, why should I breath this ayre,
Whose lost good name no treasure can repaire?
Oh were he here with mee to lead his life,
Although hee neuer vsde mee as a wife,
But as a drudge to spurne mee with his ecte,
Yet should I thinke with him that life were swéete,
How can ye once conceit so base a thing,
That haue béene kist and cokerd by a king,
Wéepe not, you hurt your self by Gods blest mother,
Your husbands dead woman, thinke vpon another,
Let vs in to supper, drinke wine, cheere your heart,
And whilst I liue, be sure ile take your part.
Sir I assure ou tis my Lord Protectors warrant.
My friend, I haue conferd it with his letters,
And tis his hand indéed, ile not denie,
But blame mee not although I be precise,
In matters that so neerely do concerne mee.
My Lord Protector, sir I make no doubt,
Dare iustifie his warrant, though perhaps,
He doth not now acquaint you why he doth it.
I thinke sic theres no subiect now in England,
Will vrge his Grace, to shew what he dare doe,
Nor will I aske him why hee does it,
I would I might, to ridde mee of my doubt.
Why sir I thinke he néeds no president,
For what he does, I thinke his power is absolute inough.
I haue no power sir to examine it.
Nor will I do: obey your warrant,
Which I wil keepe for my securitie.
You shall do well in that sir.
Heres the keyes.
And yet I could wish my Lord Protector,
Had sent his warrāt thither by some other, aside.
I do not like their lookes I tell you true.
Nor I Flud I assure thee.
What does that slaue mutter to his master?
I heare him say hée does not like our lookes?
Why not our lookes sir?
Sirra we heare you.
I am glad you doe sir? all is one for that,
But if you did not hearken better now,
I neuer saw three faces in whose lookes,
Did euer sit more terror: or more death,
God blesse the Princes if it bee his will,
I do not like these villaines.
Zounds stab the villane, sirra do you brane vs?
I thats your comming, for you come to stab.
Stab him.
Nay then ile stabbe with thee.
Zbloud cut his throat.
Hold Gentle men I pray you.
Sir I am hurt, stabd in the arme,
This is not to be iustified my friends, I
To draw your weapons here within the Towre,
And by the law it is no lesse then death,
I cannot thinke the Duke will like of this,
I pray yee be content, too much is done.
He might haue held his peace then, and beene quiet Farewell, farewell.
Hell and damnation follow murtherers.
Goe Flud get thee some surgeon to looke to thy wound.
Hast no acquaintance with some skilfull surgeon?
Keepe thy wound close, and let it not take aire.
And for my owne part, I will not stay here.
Whither wilt thou go that I may send to thee.
To one mistris Blages, an Inne in Gracious stróete,
There you shall finde mee, or shall heare of mee.
Swéete Princely babes, farewell I feare you sore,
I doubt these eies shall neuer sée you more.
How does your Lordshippe?
Well good brother Richard, how does your selfe's
You told me your headaked.
Indeed it does, my Lord feele with your hands how hot it is.
Indeed you haue caught cold,
With sitting yester night to heare me read,
I pray thee go to bed, swéet Dick, poore little heart.
Doule giue me leaue to wait vpon your Lordship.
I had more need brother to wait on you:
For you are sicke, and so am not I.
O Lord, me thinks this going to our bed,
How like it is to going to our graue:
I pray thee do not speake of graues sweet heart,
Indeed thou frightest mee.
Why my Lord Brother, did not our Tutor teach vs,
That when at night we want vnto our bed,
We still should thinke we sent vnto our graue.
Yes thats true, ye we should do as euery christian ought.
To bee preparde to die at euery howre, but I am heauie.
Indeed and so am I.
Then let vs say our praiers and go to bed.
What, bléedes your Grace?
I two drops and no more.
God blesse vs both, and I desire no more,
Brother see here what Dauid saies, and so say
Lord in thee will I trust although I die.
Go lay ye downe, but neuer more to rise,
I haue put my hand into the foulest murder,
That euer was committed since the world,
The verie sencelesse stones here in the walles,
Breake out in teares but to behold the fact,
Me thinkes the bodies lying dead in graues,
Should rise and crie against s O harke, harke,
The Mandrakes shreeks are musicke to their cries,
The verie night is frighted, and the starres,
Do drop like torches, to behold this déed:
The verie Center of the earth doth shake,
Me thinks the Towre should rent downe from the toppe,
To let the heauen looke on this monstrous deede.
Stand further damned rogue, and come not néere me.
Nay stand thou further villaine, stand aside.
Are we not both damned for this curcd deed?
Thou art the witnesse that thou bearst the King
And what hearst thou?
It is too true, oh I am damnde indeed,
I am as deepe as you, although my hand
Did not the deede.
O villaine, art thou there?
A plague light on thee.
Curse not, a thousand plagues will light vpon vs all.
The priest here in the Towre will burie them,
Let vs away.
So, set him here a while, where is more aire,
How cheere you sir, alacke he doth beginne
To change his colour, where is mistris Shoare?
Gone to her Closet for a precious Balme,
The same (she said) King Edward vsde himselfe.
Alacke I feare héele die before stée come.
Ranne quickly for some Rosa-solis, faint not sir,
Be of good comfort, come good mistris Shoare,
What haue you there?
Stand by and giue me leaue.
Unhappie me to lodge him in my house.
I warrant you woman, be not so afraid,
If not this bloud-stone hangdc about his necke,
This balme will stanch it by the helpe of God:
Lift vp his arme whilst I do bath his wound,
The signe belike was here when he was hurt,
Or else some principal and chiefe veine is pierst.
How euer sure the surgeon was a knaue,
That lookt no better to him at the first.
Blame him not mistris Blage, the best of them
In such a case as this, may bée to séeke.
Now God be blessed, sée the crimson bloud,
That was precipitate, and falling downe
Into his arme, retires into his face,
How fare you sir? how do you féele your selfe?
Oh wherfore haue you wakt me from my sleepe?
And broke the quiet slumber I was in,
Me thought I sate in such a pleasant place,
So full of all delight as neuer eie
Beheld, nor heart of man could comprehend,
If you had let me go I felt no paine,
But being now reuok't my griefe renewes.
Giue him some Rosa-solis mistris Blage,
And that will like wise animate the sprites,
And send alacritie vnto the heart,
That hath bin strugling with the pangs of death.
Here sir drinke this, you néed not feare it sir,
It is no hurt, sée I will be your taster,
Then drinke I pray you.
Now fellowes raise hi body from the chair
And gently let him walke a turne or two.
Good sooth mistris Shoare, I did not thinke till now
You had béene such a cunning skilde Phisitian.
Oh mistris Blage, though I must néeds confesse,
It would haue béene more welcome to my soule,
If I had died and beene remoude at last,
From the confused troubles of this world,
Whereof I haue sustained no meane waight,
Then lingring here be made a packhorse still
Of torments, in comparison of which
Death is but as the pricking of a thorne,
Yet I do thanke you for your taken paines,
And would to God I could requite your loue.
Sir I did you little good, what was done
Ascribe the benefit and praise thereof
Unto this Gentlewoman, kind mistris Shoare,
Who next to God preserude your féeble life.
How? Mistris Shoare, good friends let go your hold,
My strength is now sufficient of it selfe.
Oh is it she that still prolongs my wo?
Was it ordainde not onely at the first,
She should be my destruction, but now twise,
When gracious destinies had brought about,
To ende this wearie pilgrimage of mine,
Must she and none but she preuent that good,
And stop my entrance to eternall blisse?
Oh lasting plague, oh endlesse corrasiue,
It now repents me double that I scap'te,
Since lifes made death, and lifes author hate.
Sir take my counsell and sit downe againe,
It is not good to be so bold of foot,
Vpon the sudden till you haue more strength.
Mistris I thanke you, and I care not much
If I be rulde by you.
Oh God that she should pittie me vnknowne,
That knowing me by her was ouerthrowne,
Or ignorantly she should regard this smart,
That heretofore sparde not to stab my heart.
By your leaue mistris Blague, I am somewhat bold,
Is there not a Gentleman within your house,
Cald M. Floud, came hither hurt last night?
Is his name Floud, I knew it not till now,
But here he is, and well recouered,
Thanks to this Gentlewoman mistris Shoare.
Pardon me mistris Shoare, I saw you not,
And trust me I am sorie at the heart,
So good a creature as your selfe hath béene,
Should be so vilely dealt with as you are,
I momise you the world laments your case.
How mean you sir? I vnderstand you not?
Lament my case, for what? for Edwards death?
I know that I haue lost a gracious friend,
But that is not to be remedied now.
No mistris Shoare, it is for Richards hate,
That too much enuies your prosperitie.
I know he loues me not and for that cause,
I haue withdrawne me wholly from the court.
You haue not séene the Proclamation then?
The proclamation? no, what proclamation?
Oh mistris Shoare, the king in euery stréet
Of London, and in euerie borough towne,
Throughout this land hath publikely proclaimd,
On paine of death that none shal barbour you,
Or giue you food or cloathes to kéep you warme,
But hauing first done shamefull penance here,
You shall be then thrust forth the Citie gates,
Into the naked cold forsaken field,
I fable not, I would to God I did,
Sée, heres the manner of it put in print,
Tis to be sold in euerie Stationers shop,
Besides a number of them clapt on poasts.
Where people crowding as they read your fall,
Some murmure, and some sigh, but most of them,
Haue their relenting eies euen big with teares.
Gods wil be done, I know my sinne is great,
And he that is omnipotent and iust,
Cannot but must reward me heauily.
It grieues me mistris Shoare, it was my chance,
To be the first reporter of this newes.
Let it not grieue, I must haue heard of it,
And now as good, as at another time.
I pray yee mistris Blage haue care of Floud,
And what his charge is I will sée you paide,
Farewell to all that still shall be my song,
Let men impose vpon me nere such wrong,
And this extremitie shall seeme the lesse,
In that I haue a friend to leane vnto,
Sweet mistris Blage, there were vpon the earth,
No comfort left for miserable Iane,
But that I do presume vpon your loue,
I know though tyrant Richard had set downe,
A greater penaltie then is proclaimd,
Which cannot wel be thought, yet in your house,
I should haue succour and reliefe beside.
What, and so I should be a traitor, should I?
Is that the care you haue of me and mine?
I thanke you truly, no theres no such matter,
I loue you well, but loue my selfe better:
As long as you were held a true subiect,
I made account of you accordingly,
But being otherwise, I do reiect you,
And will not cherish my kings enemie:
You know the danger of the Proclamation:
I would to God you would depart my house.
When was it euer éen Iane Shoare was false
Eyther vnto her countrey, or her king?
And therefore tis not well good mistris Blage,
That you vpbraid me with a traitors name.
I, but you haue béene a wicked liuer,
And now you see what tis to be vnchaste,
You should haue kept you your honest husband:
T was neuer other like but that such filthinesse,
Would haue a foule and detestable end.
Time was that you did tell me otherwise,
And studied how to set a glosse on that
Which now you say is vgly and deformde.
I told you then as then the time did serue,
And more indéed to trie your disposition,
Then any way to incourage you to sinne:
But when I say you were ambitious,
And saintly stood on tearmes of modestie,
I left you to your owne arbiterment:
Can you denie it was not so? how say you?
We will not mistris Blage dispute of that,
But now in charitie and womanhood,
Let me find fauour if it be but this,
That in some barne or stable I may shrowde.
Till otherwise I be prouided for.
I pray you do not vrge me mistris Shoare.
I will not haue my house indangered so.
Oh you did promise I should neuer want,
And that your house was mine, & swore the same,
To keepe your oath be then compassionate.
So you did sweare you would be true to Shore,
But you were not so good as your word,
My oathes disherit which by the kings commaund.
Yet let me haue those iewels and that money,
Which is within my trunkes.
I know of none:
If there be any, ile be so bold,
As kéepe it for your diet and your mans,
It is no little charge I haue beene at,
To de your daintie tooth, since you came hither,
Beside houseroome, I am sure is somwhat worth.
Ah Iane I cannot chuse but pittie thee,
Heres the first step to thy déepe miserie.
Oh that my graue had thē bin made my house,
When either first I went vnto the Court,
Or from the court returnd vnto this place.
How now, what are you? it had béen maners
You should haue knockt before you had come in.
We are the Bishops Parators my friend,
And mistris Shoare our errand is to you.
This day it is commanded by the King,
You must be stript out of your rich attire,
And in a white shéete go from Temple barre,
Untill you come to Algate, bare footed,
Your haire about your eares, and in your hand,
A burning taper, therefore go with vs.
Euen when and whither you wil, and would to God,
The King as soone could ridde my soule of sinne,
As he may stript my bodie of these ragges.
That would be soone enough, but come away,
And mistris Blage youle hardly answere it,
When it is knowne we found her in your house.
It séemes you do not feare to harbour her.
I harbour her? out on her strumpet queane,
She prest vpon me where I would or no:
Ile see her hangde ere I will harbour her.
So now her iewels and her gold is mine,
And I am made at least foure thousand pound,
Wealthier by this match then I was before:
And what can be obiected for the same,
That once I lou'de her: well perhaps I did,
And women all are gouernd by the Moone,
But now I am of another humour,
Which is you know a planet that will change.
Now M. Sheriffe of London do your office,
Attach this rebell to his Maiestie,
And hauing stript her to her petticoate,
Turne her out a dores, with this condition,
That no man harbour her, that durst presume
To harbour that lewde curtizan Shoares wife,
Against the strait commandement of the King.
I beséech you sir.
Away with her I say.
The while le seaze vpon her house & goods,
Which wholly are confiscate to the King.
Oh what haue I beheld, were I as young,
As when I came to London to be prentice,
This pageant were sufficient to instruct,
And teach me euer after to be wise.
First haue I séene desert of wantonnesse,
And breach of wedlocke: then of flatterie,
Next of dissembilng loue, and last of all,
The ruine of base catching auarice:
But poore Iane Shore in that I lou'de thee once,
And ws thy husband I must pittie, thee,
The sparkes of olde affection long agoe,
vp in ashes of displeasure kindle,
And in this furnace of aduersitie,
The world shall see a husbands loyaltie.
Spuria vitulamina non agent radices altas.
Bastardly slips haue alwaies slender grouth.
Ah Shaw, this was the cursed theame,
That at Pauls crosse thou madest thy sermon of,
To proue the lawfull issue of thy King,
Got out of wedlocke, illegittimate.
Ah Duke of Gloster this didst thou procure.
Did Richard (villaine) no it was thy fault,
Thou wouldst be wonne to such a damned déed,
Which now to think on makes my soule to bléed.
Ah Frier Anselme, sleepe among the blest,
Thy propheste thus falsely did I wrest.
Thou didst, and be thou damnde therefore,
Nere come thy soule where blessednesse abides,
Didst thou not know the letter G. was Gloster?
Anselme I did.
Why then didst thou affirme,
That it was meant by George the duke of Clarēce
That honourable harmelesse Gentleman,
Whose thoughts all innocent as any child,
Yet came through thée to such a lucklesse death.
I was inforced by the Duke of Gloster.
Enforst saist thou? wouldst yu then be enforst,
Being a man of thy profession,
To sinne so vilely, and with thine owne mouth,
To damne thy soule? No thou wast not enforc't,
But gaine and hope of high promotion
Hyrde thée thereto, say was it so or no?
It did, it did.
Why then record in thy black hellish thoughts,
How many mischiefes haue ensude hereon?
First wronged Clarence drowned in the Towre,
Next, Edwards children murdred in the Towre:
This day at Pomfret noble Gentlemen,
Thrée the Quéenes kinred, lose their harmelesse heads.
Thinkst thou that here this floud of mischiefe
No villaine, many are markt to the blocke,
And they the nearest, thinke them furthest off,
Euen Buckingham, creator of that king,
Shall he to woe and wretched ending bring.
All this (accursed man) hath come by thee,
And thy false wresting of my prophecie,
For Englands good disclosed to thy trust,
And so it had béene, hadst thou proued iust.
But thou and euerie one that had a hand,
In that most wofull murther of the Princes,
To satall ends you are appointed all.
Here in thy studie shalt thou sterue thy selfe,
And from this houre not taste one bit of foode,
The rest shall after follow on a row,
To all their deaths, vengeance will not be slow.
Where is M. Doctor Shaw?
Here friend, what is thy will with me?
K. Richard praies yee to come to him strait.
For he would be consest.
I cannot come, I pray thée take that Frier,
For he can do it better farre then I.
A Frier M. Doctor I sée none.
Doest thou not? no, thy vntainted soule
Cannot discerne the horrors that I do.
Shaw go with him, & tell that tyrant Richard,
He hath but thrée yeares limited for life,
And then a shamefull death takes hold on him,
That done, returne, and in thy studie end
Thy loathed life that didst vs all offend,
With all my heart, would it were ended now,
So it were done, I care not where nor how.
Now mistris Shoare, here our commissionends,
Put off your roabe of shame, for this is Algate,
Whither it was appointed we should bring you,
My roabe of shame? Oh that so soule a name
Should be applied vnto so faire a garment,
Which is no more to bée condemnde of shame,
Then snow of putrefaction is deserude,
To couer an infectious heape of dung,
My roabe of shame, but not my shame put off,
For that sits branded on my forehead still,
And therefore in derision was I wrapt,
In this white Sheete: and in derision bore
This burning taper, to expresse my folly,
That hauing light of reason to direct mee,
Delighted yet in by-waies of darke error.
Wel mistris Shoare, I hope you grudge not vs,
We she wde you all the fauour poore men could.
Oh God forbid: I know the Kings Edia
Set you a worke, and not your owne desires.
I truly mistris, and for our parts,
We could be well content twere otherwise,
But that the lawes seuere, and so we leaue you.
Farewell vnto you both: and London too,
Farewell to thee, where first I was inticde,
That scandalizde thy dignitie with shame,
But now thou hast returnde me treble blame,
My tongue that gaue consent inioynde to beg.
Mine eies adiudgde to hourely laments,
Mine armes for their imbracings, catch the aire,
And these quicke nimble féet that were so readie
To step into a kings for bidden bed,
London thy ints haue punisht for their pride,
And thou hast drunke their bloud for thy reuenge,
What now auailes to thinke what I haue béene,
Then welcome nakednesse and pouertie,
Welcome contempt, welcome you barren fields,
Welcome the lacke of meat, and lacke of friends,
And wretched Iane, according to thy state,
Sit here, sit here, and lower if might be:
All things that breath in their extremitie,
Haue some recourse of succour, thou hast none,
The child offended flies vnto the mother,
The Soldiour strucke, retires vnto his Captain,
The fish distressed, slides into the riuer,
Birds of the ayre do flie vnto their dammes,
And vnderneath their wings are quickly shrouded
Nay, beat the spanniel, & his master mones him,
But I haue neither where to shroud my selfe,
Nor any one to make my mone vnto,
Come patience then, and though my bodie pine,
Make then a banquet to refresh my soule,
Let hearts déepe throbbing sighs be all my bread,
My drink salt tears, my guests repentāt thoughts
That who so knew me, and doth sée me now,
May shunne by me the breach of wedlockes vow.
Oh God how full of dangers growes these til
And no assurance séene in any state,
No man can say that hee is maister now,
Of any thing is his, such is the tide
Of sharpe disturbance running through the land,
I haue giuen ouer my office in the Towre,
Because I cannot brooke their vile complots,
Nor smoother such outragious villanies:
But mistris Shoare, to be so basely wrongde,
And vildly vsde, that hath so well deserude,
It doth afflict me in the verie soule,
She sau'de my kinsman, Harrie Stranguidge life,
Threfore in dutie am I bound to her,
To do what good I way, though law forbid,
Sée where she sits, God comfort thée good soule,
First take that to reléeue thy bodie with,
And next receiue this booke, wherein is foode,
Manna of heauen to refresh thy soule:
These holy meditations mistris Shoare,
Will yeeld much comfort in this miserie,
Whereon contemplate still, and neuer linne,
That God may be vnmindfull of thy sinne.
Master Lieutenant, in my hart I thank ye,
For this kind comfort to a wretched soule:
Welcome wéet prayer-booke, food of my life,
The soueraigne balme for my sicke conscience:
Thou shalt be my soules pleasure and delight,
To wipe my sinnes out of Ichouacs sight.
B. Do so good mistris Shoare, now I must leaue ye,
Because some other businesse cals me hence,
And God I pray regard your penitence.
Farewell sir Robert, and for this good to mée,
The God of heauen bee mindfull still of thee.
This way she went, and cannot be far off,
For but euen now I met the officers,
That were attendant on her in her penance,
Yonder she sits, now then Aire shew thy selfe,
Thankfull to her, that sometime sau'de thy life,
When Law had made thée subiect to base death,
Giue her thy purse, for here comes some Ladie,
Stand by a while, for feare thou be discouered.
What mistris Shoare, King Edwards concubin,
Set on a mole-hill, oh disparagement.
A throne were tter for your Ladiship,
Fie will you ubber these faire cheekes with feares?
Or sit so solitarie, wheres all your seruants?
Where is your gowne of silke, your periwigs,
Your fine rebaoes, and your costly iewels,
What not so much as a shooe vpon your foote,
Nay then I see the world goes hard with whoores.
The villaine slaue gibes at her miserie.
Now whether is it better to be in court,
And there to beg a licence of the King,
For transportation of commodities,
Then here to sit forsaken as thou dost,
I thinke vpon condition Edward liude,
And thou were still in fauour as before,
Thou woulds not say that Rufford had deserude,
To haue his eares rent for a worser suite,
Then licence to shippe ouer corne and leade,
What not a word, faith wench ile tell thee what,
If thou dost thinke thy olde trade out of date,
Go learne to play the bawde another while.
Jnbume wretch, why dost thou scorne her so,
And vere her grieued soule with bitter taunts,
Because I will, shee is a curtisan,
And one abhorred of the world for lust.
If all thy faultes were in thy forehead writ,
Perhaps thou wouldst thy selfe appeare no lesse,
But much more horrible then she doth now.
You are no iudge of mine sir.
Why nor thou of her.
The world hath iudgde, and found her guilty,
And tis the Kings commaund she be held odious.
The King of heauen commandeth otherwise,
And if thou b not willing to relieue her,
Let it suffize thou seest her miserable,
And studie not to amplifie her griefe.
What other wofull spectacle comes here?
Mistris take that and spend it for my sake.
Oh I am pincht with more thē common want,
Where shall I find reliefe? Good Gentleman,
Pittie a wretched woman like to starue,
And I will pray for yee. One halfepennie
For Christs sake, to comfort me withall.
What mistris Blage, ist you? no maruaile sure,
But you should be relieude, a halfepenie quotha?
I marie sir, and so be hangde my selfe,
Not I, this Gentleman may if he please,
Get you to your companion mistris Shoare,
And then there is a paire of queanes wellmet,
Now I bethinke mee, ile go to the King,
And tell him that some will relieue Shoares wife,
Except some officer there be appointed,
That carefully regards it be not so.
Thereof my selfe will I make offer to him,
Which questionlesse hee cannot but accept,
So shall I stil pursue Shoares wife with hate,
That scornd mée in her high whoores estate.
Good Gentleman bestow your charitie,
One single halfepennie to helpe my neede.
Not one, were I the master of a mint,
What? succour thee that didst betray thy friend?
See where she sits, whom thou didst scorne indeed,
And therefore rightly art thou scornde againe:
Thou thoughtst to beene riched with her goods,
But thou hast now lost both thy owne and hers,
And for my part, knew It would saue thy life,
Thou shouldst not get so much as a crum of bread
Packe counterfeit, packe a way dissembling drab.
Oh miserie, but shall I stay to looke
Her in her face, whom I so much haue wrongde?
Yes mistris Blage, I fréely pardon you,
You haue done me no wrong, come sit by mee:
Twas so in wealth, wy not in pouertie?
Oh willingly if yo u can brooke her presence,
Whom you haue great er reason to despise.
Why woman, Ric hard that hath banisht me,
And séekes my ruine (cuselesse though it bee)
Do I in heart pray for, and will do still,
Come thou & share wit h me what God hath sent,
A stranger gaue it mee, and part thereof
I do as fréely now bestow on you.
I thanke you mistris Shoare, this courtesie
Renewes the griefe of my inconstancie.
Yonder shee sits how like a withered tree,
That is in winter leauelesse and bereft
Of liuely sappe, sits she poore abic soule,
How much vnlike the woman is sh now,
She was but yesterday: so short and brittle
Is this worlds happines: but who is that.
False mistris Blage? how canst thou brook hir Iane?
I thou wast alwaies mild and pittifull,
Oh hadst thon béene as chast, we had béene blest,
But now no more of that: she shall not starue,
So long as this, and such as this may serue,
Here mistris Shoare, féed on these homely Cates,
And there is wine to drinke them downe withal.
Good sir your name, that pities poore Ia. Shoare
That in my praiers I may remember you.
No matter for my name, I am a friend,
That loues you well, so farewell mistiris Shoare,
When that is spent, I vow to bring you more.
Gods blessing be your guide where ere you go,
Thus mistris Blage you sée idst our woe,
For all the world can doe, God sends reliefe,
And will not yet wée peris in our griefe,
Come let vs step into some secret place.
Tis not amisse, if you be so content,
For here the fieldes too open & frequent.
Where vndisturbde we may partake this grace.
What is she gone so soone? alacke poore Iane,
How I compassionate thy wofull case?
Whereas we liude togther man and wife,
Oft on an humble stoole by the fire side,
Sate she contented, when as my high heat,
Would chid her for it. But what would she saye
Husband we both must lower sit one day,
When I dare sweare thee neuer dreamd of this,
But see good God what prophesying is.
This is King Richards hand, I know it well,
And this of thine is iustly counterfeit,
As hee himselfe would sweare it were ou n.
The kings hand more of that.
Why cue letter, euerie little ash,
In all respectes alike, how may I vse,
My transportation of my cozne and hides,
Without the danger of forbidding lawe,
And so I would haue done in Edwards daies,
But that good ris Shoare did please to crosse mée,
But marke how now I will requite her for it.
I moude my sute, and plainely tolde the King,
Som would reliee her, if no man had charge,
To sée seucrcly to the contrarie.
Forth with his Grace appointed mee the man,
And gaue mee officers to waite vpon mee,
Which will so countenance thy cunning worke,
As I shall no way be suspected in it: how saist thou Fogge?
It will do well indéed:
But good sir haue a care in any case,
For else you know what barme may come thereon.
A care saist thou? why man, I will not trust
My house, my strongest locks, nor any place,
But mine owne bosome, there will I kéepe it still,
If I miscarrie, so doth it with mee.
Are yee so cunning sir, I say no more,
Iane Shoare or I may quittance you for this.
Well Fogge I haue contented thee,
Thou maist be gone, I must about my charge,
To sée that none reléeue Shoares wife with ought.
Come on good fellowes, you that must atcend,
King Richards seruice vnder my commaund,
Your charge is to be verie vigilant,
Ouer that strumpet whom they call Shoares wife:
If any traitour giue her but a mite,
A draught of water, or a crust of bread,
Or any other foode what ere it bee,
Lay hold on him, for it is present death,
By good King Richards proclamation,
This is her haunt, here stand I Sentincll,
Kéepe you vnséene, and aide mee when I call.
Now must I vnder colour of playing at bowles, help till relieue my gude maistres, maistres Shoare. Come, Ieffrey, wee will play fiue vp for this bottle of Ale, and yonder gude pure woman shall keepe the stakes, and this cheese shall be the measter.
Here is a villaine, that wil not relieue her,
But yet héele loose he bowles, that way to helpe her,
Apprehend him fellowes when I bid ye:
Although his mate be gone, he shal pay for it.
Take him, and let the Beadles whip him well.
Heare ye sir, shall they be whipt and hangd that gfu to the pure, then they shall bee damne that take fro the pure.
Oh yonder sits the swéet forsaken soule,
To whom for euer I stand déeply bound:
She sau'de my life, then Aire helpe to saue hers.
Whither go ye sir?
You come to giue this strumpet some reliefe.
She did more good then euer thou canst doe,
And if thou wilt not pittie her thy selfe,
Giue others leaue, by dutie bound thereto:
Here mistris Shoare, take this, and would to God
It were so much as my poore heart could wish.
Who is it that thus pitties my poore wife?
Ti M. Aire, Gods blessing on him for it.
Darest thou do so Aire?
Rufford I dare do more:
Here is my ring, it waies an ounce of Gold,
And take my cloake to keepe yée from the cold.
Thou art a traitor Aire.
Rufford, thou art a villaine so to call me.
Lay hold on him, attach him officers.
Rufford, e answere thine arrest with this.
All this contending sir will not auaile,
This treason will be rated at thy life.
Life is too little for her sake that sau'de it.
Is he a traitour sir, for doing good?
God saue the King, a true heart meanes no ill.
I trust he hath reclaimde his arpe edict,
And will not that his poorest subiect perish,
And so perswaded I my selfe will doe,
That which both loue and nature binds me to.
I cnnot giue her as she well deserues.
For she hath lost a greater benefite.
take that purse.
kte away.
You shall not sir, for I will answere it,
Before the King if you inforce it so.
It must be so, you shall vnto the King.
You will be he will first repent the thing:
Come M. Aire, ile beare ye companie,
Which wise men doth say ease calamitie,
If griee to spéech frée passage could afford,
Or we I had a fitting word,
I migh complaine, or if my flouds of teares,
Could moue remorse of minds, or pearce dul ears,
Or wash away my cares, or cleanse my crime:
With words & teares I would be waile the time.
But it is bootlesse, why liue I to see,
All those despised that do pittie me.
Despisde? alas, destroyed, and led to death,
That gaue me almes here to prolong my breath.
Faire Dames behold, let my example proue,
There is no loue like to a husbands loue.
Now tell vs Rufford which of these it is,
That in the heat of his vpheaued spléene,
Contemnes our crowne, disdaines our dignitie,
And armes himselfe against authoritie.
Both haue offended my dread soueraigne,
Though not alike, yet both faults capitall,
These les declare what, when, & where it was.
Which is that Aire?
This young man my Liege.
I thought it was some hot distempred blood,
That fierd his gyddie braine with businesse:
Is thy name Aire?
It is.
This paper saies so.
Perish may he that made that paper speak.
Ha? Dost thou wish confusion vnto vs?
This paper is the Organe of our power,
And shall pronounce thy condemnation,
We make it speake thy treasons to thy face,
And thy malicious tongue speakes treasn still.
Relieu'st thou Shoares wife in contempt of vs?
No, but her iust desert,
She sau'de my life, which I had forfeited,
Whereby my goods and life she meited.
And thou shalt pay it in the selfe same place,
Where thou this man our Officer, didst out face,
And scorndst vs saying if we stoode by,
Thou wouldst relieue her.
I do not denie,
For want of food her breath was néere expirde,
I gaue her meanes to buy it vndesirde,
And rather chuse to die for charitie,
Then liue condemned of ingratitude.
Your good dtion brings you to y• gallws,
He hath his sentence, Rufford sée him gd.
Now sir your name?
Is it not written there?
Heres Mathew Floud.
That is his name my Lord.
Is thy name Floud?
So M. Rufford sates.
Floud and Aire? the elements conspire,
In ayre and water to confound our power:
Didst thou relieue that hateful wretch Shoares wife?
I did relieue that wofull wretch Shoares wife.
Thou séemst a man well staid and temperate,
Durst thou infringe our proclamation?
I did not breake it.
Yes, and added more,
That you would answere it before the King.
And added more, you would repent the thing.
Who, I? his Highnes knowes my innocence,
And readie seruice with my goods and life,
Answere thy treasons to his maiestie.
What canst thou say Floud why thou shouldst not die?
Nothing, for I am mortall and must die,
When my time comes, but that I thinkes not yet,
Although (God knowes) ech houre I wish it were,
So full of dolor is my wearje life:
Now say I this, that I do know the man,
Which doth abette that traiterous libeller,
Who did compose & spread that slauderous rime,
Which scandals you, and doth abuse the time.
What libeller? another Collingborne?
That wrote: The Cat, the Rat, and Louell our Dog,
Do rule all England vnder a Hog.
Canst thou repeat it Floud?
I thinke I can if you commaund me so.
We do commaund thee.
In this sort it goes.
The crooke bakt Boare the way hath found,
To roote our Roses from our ground,
Both flower and bud will he confound,
Till King of beasts the swine be crownde:
And then the Dog, the Cat, and Rat,
Shall in his trough feed and be fat.
quoth M. Fogge, chiefe secretarie and counsellor to M. Rufford.
How saist thou Floud, doth Rufford this?
He is a traitor if he do my Lord.
I it? dread Lord I aske no grace,
If I be guiltie of this libelling,
Vouchsafe me iustice as you are my Prince,
Against this traitor that accuseth me.
What iustice crau'st thou? I will combat thée,
In signe whereof I do vnbutton me,
And in my shirt my chalenge will maintaine,
Thou cal'st me traitor, I will proue thee one,
Open thy bosome like me if thou darest?
I will not be so rude before his grace.
Thou wilt not ope the packe of thy disgrace.
Because thy doublets stuft with traiterous libels.
Catesbie teare off the buttons from his breast.
What findst thou there?
Your highnes hand and seale,
For transportation of Hides, Corne and Lead.
Traitor, did I signe that commission?
O pardon me most royall King.
Pardon? to counterfeit my hand and seale?
Haue I bestowed such loue, such countenance?
Such trust on thee, and such authoritie,
To haue my hand and signet counterfet?
To carrie Corne the food of all the land,
And Lead, which after might annoy the land,
And Hides, whose leather must relieue the land,
To strangers enemies vnto the land:
Didst thou so néerely connterfet my hand?
Not I my liege, but Fogge the Atturney.
Away with him Louell and Catesbie, go,
the Sheriffes of London presently,
To see hm drawne, and hango, and quartered,
Let them not drinke before they see him dead.
Hast you againe.
Well Floud thou art my death,
I might haue liudet' haue séene thee lose thy head.
Thou hast but ustice for thy crueltie,
Against the guiltlesse soules in miserie,
I aske no fauur if I merit death.
Crast thou no fauour? then I tell thee Floud,
Thou art a traitor reaking our edict,
By succouring that traitrous quean Shoares wife.
And thou shalt die.
If I haue broke the law.
If ? didst thou not giue her thy purse?
And dst thou not maintaine the deed?
I do, if it be death to the relenting heart,
Of a kind husband, wronged by a King,
To his seduced wife,
Whom all the world must suffer by commaund,
To pine and perish for the want of food:
If it be treason for her husband then,
In the deare bowels of his former loue,
To burie his owne wrong and her misdéed,
And giue her meat whom he was wont to féede,
Then Shoare must die, for Floud is not my name,
Though once I tooke it to conceale my shame,
Pittic permits not iniured Shoare passe by,
And see his once loude wife with famine die.
Louell & Catesbie, this is Shoare indéed,
We confesse that thou hast pledge,
And art excepted in our Proclamation,
Because thou art her husband whom it concerns,
And thou maist lawfully relieue thy wife,
Upon condition thou forgiue her fault,
Take her againe, and vse her as before,
Hazard new hornes, how sasist thou, wilt thou Shoare?
If any but your Grace should so vpbraid,
Such rude reproch should roughly be repaid.
Suppose for treason that she lay condemnde,
Might I not séede her till her houre of death,
And yet my selfe no traitor for it?
Thou mightste.
And why not now (O pardon me dread lord)
When she hath had both punishment and shame
Sufficient, since a King did cause her blame,
May I not giue her food to saue her life,
Yet neuer take and vse her as my wife?
Except thou take her home againe to thée,
Thou art a stranger, and it shall not be,
For if thou do, expect what doth belong.
I neuer can forget so great a wrong.
Then neuer féede her whom thou canst not loue.
My charitie doth that compassion moue.
Moue vs no more, Louell let Aire be hangde,
Just in the place where he relicud Shoares wife:
Shoare hath his pardon for this first offence.
The name of husband pleads his innocence,
Away with them: Catesbie come you with v?
Good mistris Shoare, not with your teares,
But let me go in quiet to mine end.
Alas poore soule,
Was neuer innocent thus put to death.
The mores my ioy, that I am innocent,
My death is the lesse grieuous, I am so.
Ah M. Aire the time hath béene ere now,
When I haue kneld to Edward on my knees,
And begd for him, that now doth make me beg.
I haue giuen him, when he hath begd of me,
Though he forbids to giue me when I beg,
I haue ere now relieued him and his,
Though he and his denie reliefe to me:
Had I béene enuious then, as Richard now,
I had not staru'd, nor Edwards sons bin murdred,
Nor Richard liu'de to put you now to death.
The more Iane is thy vertue and his sinne.
Come sir dispatch.
Dispatch say you? dispatch you may it call,
He cannot stay when death dispatcheth all.
Lord, is my sinne so horrible and grieuous,
That I should now become a murderer?
I haue sau'de the life of many a man condemnd,
But neuer was the death of man before.
That any man thus for my sake should die,
Afflicts me more then all my miserie.
Iane be content,
I am as much indebted vnto thee,
As vnto nature, I owed thee a life,
When it was forfeit vnto death by law,
Thou bgdst it of the king and gau'st it me:
This house of flesh wherein this soule doth dwel,
Is thine, and thou art Landladie of it,
And this poore life a Tenant but at pleasure,
It neuer came to pay the rent till now,
But hath runne in arerage all this while,
And now for verie shame comes to discharge it,
When death distraines for what is but thy due,
I had not ought thée so much as I doe,
But by thy onely mercie to preserue it,
Untill I loose it for my charitie.
Thou giu'st me more then euer I can pay,
Then do thy pleasure executioner,
And now farewell kind vertuous mistris Shoare,
In heauen wéele méete againe, in earth no more.
Farewel, farewel, thou for thy almes dost die.
And I must end here starude in miserie,
In life my friend, in death ile not forsake thee,
Thou goest to heauen, I hope to ouertake thee.
O world what art thou? man, euen from his birth
Findes nothing else but miserie on earth,
Thou neuer (world) scorn'dst mée so much before,
But I (vaine world) do hate thee ten times more.
I am glad I féele approaching death so nie,
World thou hatest mée, I thée vaine world defie.
I pray yee yet good master officers,
Do but this kindnesse to poore wretched soules,
As let vs haue the buriall of our friend,
It is but so much labour saude for you.
There take his body, bury it where you wil,
So it be quickly done out of the way.
Whats he that begs the buriall of my friend,
And hath so oftentimes relieued mee?
Ah gentle sir, to comfort my sad woe,
Let mee that good kind man of mercie know.
Ah Iane, now there is none but thou and I
Looke on mee well, knowest thou thy Ma. Shoare?
My Husband? then breake and liue no more.
Ah my déere Iane, comfort thy heauie soule,
Go not away so soone, a little stay,
A little, little while, that thou and I,
Like man and wife may here together die,
How can I looke vpon my husbands face,
That shamde my self, and wrought his déep disgrace
Iane be content, our woes are now alike,
With one selfe rod thou séest God d vs strike,
If for thy , ile pray to heauen for thee,
And if for mine, do thou as much for mee.
Ah Shoare, ist possible thou canst forgine mée?
Yes Iane, I doc.
I cannot hope thou wilt:
My faults so great that I cannot expect it.
I faith I doe, as fréely from my soule,
As at Gods hands I hope to be forgiuen.
Then God reward thée, for we now must part,
I féele cold death doth seize vpon my heart.
And hee is come to mee, here he lies,
I féele him readie to close vp mine eies,
Lend mée thy hand to burie this our friend,
And then we both will hasten to our end.
sit thou there, here I my place will haue,
Giue mée thy hand, thus wée embrace our graue,
Ah Iane, he that the depth of woe will see,
Let him but now behold our miserie:
But be content, this is the best of al,
Lower then now we are, wée cannot fall.
Ah, I am faint, how happie Airc art thou,
Not féeling that which doth afflict vs now?
Oh happie graue, to vs this comfort giuing,
Here lics two liuing dead, here one dead liuing,
Here for his sake, loe this we doe for thee,
Thou lookste for one, and art possst of thrée.
Oh dying marriage, o, swéet married death
Thou graue which only shouldst part faithfull friends,
Bringst vs togither, and dast iyne our hnds,
Oh ing death, euen in this ding life,
Yet ere I go, once Mathew kisse thy wife.
Ah my swéet Iane, farewel, farewel poore soule,
Now tyrant Richard doo the worst thou canst,
She doth defie thée, oh vnconstant world,
Here lies a true Anatome of thee,
A King had all my ioy, that her inioyde,
And by a King againe was destroyde:
All ages of my kingly wes shall tell,
Once more inconstant world farewell, farewell.
Sirs if the King, or else the Duke of Buckingham
Do send for me, I will attend them straight,
But what are these here openly lie dead,
Oh God, the one is mistris Shoare, & this is Floud,
That was my man: the third is master Aire,
Who suffered death for his reléeuing her,
They shall not thus lie in the open way,
Lend me your hands, and heauie hearts withall,
At mine owne charge lie giue them buriall.
Most noble Lords, since it hath pleased you,
Beyend our expectation on yeut bounties,
T' mpale my temples with the Diademe.
How farre my quiet thoughts haue euer béene,
From this great ,
Heauen best can nesse: I am your King,
Long may I be so, to deserue your loue,
But I will be a seruant to you all,
Pray God my broken sléeps may giue you rest.
But onely that my bloud doth chalenge it,
Being your lawfull Prince by true succession,
I could haue wisht, with all my heart I could,
This maiestie had sitten on the browe
Of any other: so much do I affect a priuate life,
To spend my dates in contemplation.
But since that heauen and you will haue it so,
I take the crowue as méekely at your hands,
As free and pure from an ambitious thought,
As any new borne babe. Thus must thou Richard
Séeme as a saint to men in outward shew, aside.
Being a verie diuell in thy heart:
Thus must thou couer all thy villanies,
And kéepe them close from ouerlookers eyes.
My Soueraigne by the generall consent
Of all the Lords aud commons of the land,
I tender to your royall maiestie,
This princely Lady, the Lady Anne of Warwick
Iudged the onely worthiest of your loue,
To be your highnes bride, faire Englands Quéen
My royall Princely Cosin Buckingham,
I see you striue to blesse mee more and more,
Your bountie is so large and ample to mee,
You ouerflow my spirits with your great loue,
I willingly accept this vertuous Princesse,
And crowne her Angell beautie with my loue.
Then as the hand of your high parliament,
I giue her here vnto your maiestie.
Lord Louell I as heartily receiue her,
Welcome faire Queene.
And from the Lords & commons of your land
I giue the frée and voluntarie oath,
Of their allegeance to your maiesty.
As to their soueraigne and liege Lord and Ladie,
Richard the third, & beauteous Anne his Quéene,
The true and lawfull King & Quéene of England.
I doe accept it Catesbie, and returne,
Exchange of mutuall and partie loue.
Now Fogge too, that in your traiterous Libels,
Besides the counterfeiting of our hand and seale
For Rufford, though so great a fault deserud
To suffer death, as hee alreadie hath,
Going about to siubber our renowue,
And wound vs with reproach and infamie,
Yet Fogge that thou thy selfe maist plainely see,
How farre I am from séeking sharp reuenge,
Fogge I forgiue thee, and withall wee doe,
Repeale our heauie sentence gainst Shoares wie,
Restoring all her goods, for we intend,
With all the world now to be perfect friends.
Why my good Lord, you knw shées dead alreadie.
True Catesbie, else I nere had spoke such words,
Alas I see our kindnesse comes too late,
For Catesbie tels me she is dead alreadie.
I my good Lord, so is her husband too.
Would they had liude, to see our friendly change,
But Catesbie say, where dide Shoare and his wife?
Where Aire was hangde for giuing her reliefe,
There both of them round circkling his cold graue,
And arme in arme departed from this life:
The people for the loue they beare to her,
And her kind husband, pittying his wrongs,
For euer after meane to call the ditch,
Shoares Ditch, as in the memorie of them,
Their bodies in the Friers minorites,
Are in one graue enterred all together,
But mistris Blage for ingratitude,
To mistris Shoare, lies dead vnburied,
And no one will afford her buriall.
But mistris Blage she shal haue burial too,
What now we must be friends, indeed we must,
And now my Lords, I giue you all to know,
In memorie of our eternall loue,
I do ordame an order of the Bathe,
Twelue knights in number of that royall sort,
Which order with all princely ceremonies,
Shall be obserued in all royall pompe,
As Edwards our forefather of the Barter,
Which feast our selfe, and our beloued Quéene,
Will presently solemnize in our person.
Now am I bold to put your grace in mind
Of my long suite, and partly your owne promise,
The Earle of Herefords lands.
Cosin wéele better thinke on that here after.
M pains my Lord hath not deserude delay.
Wl you appoint our time: then you shal stay,
For this hote hastinesse sir you shall stay,
Moo no more you were best.
I Richard, is it come to this?
In my first suite of all, dost thou dense mee?
Breake thine o word, & turne me off so slieghtly,
Richard thoud hadst as good haue damnde thy soule,
As basely thus to beale with Buckingham:
Richard ile sit vpon thy cruped shoulder:
I faith I will, if heauen will giue me leaue,
And Harrie Richmond, this hand alone,
Shall fetch thée home, and seat thee in his throne.
What is he gone in heat, why farewell bee,
He is displeasde, let him be pleasde againe,
We haue no time to thinke on angrie men:
Come my swéet Quéene, let vs go solemnize,
Our Knighthoods order in most royall wise.