WElcome to Bradford, martiall gentlemen,
L. Bonfild, & sir Gilbert Armstrong both,
And all my troups, euē to my basest groome,
Courage and welcome; for the day is ours:
Our cause is good, it is for the lands auayle:
Then let vs fight, and dye for Englands good.
We will, my Lord.
As I am Henrie Momford, Kendals Earle,
You honour me with this assent of yours,
And here vpon my sword I make protest,
For to relieue the poore, or dye myselfe:
And know, my Lords, that Iames, the King of Scots,
Warres hard vpon the borders of this land:
Here is his Post: say, Iohn Taylour,
What newes with King Iames?
Warre, my Lord: tell, and good newes I trow:
For king Iame vowes to meete you the 26. of this month.
God willing, marie doth he sir.
My friends, you see what we haue to winne.
Well, Iohn, commend me to king Iames,
And tell him I will meete him the 26. of this month,
And all the rest: and so farewell.
why standst thou as a man in dumps?
Courage: for if I winne, Ile make thee Duke:
I Henry Momford will be King my selfe,
And I will make thee Duke of Lancaster,
And Gilbert Armestrong Lord of Doncaster.
Nothing, my Lord, makes me amazde at all,
But that our souldiers findes our victuals scant:
We must make hauocke of those countrey Swaynes:
For so will the rest tremble and be afraid,
And humbly send prouision to your campe.
My Lord Bonfild giues good aduice,
They make a scorne and stand vpon the King:
So what is brought, is sent from them perforce;
Aske Mannering else.
What sayest thou, Mannering?
When as I shew'd your high commission,
They made this answere,
Onely to send prouision for your horses.
Well, hye thee to Wakefield, bid the Towne
To send me all prouision that I want;
Least I, like martiall Tamberlaine, lay waste
Their bordering Countries,
And leauing none aliue that contradicts my Commission.
Let me alone, my Lord, Ile make them
Vayle their plumes: for whatsoere he be,
The proudest Knight, Iustice, or other, that gaynsayeth
Your word, He clap him fast, to make the rest to feare.
Doe so Nick: hye thee thither presently,
And let vs heare of thee againe to morrowe.
Will you not remooue, my Lord?
No: I will lye at Bradford all this night,
And all the next: come, Bonfield, let vs goe,
And listen out some bonny lasses here.
M. Mannering, stand aside, whilest we conferre
What is best to doe.
Townesmen of Wakefield, the Earle of Kendall
Here hath sent for victuals;
And in ayding him, we shewe our selues
No lesse than traytours to the King:
Therefore let me heare, Townesmen,
What is your consents.
Euen as you please we are all content.
Then M. Mannering we are resolu'd.
As howe?
Marriesir, thus.
We will send the Earle of Kendall no victuals,
Because he is a traytour to the King;
And in ayding him we shewe our selues no lesse.
Why, men of Wakefield, are you waxen madde;
That present danger cannot whet your wits,
Wisely to make prouision of your selues?
The Earle is thirtie thousand men strong in power,
And what towne so euer him resist,
He layes it flat and leuell with the ground:
Ye silly men, you seeke your owne decay:
Therefore send my Lord such prouision as he wants,
So he will spare your towne, and come no neerer
Wakefield then he is.
Master Mannering, you haue your answere,
You may be gone.
Well, Woodroffe, for so I gesse is thy name,
Ile make thee curse thy ouerthwart deniall;
And all that sit vpon the bench this day,
Shall rue the houre they haue withstood my Lords
Commission.
Doe thy worst, we feare thee not.
See you these seales? before you passe the towne,
I will haue all things my Lord doth want,
Inspite of you.
Proud dapper Iacke, vayle bonnet to
The bench,
That represents the person of the King;
Or sirra, Ile lay thy head before thy feete.
Why, who art thou?
Why, I am George a Greene,
True liegeman to my King,
Who scornes that men of such esteeme as these,
Should brooke the braues of any trayterous squire:
You of the bench, and you my fellowe friends,
Neighbours, we subiects all vnto the King,
We are English borne, and therefore Edwards friends,
Voude vnto him euen in our mothers wombe,
Our mindes to God, our hearts vnto our King,
Our wealth, our homage, and our carcases,
Be all King Edwards: then sirra, we haue
Nothing left for traytours, but our swordes,
Whetted to bathe them in your bloods,
And dye against you, before we send you any victuals.
Well spoken, George a Greene.
Pray let George a Greene speake for vs.
Sirra you get no victuals here,
Not if a hoofe of beefe would saue your liues.
Fellowe, I stand amazde at thy presumption:
Why, what art thou that darest gaynsay my Lord,
Knowing his mighty puissance and his stroke?
Why, my friend, I come not barely of my selfe:
For see, I haue a large Commission.
Let me see it, sirra.
Whose seales be these?
This is the Earle of Kendals seale at armes,
This Lord Charnel Bonfields,
And this sir Gilbert Armestrongs.
I tell thee, sirra, did good King Edwards sonne
Seale a commission against the King his father,
Thus would I teare it in despite of him,
Being traytour to my Soueraigne.
What? hast thou torne my Lord; Commission?
Thou shalt rue it, and so shall all Wakefield.
What, are you in choler? I will giue you pilles
To coole your stomacke.
Seest thou these seales?
Now by my fathers soule, which was a yeoman,
When he was aliue, eate them,
Or eate my daggers poynt, proud squire.
But thou doest but iest, I hope.
Sure that shall you see, before we two part.
Well, and there be no remedie, so George,
One is gone: I pray thee no more nowe.
O sir, if one be good, the others cannot hurt.
So sir, nowe you may goe tell the Earle of Kendall,
Although I haue rent his large Commission,
Yet of curtesie I haue sent all his seales
Backe againe by you.
Well, sir, I will doe your arrant.
Nowe let him tell his Lord, that he hath
Spoke with George a Greene,
Right pinner of merrie Wakefield towne,
That hath phisicke for a foole,
Pilles for a traytour that doeth wrong his Soueraigne.
Are you content with this that I haue done?
I, content, George:
For highly hast thou honourd Wakefield towne,
In cutting of proud Mannering so short.
Come, thou shalt be my welcome ghest to day;
For well thou hast deseru'd reward and fauour.
Nowe gentle father list vnto thy sonne,
And for my mothers loue,
That earst was blythe and bonny in thine eye,
Graunt one petition that I shall demaund.
What is that, my Cuddie?
Father, you knowe the ancient enmitie of late,
Betweene the Musgroues and the wily Scottes,
Whereof they haue othe,
Not to leaue one aliue that strides a launce.
O Father, you are olde, and wayning age vnto the graue:
Olde William Musgroue, which whilome was thought,
The brauest horseman in all Westmerland,
Is weake, and forst to stay his arme vpon a staffe,
That arst could wield a launce:
Then, gentle Father, resigne the hold to me;
Giue armes to youth, and honour vnto age.
Auaunt, false hearted boy, my ioynts doe quake,
Euen with anguish of thy verie words.
Hath William Musgroue seene an hundred yeres?
Haue I bene feard and dreaded of the Scottes,
That when they heard my name in any roade,
They fled away, and posted thence amaine?
And shall I dye with shame nowe in mine age?
No, Cuddie, no, thus resolue I,
Here haue I liu'd, and here will Musgroue dye.
Now, gētle Grime, God a mercy for our good chere,
Our fare was royall, and our welcome great;
And sith so kindly thou hast entertained vs,
If we returne with happie victorie,
We will deale as friendly with thee in recompence.
Your welcome was but dutie, gentle Lord:
For wherefore haue we giuen vs our wealth,
But to make our betters welcome when they come?
O, this goes hard when traytours must be flattered:
But life is sweete, and I cannot withstand it.
God (I hope) will reuenge the quarrell of my King.
What said you, Grime?
I say, sir Gilbert, looking on my daughter,
I curse the houre that ere I got the girle:
For sir, she may haue many wealthy suters,
And yet she disdaines them all, to haue
Poore George a Greene vnto her husband.
On that, good Grime, I am talking with thy
Daughter;
But she in quirkes and quiddities of loue,
Sets me to schoole, she is so ouerwise.
But, gentle girle, if thou wilt forsake
The pinner, and be my loue, I will aduaunce thee high:
To dignifie those haires of amber hiew,
Ile grace them with a chaplet made of pearle,
Set with choice rubies, sparkes, and diamonds,
Planted vpon a veluet hood to hide that head,
Wherein two saphires burne like sparkling fire:
This will I doe, faire Bettris, and farre more,
If thou wilt loue the Lord of Doncaster.
Heigh ho, my heart is in a higher place,
Perhaps on the Earle, if that be he,
See where he comes, or angrie or in loue;
For why, his colour looketh discontent.
Come, Nick, followe me.
Howe nowe, my Lord? what newes?
Such newes, Bonfild, as will make thee laugh,
And fret thy fill, to heare how Nick was vsde:
Why, the Iustices stand on their termes;
Nick, as you knowe, is hawtie in his words;
He layd the lawe vnto the Iustices,
With threatning braues, that one lookt on another,
Ready to stoope: but that a churle came in,
One George a Greene, the pinner of the towne.
And with his dagger drawne layd hands on Nick,
And by no beggers swore that we were traytours,
Rent our Commission, and vpon a braue,
Made Nick to eate the seales, or brooke the stabbe:
Poore Mannering afraid, came posting hither straight.
Oh louely George, fortune be still thy friend,
And as thy thoughts be high, so be thy minde,
In all accords, euen to thy hearts desire.
What sayes faire Bettris?
My Lord, she is praying for George a Greene:
He is the man, and she will none but him.
But him? why, looke on me, my girle:
Thou knowest, that yesternight I courted thee,
And swore at my returne to wedde with thee:
Then tell me, loue, shall I haue all thy faire?
I care not for Earle, nor yet for Knight,
Nor Baron that is so bold:
For George a Greene the merrie pinner,
He hath my heart in hold.
Bootlesse, my Lord, are many vaine replies.
Let vs hye vs to Wakefield, and send her the pinners head.
It shall be so. Grime, gramercie,
Shut vp the daughter, bridle her affects,
Let me not misse her when I make returne:
Therefore looke to her, as to thy life, good Grime.
I warrant you, my Lord.
And Bettris, leaue a base pinner, for to loue an Earle,
Faine would I see this pinner George a Greene.
It shall be thus:
Nick Mannering shall leade on the battell,
And we three will goe to Wakefield in some disguise:
But howsoeuer, Ile haue his head to day.
Why, Iohnie: then the Earle of Kendall is blithe,
And hath braue men that troupe along with him.
I marie, my liege, and hath good men
That come along with him,
And vowes to meete you at Scrasblesea, God willing.
If good S. Andrewe lend King Iame leaue,
I will be with him at the pointed day.
But soft: whose pretie boy art thou?
Sir, I am sonne vnto Sir Iohn a Barley,
Eldest and all that ere my mother had,
Edward my name.
And whither art thou going, pretie Ned?
To seeke some birdes, and kill them, if I can:
And now my scholemaster is also gone:
So haue I libertie to ply my bowe:
For when he comes, I stirre not from my booke.
Lord Humes, but marke the visage of this child;
By him I gesse the beautie of his mother:
None but Laeda could breede Helena.
Tell me, Ned, who is within with thy mother.
Not but her selfe and houshold seruants, sir:
If you would speake with her, knocke at this gate.
Iohnie, knocke at that gate.
O, I am betraide: what multitudes be these?
Feare not, faire Iane: for all these men are mine,
And all thy friends, if thou be friend to me:
I am thy louer Iames the King of Scottes,
That oft haue sued and wooed with many letters,
Painting my outward passions with my pen,
When as my inward soule did bleede for woe:
Little regard was giuen to my sute,
But haply thy husbands presence wrought it:
Therefore, sweete Iane, I fitted me to time;
And hearing that thy husband was from home,
Am come to craue what long I haue desirde.
Nay, soft you, sir, you get no entrance here,
That seeke to wrong sir Iohn a Barley so,
And offer such dishonour to my mother.
Why, what dishonour, Ned?
Though young, yet often haue I heard
My father say,
No greater wrong than to be made cuckold.
Were I of age, or were my bodie strong,
Were he ten Kings, I would shoote him to the heart,
That should attempt to giue sir Iohn the horne.
Mother, let him not come in,
I will goe lie at lockie Millers house.
Stay him.
I, well said, Ned, thou hast giuen the King
His answere:
For were the ghost of Cesar on the earth,
Wrapped in the wonted glorie of his honour,
He should not make me wrong my husband so:
But good King Iames is pleasant, as I gesse,
And meanes to trie what humour I am in;
Else would he neuer haue brought an hoste of men,
To haue them witnes of his Scottish lust.
Iane, in faith, Iane.
Neuer reply: for I protest by the highest
Holy God,
That doometh iust reuenge for things amisse,
King Iames of all men shall not haue my loue.
Then list to me, Saint Andrewe be my boote,
But Ile rase thy castle to the verie ground,
Vnlesse thou open the gate, and let me in.
I feare thee not, King Iamie, doe thy worst:
This castle is too strong for thee to scale:
Besides, to morrowe will sir Iohn come home.
Well, Iane, since thou disdainst King Iames loue,
Ile drawe thee on with sharpe and deepe extremes:
For by my fathers soule, this brat of thine
Shall perish here before thine eyes,
Vnlesse thou open the gate, and let me in.
O deepe extremes: my heart begins to breake:
My little Ned lookes pale for feare.
Cheare thee, my boy, I will doe much for thee.
But not so much, as to dishonour me.
And if thou dyest, I cannot liue, sweete Ned.
Then dye with honour, mother, dying chaste.
I am armed:
My husbands loue, his honour, and his same,
Ioynes victorie by vertue.
Nowe, King Iames, if mothers teares cannot alay thine ire,
Then butcher him, for I will neuer yeeld:
The sonne shall dye, before I wrong the father.
Why then he dyes.
My Lord, Musgroue is at hand.
Who, Musgroue? The deuill he is. Come,
My horse.
Nowe, King Iames, thou art my prisoner.
Not thine, but fortunes prisoner.
Father, the field is ours: their colours we
Haue seyzed:
And Humes is stayne: I slewe him hand to hand.
God and Saint George.
O father, I am sore athirst.
Come in, young Cuddie, come and drinke thy fill:
Bring in King Iame with you as a ghest:
For all this broile was cause he could not enter.
The sweete content of men that liue in loue,
Breedes fretting humours in a restlesse minde,
And fansie being checkt by fortunes spite,
Growes too impatient in her sweete desires:
Sweete to those men whome loue leades on to blisse,
But sowre to me, whose happe is still amisse.
Marie amen, sir.
Sir, what doe you crye, Amen at?
Why, did not you talke of loue?
Howe doe you knowe that?
Well, though I say it that should not say it,
There are fewe fellowes in our parish,
So netled with loue, as I haue bene of late.
Sirra, I thought no lesse, when the other morning,
You rose so earely to goe to your wenches.
Sir, I had thought you had gone about my honest busines.
Trow you haue hit it: for master, be it knowne
To you,
There is some good will betwixt Madge the Sousewife,
And I,
Marie she hath another louer.
Canst thou brooke any riuals in thy loue?
A rider? no, he is a sow-gelder, and goes a foote.
But Madge pointed to meete me in your wheate close.
Well, did she meete you there?
Neuer make question of that:
And first I saluted her with a greene gowne,
And after fell as hard a wooing,
As if the Priest had bin at our backs, to haue married vs.
What, did she grant?
Did she graunt? Neuer make question of that:
And she gaue me a shirt coler,
Wrought ouer with no counterfet stuffe.
What, was it gold?
Nay, twas better than gold.
What was it?
Right Couentrie blew,
Who had no sooner come there, but wot you who came by.
No, who?
Clim the sow-gelder.
Came he by?
He spide Madge and I sit together,
He leapt from his horse, laid his hand on his dagger, and
Began to sweare.
Now I seeing he had a dagger,
And I nothing but this twig in my hand,
I gaue him faire words and said nothing.
He comes to me and takes me by the bosome,
You hoorsen shue, said he, hold my horse,
And looke he take no colde in his feete.
No marie shall he sir, quoth I,
Ile lay my cloake vnderneath him:
I tooke my cloake, spread it all along,
And his horse on the midst of it.
Thou clowne, didst thou set his horse vpon
Thy cloake?
I, but marke how I serued him:
Madge and he was no sooner gone downe into the ditch,
But I plucked out my knife,
Cut foure hoales in my cloake, and made his horse stand
On the bare ground.
Twas well done: now sir, go and suruay my fields:
If you finde any cattell in the corne, to pound with them.
And if I finde any in the pound,
I shall turne them out.
Now we haue put the horses in the corne,
Let vs stand in some corner for to heare,
What brauing tearmes the pinner will breathe,
When he spies our horses in the corne.
O master where are you? we haue a prise.
A prise, what is it?
Three goodly horses in our wheate close.
Three horses in our wheat close? whose be they?
Marie thats a riddle to me: but they are there: Veluet horses, and I neuer sawe such horses before. As my dutie was, I put off my cappe, and said as followeth: My masters, what doe you make in our close? One of them hearing me aske what he made there, held vp his head and neighed, and after his maner laught as heartily as if a mare had bene tyed to his girdle. My masters, said I, it is no laughing matter; for if my master take you here, you goe, as round as a top, to the pound. Another vntoward iade hearing me threaten him to the pound, and to tell you of them, cast vp both his heeles, and let such a monstrous great fart; that was as much as in his language to say, A fart for the pound, and a fart for George a Greene. Nowe I hearing this, put on my cap, blewe my horne, called them all iades, and came to tell you.
Nowe sir, goe and driue me those three horses
To the pound.
Doe you heare? I were best take a constable
With me.
Why so?
Why, they being gentlemens horses, may stand on their
Reputation, and will not obey me.
Goe doe as I bid you, sir.
Well, I may goe.
Whither away, sir?
Whither away? I am going to put the horses
In the pound.
Sirra, those three horses belong to vs, and we put
Them in, and they must tarrie there, and eate their fill.
Stay, I will goe tell my master.
Heare you, master? we haue another prise:
Those three horses be in your wheate close still,
And here be three geldings more.
What be these?
These are the masters of the horses.
Nowe, gentlemen, I knowe not your degrees,
But more you cannot be, vnlesse you be Kings,
Why wrong you vs of Wakefield with your horses?
I am the pinner, and before you passe,
You shall make good the trespasse they haue done.
Peace, saucie mate, prate not to vs:
I tell thee, pinner, we are gentlemen.
Why sir, so may I sir, although I giue no armes.
Thou? howe art thou a gentleman?
And such is my master, and he may giue as good
Armes, as euer your great grandfather could giue.
Pray thee let me heare howe?
Marie my master may giue for his armes,
The picture of Aprill in a greene ierkin,
With a rooke on one fist, and an horne on the other:
But my master giues his armes the wrong way;
For he giues the horne on his fist:
And your grandfather, because he would not lose his
Armes,
Weares the horne on his owne head.
Well pinner, sith our horses be in,
In spite of thee they now shall feede their fill,
And eate vntill our leasures serue to goe.
Now by my fathers soule,
Were good king Edwards horses in the corne,
They shall amend the seath or kisse the pound,
Much more yours sir, whatsoere you be.
Why man, thou knowest not vs,
We do belong to Henry Momford Earle of Kendal,
Men that before a month be full expirde,
Will be king Edwards betters in the land.
King Edwards better, rebell, thou liest.
Villaine, what hast thou done? thou hast stroke
An Earle.
Why what care I? A poore man that is true,
Is better then an Earle, if he be false:
Traitors reape no better fauours at my hands.
I, so me thinks, but thou shalt deare aby this blow.
Now or neuer lay hold on the pinner.
Stay, my Lords, let vs parlie on these broiles:
Not Hercules against two, the prouerbe is,
Nor I against so great a multitude.
Had not your troupes come marching as they did,
I would haue stopt your passage vnto London:
But now Ile flie to secret policie.
What doest thou murmure, George?
Marie this, my Lord, I muse,
If thou be Henrie Momford Kendals Earle,
That thou wilt doe poore G. a Greene this wrong,
Euer to match me with a troupe of men.
Why doest thou strike me then?
Why my Lord, measure me but by your selfe:
Had you a man had seru'd you long,
And heard your foe misuse you behinde your backe,
And would not draw his sword in your defence,
You would cashere him.
Much more, king Edward is my king:
And before Ile heare him so wrong'd,
Ile die within this place,
And maintaine good whatsoeuer I haue said.
And if I speake not reason in this case,
What I haue said Ile maintaine in this place.
A pardon my Lord for this pinner,
For trust me he speaketh like a man of worth.
Well, George, wilt thou leaue Wakefielde and
Wend with me,
Ile freely put vp all and pardon thee.
I my Lord, considering me one thing,
You will leaue these armes and follow your good king.
Why George, I rise not against king Edward,
But for the poore that is opprest by wrong,
From whence came you? where doe you dwell?
I am, forsooth, a semsters maide hard-by,
That hath brought worke home to your daughter.
Nay, are you not some craftie queane,
That comes from George a Greene, that rascall,
With some letters to my daughter?
I will haue you searcht.
Alas, sir, it is Hebrue vnto me,
To tell me of George a Greene, or any other:
Search me good sir,
And if you finde a letter about me,
Let me haue the punishment that is due.
Why are you mufled? I like you the worse
For that.
I am not, sir, asham'd to shew my face,
Yet loth I am my cheekes should take the aire,
Not that I am charie of my beauties hue,
But that I am troubled with the tooth-ach sore.
A pretie wench of smiling countenance,
Olde men can like, although they cannot loue,
I, and loue, though not so briefe as yong men can.
Well, goe in, my wench, and speake with my daughter.
I wonder much at the Earle of Kendall,
Being a mightie man, as still he is,
Yet for to be a traitor to his king,
Is more then God or man will well allow:
But what a foole am I to talke of him?
My minde is more heere of the pretie lasse:
Had she brought some fortie pounds to towne.
I could be content to make her my wife:
Yet I haue heard it in a prouerbe said,
He that is olde, and marries with a lasse,
Lies but at home, and prooues himselfe an asse.
How now, my wench, how ist? what not a word?
Alas, poore soule, the tooth-ach plagues her sore.
Well, my wench, here is an Angel for to buy thee
And I pray thee vse mine house,
The oftner the more welcome: farewell.
O blessed loue, and blessed fortune both.
But Bettris, stand not here to talke of loue,
But hye thee straight vnto thy George a Greene:
Neuer went Roe-bucke swifter on the downes,
Then I will trip it till I see my George.
Come away Ienkin.
Come, here is his house. Where be you, ho?
Who knocks there?
Heere are two or three poore men, father,
Would speake with you.
Pray giue your man leaue to leade me fort
Goe, Ienkin, fetch him forth.
Come, olde man.
Father, heere is three poore men come to question
Thee a word in secrete that concernes their liues.
Say on my sonnes.
Father, I am sure you heare the newes,
How that the Earle of Kendal wars against the king,
Now father we three are Gentlemen by birth,
But yonger brethren that want reuenues,
And for the hope we haue to be preferd,
If that we knew that we shall winne,
We will march with him:
If not, we will not march a foote to London more.
Therefore good father, tell vs what shall happen,
Whether the King or the Earle of Kendal shall win.
The king, my sonne.
Art thou sure of that?
I, as sure as thou art Henry Momford,
The one L. Bonfild, the other sir Gilbert.
Why this is wondrous, being blinde of sight,
His deepe perseuerance should be such to know vs.
Magike is mightie, and foretelleth great matters:
In deede Father, here is the Earle come to see thee,
And therefore good father fable not with him.
Welcome is the Earle to my poore cell,
And so are you my Lords: but let me counsell you,
To leaue these warres against your king,
And liue in quiet.
Father, we come not for aduice in warre,
But to know whether we shall win or leese.
Lose gentle Lords, but not by good king Edward:
A baser man shall giue you all the foile.
I marie father, what man is that?
Poore George a Greene the pinner.
What shall he?
Pull all your plumes, and sore dishonour you.
He, as how?
Nay, the end tries all, but so it will fall out.
But so it shall not by my honor Christ.
Ile raise my campe, and fire Wakefield towne,
And take that seruile pinner George a Greene,
And butcher him before king Edwards face.
Good my Lord be not offended,
For I speake no more then arte reueales to me:
And for greater proofe,
Giue your man leaue to fetch me my staffe.
Ienkin, fetch him his walking staffe.
Here is your walking staffe.
Ile proue it good vpon your carcases:
A wiser wisard neuer met you yet,
Nor one that better could foredoome your fall:
Now I haue singled you here alone,
I care not though you be three to one.
Villaine, hast thou betraid vs?
Momford, thou liest, neuer was I traitor yet;
Onely deuis'd this guile to draw you on,
For to be combatants.
Now conquere me, and then march on to London:
Least you be torne in peeces with shee deuils:
Mistres Bettris, once, twice, thrice.
Oh is this no cunning?
Is this my loue, or is it but her shadow?
I this is the shadow, but heere is the substance.
Tell mee sweete loue, what good fortune
Brought thee hither:
For one it was that fauoured George a Greene.
Both loue & fortune brought me to my George,
In whose sweete sight is all my hearts content.
Tell mee sweete loue, how camst thou from thy
Fathers?
A willing minde hath many slips in loue:
It was not I, but Wily thy sweete boy.
And where is Wily now?
In my apparell in my chamber still.
Ienkin, come hither: Goe to Bradford,
And listen out your fellow Wily.
Come, Bettris, let vs in,
And in my cottage we will sit and talke.
Brother of Scotland, I doe hold it hard,
Seeing a league of truce was late confirmde
Twixt you and me, without displeasure offered,
You should make such inuasion in my land,
The vowes of kings should be as oracles,
Not blemisht with the staine of any breach,
Chiefly where fealtie and homage willeth it.
Brother of England, rub not the sore afresh,
My conscience grieues me for my deepe misdeede,
I haue the worst, of thirtie thousand men,
There scapt not full fiue thousand from the field.
Gramercie, Musgroue, else it had gone hard.
Cuddie, Ile quite thee well ere we two part
But had not his olde Father William Musgroue
Plaid twice the man, I had not now bene here,
A stronger man I seldome felt before,
But one of more resolute valiance,
Treads not I thinke vpon the English ground.
I wot wel, Musgroue shall not lose his hier.
And it please your grace, my father was
Fiue score and three at Midsommer last past,
Yet had king Iamie bene as good as George a Greene,
Yet Billy Musgroue would haue fought with him.
As George a Greene, I pray thee, Cuddie,
Let me question thee,
Much haue I heard since I came to my crowne,
Many in manner of a prouerbe say,
Were he as good as G. a Green, I would strike him sure:
I pray thee tell me, Cuddie, canst thou informe me,
What is that George a Greene.
Know, my Lord, I neuer saw the man,
But mickle talke is of him in the Country.
They say he is the Pinner of Wakefield towne,
But for his other qualities, I let alone.
May it please your grace, I know the mā too wel.
Too well, why so, Warwicke?
For once he swingde me, till my bones did ake.
Why, dares he strike an Earle?
An Earle my Lord, nay he wil strike a king,
Be it not king Edward.
For stature he is framde,
Like to the picture of stoute Hercules,
And for his carriage passeth Robin Hood.
The boldest Earle or Baron of your land,
That offereth scath vnto the towne of Wakefield,
George will arrest his pledge vnto the pound,
And who so resisteth beares away the blowes,
For he himselfe is good inough for three.
Why this is wondrous, my L. of Warwicke,
Sore do I long to see this George a Greene.
But leauing him, what shall we do, my Lord,
For to subdue the rebels in the North?
They are now marching vp to Doncaster.
Soft, who haue we there?
Here is a traitour, the Earle of Kendal.
Aspiring traitour, how darst thou once
Cast thine eyes vpon thy Soueraigne,
That honour'd thee with kindenes and with fauour?
But I will make thee buy this treason deare.
Good my Lord.
Reply not, traitour.
Tell me, Cuddy, whose deede of honour
Wonne the victorie against this rebell.
George a Greene the Pinner of Wakefield.
George a Greene, now shall I heare newes
Certaine what this Pinner is:
Discourse it briefly, Cuddy, how it befell.
Kendall and Bonfild, with sir Gilbert Armstrong,
Came to Wakefield Towne disguisd.
And there spoke ill of your grace,
Which George but hearing, feld them at his feete,
And had not rescue come into the place,
George had slaine him in his close of wheate.
But Cuddy, canst thou not tell
Where I might giue and grant some thing,
That might please, & highly gratifie the pinners thoughts?
This at their parting George did say to me,
If the king vouchsafe of this my seruice,
Then gentle Cuddie kneele vpon thy knee,
And humbly craue a boone of him for me.
Cuddie, what is it?
It is his will your grace would pardon them,
And let them liue although they haue offended.
I thinke the man striueth to be glorious.
Well, George hath crau'd it, and it shall be graunted,
Which none but he in England should haue gotten.
Liue Kendall, but as prisoner,
So shalt thou end thy dayes within the tower.
Gracious is Edward to offending subiects.
My Lord of Kend. you are welcome to the court.
Nay, but ill come as it fals out now,
I, ill come in deede, were it not for George a Greene,
But gentle king, for so you would auerre,
And Edwards betters, I falute you both,
And here I vowe by good Saint George,
You wil gaine but litle when your summes are counted.
I sore doe long to see this George a Greene:
And for because I neuer saw the North,
I will forthwith goe see it:
And for that to none I will be knowen,
We will disguise our selues and steale downe secretly,
Thou and I king Iames, Cuddie, and two or three,
And make a merrie iourney for a moneth.
Away then, conduct him to the tower.
Come on king Iames my heart must needes be merrie,
If fortune make such hauocke of our foes.
Why is not louely Marian blithe of cheere?
What ayles my Lemman that she gins to lowre?
Say good Marian why art thou so sad.
Nothing, my Robin, grieues me to the heart,
But whensoeuer I doe walke abroad,
I heare no songs but all of George a Greene,
Bettris his faire Lemman passeth me.
And this my Robin gaules my very soule.
Content, what wreakes it vs though George a
Greene be stoute,
So long as he doth proffer vs no scath?
Enuie doth seldome hurt but to it selfe,
And therefore, Marian, smile vpon thy Robin.
Neuer will Marian smile vpon her Robin,
Nor lie with him vnder the green wood shade,
Till that thou go to Wakefield on a greene,
And beate the Pinner for the loue of me.
Content thee, Marian, I will ease thy griefe,
My merrie men and I will thither stray,
And heere I vow that for the loue of thee,
I will beate George a Greene, or he shall beate me.
As I am Scarlet, next to little Iohn,
One of the boldest yeomen of the crew,
So will I wend with Robin all along,
And try this Pinner what he dares do.
As I am Much the Millers sonne,
That left my Mill to go with thee,
And nill repent that I haue done,
This pleasant life contenteth me,
In ought I may to doe thee good,
Ile liue and die with Robin Hood.
And Robin, Marian she will goe with thee,
To see faire Bettris how bright she is of blee.
Marian, thou shalt goe with thy Robin.
Bend vp your bowes, and see your strings be tight,
The arrowes keene, and euery thing be ready,
I shall be turned out of mine office.
What is that, sir?
Whensoeuer I goe to fight with any bodie,
I vse to flourish my staffe thrise about my head
Before I strike, and then shew no fauour.
Well sir, and till then I will not strike thee.
Wel sir, here is once, twice, here is my hand,
I will neuer doe it the third time.
Why then I see we shall not fight.
Faith no: come, I will giue thee two pots
Of the best Ale, and be friends.
Faith I see it is as hard to get water out of a flint,
As to get him to haue about with me:
Therefore I will enter into him for some good cheere:
My friend, I see thou art a faint hearted fellow,
Thou hast no stomacke to fight,
Therefore let vs go to the Alehouse and drinke.
Well, content, goe thy wayes and say thy prayers,
Thou scapst my hands to day.
Tell me sweet loue, how is thy minde content,
What canst thou brooke to liue with George a Greene?
Oh George, how litle pleasing are these words?
Came I from Bradford for the loue of thee?
And left my father for so sweet a friend?
Here will I liue vntill my life doe end.
Happy am I to haue so sweet a loue.
But what are these come trasing here along?
Three men come striking through the corne,
My loue.
Backe againe, you foolish trauellers,
For you are wrong, and may not wend this way.
That were great shame.
Now by my soule, proud sir,
We be three tall yeomen, and thou art but one:
Come, we will forward in despite of him.
Leape the ditch, or I will make you skip.
What, cannot the hie way serue your turne,
But you must make a path ouer the corne?
Why, art thou mad? dar'st thou incounter three?
We are no babes, man, looke vpon our limmes.
Sirra, the biggest lims haue not the stourest hearts.
Were ye as good as Robin Hood, and his three mery men,
Ile driue you backe the same way that ye came.
Be ye men, ye scorne to incounter me all at once,
But be ye cowards, set vpon me all three,
And try the Pinner what he dares performe.
Were thou as high in deedes,
As thou art haughtie in wordes,
Thou well mightest be a champion for a king:
But emptie vessels haue the loudest sounds,
And cowards prattle more than men of worth.
Sirra, darest thou trie me?
I sirra, that I dare.
How now? what art thou downe?
Come, sir, I am next.
Come sirra, now to me, spare me not,
For Ile not spare thee.
Make no doubt, I will be as liberall to thee.
Stay, George, for here I doo protest,
Thou art the stoutest champion that euer I layd
Handes vpon.
Soft you sir, by your leaue you lye,
You neuer yet laid hands on me.
George, wilt thou forsake Wakefield,
And go with me,
Two liueries will giue thee euerie yeere,
And fortie crownes shall be thy see.
Why, who art thou?
Why, Robin Hood:
I am come hither with my Marian,
And these my yeomen for to visit thee.
Robin Hood? next to king Edward
Art thou leefe to me:
Welcome, sweet Robin, welcome, mayd Marian.
And welcome, you my friends.
Will you to my poore house,
You shall haue wafer cakes your fill,
A peece of beefe hung vp since Martlemas,
Mutton and veale, if this like you not,
Take that you finde, or that you bring for me.
Godamercies, good George,
Ile be thy ghest to day.
Robin, therein thou honourest me.
Ile leade the way.
Come on, king Iames, now wee are
Thus disguised,
There is none (I know) will take vs to be kings:
I thinke we are now in Bradford,
Where all the merrie shoomakers dwell.
Downe with your staues, my friends,
Downe with them.
Downe with our staues? I pray thee, why so?
My friend, I see thou art a stranger heere,
Else wouldest thou not haue questiond of the thing.
This is the towne of merrie Bradford,
And here hath beene a custome kept of olde,
That none may beare his staffe vpon his necke,
But traile it all along throughout the towne,
Vnlesse they meane to haue about with me.
But heare you sir, hath the king
Granted you this custome?
King or Kaisar, none shall passe this way,
Except King Edward,
No not the stoutest groome that haunts his court:
Therefore downe with your staues.
What were we best to do?
Faith, my Lord, they are stoute fellowes.
And because we will see some sport,
We will traile our staues.
Heer'st thou, my friend?
Because we are men of peace and trauellers,
We are content to traile our staues.
The way lyes before you, go along.
See George, two men are passing
Through the towne,
Two lustie men, and yet they traile their staues.
Robin, they are some pesants
Trickt in yeomans weedes. Hollo, you two trauellers.
Call you vs, sir?
I, you. Are ye not big inough to beare
Your bats vpon your neckes,
But you must traile them along the streetes?
Yes sir, we are big inough, but here is a custome
Kept, that none may passe his staffe vpon his necke,
Vnlesse he traile it at the weapons point.
Sir, we are men of peace, and loue to sleepe
In our whole skins, and therefore quietnes is best.
Base minded pesants, worthlesse to be men,
What, haue you bones and limmes to strike a blow,
And be your hearts so faint, you cannot fight?
Wert not for shame, I would shrub your shoulders well,
And teach you manhood against another time.
Well preacht sir Iacke, downe with your staffe.
Do you heare my friends? and you be wise,
Keepe downe your staues,
For all the towne will rise vpon you.
Thou speakest like an honest quiet fellow.
But heare you me, In spite of all the swaines
Of Dradford town, beare me your staues vpon your necks,
Or to begin withall, Ile baste you both so well,
You were neuer better basted in your liues.
We will hold vp our staues.
What, haue you any more?
Call all your towne forth, cut, and longtaile.
What, George a Greene, is it you?
A plague found you,
I thinke you long'd to swinge me well.
Come George, we wil crush a pot before we part.
A pot you slaue, we will haue an hundred.
Heere, Will Perkins, take my purse,
Fetch me a stand of Ale, and set in the Market place,
That all may drinke that are athirst this day,
For this is for a free to welcome Robin Hood
To Bradford towne.
Here Robin, sit thou here: for thou art the best man
What is that?
Hearke in your eare.
Goe your wayes and do it.
Come downe on your knees, I haue got it.
Let vs heare what it is first.
Mary, because you haue drunke with the king,
And the king hath so graciously pledgd you,
You shall be no more called Shoomakers.
But you and yours to the worlds ende,
Shall be called the trade of the gentle craft.
I beseech your maiestie reforme this
Which he hath spoken.
I beseech your worship consume this
Which he hath spoken.
Confirme it, you would say.
Well, he hath done it for you, it is sufficient.
Come, George, we will goe to Grime,
And haue thy loue.
I am sure your worship will abide:
For yonder is comming olde Musgroue,
And mad Cuddie his sonne.
Master, my fellow Wilie comes drest like a woman,
And master Grime will marrie Wilie: Heere they come.
Which is thy old father, Cuddie?
This, if it please your maiestie.
Ah old Musgroue, kneele vp,
It fits not such gray haires to kneele.
Long liue my Soueragine,
Long and happie be his dayes:
Vouchsafe, my gracious Lord, a simple gift,
At Billy Musgroues hand:
King Iames at Meddellom castle gaue me this,
This wonne the honour, and this giue I thee.
Godamercie, Musgroue, for this friendly gift,
And for thou feldst a king with this same weapon,
This blade shall here dub valiant Musgroue knight.
Alas what hath your highnes done? I am poore.
To mend thy liuing take thou Meddellom castle,
The hold of both: and if thou want liuing, complaine,
Thou shalt haue more to mainetaine thine estate.
George, which is thy loue?
This, if please your maiestie.
Art thou her aged father?
I am, and it like your maiestie.
And wilt not giue thy daughter vnto George?
Yes, my Lord, if he will let me marrie
With this louely lasse.
What sayst thou, George?
With all my heart, my Lord, I giue consent.
Then do I giue my daughter vnto George.
Then shall the mariage scone be at an end.
Witnesse, my Lord, if that I be a woman,
For I am Wilie, boy to George a Greene,
Who for my master wrought this subtill shift.
What, is it a boy? what sayst thou to this Grime?
Mary, my Lord, I thinke this boy hath
More knauerie, than all the world besides.
Yet am I content that George shall both haue
My daughter and my lands.
Now George, it rest I gratifie thy worth:
And therefore here I doe bequeath to thee,
In full possession halfe that Kendal hath,
And what as Bradford holdes of me in chiefe,
I giue it frankely vnto thee for euer.
Kneele downe George.
What will your maiestie do?
Dub thee a knight, George.
I beseech your grace, grant me one thing.
What is that?
Then let me liue and die a yeoman still:
So was my father, so must liue his sonne.
For tis more credite to men of base degree,
To do great deeds, than men of dignitie.
Well, be it so George.
I beseech your grace dispatch with me,
And set downe my ransome.
George a Greene, set downe the king of Scots
His ransome.
I beseech your grace pardon me,
It passeth my skill.
Do it, the honor's thine.
Then let king Iames make good
Those townes which he hath burnt vpon the borders,
Giue a small pension to the father lesse,
Whose fathers he caus'd murthered in those warres,
Put in pledge for these things to your grace,
And so returne. King Iames, are you content.
I am content: and like your maiestie,
And will leaue good castles in securitie.
I craue no more. Now George a Greene,
Ile to thy house: and when I haue supt, Ile go to Aske,
And see if Iane a Barley be so faire,
As good King Iames reports her for to be.
And for the ancient custome of Vaile staffe, keepe it
Clayme priuiledge from me:
If any aske a reason why? or how?
Say, English Edward vaild his staffe to you.