NAy, my deare ASPER,
Stay your mind:
Away.
Who is so patient of this impious world,
That he can checke his spirit, or reine his tongue?
Or who hath such a dead vnfeeling sense,
That heauens horrid thunders cānot wake?
To see the earth, crackt with the weight of sinne,
Hell gaping vnder vs, and o're our heads
Blacke rau'nous ruine, with her saile-stretcht wings,
Ready to sinke vs downe, and couer vs.
Who can behold such prodigies as these,
And haue his lips seal'd vp? not I: my soule
Was neuer ground into such oyly colours,
To flatter vice and daube iniquitie:
But (with an armed, and resolued hand)
Ile strip the ragged follies of the time,
Naked, as at their birth:
(Be not too bold.
You trouble me) and with a whip of steele,
Print wounding lashes in their yron ribs.
I feare no mood stampt in a priuate brow,
When I am pleas'd t'vnmaske a publicke vice.
I feare no strumpets drugs, nor ruffians stab,
Should I detect their hatefull luxuries;
No brokers, vsurers, or lawyers gripe,
Were I dispos'd to say, they're all corrupt.
I feare no courtiers frowne, should I applaud
The easie flexure of his supple hummes.
Tut, these are so innate, and popular,
That drunken custome would not shame to laugh
(In scorne) at him, that should but dare to taxe'hem.
And yet, not one of these but knowes his workes,
Knowes what damnation is, the deuill, and hell,
Yet, howerly they persist, grow ranke in sinne,
Puffing their soules away in perj'rous aire,
To cherish their extortion, pride, or lusts.
Forbeare, good ASPER, be not like your name.
O, but to such, whose aces are all zeale,
And (with the words of HERCVLES) invade
Such crimes as these! that will not smell of sinne,
But seeme as they were made of Sanctifie!
Religion in their garments, and their haire
Cut shorter than their eye-browes! when the conscience
Is vaster than the Ocean, and deuoures
More wretches than the Counters.
Gentle ASPER,
Containe your spirit in more stricter bounds,
And be not thus transported with the violence
Of your strong thoughts.
Vnlesse your breath had power
To melt the world, and mould it new againe,
It is in vaine; to spend it in these moods.
I not obseru'd this thronged round till now.
Gracious, and kind spectators, you are welcome,
APOLLO, and the MVSES feast your eyes
With gracefull obiects, and may our MINERVA
Answere your hopes, vnto their largest straine.
Yet here, mistake me not, iudicious friends.
I doe not this, to begge your patience,
Or seruilely to fawne on your applause,
Like some drie braine, despairing in his merit:
Let me be censur'd, by th'austerest brow,
Where I want arte, or iudgement, taxe me freely:
Let envious Censors with their broadest eyes
Looke through and through me; I pursue no fauour.
Onely vouchsafe me your attentions,
And I will giue you musicke worth your eares.
O, how I hate the monstrousnesse of time,
Where euery seruile imitating spirit,
(Plagu'd with an itching leprosie of wit)
In a meere halting fury, striues to fling
His lc'rous body in the Thespian spring,
And streight leap's forth a Poet! but as lame
As VULCAN, or the founder of Cripple-gate.
In faith, this Humour will come ill to some,
You will be thought to be too peremptory.
This Humour? good; and why this Humour, MITIS?
Nay doe not turne, but answere.
Answere? what?
I will not stirre your patience, pardon me,
I vrg'd it for some reasons, and the rather
To giue these ignorant well-spoken dayes,
Some taste of their abuse of this word Humour.
O doe not let your purpose fall, good ASPER,
It cannot but arriue most acceptable,
Chiefly to such, as haue the happinesse,
Daily to see how the poore innocent word
Is rackt, and tortur'd.
I; I pray you proceede.
Ha? what? what is't?
For the abuse of Humour.
O, I craue pardon, I had lost my thoughts.
Why Humour (as 'tis ens) we thus define it
To be a quality of aire or water,
And in it selfe holds these two properties,
Moisture and fluxure: As, for demonstration,
Powre water on this floore, 'twill wet and runne:
Likewise the aire (forc't through a horne or trumpet)
Flowes instantly away, and leaues behind
A kind of dew; and hence we doe conclude,
That what soe're hath fluxure, and humiditie,
As wanting power to containe it selfe,
Is Humour: so in euery humane body
The choller, melancholy, flegme, and bloud,
By reason that they flow continually
In some one part, and are not continent,
Receiue the name of Humours. Now thus farre
It may, by Metaphore, apply it selfe
Vnto the generall disposition:
As when some one peculiar quality
Doth so possesse a man, that it doth draw
All his affects, his spirits, and his powers,
In their conflctions, all to runne one way,
This may be truly said to be a Humour.
But that a Rooke, in wearing a pyed feather,
The cable hat-band, or the three-pild ruffe,
A yard of shoe-tie, or the Switzers knot
On his French garters, should affect a Humour!
O, 'tis more then most ridiculous.
He speakes pure truth: now if an Idiot
Haue but an apish, or phantasticke straine,
It is his Humour.
Well I will scourge those Apes;
And to these courteous eyes oppose a mirrour,
As large as is the stage, whereon we act:
Where they shall see the times deformity
Anatomiz'd in euery nerue, and sinnew,
With constant courage, and contempt of feare.
ASPER (I vrge it as your friend) take heed,
The dayes are dangerous, full of exception,
And men are growne impatient of reproofe.
Ha, ha:
You might as well haue told me, yond is heauen,
This earth, these men; and all had mou'd alike.
Doe not I know the times condition?
Yes MITIS, and their soules, and who they be
That either will, or can except against me.
None, but a sort of fooles, so sicke in taste,
That they contemne all phisicke of the mind,
And like gald camels kicke at euery touch.
Good men, and vertuous spirits, that lothe their vices,
Will cherish my free labours, loue my liues,
And with the feruour of their shining grace,
Make my braine fruitfull to bring forth more obiects,
Worthy their serious, and intentiue eyes.
But why enforce I this? as fainting? no.
If any here chance to behold himselfe,
Let him not dare to challenge me of wrong,
For, if he shame to haue his follies knowne,
First he should shame to act 'hem: my strict hand
Was made to ceaze on vice, and with a gripe
Squeeze out the humour of such spongie soules,
As licke vp euery idle vanitie.
Why this is right Furor Poeticus!
Kind gentlemen, we hope your patience
Will yet conceiue the best, or entertaine
This supposition, that a mad-man speakes.
What? are you ready there? MITIS sit downe:
And my CORDATVS. Sound hough, and begin.
I leaue you two, as censors, to sit here:
Obserue what I present, and liberally
Speake your opinions, vpon euery Scene,
As it shall passe the view of these spectators.
Nay, now, y'are tedious Sirs, for shame begin.
And MITIS, note me, if in all this front,
You can espy a gallant of this marke,
Who (to be thought one of the iudicious)
Sits with his armes thus wreath'd, his hat pull'd here,
Cryes meaw, and nods, then shakes his empty head,
Will shew more seueral motions in his face,
Then the new London, Rome, or Niniueh,
And (now and then) breakes a drie bisquet iest,
Which that it may more easily be chew'd,
He sleeps in his owne laughter.
Why? will that
Make it be sooner swallow'd?
O, assure you.
Or if it did not, yet as HORACE sings,
" Ieiunus raro stomachus vulgaria temnit,
" Meane cares are welcome still to hungry guests.
'Tis true, but why should we obserue 'hem, ASPER?
O I would know 'hem, for in such assemblies,
Th'are more infectious then the pestilence:
And therefore I would giue them pills to purge,
And make 'hem fit for faire societies.
How monstrous, and detested is't, to see
A fellow, that has neither arte, nor braine,
Sit like an ARISTARCHVS, or starke-asse,
Taking mens lines, with a tabacco face,
In snuffe, still spitting, vsing his wryed lookes
(In nature of a vice) to wrest, and turne
The good aspect of those that shall sit neere him,
From what they doe behold! O, 'tis most vile.
Nay, ASPER.
Peace, MITIS, I doe know your thought.
You'le say, your guests here will except at this:
Pish, you are too timorous, and full of doubt.
Then, he, a patient, shall reiect all physicke,
'Cause the physicion tels him, you are sicke:
Or, if I say, That he is vicious,
You will not heare of vertue. Come, y'are fond.
Shall I be so extrauagant to thinke,
That happy iudgements, and composed spirits,
Will challenge me for taxing such as these?
I am asham'd.
Nay, but good pardon vs:
We must not beare this peremptorie saile,
But vse our best endeuours how to please.
Why, therein I commend your carefull thoughts,
And I will mixe with you in industrie
To please, but whom? attentiue auditors,
Such as will ioyne their profit with their pleasure,
And come to feed their vnderstanding parts:
For these, Ile prodigally spend my selfe,
And speake away my spirit into ayre;
For these, Ile melt my braine into inuention,
Coine new conceits, and hang my richest words
As polisht jewels in their bounteous eares.
But stay, I loose my selfe, and wrong their patience;
If I dwell here, they'le not begin, I see:
Friends sit you still, and entertaine this troupe
With some familiar, and by-conference,
Ile haste them sound. Now gentlemen, I goe
To turne an actor, and a Humorist,
Where (ere I doe resume my present person)
We hope to make the circles of your eyes
Flow with distilled laughter: if we faile,
We must impute it to this onely chance,
"Arte hath an enemy cal'd Ignorance.
How doe you like his spirit, MITIS?
I should like it much better, if he were lesse confident.
Why, doe you suspect his merit?
No, but I feare this will procure him much enuie.
O, that sets the stronger seale on his desert, if he had no enemies, I should esteeme his fortunes most wretched at this instant.
You haue seene his play, CORDATVS? pray you, how is't?
Faith sir, I must refraine to iudge, only this I can say of it, 'tis strange, and of a particular kind by it selfe, somewhat like Vetus Comoedia: a worke that hath bounteously pleased me, how it will answere the generall expectation, I know not.
Does he obserue all the lawes of Comedie in it?
What lawes meane you?
Why, the equall diuision of it into Acts, and Scenes, according to the Terentian manner, his true number of Actors; the furnishing of the typed by pfs Scene with GREX, or CHORVS, and that the whole Argument fall within compasse of a dayes businesse.
O no, these are too nice obseruations.
They are such as must be receiued, by your fauour, or it cannot be authentique.
Troth, I can discerne no such necessity.
No?
No, I assure you, Signior. If those lawes you speake of, had beene deliuered vs, ab initio, and in their present vertue and perfection, there had beene some reason of obeying their powers: but 'tis extant, that that which we call Comoedia, was at first nothing but a simple, and continued Song, sung by one only person, till SVSARIO inuented a second, after him EPICHARMVS a third; PHORMVS, and CHIONIDES deuised to haue foure Actors, with a Prologue and Chorus; to which CRATINVS (long after) added a fift, and sixt; EVPOLIS more; ARISTOPHANES more then they: euery man in the dignitie of his spirit and iudgement, supplyed some-thing. And (though that in him this kinde of Poeme appeared absolute, and fully perfected) yet how is the face of it chang'd since, in MENANDER, PHILEMON, CECILIVS, PLAVTVS, and the rest; who haue vtterly excluded the Chorus, altered the property of the persons, their names, and natures, and augmented it with all liberty, according to the elegancie and disposition of those times, wherein they wrote? I see not then, but we should enioy the same licence, or free power, to illustrate and heighten our inuention as they did; and not bee tyed to those strict and regular formes, which the nicenesse of a few (who are nothing but forme) would thrust vpon vs.
Well, we will not dispute of this now: but what's his Scene?
Marry, Insula Fortunata, Sir.
O, the fortunate Iland? masse, he has bound himselfe to a strict law there.
Why so?
He cannot lightly alter the Scene, without crossing the seas.
He needs not, hauing a whole Iland to run through, I thinke.
No? how comes it then, that in some one Play we see so many seas, countries, and kingdomes, past ouer with such admirable dexteritie?
O, that but shewes how well the Authors can trauaile in their vocation, and out-run the apprehension of their auditorie. But leauing this, I would they would begin once: this protraction is able to sowre the best-settled patience in the Theatre.
They haue answered your wish Sir: they sound.
O, here comes the Prologue: Now sir! if you had staid a little longer, I meant to haue spoke your prologue for you, I faith.
Mary, with all my heart, Sir, you shall doe it yet, and I thanke you.
Nay, nay, stay, stay, heare you?
You could not haue studied to ha' done me a greater benefit at the instant, for I protest to you, I am vnperfect, and (had I spoke it) I must of necessity haue beene out.
Why, but doe you speake this seriously?
Seriously! I (wit's my helpe doe I) and esteeme my selfe in debted to your kindnesse for it.
For what?
Why, for vndertaking the prologue for me.
How? did I vndertake it for you?
Did you! I appeale to all these gentlemen, whether you did or no? Come, it pleases you to cast a strange looke on't now; but 'twill not serue.
'Fore me, but it must serue: and therefore speake your prologue.
And I doe, let me die poyson'd with some venemous hisse, and neuer liue to looke as high as the two-penny roome againe.
He has put you to it, sir.
Sdeath, what a humorous fellow is this? Gentlemen, good ith I can speake no prologue, howsoeuer his weake wit has had the fortune to make this strong vse of me, here before you: but I protest—
Come, come, leaue these fustian protestations: away, come, I cannot abide these gray-headed ceremonies. Boy, fetch me a glasse, quickly, I may bid these gentlemen welcome; giue 'hem a health here: I marl'e whose wit 'twas to put a prologue in you'd ack-buts mouth: they might well thinke hee'd be out of tune, and yet you'ld play vpon him too.
Hang him, dull blocke.
O good words, good words, a well-timberd fellow, he would ha' made a good columne, and he had beene thought on, when the house was a building. O, art thou come? well said; giue mee boy, fill, so. Here's a cup of wine sparkles like a diamond. Gentlewomen (I am sworne to put them in first) and Gentlemen, a round, in place of a bad prologue, I drinke this good draught to your health here, Canarie, the very Elixir and spirit of wine. This is that our Poet calls Castalian liquor, when hee comes abroad (now and then) once in a fortnight, and makes a good meale among Players, where he has Caninum appetitum: mary, at home he keepes a good philosophicall diet, beanes and butter-milke: an honest pure Rogue, hee will take you off three, foure, fiue of these, one after another, and looke vilanously when he has done, like a one-headed CRBERVS (he do not heare me I hope) and then (when his belly is well ballac't, and his braine rigg'd a little) he sailes away withall, as though he would worke wonders when he comes home. He has made a Play here, and he calls it, Euery Man out of his humour: Sbloud, and he get me out of the humour hee has put mee in, Ile trust none of his Tribe againe, while I liue. Gentles, all I can say for him, is, you are welcome. I could wish my bottle here amongst you: but there's an old rule, No pledging your owne health. Mary, if any here be thirsty for it, their best way (that I know) is, sit still, seale vp their lips, and drinke so much of the play, in at their eares.
What may this fellow be, CORDATVS?
Faith, if the time will suffer his description, Ile giue it you. He is one, the Author calls him CARLO BVFFONE, an impudent common iester, a violent rayler, and an incomprehensible Epicure; one, whose company is desir'd of all men, but belou'd of none; hee will sooner lose his soule then a iest, and prophane euen the most holy things, to excite laughter: no honourable or reuerend personage whatsoeuer, can come within the reach of his eye, but is turn'd into all manner of varietie, by his adult'rate simile's.
You paint forth a monster.
He will preferre all Countries before his natiue, and thinkes he can neuer sufficiently, or with admiration enough, deliuer his affectionate conceit of forraine Atheistical policies: but stay—Obserue these, hee'le appeare himselfe anon.
O, this is your enuious man (MACILENTE) I thinke.
The same, sir.
VIri est, fortunae caecuatem facilè ferre.
Tis true; but, Stoique, where (in the vast world)
Doth that man breathe, that can so much command
His bloud, and his affection? well: I see,
I striue in vaine to cure my wounded soule;
For euery cordiall that my thoughts apply,
Turnes to a cor'siue, and doth eate it farder.
There is no taste in this Philosophie,
Tis like a potion that a man should drinke,
But turnes his stomacke with the sight of it.
I am no such pild Cinique, to beleeue
That beggery is the onely happinesse;
Or (with a number of these patient fooles)
To sing: My minde to me a kingdome is,
When the lanke hungrie belly barkes for foode.
I looke into the world, and there I meet
With obiects, that doe strike my bloud-shot eyes
Into my braine: where, when I view my selfe;
Hauing before obseru'd, this mn is great,
Mighty, and fear'd: that, lou'd and highly fauour'd:
A third, thought wise and learned: a fourth, rich,
And therefore honor'd: a fifth, rarely featur'd:
A sixth, admir'd for his nuptiall fortunes:
When I see these (I say) and view my selfe,
I wish the organs of my ight were crackt;
And tht the engine of my griefe could cast
Mine eye-balls, like two globes of wild-fire forth,
To melt this vnproportion'd frame of nature.
Oh, they are thoughts that haue transfixt my heart,
And often (i'the strength of apprehension)
Made my cold passion stand vpon my face,
Like drops of dew on a stiffe cake of yce.
This alludes well to that of the Poet,
Inuidus suspirat, geit, intit que demes,
Sdt frigidus, intuem quod odit.
O peace, you breake the Scene.
Soft, who be these?
I'le lay me downe a while till they be past.
Signior, note this gallant, I pray you.
What is he?
A tame Rooke, youle take him presently: List.
NAy looke you CARLO: this is my Humour now! I haue land and money, my friends left me well, and I will be a Gentleman whatsoeuer it cost me.
Tut, and I take an humour of a thing once, I am like your taylors needle, I goe through: but, for my name, Signior, how thinke you? will it not serue for a gentlemans name, when the Signior is put to it? Ha?
Let me heare: how is't?
Signior Inulso Sogliardo: me thinkes it sounds well.
O excellent! tut, and all fitted to your name, you might very well stand for a gentleman: I know many Sogliardos gentlemen.
Why, and for my wealth I might be a Iustice of Peace.
I, and a Constable for your wit.
All this is my Lordship you see here, and those Farmes you came by.
Good steps to gentility too, mary: but SOGLIARDO, if you affect to be a gentleman indeede, you must obserue all the rare qualities, humours, and complements of a gentleman.
I know it, signior, and if you please to instruct, I am not too good to learne, He assure you.
Inough sir: Ile make admirable vse i'the proiection of my medicine vpon this lumpe of copper here. Ile bethinke me, for you sir.
Signior, I will both pay you, and pray you, and thanke you, and thinke on you.
Is not this purely good?
Sbloud, why should such a prick-card hine as this,
Berich? Ha? a foole? such a transparent gull
That may be scene through? wherefore should he haue land,
Houses, and lordships? O, I could eate my entrailes,
And sinke my soule into the earth with sorrow.
First (to be an accomplisht gentleman, that is, a gentleman of the time) you must giue o're house-keeping in the countrey, and liue altogether in the city amongst gallants; where, at your first apparance, 'twere good you turn'd foure or fiue hundred acres of your best land into two or three trunks of apparel (you may doe it without going to a coniurer) and be sure, you mixe your selfe stil, with such as flourish in the spring of the fashion, and are least popular; studie their carriage, and behauiour in all: learne to play at Primero and Passage, and (euer when you lose) ha'two or three peculiar othes to sweare by, that no man else sweares: but aboue all, protest in your play, and affirme, Vpon your credit; As you are a true gentleman (at euery cast) you may doe it with a safe conscience, I warrant you.
O admirable rare! he cannot choose but be a gentleman, that ha's these excellent gifts: more, more, I beseech you.
You must endeuour to feede cleanly at your Ordinarie, sit melancholy, and picke your teeth when you cannot speake: and when you come to Playes, be humorous, looke with a good startch't face, and ruffle your brow like a new boot; laugh at nothing but your owne iests, or else as the Noblemen laugh. That's a speciall grace you must obserue.
I warrant you, sir.
I, and it o'the stage, and stout: prouided, you haue a good suit.
O, I'le haue a suit only for that, sir.
You must talke much of your kinred, and allies.
Lies! no Signior, I shall not neede to doe so, I haue kinred i'the city to talke of: I haue a neece is a marchants wife; and a nephew, my brother SORDIDOS sonne, of the Innes of Court.
O, but you must pretend alliance with Courtiers and great persons: and euer when you are to dine or suppe in any strange presence, hire a fellow with a great chaine (though it be copper it's no matter) to bring you letters, feign'd from such a Nobleman, or such a Knight, or such a Ladie, To their worshipfull, right rare, and noble qualified friend or kinsman, Signior Inulso Sogliardo; giue your selfe stile enough. And there (while you intend circumstances of newes, or enquiry of their health, or so) one of your familiars (whom you must carry about you still) breakes it vp (as 'twere in a iest) and reades it publikely at the table: at which, you must seeme to take as vnpardonable offence, as if he had torne your Mistris colours, or breath'd vpon her picture; and pursue it with that hot grace, as if you would aduance a challenge vpon it presently.
Stay, I doe not like that humour of challenge, it may be accepted; but I'le tell you what's my humour now: I will doe this. I will take occasion of sending one of my suites to the Taylors to haue the pocke repaired, or so; and there such a letter, as you talke of (broke open and all) shall be left: O, the Taylor vvill presently giue out what I am, vpon the reading of it, vvorth twentie of your Gallants.
But then you must put on an extreme face of discontentment at your mans negligence.
O, so I vvill, and beat him too: I'le haue a man for the purpose.
You may; you haue land and crownes: O partiall fate!
Masse well remembred, you must keepe your men gallant, at the first, fine pyd liueries, laid vvith good gold lace, there's no losse in it, they may tip't off and pawne it, vvhen they lacke victuals.
By'r Ladie, that is chargeable Signior, 'twill bring a man in debt.
Debt? why, that's the more for your credit sir: it's an excellent policy to owe much in these daies, if you note it.
As how good Signior? I would faine be a Polititian.
O! looke where you are indebted any great summe, your creditor obserues you with no lesse regard, then if hee were bound to you for some huge benefit, and will quake to giue you the least cause of offence, lest he loose his money. I assure you (in these times) no man has his seruant more obsequious and pliant, then gentlemen their creditors: to whom (if at any time) you pay but a moitie, or a fourth part, it comes more acceptedly, then if you gaue them a new-yeares gift.
I perceiue you, sir: I will take vp, and bring my selfe in credit sure.
Mary this, alwaies beware you commerce not with bankrupts, or poore needie Ludgathians ▪ they are impudent creatures, turbulent spirits, they care not what violent tragedies they stirre, nor how they play fast and loose with a poore gentlemans fortunes, to get their owne. Mary, these rich fellowes (that ha' the vvorld, or the better part of it, sleeping in their counting-houses) they are ten times more placable, they; either feare, hope, or modestie, restraines them from offering any outrages: but this is nothing to your followers, you shall not run a penny more in arrerage for them, and you list your selfe.
No? how should I keepe 'hem then?
Keepe 'hem? Sbloud let them keepe themselues, they are no sheepe, are they? What? you shall come in houses, where plate, apparrell, iewels, and diuers other pretie commodities lye negligently scattered, and I would ha' those Mercuries follow me (I trow) should remember they had not their fingers for nothing.
That's not so good, me thinkes.
Why, after you haue kept 'hem a fortnight, or so, and shew'd 'hem ynough to the world, you may turne 'hem away, and keepe no more but a boy, it's ynough.
Nay, my humour is not for boyes, Ile keepe men, and I keepe any; and Ile giue coats, that's my humour: but I lacke a cullisen.
Why, now you ride to the citie, you may buy one, Ile bring you where you shall ha' your choise for money.
Can you, sir?
O, I: you shall haue one take measure of you, and make you a Co of armes, to fit you of vvhat fashion you vvill.
By word of mouth, I thanke you, Signior; Ile be once a little prodigall in a humour, i' faith, and haue a most prodigious coat.
Torment and death! breake head and braine at once,
To be deliuer'd of your fighting issue.
Who can endure to see blinde Fortune dote thus?
To be enamour'd on this dustie turfe?
This clod? a whorson puck-fist? O god, god, god, god, &c.
I could runne wild vvith griefe now, to behold
The ranknesse of her bounties, that doth breed
Such bull-rushes; these mushrompe gentlemen,
That shoot vp in a night to place, and vvorship.
Let him alone, some stray, some stray.
Nay, I will examine him before I goe, sure.
The Lord of the soile ha's al vvests, and straies here? ha's he not?
Yes, sir.
Faith, then I pitty the poore fellow, he's falne into a fooles hands.
Sirrah, who gaue you commission to lye in my lordship?
Your lordship?
How? my lordship? doe you know me, sir?
I doe know you, sir.
S'heart, he answeres him like an eccho.
Why, who am I, Sir?
One of those that fortune fauours.
The Perphrasis of a foole; Ile obserue this better.
That fortune fauours? how meane you that, friend?
I meane simply. THat you are one that liues not by your vvits.
By my wits? No sir, I scorne to liue by my wits, I. I haue better meanes, I tell thee, then to take such base courses, as to liue by my wits. Sbloud, doest thou thinke I liue by my wits?
Me thinkes, Iester, you should not relilsh this well.
Ha? does he know me?
Though yours bee the worst vse a man can put his wit to, of thousands, to prostitute it at euery tauerne and ordinarie; yet (mee thinkes) you should haue turn'd your broad side at this, and haue beene readie with an Apologie, able to sinke this hulke of ignorance into the bottome, and depth of his contempt.
Sbloud 'tis MACILENTE! Signior, you are well encountred, how is't? O, we must not regard what he saies man, a trout, a shallow foole, he ha's no more braine then a butter-flie, a meere stuft suit, he looks like a mustie bottle, new vvickerd, his head's the corke, light, light. I am glad to see you so well return'd, Signior.
You are? Gramercie, good IANVS.
Is he one of your acquaintance? I loue him the better for that.
Gods precious, come away man, what doe you meane? and you knew him as I doe, you'ld shun him, as you'ld doe the plague?
Why, sir?
O, hee's a blacke fellow, take heed on him.
Is he a Scholler, or a Souldier?
Both, both; a leane mungrell, he lookes as if he were chapfalne, with barking at other mens good fortunes: 'ware how you offend him, he carries oile and fire in his pen, vvill scald vvhere it drops: his spirit's like powder, quick, violent: hee'le blow a man vp with a jest: I feare him vvorse then a rotten wall do's the cannon, shake an houre after, at the report. Away, come not neere him.
For Gods sake let's be gone, and he be a Scholler, you know I cannot abide him, I had as leeue see a Cockatrice, specially as cockatrices goe now.
What, you'le stay, signior? this gentleman SOGLIARDO, and I, are to visit the knight PVNTARVOLO, and from thence to the citie, wee shall meet there.
I, vvhen I cannot shun you, vve will meet.
'Tis strange! of all the creatures I haue seene,
I enuie not this BVFFON, for indeede
Neither his fortunes, nor his parts deserue it:
But I doe hate him, as I hate the deuill,
Or that brasse-visag'd monster Barbarisme.
O, 'tis an open-throated, black-mouth'd curre,
That bites at all, but eates on those that feed him.
A slaue, that to your face will (serpent-like)
Creepe on the ground, as he would eate the dust;
And to your backe will turne the taile, and sting
More deadly then a scorpion: Stay, who's this?
Now for my soule, another minion
Of the old lady Chance's: I'le obserue him.
O Rare! good, good, good, good, good! I thanke my Starres, I thanke my Starres for it.
Said I not true? doth not his passion speake
Out of my diuination? O my senses,
Why loose you not your powers, and become
Dull'd, if not deadded vvith this spectacle?
I know him, 'tis SORDIDO, the farmer,
A Boore, and brother to that swine vvas here.
Excellent, excellent, excellent! as I vvould wish, as I vvould vvish.
See how the strumpet Fortune tickles him,
And makes him swoune vvith laughter, ô, ô, ô.
Ha, ha, ha, I vvill not sow my grounds this yeere. Let mee see, vvhat hauest shall vve haue? Iune, Iuly, August?
What is't, a Prognostication rap's him so?
The xx, xxi, xxij, daies, raine and vvinde, O good, good! the xxiij, and xxiiij, raine and some winde, good! the xxvi, raine, good still! xxvi, xxvij, xxviij, winde and some raine; vvould it had been raine and some vvinde: vvell 'tis good (when it can be no better) xxix, inclining to raine: inclining to raine? that's not so good now. xxx, and xxxi, vvinde and no raine: no raine? S'lid stay; this is vvorse and vvorse: what saies he of S. Swithins? turne back, looke, S. Swithins: no raine?
O, here's a precious durty damned rogue,
That fats himselfe vvith expectation
Of rotten weather, and vnseason'd howers;
And he is rich for it, an elder brother!
His barnes are full! his reekes, and mowes vvell trod!
His garners cracke vvith store! O, tis vvell; ha, ha, ha:
A plague consume thee, and thy house.
O here, S. Swithins, the xv day, variable vveather, for the most part raine, good; for the most part raine: Why, it should raine fortie daies after, now, more or lesse, it vvas a rule held, afore I vvas able to hold a plough, and yet here are two daies, no raine; ha? it makes me muse. Weele see how the next moneth begins, if that bee better. September, first, second, third, and fourth daies, rainy, and blustering; this is vvell now: fift, sixt, seuenth, eight, and ninth, rainy, vvith some thunder; I mary, this is excellent; the other was false printed sure: the tenth, and eleuenth, great store of raine; O good, good, good, good, good! the twelth, thirteenth, and fourteenth daies, raine; good still: fifteenth, and sixteenth, raine; good still: seuenteenth, and eighteenth, raine, good still; nineteenth, and twentieth, good still, good still, good still, good still, good still! one and twentieth, some raine; some raine? vvell, vve must be patient, and attend the heauens pleasure, vvould it vvere more though: the one and tvventieth, tvvo and tvventieth, three and tvventieth, great tempest of raine, thunder, and lightning. O good againe, past expectation good! I thanke my blessed angell; neuer, neuer, Laid I penny better out, then this, To purchase this deare booke: not deare for price, And yet of me as dearly priz'd as life, Since in it, is contain'd the very life, Bloud, strength, and sinnewes of my happinesse. Blest be the houre, vvherein I bought this booke, His studies happy, that compos'd the booke, And the man fortunate, that sold the booke. Sleepe vvith this charme, and be as true to me, As I am ioy'd, and confident in thee.
Ha, ha, ha? I' not this good? Is't not pleasing this?
Ha, ha, ha! God pardon me! ha, ha!
Is't possible that such a spacious villaine
Should liue, and not be plagu'd? or lies he hid
Within the vvrinckled bosome of the vvorld,
Where heauen cannot see him? Sbloud (me thinkes)
'Tis rare, and strange, that he should breathe, and vvalke,
Feede vvith disgestion, sleepe, enjoy his health,
And (like a boistrous vvhale, svvallowing the poore)
Still swimme in vvealth, and pleasure! is 't not strange?
Vnlesse his house, and skin were thunder-proofe,
I vvonder at it! Me thinkes, novv, the hecticke,
Gout, leprosie, or some such loth'd disease
Might light vpon him; or that fire (from heauen)
Might fall vpon his barnes; or mice, and rats
Eate vp his graine; or else that it might rot
Within the hoary reekes, e'ne as it stands:
Me thinkes this might be well; and after all
The deuill might come and fetch him. I, 'tis true!
Meane time he sursets in prosperitie,
And thou (in enuie of him) gnaw'st thy selfe,
Peace, foole, get hence, and tell thy vexed spirit,
"Wealth in this age will scarcely looke on merit.
Who brought this same, sirha?
Mary, sir, one of the Iustices men, he saies 'tis a precept, and all their hands be at it:
I, and the prints of them sticke in my flesh,
Deeper then i'their letters: They haue sent me
Pils wrapt in paper here, that should I take 'hem,
Would poison all the sweetness of my booke,
And turne my honey into homlocke juyce.
But I am wiser then to serue their precepts,
Or follow their prescriptions. Here's a deuice,
To charge me bring my graine vnto the markets:
I, much, when I haue neither barne nor garner,
Nor earth to hide it in, I'le bring it; till then,
Ech corne I send shall be as big as Pales.
O, but (say some) the poore are like to starue.
Why let 'hem starue, what's that to me? are bees
Bound to keepe life in drones, and idle moths? no:
Why such are these (that terme themselues the poore,
Only because they would be pittied,
But are indeed a sort of lazie beggers)
Licencious rogues, and sturdie vagabonds,
Bred (by the sloth of a fat plentious yeere)
Like snakes, in heat of summer, out of dung,
And this is all that these cheape times are good for:
Whereas a holsome, and penurious dearth
Purges the soile of such vile excrements,
And kils the vipers vp.
O, but master,
Take heed they heare you not.
Why so?
They will exclaime against you.
I, their exclaimes
Moue me as much, as thy breath moues a mountaine!
Poore wormes, they hisse at me, whilst I at home
Can be contented to applaud my selfe,
To fit and clap my hands, and laugh, and leape,
Knocking my head against my roofe, with ioy
To see how plumpe my bags are, and my barnes.
Sirrah, goe, hie you home, and bid your fellowes,
Get all their flailes readie, again' I come.
I will, Sir.
I'le instantly set all my hines to thrashing
Of a whole reeke of corne, which I will hide
Vnder the ground; and with the straw thereof
I'le stuffe the out-sides of my other mowes:
That done, I'le haue 'hem emptie all my garners,
And i' the friendly earth bury my store,
That, when the searchers come, they may suppose
All's spent, and that my fortunes were belied.
And, to lend more opinion to my want,
And stop that many-mouthed vulgar dog,
(Which else would still be baying at my dore)
Each market day, I will be seene to buy
Part of the purest wheat, as for my houshold:
Where when it comes, it shall encrease my heapes,
Twill yeeld me treble gaine, at this deare time,
Promisd in this deare booke: I haue cast all.
Till then I will not sell an eare. I'le hang first.
O, I shall make my prizes as I list,
My house and I can feed on pease, and barley,
What though a world of wretches starue the while?
"He that will thriue, must thinke no courses vile.
Now, Signior, how approue you this? haue the Humorists exprest themselues truly or no?
Yes (if it be well prosecuted) 'tis hitherto happy ynough: but me thinks, MACILENTE went hence too soone, hee might haue beene made to stay, and speake somewhat in reproofe of SORDIDO'S wretchednesse, now at the last.
O, no, that had beene extremely improper, besides, he had continued the Scene too long with him, as't was, being in no more action.
You may enforce the length, as a necessary reason; but for propriety, the Scene would very well haue borne it, in my iudgement.
O, worst of both: why, you mistake his Humour vtterly then.
How? doe I mistake it? is't not enuie?
Yes, but you must vnderstand, Signior, he enuies him not as he is a villaine, a wolfe i' the common-wealth, but as he is rich, and fortunate; for the true condition of enuie, is, Dolor altenae foelicitatis, to haue our eyes continually sixt vpon another mans prosperitie, that is, his chiefe happinesse, and to grieue at that. Whereas, if we make his monstrous, and abhord actions our obiect, the griefe (we take then) comes neerer the nature of hate, then enuie, as being bred out of a kinde of contempt and lothing, in our selues.
So you'le infer it had beene hate, not enuie in him, to reprehend the humour of SORDIDO?
Right, for what a man truly enuies in another, he could alwaies loue, and cherish in himselfe: but no man truly reprehends in another, what he loues in himselfe; therefore reprehension is out of his hate. And this distinction hath he himselfe made in a speech there (if you markt it) where he saies, I enuie not this BVFFON, but I hate him.
Stay, sir: I enuie not this BVFFON, but I hate him: why might he not as well haue hated SORDIDO, as him?
No, sir, there was subiect for his enuie in SORDIDO; his wealth: So was there not in the other. He stood possest of no one eminent gift, but amostodious, and fiend-like disposition, that would turne charitie it selfe into hate, much more enuie, for the present.
You haue satisfied mee, sir; O, here comes the Foole and the Iester, againe, me thinkes.
'Twere pitty they should be parted, sir.
What bright-shining gallant's that with them? the knight they went to?
No, sir, this is one Monsieur FASTIDIVS BRISKE, otherwise cal'd the fresh Frenchefied courtier.
A humorist too?
As humorous as quick-siluer, doe but obserue him, the Scene is the coutry still, remember.
CINEDO, watch when the knight comes, and giue vs word.
I will, sir.
How lik'st thou my boy, CARLO?
O, well, well. He lookes like a colonell of the Pigmies horse, or one of these motions, in a great antique clock: he would shew well vpon a haberdashers stall, at a corner shop, rarely.
S'heart, what a damn'd witty rogne's this? how he confounds with his simile's?
Better with simile's, then smiles: and whither were you riding now, Signior?
Who, I? what a silly iest's that? whither should I ride, but to the court?
O, pardon me, sir, twentie places more: your hot-house, or your whore-house—
By the vertue of my soule, this knight dwels in Elizium, here.
Hee's gone ow, I thought he would flie out presently. These be our nimble-spirited Caso's, that ha' their euasions at pleasure, will run ouer a bog like your wild Irish: no sooner started, but they'le leape from one thing to another, like a squirrell, heigh: dance! and doe tricks i' their discourse, from fire to water, from water to aire, from aire to earth, as if their tongues did but e'en licke the foure elements ouer, and away.
Sirrha, CARLO, thou neuer aw'st my grey-hobbie yet, didst thou?
No: ha' you such a one?
The best in Europe (my good villaine) thou'lt say, when thou seest him.
But when shall I see him?
There was a noble man i' the court offered me 100. pound for him, by this light: a fine little fiery slaue, he runs like a (oh) excellent, excellent! with the very sound of the spurre.
How? the sound of the spurre?
O, it's your only humour now extant, sir: a good gingle, a good gingle.
Sbloud, you shall see him turne morris-dancer, he ha's got him bels, a good sute, and a hobby-horse.
Signior, now you talke of a hobby-horse, I know where one is, will not be giuen for a brace of angels.
How is that, Sir?
Mary, sir, I am telling this gentleman of a hobby-horse, it was my fathers indeed, and (though I say it—
That should not say it) on, on.
He did dance in it, with as good humour, and as good regard, as any man of his degree what soeuer, being no gentleman: I haue danc't in it my selfe too.
Not since the humour of gentilitie was vpon you? did you?
Yes, once; mary, that was but to shew what a gentleman might doe, in a humour.
O, very good.
Why, this fellowes discourse were nothing, but for the word Humour.
O, beare with him, and he should lacke matter, and words too, 'twere pittifull.
Nay, looke you, sir, there's ne're a gentleman i' the countrey has the like humours, for the hobby-horse, as I haue; I haue the method for the threeding of the needle and all, the—
How, the method.
I, the leigeritie for that, and the wigh-hie, and the daggers in the nose, and the trauels of the egge from singer to singer, all the humours incident to the quality. The horse hangs at home in my parlor. I'le keepe it for a monument, as long as I liue, sure.
Doe so; and when you die, 'twill be an excellent trophee, to hang ouer your tombe.
Masse, and I'le haue a tombe (now I thinke on't) 'tis but so much charges.
Best build it in your life time then, your heires may hap to forget it else.
Nay, I meane so, Ile not trust to them.
No, for heires, and executors, are growne damnably carelesse, specially, since the ghosts of testators left walking: how like you him, Signior?
Fore heauens, his humour arrides me exceedingly.
Arrides you?
I, pleases me (a pox on't) I am so haunted at the count, and at my lodging, with your refin'd choise spirits, that it makes me cleane of another garbe, another sheafe, I know not how! I cannot frame me to your harsh vulgar phrase, 'tis against my genius.
Signior CARLO.
This is right to that of HORACE, Dm vitant slli vitis, in contraria currunt: so this gallant, labouring to anoid popularitie, fals into a habit of affection, ten thousand times hatefuller then the former.
Who, hee? a gull, a foole, no salt in him i' the earth, man: hee looks like a fresh salmon kept in a tub, hee'le be spent shortly. His braine's lighter then his feather already, and his tongue more subiect to lie, then that's to wag: he sleepes with a muske-cat euery night, and walkes all day hung'd in pomander chaines for penance: he ha's his skin tan'd in ciuet, to make his complexion strong, and the sweetnesse of his youth lasting in the sense of his sweet lady. A good emptie puffe, he loues you well, Signior.
There shall be no loue lost, sir, Ile assure you.
Nay, CARLO, I am not happy i' thy loue, I see: pr'y thee suffer me to enioy thy company a little (sweet mischiefe) by this aire, I shall enuy this gentlemans place in thy affections, if you be thus priuate, yfaith. How now? is the knight arriu'd?
No, sir, but 'tis guest he will arriue presently, by his fore-runners.
His bounds! by MINERVA an excellent figure; a good boy.
You should giue him a french crowne for it: the boy would finde two better figures i' that, and a good figure of your bounty beside.
Tut, the boy wants no crownes.
No crowne: speake i' the singular number, and wee'le beleeue you.
Nay, thou art so capriciously conceited now. Sirra (damnation) I haue heard this knight PVNTARVOLO, reported to bee a gentleman of exceeding good humour; thou know'st him: pr'ythee, how is his disposition? I ne're was so fauour'd of my starres, as to see him yet. Boy, doe you looke to the hobby?
I, sir, the groome has set him vp.
'Tis well: I rid out of my way of intent to visit him, and take knowledge of his— Nay, good wickednesse, his humour, his humour.
Why, he loues dogs, and hawkes, and his wife, well: he has a good riding face, and he can fit a great horse; hee will taint a staffe well at tilt: when he is mounted, he lookes like the signe of the George, that's all I know; saue, that in stead of a dragon, he will brandish against a tree, and breake his sword as conidently vpon the knottie barke, as the other did vpon the skales of the beast.
O, but this is nothing to that's deliuerd of him. They say hee has dialogues, and discourses betweene his horse, himselfe, and his dogge: and that he will court his owne lady; as shee were a stranger neuer encounter'd before.
I, that he will, and make fresh loue to her euery morning: this gentleman has beene a spectator of it, Signior Insulso.
I am resolute to keepe a page: say you sir?
You haue seene Signior Puntaruolo accost his lady?
O, I sir.
And how is the manner of it, pr'ythee, good Signior?
Faith sir, in very good sort, he has his humours for it, sir: as first, (suppose he were now to come from riding, or hunting, or so) he has his trumpet to sound, and then the waiting gentlewoman, shee lookes out, and then hee speakes, and then shee speakes—very pretty yfaith, gentlemen.
Why, but doe you remember no particulars, Signior?
O, yes sir: first, the gentlewoman, shee lookes out at the window.
After the trumpet has summon'd a parle? not before?
No, sir, not before: and then saies he—ha, ha, ha, ha, &c.
What saies he? be not rapt so.
Saies he—ha, ha, ha, ha, &c.
Nay, speake, speake.
Ha, ha, ha, saies he: God saue you, saies he: ha, ha, &c.
Was this the ridiculous motiue to all this passion?
Nay, that, that comes after, is—ha, ha, ha, ha, &c.
Doubtlesse, he apprehends more then he vtters, this fellow: or else.
List, list, they are come from hunting: stand by, close vnder this , and you shall see it done, better then I can shew it.
So it had need, 'twill scarce poize the obseruation else.
Faith I remember all, but the manner of it is quite out of my head.
O, with-draw, with-draw, it cannot bee but a most pleasing obiect.
FOrrester, giue winde to thy borne. Inough, by this, the sound hath toucht the eares of the enclosed: Depart, leaue the dogge, and take with thee what thou hast deseru'd, the horne, and thankes.
I, mary, there's some taste in this.
Is't not good?
Ah, peace, now aboue, now aboue!
Stay: mine eye hath (on the instant) through the bountie of the window, receiu'd the forme of a Nymph. I will step forward three pases: of the which, I will barely retire one; and (after some little flexure of the knee) with an erected grace salute her (one, two, and three.) Sweet lady, God saue you.
No, forsooth: I am but the waiting gentlewoman.
He knew that before.
Pardon me: Humanum est errare.
He learn'd that of his chaplaine.
To the perfection of complement (which is the Diall of the thought, and guided by the Sunne of your beauties) are requir'd these three specials: the gnomon, the puntilio's, and the superficies: the superficies, is that we call, place; the puntilio's, circumstance; and the gnomon, ceremony: in either of which, for a stranger to erre, 'tis easie and facile, and such am I.
True, not knowing her horizon, he must needes erre: which I feare, he knowes too well.
What call you the lord of the castle? sweet face.
The lord of the castle is a knight, sir; Signior PVNTARVOLO.
PVNTARVOLO? O.
Now must he ruminate.
Does the wench know him all this while, then?
O, doc you know me, man? why, therein lies the sirrup of the iest, it's a proiect, a designement of his owne, a thing studied, and rehearst as ordinarily at his comming from hawking, or hunting, as a jigge after a play.
I, e'en like your jigge, sir.
'Tis a most sumptuous and stately edifice! of what yeeres is the knight, faire damsell?
Faith, much about your yeeres, sir.
What complexion, or what stature beares he?
Of your stature, and very neere vpon your complexion.
Mine is melancholy:
So is the dogges, iust.
And doth argue constancie, chiely in loue. What are his endowments? Is he courteous?
O, the most courteous knight in Christian land, sir.
Is he magnanimous?
As the skin betweene your browes, sir.
Is he bountifull?
'Slud, he takes an inuentory of his owne good parts.
Bountifull? I, sir, I would you should know it; the poore are seen'd at his gate, early, and late, sir.
Is he learned?
O, I sir, he can speake the French, and Italian.
Then he is trauail'd?
I, forsooth, he hath beene beyond-sea, once, or twise.
As far as Paris, to fetch ouer a fashion, and come back againe.
Is he religious?
Religious? I know not what you call religious, but hee goes to church, I am sure.
S'lid, methinkes, these answeres should offend him.
T'ut, no; he knowes they are excellent, and to her capacity, that speakes 'hem.
Would I might see his face.
Shee should let down a glasse from the window at that word, and request him to looke in't.
Doubtlesse, the gentleman is most exact, and absolutely qualified? doth the castle containe him?
No, sir, he is from home, but his lady is within.
His lady? what, is shee faire? splendidious? and amiable?
O, Lord, sir!
Pr'ythee, deare Nymph, intreat her beauties to shine on this side of the building.
That he may erect a new dyall of complement, with his gnomons, and his puntilio's.
Nay, thou art such another Cinique now, a man had need walke vprightly before thee.
Heart, can any man walke more vpright then hee does? Looke, looke; as if he went in a frame, or had a sute of wanescot on: and the dogge watching him, let he should leape out on't.
O, villaine!
Well, and e'er I meet him in the city, I'le ha'him ioynted, I'le pawne him in east cheape, among the butchers else.
Peace, who be these, CARLO?
YOnder's your god-father; doe your duty to him, sonne.
This, sir? a poore elder brother of mine, sir, a yoman, may dispend some seuen or eight hundred a yeere: that's his son, my nephew, there.
You are not ill-come, neighbour SORDIDO, though I haue not yet said, well-come: what, my god-sonne is growne a great proficient by this?
I hope he will grow great one day, sir.
What does he studie? the law?
I sir, he is a gentleman, though his father be but a yeoman.
What call you your nephew, signior?
Mary, his name is FVNGOSO.
FVNGOSO? O, he lookt somwhat like a spunge in that pinck yellow doublet, me thought: well, make much of him; I see he was neuer borne to ride vpon a moile.
My lady will come presently, sir.
O, now, now.
Stand by, retire your selues a space: nay, pray you, forget not the vse of your hat; the aire is piercing.
What? will not their presence preuaile against the current of his humour?
O, no: it's a meere floud, a torrent, carries all afore it.
What more then heauenly pulchritude is this?
What magazine, or treasurie of blisse?
Dazle, you organs to my optique sense,
To view a creature of such eminence:
O, I am planet-strooke, and in yond sphere,
A brighter sharre then VENVS doth appeare!
How? in verse!
An extasie, an extasie, man.
Is your desire to speake with me, sir knight?
He will tell you that anon; neither his braine, nor his body, are yet moulded for an answere.
Most debonaire, and luculent lady, I decline mee low, as the basis of your altitude.
He makes congies to his wife in geometricall proportions.
Is't possible there should be any such Humorist?
Very easily possible, Sir, you see there is.
I haue scarse collected my spirits, but lately scatter'd in the admiration of your forme; to which (if the bounties of your minde be any way responsible) I doubt not, but my desires shall finde a smooth, and secure passage. I am a poore knight errant (lady) that hunting in the adjacent forrest, was by aduenture in the pursuit of a hart, brought to this place; which hart (deare Madame) escaped by enchantment: the euening approching (my selfe, and seruant wearied) my suit is, to enter your faire castle, and refresh me.
Sir knight, albeit it be not vsuall with me (chiefly in the absence of a husband) to admit any entrance to strangers, yet in the true regard of those innated vertues, and faire parts, which so striue to expresse themselues, in you; I am resolu'd to entertaine you to the best of my vnworthy power which I acknowledge to bee nothing, valew'd with what so worthy a person may deserue. Please you but stay, while I descend.
Most admir'd lady, you astonish me!
What? with speaking a speech of your owne penning?
Nay, looke; pry thee peace.
Pox on't▪ I am impatient of such fopperie.
O, let's heare the rest.
What? a tedious chapter of courtship, after sir LANCELOT, and queene GVEVENER? away. I mar'le in what dull cold nooke he found this lady out? that (being a woman) shee was blest with no more copie of wit, but to serue his humour thus. 'Slud, I thinke he feeds her with porridge, I: shee could ne're haue such a thick braine else.
Why, is porridge so hurtfull, signior?
O, nothing vnder heauen more preiudiciall to those ascending subtile powers, or doth sooner abate that which we call, acumen ingenij, then your grosse fare: why, I'le make you an instance: your city wiues, but obserue 'hem, you ha'not more perfect true fooles i' the world bred, then they are generally; and yet you see (by the finenesse and delicacy of their diet, liuing into the far capons, drinking your rich wines, feeding on larkes, sparrowes, potato-pies, and such good vnctuous meats) how their wits are refin'd, and rarefi'd! and sometimes a very quintessence of conceit flowes from 'hem, able to drowne a weake apprehension.
Peace, here comes the lady.
Gods me, here's company: turne in againe.
Slight, our presence has cut off the conuoy of the iest.
All the better; I am glad on't: for the issue was very perspicuous Come, let's discouer, and salute the knight.
Stay: who be these that addresse themselues towards vs? what, CARLO? now, by the sincerity of my soule, welcome; welcome gentlemen: and how doest thou, thou grand scourge; or, second vntrusse of the rime?
Faith, spending my mettall, in this reeling world (here and there) as the sway of my affection carries me, and perhaps stumble vpon a yeoman pheuterer, as I doe now; or one of Fortunes moiles, laden with treasure, and an empty cloke-bagge following him, gaping when a bagge will vntie.
Peace, you, ban-dogge, peace: what briske Nimfadoro is that in the white virgin boot there?
Mary, sir, one, that I must entreat you take a very particular knowledge of, and with more then ordinary respect: Monsieur FASTIDIVS.
Sir, I could wish that for the time of your vouchsaft abiding here, and more reall entertainment, this my house stood on the Muses hill; and these my orchards were those of the Hesperide's.
I possesse as much in your wish, sir, as if I were made lord of the Indies; and I pray you, beleeue it.
I haue a better opinion of his faith, then to thinke it will be so corrupted.
Come, brother, I'le bring you acquainted with gentlemen, and good fellowes, such as shall doe you more grace, then—
Brother, I hunger not for such acquaintance:
Doe you take heede, lest—
Husht: my brother, sir, for want of education, sir, somewhat nodding to the boore, the clowne: but I request you in priuate, sir.
By heauen, it's a very fine sute of clothes!
Doe you obserue that, signior? there's another humour has new crackt the shell.
What? he is enamour'd of the fashion, is he?
O, you forestall the iest.
I mar'le what it might stand him in!
Nephew?
'Fore mee, it's an excellent sute, and as neatly becomes him. What said you, vncle?
When saw you my neece?
Mary, yester-night I supt there. That kinde of boot does very rare too!
And what newes heare you?
The guilt spurre and all! would I were hang'd, but 'tis exceeding good. Say you, vncle?
Your minde is carried away with somewhat else: I aske what newes you heare?
Troth, we heare none. In good faith, I was neuer so pleas'd with a fashion, daies of my life! O (and I might haue but my wish) I'ld aske no more of god now, but such a suit, such a hat, such a band, such a doublet, such a hose, such a boot, and such a—
They say, there's a new Motion of the city of Niniueh, with IONAS, and the whale, to be seene at Fleet-bridge? you can tell, cousin?
Here's such a world of question with him, now: Yes, I thinke there be such a thing, I saw the picture: would he would once be satisfi'd. Let me see, the doublet, say fifty shillings the doublet, and betweene three or foure pound the hose; then bootes, hat, and band: some ten or eleuen pound would doe it all, and suit me for the heauens.
I'le see all those deuices, and I come to London once.
Gods s'lid, and I could compasse it, 'twere rare: harke you, vncle.
What saies my nephew?
Faith vncle, I'ld ha' desir'd you to haue made a motion for me to my father in a thing, that—walke aside and I'le tell you, sir, no more but this: there's a parcell of law—bookes, (some twenty pounds worth) that lie in a place for little more then halfe the money they cost; and I thinke for some twelue pound, or twenty marke, I could goe neere to redeeme 'hem; there's PLOWDEN, DIAR, BROOKE, and FITZ-HERBERT, diuers such, as I must haue ere long: and you know, I were as good saue fiue or sixe pound as not, vncle. I pray you, moue it forme.
That I will: when would you haue me doe it? presently?
O, I, I pray you, good vncle: God send mee good luck; Lord (andt be thy will) prosper it: O, my starres, now, now, if it take now, I am made foreuer.
Shall I tell you, sir? by this aire, I am the most beholding to that lord, of any gentleman liuing; hee does vse mee the most honorably, and with the greatest respect, more indeed, then can be vtter'd with any opinion of truth.
Then, haue you the count GRATIATO?
As true nobles gentleman too, as any breathes; I am exceedingly endear'd to his loue: by this hand (I protest to you, signior, I speake it not gloriously, nor out of affectation, but) there's hee, and the count FRVGALE, signior ILLVSTRE, signior LVCVLENTO, and a sort of 'hem; that (when I am at court) they doe share me amongst 'hem. Happy is he can enioy me most priuate. I doe wish my selfe sometime an vbiquitarie for their loue, in good faith.
There's ne're a one of these, but might lie a weeke on the rack, ere they could bring forth his name; and yet he powres them out as familiarly, as if he had scene 'hem stand by the fire i' the presence, or tane tabacco with them, ouer the stage, i' the lords roome.
Then you must of necessity know our court-starre there? that planet of wit, MADDONA SAVIOLINA?
O, lord sir! my mistris.
Is shee your mistris?
Faith, here be some slight fauours of hers, sir, that doe speake it, shee is: as this scarfe, sir, or this ribb and in mine eare, or so; this feather grew in her sweet sanne sometimes, though now it be my poore fortunes to weare it, as you see, sir: flight, flight, a foolish toy.
Well, shee is the lady of a most exalted, and ingenious spirit.
Did you euer heare any woman speake like her? or enricht with a more plentifull discourse?
O, villanous! nothing but sound, sound, a meere eccho; shee speakes as shee goes tir'd, in cob-web lawne, light, thin: good enough to catch flies withall.
O, manage your affections.
Well, if thou beest not plagu'd for this blasphemie, one day—
Come, regard not a iester: it is in the power of my purse, to make him speake well, or ill, of me.
Sir, I affirme it to you (vpon my credit, and iudgement) shee has the most harmonious, and musicall straine of wit, that euer tempted a true eare; and yet to see, a rude tongue would profine heauen, if it could.
I am not ignorant of it, sir.
Oh, it flowes from her like nectar, and shee doth giue it, that sweet, quick grace, and exornation in the composure, that (by this good aire, as I am an honest man, would I might neuer stirre, sir, but) shee does obserue as pure a phrase, and vse as choise figures in her ordinary conferences, as any be i' the Arcadia.
Or rather in Greenes workes, whence she may steale with more security.
Well, if ten pound will fetch 'hem, you shall haue it, but I'le part with no more.
I'le trie what that will doe, if you please.
Doe so: and when you haue 'hem, studie hard.
Yes, sir. And I could studie to get forty shillings more now! well, I will put my selfe into the fashion, as farre as this will goe presently.
I wonder it raines not! the Almanack saies wee should haue store of raine, today.
Why, sir, to morrow I will associate you to court my selfe; and from thence to the city, about a businesse, a proiect I haue, I will expose it to you, sir: CARLO, I am sure, has heard of it.
What's that, sir?
I doe intend, this yeere of Iubile, comming on, to trauaile: and (because I will not altogether goe vpon expence) I am determined to put forth some fiue thousand pound, to be paid me, fiue for one, vpon the returne of my selfe, my wife, and my dog, from the Turkes court in Constantinople. If all, or either of vs miscarry in the iourney, 'tis gone: if we be successefull, why, there will be fiue and twenty thousand pound, to entertaine time withall. Nay, goe not neighbour SORDIDO, stay to night, and helpe to make our societie the fuller. Gentlemen, frolick: CARLO? what? dull now?
I was thinking on your proiect, sir, and you call it so: is this the dog goes with you?
This is the dogge, sir.
He do' not goe bare-foot, does he?
Away, you traitor, away.
Nay, afore god, I speake simply; he may pricke his foot with a thorne, and be as much as the whole venter is worth. Besides, for a dog that neuer trauail'd before, it's a large iourney to Constantinople: I'le tell you now (and he were mine) I'ld haue some present conference with a physicion, what antidotes were good to giue him, preseruatiues against poison: for (assure you) if once your money be out, there'll be diuers attempts made against the life of the poore animal.
Thou art still dangerous.
Is signior DELIROS wife your kinswoman?
I, sir, shee is my neece, my brothers daughter here, and my nephewes sister.
Doe you know her, sir?
O, God sir, Signior DELIRO, her husband, is my marchant.
I, I haue seene this gentleman there, often.
I crie you mercy, sir: let me craue your name, pray you.
FVNGOSO, sir.
Good signior FVNGOSO, I shall request to know you better, sir.
I am her brother, sir.
In faire time, sir.
Come, gentlemen, I will be your conduct.
Nay, pray you, sir; we shall meet at signior DELIRO'S often.
You shall ha' me at the Heralds office, sir, for some weeke or so, at my first comming vp. Come, CARLO.
Methinkes, CORDATVS, he dwelt somewhat too long on this Scene; it hung i' the hand.
I see not where he could haue insisted lesse, and t' haue made the humours perspicuous enough.
True, as his subiect lies: but hee might haue altered the shape of his argument, and explicated 'hem better in single Scenes.
That had beene single indeed: why? be they not the same persons in this, as they would haue beene in those? and is it not an obiect of more state, to behold the Scene full, and relieu'd with varietie of speakers to the end, then to see a vast emptie stage, and the actors come in (one by one) as if they were dropt downe with a feather, into the eye of the spectators?
Nay, you are better traded with these things then I, and therefore I'le subscribe to your iudgement; mary, you shall giue mee leaue to make obiections.
O, what else? it's the speciall intent of the author, you should doe so: for thereby others (that are present) may as well be satisfied, who happily would obiect the same you doe.
So, sir: but when appeares MACILENTE againe?
Mary, hee staies but till our silence giue him leaue: here hee comes, and with him signior DELIRO, a marchant, at whose house hee is come to sojourne: Make your owne obseruation now, onely transferre your thoughts to the city, with the Scene; where, suppose they speake.
I'Le tell you by and by, sir.
Welcome (good MACILENTE) to my house,
To sojourne euen for euer: if my best
In cares, and euery sort of good intreaty
May moue you stay with me.
I thanke you, sir:
And yet the muffled fates (had it pleas'd them)
Might haue suppli'd me, from their owne full store,
Without this word (I thanke you) to a foole.
I see no reason, why that dog (call'd Chaunce)
Should fawne vpon this fellow, more then me:
I am a man, and I haue limmes, flesh, bloud,
Bones, sinewes, and a soule, as well as he:
My parts are euery way as good as his,
If I said better? why, I did not lie.
Nath'lesse, his wealth (but nodding on my wants)
Must make me bow, and crie: (I thanke you, sir.)
Dispatch, take heed your mistris see you not.
I warrant you, sir. I'le steale by her softly.
Nay, gentle friend, be merry, raise your lookes
Out of your bosome, I protest (by heauen)
You are the man most welcome in the world.
(I thanke you, sir,) I know my cue, I thinke.
Where wil you haue 'hem burne, sir?
Here, good FIDO▪
What? shee did not see thee?
No, sir.
That's well:
Strew, strew, good FIDO, the freshest flowres, so.
What meanes this, signior DELIRO? all this censing?
Cast in more frankincense, yet more, well said.
O, MACILENTE, I haue such a wife!
So passing faire, so passing farre vnkind,
But of such worth, and right to be vnkind,
(Since no man can be worthy of her kindnesse.)
What can there not?
No, that is sure as death,
No man aliue! I doe not say, is not,
But cannot possibly be worth her kindnesse!
Nay, it is certain, let me doe her right.
How, said I? doe her right? as though I could,
As though this dull grosse tongue of mine could vtter
The rare, the true, the pure, the infinite rights,
That sit (as high as I can looke) within her!
This is such dotage, as was neuer heard.
Well, this must needs be granted.
Granted, quoth you?
Nay, MACILENTE; doe not so discredit
The goodnesse of your iudgement to denie it,
For I doe speake the very least of her.
And I would craue, and beg no more of heauen,
For all my fortunes here, but to be able
To vtter first in fit termes, what shee is,
And then the true ioyes I conceiue in her.
Is't possible, shee should deserue so well,
As you pretend?
I, and shee knowes so well
Her owne deserts, that (when I striue t'enioy them)
Shee weighs the things I doe, with what shee merits:
And (seeing my worth out-weigh'd so in her graces)
Shee is so solemne, so precise, so froward,
That no obseruance I can doe to her,
Can make her kind to me: if shee find fault,
I mend that fault; and then she saies, I faulted,
That I did mend it. Now, good friend, aduise me,
How I may temper this strange splene in her.
You are too amorous, too obsequious,
And make her too assur'd, shee may command you.
When women doubt most of their husbands loues,
They are most louing. Husbands must take heed
They giue no gluts of kindnesse to their wiues,
But vse them like their horses; whom they feed
Not with a manger—full of meat together,
But halfe a pecke at once: and keep them so
Still with an appetite to that they giue them.
He that desires to haue a louing wife,
Must bridle all the shew of that desire:
Be kind, not amorous; nor bewraying kindnesse,
As if loue wrought, but considerate duty.
" Offer no loue-rites, but let wiues still seeke them,
" For when they come vnsought, they seldome like them.
Beleeue me, MACILENTE, this is gospell.
O, that a man were his owne man so much,
To rule himselfe thus. I will striue i'faith,
To be more strange and carelesse: yet, I hope
I haue now taken such a perfect course,
To make her kind to me, and liue contented,
That I shall find my kindnesse well return'd,
And haue no need to fight with my affections.
Shee (late) hath found much fault with euery roome
Within my house; one was too big (shee said)
Another was not furnisht to her mind,
And so through all: all which, now, I haue alter'd.
Then here, shee hath a place (on my backe-side)
Wherein shee loues to walke; and that (shee said)
Had some ill smels about it. Now, this walke
Haue I (before shee knowes it) thus perfum'd
With herbes, and flowres, and laid in diuers places,
(AS 'twere on altars, consecrate to her)
Perfumed gloues, and delicate chaines of amber,
To keepe the aire in awe of her sweet nostrils:
This haue I done, and this I thinke will please her.
Behold, shee comes.
Here's a sweet stinke indeed:
What, shall I euer be thus crost, and plagu'd?
And sicke of husband? O, my head doth ake,
As it would cleaue asunder with these fauours,
All my room's alter'd, and but one poore walke
That I delighted in, and that is made
So fulsome with perfumes, that I am fear'd
(My braine doth sweat so) I haue caught the plague.
Why (gentle wife) is now thy walke too sweet?
Thou said'st of late, it had sowre aires about it,
And found'st much fault, that I did not correct it.
Why, and I did find fault, sir?
Nay, deare wife;
I know, thou hast staid, thou hast lou'd perfumes,
No woman better.
I, long since perhaps,
But now that sense is alter'd: you would haue me
(Like to a puddle, or a standing poole)
To haue no motion, nor no spirit within me.
No, I am like a pure, and sprightly riuer,
That moues for euer, and yet still the same;
Or fire, that burnes much wood, yet still one flame.
But yesterday, I saw thee at our garden,
Smelling on roses, and on purple flowres,
And since, I hope, the humour of thy sense
Is nothing chang'd.
Why, those were growing flowres,
And these, within my walke, are cut and strew'd.
But yet they haue one sent.
I! haue they so?
In your grosse iudgement. If you make no difference
Betwixt the sent of growing flowres, and cut ones,
You haue a sense to taste lamp-oile, yfaith.
And with such iudgement haue you chang'd the chambers,
Leauing no roome, that I can ioy to be in,
In all your house: and now my walke, and all,
You smoke me from, as if I were a foxe,
And long, belike, to driue me quite away.
Well, walke you there, and I'le walke where I list.
What shall I doe? Ô, I shall neuer please her,
Out on thee, dotard! what starre rul'd his birth?
That brought him such a starre? blind Fortune still
Bestowes her gifts on such as cannot vse them:
How long shall I liue, ere I be so happy,
To haue a wie of this exceeding forme?
Away, with 'hem, would I had broke a ioynt,
When I deuis'd this, that should so dislike her.
Away, beare all away.
I, doe: for feare
Ought that is there should like her. O, this man,
How cunningly he can conceale himselfe!
As though he lou'd? nay, honour'd, and ador'd?
Why, my sweet heart?
Sweetheart! Ô! better still!
And asking, why? wherefore? and looking strangely,
As if he were as white as innocence.
Alas, you'r simple, you: you cannot change,
Looke pale at pleasure, and then red with wonder:
No, no, not you! 'tis pitty o'your naturalls.
I did but cast an amorous eye, e'en now,
Vpon a paire of gloues, that somewhat lik't me,
And straight he noted it, and gaue command,
All should be ta'ne away.
Be they nay bane then.
What, sirra, FIDO, bring in those gloues againe,
You tooke from hence.
S'body, sir, but doe not,
Bring in no gloues, to spite me: if you doe—
Ay, me, most wretched; how am I misconstru'd?
O, how shee tempts my heart-strings, with her eye,
To knit them to her beauties, or to breake?
What mou'd the heauens, that they could not make
Me such a woman? but a man, a beast,
That hath no blisse like to others. Would to heauen
(In wreake of my misfortunes) I were turn'd
To some faire water-Nymph, that (set vpon
The deepest whirle-pit of the rau'nous seas,)
My adamantine eyes might head-long hale
This iron world to me, and drowne it all.
Behold, behold, the translated gallant.
O, he is welcome.
SAue you brother, and sister, saue you, sir; I haue commendations for you out ī the countrey: (I wonder they take no knowledge of my sute:) mine vncle SOCLIARDO is in towne. Sister, me thinkes, you are melancholy: why are you so sad? I thinke you tooke me for master FASTIDIVS BRISLE (sister) did you not.
Why should I take you for him?
Nay, nothing—I was lately in master FASTIDIVS his company, and, me thinkes, we are very like.
You haue a faire sute, brother, 'giue you ioy on't.
Faith, good ynough to ride in, brother, I made it to ride in.
O, now I see the cause of his idle demand, was his new suit.
Pray you good brother, trie, if you can change her mood.
I warrant you, let mee alone. I'le put her out of her dumps. Sister, how like you my suit?
O, you are a gallant in print now, brother.
Faith, how like you the fashion? it's the last edition, I assure you.
I cannot but like it, to the desert.
Troth, sister, I was faine to borrow these spurres, I ha' let my gowne in gage for'hem, pray you lend me an angell.
Now, beshrow my heart, then.
Good truth, I'le pay you againe at my next exhibition: I had but bare ten pound of my father, and it would not reach to put me wholly into the fashion.
I care not.
I had spurres of mine owne before, but they were not ginglers. Monsieur FASTIDIVS will be here anon, sister.
You iest?
Neuer lend me penny more (while you line then) and that I'ld be loth to say, in truth.
When did you see him?
Yesterday, I came acquainted with him at sir PVNTARVOLO'S: nay, sweet sister.
I faine would know of heauen now, why yond foole
Should weare a suit of sattin? he? that rooke?
That painted jay, with such a deale of out-side?
What is his inside trow? ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Good heauen, giue me patience, patience, patience.
A number of these popen jayes there are,
Whom, if a man conferre, and but examine
Their inward merit, with such men as want;
Lord, lord, what things they are!
Come, when will you pay me againe, now?
O god, sister!
Here comes another.
SAue you, signior DELIRO: how do'st thou, sweet lady? Let mee kisse thee.
How? a new sute? Ayme.
And how do's master FASTIDIVS BRISKE?
Faith, liue in court, signior DELIRO; in grace, I thanke god, both of the noble masculine, and feminine. I must speake with you in priuate, by and by.
When you please, sir.
Why looke you so pale, brother?
S'lid, all this money is cast away, now.
I, there's a newer edition come forth.
Tis but my hard fortune! well, I'le haue my sute chang'd, I'le goe fetch my taylor presently, but first I'le deuise a letter to my father. Ha' you any pen, and inke, sister?
What would you doe withall?
I would vse it. S'light, and it had come but foure daies sooner, the fashion.
There was a countesse gaue me her hand to kisse to day, i' the presence: did me more good by that light, then—and yesternight sent her coach twise to my lodging, to intreat mee accompany her, and my sweet mistris, with some two, or three namelesse ladies more: O, I haue beene grac't by 'hem beyond all aime of affection: this 's her garter my dagger hangs in: and they doe so commend, and approue my apparell, with my iudicious wearing of it, it 's aboue wonder.
Indeed sir, 'tis a most excellent sute, and you doe weare it as extraordinary.
Why, I'le tell you now (in good faith) and by this chaire, which (by the grace of god) I intend presently to sit in, I had three sutes in one yeere, made three great ladies in loue with me: I had other three, vn-did three gentlemen in imitation: and other three, gat three other gentlemen widdowes of three thousand pound a yeere.
Is't possible?
O, beleeue it, sir; your good face is the witch, and your apparell the spells, that bring all the pleasures of the world into their circle.
Ah, the sweet grace of a courtier!
Well, would my father had left mee but a good face for my portion yet; though I had shar'd the vnfortunate wit that goes with it, I had not car'd: I might haue past for somewhat i' the world then.
Why, assure you, signior, rich apparell has strange vertues: it makes him that hath it without meanes, esteemed for an excellent wit: he that enioyes it with means, puts the world in remembrance of his means: it helps the deformities of nature, and giues lustre to her beauties; makes continuall holy-day where it shines; sets the wits of ladies at worke, that otherwise would be idle: furnisheth your two-shilling ordinarie; takes possession of your stage at your new play; and enricheth your oares, as scorning to goe with your scull.
Pray you, sir, adde this; it giues respect to your fooles, makes many theeues, as many strumpets, and no fewer bankrupts.
Out, out, vnworthy to speake, where he breatheth.
What's he, signior?
A friend of mine, sir.
By heauen, I wonder at you, citizens, what kinde of creatures you are!
Why, sir?
That you can consort your selues, with such poore seame-rent fellowes.
He saies true.
Sir, I will assure you (how euer you esteeme of him) he's a man worthy of regard.
Why? what has he in him, of such vertue to be regarded? ha?
Mary, he is a scholler, sir.
Nothing else?
And he is well trauail'd.
He should get him clothes; I would cherish those good parts of trauaile in him, and preferre him to some nobleman of good place.
Sir, such a benefit should bind me to you for euer (in my friends right) and, I doubt not, but his desert shall more then answere my praise.
Why, and he had good clothes, I'ld carry him to court with me to morrow.
He shall not want for those, sir, if gold and the whole city will furnish him.
You say well, sir: faith, signior DELIRO, I am come to haue you play the Alchymist with me, and change the species of my land, into that mettall you talke of.
With all my heart, sir, what summe will serue you?
Faith, some three, or foure hundred.
Troth, sir, I haue promist to meet a gentleman this morning, in Parles, but vpon my returne I'le dispatch you.
I'le accompany you thither.
As you please, sir; but I goe not thither directly.
'Tis no matter, I haue no other designement in hand, and therefore as good goe along.
I were as good haue a quartane feauer follow me now, for I shall ne're bee rid of him: (being mee a cloke there, one) Still, vpon his grace at court, am I sure to bee visited; I was a beast to giue him any hope. Well, would I were in, that I am out with him, once, and— Come, signior MACILENTE, I must conferre with you, as wee goe. Nay, deare wife, I beseech thee, forsake these moods: looke not like winter thus. Here, take my keyes, open my counting houses, spread all my wealth before thee, choose any obiect that delights thee: If thou wilt eate the spirit of gold, and drinke dissolu'd pearle in wine, 'tis for thee.
So, sir.
Nay, my sweet wife.
Good lord! how you are perfum'd! in your termes, and al! pray you leaue vs.
Come, gentlemen.
Adiew, sweet lady.
I, I! Let thy words euer sound in mine eares, and thy graces disperse contentment through all my senses! O, how happy is that lady aboue other ladies, that enioyes so absolute a gentleman to her seruant! A countesse giue him her hand to kisse? ah, foolish countesse! hee's a man worthy (if a woman may speake of a mans worth) to kisse the lips of an empresse.
What's master FASTIDIVS gone, sister?
I, brother (he has a face like a Cherubin!)
Gods me, what lucke's this? I haue fetcht my taylor and all: which way went he, sister? can you tell?
Not I, in good faith (and he has a body like an angell!)
How long is't since he went?
Why, but e'en now: did you not meet him? (and a tongue able to rauish any woman i' the earth!)
O, for gods sake (I'le please you for your paines:) but e'en now, say you? Come, good, sir: S'lid, I had forgot it too: Sister, if any body aske for mine vncle SOGLIARDO, they shall ha' him at the Heralds office, yonder by Paules.
Well, I will not altogether despaire: I haue heard of a citizens wife, has beene belou'd of a courtier; and why not I? heigh, ho: well, I will into my priuate chamber, locke the dore to mee, and thinke ouer all his good parts, one after another.
Well, I doubt, this last Scene will endure some grieuous torture.
How? you feare 'twill be rackt, by some hard construction?
Doe not you?
No, in good faith: vnlesse mine eyes could light mee beyond sense. I see no reason, why this should be more liable to the racke, then the rest: you'le say, perhaps, the city will not take it well, that the marchant is made here to dote so perfectly vpon his wife; and shee againe, to bee so Fastidiously affected, as shee is?
You haue vtter'd my thought, sir, indeed.
Why (by that proportion) the court might as wel take offence at him we call the courtier, and with much more pretext, by how much the place transcends, and goes before in dignitie and vertue: but can you imagine that any noble, or true spirit in court (whose sinowie, and altogether vn-affected graces, very worthily expresse him a courtier) will make any exception at the opening of such an emptie trunke, as this BRISKE is? or thinke his owne worth empeacht, by beholding his motley inside?
No sir, I doe not.
No more, assure you, will any graue, wise citizen, or modest matron, take the obiect of this folly in DELIRO, and his wife: but rather apply it as the foile to their owne vertues. For that were to affirme, that a man, writing of NERO, should meane all Emperors: or speaking of MACHIAVEL, comprehend all States-men; or in our SORDIDO, all Farmars; and so of the rest: then which, nothing can be vtter'd more malicious, or absurd. Indeed, there are a sort of these narrow-ey'd decypherers, I confesse, that will extort strange, and abstruse meanings out of any subiect, be it neuer so conspicuous and innocently deliuer'd. But to such (where e're they sit conceal'd) let them know, the author defies them, and their writing-tables; and hopes, no sound or safe iudgement will infect it selfe with their contagious comments, who (indeed) come here only to peruert, and poison the sense of what they heare, and for nought else.
Stay, what new Mute is this, that walkes so suspiciously?
O, mary this is one, for whose better illustration; we must desire you to presuppose the stage, the middle isle in Paules; and that, the west end of it.
So, sir: and what followes?
Faith, a whole volume of humour, and worthy the vnclasping.
As how? what name doe you giue him first?
He hath shift of names, sir: some call him APPLE IOHN, some Signior WHIFFE, mary, his maine standing name is CAVALIER SHIFT: the rest are but as cleane shirts to his natures.
And what makes he in Paules, now?
Troth, as you see, for the aduancement of a Siquis, or two; wherein he has so varied himselfe, that if any one of 'hem take, he may hull p and downe i' the humorous world, a little longer.
It seemes then, he beares a very changing saile?
O, as the wind, sir: here comes more.
THis is rare, I haue set vp my bills, without discouery.
What? Signior WHIE? what fortune has brought you into these west parts?
Troth, signior, nothing but your rheume; I haue beene taking an ounce of tabacco hard by here, with a gentleman, and I am come to spit priuate, in Paues. Saue you sir.
Adieu, good signior WHIE.
Master APPLE IOHN? you are well met: when shall we up together; and laugh, and be fat with those good wenches? ha?
Faith, sir, I must now leaue you, vpon a few humours, and occasions: but when you please, sir.
Farewell, sweet APPLE IOHN: I wonder, there are no more store of gallants here!
What be these two, signior?
Mary, a couple sir, that are meere strangers to the whole scope of our play; only come to walke a turne or two, i'this Scene of Paules, by chance.
Same you, good master CLOVE.
Sweet master ORANGE.
How? CLOVE, and ORANGE?
I, and they are well met, for 'tis as drie an ORANGE as euer grew: nothing, but Salutation; and, O god, sir; and, It pleases you to say so, Sir; one that can laugh at a iest for company with a most plausible, and extemporall grace; and some houre after, in priuate, aske you what it was: the other, monsieur CLOVE, is a more spic't youth: he will fit you a whole afternoone sometimes, in a booke-sellers shop, reading the Greeke, Italian, and Spanish; when he vnderstands not a word of either: if he had the tongues, to his sutes, he were an excellent linguist.
Doe you heare this reported, for certainty?
O god, sir.
SIrrah, take my cloke: and you sir knaue, follow mee closer. If thou losest my dogge, thou shalt die a dogs death; I will hang thee.
Tut, feare him not, hee's a good leane slaue, he loues a dog well, I warrant him; I see by his lookes, I: masse hee's somwhat like him. Slud poison him, make him away with a crooked pinne, or somewhat, men; thou maist haue more security of thy life: and so sir, what? you ha' not put out your whole venter yet? ha' you?
No, I doe want yet some fifteene, or sixteene hundred pounds: but my lady (my wife) is out of her humour; shee does not now goe.
No? how then?
Mary, I am now enforc't to giue it out, vpon the returne of my selfe, my dogge, and my cat.
Your cat? where is shee?
My squire has her there, in the bag: Sirrah, looke to her: How lik'st thou my change, CARLO?
Oh, for the better, sir; your cat has nine lines, and your wife ha' but one.
Besides, shee will neuer bee sea-sicke, which will saue mee so much in conserues: when saw you signior SOGLIARDO?
I came from him but now, he is at the Heralds office yonder: he requested me to goe afore, and take vp a man or two for him in Paules, against his cognisance was ready.
What? has he purchast armes, then?
I, and rare ones too: of as many colours, as e're you saw any ooles co in your life. I'le goe looke among youd bille, and I can fit him with legs to his armes—
With legs to his armes! Good: I will goe with you, sir.
COme, let's walke in Mediterraneo: I assure you, sir, I am not the least respected among ladies; but let that passe: doe you know how to goe into the presence, sir?
Why, on my feet, sir.
No, on your head, sir: for 'tis that must beare you out, I assure you: as thus, sir. You must first haue an especial care so to weare your hat, that it oppresse not confusedly this your predominant, or fore-top; because (when you come at the presence dore) you may, with once or twice stroking vp your fore-head thus, enter, with your predominant perfect: that is, standing vp stiffe.
As if one were frighted?
I, sir.
Which indeed, a true feare of your mistris should doe, rather than gumme water, or whites of egges: is't not so, sir?
An ingenious obseruation: giue mee leaue to craue your name, Sir.
His name is, MACILENTE, sir.
Good signior MACILENTE: if this gentleman, signior DELIRO, furnish you (as he saies he will) with clothes, I will bring you, to morrow by this time, into the presence of the most diuine, and acute lady in court: you shall see sweet silent rhetorique, and dumbe eloquence speaking in her eye; but when shee speakes her selfe, such an anatomie of wit, so sinewiz'd and arteriz'd, that 'tis the goodliest modell of pleasure that euer was to behold. Oh! shee strikes the world into admiration of her; (ô, ô, ô) I cannot expresse 'hem, beleuue me.
O, your onely admiration, is your silence, sir.
'Fore god, CARLO, this is good; let's reade 'hem againe. If there be any lady, or gentlewoman of good carriage, that is desirous to entertaine (to her priuate vses) a yong, straight, and vpright gentleman, of the age of fiue, or sixe and twenty at the most: who can serue in the nature of a gentleman vsher, and hath little legges of purpose, and a blacke satten fute of his owne, to goe before her in: which fute (for the more sweetning) now lies in lauander: and can hide his face with her fanne, if neede require: or sit in the cold at the staire foot for her, as well as another gentleman: Let her subscribe her name and place, and diligent respect shall be giuen. This is above measure exellent! ha?
No, this, this! here's a fine slaue.
IF this city, or the suburbs of the same, doe affoord any yong gentleman, of the first, second, or third head, more or lesse, whose friends are but lately deceased, and whose lands are but new come to his hands, that (to bee as exactly qualified as the best of our ordinary gallants are) is affected to entertaine the most gentlemanlike vse of tabacco: as first, to giue it the most exquisite perfume; then, to know all the delicate sweet formes for the assumption of it: as also the rare corollarie, and practice of the Cuban ebolition, EVRIPVS, and whiffe; which hee shall receiue, or take in, here at London, and euaporate at Vxbridge, or farder, if it please him. If there be any such generous spirit, that is truly enamour'd of these good faculties: May it please him, but (by a note of his hand) to specifie typed by pfs the place, or ordinarie where hee vses to eate, and lie; and most sweet attendance, with tabacco, and pipes of the best sort, shall be ministred: STET QVAESO CANDIDE LECTOR.
Why this is without paralell, this!
Well, I'le marke this fellow for SOGLIARDO'S vse presently.
Or rather, SOGLIARDO, for his vse,
Faith, either of 'hem will serue, they are both good properties: I'le designe the other a place too, that we may see him.
No better place, then the Mitre, that we may bee spectators with you, CARLO. Soft, behold, who enters here: Signior SOGLIARDO! saue you.
SAue you, good sir PVNTARVOLO; your dogge's in health, sir, I see: how now, CARLO?
Wee haue ta'ne simple paines, to choose you out followers here.
Come hither, signior.
Monsieur ORANGE, yond' gallants obserue vs; pr'y thee let's talke fustian a little, and gull 'hem: make 'hem beleeue vve are great schollers.
O lord, sir.
Nay, pr'y thee let's, beleeue me, you haue an excellent habit in discourse.
It pleases you to say so, sir.
By this church, you ha' la: nay, come, begin: ARISTOTLE in his Daemonologia, approues SCALIGER for the best Nauigator in his time: and in his Hypercritiques, he reports him to be Heautontimorumenos: you vnderstand the Greeke, sir?
O god, sir.
For societies sake he does. O, here be a couple of fine tame parrats.
Now, sir, vvhereas the Ingenuitie of the time, and the soules Synderisis are but Embrions in nature, added to the panch of Esquiline, and the Inter-vallum of the Zodiack, besides the Eclipticke line being opticke, and not mentall, but by the contemplatiue & theoricke part thereof, doth demonstrate to vs the vegetable circumference, and the ventositie of the Tropicks and whereas our intellectuall, or mincing capreall (according to the Metaphisicks) as you may reade in PLATO's Histriomastix—You conceiue me, sir?
O lord, sir.
Then comming to the pretty Animall, as Reason long since is fled to animalls, you know, or indeed for the more modellizing, or enamelling, or rather diamondizing of your subiect, you shall perceiue the Hipothesis, or Galaxia, (whereof the Meteors long since had their initiall inceptions and notions) to be meerely Pithagoricall, Mathematicall, and Aristocraticall— For looke you, sir, there is euer a kinde of concinnitie and species— Let vs turne to our former discourse, for they marke vs not.
Masse, yonder 's the knight PVNTARVOLO.
And my cousin SOGLIARDO, me thinkes.
I, and his familiar that baunts him, the deuill vvith a shining face.
Let 'hem alone, obserue 'hem not.
Nay, I will haue him, I am resolute for that. By this parchment, gentlemen, I haue beene so toil'd among the Harrots yonder, you will not beleeue, they doe speake i' the strangest language, and giue a man the hardest termes for his money, that euer you knew.
But ha' you armes? ha' your armes?
Y faith, I thanke god, I can write my selfe gentlemen now, here's my pattent, it cost me thirtie pound, by this breath.
A very saire coat, well charg'd, and full of armorie.
Nay, it has as much varietie of colours in it, as you haue seene a cost haue, how like you the crest, sir?
I vnderstand it not well, what is't?
Mary, sir, it is your Bore without a head Rampant.
A Bore without a head, that's very rare!
I, and rampant too: troth, I commend the Heralds wi, hee has decyphered him well: A Swine without a head, without braine, wit, any thing indeed, ramping to gentilitie. You can blazon the rest, signior? can you not?
O, I, I haue it in writing here of purpose, it cost me two shillings the tricking.
Let's heare, let's heare.
It is the most vile, foolish, absurd, palpable, & ridiculous escutcheon, that euer this eye survis'd. Saue you, good monsieur FASTIDIVS.
Silence, good knight: on, on.
GVRONY, of eight peeces; AZVRE and GVLES, betweene three plates; a CHEV'RON, grailed checkey, OR, VERT, and ERMINES; on a cheefe ARGENT betweene two ANN'LETS, sables; a Bores head, PROPER.
How's that? on a cheefe ARGENT?
On a cheefe ARGENT, a Bores head, PROPER betweene two ANN'LETS sables.
S'lud, it's a Hogs-cheeke, and puddings in a pewter field this.
How like you 'hem, signior?
Let the word bee, Not without mustard; your crest is very rare, sir.
A frying pan to the crest had had no fellow.
Intreat your poore friend to walke off a little, signior, I will salute the knight.
Come, lap't vp, lap't vp.
You are right well encountred, sir, how do's your saire dog?
In reasonable state, sir: what citizen is that you were consorted with? a marchant of any worth?
'Tis signior DELIRO, sir.
Is it he? Saue you, sir.
Good sir PVNTARVOLO.
O, what copie of foole would this place minister, to one endew'd with patience, to obserue it?
Nay, looke you sir, now you are gentleman, you must carry a more exalted presence, change your mood, and habit, to a more astere forme, be exceeding proud, stand vpon your gentilitie, and scorne euery man. Speake nothing humbly, neuer discourse vnder a nobleman, though you ne're saw him butriding to the Starre-chamber, it's all one. Loue no man. Trust no man. Speake ill of no man to his face: nor well of any man behind his backe. Salute fairely on the front, and wish 'hem hang'd vpon the turne. Spread your selfe vpon his bosome publikely, whose heart you would cae in priuate. These be principles, thinke on 'hem, I'le come to you againe presently.
Sirra, keepe close; yet not so close: thy breath will thawmy ruffe.
O, good cousin, I am a little busie, how do's my neece? I am to walke with a knight, here.
O He is here, looke you sir, that's the gentleman.
What, he i'the blush-colour'd sattin?
I, he sir: though his sute blush, hee blushes not, looke you, that's the sute, sir: I would haue mine, such a sute without difference, such stuffe, such a wing, such a sleeue, such a skirt, belly, and all; therefore, pray you obserue it. Haue you a paire of tables?
Why, doe you see, sir? they say I am phantasticall: why, true, I know it, and I pursue my humour still, in contempt of this censorious age. S'light, and a man should doe nothing, but what a sort of stale iudgements about this towne will approue in him, he were a sweet asse: I'ld beg him yfaith. I ne're knew any more find fault with a fashion, then they that knew not how to put themselues in to't. For mine owne part, so I please mine owne appetite, I am carelesse what the fustie world speakes of me. Puh.
Doe you marke, how it hangs at the knee there?
I warrant you, sir.
For gods sake, doe, note all: doe you see the collar, sir?
Feare nothing, it shall not differ in a stitch, sir.
Pray heau'n, it doe not, you'le make these linings serue? and helpe me to a chapman for the out-side, will you?
I'le doe my best, sir: you'le put it off presently?
I, goe with mee to my chamber, you shall haue it—but make haste of it, for the loue of a customer, for I'le fit i'my old sute, or else lie a bed, and reade the Arcadia, till you haue done.
O, if euer you were strucke with a iest, gallants, now, now. I doe vsher the most strange peece of militarie profession, that euer was discouer'd in Insula Paulina.
Where? where?
What is he, for a creature?
A pimpe, a pimpe, that I haue obseru'd yonder, the rarest superficies of a humour; hee comes euery morning to emptie his hangs in Paules here: and offers vp some fiue, or sixe Hecatomb's of faces, and sighes, and away againe. Here he comes; nay, walke, walke, be not seene to note him, and we shall haue excellent sport.
S'Lid, hee vented a sigh'ne now, I thought he would haue blowne vp the church.
O, you shall haue him giue a number of those false fires ere hee depart.
See, now he is expostulating with his rapier! looke, looke.
Did you euer, in your daies, obserue better passion ouer a hilt?
Except it were in the person of a cutlers boy, or that the fellow were nothing but vapour, I should thinke it impossible.
See, againe, he claps his sword o'the head, as who should say, well, goe to.
O violence! I wonder the blade can containe it selfe, being so prouokt.
With that, the moody squire thumpt his brest,
Andrear'd his eyen to heauen, or reuenge.
Troth, and you be good gentlemen let's make 'hem friends, and take vp the matter, betweene his rapier, and him.
Nay, if you intend that, you must lay downe the matter, for this rapier (it seemes) is in the nature a hanger on, and the good gentleman would happily be rid of him.
By my faith, and 'tis to be suspected, I'le aske him.
O, here's rich stuffe, for lifes sake, let vs goe.
A man would wish himselfe a senselesse pillar,
Rather then view these monstrous prodigies:
Nil habet infelix paupertas durius in se,
Quàm quòd ridiculos homines facit—
Signior.
At your seruice.
Will you sell your rapier?
Sbloud, he is turn'd wild vpon the question, hee lookes as hee had seene a serjeant.
Sell my rapier? now fate blesse me.
Amen.
You ask't me, if I would sell my rapier, sir?
I did indeed.
Now, lord haue mercy vpon me.
Amen, I say still.
S'lud sir, what should you behold in my face, sir, that should moue you (as they say, sir) to aske me, sir, if I would sell my rapier?
Nay (let me pray you, sir) bee not mou'd: I protest, I would rather haue beene silent, then any way offensiue, had I knowne your nature.
Sell my rapier? 'ods lid! Nay, sir (for mine owne part) as I am a man that has seru'd in causes, or so, so I am not apt to injure any gentleman in the degree of falling foule, but (sell my rapier?) I will tell you sir, I haue seru'd with this foolish rapier, where some of vs dare not appeare in haste, I name no man: but let that passe. (Sell my rapier?) death to my lungs. This rapier, sir, has trauail'd by my side, sir, the best part of France and the low Countrey: I haue seene Vishing Brill, and the Hghe, with this rapier, sir, in my lord of Leysters time: and (by gods will) he that should offer to disrapier me now, I would— Looke you sir, you presume to be a gentleman of sort, and so likewise your friends here, if you haue any disposition to trauell, for the sight of seruice, or so, one, two, or all of you, I can lend you letters to diers officers and commanders in the low Countries, that shall for my cause doe you all the good offices, that shall pertaine or belong to gentlemen of your— Please you to shew the bountie of your minde, sir, to impart some ten groates, or halfe a crowne to our vse, till our abilitie be of grow'th to returne it, and we shall thinke our selfe— Sbloud! sell my rapier?
I pray you, what said he, signior, hee's a proper man.
Mary, he tells me, if I please to shew the bountie of my mind, to impart some ten groats to his vse, or so.
Breake his head, and giue it him.
I thought he had beene playing o' the Iewes trump, I.
My rapier? no sir: my rapier is my guard, my defence, my reuenew, my honour: (if you cannot impart, be secret, I beseech you) and I will maintaine it, where there is a graine of dust, or a drop of water. (Hard is the choise when the valiant must eat their armes, or clem:) Sell my rapier? no, my deare, I will not bee diuorc't from thee, yet, I haue euer found thee true as steele—and (you cannot impart sir?) Saue you gentlemen: (neuerthelesse if you haue a fancie to it, sir.)
Pr'y thee away: is Signior DELIRO departed?
Ha'you seene a pimpe out-face his owne wants better?
I commend him, that can dissemble 'hem so well.
True, and hauing no better a cloke for it, then he has neither.
Gods precious, what mischieuous lucke is this! adiew gentlemen.
Whither? in such haste, Monsieur FASTIDIVS?
After my marchant, signior DELIRO, sir.
O hinder him not, hee may hap lose his tide, a good flounder i'faith.
Harke you, signior WHIFFE, a word with you.
How? signior WHIFFE?
What was the difference betweene that gallant that's gone, and you, sir.
No difference: he would ha'giu'n mee fiue pound for my rapier, and I refus'd it; that's all.
O, was't no otherwise? wee thought you had beene vpon some termes.
No other then you saw, sir.
Adieu, good Master APPLE-IOHN.
How? WHIFFE, and APPLE-IOHN too? Heart, what'll you say if this be the appendix, or labell to both youd' indentures?
It may be.
Resolue vs of it, IANVS, thou that look'st euery way: or thou HECVLES, that hast trauail'd all countries.
Nay, CARLO, spend not time in inuocations now, 'tis late.
Signior, here's a gentleman desirous of your name, sir.
Sir, my name is CAVALIER SHIFT: I am knowne sufficiently in this walke, sir.
SHIFT? I heard your name varied e'en now, as I take it.
True, sir, it pleases the world (as I am her excellent Tabbacconist) to giue me the stile of signior WHIFFE: as I am a poore esquire about the towne here, they call mee Master APPLE-IOHN. Varierie of good names does well, sir.
I, and good parts, to make those good names: out of which I imagine yond' bils to be yours.
Sir, if I should denie the manuscripts, I were worthie to be banisht the middle I'le, for euer.
I take your word, sir: this gentleman has subscrib'd to 'hem, and is most desirous to become your pupill. Mary you must vse expedition. Signior Insulso Sogliardo, this is the professor.
In good time, sir, nay, good sir, house your head, doe you professe those sleights in tabacco?
I, doe more then professe, sir, and (if you please to bee a practitioner) I wil vndertake in one fortnight to bring you, that you shal take it plausibly in any ordinarie, theatre, or the tilt-yard, if need be, i'the most popular assembly that is.
But you cannot bring him to the whiffe so soone?
Yes, as soone, sir, hee shall receiue the first, second, and third whiffe, if it please him, and (vpon the receit) take his horse, drinke his three cups of Canarie, and expose one at Hounslow, a second at Stanes, and a third at Bogshot.
Baw-waw!
You will not sere mee, sir, will you I'le giue you more then countenance.
Pardon me, sir, I doe scorne to serue any man.
Who? he serue? Sbloud he keepes high men, and low men, he; he has a faire liuing at Fullam.
But in the nature of a fellow, I'le bee your follower, if you please.
Sir, you shall stay, and dine with mee, and if wee can agree, weele not part in haste: I am verie bountifull to men of qualitie. Where shall we goe, signior?
Your Miter is your best house.
I can make this dogge take as many whiffes as I list, and hee shall retaine, or efume them at my pleasure.
By your patience, follow me, fellowes.
Sir, PVNTARVOLO!
Pardon mee, my dogge shall not eate in his companie for a million.
Nay, bee not you amaz'd, signior WHIFFE, what e're that stiffeneckt gentleman say's.
No, for you doe not know the humour of the Dogge, as wee doe: where shall we dine, CARLO? I would faine goe to one of these ordinaries, now I am a gentleman.
So you may, were you neuer at any yet?
No faith, but they say, there resorts your most choise gallants.
True, and the fashion is, when any stranger comes in among'st 'hem, they all stand vp and stare at him, as he were some vnknowne beast, brought out of Affrick, but that'll bee help't with a good aduenturous face, you must be impudent ynough, sit downe, and vse no respect; when any thing's propounded aboue your capacitie, smile at it, make two or three faces, and 'tis excellent, they 'le thinke you haue trauail'd: though you argue a whole day in silence thus, and discourse in nothing but laughter, 'twill passe. Onely (now and then) giue fire, discharge a good full oth, and offer a great wager, 'twill be admirable.
I warrant you, I am resolute: come, good signior, there's a poore french crowne, for your ordinarie.
It comes well, for I had not so much as the least portcullice of come before.
I trauell with another obiection, signior, which I feare will bee enforc'd against the author, ere I can be deliuer'd of it.
What's that, sir?
That the argument of his Comoedie might haue beene of some other nature, as of a duke to be in loue with a countesse, and that countesse to bee in loue with the dukes sonne, and the sonne to loue the ladies waiting maid: some such crosse wooing, with a clowne to their seruingman, better then to be thus neere, and familiarly allied to the time.
You say well, but I would faine heare one of these autumne-judgements define once, Quid sit Comoedia? if he cannot, let him content himselfe with CICEROS definition (till hee haue strength to propose to himselfe a better) who would haue a Comoedie to be Imitatio vitae, Speculum consuetudinis, Imago veritatis; a thing throughout pleasant, and ridiculous, and accommodated to the correction of manners: if the maker haue fail'd in any particle of this, they may worthily taxe him, but if not, why— be you (that are for them) silent, as I will bee for him; and giue way to the actors.
NAy, gods precious, if the weather and season bee so respectlesse, that beggers shall liue as well as their betters; and that my hunger, and thirst for riches, shall not make them hunger and thirst with pouertie; that my sleepes shall be brokes, and their hearts not broken; that my coffers shall bee full, and yet care; theirs emptie, and yet merry! Tis time, that a crosse should beare flesh and bloud, since flesh and bloud cannot beare this crosse.
What, will he hang himselfe?
Faith I, it seemes his Prognostication has not kept touch with him, and that makes him despaire.
Beshrow me, he will be out of his humour then, indeed.
Tut, these star-monger knaues, who would trust 'hem? one saies, darke and rainy, when 'tis as cleere as christall; another saies, tempestuous blasts, and stormes, and 'twas as calme as a milke-bowle; here bee sweet rascals for a man to credit his whole fortunes with: You skie-staring cocks-combs you, you fat braines, out vpon you; you are good for nothing but to sweat night-caps, and make rug-gownes deare! You learned men, and haue not a legion of deuils, a vostre seruice! a vostre seruice! by heauen, I thinke I shall die a better scholler then they! but soft, how now, sirra.
Here's a letter come from your sonne, sir.
From my sonne, sir? what would my sonne, sir? some good newes, no doubt.
Sweet and deare father (desiring you first to send mee your blessing, which is more worth to me then gold or siluer) I desire you likewise to be aduertised, that this Shrouetide (contrary to custome) we vse alwaies to haue reuels; which is indeed dancing, and makes an excellent shew in truth; especially if wee gentlemen bee well attir'd; which our seniors note, and thinke the better of our fathers, the better we are maintain'd, and that they shall know if they come vp, and haue any thing to doe in the law: therefore, good father, these are (for your owne sake as well as mine) to re-desire you; that you let me not want, that which is fit for the setting vp of our name, in the honorable volume of gentilitie, that I may say to our calumniators, with TVLLIE, Ego sum ortus domus meae, tu occasus tuae. And thus (not doubting of your fatherly beneuolence) I humbly aske you blessing, and pray god to blesse you.
How's this? Yours, if his owne? is he not my sonne, except he be his owne sonne? Belike this is some new kinde of subscription the gallants vse. Wel, wherefore doest thou stay, knaue? Away: goe. Here's a letter indeede; ieels? and beneuolence? is this a weather to send beneuolence? or is this a season to reuell in? Slid the deuil and all takes part to vexe me, I thinke! this letter would neuer haue come now else, now, now, when the sunne shines, and the aire thus cleere. Soule, if this hold, we shall shortly haue an excellent crop of corne spring out of the high waies: the streets, and houses of the towne will be hid with the ranknesse of the fruits, that grow therein spight of good husbandry. Goe to, I'le preuent the ight of it, come as quickly as it can, I will preuent the sight of it. I haue this remedie, heauen. Stay; I'le trie the paine thus a little, Ô, nothing, nothing. Well now, shall my sonne gaine a beneuolence by my death? or any body be the better for my gold, or so forth? No, aliue, I kept it from 'hem, and (dead) my ghost shall walke about it, and preserue it, my son and daughter shall starue ere they touch it, I haue bid it as deep as hell from the sight of heauen, and to it I goe now.
AYe me, what pittifull sight is this! help, help, help.
How now? what's the matter?
O, here's a man has hang'd himselfe, helpe to get him againe.
Hang'd himselfe? Slid carry him afore a iustice, 'tis chance medley, o' my word.
How now, what's here to doe?
How comes this?
One has executed himselfe, contrary to order of law, and by my consent he shall answer't.
Would he were in case, to answere it.
Stand by, he recouers, giue him breath.
Oh.
Masse, 'twas well you vvent the foot-way, neighbour.
I, and I had not cut the halter.
How! cut the halter? Aye me, I am vndone, I am vndone.
Mary, if you had not beene vndone, you had beene hang'd, I can tell you.
You thred-bare horse-bread-eating rascals, if you vvould needes haue beene meddling, could you not haue vntied it, but you must out it? and in the midst too! Aye me.
Out on me, 'tis the catterpiller SORDIDO! how cursed are the poore, that the viper was blest, vvith this good fortune?
Nay, how accurst art thou, that art cause to the curse of the poore?
I, and to saue so wretched a caytife?
Curst be thy fingers that loos'd him.
Some desperate furie possesse thee, that thou maist hang thy selfe too.
Neuer maist thou be sau'd, that sau'd so damn'd a monster.
What curses breathe these men! how haue my deeds
Made my lookes differ from another mans,
That they should thus detest, and lothe my life!
Out on my wretched humour, it is that
Makes me thus monstrous in true humane eyes.
Pardon me (gentle friends) I'le make faire mends
For my foule errors past, and twenty-fold
Restore to all men, vvhat with vvrong I rob'd them:
My barnes, and garners shall stand open still
To all the poore that come, and my best graine
Be made almes-bread, to feed halfe-famisht mouthes.
Though hither to amongst you I haue liu'd,
Like an unsauourie muck-hill to my selfe,
Yet now, my gather'd heapes being spread abroad,
Shall turne to better, and more fruitfull vses.
Blesse then this man, curse him no more for sauing
My life, and soule together. O, how deeply
The bitter curses of the poore doe pierce!
I am by wonder chang'd; come in with me
And witnesse my repentance: now I proue,
"No life is blest, that is not grac't with loue.
O miracle! see vvhen a man ha's grace!
Had't not beene pitty, so good a man should haue beene cast away?
Well, I'le get our clarke put his conuersion in the Acts, and Monuments.
Doe, for I warrant him hee's a Martyr.
O god, how he wept, if you mark't it! did you see how the teares trill'd?
Yes, beleeue me, like master vicars bowles vpon the greene, for all the world.
O neighbour, god's blessing o' your heart, neighbour, 'twas a good gratefull deed.
How now, MITIS? what's that you consider so seriously?
Troth, that which doth essentially please me, the vvarping condition of this greene, and soggy multitude: but in good saith, signior, your author hath largely out-stript my expectation in this Scene, I will liberally confesse it. For, when I saw SORDIDO so desperately intended, I thought I had had a hand of him, then.
What? you suppos'd he should haue hung himselfe, indeed?
I did, and had fram'd my obiection to it ready, which may yet be very fitly vrg'd, and with some necessity: for though his purpos'd violence lost th' effect, and extended not to death, yet the intent and horror of the obiect, was more then the nature of a Comoedie vvill in any sort admit.
I? vvhat thinke you of PLAVTVS, in his Comoedie, called Cistellaria, there? vvhere he brings in ALCESIMARCHVS vvith a drawne sword ready to kill himselfe, and as hee is e'ne fixing his brest vpon it, to bee restrain'd from his resolu'd outrage, by SILENIVM, and the bawd: is not his authoritie of power to giue our Scene approbation?
Sir, I haue this only euasion left me, to say, I thinke it bee so indeed, your memorie is happier then mine: but I wonder, what engine hee vvill vse to bring the rest out of their humours!
That will appeare anon, neuer preoccupie your imagination withall. Let your mind keepe companie with the Scene still, which now remoues it selfe from the countrey, to the court. Here comes MACILENTE, and signior BRISKE, freshly suted, lose not your selfe, for now the Epitasis, or busie part of our subiect, is in act.
WEll, now, signior MACILENTE, you are not onely welcome to the court but also to my mistris withdrawing chamber: Boy, get me some tabacco, I'le but goe in, and shew I am here, and come to you presently, sir.
What's that he said? by heauen, I markt him not:
My thoughts, and I, were of another world.
I was admiring mine owne out-side here,
To thinke what priuiledge, and palme it beares
Here, in the court! Be a man ne're so vile
In wit, in judgement, manners, or what else;
If he can purchase but a silken couer,
He shall not only passe, but passe regarded:
Whereas, let him be poore, and meanely clad,
Though ne're so richly parted; you shall haue
A fellow (that knowes nothing but his beefe,
Or how to rince his clammy guts in beere)
Will take him by the shoulders, or the throat,
And kicke him downe the staires. Such is the state
Of vertue, in bad clothes! ha, ha, ha, ha,
That raiment should be in such high request!
How long should I be, ere I should put off
To the lord Chancelors tombe, or the Shriues posts?
By heauen (I thinke) a thousand, thousand yeere.
His grauitie, his wisedome, and his faith,
To my dread Soueraigne (graces that suruiue him)
These I could well endure to reuerence,
But not his tombe: no more then I'ld commend
The chappell organ, for the guilt without,
Or this base violl, for the varnisht face.
I feare I haue made you stay somewhat long, sir, but is my tabacco readie, boy?
I, sir.
Giue me, my mistris is vpon comming, you shall see her presently, sir, you'le say you neuer accosted a more piercing wit. This abacco is not dryed, boy, or else the pipe's defectiue. Oh, your wits of Italie are nothing comparable to her! her braine's a verie quiuer of iests! and she do's dart them abroad with that sweete loose, and iudiciall aime, that you would—here she comes sir.
'Twas time, his inuention had beene bogd else.
Giue me my fanne there.
How now, Monsieur BRISKE?
A kind of affectionate reuerence strikes mee with a cold shiuering (me thinkes.)
I like such tempers well, as stand before their mistresses with feare and trembling, and before their maker, like impudent mountaines.
By this hand, I'ld spend twentie pound my vauting-horse stood here now, she might see me doe but one tricke?
Why, do's she loue actiuitie?
Or if you had but your long stockings on, to be dancing a galliard, as she comes by.
I eyther. O, these stirring humours make ladies mad with desire shee comes. My good GENIVS embolden me, boy, the pipe quickly.
What? will he giue her musicke?
A second good morrow to my faire mistresse.
Faire seruant, I'le thanke you a day hence, when the date of your salutation comes forth.
How, like you that answere? is't not admirable?
I were a simple courtier, if I could not admire trifles, sir.
Troth, sweet ladie, I shall be prepar'd to giue you thanks for those thankes, and studie more officious, and obsequious regards to your faire beauties. mend the pipe, boy.
I ne're knew tabacco taken as a parenthesis, before.
Fore god (sweete ladie) beleeue it, I doe honour the meanest rush in this chamber, for your loue.
I, you need not tell mee that, sir, I doe thinke, you doe prize a rush, before my loue.
Is this the wonder of nations?
O, by this ayre, pardon me, I said, for your loue, by this light: but it is the accustomed sharpnesse of your ingenuitie, sweete mistresse, to—Masse your violl's new strung, methinkes.
Ingenuitie. I see his ignorance will not suffer him to slander her, which he had done most notably, if he had said wit, for ingenuitie, as he meant it.
By the soule of musicke, ladie (hum, hum.)
Would we might heare it once.
I doe more adore, and admire your (hum, hum) predominant perfections, then (hum, hum) euer I shall haue power, and facultie to expresse (hum.)
Vpon the violl de Gambo, you meane?
It's miserably out of tune, by this hand.
Nay, rather by the fingers.
It makes good harmonie with her wit.
Sweet ladie, tune it. Boy, some tabacco.
Tabacco againe? he do's court his mistresse with verie exceeding good changes.
Signior MACILENTE, you take none, sir?
No, vnlesse I had a Mistresse, signior, it were a great indecorum for me to take tabacco.
How like you her wit?
Her ingenuitie is excellent, sir.
You see the subiect of her sweet fingers, there? Oh, shee tickles it so, that shee makes it laugh most diuinely; I'le tell you a good iest now, and yourselfe shall say it's a good one: I haue wisht my selfe to be that instrument (I thinke) a thousand times, and not so few, by heauen
Not vnlike, sir: but how? to be cas'd vp, and hung by on the wall?
O, no, sir, to be in vse I assure you; as your iudicious eyes may testifie.
Here, seruant, if you will play, come.
Instantly, sweet ladie. In good faith, here's most diuine tabacco!
Nay, I cannot stay to dance after your pipe.
Good! nay, deare ladie, stay: by this sweete smoake, I thinke your wit be all fire.
And, hee's the Salamander belongs to it.
Is your tabacco perfum'd, seruant? that you sweare by the sweet smoke?
Still more excellent! (before heauen, and these bright lights) I thinke you are made of ingenuitie, I.
True, as your discourse is: Ô abominable!
Will your ladiship take any?
O, peace I pray you; I loue not the breath of a woodcockes head.
Meaning my head, ladie?
Not altogether so, sir; but (as it were fatall to their follies that thinke to grace themselues with taking tabacco, when they want better entertainment) you see your pipe beares the true forme of a woodcockes head.
O admirable simile!
'Tis best leauing of you in admiration, sir.
Are these the admired lady-wits, that hauing so good a plaine-song, can runne no better diuision vpon it? S'heart, all her iests are of the stampe, (March was fifteene yeres ago.) Is this the Comet, Monsieur FASTADIVS, that your gallants wonder at so?
Hart of a gentleman, to neglect mee afore presence thus! Sweet sir, I beseech you be silent in my disgrace. By the Muses, I was neuer in so vile a humour in my life, and her wit was at the loud too. Report it not for a million, good sir; let me be so farre endear'd to your loue.
What followes next, signior CORDATVS? this gallants humour is almost spent, me thinkes, it ebbes apace, with this contrarie breath of his mistresse.
O, but it will low againe for all this, till there come a generall drought of humour among all our actors, and then, I feare not but his wil fall as low as any. See, who presents himselfe here!
What, i'the old case?
Yfaith, which makes it, the more pittifull, you vnderstand where the Scene is?
WHy, are you so melancholy, brother?
I am not melancholy, I thanke you, sister.
Why are you not merrie then? there are but two of vs in all the world, and if wee should not bee comforts one to another, god helpe vs.
Faith, I cannot tell, sister, but if a man had any true melancholy in him, it would make him melancholy, to see his yeomanly father cut his neighbours throats, to make his sonne a gentleman: and yet when he has cut 'hem, he will see his sonnes throat cut too, ere he make him a true gentleman indeed, before death cut his owne throat. I must bee the first head of our house, and yet he will not giue me the head till I bee made so. Is any man term'd a gentleman that is not alwayes i'the fashion? I would know but that.
If you bee melancholy for that, brother, I thinke I haue as much cause to bee melancholy, as one: for I'le be sworne, I liue as little in the fashion, as any woman in London. By the faith of a Gentlewoman, (beast that I am to say it) I ha'not one friend i'the world besides my husband. When saw you master FASTIDIVS BRISKE, brother?
But a while since, sister, I thinke: I know not well in truth. By this hand, I could fight with all my heart, me thinkes.
Nay, good brother, be not resolute.
I sent him a letter, and he writes me no answere neyther.
Oh, sweete FASTIDIVS BRISKE! Ô fine courtier! thou art hee mak'st me sigh, and say, how blessed is that woman that hath a courtier to her husband! and how miserable a dame shee is, that hath neyther husband, nor friend i' the court! O, sweet FASTIDIVS! Ô, fine courtier! How comely he bowes him in his court'sie! how full hee hits a woman betweene the lips when hee kisses! how vpright hee sits at the table! how daintily he carues! how sweetly he talkes, and tels newes of this lord, and of that lady! how cleanely he wipes his spoone, at euery spoonfull of any whit-meat he eates, and what a neat case of pick-tooths he carries about him, still! O, sweet FASTIDIVS! Ô, fine courtier!
SEe, yonder shee is, gentlemen. Now (as euer you'll beare the name of musicians) touch your instruments sweetly, shee has a delicate eare, I tell you: play not a false note, I beseech you.
Feare not, siguior DELIRO.
O, begin, begin, some sprightly thing: Lord, how my imagination labours with the successe of it. Well said, good yfaith! heauen grant it please her. I'le not be seene, for then shee'le be sure to dislike it.
Hey—da! this is excellent! I'le lay my life, this is my husbands dotage. I thought so; nay, neuer play peeke-boe with me, I know, you doe nothing but studie how to anger me, sir.
Anger thee, sweet wife? why didst thou not send for musicians to supper last night, thy selfe?
To supper, sir? now, come vp to supper, I beseech you: as though there were no difference between supper time, when folkes should be merry, and this time when they would be melancholy? I would neuer take vpon me to take a wife, if I had no more iudgement to please her.
Be pleas'd, sweet wife, and they shall ha' done: and would to fate, my life were done, if I can neuer please thee.
Saue you, lady, where is master DELIRO?
Here, master MACILENTE: you are welcome from court, sir; no doubt you haue beene grac't exceedingly of master BRISKES Mistris, and the rest of the ladies, for his sake?
Alas, the poore phantasticke! hee's scarce knowne
To any lady there; and those that know him,
Know him the simplest man of all they know:
Deide, and play vpon his amorous humours,
Though he but apishly doth imitate
The gallant'st courtiers, kissing ladies pumps.
Holding the cloth for them, praising their wits,
And seruilely obseruing euery one,
May doe them pleasure: fearefull to be seene
With any man (though he be ne're so worthy)
That's not in grace with some, that are the greatest.
Thus courtiers doe, and these he counterfeits.
But sets not such a sightly carriage
Vpon their vanities, as they themselues;
And therefore they despise him: for indeed
Hee's like the Zani, to a tumbler,
That tries tricks after him, to make men laugh.
Here's an vnthankfull spitefull wretch! the good gentleman vouchsaft to make him his companion (because my husband put him into a few rags) and now see, how the vnrude rascall back-bites him!
Is he no more grac't amongst 'hem, then? say you?
Faith, like a pawne, at Chesse: fills vp a roome, that's all.
O monster of men! can the earth beare such an euious caytiffe?
Well, I repent me, I e're credited him so much: but (now I see what he is, and that his masking vizor is off) I'le forbeare him no longer. All his lands are morgag'd to me, and forfeited: besides, I haue bonds of his in my hand, for the receit of now fifty pound, now a hundred, now two hundred: still, as he has had a fan but wagg'd at him, he would be in a new sute. Well, I'le salute him by a Sergeant, the next time I see him, yfaith, I'le sute him.
Why, you may soone see him, sir, for hee is to meet signior PVNTARVOLO at a Notaries, by the Exchange, presently: where he meanes to take vp, vpon returne—
Now, out vpon thee, IVDAS; canst thou not be content to back-bite thy friend, but thou must betray him? wilt thou seeke the vndoing of any man? and of such a man too? and will you, sir, get your liuing by the counsell of traytors?
Deare wife, haue patience.
The house will fall, the ground will open, and swallow vs: I'le not bīde here, for all the gold, and siluer in heauen.
O, good MACILENTE, let's follow and appease her, or the peace of my life is at an end.
Now pease, and not peace, feed that life, whose head bangs so heauily ouer a womans manger.
Helpe me, brother: 'ods body, and you come here, I'le doe my selfe a mischiefe.
Nay, heare me, sweet wife, vnlesse thou wilt haue mee goe, I will not goe.
Tut, you shall ne're ha' that vantage of me, to say, you are vndone by me: I'le not bid you stay, I. Brother, sweet brother, here's foure angels, I'le giue you toward your sute: for the loue of gentry, and as euer you came of christen creature, make haste to the water fide (you know where Master FASTIDIVS vses to land) and giue him warning of my husbands malitious intent; & tel him of that leae rascals trechery: O heuens! how my flesh rises at him! nay, sweet brother, make haste: you may say, I vvould haue writ to him, but that necessitie of the time would not permit. He cannot choose but take it extraordinarily from me: and commend me, to him, good brother, say, I sent you.
Let me see, these foure angels, and then, fortie shillings more I can borrow on my gowne in Fetter-lane. Well, I will goe presently, say on my sute, pay as much money as I haue, and sweare my selfe into credit vvith my taylor, for the rest.
O, on my soule you wrong her, MACILENTE,
Though shee be froward, yet I know shee is honest.
Well, then haue I no iudgement: would any vvoman (but one that were wild in her affections) haue broke out into that immodest and violent passion against her husband? or is't possible—
If you loue me, forbeare; all the arguments i' the world shall neuer wrest my heart to beleeue it.
How like you the decyphering of his dotage?
O, strangely! and of the others enuie too, that labours so seriously to set debate betwixt a man, and his wife. Stay, here comes the knight aduenturer.
I, and his scriuener vvith him.
I Wonder, Monsieur FASTIDIVS comes not! but, NOTARIE, if thou please to draw the indentures the vvhile, I will giue thee thy instructions.
With all my heart, sir; and I'le fall in hand with 'he presently.
Well then, first, the summe is to be vnderstood.
Good, sir.
Next, our seuerall appellations, and character of my dog, and cat, must be knowne: shew him the cat, sirrah.
So, sir.
Then, that the intended bound, is the Turkes court in Constantinople: the time limited for our returne, a yeere: and that if either of vs miscarry, the whole venter is lost. These are generall, conceiu'st thou? or if either of vs turne Turke.
I, sir.
Now for particulars: That I may make my trauails by sea or land, to my best liking: and that (hyring a coach for my selfe) it shall bee lawfull for my dog, or cat, or both, to ride with me in the said coach.
Very good, sir.
That I may choose to giue my dogge, or cat fish, for feare of bones: or any other nutriment, that (by the iudgement of the most autenticall physicians, where I trauaile) shall be thought dangerous.
Well, sir.
That (after the receit of his monie) he shall neyther in his own person, nor any other, eyther by direct or indirect meanes, as magicke, witchcraft, or other such exoticke artes, attempt, practise, or complot aiething, to the preiudice of mee, my dogge, or my cat: Neyther shall I vse the helpe of any such forceries, or enchantments, as vnctious, to make our skinnes impenetrable, or to trauaile inuisible by vertue of a powder, or a ring, or to hang any three-forked charme about my dogges necke, secretly conuey'd into his collar: (vnderstand you?) but that all be performed, sincerely, without fraud, or imposture.
So, sir.
That (for testimonie of the performance) my selfe am to bring thence a Trkes mustachio, my dogge a Gracian hares lip, and my cat the traine, or taile of a Thracian rat.
'Tis done, sir.
'Tis said, sir, not done, sir: but forward. That vpon my returne, and landing on the Tower-wharfe, with the aforesaid testimonie, I am to receiue fiue for one, according to the proportion of the summes put forth.
Well, sir.
Prouided, that if before our departure, or setting forth, either my selfe, or these be visited with sicknesse, or any other casuall euent, so that the whole course of the aduenture bee hindered, thereby; that then, he is to returne, and I am to receiue the prenominated proportion, vpon faire and equall termes.
Verie good, sir, is this all?
It is all, sir: and dispatch them, good NOT ARIE.
As fast as is possible, sir.
O, CARLO! welcome: saw you Monsieur BRISKE?
Not I: did he appoint you, to meet here?
I, and I muse he should be so tardie: hee is to take an hundred pounds of mee in venter, if he maintaine his promise.
Is his houre past?
Not yet, but it comes on apace.
Tut, be not iealous of him: he will sooner breake all the commandements, then his houre, vpon my life, in such a case trust him.
Me thinkes, CARLO, you looke verie smooth! ha?
Why, I come but now from a hot-house, I must needes looke smooth.
From a hot-house!
I, doo you make a wonder on't? why it's your only physicke. Let a man sweate once a weeke in a hothouse, and be well rub'd, froted, with a good plumpe juicie wench, and sweet linnen: hee shall ne're ha' the poxe.
What, the French poxe?
The French poxe! our poxe. S'bloud we haue 'hem in as good forme as they, man: what?
Let mee perish, but thou art a salt one! was your new-created gallant there with you? SOGLIARDO?
O, porpuse! hang him, no: hee's a lieger at Hornes ordinarie yonder: his villanous GANIMEDE, and he ha' beene droning a tabacco pipe there, euer sin' yesterday no one.
Who? signior TRIPARTITE, that would giue my dogge the Whiffe?
I, hee. They haue hir'd a chamber, and all priuate to practise in, for the making of the Pato , the Receit reciprocall, and a number of other mysteries, not yet extant. I brought some dozen, or twentie gallants this morning to view 'hem (as you'ld doe a piece of Perspectiue) in at a key-hole: and there wee might see SOGLIARDO sit in a chaire, holding his snowt vp like a sow vnder an apple-tree, while th' other open'd his nostrils with a poking-sticke, to giue the smoke a more free deliuerie. They had spit some three, or fourescore ounces betweene 'hem, afore we came away.
How! spit three, or fourescore ounces?
I, and preseru'd it in porrengers; as a barber does his bloud▪ when he opens a veine.
Out, Pagan: how dost thou open the veine of thy friend?
Friend? Is there any such foolish thing i'the world? ha? S'lid I ne're rellisht it yet.
Thy humour is the more dangerous.
No, not a whit, Signior: Tut, a man must keepe time in all. I can oyle my tongue when I meet him next, and looke with a good slicke fore-head; 'twill take away all soyle of suspicion, and that's ynough: what LYNCEVS can see my heart? Pish, the title of a friend, it's a vaine idle thing, only venerable among fooles: you shall not haue one that has any opinion of wit affect it.
SAue you, good sir PVNTARVOLO.
Signior DELIRO! welcome.
Pray you, sir, did you see Master FASTIDIVS BRISKE? I heard he was to meet your worship here.
Your heard no sigment, sir, I doe expect him at euery pulse of my watch.
In good time, sir.
There's a fellow now, lookes like one of the Patricians of Sparta, mary his wit's after tenne i'the hundred. A good bloud-hound, a close-mouth'd dogge, he followes the sent well, mary he's at a fault now, me thinkes.
I should wonder at that creature is free from the danger of thy tongue.
O, I cannot abide these limmes of sattin, or rather Sathan indeed, that 'll walke (like the children of darknesse) all day in a melancholy shop, with their pockets full of blankes, readie to swallow vp as manie poore vnthrifts, as come within the verge.
So! and what hast thou for him that is with him, now?
O, (dam' mee) Immortalitie! I'le not meddle with him, the pure element of fire, all spirit, extraction.
HOW, CARLO? ha, what is he, man?
A scholler, MACILENTE, doe you not know him? a lanke raw-bon'd anatomie, he walkes vp and downe like a charg'd musket, no man dares encounter him: that's his rest there.
His rest? why has he a forked head?
Pardon me, that's to be suspended, you are too quicke, too apprehensiue.
Troth (now I thinke on't) I'le deferre it till some other time.
Not, by any meanes, signior, you shall not lose this opportunitie, he will be here presently now.
Yes saith, MACILENTE, 'tis best. For looke you, sir, I shall so exceedingly offend my wife in't, that—
Your wife? now for shame lose these thoughts, and become the master of your owne spirits. Should I (if I had a wife) suffer my selfe to be thus passionately carried (to and fro) with the streame of her humour? and neglect my deepest affaires, to serue her affections? S'light I would geld my selfe first.
O but, signior, had you such a wife as mine is, you would—
Such a wife? Now hate mee, sir, if euer I discern'd any wonder in your wife, yet, with all the speculation I haue: I haue seene some that ha' beene thought fairer then she, in my time; and I haue seene those, ha' not been altogether so tall, esteem'd properer women; and I haue seen lesse noses grow vpon sweeter faces, that haue done verie well too, in my iudgement: but in good faith, signior, for all this, the gentlewoman is a good pretie proud hard-fauour'd thing, mary not so peerelessely to bee doted vpon, I must confesse: nay, be not angrie.
Well, sir, (how euer you please to forget your selfe) I haue not deseru'd to bee thus plai'd vpon, but henceforth, pray you forbeare my house, for I can but faintly endure the fauour of his breath at my table, that shall thus iade me for my courtesies.
Nay, then, signior, let me tell you, your wife is no proper woman, and, by my life, I suspect her honestie, that's more, which you may likewise suspect (if you please:) doe you see? Ile vrge you to nothing, against your appetite, but if you please, you may suspect it.
Good, sir.
Good sir? Now horne vpon horne pursue thee, thou blinde egregious dotard.
O, you shall heare him speake like ennie. Signior MACILENTE, you saw monsieur BRISKE lately? I heard you were with him at court.
I, BVFFONE, I was with him.
And how is he respected there? (I know youle deale ingenuously with vs) is he made of amongst the sweeter sort of gallants?
Faith I, his ciuet and his casting-glasse,
Haue helpt him to a place amongst the rest:
And there, his Seniors giue him good sleight lookes,
After their garbe, smile, and salute in French
With some new complement.
What, is this all?
Why say, that they should shew the frothie foole,
Such grace, as they pretend comes from the heart,
He had a mightie wind-fall out of doubt.
Why, all their Graces are not to doe grace
To vertue, or desert: but to ride both
With their guilt sputres quite breathlesse, from themselues.
'Tis now esteem'd Precisianisme in wit;
And a disease in nature, to be kind
Toward desert, to loue, or seeke good names:
Who feeds with a good name? who thriues with louing?
Who can prouide feast for his owne desires,
With seruing others? ha, ha, ha:
'Tis folly, by our wisest worldlings prou'd,
(If not to gaine by loue) to be belou'd.
How like you him? is't not a good spitefull slaue? ha?
Shrewd, shrewd.
Dam'me, I could eat his flesh now: diuine sweet villaine!
Nay, pr'y thee leaue: what's he there?
Who? this i'the starcht beard? it's the dull stiffe knight PVNTARVOLO, man; hee's to trauaile now presently: hee has a good knottie wit, marry he carries little o't out of the land, with him.
How then?
He puts it forth in venter, as hee does his monie; vpon the returne of a dogge, and cat.
Is this he?
I, this is hee; a good tough gentleman: hee lookes like a shield of brawne, at Shrouetide, out of date, and readie to take his leaue: or a drie poule of ling vpon Easter-eue, that has furnisht the table all Lent, as he has done the citie this last vacation.
Come, you'le neuer leaue your stabbing smile's: I shall ha' you ayming at me with 'hem by and by, but—
O, renounce me then: pure, honest, good deuill, I loue thee aboue the loue of women: I could e'en melt in admiration of thee, now! gods so, looke here, man; Sir DAGONET, and his squire!
SAue you, my deare GALLANTO'S: nay, come approch, good CAVALIER: pr'y thee (sweet knight) know this gentleman, hee's one that it pleases mee to vse as my good friend, and companion; and therefore doe him good offices: I beseech you, gentles, know him, know him all ouer.
Sir (for signior SOGLIARDO'S sake) let it suffice, I know you.
Why (as I am true gentleman) I thanke you, knight, and it shall suffice. Harke you, sir PVNTARVOLO, you'ld little thinke it; he's as resolute a peece of flesh, as any's i'the world.
Indeed, sir?
Vpon my gentilitie, sir: CARLO, a word with you; Doe you see that same fellow, there?
What? CAVALIER SHIFT?
O, you know him; crie you mercy: before me, I thinke him the tallest man, liuing within the walls of Europe.
The walls of Europe! take heed what you say, signior, Europe's a huge thing within the walls.
Tut, (and 'twere as huge againe) I'ld iustifie what I speake. Slid, he swagger'd e'en now in a place where we were: I neuer saw a man doe it more resolute.
Nay, indeede swaggering is a good argument of resolution. Doe you heare this, signior?
I, to my griefe. O, that such muddy flags,
For euery drunken flourish, should atchieue
The name of manhood; whil'st true perfect valour
(Hating to shew it selfe) goes by despis'd!
Heart, I doe know now (in a faire iust cause)
I dare doe more then he, a thousand times:
Why should not they take knowledge of this? ha?
And giue my worth allowance before his?
Because I cannot swagger! Now the poxe
Light on your Pickt-hatch prowesse.
Why, I tell you, sir, he has beene the only Bid-stand that euer kept New-market, Salisbury-plaine, Hockley i'the hole, Gads-Hill; all the high places of any request: he has had his mares and his geldings, he, ha' been worth fortie, threescore, a hundred pound a horse, would ha' sprung you ouer hedge, and ditch, like your grey-hound, he has done fiue hundred robberies in his time, more or lesse, I assure you.
What? and scapt?
Scapt! yfaith I: he has broken the jayle when he has beene in yrons, and yrons; and beene out, and in againe; and out, and in; fortie times, and not so few, he.
A fit trumpet, to proclaime such a person.
But can this be possible?
Why, 'tis nothing, sir, when a man giues his affections to it.
Good PYLADES, discourse a robberie, or two, to satisfie these gentlemen of thy worth.
Pardon me, my deare ORESTES: Causes haue their quiddits, and 'tis ill iesting with bell-ropes.
How? PYLADES, and ORESTES?
I, he is my PYLADES, and I am his ORESTES: how like you the conceit?
O, it's an old stale enterlude deuice: No, I'le giue you names my selfe, looke you, he shall be your IVDAS, and you shall bee his Elder tree, to hang on.
Nay, rather, let him be captaine POD, and this his Motion; for he does nothing but shew him.
Excellent: or thus, you shall bee HOLDEN, and hee your Camel.
You doe not meane to ride, gentlemen?
Faith, let me end it for you, gallants: you shall be his Countenance, and he your Resolution.
Troth, that's pretty: how say you, Caualier, shalt be so?
I, I, most voices.
Faith, I am easily yeelding to any good impressions.
Then giue hands, good Resolution.
Masse, he cannot say, good Countenance, now (properly) to him againe.
Yes, by an irony.
O, sir, the countenance of Resolution should, as he is, be altogether grim, and vnpleasant.
GOod houres make musicke with your mirth, gentlemen, and keepe time to your humours: how now, CARLO?
Monsieur BRISKE! many a long looke haue I extended for you, sir.
Good faith, I must craue pardon; I was inuited this morning ere I was out of my bed, by a beuie of ladies, to a banquet: whence it was almost one of HERCVLES labours for me, to come away, but that the respect of my promise did so preuaile with me: I know they'le take it very ill, especially one that gaue me this bracelet of her haire but ouer-night, and this pearle another gaue me from her fore-head, mary, shee—what? are the writings ready?
I will send my man to know. Sirrah, goe you to the Notaries, and learne if he be readie: leaue the dog, sir.
And how does my rare qualified friend, SOGLIARDO? oh, signior MACILENTE! by these eyes, I saw you not, I had saluted you sooner else, o'my troth: I hope, sir, I may presume vpon you, that you will not diuulge my late checke, or disgrace, indeed, sir.
You may, sir.
S'heart, he knowes some notorious iest by this gull, that hee hath him so obsequious.
Monsieur FASTIDIVS, doe you see this fellow there? does he not looke like a clowne? would you thinke there's any thing in him?
Anything in him? beshrow me, I; the fellow hath a good ingenious face.
By this element, he is an ingenious tall man, as euer swagger'd about London: he, and I, call Countenance, and Resolution, but his name is CAVALIER SHIFT.
CAVALIER, you knew signior CLOG, that was hang'd for the robbery at Harrow o'the hill?
Knew him, sir! why, 'twas hee gaue all the directions for the action.
How? was't your proiect, sir?
Pardon me, Countenance, you doe me some wrong to make that publike, which I imparted to you in priuate.
Gods will! here are none but friends, Resolution.
That's all one; things of consequence must haue their respects, where, how, and to whom. Yes, sir, hee shewed himselfe a true CLOG in the coherence of that affaire, sir; for if he had manag'd matters as they were corroborated to him, it had beene better for him by a fortie, or fiftie score of pounds, sir, and he himselfe might ha' liu'd (in despight of fates) to haue fed on wood-cocks, with the rest: but it was his heauie fortune to sinke, poore CLOG, and therefore talke no more of him.
Why, had he more aiders, then?
O god, sir! I, there were some present there, that were the nine Worthies to him, yfaith.
I, sir, I can satisfie you at more conuenient conference: but (for mine owne part) I haue now reconcil'd my selfe to other courses, and professe a liuing out of my other qualities.
Nay, he has left all now (I assure you) and is able to liue like a gentleman, by his quality. By this dogge, hee has the most rare gift in tabacco, that euer you knew.
S'heart, hee keepes more adoe with this monster, then euer BANKES did with his horse, or the fellow with the elephant.
He will hang out his picture shortly, in a cloth, you shall see.
O, hee do's manage a quarrell, the best that euer you saw, for termes, and circumstances.
Good faith, signior, (now you speake of a quarrell) I'le acquaint you with a difference, that happened betweene a gallant, and my selfe sir PVNTARVOLO, you know him if I should name him, signior LVCVLENTO.
LVCVLENTO! what in-auspicious chance interpos'd it selfe to your two loues?
Faith, sir, the same that sundred AGAMEMNON, and great THETIS sonne; but let the cause escape, sir: Hee sent mee a challenge (mict with some few braues) which I restor'd, and in fine we met. Now indeed, sir, (I must tell you) he did offer at first very desperately, but without iudgement: for looke you, sir. I cast my selfe into this figure: now he, comes violently on, and withall aduancing his rapier to strike, I thought to haue tooke his arme (for he had left his whole body to my election, and I was sure he could not recouer his guard) Sir, I mist my purpose in his arme, rasht his doublet sleeue, ran him close by the left cheek, and through his haire. He againe, lights me here (I had on, a gold cable hatband, then new come vp, which I wore about a murrey French hat I had) cuts my hatband (and yet it was massie, gold-smithes worke) cuts my brimmes, which by good fortune (being thicke embrodered with gold-twist, and spangles) disappointed the force of the blow: Neuerthelesse, it graz'd on my shoulder, takes me away sixe purles of an Italian cut-worke band I wore (cost me three pound in the exchange, but three daies before.)
This was a strange encounter!
Nay, you shall heare, sir: with this wee both fell out, and breath'd. Now (vpon the second signe of his assault) I betooke me to the former manner of my defence; he (on the other side) abandon'd his body to the same danger, as before, and followes me still with blowes: But I (being loth to take the deadly aduantage that lay before mee of his left side) made a kind of stramazoun, ranne him vp to the hilts, through the doublet, through the shirt, and yet mist the skin. Hee (making a reuerse blow) falls vpon my emboss'd girdle (I had throwne off the hangers a little before) strikes off a skirt of a thick—lac't sattin doublet I had (lin'd with some foure taffataes) cuts off two panes, embrodered with pearle, rends through the drawings out of tissew, enters the linings, and skips the flesh.
I wonder he speakes not of his wrought shirt!
Here (in the opinion of mutuall dammage) wee paus'd: but (ere I proceed) I must tell you, signior, that (in this last encounter) not hauing leisure to put off my siluer spurres, one of the rowels catcht hold of the rule of my boot, and (being Spanish leather, and subiect to teare) ouerthrowes me, rends me two paire of silke stockings (that I put on, being somewhat a raw morning, a peach colour and another) and strikes me some halfe inch deepe into the side of the calfe; Hee (seeing the bloud come) presently takes horse, and away. I (hauing bound vp my wound with a peece of my wrought shirt)—
O! comes it in there?
Rid after him, and (lighting at the court-gate, both together) embrac'd, and marcht hand in hand vp into the presence: was not this businesse well carried?
Well? yes, and by this we can gesse what apparell the gentleman wore.
Fore valour, it was a designement begun with much resolution, maintain'd with as much prowesse, and ended with more humanitie. How now, what saies the Notarie?
He saies, he is ready, sir, he staies but your worships pleasure.
Come, we will goe to him, Monsieur. Gentlemen, shall we entreat you to be witnesses?
You shall entreat me, sir: come Resolution.
I follow you, good Countenance.
Come, signior, come, come.
O, that there should be fortune
To clothe these men, so naked in desert!
And that the iust storme of a wretched life,
Beats 'hem not ragged, for their wretched soules,
And, since as fruitlesse, euen as black as coales!
Why, but signior, how comes it, that FVNGOSO appear'd not with his sisters intelligence, to BRISKE?
Mary, long of the euill angels that she gaue him, who haue indeed tempted the good simple youth, to follow the taile of the fashion, and neglect the imposition of his friends. Behold, here hee comes, very worshipfully attended and with good varietie.
GRamercie, good shoo-maker, I'le put to strings my selfe. Now, sir, let me see, what must you haue for this hat?
Here's the bill, sir.
How does't become me? well?
Excellent, sir, as euer you had any hat in your life.
Nay, you'll say so, all.
In faith, sir, the hat's as good as any man i' this towne can serue you; and will maintayne fashion as long: ne're trust me for a groat else.
Do's it apply well to my sute?
Exceeding well, sir.
How lik'st thou my sute, haberdasher?
By my troth, sir, 'tis very rarely well made, I neuer saw a sute sit better, I can tell, on.
Nay, we haue no arte to please our friends, we.
Here, haberdasher, tell this fame.
Good faith, sir, it makes you haue an excellent body.
Nay (beleeue me) I thinke I haue as good a body in clothes, as another.
You lack points, to bring your apparell together, sir.
I'le haue points anon: how now? is't right?
Faith, sir, 'tis too little, but vpon farther hopes—Good morrow to you, sir.
Farewell, good haberdasher. Well, now master SNIP, let mee see your bill.
Me thinkes he discharges his followers too thicke.
O, therein he fancily imitates some great man. I warrant you, though he turnes off them, he keepes this taylor, in place of a page, to follow him still.
This bill is very reasonable, in faith (harke you, master SNIP) Troth, sir, I am not altogether so well furnisht at this present, as I could wish I were, but— If you'le doe mee the fauour to take part in hand, you shall haue all I haue, by this hand—
Sir—
And, but giue mee credit for the rest, till the beginning of the next terme.
O lord, sir—
Fore god, and by this light, I'le pay you to the vtmost, and acknowledge my selfe verie deeply engag'd to you, by the courtesie.
Why, how much haue you there, sir?
Mary I haue here foure angels, and fifteene shillings of white monie: it's all I haue, as I hope to be blest.
You will not faile me, at the next tearme, with the rest.
No, and I doe, pray heauen, I be hang'd. Let me neuer breathe againe, vpon this mortall stage, as the philosopher cals it. By this aire, and (as I am a gentleman) I'le hold.
He were an yron-hearted fellow, in my iudgement, that would not credit him vpon this volley of othes.
Well, sir, I'le not sticke with any gentleman for a trifle: you know what 'tis, remaines?
I, sir, and I giue you thankes in good faith. O fate! how happie am I made in this good fortune! Well, now I'le goe seeke out Monsieur BRISKE. 'Ods so, I haue forgot ribband for my shooes, and points. Slid, what lucke 's this! how shall I doe? Master SNIPPE, pray let me reduct some two or three shillings for points, and ribband: as I am an honest man, I haue vtterly disfurnisht my selfe, in the default of memorie, pray'le me be beholding to you, it shall come home i'the bill, beleeue me.
Faith, sir, I can hardly depart with ready mony, but I'le take vp, and send you some by my boy, presently. What colour'd ribband would you haue?
What you shall thinke meet i'your iudgement, sir, to my sute.
Well, I'le send you some presently.
And points too, sir?
And points too, sir.
Good lord! how shall I studie to deserue this kindnesse of you, sir? Pray, let your youth make haste, for I should haue done a businesse an houre since, that I doubt I shall come too late. Now, in good faith, I am exceeding proud of my sute.
Doe you obserue the plunges, that this poore gallant is put to (signior) to purchase the fashion?
I, and to bee still a fashion behinde with the world, that's the sport.
Stay: O here they come, from seal'd, and deliuer'd.
WEll, now my whole venter is forth, I will resolue to depart shortly.
Faith, sir PVNTARVOLO, goe to the court, and take leaue of the ladies first.
I care not, if it be this afternoones labour. Where is CARLO?
Here he comes.
Faith, gallants, I am perswading this gentleman to turne courtier. He is a man of faire reuenue, and his estate will beare the charge well. Besides, for his other gifts of the minde, or so, why, they are as nature lent him 'hem, pure, simple, without any artificiall drug or mixture of these two thred-bare beggarly qualities, learning, and knowledge, and therefore the more accommodate, and genuine. Now, for the life it selfe—
O, the most celestiall, and full of wonder, and delight, that can be imagin'd, signior, beyond all thought, and apprehension of pleasure! A man liues there, in that diuine rapture, that hee will thinke himselfe i'the ninth heauen for the time, and lose all sense of mortalitie whatsoeuer; when he shall behold such glorious (and almost immortall) beauties, heare such angelicall and harmonious voyces, discourse with such flowing and ambrosiam spirits, whose wits are as suddaine as lightning, and humorous as nectar, Oh: it makes a man al quintessence, and flame, & lifts him vp (in a moment) to the verie christall crowne of the skie, where (houering in the strength of his imagination) he shall behold all the delights of the HESPERIDES, the Insulae Fortunatae, ADONIS gardens, Tempe or what else (condfin'd within the amplest verge of poesie) to bee meere vmbrae, and imperfect figures, conferr'd with the most essentiall felicitie of your court.
Well, this Encomion was not extemporall, it came too perfectly off.
Besides, sir, you shall neuer need to goe to a hot-house, you shall sweat there with courting your mistresse, or losing your monie at primero, as well as in all the stones in Sweden. Mary this, sir, you must euer be sure to carrie a good strong perfume about you, that your mistresse dogge may smell you out amongst the rest; and (in making loue to her) neuer feare to be out: for you may haue a pipe of tabacco, or a base violl shall hang o'the wall, of purpose, will put you in presently. The trickes your Resolution has taught you in tabacco, (the whisse, and those sleights) will stand you in verie good ornament there?
I, to some perhaps: but, and hee should come to my mistresse with tabacco (this gentleman knowes) shee'ld reply vpon him, yfaith. O, (by this bright sunne) shee has the most acute, readie, and facetious wit, that—tut there's no spirit able to stand her. You can report it, signior, you haue seene her?
Then can hee report no lesse, out of his iudgement, I assure him.
Troth, I like her well enough, but shee's too selfe-conceited, me thinkes.
I indeed, shee's a little too selfe conceited, and 'twere not for that humour, she were the most-to-be-admir'd ladie in the world.
Indeed, it is a humour that takes from her other excellencies.
Why, it may easily be made to forsake her, in my thought.
Easily, sir? then are all impossibilities easie.
You conclude too quicke vpon me, signior, what will you say, if I make it so perspicuously appeare now, that your selfe shall confesse nothing more possible?
Mary, I will say, I will both applaud, and admire you for it.
And I will second him, in the admiration.
Why, I'le shew you, gentlemen. CARLO, come hither.
Good faith, I haue a great humor to the court: what thinkes my Resolution? shall I aduenture?
Troth, Countenance, as you please; the place is a place of good reputation, and capacitie.
O, my trickes in tabacco (as CARLO sayes) will shew excellent there.
Why, you may goe with these gentlemen now, and see fashions: and after, as you shall see correspondence.
You say true. You will goe with me, Resolution?
I will meet you, Countenance, about three or foure of clocke, but, to say to goe with you I cannot, for (as I am APPLE-IOHN) I am to goe before the Cocatrice you saw this morning, and therefore pray', present mee excus'd, good Countenance.
Farewell, good Resolution, but faile not to meet.
As I liue.
Admirably excellent!
If you can but perswade SOGLIARDO to court, there's all now.
O let me alone, that's my taske.
Now, by wit, MACILENTE, it's aboue measure excellent: 'twill be the onely court-exploit that euer prou'd courtier ingenious.
Vpon my soule, it puts the ladie quite out of her humour, and we shall laugh with iudgement.
Come, the gentleman was of himselfe resolu'd to goe with you, afore I mou'd it.
Why then, gallants, you two, and CARLO, goe afore to prepare the iest: SOGLIARDO and I will come some while after you.
Pardon me, I am not for court.
That's true: CARLO comes not at court indeed. Well, you shall leaue it to the facultie of monsieur BRISKE, and my selfe, vpon our liues wee will manage it happily. CARLO shall bespeake supper, at the miter, against we come backe: where we will meet, and dimple our cheekes with laughter at the successe.
I, but will you all promise to come?
My selfe shall manfrede it for them: he that failes, let his reputation lye vnder the lash of thy tongue.
Gods so, looke who comes here!
What, nephew!
Vncle, god saue you; did you see a gentleman, one monsieur BRISKE? a Courtier, he goes in such a sute as I doe.
Here is the gentleman, nephew, but not in such a sute.
Another sute!
How now, nephew?
Would you speake to me, sir?
I, when he has recouered himselfe: poore poll.
Some Rosa-solis.
How now, signior?
I am not well, sir.
Why, this it is, to dogge the fashion.
Nay, come gentlemen, remember your affaires; his disease is nothing but the fluxe of apparell.
Sirs, returne to the lodging, keepe the cat safe; I'le be the dogs Guardian my selfe.
Nephew, will you goe to court with vs? these gentlemen and I are for the court: nay, be not so melancholy.
By gods lid, I thinke no man in christendome has that rascally fortune that I haue.
Faith, your sute is well enough, signior.
Nay, not for that, I protest; but I had an errand to Monsieur FASTIDIVS, and I haue forgot it.
Why, goe along to court with vs, and remember it, come. Gentlemen, you three take one boat, and SOGLIARDO and I will take another: we shall be there instantly.
Content: good sir, vouchsafe vs your pleasance.
Farewell, CARLO; remember.
I warrant you: would I had one of Kemps shooes to throw after you.
Good Fortune will close the eyes of our iest, feare not: and we shall frollicke.
This MACILENTE, signior, begins to bee more sociable on a suddaine, mee thinkes, then hee was before: there's some portent in't, I beleeue.
O, hee's a fellow of a strange nature. Now do's hee (in this calme of his humour) plot, and store vp a world of malicious thoughts in his braine, till hee is so full with 'hem, that you shall see the very torrent of his enuie breake forth like a land-floud: and, against the course of all their affections oppose it selfe so violently, that you will almost haue wonder to thinke, how 'tis possible the current of their dispositions shall receiue so quick, and strong an alteration.
I mary, sir, this is that, on which my expectation has dwelt al this while: for I must tel you, signior (though I was loth to interrupt the Scene) yet I made it a question in mine owne priuate discourse, how he should properly call it, Euery man out of his Humour, when I saw all his actors so strongly pursue, and continue their humours?
Why, therein his art appeares most full of lustre, and approcheth neerest the life: especially, when in the flame, and height of their humours, they are laid flat, it fils the eye better, and with more contentment. How tedious a sight were it to behold a proud exalted tree lopt, and cut downe by degrees, when it might bee feld in a moment? and to set the axe to it before it came to that pride, and fulnesse, were, as not to haue it grow.
Well, I shall long till I see this fall, you talke of.
To helpe your longing, signior, let your imagination be swifter them a paire of oares: and by this, suppose PVNTARVOLO, BRISKE, FVNGOSO, and the dogge arriu'd at the court gate, and going vp to the great chamber. MACILENTE, and SOGLIARDO, wee'le leaue them on the water, till possibilitie and naturall meanes may land 'hem. Here come the gallants, now prepare your expectation.
COme, gentles. Signior, you are sufficiently instructed.
Who, I, sir?
No, this gentleman. But stay, I take thought how to bestow my dogge, he is no competent attendant for the presence.
Masse, that's true indeed, knight, you must not carrie him into the presence.
I know it, and I (like a dull beast) forgot to bring one of my cormorants to attend me.
Why, you're best leaue him at the porters lodge.
Not so: his worth is too well knowne amongst them, to bee forth-comming.
Slight, how'll you doe then?
I must leaue him with one, that is ignorant of his qualitie, if I will haue him to be safe. And see! Here comes one that wil carrie coales, ergo, will hold my dogge. My honest friend, may I commit the tuition of this dogge to thy prudent care?
You may, if you please, sir.
Pray thee let me find thee here at my returne: it shall not bee long, till I will ease thee of thy imployment, and please thee. Forth, gentles.
Why, but will you leaue him with so slight command, and infirse no more charge, vpon the fellow?
Charge? no; there were no policie in that: that were to let him know the value of the gemme he holds, and so, to tempt fraile nature against her disposition. No, pray thee let thy honestie be sweet, as it shall be short.
Yes, sir.
But harke you gallants, and chiefely Monsieur BRISKE. When we come in eye-shot, or presence of this ladie, let not other matters carrie vs from our proiect: but (if wee can) single her forth to some place—
I warrant you.
And bee not too suddaine, but let the deuice induce it selfe with good circumstance. On.
Is this the way? good truth, here be fine hangings.
Honestie sweet, and short? mary it shall, sir, doubt you not: for euen at this instant if one would giue mee twentie pounds, I would not deliuer him; there's for the sweet; but now, if any man come offer me but two pence, he shall haue him; there's for the short now. Slid, what a mad humorous gentleman is this to leaue his dogge with me? I could run away with him now, and hee were worth any thing.
Come on, signior, now prepare to court this all-witted ladie, most naturally, and like your selfe.
Faith, and you say the word, I'le begin to her in tabacco.
O, fie on't: no: you shall begin with, How does my sweet ladie? or, Why are you so melancholy, Madame? though shee bee verie merrie, it's all one: be sure to kisse your hand often inough; pray for her health, and tell her, how, more then most faire she is. Screw your face at one side thus, and protest; let her fleere, and looke a skaunce, and hide her teeth with her fanne, when she laughs a fit, to bring her into more matter, that's nothing: you must talke forward (though it be without sense, so it be without blushing) 'tis most court-like, and well.
But shall I not vse tabacco at all?
O, by no meanes, 'twill but make your breath suspected, and that you vse it onely to confound the rankenesse of that.
Nay, I'le be aduis'd, sir, by my friends.
Gods my life, see, where sir PVNTARS dog is.
I would the gentleman would returne for his follower here, I'le leaue him to his fortunes else.
S'heart, 'twere the onely true iest in the world to poison him now: ha? by this hand, I'le doe it, if I could but get him of the fellow. Signior SOGLIARDO, walke aside, and thinke vpon some deuice, to entertaine the ladie with.
So I doe, sir.
How now, mine honest friend? whose dog-keeper art thou?
Dogge-keeper, sir? I hope I scorne that yfaith.
Why? do'st thou not keepe a dogge?
Sir, now I doe, and now I doe not: I thinke this be sweet and short. Make me his dogge-keeper?
This is excellent, aboue expectation: nay stay, sir, you'ld bee trauailing, but I'le giue you a dramme shall shorten your voyage: here. So sir, I'le be bold to take my leaue of you. Now to the Turkes court in the deuils name, for you shall neuer goe o'gods name. SOGLIARDO, come.
I ha' 't ysaith now, will sting it.
Take heed you leese it not, signior, ere you come there: preserue it.
How like you this first exploit of his?
O, a piece of true enuie: but I expect the issue of the other deuice.
Here they come, will make it appeare.
WHy, I thought, sir PVNTARVOLO, you had bin gone your voyage?
Deare, and most amiable ladie, your diuine beauties doe bind me to those offices, that I cannot depart when I would.
'Tis most court-like spoken, sir: but how might we do to haue a sight of your dogge, and cat?
His dogge is in the court, ladie.
And not your cat? how dare you trust her behind you, sir?
Troth, madame, shee hath sore eyes, and shee doth keepe her chamber: mary I haue left vnder sufficient guard, there are two of my followers to attend her.
I'le giue you some water for her eyes: when doe you goe, sir?
Certes, sweet ladie, I know not.
He doth stay the rather, madame, to present you acute iudgement with so courtly, and wel-parted a gentleman, as yet your lady-ship hath neuer seene.
What's hee, gentle Monsieur BRISKE? not that gentleman?
No ladie, this is a kinsman to iustice Silence.
Pray' sir, giue me leaue to report him: he's a gentleman (ladie) of that rare and admirable facultie, as (I protest) I know not his like in Europe: hee is exceedingly valiant, an excellent scholler, and so exactly trauail'd, that hee is able in discourse, to deliuer you a modell of any princes court in the world: speakes the languages with that puritie of phrase, and facilitie of accent, that it breeds astonishment: his wit, the most exuberant, and (aboue wonder) pleasant, of all that euer entred the concaue of this eue.
'Tis most true, ladie: mary, he is no such excellent proper man.
His trauailes haue chang'd his complexion, madame.
O, sir PVNTARVOLO, you must thinke, euery man was not borne to haue my seruant BRISKES feature.
But that which transcends all, ladie; hee doth so peerelessely imitate any manner of person for gesture, action, passion, or whateuer—
I, especially a rusticke, or a clowne, madame, that it is not possible for the sharpest-sighted wit (in the world) to discerne any sparkes of the gentleman in him, when he does.
O, Monsieur BRISKE, be not so tyrannous to confine all wits within the compasse of your owne: not find the sparkes of a gentleman in him, if he be a gentleman?
No in truth (sweet ladie) I beleeue you cannot.
Doe you beleeue so? why, I can find sparkes of a gentleman in you, sir.
I, he is a gentleman, madame, and a reueller.
Indeed, I thinke I haue seene your ladiship at our reuels.
Like enough, sir: but would I might see this wonder you talke of: may one haue a sight of him, for any reasonable summe?
Yes, madame, he will arriue presently.
What, and shall we see him clowne it?
I faith (sweet ladie) that you shall: see, here he comes.
This is he! pray obserue him, ladie.
Be shrew me, he clownes it properly indeed.
Nay, marke his courtship.
How does my sweet ladie? hote, and moyst? beautifull and lustie? ha?
Beautifull, and it please you, sir, but not lustie.
O ho, ladie; it pleases you to say so in truth: and how does my sweet ladie? in health? Bonaroba, quaeso, que nouelles? que nouells? sweet creature.
O excellent: why gallants, is this hee that cannot bee decipher'd? they were verie bleare-witted, yfaith, that could not discerne the gentleman in him.
But, doe you, in earnest, ladie?
Doe I, sir? why, if you had any true court-iudgement in the carriage of his eye, and that inward power that formes his countenance, you might perceiue his counterfeiting as cleere, as the noone-day: Alas— Nay, if you would haue tryed my wit, indeed, you should neuer haue told me he was a gentleman, but presented him for a true clowne indeede; and then haue seene if I could haue decipher'd him.
Fore god, her ladiship sayes true (knight:) but does he not affect the clowne most naturally, mistresse?
O, shee cannot but affirme that, out of the bountie of her iudgement.
Nay, out of doubt hee does well, for a gentleman, to imitate; but I warrant you, he becomes his natural carriage of the gentleman, much better then his clownerie.
'Tis strange, in truth, her ladiship should see so farre into him.
I, is't not?
Faith, as easily as may be: not decipher him, quoth you?
Good sadnesse, I wonder at it!
Why, has she decipher'd him, gentlemen?
O, most miraculously, and beyond admiration!
Is't possible?
Shee hath gather'd most infallible signes of the gentleman in him, that's certaine.
Why, gallants, let mee laugh at you, a little: was this your deuice, to trie my iudgement in a gentleman?
Nay, ladie, doe not scorne vs, though you haue this gift of perspicacie aboue others: What if hee should bee no gentleman now, but a clowne indeed, ladie?
How thinke you of that? would not your ladiship bee out of your humour?
O, but shee knowes it is not so.
What if he were not a man, yee may as well say? nay, if your worships could gull me so, indeed, you were wiser then you are taken for.
In good faith, ladie, hee is a verie perfect clowne, both by father, and mother: that I'le assure you.
O, sir, you are verie pleasurable.
Nay, doe but looke on his hand, and that shall resolue you: looke you, ladie, what a palme here is.
Tut, that was with holding the plough.
The plough! did you discerne any such thing in him, madame?
Faith no, she saw the gentleman as bright, as at noon-day, she: shee decipher'd him at first.
Troth, I am sorrie your ladiships sight should be so suddainly strooke.
O, you're goodly beagles!
What, is she gone?
Nay, stay, sweet ladie, que nouelles? que nouelles?
Out, you foole, you.
Shee's out of her humour yfaith.
Nay, let's follow it while 'tis hot, gentlemen.
Come, on mine honour wee shall make her blush in the presence: my splene is great with laughter.
Your laughter wil be a child of a feeble life, I beleeue, sir. Come, signior, your lookes are too deiected, mee thinkes: why mixe you not mirth with the rest?
By gods will, this sute frets me at the soule. I'le haue it alter'd to morrow, sure.
I Am come to the court, to meet with my Countenance SOGLIARDO: poore men must be glad of such countenance, when they can get no better. Wel. Need may insult vpon a man, but it shal neuer make him despaire of consequence. The world wil say, tis base: tush, base! 'tis base to liue vnder the earth, not base to liue aboue it, by any meanes.
The poore ladie is most miserably out of her humour, yfaith.
There was neuer so wittie a iest broken, at the tilt of all the court-wits christen'd.
O, this applause taints it, fouly.
I thinke, I did my part in courting. O! Resolution!
Aye me, my dogge.
Where is hee?
Gods precious, goe seeke for the fellow, good signior.
Here, here I left him.
Why, none was here when we came in now, but CAVALIER SHIFT, enquire of him.
Did you see sir PVNTARVOLO'S dogge here, Caualier, since you came?
His dog sir? he may looke his dog, sir, I saw none of his dog, sir.
Vpon my life, he hath stol'ne your dogge, sir, and beene hir'd to it by some that haue ventur'd with you: you may gesse by his peremptorie answeres.
Not vnlike; for he hath beene a notorious thiefe by his owne confession. Sirrah, where is my dogge?
Charge mee with your dogge, sir? I ha' none of your dog, sir.
Villaine, thou lyest.
Lie, sir? S'bloud, y' are but a man, sir.
Rogue, and thiefe, restore him.
Take heed, sir PVNTARVOLO, what you doe: heele beare no coales, I can tell you (o' my word.)
This is rare.
It's mar'le hee stabs you not: by this light, he hath stab'd forty, for forty times lesse matter, I can tell you, of my knowledge.
I wil make thee stoope, thou abiect.
Make him stoop, sir! gentlemen, pacifi him or hee'le be kill'd.
Is he so tall a man?
Tall a man? if you loue his life, stand betwixt 'hem: make him stoope!
My dogge, villaine, or I will hang thee: thou hast confest robberies, and other fellonious acts, to this gentleman thy Countenance—
I'le beare no witnesse.
And, without my dogge, I will hang thee, for them.
What? kneele to thine enemies?
Pardon me, good sir; god is my witnesse, I neuer did robberie in all my life.
O, sir PVNTARVOLO, your dogge lies giuing vp the ghost in the wood-yard.
Heart! is he not dead, yet?
O, my dog, born to disastrous fortune! pray you conduct me, sir.
How? did you neuer doe any robberie, in your life?
O, this is good: so he swore, sir.
I, I heard him. And did you sweare true, sir?
I, (as I hope to be forgiuen, sir) I ne're rob'd any man, I neuer stood by the high-way-side, sir, but only said so, because I would get my selfe a name, and be counted a tall man.
Now out, base viliaco: Thou my Resolution? I thy Countenance? By this light, gentlemen, he hath confest to mee the most inexorable companie of robberies, and damn'd himselfe that he did 'hem; you neuer heard the like: out skoundrell, out, follow me no more, I commaund thee: out of my sight, goe, hence, speake not: I wil not heare thee: away camouccio.
O, how I doe feed vpon this now, and fat my selfe! here were a couple vnexpectedly dishumour'd: well, by this time, I hope, sir PVNTARVOLO and his dog are both out of humour to trauaile. Nay, gentlemen, why doe you not seeke out the knight, and comfort him? our supper at the Mitre must of necessitie hold to night, if you loue your reputations.
'Fore god, I am so melancholy for his dogs disaster, but I'le goe.
Faith, and I may goe too, but I know, I shall be so melancholy.
Tush, melancholy? you must forget that now, and remember you lie at the mercy of a furie: CARLO will racke your sinewes asunder, and raile you to dust, if you come not.
O, then their feare of CARLO, belike, makes them hold their meeting.
I, here he comes: conceiue him but to be enter'd the Mitre, and 'tis enough.
HOlla: where be these shot-sharkes?
By and by: you're welcome, good master BVFFONE.
Where's GEORGE? calme GEORGE hither, quickly.
What wine please you haue, sir? I'le draw you that's neat, master BVFFONE.
Away NEOPHITE, do as I bid thee, bring my deare GEORGE to me: Masse, here he comes.
Welcome, master CARLO.
What! is supper ready, GEORGE?
I, sir, almost: will you haue the cloth laid, master CARLO?
O, what else? are none of the gallants come, yet?
None yet, sir.
Stay, take mee with you, GEORGE: let mee haue a good faloyne of porke laid to the fire, presently.
It shall, sir.
And withall, heare you? draw me the biggest shaft you haue, out of the butt you wo of: away, you know my meaning, GEORGE, quicke.
Done, sir.
I neuer hungred so much for thing in my life, as I doe to know our gallants successe at court: now is that leane bald-rib MACILENTE, that salt villaine, plotting some mischicuous deuice, and lyes a soking in their frothy humours like a drie crust, till he has drunke 'hem all vp: could the pummise but hold vp his eyes at other mens happines, in any reasonable proportion: S'lid, the slaue were to be lou'd next heauen, aboue honour, wealth, rich fare, apparell, wenches, all the delights of the belly, and the groine, whateuer.
Here, master CARLO.
Is't right, Boy?
I, sir, I assure you 'tis right.
Well said, my deare GEORGE, depart: Come, my small gymblet, you in the false scabberd, away, so. Now to you, sir Brgomaster, let's taste of your bountie.
What, will he deale vpon such quantities of wine, alone?
You will perceiue that, sir.
I mary, sir, here's puritie: O, GEORGE, I could bite off his nose for this, now: Sweet rogue, he has drawne Nectar, the very soule of the grape! I'le wash my temples with some on't presently, and drinke some halfe a score draughts; 'twill heat the braine, kindle my imagination, I shall talke nothing but crackers, and fire-worke, to night. So, sir! please you to be here, sir, and I here: So.
This is worth the obseruation, signior.
Now, sir; here's to you; and I present you with so much of my loue.
I take it kindly from you, sir, and will returne you the like proportion: but withall, sir, remembring the merry night wee had at the countesses, you know where, sir.
By heauen, you put me in minde now of a very necessarie office, which I will propose in your pledge, sir: the health of that honorable countesse, and the sweet lady that sate by her, sir.
I doe vaile to it with reuerence. And now, signior, with these ladies, I'le be bold to mixe the health of your diuine Mistris.
Doe you know her, sir?
O lord, sir, I: and in the respectfull memorie and mention of her, I could wish this wine were the most precious drugge in the world.
Good faith, sir, you doe honour me in't exceedingly.
Whom should he personate in this, signior?
Faith, I know not, sir, obserue, obserue him.
If it were the basest filth, or mud that runnes in the channell, I am bound to pledge it, respectiuely, sir. And now, sir, here is a replenisht bowle, which I will reciprocally turne vpon you, to the health of the count FRVGALE.
The count FRVGALES health, sir? I'le pledge it on my knees, by this light.
Will you, sir? I'le drinke it on my knee, then, by the light.
Why, this is strange!
Ha' you heard a better drunken dialogue?
Nay, doe me right, sir.
So I doe, in good faith.
Good faith you doe not; mine was fuller.
Why, beleeue me, it was not.
Beleeue me, it was: and you doe lie.
Lie, sir?
I, sir.
S'wounds!
O, come, stab if you haue a mind to it.
Stab? dost thou thinke I dare not?
Nay, I beseech you, gentlemen, what meanes this? nay, looke, for shame respect your reputations.
WHy, how now CARLO! what humour's this?
O, my good Mischiefe! art thou come? where are the rest? where are the rest?
Faith, three of our ordinance are burst.
Burst? how comes that?
Faith, ouer-charg'd, ouer-charg'd.
But did not the traine hold?
O, yes, and the poore lady is irrecouerably blowne vp.
Why, but which of the munition is miscarried? ha?
Inprimis, sir PVNTARVOLO: next, the COVNTENANCE, and RESOLVTION.
How? how for the loue of wit?
Troth, the Resolution is prou'd recreant; the Countenance hath chang'd his copie: and the passionate knight is shedding funerall teares ouer his departed dogge.
What's his dogge dead?
Poison'd, 'tis thought: mary, how, or by whom, that's left for some cunning woman here o' the Banke-side to resolue. For my part, I know nothing, more then that wee are like to haue an exeeding melancholy supper of it.
S'life, and I had purpos'd to be extraordinarily merry, I had drunke off a good preparatiue of old sacke here: but will they come, will they come?
They will assuredly come: may, CARLO (as thou lou'st me) run ouer 'hem all freely to night, and especially the knight; spare no sulphurous typed by pfs iest that may come out of that sweatie forge of thine: but ply 'hem with all manner of shot, minion, saker, culvertine, or any thing what thou wilt.
I warrant thee, my deare case of petrionels, so I stand not in dread of thee, but that thou'lt second me.
Why, my good Germane tapster, I will.
What, GEORGE. Lomtero, Lomtero, &c.
Did you call, master CARLO?
More nectar, GEORGE: Lomtero, &c.
Your meat's ready, sir, and your company were come.
Is the loyne of porke enough?
I, sir, it is enough.
Porke? heart, what dost thou with such a greasie dish? I thinke thou dost varnish thy face with the fat on't, it lookes so like a glew-pot.
True, my raw-bon'd-rogue, and if thou would'st farce thy leane ribs with it too, they would not (like ragged lathes) rub out so many doublets as they doe: but thou know'st not a good dish, thou. O, it's the only nourishing meat in the world. No maruaile though that saucie, stubborne generation, the Iewes, were forbidden it: for what would they ha' done, well pamper'd with fat porke, that durst murmure at their maker out of garlicke, and onions. S'light, fed with it, the whorson strummell, patcht, goggle-ey'd Grumbledories, would ha' Gigantomachiz'd. Well said, my sweet GEORGE, fill, fill.
This sauours too much of prophanation.
O, seruetur ad imum, qualis ab incepto processerit, & sibi conflet. The necessite of his vaine compels a toleration: for, barre this, and dash him out of humour, before his time.
'Tis an Axiome in naturall philosophie, What comes neerest the nature of that it feeds, conuerts quicker to nourisment, and doth sooner essentiate. Now nothing in flesh, and entrailes, assimulates or resembles man more, then a hog, or swine—
True; and hee (to requite their courtesie) oftentimes d'offeth his owne nature, and puts on theirs; as when hee becomes as churlish as a hog, or as drunke as a sow: but to your conclusion.
Mary, I say, nothing resembling man more then a swine, it followes, nothing can be more nourishing: for indeed (but that it abhorres from our nice nature) if we fed one vpon another, we should shoot vp a great deale faster, and thriue much better: I referre me to your vsurous Cannibals, or such like: but since it is so contrary, porke, porke, is your only feed.
I take it, your deuill be of the same diet; he would ne're ha' desir'd to beene incorporated into swine else. O, here comes the melancholy messe: vpon 'hem CARLO, charge, charge.
'Fore god, sir PVNTARVOLO, I am sorry for your heauinesse: body a me, a shrewd mischance! why, had you no vnicornes horne, nor bezoars stone about you? ha?
SIr, I would request you, be silent.
Nay, to him againe.
Take comfort, good knight, if your cat ha' recouered her catarrhe, feare nothing; your dogges mischance may be holpen.
Say how (sweet CARLO) for so god mend mee, the poore knights moues draw mee into fellowship of his misfortunes. But be not discourag'd, good sir PVNTARVOLO, I am content your aduenture shall be perform'd vpon your cat.
I beleeue you, muske cod, I beleeue you, for rather then thou would'st make present repayment, thou would'st take it vpon his owne bare returne from Calice.
Nay, 'ds life, hee'ld bee content (so hee were well rid out of his company) to pay him fiue for one, at his next meeting him in Paules. But for your dogge, sir PVNTAR, if hee bee not out-right dead, there is a friend of mine, a quack-saluer, shall put life in him againe, that's certaine.
O, no, that comes too late.
Gods precious, knight, will you suffer this?
Drawer, get me a candle, and hard waxe, presently.
I, and bring vp supper; for I am so melancholy.
O, signior, where's your Resolution?
Resolution! hang him rascall: O, CARLO, if you loue me, doe not mention him.
Why, how so? how so?
O, the arrant'st crocodile that euer Christian was acquainted with. By my gentrie, I shall thinke the worse of tabacco while I liue, for his sake: I did thinke him to be as tall a man—
Nay, BVFFONE, the knight, the knight.
S'hid, hee lookes like an image carued out of boxe, full of knots: his face is (for all the world) like a dutch purse, with the mouth downeward; his beard the tassels: and hee walkes (let mee see) as melancholy as one o' the Masters side in the Counter. Doe you heare, sir PVNTAR?
Sir, I doe entreat you no more, but enioyne you to silence, as you affect your peace.
Nay, but deare knight, vnderstand (here are none but friends, and such as wish you well) I would ha' you doe this now; Flea me your dogge presently (but in any case keepe the head) and stuffe his skin well with straw, as you see these dead monsters at Bartholmew faire.
I shall be suddaine, I tell you.
Or if you like not that, sir, get me somewhat a lesse dog, and clap into the skin; here's a slaue about the towne here, a Iew, one YOHAN; or a fellow that makes perrukes, will glew it on artificially, it shall ne're be discern'd, besides, 'twill be so much the warmer for the hound to trauaile in, you know.
Sir PVNTARVOLO, 'death, can you be so patient?
O thus, sir: you may haue (as you come through Germany) a familiar for little or nothing, shall turne it selfe into the shape of your dogge, or any thing (what you will) for certaine houres; 'ods my life, knight, what doe you meane? youle offer no violence, will you? hold, hold.
'Sdeath, you slaue, you bandog, you.
As you loue wit, stay the enraged knight, gentlemen.
By my knighthood, he that stirres in his rescue, dies. Drawer, be gone.
Murder, murder, murder.
I, are you howling, you wolfe? Gentlemen, as you tender your liues, suffer no man to enter, till my reuenge be perfect. Sirha, BVFFONE, lie downe; make no exclamations, but downe: downe, you curre, or I will make thy bloud flow on my rapier hilts.
Sweet knight, hold in thy urie, and 'fore heauen, I'le honour thee more, then the Turke do's MAHOMET.
Downe (I say.) Who's there?
Here's the Constable, open the dores.
Good, MACILENTE.
Open no dore, if the ADALANTADO of Spaine were here, he should not enter: On, helpe me with the light, gentlemen: you knocke in vaine, sir officer.
Et in Brute!
Sirha, close your lips, or I will drop it in thine eyes by heauen.
O, O.
Open the dore, or I will breake it open.
Nay, good Constable, haue patience a little, you shall come in presently, we haue almost done.
So; now, are you out of your humour, sir? Shift, gentlemen.
LAy hold vpon this gallant, and pursue the rest.
Lay hold on me, sir! for what?
Mary, for your not here, sir, with the rest of your companions.
My riot! master Constable, take heed what you doe. CARLO, did I offer any violence?
O, sir, you see he is not in case to answere you, and that makes you so paramptorie.
Peremptorie, s'life I appeale to the drawers, if I did him any hard measure.
They are all gone, there's none of them will bee laid any hold on.
Well, sir, you are like to answere till the rest can be found out.
Slid, I appeare to GEORGE, here.
Tut, GEORGE was not here: away with him to the Counter, sirs. Come, sir, you were best get your selfe drest somewhere.
Good lord, that master CARLO could not take heed, and knowing what a gentleman the knight is, if hee bee angrie.
A poxe on 'hem, they haue left all the meate on our hands, would they were choakt with it forme.
What, are they gone, sirs?
O, here's master MACILENTE.
Sirha, GEORGE, doe you see that concealement there? that napkin vnder the table?
Gods so, signior FVNGOSO!
Her's good pawne for the reckoning, bee sure you keepe him here, and Ice him not goe away till I come againe, though hee offer to discharge all: Ile returne presently.
Sirrah, we haue a pawne for the reckoning.
What? of MACILENTE?
No, looke vnder the table.
I hope, all be quiet now: if I can get but forth of this street, I care not, masters, I pray you tell me, is the Constable gone?
What? master FVNGOSO?
Was't not a good deuice this same of me, sirs?
Yes saith; ha' you beene here all this while?
O god, I▪ good sir, looke, and the coast be cleere, I'ld faine be going.
Al's cleere, sir, but the reckoning; and that you must cleare, and pay before you goe, I assure you.
I pay? Slight, I eate not a bit since I came into the house, yet.
Why, you may when you please, sir, 'tis all readie below, that was bespoken.
Bespoken? not by me, I hope?
By you, sir? I know not that: but 'twas for you, and your companie, I am sure.
My companie? S'lid, I was an inuited guest, so I was.
Faith, we haue no thing to doe with that, sir, they're all gone but you, and we must be answer'd; that's the short and the long on't.
Nay, if you will grow to extremities, my masters, then would this pot, cup, and all were in my belly, if I haue a crosse about me.
What, and haue such apparell? doe not say so, signior, that mightily discredits your clothes.
As I am an honest man, my taylor had all my monie this morning, and yet I must be faine to alter my sute too: good sirs, let me goe, 'tis friday night, and in good truth I haue no stomacke in the world, to eate anie thing.
That's no matter, so you pay, sir.
Pay? gods light, with what conscience can you aske me to pay that I neuer dranke for?
Yes, sir, I did see you drinke once.
By this cup, (which is siluer) but you did not, you doe mee infinite wrong, I look't in the pot once, indeed, but I did not drinke.
Well sir, if you can satisfie our master, it shall bee all one to vs. (by and by.)
Lose not your selfe now signior.
TVt, sir, you did beare too hard a conceit of me in that, but I will now make my loue to you most transparent, in spight of any dust of suspition, that may bee raysed to cloud it: and henceforth, since I see it is so against your humour, I will neuer labour to perswade you.
Why, I thanke you, signior, but what's that you tell mee may concerne my peace so much?
Faith, sir, 'tis thus. Your wiues brother, signior FVNGOSO, being at supper to night at a tauerne, with a sort of gallants, there happened some diuision amongst 'hem, and he is left in pawne for the reckoning: now, if euer you looke that time shall present you with a happie occasion to doe your wife some gracious and acceptable seruice, take hold of this opportunitie, and presently goe, and redeeme him; for, being her brother, and his credit so amply engag'd as now it is, when she shall heare (as hee cannot himselfe, but hee must out of extremitie report it) that you came, and offered your selfe so kindly, and with that respect of his reputation, why, the benefit cannot but make her dote, and grow madde of your affections.
Now, by heauen, MACILENTE, I acknowledge my selfe exceedingly indebted to you, by this kinde tender of your loue; and I am sorrie to remember that I was euer so rude, to neglect a friend of your importance: bring mee shooes, and a cloke there, I was going to bed, if you had not come, what tauerne is it?
The Mitre, sir.
O, why FIDO, my shooes. Good faith it cannot but please her exceedingly.
Come, I marle what peece of nightwork you haue in hand now, that you call for your cloke, and your shooes! what, is this your Pandar?
O, sweet wife, speake lower, I would not he should heare thee for a world—
Hang him rascall, I cannot abide him for his trecherie, with his wilde quick-set beard there. Whither goe you now with him?
No whither with him, deare wife, I goe alone to a place, from whence I will returne instantly. Good MACILENTE, acquaint not her with it by any meanes, it may come so much the more accepted, frame some other answere. I'le come backe immediately.
Nay, and I be not worthie to know whither you goe, stay, till I take knowledge of your comming backe.
Heare you, mistresse DELIRO.
So sir, and what say you?
Faith ladie, my intents will not deserue this slight respect, when you shall know 'hem.
Your intents? why, what may your intents bee, for god sake!
Troth, the time allowes no circumstance, ladie, therefore know, this was but a deuice to remoue your husband hence, and bestow him securely, whilest (with more conueniencie) I might report to you a misfortune that hath happened to Monsieur BRISKE — nay comfort, sweet ladie. This night (being at supper a sort of young gallants committed a riot, for the which he (onely) is apprehended and carried to the Counter, where if your husband, and other creditours should but haue knowledge of him, the poore gentleman were vndone for euer.
Aye me! that he were.
Now therefore, if you can thinke vpon any present meanes for his deliuerie, doe not forslow it. A bribe to the officer that committed him, will doe it.
O god, sir, he shall not want for a bribe: pray you, will you commend me to him, and say I'le visit him presently?
No, ladie, I shall doe you better seruice, in protracting your husbands returne, that you may goe with more safetie.
Good truth, so you may: farewell, good sir. Lord, how a woman may be mistaken in a man? I would haue sworne vpon all the testaments in the world, he had not lou'd master BRISKE. Bring me my keyes there, maide. Alasse, good gentleman, if all I haue i' this earthly world will pleasure him, it shall be at his seruice.
How MACILENTE sweates i'this busines, if you marke him.
I, you shall see the true picture of spight anon: here comes the pawne, and his redeemer.
COme, brother, be not discourag'd for this, man, what?
No truly, I am not discourag'd, but I protest to you, brother, I haue done imitating any more gallants either in purse or apparell, but as shall become a gentleman, for good carriage, or so.
You say well. This is all, i' the bill here? is't not?
I, sir.
There's your monie, tell it: and brother, I am glad I met with so good occasion to shew my loue to you.
I will studie to deserue it in good truth, and I liue.
What, is't right?
I, sir, and I thanke you.
Let me haue a capons legge sau'd, now the reckoning is paid.
You shall, sir.
Where's signior DELIRO?
Here, MACILENTE.
Harke you, sir, ha' you dispatcht this same?
I marie haue I.
Well then, I can tell you newes, BRISKE is i'the Counter.
I'the Counter?
'Tis true, sir, committed for the stirre here to night. Now would I haue you send your brother home afore, with the report of this your kindnesse done him, to his sister, which will so pleasingly possesse her, and out of his mouth too, that i' the meane time you may clap your action on BRISKE, and your wife (being in so happie a moode) cannot entertaine it ill, by any meanes.
'Tis verie true, she cannot indeed, I thinke.
Thinke? why 'tis past thought, you shall neuer meet the like opportunitie, I assure you.
I will doe it. Brother, pray you goe home afore, this gentleman, and I haue some priuate businesse; and tell my sweet wife, I'le come presently.
I will, brother.
And, signior, acquaint your sister, how liberally and out of his bountie, your brother has vs'd you. (Doe you see?) made you a man of good reckoning; redeem'd that you neuer were possest of, credit; gaue you as gentleman-like termes as might be; found no fault with your comming behind the fashion; nor nothing.
Nay, I am out of those humours now.
Well, if you be out, keepe your distance, and be not made a shot-clog any more. Come, signior, let's make haste.
O Master FASTIDIVS, what pitty is't to see so sweet a man as you are, in so sowre a place?
As vpon her lips, do's shee meane?
O, this is to be imagin'd the Counter, belike?
Troth, faire lady, 'tis first the pleasure of the Fates, and next of the Constable, to haue it so: but, I am patient, and indeed comforted the more in your kind visitation.
Nay, you shall bee comforted in mee, more then this, if you please, sir. I sent you word by my brother, sir, that my husband laid to rest you this morning, I know not whether you receiu'd it, or no.
No, beleeue it, sweet creature, your brother gaue me no such intelligence.
O, the lord!
But has your husband any such purpose?
O sweet master BRISKE, yes: and therefore be presently discharg'd, for if he come with his actions vpon you (lord deliuer you) you are in for one halfe a score yeere; he kept a poore man in Ludgate once, twelue yeere, for sixteene shillings. Where's your keeper? for loues sake call him, let him take a bribe, and dispatch you. Lord, how my heart trembles! here are no spies? are there?
No, sweet mistris, why are you in this passion?
O lord, Master FASTIDIVS, if you knew how I tooke vp my husband to day, when hee said hee would arrest you; and how I rail'd at him that perswaded him to't, the scholer there, (who on my conscience loues you now) and what care I tooke to send you intelligence by my brother; and how I gaue him foure soueraignes for his paines; and now, how I came running out hither without man or boy with me, so soone as I heard on't; you'ld say, I were in a passion indeed: your keeper, for gods sake. O, Master BRISKE (as 'tis in EVPHVES) Hard is the choise, when one is compelled either by silence to die with griefe, or by speaking to liue with shame.
Faire lady, I conceiue you, and may this kisse assure you, that where aduersitie hath (as it were) contracted, prosperitie shall not— gods me! your husband.
O, me!
I? is't thus!
Why, how now, signior DELIRO? has the wolfe seene you? ha? hath GORGONS head made marble of you?
Some Planet strike me dead.
Why, looke you; sir, I told you, you might haue suspected this long afore, had you pleas'd; and ha' sau'd this labour of admiration now, and passion, and such extremities as this fraile lumpe of flesh is subiect vnto. Nay, why doe you not dote now, signior? Mee thinkes you should say it were some enchantment, deceptio visus, or so, ha? if you could perswade your selfe it were a dreame now, 'twere excellent: saith, trie what you can do, signior; it may be your imagination will be brought to it in time, there's nothing impossible.
Sweet husband:
Out lasciuious strumpet.
What? did you see, how ill that stale veine became him afore, of sweet wife, and deare heart? and are you falne iust into the same now? with sweet husband. Away, follow him, goe, keepe state, what? Remember you are a woman, turne impudent: gi' him not the head, though you gi' him the hornes. Away. And yet mee thinkes you should take your leaue of Enfans-perdus here, your forlorne hope. How now, Monsieur BRISKE? what? friday night? and in affliction too? and yet your Pulpamenta? your delicate morcels? I perceiue, the affection of ladies and gentlewomen, pursues you wheresoeuer you goe, Monsieur.
Now, in good faith (and as I am gentle) there could not haue come a thing, i' this world, to haue distracted me more, then the wrinckled fortunes of this poore spinster.
O, yes, sir: I can tell you a thing will distract you much better, beleeue it. Signior DELIRO has entred three actions against you, three actions, Monsieur; mary, one of them (I'le put you in comfort) is but three thousand, and the other two, some fiue thousand a peece, trifles, trifles.
O, I am vndone.
Nay, not altogether so, sir, the knight must haue his hundred pound repai'd, that 'll helpe too, and then sixe-score pound for a diamond, you know where. These be things will weigh, Monsieur, they will weigh.
O, heauen!
What, doe you sigh? this it is to kisse the hand of a countesse, to haue her coach sent for you, to hang poinards in ladies garters, to weare bracelets of their haire, and for euery one of these great fauours to giue some slight iewell of fiue hundred crownes, or so, why 'tis nothing. Now, Monsieur, you see the plague that treads o' the heeles of your fopperie: well, goe your waies in, remoue your selfe to the two-penny ward quickly, to saue charges, and there set vp your rest to spend sir PVNTARS hundred pound for him. Away, good pomander, goe.
Why, here's a change! Now is my soule at peace.
I am as emptie of all enuie now,
As they of merit to be enuied at.
My humour (like a flame) no longer lasts
Then it hath stuffe to feed it, and their folly,
Being now rak't vp in their repentant ashes,
Affords no ampler subiect to my spleene.
I am so farre from malicing their states,
That I begin to pitty 'hem. It grieues me
To thinke they haue a being. I could wish
They might turne wise vpon it, and be sau'd now,
So heauen were pleas'd: but let them vanish, vapors.
Gentlemen, how like you it? has't not beene tedious?
Nay, we ha' done censuring, now.
Yes, faith.
How so?
Mary, because wee'le imitate your actors, and be out of our Humours. Besides, here are those (round about you) of more abilitie in censure then wee, whose iudgements can giue it a more satisfying allowance: wee'le refer you to them.
I? is't e'en so? Wel, gentlemen, I should haue gone in, and return'd to you, as I was ASPER at the first: but (by reason the shift would haue beene somewhat long, and we are loth to draw your patience farder) wee'le intreat you to imagine it. And now (that you may see I will be out of humour for companie) I stand wholly to your kind approbation, and (indeed) am nothing so peremptorie as I was in the beginning: Mary, I will not doe as PLAVTVS, in his Amphytrio, for all this (Summi Ionis causa, Plaudite:) begge a Plaudite, for gods sake; but if you (out of the bountie of your good liking) will bestow it; why, you may (in time) make leane MACILENTE as fat, as Sir IOHN FAL-STAFFE.