I Learne in this Letter, that Don Peter of Arragon, comes this night to Meſſina.
He is very neere by this: he was not three Leagues off when I left him.
How many Gentlemen haue you loſt in this action?
But few of any ſort, and none of name.
A victorie is twice it ſelfe, when the atchieuer brings home full numbers: I finde heere, that Don Peter hath beſtowed much honor on a yong Florentine, called Claudio.
Much deſeru'd on his part, and equally remembred by Don Pedro, he hath borne himſelfe beyond the promiſe of his age, doing in the figure of a Lambe, the feats of a Lion, he hath indeede better bettred expectation, then you muſt expect of me to tell you how.
He hath an Vnckle heere in Meſſina, wil be very much glad of it.
I haue alreadie deliuered him letters, and there appeares much ioy in him, euen ſo much, that ioy could not ſhew it ſelfe modeſt enough, without a badg of bitterneſſe.
Did he breake out into teares?
In great meaſure.
A kinde ouerflow of kindneſſe, there are no faces truer, then thoſe that are ſo waſh'd, how much better is it to weepe at ioy, then to ioy at weeping?
I pray you, is Signior Mountant return'd from the warres, or no?
I know none of that name, Lady, there was none ſuch in the armie of any ſort.
What is he that you aske for Neece?
My couſin meanes Signior Benedick of Padua
O he's return'd, and as pleaſant as euer he was.
He ſet vp his bils here in Meſſina, & challeng'd Cupid at the Flight: and my Vnckles foole reading the Challenge, ſubſcrib'd for Cupid, and challeng'd him at the Burbolt. I pray you, how many hath hee kil'd and eaten in theſe warres? But how many hath he kil'd? for indeed, I promis'd to eate all of his killing.
'Faith Neece, you taxe Signior Benedicke too much, but hee'l be meet with you, I doubt it not.
He hath done good ſeruice Lady in theſe wars.
You had muſty victuall, and he hath holpe to ease it: he's a very valiant Trencher-man, hee hath an excellent ſtomacke.
And a good ſouldier too Lady.
And a good ſouldier to a Lady. But what is he to a Lord?
A Lord to a Lord, a man to a man, ſtuft with all honourable vertues.
It is ſo indeed, he is no leſſe then a ſtuft man: but for the ſtuffing well, we are all mortall.
You muſt not (ſir) miſtake my Neece, there is a kind of merry war betwixt Signior Benedick, & her: they neuer meet, but there's a skirmiſh of wit between them.
Alas, he gets nothing by that. In our laſt conflict, foure of his fiue wits went halting off, and now is the whole man gouern'd with one: ſo that if hee haue wit enough to keepe himſelfe warme, let him beare it for a difference betweene himſelfe and his horſe: For it is all the wealth that he hath left, to be knowne a reaſonable creature. Who is his companion now? He hath euery month a new ſworne brother.
I'st poſſible?
Very eaſily poſſible: he weares his faith but as the faſhion of his hat, it euer changes with ye next block.
I ſee (Lady) the Gentleman is not in your bookes.
No, and he were, I would burne my ſtudy. But I pray you, who is his companion? Is there no young ſquarer now, that will make a voyage with him to the diuell?
He is moſt in the company of the right noble Claudio.
O Lord, he will hang vpon him like a diſeaſe: he is ſooner caught then the peſtilence, and the taker runs preſently mad. God helpe the noble Claudio, if hee haue caught the Benedict, it will coſt him a thouſand pound ere he be cur'd.
I will hold friends with you Lady.
Do good friend.
You'l ne're run mad Neece.
No, not till a hot Ianuary.
Don Pedro is approach'd.
Good Signior Leonato, you are come to meet your trouble: the faſhion of the world is to auoid coſt, and you encounter it.
Neuer came trouble to my houſe in the likenes of your Grace: for trouble being gone, comfort ſhould remaine: but when you depart from me, ſorrow abides, and happineſſe takes his leaue.
You embrace your charge too willingly: I thinke this is your daughter.
Her mother hath many times told me ſo.
Were you in doubt that you askt her?
Signior Benedicke, no, for then were you a childe.
You haue it full Benedicke, we may gheſſe by this, what you are, being a man, truely the Lady fathers her ſelfe: be happie Lady, for you are like an honorable father.
If Signior Leonato be her father, ſhe would not haue his head on her ſhoulders for al Meſſina, as like him as ſhe is.
I wonder that you will ſtill be talking, ſignior Benedicke▪ no body markes you.
What my deere Ladie Diſdaine! are you yet liuing?
Is it poſſible Diſdaine ſhould die, while ſhee hath ſuch meete foode to feede it, as Signior Benedicke? Curteſie it ſelfe muſt conuert to Diſdaine, if you come in her preſence.
Then is curteſie a turne-coate, but it is certaine I am loued of all Ladies, onely you excepted: and I would I could finde in my heart that I had not a hard heart, for truely I loue none.
A deere happineſſe to women, they would elſe haue beene troubled with a pernitious Suer, I thanke God and my cold blood, I am of your humour for that, I had rather heare my Dog barke at a Crow, than a man ſweare he loues me.
God keepe your Ladiſhip ſtill in that minde, ſo ſome Gentleman or other ſhall ſcape a predeſtinate ſcratcht face.
Scratching could not make it worſe, and 'twere ſuch a face as yours were.
Well, you are a rare Parrat teacher.
A bird of my tongue, is better than a beaſt of your.
I would my horſe had the ſpeed of your tongue, and ſo good a continuer, but keepe your way a Gods name, I haue done.
You alwaies end with a Iades tricke, I know you of old.
This is the ſumme of all: Leonato, ſignior Claudio, and ſignior Benedicke; my deere friend Leonato, hath inuited you all, I tell him we ſhall ſtay here, at the leaſt a moneth, and he heartily praies ſome occaſion may detaine vs longer: I dare ſweare hee is no hypocrite, but praies from his heart.
If you ſweare, my Lord, you ſhall not be forſworne, let mee bid you welcome, my Lord, being reconciled to the Prince your brother: I owe you all duetie.
I thanke you, I am not of many words, but I thanke you.
Pleaſe it your grace leade on?
Your hand Leonato, we will goe together.
Benedicke, didſt thou note the daughter of ſignior Leonato?
I noted her not, but I lookt on her.
Is ſhe not a modeſt yong Ladie?
Doe you queſtion me as an honeſt man ſhould doe, for my ſimple true iudgement? or would you haue me ſpeake after my cuſtome, as being a profeſſed tyrant to their ſexe?
No, I pray thee ſpeake in ſober iudgement.
Why yfaith me thinks ſhee's too low for a hie praiſe, too browne for a faire praiſe, and too little for a great praiſe, onely this commendation I can affoord her, that were ſhee other then ſhe is, ſhe were vnhandſome, and being no other, but as ſhe is, I doe not like her.
Thou think'ſt I am in ſport, I pray thee tell me truely how thou lik'ſt her.
Would you buie her, that you enquier after her?
Can the world buie ſuch a iewell?
Yea, and a caſe to put it into, but ſpeake you this with a ſad brow? Or doe you play the flowting iacke, to tell vs Cupid is a good Hare-finder, and Vulcan a rare Carpenter: Come, in what key ſhall a man take you to goe in the ſong?
In mine eie, ſhe is the ſweeteſt Ladie that euer I lookt on.
I can ſee yet without ſpectacles, and I ſee no ſuch matter: there's her coſin, and ſhe were not poſſeſt with a furie, exceedes her as much in beautie, as the firſt of Maie doth the laſt of December: but I hope you haue no intent to turne husband, haue you?
I would ſcarce truſt my ſelfe, though I had ſworne the contrarie, if Hero would be my wife.
Iſt come to this? in faith hath not the world one man but he will weare his cap with ſuſpition? ſhall I neuer ſee a batcheller of three ſcore againe? goe to yfaith, and thou wilt needes thruſt thy necke into a yoke, weare the print of it, and ſigh away ſundaies: looke, don Pedro is returned to ſeeke you.
What ſecret hath held you here, that you followed not to Leonatoes?
I would your Grace would conſtraine mee to tell.
I charge thee on thy allegeance.
You heare, Count Claudio, I can be ſecret as a dumbe man, I would haue you thinke ſo (but on my allegiance, marke you this, on my allegiance) hee is in loue, With who? now that is your Graces part: marke how ſhort his anſwere is, with Hero, Leonatoes ſhort daughter.
If this were ſo, ſo were it vttred.
Like the old tale, my Lord, it is not ſo, nor 'twas not ſo: but indeede, God forbid it ſhould be ſo.
If my paſſion change not ſhortly, God forbid it ſhould be otherwiſe.
Amen, if you loue her, for the Ladie is verie well worthie.
You ſpeake this to fetch me in, my Lord.
By my troth I ſpeake my thought.
And in faith, my Lord, I ſpoke mine.
And by my two faiths and troths, my Lord, I ſpeake mine.
That I loue her, I feele.
That ſhe is worthie, I know.
That I neither feele how ſhee ſhould be loued, nor know how ſhee ſhould be worthie, is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me, I will die in it at the ſtake.
Thou waſt euer an obſtinate heretique in the deſpight of Beautie.
And neuer could maintaine his part, but in the force of his will.
That a woman conceiued me, I thanke her: that ſhe brought mee vp, I likewiſe giue her moſt humble thankes: but that I will haue a echare winded in my forehead, or hang my bugle in an inuiſible baldricke, all women ſhall pardon me: becauſe I will not do them the wrong to miſtruſt any, I will doe my ſelfe the right to truſt none: and the fine is, (for the which I may goe the finer) I will liue a Batchellor.
I ſhall ſee thee ere I die, looke pale with loue.
With anger, with ſickneſſe, or with hunger, my Lord, not with loue: proue that euer I looſe more blood with loue, then I will get againe with drinking, picke out mine eyes with a Ballet-makers penne, and hang me vp at the doore of a brothel-houſe for the ſigne of blinde Cupid.
Well, if euer thou dooſt fall from this faith, thou wilt proue a notable argument.
If I do, hang me in a bottle like a Cat, & ſhoot at me, and he that hit's me, let him be clapt on the ſhoulder, and cal'd Adam.
Well, as time ſhall trie: In time the ſauage Bull doth beare the yoake.
The ſauage bull may, but if euer the ſenſible Benedicke beare it, plucke off the bulles hornes, and ſet them in my forehead, and let me be vildely painted, and in ſuch great Letters as they write, heere is good horſe to hire: let them ſignifie vnder my ſigne, here you may ſee Benedicke the married man.
If this ſhould euer happen, thou wouldſt bee horne mad.
Nay, if Cupid haue not ſpent all his Quiuer in Venice, thou wilt quake for this ſhortly.
I looke for an earthquake too then.
Well, you will temporize with the houres, in the meane time, good Signior Benedicke, repaire to Leonatoes, commend me to him, and tell him I will not faile him at ſupper, for indeede he hath made great preparation.
I haue almoſt matter enough in me for ſuch an Embaſſage, and ſo I commit you.
To the tuition of God. From my houſe, if I had it.
The ſixt of Iuly. Your louing friend, Benedick.
Nay mocke not, mocke not; the body of your diſcourſe is ſometime guarded with fragments, and the guardes are but ſlightly baſted on neither, ere you flout old ends any further, examine your conſcience, and ſo I leaue you.
My Liege, your Highneſſe now may doe mee good.
My loue is thine to teach, teach it but how,
And thou ſhalt ſee how apt it is to learne
Any hard Leſſon that may do thee good.
Hath Leonato any ſonne my Lord?
No childe but Hero, ſhe's his onely heire.
Doſt thou affect her Claudio?
O my Lord,
When you went onward on this ended action,
I look'd vpon her with a ſouldiers eie,
That lik'd, but had a rougher taske in hand,
Than to driue liking to the name of loue:
But now I am return'd, and that warre-thoughts
Haue left their places vacant: in their roomes,
Come thronging ſoft and delicate deſires,
All prompting mee how faire yong Hero is,
Saying I lik'd her ere I went to warres.
Thou wilt be like a louer preſently,
And tire the hearer with a booke of words:
If thou doſt loue faire Hero, cheriſh it,
And I will breake with her: waſt not to this end,
That thou beganſt to twiſt ſo fine a ſtory?
How ſweetly doe you miniſter to loue,
That know loues griefe by his complexion!
But leſt my liking might too ſodaine ſeeme,
I would haue ſalu'd it with a longer treatiſe.
What need ye bridge much broder then the flood?
The faireſt graunt is the neceſſitie:
Looke what will ſerue, is fit: 'tis once, thou loueſt,
And I will fit thee with the remedie,
I know we ſhall haue reuelling to night,
I will aſſume thy part in ſome diſguiſe,
And tell faire Hero I am Claudio,
And in her boſome Ile vnclaſpe my heart,
And take her hearing priſoner with the force
And ſtrong incounter of my amorous tale:
Then after, to her father will I breake,
And the concluſion is, ſhee ſhall be thine,
In practiſe let vs put it preſently.
How now brother, where is my coſen your ſon: hath he prouided this muſicke?
He is very buſie about it, but brother, I can tell you newes that you yet dreamt not of.
Are they good?
As the euents ſtamps them, but they haue good couer: they▪ ſhew well outward, the Prince and Count Claudio walking in a thick pleached alley in my orchard, were thus ouer-heard by a man of mine: the Prince diſcouered to Claudio that hee loued my niece your daughter, and meant to acknowledge it this night in a dance, and if hee found her accordant, hee meant to take the preſent time by the top, and inſtantly breake with you of it.
Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?
A good ſharpe fellow, I will ſend for him, and queſtion him your ſelfe.
No, no; wee will hold it as a dreame, till it appeare it ſelfe: but I will acquaint my daughter withall, that ſhe may be the better prepared for an anſwer, if peraduenture this bee true: goe you and tell her of it: cooſins, you know what you haue to doe, O I crie you mercie friend, goe you with mee and I will vſe your skill, good coſin haue a care this buſie time.
What the good yeere my Lord, why are you thus out of meaſure ſad?
There is no meaſure in the occaſion that breeds, therefore the ſadneſſe is without limit.
You ſhould heare reaſon.
And when I haue heard it, what bleſſing bringeth it?
If not a preſent remedy, yet a patient ſufferance.
I wonder that thou (being as thou ſaiſt thou art, borne vnder Saturne) goeſt about to apply a morall medicine, to a mortifying miſchiefe: I cannot hide what I am: I muſt bee ſad when I haue cauſe, and ſmile at no mans ieſts, eat when I haue ſtomacke, and wait for no mans leiſure: ſleepe when I am drowſie, and tend on no mans buſineſſe, laugh when I am merry, and claw no man in his humor.
Yea, but you muſt not make the ful ſhow of this, till you may doe it without controllment, you haue of late ſtood out againſt your brother, and hee hath tane you newly into his grace, where it is impoſſible you ſhould take root, but by the faire weather that you make your ſelfe, it is needful that you frame the ſeaſon for your owne harueſt.
I had rather be a canker in a hedge, then a roſe in his grace, and it better fits my bloud to be diſdain'd of all, then to faſhion a carriage to rob loue from any: in this (though I cannot be ſaid to be a flattering honeſt man) it muſt not be denied but I am a plaine dealing villaine, I am truſted with a muſſell, and enfranchiſde with a clog, therefore I haue decreed, not to ſing in my cage: if I had my mouth, I would bite: if I had my liberty, I would do my liking: in the meane time, let me be that I am, and ſeeke not to alter me.
Can you make no vſe of your diſcontent?
I will make all vſe of it, for I vſe it onely.
Who comes here? what newes Borachio?
I came yonder from a great ſupper, the Prince your brother is royally entertained by Leonato, and I can giue you intelligence of an intended marriage.
Will it ſerue for any Modell to build miſchiefe on? What is hee for a foole that betrothes himſelfe to vnquietneſſe?
Mary it is your brothers right hand.
Who, the moſt exquiſite Claudio?
Euen he.
A proper ſquier, and who, and who, which way lookes he?
Mary on Hero, the daughter and Heire of Leonato.
A very forward March-chicke, how came you to this?
Being entertain'd for a perfumer, as I was ſmoaking a muſty roome, comes me the Prince and Claudio, hand in hand in ſad conference: I whipt behind the Arras, and there heard it agreed vpon, that the Prince ſhould wooe Hero for himſelfe, and hauing obtain'd her, giue her to Count Claudio.
Come, come, let vs thither, this may proue food to my diſpleaſure, that young ſtart-vp hath all the glorie of my ouerthrow: if I can croſſe him any way, I bleſſe my ſelfe euery way, you are both ſure, and will aſſiſt mee?
To the death my Lord.
Let vs to the great ſupper, their cheere is the greater that I am ſubdued, would the Cooke were of my minde: ſhall we goe proue whats to be done?
Wee'll wait vpon your Lordſhip.
Was not Count Iohn here at ſupper?
I ſaw him not.
How tartly that Gentleman lookes, I neuer can ſee him, but I am heart-burn'd an howre after.
He is of a very melancholy diſpoſition.
Hee were an excellent man that were made iuſt in the mid-way betweene him and Benedicke, the one is too like an image and ſaies nothing, and the other too like my Ladies eldeſt ſonne, euermore tatling.
Then halfe ſignior Benedicks tongue in Count Iohns mouth, and halfe Count Iohns melancholy in Signior Benedicks face.
With a good legge, and a good foot vnckle, and money enough in his purſe, ſuch a man would winne any woman in the world, if he could get her good will.
By my troth Neece, thou wilt neuer get thee a husband, if thou be ſo ſhrewd of thy tongue.
Infaith ſhee's too curſt.
Too curſt is more then curſt, I ſhall leſſen Gods ſending that way: for it is ſaid, God ſends a curſt Cow ſhort hornes, but to a Cow too curſt he ſends none.
So, by being too curſt, God will ſend you no hornes.
Iuſt, if he ſend me no husband, for the which bleſſing, I am at him vpon my knees euery morning and euening: Lord, I could not endure a husband with a beard on his face, I had rather lie in the woollen.
You may light vpon a husband that hath no beard.
What ſhould I doe with him? dreſſe him in my apparell, and make him my waiting gentlewoman? he that hath a beard, is more then a youth: and he that hath no beard, is leſſe then a man: and hee that is more then a youth, is not for mee: and he that is leſſe then a man, I am not for him: therefore I will euen take ſixepence in earneſt of the Berrord, and leade his Apes into hell.
Well then, goe you into hell.
No, but to the gate, and there will the Deuill meete mee like an old Cuckold with hornes on his head, and ſay, get you to heauen Beatrice, get you to heauen, heere's no place for you maids, ſo deliuer I vp my Apes, and away to S. Peter: for the heauens, hee ſhewes mee where the Batchellers ſit, and there liue wee as merry as the day is long.
Well neece, I truſt you will be rul'd by your father.
Yes faith, it is my coſens dutie to make curtſie, and ſay, as it pleaſe you: but yet for all that coſin, let him be a handſome fellow, or elſe make an other curſie, and ſay, father, as it pleaſe me.
Well neece, I hope to ſee you one day ſitted with a husband.
Not till God make men of ſome other mettall then earth, would it not grieue a woman to be ouer-maſtred with a peece of valiant duſt? to make account of her life to a clod of waiward marle? no vnckle, ile none: Adams ſonnes are my brethren, and truly I hold it a ſinne to match in my kinred.
Daughter, remember what I told you, if the Prince doe ſolicit you in that kinde, you know your anſwere.
The fault will be in the muſicke coſin, if you be not woed in good time: if the Prince bee too important, tell him there is meaſure in euery thing, & ſo dance out the anſwere, for heare me Hero, wooing, wedding, & repenting, is as a Scotch ijgge, a meaſure, and a cinque-pace: the firſt ſuite is hot and haſty like a Scotch ijgge (and full as fantaſticall) the wedding manerly modeſt, (as a meaſure) full of ſtate & aunchentry, and then comes repentance, and with his bad legs falls into the cinque-pace faſter and faſter, till he ſinkes into his graue.
Coſin you apprehend paſſing ſhrewdly.
I haue a good eye vnckle, I can ſee a Church by daylight.
The reuellers are entring brother, make good roome.
Lady, will you walke about with your friend?
So you walke ſoftly, and looke ſweetly, and ſay nothing, I am yours for the walke, and eſpecially when I walke away.
With me in your company.
I may ſay ſo when I pleaſe.
And when pleaſe you to ſay ſo?
When I like your fauour, for God defend the Lute ſhould be like the caſe.
My viſor is Philemons roofe, within the houſe is Loue.
Why then your viſor ſhould be thatcht.
Speake low if you ſpeake Loue.
Well, I would you did like me.
So would not I for your owne ſake, for I haue manie ill qualities.
Which is one?
I ſay my prayers alowd.
I loue you the better, the hearers may cry Amen.
God match me with a good dauncer.
Amen.
And God keepe him out of my ſight when the daunce is done: anſwer Clarke.
No more words the Clarke is anſwered.
I know you well enough, you are Signior Anthonio.
At a word, I am not.
I know you by the wagling of your head.
To tell you true, I counterfet him.
You could neuer doe him ſo ill well, vnleſſe you were the very man: here's his dry hand vp & down, you are he, you are he.
At a word I am not.
Come, come, doe you thinke I doe not know you by your excellent wit? can vertue hide it ſelfe? goe to, mumme, you are he, graces will appeare, and there's an end.
Will you not tell me who told you ſo?
No, you ſhall pardon me.
Nor will you not tell me who you are?
Not now.
That I was diſdainfull, and that I had my good wit out of the hundred merry tales: well, this was Signior Benedicke that ſaid ſo.
What's he?
I am ſure you know him well enough.
Not I, beleeue me.
Did he neuer make you laugh?
I pray you what is he?
Why he is the Princes ieaſter, a very dull foole, onely his gift is, in deuiſing impoſsible ſlanders, none but Libertines delight in him, and the commendation is not in his witte, but in his villanie, for hee both pleaſeth men and angers them, and then they laugh at him, and beat him: I am ſure he is in the Fleet, I would he had boorded me.
When I know the Gentleman, Ile tell him what you ſay.
Do, do, hee'l but breake a compariſon or two on me, which peraduenture (not markt, or not laugh'd at) ſtrikes him into melancholly, and then there's a Partridge wing ſaued, for the foole will eate no ſupper that night. We muſt follow the Leaders.
In euery good thing.
Nay, if they leade to any ill, I will leaue them at the next turning.
Sure my brother is amorous on Hero, and hath withdrawne her father to breake with him about it: the Ladies follow her, and but one viſor remaines.
And that is Claudio, I know him by his bearing.
Are not you ſignior Benedicke?
You know me well, I am hee.
Signior, you are verie neere my Brother in his loue, he is enamor'd on Hero, I pray you diſſwade him from her, ſhe is no equall for his birth: you may do the part of an honeſt man in it.
How know you he loues her?
I heard him ſweare his affection,
So did I too, and he ſwore he would marrie her to night.
Come, let vs to the banquet.
Thus anſwere I in name of Benedicke,
But heare theſe ill newes with the eares of Claudio:
'Tis certaine ſo, the Prince woes for himſelfe:
Friendſhip is conſtant in all other things,
Saue in the Office and affaires of loue:
Therefore all hearts in loue vſe their owne tongues.
Let euerie eye negotiate for it ſelfe,
And truſt no Agent: for beautie is a witch,
Againſt whoſe charmes, faith melteth into blood:
This is an accident of hourely proofe,
Which I miſtruſted not. Farewell therefore Hero.
Count Claudio.
Yea, the ſame.
Come, will you go with me?
Whither?
Euen to the next Willow, about your own buſineſſe, Count. What faſhion will you weare the Garland off? About your necke, like an Vſurers chaine? Or vnder your arme, like a Lieutenants ſcarfe? You muſt weare it one way, for the Prince hath got your Hero.
I wiſh him ioy of her.
Why that's ſpoken like an honeſt Drouier, ſo they ſel Bullockes: but did you thinke the Prince wold haue ſerued you thus?
I pray you leaue me.
Ho now you ſtrike like the blindman, 'twas the boy that ſtole your meate, and you'l beat the poſt.
If it will not be, Ile leaue you.
Alas poore hurt fowle, now will he creepe into ſedges: But that my Ladie Beatrice ſhould know me, & not know me: the Princes foole! Hah? It may be I goe vnder that title, becauſe I am merrie: yea but ſo I am apt to do my ſelfe wrong: I am not ſo reputed, it is the baſe (though bitter) diſpoſition of Beatrice, that putt's the world into her perſon, and ſo giues me out: well, Ile be reuenged as I may.
Now Signior, where's the Count, did you ſee him?
Troth my Lord, I haue played the part of Lady Fame, I found him heere as melancholy as a Lodge in a Warren, I told him, and I thinke, told him true, that your grace had got the will of this young Lady, and I offered him my company to a willow tree, either to make him a garland, as being forſaken, or to binde him a rod, as being worthy to be whipt.
To be whipt, what's his fault?
The ſlat tranſgreſſion of a Schoole-boy, who being ouer-ioyed with finding a birds neſt, ſhewes it his companion, and he ſteales it.
Wilt thou make a truſt, a tranſgreſſion? the tranſgreſſion is in the ſtealer.
Yet it had not beene amiſſe the rod had beene made, and the garland too, for the garland he might haue worne himſelfe, and the rod hee might haue beſtowed on you, who (as I take it) haue ſtolne his birds neſt.
I will but teach them to ſing, and reſtore them to the owner.
If their ſinging anſwer your ſaying▪ by my faith you ſay honeſtly.
The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrell to you, the Gentleman that daunſt with her, told her ſhee is much wrong'd by you.
O ſhe miſuſde me paſt the indurance of a block: an oake but with one greene leafe on it, would haue anſwered her: my very viſor began to aſſume life, and ſcold with her: ſhee told mee, not thinking I had beene my ſelfe, that I was the Princes Ieſter, and that I was duller then a great thaw, huling ieſt vpon ieſt, with ſuch impoſſible conueiance vpon me, that I ſtood like a man at a marke, with a whole army ſhooting at me: ſhee ſpeakes poynyards, and euery word ſtabbes: if her breath were as terrible as terminations, there were no liuing neere her, ſhe would infect to the north ſtarre: I would not marry her, though ſhe were indowed with all that Adam had left him before he tranſgreſt, ſhe would haue made Hercules haue turnd ſpit, yea, and haue cleft his club to make the fire too: come, talke not of her, you ſhall finde her the infernall Ate in good apparell. I would to God ſome ſcholler would coniure her, for certainely while ſhe is heere, a man may liue as quiet in hell, as in a ſanctuary, and people ſinne vpon purpoſe, becauſe they would goe thither, ſo indeed all diſquiet, horror, and perturbation followes her.
Looke heere ſhe comes.
Will your Grace command mee any ſeruice to the worlds end? I will goe on the ſlighteſt arrand now to the Antypodes that you can deuiſe to ſend me on: I will fetch you a tooth-picker now from the furtheſt inch of Aſia: bring you the length of Preſter Iohns foot: fetch you a hayre off the great Chams beard: doe you any embaſſage to the Pigmies, rather then hould three words conference, with this Harpy: you haue no employment for me?
None, but to deſire your good company.
O God ſir, heeres a diſh I loue not, I cannot indure this Lady tongue.
Come Lady, come, you haue loſt the heart of Signior Benedicke.
Indeed my Lord, hee lent it me a while, and I gaue him vſe for it, a double heart for a ſingle one, marry once before he wonne it of mee, with falſe dice, therefore your Grace may well ſay I haue loſt it.
You haue put him downe Lady, you haue put him downe.
So I would not he ſhould do me, my Lord, leſt I ſhould prooue the mother of fooles: I haue brought Count Claudio, whom you ſent me to ſeeke.
Why how now Count, wherfore are you ſad?
Not ſad my Lord.
How then? ſicke?
Neither, my Lord.
The Count is neither ſad, nor ſicke, nor merry, nor well: but ciuill Count, ciuill as an Orange, and ſomething of a iealous complexion.
Ifaith Lady, I thinke your blazon to be true, though Ile be ſworne, if hee be ſo, his conceit is falſe: heere Claudio, I haue wooed in thy name, and faire Hero is won, I haue broke with her father, and his good will obtained, name the day of marriage, and God giue thee ioy.
Count, take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes: his grace hath made the match, & all grace ſay, Amen to it.
Speake Count, tis your Qu.
Silence is the perfecteſt Herault of ioy, I were but little happy if I could ſay, how much? Lady, as you are mine, I am yours, I giue away my ſelfe for you, and doat vpon the exchange.
Speake coſin, or (if you cannot) ſtop his mouth with a kiſſe, and let not him ſpeake neither.
Infaith Lady you haue a merry heart.
Yea my Lord I thanke it, poore foole it keepes on the windy ſide of Care, my cooſin tells him in his eare that he is in my heart.
And ſo ſhe doth cooſin.
Good Lord for alliance: thus goes euery one to the world but I, and I am ſun-burn'd, I may ſit in a corner and cry, heigh ho for a husband.
Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.
I would rather haue one of your fathers getting: hath your Grace ne're a brother like you? your father got excellent husbands, if a maid could come by them.
Will you haue me? Lady.
No, my Lord, vnleſſe I might haue another for working-daies, your Grace is too coſtly to weare euerie day: but I beſeech your Grace pardon mee, I was borne to ſpeake all mirth, and no matter.
Your ſilence moſt offends me, and to be merry, beſt becomes you, for out of queſtion, you were born in a merry howre.
No ſure my Lord, my Mother cried, but then there was a ſtarre daunſt, and vnder that was I borne: coſins God giue you ioy.
Neece, will you looke to thoſe rhings I told you of?
I cry you mercy Vncle, by your Graces pardon.
By my troth a pleaſant ſpirited Lady.
There's little of the melancholy element in her my Lord, ſhe is neuer ſad, but when ſhe ſleepes, and not euer ſad then: for I haue heard my daughter ſay, ſhe hath often dreamt of vnhappineſſe, and wakt her ſelfe with laughing.
Shee cannot indure to heare tell of a husband.
O, by no meanes, ſhe mocks all her wooers out of ſuite.
She were an excellent wife for Benedick.
O Lord, my Lord, if they were but a weeke married, they would talke themſelues madde.
Counte Claudio, when meane you to goe to Church?
To morrow my Lord, Time goes on crutches, till Loue haue all his rites.
Not till monday, my deare ſonne, which is hence a iuſt ſeuen night, and a time too briefe too, to haue all things anſwer minde.
Come, you ſhake the head at ſo long a breathing, but I warrant thee Claudio, the time ſhall not goe dully by vs, I will in the interim, vndertake one of Hercules labors, which is, to bring Signior Benedicke and the Lady Beatrice into a mountaine of affection, th' one with th' other, I would faine haue it a match, and I doubt not but to faſhion it, if you three will but miniſter ſuch aſſiſtance as I ſhall giue you direction.
My Lord, I am for you, though it coſt mee ten nights watchings.
And I my Lord.
And you to gentle Hero?
I will doe any modeſt office, my Lord, to helpe my coſin to a good husband.
And Benedick is not the vnhopefulleſt husband that I know: thus farre can I praiſe him, hee is of a noble ſtraine, of approued valour, and confirm'd honeſty, I will teach you how to humour your coſin, that ſhee ſhall fall in loue with Benedicke, and I, with your two helpes, will ſo practiſe on Benedicke, that in deſpight of his quicke wit, and his queaſie ſtomacke, hee ſhall fall in loue with Beatrice: if wee can doe this, Cupid is no longer an Archer, his glory ſhall be ours, for wee are the onely loue-gods, goe in with me, and I will tell you my drift.
It is ſo, the Count Claudio ſhal marry the daughter of Leonato.
Yea my Lord, but I can croſſe it.
Any barre, any croſſe, any impediment, will be medicinable to me, I am ſicke in diſpleaſure to him, and whatſoeuer comes athwart his affection, ranges euenly with mine, how canſt thou croſſe this marriage?
Not honeſtly my Lord, but ſo couertly, that no diſhoneſty ſhall appeare in me.
Shew me breefely how.
I thinke I told your Lordſhip a yeere ſince, how much I am in the fauour of Margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to Hero.
I remember.
I can at any vnſeaſonable inſtant of the night, appoint her to look out at her Ladies chamber window.
What life is in that, to be the death of this marriage?
The poyſon of that lies in you to temper, goe you to the Prince your brother, ſpare not to tell him, that hee hath wronged his Honor in marrying the renowned Claudio, whoſe eſtimation do you mightily hold vp, to a contaminated ſtale, ſuch a one as Hero.
What proofe ſhall I make of that?
Proofe enough, to miſuſe the Prince, to vexe Claudio, to vndoe Hero, and kill Leonato, looke you for any other iſſue?
Onely to deſpight them, I will endeauour any thing.
Goe then, finde me a meete howre, to draw on Pedro and the Count Claudio alone, tell them that you know that Hero loues me, intend a kinde of zeale both to the Prince and Claudio (as in a loue of your brothers honor who hath made this match) and his friends reputation, who is thus like to be coſen'd with the ſemblance of a maid, that you haue diſcouer'd thus: they will ſcarcely beleeue this without triall: offer them inſtances which ſhall beare no leſſe likelihood, than to ſee mee at her chamber window, heare me call Margaret, Hero; heare Margaret terme me Claudio, and bring them to ſee this the very night before the intended wedding, for in the meane time, I will ſo faſhion the matter, that Hero ſhall be abſent, and there ſhall appeare ſuch ſeeming truths of Heroes diſloyaltie, that iealouſie ſhall be cal'd aſſurance, and all the preparation ouerthrowne.
Grow this to what aduerſe iſſue it can, I will put it in practiſe: be cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a thouſand ducates.
Be thou conſtant in the accuſation, and my cunning ſhall not ſhame me.
I will preſentlie goe learne their day of marriage.
Boy.
Signior.
In my chamber window lies a booke, bring it hither to me in the orchard.
I am heere already ſir.
I know that, but I would haue thee hence, and heere againe. I doe much wonder, that one man ſeeing how much another man is a foole, when he dedicates his behauiours to loue, will after hee hath laught at ſuch ſhallow follies in others, become the argument of his owne ſcorne, by falling in loue, & ſuch a man is Claudio, I haue known when there was no muſicke with him but the drum and the fife, and now had hee rather heare the taber and the pipe: I haue knowne when he would haue walkt ten mile afoot, to ſee a good armor, and now will he lie ten nights awake caruing the faſhion of a new dublet: he was wont to ſpeake plaine, & to the purpoſe (like an honeſt man & a ſouldier) and now is he turn'd orthography, his words are a very fantaſticall banquet, iuſt ſo many ſtrange diſhes: may I be ſo conuerted, & ſee with theſe eyes? I cannot tell, I thinke not: I will not bee ſworne, but loue may transforme me to an oyſter, but Ile take my oath on it, till he haue made an oyſter of me, he ſhall neuer make me ſuch a foole: one woman is faire, yet I am well: another is wiſe, yet I am well: another vertuous, yet I am well: but till all graces be in one woman▪ one woman ſhall not come in my grace: rich ſhee ſhall be, that's certaine: wiſe, or Ile none: vertuous, or Ile neuer cheapen her: faire, or Ile neuer looke on her: milde, or come not neere me: Noble, or not for an Angell: of good diſcourſe: an excellent Muſitian, and her haire ſhal be of what colour it pleaſe God, hah! the Prince and Monſieur Loue, I will hide me in the Arbor.
Come, ſhall we heare this muſicke?
Yea my good Lord: how ſtill the euening is,
As huſht on purpoſe to grace harmonie.
See you where Benedicke hath hid himſelfe?
O very well my Lord: the muſicke ended,
Wee'll fit the kid-foxe with a penny worth.
Come Balthaſar, wee'll heare that ſong again.
O good my Lord, taxe not ſo bad a voyce,
To ſlander muſicke any more then once.
It is the witneſſe ſtill of excellency,
To ſlander Muſicke any more then once.
It is the witneſſe ſtill of excellencie,
To put a ſtrange face on his owne perfection,
I pray thee ſing, and let me woe no more.
Becauſe you talke of wooing, I will ſing,
Since many a wooer doth commence his ſuit,
To her he thinkes not worthy, yet he wooes,
Yet will he ſweare he loues.
Nay pray thee come,
Or if thou wilt hold longer argument,
Doe it in notes.
Note this before my notes,
Theres not a note of mine that's worth the noting.
Why theſe are very crotchets that he ſpeaks,
Note notes forſooth, and nothing.
Now diuine aire, now is his ſoule rauiſht, is it not ſtrange that ſheepes guts ſhould hale ſoules out of mens bodies? well, a horne for my money when all's done.
Sigh no more Ladies, ſigh no more,
Men were deceiuers euer,
One foote in Sea and one on ſhore,
To one thing conſtant neuer,
Then ſigh not ſo, but let them goe,
And be you blithe and bonnis,
Conuerting all your ſounds of woe,
Into hey nony nony.
Sing no more ditties, ſing no moe,
Of dumps ſo dull and heauy,
The fraud of men were euer ſo,
Since ſummer firſt was leauy,
Then ſigh not ſo, &c.
By my troth a good ſong.
And an ill ſinger, my Lord.
Ha, no, no faith, thou ſingſt well enough for a ſhift.
And he had been a dog that ſhould haue howld thus, they would haue hang'd him, and I pray God his bad voyce bode no miſchiefe, I had as liefe haue heard the night-rauen, come what plague could haue come after it.
Yea marry, doſt thou heare Balthaſar? I pray thee get vs ſome excellent muſick: for to morrow night we would haue it at the Lady Heroes chamber window.
The beſt I can, my Lord.
Do ſo, farewell. Come hither Leonato, what was it you told me of to day, that your Niece Beatrice was in loue with ſignior Benedicke?
O I, ſtalke on, ſtalke on, the foule ſits. I did neuer thinke that Lady would haue loued any man.
No nor I neither, but moſt wonderful, that ſhe ſhould ſo dote on Signior Benedicke, whom ſhee hath in all outward behauiours ſeemed euer to abhorre.
Is't poſſible? ſits the winde in that corner?
By my troth my Lord, I cannot tell what to thinke of it, but that ſhe loues him with an inraged affection, it is paſt the infinite of thought.
May be ſhe doth but counterfeit.
Faith like enough.
O God! counterfeit? there was neuer counterfeit of paſſion, came ſo neere the life of paſſion as ſhe diſcouers it.
Why what effects of paſſion ſhewes ſhe?
Baite the hooke well, this fiſh will bite.
What effects my Lord? ſhee will ſit you, you heard my daughter tell you how.
She did indeed.
How, how I pray you? you amaze me, I would haue thought her ſpirit had beene inuincible againſt all aſſaults of affection.
I would haue ſworne it had, my Lord, eſpecially againſt Benedicke.
I ſhould thinke this a gull, but that the white-bearded fellow ſpeakes it: knauery cannot ſure hide himſelfe in ſuch reuerence.
He hath tane th' infection, hold it vp.
Hath ſhee made her affection known to Benedicke?
No, and ſweares ſhe neuer will, that's her torment.
'Tis true indeed, ſo your daughter ſaies: ſhall I, ſaies ſhe, that haue ſo oft encountred him with ſcorne, write to him that I loue him?
This ſaies ſhee now when ſhee is beginning to write to him, for ſhee'll be vp twenty times a night, and there will ſhe ſit in her ſmocke, till ſhe haue writ a ſheet of paper: my daughter tells vs all.
Now you talke of a ſheet of paper, I remember a pretty ieſt your daughter told vs of.
O when ſhe had writ it, & was reading it ouer, ſhe found Benedicke and Beatrice betweene the ſheete.
That.
O ſhe tore the letter into a thouſand halfpence, raild at her ſelf, that ſhe ſhould be ſo immodeſt to write, to one that ſhee knew would flout her: I meaſure him, ſaies ſhe, by my owne ſpirit, for I ſhould flout him if hee writ to mee, yea though I loue him, I ſhould.
Then downe vpon her knees ſhe falls, weepes, ſobs, beates her heart, teares her hayre, praies, curſes, O ſweet Benedicke, God giue me patience.
She doth indeed, my daughter ſaies ſo, and the extaſie hath ſo much ouerborne her, that my daughter is ſomtime afeard ſhe will doe a deſperate out-rage to her ſelfe, it is very true.
It were good that Benedicke knew of it by ſome other, if ſhe will not diſcouer it.
To what end? he would but make a ſport of it, and torment the poore Lady worſe.
And he ſhould, it were an almes to hang him, ſhee's an excellent ſweet Lady, and (out of all ſuſpition,) ſhe is vertuous.
And ſhe is exceeding wiſe.
In euery thing, but in louing Benedicke.
O my Lord, wiſedome and bloud combating in ſo tender a body, we haue ten proofes to one, that bloud hath the victory, I am ſorry for her, as I haue iuſt cauſe, being her Vncle, and her Guardian.
I would ſhee had beſtowed this dotage on mee, I would haue daft all other reſpects, and made her halfe my ſelfe: I pray you tell Benedicke of it, and heare what he will ſay.
Were it good thinke you?
Hero thinkes ſurely ſhe wil die, for ſhe ſaies ſhe will die, if hee loue her not, and ſhee will die ere ſhee make her loue knowne, and ſhe will die if hee wooe her, rather than ſhee will bate one breath of her accuſtomed croſſeneſſe.
She doth well, if ſhe ſhould make tender of her loue, 'tis very poſſible hee'l ſcorne it, for the man (as you know all) hath a contemptible ſpirit.
He is a very proper man.
He hath indeed a good outward happines.
'Fore God, and in my minde very wiſe.
He doth indeed ſhew ſome ſparkes that are like wit.
And I take him to be valiant.
As Hector, I aſſure you, and in the managing of quarrels you may ſee hee is wiſe, for either hee auoydes them with great diſcretion, or vndertakes them with a Chriſtian-like feare.
If hee doe feare God, a muſt neceſſarilie keepe peace, if hee breake the peace, hee ought to enter into a quarrell with feare and trembling.
And ſo will he doe, for the man doth fear God, howſoeuer it ſeemes not in him, by ſome large ieaſts hee will make: well, I am ſorry for your niece, ſhall we goe ſee Benedicke, and tell him of her loue,
Neuer tell him, my Lord, let her weare it out with good counſell.
Nay that's impoſſible, ſhe may weare her heart out firſt.
Well, we will heare further of it by your daughter, let it coole the while, I loue Benedicke well, and I could wiſh he would modeſtly examine himſelfe, to ſee how much he is vnworthy to haue ſo good a Lady.
My Lord, will you walke? dinner is ready.
If he do not doat on her vpon this, I wil neuer truſt my expectation.
Let there be the ſame Net ſpread for her, and that muſt your daughter and her gentlewoman carry: the ſport will be, when they hold one an opinion of anothers dotage, and no ſuch matter, that's the Scene that I would ſee, which will be meerely a dumbe ſhew: let vs ſend her to call him into dinner.
This can be no tricke, the conference was ſadly borne, they haue the truth of this from Hero, they ſeeme to pittie the Lady: it ſeemes her affections haue the full bent: loue me? why it muſt be requited: I heare how I am cenſur'd, they ſay I will beare my ſelfe proudly, if I perceiue the loue come from her: they ſay too, that ſhe will rather die than giue any ſigne of affection: I did neuer thinke to marry, I muſt not ſeeme proud, happy are they that heare their detractions, and can put them to mending: they ſay the Lady is faire, 'tis a truth, I can beare them witneſſe: and vertuous, tis ſo, I cannot reprooue it, and wiſe, but for louing me, by my troth it is no addition to her witte, nor no great argument of her folly; for I wil be horribly in loue with her, I may chance haue ſome odde quirkes and remnants of witte broken on mee, becauſe I haue rail'd ſo long againſt marriage: but doth not the appetite alter? a man loues the meat in his youth, that he cannot indure in his age. Shall quips and ſentences, and theſe paper bullets of the braine awe a man from the careere of his humour? No, the world muſt be peopled. When I ſaid I would die a batcheler, I did not think I ſhould liue till I were maried, here comes Beatrice: by this day, ſhee's a faire Lady, I doe ſpie ſome markes of loue in her.
Againſt my wil I am ſent to bid you come in to dinner.
Faire Beatrice, I thanke you for your paines.
I tooke no more paines for thoſe thankes, then you take paines to thanke me, if it had been painefull, I would not haue come.
You take pleaſure then in the meſſage.
Yea iuſt ſo much as you may take vpon a kniues point, and choake a daw withall: you haue no ſtomacke ſignior, fare you well.
Ha, againſt my will I am ſent to bid you come into dinner: there's a double meaning in that: I tooke no more paines for thoſe thankes then you tooke paines to thanke me, that's as much as to ſay, any paines that I take for you is as eaſie as thankes: if I do not take pitty of her I am a villaine, if I doe not loue her I am a Iew, I will goe get her picture.
Good Margaret runne thee to the parlour,
There ſhalt thou finde my Coſin Beatrice,
Propoſing with the Prince and Claudio,
Whiſper her eare, and tell her I and Vrſula,
Walke in the Orchard, and our whole diſcourſe
Is all of her, ſay that thou ouer-heardſt vs,
And bid her ſteale into the pleached bower,
Where hony-ſuckles ripened by the ſunne,
Forbid the ſunne to enter: like fauourites,
Made proud by Princes, that aduance their pride,
Againſt that power that bred it, there will ſhe hide her,
To liſten our purpoſe, this is thy office,
Beare thee well in it, and leaue vs alone.
Ile make her come I warrant you preſently.
Now Vrſula, when Beatrice doth come,
As we do trace this alley vp and downe,
Our talke muſt onely be of Benedicke,
When I doe name him, let it be thy part,
To praiſe him more then euer man did merit,
My talke to thee muſt be how Benedicke
Is ſicke in loue with Beatrice: of this matter,
Is little Cupids craſty arrow made,
That onely wounds by heare-ſay: now begin,
For looke where Beatrice like a Lapwing runs
Cloſe by the ground, to heare our conference.
The pleaſant'ſt angling is to ſee the fiſh
Cut with her golden ores the ſiluer ſtreame,
And greedily deuoure the treacherous baite:
So angle we for Beatrice, who euen now,
Is couched in the wood-bine couerture,
Feare you not my part of the Dialogue.
Then go we neare her that her eare looſe nothing,
Of the falſe ſweete baite that we lay for it:
No truely Vrſula, ſhe is too diſdainfull,
I know her ſpirits are as coy and wilde,
As Haggerds of the rocke.
But are you ſure,
That Benedicke loues Beatrice ſo intirely?
So ſaies the Prince, and my new trothed Lord.
And did they bid you tell her of it, Madam?
They did intreate me to acquaint her of it,
But I perſwaded them, if they lou'd Benedicke,
To wiſh him wraſtle with affection,
And neuer to let Beatrice know of it.
Why did you ſo, doth not the Gentleman
Deſerue as full as fortunate a bed,
As euer Beatrice ſhall couch vpon?
O God of loue! I know he doth deſerue,
As much as may be yeelded to a man:
But Nature neuer fram'd a womans heart,
Of prowder ſtuffe then that of Beatrice:
Diſdaine and Scorne ride ſparkling in her eyes,
Miſ-prizing what they looke on, and her wit
Values it ſelfe ſo highly, that to her
All matter elſe ſeemes weake: ſhe cannot loue,
Nor take no ſhape nor proiect of affection,
Shee is ſo ſelfe indeared.
Sure I thinke ſo,
And therefore certainely it were not good
She knew his loue, left ſhe make ſport at it.
Why you ſpeake truth, I neuer yet ſaw man,
How wiſe, how noble, yong, how rarely featur'd.
But ſhe would ſpell him backward: if faire fac'd,
She would ſweare the gentleman ſhould be her ſiſter:
If blacke, why Nature drawing of an anticke,
Made a foule blot: if tall, a launce ill headed:
If low, an agot very vildlie cut:
If ſpeaking, why a vane blowne with all windes:
If ſilent, why a blocke moued with none.
So turnes ſhe euery man the wrong ſide out,
And neuer giues to Truth and Vertue, that
Which ſimpleneſſe and merit purchaſeth.
Sure, ſure, ſuch carping is not commendable.
No, not to be ſo odde, and from all faſhions,
As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable,
But who dare tell her ſo? if I ſhould ſpeake,
She would mocke me into ayre, O ſhe would laugh me
Out of my ſelfe, preſſe me to death with wit,
Therefore let Benedicke like couered fire,
Conſume away in ſighes, waſte inwardly:
It were a better death, to die with mockes,
Which is as bad as die with tickling.
Yet tell her of it, heare what ſhee will ſay.
No, rather I will goe to Benedicke,
And counſaile him to fight againſt his paſſion,
And truly Ile deuiſe ſome honeſt ſlanders,
To ſtaine my coſin with, one doth not know,
How much an ill word may impoiſon liking.
O doe not doe your coſin ſuch a wrong,
She cannot be ſo much without true iudgement,
Hauing ſo ſwift and excellent a wit
As ſhe is priſde to haue, as to refuſe
So rare a Gentleman as ſignior Benedicke.
He is the onely man of Italy,
Alwaies excepted, my deare Claudio.
I pray you be not angry with me, Madame,
Speaking my fancy: Signior Benedicke,
For ſhape, for bearing argument and valour,
Goes formoſt in report through Italy.
Indeed he hath an excellent good name.
His excellence did earne it ere he had it:
When are you married Madame?
Why euerie day to morrow, come goe in,
Ile ſhew thee ſome attires, and haue thy counſell,
Which is the beſt to furniſh me to morrow.
Shee's tane I warrant you,
We haue caught her Madame?
If it proue ſo, then louing goes by haps,
Some Cupid kills with arrowes, ſome with traps.
What fire is in mine eares? can this be true?
Stand I condemn'd for pride and ſcorne ſo much?
Contempt, farewell, and maiden pride, adew,
No glory liues behinde the backe of ſuch.
And Benedicke, loue on, I will requite thee,
Taming my wilde heart to thy louing hand:
If thou doſt loue, my kindeneſſe ſhall incite thee
To binde our loues vp in a holy band.
For others ſay thou doſt deſerue, and I
Beleeue it better then reportingly.
I doe but ſtay till your marriage be conſummate, and then go I toward Arragon.
Ile bring you thither my Lord, if you'l vouchſafe me.
Nay, that would be as great a ſoyle in the new gloſſe of your marriage, as to ſhew a childe his new coat and forbid him to weare it, I will onely bee bold with Benedicke for his companie, for from the crowne of his head, to the ſole of his foot, he is all mirth, he hath twice or thrice cut Cupids bow-ſtring, and the little hang-man dare not ſhoot at him, he hath a heart as ſound as a bell, and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinkes, his tongue ſpeakes.
Gallants, I am not as I haue bin.
So ſay I, methinkes you are ſadder.
I hope he be in loue.
Hang him truant, there's no true drop of bloud in him to be truly toucht with loue, if he be ſad, he wants money.
I haue the tooth-ach.
Draw it.
Hang it.
You muſt hang it firſt, and draw it afterwards.
What? ſigh for the tooth-ach.
Where is but a humour or a worme.
Well, euery one cannot maſter a griefe, but hee that has it.
Yet ſay I, he is in loue.
There is no appearance of fancie in him, vnleſſe it be a fancy that he hath to ſtrange diſguiſes, as to bee a Dutchman to day, a Frenchman to morrow: vnleſſe hee haue a fancy to this foolery, as it appeares hee hath, hee is no foole for fancy, as you would haue it to appeare he is.
If he be not in loue vvith ſome vvoman, there is no beleeuing old ſignes, a bruſhes his hat a mornings, What ſhould that bode?
Hath any man ſeene him at the Barbers?
No, but the Barbers man hath beene ſeen with him, and the olde ornament of his cheeke hath alreadie ſtuft tennis balls.
Indeed he lookes yonger than hee did, by the loſſe of a beard.
Nay a rubs himſelfe vvith Ciuit, can you ſmell him out by that?
That's as much as to ſay, the ſweet youth's in loue.
The greateſt note of it is his melancholy.
And vvhen vvas he vvont to vvaſh his face?
Yea, or to paint himſelfe? for the which I heare vvhat they ſay of him.
Nay, but his ieſting ſpirit, vvhich is now crept into a lute-ſtring, and now gouern'd by ſtops.
Indeed that tels a heauy tale for him: conclude, he is in loue.
Nay, but I know who loues him.
That would I know too, I warrant one that knowes him not.
Yes, and his ill conditions, and in deſpight of all, dies for him.
Shee ſhall be buried with her face vpwards.
Yet is this no charme for the tooth-ake, old ſignior, walke aſide with mee, I haue ſtudied eight or nine wiſe words to ſpeake to you, which theſe hobby-horſes muſt not heare.
For my life to breake with him about Beatrice.
'Tis euen ſo, Hero and Margaret haue by this played their parts with Beatrice, and then the two Beares will not bite one another when they meete.
My Lord and brother, God ſaue you.
Good den brother.
If your leiſure ſeru'd, I would ſpeake with you.
In priuate?
If it pleaſe you, yet Count Claudio may heare, for what I would ſpeake of, concernes him.
What's the matter?
Meanes your Lordſhip to be married to morrow?
You know he does.
I know not that when he knowes what I know.
If there be any impediment, I pray you diſcouer it.
You may thinke I loue you not, let that appeare hereafter, and ayme better at me by that I now will manifeſt, for my brother (I thinke, he holds you well, and in deareneſſe of heart) hath holpe to effect your enſuing marriage: ſurely ſute ill ſpent, and labour ill beſtowed.
Why, what's the matter?
I came hither to tell you, and circumſtances ſhortned, (for ſhe hath beene too long a talking of) the Lady is diſloyall.
Who Hero?
Euen ſhee, Leonatoes Hero, your Hero, euery mans Hero.
Diſloyall?
The word is too good to paint out her wickedneſſe, I could ſay ſhe were worſe, thinke you of a worſe title, and I will fit her to it: wonder not till further warrant: goe but with mee to night, you ſhal ſee her chamber window entred, euen the night before her wedding day, if you loue her, then to morrow wed her: But it would better fit your honour to change your minde.
May this be ſo?
I will not thinke it.
If you dare not truſt that you ſee, confeſſe not that you know: if you will follow mee, I will ſhew you enough, and when you haue ſeene more, & heard more, proceed accordingly.
If I ſee any thing to night, why I ſhould not marry her to morrow in the congregation, where I ſhold wedde, there will I ſhame her.
And as I wooed for thee to obtaine her, I will ioyne with thee to diſgrace her.
I will diſparage her no farther, till you are my witneſſes, beare it coldly but till night, and let the iſſue ſhew it ſelfe.
O day vntowardly turned!
O miſchiefe ſtrangelie thwarting!
O plague right well preuented! ſo will you ſay, when you haue ſeene the ſequele.
Are you good men and true?
Yea, or elſe it were pitty but they ſhould ſuffer ſaluation body and ſoule.
Nay, that were a puniſhment too good for them, if they ſhould haue any allegiance in them, being choſen for the Princes watch.
Well, giue them their charge, neighbour Dogbery.
Firſt, who thinke you the moſt deſartleſſe man to be Conſtable?
Hugh Ote-cake ſir, or George Sea-coale, for they can write and reade.
Come hither neighbour Sea-coale, God hath bleſt you with a good name: to be a wel-fauoured man, is the gift of Fortune, but to write and reade, comes by Nature.
Both which Maſter Conſtable
You haue: I knew it would be your anſwere: well, for your fauour ſir, why giue God thankes, & make no boaſt of it, and for your writing and reading, let that appeare when there is no need of ſuch vanity, you are thought heere to be the moſt ſenſleſſe and fit man for the Conſtable of the watch: therefore beare you the lanthorne: this is your charge: You ſhall comprehend all vagrom men, you are to bid any man ſtand in the Princes name.
How if a will not ſtand?
Why then take no note of him, but let him go, and preſently call the reſt of the Watch together, and thanke God you are ridde of a knaue.
If he will not ſtand when he is bidden, hee is none of the Princes ſubiects.
True, and they are to meddle with none but the Princes ſubiects: you ſhall alſo make no noiſe in the ſtreetes: for, for the Watch to babble and talke, is moſt tollerable, and not to be indured.
We will rather ſleepe than talke, wee know what belongs to a Watch.
Why you ſpeake like an ancient and moſt quiet watchman, for I cannot ſee how ſleeping ſhould offend: only haue a care that your bills be not ſtolne: well, you are to call at all the Alehouſes, and bid them that are drunke get them to bed.
How if they will not?
Why then let them alone till they are ſober, if they make you not then the better anſwere, you may ſay, they are not the men you tooke them for.
Well ſir.
If you meet a theefe, you may ſuſpect him, by vertue of your office, to be no true man▪ and for ſuch kinde of men, the leſſe you meddle or make with them, why the more is for your honeſty.
If wee know him to be a thiefe, ſhall wee not lay hands on him.
Truly by your office you may, but I think they that touch pitch will be defil'd: the moſt peaceable way for you, if you doe take a theefe, is, to let him ſhew himſelfe what he is, and ſteale out of your company.
You haue bin alwaies cal'd a merciful mā partner.
Truely I would not hang a dog by my will, much more a man who hath anie honeſtie in him.
If you heare a child crie in the night you muſt call to the nurſe, and bid her ſtill it.
How if the nurſe be aſleepe and will not heare vs?
Why then depart in peace, and let the childe wake her with crying, for the ewe that will not heare her Lambe when it baes, will neuer anſwere a calfe when he bleates.
'Tis verie true.
This is the end of the charge: you conſtable are to preſent the Princes owne perſon, if you meete the Prince in the night, you may ſtaie him.
Nay birladie that I thinke a cannot.
Fiue ſhillings to one on't with anie man that knowes the Statues, he may ſtaie him, marrie not without the prince be willing, for indeed the watch ought to offend no man, and it is an offence to ſtay a man againſt his will.
Birladie I thinke it be ſo.
Ha, ah ha, well maſters good night, and there be anie matter of weight chances, call vp me, keepe your fellowes counſailes, and your owne, and good night, come neighbour.
Well maſters, we heare our charge, let vs go ſit here vpon the Church bench till two, and then all to bed.
One word more, honeſt neighbors. I pray you watch about ſignior Leonatoes doore, for the wedding being there to morrow, there is a great coyle to night, adiew, be vigitant I beſeech you.
What, Conrade?
Peace, ſtir not.
Conrade I ſay.
Here man, I am at thy elbow.
Mas and my elbow itcht, I thought there would a ſcabbe follow.
I will owe thee an anſwere▪ for that, and now forward with thy tale.
Stand thee cloſe then vnder this penthouſe, for it driſſels raine, and I will, like a true drunkard, vtter all to thee.
Some treaſon maſters, yet ſtand cloſe.
Therefore know, I haue earned of Don Iohn a thouſand Ducates.
Is it poſſible that anie villanie ſhould be ſo deare?
Thou ſhould'ſt rather aske if it were poſſible anie villanie ſhould be ſo rich? for when rich villains haue neede of poore ones, poore ones may make what price they will.
I wonder at it.
That ſhewes thou art vnconfirm'd, thou knoweſt that the faſhion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloake, is nothing to a man.
Yes, it is apparell.
I meane the faſhion.
Yes the faſhion is the faſhion.
Tuſh, I may as well ſay the foole's the foole, but ſeeſt thou not what a deformed theefe this faſhion is?
I know that deformed, a has bin a vile theefe, this vii. yeares, a goes vp and downe like a gentle man: I remember his name.
Did'ſt thou not heare ſome bodie?
No, 'twas the vaine on the houſe.
Seeſt thou not (I ſay) what a deformed thiefe this faſhion is, how giddily a turnes about all the Hot-blouds, betweene foureteene & fiue & thirtie, ſometimes faſhioning them like Pharaoes ſouldiours in the rechie painting, ſometime like god Bels prieſts in the old Church window, ſometime like the ſhauen Hercules in the ſmircht worm eaten tapeſtrie, where his cod-peece ſeemes as maſſie as his club.
All this I ſee, and ſee that the faſhion weares out more apparrell then the man; but art not thou thy ſelfe giddie with the faſhion too that thou haſt ſhifted out of thy tale into telling me of the faſhion?
Not ſo neither, but know that I haue to night wooed Margaret the Lady Heroes gentle-woman, by the name of Hero, ſhe leanes me out at her miſtris chamber-vvindow, bids me a thouſand times good night: I tell this tale vildly. I ſhould firſt tell thee how the Prince Claudio and my Maſter planted, and placed, and poſſeſſed by my Maſter Don Iohn, ſaw a far off in the Orchard this amiable incounter.
And thought thy Margaret was Hero?
Two of them did, the Prince and Claudio, but the diuell my Maſter knew ſhe was Margaret and partly by his oathes, which firſt poſſeſt them, partly by the darke night which did deceiue them, but chiefely, by my villanie, which did confirme any ſlander that Don Iohn had made, away vvent Claudio enraged, ſwore hee vvould meete her as he was apointed next morning at the Temple, and there, before the whole congregation ſhame her with vvhat he ſaw o're night, and ſend her home againe vvithout a husband.
We charge you in the Princes name ſtand.
Call vp the right maſter Conſtable, vve haue here recouered the moſt dangerous peece of lechery, that euer vvas knowne in the Common-wealth.
And one Deformed is one of them, I know him, a vveares a locke.
Maſt maſters.
Youre be made bring deformed forth I warrant you,
Maſters, neuer ſpeake, vve charge you, let vs obey you to goe vvith vs.
We are like to proue a goodly commoditie, being taken vp of theſe mens bils.
A commoditie in queſtion I warrant you, come vveele obey you.
Good Vrſula wake my coſin Beatrice, and deſire her to riſe.
I will Lady.
And bid her come hither.
Well.
Troth I thinke your other rebato were better.
No pray thee good Meg, Ile vveare this.
By my troth's not ſo good, and I vvarrant your coſin vvill ſay ſo.
My coſin's a foole, and thou art another, ile vveare none but this.
I like the new tire vvithin excellently, if the haire vvere a thought browner: and your gown's a moſt rare faſhion yfaith, I ſaw the Dutcheſſe of Millaines gowne that they praiſe ſo.
O that exceedes they ſay.
By my troth's but a night-gowne in reſpect of yours, cloth a gold and cuts and lac'd with ſiluer, ſet with pearles, downe ſleeues, ſide ſleeues, and skirts, round vnderborn with a blewiſh tinſel, but for a fine queint gracefull and excellent faſhion, yours is worth ten on't.
God giue mee ioy to weare it, for my heart is exceeding heauy.
'Twill be heauier ſoone, by the waight of a man.
Fie vpon thee, art not aſham'd?
Of what Lady? of ſpeaking honourably? is not marriage honourable in a beggar? is not your Lord honourable without marriage? I thinke you would haue me ſay, ſauing your reuerence a husband: and bad thinking doe not wreſt true ſpeaking, Ile offend no body, is there any harme in the heauier for a husband? none I thinke, and it be the right husband, and the right wife, otherwiſe 'tis light and not heauy, aske my Lady Beatrice elſe, here ſhe comes.
Good morrow Coze.
Good morrow ſweet Hero.
Why how now? do you ſpeake in the ſick tune?
I am out of all other tune, me thinkes.
Claps into Light a loue, (that goes without a burden,) do you ſing it and Ile dance it.
Ye Light aloue with your heeles, then if your husband haue ſtables enough, you'll looke he ſhall lacke no barnes.
O illegitimate conſtruction! I ſcorne that with my heeles.
'Tis almoſt fiue a clocke coſin, 'tis time you were ready, by my troth I am exceeding ill, hey ho.
For a hauke, a horſe, or a husband?
For the letter that begins them all, H.
Well, and you be not turn'd Turke, there's no more ſayling by the ſtarre.
What meanes the foole trow?
Nothing I, but God ſend euery one rheir harts deſire.
Theſe gloues the Count ſent mee, they are an excellent perfume.
I am ſtuft coſin, I cannot ſmell.
A maid and ſtuft! there's goodly catching of colde.
O God helpe me, God help me, how long haue you profeſt apprehenſion?
Euer ſince you left it, doth not my wit become me rarely?
It is not ſeene enough, you ſhould weare it in your cap, by my troth I am ſicke.
Get you ſome of this diſtill'd carduus benedictus and lay it to your heart, it is the onely thing for a qualm.
There thou prickſt her with a thiſſell.
Benedictus, why benedictus? you haue ſome morall in this benedictus.
Morall? no by my troth, I haue no morall meaning, I meant plaine holy thiſſell, you may thinke perchance that I thinke you are in loue, nay birlady I am not ſuch a foole to thinke what I liſt, nor I liſt not to thinke what I can, nor indeed I cannot thinke, if I would thinke my hart out of thinking, that you are in loue, or that you will be in loue, or that you can be in loue: yet Benedicke was ſuch another, and now is he become a man, he ſwore hee would neuer marry, and yet now in deſpight of his heart he eates his meat without grudging, and how you may be conuerted I know not, but me thinkes you looke with your eies as other women doe.
What pace is this that thy tongue keepes.
Not a falſe gallop.
Madam, withdraw, the Prince, the Count, ſignior Benedicke, Don Iohn, and all the gallants of the towne are come to fetch you to Church.
Helpe to dreſſe mee good coze, good Meg, good Vrſula.
What would you with mee, honeſt neighbour?
Mary ſir I would haue ſome confidence with you, that decernes you nearely.
Briefe I pray you, for you ſee it is a buſie time with me.
Mary this it is ſir.
Yes in truth it is ſir.
What is it my good friends?
Goodman Verges ſir ſpeakes a little of the matter, an old man ſir, and his wits are not ſo blunt, as God helpe I would deſire they were, but infaith honeſt as the skin betweene his browes.
Yes I thank God, I am as honeſt as any man liuing, that is an old man, and no honeſter then I.
Compariſons are odorous, palabras, neighbour Verges.
Neighbours, you are tedious.
It pleaſes your worſhip to ſay ſo, but we are the poore Dukes officers, but truely for mine owne part, if I were as tedious as a King I could finde in my heart to beſtow it all of your worſhip.
All thy tediouſneſſe on me, ah?
Yea, and 'twere a thouſand times more than 'tis, for I heare as good exclamation on your Worſhip as of any man in the Citie, and though I bee but a poore man, I am glad to heare it.
And ſo am I.
I would faine know what you haue to ſay.
Marry ſir our watch to night, excepting your worſhips preſence, haue tane a couple of as arrant knaues as any in Meſſina.
A good old man ſir, hee will be talking as they ſay, when the age is in the wit is out, God helpe vs, it is a world to ſee: well ſaid yfaith neighbour Verges, well, God's a good man, and two men ride of a horſe, one muſt ride behinde, an honeſt ſoule yfaith ſir, by my troth he is, as euer broke bread, but God is to bee worſhipt, all men are not alike, alas good neighbour.
Indeed neighbour he comes too ſhort of you.
Gifts that God giues.
I muſt leaue you.
One word ſir, our watch ſir haue indeede comprehended two aſpitious perſons, & we would haue them this morning examined before your worſhip.
Take their examination your ſelfe, and bring it me, I am now in great haſte, as may appeare vnto you.
It ſhall be ſuffigance.
Drinke ſome wine ere you goe: fare you well.
My Lord, they ſtay for you to giue your daughter to her husband.
Ile wait vpon them, I am ready.
Goe good partner, goe get you to Francis Sea-coale, bid him bring his pen and inkehorne to the Gaole: we are now to examine thoſe men.
And we muſt doe it wiſely.
Wee will ſpare for no witte I warrant you: heere's that ſhall driue ſome of them to a non-come, only get the learned writer to ſet downe our excommunication, and meet me at the Iaile.
Come Frier Francis, be briefe, onely to the plaine forme of marriage, and you ſhal recount their particular duties afterwards.
You come hither, my Lord, to marry this Lady.
No.
To be married to her: Frier, you come to marrie her.
Lady, you come hither to be married to this Count.
I doe.
If either of you know any inward impediment why you ſhould not be conioyned, I charge you on your ſoules to vtter it.
Know you anie, Hero?
None my Lord.
Know you anie, Count?
I dare make his anſwer, None.
O what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily do!
How now! interiections? why then, ſome be of laughing, as ha, ha, he.
Stand thee by Frier, father, by your leaue,
Will you with free and vnconſtrained ſoule
Giue me this maid your daughter?
As freely ſonne as God did giue her me.
And what haue I to giue you back, whoſe worth
May counterpoiſe this rich and precious gift?
Nothing, vnleſſe you render her againe.
Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulnes:
There Leonato, take her backe againe,
Giue not this rotten Orenge to your friend,
Shee's but the ſigne and ſemblance of her honour:
Behold how like a maid ſhe bluſhes heere!
O what authoritie and ſhew of truth
Can cunning ſinne couer it ſelfe withall!
Comes not that bloud, as modeſt euidence,
To witneſſe ſimple Vertue? would you not ſweare
All you that ſee her, that ſhe were a maide,
By theſe exterior ſhewes? But ſhe is none:
She knowes the heat of a luxurious bed:
Her bluſh is guiltineſſe, not modeſtie.
What doe you meane, my Lord?
Not to be married,
Not to knit my ſoule to an approued wanton.
Deere my Lord, if you in your owne proofe,
Haue vanquiſht the reſiſtance of her youth,
And made defeat of her virginitie.
I know what you would ſay: if I haue knowne her,
You will ſay, ſhe did imbrace me as a husband,
And ſo extenuate the forehand ſinne: No Leonato,
I neuer tempted her with word too large,
But as a brother to his ſiſter, ſhewed
Baſhfull ſinceritie and comely loue.
And ſeem'd I euer otherwiſe to you?
Out on thee ſeeming, I will write againſt it,
You ſeeme to me as Diane in her Orbe,
As chaſte as is the budde ere it be blowne:
But you are more intemperate in your blood,
Than Venus, or thoſe pampred animalls,
That rage in ſauage ſenſualitie.
Is my Lord well, that he doth ſpeake ſo wide?
Sweete Prince, why ſpeake not you?
What ſhould I ſpeake?
I ſtand diſhonour'd that haue gone about,
To linke my deare friend to a common ſtale.
Are theſe things ſpoken, or doe I but dreame?
Sir, they are ſpoken, and theſe things are true.
This lookes not like a nuptiall.
True, O God!
Leonato, ſtand I here?
Is this the Prince? is this the Princes brother?
Is this face Heroes? are our eies our owne?
All this is ſo, but what of this my Lord?
Let me but moue one queſtion to your daughter,
And by that fatherly and kindly power,
That you haue in her, bid her anſwer truly.
I charge thee doe, as thou art my childe.
O God defend me how am I beſet,
What kinde of catechizing call you this?
To make you anſwer truly to your name.
Is it not Hero? who can blot that name
With any iuſt reproach?
Marry that can Hero,
Hero it ſelfe can blot out Heroes vertue.
What man was he, talkt with you yeſternight,
Out at your window betwixt twelue and one?
Now if you are a maid, anſwer to this.
I talkt with no man at that howre my Lord.
Why then you are no maiden. Leonato,
I am ſorry you muſt heare: vpon mine honor,
My ſelfe, my brother, and this grieued Count
Did ſee her, heare her, at that howre laſt night,
Talke with a ruffian at her chamber window,
Who hath indeed moſt like a liberall villaine,
Confeſt the vile encounters they haue had
A thouſand times in ſecret.
Fie, fie, they are not to be named my Lord,
Not to be ſpoken of,
There is not chaſtitie enough in language,
Without offence to vtter them: thus pretty Lady
I am ſorry for thy much miſgouernment.
O Hero! what a Hero hadſt thou beene
If halfe thy outward graces had beene placed
About thy thoughts and counſailes of thy heart?
But fare thee well, moſt foule, moſt faire, farewell
Thou pure impiety, and impious puritie,
For thee Ile locke vp all the gates of Loue,
And on my eie-lids ſhall Coniecture hang,
To turne all beauty into thoughts of harme,
And neuer ſhall it more be gracious.
Hath no mans dagger here a point for me?
Why how now coſin, wherfore ſink you down?
Come, let vs go: theſe things come thus to light,
Smother her ſpirits vp.
How doth the Lady?
Dead I thinke, helpe vncle,
Hero, why Hero, Vncle, Signor Benedicke, Frier.
O Fate! take not away thy heauy hand,
Death is the faireſt couer for her ſhame
That may be wiſht for.
How now coſin Hero?
Haue comfort Ladie.
Doſt thou looke vp?
Yea, wherefore ſhould ſhe not?
Wherfore? Why doth not euery earthly thing
Cry ſhame vpon her? Could ſhe heere denie
The ſtorie that is printed in her blood?
Do not liue Hero, do not ope thine eyes:
For did I thinke thou wouldſt not quickly die,
Thought I thy ſpirits were ſtronger then thy ſhames,
My ſelfe would on the reward of reproaches
Strike at thy life. Grieu'd I, I had but one?
Chid I, for that at frugal Natures frame?
O one too much by thee: why had I one?
Why euer was't thou louelie in my eies?
Why had I not with charitable hand
Tooke vp a beggars iſſue at my gates,
Who ſmeered thus, and mir'd with infamie,
I might haue ſaid, no part of it is mine:
This ſhame deriues it ſelfe from vnknowne loines,
But mine, and mine I lou'd, and mine I prais'd,
And mine that I was proud on mine ſo much,
That I my ſelfe, was to my ſelfe not mine:
Valewing of her, why ſhe, O ſhe is falne
Into a pit of Inke, that the wide ſea
Hath drops too few to waſh her cleane againe,
And ſalt too little, which may ſeaſon giue
To her foule tainted fleſh.
Sir, ſir, be patient: for my part, I am ſo attired in wonder, I know not what to ſay.
O on my ſoule my coſin is belied.
Ladie, were you her bedfellow laſt night?
No truly: not although vntill laſt night,
I haue this tweluemonth bin her bedfellow.
Confirm'd, confirm'd, O that is ſtronger made
Which was before barr'd vp with ribs of iron.
Would the Princes lie, and Claudio lie,
Who lou'd her ſo, that ſpeaking of her foulneſſe,
Waſh'd it with teares? Hence from her, let her die.
Heare me a little, for I haue onely bene ſilent ſo long, and giuen way vnto this courſe of fortune, by noting of the Ladie, I haue markt.
A thouſand bluſhing apparitions,
To ſtart into her face, a thouſand innocent ſhames,
In Angel whiteneſſe beare away thoſe bluſhes,
And in her eie there hath appear'd a fire
To burne the errors that theſe Princes hold
Againſt her maiden truth. Call me a foole,
Truſt not my reading, nor my obſeruations,
Which with experimental ſeale doth warrant
The tenure of my booke: truſt not my age,
My reuerence, calling, nor diuinitie,
If this ſweet Ladie lye not guiltleſſe heere,
Vnder ſome biting error.
Friar, it cannot be:
Thou ſeeſt that all the Grace that ſhe hath left,
Is, that ſhe wil not adde to her damnation,
A ſinne of periury, ſhe not denies it:
Why ſeek'ſt thou then to couer with excuſe,
That which appeares in proper nakedneſſe?
Ladie, what man is he you are accus'd of?
They know that do accuſe me, I know none:
If I know more of any man aliue
Then that which maiden modeſtie doth warrant,
Let all my ſinnes lacke mercy. O my Father,
Proue you that any man with me conuerſt,
At houres vnmeete, or that I yeſternight
Maintain'd the change of words with any creature,
Refuſe me, hate me, torture me to death.
There is ſome ſtrange miſpriſion in the Princes.
Two of them haue the verie bent of honor,
And if their wiſedomes be miſled in this:
The practiſe of it liues in Iohn the baſtard,
Whoſe ſpirits toile in frame of villanies.
I know not: if they ſpeake but truth of her,
Theſe hands ſhall teare her: If they wrong her honour,
The proudeſt of them ſhall wel heare of it.
Time hath not yet ſo dried this bloud of mine,
Nor age ſo eate vp my inuention,
Nor Fortune made ſuch hauocke of my meanes,
Nor my bad life reſt me ſo much of friends,
But they ſhall finde, awak'd in ſuch a kinde,
Both ſtrength of limbe, and policie of minde,
Ability in meanes, and choiſe of friends,
To quit me of them throughly.
Pauſe awhile:
And let my counſell ſway you in this caſe,
Your daughter heere the Princeſſe (left for dead)
Let her awhile be ſecretly kept in,
And publiſh it, that ſhe is dead indeed:
Maintaine a mourning oſtentation,
And on your Families old monument,
Hang mournfull Epitaphes, and do all rites,
That appertaine vnto a buriall.
What ſhall become of this? What wil this do?
Marry this wel carried, ſhall on her behalfe,
Change ſlander to remorſe, that is ſome good,
But not for that dreame I on this ſtrange courſe,
But on this trauaile looke for greater birth:
She dying, as it muſt be ſo maintain'd,
Vpon the inſtant that ſhe was accus'd,
Shal be lamented, pittied, and excus'd
Of euery hearer: for it ſo fals out,
That what we haue, we prize not to the worth,
Whiles we enioy it; but being lack'd and loſt,
Why then we racke the value, then we finde
The vertue that poſſeſsion would not ſhew vs
Whiles it was ours, ſo will it fare with Claudio:
When he ſhal heare ſhe dyed vpon his words,
Th' Idea of her life ſhal ſweetly creepe
Into his ſtudy of imagination.
And euery louely Organ of her life,
Shall come apparel'd in more precious habite:
More mouing delicate, and ful of life,
Into the eye and proſpect of his ſoule
Then when ſhe liu'd indeed: then ſhal he mourne,
If euer Loue had intereſt in his Liuer,
And wiſh he had not ſo accuſed her:
No, though he thought his accuſation true:
Let this be ſo, and doubt not but ſucceſſe
Wil faſhion the euent in better ſhape,
Then I can lay it downe in likelihood.
But if all ayme but this be leuelld falſe,
The ſuppoſition of the Ladies death,
Will quench the wonder of her infamie.
And if it ſort not well, you may conceale her,
As beſt befits her wounded reputation,
In ſome recluſiue and religious life,
Out of all eyes, tongues, mindes and iniuries.
Signior Leonato, let the Frier aduiſe you,
And though you know my inwardneſſe and loue
Is very much vnto the Prince and Claudio.
Yet, by mine honor, I will deale in this▪
As ſecretly and iuſtlie, as your ſoule
Should with your bodie.
Being that I flow in greefe,
The ſmalleſt twine may lead me.
'Tis well conſented, preſently away,
For to ſtrange ſores, ſtrangely they ſtraine the cure,
Come Lady, die to liue, this wedding day
Perhaps is but prolong'd, haue patience & endure.
Lady Beatrice, haue you wept all this while?
Yea, and I will weepe a while longer.
I will not deſire that.
You haue no reaſon, I doe it freely.
Surelie I do beleeue your fair coſin is wrong'd.
Ah, how much might the man deſerue of mee that would right her!
Is there any way to ſhew ſuch friendſhip?
A verie euen way, but no ſuch friend.
May a man doe it?
It is a mans office, but not yours.
I doe loue nothing in the world ſo well as you, is not that ſtrange?
As ſtrange as the thing I know not, it were as poſſible for me to ſay, I loued nothing ſo well as you, but beleeue me not, and yet I lie not, I confeſſe nothing, nor I deny nothing, I am ſorry for my couſin.
By my ſword Beatrice thou lou'ſt me.
Doe not ſweare by it and eat it.
I will ſweare by it that you loue mee, and I will make him eat it that ſayes I loue not you.
Will you not eat your word?
With no ſawce that can be deuiſed to it, I proteſt I loue thee.
Why then God forgiue me.
What offence ſweet Beatrice?
You haue ſtayed me in a happy howre; I was about to proteſt I loued you.
And doe it with all thy heart.
I loue you with ſo much of my heart, that none is left to proteſt.
Come, bid me doe any thing for thee.
Kill Claudio.
Ha, not for the wide world.
You kill me to denie, farewell.
Tarrie ſweet Beatrice.
I am gone, though I am heere, there is no loue in you, nay I pray you let me goe.
Beatrice.
Infaith I will goe.
Wee'll be friends firſt.
You dare eaſier be friends with mee, than fight with mine enemy.
Is Claudio thine enemie?
Is a not approued in the height a villaine, that hath ſlandered, ſcorned, diſhonoured my kinſwoman? O that I were a man! what, beare her in hand vntill they come to take hands, and then with publike accuſation vncouered ſlander, vnmittigated rancour? O God that I were a man! I would eat his heart in the market-place.
Heare me Beatrice.
Talke with a man out at a window, a proper ſaying.
Nay but Beatrice.
Sweet Hero, ſhe is wrong'd, ſhee is ſlandered, ſhe is vndone.
Beat?
Princes and Counties! ſurelie a Princely teſtimonie, a goodly Count, Comfect, a ſweet Gallant ſurelie, O that I were a man for his ſake! or that I had any friend would be a man for my ſake! But manhood is melted into curſies, valour into complement, and men are onelie turned into tongue, and trim ones too: he is now as valiant as Hercules, that only tells a lie, and ſweares it: I cannot be a man with wiſhing, therfore I will die a woman with grieuing.
Tarry good Beatrice, by this hand I loue thee.
Vſe it for my loue ſome other way then ſwearing by it.
Thinke you in your ſoule the Count Claudio hath wrong'd Hero?
Yea, as ſure as I haue a thought, or a ſoule.
Enough, I am engagde, I will challenge him, I will kiſſe your hand, and ſo leaue you: by this hand Claudio ſhall render me a deere account: as you heare of me, ſo thinke of me: goe comfort your cooſin, I muſt ſay ſhe is dead, and ſo farewell.
Is our whole diſſembly appeard?
O a ſtoole and a cuſhion for the Sexton.
Which be the malefactors?
Marry that am I, and my partner.
Nay that's certaine, wee haue the exhibition to examine.
But which are the offenders that are to be examined, let them come before maſter Conſtable.
Yea marry, let them come before mee, what is your name, friend?
Borachio.
Pray write downe Borachio. Yours ſirra.
I am a Gentleman ſir, and my name is Conrade.
Write downe Maſter gentleman Conrade : maiſters, doe you ſerue God: maiſters, it is proued alreadie that you are little better than falſe knaues, and it will goe neere to be thought ſo ſhortly, how anſwer you for your ſelues?
Marry ſir, we ſay we are none.
A maruellous witty fellow I aſſure you, but I will goe about with him: come you hither ſirra, a word in your eare ſir, I ſay to you, it is thought you are falſe knaues.
Sir, I ſay to you, we are none.
Well, ſtand aſide, 'fore God they are both in a tale: haue you writ downe that they are none?
Maſter Conſtable, you goe not the way to examine, you muſt call forth the watch that are their accuſers.
Yea marry, that's the efteſt way, let the watch come forth: maſters, I charge you in the Princes name, accuſe theſe men.
This man ſaid ſir, that Don Iohn the Princes brother was a villaine.
Write down, Prince Iohn a villaine: why this is flat periurie, to call a Princes brother villaine.
Maſter Conſtable.
Pray thee fellow peace, I do not like thy looke I promiſe thee.
What heard you him ſay elſe?
Mary that he had receiued a thouſand Dukates of Don Iohn, for accuſing the Lady Hero wrongfully.
Flat Burglarie as euer was committed.
Yea by th' maſſe that it is.
What elſe fellow?
And that Count Claudio did meane vpon his words, to diſgrace Hero before the whole aſſembly, and not marry her.
O villaine! thou wilt be condemn'd into euerlaſting redemption for this.
What elſe?
This is all.
And this is more maſters then you can deny, Prince Iohn is this morning ſecretly ſtolne away: Hero was in this manner accus'd, in this very manner refus'd, and vpon the griefe of this ſodainely died: Maſter Conſtable, let theſe men be bound, and brought to Leonato, I will goe before, and ſhew him their examination.
Come, let them be opinion'd.
Let them be in the hands of Coxcombe.
Gods my life, where's the Sexton? let him write downe the Princes Officer Coxcombe: come, binde them thou naughty varlet.
Away, you are an aſſe, you are an aſſe.
Doſt thou not ſuſpect my place? doſt thou not ſuſpect my yeeres? O that hee were heere to write mee downe an aſſe! but maſters, remember that I am an aſſe: though it be not written down, yet forget not yt I am an aſſe: No thou villaine, yu art full of piety as ſhall be prou'd vpon thee by good witneſſe, I am a wiſe fellow, and which is more, an officer, and which is more, a houſhoulder, and which is more, as pretty a peece of fleſh as any in Meſſina, and one that knowes the Law, goe to, & a rich fellow enough, goe to, and a fellow that hath had loſſes, and one that hath two gownes, and euery thing handſome about him: bring him away: O that I had been writ downe an aſſe!
If you goe on thus, you will kill your ſelfe,
And 'tis not wiſedome thus to ſecond griefe,
Againſt your ſelfe.
I pray thee ceaſe thy counſaile,
Which falls into mine eares as profitleſſe,
As water in a ſiue: giue not me counſaile,
Nor let no comfort delight mine eare,
But ſuch a one whoſe wrongs doth ſute with mine.
Bring me a father that ſo lou'd his childe,
Whoſe ioy of her is ouer-whelmed like mine,
And bid him ſpeake of patience,
Meaſure his woe the length and bredth of mine,
And let it anſwere euery ſtraine for ſtraine,
As thus for thus, and ſuch a griefe for ſuch,
In euery lineament, branch, ſhape, and forme:
If ſuch a one will ſmile and ſtroke his beard,
And ſorrow, wagge, crie hem, when he ſhould grone,
Patch griefe with prouerbs, make misfortune drunke,
With candle-waſters: bring him yet to me,
And I of him will gather patience:
But there is no ſuch man for brother, men
Can counſaile, and ſpeake comfort to that griefe,
Which they themſelues not feele, but to ſting it,
Their counſaile turnes to paſſion, which before,
Would giue preceptiall medicine to rage,
Fetter ſtrong madneſſe in a ſilken thred,
Charme ache with ayre, and agony with words,
No, no, 'tis all mens office, to ſpeake patience
To thoſe that wring vnder the load of ſorrow:
But no mans vertue nor ſufficiencie
To be ſo morall, when he ſhall endure
The like himſelfe: therefore giue me no counſaile,
My griefs cry lowder then aduertiſement.
Therein do men from children nothing differ.
I pray thee peace, I will be fleſh and bloud,
For there was neuer yet Philoſopher,
That could endure the tooth-ake patiently,
How euer they haue writ the ſtile of gods,
And made a puſh at chance and ſufferance.
Yet bend not all the harme vpon your ſelfe,
Make thoſe that doe offend you, ſuffer too.
There thou ſpeak'ſt reaſon, nay I will doe ſo,
My ſoule doth tell me, Hero is belied,
And that ſhall Claudio know, ſo ſhall the Prince,
And all of them that thus diſhonour her.
Here comes the Prince and Claudio haſtily.
Good den, good den.
Good day to both of you.
Heare you my Lords?
We haue ſome haſte Leonato.
Some haſte my Lord! wel, fareyouwel my Lord,
Are you ſo haſty now? well, all is one.
Nay, do not quarrell with vs, good old man.
If he could rite himſelfe with quarrelling,
Some of vs would lie low.
Who wrongs him?
Marry yu doſt wrong me, thou diſſembler, thou:
Nay, neuer lay thy hand vpon thy ſword,
I feare thee not.
Marry beſhrew my hand,
If it ſhould giue your age ſuch cauſe of feare,
Infaith my hand meant nothing to my ſword.
Tuſh, tuſh, man, neuer fleere and ieſt at me,
I ſpeake not like a doard, nor a foole,
As vnder priuiledge of age to bragge,
What I haue done being yong, or what would doe,
Were I not old, know Claudio to thy head,
Thou haſt ſo wrong'd my innocent childe and me,
That I am forc'd to lay my reuerence by,
And with grey haires and bruiſe of many daies,
Doe challenge thee to triall of a man,
I ſay thou haſt belied mine innocent childe.
Thy ſlander hath gone through and through her heart,
And ſhe lies buried with her anceſtors:
O in a tombe where neuer ſcandall ſlept,
Saue this of hers, fram'd by thy villanie.
My villany?
Thine Claudio, thine I ſay.
You ſay not right old man.
My Lord, my Lord,
Ile proue it on his body if he dare,
Deſpight his nice fence, and his actiue practiſe,
His Maie of youth, and bloome of luſtihood.
Away, I will not haue to do with you.
Canſt thou ſo daffe me? thou haſt kild my child,
If thou kilſt me, boy, thou ſhalt kill a man.
He ſhall kill two of vs, and men indeed,
But that's no matter, let him kill one firſt:
Win me and weare me, let him anſwere me,
Come follow me boy, come ſir boy, come follow me
Sir boy, ile whip you from your foyning fence,
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.
Brother.
Content your ſelf, God knows I lou'd my neece,
And ſhe is dead, ſlander'd to death by villaines,
That dare as well anſwer a man indeede,
As I dare take a ſerpent by the tongue.
Boyes, apes, braggarts, Iackes, milke-ſops.
Brother Anthony.
Hold you content, what man? I know them, yea
And what they weigh, euen to the vtmoſt ſcruple,
Scambling, out-facing, faſhion-monging boyes,
That lye, and cog, and flout, depraue, and ſlander,
Goe antiquely, and ſhow outward hidiouſneſſe,
And ſpeake of halfe a dozen dang'rous words,
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durſt.
And this is all.
But brother Anthonie.
Come, 'tis no matter,
Do not you meddle, let me deale in this.
Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience
My heart is ſorry for your daughters death:
But on my honour ſhe was charg'd with nothing
But what was true, and very full of proofe.
My Lord, my Lord.
I will not heare you.
No come brother, away, I will be heard.
And ſhall, or ſome of vs will ſmart for it.
See, ſee, here comes the man we went to ſeeke.
Now ſignior, what newes?
Good day my Lord.
Welcome ſignior, you are almoſt come to part almoſt a fray.
Wee had likt to haue had our two noſes ſnapt off with two old men without teeth.
Leonato and his brother, what think'ſt thou? had wee fought, I doubt we ſhould haue beene too yong for them.
In a falſe quarrell there is no true valour, I came to ſeeke you both.
We haue beene vp and downe to ſeeke thee, for we are high proofe melancholly, and would faine haue it beaten away, wilt thou vſe thy wit?
It is in my ſcabberd, ſhall I draw it?
Doeſt thou weare thy wit by thy ſide?
Neuer any did ſo, though verie many haue been beſide their wit, I will bid thee drawe, as we do the minſtrels, draw to pleaſure vs.
As I am an honeſt man he lookes pale, art thou ſicke, or angrie?
What, courage man: what though care kil'd a cat, thou haſt mettle enough in thee to kill care.
Sir, I ſhall meete your wit in the careere, and you charge it againſt me, I pray you chuſe another ſubiect.
Nay then giue him another ſtaffe, this laſt was broke croſſe.
By this light, he changes more and more, I thinke he be angrie indeede.
If he be, he knowes how to turne his girdle.
Shall I ſpeake a word in your eare?
God bleſſe me from a challenge.
You are a villaine, I ieſt not, I will make it good how you dare, with what you dare, and when you dare: do me right, or I will proteſt your cowardiſe: you haue kill'd a ſweete Ladie, and her death ſhall fall heauie on you, let me heare from you.
Well, I will meete you, ſo I may haue good cheare.
What, a feaſt, a feaſt?
I faith I thanke him, he hath bid me to a calues head and a Capon, the which if I doe not carue moſt curiouſly, ſay my knife's naught, ſhall I not finde a woodcocke too?
Sir, your wit ambles well, it goes eaſily.
Ile tell thee how Beatrice prais'd thy wit the other day: I ſaid thou hadſt a fine wit: true ſaies ſhe, a fine little one: no ſaid I, a great wit: right ſaies ſhee, a great groſſe one: nay ſaid I, a good wit: iuſt ſaid ſhe, it hurts no body: nay ſaid I, the gentleman is wiſe: certain ſaid ſhe, a wiſe gentleman: nay ſaid I, he hath the tongues: that I beleeue ſaid ſhee, for hee ſwore a thing to me on munday night, which he forſwore on tueſday morning: there's a double tongue, there's two tongues: thus did ſhee an howre together tranſ-ſhape thy particular vertues, yet at laſt ſhe concluded with a ſigh, thou waſt the propreſt man in Italie.
For the which ſhe wept heartily, and ſaid ſhee car'd not.
Yea that ſhe did, but yet for all that, and if ſhee did not hate him deadlie, ſhee would loue him dearely, the old mans daughter told vs all.
All, all, and moreouer, God ſaw him vvhen he was hid in the garden.
But when ſhall we ſet the ſauage Bulls hornes on the ſenſible Benedicks head?
Yea and text vnder-neath, heere dwells Benedicke the married man.
Fare you well, Boy, you know my minde, I will leaue you now to your goſſep-like humor, you breake ieſts as braggards do their blades, which God be thanked hurt not: my Lord, for your manie courteſies I thank you, I muſt diſcontinue your companie, your brother the Baſtard is fled from Meſſina: you haue among you, kill'd a ſweet and innocent Ladie: for my Lord Lackebeard there, he and I ſhall meete, and till then peace be with him.
He is in earneſt.
In moſt profound earneſt, and Ile warrant you, for the loue of Beatrice.
And hath challeng'd thee.
Moſt ſincerely.
What a prettie thing man is, when he goes in his doublet and hoſe, and leaues off his wit.
He is then a Giant to an Ape, but then is an Ape a Doctor to ſuch a man.
But ſoft you, let me be, plucke vp my heart, and be ſad, did he not ſay my brother was fled?
Come you ſir, if iuſtice cannot tame you, ſhee ſhall nere weigh more reaſons in her ballance, nay, and you be a curſing hypocrite once, you muſt be lookt to.
How now, two of my brothers men bound? Borachio one.
Harken after their offence my Lord▪
Officers, what offence haue theſe men done?
Marrie ſir, they haue committed falſe report, moreouer they haue ſpoken vntruths, ſecondarily they are ſlanders, ſixt and laſtly, they haue belyed a Ladie, thirdly, they haue verified vniuſt things, and to conclude they are lying knaues.
Firſt I aske thee what they haue done, thirdlie I aske thee vvhat's their offence, ſixt and laſtlie why they are committed, and to conclude, what you lay to their charge.
Rightlie reaſoned, and in his owne diuiſion, and by my troth there's one meaning vvell ſuted.
Who haue you offended maſters, that you are thus bound to your anſwer? this learned Conſtable is too cunning to be vnderſtood, vvhat's your offence?
Sweete Prince, let me go no farther to mine anſwere: do you heare me, and let this Count kill mee: I haue deceiued euen your verie eies: vvhat your wiſedomes could not diſcouer, theſe ſhallow fooles haue brought to light, vvho in the night ouerheard me confeſſing to this man, how Don Iohn your brother incenſed me to ſlander the Ladie Hero, how you were brought into the Orchard, and ſaw me court Margaret in Heroes garments, how you diſgrac'd her vvhen you ſhould marrie her: my villanie they haue vpon record, vvhich I had rather ſeale vvith my death, then repeate ouer to my ſhame: the Ladie is dead vpon mine and my maſters falſe accuſation: and briefelie, I deſire nothing but the reward of a villaine.
Runs not this ſpeech like yron through your bloud?
I haue drunke poiſon whiles he vtter'd it.
But did my Brother ſet thee on to this?
Yea, and paid me richly for the practiſe of it.
He is compos'd and fram'd of treacherie,
And fled he is vpon this villanie.
Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appeare
In the rare ſemblance that I lou'd it firſt.
Come, bring away the plaintiffes, by this time our Sexton hath reformed Signior Leonato of the matter: and maſters, do not forget to ſpecifie when time & place ſhall ſerue, that I am an Aſſe.
Here, here comes maſter Signior Leonato, and the Sexton too.
Which is the villaine? let me ſee his eies,
That when I note another man like him,
I may auoide him: vvhich of theſe is he?
If you vvould know your wronger, looke on me.
Art thou thou the ſlaue that with thy breath haſt kild mine innocent childe?
Yea, euen I alone.
No, not ſo villaine, thou belieft thy ſelfe,
Here ſtand a paire of honourable men,
A third is fled that had a hand in it:
I thanke you Princes for my daughters death,
Record it with your high and worthie deedes,
'Twas brauely done, if you bethinke you of it.
I know not how to pray your patience,
Yet I muſt ſpeake, chooſe your reuenge your ſelfe,
Impoſe me to what penance your inuention
Can lay vpon my ſinne, yee ſinn'd I not,
But in miſtaking.
By my ſoule nor I,
And yet to ſatisfie this good old man,
I vvould bend vnder anie heauie vvaight,
That heele enioyne me to.
I cannot bid you bid my daughter liue,
That vvere impoſſible, but I praie you both,
Poſſeſſe the people in Meſſina here,
How innocent ſhe died, and if your loue
Can labour aught in ſad inuention,
Hang her an epitaph vpon her toomb,
And ſing it to her bones, ſing it to night:
To morrow morning come you to my houſe,
And ſince you could not be my ſonne in law,
Be yet my Nephew: my brother hath a daughter,
Almoſt the copie of my childe that's dead,
And ſhe alone is heire to both of vs,
Giue her the right you ſhould haue giu'n her coſin,
And ſo dies my reuenge.
O noble ſir!
Your ouer kindneſſe doth wring teares from me,
I do embrace your offer, and diſpoſe
For henceforth of poore Claudio.
To morrow then I will expect your comming,
To night I take my leaue, this naughtie man
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret,
Who I beleeue was packt in all this wrong,
Hired to it by your brother.
No by my ſoule ſhe was not,
Nor knew not what ſhe did when ſhe ſpoke to me,
But alwaies hath bin iuſt and vertuous,
In anie thing that I do know by her.
Moreouer ſir, which indeede is not vnder white and black, this plaintiffe here, the offendour did call mee aſſe, I beſeech you let it be remembred in his puniſhment, and alſo the vvatch heard them talke of one Deformed, they ſay he weares a key in his eare and a lock hanging by it, and borrowes monie in Gods name, the which he hath vs'd ſo long, and neuer paied, that now men grow hard-harted and will lend nothing for Gods ſake: praie you examine him vpon that point.
I thanke thee for thy care and honeſt paines.
Your vvorſhip ſpeakes like a moſt thankefull and reuerend youth, and I praiſe God for you.
There's for thy paines.
God ſaue the foundation.
Goe, I diſcharge thee of thy priſoner, and I thanke thee.
I leaue an arrant knaue vvith your vvorſhip, which I beſeech your worſhip to correct your ſelfe, for the example of others: God keepe your vvorſhip, I wiſh your worſhip vvell, God reſtore you to health, I humblie giue you leaue to depart, and if a merrie meeting may be wiſht, God prohibite it: come neighbour.
Vntill to morrow morning, Lords, farewell.
Farewell my Lords, vve looke for you to morrow.
We will not faile.
To night ile mourne with Hero:
Bring you theſe fellowes on, weel talke vvith Margaret, how her acquaintance grew vvith this lewd fellow.
Praie thee ſweete Miſtris Margaret, deſerue vvell at my hands, by helping mee to the ſpeech of Beatrice.
Will you then write me a Sonnet in praiſe of my beautie?
In ſo high a ſtile Margaret, that no man liuing ſhall come ouer it, for in moſt comely truth thou deſerueſt it.
To haue no man come ouer me, why, ſhall I alwaies keepe below ſtaires?
Thy wit is as quicke as the grey-hounds mouth, it catches.
And yours, as blunt as the Fencers foiles, which hit, but hurt not.
A moſt manly wit Margaret, it will not hurt a woman: and ſo I pray thee call Beatrice, I giue thee the bucklers.
Giue vs the ſwords, wee haue bucklers of our owne.
If you vſe them Margaret, you muſt put in the pikes with a vice, and they are dangerous weapons for Maides.
Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I thinke hath legges.
And therefore will come. The God of loue that ſits aboue, and knowes me, and knowes me, how pittifull I deſerue. I meane in ſinging, but in louing, Leander the good ſwimmer, Trolous the firſt imploier of pandars, and a whole booke full of theſe quondam carpet-mongers, whoſe name yet runne ſmoothly in the euen rode of a blanke verſe, why they were neuer ſo truely turned ouer and ouer as my poore ſelfe in loue: marrie I cannot ſhew it rime, I haue tried, I can finde out no rime to Ladie but babie, an innocent rime: for ſcorne, horne, a hard time: for ſchoole foole, a babling time: verie ominous endings, no, I was not borne vnder a riming Plannet, for I cannot wooe in feſtiuall tearmes: ſweete Beatrice would'ſt thou come when I cal'd thee?
Yea Signior, and depart when you bid me.
O ſtay but till then.
Then, is ſpoken: fare you well now, and yet ere I goe, let me goe with that I came, which is, with knowing what hath paſt betweene you and Claudio.
Onely foule words, and thereupon I will kiſſe thee.
Foule words is but foule wind, and foule wind is but foule breath, and foule breath is noiſome, therefore I will depart vnkiſt.
Thou haſt frighted the word out of his right ſence, ſo forcible is thy wit, but I muſt tell thee plainely, Claudio vndergoes my challenge, and either I muſt ſhortly heare from him, or I will ſubſcribe him a coward, and I pray thee now tell me, for which of my bad parts didſt thou firſt fall in loue with me?
For them all together, which maintain'd ſo politique a ſtate of euill, that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with them: but for which of my good parts did you firſt ſuffer loue for me?
Suffer loue! a good epithite, I do ſuffer loue indeede, for I loue thee againſt my will.
In ſpight of your heart I think, alas poore heart, if you ſpight it for my ſake, I will ſpight it for yours, for I will neuer loue that which my friend hates.
Thou and I are too wiſe to wooe peaceablie.
It appeares not in this confeſſion, there's not one wiſe man among twentie that will praiſe himſelfe.
An old, an old inſtance Beatrice, that liu'd in the time of good neighbours, if a man doe not erect in this age his owne tombe ere he dies, hee ſhall liue no longer in monuments, then the Bels ring, & the Widdow weepes.
And how long is that thinke you?
Queſtion, why an hower in clamour and a quarter in rhewme, therfore is it moſt expedient for the wife, if Don worme (his conſcience) finde no impediment to the contrarie, to be the trumpet of his owne vertues, as I am to my ſelfe ſo much for praiſing my ſelfe, who I my ſelfe will beare witneſſe is praiſe worthie, and now tell me, how doth your coſin?
Verie ill.
And how doe you?
Verie ill too.
Serue God, loue me, and mend, there will I leaue you too, for here comes one in haſte.
Madam, you muſt come to your Vncle, yonders old coile at home, it is prooued my Ladie Hero hath bin falſelie accuſde, the Prince and Claudio mightilie abuſde, and Don Iohn is the author of all, who is fled and gone: will you come preſentlie?
Will you go heare this newes Signior?
I will hue in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buried in thy eies: and moreouer, I will goe with thee to thy Vncles.
Is this the monument of Leonato?
It is my Lord.
Done to death by ſlanderous tongues,
Was the Hero that here lies:
Death in guerdon of her wrongs,
Giues her fame which neuer dies:
So the life that dyed with ſhame,
Liues in death with glorious fame.
Hang thou there vpon the tombe,
Praiſing her when I am dombe.
Now muſick ſound & ſing your ſolemn hymne
Pardon goddeſſe of the night,
Thoſe that ſlew thy virgin knight,
For the which with ſongs of woe,
Round about her tombe they goe:
Midnight aſſiſt our mone, helpe vs to ſigh and grone
Heauily, heauily.
Graues yawne and yeelde your dead,
Till death be vttered,
Heauenly, heauenly.
Now vnto thy bones good night, yeerely will I do this right.
Good morrow maſters, put your Torches out,
The wolues haue preied, and looke, the gentle day
Before the wheeles of Phoebus, round about
Dapples the drowſie Eaſt with ſpots of grey:
Thanks to you all, and leaue vs, fare you well.
Good morrow maſters, each his ſeuerall way.
Come let vs hence, and put on other weedes,
And then to Leonatoes we will goe.
And Hymen now with luckier iſſue ſpeeds,
Then this for whom we rendred vp this woe.
Did I not tell you ſhe was innocent?
So are the Prince and Claudio who accus'd her,
Vpon the errour that you heard debated:
But Margaret was in ſome fault for this,
Although againſt her will as it appeares,
In the true courſe of all the queſtion.
Well, I am glad that all things ſort ſo well.
And ſo am I, being elſe by faith enforc'd
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.
Well daughter, and you gentlewomen all,
Withdraw into a chamber by your ſelues,
And when I ſend for you, come hither mask'd:
The Prince and Claudio promis'd by this howre
To viſit me, you know your office Brother,
You muſt be father to your brothers daughter,
And giue her to young Claudio.
Which I will doe with confirm'd countenance.
Frier, I muſt intreat your paines, I thinke.
To doe what Signior?
To binde me, or vndoe me, one of them:
Signior Leonato, truth it is good Signior,
Your neece regards me with an eye of fauour.
That eye my daughter lent her, 'tis moſt true.
And I doe with an eye of loue require her.
The ſight whereof I thinke you had from me,
From Claudio, and the Prince, but what's your will?
Your anſwer ſir is Enigmaticall,
But for my will, my will is, your good will
May ſtand with ours, this day to be conioyn'd,
In the ſtate of honourable marriage,
In which (good Frier) I ſhall deſire your helpe.
My heart is with your liking.
And my helpe.
Good morrow to this faire aſſembly.
Good morrow Prince, good morrow Claudio:
We heere attend you, are you yet determin'd,
To day to marry with my brothers daughter?
Ile hold my minde were ſhe an Ethiope.
Call her forth brother, heres the Frier ready.
Good morrow Benedike, why what's the matter?
That you haue ſuch a Februarie face,
So full of froſt, of ſtorme, and clowdineſſe.
I thinke he thinkes vpon the ſauage bull:
Tuſh, feare not man, wee'll tip thy hornes with gold,
And all Europa ſhall reioyce at thee,
As once Europa did at luſty Ioue,
When he would play the noble beaſt in loue.
Bull Ioue ſir, had an amiable low,
And ſome ſuch ſtrange bull leapt your fathers Cow,
A got a Calfe in that ſame noble ſeat,
Much like to you, for you haue iuſt his beat.
For this I owe you: here comes other recknings.
Which is the Lady I muſt ſeize vpon?
This ſame is ſhe, and I oe giue you her.
Why thou ſhe's mine, ſweet let me ſee your face.
No that you ſhal not, till you take her hand,
Before this Frier, and ſweare to marry her.
Giue me your hand before this holy Frier,
I am your husband if you like of me.
And when I liu'd I was your other wife,
And when you lou'd, you were my other husband.
Another Hero?
Nothing certaine.
One Hero died, but I doe liue,
And ſurely as I liue, I am a maid.
The former Hero, Hero that is dead.
Shee died my Lord, but whiles her ſlander liu'd.
All this amazement can I qualifie,
When after that the holy rites are ended,
Ile tell you largely of faire Heroes death:
Meane time let wonder ſeeme familiar,
And to the chappell let vs preſently.
Soft and faire Frier, which is Beatrice?
I anſwer to that name, what is your will?
Doe not you loue me?
Why no, no more then reaſon.
Why then your Vncle, and the Prince, & Claudio, haue beene deceiued, they ſwore you did.
Doe not you loue mee?
Troth no, no more then reaſon.
Why then my Coſin Margaret and Ʋrſula
Are much deceiu'd, for they did ſweare you did.
They ſwore you were almoſt ſicke for me.
They ſwore you were wel-nye dead for me.
Tis no matter, then you doe not loue me?
No truly, but in friendly recompence.
Come Coſin, I am ſure you loue the gentlemā.
And Ile be ſworne vpon't, that he loues her,
For heres a paper written in his hand,
A halting ſonnet of his owne pure braine,
Faſhioned to Beatrice.
And heeres another,
Writ in my coſins hand, ſtolne from her pocket,
Containing her affection vnto Benedicke.
A miracle, here's our owne hands againſt our hearts: come I will haue thee, but by this light I take thee for pittie.
I would not denie you, but by this good day, I yeeld vpon great perſwaſion, & partly to ſaue your life, for I was told, you were in a conſumption.
Peace I will ſtop your mouth.
How doſt thou Benedicke the married man?
Ile tell thee what Prince: a Colledge of witte-crackers cannot flout mee out of my humour, doſt thou think I care for a Satyre or an Epigram? no, if a man will be beaten with braines, a ſhall weare nothing handſome about him: in briefe, ſince I do purpoſe to marry, I will thinke nothing to any purpoſe that the world can ſay againſt it, and therefore neuer flout at me, for I haue ſaid againſt it: for man is a giddy thing, and this is my concluſion: for thy part Claudio, I did thinke to haue beaten thee, but in that thou art like to be my kinſman, liue vnbruis'd, and loue my couſin.
I had well hop'd yu wouldſt haue denied Beatrice, yt I might haue cudgel'd thee out of thy ſingle life, to make thee a double dealer, which out of queſtiō thou wilt be, if my Couſin do not looke exceeding narrowly to thee.
Come, come, we are friends, let's haue a dance ere we are married, that we may lighten our own hearts, and our wiues heeles.
Wee'll haue dancing afterward.
Firſt, of my vvord, therfore play muſick. Prince, thou art ſad, get, thee a vvife, get thee a vvife, there is no ſtaff more reuerend then one tipt with horn.
My Lord, your brother Iohn is tane in flight,
And brought with armed men backe to Meſſina.
Thinke not on him till to morrow, ile deuiſe thee braue puniſhments for him: ſtrike vp Pipers.