LIght, I ſalute thee; but with wounded nerues:
Wiſhing thy golden ſplendor, pitchy darkneſſe.
Whats here? Th'arraignment? I: This, this is it,
That our ſunke eyes haue wak't for, all this while:
Here will be ſubiect for my Snakes and me.
Cling to my necke and wriſts my louing Wormes;
And caſt you round, in ſoft, and amorous foulds,
Till I doe bid, vncurle: Then, breake your knots;
Shoote out your ſelues at length, as your forc't ſtings
Would hide them ſelues within his malic't ſides,
To whom I ſhall apply you. Stay: the ſhine
Of this aſſembly here offends my ſight,
Ile darken that firſt, and out-face their grace.
Wonder not if I ſtare: Theſe fifteene weekes
(So long as ſince the Plot was but an Embrion)
Haue I, with burning lights, mixt vigilant thoughts,
In expectation of this hated Play:
To which (at laſt) I am arriu'd as Prologue.
Nor would I, you ſhould looke for other lookes,
Geſture, or complement from me, then what
Th' infected bulke of Enuie can afford:
For I am riſſe here with a couetous Hope,
To blaſt your pleaſures, and deſtroy your ſports,
With wreſtings, Comments, applications,
Spie-like ſuggeſtions, priuy whiſperings,
And thouſand ſuch promooting ſleights as theſe.
Marke, how I will begin: The Scene is, ha?
Rome? Rome? and Rome? Cracke eyſtrings, and your balls
Drop into earth; let me be euer blind.
I am preuented; All my hopes are croſt,
Checkt, and abated; fie, a freezing ſweate
Flowes foorth at all my Pores, my Entrailes burne:
What ſhould I doe? Rome: Rome? O my vext ſoule,
How might I force this to the preſent ſtate?
Are there no Players here? no Poet-Apes,
That come with Baſiliſkes eyes, whoſe forked tongues
Are ſteept in venome, as their harts in gall?
Either of theſe would helpe me; they could wreſt,
Peruert, and poyſon all they heare, or ſee,
With ſenſeleſſe gloſſes, and alluſions.
Now if you be good Diuels, fly me not.
You know what deare, and ample faculties
I haue endowed you with: Ile lend you more.
Here, take my Snakes among you; come, and eate,
And while the ſqueez diuice flowes in your blacke iawes,
Helpe me to damne the Author: Spit it foorth
Vpon his lines, and ſhew your ruſtie teeth
At euery word, or accent: or elſe chooſe
Out of my longeſt vipers, to ſticke downe
In your deepe throates; and let the heads come foorth
At your ranke mouthes; that he may ſee you armd
With triple malice, to hiſſe, ſting, and teare
His worke, and him: to forge, and then declame,
Traduce, corrupt, apply, enforme, ſuggeſt;
O, theſe are gifts wherein your ſoules are bleſt.
What? doe you hide your ſelues? will none appeare?
None anſwere? What, doth this calme troupe affright you?
Nay then I doe deſpaire: Downe, ſinke againe.
This trauaile is all loſt with my dead hopes.
If in ſuch boſomes, Spight haue left to dwell,
Enuie is not on earth, nor ſcarſe in hell,
STAY Monſter: ere thou ſinke, thus on thy heade
Set wee our boulder foote; with which we tread
Thy malice into earth: So Spight ſhould die;
Despis'd and ſcornd by noble induſtry.
If any muſe why I ſalute the Stage,
An armed Prologue; know 't is a dangerous age:
Wherein, who writes, had neede preſent his Scenes
Fortie fold proofe againſt the coniuring meanes
Of baſe Detractors, and illiterate Apes,
That fill vp roomes in faire and formall ſhapes.
'Gainſt theſe, haue we put on this forc't defenſe:
Whereof the Allegory and hid ſenſe
Is, that a well erected Confidence
Can fright their pride, and laugh their follie hence.
Here now, put caſe our Author ſhould once more
Sweare that his Play were good; he doth implore,
You would not argue him of Arrogance;
How ere that common Spawne of Ignorance,
Our Fry of Writers, may beſlime his fame,
And giue his action that adulterate name.
Such full blowne vanity he more doth loath
Then baſe deiection; There's a meane twixt both:
Which with a constant firmeneſſe he purſues,
As one that knowes the ſtrength of his owne Muſe.
And this he hopes all free ſoules will allowe:
Others that take it with a rugged browe,
Their moodes he rather pities, then enuies:
His minde it is aboue their iniuries.
THEN, when this bodie fals in funerall fire, My name ſhall liue, and my beſt part aspire. It ſhall goe ſo.
Young maſter, Maſter Ouid, do you heare? Gods a me! away with your ſongs and ſonets; and on with your gowne and Cappe, quickly: here, here, your Father will bee a man of this roome preſently. Come, nay, nay, nay, nay, be briefe. Theſe verſes too, a poyſon on 'hem, I cannot abide 'hem, they make me readie to caſt, by the bankes of Helicon. Nay looke, what a raſcally vntoward thing this Poetry is; I could teare 'hem now.
Giue mee, how neere's my Father?
Hart a'man: get a lawe booke in your hand, I will not anſwere you elſe. Why ſo: now there's ſome formalitie in you; By Ioue, & three or foure of the Gods more, I am right of myne olde maſters humour for that; this villanous Poetry will vndoe you, by the Welkin.
What, haſt thou buſkins on, Luſcus, that thou ſwear'ſt ſo tragically and high?
No: but I haue bootes on ſir, and ſo ha's your father too by this time: for he call'd for 'hem, ere I came from the lodging.
Why? was he no readier?
O no; and there was the mad skeldring Captaine, with the veluet armes, readie to lay holde on him as he comes down: hee that preſſes euery man hee meetes, with an oath, to lend him money, and cries; Thou muſt doo't old boy, as thou art a man, a man of worſhippe.
Who? Pantilius Tucca?
I, hee: and I met little maſter Lupus the Tribune, going thither too.
Nay, and he be vnder their arreſt, I may (with ſafetie enough) reade ouer my Elegy, before he come.
Gods a mee! What'll you doe? why, yong maſter, you are not Caſtalian mad, lunatike, frantike, deſperate? ha?
VVhat aileſt thou, Luſcus?
God be with you ſir, Ile leaue you to your Poeticall fancies and furies. Ile not be guilty, I.
Be not, good ignorance: I'm glad th'art gone: For thus alone, our Eare ſhall better iudge The haſtie errors of our morning Muſe.
ENVIE, why twitſt thou me, my Time's spent ill?
And call'ſt my verſe, fruites of an idle quill?
Or that (vnlike the line from whence I sprong)
Wars duſtie honors I purſue not young?
Or that I ſtudie not the taedious lawes;
And proſtitute my voice in euery cauſe?
Thy ſcope is mortall; mine eternall Fame,
Which through the world ſhall euer chaunt my name.
Homer will liue, whil'ſt Tenedos ſtands, and Ide,
Or to the ſea, fleete Simoïs doth ſlide:
And ſo ſhall Heſiod too, while vines doe beare,
Or crooked ſickles crop the ripened eare.
Callimachus, though in Inuention lowe,
Shall ſtill be ſung, ſince he in Arte doth flowe.
No loſſe ſhall come to Sophocles proud vaine,
With Sunne and Moone Aratus ſhall remaine.
Whil'st Slaues be falſe, Fathers hard, & Bauds be whoriſh,
VVhilst Harlots flatter, ſhall Menander floriſh.
Ennius, though rude, and Accius high-reard ſtraine,
A freſh applauſe in euery age ſhall gaine.
Of Varro's name, what eare ſhall not be tolde?
Of Iaſons Argo? and the Fleece of golde?
Then, ſhall Lucretius lofty numbers die,
VVhen Earth, and Seas in fire and flames ſhall frye.
Titirus, Tillage, Aeney ſhall be read,
Whil'ſt Rome of all the conquer'd world is head.
Till Cupids fires be out, and his bowe broken,
Thy verſes (neate Tibullus) ſhall be spoken.
Our Gallus ſhall be knowne from Eaſt to Weſt:
So ſhall Lycoris, whome he now loues beſt.
The ſuffring Plough-ſhare or the Flint may weares
But heauenly Poëſie no death can feare.
Kings ſhall giue place to it, and kingly ſhowes,
The bankes ore which gold-bearing Tagus flowes.
Kneele hindes to traſh: me let bright Phoebus ſwell,
With cups full flowing from the Muſes Well.
The froſt-drad Myrtle ſhall impale my heade,
And of ſad louers Ile be often read.
"Enuie, the liuing, not the deade, doth bite.
"For after death all men receiue their right.
Then when this bodie fals in funera'l fire,
My name ſhall liue, and my beſt part aſpire.
YOVR name ſhall liue indeede ſir; your ſay true: but how infamouſly, how ſcorn'd and contemn'd in the eyes and eares of the beſt and graueſt Romanes, that you think not on: you neuer ſo much as dreame of that. Are theſe the fruits of all my Trauaile & Expenſes? is this the Scope and Aime of thy ſtudies? are theſe the hopeful courſes, wherwith I haue ſo long flattered my expectation from thee? Verſes? Poetry? Ouid, whome I thought to ſee the Pleader, become Ouid the Play-maker?
No Sir.
Yes Sir. I heare of a Tragedie of yours comming foorth for the cōmon Players there, call'd Medea. By my houſholde gods, if I come to the acting of it, Ile adde one tragicke parte, more then is yet expected, to it: beleeue me when I promiſe it. What? ſhal I haue my ſon a Stager now? an Enghle for Players? a Gull? a Rooke? a Shot-clog? to make ſuppers, and bee laught at? Publius, I wil ſet thee on the funeral pile firſt.
Sir, I beſeech you to haue patience.
Nay, this tis to haue your eares damm'd vp to good coū ſell. I did augure all this to him afore hand, without poring into an oxes paunch for the matter, and yet he would not be ſcrupulous.
How now, good man ſlaue? what, Rowle Powle? all riuals, Raſcal? why my Knight of worſhippe, do'ſt heare? Are theſe thy beſt proiectes? is this thy deſſeignes and thy diſcipline, to ſuffer knaues to be competitors with Commaunders and Gentmen? are we paralels, raſcall? are we paralels?
Sirrah, goe get my horſes readie. You'll ſtill be prating.
Doe, you perpetuall Stinkard, doe: goe, talke to Tapſters and Oſtlers you ſlaue: they are i'your element, go: here be the Emperours captaines, you Raggamuſſin Raſcal; and not your Comrades.
Indeede, Sir Marcus Ouid, theſe Players are an idle Generation, & doe much harme in a State, corrupt young gentrie very much, I knowe it: I haue not been a Tribune thus long and obſeru'd nothing: beſides, they will robbe vs, vs, that are Magiſtrates, of our reſpect, bring vs vpon their Stages, & make vs ridiculous to the Plebeians; they will play you, or me, the wiſeſt men they can come by ſtill; me: onely to bring vs in contempt with the vulgar, and make vs cheape.
Th'art in the right, my venerable Cropſhin, they wil indeede: the tongue of the Oracle neuer twangd truer. Your Courtier cannot kiſſe his miſtreſſe Slippers, in quiet, for 'hem, nor your white innocent Gallant pawne his reuelling ſuit, to make his Punque a ſupper. An honeſt decayed Commaunder, cannot skelder, cheat, nor be ſeene in a baudie houſe, but he ſhal be ſtraight in one of their wormewod Comedies. They are growne licentious, the Rogues; Libertines, flat Libertines. They forget they are i'the Statute, the Raſcals, they are blazond there, there they are trickt, they and their Pedigrees: they neede no other Heralds Iwiſſe.
Me thinkes if nothing elſe, yet this alone; the verie reading of the publike Edictes ſhould fright thee from Commerce with them; and giue thee diſtaſte enough of their actions. But this betrayes what a Student you are: this argues your proficiencie in the Law.
They wrong me ſir, and doe abuſe you more,
That blowe your eares with theſe vntrue reports.
I am not knowne vnto the open Stage,
Nor doe I trafique in their Theaters.
Indeede, I doe acknowledge, at requeſt
Of ſome neare friends, and honorable Romaines,
I haue begunne a Poeme of that nature.
You haue ſir, a Poeme? and where is't? that's the Law you ſtudie.
Cornelius Gallus borrowed it to reade.
Cornelius Gallus? Ther's another gallant, too, hath drunke of the ſame poyſon: and Tibullus and Propertius. But theſe are Gentlemen of meanes, and Reuenewes now. Thou art a yonger brother, and haſt nothing, but thy bare exhibition: which I proteſt ſhall be bare indeede, if thou forſake not theſe vnprofitable by-courſes, and that timely too. Name me a profeſt Poet, that his Poetry did euer afford him ſo much as a competencie. I, your God of Poets there (whom all of you admire and reuerence ſo much) Homer, he whoſe worm-eaten Statue muſt not be ſpewd againſt, but with hallowed lips and groueling adoration, what was he? what was he?
Marry he tell thee old Swaggrer; He was a poore blind riming Raſcal, that liu'd obſcurely vp and down in Boothes & Tap-houſes, and ſcarce euer made a good meale in his ſleepe, the whorſon hungry begger.
He ſayes well. Nay I knowe this nettles you now: but anſwere mee; Is't not true? Is't not true? You'll tell mee his name ſhal liue, & that now (being deade) his workes haue eterniſed him, and made him diuine: but coulde this diuinitie feede him while he liued, could his name feaſt him?
Thou ſpeak'ſt ſentences, olde Bias.
Well, the day growes olde, gentlemen, and I muſt leaue you. Publius, if thou wilt hould my fauour, abādon theſe idle fruitleſſe ſtudies that ſo traduce thee. Send Ianus home his backe face againe, and looke onely forward to the Law: Intend that. I will alowe thee, what ſhal ſuit thee in the ranke of Gentlemen, and maintaine thy ſocietie with the beſt: & vnder theſe conditions, I leaue thee. My bleſſings light vpon thee, if thou reſpect them: if not, mine eyes may droppe for thee, but thine owne heart will ake for it ſelfe; and ſo farewell. What, are my horſes come?
Yes Sir, they are at the gate without.
That's well. Aſinius Lupus, a word. Captaine, I ſhall take my leaue of you?
No, my little knight Errant, diſpatch with Caualier Cothurnus there; I'le attend thee, I.
To borrowe ſome ten Drachmes, I knowe his Proiecte.
Sir you ſhall make mee beholding to you. Now Captaine Tucca, what ſay you?
Why, what ſhould I ſay? or what can I ſay, my moſt Magnanimous Mirror of Knighthood? Shold I ſay thou art rich? or that thou art honorable? or wiſe? or valiant? or learned? or liberall? Why, thou art all theſe, and thou-knoweſt it (my noble Lucullus) thou knoweſt it: come, be not aſhamed of thy vertues, olde Stumpe. Honour's a good brooch to weare in a mans hat, at all times. Thou art the man of warres Mecaenas, knight. Why ſhouldſt not thou bee grac't then by them, as well as he is by his Poets? How now my Carier, what newes?
The boy has ſtayed within for his cue, this halfe howre.
Come, doe not whiſper to me, but ſpeake it out. what, it is no treaſon againſt the State, I hope, is't?
Yes, againſt the ſtate of my maſters purſe.
Sir, Agrippa deſires you to forbeare him till the next weeke: his Moyles are not yet come vp.
His Moyles? now the Bots, the Spauin, and the Glanders, and ſome doſen diſeaſes more, light on him, & his Moyles. VVhat ha' they the Yellowes, his Moyles, that they come no faſter? or are they fowndred? ha? his Moyles ha' the Staggers belike: ha' they?
O no Sir: then your tongue might be ſuſpected for one of his Moyles.
He owes me almoſt a Talent, and he thinks to beare it away with his Moyles, does hee? Sirrah, you, Nut-cracker: goe your waies to him againe, and tell him I muſt ha' money, I: I cannot eate ſtones and Turues, ſay. What, wil he clem me and my followers? Aſke him and he will clem mee: doe, goe. Hee would haue me fry my Ierkin, would he? Away Setter, away. Yet ſtay, my little tumbler: the Knight ſhall ſupply now: I will not trouble him, I cannot be importunate, I: I cannot bee impudent.
Alas ſir no: you are the moſt maidenly bluſhing creature vpon the earth.
Do'ſt thou heare, my little Six and fiftie, or thereabouts? Thou art not to learne the humours and trickes of that old bald Cheater, Time: thou hadſt not this chaine for nothing. Men of worth haue their Chymara's, as wel as other creatures: and they doe ſee monſters, ſometimes: they doe, they doe.
Better cheape then hee ſhall ſee you, I warrant him.
Thou muſt let mee haue ſix, ſix, Drachmes, I mean, Old boy; thou ſhalt do it: I tel thee, Old boy, thou ſhalt, and in priuate too, doſt thou ſee? Goe, walke off: there, there. Six is the ſum. Thy ſonn's a gallant Sparke, and muſt not be put out of a ſuddaine: come hither, Callimachus. Thy Father tels me thou art too Poeticall, Slaue: thou muſt not be ſo: thou muſt leaue them, yoong Nouice; thou muſt: They are a ſort of poore ſtarued Raſcalles; that are euer wrapt vp in foule linnen: and can boaſt of nothing but a leane viſage, peering out of a ſeam-rent ſuite; the very Emblemes of Beggery. No: doſt heare? turne Lawyer, Thou ſhalt be my Solicitor: Tis right olde boy, Iſt?
You were beſt tell it Captaine.
No: fare thou well mine honeſt Knight, and thou olde Beauer, Pray thee Knight, when thou commeſt to towne, ſee me at my lodging, viſite me ſome times: Thou ſhalt be welcome olde boy: doe not balke me good Swaggrer; Ioue keepe thy chaine from pawning: goe thy waies: if thou lacke money Ile lend thee ſome: I'le leaue thee to thy horſe, now; Adue.
Farwell good Captaine.
Boy, you can haue but halfe a ſhare now, boy.
Tis a ſtrange boldnes, that accompanies this fellow: Come.
Ile giue attendance on you, to your horſe, Sir; Pleaſe you.—
No: keepe your chamber, and fall to your ſtudies; doe ſo: the Gods of Rome bleſſe thee.
And giue me ſtomacke to digeſt this law;
That ſhould haue followed ſure, had I beene hee.
O ſacred Poëſy, thou ſpirit of Arts,
The ſoule of Science, and the Queene of Soules,
What prophane violence, almoſt ſacriledge,
Hath here beene offered thy Diuinities!
Hmh! that thine owne guiltleſſe Pouerty ſhould arme
Prodigious Ignorance to wound thee thus!
For thence, is all their force of Argument
Drawne foorth againſt thee; or from the abuſe
Of thy great powers in Adultrate braines;
When, would men learne but to diſtinguiſh ſpirits,
And ſet true difference twixt thoſe iaded wits,
That runne a broken paſe for common hire,
And the high Raptures of a happy ſoule,
Borne on the winges of her immortall thought,
That kickes at earth with a diſdainefull heele,
And beates at Heauen gates with her bright hooues;
They would not then with ſuch diſtorted faces,
And dudgeon Cenſures ſtab at Poeſy:
They would admire bright knowledge, and their minds
Should nere deſcend on ſo vnworthy obiects,
As Gould or Titles: they would dread farre more,
To be thought ignorant, then be knowne poore.
"The time was once, when wit drownd wealth: but now,
"Your onely Barbariſm's, to haue wit, and want.
"No matter now in vertue who excells,
"He, that hath coyne, hath all perfection elſe.
Ouid?
Whoſe there? Come in.
Good morrow Lawyer.
Good morrow (deare Tibullus) welcome: ſit downe.
Not I. what: ſo hard at it? Lets ſee,
Whats here? Numa in Decimo nono?
Pray thee away.
If thrice in field, a man vanquiſh his foe,
Tis after in his choice to ſerue, or no.
How now Ouid! Law caſes in verſe?
In troth, I know not: they runne from my Penne Vnwittingly, if they be verſe. What's the newes abroad?
Off with this gowne, I come to haue thee walke.
No, good Tibullus; I'm not now in caſe.
Pray thee let me alone.
How? not in caſe!
S'light thou'rt in too much caſe, by all this Law.
Troth, if I liue, I will new dreſſe the Law,
In ſprightly Poeſyes Acoutrements.
The hell thou wilt. what, turne Law into verſe?
Thy father has ſchoold thee I ſee. Here, read that ſame.
Ther's ſubiect for you: and if I miſtake not,
A Superſedeas to your Melancholy.
How! ſubſcrib'd Iulia! O my life, my Heauen!
Is the Mood chang'd?
Muſique of wit! Note for th'harmonious Spheares!
Celeſtiall Accents, how you rauiſh me!
What is it, Ouid?
That I muſt meete my Iulia, the Princeſſe Iulia.
Where?
Why at Hart, I haue forgot: my paſſion ſo tranſports me.
Ile ſaue your paines: it is at Albius houſe,
The Iewellers, where the faire Eycoris lies.
Who? Cytheris, Cornelius Gallus Loue?
I, heele be there too, and my Plautia.
And why not your Delia?
Yes, and your Corinna.
True; but my ſweete Tibullus, keepe that ſecret:
I would not, for all Rome, it ſhould be thought
I vaile bright Iulia vnderneath that name:
Iulia, the Gem, and Iewell of my ſoule,
That takes her honours from the goulden Sky,
As beauty doth all Luſtre, from her Eye.
The Ayre reſpires the pure Elyzium ſweetes,
In which ſhe breathes: and from her lookes deſcend,
The glories of the Summer. Heauen ſhe is,
Praiſ'd in her ſelfe aboue all praiſe: and he,
Which heares her ſpeake, would ſweare the Tune-full Orbes
Turnd in his Zenith onely.
Publius, thou'lt looſe thy ſelfe.
O, in no Labyrinth, can I ſafelier erre,
Then when I looſe my ſelfe in prayſing her.
Hence Law, and welcome, Muſes; though not rich,
Yet are you pleaſing: let's be reconcilde,
And new made one. Hence foorth, I promiſe faith,
And all my ſerious howres to ſpend with you:
With you, whoſe Muſicke ſtriketh on my hart,
And with bewitching Tones ſteals foorth my ſpirit,
In Iulias name; Faire Iulia, Iulias Loue
Shall be a Law, and that ſweete Law I'le ſtudy,
The Law, and Arte of ſacred Iulias Loue:
All other obiects will but Abiects proue.
Come, we ſhall haue thee as paſſionate, as Propertius, anon.
O, how does my Sextus?
Faith, full of ſorrow, for his Cynthias death.
What, ſtill?
Still, and ſtill more, his grieues doe grow vpon him,
As doe his howres. Neuer did I know
An vnderſtanding ſpirit ſo take to hart
The common worke of Fate.
O my Tibullus,
Let vs not blame him: for againſt ſuch chaunces,
The hartieſt ſtrife of vertue is not proofe.
We may read Conſtancy and Fortitude,
To other ſoules: but had our ſelues beene ſtrooke
With the like Planet; had our Loues (like his)
Beene rauiſht from vs, by iniurious death,
And in the height, and heat of our beſt daies,
It would haue crackt our ſinnewes, ſhrunke our vaines,
And made our very hart ſtrings iarre, like his.
Come, let's goe take him foorth, and prooue, if Mirth,
Or Company will but abate his paſſion.
Content, and I implore the Gods it may.
MAſter Criſpinus, you are welcome; Pray', vſe a ſtoole Sir. Your Coſen Cytheris, will come downe preſently. We are ſo buſie for the receceauing of theſe Courtiers here, that I can ſcarce be a minute with my ſelfe, for thinking of them; Pray you ſit Sir, Pray you ſit Sir.
I am very well Sir. Nere truſt me, but you are moſt delicatly ſeated here, full of ſweete delight and blandiſhment; An excellent ayre, An excellent Ayre.
I Sir, tis a pretty ayre: Theſe Courtiers runne in my minde ſtill; I muſt looke out: for Iupiters ſake ſit Sir, or pleaſe you walke into the Garden. Ther's a Garden on the backſide.
I am moſt ſtrenuouſly well, I thanke you Sir.
Much good doe you Sir.
Come, bring thoſe Perfumes forward a little; and ſtrew ſome Roſes, and Violets here; Fie, here be roomes ſauor the moſt pittifully ranke that euer I felt: I cry the Gods mercy, my Husband's in the winde of vs.
Why this is good, Excellent, Excellent: well ſaid my ſweete Chloë. Trim vp your houſe moſt obſequiouſly.
For Vulcanes ſake, breath ſome where elſe; in troth you ouercome our Perfumes exceedingly, you are to predominant.
Heare but my Opinion, ſweete Wife.
A pinne for your Pinnion. In ſinceritie, if you be thus fulſome to me in euery thing, I'le be diuorc't; Gods my body! you know what you were, before I married you; I was a Gentlewoman borne, I: I loſt all my friends to be a Citizens wife; becauſe I heard indeed, they kept their wiues as fine as Ladies; and that we might rule our husbands, like Ladies; and doe what we liſted: doe you thinke I would haue married you elſe?
I acknowledge, ſweete wife: ſhe ſpeakes the beſt of any woman in Italy, and moues as mightily: which makes me, I had rather ſhe ſhould make Bumpes on my head, as big as my two fingers, then I would offend her: But ſweete wife—
Yet againe? I'ſt not grace inough for you, that I call you Husband, and you call me wife: but you muſt ſtill be poking me, againſt my will to things?
But you know wife; here are the greateſt Ladies, and Gallantſt Gentlemen of Rome, to be enterteyn'd in our houſe now: and I would faine aduiſe thee, to entertaine them in the beſt ſort, yfaith wife.
In ſinceritie, did you euer heare a man talke ſo Idly? You would ſeeme to be Maſter? You would haue your ſpoke in my cart? you would aduiſe me to Entertaine Ladies, and Gentlemen? bicauſe you canne marſhall your Packneedles, Horſecombes, Hobby-horſes, and Wall-Candleſticks in your ware houſe better then I; therefore you can tell how to Entertaine Ladies, and Gentlefolkes better then I?
O my ſweete wife, vpbraid me not with that: "Gaine ſauours ſweetely from any thing; He that reſpects to get, muſt reliſh all commodities alike; and admit no difference betwixt Oade, and Frankincenſe; or the moſt pretious Balſamum, and a Tarre-barrell.
Mary fough: You ſell ſnuffers to, if you be remembred, but I pray you let me buy them out of your hand; for I tell you true, I take it highly in ſnuffe, to learne how to Entertaine Gentlefolkes, of you, at theſe yeeres, I faith: Alas man; there was not a Gentleman came to your houſe i' your tother Wiues time, I hope? nor a Lady? nor Muſique? nor Maſques, Nor you, nor your houſe were ſo much as ſpoken of, before I disbaſt my ſelfe, from my Hood and my Fartingall, to theſe Bumrowles, and your Whale-bone Bodies.
Looke here, my ſweete Wife; I am Mum, my deare Mumma, my Balſamum, my Sperma Cete, & my verry Citty of— ſhe has the moſt beſt, true, faeminine wit in Rome.
I haue heard ſo Sir; and doe moſt vehemently deſire to participate the knowledge of her faire Features.
Ah, peace; you ſhall heare more anon; be not ſeene yet; I pray you; not yet; obſerue.
S'body, giue Husbands the head a little more, and they'll be nothing but Head ſhortly; whats he there?
1. I know not forſooth:
2. Who would you ſpeake with Sir?
I would ſpeake with my Coſen Cytheris.
Hee is one forſooth would ſpeake with his Coſen Cytheris.
Is ſhe your Coſen Sir?
Yes in truth for ſooth, for fault of a better.
She is a Gentlewoman?
Or elſe, ſhe ſhould not be my Coſen, I aſſure you;
Are you a Gentleman borne?
That I am Lady; you ſhall ſee mine Armes, if't pleaſe you.
No, your legges doe ſufficiently ſhew you are a Gentleman borne Sir: for a man borne vpon little legges, is alwaies a Gentleman borne.
Yet, I pray you, vouchſafe the ſight of my armes, Miſtreſſe; for I beare them about me, to haue h'em ſeene: my name is Criſpinus, or Cri-ſpinas indeede; which is well expreſt in my armes, a Face crying in chiefe; and beneath it a bloody Toe, betweene three Thornes Pungent.
Then you are welcome Sir; now you are a Gentleman borne, I can finde in my hart to welcome you: for I am a Gentlewoman borne too; and will beare my head high enough, though twere my fortune to marry a Flat-cappe.
Deare wife be not angry.
God's my paſſion!
Heare me but one thing; let not your maides ſet Cuſhions in the Parlor windowes; nor in the dining Chamber windowes; nor vpon ſtooles, in either of them in any caſe; for tis Tauerne like; but lay them one vpon an other, in ſome out Roome, or corner of the dining Chamber.
Goe, goe, meddle with your Bed-chamber onely, or rather with your Bed in your Chamber, onely; or rather with your Wife in your Bed onely; or on my faith, Ile not be pleaſ'd with you onely.
Looke here, my deare Wife, entertaine that Gentleman kindly, I pre' thee;—Mum.
Goe, I need your inſtructions indeede; Anger me no more, I aduiſe you. Citi-ſin quotha'! ſhees a Wiſe Gentlewoman yfaith, will marry her ſelfe to the Synne of the Citty.
But this time, and no more (by heauen) Wife: hang no pictures in the Hall, nor in the dining Chamber, in any caſe, but in the Gallery onely, for tis not Courtly elſe, on my word, Wife.
'Spretious, neuer haue don!
Wife.
Doe I not be are a reaſonable corrigible hand ouer him, Criſpinus?
By this hand Lady, you hold a moſt ſweete hand ouer him.
And then for the great gilt Andyrons?
Againe! would the Andyrons were in your great guts, for me.
I doe vaniſh, Wife.
How ſhall I doe, Maſter Criſpinus? here will be all the braueſt Ladies in Court preſently, to ſee your Coſen Cytheris: O the Gods! how might I behaue my ſelfe now, as to entertaine them moſt Courtly?
Marry Lady, if you will entertaine them moſt Courtly, you muſt doe thus: as ſoone as euer, your maide, or your man brings you word they are come, you muſt ſay, A pox on hem; what do they here? And yet when they come, ſpeak them as faire, & giue them the kindeſt welcome in wordes, that can be.
Is that the faſhion of Courtiers, Crispinus?
I aſſure you, it is Ladie, I haue obſeru'd it.
For your Pox Sir, it is eaſily hit vpon; but, 'tis not ſo eaſie to ſpeake faire after, me thinks?
O VVife, the Coaches are come, on my word, a number of Coaches and Courtiers.
A pox on them: what doe they here?
How now wife! wouldſt thou not haue them come?
Come? come, you are a foole, you: He knowes not the tricke on't. Cal Cytheris I pray you: and good maſter Crispinus, you can obſerue, you ſay; let me intreate you for all the Ladies behauiors, Iewels, Ieſtes, and Attyres, that you marking as well as I, we may put both our markes togither, when they are gone, and confer of them.
I warrant you Sweet Ladie; let me alone to obſerue, till I turne my ſelfe to nothing but obſeruation. God morrow coſen Cytheris.
Welcome kinde coſen. What, are they come?
I, your friend Cornelius Gallus, Ouid, Tibullus, Propertius, with Iulia the Emperors daughter, and the Ladie Plautia are lighted at the dore; and with them Hermogenes Tigellius, the excellent Muſitian.
Come, let vs goe meete them Chloë.
Obſerue Chrispinus.
At a haires breadth Ladie, I warrant you.
Health to the louely Chloë: you muſt pardon me Miſtris, that I preferre this faire Gentlewoman.
I pardon, and praiſe you for it, Sir; and I beſeech your Excellence, receiue her beauties into your Knowledge and Fauour.
Cytheris, ſhe hath Fauour, & behauiour, that commands as much of mee; and ſweete Chloë, know I doe exceedingly loue you, & that I wil approue in any grace my father the Emperour may ſhewe you. Is this your huſband?
For fault. of a better, if it pleaſe your Highneſſe.
Gods my life! how he ſhames mee!
Not a whit Chloë, they all thinke you politicke, and wittie; wiſe women chuſe not huſbands for the Eye, Merit, or Byrth; but wealth, and Soueraignty.
Sir, we all come to gratulate, for the good report of you.
And would be glad to deſerue your loue, Sir.
My wife will anſwere you all, gentlemen; Ile come to you againe preſently.
You haue choſen you a moſt faire companion here, Cytheris; and a very faire houſe.
To both which, you and all my friends, are very welcome Plautia.
With all my heart, I aſſure your Ladiſhippe.
Thanks, ſweete Miſtreſſe Chloë.
You muſt needes come to Court Ladie yfaith, and there be ſure your welcome ſhall be as great to vs.
She will well deſerue it Madam. I ſee, euen in her lookes, Gentry, and generall worthineſſe.
I haue not ſeene a more certaine Character of an exlent diſpoſition.
VVife.
O, they doe ſo commend me here, the Courtiers! what's the matter now?
For the banquet, ſweete wife.
Yes; and I muſt needs come to Court; and be welcome, the Princeſſe ſaies.
Ouid and Tibullus, you may be bolde to welcome your Miſtreſſes here.
VVe finde it ſo Sir.
And thanke Cornelius Gall.
Nay, my ſweete Sextus, infaith thou art not ſociable,
Infaith I am not Publius; nor I cannot.
Sick mindes are like ſick men that burne with Feauers,
VVho when they drinke, pleaſe but a lingring taſte,
And after beare a more impatient fit.
Pray, let me leaue you; I offend you all,
And my ſelfe moſt.
Stay ſweete Propertius.
You yeeld to much vnto your grieues, and Fate,
VVhich neuer hurtes, but when we ſay it hurts vs.
O peace Tibullus; your Philoſophie
Lends you to rough a hand to ſearch my wounds.
Speake they of griefes, that know to ſigh and grieue;
The free and vnconſtrained Spirit feeles
No weight of my oppreſſion.
VVorthie Romane!
Me thinks I taſte his miſery; and could
Sit downe, and chide at his malignant Starres:
Me thinkes I loue him, that he loues ſo truely.
This is the perfect'ſt loue, liues after death.
Such is the conſtant ground of vertue ſtill.
It puts on an inſeperable face.
Haue you markt euery thinge, Criſpinus?
Euery thing, I, warrant you
VVhat Gentlemen are theſe? doe you know them?
I, they are Poets, Ladie.
Poets? they did not talke of me ſince I went, did they?
O yes, and extold your perfections to the heauens.
Now in ſincerity, they be the fineſt kind of men, that euer I knew; Poets? Could not one get the Emper to make my huſband a Poet, thinke you?
No Ladie, tis Loue, and Beauty make Poets: & ſince you like Poets ſo well, your Loue, and Beauties ſhall make me a Poet.
VVhat ſhall they? and ſuch a one as theſe?
I, and a better than theſe: I would be ſory elſe.
And ſhall your lookes change? and your Haire change? and all, like theſe?
Why, a man may be a Poet, and yet not change his Haire, Ladie.
Well, we ſhall ſee your cunning: yet if you can chāge your Haire, I pray: do.
Ladies, and Lordings, there's a ſlight Banquet ſtaies within for you, pleaſe you drawe nere and accoſt it.
We thanke you good Albius: but when ſhall wee ſee thoſe excellent Iewels you are commended to haue?
At your Ladiſhippes ſeruice. I got that ſpeach by ſeeing a Play laſt day, and it did me ſome grace now: I ſee, 'tis good to collect ſometimes; Ile frequent theſe Playes more then I haue done, now I come to be familiar with Courtiers.
VVhy how now Hermogenes? what aileſt thou trow?
A little melancholy, let mee alone, pray thee.
Melancholy! how ſo?
With ryding: a plague on all Coaches for me.
Is that hard fauourd Gentleman a Poet too; Cytheris?
No; this is Hermogenes; as humorous as a Poet though: he is a Muſitian.
A Muſitian? then he can ſing.
That he can excellently; did you neuer heare him?
O no: will he be intreated, thinke you?
I know not. Friend, Miſtreſſe Chloe would faine heare Hermogenes ſing: are you intereſted in him?
No doubt, his owne Humanitie will commaund him ſo farre, to the ſatisfaction of ſo faire a beauty; but, rather thē faile, weele all be ſuiters to him.
'Cannot ſing.
Pray thee Hermogenes.
'Cannot ſing.
For honour of this Gentlewoman, to whoſe houſe, I know thou maiſt be euer welcome.
That he ſhall in trueth ſir, if he can ſing.
VVhat's that?
This Gentlewoman is woing Hermogeues for a ſong.
A ſong? Come, he ſhall not deny her. Hermogenes?
'Cannot ſing.
No, the Ladies muſt doe it, he ſtayes but to haue their thankes acknowledg'd as a debt to his cunning.
That ſhall not want: our ſelfe will be the firſt ſhall promiſe to pay him more then thankes, vpon a fauour ſo worthily vouchſaf't.
Thanke you Madame; but 'will not ſing.
Tut, the onely way to winne him, is to abſtaine from intreating him.
Doe you loue ſinging, Ladie?
O, paſſingly.
Intreat the Ladies, to intreat me to ſing then, I beſeech you.
I beſeech your Grace intreat this Gentleman to ſing.
That we will Chloë; can he ſing excellently?
I thinke ſo Madam: for he intreated me, to intreat you, to intreat him to ſing.
Heauen and earth! would you tell that?
Good Sir, lets intreat you to vſe your voice.
Alas Madam, I cannot in trueth.
The Gentlemans is modeſt: I warrant you, he ſinges excellently.
Hermogenes cleare your throate: I ſee by him, heer's a Gentleman will worthily chalenge you.
Not I ſir, Ile chalenge no man.
That's your modeſtie ſir: but we, out of an aſſurance of your excellency, chalenge him in your behalfe.
I thanke you Gentlemen, Ile doe my beſt.
Let that beſt be good, ſir, you were beſt.
O, this contention is excellent. VVhat is't you ſing Sir?
If I freely may diſcouer, &c. Sir, I'le ſing that.
One of your owne compoſitions, Hermogenes.
He offers you vantage enough.
Nay truely Gentlemen, Ile chalenge no man— :I can ſing but one ſtaffe of the Dittie neither.
The better: Hermogenes himſelfe will bee intreated to ſing the other.
IF I freely may diſcouer,
VVhat woulde pleaſe mee in my Louer:
I woulde haue her faire, and wittie,
Sauouring more of Court, then Citie;
A little proude, but full of pitie:
Light and Humorous in her toying,
Oft building hopes, and ſoone destroying,
Long, but ſweete in the enioying,
Neither too eaſie, nor to harde:
All extreames I would haue barde.
Beleeue me Sir, you ſing moſt excellently.
If there were a praiſe aboue Excellence, the Gentlemā highly deſerues it.
Sir, all this doth not yet make me enuy you: for I know I ſing better then you.
Attend Hermogenes now.
Shee ſhould be allowed her Paſſions,
So they were but vſ'd as faſhions;
Sometimes froward, and then frowning,
Sometimes ſickiſh, and then ſwowning,
Euery fit, with change, still crowning.
Purely Ielous, I would haue her,
Then onely constant when I craue her.
Tis a vertue ſhould not ſaue her.
Thus, nor her Delicates would cloy mee,
Neither her peeuiſhneſſe annoy mee.
Nay Hermogenes, your merit hath long ſince beene both knowne, and admir'd of vs.
You ſhall heare me ſing another: now will I beginne.
VVee ſhall doe this Gentlemans Banquet too much wrong, that ſtaies for vs, Ladies:
Tis true: and well thought on, Cornelius Gallus.
VVhy 'tis but a ſhort Ayre, 'twill be done preſently, pray ſtay; ſtrike Muſique.
No, good Hermogenes: we'll end this differēce within.
'Tis the common diſeaſe of all your Muſitians, that they knowe no meane, to be intreated, either to begin, or ende.
Pleaſe you leade the way, Gentles?
Thankes good Albius.
O, what a charme of thankes was here put vpon me! O Ioue, what a ſetting forth it is to a man, to haue may Courtiers com to his houſe! Sweetly was it ſaid of a good old Houskeeper; I had rather want meate, then want Gheſts: ſpecially, if they be Courtly Gheſts. For neuer truſt me, if one of their good legges made in a houſe, be not worth all the good cheare, a man can make them. He that would haue fine Gheſtes, let him haue a fine Wife; he that would haue a fine Wife, let him come to mee.
By your kinde leaue, Maſter Albius.
VVhat, you are not gone, Maſter Crispine?
Yes faith, I haue a deſſeigne drawes me hence: pray' Sir, faſhion me an excuſe to the Ladies.
VVill you not ſtay? & ſee the Iewels, ſir? I pray you ſtay.
Not for a Million Sir, now; Let it ſuffice, I muſt relinquiſh; and ſo in a word, pleaſe you to expiate this Complement.
Mum.
Ile preſently goe and Enghle ſome Broker, for a Poets Gowne, and beſpeake a Gyrland: and then Ieweller, looke to your beſt Iewel yfaith.
HMH? yes; I will begin an Ode ſo; & it ſhall bee to Mecoenas.
'Slid yonders Horace: they ſay hee's an Excellent Poet: Mecoenas loues him. Ile fal into his acquaintance, if I can; I thinke hee bee compoſing, as hee goes i'the ſtreete ha? tis a good humor, and hee bee: Ile compoſe too.
Swell mee a bowle with lustie wine,
Till I may ſee the plumpe Lyaeus ſwim
Aboue the brim:
I drinke, as I would wright;
In flowing meaſure, fild with Flame, & spright.
Sweete Horace! Minerua, and the Muſes ſtand auſpicious to thy deſſeignes. How far'ſt thou ſweete man? Frolicke? rich? gallant? ha?
Not greatly gallant, Sir: like my fortunes; well.
I'm bold to take my leaue Sir, you'ld naught elſe Sir, wold you?
Troth no; but I could wiſh thou didſt know vs, Horace; we are a Scholer, I aſſure thee.
A Scholer Sir? I ſhall be couetous of your faire knowledge.
Gramercy good Horace; Nay, we are newe turn'd Poet too, which is more; and a Satyriſt too, which is more then that: I write iuſt in thy vaine, I. I am for your Odes or your Sermons, or any thing indeede; wee are a Gentleman beſides: our name is Rufus Laberius Crispinus; we are a pretty Stoicke too.
To the proportion of your beard, I thinke it ſir.
By Phoebus, here's a moſt neate fine ſtreete; is't not? I proteſt to thee, I am enamord of this ſtreete now, more then of halfe the ſtreetes of Rome, againe; tis ſo polite, and terſe: Ther's the front of a Building now. I ſtudy Architecture too: if euer I ſhould build, I'de haue a houſe iuſt of that Proſpectiue.
Doubtleſſe, this Gallants tongue has a good turne, when he ſleepes.
I doe make verſes, when I come in ſuch a ſtreete as this: O your Citty-Ladies, you ſhall ha'hem ſit in euery ſhop like the Muſes,— offring you the Caſtalian Deawes, and the Theſpian Liquors, to as many as haue but the ſweete grace and Audacitie to— ſip of their lips. Did you neuer heare any of my verſes?
No Sir; but I am in ſome feare, I muſt, now.
Ile tell thee ſome (if I can but recouer 'hem) I compoſ'd e'en now of a veluet cap, I fawa Iewellers wife wear; who indeede was a Iewell her ſelfe: I prefer that kind of Tire now; What's thy opinion Horace?
With your ſiluer Bodkin, it does well, Sir.
I cannot tell, but it ſtirs me more then all your Court Curles, or your Spangles, or your Trickes; I affect not theſe high Gable ends, theſe Tuſcan tops, nor your Coronets, nor your Arches, nor your Pyramid's; giue me a fine ſweete— little veluet Cap, with a Bodkin; as you ſay: and a Muſhrome, for all your other Ornatures.
Iſt not poſſible to make an eſcape from him?
I haue remitted my verſes all this while, I thinke I haforgot 'hem.
Heres hee, could wiſh you had elſe.
Pray Ioue, I can intreat 'hem of my Memory.
You put your Memory to too much trouble, Sir.
No, ſweete Horace, we muſt not ha' thee thinke ſo.
I cry you mercy; then, they are my Eares
That muſt be tortur'd; well, you muſt haue patience, Eares.
Pray thee Horace, obſerue.
Yes Sir: your Sattin ſleeue begins to fret at the Rug that is vnderneath it, I doe obſerue; And your ample Veluet hoſe are not without euident ſtaines of a hot diſpoſition Naturally.
O,— Ile dye them into another Colour, at pleaſure: how many yards of Veluet doſt thou thinke they conteyne?
'Hart! I haue put him now in a freſh way
To vex me more: Faith Sir, your Mercers booke
Will tell you with more patience, then I can;
For I am croſt, and ſo's not that, I thinke.
'Slight; theſe Verſes haue loſt me againe: I ſhall not inuite 'hem to minde now.
Racke not your thoughts, good Sir; rather, defer it
To a new Time; Ile meete you at your lodging,
Or where you pleaſe: Till then, Ioue keepe you Sir.
Nay gentle, Horace, ſtay: I haue it, now.
Yes Sir. Apollo, Hermes, Iupiter, looke downe vpon me.
Rich was thy hap, Sweete Veluet Cap.
There to be placed;
Where thy ſmooth blacke, ſleeke white may ſmacke,
And both be graced.
White, is there vſurpt for her brow; her forehead: and then ſleeke, as the Paralell to ſmooth that went before. A kind of Paranomaſy, or Agnomination: doe you conceaue Sir?
Excellent. Troth Sir, I muſt be abrupt, & leaue you.
Why, what haſte haſt thou? pray thee ſtay a little: thou ſhalt not goe yet, by Phoebus.
I ſhall not? what remedy? Fie, how I ſweate with ſuffering.
And then—
Pray Sir, giue me leaue to wipe my face a little.
Yes, doe, good Horace:
Thanke you Sir.
'Death! muſt craue his leaue to piſſe anon;
Or that I may goe hence with halfe my teeth,
I am in ſome ſuch feare: This Tyranny
Is ſtrange; to take mine Eares vp by Commiſſion,
(Whether I will or no) and make them ſtalls
To his lewd Soloeciſmes, and woorded traſh.
Happy the bold Bolanus, now, I ſay;
Romes Common Buffon: His free Impudence
Would, long ere this, haue cald this fellow; Foole;
And ranke, and tedious Foole, and haue ſlung ieſts
As hard as ſtones, till he had pelted him
Out of the place: whil'ſt my tame Modeſty
Suffers my Wit be made a ſolemne Aſſe
To beare his Fopperies.—
Horace, thou art miſerably affected to be gone, I ſee But— Pray thee, lets proue, to enioy thee awhile: Thou haſt no buſineſſe, I aſſure me: Whether is thy iourney directed? ha?
Sir, I am going to viſit a Friend, that's ſicke.
A Friend? Whats he? doe not I know him?
No Sir, you doe not know him; and 'tis not the worſe for him.
What's his Name? wher's he lodg'd?
Where, I ſhall be fearefull to drawe you out of your way, Sir; a great way hence; Pray ſir, let's part.
Nay, but where iſt? I pray thee ſay.
On the farre ſide of all Tyber yonder, by Caeſars Gardens.
O, that's my courſe directly; I am for you. Come, goe: why ſtandſt thou?
Yes Sir: marry the Plague is in that part of the Citty; I had almoſt forgot to tell you, Sir.
Fow: It's no matter, I feare no Peſtilence, I ha' not offended Phoebus.
I haue, it ſeemes; or elſe this heauy ſcourge
Could nere haue lighted on me.—
Come, along.
I am to goe downe ſome halfe mile, this way, Sir, firſt; to ſpeake with his Phiſitian: And from thence to his Apothecary, where I ſhall ſtay the mixing of diuers drugges—
Why, its all one. I haue nothing to doe, and I looue not to be idle; Ile beare thee company. How call'ſt thou the Pothecary?
O, that I knew a Name would fright him now.
Rhadamanthus Sir:
Ther's one ſo cald, is a iuſt Iudge in hell;
And doth inflict ſtrange vengeance on all thoſe,
That (here on earth) torment poore patient ſpirits.
He dwells at the Three Furies, by Ianus Temple?
Your Apothecary does, Sir.
Hart, I owe him Money for ſweete meats, and he has laid to arreſt me, I heare: but—
Sir, I haue made a moſt ſolemne vow: I will neuer Bayle any man.
Well then, Ile ſweare, and ſpeake him faire, if the worſt come. But his Name is Minos, not Rhadamanthus, Horace.
That may be Sir: I but gueſt at his name by his Signe. But your Minos is a Iudge to, Sir?
I proteſt to thee Horace (doe but taſt me once,) if I doe know my ſelfe, and mine owne vertues truely, thou wilt not make that eſteeme of Varius, or Virgill, or Tibullus, or any of 'hem in deed, as now in thy Ignorance thou doſt; which I am content to forgiue: I would faine ſee which of theſe could pen more Verſes in a day, or with more facility then I; or that could court his Miſtres, kiſſe her hand, make better ſport with her Fanne, or her Dogge?
I can not Bayle you yet, Sir.
Or that could moue his body more gracefully? or Dance better? you ſhoo'd ſee me, were it not i'the ſtreet.
Nor yet.
Why, I haue beene a Reueller, and at my cloth of ſiluer Sute, and my long ſtocking, in my Time, and will be againe—
If you may be truſted, Sir.
And then for my ſinging, Hermogenes him ſelfe Enuies me; that is your onely Maſter of Muſique you haue in Rome.
Is your Mother liuing, Sir?
Au: Conuert thy thoughts to ſomewhat elſe, I pray thee.
You haue much of the Mother in you, Sir: your Father is dead?
I, I thanke Ioue, and my Grand-father to, and all my kinſfolkes, and well compoſ'd in their Graues.
The more their happineſſe; that reſt in peace,
Free from th'aboundant torture of thy tongue;
Would I were with them too.
What's that, Horace?
I now remember me, Sir, of a ſad fate
A Cunning woman, on Sabella ſung,
When in her Vrne, ſhe caſt my deſtiny,
I being but a Child.
What was't, I pray thee?
She tould me, I ſhould ſurely neuer periſh
By Famine, Poyſon, or the Enemies ſword;
The Hecticke Feuer, Cough, or Pleuriſy,
Should neuer hurt me; nor the tardy Goute:
But in my Time, I ſhould be once ſurpriz'd,
By a ſtrong tedious Talker, that ſhould vex
And almoſt bring me to Conſumption.
Therefore (if I were wiſe) ſhe warnd me ſhunne
All ſuch long-winded Monſters, as my bane;
For if I could but ſcape that one Diſcourſer,
I might (no doubt) prooue an ould aged man. By your leaue Sir?
Tut, tut: abandon, this idle humor, 'tis nothing but Melancholy. Fore Ioue, now I thinke out, I am to appeare in Court here, to anſwere to one that has me in ſuite: ſweete Horace goe with me; this is my howre: if I neglect it, the Law proceedes againſt me: Thou art familiar with theſe thinges; pray thee, if thou loueſt me, goe.
Now let me die Sir, if I know your Lawes;
Or haue the power, to ſtand halfe ſo long
In their ( ) Courts, as while a Caſe is Argued.
Beſides, you know Sir where I am to goe, and the Neceſſity.—
Tis true:—
I hope the howre of my releaſe be come: He will (vpon this Conſideration) diſcharge me ſure.
Troth, I am doubtfull, what I may beſt doe; whether to leaue thee, or my affaires, Horace?
O Iupiter, me Sir; me, by any meanes: I beſeech you, me, Sir.
No faith, Ile venture thoſe now; Thou ſhalt ſee I loue thee, come Horace.
Nay then, I am deſperate: I follow you Sir. 'Tis hard contending with a man that ouercomes thus.
And how deales Mecoenas with thee? Liberally? Ha? Is he open handed? bountifull?
Hee's ſtill himſelfe, Sir.
Troth Horace, thou art exceeding happy in thy Friends and Acquaintance; they are all moſt choiſe ſpirits, and of the firſt ranke of Romanes: I doe not know that Poet, I proteſt, ha's vſd his Fortune more proſperouſly then thou haſt. If thou would'ſt bring me knowne to Mecoenas, I ſhould ſecond thy deſert well; Thou ſhouldſt find a good ſure Aſſiſtance of me: One that would ſpeake all good of thee in thy Abſence, and be content with the next Place, not enuying thy Reputation with thy Patron. Let me not liue, but I thinke thou and I (in a ſmall time) ſhould lift them all out of Fauor, both Virgill, Varius, and the beſt of them; and enioy him wholly to our ſelues.
Gods, You doe know it, I can hold no longer;
This Brize hath prickt my Patience: Sir, your Silkeneſſe
Clearely miſtakes Mecoenas; and his houſe;
To thinke, there breaths a Spirit beneath his Roofe,
Subiect vnto thoſe poore affections
Of vnder-mining Enuy, and Detraction,
Moodes, onely proper to baſe groueling minds:
That Place is not in Rome, I dare affirme,
More pure, or free, from ſuch low common Euils.
There's no man greeu'd, that this is thought more Rich,
Or this more Learned; Ech man hath his Place,
And to his merit, his reward of Grace:
Which with a mutuall loue they all embrace.
You report a wonder! tis ſcarce credible, this.
I am no Torturer, to enforce you to beleeue it, but tis ſo.
Why, this enflames me with a more ardent deſire to be his, then before: but, I doubt I ſhall find the entrance to his Familiarity, ſomewhat more then difficult, Horace.
Tut, you'le conquer him, as you haue done me; There's no ſtanding out againſt you Sir, I ſee that. Either your Importunacy, or the Intimation of your good Parts; or—
Nay, I'le bribe his Porter, and the Groomes of his Chamber; make his doores open to me that way firſt: and then, I'le obſerue my times. Say, he ſhould extrude me his houſe to day; ſhall I therefore deſiſt, or let fall my ſuite to morrow? No: I'le attend him, follow him, meete him i'the ſtreete, the high waies, runne by his Coach, neuer leaue him. What? "Man hath nothing giuen him, in this life, without much Labor.
And Impudence.
Archer of Heauen; Phoebus take thy Bowe
And with a full drawne ſhaft, nayle to the earth
This Python; that I may yet runne hence, and liue:
Or Brawny Hercules, doe thou come downe;
And (though thou mak'ſt it vp thy thirteenth labor)
Reſcue me from this Hydra of diſcourſe here.
Horace. Well met.
O welcome my Redeemer.
Ariſtius, as thou loueſt me, Ranſome me.
What aylſt thou, man?
'Death, I am ſeazd on here
By a Land-Remora, I cannot ſtirr;
Not moue, but as he pleaſe.
Wilt thou goe, Horace?
'Hart! He cleaues to me like Alcides ſhirt,
Tearing my Fleſh, and Sinne wes; ô I ha' beene vext
And tortur'd with him, worſe then forty Feauers.
For Ioues ſake, find ſome meanes, to take me from him.
Yes, I will: but I'le goe firſt, and tell Mecoenas.
Come, ſhall we goe?
The ieſt will make his eyes runne, yfaith.
Nay, Ariſtius?
Farewell, Horace.
Death! will a'leaue me? Fuſcus Ariſtius, doe you heare? Gods of Rome, you ſaid you had ſomewhat to ſay to me in priuate.
I, but I ſee, you are now imployd with that Gentleman: 'twere ſinne to trouble you. I'le take ſome fitter opportunity, adue.
Miſchiefe, and torment! O my Soule, and Hart,
How are you Crampt with anguiſh! Death it ſelfe
Brings not the like Conuulſion. O this day,
That euer I ſhould viewe thy tedious face?
Horace, what Paſſion? what Humours this?
Away, good Prodigy, afflictme not.
A Friend, and mocke me thus! neuer was man
So left vnder the Axe— how now.
THat's he, in the imbrodered hat, there, with the Aſh colourd Fether: his name is Liberius Crispinus.
Liberius Crispinus; I arreſt you in the Emperors name.
Me Sir? doe you arreſt mee?
I Sir, at the ſuite of Maſter Minos the Apothecary.
Thankes, greate Apollo: I will not ſlippe thy fauour offered me in my eſcape, for my fortunes.
Maſter Minos? I know no Maſter Minos. Where's Horace? Horace? Horace?
Sir, doe not you knowe mee?
O yes; I knowe you, Maſter Minos: 'cry you mercie. But Horace? Gods 'Slid, is he gone?
I, and ſo would you too, if you knewe how. Officer looke to him.
Doe you heare, Maſter Minos? pray' let's be vſ'd like a man of our owne faſhion. By Ianus and Iupiter, I meant to haue payed you next weeke, euery Drachme. Seeke not to ecclipſe my reputation thus vulgarly.
Sir, your oathes cannot ſerue you; you knowe I haue forborne you long.
I am conſcious of it, Sir. Nay, I beſeech you, Gentlemen, doe not exhale me thus; remember 'tis but for ſweete meates—
Sweete meate muſt haue ſower ſauce, Sir. Come along.
Sweete Maſter Minos: I am forfeited to eternall diſgrace, if you doe not commiſerate. Good officer bee not ſo officious.
VVhy how now, my good brace of Blood-hounds? whether doe you dragge the Gent'man? you Mungrelles, you Curres, you Bandogges, wee are Captaine Tucca, that talke to you, you inhumane Pilchers.
Sir, he is their priſoner.
Their Peſtilence. VVhat are you, ſir?
A Citizen of Rome, ſir.
Then you are not farre diſtant from a Foole, ſir.
A Pothecary, ſir.
I knewe that was not a Phiſitian; fough: out of my Noſtrils, thou ſtinkſt of Lotium, & the Syrringe; away Quackſaluer; Follower, my ſworde.
Here, noble Leader, youle do no harme with it: Ile truſt you.
Doe you heare, You, Goodman ſlaue? Hooke, Ramme, Rogue, Catchpole, looſe the Gent'man, or by my veluet armes—
What will you doe, ſir?
Kiſſe thy hande, my honourable actiue Varlet: & imbrace thee, thus.
O Patient Metamorphoſis!
My ſworde, my tall Raſcall.
Nay, ſofte ſir; Some wiſer then ſome.
VVhat? and a Wit to? By Pluto, thou muſt be cheriſhed, Slaue; heres three Drachmes for thee: hold.
There's halfe his Lendings gone.
Giue mee.
No ſir, your firſt word ſhall ſtand: Ile holde all.
Nay, but Rogue:
You would make a reſcue of our priſoner, Sir, you?
I, a reſcue? away inhumane Varlet. Come, come; I neuer reliſh aboue one Ieſt at moſt; doe not diſgeſte me: Sirra, do not. Rogue, I tell thee, Rogue, doe not.
How ſir? Rogue?
I, why; thou art not angry Raſcall? art thou?
I cannot tell ſir, I am little better, vpon theſe termes.
Ha! Gods & Feinds! why doſt hear? Rogue, Thou, giue me thy hand; I ſay vnto thee, thy hand: Rogue. what? doſt not thou know mee? not me, Rogue? not Captaine Tucca, Rogue?
Come: pra' ſurrender the Gentleman his ſword, Officer; we'll haue no fighting here.
VVhat's thy name?
Minos, an't pleaſe you.
Minos? come hyther, Minos; Thou art a wiſe Fellowe it ſeemes: Let me talke with thee.
VVas euer wretch ſo wretched, as vnfortunate I?
Thou art one of the Centum-viri, Old boy, art' not?
Noe indeede, Maſter Captaine.
Goe to, thou ſhallt be then: Ile ha' thee one, Minos. Take my ſworde from thoſe Raſcalles, doſt thou ſee? Goe, do it; I cannot attempt with patience. VVhat does this Gentleman owe thee, little Minos?
Foureſcore Sesterties, ſir.
VVhat? no more? Come, thou ſhalt releaſe him, Minos: what, Ile be his Bayle, thou ſhalt take my worde, Old boy, and Caſheere theſe Furies: thou ſhalt do't, I ſay thou ſhalt, little Minos, thou ſhalt.
Yes, and as I am a Gentleman and a Reueller, Ile make a peece of Poetry and abſolue all, within theſe fiue daies.
Come, Minos is not to learne how to vſe a Gent'man of qualitie, I know; My ſworde: If he pay thee not, I will, and I muſt, old boy. Thou ſhalt be my Pothecary too: ha'ſt good Eringo's, Minos?
The beſt in Rome, ſir.
Goe too, then Vermine, knowe the houſe.
I warrant you Collonell.
For this Gentleman, Minos?
Ile take your word, Captaine.
Thou haſt it, my ſword.
Yes ſir: but you muſt diſcharge the arreſt, Maſter Crispinus.
How, Minos? looke in the Gentlemans face, and but reade his ſilence. Pay, pay; 'tis honour, Minos.
By Ioue, ſweete Captaine, you do moſt infinitely endeare, and oblige me to you.
Tut, I cannot complement, by Mars; but Iupiter loue me, as I loue good wordes, & good cloathes, and there's an end. Thou ſhalt giue my boy that girdle & hangers, when thou haſt worne them a little more.
O Iupiter! Captaine, he 'ſhall haue them now, preſently; Pleaſe you to be acceptiue, young Gentleman.
Yes ſir, feare not; I ſhall accept: I haue a prettie fooliſh humor of taking, if you knewe all.
Not now, you ſhall not take, boy.
By my truth, and earneſt, but a'ſhal Captaine, by your leaue.
Nay, and a 'ſweare by his trueth, take it boy: doe not make a Gentleman forſworne.
Well ſir, there is your ſworde; but thanke Maſter Minos: you had not carried it as you doe, elſe.
Minos is iuſt, and you are knaues, and—
What ſay you ſir?
Paſſe on, my good Scoundrell, paſſe on, I honour thee: But, that I hate to haue Action with ſuch baſe Rogues as theſe; you ſhould ha' ſcene me vnrip their noſes now, and haue ſent 'hem to the next Barbers, to ſtitching: for, doe you ſee? I am a man of Humor, and I doe loue the Varlettes, the honeſt Varlets; they haue Wit, and Valor, and are indeede good profitable — Arrant Rogues, as any liue in an Empire. Doeſt thou hear, Poetaſter? ſecond me. Stand vp; Minos, cloſe, gather, yet; ſo. Sir, (thou ſhalt haue a quarter ſhare, be reſolute) you ſhal at my requeſt take Minos by the hand here: little Minos, I will haue it ſo; All friends, and a health; Be not inexorable: and thou ſhalt impart the wine, Old boy, thou ſhalt do't, little Minos, thou ſhalt: make vs pay it in our Phyſicke. What? wee muſt liue and honour the Gods ſometimes; now Bacchus, now Comus, now Priapus; euery God a little. What's hee, that ſtalkes by, there? Boy, Pyrgus, you were beſt let him paſſe, Sirrah; do Leueret, let him paſſe, doe.
Tis a Player, ſir.
A Player? Call him, call the lowſie ſlaue hither; what'l hee ſaile by, and not once ſtrike, or vaile to a Man of warre? ha? doe you heare? you, Player, Rogue, Stalker, come back here: No reſpect to Men of worſhippe, you ſlaue? What, you are proude, you Raſcall, are you proude? ha? you growe rich, doe you? and purchaſe? you haue Fortune & the good yeere on your ſide, you Stinkard? you haue? you haue?
Nay, ſweete Captaine, be confinde to ſome reaſon; I proteſt. I ſawe you not, ſir.
You did not? where was your fight, Oedipus? you walke with Hares eyes, doe you? Ile ha' 'hem glaſ'd, Rogue; and you ſay the worde, they ſhall be glaz'd for you: Come, we muſt haue you turne Fiddler againe, ſlaue, 'get a Baſe Violin at your backe, and march in a Tawnie Coate, with one ſleeue, to Gooſe-faire, and then you'll knowe vs; you'll ſee vs then; you will, Gulch, you will? Then; wil't pleaſe your worſhippe to haue any Muſicke, Captaine?
Nay, good Captaine.
What? doe you laugh, Howleglas? death, you perſtemptuous Varlet, I am none of your fellowes; I haue commaunded a hundred and fiftie ſuch Rogues, I.
I, and moſt of that hundred and fiftie haue been leaders of a Legion.
If I haue exhibited wrong, I'le tender ſatisfaction, Captaine.
Say'ſt thou ſo, honeſt Vermine? Giue me thy hand, thou ſhalt make vs a ſupper one of theſe nights.
VVhen you pleaſe, by Ioue, Captaine, moſt willingly.
Doeſt thou ſweare? To morrowe then; ſay, and holde ſlaue. There are ſome of you Players honeſt Gent'man-like Scoundrels: A man may skelder yee, now and than, of halfe a dozen ſhillinges, or ſo. Doeſt thou not know that Caprichio there?
No, I aſſure you, Captaine.
Goe, and be acquainted with him, then; hee is a Gent'man, parcell-Poet, you ſlaue: his Father was a man of worſhip, I tell thee: goe, he pens high, loftie, in a newe ſtalking ſtraine; bigger then halfe the Rimers i'the towne againe: he was borne to fill thy mouth, Minotaurus; he was: he will teach thee to teare and rand, Raſcall; to him: cheriſh his Muſe; goe: thou haſt fortie, fortie; ſhillings, I meane, Stinkard; giue him in earneſt; doe: hee ſhall write for thee, ſlaue. If hee penne for thee once, thou ſhalt not neede to trauell, with thy pumpes full of grauell, any more, after a blinde Iade and a Hamper.
Troth, I thinke I ha' not ſo much about mee, Captaine.
It's no matter: giue him what thou haſt: Paunch, I'le giue my word for the reſt: though it lack a ſhilling or two, it ſkilles not: Go, thou art an honeſt Twentie i'the hundred; I'le ha' the Statute repeal'd for thee, Minos: I muſt tel thee, Minos, thou haſt deiected yon'Gent'mans ſpirit exceedingly: do'ſt obſerue? do'ſt note, little Minos?
Yes ſir.
Goe to then, raiſe; recouer; do; ſuffer him not to droop, in proſpect of a Player, a Rogue, a Stager: put twentie into his hand; twentie; Drachmes, I meane, and let no bodie ſee: goe, doe it; the worke ſhall commend it ſelfe: be Minos: I'le pay.
Yes forſooth, Captaine.
Doe not wee ſerue a notable Sharke?
And what newe Playes haue you now a foote, ſirrah? ha? I would faine come with my Cockatrice one day, and ſee a Play; if I knewe when there were a good baudie one: but they ſay, you ha' nothing but Humours, Reuels, and Satyres, that girde, and fart at the time, you ſlaue.
No, I aſſure you Captaine, not wee. They are on the other ſide of Tyber: wee haue as much Ribaldry in our Plaies, as can bee, as you would wiſh, Captaine: All the ſinners, i'the Suburbes, come, and applaud our Action, daily.
I heare, you'll bring mee o' the Stage there; you'll play mee, they ſay: I ſhall bee preſented by a ſorte of Copper-lac't Scoundrels of you: Death of Pluto, and you Stage mee, Stinkard; your Manſions ſhall ſweate for't, your Tabernacles, Varlettes: your Globes: and your Tryumphes.
Not wee, by Phoebus, Captaine: doe not doe vs imputation without deſert.
I woo not, my good two pennie Raſcall: reach me thy neufe. Do'ſt heare? What wilt thou giue me a weeke, for my brace of Beagles, here, my little Point-truſſers? you ſhall ha'them Act among yee. Sirrah, you, pronounce. Thou ſhalt heare him ſpeake, in King Darius dolefull ſtraine.
O dolefull daies! O direfull deadly dumpe!
O wicked world! and worldly wickedneſſe!
How can I hold my fist from crying thumpe,
In rue of this right raſcall wretchedneſſe!
In an amorous vaine now, ſirrah; peace.
O, ſhe is wilder, and more hard, withall,
Then Beaſt or Birde, or Tree, or stonie wall.
Yet might ſhe loue mee, to vpreare her state:
I, but perhaps, ſhee hopes ſome nobler Mate.
Yet might ſhe loue me, to content her Sire:
I, but her reaſon maſters her deſire.
Yet might ſhe loue me as her beauties thrall:
I, but I feare, ſhe cannot loue at all.
Now the orrible fierce Souldier, you Sirrah.
What? will I braue thee? I, and beard thee too.
A Romane spirit ſcornes to beare a braine,
So full of baſe Puſillanimitie.
Hiſtrio, Excellent.
Nay, thou ſhall ſee that, ſhall rauiſh thee anon: prick vp thine eares, Stinkard: the Ghoſt, Boyes.
Vindicta.
Timoria.
Vindicta.
Timoria.
Veni.
Veni.
Now, thunder, ſirrah, you, the rumbling Player.
I, but ſome bodie muſt cry murder, then, in a ſmall voice.
Your fellowe Sharer, there ſhall do't; Cry Sirrah, cry.
Murder, murder.
Who cals out murder? Ladie, was it you?
Histrio. O admirable good, I proteſt.
Sirrah, Boy, brace your drumme a little ſtraighter, and doe the t'other fellowe there, hee in the— what ſha' call him— and yet, ſtay too.
Nay, and thou dallieſt, then I am thy Foe,
And Feare ſhall force, what Friendſhip cannot winne;
Thy Death ſhall bury what thy life conceales,
Villaine! thou dieſt, for more reſpecting her, than me.
O, ſtay my Lord.
Yet ſpeake the truth, and I will guerdon thee:
But if thou dally once againe, thou diest.
Enough of this, Boy.
Why then lament therefore: damn'd be thy Guts vnto King Plutoes hell, and Princely Erebus; for Sparrowes muſt haue food.
'Pray, ſweete Captaine, let one of them doe a little of a Lady.
O! he will make thee eternally enamourd of him there: doe Sirrah; doe: 'twill allay your fellowes Fury a little.
Maſter, mocke on: the ſcorne thou giueſt me,
Pray Ioue ſome Lady may returne on thee:
No: you ſhall ſee me doe the Moore: Maſter, lend me your ſcarfe a little.
Here, 'tis at thy ſeruice, Boy:
You, Maſter Minos, harke hither a little. Exeunt.
How do'ſt like him? art not rapt? art not tickled now? do'ſt not applaud, Raſcall? do'ſt not applaud?
Yes: what will you aske for 'hem a weeke, Captaine?
No you mangonizing ſlaue, I will not part from 'hem: you'll ſell 'hem for Enghles you; let's ha' good cheare to morrow night at ſupper, Stalker, and then wee'll talke, good Capon, & Plouer, do you hear, Sirrah? & do not bring your eating Plaier with you there; I cannot away with him: He will eate a legge of mutton, while I am in my porridge, the leane Poluphagus, his belly is like Barathrum, he lookes like a Midwife in Mans apparrell, the ſlaue; nor the villanous-out-of-tune Fidler O Enobarbus, bring not him. What haſt thou there? ſix and thirty? ha?
No, here's all I haue (Captaine) ſome fiue and twenty. 'Pray Sir, will you preſent, & accommodate it vnto the Gentleman: for mine owne part, I am a meere ſtranger to his Humour: beſides, I haue ſome buſineſſe inuites me hence, with Maſter Aſinius Lupus, the Tribune.
Well: goe thy waies; purſue thy Proiects, let me alone with this Deſſeigne: my Poëtaſter ſhall make thee a Play, & thou ſhalt be a man of good parts, in it. But ſtay, let me ſee: Doe not bring your Father AEſope, your Polititian; vnleſſe you can ramme vp his mouth with Cloues: the ſlaue ſmells ranker then ſome ſixteene Dung-hilles, and is ſeuenteene times more rotten: Mary, you may bring Friskin, my Zany: Hee's a good skipping Swaggerer; and your fat Foole there, my Mango, bring him too: but let him not begge Rapiers, nor ſcarfes in his ouer-familiar playing face, nor roare out his barren bold Ieſtes, with a tormenting Laughter, betweene drunke and dry. Doe you heare, Raſcall? Giue him warning, Admonition, to forſake his ſawcy glauering Grace, and his goggle Eye: it does not become him, Sirrah: tell him ſo.
Yes Captaine: Iupiter, and the reſt of the Gods confine your moderne delights, without diſguſt.
Stay: thou ſhalt ſee the Moore, ere thou goeſt: what's he, with the halfe Armes there, that ſalutes vs out of his cloake, like a Motion? ha?
O Sir, his dubblet's a little decayed; he is otherwiſe a very ſimple honeſt fellow, Sir: one Demetrius, a dreſſer of Playes about the towne, here; we haue hir'd him to abuſe Horace, and bring him in, in a Play, with all his Gallants: as, Tibullus, Mecoenas, Cornelius Gallus, and the reſt.
And: why ſo, Stinkard?
O, it will get vs a huge deale of money (Captaine) and we haue neede on't; for this Winter ha's made vs all poorer, then ſo many ſtaru'd Snakes: No body comes at vs; not a Gentleman, nor a—
But, you know nothing by him; doe you, to make a Play of?
Faith, not much, Captaine: but our Author will deuiſe inough:
Why, my Parnaſſus, here, ſhall helpe him, if thou wilt: Can thy Author doe it impudently enough?
O, I warrant you, Captaine: and ſpitefully inough too; he ha's one of the moſt ouerflowing villanous wits, in Rome. He will ſlander any man that breathes; If he diſguſt him.
I'le know the poore, egregious, nitty Raſcall, and he haue ſuch commendable Qualities, I'le cheriſh him: ſtay; here comes the Tartar; I'le make a gathering for him; I: a Purſe, and put the poore ſlaue in freſh ragges; tell him ſo, to comfort him: well ſaid Boy.
Where art thou Boy? where is Calipolis?
Fight earth quakes, in the entrailes of the earth,
And Easterne whirle-windes in the helliſh ſhades:
Some foule contagion of th'infected heauens
Blast all the trees; and in their curſed tops
The diſmall night-rauen and tragicke Owle
Breed, and become fore-runners of my fall.
Well, now fare thee well, my honeſt Penny-biter: Commend me to ſeuen Shares and a halfe: and remember to morrow: if you lacke a ſeruice, you ſhall play in my name, Raſcalls; but you ſhall buy your owne cloth: and I'le ha' two ſhares for my Countenance: let thy Author ſtay with me.
Yes, Sir.
'Twas well done little Minos: thou didſt ſtalke well: for-giue me that I ſaid thou ſtunkſt, Minos: 'twas the ſauour of a Poet, I met ſweating in the ſtreete, hanges yet in my noſtrills:
Who? Horace?
I; he, do'ſt thou know him?
O, he forſooke me moſt barbarouſly, I proteſt.
Hang him fuſty Satyre; he ſmells all Goate; he carries a Ram, vnder his Arme-holes, the ſlaue: I am the worſe when I ſee him. Did not Minos impart?
Yes, here's twenty Drachmes, he did conuey.
Well ſaid, keepe 'hem, weell ſhare anon; come little Minos.
Faith Captaine, I'le be bould to ſhew you a Miſtres of mine, a Iewellers Wife, a Gallant, as we goe along.
There ſpoke my Genius. Minos, ſome of thy Eringoes, little Minos; ſend: come hither Parnaſſus. I muſt ha thee familiar with my little Locuſt, here; tis a good Vermine they ſay.
BVT ſweete Lady, ſay: am I well inough attir'd for the Court, in ſadneſſe?
Well inough? excellent well, ſweete
This ſtraight-bodied Citty attire (I can tell you) will ſtirre a Courtiers blood, more, then the fineſt looſe Sackes the Ladies vſe to be put in; and then you are as well Iewelld as any of them; your Ruffe, and linnen about you, is much more pure then theirs: And for your beauty, I can tell you, there's many of them would defie the Painter, if they could change with you. Marry, the worſt is, you muſt looke to be enuied, and endure a few Court-frumps for it.
O God! Madam, I ſhall buy them too cheape: Giue me my Muffe, and my Dogge there. And will the Ladies be any thing familiar with me, thinke you?
O Hercules! Why, you ſhall ſee 'hem flocke about you with their puffe wings, and aske you, where you bought your Lawne? and what you paid for it? Who ſtarches you? and entreat you to helpe 'hem to ſome pure Landreſſes, out of the City.
O, Cupid! Giue me my Fanne, and my Maſque too: And wil the Lords, and the Poets there, vſe one well too, Lady?
Doubt not of that: you ſhall haue kiſſes from them, goe pit-pat, pit-pat, pit-pat, vpon your Lips, as thicke as ſtones out of ſlings, at the aſſault of a Citty. And then your the of that you cannot your head (if you would) in three Winters after.
Thanke you, ſweete Lady. O Heauen! And how muſt one behaue her ſelfe amongſt 'hem? you know all.
Faith, impudently inough, Miſtreſſe Chloë, & well inough. Cary not too much vnder-thought betwixt your ſelfe and them; nor your Citty mannerly word (forſooth) vſe it not too often in any Caſe; but plaine I, Madam; and No, Madam: Nor neuer ſay, your Lordſhip, nor your Honor; but, you, and you my Lord, and my Lady: the other, they count too ſimple, and minſitiue. And though they deſire to kiſſe Heauen with their Titles, yet they will count them fooles that giue them too humbly.
O intollerable Iupiter! By my troth Lady, I would not for a world, but you had lyen in my houſe: and i'faith you ſhall not pay a farthing, for your boord; nor your Chambers.
O ſweete Miſtreſſe Chloë!
I faith, you ſhall not Lady; nay good Lady, doe not offer it.
Come, where be theſe Ladies? By your leaue, bright Starres; this Gentleman and I are come to man you to Court: where your late kind Entertainment is now to be requited with a Heauenly Banquet.
A Heauenly Banquet, Gallus?
No leſſe, my deare, Cytheris.
That were not ſtrange, Lady, if the Epithete were onely giuen for the Company inuited thither; your ſelfe, and this faire Gentlewoman.
Are we inuited to Court, Sir?
You are Lady, by the great Princeſſe Iulia; who longs to greet you with any fauours, that may worthily make you an often Courtier.
In ſincerity, I thanke her, Sir. You haue a Coach? ha' you not?
The Princeſſe hath ſent her owne, Lady.
O Venus! that's well: I doe long to ride in a Coach moſt vehemently:
But ſweete Gallus, pray you, reſolue me, why you giue that heauenly praiſe, to this earthly Banquet?
Becauſe (Cytheris) it muſt be celebrated by the heauenly powers: All the Gods, and Goddeſſes will be there; to two of which, you two muſt be exalted.
A pretty fiction in truth.
A fiction indeed Chloë, and fit, for the fit of a Poet.
Why, Cytheris, may not Poets (from whoſe diuine ſpirits, all the honors of the Gods haue beene deduc't) intreat ſo much honor of the Gods, to haue their diuine preſence at a Poëticall Banquet?
Suppoſe that no fiction: yet, where are your Habilities to make vs two Goddeſſes, at your Feaſt?
Who knowes not (Cytheris) that the ſacred breath of a true Poet, can blow any vertuous Humanity, vp to Deity?
To tell you the femall truth (which is the ſimple truth) Ladies; and to ſhew that Poets (in ſpight of the world) are able to Deify them ſelues: At this Banquet, to which you are inuited, we intend to aſſume the figures of the Gods; and to giue our ſeuerall Loues the Formes of Goddeſſes. Ouid, will be Iupiter: the Princeſſe Iulia, Iuno: Gallus here Apollo; you Cytheris, Pallas: I will be Bacchus, and my Loue Plautia, Ceres. And to inſtall you, and your Husband, faire Chloë, in honors, equall with ours; you ſhall be a Goddeſſe, and your Husband a God.
A God? ô my God!
A God; but a lame God, Lady: for he ſhall be Vulcan, and you Venus. And this will make our Banquet no leſſe then heauenly.
In ſincerity, it will be ſugred. Good Ioue, what a pretty fooliſh thing it is to be a Poet! But harke you, ſweete Cytheris; could they not poſſibly leaue out my Husband? me thinkes a Bodies Husband do's not ſo well at Court; A bodies Friend, or ſo: But Husband, 'tis like your Clog to your Marmaſet, for all the world, and the heauens.
Tut; neuer feare, Chloë: your Husband will be left without in the Lobby, or the great Chamber; when you ſhall be put in, i'the Cloſet, by this Lord, and by that Lady.
Nay, then I am certified: he ſhall goe.
Horace! Welcom.
Gentlemen, heare you the newes?
What newes, my Quintus?
Our melancholike Friend, Propertius,
Hath cloſ'd him ſelfe, vp, in his Cynthias Tombe;
And will by no intreaties be drawne thence.
May, good Maſter Criſpinus; Pray you bring neere the Gentleman.
Criſpinus? Hide me, good Gallus; Tibullus ſhelter me.
Make your approach, ſweete Captaine.
What meanes this, Horace?
I am ſurpriz'd againe; Farewell.
Stay, Horace.
What, and be tir'd on, by yond' Vulture? No: Phoebus defend me.
'Slight! I hold my life,
This ſame is he met him in Via ſacra.
Troth, 'tis like enough. This Act of Propertius reliſheth very ſtrange, with me.
By thy leaue, my neat Scoundrell: what, is this the mad Boy you talk't on?
I: this is Maſter Albius, Captaine.
Giue me thy hand, Agamemnon; we heare abroad, thou art the Hector of Citizens: what ſayeſt thou? are we welcome to thee, noble Pyrrhus?
Welcome, Captaine? by Ioue and all the Gods i'the Capitoll.
No more, we conceaue thee. Which of theſe is thy Wedlocke, Menelaus? thy Hellen? thy Lucrece? that we may doe her honor; mad Bay?
She i'the little veluet Cap, Sir; is my Miſtres.
For fault of a better, Sir.
A better, prophane Raſcall? I cry thee mercy (my good Scroile) was't thou?
No harme, Captaine.
Shee is a Venus, a Vesta, a Melpomene: Come hither Penelope; what's thy name, Iris?
My name is Chloë, Sir; I am a Gentlewoman.
Thou art in merit to be an Empreſſe (Chloë) for an Eye, and a Lip; thou haſt an Emperors Noſe: kiſſe me againe: 'tis a vertuous Punque, So. Before Ioue, the Gods were a ſort of Goſlinges, when they ſuffred ſo ſweete a breath, to perfume the bed of a ſtinkard: thou hadſt ill fortune, Thisbe; the Fates were infatuate; they were, Punque; they were.
That's ſure, Sir; let me craue your Name, I pray you, Sir.
I am know'n by the Name of Captaine Tucca, Punque: the noble Romane, Punque: a Gent'man, and a Commaunder, Punque.
In good time: a Gentleman, and a Commaunder? that's as good as a Poet?
A prety inſtrument: It's my Coſen Cytheris Viole, this: iſt not?
Nay, play Coſen; it wants but ſuch a voice, and hand, to grace it, as yours is.
Alas Coſen, you are merily inſpir'd.
'Pray you play, if you loue me.
Yes coſin: you knowe, I doe not hate you.
A moſt ſubtil wench! How ſhe hath bayted him with a Viole yonder, for a ſonge!
Coſin, 'pray you call Miſtreſſe Chloë; ſhe ſhall heare an Eſſay of my Poetry.
I'le call her. Come hither Cocatrice: here's one, will ſet thee vp, my ſweet Punque; ſet thee vp.
Are you a Puet, ſo ſoone, Sir?
Wife: mum.
LOVE is blinde, and a want on;
In the whole worlde, there is ſcant
one ſuch another:
No, not his Mother.
He hath pluckt her Doues, and Sparrowes,
To fether his ſharpe Arrowes,
And alone preuaileth,
Whilst ſicke Venus waileth.
But if Cypris once recouer
The wag; it ſhall behoue her
To looke better to him:
Or ſhe will vndoe him.
O, moſt odoriferous Muſicke!
A, ha; Stinkard. Another Orpheus, you ſlaue, another Orpheus; an Arion, riding on the backe of a Dolphin, Raſcall.
Haue you a Copie of this Dittie, Sir?
Maſter Albius ha's.
I, but in trueth, they are my Wiues Verſes; I muſt not ſhewe 'hem.
Shewe 'hem Bankerupt, ſhew 'hem; they haue ſalt in 'hem, and will brooke the ayre, Stinkard.
How? to his bright miſtreſſe, Canidia?
I, ſir, that's but a borrowed name; as Ouids Corinna, or Propertius his Cynthia, or your Nemeſis, or Delia, Tibullus.
It's the name of Horace his Witch, as I remember.
VVhy? the Ditt'is all borrowed; 'tis Horaces: hang him Plagiary.
How? he borrowe of Horace? he ſhall pawne himſelfe to ten Brokers, firſt. Doe you heare, Poëtaſters? I knowe you to be Knightes, and men of worſhippe. Hee ſhall write with Horace, for a Talent: and let Mecoenas and his whole Colledge of Critickes take his part: thou ſhalt do't young Phoebus: thou ſhalt, Phaeton; thou ſhalt.
Alas, ſir, Horace? he is a meere ſpunge; nothing but Humours and Obſeruation; he goes vp and down ſucking from euery ſocietie; and when he comes home, ſqueazes himſelfe dry againe. I knowe him, I.
Thou ſayeſt true, my poore Poeticall Furie, he will pen all he knowes. A ſharpe thorny-tooth'd Satyricall Raſcall, flye him; He carries Haye in his horne; he will ſooner looſe his beſt friend, then his leaſt Ieaſt. VVhat he once drops vpon paper, againſt a man, liues eternally to vpbraide him in the mouth of euery ſlaue Tankerd-bearer, or Water-man: not a Baud, or a boy that comes from the bake houſe, but ſhall point at him: 'tis all Dogge, and Scorpion; hee carries poyſon in his teeth, and a ſting in his taile; fough. Bodie of Ioue! I'le haue the ſlaue whipt one of theſe daies for his Satyres, and his Humours, by one caſheer'd Clarke, or another.
We'll vndertake him, Captaine.
I, and tickle him i'faith, for his Arrogancie, and his impudence, in commending his owne thinges: and for his trā ſlating: I can trace him i'faith: ô, he is the moſt open fellowe, liuing; I had as lieue as a newe Suite, I were at it.
Say no more then, but doe it: 'tis the onely way to get thee a newe ſuite: ſting him, my little Neufts; I'le giue you inſtructions: I'le be your Intelligencer, wee'll all ioyne, and hange vpon him like ſo many horſeleaches: the Players and all. Wee ſhall ſuppe togither ſoone; and then weele conſpire, i'-faith.
O, that Horace had ſtayed ſtill, here.
So would not I: for both theſe would haue turn'd Pythagoreans then.
What, mute?
I, as fiſhes i'faith: come Ladies, ſhall wee goe?
VVee await you, ſir. But Miſtreſſe Chloë aſkes, if you haue not a God to ſpare, for this Gentleman.
VVho, Captaine Tucca?
I; hee.
Yes, if wee can inuite him along, he ſhall be Mars.
Ha's Mars any thing to doe with Venus?
O, moſt of all, Ladie.
Nay, then I pray' let him be inuited: and what ſhall Crispinus be?
Mercury, Miſtreſſe Chloë.
Mercury? that's a Poet? is't?
No Ladie; but ſomewhat enclyning that way: hee is a Herald at Armes.
A Herald at Armes? good: and Mercury? pretty: he ha's to doe with Venus too?
A little, with her face, Ladie; or ſo.
'Tis verie well; pray' let's goe, I long to bee at it.
Gentlemen, ſhall wee pray your companies along?
You ſhall not onely pray, but preuaile, Ladie. Come, ſweete Captaine.
Yes, I follow; but thou muſt not talke of this now, my little Bankeroupt.
Captaine, looke here: mum.
I'le goe write, ſir.
Doe, doe: ſtay; there's a Drachme, to purchaſe Ginger-bread, for thy Muſe.
Come, let vs talke here; here wee may be priuate: ſhut the dore, Lictor. You are a Player, you ſay.
I, and't pleaſe your worſhippe.
Good: and how are you able to giue this intelligence?
Mary Sir, they directed a Letter to mee, and my fellow Sharers.
Speake lower; you are not now i'your Theater, Stager my ſword Knaue. They directed a letter to you, and your fellow-Sharers: forward.
Yes, ſir; to hyre ſome of our Properties; as a Scepter, and a Crowne, for Ioue; and a Caduceus, for Mercury: and a Petaſus—
Caduceus? and Petaſus? Let mee ſee your Letter. This is a Coniuration; a Conſpiracy, this. Quickly, on with my Buſkins: I'le act a Tragedy, i'faith. Will nothing but our Gods, ſerue theſe Poets to prophane? dispatch. Player, I thanke thee. The Emperour ſhal take knowledge of thy good ſeruice. Who's there now? Looke knaue. A Crowne, and a Scepter? this is good: Rebellion, now?
'Tis your Pothecary, ſir, Maſter Minos.
VVhat tell'ſt thou mee of Pothecaries, Knaue? Tell him, I haue affaires of State, in hand; I can talke to no Pothecaries, now. Heart of mee! Stay the Pothecary there.
You ſhall ſee, I haue fiſh't out a cunning piece of Plot now; They haue had ſome intelligēce, that their Proiect is diſcouer'd, and now haue they dealt with my Pothecary, to poyſon mee; tis ſo; knowing, that I meant to take Phyſick to day: As ſure as Death, 'tis there. Iupiter, I thanke thee, that thou haſt yet made mee ſo much of a Polititian. You are welcome, ſir; Take the potiō frō him there; I haue an Antidote more then you wote of, Sir; Throw it on the ground there: So. Now fetch in the Dogge; And yet wee cannot tarry to try Experiments, now: Arreſt him, you ſhall goe with mee, ſir; I'le tickle you Pothecary; I'le giue you a Glyſter, i'faith. Haue I the Letter? I: 'tis here. Come, your Faſces, Lictors: The halfe pikes, & the Halberds, take them downe from the Lares, there; Player, aſſiſt mee.
Whether now, Aſinius Lupus, with this Armory?
I cannot talke now; I charge you aſſiſt mee: Treaſon, Treaſon,
How? Treaſon?
I: if you loue the Emperour, and the State, followe me.
Gods, and goddeſſes, take your ſeuerall ſeates. Now, Mercury, mooue your Caduceus, and in Iupiters name commaunde ſilence.
In the name of Iupiter; Silence.
The Crier of the Court hath too clarified a voice.
Peace Momus.
Oh, he is the god of Reprehenſion; let him alone. 'Tis his office. Mercury, goe forward; and proclaime after Phoebus, our high pleaſure, to all the Deities that ſhall partake this high Banquet.
Yes, Sir.
The great God, Iupiter,
Of his licentious goodneſſe,
VVilling to make this Feaſt, no Faſt
From any manner of Pleaſure;
Nor to bind any God or Goddeſſe,
To be any thing the more God, or Goddeſſe, for their names:
He giues them all free Licence,
To ſpeak no wiſer, then perſōs of baſer Titles;
And to be nothing better, then cōmon Men, or VVomen.
And therefore no God
Shal need to keep himſelf more ſtrictly to his Goddeſſe,
Then any man do's to his wife.
Nor any Goddeſſe
Shall need to keepe herſelfe more ſtrictly to her God,
Then any woman do's to her Huſband.
But, ſince it is no part of wiſdome,
In theſe daies, to come into Bonds;
It ſhall be lawfull for euery Louer,
To breake louing oathes,
To change their Louers, & make loue to others,
As the heate of euery ones Bloode,
And the ſpirit of our Nectar ſhall inſpire.
And Iupiter ſaue Iupiter.
The great, &c.
Of his, &c.
VVilling, &c.
From any, &c.
Nor to, &c.
To bee, &c.
He giues, &c.
To ſpeak, &c.
And to, &c.
And ther. &c.
Shal need, &c.
Then any, &c.
Nor any, &c.
Shall need, &c.
Then any, &c.
But, ſince, &c.
In theſe.
It ſhall, &c.
To breake, &c.
To chāge, &c.
As the, &c.
And the, &c.
And Iupi. &c.
So: now we may play the Fooles, by Authoritie.
To play the foole by Authoritie, is wiſdome.
Away with your Mattery Sentences, Momus; they are to graue, and wiſe, for this meeting.
Mercury, giue our Ieaſter a ſtoole, let him ſit by; and reach him of our Cates.
Do'ſt heare, Mad Iupiter? VVe'll haue it enacted; He, that ſpeaks the firſt wiſe word, ſhall be made Cuckold. VVhat ſayſt thou? Is't not a good Motion?
Deities, are you all agreed?
Agreed, great Iupiter.
I haue read in a Booke, that to play the Foole wiſely, is high wiſdome.
How now, Vulcan! will you be the firſt Wizard?
Take his wife, Mars; & make him Cuckold, quickly.
Come, Cocatrice.
No: let me alone with him, Iupiter: I'le make you take heede, ſir, while you liue againe; if there be twelue in a companie, that you be not the wiſeſt of 'hem.
No more I will not indeede, wife, hereafter; I'le be here: mum.
Fill vs a bowle of Nectar, Ganymede: we will drinke to our daughter Venus.
Looke to your wife, Vulcan: Iupiter begins to Court her.
Nay, let Mars looke to it: Vulcan muſt do as Venus doe's, beare.
Sirrah, Boy: Catamite. Looke you play Ganymede well now, you ſlaue: Doe not ſpill your Nectar; Carry your Cuppe euen: ſo. You ſhould haue rubd your Face, with whites of Egges, you Raſcall; till your Browes had ſhone like our ſootie brothers here, as ſleeke as a Horne-booke: or ha'ſteept your lips in wine, till you made 'hem ſo Plumpe, that Iuno might haue beene Iealous of 'hem. Punque, kiſſe mee, Punque.
Here daughter Venus, I drinke to thee.
'Thanke you, good Father Iupiter.
Why, Mother Iuno! Gods and Fiends! what, wilt thou ſuffer this ocular Temptation?
Mars is enrag'd; he lookes bigge, and begins to ſtut, for anger.
VVell plaide, Captaine Mars.
VVell ſaid, Minſtrell Momus: I muſt put you in? muſt I? When will you be in good fooling of your ſelfe, Fidler? neuer?
O, 'tis our faſhion, to be ſilent, when there is a better Foole in place, euer.
'Thanke you, Raſcall.
Fill to our daughter Venus, Ganymede; who fils her father with affection.
VVilt thou be raunging, Iupiter, before my face?
VVhy not, Iuno? why ſhould Iupiter, ſtand in awe of thy Face, Iuno?
Becauſe it is thy wiues Face, Iupiter.
What, ſhall a Huſband be afraid of his wiues Face? will ſhee paint it ſo horribly? Wee are a King, Cotqueane; and wee will raigne in our pleaſures; & we will cudgell thee to death, if thou finde fault with vs.
I will finde fault with thee, King Cuckold-maker: what, ſhall the King of Gods turne the King of Good fellowes, and haue no Fellow in wickedneſſe? This makes our Poëts, that knowe our Prophaneneſſe, liue as prophane, as wee: By my God-head, Iupiter; I will ioyne with all the other Gods, here; binde thee hand and foote; throwe thee downe into earth; and make a poore Poët of thee, if thou abuſe me thus.
A good ſmart-tongu'd Goddeſſe; a right Iuno.
Iuno, wee will cudgell thee, Iuno: wee tolde thee ſo yeſterday, when thou wert iealous of vs, for Thetis.
Nay, to day ſhe had me in Inquiſition too.
VVell ſaide, my fine Phrygian Fry, informe, informe. Giue mee ſome wine, King of Heralds; I may drinke to my Cocatrice.
No more, Ganymede; wee will cudgell thee, Iuuo: By Styx, we will.
I'ts well; Gods may growe impudent in Iniquitie, and they muſt not be tolde of it.
Yea, wee will knocke our Chinne againſt our Breſt; and ſhake thee out of Olimpus, into an Oyſter-boate, for thy ſcoulding.
Your Noſe is not long enough to doe it, Iupiter; if all thy Strumpets, thou haſt among the Starres tooke thy part. And there is neuer a Star in thy Forehead, but ſhal be a Horne, if thou perſiſt to abuſe mee,
A good Ieaſt, I faith.
We tell thee, thou angerſt vs, Cotqueane; and we will thunder thee in peeces, for thy Cotqueanity: we will lay this City deſolate, and flat as this hand, for thy offences. Theſe two fingers are the Walls of it; theſe within, the People; which People, ſhall be all throwne downe thus, and nothing left ſtanding in this Citty, but theſe walls.
Another good Ieſt.
O, my hammers, and my Cyclops! this Boy fils not wine enough, to make vs kind enough, to one another;
Nor thou haſt not collied thy face enough, Stinkard.
I'le ply the table with Nectar, and make them friends.
Heauen is like to haue but a lame Skinker, then.
"Wine, and good Liuers, make true louers: I'le ſentence them togither. Here Father: here Mother: for ſhame, drinke your ſelues drunke, and forget this diſſention: you two ſhould cling togither, before our faces, and giue vs example of Vnity.
O, excellently ſpoken, Vulcan, on the ſodaine!
Iupiter, may doe well to preferre his Tongue to ſome office, for his Eloquence.
His Tongue ſhall be Gent'man Vſher to his Wit, and ſtill goe before it.
An excellent fit office.
I, and an excellent good ieaſt, beſides:
What, haue you hired Mercury, to cry your ieaſtes you make?
Momus, you are enuious:
Why, you whoreſon block-head, 'tis your only blocke of witte in faſhion (now adaies) to applaud other folkes ieaſtes.
True: with thoſe that are not Artificers them ſelues. Vulcan, you nod; and the mirth of the feaſt droopes.
He ha's fild Nectar ſo long, till his braine ſwimmes in it.
What, doe we nod, fellow Gods? ſound Muſicke, and let vs ſtartle our ſpirits with a ſong.
Doe, Apollo: thou art a good Muſitian.
What ſaies Iupiter?
Ha? ha?
A Song.
Why, doe, doe, ſing:
Bacchus, what ſay you?
Ceres?
But, to this ſong?
Sing, for my part.
Your belly weighes downe your head, Bacehus: here's a ſong toward.
Begin, Vulcan.
What elſe? what elſe?
Say, Iupiter.
Mercury.
I, ſay, ſay.
VVAKE; our mirth beginnes to die:
Quicken it with tunes, and wine:
Raiſe your notes; you're out: fie, fie;
This Drouzineſſe is an ill ſigne.
We baniſh him the Queere of Gods,
That droopes agen:
Then all are men,
For here's not one, but nods.
I like not this ſodaine and generall heauineſſe, amongſt our Godheads: 'Tis ſomewhat ominous. Apollo, Command vs lowder Muſicke, and let Mercury, and Momus contend to pleaſe, and reuiue our ſenſes.
THEN, in a free and lofty ſtrayne,
Our broken tunes we thus repaire;
And we anſwere them againe,
Running diuiſion on the panting Ayre:
To celebrate this Feast of Senſe,
As free from Scandall, as Offenſe.
Here is Beauty, for the Eye;
For the Eare, ſweete Melody;
Ambroſiack Odours, for the ſmell;
Delicious Nectar, for the Taste;
For the Touch, a Ladies Waſte;
Which doth all the reſt excell.
I: This hath wak't vs. Mercury, our Herald; Goe from our ſelfe the great God Iupiter, to the great Emperour, Augustus Caeſar: And command him, from vs (of whoſe Bounty he hath receaued his Sir-name, Augustus) that for a Thankeoffring to our Beneficence, he preſently Sacrifice as a Diſh to this Banquet, his beautifull and wanton Daughter Iulia: She's a curſt Queane, tell him; and plaies the ſcould behind his backe: Therefore let her be Sacrific'd. Commaund him this, Mercury, in our high name of Iupiter Altitonans.
Stay, Feather-footed Mercury; and tell Auguſtus, from vs, the great Iuno Saturnia; if he thinke it hard to doe, as Iupiter hath commanded him, and Sacrifice his Daughter, that he had better to doe ſo tenne times, then ſuffer her to loue the well-noſ'd Poet, Ouid; whom he ſhall doe well to whip, or cauſe to be whipt, about the Capitoll, for ſoothing her, in her Follies.
What ſight is this? Mecoenas, Horace, ſay;
Haue we our ſenſes? Doe we heare? and ſee?
Or, are theſe but Imaginary obiects
Drawne by our Phantaſie? Why, ſpeake you not?
Let vs doe Sacrifice? Are they the Gods?
Reuerence: Amaze: and Fury fight in me.
What? Doe they kneele? Nay, then I ſee tis true
I thought impoſſible: ô impious ſight!
Let me diuert mine eyes; the very thought
Euerts my Soule, with Paſſion: Looke not Man.
There is a Panther, whoſe vnnaturall eyes
Will ſtrike thee dead: turne then; and dye on her
With her owne death.
Horace. What meanes imperiall Caeſar?
What, would you haue me let the Strumpet liue, That, for this Pageaunt, earnes ſo many deathes?
Boy, ſlinke Boy.
'Pray Iupiter, we be not follow'd by the ſent, Maſter.
Say, Sir, what are you?
I play Vulcan, Sir.
But, what are you, Sir?
Your Citizen, and Ieweller, Sir.
And what are you, Dame?
I play Venus, forſooth.
I aske not, what you play? but, what you are?
Your Citizen, and Iewellers wife, Sir:
And you, good Sir?
Your Geutleman, parcell-Poet, Sir.
O, that prophaned Name!
And are theſe ſeemely company for thee,
Degenerate Monſter? all the reſt I know;
And hate all knowledge, for their hatefull ſakes.
Are you, that firſt the Deities inſpir'd
With skill of their high Natures, and their Powers,
The firſt Abuſers of their vſe-full light;
Prophaning thus their Dignities, in their formes;
And making them like you, but counterfeites?
O, who ſhall follow Vertue, and embrace her,
When her falſe boſome is found nought but Aire?
And yet, of thoſe embraces, Centaures ſpring,
That warre with humane Peace, and poyſon Men.
Who ſhall, with greater comforts, comprehend
Her vnſeene being, and her excellence;
When you, that teach, and ſhould eternize her,
Liue, as ſhe were no Law vnto your liues:
Nor liu'd her ſelfe, but with your idle breathes?
If you thinke Gods but fain'd, and Vertue painted,
Know, we ſuſtaine an actuall reſidence;
And, with the Title of an Emperour,
Retaine his ſpirit, and imperiall power:
By which (in impoſition too remiſſe,
Licentious Naſo, for thy violent wronge,
In ſoothing the declin'd Affections
Of my baſe Daughter,) I exile thy feete
From all approach, to our imperiall Court,
On paine of death: and thy miſgotten Loue
Commit to patronage of Iron doores;
Since her ſoft-harted Sire cannot containe her.
O, good my Lord; forgiue: be like the Gods:
Let royall Bounty (Caeſar) mediate.
There is no Bounty to be ſhewed to ſuch,
As haue no reall goodnes: Bountie is
A ſpice of Vertue: and what vertuous Act
Can take effect on them, that haue no power
Of equall habitude to apprehend it;
But liue in worſhip of that Idole Vice.
As if there were no Vertue, but in ſhade
Of ſtronge imagination, meerely enforc't?
This ſhewes, their Knowledge is meere Ignorance;
Their farre fetcht Dignity of ſoule, a Fancy;
And all their ſquare pretext of Grauity
A meere vaine Glory: hence: away with 'hem.
I will preferre for knowledge, none, but ſuch
As rule their liues by it, and can becalme
All Sea of Humour, with the marble trident
Of their ſtrong ſpirits: Others fight below
With Gnats, and ſhadowes; Others nothing know.
What's become of my little Punque, Venus; and the poult-foote Stinkard, her Husband? ha?
O, they are rid home i'the Coach, as faſt as the wheeles can runne.
God Iupiter is baniſht, I heare: and his Cockatrice, Iuno, lockt vp: 'Hart; and and all the Poetry in Parnaſſus get me to be a Player againe, I'le fell 'hem my ſhare for ſix pence. But this is Humours; Horace, that Goat-footed enuious Slaue: hee's turn'd fawne now; an Informer, the Rogue: 'tis he has betraid vs all; Did you not ſee him, with the Emperour, crouching?
Yes.
Well, follow me. Thou ſhalt libell, and I'le cudgell the Raſcall. Boy, pronide me a Trunchion; Reuenge ſhall gratulate him, Tam Marti, quam Mercurio.
I, but Maſter; take heed how you giue this out, Horace is a Man of the Sword.
'Tis true, introth: they ſay, hee's valiant.
Valiant? ſo is mine Arſe: Gods, and Fiendes? I'le blow him into aire, when I meete him next: He dares not fight with a puck-fiſt.
Maſter, here he comes.
Where? Iupiter ſaue thee, my good Poet; my Prophet; my Noble Horace. I ſcorne to beate the Rogue i'the Court; and I ſaluted him, thus faire, bicauſe he ſhould ſuſpect nothing, the Raſcall; Come; wee'll goe ſee how forward our Iourneyman is toward the vntruſſing of him.
Doe you heare, Captaine? I'le write nothing in it but Innocence: becauſe I may ſweare I am Innocent.
Nay, why purſue you not the Emperour for your reward, now; Lupus?
Stay, Aſinius; you, and your Stager, and your band of Lictors:
I hope your ſeruice merits more reſpect,
Then thus, without a thankes, to be ſent hence?
Well, well, ieaſt on, ieaſt on.
Thou baſe vnworthy Groome. (Lupus.) I 'tis good.
Was this the Treaſon? this, the dangerous plot,
Thy clamorous tongue ſo bellowed through the Court?
Hadſt thou no other Proiect to encreaſe
Thy Grace with Caeſar, but this Wooluiſh traine;
To pray vpon the life of innocent Mirth,
And harmeleſſe pleaſures, bred, of noble wit?
Away: I loath thy preſence: Such as thou,
They are the Moathes, and Scarabbes of a State;
The Bane of Kingdomes; and the dregges of Courts:
Who (to endeer themſelues to any 'mploiement)
Care not, whoſe fame they blaſt; whoſe life they endanger:
And vnder a diſguiſ'd, and cobweb Maſque
Of loue, vnto their Soueraigne, vomit foorth
Their owne prodigious malice; and pretending
To be the Props, and Columnes of his ſafety,
The Guardes vnto his Perſon, and his Peace,
Diſturbe it moſt, with their falſe Lapwing cries.
Good. Caeſar ſhall know of this; beleeue it.
Caeſar doth know it (Wolfe) and to his knowledge,
He will (I hope) reward your baſe Endeuours.
"Princes that will but heare, or giue acceſſe
"To ſuch officious Spies, can nere be ſafe:
"They take in poyſon, with an open Eare,
"And free from Danger, become ſlaues to Feare.
Baniſht the Court? Let me be baniſht life;
Since the chiefe end of Life is there concluded:
Within the Court, is all the Kingdome bounded;
And as her ſacred Spheare doth comprehend
Ten thouſand times ſo much, as ſo much Place
In any part of all the Empire elſe;
So euery Body, moouing in her Spheare,
Containes ten thouſand times aſmuch in him,
As any other, her choice Orbe excludes.
As in a circle, a Magitian, then
Is ſafe, againſt the Spirit, he excites;
But out of it, is ſubiect to his rage,
And looſeth all the vertue of his Art:
So I, exil'd the circle of the Court,
Looſe all the good gifts, that in it I ioy'd.
"No Vertue currant is, but with her ſtamp:
"Nor no Vice vitious, blaunch't with her white hand.
The Court's the Abſtract of all Romes deſert;
And my deare Inlia, the Abſtract of the Court.
Mee thinkes, now I come neare her, I reſpire
Some aire, of that late comfort, I receau'd:
And while the Euening, with her modeſt vaile,
Giues leaue to ſuch poore Shadowes as my ſelfe,
To ſteale abroad; I, like a hart-leſſe Ghoſt,
Without the liuing Bodie of my Loue,
Will here walke, and attend her: For I knowe,
Not farre from hence, ſhe is impriſoned,
And hopes, of her ſtrict Guardian, to bribe
So much admittance, as to ſpeake to mee,
And cheere my fainting ſpirits, with her breath.
Ouid? my Loue?
Here, heauenly Iulia.
Here? and not here? O, how that worde doth play
VVith both our Fortunes, differing, like our ſelues,
Both one; and yet diuided, as oppoſ'd?
I High, thou Lowe: ô, this our plight of Place
Doubly preſents the two lets of our Loue,
Locall and ceremoniall Height, and Lowneſſe:
Both waies, I am too high; and thou, too lowe.
Our Mindes are euen, yet: ô, why ſhould our Bodies,
That are their ſlaues, be ſo without their rule?
I'le caſt my ſelfe downe to thee; If I die,
I'le euer liue with thee: no height of Birth,
Of Place, of Dutie, or of cruell Power,
Shall keepe mee from thee; ſhould my Father locke
This bodie vp within a Tombe of Braſſe,
Yet I'le be with thee: If the Formes, I holde
Now in my Soule, be made one ſubſtance with it;
That Soule immortall; and the ſame 'tis now:
Death cannot raze th'affectes, ſhe now retaineth:
And then, may ſhee be any where ſhe will.
The ſoules of Parents rule not Childrens ſoules,
VVhen Death ſets both in their diſſolu'd eſtates:
Then is no Childe, nor Father: then Eternitie
Frees all, from any temporall reſpect.
I come, my Ouid; take me in thine armes:
And let me breath my ſoule into thy breaſt.
O, ſtay my Loue: the hopes thou do'ſt conceiue
Of thy quicke Death, and of thy future Life,
Are not autenticall. Thou chooſeſt Death,
So thou might'ſt ioy thy Loue, in th'other Life.
But knowe (my princely Loue) when thou art dead,
Thou onely muſt ſuruiue in perfect ſoule;
And in the ſoule, are no Affections:
We poure out our Affections with our Bloode;
And with our Bloods affections; fade our Loues.
"No life hath Loue in ſuch ſweete ſtate, as this;
"No Eſſence is ſo deare to moodie Senſe,
"As Fleſh, and Bloode; whoſe Quinteſſence is Senſe.
"Beautie, compoſd of Blood, and Fleſh, moues more,
"And is more plauſible to Blood, and Fleſh:
"Then Spirituall Beautie can be to the Spirit.
Such Apprehenſion, as wee haue in Dreames
(VVhen Sleepe, the bond of Senſes, locks them vp)
Such ſhall we haue, when Death deſtroyes them quite.
If Loue be then thy Obiect, change not life,
Liue high, and happie ſtill: I ſtill belowe,
Cloſe with my Fortunes, in thy height, ſhall ioy.
Ay me, that Vertue, whoſe braue Eagles winges
VVith euery ſtroake, blowe Starres, in burning Heauen;
Should like a Swallowe (praying toward ſtormes)
Fly cloſe to earth: and with an eager plume
Purſue thoſe Obiectes, which none els can ſee,
But ſeeme to all the world, the emptie Aire.
Thus thou (poore Ouid) and all vertuous men
Muſt pray like Swallowes, on inuiſible foode;
Purſuing Flies, or nothing: and thus Loue,
And euery worldly Fancie, is tranſpoſ'd,
By worldly Tyranny, to what plight it liſt.
O, Father; ſince thou gau'ſt me not my Minde,
Striue not to rule it: Take, but what thou gau'ſt
To thy diſpoſure, thy Affections
Rule not in me; I muſt beare all my griefes,
Let me vſe all my pleaſures: "Vertuous Loue
Was neuer ſcandall to a Goddeſſe ſtate.
But hee's inflexible; and, my deare Loue,
Thy life may chance be ſhortned, by the length
Of my vnwilling ſpeaches to depart.
Farewell, ſweete Life: though thou be yet exil'd,
Th'officious Court, enioy mee amply ſtill:
My Soule, in this my breath, enters thine Eares,
And on this Turrets, Floore, will I lye deade,
Till wee may meete againe; in this proud Height,
I kneele beneath thee in my proſtrate Loue,
And kiſſe the happie ſands, that kiſſe thy feete.
"Great Ioue ſubmits a Scepter, to a Cell;
"And Louers, ere they part, will meete in Hell.
Farewell all companie; and if I could
All light with thee: Helles ſhade ſhould hide my browes,
Till thy deare Beauties beames redeem'd my vowes.
Ouid; my Loue: alas, may we not ſtay
A little longer (think'ſt thou) vndeſcern'd?
For thine owne good, faire Goddeſſe, doe not ſtay:
VVho would ingage a Firmament of fires
Shining in thee, for me, a falling Starre?
Be gon, ſweete Life-bloode: if I ſhould deſcerne
Thy ſelfe but toucht, for my ſake, I ſhould die.
I will be gone then; and not Heauen it ſelfe,
Shall drawe me backe.
Yet Iulia, if thou wilt,
A little longer ſtay.
I am content.
O mightie Ouid! what the ſway of Heauen
Could not retire, my breath hath turned back.
Who ſhall goe firſt, my Loue? my paſſionate Eyes
VVill not endure to ſee thee turne from mee.
If thou goe firſt, my ſoule will follow thee.
Then wee muſt ſtay.
Aye me; there is no ſtay
In amorous pleaſures: if both ſtay, both die.
I heare thy father; hence my Deitie.
Feare forgeth ſoundes in my deluded eares;
I did not heare him: I am mad with Loue.
There is no Spirit, vnder heauen, that workes
VVith ſuch illuſion; yet ſuch witchcraft kill mee,
Ere a ſound minde, without it, ſaue my life.
Here, on my knees, I worſhippe the bleſt Place
That held my Goddeſſe; and the louing Aire,
That cloſ'd her bodie in his ſilken armes:
Vaine Ouid; kneele not to the Place, nor Ayre;
Shee's in thy hart: Riſe then, and worſhippe there.
"The trueſt wiſdome ſillie men can haue,
"Is dotage, on the follies of their fleſh.
VVE, that haue cōquer'd ſtil, to ſaue the cōquer'd,
And lou'd to make inflictions feard, not felt;
Grieu'd to reprooue, and ioyfull to reward,
More proud of Reconcilement, then Reuenge,
Reſume into the late ſtate of our Loue,
VVorthy Cornelius Gallus, and Tibullus:
You both are Knightes; and you, Cornelius,
A Souldier of Renowne; and the firſt Prouoſt,
That euer let our Romane Eagles fly
On ſwarthy Egypt, quarried with her ſpoyles.
Yet (not to beare colde Formes, nor mens out-termes,
Without the inward fires, and Liues of men)
You both haue Vertues, ſhining through your Shapes;
To ſhewe, your Titles are not writ on Poſtes,
Or hollow Statues, which the beſt men are,
Without Promethean ſtuffings reacht from Heauen.
Sweete Poëſies ſacred Gyrlands crowne your Knighthoodes:
VVhich is, of all the Faculties on Earth,
The moſt abſtract, and perfect; if ſhee be
True borne, and nurſt with all the Sciences;
She can ſo mould Rome, and her Monuments,
Within the liquid Marble of her Lines,
That they ſhall ſtand freſh, and miraculous,
Euen, when they mixe with innouating duſt:
In her ſweete ſtreames ſhall our braue Romane ſpirits
Chace, and ſwimme after Death, with their choyſe deedes
Shining on their white ſhoulders; and therein
Shall Tyber, and our famous Riuers fall
With ſuch attraction, that th'ambitious Line
Of the round World ſhall to her Center ſhrinke,
To heare their Muſicke: And for theſe high Parts,
Ceſar ſhall reuerence the Pierian Artes.
Your Maieſties high Grace to Poëſie,
Shall ſtand 'gainſt all the dull detractions
Of leaden Soules; who (for the vaine aſſumings
Of ſome, quite worthleſſe of her ſoueraigne wreaths)
Conteine her worthieſt Prophets in contempt.
Happie is Rome of all Earths other States,
To haue ſo true, and great a preſident,
For her inferiour ſpirits to imitate,
As Caeſar is; who addeth to the Sunne,
Influence, and luſtre; in encreaſing thus
His inſpirations, kindling fire in vs.
Phoebus himſelfe ſhall kneele at Caeſars Shrine,
And deck it with Bay Gyrlands deaw'd with VVine,
To quite the worſhip Caeſar does to him:
Where other Princes, hoyſted to their thrones
By Fortunes paſſionate and diſordered power,
Sit in their height, like Clouds, before the Sunne,
Hindring his comforts; and (by their exceſſe
Of cold in Vertue, and croſſe heate in Vice)
Thunder and tempeſt, on thoſe learned heads,
VVhom Caeſar with ſuch Honour doth aduance.
All humane buſineſſe, Fortune doth command
Without all order; and with her blinde hand,
Shee, blinde, beſtowes blinde gifts; that ſtill haue nurſt
They ſee not who, nor how, but ſtill, the worſt.
Caeſar, for his Rule, and for ſo much ſtuffe
As Fortune puts in his hand, ſhall diſpoſe it
(As if his Hand had eyes, and ſoule, in it)
VVith worth and iudgement. "Hands, that part with gifts,
"Or will reſtraine their vſe, without deſert;
"Or with a miſery, numm'd to Vertues right,
"Worke, as they had no Soule to gouerne them,
"And quite reiect her; ſeuering their Eſtates
"From humane order. VVhoſoeuer can,
"And will not cheriſh Vertue, is no man.
Virgill is now at hand, imperiall Caeſar.
Romes Honour is at hand then. Fetch a chaire,
And ſet it on our right hand; where 'tis fit,
Romes Honour, and our owne, ſhould euer ſit.
Now he is come out of Campania,
I doubt not he hath finiſht all his AEneids,
Which, like another Soule, I long t'enioy.
VVhat thinke you three, of Virgill, Gentlemen,
(That are of his profeſſion, though rankt higher)
Or Horace, what ſaiſt thou, that art the pooreſt,
And likelieſt to enuye, or to detract?
Caeſar ſpeakes after common men, in this,
To make a difference of me, for my pooreneſſe:
As if the filth of Pouertie ſunke as deepe
Into a knowing ſpirit, as the Bane
Of riches doth, into an ignorant ſoule.
No Caeſar; they be path-leſſe, mooriſh minds,
That being once made rotten with the dung
Of damned Riches, euer after ſinke
Beneath the ſteppes of any Villany.
But Knowledge is the Nectar, that keepes ſweete
A perfect Soule euen in this Graue of ſinne;
And for my Soule, it is as free, as Caeſars:
For, what I knowe is due, I'le giue to all.
"He that detracts, or enuies vertuous Merit,
"Is ſtill the couetous, and the ignorant ſpirit.
Thanks Horace, for thy free, and holſome ſharpneſſe:
Which pleaſeth Caeſar more, then ſeruile fawnes.
"A flatterd Prince ſoone turnes the Prince of Fooles.
And for thy ſake, wee'll put no difference more
'Twixt Knights, and Knightly ſpirits, for being poore.
Say then, lou'd Horace, thy true thought of Virgill.
I iudge him of a rectified ſpirit,
By many reuolutions of diſcourſe
(In his bright reaſons influence) refin'd
From all the tartarous Moodes of common Men;
Bearing the Nature, and ſimilitude
Of a right heauenly Bodie; moſt ſeuere
In faſhion, and collection of himſelfe;
And then as cleare, and confident, as Ioue.
And yet ſo chaſt, and tender is his Eare,
In ſuffering in any Syllable to paſſe,
That, he thinkes, may become the honour'd name
Of Iſſue to his ſo examin'd ſelfe;
That all the laſting fruites of his full merit
In his owne Poemes, he doth ſtill diſtaſte:
As if his mindes Peece, which he ſtroue to paint,
Could not with fleſhly Penſils haue her right.
But, to approue his workes of Soueraigne worth,
This Obſeruation (me thinkes) more then ſerues:
And is not vulgar. That, which hee hath writ,
Is with ſuch iudgement, labour'd, and diſtill'd
Through all the needefull vſes of our liues,
That could a man remember but his Lines,
He ſhould not touch at any ſerious point,
But he might breath his ſpirit out of him.
You meane, he might repeat part of his workes,
As fit for any conference, he can vſe?
Trew, Royall Caeſar.
'Tis worthily obſeru'd:
And a moſt worthie vertue in his workes.
VVhat thinks, Materiall Horace, of his learning?
His Learning labours not the Schoole-like Gloſſe,
That moſt conſiſts in Ecchoing VVordes, and Termes,
And ſooneſt wins a man an Empty name;
Nor any long, or far-fetcht Circumſtance,
VVrapt in the curious General'ties of Artes:
But a direct, and Analyticke Summe
Of all the worth and firſt effectes of Artes.
And for his Poëſie, 'tis ſo ramm'd with Life,
That it ſhall gather ſtrength of Life, with being;
And liue hereafter, more admir'd, then now.
This one conſent, in all your doomes of him,
And mutuall Loues of all your ſeuerall merits,
Argues a truth of merit in you all.
See, here comes Virgill; we will riſe and greet him:
Welcome to Caeſar, Virgill. Caeſar, and Virgill
Shall differ but in ſound; to Caeſar, Virgill
(Of his expreſſed Greatneſſe) ſhall be made
A ſecond Sir-name; and to Virgill, Caeſar.
Where are thy Famous Aeneids? doe vs grace
To let vs ſee, and ſurfet on their ſight.
Worthleſſe they are of Caeſars gracious Eyes,
If they were perfect; much more, with their wants;
Which yet are more, then my Time could ſupply:
And, could great Caeſars expectation
Be ſatisfied with any other ſeruice,
I would not ſhew them.
Virgill is too modeſt;
Or ſeekes, in vaine, to make our longings more.
Shew them, ſweete Virgill.
Then, in ſuch due feare,
As fits Preſenters of great works, to Caeſar,
I humbly ſhew them:
Let vs now behold
A humane Soule made viſible in life;
And more refulgent in a ſenſeleſſe paper,
Then in the ſenſuall Complement of Kings.
Read, read, thy ſelfe, deare Virgill, let not me
Prophane one accent, with an vntun'd tongue:
"Beſt matter, badly ſhowne, ſhewes worſe, then bad.
See then, this Chayre, of Purpoſe ſet for thee
To reade thy Poeme in: Refuſe it not.
"Vertue, without preſumption, place may take
"Aboue beſt Kings, whom onely ſhe ſhould make.
It will be thought a thing ridiculous
To preſent Eyes, and to all future times
A groſſe vntruth; that any Poet (void
Of Birth, or wealth, or Temporall dignity)
Should, with decorum, tranſcend Caeſars Chayre.
"Poore Vertue raiſ'd, high birth and wealth ſet vnder,
"Croſſeth Heauens courſes, and makes worldlings wonder.
The courſe of Heauen, and Fate it ſelfe, in this
Will Caeſar croſſe; much more all worldly Cuſtome.
"Cuſtome, in courſe of Honour, euer erres:
"And they are beſt, whom Fortune leaſt preferres.
Horace hath (but more ſtrictly) ſpoke our thoughts.
The vaſt rude ſwinge of generall Confluence
Is, in particular ends, exempt from ſenſe:
And therefore Reaſon (which in right ſhould be
The ſpeciall Rector of all Harmony)
Shall ſhew we are a man, diſtinct by it,
From thoſe that Cuſtome rapteth in her preaſſe.
Aſcend then Virgill: and where firſt by Chaunce
We here haue turnd thy Booke, doe thou firſt read.
Great Caeſar hath his will: I will aſcend.
'Twere ſimple iniury to his free hand,
That ſweeps the Cobwebs, from vnuſed Vertue,
And makes her ſhine proportiond, to her worth,
To be more nice to entertaine his Grace;
Then he is choyſe, and liberall to afford it.
Gentlemen of our Chamber, guard the Doores,
And let none enter. Peace. Beginne, good Virgill.
Meane while, the Skies gan thunder; and in tayle
Of that, fell powring ſtormes of ſleete, and hayle:
The Tyrian Lords, and Troian youth, each where
With Venus Dardane Nephew, now, in feare
Seeke out for ſeuerall ſhelter through the Plaine;
Whil'ſt Flouds come rowling from the Hills amaine.
Dido a Caue, The Troian Prince the ſame
Lighted vpon; There, Earth, and Heauens great Dame
That hath the charge of Mariage, firſt gaue ſigne
Vnto this Contract; Fier, and Ayre did ſhine,
As guilty of the Match; and from the Hill,
The Nymphes, withſhriekings, doe the Region fill.
Here first began their Bane; This Day was ground
Of all their Ills: For now, nor Rumours ſound,
Nor nice reſpect of State mooues Dido ought;
Her Loue, no longer now, by ſtealth is ſought:
She calls this Wedlocke, and with that faire Name
Couers her fault. Forthwith the Bruit, and Fame,
Through all the greatest. Lybian Tawnes, is gone;
Fame, a fleete Euill, then which is ſwifter none:
That moouing growes, and flying gathers ſtrength;
Little at first, and fearefull; but at length.
She dares attempt the Skies, and ſtalking proud
With feete on Ground, her Head doth pearce a Cloud.
This Child, our Parent Earth, ſtird vp with ſpight
Of all the Gods, brought foorth; and, as ſome wright,
She was last ſister of that Giant Race
That thought to ſcale Ioues Court; right ſwift of Paſe,
And ſwifter, far, of Wing. A Monſter vast,
And dreadfull: Looke, how many Plumes are plac't
On her huge Corps, ſo many waking Eyes
Sticke vnderneath: and (which may ſtranger riſe
In the Report) as many Tongues ſhe beares,
As many Mouthes, as many listning Eares.
Nightly, in midst of all the Heauen, ſhe flies,
And through the Earths darke ſhadow, ſhrieking, cries;
Nor doe her Eyes once bend, to tast ſweete ſleepe:
By Day, on tops of Houſes, ſhe doth keepe,
Or on high Towers; and doth thence affright
Cities, and Townes of most conſpicuous ſite;
As couetous ſhe is of Tales, and Lies,
As prodigall of Truth: This Monſter, &c.
Come, follow me, aſſiſt me, ſecond me: where's the Emperour?
Sir, you muſt pardon vs.
Caeſar is priuate now, you may not enter.
Not Enter? Charge 'hem, vpon their Allegeance, Cropſhin.
We haue a charge to the contrary, Sir.
I pronounce you all Traytors, horrible Traytors:
What? Doe you know my Affaires?
I haue Matter of danger, and ſtate, to impart to Caeſar.
What, noyſe is there? who's that, names Caeſar?
A Friend to Caeſar. One that for Caeſars good would ſpeake with Caeſar.
Who is't? looke, Cornelius.
Aſinius Lupus.
O, bid the turbulent Informer hence;
We haue no vacant Eare, now, to receiue
The vnſeaſond fruits of his officious tongue.
You muſt auoid him there.
I coniure thee; as thou art Caeſar, or reſpect'ſt thine owne ſafety; or the ſafety of the ſtate, Caeſar: Heare me, ſpeake with me, Caeſar: 'tis no common buſines, I come about; but ſuch as, being neglected, may concerne the life of Caeſar.
The life of Caeſar? Let him Enter. Virgill, keepe thy Seate.
Beare backe there: whether will you? keepe backe.
By thy leaue good man Vſher: mend thy Periwig, ſo.
Lay hold on Horace there; and on Mecoenas, Lictors. Romanes, offer no reſcue, vpon your Allegeance: Read royall Caeſar; I'le tickle you, Satyre.
He will, Humors, he will: He will ſqueeze you, Poet Puckfiſt.
I'le Lop you off, for an vnprofitable braunch, you Satyricall Varlet.
I, and Epaminondas your Patron, here, with his flaggon Chayne; Come, reſigne: Though 'twere your great Graund-fathers, the Law ha's made it mine now, Sir. Looke to him, my party-colourd Raſcalls; Looke to him.
What is this, Aſinius Lupus? I vnderſtand it not.
Not vnderſtand it? A Libell, Caeſar. A dangerous, ſeditious Libell. A Libell in Picture.
A Libell?
I, I found it in this Horace his ſtudy; in Mecoenas his houſe, here; I challenge the penalty of the Lawes againſt 'hem.
I, and remember to begge their Land betimes; before ſome of theſe hungry Court-hounds ſent it out.
Shew it to Horace: Aske him, if he know it.
Know it? His hand is at it, Caeſar.
Then 'tis no Libell.
It is the imperfect Body of an Embleme, Caeſar, I began for Mecoenas.
An Embleme? right: That's Greeke for a Libell. Doe but marke, how Confident he is.
A Iuſt man cannot feare, thou fooliſh Tribune;
Not, though the Malice of traducing Tongues,
The open vaſtneſſe of a Tyrants Eare,
The ſenſeleſſe Rigor of the wreſted Lawes,
Or the red Eyes of ſtrain'd Authority
Should, in a point, meete all to take his life:
His Innocence is Armour 'gainſt all theſe.
Innocence? ô Impudence! Let me ſee, Let me ſee. Is not here an Eagle? And is not that Eagle meant by Caeſar? ha? Do's not Caeſar giue the Eagle? Anſwere me; what ſayſt thou?
Haſt thou any Euaſion, Stinkard?
Now hee's turn'd dumbe. I'le tickle you, Satyre.
Piſh. Ha, ha:
Doſt thou piſh me? Giue me my Long ſword.
With reuerence to great Caeſar, worthy Romanes, Obſerue but this ridiculous Commenter:
The Soule to my Deuiſe, was in this Diſtich.
Thus, oft, the baſe and rauenous multitude
Suruiue, to ſhare the ſpoyles of Fortitude:
Which in this Body, I haue figur'd here;
A VVLTVRE—
A Vulture? I; now, 'tis a Vulture. O, abhominable! Monſtrous! Monſtrous! ha's not your Vulture a Beake? ha's it not Legges? and Tallons? and Wings? and Fethers?
Touch him, old Buskins.
And therefore muſt it be an Eagle?
Reſpect him not, good Horace: Say your Deuiſe.
A VVLTVRE and a WOLFE—
A Wolfe? Good. That's I; I am the Wolfe: My name's Lupus; I am meant by the Wolfe. On, on; A Vulture, and a Wolfe—
Praying vpon the Carcaſſe of an ASSE—
An Aſſe? Good ſtill: That's I, too. I am the Aſſe. You meane me by the Aſſe.
'Pray thee, leaue braying then.
If you will needs take it, I cannot with Modeſtie giue it from you.
But, by that Beaſt, the old Aegyptians
Were wont to Figure in their Hieroglyphicks,
Patience, Frugality, and Fortitude;
For none of which, we can ſuſpect you, Tribune.
Who was it, Lupus, that inform'd you firſt, This ſhould be meant by vs? or was't your Comment?
No, Caeſar: A Player gaue me the firſt light of it, indeede.
I, an honeſt Sycophant-like Slaue, and a Politician, beſides.
Where is that Player?
He is without, here.
Call him in.
Call in the Player, there; Maſter Aeſope, call him.
Player? where is the Player? Beare backe; None, but the Player, enter.
Yes: this Gent'man, and his Achates muſt.
'Pray you, Maſter Vſher; wee'll ſtand cloſe, here.
'Tis a Gent'man of Qualitie, this; though he be ſomewhat out of Clothes, I tell yee. Come Aeſope: haſt a Bay leafe i'thy mouth? Well ſaid; be not out, Stinkard. Thou ſhalt haue a Monopoly of playing, confirm'd to thee and thy Couey, vnder the Emperours broad Seale, for this ſeruice.
Is this he?
I, Caeſar: this is he.
Let him be whipt. Lictors, Goe, take him hence.
And Lupus, for your fierce Credulity,
One fit him with a paire of larger Eares:
'Tis Caeſars Doome, and muſt not be reuok't.
VVe hate, to haue our Court, and Peace diſturb'd
VVith theſe quotidian Clamours. See it done.
Caeſar.
Gag him, we may haue his ſilence.
Caeſar hath done like Caeſar. Fayre, and Iuſt
Is his Award, againſt theſe braineleſſe Creatures.
'Tis not the wholſome ſharpe Morality,
Or modeſt anger of a Satyricke Spirit,
That hurts, or wounds the body of a State;
But the ſiniſter Application
Of the malitious, ignorant, and baſe
Interpreter; who will diſtort, and ſtraine
The generall Scope and purpoſe of an Author,
To his particular, and priuate ſpleene.
VVe knowe it, our deare Virgill; and eſteeme it
A moſt diſhoneſt practiſe, in that man,
Will ſeeme too wittie in anothers worke.
What would Cornelius Gallus, and Tibullus?
Nay, but as thou art a man, do'ſt heare? a man of worſhippe; and honorable: Hold, here, take thy chaine againe: Reſume, mad Mecoenas. What? do'ſt thou thinke, I meant t'haue kept it, old Boy? No; I did it but to fright thee, I: to try how thou would'ſt take it. What? will I turne Sharke, vpon my Friends? or my friends Friends? I ſcorn it with my three Soules. Come; I loue Bully Horace, as well as thou do'ſt, I: 'tis an honeſt Hieroglyphick. Giue me thy wriſt Helicon. Do'ſt thou thinke, I'le ſecond ere a Rhinoceros of them all, againſt thee? ha? or thy noble Hippocrene, here? I'le turne Stager firſt, and be whipt too; do'ſt thou ſee, Bully?
You haue your will of Caeſar; vſe it Romanes.
Virgill ſhall be your Praetor; and our ſelfe
VVill here fit by, Spectator of your ſports;
And thinke it no impeach of Royalty.
Our Eare is now too much prophan'd ((Graue Maro)
VVith theſe diſtaſts, to take thy ſacred Lines:
Put vp thy Booke, till both the Time and wee
Be fitted with more hallowed circumſtance
For the receiuing ſo diuine a Labour.
Proceede with your deſſeigne.
Gall. Tib. Thanks to great Caeſar.
Tibullus, drawe you the Inditement then, whil'ſt Horace arreſts them, on the Statute of Calumny: Mecoenas, and I will take our places here; Lictors, aſſiſt him.
I am the worſt Accuſer, vnder Heauen.
Tut, you muſt do't: 'Twill be noble Mirth.
I take no knowledge, that they doe maligne me.
I, but the world takes knowledge.
'Would the World knew How hartily I wiſh, A Foole ſhould hate me.
Body of Iupiter! What? Will they arraigne my briske Poëtaſter, and his poore Iourneyman, ha? Would I were abroad skeldring for Twopence, ſo I were out of this Labyrinth againe: I doe feele my ſelfe turne Stinkard already. But I muſt ſet the beſt Face I haue, vpon't now: well ſaid, my diuine, deft Horace; bring the whorſon detracting Slaues to the Barre, doe; Make 'hem hold vp their ſpread Golls; I'le giue in Euidence for thee, if thou wilt. Take courage Criſpinus; Would thy man had a cleane band.
What muſt we doe, Captaine?
Thou ſhalt ſee anon: Doe not make Diuiſion with thy Legges, ſo.
What's he, Horace?
I only know him for a Motion, Caeſar.
I am one of thy Commanders, Caeſar; A man of Seruice, and Action; My Name is Pantilius Tucca: I haue ſeru'd i'thy Warres againſt Marke Antony; I.
Doe you know him, Cornelius?
Hee's one, that hath had the Muſtring, or Conuoy of a Company, now, and then; I neuer noted him by any other Imployment.
We will obſerue him better.
Lictor, proclaime Silence, in the Court.
In the name of Caeſar, Silence.
Let the Parties, the Accuſer, and the Accuſed, preſent them ſelues.
The Accuſer, and the Accuſed; Preſent your ſelues in Court.
Demet. Here.
Reade the Inditement.
Rufus Laberius Criſpinus, and Demetrius Fannius, hold vp your hands. You are, before this time, toyntly and ſeuerally indited; and here preſently to be arraigned, vpon the Statute of Calumny, or Lex Remmia (The one by the name of Rufus Laberius Criſpinus, aliàs Criſpinas, Poētaſter, and Plagiary: the other by the name of Demetrius Fannius, Play-dreſſer & Plagiary) That you (not hauing the feare of Phoebus or his ſhafts, before your eyes) contrary to the peace of our liege Lord, Auguſtus Caeſar, his Crowne and dignitie, and againſt the forme of a Statute in that caſe made, and prouided; haue moſt ignorantly, fooliſhly, and (more like your ſelues) malitiouſly gone about to depraue, and calumniate the Perſon and writings of Quintus Horatius Flaccus, here preſent, Poet, and Prieſt to the Muſes: and to that end haue mutually conspir'd, and plotted, at ſundry times, as by ſeuerall meanes, and in ſundry places, for the better accompliſhing your baſe and Enuious purpoſe; taxing him, falſely, of Sefe loue, Arrogancy, Impudence, Rayling, filching by Tranſlation, &c. Of all which Calumnies, and euery of them in manner and forme aforeſaid, what anſwere you? Are you Guiltie, or not Guilty?
Not Guilty, ſay.
Dem. Not Guilty.
How will you be tryed?
By the Romane Gods, and the nobleſt Romanes.
Dem. By the Romane Gods, and the nobleſt Romans.
Here fits Mecoenas, and Cornelius Gallus;
Are you contented to be tryed by theſe?
I; So the noble Captaine may be ioyn'd with them in Commiſſion; ſay.
Dem. I; ſo the noble Captaine may bee ioyn'd with them in Commiſſion.
VVhat ſaies the Plaintife.
I am content.
Captaine, then take your Place.
Alas, my worſhipfull Praetor! 'tis more of thy Gent'neſſe, then of my deſeruing, Iwuſſe. But, ſince it hath pleaſ'd the Court to make choyce of my VViſdome, and Grauitie, Come my Calumnious Varlets; Let's heare you talke for your ſelues now, an howre or two. What can you ſay? Make a noyſe. Act, Act.
Stay; turne, & take an Oath firſt. Youſhall ſweare,
By Thunder-darting Ioue, the King of Gods;
And by the Genius of Auguſtus Caeſar;
By your owne white, and vncorrupted Soules;
And the deepe reuerence of our Romane Iustice;
To iudge this Caſe, with Truth and Equitie:
As bound, by your Religion, and your Lawes.
Now reade the Euidence: But firſt demaund
Of either Priſoner, if that Writ be theirs.
Shew this vnto Criſpinus. Is it yours?
Say I. what? doſt thou ſtand vpon it, Pimpe? Doe not deny thine owne Minerua; thy Pallas; the Iſſue of thy Braine.
Yes, it is mine.
Shewe that vnto Demetrius. Is it yours?
It is.
There's a Father, will not deny his owne Baſtard, now, I warrant thee.
Reade them alowd.
Rampe vp, my Genius; be not Retrograde:
But boldly nominate a Spade, a Spade.
VVhat, ſhall thy Lubricall and glibbery Muſe
Liue, as ſhe were defunct, like Punque in Stewes?
Alas! That, were no moderne Conſequence,
To haue cothurnall Buſkins frighted hence.
No; teach thy Incubus to Poetize,
And throwe abroad thy ſpurious Snotteries,
Vpon that puft-vp Lumpe of Barmy froth,
Or Clumſy Chil-blain'd Iudgement; that, with Oath,
Magnificates his Merit; and beſpaules
The conſcious Time, with humorous Fome; & brawles,
As if his Organons of Senſe would crack
The ſinewes of my Patience. Breake his Back,
O Poëts all and ſome: For now wee liſt
Of strenuous Venge-ance to clutch the fiſt.
I mary, this was written like a Hercules in Poetry, now.
Excellently well threatned.
I, and as ſtrangely worded, Caeſar.
We obſerue it.
The other, now.
This's a fellow of a good prodigall tongue too; this'll doe well.
Our Muſe is in minde for th'vntruſſing a Poet:
I ſlip by his Name; for moſt men doe know it:
A Critick, that al the world beſcumbers
With Satyricall Humors, and Lyricall Numbers:
And for the moſt part, himſelfe doth aduance
VVith much ſelfe-loue, and more Arrogance:
And (but that I would not be thought a Prater)
I could tell you, he were a Tranſlater.
I knowe the Authors from whence he ha's ſtole,
And could trace him too, but that I vnderſtand 'hem not full and whole.
The beſt note I can giue you to knowe him by,
Is, that he keepes Gallants company;
Whome I would wiſh, in time ſhould him feare,
Leaſt after they buy Repentance too deare.
Well ſaid. This carries Palme with it.
And why, thou Motley Gull? why ſhould they feare?
When haſt thou knowne vs wrong, or taxe a Friend?
I dare thy malice, to betray it. Speake.
Now thou curlſt vp, thou poore and naſty Snake;
And ſhrinkſt thy poyſnous head into thy Boſome:
Out Viper; thou that eat'ſt thy Parents, hence.
Rather, ſuch ſpeckled Creatures, as thy ſelfe,
Should be eſchew'd, and ſhund: ſuch, as will bite
And gnaw their abſent Friends, not cure their Fame;
Catch at the looſeſt Laughters, and affect
To be thought Ieſters; ſuch, as can deuiſe
Things neuer ſeene, or heard, t' impayre mens Names,
And gratifie their credulous Aduerſaries;
Will carry Tales; doe baſeſt offices;
Cheriſh diuided Fiers; and increaſe
New Flames, out of old Embers; will reueale
Each ſecret that's committed to their Truſt:
Theſe be blacke Slaues; Romanes, take heede of theſe.
Thou twangſt right, little Horace; they be indeed:
A couple of Chap-falne Curres. Come, Wee of the Bench,
Let's riſe to the Vrne, and condemne 'hem, quickly.
Before you goe together (worthy Romanes)
We are to tender our Opinion;
And giue you thoſe Inſtructions, that may adde
Vnto your euen Iudgement in the Cauſe;
Which thus we doe Commence: Firſt, you muſt know
That where there is a true, andperfect Merit,
There can be no Deiection; and the Scorne
Of humble Baſeneſſe, oftentimes, ſo workes
In a high Soule vpon the groſſer Spirit;
That to his bleared, and offended Senſe,
There ſeemes a hideous Fault blaz'd in the Obiect;
When only the Diſeaſe is in his Eyes.
Here-hence it comes, our Horace now ſtands taxt
Of Impudence, Selfe-loue, and Arrogance,
By theſe, who ſhare no merit in themſelues;
And therefore, thinke his Portion is as ſmall.
For they, from their owne guilt, aſſure their Soules,
If they ſhould confidently praiſe their workes,
In them it would appeare Inflation;
Which, in a full, and well-digeſted man,
Cannot receiue that foule abuſiue name,
But the faire Title of Erection.
And, for his trewe vſe of tranſlating Men,
It ſtill hath beene a worke of as much Palme
In cleareſt Iudgements, as t' inuent, or make.
His ſharpneſſe, that is moſt excuſable;
As being forc't out of a ſuffering Vertue,
Oppreſſed with the Licence of the Time:
And howſoeuer Fooles, or Ierking Pedants,
Players, or ſuch like Buffonary wits,
May with their beggerly, and barren traſh,
Tickle baſe vulgar eares, in their deſpight;
This (like Ioues Thunder) ſhall their pride controule.
"The honest Satyre hath the happiest Soule.
Now, Romanes, you haue heard our thoughts. Withdrawe, when you pleaſe.
Remoue the Accuſed from the Barre.
Who holdes the Vrne to vs? ha? Feare nothing: I'le quitte you, mine honeſt pittifull Stinkards. I'le do't.
Captaine, you ſhall eternally girt me to you, as I am Generous.
Goe to.
Tibullus, let there bee a caſe of Vizardes priuately prouided: wee haue founde a Subiect to beſtowe them on.
It ſhall be done, Caeſar.
Here be wordes, Horace, able to baſtinado a mans Eares.
I. Pleaſe it great Caeſar, I haue Pils about mee
(Mixt with the whiteſt kinde of Ellebore)
Would giue him a light vomite; that ſhould purge
His Braine, and Stomack of thoſe tumorous heates:
Might I haue leaue to miniſter vnto him.
O! be as Aeſculapius, Gentle Horace;
You ſhall haue leaue, and he ſhall be your Patient.
Virgill, vſe your Authoritie, commaund him forth.
Caeſar is carefull of your health, Crispinus;
And hath himſelfe choſe a Phiſtian
To miniſter vnto you: take his Pils.
They are ſomewhat bitter, but wholſome;
Take another, yet; ſo: Stand by, they'll worke anone.
Romanes, returne to your ſeuerall ſeates: Lictors,
Bring forward the Vrne; and ſet the Accuſed at the Barre.
Quickly, you VVhorſon Egregious Varlettes; Come forwarde. What? ſhall wee ſit all day vpon you? you make no more haſte, now, than a Begger vpon Pattins: or a Phiſitian to a Patient that ha's no money, you Pilchers.
Rufus Laberius Criſpinus, and Demetrius Fannius, holde vp your handes. You haue (according to the Romane Cuſtome) put your ſelues vpon Tryall to the Vrne, for diuers and ſundry Calumnies, whereof, you haue before this time beene indited, and are now preſently arraigned: Prepare your ſelues to harken to the verdict of your Tryers. Caius Cilnius Mecoenas pronounceth you, by this hand-writing, Guiltie. Corneli.
Gallus, Guiltie. Pantilius Tucca—
us Parcell Guiltie; I.
He meanes himſelfe: for it was he indeede,
Suborn'd vs to the Calumny.
I, you whorſon Cantharides? was't I?
I appeale to your conſcience, Captaine.
Then, you confeſſe it, now.
I doe, and craue the mercie of the Court.
What ſaith Crispinus?
O, the Captaine, the Captaine.
My Phyſicke begins to worke with my Patient, I ſee.
Captaine; ſtand forth and anſwere.
Hold thy peace, Poet Praetor: I appeale frō thee, to Caeſar, I. Doe me right, Royall Caeſar.
Mary, and I will, Sir. Lictors, gag him:
And put a caſe of vizards o're his head,
That he may looke Bi-fronted, as he ſpeakes.
Gods, and Fiends. Caeſar! thou wilt not Caeſar? wilt thou? Away, you whorſon Vultures; away. You thinke I am a deade Corps now; becauſe Caeſar is diſpoſ'd to ieſt with a man of Marke, or ſo. Holde your hook't talons out of my fleſh, you inhumane Gorboduckes. Goe to, do't. VVhat? will the Royall Auguſtus caſt away a Gent'man of worſhippe, a Captaine, and a Cōmaunder; for a couple of condemn'd Caitiue Calumnious Cargo's?
Diſpatch, Lictors.
Caeſar.
Forward, Tibullus.
Demaund, what cauſe they had to maligne Horace.
In troth, no great cauſe, not I; I muſt confeſſe: but that he kept better companie (for the moſt part) then I: and that better Men lou'd him, then lou'd me: and that his writings thriu'd better then mine, and were better lik't & grac't: Nothing elſe.
Thus, enuious Soules repine at others good.
If this be all; faith, I forgiue thee freely.
Enuie me ſtill; ſo long as Virgill loues me,
Gallus, Tibullus, and the beſt-beſt Caeſar,
My deare Mecoenas; while theſe, with many more
(VVhoſe names I wiſely ſlip) ſhall think me worthy
Their honour'd and ador'd Society,
And read, and loue, prooue, and applaud my Poemes;
I would not wiſh but ſuch as you ſhould ſpight them.
O.
How now, Criſpinus?
O, I am ſicke.
A Baſon, a Baſon, quickly; our Phyſicke works. Faint not, man.
O—Retrograde—Reciprocall—Incubus.
What's that, Horace?
Retrograde, Reciprocall, and Incubus are come vp.
Thanks be to Iupiter.
O—Glibbery—Lubricall—Defunct—O—
VVell ſaid: here's ſome ſtore.
VVhat are they?
Glibbery, Lubricall, and Defunct.
O, they came vp eaſie.
O—O—
VVhat's that?
Nothing, yet.
Magnificate.
Magnificate? that came vp ſomewhat hard.
I. VVhat cheare, Crispinus?
O, I ſhall caſt vp my—Spurious—Snotteries—
Good. Againe.
Chilblaind—O—O—Clumſie—
That Clumſie ſtucke terribly.
What's all that, Horace?
Spurious, Snotteries, Chilblain'd, Clumſie.
O Iupiter!
VVho would haue thought, there ſhould ha' been ſuch a deale of filth in a Poet?
O—Barmy Froth!
What's that?
—Puffy—Inflate—Turgidous—Ventoſity.
Barmy Froth, Puffy, Inflate, Turgidous, and Ventoſity are come vp.
O, terrible, windy words!
A ſigne of a windy Braine.
O—Oblatrant—Obcaecate—Furibund—Fatuate—Strenuous.—
Heer's a deale: Oblatrant, Obcaecate, Furibund, Fatuate, Strenuous.
Now, all's come vp, I trow. What a Tumult he had in his Belly!
No: there's the often Conſcious behind, ſtill.
O—Conſcious.
It's come vp, thankes to Apollo, and Aeſculapius: Yet, there's another; you were beſt take a Pill more?
O, no: O—O—O—O.
Force your ſelfe then, a little with your Finger.
O—O—Prorumped.
Prorumped? What a noyſe it made! as if his Spirit would haue Prorumpt with it.
O—O—O.
Helpe him: it ſtickes ſtrangely, what euer it is.
O—Clutcht.
Now it's come: Clutcht.
Clucht? It's well, that's come vp. It had but a narrow Paſſage.
O—
Againe, hold him: hold his head there.
Tropologicall—Anagogicall—Loquacity—Pinnoſity.
How now, Criſpinus?
O—Obſtupefact.
Nay: that are all we, I aſſure you.
How doe you feele your ſelfe?
Pretty, and well, I thanke you.
Theſe Pilles can but reſtore him for a Time;
Not cure him quite of ſuch a Malady,
Caught by ſo many ſurfets; which haue fild
His Blood, and Braine, thus full of Crudities:
'Tis neceſſary, therefore, he obſerue
A ſtrict and holſome Diet. Looke, you take
Each morning, of old Catoes Principles
A good draught, next your heart; that walke vpon,
Till it be well digeſted: Then come home,
And taſte a piece of Terence; ſucke his Phraſe
In ſteede of Licorice; and, at any hand,
Shun Plautus, and old Ennius: They are meates
Too harſh for a weake Stomacke. Vſe to read
(But not without a Tutor) the beſt Greekes:
As Orpheus, Muſaeus, Pindarus,
Heſiod, Callimachus, and Theocrite,
High Homer; but beware of Lycophron:
He is too darke, and dangerous a Diſh.
You muſt not hunt for wild, out-landiſh Termes,
To ſtuffe out a peculiar Dialect;
But let your Matter runne before your Words:
And if, at any time, you chaunce to meete
Some Gallo-Belgick Phraſe, you ſhall not ſtraight
Racke your poore Verſe to giue it entertainement;
But let it paſſe: and doe not thinke your ſelfe
Much damnified, if you doe leaue it out;
When, nor your Vnderſtanding, nor the Senſe
Could well receiue it. This faire Abſtinence,
In time, will render you more ſound, and Cleare;
And this haue I preſcrib'd to you, in place
Of a ſtrict Sentence: which till he performe,
Attire him in that Robe. And hence-forth, learne
To beare your ſelfe more humbly; not to ſwell,
Or breath your inſolent, and idle Spight,
On him, whoſe Laughter, can your worſt affright.
Take him away.
Iupiter guard Caeſar.
And, for a weeke, or two, ſee him lockt vp
In ſome darke Place, remoou'd from Company:
He will talke idly elſe after his Phyſicke.
Now, to you, Sir: Th'Extremity of Law
Awards you to be branded in the front,
For this your Calumny; But, ſince it pleaſeth
Horace (the Party wrongd) t'intreat, of Caeſar,
A Mitigation of that iuſter Doome;
With Caeſars tongue, thus we pronounce your ſentence.
Demetrius Fannius, thou ſhalt here put on
That Coate, and Cap; and hencefoorth, thinke thy ſelfe
No other, then they make thee: vow to weare them
In euery Faire, and Generous Aſſembly,
Till the beſt ſort of Minds ſhall take to knowledge
As well thy ſatisfaction, as thy wrongs.
Only (Graue Praetor) here, in open Court,
I craue the Oath, for good Behauiour,
May be adminiſtred vnto them both.
Horace, it ſhall: Tibullus, giue it them.
Rufus Laberius Criſpinus, and Demetrius Fannius, Lay your hands on your hearts. You ſhall here ſolemnely conteſt, and ſweare; That neuer (after this inſtant) either, at Booke-ſellers Stalls, in Tauernes, Two-penny Roomes, 'Tiring-houſes, Noble-mens Buttryes, Puiſne's Chambers (the beſt, and fartheſt Places, where you are admitted to come) you ſhall once offer, or dare (thereby to endeare your ſelfe the more to any Player, Enghle, or guilty Gull, in your Company) to maligne, traduce, or detract the Perſon, or Writings of Quintus Horatius Flaccus; or any other Eminent Man, tranſcending you in Merit, whom your Enuy ſhall finde cauſe to worke vpon, either, for that, or for keeping him ſelfe in better Acquaintance, or enioying better Friends: Or if (tranſported by any ſodaine and deſperate Reſolution) you doe; That then, you ſhall not vnder the Baſtoun, or in the next Preſence, being an honorable Aſſembly of his Fauourers, be brought as voluntary Gent: to vndertake the forſwearing of it. Neither ſhall you at any time (ambitiouſly, affecting the Title of the Vntruſſers, or Whippers of the Age) ſuffer the Itch of writing to ouer-run your performance in Libel; vpon paine of being taken vp for Lepers, in Wit, and (looſing both your Time, and your Papers) be irrecouerably forfeyted to the Hoſpitall of Fooles. So helpe you our Romane Gods, and the Genius of great Caeſar.
So: now diſſolue the Court.
And thankes to Caeſar,
That thus hath exerciſ'd his Patience.
We haue, indeed, you worthieſt friends of Caeſar.
It is the Bane, and Torment of our Eares,
To heare the diſcords of thoſe Iangling Rimers,
That, with their bad and ſcandalous Practiſes,
Bring all true Arts, and learning in Contempt.
But let not your high thoughts deſcend ſo lowe,
As theſe deſpiſed Obiects; Let them fall,
With their flat groueling Soules: Be you your ſelues.
And as with our beſt fauours you ſtand crownd:
So let your mutuall loues be ſtill renownd.
Enuy will dwell, where there is want of Merit,
Though the deſeruing man ſhould cracke his Spirit.
BLVSH, Folly, Bluſh: here's none that feares
The wagging of an Aſſes Eares,
Although a Wooluiſh caſe he weares.
Detraction is but Baſeneſſe Varlet;
And Apes are Apes, though cloth'd in Scarlet.
Rumpatur, quiſquis rumpitur inuidia.