SIr Hugh, perſwade mee not: I will make a Star-Chamber matter of it, if he were twenty Sir Iohn Falſtoffe, hee ſhall not abuſe Robert Shadow Eſquire.
In the County of Gloceſter, Iuſtice of Peace and Coram.
I (Coſen Slender) and Cuſt▪ alorum.
I, and Rotulorum too; and a Gentleman borne (Maſter Parſon) who writes himſelfe Armigero, in any Bill, Warrant, Quittance, or Obligation, Armigero.
I that I doe, and haue done any time theſe three hundred yeeres.
All his ſucceſſors (gone before him) hath don't: and all his Anceſtors (that come after him) may: they may giue the dozen white Luces in their Coate.
It is an olde Coate.
The dozen white Lowſes doe become an olde Coat well: it agrees well paſſant: It is a familiar beaſt to man, and ſignifies Loue.
The Luſe is the freſh-fiſh, the ſalt-fiſh is an old Coate.
I may quarter (Coz).
You may, by marrying.
It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
Not a whit.
Yes per-lady: if hee ha's a quarter of your coate, there is but three Shirts for your ſelfe, in my ſimple coniectures; but that is all one: if Sir Iohn Falſtaffe haue committed diſparagements vnto you▪ I am of the Church and will be glad to doe my beneuolence, to make attonements and compremiſes betweene you.
The Councell ſhall heare it, it is a Riot.
It is not meet the Councell heare a Riot: there is no feare of Got in a Riot: The Councell (looke you) ſhall deſire to heare the feare of Got, and not to heare a Riot: take your viza-ments in that.
Ha; o'my life, if I were yong againe, the ſword ſhould end it.
It is petter that friends is the ſword, and end it: and there is alſo another deuice in my praine, which peraduenture prings goot diſcretions with it. There is Anne Page, which is daughter to Maſter Thomas Page, which is pretty virginity.
Miſtris Anne. Page? ſhee has browne haire, and ſpeakes ſmall like a woman.
It is that ferry perſon for all the world, as iuſt as you will deſire, and ſeuen hundred pounds of Moneies, and Gold, & Siluer, is her Grand▪ ſire vpon his deaths-bed (Got deliuer to a ioyfull reſurrections) giue, when ſhe is able to ouertake ſeuenteene yeeres old. It were a goot motion, if we leaue our pribbles and prabbles, and deſire a marriage betweene Maſter▪ Abraham, and Miſtris Anne Page.
Did her Grand, ſire leaue her ſeauen hundred pound▪
I, and her father is make her a petter penny.
I know the young Gentlewoman, ſhe has good gifts.
Seuen hundred pounds, & poſſibilities, is goot gifts.
Wel, let vs ſee honeſt Maſter Page is Falſtaffe there▪
Shall I tell you a lye? I doe deſpiſe a lyer, as I doe deſpiſe one that is falſe, or as I deſpiſe one that is not true: the Knight Sir Iohn is there, and I beſeech you be ruled by your well-willers: I will peat the doore for Maſter Page. What hoa? Got-pleſſe your houſe heere.
Who's there?
Here is go 't's pleſting and your friend, and Iuſtice Shallow, & heere young Maſter Slender: that peraduentures ſhall tell you another tale, if matters grow to your likings.
I am glad to ſee your Worſhips well: I thanke you for my Veniſon Maſter Shallow.
Maſter Page, I am glad to ſee you: much good doe it your good heart: I wiſh'd your Veniſon better, it was ill killed: how doth good Miſtreſſe Page? and I thanke you alwaies with my heart, la▪ with my heart.
Sir, I thanke you.
Sir, I thanke you: by yea, and no I doe.
I am glad to ſee you, good Maſter Slender.
How do's your fallow Greyhound, Sir, I heard ſay he was out▪ run on Cotſall.
It could not be iudg'd, Sir,
You'll not confeſſe: you'll not confeſſe.
That hee will not, 'tis your fault: 'tis your fault: 'tis a good dogge.
A Cur, Sir.
Sir: hee's a good dog, and a faire dog, can there be more ſaid? he is good and faire. Is Sir Iohn Falſtaffe heerr?
Sir, hee is within: and I would I could doe a good office betweene you.
It is ſpoke as a Chriſtians ought to ſpeake.
He hath wrong'd me Maſter Page.)
Sir, he doth in ſome ſort confeſſe it.
If it be confeſſed, it is not redreſſed; is not that ſo (M. Page?) he hath wrong'd me, indeed he hath, at a word he hath: belecue me, Robert Shallow Eſquire, ſaith hee is wronged.
Here comes Sir Iohn.
Now, Maſter Shallow, you'll complaine of me to the King?
Knight, you haue beaten my men, kill'd my deere, and broke open my Lodge.
But not kiſs'd your Keepers daughter?
Tut, a pin: this ſhall be anſwer'd.
I will anſwer it ſtrait, I haue done all this:
That is now anſwer'd.
The Councell ſhall know this.
'T were better for you if it were known in Councell: you'll be laugh'd at.
Pauca verba; (Sir Iohn) good worts.
Good worts? good Cabidge; Slender, I broke your head: what matter haue you againſt me?
Marry ſir, I haue matter in my head againſt you, and againſt your cony-catching Raſcals, Bardolf, Nym, and Piſtoll.
You Banbery Cheeſe.
I, it is no matter.
How now, Mephoſtophilus?
I, it is no matter.
Slice, I ſay; pauca, pauca: Slice, that's my humor:
Where's Simple my man? can you tell, Coſen?
Peace, I pray you▪ now let vs vnderſtand: there is three Vmpires in this matter, as I vnderſtand; that is, Maſter Page (fidelicet Maſter Page,) and there is my ſelfe, (fidelicet my ſelfe) and the three party is (laſtly, and finally) mine Hoſt of the Garter.
We three to heare it, and end it between them:
Ferry goo't, I will make a priefe of it in my notebooke, and we will afterwards orke vpon the cauſe, with as great diſcreetly as we can.
Piſtoll.
He heares with eares.
The Teuill and his Tam: what phraſe is this? hee heares with eare? why, it is affectations.
Piſtoll, did you picke M. Slenders purſe?
I, by theſe gloues did he, or I would I might neuer come in mine owne great chamber againe elſe, of ſeauen groates in mill-ſixpences, and two Edward Shouelboords, that coſt me two ſhilling and two pence a peece of Yead Miller: by theſe gloues.
Is this true, Piſtoll?
No, it is falſe, if it is a picke-purſe.
Ha, thou mountaine Forreyner: Sir Iohn, and Maſter mine, I combat challenge of this Latine Bilboe: word of deniall in thy labras here; word of deniall; froth, and ſcum thou lieſt.
By theſe gloues, then 'twas he.
Be auis'd ſir, and paſſe good humours: I will ſay marry trap with you, if you runne the nut-hooks humor on me, that is the very note of it.
By this hat, then hee in the red face had it: for though I cannot remember what I did when you made me drunke, yet I am not altogether an aſſe.
What ſay you Scarlet, and Iohn?
Why ſit, (for my part) I ſay the Gentleman had drunke himſelfe out of his fiue ſentences.
It is his fie ſences: fie, what the ignorance is.
And being fap, ſir, was (as they ſay) caſheerd: and ſo concluſions paſt the Car-eires.
I, you ſpake in Latten then to: but 'tis no matter; Ile nere be drunke whilſt I liue againe, but in honeſt, ciuill, godly company for this tricke: if I be drunke, Ile bee drunke with thoſe that haue the feare of God, and not with drunken knaues.
So got udge me, that is a vertuous minde.
You heare all theſe matters deni'd, Gentlemen; you heare it.
Nay daughter, carry the wine in, wee'll drinke within.
Oh heauen: This is Miſtreſſe Anne Page:
How now Miſtris Ford?
Miſtris Ford, by my troth you are very well met: by your leaue good Miſtris.
Wife bid theſe gentlemen welcome: come, we haue a hot Veniſon paſty to dinner; Come gentlemen, I hope we ſhall drinke downe all vnkindneſſe.
I had rather then forty ſhillings I had my booke of Songs and Sonnets heere: How now Simple, where haue you beene? I muſt wait on my ſelfe, muſt I? you haue not the booke of Riddles about you, haue you?
Booke of Riddles? why did you not lend it to Alice Short-cake vpon Alhallowmas laſt, a fortnight afore Michaelmas.
Come Coz, come Coz, wee ſtay for you: a word with you Coz: marry this there is as 'twere a tender, a kinde of tender, made a faire-off by Sir Hugh here: doe you vnderſtand me?
I Sir, you ſhall finde me reaſonable, if it be ſo, I ſhall doe that that it reaſon.
Nay, but vnderſtand me▪
So I doe Sir.
Giue care to his motions; (Maſter Slender) I will deſcription the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
Nay, I will doe as my Cozen Shallow ſaies: I pray you pardon me, he's a Iuſtice of Peace in his Countrie, ſimple though I ſtand here.
But that is not the queſtion: the queſtion is concerning your marriage.
I, there's the point Sir.
Marry is it▪ the very point of it, to Miſt. Anne▪ Page.
Why if it be ſo▪ I will marry hervpon any reaſonable demands.
But can you affection the'o man, let vs command to know that of your mouth, or of your lips: for diners Philoſophers hold, that the lips is parcell of the mouth▪ therefore preciſely, can you carry your good will to the maide?
Coſen Abraham Slender, can you loue her?
I hope ſir, I will doe as it ſhall become one that would doe reaſon.
Nay, got's Lords, and his Ladies, you muſt ſpeake poſſitable, if you can carry-her your deſires towards her.
That you muſt.
Will you, (vpon good dowry) marry her?
I will doe a greater thing then that, vpon your requeſt (Coſen) in any reaſon.
Nay conceiue mee, conceiue mee, (ſweet Coz): what I doe is to pleaſure you (Coz) can you loue the maid?
I will marry her (Sir) at your requeſt; but if there be no great loue in the beginning, yet Heauen may decreaſe it vpon better acquaintance, when wee are married, and haue more occaſion to know one another; I hope vpon familiarity will grow more content; but if you ſay mary-her, I will mary-her, that I am freely diſſolued, and diſſolutely.
It is a fery diſcretion-anſwere; ſaue the fall is in the'ord, diſſolutely; the ort is (according to our meaning) reſolutely: his meaning is good.
I, I thinke my Coſen meant well.
I or elſe I would I might be hang'd (la▪)
Here comes faire Miſtris Anne; would I were yong for your ſake, Miſtris Anne.
The dinner is on the Table, my Father deſires your worſhips company.
I will wait on him, (faire Miſtris Anee.
Od's pleſſed-will; I will not be abſence at the grace
Wil't pleaſe your worſhip to come in, Sir?
No, I thanke you forſooth, hartely; I am very well.
The dinner attends you Sir.
I am not a hungry, I thanke you, forſooth; goe Sirha, for all you are my man, goe waite vpon my Coſen Shallow; a Iuſtice of peace ſometime may be beholding to his friend, for a Man; I keepe but three Men and a Boy yet, till my Mother be dead; but what though, yet I liue like a a poore Gentleman borne.
I may not goe in without your worſhip; they will not ſit till you come.
I▪faith, ile eate nothing, I thanke you as much as though I did.
I pray you Sir walke in.
I had rather walke here (I thanke you) I bruiz'd my ſhin th'other day, with playing at Sword and Dagger with a Maſter of Fence (three veneys for a diſh of ſlew'd Prunes) and by my troth, I cannot abide the ſmell of hot meat ſince. Why doe your dogs barke ſo? be there Beares ith' Towne?
I thinke there are, Sir, I heard them talk'd of.
I loue the ſport well, but I ſhall as ſoone quarrell at it, as any man in England, you are afraid if you ſee the Beare looſe, are you not?
I indeede Sir.
That's meate and drinke to me now; I haue ſeene Sackerſon looſe, twenty times, and haue taken him by the Chaine, but (I warrant you) the women haue ſo cride and ſhrekt at it, that it paſt. But women indeede, cannot abide'em, they are very ill-fauour'd rough things.
Come, gentle M. Slender, come; we ſtay for you.
Ile eate nothing, I thanke you Sir.
By cocke and pie, you ſhall not chooſe, Sir: come, come.
Nay, pray you lead the way.
Come on Sir.
Miſtris Anne: your ſelfe ſhall goe firſt.
Not I Sir, pray you keepe on.
Truely I will not goe firſt, truely-la▪ I will not doe you that wrong.
I pray you Sir.
Ile rather be vnmannerly, then troubleſome, you do your ſelfe wrong indeede-la.
Go your wayes, and aske of Doctor Caius houſe, which is the way; and there dwels one Miſtris Quickly; which is in the manner of his Nurſe; or his dry-Nurſe; or his Cooke; or his Laundry; his Waſher, and his Ringer.
Well Sir.
Nay, it is petter yet; giue her this letter; for▪t is a'oman that altogeathers acquaintance with Miſtris Anne Page; and the Letter is to deſire, and require her to ſolicite your Maſters deſires, to Miſtris Anne Page. I pray you bee gon: I will make an end of my dinner; ther's Pippins and Cheeſe to come.
Mine Hoſt of the Garter?
What ſaies my Bully Rooke? ſpeake ſchollerly, and wiſely.
Truely mine Hoſt; I muſt turne away ſome of my followers.
Diſcard, (bully Hercules) caſheere; let them wag; trot, trot.
I ſit at ten pounds a weeke.
Thou'rt an Emperor (Ceſar, Keiſer and Pheazar) I will entertaine Bardolfe; he ſhall draw; he ſhall tap; ſaid I well (bully Hector?)
Doe ſo (good mine Hoſt.)
I haue ſpoke, let him follow, let me ſee thee froth, and liue: I am at a word: follow.
Bardolfe, follow him; a Tapſter is a good trade, an old Cloake, makes a new Ierkin, a wither'd Seruingman, a freſh Tapſter; goe, adew.
It is a life that I haue deſir'd, I will thriue.
O baſe hungarian wight, wilt thou the ſpigot wield:
He was gotten in drinke, is not the humor conceited
I am glad I am ſo acquit of this Tinderbox, his Thefts were too open, his filching was like an vnskilfull Singer, he kept not time.
The good humor is to ſteale at a minuntes reſt.
Conuay: the wiſe it call: Steale? foh: a fico for the phraſe.
Well ſirs, I am almoſt out at heeles.
Why then let Kibes enſue.
There is no remedy: I muſt conicatch, I muſt ſhift,
Yong Rauens muſt haue foode.
Which of you know Ford of this Towne?
I ken the wight; he is of ſubſtance good.
My honeſt Lads, I will tell you what I am about.
Two yards, and more.
No quips now Piſtoll; (Indeede I am in the waſt two yards about; but I am now about no waſte: I am about thrift) briefely; I doe meane to make loue to Fords wife; I ſpie entertainment in her, ſhee diſcourſes, ſhee craues, ſhe giues the leere of inuitation; I can conſtrue the action of her familier ſtile, and the hardeſt voice of her behauior (to be engliſh'd rightly) is I am Sir Iohn Falſtafs.
He hath ſtudied her will; and tranſlated her will out of honeſty, into Engliſh.
The Anchor is deepe; will that humor paſſe?
Now, the report goes, ſhe has all the rule of her husbands Purſe; he hath a legend of Angels.
As many diuels entertaine; and to her Boy ſay I.
The humor riſes it is good; humor me the angels.
I haue writ me here a letter to her; and here another to Pages wife, who euen now gaue me good eyes too; examind my parts with moſt iudicious illiads; ſometimes the beame of her view, guilded my foote, ſometimes my portly belly.
Then did the Sun on dung-hill ſhine.
I thanke thee for that humour.
O ſhe did ſo courſe o're my exteriors with ſuch a greedy intention, that the appetite of her eye, did ſeeme to ſcorch mee vp like a burning-glaſſe; here's another letter to her; She beares the Purie too; Shee is a Region in Guiana; all gold, and bountie; I will be Cheaters to them both, and they ſhall be Exchequers to mee; they ſhall be my Eaſt and Weſt Indies, and I will trade to them both; Goe, beare thou this Letter to Miſtris Page; and thou this to Miſtris Ford; wee will thriue (Lads) wee will thriue.
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my ſide weare Steele? then Lucifer take all.
I will run no baſe humor; here take the humor-Letter;
I will keepe the hauior of reputation.
Hold Sirha, beare you theſe Letters rightly,
Saile like my Pinnaſſe to theſe golden ſhores.
Rogues, hence, auaunt, vaniſh like haile-ſtones; goe,
Trudge; plod away ith' hooſe: ſeeke ſhelter, packe,
Falſtaffe will learne the honor of the age,
French thrift, you Rogues, my ſelfe, and skirted Page.
Let Vultures gripe thy guts, for gourd, and Fullam
holds, and high and low beguiles the rich and poore,
Teſter ile haue in pouch when thou ſhalt lacke,
Baſe Phrygian Turke.
I haue opperations.
Which be humors of reuenge.
Wilt thou reuenge?
By Welkin, and her Star.
With wit, or Steele?
With both the humors, I;
I will diſcuſſe the humour of this Loue to Ford.
And I to Page ſhall eke vnfold
How Falſtaffe (varlet vile)
His Doue will proue; his gold will hold,
And his ſoft couch defile.
My humor ſhall not coole; I will incenſe Ford, to deale with poyſon; I will poſſeſſe him with yallowneſſe, for the reuolt of mine is dangerous; that is my true humour.
Thou art the Mars of Malecontents; I ſecond thee; troope on.
What, Iohn Rugby, I pray thee goe to the Caſement, and ſee if you can ſee my Maſter, Maſter Doctor Caius comming; if he do (I'faith) and finde any body in the houſe; here will be an old abuſing of Gods patience, and the Kings Engliſh.
Ile goe watch.
Goe, and we'll haue a poſſet for't ſoone at night, (in faith) at the latter end of a Sea-cole-fire: An honeſt, willing, kinde fellow, as euer ſeruant ſhall come in houſe withall: & I warrant you, no tel-tale, nor no breedebate: his worſt fault is, that he is giuen to prayer; hee is ſomething peeuiſh that way: but no body but has his fault: but let that paſſe. Peter Simple, you ſay your name is?
I, for fault of a better.
And Maſter Slender's your Maſter?
I forſooth.
Do's he not weare a great round Beard, like a Glouers paring-knife?
No forſooth, he hath but a little wee-face; with a little yellow Beard, a Caine colourd Beard.
A ſofttly-ſprighted man, is he not?
I forſooth, but he is as tall a man of his hands, as any is betweene this and his head; hee hath fought with a Warrener.
How ſay you; oh, I ſhould remember him, do's hee not hold vp his head (as it were?) and ſtrut in his gate?
Yes indeede do's he.
Well, heauen ſend Anne Page, no worſe fortune, Tell Maſter Parſon, Euans, I will doe what I can for your Maſter; Anne is a good girle, and I wiſh—
Out alas, here comes my Maſter.
Wee ſhall all be ſhent; Run in here, good young man, goe into this Cloſſet: hee will not ſtay long? what Iohn Rugby? Iohn; what Iohn I ſay? goe Iohn, goe enquire for my Maſter, I doubt hee be not well, that hee comes not home, (and downe, downe, downe'a, &c.
Vat is you ſing? I doe not like des-toyes, pray you goe and vetch me in my Cloſſt, vnboyteene verd; a Box, a greene-a-Box; do intend vat I ſpeake? greene-a-Box.
I forſooth ile fetch it you: I am glad hee went not in himſelfe: if hee had found the yong man he would haue beene horne-mad.
Fe, fe, fe, fe, mai foy, il fait for chando, le man voi a le Court la grand affaires.
Is it this Sir?
Ouy mette le au mon pocket, de-peech quickly:
Vere is dat knaue Rugby?
What Iohn Rugby, Iohn?
Here Sir.
You are Iohn Rugby, and you are Iacke Rugby; Come, take your Rapier, and come after my heele to the Court.
'Tis ready Sir, here in the Porch.
By my trot, I tarry too long, od's-me: que ay ie oublie dere is ſome Simples in my Cloſſet, dat I vill not for the varld I ſhall leaue behinde.
Ay-me, he'll finde the yong man there, and be mad▪
O Diable, Diable; vat is in my Cloſſet?
Villaine, La-roone; Rugby, my Rapier.
Good Maſter be content.
Wherefore ſhall I be content-a?
The yong man is an honeſt man.
What ſhall de honeſt man do in my Cloſſet, here is no honeſt man dat ſhall come in my Cloſſet.
I beſeech you be not ſo flegmaticke; heare the truth of it. He came of an errand to mee, from Parſon Hugh.
Vell.
I forſooth: to deſire her to—
Peace, I pray you.
Peace-a-your tongue: ſpeake-a-your Tale.
To deſire this honeſt Gentlewoman (your Maid) to ſpeake a good word to Miſtris Anne Page, for my Maſter in the way of Marriage.
This is all indeed-la: but ile nere put my finger in the fire, and neede not.
Sir Hugh ſend-a you? Rugby, ballow me ſome paper: tarry you a littell-a while.
I am glad hee is ſo quiet: if hee had bin throughly moued, you ſhould haue heard him ſo loud, and ſo melancholly; but notwithſtanding man, Ile doe yoe your Maſter what good I can; and the very yea, and the no is that French Doctor my Maſter, (I may call him my Maſter, looke you, for I keepe his houſe; and I waſh, ring, brew, bake, ſcowre, dreſſe meate and drinke, make the beds, and doe all my ſelfe.)
'Tis a great charge to come vnder one bodies hand.
Are you a uis'd o' that? you ſhall finde it a great charge: and to be vp early, and downe late; but notwithſtanding, (to tell you in your eare, I would haue no words of it) my Maſter himſelfe is in loue with Miſtris Anne Page; but notwithſtanding that I know Ans mind, that's neither heere nor there.
You, Iack 'Nape; glue-'a this Letter to Sir Hugh, by gar it is a ſhallenge: I will cut his troat in de Parke, and I will teach a ſcuruy Iack-a-nape Prieſt to meddle, or make:—you may be gon: it is not good you tarry here; by gar I will cut all his two ſtones; by gar, he ſhall not haue a ſtone to throw at his dogge.
Alas, he ſpeakes but for his friend.
It is no matter'a vr dat; do not you tell-a-me dat I ſhall haue Anne Page for my ſelfe? by gar, I vill kill de Iacke Prieſt; and I haue appointed mine Hoſt of de Iarteer to meaſure our weapon, by gar, I will my ſelfe haue Anne Page.
Sir, the maid loues you, and all ſhall bee well; Wee muſt giue folkes leaue to prte; what the good ier.
Rugby, come to the Court with me: by gar, if I haue not Anne Page, I ſhall turne your head out of my dore: follow my heeles, Rugby.
You ſhall haue An-fooles head of your owne; No, I know Ans mind for that; neuer a woman in Windſor knowes more of Ans minde then I doe, nor can doe more then I doe with her, I thanke heauen.
Who's with in there, hoa?
Who's there, I troa? Come neere the houſe I pray you.
How now (good woman) how doſt thou?
The better that it pleaſes your good Worſhip to aske?
What newes? how do's pretty Miſtris Anne?
In truth Sir, and ſhee is pretty, and honeſt, and gentle, and one that is your friend, I can tell you that by the way, I praiſe heauen for it.
Shall I doe any good thinkſt thou? ſhall I not looſe my ſuit?
Troth Sir, all is in his hands aboue; but notwithſtanding (Maſter Fenton) Ile be ſworne on a booke ſhee loues you; haue not your Worſhip a wart aboue your eye?
Yes marry haue I, what of that?
Well, thereby hangs a tale; good faith, it is ſuch another Nan; (but (I deteſt) an honeſt maid as euer broke bread: wee had an howres talke of that wart; I ſhall neuer laugh but in that maids company, but (indeed) ſhee is giuen too much to Allicholy and muſing; but for you—well—goe too—.
Well, I ſhall ſee her to day; hold, there's money for thee. Let mee haue thy voice in my behalfe; if thou ſeeſt her before me, commend me.—
Willi? I faith that wee will; And I will tell your Worſhip more of the Wart, the next time we haue confidence, and of other wooers.
Well, fare-well, I am in great haſte now.
Fare-well to your Worſhip; truely an honeſt Gentleman: but Anne loues him not, for I know Ans minde as well as another do's, out vpon't, what haue I forgot.
What, haue I ſcap'd Loue-letters in the hollyday-time of my beauty, and am I now a ſubiect for them? let me ſee.
Aske me no reaſon why I loue you, for though Loue vſe Reaſon for his preciſian, hee admits him not for his Counſailour: you are not young, no more am I: goe to then, there's ſimpathie: you are merry▪ ſo am I: ha, ha, then there's more ſimpathie: you loue ſacke, and ſo doe I: would yout deſire better ſimpathie? Let it ſuffice thee (Miſtris Page) at the leaſt if the Loue of Souldier can ſuffice, that I loue thee: I will not ſay pitty mee, 'tis not a Souldier-like phraſe; but I ſay▪ loue me:
By me, thine owne true Knight, by day or night:
Or any kinde of light, with all his might,
For thee to fight, Iohn Falſtaffe.
What a Herod of Iurie is this? O wicked, wicked world.
One that is well-nye worne to peeces with age
To ſhow himſelfe a young Gallant? What an vnwaied
Behauiour hath this Flemiſh drunkard pickt (with The Deuills name) out of my conuerſation, that hee dares In this manner aſſay me? why, hee hath not beene thrice In my Company, what ſhould I ſay to him? I was then Frugall of my mirth: (heauen forgiue mee,) why ile Exhibit a Bill in the Parliament for the putting downe of men, how ſhall I be reueng'd on him? for reueng'd I will be? as ſure as his guts are made of puddings.
Miſtris Page, truſt me, I was going to your houſe.
And truſt me, I was going to you: you looke very ill.
Nay, ile nere beleeue that; I haue to ſhew to the contrary.
'Faith but you doe in my minde.
Well: I doe then; yet I ſay, I could ſhew you to the contrary; O Miſtris Page, giue mee ſome counſaile.
What's the matter, woman?
O woman; if it were not for one trifling reſpect, I could come to ſuch honour.
Hang the trifle (woman) take the honour; what is it? diſpence with trifles; what is it?
If I would but goe to hell, for an eternall moment, or ſo; I could be knighted.
What thou lieſt? Sir Alice Ford? theſe Knights will hacke, and ſo thou ſhouldſt not alter the article of thy Gentry.
Wee burne day-light; heere, read, read; perceiue how I might be knighted, I ſhall thinke the worſe of fat men, as long as I haue an eye to make difference of mens liking; and yet hee would not ſweare: praiſe womens modeſty; and gaue ſuch orderly and welbehaued reproofe to all vncomelineſſe, that I would haue ſworn his diſpoſition would haue gone to the truth of his words: but they doe no more adhere and keepe place together, then the hundred Pſalmes to the tune of Greeneſleeues: What tempeſt (I troa) threw this Whale, (with ſo many Tuns of oyle in his belly) a'ſhoare at Windſor? How ſhall I be reuenged on him? I thinke the beſt way were, to entertaine him with hope, till the wicked fire of luſt haue melted him in his owne greaſe. Did you euer heare the like?
Letter for letter; but that the name of Page and Ford differs; to thy great comfort in this myſtery of ill opinions, heer's the twyn-brother of thy Letter; but let thine inherit firſt, for I proteſt mine neuer ſhall: I warrant hee hath a thouſand of theſe Letters, writ with blancke ſpace for different names (ſure more) & theſe are of the ſecond edition; he wil print them out of doubt, for he cares not what he puts into the preſſe, when he would put vs two; I had rather be a Gianteſſe & lye vnder Mount elion. Well; I will finde you twentie laſcioious Turtles ere one chaſte man.
Why this is the very ſame; the very hand, the very words, what doth he thinke of vs?
Nay I know not; it makes me almoſt readie to wrangle with mine owne honeſty; Ile entertaine my ſelfe like one that I am not acquainted withall, for ſure vnleſſe hee know ſome ſtraine in mee, that I know not my ſelfe, hee would neuer haue boorded me in this furie.
Boording, call you it? Ile be ſure to keepe him aboue decke.
So will I, if hee come vnder my hatches, Ile neuer to Sea againe. Let's be reueng'd on him; let's appoint him a meeting, giue him a ſhow of comfort in his Suite, and lead him on with a fine baited delay, till hee hath pawn'd his horſes to mine Hoſt of the Garter.
Nay, I will conſent to act any villany againſt him, that may not ſully the charineſſe of our honeſty; oh that my husband ſaw this Letter; it would giue eternall food to his iealouſie.
Why looke where he comes; and my good man too; hee's as farre from iealouſie, as I am from giuing him cauſe, and that (I hope) is an vnmeaſurable diſtance:
You are the happier woman.
Let's conſult together againſt this greaſie Knight; Come hither.
Well, I hope, it be not ſo.
Hope is a curtall-dog in ſome affaires;
Sir Iohn affects thy wife.
Why ſir, my wife is not young.
He wooes both high and low, both rich and poore, both young and old, one with another (Ford) he loues the Gally-mawfry (Ford) perpend.
Loue my wife?
With liuer, burning hot: preuent:
Ot goe thou like Sir Acteon he, with
Ring-wood at thy heeles: O, odious is the name.
What name Sir?
The horne I ſay▪ Farewell.
Take heed, haue open eye, for theeues doe foot by night.
Take heed, ere ſommer comes, or Cuckoo▪ birds doe ſing.
Away ſir Corporall Nim.
Beleeue it (Page) he ſpeakes ſence.
I will be patient; I will finde out this.
And this is true; I like not the humor of lying, hee haue wronged mee in ſome humors; I ſhould haue borne the humour'd Letter to her, but I haue a ſword, and it ſhall bite vpon my neceſſitie, he loues your wife; There's the ſht and the long: My name is Corporall Nim, I ſpeak, and I auouch; 'tis true: my name is Nim, and Falſtoffe loues your wife, adieu, I loue not the humour of bread & cheeſe: adieu.
The humour of it (quoth'a▪) heere's a fellow frights Engliſh out of his wits.
I will ſeeke out Falſtaffe.
I neuer heard ſuch a drawling-affecting rogue▪
If I doe finde it: well▪
I will not beleeue ſuch a Catai, though the Prieſt o'th'Towne commended him for a true man.
'Twas a good ſenſible fellow, well.
How now Meg?
Whither goe you (George?) harke you.
How now (ſweet Frank) why art thou me▪ lancholy?
I melancholy? I am not melancholy:
Get you home, goe.
Faith, thou haſt ſome crochets in thy head, Now, will you goe, Miſtris Page?
Haue with you, you'll come to dinner George▪ Looke who comes yonder; ſhee ſhall bee our Meſſenger to this paltrie Knight:
Truſt me, I thought on her; ſhee'll fit it:
You are come to ſee my daughter Anne?
I forſooth: and I pray how do's good Miſtreſſe Anne?
Go in with vs and ſee, wee haue an houres talke with you.
How now Maſter Ford?
You heard what this knaue told me, did you not?
Yes, and you heard what the other told me?
Doe you thinke there is truth in them?
Hang ▪em ſlaues: I doe not thinke the Knight would offer it: But theſe that accuſe him in his intent towards our wiues, are a yoake of his diſcarded men, very rogues, now they be out of ſeruice▪
Were they his men?
Marry were they.
I like it neuer the better for that,
Do's he lye at the Garter?
I marry do's he: if hee ſhould intend this voyage toward my wife, I would turne her looſe to him, and what hee gets more of her, then ſharpe words, let it lye on my head.
I doe not miſdoubt my wife, but I would be Ioath to turne them together, a man may bee too confident, I would haue nothing lye on my head, I cannot be thus ſatisfied.
Looke where my ranting-Hoſt of the Garter comes: there is either liquor in his pate, or mony in his purſe, when hee lookes ſo merrily: How now mine Hoſt?
How now Bully-Rooke, thou'rt a Gentleman, Caueleiro Iuſtice, I ſay.
I follow, (mine Hoſt) I follow, Good-euen, and twenty (good Maſter Page) Maſter Page, will you go with vs? we haue ſport in hand.
Tell him Caueleiro-Iuſtice: tell him Bully-Rooke.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought, betweene Sir Huge the Welch Prieſt, and Caius the French Doctor.
Good mine Hoſt o'th'Garter, a word with you.
What ſaiſt thou, my Bully-Rooke?
Will you goe with vs to behold it? My merry Hoſt hath had the meaſuring of their weapons, and (I thinke) appointed them contrary places: for (beleeue me) I heare the Parſon is no Ieſter▪ harke, I will tell you what our ſport ſhall be.
Haſt thou no ſuit againſt my Knight? my gueſt-Caualeire?
None, I proteſt, but ile giue you a pottle of burn'd ſacke, to giue me recourſe to him, and tell him my name is Broome, onely for a ieſt.
My hand, (Bully,) thou ſhalt haue egreſſe and regreſſe, (ſaid I well▪) and thy name ſhall be Broome. It is a merry Knight, will you goe An-heires?
Haue with you mine Hoſt.
I haue heard the French-man hath good skill in his Rapier.
Tut Sir, I could haue told you more. In theſe times you ſtand on diſtance, your Paſſes, Stoccado's, and I know not what: 'tis the heart (Maſter Page,) 'tis heere, 'tis heere, I haue ſeene the time, with my long-ſword, I would haue made you fowre tall fellowes skippe like Rattes.
Heere boyes, heere, heere, ſhall we wag?
Haue with you, I had rather heare them ſcold, then fight.
Though Page be a ſecure foole, and ſtands ſo firmely on his wiues frailty: yet, I cannot put-off my opinion ſo eaſily, ſhe was in his company at Pages houſe, and what they made there, I know not. Well, I will looke further into't, and I haue a diſguiſe, to ſound Falſtaffe, if I finde her honeſt, I looſe not my labour, if ſhee be otherwiſe, 'tis labour well beſtowed.
I will not lend thee a penny.
Why then the world's mine Oyſter, which I, with ſword will open.
Not a penny, I haue beene content (Sir,) you ſhould lay my countenance to pawne; I haue granted vpon my good friends for three Repreeues for, and your Coach▪ fellow Nim, or elſe you had look'd through the grate, like a Geminy of Baboones: I am damn'd in hell, for ſwearing to Gentlemen my friends, you were good Souldiers, and tall-fellowes. And when Miſtreſſe Briget loſt the handle of her Fan, I took't vpon mine honour thou hadſt it not.
Didſt not thou ſhare? hadſt thou not fifteene pence?
Reaſon, you roague, reaſon; thinkſt thou Ile endanger my ſoule, gratis? at a word, hang no more about mee, I am no gibbet for you: goe, a ſhort knife, and a throng, to your Mannor of Pickt-hatch; goe, you'll not beare a Letter for mee you roague? you ſtand vpon your honour: why, (thou vnconfinable baſeneſſe) it is as much as I can doe to keepe the termes of my honour preciſe; I, I, I my ſelfe ſometimes, leauing the feare of heauen on the left hand, and hiding mine honor in my neceſſity, am faine to ſhuffle: to hedge, and to lurch, and yet, you Rogue, will en-ſconce your raggs; your Cat-a-Mountaine-lookes, your red-lattice phraſes, & your boldbeatingoathes, vnder the ſhelter of your honor? you will not doe it? you?
I doe relent: what would thou more of man?
Sir, here's a woman would ſpeake with you.
Let her approach.
Giue your worſhip good morrow.
Good-morrow, good-wife.
Not ſo, and't pleaſe your worſhip.
Good, maid then.
Ile be ſworne.
As my mother was the firſt houre I was borne.
I doe beleeue the ſwearer; what with me?
Shall I vouch-ſafe your worſhip a word, or two?
Two thouſand (faire woman) and ile vouchſafe thee the hearing.
There is one Miſtreſſe Ford, (Sir) I pray come a little neerer this waies; I my ſelfe dwell with Maſter Doctor Caius.
Well, on; Miſtris Ford, you ſay.
Your worſhip ſaies very true; I pray your worſhip come a little neerer this waies.
I warrant thee, no-bodie heares; mine owne people, mine owne people.
Are they ſo? heauen-bleſſe them, and make them his Seruants.
Well; Miſtreſſe Ford, what of her?
Why, Sir; ſhee's a good creature; Lord, Lord your Worſhip's a wanton: well, heauen forgiue you, and all of vs, I pray—
Miſtreſſe Ford, come, Miſtreſſe Ford.
Marry this is the ſhort, and the long of it; you haue brought her into ſuch a Canaries, as 'tis wonderfull; the beſt Courtier of them all (when the Court lay at Windſor) could neuer haue brought her to ſuch a Canarie: yet there has beene Knights, and Lords, and Gentlemen, with their Coaches; I warrant you Coach after Coach, letter after letter, gift aftee gift, ſmelling ſo ſweetly; all Muske, and ſo ruſhling, I warrant you, in ſilke and golde, and in ſuch alligant tearmes, and in ſuch wine and ſuger of the beſt, and the faireſt, that would haue wonne any womans heart: and I warrant you, they could neuer get an eye-winke of her: I had my ſelfe twentie Angels giuen me this morning, but I defie all Angels in any ſuch ſort, as they ſay) but in the way of honeſty: and I warrant you, they could neuer get her ſo much as ſippe on a cup with the prowdeſt of them all, and yet there has beene Earles; nay, (which is more) Pentioners, but I warrant you all is one with her.
But what ſaies ſhee to mee? bee briefe my good ſhee-Mercurie.
Marry, ſhe hath receiu'd your Letter; for the which ſhe thankes you a thouſand times; and ſhee giues you to notifie, that her husband will be abſence from his houſe, betweene ten and eleuen.
Ten, and eleuen.
I, forſooth; and then you may come and ſee the picture (ſhe ſayes) that you wot of; Maſter Ford her huſband will be from home: alas, the ſweet woman leads an ill life with him; hee's a very iealouſie-man; ſhee leades a vere framepold life with him, (good heart.)
Ten, and eleuen.
Woman, commend me to her, I will not faile her.
Why, you ſay well: But I haue another meſſenger to your worſhip: Miſtreſſe Page hath her heartie commendations to you to; and let me tell you in your eare, ſhee's as fartuous a ciuill modeſt wife, and one (I tell you) that will not miſſe you morning nor euening prayer, as any is in Windſor, who ere be the other: and ſhee bade mee tell your worſhip, that her husband is ſeldome from home, but ſhee hopes there will come a time. I neuer knew a woman ſo doate vpon a man; ſurely I thinke you haue charmes, la: yes in truth.
Not I, I aſſure thee; ſetting the attraction of my good parts aſide, I haue no other charmes.
Bleſſing on your heart for't:
But I pray thee tell me this; has Fords wife, and Pages wiſe acquainted each other, how they loue me?
That were a ieſt indeed they haue not ſo little grace I hope, that were a tricke indeed: But Miſtis Page would deſire you to ſend her your little Page of all loues; her husband has a maruellous infection to the little Page; and truely Maſter Page is an honeſt man; neuer a wife in Windſor leades a better life then ſhe do's; do what ſhee will, ſay what ſhe will, take all, pay all, goe to bed when ſhee liſt, riſe when ſhe liſt, all is as ſhe will; and truly ſhe deſerues it; for if there be a kinde woman in Windſor, ſhee is one; you muſt ſend her your Page, no remedie.
Why, I will.
Nay, but doe ſo then, and looke you, hee may come and goe betweene you both; and in any caſe haue a nay-word, that you may know one anothers minde, and the Boy neuer heede to vnderſtand any thing; for 'tis not good that children ſhould know any wickednes; old folkes you know, haue diſcretion, as they ſay, and know the world.
Farethee-well, commend mee to them both, there's my purſe, I am yet thy debter; Boy, goe along with this woman, this newes diſtracts me.
This Puncke is one of Cupids Carriers,
Clap no more ſailes, purſue▪ vp with your fights:
Giue fire; ſhe is my prize, or Ocean whelme all.
Saiſt thou ſo (old Iacke) goe thy waies Ile make more of thy old body then I haue done: will they yet looke after thee? wilt thou after the expence of ſo much money, be now a gainer? good Body, I thanke thee; let them ſay 'tis groſſely done, ſo it bee fairely done, no matter.
Sir Iohn, there's one Maſter Broome below would faine ſpeake with you, and be acquainted with you; and hath ſent your worſhip a mornings draught of Sacke.
Broome is his name?
I Sir.
Call him in: ſuch Broomes are welcome to me, that that ore'flowes ſuch liquor; ah ha, Miſtreſſe Ford and Miſtreſſe Page, haue I encompaſs'd you? goe to, via.
'Bleſſe you ſir.
And you ſir; would you ſpeake with me?
I make bold, to preſſe, with ſo little preparation vpon you.
You'r welcome, what's you ill? giue vs leaue Drawer.
Sir, I am a Gentleman that haue ſpent much, my name is Broome.
Good Maſter Broome, I deſire more acquaintance of you.
Good Sir Iohn, I ſue for yours; not to charge you, for I muſt let you vnderſtand, I thinke my ſelfe in better plight for a Lender, then you are; the which hath ſomething emboldned mee to this vnſeaſon'd intruſion: for they ſay, if money goe before, all waies doe lye open.
Money is a good Souldier (Sir) and will on.
Troth, and I haue a bag of money heere troubles me; if you will helpe to beare it (Sir Iohn) take all, or halfe for eaſing me of the carriage:
Sir, I know not how I may deſerue to bee your Porter.
I will tell you Sir, if you will giue mee the hearing.
Speake (good Maſter Broome) I ſhall be glad to be your Seruant.
Sir, I heare you are a Scholler; (I will be briefe with you) and you haue beene a man long knowne to me, though I had neuer ſo good meanes as deſire, to make my ſelfe acquainted with you. I ſhall diſcouer a thing to you, wherein I muſt very much lay open mine own imperfection: but (good Sir Iohn) as you haue one eye vpon my follies, as you heare them vnfolded, turne another into the Regiſter of your owne, that I may paſſe with a reproofe the eaſier, ſith you your ſelfe know how eaſie it is to be ſuch an offender.
Very well Sir, proceed:
There is a Gentlewoman in this Towne, her husbands name is Ford.
Well Sir.
I haue long lou'd her, and I proteſt to you, beſtowed much on her; followed her with a doating obſeruance; Ingroſs'd opportunities to meete her▪ free'd euery ſlight occaſion that could but nigardly giue mee ſight of her▪ not onely brought many preſents to giue her, but haue giuen largely to many, to know what ſhe would haue giuen briefly, I haue purſu'd her, as Loue hath purſud mee, which hath beene on the wing of all occaſions; but whatſoeuer I haue merited, either in my minde, or in my meanes, meede I am ſure I haue receiued none, vnleſſe Experience be a Iewell, that I haue purchaſed at an infinite rate, and that hath taught me to ſay this.
``Loue like a ſhadow flies, when ſubſtance Loue purſues,
``Purſuing that that flies, and flying what purſues▪
Haue you receiu'd no promiſe of ſatisfaction at her hands?
Neuer.
Haue you importun'd her to ſuch a purpoſe?
Neuer.
Of what qualitie was your loue then?
Like a faire houſe, built on another mans ground, ſo that I haue loſt my edifice, by miſtaking the place where I erected it.
To what purpoſe haue you vnfolded this to me?
When I haue told you that, I haue told you all: Some ſay, that though ſhee appeare honeſt to mee, yet in other places ſhee enlargeth hir mirth ſo farre, that there is ſhrewd conſtruction made of her. Now (Sir Iohn) here is the heart of my purpoſe: you are a Gentleman of excellent breeding, admirable diſcourſe, of great admittance, authenticke in your place and perſon, generally allow'd for your many warlike, court-like, and learned preparations.
O Sir.
Beleeue it, for you know it: there is money, ſpend it, ſpend it, ſpend more; ſpend all I haue, onely giue me ſo much of your time in exchange of it, as to lay an amiable ſiege to the honeſty of this Fords wife: vſe your Art of wooing; win her to conſent to you; if any man may, you may as ſoone as any.
Would it apply well to the vehemency of your affection that I ſhould win what you would enioy? Methinkes you preſcribe to your ſelfe very prepoſterouſly.
O, vnderſtand my drift; ſhe dwells ſo ſecurely on the excellency of her honor, that the folly of my ſoule dares not preſent it ſelfe; ſhe is too bright to be look'd againſt. Now, could I come to her with any detection in my hand; my deſires had inſtance and argument to commend themſelues, I could driue her then from the ward of her purity, her reputation, her marriage vow, and a thouſand other her defences, which now are too-too ſtrongly embattaild againſt me; what ſay you too't, Sir Iohn.
Maſter Broome, I will firſt make bold with your mony, next, giue me your hand; and laſt, as I am a Gentleman, you ſhall, if you will, enioy Fords wife.
O good Sir.
I ſay you ſhall.
Want no money (Sir Iohn) you ſhall want none.
Want no Miſtreſſe Ford (Maſter Broome) you ſhall want none; I ſhall be with her (I may tell you) by her own appointment, euen as you came in to me, her aſſiſtant, or goe betweene, parted from me; I ſay I ſhall be with her betweene ten and eleuen, for at that time the iealious raſcallyknaue her husband will be forth; come you to me at night, you ſhall know how I ſpeed.
I am bleſt in your acquaintance; do you know Ford Sir?
Hang him (poore Cuckoldly knaue) I know him not: yet I wrong him to call him poore; They ſay the iealous wittolly-knaue hath maſſes of money, for the which his wife ſeemes to me well-fauourd: I will vſe her as the key of the Cuckoldly-rogues Coffer, & ther's my harueſt▪ home.
I would you knew Ford, ſir, that you might auoid him, if you ſaw him.
Hang him, mechanicall-ſalt-butter rogue; I will ſtare him out of his wits; I will awe-him with my cudgell: it ſhall hang like a Meteor ore the Cuckolds horns: Maſter Broome, thou ſhalt know, I will predominate ouer the pezant, and thou ſhalt lye with his wife▪ Come to me ſoone at night: Ford's a knaue, and I will aggrauate his ſtile: thou (Maſter Broome) ſhalt know him for knaue, and Cuckold. Come to me ſoone at night.
What a damn'd Epicurian-Raſcall is this? my heart is ready to cracke with impatience: who ſaies this is improuident iealouſie? my wife hath ſent to him, the howre is fixt, the match is made; would any man haue thought this? ſee the hell of hauing a faire woman: my bed ſhall be abus'd, my Coffers ranſack'd, my reputation gnawne at, and I ſhall not onely receiue this villanous wrong, but ſtand vnder the adoption of abhominable termes, and by him that does me this wrong: Termes, names: Amaimon ſounds well; Lucifer, well; Barbaſon, wel; yet they are Diuels additions, the names of fiends: But Cuckold, Wittoll, Cuckold▪ the Diuell himſelfe hath not ſuch a name. Page is an Aſſe, a ſecure Aſſe; hee will truſt his wife, hee will not bee iealous; I will rather truſt a Fleming with my butter, Perſon Hugh the Welſhman with my Cheeſe, an Iriſh man with my Aqua-vitae-bottle, or a Theefe to walke my ambling gelding, then my wife with her ſelfe. Then ſhe plots, then ſhee rumiuates▪ then ſhee deuiſes; and what they thinke in their hearts they may effect; they will breake their hearts but they will effect. Heauen bee prais'd for my iealouſie: eleuen o'clocke the howre, I will preuent this, detect my wife, bee reueng'd on Falſtaffe, and laugh at Page. I will about it, beter three houres too ſoone, then a mynute too late: fie, fie, fie: Cuckold, Cuckold, Cuckold.
Iacke Rugby.
Sir.
Vat lothe clocke▪ Iack.
'Tis paſt the howre (Sir) that Sir Hugh promis'd to meet.
By gar, he has ſaue his ſoule, dat he is no-come: hee has pray his Pible well, dat hee is no-come, by gar (lack Rugby) he is dead already, if he be come.
Hee is wiſe Sir; hee knew your worſhip would kill him if he came.
By gar, de herring is no dead, ſo as I vill kill him▪ take your Rapier, (Iacke) I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
Alas ſir, I cannot fence.
Villanie, take your Rapier.
For beare, heer's company.
'Bleſſe thee, bully-Doctor.
'Saue you Maſter Doctor Caius.
Now good Maſter Doctor.
'Giue you good morrow, ſir.
Vat be all you one, two, tree, fowre, come for?
To ſee thee fight, to ſee thee foigne, to ſee thee trauerſe, to ſee thee here, to ſee thee there, to ſee thee paſſe thy puncto, thy ſtocke, thy reuerſe, thy diſtance, thy montant: Is hee dead, my Ethiopian? Is he dead, my Franciſco? ha Bully? what ſaies my Eſculapius? my Gallen? my heart of Elder? ha? is he dead bully-Stale? is he dead?
By gar, he is de Coward Iack-Prieſt of de vorld: he is not ſhow his face.
Thou art a Caſtalion-king Vrinall; Hector of Greece (my Boy)
I pray you beare witneſſe, that mee haue ſtay, ſixe or ſeuen, two tree howres for him, and hee is nocome.
He is the wiſerman (Maſter Doctor) he is a curer of ſoules, and you a curer of bodies; if you ſhould fight, you goe againſt the haire of your profeſſions▪ is it not true, Maſter Page?
Maſter Shallow; you haue your ſelfe beene a great great fighter, though now a man of peace.
Body-kins M. Page, though I now be old, and of the peace; if I ſee a ſword out, my finger itches to make one; though wee are Iuſtices, and Doctors, and Churchmen (Maſter Page) wee haue ſome ſalt of our youth vs, we are the ſons of women (Maſter Page.)
'Tis true, Miſter Shallow.
It will be found ſo, (M. Page) M. Doctor Caius, I am come to fetch you home, I am ſworn of the peace you haue ſhow'd your ſelfe a wiſe Phyſician, and Sir Hugh hath ſhowne himſelfe a wiſe and patient Churchman; you muſt goe with me, M. Doctor.
Pardon, Gueſt-Iuſtice; a Mounſeur Mockewater.
Mock-vater? vat is dat?
Mock-water, in our Engliſh tongue, is Valour (Bully.)
By gar, then I haue as much Mock-vater as de Engliſhman; ſcuruy-lade dog-Prieſt▪ by gar, mee vill his eares.
He will Clapper claw thee tightly (Bully.)
Clapper de claw? vat is dat?
That is, he will make thee amends.
By gar, me doe looke he ſhall clapper-de-claw me, for by-gar me vill haue it.
And I will prouoke him to't, or let him wag:
Me tanck you for dat.
And moreouer, (Bully) but firſt, Maſter Ghueſt, and M. Page, and eeke Caualero Slender, goe you through the Towneto Frogmore.
Sir Hugh is there, is he?
He is there, ſee what humor hee is in; and I will bring the Doctor about by the Fields; will it doe well?
Wee will doe it.
Adieu, good Maſter Doctor.
By-gar, me vill kill de Prieſt, for he ſpeake for a Iackan-Ape to Anne Page.
Let him die; ſheath thy impatience, throw cold water on thy Choller; goe about the fields with me through Frogmore, I will bring thee where Miſtris Anne Page is, at a Farm-houſe a Feaſting; and thou ſhalt wooe her, Cridegame, ſaid I well?
By-gar, me danck you vor dat; by gar I loue you, and I ſhall procure'a you de good Gueſt; de Earle, de Knight, de Lords▪ de Gentlemen, my patients.
For the which, I will be thy aduerſary toward Anne Page, ſaid. I well?
By-gar, 'tis good, vell ſaid.
Let vs wag then.
Come at my heeles, Iack Rugby.
I pray you now, good Maſter Slenders ſeruingman and friend Simple by your name; which way haue you look'd for Maſter Caius, that calls himſelfe Doctor of Phiſicke.
Marry Sir, the pittie-ward, the Parke-ward, euery way, olde Windſor way, and euery way but the Towne-way.
I moſt fehemently deſire you, you will looke that way.
I will ſir.
'Pleſſe my ſoule: how full of Chollors I am and trempling of minde; I ſhall be glad if hee haue deceiued me: how melancholies I am? I will knog his Vrinalls about his knaues coſtard, when I haue good oportunities for the orke▪ Pleſſe my ſoule. To ſhallow Riuers to whoſe falls; melodious Birds ſing Madrigalls: There will wee make our Peds of Roſes: and a thouſand fragrant poſies. To ſhallow: 'Mercie on mee, I haue a great diſpoſitions to cry: Melodious birds ſing Madrigalls:—When as I ſat in Pabilon: and a thouſand vagram Poſies. To ſhallow, &c.
Yonder he is comming, this ay Sir Hugh.
Hee's welcome: To ſhallow Riuers, in whoſe fals:
Heauen proſper the right: what weapons is he?
No weapons, Sir; there comes my maſter, Maſter Shallow, and another Gentleman; from Frogmore, ouer the ſtile, this way.
Pray you giue me my gowne, or elſe keepe it in your armes.
How now Maſter Parſon? good morrow good Sir Hugh, keepe a Gameſter from the dice, and a good Studient from his booke, and it is wonderfull.
Ah ſweet Anne Bage.
'Saue you, good Sir Hugh.
▪Pleaſſe you from his mercy-ſake, all of you.
What? the Sword, and the Word?
Doe you ſtudy them both Maſter Parſon?
And youthfull ſtill, in your doublet and hoſe, this raw-rumaticke day?
There is reaſons, and cauſes for it?
Wee are come to you, to doe a good office, Maſter Parſon.
Fery-well, what is it?
Yonder is a moſt reuerend Gentleman; who (be-like) hauing receiued wrong by ſome perſon, is at moſt odds with his owne grauity and patience, that euer you ſaw.
I haue liued foure-ſcore yeeres, and vpward; I neuer heard a man of his place, grauity, and learning, ſo wide of his owne reſpect.
What is he?
I thinke you know him; Maſter Doctor Caius the renowned French Phyſician.
Got's will, and his paſſion of my heart, I had as liefe you would tell me of a meſſe of poriedge.
Why?
Hee has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and Galen, and hee is a knaue beſides: a cowardly knaue, as you would deſires to acquainted withall▪
I warrant you, hee's the man ſhould fight with him.
O ſweet Anne Page.
It appeares ſo by his weapons; keepe them a ſunder, here comes Doctor Caius.
Nay good Maſter Parſon, keepe your weapon.
So doe you, good Maſter Doctor.
Diſarme them, and let them queſtion; let them keepe their limbs whole, and hacke our Engliſh.
I pray you let-a-mee ſpeake a word with your eare; vherefore vill you not meet a me?
I Pray you vſe your patience in good time.
By gar, you are de Coward: de Iacke dog: Iohn Ape.
Pray you let vs not be laughing-ſtocks to other mens humors; I deſire you in friendſhip, and I will one way or other make you amends; I will knog your Vrinal about your knaues Cogs-combe.
Diable; Iack Rugby: mine Hoſt de Iarteer; haue I not ſtay for him, to kill him? haue I not at de place I did appoint?
As I am a Chriſtians ſoule, now looke you; this is the place appointed, ile be iudgement by mine Hoſt of the Garter.
Peace, I ſay, Gallia and Gaule, French and Welch, Soule-Curer, and Body-Curer.
I, dat is very good, excellant.
Peace, I ſay, heare mine Hoſt of the Garter, Am I politicke? Am I ſubtle? Am I a Machiuell? Shall looſe my Doctor? No, he giues me the Potions and the Motions. Shall I looſe my Parſon? my Prieſt? my Sir Hugh? No, hee giues me the Prouerbes, and the No verbes. Giue me thy hand (Celeſtiall) ſo; Boyes of Art, I haue deceiu'd you both; I haue directed you to wrong places; your hearts are mighty, your skinnes are whole, and let burn'd Sacke be the iſſue; Come▪ lay their ſwords to pawne; Follow me, Lad of peace, follow, follow, follow▪
Truſt me, a mad Hoſt: follow Gentlemen, follow.
O ſweet Anne Page.
Ha'do I perceiue dat? Haue you make-a-de. ſot of vs, ha, ha?
This is well, he has made vs his vlowting-ſtog: I deſire you that we may be friends; and let vs knog our praines together to be reuenge on this ſame ſcall ſcuruycogging-companion the Hoſt of the Garter.
By gar, with all my heart; he promiſe to bring mee where is Anne Page, by gar he deceiue me too.
Well, I will ſmite his noddles; pray you follow.
Nay keepe your way (little Gallant) you were wont to be a follower; but now you are a Leader: whether had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your maſters heeles?
I had rather (forſooth, goe before you like a man▪ Courtier. then follow him like a dwarfe.
O you are a flattering boy, now I ſee you'l be a
Well met miſtris Page, whether go you.
Truly Sir, to ſee your wife, is ſhe at home?
I, and as idle as ſhe may hang together for want of companie; I thinke if your husbands were dead, you two would marry.
Be ſure of that, two other husbands.
Where had you this pretty weather-cocke?
I cannot tell what (the dickens) his name is my husband had him of, what doe you cal your Knights name ſirrah?
Sir Iohn Falſtaffe.
Sir Iohn Falſtafe.
He, he, I can neuer hit on's name; there is ſuch aleague between my goodman, and he; is your Wife at home indeed.
Indeed ſhe is.
By your leaue ſir, I am ſicke till I ſee her.
Has Page any braines▪ Hath he any eies? Hath he any thinking? Sure they ſleepe, hee hath no vſe of them: why this boy will carrie a letter twentie mile as eaſie, as a Canon will ſhoot point-blanke twelue ſcore: hee peeces out his wiues inclination, hee giues her folly motion and aduantage: and now ſhe's going to my wife, and Falſtaffes boy with her; A man may heare this ſhowre ſing in the winde; and Falſtaffes boy with her: good plots, they are laide, and our reuolted wiues ſhare damnation together. Well, I will take him, then torture my wife, plucke the borrowed vaile of modeſtie from the ſo ſeeming Miſtris Page, divulge Page himſelfe for a ſecure and wilfull Acteon, and to theſe violent proceedings all my neighbors ſhall cry aime. The clocke giues me my Qu, and my aſſurance bids me ſearch, there I ſhall finde Falſtaffe: I ſhall be rather praiſd for this, then mock'd, for it is as poſſitiue, as the earth is firme, that Falſtaffe is there: I will go.
Page, &c. Well met Maſter Ford.
Truſt me, a good knotte; I haue good cheere at home, and I pray you all go with me.
I muſt excuſe my ſelfe Maſter Ford.
And ſo muſt I Sir,
We haue appointed to dine with Miſtris Anne,
And I would not breake with her for more mony
Then ile ſpeake of.
We haue linger'd about a match betweene Anne Page, and my cozen Slender, and this day wee ſhall haue our anſwer.
I hope I haue your good will Father Page.
You haue Maſter Slender, I ſtand wholly for you, But my wife (Maſter Doctor) is for you altogether.
I be-gar, and de Maid is loue-a me: my nurſh-aQuickly tell me ſo muſh.
What ſay you to young Maſter Fenton? He capers, he dances, he has cies of youth▪ he writes verſes, he ſpeakes holliday, he ſmels Aprill and May, he will carry't, hee will carry't, 'tis in his buttons, he will carry't.
Not by my conſent I promiſe you. The Gentleman is of no hauing, he kept companie with the wilde Prince, & Pointz: hee is of too high a Region, hee knows too much: no, hee ſhall not knit a knot in his fortunes, with the finger of my ſubſtance, if he takes her, let him take her ſimply; the wealth I haue waits on my conſent, and my conſent goes not that way:
I beſeech you heartily, ſome of you goe home with me to dinner; beſides your cheere you ſhall haue ſport, I will ſhew you a monſter; Maſter Doctor, you ſhall goe, ſo ſhall your Maſter Page, and you Sir Hugh.
Well, fare you well:
We ſhall haue the freer woing at Maſter Pages.
Go home Iohn Rugby, I come anon.
Farwell my hearts, I will to my honeſt Knight Falſtaffe, and drinke Canarie with him.
I thinke I ſhall drinke in Pipe-wine firſt with him, ile make him dance. Will you go, Gentles?
Haue with you, to ſee this Monſter.
What Iohn, what Robert.
Quickly quickly; Is the Buck-basket—
I warrant. What Robin I ſay.
Come, come, come.
Heere, ſet it downe.
Giue your men the charge, wee muſt be briefe, be ready here hard by in the Brew houſe, and when I ſodainly call you, come forth, and (without any pauſe, or ſtaggering) take this basket on your ſhoulders; that done trudge with it in all haſt, and carry it among the Whitſters in Dotchet Mead, and there empty it in the muddie ditch, cloſe by the Thames ſide.
You will do it?
I ha told them ouer and ouer, they lacke no direction. Begone, and come when you are call'd.
Here comes little Robin.
How now my Eyas Musket, what newes with you?
My M. Sir Iohn is come in at the backe doore Miſt. Ford, and requeſts your company.
You little lack-a-lent, haue you bin true to vs.
I, ile be ſworne; my Maſter knowes not of your being heere: and hath threatned to put mee into euerlaſting liberty, if I tell you of it; for he ſweares he'll turne me away.
Thou'rt a good boy; this ſecrecy of thine ſhall be a Tailor to thee, and ſhall make thee a new doublet and hoſe. Ile go hide me.
Do ſo, go tell thy Maſter, I am alone; Miſtris Page, remember you your Qu.
I warrant thee, if I do not act it, hiſſe me.
Go too then; we'l vſe this vnwholſome humidity, this groſſe-warry Pumpion, we'll teach him to know Turtles from Iayes.
Haue I caught thee, my heauenly Iewell? Why now let me die, for I haue liu'd long enough; This is the period of ambition; O this bleſſed houre.
O ſweet Sir Iohn.
Miſtris Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate (Maſter Ford) now ſhall I ſinne in my wiſh; I would thy Husband were dead, ile ſpeake it before the beſt Lord, I would make thee my Lady.
I your Lady Sir Iohn? Alas, I ſhould be a pittifull Lady.
Let the Court of France ſhew mee ſuch another; I ſee how thine eye would emulate the Diamond; Thou haſt the right arched-beauty of the brow, that becomes the Ship-tyre, the Tyre-valiant, or any Tire of Venetian admittance.
A plaine Kerchiefe, Sir Iohn.
My browes become nothing elſe, nor that well neither.
Thou art a tyrant to ſay ſo: thou wouldſt make an abſolute Courtier, and the firme fixture of thy foote, would giue an excellent motion to thy gate, in a ſemicircled Farthingale. I ſee what thou wert if Fortune thy foe, were not Noture thy friend: Come, thou canſt not hide it.
Beleeue me, ther's no ſuch thing in me.
What made me loue thee? Let that perſwade thee: Ther's ſomething extraordinary in thee. Come I cannot cog, and ſay thou art this and that, like a manie of theſs liſping hauthorne buds, that come like women in mens apparrell, and ſmell like. Bucklers-berry in ſimple time: I cannot, but I loue thee, none but thee; and thou deſeru'ſt it.
Do not betray me ſir, I feare you loue M. Page▪
Thou mightſt as well ſay, I loue to walke by the Counter-gate, which is a hatefull to me, as the reeke of a Lime-kill.
Well, heauen knowes how I loue you,
And you ſhall one day finde it.
Keepe in that minde, Ile deſerue it.
Nay, I muſt tell you, ſo you doe;
Or elſe I could not be in that minde.
Miſtris Ford, Miſtris Ford, heere's Miſtris Page at the doore, ſweating, and blowing, and looking wildly, and would needs ſpeake with you preſently.
She ſhall not ſee me, I will enſconce mee behinde the Arras.
Pray you doe ſo, ſhe's a very tatling woman.
Whats the matter? How now?
O miſtris Ford what haue you done?
You'r ſham'd, y'are ouerthrowne, y'are vndone for euer.
What's the matter, good miſtris Page?
O weladay, miſt. Ford, hauing and honeſtman to your husband, to giue him ſuch cauſe of ſuſpition.
What cauſe of ſuſpition?
What cauſe of ſuſpition? Out vpon you:
How am I miſtooke in you?
Why (alas) what's the matter?
Your husband's comming hether (Woman) with all the Officers in Windſor, to ſearch for a Gentleman, that hee ſayes is heere now in the houſe, by your conſent to take an ill aduantage of his abſence, you are vndone.
'Tis not, ſo, I hope.
Pray heauen it be not ſo, that you haue ſuch a man heere: but 'tis moſt certaine your husband's comming, with halfe Windſor at his heeles, to ſerch for ſuch a one, I come before to tell you, if you know your ſelfe cleere, why I am glad of it, but if you haue a friend here, conuey, conuey him out. Be not amaz'd, call all your ſenſes to you, defend your reputation, or bid farwell to your good life for euer.
What ſhall I doe? There is a Gentleman my deere friend, and I feare not mine owne ſhame ſo much, as his perill. I had rather then a thouſand pound he were out of the houſe.
For ſhame, neuer ſtand (you had rather, you had rather) your husband's heere at hand, bethinke you of ſome conueyance: in the houſe you cannot bide him. Oh, how haue you deceiu'd me? Looke, heere is a basket, if hee be of any reaſonable ſtature, hee may creepe in heere, and throw fowle linnen vpon him, as if it were going to bucking; Or it is whiting time, ſend him by your two men to Datchet-Meade.
He's too big to go in there, what ſhall I doe?
Let me ſee't, let me ſee't, O let me ſee't:
Ile n ile in, follow your friends counſell, ile in.
What Sir Iohn Falſtaffe? Are theſe your Letters Knight?
I loue thee, helpe mee away: let me creepe in heere: ile neuer—
Helpe to couer your Maſter (Boy:) Call your men (Miſt. Ford.) You diſſembling Knight.
What Iohn Rugby, Iohn; Goe, take vp theſe cloathes heere, quickly: Wher's the Cowle-ſtaffe? Looke how you drumble? Carry them to the Landreſſe in Datchet meade: quickly▪ come.
'Pray you come neere; if I ſuſpect without cauſe, Why then make ſport at me, then let me be your ieſt, I deſerue it: How now? Whether beare you this?
To the Landreſſe forſooth?
Why, what haue you to doe whether they beare it? You were beſt meddle with buck-waſhing.
Bucke? I would I could waſh my ſelfe of the Buck:
Bucke, bucke, bucke, I bucke; I warrant you Bucke,
And of the ſeaſon too, it ſhall appeare.
Gentlemen, I haue dream'd to night, ile tell you my dreame, heere, heere, heere bee my keyes, aſcend my Chambers, ſearch, ſeeke, finde out: ile warrant wee'le vnkennell the Fox. Let mee ſtop this way firſt: ſo, now vncape.
Good maſter Ford, be contented:
You wrong your ſelfe too much.
True (maſter Page) vp Gentlemen,
You ſhall ſee ſport anon:
Follow me Gentlemen.
This is fery fantaſticall humors and iealouſies.
By gar, 'tis no-the faſhion of France:
It is not iealous in France.
Nay follow him (Gentlemen) ſee the yſſue of his ſearch.
Is there not a double excellency in this?
I know not which pleaſes me better,
That my husband is deceiued, or Sir Iohn.
What a taking was he in, when your husband askt who was in the basket?
I am halfe affraid hee will haue neede of waſhing, ſo throwing him into the water, will doe him a benefit.
Hang him diſhoneſt raſcall: I would all of the ſame ſtraine, were in the ſame diſtreſſe.
I thinke my husband hath ſome ſpeciall ſuſpition of Falſtafs being heere: for I neuer ſaw him ſo groſſe in his iealouſie till now.
I will lay a plot to try that, and wee will yet haue more trickes with Falſtaffe; his diſſolute diſeaſe will ſcarſe obey this medicne.
Shall we ſend that fooliſhion Carion, Miſtris Quickly to him, and excuſe his throwing into the water, and giue him another hope, to betray him to another puniſhment?
Wee will doe it; let him be ſent for to morrow eight a clocke to haue amends.
I cannot finde him; may be the knaue bragg'd of that he could not compaſſe▪
Heard you that?
You vſe me well, M Ford? Doe you?
I, I doe ſo.
Heauen make you better then your thoughts
Amen.
You doe your ſelfe mighty wrong (M. Ford)
I, I; I muſt beare it.
If there be any pody in the houſe, and in the chambers, and in the coffers, and in the preſſes; heauen forgiue my ſinnes at the day of iudgement.
Be-gar, nor I too: there is no bodies.
Fy, fy, M Ford, are you not aſham'd? What ſpirit, what diuell ſuggeſts this imagination? I would not ha your diſtemper in this kind, for the welth of Windſor caſtle.
'Tis my fault (M. Page) I ſuffer for it.
You ſuffer for a pad conſcience; your wife is as honeſt a o'mans, as I will deſires among fiue thouſand, and fiue hundred too.
By gar, I ſee 'tis an honeſt woman.
Well, I promiſd you a dinner, come, come, walke in the Parke, I pray you pardon me: I will hereafter make knowne to you why I haue done this. Come wife, come Miſt Page, I pray you pardon me. Pray hartly pardon me.
Let's go in Gentlemen, but (truſt me) we'l mocke him; I doe inuite you to morrow morning to my houſe to breakefaſt: after we'll a Birding together, I haue a fine Hawke for the buſh. Shall it be ſo:
Any thing.
If there is one, I ſhall make two in the Companie.
If there be one, or two, I ſhall make-a-theturd.
Pray you goe, M. Page.
I pray you now remembrance to morrow on the lowſie knaue, mine Hoſt.
Dat is good by gar, withall my heart.
A lowſie knaue, to haue his gibes, and his mockeries.
I ſee I cannot get thy Fathers loue,
Therefore no more turne me to him (ſweet Nan.)
Alas, how then?
Why thou muſt be thy ſelfe.
He doth obiect, I am too great of birth,
And that my ſtate being gall'd with my expence,
I ſeeke to heale it onely by his wealth.
Beſides theſe, other barres he layes before me,
My Riots paſt, my wilde Societies,
And tels me 'tis a thing impoſſible
I ſhould loue thee, but as a property.
May be he tels you true.
No, heauen ſo ſpeed me in my time to come,
Albeit I will confeſſe, thy Fathers wealth
Was the firſt motiue that I woo'd thee (Anne:)
Yet wooing thee, I found thee of more valew
Then ſtamps in Gold, or ſummes in ſealed bagges
And 'tis the very riches of thy ſelfe,
That now I ayme at.
Gentle M. Fenton.
Yet ſeeke my Fathers loue, ſtill ſeeke it ſir,
If opportunity and humbleſt ſuite
Cannot attaine it, why then harke you hither.
Breake their talke Miſtris Quickly,
My Kinſman ſhall ſpeake for himſelfe.
Ile make a ſhaft or a bolt on't, ſlid, tis but venturing.
Be not diſmaid.
No, ſhe ſhall not diſmay me▪
I care not for that, but that I am affeard.
Hark ye, Maſter Slender would ſpeake a word with you
I come to him. This is my Fathers choice.
O what a world of vilde-ill-fauour'd faults
Lookes handſome in three hundred pounds a yeare?
And how do's god Maſter Fenton?
Pray you a word with you.
Shee's comming; to her Coz:
O boy, thou hadſt a father,
I had a father (Miſtris Anne) my vncle can tel you good ieſts of him; pray you Vncle, tel Miſtris Anne the ieſt how my Father ſtole two Geeſe out of a Pen, good Vnckle.
Miſtris Anne, my Cozen loues you.
I that I doe, as well as I loue any woman in Gloceſterſhire.
He will maintaine you like a Gentlewoman.
I that I will, come cut and long-taile, vnder the degree of a Squire.
Hee will make you a handred and fiftie pounds ioynture.
Good Maſter Shallow let him woe for himſelfe.
Marry I thanke you for it, I thanke you for that good comfort: ſhe cals you (Coz) ile leaue you.
Now Maſter Slender.
Now good Miſtris Anne.
What is your will?
My will? Odd's-hart-lings, that's a prettie ieſt indeed: I ne're made my Will yet (I thanke Heauen:) I am not ſuch a ſickely creature, I giue Heauen praiſe.
I meane (M. Sender) what would you with me?
Truely, for mine owne part, I would little or nothing with you: your father and vncle hath made motions if it be my lucke, ſo; if not, happy man be his dole, they can tell you how things goe, better then I can: you may, your father, heere he comes.
Now Maſter Slender; Loue him daughter Anne.
Why how now? What does Maſter Fenton here?
You wrong me Sir, thus ſtill to haunt my houſe.
I told you Sir, my daughter is diſpoſd of.
Nay Maſter Page, be not impatient.
Good Maſter Fenton. come not to my child.
She is no match for you.
Sir, will you heare me?
No, good Maſter Fenton.
Come M. Shallow: Come ſonne Slender, in;
Knowing my minde, vou wrong me (M. Fenton.)
Speake to Miſtris Page.
Good Miſtris Page, for that I loue your daughter
In ſuch a righteous faſhion as I do,
Perforce, againſt all checkes, rebukes, and manners,
I muſt aduance the colours or my loue,
And not retire. Let me haue your good will.
Good mother, do not marry me to yond foole:
I meane it not, I ſeeke you a better huſband.
That's my maſter, Maſter Doctor.
Alas I had rather be ſet quicki'th earth,
And bowl'd to death with Turnips.
Come, trouble not your ſelfe good Maſter
Fenton, I will not be your friend, nor enemy:
My daughter will I queſtion how ſhe loues you,
And as I finde her, ſo am I affected;
Till then, farewill Sir, ſhe muſt needs go in,
Her father will be angry.
Farewell gentle Miſtris; farewell Nan.
This is my doing now; Nay, ſaine I, will you caſt away your childe on a Foole, and a Phyſitian:
Looke on Maſter Fenton, this is my doing.
I thanke thee: and I pray thee once to night,
Giue my ſweet Nan this Ring: there's for thy paines:
Now heauen ſend thee good fortune, a kinde heart he hath: a woman would run through fire and water for ſuch a kinde heart. But yet, I would my Maſter had Miſtris Anne, or I would Maſter Slender had her: or (in ſooth) I would Maſter Fenton had her; I will doe what I can for them all three, for ſo I haue promiſed, and ile be as good as my word, but ſpeciouſly for Maſter Fenton. Well, I muſt of another errand to Sir Iohn Falſtaffe from my two Miſtreſſes: what a beaſt am I to ſlacke it.
Bardolfe I ſay.
Heere Sir.
Go, fetch me a quart of Sacke, put a toſt in't. Haue I liu'd to be carried in a Basket like a barrow of butchers Offall? and to be throwne in the Thames? Wel, if I be ſeru'd ſuch another tricke, ile haue my braines 'tane out and butter'd, and giuen them to a dogge for a New-yeares gift: The rogues ſlighted mee into the Riuer with as little remorſe, as they would haue drown'de ablinde bitches Puppies, fifteene i'th litter: and you may know by my ſize, that I haue a kinde of alacrity in ſinking: if the bottome were as deepe as hell, I ſhould downe. I had beene drown'd, but that the ſhore was ſheluy and ſhallow; a death that I abhorre: for the water ſwelles a man; and what a thing ſhould I haue beene, when I had beene ſwel'd? I ſhould haue beene a Mountaine of Mummie.
Here's M. Quickly Sir to ſpeake with you.
Come, let me poure in ſome Sacke to the Thames water: for my bellies as cold as if I had ſwallow'd ſnowbals, for pilles to coole the reines. Call her in.
Come in woman.
By your leaue; I cry you mercy?
Giue your worſhip good morrow.
Take away theſe Challices;
Go, brew me a pottle of Sacke finely.
With Egges, Sir?
Simple of it ſelfe; Ile no Pullet-Sperſme in my brewage. How now?
Marry Sir, I come to your worſhip from M. Ford.
Miſ. Ford? I haue had Ford enough; I was thrown into the Ford, I haue my belly full of Ford.
Alas the day, (good-heart) that was not her fault; ſhe do's ſo take on with her men; they miſtooke their promise▪ erection.
So did I mine, to build vpon a fooliſh Womans
Well, ſhe laments Sir for it, that it would yern your heart to ſee it; her husband goes this morning a birding; ſhe deſires you once more to come to her, betweene eight and nine; I muſt carry her word quickely, ſhe'll make you amends I warrant you.
Well, I will viſit her, tell her ſo▪ and bidde her thinke what a man is; Let her conſider his frailety, and then iudge of my merit.
I will tell her.
Do ſo. Betweene nine and ten ſaiſt thou?
Eight and nine Sir.
Well, be gone; I will not miſſe her.
Peace be with you Sir.
I meruaile I heare not of Maſter Broome; he ſent me word to ſtay within; I like his money well: Oh, heere he comes.
Bleſſe you Sir.
Now M. Broome, you come to know
What hath paſt betweene me, and Fords wife.
That indeed (Sir Iohn) is my buſineſſe.
M. Broome I will not lye to you,
I was at her houſe the houre ſhe appointed me.
And ſped you Sir?
Very ill fauouredly M. Broome.
How ſo ſir, did ſhe change her determination?
No (M. Broome) but the peaking Curnuio her huſband (M. Broome) dwelling in a continnall larum of ielouſie, comes me in the inſtant of our encounter, after wee had embraſt, kiſt, proteſted, and (as it were) ſpoke the prologue of our Comedy▪ and at his heeles, a rabble of his companions, thither prouoked and inſtigated by his diſtemper, and (forſooth) to ſearch his houſe for his wiues Loue.
What? While you were there?
While I was there.
And did he ſearch for you, and could not find you?
You ſhall heare. As good lucke would haue it, comes in one Miſt. Page, giues intelligence of Fords approach: and in her inuention, and Fords wiues diſtraction, they conuey'd me into a bucke-basket.
A Buck-basket?
Yes, a Buck-basket: ram'd mee in with foule Shirts, and Smockes, Socks, foule Stockings, greaſie Napkins, that (Maſter Broome) there was the rankeſt compound of villanous ſmell, that euer offended noſtrill.
And how long lay you there?
Nay, you ſhall heare (Maſter Broome) what I haue ſuffered, to bring this woman to euill, for your good: Being thus cram'd in the Basket, couple of Fords knaues, his Hindes, were cald forth by their Miſtris, to carry mee in the name of foule Cloathes to Datchet lane; they tooke mee on their ſhoulders met the iealous knaue their Maſter in the doore; who asked them once or twice what they had in their Baſket? I quak'd for feare leſt the Lunatique Knaue would haue ſearch'd it: but Fate (ordaining hee ſhould bee a Cuckold) held his hand: well, on went hee, for a ſearch and away went I for foule Cloathes; But marke the ſequell (Maſter Broome) I ſuffered the pangs of three ſeuerall deaths: Firſt, an intollerable fright, to bee detected with a iealious rotten Bell▪ weather: Next to bee compaſs'd like a good Bilbo in the circumference of a Pecke, hilt to point, heele to▪ head. And then to bee ſtopt in like a ſtrong diſtillation with ſtinking Cloathes, that fretted in their owne greaſe thinke of that, a man of my Kidney; thinke of that; that am as ſubiect to heate as butter; a man of continuall diſſolution, and thaw: it was a miracle to ſcapeſuffocation. And in the height of this Bath (when I was more then halfe ſtew'd in greaſe (like a Dutchdiſh) to bee throwne into the Thames, and coold, glowing hot, in that ſerge like a Horſeſhoo; thinke of that; hiſſing hot: thinke of that (Maſter Broome.)
In good ſadneſſe Sir, I am ſorry, that for my ſake you haue ſufferd all this.
My ſuite then is deſperate: You'll vndertake her no more?
Maſter Broome: I will bee throwne into Eta, as I haue beene into Thames, ere I will leaue her thus; her Husband is this morning gone a Birding, I haue receiued from her another ambaſſie of meeting; 'twixt eight and nine is the houre (Maſter Broome.)
'Tis paſt eight already Sir,
Is it? I will then addreſſe mee to my appointment; Come to mee at your conuenient leaſure, and you ſhall know how I ſpeede: and the concluſion ſhall bee crowned with your enioying her: adiew; you ſhall haue her (Maſter Broome) Maſter Broome, you ſhal cuckold Ford.
Hum: ha? Is this a viſion? Is this a dreame? doe I ſleepe? Maſter Ferd awake, awake Maſter Ford▪ ther's a hole made in your beſt coate (Maſter Ford:) this 'tis to bee marryed; this 'tis to haue Lynnen, and Buckbaskets: Well, I will proclaime my ſelfe what I am▪ I will now take the Leacher; hee is at my houſe; hee cannot ſcape mee; 'tis impoſſible hee ſhould: hee cannot creepe into a halfe-penny purſe, not into a Pepper-Boxe. But leſt the Diuell that guides him, ſhould aide him, I will ſearch impoſſible places: though what I am, I cannot auoide; yet to bee what I would not, ſhall not make me tame; If I haue hornes, to make one mad, let the prouerbe goe with mee, ile bee hornemad.
Is he at M. Fords already think'ſt thou?
Sure hee is by this; or will bee preſently; but truely hee is very couragious mad, about his throwing into the water. Miſtris Ford deſires you to come ſodainely.
Ile be with her by and by; ile but bring my yong-man here to Schoole; looke where his Maſter comes; 'tis a playing day I ſee: how now Sir Hugh, no Schoole to day?
No, Maſter Slender is let the Boyes leaue to play.
'Bleſſing of his heart.
Sir Hugh, my husband ſaies my ſonne profits nothing in the world at his Booke; I pray you aske him ſome queſtions in his Accidence.
Come hither William; hold vp your head; come.
Come-on Sirha; hold vp your head; anſwere your Maſter, be not afraid.
William, how many Numbers is in Nownes?
Two.
Truely, I thought there had bin one Number more, becauſe they ſay od's-Nownes.
Peace, your tatlings. What is (Faire) William?
Pulcher.
Powlcats? there are fairer things then Powlcat, ſure.
You are a very ſimplicity o'man; I pray you peace. What is (Lapis) William?
A Stone.
And what is a Stone (William?)
A Peeble.
No; it is Lapis; I pray you remember in your praine.
Lapis.
That is a good William; what is he (William) that do's lend Articles:
Articles are borrowed of the Pronoune; and be thus declined▪ Singulariter nominatiuo hic haec, hoc.
Nominatiuo hig, hag, hog; pray you marke; genitiue huius; Well: what is your Accuſatiue-caſe?
Accuſatiue hinc.
I pray you haue your remembrance (childe) Accuſatiuo hing, hang, hog.
Hang-hog, is latten for Bacon, I warrant you.
Leaue your prables (o'man) What is the Focatiue caſe (William?)
O, Vocatiuo, O.
Remember William, Focatiue, is caret:
And that's a good roote.
O'man, forbare.
Peace.
What is your Genitiue caſe plurall (William?)
Genitiue caſe?
I.
Genitiue horum, harum, horum.
Vengeance of Ginyes caſe; fie on her; neuer name her (childe) if ſhe be a whore.
For ſhame o'man.
You doe ill to teach the childe ſuch words: hee teaches him to hic, and to hac; which they'll doe faſt enough of themſelues, and to call horum; fie vpon you.
O'man, art thou Lunaties? Haſt thou no vnderſtandings for thy Caſes, and the numbers of the Genders? Thou art as fooliſh Chriſtian creatures, as I would deſires.
Pre'thee hold thy peace.
Shew me now (William) ſome declenſions of your Pronounes.
Forſooth, I haue forgot.
It is Qui, que, quod; if you forget your Quies, your Ques, and your Quods, you muſt be preeches: Goe your waies and play, go.
He is a better ſcholler then I thought hee was.
He is a good ſprag▪ memory: Farewel Mis. Page.
Adeu good Sir Hugh.
Get you home boy, Come we ſtay too long.
Miſ. Ford, Your ſorrow hath eaten vp my ſufferance; I ſee you are obſequious in your loue, and I profeſſe requitall to a haires bredth, not onely Miſtris Ford, in the ſimple office of loue, but in all the accuſtrement complement, and ceremony of it: But are you ſure of your husband now?
Hee's a birding (ſweet Sir Iohn.)
What hoa▪ goſſip Ford; what hoa.
Step into th' chamber, Sir Iohn▪
How now (ſweet heart) whoſe at home▪ beſides your ſelfe?
Why none but mine owne people.
Indeed?
No certainly; Speake louder.
Truly, I am ſo glad you haue no body here.
Why?
Why woman, your husband is in his olde lines againe; he ſo takes on yonder with my husband, ſo railes againſt all married mankind; ſo curſes all Eues daughters, of what complexion ſoeuer; and ſo buffettes himſelfe on the for-head; crying peere-out, peere-out, that any madneſſe I euer yet beheld, ſeem'd but tameneſſe, ciuility, and patience to this his diſtemper he is in now. I am glad the fat Knight is not heere,
Why, do's he talke of him?
Of none but him, and ſweares hee was caried out the laſt time hee ſearch'd for him, in a Basket; Proteſts to my husband he is now heere, and hath drawne him and the reſt of their company from their ſport, to make another experiment of his ſuſpition: But I am glad the Knight is not heere; now hee ſhall ſee his owne foolerie.
How neere is he Miſtrs Page?
Hard by, at ſtreet end; he will be here anon▪
I am vndone, the Knight is heere:
Why then you are vtterly ſham'd, and hee's but a dead man. What a woman are you? Away with him, away with him; Better ſhame, then murther.
Which way ſhould he goe? How ſhould I beſtow him? Shall I put him into the basket againe?
No, Ile come no more i'th Basket.
May I not goe out ere he come?
Alas: three of Maſter Fords brothers watch the doore with Piſtols, that none ſhall iſſue out: otherwiſe you might ſlip away ere hee came: But what make you heere?
What ſhall I doe? Ile creepe vp into the chimney.
There they alwayes vſe to diſcharge their Birding-peece: creepe into the Kill▪hole.
Where is it?
Hee will ſeeke there on my word; Neyther Preſſe, Coffer, Cheſt, Trunke, Well, Vault, but hee hath an abſtract for the remembrance of ſuch places, and goes to them by his Note; There is no hiding you in the houſe.
Ile goe out then:
If you goe out in your owne ſemblance, you die Sir Iohn, vnleſſe you go out diſguis'd.
How might we diſguiſe him?
Alas the day I know not, there is no womans gowne bigge enough for him: otherwiſe he Might put on a hat, a muffler, and kerchiefe, and ſo eſcape.
Good hearts, diuiſe ſomething; any extremitie, rather then a miſchiefe.
My Maids Aunt the fat woman of Brainford, has a gowne aboue.
On my word it will ſerue him: ſhee's as big as he is; and there's her thrum'd hat, and her muffler▪ too: run vp Sir Iohn.
Go, go, ſweet Sir Iohn: Miſtris Page and I will looke ſome linnen for your head.
Quicke, quicke, wee'le come dreſſe you ſtraight: put on the gowne the while.
I would my husband would meete him in this ſhape; he cannot abide the old woman of Brainford; hee ſweares ſhe's a witch, forbad her my houſe, and hath threatned to beate her.
Heauen guide him to thy husbands cudgell; and the diuell guide his cudgell afterwards.
But is my husband comming?
I in good ſadneſſe is hee, and talkes of the basket too, howſoeuer he hath had intelligence.
Wee'l try that: for ile appoint my men to carry the basket againe, to meete him at the doore with it, as they did laſt time.
Nay, but hee'l be heere preſently: let goe dreſſe him like the witch of Brainford.
Ile firſt direct my men, what they ſhall doe with the basket: Goe vp, ile bring linnen for him ſtraight.
Hang him diſhonſt Varlet,
We cannot miſuſe enough:
Well leaue a proofe by that which we will doe,
Wiues may be merry, and yet honeſt too:
We do not acte that often, ieſt, and laugh,
'Tis old, but true, Still Swine eats all the draugh.
Go Sirs, take the bas basket againe on your ſhoulders: your Maſter is hard at doore: if he bid you ſet it downe, obey him▪ quickly, diſpatch.
Come, come, take it vp.
Pray heauen it be not full of Knight againe.
I hope not, I had liefe as beare ſo much lead.
I, but if it proue true (Maſter Page) haue you any way then to vnfoole mee againe. Set downe the basket villaine: ſome body call my wife: Youth in a basket: Oh you Panderly Raſcals, there's a knot: a gin, a packe, a conſpiracie againſt mee. Now ſhall the diuel be ſham'd-What wiſe I ſay: Come, come forth: behold what honeſt cloathes you ſend forth to bleaching.
Why, this paſſes Maſter Ford, you are not to goe looſe any longer, you muſt be pinnion'd.
Why, this is Lunaticks: this is madde, as a mad dogge.
In deed Maſter Ford, this is not well indeed.
So ſay I too Sir, come hither Miſtris Ford, Miſtris Ford, the honeſt woman, the modeſt wife, the vertuous creature▪ that hath the iealous foole to her husband: I ſuſpect without cauſe (Miſtris) do I?
Heauen be my witneſſe you do, if you ſuſpect me in any diſhoneſty.
Well ſaid Brazen-face, hold it out: Come forth ſirrah.
This paſſes.
Are you not a ſham'd, let the cloths alone.
I ſhall finde you anon.
'Tis vnreaſonable; will you take vp your wiues cloathes? Come, away.
Empty the basket I ſay.
Why man, why?
Maſter Page, as I am a man, there was one conuay'd out of my houſe yeſterday in this basket: why may not he be there againe, in my houſe I am ſure hee is; my Intelligence is true, my iealouſie is reaſonable, plucke mee out all the linnen.
If you find a man there, hee ſhall dye a Fleas death.
Heer's no man.
By my fidelity this is not well Maſter Ford: This wrongs you.
Maſter Ford, you muſt pray, and not follow the imaginations of your owne heart: this is iealouſies.
Well, hee's not heere I ſeeke for.
No, nor no where elſe but in your braine.
Helpe to ſearch my houſe this one time: if I find not what I ſeeke, ſhew no colour for my extremity; Let me for euer be your Table-ſport; Let them ſay of me, as iealous as Ford, that ſearch'd a hollow Wall-nut for his wiues Lemman. Satisfie me once more, once more ſerch with me.
What hoa (Miſtris Page,) come you and the old woman downe; my husband will come into the Chamber.
Old woman? what old womans that?
Why it is my maids Aunt of Brainford.
A witch, a Queane, an olde couzening queane: Haue I not forbid her my houſe. She comes of errands, do's ſhe? We are ſimple men, wee doe not know what's brought to paſſe vnder the profeſſion of Fortune telling, She workes by Charmes, by Spels, by th' Figure, and ſuch dawbry as this is, beyond our Element: wee know nothing. Come downe you Witch, you Hagge you, come downe I ſay.
Nay, good ſweet husband, good Gentlemen, let him not ſtrike the old woman.
Come mother Prat, Come giue me your hand.
Ile Prat-her: Out of my doore, you Witch, you Hagge, you Baggage, you Poulcat, you Runnion, out, out: Ile coniure you, ile fortune tell you.
Are you not a ſham'd?
I thinke you haue kill'd the poore woman.
Nay hee will do it, 'tis a goodly credit for you.
Hang her witch.
By yea, and no, I thinke the o'man is a witch indeede: I like not when a o'mans has a great peard; I ſpie a great peard vnder his muffler.
Will you follow Gentlemen, I beſeech you follow; ſee but the iſſue of my iealouſie. If I cry out thus vpon no traile, neuer truſt me when I open againe.
Let's obey his humour a little further;
Come Gentlemen.
Truſt me he beate him moſt pittifully.
Nay by th' Maſſe that he did not; he beate him moſt vnpittifully, me thought.
Ile haue the cudgell hallow'd, and hung ore the Altar, it hath done meritorious ſeruice.
What thinke you? May wee with the warrant of woman-hood, and the witneſſe of a good conſcience, purſue him with any further reuenge?
The ſpirit of wantonneſſe is ſure ſcar'd out of him, if the diuell haue him not in fee-ſimple, with find & recouery, he will neuer (I thinke) in the way of waſte, attempt vs againe.
Shall wee tell our husbands how wee haue ſeru'd him?
Yes, by all meanes: if it be but to ſcrape the figures out of your husbands braines: if they can find in their hearts, the poore vnuertuous fat Knight ſhall be any further afflicted, wee two will bee ſtill the miniſters.
Ile warrant, they'l haue him publiquely ſham'd, and me thinkes there would be no period to ieſt, ſhould he not be publikely ſham'd.
Come, to the Forge with it, then ſhape it: I would not haue things coole.
Sir, the Germane deſires to haue three of your horſes: the Duke himſelfe will be to morrow at Court, and they are going to meet him.
What Duke ſhould that be comes ſo ſecretly? I heare not of him in the Court: let me ſpeake with the Gentlemen, they ſpeake Engliſh?
I Sir, Ile call him to you.
They ſhall haue my horſes, but Ile make them pay: Ile ſauce them, they haue had my houſes a weeke at commaund. I haue turn'd away my other gueſts they muſt come off, Ile ſawce them, come.
'Tis one of the beſt diſcretions of a o'mans as euer I did looke vpon.
And did he ſend you both theſe Letters at an inſtant?
Within a quarter of an houre.
Pardon me (wife) henceforth doe what thou wilt:
I rather will ſuſpect the Sunne with gold,
Then thee with wantonnes: Now doth thy honor ſtand
(In him that was of late an Heretike)
As firme as faith.
'Tis well, 'tis well, no more:
Be not as extreme in ſubmiſſion, as in offence,
But let our plot go forward: Let our wiues
Yet once againe (to make vs publike ſport)
Appoint a meeting with this old fat-fellow,
Where we may take him, and diſgrace him for it.
There is no better way then that they ſpoke of.
How? to ſend him word they'll meete him in the Parke at midnight? Fie, fie, he'll neuer come.
You ſay he has bin throwne in the Riuers: and has bin greeuouſly peaten, as an old o'man: me-thinkes there ſhould be terror in him, that hee ſhould not come: Me-thinkes his fleſh is puniſh'd, hee ſhall haue no deſires,
So thinke I too.
Deuiſe but how you'l vſe him when he comes, And let vs two deuiſe to bring him thither.
There is an old tale goes, that Herne the
Hunter (ſometime a keeper heere in Windſor Forreſt)
Doth all the winter time, at ſtill midnight,
Walke round about an Oake, with great rag'd hornes,
And there he blaſts the tree, and takes the cattle,
And make milch-kine yeeld blood, and ſhakes a chaine
In a moſt hideous and dredfull manner.
You haue heard of ſuch a Spirit, and well you know
The ſuperſtitious idle-headed-Eld
Receiu'd, and did deliuer to our age
This tale of Herne the Hunter, for a truth.
Why yet there want not many that do feare
In deepe of night to walke by this Hernes Oake:
But what of this?
Marry this is our deuiſe,
That Falſtaffe at that Oake ſhall meete with vs.
Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come,
And in this ſhape, when you haue brought him thether,
What ſhall be done with him? What is your plot?
That likewiſe haue we thoght vpon and thus:
Nan Page (my daughter) and my little ſonne,
And three or foure more of their growth, wee'l dreſſe
Like Vrchins, Ouphes, and Fairies, greene and white,
With rounds of waxen Tapers on their heads
And rattles in their hands; vpon a ſodaine,
As Falſtaffe, and I, are newly met,
Let them from forth a ſaw▪ pitruſh at once
With ſome diffuſed ſong: Vpon their ſight
We two, in great amazedneſſe will flye:
Then let them all encircle him about,
And Fairy-like to pinch the vncleane Knight;
And aske him why that houre of Fairy Reuell,
In their ſo ſacred pathes, he dares to tread
In ſhape prophane.
And till he tell the truth,
Let the ſuppoſed Fairies pinch him, ſound,
And burne him with their Tapers.
The truth being knowne.
We'll all preſent our ſelues; diſ-horne the ſpirit,
And mocke him home to Windſor.
The children muſt
Be practis'd well to this, or they'll neu'r doo't.
I will teach the children their behauiours & I will: be like a Iacke-an-Apes alſo, to burne the Knight with my Taber.
That will be excellent,
Ile go buy them vizards.
My Nan ſhall be the Queene of all the Fairies, finely attired in a robe of white.
That ſilke will I go buy, and in that time
Shall M. Slender ſteale my Nan away,
And marry her at Eaton: go, ſend to Falſtaffe ſtraight.
Nay. Ile to him againe in the name of Broome,
Hee'l tell me all his purpoſe: ſure hee'l come.
Feare not you that; Go get vs properties
And tricking for our Fayries.
Let vs about it,
It is admirable pleaſures, and ferry honeſt knaueries.
Go Miſ. Ford,
Send quickly to Sir Iohn, to know his minde;
Ile to the Doctor, he hath my good will,
And none but he to marry with Nan Page;
That Slender (though well landed) is an Ideot,
And he, my husband beſt of all affects;
The Doctor is well monied and friends
Potent at Court; he, none but he ſhall haue her,
Though twenty thouſand worthier come to craue her.
What wouldſt thou haue? (Boore) what? (thick skin) ſpeake, breathe, diſcuſſe; breefe, ſhort, quicke, nap.
Marry Sir, I come to ſpeake with Sir Iohn Falſtaffe from Maſter Slender.
There's his Chamber, his Houſe, his Caſtle his ſtanding bed and truckle-bed: 'tis painted about with the ſtory of the Prodigall, freſh and new: goe, knocke and call: hee'l ſpeake like an Anthropophaginian vnto thee; Knocke I ſay.
There's an olde woman, a fat woman gone vp into his chamber; ile be ſo bold as ſtay Sir till ſhe come down I come to ſpeake with her indeed.
Ha▪ A fat woman? The Knight may be robb'd; Ile call. Bully-Knight, Bully Sir Iohn; ſpeake from thy Lungs Military; Art thou there? It is thine Hoſt, thine Epheſian cals.
How now mine Hoſt?
Here's a Bohemian-Tartar taries the comming downe of thy fat-woman. Let her deſcend (Bully) let her deſcend▪ my Chambers are honourable; Fie, priuacy? Fie.
There was (mine Hoſt) an old-fat-woman euen now with me, but ſhe's gone.
Pray you Sir, was't not the Wiſe-woman of Brainford?
I marry was it (Muſſel-ſhell) what would you with her?
My Maſter (Sir) my maſter Slender, ſent to her ſeeing her go thorough the ſtreets, to know (Sir) whether one Nim (Sir) that beguil'd him of a chaine, had the chaine or no▪
I ſpake with the old woman about it.
And what ſayes ſhe, I pray Sir?
Marry ſhee ſayes, that the very ſame man that beguil'd Maſter Slender of his Chaine, cozon'd him of it.
I would I could haue ſpoken with the Woman her ſelfe, I had other things to haue ſpoken with her too, from him.
What are they? let vs know.
I; come, quicke.
I may not conceale them (Sir.)
Conceale them, or thou di'ſt.
Why ſir, they were nothing but about Miſtris Anne Page, to know if it were my Maſter fortune to haue her, or no.
'Tis, 'tis his fortune▪
What Sir?
To haue her, or no: goe; ſay the woman told me ſo.
May I be bold to ſay ſo Sir?
I Sir: like who more bold.
I thanke your worſhip: I ſhall make my Maſter glad with theſe tydings.
Thou are clearkly; thou art clearkly (Sir Iohn) was there a wiſe woman with thee?
I that there was (mine Hoſt) one that hath taught me more wit, then euer I learn'd before in my life: and I paid nothing for it neither, but was paid for my learning.
Out alas (Sir) cozonage: meere cozonage.
Where be my horſes? ſpeake well of them varletto.
Run away with the cozoners: for ſo ſoone as I came beyond Eaton, they threw mee off, from behinde one of them, in a ſlough of myre; and ſet ſpurres, and away; like three Germane-diuels; three Doctor Fauſtaffes.
They are gone but to meete the Duke (villaine) doe not ſay they be fled: Germanes are honeſt men.
Where is mine Hoſt?
What is the matter Sir?
Haue a care of your entertainments: there is a friend of mine come to Towne, tels mee there is three Cozen-Iermans, that has cozened all the Hoſts of Readius, of Maidenhead; of Cole-brooke, of horſes and money: I tell you for good will (looke you) you are wiſe, and full of gibes, and vlouting-ſtocks: and 'tis not conuenient you ſhould be cozoned. Fare you well.
Ver'is mine Hoſt de Iarteere?
Here (Maſter Doctor) in perplexitie, and doubtfull delemma.
I cannot tell vat is dat: but it is tell-a-me, dat you make grand preparation for a Duke de Iamanie: by my trot; der is no Duke that the Court is know, to come▪ I tell you for good will; adieu.
Huy and cry, (villaine) goe: aſſiſt me Knight, I am vndone: fly, run: huy, and cry (villaine) I am vndone.
I would all the world might bee cozond, for I haue beene cozond and beaten too: if it ſhould come to the eare of the Court, how I haue beene transformed; and how my transformation hath beene waſhd, and cudgeld, they would melt mee out of my fat drop by drop, and liquor Fiſhermens-boots with mee: I warrant they would whip mee with their fine wits, till I were as creſt-falne as a dride-peare I neur proſper'd ſince I forſwore my ſelfe at Primero: well, if my winde were but long enough; I would repent; Now? Whence come you?
From the two parties forſooth.
e Diuell take one partie, and his Dam the other: and ſo they ſhall bee both beſtowed; I haue ſuffer'd more for their ſakes; more then the villanous inconſtancy of mans diſpoſition is able to beare.
And haue not they ſuffer'd? Yes, I warrant; ſpeciouſly one of them; Miſtris Ford (good heart) is beaten blacke and blew, that you cannot ſee a white ſpot about her.
What tell'ſt thou mee of blacke, and blew? I was beaten my ſelfe into all the colours of the Rainebow: and I was like to be apprehended for the Witch of Braineford, but that my admirable dexteritie of wit, my counterfeiting the action of an old woman deliuer'd mee, the knaue Conſtable had ſet meith' Stocks, ith' common Stocks, for a Witch.
Sir: let me ſpeake with you in your Chamber, you ſhall heare how things goe, and (I warrant) to your content: here is a Letter will ſay ſomewhat: (goodhearts) what a-doe here is to bring you together? Sure, one of you do's not ſerue heauen well, that you are ſo croſſ'd.
Come vp into my Chamber.
Maſter Fenton, talke not to me, my minde is heauy:
I will giue ouer all.
Yet heare me ſpeake; aſſiſt me in my purpoſe,
And (as I am a gentleman) ile giue thee
A hundred pound in gold, more then your loſſe.
I will heare you (Maſter Fenton) and I will▪ (at the leaſt) keepe your counſell.
From time to time, I haue acquainted you
With the deare loue I beare to faire Anne Page,
Who, mutually, hath anſwer'd my affection,
(So farre forth, as her ſelfe might be her chooſer)
Euen to my wiſh; I haue a letter from her
Of ſuch contents, as you will wonder at;
The mirth whereof, ſo larded with my matter,
That neither (ſingly) can be manifeſted
Without the ſhew of both: fat Falſtaffe
Hath a great Scene; the image of the ieſt.
Ile ſhow you here at large (harke good mine Hoſt;)
To night at Hernes-Oke, iuſt 'twixt twelue and one,
Muſt my ſweet Nun preſent the Fairie Queene;
The purpoſe why, is here▪ in which diſguiſe
While other leſts are ſomething ranke on foote,
Her father hath commanded her to ſlip
Away with Slender, and with him, at Eaton
Immediately to Marry; She hatſt conſented▪ Now Sir,
Her Mother, (euen ſtrong againſt that match
And firme for Doctor Caius) hath appointed
That he ſhall likewiſe ſhuffle her away,
While other ſports are tasking of their mindes,
And at the Deanry, where a Prieſt attends
Strait marry her: to this her Mothers plot
She (ſeemingly obedient) likewiſe hath
Made promiſe to the Doctor; Now, thus it reſts,
Her Father meanes ſhe ſhall be all in white;
And in that habit, when Slender ſees his time
To take her by the hand, and bid her goe.
She ſhall go with him; her Mother hath intended
(The better to deuote her to the Doctor;
For they muſt all be mask'd, and vizarded)
That quaint in greene, ſhe ſhall be looſe en-roab'd,
With Ribonds pendant, flaring'bout her head;
And when the Doctor ſpies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and on that token,
The maid hath giuen conſent to go with him.
Which meanes ſhe to deceiue? Father, or Mother.
Both (my good Hoſt) to go along with me:
And heere it reſts, that you'l procure the Vicar
To ſtay for me at Church, 'twixt twelue, and one,
And in the lawfull name of marrying,
To giue our hearts vnited ceremony.
Well, husband your deuice; Ile to the Vicar,
Bring you the Maid, you ſhall not lacke a Prieſt.
So ſhall I euermore be bound to thee;
Beſides, ile make a preſent recompence.
Pre'thee no more pratling; goe, ile hold, this is the third time: I hope good lucke lies in odde numbers: Away, go, they ſay there is Diuinity in odde Numbers, either in natiuity, chance, or death: away.
Ile prouide you a chaine, and ile do what I can to get a paire of hornes.
Away I ſay, time weares, hold vp your head and mince. How now Maſter Broome? Maſter Broome, the matter will be knowne to night, or neuer. Bee you in the Parke about midnight, at Hernes-Oake, and you ſhall ſee wonders.
Went you not to her yeſterday (Sir) as you told me you had appointed?
I went to her (Maſter Broome) as you ſee, like a poore-old-man, but I came from her (Maſter Broome) like a poore-old-woman; that ſame knaue (Ford her husband) hath the fineſt mad diuell of iealouſie in him (Maſter Broome) that euer gouern'd Frenſie. I will tell you, he beate me greeuouſly, in the ſhape of a woman: (for in the ſhape of Man (Maſter Broome) I feare not Goliah with a Weauers beame, becauſe I know alſo, life is a Shuttle) I am in haſt, go along with mee, ile tell you all (Maſter Broome:) ſince I pluckt Geeſe, plaide Trewant, and whip Top, I knew not what'twas to be beaten, till lately-Follow me, ile tell you ſtrange things of this knaue Ford, on whom to night I will be reuenged, and I will deliuer his wife into your hand. Follow, ſtrange things in hand (Maſter Broome) follow.
Come, come: wee'll couch i'th Caſtle-ditch, till wee ſee the light of our Fairies. Remember ſonne Slender, my
I forſoothe, I haue ſpoke with her, and wee haue a nay-word, how to know one another. I come to her in white, and cry Mum; ſhe cries Budget, and by that we know one another.
That's good too: But what needes either your Mum, or her Budget? The white will decipher her well enough. It hath ſtrooke ten a▪ clocke.
The night is darke, Light and Spirits will become it well: Heauen proſper our ſport. No man meanes euill but the deuill, and we ſhall know him by his hornes. Lets away: follow me.
Maſter Doctor, my daughter is in green, when you ſee your time, take her by the hand, away with her to the Deanerie, and diſpatch it quickly; goe before into the Parke; we two muſt goe together.
I know vat I haue to do, adieu.
Fare you well (Sir:) my husband will not reioyce ſo much at the abuſe of Falſtaffe, as he will chafe at the Doctors marrying my daughter; But 'tis no matter; better a little chiding, then a great deale of heartbreake.
Where is Nan now? and her troope of Fairies? and the Welch-deuill Herne?
They are couch'd in a pit hard by Hernes Oake, with obſcur'd Lights; which at the very inſtant of Falſtaffes and our meeting, they will at once diſplay to the night.
That cannot chooſe but amaze him.
If he be not amaz'd, he will be mock'd; If he be amaz'd, he will euery way be mock'd.
Wee'll betray him finely.
Againſt ſuch Lewdſters, and their lechery,
Thoſe that betray them, do no treachery.
The houre drawes-on; to the Oake, to the Oake.
Trib, trib Fairies; Come, and remember your parts: be pold (I pray you) follow me into the pit, and when I giue the watch-'ords, do as I pid you; Come, come trib, trib.
The Windſor-bell hath ſtroke twelue: the Minute drawes on: Now the hot-bloodied▪ Gods aſſiſt mee; Remember loue, thou was't a Bull for thy Europa, Loue ſet on thy hornes. O powerfull Loue, that in ſome reſpects makes a Beaſt a Man: in ſome other, a Man a beaſt. You were alſo (Iupiter) a Swan, for the loue of Leda: O omnipotent Loue, how nere the God drew to the complexion of a Gooſe: a fault done firſt in the forme of a beaſt, (O Ioue, a beaſtly fault:) and then another fault, in the ſemblance of a Fowle, thinke on't (Ioue) a fowlefault. When Gods haue hot backes, what ſhall poore men doe? For me, I am heere a Windſor Stagge, and the fatteſt (I thinke) i'th Forreſt. Send me a coole rut-time (Ioue) or who can blame mee to piſſe my Tallow? Who comes heere my Doe?
Sir Iohn? Art thou there (my Deere?)
My male-Deere?
My Doe, with the blacke Scut? Let the skie raine Potatoes: let it thunder, to the tune of Greeneſleeues, haile-kiſſing Comfit, and ſnow Eringoes; Let there come a tempeſt of prouocation, I will ſhelter mee heere.
Miſtris Page is come with me (ſweet heart.)
Diuide me like a brid'd-Bucke, each a Haunch: I will keepe my ſides to my ſelfe, my ſhoulders for the fellow of this walke; and my hornes I bequeath your husband. Am I a Woodman, ha? Speake I like Herne the Hunter? Why, now is Cupid a child of conſcience, he makes reſtitution. As I am a true ſpirit, welcome.
Alas, what noiſe?
Heauen forgiue-our ſinnes.
What ſhould this be?
M. Page. Away, away.
I thinke the diuell will not haue me damn'd,
Leſt the oyle that's in me ſhould ſet hell on fire;
He would neuer elſe croſſe me thus.
Fairies blacke, gray, greene, and white,
You Moone-ſhine reuellers, and ſhades of night.
You Orphan heires of fixed deſtiny,
Attend your office, and your quality.
Crier Hob-goblyn, make the Fairy Oyes.
Elues, liſt your names: Silence you aiery toyes.
Cricket, to Windſore-chimnies ſhalt thou leape;
Where fires thou find'ſt vnrak'd, and hearths vnſwept,
There pinch the Maids as blew as Bill-berry,
Our radiant Queene, hates Sluttery.
They are Fairies, he that ſpeaks to them ſhall die,
Ile winke, and couch: No man their workes muſt eie.
Wher's Bede? Go you, and where you finde a maid
That ere ſhe ſleepe has thrice her prayers ſaid,
Raiſe vp the Organs of her fantaſie,
Sleepe ſhe as ſound as careleſſe infancie,
But thoſe as ſleepe, and thinke not on their ſins,
Pinch them armes, legs, backes, ſhoulders, ſides, and ſhins.
About, about:
Search Windſor Caſtle (Elues) within, and out:
Strew good lucke (Ouphes) on euery ſacred roome,
That it may ſtand till the perpetuall doome,
In ſtate as wholſome, as in ſtate 'tis fit,
Worthy the Owner, and the Owner it.
The ſeuerall Chaires of Order, looke you ſcowre
With iuyce of Balme; and euery precious flower,
Each faire Inſtalment, Coate, and ſeu'rall Creſt,
With loyall Blazon, euermore be bleſt.
And Nightly-meadow-Fairies, looke you ſing
Like to the Garters-Compaſſe, in a ring,
Th'expreſſure that it beares: Greene let it be,
Mote fertile-freſh then all the Field to ſee;
And, Hony Soit Qui Mal-y-Pence, write
In Emrold ruffes, Flowres purple, blew; and white,
Like Saphire-pearle, and rich embroidery,
Buckled below faire Knight-hoods bending knee;
Fairies vſe Flowres for their characterie:
Away, diſperſe: But till 'tis one a clocke,
Our Dance of Cuſtome, round about the Oke
Of Herne the Hunter, let vs not forget.
Pray you locke hand in hand: your ſelues in order ſet.
And twenty glo-wormes ſhall our Lanthornes bee
To guide our Meaſure round about the Tree.
But ſtay, I ſmell a man of middle earth.
Heauens defend me from that Welſh Fairy,
Leſt he transforme me to a peece of Cheeſe.
Vilde worme, thou waſt ore-look'd euen in thy birth.
With Triall-fire touch me his finger end;
If he be chaſte, the flame will backe deſcend
And turne him to no paine: but if he ſtart,
It is the fleſh of a corrupted hart.
A triall, come.
Come: will this wood take fire?
Oh, oh, oh.
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in deſire.
About him (Fairies) ſing a ſcornfull rime,
And as you trip, ſtill pinch him to your time.
Fie on ſinnefull phantaſie: Fie on Luſt, and Luxirie.
Luſt is but a bloudy fire, kindled with vnchaſte deſire,
Fed in heart whoſe flames aſpire,
As thoughts do blow them higher and higher:
Pinch him (Fairies) mutuall: Pinch him for his villanie.
Pinch him, and burne him, and turne him about,
Till Candles, and Star-light, and Moone-ſhine be out.
Nay doe not flye, I thinke wee haue watcht you now; Will none but Hern the Hunter ſerue your turne?
I pray you come, hold vp the ieſt no higher.
Now (good Sir Iohn) how like you Windſor wiues?
See you theſe husband? Do not theſe faire yoakes
Become the Forreſt better then the Towne?
Now Sir, who's a Cuckold now?
Maſter Broome, Falſtaffes a Knaue, a Cuckoldy knaue,
Heere are his hornes Maſter Broome;
And Maſter Broome, he hath enioyed nothing of Fords, but his Buck-basket, his cudgell, and twenty pounds of money, which muſt be paid to Maſter Broome, his horſes are arreſted for it, Maſter Broome.
Sir Iohn, wee haue had ill lucke: wee could neuer meete: I will neuer take you for my Loue againe, but I will alwayes count you my Deere.
I doe begin to perceiue that I am made an Aſſe.
I, and an Oxe too; both the proofes are extant.
And theſe are not Fairies;
I was three or foure times in the thought they were not Fairies, and yet the guiltineſſe of my minde, the ſodaine ſurprize of my powers, droue the groſſeneſſe of the foppery into a receiu'd beleefe, in deſpight of the teeth of all rime and reaſon, that they were Fairies. See now how wit may bee made a Iacke-a-Lent, when 'tis vpon ill imployment.
Sir Iohn Falſtaffe, ſerue Got, and leaue your deſires, and Fairies will not pinſe you.
Well ſaid Fairy Hugh:
And leaue you your iealouzies too, I pray you.
I will neuer miſtruſt my wife againe, till thou art able to woo her in good Engliſh.
Haue I laid my braine in the Sun, and dri'de it, that it wants matter to preuent ſo groſſe ore-reaching as this? Am I ridden with a Welch Goate too? Shall I haue a Coxcombe of Frize? Tis time I were choak'd with a peece of toaſted Cheeſe.
Seeſe is not good to giue putter; your belly is all putter.
Seeſe, and Putter? Haue I liu'd to ſtand at the taunt of one that makes Fritters of Engliſh? This is enough to be the decay of luſt and late-walking through the Realme.
Why Sir Iohn, doe you thinke though wee would haue thruſt vertue out of our hearts by the head and ſhoulders, and haue giuen our ſelues without ſcruple to hell, that euer the deuill could haue made you our delight?
What, a hodge-pudding? A bag of flax?
A puftman?
Old, cold, wither'd, and of intollerable entrailes?
And one that is ſlanderous as Sathan?
And as poore as Iob?
And as wicked as his wife?
And giuen to Fornications, and to Tauernes, and Sacke, and Wine, and Metheglins, and to drinkings and ſwearings, and ſtarings? Pribles and prables?
Well, I am your Theame: you haue the ſtart of me, I am deiected: I am not able to anſwer the Welch Flannell, Ignorance it ſelfe is plummet ore me, vſe mee as you will.
Marry Sir, wee'l bring you to Windſor to one Maſter Broome, that you haue cozon'd of money, to whom you ſhould haue bin a Pander: ouer and aboue that you haue ſuffer'd, I thinke, to repay that money will be a biting affliction.
Yet be cheerefull Knight: thou ſhalt eat a poſſet to night at my houſe, where I will deſire thee to laugh at my wife, that now laughes at thee: Tell her Maſter Slender hath married her daughter.
Doctors doubt that;
If Anne Page be my daughter, ſhe is (by this) Doctour Caius wife.
Whoa hoe, hoe, Father Page,
Sonne? How now Sonne.
Haue you diſpatch'd?
Diſpatch'd? Ile make the beſt in'Gloſterſhire know on't: would I were hang'd la, elſe.
Of what ſonne?
I came yonder at Eaton to marry Miſtris Anne Page, and ſhe's a great lubberly boy. If it had not beene i'th Church, I would haue ſwing'd him, or hee ſhould haue ſwing'd me. If I did not thinke it had beene Anne Page, would I might neuer ſtirre, and 'tis a Poſt-maſters Boy.
Vpon my life then, you tooke the wrong.
What neede you tell me that? I thinke ſo, when I tooke a Boy for a Girle: If I had beene maried to him, for all hee was in womans apparrell) I would not haue had him.
Why this is your owne folly,
Did not I tell you how you ſhould know my daughter, By her garments?
I went to her in greene, and cried Mum, and ſhe cride budget, as Anne and I had appointed, and yet it was not Anne, but a Poſt-maſters boy.
Good George be not angry, I knew of your purpoſe: turn'd my daughter in white, and indeede ſhee is now with the Doctor at the Denerie, and there married.
Ver is Miſtris Page: by gar I am cozoned, I ha married oon Garſoon, a boy; oon peſant, by gar. A boy, it is not An Page, by gar, I am cozened.
Why? did you take her in white?
I bee gar, and 'tis a boy; be gar Ile raiſe all Windſor.
This is ſtrange: Who hath got the right Anne?
My heart miſgiues me, here comes Maſter Fenton▪
How now Maſter Fenton?
Pardon good father, good my mother pardon
Now Miſtris;
How chance you went not with Maſter Slender?
Why went you not with Maſter Doctor, maid?
You do amaze her: heare the truth of it.
You would haue married her moſt ſhamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in loue:
The truth is, ſhe and I (long ſince contracted)
Are now ſo ſure that nothing can diſſolue vs,
Th'offence is holy, that ſhe hath committed,
And this deceit looſes the name of craft,
Of diſobedience, or vnduteous title,
Since therein ſhe doth euitate and ſhun
A thouſand irreligious curſed houres
Which forced marriage would haue brought vpon her.
Stand not amaz'd, here is no remedie:
In Loue, the heauens themſelues do guide the ſtate,
Money buyes Lands, and wiues are ſold by fate.
I am glad, though you haue tane a ſpecial ſtand to ſtrike that your Arrow hath glanc'd.
Well, what remedy? Fenton, heauen giue thee ioy,
What cannot bee eſchew'd, muſt be embrac'd.
When night-dogges run, all ſorts of Deere are chac'd.
Well, I will muſe no further: Maſter Fenton,
Heauen giue you many, many merry dayes:
Good husband, let vs euery one go home,
And laugh this ſport ore by a Countrie fire,
Sir Iohn and all.
Let it be ſo (Sir Iohn:)
To Maſter Broome, you yet ſhall hold your word,
For he, to night, ſhall lye with Miſtris Ford.