WHat thundering power grow'n jealous of my ſtate
With ſuch hoſtilitie my troupes o're-throwes,
And arm'd with lightning, breathing flames of hate,
Big with diſdaine, high indignation ſhowes
Whil'ſt ſooth'd with ſelfe conceits aſham'd to doubt,
In greatneſſe ſhadowe I ſecurelie ſlept,
Lo change-affecting Fortune wheeles about,
And ruines all that me from ruine kept.
Thus I, whoſe onlie name amaz'd my foes,
Whom th'earth ador'd, as Monarche, once ouer all,
Am ſo degraded now, and ſunke in woes,
That who admir'd my might, admire my fall.
Ah then indeed I fell, when gallants ſtood,
And Phoenix-like renew'd their life by death,
Who hauing ſeald their force and faith with blood,
Would rather die, then draw a borrowed breath.
Yet I, but then not I, view'd not aveng'd,
Thoſe monſtrous mountaines of my ſubjects ſlaine,
Although my conſcience hath my courage cleng'd,
And knowes what valour was employ'd in vaine.
Through greateſt dangers death I did purſue,
Till heapes of ſlaughtred bodies bar'd my way,
And chang'd my Chariot to a ſcarlet hue,
Ere wounded honour could be drawne away.
O how I enuy yet their happie Ghoſtes,
Who died whil'ſt hope of victorie remain'd,
And in the preſence of two famous hoſtes
Left bloodie recordes that they died vnſtain'd?
Shall I ſuruiue that ſoule-ouerwhelming ſhame,
To be th'eternall ſtaine of Perſians praiſe?
No rather let me die, and let my name,
Be quite exſtinguiſh'd with my hatefull dayes.
Starre-boſting Babilon bluſh to behold
One cald thy King ſurmounted and abated:
How may thy Towrs but tremble, when it's told,
Thy Prince entreats, whome Princes earſt entreated?
Not vaſſal-like; I will not yeeld to this:
Were all my Empire to a period come,
Yet none ſhall vaunt that euer I was his:
Hartes holding courage are not all o're-come.
This tongue inur'd ſtill to command doth ſcorne
To breath baſe words, to ſcape a minutes paines.
Let them obey, who to obey were borne:
For Darius this indignitie diſdaines.
Since I was once iudg'd worthie to command,
Shall I returne to be a baſe entreater?
No, whil'ſt a ſword yeelds homage to this hand,
Ile not acknowledge in the world a greater.
Braue ſpirites, who now poſſeſſe the pleaſant bowers,
And glorious gardens of th'Eliſian plaine,
(For if deſerts may moue th'infernall powers,
That happie ſhade your ſhadowes muſt containe)
Thoſe fields where-as your praiſes are ſet forth
Do burie but your bodies, not your fame:
Men ſhall adore the relickes of your worth,
And reare immortall Trophees to your name.
Ile ſacrifize as incenſe to your ſoules,
His dying ſighes, and ſorrowing parents teares,
Who now, while none his inſolence controules,
Our conquer'd enſignes in his triumphe beares.
For it may eaſe your Ghoſtes to heare his grones,
Whil'ſt th'earth ouer-burdend ſends rebounding back
A plaintife Echo from the woods and ſtones,
To ſound through all the aire his armies wrack.
Why ſpend I ſpeaches to diſturbe your reſt?
What idle diſputations do I hold?
A mightie furour hath enflam'd my breſt,
And burnes me, till I be aueng'd ſeuen-fold.
Did I that ſtrong Caduſian firſt affront,
Who durſt aduance himſelfe to braue our bandes,
Then turn'd applauded, and in high account,
Charg'd with his ſpoiles the honour of my hands?
And could I then all kinde of doubt remoouing,
Aduenter only to an Armies ſhame?
And ſhould I now that auncient praiſe diſprouing,
With ſquadrons compaſt looſe that glorious name?
Blinde fortune, O, thy ſtratagems are ſtrange:
Thou wrak'ſt my greatnes, wound'ſt mine honour to,
And hauing made my ſtate the ſtage of change,
Haſt acted all inconſtancie could do.
Lo I, who late of ſwarming troupes did boſt,
Am ſpoil'd of all in whome I then repos'd,
And thoſe impriſon'd, whome I fancie moſt,
Are to th'inſulting victours pride expos'd.
O torment but to thinke, death to beleeue,
That any may command my deereſt part,
And wretched I notable to releeue
The Iewell of mine eye, ioy of my hart.
Deere obiect of my thoughtes, my life, my loue,
Sweete ſource of my delights, my one, my all,
Bright Image of excellencies aboue,
What? do'ſt thou breath, and com'ſt not when I call?
And can I be, and not be where thou art?
Hath heauen the force me from thy face to barre?
Or are my hands growne traitors to my hart,
That they ſhould ſhrinke from doing what it dare?
O could my minde but diſtribute a ſpace
Theſe emulating thoughts that toſſe my breſt,
Among thoſe pointles Cyphers that ſpend place:
Then I alone might animate the reſt.
Since in this great diſgrace I chanc'd to fall,
Now nothing reſts to raſe my fame forlorne,
But to doe deſperatly, and hazard all.
Ile liue with praiſe, or by my death flie ſcorne.
Some proſperous iſſue afterward may purge
This crime, with which th'euent would burthen me,
This crime, that carries with it ſelfe a ſcourge:
No greater torment than the want of thee.
But what hope reſts to re-obtaine that treaſure,
Which auaritious tyrants once poſſeſſe?
Another now diſpoſes at his pleaſure
Of all my wealth: how can I looke for leſſe?
Now, not till now, I deeme my ſtate in danger,
When I imagine how my beſt belou'd
Muſt entertaine my enemy a ſtranger,
I being far from offering aide remou'd.
A hoſt of furies in my breſt I finde,
Which do my ſoule with dreadfull horrours fill,
And foſter in my melancholious minde
Strange apprehenſions that affright me ſtill.
And this ſurmiz'd diſgrace, grown throughly ſtrong,
Reades hourely in my eares a hatefull ſcroule
Of an imagin'd, yet recureles wrong,
Such poiſon'd thoughtes like ſerpents ſting my ſoule.
Blind loue beguiles me not, ſharpe-ſighted feares
Finde great apparances for to ſuſpect thee:
Would God I had no hart, nor eyes, nor eares,
To thinke, to ſee, or heare thou ſhouldſt neglect me.
This aggrauates the wight of my diſpaire,
When doubt obiects, t'annull loues faſt defence,
How he is young and feirce, ſhe young, and faire,
He bent t'offend, and ſhe expoſd t'offence,
From which I feare both cannot long abſtaine:
Her beauty is ſufficient to allure:
His brauery is ſufficient to obtaine.
Captaines will force, and captiues muſt endure,
O Alexander, tender my renowne,
Although thou trauell to vſurpe my throne.
I rage to haue ariuall in my Crowne:
But in my loue I can comport with none.
Lode her not with diſgrace, and me with griefe,
Leaſt ſo thou rob her honour, and my life:
Spare in this point t'ouercharge me with miſchiefe:
In all things els let armes decide our ſtrife.
But where doth fury thus tranſport my ſpirits,
With light beleefe my beſt halfe to miſtruſt?
Deere, pardon, I treſpaſſe to wrong thy merits,
Whom I haue ſtill found faithfull louing iuſt.
Pure chaiſtitie doth then moſt firmelie ſtand,
When fortified it is with wedlockes band.
Yet let me doubt, or let me leaue to loue:
To feare the worſt it is affections part.
I'l not miſtruſt thy truth? yet it may proue,
Thy face betray thy faith, thy hap thy hart.
But on thy loue approou'd my hope relyes,
This doth diſſolue ſuſpitions power to nought.
I will repell reports, as ſlanderous lyes,
Which ſecond not thy vertue, and my thought.
Though vertues foe, and worth-enuying fortune,
Hath wrong'd my valour with an euill ſucceſſe;
Life of my life, yet muſt I thee importune,
Ioyne not with her to double my diſtreſſe.
O More then miſerable minde,
That of all things it ſelfe worſt knowes,
And being through preſumption blinde
Is puffed vp with euery winde,
Which fortune in deriſion blowes.
Such one no ſtable bliſſe can finde,
Whoſe hart is guided by his eye,
And truſtes vnto betraying ſhowes,
Which ſeeme not as they be.
Oft ſhort proſperity,
Breedes long aduerſity:
For who abuſe the firſt, the laſt o're-throwes.
A dead ſecurity all care exiles:
Tis no ſmall danger to be happie whiles.
Who on himſelfe too much depends,
A makes an Idole of his witt,
For euery favour fortune ſends,
Self-flatterer himſelfe commends,
And will no ſound aduiſe admit,
But at himſelfe beginnes, and ends,
And neuer takes a moments leaſure,
To try what fault he may commit,
But drunke with frothes of pleaſure,
Thirſtes for praiſe aboue meaſure,
Imaginary treaſure,
Which ſlowly commes, and ſoone away doth flit:
And what is moſt affected at this time,
Succeeding ages may account a crime.
A Potentate that is reſpected,
And by his ſubiects thought a God,
Thinkes, as his name on high erected
Hath what he liſt at home effected,
It may like wonders worke abrod.
O how his folly is detected!
For though he ſit in Royall ſeate,
And as he liſt his vaſſalls lod;
Yet others that are great.
Liue not by his conceate,
Nor ponder what he threat,
But plague his pride oft ere he feare the rod.
There are rare qualities required in Kings:
A naked name can never worke great things.
They who themſelues too much eſteeme,
And vainly vilipend their foe,
Oft finde not fortune, as they deeme,
And with their treaſure would redeeme
Their errour paſt: Behold euen ſo
From blame who can our King exeeme,
Who his aduerſary to ſcorne,
Thought he who in his name did goe
The laurell ſhould haue worne,
His triumphe to adorne?
But he with ſhame hath ſhorne
The fruites of follie euer ripe with woe.
An enemie (if it be well aduis'd)
Though he ſeeme weakt, ſhould neuer be deſpis'd.
But what? the Minions of our Kings,
Who ſpeake at large, and are beleeued,
Dare boaſt of many mightie things,
As they could flie, though wanting wings,
And deeds by wordes might be atchëeued,
But time at length their lies to light,
Their ſoueraigne to confuſion brings.
Yet ſo they gaine, they are not greeue'd,
But charme their Princes ſight,
And make what's wrong ſeeme right.
Thus ruine they his might,
That when he would, he cannot be releeued.
Moe kings in chambers fall by flatterers charmes,
Then in the field by th'aduerſaries armes.
All that the ſucceſſe hath approoued
By Charidemus was foreſhowne:
Yet with his wordes no man was mooued:
For good men firſt muſt be remooued,
Before their worth can well be knowne.
The King would heare but what he looued,
And what him pleaſd not did diſpiſe.
So were the beeter ſort o'er-throwne,
And Sycophants vnwiſe,
Who could the trueth diſguiſe,
Were ſuffered for to riſe,
That him, who rais'd them vp, they might caſt downe.
Thus Princes will not heare, though ſuch deceaue them,
Things as they are, but as themſelues conceaue them.
BEholde, the heauens with a benigne aſpect,
To proſper this braue enterpriſe intend,
And with propitious ſtarres ſeeme to direct
This great beginning to a glorious end.
Who would be famous muſt of force aſpite:
All thoſe aſtoniſh'd, who my troupes do view,
Doubt of thoſe two which moſt they ſhould admire;
My comming, or my conquering with ſo few.
So mightie mindes t'atchieue great actions bent
Force Fortune oft to fauour them in all:
Where baſer breaſts deuining euill euent,
Through ſuperſtitious feares procure their fall.
O howe I wonder, when I call to minde
That monſtrous camp, which not ſo much as doubted!
Dimme ſeem'd the Sunne, while-as their armour ſhind
Men had not heard the thunder, whil'ſt they ſhouted.
Th'auant-courours, that came for to examine,
When they ſo meane my nombers had perceau'd,
Did thinke them ſmall to ſatisfie the famine,
That their huge hoſte of daughter had conceau'd.
And yet in end this prou'd a poyſon'd foode,
Which of their owne to their confuſion yeeldes
Mountaines of murthered corps, and ſeas of blood:
Vn buried bodies buried all the fieldes.
So now that fewe, whome they contemn'd ſo farre,
(See how mortalitie it ſelfe deceaues)
Haue farre ouer-match'd their multitudes in warre,
And made the world waſte to people the graues.
Then, deere Parmenio, ſince the fates afforde
So faire an entrie to our firſt deſignes,
Let vs goe proſecute with dint of ſworde
That fortune, which the heauens our hopes aſſignes.
This high attempt, as we would wiſh ſucceeds.
What hoſtes haue we ouerthrow'n? what citties raz'd?
Loe, populous Aſia trembles at our deedes,
And martiall Europe doth remaine amaz'd.
Proud Greece, whoſe ſpirits oft preaſt to skorne the skyes,
A proſtrate ſupplicant before thee falles:
Rebellious Thebes, that durſt thy power diſpyſe,
Lyes now entomb'd within her broken walles.
That ſea-impyring Tyre, repoſing much
In liquide Caſtels, and a wauing maine,
Hath ratified thy forces to be ſuch,
That nothing can reſiſt thy iuſt diſdaine.
No doubt the auncient Graecians ghoſts are glad
To ſee the fierce Barbarians brought ſo lowe;
Yet are for enuy of thy fortune ſad,
And though vnbo-died bluſh at this ouerthrowe.
Miltiades by all men was admir'd,
Who once in Greece their flying troupes purſued:
And he that with a ſtratageme retir'd,
And Salaminaes ſtraites with blood imbrued.
But yet for all the Captaines of that age
The Eaſterne Monarckes empire was enlarg'd,
Who comming to their countrie, warres to wage,
The ſea with ſhippes, the land with armies charg'd.
He with moe ſwarmes of mē, then th'Autumns cluſters,
Dry'd riuers vp, & march'd on Neptunes backe;
By meaſure, not by nomber made his muſters,
And did attempt the mountaines plaine to make.
Then Europe fear'd for to beforc'd to bowe,
Wil'ſt th'earth did groane to beare ſo great an hoſt?
But thou haſt come, ſeene, and ouercom'd them nowe
Euen in the boundes wherein their might was moſt.
That hautie foe, who vilipended oft
Our predeceſſours armies, and our owne,
Now laide as lowe, as he was once aloft,
With his diſgrace muſt make thy valour knowne.
He cannot but acknowledge his diſtreſſe
In labouring firſt to haue his friends reſtor'd:
This meſſage (potent Prince) imports no leſſe:
By his requeſt thy conqueſt is decor'd.
For the recouerie of his captiu'd Queene
He offred hath innumerable golde;
And would preſent a treaſure to be ſeene
More, as they ſay, then Macedon may holde.
My counſell is that you accept thoſe offers,
And render her, as th'auncient cuſtome bindes;
Who would make warre muſt not haue empty coffers:
For hope of gaine moues mercenarie mindes.
And further, if thoſe Princeſſes doe tarrie,
It ſumptuous is to entertaine their ſtate.
Wemen, and babes are cumberſome to carrie;
Th'one young in yeares, and th'other in conceat.
If I were come to traffick in this land,
And like a greedie merchant to embrace
Before all hope of glorie gaine in hand,
This your inuild opinion might haue place.
But ſoone I ſurfet of ſuch melting things,
And famiſh but for fame, and crownes of Kings.
So, were I Alexander, would I do.
If I Parmenio were, ſo would I to.
Their ranſome would defray your ſouldiers fee.
I'le rather without ranſome ſet them free.
The good is loſte that's done vnto a fo.
The greater glorie to o'recomme him ſo.
Golde is the God that conquers in all parts.
True magnanimitie doth rauiſh harts.
Riche treaſures ſerue for th'arters of the war.
No, but couragious harts that all things darre.
The want of wages makes a mutinous band.
But who dare diſobey, when I command?
Why ſhould you, Sir, cōtemne ſo rich a treaſure?
A noble ſpirit with praiſe no gain doth meaſure.
But who delites in ſuch an airie ſtore?
If I be ſingular, I aske no more.
Although that you conceaue no ſuch ſuſpitiō,
Yet I heare how your ſouldiers oft exclame,
They ſacrifize their bloods for your ambition,
And periſh to perpetuate your name.
And yet, without regarde what they indure,
You compaſſe all the empire of the Eaſt,
And more within your minde: this may procure
Some ſuddaine tumult, when you feare it leaſt.
Retire in time, while as the heauens are cleare:
You haue perform'd, perform'd, and that right ſone,
More thē your own could hope, your foes could feare,
Or then the world can credite, when 'tis done.
Your worth in warre is wonderfullie ſhowne,
And to the terrour of all Aſia tryde:
Now let your skill in peace be likewiſe knowne,
And for the maint'nance of your ſtate prouide.
Good gouernment the ſame of Kings doth raiſe
No leſſe then conqueſt made of Realmes and townes:
'Tis harder farre, and doth deſerue more praiſe
To guide, then get: to keepe, then conquere crownes.
Your glorie in her hieſt ſpheare is plac'd,
And may not moue except it be more lowe:
And if it once diſcend to be diſgrac'd,
Each artizan your ſtatues will o're-throwe,
For in the warre, as you may well perceiue,
No little part dependeth vpon fame:
If we but once the leaſt affront receiue,
The world will gather to exſtripe our name.
Then tempt not Fortune further then you neede,
Let reaſon bridle this aſpyring thought:
Leaſt, whil'ſt your hopes with trophees faind you feed,
A moment turne your trauels all to nought.
Let Darius be a liuelie patrone now
Of th'euer-changing courſe of ſtates and crownes:
That Prince to whom the Orient once did bow,
His deſolation onely now renounes.
He ſcarſelie loat length become content
To call you King, though twiſe put in diſ-order:
In dowrie with his daughter doth preſent
The famous Euphrates, to be your border.
Or otherwiſe he condiſcends to giue
Great ſtore of Gold, or what your ſelfe deſires,
If that his mother, wife, and children liue,
To haue them rend'red, as he oft requires.
And let not vaine ambition blind your eies:
Remember what ſtrange nations will imbrace him,
Whom ſcarce he knowes by name, or neuer ſees,
Where if he fled, your troups would tire to chace him.
Peace, peace Parmenio, now thou makeſt me rage,
With theſe words vn-worthy of our eares:
It ſeemes the coldeneſſe of decaying age,
Hath kil'd thy courage with a froſt of feares.
Did I abandone thee my natiue ſoile,
And ſhaddow'd with my Enſignes vnknow'n coaſtes;
That after infinite diſtreſſe and toile,
Whil'ſt in contempt of vs our foe yet boaſtes,
I ſhould retire, effecting nought at laſt,
But ſharpned a deſire, t'augment my merites,
Then die in diſcontemment, when 'tis paſt
The time, that ſhould haue pacified my ſpirites?
No, I will raigne, and I will raigne alone:
From this deſſeigne my fancie neuer wanders,
For as the heau'ns can hold no Sunne but one:
The earth cannot containe two Alexanders.
The ample circuite of this ſpacious round
Seemes inſufficient to confine my thought:
And ô would God there could moe worlds be found,
That many might t'adorne our deedes be brought.
O, I could wiſh that th'Ocean were firme land,
Where none but hideous Giants had retreat,
Such as at Phlegra fielde in ſtriefe did ſtand
Againſt the Gods for the Etheriall ſeate.
Theſe could encourage martiall mindes to ſtrike,
Who being wonne would yeeld eternall praiſe:
I conquere men; but many did the like:
And after-ages may my equall raiſe.
But ſince none ſuch my triumphes are to grace,
Such as there are I'le to ſubiection bring:
And heere I ſweare no kinde of eaſe t'embrace,
Till all the world adore me for their King.
If you or any elſe that liue in dreede
With-drawe your ſelues, your Princes part deſpyſing;
Remember alwaies in his greateſt neede
Ye flie to ſtop his honour in the ryſing.
Paſſe home, and liue like men in priſon pent:
I meaſure not my courage by my numbers.
Your Maieſtie miſconſters my intent:
You know what I haue thold, what cares, what cumbers,
And all for you: I to your eies appeale,
Which well can witnes what my hands haue wrought.
All that I ſpake, proceeded of a zeale
And not of cowardice, or feare of ought.
Nor matche I vile repoſe with honeſt paines:
My courage is nor yet become ſo colde:
That wounted vigour hath not left my vaines,
Which ſpurd my ſpirit in youth, though I be olde.
'Tis not ynough that you your ſelfe be ſo:
To be the ſame you ſhould the reſt exhort.
Is he return'd, who was ordain'd to go
And viewe the Captiues, what doth he report?
As we were ſince by ſome of them inſtructed,
While they as yet not of ſupport diſpair'd,
And to a tent were courteouſly conducted,
Which we of purpoſe caus'd to be prepar'd;
Euen in the way one fortun'd to eſpy
The Diademe that Darius earſt had borne,
Which on the earth ſo abiectly did lie,
As each thing his calamine would ſcorne.
Then they imagin'd, from his royall head,
Whoſe dignity it ſome-time did decore,
None could it caſt, except himſelfe were dead:
And if ſo were, they long'd to liue no more.
When they had entred in the tent to weepe,
Leonatus came and at the entrie knocked:
They ſtood ſo ſtill, he thought an yornie ſleepe
Had lock'd their eies, or elſe that he was mocked.
At length by force he made a patent way,
And was aduanc'd them louingly to greet;
When loe, theſe dolorous Ladies proſtrate lay,
And with a flood of teares bedew'd his feete.
Then ſobbing ſaide, we not refuſe to die:
Let vs entombe firſt Darius like a King:
Then when that we his latter honour ſee,
Death cannot but a great contentment bring.
This ſo they vrg'd, as he could ſcarce perſwade
That Darius was not dead as they ſuppoſ'd,
But liu'd, in hope through dangers Seas to wade
And in the pow'r of other Realmes repoſ'd.
And further he proteſted on your part,
That they might looke for clemencie and grace.
Thus after that I had aſſwag'd their ſmart,
It ſeem'd they longd to ſee my Soueraignes face.
Of my good-will they may themſelues aſſure:
I neuer war'd with ſuch as were ſubiected:
And if my preſence may their eaſe procure,
Straight to their tent my ſteppes ſhall be directed.
OF all the paſsions that poſſeſſe the ſoule,
None ſo diſturbes vaine mortals mindes
As this Ambition, that ſo blindes
The ſenſe of man, that nothing can controule
Nor curb their thoughts who will aſpyre.
This raging vehement deſire
Of ſeueraignty no ſatiſfaction findes,
But in the breaſtes of men doth euer roule
The reſtleſſe ſtone of Siſiph to torment them.
And as his hart, who ſteal'd the heu'nly fire,
The vulture gnawes, ſo doth Ambition rent them:
Had they the world, the world would not content them.
This race of Ixion to embrace the cloudes,
Contemne the ſtate wherein they ſtand,
And would all but themſelues command,
As one deſire is quench'd another buds:
When they haue trauel'd all their time,
Heaps blood on blood, and crime on crime,
There is a hier power that guides their hand.
More happie he whome a poore cottage ſhroudes
Againſt the tempeſt of the threatning heauen,
He ſtands in feare of none, none enuy him:
His hart is vpright, and his wayes are eauen,
Where others ſtates are ſtill twixt ſixe and ſeauen.
That damned wretch vp with Ambition blow'n,
While-as he turnes the wheele about,
Whiles caſt within, whiles caſt without,
In ſtriuing for the top is ſtill throwne downe.
Thoſe that delight in climbing hie
Oft with a precepice doe die:
So doe the ſtarres sky-climbling worldlings flout.
But this diſeaſe is fatall to a croune;
Kings, who haue moſt ſtriue moſt t'augment their bounds;
And if they be not all, they can not be:
Which to their domage commonly redounds.
Too great a ſtate her proper waight confounds.
Th'ambitious toyling to enlarge their ſtate
Themſelues exceedingly deceaue,
In hazarding the hap they haue
For a felicitie that they conceate.
Though their dominions they incres,
Yet their deſires growe neuer les:
For though they conquer Climats, more they craue.
This is the miſerie of being great.
Such eye-beguyling pompe is all but fume;
Such glorious ſhowes diſguiſe the minds diſtres;
And who to conquere all the earth preſume,
A little earth ſhall them at laſt conſume.
And if it fortune that they die in peace
(A wonder wondrous rarelie ſeene)
Who conquere firſt; their empire cleene
Is ruin'd by ſome perſons of their race:
Who comming to the crowne with reſt,
And hauing all in peace poſſeſt,
Do ſtraight forget what bloody broils haue bene
Before their Fathers could attaine that place.
As th'Ocean flowes, and ebbes ſtates riſe and fall:
And Princes, when their actions proſper beſt,
For feare their greatnes ſhould oppreſſe the ſmal,
Are of ſome hated, and eny'd of all.
We knowe what end the mightie Cyrus made,
Whome, while he ſtriu'd to conquere ſtill,
A woman did moſt vildlie kill,
And in a bloodie veſſell rold his head;
Then ſaid, Content thy ſelfe with blood:
Thou ſtill didſt famiſh for ſuch food:
Now quench thy thirſt of blood with blood at will.
Some of his ſucceſſors, ſince he was dead
Haue raign'd a ſpace with pompe, and yet with paine.
Now all their glorie cannot doe vs good.
What they ſo long haue laboured to obtaine,
All in an inſtant muſt be loſt againe.
Loe, Darius once ſo magnified by fame,
By one whome he contemn'd o'recome,
For all his brauerie now made dombe,
With downe-caſt eyes muſt ſignifie his ſhame.
Who puft vpwith pernitious pride
Thinke ſtill t'haue fortune on their ſide,
They cannot ſcape to be a pray to ſome.
They ſpend their proſperous days as in a dreame,
And as it were in fortunes boſome ſleeping,
They in this dull ſecuritie abide,
And of their doubtfull ſtate neglect the keeping,
Whilſt gaiſt lie ruine comes vpon them creeping.
Thus the viciſsitude of worldly things
Doth to our eyes it ſelfe detect,
VVhen heauenly powers exalt, deiect,
Confirme, confound, erect and ruine Kings.
So Alexander mightie now,
To whome the vanquiſh'd world doth bow.
VVith all submiſsion, homage, and reſpect
Doth flie a borrow'd flight with Fortunes wings:
Nor enters he his dangerous courſe to ponder,
Yet, if that Fortune bend her cloudie browe:
All thoſe, who at his ſuddaine ſucceſſe wonder,
May gaze as much to ſee himſelfe brought vnder.
O Diſmall day deteſted by the light,
And would to God (but God neglects our cace)
The world were wrapt in a Cymerian night,
That no proud eye might gaze on our diſgrace.
Why did the heauens reſerue my feeble age,
To goe to graue with infamie and grief?
Could nothing but my ſhame their wrath aſſwage
Thus offred vpon th'altar of miſchief?
Ah, haue I ſpent my youth in pompe and pleaſure,
And had my ſpring-time grac'd with pleaſant flowres,
That th'Aurumne, which ſhould reape the Sōmers treaſure,
Might be diſaſtred with ſuch ſtormy ſhowres?
And did ſmooth calmes, and ſun-ſhines of delight
Make all my voyage through the world a ſport;
That toſſed with a tempeſt of deſpight
I now might periſh entring at my port?
Yet for all this, were I expos'd alone
Th'accurſed obiect of heauens plaguing-armes,
I ſhould not thinke I had iuſt cauſe to mone,
When I but waild mine owne, not others harmes.
Ay me, on thoſe, whom more then life I loue
The ſtate-diſturbing blaſtes of Fortune fall:
Yet each of them ſome ſeuerall ſorrowes moue,
But wretch I ſuffer ſhip-wracke in them all.
I ſuffered, when I ſawe Oxatres ſlaine,
My louing ſonne, and moſt entirelie lou'd:
dy'd in Darius, when he try'd in vaine,
What fates would doe, yet ſtill their hatred prou'd.
Ah, doe the deſtinies extend my breath
For further euill? O extreame crueltie,
To vſe ſo many inſtruments of death,
Againſt one burthend with calamitie.
Yet Ioue, if this may diſ-en-flame thine ire,
Let all thy lightning light vpon mine head:
To be conſum'd with a celeſtiall fire
Some comfort were, ſince that I muſt be dead.
Leaue mother theſe immoderate laments
To me the very ſource, and ſeate of ſorrowe,
Whoſe dayes are burthen'd with ſo ſad euents,
That hell it ſelfe may of my torments borrow.
Loe, the deere Lord and treaſure of my thought,
Whoſe preſence I my Paradice eſteem'd,
To ſuch a headlong praecipice is brought,
That with the world his glorie dead is deem'd.
Ah, on what prop can I repoſe my truſt,
When firſt the greatneſſe of his ſtate I ponder;
Next how his Diademe drencht in the duſt
Was Fortunes Trophee, and all Aſias wonder?
He whoſe imperious ſpeach the world reſpected,
And as an oracle had in regarde,
Now vanquiſh't and contemptiblie neglected
Can ſcarcely as a ſupplicant be heard.
And yet I know this more his minde afflicts,
Then doth the ruine of his rigall ſtate,
That him my ſight another interdicts,
Who am the ſoueraigne of his ſoules conceat.
Shall he, pure quinteſſence of my beſt part,
Then onely teſtifie the loue he beares?
No, by mine eyes I will diſtill my hart,
And for his ſake diſſolue my ſelfe in teares.
Would God my breaſt like Criſtall were tranſparent,
That all the world might ſee my ſinceare minde,
And that my loyall thoughts were all apparent,
Whoſe great affection cannot be confinde.
They haue impriſon'd onely my poore eies,
And baniſh'd them from th'obiect of their ioy:
My firie hart with winged fancies flies
And where thou goeſt doth ſtill my ſteps conuoy.
Thy Queene is ſuch, as whilſt thou draw'ſt this aire,
In counting ciptiues men may ſtill accept her:
For whilſt thou liuſt, how can thy ſpouſe diſpaire,
Whom thou prefer'ſt euen to thy ſoule and ſcepter?
Yet flatter I my ſelfe that am accurſt:
The apprehenſion, which with griefe I cheriſh,
Of thy miſhap may ſerue to make me burſt.
Ah, ah I faint, I feele my ſpirits periſh.
Help, help allace, allace, the Empreſſe falles.
O dolefull day of darknes; world of woes.
This greeuous ſpectacle my ſpirite appalles:
Heauen, earth, and all are now become our foes.
I may more iuſtly mone then any other,
Whoſe eares haue heard the hard hap of my father;
Whoſe eies behold the anguiſh of my mother,
Whom both do loade with all the woes of either.
What inhumaine humanity is this,
With ſuch a cruell pittie to oppreſſe;
To bring pale ghoſtes backe from the fields of blis,
Yet to be plung'd in th'Ocean of diſtreſſe?
O vnkinde kindeneſſe that by ſauing ſlayes,
And would with loueleſſe loue my loue controule.
Ah, of this odious Sunne th'unhappie rayes
Doe cleere mine eyes but to confound my ſoule.
Deare daughter, ſtriue your paſſions to reſtraine,
Leaſt that the torrent of your greefe grow ſuch,
That it both carie you to'agroundleſſe maine,
And him o'rewhelme for whom, ye mourne ſo much.
No doubt but he, if we reſt captiues thus,
Diſdaining theſe indignities of ours,
T'auenge himſelfe in re-obtaining vs
Will hazard all his Orientall pow'rs.
But ah, what comfort can a wretch afforde,
Whoſe care-worne bread the word of wo containes?
Yet though my hart would faine impugne my worde,
I hope-leſſe ſpeake of hope, t'appeaſe her paines.
Such conſolations now came not in ſeaſon,
Since we muſt hold our greefe the greateſt good:
Diſſemble not your ſorrow, we haue reaſon
Yea to ſigh out our ſprites and weepe our blood.
I waile my ſonne. Stat. Reg. And I my husbandes fall.
I waile my father, and in him vs all.
No woe like mine, mine cannot be releeu'd.
I waile his woe, who ſhould my woe aſſwage,
Who liues by me, by whom I ſhould haue liu'd,
Sport of my youth, and piller of mine age.
No wo like mine, who faithful to my pheere
For loue of him all others had forſaken.
But what a pheere? my ſelfe, or one more deere:
Yet from my ſelfe my ſelfe by force am taken.
No wo like mine, who borne a Monarkes childe
Thought that my birth good hap ſhould heape vpon me:
Yet all my expectations are beguil'd,
And what I hop'd in moſt hath moſt vndone me.
I mourne for him who in my womb was form'd.
I mourne for him in whō loue me transform'd.
I mourne for him by whom I formed was.
Shall I not ſee my ſelfe in that cleere glaſſe?
Ah! ſhall I neuer in his ioy reioyce?
Ah! ſhall I neuer here his cheerefull voice?
Would God frō death my death might him exeeme.
would God my life my liues life might redeeme.
Would God the life he gaue him life might giue.
Muſt theſe gray haires my ſons green youth ſuruiue?
I will preuent him and not liue to languiſhe.
Can I remaine behinde to liue in anguiſhe?
But whiles our wretched ſtate we iuſtly mone,
We may lament this infant too a ſpace,
Who in miſhap inferiour were to none,
If he could apprehend his tragic cace.
O then how can my hart but burſt a-ſunder,
Whom nature moues moſt to bemone his harmes?
I thinke I ſee the hoſtes of heau'n all thunder
On me, my ſpouſe, and this babe in my armes.
Deere image of my ſelfe, in whom I liue,
Thy ſhape ſhames not the greatneſſe of thy Syre,
But of thy birth cleere euidence doth giue:
Thy ſoure-ſweete ſight addes coales to my deſire.
Thou that ſhouldſt comfort moſt, tormēt'ſt thou me?
Huge hoſtes of paſſions now my ſoule aſſembles.
O how I grieue! and yet am glad to ſee
Thee, though not him, whom thy ſweet face reſembles,
Goe, beare this babe from hence: a wound too deep
Makes in my breaſt compaſſion of his part:
Yet let him ſtay; I ioy to heare him weepe:
This motherly affection melts my hart.
Of many woes this laſt is not the leaſt,
That vn-begun thy glorie muſt be ended;
Thy fortunes Sunne, my Sonne, ſet in the Eaſt,
While thy faire-ryſing all the world attended.
Ah! muſt this innocent taſte of miſhap,
Whoſe tender age cannot diſcerne his ſtate,
And be thus plagu'd, yea in his nurſes lap
Inherite woe by birth? Ah cruell fate.
If thou could'ſt hope, what great hopes haſt thou loſt
That art defrauded of ſo faire a throne?
Ah in thy cradle muſt I ſee thee croſt,
Whom I deſign'd ſo great when we were gone?
Yet happy hapleſſe childe, thou canſt not know
From whence the fountaine of our ſorrow flowes,
Nor what it is for to be hie, or low,
Nor on what thorne the roſe of honour growes.
Yet haſt thou felt the pricke before the ſmell.
Is this the benefit thy birth-right brings
Heere in conſtrain'd captiuitie to dwell?
Then better not be borne, then come of Kings.
O what a noiſe is that that doth affright me?
I trow to interrupt theſe teares of mine,
Leaſt that ſuch ſad lamentings ſhould delight me,
They will not let me plaine, yet make me pine.
Or is it ſome that doth condole our cace,
And commes with pittie moou'd to ſee vs pyn'd,
And to beholde how we can death imbrace,
Death ſoueraigne ſalue of a diſeaſed minde?
By many ſignes we may our ſelues aſſure,
'Tis Alexander, whom we long'd not for.
What? ah I die! and muſt my eye indure
Th'vpbraiding obiect which I moſt abhorre?
Suppreſſe ſuch ſpeaches now, leaſt all go wrong.
We are enuiron'd with outrageous hoſtes:
And weakneſſe muſt giue place vnto the ſtrong:
For Victours rage, when as the vanquiſh'd boſtes.
I will entreat him to, not for my ſelfe
(Mine olde-age is become to death a debter)
But that you may eſchew this wrackfull ſhelfe,
Whoſe flowre pot faded yet deſerueth better.
No, if you needs will ſue, ſue for my graue:
I will not be indebted to him liuing:
I rather death ſhould once the maiſtrie haue,
Then I ſhould die ſo oft with death ſtill ſtriuing.
RIſe mother, riſe, remoue thoſe cauſles feares:
I come t'appeaſe nort to procure your woe:
The honour which I owe thoſe aged heares
Permits me not to ſee you proſtrate ſo.
Moſt gracious Prince, forgiue me if I er'd,
In taking him for you, that ſtandeth by.
I finde no fault to ſee my friend prefer'd
Euen to my ſelfe: this is another I.
My ſorrowes ſo confounded haue my minde,
That ſcarce I know my ſelfe, much leſſe another:
My ſoule in ſuch an agonie I finde,
As if ſome mightie mountaine did me ſmoother.
I pray you, mother, ſet thoſe plaints apart:
They vexe me more then ſterne Bellonaes broiles.
This tender name of mother wounds my hart,
Pronounc'd by him who of that name me ſpoiles.
I was (woe that I was) a mother late
Of two faire ſonnes, faire ſonnes lights of my life:
Now th'one is dead, and in a worſe eſtate,
Doth th'other liue involu'd in woe and ſtrife,
Like th'auncient trunke of ſome diſ-branched tree,
Which Eols rage hath to confuſion brought,
Diſ-arm'd of all thoſe impes that ſprung from me,
Vn-profitable ſtock I ſerue for nought.
I ſerue for nought, ſince him I cannot ſerue,
Whoſe ſight may onlie my dead ioyes reuiue.
I with the famine of all comfort ſterue,
Since I want him for whom I wiſh'd to liue.
I liue without my halfe, without my whole,
Prodigious monſter, whome the world admires:
I want the point, the Pilote, and the Pole,
That drew, addreſt, and gouern'd my deſires,
Now toſs'd with ſtormes in th'Ocean of diſpaire
By ruine onely I attend releefe,
Threatned aboue with pitchie cloudes of care,
Threatned belowe with ſwelling gulfes of greefe.
My ſoule ſeemes to preſage diſaſtrous chances,
And varying with her ſelfe hath neuer peace:
My hare oppreſt falles into deadly trances:
My eyes muſt grace the ground of my diſgrace.
Hell hath aſſembled all her horrours heere:
Ah, in the concaue of this curſed breaſt,
As in the darke Tartarian groues, appeere
A thouſand ſhaddowes to bereaue my reſt.
Faire Princeſſe, ſpare thoſe paſſionate cōplaints
Which may augment, but not amend your harmes:
This voice, which with your woe the world acquaints,
Doth moue me more, then all the Perſians armes.
Madame, take courage, be affraide of none:
You may expect what helpe I can afforde:
I ſweare by Ioues inviolable throne,
And doe proteſt by my imperiall worde,
That neither I, nor any wight ſhall wrong you.
Yea more then this, I lay my faith in paund,
You ſhall be honoured heere as doth belong you:
And, as it were, in your owne Court command.
Ah how can I command, whilſt I am thrall?
What can I haue who wanting one want all?
Though it ſeeme glorious in ſome victors ſight
T'abuſe their captiues, and triumph in ill:
The larger growe the limites of my might,
The more I ſtriue for to reſtraine my will,
The ſaue garde of my fauour ſhall extend
Not only t'wards you, but t'wards all your traine.
I ſhall haue care that who on me attend
From offering wrong you, or yours refraine.
If any preaſe t'impugne what I appoint,
Or would in ambuſh for your honour lie,
Or diſcontent you but in any point,
As Alexander liues, that wretch ſhall die.
O what a hoſte of euils, where ere I goe,
Are ſtill encroaching on my down-caſt ſtate?
And muſt I be beholden to my foe,
Who doth deuide me from my royall mate?
Should he helpe me who would extermine him?
Curſt be my hart, if it betray him thus.
Eternall ſhaddowes mot theſe eies firſt dim,
Ere ſuch a light be gratefull vnto vs.
I holde not of my ſelfe; Lord, I am thine:
Thy loue was ſow'ne not in a barren field,
But in a fertile ground: this hart of mine
To thee, my deere, no ſmall increaſe doth yeeld.
Yet this good fortune doth miſ-fortune bring;
My conſtancie ſhall now be clearlie knowne:
Another might haue lou'd a happie King:
But I will loue thee though thou be ore-throwne.
Faine would I ſtriue to cōfort in ſome meaſure
This mourning Queene, and mitigate her paine;
Whoſe woe doth make my victorie no pleaſure,
But hath enſowr'd the ſweetneſſe of my gaine.
Moſt mightie King, thou do'ſt deſerue indeed
That, as for Darius, we ſhould pray for thee,
Who doeſt ſo farre in clemencie exceed,
That thou bewailſt our loſſe no leſſe then he.
Thou haſt not onely by thy worth ſurmounted
All other Kings in dignitie alone,
And benefits of Fortune moſt accounted,
But in all vertues worthie of a throne.
Thou do'ſt vouchſafe on me (more then I craue)
The title of a Queene, and mother ſtill:
But I confeſſe my ſelfe thy humble ſlaue,
Whoſe life hath now no limits but thy will.
I haue all that imagin'd good forgote,
Which greatneſſe gaue: I'le looke no more ſo ſadlie:
But will alow of this my preſent lot,
And beare the burthen of my bondage gladly.
If that this wretched woman heere were free,
Who hath no heauen except her husbands face,
I could content my ſelfe (great Prince) to be
The meaneſt hand-maide that attends your grace.
You may command me, as I were your Sonne,
Whoſe duteous loue ſhall prooue no leſſe intire.
Heauens recompence the court'ſy thou haſt done
Which all ſucceeding ages ſhall admire.
Thoſe captiu'd Princeſſes haue pierc'd my ſoule,
Who eu'n amid'ſt our heauen haue found a hell.
What ſtoick brow his paſſions could controule,
As not to weepe, if he re-marked well
The teares of theſe faire Ladies cauſing wonder,
Who neede not challenge nature of her duty;
But borne to bring, although they be brought vnder,
Giue greefe a grace for to apparrell beauty,
Sir, ſuch a victorie hath not beene ſeene
As you haue gain'd, whoſe greatneſſe well appeares;
The largeſt kingdome, and the faireſt Queene,
That Aſia vaunted of theſe many yeares.
Durſt Ledaes or Agenors brood compare
With that ſweete Queene, the honour of her kinde?
But as ſhe is aboue all other faire,
As farre her daughters make her go behinde.
It ſeem'd at firſt that ſorrow had beene ſleeping
While as theſe Virgines in their Grand-dames boſome
With weeping beautie, and with beauties weeping
Did with a haile of pearle blaſt beauties bloſſome.
So large a pow'r is to no Prince allotted,
As to loues Empire in their face confynd.
O how is my Hepheſtion thus aſſotted?
Dare follie ſeeke t'aſſault ſo braue a minde?
Dare Cupid enter in an armed campe,
And Mars owne minions thus preſume to danton?
Muſt his ſoft ſeale ſteele-wearing ſtomacks ſtampe,
And make them tributaries to that wanton?
We dare reſiſt (whil'ſt many a thouſand dies)
Againſt th'inuaſion of a world of men:
Yet if in yuorie orbes two Sunnie eies
Aſſault the ſoule at vnawares, O then
Some ſecret ſympathie, ſome vn-knowne motion
So charmes the minde, that vaine are all defenſes.
The hart drunke with the eies contagious potion
Corrupts the ſpirits and poyſons all the ſenſes.
But I in my conceat doe skorne all ſuch:
No, I reſolue to be a thrall to none:
Yea, ere I but abaſe my ſelfe ſo much,
I'le rather die ten thouſand deathes in one.
Should I be bound with vile affections chaines,
As one obliuious of my former ſame?
This reſolution ſtill my ſoule retaines,
To ballance nothing with a noble name.
O what a great indignity is this
To ſee a Conquerour to his luſt a ſlaue?
Who would the title of true worth were his
A minde ſurmounting euery vice muſt haue.
The braueſt trophee euer man obtain'd
Is that, which ou'r himſelfe himſelfe harh gain'd.
I ioy, my ſoueraigne, that as you excell
Not onely men, but Mars himſelfe in armes:
So you by vertues might the power repell
Of beautie, loue, and Cithereas charmes.
Your vertue bright, whoſe rayes ſhine in your words
And thence to harts center are reflected;
Now ouer my ſelfe ſuch pow'r to me affords,
That with fond loue I loth to he infected.
NOw ſince, Narbazanes, we are come hither,
Let vs accompliſh what we haue intended:
And ioyne our wit, our force, and all together,
That it may be no ſooner knowne then ended.
You ſee occaſion call vs, whil'ſt we ſleepe,
And point vs out the way to be aduanc'd;
Yea blames our ſluggiſhneſſe that cannot keepe
The courſe of things which for our weale haue chanc'd
The heauens abhorre our King, & ſtriue t'vndo him:
Nothing doth proſper that he enterpriſes:
Some new diſaſter daylie falles vnto him:
Some croſſe o'er-thwarts all things that he deuiſes.
In no ſtrict limites ſhould our thoughts be bounded
Whom ſo great happines ſeemes to importune:
For ſince our King is like to be confounded,
Vpon his fall we both may builde our fortune.
I ſhall not faile for to performe my part:
I of your words exceedingly allow:
Honour, and wealth are the idols of my hart,
Which if I may obtaine, I care hot how.
And yet I would we had ſome faire pretence.
Our countries care muſt ſeeme our ſoules to comber:
This ſeeming zeale muſt ſhaddow our offence:
For ſuch a ſhow will ſatisfie a number.
Let vs be well aduiſ'd, ere we reſolue:
And then endeuour t'execute it ſoone.
If we our ſelues once in this worke involue,
And then not finiſhe it, we are vndone.
He hath ſent one to Alexander late
To ſpeake of peace, but did the ſame in vaine:
And now involu'd in a deſpair'd eſtate,
Bar'd from accorde, he cannot warie ſuſtaine.
His purpoſe is his Captaines to conuene,
To aske of them ſome counſell for his ſaftie:
A time more fit for vs could not haue beene.
Who minde to compaſſe Kings muſt: needs be crafty.
For to atchieue that which we thinke to doe,
A courſe more fit we by no meanes could finde,
Then crooked ſeeming-vpright counſell to
Diſguiſe our practiſes, and maske our minde.
We will aduiſe him to renounce a ſpace
His ſtate to ſome one, whom he may deſire
But for the faſhion to accept his place,
And as himſelfe a certaine time impyre.
Whoſe better fortune may perchance bring back
That which his euer ebbing beares away:
Then he againe his Diademe ſhall take,
And as before the regall ſcepter ſway.
Well then amongſt our ſelues, t'auoid, debate
Which vndermines ſo many a mighty action.
I will preferre you to the imperiall ſeate.
And to approoue the ſame will frame my faction.
All that is one, which of vs two receiue it,
Since euery thing doth equallie belong vs:
I'le take it for the forme, not that I craue it,
For we will part his Empire all among vs.
But if he condiſcend to this we craue,
Which at the firſt vnfolding would ſeeme good:
Let him not thinke vs two ſuch fooles to leaue
That which ſo many Monarkes buy with blood.
Who once aduanc'd would willingly goe downe,
And not loue in authoritie to ſtand?
'Tis not the cuſtome ſo to quite a Crowne,
When one hath know'n how ſweet it's to command.
This name of faith but to get credite fain'd,
If it were ballanc'd with a kingdome, ſtraight
In them whoſe conſciences are moſt reſtrain'd
T'would ſoone ſuccumbe, a ſcepter hath ſuch waight.
Yet to betray our King we haue no reaſon:
When I muſe on th'attempt it makes me ſorrie:
Our name ſtain'd with this odious ſtile of treaſon
Shall leaue our ſucceſſours more ſhame, then glorie.
We firſt muſt end all our deſignes with paine,
Then raigne with feare, and liue ſecurelie neuer;
As in a dreame a ſpace with pompe remaine,
Then die diſgrac'd, infamie for euer.
The ſacred title of a Soueraigne King
Doth ſtrike a terrour in my troubled thought,
And maieſtie, t'amaze my minde, doth bring,
Whoſe aſpect only hath great wonders wrought.
To idle ſounds, and frivolous reports
Giue thou a paſporte, for they laſt not long:
And all that thou alledgeſt nought imports.
A Crowne may couer any kinde of wrong.
What hainous thing ſo odious is by nature,
That for a Kingdome hath not beene committed:
To be a King let me be cal'd a traitour;
Faith, if for ought, for this may be omitted.
Thoſe are but feeble braines, which fancies lode
With timorous dreames, that bare ſurmiſing brings.
Who feare vaine ſhaddowes muſt not come abrode.
Too warie-wits dare neuer worke great things.
If our braue proiect happilie ſucceede,
(As now I doubt not but it ſhall do ſoone)
We ſtraight will finde enough t'applaud our deede,
And ſooth vs vp in all that we haue done.
To haue the time and manner then praefixt,
Command the Bactrians all themſelues to arme,
And to attend till we aduertiſe next,
Prompt for all perils at the firſt alarme.
Then through the Campe a rumour we will ſpread,
That hopeleſſe Darius hath diſpairdlie gone
With violence to dwell amongſt the dead,
And ſeeme therefore exceſſiuelie to mone.
The Perſians we with promiſes muſt feede,
So to diſarme him of his natiue pow'rs:
Then we will apprehend himſelfe with ſpeede:
For while that he is free nothing is ours.
That we may ſeeme to vſe him with reſpect,
(As to the ſtate of ſuch a Prince pertaines:)
We will not this laſt ornament neglect;
He ſhall be bound, but bound with golden chaines.
To Alexander after we will ſend,
And offer Darius in his hands t'appeaſe him;
Then craue his fauour, that he will defend
Vs as his friends, who haue done all to pleaſe him;
If his good-will we cannot thus procure,
And he vs with extremitie purſue;
With Darius death we will our ſtates aſſure,
Then raiſe freſh forces, and the warres renue.
Let vs henceforth for nothing be diſmaide,
But ſtriue our ſelues courageouſlie to beare:
This dangerous action would not be delai'd,
Leaſt time worke his aſſurance, and our feare.
TYme, through Ioues iudgement iuſt,
Huge alterations brings:
Thoſe are but fooles that truſt
In tranſitory things,
Whoſe tailes beare mortall ſtings,
Which in the end will wound.
And let none thinke it ſtrange,
Though all things earthly change
In this inferiour rounde.
What is from ruine free?
The elements which be
At variance (as we ſee)
Eache other doe confound:
The earth and aire make warre:
The fire and water are
Still wreſtling at debate:
All thoſe through colde and heate,
Through drouth, and moiſture iar:
No wonder though men change and fade,
Who of thoſe changing elements are made.
How dare vaine worldlings vaunt
Of fortunes goods not laſting,
Euils that our wittes enchaunt,
Expos'd to loſſe and waſting.
Loe we to death are haſting,
Whilſt we theſe things diſcuſſe.
All things from their beginning,
Vnto an end are running:
Heauen hath ordain'd it thus.
We heare how heauen doth thunder;
We ſee th'earth burſt aſunder;
And yet we neuer ponder,
VVhat this imports to vs.
Thoſe fearfull ſignes doe proue,
That th'angrie pow'rs aboue
Are mou'd to indignation
Againſt this wretched nation,
VVhich they no longer loue:
What are we but a puffe of breath,
Who liue aſſur'd of nothing but of death?
VVho was ſo happie yet,
As neuer had ſome croſſe:
Though on a Throne he ſit,
And is not vſ'd with loſſe,
Yet fortune once will toſſe
Him, when that leaſt he would.
If one had all at ones
Hydaſpes pretious ſtones,
And yellow Tagus golde,
All th'Orient all treaſure,
And euery earthly pleaſure,
Euen in the greateſt meaſure,
It ſhould not make him bold.
For while he liues ſecure,
His ſtate is most vnſure.
VVhen it doth leaſt appeere,
Some heauie plague drawes neere,
Deſtruction to procure.
We may compare th'earths glory to a flowre,
That flouriſheth and fadeth in an houre.
In what we moſt repoſe
We finde our comfort light:
The thing we ſooneſt loſe
That's precious in our ſight.
For honour, riches, might
Our liues im paund we lay:
Yet all like flying ſhadowes,
Or flowers enambling medowes,
Euaniſh and decay.
Long time we toile to finde
Thoſe idols of the minde,
Which got we cannot binde
T'abide with vs one day.
Then why ſhould we preſume
On treaſures that conſume,
Difficile to obtaine,
Difficile to retaine,
A dreame, a breath, a fume;
Which vexe them moſt who them poſſeſſe,
Who ſtarue with ſtore, and famiſh with exceſſe.
AH, muſt I poyſon now my Princes eares
with the worſt newes that euer burthē'd fame?
Had I as many tongues, as I haue teares,
All would not ſerue my ſorrowes to proclame.
Great ſignes of greefe I in thy face diſcerne:
Spare not for to report this heauie croſſe
To one, I feare, whome it doth moſt concerne.
Iſt death, diſgrace, diſtruction, treaſon, loſſe?
Tell on the ſumme of honour at the firſt:
With no ambiguous words my paine prolong:
'Tis comfort to a wretch to know the worſt:
And I haue learn'd to be vnhappy long.
What leaſt I ſpeake, and yet ſuſpect too much,
Iſt ſome ludibrious meſſage of my skorne,
Which muſt wound me? but ah no torment ſuch,
As this to them who that diſgrace haue borne.
She was not wrong'd, as you haue miſconceiu'd.
The Gods haue had a care for to preſerue her:
Such fauour of the victour ſhe receiu'd,
As of her ſubiects that were bound to ſerue her.
But what a vollie doth my voice prepare
Of woes to charge your eares, woes full of dread?
Would God ere I the ſomme thereof declare,
That I might die in ſaying ſhe is dead.
Curſt caitiue, was it not enough, allas,
That I beheld her die, and would haue died,
But that I muſt arm'd with ſad tydings pas
To wound all them that heare what I haue ſpied?
See how he fares ſhot with theſe words of mine,
As one become the pray of greefe, and death.
Yet doth the Sunne on my affliction ſhine,
And ſees the aire infected with my breath.
And can I liue, and looke them in the face,
That haue my ignominious o're-throw ſeene?
And how I vanquiſh'd, vanquiſh'd with diſgrace
Engag'd at once my kingdome, and my Queene?
Heauen bruſe me all to powder with thy thunder,
That I no more may in the world remaine
The obiect of thy wrath, and Fortunes wonder;
Spoil'd of all hope; yet kept for greater paine.
Ah! art thou dead, and doe I lieu behinde thee?
Thy faultie husband thinkſt thou ſo to flie?
If it be thus, then I know where to finde thee.
This onely greeues me that too late I die.
O Alexander, what ſuch hainous ill
Haue I done thee, that thou requit'ſt me thus?
Whom of thy friendes, or kindred did I kill?
This crueltie comes vndeſeru'd of vs.
Think that thou hadſt iuſt cauſes to make warre:
Yet vpon women ſhould thy wrath be wroken?
This Tirrannie ſhall all thy Triumphe marre,
And euer ſhall to thy reproach be ſpoken.
Sir, without cauſe you guiltie him eſteeme.
I know her death did grieuouſlie diſpleaſe him:
A wondrous thing (which few, or none would deeme)
He tooke it ſo, that nothing could appeaſe him.
Euen as my Soueraigne now, ſo then he ſmarted;
And when he came to eaſe your mothers griefe,
As if that his owne mother had departed;
He ſeem'd to need, not for to giue reliefe.
If any ſparkes of that reſpect remaine,
Which ſhould with reaſon mooue thy minde to ruth,
I pray the Tiriotes now be plaine,
Or els ſtrange torments ſhall exact the truth:
I loth to let this queſtion ſcape my mouth,
Which both I bluſh to craue, and long to know,
Iſt poſſible ſo inſolent a youth
Did neuer tempt the treaſure which I owe?
Could this imperious Prince in flowre of age
Haue ſuch a peereleſſe beautie in his power,
And yet not ſeeke to quench his ardent rage
With the deſtruction of her honours flowre?
Spare not to tell vpon what deadly ſhelfe
My ioy is periſh'd quite, and I defac'd.
The feare of euill is worſe then th'euill it ſelfe:
I'ts to die twiſe, to die, and die diſgrac'd.
Let not thoſe loue-bred feares abuſe your thought:
By all the world no fable I contriue.
If I ſpeake partiallie, or lie in ought,
Earth open vp, and ſwallow me aliue.
He whom your Grace ſo wrongfully ſuſpects,
No, not in thought, hath once your Queene abuſ'd,
But as his ſiſter ſtill in all reſpects,
As chaſtlie, and as honourablie vſ'd.
When fortune firſt our warlike troupes had ſcattered,
And with great ſlaughter put them all to flight;
We, whom ſhe late ſo louingly had flattered,
Were made the patternes of that changlings might.
For hauing found a Crowne troad on the ground.
O laſting ſhame that cannot be recur'd.
We ſtraight imagin'd that ſome cruell wound
Had kild my Lord, and wail'd it as aſſur'd.
Would God I then had died, as I deſir'd,
So t'haue preuented thoſe enſuing harmes;
Before my honour and my hap expir'd,
With Crowne on head, & with my Queene in armes.
But Alexander hauing heard our cries
Sent one t'enquire th'occaſion of our woe;
Who finding whence our errour did ariſe,
Gaue full aſſurance that it was not ſo.
Then he himſelfe vnto our tent reſorted,
And with moſt courteous ſpeaches full of loue
Your mother, wife, and children oft exhorted
Such vaine ſurmized terrours to remoue.
With proteſtation that they ſhould expect
No harme of him their courage to appale:
Each thing he did accordinglie direct,
That no man might endomage them at all.
Thus hauing them againſt all dangers arm'd
(I thinke for feare, for who would not haue fear'd
Leaſt ſuch an Angels graces had him charm'd)
He neuer more before her face appear'd.
Or was it vertue that would flie the ſting
Of truſtleſſe pleaſures that abuſe the ſenſe?
So continent a victour, and a king
Was neuer ſeene. He fled what caus'd offence.
He doth his fame aboue all things prefer,
And will not be where it may blemiſh finde,
Nor giue his eyes commoditie to erre,
Nor ſuffer impure thoughts to ſtaine his minde.
He ſtai'd till that faire face had loſt all vigour,
And with the coulours of pale death was painted.
Iniurious heauen that with ſuch helliſh rigour
The pureſt worke that nature made hath tainted.
When he beheld death triumph in that face,
Which late had triumph'd ou'r a Monarcks hart,
He mon'd no leſſe her miſerable cace,
Then you that loſte in her your better part.
And when ſome dayes his dolour had ou'r-come,
Her funerals ſolemnelie to decore
He vſ'd ſuch honour, as might well become
The Perſian pompe in proſperous times before.
O ſupreame pow'r that of Empires diſpoſeſt,
And ratifieſt thy will with fearfull thunder,
Who, as thou pleaſeſt, placeſt, and de-poſeſt
Vncertaine worldlings whiles aboue, whiles vnder,
I pray thy Deitie in my ſoules diſtreſſe,
If that th'inhabitants of heauen can heare
The plaints of thoſe who this lowe point poſſeſſe,
Or that th'immortall can giue mortals eare,
Vouchſafe this my laſt ſute for to fulfill:
Eſtabliſh firſt this ſcepter in my hand:
But if through my deſerving, or thy will
The race of Cyrus muſt no more command;
And if thy heauenly breaſt ſuch hate contracts,
That I muſt needs my Diadem forgoe:
Let him ſucceed who prooues in all his acts
So iuſt a Victour, and ſo milde a foe.
IF Fortune had ioynd me with daſtard mindes,
Who to a noble death baſe life prefer'd,
I ſhould not harrengue heere vnto the windes,
But be content to haue my fate defer'd.
O, I repent I proou'd your worth too much,
Who ſtill haue follow'd me in all eſtates.
I rather ſhould, then doubt that you are ſuch,
Preaſe to proue worthy of ſo worthie mates.
Yee onlie reſt of all that I conducted,
Of whoſe great force and faith, which many ſing,
I by two fights, and flights haue beene inſtructed:
Yet hauing you I thinke my ſelfe a King.
He hath plac'd traitours in my townes moſt ample,
Not that he honours them (he hates their humour)
But to ſeduce you to by their example,
Then banniſh all for euery little rumour.
Yee haue not to my Fortune had regarde,
But freelie-follow'd my euill fortun'd warres:
Which, though that I might not, Ioue would rewarde,
And all the world extoll you to the ſtarres.
How long ſhall I a vagabond remaine,
And flie a ſtranger who my right would reaue?
Since by one battell we may re-obtaine
All that we loſt, or looſe all that we haue.
Like thoſe vile traitours, whom I will arraigne
To holde me vp, ſhall I goe caſt me downe?
Muſt Darius onlie by entreatie raigne?
No, none hath pow'r to take, or giue my Crowne.
I ſhall not my authoritie ſur-viue,
Nor will I proffer a ſubmiſſiue breath:
My hand ſhall holde a ſcepter while I liue:
My head ſhall beare a Diadem till death.
If thoſe franke thoughts that doe poſſeſſe my ſoule,
Such flames of vertue kindled haue in you;
A Macedonian neuer ſhall controule
Our noble actes, nor laugh to ſee vs bow.
My ſtate may teſtifie fraile Fortunes change:
May ſhe not him o're-whelme, as well as me?
At leaſt our hands beare death, if not revenge:
For who can ſtop a ſtout hart for to die?
Thinke of your aunceſtors, I you exhort,
Who made the Grecians tributaries euer;
And of whoſe wondrous actes men do report
Great things, the fame whereof ſhall periſh neuer.
Shall future ages in your praiſe be dombe,
Whil'ſt they your Fathers memorie adore?
I am reſolu'd, my Triumphe, or my Tombe
A Laurell, ora Cipreſſe ſhall decore.
What vaine amazement doth diſturbe our ſpirits?
Let vs conſult no further but goe to.
He, who the Perſians wonted worth inherites,
Will not reſt long aduiſing what to doe?
Come let vs with our beſt attire and armes
Accompanie our King to this laſt ſtrife:
Through bloody ſquadrons, and through hote alarmes
By ſlaughter onlie we muſt looke for life.
And when our hoſt, as I hope ſhall preuaile,
Our countrie ſhall haue peace, we praiſe of right:
And if our Fortune, not our courage, faile,
We die with honour in our Soueraignes ſight.
Let vs, if vanquiſh'd, be aſham'd to be.
A glorious death may greater honour giue.
Doe to o're-come, and yet not feare to die.
It's needfull that we fight, not that we liue,
My words will firſt your Maieſtie diſpleaſe:
Yet dutie makes me ſpeake where ſilence ſpilles:
The fine Phiſician cures a ſharpe diſeaſe
With ſome ſowre potion that corruption killes.
The skilfull Pilote when he feares a ſtorme,
To ſaue the ſhip will caſt out precious things:
Yet I perſwade you not in any forme
To further, but to ſtay what ruine brings.
We warre againſt the Gods, we cannot ſpeede:
To all our actions Fortune is oppoſ'd.
We muſt of force ſome other way proceede:
So haue the heau'ns of our affaires diſpoſ'd.
Deare Sir, giue ou'r the gouernment and ſtile
To ſome more happie man, not in effect?
But cloth him with your ſhaddow for a while,
Till he your Realmes halfe ruin'd re-erect.
When he hath clam'd this tempeſt now ſo hote,
And ſetled Aſia with a good ſucceſſe?
He will your kingdomes loſt with what he gote
Reſtore: appearance promiſes no leſſe.
All Bactria yet abides at your command:
The Indians, loe, would die to doe you good:
Yea many thouſand thouſands armed ſtand,
Bent for your pleaſure to beſtow their blood.
What? ſhould we ruſh like beaſtes to needleſſe ſtrife?
Be well prepar'd, and then purſue that ſtranger:
Braue mindes ſhould death deſpiſe not lothing life.
Baſe cowards craue to die for feare of danger.
But vertue, to haue no ſupport ou'r paſt,
Will firſt on all meanes poſſible be thinking:
And when that all is proou'd, death is the laſt,
To which it is ynough to goe not ſhrinking.
Now for the time let Bactria be our ſeat,
To Beſſus for the forme your Crowne reſigne:
Who, when he once hath re-aduanc'd you ſtate,
Shall quite all ſoueraigntie at the firſt ſigne.
Wretch, trauelleſt thou thy ſoueraigne to betray?
Such treaſon dareſt thou to our eares impart?
Such treaſon vnder truſt? Stay traitour, ſtay:
Ile ſheath my ſworde euen in thy traiterous hart.
Sir, you muſt ſtriue to haue this paſſion broken.
Conſider what they are, what is the time:
It may be they through ignorance haue ſpoken:
In thought, and not in word, conſiſts a crime.
Since to affront your enimie you goe,
You muſt not ſtirre for euery little obiect:
But tollerate your owne, t'offend your foe.
For now i'ts time time to loue not loſe a ſubiect.
I ſhall get triall vpon what pretence
This ou'r-ſight in aduiſe hath beene committed.
If through ſimplicitie, not for offence,
He muſt be pardon'd and his ſpeech remitted.
I wiſh that it were ſo. I take no pleaſure
To ruine them that would my fortune cheriſh.
Your grace wil grant me mercie in ſome meaſure.
Firſt heare, and if I faile then let me periſh.
I call the Gods to witneſſe of my cace,
Who can decipher euery ſecret thought:
If I intended treaſon toward your Grace,
Straight where I ſtand let me be turn'd to nought.
I counſel'd but according to my skill:
It was my vpright minde that made me bolde.
I rue my wit not anſwer'd to my will:
Yet zeale what it conceiues muſt needes vnfolde.
We ſhould beware to ſpeake in great affaires,
Where words are damn'd, or ballanc'd by th'euent.
For if things faile, the fault is ſtill thought theirs
Who gaue th'aduiſe, though of a good intent.
I fall before your feete heere for refuge:
Then let me not be without cauſe reiected:
At leaſt, examine firſt before you iudge:
Ile rather die abſolu'd, then liue ſuſpected.
Your fond opinion firſt was to be feared,
Which ſeem'd indeede ſiniſtriouſlie inclind:
For at the firſt your ſpeech to me appear'd
Th'envenom'd birth of ſome malitious minde.
But ſince you purge you ſo, Ile not araigne you,
Not further call your loyalty in doubt:
But in the ſame degree of grace retaine you,
That you were in before theſe wordes brake out.
I thinke that Patron lookes with ſpeaking eies,
As if his minde were mightily perplexed:
Come, Patron, tell what in thy boſome lies,
Wherewith thou ſeemeſt ſo wonderfullie vexed.
Sir, I would ſpeake in priuie, If I could,
That which th'affection of my ſoule affordes:
It muſt be ſeal'd with ſilence, and I would
That none were preſent to report my words.
Of fifty thouſand Greekes foure only reſt,
Companions in all perils with your hoſt:
Alike with you delighted and diſtreſt:
As faithfull now as when you floriſh'd moſt.
Where you remaine we muſt remaine with you:
All kinde of fortunes haue vs ioyn'd together.
Appoint our tents for your Pauilion now;
And we will guard you, if that you come thither.
We haue abandon'd Greece, our natiue ſoile:
We haue no Bactria to be our retreat:
Our hope is all in you: thoſe that would ſpoile
Vs of your perſon ruine all our ſtate.
Would God that all your armie did their due:
To vſe moe words th'occaſion is not fit.
I ſhould not vrge you, if your owne were true,
Your cuſtodie to ſtrangers to commit.
What ſuddaine accident doth this diſmay you
That you ſuch inconveniences forecaſt?
Sir, Beſſus and Narbazanes betray you▪
This day to you, or them will be the laſt.
They faine repentance onlie to diſſemble,
Till euery thing be for the fact prepar'd.
Their friends in haſt doe all their force aſſemble,
And once ere night minde to inuade your guarde.
I credite you: but yet I cannot wrong
My ſubiects ſo, to thinke of them the worſt:
Shall I leaue them who follow'd me ſo long?
By doing ſo to make my ſelfe accurſt.
I will awaite on what the heau'ns will offer,
For who can ſtand when fates his fall conſpire?
Among mine owne I willingly will ſuffer.
I liue too long if they my death deſire.
Take heede, Sir, to this ſubtile-witted Greeke:
The Graecian faith to all the world is knowne.
I am enform'd he by all meanes doth ſeeke
To win his grace who hath your ſtate o're-throwne.
And maruell not though mercenarie men,
Who ſell themſelues, ſell all: beleeue them neuer.
They haue no God but gold, nor houſe: how then
Can they be conſtant that are changing euer?
Although that he pre-occupie you thus,
And others who themſelues abuſe your Grace:
Faith ſhall be found inuiolate in vs,
When our accuſer dare not ſhow his face.
Who hope to haue of Alexander gaine,
Or honour to be falſe, they haue no reaſon:
No man on earth doth traitours more diſdaine,
Nor more ſeuearly will b'aueng'd on treaſon.
Well, Sir, you ſhall ſee ſhortlie what we are:
I will goe ſee your Enſignes all diſplaied.
It's better now ſince things are gone ſo farre,
Then ſeeme for to miſtruſt, to be betraide.
Loe Artabazus, I haue acted heere
My part of greatneſſe, and my glaſſe is run.
Now Patrons ſpeech doth euident appeare.
I ſee my end, yet can it no way ſhun.
The Bactrians only medled haue with this.
Go to the Graecians campe, when that is done.
And when your danger once divulged is,
The Perſians all will follow after ſoone.
And what if I were gone to patrons Tent,
And guarded with the Greekes as you deſire:
He hath but thouſands foure that are well bent;
They thirty thouſand that my fall conſpire.
And doing this I ſhould their deede excuſe,
In giuing them a motion who haue might.
They may indeede my lenitie abuſe:
But by my deede they ſhall pretend no right.
O deplorable Prince, who can but weepe
To ſee thee now reduc'd to this eſtate?
Retire you all, and ſeeke your ſelues to keepe:
I heere attend the iſſue of my fate.
I knowe yee wonder all how I can ſtand,
Downe from the top of all contentment throwne,
And not die deſperately by mine owne hand.
Ile die through others guilt, not through mine owne.
None of you all haue falſified your troath,
But with me loyall ſtill to th'end yee abide.
Now I you all disburthn of your oath:
Leaue me alone, and for your ſelues prouide.
O Wretched Monarchie, vaine mortals choice,
The glorious ſtp to a diſgrace-full fall:
Our pow'r depends vpon the peoples voice,
And to ſeeme ſoueraigne needs we muſt ſerue all.
Yet blowne, like blathers, with ambitions winde,
On enuied ſcepters weaklie we relie:
And calling not our fraile eſtate to minde,
Not onlie earth, but heauens themſelues defie.
This helliſh hag our reſtleſſe minde doth toſſe,
While carried with a popular applauſe,
T'enlarge our limites with our neighbours loſſe,
We of our owne confuſions are the cauſe.
And when th'ecclipſe comes of our glories light,
Then what auailes th'adoring of our name:
A meere illuſion made to mock the ſight,
Whoſe beſt was but the ſhaddow of a dreame?
Let greatneſſe of her glaſcie ſcepters vaunt;
Not ſceptours, no, but reeds, ſoone bruſ'd ſoone brokē:
And let this worldlie pompe our wits inchant.
All fades, and ſcarcelie leaues behinde a token.
Thoſe golden Pallaces, thoſe gorgeous halles,
With fourniture ſuperfluouſlie faire:
Thoſe ſtatelie Courts, thoſe sky-encountring walles
Evaniſh all like vapours in the aire.
O what affliction iealous greatneſſe beares,
That ſtill muſt trauell to hold others downe;
Whil'ſt all our guardes not guard vs from our feares?
So greevous is the burthen of a Crowne.
Where are they all who at my feete did bowe,
While I was made the idole of ſo many?
What ioy had I not then? what haue I nowe?
Then honoured of all, now ſcarce of any.
Our painted pleaſures but apparrell paine:
We ſpend our dayes in dread, our liues in dangers,
Balles to the ſtarres, and thralles to Fortunes raigne,
Knowne vnto all, yet to our ſelues but ſtrangers.
A golden Crowne doth couer leaden cares:
The Scepter cannot lulle their thoughts a-ſleepe,
Whoſe breaſts are fraught with infinite diſpaires,
Of which the vulgar wits ſounds not the deepe.
The Bramble growes, although it be obſcure;
While mightie Cedars feele the bluſtering windes:
And milde Plebeian ſpirits may lieu ſecure,
While mightie tempeſts toſſe imperiall mindes.
What are our daies, but dreames, our raignes but trā ces,
Whil'ſt brain-ſick reaving with our Fortunes feuer.
We ſtill are vext with changes and miſchances,
Till death vs both from life and ſcepter ſeuer?
The vanitie of greatneſſe I haue proou'd,
And beene the wonder of each gazing eye:
Now that deceauing ſhaddow is remoou'd;
And I my wretched ſtate too late eſpie.
Now bound with chaines, (which though they be of gold,
Diminiſh not my thraldome ought the more)
When this prepoſterous honour I beholde,
It but vpbraides me what I was before.
And what was I before (though to each eye
The forme of my affliction was not knowne)
But fettred in effect, while I ſeem'd free,
And in a labyrinth of labours throwne?
Was I not bound to ſerue then all mens humour,
Or to be cenſur'd with ſome Critick ſtorie;
Still clog'd with cares, aſ ſlought for euery rumour.
O glorious bondage, burthen-able glorie.
That dignitie which deified me late,
And made the world doe homage to my name,
Now cannot ſuccour my accurſed ſtate,
But hath with my miſ-fortune fethered ſame.
My beſt was but a momentarie blis,
Which leaues behinde this euerlaſting ſting,
That of all woe no woe is like to this,
To thinke I was, and am not now a King.
No man with me in all accompliſh'd ioyes,
That ſatisfie the ſoule, could once compare:
No man may matche me now in ſad annoyes,
And all the miſeries that breede diſpaire.
Thriſe Fortune did my gallant troupes entrap,
And I to fall did deſperately ſtand;
Yet could not be ſo happie in miſhap,
As for t'haue died by ſome renowmed hand.
But for my greater griefe, diſgrace, and ſcorne,
(The mindes of men ſo apt are to deceaue)
They whome aloft my favours wings haue borne,
Ev'n they made me their maiſter thus a ſlaue.
Ah, did not death in priſon from me reaue
The ſacred ſoueraigne of my ſoules deſires,
I wretch not being preſent to receaue
The laſt cold kiſſe that might aſſwage my fires?
Yet ô thriſe happie thou, that haſt not liu'd
To beare a burthen of this great diſgrace.
More then a thouſand deaths this had thee grieu'd,
To know I died, and died in ſuch a cace.
Ah, doe the pledges of our mutuall loue
(The onlie comfort that the fates haue left me)
Reſt priſon'd yet? And may I not remooue
My mother thence? then is all bliſſe bereft me.
My paines are more then with my pleaſures ev'n,
Since firſt I in authoritie did enter.
Was I exalted once vp to the heau'n,
To be caſt head-long downe to miſchiefes center?
My ample Empire, and my Princelie birth,
My great magnificence, and vaine exceſſe,
All cannot yeelde my minde one minutes mirth,
To eaſe me now in this extreame diſtreſſe.
Loe heere, reduc'd vnto the worſt of illes,
Paſt helpe, paſt hope, and only great in griefe,
I wait vpon two abiect vaſſals willes,
And dare not, no, not thinke vpon reliefe.
Death would I ſcorne (my courſe muſt once haue rū)
If I had firſt repair'd mine honours breach,
Whoſe wounds ſo thrill my ſoule, as vnbegun
The life I wiſh that does my fame impeach.
This mortall vaile I willinglie reſigne,
Since to an ende my dayes the deſtinies bring:
Nor will I ſo from Maieſtie decline,
As to doe ought vn-worthie of a King.
SOme new diſaſier day lie doth for ſhowe
Our comming ruine: We haue ſeene our beſt.
Now fortune bent vs vtterly t'ore-throw,
Throwes down our King from her wheels top ſo low,
As by no meanes his ſtate can be redreſt.
And ſince his foes by armes haue him oppreſt,
His friendes, and ſeruants leaue him all alone.
Few haue compaſsion of his ſtate diſtreſt:
Yea, falſe to him them ſelues doe many ſhow.
So foes and fined friendes conſpire in one;
Fraile Fortune, and the fates with them agree.
With axes all runne on this falling tree.
This Prince in proſperous ſtate hath floriſh'd long,
And neuer dream'd of any euill ſucceſſe,
But was well follow'd while his ſtate was ſtrong:
Him flattering Syrens with a charming ſong
Striu'd to exalt: while-as he did poſſeſſe
This earthly droſſe, that with a vaine exceſse
He might reward their mercenary loue.
But now when fortune driues him to diſtreſſe,
His fauorites whom he remain'd among,
With foes and fortune ſtraight their faith remoue.
And who for gaine to follow him were wont,
They after gaine by his deſtruction hunt.
O more then happie ten times were that King,
Who were vnhappie but a little ſpace,
So that it did no vtter ruine bring,
But made him proue (a profitable thing)
Who of his traine, did beſt deſerue his grace;
Then could, and would of thoſe the beſt imbrace,
And flie ſuch vultures as deuour him liuing;
That theſe whom he found faithful might have place.
O how this doth a generous ſtomacke ſting,
To ſee ſome grac'd for craft and lies contryuing?
This is the griefe that burſts an honeſt hart;
Lords fauour commes by chance, not by deſart.
Thoſe Minions to whom Princes do extend,
Aboue their worth, immoderate good-will,
To the diſgrace of good men, ſhew in end
They onely in proſperity depend
Not vpon them, but on their Fortune ſtill.
Which if it change, they change. thē though they fil,
Their hopes with honour, and their cheſts with coine
Yet if they fall, or their affaires goe ill,
Thoſe whom they rais'd, will not with them deſcend,
But with th'aſcending Sunne wil ſtraight way ioyne.
And doe forget all that they gaue before,
For that of them they can expect no more.
The truth hereof in end now hath th'euent
In Beſſus, and Narbazanes approoued:
On whom their Prince ſo prodigallie ſpent
Affection, honour, titles, treaſure, rent,
And all that might each honeſt mind haue mooued
So bountifull a Prince for to haue loued,
Who ſo beningly tendred their eſtate.
Yet they to him vyle traitours now haue proued:
By them he is in-chain'd, diſgrac'd and ſhent;
So as he well may rue, although too late,
That he ſuch ſlie Camelions changing hew
Prefer'd to ſeruants dutifull and trew.
But though a while thoſe traitours ſpeede,
No doubt the heau'ns once vengeance will exact:
The very horrour of this haynous deede
Doth make the harts of honeſt men to bleede:
Yea, euen the wicked hate this barbarous act:
The heauens no hier choller can contract,
Then for th'invaſion of a ſacred King:
Who, as it were, out of the ſtarres extract,
Should feare and reuerence inferiours breede,
To whom from him both health and wealth doth ſpring.
But though on earth men ſhould neglect this wrong,
Heauens will thoſe traitors plague ere it be long.
WHat ſtory or what fable can recorde
Of ſuch a nombrous troupe ſo ſtrangely loſt?
I know they quak'd to know it was my Lord,
Whoſe name alone is worth anothers hoſt.
It ſcarce ſeemes credible in many partes:
But traitors feare though al the world would backe thē.
They were but bodies deſtitute of harts:
Moe priſoners they were then men to take them.
Who would beleeue ſo few durſt ſtriue to finde
So great an armie, and the armie ſhrinkes
What is impoſſible to a braue minde?
True valour dare attempt all that it thinkes
In this encounter for t'haue had the beſt
It would content more then a common thought:
But ſince we want the chiefe, what of the reſt?
I would be ſatisfied in all, or nought.
Thoſe traitours thought t'haue finiſh'd all the warre
With giuing me their Lord, whom they had bound:
But I diſtruſt not mine owne force ſo farre,
As for to builde vpon ſo baſe a ground.
Although indeede that Darius did me wrong,
I will not ſuffer others to oppreſſe him.
I keepe him for my ſelfe: he doth belong
To me alone: none other ſhould diſtreſſe him.
Whilſt he did onely in himſelfe confide,
I labour'd by all meanes to make him bow:
But ſince his hard eſtate abates that pride,
Turn'd is my fury to compaſſion now.
Although he oft contemn'd me by his letter,
Yet I am greeu'd to ſee him ſo deceiu'd.
If he had but acknowledg'd me his better,
'Twas not his blood, nor kingdome that I crau'd.
And if thoſe traitours haue not kild him ſtraight,
Yet his deliuerie ſhall my name renoune:
I would not looſe a ſubiect of ſuch waight,
By which my clemencie might be made knowne:
Sir, now your comming cannot doe him good.
What al are fled? none haue my force withſtood?
Yet Darius cannot be redeem'd againe.
Why, haue they ſet him free? or is he ſlaine?
Now hath he got a liberty at laſt
With no leſſe ranſome then his deareſt breath.
Then is all Aſias expectation paſt.
Tell on at length the maner of his death.
The boyling ardour of th'aſcending Sunne
Had caus'd in me a moyſture parching drouth,
Which made me from the way a little runne,
To finde ſome fountaine to refreſh my mouth,
Their where a ſource her liquors ſoftly ſcatters,
Which ſhaddow'd was from Titans parching beames,
I coold my thirſt with the colde chriſtall waters.
Which ſeem'd to murmur that I forc'd their ſtreames.
When loe I ſawe (a lamentable ſight)
Two wounded horſes drawe a bloody coache,
All clad with skinnes in moſt vncomely plight,
Which narrowlie t'eſpy I did approach.
One was within, who could not long eſcape
The doubtfull paſſage of th'infernall gates:
Yet maieſtie triumphing ou'r miſhap,
He ſeem'd to threaten fortune; and the Fates,
And as not to ſo baſſe a fortune borne,
While all his blood aboundantly deval'd,
Burſt forth into theſe words in Fortunes ſcorne,
As one whoſe courage could not be appal'd,
You gaze to ſee, and haue good cauſe wherefore,
A man, no man; a King, no King; what monſter?
Now leſſe then nought, who once was both, & more:
Which few now by my preſent ſtate would conſter.
And yet amidſt my euils I muſt reioyce,
That this laſt comfort doth fore-goe my end:
I ſpeake to one that vnderſtands my voice,
And not in vaine my dying-ſpeeches ſpend.
I am, but how? in name, but not in pow'r,
That wretched Darius (which I ſhould ſuppreſſe)
Once happy, as you heard, but at this houre
The very patterne of extreame diſtreſſe;
Then a while pawſing after thus proceeded:
Tell Alexander theſe laſt wordes from me:
Although my hatred ſtill t'wards him exceeded,
Yet I am forc'd far in his debt to die.
I thanke him highlie for his great good-will,
My mother, wife, and children ſo preſeruing.
Pray him t'vſe them that reſt as gently ſtill
For his owne goodneſſe ſake, not my deſeruing.
They to his foe pertaine, and yet he ſtriues
To haue them honour'd now, as in times paſt:
But thoſe who held of me both lands and liues,
Of land and life haue me depriu'd at laſt.
I pray you on my part entreat him thus
Not to permit that vnreueng'd belowe
My ghoſt do wander. By his care of vs
That men his Iuſtice, and their fault may knowe.
Beſide the honour, which he ſhall acquire
In plaguing them that haue betraide my truſt;
Men ſhall his magnanimitie admire,
And feare t'offend him whome they finde ſo iuſt.
Loe, all my pompe is paſt, my time expir'd:
My wealth evaniſhed like watrie bubbles.
Ou'r many a mightie people I impyr'd:
Yet hath my life beene but a ſtage of troubles.
And ſince my glaſſe is runne, my glory gone,
And I dead to the world, the world to me;
I wiſh that all parts of th'earths globe in one
May condeſcend his ſubiects for to be.
Then drouping downe, faint, bloodles, and halfe dead,
He prai'd to giue him water that ſtood by.
(A ſmall requeſt by ſuch a Monarcke made)
Which when that he had gote: yet, ere I die,
This croſſe muſt come (ſaid he) t'vndoe me quite:
Though moſt parts of the world once homage ought me;
I haue not now the power for to requite
This little benefit that thou haſt brought me.
But Alexander ſhall rewarde thee well;
And him the heauens, who hath not done amiſſe,
To thoſe that haue beene mine: his foe muſt tell
That vndeſerued courteſie of his.
Though none haue pow'r his pleaſure to controule;
If he entreate them well whom he retaines;
It will procure no ſmall reſt to my ſoule,
And make him famous, while the world remaines.
When my ſprit parts out of this tent of clay,
Entreat ſome with my buriall to take order;
Leaſt churliſh Charon force me for to ſtray
An vn-reſpected ghoſt on Stygian border.
Let firſt my corps be carried to my mother,
Who may it with my aunceſtors entombe:
And, as ſhe hath more cauſe then any other,
May waile this wofull burthen of her wombe.
In pledge of that affection, which I beare
Thy Soueraignes worth, whom now I muſt ſee neuer,
Haue heere a Princes hand, I hold him deare,
And recommend me to his grace for euer.
I ſcarce had got his hand, or toucht his veſture,
When like a torch whoſe waxe and weeke is ſpent,
Somewhat perplext, yet with a princely geſture,
He died in peace: his ſprit appear'd content.
Who could refraine frō teares to heare declar'd
The deſolation of this wretched wight:
Haue ſubiects ſlaine their prince whō ſtrangers ſpar'd?
Vs hath he fled, that periſh thus he might?
I for his fall am wonderfully ſorie,
Who Neſtors age was worthie t'haue attain'd:
I envie death, becauſe it rob'd the glorie,
Which I in giuing him his life had gain'd.
Since death hath put a periode to his woes,
The fauour that t'wards him you thought t'extend,
Conuert to furour now againſt his foes.
For your deſignes can haue no fairer end.
So ſhall you both attaine perpetuall praiſe,
And winne their harts who ſee their Lord reveng'd,
Then reape no little profite in your dayes,
To haue the countrie of ſuch vipers cleng'd.
If but one vertue ſhould adorne a King,
It ſhould be Iuſtice: many great defects
Are vaild thereby; whereas each vertuous thing
In one that is vniuſt, the world ſuſpects.
Although your counſell, or yet his requeſt
Had not the pow'r to penetrate my eares:
A generous ſtomack could not well diſgeſt
So great a wrong: my minde it hardly beares.
My ſpirit impatient of repoſe diſdaines
That they ſo long this infamie ſurviue.
But I will puniſh with moſt greevous paines
The horrid treaſon that they did contriue.
What? do they thinke, deceau'd with ſome illuſion.
That Bactria is a bulwarke for my ire?
Flie where they liſt, they cannot ſcape confuſion:
My wrath ſhall follow like conſuming fire.
Heauen cannot be a ſanctuarie for them:
I dare to force th'infernall caves adventer:
Th'earth cannot keepe them ſafe, if I abhorre them:
Ile ſearch them out though they were in the center.
And hauing gotten once thoſe malefactors,
Betwixt the bending boughes of two ſtrong trees,
Vnto th'eternall terrour of all traitours,
They ſhall diſmembred be before my eyes.
Sir, may it pleaſe your Grace to take ſome care,
That ſome his funerall offices performe.
Goe preſentlie and euery thing prepare
According to the militarie forme.
THis looke, alas, hath fraught my ſoule with feares,
Speake, for my life doth on thy lips depend:
Thy count'nance (ah) a dolefull coppie beares
Of ſome ſad ſummons to denounce my end.
Starue not my eares with famiſh for thy words:
That ſwallow'd yet may make my hart to burſt.
Madame the meſſage that my'ſoule affordes
Muſt once be known, and once knowne ſtill accurſt,
Be not a niggard of euil newes.
And why?
Fame will tell the world.
But firſt to you.
Tel ſone.
Your ſon is dead.
Thē let me die.
Her ioyes and pleaſures are all periſh'd now.
Why opens not the earth for to deuoure
A curſed caitiue, that all ioy hath loſte?
The longer that I liue, my griefe growes more:
Borne I am to miſchiefe, kept to be croſt.
Would God this body in miſhappes abounding
Were couered with ſome mountaine of huge waight;
Or elſe that th'Ocean ou'r theſe fieldes inunding
Might make my buriall in her boſome ſtraight.
O Alexander, haſt thou robd his life,
Yet entertain'd me ſtill in hope to finde him?
Why didſt thou not firſt kill this poore old wim
Who was not worthie to haue liu'd behind hi?
Ah, tended all thy courteſie to this,
That I ſhould liue till thou haſt ſlaine my ſonne?
You wrong that worthie Prince: for he and his
Came him to helpe, who was ere then vndone.
What impious hands durſt one that wore a crown,
And was thereof moſt worthie, murther ſo?
Two whō himſelf rais'd vp haue caſt him down:
More faithfull then his owne he found his foe.
Tell on thy meſſage, meſſage of my death,
And load my minde with all miſchiefe and horrour:
That in ſad ſighes I may diſſolue my breath,
Whilſt thou relat'ſt theſe tydings full of terrour.
When Alexander eftſoones back had ſent
Th'Ambaſſadours that peace had ſought in vaine,
A generall muſter, then to try th'euent
Of doubtfull Mars, King Darius did ordaine,
And in one battell to aduenture all
Intending, caus'd his will to be proclaim'd,
While two vile traitours did conſpire his fall,
Who Beſſus, and Narbazanes were nam'd.
Theſe two in counſell did diſcouer firſt
Some portion of the poiſon of their hart:
Which caus'd the King ſuſpect, but not the worſt.
Yet with a ſword he ſought to make them ſmart.
But hauing ſcap'd the firſt brunt of his rage,
With teares of Crocodiles they ſo lamented,
As they his indignation did aſſwage,
Whil'ſt in appearance onlie they repented.
They came to Artabazus, honeſt man,
Who iudg'd of others by his vpright minde,
And could not, or through bountie would not ſcan
What they with craft and malice had deſing'd.
A ſinceare minde is euer leaſt ſuſpitious:
They think all faulty who themſelues are vitious.
They vrg'd him with the King to interceede.
That in his fauour he would giue them place;
With promiſe that by ſome notorious deede
Of armes they would ſeeke to deſerue his grace.
He in their fauour firſt enform'd the King,
The battell would beare witneſſe of their truth;
Then both before his maieſty did bring,
Who was by their ſubmiſſion moou'd to ruth.
Their hands ſtreatchd vp to heau'n, & hūbled knees,
Their teares like thoſe the Crocodiles doe ſhed,
Woe in their face, and pitty in their eyes
Did for compaſſion and for mercie plead.
The king of nature milde, prompt to receiue them,
While they diſſembledly were thus complaning,
Not onelie of his lenitie forgaue them,
But wept in earneſt too while they were faining.
Then as he vſ'd, his danger now not feeling,
He mounted to his Coach: they came behinde
With a ſubmiſſiue voyce moſt humbly kneeling
To him, whom ſhortly they were bent to binde.
The Graecian Captaine follow'd them with ſpeede,
Who being cal'd, and ask'd what he deſir'd,
Sollicited the King to take good heede
Of thoſe that had againſt his life conſpir'd.
He tolde him how he had their treaſon tri'de,
And ſeene the Bactrians to a tumult bent;
Then prai'd him for his ſafety to prouide,
In going with him to his truſty tent.
The King grow'n careleſſe, and his ſafety ſhunning
Refus'd this offer on affection grounded.
Or with ſome pow'rfull fate his fall fore-running,
Was carried headlong thus to be confounded.
The Greeke paſt thence diſpairing of his ſafety,
Who thus recur eleſſe helpe and health refus'd.
Then Beſſus did begin with ſpeeches craftie
To purge himſelfe, and errours paſt excus'd.
The King then Artabazus did command
T'approch, and Patrons ſpeech at length reported:
He then did doubt what danger was at hand,
And to go with the Greeke his Grace exhorted.
But when he found this reſolution plac'd,
Within his breſt, no peril for to flie:
With mutuall teares each other they embrac'd,
Parting like two, that liuing went to die,
Now ſilent night in pitchie vapours cled
Had muſtred miſts, and march'd vnto the Weſt,
A ſhadowie horrour ou'r the earth was ſpread,
The Santinelles were ſet, and all at reſt.
When a ſtrange terrour troubled all the hoſte:
The multitudes did murmure in all parts:
They did reſemble ſhips in ſtormes neere loſt,
Whilſt each to th'other cauſe of feares imparts.
Thoſe who their King appointed were to guarde
All ſhrunke away to corners none ſtaid there:
And hauing to his danger no regarde
His better-fortunes Minions fled elſe where.
The deſolation then was wonderous great:
With a few Eunuches Darius left alone
Did enter deepely to reuolue his ſtate,
And thus be-ſpake them; who did for him mone.
Depart in peace and for your ſelues prouide,
Leaſt yee be likewiſe with my ruine caught:
I will the iſſue of my fate abide:
They hearing this, as of their wits diſtraught
Went howling through the hoſt with dolorous cries:
This made the King as dead to be bewaild.
And in the armie did a rumour riſe,
That he had kild himſelfe, when all hope fail'd.
The Perſians greeu'd, while theſe things did occurre,
Did firſt encourage all their countrie bands
To helpe their Prince: but yet they durſt not ſturre
For feare of falling in the Bactrians hands.
Ev'n in the time when this confuſion was
The traitours, to deferre the fact no more,
Did to their ſoueraignes owne Pavilion paſſe,
And rooke, and bound him, whome they ſeru'd before.
He, who in golden coach ſuperbelie rode,
Was caſt in one for baſſeſt carriage vſ'd:
And who of late was honoured like a God,
By ſeruants as a bond ſlaue was abuſ'd.
Thoſe royall hands to beare a ſcepter borne
Were boūd with chains: this alſo much did grieue him
That fortune his aduerſitie would ſcorne
With golden bands, that ſeru'd not to releeue him.
Then Alexander, hauing heard in end
That Darius came not forward to affront him,
To finde him out did all his forces bend,
Not doubting but he eftſoones would ſurmount him.
But being at the laſt at length inform'd
How he was made a Captiue to his owne,
At this indignitie he highlie ſtorm'd,
And ſwore he would avenge it by his crowne.
Out of his hoſte he did ſelect a fewe,
Who were beſt horſ'd, whoſe equipage was light:
With whom his foes he did ſo faſt purſue,
That, ere they could ſuſpect, he came in ſight.
The traitours troubled with this he had done
Came to the Cart wherein the King was carried,
And bad him mount on horſe back, and flee ſoone,
Leaſt that his foe ſhould take him if he tarried.
He look'd aloft, and cry'd aloud: this day
Th'eternall Iuſticer ſees through the ſtarres:
I will not with ſuch periur'd rebelles ſtay,
And flie from him, who moou's but honeſt warres.
Then thoſe in whom impietie aboundes,
Throw'd darts at him whō they ſhould haue defended
And hurte the horſes with an hundreth woundes.
While they perform'd the Parricide intended.
Their hands were feeble, as their harts vntrue:
For when their foes began them once to comber,
The traitours firſt, then all the traiterous crue
Fled them, who were inferiour farre in number.
But to the confines of deathes kingdome brought
The King retir'd out from the way aſide,
More wounded with ingratitude then ought,
Did flie the world whoſe follies he had tri'de.
Scarce was the laſting laſt diuorcement made
Twixt ſoule and body whilſt that th'eyes grew dim
When Alexander came, and found him dead,
Who long had labour'd for t'haue ruin'd him.
Yet with the veſture which himſelfe then wore
He couered the dead corps, and not eſchew'd it;
But eu'n with teares his coffin did decore,
To the great wonder of all them that view'd it.
And hauing waild his death aboue all meaſure,
For t'haue his funerals made in Princely wiſe
He bids you ſpare no coſte, but vſe his treaſure,
And them, as beſt becommes, to ſolemniſe.
He hath his body hither ſent by me,
That the laſt honours you to him may do:
He thinkes they ſo ſhall beſt accompliſh'd be,
And who him bare ſhall ſee him buried to.
Behold how griefe hath her of ſenſe bereſt,
And choak'd her breath with ſuper-abounding grones,
No will or power to liue is to her left,
Since all her weale evaniſh'd is at ones.
Ah ſhall I ſee (no let me firſt be blinde)
That body breath-leſſe, which I brought to light?
Where would my ſoule a force ſufficient finde
T'endure the dolour of that deadly ſight.
O flintie hardned hart, that wilt not breake
With the remembrance of ſo many woes,
Why part'ſt thou not, faint ſprit, that whil'ſt I ſpeake,
In opening of my lips mine eyes might cloſe?
This heritage of death, this withered ſtock
Is but a receptacle of diſpaires:
A torture to it ſelfe, a ſtumbling block,
Whoſe aged furrowes fertile are in cares.
What helpes it now to haue bene made the mother
Of one who to ſuch dignitie did clim?
More miſerable now then any other,
I liue to waile my death, who di'd in him.
Aye me, malitious Fates haue done me wrong:
Who came firſt to the world ſhould firſt depart.
It not becommes the olde t'ou'r-liue the yong:
This dealing is praepoſterous and ou'r-thwart.
Ah, why ſhould death ſo indiſcreet be found
To ſaue a caitiue, and confound a Prince:
My halfe-dead body, weigh'd downe to the ground,
Through griefe is grow'n ripe for the graue long ſince.
WHat makes vaine worldlings ſo to ſwell with pride,
Who came of earth, and to the earth returne?
So helliſh furies with their fire brands burne
Proude and ambitious men, as they deuie
Them from themſelues, and ſo turmoile their mindes,
That all their time they ſtudie ſtill
How to content a bound-leſſe will,
Which neuer yet a full contentment findes.
Who ſo this flame within his boſome ſmothers
Doth many fantaſies contriue,
And euen forgets himſelfe a-liue,
To be remembred after death by others.
Thus while he is his paines are neuer ended;
That while he is not, he may be commended.
What can this helpe the happineſſe of Kings,
So to ſubdue their neighbours, as they doe,
And make ſtrange nations tributaries to?
The greater ſtate the greater trouble brings.
Their pompes and triumphes, ſtands them in no ſtead:
Their Arches, Tombes, Piramides hie,
And Statues are but vanitie:
They die, and yet would liue in what is dead:
And while they liue, we ſee their glorious actions
Oft wreſted to the worſt: and all their life
Is but a ſtage of endleſſe toile and ſtrife,
Of tumults, vprores, mutinies, and factions.
They riſe with feare, and lie with danger downe:
There is no burthen weightier then a Crowne.
And as Ambition Princes vndermines;
So doth it thoſe that vnder them rule all.
We ſee in how ſhort time they riſe, and fall;
How oft their light eclips'd but dimlie ſhines.
They ſtudie by all ſhifts and ſlights to moue
Their Prince of their deſerts t'account:
And when they by his fauour mount,
O what a danger is't to be aboue?
For ſtraight expos'd to hatred, and deſpight,
With all their skill they cannot march ſo euen,
But ſome opprobrious ſcandall will be giuen:
For all men enuy thoſe that haue moſt might.
And if the King diſlike them once, then ſtraight
The wretched Courtiers fal with their own waight.
Some of a poorer Spirite, who would be prais'd,
And yet haue not wherefore to be eſteem'd,
What they are not indeede would faine be deemd,
And indirectly labour to be rais'd.
This crue each publike place of honour haunts,
And changing garments euery day
While they woulde hyde, doe but bewray
With outward ornaments their inward wants.
And men of better iudgement iuſtly loth
Thoſe, who in outwarde ſhowes place all their care,
And deck their bodies, while their mindes are bare,
Like to a ſhaddow, or a painted cloth.
The multitude, who but th'apparrell notes,
Doth homage not to them, but to their cotes.
Yet Princes must be ſeru'd, and with all ſorts,
Some both to doe, and counſell what is beſt:
Some ſerue for Ciphers to ſet out the reſt,
Like liue leſse pictures, that adorne the ports.
Faire pallaces repleniſh'd are with feares:
Thoſe ſeeming pleaſures are but ſnares:
The Royall Robe doth couer cares,
Th' Aſſyrian dye deere buyth he, that it beares.
Thoſe dainty delicates, and far fetch'd foode
Oft through ſuſpition ſauour out of ſeaſon:
Embrodered beds and tapeſteries hatche treaſon:
The golden goblets mingled are with blood.
Such glorious gorgeous ſhowes do ſerue for nought:
All cannot calme the tempeſt of the thought.
O happy he, who far from fame at home
Doth ſit ſecurely by a quiet fire,
Who hath not much, and doth not much deſire,
Nor curious is to learne who goe, or come,
For ſatisfied with what his father left
His minde he meaſures by his ſtore,
And is not pyn'd to gape for more;
Nor eates ought that iniquity hath reft:
He hath his little cleanly, and in peace,
And lookes not with ſuſpitious eye.
No poyſon comes in Cups of tree:
No treaſon harbours in ſo poore a place.
No troublous dreame doth interrupt his ſleepe:
A quiet conſcience doth his cottage keepe.
He doth not ſtudy oft what ſtormes may blow:
His pouerty cannot be much impair'd:
He feares no forraine force, and craues no guarde:
None coueteth his ſpoile, none lookes ſo low:
Where as the great are commonly once croſt,
As Darius hath beene in his flowre,
Or Siſigambis at this houre,
Who hath ſcap'd long, and now at length is loſt.
But how commes this that Potentates oft fall,
Forc'd to confeſſe th' afflictions of their ſoule?
There is ſome hier pow'r that can controule
The Monarches of the earth, and cenſure all,
Who once will call their doings to accompt,
Their pride repreſsing, who t'oppreſſe were prompt.