WHat thund'ring pow'r grown jealous of my ſtate,
Which (having daunted th'earth) perchance heaven fears
Thus arm'd with lightning, breathing flames of hate,
Big with diſdaine, high indignation beares?
Long ſmooth'd of all, whilſt I (pale cares deſpis'd)
In fortunes lap aſleep, of greatneſſe dream'd,
Even in that calme, my ſtate a ſtorme ſurpris'd,
And ere I wak't, my ruine was proclam'd;
Thus I, whoſe onely name did terrour give
(As Idoll of the world,) ador'd over all,
(With croſſes compaſs'd,) ſuch a wretch doe live,
That who admir'd my might, admire my fall;
Ah, then indeed I fell, when gallants ſtood,
And Phoenix like renew'd their lives by death;
Who having ſeal'd their force, and faith, with bloud,
Would rather dye, then draw a borrowed breath;
Yet I, not I, did view, not venge (though neare)
Thoſe monſtrous mountaines of my Subjects ſlaine,
Though even my enemies muſt my courage cleare,
Which flames of fury lightned forth in vaine;
Through greateſt dangers, death I did purſue,
Till heapes of ſlaughtred bodies barr'd my way,
And chang'd my Chariot to a ſcarlet hue,
Ere wounded honour could be drawne away;
O how I envy yet their happy Ghoſts,
Who dy'd whilſt hope of victory remain'd,
And in the preſence of two famous hoſts,
To praiſe their valour, even their foes conſtrain'd:
Shall I ſurvive that memorable ſhame,
Which Perſia's glory with diſgrace confin'd?
No, rather let me dye, and let my name
As vaine, quite vaniſh, raz'd from every minde.
Starre-boaſting Babylon, all Aſia's Queene,
Bluſh to behold thy King in ſuch a ſtate,
That by the gazing world he now is ſeene,
(A ſcorned futer) humbly to entreate;
But not turn'd vaſſall, as by pow'r appall'd;
Though all my Empire to a period come,
Yet none ſhall vaunt that ever I was thrall'd:
"Hearts holding courage, are not quite o're-come.
Should I whoſe Soveraignty ſo oft was ſworne,
Be ſeene ſubmiſſe to ſcape a minutes paines,
No, let them bow, who but to bow were borne:
For Darius this indignity diſdaines,
Since I was once judg'd worthy to command,
Shall I deſcend a Subjects ſtate to try?
No, whilſt a ſword yeelds homage to this hand,
I ſcorne to grant a greater man then I.
Brave ſprites, who now poſſeſſe the pleaſant bow'rs,
And glorious Gardens of th'Elyſian Plaines,
(For, (if deſerts may move th' infernall pow'rs)
That happy ſhade your ſhadowes now containes)
Thoſe fatall fields where I did leade you forth,
Your bodies bury, but enlarge your fames,
Men ſhall adore the relickes of your worth,
And Trophees reare to your immortall names;
I'le ſacrifice as Incenſe to your ſoules,
His dying ſighes, and ſorrowing Parents teares,
Who now, whilſt none his proſpering pride controules,
Our conquer'd Enſignes in his triumph beares:
For, it may eaſe your Ghoſts to heare his grones,
Whilſt burden'd earth rebounding backe doth ſend
A wailing eccho (rais'd from woods and ſtones,)
With wounded words to ſhew that Armies end.
Why ſpend I ſpeeches to diſturbe your reſt,
As but with words (an idle ſpeaker) pleas'd?
A mighty fury hath enflam'd my breſt,
And I will rage, till by revenge appeas'd.
Did I that ſtrong Caduſian firſt afront,
Who durſt advance himſelfe to brave our bands,
Then turn'd applauded, and in high account,
Charg'd with his ſpoiles, the honour of my hands?
What, could I then (all kinde of doubt remov'd)
Alone adventure to an Armies ſhame?
And ſhould I now (that ancient praiſe diſprov'd)
With ſquadrons compaſs'd, loſe that glorious name?
Blinde fortune, O! thy ſtratagems are ſtrange!
Which ſpoile my pow'r, and ſtaine my honour too,
And (having made my ſtate the ſtage of change)
Haſt acted all was in thy power to doe;
Loe, I, who late of ſwarming troups did boaſt,
Neere left alone, have fortunes fraud diſclos'd;
And thoſe made captives whom I fancy moſt,
To vaunting Victors are by fates expos'd:
O torment but to thinke, death to beleeve,
That any may my deareſt part annoy,
And I, wretch'd I, not able to releeve
Mine eyes chiefe jewell, and my hearts chiefe joy,
Deare object of my thoughts, my life, my love,
Sweet Spring of my delights, my one, my all,
Bright image of th'excellencies above,
What? do'ſt thou breath, and com'ſt not when I call?
And can I be, and not be where thou art?
Hath heaven the force me from thy face to barre?
Or are my hands growne traitours to my heart?
That they ſhould ſhrinke from doing what it dare:
O! could my minde but diſtribute a ſpace
Thoſe emulating thoughts which toſſe my breſt,
To pointleſſe ciphers, who but ſpend a place,
Then I alone might animate the reſt;
Since in this great diſgrace, I chanc'd to fall,
Now nothing reſts to raiſe my fame forlorne,
But by ſome deſperate courſe to hazard all;
I'le live with praiſe, or by my death flye ſcorne;
Some proſp'rous iſſue afterward may purge
This crime which fortune hath impos'd on me,
This crime that carryes with it ſelfe a ſcourge:
No greater torment then the want of thee;
"But fortunes courſe, what mortall can reſtraine,
"Who Diadems through duſt for ſport doth roule?
A ſtranger now o're my delights doth raigne,
And may extort the treaſures of my ſoule;
Now, not till now, I apprehend my harmes,
When I imagine how my beſt belov'd
Muſt entertaine mine enemy in her armes,
And I ſo farre from offering ay de remov'd;
A hoſt of furies in my breſt I finde,
Which doe my ſoule with dreadfull horrours fill,
Whilſt Melancholy muſters in my minde
Strange apprehenſions that affright me ſtill;
And this ſurmiz'd diſgrace, grown throughly ſtrong,
Reades hourely in mine eares a hatefull ſcroule
Of an imagin'd, yet a helpeleſſe wrong,
Such poiſon'd thoughts like Serpents ſting my ſoule;
Blinde love beguiles me not, ſharpe ſighted feares
With reaſon fed, doe make ſuſpition live:
Would God that I had neither eyes nor eares,
Which to the heart intelligence might give;
This aggravates the weight of my deſpaire,
When doubt objects to breake loves laſt defence,
How he is yong and fierce, ſhe yong and faire,
He to offend, ſhe ſubject to offence;
From wronging me, both cannot long abſtaine:
Her beauty is ſufficient to allure,
His bravery is ſufficient to obtaine.
"Captaines will force, and Captives muſt endure.
O Alexander, tender my renowne,
Though thus thou travell to uſurpe my throne,
"I rage to have a rivall in my Crowne,
"But in my love I can comport with none,
That boundleſſe flame which in thy boſome boyles,
If quench'd with ought ſave bloud (as baſe) I blame:
My fortunes take, but ſpare her honours ſpoiles,
Which not thy glory, yet muſt breed our ſhame.
But pardon deare that which griev'd thoughts burſt orth,
More bright thy fame, that darkened is my ſtate,
"By many meanes men may approve their worth▪
"A woman onely with a wretched mate:
"Chaſt mindes ſtill pure, doe then moſt firmely ſtand,
"When fortifi'd with wedlockes ſacred band.
Yet let me doubt, or let me leave to love,
"To feare the worſt it is affections part:
I doubt not of thy truth; yet it may prove
Thy face betray thy faith, thy hap thy heart;
But on thy worth my confidence relyes,
This doth diſſolve ſuſpitions power againe;
I will repell reports as ſtand'rous lyes,
Which would my judgement, or thy vertue ſtaine.
Though fortune now my ruine doth deſigne,
Yet, with that traitreſſe ſcorne to be conjur'd,
She ſoone may helpe her fault, thou never thine:
"No helpe for honours wounds, all elſe are cur'd.
"O More then miſerable minde,
"Which of all things it ſelfe worſt knowes!
"And through preſumption made quite blinde,
"Is puffed up with every winde,
"Which fortune in deriſion blowes.
"The man no ſtable bliſſe can finde,
"Whoſe heart is guided by his eye,
"And truſts too much betraying ſhowes,
"Which make a cunning lye;
"Oft ſhort proſperity
"Breeds long adverſity:
"For, who abuſe the firſt, the laſt o'rethrowes.
"What thing ſo good which not ſome harme may bring?
"Even to be happy is a dangerous thing.
"Who on himſelfe too much depends,
"And makes an Idoll of his wit:
"For every favour fortune ſends,
"Selfe-flatterer ſtill himſelfe commends,
"And will no ſound advice admit,
"But at himſelfe beginnes and ends,
"And never takes a moments leiſure
"To try what fault he may commit:
"But, drunke with frothes of pleaſure,
"Thirſts for praiſe above meaſure,
"Imaginary treaſure,
"Which ſlowly comes, and flyes at every fit;
"And what is moſt commended at this time,
"Succeeding ages may account a crime.
A mighty man who is reſpected,
And by his Subjects thought a God,
Thinkes as his name on high erected,
Hath what he liſt at home effected,
It may like wonders worke abroad,
O how this folly is detected!
For, though he ſit in Royall ſeate,
And as he liſt his vaſſals lode,
Yet others who are great,
Live not by his conceit,
Nor weigh what he doth threat,
But plague his pride oft ere he feare therod;
There are rare qualities requir'd in Kings,
"A naked name can never worke great things.
They who themſelves too much eſteeme,
And vainely vilipend their foe,
Oft finde not fortune as they deeme,
And with their treaſure would redeeme
Their errour paſt; bebold even ſo
Our King of blame doth worthy ſeeme,
His adverſary who did ſcorne
And thought who in his name did goe,
The laurell ſhould have worne,
His triumphs to adorne,
But he with ſhame hath ſhorne
The fruits of folly ever ripe with woe:
"An enemy (if it be well advis'd)
("Though ſeeming weake,) ſhould never be deſpis
But what? the Minions of our Kings
Who ſpeake at large, and are beleev'd,
Dare brag of many mighty things,
As they could flye, though wanting wings,
And deeds by words might be atchiev'd;
But time at length their lies to light,
Their Soveraigne to confuſion brings:
Yet Soveraigne to confuſion brings:
But charme their Princes ſight,
And make what's wrong, ſeeme right,
Thus ruine they his might:
That when he would, he cannot be reliev'd,
"Moe Kings in chambers fall by flatteries charms,
"Then in the field by th' adverſaries Armes.
Loe, though the ſucceſſe hath approv'd
What Charidemus had fore-ſhowne,
Yet with his words no man was mov'd,
"For good men firſt muſt be remov'd,
"Before their worth can well be known;
The King would heare but what he lov'd,
And what him pleas'd not, did deſpiſe,
So were the better ſort o'rethrowne,
And Sycophants unwife,
Who could the truth diſguiſe,
Were ſuffered high to riſe,
That him who rais'd them up, they might caſt downe:
"Thus Princes will not heare, though ſome deceive them,
"Things as they are, but as themſelves conceive them.
BEhold, the heavens with a benigne aſpect,
To proſper this brave enterpriſe intend,
And with propitious Starres ſeeme to direct
This great beginning to a glorious end.
"Who would be famous, muſt of force aſpire,
All thoſe (aſtoriſh'd) who my Troupes doe view,
Doubt of theſe two, which moſt they ſhould admire,
My comming, or my conquering with ſo few;
"So mighty mindes whilſt for great actions bent,
"Force fortune oft to favour them in all,
"Where breſts more baſe divining bad event,
"Through ſuperſtitious feares procure their fall.
O how I wonder, when I call to minde
That monſtrous campe, which not ſo much as doubted,
Dimme ſeem'd the ſunne, while as their armour ſhin'd,
Men had not heard the thunder, whilſt they ſhouted.
Avant-couroures advanced to examine,
W en they ſo meane my numbers had perceiv'd,
Did thinke them ſmall to ſatisfie the famine
That their huge hoſt of ſlaughter had conceiv'd,
And yet in end this prov'd a poyſon'd food,
Which of their owne to their confuſion yeelds,
Huge mounts of murthered corpes; and ſeas of bloud:
Unburied bodies buried all the fields.
So now, that few whom they contemn'd ſo farre,
(See how mortality it ſelfe deceives)
Have quite o're-match'd their multitudes in warre;
And made the world neere waſte to people graves.
Then, deare Parmenio, ſince the fates afford
So faire an entry to our firſt deſignes,
Let us goe follow (lantern'd by the ſword,)
That fortune which the heavens our hopes aſſignes.
This high attempt, as we would wiſh ſucceeds,
What hoſts have we o'rethrown, what Cities raz'd?
Loe, populous Aſia trembles at our deeds,
And martiall Europe doth remaine amaz'd;
Greece, (which both Mars and Pallus did defend:)
A humble ſupplicant before thee falles,
Rebellious Thebes, which durſt with thee contend;
Lyes now entomb'd within her broken walles;
That Sea-commanding Tyre, repoſing much
In liquid Towers that Neptune rear'd in vaine,
Hath now confirm'd thy forces to be ſuch,
That nothing can reſiſt thy juſt, diſdaine.
No doubt the ancient Grecians, Ghoſts are glad
To ſee the fierce Barbarians brought ſo low,
Yet are for envy of thy fortune ſad,
And though un-bodied bluſh at this o're-throw:
Miltiades by all men was admir'd,
Who once in Greece their flying troupes purſu'd,
And he who with a ſtratagem retir'd,
And Salamina's ſtraits with bloud imbru'd;
But yet for all the Captaines of that age,
The eaſterne Monarches Empire was enlarg'd,
Who in their Country (flaming all with rage,)
The Sea with ſhippes, the land with Armies charg'd▪
He with moe ſwarmes of men then Autumnes cluſters,
Dranke Rivers dry, and march'd on Neptunes backe,
By meaſure, not by number, made his muſters,
Did ſcourge the windes, ſtriv'd mountaines plaines to make;
All Europe fear'd then to be forc'd to bow,
Whilſt th' earth did groane to beare ſo great an hoſt,
But thou haſt come, ſeene, and over-com'd them now,
Even in the bounds wherein their pow'r was moſt.
That haughty foe, who vilipended oft
Our predeceſſors force, and ſcorn'd our owne,
Now laid as low, as he was once aloft,
With his diſgrace, muſt make thy valour knowne;
He doth by this acknowledge his diſtreſſe,
In labouring thus to have his friends reſtor'd,
This meſſage (mighty Prince) imports no leſſe,
By his requeſt thy conqueſt is decor'd;
For the recovery of his captiv'd Queene,
He offred hath innumerable gold;
A maſſe ſo great, that ſuch was never ſeene,
More (as they bragge) then Maccdon can hold:
My counſell is, that you aceept his offers,
And with his daughters render her againe,
"Who would make warre, muſt not have empty coffers,
"Where one for glory, thouſands ſight for gaine;
And if thoſe Ladies guarded Captives ſtay,
It coſt and trouble breeds to fit their ſtate;
Thus more to charge, or charges to defray;
To vexe or eaſe, adviſe, and not too late.
If come to trafficke in a ſervile ſort,
And like a Merchant bent but to embrace
(All elſe deſpis'd) that which might gaines import,
Then your opinion purchaſe might a place:
But ſoone I ſurfet of ſuch melting things,
And famiſh but for fame, and Crownes of Kings.
If Alexander, I, ſo would I doe.
If I Parmenio were, ſo would I too.
So you binde Souldiers, let them Dames redeeme.
Save thankes, or praiſe, no treaſure I eſteeme.
Even good proes ill when done unto a foe.
What greater glory then to conquer ſo?
"Gold is the God that conquers in all parts.
"True magnanimity doth raviſh hearts.
"Warrs ſinewes treaſures are which moſt not faile.
"Stout breſts, ſtrong hands (not baſely given) prevaile.
"The want of wages makes a mutinous band.
"But who dare diſobey when I command?
"Thoſe are thought fooles, who riches do diſdain.
"A gallant minde likes glory more then gaine.
But who delights in ſuch an eiery ſtore:
If I be gular, I ſeeke no more.
"The truth by Princes is not underſtood:
But yet I heare your Souldiers oft exclaime,
That your ambition but exauſts their bloud,
Who periſh all to purchaſe you a name;
Yet careleſſe what they loſe, ſo you may winne,
That like your minde, your kingdome may want bounds,
One battels end, another doth beginne,
Whilſt you the glory gaine, they nought but wounds;
Such raſh reports oft blowne in every eare,
Doe breed baſe grudge, and loftie tumults too,
"When leaving reverence, duty, love and feare,
"What dare not mutinous troupes attempt to doe:
Retire in time while as the heavens are cleare;
You have perform'd, perform'd, and that even ſoone,
More then your own could hope, your foes could feare,
Yea (yet more ſtrange) then ſome can truſt, though done;
Your worth in warre (as bright as glory) ſhowne,
Which even by envy never could be ſtain'd,
Your skill in peace would likewiſe now be knowne:
Calme vertue guiding, what ſterne valour gain'd:
"A State well rul'd, the ſame of Kings doth raiſe,
"No leſſe then foughten fields, or batter'd Townes.
"More hard it is, and doth deſerve more praiſe
"To guide, then get, to keep, then conquer Crownes:
In Fortunes ſpheares chiefe height your glory plac'd,
Can now not move unleſſe it be more low,
And if it once deſcend, then quite diſgrac'd,
Each Artizan your Statues will o're-throw;
For in the warre as you may well perceive,
There doth no little part depend on Fame;
If we but once the leaſt ſmall check receive,
The world will gather to procure our ſhame;
Then tempt not Fortune further then you need,
Your raſhly mounting thoughts let reaſon raine,
Leſt whil'ſt your hopes with Trophees fain'd you feed,
A moment loſe what many dayes did gaine.
Let Darius prove all Monarchs patterne now
(What wand ring Starre doth ſway the courſe of Crownes)
That Prince to whom the Orient once did bow,
Him onely now his miſery renownes.
Scarce mov'd to call you King, though twiſe o're-throwne,
At laſt to match with you he doth agree,
And with his daughter hath for dowry ſhowne
That great Euphrates ſhall your border be;
Or otherwiſe he condeſcends to give
Great ſtore of gold, or what your ſelfe deſires
If that his mother, wife, and children live,
To have them rendred, as he oft requires:
And let not loftie thoughts cloud Reaſons eyes,
Remember what ſtrange Realmes will him embrace,
Which ſcarce he knows, by name, nor never tryes,
Where if he fled, your troups would tyre to chace.
Peace, peace Parmenio, now thou mak'ſt me rage,
With thoſe thy words not worthy of our eares;
It ſeemes the coldneſſe of declining age
Hath kill'd thy courage with a froſt of feares:
Did I abandon thee my native ſoyle,
And made my Enſignes ſhadow forraine fields,
As fear'd for danger, or elſe flying toyle,
That I ſhould turne whil'ſt yet our foe not yeelds:
Then all my labours, are but loſt at laſt,
Which have but bred an appetite of praiſe,
That I might dye diſpleas'd, the time once paſt,
When meanes remain'd, a ſtate like Ioves, to raiſe▪
No, I will raigne, and I will raigne alone,
Diſdaining to admit of more Commanders:
For (as the Heavens can hold no Sunne but one)
The Earth cannot containe two Alexanders;
The ſpatious circuit of this peopled Round,
Seemes not ſufficient to confine my thought,
And, O, would God there could moe worlds be found,
That many might to grace our deeds be brought;
O! I could wiſh that th'ocean were firme Land,
Where none but hideous Gyants had retreat,
Such as at Phlegra field in ſtrife did ſtand
Againſt the gods for the etheriall ſeat:
Theſe could encourage martiall mindes to ſtrike,
Who when ſubdu'd, would yeeld eternall praiſe.
I conquer men, but many did the like,
And after-ages may my equall raiſe:
But ſince none ſuch my triumphs are to grace,
Such as there are, Ile to ſubjection bring,
And as a peſt, I vow to flie all peace,
Till all the world adore me for their King:
Let them retyre in time who danger dread,
Yet thinke on this (whil'ſt glory bent to wed)
That ye abandon'd me in time of need,
And that I ſtay'd to fight when as ye fled;
Paſſe home in darkneſſe, ſervile reſt to finde,
I meaſure not my courage by my numbers.
Your majeſtie doth much miſtake my minde,
You know what I endur'd, what cares, what cumbers;
And for my part, I to your eyes appeale,
Which well can witneſſe what my hands have wrought.
All what I ſpake, proceeded of cleare zeale,
And not of cowardice, or feare of ought;
Nor match I vile repoſe with honeſt paines,
My courage (oft-times try'd) is not grown cold,
Nor yet that vigour hath not left my veines,
Which ſpurr'd my ſprite in youth, though I be old.
T'is not enough, that you your ſelfe be ſo,
To be the ſame you ſhould the reſt exhort;
Is he return'd, who was ordain'd to go
And view the captives? what doth he report?
As we have heard of him who thither went,
While they as yet not of ſupport deſpair'd,
And courteouſly were led unto a Tent
Which we of purpoſe caus'd to be prepar'd:
Even in the way one fortun'd there to ſpie
The Diademe which Darius ear'ſt had borne,
(Though glorious once) which low on th'earth did lye;
As earſt for pompe, then wondred at with ſcorne.
Straight they imagin'd from his Royall head,
Whoſe dignity it ſometime did decore,
None could it caſt except himſelfe were dead,
And if ſo were, they wiſh'd to live no more:
When they had entred in the Tent to weep,
Your Servant came, and at the entry knock'd,
Who (finding them ſo quiet) thought a ſleep
Had cloſ'd their eyes, or elſe that he was mock'd,
At length by force he made a patent way,
And was advanc'd them lovingly to greet,
When (loe) the Ladies proſtrated all lay,
And with a floud of teares be-dew'd his feet.
Then ſaid (by death expecting to be free)
Let us entombe great Darius like a King;
Then when we firſt his funerall honour ſee,
Death muſt to us a great contentment bring;
This oft they urg'd, though he atteſted there
That Darius was not dead (as they ſuppos'd)
But liv'd with hope, his ruines to repaire,
And in the pow'r of other Realmes repos'd.
Then did he urge what comfort and reliefe
They might attend, depending on your Grace;
Thus having toil'd to mitigate their griefe,
It ſeem'd they long'd to ſee my Soveraignes face,
I pitie ſtill, and not inſult o're ſuch,
(Though once mine Enemies) who are humbled ſo,
And leſt weake feare oppreſſe their mindes too much,
To comfort them, ſtraight to their Tent I'le go.
"OF all the paſsions which poſſeſſe the ſoule,
"None ſo diſturbes vaine Mortals mindes,
"As vaine Ambition which ſo blindes
"The light of them, that nothing can controll,
"Nor curb their thoughts who will aſpire;
"This raging vehement deſire
"Of Soveraignty no ſatisfaction findes,
"But in the breaſts of men doth ever roule
"The reſtleſſe ſtone of Siſyph to torment them,
"And as his heart who ſtole the heavenly fire,
"The Vulture gnaws, ſo doth that monſter rent them:
"Had they the world, the world would not content them.
This race of Ixion to embrace the clouds,
Contemne the ſtate wherein they ſtand,
And ſave themſelves, would all command;
"As one deſire is quench'd, another buds,
When they have travell'd all their time,
Heapt bloud on bloud, and crime on crime,
There is an higher power that guides their hand:
More happie he whom a poore Cottage ſhrouds
Againſt the tempeſt of the threatning heaven;
He ſtands in feare of none, none envies him;
His heart is upright, and his ways are even,
Where others ſtates are ſtill twixt ſix and ſeven.
That damned wretch up with Ambition blowne,
Then whil'ſt be turnes the wheele about,
Throwne high, and low, within, without,
In ſtriving for the top is tumbling downe.
"Thoſe who delight in climbing high,
"Oft by a precipice do dye,
So do the Starres skie-climbing worldlings ſlout;
But this diſeaſe is fatall to a Crowne:
Kings, who have moſt, would moſt augment their bounds,
And if they be not all, they cannot be,
Which to their damage commonly redounds,
"The weight of too great ſtates themſelves confounds.
"The mighty toyling to enlarge their ſtate,
"Themſelves exceedingly deceive,
"In hazarding the thing they have
"For a felicity which they conceive;
"Though their Dominions they encreaſe,
Yet their deſires grow never leſſe,
"For though they conquer much, yet more they crave,
"Which fatall Fortune doth attend the great,
"And all the outward pompe that they aſſume
"Doth but with ſhows diſguiſe the Minds diſtreſſe;
"And who to conquer all the earth preſume,
"A little earth ſhall them at laſt conſume.
And if it fortune that they dye in peace,
(A wonder wondrous rarely ſeene)
Who conquer firſt, heavens finde a meane
To raze their Empire, and oft-times their race,
Who comming to the Crowne with reſt,
And having all in peace poſſeſt,
Do ſtraight forget what bloudy broyles have beene,
Ere firſt their Fathers could attaine that place;
"As Seas do flow and ebbe, States riſe, and fall,
"And Princes when their actions proſper beſt,
"For feare their greatneſſe ſhould oppreſſe the ſmall,
"As of ſome hated, envied are of all.
We know what end the mighty Cyrus made,
Whom whil'ſt he ſtriv'd to conquer ſtill,
A woman (juſtly griev'd) did kill,
And in a bloudy veſſell roll'd his head,
Then ſaid (whil'ſt many wondring ſtood)
Since thou didſt famiſh for ſuch food,
Now quench thy thirſt of bloud with blond at will;
Some who ſucceeded him, ſince he was dead,
Have raign'd a ſpace with pompe, and yet with paine,
Whoſe glory now can do to us no good;
And what ſo long they labour'd to obtaine,
All in an inſtant muſt be loſt againe.
Loe, Darius once ſo magnified by fame,
By one whom he contemn'd o're-come,
For all his bravery now made dombe,
With down-caſt eyes muſt ſignifie his ſhame;
Who puft up with oſtentive pride,
Thinke Fortune bound to ſerve their ſide,
Can never ſcape, to be the prey of ſome;
Such ſpend their proſp'rous dayes, as in a dreame,
And as it were in Fortunes boſome ſleeping,
Then in a dull ſecurity abide,
And of their doubtfull ſtate neglect the keeping,
Whil'ſt fearfull ruine comes upon them creeping.
Thus the viciſsitude of worldly things
Doth oft to us it ſelfe detect,
When heavenly pow'rs exalt, deject,
Confirme, confound, erect, and ruine Kings.
So Alexander mighty now,
To whom the vanquiſh'd world doth bow,
With all ſubmiſsion, homage, and reſpect,
Doth flie a borrow'd flight with Fortunes wings;
Nor enters he his dangerous courſe to ponder;
Yet if once Fortune bend her cloudy brow,
All thoſe who at his ſudden ſucceſſe wonder,
May gaze as much to ſee himſelfe brought under.
O Diſmall day deteſted be thy light,
And would the Gods (but Gods neglect our caſe)
The world were wrapt in a Cymmerian Night,
That no proud eye might gaze on our diſgrace.
Why did the Heavens reſerve my feeble age
To make my burden more, when ſtrength grows leſſe?
Could nothing but my harmes their wrath aſſwage,
Thus offred up on th'Altar of diſtreſſe?
Ah! have I ſpent my youth in pompe, and pleaſure,
And had my ſpring-time grac'd with pleaſant flowres
That th'Autumne which ſhould reape the Sommers treaſure▪
Might be diſtempred with ſuch ſtormy ſhowres?
And did ſmooth calmes and Sunne-ſhines for a ſpace,
Make all my voyage through the world a ſport,
That I ſhould fall when neere to end my race,
(And toſſ'd with ſtormes) even periſh at my port?
Yet for all this, were I expos'd alone,
The wretched object of Ioves thund'ring armes,
I ſhould not thinke I had juſt cauſe to mone,
When I but wail'd mine owne, not others harmes;
Ah me! on thoſe whom more then life I love
The ſtate-diſturbing blaſts of Fortune fall,
Yet each of them ſome ſeverall loſſe doth move,
But I in anguiſh beare a part with all:
I ſuffred when I ſaw Oxatres ſlaine,
My loving Sonne, and moſt entirely lov'd;
I dy'd in Darius, when he try'd in vaine
What Fates would do, yet ſtill their hatred prov'd;
The heavens to plague me more, yet make me breath,
O rigour rare! what tortures rack my breaſt?
Who feele the ſowre; but not the ſweet of death,
Still cours'd, not kill'd, leſt that ſhould breed me reſt;
Yet, Iove, if this may diſ-enflame thine ire,
Let all thy lightning light upon my head,
To be conſum'd with a celeſtiall fire,
Some comfort were, ſince that I muſt be dead.
Leave mother thoſe complaints, as fit for me,
Who ſtill muſt grieve my friends, and grace my foes:
Whoſe fortune is ſo wretched ſtill to be,
That all the world may wonder at my woes.
Loe, that deare Lord and treaſure of my thought,
Whoſe preſence I my Paradiſe eſteem'd,
To ſuch a precipice is headlong brought,
That he from ruine cannot be redeem'd;
Ah! on what prop can I repoſe my truſt,
When of his ſtate I firſt the greatneſſe ponder?
Next, how his Diademe (drencht in the duſt)
Was Fortunes Trophee, and all Aſia's wonder?
He whoſe imperious ſpeech the world reſpected,
And as an Oracle had in regard,
He vanquiſh'd now, and with contempt neglected,
(Even as a ſupplicant) can ſcarce be heard;
And yet I know this more doth grieve his ſoule
Then all the harme which happned to his ſtate,
His pow'r ov'r me that any can controull,
Who (as his Idoll) was ador'd of late;
Shall he (pure quinteſſence of my beſt part)
Then onely teſtifie the love he beares?
No, by mine eyes I will diſtill my heart,
And for his ſake diſſolve my ſelfe in teares;
Would God my breaſt might ſtill tranſparant be,
That as through Cryſtall all might marke my minde,
And of my loyall thoughts the ſecrets ſee,
Whoſe great affection cannot be confin'd.
This priſons worſt hath bounded but mine eyes,
And baniſh'd them the object of their joy,
My fiery heart well wing'd with fancies flyes,
And where thou go'ſt doſt ſtill thy ſteps convoy;
Deare, whil'ſt thou doſt enjoy this common ayre,
Thoſe who me captive thinke, do groſly erre:
For whil'ſt thou liv'ſt, how can thy Queene deſpaire,
Whom thou to ſoule, and Scepter, doſt preferre;
Yet flatter I my ſelfe who am accurſt?
Of thoſe miſhaps which make my thoughts to ſtray,
The memory may ſerve to make me burſt,
Ah, ah, I faint, I feele my ſprits decay.
Help, help, alas, alas the Empreſſe falls.
O day of darkneſſe! what a world of woes?
This heavy ſight my panting heart appals:
Heaven, earth, and all, are now become our foes.
No creature hath more cauſe to mone then I,
Whoſe Fathers Fortune oft afflicts mine eares,
Whil'ſt I my mothers miſery muſt ſpie,
So that of both my breaſt the burden beares.
What inhumane humanity is this,
With ſuch a cruell pitie to oppreſſe,
To bring pale ghoſts back from the fields of bliſſe,
Yet to be plung'd in th'ocean of diſtreſſe?
O unkinde kindneſſe that by ſaving ſlayes,
And would with loveleſſe love, my love controull:
Ah! of this braving Sunne the loathſome rayes
Do cleare mine eyes, but to confound my ſoule.
Deare daughter, ſtrive your paſſions to reſtraine,
Leſt that the torrent of your griefe grow ſuch,
That both it carry you where horiours raigne;
And him o're-whelme for whom you mourn ſo much;
No doubt but he, if we reſt captives thus
Diſdaining thoſe indignities of ours,
To venge himſelfe in reobtaining us,
Will hazard all his orientall pow'rs;
But ah, what comfort can a wretch afford,
Whoſe care-worne breaſt the worſt of woe containes:
Yet though my heart would faine impugne my word,
I hopeleſſe ſpeake of hope, to eaſe her paines.
Plagu'd with what is, what may be never pauſe,
Since we muſt hold our griefe our greateſt good,
And do not feed falſe hopes, for we have cauſe
Even to ſigh out our ſouls, and weep our bloud.
I waile my Sonne.
And I my husbands fall.
I waile my Father, and in him us all.
No woe like mine, mine cannot be releev'd,
I waile his woe who ſhould my woe aſſwage,
Who lives by me, by whom I ſhould have liv'd,
Sport of my youth, and pillar of mine age.
No woe like mine, who for my Mate mourne here,
For love ot whom, I had all others left;
But what a Mate? my ſelfe, or one more deare,
Yet from my ſelfe, my ſelfe by force am reft.
So woe like mine, who born a Monarchs childe,
Hop'd by my birth of Fortunes beſt to boaſt,
Yet are my hopes even at the height beguil'd,
And what I hop'd in moſt, hath harm'd me moſt.
I mourne for him who in my wombe was form'd.
I mourn for him in whom love me transform'd.
I mourn for him who did give forme to me.
Shall I no more in him my Image ſee?
Ah! ſhall I never in his joy rejoyce?
Ah! ſhall I never heare his chearfull voyce?
Would God my ruine might his ranſome be.
Would God my life my lifes life might ſet free.
Would God the life he gave him life might give.
Muſt thoſe gray haires my Sonnes greene youth furvive?
Leſt twiſe made dye, I'le firſt prevent his fall.
Shall I live laſt to ſuffer for you all?
But whil'ſt our wretched ſtate we juſtly mone,
We may lament this Infant too a ſpace,
Who in miſhap inferiour were to none,
If he could apprehend his Tragicke caſe.
O then how can my heart but burſted be,
Whom Nature moves moſt to bemone his harmes?
I thinke the hoſts of heaven I thund'ring ſee
On me, my husband▪ and him in my armes:
Deare Image of my ſelfe, in whom I live,
Thy ſhape not ſhames the greatneſſe of thy Sire,
But of thy birth cleare evidence doth give,
Thy ſowre-ſweet ſight addes coals to my deſire.
Thou who ſhould'ſt comfort moſt, torment'ſt thou me?
Huge hoſts of paſſions now my ſoule aſſembles;
O how I grieve, and yet am glad to ſee
Thee, though not him, whom thy ſweet face reſembles!
Go beare this Babe from hence, a wound too deep
Hath piere'd me with compaſſion of his part,
Yet let him ſtay, I joy to heare him weep;
This mothers paſſion melts my burſting heart;
Of many woes this laſt is not the leaſt,
That unbegun thy glory thus muſt end:
Thy Fortunes Sunne (my Sonne) ſet in the Eaſt,
Whil'ſt all the world thy riſing did attend;
Ah! muſt this Innocent taſte of miſhap,
Whoſe tender age cannot diſcerne his ſtate,
And thus be plagu'd, yea, in his Nurſes lap,
Inherit woe by birth? ah cruell fate!
If thou could'ſt hope, what great hopes haſt thou loſt
Who art defrauded of ſo high a Throne?
Ah! in thy cradle muſt I ſee thee croſt
Whom I deſign'd ſo great when we were gone?
Yet happie hapleſſe childe, who can'ſt not know
From whence the fountaine of our ſorrow flows,
Nor what it is that men call high, or low,
Nor on what thorne the roſe of honour grows.
Yet haſt thou felt the pricke before the ſmoll;
Is this the benefit thy birth-right brings,
A captive here in miſery to dwell?
Then better not be borne, nor come of Kings.
O! what a noiſe is this that thus affrights?
I thinke of teares the torrent to reſtraine,
(Since ſoules when ſad a juſt complaint delights)
They ſtill would plague, yet ſtop me to complaine;
Or is it one who doth lament our caſe,
And is (a rare thing) in affliction kinde?
Who would behold how we can death embrace!
Death ſoveraigne phyſicke for a troubled minde.
By many ſignes we may our ſelves aſſure
T'is Alexander whom we long'd not for.
What? ah I die, and muſt mine eyes endure
That hatefull object which I moſt abhorre?
Spare, ſpare ſuch ſpeeches now, leſt all go wrong,
We are environ'd with outragious hoſts;
Thoſe who are weake muſt yeeld unto the ſtrong:
For, Victors rage when as the vanquiſh'd boſts;
I will entreat him too, not for my ſelfe
(Age bows my body to embrace pale death)
But that you yet may ſhunne this wrackfull ſhelfe,
Whoſe youth and beauty worthy are of breath.
RIſe Mother, riſe, and calme thoſe needleſſe cares,
I come to cure, not to procure your woe;
The duty which I owe thoſe ſilver haires,
Doth grieve my minde to ſee you humbled ſo.
Moſt gracious Prince, forgive me if I err'd
In taking him for you, who ſtands you by.
I finde no fault to ſee my friend preferr'd,
Even to my ſelfe; this is another I.
My ſorrows ſo confounded have my minde
That ſcarce I know my ſelfe, another leſſe;
My ſoule in ſuch an agony I finde,
As words, nor teares, nor grones cannot expreſſe.
I pray you mother ſet thoſe plaints apart,
They vex me more then ſterne Bellona's broils.
This tender name of Mother wounds my heart,
Whil'ſt nam'd by him, who of that name me ſpoils:
I was (woe that I was) a Mother late
Of two faire Sonnes (faire Sunnes) lights of my life,
But one is dead, and in a worſe eſtate,
The other lives, involv'd in woe, and ſtrife;
Like to the trunke of ſome disbranched tree
Which Aeolus hath to confuſion brought,
Since ſpoil'd of thoſe brave Impes which ſprung from me
Unprofitable ſtock, I ſerve for nought.
I ſerve for nought, ſince ſerving him no more,
Who onely may my blaſted hopes revive,
Loe (quite confounded) farre from what before,
Who him of me, me of my ſelfe deprive.
I live without my halfe, without my whole,
Prodigious Monſter, whom the world admires,
I want the point, the pilot, and the pole
Which drew, addreſt, and bounded my deſires:
Toſſ'd by ſad ſighs in flouds of bitter teares,
I (ſave from ruine) look for no reliefe,
By what I feele ſtill plagu'd, but worſe with feares,
All comfort loath'd, my glory is my griefe:
My ſoule feemes to preſage diſaſtrous chances,
And warring with it ſelfe hath never peace,
My heart ſurcharg'd doth faint in deadly trances,
My eyes muſt grace the ground of my diſgrace.
Hell hath aſſembled all her horrours here;
Ah! in the dungeons of this deſp'rate breſt,
As in the dark Tartarian groves, appeare
A thouſand ſhadows to bereave my reſt.
Faire Princeſſe, ſpare thoſe paſſionate complaints,
Which may augment, but not amend your harmes;
This voice which with your woe the world acquaints,
Doth move me more then all the Perſians Armes.
Take courage (Madam) be afraid of none:
That you may hope what help I can afford,
I ſweare by Ioves inviolable Throne,
And do proteſt by my Imperiall word;
Though for a while barr'd from your royall ſeat,
You compaſſ'd here with troups of ſtrangers ſtand,
Yet ſhall you ſtill be uſ'd as fits your ſtate,
And may (as earſt in your owne Court) command,
Ah! how can I command whil'ſt I am thrall?
What can I have, who wanting one, want all?
Though brave it ſeeme in ſome proud victors ſight,
To plague their captives, and triumph in ill:
The larger grow the limits of my might,
The more I labour to reſt raine my will.
What can be fear'd by them whom I defend?
Foes have not pow'r, and who with me remaine.
They dare not wrong, nor offer to offend
The leaſt in ranke who doth attend your traine;
If any would impugne what I appoint,
Or would in ambuſh for your honour lye,
Or diſcontent you but in any point,
As Alexander lives, that wretch ſhall dye.
O what an hoſt of evils where ere I go
Are ſtill encroaching to o're-throw my ſtate?
Ah! muſt I be beholding to my foe,
And owe him love, to whom my love owes hate?
Should he help me who ſtill his ruine plyes?
Heavens curſe my heart, if ſtain'd with treaſon thus,
Let death in darkneſſe firſt entombe mine eyes,
Ere ſuch a ſight accepted be by us.
I (Lord) am thine, and thine I will remaine,
Thy love was planted in a fertile field,
Which gratefull now thee to reward againe
From flouriſh'd faith chaſt flames for fruits doth yeeld.
Yet doth misfortune this good fortune bring,
My conſtancy ſhall now be clearly knowne;
Another might have lov'd an happie King:
But I will love thee, though thou be o're-throwne.
I labour much to comfort in ſome meaſure
This grieved Queene, that was a Monarch's choice,
Whoſe woe doth make my victory no pleaſure,
For whil'ſt ſhe mournes, I cannot well rejoyce.
Moſt mighty King thou doſt deſerve indeed,
That (as for Darius) we ſhould pray for thee,
Who do'ſt ſo much in clemency exceed,
That thou bewail'ſt our loſſe, no leſſe then he;
Not onely thou ſurmount'ſt all other Kings,
In glory riſing from thy labours gone;
And for thoſe benefits which Fortune brings,
But in all vertues worthy of a Throne;
Thou do'ſt vouchſafe on me (more then I crave)
The title of a Queene, and Mother ſtill,
But I confeſſe my ſelfe thy humble ſlave,
Whoſe life hath now no limits but thy will;
The dreamed good, that Greatneſſe gave, forgot,
My count'nance ſhall be free from clouds of cares,
And I'le allow of this my preſent lot,
As one who for my fate my force prepares;
Yea, if this wofull woman here were free,
Who hath no heaven except her husbands face;
I could content my ſelfe (great Prince) to be
The meaneſt hand-mayd that attends your Grace.
As if your Sonnes, command all that is mine,
And I will ſeek to ſecond your deſire.
Heavens recompenſe this courteſie of thine,
Which in all ages thouſands ſhall admire.
Thoſe captiv'd Princeſſes have pierc'd my ſoul,
Which even amid'ſt our heaven, have found a hell.
His paſſions ſo what Stoick could controull,
Whom now to weep, their teares would not compell?
What age could earſt ſuch ſtately beauties ſhow,
Which of perfection hold the higheſt place,
And borne to bring, though now they be brought low,
Do Beauty beautifie, give Griefe a grace?
Sir, ſuch a victory hath not beene ſeene
As you have gain'd, ſince conquering (as appeares)
The largeſt kingdome, and the faireſt Queene,
That Aſia vaunted of, theſe many yeares.
Durſt Leda's, or Agenors brood compare
With that ſweet Queene, the honour of her kinde?
But as ſhe is above all others faire,
As farre her daughters make her go behinde;
It ſeem'd at firſt that ſorrow had beene ſleeping,
Then whil'ſt thoſe Virgins in their Grand-dames boſome,
With weeping beauty, and with beauteous weeping,
Did with a haile of pearle, blaſt Beauties bloſſome:
So large a pow'r, no Prince on Earth can have,
As hath Loves Empire in their face confin'd.
What, what. Hepheſtion, what doth thee deceive?
Dare folly ſeeke to bragge ſo brave a minde?
Dare Cupid enter in an armed Camp,
And them who Mars have match'd for ſport appall?
Muſt his ſoft ſeale even through hard metall ſtamp,
And make who conquer men, to women thrall?
We dare reſiſt (whil'ſt many a thouſand dyes)
The ſteely tempeſts of a world of men,
But if from yvorie orbes two Sunnie eyes
Do charge the ſoule (I know not how) O then
A ſecret pow'r (compos'd of hopes and feares)
So charms the minde, that it ſtrange thoughts conceives,
And ſtraight the heart (quaſſ'd drunke by th'eyes and th'eares)
Doth ſtaggring reele, and full of fancies raves.
But yet, in my conceit, I ſcorne all ſuch,
And do diſdaine to yeeld my ſelfe at all;
Yea, in that ſort to bow I loath ſo much,
Let rather Mars then Cupid make me fall:
Should I be bound with fraile affections chains,
As one oblivious of my former fame?
No, no, this purpoſe ſtill my ſoule retaines,
To ballance nothing with a noble name;
O! what a great indignity is this?
To ſee a Conquerour to his luſt a ſlave!
"Who would the title of true worth were his,
"Muſt vanquiſh vice, and no baſe thoughts conceive:
"The braveſt Trophee ever man obtain'd
"Is that, which ov'r himſelfe, himſelfe hath gain'd.
I'm glad (my Soveraigne) that as you excell,
Not onely men, but Mars himſelfe in armes,
That from your minde, you likewiſe may repell
The flatt'ring pow'r of loves alluring charmes,
That vertue rare, whoſe rayes ſhine in your words,
With generous ardour doth enflame my ſoule,
And o're my ſelfe to me ſuch pow'r affords;
That ſome brave deeds muſt ſtraight this courſe controule▪
NArbazanes, now ere the time be gone,
Let us accompliſh that which we intend,
And joyne our wit, our force, and all in one,
(Ere known begun) that it may quickly end
You ſee th'occaſion (if our courſe we, keepe)
To raiſe rare fortunes, points us out the way,
Yea, blames our ſluggiſhneſſe that as a ſleepe,
So great a purpoſe doe ſo long delay.
Loe, angry Iove our Princes part diſproves:
For, Fortunes worſt what ever he attempt
From following him, the peoples minde removes:
"Diſtreſſe ſtill is attended by contempt,
A ground for ſo great hopes who ere did ſee,
As heavens ſo happily breed in our mind,
For, ſince our King confounded is to be,
We by his fall, a meanes to riſe may finde.
I will moſt willingly performe my part,
For, I the ſame exceedingly allow:
Deare wealth and honour, Idols of my heart,
If you I may enjoy, I care not how;
Yet that this courſe may beſt be kept obſcure,
Our care muſt ſeeme all for our Country bent;
"When mask'd with zeale; crimes are reputed pure,
"A ſhew of good doth vulgar mindes content,
"In dangerous plots where courage joynes with Art,
"Let ſlow advice, a quicke diſpatch be us'd:
"What can (ſave ſucceſſe) juſtifie our part,
"Who muſt command, or come to be accus'd?
To Alexander one was ſent of late,
To ſpeake of peace, whoſe ſpeech was ſpent in vaine,
So that (thus toſs'd) moſt deſp'rate is his ſtate,
Who peace cannot obtaine, nor warre maintaine;
To cleare his thoughts which many doubts doe ſway,
He now craves each mans minde who ſquadrons leads;
This for our purpoſe muſt prepare the way:
"Thoſe who would compaſſe Kings, need crafty heads:
And that to gaine which we ſo much eſteeme,
We can upon no meanes more ſafe conclude,
Then crooked counſels that doe upright ſeeme
To maske our ſelves, and others to delude;
He muſt (advis'd by ſome) renounce a ſpace
The ſhew of pow'r, and from affaires retire,
That for a faſhion one may uſe his place,
Not as uſurp'd, but at his owne deſire:
So may he try if others can bring backe
That which his fortunes ebbe hath borne away,
Then he againe his Diadem ſhall take,
And (as before) the regall Scepter ſway.
Well, then amongſt our ſelves to flye debate,
Which ſuch great actions oft-times under-mines,
I yeeld that you poſſeſſe the higheſt ſeat,
And will my faction frame for our deſignes.
All that is one, which of us two receive it,
Since every thing doth equally belong us,
I'le take it for the forme, tis one who have it,
For we will part his kingdomes all among us.
But if he condeſcend to this we crave,
To judgements raſh, which would at firſt ſeeme good,
Let him not thinke us two ſuch fooles to leave,
That which ſo many elſe have bought with bloud;
"Who once advanc'd, would willingly goe downe,
"And (prop'd with pow'r,) not love in ſtate to ſtand?
"This not the cuſtome is to quite a Crowne,
"When one hath knowne how ſweet it's to command;
"This name of faith but to get credit fain'd,
"Is (weigh'd with kingdomes) lighter then a Crowne,
"And even in them whoſe thoughts are moſt reſtrain'd,
"A Scepters weight would preſſe all goodneſſe down.
Yet of my thoughts ſome doubt new counſell claimes,
And with huge honour aggravates diſgrace:
The ſtaine of treaſon ſtill attends our names,
And with our errour burdens all our race;
Our purpoſe muſt accompliſh'd be with paine,
And we (though pompe a ſpace appeaſe our ſoules)
Shall finde afflictions to diſturbe our raigne,
And be when dead, defam'd by famous ſcroules.
The ſacred title of a Soveraigne King
Doth worke a terrour more then can be thought,
And Majeſtie to brave my minde doth bring,
Whoſe count'nance only ſtrange effects hath wrought.
To idle ſounds and frivolous reports,
Give ſtraight a paſport, for they laſt not long,
And what thou do'ſt alledge, not much imports:
"A Crowne may cover any kinde of wrong;
"What hainous thing ſo odious is by nature,
"Which for a Kingdome not committed is?
"To be a King, let me be call'd a traitour,
"Faith (if for ought) may broken be for this.
"Thoſe are but feeble braines which fancies loade,
"With timorous dreams which bare ſurmiſing brings;
"Who feare vaine ſhadowes, muſt not walke abroad,
"Too warie wits dare never worke great things.
If our brave project happily ſucceed,
(As now I doubt not but it ſhall doe ſoone)
We ſtraight will numbers finde to praiſe our deed,
And ſooth us up in all that we have done.
Now that the time and manner may be ſure,
The Bactrian bands ſhall all attend in Armes,
Yet faine a cauſe that he may live ſecure,
And be ſurpris'd not looking for alarmes.
Then through the campe a rumour muſt be ſpread,
That hopeleſſe Darius hath deſpair'dly gone,
By violence to dwell amongſt the dead,
Which (as much griev'd) we muſt appeare to mone:
The Perſians may promiſes be pleas'd,
So to diſarme him of his native pow'rs,
Then taking him, our thoughts may all be eas'd,
For whil'ſt he is his owne, we are not ours:
Till ſtrong with titles, we with pow'r command,
His ſhadow ſhrouds, while rights are forc'd, or fain'd,
And his to daunt, or ſtrangers to gaine-ſtand,
To raiſe our ſtate, his ſhew muſt be, maintain'd.
To Alexander after we will ſend,
And offer him his foe to bondage bought,
Then crave that us his favour may defend,
As thoſe who all things for his good have wrought;
Then if we thus his grace cannot procure,
But that he us with rigour doe purſue,
With Darius death we will our ſtates aſſure,
Then firſt our force, and next the warres renue.
Let us hence-forth for nothing be diſmaid,
But ſtrive our ſelves couragiouſly to beare.
This dangerous action would not bedelay'd,
Leaſt time make him to doubt, and us to feare.
TIme, through Ioves judgement juſt,
Huge alterations brings:
Thoſe are but fooles who truſt
In tranſitory things,
Whoſe tailes be are mortall ſtings,
Which in the end will wound;
And let none thinke it ſtrange,
Though all things earthly change:
In this inferiour round
What is from ruine free?
The Elements which be
At variance, (as we ſee)
Each th'other doth confound:
The Earth and Ayre make warre,
The fire and water are
Still wreſtling at debate,
All thoſe through cold and heat,
Through drought and moiſture jare.
What wonder though men change and fade,
Who of thoſe changing Elements are made?
How dare vaine worldlings vannt
Of fortunes goods not laſting,
Evils which our wits enchant?
Expos'd to loſſe and waſting?
Loe, we to death are haſting,
Whil'ſt we thoſe things diſcuſſe:
All things from their beginning,
Still to an end are running,
Heaven hath ordain'd it thus;
We heare how it doth thunder,
We ſee th' earth burſt aſunder,
And yet we never ponder
What this imports to us:
Theſe fearefull ſigns prove,
That th' angry pow'r above
Are mov'd to indignation
Againſt this wretched nation,
Which they no longer love:
What are we but a paſſe of breath
Who live aſſur'd of nothing but of death?
Who was ſo happy yet
As never had ſome croſſe?
Though on a Throne he ſit,
And is not ut'd with loſſe,
Yet fortune once will toſſe
Him, when that leaſt he would;
If one had all at once
Hydaſpes precious ſtones,
And yellow Tagus gold;
The Orientall treaſure,
And every earthly pleaſure,
Even in the greateſt meaſure,
It ſhould not ſmake him bold:
For while he lives ſecure,
His ſtate is moſt unſure;
When it doth leaſt appeare,
Some heavy plague drawes neare,
Deſtruction to procure.
Worlds glory is but like a flowre,
Which both is bloom'd, and blaſted in an houre.
In what we moſt repoſe,
We finde our comfort light,
The thing we ſooneſt loſe
That's pretious in our ſight;
For honour, riches, might,
Our lives in pawne we lay;
Yet all like flying ſhadowes,
Or flowers enamelling meadowes,
Doe vaniſh and decay.
Long time we toile to finde
Thoſe Idols the minde,
Which had, we cannot binde
To bide with us one day:
Then why ſhould we preſume
On treaſures that conſume,
Difficult to obtaine,
Difficult to retaine,
A dreame, a breath, a fume?
Which vexe them moſt, that them poſſeſſe,
Who ſtarve with ſtore, and famiſh with exceſſe.
AH! muſt I poyſon now my Princes eares,
With newes the worſt that ever burden'd fame:
Had I as many tongues as I have teares,
All would not ſerve my ſorrowes to proclaime.
Great ſignes of griefe I in thy face diſcerne,
And ſpare not to report this heavie croſſe
To one (I feare) whom it doth moſt concerne:
Is't death, diſgrace, deſtruction, treaſon, loſſe?
Tell on the ſumme of horrour at the firſt;
With no ambiguous words my paine prolong;
"A wretch for comfort craves to know the worſt,
And I have learn'd to be unhappy long;
What leaſt I ſpeake, and yet ſuſpect too much,
Art thou the Trumpet to proclaime my ſcorne
Which muſt wound me? (but ah) no torment ſuch
As this to her who that diſgrace hath borne.
She was not wrong'd, as you have wrong conceiv'd;
The Gods from harme did ſtudy to preſerve her;
She from your foe ſuch favour hath receiv'd,
As from her Subjects who were bound to ſerve her;
But what a volly doth my voyce prepare
Of woes to charge your cares? woes full of dread,
Would God ere I my meſſage can declare,
That I may dye in ſaying ſhe is dead.
And was it not enough (poore wretch alas)
That I beheld her dye, and would have dy'd?
But that I muſt (arm'd with ſad tidings) paſſe
To wound all them who heare what I have ſpy'd?
See how he ſtands (mov'd with thoſe words of mine,)
As if by griefe arreſted unto death.
Yet doth the Sunne on my affliction ſhine,
And cleare the ayre though tainted by my breath?
And can I live, and looke them in the face,
Who have my o'rethrow (ſhamefull o'rethrow) ſeene?
And how I vanquiſh'd, vanquiſh'd with diſgrace,
Did loſe at once my Kingdome and my Queene?
Heaven bruiſe me all to powder with thy thunder,
That I no more may in the world remaine
The object of thy wrath, and fortunes wonder,
Spoil'd of all hope, yet kept for greater paine.
Ah, art thou dead? and doe I live behinde thee?
Thy faulty husband, think'ſt thou ſo to flye?
If it be thin, then know I where to finde thee,
This onely grieves me that too late I dye.
O Alexander, what ſuch hainous ill
Have I done thee, that thou requit'ſt me thus?
Whom of thy friends or kindred did I kill?
This cruelty comes undeſerv'd of us,
Though juſtly thou intended had this warre,
Mars from his rage made women alwaies free,
This tyranny ſhall all thy Trophees marre,
And ſtill to thy reproch reported be.
Thus of that Prince, you without cauſe eſteem,
I know her death him grievouſly diſpleas'd,
A woodrous thing which few or none would deeme,
He wail'd it long, and could not be appeas'd.
Even as my Soveraigne now, then did he ſmart,
And when he came to calme your mothers griefe,
As acting not his owne, but even your part,
He ſeem'd to need, and not to give reliefe.
If any ſparkes of that reſpect remaine,
Which much with thee ſhould (duely weigh'd) import,
I pray thee (Tiriotes) now be plaine,
Or elſe ſtrange torments ſhall the truth extort;
I loath to let this queſtion ſcape my mouth,
Which both I bluſh to crave, and long to know,
And can it be, that this tranſported youth
Not urg'd to have that which I onely owe?
Could this fierce Prince even in his flaming age,
Have ſuch a beauty purchas'd by his toiles,
And yet not ſeeke (forc'd by affections rage)
Her honours ruine, and my pleaſures ſpoiles?
Speake frankely now, and tell what fatall ſhelfe
Hath cruſh'd my treaſures Barke, and me defac'd:
The feare of ill is worſe then ill it ſelfe,
"They twiſe doe dye, who dye, and dye diſgrac'd.
Let not thoſe love-bred feares abuſe your thought;
By all the world no fable I contrive;
If partially I ſpeake, or lye in ought,
Earth open wide, and ſwallow me alive:
He whom your grace ſo wrongfully ſuſpects,
Hath not in any ſort your Queene abus'd,
But as his ſiſter ſtill (in all reſpects)
As chaſtly and as honourably us'd;
When angry Iove ſubverted had our ſtate,
And view'd our thundred troupes diſordered flight,
Light fortune then who flattered us of late,
Did make our ſtate a mirrour of her might,
For, having found a Crowne foil'd on the ground.
O endleſſe ſhame which never can be cur'd▪
We ſtraight imagin'd that ſome cruell wound
Had kill'd our Lord, and wail'd it as aſſur'd.
Would God I then had dy'd, as I deſir'd,
To have prevented thoſe enſuing barmes,
Whil'ſt ere my hohour and my hap expir'd
A Crowne my head, a Queene enrich'd my armes.
But Alexander having heard our cryes,
Sent one to learne the cauſe that mov'd our woe;
Who finding whence our errour did ariſe,
Gave full aſſurance that it was not ſo.
Then he himſelfe did to our Tent reſort,
And with the mildeſt words he could conceive,
Your Mother, Wife, and Children did exhort
Such terrours vaine (ſince but ſurmiz'd) to leave;
And he proteſted that they ſhould expect
No harme of him their courage to appall,
Then all things did with great regard direct,
That no man might endammage them at all.
Thus when they were againſt all dangers arm'd,
(I thinke, for feare (for who would not have fear'd▪)
Leſt ſuch rare graces might his minde have charm'd)
He never more before her face appear'd;
Elſe generous vertue, jealous of each thing,
Which (tempting reaſon) ſenſes might allure,
(What rare reſtraint in a victorious King)
He fled what fault, or ſcandall could procure.
He doth his fame above all things preferre,
And will not be where it may blemiſh finde,
Nor give his eyes commodity to erre,
Leſt thoughts impure might ſtrive to ſtaine his minde.
He whil'ſt that ſhe was ſicke, did loath delight,
And (gravely griey'd) all pompe and pleaſure left.
O hatefull heaven! that with ſuch helliſh ſpight
The worlds chiefe treaſure, Natures glory reft.
When he beheld deaths triumph in that face,
Which had triumph'd o're ſuch a Monarchs heart,
With witneſs'd woe, even paſſionate a ſpace,
The lookers on did much commend his part;
And when ſome time his dolour had o're-come,
Her funerall rites ſolemnly to decore,
He us'd ſuch honour, as might well become
The Perſian pompe in proſp'rous times before.
O pow'r ſupreame that of great ſtates diſpoſeſt,
And ratifi'ſt thy will with fearefull thunder,
Who as thou pleaſeſt, placeſt, and depoſeſt
Vncertaine worldlings, now above, now under:
I pray thy Deitie in my ſoules diſtreſſe,
If that th'inhabitants of heaven can heare
The plaints of them who this low point poſſeſſe,
Or that th' immortals can give mortals care,
This favour laſt I onely doe require,
Eſtabliſh firſt the Scepter in my hand;
But if through my deſert, or thy deſire,
The race of Cyrus muſt no more command,
Since angry heaven ſo high a hate contracts,
That I muſt needs my Diadem forgoe,
Let him ſucceed, who proves in all his acts,
So milde a Victor, and ſo juſt a foe.
IF joyn'd by fates with men of daſtard mindes,
Who to a noble death, baſe life preferr'd,
I ſhould not waſte my words amongſt the windes,
But labour would that time might be deferr'd;
Though ſtill reſolv'd, your courſe confirmes me much,
Whom no diſaſter could divorce from me,
What man can doubt whom heavens doe backe by ſuch,
When (bragg'd with bondage) fighting to be free?
My courage ſwels to ſee you marching forth,
Whoſe force and faith, which all the world doth ſing,
(Oft clear'd by proofe, though fortune envy worth)
Might ſerve to make, farre more to keepe a King.
He gives our rebels Townes, not mov'd by love:
"Each Prince (though uſing them,) all traitours hates.
But that their courſe to take, this might you move,
His turne once ſerv'd, ſo forfeiting your ſtates.
Ye to my fortune have not had regard,
As of my peace, ſo partners of my warres,
Which, though that I might not, Iove would reward,
And all the world extoll you to the ſtarres.
How long ſhall I a vagabond remaine,
And flye a ſtranger who my right would reave,
Since by one battell we may re-obtaine
All that we loſt, or loſe all that we have?
Like ſome vile traitors, whom I will arraigne,
To hold me up, ſhall I goe caſt me downe?
Muſt Darius onely by entreaty raigne?
No, none hath pow'r to give, or take my Crowne.
I ſhall not my authority ſurvive,
Nor will I proffer a ſubmiſſive breath,
My hand ſhall hold a Scepter while I live,
My hand ſhall beare a Diadem till death;
If thoſe franke thoughts which doe poſſeſſe my ſoule,
Such flames of courage kindled have in you,
A Macedonian ſhall not us controule,
Nor with diſdainefull ſmiles brag whil'ſt we bow:
My ſtate may teſtifie fraile fortunes change,
May ſhe not him o're-whelme, as well as mee?
At leaſt our hands beare death, if not revenge,
"Brave mindes when no more reſts may ſtill dye free.
Now call your valorous anceſtors to minde,
Whom from the Grecians tribute ſtill requir'd,
And of whoſe deeds rare monuments we finde,
Whoſe merits make their memories admir'd;
Shall of your deeds, poſterity be dumbe,
Which doth your fathers names (though dead) adore?
I am reſolv'd, my triumph, or my tombe,
A Laurell, or a Cypreſſe ſhall decore.
What doubtfull ſilence thus your thoughts detaines?
We need adviſe with nought but with our ſwords;
He who the Perſians wonted worth retaines,
Will anſwer now with deeds, and not with words.
Let us accompany our King in Armes,
Through bloudy ſquadrons to this fatall ſtrife:
"No profit can be had without ſome harmes,
By ſlaughter onely we muſt looke for life;
And when our hoſt (as I hope) doth prevaile,
Our Country ſhall have peace, we praiſe of right;
And if our fortune (not our courage) faile,
We dye with honour in our Soveraignes ſight;
Let us (if vanquiſh'd) ſcorne baſe breath to buy,
A noble death may greater glory give,
Doe to o're-come, and yet not feare to dye:
'Tis needfull that we fight, not that we live.
My words will firſt your Majeſtie diſpleaſe,
Yet duty makes me ſpeake where ſilence ſpilles;
"The beſt Phyſitian cures a ſharpe diſeaſe,
"With ſome ſowre potion that corruption killes;
"And skilfull Pilots when they feare a ſtorme,
"To ſave the ſhip, will caſt out pretious things,
You in ſome ſort may imitate their forme,
For elſe a tempeſt totall ruine brings.
Since bent againſt the Gods, how can we ſpeed?
To all our actions, fortune is oppos'd,
We muſt of force ſome other way proceed,
So have the heavens of our affaires dispos'd:
Give (Sir,) the ſtate, at leaſt your titles place
On ſome more happy man, not in effect,
But with your ſhadow cloath him for a ſpace,
Till he your Realmes from ruine may protect.
This ſtorme once calm'd, that now diſturbes your ſtate,
And Aſia free from any forraigne hoſte,
He ſhall with haſte reſigne the Soveraigne ſeat,
Theſe Kingdoms gain'd againe, which you have loſt:
All Bactria yet abides at your command,
The Indians, loe, would dye to doe you good,
Yea, many thouſand thouſands armed ſtand,
Bent for your State to offer up their bloud;
What? ſhould we ruſh like beaſts to needleſſe ſtrife?
Be well prepar'd, and then your fortune try,
"Brave mindes ſhould death deſpiſe, not loathing life:
"For feare of danger cowards crave to dye.
"But vertue firſt all hopes accounts doth caſt,
"And of each meane to helpe maturely thinkes,
"Then, when all elſe is done, death is the laſt,
"The which to meet true courage never ſhrinkes.
Now for the time, let Bactria be our ſeate,
To Beſſus for the forme your Crowne reſigne,
Who, when he once hath re-advanc'd your ſtate,
Shll with your foes o'rethrow his charge confine.
Wretch travell'ſt thou thy Soveraign to betray?
Such treaſon dar'ſt thou to our eares impart?
Such treaſon under truſt? ſtay traitour ſtay,
My ſword ſhall ſearch what lurkes within thy heart.
Sir, reyne your rage: this but new trouble breeds;
And weigh well what they are, what is the time;
It may be this from ignorance proceeds,
"In thought, and not in word, conſiſts a crime;
Since that againſt your enemies you goe,
Be not ſevere in cenſ'ring Subjects parts,
But tolerate your owne, to grieve your foe,
Now muſt we ſtrive to gaine, not loſe mens hearts.
It by all meanes ſhall be exactly try'd,
How firſt his braine ſuch fancies did embrace,
And if but ſimply, not puft up with pride,
He muſt be pardon'd, and reſtor'd to grace.
And of my Subjects I would rather have
Then one to puniſh, them to guerdon all.
If I have err'd, no pardon (Sir) I crave.
Firſt heare, and if I faile, then let me fall;
I call the Gods to teſtifie my part,
Who can (commenting thoughts) cleare truth afford,
If ever treaſon harbour'd in my heart,
Straight let me dye, not pittied, but abhorr'd;
I counſell gave according to my skill,
It was my upright minde that made me bold,
And though my wit not anſwer'd to my will,
"Still zeale what it conceives, muſt needs unfold.
"We ſhould be loth to ſpeake in great affaires,
"Where words are damn'd, or ballanc'd by th' event:
"For, if things faile, the fault is ſtill thought theirs,
"Who gave advice, though of a good intent,
Great Prince forget this not well grounded grudge▪
Who dare be free if thus for words rejected?
At leaſt examine firſt before you judge,
I rather dye abſolv'd, then live ſuſpected.
Your fond opinion juſtly might be fear'd,
Which ſeem'd indeed ſiniſtrouſly inclind;
For, at the firſt your ſpeech to me appear'd
The poyſon'd birth of ſome malitious minde.
But your purgation now hath taken place,
And of your faith I will no further doubt,
But hold you in the ſame degree of grace,
That you enjoy'd, before thoſe words chanc'd our.
I thinke that Patron lookes with ſpeaking eyes,
As if his minde were mightily perplex'd,
Come, Patron, tell what in thy boſome lyes,
By which thou ſeem'ſt ſo wonderfully vex'd.
Sir, I would ſpeake in private if I could,
That which affection fir'd with zeale affords,
"Let ſilence ſeale what friends with feare unfold,
Take you my thoughts, none elſe ſhall have my words:
Though onely bound by voluntary choice,
We follow you (all other hopes quite loſt)
Your bodies ſhadowes, th' Ecchoes of your voyce,
As faithfull now as when you flouriſh'd moſt;
For where you are, we muſt remaine with you,
Since both our lots are in one veſſell throwne,
I wiſh our Tent were made your lodging now,
For, we will ſave your life, or loſe our owne.
We have abandon'd Greece our native ſoile,
And our retreat no Bactria now attends,
But thoſe who us would of your perſon ſpoile,
Spoile us of all, whoſe all on you depends.
Would God all yours were bent to doe their due,
"Fame big by feare doth bring forth rumours rife;
I grant it groſſe, if that his owne were true,
To truſt a ſtrange with a Monarches life.
What ſudden danger doth of late diſmay you,
Such inconveniences that you fore-caſt?
Sir, Beſſus and Narbazanes betray you,
This day to you, or them will be the laſt:
They faine repentance onely for the forme,
Till every thing be for the fact prepar'd,
The clouds are gathering which doe boaſt a ſtorme,
And they ere night, minde to invade your guard.
I truſt thy words, but yet I cannot wrong
Thoſe who by nature love to me ſhould beare,
Shall I leave them who follow'd me ſo long?
Then they may thinke, I merit what I feare.
I will await on what the heavens will ſend,
For, who can ſtand when fates his fall conſpire,
And with mine owne, at leaſt, leaſt griev'd will end;
I live too long if they my death deſire.
Take heed in time (Sir) to this ſubtile Greeke,
The Grecian faith to all the world is knowne,
I am enform'd he by all meanes doth ſeeke
To gratifie your foe, as borne his owne;
"And marvell not, though mercenary men,
"Who ſell themſelves, ſell all, this is not ſtrange,
"They have no God but gold, nor houſe, how then
"Can they be conſtant, who doe live by change?
Though this vaine man pre-occupy you thus,
And ſuch as would themſelves abuſe your grace,
Faith ſhall be found untainted ſtill in us,
When our accuſer dare not ſhew his face.
Of Alexander thoſe who hope for gaine,
By trait'rous meanes do but themſelves deceive,
Since none in earth doth Traitors more diſdaine,
Nor treaſon can in greater horrour have.
Well, Sir, you ſhall know ſhortly what we are,
I will go ſee your Enſignes all diſplai'd.
It better is ſince things are gone ſo farre,
Then ſeeme but to miſtruſt, to be betray'd.
Loe, Artabazus I have acted here
My part of greatneſſe, and my glaſſe is runne,
Now Patrons ſpeech doth evident appeare,
I ſee my end, yet can their courſe not ſhunne.
The Bactrians onely have imbark'd in this,
Go to the Greeks, which if with courage done,
When once your danger manifeſted is,
The Perſians all will follow after ſoone.
And what if I were gone to Patrons Tent,
And had the Greeks for guard as you deſire?
He h th but thouſands foure which are well bent,
Ty thirty thouſand who my fall conſpire;
And (doing this) I ſhould their deed excuſe,
In giving them a cauſe who have moſt might;
They may indeed my lenity abuſe,
But by my deed they ſhall pretend no right.
O Prince to be bemoan'd, who can but weep
To ee thee thus involv'd in ſuch a ſtate?
Retyre you all, and ſeek your ſelves to keep,
ere attend the iſſue of my fate.
Y on that a wretch yet breathing ſtands,
o whom the heavens no comfort can impart:
Fe ſhall not make me fall by mine owne hands,
No, let another ſinne though I muſt ſmart;
None of you all have falſifi'd your truth,
But loyall ſtill unto the end abide,
Now I you all disburthen of your oath,
Leave me alone, and for your ſelves provide.
O Stormy ſtate of Kings, vaine Mortalls choice,
The glorious height whence greatneſſe grones to fall!
Ah! we (who courting fame, do hunt each voyce)
To ſeeme but Soveraigne muſt be ſlaves to all:
"Yet blowne like bladders, with Ambitions winde,
"On envy'd Scepters weakly we relye;
"And (whil'ſt ſwoln fancies do betray the minde)
"Not onely th'earth, but heavens themſelves defie.
"Whil'ſt loſtie thoughts tumultuous mindes do toſſe,
"Which are paſt up with popular applauſe,
"A ſtate extended by our Neighbours loſſe,
"For further trouble but procures a cauſe;
"If Fortunes dark ecclipſe cloud glories light,
"Then what avails that pomp which pride doth claim?
"A meere illuſion made to mock the ſight,
"Whoſe beſt was but the ſhadow of a dreame;
"Of glaſſie Scepters, let fraile greatneſſe vaunt,
"Not Scepters, no, but reeds, which (rais'd up) break,
"And let eye-flatt'ring ſhows our wits enchaunt,
"All periſh'd are, ere of their pomp men ſpeak,
"Thoſe golden palaces, thoſe gorgeous Halls,
"With furniture ſuperfluouſly faire,
"Thoſe ſtately Courts, thoſe skie-encountring walls
"Do vaniſh all like vapours in the ayre.
"O! what affliction jealous greatneſſe beares,
"Which ſtill muſt travell to hold others downe,
"Whil'ſt all our guards not guard us from our fears,
"Such toile attends the glory of a Crowne?
Where are they all who at my feet did bow,
Whil'ſt I was made the Idoll of ſo many?
What joy had I not then? what have I now?
Of all once honour'd, and now ſcarce of any.
"Our painted pleaſures but apparrell paine:
"We ſpend our nights in feare, our dayes in dangers,
"Balls toſſ'd by Starres, thrals bound to Fortunes raigne,
"Though known to all, yet to our ſelves but ſtranges.
"A golden Crowne doth cover leaden cares;
"The Scepter cannot lull their thoughts aſleep,
"Whoſe ſouls are drown'd with flouds of cold deſpaires,
"Of which baſe vulgars cannot ſound the deep.
"The Bramble grows, although it be obſcure,
Whil'ſt loftie Cedars feele the bluſt'ring windes,
"And milde Plebeian ſouls may live ſecure,
"While mighty tempeſts toſſe Imperiall mindes;
"What are our dayes but dreames, our raigne a glance,
"Whil'ſt Fortunes feaver makes us rage and rave,
"VVhich with ſtrange fits doth to a height advance,
"Till, ere paine us, we firſt our life muſt leave?
For gliſt'ring greatneſſe by Ambition lov'd,
"I was the wonder of all gazing eyes,
"But free from ſhadows (reall eſſence prov'd)
"States juſt proportion ruine onely tryes.
Loe, charg'd with chains which (though they be of gold)
My ſtates diſtreſſe diminiſh not the more,
When this prepoſt'rous honour I behold,
It but upbraids me what I was before,
And what was I before (as now I ſee)
(Though what afflicted was not clearly knowne)
But ſtill in fetters, whilſt appearing free,
And in a labyrinth of labours throwne.
Was I not forc'd to ſerve a thouſand humours,
To ſcape the cenſure of a Criticke ſtorie,
Still clog'd with cares, enrag'd with many rumours;
O glorious bondage, and ô burd'nous glory!
That dignity which deifi'd me late,
And made the world doe homage to my name,
Doth not oppoſe that which purſues my ſtate,
But by fall gives feathers unto fame;
My beſt was but a momentary bliſſe,
Which leaves behind this ever-laſting ſting,
That of all woes no woe is like to this,
To thinke I was, and am not now a king.
No man with me in all th'accompliſh'd joyes
That ſatisfie the ſoule, could once compare;
No man may match me now in ſad annoyes,
Or any croſſe which can provoke deſpaire.
Thrice fortune did my gallant troups entrap,
And I to fall did deſperately ſtand,
Yet could not be ſo happy in miſhap,
As to have di'd by ſome renowned hand;
But for my greater griefe, diſgrace, and ſcorne
(The mindes of men ſo apt are to deceave)
They whom aloft my favours wings had borne,
Ev they have made their Maſter thus a ſlave.
Ah! did nor death in priſon from me reave,
The red Soveraigne of my ſoules deſires?
And I (wretch'd I) not preſent to receave,
The ol kiſſe that ſhould have quench'd my fires?
Yet, o thrice happie thou, who haſt not liv'd
To beare a burden of this great diſgrace!
More then a thouſand deaths this had thee grievd,
To know I di'd, and di'd in ſuch a caſe.
Ah! doe the pledges of our mutuall love,
(The onely comfort that the fates have left)
Reſt priſon'd yet? and may I not remove
M mother thence, as of all power quite reft?
My paines are more then with my pleaſures even,
Since firſt my head was burden'd with a Crowne;
Was I exalted once up to the Heaven,
That to the Center Iove might throw me downe?
My ample Empire, and my Princely birth,
My great magnificence, and vaine exceſſe,
All cannot yeeld my minde one minutes mirth,
To eaſe me now in this my great diſtreſſe.
Loe here reduc'd vnto the worſt of ills,
Paſt helpe, paſt hope, and onely great in griefe,
Two abject vaſſals make me waite their willes,
Not looking, no, nor wiſhing for reliefe.
If that my honour had beene firſt repair'd,
Then what though death had this fraild fortreſſe wonne?
I waile my life (ſince for diſgrace prepar'd)
Not that it ends, but that it was begunne:
What fatall conflict can my count'nance marre,
Though me to bragge, death all his horrours bring?
I never ſhall wrong Majeſtie ſo farre,
As ought to doe that not becomes a king.
SOme new diſaſter daylie doth fore-ſhow
Our comming ruine: wee have ſeene our beſt:
For, fortune bent as wholy to o'rethrow,
Throwes downe our king from her wheeles height ſo low,
That by no meanes his ſtate can be redreſt:
For, ſince by armes his pow'r hath been repreſt,
Both friends and ſervants leave him all alone;
Few have compaſsion of his ſtate diſtreſt,
To him themſelves a number falſe doth ſhow;
So foes and faithleſſe friends conſpir'd in one,
Fraile fortune and the fates with them agree:
"All runne with Hatchets on a falling tree:
This Prince in proſp'rous ſtate hath flouriſh'd long,
And never dream'd of ill, did thinke farre leſſe,
But was well follow'd whilſt his ſtate was ſtrong;
Him flattering Syrens with a charming ſong
Striv'd to exalt, then whilſt he did poſſeſſe
This earthly droſſe, that with a vaine exceſſe
He might reward their mercenarie love;
But now when fortune drives him to diſtreſſe,
His favourites whom he remain'd among,
They ſtraight with her (as hers) their faith remove;
And who for gaine to follow him were wont,
They after gaine by his deſtruction hunt.
"O more then happie ten times were that king,
Who were vnhappie but a little ſpace,
"So that it did not utter ruine bring,
"But made him prove (a profitable thing)
"Who of his traine did beſt deſerve his grace;
"Then could, and would of thoſe the beſt embrace;
"Such vulturs fled as follow but for prey,
"That faithfull Servants might poſſeſſe their place.
"All gallant minds it muſt with anguiſh fling,
"Whilſt wanting meanes their vertue to diſplay;
"This is the griefe which burſts a generous heart;
"When favour comes by chance, not by deſart.
Thoſe minions oft to whom kings doe extend
Above their worth, immoderate good-will,
(The buttes of common hate oft hit in end)
In proſp'rous times they onely doe depend,
Not upon them, but on their fortune ſtill,
Which if it change, they change, them though they fill
Their hopes with honour, and their cheſts with Coyne;
Yet if they fall, or their affaires goe ill,
Thoſe whom they rais'd will not with them deſcend,
But with the ſide moſt ſtronge all ſtraight doe joyne,
And doe forget all what was given before,
When once of them they can expect no more.
The truth hereof in end this ſtrange event,
In Beſſus and Narbazenes hath prov'd,
On whom their Prince ſo prodigally ſpent
Affection, Honour, Titles, Treaſure, Rent,
And all that might an honeſt minde have mov'd.
So bountyfull a Prince ſtill to have lov'd.
Who ſo benignely tendred had their ſtate;
Yet Traitours vile (all due reſpects remov'd)
They him to ſtrike the ſtrength he gave have bent,
Soe as he now may rue, although too late,
That ſlie Camelions changing thus their hue,
To ſervants were preferr'd, who ſtill were true.
But though thoſe Traitours for a ſpace doe ſpeed,
No doubt the Heavens once vengeance will exact;
The very horrour of this hainous deed,
Doth make the hearts of honeſt men to bleed:
Yea, even the wicked hate this barbarous act:
The Heavens no higher choler can contract,
Then for the forcing of a ſacred king,
Whoſe ſtate (if rage doe not their mindes diſtract)
Muſt feare and reverence in inferiours breed,
To whom from him all what is theirs doth ſpring;
But though on th'earth men ſhould neglect this wrong▪
Heavens will thoſe Traitours plague ere it be long.
WHAT Story or what fable can record
Of ſuch a numb'rous troupe ſo ſtrangely loſt?
I know they quak'd to know it was my lord,
Whoſe name alone is worth anothers hoſte:
It ſcarſe can truſted be in many parts;
"But Traitours feare, though all the world them backe,
They were but bodies deſtitute of hearts:
Moe priſoners they were then men to take.
Who would believe ſo few durſt ſtrive to meete
So great an Army, and the Army ſhrinkes?
"But Glories flattery, and fames ſounds are ſweet:
"True valour dare attempt all that it thinkes.
In this encounter to have had the beſt,
It would content more then a common minde;
But ſince we want the chiefe, what of the reſt?
I muſt in all a ſatisfaction finde;
Thoſe Traitours thought to finiſh thus the warre,
By giving me their Lord whom they have bound,
But I who march with confidence ſo farre
Doe ſcorne to build upon ſo baſe a ground;
To venge my wrongs dare others then deſigne?
Since Darius was ordain'd my prey to be,
How durſt they but have aim'd at ought of mine?
His o'rethrowes glory did belong to mee.
Whilſt in himſelfe he onely did confide,
I by all meanes did ſtrive to make him bow,
But ſince his hard eſtate abates that pride,
My fury turn'd is to compaſſion now;
Though he contemn'd me oft, and did me wrong,
Yet am I griev'd that he was thus deceav'd,
If but acknowledg'd once to be more ſtrong,
I not his blood, nor yet his kingdome crav'd;
And if thoſe Traytours have not kill'd him ſtraight,
Yet his delivery ſhall my name renowne,
I would not loſe a Subject of ſuch weight,
By which my clemency might be made knowne.
Sir, now your comming cannot doe him good.
What? all are fled, none have my force withſtood?
Yet can not Darius be redeem'd againe.
Why, have they ſet him free, or is he ſlaine?
Now he enjoyes a libertie at laſt;
But ranſom'd is by offering up his breath.
Then is all Aſia's expectation paſt?
Tell on at length the manner of his death.
The boiling ardor of the riſing Sunne
(All moiſture gone) did breede ſo great a drouth,
That from the way I had a little runne,
To finde ſome fountaine to refreſh my mouth;
There, by the borders of a ryſing brooke,
Which ſhadow'd was from Titans ryſing beames,
From liquid cryſtalls I a tribute tooke,
Which ſeem'd to murmure, that I forc'd their ſtreames:
When (loe) I ſaw (a lamentable ſight)
Two wounded horſes draw a bloody Coach,
Which clad with skinnes, ſhew horrour at the height;
And it to ſpie when as I did approach,
One was within, who could not long time ſcape,
The fatall paſſage of th'infernall gates;
Yet Majeſtie triumphing o're miſhap,
Hee ſeem'd to bragge both fortune and the fates,
And to ſo baſe a ſtate as firſt not borne,
Then whilſt his bloode aboundantly did fall,
He burſted forth thoſe words in fortunes ſcorne,
As one whoſe courage nothing could appall:
You gaze to ſee (and have good cauſe wherefore)
A man no man, a king no king: what change?
Now leſſe then nought who once was both, and more;
This would ſeeme wond'rous; but no ſtate is ſtrange;
And yet a midſt my evils I muſt rejoyce,
That this laſt comfort doth forgoe my end.
I ſpeake to one who can conceave my voice,
And not in vaine my dying ſpeeches ſpend;
I am, but how? in name, and not in pow'r,
That wretched Darius (which I ſhould ſuppreſſe)
Once happie (as was thought) but at this hower,
A lively patterne of extreame diſtreſſe.
Then having paus'd (he ſaid) my griefe is great,
Tell Alexander (as the world may ſpie)
That though of me he never had but hate,
Yet am I forc'd farre in his debt to die:
The favour paſt extended to my Queene,
And that poore remnant my ſurviving reſt,
(When weighing well what I to him have beene)
I wiſh continu'd, but can ſcarſe requeſt;
They to his foe belong, and yet he ſtrives
To have them honour'd now, as in times paſt;
But thoſe who held of me both ſtates, and lives,
Of ſtate and life have me depriv'd at laſt.
Entreat him too that unreveng'd below
I wander not as hapleſſe in all things:
Let men his juſtice, and their treaſon know;
This (as a common cauſe) doth touch all kings.
Beſide the honour which he ſhall acquire
In plaguing them who have betrai'd my truſt,
His magnanimity men ſhall admire,
And feare to grieve him whom they finde ſo juſt.
"As watrie rounds which riſe and reele in raine,
"Do ſwell, and flote, yet when they breake (though bright)
"Laſt, leave (when fall'n) no token ſave a ſtayne,
Pompe quickly thus both courts and ſcornes the ſight:
And ſince my glaſſe is runne, my glory gone,
I dead unto the world, the world to me,
I wiſh (ſave his) that th'earth adore no throne:
For, from his raigne what ſubject would be free?
Then drowping downe, faint, bloodleſſe, and halfe dead,
He prai'd me for ſome water that ranne by,
(A ſmall requeſt by ſuch a monarch made)
Which when that he had got: yet, eare I die
This croſſe muſt come (ſaid he) to kill me quite;
Though Nations once to mee as Soveraigne ſought,
I have not now the pow'r but to requite
This little benefit, that thou haſt brought:
But Alexander ſhall reward thee well,
And him the Heavens, ſtill yeelding his deſires,
Since that his foes (though envie burſt) muſt tell
That courteſie which all the world admires.
Now none hath pow'r his pleaſure to controule,
But if he uſe them well whom he retaines,
It will procure contentment to my ſoule,
And make him famous whilſt the world remaines.
When breath abandon'd hath this brittle clay,
Then cauſe ſome friend defray my funerall coſt,
That churliſh Charon force me not to ſtray
Where darkeneſſe dwells, an unregarded Ghoſt.
Laſt, give my corpes to her who brought it forth,
Who may it with my Anceſtours entombe,
And ſince ſhe lov'd me much, though little worth,
May waile this burden which once grac'd her wombe;
And to that Prince whoſe ſtate I wiſh to ſtand,
In ſigne of love which all my thoughts doe ſend,
My ſoule gives him my heart, it thee my hand:
Thus though I liv'd his foe, I die his friend.
I had but held his hand a little ſpace,
When dying like a Torch whoſe waxe is ſpent,
In ſpite of payne, even with a princely grace,
His hands ſtill ſeem'd directing as he went.
Who could refraine from teares to heare declar'd
The huge miſhapps, which all at once did light;
Have ſubiects ſlaine their Prince, whom ſtrangers ſpar'd?
Vs hath he fled, that periſh thus he might!
I for his fall am wonderfully ſorry,
Whom firſt I forc'd, but laſt would have maintain'd:
I envie death, becauſe it rob'd the glory
Which I (by giving him his life) had gain'd.
Since death hath put a period to his woes,
That favour which to him you would extend,
Let it with furie flame againſt his foes,
For your deſignes can have no fairer end:
So ſhall you both the peoples love obtaine,
Whilſt by your meanes reveng'd their Soveraigne reſts,
And likewiſe may the more ſecurely raigne,
The ſtate well purg'd from ſuch contagious peſts,
"If but one vertue did adorne a king,
"It would be juſtice; many great defects
"Are vail'd thereby, whereas each vertuous thing
"In one who is not juſt, the world ſuſpects.
Though this your Counſell, nor yet his requeſt,
Had not the pow'r to penetrate my eare,
A generous ſtomach could not well digeſt,
So great a wrong which courage ſtormes to beare.
My ſprite (impatient of repoſe) diſdaines,
That they ſo long their infamie ſurvive:
But I will puniſh with moſt grievous paines
The monſtrous Treaſon that they did contrive.
What? doe they thinke (though back'd with numbrous bands)
That Bactria is a bulwarke for mine Ire?
Flie where they liſt, they cannot ſcape my hands,
My wrath ſhall follow like conſuming fire.
Such damned ſoules the heaven cannot receave,
Ile force Hells dungeons, as Alcides did,
And they on th'earth no bounds but mine can have,
I'le ſearch them out though in the center hid,
And when as threatning now I once may ſtrike,
Betwixt the bending boughs of ſome ſtrong tree,
To Traitours terrours who intend the like,
They ſhall by violence diſmembred be.
Sir, may it pleaſe you to extend your care,
That ſome his funerall offices performe.
Goe preſently, and every thing prepare,
As beſt becomes the military forme.
THIS looke alas, hath charg'd my ſoule with feares:
Speak, for my life doth on thy lippes depend,
Thy count'nance (ah) a dolefull copie beares
Of ſome ſad ſummons to denounce my end.
Starve not my eares, which famiſh for thy words,
Though they when ſwallow'd may but make me burſt.
The meſſage (madame) which my ſoule affords
Muſt once be knowne, and once knowne ſtill accurſt.
Be not a niggard of ill newes.
And why?
Fame will tell all the world.
But firſt to you.
Tell ſoone.
Your ſonne is dead.
Then let me die.
Her joyes and pleaſures all are periſh'd now.
Why opens not the Earth ſtraight to devoure
A hopeleſſe caitive who all good hath loſt?
The longer that I live, my griefe growes more,
As but to miſchiefe borne, kept to be croſt;
Would God this maſſe where miſerie remaines,
A weight of Earth from ſight of men might keepe;
Or that the Seas all raging through the plaines
Would make my tombe amid'ſt their tumid deepe.
O Alexander! haſt thou rob'd his life,
Yet entertain'd me ſtill in hope to finde him?
Why did'ſt thou not firſt kill this poore old wife,
Who was not worthie to have liv'd behind him?
That I ſhould live till thou my Sonne had'ſt ſlaine,
Was all thy kindneſſe for this cauſe imploi'd?
You wrong that Prince, for he with haſt in vaine
Came him to helpe whom others had deſtroi'd.
What impious thoughts durſt dreame ſo vile a deed,
A monarchs murther, Aſia's glories end?
Two whom he rais'd did his confuſion breed,
He found his friend his foe, his foe a friend.
Tell on thy meſſage, meſſenger of death,
And loade my minde with mountaines of diſtreſſe,
That tears may drowne my ſight, ſighs choake my breath,
Whilſt ſorrow all my ſences doth poſſeſſe.
When Alexander (who at peace repin'd)
Did (ſave ſubmiſſion) hold all offers vaine,
Bent of ſterne Mars to try the doubtfull minde;
A generall muſter Darius did ordaine,
And (in one battell bent to venture all)
He caus'd his will be publikely proclaim'd,
Whilſt two vile Traitours did conſpire his fall,
Who Beſſus and Narbazanes were nam'd;
Thoſe two in councell did diſcover firſt
Some portion of the poiſon of their heart,
Which caus'd the king ſuſpect, but not the worſt,
Yet with a ſword he ſought to make them ſmart.
But having ſcap'd what firſt was fear'd from rage,
They ſeem'd ſo much their errour to lament,
His indignation that they did aſſwage,
(Falſe hypocrits) pretending to repent.
Whilſt Artabazus as an honeſt man
Who judg'd of others by his vpright minde,
(No fraud conceav'd) ſought more to ſcape then ſcan,
What they with craft to compaſſe Crownes deſign'd.
A mind ſincere is ever leaſt ſuſpitious:
"Theſe think all faultie, who themſelves are vitious.
They urg'd him with the king to interceed,
That in his favour he would give them place,
And did proteſt that by ſome valorous deed,
They labour would to gaine againe his grace;
Then Artabazus came and told the king,
That in the battell he might try their faith,
And both before his majeſtie did bring,
Who (when ſubmiſſe) did quickly calme his wrath.
With hands ſtretch'd up to Heaven, and humbled knees,
With teares like thoſe which Crocodiles doe ſhed,
Woe in their face and pitie in their eyes,
Did for compaſſion (though from rigour) pleade.
The king of nature milde did them receave,
And them (who thus but for the forme complain'd)
Not onely all (relenting) quite forgave;
But wept in earneſt too whil'ſt they but fain'd;
When in his Coach from all ſuſpition free,
With count'nance ſad long following on behinde
(As ſtill pretending ſupplicants to be)
They bow'd to him whom they were bent to binde;
The Grecian Captaine curiouſly neare
(When mark'd a ſuter) crav'd what he requir'd,
By pregnant proofes did evidently cleare,
What treaſon was againſt his ſtate conſpir'd:
He told what way their purpoſe might be tri'd,
And how the Bactrians were for trouble bent,
Then for his ſafety pray'd him to provide,
By ſtraight with him retyring to his Tent;
But in the King who did neglect his ſtate,
No kinde of care this friendly offer bred:
So that (it ſeem'd) he by ſome pow'rfull fate
Was head-long forward to confuſion led:
The Greeke paſt thence deſpairing him to ſave,
Who thus all meanes to help himſelfe refus'd;
With ſubtle words then Beſſus there did crave
To purge himſelfe, and errours paſt excus'd;
Old Artabazus happ'ning to approach,
The King to him did Patrons ſpeech report,
Who then perceiv'd what danger did encroach,
And wiſh'd he would where Greeks were ſtrong reſort.
But in his breaſt this purpoſe firmly plac'd,
That from his Subjects he would never flie,
With mutuall teares they tenderly embrac'd,
And parted there, like two who went to dye.
Now ſilent night in pitchie vapours cled,
Had muſt'red myſts, and march'd out of the Weſt;
(Dayes beauties darkning, ſhadowie horrours ſpread)
The Sentinels were ſet, and all at reſt,
When (loe) a terrour did diſtract the hoſt!
Whoſe bands to murmure were diſpers'd in parts,
With ſounds reſembling ſhips in ſtormes neare loſt,
Whil'ſt each to other cauſe of feare imparts.
Thoſe who their King appointed were to guard,
From what was due by fraud or feare did ſtray;
And (to his danger having no regard)
His Fortunes Minions fled with heraway.
The deſolation then growne wondrous great,
With ſome few Eunuchs Darius left alone,
(No ſtrength remaining, nor no ſigne of ſtate)
He thus them ſpake, who for his fall did mone:
Go, part in peace ere further harme be had,
Leſt that my ruine likewiſe you ſurpriſe.
They hearing thoſe ſad words (as men gone mad)
Went howling through the hoſt with dolorous cryes;
So that all thoſe who heard what plaints they made,
Thought that they had their Soveraignes death bewail'd;
And (forcing truſt) ſome forg'd reports were ſpread,
That he had kill'd himſelfe, all hope quite fail'd.
The Perſians griev'd whil'ſt theſe things did occurre,
Did firſt encourage all their Countrey bands
To help their Prince, but yet they durſt not ſtirre
For feare of falling in the Bactrians hands;
Even in the time when this confuſion was,
The Traitors to deferre the fact no more,
Did to their Soveraignes Tent with Squadrons paſſe,
And took, and bound, him whom they ſerv'd before;
Who in a golden Coach once proudly rode,
Was throwne in one for common carriage us'd,
And who of late was honour'd like a God,
Two of his owne (as if their ſlave) abus'd:
Thoſe royall hands to beare a Scepter borne,
Were baſely bound, and which the more him griev'd,
"(Thus miſery can hardly ſcape from ſcorne)
"With bands of gold, which burden'd, not reliev'd.
When Alexander (great with courage) ſpy'd
Our Armies flie, he (who in hope them chac'd)
To follow us with diligence did ride,
"Baſe ſeem'd the Conqueſt which no danger grac'd;
But when at laſt at length by ſome inform'd
How he was made a captive to his owne,
At this indignity he highly ſtorm'd,
As if by it his hopes had beene o're-throwne.
Out of his hoſt he did ſelect a few
Who were beſt hors'd, and fit for ſuch a fight,
With whom his foes he did ſo faſt purſue,
That e're they could ſuſpect, he came in ſight;
The Traitors vex'd when ſpying him appeare,
Came to the Cart whereas the King did ſtay,
And call'd to horſe in haſte, ſince foes were neare,
Leſt that they elſe might finde him for a prey.
He look'd aloft, and cry'd aloud, I ſee
That Nemeſis is frowning from above;
Should I with Traitors as a captive be?
And flie from him, who but brave warres doth move?
Then thoſe in whom impiety abounds,
Throw'd Darts at him (vile beaſts to be abhorr'd)
And hurt the horſes with an hundred wounds,
Then men more truſty, dying for their Lord;
As falſe in hearts, ſo feeble with their hands,
When Guilt and Danger doubled had deſpaires,
The Traitors firſt, then all their trait'rous bands
Fled from a number leſſe by halfe then theirs.
But to the bounds of Deaths pale kingdome brought.
The King retyr'd where leaſt by people ſpy'd,
More wounded with ingratitude then ought,
Did leave the world, whoſe folly he had tri'd;
The laſt divorce which laſts, was ſcarcely made
Twixt ſoule and body whil'ſt the eyes grew dim,
When Alexander came and found him dead,
Who labour'd had ſo long to ruine him,
And (whil'ſt his teares a generall mourning mov'd)
That ſtately veſture which himſelfe array'd,
(Much fear'd for valour, more for vertue lov'd)
With his owne hand on Darius corps he layd;
Then wailing long as for a brother loſt
To have his funerals furniſh'd like a Kings,
He bids you uſe his wealth, and ſpare no coſt;
For, you ſhall want no neceſſary things.
He hath his body hither ſent by me,
And ſunerall rites ſolemnely bent to do,
He thinks that they may beſt accompliſh'd be,
Whil'ſt who him bred doth ſee him buried too▪
Behold how grieſe hath her of ſenſe bereft,
Whil'ſt breath for paſſage ſtrugling is with grones,
No will, nor pow'r to live, juſt griefe hath left,
Since what ſhe value vaniſh'd is at once.
Ah! ſhall I ſee (no, let me firſt be blinde)
That body breathleſſe, which I brought to light?
Where would my ſoule a force ſufficient finde
That could encounter with ſo ſad a ſight?
O flinty heart! what hinders thee to breake,
Since (cruſh'd with cares) a ſtranger to repoſe?
Why part'ſt thou not (poore ſoule) that whil'ſt I ſpeake
In opening of my lips, mine eyes may cloſe?
This heritage of death, this wither'd ſtocke
Is but a place appointed for deſpaires,
A torture to it ſelfe, a ſtumbling block,
Whoſe aged furrows fertile are in cares.
Once for good Fortunes, now for bad deſign'd,
(To ſtate betray'd) drawne forth from calme repoſe,
To have beene happie moſt afflicts my minde,
Who, rais'd to fall, got much, the more to loſe.
Ah me! malitious fates have done me wrong,
Who firſt come to the world, ſhould firſt depart,
And ah! why ſhould the old o're-live the yong?
This Nature wrongs by a prepoſt'rous art;
Ah! why ſhould Death ſo indiſcreet be found
To ſpare a caitive, and to ſpoyle a Prince?
My halfe-dead body, bending to the ground,
Through griefe is grown ripe for the grave long ſince.
WHat makes vaine worldlings ſo to ſwell with pride,
Who come of th'earth, and ſoone to th'earth returne?
"So helliſh furies with their fire-brands burne
"Proud and ambitious men, that they divide
"Them from themſelves, and ſo turmoyle their mindes;
"That all their time they ſtudy ſtill
"How to content a boundleſſe will,
"Which never yet a full contentment findes;
"Who ſo this flame within his boſome ſmothers,
"He many fancies doth contrive,
"And even forgets himſelfe alive,
"To be remembred after death by others;
"Thus while he is, his paines are never ended,
"That whil'ſt he is not, he may be commended.
What can this help the happineſſe of Kings
So to ſubdue their Neighbours as they do?
And make ſtrange Nations tributaries too?
"The greater ſtate, the greater trouble brings;
Their pompes and triumphs ſtand them in no ſtead;
Their Arches, Tombes, Pyramides high,
And ſtatues are but vanity:
They dye, and yet would live in what is dead;
And while they live, we ſee their glorious actions
Oft wreſted to the worſt, and all their life
Is but a ſtage of endleſſe toyle, and ſtrife,
Of tumults, uproares, mutinies, and factions;
"They riſe with feare, and lye with danger downe,
"Huge are the cares which wait upon a Crowne.
And as Ambition Princes under-mynes;
So doth it thoſe who under them rule all:
We ſee in how ſhort time they riſe and fall,
How oft their light ecclips'd but dimmely ſhines;
They long time labour by all meanes to move
Their Prince to value much their parts,
And when advanc'd by ſubtle arts,
O what a danger is't to be above!
For, ſtraight expos'd to hatred, and deſpight,
With all their skill they cannot march ſo even;
But ſome opprobrious ſcandall will be given:
For all men envy them who have moſt might;
"And if the King diſlike them once, then ſtraight
"The wretched Courtiers fall with their owne weight.
me of a ſprite more poore, who would be prais'd,
And yet have nought for which to be eſteem'd,
What they are not in deed would faine be deem'd,
And indirectly labour to be rais'd.
This crue each publicke place of honour haunts,
And (changing garments every day)
Whil'ſt they would hide, do but bewray
With outward ornaments their inward wants;
And men of better judgement juſtly loath
Thoſe, who in outward ſhows place all their care,
And decke their bodies, whil'ſt their mindes are bare,
Like to a ſhadow, or a painted cloth,
The multitude which but th'apparrell notes,
Doth homage, not to them, but to their cotes.
Yet Princes muſt be ſerv'd, and with all ſorts:
Some both to do, and conſell what is beſt,
Some ſerve for Cyphers to ſet out the reſt,
Like life leſſe pictures which adorne the ports;
"Faire Palaces repleniſh'd are with feares,
"Thoſe ſeeming pleaſures are but ſnares,
"The royall robe doth cover cares;
"Th' Aſſyrian dye deare buys he who it beares;
"Thoſe dainty delicates, and farre-fetch'd food,
"Oft (through ſuſpition) ſavour out of ſeaſon,
"Embrodred beds, anatapeſtries hatch treaſon;
"The golden Goblets mingled are with bloud.
"Such ſhows the ſhadows are when Greatneſſe ſhines,
"Whoſe ſtate by them the gazing world divines.
O happie he who farre from Fame at home,
Securely ſitting by a quiet fire,
(Though having little) doth not more deſire,
But firſt himſelfe, then all things doth o'recome;
His purchaſe weigh'd, or what his parents left,
He ſquares his charge to his ſtore,
And takes not what he muſt reſtore,
Nor eates the ſpoyles that from the poore were reft:
Not proud, nor baſe, he (ſcorning creeping Art)
From jealous thoughts and envy free,
No poyſon feares in cups of tree;
No treaſon harbours in ſo poore a part:
No heavy dreame doth vex him when he ſleeps,
"A guiltleſſe minde the guardleſſe cottage keeps▪
He doth not ſtudie much what ſtormes may blow,
Whoſe poverty can hardly be impair'd;
He feares no forraine force, nor craves no guard;
None doth deſire his ſpoyle, none looks ſo low,
Whereas the great are commonly once croſt,
As Darius hath beene in his flowre,
Or Siſigambis at this houre,
Who hath ſcap'd long, and now at length is loſt:
But how comes this, that Potentates oft fall,
And muſt confeſſe this trouble of their ſoule?
There is ſome higher pow'r that can controull,
The Monarchs of the Earth, and cenſure all:
Who once will call their actions to account,
And them repreſſe who to oppreſſe were prompt.