TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspir'd,
To giue our Age the day so much desir'd.
What all the minutes, houres, weekes, months, and yeares,
That hang in file vpon these siluer haires,
Could not produce, beneath the Brittane stroke,
The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman yoke,
This point of Time hath done. Now London reare
Thy forehead high, and on it striue to weare
Thy choisest Gems; Teach thy steepe Towres to rise
Higher with people: Set with sparkling eies
Thy spacious windowes; and in euery streete,
Let thronging Ioy, Loue, and Amazement meete.
Cleaue all the ayre with showes, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and vniuersally
As Thunder; For, thou now art blist to see
That sight, for which thou didst beginne to bee.
When Brutus plough first gaue thee infant boūds,
And I, thy GENIVS walk't auspicious rounds
In euery furrow; Then did I forelooke,
And saw this day mark't white in Clotho's booke.
The seuerall Circles, both of change and sway,
Within this Isle, there also figur'd lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happinesse we taste.
Why keep you silence Daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabites you? Shall Office cease
Vpon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
More then you are, or can be? Shall TIME knowe
That Article, wherein your flame stoode still,
And not aspir'd? Now heauen auert an ill
Of that blacke looke. Ere pause possesse your breasts
I wish you more of plagues: "Zeale when it rests,
Leaues to be Zeale. Vp thou tame RIVER, wake;
And from thy liquid limbes this slumber sake:
Thou drown'st thy selfe in inofficious sleepe;
And these thy sluggish waters seeme to creepe,
Rather than flow. Vp, rise, and swell with pride
Aboue thy bankes. "Now is not euery Tyde.
TO what vaine end should I contend to show
My weaker powres, when Seas of pompe o'reflow
The Citties face: and couer all the shore
With sands more rich than Tagus wealthy ore?
When in the flood of Ioy, that comes with him,
He drownes the world; yet makes it liue and swimme,
And spring with gladnesse: Not my fishes heere,
Though they be dumbe, but doe expresse the cheere
Of these bright streames. No lesse may These, and I
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.
INdeede, true Gladnesse doth not alwayes speake:
Ioy bred, and borne but in the tongue, is weake.
Yet (lest the feruor of so pure a flame
As this my Citty beares, might loose the name,
Without the apt euenting of her heate)
Know greatest IAMES (and no lesse good, than great.)
In the behalfe of all my vertuous Sonnes,
Whereof my eldest there, thy pompe forerunnes,
(A Man without my flattring, or his Pride,
As worthy, as hee's blest to be thy guide)
In his graue name, and all his Brethrens right,
(Who thirst to drinke the Nectar of thy sight)
The Councell, Commoners, and Multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long deny'd, is viewd)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That euer King had to his Empires seate:
Neuer came man, more long'd for, more desir'd:
And being come, more reuerenc'd, lou'd, admir'd:
Heare, and record it: In a Prince it is
No little vertue, to know who are his.
With like deuotions, doe I stoope t'embrace
This springing glory of thy Godlike race;
His Countries Wonder, Hope, Loue, Ioy and Pride:
How well dooth he become the royall side
Of this erected, and broade spreading Tree,
Vnder whose shade, may Brittane euer be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoote or'e the Maine, and knit with euery shore
In onds of Marriage, Kinred, and Increase;
And stile this Land, the Nauill of their peace.
This is your Seruants wish, your Citties vow,
Which still shall propagate it selfe, with you;
And free from spurres of Hope, that slow mindes moue:
He seekes no hire, that owes his life to Loue.
And heere she comes that is no lesse a part
In this dayes greatnesse, then in my glad heart.
Glory of Queenes, and Glory of your Name,
Whose Graces doe as farre out-speake your Fame,
As Fame doth silence, when her Trumpet rings
You Daughter, Sister, Wife of seuerall Kings:
Besides Alliance, and the stile of Mother,
In which one Title you drowne all your other.
Instance, be that faire shoote, is gone before
Your eldest Ioy, and top of all your store,
With those, whose sight to vs is yet deni'd,
But not our zeale to them, or ought beside
This Citty can to you: For whose estate
Shee hopes you will be still good Aduocate
To her best Lord. So, whilst you mortall are,
No taste of sower mortalitie once dare
Approach your house; nor Fortune greete your Grace
But comming on, and with a forward face.
STay, what art thou, that in this strange attire,
Darst kindle stranger, and vnhallowed fire
Vpon this Altar?
Rather what art thou
That darst so rudely interrupt my vowe?
My habit speakes my name.
A Flamin?
Yes,
And Martialis calld.
I so did gesse
By my short view, but whence didst thou ascend
Hither? or how? or to what mistick end?
The noise, and present tumult of this Day,
Rowsd me from sleepe, and silence, where I lay
Obscur'd from light; which when I wakt to see,
I wondring thought what this great pompe might be.
When (looking in my Kalender) I found
The Ides of Marche were entred, and I bound
With these, to celebrate the Geniall feast
Of ANNA stil'd PERENNA, MARS his guest;
Who, in this Moneth of his, is yearly call'd
To banquet at his Altars; and in stald;
A Goddesse with him, since shee filles the Yeare,
And knits the oblique scarfe that girts the spheare.
Whilest foure fac't IANVS turnes his vernall looke
Vpon their meeting howers, as if he tooke.
High pride and pleasure.
Sure thou stil dost dreame,
And both thy tongue, and thought rides on the streame
Of Phantasy: Behold here Hee nor Shee,
Haue any Altar, Fane, or Deity.
Stoope; read but this inscription: and then veiwe
To whome the Place is consecrate. Tis trew
That this is IANVS Temple, and that nowe
He turnes vpon the Yeare his freshest browe;
That this is MARS his moneth; and these the Ides,
Wherein his ANNE was honourd; Both the Tides,
Titles, and Place, wee knowe: But these dead rites
Are long since buried, and newe power excites
More highe and hartie flames. Loe, there is hee,
Who brings with him a greater ANNE then shee:
Whose strong and potent vertues haue defac'd
Sterne MARS his Statues, and vpon them plac'd
His, and the worlds blest blessings: This hath brought
Sweete Peace to sit in that bright state she ought
Vnbloodie, or vntroubled; hath forc'd hence
All tumults, feares, or other darke portents
That might inuade weake mindes; hath made men see
Once more the face of welcome Liberty:
And doth (in all his present actes) restore
That first pure world, made of the better Ore.
Now Innocence shall cease to be the spoile
Of rauenous Greatnesse, or to steepe the soile
Of raised Pesantrie with teares, and bloud;
No more shall rich men (for their little good)
Suspect to be made guiltie; or vile Spies
Enioye the lust of their so murdring eyes:
Men shall put off their Yron mindes, and hearts;
The Time forget his olde malicious artes
With this new minute; and no print remaine
Of what was thought the former ages staine.
Back FLAMIN, with thy superstitious fumes,
And cense not heere; Thy ignorance presumes
Too much, in acting any Ethnick rite
In this translated Temple: Heere no wight,
To sacrifice, saue my deuotion comes,
That brings insteed of those thy Masculine gummes.
My Citties heart; which shall for euer burne
Vpon this Altar, and no Time shall turne
The same to ashes: Heere I fixe it fast,
Flame bright, flame high, and may it euer last.
Whilest I, before the figure of thy Peace,
Still tend the fire; and giue it quick increase
With praiers, wishes, vowes; whereof be these
The least, and weakest: that no Age may leese
The Memory of this so rich a daye;
But rather, that it henceforth yearely may
Begin our Spring and with our spring the prime,
And first accompt of Yeares, of Months, of Time:
And may these Ides as fortunate appeare
To thee, as they to Caesar fatall were.
Be all thy Thoughts borne perfect, and thy Hopes
In their euents still crownd beyond their scopes.
Let not wide Heauen that secret blessing know
To giue, which shee on thee will not bestow.
Blind Fortune be thy slaue; and may her store
(The lesse thou seek'st it) follow thee the more.
Much more I would: but see, these brazen Gates
Make hast to close, as vrged by thy Fates;
Here ends my Cities office, here it breakes:
Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, she speakes
A short farewell; and lower then thy feete,
With feruent thankes, thy royall paines doth greete.
Pardon, if my abruptnesse breed disease;
He merits not t'offend, that hastes to please.
THe long Laments, I spent for ruin'd Troy,
Are dried; and now mine eyes run teares of Ioy.
No more shall men suppose Electra dead,
Though from the consort of her sisters fled
Vnto the Arctick circle, here to grace,
And guild this day with her serenest Face▪
And see, my daughter Iris hasts to throw
Her Rose at wings, in compasse of a bow,
About our state, as signe of my approch
Attracting to her seate from Mithras coach,
A thousand different, and particular hewes,
Which shee throughout her body doth diffuse.
The Sunne, as loath to part from this halfe spheare,
Stands still; and Phoebe labors to appeare
In all as bright (if not as rich) as hee:
And, for a note of more serenity,
My sixe faire Sisters hether shift their lights;
To do this hower the vtmost of her Rites.
Where least the captious, or prophane might doubt,
How these cleare heauenly bodyes come about
All to be seene at once; yet neithers light
Eclips'd, or shadow'd by the others sight:
Let Ignorance know, great King, this Day is thine,
And doth admit no Night; but all do shine
As well nocturnall, as diurnall fiers,
To adde vnto the flame of our desiers.
Which are (now thou hast closd vp IANVS gates,
And giu'n so generall peace to all estates)
That no offensiue mist, or cloudie staine
May mixe with splendor of thy golden raigne;
But, as th' ast free'd thy Chamber, from the noyse
Of Warre and Tumult; thou wilt powre those ioyes
Vpon this Place, which claimes to be the Seate
Of all thy Kingly race: the Cabinet
To all thy Counsels; and the iudging Chayre
To this thy speciall Kingdome. Whose so faire
And wholsome Lawes, in euery Court, shall striue
By Aequity, and their first Innocence to thriue;
The base and guiltie bribes of guiltier men
Shall be throwne back, and Iustice looke, as when
She lou'd the earth, and feard not to be sold
For that, which worketh all things to it, Gold.
The Dam of other euils, Auarice
Shall here lock downe her Iawes, and that rude vice
Of ignorant, and pittied Greatnesse, Pride,
Decline with shame; Ambition now shall hide
Her face in dust, as dedicate to sleepe,
That in great Portalls wont her watch to keepe.
All ills shall flie the light: Thy Court be free
No lesse from Enuie, then from Flatterie;
All Tumult, Faction, and harsh Discord cease,
That might perturbe the musique of thy Peace:
The querulous Nature shall no longer finde
Roome for his Thoughts: One pure concent of minde
Shall flowe in euery brest, and not the Ayre,
Sunne, Moone, or Starres shine more serenely faire.
This from that lowd, blest Oracle, I sing
Who here, and first pronounc'd, thee Brittaines King
Long maist thou liue, and see me thus appeare,
As omenous a Comet, from my Spheare,
Vnto thy raigne; as that did auspicate
So lasting glory to Augustus state.