AWake dark sleep, rouse thee frō out this Caue;
Thy Mother Night that bred thee in her
And fed thee first with silence & with case, (womb
Doth here thy shadowing operations craue:
And therefore wake my Sonne, awake, and come
Strike with thy Horny wand, the spirits of these
That here expect some pleasing nouelties:
And make their slumber to beget strange sights,
Strange visions and vnvsuall properties.
Vnseene of latters Ages, auntient Rytes.
Of gifts diuine, wrapt vp in mysteries.
Make this to seeme a Temple in their sight,
VVhose mayne support, holy, Religion frame:
And 1 Wisdome, 2 Courage, 3 Temperance, & 4 Right,
Make seeme the Pillars that sustaine the same.
Shadow some sybill to attend the Rytes,
And to describe the Powers that shall resort,
VVith th'interpretation of the benefits
They bring in Clowdes, & what they do import.
Yet make them to portend the true desire
Of those that wish them waking reall things:
Whilcst I wil hoou'ring, here a-loofe retire
And couer all things with my sable Wings.
DEare Mother Night, I your commandement
Obay, and Dreames t'interpret Dreames will make,
As waking curiositie is woont.
Though better dreame a sleep, thē dreame awake.
And this white horny Wand shall work the deed;
Whose power doth Figures of the light present:
When from this sable radius doth proceed
Nought but confused shewes, to no intent.
Be this a Temple; there Sybisla stand,
Preparing reuerent Rytes with holy hand,
And so bright visions go, and entertaine
Al round about, whilest I'le to sleepe againe.
I The daughter of Wonder, (now made the Messenger of Power) am here discended, to signifie the cōming of a Coelestial presence of Goddesses, determined to visit this faire Temple of Peace, which holy hands & deuout desires, haue dedicated to vnitie and concord. And leauing to shewe themselues any more in Sames, Ida, Paphos, their antient delighting-places of Greece, & Asia, made now the seats of Barbarizme & spoyle, vouchsafe to recreat themselues vpon this Westerne Mount of mighty BRITTANNY, the Land of ciuil Musick and of rest, and are pleased to appeare in the selfe-same Figures, wherin antiquitie hath formerly cloathed thē, and as they haue been cast in the imagination of piety, who hath giuē mortall shapes to the gifts & effects of an eternall power, for that those beautifull Caracters of sense were easier to be read then their mysticall Ideas, dispersed in that wide, and imcomprehensible volume of Nature.
And well haue mortall men apparelled, all the Graces, all the Blessings, all Vertues, with that shape wherein themselues are much delighted, & which worke the best Motions, and best represent the beautie of heauenly Powers.
And therfore reuerent Prophetesse, that here attendest vpon the deuotions of this Place, prepare thy self for those Rytes that appertaine to thy function, and the honour of such Deities, and to the end thou mayst haue a fore-notion what Powers, & who they are that come, take here this Prospectiue, and therein note and tell what thou seest: for well mayest thou there obserue their shadowes, but their presence wil bereaue thee of all, saue admiration and amazement, for who can looke vpon such Powers and speake? And so I leaue thee.
WHAT haue I seene? where am I? or do I see at all? or am I any where? was this Iris, (the Messenger of Iuno) or els but a fantasme or imagination? will the diuine Goddesses vouchsafe to visit this poore Temple? Shall I be blest, to entertaine so great Powers? it can bee but a Dreame: yet so great Powers haue blest, as humble roofes, & vse, out of no other respect, then their owne gracefulnes to shine where they will. But what Prospectiue is this? or what shall I herein see? Oh admirable Powers! what sights are these?
FIRST here Imperiall Iuno in her Chayre,
With Septer of cōmand for Kingdomes large:
Descends all clad in colours of the Ayre,
Crown'd with bright Stars, to signifie her charge.
NEXT war-like Pallas, in her Helmet drest
With Lance of winning, Target of defence:
In whome both Wit and Courage are exprest,
To get with glory, hold with Prouidence.
THEN louely Venus in bright Maiestie,
Appeares with milde aspect, in Doue-like
With th'all combyning Skarffe of Amitie, (hue:
T'ingird strange Nations with affections true.
NEXT Holy Vesla, with her flames of Zeale
Presents her selfe, clad in white Puritie:
Whose booke, the soules sweet comfort, doth re-
By the euer-burning Lampe of Pietie. (ueale
THEN chaste Diana, in her Robes of greene,
With weapons of the Wood her self addrests
To blesse the Forrests, where her power is seene,
In peace with all the world, but Sauage beasts.
NEXT rich Proserpina, with flames of gold,
Whose state altho within the earth, yet she
Comes from aboue, & in her hand doth hold
The Myne of wealth, with cheerfull Maiestie.
THEN all in purple Robes, rich Happinesse
Next her appeares, bearing in either hand,
Th'Ensignes both of wealth, and wits t'expresse,
That by them both, her Maiestie doth stand.
NEXT all in partie-coloured Robes appeares,
In white and crimson, gracefull Concord drest
With knots of Vnion, and in hand she bearcs
The happy joyned Roses of our rest.
CLeare-eyed Astrea, nex, t with reuerent brow
Clad in Coelestiall hue, (which best she likes)
Comes with her Ballance, and her sword to shew
That first her judgement weighs before it strikes.
THen cheerefull Flora, all adorn'd with flowers,
Who cloaths the earth with beautie & delight
In thousand sundry suits, whilst shining houres
Will skarce afford a darknesse to the night.
NExt plenteous Ceres in her Haruest weede,
Crown'd with th'increase of what she gaue to
To gratitude & faith: in whom we read, (keepe:
VVho sowes on Vertue shall with glory reape.
LAstly comes Tethis, Albious fairest loue,
Whō she in faithfull Armes deigne t'embrace
And brings the Trydent of her Power, t'approue
The kinde respect she hath to do him grace.
Thus haue I read their shadowes, but behold!
In glory, where they come as Iris tolde!
DEsert, Reward, and Gratitude,
The Graces of Societie;
Do here with hand in hand conclude
The blessed chaine of Amitie:
For we deserue, we giue, we thanke,
Thanks, Gifts, Deserts, thus ioyne in ranke.
We yeeld the splendant raijes of light,
Vnto these blessings that descend:
The grace whereof with more delight,
The well disposing doth commend;
Whilst Gratitude, Rewards, Deserts,
Please, winne, draw on, & couple hearts.
For worth and power and due respect,
Deserues, bestowes, returnes with Grace:
The meed, reward, the kinde effect,
That giue the world a cheerfull face,
And turning in this course of right,
Make Vertue moue with true delight.
OPower of powers, grāt to our vowes we pray,
That these faire blessings which we now erect
In Figures left vs here, in substance may
Be those great props of glory and respect.
1 Let kingdomes large, 2 let armed policie, (white
3 Milde loue, 4 true Zeale, 5 right shouting at the
Of braue disignes: 6 let wealth, 7 felicitie,
8 Iustice, 9 & cōcord, 10 pleasure, 11 plenty, 12 might
And power by Sea, with Grace proportionate,
Make glorious both the Soueraigne & his State.
WHiles worth with honor make their choise
For measured motions ordred right,
Now let vs likewise giue a voyce,
Vnto the touch of our delight.
For comforts lock't vp without sound,
Are th'vnborne children of the thought:
Like vnto Treasures neuer found
That buryed lowe are left forgot.
VVhere words, our glory doth not shew,
(There) like braue Actions without Fame;
It seemes as Plants not set to grow,
Oras a Tombe without a Name.
AS I was the ioyfull Messenger to notifie the comming, so am I now the same of the departure of these diuine powers. Who hauing cloathed themselues with these apparances, doe now returne back againe to the Spheres of their owne being from, whence they came. But yet, of my selfe, this much I must reueale, though against the warrant of a Messenger; who I knowe had better to faile in obedience then in presumption, that these Deities by the motion of the all-directing Pallas, the glorious Patroncsse of this mightie Monarchy, descending in the Maiestie of their inuisible essence, vpon yonder Mountaine, found there, the best, (and most worthily the best) of LADIES, disporting with her choysest Attendants, whose formes they presently vndertooke, as delighting to be in the best-built-Temples of Beautie and Honour. And in them vouchsafed to appeare in this manner, being otherwise no obiects for mortall eyes. And no doubt, but that in respect of the persons vnder whose beautifull couerings they haue thus presēted themselues, these Deities will be pleased the rather at their inuocation (knowing all their desires to be such) as euermore to grace this glorious Monarchy with the Reall effects of these blessings represented.