GEntlemen giue leaue: you great embassadors,
From Francis the most christian king of Fraunce:
My Lord of Paris, and Lord Boneuet,
Welcome to England: since the king your maistes
Intreates our furtherance to aduance his peace;
Giuing vs titles of high dignitie,
As next elect to Romes Suprenacie.
Tell him we haue so wrought with English Henry
(Who, as his right hand loues the Cardinall)
That vn-delaid, you shal haue audience:
And this day will the king in person sit
To heare your message, and to answere it.
Your grace hath done vs double curtesie:
For so much doth the king our maister long,
To haue an answer of this embaage.
As minutes are thought months till we returne.
And that is the cause his highnesse moues your grace,
To quicke dispatch betwixt the king and him:
And for a quittance of your forwardnesse,
And hopefull kindnesse to the crowne of Fraunce,
Twelue reuerent Bishops are sent post to Rome,
Both from his highnesse and the Emperour,
To moue Campeus and the Cardinals,
For your election to the papall throne,
That Woolsies head may yeare the tripall Crowne.
We thanke his highnesse for remembring vs.
And so salute my Lord the Emperour,
Both which (if Woolsie be made Pope of Rome)
Shall be made famous through all Christendome.
How now .
Sir William Cumpton from his highnesse comes,
To do a message to your excellence,
Delay him a while, and tell him we are busie,
Meane time my Lords you shall with draw your selues,
Our priuate conference must not be knowne,
Let all your gentlemen in their best array,
Attend you brauely to king Henries coutt,
Where we in person presently will meete you:
And doubt not wele preuaile succsfully.
But hath your grace yet moued his highnes sister,
For kind acceptance of our Soueraignes loue.
I haue, and by the kings meanes finisht it,
And yet it was a taske, I tell yee Lords,
That might haue bee imposed to Hercules,
To win a Lady of her spirit and yeares.
To see her first loue cround with siluer haires,
As old king Lewes is, that bedrid lyes,
Vnfit for loue, or worldly vanities.
But tis is countries peace the king respects,
We thinke no lesse, & we haue fully wrought it,
The Emperours fores that were leuied,
To inuade the frontyres of loe Burgondy,
Are staid in Brabant by the kings commaund,
The Admirall Hayward that was lately sent,
With threescore aile of ships and pinnaces,
To Batter downe the townes in Normandy,
I by our care for him, cald home againe:
Then doubt not of a faire successfull end;
Since VVoolsie is esteemd your Soueraines friend.
We thanke your excellence, and take our leaues,
Hast ye to court, lie meete ye presently.
God morrow to your grace.
God morrow Lords, go cal Sir VVilliam Cumptn in,
We must haue narrow eyes, and quicke conceit,
To looke into these dangero is stratagemes,
I will effect for Fraunce, as they for me:
If Woolsie to the Popes high state attaine,
The league is kept, or else hee breakt againe,
Now good Sir William
The king my Lord intreates your reuerent grace,
There may be had some priuate conference,
Betwixt his highnesse and your excellence,
Before he heare the French Embassadors,
And wils you hasten your repaire to him,
We will attend his highnesse presently,
Bonner, see all our traine be set in readinesse,
That in our state and pompe pontificiall,
We may passe on to grace king Henries court,
I haue a message from the Queene my Lord,
Who much commends, & humbly thanks your grace,
For your exceeding loue, and zealous prayers,
By your directions through all England sent:
To inuocate for her sound prosperous helpe,
By heauens faire hand in child-bed passions.
We thanke her highnesse that accepts our loue,
In all Cathedrall Churches through the land,
Are Masses, Derges, and Prosessions sung:
With prayers to heauen to blesse her Maiestie,
And send her ioy, and quicke deliuery:
And so Sir William do my duty to her,
Queene Iane was euer kind and courteous,
And alwaies of her subiects honoured.
I take my leaue my Lord.
Adew good knight weele follow presantly,
Now Woolsie worke thy wittes like gaddes of steele,
And make them plyable to all impressions,
That King and Queene and all may honour thee:
So toild not Caesar in the state of Roome,
As Woolsie labours in the affaires of Kings:
As Hanniball with oyle did melt the Alpes:
To make a passage into Itali:
So must we beare our high pitcht Eminence
To digge for glorie in the hearts of men.
Till we haue got the papall diadem:
And to this end haue I composd this plot,
And made a League betweene the French and v
And match their Aged King in holy Mariage,
With Ladie Mary Royall Henries sister:
That he in peace complotting with the Emperor
May plea for vs within the Courts of Rome:
Wherefore was Alexanders fame so great,
But that he conquered and deposed Kings,
And where doth Woolsie faile to follow him,
That thus comman deth Kings and Emperors,
Great Englands Lord haue I so won with words:
That vnder culloure of adsing him,
I ouerrule both Counsell, Court, and King:
Let him command, but we will execute.
Making our glorie to out-shine his ame
Till we haue purchast an eternall name.
Now Boner, are those proclamations sente
As we directed to the Shriffes of London,
Of certaine new deuised Articles,
For ordering those brothelles called the Stewes?
They are readie my Lord, and the Shrieue attends for them,
Dispatch him quickely, and haste after me;
We must attend the Kings high Maiestie.
Charles Brandon, Dudly, and my good Lord Gray,
Prepare your selues, and be in readinese,
To entertaine these French Embassadors,
Meete them before our royall Pallace Gate:
And so conduct them to our Maiestie.
We meane this day to giue them Audience.
Gray, We will my Lord.
Le tone attend without.
And bring vs word when they are comming on:
How now Queene Iane (Mother of God) my loue
Thou wilt neuer be able to sit halfe this time:
Ladies, I feare shele wake ye, yerbe long,
Me thinkes she beares her burthen veric heauily,
And yet good sister and my honored Lords,
If this faire houre exceede not her expect.
And passe the callender of her accounts,
Shee will heare this Embassage, Iane wilt thou nor
Yes my deere Lord, I cannot leaue your sight.
So long as life retaines this Mantion?
In whose sweete lookes bright soueraigntyes in Thronde,
That make all Nations loue and honor thee,
Within thy frame sits Awfull Malestie,
Wrethed in the curled urrowes of thy fronte:
Admird and feard euen of thine enemies;
To be with thee, is my selicie.
Not to behold the state of all the world,
Could winne thy Queene, thy sicke vnwildie Queene,
To leaue her Chamber, in this mothers state.
But sight of thee vnequall potent ate,
God a-mercie Iane, reach me thy princely hand.
Thou art now a right woman, goodly, cheife of thy sex;
Me thinkes thou art a Queene suparlatiue,
Mother, a God this is a womans glorie,
Like good September Vines loden with fruite.
How ill did they define the name of wemen,
Adding so soule a preposition:
To call it woe to man, tis woe from man.
If woe it be, and then who dus not know,
That weomen still from men receaue their woe.
Yes, hey loue men for it, but whats their gaine,
Poore soules no more but trauaile for their paine;
Come, loue thou art sad, call Will Sommers in, to
Make her merrie, where is the foole to day,
He was met my Leige they say at London
Earely this morning with Doctor Skelton,
Hes neuer from him, goe let a grome be sent,
And fetch him home, my good Lord Cardinall:
Who are the cheife of these Embassadors?
Lord Boneue the French high Admirall,
And Iohn de Mazo reuerent Bishop of Paris.
Let their welcome be thy care good Woolsie.
It shall my Liege.
Spare for no cost, Compton, what newes?
Embassadors my Liege.
Inough, go giue them entertainement Lords,
Charles Brandon, hearst thou, giue them courtesie
Inough, and state inough, go conduct them.
I go my Lord.
How now William, what? post, post, where haue you bene riding.
Out of my way old Hary, I am all on the spurre,
I can tell yee, I haue tidings worth telling.
Why, where hast thou bin:
Marrie I rise arly, and ride post to London, to know what newes was here at Court.
Was that your neerest way William?
O I, the verie foote pathe, but yet Irid the horse▪ way to here it, I warrant there is nere a Cundhead keeperin Londō, but knowes what is done in all the Courts in Cristendome
And what is the best newes there William?
Good newes for you my Lord Cardinall, for one of the old wemen Waterbearers told me for certain, that last Friday all the belles in Rome Rang backward, there was a thowsand Derges sung, sixe hundred auemaries said, euerie man washt his face in holy water, the peopel crossing and blessing themselues to send them a new Pope, for the old is gon to purgatory.
Ha, ha, ha,
Nay, my Lord you'd laugh, if't were so indeed, for euery bodie thinks if the Pope were dead; you gape for a benefice, but this newes my Lord is cald too good to be true.
But this newes came a pace Will, that came from Rome to London since Friday last,
For, twas at Billings-gate by Satterday Morning, twas a full Moone, and it came vp in a spring tide.
Then you here of the Embassadors that are come.
I, I, & that was the cause of my ryding to know what they came for, I was told it all at a Barbars.
Ha, ha, what a fooles this, Iane, and what doe they say he comes for, Will:
Marry they say he comes to craue thy aide against the great Turk that vowes to ouerrunne all France within this fortnight, he's in a terrible rage belik, & they say, the reason is, his old god Mamet that was buried ith top on's Church at Meca, his Tombe fell downe, and kilde a Sowe and seuen Pigges, whereupon they thinke all swines flesh is new sanctified, and now it is thought the Iewes wil fall to eating of porke extreamely after it.
This is strang indeede, but is this all.
No there is other newes that was told me, among the wemen at a backe house, and that is this, they say, the great Bell in glassenberie. Tor has told twise, and that king Arthur, and his Knights of the round Table that were buried in Armour, are aliue again, crying Saint Gorge for England, and meane shortly to conquere Rome, marrie this is thought to be but a morrall,
The Embassadors are comming, and heare William see that you be silent, when you see them heare.
Ile be wise and say little I warrant thee, and therefore till I see m come, Ile go talke with the Queene; how dost thou lane, sirra. Harrie, shee lookes verie bigge vpon me, but I care not, and shee bring thee a young Prince, Will sommers may hap's be his foole, whē you two are both dead and :
Goe to William, how now Iane what groning,
Gods me th'hast an Angrie soldiers frowne:
I thinke to Harrie, thou hast prest her often:
I am sure this two yeres she has sern'd vnder thy stādard.
Good faith my Lord I must intreat your grace
That with your fauour I may leaue the presence:
I cannot stay to heare this Embassage,
Gods holy mother, Ladies leau her to her chāber,
Goe bid the Midwiues, and the Nursses v. aight,
Make hole some fiers and take her from the Ayer,
Now Iane God bring me but a chopping boy,
Be but the Mother to a Prince of Wales
Ad a ninth Henrie to the English Crowne,
And thou mak'st full my hopes, faire Queene adew:
And may heauens helping hand our ioyes renew:
God make your Maiestie a happie Mother,
And helpe you in your weakelt passions,
With zealous prayer we all will inuocate:
The powers deuine for your deliuerie:
We thanke you all, and in faire enterchange
We'l pray for you: now on my my humble knees,
I take my leaue of your high Maiestie,
God send your highnesse long and happie Raigne,
And blesse this king dome, and your subiects lyues:
And to your gratious heart all ioy restore,
I feare I shall neuer behold you more,
Doe not thinke so faire Queene, goe to thy bed,
Let not my loue be so discomforted.
No. no, I warrāt thee Iane, make hast & dispatch this
That thou maist haue another against next Christmas
Ladies attend her, Countesse of Salisburie, sister Mary
VVho first brings word that Harri hath a Son
Shall be rewarded well:
I, Ile bee his suertie: but doe you heare wenches, shee that brings the first tydings how soeuer it fall out lot her be sure to say the Child like the father or els shee shall haue nohing.
Welcome Lord Bonneuet, welcome Bishop
What from our brother brings this Embassage.
Most faire cōmends great & renowned Hen.
We in the person of our Lord and King,
Here of your highnesse, doe intreate a League
And to reedei the former peace:
Held betwixt the Realmes of England and of France,
Of late disordred for some pettie wrongs:
And pray your Maiestie to stay your powers;
Alreadie leuied in low Burgandie,
Which to maintaine our oaths, shall be ingadge,
And to confirme it with more surety,
He craues your consent vnto his loue,
And giue the Lady Aarie for his Queene,
The second sister to your Royall selfe.
So may an heire springing from both your bloods.
Make both Realmes happie by a lasting I eague,
Wee kindely doe receiue your Maisters loue,
And yet our grant stands stronge vnto his suit,
If that no following censure eeble it:
For we herein must take our Counsels aide.
But howsoeuer our answere shall be swift,
Meane time we grant you faire accesse to woe,
And winne her (if you can) to be his Queene.
Our selfe will second you. Right welcome both,
Lord Cardinall, these Lords shall be your Guests,
But let our Treasure wast to welcome them:
Banquet them, how they will, what cheere, what sport,
Let them see Harry keepes a kingly Court:
I shall my Soueraigne.
Ki With draw a while our selues will follow ye.
Now will are you not deceiu'd in this Embassage,
You heard they came for aide against the Turk.
Well then, now I see there is loud lies told in London
But als on for their comming's to as much purpose as the other:
And why I pray,
Why dost thou thinke thy sister such a foole, to marrie such an od des veneris, he get her with Prince? I, when either I, or the Cardinall prooue Pope, and that will neuer be, I hope:
How knowest thou him to be old, thou neuer him?
No, nor he me, but I saw his picture with nerva tooth the head out, and all his beard as well fauoured as a white rost, but it is no matter, if he haue her, he will dye shortly, and then she may help to buy him,
Runne, Runne, good Maddam, call the Ladyes in.
Call for more Womens helpe, the Queene is sicke.
For Gods loue goe backe againe, and wame more clothes,
O let the wine be well burned I charge yee.
I, In any case, or I cannot drinke it, doost thou heare Harry, what a coile they keepe: I warrant, these women will drinke thee vp more wine, with their gossipping, then was spent in all the Conduits at thy Coronation.
I is no matter ill, How now Ladies,
I beseech your grace command the foole forth of the pesence,
Away William you must be goue, her's womens matters in hand
Let them speake loe then, Ile not out of the roome, sure,
Come, come let's thrust him out, he'le not sture else:
Thrust me, nay and ye goe to thrusting, ile thrust some of you downe I warrant ye:
Nay, goe good William:
Ile out of their company Harry, they will scratch worse then cats, if they catch me, therefore Ile hence and leaue them, God boy Ladyes do you heare Maddam Mary, you had neede to be wary, my newes is worth a white-cake, you must play at tennis with old Saint Dennis, and your maiden-heade mustlye at the stake.
Ha, ha, the foole tels you true (my gentle sister)
But to our businesse, how fares my Queene?
How fares my Iane, has she a sonne for me?
To raise againe our kingdomes soueraignty
That yet rests doubtfull, O my princely Lord.
Your poore distressed Queene lyes weake and sicke,
And be it sonne or daughter, deere she buyes it,
Euen with her deerest life, for one must dye:
All Womens helpe is past. Then good my Leige,
Resolue it quickly, if the Queene shall liue,
The Child must die, or if it life receiues,
You must your hapeles Queene of life bereaue,
You peirce me with your newes, run, send for helpe.
Spend the reuenewes of my Crowne for aide,
To saue the life of my beloued Queene:
How hap't she is so ill attended on.
That we are put to this extremity,
To saue the Mother or the child to dye.
I beseech your grace resolue immediatly,
Immediatly (saist thou) O, tis no quicke resolue
Can giue good verdit in so sad a choise:
To loose my Queene, that is my some of blisse,
More vertuous than a thowsand Kingdomes be;
And should I lose my Sonne (if Sonne it be)
That all my subiects to desire to see.
I loose the hope of this great Monarchy.
What shall I doe?
Remember the Queene my Lord:
I not forget her (Sister) O poore soule,
But I forget thy paine and miserie,
Goe, let the Childe die; let the Mother liue,
Heauens powerfull hand may more children giue:
Away, and comfort her with our reply,
Harry will haue his Queene though thowsands die.
I know no issue of her princely wombe:
Why then should I preferre't before her life.
Whose death ends all my hopefull loyes on earth.
God's will be done, for suer it is his will,
For secret reasons to himselfe best knowne:
Perhaps he did mould forth a Sonne for me,
And seeing (that sees all) in his creation,
To be some impotent and coward spirit,
Vnlike the figure of his Royall Father:
Has thus decrede, least he should blurre out fame,
As Whylome did the sixt king of my name
Loose all his Father (the first Henrie) wonne.
Ile thanke the Heauens for taking such a Sonne.
Whose within there?
My Lord.
Goe Compton, bid Lord Seimer come to me,
The honor'd Father of my wofull Queene
Now now what newes?
We did deliuer what your highnesse wild,
Which was no sooner by her grace receiud:
But with the sad report, she seemd as dead,
Which causd vs stay, after reuouerie.
She sent vs backe tintreate your Maiestie,
As euer you did take delight in her,
As you preferre the quiet of her soule,
That now is readie to forsake this life,
As you desire to haue the life of one,
She doth intreate your grace that she may dye,
Least both doth perish in this agonie:
For to behold the infant suffer death,
Were endlesse tortures, made to stop her breath,
Then to my Lord (quoth she) thus gently say,
The child is faire, the mother earth and clay,
Sad messenger of woe; oh my poore Queene,
Canst thou so soone consent to leaue this life,
So pretious to our soule, so deere to all,
To yeeld the hopefull yssue of thy loines,
To raise our second comfort, well, be it so:
Ill, be it so: stay, I reuoke my word,
But that you say helpes not, for she must dye:
Yet if ye can saue both, ile giue my crowne:
Nay, all I haue, and enter bonds for more,
Which with my conquering sword with fury bent,
Ile purchase in the farthest continent,
Vse all your chiefest skill, make hast away,
Whilst we for your successe deuoutly pray.
All ioy and happinesse betide my Soueraigne.
Ioy be it good Lord Seymer noble father,
Or ioy, or griefe, thou hast a part in it,
Thou comit to greete vs in a doubtfull houre,
Thy daughter and my Queene lies now in paine,
And if I loose, Seymer thou canst not gaine.
Yet comfort, good my Liege, this womans woe,
Why? tis as certaine to her as her death,
Both giuen her in her first creation:
It is a sower to sweete, giuen them at first,
By their first mother, then put sorrow hence:
Your grace, erc long shall see a gallant Prince,
Be thou a Prophet Seymer in thy words,
Thy loue some comfort to our hopes affoords,
How now.
My gratious Lord, here I present to you,
A goodly sonne: see here your flesh, your bone,
Looke here royall Lord, I warrant tis your owne.
See here my Liege, by the rood a gallant Prince,
Ha little cakebread, foregod a chopping boy.
Euen now I wept with sorow, now with ioy,
Take that for thy good newes, how fares my Queene.
O my good Lord, the wofull.
Tell no more of woe, speake, doth she liue?
What? weepe ye all, nay, then my heart misgiues,
Resolue me sister, is the newes worth hearing.
Nor worth the telling, royall Soueraigne.
Now, by my crowne, thou dimst my royaltie,
And with thy cloudie lookes eclipst my ioyes,
Thy silent eye bewrayes a ruthfull sound,
Stopt in the organs of thy troubled spirit:
Say, is she dead.
Without offence she is.
Without offence, saist thou, heauen take my soule,
What can be more offensiue to my life:
Then sad remembrance of my faire Queenes death,
Thou wofull man, that camst to comfort me:
How shall I ease thy hearts calamitie?
That cannot helpe thy selfe, how one sad minute
Hath raisd a fount of sorrowes in his eyes,
And bleard his aged cheekes, yet Seymer see,
She hath left part of her selfe, a sonne to me:
To thee a graund-child, vnto the land a Prince,
The perfect substance of his royall mother,
In whom her memory shall euer liue:
Phoenix Iana obit nato Phoenice,
Dolendum secula phoenices nulla tulisse duas.
One Phenix dying, giues another life,
Thus must we flatter our extreamest griefe.
What day is this.
Saint Edwards euen my Lord.
Prepare for christning, Edward shall be his name,
My Lords of Fraunce you haue had small cheere with vs,
But you must pardon vs, the times are sad,
And focits not now for mirth and banqueting:
Therefore I pray make your swift returne,
Commend me to your king, and kindly tell him,
The English Cardinall will remaine his friend,
The Lady Mary shall be forthwith sent,
And ouertake ye ere you reach to Douer:
And for the businesse that concearnes the league,
Vrge it no more, but leaue it to my care,
We thanke your grace, my good Lord Cardinal,
And so with thankfulnesse we take our leaues.
Happily speed my honorable Lords,
My heart, I sweare, still keepes you company,
Farewell to both, pray your king remember,
My sute betwixt him and the Emperour,
We shall be thankfull, if they thinke on vs.
We will be earnest in your cause my Lord,
So of your grace we once more take our leaues.
Againe farewell, Bonner conduct them forth,
Now Gardner, what thinkst thou of these times.
Well, that the leagues confirmd, my gratious Lord,
Ill, that I feare the death of good Queene Iane,
Will caute new troubles in our state againe.
Why thinkst thou so?
I feare false Luther; doctrins spread so farre,
I cast that his highnesse now vnmaried,
Should match amongst that sect of Lutherans,
You saw how soone his maiestie was wonne,
To scorne the Pope, and Romes religion,
When Queene Anne Bullen wore the diadem.
Gardner tis true, so was the rumor spread:
But Woolsie wrought such meanes she lost her head,
Tush feare not thou whilst Haries life doth stand,
He shall be king, but we will rule the land.
Bonner come hither, you are our trustie friend:
See that the treasure we have gathered,
The Copes, the Vestments, and the Challices,
The smoake pence, and the tributary fees,
That English chimnies pay the Church of Rome:
Be barreld close within the inner seller,
Wele send it ouer shortly to prepare,
Our swift aduancement to Saint Peters chaire,
Be trustie, and be sure of honors speedily,
The king hath promised at the next election,
Bonner shall haue the Bishopricke of London.
I humbly thanke your grace.
And Gardner shall be Lord of Winchester:
Had we our hopes, what shall you not be then,
When we haue got the Papall diadem.
How now Sir William Cumpton, where is the king.
His grace is walking in the gallery,
As sad and passionate as ere he was.
Twere good your grace went in to comfort him.
Not I Lord Dudley, by my George I sweare,
Vnlesse his Highnesse first had sent for me,
I will not put my head in such a hazzard,
I know his anger, and his spleene too well.
Tis strange, this humor hath his highnesse held,
Euer since the death of good Queene Iane,
That none dares venture to conferre with him.
Here comes the Cardinall.
I, and two fooles after him, his Lordship is well attended still
Lets win this prelate to salute the king,
It may perhaps work his disgrace with him,
How now William, what? are you here to,
I my Lord, all the fooles follow you, I come to bid my cosin Patch welcome to the court, and when I come to Yorke house, hele do as much for me, will yee not Patch?
Yes cosin, hey, da, tere, dedell, dey, day.
What, are you singing sirra.
Ile make him cry as fast anon I hold a peny.
God morrow to your grace my good Lord Cardmall.
We thanke your honour.
What Cumpton, Carew.
Harke, the king cals.
Mother of God, how are we attended on: who waights without.
Go in Sir William, and if you find his grace
In any milder temper then he was last night,
Let vs haue word, and we will visit him.
I Will my Lord.
What is the occasion, that the kings so mou'd.
His grace hath taken such an inward greefe,
With sad remembrance of the Queene that's dead:
That much his highnesse wrongs his state and person,
Besides in Ireland, do the Burkes rebell,
And stout Pearsie that disclod the plot,
Was by the Earle of Kildare late put to death.
And Martin Luther out of Germanie.
Has writ a booke against his Maiestie,
For taking part with proud Pope Iulius,
Which being spred by him through Christendome,
Hath thus incenst his royall maiestie.
Tush, I haue newes, my Lord, to salue that sore,
And make the king more feard through christendome,
Then euer was his famous auncestors:
Nor can base Luther with his heresies,
Backt by the proudest germaine potentate,
Heretically blurre king Henries fame:
For honour that he did Pope Iulius,
Who in high fauour of his Maiestie,
Hath sent Campeus with a bull from Rome,
To adde vnto his title this high stile:
That he and his faire posteritie,
Proclaimd defenders of the faith shall be:
For which intent the holy Cardinals come,
As Legats from the Emperiall court of Rome.
This newes, my Lord, may somthing ease his mind,
Twere good your grace would go and visit him.
I will, and doubt not but to please him well.
So, I am glad he's in, and the king be no better pleased then he was at our last parting, hele make him repent his saucinesse.
How now old William, how chance you go not to the king, and comfort him.
No birlady, my Lord, I was with him too lately already, his fist is too heauie for a foole to stand vnder, I went to him last night, after you had left him, seeing him chase so at Charles, here to make him merry; and he gaue me such a boxe on the eare, that stroke me cleane through three chambers, downe foure paire of staires, fell ore fiue barrels, into the bottome of the seller, and if I had not well lickard my selfe there, I had neuer liu'd after it.
Faith Will, ile giue thee a veluet coate, and thou canst but make him merry.
Will ye my Lord, and ile venter another boxe on the eare but ile do it.
Cleare the presence there, the king is coming,
Gods me, my Lords, what meant the Cardinall,
So vnexpected thus to trouble him.
Is the king mou'd at it.
Iudge by his countenance, see he comes.
Ile not indure the storme.
Nor I.
Runne foole your maister will be feld else.
Did we not charge that none should trouble vs,
Presumptuous priest, proud prelate as thou art,
How comes it you are growne so saucie sir,
Thus to presume vpon our patience,
And crosse our royall thought disturbd and vext,
By all your negligence in our estate,
Of vs and of our countries happinesse.
My gracious Lord.
Fawning beast stand backe:
Or by my crowne, ile foote thee to the earth,
Wheres Brandon, Surrey, Seymer, Gray,
Where is your counsell now, O now ye crooch,
And stand like pictures at our presence doore,
Call in our guard, and beare them to the Tower,
Mother of God, ile haue the traitors heads,
Go hale them to the blocke, vp, vp, stand vp,
Ile make you know your duties to our state,
Am I a cypher, is my sight growne stale,
Am I not Hary, am I not Englands king, Ha.
So la, now the watch words giuen, nay and hee once cry ha, neare a man in the court dare for his head speake againe, lye close cosin Patch.
Ile not come neare him cosin, has almost kild me with his countenance.
We haue bene too familiar, now I see,
And you may dally with our maiestie:
Where are my pages there.
My Lord.
Trusse sirra, none to put my garter on,
Giue me some wine, here stuffe a the tother side,
Proud Cardinall who follow'd our affaires in Italy,
That we that honor'd so Pope Iulius,
By dedicating bookes at thy request,
Against that vpstart sect of Lutheraus,
Should by that hereticke be banded thus,
But by my George, I sweare, if Henry liue,
Ile hunt base Luther through all Germany,
And pull those seuen electors on their knees:
If they but backe him against our dignities.
Bace slaue tie soft, thou hurst my legge,
And now in Ireland the Burkes rebell,
And with his stubborne kernes makes hourely rodes,
To burne the borders of the English pale,
And which of all your counsels helpes vs now.
Heres wine, my Lord.
Drinke, and be dambd, I cry thee mercy Cumpton,
What the diuell mentst thou to come behind me so,
I did mistake, ile make thee amends for it,
By holy Paule, I am so crot and vext,
I knew not what I did, and here at home,
Such carefull statsemen do attend vs,
And lookes so wisely to our common weale,
That we haue ill May-dayes, and riots made:
For lawlesse rebels do disturbe our state,
Twelue times this terme, haue we in person sate,
Both in the starre chamber, and Chauncery courts,
To heare our subiects sutes determined:
Yet tis your office Woolfie, but all of you
May make a packehorse of king Henry now:
Well, what would ye say.
Nothing that might displease your maiesty,
I haue a message from the Pope to you.
Then keepe it still, we will not heare it yet,
Get all of you away, auoid our presence
We cannot yet commaund our patience,
Reach me a chaire.
Now wil, or neuer, make the king but smile,
And with thy mirthfull toyes allay his spleene,
That we his counsell, may conferre with him,
And by my Honor, ile reward thee well,
Too him good Will.
Not too fast, I pray, least will Sommers here bee seene againe, I knowe his qualities as well as the best an ye: for euer when he's angry, and no body dare speake to him, ye thrust me in by the head and shoulders, and then wee fall to buffits, but I know who has the worst ant: but go, my Lord, stand aside, and stirre not till I call yee, let my cosin Patch and I alone, and hee goe to boxing, wele fall both vpon him, thats certain: but and the worst come, bee sure the Cardinals foole shall pay fort.
Vse your best skill, good william, ile not be seene, Vnlesse I see him smile.
Where art thou cosin, alas poore foole, he's crept vnder the table, vp cosin, feare nothing, the stormes past, I warrant thee.
Is the king gon, cosin?
No, no, he sits, we are all friends now,
The Lords are gone to dinner, and thou and I must waite at the kings table.
Not I birlady, I would not waite vpon such a Lord, for all the liuings in the land, I thought he would haue kild my Lord Cardinall, he lookt so terribly.
Foe, he did but iest with him, but ile tell the cosin the rarest tricke to bee reueng'd ast passes, and ile giue thee this fine silke point and thou'lt do it.
Obraue, obtaue, giue me it cosin, and ile doe what so ere tis.
Ile stand behind the post here, and thou shalt goe softly stealing behind him, as hee sits reading yonder, and when thou comst to him, cryboh, and wele scarre him so, he shall not tell where to rest him.
But will he not be angry?
No, no, for then ile shew my selfe, and after he sees who tis hele lae and be as merie as a magge pie, and thow't bee a man by it, for all the house shall see him hugge thee in his armes, dandle thee vp and down with hand & foot an thou wert a footebal,
O fine come cosen, giue me the pynt first, & ile rore so lowd that ile make him beleeue that the dels come.
So doe and feare nothing, for an thou wert the diuell himselfe, hele coniure thee I warrant thee, I would not haue such a coniuring for twentie crownes: but whē he has made way, ile mak him merry enough, I doubt it not, so so now cossen looke to your Coxecomb:
Boe.
Mother of God whats that.
Boe.
Out asse take that and tumble at my eete.
For thus Ile spurne thee vp an downe the house:
Helpe cossen helpe:
No cossen now he's coniurng. I dare not come neere him.
Who set this nat'rall eere to trouble me.
Whose that stands laffing there, the foole, ha, ha, Wheres Comptō. Mother a God I haue found his drit, tis the cratiest old villaine in christendome, marke good Sir William, because the foole durst not come neere himselfe, seeing our anger, sent this sillie Asse, that we might wreake our royall spleene on him: whilest hee stāds laffing to behold the left, bith blessed La (Copto) Ile not leaue the foole, to gaine a million, he contents me so, come hether Will,
Ile know whether ye haue donne knocking first, my cosen pach looks pittifully, ye had best bee friends with vs I can tell you, weele scare ye out of your skin els
Alas, poore pach hold ther's an Angell to buy you points.
Law Cosin, did not I say he'le make much on ye,
I cosin but has made such a singing in my head
I cannot see where I am.
All the better cosin and your head fall a singing, your feete may fall a dauncing & so saue charges to the piper:
Wil Sommers, prethee tell me why didst thou send him first.
Because ile haue him haue the first fruits of thy furie. I knowe how the matter stood with the next that disturb'd thee, therefore I kept ith rereward, that if the battaile grew too hot, I might run presently,
But wherefore came ye.
To make thee leaue thy mellancholly and turne merrie man againe, thou hast made all the Court in such a pittifull case as passes, the Lords has attended here this oure daies, and none dares speake to thee, but thou art readie to choppe of their heads sort: and now I seeing what a fretting furie thou continuest in, and euerie one said twol'd kill thee if thou keepst it, pulld eene vp my heart, and vowd to loose my head, but ile make thee leaue it,
Well William I am behoulding to ye.
Ye shall haue a new Coate and a cap for this.
Nay then, I shall haue two new coats and cap pes, for Charles Brandon promised mee one before, to performe this enterprise:
He shall keepe his word will, goe call him in,
Call in the Lords tell them our spleene is calmbd:
Mother a God we must giue way to warth.
That chaes our Royall blood with anger thus:
And vse some mirth I see to comfort vs.
Draw neere vs Lords, Charles Brandon lift to me:
Will Sommers here must haue a Coate of you,
But Patch has earned it dearest whers the foole?
Hees enne creeping as nere the doore as he can,
Heele faine begon I see, and he could get out,
Woldest thou not cosin?
Yes cosin VVil. Ild faine be walking, I am afraid,
I am not as I should be:
Come, ile helpe thee out then, dost thou heare my Lord Cardinall, your foole is in a pittifull taking, hee smells terriblie.
You are too cratie for him William,
So is he Woolsey credit me.
I thinke so my Lord, as long as will liue, the Cardinals foole must giue way to the kings foole:
Well sir bequiet, and my reuerent Lords,
I thanke you for your patient suffering,
We were disturbed in our thoughts we sweare,
We now intreat you speake and we will heare,
Then may it please your sacred Maiestie,
Legate to his holinesse,
Attends with letters from the Court of Rome.
Let him draw neere, weele giue him Audience,
and Gray Attend the Cardinall,
And bring
to our presence here:
Gray, We goe my Lord:
Brandon and Seymer, place your selues by vs,
To heare this message from his holinesse,
You reuerent princes pillers of the Church:
Legats, Apostolicke, how fares the Pope,
In health great King and from his sacred lips:
I bring a blessing Appostolicall.
To English Henrie and his subiects all:
And more to manicst his loue to thee,
The prop and piller of the Churches peace:
And gratifie thy loue made plaine to him,
In learned books gainst Luthers heresie,
He sends me thus to gret thy Malestie:
VVith stile and titles of high dignitle,
Gommand the Heralds and the Trumpets forth:
Gentlemen dispatch and call them in:
Lord blesse vs, whats here to doe now,
Receaue this Bull sent from his holinesse.
For confirmation of his dignitie
To thee, and to thy faire posteritie.
Tis well the Kings a widdower, and he had put forrh your Bull with his hornes forward, Ide haue mard your message. I can tell ye.
Peace
Herralds attend him:
Trumpets prepare whilst we allowd prouounce
This sacred message from his Holinesse,
And in his reuerent name I heare proclayme
Henric the Eight by the grace of God,
King of England, France and Ieland▪
And to this title, from the Pope we giue:
Defender of the faith, in peace to liue:
Sound Trumpets, and God saue the King.
VVe thanke his holinesse for this princely auour,
Receiuing it with thankes and reuerence:
In which whilst we haue life, his grace shall see,
Our sword deender of the faith shalbe,
Goe one of you salute the Maior of London,
Bid him with Herralds and with Trumpets sound,
Proclaime our Titles through his gouernment,
Goe Gray, see it donne, attend him fellowes:
I goe my Lord, Trumpets follow me,
What more Lord Legat doth his holinesse will?
That Henry Ioyning with the Christian Kings
Of France and Spaine, Denmarke and Portugale
would send an Armic to assaile the Turke,
That now inuades with Warre the Ile of Rhodes,
Or send twelue thowsand pound to be disposd,
As his holines thinkes best for their rel eife.
I thought so, I knew twoold be a monnie matter, when als done, now thart desēder of the aith, the Pope will haue thee defend ucrie thing himself and all.
Take hence the foole.
I, when canye tel? dost thou thinke any oth Lords will take the foole, none here, I warrant, except the Cardinals.
What a knauish fooles this, Lords you must beare with him come hether VVyll, what saift thou to this newe tytell giuen vs by the Pope, speake, ist not rare?
I know not how rare it is, but I know how deer twill bee, for I perceiue twill cost thee twelue thowsand 'pounds, at least, besides the Cardynals cost in comring.
All these nothing; the title of defender of the faith is worth yee, twise as much, say, is it not.
No by my troth, dost heare old Harie; I am suer, the true faith is able to defend it selfe without thee, and as for the Popes faith (good faith's) not worth a arthing, and therefore giu him not a penny.
Goe too meddle not you with the Popes matters:
Let him not meddle with thy matters then, for, and he meddle withthee, He middle with him thats certaine and so farewell, Ile goe and meete my little young Master Prince Edward, they say hee comes to Courte to night, Ile to horsebacke, Prethee Harie send one to hold my sturrup: shall I tell the Prince what the Pope has donne.
I and thou wilt Will, hee shall be defender of the faith too one day.
No, and he and I can defend our selues we care not,
For we are sure the faith can.
Lord Legat, so we reuerence Rome and you,
As nothing you demaund, shall be dened:
The Turke will we expell from Chtendome,
Sending stout souldiers to his holinesse,
And mon to relecue diftressed R hodes:
So if you please, passe in to banquetting,
Goe Lords attend them, Brandon and Compton stay,
We haue some businesse to conferre vpon.
We take our leaue.
Most hartie welcome to my reuerent Lords.
So, now to our businesse, ,
Heare yee no tydings from our sister Mary,
Since her arriuall in the Reahme of France?
Thus much we heard my Lord, at Cales met her
The youthfull Dolphin, and the Pecres of France:
And brauely brought her to the King at Towers,
Where he both married her, and crownde her Queene
Tis well, but Brandon and
Compion list to me,
I must imploy your aide and secrecie,
This night we meane in some disguised shape;
To visit London, and to walke the round,
Passe through their watches, and obserue the care
And speciall diligence to keepe our peace.
They say night-walkers, hourely passe the streets,
Committing the, and hated sacriliege:
And flightly passe vnstaied, or vnpunished,
Goe Compton, goe, and get me some disguise,
This night weele see our Cities gouernment:
Brandon, doe you attend at Baynards. Castio,
Compton shall goe disguisde along with me,
Our swordes and bucklers shall conduct vs safe,
But if we catch a knock to quit our paine,
Weele put it vp, and bye vs home againe.
Come neighbours, we have a straight command.
Our watches be scuerely lookt into:
Much theft and murder was committed latelv,
There are two strangers, marchants of the Stillyard
Cruelly slaine, found floating on the Temmes:
And greatly are Stewes had in suspect,
As places fitting for no better vse,
Therefore be carefull and examine all,
Perhaps we may attach the murderer.
Nay I assure yee maister Constable, those stew houses are places of much slaughter and redemption and many crull deedes of equitie and wickednesse are committed there, for diuers good men loose both their money and their computation by them, I abire yee; how say you neighbor Prichall?
Neighbour Capcase, I knowe you're a man of courrage, and for the merry cobler of Lune streete, tho I sit as lowe as Saint Faithes, I can looke as high as Pales: I haue in my dayes walkte to the stewas as well as my neighbours, but if the mad wenches fall to burdering once, and cast men into the Thames, I haue done with them, theres no dealing, if they cari fire in one hand, and water ith tother.
Well maisters we are now plac'st about the King businesse.
And I know ye all sufficient in the knowledge of it,
I need not to repate your charge againe:
Good neighbours, vse your greatest care I pray,
And if vnruly persons trouble yee,
Call and ile come: so yrs goodnight.
Godyegodnight and twentie syr, I warrant yee, yee neede not reconcile to our charge, vor some on vs has discharged the place this forty yeare I am sure. Neighbours what thinke you best to be done?
Euery man according to his calling neighbour, if the enomic come, here Iyes my towne of Garrison, I set on him as I set on a patch, if he tread on this side, I vnderlay him on this side, or prick him through both sides, I yerke him, and tricke him, pare him and peece him, then hang him vp beth heeles till Sunday.
How say yee, by my faith neighbour Prichall yee speake to the purpose, for indeed neighbours, euery sencible watch-man is to seeke the best reformation to his owne destruction.
But what thinke yee neighbours, if euery man take a nap now, eth fore hand eth night, and goe to bed afterward.
That were not a misse neither, but and youle take but euery man his pot first, youle sleepe like the man eth Moone yfaith.
Doe yee thinke neighbour, there is a man eth Moone?
I assure yee in a cleare day, I haue seente at midnight.
Of what occupation is he trow
Some thinkes he's a shepheard, because ons dog, some saies he's a baker going to heate his ouen with a bauen ats backe, but the plaine truth is, I thinke he was a cobler, for yee know what the song sayes, I see a man eth Moone, fie man, fie, I see a man eth Moone, clowting Saint Peters shoone, and so by this reason, he should be a cobler.
By my fekins he saith true, alas, alas, goodman Dorose hath euen giuen vp the gost already, us an honest quiet soule I warrant yee.
It behoues vs all to be so how doe yee neighbour Darmonse?
Godspeed yee, Godspeed yee, nay and yee goe a godssleepie, name, I haue nothing to say to yee.
Lawe yee, his minds ons businesse, though he be nere so
Come lets all ioyne with him and steale a nappe, euery man maisters to his surall stall.
Agreed, Godnight good neighbours.
Nay, lets take no leaue, ile but winke a while, and see you againe. ward
Come sir William,
We may now stand vpon our gaurd you see,
The watch has giuen vz leaue to arme our selues,
They feare no danger, for they sleepe secure:
Goe carry those bils we tooke to Baynards Castle,
And bid Charles Brandon to disguise himselfe,
And meet me presently at Grace Church Corner,
We will attempt to passe through all the watches,
And so I take's will be an easie taske,
Therefore make haste.
I will my Liege.
The watch-word if I chance to send to yee,
Is the great Stagge of Baydon, so my name shall bee.
Inough, weele thinke on it.
So, now weele forward, soft yonder's light,
I and a watch, and all asleepe burlady:
These are good peaceable subiects, heres none
Beckens to any, all may passe in peace: Ho sirrha.
Stand, who goes there?
good fellow. Stands a hainous word ethe Kings
High way you haue bene at Noddie, I see.
I, and the first card comes to my hand's a Knaue.
I am a Coatercard indeed.
Then thou must needs be a Knaue, for art neither King nor Queene, (I am sure) But whether goest thou?.
About a little businesse that I haue in hand.
Then good night, prethy trouble me no longer.
VVhy this is easie enough, heres passage at pleasure,
What wertch so wicked, would not giue faire words
After the foulest fact of Vllainie?
That may escape vaseene so easily,
Or what should let him that is so resolu'd
To murder, rapine, theft, or sacriledge:
I see the Citie are the sleepie heads,
To do it, and passe thus vnexamined.
Fond heedlesse men, what bootes it for a King,
To toyle hithselfe in this lugh state affaires,
To summon Parhaments, and call together
The wise heads of all his Prouinces:
Making statutes for his subiects peace,
That thus neglecting them, their woes increase.
Well, weele further on, soft here comes one,
Ile stay and see, how he escapes the watch.
So, how I am got within the Cittie, I am as safe as in a Sanctuarieat is a hard world, when Blacke VVill, for a venture of iue pound, must commit uch pettie robberies at Mile-ende, but the plaine truth is, the Stewes from whence I had my quartaridgeas now growne too ote for me: theres some suspection of a murther lately done vpon two Marchants of the Stilliard, which indeede as farre as some fiue or sixe stabs comes too, I confesse I had a hand in. But mumbudget, all the Dogges in the towne must not barke at it. I must withdraw awhile till the heate ee ore, remooue my lodging, and liue vpon darke nights and mornings. Now let me them see, the strongest watch in London intercept my passage.
Such a Fellow would I faine meete withall:
Well ouertaken syr.
Sblood before me syr:
What a Dell art thou?
A man atleast.
And art thou valiant?
I carry a sword and a bucklerye see.
A sword and a buckler, and know not me, Not Blacke Will?
No trust mee.
Slaue, then thou art neither Traueller, nor Purse-taker: for I tell thee, Blacke will is knowne and feared though the seuenteene theres not a sword and Buckler man in England nor Europe, but has had a taste of my manhood. I am tole-free in all Citties, & the Subburbs about them: this is my Sconce, my Castle, my Cittadell, and but King Harry, God blesse his Maiestie, I feare not the proudest.
O ves, some of his guard.
Let his guard eats beefe and be thankfull, giue me a man wil couer himself with his buckler, and not booge and the diuel come.
Me thinkes thou wert better liue at Court as I doe, King Harry loues a man, I can tell ye.
Would thou and all the men hee keepes were hangde, and ye loue not him then: but I will not change my reuenues for all his guardes wages.
Hast thou such store of ruing?
Art thou a good fellow?
May I speake freely, and wilt not tel the king ont?
Keepe thine owne counsell, and feare not,
For of my faith the King shall know no more for mee, then thou telst him.
And I tell him any thing let him hang me: but for thy selfe, I thinke if a fat purse come ith way, thou wouldest not refuse it. Therefore leaue the Court and sharke with me, I tell thee, I am chiefe commander of all the Stewes, theres not a whoore shifts a smocke but by my priuiledge, nor opens her shoppe before I haue my weekely tribute: And to assure thee my valour carryes credite with it, doe but walke with me through the streetes of London, and let mee see the proudest watch disturbe vs.
I shall be glad of your conduct syr.
Follow me then, and ile tell thee more.
Stand, who goes there?
A good fellow: come close, regard them not.
How shall wee know thee to be a good fellow?
My names Blacke Will.
Oh, God giue yee good night, good Maister Blacke William.
God boye sir, God boye,
I am glad we are so well rid on him.
Law sir, you see heres egresse enough,
Now follow me, & you shal see weele haue regresse backe againe,
Hoe comes there?
Come afore the Constable.
VVil What haue ye forgot me so soone? tis I.
O, tis M. Blacke VVilliam,
God blesse ye sir, God blesse ye.
How likst thou now?
Faith excellent: but prethe tell me, doest thou face the world with thy man-hood, that thus they feare thee, or art thou truely valiant?
Sfoote, doest thou doubt of my man-hood? Nay then defend your selfe, ile giue you a try all presently, betake yee to your tooles sir, ile teach ye to stand vpon Intergatories.
I am for ye, theres neere a man the King keepes shal refuse ye: but tell mee, wilt thou keepe the Kings Acte for fighting.
As ye please sir: yet because th'art his man, ile obserue it, and neither thrust nore strike beneath the knee.
I am pleasde, haue at you sir.
Helpe neighbours, O take ye to your browne Billes, call vp the Constable, heres a peece of chance-meddle ready to be committed: set on good-man Sprichall.
Ile ferke them a both sides, lye close neighbour Doruse, keepe the kings peace, I charge ye, helpe M. Constable.
Keepe the peace, or strike them downe.
Sownes, I am hurt, hold I say.
Let them not passe nieghbours, heres bloodshed drawne vpon one of the Kings Officers.
Take away their weapons, and since you are so hot, Ile set you where you shall be coole enough.
Sownes the Moones a wayning harlot, with the glimse of her light I lost his poynt, & mistooke my ward, had neere brocht my blood else.
pray sir what are you?
I am the Kings man sir, and of his Guard.
More shame you should so much forget your selfe▪
For as I takte, tis parcell of your oath,
As well to keepe his peace, as guard his person:
And if a Constable be not present by,
You may as well as he, his place supply:
And seeing yee so neglect your oath and dutie,
Goe bare them to the Counter presently,
There shal yee answere for these misdemeanors.
Has broake my head syr, and furthermore it bleeds.
Away with them both, they shall pay thee well ere they come forth, I warant thee.
I beesech yee syr.
Neuer intreat man, we shall haue baile I doubt it not, But maister Constable, I hope youle doe me this fauour, to let one of your watchmen goe of an arrant for me, if I pay him?
With all my heart syr, heres one shall goe.
Hold thee good fellowe, heres an angell for thee, goe thy way to Baynards Castle, & aske for one Brandon, he serues the Duke of Suffolke, and tell him his bedfellow, or the great stagge of Baydo this night is clapteth Counter, and bid him come speake with me. Come Constable lets goe, syrrha make hast.
I warrant you syr, and this be all, ide haue done it for halfe the mony: well, I must enquire for one Brandon, and tell him the great stag of Byd i eth Couner, burlady I doubt they be both cratie knaues, and this is some watch-word betweene them: beth masse I doubt hee nere come well by his mony, hees so liberall, well ile forward.
Syr William, are you sure it was at Graces-Church
His Maiestie appointed we should meete him?
We haue bin there and mist him, what thinke yee syr?
Good faith I know not.
His Highnesse is too vnterous bold, my Lord
I know he will forsake himselfe in this,
Opposing still against a world of oddes.
Good faith tis true: but soft here comes one,
How now good fellow, whether goest thou?
It lyes in my authoritie sir,
To aske you that question.
For I am one of the kings watch, I can tell ye.
Then perhaps thou canst tel vs some tydings:
Didst thou not see a good lustie tall bigge set man, passe through your watch to night?
Yes sir, there was such a man came to our watch to to night, but none that past through, for he behaued himselfe so, that he was laid hold on quickly, and now he is forth comming in the Counter.
And whether art thou going?
Faith sir, has giuen me an Angel, to doe an arrande for him at Baynards Castle, to one Brandon, that serues the Duke of Suffolke: he sayes he is his Bed-fellow, and I must tell him, the great Stagge of Baydon, is eth Counter.
If thine errande bee to Brandon, I can saue thee a l bour, for I am the man thou look for, wee haue beene seeking him almost all this night: hold thee theres an Angel for thy newes, ile baile him I warrant thee.
I thanke you sir: but hees not so soone baylde, as you thinke for, theres two of the Kings watch has their heads broke, and that must bee answered for, but alls won to mee, let them shuffell as they will, the Angels has flowne about to night, and two guls are light into my handes, and these ile keepe, let him get out as he can.
Hoe Porter, whose without there?
Whats the matter now? will yee not goe to bed to night?
No trust me, twill be morning presently,
And I haue hope I shall be bailde ere then:
I prethe if thou canst, entreate some of the prisoners to keep me companie a paire of houres, or so: and weele spend them: ethe rouse of healthes, and all shall be my cost.
Say wilt thou pleasure me?
If that will pleasure ye sir, ye shall not want for company, heres I now that can tend it, they haue hunger and ease enough at all times.
Thees a couple of Gentlemen in the next roome, I prethe let them come in, and thers an Harry Soueraigne for thee.
I thanke you sir, I am as much beholding to you, as to King Harry for it.
I, I assure thee thou art.
Well M. Constable, you haue made the Counter
This night, the royall Court of Englands King:
And by my crowne I sweare, I would not for▪
A thousand pound t'ware otherwise.
The Officers in Citties, now I see,
Are like an Orchard set with seuerall Trees,
Where one must cherish one, rebuke the other:
And in this wretched Counters I perceiue,
Mony playes fast and loose, purchaces fauour,
And without that, nought but miserie.
A poore Gentleman hath made complaint to mee,,
I am vndone (quoth he) and kept in prison,
For one of your fellows that serues the King,
Being bound for him, and he neglecting me.
Hath brought mee to this woe and miserie.
Another Cittizen there is, complaines
Of one belonging to the Cardinal,
That in his Misters name hath taken vp
Commoditie, valued at a thousand pound:
The paiment being deferde hath causde him break,
And so is quite vndone. Thus kings & Lords I see,
Are oft abusde by eruants treacherie.
But whist a whyle, here comes my fellow prisoners.
Wheres this bullie Grig, this lad of life, that will scowre the counter with right renish to night? Oh Sir you are welcome.
I thanke ye syr, nay weele be as great as our word, I assure yee. Heere Porter, thers mony, fetch wine I prethe: Gentlemen you cannot bee merry in this melancholy place; but heres a Lad has his heart as light as his purse. Sirra, thou art some mad slaue I thinke, a reguler companion: won that that vses to walke a nights, or so. Art thou not?
Harke ethen eare, thart a good fellow.
I am right borne I assre thee.
King Harry loues a man, and thou a woman:
Shall I teach thee some wi?
And tell thee why I met thee here?
I went and set my limbe-twigs, and I thinke
I got some hundred pound,
B a crooked measure at Cooe Parke:
And now seeing there was watch layde,
And much search for suspitious persons:
I got won as honest as my selfe to arrest me,
By a contrary name, and lay me eth counter,
And here I know thayle nere seeke me,
And so when the heats ore, I am at libertie,
And meane to spend my crownes lustily:
How likst thou this my Bullie?
An excellent pollicie.
But mum, no words: vse it for your self, or so.
O syr, feare it not, be merry Gentlemen: Is not this wine come yet? Gods me, forget our chiefe gest, wheres my sword and buckler-man? wheres Blacke will? how now man, melancholy? let not a little wipe make vs enemies, clap hands, and be friends.
My bloods vp still.
When tis at highest twill fall againe, come handes, hands.
Ile shake hands with thee, because thou carriest a Sword and Buckler, yet thart not right Cauelere, thou knowst not how to vse them, thaste a heauie arme.
I a good smart stroke.
Thou cutst my head indeed, but twas no play, thou layest open enough, I could haue entred at my pleasure.
Nay I haue stout guard I assure ye.
Childish to a man of valour, when thou shouldst haue borne thy Buckler here, thou lettest it fall to thy knee, thou gauest mee a wipe, but twas meere chaunce: but had we not beene parted, I had taught ye a little Schoole play I warrant ye.
What hoe, porter: who keepes the gates there?
Who knockes so fast?
Stand by sirah.
Keepe backe I say, whither wil ye presse amongst the prisoners?
Sirrah to the Court, and we must in.
Why sir, the courts not kept eth Counter to day.
Yes when the king is there▪
All happinesse betide our Soueraigne.
Sownes king Harry.
Lord I beseech thee no.
We all ntreat your grace to pardon vs.
Stand vp good men: beshrew ye Brandon for discoouering vs, we shall not spend our time so well this moneth: but theres no remedie now, the worst is this,
The court good fellowes must be remoued the sooner,
Ye all are couriers yet. Nay, nay, come forward,
Euen now you know we were more familiar:
You see pollicies holdes not alwayes currant,
I am found out, and so I thinke will you be:
Goe Porter let him be remoued to Newga
This place I see is too secure for him:
Weele send you further word for his bestowin.
I beseech your Grace.
Theres no grace in thee, nor one for thee:
Goe, away with him.
Sownes I shall to Tybrne presently.
Gentlemen, you that haue beene wrongde by my seruants and the Cardinals, shall giue me neerer notes of it,
Both what they are, and how much debt they owe yee:
Send your peions to the Court to me.
And doubt not but you shall haue remedie:
Theres fortie Angels, drinke to King Harries health,
And thinke withall, much wrong Kings men may do:
The which their maisters nere consent vnto.
God bless your Maiesty with happy life;
That thus respect; your wofull subiects griefe,
Where VVill, nay come neerer man,
I came neerer you, though yee mislikte my play.
Beth Lord, your Maiesties the best sword and buckler man in Europe, ye lye as close to your wards, carrie your point as faire, that no Fencer comes neer ye for gallant Fence-play.
Nay now yee latter me.
Foregod yee broake my head most gallantly.
I But twas but by chance ye know, but now your heads broke, you looke for a plaster I am sure.
And your grace will giue me leaue, Ie put it vp and goe my wais presently.
Nay soft syr, the Keeper wil denie yee that priuiledge, Come hither syrrha, because ye shal know King Harrie loues a man, & I perceiue theres some mettall in thee, theres Angels for thee, marrie it shall be to keepe yee in priso still, till we haue further vse for ye. If yee can breake through watches with eges and regres so valiantly, ye shal doote amongst your countries enemies.
The wars sweet King, tis my delight, my desire, my chaire of state▪ create me but a attord Corporall, and giue me sme preheminee ouer the vulgar hot-shots, and I beat them not forward to as braue attempts, and march my selfe I th Vantguard▪ as ere carried against a Castle wall, break my head in two places more, and consume me with the mouth of a double cluering, Ie liue and dye with thee sweet King.
Twill be your best course sir, goe take him in,
VVhen we haue need of men, weele send for him.
God blese your maiestie, ile goe drinke to your health.
Begon: sir, keeper I thanke you for our lodging,
Nay indeed I doe, I know had ye known vs, it had bin better,
Praie tell the Constable that brought vs hither,
We thanke him, and commend his faithful seruice,
Gentlemen lets heare from you, & so God morrow,
Keeper, theres for my fees, discharge the offices:
And giue them charge that none discouer vs,
Till we are past the citie: in this disguise we came.
Weele keepe vs still, and so depart againe.
Once more God morrow, you may now report,
Your connter was one night king Heries court.
Away and leaue vs, Brandon what further newes?
The old king of France is dead my Liege,
And left your sister Mary a young widdow.
God forbid man, what not so soone I hope,
She has not yet bin married fortie daies:
Is this newes certaine?
Most true my Lord.
Alas poore Mary, so soone a widdow,
Before thy wedding robes be halfe worne out:
We must then prepare black funerall garments too,
Well, weele haue her home, the league i broake:
And weele not trust her safetie with the French.
Charles Brandon▪ you shall goe to France for her,
See that your traine be richly furnished,
And if the daring French, braue thee in attempts
Of honour, Barriers, Tilt, and & Tarnament:
So to retaine her, bare thee like thy selfe,
An English man, dreadlesse of the prowdest:
And highly scorning lowly hardinesse
I shall my Soueraigne, and in her honour,
Ile cast a challenge through all the court:
And dare the prodest Peere in France for her.
Commend me to the Ladie Caterine Parry,
Giue her this Ring, tell her on sunday next
She shall be Queene, and crownde at Wstminster:
And Ae of Cleae shall be sent home againe:
Come syrs, weele leaue the citie, and the counter now,
The day begins to breake, les hye to court.
And once a quarer we desire such sport.
My reuerent Lord of Lond,
Ou trustie friend, the king of France is dead,
And in his death, our hopes are hindred:
The Emperour too, mislikes his praises,
But we shall crosse him fort I doubt it not:
And tread vpon his pompe imperiall,
That thus hath wrongde the English Cardinall.
Your graces letters by Campeans sent,
I doubt not but shall worke your full content.
I that must be our safest way to worke,
Monie will make vs men, when men stand out:
The Bastard Fredericks to attaine the place,
Hath made an offer to the Cardinalls,
Of threescore thousand pound, which we will pay,
Three times thrice double, ere we lose the day.
Come cousen Willian, Ile bring yee to my Lord Cardinall presently.
I thanke yee cousen, and when you come to the court, Ile bring you to the King againe, yee knowe cousen, he gaue yee an angell.
I but he gaue me such a blow oth eare for it, as I care not for comming Ins sight againe while I liue.
How now Patch, who haue you got there? what Will Smmers welcome good William.
I thanke your grace, I hard say your Lordship had made two new Lords here, and so the two old fooles are come to waite on them.
VVe thanke yee .
Your Lordship will be wel guarded, we follow e, The Kings foole, and the Cardinalls, and we are no small fooles I asse yee.
No indeede, my cousen Patch here is something too square to be set on your shooe, marry and youle weare him on your shoulder, the foole shall ride yee.
A shrewde foole Bonner, come hither William, I haue a quarrell to you since our last ryming.
About your faire Leman at Charltn my Lord, I remember.
You speake plaine William.
Yee neuer knew foole a flatterer I warrant yee.
Well VVill, Ile try your ryming wits once more,
What say you to this?
The bells hang high, and lowd they cry, what do they speake?
If you should dye, theres none would cry, though your neck should breake.
You are something bitter William: But come on, once more I am for yee. A rod in schoole, a whip for a foole, is alwaies in season.
A halter and a rope, for him that would be pope,
Against all right and reason.
Hes too hard for me still, Ile giue him ouer, come tell me Wul, whats the nwes at Court?
Marry my Lord, they say the King must be married this morning.
Married Will, to whom I prethee?
Why to my Lady Catherin Parry, I was once by, when he was wooing on her, and then I doubted they would go together shortly.
Holy Saint Peter sheeld his Maiestie,
She is te hope of heresie:
If she be Queene, the Protestants will swell,
And Cranmer, Tutor to the Prince of Wales,
Will boldly speake gainst Romes Religion▪
But Bishops weele to Court immediately,
And plot the downfall of these Lutherans:
You two are Tutors to the Princes Mary,
Still ply her to the obedience,
And make her hate the name of Protestant;
I doe suspect that Latimer and
Chiefe teachers of the faire ,
Are not sound Catholickes, nor friendes to
It it be so, weele soone remoue them all▪
T is better they should dye, then thousands fall.
Come follow vs. Mait, VVl, and Patch.
Your Lords mad, till he be at the wedding, twas maruell the King stole it so secretly and ner told him ont, but alls one, if he be married, let him play with his Queene to night, and then to morrow heele call for me, thres no foole toth wilfull still. What shall we doe cousen?
Ile goe get the key of the wine-seller, and thou and Ile keepe a passage there to night.
VVe haue but a little wit betweene vs already cousen, and so we should haue none at all.
VVhen our wits be gone, weele sleepe eth sellor, and lye without our wits for one night.
Content, and then eth morning weele but wet them with an other cup more, and thaile shaue like a rasor all day after. Come close good cuzze, let no bodie goe with vs, least they be drunke before vs, for fooles are innocents, and must be accessarie to no mans ouerthrow.
VVelcome Queene Katherine, seat thee by our side,
Thy sight faire Queene, by vs thus dignified,
Earles, flarro, Knights, and Gentlemen,
Against yee all, weele be chiefe challenger,
To fight at Barriours, Tilt, and Turnament,
In honour of the faire Queene Katherine,
VVe thanke your highnesse, and beseech your grace,
Forbeare such hazard of your royall person,
VVithout such honors is your handmaid pleasde,
Obediently to yeeld all loue and dutie,
That may beseeme your sacred Maiestie.
God a mercie, but where are our children?
Prince Edward, Mary, and Elizabeth,
The royall Issue of three famous Queenes,
How haps we haue not seene them here to day?
They all my Liege attend your maiestie,
And your faire queene, so within the presence here.
Tis well, Dudh call Cranmer in,
He is chiefe Tutor to our Princely sonne,
For precepts that concerne diuinitie.
And here he comes, Cranmer, you must ply the Prince,
Let his wast howers be spent in getting learning:
And let those linguists for choyce languages,
Be carefull for him in their best indeuours,
Bid Doctor Tye, ply him to Musicke hard,
Hees apt to learne, therefore be diligent,
He may requite your loue when we are gone.
Our care and duty shall be had my Lord.
We thanke yee.
I tell thee Cranmer he is all our hopes,
That what our age shall leaue vnfinished,
In his faire raigne shall be accomplished.
Goe and attend him, how now Wil Sommers, whats the newes with you?
I come to bid thee and thy new Queene Godmorrow. Looke to him Kate least he cozen thee, prouide ciuill Orenges enough, or heele haue a Lemmon shortly.
Godamercie VVill, thout tell me then, wilt thou not?
I and watch him too, or let him nere trust me: but doest heare Harry, because Ide have thee haue the poores prayers, I haue brought thee some petitions, the Fyers and Priests pray too, but I thinke us as children say grace, more for fashion then heard, because they beg for Godsake, therefore I prethee dispatch them.
Reade them Semer.
The humble petition of the Lady Seaton, or her distressed son, that in his owne defence, vnhappily hath slaine a man.
The Lady Seaton, Gods holy mother,
Her sonne has had our pardon wise alreadie,
For two stout subjects that his hand hath slaine.
And y had said so but thou Harry, Ide haue tolde him a lyde, hee nere kild but one, thou kildst the tothe: for and thou hadst hang'd him for the first, the two last had bin aliue still.
The foole tels true, they wrong our Maiestie
That seeke our pardon for such crueltie:
A way with it.
Giue me i againe, It shall nere be seene more I assure ye and I had knowne tad come for that purpose, It should nere haue bin brought for VVl I warrant yee.
This other comes from two poore prisoners eth counter.
We know the inside then, come giue them me,
Lord Cardinall, heres one is dedicated to you.
How! read it: whose there? Compto enquire for Rookesbie a
Groome of the wardrope, and bring him hither.
I will.
Cardinall, what find yee written there?
Mine own discredit, and the vndoing of an honest citizen, by a false seruant.
Tis not your foole my Lord I warrant ye.
No will?
I thought so, I knewe twas one of your kaues, for your fooles are harmelesse.
Welsed Wil thou louest thy maisters credit I know.
I Kate, as well as any Coutier he keepes:
I had rather hee should haue the poore prayers, then the Popes.
Faith I am of thy mind Will, I thinke so too.
Take heed what yee say Kate, what a Lutheran?
Tis Heresie saire Queene, to thinke such thoughts.
And much vncharity to wrong the poore?
VVell, and when the Pope is at best, hee is but Saint Peters debutie, but the poore, present Christ, and therefore should be something better regarded.
Goe too foole.
Syrrha, youle be whipt for this.
Would the King wood whip thee and all the Popes whelpes out of England once, for betweene yee, yee haue rackt and puld it so, we shal be all poore shortly, you haue had foure hundred threescore pound within this three yeare for smoakepence, you haue smoakte it yfaith: dost heare Harry, next time they gather them, let them take the chimnies, and leaue the coyne behind them, wee haue clay enough to make bricke, though we want siluer mines to make mony.
VVell William your tongue is priuiledgde.
But my good Liege, I feare theres shroder heads
Although kept close, has set this oole a worke,
Thus to exstirpe against his holinesse.
Doe not you thinke so my Lord, nor stomake no bodie about it: yee know what the old Proerbe sais, therefore be patient great quarrellers small credit winnes:
VVhen fooles set stooles, and wise men breake their shinnes: therefore thinke not on it, for Ile sit downe by thee Kate and say nothing, for here comes one to be examined.
O syr, you're welcome, Is your name ?
your poore seruant is so ealde my Lord.
Our seruant we geffe yee by the cloth yee weae, but for Your pouertic tis doubtful, your credit is so good. Lets see whats the mans name, ha! Hopki, doe you know the man? ? No my Lord.
Had you neuer no dealings with such a man?
No, if it like your Maiestie.
No, if it like our Maiesie, saucie varlet:
It likes not our Maiestie, thou shouldst say no:
It likes vs not thou lyest, for that we know.
You know him not, but he too well knowes you,
And lyes imprisoned slaue, for whats thy due.
Sure some enuious man hath misinformd.
Darst thou denie it still, out-facing knaue,
Mother a God, ile hang thee presently.
Sirra ye lie: and though ye weare the kings cloath,
Yet we dare tell ye so before the king:
Slaue thou doest know him.
He here complaines he is vndone by thee,
And the kings man hath causde his miserie.
Yet youle out-face it still, denie, forsweare, and lie fir, ha▪
Not a word more, if thou louest thy life, vnlese thou confesse all, and speake faire.
I doe befeech your Grace.
Out periurde knaue, what doest thou serue the King.
And darste thou thus abuse our Maiesti:
And wrong my subiects by thy trecherie?
Thinkst thou false theefe, thou shalt be priuiledged
Because thart my man, to hurt my people:
Villaine, those that guard me, shal regard mine honour:
Put off that coate of proofe, that strong securitie:
Vnder which ye march like a halbertere,
Passing through purgatorie, and none dare strike:
A Seriants mace must not presume to touch
Your sacred shoulders with the kings owne wri ▪
Gods deere Lady, does the cloath ye weare,
Such priuiledge and strong preuention beare.
Ha, ist Rookesby?
My royall Lord.
Take that, and know your time to tell your
Message: Sirra, I am busie.
So, theres one seru'd: I thinke you would take two more with all your heart, so you were well rid on him.
Your pardon good my Liege.
Ha, pardon thees I tell thee did it touch thy life in ou ht, more then mine owne dipleasure, not the world should purchase it, vilde ause: hadst thou neglected this thy dut e to our persons danger: Hadst thou thy selfe against me ought attempted, I might bee sooner wonne to pardon thee, then for a subiects hateull iniurie.
Let me entreat your Grace to pardon him.
Away Kate speake not for him,
Out of my leitie I let him liue,
Discharge him from my cloath and countenance,
To the Counter to redeeme his creditor,
Where he shall satisfie the most mie
Of any debt, default or hindrance:
Ile keepe no man to blurre my credite so,
My cloth shall not pay what my seruants owe.
Away with him.
Now my Lord Cardinal, speakes not your paper so?
Yes my good Lord, your Grace hath showne a patterne, to draw forth mine by, I assure your Highnesse,
The punishment inflicted on your man,
Is ment for mine seruants that beares such mindes,
Their Maisters thus but serues them in their kindes.
Wheres this fellow now that brings this newes?
He is gone with a fla in his eare: But has left his Message behind with my Lord Dudley, here.
And whats the nowe.
Duke Brand my Liege.
Oh, hees returnde from France:
And who comes with him?
His royall wife, my Lord.
Ha royall wife: whose that?
Your Highnesse sister, the late Q. of France.
Ou sister Q. his : who gaue him her?
Tis sed they were maried at Doner, my liege.
I were better he had nere seen the Towne.
Dares any Subiect mixe his blood with ours, without our leaue
He comes himself my Liege, to answere it.
Health to my Soueraigne.
And our brother king, your Message is before ye sir: off with his head.
I beseech your Grace giue me leaue.
Nay you haue taken leaue, away with him, bid the Captaine of our Guard, conuey him to the Tower.
Heare me my Lord.
Audatious Brandon, thinkst thou excuse shall serue.
Right gracious Lord.
Go too, your prayers will scarce saue your selfe,
Durst ye contract your selfe without our knowledge?
Hence with that hare-braine, Duke to the Tower I say,
And beare our carelesse sister to the Fleete:
I know syr, you broke a Launce for her,
And brauely did vnhorse the Challengers:
Yet was there no such prize set on her head,
That you without our leaue should marry her.
Oh my Lord, let me intreat for them.
Tut Kate, though thus I seeme
A while to threaten them,
meane not to disgrace my sister so:
A way with them. What say ye Lords,
Is he not worthy death for his misdeed?
Vnlesse your Grace shall please to pardon him.
He deserues it then?
He does my Liege.
You are knaues and fooles, and ye latter me:
Gods holy Mother, Ile not haue him hut, for all your heads:
Deare Brandon, I imbrace thee in mine armes:
Kind sister, I loue you both so well.
I cannot dart another angry fro ne
To gaine a kingdom: here take him Mare,
I hold the happier in this English choyce,
Then to be Q. of France: Charles, loue her well.
And tell on Brandon, whats the newes in France.
The league is broke betwixt the Emperor
And the yong king of France: Forces are mustring
On ether part my Lord, for horse and foote.
Hot variance is expected speedily.
The Emperor is marching now to Ladersey,
There to inuade the townes of Burgondie.
God and S. George, weele meet his Maiesty,
And strike a league of Christian amiie.
Lord Cardinall, you shall to France with speed,
And in our name salute the Emperor,
Weele giue direction for your Embassage.
The next faire wind, shall make vs France to gret,
Where Charles the Emperor, and king shall meete.
How now yong Browne, what haue you there?
The Princes cloake and hat, my Lord.
Where is his Grace?
At Tennis, with the Marquesse Drset.
You and the Mrquesse, draw the Princes mind
To follow pleasure, & neglect his booke:
For which the King blames vs. But credite me,
You shall be soundly paide immediately.
I pray ye good my I. ile goe call the Prince away.
Nay, now ye shal not, whose within there ho? straie
My Lord.
Goe beare this yongster to the Chappel,
And bid the M. of the Children whippe him well:
The Prince will not learne sir, and you shall smart for it.
O good my L. Ile make him ply his booke to morrow.
That shall not serue your turne, away I say.
So sir, this pollicie was well deuisde: Since he was whipt thus for the Princes faults,
His Grace hath got more knowledge in a month,
Than he attained in a yeere before,
For still the fearefull boy to saue his breech,
Doth hourely haunt him whereso ere he goes.
Tis true my Lord, and now the Prince perceiues it,
As oath to see him punisht for his faults,
Plays it of purpose to redeeme the boy,
But pray my Lord, lets stand aside awhile,
And note the greeting twixt the Prince and him,
See where the boy comes and the Kings Foole with him; Lets not be seene, but list their conference.
Nay boy, and ye crie youle spoyle your eye sight, come, coe trusse vp your hose, you must hold fast your winde, both before and behinde, and blow your nose.
For what Foole?
Why for the mote in thine eye, is there not won in't, wherefore dost thou crie else?
I prethy Will go cal the Prince from the Tenniscourt.
Dost thou cry for that? nay then I smell a Ratte, the Prince has playd the Trewant to day, and his Tutors has drawne blood of thy buttocks fort: why boy tis honourable to be whipt for a Prince.
I would he would either leaue the Tenniscourt and ply his Booke, or giue me leaue to be no Courtier.
I, for ile be sworne thy breech lyes ith Hassard about it, but looke litle Ned, yonder he comes.
Some Rubbers for the Prince.
Here my good Lord.
One take our Rackets, and reach my Cloake,
By my faith Marques, you are too hard for me.
Your Grace will say so, though ye oer mach .
Why ?
loyters, and will not ply your booke, and your Tutors has whipt me for it.
Alas poore Ned, I am sorrie for it, I'le take the more paynes, and intreat my Tutors for thee: yet in troth, the lectors they read me last night out of Virgill and Oid, I am perfect in: onely I confesse I am something behinde in my Greeke Authors.
And for that speech, they haue declynde it vpon his breech.
And for my logicke, thou shalt witnesse thy selfe I am perfect: for nowe will I proue▪ that though thou we whipt for me, yet this whipping was good for thee.
Ile hardly belccue you my Lord, though Ramu himselfe should proue it: well, probe.
Marke my Probleme.
Bona virga facit bonum puerum:
Bonum est, te esse bonum puerum:
Ergo bona vorga, res bona est: And that's this, Ned.
A good rodde makes a good boy: t'is good that thou shouldst be a good boy: (ergo) therefore a good rodis good.
Nay berladie, the better the rodde is, it's the worse for him, that's certaine: but do 'st heare me, boy; since hee can prooue a rdde to bee so good, let him tak't himselfe next time.
In trueth, I pitie thee▪ and inwardly I feele the stripes thou barest, and for thy sae, Ned, ile pli my booke the fastor; in the meane time, thou shalt not say, but the Prince of Wales will honourably reward thy seruccome, Browne, kneele downe.
What, wilt thou knight him, Ned?
I will; my father ha's knighted many a oe, that neuer shedde drop of blood for him; but hee ha's often for mee.
O braue! hee lookes like the myrrour of knighthood already.
Cleere the presence, Gentlemen, the King is comming.
The King? gods me, reach bookes call my Tutors in: come rowne, Ile confirme thy knighthood afore the King.
Here bee your Tutors, my Lord, and yonder the King comes.
Health to your▪ Maiestie.
Godamercy Ned; I, at your booke so hard, t'is well, t'is well; now Bishop Cranar, and good doctor Tye, I was going to the gallory, and thought to haue had your Scholler with me, but seeing you'r so busie, Ile not trouble him, come on Wil, come, goe you along with me, what make you among the schollers here?
I come to learne my quy que quod to keepe mee from the rod: marre here's one was whipt in pudding time for he ha's gotten a knighthood about it: looke old Harry, doe's he not looke more furious then he was wont.
Who W, young Browne, Gods Mary mother, his father is a gallant Knight, as any these south partes of England holds.
He cannot compare with his sonne tho, if hee were right donsal delphebus, or the very knight of the Sunne himselfe, yet this knight shall vnhorse him.
When was he made a knight Wil.
Marry ihe last action, I can assure you, there was hot seruice, and some on vm came so neere him, they had like to smelt ont: but when all was done, the poore gentleman was pittifuly wounded in the back partes, as may appeare by the scarre, if his kightship would but vntusse there.
But who knighted him, William?
That did Ned here: and he has earnd it too, for I am sure, this two yeere he has bin lasht, for his learning.
Ha, how, come hither Ned, is this true?
It is, my Lord, and I hope your highness wil confirme my deed.
Confirme it, Gods holy mother, what shrode boyes are these? Cranmar and Tye, do yee obserue the Prince, nowe by my Crowne young Ned thou hast honord me.
I like thy kingly spirit that loues to se
Thy friendes aduanc't to types of dignitie.
Young Knight come hether, what the Prince hath done
We here confirme, be still Sir Edward Browne:
But heare ye Ned, now you haue made him Knight,
You must giue him some liuing, or else tis nothing.
I by my troth, he is now but a Knight vnder Forma papris, for a Knight without liuing is no better than an ordinarie Gallant.
Well, what will ye giue him Ned?
When I haue heard of something that may doe him good, I will entreat your Maiestie for him, and ith meane time from mine owne allowance Ile maintaine him.
Tis well sayd: but for your sake Sonne Edward, wele prouide for him; Cranmar, see presently a Pattent drawne, wherein were will confirme to him from our Exchequor a Thousand Markes a yeere.
I thanke your Maiestie.
And as I am true Knight, Ile fight and die for ye.
Now if your Tutors come to whip ye, you may chuse whether youle vntrusse byth order of armes.
Well Ned, ee ye plye your learning, and lets haue no more Knightes made in this Action, looke to him Browne, if hee loyter, his Tutors will haue you vp for't.
I hope my Lord, they dare not whip me now.
Beladie Sir, thats doubtfull.
If they doe, he shall make thee a Lord, and then they dare not.
Well Cranmar wele leaue ye, when your pupyll has done his taske ye set him now, let him come and visite vs: on Gentlemen into the Gallerie.
Heauen keepe your Maiestie.
Gentlemen draw neere.
God morrow to your Grace.
God morrow Tutors at noone, tis God euen, is it not?
We saw not your Grace to day.
O ye quippe me cunningly for my Trewantship▪ that I was not at my Booke to day, but I haue thought o that ye read last nght, I assure ye.
We doubt it not faire Prince: Lords, Gentlemen giue leaue.
All voide the rowme, theres but Schollers and Fooles.
I hope your excellence can answere me in that axiom of Phylosophie, I propounde to ye.
I promise ye Tutor, tis a Probleme to me, for the difference of your Authors opinions, makes me differ in mine owne: some say, Omne animalest, aut homo, aut bestia, that curie liuing creature is, or man, or beast.
Then a womans a beast, for shees no man.
Peace William youle be expul'st else: And againe some Authors affirme, that euerie beast is foure-footed.
Then a Fooles no beast, for he has but two.
Yet againe Will.
Mum Ned, no words, Ile be as still as a small bagpipe.
Omne Animal est, aut homo, aut bestia: And thus tis prooued my Lord, Omne Animal, est rationalis, vel irrationalis, homo est rationalis, Bestia irrationalis,
Ergo omne Animal homo est, vel Bestis:
Mongst all the creatures in this Vniuerse,
Or on the earth, or flying in the ayre,
Man onely reason hath, others onely sence,
So what is onely sensuall, in not man, but beast:
For man both sence and reason hath:
So euerie creature, hauing one of these, is sure or man, or best: and though all beasts are not foure-footed.
Thats certaine a louse has sixe.
I beseech your Grace.
A way William.
Not a word more as I am William.
For many beasts haue winges seruing in stead of feet, and some haue horn's, of which we thus esteeme, Animal cornutum non habet dentes supremas, No horned beast hath teeth aboue the roofe.
Thats a lye, a Cuckold has.
Thrust the Foole out of the presence there.
Well, Cedant arma toge, The schollers shall haue the fooles place.
Well Cranmar, you haue made me able to prooue a man no beast, if he prooue not himselfe so, wele now leaue this: And now resolue me for Diuinitic, Cranmar I loue ye, and I loue your Learning, speake and wele heare ye:
God giue ye truth that you may giue it me,
This Land ye know stands wauering in her Faith,
Betwixt the Papists and the Protestants,
You know we all must die, and this flesh
Part, with her part of immortalitie,
Tutor, I doe beleeue both Heauen and Hell:
Doe you know any third place for the soules abode
Cald'd Purgatorie, as some would haue me thinke,
For from my Sister Marie and her Tutors,
I haue oft receiued Letters to that purpose:
I loue ye Cranmar, and shall beleeue what ere ye speake,
Therefore I charge ye tell the truth.
How thinkes your Grace, is there a place of Purgatorie or no?
P. Truly I think none, yet must I vrge to you whats layd
To me, this world you know hath ben fiue Thousand yeres
Still encreasing, still decreasing, still replenih't,
How long it will be, none know's but he that made it,
We al do cal our selus Gods children, yet sure some are not,
But think ye Tutor that the compasle of that heauen & hell,
Is able to containe those soules so numberlesse,
That euer breathed since the first breath was giuen,
Wthout a Tertium, or a third place.
Who puts these doubts within your Graceshead
Are like their owne beleefe, slite, and vnregarded,
And is as easily answered and confuted:
Quod est infitum, non habet finem,
Calum est opus Dei, opus Dei est infinitum:
Ego Calum, est infinitum.
That which is infinite hath no end at all,
For that eterniti, that euerlasting essence,
That did concord heauen, earth, and hell to be
Is of himselfe all infinite, that heauen and hell are so,
His power, his workes, and wordes doe witnesse it,
For what is infinite, hath in it selle no-end,
Then must the heauens which is his glorious seat,
Be incomprehensible contayning him,
Then what should neede a third place to containe,
A world of Infinites so vast and mayne.
I thanke ye Cranmar, and doe beleeue ye
What other proofes haue been maintayn'd to me
Or shalbe, you shall know and ayd me in them:
Ynough for this time, who's there? Doctor Tye
Our Musicks Lecturer pray draw nere: Indeed I take much
In Musick may your Grace euer delight, (delight in ye Though not in me, Musicke is fit for Kings,
And not for those knowes not the chime of stings.
Truely I loue it yet there are a sort
Seeming more pure than wise, that will vpbrayd at it,
Calling it idle, vaine, and friuolous.
Your Grace hath sayd, indeed they doe vpbrayd
That terme it so, and those that doe are such
As in themselues no happic concords hold,
All Musicke jars with them, but sounds of good.
But would your Grace a while be patient,
In Musickes praise, thus will I better it.
Musicke is heauenly, for in Heauen is Musicke,
For there the Seraphins doe sing continually,
And when the best was borne, that euer was man,
A Quir of Angels sang for joy of it,
What of Celestiall was reueald to man,
Was much of Musicke, is sayd the beasts did worship
And sang before the Deitie supernall,
The kingly Prophet sang before the Arke,
And with his Musicke charmd the heart of Saule,
And if the Poet sayle vs not my Lord,
The dulcet tongue of Muske made the stones
To mooue, irrationall beast, and birds to daunce
And last, the Trumpets Musicke shall awake the dead,
And cloath their naked bones in coates of flesh,
T'appeare in that high house of Parliament,
When those that gnsh their Teeth at Musicke sound,
Shall make that place where Musicke nere was found.
Thou giuest it perfect life, skilfull Doctor
I thanke thee for the honour'd praise thou giuest it,
I pray thee lets heare it too.
Tis readie for your Grace, giue breath to your loude tun'd instruments.
Tis well, me thinkes in this sound I prooue a comepleat age,
As Musicke, so is man gouern'd by stops,
Aw'd by diuiding notes, sometimes aloft,
Sometime below, and when he hath attain'd,
His high and loftic pitch, breathed his sharpest and most
Shrillest ayre, yet at length tis gone,
And fals downe flat to his conclusion,
Another sweetnesse, and harmonious sound,
A mildel straine, another kinde agreement,
Yet mong'st these many stringes, be one vntun'd
Or jarreth low, or hyer than his course
Not keeping steddie meane among'st the rest,
Corrupts them all, so doth bad men the best.
Inough; let voyces now delight his princely care.
Doctor, I thanke you and commend your cunning.
I est haue heard my Father merrily speake,
In your hye praise, and thus his Highnesse sayth,
England, one God, one truth, one Doctor hath
For Musicks Art, and that is Doctor Tye,
Admir'rd for skill in Musickes harmonie.
Your Grace doth honor me with kind acceptance,
Yet one thing more, I doebeseech your Excellence
To daine, to Patronize this homely worke,
Which I vnto your Grace haue dedicat.
What is the Title?
The Acts of the holy Apostles turn'd into verse,
Which I haue set in seuerall to sing,
Worthy Acts, and worthily in you remembred.
Ile peruse them, and satisfie your pnes,
And haue them sung within my fathers Chappell.
I thanke yee both. Now Ile craue leaue a while
To be a little ide: pray let our lingguistes,
French and Italians, to morrow morne be ready,
I must confer with them, or I shall lese
My little practise. so God-den good utors.
Healh to your Highnesse, God increase your dayes:
The hope of England, and of learnings praise.
What haue yee here my Lord of Winchester?
Heriticall and damned heesies,
Precepts that Crammers wisdome taught the Prince,
The Pope and we are held as heritickes,
What thinkst thou Bonner of this wouering age?
As Sea-men do of stormes, yet hope for faire wether,
Berlady Gardiner we must looke about,
The Protestants begin to gather head,
Luther hath sowne well, and Englands ground
Is fatte and fertile to increase his seed,
Heres lofue plants, what, bishops and Prelats,
I nobilitie temporall, but we shall temper all
At the returne of our high Cardinall.
Bonner tis true, but in meane time we must
Preuent this ranckor that now swels so big,
That it must out or breake, they have a dangerous head,
And much I feare.
What not the King I hope?
Tis doubtfull he will bend, but sure
Queene Katherens a strong Lutheran hard yee not
How in presence of the King an Cardinall,
She did exsterp against his Holinesse.
But had our English Cardinall once attaind,
The high possession of Saint Peters Chaire,
Heed barre some toungs than now haue scope too much,
Tis he must doo't Gardiner, ' perilous thing,
Queene Katherin can do much with Englands King.
I Bonner, thats the summe of all,
There must be no Queene, or the Abbies fall,
See where she comes with the Kings Sister,
And from the Princes lodging, lets salute her.
God morrow to your Maiestie.
God morrow to my reueent Lords of London and of Winchester, saw yee the King to day?
His Highnesse was not yet abroade this morning.
But here we will attend his excellence.
Come sister weele go see his Maiestie.
We will attend yee Maddam.
Gentlemen set forward, God morrow Lords.
Ill morrow must it be to you or vs,
Conspirators gainst men religious,
Bonner, these Lutherans do conspie I see,
And scoffe the Pope and his supremacie.
Lets strike in time then, and incense the King,
And sodainly their stares to ruine bring:
The Trumpets sounds, it seemes the Queene is comming.
Weele watch and take aduantage cunningly.
Wheres Brandon?
My Leedge.
Come hether Kate.
Did your grace call?
Ile speake we anon, Ile speake we anon: Come Kate lets walke a little, whose there? my Lords of London and of Winchester, welcome, welcome: by this your maister the Cardinall I troe, has parted with the Emperour, & set a league betweene the French and him, Mother of God,
I would our selfe in person had beene there,
But Wolseys diligence we neede not feare,
Ha think yee he will not.
No doubt he will my Lord.
I Gardner twill be his best pollicie,
Their friendship must aduance his dignitie.
If ere he get the Papall gouernance.
And that will neuer be I hope.
Twere pittie it should.
Hee's proud enough already.
Haw, whats that yee talke there.
They say my Lord hee's gone with such a traine, As if he should be elected presently.
Fore-god tis a gallant Priest, come hether Charlcs prithee let me leane a thy shoulder, by Saint George, Kate grow stiffe me thinkes.
Wilt please your Highnesse sit and rest your selfe?
No, no Kate, Ile walke still, Brandon shall stay mine arme, I me fat and pursie, and twill get me a stomack: Sawst the Prince to day Kate?
I my good Lord.
God blenn him, and make him fortunate, I tell yee Lords, the hope that England hath, is now in him, fore-god I thinke old Harry must leaue yee shortly; well, Gods will be done, heerle be old shuffling then, ha will there not; well, you say nothing, pray God there be not, I like not this difference in religion I, Gods deere Lady, and I liue but seauen yeere longer, weele take order throughly.
We heare that Luther out of Germanic
Hath with a booke vnto your Maiestie,
Wherein he much repents his former deeds,
Crauing your Highnesse pardon, and withall,
Submits himselfe vnto your Graces pleasure.
Bonner tis true, and we haue answered it,
Blaming at first his haughtie insolence,
And now his lightnesle and inconstancie,
That writ he knew not what so childisbly.
Much bloodshed there is now in Germanie,
About this difference in religion,
With Lutherans, Arians, and Anabaptis
As halfe the Prouince of Heluetia,
Is with their tumults almost quite destroyde.
Me thinkes twere well my royall Soueraigne,
Your Grace, the Emperour, and the Christian kings,
Would call a Counsaile and puse the bookes,
That Luther writ against the Catholickes,
And superstitions of the Church of Rome:
And if they teach a truer way to heauen,
Agreeing with the Hebrew Testament,
Why should they not be red and followed?
Thou sayst wel Kate, so they agree with the scriptures, I thinke tis lawfull to peruse and read them, speake Bishops?
Most vnlawfull my deare Soueraigne,
Vnlesse permitted by his Holynesse.
How proue ye that my Lord?
Well sed Kate, to them againe good wench, Lordes giue vs leaue awhile, auoyde the Presence there, wel heare the Bishops and my Queene dispute.
I am a weake Scholler my Lord,
But on conditiō that your Highnesse, not these reuerent Lords,
Will take no exceptions at my womans wit,
I am content to holde them Argument:
And first with reuerence to his Maiestie.
Pray tell me, why would ye make the King beleeue.
His Highnesse and the people vnder him,
Are tyde so stictly to obay the Pope?
Because faire Queene he is Gods Deputie.
So are all Kings; and God himselfe commaunds
The King to rule, and people to obay.
And both to loue and honour him:
But you that are sworne seruants vnto Rome,
How are ye faithfull sbiects to the King,
When first ye scrue the Pope then after him?
Madame these are that sectes of Lutherans,
That makes your Highnesse so mistake the Scriptures,
Your slender arguments thus aunswered
Before the King, God .
Tis true, but pray ye answere this:
Suppose, the King by Proclamation,
Commaunded you and ,
To spurne against the Popes authoritie:
Yee know the Scripture binds yee to obey him,
But this I thinke, if that his Grace did so,
Your slight obedience all the world should know.
Gods-mother Kate, thoust toucht them there,
What say yee to that Bonner?
Were it to any but her Maiestie,
These questions were confuted easily.
Pray tell the King then, what Scripture haue yee,
To teach religion in an vnknowne language?
Instruct the ignorant to kneele to Saints,
By bare-foote pilgrimage to visite shrines,
For mony to release from Purgatorie,
The vildest villaine, theefe, or murderer,
All this the people must beleeue you can,
Such is the dregs of Romes religion.
I, those are the speeches of those hereticks,
Cranmer, Ridley, and blunt Lattimer,
That dayly raile against his Hollynesse,
Filling the land with hatefull herefies.
Nay be not angry, nor mistake them Lords,
What they haue said or done, was mildly followed,
As by their Articles are euident.
Where are those Articles Kate?
Ile goe and fetch them to your Maiestie,
And pray your Highnesse view them gratiously.
Go fetch them Kate: a sirta, we haue womē doctors,
Now I see, Mother a God, here's a fine world the whilste,
That twixt so many mens opinions,
The holy Scriptures must be banded thus.
God graunt it breede no farther detriment,
Vnto your crowne and sacred dignite:
They that would alter thus Religion,
I feare they scarcely loue your toyall person.
Ha▪ take heed what you say Gardiner.
My loue and dutie to your Maiestie,
Bids me be bolde to speake my conscience,
Vnlesse your sasetie and your life they hate,
Why should they dayly thus disturbe the state.
To smooth the face of false rebellion,
Proude traytors will pretend religion.
For vnder colour of reformation
The vpstart followers of Wickcliffes doctrine,
In the fift Henries dayes arise in armes:
And had nor dilligent care preuented them,
Their powres had sodainely surprisd the King.
And good my Leege who knows their proud intent,
That thus rebell against your gouernment.
Shrode proofes berlady and by saint Peter,
I swcare we will not trust their gentlenesse,
Speake Gardner and resolue vs speedily,
Whose the ring-leader of this Iusty crew?
Vnlesse your highnes please to pardon vs,
We dare not speake nor vrge your maiesty.
We pardon what ye speake, resolue vs speedely.
Then if your royall perso will be safe,
Your life preserude and this faire Realme in peace.
And all these troubles smoothly pacifide,
The Queene deare Lord must be remoued from you.
Haw, the Queene, bold Sir aduise ye well,
Take heede ye do not wrong her loyalty.
See here my lee ge are proofes too manifest,
Her highnesse with a sect of Lutherans:
Haue priuate meetings, secret conuentickells,
To wrest the grounds of all religion:
Seeking by tumults to subuert the state,
The which with out your maiesties consent,
Is treason capitall against the Crowne.
And seeing without the knowledge of your grace,
They dare attempt these dangerous stratagems,
Tis to befearde, which heauen we pray preuent,
They do conspire against your sacred life.
Why else, should all these priuate meetings be without the knowledge of your maiesty.
Mother a god these proofes are probabell,
And strong presumptions doe your words, within there, ho?
Sir William Compton see the dores made fast▪
Dubble our gard let none come nere our person▪
Sommon the counsell to confer with vs,
Bid them attend vs in the prity chamber,
Here is a letter for your maiesty,
From Martin Luther out of Germany.
Dabd Scysmatick still will he trouble vs with bookes and letters, leaue it and be gone▪
The villaine thinks to smooth his trechery,
By sawning speeches to our maiesty,
But by my George Lord Bishops if I liue,
Ile roote his fauorits from Englands bounds
What writes his worship?
Now Bonner stir, the game is set a foot,
The king is now incenst, lets follow close
To haue Queene Katherne shorter by a head,
These heresies will cease when she is dead.
Holy sain: Peter what a knane is this,
Ere while he writ submissiuely to vs;
And now againe repents his humblenesse,
Bishops it seemes being toucht with our reply
He wrights thus boldly to our maiesty,
Gardner looke here he was deceaued he says
When he thought to finde Iohn Baptist in the
Courts of princes, or resident with those that are
Cloathed in purple, Mother a god, Ist not a dangerous knaue.
False luther knaues he has great friends in England:
Else durst he not thus moue your Maiestie.
Weele cut his friends off, ere they grow too strong
And sweepe these vypets from our state ere long,
No maruell though Queene Katherne plead for him,
That is I see the greatest Lutherin,
How is your counsels we proceede in these?
tware best your grace did send her to the Towre.
Before they further doe consit with her.
Let it be so, go get a warrant drawne,
And with a strong garde beare her to the Towre.
Our hand shall signe your large commission,
Let Cranmer from the Prince be straight remooued,
And come not neere the Court on paine of death,
Mother a God, shall I be basseld thus,
By traitors, rebels and false heickes:
Get Articles for her araignement readie,
If she of treasou be conuict, I sweare,
Her head goes off, were she my kingdomes aire.
Cranmer.
My Lord.
Where is Franciscoe our Italian Tutor?
He does attend your Grace without my Lord.
Tell him anon we will conferre with him,
Weele plie our learning Browne least you be beaten,
We will not haue your Knighthood so disgrast.
I thanke yee good my Lord,
And your Grace would but a little plie your learning,
I warrant yee Ile keepe my Knighthood from breeching.
Faith Ned I will: how now what letter's that?
From your Graces sister the Lady Mary.
Come giue it me, we gesse at the contents.
Cranmer, my sister oft hath writ to me,
That you and Bishop Bonner might conserre,
About these points of new Religion,
Tell me Tutor will yee dispute with him.
Withall my hart my Lord, and wish the king,
Would daine to here our disputarion.
What hast thou there?
A Letter from your royall sister, young Elizabeth.
Another Letter ere we open this,
Well we will view them both immediatly,
I pray yee attend vs in the next Chamber,
And Tutors if I call yee not before,
Giue me some notice, if the king my Father
Be walkt abroade, I must goe visite him.
We will faire Prince.
What sayes my sister Mary? she is eldest,
And by due curse must first be answered,
Alas good sister still in this opinion,
These are thy blinded Tutors, Bonner, Gardner,
That wong thy thoughts with foolish herisies,
He read no farther: to him will Edward pray
For , that can him selfe preserue me,
Without the helpe of Saint or cerimonie.
Wat writes sweete sister thou hast my hart.
And of Prince Edwards loue hast greatest part.
with a Sisters loue,
Be in thy such, and let thy prayers
to God oly for tis he alone
thee, and confound thine enimies,
assurance of thy hopes in heauen,
thee in all temptations,
grace to sh Idolatrie,
life to inherite thy election,
To God I commend thee, who still I pray preserue thee.
Louing thou art, and of me best beloued.
Thy lines shalbe my contemplations cures,
And in thy vertues will I meditate,
To Christ Ile onely pray for me and thee:
This I imbrace, away Idolatrie,
How now Cranmer, where's the King?
Conferring with his counsell gratious Prince,
There is some earnest businesse troubles him:
The Guardes are doubled, and commandment giuen,
That none be suffered to come neere the presence,
God keepe his Maiestie from traitors hands.
Amen good Cranmer, what should disturbe him thus?
Is Cardinall Wolsey yet returned from France?
I my good Lord, and this day comes to court.
Perhaps this hastie business of the King,
Is touching Wolsey and his Embassage.
Pray God it be no worse my Lord.
Here comes sir William Compton from his highnesse.
Health to your excellencie.
What newes sir William?
The King expects your Graces companie,
And wils vout Highnesse come and speake with him,
And doctor Cranmer, from his Maiestie,
I charge yee speedily to leaue the Court,
And come not neere the Prince on paine of death,
Without direction from the Kg and Peeres.
Sir I obey yee God so deale with me,
As I haue wisht vnto his Maiestie.
Cranmer banisht the Court for what I pray?
I know not gratious Lord, pray pardon me,
Tis the Kings pleasure; and trust me I am sorry
It was my hap to bring this heauie message.
Nay good sir William, your message moues not me,
My seruice to his royall Maiestie
Was alwayes true and iust, so helpe me heauen:
Onely I pray your Grace to moue the King,
That I may come to tryall speedily,
And if in ought I haue deserued death,
Let me not draw another minutes breath.
Will yee goe my Lord.
Not yet, we are not your prisoner, are we sir?
No my deere Lord.
Then goe before, and we will follow yee,
Your worship will forget your selfe I see,
My tutor thrust from court so sodainly, this is strange.
The Queene my Lord is come to speake with you.
Auoyde the presence then, and conduct her in,
Ile speake with her, and after see the King,
Leaue vs alone I pray yee.
Your grace is welcome, how fares your Maiestie.
Neuer so ill deare Prince, for now I feare,
Euen as a wretched caitiffe kild with care,
I am accusde of treason, and the king
Is now in counsell to dispose of me,
I know his frowne is death, and I shall dye.
Who are your accusers.
I know not.
How know yee then his Grace is so incenst.
One of my Gentlemen passing by the presence,
Tooke vp this bill of accusations,
Wherein tweue Articles are drawne against me,
It seemes my false acusers lost it there,
Here they accuse me of conspiracie,
That I with Cranmer, Lutimer and Ridley,
Doo seeke to raise rebellion in the state,
Alter religion, and bring Luther in,
And to new gouernment inforce the king,
Then thats the cause that Cranmer was remooued,
But did your Highnesse re conferre with them?
As they haue here accusde yee to the king.
Neuer nor cuer had I one such thought,
As I haue hope in him my soule hath bought.
Then feare not gratious Maddam, Ile to the king,
And doubt not but Ile make your peace with him.
O pleade for me, tell him my soule is cleare,
Neuer did thought of treason harbor heere,
As I intended to his sacred life,
So be it to my soule or ioy or greese.
Stay here till I returne, Ile moue his maiestie,
That you may answer your accusers presently.
O I shall neuer come to speake with him,
The Lion in his rage is not to sterne,
As Royall Herry in his wrathfull spleene,
And they that haue accused me to his grace,
Will worke such meanes I neare shall see his face,
Wretched Queene Katherin, would thou hadst beene
Kate Parre still, and not great Englands Queene,
Health to your Maiestie.
Wish me good Compton woe and miserie,
This giddie flattering world I hate and coffe,
Ere long I know Queene Katherins head must off.
Came ye from the King?
I did fayre Queene, and much sad tidings bring,
His grace in secret hath reueild to me
What is intended to your Maiesty,
Which I in loue and duty to your highnesse,
Am come to tell ye and to counsell ye
The best I can in this exremine.
Then on my knees I dare intreat your grace,
Not to reuaile what I shall say to you,
For then I am assurde that deas my due.
I will not on my faith, good Comptton speake,
That with thy sad repors my heart may breake.
Thus then at your sayre feete my life I lay,
In hope to driue your hignes cares away:
You are accude of high conspiracy
And treason gainst his royall maesty.
So much they haue insenst his excellency,
That he hath granted fie commssion
To attach your person and conuay ye hence,
Close prisoner to the Towre, Articles are drawne,
And time appoynted for arrainement there.
Good maddame be aduisd by this I know,
The officers are sent to arest your person:
Preuent their malice, hast ye to the King.
Ile vse such meanes that you shall speake with him,
There plead your Innocency, I know his grace
Will heare ye mildly therfore delay not,
If you be taken ere you see the king,
I feare ye neuer more shall speake to him.
Oh Comptton twixt thy loue and my sage feare,
I feele ten thousand sad vexations here,
Leade on I pray, Ile be aduisd by thee,
The King is angry and the Queene must dye.
Come Boner now strike sure the yrons hott.
Vrge all thou canst, let nothing be forgot.
We haue the Kings hand here to warrant vs,
Twas well the Cardinall came and so luckely.
Who vrgd, the stae would quite be ruined,
If that religion thus were altered.
Which made his highnes with a firy spleene,
Direct out warrants to attache the Queene.
Twas excellent, that Ceder once orethrowne,
To crop the lower shrubs let vs alone.
Those Articles of accusations,
We rmd against her being lost by you
Had like to ouerthrow our pollicy,
Had we not stouly vrgd his maiesty.
Well well, what's now to be done.
A gard must be prouided speedely,
To beare her prisoner vnto London Towre,
And watch conuenient place to arest her person.
Tush any place shall serue for who dare contradict
His highnesse hand, euen from his side wele hale her,
And beare her quicly, to her longest home,
Lest we and ours by her to ruine come.
About it then, let them vntimely dye, that scorne the Pope and Romes supremacie.
Guarde, watch the dores and let none come nere vs,
But such as are attendant on our person
Mother a God tisime to sturre, I see,
When traors creeps so nere our maiesty:
Must English walke with armed Gards,
Now in his old age, must I feare my life,
By hatefull teason of my Queene and wife.
I do beseech your royall maiesty,
To here her speake ere ye condemue her thus.
Go too Ned, I charge ye speake not for her, shes a dangerous travtor how now, who knocks so loud there.
Tis Cardall Wolye my Lord.
And it be the Deuill tell him he comes not here.
Byd him attend vs tll our beer leaure:
Come hither Ned let me conerre with you.
Didst euer heare the disputation
Twixt Cranmer and the Queene about Religion.
Neuer my Lord, I thinke they neuer yet,
At any time had speech concerning it.
O thou art deceaued Ned, It is too certaine,
Hoyday more knocking, knock yrons an his heeles,
And beare him hence what ere he be disturbe vs, who ist?
S. William Compton my Leedge.
Ist he, well let him in, Gods holy mother, heere's a stur indeed, Compton ye knock too lowde for entrance here.
You care not though the king be neere so neere, say ye sir haw.
I do beseech you pardon for my bouldnesse.
Well what's your busines.
The Queene my Lord intreats to speake with you,
Body a me, is she not rested yet.
Why doe they not conuay her to the Towre,
We gaue commission to attach her presently.
Where is she?
At the dore my Soueraigne.
So nere our presence, keepe her out I charge ye.
Bend all your Holbeards points against the dore,
If she presume to enter strike her through,
Dare she presume againe to looke on vs.
Vpon my knees, I do beseech your highnes
To heare her speake.
Vp Ned, stand vp I will not looke on her,
Mother a god, stand close and gard it sure,
If she come in, ile hang ye all I sweare.
I doe beseech your Grace.
Sir boye no more ile here no more of her,
Proud slut, bold traitresse, and forgetfull beast,
Yet dare she further moue our patience.
Ile pawne my princely word, right royall father,
She shall not speake a word to anger ye.
Will you pawne your word for her mother a god
The Prince of Wales his word is warrant for a king,
And we will take it Ned, go call her in.
Sir William let the gard attend without,
Reach me a chaire, all but the prince depart.
How now, what doe you weepe and kneele,
Dus your blacke soule the gylte of conscience feele,
Out, out, your a traytor.
A traytor, O you all seeing powres,
Here witnesse to my Lord my loyalty
A traytor. O then you are too mercifull,
If I haue treason in me, why rip ye not
My vgly hart out with your weapons poynt,
O my good Lord, If it haue traytors blood,
It will be black, deformd, and tenibrous,
If not, from it will spring a scarlet fountaine,
And spit defiance in their periurde throates
That haue accusde me to your maiesty,
Making my state thus full of misery.
Canst thou deny it.
Else should I wrongfully accuse my selfe,
Of my deare Lord I do beseech your highnesse
To satisfie your wronged Queene in this,
Vpon what ground growes this suspicion,
Or who thus wrongfully accuseth me.
Of cursed treason gainst your maiesty.
Some probable effects my selfe can witnesse,
Others our faithfull subiects, can testifie:
Haue you not oft maintained arguments,
Euen to our face against religion:
Which ioynd with other complots show it selfe,
As it is gathered by our loyall subiects,
For treason Cappitall against our person,
Gods holy mother youle emoue vs quickly,
And turne me out, old Harry must away,
Now in mine age, lame and halfe bed-rid,
Or else youle keepe me fast inough in prison,
Haw, mistris, these are no hatefull treasons these.
Heauen on my fore-head write my worst intent,
And let your hate against my lie be bent,
If euer thought of ill against your maiestie,
Was harbord here refuse me gratious God,
To your face, my ledge, if to your face I speake it.
It maniestes no complot, nor no treason,
Nor are they loyall that so iniure ;
What I did speake, was as my womans wit,
To hold out Argument could compasse it,
My puny schollership is helde too weake
To maintaine proofes about religion,
Alas I did it but to wast the time,
Kowug as then your grace was weae and sickly,
So to expell parte of your paine and griese:
And for my good intent they seeke my life,
O God, how am I wrongd.
Ha, aist thou so, was it no otherwise.
What should I say, that you might credit me,
If I am false, heauen strike me sodainly.
Body a me, what euerasting knaues are these that wrong thee thus, alas poore Kate, come stand vp stand vp, wipe thine eyes, wipe thine eyes, foregod twas told me that thou wert a traytor: I could hardly thinke it, but that it was applde so hard to me, Godsmother Kate I eare my life I tell ye, King Harry would be loath to die by treason now, that has bid so many bruts vublemished, yet I confee that now I growe stifte, my legges faile me first but they stand furthiest from my hart, and thats still sound, I thanke my God, giue me thy hand, come kisse me Kate, so now e friends againe, hurson knaues, crafy varlets, make thee a traytor to oulde Harries life, well, well, ile meete with some on them, Sfoue come sit on my knee Kate. Mother a god he that says th'art false to me by Englands crowne ile hang him presently.
When I haue thought of ill against your state,
Let me be made the vildest reprobate.
Thats my good Kat, but byth mary God, Queene Kathere you must thanke prince Edward here.
For but for him th'adst gone toth towre I swere,
I shalbe euer thankfull to his highnesse.
And pray for him and for your maiesty,
Come Kte weell walke a while eth garden heere, who keepes the dote there?
My Lord.
Sir William Compton, here take my ring,
Bid Doctor Cranmer haste to Cout againe,
Give him that token of king Henries love,
Discharge our guards, we feare no trayors hand.
Our State, beloved of all doth firmely stand:
Go Compton.
I go my Lord.
Bid Wosey haste him to our royall presence,
Great Charles the mighty Romane Emperour,
Our Nephew, and the hope of Christendome
Is landed in our faire Dominion,
To see his Vnckle and the English Court;
Wee'le entertaine him with imperiall port:
Come hither Ned.
Felows, stay there, and when I cal, come forward,
The service you pursue, is for the kings
Therefore I charge you to performe it boldly,
We have his hand and seale to warrant it.
Wee'le fellow you with resolution sir,
The Church is on our side, what should we feare?
See yonder, shees talking with his Maiesty,
Thinke you we may attempt to take her hre?
Why should we not, have we not firme cōmission
To attach hir any where? be bold, and feare not:
Fellowes come forward.
How now, whats heere to do?
The Bishops it seemes my Lord would speake with you.
With bills and holberds, well, tarry there Kate,
Ile go my selfe; Now wherefore come you?
As loyall subiects to your state and person,
We come to apprehend that trayterous woan.
Y are a couple of
Gods holy mother, shee is more true and iust,
Then any Prelate that Subornes the Pops:
Thus to vsupe vpon our govenment?
Call you her traytor? y'are lying beastes and false conspiratours.
Your Maiesty hath seene what proofes we had.
Here you Bonner, you are a whorson coxcomb, What proofes had ye, but treasons of your owne inventons?
O my deare Lorde, respect the reverend Bishoppes.
Bonner and Gardner loves your Maiestie.
Alas poore Kate, thou think'st full little what they come for;
Thou hast small reason to commend their loves,
That falsly have accusde thy harmelesse life.
O God, are these mine enemies?
We have your highnesse hand to warrant it.
Lets see it then.
Tis heere my Liege.
So, nowe yee have both my hand to contradict what one hand did: and now out word gine shal serve as warrant to beare you both as prisoners to the Fleete, Where you shall answer this conspiracie.
You fellows that came to attah the Queens,
Lay hands on them, and beare them to the Fleete.
O I beseech your highnesse on my knees,
Ret the dooe of their imprisonment.
Stand vp good Kate, thou wrongst thy Maiesty,
To plead for them that thus have iniurde thee
I have forgotten it, and do still intreate
Then humble pardons at your gratious et.
Mother of God, what a foolish woman's this,
Well, for her sake we rovoke our doome,
But come not neere vs as you love your lives:
Away and leave vs, you are knaves and miscreants,
Wherson Caiifes, come to attach my Queene!
Vex not my Lord it will distemper you.
Mother a God, Ile temper some on them for't
How now Branden?
The Emperour my Lord.
Get a traine readie there, Charles Branden, co c
Weele mete the Monrke of imperiall Rome:
Go Ned, prepare your selfe to meete the Emperour,
Weele send you further notice of our pleasure.
Attend the Prince there: Welcome Lord Cardinall,
Hath not our tedious iorney into France,
Disturbed your Graces heath and reverent person?
No, no, ne're feare hun Harry, he haz got
More by the iourney, heele be Pope shortly.
What, Wliam, how chance I have not seene you to day? I thought you would not have bin the hindmost man to salute me.
No more I am not Harry, for yonder is Patch behinde me, I could never get him before me, since thou coniurst him i'th great chamber, all the horse i'th towne cannot hawle him into thy presence I warrant thee.
Will hee not come in?
Not for the world, he stand watching at the dore.
Hee'le not stirre while the Cardinal come;
Then the foole will follow him every where.
I thank you William, I am beholding to you stil.
Namy Lord, I am more beholding vnto you, I thanke your foole for it, we have ransakled your winesellers since you went into France: Doe you blush my Lord? na, thats nothing, you have wine there, is able to set a colour in any mans face I warrant it.
Why William, is the Cardinalls wine so good?
Better then thine Ile be sworne, Ile take but two handfulls of his wine, and it shall fill foure hoggesheads of thine (looke here else)
Mordie.
Mor divell; ist not? for without coing, you could never do it: But I pray you my Lord call vppo Mor dieu no longer, but speake plaine English, you have deceived the king in French and Latine long enough a conscience.
Is his wine turned into gold, Wil?
The foole mistakes, my gratious Soveraigne.
I, I my Lord, ne're set your wit to the fooles, Wil Sumers will be secret now, and say nothing, if I would be a blabbe of my tongue, I could tell the King how many barrells full of gold and silver there was sixe times filled with plate and jewells, twentie great tuncks with Crosses, Crosiers, Copes, Miters, Maces, golden Crucifixes, besides the foure hundreth and twelve thousand pound that poore Chineys paid for Peeter pence. But this is nothing, for when you are Pope, you may pardon your selfe for more nvery en this comes to.
Go too foole, you wrong th Cardinall,
But grieve not Woolsey, Willam will be bold:
I pray you set on to meete the Empeour,
The Maior and Citizens are gone before,
The Prince of Wales shall follow presently,
And with our George and coller of estae,
Present him with the order of the Gater:
Great Maximilian his progenitour,
Vpon his breast did weare the English Crosse,
And vndrneath our Standerd marcht in armes,
Receiving pay for all his warlike hose;
And Chales with knighthood shal be honored:
Beginne Lord Cardinall, greete his Maiestie,
And we our selfe will follow presently.
I go my Soveraigne.
Faire weather after yee:
Well, and ere he come to be Pope, I shall bee plung'd for this.
Queene William, you have angred the Cardinall I can tell you.
T'is no matter Kate, Ile anger him worse are long,
Though for a while I smooth it to his face:
I did suspect what heere the foole hath found,
He keepes forsooth; a high Court Legantine,
Taxing our subiects, gathering summes of gold,
Which he belike hath hid to make him Pope;
A Gods name let him, that shall be our owne.
But to our businesse, come Queene Katherin,
You shall with vs to meete the Emperour,
Let all your Ladies be in readinesse:
Go, let our guard attend the Prince of Wales,
Vpon our selfe, the Lords and Pentioners
Shall give attendance in their best array,
Let all estates be ready▪ come faire Kate,
The Emperour shall see our English state.
Your Maiesty is welcome into England,
Theking our Master, will reioyce to see
Great Charles the royall Emperours Maiesty.
We thank your paines my good L. Cardinall,
And much our longing eyes desires to see
Our kingly vnkle and his princely sonne,
And therefore, when you please I pray set on.
On gentlemen, and meee the Prince of Wales.
That comes forerunner to his royall father,
To entertaine the Christian Emperour:
Meane while, your Maiesty may heere behold
This warlike kingdome faire Metropolis,
The Citty London, and the river Thames,
And note the scituation of the place.
We do my Lord, and count it admirable:
But see Lord Admirall, the Prince is comming.
Well met yong coosen.
I kisse your highnesse hand.
And bid you welcome to my fathers lands
I shall not neede inferre comparisons,
Welcome beyond compare, for so your excellencie
Hath honoured England, in containing you,
As with all princely pompe and state we can,
Weele entertaine great Charles the Austrian:
And first, in signe of honour to your grace,
I heere present this collar of estate,
This golden garter of the knighthoods order,
An honour to renowne the Emperour:
Thus as my father hath commanded me,
I entertaine your royall Maistie.
True honoured off-spring of a famous King
Thou dost amaze me, and doost ake me wish
I were a second sonne to Englan Lord,
In interchange of my imperiall seates
To live with thee hope of Maiestie,
So well our welcome we accept of thee,
And with such pncely spirit pronounce the word,
Thy fathers state, can no more state afford.
Yes my good Lord, in him theres Maiesty,
In me theres love with tender infancie.
The trumpets found my Lord, the King is comming.
Go all of you attend his royall person,
Whilst we observe the Emperours Maiesty.
Hold, stand I say.
Stand genlemen.
Cease those trumpets there.
Is the Emperour yet come in sight of vs?
His Maiestie is hard at hand my Lord.
Then , sheathe Sword and beare our Maces downe,
In honour of my Lord, the Emperour:
Forward agne.
On Gentlemen afore, sound trumpets and set forward.
Behold my father, gratious Emperour.
Weele meete him Coosen:
Vnckle of England, King of France and Ireland, defender of the antient Christian faith;
With greater ioy I do embrace thy breast,
Then when the seaven Electors crowed me,
Great Emperour of the Christian Monachy.
Great Chles, the first Emperour of Alayne, King of the Romas, Semper Angustus, warlike king of Spaine and Cicily, both Naples, Navar and Arrag, king of Creete and great lerusalem, Arch-duke of Austria, Duke of Millaine, Brabant, Burgndy, Tyrrell and Flanders, with this great title I embrace thy breast,
And how thy sight doth please, suppose the rest,
Sound trumpets, while my faire Queene Katree
Gives entertainment to the Emperour.
Welcome againe to England princely Coosen,
We dwell heere, but in an ouward continent,
Where winters ice-ckles hangs on our beards,
Bordring vpon the frozen Orcades,
Our mother-point, compast with the Artike sea,
Where raging Boreas styes from winters mouth,
Yet are our bloods as hote, as where the Sun doth rise,
We have no golden mines to leade you to,
But hearts of proofe, and what we speake, weele do.
We thanke you Vnckle & now must chide you;
If we be welcome to your Country,
Why is the antient league now broke betwixt vs?
Why have your Heralds in the French kings cause.
Breathed defiance gainst our dignity,
When face to face, we met at Lander sey?
My Heroalds to desire your Maiestie?
Your grace mistakes, we sent Ambassadors
To treate a peace betweene the French and you,
Not to defie you as an enemy.
Yet Vnckle in king Henries name he came,
And boldly to our face did give the same.
Hell stop that fatall boding Emperors throte▪
That sings against vs this dismall Ravens note.
Mother of God, if this be true, we see,
There are more kings in England now then wee:
Wheres Cardinall Woolsey?
Heard you this newes in France?
I did my Liege, and by my meanes twas done,
Ile not deny it; I had Commission
To ioyne a league betweene the Frech and him▪
Which he withstanding as an enemi.
I did defie him from your Maiestie.
Durst thou presume so, base-borne Cardinall,
Without our knowledge to abuse our name;
Presumptuous taitor, vnder what pretence
Didst thou attempt to brave the Emperour?
Belike thou meantst to levell at a crowne▪
But thy ambitious crowne shall hule thee downe.
With reverence to your Maiesty, I did no more
Then I can answer to the holy sea.
Vilaine, thou canst not answer it to me,
Nor shadow thy insulting trechery:
How durst ye sirra, in your ambassage,
Vnknowne to vs stampe in our royall coyne
The base impression of your Cardinal hat.
As if you were copartner in the Crowne?
Ego & Rexmes: you and your king must be
In equal state, and pompe, and Maiestie:
Out of my presence hatefull impudencie.
Remember my Liege, that I am Cardinall
And deputie vnto his holinesse.
Be the divells Deputie, I care not I,
Ile not be baffeld by your trechery;
Y'are false abusers of religion,
You can corrupt it and forbid the King,
Vpon the penaltie of the Popes blacke curse.
If he ,
Not to suppresse an old Abbey▪
Yet you at pleasure have subvered foute,
Seizing their lands, tunning vp heapes of gold,
Secret convaiance of our royall Seale,
To raise Collections to inch thy state,
For which sir, we command you leave the Court.
We here discharge you of your offices:
You that are Catas, or great Cardinall,
Haste ye with vnto your Bishopricke,
There keepe you till you heare further from vs:
Away and speake not.
Yet will I prowdly passe as Cardinall,
Although this day define my heavy fall.
I feare king Henry, and my royall Vnckle,
The Cardinall will curse my progresse hether.
No matter , besrew his trechrous hart.
Haz moov'd my blood to much impatience.
Whees wil summer come on wise, William,
We must vse your little wt, to thase this
Anger from our blood againe:
What art doing?
I am looking round about the Emperour, mee thinks ti a for though he have seene more fooles then I, yet I never saw no more Emperours but him.
Is this Wil ▪ I have heard of him in all the Princes Courts in Christendome.
Law foole of mee,
tell yee.
Wil summers is knowne farre and neere yee see.
I am for yee, I have not rymed with yee a great while, and now Ile challenge yes, and the Emperour shall bee iudge beetweene vs.
Content my Lord, I am for ye all, come but one
Say yee
Weele put you to an presentlie.
To him Wil.
I warrnt you Madam.
Answer this sir,
The bud is spread the
A wench , was found in you bed, besides the Qeene.
Godamarcy for that Wil
Theres two angells for the:
I my Lord I am glad I know it.
God mother Kate▪ wilt thou beleeve the foole? he lies, he ies, a sirra William, I perceive and't had beene so, you would hav shamed me before the Emperour, et William have at you once more,
In yonder Tower▪ theres a flower, that hath my hart.
Within this houre, she pit full sower, & let a fart.
Hee, too hrd for you my Lord, le try him one venye my selfe, what say you to this William?
An Emperour is grete, high is his feae, who is his fo?
The that shall , his carkas for whether he will o no.
Well answeed wil, yet A uddy lip,
Who comes next then?
The Queene , tooke to your selfe,
To hi Kate.
Come on , answer to this,
What could I take, my head doth ake, what good?
Heeres will and warne your blood.
I am not repulst at first William, sir, Women and their wills, are dangerous ills, as suppose.
She that puddings fills, when must keep her nos.
Inough good William, y'are too hard for all:
My Lord the Emperour, we delay too long,
Your promised welcome to the English Court,
The honourable order of the garter,
Your Maiestie shall take immediately,
And sit instalde terewith in Windsr Castle,
I tell ye there are lads girt with that order,
That wil vngirt prowdest Champion:
Set forwards there egard the Emperours state,
First in our Court weele banquet merrily,
Then mount on steedes, and girt in complete steele,
Weele tugge at Barriers, Tilt and turnament:
Then shall yee see the Yeomen of my guard
Wrestle, shoote, throw the sledge, or pitch the barre,
Or any other active exercise:
Those triumphs past, weele forthwith haste to Windsor,
S. Gorges knight shall be the Christian Emperour