WHo ſo in pompe of prowde eſtate,
or Kingdome ſets delight:
Or who that ioyes in Princes courte
to beare the ſway of might.
Ne dreads the fates which from aboue
the wauering Gods downe flinges:
But faſt affiance fixed hath,
in frayle and fickle thinges:
Let him in me both ſe the Face,
of Fortunes ftattering ioy:
And eke reſpect the ruthful end of thee (Oruinous Troy)
For neuer gaue ſhee playner proofe, then this ye preſent ſee:
How frayle and britle is the ſtate of pride and high degree,
The flowre of flowring Aſia, loe whoſe fame the heauens refound,
The Worthy worke of Gods aboue, is baered downe to ground.
And whoſe aſſaultes they ſought afar, from Weſt wt Banners ſpred
Where Tanais cold her braunches ſeuen, abroad the world doth ſhed.
With hugie hoſt and from the Eaſt, where ſpringes the neweſt dea,
Where Luke warme Tygris channell runnes, and meetes the ruddy ſea.
And which frō wandring land of Sythe, the band of widowes ſought:
With fire and ſworde thus battered be her Turrets downe to nought.
The walles but late of high renowne lo here their ruinous fall:
The buildinges burne, and flaſhingflame, ſwepes through the pallas al.
Thus euery houſe ful hie it ſmoakes, of old Aſſarackes lande:
Ne yet the flames withholdes from ſpoyle, the greedy Victors hand.
The ſurging ſmoake, the aſure ſaye, and light hath hid away:
And (as with cloude beſet) Troyes Aſhes ſtaynes the duſky day.
Through pearſt with ire and greedy of hart, the victor from a farre.
Doth vtew the long aſſaulted Troy, the gaine of ten yeares warre,
And eke the miſeryes therof abhorres to looke vppon,
And though he ſe it yet ſcant himſelfe, belieues might be wonne,
The ſpoyles thereof with greedy hand, they ſnatch and beare awaye:
A thouſand ſhippes would not receiue aboorde ſo huge a pray
The yreful might I do proteſt of Gods aduerſe to mee,
My countryes duſt, and Troyan King I call to witnes thee,
Whom Troy nowhydes, and vnderneath the ſtones art ouertrode:
With al the Gods that guides the Ghoſt, and Troy that lately, ſtoode.
And you alſo you flocking Ghoſtes of al my children dere:
Ye leſſer Sprightes what euer ill, hath hapned to vs here.
What euer Phoebus watriſh face, in fury hath foreſayde:
At raging riſe from ſeas when earſt, the monſters had him frayde.
In childbed bandes I ſaw it yore, and wiſt it ſhould be ſo:
And I in vayne before Caſſandra told it long agoe.
Not falſe Vlyſſes kindled hath theſe fires, nor none of his:
Nor yet deceyptful Sinons craft, that hath bene cauſe of this.
My fyre it is wherwith ye burne, and Parys is the brand
That ſmoaketh in thy towres (O Troy) the flowre of Phrygian ſand.
But ay (alas) vnhappy age, why doſt thou yet ſo ſore,
Bewayle thy Countries fatall fall thou kneweſt it long before:
Behold thy laſt calamityes, and them bewayle with wares:
Account as old Troys ouerturne, and paſt by many yeares,
I ſaw the ſlaughter of the King, and how he loſt his life:
By Th' aulter ſe (more miſchiefe was) with ſtroake of Pyrrhus knife.
When in his hand he wound his lockes, and drew the King to ground,
And hid to hiltes his wicked ſword, in deepe and deadly wound.
Which when the ored King had tooke, as willing to bee ſlaynt,
Out of the old mans throate he drew his bloudy blade agayne.
Not pitty of his yeares (alas) in mans extreameſt age:
From ſlaughter might his hand withhold, ne yet his yre aſſwage:
The Gods are witnes of the ſame, and eake the ſacrifyes,
That in his kingdome holden was, that flat on ground now lies.
The father of ſo many Kings Pryam of aunient name,
Vntombed lieth and wants in blaſe of Troy: his funerall flame.
Ne yet the Gods are wreakt, but loe his Sonnes and daughters all,
Such Lordes they ſerue as doth by chance of lot to them befall.
Whom ſhall I follow now for pray? or where ſhall I be led
There is perhaps amonge the Greekes that Hectors wyfe wil wed.
Some man deſyres Helenus ſpouſe ſome would Antenors haue,
And in the Greekes their wantes not ſome, that would Caſſandra craue
But I (alas) moſt woeful wight whom no man ſeekes to chuſe,
I am the only refuge left, and me they cleane refuſe
Ye careful captiue company, why ſtints your woful crye?
Beate on your breaſtes and piteouſly complayne with voyce ſo hye,
As meete may be for Troyes eſtate, let your complayntes rebound
In toppes of Trees: and cauſe the hills to ring with terible ſounde.
NOt folke vnapt, nor nevv to vveepe (O Queene)
Thou vvilſt to vvayle by practiſe are vvee taught,
For all theſe yeares in ſuch caſe haue vve bene,
Since firſt the Troyan gueſt, Amiclas ſoughte
And ſaild the Seas, that led him on his vvay
With ſacred ſhip, to Cibell dedicate
From vvhence he brought his vnrepyning pray,
The cauſe (alas) of all this dire debate,
Ten tymes novv hydde the hilles of Idey bee,
With ſnovve of Syluer hevv all ouer layd.
And bared is, for Troyan rages each tree,
Ten tymes in field, the harueſt man afrayde,
The ſpikes of Corne hath reapt, ſince neuer day
His waylyng wantes new cauſe renewes our woe
Lift vp thy hand, (O Queene) crie well away:
We follow thee, we are wel taught thereto.
¶Ye faythful fellowes of your caſualty,
Vntie thattyre, that on your heads ye weare,
And as behoueth ſtate of miſery.
Let fall aboute your woeful neckes your hayre.
In duſt of Troy rub all your armes about,
In ſlacker weede and let your breaſtes be tyed
Downe to your bellies let your limmes lye out,
For what wedlocke ſhould you your boſomes hyde?
Your garmentes looſe, and haue in readines
Your furious handes vppon your breaſt to knocke
This habite well beſeemeth our diſtreſſe,
It pleaſeth me, I know the Troyan flocke
Renew agayne your longe accuſtomde cryes,
And more then earſt lament your miſeryes.
We bewayle Hector.
¶Our hayre we haue vntide, now euerychone,
All rent for ſorrow of our curſed cace,
Our lockes out ſpreads, the knottes we haue vndone
And in theſe aſhes ſtayned is our face.
¶Fill vp your handes and make therof no ſpare,
For this yet lawful is from Troy to take
Let dovvne your garmentes from your ſhoulders bare.
And ſuffer not your clamour ſo to ſlake.
Your naked breaſtes wayte for your handes to ſmight
Now dolor deepe now ſorrow ſhevv thy might:
Make all the coaſtes that compas Troy about
Witnes the ſouude of all your careful crye
Cauſe from the Caues the eccho to caſt out:
Rebounding voyce of all your miſery:
Not as ſhe wontes, the latter word to ſound
But all your woe from farre let it rebound
Let al the Seas it heare, and eke the land
Spare not your breaſtes vvith heauy ſtroake to ſtrike
Beate ye your ſelues, ech one vvith cruell hand
For yet your vvonted crie doth me not like
VVe bevvayle Hector.
Our naked armes, thus here vve rent for thee,
And bloudy ſhoulders, (Hector) thus vve teare:
Thus vvith our fiſtes, our heades lo beaten bee
And all for thee, behold vve hale our heare.
Our dugges alas, vvith mothers hands be torne
And vvhere the fleſh is vvounded round about
VVhich for thy ſake, vve rent thy death to morne
The flovving ſtreames of bloud, they ſpring thereout.
Thy countres ſhore, and deſtinies delay.
And thou to vvearied Troians vvaſt an ayde,
A vvall thou vvaſt, and on thy ſhoulders Troy
Ten yeres it ſtode, on thee alone it ſtaide,
VVith thee it fell: and fatall day alas
Of Hector both, and Troy but one there vvas.
Enough hath Hector: turne yonr plaint and mone
And ſhed your teares for Pryame euery chone.
Receiue our plaintes, O lord of Phrigian land
And old tvviſe captiue king, receiue our feare,
VVhile thou vvert king. Troy hurtles then could ſtand
Though ſhaken tvviſe, with Grecian ſword it weare,
And twiſe did ſhot of Hercles quiuer beare,
At latter loſſe of Hecubes ſonnes all
And roges for kings, that hgih on piles we reare:
Thou father ſhut ſtour lateſt funerall.
And beaten downe, to Ioue for ſacrifies.
Like liueles blocke, in Troy thy carkas lies.
Yet turne ye once your teares, another way,
My pryams death, ſhould not lamented be.
O Troyans all, ful happy is Pryame ſay.
For free from bondage, downe deſcended hee,
To the loweſt Ghoſte: and neuer ſhall ſuſtayne
His Captiue necke with Greekes to yoked bee.
Hee neuer ſhal behold the Atrids twayne
Nor falſe Vliſſes euer ſhal he ſee▪
Not hee a pray for Greekes to triumph at
His necke ſhall ſubiect to their conqueſtes beare
Ne geue his handes to tye behynde his backe,
That to the rule of Scepters wonted weare,
Nor following Agamemnons chare, in bande
Shall he bee pompe, to proude Mycenas land.
¶Ful happy Pryame is, each one wee ſay
That toke vvith him his Kingdome then that ſtoode
Now ſafe in ſhade, he ſeekes the wandring way,
And treads the pathes of all Elizius wood,
And in the bleſſed Sprightes, ful happy hee,
Agayne there ſeekes to meete with Hectors Ghoſt.
Happy Pryam, happy whoſo may ſee,
His Kingdome all, at once with him be loſt.
O Ye to whom the Lord of Lande and Seas,
Of Life and Death hath graunted here the powre
Lay dovvne your lofty lookes, your pride appeas
The crovvned King fleeth not his fatall howre.
Who ſo thou be that leadſt thy land alone,
Thy life vvas limite from thy mothers vvombe,
Not purple robe, not Glorious glittering throne,
Ne crovvne of Gold redeemes thee from the tombe:
A King he was that wayting for the vayle,
Of him that ſlew the Minotaure in fight:
Begilde with blacknes of the wonted ſaile
In ſeas him ſonke, and of his name they hight.
So he that wild, to vvin the golden ſpoyle
And firſt vvith ſhip, by ſeas to ſeeke renovvne,
In leſſer vvaue, at length to death gan boyle,
And thus the daughters, brought their father dovvne:
Whoſe ſnges, the vvoodes hath dravven, and riuers held,
And birdes to heare his notes, did theirs forſake,
In peece meale throvvne, amid the Thracian field,
Without returne hath ſought the Stigian lake.
They ſit aboue that holde our life in line▪
And vvhat vve ſuffer dovvne they fling from hie,
No carke, no care, that euer may vntwine
The thrids, that vvoued are aboue the ſkie,
As vvitnes he that ſometyme King of Greece,
Had Iaſon thought, in drenching ſeas to drovvne
Who ſcapt both death and gaind the Golden fleece,
Whom fates aduaunce, there may no povvre plucke dovvne
The higheſt God ſomety me that Saturne hight
His fall him taught to credite their decrees
The rule of heauens: he loſt it by their might,
And Ioue his ſonne novv turnes the rolling Skies.
Who vveneth here to vvin eternall vvelth,
Let him behold this preſent perfite proofe.
And learne. the ſecrete ſtoppe of chaunces ſtelth,
Moſt nere alas, vvhen moſt it ſeemes aloofe.
In ſlipper ioy let no man put his truſt:
Let none diſpayre that heauy haps hath paſt
The ſvvete vvith ſovvre ſhe mingleth as ſhe luſt
Whoſe doubtful web pretendeth nought to laſt.
Frailtie is the thride, that Clothoes rocke hath ſponne,
Novv from the Diſtaffe dravvne novv knapt in tvvaine
With all the world at length his end he wonne,
Whoſe works haue wrought, his name ſhould great remaine
And he whoſe trauels twelue, his name diſplay,
That feared nought the force of worldly hurt,
In fine (alas) hath found his fatall daye,
And died with ſmart of Dianyraes ſhurt,
If prowes might eternity procure,
Then Priam yet ſhould liue in lyking luſt,
Ay portly pompe of pryde thou art vnſure,
Lo learne by him. O Kinges yee are but duſt.
And Hecuba that wayleth now in care,
That was ſo late of high eſtate a Queene,
A mirrour is to teach you what you are
Your wauering wealth, O Princes here is ſeene.
Whom dawne of day hath ſeene in high eſtate
Before Sunnes ſet; (alas) hath had his fall
The Cradels rocke, appoyntes the life his date
From ſetled ioy, to ſodayne funerall.
The Spright of Achilles added to the tragedy by the Tranſlator.
FOrſaking now the places tenebrouſe,
And deepe dennes of thinfernall region
From all the ſhadowes of illuſious
That wāder there the pathes ful many one
Lo, here am I returned al alone,
The ſame Achil whoſe fierce and heauy hande
Of al the world no wight might yet withſtand.
What man ſo ſtout of al the Grecians hoſt,
That hath not ſometyme crau'd Achilles aide,
And in the Troyans, who of prowes moſt
That hath not feard to ſee my Banner ſplaide
Achilles lo, hath made them all affrayde.
And in the Greekes hath bene a piller poſt,
That ſtvrdy ſtode agaynſt their Troyan hoſt.
Where I haue lackt the Grecians went to wracke,
Troy proued hath what Achills ſword could doe
Where I haue come the Troyans fled a backe,
Retyring faſt from field their walles vnto,
No man that might Achilles ſtroke fordoe
I dealt ſuch ſtripes amid the Troian route,
That with their bloud I ſtaynd the fieldes aboute.
Mighty Memnon that with his Perſian band,
Would Pryams part with all might mayntayne,
Lo now he lyeth and knoweth Achilles hand
Amid the field is Troylus alſo ſlayne.
Ye Hector great, whom Troy accompted playne
The flowre of chiualry that might be found,
All of Achilles had theyr mortall wound.
But Paris lo, ſuch was his falſe deceipt,
Pretending maryage of Polixeine,
Behynd the aulter lay for me in wayte
Where I vnwares haue falne into the trayne
And in Appolloes church he hath me ſlayne
Wherof the Hel will now iuſt vengeance haue,
And here agayne, I come my right to craue.
The deepe Auerne my rage may not ſuſtayne,
Nor beare the angers of Achilles ſpright
From Acheront I rent the ſpoyle in twayne,
And though the ground I grate agayne to ſight:
Hell could not hide Achilles from the light,
Vengeance and bloud doth Orcus pit require,
To quench the furies of Achilles yre.
The hatefull land, that worſe then Tartare is
And burning thruſt excedes of Tantalus,
I here beholde againe, and Troy is this
O, trauell worſe, then ſtone of Siſyphus
And paines that paſſe the panges of Tityus
To light more lothſome furie hath me ſent
Then hooked wheele, that Ixions fleſh doth rent.
Remembred is alowe where ſprites do dwell
The wicked ſlaughter'wrought by wyly way▪
Not yet reuenged hath the deepeſt hell,
Achilles bloud on them that did him ſlay
But now of vengeance come the yrefull day
And darkeſt dennes of Tartare from beneath
Conſpire the fautes, of them that wrought my death.
Now miſchiefe, murder, wrath of hell draweth nere
Aud dyre Phlegethon floud doth bloud require
Achilles death ſhall he reuenged here
VVith ſlaughter ſuch as Stygian lakes deſyre
Her daughters bloud ſhal ſlake the ſpirites yre,
VVhoſe ſonue we ſlew, whereof doth yet remayne,
The wrath beneath, and hell ſhalbe their payne.
From burning lakes the furies wrath I threate,
And fire that nought but ſtreames of bloud may ſlake
The rage of winde and ſeas their ſhippes ſhall beate,
And Ditis deepe on you ſhall vengeance take,
The ſpirites crie out, the earth and ſeas do quake
The poole of Styx, vngratefull Greekes it ſeath,
VVith ſlaughtred bloud reuenge Achilles death.
The ſoyle doth ſhake to beare my heauy foote
And fearth agayne the ſceptors of my hand,
The pooles with ſtroake of thunderclap ring out,
The doubtful ſtarres amid their courſe do ſtand,
And fearfull Phoebus hides his blaſing brande
The trembling lakes agaynſt their courſe do flite,
For dread and terrour of Achilles ſpright.
Great is the raunſome ought of due to mee,
Wherwith ye muſt the ſprightes and hell appeaſe,
Polyxena ſhal ſacrifyſed be,
Vpon my tombe, their yreful wrath to pleaſe,
And with her bloud ye ſhall aſſwage the ſeas
Your ſhips may not returne to Greece agayne
Til on my tombe Polyxena be ſlayne.
And for that ſhe ſhould then haue bene my wyfe,
I wil that Pyrrhus render her to mee,
And in ſuch ſolemne ſort bereaue her life,
As ye are wont the weddinges for to ſee,
So ſhal the wrath of Hel appeaſed bee,
Nought els but this may ſatiſfy our yre,
Her wil I haue and her I you require.
ALas how long the lingring Grekes in hauen do make delay,
When eyther warre by ſeas they ſeeke or home to paſſe theyr way.
Why, ſhew what cauſe doth hold your ſhips? and Grecian nauy ſtayes,
Declare if any of the Gods haue ſtopt your homeward wayes.
My mynd is mai'd, my trembling ſinne wes quake and are affeard,
For ſtraunger newes of truth then theſe
I thinke were neuer heard.
Lo I my ſelfe haue playnly ſeene in dawning of the day,
When Phoebus firſt gan to approch and driue the ſtarres away.
The earth all ſhaken ſodaynly and from the hollow grownde:
My thought I hard with roaryng crye a deepe and dreadful ſound:
That ſhoke the woods, and al the trees ong out with thunder ſtroke,
From Ida hils downe fel the ſtkes, the mountayne oppes were broke.
And not the earth hath onely quakt, but all the Sea likewyſe▪
Achilles preſence felt and knew, and high the ſurges ryſe.
The clouen ground Erebus pittes then ſhewd and deepeſt dennes,
That downe to Gods that guyde beneath, the way appeard from hence.
Then ſhoke the tombe from whence anone in flame of fiery light,
Appeareth from the hollow caes Achilles noble ſpright.
As wonted he his Thracian armes and bannars to diſploy
And weild his weighty weapons wel agaynſt thaſſaultes of Troy,
The ſame Achilles ſeemde he than that he was wont to bee
Amid the hoſtes and eaſy could I know that this was hee.
With carkaſſe ſlayne in furious fight, that ſtopt and fild each floude.
And who with ſlaughter of his hand made Xanthus rne with bloud,
As when in Chariot high he ſate with lofty ſtomacke ſtoute.
Whyle Hector both and Troy at once he drew the walles aboute.
Alowd he cride, and euery coaſt rang with Achilles ſound,
And thus with hollow voyce he ſpake, from bottom of the ground.
The Greekes ſhal not with litle pryce redeeme Achilles yre,
A princely raunſome muſt they geue, for ſo the fates require
Vnto my aſhes Polyxene ſpouſed ſhal here be ſlayne
By Pyrrhus hand, and al my tombe her bloud ſhal ouerſtayne.
This ſayd, he ſtrayght ſanke downe agayne to Plutoes deepe region,
The earth then cloaſd, the hollow caues were vaniſhed and gon
Therwith the wether waxed clere, the raging wyndes did ſlake,
The tombling ſeas began to reſt and al the tempeſt brake.
WHat tyme our ſayles we ſhould haue ſpread,
vppon Sygeon Seas,
With ſwift returne from long delay,
to ſeeke our homeward wayes.
Achilles roſe whoſe onely hand,
hath geuen Greekes the ſpoyle.
Of Troia ſore annoyde by him,
and leueld with the ſoyle,
With ſpeede requiting his abode
and former long delay▪
At Scyros yle, and Leſbos both amid the Aegaeon ſea.
Til he came here in doubt it ſtoode of fall or ſure eſtate,
Then though ye haſt to graunt his wil ye ſhall it geue to late.
Now haue the other captaynes all the pryce of their manhood,
What els reward for his preweſſe then her al onely blood?
Ae his deſertes thinke you but light, that when he might haue fled,
And paſſing Pelyus yeares in peace, a quiet life haue led,
Detected yet his mothers craftes, forſooke his womans weede,
And with his weapons prou'd himſelfe a manly man indeede:
The King of Myſya, Telephus that woulde the Greekes withſtand,
Comming to Troy, forbidding vs the paſſage of his land:
To late repenting to haue felt. Achilles heauy ſtroke
Was glad to craue his health agayne where he his hurt had tooke
For when his ſore might not be ſalud as told Appollo playne.
Except the ſpeare that gaue the hurte, reſtoared help agayne.
Achilles plaſters cur'd his cuttes, and ſau'd the King aliue:
His hand both might and mercy knew te ſlay and then reuyne.
When Thebes fel. Eetion ſaw it and might it not withſtand,
The captiue King could nought redreſſe the ruin of his land.
Lyrneſus litle likewyſe felt his hand and downe it fill,
With ruine ouerturned like from top of haughty hil.
And taken Bryſeps land it is and priſoner is ſhe caught
The cauſe of ſtrife betwene the Kinges is Chryſes come to naught.
Tenedos yle wel knowne by fame and fertile ſoyle he tooke
That foſtreth fat the Thracian flockes and ſacred Cilla ſhooke
What bootes to blaſe the brute of him whom trumpe of fame doth ſhow,
Through all the coaſtes where Caicus floud with ſwelling ſtream doth flow?
The ruthful ruine of theſe realmes ſo many townes bet downe,
Another man would glory count and worthy great renowne.
But thus my father made his way and theſe his iourneyes are,
And battayles many one he fought whylewarre he doth prepare.
As wiſht I may his merits more ſhall yet not this remayne.
Wel knowne and counted prayſe enough that he hath Hector ſlayne
Duryng whoſe life the Grecians al might neuer take the towne,
My father onely vanquiſt Troy, and you haue pluct it downe.
Reioyce I may your parentes prayſe and brute abroade his actes,
It ſeemeth the ſonne to follow well his noble fathers factts,
In ſight of Priam Hector ſlayne, and. Memnon both they lay.
With heauy theere his parentes wayld to moutne his dying day.
Himſelfe abhord his handy worke in fight that had them ſlayne,
The Sonnes of Goddes Achilles knew were borne to die agayne
The woman queene of Amazons that greu'd the Greekes ful ſore.
Is turnd to flight then ceaſt our feare wee dread their bowes no more.
It ye wel waigh his worthynes Achilles ought to haue
Though he from Argos or Mycenas would a Virgin craue,
Doubt ye herein? allow ye not that ſtraight his wil be done.
And count ye cruel Pryams bloud to geue to Peleus ſonne?
For Helen ſake your owne childes bloud appeaſd Dianas yre
A wonted thing and done ere this it is that I require.
The onely fault of youth it is not to refraine his rage
The Fathers bloud already ſturres in Pryams wanton age:
Somtime Achilles grieuous checkes I bare with pacient hart,
The more thou mayſt the more thou oughtſt to ſuffer in good part
Wherto would yee with ſlaughtred bloud a noble ſpirit ſtayne?
Thinke what is meete the Greekes to do, and Troyans to ſuſtayne.
The proude eſtate of tyranny may neuer long endure.
The King that rules with modeſt meane of ſafety may be ſure.
The higher ſtep of princely ſtate that fortune hath vs ſignd
The more behou'th a happy man humility of mynd
And bread the chaunge that chaūce may bring, whoſe gifts ſo ſone be loſt
And chiefly then to feare the Gods, whyle they the fauour moſt.
In beating downe that warre hath wonne, by proofe I haue ben taught,
What pompe and pride in twinke of eye, may fall and come to naught.
Troy made me fierce & proude of mynde, Troy makes me frayd withal.
The Grekes now ſtand wher Troy late fel, ech thing may haue his fal.
Sometyme I graunt I did my ſelfe, and Sceptors proudly beare,
The thing that might aduaunce my hart makes me the more to feare
Thou Priam perfit proofe preſentſt thou art to mee eftſones:
A cauſe of pride, a glaſſe of feare a mirrour for the nones,
Should I accoumpt the ſceptors ought, but glorious vanity
Much like the borowed brayded hayre, the face to beautify.
One ſodayne chaunce may turne to naught, and mayme the might of men
With fewer then a thouſand ſhippes, and yeares in leſſe then ten.
Not ſhe that guydes the ſlipper wheele of fate, doth ſo delay:
That ſhe to al poſſeſſion grauntes, of ten yeares ſetled ſtay.
With leaue of Greece I wil confeſſe, I would haue wonne the towne
But not with ruine thus extreme to ſee it beaten downe.
But loe the battel made by night and rage of feruent mynd,
Could not abyde the brydling bitte that reaſon had aſſignd.
The happy ſword once ſlaind with blood vnſatiable is,
And in the darke the ſeruent rage doth ſtrike thee more amis.
Now are we wreakt on Troy ſo much let all that may remayne.
A Virgin borne of Princes bloud for offring to be ſlayne
And geuen be to ſlayne the tombe and aſhes of the ded,
And vnder name of wedlocke ſee the guiltles bloud be ſhed,
I wil not graunt for myne ſhould bee thereof both fault and blame.
Who when he may, forbiddeth not offence: doth wil the ſame.
And ſhall his ſprights haue no reward their angers to appeyſe?
Yes very great, for all the world ſhall celebrate his prayſe,
And landes vnknowen that neuer ſaw, the man ſo prayſd by fame,
Shall heate and kepe for many yeares the glory of his name.
If bloudſhed vayle his aſhes ought ſtrike of an Oxes hed,
And let no bloud that may be cauſe of mothers teares, be ſhed.
What furious franſy may this be that doth your will ſo leade,
This earneſt carefull ſutte to make in trauayle for the dead?
Let not ſuch enuy towarde your father in your heart remayne,
That for his ſacrifice yee would procure an others payne,
Proude tirant, while proſperity thy ſtomacke doth aduaunce,
And cowardly wretch that ſhrinks for feare in caſe of fearefull chaunce.
Is yet agayne thy breaſt enflamde, with brand of Venus might?
Wilt thou alone ſo oft depriue Achilles of his right?
This hand ſhall giue the ſacrifice, the which if thou withſtand.
A greater ſlaughter ſhall I make, and worthy Pyrrhus hand.
And now to long from Princes ſlaughter doth my hand abide,
And meete it were that Polyxene were layde by Priams ſide.
I not deny, but Pyrrhus chiefe renowne, in warre is this,
That Pryam ſlaine with cruell ſworde, to your father humbled is.
My fathers foes we haue them known, ſubmit themſelues humbly,
And Pryam preſently yee wot, was glad to craue mercy.
But thou for feare not ſtout to rule, lieſt cloſe from foes vp ſhit:
Whil thou to Aiax, and Vlyſſes, doſt thy will commit.
But needes I muſt, and will confeſſe, your father did not feare:
When burnt our fleete with Hectors brands, & Greeks they ſlaughtred weare.
While loytring then a loofe he lay, vnmindfull of the fight.
In ſteede of armes with ſcratch of quill, his ſounding harp to ſmight.
Great Hector then deſpiſing thee, Achilles ſonges did feare:
And Theſſale ſhips in greateſt dread, in quiet peace yet weare.
For why aloofe the Theſſale fleete, they lay from Troyans handes,
And well your father might haue reſt, he felt not Hectors brandes.
Well ſeemes a noble king to giue an other king reliefe.
Why haſt thou then a worthy king berieued of his life?
A poinct of mercy ſometime is, what liues in care to kill.
But now your mercy mooueth you a virgins death to will.
Account yee cruell now her death whoſe ſacrifice I craue.
Your own deere daughter once yee knowe, your ſelfe to th'aulters gaue.
Naught els could ſaue the Greekes frō ſeas, but th'only bloud of her:
A king before his children ought, his countrey to prefer.
The law doth ſpare no captiues bloud nor wil'th their death to ſtay
That which the law doth not forbid, yet ſhame doth oft ſay nay.
The conquerour what thing he liſt, may lawfully fulfill.
So much the leſſe he ought to liſt, that may do what he will.
Thus boaſt ye theſe as though in all ye onely bare the ſtroke
When Pyrrhus looſed hath the greekes, from bond of ten yeres yoke.
Hath Scyros yle ſuch ſtomaks bred?
No bretherns wrath it knoes.
Beſet about it is with waue.
The ſeas it do encloſe.
Thyeſtes noble ſtocke I know and Areus eke full well,
And of the bretherns dire debate, perpetuall fame doth tell.
And thou a beſtard of a may de, defloured priuely.
Whom (then a boy) Achilles gat, in filthy lecherr.
The ſame A chill that doth poſſeſſe, the raigne of Gods aboue,
With Therys ſeas: with Aeacus ſprights, the ſtarred heauen with Ioue
The ſame Achilles that was ſlaine, by ſtroke of Pars hande.
The ſame Achilles, whom no god, durſt euer yet withſtand.
The ſtouteſt man I rather would his checkes he ſhould refraine
I could them tame but all your bragges, I can full well ſuſtaine.
For euen the captiues ſpares my ſword: let Calchas called be.
If deſtyntes require her bloud, I will thereto agree
Calchas whoſe counſel rulde our ſhips, and nauy hither brought,
Vnlookſt the poale and haſt by arte the ſecretes thereof ſought,
To whome the bowelles of the beaſt, to whom the thunder clap,
And blaſyng ſtarre with flaming traine, betokeneth what ſhall hap.
Whoſe words with deareſt price I bought, now tell vs by what meane
The will of Gods agreeth that we returne to Greece againe.
The fates apoint the Grekes to buy their waies with wonted price.
And with what coſt ye came to Troy, ye ſhal repayre to Greece
With bloud ye came, with bloud ye muſt from hence returne againe,
And where Achilles aſhes lieth, the virgin ſhal be ſlaine,
In ſeemely ſort of habite, ſuch as maydens wont ye ſee,
Of Theſſalie, or Mycenas els, what time they wedded be.
With Pyrrhus hand ſhe ſhal be ſlaine, of right it ſhalbe ſo
And meete it is that he the ſonne, his fathers right ſhould do.
But not this onely ſtayeth our ſhippes, our ſayles may not be ſpred,
Before a worthier bloud then thine, (Polixena) be ſhed,
Which thirſt thirſt the fates, for Praimes nephew. Hectors litle boy:
The Erekes ſhal tumble hedlonge down, from higheſt towre in Troy.
Let him there die, this onely way ye ſhal the gods appeas,
Then ſpread your thouſand ſayles with ioy ye neede not feare the ſeas.
MAy this be true, or doth the Fable fayne,
When corps is deade the Sprite to liue as yet?
When Death our eies with heauy hand doth ſtrain,
And fatall day our leames of light hath ſhet,
And in the Tombe our aſhes once be ſet,
Hath not the ſoule likewyſe his funerall,
But ſtil (alas) do wretches liue in thrall?
Or els doth all at once togeather die?
And may no part his fatal howre delay.
But with the breath the ſoule from hence doth flie?
And eke the Cloudes to vaniſh quite awaye,
As danky ſhade fleeth from the poale by day?
And may no iote eſcape from deſteny,
When once the brand hath burned the body?
What euer then the ryſe of Sunne may ſee,
And what the Weſt that ſets the Sunne doth know.
In all Neptunus raygne what euer bee,
That reſtles Seas do waſh and ouerflow,
With purple waues ſtil tombling to and fro.
Age ſhal conſume: each thing that liuth ſhal die,
With ſwifter race then Pegaſus doth flie.
And with what whirle, the twyſe ſixe ſignes do flie,
With courſe as ſvvift as rector of the Spheares,
Doth guide thoſe gliſtering Globes eternally.
And Hecate her chaunged hornes repeares,
So drauth on death, and life of each thing vveares,
And neuer may the man, returne to ſight,
That once hath felt the ſtroke of Parcas might.
For as the fume that from the fyre doth paſſe,
With tourne of hand doth vaniſh out of ſight
And ſwifter then the Northren Boreas
With whirling blaſte and ſtorme of raging might,
Driuth farre away and puttes the cloudes to flight,
So fleeth the ſprighte that rules our life away,
And nothing taryeth after dying day.
Swift is the race we ronne, at hand the marke
Lay downe your hope, that wayte here ought to win,
And who dreads ought, caſt of thy carefull carke:
Wilt thou it wot what ſtate thou ſhalt be in,
When dead thou art as thou hadſt neuer bin.
For greedy tyme it doth deuoure vs all,
The world it ſwayes to Chaos heape to fall.
Death hurtes the Corpes and ſpareth not the ſpright,
And as for all the dennes of Taenare deeepe.
With Cerberus kingdome darke that knowes no light,
And ſtreighteſt gates, that he there ſittes to keepe,
They Fancies are that follow folke by ſleepe
Such rumors vayne, but fayned lies they are,
And fables like the dreames in heauy care.
O dreadful day, alas, the ſory time▪
Is come of al the mothers ruthful woe,
Aſtianax (alas) thy fatal line
Of life is worne, to death ſtrayght ſhalt thou goe,
The ſiſters haue decreed it ſhould be ſo,
There may no force (alas) eſcape there hand,
There mighty loue their will may not withſtand,
To ſe the mother, her tender child forſake,
What gentle hart that may from teares refrayne
Or whoſo fierce that would no pity take,
To ſee (alas) this guiltles infant ſlayne,
For ſory hart the teares myne eyes do ſtayne
To thinke what ſorrow ſhall her hart oppreſſe,
Her litle child to leeſe remedileſſe,
The double cares of Hectors wife to wayle,
Good Ladies haue your teares in readines.
And you with whom ſhould pity moſt preuayle.
Rue on her griefe: bewayle her heauines.
With ſobbing hart, lament her deepe diſtreſſe,
When ſhe with teares ſhall take leaue of her ſon,
And now (good Ladies) heare what ſhall be done.
ALas ye careful company
why hale ye thus your hayres?
Why beate you ſo your boyling breaſts
and ſtayne your eyes with teare?
The fall of Troy is new to you
but vnto me not ſo,
I haue foreſeene this careful caſe
ere this tyme long agoe
When fierce Achilles Hector ſlew and drew the Corpes aboute
Then then me thought I wiſt it well, that Troy ſhould come to naught
In ſorrowes ſonke I ſenceles am and wrapt (alas) in woe,
But ſone except this babe me held, to Hector would I goe
This ſeely foole my ſtomacke tames amid my miſery,
And in the howre of heauieſt happes permittes me not to die,
This onely cauſe conſtraynes me yet the gods for him to pray
With tract of tyme prolonges my payne, delayes my dying day:
He takes from me the lacke of feare the onely fruit of ill.
For while he liues yet haue I left wherof to feare me ſtill.
No place is left for better chaunce with worſt wee are oppreſt
To feare (alas) and ſee no hope is worſt of all the reſt.
What ſodayne feare thus moues your mynd, & vexeth you ſo ſore?
Stil ſtil (alas) of one miſhap there ryſeth more and more,
Nor yet the doleful deſtenies of Troy be come to end.
And what more grieuous chaunces yet prepare the Gods to ſend?
The caues and dennes of hel be rent for Troyans greater feare
And from the bottoms of their tombes the hidden ſprightes appeare.
May none but Greekes alone from hel returne to life agayne?
Would God the fates would finiſh ſoone the ſorrowes I ſuſtayne.
Death thankful were, a common care the Troyans all oppreſſe,
But me (alas) amaſeth moſt the feareful heauines.
That all aſtonied am for dreade, and horrour of the ſight:
That in my ſleepe appeard to mee by dreame this latter night.
Declare what ſightes your dream hath ſhewd, & tell what doth you feare
Two parts of al the ſilent night almoſt then paſſed were.
And then the cleare ſeuen cluſtered beams of ſtarres: were falle to reſt
And firſt the ſleepe ſo long vnknowne my wearyed eyes oppreſt.
If this be ſleepe the aſtonied mae of mynd in heauy moode,
When ſodaynly before myne eyes the ſpright of Hector ſtoode.
Not like as he the Greekes was wont to battail to require:
Or when amid the Grecians ſhippes, he threw the brandes of fyre.
Nor ſuch as raging on the Grees, with ſlaughtring ſtroake had ſlayne
And bare indeede the ſpoyles of him that did Achilles fayne.
His countenaunce not now ſo bright, nor of ſo liuely cheere,
But ſad and heauy like to owres and clad with vgly hayre
It did me good to ſee him though when ſhaking then his head:
Shake of thy ſleepe in haſt he ſayd, and quickly leaue thy bed:
Conuay into ſome ſecrete place our ſonne (O faythful wife)
This onely hope there is to helpe find meane to ſaue his life.
Leaue of thy piteous tears he ſayd, doſt thou yet wayle for Troy?
Would God it lay on Ground ful flat ſo ye might ſaue the boy.
Vp ſtirre he ſayd thy ſelfe in haſt conuay him priuily.
Saue if ye may the tender bloud of Hectors progeny
Then ſtrayght in trembling feare I wakt and rold myne eyes aboute
Forgettyng long my child pore wretch, and after Hector ſought.
But ſtrayght (alas) I wiſt not how the Spright away did paſſe,
And mee forſooke before I could my huſband once embraſſe.
O childe, O noble fathers broode and Troians only ioy,
O worthy ſeede of thauncient bloud, and beaten houſe of Troy.
O ymage of thy father loe, thou liuely bearſt his face,
This countnaunce lo my Hector had, and euen ſuch was his pace.
The pitch of all his body ſuch, his handes thus would he beare.
His ſhoulders high his threatning browes▪ euen ſuch as thine they were
O ſonne: begot to late for Troy, but borne to ſoone for mee,
Shal euer tyme yet come agayne, and happy daye may be,
That thou mayſt once reuenge and build agayne the towres of Troy,
And to the towne and Troyans both reſtore their name with ioy?
But why do I (forgettyng ſtate of preſent deſtenye),
So great thinges wiſh? enough for captiues is to liue only:
Alas what priuy place is left my litle childe to hide?
What ſeate ſo ſecret may be found where thou maiſt ſafely bide?
The towre that with the walles of gos ſo valiaunt was of might,
Through all the world ſo notable, ſo flouriſhing to ſight,
Is turnde to duſt: and fire hath al conſumd'e that was in Troy,
Of all the towne not ſo much now is left to hide the boy.
What place were beſt to chooſe for guile, the holy tombe is heere,
That then mies ſword will ſpare to ſpoile wher ſythe my huſband deere.
Which coſtly worke his father builte, king Pryame liberall:
And it vp raiſde with charges great, fo Hectors funerall.
Herein the bones and aſhes both of Hector (loe) they lie,
Beſt is that I commit the ſonne to his fathers cuſtodie.
A colde and fearefull ſweat doth runne, through ot my members all,
Alas I carefull wretch do feare, what chaunce may thee befall,
Hide him away: this onely way hath ſaued many more,
To make the enmies to beleue, that they were dead before.
He wil be ſought: ſcant any hope remaineth of ſafenes,
The paiſe of his nobility doth him ſo ſore oppres:
What way wer beſt to worke: that none our doings might bewray
Let none beare witnes what ye do remoue them all away.
What if the enmies aſke me: where Aſtianax both remaine?
Then ſhall y boldelie anſwere make that he in Troy was ſlaine.
What ſhal it helpe to haue him hid? at length they will him finde.
At firſt the enmies rage is fierce, delay doth ſlake his minde.
But what preuailes, ſince free from feare we may him neuer hide?
Let yet the wretch take his defence, me careleſſe there to bide.
What land vnknowne out of the way what vnfrequented place
May keepe thee ſafe? who ayds our feare? who ſhall defend our caſe?
Hector, Hector that euermore thy friendes didſt wel defend
Now chiefly ayde thy wyfe and child and vs ſome ſuccour ſend.
Take charge to keepe and couer cloſe the treaſures of thy wyfe,
And in thy Aſhes hyde thy ſonne preſerue in tombe his life.
Draw neare my Childe vnto the Tombe, why flieſt thou backward ſo?
Thou takſt great ſcorne to lurke in dens thy noble hart I know.
I ſee thou art aſham'd to feare ſhake of thy princely mynd,
And beare thy breaſt as thee behoues as chaunce hath thee aſſynd.
Behold our caſe: and ſe what flocke remayneth now of Troy
The tombe: I woeful captiue wretch and thou a ſeely boy,
But yeeld we muſt to ſory fates thy chaunce muſt breake thy breaſt,
Go to, creepe vnderneath thy fathers holy ſeats to reſt.
If ought the fates may wretches helpe thou haſt thy ſauegard there,
If not: already then pore foole thou haſt thy ſepulchere.
The tombe him cloſely hides: but leaſt your feare ſhould him betray
Let him here lie and farre from hence goe ye ſome other way.
The leſſe he feares that feares at hand, and yet if neede be ſo,
If ye thinke meete a litle hence for ſafety let vs goe.
A litle whyle keepe ſilence now refrayne your plaint and crie,
His curſed foote now hether moues the Lord of Cephalie.
Now open earth, and thou my ſpouſe frō Stix rend vp y• ground,
Deepe in thy boſome hyde thy ſonne that he may not be found.
Vlyſſes comes with doubtful pace and chaunged countenaunce
He knittes in hart decetptful craft for ſome more grieuous chaunce.
Though I be made the meſſenger of heauy newes to you,
This one thing firſt I ſhal deſyre that ye take this for true.
That though the wordes come from my mouth, and I my meſſuage tell
Of truth yet are they none of myne ye may beleue me wel.
It is the word of al the Greekes, and they the authors be,
Whome Hectors bloud doth yet forbid their countries for to ſee.
Our careful truſt of peace vnſure doth ſtil the Greekes detayne,
And euermore our doubtful feare yet drawth vs backe agayne.
And ſuffreth not our wearyed handes, our weapons to forſake,
In child yet of Andromacha, while Troyans comfort take.
And ſayth your Augure Calchas ſo?
Though Calchas nothing sayde
Yet Hector telles it vs himſelfe, of whoſe ſeede are we frayde.
The worthy bloud of noble men oft tymes we ſe it playne,
Doth after in their heires ſuccede and quickly ſpringes agayne.
For so the hornles youngling yet, of high and ſturdy bſte,
With lofty necke and braunched brow, doth ſhortly rule the reſt.
The tender twig that of the lopped ſtocke doth yet remayne,
To match the tree that bare the bough, in time startes vp again
With equall top to former wood the roume it doth ſupply,
And ſpreads on ſoyle alow the ſhade, to heauen his braunches hye.
Thus of one ſparke by chaunce yet left it hapneth ſo ful oft.
The fyre hath quickly caught his force and flamth agayn aloft.
So ſcare we yet leaſt Hectors bloud might riſe er it be long,
Feare caſtes in all thextremity and oft interprets wrong.
If ye reſpect our caſe ye may not blame theſe old ſoldiars
Though after years and monthes twice flue, they feare again the wars.
And other trauails dreadyng Troy, not yet to be wel wonne,
A great thing doth the Grecyans moue, the feare of Hectors ſon.
Rid vs of feare, this ſtayeth our fleete, and pluckes vs backe agayne,
And in the hauen our nauy ſtickes, til Hectors bloud be ſlayne.
Count me not feerce for that by fates I Hectors ſonne require,
For I as wel if chaunce it would Oreſtes ſhould deſyre.
But ſince that needes it muſt be ſo, beare it with pacient hart:
And Suffer that which Agamemnon ſuffred in good part.
Alas my child would God thou wert yet in thy mothers hand.
And that I knew what deſtentes thee held or in what land.
For neuer ſhould the mothers fayth her tender child forſake:
Though through my breaſt the enmies al, their cruell weapons ſtrake.
Nor though the Greekes with pinching bandes of yron my handes had bound,
Or els in feruent flame of fyre beſet my body rounde.
But now my litle Child (pore wretch alas) where might he bee?
Alas, what cruel deſteny what chaunce hath hapt to thee?
Art thou yet ranging in the fieldes and wandreſt ther abroad?
Or ſmothred elſe in duſty ſmoake of Troy: or ouertroad?
Or haue the Greekes thee ſlayne (alas) and laught to ſee thy bloud?
Or torne art thou with iawes of beaſtes? or caſt to foules for foode?
Diſſemble not, hard is for thee Vliſſes to deceaue,
I can ful wel the mothers craftes and ſubtilty perceaue.
The pollecy of Goddeſſes Vliſſes hath vndone.
Set al theſe fayned wordes aſſyde, tel mee where is thy ſonne?
Wher is Hector? where al the reſt that had with Troy their fall
Where Priamus? you aſke for one but I require of all.
Thou ſhalt conſtrayned be to tell the thing thou doſt deny.
A happy chaunce were Death to her that doth deſyre to dye.
Who moſt deſtres to die, would fayneſt liue when death drawth on,
Theſe noble wordes with preſent feare of death woulde ſoone be gone.
Vliſſes if ye wil conſtrayne Andromacha with feare,
Threaten my life for now to dye my cheefe deſyre it were.
With ſtripes with fyre tormenting death we wil the truth out wreſt
And dolour ſhal thee force to tel the ſecrets of thy breſt.
And what thy hart hath depeſt hid for payne thou ſhalt expreſſe,
Oft tymes thextremity preuayles much more then gentleneſſe,
Set me in midſt of burning flame with woundes my body rent,
Vſe al the meanes of cruelty that ye may al inuent.
Proue me with thirſt and hunger both, and euery torment trye,
Pearce through my ſides with burning yrons in priſon let me lie.
Spare not the worſt ye can deuyſe (if ought be worſe then this)
Yet neuer get ye more of me. I wot not where he is.
It is but vayne to hyde the thinge that ſtrayght ye wil deteckt
No feares may moue the mothers hart, ſhe doth them al neglect.
This tender loue ye beare your child, wherin ye ſtand ſo ſtoute,
So much more circumſpectly warnth, the Greekes to looke about.
Leaſt after ten yeares tract of tyme and battell borne ſo farre,
Some one ſhould liue that on our children might renew the warre,
As for my ſelfe, what Calchas ſayth, I would not feare at all
But on Telemachus I dread, the ſmart of warres would fall
Now will I make Vliſſes glad and all the Greekes alſo,
Needes muſt thou woeful wretch confeſſe declare thy hidden woe.
Reioyce ye ſonnes of Atreus there is no cauſe of dread.
Be glad Vliſſes tell the Greekes that Hectors ſonne is dead.
By what aſſurance proues thou that? how ſhal we credite thee:
What euer thing the enmies hand may thea en hap to me
Let ſpeedy fates me ſlay forthwith, and earth me hyde at ones
And after death from tombe agayne, remoue ye: Hectors bones,
Except my ſonne already now, do reſt among the dead.
And that except Aſtianax into his tomb be led.
Then fully are the fates fulfild with Hectors childes diſceace.
Now ſhal I beare the Grecians word, of ſure and certayne peace.
Vliſſes why what doſt thou now the Greekes wil euery chone,
Beleeue thy wordes, whom creditſt thou? the mothers tale alone.
Thinkſt thou for ſauegard of her child the mother wil not lye?
And dread the more the worſe miſchaunce to geue her ſonne to die?
Her fayth ſhe byndes with bond of oth, the truth to verify,
What thing is more of weight to feare, then ſo to ſweare and lye?
Now call thy craftes togeather al, beſtirre thy wittes and mynd,
And ſhew thy ſelfe Vliſſes now, the truth herein to find.
Search wel thy mothers mynd: behold ſhee weepes and wayleth out,
And here and ther with doubtful pace, ſhe raungeth al aboute,
Her careful ears ſhe doth apply to harken what I ſay,
More frayd ſhee ſeemes then ſorrowful. Now worke ſome wily way.
For now moſt neede of wit there is and crafty pollecy,
Yet one agayne by other meanes I wil the mother trye.
Thou wretched woman maiſt reioyce, that dead he is: (alas)
More doleful death by deſtenie for him decreed ther was.
From Turrets top to haue bene caſt and cruelly bene ſlayne.
Which onely towre of all the reſt doth yet in Troy remayne.
My ſpright failth me, my limmes do quake, fear doth my wits cō founde
And as the Iſe congeals with froſt, my bloud with could is bound.
She trēbleth loe: this way, this way I wil the truth out wreaſte,
The mothers fear detecteth all the ſecrets of her breaſt:
I wil renew her feare goe ſirs beſtir ye ſpedely
To ſeeke this enmye of the Greekes where euer that he lie.
Wel done he wil be found at length, goe to ſtil ſeke him out,
Now ſhal he dye. what doſt thou feare why doſt thou looke about?
Would God that any cauſe there were yet left that might me fray,
My hart at laſt now all is loſt hath layd all feare away.
Sins that your child now hath ye ſay already ſuffred death,
And with his bloud we may not purge the hoſtes as Caſchas ſayth.
Our fleete paſſe not (as wel inſpired doth Calchas prophecy)
Till Hectors aſhes caſt abroad the waues may pacify.
And tombe be rent now ſins the boy hath ſkapt his deſteny.
Needes muſt we breake this holy tombe wher Hectors aſhes lie.
What ſhal I doy mynd diſtracted is with double feare.
On thone my ſonne, on thother ſyde my huſbandes aſhes deare,
Alas which part ſhould moue me moſt, the cruel Goddes I call
To witnes with me in the truth, and Ghoſtes that guide thee all
Hector that nothing in my ſonne is elſe that pleaſeth me.
But thou alone God graunt him life he might reſemble thee:
Shal Hectors aſhes drowned beehide I ſuch cruelty,
To ſee his bones caſt in the Seas? yet let Aſtyanax die,
And canſt thou wretched mother bide, thyne owne childes death to ſee?
And ſuffer from the hie towres top that headlong throwne he be?
I can and wil take in goad part, his death and cruel payne,
So that my Hector after death be not remou'd agayne.
The boy that life and ſences hath may feele his payne and dye,
But Hector lo his death hath plaſt at reſt in tombe to lie
What doſt thou ſtay? determine which thou wlt preſerue of twayne.
Art thou in doubt? saue this: oe here thy Hector doth remayne,
Both Hectors be, thone quicke of ſpright & drawing toward his ſtrēgth
And one that may perhaps reuenge his fathers death at length.
Alas I cannot ſaue them both: I thinke that beſt it were,
That of the twayne I ſaued him that doth the Grecians feare.
It ſhalbe done that Calchas words to vs doth prophecye,
And now ſhal all the ſumptuous worke be throwne downe vtterly
That once ye ſold?
I wil it all from toppe to bottome rend.
The fayth of Goddes I call vppon Achilles vs defend,
And Pyrrhus ayd thy fathers right.
This tombe abroad ſhall lye:
O miſchiefe, neuer durſt the Greekes ſhow yet ſuch cruelty.
Ye ſtraine the temples and the Gods that moſt haue fauourd you,
The dead ye ſpare not, on their tombes your fury rageth now.
I wil their weapons all reſiſt my ſelfe with naked hand,
The yre of hart ſhal geue me ſtrength their armour to withſtand.
As fierce as did the Amazones beate down the Greekes in fight,
And Menas once enſpierd with God, in ſacrifyce doth ſmyght,
With ſpeare in hand, and while with furyous pace ſhe treads the groūd
And wood as one in rage ſhe ſtrykes, and feeleth not the wound:
So wil I runne on midſt of them and on theyr weapons dye,
And in defence of Hectors tombe among his aſhes lie.
Ceaſe ye: doth rage and fury vayne of women moue ye ought?
Diſpatch with ſpeede what I commaund, & plucke downe al to naught.
O ſlay me rather here with ſword rid me out the way,
Breake vp the deepe Auern, and rid my deſtenies delay.
Riſe Hector and beſet thy foes, breake thou Vliſſes yre,
A ſpright art good enough for him, behold he caſteth fire.
And weapon ſhakes with mighty hand do ye not Greekes him ſee?
Or els doth Hectors ſpright appear but onely vnto me
Downe quight withal.
What wilt thou ſuffer both thy ſonnes be ſlayne,
And after death thy huſbandes bones to be remou'd agayne?
Perhaps thou mayſt with prayer yet apreaſe the Grecians all.
Els downe to ground the holy tombe of Hector, ſtreight ſhall fal.
Let rather die the childe pore wretch and let the Greekes him kil,
Then father and the ſonne ſhould cauſe the tone the others yll.
Vlliſſes, at thy knees I fal, and hmbly aſke mercie,
Theſe handes that no mans feete els knew, firſt at thy feete they lye.
Take pitty on the mothers caſe and ſorrowes of my breaſt,
Vochſafe my prayers to receiue and graunt me my requeſt.
And by how much the more the Goddes haue thee aduaunced hie,
More eaſely ſtryke the pore eſtate of wretched miſery.
God graunt the chaſt bed of thy godly wyfe Penelope,
May thee receiue and ſo agayne Laerta may thee ſee,
And that thy ſonne Telemachus may meete thee ioyfully.
His graundſtres yares, ad fathers witte, to paſſe ful happely.
Take ptty on the mothers teares, her litle child to ſaue,
He is my onely comfort left, and th'onely to I haue.
¶Bryng forth thy ſonne and aſke.
COme hither child out of the dennes to mee,
Thy wretched mothers lamentable ſtore,
This Babe Vliſſes (loe) this Babe is hee.
That ſtayeth your ſhips and feareth you ſo ſore.
Submit thy ſelfe my ſonne with humble hand,
And worſhip flat on ground thy mayſters feete,
Thinke it no ſhame as now the caſe doth ſtand:
The thing that Fortune wilth a wretche is meete,
Forget thy worthy ſtocke of Kingly kynd,
Thinke not on Priams great nobility,
And put thy father Hector from thy mynde,
Such as thy Fortune let thy ſtomacke bee,
Behaue thy ſelfe as captiue bend thy Knee,
And though thy griefe pearce not thy tender yeares,
Yet learne to wale thy wretched ſtate by mee,
And take enſample at thy mothers teares.
Once Troy hath ſeene the weeping of a child,
When litle Priam turnde Alcides threats,
And he to whom all beaſtes in ſtrength did yelde,
That made his way from hel, and brake their gates
His litle enmies teares yet ouercame,
Priam he ſayd receiue thy liberty,
In ſeat of honor kepe thy Kingly name,
But yet thy Sceptors rule more faythfully.
Lo ſuch the conqueſt was of Hercules.
Of him yet learne your hartes to mollify,
Do onely Hercles cruel weapons pleaſe,
And may no end be of your cruelty?
No leſſe then Pryam, kneeles to thee this boy,
That lieth and aſketh onely life of thee.
As for the rule and gouernaunce of Troy
Where euer ortune wil ther let i bee.
Take mercy on the mothers ruthful teares
That with their ſtreames my cheekes do ouerflow,
And ſpare this guiltles inſantes tender yeares
That humbly falleth at thy feete ſo lowe.
OF truth the mothers greate ſorow,
doth moue my hart full ſore.
But yet the mothers of the Greekes,
of neede muſt moue me more,
To whom tts boy may cauſe in time
a great calamtie.
May euer he the burnt ruines
of Troy reedifie?
And ſhall theſe handes in time to come, ereckt the towne againe?
If this be th onely helpe we haue, there doth no hope remain
For Troy, we ſtand not now in caſe to cauſe your feare of mynde,
Doth ought auayle his fathers force, or ſtocke of noble kinde?
His fathers heart abated was, he drawen the walles abought.
Thus euil haps, the haughtteſt heart at lengh they bring to nought,
If ye wil needes oppreſſe a wretch what thing more grieuous were
Then on his noble neck he ſhould the yoke of bondage bere?
To ſerue in life doth any man this to a King denye?
Not Vliſſes with his death, but Calchas prophecy.
O falſe inuentor of deceipt and hainous cruelty,
By manhode of whoſe hand in warre no man did euer dye.
But by diſceipt and crafty trayne of mynd that miſchiefe ſeekes,
Before this tyme ful many one dead is, yea of the Greekes,
The Prophets wordes and guilties Gods ſaiſt thou my ſonne require,
Nay: miſchiefe of thy breaſt it is, thou doſt his death deſyre.
Thou night ſouldier, and ſtout of hart a litle child to ſtay.
This enterpriſe thou takſte alone and that by open day.
Vliſſes manhood wel to Greekes to much to you is knowne,
I may not ſpend the tyme in wordes, our Nauy wil be gone
A little ſtay, while I my laſt farewel geue to my child,
And haue with oft embracing him my greedy ſorrowes fild.
Thy grieuous ſorrowes to redreſſe, would God it lay in mee,
But at thy wil to take delay of tyme I graunt it thee.
Now take thy laſt leaue of thy Sonne, and fil thy ſelfe with teares.
Oft tymes the weeping of the eyes, the inward griefe out weakes.
O deere, O ſweete, thy mothers pledge, farewel my onely ioy,
Farewel the flowre of honor left of beaten howſe of Troy.
O Troyans laſt calamity and feare to Grecians part
Farewel thy mothers onely hope, and vayne comfort of hart.
Oft wiſh I thee thy fathers ſtrength and halfe thy graundſtres yeares
But all for naught the Gods haue all diſpoynted our deſires.
Thou neuer ſhalt in regal court thy ſceptors take in hand,
Nor to thy people geue decrees nor leade with law thy land.
Nor yet thine enmies ouercome by might of handy ſtroke.
Nor ſende the conquerde nations all vnder thy ſeruile yoke.
Thou neuer ſhalt beat downe in fight, and Greekes with ſword purſew,
Nor at thy Charyot Pyrrhus plucke, as Achill Hector drew
And neuer ſhal theſe tender handes thy weapons weild and wreſt,
Thou neuer ſhalt in woods purſue the wyld and mighty beaſt.
Nor as accustom'd is by guyſe and ſacrifice in Troy,
With meaſure ſwift: betweene the aulters ſhalt thou daunce with ioy.
O grieuous kind of cruel death that doth remayne for thee,
More woeful thinges then Hectors death the walles of Troy ſhall ſee.
Now breake of al thy mothers tears I may no more tyme ſpende.
The grieuous ſorrowes of thy hart will neuer make an end.
Vliſſes ſpare as yet my teares and graunt awhyle delay,
To cloſe his eyes yet with my handes er he depart away.
Thou dieſt but young: yet feard thou art thy Troy doth wayte for thee,
Goe noble hart thou ſhalt agayne the noble Troyans ſee.
Helpe me mother?
Alas my child why tak'ſt thou holde by me?
In vayne thou calſt where helpe none is I can not ſuccour thee.
As when the little tender beaſt that heares the Lyon crye,
Straight for defence he ſeekes his damme, & crouching downe doth lye,
The cruel beaſt when once remoued is the damme away,
In greedy aw with rauening bit doth ſnatch the tender pray
So ſtrayght the enmies wil thee take, and from my ſide thee beare.
Receiue my kiſſe and teares pore childe, receiue my rented hayre.
Depart thou hence now ful of mee, and to thy father goe,
Salute my Hector in my name and tel him of my woe
Complayne thy mothers griefe to him if former may moue,
The ſprightes: and that in funerall flame they leeſe not all their loue.
O cruel Hector ſuffreſt thou thy wyfe to be oppreſt?
With bond of Grecians heauy yoke and lieſt thou ſtill at reſt?
Achilles roſe: take here agayne my teares and rented heare,
And (al that I haue left to ſend) this kiſſe thy father beare.
Thy coat yet for my comfort leaue, the tomb hath touched it
If of his aſhes aught here lye Ile ſeeke it euery whit.
There is no meaſure of thy teares I may no lenger ſtay,
Deferre no further our returne breake of our ſhippes delay.
O Ioue that leadſt the lampes of fire,
and deckſt vvith flaming ſtarres the ſkye.
VVhy is it euer thy deſyre
ro care their courſe ſo orderly?
That novve the froſt the leaues hath vvorn
& novv the ſprīg doth cloſe the tree.
Novv fiery Leo rypes the corne,
and ſtil the ſoyle ſhould chaunged be?
But vvhy art thou that all doſt guide,
betvvene vvhoſe hands the poale doth ſvvay,
And at vvhoſe vvil the Orbs do ſlyde, careles of mans eſtate alvvay?
Regarding not the goodmans caſe, nor caryng hovv to hurt the yll.
Chaunce beareth rule in euery place and turneth mans eſtate at vvill.
She geues the vvronge the vpper hand the better part ſhe doth oppreſſe,
She makes the higheſt lovv to ſtand, her Kingdome all is orderleſſe.
O parfite profe of her frailty, the princely tovvres of Troybeat dovvne,
The flovvre of Aſia here ye ſee vvith turne of hand quight ouerthrovvne.
The ruthful ende of Hectors ſon, vvhō to his death the Greekes haue led,
His fatall hovvre is come and gone, and by this tyme the Child is ded:
Yet ſtil (alas) more cares encreaſe, O Troyans doleful deſtenie,
Faſt doth approach the maydes deceaſe, and novv Polixena ſhall die.
WHat euer woeful wedding yet,
were cauſe of funerall,
Of wayling, teares, bloud, ſlaughter els
or other miſchiefes all,
A worthy watch for Helena,
and meete for me it ware,
My wedding torch hath bene the cauſe
of al The Troyans care.
I am conſtraynd to hurt them yet,
after their ouerthrow,
The falſe and fayned mariages of Pyrrhus muſt I ſhowe.
And geue the mayde the Greekes attyre and by my pollecy:
Shal Paris ſiſter be betrayd and by diſceypt ſhal die.
But let her be beguiled thus, the leſſe ſhould be her payne
If that vnware without the feare of death: ſhe might be ſlayne.
What ceaſeſt thou the wil of Greekes, and meſſuage to fulfill?
Of hurt conſtraynd the fault returnth to th'auter of the ill.
O noble Virgin of the famous houſe and ſtocke of Troy,
To thee the Grecians haue me ſent I bring thee newes of ioy,
The Gods rue on thy afflicted ſtate more merciful they bee,
A greate and happy maryage loe, they haue prepard for thee.
Thou neuer ſhould if Troy had ſtoode, ſo nobly wedded be,
Nor Priam neuer could prefer thee to ſo hie degree.
Whom flowre of all the Grecians name the prince of honour hie,
That beares the Scepters ouer all, the lande of Theſſaly
Doth in the law of wedlocke choſe, and for his wyſe require.
To ſacred rightes of lawfu bed, doth Pyrrhus thee deſyre:
Loe Thetis great with al the reſt, of Gods that guide by ſea.
Each one ſhall thee accompt as theirs and toy by wedding day.
And Peleus ſhall thee daughter call when thou art Pirrhus wyfe,
And Nereus ſhall accompt thee his the ſpace of all thy life.
Put of thy monrning garment now, this regall veſture weare
Fogret henceforth thy captiue ſtate and ſeemly broyd thy hayre.
The fall hath lift thee higher vp, and doth thee more aduaunce
Oft to be taken in the warre doth bring the better chaunce
This ill the Troyans neuer knew in all their griefs and payne
Before this tyme ye neuer made vs to reioyce in vayne.
Troy towres geue light, O ſeemely tyme for mariage to be made,
Who would refuſe the wedding day that Helayne doth perſwade?
The Plague and ruine of each parte behold doſt thou not ſee,
Theſe tombes of noble men, and how their bones here ſcattered bee?
Thy brydebed hath bene cauſe of this for thee all theſe be ded
For thee the bloud of Asia both and Europe hath bene ſhed.
When thou in ioy and pleaſure both the fighting folke from farre,
Haſt viewde: in doubt to whom to wiſh the glory of the warre.
Goe to, prepare the martages, what neede the Torches light?
Behold the Towres of Troy do ſhine with brands that blaſe ful bright.
O Troyans all ſet to your handes, this wedlocke celebrate:
Lament this day with woeful cry and teares in ſeemly rate.
Though care do cauſe the want of wit, and reaſons rule denye,
And heauy hap doth ofttymes hate his mates in miſery
Yet I before moſt hateful iudge dare wel defend my part,
That I of all your greuous cares ſuſtayne the greateſt ſmart.
Andromacha for Hector weepes, for Priam Hecuba,
For onely Paris priuily bewayleth Helena.
A hard and grieuous thing it is captiuity to beare,
In Troy that yoke I ſuffred long a priſoner whole ten yeare.
Turnd are the fates, Troy beaten downe, to Greece I muſt repeare,
The natiue countrey to haue loſt is ill, but worſe to feare.
For dread therof you neede not care your euilles all be paſt,
On me both partes wil vengeance take al lightes to me at laſt.
Whom each man priſoner takes God wot ſhee ſtandes in ſlipper ſtay,
And me not captiue made by lot yet Paris led away.
I haue bene cauſe of all theſe wars, and then your woes were wrought,
When firſt your ſhippes the Spartayn Seas & land of Grecia ſought.
But if the Goddeſſe wild it ſo that I their pray ſhould be,
And for reward to her beautyes iudge ſhee had appoynted me,
Then pardon Paris: thinke this thing in wrathful iudge doth lie,
The ſentence Menelaus geues, and he this caſe ſhall trye.
Now turne thy playntes Andromacha, and weepe for Polyxeyne
Mine eyes for ſorrowes of my hart theyr teares may not refrayne.
Alas, what care makes Heleyn weepe? what griefe doth ſhe lament?
Declare what craftes Vliſſes caſtes, what miſchiefe hath he ſent?
Shall ſhee from height of Idey hil be hedlong tombled downe?
Or elſe out of the turrets toppe in Troy ſhal ſhe be throwne?
Or wil they caſt her from the clieues into Sygeon ſeas?
In bottom of the ſurging waues to end her ruthful days?
Show what thy countnaunce hides and tell the ſecrets of thy breaſt.
Some woes in Pyrhus wedding are farre worſe then all the reſt.
Go to, geue ſentence on the mayd, pronounce her deſteny:
Delude no longer our miſhappes, we are prepard to die.
Would God the'xpoūder of the Gods would geue his dome ſo right
That I alſo on poynt of ſword might leeſe the lothſome light,
Or at Achilles tombe with ake of Pyrrhus hand be apne:
And beare a part of al thy fates O wretched Polixeyne.
Whom yet Achilles woeth to wed, and where his aſhes lie,
Requireth that thy bloud be ſhed, and at his tombe to die.
Behold loe how her noble mynd of Death doth gladly heare,
She deckes her ſelfe? her regal weede in ſeemely wyſe to weare,
And to her head ſhe ſettes her hand the broyded hayre to lay,
To wed ſhe thought it Death, to die ſhe thinkes a wedding day
But helpe (alas) my mother ſounds to heare her daughters death,
Aryſe plucke vp your heart and take agayne the panting breath.
Alacke good mother how ſlender ſtay, that doth thy life ſuſtayne?
A little thinge ſhall happy thee thou art almoſt paſt payne.
Her breath returnes: ſhe doth reuyue, her lims their life do take.
So ſee when wretches fayne would die, how death doth them forſake.
Doth yet Achilles liue (alas) to work the Troyans ſpight?
Doth he rebell agaynſt vs yet? O hand of Paris light.
The very tombe and aſhes loe▪ yet thirſteth for our bloud,
A happy heape of children late on euery ſyde mee ſtoode.
It wearied me to deale the mothers kiſſe among them al.
The reſt are loſt, and this alone now doth me mother call.
Thou onely child of Hecuba, a comfort left to me.
A ſtayer of my ſory ſtate and ſhall I now leeſe thee?
Depart O wretched ſoule, and from this carefull carcas flie,
And eaſe me of ſuch ruthfull fates, to ſee my daughter die.
By weepyng wets (alas) my eyes, and ſtaines them ouer al,
And downe my cheekes the ſodeine ſtreames and ſhowres af teares do fal.
But thou deare daughter maiſt be glad, Caſſandra would reioyſe,
Or Hectors wife thus wed to be if they might haue their choyſe.
We are the wretches Hecuba in curſed caſe we ſtande.
Whom ſtraight the ſhippe ſhal toſſe by ſeas into a forraine land.
But as for Heleyns grieues be gone and turned to the beſt,
She ſhall againe her natyue countrey ſe and liue at reſt.
Ye would the more enuy my ſtate if ye might know your owne,
And grouth there yet more griefe to me that erſt I haue not known?
Such maſters muſt ye ſerue as doth by chaunce of lots befal.
Whoſe ſeruaunt am I then become whom ſhall I maiſter call?
By lot ye fall to Pyrhus hands you are his priſoner.
Caſſandra is happy, fury ſaues perhaps and Phoebus her.
Chiefe kinge of Greekes Caſsandra keepes and his captiue is ſhee.
Is any one amonge them all that pryſoner would haue me?
You chaunſed to Vlyſſes are his pray ye are become.
Alas what cruell▪ dyre and yrefull dealer of the dome.
What god vniuſt doth ſo deuide, the captiues to their lordes?
What grieuous arbiter is he? that to ſuch choyce accordes,
What cruel hand to wretched folke, ſo euil faes hath caſte?
Who hath amonge Achilles armour, Hectors mothers plaſte?
Now am I captiue, and beſet with all calamitie.
My bondage grieues me not, but him to ſerue it ſhameth mee.
He that Achilles ſpoyles hath won, ſhall Hectors alſo haue:
Shall barraine lande encloſde with ſeas receiue my boanes in graue?
Leade me Vlyſſes where thou wylt, leade me. I make no ſtay,
My maſter I, and me my fates, ſhall follow euery way.
Let neuer calme come to the ſeas, but let them rage with winde,
Come fire and ſword, mine owne miſchaunce and Priams let me finde.
In meane time haps this deepe diſtres my cares can know no calme:
I ran the race with Priamus, but he hath won the Palme,
But Pyrrhus comes with ſwiftned pace & thretning browes doth wreſt.
What ſtayſte thou Pyrrhus? ſtrike thy ſword now through this woful brest.
And both at ones the parents of thy fathers wife now ſlay,
Murderer of age, likes thee her bloud? he draw my daughter away
Defile the gods and ſtaine the ſprights, of hel with ſlaughtred bloud,
To aſke your mercy what auayles? our prayers do no good.
The vengeance aſke I on your ſhips, that it the gods may pleas,
According to this ſacrifice, to guide you on the ſeas.
This wiſhe I to your thouſand ſayles, Gods wrath light on them all,
Euen to the ſhip that beareth me, what euer may befall.
A Comfort is to mans calamity
A dolefull flocke of felowes in diſtres.
And ſweete to him that mournes in miſerie
To here them wayle whom ſorowes like oppre
In deepeſt care his griefe him bites the les,
That his eſtate bewayles not all alone,
But ſeeth with him the teares of many one.
For ſtill it is the chiefe delight in woe,
And ioy of them that ſonke in ſorrowes are,
To ſee like fates by fall to many moe,
That may take part of all their wofull fare,
And not alone to be oppreſt with care.
There is no wight of woe that doth complayne,
When all the reſt do like miſchaunce ſuſtayne.
In all this world if happy man were none,
None (though he were) would thinke himſelfe awretch.
Let once the ritch with heapes of Gold be gone,
Whoſe hundred head his paſtours ouerretch,
Then would the poore mans hart begin to ſtretch.
There is no wretch whoſe life him doth diſpleaſe,
But in reſpect of thoſe that liue at eaſe.
Sweete is to him that ſtandes in deepe diſtreſſe,
To ſee no man in ioyful plight to bee,
Whoſe onely veſſel wind and waue oppreſſe,
Ful ſore his chaunce bewayles and weepeth hee,
That with his owne none others wracke doth ſee
When he alone makes ſhipwracke one the ſand,
And naked falles to long deſyred land.
A thouſande ſayle who ſeeth to drench in Seas,
With better will the ſtorme hath ouerpaſt
His heauy hap doth him the leſſe diſpleaſe
When broaken boardes abroade be many caſt,
And ſhipwrackt ſhippes to ſhore they flit ful faſt,
With doubled waues when ſtopped is the floud,
With heaps of them that there haue loſt theyr good.
Ful ſore did Pirrhus Helens loſſe complayne,
What time the leader of his flocke of ſhepe,
Vppon his backe alone he bare them twayne,
And wet his Golden lockes amid the deepe,
In piteons playnt (alas) he gan to weepe.
The death of her it did him deepe diſpleaſe,
That ſhipwracke made amid the drenching ſeas.
And piteous was the playnt and heauy moode
Of woful Pyrrha and eke Deucalion
That nought beheld aboute them but the flould,
When they of all mankynd were left alone
Amid the ſeas ful ſore they made their mone
To ſee themſelues thus left aliue in woe
When neyther land they ſaw, nor fellowes moe.
Anone theſe playnts and Troans teares ſhall quaile,
And here and there the ſhip them toſse by ſeas:
When trompets ſound ſhal warne to hoyſe vp ſayle,
And through the waues with wind to ſeeke their waies
Then ſhall theſe captiues goe to ende their dayes
In land vnknowne: when once with haſty ore
The drenching deepe they take and ſhunne the ſhore.
What ſtate of mynd ſhal then in wretches bee?
When ſhore ſhall ſinke from ſight and ſeas aryſe?
When Idey hill to lurke aloofe they ſee?
Then poynt with hand from farre wher Troia lies,
Shall child and mother: talking in this wyſe:
Loe yonder Troy, where ſmoke it fumeth hie,
By this the Troyans ſhal their countrey ſpie.
ODyre, fierce, wretched, horrible,
O cruell fates accurſte,
Of Mars his ten yeares bloudſhed blows
the wofulſt and the worſt.
Alas which ſhould I firſt bewayle?
thy cares Andromacha?
Or els lament the wretched age
of woful Hecuba?
What euer mans calamityes
ye wayle for myne it is.
I beare the ſmart of al their woes each other feeles but his
Who euer he, I am the wretch all happes to me at laſt.
Slayne is the mayd, and from the walles of Troy the child is caſt.
But voth (as them became) they toke their death with ſtomacke ſtout.
Declare the double ſlaughters then, & tell the whole throughout.
One towre of all the reſt ye know doth yet in Troy remayne,
Where Pryan wonted was to ſit, and view the armies twayne.
His litle Nephew eke with him to lead▪ and from a farre,
His fathers fightes with fire and ſword to ſhow on feats of war.
This towre, ſometyme wel knowne by fame, and Troyans honor moſt.
Is now with captaynes of the Greeckes, beſet on euery coaſt.
With ſwift recourſe and from the ſhippes, in cluſtred heaps anone.
Both tagge and ragge they runne to gaſe what thing ſhould ther be done
Some clime the hilles to ſeeke a place where they might ſee it beſt,
Some one the rockes a tiptoe ſtande to ouerloke the reſt.
Some on their rēples weare the pine, ſome beech, ſome crownes of bay,
For garlandes torne is euery tree, that ſtandeth in they way,
Some from the higheſt mountaynes top aloofe beholdeth all.
Some ſcale the buildinges halfe thurne, and ſome the ruinous wall.
Yea ſome there were (O tichtee loe) that for the more deſpyghte.
The tombe of Hector ſits vppon beholders of the ſight.
With princely pace Vliſſes then paſt through the preaſed band
Of Greekes, King Priams litle nephew leading by the hand.
The Child with vnrepyning gate paſt through his enmies handes,
Vp toward the walles, and as anone in turrets top he ſtandes,
From thence adowne his lofty lookes he caſt on euery part,
The neerer death more free from care he ſeemd▪ and feare of hart.
Amid his foes his ſtomacke ſwelles. and fierce he was to ſight.
Like Tygere whele, that thrats in vayne wt tue les chap to bight.
Alas, for piy then each one, rew on his tender yeares,
And al the route that preſent were, for him they fhed their teares,
Yea not Vliſſes them reſtraynd, but trickling downe they ſal,
And onely he, wept not (poore foole) whom they bewayled al.
But whyle on Gods Vliſſes cald, and Calchas▪ wordes expound,
In midſt of Pryams land (alas) the child leapt downe to ground.
What cruel Calchas could or ſcith ſuch ſlaughter rake in hande
Or by the ſhore of Caſpyan Sea, what barbarous lawles land.
Buſyridis to th'aulters yet no infantes bloud hath ſhed
Nor neuer yet were children ſlayne for feaſt of Diomed.
Who ſhal alas in tombe thee lay, or hyde thy limmes agayne?
What limmes from ſuch a headlong fall could in a child remayne,
His bodies payſe throwne downe to ground, hath batred al his bones.
His face, his noble fathers markes are ſpoyld agaynſt the ſtones.
His necke vnioynted is: his head ſo daſht with flint ſtoane ſtroake▪
That ſcattered is the brayne about, the ſcul is al to broake.
Thus lieth he now diſmembred corpes, deformd and all to rent.
Loe herein doth he yet likewyſe, his father repreſent.
What time the Child hath headlong faine thus from the walls of Troy,
And at the Greekes the ſelues bewaild y• ſlaughter of the Boy,
Yet ſtrayght returne they backe, and at Achilles tombe agayne
The ſecond miſchiefe goe to worke the death of Polixeine.
This tombe the waues of ſurging ſeas, beſet the vtter ſide,
The other part the fields encloaſe aboute, and paſtors wyde.
In vale enuyroned with hils, that round aboute do ryſe,
A ſloape on height erected are the bankes in Theatre wyſe.
By al the ſhore then ſwarme the Greekes, & thicke on heaps they preaſe
Some hope that by her death they ſhall theyr ſhippes delay releaſe.
Some other oy their enmies ſtocke thus beaten downe to bee:
A greate part of the people, both the ſlaughter hate, and ſee.
The Troyans eke no eſſe frequent their owne calamityes
And all affrayd, beheld the laſt of all their miſeryes.
When fiſt proceeded torches bright as guiſe of wedlocke is.
And author therof led the way the Lady Tindaris.
Such wedlocke ray the Troyans then, God ſend Hermiona
And would God to her huſband ſo▪ reſtoard were Helena.
Feare maſ each part, but Polixene her baſhful looke downe caſt:
And more then earſt her glittring eyes and beauty ſhyn'd at laſt.
As ſweeteſt ſeems then Phoebus light, when downe his beams do ſway,
When ſtarres agayne with night at hand oppreſt the doubtful day.
Aſtonnted much the people were, and all they her commende,
And now much more then euer earſt, they prayſ'd her at her end.
Some with her beauty moued were, ſome with her tender yeares:
Some to behold the turnes of chaunce, and how each thing thus wears
But moſt them moues her valiant minde, and lofty ſtomacke hie,
So ſtrong, ſo ſtout, ſo ready of hart and wel prepard to dye.
Thus paſſe they forth an bold before King Pirrhus goeth the mayde,
They pitty her, they maruel her, their hartes were all affrayde.
As ſone as then the hard hil top (where die ſhe ſhould) they trode,
And hie vppon his fathers tombe the youthful Pyrrhus ſtoode.
The manly mayd ſhe neuer ſhronke one foote, nor backward drew,
But boldely turnes to meete the ſtroke, with ſloute vnchanged hew,
Her corage moues eche one, and loe a ſtrange thing monſtrous like.
That Pyrbus euen himſelfe ſtood ſtill, or dread, and durſt not ſtrike.
But as he had, his glittring ſword in her to hills vp doon,
The purple bloud, at mortall wound, then guſhing ou ſpoon.
Ne yet her corage her forſooke, when dieng in that ounde,
She fell as the'rth ſhould her reuenge with lieful rage to groūd.
Each people wept the Troyans firſt with priuy fearful crye,
The Grectans eake, each one bewayld her death apparantly.
This order had the ſacrifyce, her bloud the tombe vp dronke,
No drop remaynth aboue the ground, but downe forthwith it ſonke.
Now go, now goe ye Greekes, and now repayre ye ſafely home.
With careles ſhippes and hoiſed ſailes now cut the ſalt ſea fome.
The Child and Virgin both be ſlaine, your battels finiſht are.
Alas where ſhal I end my age? or whether beare my care?
Shal I my daughter, or my nephew, or my huſband mone?
My countrey els, or all at once? or elſe my ſelfe alone?
My wiſh is death that children both and virgins fiercely takes
Where euer cruel death doth haſt to ſtrike, it me forſakes,
Amid the enmies weapons all, amid both ſword and fyre,
All night ſought for, thou fleeſt from me, that do thee moſt deſyre.
Not flame of fyre, not fall of towre, not cruel enmies hand
Hath rid my life, how neere (alas) could death to Priam ſtand?
Now captiues all with ſwift recourſe repayre ye to the ſaies,
Now ſpread the ſhips their ſayls abroad, & forth they ſeeke theyr waies.