SLight haſtie labours in this eaſie Play,
Preſent not what you would, but what we may:
For this vouchſafe to know the onely end
Of our now ſtudie is, not to offend.
Yet thinke not, but like others raile we could,
(Beſt art Preſents, not what it can, but ſhould)
And if our pen in this ſeeme ouer ſlight,
We ſtriue not to inſtruct, but to delight,
As for ſome few, we know of purpoſe here
to taxe, and ſcowt: know firme art cannot feare
Vaine rage: onely the higheſt grace we pray
Is, you'le not taxe, vntill you iudge our Play.
Thinke and then ſpeake: tis raſhneſſe, and not wit
To ſpeake what is in paſsion, and not iudgement fit:
Sit then, with faire exſpectance, and ſuruay
Nothing but paſsionate man in his ſlight play,
Who hath this onely ill: to ſome deem'd worſt,
A modeſt diffidence, and ſelfe miſtruſt.
NAy comfort my good hoaſt Sharke, my good, Mulligrubb.
Aduance thy ſnout, doe not ſuffer to droppe on thy ſpaniſh leather ierkin, moſt hardly honeſt Mulligrub
What, cogging Cocledemoy is with a neaſt of goblets, true, what then? they will be ha merd out well enough, I warrant you.
Sure, ſome wiſe man would finde them out preſently.
Yes ſure, if we could finde out ſome wiſe man preſently▪
How was the plte loſt? how did it vaniſh?
In moſt ſincere proſe thus: that man of much money, ſome witte, but leſſe honeſtie, cogging Cocledemoy, comes this night aie into mine hoſtes Mulligrubs Tauerne heere, cals for dome, the houſe being ful, Cocledemoy conſorted with hi rable , his inſtrument of fornication, the baw Mrs.
are imparlarde next the ſtreete good po as their foode, black bird, Larke, woodcocke, and mine hoaſt here, comes in, cryes God bleſſe you, and departes: A blinde Harper enters, craues audience, vncaſeth, playes, the Drawer for female priuatnes ſake is nodded out, who knowing that whoſoeuer will hit the mark of profit, muſt like thoſe that ſhoot in ſtone-bowes winke with one eye, growes blind a the right ſide and departs.
He ſhal anſwere for that winking with one eye at the laſt day.
Let him haue day till then, and he will winke with both his eyes.
Cocledemoy perceiuing none in the roome but the blind Harper, (whoſe eyes heauen had ſhut vp, from beholding wickedneſſe,) vnclaſpes a caſement to the ſtreet very patiently, pockets vp . bowles vnnaturally, thruſtes his wench forth the window, and him ſelfe moſt prepoſterouſly with his heeles forward followes, the vnſeeing Harper playes on, bids the empty diſhes and the treacherous candles much good do them. The Drawe returnes, but out alas, not on , but alſo the beaſt of goblets were flowne away, Laente are raiſde.
VVhich did not pierce the heauens.
The Drawers mone, mine hoaſt doth crie, the bowles are gone.
Hic finis Priami.
Nay, be not iaw falne, my moſt ſharking Mulligrub.
Tis your iuſt affliction of the fellar, and repent, repent.
I am not iawfalne, but I will hang the contracting Cocledemoy, and theres an end of't.
Is it a right ſtone, it ſhewes well by candlelight.
So doe many thinges that are counterfeite, but I aſſure you this is a right Diamond.
Might I borrow it of you, it will not a little grae finger in viſitation of my Miſtreſſe.
Why vſe it moſt ſweet Cuqueture, vſe it.
Thankes good Sir, ti's growne high night: Gentle, reſt to you.
A torch, found wench, ſoft ſleepe, and ſanguin dreames to you both on boy.
Let me bid you good reſt.
Not ſo truſt me, I muſt bring my friend home: I dare not giue you vp to your owne companie, I feare the warmth of wine and youth, will draw you to ſome Common houſe of laſciuious entertainement.
Moſt neceſſarie buildings Malheureus euer ſince my intention of Marriage, I doe pray for their continuance.
Lou'd Sir, your reaſon?
Marry leaſt my houſe ſhould be made one: I would haue married men loue the Sewes, as Engliſhmen lou'd the low Countreys: wiſh war ſhould be maintain'd there, leaſt it ſhould come home to their owne dores: what, ſuffer a man to haue a hole to put his head in, though hee goe to the Pillorie for it: Youth and Appetite are aboue the Clubbe of Hercules.
This luſt is a moſt deadly ſinne ſure.
Nay, tis a moſt liuely ſinne ſure.
Well I am ſure, tis one of the head ſinnes.
Nay, I am ſure it is one of the middle ſinnes.
Pitie, tis growne a moſt dayly vice.
Well, tis a ſinne.
I, or elſe few men would wiſh to go to Heau to diſguiſe with my friend, I am now giving the way of
Not to a Curtezan.
A courteous one.
What
A Publican.
Deere my
Sir, the ſtrongeſt argument that ſpeakes▪
Againſt the ſoules eternitie is luſt.
Th Wiſemans folly, and the fools wiſd
But to
to beat, and
Nay to expe your health and ſtrength
Your precious time, and
Of due preferment aduantage
Of any worthy end to the
The common boſome
Alas good you haue would you haue them get their liuing by the curſe of man, the ſweat of their browes? ſo they doe, euerie man muſt follow his trade, and euerie woman her occupation: a poore decayed mechanicall mans wife, her husband is layd vp, may not ſhe lawfully be layd downe, when her husbands onely riſing, is by his wifes falling? a Captaines wife wants meanes, her Commaunder lyes in open field abroad, may not ſhe lye in ciuile armes at home. A waighting Gentlewoman that had wont to take ſay to her Lady, miſcaries, or ſo: the Court miſfortune throwes her downe, may not the Citie curteſie take her vp: doe you know no Alderman would pitie ſuch a womans caſe: why is charity growne a flint▪ or releeuing the poore and impotent an offence? You will beaſts take no money for their fleſhly entertainment: true, becauſe they are beaſts, therefore beaſtly, onely men giue to looſe, becauſe they are men, therefore manly: and indeede, where ſhould they beſtow their money better? In Land, the title may be crackt: In Houſes, they may bee burnt: In apparell, will weare: In wine, alas for pitie out thrate is but ſhort: But employ your money vpon women, and a thouſand to not one of them will beſtow that on you, which ſhall tile by you as long as you hue; they are no ingratefull perſons, they with giue quite for quo▪ do ye proteſt, they'e ſweate, doe you they theyle fall doe you fall, they'le riſe, do you giue them, the Crowne, they'le giue you the french; O iustus iuſta, They fell their bodies▪ doe not better perſons fell their ſoules? nay, ſince all things haue been ſould, honor, iuſtice, aim: my, euen God himſelfe, Aye me, what baſe ignobleneſſe is it the pleaſure of a wanton bed.
Why doe men ſcrape, why heape to full heapes ioyne.
But for his Miſtreſſe, who would care for coyne▪
For this I hold to be deny'd of no man,
All thinges are made for man, and man for woman, giue
Of ill you merite well: my hearts good friend, Leaue yet at length, at length, for know this euer Tis no ſuch ſinne to erre, but to perſeuer.
Beautie is womans vertue, loue the lifes Muſique: and woman the daintines or ſecond courſe of heauens curious workmanſhip, ſince then beauty loue and woman are good, how can the loue of womans beawty be bad and, Bonum quo communius to melius; wil't then goe with me?
Whether?
To a houſe of ſaluation.
Saluation?
Yes 'twill make thee repent. wil't go to the family of loue▪ I will ſhew thee my creature▪ a pretty nimble eye Dutch Tkin; An honeſt ſoft harted impropriation, a ſoft plūpe, round chee froe, that has beauty inough, for her vertue, vertue enough for a woman, and woman enough for any reaſonable man in my knowledge: wil't paſſe a long with me?
What to a Brothell, to behold an impudent on not ſhall here the whole to ſee her: the moſt odious ſpectacle the earth can preſent, is an modeſt vulger woman.
Good ſtill: my braine ſhall keep't: you muſt goe as you loue me▪
Well: Ile go to make her loath the ſhame ſhee's in, The
The ight of vie the ate o ſinne, very perdy.
Mary, Mary Faugh.
Hm.
Come any worſhipfull any blew tooth'd Patrones of wickedneſſe, giue me the gobletts.
By yea, and by nay, maiſter Coclod I feare you're play the knaue and reſtore them.
No by the Lord A, Catholie and know'ſt we loue.
What?
Oracles are ſeas'd: Tempu prt, do'ſt heare my orſhipfull gliſterpipe, thou vngodly fyer that burnt Diana , do'ſt heare Bad,
In very good truthnes you are the fouleſt mou'd prophane railing Brother, call a womā the moſt vngodly : I we all eate of the forbidden fruite, and for mine owne part tho I am one of the family of loue and as they ſay a bawd that couers the multitude of ſinnes, yet I truſt I am none of the wicked that eate fiſh a Fridaies.
Hang toaſtes, I raile at thee my worſhipfull organ bellowes that fills the pipes, my fine ratling fleamy cough a the lunges and cold with a Po, I raile at thee what my right pretious pandres ſupportres of Barbar Surgeons and inhauntres of lati and dyet drinke: I raile at thee neceſſary damnation, Ile make an oration, I, in praiſe of thy moſt courtly in faſhion, and moſt pleaſureable function. I.
I prethee do, I loue to heare my ſelfe prais'd, as well as any old Ladie, I.
Liſt then, a Band, firſt for he profeſſion or ye can i is moſt worſhipfull of all the 12. Companies, for as that trade it moſt honorable that ſells the beſt comōdityes, as the Draper is more worſhipfull then the poyntmaker, the ſilkeman more worſhipfull then the Draper, and the Goldſmith more honorable then both, Little Mary ſo, that hon all, her ſho has the beſt were, for where theſe ell but ſattens, and ſels diuine vertues as virginitie, modeſtie and ſuch rare Immes, and thoſe not like a petty chapman, by retaile, but like a great marchant hy whole ale, , ha, ho, and who are her cuſtomers, not baſe corn cutters, or ſowgelders, but moſt rae wealthie Knightes, and moſt are her cuſtomers profite, but by the loſſe and diſpleaſure of another, as the Marchant thriues non but by the licentiouſnes of giddie, and vnſetled youth: the Lawyer, but by (the vexation of his client, the Phiſition, but by the maladies of his patient, onely my ſmothe gumbde Bawd hues by others pleaſure, and onely growes rich by other riſing. O mercifull gaine, O righteous in-come. So much for her voca on, trade and life, as for their death, how can it bee their wickedneſſe is alwayes before their eyes, and a deathes head moſt commonly on their middle finger. To conclude, ti's moſt certaine they muſt needes both liue well, and de well, ſince commonly they liue in Clearken-well, and dye in Dixi Mary.
Come along, yonders the preface or exordium to my wench, the bawde: Fetch, fetch. What M. Cocledemoy, is your knaueſhippe yet ſtirring, looke to it, Mulligrub lyes for you.
The more foole he, I can lye for my ſelfe, worſhipfull friend, hang toaſtes, I vanniſh. Ha my fine boy thou art a ſcholler, and haſt read Tullies Offices, my fine knaue, hang toaſtes.
The Vintner will toaſt you and he catch you.
I will draw the Vintner to the ſtoope, and when he runs low tilt him, he my fine knaue, art going to thy recreation.
Yes my capticeous raskall.
Thou wilt looke like a foole then by and by.
Looke like a foole why?
Why according to the old ſaying, A begger when he is lowſing of himſelfe lookes like a Philoſopher, a hard bound Philoſopher, when he is on the ſtoole, lookes like a tyrant, and a when hee is in his bey , lookes like a foole, God gie your worſhip good reſt, grace and mercy keepe your Syring ſtraight, and your Lotium vnſpile.
See, Sir this is ſhe.
This?
This.
A Curteſan? Now cold bloud defend me, what a proportion afflictes me?
O mine aderliuer loue, vat ſall me do to requi dis your muſt affection.
Marry ſalute my friend, clippe his necke, and kiſſe him welcome.
A mine art, Sir you bin very velcome.
Kiſſe her man with a more familiar affection, ſo, come what entertainement, goe to your Lute.
And how doſt approue my ſomtimes elected? fees none of your ramping Cannibals, that deuoure mās fleſh, nor any of your curtian gulfes, that will neuer be ſatisfied, vntill the beſt thing has be throwne into them. I lou'd her with my heart, vntill my ſoule ſhewed me the imperfection of my body, and placed my affection on a lawful loue, my modeſt Beatrice, which if this ſhort heeles knew, there were no being for mee with eyes before her face. But faith▪ doſt thou not ſome what excuſe my ſometimes incontinency with her enforciue beauties. Speake.
Hah, ſhe is a whore, is ſhe not?
VVhore? fie whore? you may call her a Curtezan, a Cocatrice, or (as that worthy ſpirite of an eternall happineſſe ſaide) a Suppoſitarie, but whore? fie: tis not in faſhion to call thinges by their right names, is a great marchant, a coockold, you muſt ſay, he is one of the liuery, is a great Lord, a foole, you muſt ſay he is weake, is a gallant pocky, you muſt ſay, he has the court , come ſhees your miſtreſſe or ſo: Come Syren your voice.
Vill not you ſtay in mine boſome to night loue▪
By no meanes ſweet breaſt, this Gentleman has vowde to ſee me chaſtly layde.
He ſhall haue a bedde too, if dat it pleaſe him.
Peace you tender him offence, hee is one of a profeſſed abſtinence, Syren your voyce and away.
The darke is my delight,
So tis the Nightingales.
My Muſicke's in the night,
So is the Nightingales.
My body is but little,
So is the Nightingales.
I loue to ſleepe gainſt prickle.
So doth the Nightingale.
Thankes, Buſſe, ſo the night growes old good re.
Reſt to mine deare loue, reſt, and no long abſence.
Beleeue me not long.
Sall Ick not beleeue you long.
O yes, come viah, away, boy, on.
Is ſhe vnchaſt, can ſuch a one be damde?
O loue and beautie, yee two eldeſt ſeedes
Of the vaſt Chaos, what ſtrong right you haue,
Euen in thinges diuine, our very ſoules.
Wha, ha, ho, come bird come, ſtand peace.
Are ſtrumpets then ſuch things, ſo delicate,
Can cuſtome ſpoile, what nature made ſo good.
Or is their Cuſtome bad? Beauti's for vſe,
I neuer ſaw a ſweet face vitious,
It might be proud, inconſtant, wanton, nice,
But neuer tainted with vnnaturall vice.
Their worſt is, their beſt art is loue to winne,
O that to loue ſhould be or ſhame, or ſinne;
By the Lord hee's caught, Laughter eternall?
Soule I muſt loue her deſteny is weake to my affection.
A common loue, bluſh not faint breaſt
That which is euer loued of moſt is b
Let colder-eld the ſtrongſt obiections mo,
No lou's without ſome luſt, o life without ſome loue.
Nay come on good ſir, what though the moſt odious ſpectacle the world can preſent be an imōdeſt vulgar woman: Yet ſir for my ſake.
Well ſir for your ſake Ile thinke better of them.
Doe good ſir and pardon me that haue brought you in You knowe the ſight of vice augments the hate of ſinne.
Hah? will you go home ſir 'tis hye bed time.
Withall my hart ſir only do not chide me I muſt confeſſe.
A wanton louer you haue been.
O that to loue ſhould be or ſhame, or ſinne.
Say yee?
Let colder eld the ſtrongſt obiections mooue.
Howe's this?
No loue's without ſome luſt,
No life without ſome loue,
go your wayes for an Apoſtata, I beleue my caſt garment muſt be let out in the ſeames for you when all is done, "Of all the fooles that would all man out-thruſt, "He that 'gainſt Nature would ſeeme wiſe is worſt.
The morne is yet but younge: here gentlemen,
This is my Beatrice window, this the chamber
Of my betrothed deareſt, whoſe chaſte eyes,
Full of lou'd ſweetneſſe, and cleare cherefulnes,
Haue gag'd my ſoule to her in ioyings,
Shredding away all thoſe weake vnder-braunches,
Of baſe affections, and vnfruitfull heates,
Here beſtow your muſick to my voyce.
Alwaies a vertuous name to my chaſt loue,
Lou'd ſir the honor of your wiſh returne to you,
I cannot with a miſtres complement
Forced diſcourſſes, or nice art of wit,
Giue entertaine to your deere wiſhed preſence,
But ſafely thus, what harty gratefulnes,
Vnſulleine Silence, vnaffected modeſty,
And an vnignorant ſhamefaſtnes can expreſſe,
Receiue as your proteſted due. Faith my hart,
I am your ſeruant,
O let not my ſecure ſimplicity, breed your miſlike,
As one quite voyde of ſkill,
Tis Grace inough in vs not to be ill,
I can ſome good, and faith I mean no hurt,
Do not then ſweete wrong ſober ignorance,
I iudge you all of vertue, and our vowes,
Should kill all feares that baſe diſtruſt can mooue,
my ſoule what ſay you, ſtill you loue?
Still? my vowe is vp aboue me, & like time
Irrevocable. I am ſworne all yours,
No beauty ſhall vntwine our armes, no face
In my eyes can or ſhall ſeeme faire,
And would to God only to me you might
Seeme only faire; let others diſeſteeme
Your matchles graces: ſo might I ſafer ſeeme,
Enuie I couet not: far, far be all oſtent
Vaine boaſts of beauties: ſoft ioyes and the reſt,
"He that is wiſe, pants, on a priuate breſt,
So could I liue in deſart moſt vnknowne,
Your ſelfe to me enough were Populous,
Your eyes ſhall be my ioyes, my wine that ſtill
Shall drowne my often cares, your onely voyce
Shall caſt a ſlumber on my liſtning ſence,
You with ſoft lip ſhall onely ope mine eyes,
And ſucke theire lidds a ſunder, onely you
Shall make me wiſh to liue, & not feare death,
So on your cheekes I might yeild lateſt breath,
O he that thus may liue, and thus ſhall dye,
May well be enuied of a dietie.
Deare my lou'd hart be not ſo paſſionate, nothing extreame liues long.
"But not to be extreame, nothing in loue's extreame my loue receiues no meane.
I giue you fayth, and pre thee ſince poore foule I am ſo eaſy to beleeue thee, make it much more pitty to deceiue me, weare this ſleight fauor in my remēbrance.
Which when I part from, hope the beſt of life, euer part from me.
I take you and your word, which may euer liue your ſeruant, ſee day is quite broke vp, the beſt of houres.
Good morrow gracefull miſtres, our nuptiall day holds.
With happy conſtancy a wiſhed day.
My ſelfe and all content reſt with you.
The ſtudious morne with paler cheeke drawes on,
The dayes bold light, harke how the free-borne birdes
Caroll their vnaffected paſſions,
Now ſing they ſonnets, thus they crye, we loue
O breath of heauen! thus they harmles ſoules
Giue intertaine to mutuall affects.
They haue no Baudes: no mercenary bedds
No politike reſtraints: no artificiall heats
No faint diſſemblings, no cuſtome makes them bluſh,
No ſhame afflicts theire name, O you happy beaſtes
In whome an inborne heat is not held ſinne,
How far tranſcend you wretched, wretched man
Whome nationall cuſtome, Tyrannous reſpects
Of ſlauiſh order, fetters: lames his power
Calling that ſinne in vs, which in all thi els
Is natures higheſt vertue. (O miſeri querng gaud a crimen haben
Sure nature againſt vertue croſſe doth fall
Or vertues ſelfe is oft vnnaturall,
That I ſhould loue a ſtrumpet I a man of Snowe
Now ſhame forſake me whether am I fallen!
A creature of a publique vſe, my frendes loue to
To liue to be a talke to men, a ſhame
To my profeſſed vertue. "O accurſed reaſon,
"How many eyes haſt thou to ſee thy ſhame▪
"And yet how blind once to preuent defame?
Diaboli vertus in Lumbis eſt, morrow my frend; come, I could make a tedious ſcene of this now but, what, pab, thou art in loue with a Courtezan, why ſir, ſhould we loath all ſtrumpet aſume men ſhould hate their owne mothers or ſiſters, a ſinne againſt kinde I can tell you.
May it be ſeeme a wiſe man to be in loue?
Let wiſe men alone, twill beſeeme thee and me well enough.
Shall I not offend the of our frendſhip?
Wher to affect that rend affected by heaen I reſigne her freely, the creature and I moſt growe of, by this time ſhee has aſſurely heard of my reſolued marriage, and no queſtion ſweares, Gods Sacrament, en Towſand Diuells Ile reſigne I faith.
I would but imbrace her, eare her ſpeake, and at the moſt but kiſſe her.
O frend he that could liue with the ſmoake of roaſt ate might liue at a cheape rate.
I ſhall neere prooue hartely receiued,
A kinde of flat vngratious modeſty,
An inſufficient dules ſtaines my hauiour.
No matter ſir, In-ſufficiency and ſottiſhnes are much commendable in a moſt diſcommendable action, now could I ſwallow thee, thou hadſt wont to be ſo baſh and cold ile tell thee. Hell and the prodegies of angrie loue are not ſo fearefull to a thinking minde as a man without affectio, why frend, Philoſophie & a re are all one, lo, is the center in which all lines cloſe the common bonde of being.
O but a chaſt reſerued priuatnes, a modeſt continence,
He tell thee what, take this as firmeſt ſence,
"In Continence will force a Continence,
"Heae waſteth heate, light defaceth light,
"Nothing is ſpoyled but by his proper might,
This is ſome thing too waighty for thy floore▪
But how ſo ere you ſhade it, the worlds eye
Shines not and open out,
Lying, malice, enuie, are held but fidyngs.
of rage, when cuſtome and the world
Calls luſt a crime ſpotted with blackeſt terrore▪
Where errors are held Crimes, are but errors
Along ſi to her ſhee is an rrand ſtrumpet: & a ſtrumpet is.
A Sarpego Venom de to man.
Things tually poſſeſſed: yet
And againe as good make vſe of a Statue,
A body without a ſoule, a carkaſſe three monethes dead,
Yet ſince thou art in loue.
Death man, my deſtiny I cannot chooſe.
Nay I hope ſo, againe they fell but onely fleſh,
No iot affection, ſo that euen in the enioying,
Abſentem marmore amque ptes, yet ſince you needs muſt loue,
Vnauoidable though folly, worſe then madnes.
Its true, but ſince you needs mſt loue, you muſt know this,
He that muſt loue, a foole, and he muſt kiſſe,
Cocledemoy vt vales Domine.
Ago tibi gratias, my worſhipfull friend, how do'es your friend?
Out you raſcall.
Hang toaſtes, you are an Aſſe, much a your worſhips brayne lyes in your Calues, bread a God boy, I was at ſupper laſt night with a new weande bulchin, bread a God drunke, horribly drunke, horribly drunke, there was a wench one Franke Frailty, a puncke, an honeſt pole-cat, of a cleane In ſtep, found legge, ſmooth thigh, and the nimble Diuell in her buttocke, al fieſt a grace, when ſaw you Tyſefew, or M. Caqueure, that pratling gallant of a good draught common cuſtomes, fortunate, impudence and ſound fare.
A way Rogue.
Hang toaſtes, my fine boy, my companion as worſhipfull.
Yes I heare you are taken vp with ſchollers and churchmen.
Qùanquam to Marce fi my fine boy, does your worſhip want a Barb Surgeon.
Farewell knaue, beware the Mullgrubs.
Let the Malligrubs beware the knaue, what a Barbar Surgeon▪ my delicate boy?
Yes ſir an apprentiſe to ſurgery.
Ti,s my fine boy, to what bawdy doth your Maiſter belong, whats thy name?
Holifernes Rain-ſcure.
Rainſcure? good M. Holifernes I deſire your further acquaintance, nay pray yee bee couered my fine boy, kill thy itch and heale thy skabes, is thy Maiſter rotten?
My father forſooth is dead.
And laid in his graue, alas what comfort ſhall Peggy then haue.
None but me ſir, thats my mothers ſonne I aſſure you.
Mothers ſonne, a good witty boy, would liue to read an Homilie well, and to whome are you going now?
Marry forſooth to trim M. Mulligrub he Vintner.
Doe you know M. Mulligrub?
My Godfather Sir.
Good boy hold vp thy chops, I pray thee doe one thing for me, my name is Gudgeon.
good M. Gudgeon.
Lend me thy baſon, razer, and Apron.
O Lord ſir.
Wel ſpokē, good engliſh, but whats thy furniture worth?
O Lord ſir I know not.
Well ſpoken, a boy of a good wit, holde this pawne, where doſt dwell.
At the ſigne of the three razers ſir,
A ſigne of good ſhauing my caraſtrophonicall fine boy, I haue an odde ieſt to trim M. Mulligrub for a wager, a ieſt boy, a humor, Ile returne thy thinges preſently, hold.
What meane you good M. Gudgeon?
Nothing faith but a ieſt boy, drinke that, Ile recoile preſently.
You'le not ſtay long.
As I am an honeſt man, the 3. razers?
I ſir.
Good, and if I ſhaue not M. Mulligrub, my wit has no edge, and I may goe cacke in my pewter, let me ſee, a Barbar, my ſcurule tongue will diſcouer me, muſt diſſemble, muſt diſguiſe, for my beard, my falſe hayre, for my tongue Spaniſh Dutch, or Welſh, no, a Northerne Barbar, very good, widdow Raine-ſures man well, newly entertainde, right, to, hang toſtes, acardes haue white backes, and all knaues would ſeeme to haue white breaſter, ſo proceede, now worſhipfull Cocledemoy.
Nay good ſweete daughter, doe not ſwagger ſo, you heare your loue is to bee married, true, he does caſt you off, right he will leaue you to the world, what then? tho blew and white, black and greene leaue you, may not redde and yellow entertain you, is there but one coullor in the Raine-bow?
Grand Grincome on your ſentences, Gods ſacrament, ten towſand diuels take you, you ha brought mine loue, mine honor, mine boddy all to noting.
To nothing! I'le be ſworne I haue brought them to all the thinges I could, I ha made as much a your maydenhead, and you had beene mine owne daughter, I could not ha ſold your Mayden head oftner then I ha done, I ha ſworn for you God forgiue me, I haue made you acquainted with the Spaniard Don Skirtoll, with the Italian, M. Beieroane, with the Iriſh Lord, S. Patrick, with the Dutch Marchant, Haunc Herkin Gukin Skellam Elappdragon, and ſpecially with the greateſt French, and now laſtly with this Engliſh (yet in my conſcience) an honeſt Gentleman: and am I now growne one of the accurſed with you for my labour? is this my reward, am I calde Bawde? Well Mary Fough, goe thy wayes Mary Fough, thy kind heart will bring thee to the Hoſpitall.
Nay good Naunt, you'le helpe me to an oder loue, vil you not?
Out thou naughty belly, wouldſt thou make mee thy Bawde? thu'ſt beſt make me thy Bawde, I ha kept counſell for thee, who paide the Apothecary, waſt not honeſt Mary Fough? who redeemde thy petticote and mantle, waſt not honeſt Mary Fough? who helped thee to thy cuſtome not of ſwaggering Ireand Captaines, nor of 2. s. Innes a court men, but with honeſt atte-cappes, wealthy flat-caps, that pay for their pleaſure the beſt of any men in Europe, nay, which is more in London, and doſt thou defile me vile creature.
Foutra pon you Vitch, Bawde, Pole-catte, Paugh, did not you prayſe Freeuill to mine loue?
I did prayſe I confeſſe, I did prayſe him, I ſede hee was a foole, an vnthrift, a true whoremaiſter, I confeſſe, a conſtāt drabbe keeper I confeſſe, but what the winde is turnde.
It is, it is vile woman, reprobate wowan, naughtie woman it is, vat sal become of mine poore fleſh now, mine boddy muſt turne Turke for 2. d. O Diuela, life a mine art, Ick sall be reuengde, doe ten thouſand Hell damme me, Ick sal haue the rouge trote cut, and his loue, and his friend, and all his affinitie ſall ſmart, ſall dye, ſal hang, now legion of deuill ſeaze him, de gran peſt, S. Anthonies fire, and de hot Neopolitan poc rotte him.
Franciſchina.
O mine ſeete, deerſt, kindeſt, mine louing, O mine towſand, ten towſand, delicated, petty ſeet art a mine a deere leeueſt affection.
Why Monky, no faſhion in you? giue entertaine to my friend.
Icke ſal make de moſt of you, dat curteſie may: Aunt Mary, Mettre Faugh, ſtooles, ſtooles for des gallantes: mine Mettre ſing non oder ſong, frolique, frolique Sir, but ſtill complaine me doe her wrong, lighten your heart Sir, for me did but kiſſe her, for me did but kis her, and ſo let go: Your friend is very heauy, ick ſall neere like ſuch ſad company.
No thou delighteſt onely in light Company.
By mine trot, he been very ſad, vat ayle you ſir.
A tooth ake Lady, a paultry rheume.
De diet is very goot for de rheume.
How far of dwels the houſe ſurgeon Mary Fough.
You are a prophane fellow I faith, I little thought to heare ſuch vngodly termes come from your lips.
Pre de now, tis but a toy, a very trifle.
I care not for the valew, Franke, but I faith-
I fait, me muſt needes haue it (dis is Beatrice ring, oh could I get it,) ſeet pree de now, as euer you haue embraced me with a hearty arme, a warme thought, or a pleaſing touch, as euer you will profeſſe to loue me, as euer you do wiſh me life, giue me dis ring, dis litle ring.
Pree thee be not vnciuillie importunate, ſha not ha't, faith I care not for thee, nor thy ielouſie, ſha not ha't ifaith.
You doe not loue me, I heare of Sir Hubert Subboys daughter Miſtreſſe Beatrice, Gods Sacrament, ick could ſcratch out her eyes, and ſucke the holes.
Goe y' are growne a puncke rampant.
So get thee gone, nere more behold min eyes by thee made wretched.
Mary Fough farewell, farewell Franck.
Sall I not ha de ring?
No by the Lord.
By te Lord?
By the Lord.
Goe to your new Blouze, your vnproude ſluttery, your modeſt Mettre forſooth.
Marry will I forſooth.
Will you marry forſooth?
Doe not turne witch before thy time.
With all my hart Sir, you will ſtay.
I am no whit my ſelfe, Ʋideo meliora proboque,
But raging luſt my fate all ſtrong doth moue:
"The Gods themſelues cannot be wiſe and loue.
Your wiſhes to you.
Beautie entirely choyce:
Pray yee proue a man of faſhion, and neglect the neglected.
Can ſuch a raritie bee neglected, can there be meaſure or ſinne in louing ſuch a creature▪
O min poore forſaken hart.
I can not containe, he ſaw thee not that left thee,
If there be wiſedome, reaſon, honor, grace
Of any fooliſhly eſteemed vertue,
In giuing o're poſſeſſion of ſuch beautie,
Let me be vitious, ſo I may be lou'de,
Paſſion I am thy ſlaue, ſweete it ſhall be my grace,
That I account thy loue, my onely vertue:
Shall I ſweare I am thy moſt vowed ſeruant.
Mine vowed, go, go, go, I can no more of loue, no, no, no, you bin all vnconſtant, O vnfaithfull men, tyrantes, betrayers, de very enioying vs, looſeth us, and when you onely ha made vs hatefull, you onely hate vs: O mine forſaken hart.
I muſt not raue, Scilence and modeſty two cuſtomarie vertues: will you be my miſtreſſe?
Mettres? ha, ha, ha.
VVill you lie wirh me?
Lie with you, O no, you men will out-lie any woman, fi me no more can loue.
No matter, let me enioy your bed.
O vile man, vat do you tinck on me, doe you take mee to be a beaſt, a creature that for ſence onely will entertaine loue, and not onely for loue, loue? O brutiſh abhomination!
VVhy then I pray thee loue, and with thy loue enioy me.
Giue me reaſon to affect you, will you ſweare you loue me.
So ſeriouſly, that I proteſt no office ſo dangerous, no deede ſo vnreaſonable, no coſt ſo heauie, but I vow to the vtmoſt tentation of my beſt being to effect it.
Sall I, or can I truſt againe? O foole,
How naturall tis for vs to be abuſde!
Sall ick be ſure that no ſatietie,
No inoying, not time ſhall languiſh your affection?
If there be ought in brayne, hart or hand,
Can make you doubtleſſe, I am your vowed ſeruant.
VVill you doe one ting for me?
Can I doe it?
Yes, yes, but ick doe not loue dis ſame Freeuill.
VVell.
Nay I do hate him.
So.
By this kiſſe I hate him.
I loue to feele ſuch othes, ſweare againe.
No, no, did you euer heare of any that loude at the firſt ſight?
A thing moſt proper.
Now fai, I iudge it all incredible, vntill this houre I ſaw you pritty fayre eyed yout, would you enioy me?
Rather then my breath, euen as my being.
Vel, had ick not made a vow.
VVhat vow?
O let me forget it, it makes vs both deſpaire.
Deare ſoule what vow?
Hah, good morrow gentle Sir, endeuour to forget me, as I muſt be enforced to forget al lmen. Sweet mind reſt in you.
Stay, let not my deſire burſt me, O my impatient heate endures no reſiſtance, no protractiō, there is no being for me but your ſuddaine inioying.
I doe not loue Freeuil.
But what vow, what vow?
So long as Freeuil liues, I muſt not loue.
Then he.
Muſt.
Die.
I, no there is no ſuch vehemence in your affectes,
VVould I were any thing, ſo he were not.
VVill you be mine when he is not?
VVill I? deare, deare breaſt, by this moſt zealous kiſſe, but I will not perſwade you: but if you hate him that I loath moſt deadly, yet as you pleaſe, i'le perſwade noting.
VVill you be onely mine.
Vill I? how hard tis for true loue to diſſemble, I am onely yours.
Tis as irreuocable as breath, he dyes. Your loue.
My vow, not vntill hee be dead,
VVhich that I may be ſure not to infringe,
Dis token of his death, ſall ſatisfie,
He has a ring, as deare as the ayre to him,
His new loues gift: tat got and brought to me.
I ſhall aſſured your pofeſſed reſt.
To kill a man?
O done ſafely, a quarrell ſuddain pickt,
with an aduantage ſtrike, then bribe, a little coyne,
Al's ſafe, deare ſoule, but Ile not ſet you on,
Nay hee is gone, the ring, well, come, little more liberall of thy loue.
Not yet my vow.
O heauen, there is no hell but loues prolongings, deare farewell.
Farewell, Now does my hart ſwell high, for my reuenge,
Has birth and forme, firſt friend al kill his friend,
He dat ſuruiues, i'le hang, beſides'de
Chaſt Beatrice ile vexe▪ onely de ring.
Dat got the world ſall know the worſt of euils.
"VVoman corrupted is the of deuils.
To kill my friend▪ O is to kill my ſelfe,
Yet mans but mans excrement, breeding man,
As he do's wormes this nothing,
The body of a man is of the ſelfe ſame ſoule,
A's Oxe or horſe, no murther theſe,
As for that onely part, which makes man,
Murther wa powe to O wit how vile,
How helliſh art thou, when thou ffect nature
Gainſt ſacred faith▪ thinke moe to kill a friend
To gaine a woman, to Ioſo ſelfe,
For appetite and ſenſual end, whoſe very hauing,
Looſeth all appetite, and giues aetie,
That corporall end, remorſe and inward bluſhinges,
Forcing vs loath the ſteame of our owne heates,
VVhilſte friendſhip cloſde in vertue being ſpiritual,
Taſtes no ſuch languiſhinges and moments pleaſure,
VVith much repentance, but like riuers flow,
And further that they runne, they bigger grow,
Lord how was I miſgone, how eaſie ti's to erre,
VVhen paſſion wil not giue vs leaue to thinke?
"A learn'd that is an honeſt man may feare.
"And luſt, and rage, and malice, and any thing,
"when he is taken vncollected ſuddenly:
"Ti's ſinne of colde blood; miſchiefe wil wak'd eyes,
"That is the damned and the truely vice,
"Not he that's paſſionles but he 'boue paſſion's wiſe,
My friend ſhall know it all.
It is right I aſſure you, iuſt fifteene pounds.
Well Cocledemoy tis thou putſt me to this charge, but and I catch thee, I'le charge thee with as many irons: well, is the Barbar come, ile be trimd and then to Cheapeſide, to buy a faire peece of plate, to furniſh the loſſe, is the Barbar come?
Truth husband, ſurely heauen is not pleaſde with our vocation; we do winke at the ſinnes of our people, our wines are Proteſtantes, and I ſpeake it to my griefe, and to the burthē of my conſcience, we frie our fiſh with ſalt butter.
Goe looke to your buſines, mend the matter and skore falfe with a vengeance.
Welcome friend, whoſe man?
Widdow Raine ſoures man, and ſhall pleaſe your good worſhip, my nam'es Andrew Sharke.
How do's my God ſonne good Andrew.
Very well, hee's gone to trim M. Quicquid our Parſon, hold vp your head.
How long haue you beene a Barbar Andrew?
Not long Sir, this two yeare.
What and a good worke man already, I dare ſcarſe truſt my heade to thee.
O feare not, we ha polde better men then you, we learn the trade very quickly, will your good worſhip be ſhaue not
As you will, what trade didſt liue by, before thou turnedſt Barbar Andrew.
I was a Pedler in Germany, but my countrimen thriue better by this trade.
Wha's the newes Barbar, thou art ſometimes at Court.
Sometimes pole a Page or ſo ſir.
And what's the newes? how doe all my good Lordes, and all my good Ladies, and all the reſt of my acquaintance.
What an arrogant knaue's this, Ile acquaintance yee (tis caſh,) ſay yee ſir.
And what newes? what newes? good Andrew.
Marry ſir you know the Conduit at Greenewich, and the vnder-holes that ſpowtes vp water.
Very well, I was waſht there one day, and ſo was my wiſe, you might haue wrung her ſmocke ifaith, but what a thoſe holes?
Thus Sir, out of thoſe little holes in the midſt of the night crawlde out 24. huge horrible, monſtrous, fearefull deuouring.
Bleſſe vs.
Serpents, which no ſooner were beheld, but they turnd to maſſiues which howlde, thoſe maſtiues inſtantly turnde to Cockes which crowed, thoſe cockes in a moment were changde to Beares which roard, which Beares are at this hower to bee yet ſcene in Paris Garden, liuing vpon nothing but toaſted cheeſe and greene onions.
By the Lord and this may be: my wife and I will go ſee them, this portends ſomething.
Yes worſhipfull Fieſt, thou'ſt feele what portendes by and by.
And what more newes, you ſhaue the worlde, eſpecially you Barbar Surgeons you know the ground of many thinges, you are cunning priuie ſearchers, by the mas you skowre all: what more newes?
They ſay Sir that 25, coople of Spaniſh Iennetes are to bee ſeene hand in hand daunce the olde meaſures, whileſt fixe goodly Flaunders Mares play to them on a noyſe of flutes.
O monſtrous! this is a lie a my word, nay and this bee not a lie, I am no foole I warrant, nay make an Aſſe of mee once?
Shut your eyes cloſe, wincke ſure ſir, this bal wil make you ſmart.
I do winke.
Your head will take cold.
I will put on your good worſhips night-cap, whileſt I ſhaue you, ſo, much: hang toaſtes: faugh: viah: ſparrowes muſt pecke and Cocledemoy munch.
Ha, ha, ha, 25. couple of Spaniſh Iennets to daunce the olde meaſures. Andrew, makes my worſhippe laugh, ifaith, doſt take me for an Aſſe Andrew, doſt know one Cocledemoy in towne, he made mee an Aſſe laſt night, but ile aſſe him, art thou free Andrew, ſhaue me well, I ſhall bee one of the common Councell ſhortly, and then Andrew, why Andrew, Andrew, doeſt leaue me in the Suddes? why Andrew I ſhall be blinde with winking. Ha Andrew, wife Andrew, what meanes this, wife, my money wife.
What's the noyſe with you? what aile you?
VVheres the Barbar?
Gone, I ſaw him depart long ſinne, why are not you trimd?
Trimd, O wife, I am ſhau'd, did you take hence the money?
I toucht it not as I am Religious▪
O Lord I haue wink faire.
I pray Godfather giue me your bleſſing.
O Holofernes, O wheres thy mothers Andrew
Bleſſing Godfather.
The diuell choake thee, where's Andrew thy mothers man?
My mother hath none ſuch forſooth.
My money, 15. l. plague of all Andrewes, who waſt trimd me?
I know not Godfather, onelie one me me, as I was comming to you, and borrowed my furniture, as he ſaide for a ieſt ſake.
What kinde of fellow?
A thick elderly ſtub-bearded fellow.
Cocledemoy, Cocledemoy, raiſe all the Wiſe men in the ſtreete, Ile hang him with mine owne hands O wife, ſome Rſa Solis.
Good husband take comfort in the Lord, Ile play the Diuell, but ile recouer it, haue a good conſcience ti's but a weekes cutting in the Terme.
O wife, O wife, O Iacke how does thy mother? is there any Fidlers in the houſe?
Yes, M. Creakes noyſe.
Bid 'em play, laugh, make merry, caſt vp my accountes, for ile go hang my ſelfe preſently, I will not curſe, but a poxe on Cocledemoy, he has polde and ſhaude the, he has trimd me.
Nay good child, A loue once more, M. Freeuils Sonnet, a the kiſſe you gaue him.
Sha'te good Nurſe,
Pureſt lips ſoft banks of bliſſes,
Selfe alone, deſeruing kiſſes,
O giue me leaue to &c.
Piſh ſiſter Beatrice, thee reade no more, my ſtomacke alate ſtands againſt kiſſing extreamly.
Why good Criſpinell
By the faith, and truſt I beare to my face, tis grown one of the moſt vnſauorie Ceremonies▪ Boddy, a eautie tis one of the moſt vnpleaſing in fellow that but one no on , and ſtanding cor and ſkirtes alſo ude with Taſtery ſarcenet, muſt ſalute vs on the lipps as iliarly▪ Soft ſkins ſaue yet here was a ſtubbearded Iohn a ſtile with a ploydens fae ſaluted me laſt day, and ſtroke his briſtles through my lippes, I a ſpent 10. ſhillings in pomtum finde to kinne them againe. Marry it a nobleman or a knight with one he viſſit vs though his vncleane gooſe turnd greene teeth, hathe palſy his noſtrells ſmell worſe then a putrified maribone, & his looſe beard drops into our boſome, yet wee muſt kiſſe him with a curſy, a curſe, for my part I had as liue they would break wynd in my lips.
Fy Criſpinella you ſpeake too broad.
No ot ſiſter, lets neere be aſhamed to ſpeake what we be not aſhamd to thinke, I dare as boldly ſpeake venery, as think venery.
Faith ſiſter ile begone if you ſpeake ſo broad.
Will you ſo? now baſhfulnes ſeaz you, we pronoūce boldly Robbery, Murder, treaſon, which deedes muſt needes be far more lothſome then an act which is ſo naturall, iuſt and neceſſary, as that of procreation, you ſhall haue an hipocriticall veſtall virgin ſpeake, that with cloſe teeth publikely, which ſhe will receiue with open mouth priuately, for my owne part I conſider nature without apparell, without diſguiſing of cuſtome or complement, I giue thoughts wordes, and wordes truth, and truth boldnes, ſhe whoſe honeſt freenes makes it her vertue, to ſpeake what ſhe thinks, will make it her neceſſity to thinke what is good, I loue no prohibited things, and yet I would haue nothing prohibited by policy but by vertue, for as in the faſhion of time, thoſe bookes that are cald in, are moſt in ſale and requeſt; ſo in nature thoſe actions that are moſt prohibited, are moſt deſired.
Good quick-ſiſter, ſtay your pace we are priuat, but the world would cenſure you, for truly ſeuere modeſty is womens vertue.
Fye, Fye,, vertue is a free pleaſant buxom qualitie: I loue a conſtant countenance well, but this froward ignorant coynes, fower auſtere lumpiſh vnciuill priuatenes, that promiſes nothing but rough ſkins, and hard ſtooles, ha, fy out good for nothing but for nothing, well nurſe, and what do you conceaue of all this?
Nay faith my conceauing dayes be done, marry for kiſſing ile defend that, thats within my compas, but for my own part heers miſtres Beatrice is to be married with the grace of God, fine gentleman he is ſhall haue her and I warrant a ſtronge, he has a legg like a poſt, a noſe like a Lion, a brow like a Bull, and a beard of moſt faire expectation: this weeke you muſt marry him, and I now will read a lecture to you both, how you ſhall behaue your ſelues to your huſbands, the firſt monneth of your nuptiall, I ha broake my ſkull about it, I can tell you and there is much braine in it.
Read it to my ſiſter good nurſe, for I aſſure you ile nere marry.
Marry God forfend, what will you doe then?
Fayth ſtriue againſt the fleſh, marry? no fayth, huſbands are like lotts in the lottery: you may drawe forty blankes before you finde one that has any priſe in him, A huſband generally is a careles dominering thing that growes like coroll which as long as it is vnder water is ſoft and tender, but as ſoone as it has got his branch aboue the waues is preſently hard ſtiffe, not to be bowed but burſt, ſo when your husband is a ſutor & vnder your choyſe, Lord how ſuple hee is, how obſequious, how at your ſeruice ſweet Lady: once married got vp his head aboue A ſtiffe crooked knobby inflexible tyrannous creature he grows then they turne like water, more you would imbrace the leſſe you hould, ile liue my owne woman, and if the worſt come to the worſt, I had rather prooue a wagge then a foole.
O but a vertuous marriage.
Vertuous marrige? there is no more affiaity betwixt vertue and marriage, then betwixt a man and his horſe, indeed vertue gerts vp vppon marriage ſometimes, and maageth it in the right way, but marriage is of another peece, for as a horſe may be without a man, and a man without a horſe, ſo marriage you know is often without vertue, and vertue I am ſure more oft without marriage, but thy match ſiſter, by my troth I thinke twill do well, hees a well ſhapt cleane lipp'd gentleman of a handſome, but not affected finenes, a good faithfull eye, and a well humord cheeke, would he did not ſtoope in the ſhoulders for thy ſake, ſee here he is.
Good day Sweete.
Good morrow brother nay you ſhall haue my lip, good orrow ſeruant.
Good morrow ſweete life.
Life? doſt call thy miſtres life.
Life, yes why not life?
How many miſtreſſes haſt thou?
Some nine.
Why then thou haſt nine liues like a Cat.
Mew you would be taken vp for that.
Nay good let me ſtill ſit, we lowe ſtatures loue ſtill to ſit, leaſt when we ſtand we may be ſuppoſed to ſit.
Doſt not weare high corke ſhooes: chopines.
Monſtrous on's. I am as many other are, peec'd aboue and peec'd beneath.
Still the beſt part in the,
And yet all will ſcarce make me ſo high as one of the Gyants ſtilts that ſtalkes before my Lord Maiors pageant.
By the Lord ſo I thought 'twas for ſome thing Miſtres Ioyce ieſted at thy high inſteps.
She might well inough, and long inough, before I would be aſhamed of my ſhortnes, what I made or can mend my ſelfe I may bluſh at; but what nature put vpon me, let her be aſhamed for me, I ha nothing to doe with it, I forget my beauty.
Fayth Ioyce is a fooliſh bitter creature.
A pretty mildewed wench ſhe is.
And faire.
As my ſelfe.
O you forget your beauty now.
Troth I neuer remember my beauty, but as ſome men doe religion for controuerſies ſake,
A motion ſiſter.
Niniuie, Iulius Ceaſar, Ionas, or the diſtruction of Ieruſalem.
My loue heere.
Pree thee call him not love, 'tis the drabs phraſe, nor ſweete honie, nor my cunny, nor deare duckling, 'tis the Cittizen termes, but call me him.
What?
Anithing, what'ſt the motion?
You know this night our parents haue intended ſolemnly to contract vs, and my Loue to grace the feaſt hath promiſed a maſke.
You'le make one Tyſefue, and Caqueture ſhall fill vp a rome.
Fore heauen well remembred he borrowed a diamond of me laſt night to grace his finger in your viſitation: The Lying Creature will ſweare ſome ſtraung thing on it now.
Peace, he's here, ſtand cloſe, lurke.
Good morrow moſt deere, and worthy to be moſt wiſe, how do's my miſtreſſe?
Morrow ſweete ſeruant, you gliſter, pree thee let's ſee that ſtone.
A toy Lady, I bought to pleaſe my finger.
Why I am more pretious to you, than your finger:
Yes, or than all my body, I ſweare.
Why, then let it be bought to pleaſe me, come I am no profeſſed beggar.
Troth Miſtreſſe; Zoones: Forſooth, I proteſt.
Nay, if you turne Proteſtant for ſuch a toy.
In good deed la, another time ile giue you a
Is this yours to giue.
O God, forſooth mine, quoth you, nay as for that.
Now I remember, I ha ſeene this on my ſeruant Tiſes finger.
Such another.
Nay, I am ſure this is it.
Troth tis forſooth, the poore fellow wanted money to pay for ſupper laſt night, and ſo pawnd it to mee, tis a pawne faith, or elſe you ſhould haue it.
Harke ye, Thou baſe lying: how dares thy impudence hope to proſper, wer't not for the priuiledge of this reſpected companie, I would ſo hange thee.
Come hether ſeruant, What's the matter betwixt you two?
Nothing but (hearke you) he did me ſome vnciuile diſcourteſies laſt night, for which, becauſe I ſhould not call him to account, hee deſires to make me any ſatisfaction: the Coward trembles at my verie preſence, but I ha him on the hippe, ile take the forfeit on his Ringe.
What's that you whiſper to her?
Nothing Sir, but ſatisfie her, that the Ringe was not pawnd, but onely lent by you to grace my finger, and ſo tould her I crau'd your pardon, for being too familiar, or indeed ouer with your reputation.
Yes indeede he did, he ſaid you deſired to make him any ſatiſfaction for an vnciuill diſcourteſie you did him laſt night, but he ſaid he had you a the hyp and would take the forfeit of your ring.
How now ye baſe Pultrone?
Hold, hold, my miſtreſſe ſpeakes by contraries.
Contraries.
She ieſts, faith onely ieſts.
Sir, Ile no more a your ſeruice, you are a childe, Ile giue you to my nurſe.
And he come to me, I can tell you as olde as I am, what to doe with him.
I offer my ſeruice forſooth.
Why ſo, now euery dogge has his bone to knawe on.
The Maske holds, Maſter Caqueer.
I am ready Sir, Miſtreſſe Ile daunce with you, neare feare, Ile grace you.
I tell you I can my ſingles and my doubles and my tricke a xxtie, my carantapace, my trauerſe forward, and my falling backe yet ifaith.
Mine, the prouiſion for the night is ours.
Much muſt be our care, till night we leaue you,
I am your ſeruant be not tirannous,
Your vertue wan me, faith my loues not luſt,
Good wrong me not, my moſt fault is much truſt.
Vntill night onely my heart be with you
Adieu brother, come on ſiſter for theſe ſince to
Lets meete and practiſe preſently.
Content, weele but fit our pumpes, Count ye vermine.
My friend, wiſhed houres, what newes from How dos the woman of Sinne, and naturall
The eldeſt child of nature nere So dam'd a creature.
What, In noua fx animus dicere formas? which way beares the Tyde?
Deare loued Sir, I finde a minde courageouſly vitious, may put on a deſperate ſecuritie, but can neuer bee bleſſed with a firme inioying and ſelfe ſatiſfaction.
what paſſion is this, my deare Lindabridis.
Tis well, we both may ieſt, I ha beene tempted to your death.
What is the rampat Cocatrice growne mad for the loſſe of hir men?
Deuiliſhly mad.
As moſt aſſured of my ſecond loue.
Right.
She would haue had this ring.
I, and this heart, and in true proofe you were ſlaine I ſhould bring her this ring, from which ſhe was aſſured
You would not part, vntill from life you parted.
For which deede, and onely for which deede, I ſhould poſſeſſe her ſweetneſſe.
O bloody villaines, nothing is defamed but by his proper ſelfe, Phiſitions abuſe remedies, Lawyers ſpoyle the Lawe, and women onely ſhame women, you ha vow'd my death?
My luſt, not I, before my reaſon would, yet I muſt vſe , that I a man of ſence ſhould conceiue endeleſſe pleaſure in a body whoſe ſoule I know to be ſo hideouſly blacke.
That a man at twentie the ſhould cry, O ſweete pleaſure, and at fortie three ſhould ſigh, O ſharpe Poxe: but conſider man furniſhed with omnipotencie and you ouerthrowe him, thou muſt coole thy impatient appetite.
Ti's Fate, ti's Fate.
I doe malign my creation that I am ſubiect to paſſion, I muſt inioy her.
I haue it marke, I giue a maske to night
To my loues kindred, in that thou ſhalt goe:
In that we two make ſhew of falling out,
Giue ſeeming challenge, inſtantly depart,
With ſome ſuſpition to preſent fight.
VVe will be ſeene as going to our ſwordes,
And after meeting, this Ring onely lent,
Ile lurke in ſome obſcure place, till rumor
(The common Bawde to looſe ſuſpitions)
Haue fayned me ſlaine, which (in reſpect my ſelfe
NVill not bee found, and our late ſeeming quarrell)
VVill quickly ſound to all as earneſt truth:
Then to thy wench, proteſt me ſurely dead.
Shew her this Ring, inioy her, and bloud colde
VVeele laugh at folly.
O but thinke of it.
Thinke of it, come away, vertue let ſleepe thy paſſions, "VVhat old times held as crimes, are now but faſhions.
I am not at this time furniſhed, but ther's my bond for your Plate.
Your bill had ben ſufficient y'are a good man, a ſtanding cup parcell guilt, of 32. ounces. 11. pound, 7. ſhillings, the firſt of Iuly, good plate, good man, good day good all.
Tis my hard fortune, I will hang the knaue, no, firſt he ſhall halfe rot in fetters in the Dungeon, his conſcience made deſpairfull, ile hyre a Knaue a purpoſe, ſhal aſſure him he is damn'd, and after ſee him with mine owne eyes, hanged without ſinging any Pſalme. Lord that hee has but one necke.
You are too tyrannous, you'le vſe me no further.
No Sir, lend mee your ſeruant, onely to carry the plate home, I haue occaſion of an houres abſence.
VVith eaſie conſent, ſir haſt and be carefull,
Be very carefull I pray thee to my wifes owne hands.
Secure your ſelfe ſir.
To her owne hand.
Feare not, I haue deliuered greater thinges than this, to a womans owne hand.
Mounſier, pleaſe you to buy a fine delicate bll, ſweet ball; a Camphyer ball.
Pre thee away.
One a ball to ſkower, a ſkowring ball, a ball to be ſhaued
For the loue of god talke not of ſhauing, I haue been ſhaued, miſcheife and 1000. diuells ceaſe him, I haue been ſhaued.
The Fox growes fat when he is curſed, ile ſhaue ye ſmother yet, turd on a tile ſtone, my lips haue a kind of hewe at this bole, ile hau't, ile gargalize my throate with this Vintner, and when I haue don with him, ſpit him out, Ile ſhark, conſciēce does not repine, were I to bite an honeſt gentleman a poore grogaran poet, or a penurious Parſon, that had but ten pigs tayles in a twelue month & for want of lerning had but one good ſtoole in a fortnight, I were damd beyond the workes of ſuperarrogation, but to wring the whythers of my gowtie barmd ſpiggod igging-iumbler of elements. Mulligrub, I hold it as lawfull as ſheepe-ſhearing, taking egges from hens, caudels from Aſſes, or butterd ſhrimps from horſes, they make no vſe of them, were not prouided for them. And therefore worſhipfull Cocledemoy, hang toaſts, on, in grace and vertue to proceed, onely beware beware degrees, there be rounds in a ladder, and knots in a halter, ware carts, hang toaſts, the comon counſell has decreed it, I muſt drawe a lot for the great Goblet.
Nay, I pray you ſtay and drinke, and how do's your Miſtreſſe, I know her verie well, I haue ben inward with her, and ſo has many more, ſhe was euer a good patient creature yfaith, with all my hart ile remēber your maſter an honeſt man, he knew me before I was maryed, an honeſt man hee is, and a crafty, hee comes forward in the world well, I warrant him, and his wife is a proper woman that ſhe is, well, ſhe has ben as proper a woman as any in Cheape, ſhe paints now, and yet ſhe keeps her husbands old Cuſtomers to him ſtill. Introth a fine fac'd wife, in a wainſcot carued ſeat, is a worthy ornament to a Tradeſman ſhop, and an atractiue I warrant, her husband ſhall finde it in the cuſtome of his ware, Ile aſſure him, God bee with you good youth, I acknowledge the receit. I acknowledge all the recet ſure, tis very well ſpoken, I acknowledge the receit, thus tis to haue good education and to bee brought vp in a Tauerne, I doe keepe as gallant and as good companie, though I ſay it, as any ſhe in London, Squiers, Gentlemen, and Knightes diet at my table, and I doe lend ſome of them money, and full many fine men goe vpon my ſcore, as ſimple as I ſtand heere, and I truſt them and truely they verie knightly and courtly promiſe faire, giue verie good words, and a peece of fleſh when time of yere ſeruet, nay, though my husband be a Citizen and's caps made of wooll, yet I ha wit, and can ſee my good aſſoone as another, for I haue all the thankes, my ſilly husband, a laſſe, hee knowes nothing of it, tis I that beare, tis I that muſt beare a braine for all.
Faire hower to you Miſtreſſe.
Faire hower, fine terme, faith ile ſcore it vp anone a beautifull thought to you ſir.
Your Husband, and my Maiſter Mr. Garniſh has ſent you a Iole of freſh Salmon, and they both will come to dinner to ſeaſon your new cup with the beſt wine, which cup your husband intreats you to ſend backe by mee, that his armes may bee grau'd a the ſide, which he forgot before it was ſent.
By what token, are you ſent by no token? nay, I haue wit.
He ſent me by the ſame token, that he was dry ſhaued this morning.
A fad token, but true, here ſir, I pray you commend me to your Maſter, but eſpecially to your Miſtreſſe, tell them they ſhall be moſt ſincerely welcome.
Shall be moſt ſincerely welcome, worſhipfull Cocledemoy, lurke cloſe, hang toaſts, be not aſhamed of thy qualitie, euerie mans turd ſmels well in's owne noſe, vaniſh Foyſt.
Come ſpread theſe Table Diaper Napkins, and doe you heare, perfume this Parlour do's ſo ſmell of prophane Tabacco, I could neuer endure this vngodly Tabacco, ſince one of our Elders, aſſured me vpon his knowledge Tabacco was not vſed in the Congregation of the family of loue: ſpread, ſpread handſomely, Lord theſe boyes doe things arſie, varſie, you ſhew your bringing vp, I was a Gentlewoman by my ſiſters ſide, I can tell yee ſo methodically: methodically, I wonder wher it goe that word O ſir Amina dub Ruth had me kiſſe him methodically, I had it ſomewhere, and I had it indeede.
Mind, be not deſperate, ile recouer all thinges with me, ſhall ſeeme honeſt, that can be profitable, He muſt nere winch, that would or thriue, or ſaue, To be cal Nigard, cuckold, Cut-throat, Knaue.
Are they come husband?
Who? what, how nw? what feaſt towards in my priuate Parlour.
Pray leaue your foolerie, what are they come?
Come, who come?
You need not mak't ſo ſtrange?
Strange?
I ſtrange, you know no man that ſent me word, that he and his wife would come to dinner to me, and ſent this Iole of freſh Salmon before hand.
Peace, not I, peace, the Meſſenger hath miſtaken the houſe, let's eat it vp quickly, before it be enquir'd for ſit to it, ſom vinegr, quicke, ſome good luck yet faith, I neuer taſted ſalmon reliſht better, oh when a man feeds at other mens coſt.
Other mens coſt? why did not you ſend this Iole of Salmon.
No.
By Maſter Garniſh man?
No.
Sending me word, that he and his wife would come to dinner to me.
No, no.
To ſeaſon my now bowle?
Bowle?
And withall wild me to ſend the bowle backe▪
Backe?
That you might haue your Armes grau'd on the ſide?
Ha?
By the ſame token you were drie ſhauen this morning before you went forth.
Pah, how this Sammon ſtinkes.
And thereupon ſent the bowle backe, prepar'd dinner, nay and I bare not a braine.
Wife, doe not vexe, me, is the bowle gone, is it deliuer'd?
Deliuered! yes ſure, tis deliuered.
I will neuer more ſay my prayers, doe not make mee madde, tis common, let me not crie like a woman, is it gone?
Gone? Good is my witneſſe, I deliuered it with no more intention to be cozend on't, than the child new borne: and yet
Looke to my houſe, I am haunted with euill ſpirites, here mee, doe; heare me, if I haue not my Goblet againe, heauen, I'le to the Diuell, I'le to a Coniurer, looke to my houſe, I'le raiſe all the wiſe men ithe ſtreete.
Deliuer vs! what wordes are theſe, I truſt in God, hee is but drunke ſure.
I muſt haue the Sammon to worſhip, Cocledemoy, now for the Maſter peece, God bleſſe thy necke peece, and Fowtra. Faire Miſtreſſe my Maſter.
Haue I caught you, what Roger?
Peace good Miſtres, I'le tell you all, a leſt, a verie mere leſt, your husband onely tooke ſport to fright you, the bows at my Maſters, and there is your husband, who ſent me in all haſt, leaſt you ſhould be ouer frighted with his fayning, to come to dinner to him.
Praiſe Heauen, it is no worſe.
And deſired me, to deſire you to ſend the loſe of Sammon before, and your ſelfe to come after to them, my Miſtreſſe would bee right glad to ſee you.
I pray carry it: now thanke them entierly: bleſſe me, I was neuer ſo out of my skinne in my life, pray thanke your Miſtreſſe moſt entirely.
So now Figo worſhipfull Mall ough, and I will monch Cheaters & Bawds go together like waſhing & wringing.
Beſhrew his heart for his labor, how euery thing about abou me quiuers, what Chriſtian my hat and aporne, here take my ſleeues, and how I tremoſe, ſo e goſſope it now for't, thats certaine, here has been reuolutions, and falſe hers indeed.
Whether now? Whats the matter with you now? whether are you a gadding?
Come, come, play the foole no more: Will you goe?
Whether, in the ranke name of madneſſe: whether?
Whether, why to mayſter Garniſh, to eate the Iowle of Salmon? Lord, how ſtrange you make it?
Why ſo, why ſo.
Why for why did not you ſend the ſelfe ſame fellow for the Iole of Salmon, tha had the cup?
Tis well, tis very well.
And wil me to come and eate it with you at the Goldhe.
OI, I, I, art in thy right ws?
Doe you heare, make a foole of ſome body elſe, and you make an aſſe of me, Ie make an Oxe of you, do ye ſee.
Nay wife be paent, for looke you, I may be madde, or drunke, or ſo, for my wiſe part, though you can bear more then I, yet I can do well: I will not cauſe nor cary, but heauen knows what I thinke. Come, lets goe neare ſome muſicke, I will neuer more ſay my praiers. Lets goe heare ſome dolefull muſicke. Nay if Heauen forget o proſper . Ile goe no more to the Synagogue. Now I am diſcontented, Ile turne Sectarie that is faſhion.
More lights: welcome Sir Lyonell Frevile, brother Frevile ſhortly. Looke to your lights.
The Maskers are at hand.
Call downe our daughter: Harke they are at hande, ranke handſomly.
Know ſir, I haue the aduantage of the place.
You are not ſafe, I would deale euen with you.
So.
So.
I doe beſeech you ſweet, do not for me prouoke your Fortune.
What ſodaine flaw is riſen?
From whence come this?
An vlcer long time lurking, now is burſt.
Good ſi the time and your deſeigns are ſoft.
I deare ſir, councell him, aduiſe him, twill relliſh well From your caruing: Good my ſweetneſt ſafe.
As well, als well, this ſhall be ended ſtraight.
The banquet ſtaies, there weele diſcourſe more
Marriage muſt not make mn Cowards.
Nor rage fooles.
"Tis valor not where hea, but reaſon rules.
But do you heare Lady, you proud ape you. What was the leſt you brake of
Nothing, I onely ſaide you were all mettle, that you had a brazen face, a Leaden braine, and a copperheard.
Quickſiluer, thou little more then a Dwarfe, and ſomething leſſe then a Woman.
A Wiſpe, a wiſpe, a wiſpe, will you go to the banquet.
By the Lord I thinke thou ilt marry ſhortly too, thou groweſt ſomewhat fooliſh already.
O I faith, tis a faire thing to be married, and a neceſſary, To hear this word muſt, if our huſbands be proud, we muſt bear his contempt, if noyſome we muſt beare with the Gote vnder his armeholes, if a foole we muſt beare his bable, and which is worſe, If a looſe liuer, Wee muſt liue vppon vnholſome Reuerſions: Where, on the contrary ſide, our huſbands becauſe they may and we muſt; care not for vs, thinges hop'd with feare, and got with ſtruglings, are mens high pleaſures, when duety pales and flatres their appetite.
What a tart Monkey is this, by heauen if thou hadſt not ſo much wit I could finde in my hart to my marry thee. Faith bear with me for all this.
Beare with thee, I wonder how thy mother could beare thten months in her bellie, when I cannot indure thee 2. hours in mine eie.
Alaſſe for you ſweet ſoule, by the Lorde you are growne a proud, ſcuruie, apiſh, ydle, diſdainefull, ſcoffing, Gods foot, becauſe you haue read Ephues and his England, Palmerin de Oliva, & the Legend of Lies.
Why yfaith yet ſeruant, you of all others ſhoulde beare with my knowne vnmalicious humors, I haue alwaies in my Hart giuen you your due reſpect:
And heauen may be ſworne, I haue priuately giuen faire ſpeach of you, and proteſted.
Nay looke you, for my owne part, if I haue not as religiouſly vowd my hart to you, been in drunke to your health, ſwalowd flap-dragons, eate glaſſes, drunke vrine, ſtabd armes, and don all the offices of proteſted gallanrie for your ſake: and yet you tell me I haue a brazen face, a leaden braine▪ and a copper bearde, Come yet and it pleaſe you.
No, no, you do not loue me?
By () but I do now, and whoſoeuer dares ſay that I do not loue you, nay honor you, and if you would vouchſafe to marrie.
Naie as for that thinke out as you will, but Gods my record, and my ſiſter knowes I haue taken drinke and ſlept vppont, that if euer I marrie it ſhall be you, and I will marrie, and yet I hope I do not ſaie it ſhall be you neither.
By heauen I ſhalbe aſſoone wearne of health as of your inioyeng: will you caſt a ſmooth cheeke vpon me?
I cannot tell, I haue no crumpt ſhoulders, my back needs no mantle, and yet marriage is honorable: do you thinke ye ſhall proue a Cuckold?
No, by the Lord, not I?
Why, I thanke you yfaith:
Heigho: I ſlept on my backe this morning
And dreamt the ſtrangeſt dreames:
Good Lord, how things will come to paſſe?
Will you go to the banquet?
If you will bee mine, you ſhall be your owne, my purſſe, my bodie, my hart is yours, onlie bee ſilent in my houſe, modeſt at my table, and wanton in my bed, and the Empreſſe of Europe cannot content, and ſhall not be contented better.
Can anie kind hart ſpeake more diſcreetlie affectionatelie: my fathers conſent, and as for mine,
Then thus, and thus, ſo Hymen ſhould begin, Sometimes a falling out, proues falling in.
As you reſpect my vertue, giue me leaue
To ſatisfie my reaſon, though not bloud:
So, all runs right, our fained rage hath tane
To fulleſt life, they are much poſſeſt
Of force moſt, moſt all quarrell: now my right friend
Reſolue me with open breſt, free and true hart
Cannot thy vertue hauing ſpace to thinke
and fortifie her weakened powers with reaſon,
Diſcourſes, Meditations, Diſcipline.
Diuine eiaculacories, and all thoſe aydes againſt deuils:
Cannot all theſe curbe thy lowe appetite
and ſenſuall furie?
"There is no God in bloud, no reaſon in deſire:
Shall I but liue? Shall I not be forc't to act
Some deed, whoſe verie name is hydeous?
No.
Then I muſt enioy Franciſchina.
You ſhall: Ile lend this ring, ſhew it to that faire Deuill, It will reſolue me dead, which rumor with my artificiall abſence, wil make moſt firme, enioy her ſodainlie.
But if report go ſtrong that you are ſlaine, and that by me. Whereon I may be ſeizd Where ſhall I finde your being.
At maiſter Shatewes the Iewellers, to whoſe breaſt Ile truſt our ſecret purpoſe.
I reſt your ſelfe, each man hath follies.
But thoſe worſt of all,
"Who with a willing eie, do ſeeing fall.
Tis true, but truth ſeemes folly in madneſſe ſpectacles, I am not now my ſelfe, no man: Farewell.
Farewell.
"When womna's in the hart, in the ſoule hell.
Now repentance the fooles whip ſeize thee,
Nay if there be no meanes Ile be thy friend,
But not thy Vices; and with greateſt ſence
Ile force thee feele thy errors, to the worſt
The vildeſt of dangers thou ſhalt ſinke into,
No Ieweller ſhall ſee me, I will lurke
Where none ſhall know or thinke, cloſe Ile withdraw,
and leaue thee with two friendes: a whore and knaue
But is this vertue in me? No, not pure,
Nothing extreamely beſt with vs endures,
No vſe in ſimple purities, the elementes
are mixt for vſe, Siluer without alay
Is all to eager to be wrought for vſe:
Nor preciſe vertues euer purely good
Holdes vſefull ſize with temper of weake bloud:
Then let my courſe be borne, tho: with ſide-wind,
The end being good, the meanes are well aſsingd,
Come catafuge Fra hall, who who he,
Excellent, Ha, heers a plmp rmp wench, with a breaſt
Softer then a Courtyers tongue, Ladies gums,
Or an old mans mentula, my fine gue.
Pan you poultron.
Gooddy fiſte, flump pum, a my fine Wagtaile,
Thou art as falſe as proſtituted and adulcerate
as ſome tranſlated manuſcript Buſſe ſayre whore, buſſe.
Gods ſacramant. Pox.
Hadamoy key doſt thou frowne medianthou teukey
Nay look heer: Numeron key Siluer blithe for cany
Os cany goblet: Ʋs key ne moy blgefy pox
On you Goſling.
By me fait dis bin verie fine languge, Ick ſall buſh ye now, ha, be garzon vare had you dat place?
Hedemoy key, get you gon Punck rampant, key common vp-taile.
O daughter, cozen, neece, ſeruant, miſtreſſe.
Humpum, plumpum ſquat, I am gone.
There is one M. Malliereux at the dore deſires to ſee you: he ſaies he muſt not be deuide, for he hath ſent you this ring and withall ſaies tis done.
Vat ſall me do now, Gods ſacramant: tell him two howers hence he ſall be moſt affectionatlie velcome, tell him (vat ſal me do) tel him Ick am bin in my bate, and Ick fall perfume my ſeetes, mak a mine bodie ſo delicate for his arme Two houres hence.
I ſhall ſatisfie him two houres hence well.
Now Ick ſall reuange, hay, begar me ſal tartar de whole generation, mine braine vorke it, Frevile, is dead, Malhareux ſall hang, And mine riuall Beatrice, Ick ſall make run madde.
Hees gone forſooth no cawdle of Cock-ſtones, & will returne within this two houres.
Verie vel, giue mons to ſome fellow to ſquire me, Ick ſal go abroad.
Thers a luſtie Bravo beneath, a ſtranger, but a good ſtale Raſcall: he ſweaes valiantlie, kicks a Bawd right vertuouſly, and proteſtes with an emptie pocket might deſperately, Heele ſquier you.
Very velcom, mine ſan, Ick ſall reome preſantly, now ſal me be reuange ten touſant deula, der ſall be no got in me but paſsion, no tought but rage, no mercie but bloud, no ſpirit but Diula in me, Dere ſal noting tought good for me, But dat is miſchieuous for others.
Did no one ſee him ſince? pray God, nay all is well,
A litle heat, what he is but withdrawne? and yet I would to God,
But feare you nothing.
Pray God that all be well or would I were not.
Hees not to be found Sirian where.
You muſt not make a heauy face preſage an ill euent: I like your Siſter well, ſhees quick and liuely: would ſhe woulde marry faith.
, nay ell would man a an old mans a nentring▪
Ha, maſſe and ſo
You are a Widdowe.
Than I am I faith faire Criſp, and I can tell you, would you affect me, I haue it in me yet I faith.
Troth I am in loue, let me ſee your hand: would you ca your ſelfe away vpon me willingly▪
Will I: I by the
Woulde you be a Cockould willingly? By my troath us a comely, fine, and handſome ſight, for one of my yeeres to marry an old man, truth tis reſtoratiue what a comfortable thinge it is to thinke of her huſband to venerable cough a the euerlaſtings, no feele his rough ſummer handes, and winter gges, his almoſte no eies, and aſſuredly no teeth, and then thinke what ſhe muſt dreame of, when ſhe conſiders others happines and her owne want: tis a worthy and notorious comfortable match.
Piſh, piſh, will you haue me▪
Will you aſſure me.
Fiue hundred pound ioynture.
That you will die within this fortnight▪
No, by my faith Criſ.
Then Criſp. by her faith aſſures you ſheele haue none of you.
Beere leaue Gentles and men of night caps, I would I peak, But that here ſtands one is able to her owne tale beſt.
Sir mine ſpeech is to you, you vile.
Had ha, and haue.
No po, me aeome to aſſure you da on meſt Malheureus hath killed him.
O me, wretched, wretched.
Looke to our daughter.
How art thou
If dat it pleaſe you to go bring you ere you'l all hear Maſheeus his owne lips confeſſe it, a may apprehend him and reuenge your and mine loues
Your
He was ſo ſir, let you it do not dy, de yong man dat be flame did you me ten touſant touſant times more deerely.
O my hart I will loue you the better he affected? O paſsion, O my griefe which way will and conſume?
Peace.
Deare woes cannot ſpeake.
For looke you Ladie as your ing he gaue ieſts at your ſcornd kin
He did not ill not to did no will as mocke me: Gentle mine yet Ly at not to moous of ſo onlie loue me was ioy enough for only might onlie loue him.
O but to be abuſde, ſcornde, ſcoft at, O ten touſand did by ſuch a one, and vnto ſuch a one.
I thinke you ſaie not true iſter, ſhall we know one another in the other world?
What meanes my ſiſter?
I would faine ſee him againe: O my torture mind, Frevile is more then dead, he is vnkinde.
Conuey her in, and ſo ſir as you ſaid et a ſtrong watch.
I ſir, and ſo baſſe this ae common woman, you muſt make it good.
Ick ſall, or let me pay for his, mine bloud.
Come then along all, with quiet ſpeed.
O Fate?
O ſir, be wiſely ſorrie, but not paſsionate.
I will goe and reueale my ſelfe: ſtaie: no, no,
Greefe ende res Loue: Heauen to haue ſuch a wife
Is happineſſe, to breed pale enuy in the ſaintes.
Thou worthy Doue-like virgin without gall,
Cannot (that womans euill) Iealouſie,
Deſpight diſgrace, nay which is worſt, contempt
Once ſtirre thy faith. O Truth, how few ſiſters haſt thou?
Deere memorie, with what a ſuffring ſweetneſſe, quiet modeſty,
Yet deepe affection ſhe receiu'd my death,
And then with what a patient, yet oppreſſed kindneſſe
She tooke my Ieudlie intimated wrongs. O the dereſt of heauen?
Were there but three ſuch women in the world, two
Might be ſaued.
Well, I am great with expectation to what deuiliſh end
This woman of foule ſoule will driue her plots:
But prouidence all wicked art ore tops.
"and Impudence muſt know (tho ſtiffe as Ice,)
"That fortune doth not alway dote on Vice.
Plant a watch there, be verie carefull Sirs, the reſt with vs.
The heauy night growes to her depth of quiet, Tis about mid darkeneſſe.
Mine ſhambre is hard by, Ick ſall bring you to it preſant ment.
Deepe ſilence. On
within Wa, ha, h,
It was his voice, tis he: he ſuppes with his cupping glaſſes. Tis late, he muſt paſſe this waie: Ile ha him, Ile ha my fine boy, my worſhipfull Cocledemoy, Ile moy him, he ſhall be hangd in lowſie linnen, Ile hire ſome ſectary to make him an hereticke before he die? And when he is dead Ile piſſe on his graue.
Ah my fine puncks, good night, Franke, frailtie, fraile a Fraile-Hall? onus noches my vbiquitari.
Ware polling and ſhauing Sir.
A Wolfe, a wolfe, a wolfe,
Heers ſomething yet, a Cloke, a cloke, yet Ile after, he cannot ſcape the watch, Ile hang him if I haue any mercy▪ Ile ſlice him.
Who goes there? come before the Conſtable.
Bread a God Conſtable, you are a Watch for the deuil. Honeſt men are robd vnder your noſe, thers a falſe knaue in the habit of a Vintner, ſet vpon me, he would haue had my purſe, But I tooke me to my heeles: yet he got my Cloke, a plaine ſtuffe cloke poore, yet twill ſerue to hang him? Tis my loſſe, poor man that I am.
Maiſters, we muſt Watch better, iſt not ſtrange that knaues, Drunkerds, and theeues, ſhould be a brode, and yet we of the Watch, Scriueners, ſmithes, and Taylors, neuer ſtur.
Harke, who goes there?
An honeſt man and a Cittiezen.
Appeare, appeare, what are you?
A ſimple Vintner.
A Vintner ha, and ſimple, draw neerer, nerer: heers the Cloke.
I Maiſter Vintner we know you, a plaine ſtuffe cloke: tis it.
Right, come: Oh thou varlet, doeſt not thou know that the Wicked cannot ſcape the eies of the Conſtable?
What meanes this violence, as I am an honeſt man I tooke the cloke.
As you are a knaue, you tooke the cloke, we are your witneſſes for that.
But heare me, heare me, Ile tell you what I am.
A theefe you are.
I tell you my name is Mullegrub.
I will grubbe you, In with him to the ſtockes, there let him ſit tell to morrow morning that Iuſtice Quodlibet may examine him.
Why but I tell thee.
Why but I tel thee, weele tell thee now.
Am I not mad, am I not an aſſe,
Why ſcabs, Gods foot: let me out.
I, I, let him prae, he ſhall find matter in vs ſcabs I warrant: Gods ſo, what good members of the common wealth, doe wee proue.
Prethee peace, lets remember our duties, and let go ſleepe, in the feare of God.
Who goes there: I lo, ho, ho: zounds ſhall I run mad, Looſe my wits: ſhall I be hangd, hark: who goes there? Do not feare to be poore Mullegrub, Thou haſt a ſure ſtocke now.
The night growes old,
And many a cockould is now Wha, ha, ha, ho,
Maids on their backes,
Dreame of ſweet ſmackes, and warme: Wo, ho, ho, ho,
I muſt go comfort my venerable Mullegrub, I muſt
Fiddle him till he fyſt: fough:
Maides in your Night-railes,
Looke well to your light
Keepe cloſe your lockes,
and downe your ſmocks,
Keepe a brode eie
And a cloſe thigh, excellent, excellent, whoſe there?
Now Lord, Lord, (maiſter Mullegrub) deliuer vs: what does your Worſhip in the ſtocks? I pray come ou Sir.
Zounds man I tell thee I am lockt.
Lockt: O world: O men: O time: o night: that canſt not Diſcerne vertue, and wiſdome, and one of the common Counſel: What is your Worſhip in for?
For (a plague ont) ſuſpition of Fellonie.
Nay, and it be but ſuch a trifle, Lord I could weep, to ſee your good Worſhip in this taking: your Worſhippe has beene a good friend to me, and tho you haue forgot me, yet I knewe your wife before ſhe was married, and ſince I haue found your Worſh. dore open and I haue knockt, and God knows what I haue ſaued: and doe I liue to ſee your Worſhip ſtockt?
Honeſt Belman, I perceiue thou knowſt me, I prethe call the Watch. Informe the Conſtable of my reputation, That I may no longer abide in this ſhamefull habitation, And hold thee, all I haue about me.
Tis more then I deſerue ſir: Let me alone for your Deliuerie.
Doe, and then let me alone with Cockledemoy, Ile moy him.
Maids in your: Maiſter Conſtable, whoſe that ith'ſtoks?
One for a robberie: one Mullegrub, he cals himſelfe. Mullegrub? Bel-man, knowſt thou him?
Know him: O maiſter Conſt. what good ſeruice haue you done. Know him? Hees a ſtrong theefe, his houſe has beene ſuſpected for a bawdie Tauerne a great while: and a receipt for Cut-purſes, tis moſt certaine: He has beene long in the blacke booke, and is he tane now?
Berlady my maiſters weele not truſt the ſtocks with him, Weele haue him to the Iuſtices, get a Mittimus to Newgate preſentlie. Come ſir, come on ſir.
Ha: does your Raſcalſhip yet know my Worſhip In the end?
I, the end of your Worſhip we know.
Ha, goodman Conſtable, heeres an honeſt fellow can tell you what I am?
Tis true ſir, yare a ſtrong theefe hee ſaies on his owne knowledge: Binde faſt, binde faſt, we know you: Weele truſt no Stocks with you. Awaie with him to the Iayle inſtantlie.
Why but doſt heare Bel-man, Rogue, Raſcall, Gods Whie but?
Whie but; wha ha ha, excellent, excellent, ha my fine Cocledemoy, my Vintner fiſtes, Ile make him fart crackers before I ha done with him; to morrow is the daie of Iudgment.
Afore the Lord God my knauerie growes vnperegall, Tis time to take a nap, vntill halfe an houre hence: God giue your Worſhip Muſicke, content, and reſt.
You bin verie velcom to mine ſhambra.
But how knowe ye, how are ye aſſurde Both of the deed, and of his ſute returne.
O Myn-here. Ick ſall tell you, metre Malhereux
Came all bretleſſe running a my ſhambra
His ſword all bloudie: he tel a me he had kil Frevile,
And pred a me to conceale him:
Ick flatter him, bid bring monies, he ſhould liue and lie vid me,
He went whilſt Ick (me hope vidout ſins) out of mine
Muſh loue to Frevile betraie him.
Feare not, tis well: good works get grace for ſin.
Dere, peace, reſt dere, ſo ſoftlie, all goe in:
De net is laie, now ſal Ick be reuenge.
If dat me knew a dog dat Frevile loue,
Me would puiſſon him, for know de deepeſt hell
As a reuenging Womans, naught ſo fell.
Ho Coſen Francke, the partie you wot of, M. Malhereux.
Bid him come vp, I prede.
O min here man, a dere liuer Loue,
Mine ten touſant times velcom Loue,
Ha, by mine trat, you bin de iuſt, vat ſall me ſaie:
Vat ſeet honie name ſall I call you?
Anie from you is pleaſure. Come my louing
Prettineſſe, wheres thie Chamber?
I long to touch your ſheetes.
No, no, not yet mine ſeeteſt ſoft-lipped loue:
You ſall not gulp downe all delights at once:
Be min trat, dis all-fles-Louers, dis rauenous Wenches
Dat ſallow all downe hole, vill haue all at one bit,
Fie, fie, fie, be min fait dey do eate
Comfets vid ſpoones.
No, no, Ile make you chew your pleaſure vit loue,
"De more degrees and ſteps, de more delight,
"De more endeered is de pleaſure hight.
What your a lerned wanton, and proceed by art?
Go little vag, pleaſure ſhould haue a
Cranes long necke, to reliſh de Ambroſia of
Delight.
And Ick pre de tel me, for me loues to heare of manhood
Verie muſh, Iſait: Ick prede (vat vas me a ſaieng)
Oh, Ick prede tell a me:
How did you kill a metre Frevile?
Why quareld a ſet purpoſe, drew him out, Singled him, and hauing th'advantage of my ſword and might, ran him through and through.
Vat did you vid him van he was ſticken?
I dragd him by the heeles to the next wharffe and ſpurnd him in the Riuer.
Seize, ſeize him: O monſterous? O ruthleſſe Villaine?
What meane you Gentlemen? by heauen,
Speake not of anie thing thats good.
Your errors giues you paſsion: Frevile liues.
Thie own lips ſaie, thou lieſt.
Let me die if at Shatewes the Ieweller, he liues not ſafe vntoucht.
Meane time to ſtrickteſt guard, to ſharpeſt priſon.
No rudeneſſe Gentlemen: Ile go vndragd.
O wicked, wicked Diuell.
Sir, the daie of triall is this morn,
Lets proſecute the ſharpeſt rigor, and ſeuereſt end:
"Good men are cruell, when the'are vices friend.
Woman we thanke thee, with no emptie hand,
Strumpets are fit, fit for ſom-thing.
I, for Hell: O thou vnrepriueable, beyond all
Meaſure of Grace dambd immediatlie:
That things of beautie created for ſweet vſe:
Soft comfort, and as the verie muſicke of life,
Cuſtome ſhould make ſo vnutterablie helliſh?
O heauen, what difference is in women, and their life?
What man, but worthie name of Man:
Would leaue the modeſt pleaſures of a lawfull bed:
The holie vnion of two equall harts
Mutuallie holding either deere as health,
The vndoubted yſſues, Ioyes of chaſt ſheetes,
The vnfained imbrace of ſober Ignorance:
To twine the vnhealthfull loynes of common Loues,
The proſtituted impudence of things.
Senceleſſe like thoſe by Cataracks of Nyle,
"Their vſe ſo vile, takes awaie ſence how vile,
"To loue a creature, made of bloud and hell,
"Whoſe vſe makes weake, whoſe companie doth ſhame,
"Whoſe bed doth begger: yſſue doth defame.
Metre Frevile liue: ha, ha, liue at meſtre Shatewes:
Muſh at metre Shatews. Frevile is dead. Malhereux ſall hang,
And ſwete diuel, dat Beatrice would but run mad, dat
ſhe would but run mad, den me would dance and ſing,
Metre Don Dubon, me pre ye now go to Meſtres
Beatrice, tel her Frevile is ſure ded, and dat he
Curſſe hir ſelfe eſpeciallie, for dat he was
Sticked in hir quarrell, ſwering in his laſt gaſpe,
Dat if it had bin in mine quarrels,
Twould neuer haue greeued him.
I will.
Prede do, and ſaie anie ting dat vil vex her.
Let me alone to vex her.
Vil you, vil you mak a her run mad? here take
Dis ring, ſea me ſcorne to wear anie ting dat washers,
Or his: I prede torment her, Ick cannot loue her,
She honeſt and vertuous forſooth.
Is ſhe ſo? O vile creature? then let me alone with her.
Vat. Vil you mak a her mad? ſeet by min trat,
Be pretta ſeruan, Buſh, Ick ſall go to bet now.
Miſchiefe whether wilt thou? O thou tear-leſſe woman?
How monſtrous is thy Deuill,
The end of Hell as thee.
How miſerable were it to be vertuous, if thou couldſt proſper?
Ile to my Loue, the faithfull Beatrice,
She has wept enough, and faith deere ſoule too much.
But yet how ſweet it is to thinke
How deere ones life was to his Loue: how moornd his death.
Tis Ioy not to be expreſt with breath:
But O let him that would ſuch paſsion drinke,
Be quiet of his ſpeech, and onlie thinke.
Siſter, cannot a woman kill her ſelfe? Is it not lawfull to die when we ſhould not liue?
O ſiſter tis a queſtion not for vs, we muſt do what God will.
What God will? Alaſſe, can torment be his glorie, or our greefe his pleaſure? Does not the Nurces nipple iuic'd ouer with Wormwood, bid the childe it ſhoulde not ſucke? And does not Heauen when it hath made our breath bitter vnto vs, ſay we ſhud not liue? O my beſt ſiſter: to ſuffer wounds when one may ſcape this rod, is againſt nature, that is againſt God.
Good ſiſter do not make me weep: ſure Frevile was not falſe: Ile gage my life that ſtrumpet out of craft
And ſome cloſe ſecond end hath maliſt him.
O ſiſter if he were not falſe, whom haue I loſt?
If he were: what griefe to ſuch vnkindneſſe,
From head to foote I am all myſerie:
Onely in this, ſome iuſtice I haue found
My griefe is like my loue, beyond all bound.
My ſeruant, maiſter Cacature deſires to viſite you,
For griefes ſake keepe him out, his diſcourſe is like the long word, Honorificabilitudinitatibus: a great deale
Of ſound and no ſence: his companie is like a parentheſis.
To a diſcourſe you may admit it, or leau it out, it makes no matter.
By your leau ſweet creatures.
Sir, all I can yet ſay of you, is, you are vnciuill.
You muſt denie it: By your ſorrowes leaue,
I bring ſome muſſicke, to make ſweet your griefe,
What ere you pleaſe: O breake my hart
Canſt thou yet pant? O doſt thou yet ſeruiue,
Thou didſt not loue him, if thou now canſt liue▪
O Loue, how ſtrangely ſweet
are thy weake Paſſions,
That loue and ioy
in ſelfe ſame faſhions.
O who can tell
the cauſe why this ſhould moue▪
But onely this,
no reaſon, aſke of Le.
Hold, peace, the ge O my beſt ſiſter.
Ha, get you gone, cloſe the dores: My Beatrice,
Curſt be my indiſcreet trials: O my immeaſureablie louing.
She ſtirs, giue aire, ſhe breathes.
Where am I, ha? how haue I ſlipt off life?
Am I in heauen? O my Lord, though not louing
By our eternall being, yet giue me leaue
To reſt by thie dear ſide: am I not in heauen?
O eternallie much laued, recollect your ſpirits.
Ha, you do ſpeake, I do ſee you, I do liue,
I would not die now: Let me not burſt with wonder.
Call vp your bloode, I liue to honor you,
As the admired glorie of your ſex.
Nor euer hath my loue bin falſe to you.
Onely I preſum'd to try your faith too much,
For which I moſt am grieued.
Brother; I muſt be plaine with you, you haue wrong'd vs.
I am not ſo Couetous to deny it,
But yet when my diſcourſe hath ſtaide your quaking,
You will be ſmoother lipt: and the delight
And ſatisfaction which we all haue got,
Vnder theſe ſtrange diſguiſings, when you know,
You will be milde and quiet, forget at laſt,
"It is much ioy to thinke on ſorrowes paſt.
Do you then liue? and are you not ntrue?
Let me not die with Ioy, pleaſure's more extream:
Then greefe, thers nothing ſweet to ma but meane.
Heauen cannot be too gratious to ſuch goodneſſe, I ſhall diſcourſe to you the ſeueral chances, but harke I muſt yet reſt diſguiſd, the ſudden cloſe of many drifts now meet,
"Where pleaſure hath ſome profit, ar is ſweet.
Newes, newes, newes, newes.
Oyſters, Oyſters, oyſters, oyſters.
Why, is not this well now? Is not this better then louring, and pouting, and puling, which is hatefull to the liuing, and vaine to the dead? Come, come, you muſt liue by the quicke, when all is done, and for my owne part, let my wife laugh at me when I am dead, ſo ſeele ſmile vpon me whilſt I liue, but to ſee a woman Whine, and yet keepe her eies mourne, and yet keepe her cheekes fat: nay, to ſee a woman caw her huſbande by the feete when he is dead, that would haue ſcratcht him by the face whe he was liuing: this now is ſomewhat rediculous.
Lord how you prate.
And yet I was afraide ifaith that I ſhoulde ha ſeene a Garland on this beauties herſe, but time, truth, experience, and varietie, are great doers with women.
But whats the newes? the newes I pray you?
I pray you? nere pray me: for by your leaue you may command me. This tis: the publique ſeſsions which this day is paſt, hath doom'd to death ill fortun'd Malhereux.
But ſir, we heard he offerd to make good,
That Freuile liu'd at Shatews the Iewellers.
And that twas but a plot betwixt them two.
O I, I, he gagd his life with it, but know
When all approcht the teſt, Shatews deuide
He ſaw or heard of any ſuch complot,
Or of Freuill: ſo that his owne defence,
Appeard ſo falſe, that like a madmans ſword,
He ſtroke his owne hart, he hath the courſe of law
and inſtantly muſt ſuffer: but the Ieſt
(If hanging be a ieſt) as many make it)
Is to take notice of one Mullegrub, a ſharking vintner.
What of him Sir.
Nothing but hanging, the Whoreſone ſlaue is mad before he hath loſt his ſences.
Was his fact cleere and made aparant Sir?
No faith ſuſpitions, for twas thus proteſted
a cloke was ſtolne, that cloke he had, he had it
Himſelfe confeſt by force, the reſt of his defence
The choller of a Iuſtice wrongd in wine,
Ioynd with malignance of ſome haſtie Iurors,
Whoſe wit was lighted by the Iuſtice noſe, The knaue was caſt,
But Lord to heare his mone, his praiers, his wiſhes,
His zeal ill timde, and his words vnpittied,
Would make a dead man riſe and ſmile,
Whilſt he obſerued how feare can make men vile.
Shall we go meet the execution?
I ſhall be rulde by you.
By my troh a rare motion, you muſt haſt,
For male-factors goes like the world vpon wheeles.
Will you man vs, you ſhall be our guide to Freuile.
I am your ſeruant.
Ha ſeruant? Zounds I am no companion for Pandors▪ your beſt make him your loue.
So will I Sir, we muſt liue by the quicke you ſay.
Sdeath a vertue, what a damnd things this?
Whole truſt faire faces, teares, and vowes, Sdeath not I,
She is a woman, that is, ſhe can ly.
Come, come, turne not a man of time, to make al il,
Whoſe goodneſſe you conceiue , ſince the orſt of chance
Is to craue grace for ▪
So, I ha loſt my Sergeant in an ecliptique miſt, drunke, horrible drunke, he is fine: ſo now will I fit my ſelfe, I hope this habit will do me no harme, I am an honeſt man already: fit, fit, fit as a puncks taile, that ſerues euery body: By this time my Vintner thinkes of nothing but hel and ſulpher, he farts fire and brimſtone already, hang toſtes, the execution approcheth.
I do not bluſh, although condemnd by lawes,
No kind of death is ſhamefull but the cauſe:
Which I do know is none, and yet my luſt
Hath made the one (although not cauſe) moſt iuſt.
May I not be repriued? Freuile is but miſlodgd,
Some lethargie hath ſeazd him, no, much mallice,
Do not lay bloud vpon your ſoules with good inten,
Men may do ill and law ſometime repents.
Sir, ſir, prepare, vaine is all lewd defence.
"Conſcience was law: but now lawes Conſcience,
My endles peace is made, and to the poore,
My purſe, my purſe.
I Sir, and it ſhall pleaſe you the poore has your purſe a.
You are a Welyman,
But now thou ſourſe of Deuils, Oh how I lothe
The very memory of that I adorde,
He thats of faire bloud, well meand, of good breeding,
Beſt fam'd, of ſweet acquaintance and true friends▪
And would with deſperate Impudence looſe all theſe,
And hazard landing at this fatall ſhore,
Ler him nere kill, nor ſteale, but loue a Whore,
De man doſe raue, tinck a got, tinck a got, and bid d leſh, de world, and the dible farewell.
Farewell.
Farewell.
Vat iſt you ſea, ha?
Sir your pardon, with my this defence,
Do not forget proteſted violence
Of your low affections no requeſts,
No arguments of reaſon, no knowne daner.
No aſſured wicked bloodines,
Could draw your hart from this damnation.
Why ſtaie.
Vnproſperous Diuell, vat ſall me do now.
Therefore to force you from the truer danger,
I wrought the fained, ſuffering this faire Deuil,
In ſhaps of woman to make good her plot,
And knowing that the hooke was deeply faſt,
I gaue her line at will, till with her owne vaine ſtriuings,
See here ſhees tired: O thou comely damnation?
Doeſt think that vice is not to be withſtood,
O what is woman meerely made of bloud.
You maze vs all, let vs not be loſt in darkeneſſe?
All ſhall be lighted, but this time and place
Forbids longer ſpeech, onlie what you can thinke
Has bin extreamlie ill is onelie hers.
To ſeuereſt priſon with her, with what hart canſt liue? What eies behold a face?
Ick vil not ſpeake, torture, torture your fill,
For me am worſe then hangd, me ha loſt my will.
To the extreameſt whip and Iaile.
Frolique, how is it Sirs?
I am my ſelfe, how long waſt ere I could
Perſwade my paſsion to grow calme to you?
Rich ſence makes good bad language, and a friend
Should waigh no action, but the actions end.
I am now worthie yours, when before
The beaſt of man, looſe bloud diſtemperd vs,
"He that luſt rules cannot be vertuous.
On afore there, roome for the priſoners?
I praie you do not lead me to execution through cheapeſide, I owe M. Burniſh the gold-ſmith monie, and I feare heele ſet a Seriant on my backe for it.
Trouble not your skonce my Chriſtian Brothers, but haue an eie vnto the maine chance, I will warrant your ſhouldiers, as for your necke Plinius ſecundus, or marcus Tullius Cycero, or ſomebodie it is ſaies, that a three foulde corde is hardlie broken.
Wel, I am not the firſt honeſt man that hath bin caſt away, and I hope ſhall not be the laſt.
O ſir, haue a good ſtomach and mawes, you ſhal haue a ioyfull ſupper.
In troth I haue no ſtomach to it, and it pleaſe you take my trencher▪ I vſe to faſt at nights.
O husband, I little thought you ſhould haue come to think on God thus ſoon: nay and you had bin hangd deſeruedly, it would neuer haue greeud me, I haue known of many honeſt innocent men haue bin hangd deſeruedly, but to be caſt away for nothing.
Good woman hold your peace, your prittles & your prattles your bibbles and your babbles, for I pray you heare mee in priuate, I am a widdower, and you are almoſt a widdow, ſhal I be welcom to your houſes, to your tables, and your other things.
I haue a peece of mutton and a featherbed for you at all times, I pray make haſt.
I do here make my confeſsion, if I owe anie man anie thing, I do hartilie forgiue him: if any man owe me anie thing, let him paie my wife.
I will looke to your wies paiment I warrant you.
And now good yoke-fellow leaue thy poor mulligrub.
Naie then I were vnkind yſaith, I will not leaue you vntill I haue ſeene you hang.
But brothers, brothers, you muſt thinke of your ſins and iniquities, you haue bin a brocher of prophane veſſels, you haue made vs drinke of the iuice of the whore of Babylon, for whereas good ale, Perrys, Bragets, Syders, and metheglins, was the true auntient Britiſh and Troyan drinks, you ha brought in Popiſh wines, Spaniſh wines, French wines, tam marti quam mercurio, both muſcadi and malmſey, to the ſubuerſion, ſtaggering, and ſometimes ouerthrow of manie a good Chriſtian: You ha bin a great Iumbler, O remember the ſins of your nights, for your night works ha bin vnſauorie in the taſt of your Cuſtomers.
I confeſſe, I confeſſe, and I forgiue as I would be forgiuē, Do you know one Cocledemoy?
O verie wel: know him? an honeſt man he is and a comly, an vpright dealer with his neighbours, and their wiues ſpeake good things of him.
Wel, wherſoere he is, or whatſoere he is, Ile take it on my death hees the cauſe of my hanging, I hartily forgiue him, and if he would come forth he might ſaue me, for he only knowes the why, and the wherfore.
You do from your harts, and midrifs, and intrales forgiue him then you wil not let him rot in ruſty Irons, procure him to be hangd in lowſie linnen without a ſong, and after he is dead piſſe on his graue.
That hard hart of mine has procurd all this, but I forgiue as I would be forgiuen.
Hang toſts my Worſh.
behold thy Cocledemoy, my fine vintner, my caſtrophomicall fine boy: behold and ſee.
Bliſſe, a the bleſſed, who would but look for 2. knaues here?
No knaue worſh. friend, no knaue, for obſerue honeſt C cledemoy reſtores whatſoeuer he has got, to make you know, that whatſoere he has don, has bin only Euphoniae gratia, for Wits ſake: I acquit this Vintner as he has acquitted me, all has bin done for Emphiſes of wit my fine boie, my worſhipfull friends.
Goe you are a flattring knaue.
I am ſo, tis a good thriuing trade, it coms forward better then the 7. liberal Sciences, or the nine cardinall vertues, whiche may well appeare in this, you ſhall neuer haue flattering knaue turn courtyer: and yet I haue read of many Courtyers that haue turned flattring knaues.
Waſt euen but ſo, why then als well?
I could euen weepe for ioy.
I could weep to, but God knowes for what.
Hers another tack to be giuen, your ſon and daughter.
Iſt poſsible, hart I, al my hart, wil you be ioyned here?
yes aith father, mariage and hanging are ſpun both in one houre.
Why then my worſh. good friends I bid my ſelfe moſt hartily welcome to your merry nuptials, and wanton Iigga-ioggies And now my verie fine Heliconian Gallantes, and you my Worſh. friends in the middle Region: If with content our hurtleſſe mirth hath bin, Let your pleaſd minds as our much care hath bin: For he ſhall find that ſlights ſuch triuiall wit, Tis eaſier to reproue then better it: We ſcorne to feare, and yet we feare to ſwell, We do not hope tis beſt: tis all,