GOod morrow my good Lord Chamberlaine.
Many good morrowes to my good Lord of Sussex.
Whose with the Queene my Lord.
The Cardinall of Winchester: The Lord of Tame: the good Lord Shandoyse: and besides, Lo: Howard, Sir Henry Beningfeild, and diuers others.
A word my Lord in priuate.
Tuching the Queene my Lord who now sitts hye,
What thinks the realme of Phillip th'Emperours sonne,
A marriage by the Councell treated of?
Pray god 't prooue well.
Good morrow Lords.
Good morrow my good Lord of Sussex.
I cry your Honors mercy.
Good morrow to the Lords of Tame and Shandoyse.
The like to you my Lord: As you were speaking
Concerning Wiatt and the Kentish rebels,
Their ouer-throw is past: the rebell Dukes that sought
By all meanes to proclaime queene Iane cheifly Northumberland
For Gilfords sake, he for'st his brother Duke vnto that warre,
But each one had his merite.
Oh my Lord,
The Lawe proceeded gainst their great offence,
And 'tis not well, since they haue suffered Iudgment,
That we should rayse their scandall being dead,
Tis impious, not by true Iudgment bread.
Good morrow my Lord, good morrow good Sir Henry.
Pardon my Lord I sawe you not till now.
Good morrow good Lord Howard.
Your honors; The like to you my Lords.
With all my hart Lord Howard.
Forward I pray.
The suffolke men my Lord, was to the Queene
The very stayres, by which she did ascend:
Shee's greatly bound vnto them for their loues.
Good morrow Lords, attend the Queene into the presence.
Your dutyes Lords.
By gods assistance and the power of heauen,
We are instated in our brothers throane,
And all those powers, that war'd against our right,
By helpe of heauen and your freindly ayde,
Disper'stand fled, heere may we sit secure,
Our hearts is ioyfull Lords, our peace is pure.
I doe beseech your maiestie peruse this poore peticion.
O master Dodds we are indebted to you for your loue,
You stood vs in great stead even in our ebb
Of fortune, when our hopes were neere declin'd,
And when our state did beare the lowest saile,
Which we haue reason to requit wee know;
Read his peticion my good Lord Cardinall.
Oh gratious soueraigne, let my Lord the Duke haue the
Perusing of it, or any other that is neere your grace,
He will be to our suit an opposite.
And reason fellow.
Madam, here is a large recitall & vpbraydinge of your highnes Soueraignty, the Suffolke men that lifted you to the throne, and heere possest you, claime your promise you made them about religion.
True gratious Soueraigne;
But that we doe vpbraid your maiestie,
Or make recitall of our deedes forepast,
Other then conscience, honesty and zeale,
By loue, by faith, and by our dutie bound,
To you the next and true successiue heyre,
If you contrary this; I needs must say,
Your skillesse tongue doeth make our well tun'd wordes,
Iarr in the Princes eares, and of our text,
You make a wronge construction: Gratious Queene,
Your humble subiects prostrate in my mouth,
A generall suit when we first flockt to you,
And made first head with you at Framagham,
Twas thus concluded that we your liegemen:
Should still enioy our consciences, and vse that faith
Which in king Edwards daies was held Canonicall.
May't please your highnes note the Commons insolence
They tye you to conditions, and set lymits to your liking.
They shall know,
To whome their faithfull duties they doe owe,
Since they the lymbes, the head would seeke to sway,
Before they gouerne, they shall learne t'obays
See it seuerely ordred Winchester.
Away with him, it shalbe throughly scand,
And you vppon the pillory, three dayes to stand.
Has not your sister (gratious Queene) a hand
In these peticions; well your highnes knowes
She is a fauorite of these heritiques.
And well remembred, is't not probable,
That she in Wiats expedicion,
And other insurrection lately queald
Was a confederate; if your highnes wil your owne estate preserue,
You must foresee fore-danger, and cut off all such
As would your safetie preiudice.
Such is your sister,
A meere opposite to vs in our opinion, and besides
Shees next Successiue, should your maiesty
Dye yssules, which heauen defend.
Which heauen defend.
The state of our religion would decline.
My Lord of Tame and Shandoyse,
You two shall haue a firme Commission seal'd,
To fetch our sister young Elizabeth
From Ashbridge where shee lyes, and with a band
Of armed souldiers to conduct her vp to London,
Where we will heare her.
Gratious Queene, she only craues but to behold your face,
That she might cleare her selfe of all supposed treasons,
Still protesting, she is as true a subiect to your grace,
As liues this day.
Doe not you heare, with what a sawcye impudence,
This Sentlo heere presumes.
Away with him, ile teach him know his place,
To frowne when we frowne, smile on whome we grace.
Twilbe a meanes to keepe the rest in awe,
Making their soueraignes brow, to them a lawe.
All those that seeke our sisters cause to fauour,
Let them be lodged.
Young Courtney Earle of Devonshire,
Seemes cheifly to affect her faction.
Commit him to the Tower,
Till time affordes vs and our Counsell breathing space.
Whence is that Post?
My Soueraigne, It is from Southampton.
Our Secretary, vnseale them and returne
Vs present answere of the contents,
Whats the mayne busines.
That Phillip Prince of Spaine,
Sonne to the Emperour, is safely ariu'd,
And landed at Southampton.
Prepare to meete him Lords with all our Pompe.
Prepare you Lords with our fayre Queene to ride,
And his high princely state lett no man hide.
Set forwad Lords, this sodaine newes is sweete,
Two royall louers on the midde way meere.
Good morrow Mistresse, came you from the Princesse?
Master Gage, I did.
How fares her Grace.
O wondrous crazey gentle master Gage,
Her sleepes are all vnquiet, and her head
Bears and growes giddy with continuall griefe.
God grant her comfort, and release her paine,
So good a Ladie few on earth remaine.
O Arme, arme, arme.
How now what's the matter.
O Lord the house is beset, shouldiers are as hot as fier,
Are reddy to enter euerie hole about the howse,
For as I was a'th toppe of the stacke, the sound of the Drumme,
Hott mee such a box a'th Eare, that I came tumbling downe,
The stacke with a thousand byllets a'th top on me, looke about,
And helpe for gods sake.
Heauen guard the Princesse grant that all be well,
This Drumme I feare, will prooue her passing-bell.
Wher's the Princesse.
O my honor'd Lords,
(May I with reuerence presume to aske)
What meanes these armes, why doe you thus begirt,
A poore weake Lady, neere at poynt of death.
Resolue the Princesse we must speake with her.
My Lords, know there is no admittance to her presence,
VVithout the leaue, first granted from her selfe.
Goe tell her we must and will.
Ile certifie so much.
My Lords, as you are honorably borne,
As you did loue her father, or her brother,
As you do owe alegeance to the Queene,
In pitty of her weaknes, and lowe state,
With best of fauor, her commisserate.
Her grace intreates you but to stay till morne?
And then your message shalbe heard at full.
Tis from the Queene and wee will speake with her.
Ile certifie so much.
It shall not neede, presse after her my Lord.
We are not pleas'd with your intrusions Lords.
Is your hast such, of your affayres so vrgent,
That sudenly, and at this tyme of night,
You presse on one, and will not stay till morne?
Sorry we are sweet Lady, to behold you in this sad plight.
And I my Lords not glad,
My hart, oh how it beats.
Madam, our messuage and our duty from our Queene,
Wee come to tender you, It is her pleasure,
That you the 7. day of this moneth appeare at Westminster.
At Westminster? my Lords no soule more glad then I,
To doe my duty to her Maiestie,
But I am sorry at the hart, my hart, oh good Doctor rayse me:
Oh my hart, I hope my Lords, considering my excremity and
Weaknes, you will dispence a little with your hast.
Doctor Owine and Doctor Wendith,
You are the Queenes Phisitions truly sworne,
On your alegeance, as before her highnes you will answere it,
Speake, may the Princesse be remoou'd with life.
Not without danger Lords, yet without death,
Her feauer is not mortall; yet you see into what danger,
It hath brought the Princesse.
Is your opinion so?
My Iudgment is, not deadly, but yet dangerous,
No sooner shall she come to take the ayre,
But she will faint, and if not well prepar'd and attended,
Her life is in much danger.
Madam, we take no pleasure to deliuer
so strict a messuage.
Nor I my Lords to heare a messuage deliuered
with such strictnes; well must I goe.
So sayes the Queene.
Why then it must be so.
To morrow earlie then you must prepare.
Tis many a more my feeble leggs,
Felt this my bodies waight: O I shall faynt,
And if I tast the rawnes of the ayre,
I am but dead, indeed I am but dead.
Tis late, conduct these Lordes vnto their chambers,
And cheere them well for they haue iorneyd hard,
whilst we prepare vs for our morrowes Iorney.
Madam, the Queene hath sent her letter for you.
The Queene is , and we will striue with death
To tender her our life,
We are her subiect, and obay her hest,
Good night, we wish you what wee want,
Good rest.
Thus in the face of heauē, & broad eie of all the multitude,
We giue a welcome to the Spanish Prince,
Those plausiue shouts which giue you entertaine,
Ecchoes as much to the almighties cares,
And there they sownd with pleasure, and excels
The claymorous trumpetts, and loud ringing bells.
Thrise excellent and euer gracious Princesse,
Doubly famous for vertue and for beautie,
We embrace your large stretcht Honors with the armes of loue,
Our Royall marriage, treated first in Heauen
To be solemniz'd here, both by Gods voice,
And by our loues consent, we thus embrace:
Now Spaine and England two populous Kingdomes,
That haue a long time been oppos'd
In Hostile-emulation, shalbe at one:
This shalbe Spanish England, ours English Spaine.
Harke the redoubling ecchoes of the people,
How it proclaymes their loues; and welcome to this Vnion.
Then here before the of the Land,
We doe embrace and make a publique contract.
Our soules are ioyfull, then bright Heauens smile,
Whil'st we proclaime our new vnited Stile.
Read Sussex.
Long liue the King and Queene.
We thanke you all.
When please your Highnesse to solemnize this your Nuptials?
The 25. day of this month Iuly.
It likes vs well, but royall Queene we want
One Ladie at this hye solemnitie:
We haue a Sister cal'd Elixaebeth,
Whose vertues and endowments of the mind
Hath fil'd the eares of Spaine.
Great are the causes, now too long to say,
Why she my Soueraigne should be kept away.
The Lord of Tame and Shandoyse are return'd.
How fares our Sister? Is she come alonge?
We found the Princesse, sicke and in great danger;
Yet did we vrge our strickt Commission,
She much intreated that she might be spar'd,
Vntill her health and strength might be restor'd.
Two of your Highnesse Doctors we then cal'd,
And charg'd them as they would answere it,
To tell the truth, if that our iourneys toyle
Might be no preiudice vnto her life;
Or if we might with safetie bring her thence:
They answered, that we might; we did so,
Here she is to doe her dutie to your Maiestie.
Let her attend, we will find time to heare her.
But royall Queene, yet for her vertues sake,
Deeme her offences, if she haue offended,
VVith all the lenitie a Sister can.
My Lord of VVinchester, my Lord of Sussex.
Lord Howard, Tame, and Shandoyse,
Take you Commission to examine her
Of all supposed Crimes; so to our Nuptials.
VVhat Festiuall more Royall hath been seene,
Than twixt Spaines Prince, and Englands Royall Queene.
Is not my gentleman vsher yet return'd.
Madam, not yet.
O God, my feare hath been good phisick,
But the Queens displeasure, that hath cur'd my bodies Imperfectiō,
Hath made me hart sick, braine sick, and sick euen to death.
What are you?
Your howshold Officers and humble seruants,
VVho now your house faire Princesse, is desolu'd
And quite broke vp, come to attend your grace.
VVe thanke you, and am more indebted for your loues
Than we haue power: or vertue to requite,
Alas I am all the Queenes, yet nothing of my selfe,
But God and Inocence, be you my Patrons and defend my cause
VVhy weepe you gentlemen?
Not for our selues, men are not made to weepe
At there owne fortunes, our eies are made of fire,
And to extract water from fire is hard,
Nothing but such a Princesse griefe as yours,
So good a Ladie & so beautifull, so absolute a mistris,
And perfect as you haue deliuered been,
Haue power to doo't, your sorrow makes vs sad.
My Inocence yet makes my hart as light,
As my front's heauie: all that heauen sends is welcome
Gentlemen diuide these few crownes amongst you,
I am now a prisoner; and shall want nothing,
I haue some friends about her maiesty,
That are prouiding for mee all things; all things;
I, euen my graue; and being possest of that,
I shall need nothing: weepe not I pray,
Rather you should reioyce:
If I miscarry in this enterprise, and aske you why,
A Virgine and a Martyr both I dy.
He that first gaue you life, protect that life,
From those that wish your death.
VVhats my of offence? who be my accusers.
Madam, that the Queene & VVinchester best knowes.
VVhat saies the Queene vnto my late petition.
You are deny'd that grace:
Her Maiestie will not admitt you conference,
Sir William Sentlo vrging that motion,
VVas first committed, since sent to the Tower,
Madam, in breife your foes are the Queenes freindes,
Your freinds her foes,
Six of the Counsell are this day appoynted,
To examine you of certaine articles,
They shalbe welcome; my god in whome I trust,
VVill helpe, deliuer, saue, defend the iust.
All forbeare this place vnlesse the Princesse.
Madam, we from the Queene are ioynd
in full commission.
By your Fauour good my Lord ere you proceed,
Madam, although this place doth tye you to this reuerence,
It becomes not you being a Princesse to deiect your knee,
A chaire there.
My duty with my fortunes do agree,
And to the Queene in you I bend my knee.
You shall not kneele where Sussex sits in place,
The Chamber keeper, a chaire there for her grace.
Madam, perhaps you censure hardly.
That was enforst in this commission.
Knowe you your owne guilt my good Lord Chancelor,
That you accuse your selfe, I thinke not so,
I am of this mynd, no man is my foe.
Madam I would you would submit, vnto her highnes.
Submit my Lord of Winchester, tis fit
That none but base offenders should submit,
No no my Lord, I easily spy your drifte,
Hauing nothing whereon you can accuse me,
Do seeke to haue my selfe, my selfe betray,
So by my selfe my owne blood should be spilt,
Confesse submission I confesse a guilt.
What answere you to Wiats late rebellion,
Madam, tis thought that you did set them on.
Who is't will say so? men may much suspect,
But yet my Lord, none can my life detect,
I a confederate with those kentish rebells?
Yf I ere saw or sent to them, let the Queene take my head,
Hath not proud Wyat suffered for his offence,
And in the purging both of soule and body for heauen,
Did Wyat then accuse Elizabeth?
Madam he did not.
My reuerent Lord I know it.
Madam he would not.
Oh my good Lord he could not.
The same day Frogmorton was arrain'd in the Guild-hall,
It was impos'd on him, whether this Princesse had a hand
With him or no; he did deny it,
Cler'd her sore his death, yet accus'd others.
My god be prays'd, this is newes but of a minute old.
What answere you to Sir Peter Carew in the west,
The westerne Rebels.
Aske the vnborne Infant, see what that will answere,
For that and I, are both alike in guilt,
Let not by rigor Innocent blood be spilt.
Come Madam, answere breifly to these treasons.
Treason Lords, if it be treason to be the daughter
To th'Eight Henry; Sister to Edward, and the next of blood vnto
My gratious soueraigne now the Queene I am a traytor: if not, I
Spit at treason. In Henryes raigne this Law could not haue stood,
O god that we should suffer for our blood.
Madam, the Queene must here you sing another song,
Before you parte with vs.
My god doth know, I can no note but truth,
That with heauens King,
One day in quiers of Angels I shall singe.
Then Madam you'le not submit.
My life I will, but not as guilty,
My Lords, let pale offendors pardon craue,
If we offend, Lawes rigor let vs haue.
You are stubborne, come letts certifie the Queene.
Rowme for the Lords there.
Thou power eternall, Inocents iust guide,
That sways the Scepter of all Monarchyes,
Protect the guiltlesse from these rauening Iawes,
That hidious death presentes, by Tyrants Lawes,
And as my hart is knowne to thee most pure,
Grant mee release, or patience to endure.
Madam, we your poore humble seruants,
Made bold to presse into your graces presence,
To know how your cause goes.
Well, well, I thanke my god, well,
How can a cause go ill with Innocents,
They that to whome wronges in this world are done,
Shalbe rewarded in the world to come.
It is the pleasure of her maiestie,
That you be straight committed to the Tower.
The Tower, for what?
Moreouer all your howshold seruants we haue discharg'd,
Except this gentleman your vsher & this gentlewoman
Thus did the Queene commaund,
And for your guard, a hundred Northern whitecotes,
Are appoynted to conduct you thither,
To night vnto your chamber, to morrow early prepare
You for the Tower, your bardge stands ready,
To conduct you thyther.
Oh god my hart: A prisoner in the Tower,
Speake to the Queene my Lords, that some other place
May lodge her sister, that's too vild, too base.
Come my lords, lett's all ioyne in one peticion
To the Queene, that she may not be lodg'd within the Tower.
My Lord, you know it is in vaine,
For the Queenes sentence is definitiue,
And we must see't perform'd.
Then to our chamber comfortlesse and sad,
To morrow to the tower that fatall place,
Where I shall neuer behold the sunnes bright face.
Now god forbid, a better hap heauen send:
Thus men may mourne, for what they cannot mend.
Come my masters you know your chardge, tis now about
Alcauin, here we must watche till morning,
And then carry the Princesse to the tower.
How shall we spend the time till morning.
Mase weele drinck and talke of our frendes.
I but my frnd, do not talke of state matters.
Not I, Ile not meddle with the state,
I hope this a man may say without offence,
Prethee drincke to me.
Withall my harry faith, this a man might
Lawfully speake, but now, faith what wast about to say.
Masse I say this: That the Lady Elizabeth is both a lady,
And Elizabeth, and if I should say she were a vertuous Princesse,
Were there any harme in that?
No by my troth, ther's no harme in that,
But beware of talking of the Princesse,
Let's meddle with our kindred there, we may be bold.
Well sirs I haue two sisters, and the one loues the other,
And would not send her to prison for a million, is there any harme
In this? ile keepe my selfe within compas I warrant you,
For I doe not talke of the Queene, I talke of my sisters,
Ile keepe my selfe within my compas I warrant you.
I but Sir, that word sister goes hardly downe.
Why Sir, I hope a man may be bold with his owne,
I learn'd that of the Queene, Ile keepe my selfe within compasse
Ile warrant you.
I but Sir, why is the Princesse committed?
It may be she doth not knowe her selfe,
It may be the Queene knowes not the cause,
It may be my Lord of Winchester does not know,
It may be so, nothing's vnpossible to god,
It may be ther's knauery in Munckery,
Ther's nothing vnpossible, is there any harme in that?
Shoomaker, you goe a little beyond your last.
Why, in saying nothing's vnpossible to God,
Ile stand to it; for saying a truth's a truth, ile proue it;
For saying there may be knauerie in Monckery, Ile iustifie it,
I do not say there is, but may be, I know what I know,
You know what you know, he knowes what he knowes,
Marry we know not what euery man knowes.
My masters, we haue talkt so long that I thinke tis day.
I think so too, is there any harme in all this?
No harme ith world.
And I thinke by this time the Princesse is ready
To take her barge.
Come then let's goe, would all were well,
Is there any harme in all this? but alas wishes and teares
Haue both one property, they shew their loue that
want the remedy.
Did you not marke what a pitious eie she cast
To the Queens window as she past a long,
Fayne she would haue stayd, but that I caus'd
The bargmen to make hast and row away.
The bargmen were too desperat my Lord,
In staying till the water was so lowe,
For then you know, being vnderneath the bridge,
The barges sterne did strike vppon the ground,
And was in danger to haue dround vs all.
Well she hath scapt that danger,
Would she but conforme her selfe in her opinion,
She only might rely vppon my loue,
To winne her to the fauour of the Queene.
But that will neuer be, this is my censure,
If she be guilty in the least degree,
May all her wronges suruiue and light on her:
If other wayes that she be cleered,
Thus both wayes I wish her downe,
Or els her state to rayse.
Why doth the Princesse keepe her barge so longe,
Why lands she not? Some one goe see the cause.
That shall be my charge my Lord.
Oh me my Lord, her state is wondrous hard,
I haue seene the day, my hand Ide not haue lent
To bring my Soueraignes Sister to the Tower:
Good my Lords, stretch your Commission
To doe this Princesse but some little fauour.
My Lord, my Lord, let not the loue we beare the Princesse, incurre the Queenes displeasure, tis no dallying with matters of Estate, who dares gaine-say the Queene?
Marry a God not I, no, no, not I;
Yet who shall hinder these my eyes to sorrow
For her sorrow: By Gods marry deere,
That the Queene could not, though her selfe were here:
My Lords, my Lords, if it were held fowle treason,
To grieue for her hard vsage, by my Soule
My eyes would hardly prooue me a true Subiect:
But tis the Queenes pleasure, and we must obay:
But I shall mourne, should the King and Queene say nay.
My grieued Mistresse humbly thus intreats,
For to remooue backe to the Common stayres,
And not to land where Traytors put to shore,
Some difference she intreats your Honors make
Twixt Christall Fountaines, and fowle muddy Springs,
Twixt those that are condemned by the law,
And those whome Treasons staine did neuer blemish:
Thus she attends your answere, and sits still
Whilst her wet eyes, full many a teare did spill.
Marry a God, tis true and tis no reason: Lanch Bargeman.
Good Lady land, where Traitors vse to land,
And fore her guilt be proou'd, Gods marry no,
And the Queene wils it, that it should be so.
My Lord, you must looke into our Commission,
No fauors granted, she of force must land,
Tis a decree which we can not with stand,
So tell her master Gage,
As good a Lady as ere England bread,
Would he that caus'd this woe, had lost his head.
Madam, you haue stept too short into the water.
No matter where I tread,
Would where I set my foote, there lay my head,
Land Traytor like; my foot's wet in the flood,
So shall my hart ere long be drencht in blood.
Here comes the Constable of the tower,
This is your charge.
And I receiue my prisoner, come will you goe?
Whither my Lord, vnto a grate of Iron,
Where greife and care my poore hart shall enuirone,
I am not well.
A chayre for the Princesse.
Here's no chayre for prisoners,
Come will you see your chamber.
Then on this stone, this cold stone I will sit,
I needes must say you hardly me intreat,
VVhen for a chayre, this hard stone is my seate.
My Lord, you deale too cruelly with the Princesse,
You knew her father, shee's no stranger to you.
Madam it raynes.
Good Lady take my cloake.
No let it a lone: See gentle men,
The pittious heauens weepes teares into my bosome,
On this cold stone I sit, raine in my face,
But better heere, than in a worser place
VVhere this bad man will lead me.
Clarentia, reach my booke, now leade me where you please
From sight of day; or in a dungeon; I shall see to pray.
Nay, nay, you need not bolt & locke so fast,
Shee is no starter; honorable Lords,
Speake to the Queene she may haue some release.
So so, let me alone, let me alone to coope her,
Ile vse her so, the Queene shall muth commend
My diligent care.
VVhere haue you left the Princesse?
VVhere she is safe ynough I warrant you,
I haue not granted her the priuiledge
Of any walke, or garden, or to ope
Her windowes, casements to receiue the ayre.
My lord, my lord, you deale without respect,
And worse than your Commission can mainetaine.
My Lord, I hope I know mine office well,
And better than your selfe within this place,
Then teach not me my dutie, she shalbe vsd so still,
The Queene commands, and Ile obay her will,
But if this tyme should alter, marke me well,
Could this be answer'd, could it fellow Peeres?
I thinke not so.
Tush tush the Queene is young likely to beare,
Of her owne body a more royall heyre.
My Lords the Princesse humbly entreats,
That her owne seruants may beare vp her dyet,
A company of base vntutord slaues,
Whose hands did neuer serue a Princesse boord,
Do take that priuiledge.
Twas my appoyntment, and it shalbe so.
Gods marry deere, but it shall not be,
Lord Howard ioyne with me, weele to the King.
Stay good my Lords for instance, see they come,
If this be seemly, let your honors Iudge.
Come come my Lords, why do you staye so long,
The Queenes high fauor shall amend this wrong.
Now sir, what haue you got by your
complayning, you common find-fault; what, is
your Mistresse stomacke so queasie? our honest
souldiers must not touch her meat, then let her fast,
I know her stomacke will come downe at last.
Vntutor'd slaue, Ile ease thee of this burden,
Her highnes scornes to touch the dishe
Her seruants brings not vp.
Presume to touch a dish Ile lodge thee there,
Where thou shalt see no sunne for one hole yeare.
I would to god you would, in any place
Where I might liue from thought of her disgrace,
O thou all-seeing heauens, with pitious eies,
Looke on th'oppresions of their cruelty!
Let not thy truth, by falshood be opprest,
But let her vertues shyne and giue her rest,
Confound the sleights, and practise of those men,
Whose pride do kicke against thy seat of heauen.
Oh draw the courtaines from their filthy sinne,
And make them loath the hell which they liue in.
Prosper the Princesse, and her life defend,
A glorious comfort to her troubles send.
If euer thou hadst pittie, heare my prayer,
And giue releasement to a Princes care.
The Princesse thus entreats you honor'd Lord,
She may but walke in the Lieftenants garden,
Or els repose her selfe in the Queens lodgings:
My honor'd Lord, grant this as you did loue
The famous Henry her deceased father.
Come talke not to me for I am resolu'd,
Nor lodging, garden, nor lieftenants walkes
Shall here be granted, shee's a prisoner.
My Lord, they shall.
How, shall they knaue?
If the Queene please, they shall.
A noble and right reuerent Counsellor,
Promist to begge it of her Maiestie:
And if she say the word, my Lord she shall.
I, if she say the word, it shalbe so:
My lord of Winchester speakes the contrarie,
So doe the Clergie, they are honest men.
My honor'd Lord, why should you take delight
To torture a poore Lady innocent?
The Queene I know when she shall heare of this,
Will greatly discommend your crueltie.
You seru'd her father, and he lou'd you well,
You seru'd her brother, and he held you deare,
And can you hate the sister he best lou'd?
You serue her sister, she esteemes you hye,
And you may liue to serue her ere you dye:
And therefore good my Lord, let this preuaile,
Only the casements of her window ope,
Whereby she may receiue fresh gladsome ayre.
O you preach well to deafe men, no, not I,
So letters may fly in, Ile none of that,
She is my prisoner, and if I durst,
But that my warrant is not yet so strickt,
Ide lay her in a dungeon where her eyes,
Should not haue light to read her prayer booke,
So would I danger both her soule and body,
Cause she an alyen is to vs catholiques,
Her bed should be all snakes, her rest dispayre,
Torture should make her curse, her faythles prayer.
My Lord, it is the pleasure of the Queene,
The prisoner Princesse should haue all the vse
Of the lieftenants garden, the Queenes lodgings,
And all the liberty this place affords.
What meanes her grace by that?
You may goe aske her and you will my Lord,
Moreouer tis her highnes furder pleasure,
That her sworne seruants shal attend on her,
Two gentlemen of her Ewry, two of her Pantry,
Two of her Kitchin, and two of her wardrobe,
Besydes this gentleman here master Gage.
The next wilbe her freedom, oh this madds me.
Which way lyes the Princesse.
This way my Lord.
This wilbe glad tydings: come let's tell her grace.
Wilt please your honor, let my Lady
Walke in the leiftenants garden,
Or may but see the lodgings of the Queene,
Or ope the casements to receiue fresh ayre,
Shall shee my Lord: shall shee this freedom vse,
Shee shall: for you can neither will nor chuse,
Or shall shee haue some seruants of her owne,
To attend on her: I pray let it be so,
And let your looke no more poore prisoners daunt,
I pray deny not what you needes must grant.
This base groome flowts me, oh this frets my hart,
These knaues will let vpon their priuiledge,
But yet ile vex her, I haue found the meanes,
Ile haue my cookes to dresse my meate with hers,
And euerie officer my men shall match,
Oh that I could but draine her harts deare blood,
Oh it would feede me, do my soule much good.
How now, what meanes the fellow.
Audacious slaue presuming in my place.
Sir 'twas my pleasure and I did command it.
The prowdest he that keepes within the tower,
Shall haue no eie into my priuate office.
No Sir, why say 'tis I.
Be it your selfe or any other here,
Ile make him sup the hottest broth I haue.
You will not.
Zoundes I will,
I haue been true to her, and will be still.
Well, Ile haue this amended er't be long,
And venge my selfe on her for all their wrong.
I haue got another Nosegay for my young Lady,
My Lord said I should be soundly whipt
If I were seene to bring her any more,
But yet Ile venture once againe, shee's so good,
Oh heer's her chamber, Ile call and see if shee be stirring,
Where are you Lady?
Welcome sweet boy, what hast thou brought me there.
Madam, I haue brought you another nose gay,
But you must not let it be seene, for if it be,
I shall be soundly whipt, indeedla, indeed I shall.
God a mercy boy, heeres to requite thy loue.
Stay him stay him, oh haue I caught you Sir,
Where haue you been.
To carry my younge Lady some more flowers,
Alas my Lord a child, pray let him goe.
A crafty knaue my Lords, serch him for letters.
Letters my Lord, it is impossible.
Come tell me what letters thou carryedst her,
Ile giue thee figgs and suger plummes.
Will you indeed, well ile take your word,
For you looke like an honest man.
Now tell me what letters thou deliuerest.
Faith gaffer I know no letters but great A,
B and C: I am not come to K yet,
Now gaffer will you giue me my suger plummes.
Yes marry will I, take him away,
Let him be soundly whipt I charge you sirra.
They keepe euen infants from vs, they do well,
My sight they haue too long bard, and now my smell,
This tower hath made me fall to huswiffry,
I spend my labors to releeue the poore,
Goe Gage distribute these to those that neede.
Madam the Queene out of her royall bounty,
Hath freed you from the thraldome of the tower,
And now this gentleman must be your gardyan.
I thanke her: she hath ryd me of a Tyrant,
Is he appoynted now to be my keeper?
What is he Lordes?
A gentleman in fauor with the Queene.
Yt seemes so by his charge, but tell me Gage,
Is yet the scaffold standing on tower hill,
Whereon young Gilford and the Lady Iane did suffer death.
Vppon my life it stands not.
Lord Howard what is he.
A gentleman, tho of a sterne aspect,
Yet milde enough I hope your Grace will finde.
Hath he not thinke you a stretch conscience,
And if my secret murder should be put into his hands,
Hath he not hart thinke you to execute.
Defend it heauen, and Gods almightie hand,
Betwixt your Grace, and such intendments stand.
Come madam will you goe.
With all my hart, fare-well, far-well,
I am freed from Lymbo to be sent to hell.
What storme comes next: this hath disperst vs quite
And shattered vs to nothing; though we be deny'd the presence
Of our mistres, yet we will walke a loofe, and none controwle vs.
Here will she crosse the riuer, stand in her eie,
That she may take some notice of our neglected dutyes,
Come this way they say, the sweete Princesse comes,
Let vs presente her with such tokens of good will,
As we haue.
They say shee's such a vertuous Princesse, that sheele
except of a cupp of cold water, and I haue euen
a nosegay for her Grace, here she comes.
The Lord preserue thy sweete Grace.
What are these?
The townes-men of the country gathered here,
To greete your Grace, hearing you past this way.
Giue them this Gold, and thanke them for their loues.
what traytor knaues are gather'd here to make a tumult?
Now the Lord blesse thy sweete Grace.
If they persist, I charge you soldiers stop their mouthes.
Yt shall not need the poore are louing, but the rich despise,
And though you curbe their tongue, spare them their eyes,
Your loue my smart alwaies not but prolonges,
Pray for me in your harts, not with your tongues,
See see my Lord, looke I haue stild them all,
Not one amongst them, but debates my fall.
Alas Sir Harry these are honest contrey men,
That much reioyce to see the Princesse well.
My lord my Lord, my charge is great.
And myne as great as yours.
Harke harke my Lord, what Bells are these?
The townes-men of this village,
Hearing your highnes passe this way,
Salutes your comming with this peale of Bells.
Traytors and knaues ring Bells,
When the Queenes enemy passeth through the towne,
Goe set he knaues by'th heales, make their pates ring noone,
I charge thee Barwick.
Alas poore men, helpe them thou God aboue,
Thus men are forst to suffer for my loue,
What sayd my seruants, those that stood aloofe?
They deepely coniur'd me out of their loues,
To know how your case goes, which these poore people second.
Say to them tanquam Ouis.
Come come away, this lingring will benight vs.
Madam this night your lodging's at my house,
No prisoner are you Madame for this night.
How? no prisoner.
No, no prisoner, what I intend to do ile answere,
Madame, wil't please you goe.
Now gentle master vsher, what sayes my Lady.
Thus did she bid me say tanquam Ouis,
Farewell I must away.
Tanqus Ovrus pray whats tanqus Ovrus neighbor.
If the preist were here hee'd smell it out straight.
My selfe haue been a scholler, and I vnderstand
What tanquam Ouis meanes.
We sent to know how her Grace did fare,
Shee, tanquam Ouis said, euen like a sheep,
That's to the slaughter led.
Tanqus Ovrus, that I should liue to see, tanqus Ovris.
I shall nere loue tanquam Ovris againe for this tricke.
Barwicke, is this the chayre of state.
I sir, this is it.
Take it downe, and pull of my boots.
Come on Sir.
O monstrous, what a sawey companion's this?
To pull of his boots in the chayre of state,
Ile fit you a penyworth for it.
Well sayd Barwick, pull knaue.
A ha Sir.
Well sayd, now comes.
Gods pitty I thinke you are downe, cry you mercy.
What saucy arrant knaue art thou, how?
Not so sawcy an arrant knaue as your worship takes me to be.
Villaine thou hast broken my crooper.
I am sorry 'tis no worse for your worship.
Knaue, doest flout me?
The wall, the wall.
Sblood Spaniard you get no wall here, vnlesse you would
Haue your head and the wall knockt together.
Seignior Caualero Danglatero,
I must haue the wall.
I do protest, hadst not thou enforst it,
I had not regarded it, but since you will needs
Haue the wall, Ile take the paynes to thrust
You into the kennell.
O base Caualero, my sword and ponyard well
Try'd in Tolledo, shall giue thee the Imbrocado.
Marry, and welcome Sir, come on.
Holo holo, thou hast giuen me
The Canuissado.
Come Sir will you any more.
Seignior Caualero looke behint thee,
A blade of Tolledo is drawne against thee.
Hand that Ignoble groome,
Had we not beheld thy cowardice,
We should haue sworne,
Such basenes had not followed vs.
Oh vostro mandado grand Emperato.
Pardon him my Lord.
Are you respectles of our honor Lords,
That you would haue vs bosome cowardice,
I do protest the great turkes Empire,
Shall not redeeme thee from a fellons death,
What place is this my Lords?
Charing crosse my Liege.
Then by this crosse, where thou hast done this murder,
Thou shalt be hang'd, so Lords away with him.
Your Grace may purchase glory from aboue,
And intyer loue from all your peoples hearts,
To make attonement twixt the wofull Princesse,
And our dread soueraigne, your most vertuous Queene.
It were a deed worthy of memory.
My Lord she's factious, rather could I wish
She were marryed to some priuat gentleman,
And with her dower conuaid out of the land,
Then here to stay and be a mutiner,
So may your highnes state be more secure.
For whilst she liues warres, and commotions,
Foule insurrections wilbe set abroch,
I thinke 'twere not amisse to take her head:
This land would be in quiet, were she dead.
O my Lord, you speake not charitably.
Nor will we Lords embrace his heedles counsell,
I doe protest as I am King of Spaine,
My vtmost power ile stretch to make them frends,
Come Lords let's in, my loue and wit ile try
To end this Iarre; the Queene shall not deny.
What fearefull terror doth assayle my hart?
Good Gage come hether and resolue me true
In thy opinion; shall I out liue this night,
I pre thee speake.
Out liue this night, I pray Madam why.
Then to be plaine this night I looke to die.
O Madam, you were borne to better fortunes,
That God that made you, will protect you still
From all your enemies that wish you ill.
My hart is fearefull.
O my honor'd Lord,
As euer you were noble in your thoughts,
Speake, shall my Lady out liue this night, or no?
You much amaze me sir, els heauen forefend.
For if we should imagine any plott,
Pretending to the hurt of our deere mistres,
I and my fellowes though farre vnable are
To stand against your power, will dy together.
And I with you would spend my deerest blood,
To do that vertuous Lady any good.
Sir Harry, now my charge I must resigne,
The Ladye's wholy in your custody,
Yet vse her kindly as she well deserues,
And so I take my leaue, Madame adue.
My honor'd Lord farewell, vnwilling I
With griefe and woe must continue,
Helpe me to some inke and paper good Sir Harry.
What to do Madam.
To write a letter to the Queene my sister.
I finde not that in my Commission.
Good Iaylor vrge not thy Commission.
No Iaylor, but your gardian Madam.
Then reach me pen and inke.
Madam I dare not, my Commission serues not.
Thus you haue driuen me of from tyme to tyme,
Still vrging me with your Commission.
Good Iaylor be not so seuere.
Good madam I entreate you loose that name
Of Iaylor, twilbe a by-word to me and my posterity.
As often as you name your Commission,
So often will I call you Iaylor.
Say I should reach you pen, inke and paper,
Who ist dare beare a letter sent from you.
I do not keepe a seruant so dishonest,
That would deny me that.
Who euer dares, none shall.
Madame, impose the letter to my trust,
Were I to beare it through a feild of pikes,
And in my way ten thousand arm'd men ambusht,
Ide make my passage through the mid'st of them,
And perforce beare it to the Queene your sister.
Baddy of me, what a bold knaue's this?
Gage leaue me to my selfe,
Thou euer liuing power, that giuest all harts,
Giue to my pen, a true perswasiue stile,
That it may moue my impatient sisters eares,
And vrge her to compassionate my woe.
What has she written here?
Much suspected by me, nothing prou'd can be,
Finis quoth Elizabeth the prisoner,
Pray god it proue so, soft what book's this,
Marry a God, whats here an English bible?
Sanctum Maria pardon this prophanation of my hart,
Water Barwick, water, Ile meddle with't no more.
My hart is heauye and my hart doth close,
I am weary of writing, sleepy on the sodaine,
Clarentia, leaue me, and command some musick
In the with-drawing chamber.
Your letter shalbe forth-comming Lady,
I will pervse it ere it scape me now.
O God, how pleasant was this sleepe to me?
Clarentia, saw'st thou nothing?
Madame, not I,
I neare slept soundlyer for the time.
Nor heard'st thou nothing?
Neither Madame.
Did'st not thou put this booke into my hand?
Madame not I.
Then 'twas by inspiration, heauen I trust
With his eternall hand, will guide the iust.
What chapter's this? Who so putteth his trust in the Lord,
Shall not be confounded:
My sauiour thankes, on thee my hope I build,
Thou lou'st poore Innocents, and art their shield.
Here haue you writ a long excuse it seemes,
But no submission to the Queene your sister.
Should they submit that neuer wrought offence,
The Lawe will alwayes quit wrong'd Innocence:
Gage, take my letter, to the Lords commend my humble duty.
Madame I fly,
To giue this leter to her maiesty:
Hoping when I returne,
To giue you comfort that now sadly mourne.
I doe write and send, Ile crosse you still;
She shall not speake to any man aliue,
But ile ore-heare her, no letter nor no token
Shall euer haue accesse vnto her hands,
But first ile see it;
So like a subiect to my soueraigns state,
I will pursue her with my deadly hate.
O Sir Harry, you looke well to your office,
Yonders one in the garden with the Princesse.
how knaue, with the Princesse? she parted euen now.
I sir thats all one, but she no sooner came into the
Garden, but he leapt ore the wall, and there
They are together busie in talke Sir.
Heer's for thy paynes, thou art an honest fellow:
Goe take a Gard and apprehend them straight.
Bring them before me,
O this was well found out,
Now will the Queene commend my diligent care,
And prayse me for my seruice to her grace.
Ha, traytors swarme so neere about my house,
Tis time to looke into't:
O well said Barwick,
Wher's the prisoner.
Here he is in a string my Lord.
Lord blesse vs, knaue what hast thou there?
This is he I told you was busie in talke with the Princesse;
What a did there, you must get out of him by examination.
Why knaue, this is a beast.
So may your worship be for any thing that I know.
VVhat art thou knaue?
Yf you worship does not remember me,
I hope your worships crooper doth:
But if you haue any thing to say to this honest fellow,
VVho for his gray head and reuerent beard is so like,
He may be a kinne to you.
A kinne to mee, knaue ile haue thee whipt.
Then your worship will cry quittance with my
Posteriors for misvsing of yours.
Nay, but doest thou flout me still.
I pray your honor to regard my hast,
I know your busines, and your hast shall stay,
As you were speaking my Lord Constable.
When as the King shall come to seale these writes.
My Lord you know his highnes treasure stayes,
And cannot be transported this three months,
Vnles that now your honor seale my warrant.
Fellow what then: This warrant that concernes
The Princesse death, shuffle amongst the rest,
Hee'le nere peru'st.
How, the Princesse death? thankes heauen,
By whome I am made a willing instrument her life to saue,
That may liue crown'd when thou art in thy graue.
Stand ready purseuant,
That when tis sign'd,
Thou mayst be gone, and gallope with the winde.
Our Chancelor Lords, this is our sealing day,
This our states busines; is our signet there?
Stay your Imperiall hand, let not your seale imprint
Deaths impresse in your sisters hart.
Our sisters hart, Lo: Howard what meanes this?
The Chancelor and that iniuryous Lord,
Can well expound the meaning.
Oh chance accurst, how came he by this notice?
Her life is garded by the hand of heauen,
And we in vaine pursue it.
Lord Chancelor, your dealing is not fayre,
See Lords, what writs affords it selfe
To the impresse of our scale.
See my Lord, a warrant for the Princesse death
Before she be conuicted, what iugling call you this?
See, see for Gods sake.
And a pursuiuant ready to post away with it,
To see it doone with speede,
What flynty brest could brooke to see her bleed?
Lord Chancelor, out of our prerogatiue
We will make bold to enterlyne your warrant.
Whose plot was this?
The Chancelors and my Lord Constables.
How was't reueald?
By this gentleman Master Gresham the Kings Agent here.
He hath shewd his loue to the King & Queenes maiestyes,
His seruice to his Country, and care of the Princesse.
My dutie to them all.
In stead of charging of the Sheriffes with her,
We here discharge her keeper Beningfeild:
And where we should haue brought her to the blocke,
We now will haue her brought to Hampton court,
There to attend the pleasure of the Queene,
The Pursuiuant that should haue posted downe
With tydings of her death,
Beare her the messuage of her repriued life,
You master Gage assist his speed, a good dayes worke we ha made,
To rescue Innocence so soone betrayd.
Whether goe you so fast mistris Clarentia.
A milking.
A milking, that's a poore office for a Madame.
Better be a Milk-maid free, then a Madame in bondage.
Oh had'st thou heard the Princesse yesternight,
Sitting within an arbor all alone to heare a Milk-mayd sing,
It would haue moou'd a flynty hart to melt,
Weeping and wishing, wishing and weeping,
A thousand tymes she with her selfe debates,
With the poore Milk-maid to exchange estates,
Shee was a Sempster in the tower being a Princesse,
And shall I her poore gentlewoman, disdayne
To be a Milk-maid in the country.
Troth you say true, euery one to his fortune,
As men goe to hanging, the tyme hath been,
When I would ha scorn'd to carry coles, but now the case is alter'd,
Euery man as far as his tallent will stretch.
Wher's mistres Clarential to horse to horse,
The Princesse is sent for to the Court
Shee's gone already, come let's after.
The Princesse gone, and I left here behind,
Come, come our horses shall out-strip the wind.
And Ile not be long after you, for I am sure
My curtall will cary me as fast as your double Gelding.
I wonder Gage that we haue stayd so long,
So neere the Court, and yet haue heard no newes
From our displeased sister, this more affrites me
Then my former troubles, I feare this Hampton court
Wilbe my graue.
Good madam, blot such thoughts out of your minde,
The Lords I knowe, are still about your sute,
And make no doubt, but they will so preuaile
Both with the King and Queene, that you shall see
Their haynos anger wilbe turnd to loue.
Where is the Princesse.
Welcome my good Lo: Howard what sayes the Queene,
Will she admit my sight?
Madam she will, this night she hath appoynted,
That she her selfe in person meanes to heare you,
Protract no time, then come let's hast away.
Where is the Princesse.
She waights your pleasure at the common stayers.
Vsher her in by torch light.
Gentlemen vshers, & gentlemen Pentioners, lights
For the Princesse, attendance gentlemen.
For her supposed vertues, Royall Queene
Looke on your sister with a smiling brow,
And if her fault merite not too much hate,
Let her be censur'd with all lenity,
Let your deepe hatred end where it began,
She hath binne too long banisht from the sun.
Our fauor shalbe farre boue her desert,
And she that hath been banisht from the light,
Shall once againe behold our cheerfull sight.
You my Lord shall step behind the arras,
And heare our conference, weele shew her Grace,
For there shines too much mercy in your face.
We beare this mind, we errors would not feed,
Nor cherish wrongs, nor yet see Innocents bleed.
Call the Princesse.
All forbeare this place, except our sister now?
That God that rais'd you, staye you, and protect
You from your foes, and cleere me from suspect.
Wherefore do you cry?
To see your selfe so low, or vs so hye.
Neither dread Queene, mine is a womanish teare,
In part compeld by ioy, and part by feare:
Ioy of your sight, these brinish teares haue bread,
For feare of my Queenes frowne, to strike me dead.
Sister, I rather thinke they're teares of spleene.
You were my sister, now you are my Queene.
I, that's your greefe.
Madame, he was my foe, and not your freind
That hath possest you so, I am as true a
Subiect to your Grace, as any liues this day,
Did you but see,
My heart it bends, farre lower than my knee.
Wee know you can speake well: will you submit?
My life madam I will, but not as guilty,
Should I confesse
Fault done by her, that neuer did transgresse.
Iioy to haue a sister Queene so royall,
I would it as much pleas'd your maiesty,
That you enioy a sister that's so true:
If I were guilty of the least offence,
Madame, 'twould taint the blood euen in your face,
The treasons of the father being noble,
Vnnobles all your children, let your grace
Exact all torture and imprisonment,
VVhat ere my greatest enemies can deuise,
And they all haue done their worst, yet I
VVill your true subiect and true sister dye.
Myrror of vertue and bright natures pride,
Pitty it had been, such beauty should haue dy'd
You'le not submit but end as you begin.
Madame to death I will, but not to sinne.
You are not guilty then?
I thinke I am not.
I am not of your mind.
I would your highnes were.
How meane you that.
To thinke as I thinke that my soule is cleere.
You haue been wrong imprison'd then.
Ile not say so.
VVhat ere we thinke aryse and kisse our hand,
Say God hath rais'd you frends.
Then God hath kept his promise.
Promise, why?
To rayse them frends that on his word relie.
And may the heauens applaud this vnity,
Accurst be they that first procur'd this wrong,
Now by my crowne, you ha been kept downe too long.
Sister this night your selfe shall feast with me,
To morrow for the country you are free,
Lights for the Princesse conduct her to her chamber.
My soule is ioyfull that this peace is made,
A peace that pleaseth heauen and earth, and all,
Redeeming captiue thoughts from captiue thrall,
Faire Queene, the serious busines of my father,
Is now at hand to be accomplished,
Of your faire sight needes must take my leaue,
Returne I shall, tho parting cause vs greeue.
VVhy should two harts be for'st to seperate,
I know your busines but beleeue me sweete,
My soule diuines we neuer more shall meete.
Yet faire Queene hope the best I shall returne,
VVho met with ioy, tho now sadly mourne.
VVhat, droopes your honor?
Oh, I am sicke.
VVhere lyes your greife?
VVhere yours and all good subiects els should lye,
Neere at the hart, this confirmation I doe greatly dread,
For now our true religion will decay,
I do diuine who euer liues seauen yeare,
Shall see no Religion here but heresye.
Come come my Lord, this is but for a show,
Our Queene I warrant wishes in her hart,
Her sister Princesse were without her head.
No, no my Lords, this peace is naturall,
This combination is without deceyt,
But I will once more write to incence the Queene,
The plot is laid, thus it shalbe perform'd:
Sir Harry, you shall goe attach her seuant
Vppon suspition, of some trechery,
VVherin the Princesse shalbe accessary,
If this do faile, my pollicy is downe,
But I grow faynt, the feauer steales on me,
Death like a vulture tyres vpon my hart,
Ile leaue you two to prosecute this drift,
My bones to earth I giue, to heauen my soule lift.
Madam Clarentia, is my Lady stirring?
Yes master Gage, but heauie at the hart,
For she was frited with a dreame this night.
She said, she drempt her sister was new married,
And sat vpon a high Emperiall throne,
That she her selfe was cast into a dungeon,
Where enemyes enuiron'd her about,
Offering their weapons to her naked brest;
Nay they would scarcly giue her leaue to pray,
They made such hast to hurry her away.
Heauen sheild my Mistres, and make her frends increase,
Conuert her foes, estate her in true peace.
Then did I dreame of weddings, and of flowers,
Me thought I was within the finest garden,
That euer mortall eie did yet behould,
Then strayght me thought some of the cheife were pickt
To dresse the bride, O 'twas the rarest show,
To see the bride goe smiling longst the streets,
As if she went to happynes eternall.
Oh most vnhappy dreame, my feare is now
As great as yours, before it was but small,
Come let's goe comfort her, that ioyes vs all.
Winchester's dead, O God vppon euen at his death,
He shewd his mallice to the sweete young Princesse,
God pardon him, his soule must answere all,
She's still preseru'd, and still her foes do fall,
The Queene is much besotted on these Prelates,
For ther's another rays'd more base then he,
Poole that Arch, for truth and honestie.
My Lord of Sussex I can tell ill newes,
The Cardinall Poole that now was firmly well,
Is sodenly falne sicke and like to die.
Let him goe, why, then ther's a fall of Prelates.
This realme will neuer stand in perfect state,
Till all their faction be cleare ruinate.
Sir, Harry do you heare the whispring in the Court,
They say the Queene is craysy very ill.
How hard you that?
Tis common through the house.
Tis a sad Court my Lord.
What's the matter say: how fayres the Queene?
Whether in sorrow for the Kings departure,
Or els for greife at Winchesters decease,
Or els that Cardinall Poole is sodaynely dead,
I cannot tell, but shee's exceeding sick.
The state begins to alter.
Nay more my Lord, I came now from the presence,
I heard the Doctors whisper it in seecret,
There is no way but one.
Gods will be done; whose with the Queene, my Lord?
The Duke of Norfolke, the Earle of Oxford,
The Earle of Arundell, and diuers others,
They are with-drawne into the inward chamber,
There to take counsell, and intreat your presence.
VVee'le waight vpon their Honors.
O God, my last nights dreame I greatly feare,
It doth presage my death, good master Gage
Looke to the path-way that doth come from the court,
I looke each minute for deaths messenger.
Would he were here now, so my soule were pure,
That I with patience might the stroke endure.
Madame I see from farre a horse-man comming,
This way he bends his speed he comes so fast,
That he is couered in a cloud of dust,
And now I haue lost his sight, he appear's againe,
Making his way ouer Hill, Hedge, Ditch and Plaine:
One after him, they two striue
As on the race they had wagerd both their liues,
Another after him.
O God, what meanes this hast?
Pray for my soule, my life cannot long last.
Strange and miraculous, the first being at the gate,
His horse hath broke his necke, and cast his rider.
This same is but as prologue to my death,
My heart is guiltlesse though they take my breath.
God saue the Queene, God saue Elizabeth.
God saue the Queene, so all good subiects say:
I am her subiect, and for her still pray.
My horse did you allegeance at the gate,
For there he broke his necke, and there he lyes,
For I my selfe had much a do to rise,
The fall hath brus'd me, yet I liue to cry,
God blesse your Grace, God blesse your maiesty.
Long liue the Queene, long liue your maiesty,
This newes is sweete, my hart was sore affraid:
Rise thou first Barron that we euer made.
Thankes to your maiesty, happy be my tongue,
That first breath'd right, to one that had such wrong.
Am I preuented in my hast, O chance accurst!
My hopes did sooth me, that I was the first;
Let not my duty be ore swayd by spleene,
Long liue my Soueraigne, and God saue the Queene.
Thankes good Sir Iohn, we will deserue your loue.
Though third in order, yet the first in loue,
I tender my allegeance to your Grace,
Liue long faire Queene, thrise happy be your raygne,
He that instates you, your high state mayntayne.
Lord Howard thankes you euer were our frend,
I see your loue continues to the end,
But cheefly, thanks to you my Lord of Hunsdon.
Meaning this Gentleman?
The very same;
His tongue was first proclaymer of our name:
And trusly Gage in token of our Grace,
We giue to you a captaine Pentioners place.
Madame the Counsell are here hard at hand.
We will descend & meete them.
Let's guard our Soueraigne praysing that power:
That can throw downe and raise within an hower.
Come neighbor, come away, euery man his faggot,
And his double pot, for ioy of the old Queenes death,
Let bells ring, and children sing.
For we may haue cause to remember,
The seauenteenth day of Nouember.
How now my masters what's here to do.
Faith making Bone-fires for ioy of the newe Queene,
Come sir your penny, and you be a true subiect,
You'le battle with vs your faggot, we'lbe merry yfayth.
And you do well: and yet me thinke 'twere fit,
To spend some funerall teares vpon her hearce.
VVho while she liu'd was deere vnto you all.
I, but do not you know the old prouerbe,
VVe must liue by the quicke, and not by the dead.
Did you not loue her father when he liu'd,
As deerly as you ere did loue any,
And yet reioyced at his funerall:
Likewise her brother em'd him deere,
Yet once departed, ioyfully you sung,
Runne to make Bone-fiers, to proclaime your loue
Vnto the newe, forgetting still the old:
Now she is gone, how you mone for her,
VVere it not fit a while to mone her hearse,
And dutyfully there reioyce the tother;
Had you the wisest and the louingst Prince,
That euer swayd a Scepter in the world,
This is the loue he shall haue after life:
Let Princes while they liue haue loue or feare 'tis fit,
For after death, ther's none continues it.
By my fayth my masters, he speakes wisely,
Come weele to the end of the lane, and there weele
Make a bonfire and be merry,
Fayth agreed ile spend my halfepenny towards
Another faggot, rather then the newe Queene shall
VVant a Bone-fire.
I blame you not, nor do I you commend,
For you will still the strongest side defend.
Long liue, long raigne our Soueraigne.
We thanke you all.
The imperiall Crowne, I here present your Grace,
With it my staffe of Office and my place.
Whil'st we this Crowne so long your place enioy.
Th'mperiall Scepter here I offer vp.
Keepe it my Lord, and with it be you hye admirall.
This Cap of mayntenance, I present my state
of Office, and my vtmost seruice.
Your loue we knowe.
Pardon me gratious Madame 'twas not spleene,
But that alegance that I ow'd my Queene,
Madame I seru'd her truly at that day,
And I as truly will your Grace obay,
We do as freely pardon as you truly serue,
Onely your staffe of Office weele displace,
In stead of that weele owe you greater Grace,
Long liue the Queene, long liue your Maiesty,
I haue bid hard to be the first reporter,
Of these glad tydings first; and all these here.
You are in your loue as free as in your care,
You're come euen iust a day after the fayre.
What's he, my Iaylor?
God preserue your Grace.
Be not asham'd man, looke me in the face,
VVho haue you now to patronize your strictnes on?
For your kindnes this I will bestowe,
When we haue one we would haue hardly vs'd
And cruelly delt with, you shall be the man,
This is a day for peace, not for vengeance fit,
All your good deeds wee'le quit, all wronges remit.
Where we left off, proceede.
The Sword of Iustice on my bended knee,
I to your Grace present, heauen blesse your raigne.
This Sword is ours, this staffe is yours againe.
This Garter with the order of the George,
Two Ornaments vnto the Crowne of England,
I here present.
Possesse them still my Lord, what Offices beare you?
I Captaine of your highnes Pentioners.
I of your Guard.
I Sargeant Trumpetor present my Mace.
Some we intend to rayse, none to displace;
Lord Hunsdon, we will one day finde a staffe
To poyse your hand: you are our Cosen,
And deserue to be employd neerer our person:
But now to you from whome we take this staffe,
Since Cardinall Poole is now decea'st and dead,
To shew all mallice from our breast is worne,
Before you let that Purse and Mace be borne,
And now to London Lords lead on the way,
Praysing that King, that all Kings els obay.
I from this Citty London do present,
This Purse and Bible to your Maiesty,
A thowsand of your faithfull Cittizens,
In Veluet Coats and Chaines well mounted, stay
To greet their royall Soueraigne on the way.
VVe thanke you all: but first this booke I kisse.
Thou art the way to honor; thou to blisse,
An English Bible, thankes my good Lord Maior,
You of our bodie and our soule haue care,
This is the Iewell that we still loue best,
This was our solace when we were distrest,
This booke that hath so long conceald it selfe,
So long shut vp, so long hid; now Lords see,
VVe here vnclaspe, for euer it is free:
VVho lookes for ioy, let him this booke adore,
This is true foode for rich men and for poore,
VVho drinkes of this, is certaine nere to perish,
This will the soule with heauenly vertue cherish,
Lay hand vppon this Anchor euery soule,
Your names shalbe in an eternall scrowle;
VVho builds on this, dwel's in a happy state,
This is the fountaine cleere imaculate,
That happy yssue that shall vs succeed,
And in our populous Kingdome this booke read:
For them as for our owne selues we humbly pray,
They may liue long and blest; so lead the way.