HAile, CAIVS SILIVS.
TITIVS SABINVS, Haile.
Yo'are rarely met in court!
Therefore, well met.
'Tis true: Indeed, this place is not our sphaere.
No, SILIVS, wee are no good inginers;
We want the fine arts, & their thriuing vse,
Should make vs grac'd, or fauour'd of the times:
We haue no shift of faces, no cleft tongues,
No soft, and glutinous bodies, that can sticke,
Like snailes, on painted walls; or, on our brests,
Creepe vp, to fall, from that proud height, to which
We did by slauerie, not by seruice, clime.
We are no guilty men, and then no great;
We haue nor place in court, office in state,
That we can say, we owe vnto our crimes:
We burne with no black secrets, which can make
Vs deare to the pale authors; or liue fear'd
Of their still waking iealosies, to raise
Our selues a fortune, by subuerting theirs.
We stand not in the lines, that doe aduance
To that so courted point.
But yonder leane
A paire that doe.
SATRIVS SECVNDVS, and PINNARIVS NATTA,
The great SEIANVS clients: There be two,
Know more, then honest councells: whose close brests
Were they rip'd vp to light, it would be found
A poore, and idle sinne, to which their trunkes
Had not beene made fit organs. These can lye,
Flatter, and sweare, forsweare, depraue, informe,
Smile, and betray; make guilty men; then beg
The forfeit liues, to get the liuings; cut
Mens throates with whisprings; sell to gaping sutors
The emptie smoake, that flyes about the Palace;
Laugh, when their patron laughes; sweat, when he sweates;
Be hot, and cold with him; change euery moode,
Habit, and garbe, as often as he varies;
Obserue him, as his watch obserues his clocke;
And true, as turkise in the deare lords ring,
Looke well, or ill with him: ready to praise
His lordship, if he spit, or but pisse faire,
Haue an indifferent stoole, or breake winde well,
Nothing can scape their catch.
Alas! these things
Deserue no note, confer'd with other vile,
And filthier flatteries, that corrupt the times:
When, not alone our gentries chiefe are faine
To make their safety from such sordide acts,
But all our Consuls, and no little part
Of such as haue beene Praetors, yea, the most
Of Senators (that else not vse their voyces)
Start vp in publique Senate, and there striue
Who shall propound most abiect things, and base,
So much, as oft TIBERIVS hath beene heard,
Leauing the court, to crie Ô race of men,
Prepar'd for seruitude! which shew'd, that, he
Who least the publique liberty could like,
As loathly brook'd their flat seruilitie.
Well, all is worthy of vs, were it more,
Who with our ryots, pride, and ciuill hate,
Haue so prouok'd the iustice of the gods.
We, that (within these fourescore yeeres) were borne
Free, equall lords of the triumphed world,
And knew no masters, but affections,
To which betraying first our liberties,
We since became the slaues to one mans lusts;
And now to many: euery ministring spie
That will accuse, and sweare, is lord of you,
Of me, of all, our fortunes, and our liues.
Our lookes are call'd to question, and our wordes,
How innocent soeuer, are made crimes;
We shall not shortly dare to tell our dreames,
Or thinke, but 'twill be reason.
"Tyrannes artes
"Are to giue flatterers, grace; accusers, power;
"That those may seeme to kill whom they deuoure.
Now good CREMVTIVS CORDVS.
Haile, to your lordship.
Who's that salutes your cousin?
'Tis one CORDVS,
A gentleman of Rome: one, that has writ
Annal's of late, they say, and very well.
Annal's? of what times?
I thinke of POMPEI'S,
And CAIVS CAESARS; and so downe to these.
How stands h'affected to the present state?
Is he or Drusian? or Germanican?
Or ours or neutrall?
I know him not so far.
Those times are somewhat queasie to be toucht.
Haue you or seene or heard part of his worke?
Not I, he meanes they shall be publike shortly.
O. CORDVS do you cal him?
I.
But these our times
Are not the same, ARRVNTIVS.
Times? the men,
The men are not the same: 'tis we are base▪
Poore, and degenerate from th'exalted streine
Of our great fathers. Where is now the soule
Of god-like CATO? he, that durst be good,
When CAESAR durst be euill; and had power,
As not to liue his slaue, to dye his master.
Or where the constant BRVTVS, that (being proofe
Against all charme of benefits) did strike
So braue a blow into the monsters heart
That sought vnkindly to captiue his countrie?
O, they are fled the light. Those mightie spirits
Lye rak'd vp, with their ashes in their vrnes,
And not a sparke of their eternall fire
Glowes in a present bosome. All's but blaze,
Flashes, and smoke, wherewith we labour so,
There's nothing Romane in vs; nothing good,
Gallant, or great: 'Tis true, that CORDVS say's,
Braue CASSIVS was the last of all that race.
Stand by, lord DRVSVS.
Th'Emp'rours son, giue place.
I like the prince well.
A riotous youth,
There's little hope of him.
That fault his age
Will, as it growes, correct. Me thinkes, he beares
Himselfe, each day, more nobly then other:
And wins no lesse on mens affections,
Then doth his father lose. Beleeue me, I loue him;
And chiefly for opposing to SEIANVS.
And I, for gracing his yong kinsmen so,
The sonnes of Prince GERMANICVS: It shewes
A gallant cleerenesse in him, a streight minde,
That enuies not, in them, their fathers name.
His name was, while he liu'd, aboue all enuie;
And being dead, without it. O, that man!
If there were seedes of the old vertue left,
They liu'd in him.
He had the fruits, ARRVNTIVS,
More then the seedes: SABINVS, and my selfe
Had meanes to know him, within; and can report him.
We were his followers, (he would call vs friends.)
He was a man most like to vertue'; In all,
And euery action, neerer to the gods,
Then men, in nature; of a body' as faire
As was his mind; and no lesse reuerend
In face, then fame: He could so vse his state,
Temp'ring his greatnesse, with his grauitie,
As it auoyded all selfe-loue in him,
And spight in others. What his funeralls lack'd
In images, and pompe, they had supply'd
With honourable sorrow, souldiers sadnesse,
A kind of silent mourning, such, as men
(Who know no teares, but from their captiues) vse
To shew in so great losses.
I thought once,
Considering their formes, age, manner of deaths,
The neerenesse of the places, where they fell,
T'haue paralell'd him with great ALEXANDER:
For both were of best feature, of high race,
Yeer'd but to thirtie, and, in forraine lands,
By their owne people, alike made away.
I know not, for his death, how you might wrest it:
But, for his life, it did as much disdaine
Comparison, with that voluptuous, rash,
Giddy, and drunken Macedon's, as mine
Doth with my bond-mans. All the good, in him,
(His valour, and his fortune) he made his;
But he had other touches of late Romanes,
That more did speake him: POMPEI'S dignitie,
The innocence of CATO, CAESAR'S spirit,
Wise BRVTVS temp'rance, and euery vertue,
Which, parted vnto others, gaue them name,
Flow'd mixt in him. He was the soule of goodnesse:
And all our praises of him are like streames
Drawne from a spring, that still rise full, and leaue
The part remayning greatest.
I am sure
He was too great for vs, and that they knew
Who did remoue him hence.
When men grow fast
Honor'd, and lou'd, there is a tricke in state
(Which iealous princes neuer faile to vse)
How to decline that growth, with faire pretext,
And honourable colours of employment,
Either by embassie, the war, or such,
To shift them forth into another aire,
Where they may purge, and lessen; so was he:
And had his secon'ds there, sent by TIBERIVS,
And his more subtile damme, to discontent him;
To breede, and cherish mutinies; detract
His greatest actions; giue audacious check
To his commands; and worke to put him out
In open act of treason. All which snares
When his wise cares preuented, a fine poyson
Was thought on, to mature their practices.
Here comes SEIANVS.
Now obserue the stoupes,
The bendings, and the falls.
Most creeping base!
I Note 'hem well: No more. Say you.
My lord,
There is a gentleman of Rome would buy—
How cal you him you talk'd with?
'Please your lordship,
It is EVDEMVS, the physitian
To LIVIA, DRVSV'S wife.
On with your sute.
Would buy, you said—
A Tribune ▪ place, my lord.
What will he giue?
Fiftie sestertia.
LIVIA'S physitian, say you, is that fellow?
It is, my lord; your lordships answere?
To what?
The place, my lord. 'Tis for a gentleman,
Your lordship will well like off, when you see him;
And one, you may make yours, by the grant.
Well, let him bring his money, and his name.
Thanke your lordship. He shall, my lord.
Come hither.
Know you this same EVDEMVS? Is he learn'd?
Reputed so, my lord: and of deepe practice.
Bring him in, to me, in the gallerie;
And take you cause, to leaue vs there, togither:
I would confer with him, about a griefe.—On.
So, yet! another? yet? Ô desperate state
Of grou'ling honour! Seest thou this, Ô sunne,
And doe wee see thee after? Me thinkes, day
Should lose his light, when men doe lose their shames,
And, for the emptie circumstance of life,
Betray their cause of liuing.
Nothing so.
SEIANVS can repaire, if IOVE should ruine.
He is the now court-god; And well applyed
With sacrifice of knees, of crookes, and cringe,
He will doe more then all the house of heau'n
Can, for a thousand hecatombes. 'Tis he
Makes vs our day, or night; Hell, and Elysium
Are in his looke: We talke of RHADAMANTH,
Furies, and fire-brands; But 'tis his frowne
That is all these, where, on the aduerse part,
His smile is more, then ere (yet) Poets fain'd
Of blisse, and shades, nectar—
A seruing boy?
I knew him, at CAIVS trencher, when for hyre,
He prostituted his abused body
To that great gourmond, fat APICIVS;
And was the noted pathick of the time.
And, now, the second face of the whole world.
The partner of the empire, hath his image
Rear'd equall with TIBERIVS, borne in ensignes,
Command's, disposes euery dignitie,
Centurions, Tribunes, Heads of prouinces,
Praetors, and Consuls, all that heretofore
Romes generall suffrage gaue, is now his sale.
The gaine, or rather spoile, of all the earth,
One, and his house, receiues.
He hath of late
Made him a strength too, strangely, by reducing
All the Praetorian bands into one campe,
Which he command's: pretending, that the souldier
By liuing loose, and scattered, fell to ryot;
And that if any sodaine enterprise
Should be attempted, their vnited strength
Would be far more, then seuer'd; and their life
More strict, if from the citie more remou'd.
Where, now, he builds, what kind of fort's he please,
Is hard to court the souldier, by his name,
Wooes, feasts the chiefest men of action,
Whose wants, not loues, compell them to be his.
And, though he ne're were liberall by kind,
Yet, to his owne darke ends, hee's most profuse,
Lauish, and letting flye, he cares not what
To his ambition.
Yet, hath he ambition?
Is there that step in state can make him higher?
Or more? or any thing he is, but lesse?
Nothing, but Emp'rour.
The name TIBERIVS
I hope, will keepe; how ere he hath fore-gone
The dignitie, and power.
Sure, while he liues.
And dead, it comes to DRVSVS. Should he fayle,
To the braue issue of GERMANICVS;
And they are three: Too many (ha?) for him
To haue a plot vpon?
I doe not know
The heart of his designes; but, sure, their face
Lookes farther then the present.
By the gods,
If I could gesse he had but such a thought,
My sword should cleaue him downe from head to heart,
But I would finde it out: and with my hand
I'ld hurle his panting braine about the ayre,
In mites, as small as atomi, to'vndoe
The knotted bed —
You are obseru'd, ARRVNTIVS.
Death! I dare tell him so; and all his spies:
You, sir, I would, doe you looke? and you.
Forbeare.
HEere, he will instant be; Let's walke a turne.
Yo'are in a muse, EVDEMVS?
Not I, sir.
I wonder he should marke me out so! well,
IOVE, and APOLLO forme it for the best.
Your fortune's made vnto you now, EVDEMVS,
If you can but lay hold vpon the meanes;
Doe but obserue his humour, and — beleeue it —
He's the noblest Romane, where he takes —
Here comes his lordship.
Now, good SATRIVS.
This is the gentleman, my lord.
Is this?
Giue me your hand, we must be more acquainted.
Report, sir, hath spoke out your art, and learning:
And I am glad I haue so needfull cause,
(How euer in it selfe painefull, and hard)
To make me knowne to so great vertue. Looke,
Who's that? SATRIVS — I haue a griefe, sir,
That will desire your helpe. Your name's EVDEMVS?
Yes.
Sir?
It is, my lord.
I heare, you are Physitian to LIVIA, the princesse?
I minister vnto her, my good lord.
You minister to a royall lady, then.
She is, my lord, and fayre.
That's vnderstood
Of all their sexe, who are, or would be so;
And those, that would be, physicke soone can make 'hem▪
For those that are, their beauties feare no collours.
Your lordship is conceited.
Sir, you know it.
And can (if need be) read a learned lecture,
On this, and other secrets. Pray you tell me,
What more of ladies, besides LIVIA,
Haue you your patients?
Many, my good lord.
The great AVGVSTA, VRGVLANIA.
MVTILIA PRISCA, and PLANCINA, diuers —
And, all these tell you the particulars
Of euery seuerall griefe? how first it grew,
And then encreas'd, what action caused that;
What passion that: and answere to each point
That you will put 'hem.
Else, my lord, we know not
How to prescribe the remedies.
Goe to,
Yo'are a subtill nation, you Physitians!
And growne the onely cabinets, in court,
To ladies priuacies. Faith which of these
Is the most pleasant lady, in her physicke?
Come, you are modest now.
'Tis fit, my lord.
Why, sir, I doe not aske you of their vrines,
Whose smel's most violet? or whose seige is best?
Or who makes hardest faces on her stoole?
Which lady sleepes with her owne face, a nights?
Which puts her teeth off, with her clothes, in court?
Or, which her hayre? which her complexion?
And, in which boxe she puts it? These were questions
That might, perhaps, haue put your grauity
To some defence of blush. But, I enquir'd,
Which was the wittiest? meriest? wantonnest?
Harmelesse intergatories, but conceipts.
Me thinks, AVGVSTA should be most peruerse,
And froward in her fit?
She's so, my lord.
I knew it. And MVTILIA the most iocund?
'Tis very true, my lord.
And why would you
Conceale this from me, now? Come, what's LIVIA?
I know, she's quick, and quaintly spirited,
And will haue strange thoughts, when she's at leasure;
She tells 'hem all to you?
My noblest lord,
He breaths not in the empire, or on earth,
Whom I would be ambitious to serue
(In any act, that may preserue mine honour)
Before your lordship.
Sir, you can loose no honor,
By trusting ought to me. The coursest act
Done to my seruice, I can so requite,
As all the world shall stile it honorable:
"Your idle, vertuous definitions
"Keepe honor poore, and are as scorn'd, as vaine:
"Those deeds breathe honor, that do sucke in gaine.
But, good my lord, if I should thus betray
The counsels of my patient, and a ladies
Of her high place, and worth; what might your lordship,
(Who presently are to trust me with your owne)
Iudge of my faith?
Only the best, I sweare.
Say now, that I should vtter you my griefe;
And with it, the true cause; that it were loue;
And loue to LIVIA: you should tell her this?
Should she suspect your faith? I would you could
Tell me as much, from her; see, if my braine
Could be turn'd iealous.
Happily, my lord,
I could, in time, tell you as much, and more;
So I might safely promise but the first,
To her, from you.
As safely, my EVDEMVS,
(I now dare call thee so) as I haue put
The secret into thee.
My lord —
Protest not.
Thy lookes are vowes to me, vse onely speed,
And but affect her with SEIANVS loue,
Thou art a man, made, to make Consuls. Goe.
My lord, Ile promise you a priuate meeting
This day, together.
Canst thou?
Yes.
The place?
My gardens, whither I shall fetch your lordship.
Let me adore my AESCVLAPIVS.
Why, this indeed is physick! and out-speakes
The knowledge of cheape drugs, or any vse
Can be made out of it! more comforting
Then all your opiates, iulebes, apozemes,
Magistrall syrrupes, or—Be gone, my friend,
Not barely stiled, but created so;
Expect things, greater then thy largest hopes,
To ouertake thee: Fortune, shall be taught
To know how ill she hath deseru'd thus long,
To come behinde thy wishes. Goe, and speed.
"Ambition makes more trusty slaues, then need,
These fellowes, by the fauour of their arte,
Haue, still, the meanes to tempt, oft-times, the power.
If LIVIA will be now corrupted, then
Thou hast the way, SEIANVS, to worke out
His secrets, who (thou knowest) endures thee not,
Her husband DRVSVS: and to worke against them.
Prosper it, PALLAS, thou, that betterst wit;
For VENVS hath the smallest share in it.
WEe not endure these flatteries, let him stand;
Our empire, ensignes, axes, roddes, and state
Take not away our humane nature from vs:
Looke vp, on vs, and fall before the gods.
How like a god, speakes CAESAR!
There, obserue!
He can indure that second, that's no flattery.
O, what is it, proud slime will not beleeue
Of his owne worth, to heare it equall prais'd
Thus with the gods?
He did not heare it, sir.
He did not? Tut, he must not, we thinke meanely.
'Tis your most courtly, knowne confederacy,
To haue your priuate parasite redeeme
What he, in publique subtilty, will lose
To making him a name.
Right mighty lord —
We must make vp our eares, 'gainst these assaults
Of charming tongues; we pray you vse, no more
These contumelies to vs: stile not vs
Or lord, or mighty, who professe our selfe
The seruant of the Senate, and are proud
T'enioy them our good, iust, and fauouring lords.
Rarely dissembled.
Prince-like, to the life.
"When power, that may command, so much descends,
"Their bondage, whom it stoupes to, it intends.
Whence are these letters?
From the Senate.
So.
Whence these?
From thence too.
Are they sitting, now?
They stay thy answere, CAESAR.
If this man
Had but a minde allied vnto his words,
How blest a fate were it to vs, and Rome?
We could not thinke that state, for which to change,
Although the ayme were our old liberty:
The ghosts of those that fell for that, would grieue
Their bodies liu'd not, now, againe to serue.
"Men are deceiu'd, who thinke there can be thrall
"Beneath a vertuous prince. Wish'd liberty
"Ne're louelier lookes, then vnder such a crowne.
But, when his grace is meerely but lip-good,
And, that no longer, then he aires himselfe
Abroad in publique, there, to seeme to shun
The strokes, and stripes of flatterers, which within
Are lechery vnto him, and so feed
His brutish sense with their afflicting sound,
As (dead to vertue) he permits himselfe
Be carried like a pitcher, by the eares,
To euery act of vice: this is a case
Deserues our feare, and doth presage the nigh,
And close approach of bloud and tyranny.
"Flattery is midwife vnto princes rage:
"And nothing sooner, doth helpe foorth a tyranne,
"Then that, and whisperers grace, who haue the time,
"The place, the power, to make all men offenders.
He should be told this; and be bid dissemble
With fooles, and blinde men: We that know the euill,
Should hunt the Palace-rattes, or giue them bane;
Fright hence these worse then rauens, that deuoure
The quicke, where they but prey vpon the dead:
He shall be told it.
Stay, ARRVNTIVS,
We must abide our oportunity:
And practise what is fit, as what is needfull.
"It is not safe t'enforce a soueraigne's eare:
"Princes heare well, if they at all will heare.
Ha? Say you so? well. In the meane time, IOVE,
(Say not, but I doe call vpon thee now.)
Of all wilde beasts, preserue me from a tyranne;
And of all tame, a flatterer.
'Tis well pray'd.
Returne the lords this voyce, we are their creature:
And it is fit, a good, and honest prince,
Whom they, out of their bounty, haue instructed
With so dilate, and absolute a power,
Should owe the office of it, to their seruice;
And good of all, and euery citizen.
Nor shall it e're repent vs, to haue wish'd
The Senate iust, and fau'ring lords vnto vs,
"Since their free loues doe yeeld no lesse defence
"T' a princes state, then his owne innocence.
Say then, there can be nothing in their thought
Shall want to please vs, that hath pleased them;
Our suffrage rather shall preuent, then stay
Behind their wills: 'tis empire, to obey
Where such, so great, so graue, so good determine.
Yet, for the sute of Spaine, t'erect a temple
In honour of our mother, and our selfe,
We must (with pardon of the Senate) not
Assent thereto. Their lordships may obiect
Our not denying the same late request
Vnto the Asian cities: We desire
That our defence, for suffering that, be knowne
In these briefe reasons, with our after purpose.
Since deified AVGVSTVS hindred not
A temple to be built, at Pergamum,
In honour of himselfe, and sacred Rome,
We, that haue all his deedes, and wordes obseru'd
Euer, in place of lawes, the rather follow'd
That pleasing precedent, because, with ours,
The Senates reuerence also, there, was ioyn'd.
But, as, t'haue once receiu'd it, may deserue
The gaine of pardon, so, to be ador'd
With the continew'd stile, and note of gods,
Through all the prouinces, were wild ambition,
And no lesse pride: Yea, eu'n AVGVSTVS name
Would early vanish, should it be prophan'd
With such promiscuous flatteries. For our part,
We here protest it, and are couetous
Posteritie should know it, we are mortall;
And can but deedes of men: 'twere glory' inough,
Could we be truely a prince. And, they shall adde
Abounding grace, vnto our memorie,
That shall report vs worthy our fore-fathers,
Carefull of your affaires, constant in dangers,
And not afraid of any priuate frowne
For publike good. These things shall be to vs
Temples, and statues, reared in your mindes,
The fairest, and most during imag'rie:
For those of stone, or brasle, if they become
Odious in iudgement of posteritie,
Are more contemn'd, as dying sepulchres,
Then tane for liuing monuments. We then
Make here our suite, alike to gods and men,
The one, vntill the period of our race,
T'inspire vs with a free, and quiet mind,
Discerning both diuine, and humane lawes;
The other, to vouchsafe vs after death,
An honourable mention, and faire praise,
T'accompanie our actions, and our name:
The rest of greatnesse princes may command,
And (therefore) may neglect, only, a long,
A lasting, high, and happy memorie
They should, without being satisfied, pursue.
Contempt of fame begets contempt of vertue.
Rare!
Most diuine!
The Oracles are ceas'd,
That only CAESAR, with their tongue, might speake.
Let me be gone, most felt, and open this!
Stay.
What? to heare more cunning, and fine wordes,
With their sound flatter'd, ere their sense be meant?
Their choise of Antium, thereto place the guift
Vow'd to the goddesse, for our mothers health,
We will the Senate know, we fairely like;
As also, of their grant to LEPIDVS,
For his repayring the Aemilian place,
And restauration of those monuments:
Their grace too in consining of SILANVS,
To th'other Is'le Cithera, at the sute
Of his religious sister, much commends
Their policie, so temp'red with their mercy.
But, for the honours, which they haue decreed
To our SEIANUS▪ to aduance his statue
In POMPEI'S theatre (whose ruining fire
His vigilance, and labour kept restrain'd
In that one losse) they haue, therein, out-gone
Their owne great wisedomes, by their skilfull choise,
And placing of their bounties, on a man,
Whose merit more adornes the dignitie,
Then that can him: and giues a benefit,
In taking, greater, then it can receiue.
Blush not, SEIANVS, thou great aide of Rome,
Associate of our labours our chiefe helper,
Let vs not force thy simple modestie
With offring at thy praise, for more we cannot,
Since there's no voice can take it. No man, here,
Receiue our speeches, as hyperbole's;
For we are far from flatt'ring our friend,
(Let enuy know) as from the need to flatter.
Nor let them aske the causes of our praise;
Princes haue still their grounds rear'd with themselues,
Aboue the poore low flats of common men,
And, who will search the reasons of their acts,
Must stand on equall bases. Lead, away.
Our loues vnto the Senate.
Caesar.
Peace.
Great POMPEI'S theatre was neuer ruin'd
Till now, that proud SEIANVS hath a statue
Rear'd on his ashes.
Place the shame of souldiers,
Aboue the best of generalls? cracke the world!
And bruise the name of Romanes into dust,
Ere we behold it!
Checke your passion;
Lord DRVSVS tarries.
Is my father mad?
Wearie of life, and rule, lords? thus to heaue
An idoll vp with praise! make him his mate!
His riuall in the empire!
O, good prince!
Allow him statues? titles? honours? such,
As he himselfe refuseth?
Braue, braue DRVSVS!
The first ascents to soueraigntie are hard
But, entred once, there neuer wants or meanes,
Or ministers, to helpe th'aspirer on.
True, gallant DRVSVS.
We must shortly pray
To Modestie, that he will rest contented—
I, where he is, and not write emp'rour.
THere is your bill, and yours; Bring you your man:
I haue mou'd for you, too, LATIARIS.
What?
Is your vast greatnesse growne so blindly bold,
That you will ouer vs?
Why, then giue way.
Giue way, Colossus? Doe you lift? Aduance you?
Take that.
Good! braue! excellent braue prince!
Nay, come, approch. What? stand you off? at gaze?
It lookes too full of death, for thy cold spirits.
Auoid mine eye, dull camell, or my sword
Shall make thy brau'rie fitter for a graue,
Then for a triumph. I'le aduance a statue,
O'your owne bulke; but 't shall be on the crosse:
Where I will naile your pride, at breadth, and length,
And cracke those sinnewes, which are yet but stretch'd
With your swolne fortunes rage.
A noble prince!
A CASTOR, a CASTOR, a CASTOR, a CASTOR!
HE that, with such wrong mou'd, can beare it through
With patience, and an euen mind, knowes how
To turne it backe. Wrath, couer'd, carryes fate:
Reuenge is lost, if I professe my hate.
What was my practice late, I'le now pursue
As my fell iustice. This hath stil'd it new.
PHysitian, thou art worthy of a prouince,
For the great fauours done vnto our loues;
And, but that greatest LIVIA beares a part
In the requitall of thy seruices,
I should alone, despaire of ought, like meanes,
To giue them worthy satisfaction.
EVDEMVS, (I will see it) shall receiue
A fit, and full reward, for his large merit.
But for this potion, we intend to DRVSVS,
(No more our husband, now) whom shall we choose
As the most apt, and abled instrument,
To minister it to him?
I say, LYGDVS.
LYGDVS? what's he?
An Eunuch DRVSVS loues.
I, and his cup-bearer.
Name not a second.
If DRVSVS loue him, and he haue that place,
We cannot thinke a sitter.
True, my lord,
For free accesse, and trust, are two maine aides.
Skilfull physitian!
But he must be wrought
To th'vndertaking, with some labour'd arte.
Is he ambitious?
No.
Or couetous?
Neither.
Yet, gold is a good generall charme.
What is he then?
Faith, only wanton, light.
How! Is he young? and faire?
A delicate youth.
Send him to me, I'le worke him. Royall ladie,
Though I haue lou'd you long, and with that height
Of zeale, and dutie, (like the fire, which more
It mounts, it trembles) thinking nought could adde
Vnto the feruour, which your eye had kindled;
Yet, now I see your wisedome, iudgement, strength,
Quicknesse, and will, to apprehend the meanes
To your owne good, and greatnesse, I protest
My selfe through rarefied, and turn'd all flame
In your affection: Such a spirit as yours,
Was not created for the idle second
To a poore flash, as DRVSVS; but to shine
Bright, as the Moone, among the lesser lights,
And share the sou'raigntie of all the world.
Then LIVIA triumphs in her proper spheare,
When shee, and her SEIANVS shall diuide
The name of CAESAR; and AVGVSTA'S starre
Be dimm'd with glorie of a brighter beame:
When AGRIPPINA'S fires are quite extinct,
And the scarce-seene TIBERIVS borrowes all
His little light from vs, whose folded armes
Shall make one perfect or be. Who's that? EVDEMVS,
Looke, 'tis not DRVSVS? Ladie, doe not feare.
Not I, my Lord. My feare, and loue of him
Left me at once.
Illustrous ladie! stay—
I'le tell his lordship.
Who is't, EVDEMVS?
One of your lordships seruants, brings you word
The Emp'rour hath sent for you.
O! where is he?
With your faire leaue, deare Princesse. I'le but aske
A question, and returne.
Fortunate Princesse!
How are you blest in the fruition
Of this vnequald man, this soule of Rome,
The empires life, and voice of CAESARS world!
So blessed, my EVDEMVS, as to know
The blisse I haue, with what I ought to owe
The meanes that wrought it. How do'I looke to day?
Excellent cleere, beleeue it. This same fucus
Was well laid on.
Me thinkes, 'tis here not white.
Lend me your scarlet, lady. 'Tis the sunne
Hath giu'n some little taint vnto the ceruse,
You should haue vs'd of the white oyle I gaue you.
SEIANVS, for your loue! his very name
Commandeth aboue CVPID, or his shafts—
Nay, now yo'haue made it worse.
I'le helpe it straight.)
And, but pronounc'd, is a sufficient charme
Against all rumour; and of absolute power
To satisfie for any ladies honour.
What doe you now, EVDEMVS?
Make a light fucus,
To touch you ore withall.) Honor'd SEIANVS!
What act (though ne're so strange, and insolent)
But that addition will at least beare out,
If 't doe not expiate?
Here, good physitian.
I like this studie to preserue the loue
Of such a man, that comes not euery houre
To greet the world. ('Tis now well, ladie, you should
Vse of the dentisrice, I prescrib'd you, too,
To cleere your teeth, and the prepar'd pomatum,
To smoothe the skin:) A lady cannot be
Too curious of her forme, that still would hold
The heart of such a person, made her captiue,
As you haue his: who, to endeare him more
In your cleere eye, hath put away his wife,
The trouble of his bed, and your delights,
Faire Apicata, and made spacious roome
To your new pleasures.
Haue not we return'd
That, with our hate of DRVSVS, and discouerie
Of all his councels?
Yes, and wisely, lady,
The ages that succeed, and stand far off
To gaze at your high prudence, shall admire
And reckon it an act, without your sexe:
It hath that rare apparance. Some will thinke
Your fortune could not yeeld a deeper sound,
Then mixt with DRVSVS; But, when they shall heare
That, and the thunder of SEIANVS meet,
SEIANVS, whose high name doth strike the starres,
And rings about the concaue, great SEIANVS,
Whose glories, stile, and titles are himselfe,
The often iterating of SEIANVS:
They then will lose their thoughts, and be asham'd
To take acquaintance of them.
I must make
A rude departure, lady. CAESAR sends
With all his haste both of command, and prayer.
Be resolute in our plot; you haue my soule,
As certayne yours, as it is my bodies.
And, wise physitian, so prepare the poyson
As you may lay the subtile operation
Vpon some naturall disease of his.
Your eunuch send to me. I kisse your hands,
Glorie of ladies, and commend my loue
To your best faith, and memorie.
My lord,
I shall but change your wordes. Farewell. Yet, this
Remember for your heed, he loues you not;
You know, what I haue told you: His designes
Are full of grudge, and danger: we must vse
More then a common speed.
Excellent lady,
How you doe fire my bloud!
Well, you must goe?
The thoughts be best, are least set forth to shew.
When will you take some physick, lady?
When
I shall, EVDEMVS: But let DRVSVS drug
Be first prepar'd.
Were LYGDVS made, that's done;
I haue it readie. And to morrow-morning,
I'le send you a perfume, first to resolue,
And procure sweat, and then prepare a bath
To clense, and cleere the cutis; against when,
I'le haue an excellent new fucus made,
Resistiue 'gainst the sunne, the raine, or wind,
Which you shall lay on with a breath, or oyle,
As you best like, and last some fourteene houres.
This change came timely, lady, for your health;
And the restoring your complexion,
Which DRVSVS choller had almost burnt vp:
Wherein your fortune hath prescrib'd you better
Then arte could doe.
Thankes, good physitian,
I'le vse my fortune (you shall see) with reuerence.
Is my coach ready?
It attends your highnesse.
IF this be not reuenge, when I haue done
And made it perfect, let Aegyptian slaues,
Parthians, and bare-foot Hebrewes brand my face,
And print my body full of iniuries.
Thou lost thy selfe, childe DRVSVS, when thou thought'st
Thou could'st out-skip my vengeance: or out-stand
The power I had to crush thee into ayre.
Thy follyes now shall taste what kinde of man
They haue prouok'd, and this thy fathers house
Cracke in the flame of my incensed rage,
Whose fury shall admit no shame, or meane.
Adultery? it is the lightest ill,
I will commit. A race of wicked acts
Shall flow out of my anger, and o're-spread
The worlds wide face, which no posterity
Shall e're approoue, nor yet keepe silent: Things,
That for their cunning, close, and cruell marke,
Thy father would wish his; and shall (perhaps)
Carry the empty name, but we the prize.
On then, my soule, and start not in thy course;
Though heau'n drop sulphure, and hell belch out fire,
Laugh at the idle terrors: Tell proud IOVE,
Betweene his power, and thine, there is no oddes.
'Twas onely feare, first, in the world made gods.
IS yet SEIANVS come?
He's here, dread CAESAR.
Let all depart that chamber, and the next:
Sit downe, my comfort. When the master-prince
Of all the world, SEIANVS, saith, he feares;
Is it not fatall?
Yes, to those are fear'd.
And not to him?
Not, if he wisely turne
That part of fate he holdeth, first on them.
That nature, bloud, and lawes of kinde forbid.
Doe policie, and state forbid it?
No.
The rest of poore respects, then, let goe by:
State is inough to make th'act iust, them guilty.
Long hate pursues such acts.
Whom hatred frights,
Let him not dreame on sou'raignty.
Are rites
Of faith, loue, piety, to be trod downe?
Forgotten? and made vaine?
All for a crowne.
The prince, who shames a tyrannes name to beare,
Shall neuer dare doe any thing, but feare;
All the command of scepters quite doth perish
If it beginne religious thoughts to cherish:
Whole Empires fall, swaid by those nice respects.
It is the licence of darke deeds protects
Eu'n states most hated: when no lawes resist
The sword, but that it acteth what it list.
Yet so, we may doe all things cruelly,
Not safely:
Yes, and doe them thoroughly.
Knowes yet, SEIANVS, whom we point at?
I,
Or else my thought, my sense, or both doe erre:
'Tis AGRIPPINA?
She; and her proud race.
Proud? dangerous,
For in them apace
The fathers spirit shoots vp. GERMANICVS
Liues in their lookes, their gate, their forme, t'vpbraide vs
With his close death, if not reuenge the same.
The act's not knowne.
Not prou'd. But whispring fame
Knowledge, and proofe doth to the iealous giue,
Who, then to faile, would their owne thought beleeue.
It is not safe, the children draw long breath,
That are prouoked by a parents death.
It is a dangerous, to make them hence,
If nothing but their birth be their offence.
Stay, till they strike at CAESAR: then their crime
Will be enough, but late, and out of time
For him to punish.
Doe they purpose it?
You know, sir, thunder speakes not till it hit.
Be not secure: none swiftlier are opprest,
Then they, whom confidence betrayes to rest.
Let not your daring make your danger such:
All power's to be fear'd, where 'tis too much.
The youth's are (of themselues) hote, violent,
Full of great thought; and that male-spirited dame,
Their mother, slackes no meanes to put them on,
By large allowance, popular presentings,
Increase of traine, and state, suing for titles,
Hath them commended with like praiers, like vowes,
To the same Gods, with CAESAR: daies and nights
Shee spends in banquets, and ambitious feasts
For the Nobilitie; where CAIVS SILIVS,
TITIVS SABINVS, olde ARRVNTIVS,
ASINIVS GALLVS, FVRNIVS, REGVLVS,
And others, of that discontented list,
Are the prime guests. There, and to these, she tels
Whose niece she was, whose daughter, and whose wife,
And then must they compare her with AVGVSTA,
I, and preferre her too, commend her forme,
Extoll her fruitfulnesse; at which a showre
Fals for the memorie of GERMANICVS,
Which they blow ouer straight, with windie praise,
And puffing hopes of her aspiring sonnes:
Who, with these hourely ticklings, grow so pleas'd,
And wantonly conceited of themselues,
As now, they sticke not to beleeue they're such,
As these doe giue 'hem out: and would be thought
(More then competitors) immediate heires.
Whilest to their thirst of rule they winne the rout
(That's still the friend of noueltie) with hope
Of future freedome, which on euerie change,
That greedily, though emptily, expects.
CAESAR, 'tis age in all things breeds neglects,
And princes that will keepe olde dignitie,
Must not admit too youthfull heires stand by;
Not their owne issue: but so darkely set
As shadowes are in picture, to giue height,
And lustre to themselues.
We will command
Their ranke thoughts downe, and with a stricter hand
Then we haue yet put forth, their traines must bate,
Their titles, feasts and factions.
Or your state.
But how sir, will you worke?
Confine 'hem,
No.
They are too great, and that too faint a blow,
To giue them now: it would haue seru'd at first,
When, with the weakest touch, their knot had burst.
But, now, your care must be, not to detect
The smallest cord, or line of your suspect,
For such, who know the weight of princes feare,
Will, when they find themselues discouer'd, reare
Their forces, like seene snakes, that else would lye
Rould in their circles, close: Nought is more high,
Daring, or desperate, then offenders found;
Where guilt is, rage, and courage doth abound.
The course must be, to let 'hem still swell vp,
Riot, and surfet on blind fortunes cup;
Giue 'hem more place, more dignities, more stile,
Call 'hem to court, to senate: in the while,
Take from their strength some one or twaine, or more
Of the maine Fautors; (It will fright the store)
And, by some by-occasion. Thus, with slight
You shall disarme first, and they (in night
Of their ambition) not perceiue the traine,
Till, in the ingine, they are caught, and slaine.
We would not kill, if we knew how to saue;
Yet, then a throne, 'tis cheaper giue a graue.
Is there no way to bind them by deserts?
Sir, wolues do change their haire, but not their harts.
While thus your thought vnto a meane is tied,
You neither dare inough, nor doe prouide.
All modestie is fond; and chiefly where
The subiect is no lesse compeld to beare,
Then praise his sou'raignes acts.
We can no longer
Keepe on our masque to thee, our deare SEIANVS;
Thy thoughts are ours, in all, and we but proou'd
Their voice, in our designes, which by assenting
Hath more confirm'd vs, then if heartning IOVE
Had, from his hundred statues, bid vs strike,
And at the stroke clickt all his marble thumb's.
But, who shall first be strooke?
First, CAIVS SILIVS;
He is the most of marke, and most of danger:
In power, and reputation equall strong,
Hauing commanded an imperiall armie
Seuen yeeres together, vanquish'd SACROVIR
In Germanie, and thence obtain'd to weare
The ornaments triumphall. His steep fall,
By how much it doth giue the weightier crack,
Will send more wounding terrour to the rest,
Command them stand aloofe, and giue more way
To our surprising of the principall.
But what, SABINVS?
Let him grow awhile,
His fate is not yet ripe: we must not plucke
At all together, lest wee catch our selues.
And ther's ARRVNTIVS too, he only talkes.
But SOSIA, SILIVS wife, would be wound in
Now, for she hath a furie in her brest
More, then hell euer knew; and would be sent
Thither in time. Then, is there one CREMVTIVS
CORDVS, a writing fellow, they haue got
To gather notes of the precedent times,
And make them into Annal's; a most tart
And bitter spirit (I heare) who, vnder colour
Of praysing those, doth taxe the present state,
Censures the men, the actions, leaues no tricke,
No practice vn-examin'd, paralels
The times, the gouernments, a profest champion,
For the old libertie—
A perishing wretch.
As if there were that chaos bred in things,
The lawes, and libertie would not rather choose
To be quite broken, and tane hence by vs,
Then haue the staine to be preseru'd by such.
Haue we the meanes, to make these guiltie, first?
Trust that to me: let CAESAR, by his power,
But cause a formall meeting of the Senate,
I will haue matter, and accusers readie.
But how? let vs consult.
Wee shall mispend
The time of action. Counsels are vnfit
In businesse, where all rest is more pernicious
Then rashnesse can be. Acts of this close kind
Thriue more by execution, then aduice.
There is no lingring in that worke begun,
Which cannot praised be, vntill through done.
Our edict shall, forthwith, command a court.
While I can liue, I will preuent earths furie:
.
MY Lord SEIANVS—
IVLIVS POSTHVMVS,
Come with my wish! what newes from AGRIPPINA'S?
Faith none. They all locke vp themselues a'late;
Or talke in character: I haue not seene
A companie chang'd. Except they had
Intelligence by augurie of our practice.
When were you there?
Last night.
And what ghests found you?
SABINVS, SILIVS, (the olde list,) ARRVNTIVS,
FVRNIVS, and GALLVS.
Would not these talke?
Little.
And yet we offered choice of argument.
SATRIVS was with me.
Well: 'tis guilt inough
Their often meeting. You forgot t'extoll
The hospitable ladie?
No, that tricke
Was well put home, and had succeded too,
But that SABINVS cought a caution out;
For she began to swell:
And may she burst.
IVLIVS, I would haue you goe instantly,
Vnto the palace of the great AVGVSTA,
And, (by your kindest friend,) get swift accesse;
Acquaint her, with these meetings: Tell the words
You brought me, (th'other day) of SILIVS,
Adde somewhat to 'hem. Make her vnderstand
The danger of SABINVS, and the times,
Out of his closenesse. Giue ARRVNTIVS words
Of malice against CAESAR; so, to GALLVS:
But (aboue all) to AGRIPPINA. Say,
(As you may truely) that her infinite pride,
Propt with the hopes of her too fruitfull wombe,
With popular studies gapes for soueraigntie;
And threatens CAESAR. Pray AVGVSTA then,
That for her owne, great CAESARS, and the publique
safetie, she be pleas'd to vrge these dangers.
CAESAR is too secure (he must be told,
And best hee'll take it from a mothers tongue.)
Alas! what is 't for vs to sound, t' explore,
To watch, oppose, plot, practise, or preuent,
If he, for whom it is so strongly labour'd,
Shall, out of greatnesse, and free spirit, be
Supinely negligent? Our citi's now
Deuided as in time o'th'ciuill warre,
And men forbeare not to declare themselues
Of AGRIPPINA'S partie. Euery day,
The faction multiplies; and will doe more
If not resisted: you can best inlarge it
As you find audience. Noble POSTHVMVS,
Commend me to your PRISCA: and pray her,
Shee will solicite this great businesse
To earnest, and most present execution,
With all her vtmost credit with AVGVSTA.
I shall not faile in my instructions.
This second (from his mother) will well vrge
Our late designe, and spur on CAESARS rage:
Which else might grow remisse. The way, to put
A prince in bloud, is to present the shapes
Of dangers, greater then they are (like late,
Or early shadowes) and, sometimes, to faine
Where there are none, onely, to make him feare;
His feare will make him cruell: And once entred,
He doth not easily learne to stop, or spare
Where he may doubt. This haue I made my rule,
To thrust TIBERIVS into tyrannie,
And make him toile, to turne aside those blockes,
Which I alone, could not remooue with safetie.
DRVSVS once gone, GERMANICVS three sonnes
Would clog my way; whose guardes haue too much faith
To be corrupted: and their mother knowne
Of too-too vnreproou'd a chastitie,
To be attempted, as light LIVIA was.
Worke then, my art, on CAESAR'S feares, as they
On those they feare, till all my betts be clear'd:
And he in ruines of his house, and hate
Of all his subiects, bury his owne state:
When, with my peace, and safty, I will rise,
By making him the publike sacrifice.
THey'are growne exceeding circumspect, and wary.
They haue vs in the wind: And yet, ARRVNTIVS
Cannot contayne himselfe.
Tut, hee's not yet
Look'd after, there are others more desir'd,
That are more silent.
Here he comes. Away.
HOw is it, that these beagles haunt the house
Of AGRIPPINA?
O, they hunt, they hunt.
There is some game here lodg'd, which they must rouse,
To make the great-ones sport.
Did you obserue
How they inueigh'd 'gainst CAESAR?
I, baytes, baytes,
For vs to bite at: would I haue my flesh
Torne by the publique hooke, these qualified hang-men
Should be my company.
Here comes another.
I, there's a man, AFER the oratour!
One, that hath phrases, figures, and fine flowres,
To strew his rethorique with, and doth make haste
To get him note, or name, by any offer
Where bloud, or gaine be obiects; steepes his wordes,
When he would kill, in artificiall teares:
The Crocodile of Tyber! him I loue,
That man is mine. He hath my heart, and voice,
When I would curse, he, he.
Contemne the slaues,
Their present liues will be their future graues.
MAy't please your highnesse not forget your selfe,
I dare not, with my manners, to attempt
Your trouble farder.
Farewell, noble SILIVS.
Most royall princesse.
SOSIA stayes with vs?
Shee is your seruant, and doth owe your grace
An honest, but vnprofitable loue.
How can that be, when there's no gaine, but vertuous?
You take the morall, not the politique sense.
I meant, as shee is bold, and free of speech,
Earnest to vtter what her zealous thought
Trauailes withall, in honour of your house;
Which act, as it is simply borne in her,
Pertakes of loue, and honesty, but may,
By th'ouer-often, and vnseason'd vse,
Turne to your losse, and danger: For your state
Is wayted on by enuies, as by eyes;
And euery second ghest your tables take,
Is a fee'd spie, t'obserue who goes, who comes,
What conference you haue, with whom, where, when,
What the discourse is, what the lookes, the thoughts
Of eu'ry person there, they doe extract,
And make into a substance.
Heare me, SILIVS,
Were all TIBERIVS body stuck with eyes,
And eu'ry wall, and hanging in my house
Transparent, as this lawne I weare, or ayre;
Yea, had SEIANVS both his eares as long
As to my in-most closet: I would hate
To whisper any thought, or change an act,
To be made IVNO'S riuall. Vertues forces
Shew euer noblest in conspicuous courses.
'Tis great, and brauely spoken, like the spirit
Of AGRIPPINA: yet, your highnesse knowes,
There is nor losse, nor shame in prouidence:
Few can, what all should doe, beware inough.
You may perceiue with what officious face,
SATRIVS, and NATTA, AFER, and the rest
Visite your house, of late, t'enquire the secrets;
And with what bold, and priuiledg'd arte, they raile
Against AVGVSTA: yea, and at TIBERIVS,
Tell tricks of LIVIA, and SEIANVS, all
T'excite, and call your indignation on,
That they might heare it at more libertie.
Yo'are too suspitious, SILIVS.
Pray the gods,
I be so AGRIPPINA: But I feare
Some subtill practice. They, that durst to strike
At so examp-lesse, and vn-blam'd a life,
As, that of the renown'd GERMANICVS,
Will not sit downe, with that exploit alone:
"He threatens many, that hath iniur'd one.
'Twere best rip forth their tongues, seare out their eies,
When next they come.
A fit reward for spies.
HEare you the rumour?
What?
DRVSVS is dying.
Dying?
That's strange!
Yo'were with him, yesternight.
One met EVDEMVS, the Physician,
Sent for, but now: who thinkes he cannot liue.
Thinkes? if't be arriu'd at that, he knowes,
Or none.
This's quicke! what should bee his disease?
Poyson. Poyson—
How, SILIVS!
What's that?
Nay, nothing. There was (late) a certaine blow
Giu'n o' the face.
I, to SEIANVS?
True.
And, what of that?
I'am glad I gaue it not.
But, there is somewhat else?
Yes, priuate meetings,
With a great ladie, at a physicians,
And, a wife turn'd away—
Ha!
Toyes, meere toyes:
What wisdom's now i'th' streets? i'th' common mouth?
Feares, whisp'rings, tumults, noyse, I know not what:
They say, the Senate sit.
I'le thither, straight;
And see what's in the forge.
Good SILIVS doe.
SOSIA, and I will in.
Haste you, my lords,
To visit the sicke prince: tender your loues,
And sorrowes to the people. This SEIANVS
(Trust my diuining soule) hath plots on all:
No tree, that stops his prospect, but must fall.
TIs only you must vrge against him, VARRO,
Nor I, nor CAESAR may appeare therein,
Except in your defence, who are the Consul:
And, vnder colour of late en'mitie
Betweene your father, and his, may better doe it,
As free from all suspition of a practice.
Here be your notes, what points to touch at; read:
Bee cunning in them. AFER ha's them too.
But is he summon'd?
No. It was debated
By CAESAR, and concluded as most fit
To him take vnprepar'd.
And prosecute
All vnder name of treason.
I conceiue.
DRVSVS being dead, CAESAR will not be here.
What should the businesse of this Senate bee?
That can my subtile whisperers tell you: We,
That are the good dull-noble lookers on,
Are only call'd to keepe the marble warme.
What should we doe with those deepe mysteries,
Proper to these fine heads? let them alone.
Our ignorance may, perchance, helpe vs be sau'd
From whips, and furies.
See, see, see, their action!
I, now their heads doe trauaile, now they worke;
Their faces runne like shittles▪ they are weauing
Some curious cobweb to catch flyes.
Obserue,
They take their places.
What so low?
O yes,
They must be seene to flatter CAESARS griefe
Though but in sitting.
Bid vs silence.
Silence.
Fathers Conscript, may this our present meeting
Turne faire, and fortunate to the Common-wealth.
SEe, SILIVS enters.
Haile graue Fathers.
Stand.
SILIVS, forbeare thy place.
How!
SILIVS stand forth,
The Consul hath to charge thee.
Roome for CAESAR.
Is he come too? nay then expect a tricke.
SILIVS accus'd? sure he will answere nobly.
WE stand amazed, Fathers, to behold
This generall deiection. Wherefoe sit
Romes Consuls thus dissolu'd, as they had lost
All the remembrance both of stile, and place?
It not becomes. No woes are of fit waight,
To make the honour of the empire stoope:
Though I, in my peculiar selfe, may meete
Iust reprehension, that so suddenly,
And, in so fresh a griefe, would greet the Senate,
When priuate tongues, of kinsmen, and allies,
(Inspir'd with comforts) lothly are indur'd,
The face of men not seene, and scarce the day,
To thousands, that communicate our losse.
Nor can I argue these of weaknesse; since
They take but naturall wayes: yet I must seeke
For stronger aides, and those faire helpes draw out
From warme imbraces of the common-wealth.
Our mother, great AVGVSTA, 'is strooke with time,
Our selfe imprest with aged characters,
DRVSVS is gone, his children young, and babes,
Our aimes must now reflect on those, that may
Giue timely succour to these present ills,
And are our only glad-suruiuing hopes,
The noble issue of GERMANICVS,
NERO, and DRVSVS: might it please the Consul
Honour them in, (they both attend without.)
I would present them to the Senates care,
And raise those sunnes of ioy, that should drinke vp
These flouds of sorrow, in your drowned eyes.
By IOVE, I am not OEDIPVS inough,
To vnderstand this SPHYNX.
The princes come.
APproch you noble NERO, noble DRVSVS,
These princes, Fathers, when their parent dyed,
I gaue vnto their vncle, with this prayer,
That, though h' had proper issue of his owne,
He would no lesse bring vp, and foster these,
Then that selfe-bloud; and by that act confirme
Their worths to him, and to posteritie.
DVSVS tane hence, I turne my prayers to you,
And, 'fore our countrie, and our gods, beseech
You take, and rule AVGVSTVS nephewes sonnes,
Sprung of the noblest ancestors; and so
Accomplish both my dutie, and your owne.
NERO, and DRVSVS, (these shall be to you
In place of parents, these your fathers, these,
And not vnfitly: For you are so borne,
As all your good, or ill's the common-wealths.
Receyue them, you strong guardians; and blest go`ds
Make all their actions answere to their blouds:
Let their great titles find increase by them,
Not they by titles. Set them, as in place,
So in example, aboue all the Romanes:
And may they know no riuals, but themselues.
Let fortune giue them nothing; but attend
Vpon their vertue: and that still come forth
Greater then hope, and better then their fame.
Relieue me, Fathers, with your generall voyce.
May all the gods consent to CAESAR'S wish,
And adde to any honours, that may crowne
The hopefull issue of GERMANICVS.
We thanke you, reuerend Fathers, in their right.
If this were true now! but the space, the space
Betweene the brest, and lips—TIBERIVS heart
Lyes a thought farder, then another mans.
My comforts are so flowing in my ioyes,
As, in them, all my streames of griefe are lost,
No lesse then are land-waters in the sea,
Or showres in riuers; though their cause was such,
As might haue sprinkled eu'n the gods with teares:
Yet since the greater doth embrace the lesse,
We couetously obey.
Well acted, CAESAR.)
And, now I am the happy witnesse made
Of your so much desir'd affections,
To this great issue, I could wish, the fates
Would here set peacefull period to my dayes;
How euer, to my labours, I intreat
(And beg it of this Senate) some fit ease.
Laugh, Fathers, laugh: Ha' you no spleenes about you?)
The burden is too heauy, I sustayne
On my vnwilling shoulders; and I pray
It may be taken off, and re-confer'd
Vpon the Consuls, or some other Romane,
More able, and more worthy.
Laugh on, still.)
Why, this doth render all the rest suspected!
It poysons all.
O, do' you taste it then?
It takes away my faith to any thing
He shall hereafter speake.
I, to pray that,
Which would be to his head as hot as thunder,
(Gain'st which he weares that charme) should but the court
Receiue him at his word
Heare.
For my selfe,
I know my weakenesse, and so little couet
(Like some gone past) the waight that will oppresse me,
As my ambition is the counter-point.
Finely maintain'd; good still.)
But Rome, whose bloud,
Whose nerues, whose life, whose very frame relyes
On CAESAR'S strength, no lesse then heau'n on ATLAS,
Cannot admit it but with generall ruine.
Ah! are you there, to bring him of?)
Let CAESAR
No more then vrge a point so contrary
To CAESARS greatnesse, the grieu'd Senates vowes,
Or Romes necessitie.
He comes about.
More nimbly then VERTVMNVS.)
For the publique,
I may be drawne, to shew, I can neglect
All priuate aymes; though I affect my rest:
But, if the Senate still command me serue,
I must be glad to practise my obedience.
You must, and will, sir. We doe know it.)
CAESAR,
Liue long, and happy, great, and royall CAESAR,
The gods preserue thee, and thy modestie,
Thy wisedome, and thy innocence.
Where is't?
The prayer's made before the subiect.)
Guard
His meekenesse, IOVE, his pietie, his care,
His bountie—
And his subtlety, I'le put in:
Yet hee'll keepe that himselfe, without the gods.
All prayer's are vaine for him.
We will not hold
Your patience, Fathers, with long answere; but
Shall still contend to be, what you desire,
And worke to satisfie so great a hope:
Proceed to your affaires.
Now, SILIVS, guard thee;
The curtin's drawing.
aduanceth.
Silence.
Cite CAIVS, SILIVS.
CAIVS SILIVS.
Here.
The triumph that thou hadst in Germanie
For thy late victorie on SACROVIR,
Thou hast enioy'd so freely, CAIVS SILIVS,
As no man it enuy'd thee; nor would CAESAR,
Or Rome admit, that thou wert then defrauded
Of any honours, thy deserts could clayme,
In the faire seruice of the common-wealth:
But now, if, after all their loues, and graces,
(Thy actions, and their courses being discouer'd)
It shall appeare to CAESAR, and this Senate,
Thou hast defil'd those glories, with thy crimes—
Crimes?
Patience, SILIVS.
Tell thy moile of patience,
I am a Romane. What are my crimes? Proclaime them.
Am I too rich? too honest for the times?
Haue I or treasure, iewels, land, or houses
That some informer gapes for? Is my strength
Too much to be admitted? Or my knowledge?
These now are crimes.
Nay, SILIVS, if the name
Of crime so touch thee, with what impotence
Wilt thou endure the matter to be search'd?
I tell thee, AFER, with more scorne, then feare:
Employ your mercenarie tongue, and arte.
Where's my accuser?
Here.
VARRO? The Consul?
Is he thrust in?
'Tis I accuse thee, SILIVS.
Against the maiestie of Rome, and CAESAR,
I doe pronounce thee here a guiltie cause,
First, of beginning, and occasioning,
Next, drawing out the warre in Gallia,
For which thou late triumph'st; dissembling long
That SACROVIR to be an enemie,
Only to make thy entertainement more,
Whil'st thou, and thy wife SOSIA poll'd the prouince;
Wherein, with sordide-base desire of gaine,
Thou hast discredited thy actions worth
And beene a traytor to the state.
Thou lyest.
I thanke thee, SILIVS, speake so still, and often.
If I not proue it, CAESAR, but iniustly
Haue call'd him into tryall, here I bind
My selfe to suffer, what I claime 'gainst him;
And yeeld, to haue what I haue spoke, confirm'd
By iudgement of the court, and all good men.
CAESAR, I craue to haue my cause defer'd,
Till this mans Consulship be out.
We cannot,
Nor may we graunt it.
Why? shall he designe
My day of tryall? is he my accuser?
And must he be my iudge?
It hath beene vsuall,
And is a right, that custome hath allow'd
The magistrate, to call forth priuate men;
And to appoint their day: Which priuiledge
We may not in the Consul see infring'd,
By whose deepe watches, and industrious care
It is so labour'd, as the common-wealth
Receiue no losse, by any oblique course.
CAESAR, thy fraud is worse then violence.
SILIVS, mistake vs not, we dare not vse
The credit of the Consul, to thy wrong,
But only doe preserue his place, and power,
So farre as it concernes the dignitie,
And honor of the state.
Beleeue him, SILIVS.
Why, so he may, ARRVNTIVS.
I say so.
And he may choose too.
By the capitoll,
And all our gods, but that the deare republick,
Our sacred lawes, and iust authoritie
Are interess'd therein, I should be silent.
Please' CAESAR to giue way vnto his tryall.
He shall haue iustice.
Nay, I shall haue law;
Shall I not AFER? speake.
Would you haue
No, my well-spoken man, I would no more;
Nor lesse: might I inioy it naturall,
Not taught to speake vnto your present ends,
Free from thine, his, and all your vnkind handling,
Furious enforcing, most vniust presuming,
Malicious, and manifold applying,
Foule wresting, and impossible construction.
He raues, he raues.
Thou durst not tell me so,
Had'st thou not CAESARS warrant. I can see
Whose power condemnes me.
This betrayes his spirit.
This doth inough declare him what he is.
What am I? speake.
An enemie to the state.
Because I am an enemie to thee,
And such corrupted ministers o' the state,
That here art made a present instrument
To gratifie it with thine owne disgrace.
This, to the Consul, is most insolent!
And impious!
I, take part. Reueale your selues.
Alas, I sent not your confed'racies?
Your plots, and combinations? I not know
Minion SEIANVS hates me; and that all
This boast of law, and law, is but a forme,
A net of VULCANES filing, a meere ingine,
To take that life by a pretext of iustice,
Which you pursue in malice? I want braine,
Or nostrill to perswade me, that your ends,
And purposes are made to what they are,
Before my answere? O, you equall gods,
Whose iustice not a world of wolfe-turn'd men
Shall make me to accuse (how ere prouoke)
Haue I for this so oft engag'd my selfe?
Stood in the heate, and feruor of a fight,
When PHOEBVS sooner hath forsooke the day
Then I the field? Against the blue-ey'd Gaules?
And crisped Germanes? when our Romane Eagles
Haue fann'd the fire, with their labouring wings,
And no blow dealt, that left not death behind it?
When I haue charg'd, alone, into the troopes
Of curl'd Sicambrians, routed them, and came
Not off, with backward ensignes of a slaue,
But forward markes, wounds on my brest, and face,
Were meant to thee, Ô CAESAR, and thy Rome?
And haue I this returne? did I, for this,
Performe so noble, and so braue defeate,
On SACROVIR? (Ô IOVE, let it become me
To boast my deedes, when he, whom they concerne,
Shall thus forget them.)
SILIVS, SILIVS,
These are the common customes of thy bloud,
When it is high with wine, as now with rage:
This well agrees, with that intemperate vaunt,
Thou lately mad'st at AGRIPPINA'S table,
That when all other of the troopes were prone
To fall into rebellion, only yours
Remain'd in their obedience. You were he,
That sau'd the empire; which had then beene lost,
Had but your legions, there, rebell'd, or mutin'd.
Your vertue met, and fronted euery perill.
You gaue to CAESAR, and to Rome their surety.
Their name, their strength, their spirit, and their state,
Their being was a donatiue from you.
Well worded, and most like an Orator.
Is this true, SILIVS?
Saue thy question, CAESAR.
Thy spie, of famous credit, hath affirm'd it.
Excellent Romane!
He doth answere stoutly.
If this be so, there needes no farder cause
Of crime against him.
What can more impeach
The royall dignitie, and state of CAESAR,
Then to be vrged with a benefit
He cannot pay?
In this, all CAESARS fortune
Is made vnequall to the courtesie.
His meanes are cleane destroy'd, that should requite.
Nothing is great inough for SILIVS merit.
GALLVS on that side to?
Come, doe not hunt,
And labour so about for circumstance,
To make him guiltie, whom you haue fore-doom'd:
Take shorter wayes, I'le meet your purposes.
The wordes were mine, and more I now will say:
Since I haue done thee that great seruice, CAESAR,
Thou still hast fear'd me; and, in place of grace,
Return'd me hatred: so soone, all best turnes,
With doubtfull Princes, turne deepe iniuries
In estimation, when they greater rise,
Then can be answer'd. Benefits, with you,
Are of no longer pleasure, then you can
With ease restore them; that transcended once,
Your studies are not how to thanke, but kill.
It is your nature, to haue all men slaues
To you, but you acknowledging to none.
The meanes that makes your greatnesse, must not come
In mention of it; if it doe, it takes
So much away, you thinke: and that, which help'd,
Shall soonest perish, if it stand in eye,
Where it may front, or but vpbraid the high.
Suffer him speake no more.
Note but his spirit.
This shewes him in the rest.
Let him be censur'd.
He' hath spoke inough to proue him CAESARS foe.
His thoughts looke through his words.
A censure.
Stay,
Stay, most officious Senate, I shall straight
Delude thy furie. SILIVS hath not plac'd
His guards within him, against fortunes spight,
So weakely, but he can escape your gripe
That are but hands of fortune: Shee her selfe
When vertue doth oppose, must lose her threats.
All that can happen in humanitie,
The frowne of CAESAR, proud SEIANVS hatred,
Base VARRO'S spleene, and AFERS bloudying tongue,
The Senates seruile flatterie, and these
Mustred to kill, I'am fortified against;
And can looke downe vpon: they are beneath me.
It is not life whereof I stand enamour'd:
Nor shall my end make me accuse my fate.
The coward, and the valiant man must fall,
Only the cause, and manner how, discernes them:
Which then are gladdest, when they cost vs dearest.
Romanes, if any here be in this Senate,
Would know to mock TIBERIVS tyrannie,
Looke vpon SILIVS, and so learne to die.
O, desperate act!
An honorable hand!
Looke, is he dead?
'Twas nobly strooke, and home.
My thought did prompt him to it. Farewell, SILIVS.
Be famous euer for thy great example.
We are not pleas'd, in this sad accident,
That thus hath stalled, and abus'd our mercy,
Intended to preserue thee, noble Romane:
And to preuent thy hopes.
Excellent wolfe!
Now he is full, he howles.
CAESAR doth wrong
His dignitie, and safetie, thus to mourne
The deseru'd end of so profest a traytor,
And doth, by this his lenitie, instruct
Others as factious, to the like offence.
The confiscation meerely of his state
Had beene inough.
O, that was gap'd for then?
Remoue the body.
Let citation
Goe out for SOSIA.
Let her be proscrib'd.
And for the goods, I thinke it fit that halfe
Goe to the treasure, halfe vnto the children.
With leaue of CAESAR, I would thinke, that fourth
Part, which the law doth cast on the informers,
Should be inough; the rest goe to the children:
Wherein the Prince shall shew humanitie,
And bountie, not to force them by their want
(Which in their parents trespasse they deseru'd)
To take ill courses.
It shall please vs.
I,
Out of necessitie. This LEPIDVS
Is graue and honest, and I haue obseru'd
A moderation still in all his censures.
And bending to the better—Stay, who's this?
CREMVTIVS CORDVS? what? is he brought in?
More bloud vnto the banquet? Noble CORDVS,
I wish thee good: Be as thy writings, free,
And honest.
What is he?
For th'Annal's, CAESAR.
CREMVTIVS CORDꝰ.
Here.
SATRIVS SECVNDꝰ,
PINNARIVS NATTA, you are his accusers.
Two of SEIANVS bloud-hounds, whom he breeds
With humane flesh, to bay at citizens.
Stand forth before the Senate, and confront him.
I doe accuse thee here, CREMVTIVS CORDVS,
To be a man factious, and dangerous,
A sower of sedition in the state,
A turbulent, and discontented spirit,
Which I will proue from thine owne writings, here,
The Annal's thou hast publish'd; where thou bit'st
The present age, and with a vipers tooth,
Being a member of it, dar'st that ill
Which neuer yet degenerous bastard did
Vpon his parent.
To this, I subscribe;
And, forth a world of more particulars,
Instance in only one: Comparing men,
And times, thou praysest BRVTVS, and affirm'st
That CASSIVS was the last of all the Romanes.
How! what are we then?
What is CAESAR? nothing?
My lords, this strikes at euery Romanes priuate,
In whom raignes gentrie, and estate of spirit,
To haue a BRVTVS brought in parallel,
A parricide, an enemie of his countrie,
Rank'd, and preferr'd to any reall worth
That Rome now holds. This is most strangely inuectiue.
Most full of spight, and insolent vpbraiding.
Nor is't the time alone is here dispris'd,
But the whole man of time, yea CAESAR'S selfe
Brought in disualew; and he aym'd at most
By oblique glance of his licentious pen.
CAESAR, if CASSIVS were the last of Romanes,
Thou hast no name.
Let's heare him answere. Silence.
So innocent I am of fact, my lords,
As but my words are argu'd; yet those words
Not reaching eyther prince, or princes parent:
The which your law of treason comprehends.
BRVTVS, and CASSIVS, I am charg'd, t' haue prays'd:
Whose deedes, when many more, besides my selfe,
Haue writ, not one hath mention'd without honour.
Great TITVS LIVIVS, great for eloquence,
And faith, amongst vs, in his historie,
With so great prayses POMPEY did extoll,
As oft AVGVSTVS call'd him a POMPEIAN:
Yet this not hurt their friendship. In his booke
He often names SCIPIO, AFRANIVS,
Yea, the same CASSIVS, and this BRVTVS too,
As worthi'st men; not theeues, and parricides,
Which notes, vpon their fames, are now impos'd.
ASINIVS POLLIO'S writings quite throughout
Giue them a noble memorie; SO MESSALLA
Renown'd his generall CASSIVS: yet both these
Liu'd with AVGVSTVS, full of wealth, and honours.
To CICERO'S booke, where CATO was heau'd vp
Equall with heau'n, what else did CAESAR answere,
Being then Dictator, but with a penn'd oration,
As if before the iudges? Doe but see
ANTONIVS letters; read but BRVTVS pleadings:
What vile reproch they hold against AVGVSTVS,
False I confesse, but with much bitternesse.
The Epigram's of BIBACVLVS, and CATVLLVS,
Are read, full stuft with spight of both the CAESARS;
Yet deified IVLIVS, and no lesse AVGVSTVS!
Both bore them, and contemn'd them: (I not know
Promptly to speake it, whether done with more
Temper, or wisdome) for such obloquies
If they despised bee, they dye supprest,
But, if with rage acknowledg'd, they are confest.
The Greekes I slip, whose licence not alone,
But also lust did scape vnpunished:
Or where some one (by chance) exception tooke,
He words with words reueng'd. But, in my worke,
What could be aim'd more free, or farder of
From the times scandale, then to write of those,
Whom death from grace, or hatred had exempted?
Did I, with BRVTVS, and with CASSIVS,
Arm'd, and possess'd of the PHILIPPI fields,
Incense the people in the ciuill cause,
With dangerous speeches? or doe they, being slaine
Seuentie yeeres since, as by their images
(Which not the conquerour hath defac'd) appeares,
Retaine that guiltie memorie with writers?
Posterie payes euerie man his honour.
Nor shall there want, though I condemned am,
That will not only CASSIVS well approue,
And of great BRVTVS honour mindfull be,
But that will, also, mention make of me.
Freely, and nobly spoken.
With good temper,
I like him, that he is not moou'd with passion.
He puts 'hem to their whisper.
Take him hence,
We shall determine of him at next sitting.
Meane time, giue order, that his bookes be burn't,
To the' Aediles.
You haue well aduis'd.
It fits not such licentious things should liue
T' vpbraid the age.
If th' age were good, they might.
Let'hem be burnt.
All sought, and burnt, to day.
The court is vp, Lictors, resume the fasces.
LEt 'hem be burnt! Ô, how ridiculous
Appeares the Senate's brainlesse diligence,
Who thinke they can, with present power, extinguish
The memorie of all succeeding times!
'Tis true when (contrarie) the punishment
Of wit, doth make th' authoritie increase.
Nor doe they ought, that vse this crueltie
Of interdiction, and this rage of burning;
But purchase to themselues rebuke, and shame,
And to the writers an eternall name.
It is an argument the times are sore,
When vertue cannot safely be aduanc'd;
Nor vice reproou'd.
I, noble LEPIDVS,
AVGVSTVS well foresaw, what we should suffer,
Vnder TIBERIVS, when he did pronouuce
The Roman race most wretched, that should liue
Betweene so slow iawes, and so long a bruising.
THis businesse hath succeeded well, SEIANVS:
And quite remoou'd all iealousie of practice
'Gainst AGRIPPINA, and our nephewes. Now,
We must bethinke vs how to plant our ingines
For th' other paire, SABINVS, and ARRVNTIVS,
And GALLVS too (how ere he flatter vs,)
His heart we know.
Giue it some respite, CAESAR.
Time shall mature, and bring to perfect crowne,
What we, with so good vultures, haue begunne:
SABINVS shall be next.
Rather ARRVNTIVS.
By any meanes, preserue him. His franke tongue
Being lent the reines, will take away all thought
Of malice, in your course against the rest.
We must keep him to stalke with.
Dearest head,
To thy most forunate designe I yeeld it.
Sir— I' haue beene so long train'd vp in grace,
First, with your father, great AVGVSTVS, since,
With your most happie bounties so familiar,
As I not sooner would commit my hopes
Or wishes to the gods, then to your eares.
Nor haue I euer, yet, beene couetous
Of ouer-bright, and dazling honours: rather
To watch, and trauaile in great CAESAR'S safetie,
With the most common souldier.
'Tis confest.
The only gaine, and which I count most faire
Of all my fortunes, is that mightie CAESAR
Hath thought me worthie his alliance. Hence
Beginne my hopes.
H'mh?
I haue heard, AVGVSTVS
In the bestowing of his daughter, thought
But euen of gentlemen of Rome: If so,
(I know not how to hope so great a fauour)
But if a husband should be sought for LIVIA,
And I be had in minde, as CAESARS freind,
I would but vse the glorie of the kindred.
It should not make me slothfull, or lesse caring
For CAESARS state; it were inough to me
It did confirme, and strengthen my weake house,
Against the-now-vnequall opposition
Of AGRIPPINA; 'and for deare reguard
Vnto my children, this I wish: my selfe
Haue no ambition farder, then to end
My dayes in seruice of so deare a master.
We cannot but commend thy pietie
Most-lou'd SEIANVS, in acknowledging
Those bounties; which we faintly, such, remember.
But to thy suit. The rest of mortall men,
In all their drifts, and counsels, pursue profit:
Princes, alone, are of a different sort,
Directing their maine actions still to fame.
VVe therefore will take time to thinke, and answere.
For LIVIA, she can best, her selfe, resolue
If she will marrie after DRVSVS, or
Continue in the family; besides
She hath a mother, and a grandame yet,
VVhose neerer counsels she may guide her by:
But I will simply deale. That enmitie,
Thou fear'st in AGRIPPINA, would burne more,
If LIVIAS marriage should (as 'twere in parts)
Deuide th' imperiall house; an emulation
Betweene the women might breake forth; and discord
Ruine the sonnes, and nephues, on both hands.
VVhat if it cause some present difference?
Thou art not safe, SEIANVS, if thou prooue it.
Canst thou beleeue, that LIVIA who was wife
To CAIVS CAESAR, then to DRVSVS, now
VVill be contented to grow old with thee,
Borne but a priuate gentleman of Rome?
And rayse thee with her losse, if not her shame?
Or say, that I should wish it, canst thou thinke
The Senate, or the people (who haue seene
Her brother, father, and our ancestors,
In highest place of empire) will indure it?
The state thou hold'st alreadie, is in talke;
Men murmure at thy greatnesse; and the nobles
Sticke not, in publike, to vpbraid thy climbing
Aboue our fathers fauours, or thy scale:
And dare accuse me, from their hate to thee.
Be wise, deare friend. VVe would not hide these things
For friendships deare respect. Nor will we stand
Aduerse to thine, or LIVIA'S designements.
VVhat we had purpos'd to thee, in our thought,
And with what neere degrees of loue to bind thee,
And make thee equall to vs, for the present,
VVe will forbeare to speake. Only thus much
Beleeue our lou'd SEIANVS, we not know
That height in bloud, or honour, which thy vertue,
And minde to vs, may not aspire with merit;
And this wee'll publish, on all watch'd occasion
The Senate, or the people shall present.
I am restor'd, and to my sense againe,
Which I had lost in this so blinding suit.
CAESAR hath taught me better to refuse,
Then I knew how to aske. How pleaseth CAESAR
T' imbrace my late aduice, for leauing Rome?
We are resolu'd.
Here are some motiues more
Which I haue thought on since, may more confirme.
Carefull SEIANVS! we will straight peruse them:
Goe forward in our maine designe, and prosper.
IF those but take, I shall. Dull, heauie CAESAR!
Would'st thou tell me, thy fauours were made crimes?
And that my fortunes were esteem'd thy faults?
That thou, for me, wert hated? and not thinke
I would with winged haste preuent that change,
When thou might'st winne all to thy selfe againe,
By forfeiture of me? Did those fond words
Fly swifter from thy lips, then this my braine,
This sparkling forge, created me an armor
T' encounter chance, and thee? Well, read my charmes,
And may they lay that hold vpon thy senses,
As thou had'st snuft vp hemlocke, or tane downe
The iuice of poppie, and of mandrakes. Sleepe,
Voluptuous CAESAR, and securitie
Seize on thy stupide powers, and leaue them dead
To publique cares, awake but to thy lusts.
The strength of which makes thy libidinous soule
Itch to leaue Rome; and I haue thrust it on:
With blaming of the citie businesse,
The multitude of suites, the confluence
Of suitors, then their importunacies,
The manifold distractions he must suffer,
Besides ill rumours, enuies, and reproches,
All which, a quiet and retired life,
(Larded with ease, and pleasure) did auoid;
And yet, for any weightie, 'and great affaire,
The fittest place to giue the soundest counsels.
By this, shall I remooue him both from thought,
And knowledge of his owne most deare affaires;
Draw all dispatches through my priuate hands;
Know his designements, and pursue mine owne;
Make mine owne strengths, by giuing suites, and places;
Conferring dignities, and offices:
And these▪ that hate me now, wanting accesse
To him, will make their enuie none, or lesse.
For when they see me arbiter of all,
They must obserue: or else, with CAESAR fall.
TO marry LIVIA? will no lesse, SEIANVS,
Content thy aimes? no lower obiect? well!
Thou know'st how thou art wrought into our trust;
Wouen in our designe; and think'st, we must
Now vse thee, whatsoere thy proiects are:
'Tis true. But yet with caution, and fit care.
And, now we better thinke— who's there, within?
CAESAR?
To leaue our iourney off, were sin
'Gainst our decree'd delights; and would appeare
Doubt: or (what lesse becomes a prince) low feare.
Yet, doubt hath law, and feares haue their excuse,
Where princes states plead necessarie vse;
As ours doth now: more in SEIANVS pride,
Then all fell AGRIPPINA'S hates beside.
Those are the dreadfull enemies, we raise
VVith fauours, and make dangerous, with prayse;
The iniur'd by vs may haue will alike,
But 'tis the fauourite hath the power, to strike:
And furie euer boyles more high, and strong,
Heat'with ambition, then reuenge of wrong.
'Tis then a part of supreme skill, to grace
No man too much; but hold a certaine space
Betweene th' ascenders rise, and thine owne flat,
Lest, when all rounds be reach'd, his aime be that.
'Tis thought— IS MACRO in the palace? See:
If not goe, seeke him, to come to vs— Hee
Must be the organ, we must worke by now;
Though none lesse apt for trust: Need doth allow
VVhat choise would not. I' haue heard, that aconite
Being timely taken, hath a healing might
Against the scorpions stroke; the proofe wee'll giue:
That, while two poysons wrastle, we may liue.
Hee hath a spirit too working, to be vs'd
But to th' encounter of his like; excus'd
Are wiser sou'raignes then, that raise one ill
Against another, and both safely kill:
The prince, that eeds great natures, they will sway him;
VVho nourisheth a lyon, must obey him.
MAcro, we sent for you.
I heard so, CAESAR.
(Leaue vs awhile.) When you shal know, good MACRO,
The causes of our sending, and the ends;
You then will harken neerer: and be pleas'd
You stand so high, both in our choise, and trust.
The humblest place in CAESARS choise, or trust,
May make glad MACRO proud; without ambition:
Saue to doe CAESAR seruice.
Leaue our courtings.
We are in purpose, MACRO, to depart
The citie for a time, and see Campania;
Not for our pleasures, but to dedicate
A paire of temples, one, to IVPITER
At Capua, th'other at Nola, to AVGVSTVS:
In which great worke, perhaps, our stay will be
Beyond our will produc't. Now, since we are
Not ignorant what danger may be borne
Out of our shortest absence, in a state
So subiect vnto enuie, and embroild
With hate, and faction; we haue thought on thee,
(Amongst a field of Romanes,) worthiest MACRO,
To be our eye, and eare, to keepe strict watch
On AGRIPPINA, NERO, DRVSVS, I,
And on SEIANVS: Not, that we distrust
His loyaltie, or doe repent one grace,
Of all that heape, we haue conferd on him.
(For that were to disparage our election,
And call that iudgement now in doubt, which then
Seem'd as vnquestion'd as an oracle,)
But, greatnesse hath his cankers. Wormes, and moaths
Breed out of too fit matter, in the things
Which after they consume, transferring quite
The substance of their makers, int'themselues.
MACRO is sharpe, and apprehends. Besides,
I know him subtle, close, wise, and wel-read
In man, and his large nature. He hath studied
Affections, passions, knowes their springs, their ends,
Which way, and whether they will worke: 'tis proofe
Inough, of his great merit, that we trust him.
Then, to a point; (because our conference
Cannot be long without suspition)
Here, MACRO, we assigne thee, both to spie,
Informe, and chastise; thinke, and vse thy meanes,
Thy ministers, what, where, on whom thou wilt;
Explore, plot, practise: All thou doost in this,
Shall be, as if the Senate, or the Lawes
Had giu'n it priuiledge, and thou thence stil'd
The sauier both of CAESAR, and of Rome.
We will not take thy answere, but in act:
Whereto, as thou proceed'st, we hope to heare
By trusted messengers. If't be enquir'd,
Wherefore we call'd you, say, you haue in charge
To see our chariots readie, and our horse:
Be still our lou'd, and (shortly) honor'd MACRO.
I Will not aske, why CAESAR bids doe this:
But ioy, that he bids me. It is the blisse
Of courts, to be imploy'd; no matter, how:
A princes power makes all his actions vertue.
We, whom he workes by, are dumbe instruments,
To doe, but not enquire: His great intents
Are to be seru'd, not search'd. Yet, as that bow
Is most in hand, whose owner best doth know
T'affect his aymes, so let that states-man hope
Most vse, most price, can hit his princes scope.
Nor must he looke at what, or whom to strike,
But lose at all; each marke must be alike.
Were it to plot against the fame, the life
Of one, with whom I twin'd; remoue a wife
From my warme side, as lou'd, as is the ayre;
Practise away each parent; draw mine heyre
In compasse, though but one; worke all my kin
To swift perdition; leaue no vntrain'd engin,
For friendship, or for innocence; nay, make
The gods all guiltie: I would vndertake
This, being impos'd me, both with gaine, and ease.
The way to rise, is to obey, and please.
He that will thriue in state, he must neglect
The trodden paths, that truth and right respect;
And proue new, wilder wayes: for vertue, there,
Is not that narrow thing, shee is else-where.
Mens fortune there is vertue; reason, their will:
Their licence, law; and their obseruance, skill.
Occasion, is their foile; conscience, their staine;
Profit, their lustre: and what else is, vaine.
If then it be the lust of CAESARS power,
T'haue rais'd SEIANVS vp, and in an hower
O're-turne him, tumbling, downe, from height of all;
We are his ready engine: and his fall
May be our rise. It is no vncouth thing
To see fresh buildings from old ruines spring.
YOu must haue patience, royall AGRIPPINA.
I must haue vengeance, first: and that were nectar
Vnto my famish'd spirits. O, my fortune,
Let it be sodaine thou prepar'st against me;
Strike all my powers of vnderstanding blind,
And ignorant of destinie to come:
Let me not feare, that cannot hope.
Deare Princesse,
These tyrannies, on your selfe, are worse then CAESAR'S.
Is this the happinesse of being borne great?
Still to be aim'd at? still to be suspected?
To liue the subiect of all iealousies?
At least the colour made, if not the ground
To euery painted danger? who would not
Choose once to fall, then thus to hang for euer?
You might be safe, if you would —
What, my GALLVS?
Be lewd SEIANVS strumpet? Or the baud
To CAESARS lusts, he now is gone to practise?
Not these are safe, where nothing is. Your selfe,
While thus you stand but by me, are not safe.
Was SILIVS safe? or the good SOSIA safe?
Or was my niece, deare CLAVDIA PVLCHRA safe?
Or innocent FVRNIVS? They, that latest haue
(By being made guiltie) added reputation
To AFERS eloquence? O, foolish friends,
Could not so fresh example warne your loues,
But you must buy my fauours, with that losse
Vnto your selues: and, when you might perceiue
That CAESARS cause of raging must forsake him,
Before his will? Away, good GALLVS, leaue me.
Here to be seene, is danger; to speake, treason:
To doe me least obseruance, is call'd faction.
You are vnhappy in me, and I in all.
Where are my sonnes? NERO? and DRVSVS? We
Are they, be shot at; Let vs fall apart:
Not, in our ruines, sepulchre our friends.
Or shall we doe some action, like offence,
To mocke their studies, that would make vs faultie?
And frustrate practice, by preuenting it?
The danger's like: for, what they can contriue,
They will make good. No innocence is safe,
When power contests. Nor can they trespasse more,
Whose only being was all crime, before.
You heare, SEIANVS is come backe from CAESAR?
No. How? Disgrac'd?
More graced now, then euer.
By what mischance?
A fortune, like inough
Once to be bad.
But turn'd too good, to both.
What was't?
TIBERIVS sitting at his meat,
In a farme house, they call Spelunca, sited
By the sea-side, among the Fundane hills,
Within a naturall caue, part of the grot
(About the entrie) fell, and ouer-whelm'd
Some of the wayters; others ran away:
Only SEIANVS, with his knees, hands, face,
Ore-hanging CAESAR, did oppose himselfe
To the remayning ruines, and was found
In that so labouring posture, by the souldiers
That came to succour him. With which aduenture,
He hath so sixt himselfe in CAESAR'S trust,
As thunder cannot mooue him, and is come
With all the height of CAESARS praise, to Rome.
And power, to turne those ruines all on vs;
And bury whole posterities beneath them.
NERO, and DRVSVS, and CALIGVLA,
Your places are the next, and therefore most
In their offence. Thinke on your birth, and bloud,
Awake your spirits, meete their violence,
'Tis princely, when a tyran doth oppose;
And is a fortune sent to exercise
Your vertue, as the wind doth trie strong trees:
Who by vexation grow more sound, and firme.
After your fathers fall, and vncles fate,
What can you hope, but all the change of stroke
That force, or slight can giue? then stand vpright;
And though you doe not act, yet suffer nobly:
Be worthy of my wombe, and take strong cheare;
What we doe know will come, we should not feare.
REturn'd so soone? renew'd in trust, and grace?
Is CAESAR then so weake? or hath the place
But wrought this alteration, with the aire;
And he, on next remoue, will all repaire?
MACRO, thou art ingag'd: and what before
Was publique; now, must be thy priuate, more.
The weale of CAESAR, fitnesse did imply;
But thine owne fate confers necessity
On thy employment: and the thoughts borne nearest
Vnto our selues, moue swiftest still, and dearest.
If he recouer, thou art lost: yea, all
The weight of preparation to his fall
Will turne on thee, and crush thee. Therefore, strike
Before he settle, to preuent the like
Vpon thy selfe. He doth his vantage know,
That makes it home, and giues the foremost blow.
IT is a seruice, great SEIANVS will
See well requited, and accept of nobly.
Here place your selues, betweene the roofe, and seeling,
And when I bring him to his wordes of danger,
Reueale your selues, and take him.
Is he come?
I'le now goe fetch him.
With good speed. I long
To merit from the state, in such an action.
I hope, it will obtayne the Consul-ship
For one of vs.
We cannot thinke of lesse,
To bring in one, so dangerous as SABINVS.
He was a follower of GERMANICVS,
And still is an obseruer of his wife,
And children, though they be declin'd in grace;
A daily visitant, keepes them companie
In priuate, and in publique; and is noted
To be the only client, of the house:
Pray IOVE, he will be free to LATIARIS.
H'is alli'd to him, and doth trust him well.
And he'll requite his trust?
To doe an office
So gratefull to the state, I know no man
But would straine neerer bands, then kindred—
List,
I heare them come.
Shift to our holes, with silence.
IT is a noble constancie you shew
To this afflicted house: that not like others,
(The friends of season) you doe follow fortune,
And in the winter of their fate, forsake
The place, whose glories warm'd you. You are iust,
And worthy such a princely patrones loue,
As was the worlds-renown'd GERMANICVS:
Whose ample merit when I call to thought,
And see his wife and issue, obiects made
To so much enuie, iealousie, and hate,
It makes me ready to accuse the gods
Of negligence, as men of tyrannie.
They must be patient, so must we.
O IOVE.
What will become of vs, or of the times,
When, to be high, or noble, are made crimes?
When land, and treasure are most dangerous faults?
Nay, when our table, yea our bed assaults
Our peace, and safetie? when our writings are,
By any enuious instruments (that dare
Apply them to the guiltie) made to speake
What they will haue, to fit their tyrannous wreake?
When ignorance is scarcely innocence:
And knowledge made a capitall offence?
When not so much, but the bare emptie shade
Of libertie, is reft vs? and we made,
The prey to greedie Vultures, and vile spies,
That first transfixe vs with their murdering eyes?
Me thinkes, the Genius of the Romane race
Should not be so extinct, but that bright flame
Of libertie might be reuiu'd againe,
(Which no good man but with his life, should lose)
And we not sit like spent, and patient fooles
Still puffing in the darke, at one poore coale,
Held on by hope, till the last sparke is out.
The cause is publique, and the honour, name,
The immortalitie of euery soule
That is not bastard, or a slaue in Rome,
Therein concern'd: Whereto, if men would change
The weari'd arme, and for the waightie shield
So long sustain'd, employ the facile sword,
We might haue some assurance of our vowes.
This asses fortitude doth tyre vs all.
It must be actiue valour must redeeme
Our losse, or none. The rocke, and our hard steele
Should meete, t'enforce those glorious fires againe,
Whose splendor cheer'd the world, and heat gaue life
No lesse then doth the sunne's.
'Twere better stay,
In lasting darkenesse, and despaire of day.
No ill should force the subiect vndertake
Against the soueraigne; more then hell should make
The gods doe wrong. A good man should, and must
Sit rather downe with losse, then rise vniust.
Though, when the Romanes first did yeeld themselues
To one mans power, they did not meane their liues,
Their fortunes, and their liberties, should be
His absolute spoile, as purchas'd by the sword.
Why we are worse, if to be slaues, and bond
To CAESARS slaue, be such, the proud SEIANVS?
He that is all, do's all, giues CAESAR leaue
To hide his vlcerous, and anointed face,
With his bald crowne at Rhodes, while he here stalkes
Vpon the heads of Romanes, and their Princes,
Familiarly to Empire.
Now you touch
A point indeed, wherein he shewes his arte,
As well as power.
And villany in both.
Doe you obserue where LIVIA lodges? How
DRVSVS came dead? What men haue beene cut off?
Yes, those are things remou'd: I neerer look't,
Into his later practice, where he stands
Declar'd a master in his mysterie.
First, ere TIBERIVS went, he wrought his feare,
To thinke that AGRIPPINA sought his death.
Then put those doubts in her; sent her oft word,
Vnder the show of friendship, to beware
Of CAESAR, for he laid to poyson her:
Draue them to frownes, to mutuall iealousies,
Which, now, in visible hatred are burst out.
Since, he hath had his hyred instruments
To worke on NERO, and to heaue him vp;
To tell him CAESAR'S old; That all the people,
Yea, all the armie haue their eyes on him;
That both doe long to haue him vndertake
Something of worth, to giue the world a hope;
Bids him to court their grace; the easie youth,
Perhaps, giues eare, which straight he writes to CAESAR;
And with this comment: See yon'd dangerous boy,
Note but the practice of the mother, there,
Shee's tying him, for purposes at hand,
With men of sword. Here's CAESAR put in fright
'Gainst sonne, and mother. Yet, he leaues not thus.
The second brother DRVSVS (a fierce nature,
And fitter for his snares, because ambitious,
And full of enuie) him he clasp's, and hugs,
Poysons with praise, tells him what hearts he weares,
How bright he stands in popular expectance;
That Rome doth suffer with him, in the wrong
His mother does him, by preferring NERO:
Thus sets he them asunder, each 'gainst other,
Proiects the course, that serues him to condemne,
Keepes in opinion of a friend to all,
And all driues on to ruine.
CAESAR sleepes,
And nods at this?
Would he might euer sleepe,
Bogg'd in his filthy lusts.
Treason to CAESAR.
Lay hands vpon the traytor, LATIARIS,
Or take the name thy selfe.
I am for CAESAR.
Am I then catch'd?
How thinke you, sir? you are.
Spies of this head! so white! so full of yeeres!
Well, my most reuerend monsters, you may liue
To see your selues thus snar'd.
Away with him.
Hale him away.
To be a spie for traytors,
Is honorable vigilance.
You doe well,
My most officious instruments of state;
Men of all vses: Drag me hence, away.
The yeere is well begun, and I fall fit,
To be an offring to SEIANVS. Goe.
Couer him with his garments, hide his face.
It shall not need. Forbeare your rude assault,
The fault's not shamefull villanie makes a fault.
SIr, but obserue how thicke your dangers meete
In his cleare drifts! Your mother, and your brothers,
Now cited to the Senate! Their friend, GALLVS,
Feasted to day by CAESAR, since committed!
SABINVS, here we met, hurryed to fetters!
The Senators all strooke with feare, and silence,
Saue those, whose hopes depend not on good meanes,
But force their priuate prey, from publique spoile!
And you must know, if here you stay, your state
Is sure to be the subiect of his hate,
As now the obiect.
What would you aduise me?
To goe for Capreae presently: and there
Giue vp your selfe, entirely, to your vncle.
Tell CAESAR (since your mother is accus'd
To flie for succours to AVGVSTVS statue,
And to the armie, with your brethren) you
Haue rather chose, to place your aides in him,
Then liue suspected; or in hourely feare
To be thrust out, by bold SEIANV'S plots:
Which, you shall confidently vrge, to be
Most full of perill to the state, and CAESAR,
As being laid to his peculiar ends,
And not to be let run, with common safety.
All which (vpon the second) I'le make plaine,
So both shall loue, and trust with CAESAR gaine.
Away then, let's prepare vs for our iourney.
STill, do'st thou suffer heau'n? will no flame,
No heate of sinne make thy iust wrath to boile
In thy distemp'red bosome, and ore-flow
The pitchy blazes of impietie,
Kindled beneath thy throne? Still canst thou sleepe,
Patient, while vice doth make an antique face
At thy drad power, and blow dust, and smoke
Into thy nostrils? IOVE, will nothing wake thee?
Must vile SEIANVS pull thee by the beard,
Ere thou wilt open thy black-lidded eye,
And looke him dead? Well! Snore on, dreaming gods:
And let this last of that proud Giant-race,
Heaue mountayne vpon mountayne, 'gainst your state—
Be good vnto me, fortune, and you powers,
Whom I, expostulating, haue profan'd;
I see (what's equall with a prodigie)
A great, a noble Romane, and an honest,
Liue an old man! O, MARCVS LEPIDVS,
When is our turne to bleed? Thy selfe, and I
(Without our boast) are a'most all the few
Left, to be honest, in these impious times.
WHat we are left to be, we will be, LVCIVS,
Though tyrannie did stare, as wide as death,
To fright vs from it.
'T hath so, on SABINVS.
I saw him now drawne from the Gemonies,
And (what increas'd the direnesse of the fact)
His faithfull dogge (vpbraiding all vs Romanes)
Neuer forsooke the corp's, but, seeing it throwne
Into the streame, leap'd in, and drown'd with it.
O act! to be enui'd him, of vs men!
We are the next, the hooke layes hold on, MARCVS▪
What are thy artes (good patriot, teach them me)
That haue preseru'd thy haires, to this white die,
And kept so reuerend, and so deare a head,
Safe, on his comely shoulders?
Arts, ARRVNTIVS?
None, but the plaine, and passiue fortitude,
To suffer, and be silent; neuer stretch
These armes, against the torrent; liue at home,
With my owne thoughts, and innocence about me,
Not tempting the wolues iawes: these are my artes.
I would begin to studie 'hem, if I thought
They would secure me. May I pray to IOVE,
In secret, and be safe? I, or aloud?
With open wishes? so I doe not mention
TIBERIVS, or SEIANVS? yes, I must,
If I speake out. 'Tis hard, that. May I thinke,
And not be rackt? What danger is't to dreame?
Talke in ones sleepe? or cough? who knowes the law?
May I shake my head, without a comment? say
It raines, or it holds vp, and not be throwne
Vpon the Gemonies? These now are things,
Whereon mens fortune, yea their fate depends.
Nothing hath priuiledge 'gainst the violent eare.
No place, no day, no houre (we see) is free.
(Not our religious, and most sacred times)
From some one kind of crueltie: all matter,
Nay all occasion pleaseth. Mad-mens rage,
The idlenesse of drunkards, womens nothing,
Iesters simplicity, all, all is good
That can be catch'd at. Nor is now th'euent
Of any person, or for any crime,
To be expected; for, 'tis alwayes one:
Death, with some little difference of place,
Or time— what's this? Prince NERO? guarded?
ON, Lictors, keepe your way: My lords, forbeare.
On paine of CAESARS wrath, no man attempt
Speech with the prisoner.
Noble friends, be safe:
To loose your selues for wordes, were as vaine hazard,
As vnto me small comfort: Fare you well.
Would all Rome's suffrings in my fate did dwell.
Lictors, away.
Where goes he, LACO?
Sir,
His banish'd into Pontia, by the Senate.
Do' I see? and heare? and feele? May I trust sense?
Or doth my phant'sie forme it?
Where's his brother?
DRVSVS is prisoner in the palace.
Ha?
I smell it now: 'tis ranke. Where's AGRIPPINA?
The princesse is confin'd, to Pandataria.
Bolts, VULCAN; bolts, for IOVE! PHOEBVS, thy bow;
Sterne MARS, thy sword; and blue-ey'd Maid, thy speare;
Thy club, ALCIDES: all the armorie
Of heauen is too little!—Ha? to guard
The gods, I meant. Fine, rare dispatch! This same
Was swiftly borne! confin'd? imprison'd? banish'd?
Most tripartite! The cause, sir?
Treason.
O?
The complement of all accusings? that
Will hit, when all else failes.
This turne is strange!
But yesterday, the people would not heare
Farre lesse obiected, but cry'd, CAESARS letters
Were false, and forg'd; that all these plots were malice:
And that the ruine of the Princes house
Was practis'd 'gainst his knowledge. Where are now
Their voyces? now, that they behold his heires
Lock'd vp, disgrac'd, led into exile?
Hush'd.
Drown'd in their bellies. Wild SEIANVS breath
Hath, like a whirle-wind, scatter'd that poore dust,
With this rude blast. Wee'll talke no treason, sir,
If that be it you stand for? Fare you well.
We haue no need of horse-leeches. Good spie,
Now you are spi'd, be gone.
I feare, you wrong him.
He has the voyce to be an honest Romane.
And trusted to this office? LEPIDVS,
I'ld sooner trust Greeke-SINON, then a man
Our state employes. Hee's gone: and being gone,
I dare tell you (whom I dare better trust)
That our night-ey'd TIBERIVS doth not see
His minions drifts; or, if he doe, h'is not
So errant subtill, as we fooles doe take him:
To breed a mungrell vp, in his owne house,
With his owne bloud, and (if the good gods please)
At his owne throte, flesh him, to take a leape.
I doe not beg it, heau'n: but, if the fates
Grant it these eyes, they must not winke.
They must
Not see it, LVCIVS.
Who should let 'hem?
Zeale,
And dutie; with the thought, he is our Prince.
He is our monster: forfeited to vice
So far, as no rack'd vertue can redeeme him.
His lothed person fouler then all crimes:
An Emp'rour, only in his lusts. Retir'd
(From all regard of his owne fame, or Rome's)
Into an obscure Iland; where he liues
(Acting his tragedies with a comick face)
Amid'st his rout of Chaldee's: spending houres,
Dayes, weekes, and months, in the vnkind abuse
Of graue astrologie, to the bane of men,
Casting the scope of mens natiuities,
And hauing found ought worthy in their fortune,
Kill, or precipitate them in the sea,
And boast, he can mocke fate. Nay, muse not: these
Are farre from ends of euill, scarse degrees.
He hath his slaughter-house, at Capreae;
Where he doth studie murder, as an arte:
And they are dearest in his grace, that can
Deuise the deepest tortures. Thither, too,
He hath his boyes, and beauteous girles tane vp,
Out of our noblest houses, the best form'd,
Best nurtur'd, and most modest: what's their good
Serues to prouoke his bad. Some are allur'd,
Some threatned; others (by their friends detain'd)
Are rauish'd hence, like captiues, and, in sight
Of their most grieued parents, dealt away
Vnto his spintries, sellaries, and slaues,
Masters of strange, and new-commented lusts,
For which wise nature hath not left a name.
To this (what most strikes vs, and bleeding Rome,)
He is, with all his craft, become the ward
To his owne vassall, a stale catamite:
Whom he (vpon our low, and suffering necks)
Hath rais'd, from excrement, to side the gods,
And haue his proper sacrifice in Rome:
Which IOVE beholds, and yet will sooner riue
A senslesse oke with thunder, then his trunck.
THese letters make men doubtfull what t'expect,
Whether his comming, or his death.
Troth, both:
And which comes soonest, thanke the gods for.
List,
Their talke is CAESAR, I would heare all voyces.)
One day, hee's well; and will returne to Rome:
The next day, sicke; and knowes not when to hope it.
True, and to day, one of SEIANVS friends
Honour'd by speciall writ; and on the morrow
Another punish'd—
By more speciall writ.
This man receiues his praises of SEIANVS,
A second, but slight mention; a third, none:
A fourth, rebukes. And thus he leaues the Senate
Diuided, and suspended, all vncertayne.
These forked tricks, I vnderstand 'hem not,
Would he would tell vs whom he loues, or hates,
That we might follow, without feare, or doubt.
Good HELIOTROPE! Is this your honest man?
Let him be yours so still. He is my knaue.)
I cannot tell, SEIANVS still goes on,
And mounts, we see: New statues are aduanc'd,
Fresh leaues of titles, large inscriptions read,
His fortune sworne by, himselfe new gone out
CAESARS colleague, in the fifth Consulship,
More altars smoke to him, then all the gods:
What would wee more?
That the deare smoke would choke him,
That would I more.
Peace, good ARRVNTIVS.)
But there are letters come (they say) eu'n now,
Which doe forbid that last.
Doe you heare so?
Yes.
By POLLVX, that's the worst.
By HERCVLES, best.)
I did not like the signe, when REGVLVS,
(Whom all we know no friend vnto SEIANVS)
Did, by TIBERIVS so precise command,
Succeed a fellow in the Consulship:
It boded somewhat.
Not a mote. His partner,
FVLCINIVS TRIO, is his owne, and sure.
Here comes TERENTIVS. He can giue vs more.
I'le ne're beleeue, but CAESAR hath some sent
Of bold SEIANVS footing. These crosse points
Of varying letters, and opposing Consuls,
Mingling his honours, and his punishments,
Fayning now ill, now well, raysing SEIANVS,
And then depressing him, (as now of late
In all reports we haue it) cannot be
Emptie of practice: 'Tis TIBERIVS arte.
For (hauing found his fauorite growne too great,
And, with his greatnesse, strong; that all the souldiers
Are, with their leaders, made at his deuotion;
That almost all the Senate are his creatures,
Or hold on him their maine dependances,
Either for benefit, or hope, or feare;
And that himselfe hath lost much of his owne,
By parting vnto him; and by th'increase
Of his ranke lusts, and rages, quite disarm'd
Himselfe of loue, or other publique meanes,
To dare an open contestation)
His subtilty hath chose this doubling line,
To hold him euen in: not so to feare him,
As wholly put him out, and yet giue checke
Vnto his farder boldnesse. In meane time,
By his employments, makes him odious
Vnto the staggering rout, whose aide (in fine)
He hopes to vse, as sure, who (when they sway)
Beare downe, ore-turne all obiects in their way.
You may be a LINCEVS, LEPIDVS: yet, I
See no such cause, but that a politique tyranne
(who can so well disguise it) should haue tane
A neerer way: fain'd honest, and come home
To cut his throte, by Law.
I, but his feare
Would ne're be masqu'd, all-be his vices were.
His lordship then is still in grace?
Assure you,
Neuer in more, either of grace, or power.
The gods are wise, and iust.
(The fiends they are.
To suffer thee belie 'hem?)
I haue here
His last, and present letters, where he writes him
The Partner of his cares, and his SEIANVS—
But is that true, it 'tis prohibited,
To sacrifice vnto him?
Some such thing
CAESAR makes scruple of, but forbids it not;
No more then to himselfe: sayes, he could wish
It were forborne to all.
Is it no other?
No other, on my trust. For your more surety,
Here is that letter too.
(How easily,
Doe wretched men beleeue, what they would haue!
Lookes this like plot?
Noble ARRVNTIVS, stay.)
He names him here without his titles.
(Note.
Yes, and come of your notable foole. I will.)
No other, then SEIANVS.
That's but haste
In him that writes. Here he giues large amends.
And with his owne hand written?
Yes.
Indeed?
Beleeue it, gentlemen, SEIANVS brest
Neuer receiu'd more full contentments in,
Then at this present.
Takes he well th'escape
Of young CALIGVLA, with MACRO?
Faith,
At the first aire, it somewhat troubled him.
(Obserue you?
Nothing. Riddles. TIll I see
SEIANVS strooke, no sound thereof strikes me.)
I like it not. I muse h' would not attempt
Somewhat against him in the Consul-ship,
Seeing the people 'ginne to fauour him.
He doth repent it, now; but h' has employ'd
PAGONIANVS after him: and he holds
That correspondence, there, with all that are
Neere about CAESAR, as no thought can paſse
Without his knowledge, thence, in act to front him.
I gratulate the newes.
But, how comes MACRO
So in trust, and fauour, with CALIGVLA?
O sir, he ha's a wife; and the young Prince
An appetite: he can looke vp, and spie
Flies in the roofe, when there are fleas i' bed;
And hath a learned nose to'assure his sleepes.
Who, to be fauour'd of the rising sunne,
Would not lend little of his waning moone?
'T is the saf'st ambition. Noble TERENTIVS.
The night growes fast vpon vs. At your seruice.
SWell, swell, my ioyes: and faint not to declare
Your selues, as ample, as your causes are.
I did not liue, till now; this my first hower:
Wherein I see my thoughts reach'd by my power.
But this, and gripe my wishes. Great, and high,
The world knowes only two, that's Rome, and I.
My roofe receiues me not; 'tis aire I tread:
And, at each step, I feele my aduanced head
Knocke out a starre in heau'n! Rear'd to this height,
All my desires seeme modest, poore, and sleight,
That did before sound impudent: 'Tis place,
Not bloud, discernes the noble, and the base.
Is there not something more, then to be CAESAR?
Must we rest there? It yrkes, t' haue come so far,
To be so neere a stay. CALIGVLA,
Would thou stood'st stiffe, and many, in our way.
Windes lose their strength, when they doe emptie flie,
Vn-met of woods or buildings; great fires die
That want their matter to with-stand them: so,
It is our griefe, and will be' our losse, to know
Our power shall want opposites; vnlesse
The gods, by mixing in the cause, would blesse
Our fortune, with their conquest. That were worth
SEIANVS strife: durst fates but bring it forth.
SAfety, to great SEIANVS.
Now, TERENTIVS?
Heares not my lord the wonder?
Speake it, no.
I meete it violent in the peoples mouthes,
Who runne, in routs, to POMPEY'S theatre,
To view your statue: which, they say, sends forth
A smoke, as from a fornace, black, and dreadfull.
Some traytor hath put fire in: (you, goe see.)
And let the head be taken off, to looke
What 'tis— Some slaue hath practis'd an imposture,
To stirre the people. How now? why returne you?
THe head, my lord, already is tane off,
I saw it: and, at op'ning, there leap't out
A great, and monstrous serpent!
Monstrous! why?
Had it a beard? and hornes? no heart? a tongue
Forked as flatterie? look'd it of the hue,
To such as liue in great mens bosomes? was
The spirit of it MACRO'S?
May it please
The most diuine SEIANVS, in my dayes,
(And by his sacred fortune, I affirme it)
I haue not seene a more extended, growne,
Foule, spotted, venomous, vgly—
O, the fates!
What a wild muster's here of attributes,
T'expresse a worme, a snake?
But how that should
Come there, my lord!
What! and you too, TERENTIVS?
I thinke you meane to make 't a prodigie
In your reporting?
Can the wise SEIANVS
Thinke heau'n hath meant it lesse?
O, superstition!
Why, then the falling of our bed, that brake
This morning, burd'ned with the populous weight
Of our expecting clients, to salute vs;
Or running of the cat, betwixt our legs,
As we set forth vnto the capitoll,
Were prodigies.
I thinke them ominous!
And, would they had not hap'ned. As, to day,
The fate of some your seruants! who, declining
Their way, not able, for the throng, to follow,
Slip't downe the Gemonies, and brake their necks!
Besides, in taking your last augurie,
No prosperous bird appear'd, but croking rauens
Flag'd vp and downe: and from the sacrifice
Flew to the prison, where they sate, all night,
Beating the aire with their obstreperous beakes!
I dare not counsell, but I could entreat
That great SEIANVS would attempt the gods,
Once more, with sacrifice.
What excellent fooles
Religion makes of men? Beleeues TERENTIVS,
(If these were dangers, as I shame to thinke them)
The gods could change the certayne course of fate?
Or, if they could, they would (now, in a moment)
For a beeues fat, or lesse, be brib'd t'inuert
Those long decrees? Then thinke the gods, like flies,
Are to be taken with the steame of flesh,
Or bloud, diffus'd about their altars: thinke
Their power as cheape, as I esteeme it small.
Of all the throng, that fill th'Olympian hall,
And (without pitty) lade poore ATLAS back,
I know not that one deity, but Fortune;
To whom, I would throw vp, in begging smoke,
One grane of incense: or whose eare I'ld buy
With thus much oyle. Her, I, indeed, adore;
And keepe her gratefull image in my house,
Some-times belonging to a Romane king,
But, now call'd mine, as by the better stile:
To her, I care not, if (for satisfying
Your scrupulous phant'sies) I goe offer. Bid
Our priest prepare vs honny, milke, and poppy,
His masculine odours, and night-vestments: say,
Our rites are instant, which perform'd, you'll see
How vaine, and worthy laughter, your feares be.
POMPONIVS! whither in such speed?
I goe
To giue my lord SEIANVS notice—
What?
Of MACRO.
Is he come?
Entr'd but now
The house of REGVLVS.
The opposite Consul?
Some halfe houre since.
And, by night too! stay, sir;
I'le beare you companie.
Along, then—
TIs CAESARS will, to haue a frequent Senate.
And therefore must your edict lay deepe mulct
On such, as shall be absent.
So it doth.
Beare it my fellow Consul to adscribe.
And tell him it must early be proclaim'd;
The place, APOLLO'S temple.
That's remembred.
And at what houre?
Yes.
You doe forget
To send one for the Prouost of the watch?
I haue not: here he comes.
GRACINVS LACO,
You'are a friend most welcome: by, and by,
I'le speake with you. (You must procure this list
Of the Praetorian cohorts, with the names
Of the Centurions, and their Tribunes.
I.)
I bring you letters, and a health from CAESAR—
Sir, both come well.
(And heare you, with your note,
Which are the eminent men, and most of action.
That shall be done you too.)
Most worthy LACO,
CAESAR salutes you. (Consul! death, and furies!
Gone now?) the argument will please you, sir.
(Hough! REGVLVS? The anger of the gods
Follow his diligent legs, and ouer'take 'hem,
In likenesse of the gout.) O, good my lord,
We lackt you present; I would pray you send
Another to FVLCINIVS TRIO, straight,
To tell him, you will come, and speake with him:
(The matter wee'le deuise) to stay him, there,
While I, with LACO, doe suruay the watch.
What are your strengths, GRACINVS?
Seuen cohorts.
You see, what CAESAR writes: and (—gone againe?
H'has sure a veine of mercury in his feet)
Knew you, what store of the praetorian souldiers
SEIANVS holds, about him, for his guard?
I cannot the iust number: but, I thinke,
Three centuries.
Three? good.
At most, not foure.
And who be those Centurions?
That the Consul
Can best deliuer you.
(When h'is away:
Spight, on his nimble industrie.) GRACINVS,
You find what place you hold, there, in the trust
Of royall CAESAR?
I, and I am—
Sir,
The honours, there propos'd, are but beginnings
Of his great fauours.
They are more—
I heard him
When he did studie, what to adde—
My life,
And all I hold—
You were his owne first choise;
Which doth confirme as much, as you can speake:
And will (if we succeed) make more— Your guardes
Are seuen cohorts, you say?
Yes.
Those we must
Hold still in readinesse, and vndischarg'd.
I vnderstand so much. But how it can—
Be done without suspition, you'll obiect?
What's that?
The keeping of the watch in armes,
When morning comes.
The Senate shall be met, and set
So early, in the temple, as all marke
Of that will be auoided.
If we need,
We haue commission, to possesse the palace,
Enlarge prince DRVSVS, and make him our chiefe.
(That secret would haue burn't his reuerend mouth,
Had he not spit it out, now:) by the gods,
You carry things too—let me borrow'a man,
Or two, to beare these— That of freeing DRVSVS,
CAESAR proiected as the last, and vtmost;
Not else to be remembred.
Here are seruants.
These to ARRVNTIVS, these to LEPIDVS,
This beare to COTTA, this to LATIARIS.
If they demand you'of me: say, I haue tane
Fresh horse, and am departed. You (my lord)
To your colleague, and be you sure, to hold him
With long narration, of the new fresh fauours,
Meant to SEIANVS, his great patron; I,
With trusted LACO, here, are for the guards:
Then, to diuide. For, night hath many eies,
Whereof, though most doe sleepe, yet some are spies.
BE all profane farre hence; Flie, flie farre off:
Be absent farre. Farre hence be all profane.
We haue beene faultie, but repent vs now,
And bring pure hands, pure vestments, and pure minds.
Pure vessells.
And pure offrings.
Garlands pure.
Bestow your garlands: and (with reuerence) place
The veruin on the altar.
Fauour your tongues.
Great mother FORTVNE, Queene of humane state,
Rectresse of action, Arbitresse of fate,
To whom all sway, all power, all empire bowes,
Be present, and propitious to our vowes.
Fauour it with your tongues.
Be present, and propitious to our vowes.
Accept our offring, and be pleas'd, great goddesse.
See, see, the image stirres!
And turnes away!
Fortune auerts her face!
Auert, you gods,
The prodigie. Still! still! Some pious rite
We haue neglected. Yet! heau'n, be appeas'd.
And be all tokens false, or void, that speake
Thy present wrath.
Be thou dumbe, scrupulous priest:
And gather vp thy selfe, with these thy wares,
Which I, in spight of thy blind mistris, or
Thy iuggling mysterie, religion, throw
Thus, scorned on the earth. Nay, hold thy looke
Auerted, till I woo thee, turne againe;
And thou shalt stand, to all posteritie,
Th'eternall game, and laughter, with thy neck
Writh'd to thy taile, like a ridiculous cat.
Auoid these fumes, these superstitious lights,
And all these coos'ning ceremonies: you,
Your pure, and spiced conscience. I, the slaue,
And mock of fooles, (scorne on my worthy head)
That haue beene titled, and ador'd a god,
Yea, sacrific'd vnto, my selfe, in Rome,
No lesse then IOVE: and I be brought, to doe
A peeuish gigglot rites? Perhaps, the thought,
And shame of that made Fortune turne her face,
Knowing her selfe the lesser deitie,
And but my seruant. Bashfull queene, if so,
SEIANVS thankes thy modestie. Who's that?
HIs fortune suffers, till he heares my newes:
I haue waited here too long. MACRO, my lord—
Speake lower, & with-draw.
Are these things true?
Thousands are gazing at it, in the streets.
What's that?
MINVTIVS tells vs here, my lord,
That, a new head being set vpon your statue,
A rope is since found wreath'd about it! and,
But now, a fierie meteor, in the forme
Of a great ball, was seene to rowle along
The troubled ayre, where yet it hangs, vnperfect,
The amazing wonder of the multitude!
No more. That MACRO'S come, is more then all!
Is MACRO come?
I saw him.
Where? with whom?
With REGVLVS.
TERENTIVS—
My lord?
Send for the Tribunes, we will straight haue vp
More of the souldiers, for our guard. MINVTIVS,
We pray you, goe for COTTA, LATIARIS,
TRIO the Consul, or what Senators
You know are sure, and ours. You, my good NATTA,
For LACO, Prouost of the watch. Now, SATRIVS,
The time of proofe comes on. Arme all our seruants,
And without tumult. You, POMPONIVS,
Hold some good correspondence, with the Consul,
Attempt him, noble friend. These things begin
To looke like dangers, now, worthy my fates.
Fortune, I see thy worst: Let doubtfull states,
And things vncertaine hang vpon thy will:
Me surest death shall render certaine still.
Yet, why is, now, my thought turn'd toward death,
Whom fates haue let goe on, so farre, in breath,
Vncheck'd, or vnreprou'd? I, that did helpe
To fell the loftie Cedar of the world,
GERMANICVS; that, at one stroke, cut downe
DRVSVS, that vpright Elme; wither'd his vine;
Laid SILIVS, and SABINVS, two strong Okes,
Flat on the earth; besides, those other shrubs,
CORDVS, and SOSIA, CLAVDIA PVLCHRA,
FVRNIVS, and GALLVS, which I haue grub'd vp;
And since, haue set my axe so strong, and deepe
Into the roote of spreading AGRIPPINE;
Lopt off and scatter'd her proud branches, NERO,
DRVSVS, and CAIVS too, although re-planted;
If you will, destinies, that, after all,
I faint, now, ere I touch my period;
You are but cruell: and I alreadie haue done
Things great inough. All Rome hath beene my slaue;
The Senate sate an idle looker on,
And witnesse of my power; when I haue blush'd,
More, to command, then it to suffer; all
The Fathers haue sate readie, and prepar'd,
To giue me empire, temples, or their throtes,
When I would aske 'hem; and (what crownes the top)
Rome, Senate, people, all the world haue seene
IOVE, but my equall: CAESAR, but my second.
'Tis then your malice, fates, who (but your owne)
Enuy, and feare, t'haue any power long knowne.
STay here: I'le giue his lordship, you are come.
MARCVS, TERENTIVS, pray you tell my lord,
Here's COTTA, and LATIARIS.
Sir, I shall.
My letter is the very same with yours;
Onely requires mee to bee present there,
And giue my voyce, to strengthen his designe.
Names he not what it is?
No, nor to you.
'Tis strange, and singular doubtfull!
So it is?
It may bee all is left to lord SEIANVS.
GEntlemen, where's my lord?
Wee wait him here.
The Prouost LACO? what's the newes?
My lord—
NOw, my right deare, noble, and trusted friends;
How much I am a captiue to your kindnesse!
Most worthy COTTA, LATIARIS; LACO,
Your valiant hand; and gentlemen, your loues.
I wish I could diuide my selfe vnto you;
Or that it lay, within our narrow powers,
To satisfie for so enlarged bountie.
GRACINVS, we must pray you, hold your guardes
Vnquit, when morning comes. Saw you the Consul?
TRIO will presently be here, my lord.
They are but giuing order for the edict,
To warne the Senate.
How! the Senate?
Yes.
This morning, in APOLLO'S temple.
We
Are charg'd, by letter, to be there, my lord.
By letter? pray you let's see!
Knowes not his lordship!
It seemes so!
A Senate warn'd? without my knowledge?
And on this sodaine? Senators by letters
Required to be there! who brought these?
MACRO.
Mine enemie! And when?
This mid-night.
Time,
With eu'ry other circumstance, doth giue
It hath some streine of engin in't! How now?
MY lord, SERTORIVS MACRO is without,
Alone, and prayes t' haue priuate conference
In businesse, of high nature, with your lordship,
(He say's to me) and which reguards you much.
Let him come here.
Better, my lord, with-draw,
You will betray what store, and strength of friends
Are now about you; which he comes to spie.
Is he not arm'd?
Wee'll search him.
No, but take,
And lead him to some roome, where you, conceal'd,
May keepe a guard vpon vs. Noble LACO,
You are our trust: and, till our owne cohorts
Can be brought vp, your strengths must be our guard.
Now, good MINVTIVS, honour'd LATIARIS,
Most worthy, and my most vnwearied friends:
I returne instantly.
Most worthy lord!
His lordship is turn'd instant kind, me thinkes,
I' haue not obseru'd it in him, heretofore.
'Tis true, and it becomes him nobly.
I
Am rap't withall.
By MARS, he has my liues,
(Were they a million) for this onely grace.
I, and to name a man!
As he did me!
And me!
Who would not spend his life and fortunes,
To purchase but the looke of such a lord?
He, that would nor be lords foole, nor the worlds.
MACRO! most welcome, as most coueted friend!
Let me enioy my longings. When arriu'd you?
About the noone of night.
SATRIVS, giue leaue.
I haue beene, since I came, with both the Consuls,
On a particular designe from CAESAR.
How fares it with our great, and royall master?
Right plentifully well; as, with a prince,
That still holds out the great proportion
Of his large fauours, where his iudgement hath
Made once diuine election: like the god,
That wants not, nor is wearied to bestow
Where merit meets his bountie, as it doth
In you, alreadie the most happy, and ere
The sunne shall climbe the south, most high SEIANVS.
Let not my lord be' amus'd. For, to this end
Was I by CAESAR sent for, to the isle,
With speciall caution to conceale my iourney;
And, thence, had my dispatch as priuately
Againe to Rome; charg'd to come here by night;
And, onely to the Consuls, make narration
Of his great purpose: that the benefit
Might come more full, and striking, by how much
It was lesse look'd for, or aspir'd by you,
Or least informed to the common thought.
What may this be? part of my selfe, deare MACRO!
If good, speake out: and share with your SEIANVS.
If bad, I should for euer lothe my selfe,
To be the messenger to so good a lord.
I doe exceed m' instructions, to acquaint
Your lordship with thus much; but 'tis my venture
On your retentiue wisedome: and, because
I would no iealous scruple should molest
Or racke your peace of thought. For, I assure
My noble lord, no Senator yet knowes
The businesse meant: though all, by seuerall letters,
Are warned to be there, and giue their voyces,
Onely to adde vnto the state, and grace
Of what is purpos'd.
You take pleasure, MACRO,
Like a coy wench, in torturing your louer.
What can be worth this suffering?
That which followes,
The tribuniciall dignitie, and power:
Both which SEIANVS is to haue this day
Confer'd vpon him, and by publique Senate.
Fortune, be mine againe; thou hast satisfied
For thy suspected loyaltie.
My lord,
I haue no longer time, the day approcheth,
And I must backe to CAESAR.
Where's CALIGVLA?
That I forgot to tell your lordship. Why,
He lingers yonder, about Capreae,
Disgrac'd; TIBERIVS hath not seene him yet:
He needs would thrust himselfe to goe with me,
Against my wish, or will, but I haue quitted
His forward trouble, with as tardie note
As my neglect, or silence could afford him.
Your lordship cannot now command me ought,
Because, I take no knowledge that I saw you,
But I shall boast to liue to serue your lordship:
And so take leaue.
Honest, and worthy MACRO,
Your loue, and friendship. Who's there? SATRIVS,
Attend my honourable friend forth. O!
How vaine, and vile a passion is this feare?
What base, vncomely things it makes men doe?
Suspect their noblest friends, (as I did this)
Flatter poore enemies, intreat their seruants,
Stoupe, court, and catch at the beneuolence
Of creatures, vnto whom (within this houre)
I would not haue vouchsaf'd a quarter-looke,
Or piece of face? By you, that fooles call gods,
Hang all the skie with your prodigious signes,
Fill earth with monsters, drop the scorpion downe,
Out of the zodiack, or the fiercer lyon,
Shake off the loos'ned globe from her long henge,
Rowle all the world in darkenesse, and let loose
Th'inraged windes to turne vp groues and townes;
When I doe feare againe, let me be strooke
With forked fire, and vnpittyed die:
Who feares, is worthy of calamitie.
IS not my lord here?
Sir, he will be straight.
What newes, FVLCINIVS TRIO?
Good, good tidings.
(But, keepe it to your selfe) My lord SEIANVS
Is to receiue this day, in open Senate,
The tribuniciall dignitie.
Is't true?
No wordes; not to your thought: but, sir, beleeue it.
What sayes the Consul?
(Speake it not againe,)
He tells me, that to day my lord SEIANVS —
I must entreat you COTTA, on your honour
Not to reueale it.
On my life, sir.)
Say.
Is to receiue the tribuniciall power.
But, as you are an honourable man,
Let me coniure you, not to vtter it:
For it is trusted to me, with that bond.
I am HARPOCRATES.
Can you assure it?
The Consul told it me, but keepe it close.
Lord LATIARIS, what's the newes?
I'le tell you,
But you must sweare to keepe it secret—
I Knew the sates had on their distaffe left
More of our thread, then so.
Haile, great SEIANVS.
Haile, the most honor'd.
Happy.
High SEIANꝰ.
Doe you bring prodigies too?
May all presage
Turne to those faire effects, whereof we bring
Your lordship newes.
May 't please my lord with-draw.
Yes (I will speake with you, anon.)
My lord,
What is your pleasure for the Tribunes?
Why,
Let 'hem be thank't, and sent away.
My lord—
Wilt please your lordship to command me—
No.
You are troublesome.
The mood is chang'd.
Not speake?
Nor looke?
I. He is wise, will make him friends
Of such, who neuer loue, but for their ends.
I, Goe, make haste; take heed you be not last
To tender your All haile, in the wide hall
Of huge SEIANVS: runne, a Lictors pace;
Stay not to put your robes on; but, away,
With the pale troubled ensignes of great friendship
Stamp't i' your face! Now, MARCVS LEPIDVS,
You still beleeue your former augurie?
SEIANVS must goe downe-ward? you perceiue
His wane approching fast?
Beleeue me, LVCIVS,
I wonder at this rising!
I, and that we
Must giue our suffrage to it? you will say,
It is to make his fall more steepe, and grieuous?
It may be so. But thinke it, they that can
With idle wishes 'ssay to bring backe time:
In cases desperate, all hope is crime.
See, see! what troups of his officious friends
Flock to salute my lord! and start before
My great, proud lord! to get a lord-like nod!
Attend my lord, vnto the Senate-house!
Bring back my lord! like seruile huishers, make
Way for my lord! proclaime his idoll lord-ship,
More then ten cryers, or sixe noise of trumpets!
Make legs, kisse hands, and take a scatter'd haire
From my lords eminent shoulder! See, SANQVINIVS!
With his slow belly, and his dropsie! looke,
What toyling haste he makes! yet, here's another,
Retarded with the gout, will be afore him!
Get thee liburnian porters, thou grosse foole,
To beare thy obsequious fatnesse, like thy peeres.
They are met! The gout returnes, and his great carriage.
GIue way, make place; roome for the Consul.
Haile,
Haile, great SEIANVS.
Haile, my honor'd lord.
We shall be markt anon, for our not-haile.
That is already done.
It is a note
Of vpstart greatnesse, to obserue, and watch
For these poore trisles, which the noble mind
Neglects, and scornes.
I, and they thinke themselues
Deepely dishonor'd, where they are omitted,
As if they were necessities, that helpt
To the perfection of their dignities:
And hate the men, that but refraine 'hem.
O!
There is a farder cause of hate. Their brests
Are guiltie, that we know their obscure springs,
And base beginnings: thence the anger growes. On. Follow.
WHen all are entred, shut the temple doores;
And bring your guardes vp to the gate.
I will.
If you shall heare commotion in the Senate,
Present your selfe: and charge on any man
Shall offer to come forth.
I am instructed.
HOw well his lordship lookes to day!
As if
He had beene borne, or made for this houres state.
Your fellow Consul's come about, me thinkes?
I, he is wise.
SEIANVS trusts him well.
SEIANVS is a noble, bounteous lord.
He is so, and most valiant.
And most wise.
Hee's euery thing.
Worthy of all, and more
Then bountie can bestow.
This dignitie
Will make him worthy.
Aboue CAESAR.
Tut,
CAESAR is but the rector of an I'sle,
He of the empire.
Now he will haue power
More to reward, then euer.
Let vs looke
We be not slack in giuing him our voyces.
Not I.
Nor I.
The readier we seeme
To propagate his honours, will more bind
His thought, to ours.
I thinke right, with your lordship.
It is the way to haue vs hold our places.
I, and get more.
More office, and more titles.
I will not lose the part, I hope to share
In these his fortunes, for my patrimonie.
See, how ARRVNTIVS sits, and LEPIDVS.
Let 'hem alone, they will be markt anon.
I'le doe with others.
So will I.
And I.
Men grow not in the state, but as they are planted
Warme in his fauours.
Noble SEIANVS!
Honor'd SEIANVS!
Worthy, and great SEIANVS!
Gods! how the spunges open, and take in!
And shut againe! looke, looke! is not he blest
That gets a seate in eye-reach of him? more,
That comes in eare, or tongue-reach? Ô, but most,
Can claw his subtle elbow, or with a buzze
Fly-blow his eares.
Proclaime the Senates peace;
And giue last summons by the edict.
Silence:
In name of CAESAR, and the SENATE. Silence.
MEMMIVS REGVLVS, and FVLCINIVS TRIO, consuls, these present kalends of Iune, with the first light, shall hold a senate, in the temple of APOLLO PALATINE, all that are Fathers, and are registred Fathers, that haue right of entring the Senate, we warne, or command, you be frequently present, take knowledge the businesse is the common-wealths, whosoeuer is absent, his fine, or mulct, will be taken, his excuse will not be taken.
Note, who are absent, and record their names.
Fathers Conscript. May, what I am to vtter.
Turne good, and happy, for the common-wealth.
And thou APOLLO, in whose holy house
We here are met, inspire vs all, with truth,
And libertie of censure, to our thought.
The maiestie of great TIBERIVS CAESAR
Propounds to this graue Senate, the bestowing
Vpon the man he loues, honour'd SEIANVS,
The tribuniciall dignitie, and power;
Here are his letters, signed with his signet:
What pleaseth now the Fathers to be done?
Reade, reade 'hem, open, publiquely, reade 'hem.
CAESAR hath honour'd his owne greatnesse much,
In thinking of this act.
It was a thought
Happy, and worthy CAESAR.
And the lord,
As worthy it, on whom it is directed!
Most worthy!
Rome did neuer boast the vertue
That could giue enuie bounds, but his: SEIANVS —
Honour'd, and noble!
Good, and great SEIANVS!
O, most tame slauerie, and fierce flatterie!
Silence.
IF you, Conscript Fathers, with your children, bee in health, it is aboundantly well: wee with our friends here, are so. The care of the common-wealth, howsoeuer we are remoou'd in person, cannot be absent to our thought; although, oftentimes, euen to princes most present, the truth of their owne affaires is hid: then which, nothing fals out more miserable to a state, or makes the art of gouerning more difficult. But since it hath beene our ease-full happinesse to enioy both the aides, and industrie of so vigilant a Senate, wee professe to haue beene the more indulgent to our pleasures, not as being carelesse of our office, but rather secure of the necessitie. Neyther doe these common rumors of many, and infamous libels, published against our retirement, at all afflict vs; being born more out of mens ignorance, then their malice: and will, neglected, finde their owne graue quickly; whereas too sensibly acknowledg'd, it would make their obloquie ours. Nor doe we desire their authors (though found) bee censur'd, since in a free state (as ours) all men ought to enioy both their mindes, and tongues free.
The lapwing, the lapwing.)
Yet, in things, which shall worthily, and more neere concerne the maiestie of a prince, we shall feare to be so vnnaturally cruell to our owne fame, as to neglect them. True it is, Conscript Fathers, that wee haue raysed SEIANVS, from obscure, and almost vnknowne gentrie,
How! how!)
to the highest, and most conspicuous point of greatnesse, and (wee hope) deseruingly; yet, not without danger: it being a most bold hazard in that sou'raigne, who, by his particular loue to one, dares aduenture the hatred of all his other subiects.
This touches, the bloud turnes.)
But wee affie in your loues, and vnderstandings, and doe no way suspect the merit of our SEIANVS to make our fauours offensiue to any.
O! good, good.)
Though we could haue wished his zeale had runne a calmer course against AGRIPPINA, and our Nephewes, howsoeuer the opennesse of their actions, declared them delinquents; and, that he would haue remembred, no innocence is so safe, but it reioyceth to stand in the sight of mercie: The vse of which in vs, hee hath so quite taken away, toward them, by his loyall furie, as now our clemencie would be thought but wearied crueltie, if we should offer to exercise it.
I thanke him, there I look'd for't. A good fox!)
Some there bee, that would interpret this his publique seueritie to bee particular ambition; and that, vnder a pretext of seruice to vs, hee doth but remooue his owne lets: alleadging the strengths he hath made to himselfe, by the Praetorian souldiers, by his faction in Court, and Senate, by the offices hee holdes himselfe, and conferres on others, his popularitie, and dependents, his vrging (and almost driuing) vs to this our vnwilling retirement, and lastly his aspiring to be our sonne in-law.
This 's strange!
I shall anon beleeue your vultures, MARCVS.)
Your wisedomes, Conscript Fathers, are able to examine, and censure these suggestions. But, were they left to our absoluing voyce, we durst pronounce them, as we thinke them, most malicious.
O, he has restor'd all, list.)
Yet, are they offer'd to bee auerr'd, and on the liues of the informers. What wee should say, or rather what we should not say, Lords of the Senate, if this bee true, our gods, and goddesses confound vs if we know! Only, we must thinke, we haue plac'd our benefits ill: and conclude, that, in our choise, either we were wanting to the gods, or the gods to vs.
The place growes hot, they shift.)
We haue not beene couetous, Honourable Fathers, to change; neither is it now, any new lust that alters our affection, or old lothing: but those needfull iealousies of state, that warne wiser princes, hourely, to prouide their safetie; and doe teach them how learned a thing it is to beware of the humblest enemy; much more of those great ones, whom their owne employ'd fauours haue made fit for their feares.
Away.
Sit farder.
Let's remooue—
Gods! how the leaues drop off, this little winde!)
We therefore desire, that the offices he holds, bee first seized by the Senate; and himselfe suspended from all exercise of place, or power—
How!
By your leaue.
Come, Porcpisce, (wher's HATERIVS?
His gout keepes him most miserably constant.)
Your dancing shewes a tempest.
Reade no more.
Lords of the Senate, hold your seates: reade on.
These letters, they are forg'd.
A guard, sit still.
There's change.
Bid silence, and reade forward.
Silence— and himselfe suspended from all exercise of place, or power, but till due and mature tryall be made of his innocency, which yet we can faintly apprehend the necessitie, to doubt. If, Conscript Fathers, to your more searching wisedomes, there shall appeare farther cause (or of farder proceeding, either to seizure of lands, goods, or more—) it is not our power that shall limit your authoritie, or our fauour, that must corrupt your iustice: either were dishonourable in you, and both vncharitable to our selfe. We would willingly he present with your counsailes in this businesse, but the danger of so potent a faction (if it should proue so) forbids our attempting it: except one of the Consuls would be intreated for our safetie, to vndertake the guard of vs home, then wee should most readily aduenture. In the meane time, it shall not bee fit for vs to importune so iudicious a Senate, who know how much they hurt the innocent, that spare the guiltie: and how gratefull a sacrifice, to the gods, is the life of an ingratefull person. We reflect not, in this, on SEIANVS (notwithstanding, if you keepe an eye vpon him— and there is LATIARIS a Senator, and PINNARIVS NATTA, two of his most trusted ministers, and so profest, whom we desire not to haue apprênded) but as the necessitie of the cause exacts it.
A guard on LATIARIS.
O, the spie!
The reuerend spie is caught, who pitties him?
Reward, sir, for your seuice: now, you ha' done
Your propertie, you see what vse is made?
Hang vp the instrument.
Giue leaue.
Stand, stand,
He comes vpon his death, that doth aduance
An inch toward my point.
Haue we no friends here?
Hush't. Where now are all the hailes, and acclamations?
HAile, to the Consuls, and this noble Senate.
Is MACRO here? O, thou art lost, SEIANVS.
Sit still, and vn-affrighted, reuerend Fathers.
MACRO, by CAESARS grace, the new-made Prouost,
And now possest of the praetorian bands,
An honour late belong'd to that proud man,
Bids you, be safe: and to your constant doome
Of his deseruings, offers you the surety
Of all the souldiers, tribunes, and centurions,
Receiu'd in our command.
SEIANVS, SEIANVS,
Stand forth, SEIANVS.
Am I call'd?
I, thou,
Thou insolent monster, art bid stand.
Why, MACRO,
It hath beene otherwise, betweene you, and I?
This court, that knowes vs both, hath seene a difference,
And can (if it be pleas'd to speake) confirme,
Whose insolence is most.
Come downe Typhoeus,
If mine be most, loe, thus I make it more;
Kicke vp thy heeles in ayre, teare off thy robe,
Play with thy beard, and nostrills. Thus 'tis fit,
(And no man take compassion of thy state)
To vse th'ingratefull viper, tread his braines
Into the earth.
Forbeare.
If I could lose
All my humanitie now, 'twere well to torture
So meriting a traytor. VVherefore, Fathers,
Sit you amaz'd, and silent? and not censure
This wretch, who in the houre he first rebell'd
'Gainst CAESARS bountie, did condemne himselfe?
P'hlegra, the field, where all the sonnes of earth
Muster'd against the gods, did ne're acknowledge
So proud, and huge a monster.
Take him hence.
And all the gods guard CAESAR.
Take him hence.
Hence.
To the dungeon with him.
He deserues it.
Crowne all our doores with bayes.
And let an oxe
With gilded hornes, and garlands, straight be led
Vnto the capitoll.
And sacrific'd
To IOVE, for CAESARS safety.
All our gods
Be present still to CAESAR.
PHOEBVS.
MARS.
DIANA.
PALLAS.
IVNO, MERCVRIE,
All guard him.
Forth, thou prodigie of men.
Let all the traytors titles be defac'd.
His images, and statues be pull'd downe.
His chariot-wheeles be broken.
And the legs
Of the poore horses, that deserued naught,
Let them be broken too.
O, violent change,
And whirle of mens affections!
Like, as both
Their bulkes and soules were bound on fortunes wheele,
And must act onely with her motion!
WHo would depend vpon the popular ayre,
Or voyce of men, that haue to day beheld
(That which if all the gods had fore-declar'd,
Would not haue beene beleeu'd) SEIANVS fall?
He, that this morne rose proudly, as the sunne?
And, breaking through a mist of clients breath,
Came on as gaz'd at, and admir'd, as he
When superstitious Moores salute his light!
That had our seruile nobles waiting him
As common groomes; and hanging on his looke,
No lesse then humane life on destinie!
That had mens knees as frequent, as the gods;
And sacrifices, more, then Rome had altars:
And this man fall! fall? I, without a looke,
That durst appeare his friend; or lend so much
Of vaine reliefe, to his chang'd state, as pitty!
They, that before like gnats plaid in his beames,
And throng'd to circumscribe him, now not seene!
Nor deigne to hold a common seate with him!
Others, that wayted him vnto the Senate,
Now, inhumanely rauish him to prison!
Whom (but this morne) they follow'd as their lord,
Guard through the streets, bound like a fugitiue!
In stead of wreaths, giue fetters; strokes, for stoops:
Blind shame, for honours; and black taunts, for titles!
Who would trust slippery chance?
They, that would make
Themselues her spoile: and foolishly forget,
When shee doth flatter, that shee comes to prey.
Fortune, thou hadst no deitie, if men
Had wisedome: we haue placed thee so high,
By fond beliefe in thy felicitie.
The gods guard CAESAR. All the gods guard CAESAR.
NOw great SEIANVS, you that aw'd the state,
And sought to bring the nobles to your whip,
That would be CAESARS tutor, and dispose
Of dignities, and offices! that had
The publique head still bare to your designes,
And made the generall voyce to eccho yours!
That look'd for salutations, twelue score off,
And would haue pyramid's, yea, temples rear'd
To your huge greatnesse! now, you lie as flat,
As was your pride aduanc'd.
Thanks, to the gods.
And praise to MACRO, that hath saued Rome.
Liberty, liberty, liberty. Lead on,
And praise to MACRO, that hath saued Rome.
I Prophesie, out of this Senates flatterie,
That this new fellow, MACRO, will become
A greater prodigie in Rome, then he
That now is falne.
O you, whose minds are good,
And haue not forc'd all mankind, from your brests;
That yet haue so much stock of vertue left,
To pitty guiltie states, when they are wretched:
Lend your soft eares to heare, and eyes to weepe
Deeds done by men, beyond the acts of furies.
The eager multitude, (who neuer yet
Knew why to loue, or hate, but onely pleas'd
T'expresse their rage of power) no sooner heard
The murmure of SEIANVS in decline,
But with that speed, and heate of appetite,
With which they greedily deuoure the way
To some great sports, or a new theatre;
They fill'd the capitoll, and POMPEI'S circke,
Where, like so many mastiues, biting stones,
As if his statues now were sensitiue
Of their wild furie; first, they teare them downe:
Then fastning ropes, drag them along the streets,
Crying in scorne, this, this was that rich head
Was crown'd with garlands, and with odours, this
That was in Rome so reuerenced. Now
The fornace, and the bellowes shall too worke
The great SEIANVS crack, and piece, by piece,
Drop i' the founders pit.
O, popular rage!
The whilst, the Senate, at the temple of Concord,
Make haste to meet againe, and thronging cry,
Let vs condemne him, tread him downe in water,
While he doth lie vpon the banke; away:
Where some, more tardie, cry vnto their bearers,
He will be censur'd ere we come, runne knaues,
And vse that furious diligence, for feare
Their bond-men should informe against their slacknesse,
And bring their quaking flesh vnto the hooke:
The rout, they follow with confused voyce,
Crying, they'are glad, say they could ne're abide him;
Enquire, what man he was? what kind of face?
What beard he had? what nose? what lips? protest,
They euer did presage h' would come to this:
They neuer thought him wise, nor valiant: Aske
After his garments, when he dies? what death?
And not a beast of all the herd demands,
What was his crime? or, who were his accusers?
Vnder what roofe, or testimonie, he fell?
There came (sayes one) a huge, long, worded letter
From Capreae against him. Did there so?
O, they are satisfied, no more.
Alas!
They follow fortune, and hate men condemn'd,
Guiltie, or not.
But, had SEIANVS thriu'd
In his designe, and prosperously opprest
The old TIBERIVS, then, in that same minute
These very raskals, that now rage like furies,
Would haue proclaim'd SEIANVS emperour.
But what hath follow'd?
Sentence, by the Senate;
To lose his head: which was no sooner off,
But that, and th'vnfortunate trunke were seiz'd
By the rude multitude; who not content
With what the forward iustice of the state,
Officiously had done, with violent rage
Haue rent it limbe, from limbe. A thousand heads,
A thousand hands, ten thousand tongues, and voyces,
Employ'd at once in seuerall acts of malice!
Old men not staid with age, virgins with shame,
Late wiues with losse of husbands, mothers of children,
Losing all griefe in ioy of his sad fall,
Runne quite transported with their crueltie!
These mounting at his head, these at his face,
These digging out his eyes, those with his braine,
Sprinkling themselues, their houses, and their friends;
Others are met, haue rauish'd thence an arme,
And deale small pieces of the flesh for fauours;
These with a thigh; this hath cut off his hands;
And this his feet; these fingers, and these toes;
That hath his liuer; he his heart: there wants
Nothing but roome for wrath, and place for hatred!
What cannot oft be done, is now ore-done.
The whole, and all of what was great SEIANVS,
And next to CAESAR did possesse the world,
Now torne, and scatter'd, as he needs no graue,
Each little dust couers a little part:
So lyes he no where, and yet often buryed!
MOre of SEIANVS?
Yes.
What can be added?
We know him dead.
Then, there begin your pitty.
There is inough behind, to melt eu'n Rome,
And CAESAR into teares: (since neuer slaue
Could yet so highly offend, but tyrannie,
In torturing him, would make him worth lamenting.)
A sonne, and daughter, to the dead SEIANVS,
(Of whom there is not now so much remayning
As would giue fastning to the hang-mans hooke)
Haue they drawne forth for farder sacrifice;
Whose tendernesse of knowledge, vnripe yeares,
And childish silly innocence was such,
As scarse would lend them feeling of their danger:
The girle so simple, as shee often askt,
Where they would lead her? for what cause they drag'd her?
Cry'd, shee would doe no more. That shee could take
Warning with beating. And because our lawes
Admit no virgin immature to die,
The wittily, and strangely-cruell MACRO,
Deliuer'd her to be deflowr'd, and spoil'd,
By the rude lust of the licentious hang-man,
Then, to be strangled with her harmelesse brother.
O, act, most worthy hell, and lasting night,
To hide it from the world!
Their bodies throwne
Into the Gemonies, (I know not how,
Or by what accident return'd) the mother,
Th'expulsed APICATA, finds them there;
Whom when shee saw lie spred on the degrees,
After a world of furie on her selfe,
Tearing her haire, defacing of her face,
Beating her brests, and wombe, kneeling amaz'd,
Crying to heauen, then to them; at last,
Her drowned voyce gate vp aboue her woes:
And with such black, and bitter execrations,
(As might affright the gods, and force the sunne
Runne back-ward to the east, nay, make the old
Deformed CITAOS rise againe, t' ore-whelme
Them, vs, and all the world) shee fills the aire;
Vpbraids the heauens with their partiall doomes,
Defies their tyrannous powers, and demands,
What shee, and those poore innocents haue transgress'd,
That they must suffer such a share in vengeance,
Whilst LIVIA, LYGDVS, and EVDEMVS liue,
Who, (as shee say's, and firmely vowes, to proue it
To CAESAR, and the Senate) poyson'd DRVSVS?
Confederates with her husband?
I.
Strange act!
And strangely open'd: what say's now my monster,
The multitude? they reele now? doe they not?
Their gall is gone, and now they 'gin to weepe
The mischiefe they haue done.
I thanke 'hem, rogues!
Part are so stupide, or so flexible,
As they beleeue him innocent; all grieue:
And some, whose hands yet reeke with his warme bloud,
And gripe the part which they did teare of him,
Wish him collected, and created new.
How fortune plies her sports, when shee begins
To practise'hem! pursues, continues, addes!
Conounds, with varying her empassion'd moodes!
Do'st thou hope fortune to redeeme thy crimes?
To make amends, for thy ill placed fauours,
With these strange punishments? Forbeare, you things,
That stand vpon the pinnacles of state,
To boast your slippery height; when you doe fall,
You pash your selues in pieces, nere to rise:
And he that lends you pitty, is not wise.
Let this example mooue th'insolent man,
Not to grow proud, and carelesse of the gods:
It is an odious wisedome, to blaspheme,
Much more to slighten, or denie their powers.
For, whom the morning saw so great, and high,
Thus low, and little, 'fore the 'euen doth lie.