WHAT furye fell enforceth mee
to fle, th'unhappy ſeat,
That gaye and gaſpe with greedye lawe,
the fleeyng food to eate
What GOD to Tantalus the bowres
wher breathing bodyes dwel
Doth ſhew agayue? is ought found worſe, then burning thyrſt of hel
In lakes alow? or et worſe plague then hunger is there one,
In vayne that euer gapes for foode? ſhal Siſyphus his ſtone,
That ſlipper reſtles rollyng payſe vppon my backe be borne.
Or ſhall my lymmes with ſwifter ſwinge of whirling whele be torne?
Or ſhal my paynes be Tytius panges th'encreaſyng liuer ſtill,
Whoſe growing guttes the gnawing gripes and tylthy foules do fyll?
That ſtyl by nyght repayres the panch that was deuourd by day,
And wondrous wombe vnwaſted lieth a new prepared pray
What ill am I appoynted for? O cruell iudge of ſprites,
Who ſo thou be that tormentes new among the ſowles delytes
Stil to diſpoſe, ad what thou canſt to all my deadly woe,
That keeper euen of dungeon darke would fore abhorre to knowe.
Or hel it ſelfe it quake to ſe: for dread wherof likewyſe
I tremble wold, that plague ſeke out: lo now there doth aryſe
My broode that ſhal in miſchiefe farre the grandſyers gilt out goe,
And gyltles make: that firſt ſhall dare vnuentred ils to do.
What euer place remayneth yet of all this wicked land,
I wil fill vp: and neuer once while Pelops houſe doth ſtand
Shall Minos idle be.
Go forth thou deteſtable ſprite
And vexe the Goddes of wicked houſe with rage of furyes might.
Let them contend with all offence, by turnes and one by one
Let ſwordes be drawne: and meane of ire procure there may be none,
Nor ſhame: let fury blynd enflame theyr myndes and wrathful will,
Let yet the parentes rage endure and longer laſting yll
Through childrens children ſpreade: nor yet let any leyſure be
The former faws to hate, but ſtill more miſchiefe newe to ſee,
Nor one in one: but ere the gylt with vengeance be acquit,
Encreaſe the cryme: from brethren proud let rule of kingdom flyt
To runnagates: and ſwaruing ſtate of all vnſtable thinges,
Let it by doubtfull dome be toſte, betwene thuncertaine kyngs.
Let mighty fall to miſery, and myſer clime to might,
Let chaunce turne thempyre vpſydowne both geue and take the right.
The banyſhed for gylt, whan god reſtore theyr country ſhall.
Let them to miſchiefe fall a freſh as hatefull then to all,
As to themſelues: let Ire thinke nought vnlawfull to be doon,
Let brother dread the brothers wrath, and father feare the ſoon,
And eke the ſoon his parents powre: let babes be murdered yll,
But worſe begot? her ſpouſe betrapt t treaſons trayne to kyll,
Let hatefull wyfe a wayte, and let them beare through ſeas their warre,
Let bloodſhed lye the lands about and euery field a farr:
And ouer conqueryng captaynes greate, of countreys far to ſee,
Let luſt tryumphe: in wicked houſe let whoredome counted he
The light'ſt offene: let truſt that in the breaſts of brethren breedes,
And truth be gone: let not from ſight of your ſo heynous deedes
The heauens be hyd, about the poale when ſhyne the ſtarres on hye,
And flames with woonted beames of light doe decke the paynted ſkyls.
Let darkeſt night bee made, and let the day the heauens forſake.
Dyſturbe the godds of wicked houſe, hate, ſlaughter, murder make.
Fyll vp the houſe of Tantalus with miſchieues and debates,
Adorned be the pillers hygh with bay, and let the gates
Be garnyſht greene: and worthy there for thy returne to ſight.
Be kyndled fyre: let miſchyefe done in Thracia once, theyr lyght
More many folde, wherefore doth yet the vncles hand delaye?
Doth yet Thyeſtes not bewayle his childrens fatall day?
Shall he not finde them where with heat of fyres that vnder glowe
The cawderne boyles? their limmes eche one a peeces let them go
Diſperſte: let fathers fires, with blood of chyldren fyled bee:
Let deynties ſuch be dreſt: it is no miſchiefe newe to thee,
To banquet ſo: behold this day we haue to thee releaſt,
And hunger ſtarued wombe of thyne we ſend to ſuch a feaſt.
With fowleſt foode thy famyne fyll, let bloud in wyne be drownd,
And dronke in ſight of thee: loe now ſuch diſhes haue I found,
As thou wouldſt ſhonne, ſtay whither doſte thou hedlong way now take
To pooles and floods of hell agayne and ſtyll declining lake,
And flight of tree ful frayght with fruite that from the lippes doth flee,
To dungeon darke of hateful hell let leeful be for me
To goe: or if to light be thought the paynes that there I haue,
Remoue me from thoſe lakes agayne: in midſt of worſer waue
Of Phlegethon, to ſtand in ſeas of fyre beſet to bee.
Who ſo beneath thy poynted paynes by deſtenyes decree
Doſt ſtil endure who ſoo thou bee that vnderlieſt alow
The hollow denne, or ruyne who that feares and ouerthrow
Of fallyng hyl, or cruel cryes that ſound in caues of hell
Of greedy raryng Lyons throats or flocke of furyes fell
Who quakes to know or who the brandes of fyre in dyreſt payne
Halfe burnt throwes of harke to the voyce of Tantalus: agayne
That haſtes to hel, and whom the truth hath taught beleeue wel mee
Loue wel your paynes, they are but ſmall when ſhall my hap ſo bee
To flee the light?
Diſturbe thou fyrſt thys houſe with dire diſcord
Debates and battels bring with thee, and of th'unhappy ſworde
Ill loue to kinges: the cruel breſt ſtrke through and hateful hart,
With tumult mad.
To ſuffer paynes it ſeemeth wel my part,
Not woes to worke: I am ſent forth lyke vepoure dyre to ryſe,
That breakes the ground or poyſon like the plague in wondrouſe wyſe
That ſlaughter makes, ſhall I to ſuch deteſted crymes, applye
My nephewes hartes? parentes great of Gods aboue the ſkie
And myne (though ſham'de I be to graunt) although with greater pain
My tounge be vext, yet this to ſpeake I may no whit refrayne
Nor hold my peace: I ware you this leaſt ſacred hand with bloud
Of ſlaughter dyre, or franſe fell of franke fury wood
The aulters ſtayne, I wll reſiſt: And garde ſuch gylt away.
With ſtrpes why doſt thou me affryght? why threatſt thou me to fraye
Thoſe crallyn g ſnakes? or famine fyxt in empty wombe, wherfore
Doſt thou reuyue? now fries within with thyrſt enkmdled ſore
My harte: and in the bowels burnt the boyling flme do glow.
I follow thee: through all this houſe now rage and fury throwe
Let them be driuen ſo, and ſo let eyther thirſt to ſee
Each others blood ful well hath felt the comming in of thee
This houſe, and all with wicked touch of the degune to quake.
Enough it is, repayre agayne to dens nd loathſome lake,
Of floud well knowen, the ſadder ſoyle with heauy fote of thyne
Agreeued is, ſeeſt thou from syringes how waters do declyne
And inward ſinke? or how the bankes lye voyde by drughty heate?
And hoatter blaſt of fyery wynde the fewer cloudes doth beate?
The treeſe be ſpoyld, and naked ſtand to ſight in withred woddes,
The barayne bowes whoſe fruites are fled: the land betwene the floods
With ſurge of ſeas on eyther ſyde that wonted to reſound,
And earer foordes to ſeperat ſometyme with leſſer ground,
Now broader ſpred, it heareth how aloofe the waters ryſe.
Now Lerna turnes agaynſt the ſtreame Phoronides likewyſe
His poares be ſtopt, with cuſtom'd courſe Alphéus dryues not ſtill,
His hollie waues, the trembling tops of high Cithaeron hill,
They ſtand not ſure: from height adowne they ſhake their ſyluer ſnowe,
And noble fieldes of Argos feare, theyr former drought to know.
Yea Tytan doubtes himſelfe to rolie the worlde his wonted way,
And driue by force to former courſe the backward drawing daye.
THis Argos towne if any God be founde,
And Piſey boures that famous yet remayn,
Or kingdomes els to loue of Corinthes ground,
The double hauens, or ſundred ſeas in twayne
If any loue of Taygetus his ſnowes,
(By VVinter which when they on hils be caſt:
By Boreas blaſtes that from Sarmatia blowes,
VVith yerely breath the ſommer meltes as faſt)
VVhere clere Alphéus runnes with floude ſo cold,
By playes wel knowen that there Olimpiks hight:
Let pleaſaunt powre of his from henſe withholde
Such tunes of ſtryfe that here they may not light:
Not nephew worſe then grandſier ſpring from vs,
Or direr deedes delyght the yonger age.
Let wicked ſtocke of thirſty Tantalus
At length leaue of, and wery be of rage.
Enoughe is done, and naught preuaild the iuſt,
Or wrong: betrayed is Mirtilus and drownde,
That did betray his dame, and with like truſt
Borne as he bare, himſelfe hath made renound
VVith chaunged name the ſea: and better knowne
To mariners therof no fable is.
On wicked ſword the litle infant throwne
As ran the chide to take his fathers kiſſe.
Vnrype for thaulters offring fell downe deade:
And with thy hand (O Tantalus) was rent,
VVith ſuch a meate for Gods thy boordes to ſpread.
Eternall famine for ſuch foode is ſent,
And thyrſt: nor for thoſe daynty meats vnmilde,
Might meeter payne appoynted euer bee
Vith empty throate ſtandes Tantalus begylde,
Aboue thy wicked head their leanes to thee,
Then Phineys fowles in flight a ſwifter pray.
VVith burned bowes declynd on euery ſyde,
And of his fruites all bent to beare the ſway,
The tree deludes the gapes of hunger wyde
Though hee full greedy feede theron would fayne.
So oft deceyu'de neglectes to touch them yet:
He turnes his eyes, his iawes he doth refrayne,
And famine fixt in cloſed gummes doth ſhet.
But then each braunch his plenteous ritches all,
Lets lower downe, and apples from an hie
VVith lither leaues they flatter like to fall
And famine ſtyrre: in vayne that bids to trye
His handes: which when he hath rought forth anone
To be beguyld, in higher ayre againe
The harueſt hanges and fickle fruite is gone,
Then thirſt him greeues no leſſe then hungers payne:
Wherwith when kindled is his boyling bloud
Lyke fyre, the wretch the waues to him doth call,
That meete his mouth: which ſtraight the fleeyng floud
VVithdrawes, and from the dryed foorde doth fall:
And him forſakes that followes them. He drinkes
The duſt ſo deepe of gulfe that from him ſhrinkes.
O Daſtard, cowrde, O wretche, and (which
the greateſt yet of all
To Tyrantes checke I compte that maye
in waighty thinges befall)
O vnreuenged: after guyltes
ſo great and brothers guyle.
And trewth trode downe doſt thou prouoke
with vayne complaynts the whyle
Thy wrath? already now to rage all Argos towne throughout
In armoure ought of thyne, and all the double ſeas about
Thy fleete to ryde: now all the fieldes with feruent flames of thyne,
And townes to flaſh it wel beſeemde: and euery where to ſhyne,
The bright drawne ſword: all vuder foote of horſe let euery ſyde
Of Argos lande reſound: and let the woundes not ſerue to hyde
Our oes, nor yet in haughty top of hilles and mountaynes hye,
The builded towers. The people all let them to battel crye
And clere for ſake Mycenas towne who ſo his hateful head
Hides and defendes, with ſlaughter dire let bloud of him be ſhed.
This princely Pelops palace proude, and bowres of high renowne,
On mee ſo on my brother to let them be beaten downe,
Go to, do that which neuer ſhall no after age allow,
Nor none it whiſht: ſome wiſcheſe greate ther muſt be ventred now,
Both fierce and bloudy: ſuch as woulde my brother rather long
To haue bene his. Thou neuer doſt enough reuenge the wronge.
Exept thou paſſe. And feercer fact what may be done ſo dyre,
That his exceedes? doth euer he lay downe his hateful yre?
Doth euer he the modeſt meane in tyme of wealth regard
Or quiet in aduerſlty? I know his nature harde
Vntractable, that broke may be, but neuer wilit bnd.
For which are he prepare himſelfe, or force to fight entend,
Set fyrſt on him, leaſt while I reſt he ſhould on me aryſe.
He wil deſtroy or be deſtroyd in midſt the miſchiefe lyes,
Prepard to him that takes it firſt,
Doth fame of people naught
Aduerſe thee feare?
The greateſt good of kingdom may be thought
That ſtill the people are conſtraynd their princes deedes as well
To prayſe, as them to ſuffer all.
Whom feare doth ſo compell
To prayſe, the ſame his foes to bee, doth feare enforce agoyne:
But who indeede the glory ſeckes of fauour trew t'obtayne
He rather would with hates of each be prayſd, then tounges of all
The trewer prayſe ful oft hath hapt to meaner men to fall:
The falſe but vnto myghty man what nill they let them will.
Let firſt the king will honeſt thinges and none the fame dare nill.
Where leeful are to him that rules but honeſt thinges alone,
There raynes the kyng by others leaue.
And wher y• ſhame is none,
Nor care of ryght, fayth, piety, nor holines none ſtayeth,
That kingdome ſwarues.
Such holines, ſuch piety and fayth.
Are priuate goods: let kinges runne one in that that likes their will.
The brothers hurt a miſchiefe count though he be nere ſo ill.
It is but right to do to hym, that wrong to brother were▪
What heynous hurt hath his offence let paſſe to prue? or where
Refraynd the gylt, thy ſpouſe he ſtae away for lechery,
And raygne by ſtelth: the auncient note and ſygne of ampery,
By frawde he got: my houſe by fraud to vexe he neuer ceaſt:
In Pelops houſe there foſtred is a noble worthy beaſt
The cloſe kept Ramme: the goodly guyde of rych and fayreſt flockes.
By whom throughout on euery ſyde depend a downe the lockes
Of glittering gold, with fleece of which the new kinges wonted were
Of Tantals ſtocke their ſceptors gylt, and mace of might to beate.
Of this the owner raygneth he, with him of houſe ſo great
The fortune fleeth, this ſacred Ramme aloofe in ſafety ſhet
In ſecret mead is wont to graſe, which ſtone on euery ſyde
With rocky wall incloſethe rounde the fatall beaſt to hyde.
This beaſt (aduentryng miſchiefe greate) adioyning yet for pray
My ſpouſed mate, the traytour falſe hath hence conuayde away
From hence the wrongs of mutuall hate, and miſchiefe all vpſyreng:
In exile wandred he throughout my kingdomes all along:
No part of myne remayneth ſafe to mee, from traynes of hys.
My feere deflourde, and loyalty of empyre broken is:
My houſe all vext, my bloud in doubt, and naught that truſt is in,
But brother foe What ſtayſt thou yet? at length lo now beginne.
Take hart of Tantalus to thee, to Pelops caſt thyne eye:
To ſuch examples well beſeemes, I ſhould my hand applye.
Tell thou which way were beſt to bring that cruell head to death.
Through perſt wt ſword let him be ſlayne & yelde his hatefull breath.
Thou ſpeak'ſt of th'end: but I him would opres wt greter payne.
Let tyrants vexe with torment more: ſhould euer in my rayne
Be gentle death?
Doth piety in thee preuayle no whit?
Depart thou hence all piety, if in this houſe as yet
Thou euer wert: and now let all the flocke of furies dyre,
And full of ſtrife Erinnis come, and double brands of fyre
Megaera ſhaking: for not yet enough with fury great
And rage doth burne my boyling breſt: it ought to bee repleate,
With monſter more.
What miſchiefe new do'ſte thou in rage pro-uide?
Not ſuch a one as may the meane of woonted griefe abide.
No guilt will I forbeare, nor none may be enough deſpight.
What ſword?
To litle that.
what fire?
And y• is yet to
What weapon then ſhall ſorrow ſuch finde fit to worke thy will?
Thy eſtes ſelfe.
Then yre it ſelfe yet that's a greater ill.
I graunt: a tombling tumult quakes, within my boſomes loe,
And rounde it rolles: I moued am and wote not wherevnto.
But drawen I am: from bottome deepe the roryng ſoyle doth cry
The day ſo fayre with thunder ſoundes, and houſe as all from hy
Were rent, from roofe, and rafters crakes: and lares turnde abought
Haue wryde theyr ſight: ſo bee'te, ſo bee'te, let miſchiefe ſuch be ſought,
As yee O Gods would feare.
What thing ſeek'ſt thou to bring to pas
I note what greater thing my mynde, and more then woont it was
Aboue the reache that men are woont to worke, begins to ſwell:
And ſtayth with ſlouthfull handes. What thinge it is I cannot tell:
But great it is. Bee'te ſo, my mynde now in this feate proceede,
For Atreus and Thyeſtes bothe, it were a worthy deede.
Let eche of vs the crime commit. The Thracian houſe did ſee
Such wicked tables once: I graunt the miſchiefe great to bee,
But done ere this: ſome greater guilt and miſchiefe more, let yre
Fynde out. The ſtomacke of thy ſonne O father thou enſpyre,
And ſyſter eke, like is the cauſe: aſſiſt me with your powre,
And dryue my hand: let greedy parents all his babes deuowre,
And glad to rent his children bee: and on their lyms to feede.
Enough, and well it is deuiſ'de: this pleaſeth me in deede.
In meane time where is he? ſo long and innocent wherefore
Doth Atreus walke? before myne eyes already more and more
The ſhade of ſuch a ſlaughter walkes: the want of children caſt,
In fathers Iawes. But why my mynde, yet dreadſt thou ſo at laſt,
And faiut'ſt before thou enterpriſe? it muſt bee done, let bee,
That which in all this miſchiefe is the greateſt guilt to ſee,
Let him commit.
but what diſceit may wee for him prepare,
Whereby betrapt he may be drawne, to fall into the ſnare?
He wotes full well we are his foes.
He could not taken bee,
Except himſelfe would take: but now my kingdomes hopeth hee.
For hope of this he woulde not feare to meete the mighty Ioue,
Though him he threatned to deiſtroy, with lightning from aboue.
For hope of this to paſſe the threats of waues he will not fayle,
Nor dread no whit by doubtfull ſhelues, of Lybike ſeas to ſayle,
For hope of this (which thing he doth the woorſt of all beleeue,)
He will his brother ſee.
Who ſhall of peace the promiſe geeue?
Whom will he truſt?
His euill hope will ſoone beleue it well.
Yet to my ſonnes the charge which they ſhall to theyr vuckle tell,
We will commit: that whom he would from exile come agayne,
And myſeries for kingdome chaunge, and ouer Argos raygne
A king of halfe: and though to hard of heart our prayers all
Him ſelfe deſpiſe, his children yet nought woting what may fall,
With trauels tier'de, and apte to be entyſ, de from miſery,
Requeſts will moue: on th'one ſide his deſyre of Imperie,
On th'other ſyde his pouerty, and labour hard to ſee,
Will him ſubde and make to yeelde, although full ſtoute he bee.
His trauayles now the time hath made to ſeeme to him but ſmall.
Not ſo: for day by day the griefe of ill encreaſeth all.
T'is light to ſuffer miſeries, but heauy them t'endure.
Yet other meſſengers to ſend, in ſuch affayres procure,
The younger ſorte the wroſe precepts do eaſely harken to.
What thing agaynſt their vnckle now, you them enſtruckt to do,
Perhaps with you to worke the like, they will not be a dread.
Such miſchiefe wrought hath oft return'de vpon the workers head.
Though neuer man to thē the wayes of guile & guilt haue taught,
Yet kingdome will. Fear'ſt thou they ſhould be made by coūsel naught?
They are ſo borne. That whith thou car, ſte a cruell enterpryſe,
And dyrely deemeſt doone to be, and wickedly likewiſe,
Perhaps is wrought agaynſt me there.
And ſhall your ſons of this
Diſceipt beware that worke you will? no ſecretnes there is
In theyr ſo greene and tender yeares: they will your traynes diſcloſe,
A priuy counſell cloaſe to keepe, is learnde with many woes.
And will yee them, by whom yee woulde he ſhould beguiled bee,
Them ſelnes begull'de?
May let thē both from fault & blame be free.
For what ſhall neede in miſchiefes ſuch as I to woorke entende,
To mingle them? let all my hate by mee alone take ende.
Thou leau'ſte thy purpoſe ill my mynde: if thou thine owne ſorbeare,
Thou ſpareſt him. Wherefore of this let Agamemnon heare
Be myniſter: and Client eke of myne for ſuch a deede,
Let Menelâus preſent bee: truth of th'uncertayne ſeede,
By ſuch a pracktiſe may be tri'de: if it refuſe they ſhall,
Nor of debate will bearers be, if they him vnckle call,
He is their father: let them goe. But much the fearefull face
Bewrayes it ſelfe: euen him that faynes the ſecret wayghty caſe,
Doth oft betray: let them therefore not know, how great a guyle
They goe about. And thou theſe things in ſecret keepe the whyle.
I neede not warned bee, for theſe within my boſome deepe,
Both fayth, and feare, but chiefely fayth, doth ſhet and cloſely kepe.
THe noble houſe at length of high renowne,
The famous ſtocke of auncient Inachus,
Apeaſd & layd the threats of brethrē down
But nowe what fury ſtyrs & driues you thus
Eche one to thyrſt the others bloud agayne,
Or get by guylt the golden Mace in hande?
Yee litle wote that ſo deſyre to raygne,
In what estate or place doth kyngdome ſtande.
Not ritches makes a kyng or high renowne,
Not garniſht weede wyth purple Tyrian die,
Not lofty lookes, or head encloaſde with crwne,
Not glyttring beames with golde and turrets hie.
A Kyng he is that feare hath layde aſide,
And all affects that in the breaſt are bread:
VVhom impotent ambition doth not guide,
Nor fickle fauour hath of people led.
Nor all that weſt in mettalls mynes hath founde,
Or chanell cleere of golden Tagus ſhowes,
Nor all the grayne that threſshed is on grounde,
That with the heate of libyk harueſt glowes.
Nor whom the flaſshe of lightning flame ſhall be ate,
Nor eastern wynde that ſmightes vpon the ſeas,
Nor ſwelling ſurge with rage of vvynde repleate,
Or greedy Gulphe of Adria diſpleaſe.
VVhom not the pricke of Souldiers ſharpeſt ſpeare,
Or poyncted pyke in hand hath made to rue,
Nor whom the glympſe of ſwoorde myght cauſe to feare,
Or bright drawen blade of glyttring ſteele ſub due.
VVho in the ſeate of ſafty ſets his feete,
Beholdes all haps how vnder him they lye,
And gladly runnes his fat all day to meete,
Nor ought complaynes or grudgeth for to dye.
Though preſent vvere the Prynces euerychone,
The ſcattered Dakes to chaſe that vvonted bee,
That shyning ſeas beſet with precious ſtone,
And red ſea coaſtes doe holde, lyke bloud to ſee:
Or they vvhich els the Caſpian mountaynes hye,
From Sarmats ſtrong with all theyr power vvithholde:
Or hee that on the floude of Danubye,
In froſt a foote to trauayle dare bee bolde:
Or Seres in vvhat euer place they lye,
Renownde with fleece that there of ſylke doth ſpring,
They neuer might the truth here of denye,
It is the mynde that onely makes a king.
There is no neede of ſturdie ſteedes in warre,
No neede with armes or arrowes ells to fight,
That Parthus woonts with bowe to fling from farre,
VVhyle from the fielde hee falſely fayneth flight.
Nor yet to ſiege no neede it is to bringe
Great Guns in Carts to ouerthrowe the wall,
That from farre of theyr battring Pellets ſlyng.
A kyng hee is that feareth nought at all.
Eche man him ſelfe this kyng dome geeues at hand.
Let who ſo lyſt with mighty mace to raygne,
In tyckle toppe of court delight to ſtand
Let mee the ſweete and quiet reſt obtayne.
So ſet in place obſcure and lowe degree,
Of pleaſaunt reſt I ſhall the ſweetneſſe knoe.
My lyfe vnknowne to them that noble bee,
Shall in the ſteppe of ſecret ſylence goe.
Thus when my dayes at length are ouer paſt,
And tyme without all troublous tumult ſpent,
An aged man I ſhall depart at laſt,
In meane eſtate, to dye full well content.
But greeuous is to him the death, that when
So farre abroade the bruite of him is blowne,
That knowne hee is to much to other men:
Departeth yet vnto him ſelfe vnknowne.
MY countrey bowres ſ long wiſht for, and Argos rytches all,
Cyteſe good that vnto baniſht then, and Myſers may befall,
The touch of ſuyle where born I was, a gods of natiue lād,
(If gods they be,) a ſacred towres I ſee of Cycolps hād:
That repreſeat then all mans woorke, a greater maieſty.
Renowned ſtads to my youth, where noble ſometime I
Haue not ſo ſeelde as once, the palme in fathers chariot woon.
All Argos now to meete with me, and people faſt will roon:
But Atreus to. yet rather leade in woods agayne thy flight,
And buſhes thicke, and hid among the brutyſhe beaſtes from ſight,
Lyke lyfe to theyrs: where ſplendent pompe of court a princely pryde,
May not with flattring fulgent face, allure thine eyes aſide,
With whom the kingdome geuen is, behold, and well regarde,
Beſet but late with ſuch miſhaps, as all men couate full harde,
I ſtoute and ioyfull was: but now agayne thus int feare
I am returne. my mynde miſdoubtes, and backeward ſeekes to beare
My body hence: and forthe I draw my pace agaynſt my will.
With ſlouthfull ſtep (what meaneth this?) my father ſtādeth ſtill,
And turnes his face and holdes him ſelfe, in doubt what thing to do.
What thing (my minde) condreſt thou? or els ſo long whereto
Do'ſt thou ſo eaſte counſayle wreſt? wilt thou to thinges vnſure
Thy brother and the kingdome truſt? fearſt thou thoſe ills t'endure
Now ouercome, and mielder made? and trauayls do'ſt thou flee
That well were plaſte? it thee auayls, a myſer now to bee.
Turne hence thy pace while leefull is, and keepe thee from his hande.
What cauſe thee driues (O father deere) thus rō thy natiue lande,
Now ſeene to ſhrynk? what makes thee thus frō things ſo good at laſt
Withdrawe thy ſelfe? thy brother comes whoſe tres be ouerpaſt,
And halfe the kyngdome geues, and of the houſe Dyacerate,
Repayres the partes: and thee reſtores agayne to former ſtate.
The cauſe of feare that I know not, thou do'ſt require to heare.
I ſee nothing that makes mee dread, and yet I greatly feare.
I would goe on, hut yet my limmes with weary legges doe ſlacke:
And other way then I would paſſe, I am withholden backe.
So oft the ſhip that driuen is with wynde and eke with Ore,
The ſwelling ſurge reſiſting both beates backe vpon the ſhore.
Yet ouercome what euer ſtayes, and thus doth let your mynde,
And ſee what are at your returne, prepar'de for you to finde.
You may O father raygne.
I may but then when die I mought.
Chiefe thing is powre.
nought worth at al, if thou deſyre it nought.
You ſhall it to your children leaue.
the kingdome takes not twayne,
Who may be happy, rather would he myfer yet remayne?
Beleue me well, with titles falſe the great thinges vs delight:
And heauy haps in vayne are fearde. while high I ſtoode in ſight,
I neuer ſtinted then to quake, and ſelfe ſame ſworde to feare,
That hanged by myne owne ſide was. Oh how great good it were,
With none to ſtriue, but careles foode to cate and reſt to knowe?
The greater gyltes they enter not in cotage ſet alowe.
And ſafer foode is fed vpon, at narrowe boorde alway,
While drunke in golde the poyſon is by proofe well taught I ſay,
That euill haps before the good to loue it likes my will.
Of haughty houſe that ſiandes aloft in tickle top of hyll,
And ſwayes aſyde, the cyty lowe neede neuer be affright:
Nor in the top of roofe aboue, there ſhynes no Iuery bright,
Nor watchman noue defendes my ſleepes by night, or gardes my reſt:
With fleete I fiſhe not, nor the ſees I haue not backwarde preſt,
Nor turn'de to flight with builded wall: nor wicked belly I
With taxes of the people fed: nor parcell none doth lie,
Of ground of myne beyonde the Getes: and Parthians farre about:
Nor worſhiped with frankinſence I am, nor (Ioue ſhet out)
My Aulters decked are: nor none in top of houſe doth ſtande
In garden treeſe, nor kindled yet with helpe of eche mans hande,
The bathes doe ſmoake: nor yet are dayes in ſlouthfull ſiumbers led,
Nor nightes paſt forth in watche and wyne, without the reſt of bed.
Wee nothing feare, the houſe is ſafe without the hidden knyfe,
And poore eſtate the ſweetenes feeles, of teſt and quiet lyfe.
Greate kindome is to be content, without the ſame to lyue.
Yet ſhould it not refuſed be, if God the kingdome giue.
Not yet deſierd it ought to be.
your brother byds you rayne.
Bids he? the more is to be fearde: there lurketh there ſome trayne.
From whence it fell, yet piety is woont to turne at length:
And loue vnfaynde, repayres agayne his erſt omitted ſtrength.
Doth Atreus then his brother loue? eche Vrſa fyrſt on hys.
The Seas ſhall waſhe and ſwelling ſurge of Seas of Sicylye
Shall reſt and all aſſwaged be: and corne to rypenes growe
In bottawe of Ionian ſeas, and barkeſt night ſhall ſhowe
And ſpreade the light about the ſoyle: the waters with the fyre,
The lyfe with death, the wynde with ſeas, ſhall friendſhip firſt requyre,
And be at league.
of what deceipte are you ſo dreadfull here?
Of euerychone: what ende at length might I prouide of feare?
In all he can he hateth me.
to you what hurt can he?
As for my ſelfe I nothing dread you litle Babes make mee
Afrayde of him.
dread, yee to be deguilde when caught yee are:
To late it is to ſhoon the traytie in middle of the ſnare.
But goe we on this (father) is to you my laſt requeſt.
I follow you. I leade you not.
God turne it to the beſt
That well deuiſed is for good: paſſe farth with cherefull pace.
ENtrapt in trayne the beaſt is caught
and in the ſnare doth fall:
Both him, and eke of hated ſtocke
with him the ofſpryng all,
About the fathers ſyde I ſee:
and nowe in ſaufety ſtands
And ſureſt ground my wrathfull hate:
nowe comes into my hands
At length Thyeſtes: yea hee comes
and all at once to mee.
I ſcant refrayne my ſelfe, and ſcant may anger brydled bee.
So when the Bloudhound feekes the beaſt, by ſtep and quick of ſent
Drawes in the leame, and pace by pace to wynde the wayes hee went,
With noſe to ſoyle doth hunt, while he the Boare aloofe hath founde
Farre of by ſent, he yet refraynes and wanders through the grounde
With ſilent mouth: but when at hand he once perceiues the pray,
With all the ſtrength he hath he ſtriues, with voyce and calls away
His lingring maiſter, and from him by force out breaketh hee.
When Ire doth hope the preſent bloud, it may not hydden bee.
Yet let it hydden be. beholde with vgly hayre to ſight
How yrkeſomely deform'de with filthe his fowleſt tace is dight,
How lothſome lyes his Brarde vnkempt: but let vs friendſhip fayne.
To ſee my brother me delights: geue now to me agayne
Embracing long deſyred for: what euer ſtryfe there was
Before this time betwene vs twayne, forget and let it pas:
Fro this day forth let brothers loue, let bloud, and lawe of kinde
Regarded be, let all debate be ſlakte in eythers mynde.
I coulde excuſe my ſelfe, except thou wert as now thou art.
But (Atreus) now I graunt, the faulte was myne in euery part:
And I offended haue in all, my cauſe the worſe to bee,
Your this dayes kindnes makes: in deede a guilty wight is hee,
That would ſo good a brother hurt as you, in any whit.
But now with teares I muſt entreate, and firſt I me ſubmit.
Theſe handes that at thy feete doe lye, doe thee beſeeche and pray,
That yre and hate be layde aſide, and from thy boſome may
Be ſcraped out: and cleere forgot. for pledges take thou theſe
O brother deere, theſe guiltles babes.
thy hands yet from my kneeſe
Remoue, and rather me to take in armes, vpon me fall
And yee O aydes of elders age, yee litle infants all,
Mee clyp and coll about the necke: this fowle attyre forſake,
And ſpare myne eyes that pity it, and freſher veſture take
Lyke myne to ſee. and you with ioy, the halfe of emperie
Deere brother take: the greater prayſe ſhall come to mee thereby,
Our fathers ſeate to yelde to you, and brother to releue.
To haue a kingdome is but chaunce, but vertue it to geeue.
A iuſt reward for ſuch deſerts, the Gods (O brother deare)
Repay to thee: but on my head a regall crowne to weare,
My lothſome lyfe denyes: and farre doth from the ſceptor flee
My hand vnhappy: in the mydſt let leefull be for mee
Of men to lurke.
this kingdome can with twayne full well agree.
What euer is (O brother) yours, I count it myne to bee.
Who would dame fortunes gifts refuſe, if ſhee him eyſe to raigne?
The gyfts of hir eche man it wotes, how ſoone they paſſe againe.
Yee me depryue of glory great, except yee th'empyre take.
You haue your prayſe in offring it, and I it to forſake.
And full perſwaded to refuſe the kingdome, am I ſtill.
Except your part yee will ſuſteine myne owne forſake I will.
I take it then. and beare I will the name thereof alone:
The ryghts and armes, as well as myne they ſhall be yours eche one.
The regall crowne as you beſeemes vpon your head then take:
And I th'appoyncted ſacrifice for Gods, will now goe make.
WOulde any man it weene? that cruell wight
Atreus, of mynde ſo impotent to ſee
VVas ſoone astonied with his brothers ſight,
Mo greater force then pietye may bee:
VVhere kynred is not, lasteth euery threat,
VVhom true loue holdes, it holdes eternally.
The vvrath but late vvith cauſes kyndled great
All fauour brake, and did to battayle cry,
VVhan horſemen did reſouude one euery ſyde,
The ſwoordes eche vvhere, then glyſtred more & more:
VVhich raging Mars vvith often ſtroke did guide
The freſher bloud to shed yet thyrsting ſore.
But loue the ſworde agaynst theyr vvills doth ſwage,
And them to peace perſwads vvith hand in hand.
So ſodeyne reſt, amid ſo great a rage
VVhat God hath made? throughout Mycenas land
The harneſſe clynkt, but late of cyuill ſtrife:
And for their babes did fearefull mother quake,
Her armed ſpouſe to leeſe much fearde the vvyfe,
VVhen ſworde vvas made the ſcabberde to forſake,
That now by rest vvith rust vvas ouergrowne.
Some to repayre the vvalles that did decay,
And ſome to ſtrength the towres halfe ouerthrowne,
And ſome the gates vvith gyns of Yrne to ſtay
Full buſie vvere, and dredfull vvatch by nyght
From turret high did ouerlooke the towne.
VVocrſe is then warre it ſelfe the feare of fight.
(Nowe are the threats of cruell ſworde layde downe,
And nowe the rumour whiſts of battayles ſowne,
The noyſe of crooked trumpet ſilent lyes,
And quiet peace returnes to ioyfull towne.
So when the waxes of ſwelling ſurge aryſe,
VVhyle Corus wynde the Brutian ſeas doth ſmight,
And Scylla ſoundes from hollowe Caues within,
And Shipmen are with wafting waues affright,
Charybdis caſts that erſt it had drunke in:
And Cyclpos fierce his father yet doth dred,
In AEtna banke that feruent is with heates,
Leaſt quenched be with waues that ouershed
The fire that from eternall Fornace beates:
And poore Laërtes thinkes his kyngdomes all
May drowned be, and Ithaca doth quake:
If once the force of wyndes begin to fall,
The ſea lyth downe more mylde then ſtanding lake.
The deepe, where Ships ſo vvyde full dredfull vvere
To paſſe, vvith ſayles on eyther ſyde out ſpred
Now fallne adowne, the leſſer Boate doth beare:
And leyſure is to vewe the fyſhes ded
Euen there, vvhere late vvith tempeſt bet vpon
The ſhaken Cyclades vvere vvith Seas agast.
No ſtate endures the payne and pleaſure, one
To other yeldes, and ioyes be ſooneſt past.
One howre ſets vp the thinges that lowest bee.
Hee that the crownes to prynces doth deuyde,
VVhom people pleaſe with bending of the knee.
And at whoſe becke theyr battayles lay aſide
The Meades, and Indians eke to Phebus nye,
And Dakes that Parthyans doe with horſemen threat,
Him ſelfe yet holdes his Sceptors doubtfully.
And men of might he feares and chaunces great
(That eche estate may turne) and doubtfull howre.
Oyee, vvhom lorde of lande and vvaters wyde,
Of Lyfe and death grauntes here to haue the powre,
Lay yee your proude and lofty lookes aſide:
VVhat your inferiour feares of you amis.
That your ſuperiour threats to you agayne.
To greater kyng, eche kyng a ſubiect is.
VVhom dawne of day hath ſeene in pryde to raygne,
Hym ouerthrowne hath ſeene the euening late.
Let none reioyce to much that good hath got,
Let none diſpayre of beſt in vvorſt estate.
For Clotho myngles all, and ſuffreth not
Fortune to ſtande: but Fates about doth driue.
Such friendship finde wyth Gods yet no man myght,
That he the morowe might be ſure to lyue.
The God our things all toſt and turned quight
Rolles with a whyrle wynde.
WHat whirlwynde may me headlong dryue
and vp in ayre mee fling,
And wrap in darkeſt cloude, whereby
it might ſo heynous thing,
Take from myne eyes? O wicked houſe
that euen of Pelops ought
And Tantalus abhorred bee.
what new thing haſt thou brought?
What lande is this? lythe Sparta here
and Argos, that hath bred
So wicked brethern? and the ground of Corinth lying ſpred
Betweene the ſeas? or Iſter elſe where woont to take their flight,
Are people wylde? or that which woonts with ſnowe to ſhyne ſo bright
Hircana lande? or els doe here the wandring Seythians dwell?
What monſtrous miſchiefe is this place then guilty of? that tell,
And this declare to vs at large what euer be the ill.
If once my mynde may ſtay it ſelfe, and quaking limmes I will.
But yet of ſuch a cruell deede before myne eyes the feare.
And Image walkes: yee raging ſtormes now far from hence me beare
And to that place me drtue, to which now driuen is the day
Thus drawen from hence.
Our myndes yee holde yet ſtill in doubt: full ſtay.
Tell what it is yee ſo abhorre. The author thereof ſhowe.
I aſke not who, but which of them that quickly let vs know.
In Pelops Turret high, a part there is of Pallece wyde
That towarde the ſouth erected leanes, of which the vtter ſyde
With equall top to mountayne ſtantes, and on the City lies,
And people proude agaynſt theyr prynce if once the traytors riſe
Hath vnderneath his batiring ſtroke: there ſhynes the place in ſight
Where woont the people to frequent, whoſe golden beames ſo bright
The noble ſpotted pillers gray, of marble doe ſupporte,
Within this place well knowen to men, where they ſo oſt reſorte,
To many other roomes about the noble court doth goe.
The priuie Palaice vnderlieth in ſecret place alos,
With ditch ful deepe that doth encloſe the wood of priuiter,
And hidden parts of kyngdome olde: where neuer grew no tree
That chereful bowes is woont to beare, with knife or lopped be,
But Taxe, and Cypreſſe, and with tree of Home ful blacke to ſee
Doth becke and bende the wood ſo darke: alofte aboue all theeſe
The higher oke doth ouer looke, ſurmounting all the treeſe.
From hens with lucke the raigne to take, accuſtom'd are the kyngs,
From hens in daunger ayd to aſke, and doome in doubtfull things.
To this affixed are the gifts, the ſounding Trumpets bright,
The Chariots broke, and ſpoyles of ſea that now Mirtôon hight,
There hang the wheeles once won by crafte of falſer axel tree,
And euery other conqueſts note, here leefullis to ſee
The Phrygian tyre of Pelops head: the ſpoyle of enmies heere,
And of Barbarian triumphe left, the paynted gorgeous geere.
A lothſome ſpringe ſtands vnder ſhade, and ſlouthfull courſe doth take,
With water blacke: euen ſuch as is: of yrkeſome Stygian lake
The vgly waue whereby art wont, to ſweare the gods on hye.
Here all the night the griſly ghoſts and gods of death to erie
The fame reportes: with clinkyng chaynes reſoūds the wood ech where
The ſprights cry out and euery thinge that dredfull is to heare,
May there bee ſeene: of vgly ſhapes from olde Sepulchres ſent
A frarefull ſlocke doth wander there, and in that place frequent
Worſe things then euer yet were knowwne: ye all the wood full afce
With flame is woont to flaſh, and all the higher trees alofte
Without a fyre do burne: and ofte the wood beſide all this
With triple barkyng roares at once: ful oft the palaice is
Affright with ſhapes, nor lighte of day may on the terrour quell.
Eternall night doth hold the place, and darknes there of hell
In mid day raignes: from hens to them that pray out of the ground
The certayne anſwers geuen are, what tyme with dredful ſound
From ſecret place the fates be tolde, and dungeon roares within
While of the God breakes out the voyce: whereto when entred in
Fierce Atreus was, that did wyth him his brothers children trayle,
Dekt are the aulters: wh (alas) may it enough bewayle?
Behynde the infants backs anone he knyt theyr noble hands,
And eke theyr heauy heads about he bound with purple bands:
There wanted there no Frankenfence, nor yet the holy wine,
Nor knyfe to cut the ſacrifice, beſprinkt with leuens fine,
Kept is in all the order due, Icaſt ſuch a miſchiefe gret
Should not be ordred well.
who doth his hand on ſword then ſet?
He is him ſelfe the prieſt, and he himſelfe the deadly verſe
With prayer dyre from feruent mouth doth ſyng and oft reherſe.
And he at th'aulters ſtands himſelfe, he them aſſygn'de to dye
Doth handle, and in order ſet, and to the knyfe applye,
He lights the fyres, no rights were left of ſacrifice vndone.
The woode then quakt, and all at once from trembling grounde anone
The Pallace beckt, in doubt which way the payſe thereof woulde fall,
And ſhaking as in waues it ſtoode: from th'ayre and therewithall
A blaſing ſtarre that fouleſt trayne drew after him doth goe:
The wynes that in the fyres were caſt, with chaunged licour floe,
And turne to bloud: and twyſe or thryſe th'attyre ſell from his hed,
The Iuerye bright in Temples ſeem'de to weepe and teares to ſhed.
The ſights amas'de all other men, but ſtedfaſt yet alway
Of mynde, vnmoued. Atreus ſtands, and euen the Gods doth fray
That threaten him and all delay forſaken by and by
To th' aulters turnes, and there withwall a ſyde he lookes awry.
As hungry Tygre wonts that doth in gangey woods remayne
With doubtfull pace to range & roame betweene the bullocks twayne,
Of eyther pray full-couetous and yet vncertayne where
She fyrſt may byte, and roaring throate now turnes the tone to teare
And then to th'other ſtrayght returnes, and doubtfull famyne holdes:
So Atreus dyre, betwene the babes doth ſtand and them beholdes
On whom he poynctes to ſlake his yre: firſt ſtaughter where to make,
Hee doubts: or whom he ſhoulde agayne for ſecond offring take,
Yet ſkills it nought, but yet he doubtes and ſuch a cruelty
It him delightes to order well.
Whom take he ſyrſt to dy?
Firſt place, leaſt in him thinke yee might no piere to remayne
To graundſier dedicated is, fyrſt Tantalus is ſlayne.
With what a minde & count'nace, could ye boy his death ſuſtayne?
All careles of him ſelfe he ſtoode, nor once he would in vayne
His prayers leeſe. But Atreus fierce the ſword in him at laſt
In deepe and deadly wound doth hide to hilts, and gryping faſt
His throate in hād, he thruſt him through. The ſword thē drawne away
When long the body had vphelde it ſelfe in doubtfull ſtay.
Which way to fall, at length vpon the vnckle downe it falles.
And then to th'aulters cruelly Philiſthenes he tralles,
And on his brother throwes: and ſtrayght his necke of cutteth hee.
The Carcaſe keadlong falles to ground: a piteous thing to ſee.
The mourning head with murmure yet vucertayne doth complayne.
What after double death doth he and ſlaughter then of twayne?
Spares he the Child? or gilt on gilt agayne yet heayeth he?
As long maynd Lyon ſcerce amid the wood of Armenie,
The droue purſues and conqueſt makes of ſlaughter many one,
Though now defyled be his tawes with bloud and hunger gone
Yet ſlaketh not his yreful rage with bloud of Bulles ſo great,
But ſlouthful now with weary tooth the leſſer Calues doth threat:
None other wyſe doth Atreus rage, and ſwelles with anger ſtraynd,
And holding now the ſword in hand, with double ſlaughter ſtayud,
Regarding not where fell his rage, with curſed hand vnmild
He ſtrake it through his body quite, at bosome of the Child
The blade goeth in, and at the backe agayne out went the ſame,
He falles and quenching with his bloud the aulters ſacred flame,
Of eyther wound at length he dieth.
O'heynous hateful act.
Abhore ye this? ye heare not yet the end of all the fact,
There followes more.
A fiercer thing, or worſe then this to ſee
Could Nature beare?
why thinke ye this of gylt the end to be?
It is but part.
what could he wore? to cruel beaſtes he caſt
Perhappes their bodyes to be torne, and kept from fyres at laſt.
Would God he had: that neuer tombe the dead might ouer hyde,
Nor flames diſſolue, though them for food to foules in paſtures wyde
He had out throwen, or them for pray to cruell beaſtes would flinge.
That which the worſt was wont to be, were here a wiſhed thing,
That them their father ſaw vntowbd: but oh more curſed crime
Uncredible, the which denye will men ef after tyme:
From boſomes yet aliue out drawne the trembling bowels ſhake,
The vaynes yet breath, the ſcareful hart doth yet both pant and quakes
But he the ſtringes doth turne in hand, and deſtenies beholde,
And of the guttes the ſygnes each one doth vewe not fully cold.
When him the ſacrifyce had pleaſo, his diligence ē puttes
To dreſſe his brothers banquet now: and ſtreight a fonder cuttes
The bodyes into quarters all, and by the ſtoompes anone
The ſhoulders wyde, and brawnes of armes be ſtrikes of euerythune.
He layes abroad their naked limes, and cuts away the bones:
The onely heads he kepes and handes to him committed once.
Some of the guttes are broacht. and in the fyres that burne full oe
They drop, the boyling Itcour ſome doth tomble to end froe
In moorning cawderne: from the fleſh that ouerſtandes alorft
The fyre doth flye, and ſkatter out and into chimney ofte
Up heat agayne, and there conſtraynd by force to tary yet
Unwilling burnes: the liuer makes great nopse vpon the ſpit,
Nor eaſely wot I, if the fleſh, or flaies they be that bry,
But crye they do: the fyre like pitch it fumeth by an by:
Nor yet the ſmake it ſelfe ſo ſad, like flithy miſte in ſight
Aſcendeth vp as wont it is, nor takes his way vpright,
But euen the Gods and houſe it doth with fylithy turne defiſe.
O pacient Phoebus though from hence thou backeward flee the whyle,
And in the midſt of heauen aboue doſt drowne the broken day,
Thou fleeſt to late: the father eats his children, well away,
And limmes to which he once gaue life, with curſed iaw doth teare.
He ſhynes with oyntment ſhed ful ſweete all round about his heare,
Replete with wyne; and aftentymes ſo curſed kynd of food
His mouth hath held, that would not downe. but yet this one thing good
In all thy yls (Thyeſtes) is that them thou doſt not knoe,
And yet ſhal that not long andure, though Titan backward goe
And chariots turne agaynſt himſelfe, to meete the wayes be went,
And heauy night ſo heynous deede to keepe from ſight be ſent,
And out of tyme from Eaſt aryſe, ſo foule a fact to hyde,
Yet ſhall the whole at length be ſeene: thy ylles ſhall all be ſpide.
WHich way O Prince of landes and Gods on hie,
At whoſe vpriſe eftſones of ſhadowd night
All beawty fleeth, which way turnſt thou awrye?
And draweſt the day in midſt of heauen to flight?
Why doſt thou (Phoebus) hide from vs thy ſight?
Not yet the watch that later howre bringes in,
Doth Veſper warne the Starres to kindle light.
Not yet doth turne of Heſpers whele begin
To loaſe thy chare his well deſerued way.
The trumpet third not yet hath blowen his blaſt
Whyle toward the night beginnes to yeld the day:
Great wonder hath of ſodayne ſuppers haſt
The Plowman yet whoſe Oxen are vntierd.
From woonted courſe of Heauen what drawes thee backs?
What cauſes haue from certayne race conſpierd
To turne thy horſe? do yet from dongeon black
Of hollow hell, the conquerd Gyantes proue
A freſh aſſaut? doth. Tityus yet aſſay
VVith trenched hart, and wounded wombe to moue
The former yres? or from the hil away
Hath now Typhoeus wound his ſyde by might?
Is vp to heauen the way erected hie
Of phlegrey foes by mountaynes ſet vpright?
And now doth Oſſa Pelion ouerlye?
The wonted turnes are gone of day and night,
The ryſe of Sunne, nor fall ſhal be no more,
Auora dowiſh mother of the light
That wontes to ſend the horſes out before,
Doth wonder much agayne returne to ſee.
Her dawning light: ſhe wots not how to caſe
The weary wheeles, nor manes that ſmoaking be
Of horſe with ſweate to bathe amid the ſeas.
Himſelfe vnwonted there to lodge likewiſe,
Doth ſetting ſonne agayne the morning ſee,
And now commaundes the darkenes vp to ryſe.
Before the night to come prepared bee.
About the Poale yet glowth no fyre in ſight.
Nor light Moone the ſhades doth comfort yet
What ſo it be, God graunt it be the night.
Our hartes do quake with feare oppreſſed gret.
And dreadfull are leaſt heauen and earth and all
With fatall ruine ſhaken ſhall decay:
And leaſt on Gods agayne, and men ſhall fall
Disfigurde Chaos: and the land away
The Seas, and Fyres, and of the glorious Skiſe
The wandring lampes, leaſt nature yet ſhal hide.
Now ſhall no more with blaſe of his vpriſe,
The Lord of ſtarres that leades the world ſo wyde,
Of Sommer both and Winter geue the markes.
Nor yet the Moone with Phoebus flames that burnes,
Shall take from vs by night the dreadful carkes,
With ſwifter courſe or paſſe her brothers turnes,
While compaſſe leſſe ſhe fets in croked race:
The Gods on heaps ſhal out of order fall,
And each with other mingled be in place.
The wryed vvay of holy planets all,
With path a ſlope that doth deuide the Zones.
That beares the ſygnes, and yeares in courſe doth brynge,
Shall ſee the ſtarres with him fall downe at ones.
And he that firſt not yet vvith gentle ſpring,
The temperate Gale doth geue to ſayles, the Ramme
Shall headlong fall a dovvne to Seas agayne,
Through vvhich he once vvith fearefull Hellen ſvvam.
Next him the Bull that doth vvith horne ſuſtayne
The ſyſters ſeuen with him ſhall ouerturne
The twins and armes of croked Cancer all,
The Lyon hoat that wontes the ſoyle to burne
Of Hercules agayne from heauen ſhall fall.
To landes once left the Virgin ſhall be throwne,
And leueld payſe of balance ſway alow,
And draw with them the ſtinging Scorpion downe.
So likewyſe he that holdes in Theſſale bowe
His ſwift wel fethred arrowes Chiron old,
Shal breake the ſame and eke ſhal leſe his ſhotte
And Capricorne that bringes the winter cold
Shall ouerturne and breake the water pot
VVho ſo thou be: and downe with thee to grounde,
The laſt of all the ſygnes ſhal Piſces fall
And monſters eke in ſeas yet neuer drounde,
The water gulph ſhal ouerwhelme them all.
And he which doth betwene each vrſa glyde,
Lyke croked flood the ſlipper ſerpent twynde:
And leſſer Beare by greater Dragons ſyde,
Full cold with froſt congealed hard by kinde,
And carter dull that ſlowly guides his waine
Vnſtable ſhall Boòtes fall from hye.
VVe are thought meete of all men whom agayn
Should hugy heape of Chaos ouerly.
And world oppreſſe with ouerturned maſſe
The lateſt age now falleth vs vppon.
VVith euil hap we are begot alas
If wretches we haue loſt the ſight of ſonne,
Or him by fraught enforced haue to flye
Let our complayntes yet goe and feare be paſts
He greedy is of life, that wil not die
VVhen all the world ſhall end with him at laſt.
NOwe equall with the Starres I goe.
beyond each other wight,
With haughty heade the heauens aboue,
and higheſt Poale I ſmite,
The kingdome nowe, and ſeate I holde,
where once my father raynd:
I nowe lette goe the gods: for all
my wil I haue obſaynde
aoughe and well, ye euen enough for me I am acquit
But why enough? I wil procede and fyl the father yet
With bloud of his leaſt any ſhame ſhould me reſtrayne at all,
The day is gone, go to therfore whyle thee the heauen doth call
Would God I could agaynſt their wils yet hold the Goddes that flee
And of reuenging diſh conſtrayne them witneſſes to bee:
But yet (which wel enough is wrought) let it the father ſee.
In ſpighte of al the drowned day I will remoue from thee
The darkneſſe all, in ſhade wherof do lurke thy miſeryes.
And gueſt at ſuch a banquet now to long he careles lyes,
With mery face: now eate and drunke enough he hath at laſt
T'ys beſt him ſelfe ſhould know his ylls ye ſeruauntes, all in haſt
Vndoe the temple dores: and let the houſe bee open all:
Fayne would I ſee, when loke vppon his childrens heads he ſhal
What countenaunce he then would make, or in what woordes break out
Would firſt his griefe, or how would quake his body round about
With ſpright amaſed ſore: of all my worke the fruite were this
I would him not a miſer ſee, but while ſo made he is,
Behold the temple opened now doth ſhyne with many a light:
In glitteryng gold and purple ſeate he ſitees hymſelfe vpright,
And ſtaying vp his heauy head with wyne vppon his hand.
He belcheth out, now chiefe of goddes in higheſt place I ſtand,
And king of kinges: I haue my wiſh, and more then I could thinke.
He filled is, he now the wyne in ſiluer volle doth drinke
And ſpare it not: there yet remaynes a worſer draught for thee
That ſprong out of the bodyes late of ſacrifyces three,
Which wine ſhall hyde let the withall the hoordes be taken vp.
The father (mingled with the wyne,) his childrens bloud ſhall ſup.
That would haue bronke of myne. Behold he now beginnes to ſtrayne
His voyce, and ſynges, nor yet for ioy his mynde be may refrayne,
OBeaten boſomes dullde ſo longe with woe,
Laie down your cares, at length your greues relē
Let ſorowe paſſe, and all your dread let goe,
And fellow eke of fearefull baniſhment,
Sad pouertye and ill in miſery
The ſhame of cares, more whenſe thy fall thou haſte,
Then whether ſkylles, great hap to him, from hye
That falles, it is in ferety to be plaſt
Beneath, and great it is to him agayne
That preſt with ſtorme, or euylls feeles the ſmart,
Of kyngedome loſte the payſes to ſuſtaine
VVith necke vnbowde: nor yet detect of heart
Nor ouercome, his heauy haps alwayes
To beare vpright but now of carefull carkes
Shake of the ſhowres, and of thy wretched dayes
Away with all the myſerable markes.
To ioyfull ſtate returne thy chearefull face.
Put fro thy mynde the olde Thyeſtes hence.
It is the woont of wight in wofull caſe,
In ſtate of ioy to haue no confidence.
Though better haps to them returned be,
Thafflicted yet to ioy it yrketh ſore.
VVhy calſt thou me abacke, and hyndreſt me
This happy day to celebrate? wherefore
Bidſt thou me (ſorrow) wepe without a cauſe.
VVho doth me let with flowers ſo freſh and gay,
To deeke my hayres? it lets and me withdrawes.
Downe from my head the roſes fall away:
My moyſted haire with oyntment ouer all,
VVith ſodayne maſe ſtandes vp in wondrous wyſe,
From face that would not weepe the ſtreames do fall.
And howling cryes amid my wordes aryſe.
My ſorrowe yet thaccuſtomd teares doth loue
And wretches ſtil delyght to weepe and crye.
Vnpleaſant playntes it pleaſeth them to moue:
And floriſht fayre it likes with Tyrian die
Their robes to rent, to waile it likes them ſtill
For ſorrow ſendes (in ſigne that woes draw nic)
The mind that wots before of after yll.
The ſturdy ſtormes the ſhipmen ouer lye.
VVhen voyd of wynd thaſſwaged ſeas do reſt.
VVhat tumult yet or countenaunce to ſee
Makſte thou mad man? at length a truſtful breaſt
To brother gene, what euer now it be,
Cauſeles, or els to late thou art a dred.
I wretch would not ſo feare, but yet me drawes
A trembling terrour: downe myne eyes do ſhed
Their ſodayne teares and yet I know no cauſe,
Is it a greefe, or feare? or els hath teares
great ioy it ſelfe.
LEtte vs this daye with one conſente
(O brother celebrate)
This daye my ſceptors my confyrme,
and ſtabliſh my eſtate.
And faythfull bonde of peace and loue
betwene vs ratifye.
Enough with meate and eke with wyne,
now ſatiſfyed am I.
But yet of all my ioyes it were a great encreaſe to mee,
If now about my ſyde I might my litle children ſee.
Beleeue that here euen in thyne armes thy children preſent be.
For here they are; and ſhalbe here, no part of them fro thee
Sal be withheld: their loued lookes now geue to thee I wil,
And with the heape of all his babes, the father fully fyll.
Thou ſhalt be glutted feare thou not: they with my boyes as yet
The ioyful ſacrifyces make at borde where children ſit.
They ſhalbe cald, the frendly cup now take of curteſy
With wyne vpfylde.
of brothers feaſt I take ful willingly
The fynal gyft, ſhed ſome to gods of this our fathers lande,
Then let the reſt be dronke, what's this? in no wyſe wil my hand
Obeye: the payſe increaſeth ſore, and downe myne arme doth ſway.
And from my lippes the wafting wyne it ſelfe doth flye away,
And in deceiued mouth, about my iawes it rūneth rounde.
The table to, it ſelfe doth ſhake and leape from trembling ground.
Scant burnes the fyre: the ayre it ſelfe with heauy chere to ſlght
Forſooke of ſonne amaſed is betweene the day and night.
What meaneth this? yet more and more of backward beaten ſkye
The compas falles, and thicker myſt the world doth ouerly
Then blackeſt darkenes, and the night in night it ſelfe doth hyde.
All ſtarres be fled, what ſo it bee my brother God prouyde
And ſoones to ſpare: the Gods ſo graunt that al this teſtmpeſt fall
On this vyle head: but now reſtore to me my childreu all,
I wil, and neuer day agayne ſhal them from thee withdraw,
What tumult tumbleth ſo my guttes, and doth my bowels gnaw?
What quakes within, with heauy payſe I feele my ſelfe oppreſt,
And with an other voyce then myne bewayſes my doleful breſt:
Come nere my ſonnes, for you now doth thun happy father call:
Come nere, for you once ſeene, this griefe would ſoone aſſwage & fall
Whence murmure they? fathers at embrace them quickly now
For here they are loe come to thee: doſt thou thy children know?
I know my brother: ſuch a gylt yet canſt thou ſuffet well
O earth to beare? nor yet from hence to Stygian lake of hell
Doſt thou both drowne thy ſelle and vs? nor yet with broaken ground
Doſt thou theſe kingdomes and their king with Chaos rude confounde?
Nor yet vprenting from the ſoyle the bowres of wicked land.
Doſt thou Micenas ouerturne with Tantalus to ſtand,
And aunciters of ours, if there in hel be any one,
Now ought we both: now from the frames on eyther ſyde anone
Of ground, all here and there rent vp out of thy boſome depe:
Thy dens and dungons ſet abrode, and vs encloſed keepe,
In bottome low of Acheront aboue our heds aloft
Let wander all the gylty ghoſtes, with burning frete ful oft
Let fyry Phlegethon that driues his ſands both to and fro
To our confuſion ouer roon und vyolently flow
O ſlothful ſoyle vnſhaken payſe vn yet art thou?
The Gods are ſled:
but take to thee with ioy thy children now,
And rather them enbrace: at length thy children all of thee
So long wiſht for (for no delay there ſtandeth now in mee)
Enioy and kiſſe embracing armes deuyde thou vnto three.
Is this thy league? may this thy loue and fayth of brother bee?
And dooſt thou ſo repoſe thy hate? the father doth not craue
His ſonnes aliue (which might haue bene without thy gylt) to haue
And eke without thy hate, but this doth brother brother pray:
That them he may entoom be reſtore, whom ſee thou ſhalt ſtrayght waye,
Be burnt: the father naught requires of thee that haue he ſhall,
But ſoone forgoe
what euer part rt of thy children all
Remaynes, here ſhalt thou haue: and what remayneth not thou hoſt.
Lye they in fieldes, a food out fleng for fleerug ſowles to waſt
Or are they kept a pray, for wyld and brutiſh beaſten to eate?
Thou haſt deaourd thy ſonnes and fyld thy ſelfe with wicked meat.
Oh this is it that ſham'de the Gods and day from hence did dryue
Turn'd back to eaſt, alas I wretch what waylinges may I geue?
Or what complayntes? what woeful woordes may be enough for mee?
Their heads cut of, and handes of torne, I from their bodres ſee,
And wrenched ſeete from broken thighes I here behold agayn
Tys this that greedy father could not ſuffer to ſuſtayne.
In belly roll my bowels round, and cloaſed cryme ſo great
Without a paſſage ſtryues within and ſeekes away to get.
Thy ſword (O brother) leud to me much of my bloud alas
It hath: let vs therwith make way for all my ſonnes to paſſe.
Is yet the ſword from me withheld? thy ſelfe thy boſomes teare,
And let thy breſtes reſound with ſtroakes: yet wretch thy hand forbeare
And ſpare the deade: who euer ſaw ſuch miſchiefe put in proofe?
What rude Heniochus that dwels by ragged coaſt aloofe,
Of Caucaſus vnapt for men? or feare to Athens,, who
Procuſtes wyld? the father I oppreſſe my children do
And am oppreſt, is any meane of gylt or miſchiefe yet?
A meane in miſchiefe ought to be when gylt thou doſt commit,
Not when thou quytſt: for yet euen this to litle ſeemes to me.
The blood yet warme euen from the wound I ſhould in ſight of thes
Euen in thy lawes haue ſhed, that thou the bloud of them mightſt drinke
That lyued yet: but whyle to much to haſt my hate I thinke
My wrath beguyled is my ſelfe with ſword the woundes them gaue
I ſtrake them downe, the ſacred fyres with ſlaughter vowde I haue
Wel pleaſo, the carcaſe cutting then, and liueles lymmes on grounde.
I haue in litle parcels chopt, and ſome of them I brounde
In boyling cauderns, ſome to fyres that burnte ful ſlow I put,
And made to droppe: their ſynewes all, and limmes a two I cut
Euen yet alyue and on the ſpitte, that thruſt was through the ſame
I harde the liuer wayle and crye, and with my hand the flame:
I otf kept in: but euery whit the father might of this
Haue better done, but now my wrath to lightly ended is.
He rent his ſonnes with wicked gumme, himſelfe yet wotting naught.
Nor they therof
O ye encloaſ'd with bending bankes abought
All ſeas me heare, and to this gylt ye Gods now harken well
What euer place ye fled are to here all ye ſprites of hel,
And here ye landes, and night ſo darke that them doſt ouerly
With clowde ſo blacke to my complayntes do than thy ſelfe apply.
To thee now left I am, thou doſt alone me miſer ſee,
And thou art left without thy ſtarres: I wil not make for me
Peticions yet, nor ought for me require may ought yet bee
That me ſhould vayle? for you ſhal all my wiſhes now foreſee.
Thou guyder great of ſkyes aboue, & prince of higheſt might,
Of heauenly place now all with cloudes ful horrible to ſight,
Enwrap the worlde, and let the wyndes on euery ſyde breake out:
And send the dredfull thunder clap through al the world about
Nor with what hand thou gyltes houſe and vndeſerued wall
With leſſer bolt are wonte to beate, but with the which did fall
The three vnheaped mountaynes once and which to hils in height
Stoode equall vp, the gyantes huge: throuw out ſuch weapons ſtreight,
And flyng thy fires: and therwithall reuenge the drowned day.
Let flee they flames, the light thus loſt and hid from heauen away,
With flaſhes fyll: the cauſe (leſt long thou ſhouldſt doubte whom to hit)
Of ech of vs is ill: if not at leaſt let myne be it.
Me ſtrike with tryple edged toole thy brande of flaminge fyre.
Beate through this breaſt: if father I my children to deſyre
To lay in tombe or corpſes caſt to fyre as doth behoue,
I muſt be burnt if nothing now the gods to wrath may moue,
Nor powre from ſkies with thunder bolt none ſtrikes the wicked men
Let yet eternall night remayne, and hyde with darknes then
The world about: I, Titan naught complayne as now it ſtandes
If ſtil thou hyde thee thus away.
now prayſe I well my handes.
Now got I haue the palme. I had bene ouercome of thee,
Except thou ſorrow'dſt ſo but now euen children borne to mee
I compt and now of bridebed chaſt the ſayth I do repayre,
In what offended haue my ſous:
In that, that thyne they were
Setſt thou the ſonnes for fathers foode?
I do & (which is beſt)
The certayne ſonnes,
The gods that guyde all infantes I proteſt.
What wedlock gods?
who would the gilt wt gylt ſo quite again?
I know thy greefe preuented now with wrong thou doſt complayne:
Nor this thee yrkes, that ſed thou art with food of curſed kind,
But that thou hadſt not it prepared for ſo it was thy mynd,
Such meates as theſe to ſet before thy brother wotting naught,
And by the mothers helpe to haue, likewyſe my children caught:
And them with ſuch like to ſlay: this one thing letted thee,
Thou thought'ſt them thine.
the gods ſhall al of this reuengers be
And vnto them for vengeance due my vowes thee render ſhall
But vext to be I thee the whyte, geeue to thy children all.
O Kyng of Dytis dungeou darke,
and gyſty Ghoſts of hell,
That in the deepe and dre adfull Denne,
of blackeſt Tarrace dwell.
Where leane and pale dyſeaſes lye
where feare and ſamyne are,
Where discord ſtands with bleeding browes,
where euery kynde of care,
Where furies fight in beds of ſteele, and heares of crauling ſnakes,
Where Gorgon grimme, where Harpyes are, & lothſome Lymbo lakes,
Where moſt prodigious vgly thinges, the hollowe hell doth byde.
If yet a mouſter more myſhapt then all that there doe hyde,
That makes his broode his curſed foode, yee all abhorre to ſee,
Nor yet the deepe Auerne it ſelfe, may byde to couer mee,
Nor griſly gates of Putoes place, yet dare them ſelues to ſpred,
Nor gaying grounde to ſwallowe him, whom Gods and day haue ſled:
Yet breake yee out from curſed ſeates, and heere remayne with mee,
Yee neede not now to be affrayde, the Ayre and Heauen to ſee.
Nor triple headed Cerberus, thou needſt not bee affryght,
The day vnknowne to thee to ſee or els the lothſome lyght.
They both be ſled: and now doth dwell none other count'naunce heere,
Then doth beneath the fowleſt face, of hatefull hell appeete.
Come ſee a meeteſt match for thee, a more then monſtrous wombe,
That is of his vnhappy broode, become a curſed tombe.
Flocke here yee fowleſt flendes of hell, and thou O graundſyre greate,
Come ſee the glutted guts of myne, with ſuch a kinde of meate,
As thou didſt once for Gods prepare. Let torments all of hel
Now fall vppon this hatefull head, that hath deſerude them well.
Yee all be plagued wrongfully, your guiltes be ſmall, in ſight
Of myne, and meete it were your pange on me alone ſhould light.
Now thou O graundſter guiltleſſe arte, and meeter were for mee,
With fleeing floud to be beguilde, and fruite of fickle tree.
Thou ſlewſt thy ſonne, but I my ſonnes, alas, haue made my meate.
I coulde thy famyne better beare, my paūch is now repleate
With foode: and with my children three, my belly is extent.
O filthy fowles and gnawyng gripes, that Tytius be ſome rent
Beholde a fitter pray for you, to fill your ſelues vppone
Then are the growing guts of him: foure wombes enwrapt in one.
This paūche at once ſhall ſtll you all: if yee abhorre the foode,
Nor may your ſelues abide to bathe, in ſuch a curſed bloode:
Yet lend to me your clinching clawes, your pray a while forbeare,
And with your tallons ſuffer mee, this monſtrous mawe to teare.
Or whirling wheeles, with ſwinge of which Ixion ſtill is rolde,
Your bookes vpon this glutten gorge, would catche a ſurer holde.
Thou filthy floud of Lym bo lake, and Sygian poole ſo dyre,
From chocked chanell belche abrode. Thou fearefull freate of fyre,
Spue out thy flames O Phlegethon: and ouerſhed the grounde.
With vomit of thy fyry ſtreame, let me and earth be drownde,
Breake vp thou ſoyle from bottome deepe, and geue thou roome to hell,
That night, where day, y• ghoſts, where Gods were woōt to raigne, may dwel.
Why gapſt thou not? Why do you not O gates of hell vnfolde?
Why do yee thus thinfernall ſtendes, ſo long from hence withholde?
Are you likewyſe affrayde to ſee, and knowe ſo wretched wight,
From whom the Gods haue wryde theyr lookes, & turned are to flight?
O hatefull head, whom heauen and hell, haue ſhoonde and left alone,
The Sunne, the ſtarres, the light, the day, the Gods, the ghoſts be goue.
Yet turne agayne yee Skyes a while, ere quight yee goe fro mee,
Take vengeance fyrſt on him, whoſe faulte enforceth you to flee.
If needes yee muſt your flight prepare, and may no longer bide,
But rolle yee muſt with you forthwt, the Gods and Sunne a ſyde,
Yet ſlowly flee: that I at length, may you yet ouertake,
While wandring wayes I after you, and ſpeedy iorney make.
By ſeas, by lands, by woods, by rocks, in darke I wander ſhall:
And on your wrath, for right rewarde to due deſrts, will call.
Yee ſcape not fro me, ſo yee Gods, ſtill after you I goe,
And vengeaunce aſke on wicked wight, your thunder bolte to throe.