Frolick Ieronimo, thou art now confirmd,
Marshall of Spaine, by all the dewes
And customary rights vnto thy office.
My knee sings thanks vnto your highnes bountie,
Come hether boy Horatio; fould thy ioynts;
Kneele by thy fathers loynes, and thank my leedge,
by honering me, thy Mother, and thy selfe,
with this high staffe of office.
O my léedge I haue a hart thrice stronger then my years▪
and that shall answere gratefully for me.
Let not my youthfull blush impare my vallor,
If euer you haue foes, or red field scars,
Ile empty all my vaines to serue your wars:
Ile bleed for you: and more, what speech afords,
ile speake in drops when I do faile in words.
UUell spoke my boy, and on thy fathers side.
My leedge how like you Don Horatios sperit,
what, doth it not promise faire,
I, and no doubt his merit will purchase more,
Knight Marshall rise, and still rise
Higher, and greater in thy Soueraines eies.
O fortunate houre, blessed mynuit, happy day,
Able to rauish euen my sence away;
Now I remember too: O swéet rememberance,
This day my years strike fiftie, and in Rome,
They call the fifty year the year of Iubily,
The mery yeare, the peacefull yéere, Iocond yeare,
A yéere of ioy, of pleasure and delight,
This shalbe my yeare of Iubily, for tis my fifty.
Age vshers honor, tis no shame, confesse;
Beard, thou art fifty full, not a haire lesse.
How now, what news from spain, tribute returnd.
Tribute in words my leedge, but not in coine.
Ha: dare he still procrastinate with Spaine,
Not tribute paied, not thrée years payed,
Tis not at his coine
But his slack homage, that we most repine.
My léedge, if my opinion might stand firme
Within your highnes thoughts:
Marshall, our kingdome calles thée father:
Therefore speake free▪
Thy counsell ile imbrace, as I do thée.
I thanke your highnes: then my Gracious léedge,
I hold it méete by way of Embassage,
To demaund his mind, and the nectlect of tribute:
But my léedge heere must be kind words,
Which doth oft besiedge the eares of rough
Heawn tyrants more then blowes.
Oh, a polyticke speech beguiles the eares of foes,
Mary my léedge mistake me not I pray,
If friendly phraises, honied spéech, bewitching accent,
Well tuned mellody, and all swéet guifts of nature,
Cannot auaile or win him to it,
Then let him raise his gall vp to his toong,
And be as bitter as physitions drugs,
Stretch his mouth wider, with big swolne phrases:
Oh héeres a Lad of mettle, stout Don Andrea,
Mettle to the crowne
Would shake the kings hie court thrée handfuls downe.
And well pickt out knight Marshall,
Spéech well strung,
Ide rather choose Horatio ▪ were he not so young.
I humbly thanke your highnes,
In placing me next vnto his royall bosome.
How stand ye Lords to this election.
Right pleasing our dread Soueraigne,
Onely with pardon mighty Soueraigne.
I should haue chose Don Lorenzo.
I Don Rogero,
O no, not me my Lords;
I am wars Champion, and my fées are swords,
Pray king, pray peeres, let it be Don Andrea,
Hees a worthy lim,
Loues wars and Souldiers therefore I loue him.
And I loue him, and thee valliant Rogero,
Noble spyrits, gallant blouds,
Your no wise insinnating Lords,
You ha no tricks, you ha none of all their slights.
So, so, Andrea must be sent imbassador,
Lorenzo is not thought vpon: good.
Ile wake the Court, or startle out some bloud.
How stand you Lords to this election?
Right pleasing our dread Soueraigne.
then Don Andrea.
My aproued leedge.
UUe make thee our Lord hie imbassador.
Your highnes cirkels me with honors boundes,
I still discharg the waight of your command,
with best respect, i friendly tempred phraise,
Cannot affect the vertue of your charge,
I will be hard like thunder, and as rough,
as Northerne tempests, or the vext bowels,
Of too insulting waues, who at one blow,
Fiue marchants wealths into the deepe doth throw,
ile threaten crumson wars.
I, I, thats good;
Let them keepe coine, pay tribute with their bloud.
Farwell then don Andrea, to thy chardge:
Lordes letes in, ioy shalbe now our guest,
Lets in to celebrate our second feast.
Andrea's gone embassador;
Lorenza is not drempt on in this age,
Hard fate,
when villaines sit not in the highest state
Ambitions plumes that florisht in our court,
Seuere authority has dasht with iustice;
And pollicy, and pride, walke like two exiles
Giuing attendance, that were once attended;
and we reiected that were once high honored,
I hate andrea, cause he aimes at honor,
when my purest thoughts, work in a pitchy vale,
which are as different as heauen and hell,
One peeres for day, the other gappes for night.
That yawning Beldam with her Iestie skin,
Tis she I hug as mine effeminate bride,
For such complexions best appease my pride:
I haue a lad in pikell of this stamp,
A melancholy discontented courtier
Whose famisht iawes look like the chap of death
Upon whose eie browes hang damnation,
Whose hands are washt in rape, and murders bould,
Him with a goulden baite will I allure,
For Courtiers wil doe any thing for gould,
To be Andrea's death at his retourne:
Hée loues my Sister; that shall cost his life,
So shée a husband, he shall lose a wife,
O swéete, swéete pollicie, I hugg thée, good:
Andreas himens draught, shallbe in bloud.
Whether in such hast my second selfe.
I'faith my deare bosome, to take solemne leaue,
Of a most wéeping creature.
Thats a woman.
Thats Bellimperia.
Sée sée, she méetes you héere:
And what it is to loue? And be loued déere,
I haue hard of your honor, gentle brest,
I do not like it now so well me thinkes.
What, not to haue honor bestoued on me.
O yes: But not a wandring honor deere,
I could afford well didst thou stay here,
Could honor melt it selfe into thy vaines,
And thou the fountaine, I could wish it so,
If thou wouldst remaine héere with me: and not go.
Tis but to portugale.
But to demand the tribute Ladie.
Trybute, alas that Spaine, cannot of peace
Forbeare, a little coine, the Indies being so néere,
And yet this is not all: I know you are to hot,
to ull of spléene or an imbassador,
And will leane much to honor.
Push.
Nay heare me deere I know you will be rough
And violent, and portingale hath a tempestus son,
Stampt with the marke of fury, and you too.
Swéet Bellimperia.
Wéele méete like thunder, eatch imperious ouer
Others spléen, you haue both proud spirits, and both will
striue to aspire, when two vext Clouds iustle they strike
Out fire, and you I feare me war, which peace forsend,
O déere andrea pray, lets haue no wars,
First let them pay the souldiers, that were mainde
In the last battaile, ere more wretches fall,
Or walke on stilts to timelesse Funerall.
Respectiue déere, O my liues happines,
the ioy of all my being, do not shape
Frightfull conceit beyond the intent of act,
I know thy loue is vigilant ore my bloud,
And fears ill fate which heauen hath yet withstood,
But be of comfort, swéet Horatio knowes,
I go to knit friends, not to kindle foes.
true Madam Belimperia, thats his taske
the phraise he vseth must be gently stylde,
the king hath warned him to be smooth and mild.
But will you indéed andrea.
By this.
By this lip blushing kisse.
O you sweare swéetly.
Ile kéepe your oth for you tell you returne.
Then ile be sure you shall not be forsworne.
Ho Pedringano.
Signioro.
Are all things abord.
They are my good Lord.
Then Bellimperia. I take leaue: Horatio
Be in my absence my deare selfe, chast selfe,
What playing the woman Bellimperia:
Nay then you loue me not, or at the least,
You drowne my honores in those flowing watters,
Beléeue it Bellimperia, tis as common,
To wéepe at parting, as to be a woman,
Loue me more valliant, play not this moyst prize,
Be woman in all partes, saue in thy eies:
And so I leaue thée.
Farwell my Lord:
Be mindfull of my loue, and of your word.
Tis fixed vpon my hart, adew soules friend.
All honor, one Andreas steps attende.
Yet he is in sight, & yet but now hées vanisht.
Nay Lady if you stoope so much to passion, ile call him back againe.
O good Horatio, no: it is for honor prethée let him go.
Then Madam be composd as you weare wont,
to musick and delight, the time being Commick, will
Séeme short and pleasant, till his returne
From Portingale: and madam in this circle,
Let your hart moue,
Honord promotion is the sap of loue.
Come my soules spaniell, my lifes ietty substance,
Whats thy name?
My names an honest name, a Courtiers
Name: tis lazarotto.
What lazarotto.
Or rather rotting in this lazy age, that
Yéelds me no imployments, I haue mischiefe
Within my breast more then my bulke can hold,
I want a midwife to deliuer it.
Ile be the hée one then, and rid thée soone
Of this dull, leaden, and tormenting elfe:
Thou knowst the loue betwixt Bellimperia and
Andreas bosome?
I, I do.
How might I crosse, it, my swéet mischiefe:
Hunny damnation how?
Well: as many waies as there are paths to hell
And thats enow ifaith: from vserers doore
There goes one pathe, from friers that nurse
Whores, there goes another path: from brokers
Stals, from rich that die and build no hospitals,
Two other paths: from farmers that crack barns,
With stuffing corne, yet starue the néedy swarmes,
Another path: from drinking schooles one, from
Dicing houses, but from the court, none, none.
Héere is a slaue iust a the stampe, I with:
Whose uck-soules, blacker then his name,
Though it stand printed with a Rauens quill.
But lazarotto crosse, my Sisters loue, and ile
Raine showers of Duckets in thy palme.
Oh Duckets, dainty ducks forgiue me,
Duckets, ile fetch you duck inough or gold,
And thinck males, the punck wanton and the
Bawd to winke.
Discharg, discharg, good lazaratto, how we
May croe my Sisters louing hopes.
Nay? now ile tell you.
Thou knowest Addreas gone embassador.
The better thers oppertunity now list to me.
Alcario the duke Medinas sonne,
Dotes on your Sister Bellimperia,
Him in her priuate gallery you shall place,
To court her, let his protestations be,
Fashoned with rich Iewels, for in loue, great,
Gifts and gold haue the best toong to moue,
Let him not spare an oth, without a iewell,
To bind it fast: Oh I know womens harts
What stuffe they are made of, my Lord:
Gifts and giuing, will melt the chaest
Séeming female liuing.
Indéede andrea is but poore, though honorable,
His bounty amongst souldiers okes him dry,
And there ore great gifts may bewitch her eie.
Héeres no fine villainie, no damnd brother?
But say she should deny his gifts, be all
Compod of hate, as my mind giues me,
that she wooll▪ what then?
Then thus: At his returne to spaine, Ile
Murder don Andrea.
Darst thou sperit.
What dares not hée do, that near hopes
To Inherit.
Hée dares bée damnd like thée.
Dare I▪ Ha, ha, I haue no hope of euerlasting
Height, my souls a Moore you know saluations
White, what dare not I enact then, tush, hée dies;
I will make way to Bellimperias eies.
To wéepe I feare but not to tender loue.
Why is she not a woman, she must wéepe
A while as widdowes vse till their first sléepe▪
Who in the morrow folloing will be sould to newe,
Before the first are throughly cold: So
Bellimperia; For this is common, the more
She wéepes, the More shée plaies the woman.
Come then, how ere it hap Andrea shal be crost.
Let mée alone, Ile turne him to a ghoast.
Farwell true brace of villaynes,
Come hether boy Horatio, didst thou here them.
O my true brested father, my eares haue sukt
In poyson, deadly Poyson, murder Andrea:
O Inhumain practis, had not your reuerend
Yeares béene present héere, I should haue
Ponyarded the villaynes bowels, and shoued his
Soule out to Damnation, Murder Andrea:
Honest lord: Impions villayns.
I like thy true hart boy, thou louest thy friend,
It is the greatest argument and sign that I begot thée,
For it showes thou art mine.
O father: Tis a charitable déed,
To preuent those that would make vertue bléed.
Ile dispatch letters to don andrea,
Unfould their hellish Practise, damnd intent,
Against the vertuous riuers of his life?
Murder andrea.
Peace: Who comes héere: newes, newes Isaballa.
What newes Ieronimo?
Strang newes, Lorenzo is becom an honest man
Is this your wondrous newes.
I i not wondrous to haue honesty in hel, go, tell
It Abrod now, but sée you put no new aditions
To it: as thus, shal I tell you gossip: Lorenzo,
Is become an honnest man: Beware, heware,
For honesty spoken in derision points out knauery.
O then take héed, that Iest would not be trim,
Hées a great man, therefore we must not knaue him.
In gentle soule, Ile not bée long away,
As short my body, Short shallbe my stay.
Murder andrea: What bloud sucking slaue
Could choke bright honor in a skabard graue,
What harping still vpon anadreas death,
Haue courage boy: I shall preuent their plots,
And make them both stand like too politique sots.
Lorenzo has a reach as far as hell,
To hooke the diuell from his flaming cell▪
Oh sprightly father heele out rech you then,
Knaues, longer reaches haue thē honest men.
But boy feare not, Ile out stretch them al
My minds a giant, though my bulke bée full.
What is the meaning of this lowd report
An emba. my Lord is new ariued rom spaine.
Son Balthezer we pray do you goe méet him,
And do him all the honor that belonges him.
Father my best indeuour shall obay you,
Welcom worthy lord, spaines choyse embassador,
Braue stout, andrea, for soe I gesse thee.
Portugalles eire I thanke thee,
Thou semes no les then what thou arte, a prince:
And an heroycke spirit, Portingalles king,
I kisse my hand, and tender on thy throne,
My masters loue, peace, and affection.
And we receue them, and thee worthy andrea;
Thy masters hy pried loue vnto our hart,
Is welcome to his friend thou to our court.
Thankes Portingall: My lordes I had in charge
At my depart from spaine this embasage,
To put your brest in mind of tribute due
Unto our masters kingdome, these three years
Detained and kept back: and I sent to know,
Whether neglect, or will detaines it so.
Thus much returne vnto thy king andrea,
We haue wt best aduise thought of our state,
And finde it much dishonord by base homage,
I not deny but tribute hath bin due to Spaine,
By our forfathers base captiuitie,
Yet cannot rase out there successors merit:
Tis sayd we shall not answer at next birth
Our fathers fawltes, in heauen, why then one earth:
Which proues and showes that which they lost by base Captiuitie,
We may redéeme with honored valiansie,
We borow nought, our kingdome is our owne,
Hee is a base king that payes rent for his throne.
Is this thy answer Portingalle:
I spaine, a royal answer to, which Ile maintaine.
And all the péeres of Portugalle the like.
Then thus all spaine which but thrée minites, agoe was thy full friend, is now returned thy foe.
An excellent foe, we shall haue scuflling good.
Thou shalt pay trybute, Portugalle with blood.
Trybute for trybute then: And foes, for foes.
I bid you sudden warres.
I sudden blowes, and thats as good as warres.
Don, Ile not bate,
An inch of courrage nor a haire of sate,
Pay trybute I with strockes.
I with strockes you shall
Allas that spaine should correct Portugal.
Correct: O in that one word, such torments doo,
I féele that I could lash thy ribes with valiant stéele.
Prince Balthezer, shalles méete?
Méete don Andrea, yes in the battles Bowels:
Heres my gage aneuer fayling pawne.
twill kéepe his day his houre, nay minute: Twill.
Then thine, and this posses one qualitie.
O let them kis, did I not vnderstand thée noble
Ualliant, and worthy my swordes societie with thée,
For all Spaines wealth, Ide not graspe hands,
Meet Don andrea. I tell thee noble spirit▪
Ide wade vp to the knees in bloud,
Ide make a bridge of spanish carkases
to single thee, out of the gasping armye.
Woot thou prince: why euen for that I loue.
Tut, loue me man when we haue drunke,
Hot bloud together▪ woundes will tie
an euerlasting setled amity.
And so shall thine.
And thine.
What giue no place?
to whome.
to me.
To thee: why should my face,
thats placed aboue my mind,
Fall vnder it.
Ile make thee yeeld,
I when yon get me downe,
But I stand euen yet, iump crowne to crowne.
Darst thou?
I dare.
I am all vext.
I care not.
I shall forget the Law.
Do, do.
Shall I?
Spare not?
But thou wilt yeeld first.
No.
O, I hug thee sort,
the valianst spirit ere trod the Spanish courte,
Heere let the rising of our hot bloud set.
My leedge two nobler spyrits neuer met.
Untill we meet in purple, when our swords,
Agreed, right valliant prince:
Then Portugale this is thy resolute answere.
So returne: its so, we haue bethought vs what
Tribute is, how poore that Monarch shoes,
Who for his throne a yeerely penshion owes:
And what our predesessors lost to spaine,
We haue fresh sperits that can renew it againe.
Then I vnclaspe the purple leaues of war,
Many a new wound must gaspe, through an old scar:
So Portugale I leaue thee.
Our selfe in person will see thee safe aboord:
Come son, come Lords,
In steade of tribute we must pay our swords.
Remember Don andrea that we meet.
Up hether sayling in a crimson fleete.
Do you affect my Sister.
Affect, aboue affection: for her breast,
Is my liues treasure, O entire
Is the condition of my hot desire.
Then this must be your plot,
You know andreas gone embassador,
On whom my Sister Bellimperia,
Casts hir affection: you are in stature like him,
Speech alike, and had you but his vestment
On your backe, thers no one liuing but would
Sweare twere he: therefore, sly policy must
Be your guide, I haue a suite iust
Of andreas, cullers, proportiond in all parts,
Nay twas his own: this suit within my cloet,
Shall you weare, and so disguid woe, sue, and
Then at last.
What.
Obtaine my loue.
This fals out rare,
In this disguise I may both wed, bed, and boord her.
You may you may? besids, within these few daies
Héele returne.
Till this be acted I in passion burne.
All fals out for the purpose, all hits iumpe,
The date of his embassage nighe expired,
Giues strength vnto our plot.
True, true, all to the purpose.
Moreouer, I will buze Andreas Landing;
which once but crept into the vulger mouthes,
Is hurryed héer, and there, and sworne for troth,
Thinke tis your loue makes me create this guise,
And willing hope to see your vertue rise.
Lorenzoes bounty I do more enfould,
Then the greatest mind of indians brightest gold.
Come let vs in, the next time you shall show,
All Don andrea, not alcario.
Come pull the table this way, so tis well:
Come write horatio write,
This speedy letter must away to night.
What fold paper that way, to a noble man,
to Don andrea Spaines embassador?
Fie I am a shamed to see it,
Hast thou worne gownes in the Uniuersity,
Lost logick, suckt Philosophy,
Eate Cues, drunke Cées, and cannot
giue A letter the right Courtiers crest:
O thers a kind of state,
In euery thing saue in a Cuckolds pate,
Fie, fie, horatio, what is your pen foule.
No Father cleaner then lorenzoes soule,
Thats dipt in inck made of an enuious gall,
Elce had my pen no cause to write at all.
Signeor andrea say.
Signeor andrea.
tis a villainus age this.
tis a villainus age this.
That a nobleman should be a knaue, as
Well as an Ostler.
That a nobleman should be a knaue, as
Well as an Ostler.
Or a seriant.
Or a seriant.
Or a Broker.
Or a Broker.
Yet I speake not this of lorenzo,
For hees an honest Lord.
Soot, Father de not write him honest Lord.
take vp thy pen, or ile take vp thee.
What right him honest Lord ile not agree.
Youle take it vp Sir.
well, well.
what went before, thou hast put me out; beshrow
thy impudence or insolence.
Lorenzoes an honest Lord.
well Sir, and has hired one to murder you.
O, I cry you mercy Father, ment you so.
Art thou a scholler Don horatio?
And canst not aime at Figuratiue speech.
I pray you pardon me, twas but youths
Hasty error.
Come read then?
And has hired one to murder you.
He meanes to send you to heaven, when
You returne from Portugale.
From portugale.
Yet hees an honest dukes son.
Yet hees an
But not the honest son of a Duke.
But not the honest.
O that villainy should be found in the great Chamber.
O that villainy.
And honesty in the bottome of the a seller.
And honesty.
If youle be murdered you may?
If youle be
If you be not, thanke God, and Ieronimo.
I you be not.
If you be, thank the diuell and lorenzo.
If you be thank.
Thus hoping you will not be murdred and you Can choose.
Thus hoping you will.
Especially being warned before hand.
Especially
I take my leaue boy, Horatio, write leaue,
Bending in the hams like an old Courtier,
Thy assured friend say, gainst lorenza and
The diuell, little Ieronimo Marshall.
Ieronimo Marshall.
So now read it ore.
Signeor andrea tis a villainus age this,
That a Nobleman should be a knaue, as well
As an Ostler: or a Seriant, or a broker, yet
I speake not this of Lorenzo: hées an
Honest Lord, and has hired one to murder you,
When you returne from Portugale, yet
Hées an honest Dukes sonne, but not the
Honest son of a Duke? O that villainy
Shovld be found in the great chamber, and honesty
In the bottome of a seller.
True boy: thers a morrall in that, as much
To say knauery in the Court and honesty in a Chéese house.
If youle be murdred you may: if you be
Not thanke God and Ieronimo: if you be,
Thanke the diuell & Lorenzo. Thus hoping
You will not be murdered, and you can choose,
Especially being warnd before hand, I take my leaue.
Horatio hast thou wrtten leaue bending in the
Hams: enough like a Gentlemau vsher, Sfoote
No Horatio, thou hast made him straddle too much,
Like a Frenchman, for shame put his legs closer
Though it be painefull.
So: tis done, tis done.
Thy assured friend gainst Lorenza, and the diuell,
Little Ieronimo, Marshall.
Yonder he is my Lord pray you speake to him.
Wax, wax Horatio: I had néede wax two,
Our oes will stride else ouer me and you?
Hées writing a loue letter to some Spanish Lady,
And now he calls for wax to eale it.
God saue you good knight Marshall.
Whose this, my Lord lorenzo: welcom, welcom,
Your the last man I thought on, saue the diuell.
Much doth your presence grace our homely roofe.
O Ieronimo, your wife condemns you of a vncurtesie
And ouer passing wrong, and more she names
Loue letters which you send to spanish Dames.
Do you accuse me so kind Isabella.
Unkind Ieronimo.
And for my instance this in your hand is one.
In sooth my Lord there is no written name
Of any Lady, then no spanish dame.
If it were not so, you would not be afeard
To read or show the waxt letter:
Pray you let me behold it.
I pray you pardon me▪
I must confes my Lord, it treats of loue,
Loue to andrea, I euen to his very bosome.
What newes my Lord heare you from portugale.
Who I, before your grace it must not be,
The Badger feeds not till the Lyons serued,
Nor fits it newes so soone kisse subiects,
As the faire cheeke of high authrority:
Ieronimo liues much absent from the Court,
And being absent, there liues from report.
Farwell Ieronimo.
welcome my Lord Lorenzo.
Boy thy mothers iealious of my loue to her,
O she plaid vs a wie part, now ten to one
He had not ouer heard the letter read, iust as he enterd.
Though it had happend euill,
He should have hard his name yokt with the diuell,
Héere seale the letter with a louing knot,
Send it with speede, Horatio linger not:
That Don andrea, may preuent his death,
And know his enemy by his enuious breath.
Now by the honor of Castéels true house,
You are as like andrea, part for part,
as he is like himselfe: did I know you,
By my crosse I sweare: I could not think you
But Andreas selfe, so legd, so fast, so
Spéecht, so all in all: methinks, I should salute
Your quick returne and spéedy hast from portugale,
Welcome faire Lord, worthy embassador,
Brave Don andrea, Oh I laugh to sée
How we shall iest at her mistaking thée.
What have you given it out andrea is returnd?
Tis all about the court in euery eare,
And my inuention, brought to me for newes,
Last night at supper, and which the more to couer,
I tooke a boule and quaft a health to him,
When it would scarse go downe for exstreame laughter,
to thinke how soone report had scatterd it.
But is the villaine Lazarotto acquainted with Our drift.
Not for Spains wealth,
though he be secret, yet suspects the worst,
For confidence confounds the stratagem,
the fewer in a plot of iealousie,
Build a foundation surest, when multitudes
Makes it confused ere it come to head,
Be secret then, trust not the open aire,
For aire is breath, and breath blown words raise care:
this is the gallery where she most frequents,
Within this walke haue I beheld her dally,
With my shapes substance, O immortall powers.
Lend your asistance, clap a siluer tongue within
This pallat, that when I approach,
Within the presence of this demy Goddesse,
I may posses an adimanticke power,
And so bewitch her with my honied spéech,
Haue euery sillable a musick stop,
that when I pause the mellody may moue,
And hem perswasion twéene her snowy paps
that her hart hearing may relent and yéeld.
Breake of my Lord, sée where she makes approch.
then fall into your former vaines of termes:
Welcome my Lord, welcome braue Don
Andrea, Spaines best of sperit: what newes,
From Portugale tribute or war,
But see my Sister Bellimperia comes,
I will defer it till some other time,
For company hinders louds conference.
Welcom my lifes selfe forme, deere Don Andrea,
My words iterated giues thee as much,
Welcome my selfe, of selfe.
What newes Andrea? treats it peace or war?
At first they cried all war, as men resolued
to loose both life and honor at one cast:
At which I thunderd words all clad in proofe,
Which strooke amazement to their pauled speeche,
And tribute presently was yeelded vp.
But maddam Bellimperia leaue we this,
And talke of former suites and quests of loue.
tis all about the Court Andreas come;
Would I might greete him and I wonder much
My Lord lorenzo is so slack in murder,
Not to afford me notice all this while.
Gold I am true I had my hier,
And thou shalt haue thy due:
Wast possible to misse him so, soft, soft,
this gallery leads to Bellimperias lodging,
there he is sure, or wil be sure Ile stay,
the euening to begins to sluber day,
Sweet oportunefull season heere ile leane,
Like a court hound that liks fat trenchers cleane.
But has the king pertooke your embassy.
that till to morrow shall be now deferd.
Nay then you love me not,
Let that be first dispatch,
till when receiue this token.
I to the king with this unfaithfull hart,
It must not be, I play to falce a part.
Up lazarotto, yonder comes thy prize,
Now liues Andrea, now Andrea dies.
that villaine lazarotto has kild me
In stead of andrea.
Welcome home Lord embassador.
Oh, oh, oh.
Whose grone was that, what frightfull villaines this,
His sword vnshethed, whom hast thou murdred slaue?
Why Don, Don andrea?
No conterfetting villaine,
He ses my Lord that he hath murdered me.
I Don Andrea, or else Don the deuill.
Lay hands one hun, some reare vp the bléeding
Body to the light.
My Lord I think tis you, were you not héere
A man might sweare twere you.
His garments ha like mine, his face made like:
An omynous horror, all my vaines doth strike,
Sure this pretends my death, this misery
Aymes at some fatall pointed tragedy.
Son Horatio see Andrea slaine.
andrea slaine, then weapon clyng my brest.
Liue truest friend for euer loued and blest.
Liues Don andrea.
I but slaine in thought,
To sée so strang a likenes forged and wrought,
Lords cannot you yet discry
Who is the owner, of this red melting body.
My Lord it is alcario Duke Medinas son,
I know him by this mould vpon his brest.
alcario slaine, hast thou beguild me sword?
Arme hast thou slaine thy bountifull kind lord,
Why then rot off, and drop vpon the ground,
Strew all the galleries with gobbits round.
Who names Alcario slaine, it is Alcario,
O cursed déed, couldst thou not sée,
But make the wrong man bléed.
Sfoot twas your fault my lord, you brought noe word.
Peace, no words, ile get thy pardon.
Why mum then.
Who names Andrea slaine, O tis andrea,
O I sound I die.
Looke to my Sister Bellimperia.
Raise vp my déere loue, Bellimperia,
O be of comfort swéet, call in thy sperits,
Andrea liues O let not death beguile thée.
Are you Andrea.
Doe not forget, that was alcario
My shapes counterset.
Why speaks not this accursed damned villaine.
O good words my Lords, for those are courtiers vailes,
The king must heare why should I make
Two tailes, for to be ound in two,
Before the king, I will resolue you all,
This strange strang thing, I hot, yet mist,
Twas I mistooke my part.
I villaine: for thou aymst at this true hart.
Horatio ▪ twas well as fortune stands,
This letter came not to Andreas hands.
Twas happines indéed.
Was it not you Andrea questioned me bout loue?
No Bellimperia, belike twas false Andrea,
For the first obiect mine eies met,
Was that most accurst
witch, I much feare me by all signes pretend
Most doubtfull wars and dangerous pointed ends▪
To light vpon my bloud.
Angels of heauen foresend it.
Some take vp the bodie, others take charg
Of that accursed villaine.
My Lord leaue that to me; ile looke to him.
Mark, mark, Horatio: a villaine guard a villain.
The king may thinke my newes is a bad guest,
When the first obiect is a bléeding brest.
My Lords, what heauy sounds are these?
Néerer, and néerer, ha andrea the foore-runner
Of these newes, nay then I feare spaines
Ineuitable ill
Ha andrea speake, what newes from Portugale?
What is tribute paid: peace, or wars.
Wars my dread léedge.
Why then that bléeding obiect
doth presage what shall hereafter follow:
Whats he that lies there slaine, or hurt,
Or both: speake?
My léedge, alcario Duke medinas son,
And by that slaue this purple act was done.
Who names Alcario slaine: aie me tis he?
Art thou that villaine.
How didst know my name.
I see an excellent villaine hath his fame
As well as a great courtier.
Speake villain, wherefore didst thou this accursed deed.
Because I was an asse, a villainus asse,
For had I hot it right, Andrea had line there:
He walkt vpright, this ominns mistake,
This damned error breeds in my soule
An euerlasting terror.
Say slaue, how came this accursed euill?
Faith by my selfe, my short sword, and the deuill,
To tell you all without a tedious toong,
Ile cut them downe, my words shall not hang,
That haples bléeding Lord alcario ▪
Which this hand slew, pexont, was a huge dotar
On Bellimperias beautye who replide in scorne
And his hot suite denide:
For her affections were all firmly planted,
In Don andreas bosome, yet vnwise,
He still pursued it with blind louers eies:
Then hired he me with gold: O fate thou elfe,
To kill Andrea which hixe kild himselfe.
For not content to stay the time of murder,
He tooke andreas shape vnknowne to me,
And in all parts disguis as there you sée,
Intending as it séemed by that sly shift,
To steale away her troth: short tale to tell,
I tooke him for Andrea, downe he fell.
Olmpious déede, to make the heire of honor
Melt and bléede, beare him away to execution.
Nay Lord Lorenzo, whers the pardon?
Sfoot ile peach else.
Peace Lazarotto, ile get it of the king.
Doot quickly then or ile spred villainy.
My Lord he is the most notorious rogue
That euer breathd.
Away with him.
Your highnes may doe well to barre his spéech,
Tis able to infect a vertuous eare.
Away with him I will not heare him speake
My Lord Lorenzo is a
Is not this a monstrous courtier.
He is the court fode father,
Trybute denide vs, ha.
It is my léedge, and that with no meane wordes;
He will redéeme his honor lost with swordes.
So daring? Ha, so Peremptory,
Can you remember the words he spake?
Word for word my gratious soueraine,
And these they were: Thus much returne to Spaine,
Say: That our setled Iudgment hath aduisd vs,
What tribute is, how poore that Monarch shewes,
Who for his throne a yearely pension owes,
And what our predecesors lost to Spaine,
We haue fresh spirites that can renew it againe.
Ha soe peremptory, daring, stout.
Then my léedge, acording your gratious dread, Comand,
I bad defiance with, a vengfull hand.
He intertained it.
I and returned it with menasing browes,
Prince Baltheser his son,
Grow Uiolent and wished the fight begune.
So, so, I haue sent my slaue to hell:
Tho he blab there, the diueles will not tell.
How now, what means this trumpets sound?
My léedge, the Portugalles.
Are vp in armes glittring in stéel.
Wheres our lord generall, lorenzo stout andrea,
With whome I ranck spritely Horatio.
what for shame, shall the Portugalles
Trample the fields before you.
No my léedge, thers time enough
To let out bloud enough, tribute shall flow,
Out of their bowels, and be tendered so.
Farwell braue Lords, my wishes are bequeathd
A nobler ranke of sperits neuer breathd.
O my swéet boy, heauen shield thée still from care,
O be as fortunate as thée art faire.
And heauen blesse you my father in this fight,
that I may sée your Gray head crownd in white.
You came but now, must you part agen.
You told me that you sperit
Should put on peace but sée war followes war.
Nay swéet loue cease,
to be denide our honor why twere base,
to breath and liue, and wars in such a case,
Is euen as necessary as our bloud,
Swordes are in season then, when rightes with stood,
Deny vs tribute, that so many yéeres,
We haue in peace told out,
Why it would raise spléene in the host
Of Angels: twere enough
to make tranquile saints of angry stuffe.
You haue ore wrought the chiding of my brest,
And by that argument, you firmly proue
Honor to sore aboue the pitch of loue.
Lend me thy louing and thy warlicke arme,
On which I knit this softe and silken charme,
Tyed with an amorous knot, O may it proue
Inchaunted armour, being charmed by loue,
That when it mounts vp to thy warlick crest,
It may put by the sword, and so be blest.
O what deuinity procéeds from loue?
What happier fortune then my selfe can moue,
Harke, the drum beckens me; sweet deere farwell,
This scarfe shall be my charme, gainst foes and hell.
O let me kisse thée first.
The drum agen.
Hath that more power then I?
Doot quickly then: farwell.
Farwell O cruell part,
andreas bosome bears away my hart.
Come valliant sperits you Péeres of Portugale,
That owe yout liues, your faiths, and seruices,
To set you frée from base captiuity:
O let our fathers scandall nere be séene,
As a base blush vpon our frée borne chéeks,
Let all the tribute that proud Spaine receaud,
Of those all captiue Portugales deceased,
Turne into chafe, and choke their insolence:
Methinks no, moyetie not one little thought,
Of them whole seruile acts liue in their graues,
But should raise spléens big as a cannon bullet,
Within your bosomes: O for honor,
Your countries reputation, your liues fréedome,
Indéed your all, that may be termed reueng,
Now let your blouds be liberall as the sea:
And all those wounds that you receiue of Spaine,
Let thers be equall to quit yours againe▪
Speake portugales: are you resolued as I,
to liue like captiues, or as free borne die?
Prince Balthezer as you say, so say we,
to die with honor, scorne captiuity.
Why spoke like true Portugales indéed,
I am asured of your forwardnes:
Now Spaine sit firme, ile make thy towers shake,
And all that gold thou hadst from Portugale,
which makes thy court melt in Luxuriousnes,
I vow to haue it treble at thy hands,
Hark Portugales: I heare their spanish drum;
March on and meet them▪ this must be the day,
that all they haue receaued, they back must pay.
What are you brauing vs before we come,
wéele be as shrill as you: strike a larum drum.
Thou ynch of Spaine,
Thou man from thy hose downe ward,
Scarse so much: thou very little longer then
Thy beard: speake not such big words,
Thaile throw thee downe little Ieronimo,
words greater then thy selfe, it must not.
And thou long thing of Portugale, why not
Thou, that art full as tall
As an English gallows: vper beam and all:
Deuourer of apparell, thou huge swallower,
My hose will scarse make thée a standing coller,
What? Haue I almost quited you?
Haue doone impatiant Marshall.
Spanish combatants, what doo you set a little
Pygnire Marshall to question with a Prince?
No prince Balthezer, I haue desired him peace,
That we might war: What is the tribute,
Mony tendred yet?
Trybute ha, ha! what elles wherefore méete our
Drums but to tender and receiue the somes,
Of many a bléeding hart which eare Sunne fall,
Shall pay deere trybute, euen there liues and all.
Prince balthezer, I know your valiant sperit▪
I know your curage to be trid and good,
Yet, O prince, be not confirmed in blud;
Not that I tast of feare or cowerdyse,
But of religion pietye, and loue,
To many bosomes, that yet firmely moue,
With out disturbed spleenes: O, in thy hart▪
Waigh the déere dropes of many a purple part,
That must be acted on the féeldes gréene stage,
Before the euening deawes quentch the sonnes rage,
Let trybute be apeased, and so stayed,
And let not wonted fealty be denied,
To our desart full kingdome: portugales,
Kéepe your forfathers Othes; that vertue craues;
Let them not ly forsworne now in their graues,
To make their ashes periorde, and vniust,
For heauen can be reuenged on their dust,
They swore to Spaine both for themselues and you,
And will prosterity proue their sires vntrue,
This should not be mong men of vertuous sprit▪
Pay trybute thou, and receiue peace and writ.
O vertuous coward▪
O ignoble sperit?
To terme him coward for his vertuous merit
Coward, nay then: relentles-rib of stéele,
What vertue cannot, thou shalt make him feele.
Proud Alexandro thou art mine?
Agréed.
And thou Vullupo mine?
Ile make thée bléed.
And thou Don Pedro mine?
I care not whose, or thine, or thine, or all at once.
I bind thée Don Andrea, by thy honor, thy valiansie,
And all that thou holdst great,
To méete me single in the battailes heat;
Where ile set downe, in Caractors vpon thy flesh,
Foure precious lines, spoke by our fathers mouth
When first thou camst embassador: these they are:
Tis said we shall not answere at next birth
Our Fathers faults in heauen, why then on earth,
Which proues and showes, that what they
Lost by base Captiuity,
We may redéeme with wonted Ualliansie.
And to this crimson end our Coullers spred
Our courage are new borne our vallors bred,
Therefore Andrea as thou tenderst fame,
Wars reputation, and a Souldiers name. méete me▪
A will.
Single me out.
I shall.
Do you the like▪
And you.
All and we.
Can we be foes, and all so well agréed.
Why man in war thers bléeding amity,
And he this day giues me the déepest wound,
Ile call him brother.
The prince call me so;
To gaine that name ile giue the déepest blowe.
Nay then if brother-hood by strokes come dewe,
I hope boy thou wilt gaine a brother too.
Father I doubt it not.
Lord Generall, breath like your name,
A Generall defiance gainst portugale.
Defiance to the Portugales.
the like breath our Lord General gainst the spaniards
Defiance to the Spaniards.
Now cease words,
I long to heare the musick of clashed swords,
why thou shalt heare it presently.
Quickly then.
Why now.
O stay my Lords,
This will but bréede a muteny in the campe.
I am all fire, andrea.
Art thou, good:
Why then ile quench thée prince, with thyn own bloud.
Adew.
Adew.
Lets méete.
Tis méete we did.
Alexandro.
lorenzo.
Vollupo.
Rogero.
Don Pedro.
Horatio.
I, I, Don Pedro my boy shall méete thée,
Come valliant sperits of Spaine,
Ualliant Andrea, fortunate lorenzo, worthy Rogero,
Sprightly Horatio, O let me dwell a little on that name,
Be all as fortunate as heauens blest host;
But blame me not, ide haue Horatio most,
Ride all Conquerours when the fight is done,
Especially ride thée home so my son:
So, now kisse and imbrace, come, come,
I am wars tuter, strike a larum drum.
O valiant boy, strooke with a Giants arme,
His sword so fals vpon the Portugales,
As if he would slise them out like Orenges,
And squéese their blouds out: O aboundant ioy,
Neuer had father a more happier boy.
Can you not finde Don andrea forth,
O for a voise shriller then all the trumpets,
To prince Andreas ears! through the hot army,
Go search agen, bring him or neare returne.
Ualliant Andrea, by thy worthy bloud▪
Thy honored aith, which thou pawnst to mine,
By all that thou holdst déere vpon this earth,
Sweat now to find me in the hight of bloud,
Now death doth heap hir goods vp all at once,
And crams his store house to the top with bloud,
Might I now and andrea in one fight,
Make vp thy wardroope Richer by a knight.
Whose that andrea?
Ha, Vullupo.
No, but a better,
Pox ont.
Pies ont, what luck is this, but Sir
You part not, so, what ere you be, ile haue
About with you?
Content: this is ioy mixed with spight,
To misse a Lord and méete a prince in fight.
Come méete me Sir.
Iust halse way, ile méete it with my sword.
Where might I find this vallorus balthezer,
This fierce, couragious Prince, a noble, worthy,
Made of the ribs of mars and fortitude,
He promised to méete faire, and single me
Out a the mistie battaile: did you search
The least wing for him? speake:
We did my Lord.
And could he not be found.
Not in that wing my Lord.
Why this would vex the resolution
Of a suffering spleene: Prince Balthezer,
Portugals valliant heire,
The glory of our foe, the hart of courage,
The very soule of true nobility:
I call thee by thy right name, answere me,
Go Captaine passe the leaft wing squadron; hie,
Mingle your selfe againe amidst the army;
Pray sweat to find him out.
This place ile keepe,
Now wounds are wide, and bloud is very deepe,
Tis now about the heauy dread of battaile,
Souldiers drop downe as thick as if death mowed them,
As sithmen trim the long haird Ruffian fields,
So fast they fall: so fast to fate life yeelds.
I haue sweat much, yet cannot find him andrea.
Prince Balthezer: O lucky minute?
O long wished for houre,
Are you remembred Don, of a daring message
And a proud attempt, you braued me Don
Within my Fathers court.
I think I did.
this sword shall lash you for it.
Alas, war knows I am to proud a scholler grown,
Now to be lashed with stéele had I not knowne
My strength, and courage it had bin easie then,
to haue me borne vpon the backs of men;
But now I am sorry Prince you come to late,
that weare proud stéele yfaith that should do that.
I can hold no longer:
Come, come lets sée which of our strengths is stronger.
Mine for a wager.
thine: what wager, say.
I hold thrée wounds to one.
Content, a lay; but you shall kéepe stakes then.
Nay ile trust you.
For your a prince, I know youle pay your dew.
Ile pay it you soundly.
Prince you might haue paid
Tribute as well, then battailes had bin staid.
Héers tribute for you.
Ile receaue it of you,
And giue you acquittance with a wound or two▪
Thou art a wondrous friend, a happy sperit,
I owe thée now my life couldst thou inherit,
Within my bosome, all I haue is thine,
For by this act I hold thy arme deuine.
Are you not wounded: let me search and sée?
No my deere selfe, for I was blest by thée,
Else his vnpiting sword had cleft my hart,
Had not Horatio plaid some Angels part.
Come happy mortall, let me ranke by thée,
Then am I sure no star will threaten me.
Lets to the battaile once more, we may meete.
This haughtie prince, and wound him at our feete.
art thou true valliant? hast thou no
Cote of proofe girt to thy loines?
art thou true loyall?
Why looke: witnes the naked truth,
Upon my breast, come lets meete
Lets meete and break our haughty sculs
Downe to our feete.
O me, ill stead, valliant rogero slaine.
O my sad fates, Don Pedro weltring in his gore.
O could I meete andrea, now my blouds a tiptoe.
This hand and sword should melt him:
Ualliant Don Pedro.
Worthy rogero, sure twas multitudes
That made thee stoope to death,
One Portugale could neare orewhelmne thee
In such crim on streames,
And no meane bloud shall quit it,
balthezer prince balthezer.
andrea, we meete in bloud now.
I in valliant bloud, of Don rogeroes sheding
And each drop is worth a thousand Portugales.
Ile top thy head for that ambitious word.
You cannot prince, see a reuengull sword
Waues ore my head.
Another ouer mine
Let them both meete in crimson tinctures shine.
O I am slaine, helpe me Horatio,
My foes are base, and slay me cowardly,
Farwell deere, dearest Bellimperia,
Yet heerein ioy is mingled with sad death,
I keepe her fauor longer then my breath.
My other soule, my bosome, my harts friend.
My O Andrea slaine, ile haue the price
Of him in princely bloud; Prince Balthezer
My sword shall strike true straines,
And etch Andreas ransome fourth thy vaines,
Lord Generall driue them hence while I make war?
Hath war made thee so impndent and young,
My sword shall gine correction to thy toong.
Correct thy rascals Prince, thou correct him,
Lug with him boy, honors in bloud best swim.
So young and vallerus this arme neare met,
So strong a courage of so gréene a set.
I thou béest valliant cease these idle words,
And let reuenge hang on our glittering swords,
With this proud prince the haughty Balthezer.
Hand of lorenzo touch not my prisoner.
Hées my prisoner,
I seizd his weapons first.
O base renowne tis easie to seize those,
Were orst laid downe.
My lance first threw him from his Warlicke stéede▪
Thy Lance lorenzo? now by my beard you lie?
Well my Lord to you a while I tender my Whole prioner.
Horatio, you tender me part of mine own you kno.
Well peace, with my bloud dispence
Untill my leedge shall end the difference.
lorenzo, thou doost boast of base renowne,
Why I could whip al these, were there hose downe.
Speake prince to whether doost thou yeeld?
The vanquisht yeilds to both, to you first
O abiect prince, what doost thou yeild to two?
Content thee boy, thou shalt instaine no wrong,
Ile to the king before, and let him know,
The sum of victory, and his ouerthrow.
Andrea slaine, thanks to the stars aboue,
Ile choose my Sister out her second loue.
Come noble rib of honor, valliant carcasse,
I loued thee so entirely when thou breathest,
That I could die wert but to bleed with thee,
And wish me wounds, euen for society.
Heauen and this arme, once saued thée from thy foe,
When his all wrathfull sword did basely point
At the rich circle of thy labouring hart,
Thou groueling vnder indignation,
Of sword and ruth, O then stept heauen and I,
Betwéene the stroke, but now alack must die:
Since so the powers aboue haue writ it downe,
In marble leaues that death is mortall crownd,
Come then my friend in purple I will beare,
Thee to my priuate tent, and then prepare,
For honord Funerall for thy melting course.
This scarse ile weare in memorie of our soules,
And of our muteall loues, héere, héere, ile wind it,
And full as often as I thinke one thée,
Ile kisse this little ensigne this soft banner,
Smeard with foes bloud, all for the maisters honor,
Alas I pitty Bellimperias eies,
Iust at this instant her hart sincks and dies.
My boy ads treble comfort to my age,
His share is greatest in this victory,
The Portugales are slaine and put to flight,
By Spaniards orce, most by Horatioes might:
Ile to the Spanish tents to sée my sonne,
Giue him my blessing, and then all is done.
O my Lords?
Sée Don Andreas ghoast salutes me, sée embraces me.
It is your loue that shapes this apprehention.
Do you not sée him plainly Lords,
Now he would kisse my chéeke, O my pale friende,
Wert thou any thing but a ghoast I could loue theée,
Sée he points at his owne hearse, mark all,
As i he did reioyce at funerall.
Reueng giue my toong fréedom, to paint her part,
To thank Horatio, and commend his hart.
No youle blab secrets then?
By Charons boat I will not.
Nay you shall not: therefore passe,
Secrets in hell are lockt with doores o brasse:
Use action if you will, but not in voice,
Your friend conceiues in signes how you reioyce.
Sée, sée, he points to haue his goe forward on,
I prethee rest, it shall be done sweet Don,
O now hees vanisht.
I am a happy Ghost,
Reueng, my passage now cannot be crost,
Come charon: come hels Sculler, waft me ore,
You able streams which looke like moulten pitch,
My Funerall rights are made, my herse hung rich.
Charon: a bote, Charon, charon?
Who cals so loud on charon.
Indeed tis such a time the truth to tell,
I neuer want a fare, to passe to hell.
These honord rights and worthy duties spent
Upon the Funerall of Andreas dust,
Thoe once his valliant ashes, march we now
Homeward with victory to crowne Spaines brow.
The day is ours and ioy yeelds happy treasure,
Set on to Spaine, in most triumphant measure.
Foregod I haue iust mist them: ha?
Soft Ieronimo: thou hast more friends
To take thy leaue of: Looke well about thee,
Imbrace them, and take friendly leaue,
My armes are of the shortest,
Let your loues péece them out,
Your welcome all, as I am a Gentleman,
For my sons sae, grant me a man at least,
At least I am: good night kind gentles,
For I hope the neuer a Iew among you all,
And so I leaue ou.