HAste nephew, what, a sluggard? Fie for shame, Shal he that was our morning Cock, turn Owle, And locke out day light from his drowsie eies?
Pray pardon mee for once, lord vnkle, for Ile bee sworne, I had such a dreame this morning: me thought one came with a commission to take a Sorrell curtoll, that was stole from him, hee could find him. And because I feared he woul ay claime to my sorrell curtoll in my stable I ran to the Smith to haue him set on his mane againe, and his taile presently, that the Commission-man might not thinke him a curtoll. And when the Smith would not doe it, I fell a beating of him, so that I could not wake for my life til I was reuenged on him.
This is your old valure nephew, that will fight sleeping as well as waking.
Slud Aunt, what if my dreame had beene true▪ (as it might haue beene for any thing I knew) there's neuer a smith in Italie, shall make an Asse of me in my sleepe, if I can chuse.
Well said, my furious nephew: but I see
You quite forget that we must rowse to day
The sharp-tuskt Bore: and blaze our huntsmanship before the duke.
Forget Lord vncle? I hope not; you thinke belike my wittes are as brittle as a Beetle, or as skittish as your Barbarie Mare: one cannot crie weh, but straight shee cries tihi.
Well ghest coosen Hysteron Proteron.
But which way will the dukes grace hunt to day?
Toward Count Lassos house his Grace will hunt, Where he will visit his late honourd mistresse.
Who Ladie Mararot, that dear yong dame? Will his antiquitie, neuer leane his iniquitie?
Why how now nephew? turnd Parnassus lately?
Nassus? I know not: but I would I had all the dukes liuing for her sake, Ide make him a poore duke ifaith.
No doubt of that, if thou adst all his liuing.
I would not stand dreaming of the matter as I do now.
Why how doe you dreame nephew?
Mary all last night me thought I was tying her shoostring.
What all night ying her shoostring?
I that I was, and yet I tid it not neither; for as I was tying it, the string broke me thought, and then me thought, hauing but one poynt at my hose, me thought, I gaue her that to tie her shoo with all.
A poynt of much kindnesse I assure you.
Whervpon, in the vrie nicke me thought the Count came rushing in, and I ranne rushing out, with my heeles about my hose for haste.
So, will you leaue your dreaming, and dispatch?
Mum, not a worde mre, Ile goe before, and ouertake you presently.
My Lord I fancie not these hunting sports,
When the bold game you follow turnes againe,
And stares you in the facel: et me behold
A cast of Faulcons on their merry wings,
Daring the stooped prey, that shifting flies:
Or let me view the fearefull Hare or Hinde,
Tot like a musicke point with harmonie
Of well mouthed hounds. This is a sport for Princes,
The other rude Boares yeeld fit game for Boores.
Thy timorous spirit blinds thy iudgement, wife,
Those are most royall sports that most approue
The huntsmans prowesse, and his hardie minde.
My Lord, I know too well your vertuous spirit,
Take heede for Gods loue if you rowse the Bore,
You come not neere him, but discharge aloofe
Your wounding Pistoll, or well aymed Dart.
I Mary wife this counsaile rightly flowes
Out of thy bosome, pray thee take lesse care,
Let Ladies at their tables iudge of Bores,
Lords in the field: And so farewell sweete loue;
Faile not to meete me at Eare Lassos house.
Pray pardon me for that: you know I loue not These solemne meetings.
You must needes, for once
Constraine your disposition; and indeede
I would acquaint you more with Ladie Margaret,
For speciall reason.
Very good, my Lord. Then I must needes go fit me for that presence.
I pray thee doe, farewell.
Here comes my frind.
Good day my Lord; why does your grace confront
So cleare a morning with so clowdie lookes?
Ask'st thou my griefes, that knowst my desprate loue
Curbd by my fathers sterne ralitie:
Must not I mourne that know not whether yet
I shall enoy a stepdame or a wife?
A wife prince, neuer doubt it; your deserts
And youthfull graces haue engag'd so farre,
The beauteous Margaret, that she is your owne.
O but the eie of watchfull iealousie
Robs my desires of meanest inioy her fauour.
Despaire not: there are meanes enow for you,
Suborne some seruant of some good respect,
Thats neere your choice, who though she needs no wooing,
May yet imagine you are to begin,
Your strange yong loue sute, and so speake for you,
Beare your kind letters, and get safe accesse.
All which when he shall do; you neede not feare
His trustie secrecie, because he dares not
Reueale escapes, where of himselfe is Author,
Whom you may best attempt, she must reueale;
For if she loues you, she already knowes,
And in an instant can resolue you that.
And so she will, I doubt not: would to heauen
I had fit time, euen now to know her minde:
This counsaile feedes my heart with much sweet hope.
Pursue it then; t'will not be hard t'effect:
The Duke haz none for him, but Medice
That fustian Lord, who in his buckram face,
Bewraies, in my conceit, a map of basenesse.
I, theres a parcell of vnconstrued stuffe,
That vnknowne Minion raisde to honours height,
Without the helpe of Vertue, or of Art,
Or (to say true) nay of honest part:
O how she shames my father! he goes like
A Princes foote-man, in old fashioned silkes,
And most times, in his hose and dublet onely,
So miserable, that his owne few men
Doe beg by vertue of his liuerie;
For he giues none for any seruice done him,
Or any honour, any least reward.
Tis pittie such should liue about a Prince:
I would haue such a noble counterset, nailde
Vpon the Pillory, and after, whipt
For his adultery with nobilitie,
Faith I would faine disgrace him by all meanes,
As enemy to his base-bred ignorance,
That being a great Lord, cannot write nor reade.
For that, weelle follow the blinde side of him,
And make it sometimes subiect of our mirth.
See, what newes with your Nephew Pogio?
None good I warrant you.
Where should I finde my Lord Vnckle?
Whats the huge haste with you?
O ho, you will hunt to day.
I hope I will.
But you may hap to hop without your hope: for the truth is, Kilbucke is runne mad.
Whats this?
Nay, t'is true sir: and Kibucke being runne mad, bit Ringwood so by the left buttocke, you might haue turnd your nose in it.
Out Asse.
By heauen you might my Lord: d'ee thinke I he?
Zwoundes, might I? lets blanket him my Lord: a blanket heere.
Nay, good my Lord Vincentio, by this rush I tel you for good will: and Venus your brache there, runnes so prowd, that your Hunts man cannot take her downe for his life.
Take her vp foole, thou wouldst say.
Why sir, he would soone take her down and he could take her vp I warrant her.
Well said, ham mer, hammer.
Nay, good now lets alone, and theres your horse, Gray Strozza too haz the staggers, and haz strooke bay. Bettrice, your Barbary mare so, that shee goes halting a this fashion, most filthily.
What poison blisters thy vnhappy tongue
Euermore braying forth vnhappy newes,
Our hunting sport is at the best my Lord:
How shall I satisfie the Duke your father,
Defrauding him of his expected sport?
See, see, he comes.
Is this the copie of the speech you wrote, Signieur Sarpego?
It is a blaze of wit pocticall,
Reade it, braue Duke, with eyes pathetical.
We will peruse it strait: well met Vinetio,
And good Lord Strozza, we commend you both
For your attendance: but you must conceiue,
Tis no true hunting we intend to day,
But an inducement to a certaine shew,
Wherewith we will present our beateous loue,
And therein we bespeake your company.
We both are ready to attend your Highnesse.
See then, heere is a Poeme that requires
Your worthy censures; offerd if it like
To furnish our intended amorous shew:
Reade it Uincentio.
Pardon me my Lord, Lord Medices reading, will expresse it better▪
My patience can digest your scoffes my Lord.
I care not to proclaime it to the world:
I can nor write, nor reade; and what of that?
I can both see and heare, as well as you.
Still are your wits at warre: heere, read this poeme.
The red fac'd Sunne hath firkt the flundering shades,
And cast bright ammell on Araes brow.
High words and strange:
Reade on Vincentio.
The busky groues that gag-tooth'd boares do shrowd With cringle crangle hornes do ring alowd.
My Lord, my Lord, I haue a speech heere worth ten of this, and yet Ile mend it too.
How likes Vincentio?
It is strangely good,
No inkehorne euer did bring forth the lik,
Could these braue prancing words with Actions spurre,
Be ridden throughly, and managed right,
T'would fright the audience, and perhaps delight.
Doubt you of action sir?
I, for such stuffe.
Then know my Lord, I can both act and teach
To any words; when I in Padua schoolde it,
I plaid in one of Plautus Comedies,
Namely, Curco, where his part I acted,
Proiecting from the poore summe of foure lines,
Forty faire actions.
Lets see that I pray.
Your Highnesse shall commaund,
But pardon me, if in my actions heate
Entering in post post haste I chaunce to take vp
Some of your honord heels;
Y'ad best leaue out that action for a thing that I know sir.
Then shal you see what I can do without t.
See see, he hath his furniture and all.
You must imagine, Lords, I bring good newes,
Whereof being princely prowd I scowre the streete
And ouer-tumble euery man I meete.
Beshrew my heart if he take vp my heeles.
Date viam mihi Noti, at que Ignoti.
Dum ego, hîc, officium meum facio.
Fugite omnes at que abite, & de via secedite, ne quem
in cursu; aut capite, aut cubito, aut pectore offendam, at genu.
Thankes good Seigneur Sarpego.
How like you Lords, this stirring action?
In a cold morning it were good my Lord.
But something harshe vpon repletion.
Sir I haue ventred, being enioynde to eate
Three schollers commons, and yet drewe it neate.
Come sir, you meddle in too many matters; let vs pray tend on our owne shew at my lord Lassos.
Doing obeisance then to euery lord
I now consorte you sir euen tot corde.
My lord, away with these scholastique wits,
Lay the inuention of your speech on me,
And the performance too; ile play my parte,
that you shall say, Nature yeelds more then Art.
Bee't so resolu'd; vnartificiall truth
An vnfaind passion can descipher best.
But t'wil be hard my lord, for one vnlearnd.
Vnlearnd? I cry you mercie sir; vnlearnd?
I meane, vntaught my lord, to make a speech,
As a pretended Actor, without close,
More gratious then your doublet and your hose.
What, think you sonne we meane t'expresse a speech
Of speciall weight without a like attire?
Excuse me then my lord; so stands it well.
Haz brought them rarely in, to pageant him.
What; thinke you lord; we thinke not of attire?
Can we not make vs ready at this age?
Alas my lord, your wit must pardon his.
I hope it will, his wit is pittyfull.
I pray stand by my Lord; y'are troublesome.
To none but you; am I to you my Lord?
Not vnto mee.
Why then you wrong me Strozza.
Nay, fall not out my Lords.
May I not know
What your speech is my Liege?
None but my selfe, and the Lord .
No, pray my Lord
Let none partake with vs.
No be assur'd,
But for another cause; a word Lord Strozza,
I tell you true, I feare Lord Medice
Will scarce discharge the speach effectually:
As we goe therefore, ile explaine to you
My whole intent; that you may second him
If neede and his debilitie require.
hanks for this grace my Liege.
My Lord; your sonne.
Why how now sonne? forbeare; yet tis no matter
Wee talke of other busiesse Medice
And come, we will prepare vs to our shew.
Which as we can, weele cast to ouerthrow.
Stand by there, make place.
Saie now Bass; you on whom relies
The generall disposition of my house,
In this our preparation, for the Duke
Are all our officers at large instructed,
For fit discharge of their peculiar places?
At large my lord instructed.
Are all our chambers hung? Thinke you our house amplie capacious to lodge all the traine?
Amply capacious: I am passing glad.
And now then to our mirth and musicall shew,
Which after supper we intend t'indure,
Welcomes cheefe dainties: for choice cates at home,
Euer attend on Princes; mirth abroad,
Are all parts perfect.
One I know there is.
And that is yours.
Well guest in earnest Lord,
I neede not er ubescere, o take
So much vpon me: That my backe will beare.
Nay, he will be perfection it selfe,
For wording well, and dexterous action too.
And will these waggish pages, hit their songs?
Remi fa solla?
O they are practising; good boyes, well done;
But where is Pogio? there y'are ouershot.
To lay a capitall part vpon his braine,
Whose absence tells me plainely hee'le neglect him.
O no my Lord, he dreames of nothing else,
And giues it out in wagers, hee'le excell;
And see, (I told your Lo:) he is come.
How now my Lord, haue you borrowed a Snite for me: Seigneur Bassiolo, can all say, are all things ready? the Duke is hard by, and little thinks that Ile be an Actor ifaith, I keepe all close my Lord.
O, tis well done, call all the Ladies in,
Sister and daughter, come, for Gods sake come,
Prepare your courtliest carriage for the Duke.
Corte And Neece, in any case remember this,
Praise the old man, and when you see him first,
Looke me on none but him, smiling and louingly:
And then, when he comes neere, make beisance low,
With both your hands thus mouing, which not onely
Is as t'were courtly, and most comely too,
But speakes (as who should say) come hither Duke;
And yet saies nothing, but you may denie.
Well taught sister.
I, and to much end:
I am exceeding fond to humour him.
Harke, does he come with musicke? what, and bound?
An amorous deuice: daughter, obserue.
Now let gull Medi, I doe not doubt,
But this aire put on, will put him out.
Weele doe our best to that end, therefore marke.
Lady, or Princesse, both your choice commands.
These spirits and I, all seruants of your beautie,
Present this royall captiue to your mercie.
Captiue to mee a subiect.
I, faire Nimph;
And how the worthy mystery befell
heere, this woodden god can tell.
Now my Lord.
No the time man, speake.
Peace.
Pea Vincentio.
Swonds my Lord,
Shall I stand by and suffer him to shame you?
My Lord Medice?
Will you not speake my Lord?
How can I?
But you must speake in earnest:
Would not your Highnesse h him speake my Lord?
Yes, and I will speake, and perhaps speake so,
As you shall neuer mend: I can I know.
Doe then my good Lord.
Medice, forth.
Goddesse, faire godde, for no lesse, no lesse.
No. lesse, no lesse▪ no more, no more: speake you.
Swounds they haue put me out.
Laugh your faire goddesse,
This nobleman disdaines to be your foole.
Ventio, peace.
Swounds my Lord, i is as good a shew:
Pray speake Lord Strozza.
Honourable dame.
Take heede you be not out I pray my Lord.
I pray forbeare my Lord Vincentio:
How this destressed Prince came thus inthralde,
I must relate with words of height and wonder:
His Grace this morning visiting the woods,
And straying farre, to finde game for the Chase,
At last, out of a mirtle groue he rowsde
A vast and dreadfull Boare, so sterne and fier ▪
As if the Feend fell Crueltie her selfe
Had come to fright the woods in that strange shape.
Excellent good.
Too good a plague on him.
The princely Sauage being thus on foote,
Tearing the earth vp with his thundering hoofe,
And with the'nragde Aetna of his breath.
Firing the ayre, and scorching all the woods,
Horror held all vs Huntsmen from pursuit,
Onely the Duke incenst with our cold feare,
Incouragde like a second Hercules.
Zwounds, too good man.
Pray thee let me alone:
And like the English signe of great Saint Georg.
Plague of that Simile.
Gaue valorous exmple, and like fire,
Hunted the monster close, and chargde so fierce,
That he inforc'd him (as our sence conc'd)
To leape for soile into a cristall spring,
Where on the suddaine strangely vanishing,
Nimph-like for him, out of the waues arose
Your sacred figure like Diana armde,
And (as in purpose of the beasts reuenge)
Dischargde an arrow through his Highnesse breast▪
Whence yet no wound or any blood appearde▪
With which, the angry shadow left the light:
And this Enchanter with his power of spirits,
Brake from a caue, scattering enchanted sounds,
That strooke vs sencelesse, while in these strange bands,
These cruell spirits thus inchainde his armes,
And led him captiue to your heauenly eyes▪
Th'intent whereof on their report relies.
Bright Nimph, that Boare figur'd your ueltie,
Chared by loue, defended by your beautie.
This amorous Huntsman heere, we thus inthral'd,
As the attendants on your Graces charmes,
And brought him hither by your boous hands.
To be releast, or liue in endlesse bands.
Daughter, release the Duke: alas my Liege.
hat meant your Highnesse to indure this wrong?
Enlarge him Neece, come dame, it must be so▪
What Madam, shall I arrogate so much?
His Highnesse pleasure is to grace you so.
Performe it then sweete loue, it is a deede
Worthy the office of your honor'd hand.
Too worhie I confesse my Lord for me,
If it were serious: but it is in sport,
And women are fit Actors for such pageants.
Thanks gracious loue; why made you strange of this?
I rest no lesse your captiue then before,
For me vntying, you haue tied me more.
Thanks Strozza for your speech, no thanks to you.
No, thanke your onne my Lord.
T'was very well,
Exceeding well performed on euery part,
How say you Bassalo?
Rare I protest my Lord.
O, my Lord Medice became it rarely,
Me thought I likde his manlie being out;
It becomes Noblemen to do nothing well.
Now then wil't please your Grace to grace our house,
And still vouchsafe our seruice further honour.
Leade vs my Lord, we will your daughter leade.
You do not leade, but drag her leaden steps.
How did you like my speech?
O fie vpon't, your Rheoricke was too fine.
Nothing at all:
I hope saint Georges signe was grosse enough:
But (to be serious) as these warnings passe,
Watch you your father, Ile watch ,
That in your loue-suit, we may shun suspect:
To which end, with your next occasion, vrge
Your loue to name the person she will choose,
By whose meanes you may safely write or meete.
Thats our cheefe businesse: and see, heere she comes.
My Lord, I onely come to say, y'are welcome▪
And so must say, farewell.
One word I pray.
Whats that?
You needes must presently deuise,
What person trusted chiefely with your guard,
You thinke is aptest for me to corrupt,
In making him a meane for our safe meeting?
My fathers Vsher, none so fit,
If you can worke him well: and so farewell,
With thanks my good Lord Strozza for your speech.
I thanke you for your patience, mocking Lady.
O what a fellow haz she pickt vs out?
One that I would haue choosde past all the rest,
For his close stockings onely.
And why not?
For the most constant fashion of his hat?
Nay then, if nothing must be left vnspoke,
For his strict forme, thus still to weare his cloke.
Wll sir, he is your owne, I make no doubt:
For to these outward figures of his minde,
He hath two inward swallowing properties
Ofany gudgeons; seruile Auarice,
And ouerweening thought of his owne worth,
Ready to snatch at euery shade of glory:
And therefore, till you can directlie boord him,
Waft him aloofe with hats, and other fauours,
Still as you meete him.
Well, let me alone,
He that is one mans slaue, is free from no.
Come Lady, sit you heere: Page, fill some Sacke,
I am to worke vpon this aged Dame,
To gleane from her, if there be any cause
(In louing others) of her Neeces coines
To the most gratious loue suite of the Duke:
Heere noble Lady, this is healthfull drinke
After our supper.
O, tis that my Lorde,
That of all drinkes keeps life and soule in me.
Heere, fill it Page, for this my worthy loue▪
O how I could imbrace this good olde widdow.
Now lord, when you do thus, you make me thinke
Of my sweete husband; for he was as like you;
Eene the same words, and fashion: the same eies,
Manly, and cholerike, eene as you are iust,
And eene as kinde as you for all the world.
O my sweete widdow, thou dost make me prowd.
Na, I am too old for you.
Too old, thats nothing,
Come pledge me wench, for I am drie againe,
And strait will charge your widdowhood fresh ifaith:
Why thats well done.
Now fie on't, heeres a draught.
O, it will warme your blood: if you should sip,
T would make you heart burnd.
Faith and so they say:
Yet I must tell you, since I plide this geere,
I haue beene hanted with a horson paine heere,
And euery moone almost with a shrewd feuer,
And yet I cannot leaue it: for thanke God,
I neuer was more sound of winde and limbe.
Looke you, I warrant you I haue a leg,
Holds out as hansomly.
Beshrew my life,
But tis a legge indeed, a goodly limbe.
This is most excellent.
O that your Neece
Were of as milde a spirit as your selfe.
Alas Lord Medice, would you haue a girle.
As well seene in behauiour as I?
Ah shees a fond yong thing, and growne so prowde▪
The wind must blow at west stil, or sheele be angry.
Masse so me thinke; how coy shees to the duke?
I lay my life she haz some yonger loue.
Faith like enough.
Gods me, who should it bee?
If it be any; Page, a little Sacke.
If it be any: harke now; if it be,
I know not, by this Sacke, but if it be,
Marke what I say, my Lord; I drinke tee first.
Well said good widdow, much good do thy heart▪
So; now what if it be?
Well, if it be;
To come to that I said, for so I said,
If it be any, Tis the Shrewde yong Prince,
For eies can speake, and eies can vnderstand▪
And I haue markt her eies; yet by this cup,
Which I will onely kisse.
O noble Crone,
Now such a huddle and kettle neuer was.
I neuer yet haue seene; not yet I say,
But I will marke her after for your sake.
And doe I pray; for it is passing like;
And there is Strozza, a slie Counsailor
To the yong boy: O I would giue a limbe,
To haue their knauerie limm'd and painted out.
They stand vpon their wits and paper learning:
Giue me a fellow with a naturall wit,
That can make wit of no wit; and wade through
Great things with nothing, when their wits sticke fast,
O they be scuruie Lords.
Faith so they be,
Your Lordship still is of my mind in all,
And ene so was my husband.
Gods my life,
Strozza▪ hath Euesdropt here, and ouer-heard vs.
They haue descried me; what Lord Medice
Courting the lustie widow?
I, and why not?
Perhaps one does as much for you at home.
What, cholericke man? and toward wedlocke too?
And if he be my Lord; he may do woorse.
If he be not; madame he may do better.
My Lords, and Madame, the Dukes grace intreates you
T'attend his new-made Dutchesse for this night,
Into his presence.
We are readie sir.
Come strew this roome afresh; spread here this carpet,
Nay quickly man, I pray thee; this way foole,
Lay me it smoothe, and Euen; looke if he will;
This way a little more: a little there.
Hast thou no forecast? lood me thinks a man
Should not of meere necessitie be an Asse.
Looke how he strowes here too: Come sir Giles Goosecap,
I must do all my selfe, lay me vm thus:
In fine smoothe threaues, looke you sir, thus in threaues.
Perhaps some tender Ladie will squat here,
And if some standing Rush should chance to pricke her,
Shee'd squeak & spoile the songs that must be sung.
See where he is; now to him, and prepare
Your familiaitie.
Saue you master Bassiolo,
I pray a word sir; but I feare I let you.
No my good Lord, no let.
I thanke you sir.
Nay pray be couerd; O I crie you mercie,
You must be bare.
Euer to you my Lord,
Nay, not to me sir,
But to the faire right of your worshipfull place.
A shame of both your worships.
What means your Lordship?
Onely to doe you right sir, and my selfe ease.
And what sir, will there be some shew to night?
A slender presentation of some musick
And some thing else my Lord.
T'is passing good sir,
Ile not be ouer bold t'aske the particulars.
Yes, if your Lordship please.
O no good sir,
But I did wonder much; for as me thought
I saw your hands at work.
Or else my Lord
Our busines would be but badly done.
How vertuous is a worthy mans example?
Who is this throne for pray?
For my Lords daughter,
Whom the duke makes to represent his dutches.
T'will be exceeding fit; and all this roome
Is passing wel preparde; a man would sweare,
That all presentments in it would be rare.
Nay, see if thou canst lay vm thus in threaues.
In threaues dee call it?
I my Lord in threaues.
A pretty terme:
Well sir I thanke you highly for this kindnesse,
And pray you alwayes make as bold with me
For kindnesse more then this, if more may bee.
O my Lord this is nothing.
Sir, tis much.
And now ile leaue you sir; I know y'are busie.
Faith sir alittle.
I commend me ee Sir.
A courteous prince beleeue it; I am sory
I was no bolder with him; what a phrase
He vsde at parting▪ I commend me tee▪
Be hate yfaith;
Good master Vsher, will you dictate to me,
Which is the part precedent of this night-cap,
And which posterior? I do ignorare
How I should weare it.
Why sir; this I take it
Is the precedent part; I, so it is.
And is all well sir thinke you?
Passing well.
Why sir come on; the Vsher shal be iudge:
See master Vsher: this same Fungus here,
Your Lords retainer, whom I hope you rule,
Would weare this better Ierkin for the Rush-man,
When I doe play the Broome-man; and speake first.
Why sir, I borrowed it, and I will weare it.
What sir, in spite of your Lords gentleman, Vsr:
No spite ir, but you haue changde twice already,
And now woulde ha't againe.
Why thats all one sir,
Gentillitie must be faasticall.
I pray thee Fungus let master Pogio weare it.
And what shall I weare then?
Why here is one, that was a Rush-mans Ierkin, and I pray, wer't not absurd then; a Broome-man should weare it?
Foe, theres a reason, I will keepe it ir.
Will sir; then do your office maister Vsher,
Mke him put off his Ierkin; you may plucke
His coate ouer his cares, much more his Ierkin.
Fungus y'ad best be rulde.
Best ir! I care not.
No sir? I hope you are my Lords reainer.
I neede not care a pudding for your Lord:
But spare not, keepe it, for perhaps Ile play
My part as well in this, as you in that,
Well said, master Pogio; my Lord shall know it.
Looke master Vsher, are these wags wel drest?
I haue beene so in labour with-vm truly.
Y'aue had a verie good deliuerane, Ladie:
How I did take her at her labour there,
I vse to gird these Ladies so sometimes.
1 I pray my Lord, must not I weare this haire?
I pray thee aske my Vsher; Come, dispatch,
The duke is readie: are you readie there?
2 See master Vsher; must he weare this haire?
Pray master Vsher, where must I come in?
2 Am not I well for a Bug, master Vsher?
What stirre is with these boyes here, God forgiue me,
If t'were not for the credite on't, I'de see
Your apish trash are, ere I'de indure this.
1 But pray good master Vsher.
Hence ye Brats,
You stand vpon your tyre; but for your action
Which you must vse in singing of your songs,
Exceeding dexterously and full of life,
I hope youle then stand like a sort of blocks,
Without due motion of your hands, and heads,
And wresting your whole bodies to your words,
Looke too't, y'are best; and in; Go; All go in:
Come in my masters; lets be out anon.
What, are all furnish well?
All well my Lord.
More lights then here, and let lowd musicke sound.
Sound Musicke.
Aduaunce your selfe, faire Dutchesse to this Throne▪
As we haue long since raisde you to our heart,
Better decorum neuer was beheld,
Then twixt this state and you: And as all eyes
Now fixt on your bright Graces thinke it fit,
So frame your fauour to continue it.
My Lord; but to obey your earnest will,
And not make serious scruple of a oy,
I scarce durst haue presde this minut height.
Vsher, cause other msicke; begin your shew.
Sound Consort; warne the Pedant to be readie.
Madam, I thinke you'le see a prettie shew.
I can expect no lesse in such a presence.
Lo what attention and state beautie breedes,
Whose moning silence no shrill herauld needes.
Lords of high degree,
And Ladies of low courtesie,
I the Pedant here,
Whom some call schoolmaistere,
Because I can speake best,
Approc before the rest.
A verie good reason.
But there are others comming,
Without maske or mumming:
For they are not ashamed,
If need be, to be named,
Nor will they hide their faces,
In any place or places;
For though they seeme to come,
Loded with Rush, and Broome:
The Broomeman you must know,
Is seigneur Pogio,
Nephew, as shall appeare,
To my Lord Strozza here.
O Lord, I thanke you sir, you grace me much.
And to this noble dame,
Whome I with finger name.
A plague of that fooles finger.
And women wil ensue,
Which I must tell you true,
No women are indeed,
But Pages made for need,
To fill vp womens places.
By vertue of their faces,
And other hidden graces.
A hall, a hall; whist, stil, be mum,
For now with siluer song they come.
Heroes, and Heroines, of gallant straine,
Let not these Broomes, motes in your eies remaine,
For in the Moone, theres one beares with'red bushes:
But we (deare wights) do beare greene broomes, green rushes,
Where of these verdant herbals cleeped Broome,
Do pierce and enter euerie Ladies roome,
And to proue them high borne, and no base trash,
Water with which your phisnomies you wash,
Is but a Broome. And more truth to deliuer,
Grim Hercules swept a stable with a riuer,
The wind that sweepes fowle clowds out of the ayre,
And for you Ladies makes the Welken faire,
Is but a Broome: and O Dan Titan bright,
Most clearkly calld the Scauenger of night,
What art thou, but a verie broome of gold?
For all this world not to be cride nor sold;
Philosophy, that passion sweepes from thought,
Is the soules Broome, and by all braue wits sought,
Now if Philosophers but Broomemen are,
Each Broomeman then is a Philosopher.
And so we come (gracing your gratious Graces)
To sweepe Cares cobwebs from your cleanly faces.
Thanks good master Broomeman,
For me Rushman then,
To make Rush ruffle in a vpse of ten,
A Rush which now your heeles doe lie on ere.
Crie mercie ir.
Was whilome vsed for a pungent speare,
In that odde battaile, neuer fought but twice
(As Homer ings) betwixt the frogs and mice,
Rushes make True-loue kno; Rushes ,
Your Rush maugre the beard of :
And when with gentle, amorous, ay ,
Each Lord with his faire Ladie swtly swims
On these coole Rushes; they may with these bables,
Cradles for children make; children for cradles,
And lest some Momus here might now rie push,
Saying our pageant is not woorth a Rush,
Bundles of Rushes, lo, we bring along,
To picke his teeth that bies them with his tongue.
See, see, thats Lord Mdice.
Gods me, my Lord,
Haz hee pickt you out, piing of yor th?
What picke you ou of that?
Not such stae stu
As you picke from your teeth.
Leaue this warre with Rushes,
Good master pedant; pray forth with your shew.
Lo thus farre thn (braue duke) you see
Meere entertainement; Now our gl
Shall march forth in :
And this qeint Dutchesse here shall see
The fault of virgine Nicetie,
First wooed with Rurall courtese,
Disbrthen them; praunce on this ground,
And make your xit with your Round.
Well haue they denc'd as it is meet,
Both with their imble heades and eet.
Now, as our coury girls held off,
And rudely did their louers scoff;
Our Nymph hall only glaunce
By your faire eies, and looke
Vpon hr female friend that woes her.
Who is in plaine to loose her.
And after them, to conclude all,
The prlue of our Paorall.
A female bug, and eke her friend,
Shall onely come ad sing, and end
This Lady and Dutchesse we conclude,
Faire Virgins must not be too rude:
For though the rurall wilde and ntike,
Abusde their loues as they were franuke;
Ye take you in your Iuory clutches,
This noble Duke, and be his Dtches.
Thus thanking all for their tacete,
I vo the roome, and cry valete.
Generally well, and pleasingly performed.
Now I resigne this borrowed maiesty,
Which ate vnseemely on my worthlesse head,
With humble seruice to your Highnesse hands.
Well you became it Lady, and I know
All heere could wish it might be euer so.
Heeres one saies to that.
Plague on you, peace.
Now let it please your Highnesse to accept
A homely banquet, to close these rude sports.
I thanke your Lordship much.
Bring lights, make place.
How dee my Lord?
O master broomeman, you did passing well.
A you mad slue you! you are a tickling Actor.
I was not out like my Lord Medice.
How did you like me Aunt?
O rarely, rarely.
O thou hast dne a worke of memory,
And raisde our house vp higher by a story.
Friend, how conceit you my young mother heere?
Fitter for you my Lord, than for your .
No more of that sweee friend, those are bugs words.
Thou art my trusty sruant nd thou kowst,
I haue beene euer bountifull Lord to thee,
As still I will be: be thou thankfull then,
And doe me now a seruice of import.
Any my Lord in compasse of my life.
To morrow then the Duke intends to hunt,
Where Strozza my despightfull enemie,
Will giue attendance busie in the chase,
Wherein (as if by chance, when others shoote
At the wilde Boare) do thou discharge at him,
And with an arrow, cleaue his canckerd heart.
I will not faile my Lord.
Be secret then.
And thou to me shalt be the dear'st of men.
Now Vanitie and Policie inrich me
With some ridculous fortune on this Vsher.
Wheres Master Vsher?
Now I come my Lord.
Besides, good sir, your shew did shew so well,
Did it in deede my Lord?
O sir, beleeue it;
Twas the best fashiond and well orderd thing
That euer eye beheld: and there withall,
The fit attendance by the seruants vsde,
The gentle guise in seruing eury guest,
In other entertainements; euery thing
About your house so sortfully disposde,
That een as in a turne-spit calld a Iacke,
One vice assists another; the great wheeles
Turning but softly, make the lesse to whirre
About their businesse; euery different part
Concurring to one commendable end:
So, and in such conformance, with rare grace,
Were all things orderd in your good lordes house.
The most fit simile that euer was.
But shall I tell you plainely my conceit,
Touching the man that I thinke causde this order?
I good my Lord.
You note my simile.
Drawne from the turne-spit.
I see you haue me,
Euen as in that queint engine you haue seene,
A little man in shreds stand at the winder,
And seemes to put all things in act about him,
Lifting and pulling with a mightie stirre,
Yet addes no force to it, nor nothing does:
So, (though your Lord be a braue Gentleman)
And seemes to do this busines,
He does nothing;
Some man about him was the festiuall robe,
That made him shew so glorius and diuine.
I cannot tell my Lord, yet I should know if any such there were.
Should know quoth you;
I warrant you know: well, some there be
Shall haue the fortune to haue such rare men,
(Like braue beasts to their Armes) support their state,
When others of as high a worth and breede,
Are made the wastefull food of them they feede:
What state hath your Lord made you for your seruice?
He haz beene my good Lord, for I canspend
Some fifteene hundred crownes in lands a yeare,
Which I haue gotten since I seru'd him first.
No more then fifteene hundred crownes a yeare?
It is so much as makes me lie my Lord,
Like a poore Gentleman.
Nay, tis prettie well:
But certainely my nature does esteeme
Nothing enough for vertue; and had I
The Duke my fathers meanes, all should be spent,
To keepe braue men about me: but good sir,
Accept this simple iewell at my hands,
Till I can worke perswasion of my friendship,
With worthier arguments.
No good my Lord,
I can by no meanes erite the free bounties
You haue bestowed besides.
Nay, be not strange,
But doe your selfe right, and be all one man
In all your actions, doe not think but some
Haue extraordinarie spirits like your selfe,
And wil not stand in their societie,
On birth and riches: but on worth and vertue,
With whom there is no nicenesse, nor respect
Of others commn friendship; be he poore
Or baselv borne, so he be rich in soule,
And noble in degrees of qualities,
He shall be my fiend sooner then a King.
T a most kingly idgement in your lordship,
Faith sir I know not, but tis my vane humour.
O, ti an honour in a Nobleman.
Y'aue some lords now so politike and prowd,
They skorne to giue good lookes to worthy men.
O fie vpon vm; by that light my lord,
I am but seruant to a Noblman,
But if I would not skone such puppet lords,
Would I weare breathlesse.
You sir? so you may,
For they will cogge so when they wish to vse men,
With, pray be couerd sir, I beseech you sit,
Whoe's there? waite of Master Vsher to the doore.
O, these be godly gudgeons: where's the deedes?
The perfect Nobleman?
O good my Lord.
Away, away, ere I would flatter so,
I wold eate rushes like lord Medici.
Well, wel my Lord, would there were more such Pinces.
Alas, twere pitty sir, they would be gulld
Ot of their very skinnes.
Why how are you my lord?
Who I, I care not:
If I be guild whre I professe plaine loue,
T'will be their faults you know.
O t'were their shames.
Well, take my iewell, you shall not be strange,
I loue not mane words.
My lord, I thanke you, I am offew words too.
Ti riendlie said,
You proue your selfe a friend, and I would haue you
Aduance your thoughts, and lay about for state,
Worthy your vertues: be the Mineon
Of some great King or Duke: theres Medici,
The Minion of my Father: O the Father!
What difference is there? but I cannot flatter
A word to wise men.
I perceiue your Lordship.
Your Lordship? talke you now like a friend?
Is this plaine kindnesse?
Is it not my Lord?
A palpable flattring figure for men common:
A my word I should thinke, if twere another,
He meant to gull mee.
Why tis but your due.
Tis but my due: if youle be still a stranger:
But as I wish to choose you for my friend,
As I intend when God shall call my father,
To doe I can tell what: but let that passe,
Thus tis not fit; let my friend be familiar,
Ve not me Lordship, nor yet call me Lord,
Nor my whole name Vincentio; but vince,
As they call Iacke or Will, tis now in vse,
Twixt men of no equallity or kindnesse.
I shall be quickely bold enough my Lord.
Nay, see how still you vse that co terme, Lord
What argues this, but that you shunne my friendship?
Nay▪ pray say not so.
Who hould not say so?
Will you fford me now no name at all?
What should I call you?
Nay, then tis no matter.
But I told you Vince.
Why then my sweete Vince.
Whe so then; and yet ull there is a fault,
In vsing these kind words, without kinde deedes:
Pray ee imbrae me too.
Why then sweete Vince.
Why now I thank you, sblood shall friends be strange?
Where there is plamenesse, there is euer truth:
An I will still be plame since I am true:
Come let vs lie a little, I am wearie.
And so am I, I sweare since yesterday.
You may sir by my faith; and sirra, hark thee,
What lordship wouldst thou wish to haueifaith,
When my old father dies?
Who I? alas.
O not you, well sir, you shall haue none,
You are as coy a peece as your Lords daughter.
Who, my mistris?
Indeede, is she our Mistris?
I faith sweet Vince, since she was three yeare old.
And are not wee too friends?
Who doubts of that?
And are not two friends one?
Euen man and wife.
Then what to you she is, to me she should be.
Why Vince, thou wouldst not haue her?
O not I: I doe not fancie any thing like you▪
Nay but I pray thee tell me.
You do not meane to marry her your self?
Not I by heauen.
Take heede now, do not gull me.
No by that candle.
Then will I be plaine.
Thinke you she dotes not too much on my father?
O yes, no doubt on't.
Nay, I pray you speake.
You seely man you, she cannot abide him.
Why sweete friend pardon me, alas I knew not.
But I doe note you are in some things simple,
And wrong your selfe too much.
Thanke you good friend,
For your playne dealing, I doe mene so well.
But who saw eer summer mixt with winter?
There must be equall yeares where firme loue is.
Could we two loue so well so soddainely
Were we not some thing equaller in yeares.
Than he and shee are?
I cry ye mercy sir, I know we could not, but yet be not oo bitter,
Considering loue is fearefull. And sweete friend,
I haue a letter t'intreate her kindnesse.
Which if you would conuay.
I, if I would sir?
Why fayth, deare friend, I would not die requitelesse.
Would you not so sir?
By heauen a little thing would make me boxe you,
Which if you would convaie? why not I pray?
Which (friend) thou shalt conuaie.
Which friend, you shall then.
Well friend, and I will then.
And vse some kinde perswasiue wordes for me?
The best I sweare that my poore toung can forge.
I, wel said, poore toung: O tis rich in meekenesle;
You are not knowne to speake well? You haue wonne
Direction of the Earle and all his house,
The fauour of his daughter, and all Dames
That euer I sawe, come within your sight,
With a poore tongue? A plague a your sweete lippes.
Well, we will doe our best: And faith my Uince,
She shall haue an vnweldie and dull soule,
If she be nothing moou'd with my poore tongue,
Call it no better; Be it what it will.
Well said ifaith; Now if I doe not thinke
Tis possible, besides her bare receipt
Of that my Letter, with thy friendly tongue.
To get an answere of it, neuer trust me.
An answer man? Sbloud make no doubt of that.
By heauen I thinke so; now a plague of Nature,
That she giues all to some, and none to others.
How I endeare him to me! Come Vince, rise,
Next time I see her, I will giue her this:
Which when she sees, sheele thinke it wondrous strange
Loue should goe by descent, and make the sonne
Follow the father in his amorous steppes.
Shee needes must thinke it strange, that neuer yet saw
I durst speake to her, or had sarce hir sight.
Well Vince, I sweare thou shalt both see and kisse her.
Sweares my deere friend? by what?
Euen by our friendship.
O sacred oath! which, how long will you keepe?
While thee be bees in Hybla, or white swannes
In bright Meander; while the banks of Po
Shall beare braue lillies; or Italian dames
Be called the Bone robes of the world.
Tis elegantly said: and when I faile,
Ler there be found in Hybla hiues no bees;
Let no swannes swimme in bright Meander streame▪
Nor lillies spring vpon the bans of Po,
Nor let one fat Italian dame be found,
But leane and brawn-falne; I, and scarsly sond.
It is enough, but lets imbrace with all.
With all my hart.
So, now farewell swet Vince.
Farewell my wothie friend, I thinke I haue him.
I had forgot the parting phrase he taught me, I commend me t'ee sir.
At your wish ruice sir:
O fine friend, he had forgot the phrase:
How serious apish soules are in vaine forme:
Well, he is mine, and he being trusted most
With my deare ioue, may often worke our meeting,
And being thus ingagde, dare not reeale.
Horse, horse, horse, my lord, horse, your father is going a hunting.
My Lord horse? you asse d'e call my Lord horse?
Nay, he speakes huddles still, lets sl h tongue.
Nay good vnkle now, sbloud, what cap, marchants you be; so the Duke tooke me vp euen now: my lord vnckle heere, and my old lord Lasso, by heauen y'are too witty for me, I am the veriest foole on you all, e be sworne.
Therein thou art worth vs all, for thou knowst thy selfe.
But your wedom was in a pretty tg lst night; was it not I pray?
O, for taking my drink a little? faith my Lord, for that you shall haue the best sport pntly with Mad Cor, that eer was; I haue made her so drunke, that she does nothing b kisse my Lord Medice.
See shee comes riding the Duke, shees passing well mounted▪ beleeue it.
Good wench forbeare.
My Lord, you must put forth your selfe among Ladies, I warrant you haue much in you, if you would shew it; see, a cheeke a twentie; the bodie of a George, a good legge still; still a good calfe▪ and nt slabby, nor hanging I warrnt you; a brawe of a thumb here, and t'were a pd p; Neece Meg ou shalt haue the sweetest bedfellow on him, that euer calld Ladie husband; trie him you shamefac'd bable you, him.
Good Madame be rulde.
What a nice thing it is, my Lord, you must set foorth this gre▪ and ke her; yfaith you must; get you togher and be naugh awhile, get you together.
Now what a merrie harmlesse dame it is!
My Lord Medice, you are a right noble man, & wil do a woman right in a wrong matter and neede be; prav do you giue the duke ensample vpon me; you come a wooing to me now; I accept it.
What ane you sister?
Pray my Lod away; consider me as I am, a woman.
Lord, how I haue whd her?
You come a woong to me now; ay ee Duke marke my Lord Medi; and do you mare me ; Stand you aside, m Lord▪ , and you; g pl; now y L edice, ut case I b stge a yt y lik to it. Come e me my Ld, be not .
Not I Mad, come no ng ou.
.
fister, v' too ; will you goet
.
Whats the matter?
Dee thinke I am drune?
I thinke so truly.
But are you sure I am drunke?
Else I would not thinke so.
But, I would be glad to be sure on't.
I assure you then.
Why then say nothing; & Ile begone God bwy lord, duke
Ile come againe anone.
I hope your Grace will pardon her my liege,
For tis most strange; shees as discreete a dame
As any in these countries, and as sober,
But for this onely humour of the cup
Tis good my Lord sometimes:
Come, to our hunting; now tis time I thinke.
The verie best time of the day, my Lord.
Then my Lord, I will take my leaue till night,
Reseruing thanks for all my entertainment,
Till I returne; in meane time, louely dame,
Remember the high state you last presented,
And thinke it was not a mere festiuall shew,
But an essentiall type of that you are
In full consent of all my faculties
And harke you good my Lord.
See now, they whisper
Some priuate order, (I dare lay my life)
For a forc'd marriage t'wixt my loue and father▪
I therefore must make sure: and noble friends,
Ile leaue you all, when I haue brought you forth,
And seene you in the chase; meane-while obserue
In all the time this solemne hunting lasts,
My father and his minion Medice,
And note, if you can gather any signe,
That they haue mist me, and suspect my being,
If which fall out, send home my Page before.
I will not faile my Lord.
Now take thy time.
I warrant you my Lord, he shall not scape me.
Now my deere Mistresse, till our sports intended end with my absence, I will take my leaue.
Blo, attend you on my daughter.
I will my Lord.
Now will the sport beginne; I think my loue Will handle him, as well as I haue doone.
Madam, I take my leaue, and humblie thanke you.
Welcome good madam; mayds wait on my Lady.
So mistris, this is fit.
Fit sir, why so?
Why so? I haue most fortunate newes for you.
For me sir? I beseech you what are they?
Merit and Fortune, for you both agree;
Merit what you haue, and haue what you merit.
Lord with what Rhetorike you prepare your newes▪
I need not; for the plaine contents they beare
Vttred in any words, deserue their welcome,
And yet I hope the words will serue the turne.
What, in a letter?
Why not?
Whence is it?
From one that will not shame it with his name▪ And that is Lord Vincentio.
King of heauen!
Is the man madde?
Mad Madam, why?
O heauen, I muse a man of your importance,
Will offer to bring me a letter thus?
Why, why good Mistresse, are you hurt in that?
Your answer may be what you will your selfe.
I, but you should not doe it: Gods my life,
You shall answer it.
Nay, you must answer it.
I answer it! are you the man I trusted?
And will betray me to a stranger thus?
Thats nothing, dame, all friends were stranges first.
Now was there euer woman ouerseene so,
In a wise mans discretion?
Your braine is shallow, come, receiue this letter▪
How dare you say so? when you know so well
How much I am engaged to the duke?
The duke? a proper match: a graue olde gentman:
Haz berd at will; and would, in my conceyt,
Mke a most exellent patterne, for a potter
To haue his pictue stampt on a Iugge.
To keepe ale-nights in memorie of sobrietie.
Heere gentl mdam, take it.
Take it si?
A I common taker of loe letters?
Common? why when receiu'd you one before?
ome, tis no matter; I had thought your care
Of my bestowing, would not tempt me thus
To one I know not; but it is because
You know I dote so much on yur direction.
On my direction?
No sir, Not on yours.
Well mistris, if you will take my aduice
At ay time, then take this letter now.
Tis strange, I woonder the coy gentleman,
That seeing mee so oft, would neuer speake,
Is on the so far wrapt to write.
It shewd his iudgement, that he would not speake
Knowing with what a strict and iealous eie
He should be noted; holde, if you loue yourselfe;
Now will you take this letter? pray be rulde.
Come, you haue such another plaguie toung,
And yet yfayth I will not.
Lod of heauen,
What, did it bune your hands? holde, hold, I pray,
And let the words within it fire your heart.
I woonder how the deuill, he found you ou
To be his spokesman,—O the duke would thanke you,
If he knew how you vrgde me for his sonne.
The duke? I haue fretted her,
Fuen to the liuer, and had much adoe
To ake her take it, but I knew t'was sure;
For he that cannot turne and wnde a woman
Like silke about his finger, is no man,
Ile make her answer't too.
O here's good stuffe.
Hold, pray take it for your paines to bring it.
Ladie you erre in my reward a little,
Which must be a kind answere to this letter.
Nay then yfaith, t'were best you brought a Priest;
And then your client; and then keepe the doore.
God me I neuer knew so rude a man.
Wel, you shall answer; Ile fetch pen and paper.
Poore Vsher, how wert thou wrought to this brake?
Men worke on one another for we women,
Nay each man on himselfe; and all in one
Say; No man is content that lies alone.
Here comes our gulled Squire.
Here Mistresse, write.
What should I write?
An answer to this letter.
Why sir, I see no cause of answer in it,
But if you needs will shew how much you rule me,
Sit downe; and answer it, as you please your selfe,
Here is your paper, lay it faire afore you.
Lady, content, Ile be your Secretorie.
I fit him in this taske; he thiukes his penne
The Shaft of Cupid, in an amorous letter.
Is heere no great worth of your answer say you?
Beleeue it, tis exceedingly well writ.
So much the more vnfit for me to answere,
And therefore let your Stile and it contend.
Well, you shall see I will not be farre short,
Although (indeede) I cannot write so well
When one is by, as when I am alone.
O, a good Scribe must write, though twenty talke, and he talke to hem too.
Well, you shall see.
A proper peece of Scribeship theres no doub;
Some words, pict out of Proclmations,
Or great mens Speeches; or well slling Pamphlets:
See how he rubbes his emples
His Muse lies in the backe- ,
Which thicke and grosse, is hard to be brought forward,
What? is it loath to come?
No, not a whi:
Pray hold your peace a little.
He sweates, with bringing on his heauie stile,
Ile plie him still, till he sweate all his wit out,
What man, not yet?
Swoons, yowle not extort it from a man,
How do you like the worde Endeare?
O fie vpon't.
Nay, then I see your iudgement: what say you to condole?
Worse and worse.
O braue I should make a sweete answer, if I should vse no words but of your admittance.
Well sir, write what you please.
Is modell a good word with you?
Put them togither I pray.
So I will I warrant you.
See, see, see, now it comes powring downe.
I hope youle take no exceptions to beleeue it.
Out vpon't, that phrase is so runne out of breath in trifles, that we shall haue no beleefe at all in earnest shortly. Beleeue it tis a prettie feather; beleeue it a daintie Rush; beleeue it an excellent Cocks-combe.
So, so, so, your exceptions sort very collaterally.
Collaterally? theres a fine word now; wrest in that if you can by any meanes.
I thought she would like the very worst of them all, how thinke you? do not I write, and heare, and talke too now?
By my soule, if you can tell what you write now, you write verie readily.
That you shall see straight.
But do you not write that you speake now?
O yes, doe you not see how I write it? I can not write when any bodie is by me, I.
Gods my life, stay man; youle make it too long.
Nay, if I can not tell what belongs to the length of a Ladies deuice yfaith.
But I will not haue it so long.
If I cannot fit you?
O me; how it comes vpon him? pre thee be short.
Wel, now I haue done, & now I wil reade i; your Lordships motiue accōmodating my thoughts, with the very model of my hearts mature consideration: it shall not be out of my Element to negotiate with you in this amorous duello; wherein I will condole with you, that our proiect cannot be fo collaterally made, as our endeared hearts may verie well seeme to insinuate.
No more: no more; fie vpon this.
Fie vpon this? hees accurst that haz to doe with these vnsound women, of iudgement: if this be not good yfaith.
But tis so good, t'will not be thought to come from a womans braine.
Thats another matter
Come, I will write my selfe.
A Gods name Lady: and yet I will not loose this I warrant you; I know for what Ladie this will serue as fit; now we shall haue a sweete peece of inditement.
How spell you foolish?
F, oo, l, i. sh▪ she will presume t'endite that cannotspel:
How spell you Vsher?
Sblood, you put not in those words togither, do you?
No, not togither.
What is betwixt I pray?
Asse the.
Asse the? betwixt foolish, and Vsher,
Gods my life, oolish Asse the Vsher?
Nay then you are so iealous of your wit: now reade all I haue written I pray.
I am not so foolish as the Vsher would make me: O so foolish as the Vsher would make me? Wherein would I make you foolish?
Why sir, in willing me to beleeue he lou'd me so wel, being so meere a stranger.
O, is't so? you may say so indeed.
Cry mercie sir, and I will write so too, & yet my hand is so vile, Pray thee sit thee downe and write as I bid thee.
With all my heart ady, what shall I write now?
You shall wrie this sir, I am not so foolish to thinke you loue me, being so meere a stranger.
So meere a stranger!
And yet I know, loue works strangely.
Loue workes strangely.
And therefore take heed, by whom you speake for loue.
Speake for loue.
For he may speake for himselfe.
May speake for himselfe.
Not that I desire it,
Desire it.
But if he do▪ you may speede, I confesse.
Speede I confsse.
But let that psse, I do not loue to discourage any bodie.
Discourage y bodie.
Do you or he icke out what you can; & so farewell.
And so fare well. Is this all?
I, and he may thanke your Syrens tongue that it is so much.
A proper Letter if you marke it.
Well sir, though it be not so proper as the writer; yet tis as proper as the diter; Euerie woan cannot be a gntleman Vsher; they that cannot go beore, must come behind.
Well Ladie, this I will carrie instantly, I commend me tee Ladie.
Pittifull Vsher, what a prettie sleght,
Goes to the workng vp of euerie thing?
What swet varietie seues a womans wit?
W make men fue to vs for that we wih.
Poore men; hold ot a while; and do not sue,
And spite of Custome we will se t ou.
O Go, how wearie I am? Aunt, Mdam. Cynanche, Aunt?
How now?
O God, Aunt: O God Aunt: O God.
What bad newes brings this man? wher is my Lord?
O Aunt, my Vnkle, hees shot.
Shot, ay me!
How is he shot?
Why with a forked shaft
As he was hunting, full in his left side.
O me accurst, where is hee? bring me, where?
Comming with Doctor Beniuemus,
Ile leaue you, and goe tell my Lord Vincentio.
See the sad sight, I dare not yeeld to griefe,
But force faind patience to recomfort him:
My Lord, what chance is this? how fares your lordship?
Wounded, and faint with anguish, let me rest.
A chaire.
O Doctor, ist a deadly hurt?
I hope not Madam, though not free from danger▪
Why plucke you not the arrow from his side?
We cannot Lady, the forckt head so fast
Stickes in the bottome of his sollide ribbe.
No meane then Doctor rests there to educe it?
This onely, my good Lord, to giue your wound
A greater orifice, and in sunder break
The pierced ribbe; which being so neere the midiffe,
And opening to the region of the heart,
Will be exceeding dangerous to your life.
I will not see my bosome mangled so,
Nor sternely be anatomizde aliue,
Ile rather perish with it sticking still.
O no; sweete doctor thinke vpon some help.
I tolde you all that can be thought in Arte,
Which since your Lordship will not yeelde to vse,
Our last hope rests in Natures secret aide,
Whose power at length may happily expell it.
Must we attend at deaths abhorred doore,
The torturing delaies of slauish Nature?
My life is in mine owne powers to dissolue:
And why not then the paines that plague my life?
Rise furies, and this furie of my bane,
and conquer; what men madnesse calle
(Tht hath no eye to sense, but frees the foule,
Exempt of hope, and feare with instant fate)
Is mnliest reason; manliest reason then,
Resolue and rid me of this brutish life,
Hastn the cowardly protracted cure
Of all diseases: King of Phisitians, death,
Ile dig thee from this Mine of miseie.
O hold my Lord, this is no christian part,
Nor yet skarce manly, when your mankinde foe,
Imperious death shall make your grones his trumpets
To summon resignation of lifes Fort,
To flie without resistance; you must force
A countermine of Fortitude, more deepe
Than this poore Mine of paines, to blow him vp,
And spight of him liue victor, though subdu'd:
Patence in torment, is a valure more
Than eer crownd T' Alcmenean Conquerour.
Rage is the vent of torment, let me rise.
Men doe but crie, that rage in miseries,
And scarcely beaten children, become cries:
Paines are like womens clamors, which the lesse
They find mens patience stirred, the more they cease.
Of this tis said, afflictions bring to God,
Because they make vs like him, drinking vp
Ioyes that deforme vs with the lusts of sense,
And turne our generall being into soule,
Whose actions simply formed and applied,
Draw all our bodies frailties from respect.
Away with this vnmedcinable balme
Of worded breath; for beare friends, let me rest,
I sweare I will be bands vnto my selfe.
That will become your lordship best indeed.
Ile breake away, and leape into the Sea.
Or from some Turret cast me hedlong downe,
To shiuer this fraile carkasse into dust.
O my deare Lord, what vnlike words are these▪
To the late fruits of your religious Noblesse?
Leaue me fond woman.
Ile be hewne from hence
Before I leaue you; helpe me gentle Doctor▪
Haue patience good my Lord.
Then leade me in,
Cut off the timber of this cursed Shaft,
And let the fork'd pile canker to my heart.
Deare Lord, resolue on humble sufferance.
I will not heare thee, woman, be content.
O neuer shall my counsailes cease to knocke
At thy impatient eares, till they fle in
And salue with Christian patience, Pagan sinne.
This is her letter sir, you now shall see
How seely a thing tis in respect of mine,
And what a simple woman she haz prou'd,
To refuse mine for hers; I pray looke heere.
Soft sir, I know not, I being her sworn seruant,
If I may put vp these disgracefull words,
Giuen of my Mistis, without touch of honour.
Disgracefull words; I protest I speake not
To disgrace her, but to grace my selfe.
Nay then sir, if it be to grace your selfe,
I am content; but otherwise you know,
I was to take exceptions to a King.
Nay, y'are ith right for that; but reade I pray▪ if there be not more choice words in that letter, than in any thre of Geuaras golden epistles, I am a very asse. How thinke you ?
By heauen no lesse sir, it is the best thing;
Gods what a beast am I.
Is is no matter,
I can set it together againe.
Pardon me sir, I protest I was rauisht: but was it possible she should preferre hers before this?
O sir, she cride fie vpon .
Well, I must say nothing, loue is blind you know, and can finde no fault in his beloued.
Nay, thats most certaine.
me: Ile haue this letter.
No good Vince, tis not worth it.
Ile ha't , heeres enough in it for my letters as long as I liue; Ile it to breede on as twere:
But I much wonder you could make her write.
Indeede there were some words belongd to that.
How strong an influence works in plac'd words,
And yet there must be a prepared loue,
To giue those words so mighty a command,
Or twere impossible they should moue so much:
And will you tell me true?
In any thing.
Does not this Lady loue you?
Loue me? why yes; I thinke does not hate me.
Nay but ifaith, does she not loue you dearely?
No I protest.
Nor haue you neuer her?
her, thats nothing.
But you know my meaning:
Haue you not beene, as one would say, afore me?
Not I, I sweare.
O, y'are too true to tell.
Nay be my troth, she haz, I must confesse,
Vsde me with good respect, and nobly still,
But for such matters.
Verie little more,
Would make him take her maidenhead vpon him:
Well friend, I rest yet in a little doubt,
This was not hers.
T'was by that light that shines,
And Ile goe fetch her to you to confirme it.
O passing friend.
But when she comes, in any case be bold,
And come vpon her with some pleasing thing,
To shew y'are pleasde: how euer she behaues ,
As for example; if she turne her backe,
Vse you that action you would doe before,
And court her thus; Lady, your backe part is as faire to me, as is your fore part.
T'will be most pleasing.
I, for if you loue
One part aboue another, tis a signe
You like not all alike, and the worst part
About your Mistris, you must thinke as faire,
As sweete, and daintie, as the very best,
So much, for so much, and considering too,
Each seuerall limbe and member in his kinde.
As a man should.
True, will you thinke of this?
I hope I shall.
But if she chance to laugh,
You must not lose your countenance, but deuise
Some speech to shew you pleasde, euen being laugh'd at.
I, but what speech?
Gods pretious man! do something of your selfe?
But Ile deuise a speech.
Inspire him folly.
Or no matter, be but bold enough,
And laugh when she laughs, and it is enough:
Ile fetch her to you.
Now was there euer such a demilance,
To beare a man so cleare through thicke and thinne?
Or harke you sir, if she should steale a laughter
Vnder her fanne, thus you may say, sweete Lady,
If you will laugh and lie downe, I am pleasde.
And so I were by heauen; how know you that?
Slid man▪ Ile hit your very thoughts in these things.
Fetch her sweete friend, Ile hit your words I warrant,
Be bold then Vince, and presse her to it hard,
A shamefac'd man, is of all women barr'd.
How easly worthlesse men take worth vpon them,
And being ouer credulous of their owne worths,
Doe vnderprize as much the worth of others.
The foole is rich, and absurd riches thinks
All merit is rung out, where his purse chinks.
My Lord, with much intreaty heeres my Lady.
Nay Maddam, looke not backe: why Vince I say?
Vince? O monstrous ieast!
To her for shame.
Lady, your backe part is as sweete to me
As all your forc part.
He miss'd alittle: he said her back part was sweet, when
He should haue said faire; but see, she laughs most fitly,
To bring in the tother: Vince, to her againe, she laughs.
Laugh you faire Dame?
If you will laugh and lie downe, I am pleasde.
What villanous stuffe is heere?
Sweete Mistris, of meere grace imbolden now
The kind young Prince heere, it is onely loue
Vpon my protestation, that thus daunts
His most Heroicke spirit: so a while
Ile leaue you close together; Vince, I say—
O horrible hearing, does he call you ?
O I, what else? and I made him imbrace me,
a most familiar league of friendship.
But wherefore did you court me so absurdly?
Gods me, he taught me, I spake out of him.
O fie vpon't, could you for pitty make him
Such a poore creature? abuse enough
To make him take on him such sawcie friendship;
And yet his place is great; for hees not onely
My fathers Vsher, but the worlds beside,
Because he goes before it all in folly.
Well, in these homely wiles, must our loues maske,
Since power denies him his right,
But is there no meane to dissolue that power,
And to preuent all further wrong to vs,
Which it may worke, by forcing Mariage rites,
Betwixt me and the Duke?
No meane but one,
And that is closely to be maried first,
Which I perceiue not how we can performe:
For at my fathers comming backe from hunting,
I feare your father and himselfe resolue,
To barre my interest with his present nuptialls.
That shall they neuer doe; may not we now
Our contract make, and marie before heauen?
Are not the lawes of God and Nature, more
Than formall lawes of men? are outward rites,
More vertuous then the very substance is
Of holy nuptialls solemnizde within?
Or shall lawes made to curbe the common world,
That would not be contain'd in forme without them,
Hurt them that area law vnto themselues?
My princely loue, tis not a Priest shall let vs:
since th'eternall acts of our pure soules,
Knit vs with God, the soule of all the world,
He shall be Priest to vs; and with such rites
As we can heere deuise, we will expresse,
And strongely ratifie hearts true vowes,
Which no externall violence shall dissolue.
This is our onely meane t'enioy each other:
And, my deare life, I will deuise a forme
To execute the substance of our mindes,
In honor'd . First then hide your face
With this your spotlesse white and virgin vaile:
Now this my skarfe Ile knit about your arme,
As you shall knit this other end on mine,
And as I knit it, heere I vow by Heauen,
By the most sweete imaginarie ioyes,
Of vntride nuptialls; by loues vshering fire,
Fore-melting beautie, and loues flame it selfe.
As this is soft and pliant to your arme
In a circumferent flexure, so will I
Be tender of your welfare and your will,
As of mine owne, as of my life and soule,
In all things, and for euer; onelie you
Shall haue this care in fulnesse, onely you
Of all dames shall be mine, and onely you
Ile court, coend and ioy in, till I die.
Wth like conceit only our arme this I tie,
And heere in sight of heauen, by it I sweare,
By my loue to you, which commands my life,
By the deare price of such a constant husband,
As you haue vowed to be: and by the ioy
I shall imbrace by all meanes to requite you:
e be as apt to gouerne as this silke,
As priuate as my face is to this vaile,
And as farre from offence, as this from blacknesse.
I will be courted of no man but you,
In, and for you shall be my ioyes and woes:
If you be sicke, I will be sicke, though well:
If you be well, I will be well, though sicke:
Your selfe alone my compleat world shall be,
en from this houre, to all eternity.
It is inough, and binds as much as marriage.
Ile see in what plight my poore louer stands,
Gods mea beckons me to haue me gone,
It seemes hees entred into some good vaine:
Ile hence, loue cureth when he vents his paine.
Now my sweet life, we both remember well
What we haue vow'd shall all be kept entire
Maugre our fathers wraths, danger and death:
And to confirme this, shall we spend our breath?
Be well aduisde, for yet your choice shall be
In all things as before, as large and free.
What I haue vow'd▪ keepe uen past my death.
And I: and now in token I dissolue
Your virgin state, I take this snowie vaile,
From your much fairer face, and claime the dues
Of sacred nuptialls: and now fairest heauen,
As thou art infinitely raisde from earth,
Diffrent and opposite, so blesse this match,
As farre remou'd from Customes popular sects,
And as vnstaind with her abho'd respects.
Mistris, away, Pogio runnes vp and downe,
Calling for Lord Vin; come away,
For hitherward he bends his clamorous haste.
Remember loue.
Or else forget me heauen.
Why am I sought for by this Pogio?
The Asse is great with child of some ill newes,
His mouth is neuer fill'd with other sound.
Where is my Lord Vincentio, where is my Lord?
Here he is Asse, what an exclaiming keep'st thou?
Slood, my Lord, I haue followed you vp and downe like a Tantalus pig, till I haue worne out my hose here abouts▪ Ile be sworne, and yet you call me Asse still; But I can tell you passing ill newes my Lord.
I know that well sir, thou neuer bringst other; whats your newes now, I pra ▪
O Lord, my Lord vncle is shot in the side with an arrow.
Plgues take thy tongue, is he in any danger?
O danger; I, he haz lien speechlesse this two houres,
And talkes so idlely.
Accursed newes, where is he, bring me to him▪
Yes, do you lead, and Ile guide you to him.
How fares it now with my deare Lord and husband?
Come neere me wife, I fare the better farre
For the sweete foode of thy diuine aduice,
Let no man value at a little price.
A vertuous womans counsaile, her wing'd spirit,
Is fe herd oftentimes with heauenly words;
And (like her beauti) rauishing, and pre.
The weaker bodie, still the stronger soule,
When good endeuours do her powers applie,
Her loue drawes neerest mans felicitie,
O what a treasure is a vertuous wife,
Discreet and louing, Not one gift on earth,
Makes a mans life so highly bound to heau ▪
She giues him doble forces, to endure
And to enioy; by being one with him,
Feeling his Ioies and Griefes with equall senc;
And like the twins Hypates reports:
If he fetch sighes, she drawes her breath as short:
If he lament, she melts her selfe in teares:
If he be glad, she triumphs; if he ste,
She moou's his way; in all things his sweete Ap:
And is in alteratious passing strange.
Himselfe dely varied without change:
Gold is right pretious; but his price infects
With pride and auarice; Aucthority l
Hats from mens heades; and bowes the strongest knees▪
Yet cannot bend in rule the weakest heats;
Musicke delights but one sence; No choice meats
One quickly fades, the other stirre to sinne▪
Bt a true wife, both sence and soule delights,
And mixeth not her good with any ill;
Her vertues (ruling hearts) all powres command;
All Store without her, leaues a man b poore;
And with her, Pouertie is exceeding Store;
No time is tedious with her, her true woorth
Makes a true husband thinke, his armes enfold;
(With her alone) a compleate worlde of gold.
I wish (deare loue) I coulde deserue as much▪
As your most kinde conceipt hath well exprest:
But when my best is done, I see you wounded;
And neither can recure nor ease your pains.
Cynanche, thy aduise hath made me well;
My free submission to the hand of heauen
Makes it redeeme me from the rage of paine▪
For though I know the malice of my wound
Shootes still the same distemper through my vain,
Yet the Iudiciall patience I embrace,
(In which my minde spreads her impassiue powres
Through all my suffring parts;) expels their frail;
And rendering vp their whole life to my soule,
Leaues me nought else but soule; and so like her,
Free from the passions of my ing blood.
Would God you were so; and that too much payne.
Were not the reason, you felt sence of none.
Thinkst thou me mad Cynanche? for mad men,
By paynes vngouernd, haue no sence of payne.
But I, I tell you am quite contrary,
Easde with well gouerning my submitted payne▪
Be cheerd then wife; and looke not for, in mee,
The manners of a common wounded man.
Humilitie hath raisde me to the starres;
In which (as in a sort of Cristall Globes)
I sit and see things hidde from humane sight.
I, euen the very accidents to come
Are present with my knowledge; the seuenth day
The arrow head will fall out of my side.
The seauenth day wife, the forked head will out.
Would God it would my Lord, and leaue you we
Yes, the seuenth day, I am assurd it will:
And I shall liue, I know it; I thanke heauen,
I knowe it well; and ile teach my phisition,
To build his cares heereafter vpon heauen
More then on earthly medcines; for I knowe
Many things showne me from the op'ned skies,
That passe all arts. Now my phisition
Is comming to me, he makes friendly haste;
And I will well requite his care of mee.
How knowe you he is comming?
Passing well; and that my deare friend lord Vincentio Will presently come see me too; ile stay (My good phisition) till my true friend come.
Ay me, his talke is idle; and I feare,
Foretells his reasonable Soule now leaues him.
Bring my Physition in, hee's at the doore.
Alas, theres no Physition.
But I know it;
See, he is come.
How fares my worthy Lord?
Good Doctor, I endure no paine at all,
And the seauenth day, the arrowes head will out.
Why should it fall out the seuenth day my Lord?
I know it; the seuenth day it will not faile.
I wish it may, my Lord.
Yes, t'will be o,
You come with purpose to take present leaue,
But you shall stay a while; my Lord Vinceno
Would see you faine and now is comming hither:
How knowes your Lordship? haue you sent for him?
No but t'is very true; hee's now hard by,
And will not hinder your affaires a whit.
How want of rest distempers his light braine?
Brings my Lord any traine?
None but himselfe.
My nephew Pogio now hath left his Grace.
Good Doctor go, and bring him by his hand,
(Which he will giue you) to my longing eyes,
Tis strange, if this be true.
The Prince I thinke,
Yet knowes not of your hurt.
Yes wife, too well,
See he is come; welcome my princely friend:
I haue beene shot my Lord; but the euenth day
The arrowes head will fall out of my side,
And I shall hue.
I doe not feare your life,
But, Doctor, is it your opinion,
That the seuenth day the arrow head will out?
No, t'is not his opinion, t'is my knowledge:
For I doe know it well; and I do wish
Euen for your onely sake, my noble Lord,
This were the seuenth day; and I now were well,
That I might be some strength to your ard state,
For you haue many perils to endure:
Great is your danger; grea; vour vniustill
Is passing foule and mortall; would to God
My wound were something wel, I might be with you,
Nay do not whisper, I know what I say,
Too well for you, my Lor ▪ I wonder heauen
Will let such violence threat an innocent life.
What ere it be, deare friend, so you be well,
I will endure it all; your wounded state
Is all the daunger I feare towards me.
Nay, mine is nothing; For the seuenth day
This arow head will out, and I shall liue,
And so shall you, I thinke; but verie hardly.
It will be hardly, you will scape indeed.
Be as will be; pray heauen your prophecie
Be happily accomplished in your selfe,
And nothing then can come amisse to me.
What sayes my Doctor? thinks he I say true?
If your good Lordship could but rest a while,
I would hope well.
Yes, I shall rest I know,
If that will helpe your indgement.
Yes, it will,
And good my Lord, lets helpe you in to trie.
You pease me mch, I shall sleepe instantly.
Why should the humorous boy forsake the chace?
As if he tooke aduantage of my absence,
To some act that my preence would offend.
I warrant you my Lord, t'is to that end:
And I beleeue he wrongs you in your loue.
Children presuming on their parents kindnesse,
Care not what vnkind actions they commit
Against their quiet: And were I as you,
I would affright my sonne from these bold parts,
And father him as I found his deserts.
I sweare I will: and can I proue he aymes
At any interruption in my loue,
Ile his life.
We soone shall see,
For I haue made Madam Corteza search
With pick-locks, all the Ladies Cabynets
About Earle Lassos house; and f here be
Traffique of loue, twixt any one of them,
And yoūr suspected sonne; t'will soone appeare,
In some signe of their amorous marchandise;
See where she comes, loded with & paper.
See here, my Lord, I haue rob'd all their Caskets,
Know you this Ring? this Carquanet? this Chaine?
Will any of these letters serue your turne?
I know not these things; but come: let me reade some of these letters.
Madam, in this deed
You deserue highly of my Lord the Duke.
Nay my Lord Medice, I thinke I told you
I could do prettie well in these affaires:
O these yong Girles engrosse vp all the loue
From vs, (poore Beldams;) but I hold my hand,
Ile ferret all the Cunni-holes of their kindnesse
Ere I haue done with them.
Passion of death!
See, see, Lord Medice, my trait'rous sonne,
Hath long ioyde in the fauours of my loue:
Woe to the wombe that bore him: and my care
To bring him vp to this accursed houre,
In which all cares possesse my wretched life.
What father, would beleeue he had a sonne
So full of trecherie to his innocent state?
And yet my Lord, this letter hewes no meeting,
But a desire to meete.
Yes, yes, my Lord,
I doe suspect they meete; and I beleeue
I know well where too; I beleeue I doe;
And therefore tell me; does no creature know,
That you haue left the chase thus suddenly?
And a come hither? haue you not beene seene
By any of these Louers?
Not by any.
Come then, come follow me; I am perswaded
I shall go neare to shew you their kind hands.
Their confidence, that you are still a hunting,
Will make your amorous sonne that stole from thence,
Bold in his loue-sports; Come, come, a fresh chace,
I hold this pickelocke, you shall hunt at view.
What, do they thinke to seape? An old wiues eye
Is a blew Cristall full of sorcerie.
If this be true, the traitrous boy shall die.
Tell me I pray you, what strange hopes they are
That feed your coy conceits against the Duke,
And are prefer'd before th'aslured greatnes
His highness graciously would make your fornes?
I haue small hopes, my Lord; but a desire
To make my nuptiall choice of one I loue,
And as I would be loath t'impaire my state;
So I, affect not honours that exceed it.
O you are verie temp'rate in your choice,
Pleading a iudgement past your sexe, and yeares.
But I beleeue some fancie' will be found,
The forge of these gay Gloses: if it be,
I shall descipher what close traitor tis
That is your Agent in your secret plots.
Swoones.
And him for whom you plot; and on you all
I will reuenge thy disobedieuce,
With such seuere correction, as shall fright
All such deluders fom the like attempts:
But chiefly he shall smart that is your factor▪
O me, accurst!
Meane time Ile cut
Your poore craft short yfaith.
Poore craft indeede,
That I, or any others vse, forme.
Well Dame, if it be nothing but the iarre
Of your vnfiued fancie; that procures
Your wilfull coynesse to my Lord the Duke,
No doubt but Time, and Iudgent will conforme it
To such obedience, as so great desert
Proposde to your acceptance doth require.
To which end doe you cosaile her Bassio l.
And let me see Maid gainst the Duks returne,
Another tincture set vpon your lookes
Then hereofore; For be assur'd at last
Thou shalt connt, or else incurre my curse:
Aduise her, you Bassiolo.
I, my good Lord;
Gods pittie, what an errant Asse was I,
To entertaine the Princes craftie friendship?
Slood, I halfe suspect, the villaine guld me;
Our Squire I thinke is star'd.
Nay Ladie it is true,
And you must frame your ancie to the Duke,
For I protest I will not be corrupted,
For all the friends and fortunes in the world,
To gull my Lord that trusts me.
O sir, now,
Y'are true too late.
No Ladie, not a whit,
Slood, and you thinke to make an Asse of me,
May chance to rise betimes; I know't, I know.
Out seruile coward, shall a light suspect,
That hath no slendrest proofe of what we do,
Infringe the weighe faith that thou hast sworne,
To thy deare friend the Prince that dotes on thee;
And will in peeces cut thee for thy falshood;
I care not; Ile not hazard my estate,
For any Prince on earth: and Ile disclose
The complot to your father, if you yeeld not
To his obedience.
Doe if thou dar'st,
Euen for thy scrapt vp liuing, and thy life,
Ile tell my father then, how thou didst wooe
To loue the yong Prince; and didst force me too,
To take his Letter; I was well enclin'd,
I will be sworne. before, to loue the Duke,
But thy vile railing at him, made me hate him.
I raile at him?
I marie did you sir,
And said he was a patterne for a Potter,
Fit t'haue his picture stampt on a stone Iugge,
To keepe Ale-knights in memorie of Sobriety.
Sh'as a plaguie memory.
I could haue lou'd him else; nay, I did loue him,
Though I dissembled it, to bring him on,
And I by this time might haue beene a Dutchesse:
And now I thinke on't better: for reuenge,
Ile haue the Duke, and he shall haue thy head,
For thy false wit within it, to his loue.
Now goe and tell my Father, pray be gone.
Why and I will goe.
Goe, for Gods sake goe, are you heere yet?
Wll, now I am resolu'd.
Tis brauely done, farewell: but do you heare sir?
Tae this with you besides; the young Prince keepes
A certaine letter you had writ for me,
(Endearing, and Condoling, and Mature)
And if you should denie things, that I hope
Will stop your ipudent mouth: but goe your waies,
If you can answer all this, why tis well.
Well Lady, if you will assure me here,
You will refraine to meete with the young Prince,
I will say nothing.
Good sir, say your worst,
For I will meete him, and that presently.
Then be content I pray, and leaue me out,
And meete heereafter as you can your selues.
No, no sir, no, tis you must fetch him to me,
And you shal fetch him, or Ile do your arrand.
Swounds what a spight is this, I will resolue
T'endure the worst; tis but my foolish feare,
The plot will be discouerd: O the gods!
Tis the best sport to play with these young dames;
I haue dissembl'd, Mistris, all this while
Haue I not made you in a pretty taking?
O tis most good; thus you may play on me;
You cannot be content to make me loue
A man I hated till you spake for him,
such nchanting speeches, as no friend
Could possily resist: but you must vse
Your villanous wit, to driue me from my wits:
A plague of that bewitching tongue of yours;
Wou'd I had neuer heard your scuruie words.
Pardon deare Dame, Ile make amends ifaith,
Thinke you that Ile play false with my deare Vince
I swore sooner Hybla should want bees,
And Italy bon robes, then I; faith
And so they shall.
Come, you shll meete, and double meete, in spight
O all your foes, and Dkes that dare maintaine them,
A plague of al old doters, I disd aine them:
Sd like a friend; O let me combe the cokscombe.
Heere is the place will doe the deede ifaith;
This Duke will shew thee how youth puts downe age,
I and perhaps how youth does put downe youth.
If I shall see my loue in any sort
Preuented, or abusde, th'abuser dies.
I hope there is no such intent my Liege,
For sad as death should I be to behold it.
You must not be too confident my Lord,
Or in your daughter or in them that guard her.
The Prince is polike, and enuies his Father:
And though t for himselfe, nor any good
Intended to your daughter, yet because
He knowes t'would kill his father, he would seeke her.
Whist▪ whst, they come.
Come, meete me boldly, come,
And let them come from hunting when they dare.
Haz the best spirit.
Spirit? what a plague,
Shall a man feare Capriches? you forsooth
Must haue your loue come t'ee, and when he comes,
Then you grow shamefac'd, and he must not touch you:
But fie, my Father comes, and foe, my Aunt,
O a hearing, ist not thinke you?
Nay, pray thee doe not mocke her gentle friend.
Nay, you are euen as wise a wooer too,
If she turne from you you euen let her turne,
And say; you doe not loue to force a Lady.
T'is too much rudenesse; gosh hat, what's a Lady?
Must she not be touch'd? what. is she copper thinke you?
And will not bide the touch stone? kisse her Vince,
And thou doost loue me, kisse her.
Lady, now
I were too simple if I should not offer.
O God sir, pray away, this man talks idlely.
How shay by that; now by that candle there,
Were I as Vince is, I would handle you
In ruftie tuftie wise, in your right kinde.
O, you haue made him a sweete beagle, ha'y not?
T'is the most true beleeuer in himselfe:
Of all that sect of follie faith's his fault.
So to her Vince, I giue thee leaue my lad,
Sweete were the words my mistris spake, when teares fell from He lies down her eyes. by them.
Thus, as the Lyon lies before his den,
Guarding his whelps, and streakes his carelesse limbs,
And when the Panther, Foxe, or Wolfe comes neere
He neuer daines to rise, to fright them hnce,
But onely puts forth one of his sterne pawes,
And his deare whlps safe, as in a hutch,
So I prsent his person, and keepe mine.
Fox s, goe by I put my terror forth,
Let all the world what they can,
Her bargaine best she makes,
That hath the wit to choose a man,
To pay for that he takes.
Dispatch sweete whelps the bug, the Duke comes strait:
O tis a grae old loer that same Duke,
And chooses Minions rarely, if you marke him.
The noble Medice, that man, that Bobbadilla▪
That foolish knue, that hose and dblet inckard.
Swounds my Lord, rise, lets indure no more.
A little, pry my Lord, for I bleeue
We shall discouer very notable knauey.
Als how I am gre'd and sham'd in this.
Neuer care you Lord brother, theres no harme done.
But tht sweet Creature▪ my good Lords sister,
Madam Cortezza, she, the noblest Dame
That euer any veine of honour bled;
There were a wise now, for my Lord the Due
Had he the grace to choose her, but in eede,
To speke her tru prais, I must vse some sudy.
Now truly brother, I did eer thinke
This man the honestest man that ere you kpt.
So siste, so, because he praises you.
Nay sit, but you shall here him further yet.
Were not her head sometimes a litle light,
And so vnapt for mater of much weight,
She were the fittest, ad the wortest Dame
To leape a window, and to breake her necke,
That euer was.
Gods pitty, arant knae,
I euer thought him a dissembling varlot.
Well, now my hearts be warie, for by this,
I feare the Duke is comming; Ile go watch,
And giue you warning: I commend me ee.
O fine phrase,
And very timely vsde.
What now sweete life, shall we resolue vpon?
We neuer shall inioy each other heere.
Direct you then my Lord, what we shall doe,
For I am at your will, and will indure
With you, the cruellst absence, from the state
We both were borne too, that can be supposde.
That would extreamely greeue me, could my selfe
Onely indure the ill, our hardest fates,
May lay on both of vs; I would not care,
But to behold thy sufferance, I should die.
How can your Lordship wrong my loue so much,
To thinke the more woe I sustaine for yo,
Breedes not the more my comfort? I alas
Haue no meane else, to make my merit euen
In any measure, with your eniment worth.
Now st I exercise my timorous louers,
Like fresh arm'd souldiers, with some false alarms,
To mae them yare and warie of their foe
The boistrous bearded Duke: Ile rush vpon them
With a most hideous cry, the Duke, the Duke, the Duke.
Ha, ha, ha, wo ho, come againe I say,
The Duke's not come ifaith.
Gods precious man,
What did you meane to put vs in this feare?
O sir, to make you looke about the more;
Nay, we must teach you more of this I tell yo:
What, can you be too safe sir? what I say,
Must you be pamperd in your vanities?
Ah, I do domineere and rule the rost.
Was euer such an Ingle? would to God,
(If twere not for our selues) my father saw him.
Minion, you haue your praier, and my curse,
For your good Huswiferie.
What saies your Highnesse?
Can you indure these iniuries any more?
No more, no more, aduise me what is best,
To be the penance of my gracelesse sonne?
My Lord, no meane but death or banishment,
Can be fit penance for him: if you meane
T'inioy the pleasure of your loue your selfe.
Giue him plaine death my Lord, and then y'are sure
Death or his banishment, he shall indure,
For wreake of that ioyes exile I sustaine.
Come, call our Gard, and apprehend him strait.
I haue sme Iewells then my dearest life,
Which with what euer we can get beside,
Shall be our meanes, and we will make escape.
Sblood, the Duke and all come now in earnest;
The Duke, by heauen, the Duke.
Nay, then ifaith
Your ieast is too too stale.
Gods petious,
By these ten bones, and by this hat and heart,
The Duke and all comes, see, we are cast away.
Lay hands vpon them all, pursue, pursue.
Stay thou vngracious girle.
Lord Medice,
Leade you our Guard, and see you appehend
The treacherous boy▪ nor let him scape with life,
Vnlesse he yelde to his externall exile.
T'is princely said my Lord—
And take my Vsher.
Let me goe into exile with my Lord,
I will not liue, if I be left behinde.
Impudent Damzell, wouldst thou follow him?
He is my husband, whom lse should I follow?
Wretch, thou speakest treason to my Lord the Duke.
Yet loue me Lady, and I prdon all.
I haue a husband, and must loue none else.
Disightfull Dame, Ile dis inherit him,
And thy good Father heere shall cast off thee,
And both shall feede on ayre, or staru, and die.
If this be iustice, let it be our doomes:
If free and spotlesse loue in equall yeares,
With honours vnimpaired deserue such ends,
Let vs approue what iustice is in friends.
You shall I sweare: sister, take you her close
Into your chamber, locke her fast alone,
And let her stirre nor speake with any one.
She shall not brother: come Necce, come with me.
Heauen saue my loue, and I will suffer gladly.
Haste Iulio, follow thou my sons pursuit,
And will Lord Medice not to hurt nor touch him,
But either banish him, or bring him backe:
Charge him to vse no violence to his life.
I will my Lord.
O Natue! how alas
Art thou and Reason thy true guide opposde?
More bane thou tak'st, to guide Sense, led amisse,
Then being guided, Reason giues thee blisse.
Now see good Doctor, t'was no frantike fancie,
That made my tongue presage this head should fall
Out of my wounded side the seuenth day;
But an inspired rapture of my minde,
Submitted and conioynde in patience,
To my Creator, in whom I fore-saw
(Like to an Angell) this diuine euent.
So is it plaine, and happily approu'd,
In a right christian president, confirming
What a most sacred medcine Patience is,
That with the high thirst of our soules, cleare fire
Exhausts corpore humour; and all paine,
Casting our flesh off, while we it retaine.
Make some religious vow then my deare Lord,
And keepe it in the proper memorie,
Of so Celestiall and free a grace.
Sweete wife, thou restest my good Angell still,
Suggesting by all meanes, these ghostly counsailes.
Thou weariest not thy husbands patient eares,
With motions for new fashions in attire,
For change of Iewells, pastimes, and nice cates,
Nor studiest eminence, and the higher place
Amongst thy consorts, like all other Dames:
But knowing more worthy obiects appertaine
To euery woman that desires t'inioy
A blessed life in mariage: thou contemn'st
Those common pleasures, and pursu'st the rare,
Vsing thy husband in those vertuous gifts:
For which, thou first didst choose him, and thereby
Cloy'st not with him, but lou'st him endlesly.
In reuerenc of thy motion then, and zeal
To that most soueraigne power, that was my cure.
I make a vow to goe on soote to Rome,
And offer humbly in S. Peters Temple,
This fatall Arrow head: which work, let none iudge
A snperstitious Rite, but a right vse,
Proper to this peculiar instrument,
Which visiblie resignde to memorie,
Through euery eye that sees, will stirre th soule
To Gratitude and Progresse, in the vse
Of my tried patience which in my powers ending,
Would shut th'example out of future liues.
No act is superstitious, that applies
All power to God, deuoting hearts, through eyes.
Spoke with the true tongue of a Nobleman:
But noware all these excitations toyes,
And Hono fas his braine with other ioyes.
I know your true fiend, Prince Vincentio
Will triumph in this excellent effect
Of your late .
O, my deare frds name
Presents my thoughts, with a most mortall danger,
To his right innont life: a monsts fact
Is now effected on him.
Where? or how?
I doe not well those circumstances know,
But am assur'd, the substance is too te.
Come reuerend Doctor, let vs harken out
Where the young Prince remaines, and beare with you
Medcines t'allay danger: if by wounds,
Beare pretious Balsome, or se sgne iuyce;
If by fell poison, some choice Ate,
If by blacke witch, our good sts and prayers
Shall exorcise the diuelish wrath of hell,
Out of his princely bosome.
Where? where? where? where's my Lord vnche, my Lord my vncle?
Here's the ill tydings-bringer; what newes now, with thy vnhappie presen?
O my Lord my Lord Vincentio, is almost kild by my Lord Med.
See Doctor, see, if my prge be true.
And well I know if he haue hurt the Prince,
T'is trecherously done, or with much helpe.
Nay sure he had no helpe, but all the Dukes Guard; and they set vpon him indd; and after he had defended himselfe, dee see? he drew▪ & hauing as good as wounded the Lord Medice almost, he strake a him, and d h, dee marke?
What tale is here? where is this mischiefe done?
At Monks well, my Lord, Ile gde you to him preseny
I doubt it no; fooles are best gdes to ill,
And mischiefes readie way ls open still.
Lead sir I pray.
Quie your selfe, Nece; though your loue be slaine,
You haue another that's woorth two of him.
It is not possible; it cannot be
That heauen should suffer such impi tie.
T is true, I sweare neece.
O most vniust truth▪
Ile cast my selfe downe headlong from this Tower,
And force an inst passge for my soule,
To seeke the wandring spirit of my Lord.
Will you do so Neece? That I hope you will not,
And yet there was a Maid in Saint Marks streete,
For such a matter did so; and her clohes
Flew vp about her so as she had no harme:
And grace of God your clothes may e vp too,
And saue you harmelesse; for your cause and hers
Are ene as like as can be.
I would not sape;
And certainly I thinke the death is easie.
Ot'is the eafiest death that euer was,
Looke Ne, it is so farre hence to the ground.
You shoulde bee quite dead, long before you felt it.
Yet do not leape Ne.
I will kill my selfe
With running on some sworde; or drinke strong poison;
Which dh is eest I would faine endure.
Sure Cleopatra was of the same de,
And did so; she was honord euer since,
Yet do not you so Neece.
Wretch that I am; my heart is softe and faint;
And trembles at the veri hought of death,
Though thoughts ten-folde more greuous do torment it;
Ile fle death by degrees; and first deforme
This my accursed face with vglie wounds,
That was the first cause of my deare loues death.
That were a cruell deed; yet Adelasia;
In Pettis Pallace of Petit pasure,
For all the worlde, with such a knife as this
Cut off her cheeks, and nose, and was commended
More then all Dames that kept their faces whole;
O do not cut it.
Fie on my faint hear,
It will not giue my hand the wished strength;
Beholde the iust plague of a sensuall life,
That to preserue it selfe in Reasons spight,
And shunne deaths horror, feels it ten times more.
Vnworthy women, why doe men adore
Our fading Beauties, when thir worthiest liues,
Being lost for vs, we dare not die for them?
Hence haplesse Ornaments that adorn'd this head:
Disorder euer these entring carles
And leaue my beautie like a wildernesse,
That neuer mans moe may dare t'inuade.
Ile tell you Nce; and yet I will not tell you,
A thing that I desire to haue you doe.
But I will tell you onely what you might doe,
Cause I would pleasure you in all I cud.
I haue an Ointment hre, which we Dames vse,
To take off hair hen it does growe too lowe▪
Vpon our foreheads, and that for a neede,
If you should rub it hard vpon your face,
Would blister it, and make it looke most vildely.
O Ge me that Aunt.
Giue it you virg? that were well indeede:
Shall I be thought to tempt you to such matters?
None (of my faith) shall know it: gentle Aunt,
Bestow it on me, and Ile euer loue you.
Gods pitty, but you shall not spoile your face.
I will not then indeede.
Why then Neece take it:
But you shall sweare you will not.
No, I swere.
What, doe you force it from me? Gods my deare,
Will you mis-vse y ur face so? what, all ouer?
Nay, if you be so desp'rate, Ile be gone—
▪ plesse bautie, turne the vgliest face
Th euer Aethiop, or affrightfull fiend
Shew'd in th'amaz'd eye of prophan'd light:
See pretious Loue, if thou be it in ayre,
And canst breake darknesse, and the strongest Towres,
With thy dissolued intellectuall powers,
See a woe tormen sffered for thy death,
Then ifit had extended his blacke force,
In seuen-fold horror to my hated life.
Smart pretious ointment. smart. and to my braine
Sweate thy enunom'd furie, make my eyes
Burne with thy sulphre▪ like the lakes of hell,
That feare of me may sher him to dust,
That eate his owne childe with the jawes of lust—
I wonder how farre they pursu'd my Son,
That no returne of him or them appears,
I feare some haplesse accident is chanc'd,
That makes the newes so loath to pierce mine eares.
High heauen vouchsafe no such effct succeede
Those wretched caes that from my house flow,
But that in helesse loue all acts may end.
What shall I do? Ala I cannot rule
My desprate Neece, all her sweete face is spoylde,
And I dare keepe her prisoner no more:
See, see, she comes frantike and all vndrest.
Tyrant! behod how thou hast vsde thy loue,
See, theefe to Nure, thou hast kil'd and rob'd,
Kil'd what my selfe kill'd, rob'd what makes thee poore▪
Beautie (a Louers treasure) thou hast lost▪
Where none can find it; all a poore Maides dow
Thou hast forc'd from me: all my ioy and hope.
No man will loue me more; all Dames excell me,
This ougly thing is now no more a face,
Nor any vile forme in all Earth resembled,
But thy fowle tyrannie; for which all the paines
Two faithfull Louers feele, that thus are parted,
All ioyes they might haue felt, turne all to paines;
All a yong virgin thinks she does endure,
To loose her loue and beautie; on thy heart
Be heapt and prest downe till thy soule depart.
Haste Liege, your sonne is daungerously hurt.
Lord contemning your commaund,
By me deliuered, as your Highnesse will'd,
Set on him with your Guard; who rooke him downe;
And thn the coward Lord, with mortall wounds,
And insolencie, plow'd vp his soft breast;
Which barbarous fct in part is laid on you,
For first enioyning it, and owle exclaimes
In pittie of your sonne, your subiects breathe
Gainst your vnnaturall furie; amongst whom
The good Lord Strozza desp'rately raues,
And vengeance for his friends iniustice craues.
See where he comes burning in zeale of friendship.
Where is the tyrant? let me strie his eyes
Into his braine, with horror of an obiect.
See Pagan Nero; see how thou hast ri
Thy bosome; rooted vp that flowre,
From whence thy now spent life should spring anew,
And in him kild (that would haue bred thee fresh)
Thy mother and thy father.
Good friend cease.
What hag with child of Monster, would haue nurst
Such a prodigous longing? But a father
Would rather eate the brawne out of his armes
Then glut the mad worme of his wilde desires
With his deare issues entrailes.
Honourd friend;
He is my father, and he is my Prince,
In both whose rights he ma commaund my life.
What is a father? urne his entrailes gulfs
To swallow children, whn they haue begot them?
And whats a Prince? Had all beene vertuous men,
There neuer had beene Prince vpon the earth,
And so no subiect; all men had beene Princes:
A vertuous an is subiect to o Prince,
But to his soule and honour; which are lawes,
That carrie Fire and Sword within themselues
Neuer corrupted neuer out of rule;
What is there in a Prince? That his least lute
Are valued at the liues of other men,
When common faults in him should prodigies be,
And his grosse dotage rther then sooth'd.
How thicke and my plagues descend▪
Not giuing m mazde powres a time to speake:
Poure moe rebuke vpon me worthie Lord,
For I haue guilt and patience for them all:
Yet know, deare sonne, I did forbid thy harme:
This Gentleman can witnes, whom I sent
With all commnd of haste to terdict
This forward man in mischiefe; not to touch thee:
Did I not Iuio? vtter nought but truth.
All your guard heard, my Lord, I gaue your charge,
With lowd and violent erations.
After all which, Lord Medice cowardly hurt him.
The Guara. He did my Princely Lord.
Beleeue then sonne,
And know me pierst as deeply with thy wounds:
And pardon vertuous Ladie that haue lost
The dearest treasure proper to your sexe.
Ay me, it seemes by my vnhappie meanes!
O would to God, I could with present cure
Of these vnnaturall wounds; and moning right
Of this abused beautie, ioyne you both,
(As last I left you) in eternall nuptals.
My Lord, I know the malice of this man,
Not your vnkinde consent hath vsde vs thus.
And since I make no doubt I shall suruiue
These fatall dangers; and your grace is pleasde,
To giue free course to my vnwounded loue;
T'is not this outward beauties ruthfull losse,
Can any thought discourage my desires:
And therefore, deare life, doe not wrong me so,
To thinke my loue the shadow of your beautie,
I wooe your vertues, which as I am sure
No accident can alter or empaire;
So, be you certaine nought can change my loue.
I know your honourable minde my Lord,
And will not do it that vnworthie wrong,
To let it spend her forces in contending
(Spite of your sence) to loue me thus deformed:
Loue must haue outward obiects to delight him,
Else his content will be too graue and sowre.
It is inough for me my Lord, you loue,
And that my beauties sacrifice redeemde
My sad feare of your slaughter. You first lou'd me
Closely for beautie; which being with'red thus,
Your loue must fade; when the most needfull rights
Of Fate, and Nature, haue dissolu'd your life,
And that your loue must needs be all in soule,
Then will we meete againe: and then (deare Loue)
Loue me againe; for then will beautie be
Of no respect with loues eternitie.
Nor is it now; I wooed your beautie first
But as a louer: now as a deare husband,
That title and your vertues binde me euer.
Als, that title is of little force
To stirre vp mens affectious: when wiues want
Outward excitements, husbands loues grow skant.
Assist me Heauen, and Art, giue me your Maske,
Open thou little store-house of great Nature,
Vse an Elixar drawne through seuen yeares fire,
That like Medeas Cauldron, can repaire
The vgliest losse of liuing temp'rature:
And for this princely paire of vertuous Turtles,
Be lauish of thy pretious influence
Lady, t'attone your honourable strife,
And take all let from your loues tender eyes▪
Let me for euer hide this staine of Beauty,
With this recureful Maske; heere be it fix'd
With painelesse operation; of it selfe,
(Your beauty hauing brook'd three daies eclips)
Like a dissolued clowd it shall fall off,
And your faire lookes regaine their freshest raies:
So shall your Princely friend, (if heauen consent)
In twice your sufferd date renue recure,
Let me then haue the honor to conioyne
Your hands, conformed to your constant hearts.
Graue Beuenius, honorable Doctor,
On whose most soueraigne Aesculapian hand,
Fame with her richest miracles attends,
Be fortunate, as euer heeretofore,
That we may qite thee both with gold and honour,
And by thy happy meanes, haue powre to make
My Sonne, and his much iniur'd loue amends,
Whose well proportion'd choice we now applaud,
And blesse all those that euer further'd it.
Where is your discreete Vsher my good Lord,
The speciall furtherer of this eqall match?
Brought after by a couple of your Guard.
Let him be fetch'd, that we may doe him grace.
Ile fetch him my Lord: away, you must not go: O here
He comes; O master Vsher, I am orie for you, you must presently be chopt in peeces.
Wo to that wicked Prince that ere I saw him.
Come, come, I gull you master Vsher, you are like to be the Dukes Minion man; dee thinke I would haue beene seene in your companie, and you had bene out of fauour? Here's my friend maister Vsher, my Lord.
Giue me your hand friend, pardon vs I pray,
We much haue wrong'd your worth, as one that knew the fitnesse of this match aboue our selues.
Sir, I did all thing for the best, I sweare,
And you must thinke I would not haue beene gul'd,
I know what's fit sir; as I hope you know now:
Sweete Vince, how fa'st thou, be of honourd cheere.
Vince does he call him? O Foole, dost thou call
The Prince Vince, like his equall?
O my Lod, Ahlas
You know not what haz past twixt vs two;
Here in thy bosome I will e sweete Vince,
And die if thou die, I protest by heauen.
I know not what this meanes.
Nor I my Lord:
But sure he saw the fitnes of the match,
With freer and more noble cies then we.
Why I sw that as well as he my Lord; I knew t'was a foolish match betwixt you two; did no you thinke so my Lord Vincentio? Lord vncle, did not I say at fist of the Duke▪ will his Antiquitie neuer leaue his Imqutie?
Go to, too much of this; but aske this Lord,
If he did like it.
Who, my Lord Medice?
Lord Stinkard Man, his name is▪ him Lord Stinkard▪ did you like the match? say.
My Lord Stinkar, did you like the match betwixt the Duke, and my Ladie Margaret?
Sicophant, I will haue thy lfe.
Vnworthie Lod, put vp: hirst'st ou more blood?
Ty life is tt'st to be call'd in question,
For thy most murthrous cowardise on my sonne▪
Thy forwardnesse to euery cruelty
Calls thy pretended Noblesse in suspect.
Noblesse my Lord? set by your princely fauour,
That gaue the lustre to his painted state,
Who euer view'd him but with deepe contempt,
As reading vilenesse in his very lookes?
And if he proue not sonne of some base drudge,
Trim'd vp by Fortune, being dispos'd to ieast
And dally with your state, then that good Angell,
That by diuine relation spake in me,
Fore-telling these foule dangers to your sonne▪
And without notice brought this reuerend man
To rescue him from death: now failes my tongue,
And Ile confesse, I doe him open wrong.
And so thou doost; and I returne all note
Of infamy or basenesse on thy throte:
Damne me my Lord, if I be not a Lord.
My Liege, with all desert, euen now you said
His life was duely forfet, for the death
Which in these brbarous wounds he sought your sonne;
Vouchsafe me then his life, in my friends right,
For many waies I know he merits death;
Which, (if you grant) will instantly appeare,
And that I feele with some rare miracle.
His life is thine Lord Strozza, Giue him death.
What my Lord,
Will your grace cast away an innocent life?
Villaine thou liest, thou guiltie art of death
A hundred waies, which now Ile execute.
Recall your word my Lord.
Not for the world.
O my deare Liege, but that my spirit prophetike
Hath inward feeling of such sinnes in hi,
As aske the forfait of his life and soule,
I would, before I tooke his life, giue leaue
To his confession, and his penitence:
O, he would tell you most notorious wonder,
Of his most impious state; but life and soule
Must suffer for it in him, and my hand
Forbidden is from heauen to let him liue,
Till by confession he may haue forg uenesse.
Die therefore monster.
O be not so vncharitable sweete friend,
Let him confesse his sinnes, and aske heauen pardon.
He must not Princely friend, it is heauens iustice
To plague his life and soule, and heer's heauens iustice.
O saue my life my Lord.
Hold good Lord Strozza,
Let him confesse the sinnes that heauen hath told you,
And aske forgiuenesse.
Let me good my Lord,
And Ile confesse what you accuse me of;
Wonders indeede, and full of damn'd deserts.
I know it, and I must not let thee liue
To aske forgiuenesse.
But you shall my Lord,
Or I will take his life out of your hand.
A little then I am content my Liege:
Is thy name Medice?
No my Noble Lord,
My true name is Mendice.
Mendice? see,
At first a Mighty scandall done to Honour.
Of what countrie art thou?
Of no Country, I,
But borne vpon the Ses, my mother passing
Twixt Zat and Uenice.
Where wert thou christned?
I was neuer christned,
But being brought vp with beggars▪ call'd Mendice.
Strange, and vnspeakeable.
How cam'st thou then
To beare that port thou didst, entring this Court?
My lord when I was young, being able limb'd,
A Captaine of the Gipsies entertain'd me,
And many yeares I liu'd a loose life with them:
At last I was so fauor'd, that they made me
The King of Gipsies; and being told my fortune
By an old Sorceresse, that I should be great
In some great Princes loue, I tooke the treasure
Which all our company of Gipsies had
In many yeares, by seuerall stealths collected,
And leaing them in warres, I liu'd abroad,
With no lesse shew then now: and my last wrong
I did to Noblesse, was in this high Court.
Neuer was heard so strange a counterfet.
Didst thou not cause me to be shot in hunting?
I did my Lord, for which, fo heauens loue pardon.
Now let him liue my Lord, his bloods least drop
Would staine your Court, more then the Sea could cleanse:
His soule's too foule to expiate with death.
Hence then, be euer banish'd from my rule▪
And liue a monster, loath'd of all the world.
Ile get boyes and baite him out a'th Court my Lord.
Doe so I pray thee, rid me of his sight.
Come on my Lord Stinckerd, Ile play Fox, Fox, coe out of thy hole with you ifaith.
Ile runne and hide me from the sight of heauen.
Fox, Fox, goe out of thy hole; a two leg'd Fox,
A two leg'd Fox.
Neuer was such an accident disclosde.
Let vs forget it honourable friends,
And satisfie all wrongs with my sonnes right,
In solemne mariage of his loue and him.
I humbly thanke your Highnesse honor'd Doctor▪
The Balsome you infusde into my wounds,
Hath easde me much, and giuen me sodaine strength
Enough t'assure all danger is exempt,
That any way may let the generall ioy,
My Princely Father speakes of in our nuptialls.
Which my deere Sonne shall with thy full rere
Be celebrate in greater Maiesty,
Than euer grac'd our greatest Ancestrie.
Then take thy loue, which heauen with all ioyes blee,
And make yee both mirrors of happinesse.