HOW now gallants, what iſt? what iſt?
The Ile of Guls.
The Ile of Guls, what ſhould that be?
A play by the name, but come ſhals quarter our ſelues?
If ſome had had the wit to doe ſo in time, they might haue ſau'd the hang-man a labour. But come boy, furniſh us with ſtooles.
Pardon mee ſir, my office is to ſpeake a Prologue, not to provide you ſtooles.
And you were the Epilogue to ſir—
Fie be not incivill: doſt heare youth, prethee what's he that diſcovered your new found Land, the Ile of Guls? what is he?
A meere ſtranger ſir.
A ſtranger? the better welcome: comes hee Eaſt-ward, Weſt-ward, or North-ward hoe?
None of the three wayes I aſſure you.
Prethee where is he?
Not on his knees in a comer to Apollo, praying that his play may hold in a good hand at Paſſage, nor on the ſtage amongſt gallants, preparing a beſpoke Plaudite; but cloſe in his ſtudy writing hard, to get him a handſome ſuite againſt Summer.
And where ſit his friends? hath he not a prepared company of gallants, to applaud his jeſts, and grace out his play?
None I proteſt▪ Do Poets uſe to beſpeake their Auditory?
The beſt in grace doe, and but for that, ſome that I know, had never had their grace in Poetry till this day.
Then muſt our Author looké for a certaine diſgrace, for he is altogether unfurniſht of ſuch a friendly audience.
Then he muſt lay his triall upon God and good wits But why doth he call his play The Ile of Gulls? it begets much expectation.
Not out of any dogged diſpoſition, nor that it figures any certaine ſtate, or private government: farre bee that ſuppoſition from the thought of any indifferent Auditor: and the argument being a little ſtring or ivolet, drawen from the full ſtraine of the right worthy Gentleman Sir Phillip Sydnies well knowne Arcadia, confirmes it: only a Duke, to make triall of certaine experiments, retires with his retinue into a nameleſſe deſert. Now as well for faſhion ſake, as that all thoſe which haue to doe in that deſert, are guld in the reach of their hopes; therefore he cals it, (and as he preſumes, not improperly) The Ile of Gulls.
Out a queſtion he hath promiſed thee ſome fee, thou pleadeſt ſo hard for him, but and he be a right Poet he will never performe it. But what method obſerues he in his Play, iſt any thing Criticall? Are Lawyers fees, and Citizens wiues laid open in it? I loue to heare vice anatomizd, and abuſe let blood in the maſter vaine, is there any great mans life charactred in't?
None I proteſt ſir, only in the perſon of Dametas, he expreſſes to the life the monſtrous and deformed ſhape of vice, aſwell to beget a loathing of abuſe, as that his villany may giue the greater luſter to the vertuous diſpoſitions of true-borne gentility.
All that's nothing to mee, and there bee not Worme-wood water and Copperes in't, Ile not like it, ſhould Apollo write it, and Roſius himſelfe act it.
Fie upon thee, thou art too too criticall: is there any good baudry in't, jeſts of an ell deepe, and a fathome broad, good cuckolding, may a couple of young-ſetters-up learne to doe well in't? Giue me a Scene of venery, that will make a mans ſpirits ſtand on their tiptoes, and die his blood in a deepe ſcarlet, like your Ovids Ars Amandi, there flowes the true Spring-head of Poetry, and the very Chriſtall fount of Parnaſſus.
Chaſt eares would never endure it fir.
Chaſt eares? now deafeneſſe light upon them, what ſhould chaſt eares doe at a play?
Tis ſtrange now, I am of neither a both your opinions, I like neither rayling nor baudry: no, giue me a ſtately pend hiſtorie, as thus: The rugged winds, with rude and ragged ruffes, &c.
Fie upon't, more fuſtian; I had rather heare two good baudy jeſts, then a whole play of ſuch teare-cat thunder-claps.
Alas Gentlemen, bow iſt poſſible to content you? you wil haue rayling, and invectiues, which our Author neither dares, nor affects: you baudy and ſcurrill jeſts, which neither becomes his modeſty to write, nor the eare of a generous Auditory to heare: you muſt haue ſwelling compariſons, and umaſt Epithites, which are as fit for the body of a Comedy▪ as Herles ſhooe for the foote of a Pigmey: yet all theſe we muſt haue, and all in one play, or tis already condemn'd to the hell of eternall diſgrace.
Looke to't, if there be not gall in't, it ſhall not paſſe.
If it be not baudy, tis impoſſible to paſſe:
If it bee both criticall and baudy, if it bee not high written, both your Poet and the houſe too, looſe a friend of me.
Nay I beſeech you ſir, if you be his friend, ſtand ſo to him ſtill, for he hath too many enemies already, in whoſe judgements, he and his labours ſtand excommunicate, as though unworthy to preſent themſelues in this aſſembly.
Enemies? nays foote then there's ſome hope in his play, for Envie never workes but againſt deſert and merit. If he be envied theres ſome worth in him, and ile ſee out his play for that onely.
Faith and Ile ſee an act or two out, but I tell you afore-hand I cannot ſee it out.
Not ſee it out? your reaſon.
Fore God I lay in bed till paſt three a clock, ſlept out my dinner, and my ſtomacke will toule to ſupper afore fiue, therefore you muſt pardon me.
Either ſee it all or none; for tis growen into a cuſtome at playes, if any one riſe (eſpecially of any faſhionable ſort) about what ſerious buſines ſoever, the reſt thinking it in diſlike of the play, though he never thinks it, cry mew, by eſus vilde; and leaue the poore heartleſſe children to ſpeake their Epilogue to the empty ſeats.
Why doeſt thinke thy audience like a flock of ſheepe, that one cannot leape over a hedge, but all the reſt will follow? they haue more of reaſon in them then ſo.
Well, Ile ſit out the play, an't bee but to avoyd that ſheepiſh imputation, but ſee it be baudy, or by this light I and all my friends will hiſſe.
You ſhould not deale gentleman-like with us els.
THe miſery that waytes upon the pen
Of the beſt Writers, iudge it Gentlemen,
Let them expreſſe the very ſoule of wit,
And want Opinions voice to count'nance it,
Tis like the idle buzzing of a Flie,
Heard, not regarded: wretched Poetry!
If he write mirth, tis ribaldry, and meane,
Scorn'd of chaſt eares: If he compoſe a Sceane
Of high writ Poeſie, fitting a true ſtage,
Tis counted ſuſtian: If Poetickerage
Strike at abuſe, or op the veine of ſinne,
Hee's ſtraight inform'd againſt for libelling.
Neither quicke mirth, invective, nor high ſtate
Can content all, ſuch is the boundleſſe hate
Of a confuſed Audience: Then we
That ſcarcely know the rules of Poeſie
Cannot ſcape check. Yet this our comfort is,
The wiſe will ſmile to heare th'impartiall hiſſe.
We neither bragge, nor tremble, faint nor intreat,
Our merits nothing, yet our hopes are great,
Yet this our Author bad me boldly ſpeake,
His play ſhall paſſe, let Envie ſwell and breake,
Detraction he ſcornes, honours the beſt,
Tanti for hate; thus low to all the reſt.
VVElcome gallants, welcome honor'd bloods; the reaſon that we haue uncloth'd us of our princely government in Arcadia, and haue to doe with this private retirement here in this deſert Ile, you ſhall find in that ſhedule, only thus much for publicke ſatisfaction: Tis not ſtrange to you, that the choiſeſt treaſure Nature indow'd us with, is min'd up in the veines of my two daughters: how much their quiet, and the ſmooth ſtreame of our government in Arcadia, was troubled by the impetuous concourſe of untruely ſuters, is familiar with your knowledge; this to avoid, I haue for my Image there in my abſence appointed my brother, and undertooke this private retirement.
Why my Lord, are you ſo covetous of your daughters beauties, that their perfections ſhall bee a meanes to hinder their preferment?
Rather to further it faire Queene: they are the only pearles of our age, and to ſee them wel ſet in honourable and well-befitting Marriage, is our wiſhes happineſſe.
To which effect we haue ſent a generall challenge
To all the youthfull bloods of Affrica,
That whoſoever (borne of princely ſtem)
Dares foote the boſome of this deſert Ile,
(The ſtage where Ile performe this lovers prize)
And by his wit and actiue pollicie,
Wooe, win, intice, or any way defeate
Me of my charge, my daughters of their hearts,
Shall with their loues weare my imperiall crowne
Wreath of their conqueſt.
A prize, a prize, rare worke for Fencers.
What coward would not venter a crackt crowne for ſuch a bootie?
To that intent our Iland is fenc't in
By ſea and land, and at each corner built
A Caſtle for defence, which like great men,
Doe over-looke Arcadia: over which,
Wee haue appointed Captaines. More to deſire,
Is more then we are willing to diſcover.
Well then ſiſter, I ſee we muſt to hap-hazard for husbands.
God ſend me one with a good face and I care not.
Loue an't be thy will, ſend me one with a faire table in his forehead, like Time.
Nay, and his face be good, let me alone to tricke his forehead, a countrey-gentlewoman taught me how: But father I wonder how you dare undertake ſuch a peremptory challenge againſt all commers, conſidering you haue beene ſo long troubled with Ague.
An ague? what ague?
Why your quotidian, Dametas the Court ſurfet, hee that dwels in your eye, like a diſeaſe in your blood.
And the Preſence were not exceeding empty-ſtomackt, it would never diſgeſt ſuch Almes-basket-ſcraps, the very fall and garbidge of gentry; fie upon him, hee becomes the great chamber worſe then a Gentleman-uſher with wry legges.
He is the moſt miſhapen ſute of gentility that ever the Court wore.
Had hee not beene of my fathers owne making, I ſhould haue condemned his taylor for an exceeding botcher.
If you retaine the loue of children, or the dutie of ſubjects, expreſſe it in your obedience, we know Dametas loues us▪
As Captaines and Courtiers doe old widdowes, for profit and preferment.
In ſigne whereof wee make him.
Nay, you haue beſtowed too much of the making of him up already.
The very making of him up, has ſtood you in more then the whole outſide's worth.
In my free thoughts you wrong him, therefore to expreſſe our loue, aud to giue the world publicke note of his loyaltie, we create him your Gardian.
How father, my Gardian?
I minion, yours.
Doe you heare father, bid him beſpeake ſpectacles, for my fingers haue vowed to haue a blind match with his eyes.
Well ſaid Haggart, Ile make your proud heart ſtoope to the lure of obedience. But come, by this time our challenge is publiſht, and our gallants wits ſweating in the field of Invention, and it behoues us not to reſt unexerciſed.
So to our lodge, in the meane time be it knowne,
Our breath has power to raiſe, or caſt men downe.
Now Captaine Obſervation, times bawd, thou that haſt kept the Ages doore, whilſt up-ſtart baſeneſſe crept into the bed of greatneſſe, what doeſt thou thinke of this change?
That it pleas'd the Duke, and becomes not ſubjects to examine his actions.
Thats no part of my meaning, yet would I gladly bee better inſtructed why the Duke broke up his Court in Arcadia, and removed it into this Iland.
I am not Secretary to his thoughts, but the generall rumour is, that out of the freeneſſe of his ſpirit, he hath ſent a challenge to all his neighbour Princes, that whoſoever (within a twelue moneth) can defeate him of his daughters, ſhall with their loues enioy his Dukedome, the garland propos'd for the victors.
Your words throw ſenſe into me, and thats the cauſe the Iland is ſo ſurely guarded with Watch-towers, over which our ſelues and other Captaines haue the charge.
And to the end that not affection, but deſert may proue victor, are the two Ladies ſo narrowly obſerved, the one never out a the eye of her Father, the other continually in the lodge of Dametas, the Dukes chiefe director.
If inquiſitiueneſſe be not too bold a gueſt, what do you thinke of Dametas?
As of a little hillock, made great with others ruines.
Your compariſon holds, for by report, his avarice has unmade many to make him up.
How did he firſt ſtumble on the Princes favour?
As ſome doe upon offices, by fortune and flattery, or as truth ſayes, the Prince having one day loſt his way, wandring in the woods, found this Dametas, affected his diſcourſe, tooke him along to the Court, and like great men in loue with their owne doings, countenanc't his defects, gaue him offices, titles, and all the additions that goe to the making up of a man worſhipfull.
I cannot commend the Duke for raiſing him, nor yet praiſe him, that hee proportions not his carriage anſwerable to his fortunes.
Your thoughts and mine are twinnes in that: but I heare the warning bell, ſome ſtrangers are arrived.
Lets to our office then, and conduct them to Dametas, whoſe cuſtome is to ſpit and hem, whilſt his Scribe Major takes their Examinations.
Manaſſes, how doeſt like my play at Tennis?
You play well, but you loſe ſtill.
Pollicie Manaſſes, pollicie; for when any man upbraides me with my gettings at Court, I may ſweare truly, I haue loſt more then I haue got by't.
By the Tennis-court I thinke you haue.
If by any Court, tis enough to ſaue mine oath. But what doe our ſpruce-witted gallants ſay of my bountie?
Faith ſir, according to the proportion of it, little or nothing, they ſay tis a banckrout, and dares not ſhew his head.
Then let em leaue jeſting at me, though it pleaſe the Duke for ſome few good parts that hee ſees in me, to make me his familiar, I ſcorne to be publike, or every Courtiers companion: but who comes heere?
The Captaines of the watch-towers? what newes with you?
A couple of petitioners, ant like your worſhip.
Had I beſt take their Petitions, Manaſſes?
O in any caſe, though you never peruſe em, tis the onely courſe in requeſt.
Fellowes, deliver your petitions to my Scribe Major, and doſt heare? put em up Manaſſes, they may be wrongs to us.
And they bee, I hope they be not the firſt wrongs I haue put up for your worſhip.
That fellowes pocket is like a Tailors hell, it eats up part of every mans due: tis an Executioner, and makes away more innocent petitions in one yeere, then a red-headed hangman cuts ropes in an age.
Now, what are you ſirra?
A poore ſouldier, ant like your Worſhip.
Poore ſouldiers doe not like my vvorſhip, they are bad members.
Then if they had a woman to their Iudge, they ſhould be ſure to be cut off, for they cannot indure bad members in a Common-wealth.
What are you?
A poore ſcholler, ant like your Worſhip.
Poore ſchollers do not like our worſhip neither, they raile againſt rich Cormorants, they are bad members too.
Cut them off both ſir, and make the land an Eunuch.
Ile take order with em I warrant thee; and I may haue my will, ile neither ha poore ſcholler nor ſouldier about the Court.
The next way to make it the Ile of fooles.
Whats he talks of fooles there? why how now ſir, know you to whom you ſpeake?
Cry your worſhip mercy, I had forgot your authority.
But I remember well enough I warrant you; I command you in my name and the Dukes, to attend your guard, and you regard me no more then a careleſſe Lawyer doth an undone clyent, but ile informe: the Duke ſhall know, out, packe.
Command your ſlaues ſir, we are gentlemen.
Why ſo I hope are we ſir, and of the beſt and laſt edition, of the Dukes owne making.
Cry your authoritie mercy, will you diſcharge us of theſe paſſengers?
You are diſcharg'd, about your buſineſſe.
Bad fate, that wrong ſhould ſet his foot on right, And true borne Eagles ſtoope to this baſe Kite.
What an excellent trade it is to be an officer maker, ile haue more officers, and one ſhalbe to keepe ſchollers and ſouldiers out of the Court, for they dare not come in the great Chamber already, for want of good clothes. But gods me Manaſſes, go tell the Duke I muſt ſpeake with him.
Preſently ſir, Ile goe fetch the head to giue the foot a poſſet: and my maſter had wit to his villanie, he would make an excellent diſh for the hang-man.
Right vvorſhipfull.
I ſir, I know my place is vvorſhipfull; I tell thee Knaue, I could hang thee by my pattent, if it were granted once, ile tell thee how it runs, it allowes me 24. knaues, 6 knights, 10. fooles, 13. fellons, and 14. traytors by the yeare, take them how, why, when, and where I pleaſe.
I doe not thinke the Duke will ever grant it.
Why not grant it? why ſhould you thinke hee will not grant it? Such another word and ile ſend you to Limbo inſtantly.
We thanke you good Dametas. Diſcover themſelues.
I hope you'l take reaſonable baile for our forth comming.
The caſe is alter'd with you ſince you came out of Arcadia.
My honorable friends, Iulio and Aminter, my ſelfe and the beſt abilitie of my power, lies at your ſervice.
You ſee how confidently wee preſume upon your Letters promiſe, in furthering us to attaine the lovers prize.
The Dukes daughters are your owne, and in a word thus ſhall you attaine them, ſome 3 dayes hence I will appoint a hunting, to which I will invite the Duke & both his daughters: in this hunt will I upon ſome ſudden occaſion divide the traine, and having ſingled out the two Does, I hope you haue wit enough to ſtrike.
To ſtrike, how meane you?
As headſmen doe, off with their maiden-heads, or if the Duke offer reſiſtance, off with his crowne too.
That were violence, and cleane oppoſite to the intent of the challenge.
Come yee are ſhallow, to't vi & armis, to't, Ile bee your ſecond, thinke of the Crowne, haue my Letters travaild for you, my wit wrought for you, and my invention ſweat for you, to poſſeſſe you of your loues, and ſeate you in the Dukedome, and come you now with tis violence, and againſt the intent of the challenge? I am aſhamed to heare you.
Nay Dametas, and your reſolution bee ſo forward, ours ſhall over-take you, wee doubted leaſt the preferments your Lord hath heapt upon you, had ſmothered your affection to usward.
That was the father that begot the doubt in us, you will appoint the hunt.
Sever the Duke, divide the traine, and then—
We haue your meaning.
Put it in execution then, but firſt entertaine ſome new diſguiſe, as at our next meeting Ile informe you. Adew, I ſhall thinke long till I ſee you againe.
As a Lawyer doth for his Clyent for a ſecond fee. Here's no Iudas?
Yes, and a damn'd one too, for he would betray and ſell his Maſter.
Tis common in ſuch baſe fellowes, ſuch Court-ſpiders, that weaue their webs of flattery in the eares of greatneſſe, if they can once entangle them in their quaint-treachery, they poyſon them ſtraight.
They are like unneceſſary wormes, whom the ſun of greatneſſe creates of the groſſe and ſlimy multitude, as ſoone as they recover ſtrength, they eate into the credite of true borne gentry, undermine and worke out the true nobilitie, to inroote and eſtabliſh themſelues.
And in the end, like Eſops ſtaru'd ſnake, having lapt the ſweet milk of greatneſſe, made themſelues ſtrong in authority and friends, they turne their ſtings of envie into their preſervers boſome.
The example liues in this Dametas, who notwithſtanding the Duke hath raiſd him to that height that he lookes equall with himſelfe, yet for the baſe hope of incertaine government, he offers him to ſale; but let his treaſon liue to the laſt minute.
For my part Ile make that uſe of him that Phyſicians doe of poyſon, uſe as much of him as ſerues for mine honeſt intent, and caſt downe the reſt, as unfit for any neceſſary imployment.
Let our carriage in this attempt put on no ſhew of violence, either to the Duke, or his daughters.
And let our diſcourſe goe ſo ſmoothly apparelled, that it mooue not the patience of the moſt tender eare.
About it then, though his intent be baſe,
Our enterpriſe ſhall weare a noble face.
Arcadia, thou heaven, within whoſe ſpheare
The ſtarre that guides my motion is fixt,
I court thy gracious boſome with a kiſſe
For this admittance: in thine amorous armes,
Faire Violetta, fairer then the flower
That chriſtned her, and grac't her with that name,
Do's play the wanton:
Onely her Father like a covetous churle,
Owner of that vnvalewed Diamond,
Hath made this deſart Ile th'unwilling cheſt
In which he lockes her. But the faire advantage
Of this large Challenge, and my ſtarres to friend,
Ayded by this diſguiſe, I ſhall breake ope
His yron Casket, and inlarge my hope.
This way ſhe went ſir, this way.
But I ſay this way, I would thou ſhouldſt know, we old Courtiers can hunt a Cony, and put her to the ſqueak, and make her crie out like a yong married wife of the firſt night.
For more helpe, as ſome of them haue done: But there ſhe is.
Ile upon her preſently: doſt heare me ſirra? thou veſſell of infirmitie, woman, and by thy out-ſide little better then one of the wicked, come hither and ſhew thy ſelfe before us, ſhew thy ſelfe before Dametas.
Dametas? Liſander then diſſemble,
For hee's the man muſt worke thy entrance.
What art thou? ſpeake.
My mother is the Queene of Amazons,
My ſelfe a Virgin, married unto Armes,
And bold atchieuements, who haue pac'd the world
In queſt of fayre Antioſte my ſiſter:
And turning homeward, the unconſtant winds,
And wrathfull Neptune caſt me on this ſhore.
And what's your buſineſſe now you are landed?
My buſineſſe is in private with the Duke.
The Duke is buſie, and ſhall ſpeake with no body.
I beſeech you ſir.
Tis no beſeeching matter I aſſure you.
No, never beſeech for the matter, for except you could beſeech with the tongue of Angels, tis to no purpoſe with him.
Tis ſtrange, I haue heard thy maſter is a very good man where hee takes.
True, where he takes he is, but he takes nothing of you, and therefore looke for no kindneſſe from him.
Good, and doſt thou take after thy Maſter?
No Madam, I take commonly afore my Maſter, for where he takes, he takes all, and leaues nothing for me to take.
Oh, I feele your meaning.
Let my maſter haue ſome feeling of yours, and heele preferre your ſuit.
Tis not the Dukes pleaſure Petitioners ſhould buy their acceſſe.
All's one, tis my maſters pleaſure, and uſuall faſhion.
And I muſt maintaine the faſhion. Worſhipfull Dametas, my late ſhipwrack as you ſee, hath made a defeat both of my friends and treaſure; notwithſtanding, Fortune hath referv'd me one jewell, which if I might requeſt your Worſhip in loue to accept, and be a meanes to worke my admittance to the Duke, I ſhould become a true debter to your loue.
Well Madam, tho I hate nothing more then a man that takes bribes, yet preſt by your importunity, and that you tender it in loue, leſt I might ſeeme too nice to withſtand a Ladies favour, Ile weare it for your ſake, and if the Duke be not too buſily employed, worke your acceſſe.
So doing, you ſhall performe the office of a deare-bought friend.
How quickly the tide's turn'd! but doe you heare Madam? though I take neither afore nor after my Maſter, yet take my counſell, and do not truſt my maſter: if you haue a ſute to the Duke, keepe it to your ſelfe, for if you truſt my maſter with it, heele preferre it for you, but heele beg't for himſelfe.
Thats plaine coozenage.
Fie no, tis cunning in him, marry twould be thought little better then coozenage in a country gentleman: but he returnes.
Madam, I haue been earneſt, very earneſt with the Duke for your admittance.
And haue you wrought it?
I haue, marry you muſt think I beſtowd much labour in't.
'Tmay be you did.
'Tmay be you did: and looke a ſcance like a Pothecaries wife pounding Colliquintida; haue my braines ſweat for this?
Why the jewell is right Dametas, had I but an Aſſe that would ſweat me ſuch pearle.
An Aſſe? and ſweat ſuch pearle? Ile bar her admittance, here take your jewell, the Duke will allow no admittance, and I will keep you backe.
Keep me backe? thou couldſt doe no more and I were a poore mans petitioner.
And Ile doe ſo much being a rich petitioner.
You cannot ſit, you Court ſpaniell, you unneceſſary muſhrump, that in one night art ſprung out of the root of greatneſſe, I have bought my admittance, and Ile ha't in deſpetto del fato.
I muſt admit her, theſe Ladies are ſo inward with our trickes, there's no good to be done upon them: well Madam, your admittance is open, will you follow?
With all my heart ſir, Ile be the blind man and poore petitioner, and thou ſhalt play the Court-ſpaniell with the ſilver bell, and lead me into the Preſence.
Court-ſpaniell? mum: Ile boſome what I thinke, Old Gib's not blind, I ſee, although I winke.
BOy, how doſt like me in this attire?
As the Audience doth a bad play, ſcurvily.
Is it not ſtrange a Prince ſhould be thus metamorphoſed?
Not ſo ſtrange as the Metamorphoſis of Ajax, an't like your Grace.
Grace you Aggot, haſt not forgot that yet?
No, and yet tis a wonder I ha not, grace being ſo ſeldome uſed, I'm ſure they ſay none at ſome Ordinaries, for at ſitting down they cannot intend it for hunger, and at riſing up, they are either drunke, or have ſuch mind a dice, they never remember, my Lord then.
No more Lord, ſirrah.
Indeed there are too many already, but is not this ſtrange, that rich men ſhould forſake their titles? maſter then.
Your will ſir.
You have left many Countries behind you in ſeeking your friend Liſander, and yet you cannot find him.
True ſir.
I haue ſeene much gold lying upon Lombards ſtals, and could never finger penny of it.
Very well.
Nay, twas not well ſir.
What conclude you then?
That you were beſt ſit downe, and ſee what you haue got by your journey.
I haue ſeene a face as beautifull as heaven.
Thats nothing, a priſoner ſees the face of heaven it ſelfe, when hee lookes but out at the priſon-gate, ile ſtand to't, a man were as good be hang'd, ſo a meet a handſome hangman, & a ſtrong rope, as be in loue.
Your reaſon for that.
Mary this ſir, hanging is end of all troubles, and loue the beginning: Nay further, I thinke a Lover cannot be ſaved, for hee is of all religions.
Your proofe for that.
This; hee thinkes with the Atheiſt there's no God but his Miſtreſſe, with the Infidell no heaven but her ſmiles, with the Papiſt no Purgatory but her frownes, and with the familie of loue, holds it lawful to lie with her, though ſhe be another mans wife.
So ſir, what followes?
Serving-men ſir, the Maſter goes in before his wife, and the Servingman followes his maſter.
Sirra forbeare, I muſt meditate.
As the Vſurer before hee parts with money, meditates upon the aſſurance.
If Violettaes preſence ha'not quencht
The memory of all things but her ſelfe,
I ſhould be more familiar with that face.
I haue left my countrey to ſeeke my friend.
And I my countrey and my friend for loue.
And in the ſearch of him haue loſt my ſelfe
In the ſtrange Region of a womans eye.
In loue, and in Arcadia.
As much as heaven tranſcends the humble earth,
So towres her praiſe her face differs as farre
From others, as a glo-worme from a ſtarre.
She is a Princeſſe that my ſoule affects.
And rich.
Halfe heire unto this Dukedome.
And ſhe were whole heire to the foure morall vertues, twere nothing: when ſhall I ſee the time that men will loue for vertue, or a rich heire marry a poore wench without a portion? never I thinke.
Had not my friend Liſander.
What of mee?
Left me in Thrace.
We had never met in loue,
His ſillables betray him. I arreſt you.
At whoſe ſute?
Not at his Taylers in any caſe, for there's no greater ſtitch to a younger brothers conſcience, then to pay for a ſute of apparrell when tis worne out.
Liſander or his ghoſt?
Demetrius,
Or ſome illuſiue tenant in his ſhape?
Vnkind, why didſt thou leane my company?
For that which made the amorous Gods leaue heaven, or loue: but why is Demetrius thus diſguiſ'd?
For that which would make a Iackanapes a Monkey, and he could get it: a tayle.
Peace rogue.
Why wagge, is thy maſter in loue?
Faith ſit he hath entred his action in Cutids Court, and mean to proceed in the ſute it ſhould ſeeme.
Why didſt not take my counſell in thy choice?
Becauſe I fear'd a chiding, for doubting their honourable thoughts would not haue not haue conſented to my effeminate attempts, I ſtole this ſecret courſe, and manner of diſguiſe, as beſt helping to acceſſe, which it hath begot, now what acceſſe will bring forth, I commit to unborne induſtry.
It cannot but be proſperous: only the ſtrict obſervance of our loues hinders the paſſage of our hopes.
Indeed that's not the leaſt hinderance, yet the Duke himſelfe, and my quaint diſguiſe hath removed it out of my way, who not only takes me for a woman, but hath allowed me for my loues companion.
Fortune deales kindly with thee, I am as farre from acceſſe to my loue, as when I was in Thrace.
Dametas is the oyſterſhell that holds thy pearle, our wits muſt fiſh for him.
Will the Cods head bite?
Like an old Vſurer at a young heires inheritance, and I haue it ready hookt for him: and here he comes, my plot is to preferre thee to his ſervice.
Prethee doe, and ile ſerue him in his right kind.
Dametas, my loue is yours.
Which madam I am as proud of—
As a malecontent of a change, or an old Lady of a new faſhion.
To be round, I haue a ſute to you in the behalfe of this woodman
To me ſweet bloſſome, though I be ſomewhat ſtrict in mine office, I cannot be ſtony to Ladies. Fellow is thy petition drawne?
Petition?
Your onely way to moue a fute by: Humbly complayning to your good worſhip, O tis moſt patheticke, & indeed, without money, can doe juſt nothing with authority.
Come hether ſtripling, whoſe ſonne wert thou?
I am not ſo wiſe a child as you take me for, I never knew my father.
Didſt not know thy father?
A common fault, his betters forget themſelues when they grow rich, then blame not him to forget his father.
What was his name?
If I may giue credite to my mother, they cald him Menalchas, who on his death-bed made me his heire, with this charge, to ſeeke your worſhips ſervice, and gaue me this gold as a remembrance to purchaſe your favour.
Gold? hem.
Now doth my Maſter long more to ſinger thar gold, then a young girle, married to an old man, doth to run her husband aſhore at Cuckolds haven.
Well, I could doe for this fatherleſſe youth.
As many Executors and Overſeers haue done, cheate him of his portion, and then turne him out of doores a begging.
But for I haue the Gardian-ſhip of the Princeſſe, I dare doe nothing without the conſent of the Duke.
Come, come ſir, your worſhip ſhall not refuſe him.
Well then I woo not, but tis for your ſake I aſſure you.
Meaning the gold.
What ſhall I call thy name?
Dorus an't like your worſhip.
Ah, good Dorus, be an honeſt youth Dorus, reverence your Maſter, and loue your ſelfe: bee ſure to get under me, and you ſhall looſe nothing in my ſervice. Madam, the Duke and Dutcheſſe expect you at the hunt, and await your comming at Dianaes oake.
e attend them preſently, be a good ſervant Dorus.
Twill be his owne another day Madam.
In the meane time let it be yours to lead the way.
My ſervice doth attend you.
As the Purſevant doth the priſoner for a double fee.
Welcome ſlaue to a ſlaue, a faire preſage,
The hope of loue ſweetens loues vaſſ lage.
Now and Dametas bee the mettle hee was ſtampt for, a right villaine.
And he be not, hang him.
Nay he deſerues hanging too if he be: but will you truſt him?
Yes as farre as I ſee him, and he that truſts him further, my truſt is he will be deceived.
Indeed, he that will proue falſe to his maker, will be true to no man.
Yes, for the preſent time, like a bawd to him that giues moſt
Thats not for loue.
Yes of the money: he that lookes for other loue in this age—This is the place his Letter ſpeakes of, and here he comes himſelfe.
Why ſo lo: now is the web of my hopes upon the Loombe of perfection, and in this quech of laſhes Aminter & Iulio,
See and ſee not, all mum, you know your cue,
The game's your owne, if you can hunt it true.
Dametas, were thine cares ever at a more muſicall banquet? how the hounds mouths like bels are tuned one under another like a ſlothfulneſſe, the ſpeed of the cry out-ran my ſenſe of hearing.
Croſſe over the Forreſt to Dianaes oake my liege, & there your grace advantag'd by the height of the ground, ſhall not onely at pleaſure heare, but be eye-witneſſe of their muſicall contention.
Thankes good Dametas, bee thy directions our wiues convoy.
Where is his highneſſe Dametas?
At Adonis bower Madam, where he expects your preſence, to ſee the fleſhing of a couple of Spartane hounds, in the waſting blood of the ſpent Deare.
Thankes good Dametas, mine eyes would not be good friends with my feet, ſhould they not bring 'em to that kingly ſport.
Sweet Ladies, to ſaue you the expence of much breath, which muſt be laid out in the purchaſe of the game, I haue provided you this ſtand, from whence your eyes may be commanders of the ſport: ſuch ſport as you little dreame of.
We are your loues debters kind Dametas.
As I loue vertue I pitty theſe poore beaſts,
Theſe Sylane commoners, to ſee what taskes
Our covetous Forreſters impoſe upon them,
Who not content with impoſt of their breath,
(Poore hearts) purſue them ſmiling to their death.
Twas the end of their creation Madam.
So was the end of ours to liue in peace,
And not to tyranniſe on harmeleſſe beaſts,
But Forreſters, like Images ſet forth
The tyrannie of greatneſſe without pitty,
As they the Deare, ſo covetous wealth purſues
The trembling ſtate of their inferiors,
And to claſpe up the volume of their ſinnes,
They drinke their blood, and cloath them with their skins:
Then ceaſe to preſſe poore beaſts with tyrannie,
You loue your liues, thinke they are loath to dye.
You are too tender-hearted to bee a good huntſwoman Lady.
And ſome of you too hard-hearted, but leaving this diſcourſe of hunting, haue all our gallantry of Lacedemon and Greece, ſpent the vigor of their wits, that not one dares venter.
For our loues ſiſter, you may ſee, the properer women, the worſe lucke.
Tuſh you ſhall haue ſuters, feare not Madam.
No at any hand ſiſter, for with a feare it comes.
Then ile feare of purpoſe, becauſe I would haue 'em come.
And they doe not, they are notable cowards.
Then let them keepe away ſtill, for I haue vowed my maidenhead ſhall never doe homage to the bed of a coward.
Sweet Ladies, will you beguile a minute or two with this diſcourſe, till I ſtep up to the top of the hill▪ and make diſcovery of the game.
Let your returne be ſpeedy good Dametas.
Ile put on wings and fly.
Out of the Court, and the whole Countrey ſhall haue a good riddance.
So, he hath put'em faire to the ſtand, lets iſſue & ſurpriſe them.
Be reſolute and ſuddaine.
Aminter and Iulio iſſue out, and beare them away.
Murther, treaſon, reſcue, helpe.
Yes much reskue, much helpe, much Dametas: why ſo, this jeſt was drawen home cloſe to the head, it cannot chuſe but cleaue the very white of our hopes, the Dukes wit: to thy tackle good wit, ſome ſudden ſea roome, or our ſtratagem is run a ground.
Tell me Dametas, was not the Deare a prodigall? did hee not ſpend his breath freely amongſt us?
And his blood too my liege, but did you obſerue how the hounds like politicians nos'd out the game?
True: and comming to the loſſe, Melampus, but where are our daughters?
Did you obſerue that my liege, that Melampus as a true hound is ever horce cheerd or hollow, yet he kept time too.
Certaine Dametas, but where are our daughters man?
Buſie my Lord under a brake buſh, diſputing of the vertue of ſweet water, and ground Iuie.
What cry of treaſon's that Dametas?
Pray God no danger ſets upon my daughters,
Seeke out our wife, ile haſte unto their reskue.
And my ſword un-employd? alleageance ſayes nay to that my ige, I am for the adventure my ſelfe, if they be ſurpris'd (I am a mad man) your grace ſhall heare more: if not (I am the more ſorry) your grace ſhall heare more too: make peace with your thoughts till my returne, and doubt not their recovery.
Speake, where's the Duke?
Here my Gynetia. What meane theſe weapons, are our daughters afe?
As a thiefe in a mill father, we thanke our redeemers▪
The more my griefe, were you ſurpriſ'd then madam?
Yes faith Dametas.
And how ſweet Ladies, and how were you reſcued?
Being ſurpriſ'd, this gallant Amazon
Preſt to their recue, had you ſeene what worth
She and this woodman ſpent in our defence,
Wonder would ha' bereft you of all ſenſe,
She rai▪'d her ſword with ſuch a manly grace,
As had not her mild ſexe contrould my thoughts,
I could haue falne in loue with her high worth.
You over-priſe us madam, not our deſert,
But the weake ſpirits of our oppoſites,
Gaue luſter to the dimneſſe of our worth.
It pleaſeth your modeſty to leſſon it,
But it ſhall ſtill liue great in our regard. What woodman's that?
My follower, my liege.
What ere he be, he hath deſeru'd our loue,
Fellow be neere us, and for this deſert,
Perform'd againſt thoſe Traytors to our blood,
Vnder thy maſter we giue thee an attendant,
To guard the life and ſafetie of our daughter.
Thanke you good father, who ever looſe by the bargaine,
I haue got me a ſervant by the match: woo't ſerue me fellow?
In the beſt I can.
In heart your fellow, though in ſhow your man.
Ile try your dutious ſervice: I command
Your knee to kie the ground, your lip my hand.
Pardon me Madam.
Here's hot loue no doubt,
I may command my man, and goe without.
Truce to this ayrie warre, theſe paper bullets
Better become a Cloſſet then a Parke,
The Forreſt muſicke is to heare the hounds
Rend the thin ayre, and with a luſty cry
Awake the drowſie Eccho, and confound
Their perfect language in a mingled ſound,
Then to the Court, our Forreſt ſport being done,
A ſecond chace of lovelier ſports begunne.
If fortune croſſe not what our hopes purſue,
Our feares have met their deaths, our loves their due.
Croſt in my hopes, the Ladies reſcu'd, and the Princes like ravens beat out of the game-place, my invention muſt turne traveller for more ſtratagems: what & I ſhould diſcover their plot to the Duke, attach em for traitors, and beg their lands for my labour, though they be my friends, twere a pretty parcell of pollicy.
All things are lawfull that doe profit bring,
A wiſe mans bow goes with a two-fold ſtring.
Did ever two Princes meet ſuch ſtrange changes in their loves? now we have wrought our admittance, and in a manner got em into our poſſeſſions, our hopes like falſe fires having brought us within ken, vaniſh, and leave us out of all comfort.
That the Duke ſhould doat upon thee for a woman, makes for our purpoſe, but that the Dutcheſſe ſhould be enamourd on thee for a man, is prepoſterous.
Whether my valour ſhown in the reskue of the Ladies, or the ardent glances her daughters beauty ſteales from my eyes, give her thoughts encouragement, I know not, but her hopes ſtand confident I am a man, and for that cauſe am I barr'd from acceſſe.
I weigh thy combrances by my own, for though by the dukes allowance I am her priviledg'd attendant, yet ſuch is the deviliſhnes of Dametas, that I cannot joy ſo much acceſſe as to confer with her.
I can compare my lord & his friend to nothing in the world ſo fitly, as to a couple of water buckets, for whil'ſt hope winds the one up, diſpaire plunges the other down, whil'ſt I, like a Harlakene in an Italian Comoedy, ſtand making faces at both their follies.
Well, ſince the ſhape of our proceeding growes ſo monſtrous, lets caſt our inventions in a new mold, and having ſo firme a foundation as this diſguiſe to build upon, lets draw the modell, and raiſe the whole frame of our attempts anew.
Indeed, lovers ſhould be condition'd like tyrants, who having the aime of a crowne in their eye once, runne violently over all lets that intervent their courſe, and ſo muſt we.
And ſo will we, my reſolution is already bent, and if I ſhoot not, the next levell I take, Love I beſeech thee breake thy bow about mine eares, and ſtrike thy hornes in my forhead, for married men to hang their cap on.
I have met a meanes fit for my purpoſe already: Mopſa Dametas onely daughter is overſhooes in love with me, & to her le feigne extreame ardor of affection, and make her the ſhadow under which Ile court the true ſubſtance of my divine Hippolita.
About it then, Ile ſweat my invention to death but Ile overtake thee; but heere comes one of my Burres▪ I muſt beare his importunity, for no reaſonable denyall will bruſh him off.
Zelmane.
My Liege.
My thoughts come like a ſaile afore the wind, ſwolne big with news, and thine eares the midwife muſt deliver me of this burden: my Dutcheſſe is ſicke, heart-ſicke for thee Zelmane.
For me? why my Lord, I am no Roſa ſolis, nor Aqua mirabilis to recover ſicke folkes.
Shall I be ſhort with thee? My Ladie's in love with thee.
With me my Lord?
With thee my Lady: her amorous glances are her accuſers, her very looks write Sonnets in thy commendations, ſhe carves thee at boord, and cannot ſleepe for dreaming on thee in bed, ſhee's turn'd ſunne-riſer, haunts private walkes, and like a diſgrac'd Courtier, ſtudies the Art of melancholly.
Now alas good Lady.
Nay never pitty her, ſhe deſerves none, rather lets bend our indeavors to intangle her more. To ſee the kindnes of fortune, who fearing we ſhould be acquainted with ſollitude in this our 12 month retirement, hath begot a domeſticall merriment, and made our own thoughts Actors in't, and as bad a Poet as I am, Ile ha one ſcene in't of my owne invention.
Dametas will ſtorme at that, for hee cannot abide Poetry ſhould be countenanc'd; but how is't my Liege?
Tis ready plotted already, and that the Dutcheſſe may not find thee unprovided when ſhe comes to court thee.
Court me, court a woman my Liege?
Why that's the very happineſſe of the jeſt, but in any caſe confeſſe thy ſelfe a man.
A man my Liege? I ha no colour for't.
Tuſh, Ile furniſh thee, ſay thou art a Prince, no matter who, and haſt to doe with this diſguiſe of purpoſe to court my daughter Violetta.
Is this ſcene of your owne inventing my Liege?
Mine own ifaith, and to confirm't the rather, uſe more oft and private conference with my daughter, interchange diſcourſe & amorous dalliance, oh twill ſet my Dutcheſſe affections afire, to think her rivalld by her daughter, and give us ſmooth paſſage to our love.
How occaſion playes the wanton with me. Well my liege, do but you work my admittance to your daughter, and le beſtow al the art I am worth in courting her; and ſee, as if Fortune had a hand in our Comoedy, ſhe hath entred the Dutcheſſe juſt at her cue, ſhaddow your ſelfe in your Arke, and leave me to give her entertainment.
Forget not to perſonate ſome Prince in any caſe.
I warrant you, Ile play the Prince with much art.
This way he went, on this ſweet violet bed
Still dwells the print of his inamour'd tread,
The depreſt flowers have ſtrengthened their ſweet
By ſtealing amorous kiſſes from his feet.
Abſolute Poet. Penelope was a ballad-maker to her.
Oh doe not fly my preſence, gentle wanton ſtay,
What haue I found you, faith you run-away
Ile tye a chaine about your waſt for this,
And make you buy your freedome with a kiſſe.
Fie Madam, this courteſy is more then needes.
Be not ſo coy, let not a loving Dame
Find thee leſſe kind then ſenſeleſſe elements,
Thou never walk'ſt, but the enamour'd aire
Like an officious lover beares thy traine,
Whil'ſt the coole wind doth with his velvet wing
Fanne the thinne ayre upon thy ſweaty cheeke,
Stealing ſweet kiſſes from thy ſilken lip.
Shield this vain breath, beat at ſome Ladies eare.
But you are none, you are not, come you are not.
Your valour, lookes, and geſture ſhow you are not,
Your manly brow, and your commanding eye,
Where warre and fortune dwell in majeſtie,
Your private walkes, and varied paſſions,
Your glances to my daughter, ſure you are not,
And my firme love is confident you are not.
There's a lover of a right temper, ſhee'l out-face the name of her ſexe inſtantly.
Well Madam, ſith your obſervation hath diſcover'd me, upon promiſe of your ſecrecy, I confeſſe my ſelfe a man.
Good, excellent, how truely ſhe takes my directions.
I knew my judgement could not be deceiv'd,
Nor durſt proud love have done me ſo much wrong
To caſt my thoughts unto a womans eye.
Love durſt not, good, good, excellent, what next?
But Madam, now I am known to you, what further requeſt you?
Exchange of lookes, and freedome of thy bed,
Thy preſence, thy embracements, thy kind love,
For which my amorous thoughts have long lyen ſicke.
Thank you good wife; nay, and a Dutcheſſe long to give her husband the horning, let it never grieve Butchers to doe homage at Cuckolds haven.
Well Madam, to give content to your affections, and in a ſtrong hope you will mediate my ſute to your daughter, ſort out but fit time and opportunity, and maſter your deſires.
And he were a man now I might be rarely tupt.
Give me thy hand then, with this amorous kiſſe I ſeale thee mine.
And I confirm't with this.
Rare, rare, rare, ſhee's his, ſeald and deliverd in the preſence of her husband.
Now leſt my husband ſhould ſuſpect our love.
Now, what for that now?
Heare a good jeſt, perſwade him thou art a woman.
That's not to doe now Madam, for he as confidently beleeves and ardently courts me for a woman as you for a man.
Good, excellent, maintaine that humour ſtill,
Seeme coy, looke nice, and as we women uſe,
Be mild, and proud, imbrace, and yet refuſe.
Excellent vertues in a woman.
I prithee doe, twill be a ſcene of mirth
For me to quote his paſſions and his ſmiles,
His amorous haviour, and how his eye
Will beget ſtrange variety of lookes,
And ſhoot em into thine; but the chiefe ſport's this,
To ſee an old man with a young man kiſſe.
To ſee an old Dutcheſſe a young Lady kiſſe.
Now the plot packs, the ſcene's all comicall,
I cannot ſpeake for laughter, to ſee theſe women,
That would be counted wonders for their wit,
Lay plots to gull themſelves, ſilly conceit.
To take me for a man.
And arme her ſelfe
To laugh at me, make jeſts and ſcoffes at me,
But ſooth her humour, the revenge ſhee'd throw
Vpon my head, ſhall fall on her owne brow.
Vpon you both, ſo, ſo, ſo, how greedily their inventions like bugles follow the ſent of their owne gullery, yet theſe are no fooles, God forbid, not they: but to the drift, mirth in my warme blood ſits Laughing at this diviſion of their wits.
Woo't beleeve mee ſiſter? I never eat a cherry, but it puts mee in mind of a husband, it kiſſes my lips with ſuch a harmeleſſe prettineſſe.
Now in good deed lo I loue em a liſe too, I thinke I ſhall never ha my belly full on em.
Of what, not of husbands Violetta?
No, of cherries Hippolita, but take heed of em, they bee a very filling meat, and dangerous things for us Maydes I can tell you, we may ſurfet after em preſently.
Surfet after what, a husband?
I, and after cherries too Hippolita.
I warrant you ſiſter, an old Lady in Lacedemon taught me a preſervative againſt that.
For the love of cherries what?
Marry this it was, ſtill ſaid ſhe, betwixt every cherry ſaid ſhe, be ſure to cracke a ſtone ſaid ſhe.
Then let me alone, Ile cracke a couple of ſtones betwixt every cherry, rather then ſurfet on them.
You muſt take heed you cracke not too many too, for you may ſurfet of the ſtone as well as of the cherry.
Nay and they be ſuch dangerous things, I ha done with em.
So have I too for this time, but ſiſter, is it not a ſtrange kind of ſervile liberty that we live in here in Arcadia?
For all the world as Engliſhmen keep their fellons, and Italians their wives, we never ſtirre abroad without our laylors.
And for what cauſe forſooth? only to keep us from mariage.
Sure it is either ſome high content, or extreame diſcommoditie, that our father debarres us of it.
By this ſtone, me thinks I long like a woman with child, till I know the difference betwixt a Mayd and a wife.
Well, god a mercy of all curſen ſoules, I was neere the knowledge on't laſt night I can tell you.
O that I had bin with thee I might ha been ſo too: for the love of marriage how?
Why thus: As I lay ſlumbring in my bed,
No creature with me but my mayden-head.
Is that a creature?
Some maintaine it is,
Got in the eye, conceived in a kiſſe;
Others, whoſe ſpeech ſeemes neere akin to truth,
Say tis a paſſion, bred i'th heat of youth,
Some call't a ſigh, and ſome an amorous grone,
All differ in the definition:
But in th'allow'd opinion of moſt,
Tis never truely had till it be loſt.
But lying thus alone, as Mayds doe uſe,
Me thought I dreamt, as Mayds can hardly chuſe,
And in my dreame me thought twas too much wrong
A pretty Mayd ſhould lye alone ſo long;
With that a gallant comes, gallants can doe
Much with young Mayds.
And with old women too.
He courted me once, and agen, and thrice,
Tis vertue to ſay nay, to bee too nice
Agrees not with my humour, yet ſome ſay,
We Mayds wiſh things, to which we anſwer nay;
Briefely, me thought he ſtood ſo long a wooing,
I rather could ha wiſht he had been doing
Some other buſineſſe, yet at laſt we'greed,
Twere ſtrange if earneſt futers ſhould not ſpeed.
In what agreed you?
In our Wedding-ring,
Time, place, and houre, indeed in every thing;
The day appoynted, and each thing in frame,
I thought each houre an age untill it came,
Well, come it is, the morning once in ſight,
I thought it ten times longer till twas night.
At dinner time me thought I ſweld with pride
To be drunke to by name of Miſtreſſe bride,
Muſicke ſpake loud, no delicates were ſcant,
Yet ſtill me thought another thing did want,
For ſure thought I, there's ſomething in a man
That wiues loue well, hope brides may wiſh it than.
Long lookt for comes at laſt, to bed we goe.
Would I had dreamt I might ha' done ſo too.
My bed-mate turn'd, and as he would ha' ſpoke,
I ſweat with feare, and in that feare I woke,
But ſeeing my kind bed-fellow was gone,
Lord how it chaft me that I wakt ſo ſoone,
One minuts dreaming longer, I had tride,
The difference twixt a virgin and a bride.
Otwould ha' vext a Saint, my blood would burne
To be ſo neere, and miſſe ſo good a turne.
And ſo did mine too I warrant you, nay though I bee but a little pot, I ſhall be as ſoone hot as another.
You ſhould not be my ſiſter elſe.
Nor my mothers daughter neither.
And in good earneſt wee are not fathr amiſſe.
Are you avis'd of that, and Ifaith tell what thinke you of your ſervant Dorus.
As of a ſweet Almond in a rugged ſhell, the Sun in a cloud, or a wealthy Diamond in a rocke, indeed cleane contrary to the world, hee weares the worſt ſide outward, and is much better then he ſeemes: but what thinke you of your manly Amazon??
Nay the ſport is I know not what to thinke, Zelmanes humour would afford project for a pretty Court Comoedy, my father courts her for a woman, and as I feare ſhe is, my mother doats upon her for a man, and as I wiſh he were, and that with ſuch an ardor of affection, that I could find in my heart to turne my mother out of the company, and play the lovers part my ſelfe.
How ever man or woman, the jeſt holds currant in one.
I know not what knaviſh motion hath had to doe with my thought, but my mind tels mee that your ſervant Dorus and my Amazon, are other then they ſeeme: and here he comes.
Why how now madam, Ladies gadding, is this the obedience of your fathers charge.
Pardon Miſtreſſe Miſo, 'twas my doing and the Dukes.
But the Dutcheſſe will like neither the Dukes doings nor yours, neither in this caſe I can tell you. The Duke ſtaies your comming, and yet the Dutcheſſe is very deſirous on't, my husband is in the next Arbour to man you. For you Lady, my preſence be your priviledge.
Miſo ſhould be either a hang man or a Herald, for ſhe never comes amongſt us, but ſhe quarters our company and armes.
Excellent beauty, & therefore more excellent, becauſe ſituate in ſo faire a creature.
You are a merry man Dorus, but all this cannot make me loue me, how ſay you mother doth he?
Mary let him chuſe daughter, when I was as thou art—
You were as ſhe is? but faith madam Mopſa, I perceiue my ſervant Dorus beares a moneths mind to you, bee not ſo ſtraight laced to him.
Straight lac'd? ſgod mend me I am not lac'd at all, am I Dorus? no in ſooth, I goe wide ope wenſday, I never lace my ſelfe but on ſundayes, & that for feare I ſhould burſt with cating of plum-porridge.
I meane let fall ſome comfortable lookes on your ſuter.
Sgod mend me, ile let fall or take up any thing I haue to doe him good.
Why that's kindly ſaid, and Dorus your loue is very ambitious, to climbe ſo high as the beautifull Mopſa.
O are you avis'd of that, 'twould make a horſe breake his bridle to heare how the youth of the village will commend me, oh the pretty little pincking nies of Mopſa ſayes one, oh the fine flat lips of Mopſa ſayes another, and then doe I bridle my head like a malt-horſe thus, ſet mine armes a kembo thus, wreath my necke and my body thus, winke with one eye thus, and ſpread my peacocks tay le as broad as the proudeſt minxe of em all.
Theſe extraordinary graces muſt not want admiration, but where's your mother?
Speake ſoftly in the Lobby there, for waking my Ladies foiſting hound.
Godſme, my mother's ſtealing of a nap.
Nay, ſhee cannot bee ſaid to ſteale a nap, for the noiſe ſhee makes herſelfe would diſcover her theft: but Dorus ſith your fortunes are poore, you ſhould ſtudy to enoble your deſerts, and beget effects worthy to court and win your Ladies acceptance.
Laſſe madam, I chuſe no better moderater then your ſelfe, betwixt me & my unworthy ſervices, ſuppoſe your ſelfe though but a Cucko compar'd with this ſweet ſinging Nitingale, ſhould be ſued to by a Prince like me, I meane like me in loue, for loue in Princes & peſants admits compariſon: ſuppoſe Demetrius ſhould in like diſguiſe court you as I doe, Mopſa, ſigh for you, as I doe, for Mopſa, kneele to you thus, as I doe, to Mopſa, lay downe his life to you, as I doe, to Mopſa, prefer your good before his owne, as I proteſt I do, Mopſaes, ſuppoſe he ſhould ſhew you the knowen marke of his neck, to aſſure you he were Demetrius, as I doe this to Mopſa, to witneſſe I am the ſonne of Menalchas, could your disdaine ſtand out like Mopſaes?
What a keenes neceſſitie ſets upon the edge of invention, truſt me Mopſa your ſervant ſpeakes well, and if hee can proue himſelfe the man he ſpeakes of, and my wiſhes well hope, Demetrius, you haue no reaſon to thinke ſcorne of him.
Why what ſhould I doe Madam? my mother tels me I muſt not ſay as I thinke.
I am no counſeller, but ſhould Demetrius in like diſguiſe court me, thus would I embrace him, thus ſeale my affections with a kiſſe, and thus argue: thinke not Demetrius that the clouds of baſeneſſe could ſo muſfle thee, but that the Sun of valour ſhind through them long ſince, and in regard of thy ſerviceable dutie in concealing, and unprevented policy in thus making knowen thy loue, ſort but out fit opportunity, and in deſpight of al guardians ſtrict obſervance, goe where thou wilt, the worth of Demetrius ſhall draw Hippolita, this would I vow, and this will I performe.
And were I Demetrius and you Hippolita, I would deceiue Dametas, outreach Miſo, forſweare Mopſa, and forſake Arcadia, to ſhare the fortunes of divine Hippolita.
And what ſhould I doe then?
I doe but ſpeake in the perſon of Demetrius, and under Hippolita ſhadow what I intend to the rare, and never enough wondred at Mopſa, the blacke ſwan of beauty, and madg-howlet of admiration.
Doe not you flout me Dorus? and you doe not, provide a Prieſt and ile marry you, and my father and mother ſhall never know on't.
Manaſſes is the man.
And ile bee the woman, whoſoever ſay nay to't, little dreames my mother of what we haue done.
T'may be ſhe did, for ſhe ſigh'd & groand much in her ſleepe.
Tis well ſhee was ſo quiet, for ſhee eate peaſe-poridge to breakefaſt, and they'l make mebreake wind in my ſleepe like a horſe, and ſee as the devill will ha't ſhe wakes, and here comes my father, no words and yee loue me.
Why God a mercy Dorus, this diligence becomes the ſervant of Dametas, and ile preferre thee for't.
You were worſe then the devill elſe, for they ſay hee helps his ſervants, then you may doe little and you cannot helpe yours.
Will you breake your jeſts againſt the bars of your chamber window, and cleare the greene? the Duke is comming to bowles, and I would not for halfe mine office you ſhould be a rub in the way of his patience: daughter and wife, conduct her to the Lodge, Exit. And Dorus, make you haſte about your buſines.
I warrant you Sir: be my hopes rightly plac't, You will condemne me for my too much haſte.
Why ſo: this tis to be in authority: Inferiour perſons, I and the Princes themſelues, fly from my preſence, like the chirping Birds from the ſight of the Faulcon: my very breath like a mighty wind blowes away inferiour Officers (the Court rubbiſh) out of my way, and giues me a ſmooth paſſage: I am the morning ſtarre, I am ſeldome ſeene but about the riſing of the Sunne: indeed I am never out of the Dukes eye; and here he comes.
Doth our match hold?
Yes, whoſe part will you take?
Zelmanes.
Soft, that match is yet to make.
Lets caſt a choiſe, the neereſt two take one.
My choice is caſt, helpe ſweet occaſion.
Come, here's agood.
Well, better'd.
Beſt of all.
The Duke and I.
The weakeſt goe to the wall.
Ile leade.
Ile follow.
We haue both one mind.
In what?
In leaving the old folke behind.
Well jeſted daughter, and you leade not faire,
The hindmoſt hound, though old, may catch the hare.
Your laſt bowle, come.
By the faith a me, well lead.
Would I might leade you.
Whither?
To my bed.
I am ſure you would not.
By this aire I would.
I hope you would not hurt me, and you ſhould.
I'de love you ſweet.
Soure, ſo I heard you ſay.
A cept it then.
Of what acquaintance pray?
Of loves and mine.
Daughter, your bowle winnes one.
None of my Maydenhead father, I am gone,
The Amazon hath wonne one.
Yield to that.
The caſt I doe.
Your ſelfe?
Nay ſcrape out that.
Whoſe is it yet?
The Dukes: play ſmooth and fine.
The ſmalleſt helpe that is will make you mine.
Me yours?
You mine, for though the caſt I loſe,
I ha wonne your love.
Much: in my tother hoſe.
Come, the laſt marke; this caſt is worth all the reſt,
The leader as the follower.
Bad's the beſt.
I winne her for ten Crownes, and there they be.
I take your lay.
A match twixt you and me.
Ile be your halfe.
That were unkindly done.
Pardon me mother, Ile beare all or none.
I ha wonne you Madam.
Me?
I meane your bet.
Then take your winnings, Ile not die in debt.
Madam beleeve mee, I am, as I proteſt, a Prince, my name Liſander.
Looke to the Dukes ſtanding Madam.
So I will I warrant you, and to your falling.
Thus clouded as you ſee for your love, my ſoule ſpeakes in my tongue; I appoynted this match at Bowles a purpoſe to acquaint you with it.
Barre ſtealing Father; yet and all hit right,
Here's one would ſteale a piece of fleſh to night.
Deere Madam.
No more words, I have perceived as much in your eye, as you can expreſſe with your tongue, and as farre as my mothers jealouſy would give me leave, anſwered it with kind lookes: your bias ſtands wrong mother.
Why? it ſtands toward Zelmanes.
Hath it ſtood ſo long?
All the game through.
Then all your game's bowld wrong: furniſh you with neceſſaries befitting an eſcape, and my will ſhall be as ready to take wing as yours: put in a caſt now mother, or the game is gone indeed.
Whoſe is the throw?
Ours, till the laſt bowle came;
But that hath wonn't em cleere, both caſt and game.
Our winnings, come, a kiſſe and bate the reſt.
What, doe you kiſſe in eaneſt or in jeſt?
In earneſt in good truth.
Troth kindly ſed,
Take heed you kiſſe not out your Mayden-head.
In jeſt?
In earneſt.
Tis the faſhion,
Much in requeſt among our nation.
To kiſſe away their Maiden-heads?
Now and then,
And being gone, to kiſſe it backe agen:
For lovers indentures nere are fairly drawn,
Vntill the Maiden-head be left in pawne,
As earneſt of the match, ſo mothers ſed,
And ſo will daughters doe when mams be dead.
What pawne their Maydenheads?
Yes, and loſe em too.
And you' maintaine that faſhion?
Signeor Noe.
Lay by this home-bred mirth, and prepare your eares to entertaine ſtrangers.
Strangers? why father ſtrangers are as welcome to mee, as mine owne Country-men, if they bring good manners and civill humanity in their company; otherwiſe, they are like foule weather, come afore they be ſent for.
Dametas? nay then we ſhall have newes enough, for he never comes into the preſence, but he brings a whole ſacke full of lies, of newes I ſhould ſay.
Welcome Dametas: what officious fellow is that?
A pure well willer of your Majeſties, and a follower of mine.
O tis Manaſſes, and he could make armes as well as he mares legs, hee would grow in great requeſt for Heraldry: What's your newes?
Theſe Lacedemonians, ſubjects to your Majeſty, having a meſſage to deliver to your Majeſties inſtruments of hearing, commonly eclip'd eares.
How, hath any one here clipt eares?
Sweete Feminine, clip off the taile of thy diſcourſe with the Siſſars of attention, as I ſay, theſe Lacedemonians have choſen me their tongue.
Of a long tongue thou ſpeakeſt very little.
That proves me no woman, for they ſpeake over much.
What grievances oppreſſe them? briefely ſpeake.
Merchandize (my Liege) through the avarice of purchaſing Officers, is wrackt with ſuch unmercifull impoſt, that the very name of Trafficke growes odious even to the profeſſour.
Townes ſo oppreſt for want of wonted and naturall liberty, as that the native Inhabitanus feeme Slaves, and the Forreiners free Denizens.
Offices ſo bought and ſold, that before the purchaſer can be ſayd to be placed in his office, he is againe by his covetous Patron diſplac'd.
Common Riots, Rapes, and wilfull Homicide in great mens followers, not onely not puniſhed, but in a manner countenanced and applauded.
Indeed ſince your Majeſtie left the Land, the whole body of the Common-wealth runs cleane againſt the bias of true and priſtine governement.
And your honourable Brother, like a ſhip toſt upon the violent billowes of this inſurrection, by us intreats your Majeſties Letters of ſpeedy reformation, for feare the whole Kingdome ſuffer inevitable ſhipwracke.
Which after ſhort deliberation with our Councell, your ſelfe ſhall returne. Dametas reward their travels with two hundred Crownes: in the meane time, let them taſte the beſt entertainement of our Court.
Proud Rebels, they ſhall ſee that a Dukes frowne,
Can at his pleaſure, turne Rebellion downe:
See them rewarded.
Manaſſes, ſee the fellowes entertayned; I muſt attend of the Duke.
Boy, ſee the fellowes entertayned; I muſt waite of my Lord.
Fellowes, be as merry as you may, I muſt follow my M.
So, here's Petitioners attendance right; good words, and ſhort Commons: But tis not their entertainement wee come for. I made a ſimple ſhift to get entertainement into the Court.
Well Cupid, pray for our liues, for and wee were gone, I know not where thou wouldſt haue two ſuch ſtates-men againe.
His Common-wealth could not ſtand without us; and that his Mother knowes well enough: and hee ſends no better ſucceſſe then we had at our hunting, he looſes a friend of me.
'Twill not ſinke in my thought yet, but that old muſty ſlaue Dametas played the ſlaue with us.
Would I could proue it once: but ſince wee are againe admitted our Realme, ſhall wee be idle? ſomewhat weele doe, though they'l giue us but ſmall thankes for our labour.
The Duke ſhall not ſay his Daughters are ſo ill beloved, but vveele change a thruſt or two vvith his intent for'em.
T'vvould put the poore Wenches out of conceit vvith themſelues, and there ſhould not be ſome contending for them.
We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our ayme .
We are ifaith: Invention could not weaue, , Suſpition to deceiue.
Come, paſſe off this groveling imitation; a Lovers muſt bee ambitious, and like the Eagle, ſcorning the baſe where Kites and Crowes lie flagging: mount the cleare sky of , and overpeere all hindrances:
The Ladies themſelues are willing.
Ready to embarke upon the next tide of occaſion whatſoever.
Let mee alone to worke it then▪ But here comes my Boy.
'Twere more for your credite Sir, and you could ſay your man: but men and warre were worne out of faſhion both in a Summer.
I am of thy beliefe in that Boy.
Would my Lord were ſo too ſir.
Suppoſe I were Sir, what then?
I ſhould (as many upſtarts haue done) proue rich: for I beleeue you would make me your heire.
Is that part of your beliefe?
A principall poynt ſir.
Renounce it then, for I beleeue you'l never be ſaved by't.
I am ſure I cannot looſe by't. I beleeue further, that many Knights, and ſome Ladies, were never of Gods making.
Of whoſe then, wagge?
Ile tell you: the Minters coyne Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Heralds makes Knights, and Knights ſtampe Ladies.
And what doe Ladies?
They liue not idle neither; they make ſome Knights, and marre many Gentlemen.
Ladies are good worke-women too, then?
Farre better then any Taylor: they'l make you an end of a ſuite, eſpecially a Court ſuite, when all the Taylors in a Countrey know not how to ſet a ſtitch in't▪
I am of the beliefe you are a knaue, ſir.
I had no faith, ſhould I ſay you were not?
Well, what a Knaue?
In a Knaues beliefe ſir.
Becauſe in yours?
Doe you ſay't, and ile ſweare it, my Lord.
No more Boy, I am weary of your jeſts.
That confirmes them to be good ſir.
Your reaſon for that, ſir?
Becauſe travellers and lovers, are ſoone weary of goodneſſe.
Goodly ones indeed: but leaving this high-way of circumſtance; I ſent you for Manaſſes.
The learned Scribe attends you.
Will you fall off ſir?
Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without ſhaking.
Welcome Manaſſes: I haue preſent employment for thee, in which I muſt borrow—
Pardon me Madam, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without ſecuritie and pawnes.
'Tis not money (Manaſſes) but counſell and furtherance that we deſire.
Good counſell is worth good money Madam.
Thou ſhalt bee well conſidered; there's twenty Crownes in earneſt.
Nay Madam, this hand is like a fellow that takes every thing in jeſt; if you be in earneſt, let me feele it here: So Lady, now betwixt earneſt and jeſt, if your Will be ready drawne, before your friend delivered as your deed, and put me in truſt to execute it.
Take it this, in a word honeſt Sheepheard, and thy Lords daughter Madam Mopſa, are man and wife.
Man, and woman perhaps, but not man and wife: for though moſt women haue a will to bee Ladies, like my Lords wife; yet every Lady hath not wit to bee a wife, as my Lords Daughter. But what good can I doe in this?
Overy much: for though they bee man and wife by oath and proteſtation, the chiefeſt ceremony of all; namely Mariage is yet unperformed, and hearing that you haue ane orders.
That I haue: I haue tane order for the making away of a hundred Maidenheads in my time, and not ſo few: but I am in the mind of you now, theſe two beagles, Dorus and Mopſa, haue runne themſelues breathleſſe in the chaſe of loue, you would ha' me couple them up in the leaſes of Matrimonie.
We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our ayme deceiues not.
We are ifaith: Invention could not weaue,
A quainter web, Suſpition to deceiue.
Come, paſſe off this groveling imitation; a Lovers thoughts muſt bee ambitious, and like the Eagle, ſcorning the baſe ayre where Kites and Crowes lie flagging: mount the cleare sky of Invention, and overpeere all hindrances:
The Ladies themſelues are willing.
Ready to embarke upon the next tide of occaſion whatſoever.
Let mee alone to worke it then, But here comes my Boy.
'Twere more for your credite Sir, and you could ſay your man: but men and warre were worne out of faſhion both in a Summer.
I am of thy beliefe in that Boy.
Would my Lord were ſo too ſir.
Suppoſe I were Sir, what then?
I ſhould (as many upſtarts haue done) proue rich: for I beleeue you would make me your heire.
Is that part of your beliefe?
A principall poynt ſir.
Renounce it then, for I beleeue you'l never be ſaved by't.
I am ſure I cannot looſe by't. I beleeue further, that many Knights, and ſome Ladies, were never of Gods making.
Of whoſe then, wagge?
Ile tell you: the Minters coyne Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Heralds makes Knights, and Knights ſtampe Ladies.
And what doe Ladies?
They liue not idle neither; they make ſome Knights, and marre many Gentlemen.
Ladies are good worke-women too, then?
Farre better then any Taylor: they'l make you an end of a ſuite, eſpecially a Court ſuite, when all the Taylors in a Countrey know not how to ſet a ſtitch in't.
I am of the beliefe you are a knaue, ſir.
I had no faith, ſhould I ſay you were not?
Well, what a Knaue?
In a Knaues beliefe ſir.
Becauſe in yours?
Doe you ſay't, and ile ſweare it, my Lord.
No more Boy, I am weary of your jeſts.
That confirmes them to be good ſir.
Your reaſon for that, ſir?
Becauſe travellers and lovers, are ſoone weary of goodneſſe.
Goodly ones indeed: but leaving this high-way of circumſtance; I ſent you for Manaſſes.
The learned Scribe attends you.
Will you fall off ſir?
Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without ſhaking. Exit.
Welcome Manaſſes: I haue preſent employment for thee, in which I muſt borrow—
Pardon me Madam, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without ſecuritie and pawnes.
'Tis not money (Manaſſes) but counſell and furtherance that we deſire.
Good counſell is worth good money Madam.
Thou ſhalt bee well conſidered; there's twenty Crownes in earneſt.
Nay Madam, this hand is like a fellow that takes every thing in jeſt; if you be in earneſt, let me feele it here: So Lady, now betwixt earneſt and jeſt, if your Will be ready drawne, before your friend delivered as your deed, and put me in truſt to execute it.
Take it this, in a word honeſt Sheepheard, and thy Lords daughter Madam Mopſa, are man and wife.
Man, and woman perhaps, but not man and wife: for though moſt women haue a will to bee Ladies, like my Lords wife; yet every Lady hath not wit to bee a wife, as my Lords Daughter. But what good can I doe in this?
O very much: for though they bee man and wife by oath and proteſtation, the chiefeſt ceremony of all; namely Mariage is yet unperformed, and hearing that you haue ane orders.
That I haue: I haue tane order for the making away of a hundred Maidenheads in my time, and not ſo few: but I am in the mind of you now, theſe two beagles, Dorus and Mopſa, haue runne themſelues breathleſſe in the chaſe of loue, you would ha' me couple them up in the leaſes of Matrimonie.
You are in the right.
And you in the wrong, ile keepe your jeſt, but in any caſe take backe againe your earneſt: ile not purchaſe my Lords diſpleaſure with your gold.
Thy Lord ſhall never know't.
Oh ſir! though my Mhath but bad eyes, hee hath exceeding long eares: and though a Forrayner may play with a Citizens wooden Dagger, I would not wiſh any to jeſt with a Courtiers ſteeld Sword; tis ſeldome drawen but it drawes blood.
Tuſh man, be not ſo timerous, my credite ſhall countenance thee: bee not an Aſſe, make uſe of thy time: thy maſters ſervice is no heritage; the world knowes hee gets under the Duke, thou art a foole, and thou wilt looſe under him: there's a hundred Crownes for thee; tuſh man, thy betters will ſtraine curteſie with aleagence for a bribe
Madam, could you to every one of theſe Crownes giue me a Kingdome?
What then?
I ſhould haue more ground then halfe the Kings in Chriſtendome: here's my hand, ile do't: my M. is my M. and I loue him; but my gold's my God, and I honour it: ile do't; the time and place?
Soone in the evening at Adonis Chapell. Art reſolute?
As your Adamant: thinke you 'twas feare made me keepe out? no twas hope of theſe flattering ſweet lipt dabs. I feare to marry my Ladies daughter? no nor to goe to bed with her neither, Why, I haue counterfeited his hand and ſeale. Hee has beene content with mee, to come neerer to him, at his entertainement of the laſt Embaſſadour, when hee was heate with drinking of healths. As I led him to his Chamber, I nimdhis Chaine, and drew his Purſe, and next morning perſwaded him he lot it in the great Chamber at the Revels. Hee puts me in truſt with his whole eſtate: he buyes Maners, I purchaſe Farmes: he builds houſes, I plucke downe Churches: he gets of the Duke, and I of the Commons: he beggers the Court, and I begger the whole Countrey.
Theſe are notable knaviſh courſes. What breeding haſt had?
Very good breeding ſir: My great Grandfather was a Rat-catcher, my Grandſier a Hangman, my father a Promooter, and my ſelfe an Informer.
Thou wert a knave by inheritance.
And by education too: but bawdy Informations growing ſtale, I gave up my cloake to a Broker, and crept into credite for a Gowne, and of Manaſſes a penurious Informer, I turned Coppy, and became Manaſſes, a moſt preciſe and illiterate expoſitor.
Were you a Reader then?
And a Writer too Bullie, I ſet ſome of my Pariſhioners wives ſuch coppies, as their husbands might caſt their caps at it, but could never come neere.
But and you us'd ſuch a high and elevate ſtile, your auditories low and humble underſtandings ſhould never crall over't.
Tuſh, I could faſhion the body of my diſcourſe fit to the eare of my auditory: for to caſt Eloquence amongſt a company of Stinkards, is all one as if a man ſhould ſcatter pearle amongſt the hoggiſh animals ecliped Swine: no, I had paraphraſticall admonitions of all ſorts; Some againſt couetous Land-lords, and that would I ſquirt amongſt beggarly Tennants; Some againſt Vſurers, and that would I throw in at Priſon Grates amongſt prodigall Bankroutes; Some againſt the pride of the Court, and that honies the eare of the Citizen; Some againſt the fraud of the city, and that's cake and cheeſe to the Countrey; Some againſt Proteſtants, and that plumps the laſy Catholike; againſt Papiſt and Proteſtant, and that fattens the ranke-witted Puritan; againſt Papiſt, Puritan, and Proteſtant, and that tickles the eare of the luxurious Athieſt.
Why you never light upon any Athieſts, doe you?
Oh very many.
In the countrey perhaps, and the out-skirts of the City.
In the very boſome of the City, and by your leave, here and there one in the Court too: But wee fit em all; for indeed wee wandring Lights have (as other Tradeſ-men have) Commodities of all ſorts and prices.
How doe they come by them?
As many doe by Offices, ſteale into them ere the Duke be aware of em. Some buy em at Booke-ſellers ſtalls, but the beſt they beſpeake of Poets.
Mee thinkes Poets of all men ſhould not edify, they are ſo envious.
One to another, to nobody elſe: a Proud Poet is for all the world like a Puncke in requeſt, covetous of many Clients, when ſhe hath more then ſhee can handſomely play off: You ſhall have ſome Poet (Apolloes Vicar eſpecially) write you a Comicall, Paſtorall, Tragicall, Muſicall hiſtory in Proſe, will make the Auditors eyes runne a water like ſo many water-ſpouts; I had one of them my ſelfe, and your eares bee in caſe, Ile give you a taſt on't; his argument was fet out of the Poem called, The loſt ſheepe, and thus it is.
Prithee be briefe.
Nay peace, and it were in place where you might wake the beſt men in the pariſh, for commonly they ſleepe the beginning, becauſe they love not diviſion: but to the loſt Sheepe. Beloved, you muſt imagine this Sheepe was a Sheepe, a loſt Sheepe, a Sheepe out a the way; but my deare Flocke and loving Sheepe, whom like a carefull Shepheard I have gathered together, with the whiſtle or pipe, as it were of mine Eloquence, into this Fold of peacefull Communitie, doe not you ſtray, doe not you flie out, doe not you wander, doe not you looſe your ſelves; but like kinde Sheepe and valiant Rams, I ſpeake to you the better part and head of my Flocke: As I ſay, you ſhall ſee the valiant Rammes turne all their hornes together, and oppoſe themſelves againſt the Wolfe, the hungry Wolfe, the greedy Wolfe, the Lambes-devouring Wolfe, the Wolfe of all Wolfes, to defend their Eawes and young ones. Durſt you lay all your heads together, and with the hornes of your Manhood defend your Families, your owne Wives, and your neighbours children: Was not this ſtinging geere?
A good Sheepiſh admonition.
The fitter for my audience; while you live have a care to fit your audience.
Thou ſpeakeſt like a Chriſtian, prithee what Religion art of?
How many ſoever I make uſe of, Ile anſwer with Piavano Orlotto the Italian; I profeſſe the Dukes onely.
What's his reaſon for that?
A very ſound reaſon: for ſayes hee, I came raw into the world, and I would not willingly goe roſted out: ſo cloſe up the ſtomacke of your diſcourſe with that dry anſwer, and every man about his buſineſſe.
You'l be mindfull of tomorrow night?
As your Lawyer of the Tearme, or your Landlord of the Quarter-day.
Why ſo: the mettle I muſt forge my plot on, lies a warming in the furnace of my braine; and I muſt faſhion it inſtantly, for feare it burſt vvith heat. Giue my conceit way, for here comes one muſt helpe to proportion it.
How now Demetrius, what wind hath blowne up this ſtorme of melancholy? thy countenance was not wont to bee thus cloudy; Whence proceeds this ſudden alteration?
From mine owne hard fortune my Lord, that my ill-ſtard nativitie ſhould continue thus oppoſite.
Art croſt in a ſute at Court? or what's the matter? ſpeake.
Ile acquaint your Honour: I hope no other eare overheares us. Vnder Dianaes Oake I found an inſcription upon a ſtone, which told me, that wealthy Ariſtomones ſometimes brought into Arcadia, had there under hid a maſſie ſumme of treaſure.
Vnder Dianaes Oake? Dorus ſhall haue my daughter Mopſa: no more words on't, and thou loveſt me Dorus: ſmother thy golden hopes a day or two; thou ſhalt haue Mopſa, but le haue all the Gold, then marry my daughter to ſome great man, though he be poore, tis the faſhion: Ile bee nobly allied what ere it coſt me: ſhalt bee my Sonne in law Dorus. haue an eye to the Princeſſe, fall cloſe to my daughter Mopſa,
Court her and ſpare not: now begins the ſport,
Kiſſe her, doe, kiſſe her; thou ſhalt pay ſweetly for't:
I can gull you, know what faire words can doe,
I'me an old Knaue, and a young Courtier too.
So, ſo; how violently hee devoures his bane, and ſteales himſelfe into the order of Gullerie: me thinkes I ſee how betwixt hope and feare he ſweats in his practice, and like a fooliſh dreamer, caſts how to lay out his wealth before it comes in▪ So much for him: Now to my Lady Beauty his wife; and as the Devill would hat, here ſhe comes.
Dorus, how now Dorus? What time a day is't with you?
What time a day ſoever it bee with me, tis ſleeping time with my Lord, I am ſure of that.
Sleeping time Dorus, what doſt thou meane by that?
Nay nothing, hee is troubled with a kind of malady called Inſurrectio carnis.
How, a diſh of Crevices? nay and that be the worſt, good enough; I am glad a falls to Fiſh, for hee was given to Fleſh a late too too bad.
Maſſe I thought as much, for I ſaw him goe a angling.
I hold my Ladiſhip, to ſome ſtruet.
Life a jealouſy, I think you are a witch, twas ſo indeed.
Nay I thought as much; he was wont to kiſſe me, and doe all indneſſe a man could doe, till he came to the Court, and now he will not lye with me for ſooth, and why? tis the Court faſhion: he will not love me, and why? tis the Court faſhion: I muſt not come neere him at his downe-ing, nor his up-riſing, &c. And this bee the Court faſhion, would I were an honeſt woman of the Countrey againe, be Courtiers who liſt: I, I, Dorus, I tell thee in teares, hee hath not dealt by me as a husband ſhould doe.
Tis nothing to mee, I cannot doe withall Madam, would I could.
Yes marry mayſt thou Dorus; thou mayſt, and ſhalt doe withall too and thou wilt: but as thou lookeſt to enjoy my daughter Mopſa, acquaint me with the old Foxes ſtarting hole.
That's paſt my cunning, the old Foxe has more holes then one to hide's head in: But not to goe long about the buſh with you.
No good Dorus, I doe not love a man ſhould goe long about my Buſh: what is ſhe for a woman?
I know not what ſhe is for a womn, marry I feare ſhee's little better then a whore for your husband; hearke in your eare, ſhee's Manaſſes wife.
Manaſſes wife? marry fire maſter gunner, a Puritan turnd Punke: Gods my precious. Ile ſlit her noſe, as I am a Lady will I; is ſhe the party you wot on?
Yes faith Madam, ſhee is the Mare the man rid on.
Ile ſpoyle their ſport, ſaddle my Mule there, have an eye to the Princeſſe; ſhaltha my daughter, an't be but to ſpite him withal, faith Fox Ile ha you out of your hole, or Ile fire you out.
Nay that will doe no good, but for your owne good Madam, take heed you doe not ſcold.
Why, may not a Lady ſcold Dorus?
Scold? O in no caſe, twill marre a Ladies beauty cleane, and make her looke as hard-favoured as any ordinarie woman.
Godamercy for that Dorus, Ile not loſe my beauty for twenty on em: ſaddle my Mule, bring mee my chopping-knife, Ile geld the lecherous Goat, and mince his Trull as ſmall as herbs to the pot. This is not ſcolding Dorus, is't?
No this is tollerable.
Nay then I care not, ſaddle my Mule I ſay, let her pray God her feeling be good, for as I am a Lady, Ile not leave her an eye to ſee withall, and yet I will not ſcold neither.
Oh take heed of that at any hand. So, ſo, ſo; now it beginnes to quicken, me thinkes I ſee already how ſhe runnes atilt at the wenches eyes, calls the Mayd Bawd, the woman whore, and her husband Lecher; and when all comes to all, like an Iriſh wolfe, ſhe barkes at her owne ſhaddow; but committing her and her Aſſe to their wild-gooſe chace, now to my ſweet-heart Mopſa, for ſhee's all the blocke's laſt in my eye to ſtumble on; and God bleſſe my wits, for the foole haunts me.
Dorus, where's my Father Dorus?
Your father? O my deere Mopſa.
Nay now you flowt me.
Flout you? Oh the faire heavens! but this 'tis for a man to caſt away himſelfe in violence of paſſion, and extremity of ſighs, on a piece of beauty that cares not for him, but it is the trickes of you all.
Trickes? no as God mend mee; and I ſhould not have a husband till I got him with trickes, I ſhould leade Apes in hell: but faith tell me, doſt thou love me Dorus?
Doe I love you quoth ye? It cuts my very heart-ſtrings, doe I love you? why tis the onely marke my endeavours ſhoot at.
If thou doſt not hit the marke then, thou art a very bungler: but where is my father?
Why I have ſent him and your mother out of the way of purpoſe, and appoynted Manaſſes to meete us this evening at Adonis Chappell, in the Amazons aparrell, to marry us; I thinke theſe are ſignes I love you.
I but you jeſt, I doubt you will not marrie me.
Will you meet me there?
As I am a virgine I will.
And come with an intent to marry me?
As I hope to be a wife I will.
You muſt take heed you keepe our purpoſe cloſe.
As I did the loſſe of my Maydenhead.
Why haue you loſt it then?
Many a deare day agoe, yet I told no body on't but my Mother and our Horſe-keeper, and they ſay I am nere the worſe maid for that, and I can keepe my owne counſell, as I hope I ſhall; but will you meet me ſoone?
Iuſt in the mid-way, as Tilters doe.
Ile goe afore and ſtay, but doe not deceiue me, and you doe, ile ſhew my Fathers Horſe-keeper all as God mend me.
So tria ſequuntur tria, now am I rid of a triumuirie of fooles, and by their abſence haue wonne a free acceſſe to an eſcape.
If my Liſanders hope proue like to this,
This night ſhall crowne us Monarches of our bliſſe.
No more of theſe delayes ſweet Madam, your loue hath broken day oft with my expectance, I dare giue it truſt no longer.
I confeſſe it my Liege, and like a ſpent Deare, not able to maintaine longer flight, I caſt my ſelfe downe breathleſſe at your loues mercy: yet I beſeech your Majeſtie, let not your eager deſires practiſe any preſent violence upon my yeelding chaſtitie: 'twas only poſſeſſion of my loue you had in chace, which with convenient time and place purchaſed, I put your grace in full poſſeſſion of.
Although thy breath bee never but muſicall, yet it never raught the ſtring of true happineſſe till now: and to approue thy heart ſets hand to thy word, appoint the time.
Then this preſent evening (and yet my Virgine blood is aſhamed to conſent to the betraying of my modeſtie) meet me at Adonis bower, where ile make tender of ſubdued chaſtitie to your high Majeſtie, as my firſt and moſt victorious conquerour.
By my Imperiall Globe, and hope of thoſe joyes, thy preſence ſhall bring to enrich mee with, Ile meet thee, and make thee Queene over the moſt ſubmiſſe Captiue that ever loue tooke priſoner.
If you deceiue me—
Not except warme life,
Deceiue my veines of their innatiue heat.
Then haſte ſlow time, exchange thy leaden feete
For Hermes wings till I my faire hopes meet.
But lockt once in the armes of my delight,
Cloath all the world in an eternall night.
And ſteed of morning when the Sun ſhould riſe,
They ſhall ſee two in my Zelmanes eyes.
So farewell thought I, I haue prepar'd you a Zelmanes anſwerable to your expectation.
Then triumph in thy will, and let thy thoughts
Proclaime a Iubilee: my teeming hopes
Are now deliver'd of a gratious birth,
Which I haue chriſtened, opportunitie,
Vnto whoſe ſhrine in honour of this day,
My thoughts ſhall hold a monethly ſacrifice.
Loue grant Demetrius meet the like ſucceſſe,
Our paines are crown'd with double happineſſe.
Only our diſguiſes hold firme, but all other attempts meet untimely deaths, even in their cradles.
What and we ſhould acquaint the Ladies with our intents?
'Twould argue a kind of cowardiſe in our wits, that haue ſuch ſuſpectles admittance to their preſence, as this diſguiſe hath purchaſed us, wee ſhould not haue that abilitie of inventure to entangle them in their owne ſecuritie.
Well howſoever, wee muſt not dwell long determining for the libertie of ſtay with Dametas, who out of his covetous diſpoſition in detayning our reward allowed us, the eldeſt day of our licenc't aboad at Court, is run out.
Tis very true, and for my part, Ile rather goe home with a private repulſe, then managing any unlikely attempt, become ſufferer under a publicke diſgrace.
That's my very thought, yet that our ſecond arrivall bee not altogether empty of employment, lets practiſe ſomething upon Dametas, and acquaint the world with his coward baſeneſſe; in which, hee not onely detracts from his maſters bountie, but looke how as a Conduit head or maſter-ſpring that is poyſoned, doth his beſt, to infect the whole body of the Court, with the leaproſie of his covetouſneſſe.
There's no action of his begetting can be ſaid to bee truely honourable.
How can they when their Father is a mungrell? the Duke out of his honourable bounty commanded him to reward our travels with 00. Crownes: and now after two moneths attendance, and enforc't delayes, In which time an ordinary Petitioner might haue ſpent the valew of the reward, hee packs us off with fiftie Crownes, his excuſe being that his maſter hath forgot us, and what he doth, is of his owne bounty, as if the Moone ſhould brag ſhee gaue the world light, when all the luſter ſhe hath, comes from the heat of the Sunne.
Should his villanies be ſuffered to proſper, they would grow to ſuch height, as the Dukes authority ſhould haue much trouble to prune them.
To prevent which, his Majeſty ſhall haue private note of it, knew we in whoſe truſt to conduct it.
Tis an office very few dare undertake, he is ſo riveted to the Dukes good opinion.
Lies there no jarre twixt none of the Nobilitie and him, what ſay you of Zelmane?
The gallant Amazon: you could not haue caſt your choice fitter, for her honourable minde maintaines deadly feud againſt his baſe proceedings; and here ſhee comes, attended by Dameta's ſervant, lets waite on opportunity.
Liſander.
Demetrius.
Liſander and Demetrius? ſtand cloſe, of my life wee are come to the birth of ſome notable knavery.
How blowes the winds of our hopes?
Faire to the poynt of our expectation, I haue made away the Duke and the Dutcheſſe.
How made away them? poyſon'd them?
With a confection of loue, which I haue ſo tempred with faire promiſes, as their mindes are in loues haven already, Videlicet in Adonis bower, where this evening I haue given them my word to meet them; but I haue ſo caſt it, that Manaſſes ſhall meet them in my ſteed.
'Twill be a rare Scene of mirth, to heare what coſtly diſcourſe they'l beſtow upon the foole in thy outſide.
Doe you heare that?
Yes, thanke loue and my eares, but liſt the concluſion.
I haue cleard the way to Violetta, but what order haſt thou ane with thy burbolts, Dametas, Miſo, and amorous Mopſa?
Shot them away, at three ſeverall markes, yet ſo conveyed it, that in the end they ſhall all meet at Adonis Chappell.
This project cannot but bring forth ſome notable deceit.
My hopes ſhould want of their will, and it doe not—
Now we haue made a ſmooth paſſage to our eſcape, how ſhall we convey our loves out of the Iland?
I haue determined of that ſir, and better to effect, my boy this time hath caſt ſuch a baite of knavery to the two Captaines, Kalander and Philanax, as we may paſſe without ſuſpition.
But how for tranſportation.
I am furniſht of that too, you remember the two Lacedemon intelligencers.
Now what of us?
Hold my life, we ſhall be put in this Scene of Gullery.
Oh in any caſe.
For the loue of Cupid doe, inquiry is paſt, lets take our entrance, and paſſe over the ſtage like mutes, to furniſh out a ſhow.
And ſee occaſion like a kind wench preſents them in the very inſtant, my honeſt friend welcome, haue you not your diſpatch with a letter to Lacedemon.
Madam we haue, and ſtay onely to take our leaues of your Ladiſhip, and know what ſervice your honour will command.
You haue my thankes, for the truth is, I muſt commit buſines of much import unto your truſt, and to prevent much circumſtances take my word, your are not ignorant of the Kings generall challenge.
About his daughters.
You underſtand mee, with theſe few crownes receiue my mind, which is to convey the two Ladies, whom we in theſe diſguiſes haue wonne to Lacedemon.
Were we but confirm'd of your eſtates.
Wee'l giue you ſufficient aſſurance of that, and the Princeſſes themſelues ſhall confirme it.
Wee craue no better Madam, but ſhall we not haue your honours company?
No: having brought them aboard, wee'l make returne to the Duke, to let him underſtand we ſtole not our prizes but wonne them manfully at the poynt of wit.
A noble reſolution.
His foile will appeare the more palpable, and your conqueſt the more applauſible, where ſhall we receiue the Ladies?
Be that our care, but on your liues be heedfull of their▪ ſafeties.
More then of our owne my Lord.
Enough, whilſt you attend weele to the Duke, and play all Guls or none.
All Guls indeed ſince you had follies vvhip,
No Guls, to all Guls, fooles loue fellowſhip.
Looke well to mine Aſſe there, Lord how I ſweat with anger; this ſames the houſe ſure, and now like a wiſe Lady let me count my hurts, and ſee how I ſhall be reveng'd: it ſhall be ſo, ile haue them both carted, and Manaſſes ſhall goe afore like a whifer, and make way with his hornes: where be theſe whores? open the doore, where bee theſe panders? O that I vvere not a Lady, I could ſcold like a butter-vvhore.
Whoſe there a Gods name? Lord for his mercy is the vvoman mad?
Yes I thanke yee fo't▪ horne mad, vvhere's your companion, vvhere's the old leacherous Goat my husband? open the doore I ſay.
Ieſus for thy mercy ſake, Madam vvhat doe you vvant?
What do I vvant? the chiefe implement a vvoman ſhould haue; I vvant that as a vvoman cannot be vvithout, I meane my husband I vvant.
Your husband? I ſavv him not as I am an honeſt vvoman.
Not as you are an honeſt, ſo I thinke, but as you are an arrant vvhore you did, you muſt haue your Creviſhes vvith a pox, cannot Citty Maunchet and freſh God ſerue your turne, but you muſt haue Court Cake-bread and Creviſhes vvith a vengeance? but come giue me my husband, or Ile haue him ou of the fleſh on thee, and yet I vvill not ſcold neither.
Pray madam ha' patience: vvhat ſhould your husband doe here?
That vvhich he ſhould doe at home vvith his vvife, and he were worth his eares.
Lady I protect I doe not know him.
Not know him? thou lieſt in every vee i'th heart, thou lyeſt thou knoweſt him, and as Adam knew Eue thou knoweſt him, he hath beene as in ward with thee, as ever he was with me, he hath, by his owne confeſſion he hath, and thou denieſt it, thou lieſt in thy throat like a Puritanicall whore as thou art, O that I were a butter whoe for an houre I might ſcold a little.
Madam they are no honeſt men that bring theſe tales to you.
Men bring tales to me? I deie thee in thy guts, I defie thee. men bring tales to mee? thou takeſt me to bee one of thine owne Church doſt? they are no honeſt men that bring tales to thee and ha' wiues of their own, & my husbands one of them, go thy waies now.
I beſeech you Madam doe but heare me.
Heare thee? I haue heard too much of thee, too too much, too much, where's my husband? bring forth my husband, ile teach him to put a difference betwixt Ioan and my Lady I hold him ten pound on't, and yet I will not ſcold neither, and I had beene an old hag paſt teaming, as his whore is a puritan, it had bin ſomewhat, but being a woman of Gods making, & a Lady of his own, and wearing mine owne haire which is much in a Lady of my ſtanding I can tell you, to uſe me thus, fleſh and blood cannot endure it, let me come in, open the doore let me come in, O that I were any vile thing in the world but a Lady that I might ſcold a little.
So, ſo, ſo, take your places, for this ſame bald pated oake is the ſtage, where yee ſhall ſee the part of a doting foole performed by an old man and a young wench.
Who worſhipfull Dametas?
The ſame man.
Hath he no fellow Acters in his moſt lamentable, comicall, hiſtoricall, tragicall, muſicall, paſtoa'l?
None that require any mouthing but his Aſſe and himſelfe, marry then he has Signior Mattocke, a very ſharpe ſatyricall humoriſt, and Mounſier le ſpade, but he goes ſomewhat more bluntly to his buſines, yet heele ſerue for mutes, and as good as the beſt to furniſh out the ſtage.
But dares Dorus being but Dametas ſervant ſo abuſe his mad maſter thus groſly.
O Lord Sir, there haue beene ſerving men haue done their Maſters farre greater abuſe, yet had their wiues conceald it, their eares ſhould never haue beene acquainted with it.
Is that a faſhion in requeſt?
Altogether ile aſſure you, but obedience, Gentlemen the Scene begins.
Pray God it be good he ſtayes ſo long, Ridiculous enough, and good enough.
So, ſtand Aſſe, ſtand gentle Aſſe.
What Countrey-man is his Aſſe, he ſpeakes ſo familiarly to him?
A'th Citie breed, marry hee picks up his living ath burs and nettles that grow about the Court gate.
Be in readineſſe good mattocke, play thy part ſweet ſpade, let mee ſee; Dianaes oake? I held Dianaes oake divine, true pure gold, honeſt Dorus, fortunate Dametas.
An excellent comoedian, what life he puts into his part.
So, by thy leaue ſtone, by thy patience honeſt ſtone, the very gravell ſavours of treaſure, this ſame's the bed-chamber of my Lady Pecuia, and ſee, ſee ſome of her golden haires, more, more, more yet divine tree, pure gold, honeſt Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, ſoftly, ſoftly, not too faſt, let me not devoure my content too greedily, leſt like a cormorant I take a ſurfet on't.
Oh take heed of that maſter in any caſe.
Pure mettle, excellent gold: but let me ſee now, I ſhall by computation haue ſome three millions of 'em, ſome three or foure milions, how ſhall I employ them to make the moſt profit of them
That would be knowen indeed.
Ile put out one million to uſe, after the rate of ſeven ſcore to the hundreth: and yet I wont, no fie, for then you will haue my humour brought ath ſtage for a vſurer; to prevent with ſcandalous report, ile put it into my Scribe-majors hand, & he ſhall deae for me.
There's a ſimple cloake▪ to cover his villany.
Tis a very ſhort one: and paſſing ſlte to hide his knavery.
It cannot chuſe but be ſeene through.
An other million ile lay to beſlow in Offices. I will haue wealth, or ile rake it out ath kennels elſe, chimnies ha' ſmoakt for't already, and now ile deale upon ſea-cole and ſalt, now, now, now, it comes, ſweet gold, honeſt Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, divine gold, how, how ſhal I adore thee? O let me doe the homage of my knees: now, now, for the tongue of a Poet, though I hate poetry worſe then ny of the ſeven deadly ſins, I could wiſh my ſelfe a Poet for ſome houre, to write a Poem in the praiſe of my divine miſtreſſe; and ſee he very bed wherein her divinitie is lodged: happy, happy, thrice happy Dametas, now like an o're joyd lover, let mee open the ſheets of my heavenly miſtreſſe with reverence, ſo with humble reverence, and like a bluſhing lover that puts out the light ere he preſumes to touch the bed of his loue, ſo let me darken the candles of my body, mine eyes, and firſt bleſſe my hands with touching, next enrich mine eares with hearing, and laſtly make happy my eyes with ſeeing, and let them convey the joy downe into the boſome of my thoughts by degrees, ſoftly by degrees.
Did you ever ſee Aſſe make ſuch a ceremonious preparation?
Be not offended ſweet mitreſſe that I preſume to touch.
A fooles head of your owne.
Has a beene at any coſt of all this invocate for a coxcombe and a bell.
Beſhrow my judgement but he deſerues it.
And his deſert were nere ſo much, he could but beare away the bell, and ſo you ſay he doth.
A coxcombe and a bell, oh indignity: damnable oake, vile and evill accurſt Dorus, unfortunate Dametas; Diana I tell thee thou art no honeſt goddeſſe to uſe a Gentleman thus. Whats here a writing, your helpe good ſpectacles, lend me your helpe good ſpectacles, ſome comfortable newes good ſpectacles:
Who hath his hire, hath well his labours plac't,
Earth thou didſt ſeeke, and ſtore of earth thou haſt.
He that vaine hopes purſues for loue of pelfe,
Shall looſe his vvits and likely find himſelfe.
Then thinke thy paines revvarded vvell,
Thou broughſt the foole, beare backe the bell:
Of other matters vvhat enſues,
Adonis bovver ſhall tell thee nevves,
Villanous poetry, I am made a flat foole by poetry; But though I can doe them no▪ further diſgrace, my fatall curſe, A vvronged gentlemans fatall curſe dvvell ever upon them: Diana here me, and let my vvords find gratious acceptance.
Hide your heads, the terrible curſe comes like a ſtone upon you.
Rancor, ſpite, malice, hate, and all diſaſters,
Strengthen my faith againſt all poetaſtors.
May their intents though pure as chriſtall glaſſes,
Be counted falte and capitall Treſpaſſes,
O may their lines and labour'd induſtrie,
Though worthy of Apollo's plaudite,
The cleereſt thought in loyalty excelling,
Be by ſome Dor preſented for libelling;
When they have writ a Scene, in which their braines
Have dropp'd their deereſt ſweets, and their ſwolne veines
Emptied the Conduit of their pureſt ſpirit,
As they ſtand gaping to receive their merit,
In ſtead of Plaudities, their chiefeſt bliſſes,
Let their deſerts be crown'd with mewes and hiſſes:
Behind each poſt, and at the Gallery corners,
Sit empty gulls, ſlight fooles, and falſe Informers;
Let ſome ſlye Foxe out of diſcretions embers,
Terme them the Lands unneceſſary members;
And like the Deere, when they have ſpent their breath
To make Kings ſport, let them be torne to death,
Even by their friends; 'twould ſet my thoughts a twanging,
Might I but e one of them goe to hanging.
A paſſing ſtrange curſe, and no queſtion he has travelled farre for ſome of the times.
He muſt travell further that findes any reaſon in't.
No matter for reaſon, there's rime enough if that be good.
Some of it is no better then it ſhould bee, or my judgement deceives me.
Sure hee had ſome reaſon to make this rime, and a man could picke it out.
Rather then Ile bee counted inquiſitive, mine eares ſhall content themſelves with the rimes only, and leave the reaſon to the ſcanning of Poets, whom it more neerely concernes.
But where's the wag that invited us to this banquet of mirth, ſhrunke in the wetting?
I were a rare jeſt now, if whil'ſt the Boy keeps us here in expectation of Dametas gullery, his Maſter has made an eſcape with the Dukes daughters.
That, or ſome knavery elſe upon my life: I had the boy in ſhrewd ſuſpicion at the firſt.
And this his ſudden and ſtoln departure confirms it currant.
Then we are ſped, for in ſuſpitions face
I ſee ſome ſubtle ſtratagem in chace.
Will your Ladiſhip beleeve me now? nay and I ſay't your worſhip may ſwear't, though I have but a (poore as to ſay) hole of mine owne, I hope the ſpirits have more denomination over mee, then to make it a common Slaughter-houſe of carnallity, where every Iacke may command fleſh for his money.
No more wordes ſweete woman, I confeſſe I was in the wrong, this is not the hole the Foxe hides his head in, and therfore for the love of woman-hood conceale mine errours; for howſoever I complain'd, tis thy forehead akes, thy temples have the terrible blow as they ſay, thy husband is a bad man.
My husband?
I, I, good woman, thy husband; hee is, as I ſay, a fleſhly member, and I feare he has overcome the fooliſh thing my daughter.
Your daughter? Ile ſlit her noſe by this light, and ſhe were ten Ladies, twas not for nothing my husband ſaid hee ſhould meete her this Evening at Adonis Chappell: but and I come to the Godſpeed on't, Ile tell em on't ſoundly.
I doe good woman, tell em on't and ſpare not, but in any caſe doe not ſcold.
Why, may not a Gentlewoman ſcold in a good caſe?
I know not what a Gentlewoman may doe in a good caſe, but a Lady muſt not in any caſe.
Though I may not ſcold, I may tell em roundly on't I hope.
That you may doe law.
And Ile not bee mealely mouth'd I warrant em: will you beare me company to the Chappell Madam?
With all my heart Miſtris: What Dorus hath given me, Ile give my friend, No foole to company.
FArewell bright Sunne, thou lightner of all eyes,
Thou fall'ſt to give a brighter beame to riſe.
Each tree and ſhrub weare trammells of thy haire,
But theſe are wiers for none but Kings to weare,
And my rude tongue, ſtriving to blaze her forth,
Like a bad Arts-man, does diſgrace her worth:
But here's the place, upon this Chriſtall ſtreame,
Where Citharea did unyoake her teame
Of ſiluer Doves to interchange a kiſſe
With young Adonis, ſhall I meet my bliſſe?
The gentle minutes crown'd with chryſtall flowers,
Loſing their youths, are growne up perfect houres,
To haſten my delight: The baſhfull Moone,
That ſince her dalliance with Endymion
Durſt never walke by day, is under ſaile,
In ſtead of ſheetes has ſpread her ſilver vaile,
Each gliding Brooke and every buſhy tree,
Being tipt with ſilver, weare her livery;
And the dimme night, to grace our amorous warres,
Hath ſtucke nine Spheares full of immortall ſtarres,
In ſtead of pearles; the way on which ſhe treads
Is ſtrew'd with chryſtall deaw and ſilver beades:
She comes, her feet make muſicke with the ground,
And the chaſt aire is raviſht with the ſound,
My ſoule flies forth to meet her: hell, my wife,
Her preſence like a murtherer drives the life
Out of my pleaſures breſt, her jealous eye
Envies the heaven of my felicity.
Zelmane, or my husband? life, or hate?
What makes old Autumne out a bed ſo late?
That ſnow ſhould goe a wooing to the Sunne,
When one warme kiſſe workes her confuſion!
I have the jeſt, ſuſpition that keepes
Court in my husbands thoughts, ſeeing my Love
Elect this walke, hath brought him after him.
She dogs her ſure, and ſhe to ſhake her off
Hath tane ſome other walk, Ile place mine care
In diſtance of her will.
Could I but heare the innocent delivery of his breath,
'Twould be a ſecond Iubile of mirth.
Here comes my Love.
Your Love? Alas poore Duke,
Your forward hopes will meet a barren ſpring,
My Sunne appeares.
Fie, your love ſpeakes too loud,
Your Sunne's eclips'd, you doate upon a cloud.
See how his armes, like precious Phoenix wings, Spread to imbrace me.
Now the Cuckow ſings;
Thoſe amorous armes doe make a golden ſpace
To hug a Duke.
But Ile fill up the place.
Thoſe fingers tipt with curious Porphery,
Staining Pigmalions matchleſſe imag'ry,
Like amorcus twins all of one mother urſt,
Contend in courteſy who ſhould touch me firſt.
Should touch me firſt; their ſtrife is undertooke,
To twine a young Bay, not a ſtooping Oake.
Young Bay? ſtale jeſt, that a dry ſapleſſe rinde
Should hold young thoughts, and a licentious mind:
Were ſhe but gone now.
Were the Duke away,
My hopes had got the better of the day.
This is Adonis Chappell, I wonder they come not; though I beare but a litle learning about me, and a few good clothes, I would not wiſh em to make Balams Aſſe of me: for though many fooles take no felicity but in wearing good clothes (though they bee none of their owne) I have a further reach in me.
I could ban my ſtarres.
my fate.
That croſſe me thus.
Makes me unfortunate.
Alas good Lady, how her pretty feet
Labour to find me.
Such blacke events.
Darken her ſelfe.
That in the boſome of ſome foggy cloud
I might imbrace my love.
That my hopes ſhould meet
O would the friendly night
Would the Moone loſe her light,
But night is purblind,
To make a Duke a ſlave.
To make e Dutcheſſe
Wreſtle with amorous paſſions.
Life a ſpleene,
Could my rough breath like a temptſtuous wind,
Blow out heavens candles, leaue the world ſtarke blind,
That it might either haue no eyes to ſee,
Or uſe thoſe eyes it hath to pleaſure me.
Or uſe thoſe eyes it hath to pleaſure me?
Who would haue thought the cold had beene ſo good a muſician? how it playes upon my chaps? and maketh my teeth skip up and downe my mouth like a company of virginall Iacks, but I find ſmall muſicke in it, and Mopſa ſhould come now I could doe her little good, yet and ſhe were here, ſhe and I would haue about at cob-nut or at chery-pit, or ſome what to keepe our ſelues from idleneſſe, though ſhe be but a foole, the bable's good enough to make ſport withall in the darke, and that very word hath ſtarted her.
Whoſe there Manaſſes?
Yes Mopſa.
Plaine Mopſa, I might bee Madam Mopſa in your mouth, goodman—where's Dorus?
Why? becauſe he will not be ſaid to make too much haſte to a bad bargaine, he is not come yet.
Not come? a peaſcod on him, but al's one, I thought at firſt he would make but a foole on mee.
Would you haue him mend Gods workemanſhip?
But chuſe him, ſince he hath buld me with an vrchin, ile goe fetch Raph our Horſe-keeper; let him that got the calfe keepe the cow in a knaues name and he will, haue you your booke here?
No matter wench, I can do't well enough without booke.
Nay and yee can do't well enough your ſelfe, I care for neither of them both, but indeed I loue to haue a thing well done, for ſayes my mother, a thing once well done, is twice done, and I am in her mind for that up and downe.
Whoſe with my Lord the Duke? it cannot be,
Mine eye would not conceale ſuch treachery.
Tis not the Dutcheſſe ſure, no it is amarous Ioue,
That ſeeing Zelmane paſſionate for loue,
Deſcends to comfort her; Ioue if there be
A powerfull Phoebus God of poetry,
In deare remembrance of faire Daphnes rape,
To winne my loue, lend me ſome ſtranger ſhape,
Such as your ſelues haue worne, that when your ſame
Is ſung by Poets, they may quote my name.
Sure tis my daughter.
Daughter? how her eye
Cut out new formes, new ſhapes of jealouſie?
As ſure as death tis ſhe, for ſee they ſtand
Like amarous twins, in twiſted hand in hand,
Breaſt againſt breaſt, and that no joy be miſſing,
To heare diſcourſe, their lips keepe time with kiſſing,
Ile not endure't, impatience grow ſtrong,
And though a Prince, tell him he doth thee wrong.
Doe, prethee doe, this ſweetens all the reſt,
But here would be the elixar of the jeſt,
If whilſt we keepe each other at a bay,
A third ſhould come, and beare the hare away.
Villanous poetry, unchriſtian-like poetry, I am cozend of my gold by poetry, rob'd of my charge by poetry, made an apparant foole by poetry, villanous Oke, accurſt Dorus, unfortunate Dametas: whoſe there my daughter and with Zelmane? a wel-willer to Dorus, a favorite to poetry, and therefore enemy to Dametas, come hither Mopſa, a thy fathers bleſſing come not neare her: what Mopſa.
Yes, whoſe there? Dorus.
Confuſion a Dorus, I am thy miſerable father, didſt not ſee Hippolita?
No by my troth not. Did yee not ſee Dorus?
Poxe of Dorus, I am undone Madam and thou telft me not of Hippolita.
Poxe a Hippolita, I am a dumbe woman and you can tell me newes of Dorus.
I had rather ſee ten Doruſſes hanged, then looſe Hippolita.
I had rather ſee ten fathers damn'd, then looſe my ſweet Dorus.
I ſhall run mad and I find not Hippolita.
I ſhall run franticke and I find not Dorus.
Whats here? I ſhall run mad for Hippolita.
And I ſhall run franticke and I find not Doras, I hold my life we haue ſome Comoedy in hand, wee ſhall haue a full Scene, for here comes more Actors.
As ſure as I am a ſinner to God Madam, that ſames he.
What with a brace of wenches, ifaith old brocke, have I ne you in the manner, is this the fruits of your lying alone, is this your Court cuſtome with a wannion? lend me thy knife, though I had neither houſe nor land to give em, Ile beſtow a whores marke betwixt you, and yet I will not ſcold neither.
What a goodyer aile you mother, are you frampall, know you not your owne daughter?
Mopſa? O inſufferable wrong, make thine owne naturall child thy Bawd?
Here's an excellent patterne for wives to learne to ſcold by.
What Miſtreſſe Amazon? ha you ſuch a cocking ſpirit, honeſt women cannot keep their husbands at home for you? tis not for nothing now I ſee, that the Dutcheſſe lookes yellow on you, but Ile teare that painted whores face of yours, (by this light) and yet I will not ſcold neither.
Madam.
Ile mad you with a vengeance.
Touch not the Prince.
On your allegeance forbeare, what means this outrage, cannot our private walkes be priviledg'd from your wild contentions?
How fares the Prince?
How cheeres my good Zelmane?
Zelmane? No Gods my judge my iege am Manaſſes, miſerable Manaſſes▪ your husbands Scribe-major Madam.
Manaſſes?
A foole.
My mn.
And my deare hda ſweet love, what makeſt th here?
My worke for the Hang-man, and the Duke bee not the more mercifull.
There's ſome deceipt in this: Dametas, where's Hippolita?
I, I, there's ſome knavery in this: Mopſa, where's Hippolita?
Doubtles ther ſome villany in this: Mopſa, wher's Hipolita?
There's no plaine dealing in this, Manaſſes, where's Dorus?
Anſwer directly, where's Hippolita?
Alas Madam I know not, whil'ſt I almoſt meled my ſelfe with digging of gold in Diana's Oke, I left her in my wives charge.
And whil'ſt I ran to Manaſſes, thinking to take my husband and his wife in the manner, I left Hippolita in my daughters chamber.
And whil'ſt came to Adonis chappel, to be toſt in my mariage blankets with Dorus, I left my litle dog Pearle picking dazies.
Who ſent you to Diana's Oake to dig gold?
Who ſent you to take your husband in Manaſſes houſe?
Dorus.
Who ſent you to Adonis Chappell?
Dorus.
And who turn'd you into this ſhape?
They that I feare have made Gulls of us all, Zelmane and Dorus.
We are all ſimply gulld, and ſee where the Sn ſcarce halfe ready, skips from his Eaſterne bed, ſmiling at our gullery.
Come where's this luſty wit-maſter?
The Keeper of this Love-lotterie.
This gallant Iuventus of foureſcore, that like my Ladie of the Lake, diſplayes againſt all commers.
May a couple of plaine-witted Princes have a ſight of your prizes?
Where be theſe Ladies, ha? ha your wits had ſuch a skir miſhing, that the two Maids have loſt their heads in the conflict?
Heads? I and bodies too my Lord, and all at one ſhot, and which is worſe, our wits are ſo ſcattered with the terrible blow, that, to be plaine, we are ſcarce our owne men againe.
Then you had ſome knocking.
So it appeares by the ſtorie my Lord.
How ſay you my Lady, what Oule ſings out of that Ivy-buſh?
VVas your wit Knighted in this laſt action?
I am not ſuch a foole, I love my Lord, I am no Knight, I am Manaſſes, they made a plaine foole.
The onely weare, for the guarded foole is out of requeſt: but faith my Liege, how did your oppoſites behave themſelves, did they winne the wenches faire at the point?
At the very puſh of invention, and went off cleere untoucht.
And could you draw no blood of their wits?
Not a drop.
Nor Dametas neither, nor Manaſſes?
Neither, to our diſgrace be it ſpoken, the carriage of this ſtratagem deſerves applauſe, and I hold it a credite to reſt captive to ſuch valiant conquerours.
VVhy ſo be, I like a man that will confeſſe his errour.
It merits commiſeration Madam and my Liege, not to detract from our worth: your eare, we two are the parties you wot on.
Were you the man?
No he was the man, marry I was the woman in the Moone, that made you walke all this laſt night like the man in the miſt, I could ſay ſomewhat to you Madam, as for Dametas and his man, let them ſtand like fooles as they are.
Can it be poſſible?
No, no, we are Guls, innocent ſots, but lante tanta, the girles are ours we haue won them away to Dargiſon.
Come we haue won the conqueſt, and that's ſufficient.
You are a Manaſſes tis not ſufficient: aha not Hercules for Iole, Ioue for Danae, Apollo for Daphne, Pan for Sirne; nay the whole packe of their piperly godheads could a diſcharg'd a ſtratagem with more ſpirit of all merit; an ambling nag and a downe a downe we haue borne her away to Dargiſon.
'Twas the moſt rareſt, divineſt, Metaphyſicalſt piece of invention, that—what ſay you my liege?
I giue your deſerts their full merit, you haue gotten equality.
All the wenches gaue you.
Alas hat ſpirits under the Moone could haue detaind her, but know that her cherry red lip, a downe, a downe.
Truſt me but you haue deſerved high commendation.
Your merit ſtood of the upper ſtaire of admiration.
Why thou haſt a pretty reliſh of wit now, that canſt ſee the broad eye of my deſert at a little hole of demonſtration.
Your deſert ſaue mee free, you haue done a moſt (to uſe your owne phraſe) Metaphyſicall peece of ſervice, but you had ſome helpe in't queſtionleſſe.
I doe not thinke but the Ladies had ſome handin't.
A finger, I confeſſe a finger by the hope of perſeverance, a very little finger.
I thought as much by making of the jeſt.
I cannot detract from the Ladies worth, for I know them for excellent worke-women.
Worke-women fit to make Taylors men.
I by my faith doe I, nay your beſt taylors are arrant botchers to them, you ſhall haue a Lady make an end of a ſute, a Court ſute, eſpecially when all the Taylors in a countrey know not how to ſet a ſtitch in't.
Some ordinary ſute perhaps.
Your beſt Court ſuits that are, are finiſht by Ladies, I haue knowen a ſuite my ſelfe lien a making and mring , , and fiue yeare together, and then a Lady hath diſpatcht it in a moneth with a wet finger, ſuch a finger might the Ladies haue in your plot.
Never wet a finger by this Sunne.
Then ſhe helpt you with one dry jeſt or another, but and we may be ſo bold: faith whereare the Ladies?
Sure enough I warrant you, ſome fooles now would haue kept them here, and haue bin guld on them againe, and laught at age, but to prevent all danger, we haue ſhipt them home for Lacedemon.
To Lacedemon? your ſunne of wit ſhines but dimly in that me thinkes, to whoſe charge haue you truſted them?
To them we durſt, nay you muſt thinke we are no fooles,
Fooles? nay deepe wit, and pollicy forbid.
We had no ſooner their ſurpriſall, but we had diſguiſe ready, a ſhip ready, a couple of luſty friends ready, the Lacedemon Intelligencers.
Durſt you truſt ſuch pretious jewels in ſuch ruſty caskets?
Durſt? our health, our liues, why they were my tenants; nay you muſt thinke we ſifted them, we are no fooles in that neither.
If in any thing your wits deſerue the bable tis in that.
None but fooles would haue committed ſuch ineſtimable peeres to a couple of ſtrangers.
And in a ſhip too.
And under ſaile too.
And unfurniſht of friends too.
And without ſhipping to follow them too.
You were no fooles in any thing but that, and in that not to flatter, you expreſſe the true ſhape of folly, and meerely merit the name of fooles.
What will you ſay now when theſe fellowes ſurrender us our loues?
Weele diſcharge you and ſet their names downe for Guls in your ſteed.
You knovv the Proverbe, vvhen the skie ſals vve ſhall haue Larkes.
And vvhen you can bring proofe that vve are conſend of our Wenches vveele be the Woodcocks.
VVhy then we have once ſpring'd a couple of woodcocks.
Doe you know theſe? who are the fooles now?
Hippolita?
My Violetta?
VVhat a ſtrange change is here▪
Yes ſaith Gallants, you have very ſtrange carding and you knew all, but I hope you'l offer up your cards, and yield the ſet loſt.
Gulls?
And abus'd? Ile loſe my life before Ile loſe my honour.
Honour and life before Ile loſe my love.
Nay Gentlemen, wee barre all violence; the liberty of our challenge was to all alike equally free, and ſince theſe by faire play have won em, it ſtands with our honour to ſee them peaceably poſſeſt of em, then ſurely take em, for though you weare the breeches, give us leave to ſtand a little.
VVhy father, is't not time that we were ſped?
Tis a great charge to keep a Mayd-head,
Loſe it we muſt, and to prevent ill courſe,
Better to giv't, then haue it tane perforce,
If you be pleas'd let envy doe her worſt,
Spit out her poyſon, or contain't and burſt.
VVelcome to all, to all a kind good-night,
They truely live, that live in ſcorne of ſpight.