BId all profane away;
None here may stay
To view our Mysteries,
But, who themselues have beene,
Or will, in Time, be seene
The selfe-same Sacrifice.
For VNION, Mistris of these Rites,
Will be observ'd with Eyes,
As simple as her Nights.
Flie then, all profane, away,
Flie farre off, as hath the Day;
Night her Cortine doth display,
And this is HYMENS Holiday.
VVHat more than vsuall Light
(Throughout the Place extended)
Makes IVNO'S Fane so bright!
Is there some greater Deitie descended?
Orraigne, on earth, those Powers
So rich, as with their beames
Grace VNION more than our's;
And bound her Influence, in their happier streames?
Tis so: This same is he,
The King, and Priest of Peace!
And that his Empresse, she,
That sits so crowned with her owne increase!
O you, whose better Blisses,
Have proov'd the strict embrace
Of VNION, with chaste kisses,
And seene it flowe so in your happy Race;
That know, how well it bindes
The fighting Seedes of Things,
Winnes Natures, Sexes, Mindes,
And ev'ry discord in true Musique brings:
Sit now propitious Aydes,
To Rites, so duely priz'd;
And view two Noble Maydes,
Of different Sexe, to VNION sacrifiz'd.
In honour of that blest Estate,
Which all Good Mindes should celebrate.
SAve, save the Virgins; Keepe your halow'd Lights
Vntouch'd: And with their flame defend our Rites.
The foure vntempred Humors are broke out:
And, with their wild Affections, goe about
To ravish all Religion. If there be
A Power, like REASON, left in that huge Bodie,
Or little World of Man, from whence these came,
Looke forth, and with thy bright and numerous flame
Instruct their Darkenesse, make them know, and see,
In wronging these, they have rebell'd gainst thee.
FOrbeare your rude attempt; what Ignorance
Could yeelde you so profane, as to advance
One thought in Act, against these Mysteries?
Are VNION'S Orgies of so slender price?
She that makes Soules, with Bodies, mixe in Love,
Contracts the World in one, and therein IOVE;
Is Spring, and End of all Things yet, most strange!
Her selfe nor suffers Spring, nor End, nor Change.
No wonder, they were you, that were so bold;
For none but Humors and Affections would
Have dar'd so rash a venture. You will say
It was your Zeale, that gave your powers the sway;
And vrge the masqued, and disguisd pretence
Of saving Bloud, and succ'ring Innocence?
So want of Knowledge, still, begetteth iarres,
When humorous Earthlings will controle the Starres.
Informe your selves, with safer Reverence,
To these mysterious Rites, whose mysticke sense
REASON (which all things but it selfe) confounds)
Shall cleare vnto you, from th'authentique grounds.
THe Paire, which doe each other side,
Though (yet) some space doth them divide,
This happy Night must both make one
Blest Sacrifice, to VNION.
Nor is this Altar hut a Signe
Of one more soft, and more divine
The Geniall Bed, where HYMEN keepes
The solemne Orgies, voyd of sleepes:
And wildest CVPID, waking, hovers
With adoration 'twixt the Lovers.
The Tead of white, and blooming Thorne,
In token of increase is borne:
As also, with the omenous Light,
To fright all Malice from the Night.
Like are the Fire, and Water set;
That, ev'n as Moysture, mixt with Heate,
Helpes every Naturall Birth, to life;
So, for their Race, ioyne Man, and Wife.
The blushing Veyle shewes shamefastnesse
Th'ingenuous Virgin should professe
At meeting with the Man: Her Haire
That flowes so liberall, and so faire,
Is shed with grey, to intimate
She entreth to a Matrons state.
For which those Vtensills are borne.
And, that shee should not Labour scorne,
Her selfe a Snowie Fleece doth weare,
And these her Rocke and Spindle beare,
To shew, that Nothing, which is good,
Gives checke vnto the highest blood.
The Zone of wooll about her waste,
Which, in contrary Circles cast,
Doth meete in one strong knot, that bindes,
Tells you, so should all Married Mindes.
And lastly, these five Waxen Lights
Imply Perfection in the Rites;
For Five the speciall Number is,
Whence halow'd VNION claymes her blisse.
As being all the Summe, that growes
From the vnited strengths, of those
Which Male, and Female Numbers wee
Do stile, and are First Two, and Three.
Which, ioyned thus, you cannot sever
In aequall partes, but One will ever
Remaine as common; so we see
The binding-force of Vnitie:
For which alone, the peace-full Gods
In Number, alwayes, love the oddes;
And even partes as much despise,
Since out of them all Discords rise.
ANd see, where IVNO, whose great Name
Is VNIO, in the Anagram,
Displayes her glistering State, and Chaire,
As she enlightned all the Ayre!
Harke how the charming Tunes doe beate
In sacred Concords bout her seate!
And loe! to grace what these intend,
Eight of her Noblest Powers descend,
Which are enstil'd her Faculties,
That governe nuptiall Mysteries;
And weare those Masques before their faces,
Lest, dazling Mortalls with their graces
As they approach them, all Mankind
Should be, like CVPID, stroken blinde.
These ORDER waytes for, on the ground,
To keepe, that you should not confound
Their measur'd steppes, which onely move
About th' harmonious sphaere of LOVE.
THese, these are they,
Whom Humor and Affection must obey;
Who come to decke the geniall Bower,
And bring, with them, the gratefull Hower
That crownes such Meetings, and excites
The married Paire to fresh Delights:
As Courtings, Kissings, Coyings, Oths, & Vowes,
Soft Whisperings, Embracements, all the Ioyes,
And melting Toyes,
That chaster LOVE allowes.
CHO. Hast, hast, for HESPERVS his head down bowes.
COnvey them, ORDER, to their places,
And ranke them so, in severall traces,
As they may set their mixed Powers
Vnto the Musique of the Howers;
And THESE, by ioyning with them, know
In better temper how to flow:
Whilst I (from their abstracted Names)
Report the vertues of the Dames.
First CVRIS comes to decke the Brides faire Tresse.
Care of the oyntments VNXIA doth professe.
IVGA, her office to make One of Twaine:
GAMELIA sees that they should so remaine.
Faire ITERDVCA leades the Bride her way;
And DOMIDVCA home her steppes doth stay:
CINXIA the Maid, quit of her Zone defends;
TELIA (for HYMEN) perfects all, and ends.
NOw, now beginne to set
Your spirits in active heate;
And, since your Hands are met,
Instruct your nimble Feete,
In motions swift, and meete,
The happy ground to beate:
Whilst all this Roofe doth ring,
And ech discording String,
With every varied Voyce,
In VNION doth reiyce.
SVch was the Golden Chaine let down from Heaven;
And not those Linkes more even,
Then these: so sweetly temper'd, so combin'd
By VNION, and refin'd.
Here no Contention, Envie, Griefe, Deceipt,
Feare, Iealousie have weight;
But all is Peace, and Love, and Faith, and Blisse:
What Harmony like this?
The Gall, behinde the Altar quite is throwne;
This Sacrifice hath none.
Now no Affections rage, nor Humors swell;
But all composed dwell.
O IVNO, HYMEN, HYMEN, IVNO! who
Can merit with you two?
Without your presence, VENVS can doe nought,
Save what with shame is bought:
No Father can himselfe a Parent show,
Nor any House with prosp'rous Issue grow.
O then! What Deities will dare
With HYMEN, or with IVNO to compare?
Thinke, yet, how Night doth wast,
How much of Time is past,
What more then winged hast
Your selves would take,
If you were but to tast
The ioy, the Night doth cast
(O might it ever last)
On this bright Virgin, and her happy Make.
SSee, see! the bright Idalian Starre,
That lighteth Lovers to their Warre,
Complaines, that you her influence loose;
While thus the Night-sports you abuse.
THe longing Bridegroome, in the Porch,
Shewes you againe, the bated Torch;
And thrice hath IVNO mixt her Ayre
With Fire, to sommon your repaire.
SEe, now she cleane withdrawes her Light;
And (as you should) gives place to Night:
That spreades her broad, and blackest wing
Vpon the world, and comes to bring
A thousand severall-colour'd Loves,
Some like Sparrowes, some like Doves,
That hop about the Nuptiall-Roome,
And flutt'ring there (against you come)
Warme the chaste Bowre, which CYPRIA strowes,
With many a Lilly, many a Rose.
HAste therefore, haste, and call, Away:
The gentle Night is prest to pay
The vsurie of long Delights,
She owes to these protracted Rites.
O Know to end, as to beginne:
A Minutes losse, in Love, is sinne.
These Humors will the Night out weare
In their owne Pastimes here;
You doe our Rites much wrong,
In seeking to Prolong
These outward Pleasures:
The Night hath other Treasures
Then these (though long concea'ld)
Ere day, to be reveal'd.
Then, know to end, as to beginne;
A Minutes losse, in Love, is sinne.
HEre stay, and let your Sports be crown'd:
The perfect'st Figure is the Round.
Nor fell you in it by adventer,
When REASON was your Guide, and Center.
This, this that beauteous Ceston is
of Lovers many-coulor'd Blisse.
Come HYMEN, make an inner Ring,
And let the Sacrificers sing;
Cheare vp the faint, and trembling Bride,
That quakes to touch hir Bridegroom's side:
Tell her, what IVNO is to IOVE,
The same shall she be to her Love;
His Wife: which we doe rather measure
A Name of Dignity, then Pleasure.
Vp Youths, hold vp your Lights in ayre,
And shake abroad their flaming haire.
Now move vnited, and, in Gate,
As you (in paires) doe front the State,
With gratefull Honors, thanke his Grace
That hath so glorified the Place:
And as, in Circle, you depart
Link'd hand in hand; So, heart in heart,
May all those Bodies still remaine
Whom he, (with so much sacred paine)
No lesse hath bound within his Realmes
Then they are with the OCEANS streames.
Long may his VNION find increase
As hee, to ours, hath deign'd his peace.
GLad Time is at his point arriv'd,
For which Loves hopes were so long-liv'd.
Lead HYMEN, lead away;
And let no Obiect stay,
Nor Banquets, (but sweete kisses)
The Turtles from their Blisses.
Tis CVPID calls to arme;
And this his last Alarme.
Shrinke not, soft VIRGIN, you will love,
Anone, what you so feare to prove.
This is no killing Warre,
To which you pressed are;
But faire and gentle strife
Which Lovers call their Life.
Tis CVPID cries to Arme;
And this his last Alarme.
Helpe Youths, and Virgins, helpe to sing
The Prize, which HYMEN here doth bring,
And did so lately rap
From forth the Mothers lap,
To place her by that side
Where she must long abide.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
See, HESPERVS is yet in view!
What Starre can so deserve of you?
Whose light doth still adorne
Your Bride, that ere the Morne,
Shall farre more perfect bee,
And rise as bright as Hee;
When (like to him) her Name
Is chang'd, but not her Flame.
Hast, tender Lady, and adventer;
The coveous House would have you enter,
That it might wealthy bee,
And you, her Mistresse see:
Hast your owne good to meete;
Aud lift your golden feete
Above the Threshold, high,
With prosperous Augury.
Now, Youths, let goe your pretty armes;
The Place within chant's other charmes.
Whole showers of Roses flow;
And Violets seeme to grow,
Strew'd in the Chamber there,
As VENVS Meade it were.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
Good Matrons, that so well are knowne
To aged Husbands of your owne,
Place you our Bride to night;
And snatch away the Light:
That she not hide it dead
Beneath her Spouse's Bed;
Nor he reserve the same
To helpe the funerall Flame.
So, now you may admit him in;
The Act he covets, is no Sinne,
But chast, and holy Love,
Which HYMEN doth approve:
Without whose hallowing Fires
All Aymes are base Desires.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
Nw, free from Vulgar Spight, or Noyse,
May you enioy your mutuall ioyes;
Now, You no Feare controules,
But Lippes may mingle Soules;
And soft Embraces binde,
To each, the others Minde:
Which may no Power vntie,
Till One, or both must die.
And, looke, before you yeeld to slumber,
That your Delights be drawne past number;
"Ioyes, got with strife, increase.
Aect no sleepy peace;
But keepe the Brides faire eyes
Awake, with her owne Cries,
Which are but Mayden-feares:
And Kisses drie such teares.
Then, Coyne them, twixt your Lippes so sweete,
And let not Cockles closer meete;
Nor may your Murmuring Loves
Be drown'd by CYPRIS Doves:
Let Ivie not so bind
As when your Armes are twin'd:
That you may Both, e're Day,
Rise perfect every way.
And, IVNO, whose great Powers protect
The Marriage-Bed, with good effect
The Labour of this Night
Blesse thou, for future Light;
And, Thou, thy happy charge,
Glad GENIVS, enlarge:
That they may Both, e're Day,
Rise perfect every way.
And VENVS, Thou, with timely seede
(Which may their after-Comforts breede)
Informe the gentle Wombe;
Nor, let it prove a Tombe:
But, e're ten Moones be wasted,
The Birth, by CYNTHIA hasted.
So may they Both, e're Day,
Rise perfect everie Way.
And, when the Babe to light is showne,
Let it be, like each Parent, knowne;
Much of the Fathers Face,
More of the Mothers Grace:
And eyther Grand-Sires Spirit,
And Fame let it inherit.
That Men may blesse th' Embraces,
That ioyned two such Races.
Cease Youths, and Virgins, you have done;
Shut fast the Dore: And, as They soone
To their Perfection hast,
So may their ardors last.
So eithers strength out-live
All losse that Age can give:
And, though full Yeares be tolde,
Their Formes growe slowly olde.
WHo art thou, thus that imitat'st my Grace,
In Steppes, in Habite, and resembled Face?
Grave Time, and Industry my Parents are;
My Name is TRVTH, who through these sounds of War
(Which figure the wise Mindes discursive fight)
In Mists by Nature wrapt, salute the Light.
I am that TRVTH, thou some illusive Spright;
Whome to my likenesse, the blacke Sorceresse Night
Hath of these drie, and empty fumes created.
Best Herald of thine owne Birth, well related:
Put me and mine to proofe of wordes, and facts,
In any Question this faire Houre exacts.
I challenge thee, and fit this Time of Love,
With this Position, which TRVTH comes to prove;
That the most honor'd state of Man and Wife,
Doth farre exceede th'insociate Virgin-Life.
I take the adverse part; and she that best
Defends her side, be TRVTH by all confest.
It is confirm'd. With what an equall brow
To TRVTH, OPINION'S confident! and how,
Like TRVTH, her Habite shewes to sensuall Eies!
But whosoe're thou be, in this disguise,
Cleare TRVTH, anone, shall strippe thee to the heart;
And shew how mere Phantasticall thou arte.
Know then, the first Production of Things,
Required Two; from meere One nothing springs:
Without that knot, the Theame thou gloriest in,
(Th'vnprofitable Virgin) had not bin.
The Golden Tree of Marriage began
In Paradise, and bore the fruict of Man;
On whose sweete branches Angells sate, and sung,
And from whose firme roote all Societie sprung.
LOVE (whose strong Vertue wrapt Heav'ns soule in Earth,
And made a Woman glory in his Birth
In Marriage, opens his inflamed Breast;
And, lest in him Nature should stifled rest,
His geniall fire about the world he dartes;
Which Lippes with Lippes combines, and Hearts with Hearts.
Marriage LOVES Obiect is; at whose bright eies
He lights his Torches, and call's them his Skies.
For her, he wings his shoulders; and doth flie
To her white bosome, as his Sanctuary:
In which no lustfull Finger can profane him,
Nor anie Earth, with blacke Eclipses wane him.
She makes him smile in sorrowes, and doth stand
Twixt him, and all wants, with her silver hand.
In her soft Lockes, his tender Feete are tied;
And in his Fetters he takes worthy pride.
And as Geometricians have approv'd
That Lines, and Superficies are not mov'd
By their owne forces, but doe follow still.
Their Bodies motions; so the selfe-lov'd Will
Of Man, or Woman should not rule in them,
But each with other weare the Anademe.
Mirrors, thogh deckt with Diamants, are noght worth,
If the like Formes of Things they set not forth;
So Men, or Women are worth Nothing, neyther,
If eithers Eyes and Hearts present not either.
Vntouch'd Virginity, Laugh out; to see
Freedome in Fetters plac'd, and vrg'd' gainst thee.
What Griefes lie groaning on the Nuptiall Bed?
What dull Satietie? In what sheetes of Lead
Tumble, and tosse the restlesse Married Paire,
Each, oft, offended with the Others aire?
From whence springs all-devouring Avarice,
But from the Cares, which out of Wedlocke rise?
And, where there is in Lifes best-tempred Fires
And End, set in it selfe to all desires,
A setled Quiet, Freedome never checkt,
How farre are Maried Lives from this effect?
EVRIPVS, that beares Shippes, in all their pride,
Gainst roughest Windes, with violence of his Tide,
And ebbes, and flowes, seven times in every day,
Toyles not more turbulent, or fierce then they.
And thē, what Rules Husbands praescribe their Wives!
In their Eyes Circles, they must bound their Lives.
The Moone, when farthest from the Sunne she shines,
Is most refulgent; nearest, most declines:
But your poore Wives farre off must never rome,
But wast their Beauties, neare their Lords, at home:
And when their Lords range out, at home must hide
(Like to beg'd Monopolies) all their Pride.
When their Lords list to feede a serious Fit
They must be serious; when to shew their Wit
In lests, and Laughter, they must laugh, and iest;
When they wake, wake; and when they rest, must rest.
And to their Wives Men give such narrow scopes,
As if they meant to make them walke on Ropes:
No Tumblers bide more perill of their Necks
In all their Tricks; Then Wives in Husbands Checks.
Where Virgins, in their sweete, and peacefull State
Have all things perfect; spinne their owne free Fate;
Depend on no prowd Second; are their owne
Center, and Circle; Now, and alwaies One.
To whose Example, we doe still heare nam'd
One God, one Nature, and but one World fram'd,
One Sunne, one Moone, one Element of Fire,
So, of the Rest; One King, that doth inspire
Soule, to all Bodies, in this royall Spheare:
And where is Mariage more declar'd, then there?
Is there a Band more strict, then that doth tie
The Soule, and Body in such vnity?
Subiects to Soveraignes? doth one Mind display
In th'ones Obedience, and the others Sway?
Beleeve it, Mariage suffers no compare,
When both Estates are valew'd, as they are.
The Virgin were a strange, and stubborne Thing,
Would longer stay a Virgin, then to bring
Her selfe fit vse, and profit in a Make.
How she doth erre! and the whole Heav'n mistake!
Looe how a Flower, that close in Closes growes,
Hid from rude Cattell, bruised with no Ploughes,
Which th' Ayre doth stroke, Sun strengthen, Showers
It many Youths, & many Maids desire; (shoot higher,
The same, when cropt by cruell hand is wither'd,
No Youths at all, No Maydens have desir'd:
So a Virgin, while vutouch'd she doth remaine,
Is deare to hers; but when with Bodyes stayne
Her chaster Flower is lost, she leaves to appeare
Or sweete to Yong Men, or to Maydens deare.
That Conquest then may crowne me in this Warre,
Virgins, O Virgins fly from HYMEN farre.
Virgins, O Virgins, to sweete HYMEN yeeld,
For as a lone Vine, in a naked Field,
Never extols her branches, never beares
Ripe Grapes, but with a headlong heavinesse weares
Her tender bodie, and her highest sproote
Is quickly levell'd with hir fading roote;
By whom no Husband-men, no Youths wil dwell;
But if, by fortune, she be married well
To th Elme, her Husband, many Husband-men,
And many Youths inhabite by her, then:
So whilst a Virgin doth, vntouch't, abide
All vnmanur'd, she growes old, with hir pride;
But when to equall Wedlocke, in fit Time,
Her Fortune, and Endeuor lets her clime
Deare to hr Loue, and Parents, she is held.
Virgins, O Virgins, to sweete HYMEN yeeld.
These are but words; hast thou a Knight will trie
(By stroke of Armes) the simple Veritie?
To that high proofe I would haue dared thee.
Ile strait fetch Champions for the Brides and Mee.
The like will I do for Virginitie.
Now ioyne; and if his varied Triall faile,
To make my Truth in Wedlocks praise prevaile,
I will retire, and in more power appeare;
To cease this strife, and make our Question cleare.
Whereat OPINION insulting, followed her with this speach.
I, Doe: it were not safe thou shouldst abide:
This speakes thy Name, with shame to quit thy side.
PRinces, attend a tale of height, and wonder.
TRVTH is descended in a second Thunder,
And now will greete you, with ludiciall state,
To grace the Nuptiall part in this debate;
And end with reconciled hands these warres.
Vpon her head she weares a Crowne of Starres,
Through which her orint Hayre waves to her wast,
By which beleeving Mortalls hold her fast,
And in those golden Chordes are carried even
Till with her breath she blowes them vp to Heaven.
She weares a Roabe enchas'd with Eagles Eyes,
To signifie her sight in Mysteries;
Vpon each shoulder sits a milke white Dove,
And at her feete doe witty Serpents move:
Her spacious Armes doe reach from East to West,
And you may see her Heart shine through her breast.
Her right hand holds a Sunne with burning Rayes,
Her left a curious bunch of golden Kayes,
With which Heav'n Gates she locketh, and displayes.
A Cristall Mirror hangeth at her brest,
By which mens Consciences are search'd, and drest:
On her Coach wheeles Hypocrisie lies rackt;
And squint-eyd Slander, with Vaine-Glory backt
Her bright Eyes burne to dust: in which shines Fate.
An Angel vshers hir triumphant Gate,
Whilst with her fingers Fannes of Starres she twists,
And with them beates backe Error, clad in mists.
Eternall Vnity behind her shines
That Fire, and Water, Earth, and Ayre combines.
Her voyce is like a Trumpet lowd, and shrill,
Which bids all sounds in Earth, and Heav'n be still.
And see! descended from her Chariot now,
In this related Pompe she visits you.
Honor to all, that Honor Nuptialls.
To whose faire Lot, in ustice, now it falls,
That this my Counterfeit be here disclos'd,
Who, for Virginity hath her selfe oppos'd.
Nor, though my Brightnesse doe vndoe her Charmes,
Let these her Knights thinke, that their equall Armes
Are wrong'd therein; "For Valure wins applause
"That dares, but to maint aine the weaker Cause.
And Princes, see, tis meere OPINION,
That in TRVTH'S forced Robe, for TRVTH hath gone!
Her gaudy Colours, peec'd, with many Folds,
Shew what vncer tainties she ever holds:
Vanish Adult'rate TRVTH, and never dare
With prowd Maydes prayse, to prease where Nuptialls are.
And Champions, since you see the Truth I held,
To Sacred HYMEN, reconciled, yeeld:
Nor, (so to yeld,) thinke it the least Despight
"It is a Conquest to submit to Right.
This Royall Iudge of our Contention
Will prop, I know, what I have vnder gone;
To whose right Sacred Highnesse Iresigne
Low, at his feete, this Starry Crowne of mine,
To shew his Rule, and Iudgement is diuine;
These Doves to him I consecrate withall,
To note his Innocence, without spot, or gall;
These Serpents, for his Wisedome▪ and these Rayes,
To shew his piercing Splendor; These bright Keyes,
Designing Power to ope the ported Skies,
And speake their Gloris to his Subjects Eyes.
Lastly, this Heart, with which all Hearts be true:
And TRVTH in him make Treason ever rue.