Sit now propitious Aides,
To Rites, so duely priz'd;
And view two noble Maides,
Of different sexe, to VNION sacrific'd.
In honour of that blest Estate,
Which all good minds should celebrate.
Here out of a Microcosme, or Globe, (figuring Man) with a kind of contentious Musique, issued forth the first Masque, of eight men.
These represented the foure Humors, and foure Affections, all gloriously attired, distinguisht only by their seuerall Ensignes and Colours; and, dauncing out on the Stage, in their returne, at the end of their daunce, drew all their swords, offered to encompasse the Altar, and disturbe the Ceremonies. At which, HYMEN troubled, spake:
SAue, saue the virgins; keepe your hallow'd lights
Vntouch'd; and with their flame defend our Rites.
The foure vntemp'red Humors are broke out,
And, with their wild affections, goe about
To rauish all Religion. If there be
A Power, like REASON, left in that huge Bodie,
Or little world of Man, from whence these came,
Looke forth, and with thy bright and numerous flame
Instruct their darknesse, make them know, and see,
In wronging these, they haue rebell'd 'gainst thee.
FOrbeare your rude attempt; what ignorance
Could yeeld you so prophane, as to aduance
One thought in act, against these mysteries?
Are VNION'S orgies of so slender price?
She that makes soules, with bodies, mixe in loue,
Contracts the world in one, and therein IOVE;
Is spring, and end of all things: yet, most strange!
Her selfe nor suffers spring, nor end, nor change.
No wonder, they were you, that were so bold;
For none but Humors and Affections would
Haue dar'd so rash a venture. You will say
It was your zeale, that gaue your powers the sway;
And vrge the masqued, and disguis'd pretence,
Of sauing bloud, and succ'ring innocence?
So want of knowledge, still begetteth iarres,
When humorous earthlings will controll the starres.
Informe your selues, with safer reuerence,
To these mysterious rites, whose mysticke sence,
REASON (which all things, but it selfe, confounds)
Shall cleare vnto you, from th'authentique grounds.
THe Paire, which doe each other side,
Though (yet) some space doth them diuide,
This happie Night must both make one
Blest sacrifice, to VNION.
Nor is this Altar but a signe
Of one more soft, and more diuine.
The Geniall bed, where HYMEN keepes
The solemne Orgies, void of sleepes:
And wildest CVPID, waking, houers
With adoration 'twixt the louers.
The Tead of white and blooming Thorne,
In token of encrease is borne:
As also, with the ominous light,
To fright all malice from the Night.
Like are the fire, and water, set;
That, eu'n as moisture, mixt with heat,
Helpes euerie naturall birth, to life;
So, for their Race, ioyne man and wife.
Who come to decke the geniall Bower,
And bring, with them, the gratefull Hower
That crownes such meetings, and excites
The married Paire to fresh delights:
As Courtings, Kissings, Coyings, Othes, and Vowes,
Soft Whisperings, Embracements, all the Ioyes,
And melting Toyes,
That chaster LOVE allowes.
CHO, Haste, haste, for HESPERVS his head downe bowes.
COnuey them, ORDER, to their places,
And ranke them so, in seuerall traces,
As they may set their mixed Powers
Vnto the Musique of the Howers;
And THESE, by ioyning with them, know
In better temper how to flow:
Whilst I (from their abstracted Names)
Report the vertues of the Dames.
First CVRIS comes to decke the Brides faire Tresse.
Care of the oyntments VNXIA doth professe.
IVGA, her office to make one of twaine:
GAMELIA sees that they should so remaine.
Faire ITERDVCA leades the Bride her way;
And DOMIDVCA home her steppes doth stay;
CINXIA the mid, quit of her Zone, defends;
TELIA (for HYMEN) perfects all, and ends.
NOw, now, beginne to set
Your spirits in actiue heate;
And, since your hands are met,
Instruct your nimble feete,
In motions, swift, and meete,
The happy ground to beate:
Whilst all this Roofe doth ring,
And each discording string.
With uery varied voyce,
In VNION doth reioyce.
SVch was the Golden Chaine let downe from Heauen;
And not those linkes more euen,
Then these: so sweetly temper'd, so combin'd
By VNION, and refin'd.
Here no contention, enuy, griefe, deceit,
Feare, iealousie haue weight;
But all is peace, and loue, and faith, and blisse:
What harmony like this?
The gall, behinde the altar quite is throwne;
This sacrifice hath none.
Now no affections rage, nor humors swell;
But all composed dwell.
O IVNO, HYMEN, HYMEN, IVNO! who
Can merit with you two?
Without your presence, VENVS can doe nought,
Saue what with shame is bought;
No father can himselfe a parent show,
Nor any house with prospe'rous issue grow.
O then! What deities will dare
With HYMEN, or with IVNO to compare?
THinke, yet, how night doth wast,
How much of time is past,
What more then winged hast
Your selues would take,
If you were but to tast
The ioy, the night doth cast
(O might it euer last)
On this bright virgin, and her happy make.
SEe, see! the bright Idalian starre,
That lighteth louers to their warre,
Complaynes, that you her influence loose;
While thus the night-sports you abuse.
THe longing bridegroome, in the porch,
Shewes you againe, the bated torch;
And thrice hath IVNO mixt her ayre
With fire, to summon your repayre.
SEe, now shee cleane with-drawes her light;
And (as you should) giues place to night,
That spreades her broad, and blackest wing
Vpon the world, and comes to bring
A thousand seuerall colour'd loues,
Some like sparrowes, some like doues,
That hop about the nuptiall-roome,
And flutt'ring there (against you come)
Warme the chaste bowre, which CYPRIA strowes,
With many a lilly, many a rose.
HAste therefore, haste, and call, away:
The gentle night is prest to pay
The vsurie of long delights,
Shee owes to these protracted rites.
O Know to end, as to beginne:
A minutes losse, in loue, is sinne.
These humours will the night out-weare
In their owne pastimes here;
You doe our rites much wrong,
In seeking to prolong
These outward pleasures:
The night hath other treasures
Then these (though long conceal'd)
Ere day, to be reueal'd.
Then, know to end, as to beginne;
A minutes losse, in loue, is sinne.
HEre stay, and let your sports be crown'd:
The perfect'st figure is the round.
Nor fell you in it by aduenter,
When REASON was your guide, and center.
This, this that beauteous CESTON is
Of louers many-colour'd blisse.
Come HYMEN, make an inner ring,
And let the sacrificers sing;
Cheere vp the faint, and trembling Bride,
That quakes to touch her Bridegroom's side:
Tell her, what IVNO is to IOVE,
The same shall shee be to her loue;
His wife: which we doe rather measure
A name of dignitie, then pleasure.
Vp youths, hold vp your lights in ayre,
And shake abroad their flaming hayre.
Now moue vnited, and, in gate,
As you (in paires) doe front the state,
With gratefull honors, thanke his grace
That hath so glorified the place:
And as, in circle, you depart
Link'd hand in hand; So, heart in heart,
May all those bodies still remayne
Whom he (with so much sacred payne)
No lesse hath bound within his realmes
Then they are with the OCEANS streames.
Long may his VNION find increase
As he, to ours, hath deign'd his peace.
GLad time is at his point arriu'd,
For which loues hopes were so long-liu'd.
Lead HYMEN, lead away;
And let no obiect stay,
Nor banquets (but sweet kisses)
The turtles from their blisses.
'Tis CVPID calls to arme;
And this his last alarme.
Shrinke not, soft Virgin, you will loue,
Anon, what you so feare to proue.
This is no killing warre,
To which you pressed are;
But fayre and gentle strife
Which louers call their life.
'Tis CVPID cryes to arme;
And this his last alarme.
Helpe youths, and virgins, helpe to sing
The prize, which HYMEN here doth bring,
And did so lately rap
From forth the mothers lap,
To place her by that side
Where shee must long abide.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This night is HYMEN'S all.
See, HESPERVS is yet in view!
What starre can so deserue of you?
Whose light doth still adorne
Your Bride, that, ere the morne,
Shall farre more perfect be,
And rise as bright as he;
When (like to him) her name
Is chang'd, but not her flame.
Haste, tender lady, and aduenter;
The couetous house would haue you enter,
That it might wealthy bee,
And you, her mistris see:
Haste your owne good to meet;
And lift your golden feet
Aboue the threshold, high,
With prosperous agury.
Now, youths, let goe your pretty armes;
The place within chant's other charmes.
And then, what rules husbands praescribe their wiues!
In their eyes circles, they must bound their liues.
The moone, when farthest from the sunne she shines,
Is most refulgent; neerest, most declines:
But your poore wiues farre off must neuer rome,
But wast their beauties, neere their lords at home:
And when their lords range out, at home must hide
(Like to beg'd monopolies) all their pride.
When their lords list to feed a serious fit
They must be serious; when to shew their wit
In iests, and laughter, they must laugh and iest;
When they wake, wake; and when they rest, must rest.
And to their wiues men giue such narrow scopes,
As if they meant to make them walke on ropes:
No tumblers bide more perill of their neckes
In all their trickes; then wiues in husbands checkes.
Where virgins, in their sweet, and peacefull state
Haue all things perfect; spinne their owne free fate;
Depend on no proud second; are their owne
Center, and circle; Now, and alwayes one.
To whose example, we doe still heare nam'd
One god, one nature, and but one world fram'd,
One sunne, one moone, one element of fire,
So, of the rest; one king, that doth inspire
Soule, to all bodies, in their royall spheare:
And where is marriage more declar'd, then there?
Is there a band more strict, then that doth tie
The soule, and body in such vnity?
Subiects to soueraignes? doth one mind display
In th'ones obedience, and the others sway?
Beleeue it, marriage suffers no compare,
When both estates are valew'd, as they are.
The virgin were a strange, and stubborne thing,
Would longer stay a virgin, then to bring
Her selfe fit vse, and profit in a make.
How she doth erre! and the whole heau'n mistake!
Looke, how a flower, that close in closes growes,
Hid from rude cattell, bruised with no ploughes,
Which th' ayre doth stroke, sun strengthē, showres shoot higher,
It many youths, and many maydes desire;
The same, when cropt by cruell hand is wither'd,
No youths at all, no maydens haue desir'd:
So a virgin, while vntouch'd she doth remaine,
Is deare to hers; but when with bodies staine
Her chaster flower is lost, she leaues to appeare
Or sweet to young men, or to maydens deare.
That conquest then may crowne me in this warre,
Virgins, O virgins, flie from HYMEN farre.
Virgins, O virgins, to sweet HYMEN yeeld,
For as a lone vine, in a naked field,
Neuer extolls her branches, neuer beares
Ripe grapes, but with a headlong heauinesse weares
Her tender body, and her highest sproote
Is quickly leuell'd with her fading roote;
By whom no husbandmen, no youths will dwell;
But if, by fortune, she be married well
To th'elme her husband, many husbandmen,
And many youths inhabit by her, then:
So whilst a virgin doth, vntouch't, abide
All vnmanu'd, she growes old, with her pride;
But when to equall wedlocke, in fit time,
Her fortune, and endeuor lets her clime,
Deare to her loue, and parents she is held.
Virgins, O virgins, to sweet HYMEN yeeld.
These are but words; hast thou a knight will trie
(By stroke of armes) the simple veritie?
To that high proofe I would haue dared thee.
Ile strait fetch champions for the bride and me.
The like will I doe for Virginity.