Now hath Flora rob'd her bowers
To befrend this place with flowers;
Strowe aboute, strowe aboute,
The Skye rayn'd neuer kindlyer Showers.
Flowers with Bridalls well agree,
Fresh as Brides, and Bridgromes be,
Strowe aboute, strowe aboute,
And mixe them with fit melodie.
Earth hath no Princelier flowers
Then Roses white, and Roses red,
But they must still be mingled.
And as a Rose new pluckt from Venus thorne
So doth a Bride her Bride groomes bed adorne.
Diuers diuers Flowers affect
For some priuate deare respect,
Strowe about, strow about,
Let euery one his owne protect.
But hees none of Floras friend
That will not the Rose commend.
Strow about, strow about,
Let Princes Princely flowers defend.
Roses the Gardens pride,
Are flowers for loue, and flowers for Kinges,
In courts desir'd, and Weddings.
And as a Rose in Venus bosome worne,
So doth a Bridegroome his Brides bed adorne.
FLowers and good wishes Flora doth present,
Sweete flowers, the ceremonious ornament
Of maiden mariage, Beautie figuring,
And blooming youth, which though we careles fling
About this sacred place, let none prophane
Thinke that these fruits from common hils are tane,
Or Vulgar vallies which do subiect lie
To winters wrath, and cold mortalitie.
But these are hallowed and immortall flowers
With Floras hands gather'd from Floras bowres.
Such are her presents, endles, as her loue,
And such for euer may this nights ioy proue.
FOr euer endles may this nights ioy proue,
So eccocs Zephyrus the friend of loue.
Whose aide Venus implores when she doth bring
Into the naked world the greene leau'd spring.
When of the Sunnes warme beames the Nets we weaue
That can the stubborn'st heart with loue deceiue.
That Queene of beauty, and desire by me
Breaths gently forth this Bridall prophecie.
Faithfull and fruitfull shall these Bedmates proue,
Blest in their fortunes, honoured in their loue.
ALL grace this night, & Siluans so must you,
Offring your mariage song with chāges new
WHO is the happier of the two,
A maide, or wife?
Which is more to be desired
Peace or strife?
What strife can be where two are one,
Or what delight to pine alone?
None such true freendes, none so sweet life,
As that betweene the man and wife.
A maide is free, a wife is tyed.
No maide but faine would be a Bride.
Why liue so many single then.
Tis not I hope for want of men?
The bow and arrow both may fit,
And yet tis hard the marke to hit.
He leuels faire that by his side
Laies at night his louely Bride.
Sing Io: Hymen, Io: Io: Hymen.
VAnish darke vales, let night in glory shine
As she doth burn in rage, come leaue our shrine
You black hair'd hours, and guide vs with your lights,
Flora hath wakened wide our drowsy sprights
See where she triumphs, see her flowers are throwne,
And all about the seedes of malice sowne?
Despightfull Flora ist not enough of griefe
That Cynthia's robd, but thou must grace the theefe?
Or didst not here Nights soueraigne Queen complaine
Hymen had stolne a Nimph out of her traine.
And matcht her here plighted henceforth to be
Loues friend, and stranger to Virginitie
And mak'st thou sport for this?
BEe mild sterne night
Flora doth honour Cinthia, and her right,
Virginitie is a voluntary powre,
Free from constraint, euen like an vntoucht flower
Meete to be gather'd when tis throughly blowne.
The Nimph was Cinthias while she was her owne,
But now another claimes in her a right
By fate reseru'd thereto, and wise foresight.
CAn Cynthia one kind virgins losse bemone?
How if perhaps she brings her tenne for one?
Or can shee misse one in so full a traine?
Your Goddesse doth of too much store complaine.
If all her Nimphes would aske aduise of me
There should be fewer virgins then there be.
Nature ordaind not Men to liue alone,
Where there are two, a Woman should be one.
THou breath'st sweet poison wāton Zephyrus
But Cynthia must not be deluded thus.
Her holy Forrests are by theeues prophan'd,
Her Virgins frighted, and loe, where they stand
That late were Phoebus Knights, turnd now to trees
By Cynthias vengement for their iniuries
In seeking to seduce her Nymphes with loue:
Here they are sixt ond neuer may remoue
But by Dianaes power that stucke them here.
Apollos loue to them doth yet appeare,
In that his beames hath guilt them a they grow,
To make their miserie yeeld the greater show.
But they shall tremble when sad Night doth speake,
And at her stormy words their boughes shall breake.
HAyle reuerend angrie Night, haile Queene of Flowers,
Mild sprited Zephyrus haile, Siluans and Howers.
Hesperus brings peace, cease then your needlesse iarres
Here in this little firmament of starres.
Cynthia is now by Phoebus pacified,
And well content her Nymph is made a Bride▪
Since the faire match was by that Phoebus grac't
Which in this happie Westerne Ile is plac't
As he in heauen, one lampe enlightning all
That vnder his benigne aspect doth fall▪
Deepe Oracles he speakes, and he alone
For artes and wisedomes meete for Phoebus throne.
The Nymph is honour'd, and Diana pleas'd:
Night be you then, and your blacke howers appeas'd▪
And friendly listen what your Queene by me
Farther commaunds, let this my credence be,
View it, and know it for the highest gemme,
That hung on her imperiall Diadem.
I know, and honour it louely Hesperus,
Speake then your message, both are welcome to
YOur Soueraigne frō the vertuous gem she sends vs.
Bids you take power to retransforme the frends
Of Phoebus, metamorhpos'd here to trees,
And giue them straight the shapes which they did leese.
This is her pleasure.
HEsperus I obey,
Night must needs yeeld when Phoebus gets the day.
Honor'd be Cynthia for this generous deede.
Pitie growes onely from celestiall seede.
IF all seeme glad, why should we onely lowre?
Since t'expresse gladnes we haue now most power.
Frolike grac't Captiues, we present you here
This glasse, wherein your liberties appeare,
Cynthia is pacified, and now blithe Night
Begins to shake off melancholy quite.
WHo shold grace mirth, & reuels but the night,
Next loue she should be goddesse of delight.
TIs now a time when (Zephyrus) all with dancing
Honor me, aboue day my state aduancing.
Ile now be frolicke, all is full of hart,
And eu'n these trees for ioy shall beare a part.
Zephyrus they shall dance.
Daunce Goddesse? how?
SEemes that so full of strangenes to you now?
Did not the Thracian harpe long since the same?
And (if we ripp the ould records of fame)
Did not Amphions lyre the deafe stones call,
When they came dancing to the Theban wall?
Can musicke then ioye? ioy mountaines moues
And why not trees? ioyes powerfull when it loues.
Could the religious Oake speake Oracle
Like to the Gods? and the tree wounded tell
T'Aeneas his sad storie? haue trees therefore
The instruments of speech, and hearing more
Then th'aue of pacing, and to whom but Night
Belong enchantments? who can more affright
The eie with magick wonders? Night alone
Is fit for miracles, and this shalbe one
Apt for this Nuptiall dauncing iollitie.
Earth then be soft and passable to free
These fettered roots? ioy trees the time drawes neere
When in your better formes you shall appeare.
Dauncing, and musicke mnst prepare the way,
Ther's little tedious time in such delay.
This spoken, the foure Siluans played on their instruments the first straine of this song following: & at the repetition thereof the voices sell in with the instrumentes which were thus deuided, a treble and a base were placed neere his Maiestie, and an other treble and base neere the groue, that the words of the song might be heard of all, because the trees of gould instantly at the first sound of their voices began to moue, and dance according to the measure of the time which the musitians kept in singing, and the nature of the wordes which they deliuered.
MOue now with measured sound
You charmed groue of gould,
Trace forth the sacred ground
That shall your formes vnfold.
Diana, and the starry night for your Apollos sake
Endue your Siluan shapes with powre this strāge delight to make
Much ioy must needs the place betide where trees for gladnes moue,
Afairer sight was nere beheld, or more expressing loue.
Yet neerer Phoebus throne
Mete on your winding waies,
Your Brydall mirth make knowne
In your high-graced Hayes.
Let Hymen lead your sliding rounds, & guide thē with his light,
While we do Io Hymen sing in honour of this night
Ioyne three by three, for so the night by triple spel decrees
Now to release Apollos knights from these enchanted trees.
BY vertue of this wand, and touch deuine,
These Siluan shadowes back to earth resigne,
Your natiue formes resume, with habite faire,
While solemne musick shall enchant the aire
Presently the Siluans with their foure instrumēts, and fiue voices, began to play, and sing together the song following at the beginning whereof that part of the stage whereon the first three trees stoode began to yeeld, and the three formost trees gently to sincke, and this was effected, by an Ingin plac't vnder the stage. VVhen the trees had sunke a yarde they cleft in three parts, and the Maskers appeared out of the tops of them, the trees were sodainly conuayed away, and the first three Maskers were raysed againe by the Ingin. They appeared then in a false habit, yet very faire, and in forme not much vnlike their principall, & true robe. It was made of greene taffatie cut into leaues, and layed vpon cloth of siluer, and their hats were sutable to the same.
NIght, and Diana charge,
And th'Earth obayes
Opening large
Her secret waies,
While Apollos charmed men
Their formes receiue againe.
Giue gratious Phoebus honour then,
And so fall downe, and rest behinde the traine
Giue gratious Phoebus honour then and so fall &c.
THus can celestials worke in humane fate,
Transforme, & forme as they do loue or hate.
Like touch, and change receiue: the Gods agree
The best of numbers is contained in three.
The song of transformation againe.
Night and Diana, &c.
THe last, & third of nine, touch magick wand,
And giue them back their formes at nights command
Againe this song reuiue and sound it hie,
Long liue Apollo Brittaines glorious eye.
PHoebus is pleas'd, and all reioice to see
His seruants, from their golden prison free,
But yet since Cinthia hath so freendly smilde,
And to you tree-borne Knights, is reconcild,
First ere you any more worke vndertake,
About her tree solemne procession make,
Dianas tree, the tree of Chastitie,
That plac't alone on yonder hill you see.
These greene leau'drobes wherein disguisde you made
Stelths to her Nimphes through the thicke forrests shade
There to the goddesse offer thankfully,
That she may not in vaine appeased be.
The night shall guide you, and her howres attend you
That no ill eyes, or spirits shall offend you.
WIth spotles mindes now mount we to the tree
Of single chastitie.
The roote is temperance grounded deepe
Which the coldiewc't earth doth steepe:
Water it desires alone,
Other drinke it thirsts for none:
Therewith the sober branches it doth feede,
Which though they fruitlesse be,
Yet comely leaues they breede,
To beautifie the tree,
Cynthia protectresse is, and for her sake,
We this graue procession make.
Chast eies and eares, pure heartes, and voices
Are graces wherein Phoebe most reioyces.
KNights of Apollo proude of your new birth,
Pursue your triumphs still with ioy and mirth,
Your changed fortunes, and redeemd estate
Hesperus to your Soueraigne will relate,
T'is now high time he were far hence retir'd,
Th'ould Bridall friend, that vshers Night desir'd
Through the dimme euening shades, then taking flight
Giues place and honour to the nuptiall Night.
I that wish't euening starre must now make way
To Hymens rights much wrong'd by my delay.
But on Nights princely state you ought t'attend,
And t'honour your new reconciled frind.
HEsperus as you with concord came, eu'n so
T'is meet that you with cōcord hence shold go
Then ioyne you that in voice, and art excell,
To giue this starre a musicall farewell.
Of all the starres which is the kindest
To a louing Bride?
Hesperus when in the west
He doth the day from night deuide.
What message can be more respected
Then that which tells wish't ioyes shalbe effected?
Do not Brides watch the euening starre?
O they can discerne it farre:
Loue Bridegroomes reuels?
But for fashion.
And why?
They hinder wisht occasion.
Longing hearts and new delights,
Loue short dayes, and long nights
HEsperus since you all starres excell
In Bridall kindnes kindly farewell farewell.
COme Flora let vs now withdraw our traine
That th'ecclipst reuels maie shine forth againe
HEre stay, Night leaden-eied, and sprighted growes
And her late houres begin to hang their browes
Hymen long since the Bridall bed hath drest,
And longs to bring the turtles to their nest.
Then with one quick dence sound vp your delight,
And with one song weele bid you all god-Night.
TEll me gentle howre of night
Wherein dost thou most delight?
Not in sleepe,
Wherein then?
In the frolicke vew of men?
Louest thou musicke?
O t'is sweet.
Whats dauncing?
Eu'n the mirth of feete
Ioy you in Fayries and idelues?
We are of that sore our selues,
But Siluan say whie do you loue
Onely to frequent the groue?
Life is fullest of content
Where delight is innocent.
Pleasure must varie not be long,
Come then lets close, and end our song.
YEt ere we vanish from this princely sight,
Let vs bid Phoebus, & his states god-night
Neither buskin now, norbayes
Challenge I, a Ladies prayse
Shall content my proudest hope,
Their applause was all my scope
And to their shrines properly
Reuels dedicated be:
Whose soft eares none ought to pierce
But with smooth and gentle verse,
Let the tragicke Poeme swell,
Raysing raging seendes from hell,
And let Epicke Dactils range
Swelling seas and Countries strange.
Little roome small things containes
Easy praise quites easy paines.
Suffer them whose browes do sweat
To gaine honour by the great.
It s enough if men me name
A Retailer of such fame.
Quid tu te numeris immises? anne medente
Metra cathedratum ludicra scripta decent
Musicus & medicus, celebris quoque Phoebe Poeta e
Et lepor aegrotos arte rogante iuat.
Crede mihi doctum qui carmen non sapit, idem
Non habet ingentum, nec genium medici.