THe Charmes of silence through this Square be throwne,
That an vn-vsde Attention (like a Iewell)
May hang at euery eare, for wee present
Matter aboue the vulgar Argument:
Yet drawne so liuely, that the weakest eye,
(Through those thin vailes we hang betweene your sight,
And this our peice) may reach the mistery:
What in it is most graue, will most delight.
But as in Lantskip, Townes and Woods appeare
Small a farre off, yet to the Optick sence,
The mind shewes them as great as those more neere;
So, winged Time that long agoe flew hence
You must fetch backe, with all those golden yeares
He stole, and here imagine still hee stands,
Thrusting his siluer locke into your hands.
There hold it but two howres, It shall from Graues
Raize vp the dead: vpon this narrow floore
Swell vp an Ocean, (with an Armed Fleete,)
And lay the Dragon at a Doues softfeete.
These Wonders sit and see, sending as guides
Your Iudgement, not your passions: passion slides,
When Iudgement goes vpright: for tho the Muse
(Thats thus inspir'de) a Nouell path does tread,
Shee's free from foolish boldnes, or base dread.
Loe; scorne she scornes and Enuies ranckling tooth,
For this is all shee does, she wakens Truth.
THat we, in pomp peace, in god like splendor,
With adoration of dazeled eies▪
Should breath thus long, and grow so full of daies,
Be fruitfull as the Vine▪ sonnes and daughters,
(All Emperors, Kings, Queenes) that (like to Cedars
Vprising from the bre Lyhanus,
Or Oliues nurst vp by Ierusalem)
Heightened our glories, whilst we held vp them:
That this vast Globe Terrestriall should be cantled,
And almost three parts ours, and that the ons,
Who suspiration draw out of this aire,
With vniuersall Aues, shows, and oes,
Should vs acknowledge to be head supreame
To this great body (for a world of yeares:)
Yet now, when we had made our Crowne compleat,
And clos'd it strongly with a triple arch,
And had inrich'd it with those pretious jewels
Few Princes uer see (white haires) euen now
Our greatnesse hangs in ballance, and the stampe
Of our true , .
By wh
Aske these holy Fathers:
Aske those our out-cast sonnes: a throne vsurped
Our chaire is counted, all our titles stolne.
What blasphemy dare speake so?
All our roabes,
Your vestments, (reuerend, yet pontificall:)
This sword, these keyes, (that open kingdoms hearts
To let in sweet obedience) All, but borrowed.
What soule aboue the earth—
Our royall signet,
With which, we, (in a mothers holy loue)
Haue sign'd so many pardons, is now counterfeit:
From our mouth flow riuers of blasphemy
And lies; our Babylonian Sinagogues
Are counted Stewes, where Fornications
And all vncleannesse Sodomiticall,
(Whose leprosy touch'd vs neuer) are now daily acted:
Our Image, which (like Romane Caesars) stamp'd
In gold, through the whole earth did currant passe;
Is now blanch'd copper, or but guilded brasse.
Can yonder roofe, thats naild so fast with
Couer a head so impious, and not cracke? (starres,
That Sulphure boyling o're celestiall fires,
May drop in whizing flakes (with skalding vēgeāce)
On such a horrid sinne!
No mortall bosome
Is so vnsanctified.
Who i'st bright Empresse,
That feeds so vlcerous, and so ranke a Spleene?
A woman.
VVoman! who?
The Fairie Queene: (nights
Fiue Summers haue scarce drawn their glimmering
Through the Moons siluer bowe, since the crownd
Of that adored beast, on which we ride, (heads
VVere strucke and wounded, but so heal'd againe,
The very scarres were hid. But now, a mortall,
An vnrecouerable blovv is taken,
And it must bleed to death.
Heauen cannot suffer it.
Heauen suffers it, and sees it, and giues ayme,
Whilst euen our Empires heart is cleft in sunder:
That strumpet, that inchantresse, (who, in robes
White as is innocence, and with an eye
Able to tempt stearne murther to her bed)
Calles her selfe Truth, has stolne faire Truths attire,
Her crowne, her sweet songs, counterfets her voyce,
And by prestigious tricks in sorcerie,
Ha's raiz'd a base impostor like Truths father:
This subtile Curtizan sets vp againe,
Whom we but late banisht, to liue in caues,
In rockes and desart mountaines.
Feare her not, shee's but a shadow.
O t'is a cunning Spider,
And in her nets so wraps the Fairie Queene,
That shee suckes euen her breast: Sh'as writ a booke,
Which shee calles holy Spels.
Weele breake those spels.
The poles of heauen must first in sunder breake,
For from the Fairie shores this Witch hath driuen
All such as are like these (our Sooth-Saiers)
And cal'd false Seers home, that of things past,
Sing wonders, and diuine of things to come:
Through whose bewitching tongues runne golden chaines,
To which ten thousand eares so fast are bound,
As spirits are by spells; that all the Tones
Of harmony, that Babylon can sound,
Are charmes to Adders, and no more regarded,
Than are by him that's deafe, the sicke mans groanes
Shee, they, Titania, and her Fairie Lords,
Yea euen her vassaile elues, in publike scorne
Defame me, call me Whore of Babylon.
O vnheard of prophanation!
Giue out I am common: that for lust, and hire
I prostitute this body: that to Kings
I quaffe full bowles of strong enchanting wines,
To make them dote on me.
Lets heare no more.
And that all Potentates that tread on earth,
With our abhominations should be drunke,
And be by vs vndone.
Weele heare no more.
You haue thrust Furies whips into our hands.
Say but the word, and weele turne home your wrōgs,
In torne and bloody collours.
All her bowers,
Shall like burnt offerings purge away (in fire)
Her lands pollution.
Let's to armes.
Stay: heare me:
Her kingdome weares a girdle wrought of waues,
Set thicke with pretious stones, that are so charm'd,
No rockes are of more force: her Fairies hearts,
Lie in inchanted towers (impregnable)
No egine scales them. Therefore goe you three,
Draw all your faces sweetly, let your browes
Be sleekd, your cheekes in dimples, giue out smiles,
Your voyces string with siluer, wooe (like louers)
Sweare you haue hils of pearle: shew her the world,
And say shee shall haue all, so shee will kneele
And doe vs reuerence: but if shee grow nice,
Dissemble, flatter, stoope to licke the dust
Shee goes vpon, and (like to serpents) creepe
Vpon your bellies, in humilitie;
And beg shee would but with vs ioyne a league,
To wed her land to ours: our blessing, goe.
When mines are to be blowne vp, men dig low.
And so will wee.
Prosper: till this sunne set
The beames that from vs shoot, seeme tountefet.
This physicke cures not me.
Nor me.
Nor vs.
It is not strong of poyson, to fetch vp
Thats bak't within: my gall is ouerflowne,
My blood growne ranke and fowle: An inflamation
Of rage, and madnes so burnes vp my liuer,
That euen my heart-strings cracke (as in a furnace)
And all my nerues into my eye-balles shrinke,
To shoot those bullets, and my braines at once
Against her soule that ha's halfe dambd vs: falls
Fetcht hie, and neare to heauen, light on no ground,
But in hels bottome, take their first rebound.
Such are our falles: we once had mountaine-growth,
With Pines and Cedars.
Now with none of both.
I could be glad to loose the diuine office
Of my creation, to be turn'd into
A dogge, so I might licke vp but her blood,
That thrusts vs from our vineyards.
So could all.
Reuenge were milke to vs.
Manna.
And it shall.
But how? wee will not (as the head supreame
Ouer all nations, counselleth) licke the dust
The Faierie treads on, nor (like serpents) creepe
Vpon our bellies in humilitie:
This were (with Fencers) basely to giue ground,
When the first bowt may speed: or to sound parly,
Whilst they within, get swords to cut our throats:
No, weele at one blow strike the heart through.
How?
By ponyards.
No.
Poyson.
No.
Treason.
Neither.
How (reuerend Como) then?
Thus—let's consult—nay you shal heare.
You know that all the springs in Fairie land
Ran once to one head: from that head, to vs:
The mountaine and the valley paid vs fruit;
The field her corne, the countrey felt no heat
But from our fires: Plenty still spread our boards,
And Charitie tooke away. We stept not forth
But with a god-like adoration
All knees bowed low vnto vs: why was this?
Why were our gardens Eden? why our bowers
Built like to those in Paradise? I shall tell you,
It was because the Law most mysticall,
Was not made common: therefore was not vile;
It was because in the great Prophets Phanes
And hallowed Temples, we were Choristers:
It was because (wise Pylots) we from rockes,
And gulfes infernall, safely set on shore
Mens soules at yonder hauen: or (beeing shipwrackt)
Strong lines forth cast we, suffering none to sinke
To that Abisse, which some hold bottomlesse.
But now our very graues
Cannot saue dead mens bones from shame and bruzes.
The monumentall marble Vrnes of bodies
(Laid to rest long agoe) vnreuerently
Are turned to troughes of water now for jades:
Vast Charnel-houses, where our fathers heads
Slept on the cold hard pillowes of the earth,
Are emptied now, and chang'd to drinking roomes,
Or vaults for baser office.
What's therefore to be done?
This must be done:
This shall be done: They hunted vs like wolues,
Out of their Fairie forrests, whipt vs away
(As vagabonds) mockt vs, and said our fall
Could not be dangerous, because we bore
Our gods vpon our backes: now must we whip them,
But wiselier.
How?
Thus: those that fill our roomes,
Hold Beacons in their eies (blazing with fire
Of a hot-seeming zeale) to watch our entrance,
And to arme all against vs: these we must quench:
They are counted wels of knowledge, poyson these wells:
They are the kingdoms musicke, they the Organs,
Vnto whose sound her Anthems now are sung,
Set them but out of tune, alls out of square,
Pull downe the Church, and none can it repaire,
But he that builds it: this is the faggot band
That binds all fast: vndoo't, vndoe the land—
Most certaine.
You therefore (the best consort of the soule)
Shepheards (whose flocks are men, lambs, Angels,) you
That hold the roofe of yon Starre-chamber vp,
From dropping downe to grinde the world to dust,
You shall to Fairie land.
A joyfull voyage.
Those that sing there the holy Hymnes, as yet
Haue not their voyces cleere, the streame of ceremony
Is scarcely settled, trouble it more: bayte hookes
To take some, some to choake: cast out your net
At first, for all the frie: let vs spread sayles
To draw vnto our shores the Fairie whales.
That Truth, whose standard-bearer Babylon,
And all we are, is not cleane driuen from thence,
Whither we send you: there sheeliues, but liues
A widdow; steps not forth, dares not be seene
During her moneth of mourning: here we write you
How, and with whom to finde her: what shee bids,
That doe: your hire's aboue.
We know it well.
And when you see those Fairy fishermen
Rowe in your streames, when they grow cold in working,
And weary of their owne waters, that the sayles
(Which stifly beare them vp) flag and hang low,
And that (like reedes, playing with a paire of winds.)
They promise facill pliance, then, then shake
The trees by the root, then'le make the branches blow,
And drop their mellowed fruits, euen at your feet,
Gather them they are our owne, then is the houre,
To weane those sonnes of blacke Apostasi
From her. (their stepdame) and to make them take,
A blessing from our reuerend mothers hands,
Be happie goe.
Wee shall remember you,
In all our kneelings.
Stay: ere you shift Ayre,
Sprinkle your selues all ore with sacred droppes,
Take Periapts, Pentacles, and potent Charmes
To coniure downe fowle feinds, that will be rayzed
To vex you, tempt you, and betray your bloud,
About your necks hang hallowed Amulets,
That may Conserue you from the plagues of Error
Which will strike at you.
Wee obey most holy fathers.
And heare you,
If clymbing vp to this haught enterprize
The foot slip, and (ith'fal) with death you meet—
O glorious ladder!
A Saints winding sheet,
Farewell: Mount all the engines of your wit
When darts are sent from all parts, some must hit.
There is a fellow to whome, because he dare
Not be a slaue to greatnes, nor is molded
Of Court dow (flattering) but (should it thunder)
To his father. doing ill, (would speake ill) our Empresse,
Hath giuen this name. (Plaine Dealing): this plaine dealing
Haue I shipd hence, and is long since arriued
Vpon the fairy strnod: from him I expect,
Intelligence of all Occurrences,
He for the names sake, shall perhaps be welcome,
Into that Harlots Company (whom the fairyes
Thinke honest, and sweare deeply, she is Truth.
That Strumpet by inticement heele bring ouer,
It came to me in letters (two dayes since.
That this plaine dealing serues the fairy Queene,
And will no more be seene in Babilon.
How no more seene in Babilon, tis but one lost,
If Babilon subscribe to our wise-doome,
Shee shall lodge Double-Dealing in his roome.
Wee thought the fates would haue closde vp our eyes,
That wee should nere haue seene this day-starre rise:
How many plots were laid to barre vs hence,
(Euen from our Cradle?) but our Innocence
Your wisedome (fairy Peeres) and aboue all,
That Arme) that cannot let a white soule fall,
Hath held vs vp, and lifted vs thus hie,
Euen when the Arrowes did most thickly flie:
Of that bad woman, (Babilons proud Queene,
Who yet (we heare) swels with Inuenomed Spleene.
Whose poyson, shall (like Arrowes shot vpright)
When forth it bursts, to her owne downfall light.
Truth be my witnes (whome we haue imployde,
To purge our Aire that has with plagues destroyed
Great numbers, shutting them in darksome shades)
I seeke no fall of hirs, my Spirit wades,
In Clearer streames; her bloud I would not shed,
to gaine that triple wreath that binds her head,
Tho mine shee would let forth, I know not why,
Only through rancke lust after Souereigntie.
Enough it is for me, if with a hand,
(Vnstaind and vn-ambitious) fairy Land
I Crowne with Oliue-branches: all those wounds,
Whose goary mouthes but lately staind our ounds,
Bleed yet in me: for when great Elfiline
(Our grandsire) fild this throne, your bowers did shine
With fire-red steele, and not with Fairies eies,
You heard no musicke then, but shriekes and cries,
Then armed Vrchins, and stearne houshold Elues,
Their fatall pointed swords turnd on themselues.
But when the royall Elfiline sat crowned,
These ciuill woes in their own depth lay drowned.
He to immortall shades beeing gone,
(Fames minion) great King Oberon
Titaniaes royall father, liuely springs,
Whose Court was like a campe of none but Kings.
From this great conquering Monarchs glorious stemme,
Three (in direct line) wore his Diadem:
A King first, then a paire of Queenes, of whom,
Shee that was held a downe-cast, by Fates doome,
Sits now aboue their hopes: her maiden hand,
Shall with a silken thred guide Fairie land.
And may shee guide it,
Euen till stooping time
Cut for her (downe) long yeeres that shee may climbe
(With ease) the highest hill old age goes o're,
Or till her Fairie subiects (that adore
Her birth-day as their beeing) shall complaine,
They are weary of a peacefull, golden raigne.
Which, that they neuer shall, your stately towers
Shall keepe their ancient beauty: and your bowers
(Which late) like prophan'd Temples empty stood,
The tops defac'd by fire, the sloores by blood,)
Shall be fill'd full of Choristers to sing
Sweet heauenly songs, like birds before the Spring:
The flowers we set, and the fruits by vs sowne,
Shall cheere as well the stranger as our owne.
We may to strange shores once our selues be driuen,
For who can tell vnder what point of heauen
His graue shall open? neither shall our oakes,
Trophies of reuerend Age, fall by our stroaks,
Nor shall the brier, or haw thorne (growing vnder)
Feare them, but flie to them, to get from thunder,
And to be safe from forraine wild-fire balles,
Weele build about our waters wooden walles.
On which weele spend for you our latest liues.
Fairies I thank you all, Stay who comes here?
Parthenophill, a Fairie Peere.
Parthenophill.
Bright Empresse, Queene of maides
To vs your Lords, amidst your Fairie shades:
Three Princes (so themselues they style) are come,
From whence, they'l vs not learne, and doe intreat
Faire, and a free accesse.
What is their businesse?
The splendor of your glories, which a farre
Shines (as they say, and iustly say) as brightly
As here at hand, hither them drawes, protesting
All faith and seruice to you, and requesting
That they the tribute of their loues may pay,
At your most sacred feet.
Allow them entrance.
They in a Fairie maske, the argument
Of this their dutie, gladly would present.
As best them please.
Your painted cheeks beeing off, your owne discouers,
You are no Fairies.
No: but wounded louers.
How! louers! what! would you deflower my bed,
And strike off a poore maiden-head?
We know you not: what are you? and from whence?
The land of whom the sunne so enamor'd is,
He lends them his complexion, giues me birth,
The Indian and his gold are both my slaues,
Vpon my sword (as on the Axell tree)
A world of kingdomes mooue: and yet I write
Non sufficit. that lustie sonne of Ioue
That twelue times shewed himselfe more then a man,
Reard vp two pillars for me, on whose Capitals
I stand (Colossus-like) striding ore seas,
And with my head knock at the roofe of Heauen:
Hence come I, this I am, (O most diuine)
All that I am is yours, be you but mine.
The country at whose breast, hundreds of Kings
Haue royally bin fed, is nurce to me:
The god of grapes is mine, whose bounteous hand
In clusters deales his gifts to euery land:
My Empire beares for greatnes, pollicy,
State, skill in Arts and Armes, sole soueraigntie
Of this Globe vniuersall. All her Princes
Are warriours borne: whose battels to be told,
Would make the hearers souldiers: t'is a land
Of breath so sweet, and of aspect so faire,
That to behold her, and to conquer her,
(In amorous combats,) great king Oberon,
Your awefull father, oft ha's thither come,
Like to a bridegrome, or a Reueller,
And gone agen in goodly triumphs home.
From hence I spring, (fairest and most diuine)
All that this is, is yours, be you but mine.
Be you but mine, and doubly will I treble
Their glories, and their greatnesse: like to thunder
My voyce farre off, shakes kingdomes; whilst mine owne
Stands on Seauen (b) hills, whose towers, and pinnacles,
And renrend Monuments, hold in them such worth,
And are so sacred, Emperours and Kings
(Like barefoote pilgrims) at her feet doe fall,
Bowing to her trible crowne imperiall.
The language which shee speakes, goes through the world,
To proue that all the world should stoope to her,
And (saue your selfe) they doe; you thinke you leaue
A rich inheritance, if to your sonnes,
Ou fluent tongue you leaue, (nor need they more)
Who speake and spend it well, cannot be poore:
On many nations necks, a foot to t,
If it be glorious, then may you be great.
We are all pleasd, so please you be the bride,
Of three, we care not which two be deni'd.
For we are brethren, and those sacred breasts
From whence we draw our nourishment, would runne
Nectar to you (sweete as the food of life:)
Our aged mother twentie times an hower,
Would breath her wholesome kisses on your cheeke,
And from her own cup you should drinke that wine
Which none but Princes tast, to make you looke
With cheerefull countenance.
You haue a sonne,
Rebellious, wild, ingratefull, poore, and yet
Apollo from's owne head cuts golden lockes,
To haue them grow on his: his harp is his,
The darts he shoots are his: the winged messenger
That runnes on all the errands of the gods,
Teaches him swiftnes hee'l outstrip the windes:
This child of yours is (by adoption)
Our mothers now, her blessing he receiues;
And tho (as men did in the golden Age)
He liue ith' open fields, hiding his head
In dampish caues, and woods, (sometimes for feare,)
Yet doe we succour him. This your lost sheep,
We home agen will bring, to your owne fold,
Humbly to graze vpon your Faierie plaines,
Prouided, that you sow them with such seed,
On which your whole land wholesomely may feed.
We know you now: O what a deale of paines
Would you (as others of this wing haue taken)
To be in Faierie land calld Soueraignes?
Thankes for it: rashly nothing must we doe:
When kingdoms marrie, heauen it selfe stands by
To giue the bride: Princes in tying such bands,
Should vse a thousand heads, ten thousand hands:
For that one Acte giues like an enginous wheele
Motion to all, sets all the State a going,
And windes it vp to height, or hurles it down,
The least blast turnes the scale, where lies a crowne:
VVeele therefore take aduice. If these thinke fit
VVe should be yours, you ours, we signe to it:
Your counsell Fairie Lords: Fideli speake.
Would you (my royal mistres) haue those christal
Faire, double-leaued doores, where light comes forth
To cheere the world, neuer to open more?
VVould you haue all your slūbers turn'd to dreams,
Frightfull and broken? would you see your Lords
(In stead of sitting at your Councell boards)
Locking their graue, white, reuerend heads in steele?
If so, you cannot for all Fairie land
Find men to fit you better.
Florimell,
Breathes there in you Fidelies spirit?
No Lady.
No nor in any brest that's soūd: true Coūceller,
Already you speake musicke: you are strung
VVith golden chords; Angels guide on your tongue.
These potent, politicke, and twin-borne States,
VVould to their mitred fortunes tie our fates:
Our Fairie groues are greene, our temples stand
Like goodly watch-towers, wafting passengers
From rockes, t'arriue them in the Holy land:
Peace (here) eats fruits, which her own hād hath sown,
Your lambes with lyons play: about your throne,
The Palme, the Lawrell, and the abundant Vine
Grow vp, and with your roses doe entwine.
But if these gripe your Scepter once,
VVhat then?
Vultures are not more rauenous thā these men,
Confusion, tyranie, vproares will shake all,
Tygres, & wolues, and beares, will fil your seat,
In nothing (but in miserie) youle be great:
Those black and poisonous waters that bore down
In their rough torrent, Fairie townes and towers,
And drownd our fields in Marianes daies,
VVill (in a mercilesse inundation)
Couer all againe: red Seas will flow again:
The Deuill will roare againe: if these you loue,
Be (as the Serpent,) wise then, tho a Doue.
This hee that speakes in musicke?
Are you all,
Of this opinion Lordes?
All, all.
Lets hence.
VVhen close plots faile, vse open violence.
Stay: Princes are free-borne, & haue free wils,
Theis are to vs, as vallies are to hills,
VVe may, be counceld by them, not controld:
Our wordes our Law.
Bright Souereigne.
Y'are too bold.
I knew the fort would yeeld.
Attend.
Shees ours.
You would Combine a League, which these would breake.
A League!
Holy.
Honorable.
Nay heare me speake,
You court me for my loue, you I imbrace
As maides doe Suiters, with a smiling face
as you doe me: receiue our answere then:—
I cannot loue you:—what! such hardy men
And flie for one repulse? I meane as yet;
As yet I'mnot at leisure: But I sweare
Euen by my birth-day, by the crowne I weare,
By those sweet waters, which into vs powre
Health, that no sicknes taints, by that blest flower
Vpon whose roseal stalke our peace does grow,
I sweare I will my loue on you bestow,
VVhen one day comes, which now to you Ile name.
The time! O blessed time!
Balme to our sorrow.
Name that most happie houre.
May be tomorrow:
Marke els and iudge whether it may or no:
When Lambes of ours, are kild by wolues of yours,
Yet no bloud suckt: when Heauen two Suns endures:
When Soules that rest in vnder-groundes,
Heare Anthems sung, and prayse the soundes:
When drops of water are so spilt,
That they can wash out murders guilt:
When Surgeons long since dead and gone,
Can cure our woundes, being cald vpon:
When from yon towers I heare one cry,
You may kill Princes lawfully:
When a Court has no Parasite,
When truth speakes false, and falshood right:
When Conscience goes in cloth of gold,
When Offices are giuen; not sold:
When merchants wiues hate costly clothes,
When ther's no lies in tradsmens oathes:
When Farmers by deere yeeres do leeze,
And Lawyers sweare to take no fees:
(And that I hope will neuer, neuer bee)
But then (and not till then) I sweare,
Shall your bewitching Charmes sleepe in mine eare.
Away.
Derided to our faces!
Baffuld!
Made fooles!
This must not be.
It shall not be.
Reuenge:
Flie to our Empres bosome, there sucke treason,
Sedition, Herezies confederacies,
The violation of al sacred leagues.
The combination of all leagues vniust,
The dispensation for sacramentall oathes,
And when ye'are swolne with theis, returne againe,
And let their poyson raine downe here in showres:
Whole heards of bulls loaden with hallowed curses,
VVith Interdictions, excommunications,
And with vnbinding Subiects fealties,
And with large pattents to kill Kings and Queens
Driue roaring hither, that vpon their hornes
This Empire may be tost.
Shee shall bee torne,
Euen ioynt from ioynt: to haue her baited wel,
(If we cannot) wee will vn-kennell hell:
Will not you home with vs?
No: here Ile lurke,
And in a Doue-like shape rauen vpon Doues:
Ile suck allegiance from the common brest,
Poyson the Courtier with ambitious drugs,
Throw bane into the cups where learning drinkes,
Ile be a Saint, a Furie, Angell, Deuill,
Or'e Seas, on this side Seas; Deuils forreners,
VVith Deuils within hel freedom, Deuils in Vaults.
And with Church Deuil, be it your soules health,
To drinke downe Babylonian Stratagems.
And to forge three-forkt thunderbolts at home,
VVhilst I melt Sulphure here: If the sweet bane
I lay bee swallowed, oh! a Kingdome bursts,
But if the poysoned hooke be spied, then leuy
Eightie eight Legions, ad take open armes,
The Guidon shall be mine, Ile beare the Standard.
Twi'll be a glorious warre.
Farewell.
Bee gon, then one.
VVho cleanes a Realmes head, needs more swordes
These euill Spirits are vext, & tho they vanisht
Like hideous dreames, yet haue they left behind them,
Throbs, and heart▪ akings, in the generall boosome,
As omynous bodings. Fairy Lack eyes.—
Here.
Flie Sirra throug the Ayre and neuer rest
(On paine to be into an vrchin turnd)
Till thou hast fixt vpon the highest gates,
Of our great'st Cities Thei's a warning peece. Away.
Theis to the Spirits that our waters keepe,
Charge thē that none rowst ther, but those whose nets,
Are cast out of our Fairy gundolets. Away.
Theis to the keepers of those royall woods
VVhere Lyons, Panthers, and the kingly heardes
Feede in one company; that if wild Boares,
Mad Buls, or rauing Beares, breake in for prey,
Hoping to make our groues their wildernes,
Ours may like souldiers bid thē battaile. Flie.
Theis to the Shepheards on our Fairie downs
To warne them not to sleepe, but with sweet Layes
And Iolly pipings driue into fat pastures
Their goodly flocks: VVolues are abroad say, Fly.
Place Prouidence, (because she has quick eye:
And is the best at kenning) in our Nauy,
Courage shall wait on her.
No: shees most fit
To goe with vs.
Let her in Counsell it.
T is said: and least they breake into our walkes
And kill our fairie-dear, or change themselues
Into the shape of Fawnes, being indeed foxes,
Range all the forrest danger to preuent,
Foresight, beats stormes backe, when most Imminent.
Away then.
Wise Pilots? firmest pillers? how it agrees,
When Princes heads sleepe on their counsels knees:
Deepe rooted is a state, and growes vp hie,
VVhen Prouidence, Zeale, and Integritie
Husband it well: Theis fathers twill be said
(One day) make me a grandae of a maid.
Meane time my farewell to such gaudy lures
As here, were thrown vp t'haue me quite ore-thrown,
I charge you maids, entertaine no desires,
So irreligious and vnsanctified:
Oh, they ha snakes sleeky tongues, but hearts more rugged
Then i the Russian Beare: our Fairie bowres
Would turne to Arabian desarts, if such flowers,
(Mortall as killing Hemlocke) here should grow,
Which to preuent, Ile haue you vow.
We vowe
By the white balles in bright Titaniaes eies,
We their inchantments skorne.
It does suffice:
To bind it sure, Strew all your meades with charmes,
Which if they doe no good, shall doe no harme.
Here comes your new sworne seruant.
Now Sirra, where haue you bin?
Where haue I bin? I haue bin in the brauest prison—
What prison? a braue prison? Can there be a braue prison?
All your fine men liue and die there, it's the Knights ward, and therefore mustneeds bee braue: some call it an Ordinarie, but I say tis a prison, for most of our gallants that are serued euery day with woodcockes there, lie there in a manner vpon Execution: they dare not peepe out of doores for feare of Serieants.
What are those Serieants?
Doe not you know (mistresse) what Serieants are? a nūber of your courtiers are deare in their acquaintāce: why they are certaine men-mid wiues, that neuer bring people to bed, but when they are sore in labour, that no body els can deliuer them.
Are there such places in our kingdome, as Ordinaries,
what is the true fashion of them, whats their order?
They are out of all true fashion: they keep no order.
Where about in Fairie land stand they?
In your great cittie: and here's the picture of your Ordinarie.
When Master Painter please we shall haue it: come Sir.
Your gallants drink here right worshipfully, eat most impudently, dice most swearingly, sweare most damnably, quarrell most desperatly, and put vp most cowardly. Suppose I were a young countrey gentleman, and that I were to come in (like an asse) among 'em, new cast into the bonds of sattin.
What then?
Mary then doe all the gyltrapiers turne their Tobacco faces in the roome vpon me, and they puffe, they gape on a fresh man like so many stale Oysters at a full tyde: then is there no salt to throw vpon them, and to make them leaue gaping, but this; to cast off his cloake, hauing good cloathes vnderneath, single out some in the roome worse accoustred then himselfe, with him to walke boldly vp and downe strutting, laugh alowd at any thing, talke alowde of nothing, so they make a noise, it is no matter.
You are growne sirra an obseruer since you came out of Babylon.
Troth mistresse, I left villains and knaues there, & find knaues & fooles here: for your Ordinary is your Isle of Gulles, your ship of fooles, your hospitall of incurable madmen: it is the field where your captaine and braue man is cal'd to the lastreckoning, and is ouerthrown horse and foot: it is the onely schoole to make an honest man a knaue: for Intelligencers may heare enough there, to set twenty a begging oflands: it is the strangest Chesse-board in the world.
Why?
Because in some games at Chesse, knights are better then pawnes, but here a good pawne is better then a knight.
Affoard our shores such wonders?
Wonders? why this one little Cocke-pit, (for none come into it, but those that haue spurs) is able to shew all the follies of your kingdome, in a few Apes of the kingdome.
Haue we not in our Land Physitions
To purge these red impostumes?
Troth yes mistresse; but I am Plaine dealing, and must speake truth, thou hast many Physitions, some of thē sound men, but a number of them more sicke at heart, then a whole parish full of Patients: let them cure themselues first, & then they may better know how to heale others: then haue you other fellowes that take vpon them to be Surgeons, and by letting out the corruption of a State, and they let it out Ile be sworne; for some of them in places as big as this, and before a thousand people, rip vp the bowels of vice in such a beastly manner, that (like women at an Execution, that can endure to see men quartred aliue) the beholders learne more villany then they knew before: others likewise there be of this consort last named, that are like Beadles bribed, they whip, but draw no blood, and of these I haue made a Rime.
Let's heare it.
Those that doe jerke these times, are butlike fleas;
They bite the skinne, but leap from the disease.
Ile haue you Sir (because you haue an eye so sharply pointed) to looke through and through that our great Citie, and like death, to spare the liues of none, whose conscience you find sickly and going.
If I giue you the copie of the Cities countenance, Ile not flatter the face, as painters do; but shew al the wrinckles of it.
Doe so, you shall no more to Babylon,
But liue with vs, and be our Officer.
Haue I any kinred in your Court? is there any one of my name an officer? if there bee, part vs; because it will not bee good, to haue two of the Plain-dealings in one office, they'l bee beggars if they doe.
No Sirra, wee'le prouide you shall not want
VVhilst vs you serue. Goe learne where Tuth doth lie.
Nay, nay, I haue heard of her, she dwelles (they say) at the signe of the Holy Lambe.
VVee built her vp a lodging at our cost,
To haue her labour in our Vineyards:
For till shee came, no Vines could please our taste,
But of her fining Set your hand to hers,
Liue with her in one house, fetch from our Court
Maintenance to serue you all: t'will be to her
A comfort to haue you stilby her sides,
Shee ha's such prettie and delightfull songs,
That you will count your forestlabour light,
And time well spent only to heare her sing.
A way loose no more minutes.
Not a minute: Ile set more watches then a clockmaker.
VVhats yonder man that kneeles?
Tis Paridel
Our doctor?
The most wretched in your land.
the most in soule deiected; the most base,
And most vnseruiceable weede, vnles
You by your heauenly Influence change his vilenes
Into a vertuall habit fit for vse.
Oh: we remember it; you are condemnd?
To Death.
Deseruedly.
You had your hand
Not coulored with his bloud.
No deerest Lady
Vpon my vowed Loyalty.
The law, hath fastned on me only for attempt,
It was no actuall nor commenced violence
That brought death with it, but intent of ill.
We would not saue them, that delight to kill,
For so we wound our selues: bloud wrongly spilt
Who pardons, hath a share in halfe the guilt.
You strooke, our lawes not hard, yet what the edge
Of Iustice could take from you, mercy giues you
(Yourlife.) You haue it signed, rize.
May yon Clouds
Muster themselues in Armies, to confound
Him that shall wish you dead, hurt, or vncrownd.
To run in debt thus basely for a life,
To spend which, had beene glory! O most vile!
The good I reape from this superfluous grace,
Is but to make my selfe like Casars horse,
To kneele whilst he gets vp: my backe must beare
Till the chine crack, yet still a seruile feare
Must lay more loades on me, and presse me downe.
VVhen Princes giue life, they so bind men to'em,
That trusting them with too much, they vndo'em.
VVho then but I, from steps so low would rise?
Great fortunes (eanrd thus) are great Slaueries:
Snatcht from the common hangmans hands for this?
To haue my mind feele torture! now I see,
VVhen good dayes come, (the Gods so seldome giue them;)
That tho we haue them, yet we scarce beleeue them.
Heart how art thou confinde? and bard of roome,
Thart quicke enough, yet liuest within a tombe.
His name.
Campeius: Deeply learnd.
We heare so:
But with it heare (from some whome we haue weied
For iudgement and experience) that he caries:
A soule within him framde of a thousand wheeles'
Yet not one steddy.
It may be the rumor
That thus spreades ouer him, flowes out of hate.
Belieue vs no: of his, and tothers fate,
The threedes are too vnlike, to haue that wouen.
To gaine her crowne Ile not kneele thus.
Besides
The haruest which he seekes is reapde already:
We haue bestowed it.
Here then dies our sute.
Now shall you trie with what impatience
That bay tree will endure a little fire,
My Lord, my Lord,
Such swelling spirites hid with humble lookes,
Are kingdoms poysons, hung on golden hookes,
I hope heele proue none such.
Such men oft proue.
Valleyes that let in riuers to confound
The hils aboue them, tho themselues lie drounde,
My Lord, I like not calme and cunning seas
That to haue great ships taken or distrest,
Suffer base gallyes to creepe ore their breast,
Let course harts weare course skins: you know our wil.
Which (as a doome diuine) I shall fulfill.
Thrown downe, or raizd?
All hopes (for this) are gone,
ome planet stands in opposition.
Vmh: So.
Now Doctor Paridell.
An humble suite,
I am growne bold finding so free a giuer,
Where beggers once take almes, they looke for't euer.
You ha beene sworne our seruant long.
Tenne yeares. (uing)
And we should wrong you; since you take vs gi-
To let you goe with life, that should want liuing,
What is it we can grant you.
I ha beene by two great Fayries in your land,
(Opprest I dare not say) but so beaten downe,
And suncke so low now with my last disgrace,
That all my happy thoughts lie in the dust,
Asham'd to looke vp yet: most humbly therefore
Begge I your gratious leaue that I may vary,
This natiue Aire for Forren.
Oh you would trauell,
You may, you haue our leaue: Challenge our hand.
Stormes are at Sea, when it is calme at land.
The Sea-God hath vpon your maiden shoares,
(On Dolphins backes that pittie men distrest)
In safetie setta people that implores,
The Soueraigne mercie flowing from your brest.
What people are they?
Neighbours: tis the nation,
With whome our Faries enterchange commerce,
And by negotiation growne so like vs,
That halfe of them are Fayries: th'other halfe
Are hurtfull Spirits, that with sulphurous breath
Blast their corne feilds, deface their temples, cloth
their townes in mourning, poyson hallowed founts,
And make their goodliest Citties stand (like tombes)
Full of dead bodies, or (like pallaces,
From whence the Lords are gone) all desolate.
They haue but 17. danghters young and faire,
Vowd to liue vestalls, and to know the touch
Of any forced or vnreuerend hand.
Yet Lust and Auarice (to get their dowers)
Lay barbarous seidge against their chastitie,
Threaten to rauish them, to make their bodies
The tempes of polution, or their bedds,
Graues where their honors shall lie buried,
They pray to haue their virgins wait on you,
That you would be their mother, and their nurse,
Their Guardian and their Gouernour; when Princes
Haue their liues giuen'em, fine and golden threds
Are drawne and spun (for them) by the good fates,
That they may lift vp others in low states.
Els let our selfe decline; giue them our presence:
In mysery all nations should be kin,
And lend a brothers hand, vsher them in.
Stood here my foes (distrest) thus would I grieue them▪
Not how they ha bin, but how I might relieue them.
Your good deeds (matchlesse Fayrie) like the Sun,
(Rising but onely in this poyn of heauen,
Spred through the world, So that a Prince (made wretched,
By his vnhappy father, that lies slaine
By barbarous swords, and in his goary wounds,
Drownes all the hopes of his posteritie)
Hether, is like an orphan come (from farre)
To get reliefe and remedie gainst those,
That would defeat him of his portion.
Pittie ad we had talke before you came,
She hath not taken yet her hand from ours,
Nor shall shee part, vntill those higher powers
Behold that Prince: good workes are theirs, not ou'rs;
Goe: bid him trust his misery in our hands,
Great trees I see do fall, when the shrub stands.
Stands my beard right? the gowne I must looke graue,
White haires like siluer cloudes a priuiledge haue,
Not to be search'd, or be suspected fowle:
Make away those 2. turne coates. Suite me next
Like to a Sattin diuell (brauely) flie
Your sayles shape: be here immediatly.
So: excellent: a subtile masque: alls fit,
This very cap makes my head swell with wit.
Mongst souldiers, I haue plaid the souldier,
Bin mutinous, raild at the State, cursd peace:
They walke with crosse-armes, gaping for a day,
Haue vnder-shorde their eie-lids (like trap windows.)
To keep them open, and with yawning eares,
Lie listning on flocke bolsters, till rebellion
Beat vp her drum: this lards me fat with laughter,
Their swords are drawn halfe way, & all those throats
That are to bleed are mark'd: and all those doores,
Where ciuill Massacres, murders (di'd in graine)
Spoile, riflings, and sweet rauishments shall enter,
Haue tokens stamp'd on them (to make 'em knowne)
More dreadfull then the Bils that preach the plague▪
From them, with oyl'd hammes (lap'd in seruile blew)
I stole, and fil'd out wine of Babylon,
To liue things (made of clods) poore countrey sots,
And drunke they are: whole shires with it do reele,
Poysons run smooth, because men sweetnes feele.
Now to my schoole-men, Learnings fort is strong,
But poorely man'd, and cannot hold outlong
VVhen golden bullets batter.—Yonders one—
Y'are a poore scholler?
Yes.
VVhat read you?
A booke.
So learned, yet so young?
Yee may see Sir.
You feede some discontent?
Perhaps I ha cause.
VVhat troubles you?
You trouble me: pray leaue me.
Put your selfe, and your griefe into my hands.
Say yee?
Put your selfe & your grief into my hands.
Are you a Doctor? your hands Sir, pray why?
You know me no.
Do you know your selfe? your busines▪
Are you a scholler?
Iudge of that by these. (ool▪
Oh Sir, I haue seene many heads vnder such
That scarce had braines to line it: if y'are a scholler,
Mee thinks you should know manners, by your leaue
Pray leae your name behind you. Sir.
Name, Campeius.
Campeius! vmh: Campeius? a lucky plannet
strikes out this houre: Campeius Babylon,
His name hath in her tables: on his forehead,
Our Queene hath set her marke: it is a mould
Fit to cast mischeife in none sooner rent
A Church in two, then Schollers discontent.
I must not loose this Martines nest,—once more
Y'are happely met.
This bur stil hang on mee!
And you Sir.
Tell me pray, did you neuer tast-I'me bold-did you
Those cleere & redolent fountains that do norish, nee'r tast
In viue and fresh humiditie those plants
That grow on thother side (our opposites)
Those that to vs here, are th' Antipodes,
Cleane against vs in grounds-you feele me-say
Ne're drunke you of that nectar.
Neuer.
Neuer!
I wish you had, I gather from your eyes,
VVhat your disease is, I h bin your selfe,
This was Campeius once (thō not so learn'd)
For I was bred (as you) in Fairy Land,
A Country! well▪ but tis our country: and so,
Good to breed beggers: Shee starues Arts▪ fats fools,
Shee sets vp drinking roomes, & pulls downe schools.
So Sir.
No more but so Sir? this discourse
Not to be search'd, or be suspected fowle:
Make away those 2. turne coates. Suite me next
Like to a Sattin diuell (brauely) flie
Your sayles shape: be here immediatly.
So: excellent: a subtile masque: alls fit,
This very cap makes my head swell with wit.
Mongst souldiers, I haue plaid the souldier,
Bin mutinous, raild at the State, cursd peace:
They walke with crosse-armes, gaping for a day,
Haue vnder-shorde their eie-lids (like trap windows.)
To keep them open, and with yawning eares,
Lie listning on flocke bolsters, till rebellion
Beat vp her drum: this lards me fat with laughter,
Their swords are drawn halfe way, & all those throats
That are to bleed are mark'd: and all those doores,
Where ciuill Massacres, murders (di'd in graine)
Spoile, riflings, and sweet rauishments shall enter,
Haue tokens stamp'd on them (to make'em knowne)
More dreadfull then the Bils that preach the plague▪
From them, with oyl'd hammes (lap'd in seruile blew)
I stole, and fil'd out wine of Babylon,
To liue things (made of clods) poore countrey sots,
And drunke they are: whole shires with it do reele,
Poysons run smooth, because men sweetnes feele.
Now to my schoole-men, Learnings fort is strong,
But poorely man'd, and cannot hold out long
VVhen golden bullets batter.—Yonders one—
Y'are a poore scholler?
Yes.
VVhat read you?
A booke.
So learned, yet so young?
Yee may see Sir.
You feede some discontent?
Perhaps I ha cause.
VVhat troubles you?
You trouble me: pray leaue me.
Put your selfe, and your griefe into my hands.
Say yee?
Put your selfe & your grief into my hands.
Are you a Doctor? your hands Sir, pray why?
You know me not.
Do you know your selfe? your busines▪
Are you a scholler?
Iudge of that by these. (ool▪
Oh Sir, I haue seene many heads vnder such
That scarce had braines to line it: if y'are a scholler,
Mee thinks you should know manners, by your leaue
Pray leae your name behind you. Sir.
Name, Campeius.
Campeius▪ vmh: Campeius? a lucky plannet
strikes out this houre: Campeius Babyl,
His name hath in her tables: on his forehead,
Our Queene hath set her marke: it is a mould
Fit to cast mischeife in▪ none sooner rent
A Church in two, then Schollers discontent.
I must not loose this Martines nest,—once more
Y'are happely met.
This bur stil hang on m ▪
And you Sir.
Tell me pray, did you neuer tast-I'me bold-did you
Those cleere & redolent fountains that do norish, nee'r tast
In viue and fresh humiditie those pants
That grow on thother side (our opposites).
Those that to vs here, are th'Antipodes,
Cleane against vs in grounds-you feele me-say
Ne're drunke you of tat .
Neuer.
Neuer!
I wish you had, I gather from your eyes,
VVhat your disease is▪ I a bin your selfe,
This was Campeius once (tho not so learn'd)
For I was bred (as you) in Fairy Land,
A Country! well, but tis our country: and so,
Good to breed beggers▪ Shee starues Arts: arts fools,
Shee sets vp drinking roomes, & pulls downe schools.
So Sir.
No more but lo Si this discoure
Pallats not you.
Yes.
Nothing hath passed me
Ihope, against my countrey, or the State,
That any you can take hold of.
If they could,
Tis but mine I, to your no.
Y'are to sowre:
Vnmellowed: you stand here in the shade,
Out of the warmth of those blest ripening beames,—
Goe to—I grieue that such a blossome—(raiz'd,
Sir, I know you not this thing which you haue
Affrights me: schollers of weake temper need
To feare (as they on Sunbankes lie to read)
Adders i'th highest grasse: these leaues but turn'd,
Like willow stickes hard rub'd may kindle fire,
Cities with sparkes as small haue oft beene burn'd.
Doe you take me for a hangman?
I would be loath,
For any harsh tune that my tongue may warble,
To haue the instrument vnstrung.
You shall not:
Welfare vnto you.
And to you. A word Sir:
Bred in this countrey?
Yes.
I am no bird
To breake mine own neast downe: what ight soeuer
Your words make through this ayre (tho it be trobled)
Myne eare Sir, is no reaching Fowling piece
What passes through it, kills: you may proceed,
Perhaps you would wound that, I wish should bleed.
You haue th'aduantage now,
I put the longest weapon into your hands▪
It shall guard you:
You draw me by this line: let's priuate walke.
This paths vnbruz'd: goe on Sir.
Sir I loue you.
The Dragons that keep learnings golden tree▪
As you now haue, I fought with, conquered them,
Got to the highest bough, eat of the fruit,
And gathered of the seauen-sold leues of Art,
What I desir'd; and yet for all the Moons
That I haue seene waxe olde, and pifor anger,
I had outwatched them: and for all the candles
I wasted out on long, and frozen nights,
To thaw them into day; I fild my head
With books, butscarcecould filmy mouth with read,
I had the Muses smile, but moneyes frowne,
And neuer could get out of such a gowne.
How did you change your starre 3
By changing Aire:
The god of waues washt of my pouertie,
I sought out a new sunne beyond the seas,
VVhose beames begat me gold.
O me dull asse▪
I am nail'd downe by wilfullbeggerie,
Yet feele not where it enters: like a horse
My hoofes are par'd to 'th quicke) euen til they ble
To make me runne from hence, yet this Tortois shell,
(My countrey) lies so heauy on my back,
Pressing my worth downe, that I slowly creep▪
Through base and slimie waies.
Countrey▪
Shee hangs
Her owne brats at her backe, to teach them begge,
And in her lap sets strangers.
Yet your countrey.
I was not borne to this, not school'd to this,
My parents spent not wealth on meto this,
I will not stay here long.
Doe not.
Beeing hence,
Ile write in gall and poyson gainst my rce
This Fairie land, for rewarding merit:
If euer I come backe Ile be a Calrop
To pricke my countries feet, that tread on me.
O shee's vnkind, hard hearted▪
In disputation
I dare for latine, hebrew, and the greeke,
Challenge an vniuersitie; yet, (O euill hap!)
Three learned languages cannot set a nap.
Vpon this thred-bare gowne: how is Arte curs'd?
Shee ha's the sweetest lymbes, and goes the worst:
Like common Fidlers, drawing down others meate
With lickorish tunes, whilst they on scraps do eate.
Shake then these seruile fetters off.
But how?
Play the mules part, now thou hast suckt a dam
Drie and vnholsome, kicke her sides.
Her heart—her very heart—
Would it were dried to dust, to strew vpon
Th'inuenomed paper vpon which Ile write.
Know you the Court of Babylon?
I haue read,
How great it is, how glorious, and would venter
A soule to get but thither.
Get then thither; you venture none, but saue a soule going thither:
The Queene of Babylon rides on a beast,
That carries vp seauen heads.
Rare.
Each head crow'nd.
O admirable!
Shee with her owne hand
Will fil thee wine out of a golden bowle.
There's Angels to conduct thee. Get to sea,
Steale o're, behold, here's one to waft thee hence,
Take leaue of none, tell none, th'art made, farewell.
Thus to meet heauen, who would not wade through hell?
To flea off this hypocrisie, tis time,
Least worne too long, the Foxes skinne be known:
In our dissembling now we must be braue,
Make me a courtier come; Asses I see,
In nothing but in trappings, different be
From foote-cloth nags, on which gay fellows ride,
Saue that such gallants gallop in more pride.
Away. Stow vnder hatches that light stuffe:
Tis to be worne in Babylon.
At this groue,
And much about this howre, a slaue well moulded,
In profound, learned villany, gaue oath
To meet me: Art thou come! Can thy blacke Arte
This wonder bring to passe?
See, it is done.
Tis. picture right.
This virgin waxe,
Burie I will in slimie putred ground,
Where it may peece-meale rot: As this consumes,
So shall shee pine, and (after languor) die.
These pinnes shall sticke like daggers to her heart,
And eating through her breast, turnethere to gripings
Cramp-like Convns, g vp her nerues,
As into this they eate.
Thou art fam'd for euen,
If these thy holy labours well succeed,
Statues of molten brasse shall reare thy name,
The Babylonian Empresse shall thee honour.
And (for this) each day shalt thou goe in chaines.
Where wilt thou burie it?
On this dghill.
Good:
And bind it down with most effectuall charmes,
That whosoeuer with vnhallowed hands,
Shall dare to take it hence, may raue and die.
Leaue me.
Farewell and prosper: be blinde you skies,
You looke on things vnlawfull with sore eies.
Who sets those tunes to mock vs? Stay them.
Peace.
Peace there.
No more: your musicke must be dombe.
When those Caelestiall bodies that doe moue,
Within the sacred Spheres of Princes bosomes
Goe out of order, tis as if you Regiment,
Weare all in vp-roare: heauen should then be vext,
Me thinkes such indignation should resemble,
Dreadfull eclypses, that portend dire plagues
To nations, fall to Empires, death to Kings,
To Citties deuastation, to the world,
That vniuersall hot calamitie
Of the last horror. But our royall bloud,
Beates in our veines like seas strugling for bounds,
Atna, burns in vs: bearded Comets shoote
Their vengeance through our eyes: our breath is lightning,
Thunder our voyce; yet, as the idle Cannon,
Strikes at the Aires Invulnerable brest)
Our darts are phillip'd backe in mockery,
Wanting the poynts to wound.
Too neere the heart,
(Most royall Empresse) these distempers fit,
So please you, weele againe assayle her bewtie
In varied shapes, and worke on sutler Charmes,
Again loues poysoned arrowes weele let she.
No: proud spirits once denying, still deny.
Then be your selfe, (a woman) change those ouer turs
You made to her of an vnusuall peace,
To an vnusde defiance: giue your reuenge,
A full and swelling saile, as from your greatnes
You tooke, in yling to her: you haue beene
Too cold in punishment, too soft in hyding,
And like a mother (cause her yeares are greene)
Haue winck't at Errors, hoping time, or councell,
Oher owne guilt (seing how she goes awry,)
Would streigtenall.—you find the contrarie.
What followes▪
Sharp chastizment, leaue the Mother
And be the steptdame; wanton her no more
On your Indulgent knee, signe no more pardons
To her Off-fallings and her flyings out,
But let it be a meritorious Act:
Make it a ladder for the soule to climbe,
Lift from the hindges all the gates of heauen;
To make way for him that shall kill her.
Good.
Giue him an office in you Star-chamber,
Or els a Saints place and Canonize him;
So Sanctifie the arme that takes her life,
That sylly soules may go on pilgrimage,
Only to kisse the Instrument (that strikes)
As a most reuerent relique.
Be it so.
In that one word she expires
Her fayrie Lordes
(That play the Pilots nowe, and steere her kingdome
In fowlest weather) as white bearded corne
Bowes his proud head before th'imperiall windes,
Shall soly groueling (heere) when that day comes.
And that it shall come fates thēselues prepare.
True, but old Lyons hardly fall into the snare.
Is not the good and politique Satyran
(Our leagued brother, and your vassaile sworne)
Euen now (this very minute) sucking close
Their fairest bosomes▪ if his trayn take well:
They haue strange workings (down-wards) into hel.
That Satiran is this hand: his braines a forge
Still working for vs, he's the trew set clocke
By which we goe, and of our houres doth keepe
The numbred strokes, when welye bound in sleepe.
Besides such voluntaries as will serue
Vnder your holy cullors and forsake
The Fairie standard, all such fugitiues
Whose heartes are Babylonied: all the Muers
All the damb'd Crew, that would for gold teare off
The deuills beard: All schollers that doe eate
The bread of sorrow, want, and discontent,
Wise Satryan takes vp, presses, apparrels, (woues,
Their backes like Innocent Lambes, their minds like
Rubs or'e their tongues with poyson, which they spot
Against their owne annointed; their owne Country,
Their very parent. And thus shippes'em hither.
To make em yours.
To vse.
Only to imploy them
As Bees whilst they haue stings, & bring thighs laden
With hony, hiue them, when they are droanes, destroy them.
The earnest which he giues you (adored Empresse,)
Are three fit engines for vs.
Are they wrought?
They are: and waite in Court your vtmost pleasure,
Out of your Cup made wee them drunke with wines,
To sound their hearts, which they with such deuotion
Receiued downe, that euen whilst Bacchus, swom
From lippe to lippe, in midst of taking healths,
They tooke their owne damnation, if their bloud
(As those grapes) stream'd not forth, to effect your good.
Let vs behold these fire-workes, that must run
Vpon shortlines of life: yet wil Wee vse them,
Like instruments of musicke play on them,
A while for pleasure, and then hang them by,
Who Princes can vpbrayd, tis good they die.
For as in building sumptuous pallaces,
We climb by base and slender scaffoldings,
Till wee haue raized the Frame: and that being done,
(To grace the worke) we take the Scaffolds downe,
So must we these: we know they loue vs not,
But Swallow-like when their owne summers past,
Here seeke for heat: or like flight Traualers,
(Swolne with vaine-glory, or with lust to see,)
They come to obserue fashions and not mee.
As Traualers vse them then, till they be gone,
Looke Cheerefully; backs turnd, no more thought vpon.
What are they that fly hither (to our bosome)
But such as hang the wing, such as want neasts;
Such as haue no sound feathers; birds: so poore,
They scarce are worth the killing: with the Larke
(The morning's fawlkner) so they may mount hie,
Care not how base and low their risings be?
What are they but leane hungry Crowes that tyre
Vpon the mangled quarters of a Realme?
And on the house-tops of Nobilitie
(If there they can but sit) like fatall Rauens,
Or Skrich-Owles croake their fals and hoarsely bode,
Nothing but scaffolds and vnhallowed graues?
Fitter for vs: yet sit they here like doues.
True: like corrupted Churchmē they are doues,
That haue eate carrion: home weele therefore send
These busie-working Spiders to the wals
Of their owne countrey, when their venemous bags
(Which they shall stuffe with scandales, libels, treasons)
Are full and vpon bursting: let them there
Weaue in their politicke loomes nets to catch flies;
To vs they are but Pothecary drugs,
Which we will take as Physicall pils, not food:
Vse them as lancets to let others bloud,
That haue foule bodies, care not whom you wound,
Nor what parts you cut off, to keepe this sound.
Here come they.
Welcome: rise, and rise vp high
In honours and our fauour: you haue thrust
Your armes into our cofers, haue you not?
Yes sacred Empresse.
And into our owne,
Haue rayned downe showers of gold.
You shall deserue it:
You see what Ocean can replenish you,
Be you but duteous tributarie streames:
But is your temper right? are not the edges
Of your sharpe spirits rebated? are you ours?
Doe not your hearts sinke downe yet? will you on?
Stood deathith' way.
Stood hell.
Nobly resolu'de:
But listen to vs, and obserue our counsell:
Backe must we send you to the Fairie Land,
Danger goes with you; here's your-safetie: listen.
Chuse winds to sayle by; if the way ward seas
Grow stormie, houer, keepe aloofe: if feares,
Shipwracks, and death lie tumbling on the waues,
And will not off, then on: be venturous,
Conquests hard got are sweet and glorious.
Being landed, if suspition cast on you
Her narrow eyes, turne your selues then to Moles,
Worke vnder ground, and vndermine your countrey,
Tho you cast earth vp but a hand full high,
To make her stumble: if that bloud-hound hunt you,
(That long-ear'd Inquisition) take the thickets,
Climbe vp to Hay-mowes, liue like birds, and eate
The vndeflowred corne: in hollow trees
Take such prouision as the Ant can make:
Flie with the Batt vnder the eeues of night,
And shift your neasts: or like to Ancresses,
Close vp your selues in artificiall wals:
Or if you walke abroad, be wrapt in clouds,
Haue change of haires, of cie-brows, halt with soldiers,
Be shauen and be old women, take all shapes
To escape taking: But if the ayre be cleere,
Flie to the Court, and vnderneath the wings
Of the Eagle, Faulcon, or some great bird houer,
Oakes and large Beech-trees many beasts doe couer.
He that first sings a Dirge tun de to the death
Of that my onely foe the Fairie Queene,
Shalbe my loue, and (clad in purple) ride
Vpon that scarlet-coloured beast that beares
Seuen Kingdomes on seuen heads.
If all the Spels.
That wit, or eloquenee, or arts can set:
If all the sleights that bookemen vse in schooles
Be powefull in such happinesse, 'tis mine.
What physicke can I dare onely to grow
(But as I merit shall) vp in your eye.
Weele erect ladders for you strong and high,
That you shall climbe to starrie dignitie.
We take our leaue dread Empresse.
Fare you well:
Our benediction goe along with you—
Our malediction and your soules confusion
Like shiuer'd towers fall on your hickelesse heads,
And wedge you into earth low as the deepe
Where are the damned, if our world you fire,
Since desperately you'le ride and dare aspire.
But is this all? shall we thus bend our sinews
Onely to emptie quiuers, and to shoot
Whole sheafes of forked arrowes at the Sunne,
Yet neuer hit him?
And the marke so faire!
Nay, which is more, suppose that al these torrēts
Which from your sea of Greatnesse, you (for your part)
And all those stragling flouds which we haue driuen
VVith full and stiffe winds to the Fairie Stronds,
Should all breake in at once, and in a deluge
Of Innouation, rough rebellion, factions,
Of massacres, and pale destruction
Swallow the kingdome vp, and that the bloud
Euen of Titania's heart should in deepe crimson
Dye all these waters: what of this? what share
Is yours? what land shall you recouer?
All.
All!
I, all:
Betweene the Transuersaries that doe run
Vpon this crosse staffe, a dull eye may find
In what degree we are, and of what height
Your selfe (our brightest Ariade) is,
Being vnderneath that Tropicke: as those jewels
Of night and day are by alternate course
VVorne in Heauens fore-head,
So when Deaths VVinter comes,
And shortens all those beames of Maiestie,
Which in this oblique and Zodiacall Sphere
Moue with Titania now, shall loose their heat,
Where must the next Sun rise but here? from whence
Shall Fairie land get warmth? meerely from hence.
Let but the taper of her life burne out,
We haue such torches ready in her land
To catch fire from each other, that the flames
Shall make the frighted people thinke earth burnes,
And being dazled with our Copes of Starres,
We shall their temples hallow with such ease,
As 'twere in solemne gay procession.
Some lyne sea cards, that know not the seas tast,
Nor scarce the colour: by your charmes I gather
You haue seene Fairie land—but in a Map:
Can tell how't stands: but if you giue't a fall,
You must get bigger bones: for let me whisper
This to your eare; though you bait hookes with gold,
Ten thousand may be nibbling, when none bites,
And those you take for Angels, you'le find Sprites.
Say that Titania were now drawing short breath,
(As that's the Cone and Button that together
Claspes all our hopes) out of her ashes may
A second Phoenix rise, of larger wing,
Of stronger talent, of more dreadfull beake,
Who swooping through the ayre, may with his beating
So well commaund the winds, that all those trees
VVhere sit birds of our hatching (now fled thither)
VVill tremble, & (through feare strucke dead) to earth,
Throw those that sit and sing there, or in flockes
Driue them from thence, yea and perhaps his talent
May be so bonie and so large of gripe,
That it may shake all Babilon.
All Babylon!
Your pardon: but who'le swear this may not be?
How the preuention?
Thus; to fell downe their Q. is but one stroake;
Our axe must cleaue the kingdome, that's the Oake.
The manner.
Easie: whilest our thunderbolts
Are anuiling abroad, call Satyran home,
He in his fadome metes vast Argoziet,
Huge Galeasses, and such wodden Castles,
As by enchantment of the waters moue:
To his, marry yours and ours; and of them all
Create a braue Armado, such a Fleete,
That may breake Neptunes backe to carry it:
Such for varietie, number, puissance,
As may fetch all the Fairie Land in turfes,
To make a greene for you to walke vpon
In Babilon.
Inuincible! goe on.
Now when the volley of those murdring shot
That are to play first on Titaniaes breast,
And (yet) leane on their rests, goe off and kill her,
So that the very Aluerado giuen,
Sounds the least hope of conquest; then, then shew
Your warlike Pageants dancing on the waues,
Yours is the Land, the Nation are your slaues.
Counsell from Heauen!
None this shall ouer-whelme:
Braue voyage! Rig out ships, and fetch a Realme.
You ariue on a blest shore. The freight you bring
Is good: it will be bought vp of vs all
With our deere blouds: be constant, doe not warpe
In this your zeale to Babilon.
Graue Palmio,
To you I haue vnladen euen my soule,
The wings frō home that brought me had sick feathers,
Some you haue puld off: my owne countrey grasse
Was to my feet sharpe needels (stucke vpright)
I tread on downe-beds now.
But are your countreymen
(I meane those that in thought with vs feast richly)
Fed with the course bread of affliction still?
Still father Palmio still, and to relieue them
I dare doe what I told you.
Noble valour!
So that I might but read on yonder scrolls,
A warrant writ vnder the seale of Heauen,
To justifie the Act.
You haue my hand,
And shall haue more. Y'are reconcil'de (Sonne?)
Yes.
Who did confesse you?
Father Anniball.
But did the Nuntio Campeggio
Present your letters, and your vowed seruice
At Babylon.
He did: I sued out warrant
For passage safely thither: and from graue Com
(One of the capitall Columnes of the state)
This I receiued.
He sends you here good welcome;
'Tis strong; why went you not?
I like it not:
There wants a conuoy of some better words,
Which hourely I expect: vpon a Sea
So dangerous, so full of rockes, so narrow,
(Albeit the venture holy and of honour)
I would not gladly sayle, without direction
Of noble Pilots, home I would not come
Basely, but like a glorious voyager.
Yea, you do well; the Nuntio Raggazoni!
Not know him?
Certes no.
Come, you shall meete:
Monsignor, here's a Gentleman desires
To haue your armes about him.—
Willingly.
He vndertakes an action full of merit,
Sans promise or reward, to cure all those
Through Fairie land, that are diseas'd within,
And he will doo't, by letting one veine bloud.
Shootes he at highest?
Yes.
Draw home, and giue
Your arrowes compasse, that vntill they fall
Full on the head, none see them: you do well:
My hands are yours: good speede.—
Campeggio?
Now shall you heare some newes.
I doe assure you,
The Mistris of vs all, hath on this paper
Breath'd you a blessing: your deuotion
Is recommended highly, and to nourish
The flames new kindled in you, here's more fewell,
Licence to go and come, in verbo imperatrieis per omnes Iuris-dictiones Babilonicas abs que impedimento.
Good: would it had come sooner.
Why?
'Tis generall,
Exceeding absolute and peremptorie.
It giues me my ful saile: but by deepe vows,
I am to trauell lower, yet if season
Beat me not backe, I will to Babylon,
What rubs soe're I meete in letters still,
Ile kisse her sacred hand.
You change not byas.
Oh good sir, yonder is the goale I run for!
Lend me your speeches both.
Yonder comes one of your owne countrey.
Oh I know him Sir.
Walk in this colledge classe but som few minutes,
Ile send or bring to you a Gentleman,
Next neighbour to your countrey: an Albanois—
The man I told you of.
Thankes Sir.
Met happily, I look'd for you.
Deere countryman the parly we late held
About the land that bred vs, as how order
Was rob'd of ceremonie (the rich robe of order)
How Truth was freckled, spotted, nay made leaprous:
How Iustice—
Come, no more.
Euen now (as then)
You ward blowes off from her, that at all weapons
Strikes at your head: but I repent we drew not
That dialogue out to length, it was so sweet. (man
At houres more opportune we shal: but country-
I heard of late the musicke of my soule,
And you the instrument are made that sounds it:
Tis giuen me, that your selfe hath seal'd to heauen
A bond of your deuotion, to goe forth
As champion of vs all, in that good quarrell,
That hath cost many liues.
What need we vse
Circumgyrations, and such wheelings? Sir,
Beleeue it, to recouer our sicke Nurse
Ide kill the noblest foster-child she keepes.
I know what bird you meane, & whō you hate,
But let him stand to fall: no sir, the Deere
Which we all hope you'le strike, is euen the pride
And glory of the Forrest: So, or not?
My vowes are flowne vp, and it must be done,
So this may be but settled.
Do you stagger?
All winds are not yet layd.
Haue you looked out
or skilfull coasters, that know all the sounds,
The flats, and quicke sands, and can safely land you
Out of all touch of danger?
I haue met many,
And like a consort they hold seuerall tunes—
But make they musicke?
Faith a little jarring:
Sometimes a string or so: yet reuerend Palmio,
And Anniball a Codreto keepe the streame
In which I swim: the Nuntio Ragazzoni
Plies me with wholesome phisicke; so the Nuntio,
My honored Friend Campeggio makes it cleere,
That it is lawfull.
Where at stick you then?
At a small rocke, (a dispensation.)
You cannot want for hands to helpe you for▪
In such a noble worke your friends are neere; (ward:
Deere Countriman, my sword, my state, and honor,
Are for your vse, goe on; and let no heate
thaw your strong resolution, I shall see you,
Before you take to Sea.
You shall.
My dewtie.
This is the worthy Gentleman, to whome
I wish your loue endeer'de: we haue some conference.
Borne Sir in Fairy Land?
No marry Sir-An Albanois,
Then for proximitie
Of Countries, let vs enterchange acquaintance,
I wish'd for your embracements, for your name
Is crown'd with titles of integritie,
Iudgement and Learning: let me vpon their Bases
Erect a piller, by which Babylon,
And all we may be strengthned.
I pray be apert and plaine.
Then thus Sir; by the way of Argument
I would a question put, to tast your censure,
Because I doe not soundly relish it.
Propone it Sir, Ile solue it as I can.
Suppose that in the field there were an Army,
Commixt of halfe your kinsfolke, friends, and louers,
The other halfe sworne foes, (all countrimen;)
And that the leader of them were your father,
And that this leading father were so partiall,
That to preserue that halfe which loues you not,
Ye would loose that which loues you: & that to take
This Captaines life away, might bring this good,
Of two sides to make one, and saue much bloud:
Would not you doe it.
Vmh: ya're ful of Ambage:
I answere as my spirits leade me, thus,
I would not doe it.
Why Sir.
Because I hold, Quod non omninò Licet.
Come, Come, I know (without al commenting)
This text you vnderstand: wey the vtilitie,
That goes with it: the health it giues to thousands;
The sap it spreads through brāches which now wither:
The restauration—
Sir I see to'th bottome,
Of this deepe well you diue in: I doe arme you,
In this strong fight, iust with the selfe same weapons
Which I would weare to guard mee, and those are
My readings and beliefe setled by reading,
And this I find-Quod non sunt faciēda mala, vt veiant
For good; (how great soeuer) must be don,
no ill how small soeuer.
Tis no euill.
To barre out so great ill, with so great good.
All good must not be done, but onely that-Quod benè & legitimè fieri potest: For Sir I know, that Deus magis amat aduerbia quam nomina. Quia in actionibus magis et Placent Benè & legitimè quàm bonum. Ita vt nullum bonum Liceat sacere, nisi ben & legiime fieri potest. Quod in hoc Casu fieri non potest.
Yet (with your fauour) seuerall learned men,
Are cleane from your opinion and doe hold, Quòd licet.
Those learned men perhaps may hold it fit,
That to saue many, they to one mans danger,
(Referring all to the depth inscrutable)
May allow of a particular; on no warrant
That they can shew me written, but being stird,
With a humaine compassion to mens liues:
And lesse you reuelation haue diuine,
That bids you do, doe not; Thus you haue mine.
What so hard at it.
We haue done: the time,
Doe's pull me from your sweet societie,
You will to Babylon.
I cannot tell;
Whether I doe or no, you shall haue notice,
How this great worke goes forward; strengthen mee,
VVith all your comforts, and commend my seruice
To the most glorious throne: if I get or'e,
There lands blacke vengeance on the Fairy shore.
If prayers can doe it shall.
But how shall I know, thou art the right truth;
Because I am not painted.
Nay if thou hast no better coulour then that, ther's no trueth in thee, for Im'e sure your fairest wenches are free of the painters.
Besides I am not gorgious in attire,
But simple, plaine and homely; in mine eyes,
Doues sit, not Sparrowes: on my modest cheekes,
No witching smiles doe dwell: vpon my tongue
No vnchast language lies: my Skins not spotted
VVith foule disease, as is that common harlot,
That baseborne trueth, that liues in Babylon.
VVhy? is shee spotted?
All ouer, with strange vglines, all ouer,
Then she has got the pox, and lying at my host Gryncums, since I left her company: how soeuer it be thou and I will liue honest togither in one house, because my court mistris will haue it so: I haue beene a Trauailer a great while, plaine dealing hath lept from country to country, till he had scarce a paire of soales to carrie him.
VVhy? in what Countries haue you beene?
In more then I had mind to stay in; I haue beene amongst the Turkes too, the Turkes made as much of poore plaine dealing, as those whom we call Christians.
VVhat man is that great Turke? I neuer saw him:
Nor euer shalt: why the great Turke is a very little fellow; I haue seene a scuruy little bad paltry Christian, has beene taken for the greatest Turke there.
VVhere had you bin, when now you met with me.
Looking vp and downe for thy selfe: and yet I lie too, now I remember, I was in the citie: our mistresse would needes haue me goe thither, to see fashions: I could make an excellent Taylor for Ladies and gentlemen, and fooles, for I haue seene more fashions there, then a picture drawer makes skuruy faces, the first two yeares of his trade: its the maddest circle to coniure in, that euer raiz'd spirit.
Tell me good kinsman, what in the citie saw you?
What did I see? why Ile tell the cozen; I sawe no more conscience in most of your rich men, then in Tauerne faggots: nor no more sobernes in poore men, then in Tauerne spiggots: I see that citizens fine wiues vndo their husbands (by their pride) within a yeare after they are married; and within halfe a yeare after they be widdowes, knights vndo them: they'le giue a 100. pound to be dubd ladies, and to ride in a coach, when they haue scarce another hundred pound left to keep the horses. But cozē Truth, I met in one street a number of men in gowns, with papers in their hands, what are all those?
Oh! they are the sonnes of Iustice; they are those.
That beat the kingdom leuell, keep it smooth
And without rubs: they are the poore mans captaine,
The rich mans souldier, and cal'd Lawiers.
Lawiers? doest know any of them?
A few.
I wondred what they were, I asked one of them if they were going to foot-ball, yes said he, doe you not see those countrey fellowes, we are against them; and who do you thinke shall winne, said I, oh said he, the gownes, the gownes.
Follow me Truth; Plaine dealing follow me.
He charges like a Constable; come, wee are his watch: follow me? Is our Time mad?
O braue mad Time.
See there's the Caue, where that Hyna lurkes,
That counterfets thy voyce, and calles forth men
To their destruction.
How full of the small poxe shee is, what ayles shee to stamp thus? is the whore mad? how now? Yea do you rise before Doomes day; father Time, what conduit-pipes are these, that breake out of the earth thus?
The conduit-heads of treason, which conuey
Conspiracies, scandals, & ciuill discord,
Massacres, poysonings, wrackes of faith and fealtie
Through Fairies hearts, to turne them into elues:
See Truth, see sonne, the snake slips off his skinne,
A scholler makes a ruffian.
Now must that ruffian cuffe the scholler, if I were as he.
And see, that shape which earst shew'd reuerend,
And woe, the outward badge of sanctitie,
Is cloath'd in garments of hypocrisie.
See, see, father, he ha's a iacke in a boxe: whats that?
A wild beast, a mad bull, a bull that roares,
To fright allegiance from true subiects bosoms;
That Bull must bellow, at the Flamins gate:
His gate, that tends the flockes of all those sheep,
That graze in the fatst pasture of the land,
Beeing all inclos'd: that bull will on his backe
Beare all.
Whither? whither?
To hell: tis said to heauen
That will but sit him, till with hoofe or horne,
He goare the annointed Fairie.
Such Bulls haue I seene sent out of Babylon, to runne at people: I should once haue rid vpon one of thē, but he that beg'd my office, broke his necke by the bargaine, and sau'd me a labour: whats he with the sword, a master of the noble Science?
A noble villaine: see, he pulls down heauen
With imprecations, if that blade he sheath not,
In our sweet mistresse breast. (villaine?
O rogue! what good cloathes hee weares, and yet is a
I, doe: clap hands vpon't, that poysoned gloue,
Shall strike thee dead to death, with the strong sent
Of thy discouered treason.
Whats that horse-courser with the bridle?
A slaue, that since he dares not touch her head,
Would worke vpon her hand:—laugh and conspire;
The higher villaines climbe, they fall the higher.
Stay father, now the Armie comes forward: shee takes downe the flagge, belike their play is done; what will shee beare the collours? thou hast collour enough in thy face already, thou needst no more: did ye euer see a more lowsie band? there's but two rapiers in the whole regiment: now they muster, now they double their files: marke how their hands juggle, and lay about; this is the maine battell: O well florisht Ancient! the day is their's; see, now they soūd retrait: whither march they now?
To death; their falles, thus Time and Truth proclaime,
They shall like leaues-drop from the Tree of shame.
Lets follow them.
To the gallowes? not I; what doe we know, but this freckled face queane, may be a witch.
Shee is so; shee's that damned sorceresse,
That keepes the inchanted towers of Babylon.
This is the Truth, that did bewitch thee once.
Is this speckled toade shee? Shee was then in mine eye,
The goodliest woman that euer wore fore part of Sattin:
To see what these female creatures are, when they deale with 2. or 3. Nations; how quickly they were carbules & rich stones? now shee is more vgly then a bawd.
Shee look'd so then; fairenes it selfe doth cloth her
In mens eyes, till they see me, and then they loath her.
Loose no more minutes, come, lets follow them.
With hue and crie, now I know her: this villanous drab is bawd, now I remember, to the Whore of Babylon; and weele neuer leaue her, till shee be carted: her face is full of those red pimples with drinking Aquauite, the common drinke of all bawdes: come.
What comes this paper for?
Your hand.
The cause?
The Moone that from your beames did borrow light,
Hath from her siluer bow shot pitchy clowds
T'ecclipse your brightnes: heauen tooke your part,
And her surpriz'd; A jurie of bright starres,
Haue her vnworthy found to shine agen:
Your Fairies therefore on their knees intreat,
Shee may be puld out from the firmament,
Where shee was plac'd to glitter.
Must we then,
Strike those whom we haue lou'd? albeit the children,
Whom we haue nourisht at our princely breast,
Set daggers to it, we could be content
To chide, not beat them (might we vse our will,)
Our hand was made to saue, but not to kill.
You must not (cause hee's noble) spare his blood.
We should not, for hee's noble that is good.
The fall of one, like multitudes on yee,
Makes all the rest, (of footing) be more nyce:
But if by ventring on that glassie floore
Too farre, he sinks, and yet rise with no more harme,
Ten thousand to like danger it doth arme:
All mercy in a Prince, makes vile the state,
All justice makes euen cowards desperate.
In neither of these seas, spread we our sayles,
But are the impartiall beame between both scales;
Yet if we needs must bow, we would incline
To that where mercy lies, that scale's diuine:
But so to saue were our owne breast to wound,
Nay (which is more) our peoples: for their good,
We must the Surgeon play, and let out blood.
Euery Peeres birth stickes a new starre in heauen,
But falling by Luciseran insolence,
With him a Constellation drops from thence.
Giue me his Axe—how soon the blow is giuen? writes
Witnesse: so little we in blood delight,
That doing this worke, we wish we could not write.
Let's walke my Lords. Florimel?
Madame.
Stay:
Not one arm'd man amongst vs? you might now
Be all old-beaten souldiers: truth I thanke ye;
If I were now a jewel worth the stealing,
Two theeues might bind you all.
With much adoe.
I marry I commend yon gentleman.
Pray Sir come neere, looke you hee's well prouided
For all rough wethers: Sir, you way be proud,
That you can giue armes better than these Lords,
I thanke you yet, that if a storme should fall,
We could make you our shelter. A good sword?
This would goe through stich; had I heart to kill
I'de wish no better weapon; but our dayes
Of quarreling are past; Shall we put vp Sir,
We ha put vp wrongs ere now, but this is right,
Nay we are not falling yet,
It did vs good
To see how your Maiestick presence dawnted
The silly gentleman.
The sillie gentleman!
He knew not how to stand, nor what to speak,
The silly gentleman? know you him Lords?
Where is hee?
Gotten hence poore wretch with shame.
That wretch hath sworne to kill me with that
How? (sword,
The traytor.
Locke the Court gates.
Guard her person.
You guard it well. Alacke! when louers wooe,
An extreame ioy and feare, them so apall,
That ouer much loue, shewes no loue at all.
Zeale sometimes-ouer-does her part-It's right—
When the frais done, Cowards crie whers the Flight. Pentions. Florimell
The wolfes in his own snare: O damned slaue!
I had like to ha made his heart my ponyards graue.
How got you to this knowledge?—blessed heauen!
It came vnto me strangely: from a window,
Mine eyes tooke marke of him; that he would shoot
Twa's told me, and I tried if he durst doo't.
Is Ropus here, our Doctor?
Gratious Lady.
You haue a lucky hand since you were ours,
It quickens our tast well; fill vs of that
You last did minister: a draught, no more,
And giue it fire, euen Doctor how thou wilt.
I made a new extraction, you shall neuer
Rellish the like.
Why, shall that be my last?
Oh my deere Mistres!
Go, go, I dare sware thou lou'st my very heart.
This scaly Serpent
Is throwne (as he deserues) vpon the Sword
Of Iustice; and to make these tydings twinnes,
I bring this happy newes, Campeius,
(A Snake that in my bosome once I warm'd:)
The man for whome—.
Oh, wee remember him.
This Owle, that did not loue your sacred light,
Stole or'e the Seas by darknes, and was held
In Babilon a bird of noble flight:
They tourn'd him to a Goshawke, fether'd him
Arm'd him with tallents, & then gaue him bels,
And hither charg'd him fly, he did: and soar'd
O're all your goodlyest woods, and thickest groues,
Inticing birdes that had the skill in song,
To learne harsh notes: and those that fail'd in voice,
He taught to pecke the tender blossomes off,
To spoyle the leauy trees, and with sharpe bils
To mangle all the Golden eares of corne.
But now hee's tan'e.
Good sheapheards ought not care,
How many foxes fall into the Snare.
Your ciuill Doctor, Doctor Par
Casts Anchor on your shores againe, being freighted
With a good venture, which he saies, your selfe
Must onely haue the sight of.
Bring him hither:
Lord Florimell, pray call Fideli to vs.
Sure 'tis too hot.
On roague!
Set it to coole,
Hell and damnation, Diuels,
What's that?
The damned'st treason! Dog: you whorsen dog;
O blessed mayd: let not the toad come neere her:
What's this? If't be his brewing, touch it not—
For 'tis a drench to kill the strongest Deuill,
That's Druncke all day with brimstone: come sucke, Weezell,
Sucke your owne teat, you—pray;
Thou art preseru'd.
From what? From whome?
Looke to that Glister-pipe:
One crowne doe's serue thy tourne, but heere's a theefe,
That must haue 50000. crownes to steale
Thy life: Here 'tis in blacke and white—thy life,
Sirra thou Vrinall, Tynoco, Gama,
Andrada, and Ibarra, names of Diuels,
Or names to fetch vp Diuels: thou knowest these Scar-crowes.
Oh mee! O mercy, mercy! I confesse.
Well sayd, thou shalt be hang'd then.
Haue we for this
Heap'd fauours on thee.
Heape halters on him: call the Guard: out polecat:
He smels, thy conscience stincks Doctor goe purge
Thy soule, for 'tis diseas'd. Away with Ropus.
Away with him: foh.
Here my tale but out.
Ther's too muchout already.
Oh me accursed! and most miserable.
Goodnes ! is my bloud so sweet,
That they would pay so deere for't
To sucke Lambes,
What would not Wolues doe, he that this paper writte,
Had neuer meaning we should finger it.
Our a mercy makes them cruell, hunt out these Leopards:
Their own spots will betray them: they build caues
Euen in our parkes: to them, him; and the rest,
Let death be sent, but sent in such a shape,
As may not be too frightfull. Alacke! what glorie
Is it to buffet wretches bound in giues?
The debt is derely paid that's payd with liues
Oh! leaue vs all.
More Doctors! if this doe
As well as tother, best to hang him too.
Florimell! Stay,
But giue vs liberty.
This is the blessed day for which (through want
Of those bright rayes that sparkle from your eyes)
My frozen soule hath languish'd Goddesse compleate,
If you, a wretch so meane, will bid to speake,
I shall vnclaspe a booke whose very first line,
(Being not well pointed) is my doome to death:
But if your sacred iudgement (on the Margine,)
Controwle all wresting comments, All your subiects
Will fold me in their bosomes.
Giue your minde.
A Pilgrim haue I been on forren shores,
(Your gracious hand allow'd it) in my wandring,
With Monsters I encountred of straunge shape,
Some that suckt poyson vp, and spet it foorth,
Vpon your land: some, that shot forked stinges,
At your most God-like person: all were Gyants,
Fighting against the heauen of your blest raigne:
With these (oh pardon me!) with these I held
A polliticke league, the lines of all their treasons,
(Drawne from one damned circle) met in mee,
My heart became the Center, and the point
Was this—I dare not tell it.
Speake?
To kill you.
How durst you (being our subiect) wade so far?
Your eare of mercy. I became a spunge
To drincke vp all their mischiefe, and lay drown'd
In their infected waters, (with much loathing,)
Onely that I before you might wring out
This their corruption, and my selfe make cleere.
And now (immortall maid) i'me not vnlike
A casket wherein papers stuft with danger,
Haue close beene lockt, but those tane out, the chest
Serues to good vse, so may my loyall brest:
For from their flintie hearts what sparkes I got,
Were but to fire themselues.
I praise your plotte,
You make vs now your debter, but a day
Will come, when we shal pay. My Lord, we want your Arme.
Vmh! I feare—
Doctor, weele haue (Sir) other Dialogues.
O shallow foole, thou hast thy selfe vndone,
Shees hardned and thou melted at one sunne.
Our eyes haue lusted for you, and your presence
Comes as the light to day, showers to the spring,
Or health to sicke men.
Thankes most reuerend Fathers.
Our bloud ranne all to water, yea our soules
Stroue all (at once) t'expire, (when it was blowne
Hither from Faiery land, that all the darts
Which ours heere, and your arme deliuered there,
Fell either short, or lighted vpon yce)
Lest you had lost bloud in the enterprize.
No, I weare stronger Armour: gamester-like
I sawe the dogges brought forth; and set them on,
Till the Diuell parted them; but pluckt off none,
I kept aloose out of the reach of pawes:
Better to fight with Lions then with lawes.
What drummes are these?
Musicke of heauen.
The dancers reuell in steele.
These march to fill our Fleete.
From whence weele match with prowd victorious feete,
And walke on Fayeries hearts, their beaten waies
With their owne heades weele paue, whilst ours with bayes,
And oake (the conquering souldiers wreath) we crowne:
These hookes, or none, must pull their Cities downe,
Inuasion is the fire: See, See, i'th Ayre
Angels hang beckoning vs to make more haste,
Vengeance deferd growes weake, and runnes to waste.
Whats this?—
Ere we take ship, we must to Court.
A ay.
In thunder: tis the souldiers sport.
It is the Imperiall pleasure, decree, peremptory edict, and dreadfull command (vpon paine of a curse to be denounced vpon him that is disobedient) from her who hath power giuen her to make the backes of stubborne Kings her foote-stooles, and Emperours her vassales: the mother of Nations; the triple-crowned head of the world; the purple-rider of the glorious beast; the most high, most supreame, and most adored Empresse of Babilon; that no Captaine Generals of Armies, Generals of Squadrons, Admirals, Colonels, Captaines, or any other Officers of her magnificent, incomparable, formidable, and inuincible Armada, which is ordayned to swallow vp the kingdome of Faiery, shall presume to set one foote on ship-bod, till her sacred hand hath blessed the enterprize by sealing them all on the forhead, and by bowing their knees before the Beast. Sound, goe on.
Feeles the base earth our weight? ist common Aire
We suck in and respire? doe seruile clowdes,
(Whose azue winges spread ouer graues and tombes)
Our glorious body circumvolue? are night
Cast her black nets into dayes cristall streames,
To draw vp darknesse on our golden beames:
And vs t'ecclipse, why is not Babilon
In a contorted chaire made all of starres,
Wound vp by wheeles as high, nay boue the thrones
Supernall, which with Ioues owne seate stand euen,
That we might ride heere as the Queene of heauen.
And with a spurne from our controwling foote,
That should like thunder shake th'etheriall floore,
Of life and heauen them both ot once bereaue,
That thither vp dare clime vithout our leaue.
You doe: you ride there now this is your Sphere,
Earth is all one with heauen when you are heere.
Yet ther's a hell on earth or if nothell,
Diuels there are or worse then Diuels, that roare onely at you.
At vs? what, dare they roare?
Your pardon, and ile tell it.
Tell: We feare, no spots, the orbe we shine in is so cleere.
Thus then: the Faiery Adders hisse: they call you
The superstitious Harlot: purple whore:
The whore that rides on the rose-coloured beast:
The great whore, that on many waters sitteth,
Which they call many Nations: whilst their Kings,
Are slaues to sate your lust, and that their bloud,
(When with them you haue done) serues as a floud,
For you to drinke or swimme in.
O prophane!
Goe on: the searching small wounds is no paine.
These cowards thus when your back's turnd (that strike)
Follow theirblowe and sweare, that where you claime,
Supremacie monarchall ouer Kings,
Tis but your tiranous pride, and not your due.
But what your selues giue, what haue we from you?
You say we are your mother, and if so,
Must not sonnes kneele? they pay but what they owe.
They say the robes of purple which you weare,
Your scarlet veiles, and mantles are not giuen you
As types of honour and regality,
But dyed so deepe with bloud vpon them spilt,
And that (all or'e) y'are with red murder gilt:
The drinke euen in that golden cup, they sweare
Is wine sophisticated, that does runne
Low on the lees of error, which in taste,
Is sweete and like the neate and holsome iuyce
Of the true grape, but tis ranke poyson downe.
Haue we not all it tasted?
Nay, vtter all.
Out of their lips you see flowes naught but gall.
What can my breath doe more, to blast your cheekes,
And leaue them glowing as red gads of steele?
My tongue's already blistred sounding this,
Yet must I whisper to your sacred eare:
That on your brow (they say) is writ a name
In letters misticall, which they interpret
Confusion, by great Babylon they meane.
The Citie of Confusion.
View our forhead?
Where are we printed with such Characters?
Point out these markes: Which of you all can lay
A finger on that Moale that markes our face?
They say you can throw mists before our eyes,
To make vs thinke you faire.
Damnd blasphemies.
You shall with rods of iron scourge these treasons.
The Mace is in your hand, grinde them to dust.
And let your blowes be sound.
For they are iust.
Lets heare with what lowde throats our thunder speakes,
Repeate our vengeance o're, which to beate Kings
Must now flie o're the seas with linnen winges.
Our Galeons, Galeasses, Zabraes, Gallies,
Ships, Pynaces, Pataches, huge Caruiles,
For number, rib and belly are so great,
That should they want a Sea neere Faiery land
Of depth to beare them vp, they in their wombs
Might swim with a sea thither: here are breifes
Of your imperiall Armies.
Reade them lowde:
Thunder ner'e speakes, but the voice crackes a clowde.
In the first Squadron twelue great Galeons:
Floate like twelue moouing Castles: Zabraes two.
Habilimented gloriously for warre,
With Souldiers, Seamen, shot, and ordinance:
This Squadron stout Medyna does command:
Who of the maine is Captaine Generall.
The second Squadron braue Ricalde leades,
Being Admirall to fouretene Galleons.
Flores de Ualdes guides, the third, the fourth
Followes the silken streamers of the haughty
Pedro de Valdes that▪ tryed warriour.
Oquendo in the fift front cries a Charge.
Bretandona bringes vp the Leuantines
With his sixt Squadron: Gomes de Medyna
Waftes vp the seauenth like the God of warre,
The eighth obayes Mendoza: and the ninth
Fierce Vgo de Montada: all these Squadrons,
For vessell, numbred are one hundred thirtie,
The sight of Souldiers, Marriners, and Slaues
Twentie nine thousand, eight hundred thirtie three.
Peeces of brasse for battery these,
Six hundred thirtie: adde to these Gallions
Twentie Caruiles, and Saluees ten: which make
The whole Armada, eightscore lustie saile.
Add to all these your Generals of Armies,
Your Captaines, Ensigne bearers, (which in role,
Are eightscore and eleauen) the Voluntaries,
With officers and seruants, then the Regiments
That are in pay: to these, all men of orders,
All ministers of iustice: and to these
Supplies of forces that must second vs,
And last that host of starres which from the Moone
Will fall to guide vs on: these totald vp,
You shal a hundred thowsand swordes behold
Brandish't at once, whose—standes
Men will seeme borne with weapons in their handes.
Goe: cut the falt some with your mooned keeles,
And let our Galeons feele euen child-birth panges,
Till their great bellies be deliuered
On the soft Faiery shoares: captiue their Queene,
That we may thus take oft her crowne, whilst she
Kneeles to these glorious wonders, or be trampled
To death for her contempt: burne, btter, kill,
Blow vp, pull downe, ruine all, let not white haires,
Nor red cheekes blunt your wrath, snatch babes from brests,
And when they crie for milke, let them sucke bloud,
Turne all their fieldes to lakes of gellyed goare,
That Sea-men one day sayling by the land
May say, there Faiery kingdome once did stand.
They shall.
Ti done already.
To be sure
You all are ours, bow and adore the beast;
On whome we ride.
We fall beneath his feete.
Be blest, obedience is in sonnes most sweete,
O strange, to you he stoopes as you before him,
Humility, he bowes whilst you adore him:
To kindle lustie fires in all your bloud,
A health to all, and as our cup goes rownd,
Draw neere, weele marke you for our chosen flocke,
Who buildes on heartes confirmd, buildes on a rocke:
The seale of heauen! who on their foreheads weare it,
We choose for counsaile: on their hands who beare it,
We marke for Action: Heere, a health to all.
Braue health! to pledge it, see Kings prostrate fall▪
On: All: On▪
Sing warre thy lowd and loftiest notes.
We winne; our ships meete none but fisher-boates.
What if I shewe you a foundation,
Firme as earthes fixed Center? a strong warrant,
To strike the head off, an In unction
That bids me doo't: A dispensation
For what I doe: A pardon sign'd, that giues
Indulgence , and full remission
(For any criminall breach of the highest Law)
After 'tis done: nay more, a voice as cleere
As that of Angels, which proclaimes the act,
Good, honourable, meritorious,
Lawfull, and pyous, what if I shew you this?
Come, come, you cannot, then let riotous heires
beg pattents to kill fathers: graunt but this
Murder may be a faire Monopoly,
And Princes stab'd by Acts of parliament:
Who i'st dare that thing meritorious call,
Which feindes themselues count diabolicall?
Your coldnes makes me wonder: why should you
ronne vp to'th necke, from drowning to saue her,
That treades vpon your head; your throat, to sincke you?
Say you should wound me; should I (in reuenge)
Murder my selfe? for what can be the close
But death, dishonour; yea, damnation
To an act so base▪ nay so impossible.
Impossible; the parting of the ayre,
Is not more easy: looke vpon the Court,
Through narrowe sights, and shees the fairest make,
And soonest hit of any: like the Turke
Shee walkes not with a Ianisarie—Guard,
Nor (as the Russiā with fowle-big-boand slaues,
Strutting on each side with the slicing Axe,
Like to a payre of hangmen: no, alas:
Her Courts of Guard are Ladies, & sometimes)
Shee's in the garden with as small a trayne,
As is the Sun in heauen: and our Accesse,
May then as easy be as that of Clyents,
To Lawyers out of terme—time.
Grant all this:
Nay, say the blow were giuen: how would you scape?
Oh sir, by water.—
I but.—
Nay, good cozen.—
You leape as short at safety, as at starre: s
By water: why the gates will all be lockt,
Wayters you must haue-none.
Heare me.
Heare me,
You must not haue a man, and if you kill
With powder, ayre betrayes you.
Powder! no sir, my dagge shall be my dagger
Good sweete Cozen marke but how smooth
My pathes are: looke you sir.
I haue thought vpon a course.
Nay, nay, heare mine,
You are my marke, suppose you are my marke,
My leuell is thus lowe, but er'e I rise,
My hand's got vp thus hie: the deere being strucke,
The heard that stand about so frighted are,
I shall haue leaue to scape, as does a pirate,
Who hauing made a shot through one more strong,
All in that ship runne to make good the breach,
Whilst th'other sailes away. How like you this?
As I like paper harnesse.
Ha, well, pawse then:
This bow shall stand vnbent, and not an arrow
Be shot at her vntill we take our ayme
In S. Iagoes parke; a rare, rare Altar!
The fitt'st to sacrifize her bloud vpon:
It shall be there: in S. Iagoes parke:
Ha coz! it shall be there: in the meane time,
We may keepe followers (nine or ten a peece)
Without suspition: numbers may worke wonders;
The storme being sudden too: for were the guard
A hundred strong about her, looke you sir,
All of vs well appoynted—Case of dags
To each man, see you? you shoote there, we heere,
Vnlesse some spirits put the bullets by,
Ther's no escape for her: say the dags faile,
Then to our swordes.—Come, ther's no mettle in you.
No mettle in me? would your warres were honest,
I quickly would finde Armour: what's the goade
So sharpe, that makes you wildely thus to runne
Vpon your certaine ruine?
Goad? sharp ponyards,
Why should I spare her bloud?
She gaue you yours.
To ha tan'e it had bin tyrany, her owne lips
Confest I strucke her lawes not hard: I ha spent
My youth, and meanes in seruing her: what reape I?
Wounds (discontents) what giues she me? good words
(Sweet meates that rotte the eater:) why, last day
I did but begge of her the maistership
Of Santa Cataryna, twas denied me.
She keepes you to a better.
I tush, thats not all:
My bonds are yonder seald; And she must fall.
Well coz, ile hence.
When shall I see you?
Hah.
Soone: very soone: sooner than you expect,
Let me but breath, and what I meane to doe,
I shall resolue you.
Fare you well,
Ade.—
Newes; thundring newes sweete Lady: Enuy, Ambition,
Theft sactilegious, and base treason, lay
Their heads and handes togither, at one pull
To heaue you from your throne: that mannish woman-Diuell,
That lustfull bloudie Queene of Babylon,
Hath (as we gather ripe intelligence)
Rigd an Ad fleete, which euen now beates the waues,
Boasting to make their wombes our Cities graues.
Let it come on: our Generall leades aboue them,
Earth-quakes may kingdomes mooue, but not remooue them, Fideli.
He yonder, he that playes the fiend at sea,
The little Captaine that's made all of fire,
Sweares (Flemming-like) by twenty thousand Diuels,
If our tongues walke thus, and our feete stand still,
So many huge ships neere our coasts are come,
An Oyster-boate of ours will scarce finde roome.
He sweares the windes haue got the sailes with childe,
With such big bellies, all the linnen's gone,
To finde them linnen and in Babylon,
That ther's not one ragge left,
Why swels this fleete?
Thus they giue out, that you sent forth a Drake,
Which from their riuers beate their water-fowle,
Tore siluer feathers from their fairest Swannes,
And pluckt the Halcions winges that roue at sea,
And made their wilde-duckes vnder-water diue,
So long, that some neuer came vp aliue.
This Sea-pie Babylon, her bug Beare calles,
For when her bastards cry, let the nurse cry
But this, the Drake comes, they hush presently,
For him thei'le cudgell vs: will you ha the troth?
That scarlet-whore is thirstie and no bloud,
But yours, and ours (sweete maide) can doe her good.
That drake shal out againe: to counsel Lords.
Come, come, short counsell: better get long swordes.
Good Lady dread not you, what ere befall.
Weel'e die first, yours is the last funeral: away, away, away.
Posts, posts, cal messengers, posts with al speed.
How? feare? why should white bosomes.
Feare a Tyrants Arme?
Tyrants may kill vs, but not doe vs harme.
Are we your prisoners that you garde vs thus?
Stay, And you too, we are alone: when last
We entertaynd your speech (as we remember)
Close traines and dangerous you did discouer
To fire which you were praid.
I was.
And yeelded.
Albeit it were against our life.
Most true:—my reasons.—
We forget them not: at that time
Here was but one, (true) but one counceller,
Who stood aloofe, heard nothing; and though abloud
Of courser veines then ours, would haue beene stird
Into a sea tempestuous to boyle vp,
And drowne the Pilate that durst saile so farre,
Yet of our princely grace (tho twas not sitte,
Nor stood with wisdome) did we silence it.
These heaped fauours, notwithstanding (Doctor)
Tis in our eare: the hammers lie not still,
But that new clubs of iron are forging now,
To bruise our bones, and that your selfe doe knowe,
The very Anuile where they worke.
I.
Heare vs, because tis thought some of those worser spirits,
And most malignant that at midnight rise
To blast our Faiery circles by the Moone,
Are your Familiars.
Madam.
Sir anone.
Thee therefore I coniure (if not by faith,
Oathed allegeance, nor thy conscience,
Perhaps this ranckling vlcerateth them)
Yet by thy hopes of blisse, tell, and tell true,
Who i'st must let vs bloud?
O vnhappie man;
That thou shouldst breathe thus long: mirrour of women,
I open now my brest euen to the heart,
My very soule pants on my lips: none, none,
I know of none.
Well; none: rise and take heede,
They are no common droppes when Princes bleede.
What houre is this? does not my larum strike?
This watch goes false.
This watch goes true.
All's naught.—what houre is this?
Thy last houre, O heauens, furder
The worke you haue begun: where art thou heart?
Oh we see't: Doctor wind vp the wheele, tis downe,
Tis downe.
How no what strucke hee downe? thy lookes are wildes
Why was thine armed hand reard to his height?
What blacke worke art thou doing?
Of damnation vpon my selfe;
How?
Your wordes haue split my heart in thowsand shiners,
Heere, heere that stickes which I feare will not out
Better to die than liue suspected. Had not your bright eyes
Turnd backe vpon me, I had long ere this
Layen at your feete a bloudie sacrifice.
Staind Altars please not vs: why doest thou weepe?
Thou mak'st my good thoughts of thee now declyne,
Who loues not his owne bloud, will ne're spare mine,
Why doest thou weepe?
When on your face I looke,
Me thinkes I see those Vertues drawne aliue
Which did in Elfilyne the seauenth suruiue,
(Your fathers father, and your grandfather,)
And then that you should take me for a serpent
Gnawing the branches of that glorious tree,
The griefe melts euen my soule, O pardon me.
Contract thy spirits togither, be compos'd;
Take a full man into thee, for beholde
All these blacke clowdes we cleere: looke vp, tis day,
The sunne shines on thee still: weel'e reade: away—
O machlesse; im'e all poyson, and yet she.
Tutnes all to goodnes by wise tempering me.
If thou prou'st copper—well; this makes vs strong
As towers of slint, All traytors are but waues,
That beate at rockes, their owne blowes digge their graues.
For not dooing am I damde: how are my spirits
Halde, tortured, and growne wilde? on leaues eternall
Vowes haue I writ so deepe, so bound them vp,
So texted them in characters capitall,
I cannot race them but I blot my name
Out of the booke of sence: mine oath stands filde
On your court-roles, Then keepe it, vp to heaue
Thy ladder's but thus hie: courage, to kill
Ten men I should not freeze thus: yet her murder
Cannot be named bloud-shed, for her Faieries
Are all of faith, and fealty assoyled
The balme that her annoynted is washt off,
Her crowne is now not hers; vpon the paine
Of a blacke cse, no more must I obey her,
I climbe to heauen by this, climbe then and slay her.
Atyrants strange, but iust end!
Ran mad for sloepe, and died Princes that plunge
Their soules in ranke and godlesse appetites
Must seeke no rest but in the armes of Sprites.
Nothing to read? that (if my nerues should shrink
And make mine arme reuolt) I might haue colour
To vsurp this walke of hers: whats this? see, see
An Angel thsts this iron into my hand,
My warrant signd from Babylon to kill her,
Endorsed, the last will of Paridell.
Le concede sua Benedictione, plenaria indulgenza,
E remissione dittti li peccati—tutti li peccati—
All, all my sinnes are paid off, paying this,
Tis done, tis done, All you blest powers I charme,
Now, now, knit all your sinewes to this arme.
You haproou'd your selfe a loyall gentleman.
The hand of Angels guide vs: Shees not heere,
The Queen's kild; treason: Wenches, raise the Court.
Walke seuerall waies first.
Waies; shees murdered: treason.
Treason; asword. What traytor dare? who? where?
A guard the damned serpent, see, lurkes heere.
Sure heeres some nest they breed in paw him fast,
This Woolfe, this Yeade (marke, he swelles red with poyson,)
This learned knaue is swome to murder thee.
I defie any man that speakes it.
Hah:—defie this , est ge,
Defie him, he shal spit ,
Thy beard scald ,
And doest thou bey Sui thou so?
And will sea with bloud.
My no against ; My good.
Better, his yeas goe ked, noes
Very well elo off, , th
And heres his naked tru.
Againe.
Oh me;—new nothing l your mercy me can saue.
It must not: pri that would safely liue,
May grieue at traytor falles but not fome.
Let him be sonniond to the bre of she.
Tis welcome, a blacke life, bla fame,
Away with him.
Now to the busines,
We haue one foote.
I, I, looke to the head.
The hangman cures those members.
What is done?
This (sacred Lady:) we ll either hand
Haue raisde an Armie both by a and land.
Your goodly ships beare the most royall freight,
That the world owes (true hearts) their wōbes are ful,
Of noble spirits, each man in his face
Shewes a Kings dauning looke, the souldiers stand
So thickly on the decke, so braue sim'd,
(The Silken streamers walng or their heades)
That (seeing them) you woulddge twe pentecost,
And that the iollie youngsters of your townes,
Had flockt togither in gay multitudes,
For May-games, and for summer merriments,
They looke so ely: in such de mome
So many Faieries neuer dwelt at once,
Neuer so many men wea borne so soone,
The drum that gaue the call, could not be heard
For iustling armours: er'e the call was done,
It was so rigd about with groues of pikes,
That when they brake on both sides to giue way,
The beating of the drum ws thunder noise,
Whilst coates of steele clasht so on coates of steele,
Helmets on helmets that they strucke out fire,
Which shewd like lightning, or those flames that flie
From the huge Cyclops-hammer, when they sweate
To forge Ioues thunder: And in such a heate
With quicknes rush they armed forth, captaines swore,
Harnesse was sure the cloathes they daily wore.
Men faster came to fight then to a feast.
Nay, women sued to vs they might be prest.
Old grandams that on crutches beare vp age,
Full nimbly buckled Armours on their sonnes,
And when twas on, she clapt him on his backe,
And spake thus, runne my boye, fight till th'art dead,
Thy bloud can neuer be more brauely shed.
How are the numbers you haue leuied?
What your sea-forces are, this briefe doth speak.
We haue rais'd double walls to fence your land.
The one the bodie of a standing Camp,
Whose tents by this are pitcht in Beria,
On the shores point▪ to barre the foe from footing.
Ouer that Camp at Beria we create
Your Florimell Lieuetenant Generall;
The other is to guarde your royall person.
Whose charge is yours: the sea Fideli, yours.
The standing camp of horsemen and of foote,
These numbers fill▪ Launces 253. Horsemen 769.
Footemen 22000. The mouing Army, which attends on you,
Is thus made vp: of horsmen & of foote, Launcers 481.
Light horse-men 1421. Footemen 34050.
We do not raise our hopes on points of speares,
A handfull is an host, in a good fight,
Lambes may beate Lions in a warre not right.
The Generall of all armies be our leader,
Be full of courage Lor 're in year.
For this be sure weele not out-liue our peeres.
Weele al liue, but wil first haue them b'th cas.
Goe on, your conduct be the prosperous hand,
Make you the sea good, weele not loose the land.
Your Queene will to the field, It shall be said,
Once souldiers to their Captaine had a Maide.
You sweate well in this haruest.
Nay, when we come to binde vp the whoe of Babilon
Punckes and Pynaces in sheaues, weele sweate worse.
Haue you bestowed the other handes?
I haue.
Incorporate this to you then is the mandate
Of your Liefetenant Generall. You fight
In your great Faieries quarrell, and Truthes right,
Stand therefore oo't.
I will haue no woundes on my shoulders, I scorn to run,
Or to cry out of warlike kybes in the heele.
Goe (thou most God-like maide) & buckle on
The brest-plates fetcht from thine owne Armoury,
Let euery souldier weare one, on each leader
Bestowe a guiding-staffe, and a strong shield
That may as faithfull be to his good sword
As thou art to his heart: head all the speares
With gold of Angell-proofe. Sit like a doue
Vpon the Horsmans helme, and on his face
Fan with thy siluer winges sweete victorie,
Goe, beate thy drum, that men may know thy mach,
Spread thine owne colours (Truth) so let them shine,
Souldiers may sweare thei'le follow none but thine.
I flie, swift as the winged winges.
Today is workiday with me for all I haue my best clothes
On, what doe you set me to?
Goe thou and sweepe th buses from the camp. (cleane,
Conscience has left no bmes big enough to doe that
Then purge the ents of all infectious aires.
Yonder's one infection new broke out, if it be not
From running, will choake vs all.
Name it, ile minister the remedie.
Time may do it, this tis: A Broker and his wife that dropt out of the Hangmans budget but last day; are now eating in Camp, and are victualrs to it: their very Cannes haue hoops of gold lace now, that bangd Captaines Ierkins all or'e but yesterday: 15. Liefe tenants haue eaten vp their buffe Ierkins with cheese and mustard: Nay this vil aine of fourescore ith hundred has set vp three Armourers shops with hanesse caps, and pewter coates, that are de cleane out with Ale: the Rogue lies euery night vpon as many fethers which grew in souldiers has, as will vndooe foure hundred Schoolemasters to hire them for their boyes to goe a feasting,
Breede such disorders mongst the souldiers?
They swarme like lyce: nay his wife tickels it too, for three Muskateeres came but to drinke Tabacco in her cabbin, and she fired their flaskes and tuch-boxes.
Goe the Camp of these, and al like these.
If any souldier swere ile casheere him too.
You will scarce leaue two in the Army then.
What shall I doe with those Pyoners yonder?
You know the ground, lead them to cast vp trenches. Away.
They are by this time leading one another, for when I left them, I left them all casting, ile now goe see what it comes to.
Ile flie hence to the fleete of Babylon.
And from their tacklings and their maine-mst tons▪
Time shal shoote vengeance through his bo of steele,
Wedge like to split their Nauie to the keele.
Ile cut their Princes downe as blades of grasse,
As this glasse, so the Babilonian power,
The higher shall runne out to fill the lower.
The sulphurous belchth on our ships,
Cut Cables, or the whole fleete drownes in
Holla.
Of Babilon.
What fire?
The Diuels
Wher's
Close vnder hat dr no she his head.
Daation on ch Ricalde?
Who?
Our Adiral the Admall of Nauy▪
Our stowte and braue alde keepes bed.
All poos fire him out; Pdro de Vald
Hauing about him 50. Canon throes,
Stretch wide to barke is boarded, taken.
Taken?
Without resistance: sunke,
Oquendo burnt, Moncaa drown'd, or ,
The ship of all our medicaents is lost.
Dogges eate our medicaments, such are our wounde
We more shall Sextons neede than Surgeons.
What course is best?
The best to get the day▪
Is to oise sayles vp, and away.
Away, away, hoise sailes vp and away.
A world of men and wealth lost in one day.
Shoot, shoot, they answer▪ brau mre Linstocks: shoot:
This stratage dropt downe from in fi.
Board, board, hoyse more saile vp▪ thy flie, shoot, Shoot.
We neuer held a royal Court till now:
(Warriours) would no st glorious,
To haue Embassado to
Our of state▪ a dru for
Ruffling about vs, heads in glo
Of bright reflecting stle: for
(Treading soft )
Trust me, I like the all life wll,
I could change Cou ,
Tis a braue life: Me thinkes it best beco
A Prince to
My fellow souldier: I dare sweare youl'e fight,
To the last man, your Captaine being in fight.
To the last least mans little finger.
What through all your bloud your breth inspir
For that we come not: no brest heere wants fires.
Twas kined in their cradles, strength, courage, zeale,
Meete in each bosome like a three-fold floud,
We come with yours to venture our owne bloud.
For you and we are fellowes; thus appeares it,
The souldier keeps the crowne on, the prince weares it.
Of all men you we hold the most most deere,
But for a souldier I had not beene heere.
Doe not their gunnes offend you?
How? we are tried,
wh'im'e borne a souldier by the fathers side.
The Cannon (thunders Zany) playes to vs,
Soft musikes tunes, and more mellodious:
And me more rarely like, because all these,
That now can speake the language of sterne warre,
Could not speake swords, or guns, nay scarce could go,
Nay were not borne, but like to new sowne graine
Lay hid i'th mold, when we went to be crown'd,
Tho now th'are tall corne fields, couering the ground.
Roome, roome, newes, newes, the youngest newes that euer was brought forth amonst men at Armes: a woman (sweete mistris) is brought to bed of a man childe it'h Camp: a boy that lookes as if he would shoote off already: the bed they haue swadled him in, is the peece of an old torne Ancient: his blankets are two souldiers Mandilions: his cradle is the hollow backe-peece of a rustie Armour: his head lies in a Murren thats quilted to keepe him warme, the first thing that euer he laid hold on, was a truncheon, on which a Captaine leand to looke vpon him, hee'le bee a warriour I warrant. A Can of beere is set to his mouth already, yet I doubt hee'le prooue but a victualer to the Camp: A notable fat double-chind bulchin.
A child borne in ou Camp! goe giue him fame,
Let him be Beria cald, by the Campes name.
Thats his name then: Beria, in steede of a Mid ▪ Captaine shall beare him to the Pont, and if there to followe it, they shal who would sweate thus to get for another child? fathers themselues are gu so sometimes, farewel .
With roses vs you crowne, your selfe with palme,
Had we al woundes, your words are soueraigne balme.
Are those clowds sperst that stroue to dimme our light?
And driuen into the caues of night.
Our handes be hea'd vp for it.
Therers good cause,
We'are bown'd to doe so by the higher lawes,
Those roaring Whales came with deuouring wombes▪
To swallow vp your kingdomes: foolish he ▪
When halfe of them scarce knew where it did stand,
Vnder what Zenith, did they share your land.
At dice they plaid for , at each cast▪
A Knight at least was lost: what doe you set?
This Knight cries one (and names him) no, a Lord
Or none, tis done, he throwes and sweepes the bord,
His hatte is fall of Lords vpto the brimme,
The sea threw next at all, won all and him,
Would you these Gamesters see now?
See now? where?
Thei'le scarce see vs, the last sight cost so deere,
Bid you me do it, tis done, Time takes such pride,
To waite on ou, heele lackie by your-side.
Those daies of their Arriuall, battaile, flight,
And ignominious shipwrackes (like lt Arrowes,)
Are out of reach: of them the world receaues
But what Times booke shewes turning back the leaues,
But if you'le see this Concubine of Kinges,
In her maiesticke madnes with her sonnes,
That houre is now but numbring out in sand,
These minutes are not yet run through Times hand,
For you and for your delight
,
I be a glori ,
Vnseene you shall see and heare these
On the greene Mount of Trueth the Armie moue,
And meete you in the vale of ,
Your captiues are sent thither: quicke thought
You shall : vpon my actiue winges,
Time at one instt sees all Courts of King.
Hence: sting me not: y'are Scorpions to my brest,
Diseases to my bloud: he dies that speakes.
Y'are madde.
Y'are madde.
ô falles not heauen!
Be silent:
Be damned for your speech: as y'are for Act,
You are all blacke and close conspirators
In our disgrace.
You lie▪
O horrible?
You Raue yet know not why,
Thou saist all's lost.
Drownd, burnt, split vpon rockes, cast ouer bord,
Throates cut by Knes, whose haires like else-loekes hang,
One of those shaock-eaters at one break fast,
Slit fourescore wezand pipes of ours,
Of yours:
Oquendo burnt, Piemetelli Slaine,
Pedro de Valdes tane,
Could dwarfes beate Gyants?
In one day fell : Galleous 15.
Drownd at the same time; or which was worser taken,
The same day made 1000. prisoners.
Yet not a cherry stone of theirs was sunke.