MY Lordes,
Know that we far from any naturall pride
Or touch of temporall ſway, haue ſeene our face
In our graue counſels foreheads: where doth ſtand
Our trueſt glaſſe, made by Times wrinckled hand.
We know wee're old, my daies proclayme me ſo:
Fortie-fiue yeres, I'ue gently ruld this Dukedome,
Pray heauen it be no fault,
For there's as much diſeaſe, though not to th' eye,
In too much pittie, as in Tyrannie.
Your grace hath ſpoke it right.
I know that life
Has not long courſe in me, twill not be long
Before I ſhow that Kinges haue mortall bodies
As well as Subjects, therefore to my comfort,
And your ſucceſfull hopes I haue a Sonne
Whome I dare boaſt of;—
Whome we all do boaſt off,
A Prince elder in vertues then in yeares,
His iudgement is a Father to his youth,
I, I, would he were from Court,
Our largeſt hopes grow in him,
And tis the greateſt pittie Noble Lord,
He is vntraueld,
Tis indeede my Lord.
Had he but trauaile to his time and Vertue—oh hee ſhould neere returne agen.
It ſhall be ſo, what is in hope begun,
Experience quickens, trauaile confirmes the man,
Who's elſe liues doubtfull, and his daies oft ſorye,
"Who's rich in Knowledge, ha's the ſtocke of glorye.
Moſt true my royall Lord.
Some one attend our Sonne.
See, heere hee comes my Lord.
Oh you come well.
Tis alwaies my deſire my worthy Father.
Your Serious ſtudyes, & thoſe fruitfull howres
That grow vp into iudgement, well become
Your birth, and all our loues: I weepe that you are my ſonne,
But Vertuouſly I weepe, the more my gladnes:
We haue thought good and meete by the conſent
Of theſe our Nobles, to moue you toward Trauaile,
The better to approue you to your ſelfe
And giue your apter power, foundation:
To ſee affections actually praeſented,
Ee'n by thoſe men that owe them, yeeld more profit,
I more content, then ſingly to reade of them,
"Since loue or feare, make Writers partiall,
The good and free example which you finde,
In other Countries, match it with your owne,
The ill to ſhame the ill, which will in time,
Fully inſtruct you how to ſet in frame,
A kingdome all in peeces.
Honoured Father,
With care and duetie I haue liſtned to you,
What you deſire, in me it is obedience,
I doe obey in all, knowing for right,
"Experience is a Kingdomes better ſight.
Oh tis the verie luſtre of a Prince,
Trauaile! tis ſweete and generous,
He that knowes how to obey, knowes how to reigne
And that true knowledge haue we found in you,
Make choice of your Attendants.
Theyr ſoone choſe, only this man my Lord, a louing ſeruant of mine.
What none but he?
I doe intreate no more,
For that's the benefit a priuate Gentleman
Enioyes beyond our ſtate, when he notes all,
Himſelfe vnnoted,
For ſhould I beare the faſhion of a prince,
I ſhould then win more flatterie, then profit,
And I ſhould giue e'm time & warning then
To hide their Actions from me, if I appeare a Sunne,
Theile run into the ſhade with their ill deedes,
And ſo preuent me.
A little too wiſe, a little too wiſe to liue long.
You haue anſwered vs with wiſdome, let it be.
Things priuate are beſt known through priuacy.
Stay you my elected ſeruant.
My kinde Lord.
The Duke my Father has a heauy burthen,
Of yeares vpon him.
My Lord it ſeemes ſo, for they make him ſtoope.
Without diſſemblance hee is deepe in age,
He bowes vnto his graue, I wonder much
Which of his wilde Nobilitie it ſhould bee
(For none of his ſad counſell has a voyce in't)
Should ſo farre trauaile into his conſent,
To ſet me ouer into other Kingdomes.
Vpon the ſtroke and minute of his death?
My Lord, tis eaſier to ſuſpect them all,
Then truly to name one.
Since it is thus,
By abſence, ile obey the Duke my father,
And yet not wrong my ſelfe.
Therein my Lord,
You might be happie twice.
So it ſhall bee,
Ile ſtay at home, and trauaile;
Would your Grace
Could make that good.
I can, & indeed a Prince need no trauaile farther then his owne Kingdome, if hee applie himſelfe faythfullye, worthie the glorie of himſelfe and expectation of others: and it would appeare farre nobler induſtrie in him, to reforme thoſe faſhions that are alreadye in his Countrey, then to bring newe ones in, which haue neither true forme nor faſhion; to make his Court an Owle, Cittie an Ape, and the Countrey a Wolfe, preying vpon the ridiculous pride of eyther, and therefore I holde it a ſafer ſterne vpon this luckie aduantage, ſince my father is nere his ſetting, and I vpon the Eaſterne hil to take my riſe, to look into the heart & bowels of this Dukedome, and in diſguiſe, marke all abuſes readie for Reformation or Puniſhment.
Giue me but leaue vnfainedly to admire you,
Your wiſdome is ſo ſpacious and ſo honeſt,
So much haue the complaints and ſuits of men, ſeauen, nay ſeauenteene yeares neglected, ſtil interpoſd by coine and great enemies, preuaild with my pittie, that I cannot otherwiſe thinke but there are infectious dealings in moſt offices, and foule miſteries throughout al Profeſſions: and therefore I nothing doubt but to find trauaile ynough within my ſelfe, and Experience I fear too much: nor will I be curious to fit my bodie to the humbleſt forme and bearing, ſo the labor may be fruitfull: for how can abuſes that keepe lowe, come to the right view of a Prince, vnleſſe his lookes lie leuell with them, which elſe will be longeſt hid from him, hee ſhall be the laſt man ſees 'em.
For oft betwene Kings Eyes, and ſubiects Crimes
Stands there a barre of brybes, the vnder office
Flatters him next aboue it: he the next,
And ſo of moſt, or manye, Euerie Abuſe will chuſe a brother,
Tis through the world, this Hand will rub the other.
You haue ſet downe the worlde briefly my Lord.
But how am I aſſur'd of faith in thee?
Yet I durſt truſt thee.
Let my ſoule be loſt,
When it ſhall looſe your ſecrets: nor will I onely bee a preſeruer of them, but if you ſo pleaſe an aſſiſter.
It ſuffices:
That King ſtands ſur'ſt who by his vertue riſes
More then by birth or blood, that Prince is rare,
Who ſtriues in youth to ſaue his age from care,
Let's be preparde away.
Ile follow your Grace,
Thou wonder of all Princes, Preſident, and Glorie,
True Phoenix, made of an vnuſuall ſtraine,
"Who labours to reforme is fit to raigne.
How can that King be ſafe that ſtudies not
The profite of his people? See where comes
The beſt part of my heart, my loue.
Sir, I am bound to find you, I heard newly
Of ſuddaine Trauaile which his grace intends
And onely but your ſelfe to accompany him.
You heard in that, little beſide the truth,
Yet not ſo ſuddaine as to want thoſe manners,
To leaue you vnregarded.
I did not thinke, ſo vnfaſhionably of you:
How long is your returne?
Tis not yet come to me, ſcarce to my Lord,
Vnleſſe the Duke referre it to his pleaſure,
But long I thinke it is not, the Dukes age,
(If not his apt experience) will forbid it.
His grace commaunds, I muſt not think amiſſe, farwell
Nay ſtay, and take this comfort,
You ſhall heare often from vs, ile direct
Where you ſhall ſurely knowe, and I deſire you
Write me the Truth, how my new father in lawe, the
Captaine beares himſelfe toward my Mother,
For that marriage, knew nothing of my minde,
It neuer flouriſht in any part of my affection.
Me thinkes ſha's much diſgrac'd herſelfe.
Nothing ſo: if he be good & wil abide the touch, a Captaine may marrie a Lady, if hee can ſaile into her good will.
Indeede thats all,
Tis al in al, commend me to thy breſt, farwel.
So by my Lords firme pollicy we may ſee,
To preſent view, what abſent formes would be.
There's Noble purchaſe Captaine.
Nay admirable purchaſe.
Ynough to make vs proud for euer.
Hah?
Neuer was opportunitie ſo Gallant.
Why you make me madde.
Three Ships not a poope leſſe.
And euerieone ſo wealthily burdned vpon my manhood.
Pox on't, and now am I tyed ee'n as the Deuil would ha't.
Captaine, of all men liuing I wold ha' ſworne thou wouldſt nere haue married.
S'foot, ſo would I my ſelfe man, giue mee my Due, you know I ha ſworne all heauen ouer and ouer:
That you haue y faith.
Why goe too then.
Of a man that has taſted ſalt water to commit ſuch a freſh Tricke.
Why tis abhominable I grant you now I ſee't:
Had there beene fewer Women—
And among thoſe Women fewer Drabs—
And among thoſe Drabs fewer pleaſing—
Then t'ad beene ſomething:
But when there are more women, more common pretty ſweete hearts, then euer any age could boaſt off.
And I to play the Artificer and marrie: to haue my wife daunce at home, and my Ship at Sea, and both take in ſalt water together: oh Leiftenant thou'rt happie, thou keepſt a Wench.
I hope I am happyer then ſo Captaine, for a my Troth ſhee keepes me.
How? is there anye ſuch fortunate man breathing? and I ſo miſerable to liue honeſt? I enuie thee Lieutenant, I enuie thee, that thou art ſuch a happye Knaue, heres my hand among you, ſhare it equally, Ile to ſea with you.
There ſpoke a Noble Captaine.
Lets heare from you, there will be newes ſhortly.
Doubt it not Captaine.
What luſtfull paſſion came aboord of mee, that I ſhould marrye, was I drunke? yet that cannot altogether holde, for it was foure a clocke 'ith morning, had it beene fiue, I would ha ſworne it: that a man is in danger euerie minute to be caſt away, without hee haue an extraordinarie Pilot that can performe more then a man can doe: and to ſay truth too, when 'ime abroad what can I doe at home? no man liuing can reach ſo farre: & what a horrible thing t'would bee to haue hornes brought me at Sea, to looke as if the Deuill were 'ith ſhip: and all the greate Tempeſtes would bee thought of my Rayſing, to bee the generall curſſe of all Merchants: and yet they likely are as deepe in as my ſelfe, and thats a comfort: O that a Captaine ſhould liue to be marryed! nay, I that haue beene ſuch a Gallant ſalt-theefe, ſhould yet liue to be marryed: What a fortunate Elder Brother is he, whoſe father being a Ramiſh Plough-man, himſelfe a perfumde Gentleman, ſpending the labouring reeke from his Fathers: Noſthrils in Tobacco: the ſweate of his Fathers bodye in monthlye Phiſickc for his pretty queſie Harlot: he ſowes a pace 'ith Countrie: the Taylor oretakes him i'th Cittie, ſo that often times before the Corne comes to Earning, tis vp to the eares in high Collars, and ſo at euerie harueſt the Reapers take paines for the Mercers, ha! why this is ſtirring happineſſe indeede, would my father had held a plow ſo, and fed vpon ſqueaz'd Curds and Onions, that I might haue bath'd inſenſualitie: but hee was too ruttiſh himſelfe to let me thriue vnder him, canſumde me before hee got me, & that makes me ſo wretched, now to be ſhackled with a wife, & not greatly rich neither.
Captaine, my Huſband.
S'life call me husband agen, & ile play the Captaine and beate you.
What ha's diſturb'd you ſir, that you now looke ſo like an Enemie vpon me?
Goe make a Widdower, hang thy ſelfe,
How comes it that you are ſo oppoſite
To loue and kindenes? I deſerue more Reſpect,
But that you pleaſe to be forgetfull of it.
For loue to you, did I neglect my ſtate,
Chide better fortunes from me,
Gaue the world talke, laide all my friendes at waſte.
The more foole you, could you like none but me?
Could none but I ſupplye you?
I am ſure you were ſued to▪ by far worthyer men,
Deeper in wealth and Gentrie.
What couldſt thou ſee in me, to make thee doate ſo on me,
If I knowe, I am a Villaine: what a torments this? why didſt thou marry me? you thinke as moſt of your inſatiate Widdowes, that Captaines can doe wonders, when 'laſſe the name do's often proue the better man.
That which you vrge, ſhould rather giue me cauſe to repent then your ſelfe.
Then to that end I doo't.
What a miſerable ſtate am I led into?
How now ſir?
Count Proditer is now alighted.
What, my Lord: I muſt make much of him, heele one day write me Cuckold: tis good to make much of ſuch a man, ee'n to my face, hee plyes it hard I thanke him:—
what, my worthy Lord!
Ile come to you in order Captaine.
Oh thats in order: a kiſſe is the Gammoth to prickſong.
Let me ſalute you Captaine.
My deere eſteemed Count, I haue a life for you:
Heare you the newes?
What may it be my Lord?
My Lord, the Dukes Sonne is vpon his trauaile to ſeuerall Kingdomes.
May it bee poſſible my Lord, and yet ſo little rumord?
Tak't of my Truth, nay, twa's well manag'd, thinges are as they are handled: but all my care is ſtill, pray heauen hee returne ſafe, without danger Captaine.
Why, is there any doubt to bee had of that my Lord?
I by my faith Captaine.
Princes haue priuate enemies, and great:
Put caſe a man ſhould grudge him, for his Vertues:
Or enuie him, for his wiſdome: why you know
This makes him lye bare breſted to his foe.
That's ful of certaintie my Lord, but who be his Attendants?
Thence Captaine comes the feare, but ſinglie attended neither (my beſt gladnes) only by your Sonne in Law Fidelio.
Is it to be beleeu'd? I promiſe you my Lord then I beginne to feare him my ſelfe, that fellow will vndoe him: I durſt vndertake to corrupt him with twelue pence ouer and aboue, and thats a ſmall matter: ha's a whoriſh Conſcience, hee's an inſeperable Knaue, and I could neere ſpeake well of that fellow.
All wee of the younger houſe, I can tell you do doubt him much,—the Ladyes remoou'd, ſhall we haue your ſweete ſoſcietie Captaine?
Though it bee in mine owne houſe, I deſire I may follow your Lordſhip.
I loue to auoide ſtrife,
Not many monthes Phoenix ſhall keepe his life.
So, his way is in, he knowes it,
We muſt not be vncurteous to a Lord,
Warne him our houſe t'were vilde: his preſence is an honour, if he lie with our wiues, tis for our credite, wee ſhall be the better truſted, tis a ſigne wee ſhall liue ith world: O Tempeſts and Whirlewinds (who but that man whom the forefinger cannot daunt, that makes his ſhame his liuing:) Who but that man I ſay, could endure to be throughly married? Nothing but a diuorce can relieue me: any way to be rid of her would rid my torment: if all meanes faile Ile kil, or poyſon her, and purge my fault at ſea: but firſt Ile make gentle Trie of a Diuorce: But how ſhal I accuſe her ſubtle honeſtie? Ile attach this Lords comming to her, take hold of that: ask counſell: and now I remember, I haue acquaintance with an olde craftie Client, who by the puzzle of ſuites & ſhifting of Courts, has more tricks & ſtarting holes, then the dizzie pates of fifteene Atturneys: one that has beene muzled in Law like a Beare, and lead by the Ring of his ſpectacles from office to office: him Ile ſeeke out with haſte, all paths Ile tread,
All deathes Ile die ere I die married.
Puh, you doe reſiſt me hardly.
I beſeech your Lordſhip ceaſe in this,
Tis neuer to be grāted: if you come as a friend vnto my honour and my husband, you ſhall be euer welcome, if not, I muſt intreate it—
Why aſſure your ſelfe, Madame, tis not the faſhion.
Tis more my griefe my Lord, ſuch as my ſelfe are iudg'd the worſe for ſuch.
Faith y' are too nice, youle ſee me kindly forth:
And honourably welcome.
Gentlemen, y' are moſte neately welcome.
Y' are very cleanelye Sir, prethee haue a care to our Geldings.
Your Geldings ſhall be well conſidered.
Conſidered?
Sirha, what Gueſſe do's this Inne holde now?
Some fiue and twentie Gentlemen beſides their beaſtes.
Their Beaſtes?
Their wenches I meane ſir, for your worſhip I nowes thoſe that are vdder men are beaſtes.
How do's your Mother ſit?
Verie well in health I thanke you heartily ſir.
And ſo is my Mare y faith.
Ile doe her commendations indeede ſir.
Well kept vp Shuttle-cocke:
But what olde fellow was he that newly alighted before vs?
Who he? as arrant a craftie fellow as ere made water on horſebacke: ſome ſay hee's as good as a Lawyer, (marrie 'ime ſure hee's as bad as a Knaue) if you haue any ſuites in lawe, hee's the fitteſt man for your companie: ha's beene ſo▪ toward and lug'd himſelfe▪ that hee is able to affood you more knauiſh counſell for tenne groates, then another for ten ſhillings.
A fine fellowe: but doe you know him to be a Knaue, and will lodge him.
Your worſhip begins to talke idlely, your bed ſhall be made preſently; if we ſhould not lodge knaues, I wonder how we ſhould bee able to liue honeſtlye, are there honeſt men enough thinke you in a Terme time to fill all the Innes in the towne, and as far as I can ſee▪ a knaues Gelding eats no more hay then an honeſt mans: nay theeues Gelding eates leſſe, ile ſtād too't, his Maiſter allowes him a better Ordnarie: yet I haue my eightpece day & night, twere more for our profit I wus, you were all theeues, if you were ſo contented: I ſhall bee cald for: giue your worſhips good morrow.
A royall knaue y faith: wee haue hapned into a Godly Inne.
Aſſure you my L. they belong al to one church.
This ſhold be ſome olde buſie turbulent fellowe: villanous Law-worme, that eates holes into poore mēs cauſes.
May it pleaſe your worſhip to giue me leaue?
I giue you leaue ſir, you haue your Veniam, now fill me a browne Toſte ſirha.
Will you haue no drink too't ſir?
Is that a queſtion in lawe?
Yes, in the loweſt Court: 'ith Sellor ſir.
Let me haa't remou'd preſently ſir.
It ſhall bee done ſir.
Now as you were ſaying Sir, ile come to you immediately too.
Oh verie wel ſir:
I'me a little buſie ſir,
But as how ſir?
I pray ſir?
Ha's brought me into the Court, marry my aduerſarie ha's not declarde yet.
Non declarauit Aduerſarius ſaiſt thou: what a Villain's that, I haue a tricke to doe thee good: I will get thee out a Proxe, & make him declare with a Poxe to him.
That wil make him declare to his fore griefe, I thank your good worſhip: but put caſe he doe declare?
Si declaraſſet, If he ſhould declare there,
I would be loath to ſtād out to the iudgement of that Court
Non ad iudicium, doe you feare corruption? then ile releeue you agaen: you ſhall get a Superſdiae, Non moleſt andam; and it big her.
Verie good.
Now if it ſhould euer come to a Teſtificandum, what be his witneſſes?
I little feare his witneſſes.
Non metuis teſtes? more valiant man then Oreſtes
Pleaſe you ſir to diſſolue this into Wine, Ale, or Beere, I come a hundred mile to you I proteſt, and leaue all other counſell behind me.
Nay you ſhal alwayes finde me a ſound Card, I ſtoode not ath Pillorie for nothing in eightie eight, all the world knowes that: now let me diſpatch you ſir; I come to you Preſenter.
Faith the partie hath remou'd both bodie and cauſe with a habeas corpus.
Has he that knauerie? But has hee put in baile aboue canſt tell?
That I can aſſure your worſhip, he has not.
Why then thy beſt courſe ſhall be, to lay out more money, take out a Procedendo, and bring downe the cauſe and him with a Vengeance.
Then he will come indeed
As for the other partie, let the Audita querela alone, take me out a ſpecial Supplicauit, which will coſt you inough, and then you pepper him. For the firſt partie after the Procedendo youle get coſts, the cauſe being ſound, youle haue a Iudgement, Nunc pro Tunc, youl get a Venire facies to warne your Iurie, a Decem tales to fill vp the number, and a Capias vt Legatum for your execution.
I thanke you my learned counſell.
What a buſie Caterpiller's this? let's accoſt him in that maner.
Content my Lord.
O my olde admirable fellow, how haue I all this while thirſted to ſalute thee? I knew thee in Octauo of the Duke.—
In Octauo of the Duke: I remember the yere well.
Bih maſſe a luſtie proper man.
Oh was I?
But ſtill in lawe▪
Still in Law. I had not breath'd elſe now, tis verie marrow, verie manna to me to be in law: ide been dead ere this elſe: I haue found ſuch ſweete pleaſure in the vexation of others, that I could wiſh my yeares ouer and ouer agen, to ſee that fellow a Begger, that bawling Knaue a Gentleman: a matter brough 'een to a iudgement to day, as far as ere t'was to begin again to morowe: O Raptures I heere a writ of Demur, there a Procedendo, heere a Sui ſurrara, there a Capiendo, Tricks, Delayes▪ Money-lawes:
Is it poſſible olde Lad?
I haue beene a Tearme-trotter my ſelfe anye time this fiue and fortie yeares, a goodly time & a gratious: in which ſpace I ha beene at leaſt ſixteen times beggard, and got vp agen: and in the mire agen, that I haue ſtunke agen, and yet got vp agen.
And ſo cleane and handſome how?
You ſee it apparantly▪ I cānot hide it frō you: nay more, in foelice hora bee it ſpoken, you ſee i'me olde, yet haue I at this preſent, nine and twentie ſutes in Lawe.
Deliuer vs man!
And all not worth forthy ſhillings.
May it cu'd?
The pleaſure of a man is all.
An olde fellow and ſuch a ſtinger.
A ſtake puld out of my hedge, theres one: I was well beaten I remember, that's two: I tooke one a bed with my wife agen her will, that's three: I was cal'd cuckold for my labour▪ that's foure: I tooke another a bed agen, that's fiue thē one cald me wittal that's ſixe: he kild my Dog for Barking, ſeaen: my Maide Seruant was knockt at that time, eight: my wife miſcarryed with a puſh, Nine, & ſic de coeteris, I haue ſo vext and beggerd the whole pariſh, with proceſſe, Suppoeneas, and ſuch like moleſtations, they are not able to ſpare ſo much readie mony from a Tearme, as woulde ſet vp a new Weather-cocke: the Church-wardens are faine to goe to law with the Poores mony.
Fie, fie.
And I ſo fetch vp al the men euery Tearm time that tis impoſſible to be at ciuill cuckoldry, within our ſelues, vnleſſe the whole country riſe vpon our wiues.
A my faith a prettie pollicie.
Nay an excellent ſtratagem: but of all I moſt wonder at the continuall ſubſtance of thy wit, that hauing had ſo many ſuits in law from time to time, thou haſt ſtill mony to relieue 'em.
Ha's the beſt fortune for that, I neuer knew him without.
Why doe you ſo much wonder at that? why this is my courſe: my Mare and I come vp ſome fiue dayes before a Tearme.
A good Decorum.
Here I Lodge as you ſee amongſt Innes, and places of moſt receit—
Verie wittily.
By which aduantage I diue into Country mens cauſes, furniſh 'em with knauiſh counſell, little to their profite, buzzing into their Eares, this courſe, that writ, this office, that Ʋltimum refugium, as you know I haue words enow for the purpoſe.
Enow a conſcience y faith.
Enow a law, no matter for conſcience. For which buſie and laborious ſweating curteſie, they cannot chuſe but feede me with mony, by which I maintaine mine owne ſuits: ho, ho, ho.
Why let me hug thee, Caper in mine armes.
Another ſpeciall tricke I haue, no body muſt know it, which is, to prefer moſt of thoſe men to one Atturney whom I affect beſt, to anſwere which kindneſſe of mine, he will ſweat the better in my cauſe, and doe them the leſſe good, tak't of my worde, I helpt my Atturney to more Clients the laſt Tearme then he will diſpatch all his life time: I did it.
What a noble memorable deed was there?
Sir.
Now ſir.
There's a kind of captaine, verie robuſtiouſly enquires for you.
For me? a man of warre: a man of law is fit for a man of warre: we haue no leyſure to ſay prayers: wee both kill a Sunday mornings: Ile not be long from your ſweete companie.
O no I beſeech you.
What captaine might this be?
Thou Angell ſent amongſt vs, ſober Law.
Made with meeke Eyes, perſwading Action,
No lowd immodeſt Tongue, voic'd like a virgin,
And as chaſte from ſale,
Saue onely to be heard, but not to raile.
How has abuſe deform'd thee to all Eyes?
That where thy vertues ſat, thy vices riſe,
Yet why ſo raſhly for one villaines fault▪
Doe I arraigne whole man? Admired Law,
Thy vpper parts muſt needes be ſacred, pure,
And incorruptible, th'are graue and wiſe,
T'is but the droſſe beneath 'em, and the clowdes
That get betweene thy glorie and their praiſe,
That make the viſible and foule Eclipſe,
For thoſe that are neere to thee, are vpright,
As noble in their conſcience, as their birth,
Know that damnation is in euery bribe,
And rarely put it from 'em: rate the Preſenters,
And ſcourge 'em with fiue yeares impriſonment,
For off ring but to tempt 'em.
Thus is true iuſtice exerciſde and vſde,
"Woe to the giuer when the Bribe's refuſde.
Tis not their wil, to haue law worſe then warre,
Where ſtill the poor'ſt die firſt,
To ſend a man without a ſheete to his graue,
Or burie him in his Papers.
Tis not their minde it ſhould be, nor to haue
A ſute hang longer then a man in chaines
Let him be nere ſo faſtned, they leaſt know
That are aboue, the tedious ſteps below.
I thanke my time, I doe.
I long to know what captaine this ſhould be:
See where the Bane or euery cauſe Returnes.
S'foote tis the captaine my father in law, my L.
Take heede.
The Diuorſe ſhall reſt then, and the fiue hundred crownes ſhall ſtand in full force and vertue.
Then doe you wiſely Captaine.
A way ſayle I, fare thee well.
A luſtie cracke or winde goe with thee.
But ah!
Hah:
Remember a Scriuener
Ile haue him for thee. Why thus am I ſought after by all profeſſions; heer's a weather beaten Captaine, who not long ſince newe married to a Ladie widow, would now faine haue ſued a Diuorce betweene her and him, but that her honeſtie is his onely hinderance: to be rid of which, he do's determine to turne her into white mony, and there's a Lord his Chapman has bid fiue hundred Crownes for her alreadie.
How?
Or for his part, or whole in her.
Why, do ſhe eaue to ſell his wife?
His wife? I bith maſſe, he would ſell his ſoule if he knew what Merchant would lay out money vppon't, and ſome of 'em haue need of one they ſweare ſo faſt.
Why, I neuèr heard of the like.
Non audiuiſti, didſtnere heere of that tricke? why Piſtor a Baker ſold his wife tother day to a cheeſemonger, that made Cake and Cheeſe: another to a Coferer: a third to a common player: why you ſee tis cō mon: nere feare the Captaine, be ha's not ſo much witte to bee a praeſident himſelfe: I promiſd to furniſh him with an odde Scriuener of mine owne▪ to draw the bargaine, and ſale of his Lady, your horſes ſtand heere Gentleman.
I, I, I.
I ſhall bee buſilye plung'd till towards bed time, aboue the chin in profundis.
What monſtrous daies are theſe?
Not onely to be vicious, moſt men ſtudy,
But in it to be vgly, ſtriue to exceed,
Each other in the moſte deformed deede.
Was this her priuate choice? did ſhee neglect
The preſence and opinion of her friends, for this?
I wonder who that one ſhould be,
Should ſo diſgrace that Reuerend Name of Lord,
So loathſomly to buy Adulterie?
We may make meanes to knowe.
Take courage man, weele beget ſome defence.
I am bound by nature.
I by Conſcience — To ſell his Lady: indeed ſhe was a Beaſt to marrie him, and ſo he makes of her, come, ile thorowe now 'ime entred.
Is my ſweete Knight comming, are you certaine hee's comming?
Certaine for ſooth, I am ſure I ſaw him out of the Barbers ſhop, ere I would come away.
A Barbers ſhop, O hee's a trim Knight, would hee venture his body into a Barbers ſhop, when hee knowes tis as dangerous as a peece of Ireland: O yonder, yonder, hee comes, get you backe agen, and looke you ſay as I aduiz'de you.
You know me miſtris?
My maske, my maske.
My ſweete Reuenewe!
My pleaſure welcome: I haue got ſingle, none but you ſhall accompany mee to the Iuſtice of peace my Fathers.
Why, is thy Father Iuſtice of Peace, and I not knowe it?
My father! yfaith ſir I, ſimply tho I ſtand heere a Cittizens wife: I am a Iuſtice of Peaces Daughter.
I loue thee the better for thy birth.
Hee's at thy ſeruice my ſweete Reuenewe, for thy money paide for e'm.
Why then let him run a little before I beſeech thee, for a my troth he will diſcouer vs elſe.
Hee ſhall obey thee, before ſirrha▪ trudge: but doe you meane to lye at your Fathers all night?
Why ſhould I deſire your company elſe?
S'foot where ſhall I lye then.
What an idle queſtion's that? why doe you hinke I cannot make roome for you in my Fathers houſe, as well as in my huſbands, th'are both good for nothing elſe?
A man ſo reſolute in valour as a Woman in deſire, were an abſolute Leader.
May it pleſe your good worſhip maiſter Iuſtice.
Pleaſe me and pleaſe are your ſelfe,
Thats my word.
The partie your worſhip ſent for, will by no means be brought to appeare.
Hee will not, then what would you aduize me to doe therein?
Onely to graunt your worſhips warrant, which is of ſufficient force to compell him.
No by my faith: you ſhall not haue me in that Trap: am I ſworne Iuſtice of Peace, and ſhall I giue my warrant to fetch a man againſt his will? why there the peace is Broken, wee muſt doe all quietly, if hee come hee's welcome, and as far as I can ſeeyet, hees a foole to bee abſent, I by this golde is hee (which hee gaue me this morning)
Why, but may it pleaſe your good worshippe.—
I ſay agen pleaſe me and pleaſe your ſelfe, thats my word ſtill.
Sir, the world eſteemes it a Common fauour, vpon the Contempt of the partie, the juſtice to graunt his warrant.
I, tis ſo common, tis the worſe agen, twere the better for me twere otherwiſe.
I proteſt ſir, and this Gentleman can ſay as much, it lyes vpon my halfe vndooing.
I cannot ſee yet, that it ſhould be ſo— I ſee not a croſſe yet.
I beſeech your worſhip ſhowe me your immediate fauour, and accept this ſmall trifle but as a remembrance to my ſucceeding Thankfulnes.
Angels? ile not meddle with them, you giue e'm to my wife not to me.
I, I ſir.
But I pray tell mee nowe, did the partie Ʋina Voce, with his owne mouth deliuer that contempt, that that he would not appeare, or did you but ieſtint?
Ieſt no a my troth ſir, ſuch was his inſolent anſwer
And do you thinke it ſtood with my credite to put vp ſuch an abuſe? will he not appeare ſayes he? Ile make him appeare with a Vengeance Latronello.
Do's your worſhip call?
Draw me a ſtrong limbd warrant for the Gentleman ſpeedily, he will be bountifull to thee: goe and thanke him within.
I ſhall know your worſhip hereafter.
I, I prethee doe. Two Angels one partie, foure another: and I thinke it a great ſparke of wiſdome and policie (if a man come to me for Iuſtice) firſt to knowe his greefes by his fees, which bee light and which bee he ie: he may coūterfet els, & make me do Iuſtice for nothing: I like not that▪ for when I meane to be iuſt, let me be paide wel for't: the deed ſo rare, purges the bribe: how now, what's the newes thou art come ſo haſtily? how fares my Knightly Brother?
Troth he nere farde worſe in his life ſir: he nere had leſſe ſtomack to his meate ſince I knew him.
Why ſir?
Indeede hee's dead ſir.
How ſir?
Newly deceaſd I can aſſure your Worſhip: the Tabacco-pipe new dropt out of his mouth before I tooke horſe, a ſhrewd ſigne: I knew then there was no way but one with him, the poore pipe was the laſt man he took leaue off in this world, who ſel in three peeces before him, & ſeem'd to mourne inwardly, for it lookt as blacke'th mouth as my maiſter.
Would hee die ſo like a Polititian, & not once write his minde to me?
No Ile ſay that for him ſir: he dyed in the perfect ſtate of memorie, made your worſhip his ful and whole executor: bequeathing his Daughter, and with her all his wealth, onely to your diſpoſition.
Did he make ſuch a godly end ſaiſt thou? did he die ſo comfortably, and bequeath all to me?
Your neece is at hand ſir, the will, & the witneſſes.
What a precious ioy and comfort's this, that a Iuſtices brother can die ſo wel, nay in ſuch a good and happie memorie, to make me full executor. Wel he was too honeſt to liue, and that made him die ſo ſoone: now I beſhrew my heart, I am glad hee's in heauen, has left all his cares and troubles with me, and that great vexation of telling of Money, yet I hope hee had ſo much grace before he died to turn his white mony into gold, a great eaſe to his Executor.
See here comes your Neece my yong miſtris ſir,
Ah my ſweete Neece, let me kiſſe thee, & drop a teare betweene thy lips: one teare from an old man is a great matter, the cockes of age are drie, thou haſt loſt a vertuous father, to gaine a notable vncle.
My hopes now reſt in you next vnder heauē
Let 'em reſt, let 'em reſt.
Sir?
Y'are moſt welcome ere ye begin ſir.
We are both led by oath and dreadfull promiſe,
Made to the dying man at his laſt ſence,
Firſt to deliuer theſe into your hands,
The ſuerties and reuealers of his ſtate.
Good.
With this his onely daughter and your Neece,
Whoſe fortunes are at your diſpoſing ſet,
Vncle and father are in you both met.
Good yfaith, a well ſpoken Gentleman, y'are not an Eſquire ſir?
Not ſir.
Not ſir? more's the pitie: by my faith better men then you are, but a great many worſe: you ſee I haue beene a Scholler in my time, tho I'me a Iuſtice nowe: Neece y'are moſt happily welcom, the charge of you is wholy and ſoly mine owne: and ſince you are ſo fortunately come Neece, Ile reſt a perpetuall widower.
I take the meaning chaſter then the words:
Yet I hope well of both, ſince it is thus,
His phraiſe off ends leaſt that's knowne humourous.
I make my brother (ſaies he) full and whole Executor, honeſtly done of him yfaith, ſeldome can a man get ſuch a brother: and here again ſaies he, very vertuouſly, I bequeath all to him and his diſpoſing: an excellent fellow a my troth, would you might all die no worſe, Gentlemen.
But as much better as might be.
Bleſſe your vprightneſſe maiſter Iuſtice,
You'r moſt ſoberly welcome ſir: daughter y'aue that ye kneele for, riſe, ſalute your weeping coozen.
Weeping coozen?
I coozen.
Eye to weeping is verie proper, and ſo is the partie that ſpake it beleeue me, a prettie, fine, ſlender, ſtreight, delicate knit bodie.
Oh how it moues a pleaſure through our ſenſes!
How ſmall are womens waſtes to their expences?
I cannot ſee her face, that's vnder water yet.
Newes as cold to the heart as an old mans kindneſſe: my vncle dead?
I haue loſt the deereſt Father.
If ſhe marry by your conſent, choyce and liking make her dowrie fiue thouſand crowns: hum, fiue thouſand crownes? therefore by my conſent ſhee ſhall nere marry, I will neither chuſe for her, like of it, nor conſent too't.
Now by the pleaſure of my blood a pretty coozen: I would not care, if I were as nere kin to her, as I haue beene to her kinſwoman.
Daughter, what Gentleman might this be?
No Gentleman ſir, hee's a Knight.
Is he but a knight? troth, I would a ſworne had beene a Gentleman, to ſee, to ſee, to ſee.
Hee's my husbands owne brother, I can tel you (ſir:
Thy husbands brother: ſpeak certainly prethee.
I can aſſure you father, my husband and hee has laine both in one bellie.
Ile ſwear then he is his brother indeed, & by the ſurer ſide: I craue heartie pardon ſweete kinſman that thou haſt ſtood ſo long vnſaluted in the way of kinred.
Welcome to my boord: I haue a bed for thee,
My daughters husbands brother ſhall commaund,
Keyes of my Cheſts and Chambers.— I haue ſtable for thy horſe, chamber for thy ſelfe, and a loft abou for thy lowzie lackie, all fit, away with handkirchers, drie vp eies, at funeral we muſt cry: now let's be wiſe.
I told you his affection.
It fals ſweetly.
But here I bar you from all plots to night,
The time is yet too heauie to be light.
Why, I'me còntent, ile ſleepe as chaſt as you,
And wager night by night who keepes moſt true.
Well we ſhall ſee your temper.
Feare not me Fidelio: become you that inuiſible Rope-maker the Scriuener, that binds a mā as he walks yet all his ioynts at libertie, aſwell as ile fit that common folly of Gentry, the eaſie-affecting venturer, and no doubt our purpoſe will arriue moſt happily.
Chaſt dutie my Lord works powerfully in mee, and rather then the poore Ladie my mother ſhould fall vpon the common ſide of rumour to begger her name, I would not only vndergoe all habits, offices, diſguiz'd profeſſions, tho ee'n oppoſite to the temper my blood holds: but in the ſtainleſſe quarrell of her reputation, alter my ſhape for euer.
I loue thee wealthier, thou haſt a noble touch, & by this means which is the only ſafe means to preſerve thy mother from ſuch an vgly land and ſea monſter as a counterfeit Captain is, he reſigning and baſely ſelling all his eſtate, title, right, and intereſt in his Ladie, as the forme of the writing ſhall teſtifie.
What otherwiſe can follow but to haue,
A Ladie ſafe deliuered of a knaue?
I am in debt my life, to the free goodnes of your inuentions.
Oh they muſt euer ſtriue to be ſo good,
"Who ſels his vow is ſtampt the ſlaue of blood.
Away.
Captaine, my husband.
Hence, we're at a price for thee, at a price, wants but the telling, and the ſealing, then —
Haue you no ſence, neither of my good name or your owne credit?
Credit? pox of credit, that makes me owe ſo much: it had bine better for me by a thouſand Royals I had loſt my credite, ſeauen yeare ago, t'as vndone me, that's it that makes me flie: what neede I to ſea elſe, in the Spring time, when Woods haue leaues, to looke vpon balde Oake.
Happier that man ſay I, whom no man truſts,
It makes him valiant, dares outface the priſons,
Vpon whoſe carkaſſe no Gownde Rauen iets,
Oh he that has no credite owes no debts.
Tis time I were rid on't.
Oh why do you ſo wilfully cherriſh your own poyſon? and breath againſt the beſt of life, chaſt credit.
Well may I call it chaſt, for like a Maide
Once falſly broke it euer liues decaide.
O Captaine, husband, you name that Diſhoneſt,
By whoſe good power all that are honeſt liue,
What madneſſe is it to ſpeake ill of that,
Which makes all men ſpeake well, take away credite
By which men amongſt men, are well reputed,
That man may liue, but ſtill liues executed.
Oh then ſhewe pittie to that noble Title
Which elſe you doe Vſurpe: you'r no true Captaine,
To let your enemies leade you, foule diſdaine,
And euerlaſting Scandall, Oh beleeue it!
The money you receive for my good name
Will not be halfe enough to pay your ſhame.
No, ile ſell thee then to the Smocke: ſee heere comes my honourable Chapman.
Oh my poyſon!
Him, whome mine honour and mine eye abhors.
Lady, what ſo vniouially departed?
Fine ſhee pollicie? ſhe makes my backe her Bolſter, but before my face, ſhe not indures him, Tricks.
Captaine, how haps it ſhe remou'd ſo ſtrangely?
Oh for Modeſties cauſe awhile my Lord: ſhee muſt reſtraine her ſelfe, ſhee's not yours yet:
Beſide, it weare not wiſdome to appeare,
Eaſie before my ſight, fah, wherefore ſerues modeſtie but to pleaſure a Lady now and then, and help her from ſuſſpect, that's the beſt vſe tis put too.
Well obſeru'd of a Captaine.
No doubt youle be ſoone friendes my Lord.
I thinke no leſſe.
And make what haſt I can to my ſhip, I durſt wager you'l be vnder ſaile before me.
A pleaſant voyage Captaine.
I, a verie pleaſant voyage as can be: I ſee the houre is Ripe, heere comes the Priſons Bawde the bond-maker, one that bindes heires before they are begot.
And here are the Crownes Captaine, goe? attend,
Let our bay Courſer waite.
It ſhall be obeyed.
A Farmers ſonne, iſt true?
Has crownes to ſcatter?
I giue you your ſalute ſir.
I take it not vnthankfully ſir.
I heare a good report of you ſir—y'aue money.
I haue ſo, true.
An excellent vertue.
I, to keeep from you—heare you me Captaine?
I haue a certaine generous itch ſir, to looſe a fewe Angels in the way of profit: tis but a game at Tennis,
Where if the ſhip keepe aboue line, tis three to one:
If not, there's but three hundred Angels gone.
Is your venture three hundred? y'are verie pretiouſly welcome: heere's a voyage towarde will make vs all.—
Beggerly fooles, and ſwarming knaues.
Captaine, whats he?
Feare him not my Lord, hee's a Gull', hee ventures with me, ſome filthy Farmers ſonne, the father's a Iew, and the ſonne a Gentleman:pha.—
Yet he ſhould be a Iew too, for he is new come from giuing ouer ſwine.
Why, that in our Countrey makes him a Gentleman.
Goe to, tell your money Captaine.
Read aloft Scriuener. 1.2.—
To all good and honeſt Chriſtian people, to whō this preſent writing ſhal come: know you for a certain, that I Captaine, for and in the conſideration of the ſum of fiue hundred crownes, haue clearly bargained, ſolde, giuen, graunted, aſſigned and ſet ouer, and by theſe preſents doe cleerly bargaine, ſell, giue, graunt, aſſigne and ſet ouer, al the right, eſtate, title, intereſt, demaund, poſſeſſion, and tearme of yeares to come, which I the ſaide Captaine haue, or ought to haue.—
If I were as good as I ſhould be,—
In and to Madona Caſtiza, my moſt vertuous, modeſt, louing, and obedient wife.—
By my troth my Lord and ſo ſhe is.— 3.4.5.6.7.
The more Slaue he that ſayes it, and not ſees it.
Togither, with all and ſingular thoſe admirable qualities with which her noble breſt is furniſht.
Well ſaid Scriuener, haſt put'em all in: you ſhal heare now my L.
In primis, the beuties of her minde, chaſtitie, temperance, and aboue all, pacience:
You haue bought a Iewell yfaith, my L, nine and thirtie, fortie.
Excellent in the beſt of Muſicke, in voice delicious: in conference wiſe and pleaſing: of age contentful: neither too yōg to be a piſh, nor too old to be ſottiſh
You haue bought as louely a penny-woorth my Lord, as ere you bought in your life.
Why ſhould I buy her elſe Captaine?
And which is the beſt, of a wife a moſt comfortable ſweete companion.
I could not affoord her ſo y faith, but that I am-going to ſea and haue need of money.
A moſt comfortable ſweete companion.
What agen? the Scriuener reades in paſſion.
I read as the words moue me: yet if that be a faul it ſhall be ſeen no more,—which ſaid Madona Castia lying, & yet being in the occupatiō of the ſaid captain
Ninteene—occupation? Pox out, out with occupation, a Captaine is of no occupation, man.
Nor thou of no religion.
Now I come to the Habendum, to haue and to holde, vſe and—
Vſe? put out vſe too for ſhame.
Till we are all gone, I prethee.
And to be acquited of and from all former bargaines, former ſales:
Former ſailes, nine & twenty thirty, by my troth my Lord, this is the firſt time that euer I ſolde her.
Yet the writing muſt run ſo Captaine.
Let it run on then, nine and fortie, fiftie, —
Former ſales, Guiftes, Grants, Surrenders. Reentryes. —
For Reentryes, I will not ſweare for her.
And furdermore (I the ſaid) of and for the conſideration of the ſomme of fiue hundred Crownes to ſet me a boord before theſe preſents vtterly diſclaime for euer, any Title, eſtate, right, intereſt, demaund, or poſſeſſion, in or to the ſaid Madona Caſtiza, my late vertuous, and vnfortunate wife.
Vnfortunate indeede, that was wel plac'd.
As alſo neither to touch, attempt, moleſt, or incumber any parte, or partes whatſoeuer: either to bee namde or not to be namde: eyther hidden or vnhidden, eyther thoſe that boldly looke abroad, or thoſe that dare not ſhow their face.
Faces: I knowe what you meane by faces: Scriuener, there's a great figure in faces.
In witneſſe wherof, I the ſaid Captaine haue interchangeably ſet to my hand and ſeale: in preſence of all theſe, the day and date aboue written.
Verie good ſir, Ile bee ready for you preſently, foure hundred and twentie. 1.2.3.4.5.—
Of all deedes, yet this ſtrikes the deepeſt wound
Into my apprehenſion,
Reuerend, and honourable Matrimony,
Mother of lawfull ſweetes, vnſhamed mornings:
Dangerleſſe pleaſures, thou that mak'ſt the bed,
Both pleaſant, and legitimately fruitfull: without thee,
All the whole world were ſoyled Baſtardy.
Thou art the onely and the greateſt forme.
That put'ſt a difference betweene our deſires
And the diſordered appetites of Beaſtes,
Making their mates, thoſe that ſtand next their luſts.
Then,—with what baſe iniurie is thy goodnes paide
Firſt, rare to haue a Bride commence a Maide,
But do's beguile ioy of the puritie:
And is made ſtrickt by power of Drugs and Art,
An Artificall Maide, a Doctord Virgin,
And ſo deiceues the glorie of his bod:
A foule contempt, againſt the ſpotleſſe power
Of ſacred wedlocke, but if chaſt and honeſt,
There is another Deuill hauntes marriage,
(None fondly loues but knowes it) Iealouſie,
That Wedlocks yellow ſicknes, that whiſpering ſeperation euerie minute.
And thus the curſſe takes his effect or progreſſe,
The moſte of men in their firſt ſuddaine furyes,
Rayle at the narrow boundes of marriage,
And cal't a priſon then it is moſte iuſt,
That the diſeaſe'ath priſon, Ielouſie
Should ſtill affect a'm, but oh! here I am fixt,
To make ſale of a wife, monſtrous and foule,
An act abhord in nature, could in ſoule:
Who that ha's man in him, could ſo reſigne,
To make his ſhame, the poeſye to the Coyne?
Right yfaith, my Lord fully fiue hundred,
I ſaide how you ſhould finde it Captaine, and with this competent ſumme you reſt amplye contented.
Amply contented.
Heere's the Pen Captaine: your name to the ſale.
S'foote dooſt take me to be a pen-man? I proteſt I could nere write more then A, B, C, thoſe three letters in my life.
Why thoſe will ſerue Captaine.
I could nere get furder.
Would you haue got furder then A B C? ah Baſe Captaine, that's far ynough yfaith.
Take the Seale off Captaine.
It goes on hardly, and comes off eaſily.
I iuſt like a Coward.
Will you write witneſſe Gentleman?
Hee? he ſhall, prethe come and ſet thy hand for witneſſe Rogue, thou ſhall venture with me?
Nay, then I ha reaſon Captaine that commaunds me?
What a faire fiſt the pretty whorſone writes, as if he had had manners and bringing vp, a farmers Sonne: his Father dam's himſelfe to ſell muſtie Corne, while hee ventures the Money, twill proſper well at Sea no doubt he ſhall nere ſee't agein
So, Captaine you deliuer this as your deede.
As my deede, what elſe ſir?
The ouglyeſt deed that ere mine eye did witnes
So my Lord, you haue her, clip her, enioy her, ſhee's your owne, and let me be proud to tell you now my Lord, ſhee's as good a ſoule if a man had a minde to liue honeſt, and keepe a wench, the Kindeſt, ſweeteſt, comfortableſt Rogue.—
Harke in thine eare,
The Baſer ſlaue art thou: and ſo ile tell her,
I loue the Pearle, thou ſoldſt, hate thee the Seller—
Goe, to Sea, the end of thee—is Lowſie.
This fine worke: a verie braue end, hum—
Wel thought vpon, this Scriuener may furniſh me
Why ſhould this fellowe be a Lord by birth?
Being by bloud a Knaue, one that would ſell
His Lordſhip if he likt her Ladyſhip.
Yes my Lord.
What's here Now?
I haue imployment for a truſtie fellow, bould, ſure—
What if he be a Knaue my Lord?
There thou comſt to me, why he ſhould be ſo, and men of your quill are not vnacquainted.
Indeed al our chiefe liuing my Lord, is by fooles and knaues, we could not keepe open ſhop elſe▪ Fooles that enter into bonds, and Knaues that binde e'm.
Why now we meete.
And as my memorie happily leades me: I know a fellowe of a ſtanding eſtate, neuer flowing: I durſt conuey treaſon into his boſome,
And keepe it ſafe nine yeares.
A goodly Time.
And if neede were would preſſe to an attempt,
And cleaue to Deſperate action.
That Laſt fits mee.
Thou haſt the meaſure right, looke I heare from thee.
With duteous ſpeede.
Expect a large reward:
I will finde time of her to finde regard.
The end of me is lowzie.
Oh my Lord! I haue ſtrange wordes to tell you.
Stranger yet? ile chuſe ſome other hower to liſten to thee, I am yet ſicke of this, diſcouer quickly.
Why, wil you make yourſelfe knowne my Lord
I.
Who ſcourgeth ſinne let him doo't dreadfully.
Pox of his diſſemblance: I will to ſn.
Nay, you ſhall to ſea, thou wouldſt poyſon the whole land elſe—why how now Captaine?
In health.
What, drooping?
Or a ſhamde of the ſale of thine owne wife?
You might count me an aſſe then yfaith.
If not a ſham'd of that, what can you be a ſhamd ofthen?
Prethe ha done, I am aſham'd of nothing.
I eaſily beleeue that.
This Lord ſtickes in my ſtomacke.
How? take one of thy fethers downe, and fetch him vp.
Ide make him come.
But what if the Duke ſhould heare of this?
I, or your Sonne in Law, Fidelio knowes of the ſale of his mother.
What and they did, I ſell none but mine owne: as for the Duke, hee's abroad by this time, and for Fidelio hee's in labour.
Hee, in labour?
What call you Trauelling?
That's true:— but let me tell you Captain: whether the Duke heare on't, or Fidelio know on't: or both, or neither, twa's a moſte filthie loathſome part.
A baſe vnnaturall deede—
Slaue and foole: —ha, who? oh—
Thou hatefull villaine: thou ſhouldſt chuſe (to ſincke
To keepe thy baſenes ſhrouded.
Ougly wretch.
Who hath laid violence vpon my husband?
My deare ſweet Captaine, helpe—
Lady you wrong your value,
Call you him deere that has ſolde you ſo cheape?
I do beſeech your pardon good my Lord.
Riſe.
My abuſed Mother:
My kinde Sonne,
Whoſe liking I neglected in this match.
Not that alone, but you far happyer fortunes.
Is this the Scriuener and the Farmers Sonne,
Fire on his Lordſhip he tolde me they Trauaild.
And ſee the ſumme tolde out to buy that Iewel
More pretious in a Woman then her eye, her honour:
Nay take it to you Lady, and liudge it,
Too ſlight a recōpence, for your great wrong, but that his riddance helpes it.
S'foot he vndoes me, I am a Rogue & a Beggar,
The Aegiptian plague creepes ouer me alreadie,
I begin to be lowſie.
Thus happily preuented, y'are ſet free,
Or elſe made ouer to adulterie.
To heauen and to you my modeſt thankes.
Monſter, to ſea, ſpit thy al herred foame,
Where it may doe leaſt harme, ther's ayre and roeme.
Thour't Dangerous in a Chamber, Ʋirulext Ʋenem,
Vnto a Ladies name, and her chaſt breath
If paſt this euenings verge, the Dukedome hold thee,
Thou art reſeru'd for abiect puniſhment.
I doe beſeech your good Lordſhip conſider the ſtate of a poore downe-caſt Captaine.
Captaine, off with that noble title thou becomſt it vildely, I nere ſaw the name fit worſe, ile ſooner allowe a Pandar a Captaine then thee.
More's the pittie.
Sue to thy Lady for pardon.
I giue it without ſuite.
I do beſeech your Ladiſhip not ſo much for pardon, as to beſtow a few of thoſe Crownes vpon a poore vnfethered Rouer that will as truely pray for you, and wiſh you hangd, as any man breathing.
I giue it freely all.
Nay by your fauour:
I will containe you Lady, here▪ be gone:
Vſe ſlaues like ſlaues—wealth keepes their faults vnkowne.
Well 'ime yet glad, i'ue libertie and theſe:
The Land has plagu'd me, and ile plague the ſeas.
The Sceane is cleer'd, the bane of brightnes fled
Who ſought the death of honour, is ſtrucke dead.
Come modeſt Lady:
My moſte honeſt mother.
Thy vertue ſhall liue ſafe from reach of ſhames,
That Act endes nobly, preſerues Ladies fames.
Why this is but the ſecond time of your comming Kinſman, viſit me oftner, Daughter, I charge you bring this Gentleman along with you: Gentleman, I I crie yee mercy ſir, I call you Gentleman ſtill: I forget y'are but a Knight, you muſt pardon me ſir.
For your worſhips kindenes—worſhip I crie you mercie ſir, I call you worſhipfull ſtill, I forget, y'are but a Iuſtice.
I am no more yfaith.
You muſt pardon me ſir.
Tis quickly done ſir, you ſee I make bould with you Kinſman, thruſt my Daughter and you into one Chamber.
Beſt of all ſir: Kinred you knowe may lye anye where.
True, true ſir, Daughter receiue your bleſſing— take heed the Coach iopper not to much▪ haue a care to the fruits of your bodye—looke to her Kinſman.
Feare it not ſir.
Nay Father though I ſay it, that ſhould not ſay it, hee lookes to me more like a husband then a Kinſman.
I heare good commendations of you ſir.
You heare the worſt of me I hope ſir,—I ſalute my leaue ſir.
Y'are welcome all ouer your body ſir: nay, I can behaue my ſelfe courtly, though I keepe houſe 'ith Countrie: what, does my Neece hide herſelfe, not preſent, ha? Latronello.
Sir.
Call my Neece to mee.
Yes ſir.
A fooliſh, coy, baſhfull thing it is, ſhee's afraid to lie with her owne Vncle: ide do her no harme yfaith, I keepe my ſelfe a widdower a purpoſe, yet the fooliſh Girle will not looke into't, ſhee ſhould haue all yfaith, ſhee knowes I haue but a time, cannot holde long, ſee where ſhe comes, pray whome am I Neece?
I hope y'are your ſelfe.
Vncle to me, and Brother to my Father.
Oh am I ſo, it do's not appeare ſo,—for ſurely you would loue your Fathers Brother for your Fathers ſake, your Vncle for your owne ſake.
I doe ſo.
Nay you doe nothing Neece.
In that loue which becomes you beſt I loue (you.
How ſhould I know that loue becomes me beſt?
Becauſe tis chaſt, and honorable.
Honorable! it cannot become me then Neece.
For'ime ſcarce worſhipfull: Is this an age,
To entertaine bare loue without the fruites
When I receiu'd thee firſt, I look't
Thou ſhouldſt haue beene a wife vnto my houſe
And ſau'd me from the charge of marriage.
Do you thinke your Fathers fiue thouſand pound wold ha made me take you elſe? no, you ſhould neere a ha beene a charge to me.
As far as I can perceiue yet by you,
I'ue as much neede to marrie as ere I had: would not this be a greate griefe to your friendes thinke you, if they were aliue agen?
Twould be a griefe indeede.
Y'aue confeſt
All about houſe, that young Fidelio
Who in his Trauailes does attend the Prince,
Is your vowde loue.
Moſt true, hee's my vow'd Husband.
And what's a Husband is not a Husband a ſtrāger at firſt, and wil you lye with a ſtranger before you lie with your owne Vncle? take heede what yee doe Neece, I counſell you for the beſt: ſtrangers are drunken fellowes I can tell you, they will come home late a nights, beate their wiues, and get nothing but Girles: look too't, if you marry, your ſtubbernes is your Dowrie: fiue thouſand Crownes were bequeathed to you, true, if you marry with my conſent: but if ere you goe to marrying by my conſent, ile goe to hanging by your's: goe too▪ be wiſe and loue your Vncle.
I ſhould haue cauſe then to repent indeede.
Do you ſo far forget the Offices
Of bluſhing modeſtie? Vncles are halfe Fathers,
Why they come ſo neare our bloods th'are ene part of it.
Why now you come to mee Neece: if your Vncle be part of your owne fleſh and blood, is it not then fit your owne fleſh and bloud ſhould come neereſt to you? anſwere me to that Neece.
You doe allude all to inceſtuous will,
Nothing to modeſt purpoſe: turne me foorth,
Be like an Vncle of theſe latter daies,
Periurde ynough, ynough vnnaturall,
Play your Executorſhip, in Tyranny,
Reſtraine my fortunes, keepe me poore, I care not,
In this alone moſte women ile excell,
Ile rather yelde to beggery then to hell.
Very good, a my troth my Neece is Valiant, ſha's made me ritcher by fiue thouſand Crownes, the price of her Dowrie: are you ſo honeſt, I doe not feare but I ſhall haue the Conſcience to keepe you poore ynough Neece, or elſe I am quite altered a late—The Newes, may it pleaſe you ſir?
Sir, theres an olde fellowe, a kinde of Law-driuer, entreates conference with your worſhip.
A Law-driuer, prethee driue him hither.
No, no I ſay if it bee for defect of Apparance, take me out a ſpeciall Significauit.
Verie good ſir.
Then if he purchaſe an Alias or Capias, which are Writs of cuſtome, onely to delay time, your Procedendo do's you Knights ſeruice—that's nothing at all, get your Diſtringas out as ſoone as you can for a Iurie.
Ile attend your god worſhips comming out.
Do I prethee, attend me, ile take it kindly, a Voluntate.
What, old Seigneur Tangle!
I am in debt to your worſhips remembrance.
My old maſter of Fence: come, come, come, I haue not exerciz'd this twelue Moones, I haue almoſt forgot all my Law-weapons.
They are vnder fine and Recouerie, your worſhip ſhall eaſily recouer them.
I hope ſo: when there?
Sir.
The Rapler and Dagger foyles inſtantly: and whats thy ſuite to mee olde Tangle, ile graunt it preſently.
Nothing but this ſir, to ſet your worſhips hand to the commendation of a Knaue whome no bodye ſpeakes well on.
The more ſhame for e'm, what was his offence I pray?
Veſtras Deducite Culpas—nothing but robbing a Veſtrie.
What, what! alaſſe poore Knaue, giue me the Paper, he did but ſaue the Churchwardens a labour: come, come, he has done a better deed in't then the pariſh is a aware off, to preuent the Knaues, hee robs but ſeldome, they once a quarter: me thinks twere a part of good iuſtice, to hang e'm at yeares end, wen they come out of their office, to the true terrifying of all Collectors and Sidemen.
Your worſhip would make a fruitefull Common-wealths man, the Conſtable lets e'm alone, looks on, and ſayes nothing.
A laſſe good man, he lets e'm alone for quietnes ſake, and takes halfe a ſhare with e'm: they know wel enough too, he ha's an impediment in his tongue, hee's alwaies drunke when he ſhould ſpeake.
Indeede your worſhip ſpeakes true in that ſir: they blinde him with beere, and make him ſo narrowe eyde, that he wincks naturallye at all their Knaueries,
So, ſo, heeres my hand to his commendations.
A Charitate, you doe a charitable deede in't ſir.
Nay, if it be but a Veſtrie matter, viſit me at anye time, olde Signeor Law-thiſtle! O well done, heere are the Foiles, come, come ſir, ile trie a Law-bout with you.
I am affraide I ſhall ouerthrowe you ſir yfaith.
Tis but for want of vſe then ſir.
Indeed that ſame odde word Vſe, makes a man a good Lawyer, and a woman an arrant—tuh tuh, tuh, tuh, tuh, now am I for you ſir: but firſt to bring you into forme, can your worſhip name all your weapons?
That I can I hope, let me ſee, Longſwoord, what's Longſword? I am ſo duld with dooing juſtice, that I haue forgot all yfaith.
Your long ſword, thats a writ of delay.
Maſſe that ſwords long enough indeede, I ha knowne it reach the length of fifteene Tearmes.
Fifteene Tearmes, that's but a ſhort ſword.
Me thinkes tis long enough, proceede ſir.
A Writ of Delay, Long-ſword.
Scandala Magnatum, Backeſword.
Scandals are back-ſwords indeede
Capias cominus, Caſe of Rapyers.
Oh Deſperate!
A Latitat, ſword and Dagger.
A writ of Execution, Rapier and Dagger.
Thou art come to our preſent weapon, but what call you ſword and Buckler then?
Oh! that's out of vſe now, ſword and Buckler was cal'd a good conſcience, but that weapons left long agoe, that was too manly a fight, too ſound a weapon for theſe our daies, ſl'id wee are ſcarce able to lift vp a Buckler now, our armes are ſo bound to the Poxe: one good bang vppon a Buckler would make moſte of our Gentlemen flye a peeces, tis not for theſe lintie times, our Lawyers are good Rapyer and Dagger men, theile quickly diſpatch your—money.
Indeede ſince ſword and buckler time, I haue obſeru'd, there ha's beene nothing ſo much fighting: where bee all our gallant Swaggerers? there are no good frayes alate.
Oh ſir, the properties altred, you ſhall ſee leſſe fighting euerie day then other, for euerie one gets him a Miſtris, and ſhe giues him woundes enowe, and you knowe, the Surgeons cannot beehere and there too, if there were red woundes too, what wold become of the Reiniſh woundes?
Thou ſaiſt true yfaith, they would bee but il favouredly lookt to then.
Verie well ſir.
I expect you ſir.
I lye in this court for you ſir, my Rapyer is my Atturney, and my Dagger his Clarke.
Your Atturney wants a little oyling, me thinkes, he lookes very Ruſtily.
Tis but his proper colour ſir, his Father was an Iremonger, he will nere look brighter, the ruſt ha's ſo eat into him, ha's neuer any leaſure to be made cleane.
Not in the vacation.
Non Vacat exiguis rebus adeſſe Ioui.
Then Ioue will not be at leyſure to ſcoure him, becauſe he ere came to him before.
Y'are excellent at it ſir—and now you leaſt thinke on't, I arreſt you ſir.
Very good ſir.
Nay very bad ſir by my faith—I followe you ſtill, as the Officers wil followe you as long as you haue a penny.
You ſpeake ſentences ſir—by this time haue I tryed my friendes, and now I thruſt in baile—
This baile will not be taken ſir, they muſt be two Cittizens that are no Cuckolds.
Berlady then 'ime like to lye by it, I had rather twere a hundred that were.
Take heede I bring you not to an Niſiprius ſir.
I muſt ward my ſelfe as well as I may ſir.
Tis Court day now, Declarat Atturnatus, my Atturney gapes for money.
You ſhall haue no Aduantage yet, I put in my Anſwere.
I follow the ſute ſtill ſir.
I like not this Court birlady—I: take me out a writ of Remoue, a writ of Remoue, doe you ſee ſir?
Very well ſir.
And place my cauſe higher.
There you ſtarted me ſir—yet for all your Demurres, Plures, and Surſurarers, which are all Longſwords: that's Delaies: al the comfort is, in nine yeares a man may ouerthrowe you.
You muſt thanke your good friendes then ſir.
Let nine yeares paſſe, fiue hundred crownes caſt away a both ſides, and the ſuite not twentie, my Counſellors wife muſt haue another hood you knowe, and my Atturneyes wife wil haue a new forepart, yet ſee at length law, I ſhal haue law: now beware, I bring you to a narrowe exigent, and by no meanes can you auoide the Proclamation—
Oh!
Now followes a writ of execution, a Capias, vt Legatum, giues you a wound mortall, trippes vp your heeles, and layes you ith Counter.
O Villaine!
I crie your worſhip heartily mercie ſir, I thought we had beene in Lawe together, Aduerſarius contra aduerſarium by my troth.
Oh! reach me thy hand, I nere had ſuch an ouerthrowe in my life.
Twa's long of your Atturney there, hee might a ſtaide the execution of Capias vt Legatum, and remou'd you with a Superſedeas non moleſtandum into the Court of Equitie.
Pox on him, he fell out of my hand when I had moſt neede of him,
I was bound to follow the ſuite ſir.
Thou couldſt doe no leſſe then ouerthrowe me,
I muſt needes ſay ſo.
You had recouered coſt elſe ſir.
And now by'th maſſe I thinke I ſhal hardly recouer without coſt.
Nay, that's Certoſcio, an execution is very chargeable.
Well, it ſhall teach mee witte as long as I am a Iuſtice: I perceiue by this tryall, if a man haue a ſound fall in Law, hee ſhall feele it in his bones all his life after.
Nay, that's Recto vpon Record, for I my ſelfe was ouerthrowne in eighty eight by a Taylor, and I haue had a Stitch in my ſide euer ſince, oh!
Why Latronello, Furtiuo, Fucato, where be theſe lazie knaues that ſhould truſſe me, not one ſtirring yet?
Followe, followe, followe.
What newes there?
This way, this way, follow, follow.
Hark you ſluggiſh Soporiferous villaines, ther's knaues abroad when you are a bed, are ye not a ſham'd on't, a Iuſtices men ſhould be vp firſt, and giue example all knaues.
Oh I beſeech your good worſhip.
Your worſhipfull worſhip.
Theeues, my two hand ſword, ime rob'd 'ith Hal, Latronello, Knaues, come down, my two hand ſword I
I am Latronello, I beſeech your worſhip, (ſay.
Thou Latronello, thou lyeſt, my men ſcorne to haue beardes.
We forget our beards, now I beſeech your worſhip quickly remember vs.
How now?
Nay theres no time to talke of how now, tis don.
Follow, follow, follow.
Foure marke and a Liuerie is not able to keepe life and ſoule together, wee muſt flye out once a quarte, tis for your worſhips credit to haue moneye in our purſſe, our Fellow Furtiuo is taken in the Action.
A pox on him for a lazie knaue, would hee bee taken?
They bring him along to your worſhip, your the next Iuſtice, now or neuer ſhow your ſelfe a good maiſter, an vpright Magiſtrate, and deliuer him out of their hands.
Nay, he ſhal finde me—apt enough to doe him good I warrant him.
Hee comes in a falſe beard ſir.
S'foot what, ſhould hee doe here elſe? there's no comming to me in a true on: if he had one,—the ſlaue to be taken: doe not I keepe Geldings ſwift enough?
The goodlyeſt Geldings of any Gentleman in the ſhire.
Which did the whorſon knaue ride vpon?
Vpon one of your beſt ſir.
Stand and deliuer.
Vpon Stand and Deliuer: the verie Gelding I chuſe for mine owne riding, as nimble as Pegaſus the flying horſe yonder: goe ſhift your ſelues into your coates, bring hither a great chaire, and a little table.
With all preſent ſpeede ſir.
And Latronello.
I ſir.
Sit you downe, & very ſoberly take the examnation.
Ile drawe a few horſe heades in a paper, make a ſhew: I hope I ſhall keepe my countenence.
Pox on him agen, would he be taken? hee frets me: I haue beene a youth my ſelfe, I ha ſeene the day I could haue told money out of other mens purſes (Maſſe ſo I can doe now) nor will I keepe that fellow about me that dares not bid a man ſtand: for as long as drunkenneſſe is a vice, ſtand is a vertue: but I would not haue 'em taken. I remember now betimes in a morning I would haue peept through the greene boughs, & haue had the partie preſently, and then to ride away ſinelye in feare, twas e'en Venerie to me yfaith, the pleaſantſt courſe of life, one would thinke euery Woodcok a Conſtable, and euery Owle an officer, but thoſe dayes are paſt with mee: and a my troth I thinke I am a greater theefe now, and in no danger: I can take my eaſe, ſit in my Chaire, look in your faces now, and rob you, make you bring your money by authoritie put off your hat, and thanke me for robbing of you, O there is nothing to a theefe vnder Couert Barne.
Come Officers bring him away.
Nay, I ſee thee through thy falſe beard, thou mid-winde chinde Raſcall,
How now my Maiſters, whats he? ha?
Your worſhip knowes, I neuer come but I bring a theefe with me.
Thou haſt left thy wont elſe Conſtable.
Sir, we vnderſtand you to be the onely vp rightnes of this place.
But I ſcare vnderſtand you ſir.
Why then you vnderſtand not your ſelfe ſir.
Such another word, and you ſhal change places with the Theefe.
A maintayner of equall cauſes I meane.
Now I haue you, proceede ſir.
This Gentleman and my ſelfe, being led heather by occaſion of buſineſſe, haue beene offered the diſcurteſie of the Country, ſet vppon by three theeues and rob'd.
What are become of the other two, Latronello, and Fuca?
Heere ſir.
They both made away from vs, the crie purſues e'm, but as yet none but this taken.
Latronello.
Sir.
Take his examination.
Yes ſir.
Let the Knaue ſtand ſingle.
Thanke your good worſhip.
Ha's beene a ſuter at Court ſure, hee thankes me for nothing.
Hee's a Theefe now ſure.
That we muſt know of him, what are you ſir?
A peece next to the Taile ſir—a Seruingman.
By my troth a prettie phraſe and verye cleanly handled, put it downe Latronello: thou mayſt make vſe on't. Is hee of honour or worſhip whom thou ſerueſt?
Of both deere ſir, honourable in minde, and worſhipfull in bodie.
Why would one wiſh a man to ſpeake better?
Oh ſir, they moſt commonly ſpeake beſt, that doe worſt.
Say you ſo ſir, then weele trie him farther, — Do's your right worſhipfull maiſter, goe before you, as an enſample of Vice, and ſo encourage you to this ſlinking iniquitie? hee is not a Lawer, is he?
Ha's the more wrong ſir, both for his conſcience, and honeſtie, he deſerues to be one.
Pittie hee's theefe yfaith, I ſhould entertaine him elſe.
I, if he were not as he is, hee would be better then himſelfe.
No tis well knowne ſir, I haue a maiſter, the verie picture of wiſdome,
For indeed he ſpeakes not one wiſe worde.
And no man but will admire to heare of his Vertues.
Becauſe he nere had any in all his life.
You write all downe Latronello.
I warrant you ſir.
So ſober, ſo diſcrete, ſo iudicious:
Hum.
And aboue all, of moſt reuerend grauitie.
I like him for one qualitie, hee ſpeakes well of his maiſter, he will fare the better:—Now ſir, let mee touch you,
I ſir.
Why, ſeruing a Gentleman of ſuch worſhip and wiſdome, ſuch ſobrietie and vertue, ſuch diſcretion and iudgement as your maſter is, doe you take ſuch a beaſtly courſe, to ſtop horſes, hinder Gentlewomen from their meetings, and make Citizens neuer ride but a Sundaies, onely to auoyd Morning praier and you: is it becauſe your worſhipfull Ma. feeds you with leane ſpits, paies you with Iriſh mony, or clothes you in northern dozēs?
Farre be it from his mind, or my report, Tis well knowne he kept worſhipful cheer the day of his wiues burial, payes our foure marks a yeare as duly by twelue pence a quarter as can be.
His wiſdome ſwallowes it.
And for Northren dozens, fie, fie, wee were nere troubled with ſo many.
Receiuing then ſuch plenteous bleſſings from your vertuous and bountiful maſter, what cauſe haue you to be theefe now? anſwer me to that geere:
Tis ee'n as a man giues his mind too't ſir.
How ſir?
For alas, if the whole worlde were but of one trade; traffique were nothing: if wee were all truemen, wee ſhould bee of no trade: what a pittifull world would heere bee, heauen forbid we ſhould bee all truemen: then howe ſhould your worſhips next ſuite bee made? not a Tayler left in the lande: of what ſtuffe would you haue it made? not a Merchant left to deliuer it, would your worſhip goe in that ſute ſtill? You would ha more theeues about you then thoſe you haue baniſht, and be glad to call the great ones home agen, to deſtroy the little.
A notable Rogue.
A my troth, a fine knaue, & ha's anſwered me gloriouſly, what wages wilt thou take after thou art hāg'd?
More then your worſhip's able to giue, I would thinke foule ſcorne to be a Iuſtice then.
He ſayes true too yfayth, for we are all full of corruption here,—hearke you my friends.
Sir.
By my troth if you were no crueller then I, I could find in my hart to let him goe.
Could you ſo ſir, the more pittiful Iuſtice you.
Nay I did but to trie you, if you haue no pittie, Ile ha none, away hee's a Theefe, to priſon with him.
I am content ſir.
Are you content, bring him backe, nay then you ſhall not goe.
Ile be as cruel as you can wiſh: y'are content, belike you haue a tricke to breake priſon, or a bribe for the Officers.
For vs ſir?
For you ſir? what colour's ſiluer I pray, you nere ſaw mony in your life:—Ile not truſt you with him, Latronello and Fucato, lay hold vpon him, to your charge I commit him.
Oh, I beſeech you ſir.
Nay if I muſt be cruell, I will be cruell.
Good ſir, let me rather goe to priſon.
You deſire that▪—Ile truſt no priſon with you, Ile make you lye in mine own houſe, or Ile know why I ſhal not.
Mercifull ſir.
Since you haue no pittie I will be cruell.
Verie good ſir, you pleaſe vs well.
You ſhall appeare to morrow ſirs.
Vpon my kees ſir.
You ſhall be hang'd out a'th way, away with him Latronello, and Fucato,—Officers I diſcharge you my houſe, I like not your companie.
Report me as you ſee me, fire and fuell,
If men be Iewes, Iuſtices muſt be cruell.
So ſir, Extreames ſet of all Actions thus,
Eyther too tame, or elſe too tyranous:
He being bent to furie, I doubt now
We ſhall not gaine acceſſe vnto your loue or ſhe to vs.
Moſt wiſhfully here ſhe comes.
Is that ſhee?
This is ſhe my Lord.
A modeſt preſence.
Vertue bleſſe you Ladie,
You wiſh me well ſir.
I'de firſt in charge this kiſſe, and next this paper,
You'le know the language, tis Fidelios.
My euer vowed loue, how is his health?
As faire as is his fauour with the Prince.
I'me ſick with ioy, do's the Prince loue him ſo?
His life cannot requite it,
Not to wrong the remembrance of his loue,
I had a token for you, kept it ſafe,
Till by misfortune of the way this morning,
Theeues ſet vpon this Gentleman and my ſelfe,
And with the reſt robd that.
Oh me, I'me deerly ſorie for your chance, was it your loſſe?
They boldly looke you in the face that rob'd you,
No farther villaines then my vncles men.
What Ladie?
Tis my griefe I ſpeake ſo true.
Why my Lord?
But giue me pawſing Lady: was hee one that tooke the examination?
One and the chiefe.
Hence-forth hang him that is no way a theefe,
Then I hope few will ſuffer,—nay all the ieſt was, hee committed him to the charge of his fellowes, and the rogue made it lamentable, cryed to leaue'em.
None liue ſo wiſe but fooles may once deceiue em?
An vncle ſo inſaciate?
I, Iſt not ſtrange too,
That al ſhould be by Nature vicious, and he bad againſt
Nature?
Then you haue heard the ſum of al my wrongs.
Lady, we haue, and deſire rather now
To heale 'em, then to heare 'em:
For by a letter from Fidelio
Direct to vs, we are entreated ioyntly,
To haſten your remoue▪ from this foule den,
Of theft and purpos'd inceſt:
I reioyce in his chaſt care of mee, Ile ſoone bee furniſht.
He writes that his returne cannot be long.
I'me chiefly glad,—but whither is the place?
To the ſafe ſeate of his late wronged mother.
I deſire it,—
Her conference will fit mine, well you preuaile,
At next groue weele expect you:
Ile not faile.
It ſtands vpon the frame of my reputation I proteſt Ladie.
Ladie, that worde is worth an hundred Angels at all times, for it coſt more: if I liue til tomorrow night, my ſweete pleaſure thou ſhalt haue them.
Could you not make 'em a hundred and fiftie thinke you?
Ile do my beſt endeuour to multiply, I aſſure you.
Could you not make 'em two hundred?
No by my faith.—
Peace, ile rather be confin'd in the hundred & fifty.
Come ee'n much about this time, when Tauerns giue vp their Ghoſts, and Gentlemen are in their firſt caſt.—
Ile obſerue the ſeaſon.
And doe but whirle the Ring a'th doore once about, my maid-ſeruant ſhal be taught to vnderſtand the language.
Inough my ſweet Reuenew.
Good reſt my effectuall pleaſure.
Come hither Phoenix.
What makes your honour breake ſo earely?
A toy, I haue a toy.
A toy my Lord.
Before thou layeſt thy wrath vpon the duke,— be aduiz'd.
I, I, I warran you my Lord.
Nay, giue my words honour, heare me,
Ile ſtriue to bring this Act into ſuch forme,
And credite amongſt men, they ſhall ſuppoſe.
Nay verily beleeue the Prince his ſonne,
To be the plotter of his Fathers murther.
Oh that were infinitely admirable!
Wert not, it pleaſeth me beyond my bliſſe:
Then if his ſonne meet death as he returnes,
Or by my hired Inſtruments turne vp,
The generall voice will crie—O happy vengeance!
O bleſſed vengeance!
I, ile turn my braine
Into a thouſand vſes, Tire my inuentions,
Make my blood ſicke with ſtudie, and mine eye
More hollow then my heart, but I will faſhion,
Nay I will faſhion it,—Canſt counterfet?
The Princes hand, more truly, moſt direct,
You ſhall admire it.
Neceſſarie miſchiefe.
Next to a woman, but more cloſe in ſecrets
Thou'rt all the kinred that my breaſt vouch ſafes,
Looke into me anon,—I muſt frame, and muſe, and
faſhion—
Twas time to looke into thee, in whoſe heart
Treaſon growes ripe, and therefore fit to fall,
That ſlaue firſt ſinkes, whoſe enuie threatens all,
Now is his Venom at full height.
Lying, or being in the ſaid Countie in the Tenor and occupation aforeſaide.
No more then, a writ of courſe vpon the matter of—
Silence.
Oh o-o-o-yes Carlo Turbulenzo, appeare or looſe twentie marke in the ſuites.
Ha? whether haue my thoughts conueyed me? I am now within the Dizzie murmur of the law.
So that then, the cauſe being found cleere, vpon the laſt Scitation.
Carlo turbulenzo, Come into the Court.
Now, now, now, now, now, vpon my knees I praiſe Mercury the God of law, I haue two ſuits at iſſue, two ſuites at iſſue.
Doe you heare ſir?
I wil not heare, i'ue other buſines.
I beſeech you my learned Counſell.
Beſeech not me, beſeech not me, I am a mortall man, a Clyent as you are, beſeech not me.
I would doe all by your worſhips direction.
Then hang thy ſelfe.
Shall I take out a ſpeciall ſupplycauit.
Mad me not, torment me not, teare me not, youle giue me leaue to heare mine own cauſe, mine owne cauſe
Nay moreouer, and farder—
Well ſaid my Lawyer, well ſaide, well ſaide.
All the opprobious ſpeeches that man could inuent all malicious inuectiues, called Wittoll to his face.
Thats I, thats I, thank you my learned counſell for your good remembrance: I hope I ſhall ouerthrowe him horſe and foote.
Nay but good ſir.
No more ſir, he that brings me happy newes firſt ile releeue firſt.
Sound executions rot thy cauſe and thee.
I, I, I, pray ſo ſtill, pray ſo ſtill, theile thriue the better
I wonder how this fellow keepes out madnes?
What ſtuffe his braines are made on?
I ſuffer, I ſuffer,—till I here a iudgement.
What old Signior?
Prethee I will not knowe thee nowe, tis a buſie time, a buſie time with me.
What not me Signeur?
Oh crie thee mercie, giue me thy hande,—fare thee well,—ha's no reliefe agen mee then,—his demurs will not help him, his Surſararaes wil but play the knaues with him.
The Iuſtice: tis hee
Haue I found thee yfaith? I thought where I ſhould ſmell thee out old Tangle.
What old Signeur Iuſticer,—embrace me another time and you can poſſible: how do's all thy wiues children,—well? that's well ſaid yfayth.
Heare me olde Tangle.
Prethee doe not rauiſh me, let me goe.
I muſt vſe ſome of thy counſaile firſt.
Sirrah, I ha brought him to an Exigent▪ hark that's my cauſe, thats my cauſe yōder, I twind'g him, I twind'g him.
My Neece is ſtolne away.
Ah, get mee a ne exeat Regno quickly, nay you muſt not ſtay vppo'nt, ide faine haue you gone.
A ne exeat Regno, ile about it preſently,—adue.
You ſeeke to catch her Iuſtice, ſheele catch you.
A iudgement, a iudgement.
What, what, what?
Ouerthrowne, ouerthrowne, ouerthrowne.
Ha, a, a.
Newes, newes, newes.
The diuell, the diuell, the diuell.
Twice Tangle's ouerthrowne, twice Tangles ouerthrowne.
Holde:
Now olde cheater of the Law,
Pray giue me leaue to bee madde.
Thou that haſt found ſuch ſweete pleaſure in the vexation of others.
May I not be mad in quiet?
Very Marrow, very manna to thee to be in law.
Very ſirrop of Toades, and perſeru'd Adders.
Thou that haſt vext, and beggerd the whole
Parriſh, and made the honeſt Church wardens goe to
Lawe with the poores money.
Heare me, doe but heare me, I pronounce a terrible, horrible curſſe vpon you al—and wiſh you to my Atturney: ſee where a Praemunire comes a Dedimus poteſtatem, and that moſte Dreadful Execution, Excommunicato Capiendo, there's no baile to be taken, I ſhal rot in fifteene Iayles: make Dice of my bones, and let my Counſellors Sonne play away his Fathers money with e'm; may my bones reuenge my quarrell!— A Capias Cominus? heere, heere, heere, heere: quicklye dip your Quilles in my blood, off with my skin and write fourteen lines of a ſide—there's an honeſt conſcionable fellowe, he takes but ten ſhillinges of a Bellowes-mender—heere's another deales all with charitie, you ſhall giue him nothing, onely his wife an embrodered Pettycoate, a golde frindge for her taile, or a border for her head, ah ſirrha! you ſhall catch mee no more in the ſprindge of your Knaueries.
Follow, follow him ſtill, a little thing now ſets him forward.
None can except againſt him, the mans mad,
And priuiledgd by the Moone, if he ſay true:
Leſſe madnes tis to ſpeake ſinne, then to doe.
This wretch that lou'd before, his foode, his ſtrife,
This puniſhment falles euen with his life.
His pleaſure was vexation, all his bliſſe
The torment of another.
Their heart, his health: their ſtarued hopes his ſtore,
Who ſo loues Law, dies either mad or poore.
A miracle, a miracle!
How now Fidelio?
My Lord a miracle!
What iſt?
I haue found
One quiet, ſuffering, and vnlawyer'd man.
An oppoſite, a very Contrarie
To the olde turbulent fellowe.
Why hee's mad.
Mad, why he is in his right wits, could he be madder then he was, if he be any way altered from what hee was, tis for the better, my Lord.
Well, but where's this wonder?
Tis comming my Lord: A man ſo truely a man, ſo indifferently a creature, vſing the world in his right nature but to tread vppon, one that would not bruſe, the cowardly eſt enemy to man, the worme, that dares not ſhow his malice till we are dead: nay my Lord, you will admire his temper! ſee where he comes, I promiſd your acquaintance, ſir
Yon is the Gentleman I did commend for Temper.
Let me embrace you ſimply.
That's perfectly, and more in heart then hand:
Let affectation keepe at Court.
I, let it.
Tis told me you loue quiet
Aboue wealth.
I aboue life: I haue been wilde and raſh
Committed many and vnnaturall crimes,
Which I haue ſince repented.
Twa's well ſpent.
I was mad, ſtarke mad, nine yeares together.
I pray! as how?
Going to law, yfaith it made me mad.
With the like frenzie not an houre ſince
An aged man was ſtrucke.
Alaſſe I pittie him.
Hee's not worth pittying, for twa's ſtil his gladnes to be at variance.
Yet a mans worth pittie,
My quiet blood ha's bleſt me with this guift,
I haue cur'd ſome, and if his wits be not
Too deepely cut, I will aſſay to helpe e'm.
Sufferance does teach you pittie.
O Maiſter, Maiſter, your abhominable next neighbor came into the houſe, being halfe in drink, and tooke away your beſt Carpet.
Has hee it?
Alaſſe ſir:
Let him goe, trouble him not, lock the doore quietly after him, and haue a ſafer care who comes in next.
But ſir, might I aduize you, in ſuch a cauſe as this, a man might bouldlye, nay▪ with conſcience goe to Law.
Oh, ile giue him the table too firſt. Better indure a fiſt then a ſharpe ſword: I had rather they ſhould pull off my cloathes then flea of my skin, and hang that on mine enemies hedge.
Why, for ſuch good cauſes was the law ordaind:
True, and in it ſelfe tis glorious and deuine,
Law is the verie Maiſter peece of heauen:
But ſee yonder.
Ther's many Clowdes betweene the ſunne and vs,
There's too much cloath before we ſee the Law:
I'me content with that anſwere, be milde ſtill,
Tis honour to forgiue thoſe you could kill.
There doe I keepe.
Reach me your hand, I loue you,
And you ſhall knowe me better.
Tis my ſute.
The night growes deepe—and—
Come away, this way, this way.
Who be thoſe? ſtand cloſe a little.
Oh, y'are come as well as ere you came in your life, my Maiſter's new gone to bed, giue me your Knightly hand, I muſt leade you into the blind Parlor, my miſtris will be downe to you preſentlye.
I tell you our ſafeſt courſe will bee to arreſt him when hee comes out a'th Tauerne: for then he will bee halfe drunke, and will not ſtand vppon his weapon.
Our ſafeſt courſe indeede, for hee will drawe.
That he will, though he put it vp agen, which is more of his courteſie, then of our deſeruing.
The world is nothing but vexation,
Spite and vncharitable Action.
Did you ſee the Gentleman?
Not I.
Where ſhould he be, it may be hee's paſt by,
Good ſir, lets ouertake him.
Here ſir, now you are there ſir, ſheele come downe to you inſtantlye, I muſt not ſtay with you, my Miſtris would be iealous, you muſt doe nothing to me, my miſtris would finde it quickly.
S'foot whether am I led? brought in byth hand? I hope it can bee no harme to ſtay for a woman, tho indeede they were neuer more dangerous, I haue ventured heatherto and ſafe, and I muſt venture to ſtay now, this ſhould be a faire Rome, but I ſee it not, the blinde Parlor cal's ſhee it?
Where art thou, O my Knight!
Your Knight, I am the Dukes knight.
I ſay you'r my knight, for I'me ſure I paid for you
Paid for you hum,—S'foot a light.—
Now out vpon the Marmoſet, haſt thou ſeru'd me ſo long, and offer to bring in a Candle?
Faire Roome, villanous face, and worſe woman, I ha learnt ſomething by a glimpſe ath Candle:
How hapned it you came ſo ſoone, I lookt not for you theſe two howers: yet as the ſweete chance is, you came as well as a thing coulde come, for my huſ: band's newly brought a bed.
And what ha's Ioue ſent him?
Hee nere ſent him any thing ſince I knewe him, hee's a man of a bad nature to his wife, none but his Maides can thriue vnder him.
Out vpon him.
I, iudge whether I haue a cauſe to be a Curtezan or no? to doe as I doe, an elderly fellow as hee is, if hee were marryed to a young Virgin, hee were able to breake her heart, tho he could breake nothing elſe: here, here, there's iuſt a hundred and fiftie, but I ſtole e'm ſo hardlye from him, twold ee'ne haue grieud you to haue ſeene it.
So twould yfaith.
Therefore prethee my ſweete pleaſure, doe not keepe company ſo much, how doe you thinke I am able to maintaine you? though I bee a Iewellers wife, Iewells are like women, they riſe & fal, we muſt be content to looſe ſometimes, to gaine often, but you'r content alwaies to looſe, and neuer to gaine: what need you ride with a Footeman before you?
Oh thats the grace,
The grace? tis ſufficient grace that y'aue a Horſe to ride vpon, you ſhould thinke thus with your ſelfe euery time you goe to bed if my head were laide, what would become of that horſe? he would runne a bad race then as well as his Maiſter.
Nay, and you giue me money to chide me:—
No, if it were as much more, I would thinke it foule ſcorne to chide you, I aduiſe you to be thrifty, to take the time now, while you haue it, you ſhall ſildome get ſuch an other foole as I am, I warrant you: why there's Mettrezza Auriola keepes her loue with halfe the coſt that I am at, her friend can goe a foote like a good Husband, walke in woſted Stockings, and enquire for the Six-penny ordinarie.
Pox on't, and would you haue me ſo baſe?
No, I would not haue you ſo baſe neither: but now and then, when you keep your Chamber, you might let your Footeman out for eighteen pence a day, a great releefe at yeares end I can tell you.
The age muſt needs be foule when vice reformes it.
Nay, I'ue a greater quarrell to you yet.
Yfaith, what iſt?
You made me beleeue at firſt the Prince had you in great eſtimation, and would not offer to Trauaile without you, nay, that he could not trauaile without your Direction and intelligence.
I'me ſorrie I ſaide ſo yfaith, but ſure I was ouerflowen when I ſpoke it, I could nere ha ſaide it elſe.
Nay more, you ſwore to me, that you were the firſt that taught him to ride a greate horſe, and tread the Ring with agilitie.
By my troth I muſt needes confeſſe I ſwore a great lye in that, & I was a villain to doe it, for I could nere ride greate horſe in my life.
Why loe, who would loue you now but a Cittizens wife? so inconſtant, ſo for ſworne: you ſay women are falſe Creatures, but take away men, and thei'd bee honeſter then you—Nay laſt of all, which offends me moſte of all, you tolde me you covld countenance me at Court, and you knowe wee eſteeme a friend there, more worth then a Husband heere.
What I ſpake of that. Lady, ile maintaine.
You maintaine? you ſeene it court?
Why by this Diamond—
Oh take heede, you cannot haue that, tis alwaies in the eye of my huſband.
I proteſt I will not keepe it, but onely vſe it for th is vertue, as a token to fetch you,& approue my power, where you ſhall not onely ye bee receiued, but made knowne to the beſt and chiefeſt.
Oh are you true?
Let me looſe my Reuenewe elſe.
That's your word indeede, and vppon that condition take it this kiſſe and my loue for euer.
Ynough.
Giue me thy hand, ile leade thee foorth.
I'me ſicke of al profeſſions, my thoughts burne:
He trauailes beſt, that knowes when to returne.
Adue, farwell, to bed you, I to my ſweete Cittybird, my precious Reuennew, the verie thought of a hundred & fiftie Angels, encreaſes Oyle and Spirit, ho:
I arreſt you ſir.
Oh!
You haue made vs wayte a goodly time for you, haue you not thinke you? you are in your Rowſes & Mulwines a poxe on you: and haue no care of poore Officers ſtaying for you.
I drunk but one health I proteſt, but I could void it now: at whoſe ſute I pra'y?
At the ſute of him that makes ſuits, your Taylor,
Why, he made me the laſt, this, this that I weare
Argo, nay, we haue bene Schollars I can tell you, wee could not haue beene knaues ſo ſoone elſe, for as in that notable Cittie cald London, ſtand two moſt famous Vniuerſities, Poultrie and Woodſtreet, where ſome are of twentie yeares ſtanding, and haue tooke all their degrees from the Maiſters ſide, downe to the Miſtris ſide, the Hole, ſo in like manner—
Come, come, come, I had quite forgot the hundred and fiftie Angells.
S'lid where be they?
Ile bring you to the ſight of e'm preſently.
A notable Lad, and worthy to be arreſted: weele haue but ten for wayting, and then thou ſhalt chuſe whether thou wilt runne away from vs, or wee from thee.
A match at running, come, come, followe me.
Nay, feare not that.
Peace, you may happen to ſee toyes, but doe not ſee e'm.
Pah.
Thats the Doore.
This?—knockes.
S foote Officer you haue ſpoilde all already?
Why?
Why? you ſhall ſee, you ſhould haue but whirld the ring once about, and there's a Maid ſeruant brought vp to vnderſtand it.
Whoſe at doore?
Als well againe: phiſt, tis I, tis I.
You, what are you?
Puh, where's thy miſtris?
What of her?
Tell her One, ſhe knowes who, her Pleaſure's heere, ſay.
Her Pleaſure? my miſtris ſcornes to be without her pleaſure at this time of night: is ſhee ſo voide of friendes thinke you? take that for thinking ſo: a Boxe
The hundred and fifty Angells are lockt vp in a Boxe, we ſhall not ſee e'm tonight.
Howe's this? am I vſde like a hundred pound Gentleman? Do's my Reuennew forſake me? Dam me if euer I bee her pleaſure agen.— Well I muſt to priſon.
Goe prepare his roome, there's no remedie, ile bring him along, hee's tame enough now.
Dare my Tailor preſume to vſe me in this ſort?
He ſteales and I muſt lie in priſon for't.
Come, come away ſir.
Art ſure thou ſaweſt him areſted Drawer?
If mine eyes be ſober.
And that's a queſtion, Maſſe here he goes, hee ſhall not goe to priſon, I haue a tricke ſhall baile him— away.
Oh!
Geſſe, geſſe, who am I? who am I?
Who the Diuell are you? let goe, — a Poxe on you, who are you? I haue loſt my priſoner.
Priſoner: I'ue miſtooke, I crie you heartily mercie, I haue done you infinite iniurie, a my troth I tooke you to be an honeſt man.
Where were your eyes? could you not ſee I was an Officer, ſtop, ſtop, ſtop, ſtop.
Hah, hah, hah, ha.
Now Phoenix.
Now my Lord.
Let princely blood
Nouriſh our hopes, we being confuſion now.
A terrible ſuddaine blow.
I:what day is this hangs ouer vs?
Bith Maſſe Monday.
As I could wiſh my purpoſe will thriue beſt.
Twa's firſt my birthday, now my fortunes daie,
I ſee whome fate will raiſe needes neuer pray.
Neuer.
How is the ayre?
Oh full of trouble.
Do's not the skie looke pittiouſly blacke
As if twere hung with Rich mens Conſciences.
Ah, Stucke not a Comet like a Carbuckle
Vpon the dreadfull browe of Twelue laſt night?
Twelue, no twa's about one.
About one moſt proper, for thats the Duke.
Well ſhifted from thy ſelfe.
I could haue wiſht it betweene one and two
His ſonne and him.
Ile giue you comfort then.
Prethee.
There was a villanous Rauen ſeene laſt night,
Ouer the preſence chamber in hard Iuſtle
With a yong Eglet.
A Rauen! that was I, what did the Rauen?
Mary my Lord the Rauen—to ſay truth,
I left the combat doubtfull.
So tis ſtill,
For all is doubt, till the deed crowne the will,
Now bleſſe thy loynes with Freedome, wealth and honour,
Think all thy ſeede young Lords, and by this Acte.
Make a foote-cloathd poſteritie: now imagine
Thou ſeeſt thy Daughters with their traines borne vp,
Whome elſe deſpiſed want, may curſſe to whoredome,
And publike ſhames, which our ſtate neuer threate,
Shee's neuer lew'd, that is accounted great.
Ile alter that Court-Axiom▪ thus renewd,
Shee's neuer great, that is accounted lewde.
Stand cloſe, the preſence fils, heere, heere the place
And at his rizing, let his fall be baſe,
Beneath thy foote.
How for his Guard my Lord?
My golde and feare keepes with the chiefe of them
That's rarely well.
Bould heedleſſe ſlaue, that dares attempt a deede which ſhall in peeces rend him my Lords both.
The happineſſe of the day.
Time my returning,
Treaſons haue ſtill the worſt, yet ſtill are ſpurning.
The Duke!
I nere was gladder to beholde him.
All. Long liue your Grace.
I do not like that ſtraine,
You know my age affoords not to liue long.
Spoke truer then you thinke for.
Beſtow that wiſh vpon the Prince our Sonne.
Nay, hee's not to liue long neither.
Him as the wealthie Treaſure of our hopes,
You as poſeſſion of our preſent Comfort,
Both in one heart, we reuerence in one.
Oh Treaſon of a good cōplexion.
How now, what freſher newes fils the Courts eare?
Fidelio!
Glad Tydings to your Grace,
The prince is ſafe return'd, and in your Court.
Our ioy breakes at our eyes, the Prince is come!
Soule qucking newes—pale vengeance to my blood.
By me preſenting to your ſerious view,
A briefe of all his Trauailes.
Tis moſt welcome.
It ſhall be Deere and pretious to our Eye.
Hee Reades, i'me glad her reades.
Now take thyopportunitie, leaue that place.
At hys firſt riſing let his fall be baſe.
That muſt be altered now.
Which? his riſing or his fall?
Art thou dull now?
Thou hear'ſt the Prince is come.
What's heere my Lord?
My Lord?
I have got ſuch a large portion of knowledge, moſt worthy father, by the benefit of my Trauaile,
And ſo he has no doubt my Lord.
That I am bolde now to warne you of Lord
Proditors inſolent Treaſon, who has irreligiouſlye ſeduc'd a fellow, and cloſely conuaide him ee'n in the preſence-chaire to murder you:
Oh guiltie, guiltie.
What was that fell? whats hee?
I am the man.
O ſlaue!
I haue no power to ſtrike,
I'me gone, i'me gone.
Let me admire heauen's wiſdome in my Sonne.
I confeſſe it, he hyred me—
This is ſlaue,
Tis forg'd againſt mine honour and my life,
For in what part of reaſon can't appeare,
The Prince being Trauaild ſhould know Treaſons heere
Plaine counterfet—
Dooſt thou make falſe our Sonne?
I know the prince will not affirme it.
He can and will my Lord.
Moſt iuſt, he may:
A guard.
We cannot but in loyall zeale our ſelues,
Lay hands on ſuch a Villaine.—
Stay you, I finde you heere too.
Vs my Lord?
Againſt Luſſurioſo and Infeſto, who not onelye moſte ryotouſlye conſume their houſes in vicious gaming, morgaging their liuings to the Merchant, wherby he with his heires enter vppon their lands, from whence this abuſe comes, that in ſhort time the Sonne of the Marchant has more Lordſhips then the Sonne of the Nobleman(which elſe was neuer borne to inheritance) but that which is more impious, they moſt adulterouſly traine out young Ladyes to Mid-night banquets, to the vtter defamation of their owne honors, & ridiculous abuſe of their Husbands.
How could the Prince heare that?
Moſt true my Lord.
My Conſcience is a witneſſe gainſt it ſelfe,
For to that execution of chaſt honour,
I was both hyr'd and led.
I hope the Prince out of his plentious wiſdome
Will not giue wrong to vs: as for this fellowe
Hee's poore, and cares not to be deſperate.
Iuſtice my Lord, I haue my Neece ſtolne from me
Sh'as left her Dowrie with me, but ſhee's gone,
Ide rather haue had her loue then her money I,
This, this, is one of them, Iuſtice my Lord:
I know him by his face, this is the Theefe.
Your grace may now in milder ſence perceiue
The wrong done to vs by this impudent wretch,
Who ha's his hand fixt at the throate of lawe,
And therefore durſt be deſperate of his life,
Peace, you'r too foule, your crime is in exceſſe:
One ſpot of him, makes not your Vlcers leſſe.
Oh!
Did your Violence force away his Neece?
No my good Lord; ileſtil confeſſe whats truth.
I did remoue her from her many wrongs,
Which ſhee was pleaſd to leaue, they were ſo vilde.
What are you nam'd?
Falſo my Lord, Iuſtice Falſo, i'me knowne by that name.
Falſo, you came fitly,
You are the verie next that followes here.
I hope ſo my Lord, my name is in all the Records
I can aſſure your good grace.
Againſt Iuſtice Falſo.
Ah.
Who hauing had the honeſt charge of his Neece committed to his truſt, by the laſt will and Teſtament of her deceaſed father, and with her all the power of his wealth, not onely againſt faith and conſcience detaines her Dowrie, but againſt Nature and humanity aſſaies to abuſe her body.
I'me preſent to affirme it my lou'd Lord.
How? what make I heere?
Eyther I muſt agree.
To loathed luſt, or deſpiſde beggery.
Are you the plaintiue here?
I my good Lord,
For fault of a better.
Sildome comes a worſe—and moreouer not containde in this vice onelye, which is odious to much, but againſt the ſacred vſe of Iuſtice, maintaines three threeues to his men.
Cuds me!
Who onely take Purſſes in their Maiſters libertie, where if any one chance to be taken, he appeares before him in a falſe Beard, and owne of his owne fellows takes his examination.
By my troth as true as can be, but hee ſhall not knowe on't.
And in the end will execute Iuſtice ſo cruellye vpon him, that hee will not truſt him in a priſon, but commit him to his fellowes chamber.
Can a man doe nothing i'the Countrey but tis told at Court? there's ſome buſie informing knaue abroad, a my life.
That this is true, and theſe, and more my Lord.
(Be it vnder pardon ſpoken for mine owne)
Hee the diſeaſe of Iuſtice, theſe of honour,
And This of Loyaltie and Reuerence:
The vnſwept venome of the Pallace,
Slaue!
Behold the Prince to approoue it.
Oh, where?
Your Eyes keep with your Actions, both looke wrong.
An infernall to my ſpirit.
My Lord the Prince:
Tread me to duſt, thou in whō wonder keepes,
Behold the Serpent on his bellie creepes.
Ranckle not my foote, away.
Treaſon, we laugh at thy vain-labouring ſtrings,
Aboue the foote thou haſt no power ore Kings
I cannot with ſufficient ioy receiue thee,
And yet my ioye's too much,
My royall Father,
To whoſe vnnaturall murther I was hir'd,
I thought it a more naturall courſe of trauaile,
And anſwering future expectation,
To leaue farre Countryes, and enquire mine owne,
To thee let Reuerence all her powers engage,
That art in youth a myracle to age.
State is but blindneſſ, ethou hadſt piercing Art,
We onely ſaw the knee; but thou the heart.
To thee then power and Dukedome we reſigne,
▪Hee's fit to raign, whoſe knowledge can refine:
Forbid it my obedience.
Our word's not vaine,
I know thee wiſe can'ſt both obey and raigne,
The reſt of life we dedicate to heauen.
A happy and ſafe raigne to our new Duke.
Without your praiers ſafer, & happier: Fidelio.
My royall Lord.
Here take this Diamond:
You know the vertue on't, it can fetch vice:
Madam Caſtiza:
She attends my Lord.
Place a guard neare vs.
Know you you fellow Ladie?
My honours euill.
Torment agen?
So vgly are thy crimes,
Thine eye cannot endure 'em.
And that thy face may ſtand perpetually
Turn'd ſo from ours, and thy abhorred ſelfe,
Neither to threaten wracke of ſtate or credite,
An euerlaſting baniſhment ceaze on thee.
Oh Fiend!
Thy life is ſuch it is too bad to end.
May thy Rule, life, and all that's in thee glad,
Haue as ſhort time—as thy begetting had.
Away, thy curſe is idle, the reſt are vnder reformation, and therefore vnder pardon.
Our duties ſhall turne edge vpon our crimes.
S'lid I was afraid of nothing, but that for my theeuerie, and bawderie I ſhould haue beene turnd to an Inkeeper: my daughter, I am aſham'd her worſhip ſhould ſee mee.
Who would not loue a friend at Court? what fine Galleries and roomes am I brought through? I had thoght my knight durſt not haue ſhown his face here, I.
Now mother of pride, and daughter of luſt, which is your friend now?
Ah me!
I'me ſure you are not ſo vnprouided to be without a friend here, you'le pay enough for him firſt.
This is the worſt roome that euer I came in.
I am your ſeruant Miſtris, know you not me!
Your worſhip is to great for me to know: I'me but a ſmall timbred-woman when I'me out of my apparell, and dare not venture vpon greatnes.
Doe you denie me then? know you this purſe?
That purſe? O death has the Knight ſeru'd me ſo? giuen away my Fauours?
Stand forth—thou one of thoſe, for whoſe cloſe luſts the plague neuer leaues the Citie.
Thou worſe then common: priuate, ſubtill harlot,
That doſt deceiue Three with one faigned lip,
Thy husband, the worlds eye, and the lawes whip.
Thy zeale is hot, for tis to luſt and frawde,
And doſt not dread to make thy booke thy Bawde,
Thou'rt curſſe enough to husbands il-got gaines,
For whom the Court reiects, his gold maintaines:
How deere and rare was Freedome wont to be,
Now few but are by their wiues copies free,
And brought to ſuch a head that now we ſee,
Citie and Suburbs weare one liuerie.
Tis long of thoſe, an't like your grace, that come in vpon vs, & wil neuer leaue marrying of our widdows till they make 'em all as free as their firſt husbands.
I perceiue you can ſhift a point well.
Let me haue pardon I beſeech your grace, and Ile peach 'em all, all the cloſe women that are, and vpon my knowledge there's aboue fiue thouſand within the walls and the liberties.
A band▪ they ſhall be ſent againſt the Turke, Infidels againſt Infidels.
I will hereafter liue ſo modeſtly, I will not lie with mine owne husband, nor come neere a man in the way of honeſtie.
Ile be her warrant my Lord.
You are deceiu'd, you thinke y' are ſtil a Iuſtice.
S'foot, worſe then I was before I kneeld, I am no Iuſtice now, I know I ſhall be ſome Inne-keeper at laſt.
My father! tis mine owne father.
I ſhould haue wondred elſe, luſt being ſo like.
Her birth was kin to mine, ſhe may proue modeſt, for my ſake I beſeech you pardon her.
For thy ſake Ile doe more, Fidelio hand her,
My fauours on you both, next all that wealth
Which was committed to that Periur'ds truſt.
I'me a begger now, worſe then an Inne-keeper.
Your Mittimus ſhall not ſerue, Ile ſet my ſelfe free with a Deliberandum, with a Deliberandum, marke you:
What's he? a guard!
Vnder your ſufferance, worthy Father,
His harme is to himſelfe,
One that ha's lou'd vexation ſo much,
He cannot now be rid on't,
Has beene ſo long in ſuits that hee's Law-mad.
A iudgement, I craue a iudgement, yea! Nunc pro tunc, Corruptione alicuius, I peept me a Rauen in the face, and I thought it had beene my Soliſter: oh the pens pricke me.
And here comes he (wonder for temperance:)
Will take the cure vpon him.
A bleſſing to this faire aſſembly.
Awa, yile haue none ont, giue me an Audita querela, or a Teſtificandum, or a diſpatch in twelue Tearms, there's a bleſſing, there's a bleſſing.
You ſee the vnbounded rage of his diſeaſe,
Tis the foule fiend my Lord ha's got within him the reſt are faire to this, this breeds in Inke,
And to that colour turnes the blood poſſeſt,
For inſtance, now your grace ſhall ſee him dreſt.
Ah hah I reioice then hee's puzled▪ & muzled too Iſt come to a Soepe corpus?
Ah, good ſir, this is for want of patience.
That's a foole.
She neuer ſaw the Dogs and the Beares fight,
A Countrey thing.
This is for lacke of grace,
I'ue other buſineſſe, not ſo much idle time.
You neuer ſay your prayers.
I'me, aduizde by my learned counſel,
The power of my charme come o're thee,
Place by degrees thy wits before thee,
With ſilk en patience here I binde thee,
Not to moue till I vnwinde thee.
Yea! is my cauſe ſo muddy? do I ſticke, do I ſticke (faſt?
Aduocate heer's my hand, pull, art made of flint?
Wilt not helpe out?—alas there's nothing in't.
Oh doe you ſluce the Veyne now?
Yes my honoured Lord.
Pray let me ſee the iſſue.
I therefore ſeeke to keepe it,—now burſt out
Thou filthy ſtreame of trouble, ſpite and doubt.
Oh an extent, a Proclamation, a Summons, a Recogniſance, a Tachment. and Iniunction, a Writ, a Seyſure, a Writ of praeiſement, an Abſolution, a Quietus eſt.
You'r quieter I hope by ſo much Dreggs.
Beholde my Lord:
This, why it out frownes Inke:
Tis the diſeaſes Nature, the Fiends drinke.
Oh ſicke, ſick, Signior Ply-fee, ſicke: lend me thy Nightcap, oh!
The Balſum of a temperate braine,
I poure into this thirſtie veine,
And with this bleſſed oyle of quiet,
Which is ſo cheape, that few men buy it,
Thy ſtormie Temples I allay,
Thou ſhalt giue vp the Diuell and pray,
Forſake his works, the'yre foule and black,
And keepe thee bare in purſſe and backe.
No more ſhalt thou in paper quarrell,
To dreſſe vp Apes in good apparell.
He throwes his ſtocke, and all his flocke,
Into a ſwallowing gulfe,
That ſendes his Gooſe vnto his Foxe,
His Lambe vnto his Wolfe.
Keepe thy encreaſe,
And liue at peace,
For war's not equall to this battaile,
That eates but men this men and cattaile,
Therefore no more this combate chooſe:
Where he that wins, do's alwayes looſe,
And thoſe that gaine all, with this curſſe receiue it,
From fooles they get it, to their ſonnes they leaue it.
Haile ſacred patience, I begin to feele
I haue a Conſcience now, Truth in my words, Compaſſion in my hart, & aboue al, in my blood peaces muſick,
Vſe me how you can,
You ſhall find me an honeſt-quiet man.
Oh, pardon, that I dare behold that face,
"Now I'ue leaſt law, I hope haue moſt grace,
We both admire the work-man and his peece:
Thus when all hearts are tunde to Honors ſtrings,
There is no muſicke to the Quire of Kings.
THe markes and notions extant in each ſpirit,
Seald by th'induſtrious hand of art & merit,
Me thinkes appeare tranſparant (as the minde
By fence were bounded and might ſeeme confind
In th' externall eye) nor ſhall our tragicke muſe,
(If ſtrong hope faile not) need a coynd excuſe
But to thoſe marginall noates of yours do bring
(In following nombers from the learned ſpring)
Matter inſtructiue to inrich their parts
Where knowledge raignes crownd with it own deſarts,
Let ſuch with ſerious and impartiall hearing
Sound ſence, quicke ſight and iudgement neuer erring:
Suruay and cenſure the mineruall frame
Of his elaborate worke: and if his name
Merrit regard, and you vouchſafe to grace him
With eminent loue, or mongſtthoſe lawreats place him,
That with the magicke of ſweet poeſie,
Tranſfer Pernaſſus into Brittany,
He ſhall digeſt the Chaos of his braine,
To tunefull order and acquire a ſtraine,
Neere to the muſicke of the heauenly ſpheres,
To fit Times guard and rauiſh choyſeſt eares.
FAme and Opinion like the two vvingd cap
On Hermes head, do lift all Poets vp:
Some, though deſeruing, yet aboue the Sphere
Of true impartiall cenſure, vvhoſe tun'd eare
Liſtens to all and can vvith iudgement ſay,
Others ſing vvell, though Thracian Orpheus play.
Our Muſe affects no excellence: if Fame tell
And through her ſhrill trompe at the Muſes well
(Where the thrice trebled bench of learning ſits
In ſtrict examination of others wits)
Sound ours, thogh humbly ſtraines, whoſe infant growth
Nor dares, nor will, with times hugd darlings quarrell,
Nor ſtand the lightning with the ſacred Lawrell)
We reſt content: yet thus farre may conceipt
Carry each labouring Artiſt, where the weight
Of his oyld taske is ouer, that his tongue
May like a father of his tender young
Speak natures language and not be withſtood,
When with our Muſe he ſaith, that This is good.