GRacious spectators doe not heere expect,
Visions of pleasure, amorous discourse:
Our subiect is of bloud and Tragedie,
Murther, foule Incest, and Hypocrisie.
Behold the Strumpet of proud Babylon,
Her Cup with fornication foaming full
Of Gods high wrath and vengeance for that euill,
Which was imposd vpon her by the Diuill.
SEnt from the Christall Palace of true Fame,
And bright Starre-Chamber of eternall soules,
Seuerd from Angels fellowship awhile,
To dwell with mortall bodies here on earth:
I Francis Guicciardine a Florentine,
Am by the powerfull and commanding Muse,
(Which beareth domination in our soules)
Sent downe to let you see the Tragedie,
Of Roderigo Borgia lately Pope,
Calld the sixt Alexander, with his sonne
Proud Caesar: to present vnto your eyes,
Their faithlesse, fearelesse, and ambitious liues:
And first by what vngodly meanes and Art,
Hee did attaine the Triple-Diadem,
This vision offerd to your eyes declares.
Thus first with golden bribes he did corrupt
The purple conclaue: then by diuelish art
Sathan transfigur'd like a Pronotarie
To him makes offer of the triple Crowne
For certaine yeares agreed betwixt them two.
The life of action shall expresse the rest.
Renouned Lodowik our warlike Couzen,
Auspiciously encountred on the skirtes
Of Piemont, we greete you ioyfully.
Thrise and foreuer most renowned Charles,
A aithfull tongue from an vnfained heart
As a iust herrold full of uth and honor
On the behalfe of forlorne talie
Needing and crauing a your Princely hands,
The patronage and true protection
Of such a Potent and victorious King
Humbly salutes your royall Maiesty.
The shippe of which some-time well guided state,
Is through tempestious times malignity
By worthlesse Pilots, foolish Gouerners
Mutually factious, like to sinck through Schisme
Into the bottome of the blacke abisme
Through th'imposition of necssity.
Do not! oh do not then (most Christian Charles)
Do not forsake hir holding vp hir hands
For succor to your royall Clemency:
Hir sayles are rent, mastes spent and rudder brooke
And vnder water such wide open leakes
As vnder water soone will make her sinke.
Hauing beene bilg'd vpon so many shelues,
So torne, so rotten and so long vnrig'd,
And playing with the waues to and againe
As one not gouerned with helpe of hee.
One then whome nature in his vowes to God▪
Hath tied to tender her forlone estate
With eyes fore-seeing and compassionate▪
Retenders her to your high Maiestie,
A Christian Prince so wise so valiant:
Vndoubted heire vnto the Crowne of Naples,
By lawfull right of that greate house of Aniou:
Of which your grace is well knowne lawfull heire,
By th'issues of that Charles the first, that first
Of the bloud royall of the Crowne of France,
Obtain'd that Kingdome ages manie past.
These reasons weare with Lodowik Sforza mou'd,
To moue your Maiesty with martiall force
To passe these mountaines to possesse your owne.
March then most Christian and renowned Prince,
Aduance thy lilly standard potent King:
And since all skandalls are remou'd and cleer'd,
Strike vp your cheerfull drummes and march along
In Gods name; with good auspices of Saint Denys,
I know you doubt not mine integrity:
Can more grosse error rest in pollicy.
Then first to raise a turbulent sharpe storme,
And vnaduisedly to leaue defence
To doubtfull chance and possibilities.
To broach strong poyson is too dangerous,
And not be certeine of the present vertue
Which is contained in his Antidot.
Wilde fire permitted without limmit burnes,
Euen to consume them that first kindled it:
I did aduise you, I inducted you,
And Lodowike, which brought you on with honor,
Will bring you of with triumph and renowne.
Embrace me Couzen Sforza: by the soules
Of my forefathers I reioyce as much
In thy deare friendship and wise industrie,
As in the more parteof my patrimonie:
Courage togither let vs share all one,
In life, in death, in purchase or in none.
are fornmate for Daubigny,
how that the Coloneses,
(Although Alfonso did accord with them,)
Declared haue them-selues for France and vs,
Without dissembling or hypocrisie.
Why this was it I did expect great Charles,
Our armies and our friends haue beene long sowne,
The ground well plowed, the blade is full come vp,
And doubt not we shall haue a ioyfull haruest.
Coosen Montpansier
March with your regiments to Pontremolt.
Expect vs, or from vs directions,
To meete our forces, when wee come neere Florence,
There shall you finde the Swisse with their Artillerie,
Newly by sea brought vnto Spetia,
Come Coosen march we cheerefully together,
Faire is the way, faire fortune, and faire wether,
Nay such prophane and monstrous Sodomie,
Such obscure Incest and Adultery,
Such odious Auarice and perfidie,
Such vinolence and brutih gluttony,
So barren of sincere integritie.
In whom there is no shame nor veritie,
Faith nor religion, but meere cruelty?
Immoderate ambition, guilfull treacherie,
Such prophanation and Apostacie▪
And in all falsehood such dexteritie.
As heauens detest, and men on earth distaster
Such impious sacriledge, such adulation:
Of all good men such detestation.
Such Magick skill, such diuilish incantation.
Apparantfigures of damn'd reprobation.
As in all thoughts is thought abhomination▪
Time will out-strip vs; for the morning starre,
Portends the mounting of faire Phoebus Carre.
Hast we, for danger drawne on by delay,
Admits no time o tarry till cleere day.
Fix on your Papers, these for Alexander
And his ambitious Caesar: set on yours.
Hale reuerent Pasquill I doll of veritie,
Accept these sacriices which we bring.
These be sinne offrings figuring foule vice.
Oh glorious guider of the golden Spheres,
And thou that from thy pretious lyricke strings
Makes Gods and men in heauen and earth to dance
With sacred touch of sweetest harmony:
Pitty these times, by whose malignitie,
We loose our grace, and thou thy dignity.
High Muse, which whilome vertues patronized,
In whose eternall rowles of memory
The famous acts of Princes were comprized
By force of euer-liuing Historie:
What shall wee doe to call thee backe againe?
True Chronicler of all immortall glory,
When here with mortall men nought is deuis'd,
But how all stories with foule vice to staine:
So that alas thy gratious Oratorie,
Which with meere truth and vertue simpathiz'd,
Is silent; and wee Poets now with paine,
(Which in Castalian Fountaines dip'd our quilles)
Are forc'd of mens impietie to plaine;
And well thou wotet, wrought against our wills,
In rugged verse, vile matters to containe:
And herein lurkes the worst of mortall ills,
That Rome (which should be Vertues Paradice)
Bare of all good, is wildernesse of vice.
How luculent and more conspicuous
Euen then the sunne, in cleerest Maiestie,
His vehement and more then hellish thirst
Soaring to pearch vpon the spire of honour
Disples his bastard wings: and in that nest
Where princely Fawlcons, or Ioues kingly Birds,
Should hatch their young ones, plants his rauenous Harpies,
His graceless, impious, and disastrous sonnes,
Euen in the soueraigne Chaire of domination.
But chiefly one, that diuelish Cardinall,
Proud Caesar, farst, with fierce impietie:
His Oracle and instrument of shame
In all nefarious plotts and practises,
Is now become as wicked as himselfe:
But hast we now, least any should suspect vs.
Much conference with Pasquill may detect vs.
Dio viguarda Signior illustrissimo: whether in such hast my noble Lord thus early?
Signior Barbarossa in happy time well encountred, for I haue some businesse this morning with my brother the Duke of Candie, wherein I would both vse your counsell and countenance.
My good Lord Viselli, the countenance of your deuoted poore friend, is of lesse value then his counsell, yet both of very small validity: such as they be, with his life and best fortunes he sincerely sacrificeth all to your seruice.
Pardon mee deere sir no seruice more then reciprocall, and in due paritie betwixt vs, and since wee be so neere it, let vs not passe Pasquill without an Aue: what scandalous hyerogliphickes haue wee heere?
A. S. P. M. Auaritia, Superbia, Perfidiae, Malitiae, Alexander, Sextus, Pontifex, Maximus. Against my Lord the Popes holinesse such blasphemous impudence, such intollerable bitternesse! M. P. S. A. These are the same letters with the first beginning at the last, Magnum Petrum Sequitur Antichristus. Phy Diabolo, our blessed Alexander (beeing Saint Peeters successor) this diuilish libeller calls Antichrist.
Pause there my Lord a litle, some-what here concernes my Lord the Cardinall Borgia.
Read it good Barbarossa.
Alexander Caesarem suum Galero et purpura donauit vt menstruoso spiritus sui veneno, vniuersum simul conclaue suffocaret.
Oh most intollerable abhomination?
Alexander adopted his sonne Caesar into the fellowship of Cardinalls, that he with the menstruous poyson of his breath might choake the whole Conclaue.
By the blessed alter of Saint Peeter this villanie surpasseth patience.
My Lord here's a long libell.
Read it good Barbarossa: more mischeife of my wife nay read it.
Quid mirum? Romae facta est Lucretia Thais,
Vnica Alexandri filia, sponsa nurus.
The same in effect inseueth.
Welcome good Post from Rome tell vs some newes,
Lucrece is turned Thayis of the stewes:
In whome her father Alexander saw,
His onely daughter, wife, and daughter in law,
Shall I read on my Lord? here is much more.
Nay read out all, it is but of a whore.
Francesco di Gonsaga was the first,
That married Lucrece Alexanders daughter,
And yet the Pope those bains of bridale burst,
And made of marriage sacrament a laughter,
His reason was because that fellow poore,
Lackt maintenance for such a noble whore.
Malignant aspect of vngratious stars,
Why haue you poynted at my miseries?
Haue patience good my Lord and here the rest,
Patienza per forza, but this wounds to th'quick.
Iohn Sforza now Lord Maerques of Pescare,
Was second husband to this ioly dame,
Of natures faculties he being bare,
In like state with his predecessor came,
he, when he should haue writ his mind,
Paper well might; but pen or incke none finde.
Oh villamies of monstrous people,
Fashions and times deformed and vnseasonable,
Yet my Lord a little haue patience in your owne cause
Mallice performe thy worst least comming late,
I with anticipation crosse that fate. Read it, toot man.
Gismond Viselli, nobly descended,
Is for his shamefull match much discommended.
For neuer was the shamelesse Fuluia,
Nor Lais noted for so many wooers,
Nor that vnchast profuse Sempronia.
A common dealer with so many dooers,
So proud, so faithlesse, and so voyd of shame,
As is new brodell bride Lucretia,
Take to thee Gismond both the skorne and shame,
And liue long ealous of Lucretia.
With pushing hornes keepe out all commers in,
For now thy mortall miseries begin.
Mortall miseries? but we are all mortall,
Fortune I scorne thy malice, and thy meed,
Keepe them vp safe that I may shew them to his holines,
Is this the licence which our citty Rome
Hath giuen to beastly Bardes, and satyrists,
Ribbaldly Rimesters, and malicious curs,
To leaue no state of Church nor seculer,
Free from their ordure, and polution.
Good Barbarossa beare me Company:
Exile and Punishment for such base poets,
And strpes with wiery scourges were too litle.
Which breathing here in Rome, and taking grace▪
From the faire Sunne-shine of this hemisphere,
Contaminate that ayre with their vile breath.
Obumbrating this light by which they liue,
If these were truth: this times impietie,
May soone sincke downe vnder the diety.
With what expence of money plate and iewels
This Miter is attayn'd my Coffers witnesse:
But Astaroth my couenant with thee
Made for this soule more pretious then all treasure,
Afflicts my conscience, O but Alexander
Thy conscience is no conscience; if a conscience,
It is a coprouse and poluted conscience.
But what? a coward for thy conscience?
The diuill is witnesse with me when I seald it
And cauteriz'd this conscience now scard vp
To banish out faith, hope and charity;
Vsing the name of Christian as a stale
For Arcane plots and intricate designes
That all my misty machinations
And Counsels held with black Tartarian fiends
Were for the glorious sunne-shine of my sonnes;
That they might mounte in equall paralel
With golden maiesty like Saturnes sonne
To darte downe fire and thunder on their foes.
That, that was it, which I so much desir'd
To see my sonnes through all the world admir'd,
In spight of grace, conscience, and Acharon
I will reioyce and triumph in my Charter.
Sedebis Romae Papa, summa in foelicitate tui et
Filiorum vine; 11. et 7. dies 8. post moriere.
Prouiso quod nunquam te signes tremende
Crucis signo.
Was diill prouideth in his couenant
I should not crosse my selfe at any time;
I neuer was so ceremonious.
Well this rich Miter thought it cost me deare
Shll make me liue in pompe whilst I liue heere.
Holla Bernardo?
Call hether my two sonnes the Duke of Candy and the
Cardinall of Valence.
Happie those sonnes whom fathers loue so well
That for their sakes they dare aduenture hell.
Come my deare sonnes the comfort of my life
Yours is this earthly glory which I hold.
Cannot the spacious boundes of Italy
Diuided equally containe you both?
From France and Swisserland I will beginne
With Naples and those Townes in Peadmont
And all the signories in Lombardy
From Porto di Volane to Sauona
And Genes on th' otherside of Italy
Vpon the Mediterranean towards Greece;
Allotted Candy for his patrimony.
And in Romania from Pontremoli
And Prato to faire Florence; and from thence
In Tuskany within the Riuer Narre
And fruitfull Arno those sweete Prouinces
Euen to Mont Alto, Naples, Policastro
And Petrasilia in Calabria
The furthest home of Italy for Caesar.
Gaine dubble strength with your vnited loues
Loue one another boies you shal be Kings:
Fortune hath beene auspicious at my birth
And will continue gratious to mine end.
Castor and Pollux would not liue in Heauen
Vnlesses they might be stellified togither,
You for a little-turfe of earth contend
When they togither shine the welkin cleeres:
And gentle gales beare fourth the winged failes,
But when they shine a parte they threaten stormes
And hiddeous tempests to the Marriners
Castor would not be called but Pollux Castor
And Castor Castors Pollux: so my Candy
Be Candy, Caesa, Candies Caesar,
With perfect loue, deare boyes loue one another
So shal be sengtend by his brother.
Ms blessed reuerend and renowned father,
Th lou by nture to my brother Candy,
me some-times in plainer sort
To clee my conscience issuing from pure loue,
It is meere loue which mooues these passions,
When I do counse or aduise your good.
I know deere brother when your counsell tends
Vnto my good it issueth from pure loue.
As when I tax your princely conscience
Like an vnpitted penetentiarie,
Brother with reuerence of his Holinesse
You eart is too much spic'd with honesty.
I and I feare me he will ind it so,
Your brother Caesar tells you very true:
You must not be so ceremonious
Of oathes and honesty, Princes of this world
Are not pickt in the bookes of conscience,
You may not breake your promise for a world:
Learne this one lesson looke yee marke it well,
It is not alwaies needfull to keepe promise,
For Princes (forc'd by meere necessity
To passe their faithfull promisses) againe
Forc'd by the same necessity to breake promise.
And for your more instructions learne these rules!
If any Cedar, in your forrest spread,
And ouer-peee your branches with his top,
Prouide n axe to cut him at the roote,
Suborne informers or by snares intrap
That King of Flies within the Spiders Webbe;
Or els insnare him in the Lions toyles.
What though the multitude applaud his fame:
Because the vulgar haue wide open eares
Mutter amongst them and possesse their hearts
That his designements wrought against the state
By which yea wound him with a publicke hate.
So let him perish, yet seeme pittifull
Cherrish the weakenesse of his stocke and race
As if alone he meritted disgrace.
Suffer your Court to mourne his funeralls,
But burne a bone-fire for him in your Chamber.
Caesar deliuereth Oracles of truh.
Tis well sayd Caesar, yet attend a little,
And binde them like rich bracelets on thine armes
Or as a precious iewell at thine eare.
Suppose two factious Princes both thy friends
Ambitious both, and both competitors,
Aduance in hostile armes against each other
Ioyne with the strongest to confound the weake
But let your wars foundation touch his Crowne,
Your neerest Charity concernes your selfe;
Els let him perish; yet seeme charitable.
As if you were meerely compos'd of vertue:
Beleeue me Candy things are as they seeme,
Not what they be themselues; all is opinion:
And all this world is but opinion.
Looke what large distance is twixt Heauen and Earth,
So many leagues twixt wealth and honesty:
And they that liue puling vpon the fruits
Of honest consciences; starue on the Common.
Caesar can tell thee this in ample sorte.
And Caesar loue him, loue him hartily;
Though mildenesse do possesse thy brother Cande,
It is a gentle vice, vicining vertue.
Vnder correction of your Holinesse,
Those warres which vertue leues against vce,
Are onely knowne to some particulers
Which haue them wrytten in their consciences.
Those are the same they seeme and in such warres
Your sonne shall make remonstrance of his valour,
And so become true Champion of the Church.
It is the precious Ornament of Princes
To be strong hearted, proud, and valiant,
But well attempted with callidity,
Brother with reuerence of his holinesse
(Whose sacred words like blessed Oracles
Haue pointed at your prudence) Caesar would
Haue giuen the like aduise: but (in conclusion)
Vndoubtedly to worke out thy confusion.
Vpon my blessing follow Caesars counsell;
It tendeth to thy glory.
Most blessed Lord,
Embassadors from Ferdinande of Naples
Arriued heere attend your holinesse.
This is a welcome messenger for Godfrey,
To make a marriage with the Lady Saunce:
And Cany for so much as this requires
A ioyful entertainment; take that honor
And bid him welcome with due complements.
Shew courteous, language laudable apporte;
Let them be feasted in more sumpteous sort
Then ordinary messengers of state:
Obserue his speeches, fathome his designes;
And for I know thy nature tractable,
And full of courtesie: shew courtesie
And good intreatie to them: Gentle Candie
Now shew thy sele a polititian;
I neede not giue thee large instructions;
For that I know thee wise▪ and honorable
Greete them from vs: Caesar shall at a turne
Giue correspondence to thy courtesie:
I as well sitteth with my state and honor
Within these ten daies wil admit them hearing:
Meane while learne out by lore of policie
The substance of their motions, that we may
Be better armd to giue them resolution.
Your holinesse in this shall see my skill,
To do you seruice,
Caesar now to thee.
This taske vpon thy shoulders onely leanes;
I rest vpon thee Caesar: were it not
That thou must second it, or first it rather
I durst not trust such things of consequence,
To feeble spirits: therefore from our stables
Six Persian Coursers arm'd and furnished
With rich Caparisons of gold and Pearle,
With six rich Complet Armors for thei saddles,
And such a Cabbinet of pretious Iewels
As we shall choose within to morrow morning
Present from vs in token of our loue.
Let for no cost in sumptuous banqueting,
Beleeue me Caesar some-times at a banquet,
More ground is got then at a bloudy battell.
Worme out their humors, fathom their delights,
If they delight in that which Naples couets,
Fine, witty, loue-sick, braue, and beautifull,
Eloquent, glancing, full of fantasies.
Such Sugar harted Syrens, or such Commets,
As shine in our imperiall state of Rome,
True pick-locks in close wards of policie,
Present them with the Paragons of Rome:
And spare not for a Million in expence,,
So long as here they keepe their residence.
Caesr in such a case will prooe true Caesar,
Wise, franke, and honorable.
I doubt it not:
And Caesar, (as thou doost imbrace my loue,
More then the world besides) accomplish this,
And wee shall Caesar with high blessings blisse,
By this time is my faire Lucretia,
Befitted for a businesse of bloud,
Neerely concerning her estate and mine.
Lucretia cast off all seruile feare,
Reuenge ty see vpon thy iealous husband
Tt thine honor, wrong'd thy bed:
Fre not; wth resolution act his death:
L ace in policies
now proue Caesars Sister,
y sratagems as hee:
aue found examples in all times.
thou mlt he cll to minde,
wrath fll furie,
indeous :
ther of her onely sonne,
A Dauhters (all but one)
i one night, their husbands sleeping slew.
My as ust as theirs, my heart as resolute,
My hands as ready. Gsmond I come,
Hald on with furie o reuenge these wrongs
And loue impson'd with thy iealousie,
I haue deised such a cuious sare,
As neuer yet deuis'd,
To grape hs armes vable to resst,
Daths isruments inclosed in these hands.
You Dauhers of gumme Erebus,
Which spit out vengece from your vipeous heires,
Infe a three- g in these armes;
Ible rng indurate heart,
To consumate the pl o my reuenge.
Heere comes the snect of my Tragedy.
Wat my Lucretia walking alone?
The solitarie assions should bewray
Some discontentment, and those gracious eyes
Seeme to be moon'd with anger, not with loue:
Tell me Lucretia, may thy Gismond know?
Demaundst thu the cause miutious Gismond?
When like a reduse (shut vp from he world)
I liue close prisoner to thy iealousie?
The Esperian Dragons kept not with more watch,
The golden ruit then thou my fatall beauty:
Thou wouldst exclude me from the sght of Sunne,
But that his beames break trough some cusies
Thou woulst dbare me om the common ayre,
that against my will I uck it in,
Ad breat it out in sealding sighes againe:
Were I in Nxos no nose is head
But Nmes age ghts but ruthelesse rocks.
Or in te Libin esers or exhang'd
This Hemisphe o Rome for Intodes,
Wee ot so gous as to dwell in Rome,
Bah'd and conference f friends.
tou my ielouse? may blame thy beauty,
And loue imson'd in those amoous lookes:
eae the efectos on thy face,
Least he more wondring at thy precious eyes,
Then any Nimphes whch he most honoed,
Shoud beare thee to some other Paradice,
And ob me, silly man, of this worlds ioy.
I eare the windes least amorous Ioue in them,
(Enuying such pretious nature amongt men)
With extreame passion hence should hurry thee.
Oh loue is full of feae all things I feare,
By which I mght be frustrate of thy loue.
Scoffst thou mee Gisond wih continuall taunts?
Oh God of heauens, shall both suffer shame
And scorne, with such dispisd captiuitie.
Here in the presence of the powers in Heauen,
I doe not speake n scorne, but in meere loue:
And further Lucrese, (of thy clemencie,
For loue, and bautie▪ both are riche in bountie)
Frgiue me what is past, and I will sweare,
Neuer to vex thee with more ielousie.
Thou wil so seare thy selfe: Gismond come hither?
Sit downe and answer me this question.
When I bestowed on thee this diamond
A Iewel once held precious as my life;
And wth it cat away my selfe on thee
Didst tou not promie to mantaine mine honour,
in word nor deed to giue suspect
O y and hast thu not since then
In of my nees Noble friends
a for my lightness?
his moy vp
So and sight of them?
Wh thou didst bestow this Diamond
I ad a lustre in mine eye:
And wa o vertue, when I vow'd
To mantaine that, which was impossible:
Bt that time this stone hath had a saw,
within te ring, his foile growne dimme,
The vetue vani and the luste lost.
I can no longer brooke these base rebukes.
These riddles and close libellings
Oh helpe I am strangled.
Peace wetched villaine, then reciue this quickly:
Or by the liuing powers of heauen ile kill thee.
Take pen and incke: tis not to make thy will;
For if then wilt subscribe, I will not kill.
Tis but to cleere those scandalls of my shame,
With which thy iealousie did me defame.
So now that part is playd, what followes now?
Thou Ribbauld, Cuckcold Rascall, Libeller,
Perncious Leche voide of al performance;
Peruious Coxcombe, oule, now for those wrongs
Which no great spirit could well tollerate
Come I, with mortall vengeance on thy soule.
Take this for sclandring of his Holinesse
My blessed father and my brother Caesar
With incest: this take for my brother Candy:
And this for Noble Sphorza whom thou wrongest;
And since the time is shorte I will be shorte:
For locking vp of me, calling me whore,
Setting espalls tending at my taile;
Take this and this & this to make amends.
And put thee from thy paines;
Now will my father Alexander say
That I did take the best and safest way,
And Caesar will appoue it with his heart,
That Lucrere hath perform'd a cunning parte.
If others aske who Gismonde kild or why
It was himselfe repenting iealousie.
Holla within there?
Why ellowes?
Heere my Lord.
What is my Lord Viselli stirring yet?
My Lord the Pope expects him and the ambassadors
Of Naples craue his company.
My Lord I haue not seene him yet this morning.
Is not your Lady Lucrce stiring yet?
No my good Lord I thinke shee be not yet come from her chamber, her custome is not to be seene so soone.
Tis well, ts wel, let her take case in gods name,
But make hast call vp my Lord thy maister honest fellow.
Wih patience of your Lordship I will speake:
For three daies space I did finde in my Lord
Passionate motions, and strange melancholie
'T may be his solitude hath drawne him forth,
I will first looke the garden and the galleries.
Do my good friend I will expect thee in this parler here?
Fellow come bake, come back, fellow come back:
Yur Lod mutred here call vp your Lady;
Call i your ellow seuants. Dh anta Croce.
gasped in his fatall and
ome violence, wrought on himselfe:
much vioate her selfe?
ought by bloudy Borgies race?
te hypchrisie,
Iuse me and ineruable
Realet, o it in thy mecy.
Where y Lord? my dea Ld?
Faiy Lady.
Approch no neere this thull setacle;
Approach not neere ths speace o blud,
This uhfull spectcle of blud and death,
Lease suddain horror of these bleeding wounds
Wound thy dstracted sprits to pale death.
Wha honor or what motall spectacle.
Vpon such suddaine hath astonished me?
Oh my deere Lord: Visell speake to me:
Oh most disastrous accident and houre;
Ay me most wretched and vnfortunate,
My deerest▪ the treasue of my life,
The sweetest paradie of my best hopes,
Is murthedik out the murtherers
Leaue not vnsearcht a corner nr a Crany:
Locke vp the otes there least that homicide
Escape vs in ti passion —
Hau patience Lady
Heauens will reueale te murther dobt it not.
Ah Noble Barbaroa much I feae
Now with tese eyes I see the murtherer,
Saind wi the guilt of nature; h my Lord
You lttle knw that these wke wmans hads
Twise escued haue the volee o his;
From killing of himselfe before this time:
Oh fe vpon the diuill, and melancholy;
Which leaue me desolate a forelorne widdow.
Madam these papers will bewray some matter.
Oh might I finde an other murtherer.
Thse do containe some matter read them Lady.
My heat swolne vp with sorrow, lends no light
Vnto mine eyes, nor force vnto my tongue
To see one letter, or to reade one word,
I pray you reade it good Lord Barbarossa.
I Gismond de Viselli through desperate griefe conceiued in iealousie (which I bare against my Lady Lucrecia) hauing found out by much triall, and examinaion her faithfulnesse and innocency, make this my protestation as the last piacular oblation to her for those wrongs that with mine own vnfortunate hands I haue ended my lie, desring her and all others to forgiue me, and pray for me, subscribed with mine owne hand, ad sealed with my seale.
Oh Lord of heauens haue pardon on his soule.
This is his hand and seale, speake now my Lord:
Did not I soone disclose the murtherer?
Told I not that the murherer was present?
Ah neuer neuer shall I liue to see.
Comfort you selfe deere Lady God will send succor
Your huband hath paied deerely for these wrongs.
Giue me my Lord againe, death shall not haue him,
Come my deere Gsmond ▪ come agane my ioye:
Delay me not least I preuent thy loe
I cannot brooke delay's, Lcrece shall follow.
Tempt not Gods iustice Lady, fall to praier,
Helpe, in the take your Lord out of her sight.
Oh my deare friends that see my miseries,
I you beseech in deaest tendernesse
Bring in the body of my dearest Lord;
That I before my death may (with these eyes)
Behold him honor'd in his obsequies.
And I wil beare these papers to his Holines,
Whose sorrow wil exceed for Gismonds death.
Thus foule suspition, feare and jealousie
Of shame, dishonor, and his wiues hot lust,
Hath seaz'd vpon Visell; whose reuenge,
Was to restraine Lucrece from Company▪
But swelling pride, and lust, both limitles,
Answer'd his louing feare and shame with death.
Attend the sequell. Now successiuely
(After such warlike preparations,
So many firme hopes found in Italy)
King Charles with fifteene hundred men at armes,
Three thousand Archers, with six thousand Swisse.
French men, and Gascons twise as many more,
With martiall measures, ouer Piemont
Treads a long march after his drums and fife,
With Milans force, and now his trumpets hard,
Vnto the gates of Rome giue fresh allarms,
Vnto the Pope, who stirreth vp in armes,
Castillian take fiue hundred harguebusse,
Two hundred Arbalastes, and fortifie,
Vpon the tower of Saint Sebastian,
Affronting that port where prowd Charles should enter,
Call'd Santa Maria di Poplo.
Our souldiers ready be with match in cocke,
T'attend this seruice, and our scurriers,
Are now return'd hauing discryd King Charles,
Hi ensigns and his Cornets proudly mand,
With plumed regiments, and troopes of horse,
Marching in glory to the gates of Rome.
Brauely bring on your companies bold hearts,
Gaspar de Fois are those two Basiliskes,
Aleady mounted on their carriages?
They bee.
We make you maister of our Ordinance,
And on the Turret of Saint Adrian.
Plant six more Cannon, and foure Culuerings,
Foure Lizards, and eight Sacres, with all speed,
Take Gunners with you to the Cittadell,
Powder and shot, with Ladles for their charge,
See none be wanting; set them to their taske.
Haue a good care your Pyoners worke hard,
To further your fortifications.
Pleaseth your Holinesse to giue me leaue,
It fitteth well with our owne purposes,
To giue Charles entrance, and without restraint,
Least he by rigor should vsurpe that leaue,
Which to resist were vaine and dangerous.
Beleeue me Father we must temporize.
Besides you see how the Calabrian Duke,
Out of the Port of Saint Sabastian,
Not one houre past, hath issued and left Rome.
Now though you do suspect, conceale all doubts:
For you shall finde this sure and commonly,
Dangers accompany suspition,
We will embrace that course, but with your leaue,
In Castle Angelo Capitulate:
Standing (as best befits vs) on our guarde.
Tis time your Holinesse tooke to your guard,
For Potent Charles (like one that conquereth)
Arm'd at all peeces, in his plumed caske,
And with a Launce resting vpon his thigh,
Already with his forces hath possest
The suberbs, and is now come to the gates.
We are resolued: Gasper de fois take heed,
On paine of death no souldier be so bould
As to dischardge one peece or arbalast,
Before th'alarme being giuen from them,
Wee with a culuering from Castle Angelo,
Proclame hostility: troope on a pace,
Take we what fortune peace or warre affords,
The worst of resolution is with swords.
Thus far with much applause in ioyfull martch,
With good successe and hopefull augurie,
We marched haue within the walls of Rome,
Not litle wondering that his Holines,
Doth giue such slender welcome to our troups.
Your maiesty may well perceaue how feare,
And iealeous iudgement of a wounded conscience,
Workes hard in Alexander.
And how foxe-like.
(Houlding newtrality the surest gard)
He coopes himselfe in Castle Angelo.
Pleaseth your maistie to giue a summons,
Vnto the Castle for some parliance,
Vpon such articles as were set downe,
Come we wil touch him, summon forth a parle.
What office beare you marching on those walls,
We made no summons to confer with you.
Most Christian prince pleaseth your mightines,
I am Castillian of Saint Angelo, Vnder his Holines.
To bid defiance to our forces?
Noe most gracious Lord.
But to salute you from his Holines.
What is he sicke?
Not very well dispos'd,
S. Pe. ad vin. Nor euer was, nor will be well dispos'd.
An other summons for his Holines,
Most Christian Charles, here I salute your grace,
Bidding you peaceably welcome to Rome,
If you bring peace along with you to Rome.
In filiall Loue I thanke your Holines,
We litle thought it our most holy father,
That our alegeance to the Church of Rome,
Which we with all our predecessors tendred,
Should haue enforc'd you to take sanctuary.
Sonne Charles know then we tooke not to this place,
In feare as to some refuge or asyle:
But for asmuch as news were brought in post,
That you with all your forces did approch.
Arm'd and in hostile manner to this Citty,
The Conclaue thought it fit tendring the safty,
Of holy Church, and sacred priuiledge,
To know your meaning first, and then with pomp,
To make your welcome in Saint Peters pallace,
In the best fashion with due ceremonies.
Know then most holy father what we would,
Hauing in tedious marcht from France thus far,
Past with our forces God stil guiding vs,
(As we be deepely bound by lawes of nature.
And reason to worke surely for our right)
We left noe busie doubts, nor obstacles,
Which might preuent vs in our iust imprease,
Hence was it that we did Capitulate,
So strictly with the crafty Florentines,
Whome we well knew fauour'd Alphonsoes part.
And this made Veice ioyne in league with vs.
Yet hauing notice that your Holines.
Both with Alphonso (that vsurpes my Crowne)
And his sonne Ferdinand drue deeper in
Vpon considerations of more weight;
We thought it good to take France in our way.
And there to craue some certaine Cautions
Of your indifferency to his iust title
Had in the Crowne of Naples: therefore first
We do require (if you these parties tender,
(As your late letters did importe) yeeld vp
In Caution of your good intent to France;
This Castle which you now retaine against vs.
Why Lodowick? the wethercocke is turnd,
The winde stands faire, but how long will that hold?
So may we put in hazard our whole Church
The deere estate of Christes flock militant
And bring confusion vnto Christendome.
So may you seaze vpon the Churches rights,
If that we should referre all to your trust.
This is Saint Peters bul-warke; for my parte
Here I will die ere I surrender it.
Now find I true which cōmon bruite proclameth
Of your bad meanings and hypochrisie:
But I referre your conscience to that Iudge
Whom (if my conscience harber any thought
To wrong the Church of God, in any thing)
I call in iustice to reuenge on me.
Renowned Charles, suppose we should surrender▪
How may we be secured that you will
Restore it, after your imprease at Naples.
The faith and honour of a Christian King.
Your faith & honor? stay most Christian Charles
Men will not yeeld vp Castels vpon wordes
Vnles their states, and liues grow desperate.
Why make we longer parlee with this Pope
Whose false-hood is so much that neither oth,
Nor honesty can purchase place with him.
Who neuer yet in cause of conequence
Hah kpt his promise.
Tell vs, will yee graunt?
What should we graunt most Christian King of France
And tell me truly (were it your owne case)
Whether you would (on such slight promises)
Accord to such vneuen conditions?
We did not thinke our royall promises
Had beene so slightly censur'd in your heart:
But since we finde your infidelities
We must requite it with extremity,
Couzen Mountpanseir.
My Lord.
Forthwith cause ten brasse peeces with their shot
And powder to be drawne out of Saint Markes;
Such as you finde most fit for battery.
You will not here vs now, we speake so low:
Standing aloft you proudly scorne inferiors;
Weele send our mindes, written in firy notes.
Giue doubtfull answers, bee not peremptory
Least through your heate, his rage exsaperate.
Offer vnto him on his Princely word,
The strength of Terracina for a pledge.
Victorious Chales, such is my trust and loue
That neither feare of force nor violence
Could any wayes induce me to suspect you.
Hence came it that the portes of Rome were opened
(At our behests) to giue you guestning.
Accept vs therefore with our promises,
Which we shall vnder hand and seale confirme
Not any way to Crosse your action.
If you will yeeld vp Castell Angelo
Resolue vs presently without delaies?
Because it is Saint Peeters Cittadell
The conclaue is in doubt to make surrender.
You will not yeeld then?
We cannot, nor wee will not yeeld it vp.
Why then a parle with our ordinance.
What come yee to make pillage of the Church,
Which held you deere as her chiefe Champion?
For beare your violence in the name of God:
Fearing the scourge, and thunder from aboue,
Ou offers are both iust and reasonable.
Peeces which are of more validty
We meane to tender to your Maiesty.
What are those peeces you would tender vs.
To render presently the Cittadells
Of Terracina, Cinita Vecchia, and Spoleto.
And we receiue them very hankfully.
S. P ad vin. Our voices of the cōclaue passe, that Charles
Shalbe possest of Castell Angelo.
And if your meaning with your words accord
We dare ingage our soules for resurrender.
Your soules? foh foh they stinck in sight of God & man,
Your soules? why they be sould to Lucifer,
Your consciences are of so large a last
That you would sell Saint Peters Patrimony,
As Esau did his heritage for broath.
Thou most prophaine & impious Moabite;
So full of vices and abominable,
No Pope but Lucifer in Peters Chaire.
Renowned Charles pull downe this Antichrist;
Aduance some worthy father in his place.
Your fame shal liue with all posterities
VVho from a wicked Bishops tiranny
Infranchised the Church of God misguided;
Euen as (in this worlds worthy memories)
The names of Pepin and King Charlemaine
Your predecessors, were eternized
For helping good Popes, Saints of Holy life,
Ot of vngodly persecutions.
A Pope by nature full of fraud, and pride;
Ambitious, auaritious, shameles, diuilish,
And that and which your experience testifies)
One that with mortall malice hates the French:
By whome this reconcilation made
Was more in feare and hard necessity
Then faithfull inclination, or good will.
Iscraiot, reprobate apostata,
I charge thee to desist and make submission
VVith pennance to the Mother Church of Rome
On paine of euerlasting reprobation.
Blasphemous exorsist, heere are no diuills
VVhich thou canst coniure, with thy diuilish spirit.
We charge thee render vp that triple Crowne
Which most vngodly man thou dost vsurp.
Those robes pontificall which thou prophanest,
Saint Peters Chaire wherein (like Antichrist)
Thou doest aduance thy selfe thou man of sinne.
Saint Peeter doth make challenge to those keyes,
Which (in those hands defil'd with bloud and bribes)
Thou like a prophane deputy dost hold.
That sword (with which thou sholdst strike Antichrist)
Thou like proud Antichrist conuerted hast
Vpon the members of Christes chosen flocke;
Saint Paule demaundes his sword, Peter his keyes:
Forbeare your blasphemies, what know yee not
Christes Vicar generall chosen on earth?
Haue not I power to binde and loose mens sinnes,
And soules, on earth, in hell, and purgatory?
Come take Saint Peters Chaire proud heretiks;
Here take this triple Crowne, oh you would take it:
But he, that made it, did not for you make it.
Ascanio thou wouldst haue these Golden keies;
Here take them with my vengeance on thy head,
And Pseudo Paulus would haue Saint Paules sword,
Ordained for his decollation.
Sonne Charles (since we capitulato with you)
Me thinkes you should not suffer these t'affront vs.
Forbeare your idle velletations,
Anging and rubbing vp the festred scarres
O wrath inueterate, and mortall quarrels,
We come not here to foster factions,
All are in one accorded, all are friends.
But yet most Holy-Father, let me craue,
Two fauours more, both very reasonable;
First that you pardon both these Cardinalls,
And other Barons which pertake with me.
Then that the brother of great Baiaset,
That fled from Rhodes to France, and last to Rome,
With the protection of Pope Innocent
Call'd Gemen Ottoman, may be deliuer'd
Into my hands, when after-time shall serue
For my best vantage in those holy warres,
Which we pretend against the Turkes here-after.
The sunne shall neuer set vpon my wrath;
That Oylie Lampe of blessed Charitie
Shall not extinguish in my zealous heart:
He that knowes all, knowes this I cannot falter
With any brother, all are faithfull friends:
Be but submissiue, milde, and penitent,
And all is past, as all had beene well ment.
Now touching Gemen Ottoman, sonne Charles,
When you shall vndertake those godly warres,
I will deliuer him as willingly
As you demaund: and with a cheerefull heart,
Praising your godly zeale on Christs behalfe,
And praying for your good successe in warre.
I thanke your Holynesse.
These quarrels are as happily determined
As we could wish: call for an Actuarie,
And let a Charter Bipartite be drawne
Betwixt you: to confirme this amity.
And now most blessed Father I beseech,
That I may shew the duty which belongs
Vnto this place, and see Apostolick.
We will regreete your presence presently.
Sonne Charles, your welcome is as acceptable,
As euer was Kings presence into Rome:
To morrow we will with the power of heauen,
Together celebrate a solemne Masse:
After the Senior, Bishop, Cardinall,
You must take place: and as our custome is,
Shall giue vs water when we celebrate:
This done, we will bestow some time in pleasures.
Heere leaue we Charles with pompous ceremonies,
Feasting within the Vaticane at Rome:
From thence to Naples, where the peoples hatred
Conceiu'd against the former Kings, made way
For him, without resistance to the crowne.
This done, he marcheth back againe for France,
And Ferdinand doth repossesse his state.
Meane while King Charles sick of an Apoplexie,
Dyes at Ambois: the Duke of Orleance,
Lewis the twelfth conioyntly knitting force,
Doth march in armes with Ferdinand of Spaine,
These regaine Naples and deuide that realme,
But this breedes mortall warre betwixt them both,
The wily Pope dissembles at all hands,
These quell onely concernes him and Caesar.
Brother Phillippo what auaileth it,
When our state lost the Fauintines compounded,
That I should hold both life and liberty,
Withall reuenues of my proper state,
When as my life within the Court of Rome,
Is much more loathsome to my soule then death,
And liberty more griefe then seruitude.
I rather choose within the riuer Tiber
To drowne my selfe, or from Tarpeyan hill,
My vexed body to precipitate,
Then to subiect my body to the shame
Of such vild brutish and vnkindely lust.
He that with fire and Brimstone did consume
Sodome and other Citties round about.
Deliuer vs from this soule-slaying sinne.
To which our bodies are made prostitute,
Deare salutations from my Lord the Pope,
I recommend vnto your excellence,
With semblable remembrance of his loue,
To you my Lord Phillippo,
Good Barnardo.
My dutie bound vnto his Holynesse,
Returne in paiment from his Captiue seruant.
Ingenious Prince, I bring a friendly message
Of tender kindnesse, which I must impart:
This Ruby from our Holy-fathers finger,
(In puate token of his faithfull loue)
And there-withall, desireth of your loue,
To haue with him some priuate conference.
I was now going to our Ladies masse,
In Saint Iohn Laterans; where my ghostly father
Attendeth me for my confession.
But thanke his Holynesse on my behalfe,
In all due reuerence and humilitie.
Tell him I meane—so soone as I returne,
To come according to my bounden duty.
My case is desperate, what shall I doe?
Phillippo, was there euer any man
Hunted with such vnsatisfied rage?
What hath he sent againe to visit you?
To visit me, nay to dishonor me,
Behold this Ruby sent from his owne finger,
Which as a Bawde inuiteth me to shame.
Astor? what Astor? my delight my ioy,
My starre, my triumph, my sweete phantasie,
My more then sonne, my loue, my Concubine,
Let me behold those bright Stars my ioyes treasure,
Those glorious well attempred tender cheekes;
That specious for-head like a lane of Lillies:
That seemely Nose loues chariot triumphant,
Breathing Panchaian Odors to my sences,
That gratious mouth, betwixt whose crimosin pillo
Venus and Cupid sleeping kisse together.
That chin, the ball vow'd to the Queene of beauty,
Now budding ready to bring forth loue blossoms,
Astor Manfredi turne thee to my loue,
Come hither Astor we must talke aboue.
Betraid? a slaue to sinne? what shall I say?
Most Holy father.
Doe not mee forget:
I am thy brother, and thy deerest friend,
In iper yeares is pure and permanent,
Grounded on iudgement, flowing from pure loue:
Whereas the loue lightning from young desire,
Fickle and feeble will not long hold fire,
It is so violent it will not last.
They'r blest whose louers loue when youth is past.
To call you friend were too familiar,
To call you brother sorts not with our yeares:
To call you Father doth import some feare,
Due to that age your Holinesse doth beare.
Tell me not of mine age and Holinesse,
Thy sight sufficeth me to make me young:
Neither vpbraide me with my sanctimonie,
Loue is the purest essence from boue,
And to thy soule I would affix my loue.
Come hither then and rest with mee to night,
Giue me ruition of those amorous pits,
Where blinded Cupid close in ambush sits:
Who with his Arrow (when thou laught at Venus)
Shot through thy smiling cheekes, and did inchaine vs.
Thy Chamber with Ambrosiall odors breatheth,
New loues and true loues vnto them that entreateth,
And furious Mrs made milde his Faulcheon sheatheth
At thy delicious aspect: see thy Chamber:
The walles are made of Roses, roofe of Lillies,
Be not asham'd to mount and venture it,
Here Cupids Alter, and faire Venus hill is.
Thy bed is made with spice and Calamus,
With Sinamond and Spicnard, Arabick,
With Opobelsam and rich gums of Aegipt,
Musick Angelicall of strings and voyces.
With sundry birds in sugred simphony,
Where whistling Wood-nimphes, and the pleasant choise is
Of Antique action mixt with harmony,
Attend thy ioyous entrance to this Chamber.
Is it possible that the Diuil can be so sweet a dissembler?
Yes and play the pleasant part of a conceited Anire,
the shape of a bright Angell.
Now my sweet friend the ioyes of loue doth mutter
Thy mind too bashfull is, speake tounge loues vtter,
Thy Corrall gums cud loues pure quintisence,
And thou thy selfe faire boy loues purest essence.
Oh blessed heauens let Sathan tempt no longer,
His force is powerfull yet thy strenght much stronger,
He that with guilefull baites gilded vntruth,
So seekes to blast the blossome of my youth.
Delicious fruites diuine Confections,
Of hearbes, roots, flowers of sundrie fashions.
Preseruatiues drawne from the rich Elixar,
Of finest gould pure pearle and precious stones,
Prouided for thy diuine apetite,
Wines of more price (made by th'industrious art,
Insacred distillations) then that Nectar,
Which Hebe bare, when Ioue did most affect her.
Sathan false god of lies, and flatterie;
How palpable is this grosse villaine?
What wilt thou come Manfredi to my Chamber,
And blesse me with thy precious breath of Amber.
After our ladies Masse I will returne.
Deare God what furies in his soule doe burne?
After the Celebration of the Masse,
I come my Lord.
Come then, and let that passe,
Holla Barnardo?
All busines for this night I will adiourne,
Giue good attendance that at his returne▪
Astor may come to me for my sicke heart,
Till Astor with his beauty full embrace,
Doe blesse my body wounded with his dart,
Can find no rest, loue hath it in hot chase.
Wilt thou performe it faithfully?
What I? will I liue to eate, to drinke, to sleepe?
Wilt thou performe it valiantly?
Will I eate to drinke, will I drinke to sleepe, will I sleepe to liue?
Will thou be secret, and conceale my plot?
My name is Frescobaldi, as for my pedigree,
My mother was of consanguinitie▪ with the Princesse
Of Perugia: my father of the noble family of the Oddi,
Florentine both: I my selfe
Brought vp a Page vnder Rayner King of Sicily,
Haue seru'd against the Turkes and Sarazines,
Where at Vienna (with my single Pike,
Arm'd in a Maly Briggandine of Naples,
And with an old-Fox which I kept in store,
A monument of Mars when I depart)
I did vnhorse three Turkie Ianizaries.
Then (in the warres of Ferdinand the King)
This Hippe was shott through with a Crocadile,
But that it were too tedious I could shew you:
Vnder the King of Romaines I was cut,
Iust from this shoulder to the very pappe:
And yet by fortunes of the warre am heere,
I thanke God, and my Surgion▪ all fix, trillill▪
I fought at Malta when the towne was girt
With Sargeants heads, and bul-beggers of Turkie:
And by my plot (niming below the rampier)
We gaue th'obgoblings leaue to scale our walls,
And being mounted all vpon that place:
I with my Lint-stock gaue fire to the traine,
And sent them capring vp to Capricornus.
Which when the wise Astronomers of Greece,
Prodigiously discouered from a farre.
They thought those Turcaes fiery meteors.
Which with their Pikes were pushing in the clowds,
The learned Booke-men writte strange Almanacks,
Of signes, and apparitions in the ayre:
And by these honors (if I proue a blabbe)
Then call mee villaine, varlet, coward, skabbe.
Then tell mee Frescobaldi
Where I may send to thee time shall serue.
Faith for the most parte my mansion is in Ciuitauechiae nella strada di san lorenzo, nere the conduict at a good olde Ladies house, la dōna sempronia at signe of the glister pipe, where if you chance to faile of mee. Within three houses more at signe of the frying-panne you may commande mee, at all houres in the fore-noone.
Well gramercie rescobaldi I wil take the note of those houses in my tables.
But be sure and ready when oportunitie calles vpon you.
May it please your most reuerend grace (without offence to your Lordship) to deliuer me the parties name vpon whome I should performe this Tragedy. For I may parcase catch him in a gilder my selfe before you are aware; and moylie mufle vp his maistership, with the garotta, or stiletto, perchance the ponyad or pistol, such as I warrant you shal serue his turne.
Be it sufficient thou shalt know hereafter,
My businesse and affaires are very great:
One word more, and adue.
Secret as mid-night, sure as the sunne, quick as the waters
Why? so sayd braue Frescobaldi like a man of some resolution farewell remember the watchward—do not faile.
My businesse and affaires are very great my gratious Lord, one word more with your grace my good Lord, and so I kisse your foote.
It was not ingratitud, neither forgetfulnesse in me Frescobaldi: Here take this and remember me.
I encounter your munificence with my loue, and your loue with my seruice, my loue and seruice with your mony.
Padrone mio multo honorato,
More for your loue then your mony,
And yet your grace wel knowes, clothes must be wrought, weapons must be bought; and Tauerns must be sought, and all braue exploits must be done, as they should be done brauely.
But that I keepe my secret to my selfe;
I would not vse this slaue for any gold:
Yet when I trust him he shall not deceiue me.
Now skelder yee scounderels, skelder you maggotmūgers, you pompiós; you wood-wormes, you magatapipicoes, I am for you, now Frescobaldi, call thy wits togither, let me see what a clock it is: very neere eight, and almost breakfast time at a cleauen, this very night must I stand Perdue for this bloudy seruice. I know my place and houre; I must confesse and perchance be hang'd, I haue in the Burdelliaes and in other such houses of naturall recreation and agility, received three or foure score broken pates in my time: and some bastinadoes for crossing courting spicy-spirited inamoratoes in their humors. Besides I was the first that from the Swisse quarter, in the raigne of king Ferdinand brought vp in his army the fashions of bowsing and to vsing Greeke and Spanish wines by the flagon, with that old stinckard Henrico Baglioni, somtime Alferoes to Capitanco Piccolomini & my selfe; I remember likewise at Terracinae I broake a glasse (contayning some quart of Robollia) vpon the face of Capitanco Fransesco Boccansacchia a very sufficient souldier in that seruice, and to my knowledge a tall trencherman: howbeit from the teeth down-ward as base a mettled coward as euer was coyn'd out of the sooty side of a copper kettle; so he was: well I will second my Lord in any slaughter for his wages, and if any man will giue me better hiers (when I haue seru'd the Cardinalls turne) I will present my pistoll vpon his sacred person afterward for charities sake: well, now to the drinking schoole, then to the fence schoole, and lastly to the vaulting schoole, to my Lady Sempronia.
This was an act of such strange consequence,
As neuer yet was heard, a man found dead
Within a private chamber of his house;
When all his seruants stird: not one of them
That could giue euidence of what befell
But that he kill'd himselfe. Cosa impossibile.
I was the first that found him in his bloud;
Then warme from slaughter: such a ruthfull sight
As yet I tremble to remember it.
It is impossible (after a search)
No anger found within Visllies doers,
But that some seruant of his family
Should haue sure notice how the murther was.
It was his owne hand sure.
I cannot thinke it.
The gentleman was honest, full of sport,
And well affected.
Pardon me my Lord,
My Ladie Lucrece told it in great griefe
She twise before had rescued his life.
Go too, go too.
Besides my Noble Lord.
Papers both writ, and sealed with his hand
Were found about him tstifying this.
Good Barbarossa pray my sister Lucrece,
Here to encounter me with her good company:
Som-what I would in priuate talke with her.
My Lord I will.
High God be mercifull.
Thou that doest know the secrets of al hearts,
If Lucrece (as my father doth suspect)
Was priuie to this murther of my life
I can learne all she knowes.
But yet I will not either suspect, or vrge her were it true
Being indeede a violation of brother-hood & common humanity
She maketh towards me—sister how faires it with you?
As with a dead Corse in a Sepulcher
Cold▪ liuelesse, comfortlesse, opprest with sorrow.
Nor since my ioy did leaue me desolate
Euer could I brooke well this open ayre
But still lamenting and disconsolate
Kept vp in Chamber, mourning for my Lord.
What order tooke you for his funnerall?
He that aliue was shrined in my brest,
Now dead liues yet intombed in my thoughts,
There is a modell of it in my closet.
Performe it decently with dilligence.
Brother me thinkes the ayre is cold and raw,
And as you please let vs conferre within.
Gladly deere sister with what hast you may,
And I desire you noble Barbarosa
To meete vs at my Chamber after supper.
My brother Caesar hath appoynted with me
Some businesse, and I craue your company.
Thankes my good Lord: but matters of much moment,
I haue at that time with my Lord Caraffa;
And I must speake this night with my Lord Caesar.
Tell him I will attend by nine of clocke.
I will my good Lord.
Farewell Barbarossa.
Ioy to you both.
My trembling liuer throbs, my cold hearts heauy;
My mind disturbed and I know not why
But all as he will, heauens aboue for me.
This is the black night, this the fatall hand:
These are the bloudy weapons which must be
Witnesse and actors of this Tragedy.
Now Frescobaldi play thy masters prize:
Here is a rich purse cram'd with red crusadoes
Which doth inspire me with a martiall spirit,
Now could I combate with the diuill to night.
First did I wash my liuer, lungs, and heart.
In Cretane wines and head strong Maluese
(Such as would make a coward fight with Mars)
Then least I should with any weapons drawne
Be driuen to danger of mine enemy;
I practised my martiall fects of fence:
As for example if with armes vnsheath'd,
I were to kill this conduct here I come.
He makes a thrust, I with a swift passado,
Make quick auoydance, and with this stoccado
(Although he fence with all his finest force)
Bar'd of his body thrust him in the throate.
Grdrei ene, siguri honorenoli.
Suppose this conduict or my duellist,
Should falsifie the foine vpon me thus.
Here will I take him, turning downe this hand.
Il punto verso indrizzato, thus.
Admit he force me with his ambroccado
Here I deceiue then, with this passado
And come vppon him in the speeding place.
what Mandragon or saluage Ascapart,
what Pantaconger or Pantagruell
Art thou that fightest with thy fathers soule
Or with some subtill apparitions.
Which no man can behould with mortall eyes
Or art thou rauished with bedlamy
Fighting with figments and vaine fantazies
Chimeraes ot blacke spirrits of the night.
Come not within 9. furlongs of this place.
My name is Rubosongal the grimme ghost
Of Bembocamber king of Calicute.
And here for this night I keepe centrenell
For Muscopateron great king of flyes;
Great grandfier of ten thousand hecatombes.
I Coniure thee fowle fiende of Acheron
By puissant Hoblecock and Bristletoe,
By Windicaper Monti-bogglbo.
Polipotmos and the dreadfull names
of Mulli-sacke and Hermocotterock.
By Petrouidemi, by the dogged spirrits
Of Bacchus which Canary land inherrits.
By purple Aligant the bloudy gyant.
And leaden headed hollock pure and pliant.
By Brrha Martia and by Sydrack sweete
Who did with mathew Glynne in combat meete.
And by this awfull crosse vppon my blade
Of which black curres and hedghogges are affraid.
And by this fox which stinkes of Pagan bloud,
Do'st thou walke there for mischiefe or for good.
Braue man whose spirit is approued well,
(As most aprooued panders truly tell)
Vnder geene hedges, vnder Coblers stalles,
In portall, porches, vnder batterd walles,
Wich day; by night keepes watch-full centinell
To guze the pleasures of faire Claribell
Profane arch patriark of Pancridge steeple,
The bauldy beaken of vngodly people.
With oter mater which I might alleadge
To the Grand Captaine of Collman-hedge,
Marching fowle Amazonian trulls in troupes
Whose anthornes are still lighted in their Poupes.
Some without kerchiefes, others with torne smockes;
Certaine imboch'd with piles, and some with poxes.
Others with rotten shooes and stockings rente
With carrine in each ditch keepe parliament.
In petticotes all patch'd and wast-coate torne,
And wandring with some ragge blesse euery thorne.
Which with their Targets neuer make retire,
From any breach till they their foomen fire.
Rebating the stiffe pointes of their keene blades
Till al their champions masculine proue lades.
To thee saith Frescebadi case thy steele
Least thou the rigor of my fuie feele.
And yet I loue thee for thy martiall grace,
Thine in all seruice: shake hands and embrace.
A pox vpon thy coward fistes foule knaue,
And yet I loue thee roague: aske roague and haue.
Come and embrace: tis blih when malte-men meete,
And drinke till they haue lost both head and feete.
And driueling sleepe on euery stall and bench
With euery man a knee in his hand and in his Can a prettie wench
But Frescobaldi my braue Bodigonero,
Varlet of veluet, my moccado villaine,
Old heart of durance, my stript canuase shoulders,
And my Perpetuana pander tell me;
Tell me what humors Cataplasmatick,
Excited haue thy Bacchick fantasies:
To draw that triumphant swerlidildido,
Vpon some spirit of the Buttery,
This was no barmie spirit of the bottle,
It was a bloudy spirit of the battell:
And if I lye, call me thy Wimble-cock.
A mouldy iest, well I will answere thee:
I conire thee by Negra Luciaes name,
By Dol Pattenti, by the subtill shape,
Of Nanna Baliker, by the cunning fleights
Of Vini Clerilicks with hir faire sprights:
By Mega Court, with Marga Marichalus,
That in Turnuliball doth keepe an Ale-house:
By Nan Riuehomo that hote stigmatist,
Now bedded wih th'Itaian Vitraillist,
Wich in the fierie Phlegitonian flames,
Did worke strange vitriall dildidoes for Dames,
Her spirits haue no power to touch this strand.
Till they transported from Lambechia land,
By Charon Ferriman of Black Auerne,
Fall Anchor at the Stilliard Tauerne,
And by Tartarean Plutoes Heben bowle,
Why didst thou combate with thy Fathers soule?
Learned Magitian skild in hidden Artes,
As well in prior as posterior parts,
I see thou kennist the secrets of all sorts,
Of sharpe sringues and salacious sports:
Venerall Buboes, Tubers Vlcerous,
And Iames Defisticanckers venemous.
Doubtlesse Don Vigo then his vigor pour'd
Into thy braines, when he thy bottle scour'd.
Noble Henrilico question no further,
My meditations are of bloud and murther,
I easted haue too long, pree-thee be gone.
Henrico Baglioni (by this sword)
I am to morrow to performe a duell,
And practising in this nights melancholie,
How to dispatch it with a braue stoccadoe.
Heere I did make a proofe, prithie good-night,
Trouble me now no more: early to morrow,
Ile march vnto the signe oth frying-panne,
And take thee timely with thy pointes vntrust,
To drinke a flagon of greeke wine with thee.
Goodnight my noble Rillibilbbo,
Thou shalt be welcome in the darkest midnight.
Now to my watchword it is quight forgot, oh
Col nunolo la Pioggia: thinke vpon it.
This is mine hower appoynted this the place,
Here will I stand close till tha'llatum call,
What ist a clocke boy now?
My gratious Lord,
By Sistoes horologe tis strooke eleuen.
A fit hower for our purpose noble brother,
But hath La Bella formiana notie,
Of our aproch to night.
Oh doubt it not, villaine put out that torch,
Being disguis'd we will not be discryed,
Depart you to my lodging presently,
Paine of thy life not one word that thou saw vs.
Tis very darke, good brother goe before,
You know the streets best.
Oh keepe your way; you cannot lightly fall,
But if you doe.
How then.
You shalbe supported.
My heart begins to throb, my soule misdoubts,
I feare some treachery A che me fido, guarda me Dio,
On in Gods name.
Giue me your hand brother, fie doe not faint.
Caesar I can scarse goe,
A suddaine qualme hath seaz'd vpon my spirits.
Tut brother forward with alacritie,
My life for yours youle be at ease anon,
Tis a foule busines let vs retire,
And seeke some other seasone for our sports,
I am asham'd thou should'st be generall,
To lead those forces that fight for the Church,
And heere shew such faint harted cowardize.
Are you dspos;d to quarrell in the streets,
Neither the time nor place serues instantly;
To call you to some audit for these words.
Abortiue Coward borne before thy time,
I will not brooke thy foolish insolence.
Col nuuolo la pioggia.
Deere God reuenge my wrongs, receaue my soule.
Let him receaue thy soule when he thinkes good,
Ile take an order for thy buriall.
Helpe Frescobaldi let vs heaue him ouer,
That he may fall into the riuer Tiber,
Come to the bridge with him.
Be what he will the villaine's ponderous,
Hath he some gould about him shall I take it?
Take it were there a million of duckets,
Thou hast done brauely Frescobali,
Stretch thee, streth out thine armes feare that he
Fall not vpon the arches.
Ile wash him doubt you not of a new fashion.
I thinke thou neuer hadst thy Christendome,
Follow for Company prenitious villaine.
Hold hold, Coxwounds my Lord hold,
The diuell goe with you both for company.
Now Caesar Muster vp thy wittes together.
Summon thy sences and aduance thy selfe,
Ware and Earth haue interpos'd their bodies,
Betwixt the worldes bright eye and this blacke murther.
Sweete silent nigt (gurded with secret starres)
Keepe silence, and coale this Tragedie;
Sature is lord ascendant f this hower,
Propitious patron of assassiates
O murters, Paracides, and massacres:
Lord of my birth, auspitious to my life,
This is my irst degree to dmination.
Who can, or (if they could) who dare suspect,
How Caesar Borgia kild his brother Candie?
This is infallbe, that many crimes
Lurke vnderneath the robes of Holinesse:
And vnderneath my Purple tunicle
This fact concealed is: Ascanio Sforza
Shall strangely (by some wilie policies)
Be brought nto suspect for Candies death.
Sister Lucretia thou must follow next:
My fathers shame and mine, endeth in thee.
Now shew thy selfe true Caesar; Caesar shall
Either liue Caesar like, or not at all.
Death and bloud onely lengthen out our Scoene.
These be the visible and speaking shewes,
That bring vice into detestation,
Vnnaturall murthers▪ cursed poysonings,
Horrible exorcisme, and Inuocation,
In them examine the rewarde of sinne.
What followes, view with gentle patience.
Fore-god 'tis Candie, 'tis Candy I know 'tis Candie,
Where is that traiterous homicide? where is hee?
I cannot see him: hee shall not scape me so▪
I must and will finde him, though he we inuisible,
Appeare appeare; not yet; ha and Candy murthered too,
Let me looke forth.
Oh, oh, very good very good: well I perfectly peceiue.
By this descention of Arctophilax,
What time of night it is, sorrow giue place;
Reuenge in blood and fierie sacrafice,
Commaundeth: nature now preuents her current: yeeld,
Let vs adore the second eye of heauen,
Bright Armatas increaseth she, is not combust.
O sacred season for nocturnall Ceremonies.
This ioyeous quarter is in Casmaran. ha.
What hower of night ist? why tis Salem, twelue a cloke,
What are our angells this quarter?
Gargatel Tariel Gauiel.
How goodly these augurize faire auspices of truth,
Now mountes bright Athaman in his goulden ascention,
Direct in opposition with our hemispher,
And now there hower with them is Aetalon:
Bernardo bring hither thy white robes of sanctity,
Hast thou Coles ready burnt bring in my Thurible,
And sence about this sanctified place,
For heere Festatiui must haue her honor.
Candie my sonne is murthered, Candie my sonne,
Candie my sonne is murthered: I will raise
All the great diuills to shew the murtherer,
Euen as thou lou'dst my sonne hast and dispatch,
Hast and dispatch it as thou louest my soule.
Tis not yet yawne by three quarters of an hower,
What are our Angels of this night? Michael, Dardael, Huratipel
In a triumphant carre of burning gold,
Crownd with a circlet of blacke hebeny,
And with a mace of Iet King Varca rides.
Attended with his ministers of state, Andas and Cynaball.
Fit dismall times for our solemnities.
Put on my robes giue me my Pentacle,
Cense well Barnardo: bring me some fire in an earthen vessell
Now must I laboure like a collyers horse.
My pretious best approu'd and trusty seruant,
Hence in all hast be-take thee to thy beads,
Whist these darke workes of horror are in hand,
Red Sandll is my umigation.
I coniure thee by these aforesaid names,
That thou receaue no phantasmatike illusions.
What would great Alexander haue with vs,
That from our fiery region millions of leagues,
Beneath the sulphuros bottome of Abisse,
Where Mammon tells his euer tryed gould,
Thou call'st me from strong busines of high state,
From sure subuersions and mutations
Of mighty Monarches, Emperors, and Kings,
From plotting bloody feilds and massacres,
Triumphant treasons and assassinates.
Whats thy demand?
I charge thee by the fower recited names,
And by the dreadfull title of great Phaa.
By which all creatures are sure sealed vp,
By which the prince of darknes and all powers,
In earth and hell doe tremble and fall downe,
Shew me the shape of that condemned man,
Which murthered my sonne the duke of Candy.
Keepe a firme station stir not for thy life,
Expect a messenger of trust stand fast,
Sent from the foggy lake of fearefull stix.
Am I comaunded by that puissant monarch,
Which rides tryumphing in a charriot,
On misty blacke clouds mixt with quenchles fire,
Through vnquoth corners in darke pathes of death,
To doe what thou demandest.
Then by the dreadfull names of Amioram,
Titepand Sadai shew me that damned childe of reprobation.
Which this night murthered the duke of Candie.
Keepe a firme station stir not for thy life,
Hold, hold, hold, hold; per todos santos now no more,
Caesar hath kill'd a brother and a father.
What wouldest thou more shall I descend?
Shew me the person by whose impious hand,
Gismond Viselli, was done to death?
Keepe a firme station stirre not for thy life.
Out, out, no more no more, my soule disolues.
Say, say what wouldest thou more? discend,
Beldachiensis, Berolanensis, Helioren, discende, discend, iubeo, mando▪ impero. Deuill desedeth with thunder. &c.
Out out alas Bernardo I am wounded,
With grisly wounds and deepe incurable.
Comfort your selfe in Gods name blessed father.
Se long as noe wounds of the body bleed.
The cureles wounds I meane are of my body
Wounds both of my soule and body: but Bernardo
This is my comfort in calamity
Some shall packe after them for company
Whats a clocke?
Vey neere six by Saint Peters bell
Hast thee, then passe thee to my Poticary, bid him prouide those drugges I spoke for yester-day, and beare them in all hast to Dominico Giglio take you those letters with you which are here, bid him deliuer them Lodowick Sforzaes name her lustfull Paramoure; make hast and see that he dispatch it quickly, deliuer him a purse from mee for a token cramd with two hundred ducates, bid him bee secreat as he loues his life, hast and begon.
Astor shall follow, I must haue his Lands
This thorne must be cut of being but tender
Then cut it soone whilst it is yong and slender,
Least growing great it prick thee to the bone
My lust importunes it and he shall die,
Sonnes, Nephewes, Daughters, Concubines, shall die.
My conscience is turn'd mercies enemy,
He that would rise to riches and renowne
Must not regard though he pull millions downe.
Where is his Holinesse? where is my father?
Alas your Sonne is slaine; your haples Sonne,
My noble brother out alas, alas
Is murthered: in tender passion
Let curious search and inquisition
Be made through Rome to finde the murtherers:
I feare that Traitrous Iudas Cardinall
Ascio Sforza with his complecies:
I wi not hould fraternity with him:
An behold my meaning blessed father:
gaine these robes, take here this hat,
And in these armes which I haue bucled on
I do forsweare al offices of Church,
Vntill I be reuenged for his death.
A foule red vengeance ouer hangs his head
Whose heart indurate or whose diuilish braine,
Could execute conceiue or meditate
So foule a murther of an Innocent.
Caraffa with Bentiuoli giue leaue
Some-what I would in priuate haue with Caesar.
Caesar desemble not for that were vaine
Whence comest thou.
Directly from my Chamber.
Where didst thou here this newes.
Fishers which found his body brought the newes.
Then he was droun'd Caesar was he not?
It seemes he was.
What by some Fisher.
How should I know that.
Sure by some subtill Fisher that layd nets
For Candies life and honor: but say truly,
Was it thy brother.
Are not you my father?
Ah that I neuer had beene any father,
But speake againe, man speake the truth and feare not:
Who slew thy brother Candie this last night,
Who traind him forth who walk'd along with him.
Am I the keeper of my brothers person.
Execrable Cain; perfidious Homecide,
Apparant villaine what canst thou designe?
Which I would know that thou canst hide from me.
A plague vpon your diuills you deale with them,
That watch more narrowly to catch your soule
Then he which sought my brother Candies death,
You know that Sathan is the lord of lies
A false accuser and desembler,
Tell your falce liers they be lying Diuils.
Caesar no more, Caesar no more, thou knowst.
What know I?
That I know, dissemble not.
Suppose you know, suppose in wrath & fury
I killd my brother; can we mend it now?
He was not fashion'd for these busie times:
He rests in peace, our peace rests in our swords.
Caesar thou do'st vnkindly vex my soule,
With rubbing vp my secret miseries:
Incur'd by seeking to lift vp thy head.
Pull me not downe good father with your conscience:
Your conscience, father of my conscience is.
My conscience is as like your conscience,
As it were printed with the selfe-same stampe.
I know my sinnes are burthenous, and beare them,
Your sinnes more hainous, yet your robes conceale them.
Out wicked and nefarious homicide.
Vpbraid me not, for if that Lampe burne dimme,
Which should giue light to men in darkest night;
How can they choose but must in shaddowes erre,
That follovv the blind-glimering thereof:
Doth this one petty fault appeare so grieuous?
Which if you vvell consider is no fault;
He vvas an honest man, and fitt for heauen:
Whilste he liu'd here he breath'd in miserie;
And vvould haue beene enlarg'd: I et him free,
Novv if I may compare your state vvith his,
Or your condition vvith my qualitie,
Haue you not sold your selfe vnto the Diuill,
To be promoted to the Papacie:
Haue you not sould the liuings of the Church?
Are not your coffers cram'd vvith beastly bribes,
With foule extortion, and base Vsury?
Haue yee not (since your inauguration)
Poysoned and done to death six Cardinals;
In diuilish auarice to get their goods?
Haue you not (vvhich is most abhominable)
Commited incest vvith your onely daughter;
And made me sinne vvith her for company,
That both might raigne in hell for company?
Did you not take of Georgio Bucciardo
One hundred thousand Ducats from the Turke,
To kill his brother Gemen Ottamon?
Haue you not kept the Pearle of Italie,
Astor Manfred that young vertuous Prince,
In beastly lust, and filthy Sodomie.
Blasting the blossome of his toward youth?
Haue you not now giuen order for the death
Of my deere Sister, whom your passions caus'd
To kill her latter husband Di Viselli,
And robd the noble Earle of his new spowse,
Onely to cloake your vile impiety,
Caesar the Diuill hath bin thy Schole-maister.
I passe your secret counsell with the diuill,
Your Auarice, ambition, perfidie,
Your bloudie plots, inhumane crueltie,
Why then vpbrayd yee mee with Candies death?
A bastard of our house, degenerate,
In whom no sparke or spiracle of honor,
Appear'd to raise the race of Borgia.
But had I beene Lieutenant of your forces,
This arme had conquer'd all Romania,
France before this had trembled, Spaine had stoop'd,
The Romaine Emperor had faun'd vpon vs.
King Charles had beene restraind, Frederick expulsd,
And Naples had beene made our heritage.
A triple ioy succeeds a single griefe,
I haue engag'd all to make Caesar great,
Caesar it suteth with thy grace and glory,
To cloake my vices, I will pardon thine,
Let one of vs excuse an others crimes,
And for this bloudy fact so lately done.
As thou didst cunningly begin proceed,
To lay the guilt or imputation
On them whose death may doe thee benefit:
And neuer was my soule better contented,
Then that our woes are with rich hopes preuented.
Now stands Romania subiect to my sword.
Imola furli, Camerine, and Vrbine
Shall haue the first charge, if I there succeed,
Haue forward farther with a better speed,
Caesar o nullo written in my guydon,
When with my troopes victoriously I ride on.
Holla Bernardo, call in Caraffa with Bentiuoly:
Ay now now now, my precious boy, my Caesar,
Prosecute as thou hast begunne,
With Arte, looke sullaine and demure,
Hold downe thy head, like one swolne vp with sorrow,
They come, they come, say that those armes were put on,
In reuenge of Candies death.
The soueraigne medicine of things past cure,
Is for to beare with patience and forget,
Caesar hath vowde reuenge for Candies death,
And in regarde of Caesars piety,
I make him generall in his brothers place.
And neuer shall I sheath this sword in peace
Till it haue wrought vpon the murtherer.
Happy successe accompany my Lord,
And in your battles giue you victory.
Is order taken for his funerals.
Bentiuoli take you no thought for that,
That is the greatest care, which troubles me.
Come on my Lords, we will aduise within,
For I must haue your counsels in my griefe.
Kinde Lodowike hadst thou presented me,
With Persian clothes of gold or Tinsilry,
With rich Arabian Odors, pretious stones,
Or what braue women hold in highest price,
Could not haue beene so gracious as this tincture,
Which I more valew then my richest iewels,
Oh Motticilla.
Bring me some mixtures and my dressing boxes,
This night I purpose priuately to sup
With my Lord Cardinall of Capua.
Bring me some blanching water in this bowle.
Here I perceiue a little riueling
Aboue my for-head but I wimple it
Either with iewels or a lock of haire,
And yet it is as white as the pure snow:
O God when that sweet Marques Mantoua,
Did in Ferrara feast my Lord and mee,
What rich comparisons and similies,
He with ingenious fantasie deuis'd,
Doting vpon the whitenesse of my browes?
As that betwixt them stood the chaire of state,
Compos'd of Iuorie for the Paphian Queene:
Sitting in comfort after amourous conquest.
And kist my for-head twenty thousand times.
Oft haue I wisht the coulour of this haire
More bright, and not of such a Spanish dye,
And yet the Duke of Bourbon on his knees,
As the diuinest fauour of this world,
Did beg one lock to make a Bracelet,
For which few haires he garnished my head
With Iewels worth six thousand crownes at least.
My beaming eyes yet full of Maiesty,
Dart loue, and giue bright luster to the glasse,
As when the sunne beames touch a Diamond.
The Prince of Salerne solemnly did sweare,
These eies were quiuers which such shafts did beare
That were so sharpe, and had such fierie touch,
As Cupids Arrowes neuer had so much,
The Rosie Garden of these amourous cheekes,
My nose the gratious forte of conquering loue,
Breathing attractiue odors to those louers
That languish and are vanquisht with desie,
Gonzaga calleth it the siluer pearch,
Where Venus turtles mutuall pleasure search.
Sweet mouth the uby port to Paradice
Of my worlds pleasure from whence issue forth,
Many fase brags, bold sallies, sweet supplies,
A chinne the matchles fabricke of faire nature,
A necke two brests vpon whose cherry niples.
So many sweet solcions Cupid suckt,
Giue me some blanching water in this boule,
Wash my face Motticilla with this cloth,
So tis well now will I try these collours.
Giue me that oyle of Talck,
Take sasnet Motticilla smooth my forehead.
I must delay this colour is it carnation right.
Oh the true tincture of a damask rose,
What is it excellent.
Most full of life.
And madame thats a pretious liniment,
As euer I beheld to smooth the browes.
I will correct these arches with this mullet,
Plucke not to hard, beleeue me Motticilla,
You plucke to hard.
I feele a foule stincke in my nostrells,
Some stinke is vehement ad hurts my braine,
My cheekes both burne and sting giue me my glasse.
Out out for shame I see the blood it selfe,
Dispersed and inflamed, giue me some water.
My braines intoxicate my face is scalded.
Hence with the glasse: coole coole my face, rancke poyson,
Is ministred to bring me to my death,
I feele the venime boyling in my veines.
Ah me deere Lady; what strang leoprosie?
The more I wash the more spreads on your face.
Send to my father; call phisitions in,
Oh Candie where art thou my comforter,
Dead and intomb'd; Lucrece must follow thee,
I burne I burne, oh where is my deere Lord.
My braines are seard vp with some fatall fire.
Deere Lady cheere your selfe, be not dismayd,
His Holines in hast hath sent releife:
His owne Phisition to recomfort you.
For our deere Ladies passion bring some water to coole my thist.
Madam you may not drinke,
Till you receaue this one preseruatiue.
A foule vnsauorie loathsome stinke choakes vp
My vitall sences and a boyling heat
suppes vp the liuely spirit in my lungs.
This poyson spreads and is incurable,
Madame receiue one precious antidote.
What haue I caught you Sforza,
Who painted my faire face with these foule pots,
You see them in my soule deformed blots,
Deliuer me from that murthered man,
He comes to stab my soule I wounded him,
Oh Gismond Gismond hide those bleeding wounds,
My soule bleeds drops of sorrow for thy sake;
Looke not so wrathfull I am penitent.
Loue and remorse did harbour in thine hart,
What doest thou becken to me I will come,
And follow thee through millions of woes.
Sweet Lady will you take a little rest,
It will refresh your spirits instantly.
No rest vntill I see my Lord againe.
Deere Lady doe you loue your life, take rest,
From the pure burning coles of true contrition.
Me thinkes I see the liuely counterfet,
Of catiue Cressed in her misery,
Ingenderd out of hir disloyalty,
Ah Moticilla whome I trained vp
In cunning sleights and snares of filthinesse,
Forgiue me for that sinne; liue and repent.
Oh God forgiue me for my sinnes are great,
And if his goodnesse lend my life some space,
I will with pennance call on him for grace,
And spend the remnant of my life in prayer.
I can no more, death summoneth my soule,
Open thy bosome father Abraham,
Mercyfull father let thy mercy passe
Extend thy mercy where no mercy was.
Mercyfull father for thy sonnes deere merrit
Pardon my sinnfull soule receiue my spirrit.
Now is her soule at rest tis very strange,
As well the cause as manner of her death,
I haue beene studied in Hipocrates,
In bookes of Gallen and olde Auecine,
Obseru'd the cures of diuers learned doctors,
In France in Spaine and higher Germany,
Yet neuer met with such an accicent,
Beare in her body I will in all hast,
Bring wofull newes vnto saint Peeters Pallace,
His Holinesse will grieuiously lament.
Fellows in armes after our victories,
Had in the first front of our happie warr,
With men of hardy resolution,
Now must we bend our forces against Furly,
Where that prowd Amazonian Katharine,
Dareth defiance in the face of warr,
And yet our hopes are sure, all passage cleere,
And she before I lodge this restles head,
Shall beare the bondage of this victori.
These proud presuming spirrits of vaine women,
Whose bloodlesse woundes are only bloody words,
without reason, fight without resistance,
But on the face of grimme deuouring Warre,
With frowning fore-head menacing his force,
They fall downe on their backs as Venus did,
When Mars beheld her with a Souldiers face,
Nay we must fight: I know the puissant spirit
Of warlike Kate the pride of Italie,
Sforzaes braue sister and old Riarioes widdow,
Excellent valour, and deepe policie
Must winne it, if we purchase at her hands.
And yet we be before-hand with the Lady,
Hauing surprized her treasure and her sonnes,
As they were making their escape for Florence:
What shall we trie renowned generall?
And search her resolution.
Shall wee? doubt you not,
Nay though the walles of Furly were of steele,
These pledges should make passage for our powers,
And what? shall we stoope for those twenty Ensignes,
Which this last night haue enter'd their Ports,
Nay were they ten to one within those walles,
Caesar (that carries Fortune in his Standerd)
Would make them giue ground & subiect them-selues.
Speake then at once renowned generall,
Shall we go Souldier-like to worke at first?
Shall we salute her with our Cannon?
What? no Barbarossa not without a parlee,
Fore-God I loue her, and admire her valour,
And till we finde her words prooue empty squibs,
We giue her all the noble rights of warre,
Summon a parlee.
What haue wee Pallas come vpon these walles,
To bring confusion of our companies:
Doth proud Penthesilea liue againe,
Which some-time raging in the Fields of blood,
Made passage with her angry sword through millions.
I tell thee Csar sonne of Alexander
A booke befits thee better then a blade:
Percase in scorne thou wilt reply the like,
A distaffe fits me better then a pike.
Know Caesar had I now so many liues
As here are stoanes or haires vpon your beards,
I would forgo them al before this honor,
Which my deere Lord Riario did leaue mee,
The pledge of my deere loue his Childrens patrimony.
Speake in a milder key renowned Kate.
I loue you well and all braue Sforzaes race
Yet you must yeeld there is no remedy,
It is the Churches right and I must haue it.
Me thinkes a pulpet were more fit for thee,
But did'st thou euer reade Saint Gregory:
That he which hunteth for authority,
Himselfe should gouerne direct and know well;
He did a deede of danger that aduanc'd thee,
For proud ambition violates all right.
Be not so bitter Kate a friend intreates you,
But if intreaties will not, looke vpon mee:
Heere standeth Csar, the sharpe scourge of Furly
And were your fort fenc'd with as many men,
As it is girt with stones Caesar would haue it.
Subdue them and make pillage of their goods
And in resistance seale it with their blouds.
What are your weapons sheathed in your throates?
Is euery word a sword then shake hands Caesar:
Venter no futher and we will be friends
But if your words haue accents in keene swords,
And end in bloud, then Caesar looke on me:
I with defiance turne swords in your throates,
You shall not thrust that imputation
Vpon our fex, for I will fight it ou
So long as I can stand vpon these walls.
You would repent it, if you knew the worst,
Consider Kate be well aduised first.
Caesar at one word to discharge my conscience,
Were there a Cannon there to be dischardg'd
Vpon this fruitfull wombe the nurse of Children,
And I sure peece mell to be torne withall,
If I would not surrender vp this forte
Your Cannon shot should plowe these bowells vp,
That vow to God and my deere husband made:
I neuer will infringe with perfedy:
I know thee bloudy Caesar: the dishonor,
In yeelding vp thy reuerend purple roabes
Which should protect widowes and Orphanes rightes,
Appeareth well in taking vniust armes,
To wrong the Widowes and the Fatherlesse
Either fight Caesar or forsake the field,
Perswade thy selfe aliue I will not yeeld.
Then I will shew you what warres desteny,
Prognosticates, bring forth her ransome hither
If nature be not quite extinguished
These pledges shall enfranchize you from warre
I brought them to this purpose; that in them,
You with your friends might liue in liberty.
Neuer but with advantages deere Lord.
Monster of misery what think'st thou Csar
That I will yeeld mine honor for their safety?
Be not deceiu'd thou hast surpriz'd my Children,
Riarioes riches left in my tuition
And borne out of these bowells; but deere boyes,
Courage your selues I will defend your honors:
I tell thee Csar these my boyes are taught
To beare with patience fates ineuitable
These carry Sforzaes spirit and their fathers;
I dare gage life and aske them they will chuse,
To lack their liues before they loose their honors.
Caesar in this hath offered like himselfe,
He proffereth to preserue your towne vntouch't:
Your goods, your wiues, your liues, your liberties:
But marke what fruites thy bitternesse brings forth,
To make thine hard heart infamous for euer,
Before thy face these boyes shall loose their liues
If thou surrender no without more palee.
Bloudy I defie thy malice,
I spit defiance in thy cowards face.
Traytour to God and man had'st thou beene Caesar,
Inssting on high tearmes of worth and honor
Thou woulst consider that their bloud is Noble,
Thou wouldst consider that they be but children,
Thou wouldst consider that thou art a warrier
And that such noble bloud spilt with dishonor
And tram'd in with insideous trechery,
By God nor man in heauen nor earth below
Can be forgotten or abolished.
Braue generall you parlee with a woman,
Whose heart is obstinate, whose hands are freeble,
Seemeth in vaine and ouer tedious.
Speake at a word cannon is my next parlee,
You will not yeed your state to saue their liues.
I will not Caesar.
Cut of both their heads.
Let vs intreat our mother noble generall,
For to deliuer vp the state of Furly
And will you saue our liues then.
Good Captaine do not kill vs.
If she will yeeld the state your liues are safe.
Good mother for my fathers sake that's dead,
And for mine Vncle sake part of your bowells
And for our owne sakes yeeld your selues and saue vs.
Good sweete mother saue vs.
Poore boies, in heart vnlike Riarioes race,
Or Sforzaes warlike linnage by the mother
Know what it is die with liberty,
And liue with ignomineous seruitude.
If you your liues buy with the losse of states
It were of all extreameties the vilest
But in extreamety to die resolu'd
Preseruing state and reputation:
Is said to dye within the bed of honour,
This is an honor for Riarioes children,
And for my part, it neuer shall be sayd,
That Katherine being strong vpon hir guarde,
Hauing good forces able to defend,
In brutish feate should giue away your states,
I rather will obtrude my selfe vnarm'd,
And meete the thickest ranckes that enter breach,
To be tost vp vpon their souldiers pikes,
Sooner I will set all the towne on fire,
And with my soldiers sacrifice my selfe,
Rather then render vp your heritage,
Oh brauely spoken warlike Amazn.
Mother we scorne death in respect of honor
Let him performe his worst, we feare him not,
Courage sweete brother, thinke vpon my father,
I will dye first, be not affraid of death.
Why then you are resolu'd to dye?
I to dye Caesar.
Bring hether both their heads.
Gods blessing rest with you my deerest sonnes
And if I loose your states, my life shall follow,
Nothing but violence shall force it from vs,
Ere long this quarrell twixt vs will stand euen:
Farewell deere boyes, till we three meete in heauen.
Ah deere Mother, sweete mother, good Vncle Inlio saue our liues.
Away with him.
Let me before I dye, but kisse my mother.
What wouldst thou runne againe into my wombe?
If thou wet here thou shouldst be Posthumus,
And ript out of my sides with soldiers swords,
Before I would yeeld vp thine heritage.
Come brother let vs brauely dye together.
I tell thee when that these haue lost their heads,
I will make sacke and pillage of your state,
Man, women, Orphanes, all put to the sword,
This hath your obstinacie wrought in vs,
Carry them hence, bring hether both their heads.
And then a charge vpon this valiant Lady,
Thi , this proud Semeramis,
Whse valou Brbarssa by these heauens,
Is very wonderfull and gloious.
Had he more force, what would this tirant do?
A chage a charge.
Fr Gods sake charge, a charge let vs to sight.
A spiit full of vengeance, wrah, and spite,
Assaut, assault, chrge noble hearts a charge.
Couragious Kate, you that would throw defiance
Into the face and throate of fate and Caesar,
Such are the fruites of pride and wilfulnesse.
Haue I perform'd my word? are you surpriz'd?
Is not your life and liuing in my power?
Now that my sonnes first by insidious meanes,
Bereaued of their liues, and their states lost,
The date of my calamities is out,
Goe forward with thy tyrannie, strike Caesar,
And take away the Mother with her sonnes:
This done, recount what is thy victory.
A woman with two children vanquished,
A prize befitting the renowne of Caesar.
Come hither Katherine wonder of thy sex,
The grace of all Italian woman-hood:
Caesar shall neuer prooue dishonourable,
Behold thy children liuing in my Tent.
Oh mother, mother, are you come, wee be not dead.
Good mother, thanke the Captaine, we liue yet,
They gaue vs spices, wines, and bad vs welcome,
I pray you thanke them.
Oh but your lands and honors are both lost,
Had not an honorable death beene better:
Then thus to loose your states and liuely-hoods.
Heroike souldier, whose deceipt is honour.
Thou that hast vnexpected sau'd the liues
Of my two children, I submit them here
Thy captiues, for their ransome what is fitt.
I freely pardon hese two boyes their ransome,
Lady behold thy treasure in my Tent,
Had I not wonne this towne, this hadst thou lost,
See Souldiers that her Iewels be reseru'd
For her owne seruice, now the quarrell ends.
But noble Caesar well intreate our people,
They be men valiant, ciuill, obedient,
If you their Magistrates intreate them well.
Take you the charge of Furly, Barbarossa,
Intreate the people well, do not restraine them,
We freely pardon all of them their ransomes,
So much as is in vs, we pardon all,
Vse them as Cittizens of Rome in fauor,
Other instructions you shall haue here-after:
Till then regarde your charge and so farewell.
Lady, your selfe, with your two little babes,
I will take order shalbe sent to Rome,
Be not dismaid, you shall bee well intreated,
You shall want nothing fitting your estates,
March with vs on our way for Capua.
Bring in that Opium, and bowle of Wine,
Heere I must act a Trage-comoedie,
Bernardo is it well confected and prepar'd?
According to my conference with Rotsi.
He sent it as your Holines may see,
Safe sealed vp
Fill me that bowle of wine,
Tis a drowsie medicine, do not tast it my Lord,
Thou hast ben taster to me, many times,
Begin Bernardo.
My Lord I slept too much the last night and I dare not,
It holds good colour hold here Bernardo,
Giue good attendance, bring them to their rest,
Then giue me notice at my study doore.
One set was past before I parted from them,
And by this time they be well heated.
Sirra be diligent and seruiceable in this,
Euen as thou louest thy maister.
Feare me not?
Were t not that my conscience hath bene fyer'd,
With flames of purgatory by this Pope,
I neuer could endure such villany,
The best is he doth pardon all my sinnes.
This set was strangely lost I durst haue wagerd,
An hunder'd ducats after the first chase.
You thinke you play well, but beleeue me brother,
You cannot take paines not obserue a ball,
With that dexterity which appertaineth.
Holla within there if I take no paines,
My wastcote well can witnes for I sweate.
Barber bring in some linnen for my Lords
Bring me some wine for I am very thirsty
I listend for that string and he hath toucht it.
Wilt please your Lordship sit on this low chaire?
Rub my head first then combe it,
Fill me some wine Bernardo,
Good my Lord coole your selfe a litle,
Giue me wine and let it be thy laboure good Barnardo
To call for musicke.
Brother in this cup I commend the loues,
Of all true Fauentines our trusty friends,
Hoping ere long to liue againe with them.
I thanke you brother, if our father Pope.
Performe his promise we'shall soone returne.
This wine was good yet tasteth of the casck,
It hath a musty rellish.
Lets here this musicke,
Holla within there.
My Lord.
I thinke it good after this little rubbing to repose my body
I am some what heauy.
I know the cause,
And what Bernardo.
Marry with much motion of your bodies my Lords,
You must not be so vehement in play.
I knew a noble French man at Anchona,
Twenty yeares since at tennice tooke his death.
With ouer heating of him selfe in play.
More musicke there.
My Lords are both a sleepe musicke depart.
And leaue them to their ease; alasse sweet boyes,
Is it not pitty that these noble branches,
So sweetly knit in one, should neuer wake?
I that am hard of heart sighe for their sake,
My Lord.
What newes man?
Both fast a sleepe.
And both vpon one bed?
Ti done.
And chamber voyded?
All is performed my Lord.
My blessinge rest vpon thee my Benardo.
Depart now with those letters I deliuerd,
To be conuayd to lorece leaue me here.
Slp both secure vpon your fatall bed,
Now hat he God of silence Morpheus,
Hath with his to black horne seal'd vp,
Your langued eye lids loaden with pale death,
Sleepe vntill you draw your latest breath,
Poore hameles boyes strangers to sinne and euill,
Oh were my soule as innocent as yours!
This office is of highest consequence,
In friendshp for I consider it,
I sent you from a million of sorrows,
Into the flowry fields of Paradice.
Their to goe habit in the groues of mittle,
To feed on Manna and to drinke pure Nectar,
A cup of euerlasting happines.
Where such sweet musick vn-con-ceiueable,
Shall entertaine your senses in sweet comfort,
As the delight thereof shall neuer die
Astor what Astor speake awake Phillippo,
Both fast a sleepe.
Now Roderick betake thee to thy taske,
What? peace Astor begins to talke I will attend.
Faire gratious Angell of eternall light,
Which reachest out that hand of happines.
Hayling my spirit to that triumphant throne,
Of endles comfort I adore thy grace.
Oh goulden light of neuer setting Sunne,
Harke brother Astor harke my soule is rapt,
Into the ioyes of heauen with harmony.
Doe they not sleepe? are they not yet a sleepe?
Be not their sences yet lockt vp in sleepe.
Astor awake awake, awake Philippo.
All safe and sure, oh this was but a dreame,
Their Genius hath fore told them of their end,
And ioyfully they doe shake hands with death.
Come out here now you Cleopatraes birds.
Fed fat and plump with proud Egiptian slime,
Of seauen mouth'd Nylus but now turn'd leane:
Take your repast vpon these Princely paps.
Now Ptolamies wife is highly magnified,
Ensigning these faire princely twins their death,
And you my louely boyes competitors,
With Cleopatra share in death and fate.
Now Charon stayes his bote vpon the strond,
And with a rugged for head full of wrath'
He thrusts a million from the shore of Stix,
To giue you waftage to the Elisian fields,
I see their coulors chang and death sittes heauy.
On their fayre foreheads with his leaden mace.
My birds are glutted with this sacrefice.
What now proud wormes? how tasts you princes blood.
The slaues be plump and round in to your nests,
Is there no token of the serpents draught,
All cleere and safe well now faire boyes good-night.
Bernardo, Bernardo, the feate is done,
Vse thy discretion as I did deect.
Tis done in deed alasse they both be dead:
Now must I follow my directions,
Holla within there.
What newes Bernardo?
Alas my Lord ill newes,
But that his Holinesse is fast a sleepe,
And this day stir'd not from his bed-chamber
I would haue brought him to this wofull sight:
Prince Astor with Phillippo was at Tennis,
And being ouer-heated at their game,
Drinking so suddainly vpon that heate,
With much sweete Wine did surfet instantly,
And here alas lye dead vpon this bed.
Alas it is a ruthfull spectacle,
Two princely boyes of noble disposition,
Endued with honorable gifts of vertue.
Of gracious fauour, wise, and liberall.
Phaenzaes hope: Bernardo beare them in,
His Holynesse will much bemone their fate.
My Lord, my Lord, I do not like of this.
Peace man, no more do I, but beare with patience.
It is suspicious but we may not talke,
Come let vs in, oh God!
Oh God what times are these.
After the bloudy Duke Valentinoys
Had conquered Furly, with the warlick Lady,
By wily force he tooke in Capua,
Then through insidious sleights and treacheries,
He did surprize the state of Camerine,
Where he captiued Iulio di Varana,
With his two sonnes all which he strangled,
With semblable tyranny proud Coesar,
On termes of trust meetes with the Duke Grauina,
And Vitelozzo with the prince of Fermo:
Whome he betraide at Sinigaglia,
Bereauing them both of their states and liues,
He conquereth Vrbin; and with violence,
Performeth strange and hiddeous outrages.
By this time with his forces backe to Rome,
Caesar is marching; what betyded there,
Endes in the subiect of this Tragedie.
Now that by cunning force and pollicie,
All the free states and citties o Romania
Subiected are vnto the Church of Rome.
And that our pikes and swordes in blood and slaughter,
Are staind and sheath'd quiet in our scaberds,
Our blood and wounds stanch'd and bound vp in scarfs,
Let vs for this could season of the yeare,
Rest vs and cheere our selues till the next spring.
And then march forward with alacrity.
Braue Barbarossa take these souldiers,
Vnto some quarter where by sound of drum,
According to their muster giue them pay,
Let them be satisfied and so dischargd.
Fellowes in armes faithfull and valiant,
I thanke you for your paines and honesties,
In token of our good heart to your seruice,
Wee giue each common soldier more then pay,
Two ducates: and all other officers.
According to their place redoubled,
With many thankes for your exceeding valor,
Assuring you that in these warres with vs,
Caesar shall make you Captaines of your spoyles,
And so doth he commend you to your ease.
A Caesar a Caesar God saue Caesar.
Sirra come hether you must wayte on me.
My good Lord Cardinall and Bentiuoli,
Much thankes and deere acceptance of your loues,
I louingly returne for your great paines.
His Holinesse gaue vs in serious charge,
To giue you greeting and withall prepares
A sumpteous east for that solemnity.
To which he doth inuite the Cardinalls
With other Lords yor fauourers in Rome.
Humbly commend my duty to my father
Tell him this night I purpose to be with him,
Tell him I liue in health and touching these,
I pray you certifie his Holinesse,
I will haue speciall care: and so my Lords
For a small season I wil take my leaue.
We do congratulate your safe returne.
Come hither Baglioni speake sincerely,
Knowst thou Brandino Rotsi th'apothecary.
What I my gratious Lord? know I my selfe?
How should I know that sir?
May it please your highnes he serues his Holines.
He did indeed somtime and for his villanies,
Is wortily cat of; but tell me sirra:
Thou do'st remembr how for breach of armes
When thou didst stab a certaine lance-prizado:
I pardon'd thee ty life.
True my good Lord I very well remember,
He was a lowsie villaine, marry was he,
And if he liued yet such is my stomacke,
That were he chopt in mammockes I could eate him:
But for that honour in a souldiers word
He spend my life to do your highnesse seruice.
Hast thou thy peece then ready.
Oh my good Lord lies fix, sound as a bell,
With all my warlike furniture beside
Good flask and touch-box, a Valentia blade
A slauish dagger, powder of Rhemes and bulletes
Here they beene.
Somtime this after-oone within the parke,
Next, to the Vatican, Ratsie wilbe:
And as I know thee stout and resolute,
Betow a bullet on him as he posseth;
Few words; if any man attach thee for it,
By my protection thou shalt be enlarged.
And if I do not my good Lord damme me for it
I haue an old grudge at him cole black curre,
He shal haue two steele bullets strongly charg'd
Nay but heere me my Lord?
Ile tell you what,
By this rue fox of steele
I had as good a spaniell for the water,
As euer hunted ducke: and this true villaine
Because my dog did eate vp a pannado
Within his house; what did that Spanish roague?
What did he thinke you my Lord?
Marry very faire an instantly
Poysond my paniell with Rosa-solis,
A pox on him micher, faith ile pay him his olde fippence for't now.
Take this to buy thee clothes my trusty seruant,
Nay tis gold be not affeard of it.
Affeard my Lord
Were it a tempest in a showre of gold
I would indure it and adore you for't.
Then Baglion fit thee, to thy furniture,
Watc in a corner close beyond some tree:
And when the deed is done repaire to me:
Say that thy peece went off against thy will,
Keepe a light match in cock, weare flaske and touch-box:
And take a murren with thee so fare-well;
Thus must I diue deepe in a villaines nature,
And thus must saue a villaine rom the gallows
To play my partes in others purposes.
The man wome I to benefit would choose,
I must in matters of more moment vse:
Or els I will not benefit a man,
Ad cut him of in sque'l if I can.
Here me, but my good Lord marke my words well,
If old Henrilico sin in this seruice
Cassir him, call him whip-stock, let him perish,
For want of Saish wines, and maluasie.
Then faile not my true seruant finely, closely.
No more, but by this crosse,
Why now this Noble Caesars like himself,
Hath fitted me with seruice: if the world,
Had sought out som-what to content a man,
Nothing could better please old Ballion
Then to kill a raskall, coward, curre,
A Spanish squirt-vp, a black poysning toade.
I like this trading better then the warres
For there I serue for two ducates a month,
And not a duck egge richer when I march
And in continuall hazard of my life
For which percase my peece kills twenty persons:
Now shall I march in purse with many ducates,
For one houres seruice but to kill one man,
Free from all danger of mine enemy,
I will about it and take vp my stand.
Thus doth one hideous act succeed an other,
Vntill the mouth of mischeife be made vp:
Now must I traine my fellow to his death,
A deed of uch and I did sweare the same,
Not only for the secrecy thereof.
But to conceale a matter of more weght,
Of greater moment and high cruelty:
When any ded of murther must be done,
To serue his Holinesse, call for Bernardo.
He must be princpall or accessary
To serue all purposes; for gold or pardone,
The Pope giues both; and I can take them both:
Gold can make hard the softet conscience,
And mine is harden'd by the practise of it.
Holla Signeor Bandino.
Who calls without there? what my good fellow Bernardo?
Very welcome: what newes with you?
My Lord hath sent me for the things he spake of.
Here they be very strong and sufficiently compounded
According to directions from his Holinesse,
And speciall warrant vnder his priuy signet
I tried them on three men condemn'd to death:
For rapine and vile murther: but the first
Within lesse then one quarter of an houre,
Puft vp, grew leaprous and his heart strings broake;
Then did I giue alay the second time,
The second prizoner died within three houres
I did the third time mittigate, a little,
And saw when it was minister'd the third man,
Who did within eight houres swell, rage and die.
Well haue you done your part, set downe your bottels,
And read this letter from the Duke Valentinoys,
Well sayd braue Pincoginger, by mine honour
Before I do this seruice lie there peece.
For I must haue a saying to those bottels,
True stingo stingo by mine honour. Oh that mine old friend and Boccadillio Frecobaldi Weare heare aliue againe to taste of this other bottle, Well I will venter vpon it, that I may drinke one heath To Frscebaldi I will encounter with this stout He torean, Greeke.
Were Meleager here that slew the boore.
Like a Boracchio armed all in sacke,
Or stoute Achilles in a pewter coate.
Or old Assarcus amed in a wicker lyrkin,
Or Priamus armed with a leather Iacket,
Lin'd and imbost with Alligant and Hollock
By forch of armes and Mars his valiant hand,
I would encounter them whilst I could stand.
The laues are buisie reading their paphlagonian papers,
I must haue a aying to yu sir I must; though,
You be prouided for his Holines owne mouth; I will be,
Bould to be the Popes tater by his leaue.
Now trusty Troylus, base los manos.
Let him alone it is the Dukes pleasure,
That if he will taste he shall be suffered,
And therefore I was commanded to set them downe,
In presence of such a fellow whome for his sawcinesse,
I haue pepered.
Oh tis a perilous villeine if you knew him so well as I, beleeue me he would peper you for it if he vnderstood so much, peace man he hath broken vp the bottle let him drinke.
Nay let him drinke and burst, for beleeue me I as enformd before of such a ellowe; for whome I was commanded to lay bate; oh notable villeine, how he sealeth death.
This is a Noble nipster faith, so so.
Backe againe to kennell slaue.
He hath his full wages dout not Bernardo, to serue him till he die, seeme not to respect him in any case doe I pray you.
Nay but doe not you respect him, least he doubte you suspect him.
Oh doubt you not, doubt you not, I will neuer looke, let vs turne our talke. Tell his Holinesse tis well compounded and composed of all those drugges mentioned in your letter, giue the Duke right humble thankes for his token, and with all reuerence kisse his excellent hand.
And by this signet you are to deluiuer me the bottles.
Haue a care of them and deliuer them.
Farewell fellow Rotsi.
Adieu Bernardo.
Now doe not I pitty this Spanish villaine because hee consented to the poysoning of this soldier, but for that I am innocent.
What is the wild goose fallen? haue at you Sir, might a poore soldier speake halfe a score woords to your venemous worship and according to your accustomed surlinesse haue no repyall: I beleeue you sir, your wordes are not offenciue in any sort I must confesse. Now thou infectious slaue, thou compictious Rascal, thou confectionary villeine: where is you sublimatum now sir? where is your Ratsbanatum now? now where are your poysoned pulets in stued-broth? where bee they? you neuer drempt of a poysoned ballet, did you goe too? now Signor currigantino will I romage in the worme eaten keele of your rotten hulk: passion of my soule what papers are these. Foh powder, powder foh, whats here I marry sir I like this well, ae you so pursie sir, this may serue to stop a gap in my neighbours hedg, what is this you show me with a same to you, yea and maister of the small ordinance to, this Basilisk hath beene often mounted where there hath beene hot and dangerous siruice in the Ile of Iapan, hold passion of me my guts, out vpo thee thou hast poysoned mee with thy stinking breath or with thy villonous powders out alasse alasse what sirie commotions I feele in my bodie gryping fretting and suming, a plague on your bottle ale with a vengeance, I am peppered there is no remedie in all these extreame agonies! must draw this villeine further: and throw him into a ditch, Deh veleno dell Diabolo, farewell farewell my old Shurcordillio Frescobldi ▪ farewell Madam Sempronia, for in conscience I am guilty of mine owne death oh the pangs of hell and purgatory; come you lowsie Raskall I will bury thee with carryon in the next ditch.
Haue you deliuered to the bottleman,
The fatall wine.
I I gaue charge to Bernardo,
Hauing them safely seald with mine owne signet,
That when feasting I do call for wine,
He shall breake vp the seales and fill that out,
For the two Cardinalls Cornetto and Modina.
Tis well, now if our plot proue right,
Thou shalt be maister of much welth to night,
Dying in estate all comes to my share,
Caraffa loues a sallet passing well,
And I haue fitted one to serue his turne,
Their gould will make thy soldiers fight in blood,
And winge thy victories with good successe.
Let vs noe longer entertaine the time,
By this the Cardinalls expect our presence.
On with auspicious steps triumphant Caesar.
And entertaine them in braue iollity.
Haue spetiall care you that haue these in charge.
That these two sealed bottels be not stird,
Vntill his Holines call for that wine
Feare not I will attend it as my life.
Martiall your selues heere sworne-men and there
Church-men.
Here sit we swordmen to defend the Church.
My Lords giue answere in sinceritie,
Hath not my Caesar fought well for the Church?
That hath so soone subiected in her right.
Imola, Furly, Camerino, Capua,
Vrbine, Faenza▪ Sinegaglia.
Braue Caesar I must bost of it in presence,
That I Christes vicare of his Church on earth,
Haue such a sonne which issued fuom my loynes,
That being vicare of the Churches warres.
Hath in reuolution of one year,
Done more then all the generalls haue done,
In honor of our Church for fortie yeares,
Your Holines with all your Cardinalls,
Your barrons and indeed all christendome
Are bound to giue God thankes for such a Prince.
And him great honor for his fortitude.
Your excellence did in a blessed hower.
Surrende vp your Holy robe a hat,
Be taking and ames,
By whic you mght enlarge our liberties.
my Lord and see we haue all of vs good cause to reioyce, I had bene with your excellence at Capua, I would hd one boat with them as old as I am.
You might my Lord haue had your choyse of Ladies,
Bfull pisners to be ent to Rom.
I marry my Lord some what might haue beene said to this geere to die , but traseant cum ceteris erroribus, would to GOD I weare as young as when I was a Scholler in Padua, faith then I could haue swingd a sword and a buckler, and I did that then wil being but a spring all of 24. yeares which be talkt of in Padua these 40. yeares I warrant it faith my Lord were I so lusty now I would goe with you to the waires this next spring thats flat, wil you eate any sallet my Lord, faith here are excellent herbes if you loue them.
They be my Lord too cold for my stomacke, wilt please you my Lord to drinke a cup of old Greeke wine with it, bring me some wine here.
Bring me some wine here I will drinke a Ioy to Caesar and this Noble company.
Some wine for his Holines owne mouth, Bernardo.
Csar your selfe are master of this east,
I drinke a good successe and victory,
To Caesar and great happines to all.
Happy successe and fortune to you all.
Hold Caesar; stay for wee are poysoned,
My Lord it is all of.
Then art thou qute vndone.
Some villanous conspiracie lyes hid
Within this company, and this pernicious villaine
Hath practiz'd with the; goe with thy soule to hell,
I feele the raging of i.
Away my Lord Modina come away,
Thi trae was laide of purpose or our liues.
Our reuge and defence is from aboue,
Let Sathan worke, he neuer shall preuaile.
How doth my gratious Lord.
Oh very ick bring me preseruatiues,
I thinke I haue s good a any man.
My Lord entiugli take heere my keyes,
You know my study, search my Cabbinet,
There shall you finde a little Christall Phiall,
Wrapt vp in Sarcenet bring i hether straight,
I feele Vesonus raging in my guttes.
Heere Csar taste some of this precious water,
Against all plague, poison, and pestilence
A present helpe: I bought it of a Iew,
Borne and brought vp in Galily.
My Lord it is too sorceable and hotte.
The flames of Mongibell consume my liuer,
Bring me to some repose.
Comfort your selfe my Lord.
Csar take rest,
Send for Physitions, all my feare remaines
That Caesar shall miscarry.
And all my griefe that both.
Noble Bentiuogli with-draw we both,
Vnto my Chamber, I am very sick.
Belchar, Belchar, Belchar;
Varca, Varca, Varca,
Astaroth, Astaroth, Astaroth.
Let Orcus Erebus and Acheron,
And all those Ghosts which haunt the pitchy vaultes
Of cole black hags in Cimerian shades
Muster themselues in numbers numberlesse,
To daunce about the Ghost of Alexander.
Our firy region voyd of all religion,
And diuilish order by necessity,
Compell'd requires his present policy.
That fatall wine which for his Cardinalls,
He destined I tooke out of the place:
And plac'd his owne wine for those Cardinalls.
The date of his damnation is at hand.
Be ready then for I the first will beare,
As swist as wirl-winde his black soule to Stix.
And I with poysned toads will stop his mouth,
Whose heart was neuer satisfied with lust.
And I with snakes and stinging Scorpions
Will scourge him for his pride and insolence.
And I with force of fiends will hall his limmes,
And pull them till he stretch an achor length.
And for his auarice I will fill his paunch,
With store of moulten gold and boyling leade.
Then let vs for his sake a horne-pipe treade.
You talke of pennance and of penitence,
Compunction with contrition and remission
For all my sinnes; I pray you thinke of yours
You vex your selues too much I cannot thank you,
Haue patience sirs; oh tis a goodly exorcisme
Quem penitet peccasse paene est innocens
Giue leaue, giue leaue, come hither when I call
Eyther mere fooles or good phisitions all.
Nay leaue me good my lords, faine would I meditate,
Leaue me I pray you.
We leaue our praiers with your Holinesse,
Call vpon God, thinke of his endlesse bounty.
Pray for your selues, troble not me with praiers,
I pray you troble not your selues with praying.
solus. What is repentance? haue I not forgotten?
Why repentance is a spirituall martiredome,
Which mortifieth sinnes and heales the soule:
Hauing beene wounded with the spirits sword
This sword Gods booke: that booke by me profain'd
And by which booke of God my soule is damn'd,
I damn'd vndoubtedly.
Oh wretched Alexander, slaue of sinne
And of damnation; what is he that can
Deliuer thy poore soule? oh none but he
That when thou didst renounce him cast of thee,
Repentance is in vaine, mercy too late,
Oh why should miserable mortall man,
Whose languashing breath liues in his nostrills
Vex and torment himselfe with dayly trauell
To scrape vp heapes of gold to gape for honors?
What were the conquests of great Alexander:
Of Cyrus, Caus Caesar? what were it
To be possessed of this vniuerse
And leaue it all behind him in a moment?
Might some one man attaine that happinesse
Which our first Adam had n Parradice,
Before he did preuaricate? why then
It were a worke oflasting worthinesse
To rippe the bowells of our mother Ops
For treasure; and to conquer all the world,
Because eternity would promise it,
Out, out als my paines, my guttes, my liuer
And yet I feare it not though in secuity
Once more I will with powrefull exorcismes,
Inuoke those Angells of eternall darkenesse
To shew me now the manner of death.
What dost thou start foule child of reprobation
Vaine are thy crosses, vaine all exorcismies,
Those be no fruites of faith but mere hypocrisie:
Signa te signa temeré me tangis & angis
Roma tibi subito motibus ibit amor.
Rome Which once was thy gorgeous concubine
Hath now forsaken thee: now doth she finde,
Thy falshood which did her adulterate
What dost thou tremble slaue of sinne and hell?
I exorcise thee foule malignant spirit
In the names of, of, of —
Of what? foule mouth, poluted soule?
Corrupted slesh; God hath forsakn hee,
Thy date expired it, thy powre determined.
Dissolue dissolue, break, breake, black soule dissolue,
And poyson all this hem so here wih sinne.
Thy death and dissolution stand at dore,
Resolue now to dissolue, thy soule is ours.
Proud Lucifer Traytor, to great Iehouah,
Father of lies my time is not expir'd
I will not do that violence to God,
Taking that which is his from him
To be bestow'd on his great enemy.
Thou that hast throwne those graces in his face,
How canst thou think vpon saluation?
Think that th'art damn'd. I will declare it plainely.
Seauen years are yet to come, I look for them.
Examine thy soule with this counterparte.
Behold it? is it not for eight years & 8 daies?
Thou foole examine in Arithmetik,
Numbers without distinction placed thus.
Annos with the figure 11. signifying eleuen years, & the figure,
Seauen applyed to Dies importing seauen daies.
How? how? how? how? howes that?
Deh quella malitia del Diabolo: Deh quello veleno del inferuno.
And for what stands this figure then?
Why for eighteene this figure stands for octauo referred vnto di last before, signifying th'eight day after, so that Annos vndicem without distinction signifying eleauen years; and this figure seauen added to daies; and that octauo post, importing the eight day following, moriere, thou shalt die. I meane thy bodie with thy soule in respect of Heauen.
Thus many daies hast thou continued Pope,
And this is thy last day design'd by fate.
Thou canst not mock me with thy Sophistrie,
M soule is more diuine and cannot perish.
Thy soule foule beast is like a Menstruous cloath,
oluted with vnpardonable sinnes.
Know then malignant Angell of confusion,
My soule is a diuine light first created
In liknesse liuely formed to the word,
Which word was God, that God the cause of causes,
My soule is substance of the liuing God,
Stampt with the seale of heauen, whose Carracter
Is his eternall word, at which hell trembles.
And what of that? thou therein hast no part,
I do confese thy soule was first ordayn'd
To good: but by free-will to sinne thou slaue,
Hast sold that soule from happinesse to hell.
Marke yet what I can answer for this soule.
Mightie Iehouah most exuperant,
Two creatures made in feature like himselfe,
The world and man: world reasonable and immortall,
Man reasonable, but dissoluble and mortall,
And therefore man was called Microcosmus,
The little world, and second tipe of God,
Conteyning those high faculties and functions,
And elements which are within the world.
Man then that dh participate with all,
Through operation, conuersation, and simbolisation,
With matter in the subiect properly,
With th'elements in body quadrifarie,
With growing plants in vertue vegitatiue
In sence with beasts; with heauens by th'influence
Of the superiour spirits into th'inferiour
In wisedome and capacitie with Angels,
With Eloym in that great continent,
Is without doubt preserued by that God,
Finding all things conteined in himselfe.
Answer me vaine Philosopher to this,
Thou that hast planted man in this perfection,
Not looking on thy detestable soule,
Which first like a pure leafe of whitest Lilly,
Cleere from all blemish was bestow'd by God,
And thou foule beast didst shamefully polute it.
Is it not one of humaine faculties,
To propose for your selues the best you can,
Where other creatures carryed with blinde force,
Make them-selues bond-slaues to the present time.
The scope of mans creation was to glorifie
The most all potent maker of all things,
The Alpha and Omega of all bountie.
But he that wilfully betrayes this soule,
That pretious Iewell wherein God delights,
Dishonors God and doth depriue himselfe,
Of all saluation and beatitude.
Rest with this answer, that my soule is Gods
Whose habitacle is prepar'd in heauen.
First it doth know God being figured
According to that Image of himselfe,
And then the world whose liuely shape it beares,
And to conclude the soule of man knowes all,
Because with all things it doth simbolize,
For in this Man there is a minde intelligent,
A quickning word and a celestiall spirit,
That like a lightning euery way diffused,
All things which are made by the mighty power,
Vniteth, moueth, and replenisheth.
These things should haue beene thought vpon before,
The summum bonum which liues in the soule,
Is an eternall pleasure to behold,
And haue fruition of the mightie power.
Which thou didst neuer see, nor canst enoy.
Pawse yet a little, let me meditate, Mercy, mercy, mercy; arise arise: vp, vp, vp: fy, fy: no, no? stirre stubburne, stonie, stiff indurate heart not yet, vp. why, what? wilt thou not foule traytor? to my soule? not yet?
Arise, arise, aduaunce heart clogg'd with sinne,
Oppressed with damnation: vp aduaunce yet.
Wilt thou not stirre stiffe heart? what am I damn'd?
Yet a little, yet a little, oh yet: not yet? alas.
High God of heauens and earth if thou beare loue,
Vnto the soule of infull man shew mercy,
Mecy good Lord, oh mercy, mercy, mercy.
Oh saue my soule out of the Lyons pawes,
My darling from the denne of blacke damnation,
My soule, my doue, couer with siluer wings,
Her downe and plumage make of fine tryed gould,
Help, help, help, aboue▪ stirre, stirre, stupiditie.
He charmes in Dauids words with Iudas spirit,
It will not, no it will not, yet alas, no, no, no? is that my sentence to damnation?
I am vndone, vndone.
He shall dispaire, vassall of sinne and hell,
Prouide thy selfe in black dispaire to dwell.
I tell thee I cannot be resolu'd,
To dwell in darkenesse breake black soule dissolue,
And poyson all this Hemisphere with sinne,
And if I may not reach that happinesse,
Since for my sonnes sake I my selfe inthral'd,
Tell me shall Caesar die this death with me?
Caesar; his youth and strength of blood driues out
This fat all poyson and shall liue a while.
Oh shew me then the manner of his death,
Attend it time growes short all feare is past.
What meanes that ghastly shadow which came first?
By that which represents Lucretia,
Leprous and poisoned is thy death declar'd,
By poyson which now struggleth with thy spirits,
And by that other which sets out to thee,
The murther of thy sonne the Duke of Candy,
Prefigur'd is the death of thy sonne Caesar,
Thou for the poysoning of thy daughter poysoned:
He for the murthering of his brother murthered.
Thus God is onely iust.
The Diuill cannot deny it.
Man onely false.
Learne miserable wretched mortall men,
By this example of a sinfull soule,
What are the fruites of pride and Auarice,
Of cruell Empire and impietie,
Of prophanation and Apostacie,
Of brutish lst falsehood, and perfidie,
Of deepe dissembling and hypocrisie,
Learne wicked worldlings, learne, learne, learne by me
To saue your soules, though I condemned be.
Here comes a fatall message, I must hence.
My roabes, my roabes; he robs me of my roabes,
Bring me my roabes, or take away my life,
My roabes, my life, my soule and all is gone.
From the pale horror of eternall fire,
Am I sent with the wagon of blacke Di,
To guide thy spirit to the gates of death,
Therefore I summon thee to come with speed,
For horrizons now stand thee not insteed.
Horror and horror, feare ensueth feare,
Torment with tormentes is Incompassed:
Dispaire vpon dispaire, damnation
Vpon damnati, hell and consence,
Muter lust aarice impiety,
Vae prphnation and apotacie,
Rage and distraction tranize: away,
Away proud Lucifer, away.
away, away.
Holla, holla, holla, come, come, come, what, when, where when, why, deaf, strike, dead, aliue, oh alas, oh alas, alwaies burning, alwayes feezing, alwayes liuing, tormented, neuer ending, neuer, neuer, neuer mending, out, out, out, out, why, why, whether whether, thether.
Thether, thether, thether.
What is he dead?
Dead, and in such a fashion,
As much affrights my spirits to remember,
Thunder and fearfull lightning at his death,
Out cries of horror and extremity.
Cause all your bells to ring my lords of Rome,
Rome is redeemed from a wicked Pope.
God hath beheld vs with his eyes of mercy,
His name be glorified, ioyne all in prayer,
And giue him praise that tooke away your shame.
Goe your procession, sing your letinies,
A let your Churches through with multitudes,
Banquets and bonfiers through the Citty make.
In signe our Church is freed from infamy,
Euen as his spirit was inflate with pride,
Behold his bodie puffed vp with poyson,
His corps shall be conuaied to saint Peeters,
Open for all beholders, that they may
See the reward of sinne, amend and pray.
Th'omnipotent great guider of all powers,
(Whose essence is pure grace, and heauenly loue,
As he with glorie crownes heroyick actions,
Bearing a taste of his eternall vertue)
So semblably doth he with terror strike,
In heauie vengeance sinnes detestable:
As in this tragike myrrour to your eyes,
Our sceane did represent in Alexander,
Flagicious Caesar his ambicious sonne,
Reseru'd for more calamities to come,
After he was imprisoned by the Church,
Escap't into the kingdome of Nauarre,
Vnto King Iohn then brother to his wife:
Where in an ambush at Viano slaine,
ust Nemesis repaide his treacherie.
HEroicke and beneuolent spectators,
Your gratious eares, and curious obseruations,
Iuditious censures, and sweete clemencie,
Haue thus addrest our Tragick Theater,
T'exchange contentment, or benignitie:
Humbly deuoted to your good desires.
For some delight, cause of discourse for others,
For all example, and for none offence,
Your fauours are a royall recompence.
Which when our loftie Muses shall perceiue,
Then in more pompous and triumphant state,
Your eyes with glory shall the deed receaue
Of mightie Monarches, Kings, and change of fate.
By me those persons which our Scene presented,
Kisse all your hands, and wish you well contented.