ISyster of the thunderer, (for nowe that name alone remaynes to me) Ioue euermore as though deuorste and gone,
And temples of the hyghest ayre as wwe shunned haue,
And beaten out of skyes aboue the place to harlots gaue.
I muite goe dwell beneathe on grounde, for hoores doo holde the skye.
From hens the beare in parte aboue of yye ple full hye,
A haughty starre the greekysh shypps by seas dothe guyde about.
Frō this way, whēs at spryng tyme warme the days is loased out,
Europes bearer through the waues of Tyria shynes full bright.
From ths, their stormy fearefull flocke to shypps, and seas affright,
The wandryng daughters here and there of Atlas vpwarde swaye.
With staryng bushe of heare from hens Orion gods dothe fraye:
And Perseus eke his glyttryng starres of golden glosse hathe heere.
From hens the twynns of Tyndars stocks doe shyne, a sygne full clere:
And at whose byrth fyrst stoode the grounde that erste went too and fro.
Nor onely Bacchus nowe hymselfe, or Bacchus mother lo,
Haue clymbde to gods: least any parte shoulde from rebuke be free,
The skyes the Gnossian strumpets crounes doe beare in spight of mee.
But I of ollde contempts complayne: me, one dire, fierce, and shrewde
Thebana lande, with wicked broode of Ioues base daughters strewde,
Howe ofte hath it a stepdame made? though vp to heauen shoulde rise,
The conqueryng drabbe Alcmena nowe, and holde my place in skies,
And eke her sonne to promysde starres obtayne the woorthye waye,
At byrthe of whome the staying worlde so long deferrde the daye,
And Phoebus slowe from mornyng sea begoon to glyster bryght,
Commaunded long in th'ocean waues to hyde his drowned lyght:
Yet shall my hates not leaue them so. a wrathfull kyndlyng rage
His mynde in madnesse shall styrre vp, and yre that maye not swag
Shall euermore (all peace layde downe) wage warres eternally.
What warrs? what euer hydous thyng the earthe his ennemy
Begetts, or what soeuer sea, or ayre hath brought to syght
Bothe dredfull, dire, and pestplent, of cruell flercest myght,
Tis tierde, and taemde: he passeth all, and name by ylls dothe rayse,
And all my wrathe he dothe enioye: and to his greatter prayse
He turnes my hates: whyle tedyous tayles to muche I hym beehest,
He proues what father hym begot. bothe the, where lyght epprect
Hath sea, and where it showde agayne, where an daye dothe crayne,
And with his brande approchyng neere dothe dye those Aethiops twayne,
His strengthe vntamde is honoured: and god eche where is he
Nowe calde in world. and nowe more of monsters want to me,
And labour lesse to Hercles is t'accomplyshe all my wyll,
Then me to bydde: at ease he doothe myne imperies fulfyll.
What cruell hestes of tyraunt nowe so fierce a yong man maye
Preuayle to hurte? for loe he beares for weapons nowe awaye
What once he fearde, and put to flyght: he armed comes at syde
With lyon fierce, and Hydra bothe: nor lande suffiseth wyde,
But broake he hath the thresholde lo of that infernall Ioue,
And spoyles with hym of conquerde kyng be drawes to godds aboue.
But thats but lyght, broke is the league of sprightes that there doo dwell.
I sawe my selfe, I sawe hym loe (the nyght nowe gone of hell,
And Ditis taemde) throwe out abroade before his fathers syght
His brothers spoyles. Why drawes he not ppreste and bounde by myght
Hymselfe in chaynes that equall thynges to Ioue by lotte dooth holde?
And beare the rule of captyue hell, and waye to Styx vnfolde?
Up opened is from lowest ghosts the backewarde waye to shye,
And sacred secrets of dire deathe in open syght doo lye.
But he (the dredfull denne of sprights breake vp) full fiercs and stout
Euen uer me doothe triumphe l, and with prowde hande about
The oule black dogge by Grekishe townes he leades from hell awaye.
When seene was vgly Cerberus I sawe the fadyng daye,
And fearefull soon: euen melykewyse a tremblyng dreade oppreste,
And lookyng on the fylthy necks of conquerde monstrous beaste,
I feared muche myne owne behests. but lyght thyngs I complayne,
For heauen I maye be frayde, least he may get the hyghest rayne,
That lowest woon. the sceptors from his father wyll he take,
Nor he to starrs (as Bacchus dy) his waye wyll gently make:
The waye with ruyne wyll he seeke, and be in empty skyes
Wyll reygne alone. with force displayde his haughtye harte doothe ryse,
And he, that heauen it selfe, by force of his myght gotten bee,
It bearyng learnde: quight vndernethe the worlde his headsette he,
Nor ones his shoulders bowde, the payse of suche a myghty mas:
And mydst of heauen on Hercles necke alone lo settled was.
His necke vnwryde the starrs aboue and skies dyd onelye staye:
And me lykewyse oppressyng hym, to Gods he seekes the waye.
Goe Ire, goe on, and beate hym downe that greate thynges doothe inuent,
Matche thou with hym, and with thy hands nowe thou thy selfe hym rent.
Suche hates why dooste thou meditate? Lette all wylde beastes nowe go:
And weary Eurystheus nowe be free from geeuyng charges me.
The Titans daryng once of Ioue to breake the imperye
Sende out: lette loase the denne abroade of mounte of Sicilye.
The Doricke lande that with the turn of gyant quakes afrayde,
Let it bryng foorthe the dredefull necke of moner vnderlayde.
Let yet the haughty moone aboue some other beastes beeget.
But these he ouercame. seekst thou a matchet' Alcides yet?
Thers none, except hymselfe: let hym agaynst hym selfe rebell.
Let present bee from bottome deepe vpraysde of lowest hell
Th' Eumenides, let flamyng lockes of theyrs the fyres out flyng,
And furious handes beestowe about the stroakes of vypers styng.
Goe nowe full prowde, and skale the skyes to seates of godds make waye.
Nowe must thy battels wage be, full cleere loe shynes the daye.
Despise mās works: thinkst ye fierce wight that hell and soules alowe
Thou haste escapte? naye here I wyll an other hell the showe.
In deepe myste hyd I wyll call vp frome bottome lowe of hell
Beyonde the wayes of gylty ghostes rebatefull goddesse fell.
where as the roaryng dredfull denne resoundes with cries about,
From deepest bonde of Ditis raigne beneathe I will fette out,
what so is lefte. Let hatefull hurte nowe come in anger woode,
And fierce imptetie emrewe hym selfe with his owne bloode,
And errour eke, and fury armde agaynste it selfe to foght.
This meane, this meane, let wrath of myne nowe vse to shewe my myght.
Begyn ye seruantes nowe of hell: the feruent burnyng tree
Of pyne shake vp: and sette with snakes her dredfull flocke to see
Lette nowe Megaera bryng to syght: and with her mournefull hande
for burnyng roage bryng out of hell a huge and direfull brande.
Doo this, require you vengeance due, and paynes of hell his spoyle,
Stryke through his breaste: let fiercer flame within his bosome boyle,
Then whiche in Aetna fornace beates so furiousely to see.
That madde of mynde and witles may Alcides dryuen bee
With fury great through pearced quight, my selfe must fyrst of all
Be madde. Wherfore dothe Iuno yet not in to ragyng fall?
Mee, met, ye Furies, systers three throwne quight out of my wyt
Cosse fyrst, yf any thyng to doo I doo endeuour yet
For stepdame meete: let now my hates be turnde an other way.
Let hym (returnde) his babes beholde in safetie, I you praye,
And strong of hande come home: I haue nowe found the day at length,
In whiche may greatly me auayle the hated Hercles strengthe.
Bothe me, and eke hym selfe let hym subdue, and wyshe to dye
Returnde from hell. yea let it here be my commoditye,
That he of Ious begotten is: here present wyll I stande,
And that his shafts goe streight from bowe, I wyll directe his hande:
The mad mans weapons wyll I guyde, Euen Hercles fyghtyng
At length Ile ayde. This gylt once doone then leefull is that so
His father may admytte to skyes those gyltie handes of his.
The fadīg stars now shine but seeld in sight in stipye skye, night ouercome with day,
Plucks ī her fires, while sprōg again is light yt dai star draws yt clere sō beams their way.
The yye sygne of haughty peale agayne, with seuē starrs markt yt beares of Arcady,
Do call the light with ouerturned wayne. with marble hors now drawn his way to hy
Doth Titan toppe of Detha ouerspred. the bushes bright that now with beries bee
Of Thebes strewd, by day do blush full red. and to returne dothe Phoebus syster flee.
Now labor hard begyns, and euery kynde of cares it stirrs, the shepeherd doth vnfolde
His flocksvnpēd, do grase their fode to finde & nipps yt grasse, with hoary frost ful colde.
At will dothe play in open medowe fayre, yt ealfe, whose brow did dam yet neuer teare
The empty kyne their vdders doo repayre. & light with course vncertayn, here & there,
In grasse full soft the wanton kid he flyngs. in top of bow doth sit with chauntyng song,
And to the son new rose to sprede her wyngs bestirrs herself, her mournfull nests amōg
The nightingale: & doth with birdes about confuse resound, with murmure myxed rife
To witnes day, his sailes to wynds sette out the shipman doth cōmit in doute of lyfe,
While gale of wīd yt slack sails fils ful strait he leanyng ouer hollowe rocks dothe lye, .
And eyther his beegiled hookes dothe bayte, or els beholds and feeles the pray from hye with paysed hande.
The trēblyng fishe he feeles with lyne extēt. this hope to them to whom of hurtlesse life,
Is quiet rest, and with his owne content, and lytle, house, suche hope in fieldes is rife.
The troublus hopes wt rollīg whirlwīd gret & dredful feares, their waies in cities kepe.
He proude repaire to prince in regall seate, & harde court gates without the rest of slepe
Esteemes, and endles happynes to holde doth gather goods, for tresure gaping more,
And is full poore amyd his heaped golde. the peoples fauour him (astonied sore)
And cōmons more vnconstant then the sea, with blast of vain renun lifts vp ful proud.
He sellyng at the braulyng barre his plea, full wicked, setts his yres & scolldyng lowde
And woords to sale a fewe hath known of al the careles rest, who mindful howdoth tte
Swyft age away, the tyme that neuer shall returne again do hold. while fates permitte.
At quiet lyue: the life ful quickly glides with hastned course, & with the winged day
The whele is turnd of yere yt hedlōg lides, the sisters hard performe their tasks alway,
Nor mai again vntwist their threds ons spō yet mankynde lo vnsure what waye to take
To mete the greedy destenies dothe ron, and willyngly we seeke the Stygian lake.
To muche Alcides thou with stomack stout the sory sprights of hell dooste haste to see. with course prefixt the fates ar broght about to none once warnd to come, may respyte be
To none to passe their once appointed day. the tombe all people calde by death doth hide
Let glory him by many landes away display, & same throughout all cities wide
Full bablyng praise, & euē with skye to stād auaunce, & starrs: let hym in chariot bright
Full haughty goe: let me my natiue land in safe & secret house kepe close frō sight.
To restful men hoare age by cours doth fal, and lowe in place, yet safe, & sure doth lye
The poore and base estate of cottage small: the prowder pōpe of mynd doth fall frō hye.
But sad here comes with losed locks of hear loe Megara, with lyttle cumpanye,
And slow by age draws Hercles father nere
QGuyder great of heauen, and of the worlde o iudge full hye,
Yet now at length apoynt a mean of carefull myserye,
And ende of our calamitie. to me yet neuer daye
Hath carelesse shynde, the ende of one affliction paste awaye
Begynnyng of an other is: an other ennemye
Is foorthwith fownde, before that he his ioyfull famylye
Retourne vnto, an other fyght he taketh by behest:
Nor any respite gyuen ys to hym nor quiet rest,
But whyle that he commaunded is: strayght hym pursueth shee
The hatefull Iune. Was yet once from toyle and labour free
His infantes age? the monsters lo he vanquysht hathe and slayne,
Before he knew what monsters ment. The skaled serpents twayne
Theyr double neckes drew on toward hym, agaynst the whyche to ryse,
The infant crepte to meete with them, the serpentes glyttryng eyes
Lyke fyre, with quiet carelesse brest he lookyng fast vppon,
With coūtnance cleere, hard wrested kkots of them he caught anon:
And stranglyng then the swellyng throates of them with tender hande,
To Hydraprelude made, the beaste so swyfte of Maenale lande,
That with muche golde bare vp full bryght his beautified heade,
Is caught in course. of Nemey woode lykewyse the greatest dreade
The lyon prest with Hercles armes hath rearde with dreadfull crye.
What shoulde I speake of stables dyre of steedes of Bystonye?
Or kyng caste out hym selfe for foode his horses fierce to fyll?
And brittled beast in thicke topps woont of Crymanthus hyll,
The boare of Maenalye, the woodds of Arcady to shake.
And bull that dyd no lyttle dreads to hundred peoples make?
Among the flocks of Hesper lande that hens farre distant bee,
The shepherde of Cartesian coast of tryple shape to see
Is slayne, and dryuen is the praye from farthest parte of weaste,
Cithaeron quakte when by hym past to sea the well knowne beast.
He beeyng byd to make by coastes of sommer sonne his waye,
And parched landes whche sore with heate dooth boyle the myddell daye,
The mountayns brake on eyther syde and rampters all vndoon,
Euen vnto swyfte and ragyng sea hathe made a waye to roon.
Then entryng in of plenteous wood the pleasant gardeyns gaye,
The wakyng dragons golden spoyles with hym he brought awaye.
The Lerna monsters numerous yll what neede to tell haue I?
Hath he not hym with fyre at lengthe subdewde, and taught to dye?
And which were woont with wyngs abrode to hyde the daye from syght,
Euen from the cloudes he sought and draue the Srymphale byrdes to flyght.
Not hym subdewde who euer lyes in bedde vnmatcht at nyght
The wyddowe queene of them that toke to Thermodont their flyght.
Nor handes that well durst enterprise his noble trauayles all
The fylthy labour made to shrynke of foule Augias hall.
What vayle all these? he wants the worlde whyche ofte defended he.
And th'erthe well knowes the woorker of his quietnes to be
Away from earthe: the prosperous gylt that beareth happy swaye,
Is vertue callde, and now the good to wycked doo obaye.
The ryght doth stande in myght of armes, feare treadeth downe the lawe.
Before my face with cruell hande euen presently I sawe
Reuengers of theyr fathers reygne the sonnes with swoorde downe cast,
And of the noble Cadmus eke hymselfe the ofspryng last
Then slayne: I sawe his regall crowne at once from hym awaye
With head byreft. Who Thebes alas enough bewayle nowe maye?
The fertile lande of godds, what lorde nowe quakes it for to knowe?
Out of the fieldes of whiche somtyme, and fruitefull bosome lowe.
The youth vpsprong with sworde in hand preparde to battell stoode:
And walls of whiche Amphion one of myghty Ioue his broode,
Hath buylt with sowndyng melody in drawyng to the stones:
To towne of whome the parent cheefe of Godds not onely ones
Heauen beyng left hath come, this lande that godds aboue alway
Receyuds, & whiche hath made them godds, and (leefull beete to say)
Perhapps shall make, with lothsome yoake of bondage is preste downe.
O Cadmus stocke, and citezens of olde Amphions towne,
Wherto are ye nowe fallne? dreade ye a cowardly exul thus,
His coastes to dwell in lachyng, and to ours iniurious?
Who through the worlde pursues the gyllts and wrong by sea and lande,
And cruell sceptors broken hath with iuste and ryghtfull hande,
Nowe absent serues, and what he eae in other doothe sustayns:
And nowe doth vannyshr Lycus holde of Hercles Thebes the rayne.
Yet shall he not: he shall come home, And hym with vengeaunte quight,
And sodayne ryfe to starrs: he wyll Soone fynde the waye to lyght,
Or make it ells. returne thou sate, repayre to thyne in haste:
And conquerour to conquerde house yet come agayne at laste.
Ryse vp my spouse, and darknesse deepe repellde of helly shade
Breake vp with hande, yf no way may for thee kept backe bee made,
And passage be shette vp, returne with worlde vprent by myght.
And what soeuer lythe possest byneathe in darkest nyght,
Sende out with thee. as when the topps of haughty hylles vndoon
A hedlong passage makyng through for hasty floude to roon
Thou somtyme stoodst, whā wt great might of thyne asunder broake
The Tempye woods wyde open laye: and beaten with thy stroake
Of more renowns.
what wretches moste chiefly wyshe of all,
They soone beleue.
Nay what thei feare to muche least it may fall,
They thynke it neuer may bee shoonde, nor rydde by remedy.
Beleefe is ready styll to dreade the woorser myseye.
Depe drownde, & whelimde, & farthermore with all the worlde full lowe
Oppressed downe, what ways hath he to lyght agayne to goe?
What way I pray you had he then when through the burnyng coste,
Aud tumblyng after maner of the troubled sea vp toste
He went by sands: and freate that twyse with ebbe away doothe slyppe,
And twyse vpflowe: and when alone with his forsaken shyppe,
Fast caught he stucke in shallowe foordes of shelfy Syrtes sande.
And (nowe his shyppe on grounde) dyd passe through seas a foote to lande?
Iniurious fortune vertue most of men moste stoute and strong
Doothe seldome spare: no man alyue Hymselfe in safetie long
Ile gyue the secret sacrifyce: to thee with muche fayth loe
Long fyre brandes at Eleusis towne full sylent wyll I throe.
Then to my brethern shall I thynke to bee restoarde agayne
Theyr sowles, and eke hymselfe alyue and guydyng of his rayne
My father for to flouryshe yet. yf any greater myght
Deo kepe thee shette, we followe thee: with thy returne to syght
Defende vs all, or els to hell drawe downe vs all to thee.
Thou shalt vs drawe, no god shall rayse vs vp that broken bee.
O Faythfull fellowe of our bloude, with chaste true faythfulnes
The bridebed keeping, and the sonns of haughty Hercules,
Conceyue in mynde some better thyngs, and take good harte to thee:
He wyll come home, as after all his labours woonteth hee,
The mownt, now here, now ther fel dow and rampier rente of staye,
The ragyng brooke of Thessaly dyd roon a newe fownde waye.
Thy parentes so, thy soons, thy lande repayryng home to see,
Breake out, and lowest bonde of thyngs out bryngyng thens with thee,
And what soeuer greedy age in all these long yeares race
Hath hyd, shewe foorth, & ghosts that haue forgotte theyr former case,
And people vp before the dryue that fearefull are of lyght.
Unworthy spoyles for thee they are, yf thou but bryng to syght
What bydden is. great things, but farre to muche I speake for me,
Unwotyng of myne owne estate. when shall I happe to see,
The day when thee, and thy ryght hande, I maye embrace agayne,
And slowe returnes, nor yet of me once myndefull, may complayne?
To thee for this O guyde of godds, vntamed bulls shall bryng
Theyr hundred neckes: to thee O queen of frutes on earthe that spryng
To peryls great and daungers may so often tymes out caste.
Whome chaunce doothe often ouerslippe, the same yt fyndes at laste.
But cruell loe, and greeuous threats euen bearyng in his face,
And suche as he of stomacke ys, doothe come euen suche of pace,
Prowde Lycus who the sceptors shakes in bande of other kyng,
The plentuous places of the towne of Thebes gouernyng,
And euery thyng aboute the whyche with fertyle soyle dooth goe
Sloape Phocis, and what euer doothe Ismenus ouerflo,
What euer thyng Cithron seethe with haughty toppe and hye,
And slender Isthmos yle, the whyche betweene two seas dooth lye.
NOt I of natiue countrey bowres Possesse the auncient ryght
Unworthy heyre nor yet to me are noble men of myght,
The grandfathers, nor stocke renownd with titles hy of name,
But noble vertue: who so boastes of kynred whence he came,
Of others vertue makes his vwnte. but gotte with fearefull hande
My sceptors are obtaynde: in swoorde dothe all my safety stande.
What thee thou wottst agaynst the wyll of cytesyns to get,
The bryght drawne sworde must it defende. in forayne counttey set
No stable kyngdome is. But one my pompe and princely myght
May ratifye, once ioynde to me with regall torche full bryght,
And chambers Megara: of stocke of suche nobilitee
Let vpstarte state of myne take shape. I doo not thynke that shee
Refuse it wyll, or in the bedde with me despyse to lye.
But yf with proude vnbrydled mynd thee stubberne doo denye,
Then quyght I purpose to destroye the house of Hercules.
The hate of men wyll then my pryde, and peoples speache oppres.
Chiese knacke of kyngdome is to beare Thy subiects hares eche one.
Lets proue her then, chaunce gyuen hath To vs a place alone.
For she her head in folde of daple full sadde and wofully
Enwrapt, the gods that are her guydes for succour stands faste by,
And at the syde of her doothe leane Acides father trewe.
What thyng dothe this destroier of our stocke, agayne a newe
Prepare? what proueth he?
O queene That name renowned hye
And title takste of regall stocke, full gentle and easyly
A lyttle while receyue and beare my woords with pacient eare.
If alwayes men eternall hates shoulde one to th'other beare,
And rage beegon, out of the harte shoulde neuer fall awaye,
But th'happy still shoulde armour holde th'unhappye styll obaye,
Then shall the battayles nothyng leaue: with wyde fieldes then the lands
Shall lye vntyllde, with vnderlayde to housen fyrybrande
Then ashes deepe shall ouer whelme the buried people all.
Expedient is to conquerour to wyshe that peace befall:
To conquerde needefull, partener of the kyngdome come to me:
Letts ioyn our mynds, take here this pledge of faythe and truthe to thee:
My ryght hand touche. Why whishtest thou with cruell face and moode?
Shoulde I abyde, that I the hande sprinkte with my fathers bloode,
Shoulde touche and double death enbrewde of bothe my bretherne? naye
Fyrst shall sonne ryse extinguishe quyght, And weste shall bryng the daye:
Fyrst faithfull peace betweene the snowes and fyres there shall bee tryde,
And Scylla shall t'Ausonius fyrste ioyne his Sicilyan syde,
And fyrst, the fleeyng floude that with swyfte turnes of course deothe flowe
Euripus, with Euboik waue shall stand full styll and slowe.
My father th'empire, brethern, howse, Thou haste me cleare berefte
My countrey to: what may bee more? one thyng to me is lefte,
Then brother, father, kyngdome, house, that deerer is to me
The hate of thee: the whyche to me with people for to bee
In commune, woe I am: howe greate ys myne allonely parte?
Rule on full proude, beare vp full hye thy sprights and haughty harte:
Yet god the prowde behynde theyr backes dothe followe them to wreake.
I knowe the The bane kyngdomes. What shoulde I the mothers speake,
Bothe suffryng, and aduentryng gylts? what double myschefe donne?
And myxed name of spouse at once, of father and of sonne?
What bretherns double tents? or what as many roages also?
The mother prowde of Tantalls broode congealde in mournyng lo,
And sory stone yet flowes with teares in Phrygian Sipylye.
Hymselfe lyke wyse erectyng vp his skaled head awrye,
Euen Cadmus measuryng throughout th'Illyrian landes in flyght,
Behynde hym lefte of body drawne long slyniye marks in syght.
All these examples wayte for thee: rule thou as lykes thy wyll,
Whyle thee our kyngdoms woonted fates doo call and ofte hapte yll.
Goe o, these fierce and furious woords thou woman madde refrayne:
And imperies of princes learne of Hercles to sustayne.
Though I the sceptors gotten by the force of warre doo beare
In conquryng hande, and all doo rule without the lawe his feare
Whiche armes subdue, a fewe words yet to thee nowe speake I shall
For this my cause: thy father dyd in blouddy battayle fall:
Thy bretherne fell: the weapons keepe n measurable staye.
For neyther easyly tempred bee, nor yet repressed maye
The drawne swoordes yre: the battels doth the bloude delyght out shed.
But he yet for his kyngdome fought, we all togyther led
With wycked luste: yet th'ende of warre ys nowe complayned loe,
And not the cawse. but no we let all remembrance therof goe:
When conquerour hath weapons left, the conquerds parte shoulde bee
To leaue his hates. No I that thou with lowly bended knee
Me raignyng worshyp shouldst, require: Euen this dooth me delight,
That thou thy myseries doost beare with mynde so soute vpright.
Thou for a kyng a spuse arte meete, letts ioyne our bedd anone.
A trēblng cold doth run throughout my bloudlesse lyms eche one.
What heinous thing comes to myne eares? I fearde not then at all,
When (all peace broake) the noyse of warre dyd by the citie wall
sounde about, I bare all that vnfeare fully to see,
I feare the weddyng chambers: nowe I captyue seeme to mee.
Let heauy chaynes my body greeue, and ke with hunger long
Let lyngryng death be slowly brought, yet shall no force full strong
My truthe subdue: for euen thyne own wyll I dye.
Doth then thy husband drownd in hell geue thee this stomacke hye?
Thehells alowe he toucht, that he
The heyght agayne myght get.
The heauy payse oppresseth hym
Of all the earthe full great.
He with no burdeyn shall be prest, that heauen it selfe ustaynde.
Thou shalt be forst.
He wos not how to dye, that is constraynde.
Speake, what may rather I prepare then weddyng newe for th
More oyall gyft▪
Thyne owne death els, or ells the death of mee.
Then shalt mad woman dye.
I shal then to my husbande go.
More then my sceptors is to thee a seruant loued so?
Howe many hath this seruant ayne of kyngs with handye stroake?
Why dohe he yet a kyng then serus, and styll ustayne his yoake?
Take once away the harde behests, whats vertue then at lae?
Dooe thou it vertue counte, to bee to beasts, and monsters caste?
is vertues part, to tame the thyngs, that all men quake to knowe.
Hym great thyngs braggyng, darknes deepe o presse full lowe.
There neuer may frō grownd to stars an easye passage be.
Of whom be got, the housen then of godds through pearceth he?
O wretched wyfe of Hercles great, thy woords a whyle now spare.
My parte it is, the father of Alcides to declare,
And his true stocke. yet after all of man so stoute as this
So famous deedes, and after all Appeasde with hande of his
What euer Titan rysen vp, Doothe see, orels at fall,
And after all these monsters taemde, and Phlegrey sprynkled all
With wycked bloude, and after godds defended all on hye,
Is not his father yet well knowne? Or Ioue doo we beelye?
Beleeue it yet by Iunoes hate.
why dooste thou sclawnder Ioue?
No mortall kynred euer maye bee myxte with heauen aboue.
To many of the godds in skyes is this a common trade.
But were they euer seruantes yet, before they godds were made?
Of Delos yle the shepherde los the flocks of Pherey fed.
But through all coasts he wandred not abroade as banyshed.
Whome straying mother fyrst brought foorth in wandryng lande to syght.
Yet Phoebus dyd no monsters feare, or beasts of cruell myght.
First dragon with his blood embrewde the shafts of Phoebus loe.
Howe greeuous ylls euen yet full yong he bare, doo yow not knoe?
Frō mothers wombe the babe out throwne with lyghtnyng flame from hye,
Euen next his lyghtnyng father stoode foorthwith aboue in skye.
What? he hym selfe that guydes the starrs, and shakes the cloudes at wyll,
Dyd not that infant lurke in denne of hollowe caued hyll?
The byrthes so great full troublous price to haue lo allways ought:
And euer to be borne a God, with coste full greate is bought.
Whome thou a myser seeste, thou mayst Knowe hym a man to bee.
A myser hym denye ye maye, whome stoute of harte ye see.
Call we hym stoute, from shoulders hye of whom the lyon throwne
A gyfte for mayden made, and eke his clubbe from hande fell downe,
And paynted syde with purple weede dyd shyne that he dyd weare?
Or may we hym call stoute of harte, whose staryng lockes of heare
With ointmēt flowde? who hāds renownde and knowne by prayses hye
To sownde vnmeete for any man of tymber dyd applye,
With barbarous mytar cloasyng in his forhed rownde about?
The tender Bacchus dyd not blushe abroade to haue layde out
His brayded heares, nor yet with hande full softe the Thyrsus lyght
For to haue shooke, what tyme that he with pace vnstoute in syght
His long traynde barbarous garmēt drew with golde full fayre to see.
Styll vertue after many woorkes is woont releaste to bee.
Of this the house of Curitus destroyde doothe wytnesse beare,
And virgins flockes that brutyshly by hym oppressed weare.
No Iuno dyd commawnde hym this, Nor none Eurystheus loe.
But these in deede his owne woorks are.
Yet all ye doo not knoe.
His woorke it is with weapons of his owne hande vanquyshed
Bothe Eryx, and to Eryx ioynde Anteus Lybian ded:
And aultars whiche with slaughter of the straungers flowyng fast,
Busyris well deserued bloode lykewyse haue droonke at last.
His deede it is, that he that met the wownde, and swoorde is flayne
Constraynde to suffre deathe before those other Geryons twayne.
Nor one allonely Geryon dothe with one hande conquerde lye.
Thow shalt among these he: whych yet with none adulterye
Haue wedlocke hurte.
What is to Ione to kyng is leefull thyng:
To Ioue thou gaufts a wyfe, thou shalt nowe geue one to a kyng.
And euen of thee shee shall it learne to bee a thyng not newe,
Her husband euen approuyng it the better man t'ensewe.
But y she stubberne to be matcht with me denye it styll,
Then euen by force a noble chylde Of her beget I wyll.
O Creons ghosts, and all ye godds of th'howse of Labdacus,
And weddyng torches blasyng bryght, of wycked Oedipus,
To this my weddyng geue ye nowe our woonted destenies.
Now, now ye bloody daughters all of Egyptes kyng lykewyse,
Bee here whose hands desyled are with so muche bloude out spylt:
One daughter lacks of Danaus, I wyll fyll by the gylt.
Because that stubburnely thou dooest refuse my weddyng so,
And fearste a kyng, thou shalt know what the sceptors nowe maye do.
Enbrace thyne aultars, yet no god shall euer take away
Thee from my handes: no not although with worlde vpturned, may
Alcides victor yet agayne to gods aboue returne.
The wodos on he apes togyther cast, let all their temples burns
Euen throwne vpon theyr heds: his wyfe, and all his flocke at laste
With vnderlayed fyre, let one wood pyle consume and waste.
This only bowne I father of Alcides aske of thee,
Whiche well may me beseeme to craue, that I fyrst slayne may bee.
Who all appoynts with present deathe to haue theyr punyshment,
He tyrant wotts not how to bee: more sundry greeues inuent.
Restrayne the wretched man from death, commaunde that th'happy dye.
I, whyle with beames preparde to burne the pyle encreaseth hye,
Wyll hym with vowyng sacrifyce that rules the seas entreate.
Oh chiefest powre of godde, and oh of heauenly thyngs so great
The guyde, and parent eke, with whose throwne thunderboltes doo shake
All thyngs humane throughout the worlde, of kyng so cruell slake
The wycked hande: but why doo I to godds in vayne thus crye?
Where euer thou be heare me soon. why starte so sodaynlye
The temples thus with mouyng sha Why roareth out the grownde?
The noyse of hell from bottome deepe byneathe hath made a sownde:
We herde are, loe it is the sownde of Hercules his pace.
O fortune hatyng men of stoutest brest, howe yll rewards dost thou to good deuyde?
Eurystheus raynes at home in easye rest,
Alcinenaes sonne in euery battayle tryde,
To mūsters turns his hand yt skies did stay: and cruell neckes cuts of of hydous snake,
And apples bryngs frō systers mokt away, whē ece to slepe his watcheful eies betake,
Did dragon set ryche fruite to ouersee. he past Scythiā bowres y• stray abroade,
And those that in their coūtreis strangers be and hardened top of frolen freat he croade,
And sylent sea with banks ful dūme about. the waters hard wt ther their floods to flo.
And where before yt ships full sails spred out is worne a pathe for Sarmates wyld to go.
The sea doth stand to moue in course again, now apt to beare the ship, now horsmen bold
The quene yt there doth ouer wydows rayn, yt girds her wōbe wt girth of glittryng gold,
Her noble spoile from body drawne hath she & shield, & bands of brest as white as snowe,
Acknowlegyng the conquerour with knee. wt what hope drawne to hedlēg hell alowe,
S bolde to passe the vnreturned wayes sst thou Proserpines rayne of Sicylye?
With southern wid, or western ther no se as aryse with waue and swellyng surges hye.
Not there of Tyndars stocke yt double brood two starrs the feareful ships do aide & guide. with gulph ful blak doth stād yt slothful flood and whē pale deth with gredyteeth so wide
Unnūbred natiōs hath set down to sprights with one boate man all ouer feryed bee.
God graūt thou maist of hl subdue yt tights
And vnreueked webs of systers three,
There kyng of many people raigneth hee, who whe thou didst wt Nestors Pylos fight,
Pestierous hāds applide to matche we thee & weapon bare with triple mace of might:
And prickt with litle wound he fled awaye, and lorde of death hymselfe did feare to dye.
Breake fate by force: & let the syght of daye to sory sprights of hell apparentlye, and porche vnpast shew way to gods aboue. the cruel lords of sprights with plesant song
And hūble bown ful wel could Orpheꝰmoue while he Eurydicen them craues among.
The art yt drew woods, birds, & stones at w which made delay to flouds of flitting flight
At soūd wherof the sauage beasts stood styll with tunes vnwōt doth ghosts of hel delight
And cleerer dothe resounde in darker place: & wepe with teares did gods of cruell brest:
And they which fautes with to seuere a face do seeke, & former gylt of ghosts out wrest:
The Thracian daughters wails Eurydicē. for her the iudges weeping sitte also.
We cōquerd ar, chief kyng of death said thē to godds (but vnder this cōdition) goe,
Behynd thy husbands back kepe y• thy way, looke thou not backe thy wyfe before to see,
Thā the to sight of gods hath brought yt day and gate of Spartane Taenare present bee.
Loue hates delay, nor coulde abyde so long. his gyfte, he loste, while he desires the syght.
The place yt coulde be thus subdewd we song that place may soone be ouercom by myght.
QComfortable guyde of lyght, and honour of the skye,
That cōpassyng both hemyspheres with flamyng charyot hys
Thy radiant head to ioyfull landes about the worlde doste bryng,
Thou Phoebus pardon geue to me, yf any vnlawfull thyng
Thyne eyes haue seene: (commanded) I haue here to lyght out fette
The secretes of the worlde: and thow of heauen o guyder grette,
And parent eke, in flashe out throwne of lyghtnyng hyde thy syght.
And thou that gouernest the seas with seconde sceptors myght,
To bottome synke of deepest waues: who so from hye dothe see,
And dreadyng yet with cowntnance newe the erthe defylde to bee,
Let hym from hens turne backe his syght, and face to heauen vpholde,
These mōstrous syghts to shoon: let twain this mischiefe great beholde,
He who it brought, and she that badde. for paynefull toyles to me,
And labours long, not all the earthe thowght wyde ynough may be
For Iunoes hate: thyngs vncome to of all men I dyd see,
Unknowne to sonne, and spaces wyde that darke and shadesull bee
Whiche woorser poale geeues dyrer Ioue to raigne and rule theryn.
And yet yf thyrde place pleasyd more for me to enter yn,
I there coulde raigne. the Chaos of eternall nyght of hell,
And woorse then nyght, the dolefull godds I haue that there dood ll,
And fates subdude, the deathe contemnde I am returnde to lyght.
What yet remaynes? I sawe and showde the spryghts of hell to syght:
Appoynte, yf ought be more, doste thou my hands so long permyt
Iuno to ceasse? what thyng bydst thou to be subdued yet?
But why doo cruell sowldyars holde the holy temples wyde?
And dreade of armour sacred porche beset on euery syde?
DOo eyther ells my great desyres delude and mocke myne eyes?
Or hath the tamer of the worlde and greekes renowne lykewyse,
For sooke the silent howse, besette with cloude full sadde to see?
Is this my soone? my membres loe for ioy amased bee.
Oh sonne, the sure, and sauegarde late of Thebes in mysery,
See I thy bodye true in deede? or els deceyude am I
Mot with thy spright? art thou the same these brawnes of armes I knowe,
And shoulders, and thy noble handes From body hye that growe.
Whens (father) happs this vglynes, And why in mournyng cladde
Is thus my wyfe? howe happs it that with fylthe so fowle bestadde
My chyldren are? what myserye doothe thus my howse oppresse?
Thy father in lae is slayne: the kyngdome Lycus doothe possesse.
Thy sonnes, thy parent, and thy wyfe to deathe pursueth he.
Ungratefull land, dothe no man come that will an ayder be
Of Hercles howse? and this behelde so greate and heynous wrong
Hath th' ayded worlds? but why weare I the daye in playnt so long?
Let th'enmy dye: and this renowne let strengthe obtayne in haste,
And of Alcides enmyes all let Lycus be the laste.
I dryuen am to goe to shedde the blood of enmye out.
Watche Theseu, that no sodayne strength beeset vs heere about.
Me warres requyre. enbracyng yet deferre O father deare,
And wyfe deferre them: Lycus shall to hell this message beare
That I am nowe returnde.
Shake of O queene out of thyne eyes
This weepyng face, and thou sens that thy sonne is safe lykewyse
Thy droppyng teares refrayne: yf yet I Hercles euer knewe,
Then Lycus shall for Creon paye the paynes to hym full dewe.
Tis lyght, he shall: he doothe: and thats to lyght, he hathe it doone.
Now god that can them bring to passe, speede well our wyshes soone,
And come to helpe our weary woes. O noble harted mate
Of my stoute sonne, of his renowne declare vs all the rate:
Howe long a waye doothe leade to place where sory sprights doo dwell,
And howe the harde and heauy bonds the dogge hathe borne of hell.
The deedes y• doost constrayne to tell, that euen to mynde secure
Are dredfull yet and horryble, scant yet the truste is sure
Of vitall ayre, sore blunted is the sharpnesse of my syght,
And dulled eyes doo scant sustayne to see th'vnwoonted lyght.
Yet Theseus throwghly ouercome what euer feare remaynes
In bosome deepe, nor doo thou not of best frute of thy paynes
Beguylde thy selfe. What thyng hath once to suffre beene a care,
To haue remembred it is sweete. those dredfull happe declare.
All ryght of worlde, and thee lykewise I pray that bearste the rayne
In kyngdome wyde, and thee, for whome All rownde about in dayne
Thy mother throughout Aetna sowght, that secret thyngs alowe
And hydde in grownde, it freely may bee lawfull for to showe.
The Spartane lande a noble toppe of hyll aduaunceth hye,
Where Taenarus with woodes full hycks the sea doothe ouerlye.
The house of hatefull Ditis here his mowthe doothe pen sette,
And rocks of hyll about doothe gape, and with a denne full grette
A huge and gapyng clefte of grownd with iawes full wyde doothe lye,
And way full broade to people all dothe spredde to passe therby.
Not straight with darkenes dothe begynne The way that blyndes the syght.
A lyttle lyngryng bryghtnes lo behynde of late lefte lyght,
And dubtfull glyttryng yet of sonne afflicted falles alowe,
And mocks the syght: suche lyght is woont vndoubtedly to showe
The dawne of day, or twylyght els at edge of euenyng tyde.
From hens to hollowe places voyde Are loaste the spaces wyde,
To whiche needes peryshe must all kynde of men that once are throwne.
Nor it a labour is to goe, the waye it selfe leades downe.
As ofte the shypps agaynst theyr wylles do the tosse the swellyng surge,
So downe warde dothe that hedlong way, and greedy Chaos vrge:
And backe agayne to drawe thy pat thee neuer doo permytte
The sprights who what they catch hold fast. alowe within doothe flytte
In chanell wyde with sylent foorde the quiet lake of lethe,
And cares dothe rydde: and that theremay to scape agayne from deathe
No meane be made, with many turnes and wyndyngs euery waye
Foldes in his floode. in suche sorte as with waue vnsure doothe play
Maeander wandryng vp and downe, And yeldes hymselfe vnto,
And dowbtfull stands, yf he toward banke, or backe to spryng may go.
The soule and fylthy peole to see of slowe Cocytus lyes.
On th'one the grype, on th'other syde the mournefull howlet cryes,
And sadde lucke of th'unhappy Strix lykewyse resoundeth there.
Full vglyelye in shady bowes blacke lockes of lethsome heare,
Where Taxus tree dothe ouer leane, whiche holdeth slouthfull sleepe,
And hunger sadde with famysht lawe that lyes his place to keepe,
And shame to late doth hyde his face that knowes what crimes it hathe,
Bothe feare, and quakyng, funerall, and frettyng ragyng wrathe,
And mournyng dyre dothe followe on, and tremblyng pale disease,
And boystrous battailes set with swoorde: and hydde beyonde all thease
Dothe slouthfull age his lyngryng pace healpe foorth with staffe in hande.
Of corne and wyne in hell alowe is any fertile lande?
No ioyful meades do there bring foorth with face so greene and fayre,
Nor yet with gentyll Zephyrus wagges ripened corne in th'ayre.
Nor any tree hath there suche bowes as doe bryng apples out.
The barrayne compasse of deepe soyle full fylthye lyes about,
And withred with eternall drought the lothsome lande dothe wae
And bonde full sadde of thyngs, and of the worllde the places laste:
The ayre vnmoued stands, and nyght sytts there full darke to see
In slouthfull worlde, all thynges by dread full horrible there bee.
And euen farre worse then deathe it selfe, is place where deathe doothe byde.
What? e that doth those places darke with regallsceptor gwyde,
In what seate sette, dothe he dispose and rule those peoples light?
A place there is in turne obscure of Tartarus from syght,
Which myst full thicke with feareful shade doothe holde and ouergoe.
From hens a double parted streame from one wellspryng doothe floe:
The tone, muche lyke a standyng poole (by this the godds doo sweare)
The whiche the sacred Stygian lake with silent floude doothe beare:
The tother fierce with tumulte great is drawen hys course to goe,
And Archeron with ragyng flood the stones dryues to and froe
Unsaylable. with double foorde is rounoe about besette
Agaynst it Ditis palayce dyre, and manspon howse full grette
In shadefull woode is couered: from wide denne here the posts
And thresholds of the tyrant hang, this is the walke of ghosts:
This of his kyngdome is the gte: a felde about it goes,
Where syttyng with a countnaunce proud abroade he doothe dispose
Newe sowles, a cruell maiestie is in the god to knowe:
A frownyng forhead, whyche yet of his brethren beares the showe,
And so great stocks: there is in hym of Ioue the very face,
But when he lyghtens: and great parte of cruell kyngdomes place,
Is he hymselfe the lorde therof: the syght of whoe dothe feare,
What euer thyng is fearde.
Is fam in this poynt trewe, that there
Suche rygours are, and gyltie ghosts of men that there remayne
Forgetfull of theyr former faute, haue their deserued payne?
Who is the rector there of ryght, and iudge of equitye?
Not onely one extorter out of futes in seate sette hye
The iudgements late to tremblyng sowles doothe there by lotte awarde:
In one appointed iudgement place is Gnossian Minos harde,
And in an other Radamanthe: This ryme doothe Aac beare.
What eche man ones hath doone, he feeles: and guylt to th'author theare
Returnes, and th'hurtfull with their owns example punnht bee.
The bluddy cruell captaynes I in pryson shette dyd see,
And backe of tyrant impotent euen with hys peoples hande
All trne and cutte. what man of myght with fauour leades his lande,
And of his owne lyfe lorde reserues his hurtlesse handes to good,
And gently doothe his empyre guyde without the thyrst of blood,
And spares his sowle, he hauyng long ledde foorthe the lyngryng dayes
Of happy age, at lengthe to heauen dothe eyther fynde the wayes,
Or ioyfull happy places ells of fayre Elysius woode.
Thou then that here muste be a iudg abstayne from man his bloode,
Who so thou bee that raygnest kyng: our gyltes are there acquytte
In greater wyse.
Doothe any place prescript of lymite h ytte
The gyltie ghosts, and as the fame reportes, dothe cruell payne
The wycked men make tame that in eternall bondes remayne?
Ixion rollde on whyrlyng wheele is ost and turned hye:
Uppon the necke o Sisyphus the myghty stone dooth lye.
Amyd the lake with thyrsty iawes olde Tantalus theryn
Pursues the waues, the water stream doothe wette and washe his hyn,
And when to hym nowe otte deceyude it doothe yet prmyse make,
Straight ytts the ood: the trute at mowth his famyne doothe forsake.
Eternall foode to leeyng owle doothe Tityus harte geue syll:
And Danaus daughters oo in vayne theyr water vessells fyll.
The wycked Cadmus daughters all go ragyng euery wae:
And there doothe greedy rauenyng byrde the Phiy tables fraye.
Nowe of my sonne declare to me the noble woorthy fyght.
Bryngs he his wyllyng vnkles gyfts, or Plutoes spoyles to syght?
A dyre and dredfull stone there ys the slouthfull foordes fast bye,
Where sluggysh freate with waue astoond full dull and flowe doothe lye:
This lake a dredfull fellowe keepes bothe of attyre and syght,
And quakyng ghosts doothe ouer beare An aged vgly wyght:
His bearde vnkempt, his hosome fowle deformde in fylthy wyse
A knotte byndes in, full lothesome stande in head his hollows eyes:
He fery man doothe steare aboute his beate with his long ore.
He dryuyng nowe his lyghtned shippe of burden towarde the shore,
Repaires to waues: and then his way Alcides doothe requyre.
The flocke of ghosts all geuyng place: Alowde cries Charon dyre,
What way attemptest thou so bolde? thy hastenyng pace here staye.
But natheles Alcmenaes sonne abydyng no delaye,
Euen with his owne poale bette he doothe full tame the shypman make,
And clymes the shippe: the barke that could full many peoples take,
Dyd yelde to one: he satte, the boate more heauy lyke to breake
With shyueryng ioyntes on eythersyde the lethey floode doothe leake.
Then tremble all the monsters huge, the Centaures fierce of myght,
And Lapythes, kyndled with muche wyne to warres and blouddy fyght.
The lowest chanelles seekyng out of Stygian poole a downe,
His lerney labour sore affright his sertyle heddes doothe drowne.
Of greedy Ditis after this doothe then the house appere.
The fierce and cruell Stygian dogge doothe fraye the spirites there,
The whiche with great and roaryng sounds his hedds vpshakyng three,
The kyngdome keepes: his ugly head with fylthe full fowle to see
The serpentes lycke: his heares be fowle with vypers among,
And at his crooked wrested tayle doothe hysse & dragon longe:
Like yre to shape. when hym he wy his pace that way to take,
His bristle heares he lysteth vp with fierce vp bended snake:
And sownde sent out he soone perceyues in his applyed eare,
Who euen the sprights is woonto sent. as soone as stoode more neare
The sonn of Ioue, the doubtfull dogge strayte couched downe in denne,
And eche of them dyd feare. beholde with dolefull barkyng then
The places dumme he makes a dred, the threatnyng serpent stoute
Through all the fieldes aboute dooth hysse: the bawlyng noyse sent out
Of dredfull voyce from triple mouthe, euen spryghts that happy bee
Dothe make afrayde. from lefte syde then strayte way vndoeth hee
The cruell tawes, and lyons hed once slayne in Cleon fielde
Agaynst hym setts, and couer doothe hymselfe with myghty shielde.
And bearyng in his conquerng hands a sturdy clubbe of oke,
Nowe ere, nowe there he olleth hym about with often stre:
His strypes he doubles: he subdewde his threates asswaged all,
And all his heds the weery dogge at once full lowe lette fall,
And quight out of the enne he fedde. full greatly feared
In regall throne) both, kyng and queene, and dadde hym to .
And me lykewyse ne for to Hercl e.
The mon with aude then thr,
In lynked cha he : forgettyng
The dogge the watche keeper the kyngdome darke, at leng
Laythe downe his eares full so affrayde: and suffryng to be lende,
And eke acknowledging his lorde, folowyng with lowly hedde,
With tayle that snakes theron doothe beare he bothe his sydes doethe smyght.
But after that to Taenate mouthe we came, and clearenes bryght
Had stroake his eyes of lyght vnknowne, good stomacke yet agayne
He takes althowgh onse ouercome, and now the heauye chayn
He ragyng shakes: he had almost his leader pluckt from place,
And hedlong backwarde drawne to hell, and moued from his pace.
And euen to my handes Hercles then his eies dyd backewarde caste,
We bothe with double ioyned strengthe the dogge out drawne at laste
For anger woode, and battells yet attemptyng all in vayne,
Brought vp to worlde. as soone as he the cleere ayre sawe agayne,
And spaces pure of bryght fayre poale had once behelde with eye,
The nyght arose: his syght to grownde he turned by and by,
Caste downe his eyes, and hatefull daye foorthwith he put to flyght,
And backewarde turnde away his looke, And streyght with all hys myght
To th'erthe he falles: and vnderneathe the shade of Hercles then
He hyd his head. therwith there came a great resorte of men
With clamour gladde, that dyd the bay about theyr forhedds bryng:
And of the noble Hercules deserued prayses syng.
EUrystheꝰ born wt swiftned birth in hast, did bid to bottom of the worlde to go:
This onely lackte of labours all at last, to spoyle the kyng of thyrde estate also.
The dongeons darke to enter ventred he, wher as yt way to sprights far of doth bryng
Full sadde, & woode so blacke & feard to be: but full with flock full great him followyng.
As great a prease as flocke in cities streetes, to see the playes of Theatre newe wrought:
As great as at Eléus thundrer meetes, whē somer fift yt sacred game hath brought:
As gret as whē comes houre of lōger night, and willyng quiet sleepes to bee extent,
Holds equal Libra Phoebus chariots light, a sorte the secrete Ceres doo frequent,
And frō theyr howsen left doo hast to cum, the Atticke priestes the nyght to celebrate:
Such heape is chast beneth by fields so dum, with age ful slow som taking forth their gate
Full sad, and fylld with life so long now led: some yet do runne the race of better yeares,
The virgins yet vnieynde to spowses bed, yonglings eke on whō grow yet no heares
And infāt lately taught his mothers name.
To these alone, (that the y• les might feare)
Is graūted night to ease wt foreborne flame. the rest full sad by darke doo wander theare:
As is our mynde, when ones away is fled the lyght, when eche man sory feeles to bee
Dep ouerwhelmd with all the erth his hed. thyck Chaos stands, & darknes fowle to see,
And colour yll of nyght▪ and slouthfull state of silent world, and duers clowdes abowt.
Let hoary age vs thyther bryng full late. no mā comes late to that, whence neuer out,
Whē once he is come, turne agayn he may. to hast the hard and heuy fate what vayles?
This wādring beape in wide lāds far away, shall go to ghosts: & al shall geue their sayles
To slowe▪ Cocys. all is to thee enclynde, both what the fall, and rise of sonne doth see:
Spare vs that cum, to the we deth ar signde: though thou be slow, our selfs yet we.
Fyrst houre, y• gaue the lyfe, it loast againe.
TO Thebes is come the ioyfull daye, your aulters touche ye humbyllye,
The fatte fayre sacrfices slaye. maydes yxte with men in cumpanye
Let them in sole ne flocks goe royle: and nowe with yake layde downe let cease
The tyllers of the fertyle soyle.
is with hande of Hercles peace betweene the morne and Hespers glade,
And where sonne holdyng myddle seate, dothe make the bodyes caste no shade.
What euer grownde is ouerweate with compasse long of seas abowght,
Alcides labour aemde full well. he ouer foordes of Tartare browght
Returnde appeased beeyng hell. there is remaynyng nowe no feare,
Nought lyes beyonde the hell to see.
O preest thy staryng lockes of hear wrappe in with loued poplar tree.
WIth my reuēgyng right hand slayn nowe Lycus loe the grownde with groueling face hath smit: thē who soeuer fellow fownde
Of tyrant was, partaker of his paynes dyd also lye.
Nowe to my father sacryfyce and godds victor wyll I,
And aulters that deserue it, with ayne offyngs reuerence.
Thee, thee O mate of all my toyles I praye and my defence
O warrefull Pallas, in whose lefte hande thy cleare shielde Aegis shakes
Fierce hretes, wt head that eche thyng stone that lookes vpon it makes.
Let amer of Lycurgus nowe, and of redde sea be heare,
That poynte of speare with yuye greene in hande doothe couerde beare:
And two godds powre, bothe Phoebus, and his syster too I praye,
The syster meeter for her shaftes, but he on th'harpe to playe:
And what soeuer brother ells of myne doothe dwell in skye,
Not of my stepdame brother. bryng ye hyther by and by
Your plentuous flockes, what euer haue all th' Indians frutes browght owt,
And what sweete odours th' Arabickes doo gette in trees abowt,
To th'aultars bryng: lett vapour fae and ume smoke vp full hye,
Let rownde abowt the poplar tree my heares nowe bewtifye.
Let th'olyue bowe thee hyde with braunch accustomde in our lande
Thescu: for foorthwith reuerence the thundrer, shall my hande.
O godds the buylders of the towne, and whiche of dragon fell,
The wylde woods denns, and noble wa lykewyse of Dirces well,
And Tyrian house enhabite eke of straunger wandryng kyng.
Caste into fyres the trankencense.
Sonne fyrste thy handes flowyng with blouddy slaughter, and the deathe of enmye puryfye.
Would god the blood of hatefull he Euen vnto godds on hye
I myght out shedde, for lycour loe more acceptable none
Myght th'aulters stayne: nor sacrifice more ample any one
Nor yet more plentyfull may bee To Ioue aboue downe caste,
Then kyng vniust.
Desyre that nowe thy father ende at laste
Thy labours all: lette quyetnesse At lengthe yet gyuen bee,
And re to weery folke.
I wyll the prayers make, for mee
And Ioue full meete. yn his due place Lette stands the haughty skye,
And lande, and ayre, and lette the starres dryue foorthe eternallye
Their course vnstayde: let restfull peace keepe nations quietlye,
Let labour of the hurtlesse lande all yron nowe occupye,
And sooprdes lye hydde: let tempest none full vyolent and dyre
Disturbe the sea: let from the skyes no flashe of lyghtnyng fyre
Fall downe whyle Ioue full angry is: nor yet with wynter snowe
Encreased floode the grownde vpturnde and fieldes quight ouerthrowe.
Let poysons cease: and from hensfoorth let vp from grownde aryse
No greeuous herbe with hurtfull sappe: nor fierce and fell lykewyse
Let tyrantes raygne: but yf to syght some other mischiefe bryng
The grownde yet shall, let it make haste: and any monstrous thyng
If it prepare, let yt bee myne. but what meanes this? myd daye
The darknes haue encloasde abowt, lo Phoebus gothe his ways
With face obscure withowt a clowde. who dryues the daye to flyght,
And turnes to east? from whence doth now his dusky hd the nyght
Unknown bryng forth? whēce fyl the so many rownde about
Of daytyme starres? lo here beholde my labour fyrst full stoute
Not in the lowest parte of heauen the lyon shyneth bryght,
And feruently dothe rage with yre, And byttes prepares to fyght.
Euen now loe he some starre wyl take▪ with mouthe full wyde to see
He thretnyng stands, and fyres out blowes and mane vp rustleth he
Shakyng with necke. the haruest sadde o shape, what euer thyng,
And what soeuer wynter cllde in frosen tyme doothe bryng,
He with one rage wyll ouerpasse, of spryng tyme bull he wyll
Bothe seeke, and breake the neckes at once.
What is this sodayne yll?
Thy cruell cowntnance whether sonne Doste thou caste here and there?
And seeste with troubled daselde syght false shape of heauen appere?
The land is taemde, the swellyng seas theyr surges dyd asswage,
The kyngdomes lowe of hell lykewyse haue felte and knowne my rage,
Yet heauen is free, a labour meete for Hercules to proue.
To spaces hygh I wyll hee borne of hawghtye skyes about:
Let th'ayre be skaelde, my father dooth me promyse starrs t'obtayne.
What yf he it denyde? all th'earthe can Hercles not contayne,
And geeues at length to godds me calls of owne accorde beholde
The whole assembly of the godds, and dooth theyr gates vnfolde,
Whyle one for bydds receyuste thou me, and openest thou the skye,
Or els the gate of stubborne heauen drawe after me doo I?
Do I yet doubte? I even the bonde from Saturne wyll vndoe,
And euen agaynst the kyngdome prowde of wycked father loe,
My grandsyre loase. let Titans nowe prepare agayne theyr fyght
With me theyr captayne ragyng: stones with woodes I wyll downe smyght,
And hye hylles topps with Centaures full in ryght hande wyll I take.
With double mountayne nowe I wyll a stayre to godds vp make.
Let Chiron vnder Ossa see his Pelion mowntayne grette:
Olympus vp to heauen aboue in thyrde degree then sette
Shall come it selfe, or ells bee caste.
Put farre awaye from thee
The thowghts that owght not to be spoake: of mynde vnsownde to see,
But yet full great, the furyows rage asswage and laye awaye.
What meaneth this? the gyantes d pestiferous armes assaye,
And Tityus from the sprights is fledde, and bearyng torne to see
And empty bosome, lo howe neere to heauen it selfe stoode hee?
Cythaeron falles, the mountayne hye Pallene shakes for feare,
And torne are Tempe. he the toppes of Pindus cawght hathe here,
And Oethen he, some dredfull thyng threatnyng doothe rage abowt
Crinnys bryngyng flames: with strypes she soundes nowe shaken out,
And burned brandes in funeralls, loe yet more neare and neare
Throwes in my face: fearce Tisyphone with head and vgly heare
With serpents sette, nowe after dogg fet owt with Hercles hande,
That emptye gate she hathe shette vp, with bolte of fyry brande.
But lee the stocke of enmiows kyng doothe hydden yet remayne,
The wycked Lycus seede: but to your hatefull father slayne
Euen nowe this ryght hande shall you send let nowe his arrowes lyght
My bowe owt shoote: it seemes the shaftes to goe with suche a flyght
Of Hercles.
Whether doothe the rag and fury blynde yet goe?
His myghty bowe he drewe with hornes togyther dryuen loe,
And quyuer loaste: great noyese makes with byolence sente owt
The shafte, and quyght the weapon flewe his myddle necke torowghowt,
The wownd yet left
His other brods I ouerthrowe wyll quyght,
And corners all. What stay I yet? to me a greater fyght
Remaynes then all Mycenes loe, that rockye stones shoulde all
Of Cyclops beeyng ouerturnde with hande of myne, downe fall.
Let shake bothe here: and there the house, with all stayes ouerthrowne,
Let breake the poasts: and quight let shrinke the shaken pyller downe:
Let all the palayce fall at once. I here yet hydden see
The sonne of wycked father.
Loe his flattryng handes to thee
Applyeng to thy knees doothe craue his lyfe with pyteous mone.
O wycked gylte, full sadde, and eke abhorde to looke vppone,
His humble ryght hande caught he hath, and ragyng rownde abowt
Him rlled twyse, or thryse hath cast. his head resoundeth owt,
The sprynkled howses with the brayne of hym throwne owt are wet.
But shee poore wretche her lyttle sonne in bosome hydyng yet
Loe Megara, lyke one in rage doothe from the corners flee.
Thowgh runnagate in bosome of the thundrer hydde thou bee,
This ryght hande shall from euery where Thee seeke, and bryng to syght.
wher goest thow wretch? what lurkyng denns, seeke thou to take, or flyght?
No place of sauegarde ys yf once bee Hercles styrde with yre:
But doo thou rather hym enbrace, and with thy meeke desyre
Assaye t' asswage hym.
Husbande spare vs I beseeche thee nowe,
And knowe thy Megara, this sonne thy cowntenaunce doothe showe,
And bodyes pytche: beholdst thow how his hands vp lyfteth hee?
I holde my stepdame: followe on dewe penawnce paye to mee,
And bownden Ione from fylthy bond delyuer free awaye:
But I before the mother wyll this lyttell monster slaye.
Thou mad man whither goest thow? wylte thou thyne owne bloode sheade?
Th'infant with fathers fyry face astonnyde all for dreade,
Dyed euen before the wownde: his fear hath tooke away his lyfe.
And nowe lykewyse his heauy clubbe is shaken towarde his wyfe:
He broaken hath the bones, her head from blocklyke bodye gone
Is quight, nor any where it stayes. darste thow this looke vppone
To long lyude age? yf mournyng doo thee greue, thou hast then loe
The deathe preparde. Doo thou thy breast vppon his weapons throe,
Or ells this clubbe with slaughter staynde of monsters slayne that bee,
Nowe hyther turne. thy parent false, vnfytte for name of thee
Kyd hens away, least he shoulde be to thy renowne a let.
Which waie y• father toward thy death dooste thow thy selfe caste yet?
Or whyther goest thou madde man? flee, and lye thow cloasely hyd,
And yet from handes of Hercules this onely myschiefe ryd.
Tis well, the howse of shameful kyng ys nowe quyght ouerthrowne.
To thee O spowse of greattest Ioue I haue loe beaten downe
This offred flocke: I gladly haue fulfyllde my wyshes all
Full meete for thee, and Argos nowe geeue other offryngs shall.
Thow hast not sonne yet al performde, fyll vp the sacrifyse.
Loeth offryng doothe at th'aultars stande, it waytes thy hande lykewyse
With necke full prone: I gyue my selfe, I roon, I followe loe.
Mee sacrifyce. what meaneth this? his eyes rolle to and froe,
And heauynesse doothe dull his syght. see I of Hercules
The tremblyng hands? down falles his face to sleepe and quietnes,
And weery necke with bowed head full faste doothe downewarde shryuke,
With bended knee: nowe all at once he downe to grownde doothe synke,
As in the woodes wylde asshe cut downe, or bulwarke for to make
A hauen in seas. Lyuste thow? or els to deathe doothe thee betake
The selfe same rage, that hath sent all thy famylye to deathe?
It is but sleepe, for to and froe doothe goe and come his breathe.
Let tyme bee had of quietnesse, that thus by sleepe and reste
Greate force of his disease subdewde, may ease his greeued breste.
Remous his weapons seruantes, lea he madde gette them agayne.
LEt th'ayre cōplain, & eke y• parent great of haughty sky, & fertile lad throughout,
And wādryng waue of euer mouing freate.
And thow before thē all, which lands about
And train of sea thy beams abroad dost throe with glyttryng face, & makst y• night to flee,
O feruent Titan: bothe thy settyngs loe and rysyng, hath Alcides seene with thee: & known likewise he hath thy howsē twayn. from so great yls release ye nowe his brest,
O godds release: to better turne agayne his ryghter mynde. and thow O tamer best
O sleepe of toyles, the quietnesse of mynde, of all the lyfe of man the better parte,
O of thy mother astey wynged kynde, of hard and pinyng death that brother arte,
With truth mingling the false, of after state
The sure, but eke the worste foreteller yet:
O father of all thynges, of lyfe the gate,
Of light the rest, of nyght and felowe fytte, that comst to kyng, and seruant equallye,
And gentlye cherysshest who weerye bee,
All mankynde loe that dredfull is to dye, thou doost cōstrain lōg deth to learn by thee. keepe him fast bound wt heauy slepe opprest,
Let slōber deps his limmes vntamed bynde,
Nor sooner leaue his vnryght ragyng brest,
Thē former mīd his course again may fynd.
Lo layd on groūd wt full fierce hart yet styll
His cruell sleepes he turnes: and not yet is
The plague subdewde of so great raging yll:
And on great clubbe the weery head of his
He woont to lay, dothe seeke y• staffe to fynde
With empty hand, his armes owt castīg yet with mouing vayn: nor yet all rage of mynde he hath laid down: but, as wt south wind gre
The waue once vext, yet after kepeth styll his ragyng long, & though the wind now be
Asswaged, swells. shake of these madde & yll tossyngs of mynde, returne let pitee,
And vertue to the man, ells let be so his mynd with mouing mad tost euery way:
Let errour blynde, where it begoon hath, go. for nowght els now but only madnes may
Thee gyltlesse make: in next estate it stands to hurtles hands, thy mischief not to knowe.
Now strooken let with Hercules his hands thy bosoms soūd: thyne armes y• world alow wer wōt to bear, let greuoꝰ strips now smite with cōquryng hād: & loude cōplainīg cries
Let th'aire now here: let of dark pole & night the quene them heare, & who ful fiersely lyes
That bears his necks in mighty chains fast boūd, low lurking Cerberus in depst caue.
Let Chaos all with clamour sad resound, and of broade sea wide open wasting waue.
And th' ayre that felt thy weapōs better yet,
But felt them thowgh.
The brestes with so greate yls as these beset, with litle stroake they must not beaten be.
Let kyngdoms three soūd wt one plaīt & cry, and thow neckes honowr, & defence to se,
His arrowe strong long hanged vp on hye, & quiuers light, ye cruel strypes now smyght on his firce back, his shoulders strōg & stowt let oken clubbe now stryke, & poaste of might wt knots full harde his brests loade al about. let euen his weapōs so greate woes cōplain.
Not you poore babes mates of your fathers wt cruel woūd reuēging kings agaī: (praise, not you your lims in argos barriars plaies,
Are taught to turn wt wepō strōg to smight, & strōg of hād: yet euē now daring loe the weapon of the Scythian quiuer light
With steady hand to paise sēt out frō bowe, and stags to perse y• saue thē selues by flyght, and backes not yet full maend of cruel beast.
To Stygā hauens goe ye of shade & night, goe hurtles souls, whō mischief hath opprest
Euen in first porche of lyfe but lately hadde,
And fathers furye. goe vnhappy kynde
O little chyldren, by the way full sadde
Of tourneye knowne.
Goe, see the angrye kyngs.
WHat place is this? what region or of the worlde what coaste?
Where am I? vnder ryse of sane, or bonde els vttermoste
Of th'ycy beare? or els doothe here of sea of Hesperye
The fardest grownde appoynte a bond for th'ocean sea to lye?
What ayre drawe we to weery wyght what grownde is vndersette?
Of truthe we are returnde from bell. whence in my howse downe bette
See I these bloudy bodyes? hath not yet my mynde of cast
Thinfernall shapes? but after yet returne from hell at last
Yet wander dooth that helly heape before myne eyes to see?
I am ashamde to grawnte, I quake, I knowe not what to mee,
I can not tell what greuous yll my mynde before dooth knowe.
Where is my parent? where is shee with goodly chyldrens showe
My noble hartye stomakt spowse? why dothe my lefte syde lacke
The lyons spoyle? whiche waye is gone the couer of my backe?
And selfe same bed full softe for sleepe of Hercules also?
Where are my shaftes? where ys my bowe? Them from me lyuing who
Cowlde plucke awaye? who taken hathe the spoyles so greate as thes?
And who was he that fearyd not euen sleepe of Hercules?
To see my conquerour me lykes, yt lykes me hym to knowe:
Ryse victor vp, what newe sonne hath my father gotten nowe
Heauen beeynge left? at byrthe of whome myght euer stayed bee
A longer nyght, then was in myne? what myschiefe do I see?
My chyldren loe do lye on grownde with bloodie slawghter stayne:
My wyfe is kyllde: what Lycus dothe the kyngedome yet obtayne?
Who durst so heynous gyltes as these At Thebes take in hande
When Hercles is returnde? who so Ismenus waters lande,
Who so Acteons fieldes, or who with dowble seas beset
The shaken Pelops kyngdomes doste of Dardan dwell on yet,
Healpe me: of cruell slawghter showe who may the author bee.
Let rage my yre on all: my foe he ys, who so to mee
Showes not my foe. doste thou yet hydd Alcides victour lye?
Come foorthe, euen whether thow reuenge the cruell chariots hys
Of bloudy Thracian kyng, or yf thow Geryons catell quyght,
Or lordes of Libya, no delaye there ys with thee to fyght.
Beholde I naked stande, althowgh euen with wy weapons loe
Thow me vnarmed sette vppon. wherfore feeth Theseus soe
And eke my father from my syght? theyr faces why hyde they?
Deferre your weepyngs, and who dyd my wyfe and chyldren sley
Thus all at ones, me tell. Wherfore O father do thow whushte?
But tell thow Theseu, but Theseu with thy accustonide truste.
Eche of them sylent hydes awaye their bashefull cowntnawnces,
And pryuelye they shedde their teares. In so greate yls as thes,
Of what owghte we ashamde to bee? dothe ruler yet of myght
Of Argos towne, or hatefull bande Of sowldyars ape to fyght
Of Lycus dyinge, vs oppresse with such calamytee?
By prayse of all my noble actes I do desyre of thee
O father, and of thy great name approude to me alwaye
The prosperous powre, declare to me, who dyd my hou sholde slaye?
Whose praye laye I?
Let thus thyue yls in sylence ouerpas.
That I shoulde vnreuenged bee?
Reuenge ofte hurtfull was.
Dyd euer man so greuows ylles without reuenge sustayne?
Whos'euer greater feard.
Then these, O father yet agayne
May any greater thing, or els More greuows feared bee?
How greate a parte is it thow wost, Of thy calamitee?
Take mercy father, lo I lyfte to thee my humble handes.
What meaneth this? my hand fleeth backe, some priuye gylte here standes.
Whēce coms this blood? or what doth mean flowyng with deathe of chyllde
The shafte, enbrewde with slawghter onc of Lerney monster kyllde?
I see my weapons nowe, the hande I seeke no more to wyt.
Whose hand could bend this bow but myne? or what ryght arme but yt
Coulde stryng the bowe, that vnto me Euen scantely doothe obaye?
To you I tourne: O father deere, is thys my gylte I praye?
They healde theyr peace: it is myne owne.
Thy greeuous woe is there,
The cryme hy stepdames: this myschawnce no fawte of thyne hath here.
From euery part now father throwe in wrathe thy thunders myght,
And of thy sonne forgetfull nowe, with cruell hande requyght
At least thy nephewes: let the worlde that beares the starres sownde owt,
And let bothe th'one and th'other pale, flyng downe thy flames abowt:
And let the bankes of Caspian sea my bownden bodye teare,
And greedye fowle. Wherefore doe of Promethens lacke heare
The rockes? with huge and hawtye toppe let now prepared bee,
Bothe feedyng beastes and fowles, the syde Of Cawcas torne to see,
And bare of woods, the yle that brydge Of Scythe that thereby standes
Symple gas ioynes, bothe here and there Let it my bounden handes
Stretch out abroade: and when with course returnde accustomdlye
They shall togyther dryue, and shall the rockes tosse vp to skye
With bankes togyther beyng thruste, and eke the myddle seaye,
Let me betwene the mountaynes lye vnquiet restlesse staye.
But buyldynge vp with woode throwen on a heaped pyle on hye,
My body thus with wycked bloude besprynkt, why burne not I?
So, so yt must bee doone: to hell I Hercles wyll restore.
Not yet his harte astonyde lackes his ragyng tumulte sore,
But wraths hath turnde: and which of rag ys propertie and yre
Agaynst him sellfe he rageth now.
The furies places dyre
And donge on deepe of sprights yn hell and place of tormentrrye
To gylty ghosts, and banishment yf any yet doo lye
Beyonde Erebus, yet vnknowen to Cerberus and mee,
There hyde me grownde: to farthest bond of Tartarus to see
To tarye there Ile goe. O breste of myne to fierce and wte:
Who yow my chyldren thus disperst through all my house abowte,
Maye worthyly enowghe bewayle? in all my euylls yet
This countnaunce harde, can neuer wepe. a swoorde nowe hyther set,
My shafces reatche hyther, hyther reatche my myghty clubbe also:
To thee my weapons breake I will, to thee my sonne, atwo
Ile knappe my bowes, and eke my clubbe this blocke of heauye wayght,
Shall to thy spryghts bee burned loe: this selfe same quyuer frayght
With Lerney shaftes, to funerall of thyne shall likewise go.
Let all my weapons penawnce paye, and yow vnhappye to
Euen with my weapons burne I wil, O stepdames handes of myne.
who euer yet to Ignoraunce hath geuen name of cryme?
Full oftentymes dyd errour greate the place of gylt obtayne.
Cys neede to be a Hercles nowe, this heape of ill sustayne.
Not o hath shame yet geuen place with furye drowned quight:
But peoples all I rather shoulde dryue from my wycked sight.
My weapons, weapons Theseus, I quickly craue to mee
withdrawen to be restoard agayne: if sownde my mynde now bee,
Restore to me my weapons: if yet last my rage of mynde,
Then father flee: for I the waye to death my selfe shall fynde.
By sacred hollye kynreds rights, by force and duetie all
Of bothe my names, yf eyther mee thy brynger vp thou call,
Or parent ells, and (whiche of good men reuerenced are)
By these boare heates, I thee beseche my desert age yet spare,
Aud werye yeares: of howse falne downe the one alonely staye,
One onely lyght to me, with ylles afflicted euery waye
Reserue thy lelfe: yet neuer hath there hapned once of thee
Frute of thy toyles: styll eyther I the dowtfull seae to see
Or monsters farde: who euer yet bathe bene a cruell kyng
In all the worlde, to ghosts alowe, and aulters both hurtyng,
Of meys fearde: the father of thee absent styll, to haue
The frut, the towching, and the sight, of thee atlength I craue.
wherfore I longer shoulde sustaine my lyfe yet in this lyght,
And lynger here no cause there is: all good lost haue I quight,
My mynde, my weapons, my renowne, my wyfe, my sonnes, my handes,
And furye to. no man may heale and loase from gyltye bandes
My mynde defyellde: needes must with deth, be healde so heinous yll.
wilt thou thy father slay?
Least I should doe it dye I will.
Before thy rathers face?
I taught hym mischiefe for to se.
Thy deedes markyng rather that should of all remembred be,
Of this one onely cryme I doe a pardon of thee craue.
Shall he geue pardon to hym selfe, that to none els it gaue?
I beeyng bidden prayse deserud, this deede mine owne dothe proue,
Helpe father now, if eyther els thy pietye thee moue,
Or els my heauy fate, or els the honour and renowne
Of stained strength: my weapons bryng, let fortune be throwen downe
With my right hande.
The praiers which thy father makes to thee
Are stronge enough, but yet likewise with wepyng loe of me
Be moued yet: aryse thou vp, and with thy wonted myght
Subdue thyne yl: now suche a mynde vnmeete to beare vpright
No euyll hap, receyue agayne: loe now with manhode gret
Thou must preuayle, eueri Hercules sorbyd with yre to fret.
Alyue, I hurte: but yf I dye, I take the gylt also.
I hast to rydde the worllde of cryme, euen now before me so
A wycked monster, cruell, and vntamed, fierce, and stoute
Do the wander: now with thy ryght hande begyn to goe aboute
A greate affayre, yea more then all thy twise syx labours long.
Yet stayste thou wretche, that late agaynste the children waste so strong,
And fearefull mother? now excepte restoarde my weapons be,
Of Thracian Pindus eyther I wyll teare downe euery tree,
and Bacchus hollye woods, and toppes of mount Cythaeron hye
Burne with my selfe. and all at once with all their housen I
And with the Lordes there of the roofes, with goddes of Thebes all
The Thebane temples euen vppon my bodye will lette fall:
And wyll be hyd in towne vpturnde: if to my shoulders might
The walles themselues all cast thereon shall fall a burden lyght,
And couerde with seuen gates I shall not be enough opprest,
Then all the wayght whereon the worlde in middle parte doth rest,
And partes the Gods, vpon my hed Ile turne and ouerthroe.
My weapons geeue.
This word is mete for Hercles father loe.
With this same arrowe slayne beholde thy sonne is tombled downe,
This weapon cruell Iuno lo from handes of thyne hath throwne,
This same will I now vse. loe see how leapes with feare affright
My wretched hart, and how it doth my carefull body smight.
The shafte is set there to, thou shalt a mischiefe loe do now
Both willing it, and wotting: tell, what thing commaundest thou?
I nothing craue, my dolour loe in safetie standeth now.
To kepe my sonne aliue to me that onely do canst thou
o Theseu, yet I haue not sapte, greatst feare that happen can.
Thou canst e not a myler make, thou maist a happy man.
So order euery thyng thou dooste, as all thy cause in hande,
And fame thou mayst well know in strayg and doutfull case to stande:
Thou iust, or dyest: thys slender sowle that lyght is hense to flee,
weyed with age, and no lesse bet with greuous yle to see,
In mouthe I holoe. so slowlye to a father with suche staye
Dothe any man geue lyfe? I wyll no longer byde delaye,
The dedlye sworde throughout my brest to stryke I will applye,
Here, here the gylt of Hercules eue sownde of mynde shall lye.
Forbeare O father now, forbeare, withdrawe thy hande agayne.
My manhode yeelde, thy fathers wyll, and Imperye sustayne.
To Hercles labours now lykewyse, let this one labour goe,
Let me yet lyue lyfte vp from grounde hafflicted lymmes with woe,
o Theseu of my parent: for from godly touche doth fle
My wicked hande.
I gladly doe this hande embrace to me.
By this I beeyng stayed will goe, this mouing to my brest
Ile slake my woes.
what place shal I secke roonagae for rest?
Where shall I hyde my selfe? or in what lande my selfe engraue?
What Tanais, or what Nilus els, or with his persyan waue
what Tigris violent of streame, or what fierce Rhenus flood,
Or Tagus troublesome that flowes with I bere treasures good
May my right hande now wash from gylt? although Maetis collde
The waues of all the Northen seae on me shed out now wollde,
And al the water thereof shoolde now passe by my two handes,
Yet will the mischiefe deepe remayne. Alas into what landes
wilt thou o wicked man resorte? to East, or westerne coste?
Eche where well knowen, all place I haue of banishmente quight loste
Frō me the worlde doth flee a backe, the starres that spdelyng ron
Do backwarde dryue their turned course, euen Cerberus the soo
better countnaunce di b. holde. o faythfull frende I saye
o Theseu, secke some lurkyng place, farce hence, out of the waye.
O thou awarder of mens gyltes what euer iudge thou be
That hurtefull men doest loue, repaye a worthy thanke to me:
And my desertes. I hee beseeche, to ghostes of hell agayne
Sende me that ones escaped them: and subiect to thy rayne
Restore me yet to those thy bandes. that place shall me well hyde:
And yet euen that place knowes me well.
Our lande for thee doth dyde.
There Mars, his hand acquit agayne and made from slaughter free
Restoarde to armour: loe that lande (Alcides) calles for thee,
which wontes to quight the gods, and proue them Innocent to be.