HOw fares the King, my Lord?
speakes he cheerely?
Euen as a dying man, whose life
Like to quicke lighting, which is
no sooner seene, but is extinct.
Is the Kings will confirm'd?
I, thats the point that we leuel at.
But oh, the confirmation of that will, tis all, tis all.
That will confirme my Daughter Queene.
Right, & my Sonne is marryed to your daughter.
My Lord, in an euen plaine way, I will
Deriue the Crowne vnto your Daughters head.
What though the King hath left behinde,
Two Sisters, lawfull and immediate heires,
To succeed him in his Throane Lyes it not
In our powers to contradict it?
Haue we not the King and Counsels hands vnto it?
Tut, wee stand high in mans opinion,
And the worldes broad eye.
Heere comes Sir Thomas Wyat.
Sir Thomas booted and spur'd, whether away so fast?
It bootes me not to stay,
When in this land rebellion beares such sway.
Gods will, a Court! Tis chang'd
Since Noble Henries daies.
You haue set your handes vnto a will.
A will you well may call it:
So wils Northumberland:
So wils great Suffolke,
Against Gods will, to wrong those Princely Maides.
Will you not subscribe your hand with other of the Lords?
Not with me, that in my handes,
Surprise the Soueraigntie?
Ile damb'd my soule for no man, no for no man,
who at doomes day must answere for my sinne:
Not you, nor you my Lordes,
Who nam'de Queene Iane in noble Henries daies,
Which of you all durst once displace his issue?
My Lords, my Lords, you whet your kniues so sharp,
To carue your meate,
That they will cut your fingars.
The strength is weakenesse that you builde vpon,
The King is sicke, God mend him, I, God mend him:
But were his soule from his pale body free,
Adieu my Lords, the Court no court for me.
Farwell, I feare thee not.
The Fly is angrie, but hee wants a sting,
And all the Counsell: onely this peruerse
And peeuish Lord, hath onely deny'd his hand
To the inuesting of your princely Daughter.
Hee's idle, and wants power.
Our Ocean shall these petty brookes deuoure,
Heere comes his Highnesse Doctor.
How fares his Highnesse?
His body is past helpe.
We haue left our practice to the Diuines,
That they may cure his soule
Past phisickes helpe, why then past hope of life,
Heere comes his Highnesse Preacher:
Life reuerent man.
Life, life, though death his body doe disseuer,
Our King liues with the King of heauen for euer.
Dead! send for Heralds, call me Purseuants,
Wher's the King at armes? in euerie market towne
Proclaime Queene Iane.
Best to take the opinion of the Counsell.
You are too timorous. We in our selues
Are power sufficient: the King being dead.
This hand shall place the crowne
On Queene Ianes head.
Trumpets and Drums, with your notes resound,
Her royal name, that must in state be crown'd.
Our Cousen King is dead.
Alasse, how small an Vrne containes a King?
He that ruld all, euen with his princely beath,
Is forc'd to stoope now to the stroake of death.
Heard you not the proclamation?
I heare of it, and I giue credit to it
What great men feare to be,
Their feares grow greater.
Our Fathers grow ambitious
And would force vs saile in mightie tempests,
And are not Lordes of what they doe possesse.
Are not thy thoughts as great?
I haue no thoughts so ranke, so growne to head,
As are our Fathers pride.
Troth I doe inioy a Kingdome hauing thee.
And so my paine be prosperous in that,
What care I though a Sheep-cote be my Pallace
Or fairest roofe of honour.
See how thy blood keepes course with mine:
Thou must be a Queene, aye me! a Queene,
The flattering belles that shrilly sound
At the Kings funerall with hollow heartes,
Will cowardly call thee Soueraigne:
For indeed thou wouldst prooue but an Vsurper.
Who would weare fetters though they were all of golde?
Or to be sicke, though his faint browes
For a wearing Night-cap, wore a Crowne.
Thou must assume, a tytle that goes on many feet,
But tis an office, wherein the heartes of Schollers,
And of Souldiers will depend vppon thy Hearse.
Were this rightly scand,
Wee scarce should finde a King in any Land.
Honor and happy reigne
Attend the new Maiestie of England.
To whome my Lord bends this your aue.
To your grace dread Soueraigne,
You are by the Kings will, and the consent
Of all the Lords, chosen for our Queene.
O God! me thinkes you sing my death,
In parts of musickes lowdnes,
Tis not my turne to rise.
The voice of the whole Land-speakes in my tongue
It is concluded your Maiestie must ride,
From hence vnto the Tower: there to stay
Vntill your Coronation.
O God!
Why sighes your Maiestie?
My Lord and Father, I pray tell me,
Was your Fathers Father ere a King?
Neuer, and it like your grace.
Would I might still continue of his lyne,
Not trauell in the cloudes.
It is often seene, the heated blood
That couets to be royall, leaues off ere it be noble,
My learned carefull King, what must we goe?
We must.
Then it must be so.
Set forward then.
The Towre will be a place of ample state,
Some lodgings in it, will like dead mens sculs,
Remember vs of frailty.
We are led with pompe to prison,
O propheticke soule.
Lo we ascend into our chaires of State,
Like funerall Coffins, in some funerall
Pompe descending to their graues. But we must on.
How can we fare well, to keep our Court:
Where Prisoners keepe their caue?
Thus like a Nun, not like a Princesse borne,
Descended from the Royall Henries loynes:
Liue I inuirond in a house of stone,
My Brother Edward liues in pompe and state,
I in a mansion here all ruinate.
Their rich attire, delicious banquetting:
Their seuerall pleasures: all their pride and honour,
I haue forsaken for a rich prayer Booke.
The Golden Mines of wealthy India,
Is all as drosse compared to thy sweetnesse.
Thou art the ioy, and comfort of the poore,
The euerlasting blisse in thee we finde.
This little volume inclosed in this hand,
Is richer then the Empire of this land.
Pardon me Madam, that so boldly
I presse into your Chamber. I salute your
Highnesse with the high stile of Queene.
Queene! may it be?
Or iest you at my lowring miserie.
Your Brother King is dead,
And you the catholicke Queene must now succede.
I see my God, at length hath heard my prayer.
You Sir Harry, for your glad tydings,
Shall be held in honour and due regard.
Health to the Lady Mary.
And why not Queene, Sir Thomas?
Aske that of Suffolke duke, & great Northumberland
Who in your steede hath Crown'd another.
another Queene, Sir Thomas wee aliue,
The true immediate heires of our dread Father?
Nothing more true then that:
Nothing more true then you are the true heire,
Come leaue this Cloyster and be seene abroad,
Your verie sight will stirre the peoples heatts,
and make them cheerely, for Queene Maries crie.
One comfort I can tell you: the tenants of the Dukes
Northumberland and Suffolke denide their ayde,
In these vnlawfull armes: to all the Counsell
I denide my hand, and for King Henries Issue still will stand.
Your Counsel, good sir Thomas, is so pithy
That I am woon so like it.
Come let vs streight from hence,
From Framingham:
Cheere your spirits.
Ile to the Dukes at Cambridge, and discharge them all:
Prosper me God in these affaires,
I lou'd the Father wel, I lou'd the Sonne,
And for the Daughter I through death will run.
wher's Captaine Bret?
Heere my Lord.
Are all our numbers full?
They are my Lord.
See them arain'd, I will set forward steright.
Honorable friends, and natiue peeres,
That haue chosen me to be the leader of these martiall
troopes, to march against the sister
Of our late dead Soueraigne.
Beare witnesse of my much vnwillingnesse,
In furthering these attemps,
I rather ioy to thinke vpon our ancient victories
Against the French and Spaniard,
Whose high pride we seueld with the waues of brittish shore
Dying the hauen of Brit, with guiltie blood,
Tll all the Harbor seem'd a sanguine poole:
Or we desire these armes, we are now to warre
Gainst the perfidious northern enemie,
Who trembling at our first shocke voice and sight,
Like cowards turn'd their backes with shmefull flight
But those rich spoiles are past: we are now to goe,
Being natiue friends, against a natiue foe.
In your hands we leaue the Queene elected,
She hath seisure of the Tower,
If you'be confident, as you haue sworne
Your selues true lige men to her highnesse
She no doubt, with royall fauour will remunerate
The least of your . Farwell
My teares into your bosomes fll,
With one I doe include you all.
My Lord most lou'd with what a mourning heart
I take your farwell, let the after signes
Of my imploym nt witnesse. I protest.
Did not the sacred person of my Queene,
Whose weale I tender as my soules cheefe blisse,
Vrge my abode, I would not thinke it shame
To traile a pike where you were generall.
But wishes are in vaine, I am bound to stay,
And vrgent businesse calls your grace away.
See, on my knees I humbly take my leaue,
And steep my wordes with teares.
Kinde Arundell, I bind thee to my loue.
Once more farwell.
Heauens giue your grace successe.
Commend vs to the Queene and to your Sonne,
Within one weeke, I hope war will be done.
Come my Lords, shall vs march.
I, I, sor Gods sake on.
Tis more then time my friendes, that we were gone.
What ho Porter! open the gate.
I beseech your honour to pardon me,
The Couns hath giuen commaund
Not shall this way.
Why you idle fellow, am I not sent vppon the Queenes affaires, commanded by the Lords? and know you not that I am Treasurer? come open the Gate, doe you know not what.
Well my Lord, I doe aduenture on your word.
The Dukes displeasure: all the Counsell boord
Bésides, may be my heauie enemies,
But goe a Gods name, I the worst will proue,
And if I die, I die for him I loue.
I thanke thee, and will warrant thee from death. Is my Horse ready?
It is my Lord
Then will I flie this fearefull Counsell boord,
My heart misgiues me, I haue done amisse,
Yet being a Counsellor one of the number
Nothing can prooue amisse.
Now shall I know the worst.
Heere comes my Lord of Arundell.
Porter, Did the Lord Treasurer passe this way?
But now my gratious Lord.
Vngratious Villaine, follow,
Bring him backe againe,
If not, by faire meanes bring him backe by force:
And heare you sirra, as you goe, will the Lord Maior and some Aldermen of his Bretheren, and some especiall Citttzens of note, to attend our further pleasures presently. Treasurer fled: the Duke is but newly arrested, some purpose, on my life, to crosse their plots: weeleset strong watches, see Gates and walles well mand: tis ten to one but princely innocence,
Is these strange wisest violence.
Though' your attempt, Lord Treasurer be such,
That hath no colour in these troublous times,
But an apparant purpose of reuolt,
From the deceast Kings will, and our degree,
Yet, for you are a Counsellor of note,
One of our number, and of high degree,
Before we any way presume to iudge,
We giue you leaue to speake in your behalfe.
My Lord, the businesse of these troublous times,
Binding vs al, still to respect the good of common weale:
Yet doth it not debar priuate regard of vs & of our own
The generall weale is treasur'd in your brest,
And all my ablest powers haue bin imployed
To stir them there, yet haue I borne a part,
Laying the commons troubles next my heart,
My ouersight in parting without leaue:
Was no contempt, but onely for an houre.
To order home affaires, that none of mine,
In these nice times should vnto faction clime.
Nay my good Lord, be plaine with vs, I pray,
Are you not grieu'd that we haue giuen consent
To Lady Ianes election?
My Lords I am not,
Speake like a Gentleman, vpon your word
Are you not discntent?
Troth to be plaine, I am not pleas'd,
That two such princely Maides lineally descended,
From our royall King, and by his testimonie,
Confirmed heyre, if that their Brother dying Issules,
And one that neuer dream't, it neuer desired
The rule of Soueraignetie,
But with virgins teares hath oft bewaild her miserie,
Should politickly by vs be nam'd a Queene.
You haue said nobly, sit and take your place.
My Lords, Sir Thomas Wyat craues accesse vnto your honours.
Let him come neare.
Roume for Sir Thomas Wyat.
A diuine spirit teach your honours truth,
Open your eyes of iudgement to beholde
The true Legitimate, Mary your vndoubted soueraigne.
A rise sir Thomas, sit and take your place.
Now to our former businesse:
The obligation wherein we all stood bound
To the deceased late Kings will and our decree,
His cousen Iane, and the two absent Dukes
Cannot be conceal'd without great reproach
To vs and to our Issue.
We haue sworn in presence of the sacred host of heauen
Vnto our late young Lord, to both the Dukes,
That no impeachment should diuert our heartes
From the impeachment of the Lady Iane.
To this end we haue ceased her in the tower,
By publike proclamation made her Queene:
To this end we haue armed the Duke, with power
Giuen them commission vnder our owne handes
To passe against the Lady. You performe in hostile maner
And no doubt, the spleene of the vndanted spirit
Of Northumbers Earle, will not be called
With writings of repeale.
Aduice in this, I holde it better farre
To keepe the course we runne then seeking chan,
Hazard our liues, our heires and the Realmes.
In actions roauing rom the bent of truth,
We haue no persident thus to persist
But the bare name of worldly policie.
If others haue ground from Iustice, and the law,
As well diuine as politicke agreeing,
They are for no cause to be disinherited.
If you not seauen yeares since o that effect,
Swore to the Father to maintaine his seede,
What dispensation hath acquited you
From your first sacred vowes?
Youle say, the will extorted from a childe.
O! let mne eyes in naming that sweete youth,
Obserue their part,
Powring downe teares, sent from my swelling heart.
God, mother, I tearme childe? but ile goe on,
Say that the will were his, forced by no tricke,
But for religions loue his simple act,
Yet note how much you erre.
You were sworne before to a mans will,
and not a will alone,
But strengthned by an act of Parliament.
Besides this sacred proofe. The Princely Maides,
Had they no will nor act to prooue their right?
Haue birthrights no priledge, being a plea so strong,
as cannot be refeld, but by plaine wrong?
Now were you toucht. The Lady in tower,
alasse shee's innocent of my claime.
Trust me, shee'd thinks t a moste happy life,
To leaue a Queenes, and keepe a Ladies name.
And for the Dukes, your warrants sent them foorth,
Let the same warrant call them backe againe.
If they refuse to come, the Realme, not they
Must be regarded. Be strong and bold:
We are the peoples factors. Saue our Sonnes
From killing one another, be affraide,
To tempt both heanen and earth, so I haue said.
Why then giue order that she shall be Queene,
Send for the Maior, her errors wele forget,
Hoping she will forgiue.
Neuer make doubt, setting her ceremonious order by.
She is pure within, and mildly chast without.
Giue order to keepe fast the Lady Iane,
Dissolue the the Counsell. Let vs leaue the Tower, and in the Citie hold our audience.
You haue aduised well honorable Lordes,
So will the Citizens be wholly ours,
and if the Dukes be crosse, weele crosse their powers.
Lance persado, quarter, quarter,
What shall we quarter Captaine?
Why the Souldiers?
Why they are not hang'd nor drawn'e yet?
Sir I meane quarter them, that the offended multitude, may passe in safetie.
May we not take tooles of the pie & the aple-women
Not in any sorte the Dukes pleasure will pasle free.
The Cōmons shal be vsed with al cōmon curtesie
That goes in rank like beanes and chees-cakes on their
heads in steade of Cappes.
Sir, this is a famous Vniuersitie, and those schollers, those lofty buildings and goodly houses,
Founded by noble Patrons. But no more. Set
a strong watch. That be your care.
What Souldiers?
Feare not, good speech, thuse rude armes I beare,
Ist nt to fight, Sweet, gentle Peace away,
But to succour your liues, passe peaceibly away.
Crie saue the Queene as you goe, and God send you a good market.
God saue the Queene, what Queene? there lies the sese
When we haue none, it can be no offence.
What carry you there in your basket? Mat. Egs orsooth.
Well, crie God saue Queene Iane as you goe, and
God snd you a good Market.
Is the right Queene called Iane? alacke for woe,
at the first she was not christened so.
Thus olde and young still descant on her name,
Nor lend no eare, when wee horstile proclaime.
I feare, I feare. Fear Bret, what shouldst thou feare?
Thou hast a brest compos'd of adamant.
Fal what ill betide, my anchor is cast,
and I in Harbor ride.
My Lord tis true, you sent vnto the Counsell for fresh supplies, what succour, what supplies? Happie is he can draw his necke out of the coller, and make his peace with Marie.
How stands the Treasurer addicted to vs?
I had forgot: when we weare at counsell,
He stole away, and went home to his house,
And by much intreatie was woon to returne,
In briefe they all incline to Queene Mary
My Lord farwell, each hastic houre:
Will coulder tydings cell.
Come they in thunder, we will meete with them?
In the loudest language that their ordinance speakes,
Ours shall answere theirs.
Call me a Herald, and in the market place Proclaime
Queene ane. The streetes are full,
The towne is populous, the people gape for noueltie.
Trumpets speake to them,
That they may answere with an echoning crie,
God saue Queene Iane, God saue her Maiestie.
Ha? a bare report of Trumpets!
Are the slaues horse, or want they arte to speake?
O me! This Towne consis on famous Colledges,
Such as know both how, and what, and when to speake,
Well, yet wee will proceede,
and smother what close enuie hath decreed.
Ambrose my Sonne, what newes?
O my thrice honoured Father,
Boy, speake the worst,
That which soundes deadly est, let me heare that first.
The Lords haue all re uolted from your faction
Wee in our selues are strong.
In Baynards Castle was a counsell held,
Whether the Maior and Sheriffes did resort,
And twas concluded to proclaime Queene Mary.
Then they reuolt the alegeance from my Daughter, and giue it to another:
True my thrice honoured Father,
Besides, my brother Guilford and his wife
Where she was proclaimde Queene, are now
close Prisoners, namely in the Tower.
God take them to his mercie, they had neede,
Of grace and patience, for they both must bleede,
Poore Innocentsoules, they both from guilt are free.
O my thrice honoured Father! might I aduise
you, flie to your manner, there studdie for your saftie.
Boy, thou saist well,
And since the Lords haue all reuolted from me,
My selfe will now reuolt against my selfe.
Call me a Herald to fill their emptie eares,
Assist me Sonne, my good Lord Huntington,
Euen in this market Towne proclaime Queene Mary.
Mary by the grace of God, Queene of England,
France and Ireland, defendres of the Faith. Amen.
Amen, I beare a part,
I with my tongue, I doe not with my heart,
Now they can , now they can baule and yell,
Base minded slaues, sincke may your soules to hell.
My honored Lord, the Counsell greetes you with these Letters.
Stay Maister Roose, ere you depart receiue an answere and reward.
In the Soueraigne name of Mary our Queene
You al vppon the sight hereof,
Surcease your armes, discharge your Souldiers,
And presently repaire vnto the Court,
Or else to be held as an Arch-Ttaitor.
Tis short & sharp, Maister Roose, we do obey your
warrant: but I pray tel mee, how doth all our friendes at
Court? is there not a great mortalitie amongst them?
Is there not a number of them deade of late since I came thence?
My gratious Lord not any.
O maister Roose, it cannot bee, I will assure you
At my departure thence, I left liuing there at least
Fiue hundred friendes, and now I haue not one,
simply not one: friendes! ha, ha, ha, Commission
Thou must be my friend.
And stand betiwixt me and the stroake of death,
Were thy date out, my liues date were but short,
They are colde friends, that kils their friends in sport
Heere comes your honoured friend the Earle of Arundell.
My friend!
I am no friend to Traitors: in my moste high &
Princely Soueraignes name,
I doe arst your honour of high Treason.
A Traitor Arundell? haue I not your hand in my
commission? let me peruse it: as I tis heere,
and by your warrant haue so strict proceeded.
Is the limits of my warrant broke answere me.
It may be that it hath pleased her Maiestie
To pardon vs, and for to punnish you.
I know no other reason, this I must,
I am commounded, and the act is Iust.
And I obey you: when we parted last
My Lord of Arundel, our farwell was
then our greeting now.
Then you cride God speede,
Now you come on me ere you say take heede:
Then you did owe me your best bloods: nay green'd
You could not spend them in my seruice.
O then it was a double death to stay behinde,
But I am ouertooke and you are kinde,
I am, beshrew you else, but I submit,
My crime is great, and I must answere it.
You must with your three Sons, be guarded safe
Vnto the Tower: with you, those Lords and Knights
That in this faction did associate you,
For so I am inioyn'd.
Then peaciuely, let conduct you thither,
O my Children! my soule weepes endlesse teares for you.
O at the generall Sessions, when all soules
Stand at the bar of Iustice,
And hold vp their new immortalized handes,
O then lot the of their tragick endes
Be racd out of the bed-rowle of my sinnes:
When ere the black booke of my crime's vnclaspt.
Let not these scarlet Letters be found there:
Of all the rest, onely that page be cleere.
But come to my arraignement, then to death,
The Queene and you haue long aim'd at this head,
If to my Children, she sweet grace extend,
My soule hath peace, and I imbrace my end.
Three daies are past, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday too
Yet my protesting seruant is not come.
Himselfe conducted me to this hard lodging,
A simple Cabin, for so great a Prince,
And then he swore, but oathes you see are vain,
That he would hourely come and visite me:
I that was wont, to sur in estate,
Am now through hunger almost desolate.
My Lord.
Ned Homes, speake hast thou brought me meate?
With much a doe my Lord, meat, bread & wine,
While you refresh your selfe, I will recorde
The cause of my long stay.
I prethee doe, neede bids me eate,
Neede bids me heare thee too.
The night I left you in the hollow tree,
My house was searched.
Goe on, goe on.
And I no sooner entred but attached,
Threatned the Rack: and if I did not yeeld
Your gracious selfe into their gracelesse hands.
And thou hast don't, thou hast betraied me.
Done it! o betraie you? O noe!
First would I see my loued wife and Children
Murdered, and tos'd on speares, before I would
Deliuer your grace vnto their handes,
For they intend your death.
Goe on, goe on.
and offer'd a thousand Crownes to him that can
Bring newes of your abode, twas offer'd in my hands.
Which I beseech may stop my Vitall breath,
When I am feede with golde to worke your death.
See yonder sits the Duke.
I kisse thee in requitall of this loue.
and in requitall of so great a grace,
I kisse your hand that dares to kisse my face.
So Iudas kist his Maister: ceaze the Duke.
Ah me! Ned Homes we are vndone,
Both thou and I betraide.
My Lord, late Duke of Suffolke, in her highnesse name I doe arrest you of high Treason.
I doe obey, and onely craue this kindnesse,
You would be good vnto my Seruant Homes,
Where in releeuing me, hath but performde
The duetie of a seruant to his Lord.
You are deceiu'd sir in your seruant much,
Hee is the man that did betray you.
Heere Maister Homes, towards your thousand pounds,
Heere is a hundred markes,
Come to the Exchequer, you shall haue the rest.
Hast thou betraide me? yet with such a tongue,
so smoothly oilde, slight of my dangers feare,
O break my heart, this griefe's too great to beare.
Pardon me my Lord.
God pardon thee, and lay not to thy soule
This greeuous inne: Farwell.
And when thou spendest this ill got golde
Remember how thy Maister life was solde.
Thy Lord that gaue thee Lordships, made thee great,
Yet thou betraidst him as he sat at meate.
On to my graue, tis time that I were dead,
When he that held my heart betraies my head.
O God, O God, that euer I was borne,
This deede hath made me (slaue) to abiect scorne.
O poore shrimpe, how art thou falne away for want of mouching? O Colen cries out most tirannically, the little gut hath no mercie, whats heere vittailes? O rare! O good! Feede chops, drinke throate, good victailes makes good blood.
But stay, whose heere? more Sheriffes more searchers?
O no, this is Homes that betraide his honest Maister,
How, with a Halter about his necke? I hope hee doth
not meane to hang himselfe? ile step a side.
This is the place, where I betraide my Lord,
This is the place where oft I haue releeu'd:
and villaine I, betraide him to the Iawes of death,
But heere before I further will proceede
Heere will I burie this inticing gould,
Lye there damn'd fiend neuer serue humaine more,
This is rare, now in this moode hee would hang himselfe twre excellent.
Shall I aske mercie? no it is too late,
Heauen will not heare, and I am desperate.
So, so, a very good ending, would all falce Seruants
might drinke of the same sauce.
Gold, you are firstmine, you must helpe
To shift my selfe into some counterfeite suite
Of apparel, and then to London:
If my olde Maister be hanged, why so:
If not, why rusticke and lusticke:
Yet before I goe, I doe not care if I throwe this Dog in
a Ditch: come away dissembler: this cannot chuse but be
a hundred pound it wayes so heauy.
By Gods asistance, and the power of heauen,
after our Troubles we are safely set,
In our inheritance, for which we doe subscribe
The praise and benefit to God, next thankes
To you my Lordes. Now shall the sanctuarie,
And the house of the moste high be newly built.
The ancient honours due vnto the Church,
Buried within the Ruine Monastaries,
Shall lift their stately heads, and rise againe
To astonish the destroyers wandring eyes.
Zeale shall be deckt in golde,
Religion not like a virgin robd of all her ponipe,
But briefly shining in her Iemmes of state,
Like a faire bride be offerd to the Lord.
To build large houses pull no churches downe,
Rather in rich the Temple with our crowne.
Better a poore Queene, then the Subiects poore.
May it please your grace to giue release
Vnto such ancient Bishops that haue lost their
Honours in the church affaires.
We haue giuen order to the Duke of Norfolke to release them.
Your sacred Highnesse will no doubt be minde
full of the late Oath you tooke at
O my Lord of Arundell, wee remember that,
But shall a Subiect force his Prince to sweare
Contrarie to her conscience and the Law?
Wee heere release vnto our faithfull people,
one Subsidie,
Due vnto the Crowne in our dead Brothers daies.
The Commonaltie shal not be burdned
In our reigne, let them be liber all in Religion,
and wee will spare their treasure to themselues:
Better a poore Prince then the Nation poore,
The Subiects Treasure, in the Soueraignes store.
What is your Highnesse pleasure about the Rebels?
The Queene-like Rebels,
Meane you not Queene Iane?
Guilford and Iane, with great Northumberland, and hauty Suffolkes Duke.
The Duke of Suffolke is not yet apprehended,
Therefore my Lords,
Some of you most deare to vs in loue,
Be carefull of that charge:
The rest weele leaue for try all of the other prisoners.
The Lady Iane most mightie Soueraigne,
Alyde to you in blood: for shes the
Daughter of your Fathers Sister.
Mary the Queene of France: Charles Brandons
Wife your Neece, your next of blood, except your sister,
Deserues some pittie, so doth youthfull Guilford.
Such pittie as the law alowes to Traitors.
They were misled by their ambitious Fathers,
What Sonne to obey his Father proues a Traitor,
Must buy their disobedience with their death.
My Lord of Winchester, still thirsts for .
Wiat no more, the law shall be their Iudge,
Mercie to meane offenders weele ostend,
Not vnto such that dares vsurpe our Crowne.
Count Edmond the Embassador from Spaine,
attends your highnesse answere, brought those
Letters sent from the Emperor
In his Sonnes behalfe.
In the behalfe of louely Princely Philip,
Whose person wee haue shrined in our heart?
at the first sight of his delightfull picture
That picture should haue power to tingle
Loue in Royall brests: the Dartes of loue are wordes, pictures,
conceite, heele preuaile by any,
Your counsell Lords about this forraine businesse.
I say and it like your royall Maiestie,
a royall treatie, and to be confirm'd,
and I alowe the match.
Alow it Lordes, we haue cause
To thanke our God, that such a mightie Prince
as Phillip is, Sonne to the Emperor,
Heire to wealthy Spaine, and many spacious
Kingdomes, will vouchsase —
Vouchsafe! my Lord of Winchester, pray what?
To grace our mightie Soueraigne with his honourable Title.
To marrie with our Queene: mean you not so?
I doe, what then?
O God! is shee a beggr, a forsaken Maide,
that she hath neede of grace from forrine princes?
By Gods deare mother, O God prdon sweae I,
Me thinkes she is a faire and louely Prince,
Her onely beautie (were she of meae birth)
Able to make the greatest ,
I the great Emperor of the Cham,
That hath mor vnder his Commaund,
Then spanish Philip's like to inherrit townes,
To come and lay his Scpter at her feet,
And to intreate her to vouchsafe the grace
To take him and his Kingdome to her mercy.
Wat you are too hot.
And you to proude vouchsafe? O base!
I hope sheele no vouchsafe to take the Emperors
sonne to her deare mercie.
my Lord of Winchester I pra'y.
Then I say, we haue cause to thanke our God,
That such a mightie Prince will look so lowe,
As to respect this Iland and our Queene.
Pardon me Madam, hee respect your more th your person? thinke of that.
Wiat, you wrong the affection of the Prince,
For he desires noe nor townes,
Nor to beare any office, rule or state,
Either by person or by Substitu,
Nor yet himselfe to be a Counsellor in our affaires.
What neede hee (Noble Lords) to aske the
fruite, when he demaundes the tree?
No Castle, , nor Towers of strength,
It bootes not, when the chiefest Tower of all
The key that opens vnto all the Land.
I meane our Gratious Soueraigne must be his,
But he will beare no office in the land,
And yet will marry with the Queen of all.
Nor be of counsell in the Realmes affaires,
And yet the Queene inclosed in his armes:
I doe not like this strange marriage
The Fox is suttle, and his head once
The slender body easily will follow.
I grant, he offers you in name of dowre,
The yearely summe of threescore thousand Duccats.
Besides, the seauenteene famous Prouinces,
And that the heire suceeding from your loynes,
Shall haue the Souereigne rule of both the Ralmes.
What, shall this mooue your Highnesse to the match?
Spaine is too farre for England to inherit,
But England neare enough for Spaine to woe.
Has not the Kinges of England (good Sir Thomas)
Espous'd the Daughters of our Neighbour Kinges?
I graunt, your predecessors oft haue sought
Their Qune from France,
And sometimes to from Spaine.
But neuer could I heare that England yet
Has bin so base, to seeke a King from either:
Tis policie deare Queene, no loue at all.
Tis loue great Queene, no pollicie at all.
Which of you all, dares iustifie this match,
And not be toucht in conscience with an oath?
Remember, O remember I beseech you,
King Henries last will, and his act at Court,
I meane that royall Court of Parliament,
That does prohibit Spaniards from the Land,
That Will and Act, to which you all are sworne,
And doe not damme your soules with periurie.
But that wee knowe thee Wyat to be true
Vnto the Crowne of England and to vs,
Thy ouer-boldnesse should bee payde with death.
But cease, for feare your liberàll tongue offend,
With one consent my Lordes you like this match?
We doe great Soueraigne.
Call in Count Edmond Honorable Lords.
Wee haue determined of your Ambassie,
and thus I plight, our loue to Philips heart,
Imbarke you straight, the winde blowes wondrous faire:
Till he shall land in England, I am all care.
And ere hee land in England, I will offer
My loyall brest for him to treade vpon.
O who so forward Wyat as thy selfe,
To raise this troublesome Queene in this her Throane?
Philip is a Spaniard, a proud Nation,
Whome naturally our Countrie men abhorre.
Assist me gratious heauens, and you shall see
What hate I beare vnto their Slauerie.
Ile into Kent, there muster vp my friendes,
To saue this Countrie, and this Realme defend.
God morrow to the Patron of my woe.
God morrowe to my Lord, my louely Dudley.
Why doe you looke so sad my dearest Lord?
Nay why doth Iane, thus with a heauie eye,
And a defected looke, salute the day?
Sorrow doth ill become thy siluer brow,
Sad griefe lyes dead, so long as thou liues fayre,
In my Ianes ioy, I doe not care for care.
My lookes (my loue) is sorted with my heart,
The Sunne himselfe, doth scantly show his face,
Out of this firme grate, you may perceiue the Tower-Hill
Thronged with store of people,
As if they gap'd for some strange Noueltie.
Though sleepe doe sildome dwéll in men of care,
Yet I did this night sleepe, and this night dream't,
My Princely father great (Northumberland)
Was marryed to a stately Bride:
And then me thought, iust on his Bridall day,
A poysoned draught did take his life away.
Let not fond visions so appale my Loue,
For dreames doe oftentimes contrarie prooue.
The nights are teadious, and the daies are sad,
And see you how the people stand in heapes,
Each man sad, looking on his aposed obiect,
As if a generall passion possest them?
Their eyes doe seeme, as dropping as the Moone,
As if prepared for a Tragedie.
For neuer swarmes of people there doe tread,
But to rob life, and to ich the dead
And shewe they wept.
My Lord they did so, for I was there.
I pra'y resolue vs good Maister Lieftenant
Who was it yonder, that rendered vp his life
To natures death?
Pardon m my Lord, tis fellony to acquaint you with death of any Prisoner, yet to resolue your grace, it was your Father, great Northumberland, that this day lost his head.
Peace rest his soule, his sinnes be buried in his graue,
And not remembred in his Epitaph: but who comes ?
My Father Prisoner!
O Iane! now ght but fearethy Tytle & thy state,
Thou now must leaue for a small graue.
Had I bin contented to a bin great, I had stood,
But now my rising, is puld downe with blood.
Farwell, point me my house of prayers.
Is greefe so short? twa's wont to be full of wordes,
Tis true, but now Deathes lesson, bids a coulde adue.
Farwell, thus friendes on desperate iourneys parte,
Breaking of wordes with teares, that swelles the heart.
It is the pleasure of the Queene that you part lodgings.
Till your Arrainement, which must be to morrow.
Good Maister Lieftenant let vs pray together.
Pardon me Madam I may not, they that owe you, sway me.
Intreate not Iane, though shee our bodies part,
Our soules shall meete. Farwell my loue.
My Dudley, my owne heart.
Hold Drumme, stand Gentlemen,
Giue the word along: stand, stand:
Maisters, friendes, Souldiers, and therefore Gentlemen,
I know some of you weare warme pursses
Linde with golde, to them I spke not,
But to such leane knaues that cannot put vp
Crosses, thus I say, fight valiantly,
And by the mary God, you that haue all
Your life time siluer lackt,
Shall now get Crownes, marry they must be crackt.
No matter, weele change them for white money.
But it must needs be so, deare Countriemen,
For Souldiers are the maisters of wars mint,
Blowes are the stamps, they set vpon with bullets,
And broken pates are when the braines lyes spilt:
These light crownes, that with blood are double guilt,
But thats not all, that your stout hearts shall earne,
Sticke to this glorious quarrell, and your names
Shall stand in Chronicles ranck'd with King
You fe your Countrie from base spanish thrall,
From Ignominious slauerie,
Who can disgest a Spaniard, that's a true Englishman?
Would he might choake that disgest him.
Hee that loues freedome and his Countrie,
Crie a Wyat: he that will not, with my heart
Let him stand foorth, shake handes,
And weele depart.
A Wyat, a Wyat, a Wyat.
Forbeare, or with the breath thy Trumpet spends,
This shall let foorth thy soule.
I am a Herald, and chalenge safetie
By the lawe of armes.
So shalt thou when thou art lawfully imploide
What loude knaues that?
No kna Sir Thomas, I am a true man
to my Queene, to whome thou art a Traytor.
Knocke him downe.
Knocke him downe, fie no,
Weele handle him, he shall sound before he goe.
Hee comes from Norfolke and those fawning Lords, in Maries name, waying out life to them that will with basenesse burie it
Ceaze on him as a pernitious enemie.
Sir George be ruld,
Since we professe the Arte of Warre,
Let's not be hist at for our ignorance,
Hee shall passe and repasse, iuggle the best he can,
Lead him into the Crai. Norry set foorth
Set foorth thy brasen throate and call all Rochester
About thee: doe thy office, fill their
Light heads with proclamations, doe,
Catch Fooles with Lime-twigs dipt with pardons.
But Sir George and good sir Harry Isley,
If this Gallant open his mouth too wide,
Powder the Varlet, pistoll him, fire the Roofe that's ore his mouth
He craues the law of Armes, and he shall ha't,
Teach him our law, to cut's throate if he prate.
If lowder reach thy Proclamation,
The Lord haue mercie vppon thee.
Sir Thomas, I must doe my office.
Come. Weele doe ours too,
I, I, doe, blowe thy selfe hence
Whorson prou'd Herrald, because he can
giue armes, he thinkes to cut vs off by the elbowes.
Maisters and fellow Souldiers, say, wil you leaue old
Tom Wiat?
No, no, no.
A March! Norfolkes Drum vpon my life.
I pra'y see what Drum it is.
The word is giuen, arme, arme flies through the camp
As loude, though not so full of dread thunder:
For no mans looke pale, but euerie face,
Is lifted vp aboue his foremans head,
And euerie Souldier does on stand,
shaking a drawne sword in his threatning hand.
At whome, at whose Drum?
At Norfolke, Norfolkes Drum:
With him comes Arundell, you may beholde
The silken faces of their showe,
Nothing but in the winde,
Norfolke rides , his crest well knowne,
Proud, as if all our heads were now hi owne.
Soft, he shall pay more for them.
Sir Robert Rodston, bring our ,
To our , let all our archery,
Fall off in of shot a both sides of the van,
To gall the first Horse of the enemie
That shall come fiercely on:
Our , bid thm to charge, charge my .
Charge, charge.
Saint George for England, Wiat for poore Kent,
Blood lost in Countries qarrell, is nobly spent.
Base , hard hearted fugi,
He that you sent with Norry, false sir George
to Norfolke.
Sir George Harper fled?
thought better of a Counter ite,
His name was Harper, was it not? him goe,
Hence all for his sake shall stand,
But for plaine nine pence, throughout all the land.
They come, no man giue ground in these hot Caes,
Be Englishmen and them to their faces. Exeunt
Yonder the Traitor marcheth with a stele bowe.
Bent on his Souereigne, and his kingdomes peace:
To waue him to vs with a flag of truce,
And tender him soft mercie,
Were to call our right in question,
Therefore put in act, your resolute intendments,
If rebellion be suffered to take head,
She liues too long, treason doth sware.
Therefore giue signall to the fight,
Tis good, tis good, my Lord.
Where's Captaine Bret?
Heere my Lord.
To doe honour to you and those fiue hundred
Londoners that march after your colours,
You shall charge the Traitor in the Vantgard
Whilst my selfe with noble Arundell
And stout Iarningam, econd you in the maine,
God and Saint George, this day fight on our side.
While thus we tame a desperate Rebels pride.
Countrimen and friendes, And you the moste valiant sword and BucklerMen of London, the Duke of Norfolk in honour has promoted you to the Vangard, and why to the Vangard? but because he knowes you to men, martall men, men of good stomacks, hot , verie actious for valour, such as scornes to shrink for a wetting, who wil off any thing with head and shoulders.
Well forward, good commaunder for wards,
I am to lead you, & whether? to fight: and with whome? with Wyat: and what is Wyat? a moste famous and Arch-Traytor, to nobody by this hand that I knowe.
Nay, speake out good Captaine.
I say again, is worthy Norfolke gone?
I, , gon, .
I say agen, tht Wyat thus, In with the thus at his taile, is worthy to be hang'd like a in the Kingdomes , say I well my Lads?
Forwards, forwards.
And off his head shall haue for —
What shall I haue? .
The pox, the plague, and all the deseases, the and can throwe vppon .
not , flat.
And wherefore is Wyat vp?
Because he cannot keep his .
No, Wyat is vp to the Spaniards down, to keepe King Pillip out, whose comming in will giue the Land such a Phillip, will make it agen.
A would it were come to tht, wee would, wee wold leaue off Philips fll to .
Philip is a Spaniard, and what is a Spaniard?
A Spaniard is no Englishman that I knowe.
Right, a Spaniard is a Camocho, a Callimanco, nay which worse, a Dondego, and what is a Dondego?
A Dondego is a kinde of Spanish Stockfish, or poore Iohn.
No, a Dondego is a desperate Viliago, a very Castilian, God blesse vs.
There came but one Dundego into England, & hee made all Paules stincke agen, what shall a whole a my of Dondegoes doemy sweete Countrimen?
Marry they will make vs all smell abhominably, hee comes not heere that's flat.
A Spaniard is cad so, because hee's a Spaniard his yad is but a span.
That's the reason our Englishwomen loue them not.
Right, for he caries not the English mans yard bout him, if you deale with him looke for sure: if you giue an inch hee'le take an ell: he giue an ell, heele take an inch. Therefore my fine, spr, dapp, finicall, , if you now, you haue alwaies bin, counted politique Londiners, ty to the stronger side, leaue Arull, leaue Norfolke, and loue Bret.
Weele fling our flat Caps at them.
Weare your o Neates-leather sooes? Scorn Spanish Leather, crie a figge for the Spaniard: (faide I) well bollies?
I, I, I.
Why then fiat, fiat, and euerie man dye at his foote, that cries not Wyat, a Wya.
A Wya, Wyat, a Wyat.
Sweete musicke, Gallant fellow-Londiners.
Y faith wee are the Mad caps, we are the .
You shall be all Lord Maiores at least,
Those eight shall doe seruice
now against their Maisters Norfolke and Arundell,
They may t their heeles more then their hands
for sauing of their liues,
When souldiers turne surueyors and measure Lands,
God helpe poore .
Souldiers and friend, let v all play nible bloud,
Houndes, and hunt them step by step,
We heare the Lawyers plead in Armour steede of
Gownes, if they fall out about the case they Iar,
Then they may c each the Bar.
Soft, this is Ludg are, stand knock.
Who knockes?
A Wyat, a true friend,
Open your gates, you louring Citizen,
I bring you freedome, from a Prince,
The Qu has heard your suite,
And tis her pleasure the Ctie gates,
Stand open to vs.
Aaunt thou Traitor, thinkes thou by forgerie
To enter London with rebellious armes?
Knowe that these gates are bard against thy entrance
And it shall cost the liues of twentie thousand true
subiects to the Qeene before a Traytor enters.
Shoote him through.
Stay, lets know him first.
Kill him, then le know him afterwards.
Looke on my face, and blushing, see with shame, thy treasons Charecter'd.
Tis the Lord Pembroke.
What haue wee to doe with the Lord P broke, wheres the Queenes Lieftenant?
I am Lieftenant of the Citie now.
Are you Lord Maior?
The greatest Lord that breathes enters not beere, without expresse commaund from my deare Queene.
She commaundes hy vs.
I doe commaund thee in her highnesse name,
To leaue the Cittie , or by y honour,
A peece of ordinance shall be straite dischargd,
To be thy deathes man, & shoote thee to thy graue.
Then heer,s no entrance.
No, none.
What should wee doe following Wyat anye longer.
O London, London, thou perfidious Town,
Why hast thou broke, thy promise to thy friend?
That for thy sake, and for thy generall sake,
Hath thrust my selfe into the mouth of danger?
March backe to Fleet-streete, if that Wyt die,
London vniustlie, buy thy treacherie.
Wold I could steale away from Wyat, it should be the first thing that I would doe,
Wheres all my Souldier? what all gone,
And left my Drum and colours without guard?
O infilicitie of carefull men!
Yet will I sell my hooured blood as deere,
s euer did faithfull subiect to his Prince.
Pembroke reuolts, and flies to Wyats side.
Hee's damb'd in hell that speakes it.
O my good Lord! tis spred,
That Pembroke and Count Arundell both are fled.
Sfoote who said so? what diuil dares sturre my patience ounds I was talking with a ue of vagabonds that lagd at Wiats taile, and am I thus paid for my paines?
And there being mist, some villaine finding you out of sight hath raisde this slander on you, but come my Lord.
Ile not fight.
Nay sweete Earle.
Zoundes fight, and heare my name dishonoured?
Wiat is march downe Fleete-streete: after him.
Why doe not you, and you, pursue him?
If I strike one blo may my hand off.
And if I doe by this —
Come leaue your swearing,
Did not countries care vrge me to this quarrell?
For my part I would not strike a blowe.
No more would I, ile eate no wrongs,
Let's all die, and ile die.
Stand on your Guard, for this way Wyat is persude a maine.
Follow, follow.
Stand Traitor stand, or thou shalt nere stand ore.
Lords I yeeld, an easie conquest tis to win the field,
After al's lost I am wounded, let me haue a surgion,
that I may goe vnto my grau.
Tis not the name of Traitor paules me,
Nor pluckes my weapon from my hand.
Vse me how you can, though you say Traitor,
I am a Gentleman.
Your dreadfull shaking me, which I defie,
Is a poore losse of life, I wish to die,
Death spirit, no more then can my bed,
Nor will I change one haire, loosing this head.
Come guard him, guard him.
No matter where,
I hope for nothing, therefore nothing feare.
My Lord of Norfolke, will it please you sit
By you the noble Lord of Arundell,
Since it hath pleasde her sacred Maiestie,
To nominate vs heere Commissioners:
Let vs without all partialitie be open eard,
To what they can : where's the Lieftenant of the Tower?
my good .
Fetch foorth the prisoners,
Place them in of state.
Clarke of the requires.
Guilford Dudley, hold vp thy at the barre.
And would to God, this ,
Might haue ,
For , and weale.
Iane Gray, Lady Iane Gray,
Hould vp thy .
A hand as from ,
At the white liuerie, worne by the Angels in their makers sight.
You are heere indited by the names of Guilford Dudly, Lord Dudley; Iane Gray, Lady Iane Gray; of and high Treason, against our moste Lady the Queenes Maiestie.
That is to say, that you Guilford Dudley, and Ladye Iane Gray, haue by all possible sought to procure vnto your selues, the Royal of the Crow of England, to the ting of our new Soueraigne Lady the Qu Maiestie, the true and lawfull lfull to that mous King Henrie the eight, and haue ly adorned your selues with the states Garland imperiall, and haue graunted , Commissions, and such like, for leuying of men and Souldiers to bee sent against the saide : what answere you to this In, ?
Our answere be seuerall like :
Yet Noble the ,
May we not make some Apolegie vnto the Cou
It is of the Law, therfore directlye pl vnto the , and then you shall be .
the law?
,
For what ,
And you our deathes.
, you of these crimes or not
Ile answere first I am, and I am not,
should we vnto the last vnguilty;
You large conscience to
The browe with stile of .
The of the Land shall bee your Iurie.
An honorable and worthy Tryall,
And God forbid, so many Noblemen
Should be made of .
Youle answere to the , will you
My Lord I will, I am.
What, are you or ?
I say vnguiltie still, yet I am guiltie,
Slander not thy selfe,
If there be any guiltie was I,
I was Queene, I the should weare.
I was thy Husband I .
Our wee our , our ,
And shall our fathers liues ?
It was my that made thee ,
O but for , my Guilford .
My Iane had as .
My free from this soule .
If wee bee guiltie, tis fault ,
And shall , for in
We sought no , we no Crowne,
It was imposde vpon by ,
Like goulden on a Tree,
And will you such ?
Then make the ,
As blacke as Sickts, because it was constraind to beare the bankes, whose battering ordinance should haue bin imploid against the hindrers of our Royaltie.
You talke of senceless ethings.
Dooe's Trees want sence, that by the power of musick? haue bene drawn to dance a pleasing measure, wcome then vnto liuing thinges, say wee vsurpe the English Royaltie, wast not by your
I tel you Lords, I haue your hands to show,
Subscrib'd to the Commission of my father, cons?
By which, you did authorice him to wage armes,
If they were Rebellious against your Souaigne
Who cride so loude as you, God saue Queene Iane?
And come you now your Soueraigne to arraigne?
Come downe, come downe, here at a Prisoners barre
Better doe so, then iudge your selues amisse
For looke what , on our heads you lay,
Vpon your owne, may light another day.
The Queene hath pardon'd them:
And wee must die, for a lesse fault,
O partiallitie!
Patience my Guilford, it was euer knowne,
They that find least, the punishment haue borne.
True, my faire Queene of sorrowe truely speake.
Great men like great Flies,
Through lawes Cobw breake,
But the thin'st the prison of the weake.
Now trust me Arund ell,
It doth gri mee much, to sit
In iudgement of these harmlesse —
I helpt to attach the Father, but the sonne —
O through my blood, I feele compassion.
Ru my Lords, weele be humble suters to the Queen
to saue these innocent creatures from their deathes.
Lets breake vp Court,
If Norfolke long should stay,
In teares and passion, I should melt away.
Sit still, what will you take compassion vpon such? they are Heritickes.
VVe are Christians,
Leaue our conscience to our selues:
VVe stand not heere about Religious causes
But are accused of Capitall Treason.
Then you confesse the inditement.
Euen what you will,
Yet saue my Iane, although my blood you spill.
If I must die, saue Princely Guilfords life.
Who is not moou'd, to see this louing strife?
Pray pardon me, doe what you will to day,
And ile approue it though it be my death.
Then heare the speedye sentence of your deathes,
You shall be carried to the place from whence you
came, from thence vnto the place of Execution,
through London to be drawne on Hurdles,
Where thou Iane Gray shalt suffer death by fire.
Thou GuilforId Dudley hang'd and quartered,
So Lord haue mercie vpon you.
VVhy this is well, since we must die,
That wee must die together.
Stay and heere the mercie of the Queene,
Because you are of noble parentage,
Although the crime of your offence be greate,
Shee is onely pleased that you shall —
Will shee pardon vs?
Only I say that you shall loose your heads
Vpon the Tower-Hill, so conuey them hence Leifetenant
stricktly looke ynto your charge.
Our doomes are knowne,
Our liues haue plaide their parte,
Farwell my Iane.
My Dudley, owne heart.
Faine would I take a serimonious leaue,
But thats to die a hundred thousand death:
I cannot speake for teares.
My Lord, come:
Great griefes speake louder
When the least are dumb'd.
The sad aspect, this prison doth ,
Iumpes with the measure that my heart dooth
And this inclosure here, of naught but stone,
Yeildes far mòre comfort then the stony hearts
Of them that wrong'd their country, and their friend
Heere is no peri Counsellors to sweare
sacred oath, and th forsweare the same,
No innovators heere, doth harbor keepe,
A stedfast silence, doth possesse the place,
In this the Tower is noble being base.
Sir Thomas Wyat.
Thats my name indeede.
You should say Traitor.
Traitor and Wyats name,
Differ as farre as Winchester and ho.
I am a Piller of the Mother Church.
And what am I?
One that subuerts the state.
Insult not too much, oreth' vnfortunate,
I haue no Bishoppes Rochet to declare my innocencie,
This is my crosse, that causelesse
I must suffer my heads losse.
When that houre comes, wherein my blood is spilt,
My crosse will looke as bright as yours twice guilt.
Here's for that purpose.
Is your grace so short?
Belike you come to make my death a sport.
VVe come to bring you to your execution,
You must be hang'd and instantly:
At the parke Corner, it a gallous set,
Whether make hast to tender debt.
Then the end of Wy rising vp,
Ito was ,
Right willingly I yeelde my selfe to th,
But sory such, should haue my place of birth.
Had London kept his word, VVyat had ood,
But now King Phillip enters through my blood.
Wheres the Li of the Tower?
Heere my Lord.
Fetch foorth your other Prisoners.
My Lord I will, heerelyes young Guilford, heere the Lady Iane.
Conduct them .
Good morrowe once more to my lolye Iane.
The last good morrow my sweete loue to thee.
VVhat were you reading?
On a prayer booke.
Trust me so was I, wee hade neede to pray,
For see, the Ministers of death drawe neere.
To a prepared minde death is a pleasure,
I long in soule, till I haue spent my breath.
My Lord High Chancelor, you are welcome heather,
What come you to beholde our execution?
And my Lord Arundell, thrice welcome,
You helpt to attache our Father, come you now,
To see the blacke conclusion of our Tragedie?
VVe come to doe our office.
So doe wee.
Our office is to die, yours to looke on:
VVe are beholding vnto such beholders,
The time was Lords, when you did flock amaine,
To see her crownd, but now to kill my Iane,
The world like to a sickell, bends it selfe,
Men runne their course of liues as in a maze,
Our office is to die, yours but to gaze.
Patience my Guilford.
Patience my louely Iane:
Patience has blancht thy soule, as white as snow,
But who shall answere for thy death? this know,
An innocent to die, what is it lesse,
But to Angels ,
The guiltie dying, doe applaud the law,
But when the innocent creature stoopes his neck
to an vniust doome; vpon the Iudge they check.
Liues are like soules, requird of their neglectors,
Then ours of you, that should bee .
Raile not against the law.
No, God forbidde, my Lor of Wi chester,
It's made of lawe, and should
Twere against you, if I forgt ,
You reioyc`d to see the fall of ,
Ioy you now at me?
Oft dying men are fild with prophesies,
But ile not be a prophet of your il.
Yet knowe my Lordes, they that behold vs now,
May to the axe of Iustic one day bowe,
And in that plot of ground where di,
Sprinckle their bloodes,
Though I know no cause why.
Speake you to me Guilfo
Norfolk no, I speake to —
To whome?
Alasse I doe not knowe whih of dies first.
The better part.
Tis I sweete loue, kisse the blocke.
I am a man men better brook
shocke of thrtning death,
sexe are euerweake
The thoughts of death, a womans hearte will breake.
But I am armde to die.
Likelyer to liue:
Death to the vnwilling dooth his presence giue?
Hee dares not looke the bolde man in the face,
But on the fearefull layes his killing Mace.
It is the pleasure of the Queene, that the
Lady Iane must first suffer death.
I thanke her Highnesse,
That I shall first depart this haplesse world,
not Suruiue to see my dre loue dead.
She dying first, I three times loose my head.
Forgiue me Lady I pra'y your death.
Ha? hast thou the heart to kill a face so faire.
It is her Heades-man.
And demaundes a pardon,
Onely of her, for taking off her head?
I gntle Guilford, and I pardon him.
But ile not pardon him, thou art my wife.
And he shall aske me pardon for thy life,
Pard Lord.
Rise, doe not kneele.
Thugh thou submit'st, thou hast a lowring steele
Whose fatal declynation brings our death:
Good man of earth, make haste to make vs ear.
Pleaseth the Lady Iane, ile helpe her off with her night-Gowne.
Thankes gentle riend,
But I haue other waiting women to attend mee.
Good Mistris Ellin lend me a helping hand,
To strip me of this worldly ornamen
Off with these robes, O the from my side,
Such silken coue are the guilt of prid.
Insteede of gownes, my ,
My worldly death new .
What is it off?
Madam almoste.
Not yet, O God! how hardly can we
shake off this worldes Pomp,
That cleaues vnto vs like our bodies
Yet thus O God shake of thy seruants sinne.
Here is a scarfe to blinde you .
From all the world, but from my Guilford sight:
Befor
Let me with a looke.
O doe not kill me with that
Tis my last farwell, take it :
My dearest Guilford
Nowe blinde mine ey,
Oh!
How fares my Lod
Hee's fal into a .
,
Guilrd if thou
will be the first in heauely bliss
Heare comes the Heads-man, with the head of Iane:
Who spake of Iane? who namde my lòuely Iane?
Behold her head.
O I shall faint againel
Yet let me beare this fight vnto my
My sweete Ianes head:
Looke Norfolke, Arundell, Winches
Doe male factors, looke:
Thus when they die ruddi lippe,
A cleere reflecting eye,
Cheekes purer then the Maiden oreant
That bashlnes through the
Her innocence, has giuen her this looke:
The like for me to show so well being dead,
How innocence, would Guilford loose his head.
My Lord, the time run on.
So does our death.
Heeres one has run so fast shee's out of breath,
But the time goes on,
And faire Ianes white soule, wil be
In heauen before me
If I doe stay: stay getle wie,
Thy Guilfrd followes thee,
Though on the earth we part, by aduerse fate,
Our soules sall knock together at heauens gate.
The is deathes haue a
And we the smoother on our way.
My Lords farwell, farwel to all,
The Fathers prid has causde the Childrens fall.
Thus haue we seene her Highnesse will perform'd,
And now their heads and bodies shall beeioynd
and buried in one graue, as fis their loues.
Thus much ile say in their behalfes now dead,
Fathers pride their liues haue seuered.