I Syſter of the Thunderer,
(for now that name alone
Remaynes to me) Ioue euermore
as though deuorſt and gone,
And temples of the higheſt ayre
as wydowe ſhunned haue,
And beaten out of ſkyes aboue
the place to Harlots gaue.
I muſt go dwell beneath on ground, for Whoores do hold the ſky.
From hence the Beare in parte aboue of ycy peale full hy,
A haughty ſtarre the greekiſh ſhyps by Seas doth gurde about:
From this way, whence at ſpring time warme the day is loaſed out,
Euroaes bearer through the waues of Tyria ſhyues full bright.
From thence, their ſtormy fearefull flocke to Ships, and ſeas affright,
The wandring daughters here and there of Atlas vpward ſway.
With ſtaring buſh of hayre from hens Orion Gods doth fray:
And Perſeus eke his glitteryng ſtarres of golden gloſſe hath here.
From hence the twynnes of Tyndars ſtocke do ſhine, a ſigne full clere:
And at whoſe byrth firſt ſtode the grounde that erſt went to and fro.
Nor onely Bacchus now himſelfe, or Bacchus mother lo,
Haue clymd to Gods: leaſt any parte ſhould from rebuke be free,
The ſkies the Gnoſſian ſtrumpets crownes do beare in ſpight of mee.
But I of old cōtemptes complayne: me, one dire, fierce, and ſhrewde
Thebana land with wicked broode of Ioues baſe daughters ſtrewde,
How oft hath it a ſtepdame made? though vp to heauen ſhould ryſe,
The conqueryng drabbe Alcmena now, and hold my place in ſkyes,
And eke her ſonne to promiſd ſtarres obtayne the worthy way,
At byrth of whom the ſtaying worlde ſo long deferd the day,
And Phoebus ſlow frome morning ſea began to gliſter bright,
Commaunded long in th' Ocean waues to hyde his drowned lyght.
Yet ſhall my hates not leaue them ſo, a wrathful kindled rage
His mynd in madnes ſhall ſtirre vp, and yre that may not ſwage
Shall euermore (all peace layd downe) wage warres eternally.
What warres? what euer hideous thinge the earth his ennemy
Begets, or what ſoeuer ſea or ayre hath brought to ſyght
Both dredfull, dire, and peſtilent, of cruel fierceſt might,
T'is tierd and tam'd: he paſſeth all, and name by ills doth rayſe,
And all my wrath he doth inioy, and to his greater prayſe
He turnes my hates: whyle tedious toyles to much I him beheſt,
He proues what father him begot: both thence where light oppreſt
Hath ſea, and where it ſhowde agayne, where Titan day doth trayne,
And with his brand approaching nere doth dye thoſe Aethiops twaine,
His ſtrengh vntamde is honoured: and God eche where is hee
Now calde in worlde, and now more ore of monſters want to mee,
And laboure leſſe to Hercles is t'acompliſh all my will,
Then me to bydde: at eaſe he doth myne imperies fulfyl.
What cruel heſtes of tyrante now ſo fyerce a yong man may
Preuayle to hurt? for lo he beares for weapons now awaye
What once he fearde, and put to flight: he armed comes at ſyde
With Lyon fyerce and Hydra both: nor land ſuffiſeth wyde,
But broake he hath the threſhold loe of that infernall Ioue.
And ſpoyls with him of conquerd king he drawes to Gods aboue.
But thats but light, broke is the league of ſprites that there do dwell.
I ſaw my ſelfe, I ſaw him lo (the night now gone, of hell
And Ditis tamde) throw out abroade before his fathers ſight
His broths ſpoyles. Why drawes he not oppreſt and bound by might
Hymſelfe in chaynes that equall thynges to Ioue by lot doth hold?
And beare the rule of captiue hel, and way to Styxe vnfolde?
Vp opened is from loweſt ghoſtes the backward way to ſkye,
And ſacred ſecrets of dire death in open ſight do lye.
But he (the dredful den of ſprites brake vp ful fierce and ſtout
Euen ouer mee doth tryumph lo, and with proude hand about
The foule blacke dogge by Grekiſh townes he leades frō hel away.
When ſeene was vgly Cerberus I ſaw the fading day,
And fearefull ſunne: euen me lykewyſe a trembling dread oppreſt,
And looking on the fylthy neckes of conquerd monſtruous beaſt,
I feared much myne owne beheſtes: but light things I complayne,
For heauen I may be frayde, leſt he may get the higheſt rayne,
That loweſt wonne, the ſceptors from his father wil he take,
Nor hee to ſtarres (as Bacchus dyd) his way wil gently make:
The way with ruine will he ſeeke, and hee in empty ſkyes
Wil reygne alone with force diſplayd hys haughty hart doth ryſe,
And he that heauen it ſelfe by force of his might gotted bee,
It bearyng learnd: quite vnderneth the world his head ſet hee.
Nor once his ſhoulders bowde the prayſe of ſuth a mighty as:
And midſt of heauen on Hercles necke alone (loe) ſetled was.
His necke vnwryde the ſtarres aboue and ſkyes did only ſtay:
And me likewyſe oppreſſyng him, to Gods he ſeekes the way.
Goe ire, goe on, and beate hym downe that great things doth inuent
Match thou with him, and with thy handes now thou thy ſelfe him rent.
Such hates why doſt thou meditate? let all wyld beaſtes now go:
And weary Euriſtheus now be free from geeuing charges mo.
The Tytans daryng once of Ioue to breake the impery
Send out: let loaſe the denne abroade of mount of Sicilye.
The Doricke land that with the turne of gyant quakes afrayd,
Let it bring forth the dredful neckes of monſter vnder layd.
Let yet the haughty moone about ſome other beaſtes beget,
But theſe he ouercame. Seekes thou a match t'Alcides yet?
Thers none, except hymſelfe: let him agaynſt himſelfe rebell.
Let preſent be from bottome deepe vprayſd of loweſt hell
Th'Eumenides, let flaming lockes of theyrs the fires out flinge,
And furious hands beſtowe aboute the ſtroakes of vipers ſting.
Go now ful prowde, and ſcale the ſkyes to ſates of gods make waye.
Now muſt thy battels wages be ful cleere loe ſhynes the daye.
Deſpyſe mans workes thinkſt thou fierce wight y• hell and ſoules alow
Thou haſt eſcapt? nay here I wil another hel thee ſhow.
In deepe miſte hid I wil call vp from bottome low of hell
Beyond the wayes of gylty ghoſtes debateful goddeſſe fell.
Wheras the roaring dreadful den reſoundes with cryes about.
From depeſt bond of Ditis raygne beneath I wil fet out,
What ſo is left. Let hateful hurt now come in anger wood,
And fierce impyety imbrew himſelfe with his owne bloud.
And errour eke, and fury arm'd agaynſt it ſelfe to fight.
This meane, this meane, let wrath of myne now vſe to ſhewe my might.
Beginne ye ſeruantes now of hell: the feruent burning tree
Of Pyne ſhake vp: and ſet with ſnakes her dreadful flocke to ſee.
Let now Megaera bring to ſight, and with her mournful brand.
For burning rage bring out of hell a huge and direful brand.
Do this, require you vengeance due, and paynes of hel his ſpoyle,
Strike through his breaſt, let fyercer flame, within his boſome boyle.
Then which in Aetna fornace beates, ſo ſuriouſly to ſee.
That mad of mind and witles may Alcides driuen bee
With fury great through pearced quight, my ſelfe muſt firſt of all
Be mad. Wherfore doth Iuuo yet not into raging fall?
Mee, me, ye Furyes, ſyſters three throwne quite out of my wit
Toſſe fyrſt, if any thing to do, I do endeuour yet
For ſtepdame meete: let now my hates be turnd another way,
Let him (returnd) his babes behold in ſafety I you pray.
And ſtrong of hand come home, I haue now found the day at length.
In which may greatly mee auayle the hated Hercles ſtrength.
Both mee and eke hym ſelfe let him ſubdue and wiſh to die
Returnd from hel, yea let it here be my commodity,
That he of Ioue begotten is: here preſent wil I ſtand,
And that his ſhaftes goe ſtreyght from how, I wil direct his hand,
The mad mans weapons will I guide, euen Hercles fyghtyng, lo,
At length Ile ayde. This gylt once done then leefull is that ſo
His father may admit to ſaies thoſe gylty haades of his
THe fading ſtarres now ſhyne but ſeelde in ſighte
In ſtipye ſkye, night ouercome with day
Plucks in her. fyres, while ſpronge agayne is light.
The day ſtarre drawes the clereſome beames theire waye.
They cye ſigne of haughtye poale agayne,
VVith ſeuen ſtarres markt, the Beares of Arcadye,
Do call the light with ouerturned wayne.
VVith marble horſe now drawne, hys waye to hye
Doth Titan toppe of Oetha ouer ſpred
The bushes bright that nowe with berryes bee
Of Thebes ſtrewde, by daye do bluſhe full redde.
And to returne doth Phabus ſyſter flee.
Now labor harde beginnes, and euerye kynde
Of cares it ſtyrres, the Shepehearde doth vnfolde:
His flockes vnpende, do graſe their foode to fynde,
And nippes the graſſe with hoary froſt full colde.
At will doth play in open medow faire
The Calfe whoſe brow did damme yet neuer teare,
The empty Kyne their vdders doe repayre.
And lyght with courſe vncertayne here and there,
In graſſe full ſoft the wanton kidde hee flynges.
In toppe of boughe doth ſitte with chaunting ſonge,
And to the Sunne newe roſe to ſpreade her wynges,
Beſtirres her ſelfe her mourneful neſtes amonge
The Nightingall. and doth with byrdes aboute
Confuſe reſound mith murmure mixedryfe
To witnes day; his ſayles to wynde ſet out
The ſhypman doth committe in doubt of lyfe.
VVhyle gale oſwynde the ſlacke ſayles filles full ſtrayte,
He leaning ouer hollow rocke doth lye,
And either his begiled hookes doth bayte,
Or els beholdes and feeles the pray from hye with paiſed hand.
The trembling fish he feeles with line extent.
This hope to them to whom of hurtles lyfe.
Is quiet reſt, and with his owne content,
And lytle, houſe, ſuch hope in fieldes is ryfe
The troblous hopes with rolling whirlewynd great,
And dredful feares their wayes in cityes keepe.
He proude repayre to prince in regall ſeate,
And hard court gates without the reſt of ſleepe
Eſteemes, and endles happynes to hold
Doth gather goods, for treaſure gaping more,
And is ful pore amid his heaped gold.
The peoples fauour him (aſtonied ſore)
And commons more vnconſtant then the ſea,
VVith blaſt of vayne renoume liftes vp full proude.
He ſelling at the brawling barre his plea,
Full wicked, ſets his yres and ſcoulding loud
And woordes to ſale, a fewe hath knowne of all
The careles reſt, who mindfull how doth flitte
Swift age away, the tyme that neuer ſhall
Returne agayne do holde: while fares permitte,
At quiet liue: the lyfe full quickly glydes
VVith haſtned courſe, and with the winged day
The wheele is turnde of yere that hedlong ſlides,
The ſiſters hard perfourme their taſkes alway,
Nor may agayne vntwiſt the threede once ſponne.
Yet mankind loe vnſure what way to take
To meete the greedy deſtenyes dothronne
And willingly wee ſeke the Stigian lake.
To much Alcides thou with ſtomacke ſtoute
The ſory ſprites of hell doſt haſt to ſee.
VVith courſe prefixt the fares are brought aboute
To none once warnd to come may reſpite bee
To none to paſſe their once appointed day,
The tombe all people calde by death doth hyde
Let glory him by many landes awaye
Diſplay, and fame throughout all cityes wyde
Full babling praiſe, and euen with ſkye to ſtande
Auaunce and ſtarres: let him in chariot bright
Ful haughty goe: let me my natiue land
In ſafe and ſecrete houſe keepe cloſe from ſight.
To reſtful men hoare age by courſe doth fall,
And low in place, yet ſafe and ſure doth lye,
The poore and baſe eſtate of cottage ſmall:
The prowder pompe of minde doth fall from hye.
But ſad here comes with loſed lockes of heare
Loe Megara with litle company,
And ſtowe by age drawes Hercles father neare
OGuider great of heauen, & of the world O Iudge full hie,
Yet now at length apoinct a meane of carefull miſerie.
And ende of our calamitie. To mee yet neuer day
Hath careles ſhin' de: the ende of one affliction paſt away
Beginning of an other is: an other ennemy
Is forthwith founde, before that hee his ioyfull family
Retourne vnto an other fyght hee taketh by beheſt:
Nor any reſpite giuen is to him nor quiet reſt:
But whyle that he commaunded is: ſtraight him purſueth ſhee
The hatefull Iuno. Was yet once from toyle and labour free
His infants age? the monſters (lo) he venquiſht hath and ſlayne,
Before he knew what monſters ment. The ſkaled ſerpents twayne
Their double neckes drew on toward him, agaynſt the which to ryſe,
The infant crept to meete with them, the ſerpents glittring eyes
Lyke fyre, with quiet careleſſe breſt he looking laſt vpon,
With coūtnance cleere, hard wreſted knots of them he caught anon:
And ſtrangling then the ſwelling throates of them with tender hand,
To Hydra prelude made. the beaſt ſo ſwyfte of Maenale land.
That with much Golde bare vp full bright his beautifled head,
Is caught in courſe. of Nemey wood likewiſe the greateſt dread
The Lyon preſt with Hercles armes hath roarde with dreadfull crie.
What ſhould I ſpeake of ſtables dyre, of ſteedes of Byſtonye?
Or King caſt out himſelfe for foode his horſes fierce to fill?
And briſtled beaſt in thicke tops woont of Erymanthus hill?
The boare of Maenalye, the woods of Arcady to ſhake?
And Bull that did no litle dread to hundred peoples make?
Among the flocks of Heſper lande that hence farre diſtant bee,
The ſheepherde of Carteſian coaſt of triple ſhape to ſee
Is ſlayne, and driuen is the pray from fartheſt parte of weaſt,
Citheton quak't when by him paſt to ſea the well knowne beaſt.
He being bid to make by coaſtes of ſommer ſunne his way,
And parched landes which ſore with heate doth boyle the middell day,
The mountaynes brake on either ſide and rampiers all vndoon,
Euen vnto ſwyft and raging ſea hath made a way to roon.
Then entring in of plenteaus wood, the pleaſant gardeins gay,
The waking dragons golden ſpoyles with him he brought away.
The Lerna monſters numerous ill what neede to tell haue I?
Hath he not him with fyre at length ſubdewde, and taught to dye?
And which were woont with wings abrode to hyde the day from ſight,
Euen from the cloudes he ſought & braue the Stimphale birdes to flight.
Not him ſubdewde who euer lyes in bed vnmacht at night
The wyddowe queene of them that tooke to Thermodont their flight.
Nor handes that well durſt euterpriſe his noble trauayles all
The filthy labour mad to ſhrynke of foule Augias hall.
What vayle all theſe? he wants the world which oft defended he.
And th earth well knowes the worker of his quietnes to be
Away from earthe: the proſperous gilt that beareth happy ſwey.
Is vertue callde, and now the good to wicked doe obay.
The right doth ſtand in might of armes, feare treadeth downe the lawe.
Before my face with cruell hand, euen preſently I ſawe
Reuengers of theyr fathers reygne, the ſonnes with ſworde downe caſt,
And of the noble Cadmus eke himſelfe the ofſpring laſt
Then ſlayne: I lawe his regall crowne at once from him away
With head bereft. Who Thebes alas enough bewayle nowe may?
The fertile land of Gods, what lorde now quakes it for to knowe?
Out of the fieldes of which ſomtime, and fruictfull boſome lowe,
The youth vpſprong with ſwarde in band preparde to battell ſtoode:
And walls of which Amphion one of mighty Ioue his broode,
Hath built with ſounding melody in drawing to the ſtones:
To towne of whom the parent chiefe of Gods not onely ones
Heauen being left hath come. this land that Gods aboue alway
Receiu'de, and which hath made them Gods, and (leefull beete to ſay)
Perhaps ſhall make, with lothſome yoake of bondage is preſt downe.
O Cadmus ſtocke, and citezens of olde Amphions towne,
Whereto are yee nowe fall'ne? dread yee a cowardly exull thus,
His coaſtes to dwell in, lacking, and to ours iniurious?
Wo through the worlde purſues the gilts and wrong by ſea and land,
And cruell ſceptors broken hath with iuſt and ryghtfull hand,
Nowe abſent ſerues, and what he eal'de in other doth ſuſtayne:
And now doth bannyſht Lycus holde of Hercles Thebes the rayne.
Yet ſhall he not: he ſhall come home, and him with vengeaunce quight,
And ſodaine riſe to ſtarres: he will ſoone flude the way to light,
Or make it ells. returne thou ſafe, repayre to thine in haſte:
And conquerour to conquer'de houſe yet come agayne at laſte.
Ryſe vp my ſpouſe, and darknes vecye repell'de of helly ſhade
Breake vp with hand, if no way may for thee kept backe bee made,
And paſſage be ſhut vp, returne with world vprent by might.
And whatſoeuer is the poſſeſt byneath in darkeſt night,
Send dut with thee, as when the tops of haughty hylles vndoon
A headlong paſſage making through for haſty floude to roon
Thou ſomtime ſtoodſt, whā with great might of thyne a ſunder broake
The Tempye woods wyde open lay: and beaten with thy ſtroake
The mount, now here, now there fell downe: and rampier tente of ſtay,
The raging brooke of Theſſaly did roon a newe found way.
Thy parentes ſo, thy ſonnes, thy land repayring home to ſee,
Breake out, and loweſt bonde of things out bringing thence with thee,
And what ſoeuer greedy age in all theſe long yeares race
Hath hid, ſhew forth, & ghoſts that haue forgot theyr former caſe,
And people vp before thee driue that fearefull are of light.
Vnworthy ſpoyles for thee they are, if thou but bring to ſight
What bidden is. great thinges, but farre to much I ſpeake for mee,
Vnwotting of myne owne eſtate. when ſhall I hap to ſee,
The day when thee, and thy right hand, I may embrace agayne,
And ſlowe returnes, nor yet of me once myndefull, may complayne?
To thee for this O guide of Gods, vntamed Bulls ſhall bring
Their hundred necks: to thee O Queene of fruits on earth that ſpring
I'le geue thee ſecret ſacrifice: to thee with much fayth loe
Long fyre brands at Eleuſis towne full ſilent wyll I throe.
Then to my brethren ſhall I thinke to bee reſtort de agayne
Theyr ſoules, and eke himſelfe aliue and guiding of his reyne
My father for to flouryſhe yet. If any greater might
Dor keepe thee ſhet, we followe thee: with thy returne to fight
Defend vs all, or els to hell drawe downe vs all to thee.
Thou ſhalt vs drawe, no God ſhall rayſe, vs vp that broken bee.
O Faythfull fellowe of our bloud, with chaſte true faythfullnes
The Bridebed keeping, and the ſonne of haughty Hercules,
Conceiue in mynde ſome better thinges, and take good heart to thee:
He will come home, as after all his labours wounteth hee,
Of more renowne
What wretches doe moſt chiefly wiſhe of all.
They ſoone beleue.
Nay what they feare to much leſt it may fall,
They thinke it neuer may bee ſhoon'de, nor rid by remedy.
Beleefe is ready ſtill to dreade the woorſer myſery.
Deepe drown▪de, & whellm'de, & farthermore with all ye world full lowe
Oppreſſed downe, what way hath he to light agayne to goe?
What way I pray you had he then whē through the burning coſte,
And tumbling after maner of the troubled Sea vp toſte
He went by ſands: and freate that twyſe with ebbe away doth ſlip,
And twyſe vpflowe: and when alone with his forſaken ſhip,
Faſt caught he ſtucke in ſhallowe foordes of ſhelfye Syrtes ſande,
And (nowe his ſhip on grounde) did paſſe throught ſeas a foote to land?
Iniurious fortune vertue moſt of men moſt ſtout and ſtrong
Doh ſeldome ſpae: no man alyue himſelfe in ſafety long,
To perills great and daungers may ſo often times out caſt,
Whom chaunce doth often ouerſlip, the ſame it findes at laſt.
But cruell loe, and greeuous threats euen bearing in his face,
And ſuch as he of ſtomacke is, doth come euen ſuch of pace,
Proude Lycus who the ſceptors ſhakes in hande of other king,
The plentuous places of the towne of Thebes gouerning,
And euery thinge about the whych with fertile ſoyle doth goe
Sloape Phocis, and what euer doth Iſmenus ouerfloe,
What euer thing Cithaeron ſeeth with haughty top and hye,
And ſlender Iſthmos Ile, the which betweene two ſeas doth lye.
NOt I of natiue countrey howres poſſeſſe the auncient right
Vnworthy heir, nor yet to me are noble men of might
The grandfathers, nor ſtocke renownd with titles hie of name,
But noble vertue: who ſo boafles of kinred whence he come,
Of others vertue makes his vaunt, but got with fearful hand
My ſceptors are obtaynd: in ſword doth all my ſafety ſtand.
What thee thou worſt agaynſt the will of cyteſyns to get,
The bright drawne ſword muſt it defend▪ in forrayne countrey ſet
No ſtable kingdome is. But one my pompe and princely might
May ratify once ioynd to me with regall forche ful bright,
And chambers Megara: of ſtocke of ſuch nobility
Let vpſtart ſtate of myne take ſhape. I do not thinke that ſhee
Refuſe it will, or in the bed with mee deſpyſe to lye.
But if with proude vnbridled mynde ſhee ſtubburn do denye,
Then quite I purpoſe to deſtroy the houſe of Hercules
The hate of men will then my pryde, and peoples ſpeach oppres.
Chiefe knacke of kingdome is to beare thy ſubiectes hates eche one.
Lets proue her then, chaunce geuen hath to vs a place alone.
For ſhee her head in fold of vayle ful ſad and wofully
Enwrapt the Gods that are her guides for ſuccour ſtandes faſt by,
And at the ſyde of her doth leane Alcides father trewe.
What thing doth this deſtroyer of our ſtocke agayne anewo
Prepare? what proueth he?
O Queene that name renowmed hye
And tytle takſte of regall ſtocke ful gentle and eaſily
A litle whyle receiue and heare my wordes with pacient eare,
If alwayes men eternal hates ſhould one to th' other beare,
And rage be gone out of the hart ſhould neuer fall away,
But th'happy ſtill ſhould armour holde, th'vnhappy ſtil obay,
Then ſhall the battayles nothing leaue: with wide fieldes then the lande
Shall lie vntild, with vnderlayd to houſen fiery brand
Then aſhes deepe ſhal ouerwhelme the buried people all.
Expedient is to conquerour to wiſh that peace befall:
To conquerd nedefull partner of the kingdome come to me:
Let's toyne our myndes, take here this pledge of ſayth and truth to thee.
My right hand touch. Why whiſhteſt thou with cruell face and moode?
Should I abyde, that I the hand ſprinkt with my fathers bloud,
Should ouch, and double death imbrewd of both my brethren? nay
Firſt ſhall ſunne ryſe extinguiſh quitte, and Weſt ſhal bring the day:
Firſt faythful peace betweene the ſnowes and fiers there ſhalbe tryde,
And Scilla ſhall t' Auſonius fyrſt ioyne his Sicilian ſyde:
And fyrſt, the fleetyng floud that with ſwift turnes of courſe doth flowe
Euripus with Euboik waue ſhall ſtand ful ſtil and ſlow.
My father, th'empire, bretherne, houſe, thou. haſt me cleare bereft,
My countrey to: what may be more? one thing to me is left,
Then brother, father, kingdome, houſe, that dearer is to mee
The hate of thee, the which to me with people for to be
In commune woe I am: how great is myne alonly part?
Rule on ful proude, beare vp ful hye thy ſprites and haughty hart:
Yet God the proude behynd theyr backes doth follow them to wreake.
I know the Thebane kingdomes: what ſhould I the mothers ſpeake,
Both ſuffring, and aduentring gyltes? what double miſchiefe done?
And mixed name of ſpouſe at once, of father and of ſonne?
What brether as double tentes? or what as many roages alſo?
The mother proude of Tantals brood congeald in mourning Ie,
And ſory ſtone yet flowes with teares in Phrygian Sipylye.
Himſelfe like wyſe erected vp his ſealed heade awrye.
Euen Cadmus meaſuring throughout th'Illyrian landes in flight,
Behynd him left of body drawne long ſlymy markes in ſight.
All theſe examples wayte for thee: rule thou as likes thy will,
Whyle thee our kingdomes wonted fates do call and oft hap yll.
God to, theſe fierce and furious wordes thou woman mad refraine,
And imperyes of princes learne of Hercles to ſuſtayne.
Though I the ſcepters gotten by the force of war do beare,
In conquering hand & all do rule without the law his feare.
Which armes ſubdue, a few wordes yet to thee now ſpeake I ſhall
For this my cauſe thy father did in bloudy battel fall:
Thy brethren fell, the weapons kepe no meaſurable ſtay.
For neither eaſily tempred be, nor yet repreſſed may
The drawne ſwordes yre, the battels doth the bloud delite out ſhedde.
But he yet for his kingdome fought, wee altogether led
With wicked luſt: yet th'end of war is now complayned, loe,
And not the cauſe, but now let all remembraunce therof goe:
When conquerour hath weapons left, the conquerds part ſhould be
To leaue his hates. Not I that thou with lowly bended knee
Mee raygning worſhip ſhould'ſt, require: euen this doth mee delight.
That thou thy myſeries do'ſt beare with mynde ſo ſtout vpright.
Thou for a king a ſpouſe art meete, let's ioyne our beds anone.
A trembling colde doth run throughout my bloudles lims ech one.
What hainous thinge comes to myne eares? I fear'de not then at all,
When (all peace broake) the noyse of warre did by the city wall
Reſounde about, I bare all that vnfearefully to ſee,
I feare the wedding chambers: nowe I captiue ſeeme to mee.
Let heauy chaynes my body greeue, and eke with hunger long
Let lingring death be ſlowly brought, yet ſhall no force full ſtrong
My truthe ſubdue: for euen thine owne Alcides will I dye.
Doth then thy huſband droun'de in hell geue thee this ſtomack hic?
The hells alowe he toucht, that he the height againe might get.
The heauy paiſe oppreſſeth him of all the earth full great.
Hee with no burdein ſhall be preſt, that heauen it ſelfe ſuſtayn'de.
Thou ſhalt be forſt.
He wots not how to die, that is cōstrain'd.
Speake, what may rather I prepare then wedding newe for thee.
More royall gyft?
Thine owne death els, or els the death of mee.
Thou ſhalt mad woman die.
I ſhall then to my huſbande go.
More then my Sceptors is to thee a ſeruaunt loued ſo?
How many hath this ſeruant ſlayne of kings with hendy ſtroake?
Why doth he yet a king then ſerue, and ſtill ſuſtayne his yoake?
Take once away the hard beheſts, what's vertue then at laſt?
Do'ſt thou it vertue counte, to bee to beaſts, and monſters caſt?
T'is vertues part, to tame the things, that all men quake to know.
Him great things braggīg, darknes deepe of tartare presse ful low.
There neuer may from ground to ſtars an eaſy paſſage be.
Of whom begot, the houſen then of Gods through pearceth he?
O wretched wife of Hercles great, thy words a whyle now ſpare.
My parte it is, the father of Alcides to declare.
And his true ſtocke, yet after all of man ſo ſtoute as this
So famous deebes, and after all appeaſ'de with hand of his
What euer Titan ryſen vp, doth ſee, or els at fall,
And after all theſe monſters tam'de, and Phlegrey ſprinkled all
With wicked bloud, and after Gods defended all on hye,
Is not his father yet well knowne? or Ioue doe we beelye?
Beleeue it yet by Iunoes hate.
Why do'ſte thou ſclaunder Ioue?
No mortall kinred euer may be mixt with heauen aboue.
To many of the Gods in ſkyes is this a common trade.
But were they euer ſeruauntes yet, before they Gods were made?
Of Delos Ile the ſheepherde loe the flocks of Pherey fed.
But through all coaſts he wandred not abroade as baniſhed.
Whō ſtraying mother firſt brought forth wādring loud to ſight.
Yet Phoebus did no monſters feare, or beaſts of cruell might.
Firſt Dragon with his bloud embrew'd the ſhalts of Phoebus lo.
Howe greeuous ills euen yet full yong he bare, doe you not knoe?
From mothers wombe ye babe out thrown with lightning flame frō hie,
Euen next his lightning Father ſtoode forthwith aboue in ſkye.
What? he him ſelfe that guides the ſtarres, & ſhakes the clouds at will,
Did not that Infant lurke in Den of hollowe caued hill?
The byrthes ſo great full troublous pryce to haue loe alwayes ought:
And euer to be borne a God, with coſte full great is bought.
Whom thou a miſer ſee'ſt, thou mai'ſt know him a man to bee.
A miſer him deny yee may, whom ſtout of heart yee ſee.
Call we him ſtout, from ſhoulders hye of whom the Lyon throwne
A gift for mayden made, and eke his Club from hand fell downe,
And paynted ſide with purple weede did ſhyne that he did weare?
Or may we him call ſtout of heart, whoſe ſtaring lockes of heare
With ointmēt ſlowde? who hands renownde & knowne by prayſes hye
To ſound vnmeete for any man of timber did applye,
With barbarous mytar cloaſting in his forhead rounde about?
The tender Bacchus did not bluſhe abroade to haue layde out
His brayded heares, nor yet with hand full ſoft the Thyrſus light
For to haue ſhooke, what time that he with pace vnſtout in ſight
His long train'de batbarous garment drew with golde full fayre to ſee.
Still vertue after many workes is woont releaſt to bee.
Of this the houſe of Euritus deſtroyde doth witneſſe beare,
And virgins flockes that brutiſhly by him oppreſſed weare.
No Iuno did commaunde him this, nor none Euryſtheus loe.
But theſe in deede his owne workes are.
Yet all yee doe not knoe,
His worke it is, with weapons of his owne hand vanquiſhed
Both Eryx, and to Eryx ioyn'de Antaeus Lybian ded:
And aulters which with ſlaughter of the ſtraungers flowing faſt,
Buſyris well deſerued bloud likewiſe haue drunke at laſt.
His deede it is, that he that met the wounde, and ſworde is ſlayne
Conſtrain'de to ſuffre death before thoſe other Geryons twayne.
Nor ene all onely Geryon doth with one hand conquer'de lye.
Thou ſhalt among theſe be which yet with none adulterye
Haue wedlocke hurt.
What is to Ioue, to king is leefull thyng:
To Ioue thou gau'ſte a wyfe, thou ſhalt nowe geue oue to a kyng.
And euen of thee ſhee ſhall it learne to bee a thing not newe,
Her huſband euen approuing it the better man t'enſewe.
But if ſhee ſtubberne to be matcht with me deny it ſtill,
Then euen by force a noble childe of her beget I will.
O Creons ghoſts and all yee Gods of th houſe of Labdacus,
And wedding forches blaſing bryght, of wicked Oedipus.
To this my wedding geue yee nowe our wonted deſtenyes.
Now, now yee bloudy daughters all of Aegypts king likewyſe,
Bee here whoſe hands defyled are with ſo much bloud out ſpilt:
One daughter lacks of Daaus, I wyll fyll vp the gylt.
Becauſe that ſtubburnely thou do'ſt refuſe my wedding ſo,
And fear'ſte a king, thouſhatt know what the Scepters now may do.
Embrace thyne aulters, yet no God ſhall euer take away
Thee from my hands: no not although with world vpturned, may
Alcides victor yet agayne to Gods aboue returne.
The woods on heapes together caſt, let all their temples burne
Euen throwne vpon theyr heads: his wyfe, and all his flocke at laſte
With vnderlayed fyre, let one wood pyle conſume and waſte.
This only bowne I father of Alcides aſke of thee,
Which well may me beſeeme to craue, that I fryſt ſlayne may hes.
Who all appoyncts with preſent death to haue their puniſhment,
He tyrunt wats not how to be: more ſundry greeues inuent.
Reſtrayne the wretched man from death, commaunde that th'happy dye.
I, while with beames prepar'de to burne the pyle encreaſeth hye,
Will him with vowing ſacrifyce that rules the ſeas entreate.
Oh chiefeſt powre of Gods, and oh of heauenly things ſo great
The guyde, and parent eke, with whoſe throwne thunderbolts do ſhake
All things humane throughout the world of king ſo cruell ſlake
The wicked hande: but why do I to Gods in vayne thus cry?
Where euer thou be, heare me ſoone. why ſtart ſo ſodaynely
The temples thus with moouing ſhakte? Why roareth out the graūd?
The noyſe of Hell from bottome deepe byueathe hath made a ſound:
Wee herde are, loe it is the ſound of Hercules his pace.
O Fortune hating men of ſtouteſt breſt,
How ill rewards doſt thou to good deuyde?
Euryſtheus raynes at home in eaſy reſt,
Alcmendes ſonne in euery battayle tryde,
To Monſters turnes hys hande that Skyes dyd ſtay:
And cruell Neckes cuts of, of hydous Snake,
And Apples brynges from Syſters mokt away,
When once to ſleepe hys watchefull Eyes beetake,
Dyd Dragon ſet ryche fruicte to ouerſee.
Hee paſt the Scythian bowres that ſtraye abroade,
And thoſe that in their countreys ſtraung ers bee
And hardned top of froſen freate hee troade,
And ſylent Sea with bankes full dumme about.
The Waters hard want there their floudes to ſloe.
And there before the Shyps full Sayles ſpred out
Is worne a pathe for Sarmates wylde to goe.
The Sea doth ſtande to mooue in courſe agayne.
Nowe apt to beare the Ship, nowe horſemen bolde
The Queene that there doth ouer Wydowes rayne,
That gyrds her Wombe wyth gyrth of glittring gold,
Her noble ſpoyle from body drawne hath ſhee
And ſhyelde, and bandes of breaſt as whyte as ſnowe,
Acknowledging the Conquerour with Knee.
Wyth what hope drawne to headlong Hell alowe,
So bolde to paſſe the vnreturned wayes
Saw'ſte thon Proſerpines rayne of Sicylye?
Wyth Southern wynde, or Weſtern there no ſeas
Aryſe wyth waue and ſwellinge Surges hye.
Not there of Tyndars ſtocke the double broode
Two ſtarres the fearefull Shyps doe ayde and guide.
Wyth gulph full blacke doth ſtande the ſlouthfull floode
And when pale death with greedy teeth ſo wyde.
Vnnumbred Nations hath ſent downe to ſprightes
Wyth one Boateman all ouer feryed bee.
God grauut thou maiſt of Hell ſubdue the rightes
And vnreuoked webs of Syſters three.
There kyng of many people raygneth hee.
Who when thou did'ſt wyth Neſtors Pylos fight,
Peſtiferous handes applide to matche with thee
And weapon bare with triple mace of might:
And prickt with litle wounde he fled away,
And lorde of death hymſelfe did feare to dye.
Breake Fate by force: and let the ſight of day
To ſorry ſprightes of Hell apparant lye
And porche vnpaſt ſhew way to Gods aboue.
The cruell lordes of ſprightes wyth pleaſaunt ſong
And humble bowne full well could Orpheus moue,
Whyle he Eurydicen them craues among.
The Arte that drew Woods, Byrds, and ſtones at will:
Which made delay to Floudes of flitting flight
At ſound whereof the ſauage Beaſtes ſtoode ſtill
With tunes vnwont doth Ghoſts of hell delight
And clearer doth reſounde in darker place:
And weepe wyth teares did Gods of cruell breſt:
And they which faultes with to ſeuere a face
Doe ſeeke, and former gylt of Ghoſts out wreſt:
The Thracian Daughters wayls Eurydicen.
For her the Iudges weeping ſit alſo.
Wee conquer'de are, chy efe kyng of death ſayd then
To Gods (but vnder this condition) goe,
Behynde thy huſbandes backe keepe thou thy way,
Looke thou not backe thy Wyfe before to ſee.
Than thee to ſight of Gods hath brought the day
And gate of Spartane Taenare preſent bee.
Loue hates delay, nor coulde abyde ſo long.
His gyft, hee loſt, while hee deſires the ſyght.
The place that coulde be thus ſubdew'de with ſong
That place may ſoone bee ouercome by myght.
O Comfortable guyde of light, and honour of the ſkye,
That cōpaſting both Hemyſpheres with flaming chariot hye
Thy radiāt head to ioyful lāds about y• world doſt bring,
Thou Phoebus pardon geue to me, if any vnlawful thing
Thyne eyes haue ſeene: (cōmaūded) I haue here to light out ſet
The ſecretes of the worlde: and thou of heauen to guider gret,
And parent eke, in flaſhe out throwne of lightning hide thy fyght.
And thou that gouerneſt the ſeas with ſeconde ſceptors ſyght.
To bottome ſynke of deepeſt waues: who ſo from hye doth ſee,
And dreading yet with countnaunce newe the earth deſil'de to bee,
Let him from hence turne backe his ſight, and face to heauen vpholde,
Theſe monſtrous ſights to ſhun: let twayn this miſchiefe great behold,
Hee who it brought, and ſhee that bad. for paynefull toyles to mee,
And laboures long, not all the earth thought wide inough may bee
For Iunoes hate: things vncome to all men I did ſee,
Vnknowne to ſoone, and ſpaces wyde that darke and ſhadefull bee
Which woorſer poale geues dyrer Ioue to raygne and rule therein.
And yet if thyrde place pleaſed more for mee to enter in,
I there coulde raygne. the Chaos of eternall nyght of hell,
And woorſe then night, the dolefull Gods I haue that there doe dwell,
And Fates ſubdu'de, the death contemn'de I am return'de to light.
What yet remaynes? I sawe and ſhow'de the ſpryghts of hell to ſight:
Appoynt, if ought be moe, do'ſte thou my hands ſo long permit
Iuno to ceaſſe? what thing byd'ſt thou to be ſubdued yet?
But why doe cruell ſouldiars holde the holy temples wyde?
And dread of armour ſacred porche beſet on euery ſyde?
DOo eyther els my great deſyres delude and mocke myne eyes?
Or hath the tamer of the world and Greekes renowme likewyſe,
Forſooke the ſilent howſe, beſette with cloude full ſadde to ſee?
Is this my ſonne? my members loe for ioy amaſed bee.
Oh ſonne, the ſure and ſauegard late of Thebes in miſery,
See I thy body true indeede? or els deceiu'de am I
Mockt with thy ſprite? art thou y• ſame? theſe brawnes of armes I know
And ſhoulders, and thy noble handes from body hie that grow.
Whens (father) happes this vglines, and why in mourning clad
Is thus my wyfe? how happes it that with filth ſo foule beſtad
My children are? what miſery doth thus my houſe appreſſe?
The father in law is ſlayne: the kingdome Licus doth poſſeſſe.
Thy ſonnes, thy parent and thy wyfe to death purſueth hee.
Vngrateful laud, doth no man come that will an ayder bee.
Of Hercles houſe? and this behelde ſo great and haynous wronge
Hath th'ayded world? but why were, I the day in playnt ſo long?
Let then my dye and this renoume let ſtrength obtayne in haſte,
And of Alcider enmies all let Lycus be the laſt.
I driuen am to goe to ſhedde the bloud of enmye out.
Watch Theſeu that no ſodayne ſtrength beſet vs here aboute:
Me wares require, embracing yet deferre O father deare,
And wyfe deferre them: Lycus ſhall to hell this meſſage beare
That I am now returnd. The, Shake of O Queene ont of thyne eyes
This weping face, and thou ſynce that thy ſonne is ſafe likewyſe
Thy drupping teares refrayne: yf yet I Hercles euer knew
Then Lycus ſhall for Creon paye the paynes to him ful due.
T'is lyght, he ſhal, he doth and that's to light he hath it done.
Now God that can them bring to paſſe, ſpede wel our wiſhes ſoone,
And come to helpe our weary woes. O noble harted mate
Of my ſtout ſonne, of his renowne declare vs all the rate:
How long away doth leade to place where ſory ſprites doth dwell,
And how the hard and heauy bondes the dog hath borne of hell.
The deedes thou doſt conſtrayne to tell, that euen to mynde ſecure
Are dredful yet and horrible, ſcant yet the truſt is ſure
Of vitall ayre, ſore blunted is the ſharpneſſe of my ſight,
And dulled eyes do ſcant ſuſtayne to ſee th'vnwoonted light.
Yet Theſeus throughly ouercome what euer feare remaynes
In boſome deepe, nor do thou not of beſt fruict of thy paynes
Beguilde thy ſelfe. What thing hath once to ſuffre beene a care,
To haue remembred it is ſweete. thoſe dredfull haps declare.
All ryght of worlde, and thee lykewyſe I praye y• bearſt the rayns
In kingdome wyde, and thee, for whom all round about in vayne
Thy mother throughout Aetna ſought, that ſecret things alowe
And hid in ground, it freely may bee lawfull for to ſhowe.
The Spartane land a noble toppe of hyll aduaunceth hye,
Where Taenarus with woods full thick the Sea doth ouerly.
The houſe of hatefull Ditis here his mouth doth open ſet,
And rocke of hyll aboue doth gape, and with a denne full gret
A huge and gaping cleft of ground with Iawes full wyde doth lye,
And way full broade to people all doth ſpred to paſſe thereby.
Not ſtraight with darkenes doth begin the way that blindes the ſight.
A litle lingring brightnes loe behinde of late left light,
And doubtfull glittring yet of ſonne afllicted falles alowe,
And mocks the ſight: ſuch light is wont vndoubtedly to ſhowe
The dawne of day, or twylight els at edge of euening tyde.
From hence to hollowe places voyde are loaſte the ſpaces wyde,
To which needes peryſhe muſt all kinde of men that once are throwne.
Nor it a labour is goe, the way it ſelfe leades downe.
As oft the ſhips agaynſt theyr willes doth toſſe the ſwelling ſurge,
So downward doth that headlong way, and greedy Chao vrge:
And backe agayne to drawe thy pace thee neuer doe permit
The ſprits who what they catch hold faſt. alowe within doth flit
In chanell wyde with ſilent foorde the quiet lake of lethe.
And cares doth rid: and that there may to ſcape agayne from death
No meane be made, with many turnes and windings euery way
Foldes in his floude. in ſuch ſorte as with waue vnſure doth play
Maeander wandring vp and downe, and yeldes himſelfe vnto,
And doubtfull ſtands, if he toward banke, or backe to ſpryng may goe.
The foule and filthy poole to ſee of ſlowe Cocytus lyes.
On th'one the Grype, on th'other ſide the mournefull Howlet cries,
And ſad lucke of th'unhappy Strix likewi loundeth there.
Full vglily in ſhady bowes blacke Locks of lothſome heare,
Where Taxus tree doth ouer leane, which holdeth ſlouthfull ſleepe,
And hunger ſad with famiſht Iawe that lyes his place to keepe,
And ſhame to late doth hide his face that knowes what crimes it hath,
Both feare, and quaking, funerall, and fretting raging wrath,
And mourning dyre doth follow on, and trembling pale diſeaſe,
And boyſtrous battayles ſet with ſworde: and hid beyond all theaſe
Doth ſlouthfull age his lingring pace help forth with ſtaffe in hand.
Of corne and wyne in hell alowe is any fertile land?
No ioyfull Meades do there bring forth with face ſo greene & fayre,
Nor yet with gentill Zephyrus wagges ripened corne in th'ayre.
Nor any tree hath there ſuch bowes as doe bryng apples out.
The barrayne compaſſe of deepe ſoyle full filthy lyes about,
And withred with eternall drought the lothſome land doth waſte
And bond full ſad of thinges, and of the worlde the places laſte:
The ayre vnmoued ſtands, and night ſits there full darke to ſee
In ſlouthfull world, all thinges by dread full horrible there bee.
And euen farre worſe then death it ſelfe, is place where death doth bide.
What? he that doth thoſe places darke with regall ſceptor guide,
In what ſeate ſet, doth he diſpoſe and rule thoſe peoples light?
A place there is in turne obſcure of Tartarus from ſight?
Which miſt full thick with fearefull ſhade doth holde and ouergoe.
From hence a double parted ſtreame from one wellſpring doth floe:
The tone, much like a ſtanding poole (by this the gods doe ſweare)
The which the ſacred Stygian lake with ſilent floude doth beare:
The t'other fierce with tumult great is drawen his courſe to goe,
And Acheron with raging floud the ſtones dryues to and froe
Vnſaylable. with double foorde is rounde about beſet
Agaynſt it Ditis pallace dyre, and manſton houſe full gret
In ſhadefull woode is couered: from wide den here the poſts
And threſholds of the tyrant hang, this is the walke of ghoſts:
This of his kingdome is the gate: a fielde about it goes,
Where ſitting with a countnaunce proude abroade he doth diſpoſe
Newe ſoules, a cruell maieſty is in the God to knowe:
A frowning forehead, which yet of his brethren beares the ſhowe,
And ſo great ſtocke: there is in him of Ioue the very face,
But when he lightens: and great part of cruell kingdomes place,
Is he himſelfe the lorde thereof: the ſight of whom doth feare,
What euer thing is fear'de▪
Is fame in this poynet true, ye there
Such rygours are, and gilty hoſts of men that there remayne
Forgetfull of theyr former faulte, haue their deſerued payne?
Who is the rector there of ryght, and iudge of equity?
Not onely one extorter out of faultes in ſeate ſet hye
The iudgements late to trembling ſoules doth there by lot awarde:
In one appoyncted iudgement place is Gnossian Minos harde,
And in an other Radamanthe: this crime doth Aeac heare.
What eche man once hath done, he feeles: and guilt to th'author the are
Returnes, and th'hurtfull with their owne example puniſht bee.
The bloudy cruell captaynes I in pryſon ſhee did ſee,
And backe of tyrant impotent euen with his peoples hande
All torne and cut. what man of might with fauour leades his lande,
And of his owne lyfe lorde reſerues his hurtleſſe handes to good,
And gently doth his empyre guide without the thyrſt of blood,
And ſpares his ſoule, he hauing long led forth the lingring dayes
Of happy age, at length to heauen doth eyther finde the wayes,
Or ioyfull happy places ells of fayre Elyſius woode.
Thou then that here muſt be a iudge abſtayne from man his bloode,
Who ſo thou be that raygneſt kyng: our gyltes are there acquit
In greater wyſe.
Doth any place preſeript of lymite ſhit
The gylty Ghoſts, and as the fame reportes, doth cruell payne
The wicked men make tame that in'eternall bondes remayne?
Ixion roll'de on whyrling wheele is toſt and turned hye:
Vpon the necke of Siſyphus the mighty ſtone doth lye.
Amyd the lake with thyrſty Iawes olde Tantalus therein
Purſues the waues, the water ſtreame doth wet and waſhe his chin,
And when to him nowe ofte deceyu'de it doth yet promiſe make,
Straight flits the floud: the fruicte at mouth his famyne doth forſake.
Eternall foode to fleeing foule doth Tytius hart geue ſtill:
And Danaus daughters doe in vayne theyr water veſſells fill.
The wicked Cadmus daughters all goe raging euery way:
And there doth greedy rauening byrde the Phiney tables fray.
Nowe of my ſonne declare to me the noble worthy fight.
Brings he his willing vnckles gyft, or Plutocs ſpoyles to ſight?
A dyre and dredfull ſtone there is the ſlouthfull foordes faſt bye,
Where ſluggiſh freat with waue aſton'd full dull and ſlowe doth lye:
This lake a dredfull fellow keepes both of attire and ſight,
And quaking Ghoſts doth ouer beare and aged vgly wyght:
His Bearde vnkempt, his boſome foule deform'de in filthy wyſe
A knot byndes in, full lotheſome ſtand in head his hollowe eyes:
He Feary man doth ſteare about his Boate with his long Ore.
He driuing nowe his lightned Ship of burden towarde the Shore,
Repayres to waues: and then his way doth requyre,
The flocke of Ghoſts all geuing place: alowde cryes Charon dyre,
What way attempteſt thou ſo bolde? thy haſtening pace here ſtay.
But Nathales Alcmenaes ſonne abyding no delay,
Euen with his owne poale bet he dothe full tame the ſhipman make,
And clymes the ſhip: the barke that coulde full many peoples take,
Did yelde to one: he ſat, the boate more heauy like to breake
Whih ſhyuering ioyntes on eyther ſyde the lethey floud doth leake.
Then tremble all the monſters huge, the Centaures fierce of myght,
And Lapithes, kindled with much wyne to warres and bloudy fight.
The loweſt Chanelles ſeeking out of Stygian poole a downe,
His Lerney labour ſore affright his fertile heads doth drowne.
Of greedy Ditis after this doth then the houſe appere.
The fierce and cruell Stygian dogge doth fray the ſpirites there,
The which with great and roaring ſounde his heads vpſhaking three,
The kingdome keepes his vgly head with filth full foule to ſee
The ſerpentes licke: his hayres be fowle with vypers ſet among,
And at his crooked wreſted tayle doth hyſſe a Dragon longe:
Lyke yre to ſhape, when him he wyſt his pace that way to take,
His briſtle hayres he lifteth vp with fierce vp bended ſnake:
And ſounde ſent out he ſoone perceyues in his applyed eare,
Who euen the ſprits is wont to ſent as ſoone as ſtoode more neare
The ſonne of loue, the doubtfull dogge ſtrait couched downe in denne,
And eche of them did feare. beholde with dolefull barking then
The places dumme he makes a dred, the threatning ſerpent ſtout
Through all the fieldes about doth hyſſe: the bawling noyſe ſent out
Of dredfull voyce from triple mouth, euen ſprits that happy bee
Doth make afrayde. from left ſide then ſtrayte way vndoeth hee
The cruell Iawes, and Lyons head once ſlayne in Cleon fielde
Agaynſt him ſets, and couer doth himſelfe with mighty ſhielde.
And bearing in his conquering hande a ſturdy club of Oke,
Nowe here, now there he rolleth him about with often ſtroke:
His ſtripes he doubles: he ſubdew'de his threates aſſwaged all,
And all his heads the weary dogge at once full lowe let fall,
And quite out ot the denn he fled, full greatly feared (ſet
In regall throne) both king and queene, and bad him to bee fet.
And me likewyſe they gaue for gyft to Hercles crauing me.
The monſters heauy neckes with hand then ſtroaking downe all three,
In lynked chayne he byndeth faſte forgetting then his ſtrength
The dogge the watchefull keeper of the kingdome darke at length
Layth downe his eares ull ore affray'de: and ſuffring to be led,
And eke acknowledging his lorde, following wyth lowly hed,
With tayle that ſnakes theron doth beare he both his ſides doth ſmight.
But after that to Taenare mouth we came, and clearenes bright
Had ſtrooke his eyes of light vnoknwne, good ſtomacke yet agayne
He takes although once ouercome, and now the happy chayne
He raging ſhakes: he had almoſt his leader pluckt from place,
And headlong backward drawne to hell, and moued from his pace.
And euen to my handes Hercles then his eyes did backward caſt,
Wee both with double ioyned ſtrength the dogge out drawne at laſt
For anger woode, and battells yet attempting all in vayne,
Brought vp to world, as ſoone as he the cleere ayre ſawe agayne,
And ſpaces pure of bryght fayre poale had once behelde with eye,
The nyght aroſe: his ſight to ground he turned by and by,
Caſt downe his eyes, and hatefull day forthwith he put to flight,
And backward turnd away his looke, and ſtreight with all his might
To th' earthe he falles: and vnderneath the ſhade of Hercles then
He hyd his head. therewith there came a great reſorte of men
With clamour glad, that did the bay about theyr forheads bryng:
And of the noble Hercules deſerued prayſes ſing.
EVryſtheus borne with ſwiftned birth in haſt,
Did bid to bottome of the Worlde to go:
This onely lackt of labours all at laſt,
To ſpoyle the Kyng of thyrde eſtate alſo.
The dongeons darke to enter ventred hee,
Where as the way to ſprits farre of doth bring
Full ſadde, and woode ſo blacke and fear'de to bee:
But full with flocke full great him following.
As great a preaſſe as flocke in cyties ſtreetes,
To ſee the Playes of Theatre newe wrought:
As great as at Eléus thundrer meetcs,
When Sommer fift the ſacred game hath brought:
As great as when comes houre of longer night,
And willing quiet ſleepes to bee extent,
Holdes equall Libra Phoebus Char light,
A ſorte the ſecrete Ceres doe frequent,
And from theyr howſen left doe haſt to comme,
The Atticke prieſtes the nyghte to celebrate:
Such heape is chaſte beneath by fieldes ſo dumme.
With age full ſlowe ſome taking forth their gate
Full ſad, and fillde with life ſo long now led:
Some yet doe runne the race of better yeares,
The virgins yet vnioynde to Spowſes bed,
And yonglings eke on whom grow yet no heares
And Infant lately taught his mothers name.
To theſe alone, (that they the leſſe might feare)
Is graunted night to eaſe with foreborne flame.
The reſt full ſad by darke doe wander theare:
As is our mynde, when once away is fled
The lyght, when eche man ſorry feeles to bee
Deepe ouer whelmde with all the earth his hed.
Thick Chaos ſtandes, and darkneſſe fowle to ſee,
And colour ill of night, and ſlouthfull ſtate
Of ſilent World, and diuers Cloudes about.
Let hoary age vs thyther bring full late.
No man comes late to that, whence neuer out,
When once hee is come, turne agayne he may.
To haſt the hard and heauy Fate what vayles?
This wandring heape in wyde landes farre away,
Shall goe to Ghoſts: and all ſhall geue their ſayles
To ſlowe Cocytus all is to thee enclinde,
Both what the fall, and riſe of ſonne doth ſee:
Spare vs that comme, to thee wee death are ſignde:
Though thou be ſlow, our ſelues yet haſte doe wee.
Fyrſt houre, that gaue the lyfe, it loaſt agayne.
TO Thebes is come the ioyfull day,
Your Aulters touch yee humbylly,
The fat fayre Sacrifices ſlay.
Maydes myxte with men in cumpany
Let them in ſolempne Flockes goe royle:
And nowe wyth yoake layde downe let caſe
The Iillers of the fertile Soyle.
Made is wyth hande of Hercles peace
Betweene the morne and Heſpers Glade,
And where Sonne holding myddle ſeate,
Doth make the Bodyes caſte no Shade.
What euer grounde is ouerweate
Wyth compaſſe longe of Seas abought,
Alcydes laboure taemde full well.
Hee ouer foordes of Tartare brought
Returnde appeaſed beeinge Hell.
There is remayning nowe no feare,
Nought lyes beyonde the Hell to ſee.
O Prieſt thy ſtaring Lockes of heare
Wrappe in wyth loued Poplar tree.
WIth my reuēging right hād ſlayne now Lycus loe the groūd
With groueling face hath ſmit: thē who ſoeuer fellow foūd
Of Tyraunt was, partaker of his paynes did alſo lye.
Nowe to my father ſacrifice and Gods victor will I,
And aulters that deſerue it, with ſlayne offrings reuerence.
Thee, thee O mate of all my toyles I pray and my defence
O warrefull Pallas, in whoſe left hand thy cleare ſhielde Aegis ſhakes
Fierce threats, whead that eche thing ſtone that looke vpon it makes.
Let tamer of Lycurgus nowe, and of red Sea be heare,
That poynct of ſpeare with Iuye greene in hand doth couer'de beare:
And two Gods powre, doth Phoebus, and his Syſter to I pray
The ſiſter meeter for her ſhaftes, but hee on th'harpe to play:
And what ſouer brother ells of myne doth dwell in ſky,
Not of my ſtepdame brother, bring yee hyther by and by
Your plentuous flocks, what euer haue all th' Indians fruicts brought out,
And what ſweete odours th' Arabickes doe get in trees about,
To th' aulters bring: let vapour fat and fume ſmoke vp full hye,
Let rounde about the Poplar tree my hayres now beautifye
Let th'oliue bowe thee hyde with braunche accuſtom'de in our lande
Theſeu: for foorthwith reuerence the thundrer, ſhall my hande,
O Gods the builders of the towne, and which of Dragon fell,
The wilde woods vens, and noble waues likewiſe of Dirces well,
And Tyrian houſe enhabite eke of ſtraunger wandring king.
Caſt into fyres ye frankencenſe.
Sonne fyrſt thy hands flowing
With bloudy ſlaughter, and the death of enmy purify.
Would God the bloud of hatefull head euen vnto Gods on hye
I might out ſhed, for lycour loe more acceptable none
Myght th' aulters ſtayne: nor ſacrifice more ample any one
Nor yet more plentyfull may bee to Ioue aboue downe caſt,
Then king vniuſt.
Deſyre that now thy father ende at laſt
Thy labours all: let quietnes at length yet gieuen bee,
And reſt to weary folke.
I will thee prayers make, for mee
And Ioue ful meete in this due place let ſtand the haughty ſkye,
And land, and ayre, and let the ſtarres dryue forth eternally
Their courſe vnſtayde: let reſtful peace kepe nations quietly,
Let labour of the hurtles land all yron now occupye,
And ſwordes lye hyd: let tempeſt none ful vyolent and dyre
Diſturbe the ſea: let from the ſkyes no flaſh of lightning fyre
Fall downe whyle Ioue ful angry is: nor yet with winter ſnowe
Encreaſed flood the ground vpturnde, and field quyte ouerthrowe,
Let poyſons ceaſe: and from hensforth let vp from ground aryſe
No greeuous hearbe with hurtful ſappe: nor fierce and fell lykewyſe
Let tyrantes raygne but if to ſight ſome other miſchiefe bringe
The ground yet ſhall, let it make haſt: and any monſtruous thinge
It it prepare let it be myne, but what meanes this? myd day
The darkenes haue incloaſ'd aboute lo Phoebus goeth his way
With face obſcure without a clowde who dryues the day to flight,
And turnes to eaſt? from whence doth now his duſky hed the night
Vnknowne bring forth? whence fil the poale ſo many rownde about
Of daytyme ſtarres? lo here behold my laboure firſt ful ſtout
Not in the loweſt parte of heauen the Lyon ſhyneth bryght,
And feruently doth rage with yre, and byttes prepares to fyght.
Euen now loe he ſome ſtar wil take, with mouth full wyde to see
He threatning ſtandes, and fires out blowes and mane vp ruſtleth he
Shaking with necke the harueſt ſad of ſhape, what euer thinge,
And what ſoeuer winter colde in froſen tyme dothbring,
He with one rage wil ouerpaſſe, or ſpring tyme bull he will
Both ſeeke and breake the neckes at once.
what is this ſodayne ylle?
Thy cruel count'naunce whether ſonne doſt thou caſt here and there?
And ſeeſt with troubled daſeld ſyght falſe ſhape of heauen appere
The land is tam'de the ſwelling feas their ſurges did aſſwage,
The kingdomes lowe of hell lykewyſe haue felt and knowne my rage,
Yet heauen is free, a labour meete for Hercules to proue.
To ſpaces high I wil be borne of haughty ſkies aboue
Let th' ayre be ſkaeld, my father doth me promiſe ſtarres t'obtayne.
What if he it denyde? all th' earth can Hercles not contayne,
And geeues at length to gods, me calles of one accorde beholde
The whole aſſembly of the gods, and doth their gates vnfolde,
Whyle one forbyddes, receyu'ſt thou mee, and openeſt thou the ſkye,
Or els the gate of ſtubburne heauen draw after me do I?
Do I yet doubt? I euen the bondes from Saturne wyll vndoe,
And euen agaynſt the kingdome prowde of wicked father loe
My graundſyre loaſe. let Titans now prepare agayne their fight
With me theyr captaine raging: ſtones with woods I will down ſmight
And hye hilles tops with Centaures full in right hande will I take.
With dauble mountayne now I will a ſtayre to Gods vp make.
Let Chyron vnder Oſſa ſee his Pelion mountayne gret:
Olympus vp to heauen aboue in thyrd degree then ſet
Shall come it ſelfe, or ells be caſt.
Put farre away frour thee
The thoughts that ought not to be ſpoake: of mynde vnſounde to ſee,
But yet full great, the furious rage aſſwage and lay away.
What meaneth this? the Gyauntes doe peſtiferous armes aſſay,
And Tityus from the ſprights is fled, and bearing torne to ſee
And empty boſome, loe howe neere to heauen it ſelfe ſtoode hee?
Cythaeron falles, the mountayne hie Pallene ſhakes for feare,
And torne are Tempe. he the tops of Pindus caught hath here,
And Octhen he, ſome dredfull thing threatning doth rage about
Erynis bringing flames: with ſtripes ſhe ſoundes nowe ſharken out,
And burned brandes in funeralles, loe yet more neare and neare
Throwes in my face: fearce Tiſyphone with head and vgly heare
With ſerpentes ſet, nowe after dogge fet out with Hercles hand,
That empty gate ſhee hath ſhut vp, with bolte of fyry brande,
But loe the ſtocke of enmious king doth hidden yet remayne,
The wicked Lycus ſeede: but to your hatefull father ſlayne
Euen now this right hande ſhall you ſende let nowe his arrowes light
My bowe out ſhoote: it ſeemes the ſhaftes to goe with ſuch a flight
Of Hercles.
Whether doth the rage and fury blinde yet goe?
His mighty Bowe he drewe with hornes together driuen loe,
And quiuer loaſte: great noyeſe makes with violence ſent out
The ſhaft, and quight the weapon flewe his middle necke throughout,
The wound yet left.
His other broode I ouerthrow will quight,
And corners all. What ſtay I yet? to me a greater fyght
Remaynes then all Mycenes loe, that rockye ſtones ſhould all
Of Cyclops being ouerturn'de with hande of myne, downe fall.
Let ſhake both here, and there the houſe, with all ſtayes ouerthrowne,
Let breake the poaſts: and quight let ſhrinke the ſhaken piller downe:
Let all the Pallace fall at once. I here yet hidden ſee
The ſonne of wycked father.
Loe his flattring handes to thee
Applying to thy knees dooth craue his lyfe with piteous mone.
O wicked gylt, full ſad, and eke abhorde to looke vpone,
His humble right hand caught he hath, and raging rounde about
Him rolled twyſe, or thryſe hath caſt. his head reſoundeth out,
The ſprinkled houſes with the brayne of him throwne out are wet.
But ſhee poore wretch her little ſonne in voſome hyding yet
Loe Megara, like one in rage doth from the corners flee.
Though runagate in boſome of the thundrer hid thou bee,
This right hand ſhall from euery where thee ſeeke, and bring to ſight.
Wher goeſt thou wretch? what lurking dens, ſeekſt thou to take, or flight?
No place of ſauegarde is if once bee Hercles ſtyrde with yre:
But doe thou rather him embrace, and with thy meeke deſyre
Aſſay t'aſſwage him.
Huſband ſpare vs I beſeech thee nowe,
And knowe thy Megara, this ſonne thy countenaunce doth ſhowe,
And bodyes pytche: behould'ſt thou howe his hands vp lyfteth hee?
I holde my ſtepdame: followe on due penaunce paye to mee,
And bounden Ioue from fylthy bonde deliuer free away:
But I before the mother will this litle monſter ſlay.
Thou mad man whither goeſt thou? wylt thou thine owne bloude ſheade?
Th'infant with fathers fyry face aſtonnted all for bread,
Died euen before the wounde: his feare hath tooke away his lyfe.
And now likewiſe his heauy club is ſhaken towarde his wyfe:
He broaken hath the bones, her head from blocklyke body gone
Is quight, nor any where it ſtayes, dar'ſte thou this looke vpone
To long lyu'de age? If mouruing doe the greeue, thou haſt then loe
The death preparde. Doe thou thy breaſt vppon his weapons throe,
Or ells this club with ſlaughter ſtayn'de of monſters ſlayne that bee,
Nowe hyther turne. thy parent falſe, vnfit for name of thee
Ryd hence away, leaſt he ſhould be to thy reuowne a let.
Which way the father toward thy death doſt thou thy ſelfe caſt yet?
Or whyther goeſt thou mad man? flee and lye thou cloaſely hid,
And yet from handes of Hercules this onely myſchiefe rid.
T'is well, the houſe of ſhameful king is now quight ouerthrowne.
To thee O ſpouſe of greatteſt Ioue I haue loe beaten downe
This offred flocke: I gladly haue fulfill'de my wyſhes all
Full meete for thee, and Argos now geue other offrings ſhall.
Thou haſt not ſonne yet all perform'de, fill vp the ſacrifiſe.
Loe th'offring doth at th'aultars ſtande, it waytes thy hand likewyſe
With necke full prone: I geue my ſelfe, I roon, I follow loe.
Mee ſacrifice. what meaneth this? his eyes rolle to and froe,
And heauines doth dull his ſight. ſee I of Hercules
The trembling hands? downe falles his face to ſleepe and quietnes,
And weary necke with bowed head full faſt doth downeward ſhrynke,
With bended knee: nowe all at once he downe to ground doth ſinke,
As in the woods wylde Aſhe cut downe, or Bulwarke for to make
A Hauen in Seas. Liu'ſte thou? or els to death doth thee betake
The ſelfe ſame rage, that hath ſent all thy famyly to death?
It is but ſleepe, for to and fro doth goe and come his breath.
Let tyme bee had of quietneſſe, that thus by ſleepe and reſt
Great force of his diſeaſe ſubdew'de, may eaſe his greeued breſt.
Remoue his weapons ſeruants, leaſt he mad get them agayne.
LEt th'ayre complayne, and eke the parent great
Of haughty Sky, and fertile land throughout,
And wandring waue of euer mouing freat.
And thou before them all, which lands about
And trayn of Sea thy beames abroade doſt throe
With glittring face, and mak'ſt the night to flee,
O feruent Titan: bothe thy lettinges loe
And ryſing, hath Alcides ſeene wyth thee:
And knowne lykewiſe hee hath thy howſen twayne.
From ſo great ills releaſe yee nowe hys breſt,
O Gods releaſe: to better turne agayne
His ryghter mynde, and thou O tamer beſt
O ſleepe of toyles, the quietneſſe of mynde,
Of all the lyfe of man the better parte,
O of thy mother Aſtrey wynged kynde,
Of hard and pyning death that brother arte,
With truth mingling the falſe, of after ſtate
The ſure, but eke the worſte foreteller yet:
O Father of all thynges, of Lyfe the gate,
Of lyght the reſt, of nyght and fellowe fyt,
That com'ſt to Kyng, and ſeruaunt equally,
And gently cheryſſheſt who weary bee,
All mankynde loe that dreadfull is to dye,
Thou dooſt conſtrayne long death to learne by thee.
Keepe him faſt bounde wyth heauy ſleepe oppreſt,
Let ſlomber deepe his Limmes vntamed bynde,
Nor ſoner leaue his vnright raginge breaſte
Then former mynd his courſe agayne may fynd.
Loe layd on ground with full fieree hart yet ſtill
His cruel ſleepes he turnes: and not yet is
The plague ſubdude of ſo great raging yll
And on great club the weary head of his
He wont to laye, doth ſecke the ſtaffe to fynde
VVith empty handes his armes out caſting yet
VVith mouing vayne: nor yet all rage of minde
He hath layd downe, but as with Sowthwind greate
The waue once vxt yet after kepeth ſtill
His raging long, and though the wind now bee
Aſſwaged ſwelles, ſhake of theis madde and yll
Toſſinges of mynde, returne let piety,
And vertue to the man, els let be ſo
His mynde with mouing mad toſte euery waye:
Let errour blynd, where it begun hath, go,
For naught elsnow but only madnes maye
Thee gyltles make: in next eſtate it ſtandes
To hurtles handes thy miſchiefe not to know.
Now ſtroken let with Hercules his handes
Thy boſome ſounde: thyne armes the worlde allow
VVere wonte to beare, let greuous ſtrypes now ſmyte
VVith conquering hande, and lowde complaying cryes,
Let th'ayre now heare, let of darke pole and nighte
The Queene them hear, and who fulfyercely lyes
That beares his neckes in mighty chaynes faſt bounde,
Low lurking Cerberus in deepeſt caue.
Let Chaos all with clamour ſad reſound,
And of broad ſea wide open wafting waue.
And th'ayre that felt thy weapons beter yet,
but felt them though.
The breaſtes with ſo great yls as theſe beſet,
VVith litle ſtroake they mnſt not beaten bee.
Let kingdomes three ſound with one playnt and crye,
And thou neckes honour and defence to ſee,
His arrowe ſtrong longe hanged vp on hye,
And quiuers light the cruell ſtripes now l'myte
On his fierce backe his ſhouldars ſtrong and ſtout
Let oken club now ſtrike and poaſt of might
VVith knots ful hard his breee load all aboute.
Let euen his weapons ſo great woes complayne
Not you pore babes mates of your fathers praiſe,
VVith cruell wound reuenging kinges agayne:
Not you your lims in Argos barriars playes,
Are taught to turne with weapons ſtrong to ſmie
And ſtrong of hand yet euen now daring loe
The weapons of the Scithian quiuer light
VVith ſtedy hand to paiſe ſet out from bow.
And ſtags to perce that ſaue them ſelues by flight
And backes not yet ful maend of cruel beaſt.
To Stigian hauens goeye of ſhade and night
Goe hurtles ſoules, whom miſchiefe hath oppreſt
Euen in fyrſt porch of lyfe but lately had,
And fathers fury goe vnhappy kind
O litle children, by the way ful ſad
Of iourney knowen.
Goe ſee the angry kynges.
WHat place is this? what region? or of the world what coaſt?
Where am I? vnder ryſe of ſunne or bond els vttermoſt.
Of th'cy beare or els doth here of ſea of Hepery
The fardeſt ground appoynt a bond for th'ocean ſea to lye?
What ayre draw we? to weary wight what ground is vnderſet?
Of truth we are returnd from hell whence in my houſe downe bet
See I theſe bloudy bodyes? hath not yet my mynd of caſt
Th'infernall ſhapes? but after yet returnd from hel at laſt
Yet wander doth that belly heape before myne eys to ſee?
I am aſham'de to graunt, I quake, I know not what to me,
I cannot tell what greeuou yll my mynde before doth know.
Where is my parent? where is ſhee with goodly childrens ſhow
My noble harly ſtomackt ſpouſe why doth my left fyde lacke
The lyons ſpoyle? which way is gone the couer of my backe?
And ſelfe ſame bedde ful ſoft for ſlepe of Hercules alſo?
Where are my ſhates? where is my bow? then from my liuing who
Could plucke away? who taken hath the ſpoyles ſo great as theſe
And who was he that feared not euen ſleepe of Hercules?
To ſee my conquerour me lykes, yt lykes me hym to know
Ryſe victor vp, what new ſonne hath my father gotten now
Heauen beynge left? at byrth of whom myght euer ſtayd bee
A longer night then, was in myne? what miſchiefe do I ſee?
My children loe do lye on ground with bloudy ſlaughter ſlayne?
My wyfe is kild: what Lycus doth the kingdome yet obtayne?
Who durſt ſo haynous giltes as theſe at Thebes take in hand
When Hercles is returnd? who ſo Iſmenus waters land,
Who ſo Acteons fieldes or who with double ſeas beſet
The ſhaken Pelops kingdomes doſt of Dardan dwell on yet
Helpe me: of cruel ſlaughter ſhow who may the author bee.
Let rage my yre and all: my foe he is who ſo to me
Shewes not my foe doſt thou yet hyde Alcides victorly?
Come forth, euen whether thou reuenge the cruel charyots hye
Of Bloudy Thracian king or yf thou Gerions catell quight
Or lordes of Lybia, no delay there is with thee to fight.
Beholde I naked ſtande, although euen with my weapons loe
Thou me vnarmed ſette vppon. Wherfore fleeth Theſeus ſoe,
And eke my father from my ght? theyr faces why hyde they?
Deferre your weepings, and who did my wyfe and children ſley
Thus all at once, me tell. Wherfore O father doſt thou whuſh?
But tell thou Theſeu, but Theſeu with thy accuſtom'd truſte.
Ech of them ſylent hydes away their baſhefull countnaunces,
And priuily they ſhed their teares in ſo great ils as theſe,
Of what ought wee aſham'de to be? doth ruler yet of might
Of Argos towne, or hateful band of ſowldiars apt to fight
Of Lycus dying, vs oppreſſe with ſuch calamity?
By prayſe of all my noble actes I do deſyre of thee
O father, and of thy great name approu'de to me alway
The proſperous powre declare to mee, who did my houſhold flay?
Whoſe pray lay I?
Let thus thyne ylles in ſylens ouerpas.
That I ſhould vnreuenged bee? Am, Reuenge oft hurtful was.
Did euer man ſo greeuous yls without reuenge ſuſtayne?
Whoſ euer greater fearde.
Then theſe O father yet agayne
May any greater thing, or els more greuous feared be?
How great apart is it thou woſt of thy calamity?
Take mercy father, lo I lift to thee my humble hands.
What meaneth this? my hand fleeth backe, ſome priuy gyt their ſtandes
Whence comes this bloud? or what doth mean flowing wt death of child
The ſhaft imbrewd with ſlaughter once of Lerney monſter kilde?
I ſee my weapons now, the hand I ſeeke no more to witte.
Whoſe hand could bend this bow but myne? or what right at me but it▪
Could ſtring the bow that vnto mee euen ſcantly doth obay?
To you I turne: O father deare, is this my gylt I pray?
They held their peace: it is myne own.
Thy greuous woe is ther,
The cryme thy ſtepdames: this miſchaunce no falt of thyne hath here.
From euery part now father throw in wrath thy thunders mighte,
And of thy ſonne forgetful now with cruel hand requighte
At leaſt thy nephewes, let the world that beares the ſtarrs ſounde out.
And let both th'one and th'other poale, flyng downe thy flames aboute:
And let the bankes of Caſpyan ſea my bounden body teare,
And gredy foule. Wherfore do of Prometheus lacke heare
The rockes? with huge and haughty top let now prepared be,
Both feeding beaſtes and foules, the ſyde of Caucas turne to ſee,
And bare of woods, the yle that bridge of Scithe that therby ſtandes
Simplegas ioynes, both here and there let it my bounden handes
Stretch out abroade: and when with courſe return'de accuſtomd'ly
They ſhall togeather dryue, and ſhall the rockes toſſe vp to ſkye
With bankes togeather beyng thruſt, and eke the middle ſeay,
Let me bet weene the mountaynes lye vnquiet reſtleſſe ſtay
But building vp with wood throwne on a heaped plie on he
My body thus with wicked bloud eſprinct, why bute not I?
So, ſo yt muſ be done: to hell I Hercles will reſtore.
Not yet his hart aſtonted lackes his ragyng ſore,
But wrath hath turnd: and which of rage is proprty and yre
Agaynſt himſelfe he rageth now
The furies places dire
And dungeon depe of ſprites in hell and place of tormentry
To gylty ghoſtes and baniſhment yf any yet do lye
Beyond Erebus, yet vnknowen to Cerberus and mee,
There hyde me ground to fartheſt bond of Tartarus to ſee.
To tary there Ile goe. O breſt of myne to fierce and ſtoute:
Who you my children thus diſperſt through all my houſe about,
May worthely enough bewayle? in all my euils yet
This countnaunce hard can neuer weepe, a ſword now hether ſet:
My ſhaftes reach hether, hyther reach my mighty club alſo:
To thee my weapons breake I wi, to thee my ſonne a two
Ile knappe my bowes, and eke my clubbe, this blocke of heauy wayghte
Shal to thy ſprites be burned loe: this ſelfe ſame quiuer frayght
With Lerney ſhaftes to funerall of thyne ſhall like wyſe goe.
Let all my weapons penance pay and you vnhappy to
Euen with my weapons burne I wil, O ſtepdames handes of myne.
Who euer yet to ignoraunce hath geuen name of cryme?
Ful oftentymes did errour greate the place of gylt obtayne.
T'is neede to be a Hercles now, this heape of yll ſuſtayne.
Not ſo, hath ſhame yet geuen place with fury drowned quight:
But peoples all I rather ſhould dryue from my wicked ſight.
My weapons, weapons
I quickly craue to mee
Withdraw to be reſtoard agayne: if ſound my mynd now bee,
Reſtore to me my weapons: if yet laſt my rage of mynd,
Then father flee: for I the waye to death my ſelfe ſhalfynde.
By ſacred holy ynreds rightes, by force and duty all
Of both my names; if eyther me thy brynger vp thou call.
Or parent els, and (which of good men reuerenced are)
By theſe hoare yres, I the beſech my deſert age yet ſpare,
And wery yeares of houſe ſalne downe the one alonly ſtay,
One onely light to mee, with yls afflicted euery way
Reſerue thy ſelfe: yet neuer hath there happned once of thee
Fruite of thy toyles: ſtill eyther I the doubtful ſea to ſee
Or monſters feard: who euer yet hath bene a cruell king
In all the world to ghoſtes allow, and aulters both hurtinge,
Of me is feard: the father of thee abſent ſtil to haue
The feuite, the touching, and the ſight of thee at length I craue.
Wherfore I longer ſhould ſuſtayn my life yet in this light,
And linger here no cauſe there is, all good loſt haue I quighte,
My mynd, my weapons, my renoume, my wife, my ſonnes, my handes,
And fury to no man may heale and loſe from gylty handes
My mynd defyeld: needes muſt with death he heald ſo haynous yll.
Wilt thou thy father IIay?
Leaſt I ſhoulde do it die I will.
Before thy fathers face?
I taught him miſchief for to ſee.
Thy deedes marking rather that ſhould of al remembred bee,
Of this one only cryme I do a pardon of thee craue.
Sall he geue pardon to himſelfe, that to none els it gaue?
I beeing bidden prayſe deſeru'd, this deede mine owne doth proue.
Helpe father now, if eyther els thy piety thee moue,
Or els my heauy fate, or els the honour and renowne.
Of ſtained ſtrength, my weapons bringe, let fortune be throwen downe.
with my right hand.
The prayers which thy father makes to thee
Are ſtronge enough, but yet likewyſe with weeping loe of me
By moued yet: aryſe thou vp, and with thy wonted myght
Subdue thyne yls: now ſuch a mynde meete to beare vpright
No euill hap, receyus againe loe now with manhode gret
Thou muſt preuayle. euen Hercules forbyd with yre to fret.
Alyue, I hurt: but if I dye I take the gylt alſo.
I haſt to ridde the world of cryme euen now before me lo
A wicked monſter cruel, and vntamed fierce and flout
Doth wander: now with thy ryght hand begime to goe aboute
A greate affayre, yea more then all thy twyſe ſixe labours long.
Yet ſtayſt thou wretch, that late agaynſt the children waſt ſo ſtronge,
And fearful mother now except reſtoard my weapons ee,
Of Thracian Pindus eyther I wil feare downe euery tree,
And Bacchus holly woods and tops of mount Cythaeron hye
Burne with myſelfe, and al 'at once with all their houſen I
And with the Lordes therof the roofes with goddes of Thebes all
The Thebane temples euen vppon my body will let fall:
And wyl be hyd in to wne vpturnd: if to my ſhoulders might
The walls themſelues all caſt ther ſhall fall a burden light,
And couerd with ſeuen gates I ſhall not be enough oppreſt,
Then all the wayght wheron the worlde in middle part doth reſt,
And partes the Goddes vppon my head Ile turne and ouerthrow
My weapons geue.
This word is meete for Hercles father lo
With this ſame arrow ſlaine behold thy ſonne is tombled downe,
This weapōs cruell Iuno lo from handes of thyne hath throwne,
This ſame wil I now vſe, loe ſee how leaps with feare afright
My wretched harte, and how it doth my careful body ſmight.
The ſhaft is ſet therto thou ſhalt a miſchiefe lo do now
Both willing it and wotting: tel, what thing commaundeſt thou?
I nothing craue my doloure let in ſaf'ty ſtandeth now.
To kepe my ſonne alyue to mee that onely do canſt thou
O Theſeu, yet I haue not ſcapte great'st feare that happen can
Thou canſt mee not a miſer make, thou mayſt a happy man
So order euery thyng thou doſt, as all thy cauſe in hand,
And fame thou mayſt wel know in ſtrayght and doubtful cae to ſtande
Thou liu'ſt, or dieſt: this ſlender ſoule that light is hence to flee,
Weried with age and no leſſe bet with greuous ils to ſee,
In mouth I holde ſo ſlowly to a father with ſuch ſlaye
Doth any man geue lyfe? I wilno longer bid delay,
The deadly ſword throughout my breaſt to ſtrike I wil apply,
Here, here the gylt of Hercules euen ſound of mynd ſhall lye.
Forbeare O father now forbeare, with draw thy hand againe.
My manhood yeld thy fathers will, and impery ſuſtaine.
To Hercles labours now like wyſe, let this one labour goe,
Let me yet liue, lift vp from ground th'afflicted lims with woe
O Theeu of my parent: for from Godly touch doth flee
My wicked hand.
I gladly do this hand embrace to mee.
By this I beyng ſlayed will goe, this meuing to my breſt
Ile ſlake my woes,
what place ſhall I ſeeke ronnagate for reſt?
Where ſhall I hyde my ſelfe? or in what land my ſelfe engraue?
What Tanais, or what Nilus els, or with his Perſyan waue
What Tygris violent of ſtreame, or what fierce Rhenus flood,
Or Tagus troubleſome that flowes with Ibers treaſures good
May my ryght hand now waſh from gylt? although Maeotis cold
The waues of all the Northen ſea on me ſhed out now wolde,
And al the water ther of ſhoulde now pas by my two handes,
Yet wil the miſchiefe deepe remayne▪ alas into whet landes
Wilt thou O wicked man reſort? to Eaſt or weſterne coſte?
Ech where wel knowen, all place I haue of baniſhment quight loſte
From me the warlde doth flee a back, the ſtarres that ſydelyng roue
Do back warde dryue their turned courſe, euen Cerberus the ſoue
With better count'naunce did behold O faythfull friend I ſaye,
O Theſeu ſeeke ſame lurking place, farre hence out of the way
O thou a warder of mens gyltes what euer Iudge thou hee
That hurtful men doſt loue, repay a worthy thanke to me:
And my deſertes. I thee beſeech, to ghoſtes of hell againe
Send me that once eſcaped them: & ſubiect to thy raine
Reſtore me yet to thoſe thy bandes, that place ſhal me wel hyde:
And yet euen that place knowes me wel
Our land for thee doth bide
There Mars his hande acuie agayne and made from ſlaughter free
Reſtoard to armoure, le that land (Alcides) for thee,
Which wontes to quite the gods, and proue them Innocent to be.