THough I (a Goddeſſe) grace the azure round,
Whilſt birds (all bright with eyes) my Coach do move,
And am with radiant ſtarres, heavens Empreſſe crown'd,
The thunderers ſiſter, wife of mighty Iove,
And though I banquet in th'ethe riall bowres,
Where Ambroſie and Nectar ſerves for meate,
And at the meeting of th' Immortall powres,
And ſtill advanc'd unto the higheſt ſeat:
Yet by thoſe glorious ſhewes of boundleſſe bliſſe,
My burden'd minde can no way be reliev'd:
Since immortallity affords but this,
That I live ever to be ever griev'd.
In vaine, vaine mortals ſeeke for helpe at me,
With ſacred odours on my Altars throwne:
What expectation can they have to ſee
One venge their wrongs, who cannot venge her own?
May Pallas then drowne thouſands if ſhe pleaſe,
Who metamorphos'd Diomedes mates?
And muſt my enemies alwaies live at eaſe,
As me to ſpight appointed by the fates?
Of all the dying race which lives below,
With ſuch indignities none could comport,
As wound my breſt, whom Gods and men doe know,
To be abus'd by Iove in many a ſort.
Though knowne to me, from others if conceal'd,
His faults might breed me griefe, but yet not ſhame;
Where, loe, now both through heaven and earth reveal'd,
Each ſlandrous Theater doth his ſcorne proclaime.
If divine ſoules divinely liv'd aloft,
The world below would imitate them then,
But humaniz'd by haunting mortals oft,
Where men ſhould grow like Gods, Gods grow like men.
My painted Iris in her beauties pride,
Smiles not on Phoebus with ſo many hewes,
As Iove in divers ſhapes himſelfe can hide,
When he poore Maydes (by Cupid ſpurr'd) purſues;
He Danae (a golden ſhower) deceiv'd;
And did (a Swanne) in Ledaes boſome light;
Then (turn'd a Bull) Agenors daughter reav'd;
And Io made a Cow to mocke my ſight:
But O! I wiſh that with ſuch wanton Dames,
He ſtill to ſport would as with me remaine;
Not able then to touch celeſtiall flames,
All (like the drunkards mother) might be ſlaine.
Then ſuch a troupe as Rheas boſome ſtores,
Would not hold him and me at endleſſe jarres;
The heavens are peſtred with my husbands whores,
Whoſe lights impure doe taint the pureſt ſtarres.
"Though wrongs, when groſſe, are heavy to digeſt,
"An Actors greatneſſe doth ſome griefe remove,
"Of whom to ſuffer wrong it ſhames one leaſt:
"If I were wrong'd 'I would be wrong'd by Iove;
But (ah) this long, tormented hath my breſt,
A Man, a Boy, a ſhepheard, yea, and worſe,
The Phrygian fire-brand, the adultrous gueſt,
Who firſt wrought wrong by fraud, and then by force;
He, he was he, whoſe verdict mov'd me moſt,
Whilſt partiall fancies judg'd of beauties right;
Nor was it ſtrange though one all judgement loſt,
Who had three naked Goddeſſes in ſight;
And yet I know, had not his wandring eyes
The Cyprian brib'd by ſome laſcivious ſmiles,
My pompous birds (in triumph) through the skyes,
Had borne the gold which oft her Nymphs beguiles;
And am I ſhe whoſe greatneſſe is admir'd,
Whom Iove for wife, whom thouſands court for love?
Whom haughty Ixion to embrace deſir'd,
Yet with a cloud deluded did remove?
And what made me a matter to ſubmit,
Where my authority might have avail'd?
Whilſt though I promis'd wealth, and Pallas wit,
Yet with a yong man, Venus moſt prevail'd;
"But how durſt he of one the glory raiſe,
"Where two contemn'd would needs the wrong repaire?
"It ſpites our ſexe to heare anothers praiſe,
"Of which each one would be thought onely faire.
To venge my ſelfe no kinde of paine I ſpar'd,
And made his greateſt gaine his greateſt loſſe:
As Venus gave him Helen for reward,
I gave him Helen for his greateſt croſſe;
Nor did he long with joy her love enjoy,
Whoſe fatall flames his Country did confound,
Whſt Armies arm'd for her did Troy deſtroy,
And Neptunes labours levell'd with the ground;
Whilſt Simois ſeem'd to be a buriall field,
Whoſe ſtreams as ſtreets) were with dead bodies pav'd,
All Zanthus Plaine (as turn'd a Sea) did yeeld
A floud of bloud, from Heroes wounds receiv'd;
Whilſt braving thouſands once, though much eſteem'd,
By duſt and bloud deform'd, of Hector ſlaine,
(Not like Patroclus by the ſword redeem'd)
The body baſely was bought backe againe;
Then, by the ſame mans ſonne who kill'd his ſonne,
Old Priamus ſurpriz'd, ſigh'd forth his breath,
And even moſt harm'd where he for helpe had runne,
The Altar taking, taken was by death.
Though wreſtling long to ſcape the heavens decree,
(Bloud quenching luſt) laſt parted from the light,
He who lov'd Helen, and was loath'd by me,
Did (as a Sacrifice) appeaſe my ſpight.
Then, having liv'd (if wretches have a life)
Till in all hers ere dead, oft buried ſpi'd)
Though once known both, nor mother then, nor wife,
The fertile Hecuba (mad childeleſſe) dy'd.
Thus, by thoſe meanes it would have ſeem'd to ſome
That ſcorned beauty had beene well reveng'd:
But whilſt they were o're-com'd, they did o're-come,
Since they their ſtates for better ſtates have chang'd.
I in one part that people did confound,
But did enlarge their power in every place:
All war-like Nations through the world renown'd,
From Phrygian ruines ſtrive to raiſe their race.
And yet two traitors who betray the reſt
O! that the heaven on treaſon ſometime ſmiles!
Though having worſt deſerv'd, did chance the beſt,
More I appy then at home in their exiles;
Did not Antenor (ſtealing through his foes)
Neere to th' Euganian Mountaines build a Towne,
Of which ſoe nurſlings once ſhall ſeeke repoſe,
Amidſt the waves, and in the depths ſit downe:
Their Citie (ſpouſing Neptune) ſhall ariſe,
The rareſt Common-wealth that ever was,
Whoſe peo;e, if as ſtout as rich and wiſe,
Might boaſt to bring miraculous things to paſſe.
Then falſe Aeneas, though but borne t' obey,
Did (of a fugitive) become a King:
And ſome of his neere Tibers ſtreames that ſtay,
Would all the world to their obedience bring.
Their ravenous Eagles ſoaring o're all lands,
By violence a mighty prey have wonne,
That baſtard brood of Mars with martiall bands,
Have conquerd both the Manſions of the Sunne;
Their courſe by mountaines could not be controld,
No; Neptune could not keep his boſome free:
The parching heate, nor yet the freezing cold,
Their Legions limits no way could decree;
Yet, of that City there can come no good,
Whoſe riſing walles with more then barbarous rage,
The builder firſt bath'd with his brothers bloud,
Which their prodigious conqueſts did preſage.
Oft hath that Towne my ſoule with anguiſh fili'd,
Whoſe new-borne ſtate did triumph o're my wrath,
Like my old foe who in his Cradle kill'd
The Serpents which I ſent to give him death.
By Sabins, Albans, Tuſcans, oft aſſail'd,
Even in her infancy I toſs'd Romes ſtate,
Yet ſtill Laomedons falſe race prevail'd,
And angry Iuno could doe nought but hate.
Then when the gallant Gaules had vanquiſh'd Rome,
Who baſely bought her liberty with gold,
A baniſh'd man Camillus chanc'd to come,
And her imballanc'd ſtate redeem'd of old;
Great Hanniball our common cauſe purſu'd,
And made his bands within their bounds remaine,
With Conſuls and with Pretors bloud, imbru'd,
At Thraſimene, and at Cannas ſlayne;
In Romans mindes, ſtrange thoughts did doubt infuſe,
But whilſt they fear'd the taking of their Towne,
He who could vanquiſh, victory not uſe,
Was by their braſen fate (when high) thrown downe;
O what a torrent of Barbarian bands,
In inundations once their walles did boaſt,
Whilſt Teutons huge, and Cymbers from their Lands,
Like Gyants march'd, a more then monſtrous hoſte?
But though from parts unknowne to ruine Rome,
I led thoſe troupes which all the word admir'd,
Yet did fierce Marius me with them o're-come,
And I in vaine to venge old wrongs aſpir'd;
By meanes more baſe I likewiſe ſought her harmes,
Whilſt Ianus Church imported never peace,
I rais'd up abject Spartacus in Armes,
Who neere eclips'd Romes glory with diſgrace.
Though I who all the world for helpe have ſought.
From Europe, Africke, and from Aſia thus,
Gaules, Carthaginians, and the Cymbers brought,
Yet did the dammage ſtill redound to us:
Of heaven and earth I all the pow'rs have prov'd,
And for their wracke have each advantage watch'd,
But they by forraine force cannot be mov'd:
By Romans, Romans onely may be match'd.
And I at laſt have kindled civill warre,
That from their thoughts (which now no reaſon bounds)
Not onely laws, but Natures laws doth barre;
The Sonne the Syre, the brother brother wounds;
Whil'ſt th'Eagles are oppos'd to th'Eagles ſo,
O what contentment doth my minde attaine!
No wound is wrong beſtow'd, each kills a foe,
What ever ſide doth loſe, I alwayes gaine.
But this my ſoule exceedingly annoyes,
That all at one time cannot be ſuppreſt:
"The warre helps ſome, as others it deſtroyes,
And thoſe who hate me moſt, ſtill proſper beſt.
Whil'ſt with their bloud their glory thouſands ſpend,
Ah! ones advancement aggravates my woe,
Who vaunts himſelfe from Venus to deſcend,
As if he claim'd by kinde to be my foe.
I meane the man whoſe thoughts nought can appeaſe,
Whil'ſt, them too high a blinde ambition bends,
Whom (as her minion) Fortune bent to pleaſe,
Her rareſt treaſures prodigally ſpends;
Not onely hath he daunted by the Sword
The Gauls, the Germans, and th'Aegyptians now,
But of all Lords pretends to be made Lord,
That who command the world to him may bow;
Thus diſpoſſeſſing Princes of their Thrones,
Whil'ſt his Ation nothing can aſſwage,
That the ſubjected world in bondage grones,
The prey of pride, the ſacrifice to rage,
"Men raile on Iove, and ſigh for Saturnes time,
"And to the preſent, Ages paſt preferre,
"Then burden would the Gods with every crime,
"And damne the heavens, where onely th'earth doth erre.
Though Iove (as ſtupid) ſtill with Cupid ſports,
And not the humour of proud Caeſar ſpies?
Who may (if forcing thus the worlds chiefe Forts)
Then Titans earſt, more pow'rfull, ſcale the skies.
Yet leſt he thrall him too, who none free leaves,
We from the bounds above him muſt repell,
To brawle with Pluto in th'umbragious Caves,
There ſince he will be firſt, made firſt in hell.
What? with that Tyrant I will ſtraight be even,
And ſend his ſoule to the Tartarian grove▪
Though Iove will not be jealous of his heaven,
Yet Iuno muſt be jealous of her Iove;
And though none in the heavens would do him ill,
I'le raiſe up ſome in th'earth to haſte his death:
Yea tho both heaven and earth neglect my will,
Hll me Miniſters of wrath▪
I'le cro and the ſmoaking lakes;
To borrow ency brothers damned bands,
The furies arm'd with fire-barands, and with Snakes,
Shall plant their hell where Rome ſo ſtately ſtands;
Whil'ſt Furies furious by my fury made,
Do ſpare the dead to have the living pin'd:
O! with what joy will I that Army leade?
"Nought then revenge more calmes a wronged minde;
I muſt make this a memorable age,
By this high vengeance which I have conceiv'd:
But what though thouſands dye t'appeaſe my rage?
'So Caeſar periſh, let no ſoule be ſav'd.
"VVE ſhould be loath to grieve the gods,
"Who hold us in a ballance ſtill;
"And as they will
"May weigh us up, or downe;
"Thoſe who by folly foſter pride,
"And do deride
"The terrour of the Thunderers rods,
"In ſeas of ſinne their ſoules do drowne,
"And others them abhorre as moſt unjuſt,
"Who want Religion do deſerve no truſt:
How dare fraile fleſh preſume to riſe
(Whil'ſt it deſerves heavens wrath to prove)
On th'earth to move,
Leſt that it opening ſtraight,
Give death and buriall both at once?
How dare ſuch ones
Look up unto the skies,
For feare to feele the Thunderers weight?
"All th'Elements their Makers will attend,
"As prompt to plague, as men are to offend.
All muſt be plagu'd who God diſpleaſe,
Then whil'ſt he Bacchus rites did ſcorne,
Was Pentheus torne;
The Delians high diſdaine
Made Niobe (though turn'd a ſtone)
With teares ſtill mone,
And (Pallas to appeaſe)
Arachne weaves loath'd webbes in vaine:
Heaven hath prepar'd ere ever they begin,
A fall for pride, a puniſhment for ſinne.
Loe, Iuno yet doth ſtill retaine
That indignation once conceiv'd,
For wrong receiv'd
From Paris as we finde;
And for his cauſe (bent to diſgrace
The Trojan race)
Doth hold a high diſdaine,
Long layd up in a loftie minde:
"We ſhould abſtaine from irritating thoſe
"Whoſe thoughts (if wrong'd) not till reveng'd repoſe.
Thus, thus for Paris fond deſire,
Who of his pleaſures had no part,
For them muſt ſmart:
Such be the fruits of luſt;
Can heavenly breaſts ſo long time lodge
A ſecret grudge?
Like Mortals thrall to yre,
Till juſtice ſometime ſeemes unjuſt?
"Of all the furies which afflict the ſoule,
"Luſt and revenge are hardeſt to controull
The Gods give them but rarely reſt,
Who do againſt their will contend,
And plagues do ſpend,
That fortunate in nought,
Their ſprits (quite parted from repoſe)
May ſtill expoſe
The ſtormy troubled breſt
A prey to each tyrannicke thought:
"All ſelfe-accuſing ſoules no reſt can finde,
"What greater torment then a trouble minde?
Let us adore th'immortall powers,
On whoſe decree, of all that ends,
The ſtate depends,
That (farre from barbarous broiles)
We of our life this little ſpace
May ſpend in peace
Free from afflictions ſhowres;
Or at the leaſt from guilty toyles;
"Let us of reſt the treaſure ſtrive to gaine,
"Whithout the which nought can be had but paine.
NOw have my hopes attain'd the long'd for heaven,
In ſpight of partiall Envies poyſnous blaſts:
My Fortune with my courage hath prov'd even;
No Monument of miſcontentment laſts.
Thoſe who corrival'd me, by me o're-throwne,
Did by their falls give feathers to my flight:
I in ſome corner rather live unknowne
Then ſhine in glory, and not ſhine moſt bright;
What common is to two, reſts no more rare,
In all the world no Phoenix is ſave one,
That of my deeds none challenge might a ſhare,
Would God that I had acted all alone:
And yet at laſt I need to mourne no more
For envy of the Macedonians praiſe,
Since I have equall'd all that went before;
My deeds in number do exceed my dayes.
Some earſt (whoſe deeds reſt regiſtred by Fame)
Did from their Conqueſts glorious titles bring,
But Greatneſſe to be great, muſt have my name,
To be a Caeſar is above a King.
Thoſe warre-like Nations, which did Nations ſpoile,
Are by thy Legions to our laws made thrall;
"What can brave mindes not do by time and toyle?
"True magnanimity triumphs o're all.
Th'out-ragious Gauls who in moſt monſtrous ſwarmes
Went waſting Aſia, thundering downe all things,
And (Macedony quaking at their Armes)
Did inſolently make, and un-make Kings:
Thoſe Gauls who having the worlds Conquerours foil'd,
(As if the world might not have match'd them then)
Would ſacrilegiouſly have Delphos ſpoil'd,
And warr'd againſt the Gods, contemning men;
Yea, thoſe whoſe Anceſtors our City burn'd,
(The onely people whom the Romanes fear'd)
By me (Romes nurſling) match'd, and o're-match'd mourn'd:
So what they firſt eclipſ'd, againe they clear'd.
Then, as to Subjects having given degrees,
The Gauls no more preſuming of their might,
I (wounding Neptunes boſome with wing'd trees)
Did with the world-divided Britains fight;
The Germans from their birth inur'd to warre,
Whoſe martiall mindes ſtill haughtie thoughts have bred,
Whil'ſt neither men, nor walls, my courſe could barre,
(Mask'd with my banners) ſaw their Rhene runne red;
The Eaſterne Realmes when conqu'ring now of late,
My comming, and o're-comming was but one;
With little paine ear'ſt Pompey was call'd great,
Who fought ſoft bands whoſe glorious dayes were gone:
But what though thouſands ſet ones praiſes forth,
For fields which ſhadows, and not ſwords, obtain'd;
The rate (too eaſie) vilifies the worth:
"Save by great paines, no glory can be gain'd:
From dangers paſt, my comfort now proceeds,
Since all who durſt gaine-ſtand I did o're-come:
And, in few words to comprehend my deeds,
Rome conquer'd all the world, and Caeſar, Rome.
Loe thoſe who ſtriv'd your vertue to ſuppreſſe,
(As whoſe great actions made them jealous ſtill)
Whil'ſt labouring but too much to make you leſſe,
Have made you to grow great againſt your will:
Great Pompeys pompe is paſt, his glory gone,
And rigorous Cato by himſelfe lyes kill'd;
Then daſtard Cicero more you honours none,
Thus all your foes are with confuſion fill'd.
The Senatours who could not be aſſwag'd,
Long to your prejudice their pow'r abus'd,
Till at their great ingratitude enrag'd,
I ſwore our ſwords would grant what they refus'd▪
When having ſcap'd, endanger'd, and deſpis'd,
Brave Curio and I did to your Camp reſort,
In old bare gownes (like ſome baſe ſlaves) diſguis'd,
All ſigh'd to ſee us wrong'd in ſuch a ſort.
The higheſt in the heaven who knows all hearts,
Do know my thoughts as pure as are their Starres,
And that (conſtrain'd) I came from forraine parts
To ſeeme uncivill in the civill warres.
I mov'd that warre which all the world bemoanes,
Whil'ſt urg'd by force to free my ſelfe from feares;
Still when my hand gave wounds, my heart gave groanes;
No Romans bloud was ſhed, but I ſhed teares:
But how could any elevated ſpright,
Who had for honour hazarded his blood,
Yeeld willingly (by foes outragious ſpight)
To be defrauded of th'expected good:
When as a multitude of battels wonne,
Had made Romes Empires, and my glory great;
And that the Gauls (oft vanquiſh'd) had begun
To beare the yoke which they diſdain'd of late.
Then glorious Pompey, my proud ſonne-in-law,
And Cato (who ſtill croſſ'd what I deſign'd)
From favouring me the people did with-draw,
And had a ſucceſſour for ſpight aſſign'd;
Not that he ſhould ſucceed in dangerous broils,
But (even through envy) as they had ordain'd,
That he might triumph ſo of all my toils,
And rob the glory which I dearly gain'd;
With ſuch indignity who could comport,
When prizing honour dearer then the light?
No (whil'ſt my ſoule reſts ſoverainge of this fort)
None ſhall have powr to rob me of my right:
And yet by Iove who all the world commands,
To uſe ſuch violence I did miſlike:
And would have oft abandon'd all my bands,
If that mine enemies would have done the like;
But yet the multitude, which floting ſtill
(As waves with windes) are carried with conceits,
With nought but my diſgrace would bound their will,
And I committed all unto the fates.
Yet when at Rubicon I ſtood perplex'd,
And weigh'd the horrour of my high attempt,
My ſtormy ſoule a thouſand fancies vex'd,
Which reſolution buried in contempt.
"Nought in a Captaine more confounds his foes,
"Then of a ventrous courſe, the ſwift effects,
"Since (ſo quite cruſh'd) ere they their thoughts diſpoſe,
"All good advice a care confuſ'd neglects.
Though when you march'd to Rome, your pow'r was ſmall,
The ſudden news ſo thundred in each eare,
That (as if heaven had falne upon them all)
If bred amazement, and th'amazement feare.
"Some ſecret deſtiny (as then was ſeene)
"Doth guide mens actions, and their judgement bounds:
"Thoſe who by hoſts could not have frighted beene,
"A ſhadow, or a rumour oft confounds:
"All haſtie dangers ſo ſurpriſe the minde,
"That feare prevents the reſolutions power,
"Or elſe the fates make curious Reaſon blinde,
"When heavens determin'd have a fatall houre.
Great Pompey (loe) who was growne ag'd in armes,
And had triumph'd o're all the worlds three parts,
Whil'ſt (quite diſcourag'd, by imagin'd harmes)
Fled Rome, though without reach of th'enemies darts.
As to a torrent all gave place to you,
And whom they call'd a rebell made their Lord;
Your ſucceſſour Domitius (forc'd to bow)
Did truſt your favour, more then feare your ſword.
When in th'Iberian bounds you did arrive,
There, Adverſaries (who did vainly vaunt)
Had all th'advantage that the ground could give,
Of victuals plenty, which with us were ſcant.
Yet the celerity that you had us'd,
Did ſo diſcourage their diſordred band,
That (as Iove in their breaſts had feare infus'd)
They had no ſtrength againſt our ſtrokes to ſtand.
And when Romes Generall with brave legions ſtor'd,
Seem'd to poſſeſſe all that his ſoule requir'd,
Whil'ſt us to daunt, both famine and the ſword,
The Sea, the Land, and all in one conſpir'd;
Then, for your offices they did contend,
As thoſe who of the victory were ſure,
And (where they might th'affaires of ſtate attend)
In Rome for lodgings fondly did procure.
Yet memorable now that day remaines,
When all the world was in two Armies rang'd,
Whil'ſt Mars went raging through th'Aemathian plaines,
And to deſpaires high expectations chang'd;
When Pompeys partie had the battell loſt;
(As Lyons do their prey) you did purſue
The ſcattred remnant of that ruin'd hoſt,
On which new heads ſtill (like a Hydra) grew
Though victory in Africke fatall ſeem'd
To any Army that a Scipio led,
Yet, you ſhew'd there (for worth in warre eſteem'd)
That Rome a better then a Scipio bred;
And all our Enemies were confounded thus,
Who us in number ever did ſurmount;
But Caeſar and his fortune were with us,
Which we did more then many thouſands count.
The ſweeteſt comfort which my conqueſts gave,
Was that I ſo might do to many good:
For, every day ſome Romanes life I ſave,
Who in the field to fight againſt me ſtood,
Thus, may my minde be judg'd by the event,
Who (even when by my greateſt foes aſſail'd)
To winne the battell never was more bent,
Then prompt to pardon when I had prevail'd.
Not covetous of bloud, of ſpoyls, nor harmes,
I (even when victor) did inſult o're none,
But layd aſide all hatred with my Armes,
A foe in fight, a friend when it was gone▪
"Of clemency I like the praiſe, more then
"Of force, which mortals with affliction lodes;
"Strength oft may prove the worſt thing that's in men,
"And pity is the beſt thing in the Gods.
Sterne Cato (ſtill affecting to be free)
Who either death or life (if given) disdain'd,
Thy death I envy, who didſt envy me,
The glory that I (ſaving thee) had gain'd.
Yet I to Rents and dignities reſtore,
Even thoſe who long my ruine had deſign'd:
And O! it doth delight my minde farre more,
By benefits, then by conſtraint to binde.
I would have all my foes brought to their ends,
I rather have my foes all made my friends.
Their bloud whom I ſuſpect'd ſhould quench all ſtrife.
So might one do who lik'd of nought but life.
Still life would be redeem'd from dangers forth.
Not with a ranſome then it ſelfe more worth.
Then life to man, what thing more deare ſucceeds?
The great contentment that true glory breeds.
Men by all meanes this blaſt of breath prolong▪
Men ſhould ſtrive to live well, not to live long.
And I would ſpend this momentary breath
To live by fame for ever after death:
For I aſpire in ſpight of fates to live.
I feare that ſome too ſoone your death contrive.
Who dare but lodge ſuch thoughts within their mindes?
Thoſe whom the ſhadow of your Greatneſſe blindes.
The beſt are bound to me by gifts in ſtore.
But to their Countrey they are bound farre more.
Then loath they me as th'Enemy of the ſtate?
Who freedome love, you (as uſurper) hate.
I by great battels have enlarg'd their bounds.
By that they thinke your pow'r too muchy abounds.
From doing wrong, yet I refraine my will.
They feare your powe'r, becauſe it may do ill.
The preſent ſtate ſtill miſcontentment brings
To factious mindes affecting matters ſtrange,
Which (burdens to themſelves) do loath all things,
And ſo they change, regard not what they change.
In populous Townes where many do repaire,
(Who at their meeting what they pleaſe do touch)
They further then their bounds extend their care:
"The idle who do nothing, muſt thinke much.
Loe, Rome (though waſted all with raging warres)
Whil'ſt private grudge pretended publike good,
Equality (ſtill rude) engendring jarres,
Did prove too prodigall of Roman blood.
Though yet now at the laſt attaining reſt,
Whil'ſt all (obeying one) may baniſh teares:
It (if conſtrain'd) even ſcorns (as bad) the beſt,
This word neceſſity ſo wounds the eares.
The inſolent with vile ſeditious words,
(Who trembled whil'ſt they heard the Trumpets ſound)
Stirre now their tongues, as we did then our ſwords,
And what Mars ſpar'd, make Mercury confound.
"The people thus in time of peace agree
"To curbe the great men ſtill, even in that forme,
"As in calme dayes they do disbranch the Tree,
"Which ſhrowded them of late againſt a ſtorme.
But now I look'd (brave deeds appeaſing ſpight)
That burſted Envy ſhould for anguiſh dye,
Darke ſhadows (as aſham'd) do vaniſh quite,
When at his height bright Phoebus cleares the skie.
And though their hatred deeply they diſguiſe,
Yet can they not ſo hide enflam'd deſires,
But that their ſpight reſts ſparkling through their eyes,
And boaſts to burſt out ſtraight in open fires.
Since firſt (great Caeſar) I diſcern'd thy worth,
On all thy actions I did ſtill attend;
And what ſome whiſper muſt ſpeake freely forth:
"Franke admonitions do become a friend.
The men who do ſuſpect that you aſpire
Of government the preſent forme to change,
All in their ſoules your ruine do conſpire,
And their affections farre from you eſtrange.
Since chaſt Lucretia (by proud Tarquin ſtain'd)
Waſh'd with her bloud the violated bed,
Whil'ſt by his pow'r Rome baſely was conſtrain'd,
All to obey which his curſt braine had bred.
This government which ſome tyrannicke call,
Doth ſound ſo odious in the peoples eares,
That they as Tyrants vile, deteſt them all,
Whoſe greatneſſe gives them any cauſe of feares▪
I not affect the title of a King
For love of glory, or deſire of gaine,
Nor for reſpect of any private thing,
But that the State may by my travels gaine,
You know Sibylla's books which never faile;
In many mindes have an opinion bred,
That o're the Parthians Rome cannot prevaile,
Till by a Prince her valorous Bands be led:
"For, as confuſion is the fruit (we finde)
"Of thoſe affaires which divers thoughts diſpoſe,
"So Soveraignty match'd with a gallant minde,
"Breeds reverence in ones owne, feare to his foes.
And O! it grieves me, that theſe ſteps of ours
Have trod ſo oft on many a millions necks,
Whil'ſt yet the Parthian vilipends our pow'rs,
And all our victories (not vanquiſh'd) checks;
Ah! ſhould a Generall of the Roman race
Be by Barbarians kill'd? and not reveng'd?
And ſhould his Enſignes, ſignes of our diſgrace,
Reſt in the ranke of conquer'd relicts rang'd?
No, no, (wretch'd Craſſus) now thy ſelfe content,
Ile pacifie thy Ghoſt with Parthians ſpoyles,
My boyling fancies have beene alwayes bent
To match the matchleſſe, daunt th'undaunted ſoiles.
With victories quite cloi'd, will you not then
Your ſafety once, more then new warres reſpect?
No, though I have ſurmounted other men,
My fancies yet do greater things affect:
In emulation of my ſelfe at laſt,
I even with envy look on my owne deeds;
And (bent to make the new ſurpaſſe things paſt)
Now to my minde ſtale praiſe no pleaſure breeds.
The world hath ſeene thee (great man) for Romes good,
In danger oft of many a dangerous ſhelfe,
Whil'ſt for her glory thou engag'd thy bloud,
Of others carefull, careleſſe of thy ſelfe.
Though whil'ſt in th'Aprill of my blooming age,
I from the vulgar rate redeem'd my name,
Some with my deeds did burden youths hot rage,
And an ambitious appetite of Fame,
Yet ſince the coldneſſe of declining yeares,
Boaſts to congeale the bloud which boil'd of late,
Whil'ſt loe, my life the Sunne of glory cleares,
Who now of all the world am knowne moſt great;
I cannot covet that thing which I have,
I have all honour that can be requir'd:
And now (as that which wants) would onely crave
To taſte the pleaſures of a life retyr'd:
But (ſave to ſerve the State) for nought I ſtrive,
For, O! (neglecting th'ecchoes of renowne)
I could content my ſelfe unknowne to live
A private man, with a Plebeian gowne:
Since (Anthonie) thus for the ſtate I care,
And all delights which Nature loves diſdaine,
Go, and in time the peoples mindes prepare,
That, as the reſt, I may the title gaine;
Yet indirectly at the firſt aſſay
To what their doubtfull mindes do moſt incline,
But as without my knowledge, that they may
All marke your minde, and yet not thinke of mine.
DId I ſurvive th'impetuous Scilla's rage,
And in a torrent of deſtruction ſtood,
Whil'ſt Tyrants did make Rome a tragicke ſtage
Through a voluptuous appetite of bloud?
Scap'd I confuſion in a time ſo bad,
Of liberty and honour once to taſte,
That bondage now might make my ſoule more ſad
By the remembrance of my fortunes paſt?
What though I once (when firſt by Fame made knowne)
From Catilines ſtrange treaſon did preſerve
This Towne (when free from foes) thrall'd by her owne,
Since now the world from equity doth ſwerve?
A ſparke of that conſpiracy I ſpie
As yet not quench'd to have our ſtate imbroil'd,
Which Rome to burne makes many flames to flie:
Thus one was ſpar'd, that we might all be ſpoil'd.
O worthy Cato, in whoſe matchleſſe minde
Three (rarely match'd) things Nature did reveale,
Wit, Honeſty, and Courage, which deſign'd
A Citizen for Plato's common-weale:
Whil'ſt courteous Pompey did things as a friend,
Thou as a wiſe-man ſpoke, and ſtill fore-told
To what all Caeſars deeds would turne in th'end,
If that his pride were not in time controld.
And had we him (as wiſely thou advis'd)
Given to the Germans whom he had injur'd,
We had not now beene thus like ſlaves deſpiſd,
To ſee Rome's glory, and our owne obſcur'd:
But yet I may (disbending former cares)
A ſpace comport with that proud Tyrants pow'r;
Age gives aſſurance by my hoarey haires,
Ere he Romes freedome, death will me devour.
But all whoſe youth and ſprite might have attain'd
Thoſe dignities which Caeſar hath undone:
O! ye have loſt as much as he hath gain'd,
Whoſe riſing hopes muſt be retrench'd ſo ſoone.
Though if novations at the firſt ſeeme ſtrange,
Yet oft experience approbation brings,
And if with upright thoughts we weigh this change,
From thence the ſafety of our City ſprings;
As doth a ſhip, when toſſ'd by ſeverall windes,
More danger runne whil'ſt Pylots do conteſt,
So was our City vex'd by differing mindes,
Who did interpret laws as pleas'd them beſt;
Whil'ſt for one ſickneſſe divers drugges are us'd,
Whoſe pow'rs (repugnant) in digeſtion jarre,
Th'impatient patients periſh, when abus'd,
So did we long whil'ſt croſſ'd by civill warre;
But now great Caeſar from tempeſtuous windes,
Romes ſcattered ruines recollects of late:
A Pilot meet to calme tumultuous mindes▪
A fit Phyſitian for an aguiſh State.
The State from ſtormes ſecure by drowning proves,
Now whil'ſt deſpaire doth doubtfull feares appeaſe;
He (with the life) the ſickneſſe quite removes:
Thus is the Phyſick worſe then the Diſeaſe.
This Common-weale (as all the world did ſpie)
Was by proud ſpirits in civill warres involv'd,
Yet like black Clouds which would obſcure the skie,
Theſe tumid humours ſuddenly diſſolv'd;
And no diſgrace unto the ſtate redounds,
But to th'Ambitious men that it abus'd,
Who (had their pow'r like Caeſars wanted bounds)
Would (whil'ſt they rul'd) have greater rigour us'd.
All parts (we ſee) bred people of all kindes,
And as advanc'd ſome bad men did abide,
In pow'r their equals, and of better mindes,
Some alwayes vertuous were to curbe their pride,
But ſince that ſacred liberty was loſt,
The publike pow'r to private ends one turnes:
And (as his lawleſſe wayes did alwayes boaſt)
The Common-weale by violence o're-turnes.
Though what you burden Caeſar with were true,
Neceſſity hath purg'd his part from crime,
Who was (foes force to ſhunne) forc'd to purſue,
And urg'd by danger to attempt in time.
To th'enemies envy more oblig'd he reſts,
Then to his wit which no ſuch courſes ſcan'd:
For when quite barr'd from uſing of requeſts,
Th'occaſion then invited to command.
His thoughts when calme, to ſtorm fond foes did tempt:
"True worth diſdaines to ſuffer open wrong:
"A gallant courage kindled by contempt
"Burns with revenge, whil'ſt fury makes one ſtrong.
O Decius, now a wrong account you caſt,
The purpoſe, not th'event, declares the minde:
Tread backe the ſteps of all his actions paſt,
And what he compaſſ'd had beene long deſign'd.
As by ſome ſprite inſpir'd, proud Scilla ſaid,
That there in Caeſar many Marians were,
And Rome in tie was warn'd to be afraid
Of that evill-girded youth, with ſmooth-comb'd haire;
Then when (as ſtill to quietneſſe a foe)
The memory of Marius he renew'd,
By re-erecting Tyrants ſtatues ſo,
His thoughts all bent to tyranny were view'd.
That people-pleaſer might have beene perceiv'd,
By courteous complements below his rank,
Who (laviſhing forth gifts) the world deceiv'd,
And to gaine more then his, of his prov'd franke.
Though nought at all indulgent to his wife,
By proſtrated pudicity diſgrac'd;
Yet did he ſave th'adultrous Clodius life,
To ſooth the multitude, whoſe ſteps he trac'd.
"Theſe be the meanes by which Ambition mounts,
"Without moſt humble, when within moſt high,
"As if it fled from that things which it hunts,
"Still waſting moſt, when it for moſt doth plie.
Then he (ſtill tyranny bent to embrace)
Was thought conjoyn'd with Catiline to be,
And, had wiſe Cato's counſell taken place,
Might with the reſt have ſuffered death by me.
Yet having deeply div'd in ſome mens ſoules,
With factious followers being pined oft,
He got the Conſul-ſhip which nought controuls,
And matching pride with pow'r, did look aloft;
To flatter them who now muſt flatter him,
His pow'r to make unlawfull laws prevail'd,
And thoſe to croſſe who ſcorn'd he ſo ſhould clime,
He furniſh't was with force, where reaſon fail'd:
But yet becauſe he could not be aſſur'd
To rule alone according to his will,
To governe France, he craftily procur'd,
So to be ſtrengthened with an Army ſtill.
As Rome firſt warr'd at home, till being ſtrong,
She thought her power might forraine Realmes o're-co
So Caeſar warr'd againſt ſtrange Nations long,
Till that he thought his Might might conquer Rome.
Then having all that force or fate aſſignes,
Of diſcontentment he did cauſe pretend,
So to diſſemble fore-conceiv'd deſignes:
"One ſoone may finde a fault that would offend:
But when he firſt in a prodigious dreame,
His mother ſeem'd inceſtuouſly to uſe,
It might have ſhown to his eternall ſhame,
How of his birth the bounds he did abuſe.
And yet I thinke (avoyding threatned harmes)
He by conſtraint imbark'd in civill broyles:
Did he not covenant to quite his Armes,
As not deſirous of his Countries ſpoiles?
Durſt he with thoſe who had his charge confin'd,
Stand to capitulate, as if their mare,
Where (as his Soveraigne) to obey their minde,
It was his duty, and their due of late,
What? what? durſt he whom (bound to keep the law)
The people in authority did put
The ſword which they had given, againſt them draw;
When it was ſharpned ſt their throat to cut?
That had not come which all o anguiſh breeds,
If he unforc'd when as his charge expir'd;
Till that the Senate cenſur'd had his deeds,
Had from his Province peaceably retir'd.
No, he hath but betray'd his native Towne,
Thoſe bands, by which ſhe did him firſt preferre,
T'enlarge her borders, and his owne renowne
Thoſe hath he us'd to tyrannize o're her.
My paſſions (ah! tranſported as you ſee
With an exceſſive love to my deare ſoile)
Of my hearts ſtore have made my tongue too free,
By flaming forth what in my breſt doth boile.
That Caeſars part might juſtly be excus'd,
Loe, with the cauſe alledg'd, his courſe accords,
Of which that mildeneſſe which he ſince hath us'd,
A teſtimony to the world affords.
Though forc'd to fight, he alwaies had great care
To ſave our Citizens as each man knowes,
And will'd his Captaines Romans ſtill to ſpare;
Barbarians bodies objects were for blowes,
Of th'adverſaries after bloudy ſtrife,
When oft he might have made ſome Captives ſmart,
Not onely was he liberall of their life,
But pardon'd them, even to take Pompeys part;
At that infortunate Pharſalian field,
When he ſecurely might have us'd the ſword,
He both did ſpare all th'enemies that would yeeld,
And them to rents and dignities reſtor'd:
Then when th'Egyptians (ſo to get reliefe)
Brought to his ſight pale Pompey's bloud-leſſe head,
He teſtifi'd with teares hs inward griefe,
And grac'd his Statues after he was dead.
Thoſe his proceedings plainely may approve,
That he againſt his will did make this warre;
And to his Country beares a tender love,
Who could comport to reyne his rage ſo farre.
Thoſe favours fain'd, by him beſtow'd, or due,
(As is ones cuſtome whoſe high heart aſpires,)
Were ſpent on many that who them did view
Might love his courſe, ſo kindling their deſires:
But where he thus pleas'd ſome, he ſpoil'd whole hoſts,
And the Barbarians all to Rome not wrought
Such harme as he, who, of his goodneſſe boaſts,
Yet her beſt men hath to confuſion brought;
That great man, whom earſt fortune ne're did fayle,
Who ſtill prevail'd, though warring without right,
Now in a good cauſe, for the common-weale
With Caeſar did infortunately fight.
Whilſt fled from Lesbos with his wretched wife,
Three baſe-borne Groomes (can fortune change ſo ſoone?)
Stood to conſult upon great Pompeys life,
And did what thouſands durſt not once have done;
Then he whoſe knees had oft been kiſs'd by Kings,
(Moſt highly happy, had he dy'd in time)
By one of his owne ſlaves, with abject things
His funerals had perform'd; what monſtrous crime
Romes greateſt Captaine to entombe alone?
The Roman who arriv'd with reaſon ſaid:
The fatall glory was too great for one,
And to have part of that laſt honour ſtaid;
The teares beſtow'd by Caeſar on his head,
Forth from a guilty minde, remorſe had throwne:
Or elſe he wept to ſee his enemie dead
By any others hands then by his owne.
That conſtant Cato, who even death did ſcorne,
And for a coward once had Caeſar brav'd,
(Who liv'd as if to grace all mortals borne)
Would rather periſh then by him be ſav'd.
He juſtly whilſt more juſt, himſelfe more ſtrong
Then Caeſar thought, who for no juſtice car'd:
And ſince diſcovering what he cloak'd ſo long,
Said, that the other, and not he was ſnar'd.
Thus Caeſar conquer'd all but Cato's minde,
Who to a tyrant would not owe his breath:
But in ſuch ſort his famous courſe confin'd,
Then Caeſars life, more glorious was his death:
Thoſe great men thus brought to diſaſtrous ends,
The author of their death make me deſpiſe,
Who to uſurpe all pow'r while as he tends,
By treading good men downe, doth ſtrive to riſe.
Now made moſt great by leſſening all the great,
He proudly doth triumph in Rome, o're Rome:
And we muſt ſeeme to like the preſent ſtate,
Whoſe doubtfull breath depends upon his doome.
Yet had I not enlarg'd my griefes ſo long,
To you whom Caeſar doth pretend to love;
Save that (I know) touch'd with the common wrong:
"A juſt diſdaine all generous mindes muſt move.
Had Caeſar willingly reſign'd his Armes,
And rendred Rome her liberty at laſt,
When as from fores he fear'd no further harmes,
But had repair'd his juſt diſpleaſures paſt,
More then for all that could be done for me,
He ſhould have had and Altar in my beſt,
As worthy (for his vertuous deeds) to be
Fear'd by the bad, and honour'd by the beſt:
But ſince (though conqu'ring all the world by might)
He (to himſelfe a ſlave) would make Rome thrall,
His benefits are loathſome in my ſight,
And I am griev'd that he deſerves to fall;
My fancies move not in ſo low a ſphere,
But I diſdaine that one Romes Crowne requires;
Yet it is beſt that with the time we beare,
And with our pow'r proportion our deſires.
Though firſt diſſembling, ſo your minde to try,
I told what fame to Caeſars praiſe relates;
Yet was I pleas'd, that moe were griev'd then I:
"All miſcontented men are glad of Mates.
Since tyranny all liberty exiles,
We muſt our ſleves (no more our ſelves) diſguiſe;
Then, learne to maske a mourning minde with ſmiles,
And ſeeme to like that which we moſt deſpiſe.
Yet all our deeds not Caeſars humour pleaſe,
Who (ſince miſtruſting once) eſteemes us ſtill,
When dumb diſdainefull, flatterers when we praiſe,
If plaine, preſumptuous, and in all things ill:
Yea, we, whoſe freedome Caeſar now reſtraines,
As his attenders all his ſteps muſt trace;
And know, yet not acknowledge his diſdaines,
But ſtill pretend an intereſt in his grace:
Though all my thoughts deteſt him as a foe,
To honour him, a thouſand meanes I move,
Yet but to ſave my ſelfe, and plague him ſo:
"No hate more harmes then it that lookes like love.
His pride is by prepoſt'rous ſtate growne ſuch,
That by the better ſort, he is abhorr'd;
The gods are jealous, and men envy much
To ſee a mortall man ſo much ador'd.
Well, Cicero let all meanes be entertain'd,
That may embarke us in his boſomes deepes,
Till either willingly, or then conſtrain'd,
He juſtly quite what he unjuſtly keepes.
"THis life of ours is like a Roſe,
"Which whilſt rare beauties it array,
"Doth then enjoy the leaſt repoſe;
"When Virgin-like make bluſh (we ſee)
"Of every hand it is the prey,
"And by each winde is blowne away;
"Yea, though from violence ſcap'd free,
"(Thus time triumphs, and leades all thrals)
"Yet doth it languiſh and decay:
"O! whilſt the courage hotteſt boiles,
"And that our life ſeemes beſt to be,
"It is with dangers compaſt ſtill;
"Whilſt it each little change appalles,
"The body, force, without oft foiles,
"It th' owne diſtemp'rature oft ſpoiles,
"And even, though none it chance to kill,
"As nature failes, the body falles,
"Of which ſave death, nought bounds the ioyles;
"What is this moving Towr in whith we truſt?
"A little winde clos'd in a cloud of duſt.
And yet ſome ſprites though being pent
In this fraile priſons narrow bounds,
(Whilſt what might ſerve, doth not content,)
Doe alwaies bend their thoughts too high,
And ayme at all the peopled grounds;
Then whilſt their breſts Ambition wounds,
They feed as fearing ſtraight to dye,
Yet build as if they ſtill might live,
Whilſt famiſh'd for fames empty ſounds:
Of ſuch no end the travell ends,
But a beginning gives, whereby
They may be vex'd worſe then before;
For, whilſt they ſtill new hopes contrive,
"The hoped good more anguiſh ſends,
"Then the poſſeſs'd contentment lends;
As beaſts not taſte, but doe devoure,
They ſwallow much, and for more ſtrive,
Whilſt ſtill their hope ſome change attends:
"And how can ſuch but ſtill themſelves annoy,
"Who can acquire, but know not how t'enjoy?
Since as a ſhip amidſt the deepes,
Or as an Eagle through the ayre,
Of which no way th' impreſsion keepes,
Moſt ſwift when ſeeming leaſt to move:
This breath of which we take ſuch care,
Doth toſſe the body every where,
That it may hence with haſte remove:
"Life ſlips and ſleepes alwayes away,
"Then hence, and as it came, goes bare,
Whoſe ſteppes behinde no trace doe leave;
Why ſhould heaven-baniſh'd ſoules thus love
The cauſe, and bounds of their exile,
As reſtleſſe ſtrangers where they ſtray?
And with ſuch paine why ſhould they reave
That which they have no right to have,
Which with them in a little while,
As ſummers beauties muſt decay,
And can give nought except the grave?
"Though all things doe to harme him what they can,
"No greater enemie then himſelfe to man;
Whilſt oft environ'd with his foes,
Which threatned death on every ſide,
Great Caeſar parted from repoſe,
(As Atlas holding up the Starres,)
Did of a world the weight abide;
But ſince a prey to fooliſh pride,
More then by all the former warres,
He now by it doth harm'd remaine,
And of his fortune doth diffide.
Made rich by many Nations wreake,
He (breaking through the liquid barres)
In Neptunes armes his Minion forc'd;
Yet ſtill purſu'd new hopes in vaine:
"Would the ambitious looling backe
"Of their inferiours knowledge take,
"They from huge cares might be divorc'd,
"Whilſt viewing few, more pow'r attaine,
"And many more then they to lacke:
"The onely plague from men that reſt doth reave,
"Is that they weigh their wants, not what they have.
Since thus the great themſelves involve
In ſuch a labyrinth of cares,
Whence none to ſcape can well reſolve,
But by degrees are forward led,
Through waves of hopes, rockes of deſpaires
Let us avoyd ambitions ſnares,
And farre from ſtormes by envy bred,
Still ſeeke (though low) a quiet reſt,
With mindes where no proud thought repaires,
That in vaine ſhadowes doth delight;
Thus may our fancies ſtill be fed
With that which Nature freely, gives;
Let us iniquity deteſt,
And hold but what we owe of right;
Th' eyes treaſure is th' all-circling light,
Not that vaine pompe for which pride ſtrives,
Whoſe glory (but a poyſnous peſt)
To plague the ſoule, delights the ſight:
"Eaſe comes with eaſe, where all by paine buy paine,
"Reſt we in peace, by warre let others raigne.
NOw (Brutus) now we need no more to doubt,
Nor with blinde hopes our judgement to ſuſpend,
That flatt'rers credit (loe) is quite worne out;
We muſt in time attempt, and not attend:
That race of victors which did Realmes appall,
Ah (vanquiſh'd by their victories at laſt)
Are by their too much liberty made thrall,
Since all their ſtrength but down themſelves doth caſt;
And we who by our birth aym'd at great things,
Of the worlds miſtreſſe mighty minions once,
Who might have labour'd to give lawes to Kings,
Lawes from a King, muſt looke for now with grones:
For, ſuch of Caeſar is the monſtrous pride,
That though he domineers even at this houre,
And to his Clients kingdomes doth divide
With an unlimited tyrannicke pow'r;
Yet of Dictator he diſdaines the name,
And ſeekes a tyrants title with the place,
Not for his honour, no, but for our ſhame,
As onely bent bragge of our diſgrace.
I thought to ſee that man (as others are)
Walke re-apparrell'd with a private gowne,
As one who had unwillingly made warre,
To ſtand himſelfe, not to caſt others downe:
So Silla (though more inhumane then he)
Whilſt having all to what his heart aſpir'd,
The Soveraignty reſign'd, and ſet Rome free,
When expectations date was quite expir'd.
By Caeſars worth we muſt thinke that he too
Will render freedome to this captiv'd ſtate,
When firſt the world hath view'd what he might doe,
His thoughts are generous, as his minde is great.
Though inſolencies oft from courage flow,
His dying fury ſparkles but a ſpace:
"High thoughts which Mars inſpires, nought can bring low,
"Till one have us'd the purity of peace.
"Thoſe who by violence to all things tend,
"Scr can themſelves to quietneſſe conforme;
"Their ſtately carriage, and franke words, offend,
"Whil'ſt peace cannot comport with warres rude forme,
I hope that Caeſar ſetling civill broyles,
When worne by cuſtome from inteſtine rage,
Will ſtrive to mitigate his Countries toyles,
And all thoſe flames which burn'd his breſt, aſſwage.
Thus, of his courſe you by your owne conceiv'd,
As if like thoughts of both did bound the will:
"Ah, honeſt mindes are with leaſt paine deceiv'd,
"Thoſe who themſelves are good, dreame not of ill.
"To ſound of ſome the ſtill unſound device,
"Their inclination muſt your judgement ſway:
"The ſquare of vertue cannot meaſure vice,
"Nor yet a line when ſtraight, a crooked way.
So Caeſar riſing may uſurpe the State,
He cares not by what force, nor by what ſleight:
"O! one may ſoone deceive men, and grow great,
"Who leaves religion, honeſty and right.
When as the Senators (no more their owne)
Came to that Tyrant whom ambition blindes,
And by high honours ſhew'd how they had ſhown
To gratifie his greatneſſe, gratefull mindes;
He (in a Chayre imperiouſly plac'd,)
Not daign'd to riſe, nor bow in any ſort,
As both of them had but their due embrac'd,
When he a haughty, they a humble port.
But if he thus, ere we be throughly thrall'd,
Dare ſo diſdainefully ſuch great men uſe,
When in a regall Throne by us enſtall'd,
Then will he breake that which he now doth bruiſe.
Was he not firſt who ever yet began
To violate the ſacred Tribunes place,
And puniſh'd them for puniſhing a man
Who had tranſgreſs'd the lawes in time of peace?
The lawes which doe of death all guilty hold,
Whoſe actions ſeeme to tyranny inclin'd,
So earneſt were our Anceſtors of old,
To quench a tyrants light before it ſhin'd:
And ſhall our Nephewes (heires of bondage) blame
Vs daſtard parents who their hopes deceiv'd,
Who ſaw, who ſuff'red, who ſurviv'd ſuch ſhame,
Not leaving dead, what we when borne receiv'd?
By Caeſars friends, to an aſſembly brought,
The Senators intend to call him King.
I'le not be there.
But what if we be ſought.
To ayde (as Pretors) ſuch a publike thing?
I will reſiſt that violent decree;
None of Romes Crowne ſhall long ſecurely boaſt:
For, ere that I live thrall'd, I'le firſt dye free,
"What can be kept when liberty is loſt?
O! with what joy I ſwallow up thoſe words,
Words worthy of thy worth, and of thy name:
But (Brutus) doe not feare, this cauſe affords
In danger many, but few mates in fame;
When Anthony proud Caeſars image crown'd,
By ſilent ſorrow all the people told
In what a depth of woes their thoughts were drown'd,
That bondage-bragging Comet to behold.
What doe thoſe ſcroules throwne in thy chaire import:
Which, what thou art, to brave thy courage, brings?
Be thoſe the fancies of the vulgar ſort?
No, none but noble mindes dreame of great things;
Of other Pretors people looke for ſhowes,
And diſtributions whoſe remembrance dyes,
Whilſt bloudy Fencers fall with mutuall blowes,
And Africkes monſters doe amaze their eyes;
But from thy hands they liberty attend,
(By birth-right due) the glory of thy race,
And bent for thee, their bloud will frankely ſpend,
So thou ſucceed in thy great Parents place.
He (Rome redeeming) Tarquin did o'rethrow,
Though from his birth obey'd, and without ſtrife;
A riſing tyrant then bring boldly low,
To what extinguiſh'd was, who would give life.
I weigh thy words with an afflicted heart,
Which for compaſſion of my Country bleeds:
And would to God that I might onely ſmart,
So that all others ſcap'd what miſchiefe breeds;
Then, never man himſelfe from death did free,
With a more quiet and contented minde,
Then I would periſh, if I both could be
To Caeſar thankefull, to my Country kinde:
But though that great mans grace to me enlarg'd,
May chalenge right in my affections ſtore,
Yet muſt the greateſt debt be firſt diſcharg'd,
I owe him much, but to my Country more.
This is my breſt hath great diſſenſion bred:
I Caeſar love, but yet Romes enemy hate,
And as Iove lives, I could be mov'd to ſhed
My bloud for Caeſar, Caeſars for the State.
I for my fathers death loath'd Pompey long,
Whilſt juſt diſdaine did boyle within my breſt:
Yet when he warr'd to venge the common wrong,
I joyn'd with him, becauſe his cauſe was beſt.
A minde to raigne if Caeſar now reveale,
I will in time precipitate his end:
Thus (never arm'd but for the Common-weale)
I help'd a foe, and now muſt hurt a friend.
Leſt of his favour thou the poyſon prove,
From ſwallowing of ſuch baites in time now ſpare,
"No tyrant (truſt me) can intirely love,
"Nor none who for himſelfe doth onely care:
He by this courſe doth cunningly intend
(Thy vertue ſlack'd) to undermine thy minde:
Thy well-knowne courage purpos'd to disbend,
Thus (though with ſilken bonds) he would thee binde;
This of each tyrant is the common tread,
To wreake all thoſe in whom moſt worth he findes;
Or (whilſt that terrours toſſe his jealous head)
By ſubtilty to ſnare the greateſt mindes:
As, for the Pretor-ſhip when we did ſtrive,
Then both were held in hope, that ſo deceiv'd,
Each th'others harmes might ſtudy to contrive
Through emulation and diſdaine conceiv'd.
Thus ſubtile Caeſar by ſuch ſleights hath toild
To ſow diſſenſion, that we both might pauſe
Of private wrongs, and (by ſuch meanes imbroil'd)
Still courting him, neglect the common cauſe.
But nought muſt make us th' one t'another ſtrange,
Who ſhould in time the tyrants courſe reſtraine:
Let other men lament, we muſt revenge,
I ſcorne to beare a ſword, and to complaine.
Though Caeſar (now) I muſt conſpire thy fall,
My heart to thee yet never harbour'd hate;
But (pardon me) who ever make it thrall,
From bondage Brutus muſt redeeme the ſtate.
Of this my courſe what ever others judge,
Here, I proteſt it is for good deſign'd;
My thoughts are guilty of no private grudge,
For, reaſon and not fury moves my minde;
Nor doth ambition now enflame my breſt,
With a prodigious appetite to raigne,
That when I have made Caeſar Pluto's gueſt,
I in his roome a Monarch may remaine:
No, if that glory did my fancies charme,
To which (blind-folded) tyrants doe aſpire,
I needed not to doe, nor ſuffer harme,
But with leſſe paine might compaſſe my deſire:
For, if I would but temporize a ſpace,
Till time or death diminiſh Caeſars might,
He thinkes that I deſerve to have his place,
And I could make my day ſucceed his night;
Yet doe I not for glory ſeeke ſo much
As to attaine it by my Countries ſhame:
But, O! I would (my zeale to it is ſuch)
That it may ſcape, incurre a kinde of blame.
Yea, ſo that I may free with honour'd wounds
My ſoile that's dearer then my ſoule to me,
I could my ſelfe live baniſh'd from that bounds,
Which at ſo deare a rate I would ſet free.
What man doth breath of Mars his martiall race,
But will with Brutus ſacrifize his bloud,
And (charg'd with Armes) ere tyranny take place,
Dare venture all things for his Countries good,
Can any judgement be deceiv'd ſo farre,
But it already clearely may behold,
How that this change Romes greatneſſe ſoon will marre,
And raze the Trophees which ſhe rear'd of old.
Of old in Rome, all thoſe who once had worne
The peace-importing gowne, or war-like ſhield,
(Of dignities as capable all borne,)
Durſt ayme at ought that liberty could yeeld;
Thoſe in affaires to deale, who would ſet forth;
Were not diſcourag'd by their birth, though baſe;
And poverty could not hold backe true worth,
From having honour both by warre and peace:
Then emulation violently driv'd
All gallant mindes to tempt great actions ſtill;
In vertues love, who friendly rivals liv'd,
Whilſt in their boſomes Glory balme did ſtill:
Fabricius firſt was from the Plow advanc'd,
The Rudder of the Common-weale to hold,
Yet by no meanes his private wealth enhanc'd,
As rich in vertue ſtill, as poore in gold.
Rude Marius too, to match red Mars in fame,
Forth from the vulgar droſſe his race remov'd,
And loe, of Cicero the ridiculous name,
As famous as the Fabians now hath prov'd.
Each abject minde diſdain'd to be obſcure,
When ſtill preferment follow'd lofty cares,
And that one might by dangers paſt, procure
Fame for himſelfe, and honour to his heires:
But ſince that ſtate by Caeſar is o're-turn'd,
Whilſt all our lives upon ones lippes depend,
Of breſts which once with love of glory burn'd,
The ſoaring thoughts this wholly doth disbend;
Advancement now doth not attend deſert,
But flowes from fancies of a flatt'red minde;
Which to baſe hirelings, honour doth impart,
Whilſt envy'd worth no ſafe retreat can finde.
"All proud uſurpers moſt addicted prove,
"To them whom without cauſe they raiſe too high,
"As thinking thoſe who ſtand but by their love,
"To entertaine the ſame, all meanes muſt try.
"Where they, whoſe vertue reapes a due reward,
"Not building onely on the givers grace,
"Doe by deſerts not gaine ſo great regard,
"VVhilſt they maintaine, as they obtaine their place.
"And if a worthy man to worke great things,
"VVing'd with a tyrants favour, raiſe his flight,
"The higheſt courſe to him moſt harme ſtill brings,
"VVho till he fall, cannot have leave to light.
"Thoſe who by force would have th'affection mov'd,
"When willingly men hold ſuch gallants deare,
"Doe rage that any ſhould be freely lov'd,
"Whoſe vertue makes their vice more vile appeare.
The man who now to be preferr'd aſpires,
Muſt by baſe flattery in a ſervile forme,
So ſoothing Caeſar, ſeale all his deſires,
And in ſome ſhadow lurke to ſcape a ſtorme.
A number now of that proud Rebels foes,
Who grieve to ſee the ground whence growes their griefe,
Would in obſcurity entombe their woes,
So waiting, and not working for reliefe.
But we whoſe lofty mindes diſdaine to lowre,
Like them who ſeeke but their owne ſafety thus;
When ſhall we uſe high indignations pow'r,
Which (as brave Romans) worthy is of us?
Since no indignity you will endure,
I ſee our mindes doe ſympathize in this;
Should we by ſuffring, ſeek to live ſecure,
Whoſe action muſt amend what is amiſſe?
No, no ſuch abject thought muſt ſtaine our breſt,
Whoſe active thoughts reach further than diſcourſe,
Whilſt but like beaſts, affecting food and reſt,
Where men by reaſon ſhould direct their courſe;
Like thoſe of other parts, not rais'd by ſtrife,
If Caeſar had been born, or chus'd our Prince,
Then thoſe who durſt attempt to take his life,
The world of treaſon juſtly might convince.
Let ſtill the States which flouriſh for the time,
By ſubjects be inviolable thought,
And thoſe (no doubt) commit a monſtrous crime,
Who lawfull Soveraignty prophane in ought:
And we muſt thinke (though now thus brought to bow)
The Senate King; a ſubject Caeſar is;
The Soveraignty whom violating now,
The world muſt damne, as having done amiſſe.
We will (deare Caſsius) for our Countries ſake,
(What ever follow) give, or ſuffer death,
And let us now adviſe what courſe to take,
Whilſt nought but th'ayre can beare away our breath.
I thinke this matter needs not many words,
Since but one deed can bound the common ſhame;
In Caeſars body we muſt ſheath our ſwords,
And by his death our liberty reclaime;
But ſince his fortune did confound them all,
Who in the fields to match him did begin;
VVhilſt he by thouſands made their bands to fall,
VVith hoary legions alwayes us'd to winne:
As Pompeys, Scipio's, and Petreius ghoſts,
In lightleſſe ſhades can by experience tell,
Who after fatall proofes of numrous hoaſts,
All famous (though infortunately, fell:)
And ſince (provided for the Parthian warre)
His Armie arm'd attends on his decree,
Where we (ſequeſtred from ſuch forces farre)
Would (if ſuſpected) ſoone prevented be:
With ſome few friends whom all things to aſſay,
A love to us, or to their Country bindes,
We to his wreake muſt walke another way,
Whilſt, ere our tongues, our hands doe tell our mindes:
Now when moſt high, and therefore hated moſt,
The gathered Senate ſeeks to make him King,
We muſt goe give the blow before we boaſt,
And him to death, Rome out of bondage bring.
In all this courſe I onely one thing blame,
That we ſhould ſteale, what we may juſtly take,
By cloathing honour with a cloake of ſhame,
Which may our cauſe (though good) more odious make.
O! I could wiſh with honourable wounds
To match Romes enemy in the battels duſt:
No ſweeter Muſicke then the Trumpets ſounds,
When right and valour keepe a conſort juſt:
Then, free if quicke, elſe dead, no harme more fear'd,
I alwayes ſo contentment might attaine;
What tombe to men more glorious can be rear'd,
Then mountaines made of foes whom they have ſlaine?
But how are my tranſported thoughts growne ſuch,
That they diſdaine a meaſure to admit?
Whilſt (bent not what to doe, but to doe much)
On Glories Throne, Ambition ſtrives to ſit.
No, to the State me from my ſelfe I give,
Free from particulars, as who expoſe
Fame, life, and all for it, and whilſt I live,
So Rome may gaine, I care not what I loſe.
I'le never reſt till he for ever reſt,
Who gives my Country ſuch a cauſe of griefe:
And that to doe no forme I will deteſt,
Nor for my fame endanger Romes reliefe:
But (worthy Caſsius) ere we further doe,
Let our friends mindes firſt well be underſtood,
Of which I hope to have aſſiſtance too,
Who will not venture for his Countries good?
Now whilſt my ſoule reſts raviſh'd in a trance,
I thinke I ſee great Rome her courage raiſe,
Then beat the ayre with ſongs, th'earth with a dance,
And crowne thy vertues with deſerved praiſe.
MY deareſt halfe, my comfort, my delight,
Of whom one ſmyle may ſweeten all my ſow'rs:
Thou in my boſome us'd to powre thy ſpright,
And where I was didſt ſpare afflictions pow'rs.
When broils domeſticke did diſturbe thy reſt,
Then ſtill (till finding) faining ſome reliefe;
Thou with calme words diſguiſ'd a ſtormy breſt,
Ioyes frankly ſharing, and engroſſing griefe;
Still tend'ring me with a reſpective care,
What might offend, was by no meanes made knowne:
But (with loves colours all things painted faire)
What might have made me glad, was gladly ſhowne.
How com'ſt thou then thy courage thus to loſe,
That thou canſt look ſo ſad, and in my ſight?
Lend me (deare Love) a portion of thy woes;
"A burden (when divided) doth grow light;
I ſee the Roſes fading in thy face,
The Lilies languiſh, Violets take their place.
Thou haſt (deare Lord) prevented my deſigne,
Which was to aske of thee, what makes me pale;
If Phoebus had no light, could Phoebe ſhine?
No, with the cauſe of force th'effects muſt faile.
The mirrour but gives backe as it receives,
By juſt reſemblance the objected forme,
And what impreſſion the ingraver leaves,
The waxe retains, ſtill to the ſtamp conforme.
I am the mirrour which reflects thy minde,
As forc'd from thoughts, or flowing from thine eyes;
I take the ſtate in which thy ſtate I finde;
Such is my colour as thy count'nance dyes.
Then how can I rejoyce, whil'ſt thou art ſad,
Whoſe breaſt of all thy croſſes is the ſcroule?
I am ſtill as thou art, if griev'd, or glad,
Thy bodies ſhadow, th'eſſence of thy ſoule:
On that great Planet which divides the yeares,
Of fields inferiour as the fruit depends,
And as it vaniſh doth, or pleas'd appeares,
In th'earths cold boſome, life begins, or ends;
Sunne of my ſoule, ſo I ſubſiſt by thee,
Whoſe ſhining vertue leades me as a thrall:
From care-bred clouds if that thy face be free,
I riſe in joyes, but if thou faint, I fall.
With all my courſe this count'nance beſt accords,
Who as you know, yet never from my birth,
Light geſtures us'd, nor did delight in words,
Whoſe pleaſant ſtraines were onely tun'd to mirth.
My melancholy Nature feeds on cares,
Whil'ſt ſmothred ſorrow by a habite ſmokes:
"A thought-full breaſt (when burden'd with affaires)
"Doth make a ſilent mouth, and ſpeaking looks;
As for my paleneſſe, it imports but good:
"The bodies humbling doth exalt the minde,
Where fatneſſe (come from food) but ſerves for food:
In fatteſt bodies, leaneſt ſprits we finde.
Ah! ſince I ſaw th'abhorr'd Theſſalia's bounds,
All drench'd with bloud of Senatours and Kings,
(As if my ſoule yet ſmarted in their wounds)
A ſecret ſorrow often-times me ſtings:
But ſince thy Father (braving paine with blows)
In the moſt hideous forme affronted death,
To him my minde a ſad remembrance owes,
Which ſorrow ſhall exact whil'ſt I have breath;
Yet grieve I that I gave thee cauſe of griefe,
Who thoughtſt ſome new miſhap did me diſmay;
To ſuch old ſores one worſt can give reliefe;
But Time in end may weare my woes away.
Why ſhould'ſt thou ſo from me thy thoughts conceale?
From thine own ſoule between whoſe breaſts thou ſleep'ſt,
To whom (though ſhowne) thou doſt them not reveale,
But in thy ſelfe more inwardly them keep'ſt?
And thou canſt hardly hide thy ſelfe from me,
Who ſoone in thee each alteration ſpie,
I can comment on all that comes from thee:
"True love ſtill looks with a ſuſpitious eye:
Within our boſome reſts not every thought,
Tun'd by a ſympathie of mutuall love?
Thou marr'ſt the Muſicke if thou change in ought,
Which (when diſtemper'd) I do quickly prove.
Soule of my ſoule, unfold what is amiſſe,
Some great diſaſter all my thoughts divine,
Whoſe curiouſneſſe may be excus'd in this,
Since it concerns thy State, and therefore mine.
I wonder that thou doſt thy frailtie ſhow!
"By Nature women have beene curious ſtill,
And yet till now thou never crav'd to know
More then I pleas'd to ſpeak of my free will.
"Nought ſave the wife a man within the walls,
"Nor ought ſave him without ſhe ſhould embrace:
"And it not comely is, but th'one enthralls,
"When any ſexe uſurpes anothers place.
Deare, to their wonted courſe thy cares inure,
I may have matters which import the State,
Whoſe op'ning up might my diſgrace procure,
Whoſe weight for femall thoughts would be too great.
I was not (Brutus) match'd with thee, to be
A partner onely of thy boord, and bed:
Each ſervile whore in thoſe might equall me,
Who but for pleaſure, or for wealth did wed.
No, Portia ſpouſ'd thee minding to remaine
Thy Fortunes partner, whether good or ill:
"By loves ſtrict bonds whil'ſt mutuall duties chaine,
"Two breaſts muſt hold one heart, two ſouls one will;
"Thoſe whom juſt Hymen voluntar'ly bindes,
"Betwixt them ſhould communicate all things,
"But chiefly that which moſt doth move the mindes,
"Whence either pleaſure, or diſpleaſure ſprings.
If thus thou ſeek thy ſorrows to conceale
Through a diſdaine, or a miſtruſt of me,
Then to the world what way can I reveale,
How great a matter I would do for thee?
And though our ſexe too talkative be deem'd,
As thoſe whoſe tongues import our greateſt pow'rs,
For ſecrets ſtill bad Treaſurers eſteem'd,
Of others greedy, prodigall of ours;
"Good education may reforme defects,
And this may leade me to a vertuous life,
(Whil'ſt ſuch rare patterns generous worth reſpects)
I Cato's daughter am, and Brutus wife.
Yet would I not repoſe my truſt in ought,
Still thinking that thy croſſe was great to beare,
Till I my courage to a tryall brought,
Which ſuffering for thy cauſe can nothing feare:
For firſt to try how that I could comport
With ſterne afflictions ſprit-enfeebling blows,
Ere I would ſeek to vex thee in this ſort,
To whom my ſoule a dutious reverence owes.
Loe, here a wound which makes me not to ſmart,
No, I rejoyce that thus my ſtrength is knowne:
Since thy diſtreſſe ſtrikes deeper in my heart,
Thy griefe (lifes joy) makes me neglect mine owne.
Thou muſt (deare love) that which thou ſought'ſt receive,
Thy heart ſo high a ſaile in ſtormes ſtill beares,
That thy great courage doth deſerve to have
Our enterpriſe entruſted to thine eares;
This magnanimitie prevailes ſo farre,
That it my reſolution muſt controule,
And of my boſome doth the depths unbarre,
To lodge thee in the centre of my ſoule.
Thou ſeeſt in what eſtate the State now ſtands,
Of whoſe ſtrong pillars Caeſar ſpoyl'd the beſt,
Whil'ſt by his owne, preventing others hands,
Our famous Father fell amongſt the reſt.
That proud uſurper fondly doth preſume
To re-erect deteſted Tarquins throne,
Thus the worlds Miſtreſſe all-commanding Rome,
Muſt entertaine no Minion now but one.
All thoſe brave mindes who mark where he doth tend,
Swell with diſdaine, their Countries ſcorne to ſee;
And I am one of thoſe who ſoone intend
(His death or mine procur'd) to be made free.
And without me, canſt thou reſolve ſo ſoone,
To try the danger of a doubtfull ſtrife?
As if deſpair'd, and alwayes but undone,
Of me growne weary, weary of thy life.
Yet ſince thou thus thy raſh deſigne haſt ſhowne,
Leave Portia's portion, venter not her part,
Endanger nought but that which is thine owne,
Go where thou lik ſt, I will hold ſtill thy heart.
But leſt by holding of thy beſt part back▪
The other periſh't, aggravate my grones:
Who would be ſo thought guilty of thy wrack,
Take all thy Treaſure to the Seas at once.
Like Aſia's Monarchs wife, who with ſhort haires,
(Sad ſignes of bondage) paſt ſtill where he paſt,
To weare away, or beare away thy cares,
I'le follow thee, and of thy fortune taſte.
Theſe hands which were with mine own bloud imbru'd,
To ſtrike another, may more ſtrength afford,
At leaſt when thou by th'enemies art purſu'd,
I'le ſet my ſelfe betwixt thee and each Sword;
But if too great a priviledge I claime,
Whoſe actions all ſhould be diſpoſ'd by thee,
Ah! pardon (Brutus) and but onely blame
This ſtreame of paſſions that tranſported me.
Thou ask'ſt what thou ſhouldſt give, forgive deare Mate,
This ventrous courſe of mine, which muſt have place,
Though it make Fortune Tyrant of our State,
Whoſe fickle foot-ſteps Vertue grieves to trace.
And wonder not though thus to thee I prove,
Since private duties now all pow'r have loſt;
I weigh not glory, profit, pleaſure, love,
Nor what reſpect may now import me moſt:
So to the land of which I hold my life,
I may performe that worke which I intend,
Let me be call'd unkinde unto my wife:
Yea, worſt of all, ingrate unto my friend.
"As an inſtinct by Nature makes us know,
"There are degrees of duty to be paſt,
"Of which the firſt unto the Gods we owe,
"The next t'our Countrey, to our friends the laſt.
From Rome of old proud Tyrants bent to drive,
Did th'author of my race with ardent zeale,
Make thoſe to dye, whom he had made to live,
And ſpoil'd himſelfe to raiſe the Common-weale▪
To ſettle that which Caeſar now o're-throws,
(Though vertues nurſerie, ſtately whil'ſt it ſtood)
He with the Tyrant inter-changing blows,
On Glories Altar offered Fame his bloud.
And did that man to croſſe the common foe,
Then damne his Sonnes to death? and with dry eyes,
And is his ſpeciall heire degener'd ſo,
In abject bondage that he baſely lyes?
No, his poſterity his name not ſtaines,
But even to tread his ſteps doth faſt draw neare;
Yet, of his ſprit in us ſome ſpark remaines,
Who more then life, our liberty hold deare.
Then proſecute thy courſe, for I proteſt,
Though with ſome griefe, my ſoule the ſame approves;
This reſolution doth become thy breſt,
In honours ſpheare where heavenly Vertue moves:
And do this enterpriſe no more deferre,
What thee contents, to me contentment brings,
I to my life thy ſafety do preferre,
But hold thy honour deare above all things.
It would but let the world my weakneſſe ſee,
If I ſought my delights, not thy deſires,
Though griefe it give, and threaten death to me,
Go follow forth that which thy Fame requires.
Though Nature, ſexe, and education breed,
No power in me, with ſuch a purpoſe even,
I muſt lend help to this intended deed,
If vows and pray'rs may penetrate the heaven:
But difficulties huge my fancie findes,
Nought, ſave the ſucceſſe, can defray my feare:
"Ah! Fortune alwayes frownes on worthy mindes,
"As hating all who truſt in ought ſave her.
Yet I deſpaire not but thou may'ſt prevaile,
And by this courſe to eaſe my preſent grones,
I this advantage have which cannot faile:
Ile be a free-mans wife, or elſe be nones:
For, if all proſper not as we pretend,
And that the Heavens Romes bondage do decree,
Straight with thy liberty my life ſhall end,
Who have no comfort but what comes from t ▪
My Father hath me taught what way to dye,
By which if hindred from encountring death,
Some other meanes, I (though more ſtrange) muſt try:
For, after Brutus none ſhall ſee me breathe.
Thou for my cauſe all others earſt didſt leave,
But now forſak'ſt thy ſelfe to joyne with me,
"Ore generous love no pow'r weake paſſions have,
Againſt thy minde thou doſt with mine agree.
Ile (ſince by thee approv'd) ſecurely go,
And vilipend the dangers of this life:
Heavens make my enterpriſe to proſper ſo,
That I may once prove worthy ſuch a wife:
But ah! of all thy words thoſe grieve me moſt,
Which bragge me with the dating of thy dayes;
What? though I in ſo good a cauſe were loſt,
"None flies the fate which ſtabliſh'd for him ſtayes.
Do not defraud the world of thy rare worth,
But of thy Brutus the remembrance love;
From this faire priſon ſtrive not to breake forth,
Till firſt the fates have forc'd thee to remove.
The heavens (I feare) have our confuſion ſworn,
Since this ill Age can with no good accord,
Thou and my Father (ah!) ſhould have beene borne,
When Vertue was advanc'd, and Vice abhorr'd.
Then, ere the light of Vertue was declin'd,
Your worth had reverenc'd beene, not throwne away,
Where now ye both have but in darkneſſe ſhin'd,
As Starres by night, that had beene Sunnes by day.
My treaſure, ſtrive to pacifie thy breſt,
Leſt ſorrows but ſiniſtrouſly preſage
That which thou would'ſt not wiſh, and hope the beſt,
Though Vertue now muſt act on Fortunes Stage.
THen liberty, of earthly things
What more delights a generous breſt?
Which doth receive,
And can conceive
The matchleſſe treaſure that it brings;
It making men ſecurely reſt,
As all perceive,
Doth none deceive,
Whil'ſt from the ſame true courage ſprings,
But fear'd for nought, doth what ſeemes beſt:
"Then men are men, when they are all their owne,
"Not, but by others badges when made knowne:
Yet ſhould we not miſpending houres,
A freedome ſeeke, as oft it falls,
With an intent
But to content
Theſe vaine delights, and appetites of ours;
For, then but made farre greater thralls,
We might repent
As not ſtill pent
In ſtricter bounds by others pow'rs,
Whil'ſt feare licentious thoughts appalls:
"Of all the Tyrants that the world affords,
"Ones owne affections are the fierceſt Lords:
As Libertines thoſe onely live,
Who (from the bands of vice ſet free)
Vile thoughts cancell,
And would excell
In all that doth true glory give,
From which when as no Tyrants be
Them to repell,
And to compell
Their deeds againſt their thoughts to ſtrive,
They bleſt are in a high degree:
"For, ſuch of fame the ſcrouls can hardly fill,
"Whoſe wit is bounded by anothers will.
Our Anceſtors of old ſuch prov'd,
(Who Rome from Tarquines yoke redeem'd)
They firſt obtain'd,
And then maintain'd
Their liberty ſo dearly lov'd;
They from all things which odious ſeem'd
(Though not conſtrain'd)
Themſelves reſtrain'd,
And willingly all good approv'd,
Bent to be much, yet well eſteem'd;
"And how could ſuch but ayme at ſome great end,
"Whom liberty did leade, Glory attend?
They leading valorous legions forth,
(Though wanting Kings) triumph'd o're Kings,
And ſtill aſpir'd,
By Mars inſpir'd,
To conquer all from South to North;
Then lending fame their Eagles wings,
They all acquir'd
That was requir'd,
To make them rare for rareſt things,
The world made witneſſe of their worth:
Thus thoſe great mindes who domineer'd o're all,
Did make themſelves firſt free, then others thrall,
But we who hold nought but their name,
From that to which they in times gone
Did high aſcend,
Muſt low deſcend,
And bound their glory with our ſhame,
Whil'ſt on an object Tyrants Throne,
We (baſe) attend,
And do intend
Vs for our fortune ſtill to frame,
Not it for us, and all for one:
"As liberty a courage doth impart,
"So bondage doth disbend, elſe breake the heart,
Yet, O! who knows but Rome to grace
Another Brutus may ariſe?
Who may effect
What we affect,
And Tarquines ſteps make Caeſar trace;
Though ſeeming dangers to deſpiſe
He doth ſuſpect
What we expect
Which from his breaſt hath baniſh'd peace,
Though fairely he his feares diſguiſe:
"Of Tyrants even the wrong, revenge affords,
"All feare but theirs, and they feare all mens ſwords.
DEare Coſin, Caſsius did acquaint mine eares
With a deſigne which toſſ'd my minde a ſpace;
"For, when ſtrange news, a ſtrangers breath firſt beares,
"One ſhould not ſtraight to raſh reports give place.
I would not then diſcover what I thought,
Leſt he to trap my tongue, a ſnare had fram'd,
Till firſt with thee I to conferre was brought,
Whom he for Patron of his purpoſe nam'd.
"One ſhould look well to whom his minde he leaves,
"In dangerous times when tales by walls are told,
"Men make themſelves unneceſſar'ly ſlaves,
"Of thoſe to whom their ſecrets they unfold.
As Caſsius told thee, griev'd for Romes diſtreſſe,
Which to our ſhame in bondage doth remaine,
We ſtraight intend what ever we profeſſe,
With Caeſars bloud to waſh away this ſtaine.
Though for this end a few ſufficient are,
To whom their vertue courage doth impart,
Yet were we loth to wrong thy wroth ſo farre,
As of ſuch glory to give thee no part.
Since both this cauſe, yea, and thy name thee binde,
In this adventrous band to be compris'd,
There needs no Rhetoricke to raiſe thy minde,
To do the thing which thou ſhouldſt have devis'd.
I thought no creature ſhould my purpoſe know,
But he whoſe intreſt promis'd mutuall cares:
"Of thoſe to whom one would his ſecret ſhow,
No greater pledge of truſt then to know theirs;
As when two meet whil'ſt mask'd (though moſt deare friends)
With them (as ſtrangers) no reſpect takes place,
But ſtraight when friend-ſhip one of them pretends,
The other likewiſe doth un-cloud the face.
So as thou firſt, I'le now at laſt be bold:
My breſt with the ſame birth long bigge hath gone,
But I to others durſt it not unfold,
Nor yet attempt to compaſſe it alone;
But ſince this courſe, at which I long did pauſe,
On ſuch great pillars now ſo ſtrongly ſtands,
Whoſe count'nance may give credit to a cauſe,
It hath my heart, and it ſhall have my hands.
To our deſignes propitious ſignes are ſent,
So that the Gods would give us courage thus:
For, all who ever heard of our intent,
Would willingly engage themſelves with us:
Let other men diſcourſe of vertuous rites,
Ours but by action onely ſhould be ſhowne:
"Bare ſpeculation is but for ſuch ſprits
"As want of pow'r, or courage keeps unknowne.
"In thoſe who vertue view, when crown'd with deeds,
"Through Glories glaſſe, whoſe beauties long have ſhin'd,
"To be embrac'd an high deſire ſhe breeds,
"As load-ſtones iron, ſo raviſhing the minde:
What though a number now in darkneſſe lyes,
Who are too weak for matters of ſuch weight?
We who are eminent in all mens eyes,
Let us ſtill hold the height of honour ſtraight.
Earſt (that our faction might be ſtrengthned thus)
I labour'd much to purchaſe all their pow'rs,
Whom hate to Caeſar, love to Rome, or us,
Might make imbarke in thoſe great hopes of ours;
By ſickneſſe then impriſon'd in his bed,
Whil'ſt I Ligarius ſpy'd whom paines did pricke,
When I had ſaid with words that anguiſh bred:
In what a time Ligarius art thou ſick?
He anſwer'd ſtraight as I had Phyſicke brought,
Or that he had imagin'd my deſigne,
If worthie of thy ſelfe thou would'ſt do ought,
Then Brutus I am whole, and wholly thine:
Since he by Caeſar was accus'd of late
For taking Pompey's part, yet at this houre
He (though abſolv'd) doth ſtill the Tyrant hate,
Since once endanger'd by his lawleſſe pow'r:
Thus (of great ſprits exaſperating ſpites)
Heaven of our courſe the progreſſe doth direct,
One inſpiration all our ſoules incites,
Who have advis'dly ſworne for one effect.
So I with Cicero did conferre at length,
Who (I perceive) the preſent ſtate deteſts,
And though old Age diminiſh'd hath his ſtrength,
In him a will to free his Countrey reſts.
That man whoſe love ſtill to his countrey ſhin'd,
Would willingly the common-wealth reſtore:
Then he (I know) though he conceals his minde,
None Caeſar more diſlikes, nor likes us more:
Yet to his cuſtody I'le not commit
The ſecrets of our enterpriſe ſo ſoone:
"Men may themſelves be often-times not fit
"To do the things which they would wiſh were done.
He ſtill was timorous, and, by age growne worſe,
Might chance to lay our honour in the duſt;
"All Cowards muſt inconſtant be of force,
"With bold deſignes none fearfull breaſts ſhould truſt.
Then, ſome of ours would hold their hands ſtill pure,
Who (ere they be ſuſpected) for a ſpace,
Amid'ſt the tumult may remaine ſecure,
And with the people mediate our peace:
But who then Tullius fitter for that turne,
Whoſe eloquence is us'd to charme their eares?
His baniſhment they in black Gownes did mourne,
Whom all do honour for his worth and yeares.
Thoſe ſtudious wits which have through dangers gone,
"Would ſtill be out, ere that they enter in:
"Who muſe of many things, reſolve of none,
"And (thinking of the end) cannot begin.
"The minde which looks no further then the eye,
"And more to Nature truſts, then unto Art,
"Such doubtfull fortunes fitteſt is to try:
"A furious actor for a deſp'rat part.
We have enow, and of the beſt degree,
Whoſe hands unto their hearts, hearts t'us are true,
And if that we ſeek moe, I feare we be
To hide, too many, if diſclos'd, too few;
Let us adviſe with an induſtrious care
(Now ere the Tyrant intercept our mindes)
The time, the place, the manner, when, and where
We ſhould en-truſt our Treaſure to the windes;
And ſince our ſtates this doth in danger bring,
Let every point be circumſpectly weigh'd,
"A circumſtance, or an indifferent thing,
"Doth oft marre all, when not with care conveigh'd.
As for the time, none could be wiſh'd more fit,
Then is the preſent to performe our vow,
Since all the people muſt allow of it,
By recent anguiſh mov'd extreamely now.
When repreſented in his triumph paſt,
Great Cato's mangled intrails made them weep,
And deſp'rat Scipio whil'ſt he leap't at laſt
To ſeek a Sanctuary amidſt the deep.
Then all thoſe great men whom in ſeverall parts,
Bent for Romes freedome, Caeſar did o're-throw,
Did by their pictures pierce the peoples hearts,
And made a piteous (though a pompous) ſhow;
How could they but conceive a juſt diſdaine
To be upbraided in ſo ſtrange a ſort,
Whil'ſt he who onely by their loſſe did gaine,
Of their calamitie did make a ſport?
But yet his purpoſe grieves them moſt of all,
Since that he ſtrives to be proclaim'd a King:
And not contents himſelfe to make us thrall,
But would even all our heires to bondage bring.
Thus whil'ſt the people are with him diſpleas'd,
We beſt may do what to our part belongs:
For, after this they may be beſt appeas'd,
If, whil'ſt their wrath doth laſt, we venge their wrongs;
And (ſince we nought intend but what is right,
Whil'ſt from our Countrey we remove diſgrace)
Let all be acted in the Senates ſight,
A common cauſe, and in a common place.
Let thoſe whoſe guilty thoughts do damne their deeds,
In corners like Minerva's birds abide,
That which our Countrey good, us glory breeds,
May by the lights of heaven and earth be try'd.
The Senatours by our example mov'd,
Pleas'd with this action which imports them too,
To have the yoke of tyranny remov'd,
May at the leaſt confirme that which we do;
So all the Senatours were ſaid of old,
King Romulus in peeces to have torne,
Who then to tyrannize was growne too bold,
And, ere turn'd God, humanitie did ſcorne.
Yea, what though Caeſar were immortall made,
As Romulus, whoſe deitie him revives?
I rather as a God adore him dead,
Then as a King obey him whil'ſt he lives.
That place indeed, moſt for our glory makes,
A Theater worthy of ſo great an act,
Where in their ſight from whom moſt pow'r he takes,
We of the Tyrant vengeance may exact;
But I muſt recommend unto your minde,
A courſe (though ſtrict) of which we muſt allow,
Leſt it o're-throw all that we have deſign'd,
Since paſt recovery, if neglected now:
There is Antonius, Caeſars greateſt friend,
A man whoſe Nature tyranny affects,
Whom all the Souldiers daily do attend,
As one who nought but to command reſpects;
I feare that he when we have Caeſar ſlaine,
The grieved faction furniſh with a head:
So when we end, we muſt begin againe
With one who lives worſe then the other dead;
And in my judgement I would thinke it beſt,
VVhen ſacrific'd the proud uſurper lyes,
That this ſeditious enemy of reſt
Should fall with him, with whom he firſt did riſe:
Thus, of our liberty we now may lay
A ſolid ground, which can be ſhak't by none:
"Thoſe of their purpoſe who a part delay,
"Two labours have, who might have had but one.
I cannot (Caſsius) condeſcend to kill
(Thus from the path of juſtice to decline)
One faultleſſe yet, leſt after he prove ill,
So to prevent his guiltineſſe by mine;
No, no, that neither honeſt were, nor juſt,
Which rigorous forme would but the world affright;
Men by this meane, our meaning might miſtruſt,
And for a little wrong damne all that's right:
If we do onely kill the common foe,
Our Countries zeale muſt then acquire due praiſe,
But if (like Tyrants) fiercely raging ſo,
We will be thought that which we raze to raiſe;
And where we but intend to aide the State,
Though by endangering what we hold moſt deare,
If ſlaying him (as arm'd by private hate)
We to the world all partiall will appeare,
Ah, ah! we muſt but too much murder ſee,
Who without doing ill cannot do good:
And, would the Gods, that Rome could be made free
Without the ſhedding of one drop of bloud!
Then, there is hope that Anthonie in end,
Whil'ſt firſt our vertue doth direct the way,
Will (leagu'd with us) the liberty defend,
And (when brought back) will bluſh, as once aſtray.
Well Brutus, I proteſt againſt my will,
From this black cloud, what ever tempeſt fall,
That mercy but moſt cruelly doth kill,
Which thus ſaves one, who once may plague us all.
When Caeſar with the Senatours ſits downe,
In this your judgements generally accord,
That for affecting wrongfully the Crowne,
He lawfully may periſh by the Sword:
No greater harme can for our courſe be wrought,
Then by protracting the appointed time,
Leſt that, which acted would be vertue thought,
Be (if prevented) conſtru'd as a crime;
Can one thing long in many mindes be pent?
"No, purpoſes would never be delayd,
"Which judg'd by th'iſſues Fortune doth comment,
"If proſp'ring, reaſon, treaſon if betrai'd.
There may amongſt our ſelves ſome man remaine,
Whom (if afraid) his pardon to procure,
Or (if too greedy) for the hope of gaine,
Time to diſcloſe his conſorts may allure.
Then for our recompence we ruine reape,
If ought our courſe thus made abortive marre,
For, if diſcovered once, we cannot ſcape:
"As tyrants eares heare much, their hands reach farre.
The breſt in which ſo deep a ſecret dwels,
Would not be long charg'd with ſo weighty cares:
For, I conjecture, as their count'nance tels,
That many know our mindes, though we not theirs:
Even but of late one, Caſca came to ſee
Who curious was to have our purpoſe knowne,
And ſaid to him, that which thou had'ſt from me,
To me by Brutus hath at length been ſhown.
Then Laena once came to us in like ſort,
And wiſh'd that our deſigne might proſper well;
But yet to haſte did earneſtly exhort,
Since others told what we refus'd to tell.
Whilſt ſtrangers reſt familiar with our minde,
And ere we them, doe all our purpoſe ſpy,
Make forward faſt, or we will come behinde:
"Fame (wing'd with breath) doth violently flye.
Their words but burſt from tales uncertaine forth,
For, whilſt conſidering of their bondage thus,
Of Caeſars tyranny and of our worth,
They thinke this ſhould be done, and done by us.
Such conjurations to confirme of old,
Some drinking others blouds, ſwore on their ſwords,
And curſing thoſe who did their courſe unfold,
Vs'd imprecations, execrable words;
And yet, then this, though voluntar'ly vow'd,
Free from all bonds, ſave that which vertue bindes,
More conſtantly no courſe was ere allow'd,
Till that the end muſt manifeſt our mindes.
And ſince ſo many frankely keep their faith,
What firſt intended to accompliſh bent,
No doubt in ſpight of ſickle fortunes wrath,
A happy ſucceſſe ſhall our ſoules content.
Might ſome few Thebans from the Spartans pride,
By divers tyrants deaths redeem their Towne?
And one Athenian who his vertue try'd,
By thirty tyrants ruine, get renowne?
And to the Greekes are we inferiours growne,
That where they have ſo many tyrants ſpoil'd,
There cannot one be by us all o'rethrowne,
Whoſe ſtate yet ſtaggering may be ſoon imbroil'd?
I am reſolv'd, and with my thoughts decree,
VVhat ever chance to come, or ſweet, or ſowre,
I ſhall my ſoile from tyranny ſet free,
Or then my ſelfe free from the tyrants pow'r.
By Lepidus invited this laſt night,
VVhilſt Caeſar went to ſuppe, and I with him,
Of all deaths ſhapes to talke, we tooke delight,
So at the table to beguile the time:
And whilſt our judgements all about were try'd,
Straight Caeſar, (as tranſported) to the reſt,
With a moſt ſudden exclamation cry'd:
O! of all deaths, unlook'd for death is beſt:
It from our ſelves doth ſteale our ſelves ſo faſt,
That even the minde no fearefull forme can ſee,
Then is the paine ere apprehended paſt;
"Sowre things ere taſted, would firſt ſwallowed be.
The threatned deſtiny thus he divin'd:
(It would appeare) divinely then inſpir'd;
For, now I hope that he ſhall ſhortly finde
That forme of death which he himſelfe deſir'd.
Whilſt of our band the fury flames moſt hot,
And that their will to end this worke is ſuch,
Leſt Caeſars abſence diſappoint the plot,
Which would of ſome abate the courage much;
It (Decius) were exceedingly well done,
That to his lodging you addreſt your way,
Him by all meanes to further forward ſoone,
Leſt him ſome ſudden chance may move to ſtay.
There, where the Senate minds this day to ſit,
Stand all prepar'd, not fearing danger more,
And for the Sacrifice when all is fit,
I'le bring an offring hallowed of before.
LOng-lookt-for Time that ſhould the glory yeeld,
Which I through Neptunes truſtleſſe raign have ſought;
And through the duſt of many a bloudy field,
As by all dangers worthy to be bought.
Thy comming now thoſe lowring ſhadowes cleares,
My hopes horizon which did long o're-caſt;
This day defrayes the toyles of many yeares,
And brings the harveſt of my labours paſt.
The Senators a Meſſenger have ſent
Moſt earneſtly entreating me to come
And heare my ſelfe diſcern'd by their conſent
To weare a Crowne o're all, excepting Rome;
Thus, they deviſe conditions at this houre
For him, of whom Mars hath made them the prey,
As Subjects limit could their Soveraignes pow'r,
Who muſt have minde of nought but to obey;
But having pacifi'd thoſe preſent things,
I minde to leade my valorous legions forth
To th' orientall Realmes (adoring Kings)
Who can afford all that is due to worth.
Then ſwimme my thoughts in th' ocean of delight,
Whilſt on the pillow of ſoft praiſe repos'd;
Thoſe eyes to gaze upon my glories light,
Which Envy open'd, Admiration clos'd.
Ah, though your fancies great contentment finde,
Whilſt thus the world your vertue doth advance;
Yet a prepoſt'rous terrour ſtings my minde,
And braggs me with I know not what miſchance;
My wavering hopes o're-ballanc'd are with feares,
Which to my ſoule ſiniſtrous ſignes impart;
And om'nous rumours ſo aſſault mine eates,
That they almoſt make breaches in my heart.
What? do foil'd Pompeys floting followers ſtrive
To recollect their ruines from the duſt?
Dare they who onely by my tollerance live,
More to their ſtrength, then to my favour truſt?
Or do'ſt thou feare his ſonnes dejected ſtate,
Who ſteales infamous flying through thoſe flouds,
Which his great father, Admirall of late,
Did plant with ſhips, till all their waves ſeem'd woods;
Or makes his brothers death his hopes grow more,
Since (by them ſtraited in a bloudy ſtrife)
I who in all the battels given before,
Did fight for victory, then, fought for life;
Or, whilſt to march to Parthia I prepare,
Doth a ſuſpition thus afflict thy ſprite:
By Craſſus fortune mov'd, who periſh'd there,
The ſcorned prey of the Barbarians ſpight?
To thoſe with Caſsius who from thence retir'd,
Amongſt my bands a place I will allow,
Whoſe foes ſhall finde (bad fate at laſt expir'd,)
Though the ſame ſheep, another ſheep-heard now:
Doe not imagine matters to bemone,
For, whilſt there ſtands a world, can Caeſar fall?
Though thouſand thouſands were conjur'd in one,
I, and my fortune might confound them all.
No, none of thoſe my minde doth miſcontent,
Who undiſguis'd ſtill like themſelves remaine:
Vnlook't-for harmes are hardeſt to prevent:
There is no guard againſt conceal'd diſdaine;
But, in whom further can your truſt repoſe,
Whom danger now o're all by all attends?
"Where private men but onely feare their foes,
"Oft Kings have greateſt cauſe to feare their friends,
"For, ſince moſt truſted, fitteſt to betray,
"Thoſe unto whom ones favour force affords,
"Moſt dangerous ambuſhes with eaſe may lay,
"Whilſt falſeſt hearts are hid with faireſt words.
And ſome report (though privately) yet plaine,
That Dolabella and Antonius now,
By your deſtruction doe intend to gaine
That which you keep by making all men bow.
No corpulent ſanguinians make me feare,
Who with more paine their beards then th'en'mies ſtrike,
And doe themſelves like th'Epicurians beare
To Bacchus, Mars, and Venus borne alike;
Their hearts doe alwaies in their mouthes remaine,
As ſtreames whoſe murmuring ſhowes their courſe not deep,
Then ſtill they love to ſport, though groſſe, and plaine,
And never dreame of ought but when they ſleep:
But thoſe high ſprites who hold their bodies downe,
Whoſe viſage leane their reſtleſſe thoughts records:
Whilſt they their cares depth in their boſomes drown,
I feare their ſilence more then th'others words.
Thus Caſsius now and Brutus ſeeme to hold
Some great thing in their minde, whoſe fire oft ſmoaks;
What Brutus would, he vehemently would;
Thinke what they liſt, I like not their pale lookes:
Yet with their worth this cannot well agree,
In whom bright vertue ſeemes ſo much to ſhine:
Can thoſe who have receiv'd their lives from me,
Prove ſo ingrate, that they doe thirſt for mine?
Dare Caſsius (match'd with me) new hopes conceive,
At th'Helleſpont, who fortune durſt not try,
And (like a daſtard) did his Gallies leave,
In all (ſave courage) though more ſtrong then I?
Shall I ſuſpect that Brutus ſeekes my bloud,
Whoſe ſafety ſtill I tendred with ſuch care,
Who when the heavens from mortals me ſeclude,
Is onely worthy to be Caeſars heire?
"The corners of the heart are hard to know;
Though of thoſe two the world the beſt doth deeme,
Yet doe not truſt too much to th' outward ſhow,
For, men may differ much from what they ſeeme.
"None oft more fierce then thoſe who look moſt milde,
"Impiety ſometime appeares devout,
And (that the world the more may be beguil'd)
"Even vice can cloath it ſelfe with vertues cote.
Though it would ſeem (all hatred now laid downe)
They on your favour onely ſhould depend,
Yet no reſpect can counterpoiſe a Crowne:
"Ambition hath no bounds, nor Greed no end.
Mov'd by vindictive hate, or emulous pride,
Since ſome your perſon, ſome your place purſue;
All threatned dangers to prevent, provide,
And uſe for ſafety, what to State is due.
No armour is that can hold treaſon out.
To fright your foes with bands be back'd about.
So daſtard tyrants ſtrive themſelves to beare.
It better is to give, then to take feare.
No guard more ſtrong then is the peoples love.
But nought in th'earth doth more inconſtant prove.
Guards (ſhewing feare) to charge me men might tempt.
Guards would put them from hope, you from contempt.
My breſt from terrour hath been alwaies cleare.
When one leaſt feares, oft danger lurks moſt neare.
I rather dye then feare: at laſt life goes.
Yet, death muſt grieve, when forc'd by vaunting foes.
I will not croſſe my preſent pleaſures ſo,
By apprehending what may chance to come,
This world affords but too much cauſe for woe;
And ſorrowes ſtill muſt harbour'd be by ſome.
By joyes in time we muſt embrace reliefe,
That when they end, we in ſome meaſure may
By their remembrance mitigate the griefe
Which ſtill attends all thoſe on th'earth that ſtay.
I thinke the Senate is aſſembled now,
And for my comming doth begin to gaze,
Let me condignely once adorne my brow,
And feaſt mine eares by drinking in due praiſe.
Stay, ſtay (deare Lord) retire thy ſteps againe,
And ſpare a ſpace to prorogate whole yeares;
Let not this ominous day begin thy raigne,
WHich fatall and unfortunate appeares.
An Aſtrologian through the world renown'd,
Thy horoſcopes juſt calculation layes,
And doth affirme (as he by ſignes hath found)
That Marches Ides doe bragge to bound thy dayes;
Walke not abroad where harmes may be receiv'd
(By great neceſſity ſince no way forc'd)
For, (though his judgement may be farre deceiv'd)
"In things that touch thy life, ſuſpect the worſt.
Whilſt I reform'd the Calendar by fits,
Which did confound the order of the yeare;
I waded through the depths of all their wits,
Who of the ſtarres the myſteries would cleare.
Thoſe pregnant ſprites who walke betwixt the Poles,
And lodge at all the Zodiackes ſeverall ſignes,
Doe reade ſtrange wonders wrapt in th'azure ſcroules,
Of which our deeds are words, our lives are lines.
By ſpeculation of ſuperiour pow'rs,
Some Natures ſecrets curious are to know,
As how celeſtiall bodies rule o're ours,
And what their influence doth worke below.
Yea, they ſometime may brave conjectures make
Of thoſe whoſe parts they by their birth doe prove,
Since naturally all inclination take
From Planets then predominant above;
And yet no certainty can ſo be had,
Some vertuouſly againſt their Starres have ſtriv'd,
As Socrates, who grew (though borne but bad)
The moſt accompliſh'd man that ever liv'd.
But of the houre ordain'd to cloſe our lights,
No earth-clog'd ſoule can to the knowledge come,
For, O! the deſtinies farre from our ſights,
In clouds of darkneſſe have involv'd our doome!
And ſome but onely gueſſe at great mens falls,
By bearded Comets, and prodigious Starres,
Whoſe ſight-diſtracting ſhape the world appalls,
As ſtill denouncing terrour, death, or warres.
The time uncertaine is of certaine death,
And that fantaſticke man farre paſt his bounds:
"With doubt and reverence they ſhould manage breath,
"Who will divine upon conjectur'd grounds.
But this all day hath prey'd upon my heart,
And from the ſame of cares a tribute claim'd;
Doe not deſpiſe that which I muſt impart,
Though but a dreame, and by a woman dream'd.
I thought (alas) the thought yet wounds my breaſt,
Then whilſt we both (as thoſe whom Morpheus weds)
Lay ſoftly buried (with a pleaſant reſt)
I in thy boſome, thou within the beds:
Then from my ſoule ſtrange terrours did with-draw
Th' expected peace by apprehended harmes;
For, I imagin'd, no, no doubt I ſaw,
And did embrace thee bloudy in mine armes.
Thus whilſt my ſoule by ſorrowes was ſurcharg'd,
Of which huge weight it yet ſome burden beares,
I big with griefe, two Elements enlarg'd,
Th' ayre with my ſighes, the water with my teares.
That which I heard, with thy report accords,
Whilſt thou all ſeem'd diſſolv'd in griefe at once,
A heavy murmuring made with mangled words,
Was interrupted oft by tragicke grones.
The memory, but not the judgement frames
Thoſe raving fancies which diſturbe the braine,
Whilſt night diſſolves all dayes deſignes in dreames,
"The ſenſes ſleeping, ſoules would ſtirre in vaine.
From ſuperſtitious feares this care proceeds,
Which ſtill would watch o're that which thou doſt love,
And in thy minde thus melancholy breeds,
Which doth thoſe ſtrange imaginations move.
Ah, in ſo light account leave off to hold.
Thoſe fatall warnings, which our mindes ſhould leade
To ſearch darke matters, till we may unfold
What dangers huge doe hang above thy head.
With ſacred Garlands he who things divines,
By th' intrails of the conſecrated beaſt,
Doth in the offring ſee ſiniſtrous ſignes,
And I entreat thee doe not hence make haſte.
When I in Spaine againſt yong Pompey went,
Thus, the diviner threatned me before,
Yet did I proſecute my firſt intent,
Which with new lawrels did my browes decore.
And yet you hardly there (as I doe heare)
From danger (farre engag'd) redeemd your life;
But tokens now more monſtrous doe appeare,
And I ſuſpect farre worſe then open ſtrife.
Leſt I too much ſeeme wedded to my will,
(As others counſels ſcorning to allow)
With jealous eyes I'le ſearch about me ſtill,
And even miſtruſt my ſelfe to truſt thee now;
Yet if I ſtay, the Senators deceiv'd,
May my beginning ſtraight begin to hate;
So might I periſh, ſeeking to be ſav'd:
"By flying it, ſome fall upon their fate.
But here one comes who can reſolve me much,
With whom I uſe to weigh affaires of weight;
Whence com'ſt thou Decius, that thy haſte is ſuch?
Is ought occurr'd that craves our knowledge ſtraight?
I come to tell you how the Senate ſtayes,
Till that your preſence bleſſe their longing fight,
And to conclude what is propos'd, delayes,
Since your applauſe can onely make it right:
They your contentment to procure intend,
And all their thoughts ſeeme at one object bent,
Save that amongſt themſelves they doe contend,
Who you to pleaſe, ſhall rareſt wayes invent.
Then that, no treaſure to my ſoule more deare,
Which to enjoy from hence I long to part,
But yet I know not what arreſts me here,
And makes my feet rebellious to my heart;
From thee (deare friend) I never doe conceale
The weightieſt ſecrets that concerne me moſt;
And at this time I likewiſe muſt reveale,
How avens by ſignes me with deſtruction boaſt:
To ſuperſtition though not earſt inclin'd,
My wife by dreames doth now preſage my fall,
It a ſooth-ſayer likewiſe hath divin'd:
The Sacrifice prodigious ſeemes to all,
So that till this diſaſtrous day be gone,
All company I purpoſe to diſuſe,
And to the Senators will ſend ſome one,
To paint my abſence with a faire excuſe.
Brut. Doe not repoſe on ſuperſtitious ſignes,
You to ſuſpect the people thus to bring,
Whilſt Soveraigne-like you limit their deſignes,
Seeme not a tyrant, ſeeking to be King:
How can we ſatisfie the worlds concet,
Whoſe tongue ſtill in all eares your praiſe proclaimes?
Or ſhall we bid them leave to deale in ſtate,
Till that Calphurnia firſt have better dreames?
If that this day you private would remaine,
The Senate to diſſolve your ſelfe muſt goe,
And then incontinent come backe againe,
When you have ſhowne to it ſome reverence ſo.
With thy adviſe (as pow'rfull) I agree,
The Senatours ſhall have no cauſe to grudge:
A little ſpace, all part a ſpace from me,
And I'le be ſhortly ready to diſlodge.
VVHence comes this huge and admirable change,
That in my breſt hath uncouth thoughts infus'd,
Doth th'earth then earſt yeeld terrors now more ſtrange,
Or but my minde leſſe courage then it us'd?
What ſpightfull fate againſt my ſtate contends,
That I muſt now to fancied plagues give place,
By toes not mov'd, afraid amongſt my friends,
By warre ſecure, endanger'd but by peace?
When ſtrongeſt troopes to fight with me did come,
Then did my heart the higheſt hopes conceive,
I warr'd with many, many to o're-come;
The greateſt bttels, greateſt glory gave.
As th'enemies numbers, ſtill my courage grew;
Through depths of dangers oft times have I paſt,
Yet never did thoſe boundleſſe labours rue,
To have none greater firſt, none equall laſt:
When bragging Gauls mov'd by their neighbours fals,
Had from the fields, no, from my fury fled;
And hid themſelves with Armes, their Armes with walles,
Whilſt I my troupes before Alexia led;
Then, though there ſwarm'd forth from the bounds about,
Huge hoſts to compaſſe me enflam'd with wrath,
That the beſiegers (all beſieg'd about,)
Seem'd drawne by danger in the nets of death.
No way I who could with the pride comport,
That thoſe Barbarians by vaine vaunts bewray'd,
Did re-aſſault th' aſſaulters in ſuch ſort,
That words by wounds, wounds were by death repayd.
Of thoſe within the towne (to eaſe their toyles)
Till quite o're-com'd, their comming was not knowne,
Who ſtraight (upbraided by the barb'rous ſpoiles)
Did yeeld themſelves, as if with them o're-throwne,
By liquid legions whilſt with tumid boaſts
The Trident-bearer ſtriv'd my ſpoiles to beare;
Though threatned thriſe amid'ſt his humid hoſts,
Still courage ſcorn'd to thinke of abject feare.
I us'd thoſe Pyrats who had me deceiv'd,
Still as my ſervants (thundring threatnings forth)
And gave them money more then they had crav'd,
Whoſe ignorance too meanely priz'd my worth:
Yet gathering ſhips, I ſtay'd not long a ſhore,
But trac'd their ſteps, though they not pav'd the way,
And taking them (as I had vow'd before)
By nought but death their ranſome would defray;
Then when (without th'advice of others mindes)
Through hoary waves I paſt alone by night,
Whilſt in a little Barke againſt great windes,
That even the Pilot lookt not for the light;
The waves themſelves aſunder ſeem'd to teare,
That in their gravell I might chuſe a grave,
And cry ſtall arches did above me reare,
That I a Tombe fit for my ſtate might have.
Whilſt dangers ſeem'd to merit Caeſars death,
As Neptune rais'd his head, I rais'd my heart;
And ſhe wing what I was with conſtant breath,
To weake Amiclas courage did impart.
Was I not once amid'ſt large Nilus ſlote,
Whilſt me to wound, a wood of darts did flye,
Yet ſwim'd ſo careleſſe of my enemies ſhot,
That in my hand I held ſome papers dry?
With open dangers thus in every place,
I (whilſt oft compaſs'd both by Sea and Land,)
Did undiſmay'd looke horrour in the face,
As borne for nought, but onely to command.
But ſince a world of victories have fill'd
With Trophees Temples, Theaters with my praiſe,
That bath'd with balme which glories bayes had ſtill'd,
With friends in peace, I look'd to ſpend my dayes;
The chambers muſicke now afrights me more,
Then Trumpets ſounds when marching in the field,
And Gowns (though ſignes of peace) worſe then before
The pompous ſplendour of a flaming ſhield.
Thoſe thoughts of late which had diſdain'd to doubt,
Though I alone had march'd amongſt my foes,
Loe, whilſt amongſt my friends well back'd about,
They, then the eyes more danger now diſcloſe.
If any chance, to meet a number brings,
I inſurrections feare from common wrath,
Yea, if two talke a part of private things,
Straight I ſuſpect that they conſpire my death;
en ſudden rumours riſe from vulgar ſmoake;
(ilſt th'inward motions roule my reſtleſſe eyes,)
I at ch corner for an ambuſh looke,
Aſtart aſtoniſh'd, leſt ſome tumult riſe.
When light (firſt lightning) doth encourage toyles,
I ſtill deſpaire to re-enjoy the night,
And when mine eyes th' umbragious darkeneſſe ſpoils,
I never looke to grace them with the light;
For, when the light with ſhadowes makes a change,
To flatter mortals with a dreame of reſt,
What ugly Gorgons, what Chimera's ſtrange
Doe bragge the little world within my breſt?
The time which ſhould appeaſe impetuous cares,
Doth double mine, who view moſt when quite blinde;
I apprehend huge horrours and deſpaires,
Whilſt th' outward objects not diſtract my minde:
Now of my conqueſts what delight remaines?
Where is the peace purſu'd by many a ſtrife?
Have I but taken paine to purchaſe paines?
And ſought by dangers for a dangerous life?
Is this the period of aſpiring pow'rs,
In promis'd calmes to be moſt plagu'd by ſtormes?
Lurke poyſ'nous Serpents under faireſt flow'rs,
And helliſh furies under heavenly formes?
It will not grieve my ghoſt below to goe,
If circumvented in the warres I end,
As bold Marcellus by Romes greateſt foe,
Who gave his aſhes honour as a friend;
Or like t' Epaminondas in his death,
O! would the Gods I had amidſt alarmes,
When charg'd with recent ſpoiles, been ſpoil'd of breath,
Whilſt I to Pluto might have march'd in armes;
Yet, life to end, which nought but toyles affords,
I'le pay to death the tribute that it owes;
Straight with my bloud, let ſome come dye their ſwords,
Whoſe naked breſt encounter ſhall their blowes:
But ah! how have the furies ſeaz'd my breſt,
And poyſon'd thus my ſprite with deſp'rate rage?
By horrid Serpents whilſt quite barr'd from reſt,
No kinde of comfort can my cares aſſwage;
No, Atropos, yet ſpare my threed a ſpace,
That to the Stygian ſtreames ere walking downe,
I may of honour have the higheſt place,
And if I fall, yet fall beneath a Crowne.
VVhilſt eares are bended to applauding ſhouts,
My thoughts divided are within my breſt,
And my toſs'd ſoule doth flote between two doubts,
Yet knowes not on what ground to build her reſt.
The Senators, they have this day deſign'd,
To ſhew the world how they eſteeme my worth;
Yet doe portentuous ſignes perturbe my minde,
By which the heavens would point my danger forth:
The Gods from me with indignation gone,
In every thing charact'red have my death:
And muſt both heaven and earth conſpire in one,
To quench a little ſparke of ſmoaking breath?
My ſafety would that I ſhould ſtay within
Till this diſaſtrous day give darkeneſſe place,
But daring honour would have me begin
To reape the glory of my painefull race,
And I'le advance in ſpight of threatned broyles,
For, though the fates accompliſh what we dreame,
When onely death hath triumph'd of my ſpoyles,
I then (though breathleſſe) ſtill ſhall breathe with fame.
VVHat fury thus doth fill the breſt
With a prodigious raſh deſire,
Which baniſhing their ſoules from reſt,
Doth make them live who high aſpire,
(Whilſt it within their boſome boyles)
As Salamanders in the fire;
Or like to Serpents changing ſpoyles,
Their wither'd beauties to renew?
Like Vipers with unnaturall toyles,
Of ſuch the thoughts themſelves purſue,
Who for all lines their lives doe ſquare,
Whilſt like Camelions changing hue,
They onely feed on empty ayre:
"To paſſe ambition greateſt matters brings,
"And (ſave contentment) can attaine all things.
This active paſsion doth diſdaine
To match with any vulgar minde,
As in baſe breaſts where terrours raigne,
Too great a gueſt to be confin'd;
It doth but lofty thoughts frequent,
Where it a ſpatious field may finde,
It ſelfe with honour to content,
Where reverenc'd fame doth lowdeſt ſound;
Thoſe for great things by courage bent,
(Farre lifted from this lumpiſh round)
Would in the ſphere of Glory move,
Whilſt lofty thoughts which nought can binde,
All rivals live in vertues love;
"On abject preyes as th' Eagles never light,
"Ambition poyſons but the greateſt ſprite,
And of this reſtleſſe Vultures brood,
(If not become too great a flame)
A little ſparke doth ſometime good,
Which makes great mindes (affecting fame)
To ſuffer ſtill all kinde of paine:
Their fortune at the bloudy game,
Who hazard would for hope of gaine,
Vnleſſe firſt burn'd by thirſt of praiſe?
The learned to a higher ſtraine,
Their wits by emulation raiſe,
As thoſe who hold applauſes deare;
And what great minde at which men gaze,
It ſelfe can of ambition cleare,
Which is when valu'd at the higheſt price,
A generous errour, an heroicke vice?
But when this frenzie flaming bright,
Doth ſo the ſoules of ſome ſurpriſe,
That they can taſte of no delight,
But what from Soveraignty doth riſe,
Then, huge affliction it affords;
Such muſt (themſelves ſo to diſguiſe)
Prove prodigall of courteous words,
Give much to ſome, and promiſe all,
Then humble ſeeme to be made Lords,
Yea, being thus to many thrall,
Muſt words impart, if not ſupport;
To thoſe who cruſh'd by fortune fall;
And grieve themſelves to pleaſe each ſort:
"Are not thoſe wretch'd, who o're a dangerous ſnare,
"Do hang by hopes, whilſt ballanc'd in the ayre;
Then when they have the Port attain'd,
Which was through Seas of dangers ſought,
They (loe) at laſt but loſſe have gain'd,
And by great trouble, trouble bought:
Their mindes are married ſtill with feares,
to being forth many a jealous thought;
With ſearching eyes, and watching eares,
To learne that which it grieves to know,
The breſt that ſuch a burden beares,
What huge afflictions doe o'rethrow?
Thus, each Prince is (as all perceive)
No more exalted then brought low,
"Of many, Lord, of many, ſlave;
"That idoll greatneſſe which th'earth doth adore,
"Is gotten with great paine, and kept with more:
He who to this imagin'd good,
Did through his countries bowels tend,
Neglecting friendſhip, duty, bloud,
And all on which truſt can depend,
Or by which love could be conceiv'd,
Doth finde of what he did attend,
His expectations farre deceiv'd;
For, ſince ſuſpecting ſecret ſnares,
His ſoule hath ſtill of reſt beene reav'd,
Whilſt ſquadrens of tumultuous cares,
Forth from his breſt extort deep grones:
Thus Caeſar now of life deſpaires,
VVhoſe lot his hope exceeded once;
And who can long well keep an ill wonne State?
"Thoſe periſh muſt by ſome whom all men hate.
ARe generous Romans ſo degener'd now,
That they from honour have eſtrang'd their hands?
And, us'd with burdens, do not bluſh to bow,
Yea (even though broken) ſhake not off their bands;
This glorious worke was worthy of your paine,
Which now ye may by others dangers have;
But what enchaunts you thus, that ye abſtaine
That which ye ſhould have taken, to receive?
Where be thoſe inundations of delight,
Which ſhould burſt out from thoughts o're-flow'd with joy,
Whil'ſt emulous Vertue may your mindes incite,
That which we give you bravely to enjoy,
Or quite conform'd unto your former ſtate,
Do ſtill your mindes of ſervitude allow,
As broken by adverſitie of late,
Not capable of better fortune now?
Loe, we who by the Tyrants favour ſtood,
And griev'd but at the yoke which you out-rag'd,
Have our advancement, riches, reſt, and bloud,
All liberally for liberty engag'd.
Thou like thy great Progenitour in this,
Haſt glory to thy ſelfe, t'us freedome brought;
"Then liberty what greater treaſure is?
"Ought with it much, without it much ſeemes nought:
But pardon us (heroicke man) though we
To high perfection hardly can aſpire,
Though every man cannot a Brutus bell▪
"What none can imitate, all muſt admire.
At this ſtrange courſe (with too much light made blinde)
We our opinions muſt ſuſpend a ſpace,
"When ſudden chances do diſmay the minde,
"The Iudgement to the Paſſion firſt gives place.
What wonder now though this moſt barbarous deed
Have with amazement clos'd your judgement in,
Which O (I feare) ſhall great confuſion breed?
When Caeſars toyls did end, Romes did begin:
The moſt ſuſpitious mindes had not beleev'd,
That Romans reverenc'd for their worth by us,
Would have preſum'd to kill, or to have griev'd
An hallow'd body inhumanely thus;
Who would have once but dream'd of ſuch deſpight?
What ſtrange hoſtilitie! in time of peace
To kill, though not accus'd, againſt all right,
A ſacred man, and in a ſacred place?
If Caeſar as a Citizen had liv'd,
And had by Law decided every ſtrife,
Then I would grant thoſe treaſon had contriv'd,
Who went without a Law to take his life;
But to pervert the Laws, ſubvert the State,
If all his travels did directly tend,
Then I muſt ſay, we did no wrong of late:
"Why ſhould not Tyrants make a Tragicke end?
Since deſtinies did Caeſars ſoule enlarge,
What courſe can we for his recovery take?
Ah! th'unrelenting Charons reſtleſſe Barge
Stands to tranſport all o're, but brings none back:
"Of lifes fraile glaſſe (when broken) with vaine grones,
"What earthly power the ruines can repaire;
"Or who can gather up, when ſcattred once,
"Ones bloud from th'earth, or yet his breath from th'ayre?
Let us of thoſe who paſſe oblivions floud
Oblivious be, ſince hope of help is gone,
And ſpend our cares where cares may do moſt good,
Leſt Rome waile many, where ſhe wailes but one.
Still concord for the Common-weale were beſt,
To reconcile divided thoughts againe:
"Then diſcord to great Townes, no greater peſt,
Whoſe violence no reverence can reſtraine.
Yet often-times thoſe warie wits have err'd,
Who would buy wealth and eaſe at any coſt:
"Let honeſty to profit be preferr'd,
"And to vile peace warre when it wounds us moſt;
But ſeeking peace, what ſurety can we finde?
Can faithleſſe men give faith, juſt feares to ſtay?
"No ſacred band Impiety can binde,
"Which ſweares for truſt, ſeeks truſt but to betray;
What help'd it Caeſar, that we all had ſworne
His body ſtill from dangers to redeeme?
"Thoſe who are once perjur'd, hold oaths in ſcorne?
"All are moſt franke of what they leaſt eſteeme.
None needs in States which are from Tyrants free,
Loath'd execrations to confirme his will,
Where willingly men would with good agree,
And without danger might deſpiſe all ill;
All odious oaths by thoſe are onely crav'd,
Whoſe ſuit from Reaſon doth a warrant want,
Whil'ſt who deceive (affraid to be deceiv'd)
Seek of men thrall'd, what none whil'ſt free would grant.
When Caeſar had prevail'd in France and Spaine,
His Fortune building on his Countries wracke,
(Of liberty a ſhadow to retaine)
We gave him all that he was bent to take.
The Senate had reſerv'd nought but a ſhow,
Whoſe courſe to it by Caeſar was impos'd,
Who lifted up, by bringing others low,
Of Offices, and Provinces diſpos'd:
Then that our faded hopes might never ſpring,
When bent to try the Parthians wooden ſhowre,
He for five yeares diſpoſ'd of every thing,
Even in his abſence leaving us no pow'r.
O how ſome aggravate our deed with hate!
Who durſt his body wound, or with bloud ſtaine,
Though conſecrated by conſtraint of late,
Yea, but reputed holy, yet prophaine,
And did forget how he (a wondrous caſe)
The Tribuneſhip did violate with ſcorne,
Which our fore-fathers (free) in time of peace
Adviſ'dly had inviolable ſworne.
Did he not once appropriate (ſwolne with wrath)
The publike treaſure to his private uſe?
And to the Tribune boldly threatned death,
Who did reſiſt, griev'd at that great abuſe.
Twixt Romans and a Tyrant what availes
A Covenant whil'ſt Right reſts trod on thus?
"Who can build further when the ground once fails?
Could we ſave him who ſought to ruine us?
So abſolutely good no man remaines,
Whoſe naturall weakneſſe may not him o're-come;
"Even Vertues dye from Vice may take ſome ſtaines,
"And worthy minds may of groſſe faults have ſome:
"As in fine fruits, or weeds, fat earth abounds,
"Even as the Labourers ſpend, or ſpare their paine,
"The greateſt ſprits (diſdaining vulgar bounds)
"Of what they ſeek the higheſt height muſt gaine;
"They (that bright glory may be ſo enjoy'd)
"As onely borne to be in action ſtill,
"Had rather be (then idle) ill imploy'd:
"Great ſprits muſt do great good, or then great ill;
The worlds chiefe treaſure which bright Rayes do arme,
Huge evill procur'd (though onely fram'd for good)
Till that fond youth whom his owne wiſh did harme,
Was kill'd by fire, and buried in a floud.
By rules of Reaſon whil'ſt he rightly liv'd,
When lawfully elected by the State,
What glorious deeds by Caeſar were atchiev'd,
Which all the world as wonders muſt relate?
But when of right he buried all reſpects,
(As blinde Ambition had bewitch'd his minde)
What harme enſu'd, by pitifull effects,
We at the firſt▪ he at the laſt did finde;
Whil'ſt like Narciſſus with himſelfe in love,
He with our bondage banqueted his ſight,
And for a while (uncertaine joyes to prove)
VVith all our woes would ſweeten his delight▪
How could brave men (with vertuous mindes) as tho
VVho of their Countries weale are jealous ſtill,
But ſtoutly to all ſtormes their States expoſe,
The States deſtroyer reſolute to kill?
But ſince our freedome flows from Caeſars bloud,
Let us embrace that which too long we lack:
"Peace gives to juſtice pow'r, it, to all good,
"VVhere warre breeds wrong, and wrong all kinde of wracke.
This Citie hath experienc'd with great paine,
VVhat guilty troubles riſe from civill ſtrife,
VVhich by her ruines regiſtred remaine,
Since firſt the Gracchi gave contention life.
VVhen Scilla once, and Marius (mad through pride)
Did ſtrive who ſhould the moſt tyrannicke prove,
VVhat memorable miſeries were try'd,
From Romans mindes no time can e're remove?
Then laſt by Caeſar, and his Sonne in law,
VVhat thouſands Ghoſts to Pluto were diſpatch'd?
Ah! that the world thoſe hoſts divided ſaw,
Which, joyn'd in one, no world of worlds had match'd.
Yet with this wit which we have dearly bought,
Let us abhorre all that may breed ſuch broils,
Leſt when we have our ſelves to ruine brought,
In end Barbarians beare away our ſpoyls.
Rome to thoſe great men hardly can afford
A recompence, according to their worth,
Who (by a Tyrants o're-throw) have reſtor'd
The light of liberty which was put forth;
Yet (by due praiſes with their merits even)
Let us acknowledge their illuſtrious mindes;
And to their charge let Provinces be given:
"Still vertue grows, when it preferrement findes.
Thoſe barbarous Realms by whoſe reſpective will,
Of Caeſars Conqueſts monuments are ſhowne:
As if they held them highly honour'd ſtill,
Who warr'd with Caeſar though they were o'rethrown,
Can this diſgrace by their proud mindes be borne,
Whil'ſt we diſhonour, whom they honour thus?
And ſhall we not (whil'ſt as a Tyrant torne)
Give him a tombe, who gave the world to us?
Muſt his Decrees be all reduc'd againe,
And thoſe degraded whom he grac'd of late.
As worthy men unworthily did gaine
Their roomes of reputation in the State?
As if a Tyrant we him damne ſo ſoone,
And for his murd'rers do rewards deviſe,
Then what he did, muſt likewiſe be undone,
For which I feare, a foule confuſion riſe.
Ah! (brave Antonius) ſow not ſeeds of warre,
And if thou alwayes do'ſt delight in armes,
The haughty Parthians yet undaunted are,
Which may give thee great praiſe, and us no harmes.
Deteſt in time th'abhominable broils,
For which no Conquerour to triumph hath com'd,
Whil'ſt this wretch'd Towne (which ſtill ſome party ſpoils)
Muſt loath the Victor, and lament th'ore-com'd:
And ſhall we ſtill contend againſt all good,
To make the yoke where we ſhould bound abide?
Muſt ſtill the Commons ſacrifize their bloud,
As onely borne to ſerve the great mens pride?
Whil'ſt I the depths of my affection ſound,
And reade but th'obligations which I owe,
I finde my ſelfe by oaths, and duty bound,
All Caeſars foes, or then my ſelfe t'ore-throw.
But when I weigh what to the State belongs,
The which to plague no paſſion ſhall get place,
Then I with griefe digeſting private wrongs,
Warre with my ſelfe to give my Countrey peace.
Yet whil'ſt my thoughts of this laſt purpoſe muſe,
I altogether diſ-aſſent from this,
That Caeſars fame, or body we abuſe,
To deale with Tyrants as the cuſtome is:
Leſt guilty of ingratitude we ſeeme,
(If guerdoning our benefactors thus)
Great Caeſars body from diſgrace redeeme,
And let his acts be ratifi'd by us.
Then for the publike-weale which makes us pauſe,
Towards thoſe that have him kill'd t'extend regard,
Let them be pardon'd for their kinſmens cauſe:
"Remiſſion given for evill is a reward.
We ſtand not vex'd like Malefactors here,
With a dejected and remorſefull minde,
So in your preſence ſupplicants t'appeare,
As who themſelves of death do guilty finde;
But looking boldly with a loftie brow,
Through a delight of our deſigne conceiv'd,
We come to challenge gratefulneſſe of you,
That have of us ſo great a good receiv'd.
But if you will ſuſpend your thoughts a ſpace,
Though not the givers, entertaine the gift;
Do us reject, yet liberty embrace:
To have you free (loe) that was all our drift.
So Rome her ancient liberties enjoy,
Let Brutus and let Caſsius baniſh't live;
Thus baniſhment would breed us greater joy,
Then what at home a Tyrants wealth could give.
Though ſome miſconſtrue may this courſe of ours,
By ignorance, or then by hate deceiv'd;
"The truth depends not on opinions pow'rs,
"But is it ſelfe, how ever miſconceiv'd.
Though to acknowledge us, not one would daigne,
Our merit of it ſelfe is a reward,
"Of doing good none ſhould repent their paine,
"Though they get no reward, nor yet regard.
I'le venture yet my fortune in the field,
With every one that Rome to bondage draws;
And as for me, how ever others yeeld,
I'le nought obey, but Reaſon, and the Laws.
What fools are thoſe who further travell take,
For that which they even paſt recovery know?
Who can revive the dead, or bring time back?
That can no creature who doth live below.
Great Pompey (now) for whom the world ſtill weeps,
Lyes low, neglected on a barbarous ſhore;
Selfe-ſlaughtered Scipio flotes amidſt the deeps,
Whom, it may be, Sea-monſters do devoure.
Of Libyan Wolves grave Cate feaſts the wombes,
Whoſe death, of worth the world defrauded leaves;
Thus ſome that did deſerve Mauſolean tombes,
Have not a title grav'd upon their graves.
And yet may Caeſar who procur'd their death,
By brave men ſlaine be buried with his race;
All civill warre quite baniſh'd with his breath,
Let him now dead, and us alive have peace.
"We ſhould deſiſt our thoughts on things to ſet,
"Which may harme ſome, and can give help to none,
"Learne to forget that which we cannot get,
"And let our cares be gone of all things gone.
"Thoſe who would ſtrive all croſſes to o're-come,
"To preſent times muſt ſtill conforme their courſe,
"And making way for that which is to come,
"Not medle with things paſt, but by diſcourſe.
"Let none ſeek that which doth no good when found;
Since Caeſar now is dead, how ever dead;
Let all our griefe go with him to the ground,
For, ſorrow beſt becomes a lightleſſe ſhade;
It were the beſt, that joyn'd in mutuall love,
We phyſicke for this wounded State prepare:
"Neglecting thoſe who from the world remove.
"All men on earth for earthly things muſt care.
O how thoſe great men friendſhip can pretend,
By ſoothing others thus with painted windes;
And ſeeme to truſt, where treaſon they attend,
Whilſt love their mouth, and malice fills their mindes;
Thoſe but to them poore ſimple ſoules appeare,
Whoſe count'nance doth diſcover what they thinke,
Who make their words, as is their meaning, cleare,
And from themſelves can never ſeeme to ſhrinke.
Loe, how Antonius faines to quench all jarres,
And whom he hates with kindeneſſe doth embrace,
But as he further'd firſt the former warres,
Some feare he ſtill will prove a foe to peace.
Now where Calphurnia ſtayes our ſteppes addreſſe,
Since by this ſudden chance her loſſe was chiefe.
"All viſite ſhould their neighbours in diſtreſſe,
"To give ſome comfort, or to ſhare in griefe.
WHen darkeneſſe laſt impriſoned had myne eyes,
Such monſtrous viſions did my heart affright,
That (quite dejected) it as ſtupid dies
Through terrours then contracted in the night;
A melancholy cloud ſo dimmes my breſt,
That it my mind fit for misfortune makes,
A lodging well diſpos'd for ſuch a Gueſt,
Where nought of ſorrow but th'impreſſion lackes;
And I imagine every man I ſee
(My ſenſes ſo corrupted are by feares)
A Herauld to denounce miſhaps to me,
Who ſhould infuſe confuſion in my eares.
O! there he comes to violate my peace,
In whom the object of my thoughts I ſee;
Thy meſſage is charactred in thy face,
And by thy lookes directed is to me:
Thy troubled eyes reſt rowling for reliefe,
As lately frighted by ſome uglie ſight;
Thy breath doth pant as if growne big with griefe,
And ſtraight to bring ſome monſtrous birth to light.
The man of whom the world in doubt remain'd,
If that his minde or fortune was more great,
Whoſe valour conquer'd, clemencie retain'd
All Nations Subject to the Romane State;
Fraud harm'd him more then force, friends more then foes;
Ah! muſt this ſad diſcourſe by me be made?
Stay, ere thou further goe defray my woes,
How doth my love? where is my life? Nun. dead. Cal. dead?
Though apprehending horrours in her minde,
Now ſince ſhe hath a certaintie receiv'd,
She by experience greater griefe doth finde:
"Till borne, the paſſions cannot be conceav'd.
When as a high diſaſter force affords,
O how that Tyrant whom affliction bears,
Barres th'eares from comfort, and the mouth from words,
And when obdur'd ſcornes to diſſolve in teares!
Ah! ſince the lights of that great light are ſet,
Why doth not darkneſſe ſpread it ſelfe o're all?
At leaſt what further comfort can I get,
Whoſe pleaſures had no period but his fall?
O would the Gods I always might confine
Flames in my breſt, and floods within my eyes
To entertaine ſo great a griefe as mine,
That thence there might fit furniture ariſe;
Yet I diſdaine (though by diſtreſſe o'rethrowne)
By ſuch externall meanes to ſeeke reliefe:
"The greateſt ſorrowes are by ſilence ſhowne,
"Whilſt all the Senſes are ſhut up with griefe:
But miſerie doth ſo tyrannick grow
That it of ſighes and teares a tribute claimes;
"Ah! when the cup is full, it muſt o'reflow,
"And fires which burne muſt offer up ſome flames;
Yet though what thou haſt ſayd my death ſhall be,
(Since ſunke ſo deeply in a melted heart)
Of my lives death report each point to mee,
For every circumſtance that I may ſmart.
What fatall warnings did foregoe his end,
Which by his ſtay to fruſtrate ſome did try?
But he who ſcorn'd excuſes to pretend,
Was by the deſtinies drawne forth to die.
Whilſt by the way he chanc'd to meet with one,
Who had his deaths-day nam'd, he to him ſaid:
The Ides of March be come; but yet not gone
The other anſwer'd, and ſtill conſtant ſtayd:
Another brought a letter with great ſpeed,
Which the conſpiracie at length did touch,
And gave it Caeſar in his hand to reade,
Proteſting that it did import him much.
Yet did he lay it up where ſtill it reſts,
As doe the great whom bleſt the world reputes,
Who (griev'd to be importun'd by requeſts)
Of ſimple ſupplicants neglect the ſuites:
Or he of it the reading did deferre,
Still troubled by attendants at the gate,
Whilſt ſome to ſhow their credit would conferre,
To flatter ſome, ſome ſomething to entreate.
Not onely did the Gods by divers ſignes
Give Caeſar warning of his threatned harmes;
But did of foes diſturbe the raſh deſignes,
And to their troubled thoughts gave ſtrange alarmes;
A Senator who by ſome words we find,
To the conſpirators (though none of theirs)
Had ſhowne himſelfe familiar with their minde,
Then chanc'd to deale with Caeſar in affaires.
That ſight their ſoules did with confuſion fill,
For, thinking that he told their purpos'd deeds,
They ſtraight themſelves, or Caeſar thought to kill:
"A guiltie conſcience no accuſer needs;
But marking that he us'd (when taking leave)
A ſuters geſture when affording thankes,
They of their courſe did greater hopes conceave,
And rang'd them ſeven according to their rankes.
Then Caeſar march'd forth to the fatall place;
Neere Pompeys Theater where the Senate was,
Where (when he had remain'd a litle ſpace)
All the confederats flock'd about. Calph. Alas.
Firſt for the forme, Metellus Cimber crav'd
To have his Brother from exile reſtor'd,
Yet with the reſt a rude repulſe receiv'd,
Whilſt it they all too earneſtly implor'd:
Bold Cimber who in ſtrife with him did ſtand,
Did ſtrive to cover with his Gowne his head:
Then was the firſt blow given by Caſca's hand,
Which on his necke a litle wound but made.
And Caeſar (ſtarting whilſt the ſtroke he ſpi'd)
By ſtrength from further ſtriking Caſca ſtai'd,
Whilſt both the two burſt out at once, and cry'd:
He Traitour Caſca, and he, Brother aide;
Then all the reſt againſt him did ariſe
Like deſp'rat men, whoſe furie force affords,
That Caeſar on no ſide could ſet his eyes,
But every looke encountred with ſome Swords;
Yet, as a lyon (when by nets ſurpriz'd)
Stands ſtrugling ſtill ſo long as he hath ſtrength,
So Caeſar (as he had their pow'r deſpis'd)
Did with great rage reſiſt, till at the length
He thus cri'd out (when ſpying Brutus come)
And thou my Sonne! then griefe did back rebound:
"Nought but unkindneſſe Caeſar could o'recome,
"That, of all things, doth give the deepeſt wound.
"Ah! when unkindneſſe is, where love was thought,
A tender paſſion breakes the ſtrongeſt heart:
"For, of all thoſe who give offence in ought,
"Men, others hate, but for unkinde men, ſmart.
Ah! taking then no more delight in light,
As who diſdainfullie the world diſclaim'd,
Or if from Brutus blow to hold his ſight,
As of ſo great ingratitude aſham'd,
He with his Gowne when cover'd firſt o're all,
As one who neither ſought, nor wiſh'd reliefe,
Not wronging majeſtie, in ſtate did fall,
No ſigh conſenting to betray his griefe.
Yet (if by chance or force I cannot tell)
Even at the place, where Pompey's ſtatue ſtood,
(As if to crave him pardon,) Caeſar fell,
That in revenge it might exhauſt his blood;
But when his corpes abandon'd quite by breath,
Did fortunes frailties monument remaine,
That all might have like int'reſt in his death,
And by the ſame, looke for like praiſe or paine:
Then Caſsius, Brutus, and the reſt began
With that great Emperours blood to die their hands;
"What beaſt in th'earth more cruell is then man,
"When o're his reaſon paſſion once commands?
Whilſt brutiſh Brutus, and proud Caſsius thus
Romes greateſt Captaine under truſt deceiv'd,
Where was Antonius (ſince a friend to us)
That he not loſt himſelfe, or Caeſar ſav'd?
The whole conſpiratours remain'd in doubt,
Had he and Caeſar joyn'd, to be undone,
And ſo caus'd one to talke with him without,
Who fain'd a conference till the fact was done.
Then knowing well in ſuch tumultuous broiles,
That the firſt danger alwayes is the worſt,
He fled in haſt, diſguis'd with borrow'd ſpoiles,
For rage and for diſdaine even like to burſt.
The Senatours which were aſſembled there,
When they beheld that great man brought to end,
What was their part? to what inclin'd their care?
I fear affliction could not finde a friend.
Of thoſe who in the Senate-houſe did ſit
(So ſad an object ſorrie to behold,
Or fearing what bould hands might more commit)
Each to his houſe a ſeverall way did hold;
This act with horrour did confound their ſight,
And unawares their judgement did ſurpriſe:
"When any haſtie harmes un-lookt-for light,
"The reſolution hath not time to riſe:
That man on whom the world did once rely,
By all long reverenc'd, and ador'd by ſome,
None to attend him had but two and I.
To what an ebbe may fortunes flowing come?
Why ſhould men following on the ſmoake of prie,
Leave certaine caſe to ſeeke a dream'd delight,
Which when they have by many dangers tri'd,
They neither can with ſafety keepe nor quite?
"The people who by force ſubdu'd remaine,
"May pitty thoſe by whom oppreſt they reſt;
"They but one Tyrant have, whereas there raigne
A Thouſand Tyrants in one Tyrants breſt;
VVhat though great Caeſar once commanded Kings,
VVhoſe onely name whole Nations did appall?
Yet now (let no man truſt in worldly things)
A little earth holds him who held it all.
Ah! had he but beleev'd my faithfull cares,
His State to ſtabliſh who have alwayes ſtriv'd,
Then (ſcaping this conſpiracie of theirs)
He, honour'd ſtill, and I had happy liv'd.
Did I not ſpend of ſupplications ſtore,
That he within his houſe, this day would waſte,
As I by dreames advertis'd was before,
VVhich ſhew'd what was to come, and now is paſt;
VVhil'ſt the Sooth-ſayers ſacrific'd did finde
A beaſt without a heart, their Altars ſtaine,
By that preſage my ſoule might have divin'd,
That I without my heart would ſoone remaine;
But all thoſe terrours could no terrour give
To that great minde, whoſe thoughts too high ſtill aym'd;
He by his fortune confident did live,
As, if the heavens, for him had all things fram'd;
Yet though he ended have his fatall race,
To bragge for this, let not his Murtherers ſtrive:
For, O! I hope to ſee within ſhort ſpace,
Him dead ador'd, and them abhorrd alive.
Though now his name the multitude reſpects,
Since murdering one who him had hel ſo deare,
VVhil'ſt inward thoughts each outward thing reflects,
Some monſtrous ſhape to Brutus muſt appeare.
Iuſt Nemeſis muſt plague proud Caſsius ſoone,
And make him kill himſelfe, from hopes eſtrang'd;
Once all the wrongs by foes to Caeſar done,
May by themſelves be on themſelves reveng'd.
"Some, Soveraigne of the earth, would fortune prove,
"As if, confus'dly, Gods did men advance;
"Nought comes to men below, but from above,
"By providence, not by a ſtaggering chance:
"Though to the cauſe that laſt forgoes the end,
"Some attribute the courſe of every thing,
"That cauſe, on other cauſes doth depend,
"Which chain'd 'twixt heaven and earth due ends forth bring;
"Of thoſe decrees the heavens for us appoint,
"(Who ever them approves, or doth diſprove)
"No mortall man can diſappoint a point,
"But as they pleaſe here moves, or doth remove;
"We, when once come the worlds vaine pompe to try,
"(Led by the fates) to end our journey haſte:
"For, when firſt borne, we ſtraight begin to dye,
"Lifes firſt day is a ſtep unto the laſt.
"And is there ought more ſwift then dayes, and yeares,
"Which weare away this breath of ours ſo ſoone,
"Whil'ſt Lacheſis to no requeſt gives eares,
"But ſpinnes the threeds of life till they be done?
"Yet fooliſh worldlings following that which flies,
"As if they had aſſurance of their breath,
"To fraile preferrement fondly ſtrive to riſe,
"Which (but a burden) weighs them downe to death.
There's none of us but muſt remember ſtill,
How that the Gods by many a wondrous ſigne,
Did ſhew (it ſeem'd) how that againſt their will,
The deſtinies would Caeſars dayes confine.
A monſtrous ſtarre amidſt the heaven hath beene,
Still ſince they firſt againſt him did conſpire;
The ſolitary birds at noone were ſeene,
And men to walke environ'd all with fire:
What wonder though the heavens at ſuch a time,
Do brave the earth with apparitions ſtrange,
Then whil'ſt intending ſuch a monſtrous crime,
"Unnaturall men make Natures courſe to change?
Though all ſuch things ſeeme wonderfull to ſome,
They may by Reaſon comprehended be,
For, what, beyond what uſuall is, doth come,
The Ignorant with wondring eyes do ſee.
Thoſe baſtard Starres, not heritours of th'ayre,
Are firſt conceiv'd below, then borne above,
And when fore-knowing things, ſprits take moſt care,
And by illuſion, ſuperſtition move.
Yet this, no doubt, a great regard ſhould breed,
When Nature hath brought forth a monſtrous birth,
In ſecret Characters where men may reade
The wrath of heaven, and wickedneſſe of th'earth.
The Naturalliſts, and th'Aſtrologians skill
May oft, encountring, manifeſt like care:
Since th'one looks back, the other forward ſtill,
One may tell what, the other why things are.
Shall ſorrow through the waves of woes to ſaile,
Have ſtill your teares for Seas, your ſighs for winds;
To miſerie what do baſe plaints availe?
A courſe more high becomes heroicke mindes.
"None are o're-come, ſave onely thoſe who yeeld,
From froward Fortune though ſome blows be borne,
Let Vertue ſerve Adverſity for ſhield:
"No greater griefe to griefe then th'enemies ſcorne;
This makes your foes but laugh to ſee you weep,
At leaſt theſe teares but for your ſelfe beſtow,
And not for that great ſprit, whoſe ſpoyls heavens keep;
For, he no doubt, reſts deified ere now.
I onely waile my life, and not his death;
Who now amongſt th'immortals doth repoſe,
And ſhall ſo long as I have bloud or breath,
To furniſh forth the elements of woes.
I care not who rejoyce, ſo I lament,
Who do to darkneſſe dedicate my dayes,
And ſince the light of my delight is ſpent,
Shall have in horrour all Apollo's rayes.
(I will retyre my ſelfe to waile alone,
As truſtie Turtles mourning for their Mates)
And (my misfortune alwayes bent to mone)
Will ſpurne at pleaſures as empoyſon'd baits;
No ſecond gueſt ſhall preſſe great Caeſars bed,
Warm'd by the flames to which he firſt gave life;
I thinke there may be greater honour had,
When Caeſars widow, then anothers wife.
This had afforded comfort for my harmes,
If I (ere chanc'd abandon'd thus to be)
Had had a little Caeſar in mine armes,
The living picture of his Syre to me.
Yet doth that Idoll which my thoughts adore,
With me of late moſt ſtrictly match'd remaine,
For, where my armes him ſometimes held before,
Now in my heart I ſhall him ſtill retaine.
That (though I may no pretious things impart)
Thy deitie may by me be honour'd oft,
Still offring up my thoughts upon my heart,
My ſacred flame ſhall alwayes mount aloft.
WHat fools are thoſe who do repoſe their truſt
On what this maſſe of miſery affords?
And (bragging but of th'excrements of duſt)
Of life-leſſe Treaſures labour to be Lords:
Which like the Sirens ſongs, or Circes charmes,
With ſhadows of delight hide certaine harmes.
Ah! whil'ſt they ſport on pleaſures yie grounds,
Oft poyſon'd by Proſperitie with Pride,
A ſudden ſtorme their floting joyes confounds,
Whoſe courſe is ordred by the eye-leſſe guide,
Who ſo inconſtantly her ſelfe doth beare
Th'unhappie men may hope, the happy feare.
The fortunate who bathe in flouds of joyes,
To periſh oft amidſt their pleaſures chance,
And mirthleſſe wretches wallowing in annoye▪
Oft by adverſitie themſelves advance;
Whl'ſt Fortune bent to mock vaine worldlings cares,
Doth change deſpaires in hopes, hopes in deſpaires▪
That gallant Grecian whoſe great wit ſo ſoone,
Whom others could not number, did o're-come,
Had he not beene undone, had beene undone,
And if not baniſh'd, had not had a home;
To him feare courage gave (what wondrous change!)
And many doubts are ſolution ſtrange.
He who told one who then was Fortunes childe,
As if with horrour to congeale his bloud:
That Caius Marius farie from Rome exil'd,
Wretch'd on the ruines of great Carthage ſtood;
Though long both plagu'd by griefe, and by diſgrace,
The Conſul-ſhip regain'd, and dy'd in peace.
And that great Pompey (all the worlds delight)
Whom of his Theater then th'applauſes pleas'd,
Whil'ſt praiſe-tranſported eyes endeer'd his ſight,
Who by youths toyles ſhould have his age then eas'd,
He by one blow of Fortune loſt farre more
Then many battels gayned had before.
Such ſudden changes ſo diſturbe the ſoule,
That ſtill the judgement ballanc'd is by doubt;
But, on a Round, what wonder though things roule?
And ſince within a Circle, turne about?
Whil'ſt heaven on earth ſtrange alterations brings,
To ſcorne our confidence in worldly things.
And chanc'd there ever accidents more ſtrange,
Then in theſe ſtormy bounds where we remaine?
One did a ſheep-hooke to a Scepter change,
The nurceling of a Wolfe o're men did raigne;
A little Village grew a mighty Towne,
Which whil'ſt it had no King, held many a Crowne.
Then by how many ſundry ſorts of men,
Hath this great State beene rul'd? though now by none,
Which firſt obey'd but one, then two, then ten,
Then by degrees return'd to two, and one;
Of which three States, their ruine did abide,
Two by Two's luſts, and one by Two mens pride.
What revolutions huge have hapned thus,
By ſecret fates all violently led,
Though ſeeming but by accident to us,
Yet in the depths of heavenly breaſts firſt bred,
As arguments demonſtrative to prove
That weakneſſe dwels below, and pow'r above.
Loe, proſprous Caeſar charged for a ſpace,
Both with ſtrange Nations, and his Countreys ſpoyls,
Even when he ſeem'd by warre to purchaſe peace,
And roſes of ſweet reſt, from thornes of toils;
Then whil'ſt his minde and fortune ſwell'd moſt high,
Hath beene conſtrain'd the laſt diſtreſſe to trie.
What warnings large were in a time ſo ſhort,
Of that darke courſe which by his death now ſhines?
It, ſpeechleſſe wonders plainly did report,
It, men reveal'd by words, and gods by ſignes,
Yet by the chaynes of deſtinies whil'ſt bound,
He ſaw the ſword, but could not ſcape the wound.
What curtaine o're our knowledge errour brings,
Now drawn, now open'd, by the heavenly hoſt,
Which makes us ſometime ſharpe to ſee ſmall things,
And yet quite blinde when as we ſhould ſee moſt,
That curious braines may reſt amaz'd at it,
Whoſe ignorance makes them preſume of wit;
Then let us live, ſince all things change below,
When rais'd moſt high, s thoſe who once may fall,
And hold when by diſaſters brought more low,
The minde ſtill free, what ever elſe be thrall:
"Thoſe (Lords of Fortune) ſweeten every State,
"(Who can command themſelves, though not their fate.