I Thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany, then Cornwall.
It did alwayes ſeeme ſo to vs: But now in the diuiſion of the Kingdome, it appeares not which of the Dukes hee valewes moſt, for qualities are ſo weigh'd, that curioſity in neither, can make choiſe of eithers moity.
Is not this your Son, my Lord?
His breeding Sir, hath bin at my charge. I haue ſo often bluſh'd to acknowledge him, that now I am braz'd too't.
I cannot conceiue you.
Sir, this yong Fellowes mother could; wherevpon ſhe grew round womb'd, and had indeede (Sir) a Sonne for her Cradle, ere ſhe had a husband for her bed. Do you ſmell a fault?
I cannot wiſh the fault vndone, the iſſue of it, being ſo proper.
But I haue a Sonne, Sir, by order of Law, ſome yeere elder then this; who, yet is no deerer in my account, though this Knaue came ſomthing ſawcily to the world before he was ſent for: yet was his Mother fayre, there was good ſport at his making, and the horſon muſt be acknowledged. Doe you know this Noble Gentleman, Edmond?
No, my Lord.
My Lord of Kent:
Remember him heereafter, as my Honourable Friend.
My ſeruices to your Lordſhip.
I muſt loue you, and ſue to know you better.
Sir, I ſhall ſtudy deſeruing.
He hath bin out nine yeares, and away he ſhall againe. The King is comming.
Attend the Lords of France & Burgundy, Gloſter.
I ſhall, my Lord.
Meane time we ſhal expreſſe our darker purpoſe.
Giue me the Map there. Know, that we haue diuided
In three our Kingdome: and 'tis our faſt intent,
To ſhake all Cares and Buſineſſe from our Age,
Conferring them on yonger ſtrengths, while we
Vnburthen'd crawle toward death. Our ſon of Cornwal,
And you our no leſſe louing Sonne of Albany,
We haue this houre a conſtant will to publiſh
Our daughters ſeuerall Dowers, that future ſtrife
May be preuented now. The Princes, France & Burgundy,
Great Riuals in our yongeſt daughters loue,
Long in our Court, haue made their amorous ſoiourne,
And heere are to be anſwer'd. Tell me my daughters
(Since now we will diueſt vs both of Rule,
Intereſt of Territory, Cares of State)
Which of you ſhall we ſay doth loue vs moſt,
That we, our largeſt bountie may extend
Where Nature doth with merit challenge.
Our eldeſt borne, ſpeake firſt.
Sir, I loue you more then word can weild ye matter,
Deerer then eye-ſight, ſpace, and libertie,
Beyond what can be valewed, rich or rare,
No leſſe then life, with grace, health, beauty, honor:
As much as Childe ere lou'd, or Father found.
A loue that makes breath poore, and ſpeech vnable,
Beyond all manner of ſo much I loue you.
What ſhall Cordelia ſpeake? Loue, and be ſilent.
Of all theſe bounds euen from this Line, to this,
With ſhadowie Forreſts, and with Champains rich'd
With plenteous Riuers, and wide-skirted Meades
We make thee Lady. To thine and Albanies iſſues
Be this perpetuall. What ſayes our ſecond Daughter?
Our deereſt Regan, wife of Cornwall?
I am made of that ſelfe-mettle as my Siſter,
And prize me at her worth. In my true heart,
I finde ſhe names my very deede of loue:
Onely ſhe comes too ſhort, that I profeſſe
My ſelfe an enemy to all other ioyes,
Which the moſt precious ſquare of ſenſe profeſſes,
And finde I am alone felicitate
In your deere Highneſſe loue.
Then poore Cordelia,
And yet not ſo, ſince I am ſure my loue's
More ponderous then my tongue.
To thee, and thine hereditarie euer,
Remaine this ample third of our faire Kingdome,
No leſſe in ſpace, validitie, and pleaſure
Then that confeir'd on Gonerill. Now our Ioy,
Although our laſt and leaſt; to whoſe yong loue▪
The Vines of France, and Milke of Burgundie,
Striue to be intereſt. What can you ſay, to draw
A third, more opilent then your Siſters? ſpeake.
Nothing my Lord.
Nothing?
Nothing.
Nothing will come of nothing, ſpeake againe.
Vnhappie that I am, I cannot heaue
My heart into my mouth: I loue your Maieſty
According to my bond, no more nor leſſe.
How, how Cordelia? Mend your ſpeech a little,
Leaſt you may marre your Fortunes.
Good my Lord,
You haue begot me, bred me, lou'd me.
I returne thoſe duties backe as are right fit,
Obey you, Loue you, and moſt Honour you.
Why haue my Siſters Husbands, if they ſay
They loue you all? Happily when I ſhall wed,
That Lord, whoſe hand muſt take my plight, ſhall carry
Halfe my loue with him, halfe my Care, and Dutie,
Sure I ſhall neuer marry like my Siſters.
But goes thy heart with this?
I my good Lord.
So young, and ſo vntender?
So young my Lord, and true.
Let it be ſo, thy truth then be thy dowre:
For by the ſacred radience of the Sunne,
The miſeries of Heccat and the night:
By all the operation of the Orbes,
From whom we do exiſt, and ceaſe to be,
Heere I diſclaime all my Paternall care,
Propinquity and property of blood,
And as a ſtranger to my heart and me,
Hold thee from this for euer. The barbarous Scythian,
Or he that makes his generation meſſes
To gorge his appetite, ſhall to my boſome
Be as well neighbour'd, pittied, and releeu'd,
As thou my ſometime Daughter.
Good my Liege.
Peace Kent,
Come not betweene the Dragon and his wrath,
I lou'd her moſt, and thought to ſet my reſt
On her kind nurſery. Hence and avoid my ſight:
So be my graue my peace, as here I giue
Her Fathers heart from her; call France, who ſtirres?
Call Burgundy, Cornwall, and Albanie,
With my two Daughters Dowres, digeſt the third,
Let pride, which ſhe cals plainneſſe, marry her:
I doe inueſt you ioyntly with my power,
Preheminence, and all the large effects
That troope with Maieſty. Our ſelfe by Monthly courſe,
With reſeruation of an hundred Knights.
By you to be ſuſtain'd, ſhall our abode
Make with you by due turne, onely we ſhall retaine
The name, and all th' addition to a King: the Sway,
Reuennew Execution of the reſt,
Beloued Sonnes be yours, which to confirme,
This Coronet part betweene you.
Royall Lear,
Whom I haue euer honor'd as my King▪
Lou'd as my Father, as my Maſter follow'd,
As my great Patron thought on in my praiers.
The bow is bent & drawne, make from the ſhaft.
Let it fall rather, though the forke inuade
The region of my heart, be Kent vnmannerly,
When Lear is mad, what wouldeſt thou do old man?
Think'ſt thou that dutie ſhall haue dread to ſpeake,
When power to flattery bowes?
To plainneſſe honour's bound,
When Maieſty falls to folly, reſerue thy ſtate,
And in thy beſt conſideration checke
This hideous raſhneſſe, anſwere my life, my iudgement:
Thy yongeſt Daughter do's not loue thee leaſt,
Nor are thoſe empty hearted, whoſe low founds
Reuerbe no hollowneſſe.
Kent, on thy life no more.
My life I neuer held but as pawne
To wage againſt thine enemies, nere feare to looſe it,
Thy ſafety being motiue.
Out of my ſight.
See better Lear, and let me ſtill remaine
The true blanke of thine eie.
Now by Apollo,
Now by Apollo, King
Thou ſwear▪ſt thy Gods in vaine.
O Vaſſall! Miſcreant.
Cor. Deare Sir forbeare.
Kill thy Phyſition, and thy ſee beſtow
Vpon the foule diſeaſe, reuoke thy guift,
Or whil'ſt I can vent clamour from my throate,
Ile tell thee thou doſt euill.
Heare me recreant, on thine allegeance heare me;
That thou haſt ſought to make vs breake our vowes,
Which we durſt neuer yet; and with ſtrain'd pride,
To come betwixt our ſentences, and our power.
Which, nor our nature, nor our place can beare;
Our potencie made good, take thy reward.
Fiue dayes we do allot thee for prouiſion,
To ſhield thee from diſaſters of the world,
And on the ſixt to turne thy hated backe
Vpon our kingdome; if on the tenth day following,
Thy baniſht trunke be found in our Dominions,
The moment is thy death, away. By Iupiter,
This ſhall not be reuok'd,
Fare thee well King, ſith thus thou wilt appeare,
Freedome liues hence, and baniſhment is here;
The Gods to their deere ſhelter take thee Maid,
That iuſtly think'ſt, and haſt moſt rightly ſaid:
And your large ſpeeches, may your deeds approue,
That good effects may ſpring from words of loue:
Thus Kent, O Princes, bids you all adew,
Hee'l ſhape his old courſe, in a Country new.
Heere's France and Burgundy, my Noble Lord.
My Lord of Bugundie,
We firſt addreſſe toward you, who with this King
Hath riuald for our Daughter; what in the leaſt
Will you require in preſent Dower with her,
Or ceaſe your queſt of Loue?
Moſt Royall Maieſty,
I craue no more then hath your Highneſſe offer'd,
Nor will you tender leſſe?
Right Noble Burgundy,
When ſhe was deare to vs, we did hold her ſo,
But now her price is fallen: Sir, there ſhe ſtands,
If ought within that little ſeeming ſubſtance,
Or all of it with our diſpleaſure piec'd,
And nothing more may fitly like your Grace,
Shee's there, and ſhe is yours.
I know no anſwer.
Will you with thoſe infirmities ſhe owes,
Vnfriended, new adopted to our hate,
Dow'rd with our curſe, and ſtranger'd with our oath,
Take her or, leaue her.
Pardon me Royall Sir,
Election makes not vp in ſuch conditions.
Then leaue her ſir, for by the powre that made me,
I tell you all her wealth. For you great King,
I would not from your loue make ſuch a ſtray,
To match you where I hate, therefore beſeech you
T' auert your liking a more worthier way,
Then on a wretch whom Nature is aſham'd
Almoſt t' acknowledge hers.
This is moſt ſtrange,
That ſhe whom euen but now, was your obiect.
The argument of your praiſe▪ balme of your age,
The beſt, the deereſt, ſhould in this trice of time
Commit a thing ſo monſtrous, to diſmantle
So many folds of fauour: ſure her offence
Muſt be of ſuch vnnaturall degree,
That monſters it: Or your fore-voucht affection
Fall into taint, which to beleeue of her
Muſt be a faith that reaſon without miracle
Should neuer plant in me.
I yet beſeech your Maieſty.
If for I want that glib and oylie Art,
To ſpeake and purpoſe not, ſince what I will intend,
Ile do't before I ſpeake, that you make knowne
It is no vicious blot, murther, or fouleneſſe,
No vnchaſte action or diſhonoured ſtep
That hath depriu'd me of your Grace and fauour,
But euen for want of that, for which I am richer,
A ſtill ſoliciting eye, and ſuch a tongue,
That I am glad I haue not, though not to haue it,
Hath loft me in your liking.
Better thou had'ſt▪
Not beene borne, then not t haue pleas'd me better.
Is it but this? A tardineſſe in nature,
Which often leaues the hiſtory vnſpoke
That it intends to do: my Lord of Burgundy,
What ſay you to the Lady? Loue's not loue
When it is mingled with regards, that ſtands
Aloofe from th' intire point, will you haue her?
She is herſelfe a Dowrie.
Royall King,
Giue but that portion which your ſelfe propos'd,
And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
Dutcheſſe of Burgundie.
Nothing, I haue ſworne, I am firme.
I am ſorry then you haue ſo loſt a Father,
That you muſt looſe a husband.
Peace be with Burgundie,
Since that reſpect and Fortunes are his loue,
I ſhall not be his wife.
Faireſt Cordelia, that art moſt rich being poore,
Moſt choiſe forſaken, and moſt lou'd deſpis'd,
Thee and thy vertues here I ſeize vpon,
Be it lawfull I take vp what's caſt away.
Gods, Gods! 'Tis ſtrange, that from their cold'ſt neglect
My Loue ſhould kindle to enflam'd reſpect.
Thy dowreleſſe Daughter King, throwne to my chance,
Is Queene of vs, of ours, and our faire France:
Not all the Dukes of watriſh Burgundy,
Can buy this vnpriz'd precious Maid of me.
Bid them farewell Cordelia, though vnkinde,
Thou looſeſt here a better where to finde.
Thou haſt her France, let her be thine, for we
Haue no ſuch Daughter, nor ſhall euer ſee
That face of hers againe, therfore be gone,
Without our Grace, our Loue, our Benizon:
Come Noble Burgundie.
Bid farwell to your Siſters.
The Iewels of our Father, with waſh'd eies
Cordelia leaues you, I know you what you are,
And like a Siſter am moſt loth to call
Your faults as they are named. Loue well our Father:
To your profeſſed boſomes I commit him,
But yet alas, ſtood I within his Grace,
I would prefer him to a better place,
So farewell to you both.
Preſcribe not vs our dutie.
Let your ſtudy
Be to content your Lord, who hath receiu'd you
At Fortunes almes, you haue obedience ſcanted,
And well are worth the want that you haue wanted▪
Time ſhall vnfold what plighted cunning hides,
Who couers faults, at laſt with ſhame derides:
Well may you proſper.
Come my faire Cordelia.
Siſter, it is not little I haue to ſay,
Of what moſt neerely appertaines to vs both,
I thinke our Father will hence to night.
That's moſt certaine, and with you: next moneth with vs.
You ſee how full of changes his age is, the obſeruation we haue made of it hath beene little: he alwaies lou'd our Siſter moſt, and with what poore iudgement he hath now caſt her off, appeares too groſſely.
'Tis the infirmity of his age, yet he hath euer but ſlenderly knowne himſelfe.
The beſt and ſoundeſt of his time hath bin but raſh, then muſt we looke from his age, to receiue not alone the imperfections of long ingrafted condition, but therewithall the vnruly way wardneſſe, that infirme and cholericke yeares bring with them.
Such vnconſtant ſtarts are we like to haue from him, as this of Kents baniſhment.
There is further complement of leaue-taking betweene France and him, pray you let vs ſit together, it our Father carry authority with ſuch diſpoſition as he beares, this laſt ſurrender of his will but offend vs.
We ſhall further thinke of it.
We muſt do ſomething, and i' th' heate.
Thou Nature art my Goddeſſe, to thy Law
My ſeruices are bound, wherefore ſhould I
Stand in the plague of cuſtome, and permit
The curioſity of Nations, to depriue me?
For that I am ſome twelue, or fourteene Moonſhines
Lag of a Brother? Why Baſtard? Wherefore baſe?
When my Dimenſions are as well compact,
My minde as generous, and my ſhape as true
As honeſt Madams iſſue? Why brand they vs
With Baſe? With baſenes Barſtadie? Baſe, Baſe?
Who in the luſtie ſtealth of Nature, take
More compoſition, and fierce qualitie,
Then doth within a dull ſtale tyred bed
Goe to th' creating a whole tribe of Fops
Got 'tweene a ſleepe, and wake? Well then,
Legitimate Edgar, I muſt haue your land,
Our Fathers loue, is to the Baſtard Edmond,
As to th' legitimate: fine word: Legitimate.
Well, my Legittimate, if this Letter ſpeed,
And my inuention thriue, Edmond the baſe
Shall to' th' Legitimate: I grow, I proſper:
Now Gods, ſtand vp for Baſtards.
Kent baniſh'd thus? and France in choller parted?
And the King gone to night? Preſcrib'd his powre,
Confin'd to exhibition? All this done
Vpon the gad? Edmond, how now? What newes?
So pleaſe your Lordſhip, none.
Why ſo earneſtly ſeeke you to put vp yt Letter?
I know no newes, my Lord.
What Paper were you reading?
Nothing my Lord.
No? what needed then that terrible diſpatch of it into your Pocket? The quality of nothing, hath not ſuch neede to hide it ſelfe. Let's ſee: come, if it bee nothing, I ſhall not neede Spectacles.
I beſeech you Sir, pardon mee; it is a Letter from my Brother, that I haue not all ore-read; and for ſo much as I haue perus'd, I finde it not fit for your ore-looking.
Giue me the Letter, Sir.
I ſhall offend, either to detaine, or giue it:
The Contents, as in part I vnderſtand them.
Are too blame.
Let's ſee, let's ſee.
I hope for my Brothers iuſtification, hee wrote this but as an eſſay, or taſte of my Vertue.
This policie, and reuerence of Age, makes the world bitter to the beſt of our times: keepes our Fortunes from vs, till our oldneſſe cannot relliſh them. I begin to finde an idle and fond bondage, in the oppreſſion of aged tyranny, who ſwayes not as it hath power, but as it is ſuffer'd. Come to me, that of this I may ſpeake more. If our Father would ſleepe till I wak'd him, you ſhould enioy halfe his Reuennew for euer, and liue the beloued of your Brother. Edgar.
Hum? Conſpiracy? Sleepe till I wake him, you ſhould enioy halfe his Reuennew: my Sonne Edgar, had hee a hand to write this? A heart and braine to breede it in? When came you to this? Who brought it?
It was not brought mee, my Lord; there's the cunning of it. I found it throwne in at the Caſement of my Cloſſet.
You know the character to be your Brothers?
If the matter were good my Lord, I durſt ſwear it were his: but in reſpect of that, I would faine thinke it were not.
It is his.
It is his hand, my Lord: but I hope his heart is not in the Contents.
Has he neuer before ſounded you in this buſines?
Neuer my Lord. But I haue heard him oft maintaine it to be fit, that Sonnes at perfect age, and Fathers declin'd, the Father ſhould bee as Ward to the Son, and the Sonne manage his Reuennew.
O Villain, villain: his very opinion in the Letter. Abhorred Villaine, vnnaturall, deteſted, brutiſh Villaine; worſe then brutiſh: Go ſirrah, ſeeke him: Ile apprehend him. Abhominable Villaine, where is he?
I do not well know my L. If it ſhall pleaſe you to ſuſpend your indignation againſt my Brother, til you can deriue from him better teſtimony of his intent, you ſhold run a certaine courſe: where, if you violently proceed againſt him, miſtaking his purpoſe, it would make a great gap in your owne Honor, and ſhake in peeces, the heart of his obedience. I dare pawne downe my life for him, that he hath writ this to feele my affection to your Honor, & to no other pretence of danger.
Thinke you ſo?
If your Honor iudge it meere, I will place you where you ſhall heare vs conferre of this, and by an Auricular aſſurance haue your ſatisfaction, and that without any further delay, then this very Euening.
He cannot bee ſuch a Monſter. Edmond ſeeke him out: winde me into him, I pray you: frame the Buſineſſe after your owne wiſedome. I would vnſtate my ſelfe, to be in a due reſolution.
I will ſeeke him Sir, preſently: conuey the buſineſſe as I ſhall find meanes, and acquaint you withall.
Theſe late Eclipſes in the Sun and Moone portend no good to vs: though the wiſedome of Nature can reaſon it thus, and thus, yet Nature finds it ſelfe ſcourg'd by the ſequent effects. Loue cooles, friendſhip falls off, Brothers diuide. In Cities, mutinies; in Countries, diſcord; in Pallaces, Treaſon; and the Bond crack'd, 'twixt Sonne and Father. This villaine of mine comes vnder the prediction; there's Son againſt Father, the King fals from by as of Nature, there's Father againſt Childe. We haue ſeene the beſt of our time. Machinations, hollowneſſe, treacherie, and all ruinous diſorders follow vs diſquietly to our Graues. Find out this Villain▪ Edmond, it ſhall loſe thee nothing, do it carefully: and the Noble & true-harted Kent baniſh'd; his offence, honeſty. 'Tis ſtrange.
This is the excellent foppery of the world, that when we are ſicke in fortune, often the ſurfers of our own behauiour, we make guilty of our diſaſters, the Sun, the Moone, and Starres, as if we were villaines on neceſſitie, Fooles by heauenly compulſion, Knaues, Theeues, and Treachers by Sphericall predominance. Drunkards, Lyars, and Adulterers by an inforc'd obedience of Planatary influence; and all that we are euill in, by a diuine thruſtng on. An admirable euaſion of Whore-maſter-man, to lay his Goatiſh diſpoſition on the charge of a Starre, My father compounded with my mother vnder the Dragons taile, and my Natiuity was vnder Vrſa Maior, ſo that it followes, I am rough and Leacherous. I ſhould haue bin that I am, had the maidenleſt Starre in the Firmament twinkled on my baſtardizing.
Pat: he comes like the Cataſtrophe of the old Comedie: my Cue is villanous Melancholly, with a ſighe like Tom o' Bedlam. — O theſe Eclipſes do portend theſe diuiſions. Fa, Sol, La, Me.
How now Brother Edmond, what ſerious contemplation are you in?
I am thinking Brother of a prediction I read this other day, what ſhould follow theſe Eclipſes.
Do you buſie your ſelfe with that?
I promiſe you, the effects he writes of, ſucceede vnhappily.
When ſaw you my Father laſt?
The night gone by.
Spake you with him?
I, two houres together.
Parted you in good termes? Found you no diſpleaſure in him, by word, nor countenance?
None at all,
Bethink your ſelfe wherein you may haue offended him: and at my entreaty forbeare his preſence, vntill ſome little time hath qualified the heat of his diſpleaſure, which at this inſtant ſo rageth in him, that with the miſchiefe of your perſon, it would ſcarſely alay.
Some Villaine hath done me wrong.
That's my feare, I pray you haue a continent forbearance till the ſpeed of his rage goes ſlower: and as I ſay, retire with me to my lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to heare my Lord ſpeake: pray ye goe, there's my key: if you do ſtirre abroad, goe arm'd.
Arm'd, Brother?
Brother, I aduiſe you to the beſt, I am no honeſt man, if ther be any good meaning toward you: I haue told you what I haue ſeene, and heard: But faintly, Nothing like the image, and horror of it, pray you away.
Shall I heare from you anon?
I do ſerue you in this buſineſſe:
A Credulous Father, and a Brother Noble,
Whoſe nature is ſo farre from doing harmes,
That he ſuſpects none: on whoſe fooliſh honeſtie
My practiſes ride eaſie: I ſee the buſineſſe.
Let me, if not by birth, haue lands by wit,
All with me's meete, that I can faſhion fit.
Did my Father ſtrike my Gentleman for chiding of his Foole?
I Madam.
By day and night, he wrongs me, euery howre
He flaſhes into one groſſe crime, or other,
That ſets vs all at ods: Ile not endure it;
His Knights grow riotous, and himſelfe vpbraides vs
On euery trifle. When he returnes from hunting,
I will not ſpeake with him, ſay I am ſicke,
If you come ſlacke of former ſeruices,
You ſhall do well, the fault of it Ile anſwer.
He's comming Madam, I heare him.
Put on what weary negligence you pleaſe,
You and your Fellowes: I'de haue it come to queſtion;
If he diſtaſte it, let him to my Siſter,
Whoſe mind and mine I know in that are one,
Remember what I haue ſaid.
Well Madam.
And let his Knights haue colder lookes among you: what growes of it no matter, aduiſe your fellowes ſo, Ile write ſtraight to my Siſter to hold my courſe; prepare for dinner.
If but as will I other accents borrow,
That can my ſpeech defuſe, my good intent
May carry through it ſelfe to that full iſſue
For which I raiz'd my likeneſſe. Now baniſht Kent,
If thou canſt ſerue where thou doſt ſtand condemn'd,
So may it come, thy Maſter whom thou Iou'ſt,
Shall find thee full of labours.
Let me not ſtay a iot for dinner, go get it ready: how now, what art thou?
A man Sir.
What doſt thou profeſſe? What would'ſt thou with vs?
I do profeſſe to be no leſſe then I ſeeme; to ſerue him truely that will put me in truſt, to loue him that is honeſt, to conuerſe with him that is wiſe and ſaies little, to feare iudgement, to fight when I cannot chooſe, and to eate no fiſh.
What art thou?
A very honeſt hearted Fellow, and as poore as the King.
If thou be'ſt as poore for a ſubiect, as hee's for a King, thou art poore enough. What wouldſt thou?
Seruice.
Who wouldſt thou ſerue?
You.
Do'ſt thou know me fellow?
No Sir, but you haue that in your countenance, which I would faine call Maſter.
What's that?
Authority.
What ſeruices canſt thou do?
I can keepe honeſt counſaile, ride, run, marre a curious tale in telling it, and deliuer a plaine meſſage bluntly: that which ordinary men are fit for, I am quallified in, and the beſt of me, is Dilligence.
How old art thou?
Not ſo young Sir to loue a woman for ſinging, nor ſo old to dote on her for any thing. I haue yeares on my backe forty eight.
Follow me, thou ſhalt ſerue me, if I like thee no worſe after dinner, I will not part from thee yet. Dinner ho, dinner, where's my knaue? my Foole? Go you and call my Foole hither. You you Sirrah, where's my Daughter?
So pleaſe you —
What ſaies the Fellow there? Call the Clot-pole backe: wher's my Foole? Ho, I thinke the world's aſleepe, how now? Where's that Mungrell?
He ſaies my Lord, your Daughters is not well.
Why came not the ſlaue backe to me when I call'd him?
Sir, he anſwered me in the roundeſt manner, he would not.
He would not?
My Lord, I know not what the matter is, but to my iudgement your Highneſſe is not entertain'd with that Ceremonious affection as you were wont, theres a great abatement of kindneſſe appeares as well in the generall dependants, as in the Duke himſelfe alſo, and your Daughter.
Ha? Saiſt thou ſo?
I beſeech you pardon me my Lord, if I bee miſtaken, for my duty cannot be ſilent, when I thinke your Highneſſe wrong'd.
Thou but remembreſt me of mine owne Conception, I haue perceiued a moſt faint neglect of late, which I haue rather blamed as mine owne iealous curioſitie, then as a very pretence and purpoſe of vnkindneſſe; I will looke further intoo't: but where's my Foole? I haue not ſeene him this two daies.
Since my young Ladies going into France
Sir, the Foole hath much pined away.
No more of that, I haue noted it well, goe you and tell my Daughter, I would ſpeake with her. Goe you call hither my Foole; Oh you Sir, you, come you hither Sir, who am I Sir?
My Ladies Father.
My Ladies Father? my Lords knaue, you whorſon dog, you ſlaue, you curre.
I am none of theſe my Lord,
I beſeech your pardon.
Do you bandy lookes with me, you Raſcall?
Ile not be ſtrucken my Lord.
Nor tript neither, you baſe Foot-ball plaier.
I thanke thee fellow.
Thou ſeru'ſt me, and Ile loue thee.
Come ſir, ariſe, away, Ile teach you differences: away, away, if you will meaſure your lubbers length againe, tarry, but away, goe too, haue you wiſedome, ſo.
Now my friendly knaue I thanke thee, there's earneſt of thy ſeruice.
Let me hire him too, here's my Coxcombe.
How now my pretty knaue, how doſt thou?
Sirrah, you were beſt take my Coxcombe.
Why my Boy?
Why? for taking ones part that's out of fauour, nay, & thou canſt not ſmile as the wind ſits, thou'lt catch colde ſhortly, there take my Coxcombes why this fellow ha's baniſh'd two on's Daughters, and did the third a bleſſing againſt his will, if thou follow him, thou muſt needs weare my Coxcombe. How now Nunckle? would I had two Coxcombes and two Daughters.
Why my Boy?
If I gaue them all my liuing, I'ld keepe my Coxcombes my ſelfe, there's mine, beg another of thy Daughters.
Take heed Sirrah, the whip.
Truth's a dog muſt to kennell, hee muſt bee whipt out, when the Lady Brach may ſtand by' th' fire and ſtinke.
A peſtilent gall to me.
Sirha, Ile teach thee a ſpeech.
Do.
Marke it Nuncle;
Haue more then thou ſhoweſt,
Speake leſſe then thou knoweſt,
Lend leſſe then thou oweſt,
Ride more then thou goeſt,
Learne more then thou troweſt,
Set leſſe then thou throweſt;
Leaue thy drinke and thy whore,
And keepe in a dore,
And thou ſhalt haue more,
Then two tens to a ſcore.
This is nothing Foole.
Then 'tis like the breath of an vnfeed Lawyer, you gaue me nothing for't, can you make no vſe of nothing Nuncle?
Why no Boy,
Nothing can be made out of nothing.
Prythee tell him, ſo much the rent of his land comes to, he will not beleeue a Foole.
A bitter Foole.
Do'ſt thou know the difference my Boy, betweene a bitter Foole, and a ſweet one.
No Lad, teach me.
Nunckle, giue me an egge, and Ile giue thee two Crownes.
What two Crownes ſhall they be?
Why after I haue cut the egge i' th' middle and eate vp the meate, the two Crownes of the egge: when thou cloueſt thy Crownes i' th' middle, and gau'ſt away both parts, thou boar'ſt thine Aſſe on thy backe o're the durt, thou had'ſt little wit in thy bald crowne, when thou gau'ſt thy golden one away; if I ſpeake like my ſelfe in this, let him be whipt that firſt findes it ſo.
Fooles had nere leſſe grace in a yeere,
For wiſemen are growne foppiſh,
And know not how their wits to weare,
Their manners are ſo apiſh.
When were you wont to be ſo full of Songs ſirrah?
I haue vſed it Nunckle, ere ſince thou mad'ſt thy Daughters thy Mothers, for when thou gau'ſt them the rod, and put'ſt downe thine owne breeches, then they
For ſodaine ioy did weepe,
And I for ſorrow ſung,
That ſuch a King ſhould play bo-peepe,
And goe the Foole among.
Pry' thy Nunckle keepe a Schoolemaſter that can teach
thy Foole to lie, I would faine learne to lie.
And you lie ſirrah, wee'l haue you whipt.
I maruell what kin thou and thy daughters are, they'l haue me whipt for ſpeaking true: thou'lt haue me whipt for lying; and ſometimes I am whipt for holding my peace. I had rather be any kind o' thing then a foole, and yet I would not be thee Nunckle, thou haſt pared thy wit o' both ſides, and left nothing i' th' middle; heere comes one o' the parings.
How now Daughter? what makes that Frontlet on? You are too much of late i' th' frowne.
Thou waſt a pretty fellow when thou hadſt no need to care for her frowning, now thou art an O without a figure, I am better then thou art now, I am a Foole, thou art nothing. Yes forſooth I will hold my tongue, ſo your face bids me, though you ſay nothing.
Mum, mum, he that keepes nor cruſt, not crum,
Weary of all, ſhall want ſome. That's a ſheal'd Peſcod.
Not only Sir this, your all-lycenc'd Foole,
But other of your inſolent retinue
Do hourely Carpe and Quarrell, breaking forth
In ranke, and (not to be endur'd) riots Sir.
I had thought by making this well knowne vnto you,
To haue found a ſafe redreſſe, but now grow fearefull
By what your ſelfe too late haue ſpoke and done,
That you protect this courſe, and put it on
By your allowance, which if you ſhould, the fault
Would not ſcape cenſure, nor the redreſſes ſleepe,
Which in the tender of a wholeſome weale,
Might in their working do you that offence,
Which elſe were ſhame, that then neceſſitie
Will call diſcreet proceeding.
For you know Nunckle, the Hedge-Sparrow fed the Cuckoo ſo long, that it's had it head bit off by it young, ſo out went the Candle, and we were left darkling.
Are you our Daughter?
I would you would make vſe of your good wiſedome
(Whereof I know you are fraught) and put away
Theſe diſpoſitions, which of late tranſport you
From what you rightly are.
May not an Aſſe know, when the Cart drawes the Horſe?
Whoop Iugge I loue thee.
Do's any heere know me?
This is not Lear:
Do's Lear walke thus? Speake thus? Where are his eies?
Either his Notion weakens, his Diſcernings
Are Lethargied. Ha! Waking? 'Tis not ſo?
Who is it that can tell me who I am?
Lears ſhadow.
Your name, faire Gentlewoman?
This admiration Sir, is much o' th' ſauour
Of other your new prankes. I do beſeech you
To vnderſtand my purpoſes aright:
As you are Old, and Reuerend, ſhould be Wiſe.
Heere do you keepe a hundred Knights and Squires,
Men ſo diſorder'd, ſo deboſh'd, and bold,
That this our Court infected with their manners,
Shewes like a riotous Inne; Epicuriſme and Luſt
Makes it more like a Tauerne, or a Brothell,
Then a grac'd Pallace. The ſhame it ſelfe doth ſpeake
For inſtant remedy. Be then deſir'd
By her, that elſe will take the thing ſhe begges,
A little to diſquantity your Traine,
And the remainders that ſhall ſtill depend,
To be ſuch men as may beſort your Age,
Which know themſelues, and you.
Darkneſſe, and Diuels.
Saddle my horſes: call my Traine together.
Degenerate Baſtard, Ile not trouble thee;
Yet haue I left a daughter.
You ſtrike my people, and your diſorder'd rable, make Seruants of their Betters.
Woe, that too late repents:
Is it your will, ſpeake Sir? Prepare my Horſes.
Ingratitude! thou Marble-hearted Fiend,
More hideous when thou ſhew'ſt thee in a Child,
Then the Sea-monſter.
Pray Sir be patient.
Deteſted Kite, thou lyeſt.
My Traine are men of choice, and rareſt parts,
That all particulars of dutie know,
And in the moſt exact regard, ſupport
The worſhips of their name. O moſt ſmall fault,
How vgly did'ſt thou in Cordelia ſhew?
Which like an Engine, wrencht my frame of Nature
From the fixt place: drew from my heart all loue,
And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!
Beate at this gate that let thy Folly in,
And thy deere Iudgement out. Go, go, my people.
My Lord, I am guiltleſſe, as I am ignorant
Of what hath moued you.
It may be ſo, my Lord.
Heare Nature, heare deere Goddeſſe, heare:
Suſpend thy purpoſe, if thou did'ſt intend
To make this Creature fruitfull:
Into her Wombe conuey ſtirrility,
Drie vp in her the Organs of increaſe,
And from her derogate body, neuer ſpring
A Babe to honor her. If ſhe muſt teeme,
Create her childe of Spleene, that it may liue
And be a thwart diſnatur'd torment to her.
Let it ſtampe wrinkles in her brow of youth,
With cadent Teares fret Channels in her cheekes,
Turne all her Mothers paines, and benefits
To laughter, and contempt: That ſhe may feele,
How ſharper then a Serpents tooth it is,
To haue a thankleſſe Childe. Away, away.
Now Gods that we adore,
Whereof comes this?
Neuer afflict your ſelfe to know more of it:
But let his diſpoſition haue that ſcope
As dotage giues it.
What fiftie of my Followers at a clap?
Within a fortnight?
What's the matter, Sir?
Ile tell thee:
Life and death, I am aſham'd
That thou haſt power to ſhake my manhood thus,
That theſe hot teares, which breake from me perforce
Should make thee worth them.
Blaſtes and Fogges vpon thee:
Th' vntented woundings of a Fathers curſe
Pierce euerie ſenſe about thee. Old fond eyes,
Beweepe this cauſe againe, Ile plucke ye out,
And caſt you with the waters that you looſe
To temper Clay. Ha? Let it be ſo.
I haue another daughter,
Who I am ſure is kinde and comfortable:
When ſhe ſhall heare this of thee, with her nailes
Shee'l flea thy Woluiſh viſage. Thou ſhalt finde,
That Ile reſume the ſhape which thou doſt thinke
I haue caſt off for euer.
Do you marke that?
I cannot be ſo partiall Gonerill,
To the great loue I beare you.
Pray you content. What Oſwald, hoa?
You Sir, more Knaue then Foole, after your Maſter.
Nunkle Lear, Nunkle Lear,
Tarry, take the Foole with thee:
A Fox, when one has caught her.
And ſuch a Daughter,
Should ſure to the Slaughter,
If my Cap would buy a Halter,
So the Foole followes after.
This man hath had good Counſell,
A hundred Knights?
'Tis politike, and ſafe to let him keepe
At point a hundred Knights: yes, that on euerie dreame,
Each buz, each fancie, each complaint, diſlike,
He may enguard his dotage with their powres,
And hold our liues in mercy. Oſwald, I ſay.
Well, you may feare too farre.
Safer then truſt too farre;
Let me ſtill take away the harmes I feare,
Not feare ſtill to be taken. I know his heart,
What he hath vtter'd I haue writ my Siſter:
If ſhe ſuſtaine him, and his hundred Knights
When I haue ſhew'd th' vnfitneſſe.
How now Oſwald?
What haue you writ that Letter to my Siſter?
I Madam.
Take you ſome company, and away to horſe,
Informe her full of my particular feare,
And thereto adde ſuch reaſons of your owne,
As may compact it more. Get you gone,
And haſten your returne; no, no, my Lord,
This milky gentleneſſe, and courſe of yours
Though I condemne not, yet vnder pardon
Your are much more at task for want of wiſedome,
Then prai'sd for harmefull mildneſſe.
How farre your eies may pierce I cannot tell;
Striuing to better, oft we marre what's well.
Nay then —
Well, well, the'uent.
Go you before to Gloſter with theſe Letters; acquaint my Daughter no further with any thing you know, then comes from her demand out of the Letter, if your Dilligence be not ſpeedy, I ſhall be there afore you.
I will not ſleepe my Lord, till I haue deliuered your Letter.
If a mans braines were in's heeles, wert not in danger of kybes?
I Boy.
Then I prythee be merry, thy wit ſhall not go ſlip-ſhod.
Ha, ha, ha.
Shalt ſee thy other Daughter will vſe thee kindly, for though ſhe's as like this, as a Crabbe's like an Apple, yet I can tell what I can tell.
What can'ſt tell Boy?
She will taſte as like this as, a Crabbe do's to a Crab: thou canſt tell why ones noſe ſtands i' th' middle on's face?
No.
Why to keepe ones eyes of either ſide's noſe, that what a man cannot ſmell out, he may ſpy into.
I did her wrong.
Can'ſt tell how an Oyſter makes his ſhell?
No.
Nor I neither; but I can tell why a Snaile ha's a houſe.
Why?
Why to put's head in, not to giue it away to his daughters, and leaue his hornes without a caſe.
I will forget my Nature, ſo kind a Father? Be my Horſſes ready?
Thy Aſſes are gone about 'em; the reaſon why the ſeuen Starres are no mo then ſeuen, is a pretty reaſon.
Becauſe they are not eight.
Yes indeed, thou would'ſt make a good Foole.
To tak't againe perforce; Monſter Ingratitude!
If thou wert my Foole Nunckle, Il'd haue thee beaten for being old before thy time.
How's that?
Thou ſhouldſt not haue bin old, till thou hadſt bin wiſe.
O let me not be mad, not mad ſweet Heauen▪ keepe me in temper, I would not be mad. How now are the Horſes ready?
Ready my Lord.
Come Boy.
She that's a Maid now, & laughs at my departure,
Shall not be a Maid long, vnleſſe things be cut ſhorter.
Saue thee Curan.
And your Sir, I haue bin
With your Father, and giuen him notice
That the Duke of Cornwall, and Regan his Ducheſſe
Will be here with him this night.
How comes that?
Nay I know not, you haue heard of the newes abroad, I meane the whiſper'd ones, for they are yet but ear-kiſſing arguments.
Not I: pray you what are they?
Haue you heard of no likely Warres toward,
'Twixt the Dukes of Cornwall, and Albany?
Not a word.
You may do then in time,
Fare you well Sir.
The Duke be here to night? The better beſt,
This weaues it ſelfe perforce into my buſineſſe,
My Father hath ſet guard to take my Brother,
And I haue one thing of a queazie queſtion
Which I muſt act, Briefeneſſe, and Fortune worke.
Brother, a word, diſcend; Brother I ſay,
My Father watches: O Sir, fly this place,
Intelligence is giuen where you are hid;
You haue now the good aduantage of the night,
Haue you not ſpoken 'gainſt the Duke of Cornewall?
Hee's comming hither, now i' th' night, i' th' haſte,
And Regan with him, haue you nothing ſaid
Vpon his partie 'gainſt the Duke of Albany?
Aduiſe your ſelfe.
I am ſure on't, not a word.
I heare my Father comming, pardon me:
In cunning, I muſt draw my Sword vpon you:
Draw, ſeeme to defend your ſelfe,
Now quit you well.
Yeeld, come before my Father, light hoa, here,
Fly Brother, Torches, Torches, ſo farewell.
Some blood drawne on me, would beget opinion
Of my more fierce endeauour. I haue ſeene drunkards
Do more then this in ſport▪ Father, Father,
Stop, ſtop, no helpe?
Now Edmund, where's the villaine?
Here ſtood he in the dark, his ſharpe Sword out,
Mumbling of wicked charmes, coniuring the Moone
To ſtand auſpicious Miſtris.
But where is he?
Looke Sir, I bleed.
Where is the villaine, Edmund?
Fled this way Sir, when by no meanes he could.
Purſue him, ho: go after. By no meanes, what?
Perſwade me to the murther of your Lordſhip,
But that I told him the reuenging Gods,
'Gainſt Paricides did all the thunder bend,
Spoke with how manifold, and ſtrong a Bond
The Child was bound to' th' Father; Sir in fine,
Seeing how lothly oppoſite I ſtood
To his vnnaturall purpoſe, in fell motion
With his prepared Sword, he charges home
My vnprouided body, latch'd mine arme;
And when he ſaw my beſt alarum'd ſpirits
Bold in the quarrels right, rouz'd to th' encounter,
Or whether gaſted by the noyſe I made,
Full ſodainely he fled.
Let him fly farre:
Not in this Land ſhall he remaine vncaught
And found; diſpatch, the Noble Duke my Maſter,
My worthy Arch and Patron comes to night,
By his authoritie I will proclaime it,
That he which finds him ſhall deſerue our thankes,
Bringing the murderous Coward to the ſtake:
He that conceales him death.
When I diſſwaded him from his intent,
And found him pight to doe it, with curſt ſpeech
I threaten'd to diſcouer him; he replied,
Thou vnpoſſeſſing Baſtard, doſt thou thinke,
If I would ſtand againſt thee, would the repoſall
Of any truſt, vertue, or worth in thee
Make thy words faith'd? No, what ſhould I denie,
(As this I would, though thou didſt produce
My very Character) I'ld turne it all
To thy ſuggeſtion, plot, and damned practiſe:
And thou muſt make a dullard of the world,
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potentiall ſpirits
To make thee ſeeke it.
O ſtrange and faſtned Villaine,
Would he deny his Letter, ſaid he?
Harke, the Dukes Trumpets, I know not wher he comes;
All Ports Ile barre, the villaine ſhall not ſcape,
The Duke muſt grant me that: beſides, his picture
I will ſend farre and neere, that all the kingdome
May haue due note of him, and of my land,
(Loyall and naturall Boy) Ile worke the meanes
To make thee capable.
How now my Noble friend, ſince I came hither
(Which I can call but now,) I haue heard ſtrangeneſſe.
If it be true; all vengeance comes too ſhort
Which can purſue th' offender; how doſt my Lord?
O Madam, my old heart is crack'd, it's crack'd.
What, did my Fathers Godſonne ſeeke your life?
He whom my Father nam'd, your Edgar?
O Lady, Lady, ſhame would haue it hid.
Was he not companion with the riotous Knights
That tended vpon my Father?
I know not Madam, 'tis too bad, too bad.
Yes Madam, he was of that conſort.
No maruaile then, though he were ill affected,
'Tis they haue put him on the old mans death,
To haue th' expence and waſt of his Reuenues:
I haue this preſent euening from my Siſter
Beene well inform'd of them, and with ſuch cautions,
That if they come to ſoiourne at my houſe,
Ile not be there.
Nor I, aſſure thee Regan;
Edmund, I heare that you haue ſhewne your Father
A Child-like Office.
It was my duty Sir.
He did bewray his practiſe, and receiu'd
This hurt you ſee, ſtriuing to apprehend him.
Is he purſued?
I my good Lord.
If he be taken, he ſhall neuer more
Be fear'd of doing harme, make your owne purpoſe,
How in my ſtrength you pleaſe: for you Edmund,
Whoſe vertue and obedience doth this inſtant
So much commend it ſelfe, you ſhall be ours,
Nature's of ſuch deepe truſt, we ſhall much need:
You we firſt ſeize on.
I ſhall ſerue you Sir truely, how euer elſe.
For him I thanke your Grace.
You know not why we came to viſit you?
Thus out of ſeaſon, thredding darke ey'd night,
Occaſions Noble Gloſter of ſome prize,
Wherein we muſt haue vſe of your aduiſe.
Our Father he hath writ, ſo hath our Siſter,
Of differences, which I beſt though it fit
To anſwere from our home: the ſeuerall Meſſengers
From hence attend diſpatch, our good old Friend,
Lay comforts to your boſome, and beſtow
Your needfull counſaile to our buſineſſes,
Which craues the inſtant vſe.
I ſerue you Madam,
Your Graces are right welcome.
Good dawning to thee Friend, art of this houſe?
I.
Where may we ſet our horſes?
I' th' myre.
Prythee, if thou lou'ſt me, tell me.
I loue thee not.
Why then I care not for thee.
If I had thee in Lipsbury Pinfold, I would make thee care for me.
Why do'ſt thou vſe me thus? I know thee not.
Fellow I know thee.
What do'ſt thou know me for?
A Knaue, a Raſcall, an eater of broken meates, a baſe, proud, ſhallow, beggerly, three-ſuited-hundred pound, filthy wooſted-ſtocking knaue, a Lilly-liuered, action-taking, whoreſon glaſſe-gazing ſuper-ſeruiceable finicall Rogue, one Trunke-inheriting ſlaue, one that would'ſt be a Baud in way of good ſeruice, and art nothing but the compoſition of a Knaue, Begger, Coward, Pandar, and the Sonne and Heire of a Mungrill Bitch, one whom I will beate into clamours whining, if thou deny'ſt the leaſt ſillable of thy addition.
Why, what a monſtrous Fellow art thou, thus to raile on one, that is neither knowne of thee, nor knowes thee?
What a brazen-fac'd Varlet art thou, to deny thou knoweſt me? Is it two dayes ſince I tript vp thy heeles, and beate thee before the King? Draw you rogue, for though it be night, yet the Moone ſhines, Ile make a ſop oth' Moonſhine of you, you whoreſon Cullyenly Barber-monger, draw.
Away, I haue nothing to do with thee.
Draw you Raſcall, you come with Letters againſt the King, and take Vanitie the puppets part, againſt the Royaltie of her Father: draw you Rogue, or Ile ſo carbonado your ſhanks, draw you Raſcall, come your waies.
Helpe, ho, murther, helpe.
Strike you ſlaue: ſtand rogue, ſtand you neat ſlaue, ſtrike.
Helpe hoa, murther, murther.
How now, what's the matter? Part.
With you goodman Boy, if you pleaſe, come,
Ile fleſh ye, come on yong Maſter.
Weapons? Armes? what's the matter here?
Keepe peace vpon your liues, he dies that ſtrikes againe, what is the matter?
The Meſſengers from our Siſter, and the King?
What is your difference, ſpeake?
I am ſcarce in breath my Lord.
No Maruell, you haue ſo beſtir'd your valour, you cowardly Raſcall, nature diſclaimes in thee: a Taylor made thee.
Thou art a ſtrange fellow, a Taylor make a man?
A Taylor Sir, a Stone-cutter, or a Painter, could not haue made him ſo ill, though they had bin but two yeares oth' trade.
Speake yet, how grew your quarrell?
This ancient Ruffian Sir, whoſe life I haue ſpar'd at ſute of his gray-beard.
Thou whoreſon Zed, thou vnneceſſary letter: my Lord, if you will giue me leaue, I will tread this vnboulted villaine into morter, and daube the wall of a Iakes with him. Spare my gray-beard, you wagtaile?
Peace ſirrah,
You beaſtly knaue, know you no reuerence?
Yes Sir, but anger hath a priuiledge.
Why art thou angrie?
That ſuch a ſlaue as this ſhould weare a Sword,
Who weares no honeſty: ſuch ſmiling rogues as theſe,
Like Rats oft bite the holy cords a twaine,
Which are t' intrince, t' vnlooſe: ſmooth euery paſſion
That in the natures of their Lords rebell,
Being oile to fire, ſnow to the colder moodes,
Reuenge, affirme, and turne their Halcion beakes
With euery gall, and varry of their Maſters,
Knowing naught (like dogges) but following:
A plague vpon your Epilepticke viſage,
Smoile you my ſpeeches, as I were a Foole?
Gooſe, if I had you vpon Sarum Plaine,
I'ld driue ye cackling home to Camelot.
What art thou mad old Fellow?
How fell you out, ſay that?
No contraries hold more antipathy,
Then I, and ſuch a knaue.
Why do'ſt thou call him Knaue?
What is his fault?
His countenance likes me not.
No more perchance do's mine, not his, nor hers.
Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plaine,
I haue ſeene better faces in my time,
Then ſtands on any ſhoulder that I ſee
Before me, at this inſtant.
This is ſome Fellow,
Who hauing beene prais'd for bluntneſſe, doth affect
A ſaucy roughnes, and conſtraines the garb
Quite from his Nature. He cannot flatter he,
An honeſt mind and plaine, he muſt ſpeake truth,
And they will take it ſo, if not, hee's plaine.
Theſe kind of Knaues I know, which in this plainneſſe
Harbour more craft, and more corrupter ends,
Then twenty ſilly-ducking obſeruants,
That ſtretch their duties nicely.
Sir, in good faith, in ſincere verity,
Vnder th' allowance of your great aſpect,
Whoſe influence like the wreath of radient fire
On flicking Phoebus front.
What mean'ſt by this?
To go out of my dialect, which you diſcommend ſo much; I know Sir, I am no flatterer, he that beguild you in a plaine accent, was a plaine Knaue, which for my part I will not be, though I ſhould win your diſpleaſure to entreat me too't.
What was th' offence you gaue him?
I neuer gaue him any:
It pleas'd the King his Maſter very late
To ſtrike at me vpon his miſconſtruction,
When he compact, and flattering his diſpleaſure
Tript me behind: being downe, inſulted, rail'd,
And put vpon him ſuch a deale of Man,
That worthied him, got praiſes of the King,
For him attempting, who was ſelfe-ſubdued,
And in the fleſhment of this dead exploit,
Drew on me here againe.
None of theſe Rogues, and Cowards
But Aiax is there Foole.
Fetch forth the Stocks?
You ſtubborne ancient Knaue, you reuerent Bragart,
Wee'l teach you.
Sir, I am too old to learne:
Call not your Stocks for me, I ſerue the King.
On whoſe imployment I was ſent to you,
You ſhall doe ſmall reſpects, ſhow too bold malice
Againſt the Grace, and Perſon of my Maſter,
Stocking his Meſſenger.
Fetch forth the Stocks;
As I haue life and Honour, there ſhall he ſit till Noone.
Till noone? till night my Lord, and all night too.
Why Madam, if I were your Fathers dog,
You ſhould not vſe me ſo.
Sir, being his Knaue, I will.
This is a Fellow of the ſelfe ſame colour,
Our Siſter ſpeakes of. Come, bring away the Stocks.
Let me beſeech your Grace, not to do ſo,
The King his Maſter, needs muſt take it ill
That he ſo ſlightly valued in his Meſſenger,
Should haue him thus reſtrained.
Ile anſwere that.
My Siſter may recieue it much more worſſe,
To haue her Gentleman abus'd, aſſaulted.
Come my Lord, away.
I am ſorry for thee friend, 'tis the Duke pleaſure,
Whoſe diſpoſition all the world well knowes
Will not be rub'd nor ſtopt, Ile entreat for thee.
Pray do not Sir, I haue watch'd and trauail'd hard,
Some time I ſhall ſleepe out, the reſt Ile whiſtle:
A good mans fortune may grow out at heeles:
Giue you good morrow.
The Duke's too blame in this,
'Twill be ill taken.
Good King, that muſt approue the common ſaw,
Thou out of Heauens benediction com'ſt
To the warme Sun.
Approach thou Beacon to this vnder Globe,
That by thy comfortable Beames I may
Peruſe this Letter. Nothing almoſt ſees miracles
But miſerie. I know 'tis from Cordelia,
Who hath moſt fortunately beene inform'd
Of my obſcured courſe. And ſhall finde time
From this enormous State, ſeeking to giue
Loſſes their remedies. All weary and o're-watch'd,
Take vantage heauie eyes, not to behold
This ſhamefull lodging. Fortune goodnight,
Smile once more, turne thy wheele.
I heard my ſelfe proclaim'd,
And by the happy hollow of a Tree,
Eſcap'd the hunt. No Port is free, no place
That guard, and moſt vnuſall vigilance
Do's not attend my taking. Whiles I may ſcape
I will preſerue myſelfe: and am bethought
To take the baſeſt, and moſt pooreſt ſhape
That euer penury in contempt of man,
Brought neere to beaſt; my face Ile grime with filth,
Blanket my loines, elſe all my haires in knots,
And with preſented nakedneſſe out-face
The Windes, and perſecutions of the skie;
The Country giues me proofe, and preſident
Of Bedlam beggers, who with roaring voices,
Strike in their num'd and mortified Armes,
Pins, Wodden-prickes, Nayles, Sprigs of Roſemarie:
And with this horrible obiect, from low Farmes,
Poore pelting Villages, Sheeps-Coates, and Milles,
Sometimes with Lunaticke bans, ſometime with Praiers
Inforce their charitie: poore Turlygod, poore Tom,
That's ſomething yet: Edgar I nothing am.
'Tis ſtrange that they ſhould ſo depart from home,
And not ſend backe my Meſſengers.
As I learn'd,
The night before, there was no purpoſe in them
Of this remoue.
Haile to thee Noble Maſter.
Ha? Mak'ſt thou this ſhame ahy paſtime?
No my Lord.
Hah, ha, he weares Cruell Garters Horſes are tide by the heads, Dogges and Beares by' th' necke, Monkies by' th' loynes, and Men by' th' legs: when a man ouerluſtie at legs, then he weares wodden nether-ſtocks.
What's he▪
That hath ſo much thy place miſtooke
To ſet thee heere?
It is both he and ſhe,
Your Son, and Daughter.
No.
Yes.
No I ſay.
I ſay yea.
By Iupiter I ſweare no.
By Iuno, I ſweare I.
They durſt not do't:
They could not, would not do't: 'tis worſe then murther,
To do vpon reſpect ſuch violent outrage:
Reſolue me with all modeſt haſte, which way
Thou might'ſt deſerue, or they impoſe this vſage,
Comming from vs.
My Lord, when at their home
I did commend your Highneſſe Letters to them,
Ere I was riſen from the place, that ſhewed
My dutie kneeling, came there a reeking Poſte,
Stew'd in his haſte, halfe breathleſſe, painting forth
From Gonerill his Miſtris, ſalutations;
Deliuer'd Letters ſpight of intermiſſion,
Which preſently they read; on thoſe contents
They ſummon'd vp their meiney, ſtraight tooke Horſe,
Commanded me to follow, and attend
The leiſure of their anſwer, gaue me cold lookes,
And meeting heere the other Meſſenger,
Whoſe welcome I perceiu'd had poiſon'd mine,
Being the very fellow which of late
Diſplaid ſo ſawcily againſt your Highneſſe,
Hauing more man then wit about me, drew;
He rais'd the houſe, with loud and coward cries,
Your Sonne and Daughter found this treſpaſſe worth
The ſhame which heere it ſuffers.
Winters not gon yet, if the wil'd Geeſe fly that way,
Fathers that weare rags, do make their Children blind,
But Fathers that beare bags, ſhall ſee their children kind.
Fortune that arrant whore, nere turns the key to th' poore.
But for all this thou ſhalt haue as many Dolors for thy
Daughters, as thou canſt tell in a yeare.
Oh how this Mother ſwels vp toward my heart!
Hiſtorica paſſio, downe thou climing ſorrow,
Thy Elements below where is this Daughter?
Wirh the Earle Sir, here within.
Follow me not, ſtay here.
Made you no more offence,
But what you ſpeake of?
None:
How chance the the King comes with ſo ſmall a number?
And thou hadſt beene ſet i' th' Stockes for that queſtion, thoud'ſt well deſeru'd it.
Why Foole?
Wee'l ſet thee to ſchoole to an Ant, to teach thee ther's no labouring i' th' winter. All that follow their noſes, are led by their eyes, but blinde men, and there's not a noſe among twenty, but can ſmell him that's ſtinking; let go thy hold, when a great wheele runs downe a hill, leaſt it breake thy necke with following. But the great one that goes vpward, let him draw thee after: when a wiſeman giues thee better counſell giue me mine againe, I would hause none but knaues follow it, ſince a Foole giues it.
That Sir, which ſerues and ſeekes for gaine,
And followes but for forme;
Will packe, when it begins to raine,
And leaue thee in the ſtorme,
But I will tarry, the Foole will ſtay,
And let the wiſeman flie:
The knaue turnes Foole that runnes away,
The Foole no knaue perdie.
Where learn'd you this Foole?
Not i' th' Stocks Foole.
Deny to ſpeake with me?
They are ſicke, they are weary,
They haue trauail'd all the night? meere fetches,
The images of reuolt and flying off.
Fetch me a better anſwer.
My deere Lord,
You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
How vnremoueable and fixt he is
In his owne courſe.
Vengeance, Plague, Death, Confuſion:
Fiery? What quality? Why Gloſter▪ Gloſter,
I'ld ſpeake with the Duke of Cornewall, and his wife.
Well my good Lord, I haue inform'd them ſo.
Inform'd them? Do'ſt thou vnderſtand me man.
I my good Lord.
The King would ſpeake with Cornwall,
The deere Father
Would with his Daughter ſpeake, commands, tends, ſeruice,
Are they inform'd of this? My breath and blood:
Fiery? The fiery Duke, tell the hot Duke that —
No, but not yet, may be he is not well,
Infirmity doth ſtill neglect all office,
Whereto our health is bound, we are not our ſelues,
When Nature being oppreſt, commands the mind
To ſuffer with the body; Ile forbeare,
And am fallen out with my more headier will,
To take the indiſpos'd and ſickly fit,
For the ſound man. Death on my ſtate: wherefore
Should he ſit heere? This act perſwades me,
That this emotion of the Duke and her
Is practiſe only. Giue me my Seruant forth;
Goe tell the Duke, and's wife, Il'd ſpeake with them:
Now, preſently: bid them come forth and heare me,
Or at their Chamber doore Ile beate the Drum,
Till it crie ſleepe to death.
I would haue all well betwixt you.
Oh me my heart! My riſing heart! But downe.
Cry to it Nunckle, as the Cockney did to the Ecles, when ſhe put 'em i' th' Paſte aliue, ſhe knapt 'em o' th' coxcombs with a ſticke, and cryed downe wantons, downe; 'twas her Brother, that in pure kindneſſe to his Horſe buttered his Hay.
Good morrow to you both.
Haile to your Grace.
I am glad to ſee your Highneſſe.
Regan, I thinke your are. I know what reaſon
I haue to thinke ſo, if thou ſhould'ſt not be glad,
I would diuorce me from thy Mother Tombe,
Sepulchring an Adultreſſe. O are you free?
Some other time for that. Beloued Regan,
Thy Siſters naught: oh Regan, ſhe hath tied
Sharpe-tooth'd vnkindneſſe, like a vulture heere,
I can ſcarce ſpeake to thee, thou'lt not beleeue
With how deprau'd a quality. Oh Regan.
I pray you Sir, take patience, I haue hope
You leſſe know how to value her deſert,
Then ſhe to ſcant her dutie.
Say? How is that?
I cannot thinke my Siſter in the leaſt
Would faile her Obligation. If Sir perchance
She haue reſtrained the Riots of your Followres,
'Tis on ſuch ground, and to ſuch wholeſome end,
As cleeres her from all blame.
My curſes on her.
O Sir, you are old,
Nature in you ſtands on the very Verge
Of his confine: you ſhould be rul'd, and led
By ſome diſcretion, that diſcernes your ſtate
Better then you your ſelfe: therefore I pray you,
That to our Siſter, you do make returne,
Say you haue wrong'd her.
Aske her forgiueneſſe?
Do you but marke how this becomes the houſe?
Deere daughter, I confeſſe that I am old;
Age is vnneceſſary: on my knees I begge,
That you'l vouchſafe me Rayment, Bed, and Food.
Good Sir, no more: theſe are vnſightly trickes:
Returne you to my Siſter.
Neuer Regan:
She hath abated me of halfe my Traine;
Look'd blacke vpon me, ſtrooke me with her Tongue
Moſt Serpent-like, vpon the very Heart.
All the ſtor'd Vengeances of Heauen, fall
On her ingratefull top: ſtrike her yong bones
You taking Ayres, with Lameneſſe.
Fye ſir. fie.
You nimble Lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her ſcornfull eyes: Infect her Beauty,
You Fen-ſuck'd Fogges, drawne by the powrfull Sunne,
To fall, and bliſter.
O the bleſt Gods!
So will you wiſh on me, when the raſh moode is on.
No Regan, thou ſhalt neuer haue my curſe:
Thy tender-hefted Nature ſhall not giue
Thee o're to harſhneſſe: Her eyes are fierce, but thine
Do comfort, and not burne. 'Tis not in thee
To grudge my pleaſures, to cut off my Traine,
To bandy haſty words, to ſcant my ſizes,
And in concluſion, to oppoſe the bolt
Againſt my comming in. Thou better know'ſt
The Offices of Nature, bond of Childhood,
Effects of Curteſie, dues of Gratitude:
Thy halfe o' th' Kingdome haſt thou not forgot,
Wherein I thee endow'd.
Good Sir, to' th' purpoſe.
Who put my an i' th' Stockes?
What Trumpet's that?
I know't, my Siſters: this approues her Letter,
That ſhe would ſoone be heere. Is your Lady come?
This is a Slaue, whoſe eaſie borrowed pride
Dwels in the fickly grace of her he followes.
Out Varlet, from my ſight.
What meanes your Grace?
Who ſtockt my Seruant? Regan, I haue good hope
Thou did'ſt not know on't.
Who comes here? O Heauens!
If you do loue old men; if your ſweet ſway
Allow Obedience; if you your ſelues are old,
Make it your cauſe: Send downe, and take my part.
Art not aſham'd to looke vpon this Beard?
O Regan, will you take her by the hand?
Why not by' th' hand Sir? How haue I offended?
All's not offence that indiſcretion findes,
And dotage termes ſo.
O ſides, you are too tough!
Will you yet hold?
How came my man i' th' Stockes?
I ſet him there, Sir: but his owne Diſorders
Deſeru'd much leſſe aduancement.
You? Did you?
I pray you Father being weake, ſeeme ſo.
If till the expiration of your Moneth
You will returne and ſoiourne with my Siſter,
Diſmiſſing halfe your traine, come then to me,
I am now from home, and out of that prouiſion
Which ſhall be needfull for your entertainement.
Returne to her? and fifty men diſmiſs'd?
No, rather I abiure all roofes, and chuſe
To wage againſt the enmity oth' ayre,
To be a Comrade with the Wolfe, and Owle,
Neceſſities ſharpe pinch. Returne with her?
Why the hot-bloodied France, that dowerleſſe tooke
Our yongeſt borne, I could as well be brought
To knee his Throne, and Squire-like penſion beg,
To keepe baſe life a foote; returne with her?
Perſwade me rather to be ſlaue and ſumpter
To this deteſted groome.
At your choice Sir.
I prythee Daughter do not make me mad,
I will not trouble thee my Child: farewell:
Wee'l no more meete, no more ſee one another.
But yet thou art my fleſh, my blood, my Daughter,
Or rather a diſeaſe that's in my fleſh,
Which I muſt needs call mine. Thou art a Byle,
A plague ſore, or imboſſed Carbuncle
In my corrupted blood. But Ile not chide thee,
Let ſhame come when it will, I do not call it,
I do not bid the Thunder-bearer ſhoore,
Nor tell tales of thee to high-iudging Ioue,
Mend when thou can'ſt, be better at thy leiſure,
I can be patient, I can ſtay with Regan,
I and my hundred Knights.
Not altogether ſo,
I look'd not for you yet, nor am prouided
For your fit welcome, giue eare Sir to my Siſter,
For thoſe that mingle reaſon with your paſſion,
Muſt be content to thinke you old, and ſo,
But ſhe knowes what ſhe doe's.
Is this well ſpoken?
I dare auouch it Sir, what fifty Followers?
Is it not well? What ſhould you need of more?
Yea, or ſo many? Sith that both charge and danger,
Speake 'gainſt ſo great a number? How in one houſe
Should many people, vnder two commands
Hold amity? 'Tis hard, almoſt impoſſible.
Why might not you my Lord, receiue attendance
From thoſe that ſhe cals Seruants, or from mine?
Why not my Lord?
If then they chanc'd to ſlacke ye,
We could comptroll them; if you will come to me,
(For now I ſpi danger) I entreate you
To bring but fiue and twentie, to no more
Will I giue place or notice.
I gaue you all.
And in good time you gaue it.
Made you my Guardians, my Depoſitaries,
But kept a reſeruation to be followed
With ſuch a number? What, muſt I come to you
With fiue and twenty? Regan, ſaid you ſo?
And ſpeak't againe my Lord, no more with me.
Thoſe wicked Creatures yet do look wel fauor'd
When others are more wicked, not being the worſt
Stands in ſome ranke of praiſe, Ile go with thee,
Thy fifty yet doth double fiue and twenty,
And thou art twice her Loue.
Heare me my Lord;
What need you fiue and twenty? Ten? Or fiue?
To follow in a houſe, where twice ſo many
Haue a command to tend you?
What need one?
O reaſon not the need: our baſeſt Beggers
Are in the pooreſt thing ſuperfluous,
Allow not Nature, more then Nature needs:
Mans life is cheape as Beaſtes. Thou art a Lady;
If onely to go warme were gorgeous,
Why Nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'ſt,
Which ſcarcely keepes thee warme, but for true need:
You Heauens, giue me that patience, patience I need,
You ſee me heere (you Gods) a poore old man,
As full of griefe as age, wretched in both,
If it be you that ſtirres theſe Daughters hearts
Againſt their Father, foole me not ſo much,
To beare it tamely: touch me with Noble anger,
And let not womens weapons, water drops,
Staine my mans cheekes. No you vnnaturall Hags,
I will haue ſuch reuenges on you both,
That all the world ſhall — I will do ſuch things,
What they are yet, I know not, but they ſhalbe
The terrors of the earth? you thinke Ile weepe,
No, Ile not weepe, I haue full cauſe of weeping.
But this heart ſhal break into a hundred thouſand flawes
Or ere Ile weepe: O Foole, I ſhall go mad.
Let vs withdraw, 'twill be a Storme.
This houſe is little, the old man an'ds people,
Cannot be well beſtow'd.
'Tis his owne blame hath put himſelfe from reſt,
And muſt needs taſte his folly.
For his particular, Ile receiue him gladly,
But not one follower.
So am I purpos'd,
Where is my Lord of Gloſter?
Followed the old man forth, he is return'd.
The King is in high rage.
Whether is he going?
He cals to Horſe, but will I know not whether.
'Tis beſt to giue him way, he leads himſelfe.
My Lord, entreate him by no meanes to ſtay.
Alacke the night comes on, and the high windes
Do ſorely ruffle, for many Miles about
There's ſcarce a Buſh.
O Sir, to wilfull men,
The iniuries that they themſelues procure,
Muſt be their Schoole-Maſters: ſhut vp your doores,
He is attended with a deſperate traine,
And what they may incenſe him too, being apt,
To haue his eare abus'd, wiſedome bids feare.
Shut vp your ores my Lord, 'tis a wil'd night,
My Regan counſels well: come out oth' ſtorme.
Who's there beſides foule weather?
One minded like the weather, moſt vnquietly.
I know you: Where's the King?
Contending with the fretfull Elements;
Bids the winde blow the Earth into the Sea,
Or ſwell the curled Waters 'boue the Maine,
That things might change, or ceaſe.
But who is with him?
None but the Foole, who labours to out-ieſt
His heart-ſtrooke iniuries.
Sir, I do know you,
And dare vpon the warrant of my note
Commend a deere thing to you. There is diuiſion
(Although as yet the face of it is couer'd
With mutuall cunning) 'twixt Albany, and Cornwall:
Who haue, as who haue not, that their great Starres
Thron'd and ſet high; Seruants, who ſeeme no leſſe,
Which are to France the Spies and Speculations
Intelligent of our State. What hath bin ſeene,
Either in ſnuffes, and packings of the Dukes,
Or the hard Reine which both of them hath borne
Againſt the old kinde King; or ſomething deeper,
Whereof (perchance) theſe are but furniſhings.
I will talke further with you.
No, do not:
For confirmation that I am much more
Then my out-wall; open this Purſe, and take
What it containes. If you ſhall ſee Cordela,
(As feare not but you ſhall) ſhew her this Ring,
And ſhe will tell you who that Fellow is
That yet you do not know. Fye on this Storme,
I will go ſeeke the King.
Giue me your hand,
Haue you no more to ſay?
Few words, but to effect more then all yet;
That when we haue found the King, in which your pain
That way, Ile this: He that firſt lights on him,
Holla the other.
Blow windes, & crack your cheeks; Rage, blow
You Cataracts, and Hyrricano's ſpout,
Till you haue drench'd our Steeples, drown the Cockes.
You Sulph'rous and Thought-executing Fires,
Vaunt-curriors of Oake-cleauing Thunder-bolts,
Sindge my white head. And thou all-ſhaking Thunder,
Strike flat the thicke Rotundity o' th' world,
Cracke Natures moulds, all germaines ſpill at once
That makes ingratefull Man.
O Nunkle, Court holy-water in a dry houſe, is better then this Rain-water out o' doore. Good Nunkle, in, aske thy Daughters bleſſing, heere's a night pitties neither Wiſemen, nor Fooles.
Rumble thy belly full: ſpit Fire, ſpowt Raine:
Nor Raine, Winde, Thunder, Fire are my Daughters;
I taxe not you, you Elements with vnkindneſſe.
I neuer gaue you Kingdome, call'd you Children;
You owe me no ſubſcription. Then let fall
Your horrible pleaſure. Heere I ſtand your Slaue,
A poore, infirme, weake, and diſpis'd old man:
But yet I call you Seruile Miniſters,
That will with two pernicious Daughters ioyne
Your high-engender'd Battailes, 'gainſt a head
So old, and white as this. O, ho! 'tis foule.
He that has a houſe to put's head in, has a good Head-peece:
The Codpiece that will houſe, before the head has any;
The Head, and he ſhall Lowſe: ſo Beggers marry many.
The man yt makes his Toe, what he his Hart ſhold make,
Shall of a Corne cry woe, and turne his ſleepe to wake.
For there was neuer yet faire woman, but ſhee made mouthes in a glaſſe.
No, I will be the patterne of all patience,
I will ſay nothing.
Who's there?
Marry here's Grace, and a Codpiece, that's a Wiſeman, and a Foole.
Alas Sir are you here? Things that loue night,
Loue not ſuch nights as theſe: The wrathfull Skies
Gallow the very wanderers of the darke
And make them keepe their Caues: Since I was man,
Such ſheets of Fire, ſuch burſts of horrid Thunder,
Such groanes of roaring Winde, and Raine, I neuer
Remember to haue heard. Mans Nature cannot carry
Th' affliction, nor the feare.
Let the great Goddes
That keepe this dreadfull pudder o're our heads,
Finde out their enemies now. Tremble thou Wretch,
That haſt within thee vndivulged Crimes
Vnwhipt of Iuſtice. Hide thee, thou Bloudy hand;
Thou Periur'd, and thou Simular of Vertue
That art Inceſtuous. Caytiffe, to peeces ſhake
That vnder couert, and conuenient ſeeming
Ha's practis'd on mans life. Cloſe pent-vp guilts,
Riue your concealing Continents, and cry
Theſe dreadfull Summoners grace. I am a man,
More ſinn'd againſt, then ſinning.
Alacke, bare-headed?
Gracious my Lord, hard by heere is a Houell,
Some friendſhip will it lend you 'gainſt the Tempeſt:
Repoſe you there, while I to this hard houſe,
(More harder then the ſtones whereof 'tis rais'd,
Which euen but now, demanding after you,
Deny'd me to come in) returne, and force
Their ſcanted curteſie.
My wits begin to turne.
Come on my boy. How doſt my boy? Art cold?
I am cold my ſelfe. Where is this ſtraw, my Fellow?
The Art of our Neceſſities is ſtrange,
And can make vilde things precious. Come, your Houel;
Poore Foole, and Knaue, I haue one part in my heart
That's ſorry yet for thee.
He that has and a little-tyne wit,
With heigh-ho, the Winde and the Raine,
Muſt make content with his Fort es fit,
Though the Raine it raineth euery day.
True Boy: Come bring vs to this Houell.
This is a braue night to coole a Curtizan:
Ile ſpeake a Propheſie ere I go:
When Prieſts are more in word, then matter;
When Brewers marre their Malt with water;
When Nobles are their Taylors Tutors,
No Heretiques burn'd, but wenches Sutors;
When euery Caſe in Law, is right;
No Squire in debt, nor no poore Knight;
When Slanders do not liue in Tongues;
Nor Cut-purſes come not to throngs;
When Vſurers tell their Gold i' th' Field,
And Baudes, and whores, do Churches build,
Then ſhal the Realme of Albion, come to great confuſion:
Then comes the time, who liues to ſee't,
That going ſhalbe vs'd with feet.
This prophecie Merlin ſhall make, for I liue before his time.
Alacke, alacke Edmund, I like not this vnnaturall dealing; when I deſired their leaue that I might pity him, they tooke from me the vſe of mine owne houſe, charg'd me on paine of perpetuall diſpleaſure, neither to ſpeae of him entreat for him, or any way ſuſtaine him.
Moſt ſauage and vnnaturall.
Go too; ſay you nothing. There is diuiſion betweene the Dukes, and a worſſe matter then that: I haue receiued a Letter this night, 'tis dangerous to be ſpoken, I haue lock'd the Letter in my Cloſſet, theſe iniuries the King now beares, will be reuenged home; ther is part of a Power already footed, we muſt incline to the King, I will looke him, and priuily relieue him; goe you and maintaine talke with the Duke, that my charity be not of him perceiued; If he aske for me, I am ill, and gone to bed, if I die for it, (as no leſſe is threatned me) the King my old Maſter muſt be relieued. There is ſtrange things toward Edmund, pray you be carefull.
This Curteſie forbid thee, ſhall the Duke
Inſtantly know, and of that Letter too;
This ſeemes a faire deſeruing, and muſt draw me.
That which my Father looſes: no leſſe then all,
The yonger riſes, when the old doth fall.
Here is the place my Lord, good my Lord enter,
The tirrany of the open night's too rough
For Nature to endure.
Let me alone.
Good my Lord enter heere.
Wilt breake my heart?
I had rather breake mine owne,
Good my Lord enter.
Thou think'ſt 'tis much that this contentious ſtorme
Inuades vs to the skinſo: 'tis to thee,
But where the greater malady is fixt,
The leſſer is ſcarce felt. Thou'dſt ſhun a Beare,
But if they flight lay toward the roaring Sea,
Thou'dſt meete the Beare i' th' mouth, when the mind's free,
The bodies delicate: the tempeſt in my mind,
Doth from my ſences take all feeling elſe,
Saue what beates there, Filliall ingratitude,
Is it not as this mouth ſhould teare this hand
For lifting food too't? But I will puniſh home;
No, I will weepe no more; in ſuch a night,
To ſhut me out? Poure on, I will endure:
In ſuch a night as this? O Regan, Gonerill,
Your old kind Father, whoſe franke heart gaue all,
O that way madneſſe lies, let me ſhun that:
No more of that.
Good my Lord enter here.
Prythee go in thy ſelfe, ſeeke thine owne eaſe,
This tempeſt will not giue me leaue to ponder
On things would hurt me more, but Ile goe in,
In Boy, go firſt. You houſeleſſe pouertie,
Nay get thee in; Ile pray, and then Ile ſleepe.
Poore naked wretches, where ſo ere you are
That bide the pelting of this pittileſſe ſtorme,
How ſhall your Houſe-leſſe heads, and vnfed ſides,
Your lop'd, and window'd raggedneſſe defend you
From ſeaſons ſuch as theſe? O I haue tane
Too little care of this: Take Phyſicke, Pompe,
Expoſe thy ſelfe to feele what wretches feele,
That thou maiſt ſhake the ſuperflux to them,
And ſhew the Heauens more iuſt.
Fathom, and halfe, Fathom and halfe; poore Tom.
Come not in heere Nuncle, here's a ſpirit, helpe me, helpe me.
Giue me thy hand, who's there?
A ſpirite, a ſpirite, he ſayes his name's poore Tom.
What art thou that doſt grumble there i' th' ſtraw? Come forth.
Away, the foule Fiend followes me, through the ſharpe Hauthorne blow the windes. Humh, goe to thy bed and warme thee.
Did'ſt thou giue all to thy Daughters? And art thou come to this?
Who giues any thing to poore Tom? Whom the foule fiend hath led though Fire, and through Flame, through Sword, and Whirle-Poole, o're Bog, and Quagmire, that hath laid Kniues vnder his Pillow, and Halters in his Pue, ſet Rats-bane by his Porredge, made him Proud of heart, to ride on a Bay trotting Horſe, ouer foure incht Bridges, to courſe his owne ſhadow for a Traitor. Bliſſe thy fiue Wits, Toms a cold. O do, de, do, de, do de, bliſſe thee from Whirle-Windes, Starre-blaſting, and taking, do poore Tom ſome charitie, whom the foule Fiend vexes. There could I haue him now, and there, and there againe, and there.
Ha's his Daughters brought him to this paſſe?
Could'ſt thou ſaue nothing? Would'ſt thou giue 'em all?
Nay, he reſeru'd a Blanket, elſe we had bin all ſham'd.
Now all the plagues that in the pendulous ayre
Hang fated o're mens faults, light on thy Daughters.
He hath no Daughters Sir.
Death Traitor, nothing could haue ſubdu'd Nature
To ſuch a lowneſſe, but his vnkind Daughters.
Is it the faſhion, that diſcarded Fathers,
Should haue thus little mercy on their fleſh:
Iudicious puniſhment, 'twas this fleſh begot
Thoſe Pelicane Daughters.
Pillicock ſat on Pillicock hill, alow: alow, loo, loo.
This cold night will turne vs all to Fooles, and Madmen.
Take heed o' th' foole Fiend, obey thy Parents, keepe thy words Iuſtice, ſweare not, commit not, with mans ſworne Spouſe: ſet not thy Sweet-heart on proud array. Toms a cold.
What haſt thou bin?
A Seruingman? Proud in heart, and minde; that curl'd my haire, wore Gloues in my cap; ſeru'd the Luſt of my Miſtris heart, and did the acte of darkeneſſe with her. Swore as many Oathes as I ſpake words, & broke them in the ſweet face of Heauen. One, that ſlept in the contriuing of Luſt, and wak'd to doe it. Wine lou'd I deerely, Dice deerely; and in Woman, out-Paramour'd the Turke. Falſe of heart, light of eare, bloody of hand; Hog in ſloth, Foxe in ſtealth, Wolfe in greedineſſe, Dog in madnes, Lyon in prey. Let not the creaking of ſhooes, Nor the ruſtling of Silkes, betray thy poore heart to woman. Keepe thy foote out of Brothels, thy hand out of Plackets, thy pen from Lenders Bookes, and defye the foule Fiend. Still through the Hauthorne blowes the cold winde: Sayes ſuum, mun, nonny, Dolphin my Boy, Boy Seſey: let him trot by.
Thou wert better in a Graue, then to anſwere with thy vncouer'd body, this extremitie of the Skies. Is man no more then this? Conſider him well. Thou ow'ſt the Worme no Silke; the Beaſt, no Hide; the Sheepe, no Wooll; the Cat, no perfume. Ha? Here's three on's are ſophiſticated. Thou art the thing it ſelfe; vnaccommodated man▪ is no more but ſuch a poore, bare, forked Animall as thou art. Off, off you Lendings: Come, vnbutton heere.
Prythee Nunckle be contented, 'tis a naughtie night to ſwimme in. Now a little fire in a wilde Field, were like an old Letchers heart, a ſmall ſpark, all the reſt on's body, cold: Looke, heere comes a walking fire.
This is the foule Flibbertigibbet; hee begins at Curfew, and walkes at firſt Cocke: Hee giues the Web and the Pin, ſquints the eye, and makes the Hare-lippe; Mildewes the white Wheate, and hurts the poore Creature of earth.
Swithold footed thrice the old,
He met the Night-Mare, and her nine-fold;
Bid her a-light, and her troth-plight,
And aroynt thee Witch, aroynt thee.
How fares your Grace?
What's he?
Who's there? What is't you ſeeke?
What are you there? Your Names?
Poore Tom, that eates the ſwimming Frog, the Toad, the Tod-pole, the wall-Neut, and the water: that in the furie of his heart, when the foule Fiend rages, eats Cow-dung for Sallets; ſwallowes the old Rat, and the ditch-Dogge; drinkes the green Mantle of the ſtanding Poole: who is whipt from Tything to Tything, and ſtockt, puniſh'd, and impriſon'd: who hath three Suites to his backe, ſixe ſhirts to his body:
Horſe to ride, and weapon to weare:
But Mice, and Rats, and ſuch ſmall Deare,
Haue bin Toms food, for ſeuen long yeare:
Beware my Follower. Peace Smulkin, peace thou Fiend.
What, hath your Grace no better company?
The Prince of Darkeneſſe is a Gentleman. Modo he's call'd, and Mahu.
Our fleſh and blood, my Lord, is growne ſo vilde, that it doth hate what gets it.
Poore Tom's a cold.
Go in with me; my duty cannot ſuffer
T' obey in all your daughters hard commands:
Though their Iniunction be to barre my doores,
And let this Tyrannous night take hold vpon you,
Yet haue I ventured to come ſeeke you out,
And bring you where both fire, and food is ready.
Firſt let me talke with this Philoſopher,
What is the cauſe of Thunder?
Good my Lord take his offer,
Go into th' houſe.
Ile talke a word with this ſame lerned Theban:
What is your ſtudy?
How to preuent the Fiend, and to kill Vermine.
Let me aske you one word in priuate.
Importune him once more to go my Lord,
His wits begin t' vnſettle.
Canſt thou blame him?
His Daughters ſeeke his death: Ah, that good Kent,
He ſaid it would be thus: poore baniſh'd man:
Thou ſayeſt the King growes mad, Ile tell thee Friend
I am almoſt mad my ſelfe. I had a Sonne,
Now out-law'd from my blood: he ſought my life
But lately: very late: I lou'd him (Friend)
No Father his Sonne deerer: true to tell thee,
The greefe hath craz'd my wits. What a night's this?
I do beſeech your grace.
O cry you mercy, Sir:
Noble Philoſopher, your company.
Tom's a cold.
In fellow there, into th' Houel; keep thee warm.
Come, let's in all.
This way, my Lord.
With him;
I will keepe ſtill with my Philoſopher.
Good my Lord, ſooth him:
Let him take the Fellow.
Take him you on.
Sirra, come on: go along with vs.
Come, good Athenian.
No words, no words, huſh.
Childe Rowland to the darke Tower came,
His word was ſtill, fie, foh, and fumme,
I ſmell the blood of a Brittiſh man.
I will haue my reuenge, ere I depart his houſe.
How my Lord, I may be cenſured, that Nature thus giues way to Loyaltie, ſomething feares mee to thinke of.
I now perceiue, it was not altogether your Brothers euill diſpoſition made him ſeeke his death: but a prouoking merit ſet a-worke by a reprouable badneſſe in himſelfe.
How malicious is my fortune, that I muſt repent to be iuſt? This is the Letter which hee ſpoake of; which approues him an intelligent partie to the aduantages of France. O Heauens! that this Treaſon were not; or not I the detector.
Go with me to the Dutcheſſe.
If the matter of this Paper be certain, you haue mighty buſineſſe in hand.
True or falſe, it hath made thee Earle of Glouceſter: ſeeke out where thy Father is, that hee may bee ready for our apprehenſion.
If I finde him comforting the King, it will ſtuffe his ſuſpition more fully. I will perſeuer in my courſe of Loyalty, though the conflict be ſore betweene that, and my blood.
I will lay truſt vpon thee: and thou ſhalt finde a deere Father in my loue.
Heere is better then the open ayre▪ take it thankfully: I will peece out the comfort with what addition I can: I will not be long from you.
All the powre of his wits, haue giuen way to his impatience: the Gods reward your kindneſſe.
Fraterretto cals me, and tells me Nero is an Angler in the Lake of Darkneſſe: pray Innocent, and beware the foule Fiend.
Prythee Nunkle tell me, whether a madman be a Gentleman, or a Yeoman.
A King, a King.
No, he's a Yeoman, that ha's a Gentleman to his Sonne: for hee's a mad Yeoman that ſees his Sonne a Gentleman before him.
To haue a thouſand with red burning ſpits
Come hizzing in vpon 'em.
Bleſſe thy fiue wits.
O pitty: Sir, where is the patience now
That you ſo oft haue boaſted to retaine?
My teares begin to take his part ſo much,
They marre my counterfetting.
The little dogges, and all;
Trey, Blanch, and Sweet-heart: ſee, they barke at me.
Tom, will throw his head at them: Auaunt you
Curres, be thy mouth or blacke or white:
Tooth that poyſons if it bite:
Maſtiffe, Grey-hound, Mongrill, Grim,
Hound or Spaniell, Brache, or Hym:
Or Bobtaile tight, or Troudle taile,
Tom will make him weepe and waile,
For with throwing thus my head;
Dogs leapt the hatch, and all are fled.
Do, de, de, de: ſeſe: Come, march to Wakes and Fayres,
And Market Townes: poore Tom thy horne is dry,
Then let them Anatomize Regan: See what breeds about her heart. Is there any cauſe in Nature that make theſe hard-hearts. You ſir, I entertaine for one of my hundred; only, I do not like the faſhion of your garments. You will ſay they are Perſian; but let them bee chang'd.
Now good my Lord, lye heere, and reſt awhile.
Make no noiſe, make no noiſe, draw the Curtaines: ſo, ſo, wee'l go to Supper i' th' morning.
And Ile go to bed at noone.
Come hither Friend:
Where is the King my Maſter?
Here Sir, but trouble him not, his wits are gon.
Good friend, I prythee take him in thy armes;
I haue ore-heard a plot of death vpon him:
There is a Litter ready, lay him in't,
And driue toward Douer friend, where thou ſhalt meete
Both welcome, and protection. Take vp thy Maſter,
If thou ſhould'ſt dally halfe an houre, his life
With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
Stand in aſſured loſſe. Take vp, take vp,
And follow me, that will to ſome prouiſion
Giue thee quicke conduct. Come, come, away.
Poſte ſpeedily to my Lord your husband, ſhew him this Letter, the Army of France is landed: ſeeke out the Traitor Glouſter.
Hang him inſtantly.
Plucke out his eyes.
Leaue him to my diſpleaſure. Edmond, keepe you our Siſter company: the reuenges wee are bound to take vppon your Traitorous Father, are not fit for your beholding. Aduice the Duke where you are going, to a moſt feſtiuate preparation: we are bound to the like. Our Poſtes ſhall be ſwift, and intelligent betwixt vs. Farewell deere Siſter, farewell my Lord of Glouſter.
How now? Where's the King?
My Lord of Glouſter hath conuey'd him hence
Some fiue or ſix and thirty of his Knights
Hot Queſtriſts after him, met him at gate,
Who, with ſome other of the Lords, dependants,
Are gone with him toward Douer; where they boaſt
To haue well armed Friends.
Get horſes for your Miſtris.
Farewell ſweet Lord, and Siſter.
Edmund farewell: go ſeek the Traitor Gloſter,
Pinnion him like a Theefe, bring him before vs:
Though well we may not paſſe vpon his life
Without the forme of Iuſtice: yet our power
Shall do a curt'ſie to our wrath, which men
May blame, but not comptroll.
Who's there? the Traitor?
Ingratefull Fox, 'tis he.
Binde faſt his corky armes.
What meanes your Graces?
Good my Friends conſider you are my Gheſts:
Do me no foule play, Friends.
Binde him I ſay.
Hard, hard: O filthy Traitor.
Vnmercifull Lady, as you are, I'me none.
To this Chaire binde him,
Villaine, thou ſhalt finde.
By the kinde Gods, 'tis moſt ignobly done
To plucke me by the Beard.
So white, and ſuch a Traitor?
Naughty Ladie,
Theſe haires which thou doſt rauiſh from my chin
Will quicken and accuſe thee. I am your Hoſt,
With Robbers hands, my hoſpitable fauours
You ſhould not ruffle thus. What will you do?
Come Sir.
What Letters had you late from France?
Be ſimple anſwer'd, for we know the truth.
And what confederacie haue you with the Traitors, late footed in the Kingdome?
To whoſe hands
You haue ſent the Lunaticke King: Speake.
I haue a Letter gueſſingly ſet downe
Which came from one that's of a newtrall heart,
And not from one oppos'd.
Cunning.
And falſe.
Where haſt thou ſent the King?
To Douer.
Wherefore to Douer?
Was't thou not charg'd at perill.
Wherefore to Douer? Let him anſwer that.
I am tyed to' th' Stake,
And I muſt ſtand the Courſe.
Wherefore to Douer?
Becauſe I would not ſee thy cruell Nailes
Plucke out his poore old eyes: nor thy fierce Siſter,
In his Annointed fleſh, ſticke boariſh phangs.
The Sea, with ſuch a ſtorme as his bare head,
In Hell-blacke-night indur'd, would haue buoy'd vp
And quench'd the Stelled fires:
Yet poore old heart, he holpe the Heauens to raine.
If Wolues had at thy Gate howl'd that ſterne time,
Thou ſhould'ſt haue ſaid, good Porter turne the Key:
All Cruels elſe ſubſcribe: but I ſhall ſee
The winged Vengeance ouertake ſuch Children.
See't ſhalt thou neuer. Fellowes hold ye Chaire,
Vpon theſe eyes of thine, Ile ſet my foote.
He that will thinke to liue, till he be old,
Giue me ſome helpe. — O cruell! O you Gods.
One ſide will mocke another: Th' other too.
If you ſee vengeance.
Hold your hand, my Lord:
I haue ſeru'd you euer ſince I was a Childe:
But better ſeruice haue I neuer done you,
Then now to bid you hold.
How now, you dogge?
If you did weare a beard vpon your chin,
I'ld ſhake it on this quarrell. What do you meane?
My Villaine?
Nay then come on, and take the chance of anger.
Giue me thy Sword. A pezant ſtand vp thus?
Oh I am ſlaine: my Lord, you haue one eye left
To ſee ſome miſchefe on him▪ Oh.
Leſt it ſee more, preuent it; Out vilde gelly:
Where is thy luſter now?
All darke and comfortleſſe?
Where's my Sonne Edmund?
Edmund, enkindle all the ſparkes of Nature
To quit this horrid acte.
Out treacherous Villaine,
Thou call'ſt on him, that hates thee. It was be
That made the ouerture of thy Treaſons to vs:
Who is too good to pitty thee.
O my Follies! then Edgar was abus'd,
Kinde Gods, forgiue me that, and proſper him.
Go thruſt him out at gates, and let him ſmell
His way to Douer.
How is't my Lord? How looke you?
I haue receiu'd a hurt: Follow me Lady;
Turne out that eyeleſſe Villaine: throw this Slaue
Vpon the Dunghill: Regan, I bleed apace,
Vntimely comes this hurt. Giue me your arme.
Yet better thus, and knowne to be contemn'd,
Then ſtill contemn'd and flatter'd, to be worſt:
The loweſt, and moſt deiected thing of Fortune,
Stands ſtill in eſperance, liues not in feare:
The lamentable change is from the beſt,
The worſt returnes to laughter. Welcome then,
Thou vnſubſtantiall ayre that I embrace:
The Wretch that thou haſt blowne vnto the worſt,
Owes nothing to thy blaſts.
But who comes heere? My Father poorely led?
World, World, O world!
But that thy ſtrange mutations make vs hate thee,
Life would not yeelde to age.
O my good Lord, I haue bene your Tenant,
And your Fathers Tenant, theſe foureſcore yeares.
Away, get thee away: good Friend be gone,
Thy comforts can do me no good at all,
Thee, they may hurt.
You cannot ſee your way.
I haue no way, and therefore want no eyes:
I ſtumbled when I ſaw. Full oft 'tis ſeene,
Our meanes ſecure vs, and our meere defects
Proue our Commodities. Oh deere Sonne Edgar,
The food of thy abuſed Fathers wrath:
Might I but liue to ſee thee in my touch,
I'ld ſay I had eyes againe.
How now? who's there?
O Gods! Who is't can ſay I am at the worſt?
I am worſe then ere I was.
'Tis poore mad Tom.
And worſe I may be yet: the worſt is not,
So long as we can ſay this is the worſt.
Fellow, where goeſt?
Is it a Beggar-man?
Madman, and beggar too.
He has ſome reaſon, elſe he could not beg.
I' th' laſt nights ſtorme, I ſuch a fellow ſaw;
Which made me thinke a Man, a Worme. My Sonne
Came then into my minde, and yet my minde
Was then ſcarſe Friends with him.
I haue heard more ſince:
As Flies to wanton Boyes, are we to th' Gods,
They kill vs for their ſport.
How ſhould this be?
Bad is the Trade that muſt play Foole to ſorrow,
Ang'ring it ſelfe, and others. Bleſſe thee Maſter.
Is that the naked Fellow?
I, my Lord.
Get thee away: If for my ſake
Thou wilt ore-take vs hence a mile or twaine
I' th' way toward Douer, do it for ancient loue,
And bring ſome couering for this naked Soule,
Which Ile intreate to leade me.
Alacke ſir, he is mad.
'Tis the times plague,
When Madmen leade the blinde:
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleaſure:
Aboue the reſt, be gone.
He bring him the beſt Parrell that I haue
Come on't, what will.
Sirrah, naked fellow.
Poore Tom's a cold. I cannot daub it further.
Come hither fellow.
And yet I muſt:
Bleſſe thy ſweete eyes, they bleede.
Know'ſt thou the way to Douer?
Both ſtyle, and gate; Horſeway, and foot-path: poore Tom hath bin ſcarr'd out of his good wits. Bleſſe thee good mans ſonne, from the foule Fiend.
Here take this purſe, yu whom the heau'ns plagues
Haue humbled to all ſtrokes: that I am wretched
Makes thee the happier: Heauens deale ſo ſtill:
Let the ſuperfluous, and Luſt-dieted man,
That ſlaues your ordinance, that will not ſee
Becauſe he do's not feele, feele your powre quickly:
So diſtribution ſhould vndoo exceſſe,
And each man haue enough. Doſt thou know Douer?
I Maſter.
There is a Cliffe, whoſe high and bending head
Lookes fearfully in the confined Deepe:
Bring me but to the very brimme of it,
And Ile repayre the miſery thou do'ſt beare
With ſomething rich about me: from that place,
I ſhall no leading neede.
Giue me thy arme;
Poore Tom ſhall leade thee.
Welcome my Lord. I meruell our mild husband
Not met vs on the way. Now, where's your Maſter?
Madam within, but neuer man ſo chang'd:
I told him of the Army that was Landed:
He ſmil'd at it. I told him you were comming,
His anſwer was, the worſe. Of Gloſters Treachery,
And of the loyall Seruice of his Sonne
When I inform'd him, then he call'd me Sot,
And told me I had turn'd the wrong ſide out:
What moſt he ſhould diſlike, ſeemes pleaſant to him;
What like, offenſiue.
Then ſhall you go no further.
It is the Cowiſh terror of his ſpirit
That dares not vndertake: Hee'l not feele wrongs
Which tye him to an anſwer: our wiſhes on the way
May proue effects. Backe Edmond to my Brother,
Haſten his Muſters, and conduct his powres.
I muſt change names at home, and giue the Diſtaffe
Into my Husbands hands. This truſtie Seruant
Shall paſſe betweene vs: ere long you are like to heare
(If you dare venture in your owne behalfe)
A Miſtreſſes command. Weare this; ſpare ſpeech,
Decline your head. This kiſſe, if it durſt ſpeake
Would ſtretch thy Spirits vp into the ayre:
Conceiue, and fare thee well.
Yours in the rankes of death.
My moſt deere Gloſter.
Oh, the difference of man, and man,
To thee a Womans ſeruices are due,
My Foole vſurpes my body.
Madam, here come's my Lord.
I haue beene worth the whiſtle.
Oh Gonerill,
You are not worth the duſt which the rude winde
Blowes in your face.
Milke-Liuer'd man,
That bear'ſt a cheeke for blowes, a head for wrongs,
Who haſt not in thy browes an eye-diſcerning
Thine Honor, from thy ſuffering.
See thy ſelfe diuell:
Proper deformitie ſeemes not in the Fiend
So horrid as in woman.
Oh vaine Foole.
Oh my good Lord, the Duke of Cornwals dead,
Slaine by his Seruant, going to put out
The other eye of Glouſter.
Glouſters eyes.
A Seruant that he bred, thrill'd with remorſe,
Oppos'd againſt the act: bending his Sword
To his great Maſter, who, threat-enrag'd
Flew on him, and among'ſt them fell'd him dead,
But not without that harmefull ſtroke, which ſince
Hath pluckt him after.
This ſhewes you are aboue
You Iuſtices, that theſe our neather crimes
So ſpeedily can venge. But (O poore Glouſter)
Loſt he his other eye?
Both, both, my Lord.
This Leter Madam, craues a ſpeedy anſwer:
'Tis from your Siſter.
One way I like this well.
But being widdow, and my Glouſter with her,
May all the building in my fancie plucke
Vpon my hatefull life. Another way
The Newes is not ſo tart. Ile read, and anſwer.
Where was his Sonne,
When they did take his eyes?
Come with my Lady hither.
He is not heere.
No my good Lord, I met him backe againe.
Knowes he the wickedneſſe?
I my good Lord: 'twas he inform'd againſt him
And quit the houſe on purpoſe, that their puniſhment
Might haue the freer courſe.
Glouſter, I liue
To thanke thee for the loue thou ſhew'dſt the King,
And to reuenge thine eyes. Come hither Friend,
Tell me what more thou know'ſt.
Alacke, 'tis he: why he was met euen now
As mad as the vext Sea, ſinging alowd,
Crown'd with ranke Fenitar, and furrow weeds,
With Hardokes, Hemlocke, Nettles, Cuckoo flowres,
Darnell, and all the idle weedes that grow
In our ſuſtaining Corne. A Centery ſend forth;
Search euery Acre in the high-growne field,
And bring him to our eye. What can mans wiſedome
In the reſtoring his bereaued Senſe; he that helpes him,
Take all my outward worth.
There is meanes Madam:
Our foſter Nurſe of Nature, is repoſe,
The which he lackes: that to prouoke in him
Are many Simples operatiue, whoſe power
Will cloſe the eye of Anguiſh.
All bleſt Secrets,
All you vnpubliſh'd Vertues of the earth
Spring with my teares; be aydant, and remediate
In the Goodmans deſires: ſeeke, ſeeke for him,
Leaſt his vngouern'd rage, diſſolue the life
That wants the meanes to leade it.
Newes Madam,
The Brittiſh Powres are marching hitherward.
'Tis knowne before. Our preparation ſtands
In expectation of them. O deere Father,
It is thy buſineſſe that I go about: Therfore great France
My mourning, and importun'd teares hath pittied:
No blowne Ambition doth our Armes incite,
But loue, deere loue, and our ag'd Fathers Rite:
Soone may I heare, and ſee him.
But are my Brothers Powres ſet forth?
I Madam▪
Himſelfe in perſon there?
Madam with much ado:
Your Siſter is the better Souldier.
Lord Edmund ſpake not with your Lord at home?
No Madam.
What night import my Siſters Letter to him?
I know not, Lady.
Faith he is poaſted hence on ſerious matter:
It was great ignorance, Glouſters eyes being out
To let him liue. Where he arriues, he moues
All hearts againſt vs: Edmund, I thinke is gone
In pitty of his miſery, to diſpatch
His nighted life: Moreouer to deſcry
The ſtrength o' th' Enemy.
I muſt needs after him, Madam, with my Letter.
Our troopes ſet forth to morrow, ſtay with vs:
The wayes are dangerous.
I may not Madam:
My Lady charg'd my dutie in this buſines.
Why ſhould ſhe write to Edmund?
Might not you tranſport her purpoſes by word? Belike,
Some things, I know not what. Ile loue thee much
Let me vnſeale the Letter.
Madam, I had rather—
I know your Lady do's not loue her Husband,
I am ſure of that: and at her late being heere,
She gaue ſtrange Eliads, and moſt ſpeaking lookes
To Noble Edmund. I know you are of her boſome.
I, Madam?
I ſpeake in vnderſtanding: Y' are: I know't,
Therefore I do aduiſe you take this note:
My Lord is dead: Edmond, and I haue talk'd,
And more conuenient is he for my hand
Then for your Ladies: You may gather more:
If you do finde him, pray you giue him this;
And when your Miſtris heares thus much from you,
I pray deſire her call her wiſedome to her.
So fare you well:
If you do chance to heare of that blinde Traitor,
Preferment fals on him, that cuts him off.
Would I could meet Madam, I ſhould ſhew
What party I do follow.
Fare thee well.
When ſhall I come to th' top of that ſame hill?
You do climbe vp it now. Look how we labor.
Me thinkes the ground is eeuen.
Horrible ſteepe.
Hearke, do you heare the Sea?
No truly.
Why then your other Senſes grow imperfect
By your eyes anguiſh.
So may it be indeed.
Me thinkes thy voyce is alter'd, and thou ſpeak'ſt
In better phraſe, and matter then thou did'ſt.
Y' are much deceiu'd: In nothing am I chang'd
But in my Garments.
Me thinkes y' are better ſpoken.
Come on Sir,
Heere's the place: ſtand ſtill: how fearefull
And dizie 'tis, to caſt ones eyes ſo low,
The Crowes and Choughes, that wing the midway ayre
Shew ſcarſe ſo groſſe as Beetles. Halfe way downe
Hangs one that gathers Sampire: dreadfull Trade:
Me thinkes he ſeemes no bigger then his head.
The Fiſhermen, that walk'd vpon the beach
Appeare like Mice: and yond tall Anchoring Barke,
Diminiſh'd to her Cocke: her Cocke, a Buoy
Almoſt too ſmall for ſight. The murmuring Surge,
That on th' vnnumbred idle Pebble chafes
Cannot be heard ſo high. Ile looke no more,
Leaſt my braine turne, and the deficient ſight
Topple downe headlong.
Set me where you ſtand.
Giue me your hand:
You are now within a foote of th' extreme Verge:
For all beneath the Moone would I not leape vpright.
Let go my hand:
Heere Friend's another purſe: in it, a Iewell
Well worth a poore mans taking. Fayries, and Gods
Proſper it with thee. Go thou further off,
Bid me farewell, and let me heare thee going.
Now fare ye well, good Sir.
With all my heart.
Why I do trifle thus with his diſpaire,
Is done to cure it.
O you mighty Gods!
This world I do renounce, and in your ſights
Shake patiently my great affliction off:
If I could beare it longer, and not fall
To quarrell with your great oppoſeleſſe willes,
My ſnuffe, and loathed part of Nature ſhould
Burne it ſelfe out. If Edgar liue, O bleſſe him:
Now Fellow, fare thee well.
Gone Sir, farewell:
And yet I know not how conceit may rob
The Treaſury of life, when life it ſelfe
Yeelds to the Theft. Had he bin where he thought,
By this had thought bin paſt. Aliue, or dead?
Hoa, you Sir: Friend, heare you Sir, ſpeake:
Thus might he paſſe indeed: yet he reuiues.
What are you Sir?
Away, and let me dye.
Had'ſt thou beene ought
But Gozemore, Feathers, Ayre,
(So many fathome downe precipitating)
Thou'dſt ſhiuer'd like an Egge: but thou do'ſt breath:
Haſt heauy ſubſtance, bleed'ſt not, ſpeak'ſt, art ſound,
Ten Maſts at each, make not the altitude
Which thou haſt perpendicularly fell,
Thy life's a Myracle. Speake yet againe.
But haue I falne, or no?
From the dread Somnet of this Chalkie Bourne
Looke vp a height, the ſhrill-gorg'd Larke ſo farre
Cannot be ſeene, or heard: Do but looke vp.
Alacke, I haue no eyes:
Is wretchedneſſe depriu'd that benefit
To end it ſelfe by death? 'Twas yet ſome comfort,
When miſery could beguile the Tyrants rage,
And fruſtrate his proud will.
Giue me your arme.
Vp, ſo: How is't? Feele you your Legges? You ſtand.
Too well, too well.
This is aboue all ſtrangeneſſe,
Vpon the crowne o' th' Cliffe. What thing was that
Which parted from you?
A poore vnfortunate Beggar.
As I ſtood heere below, me thought his eyes
Were two full Moones: he had a thouſand Noſes,
Hornes wealk'd, and waued like the enraged Sea:
It was ſome Fiend: Therefore thou happy Father,
Thinke that the cleereſt Gods, who make them Honors
Of mens Impoſſibilities, haue preſerued thee.
I do remember now: henceforth Ile beare
Affliction, till it do cry out it ſelfe
Enough, enough, and dye. That thing you ſpeake of,
I tooke it for a man: often 'twould ſay
The Fiend, the Fiend, he led me to that place.
Beare free and patient thoughts.
But who comes heere?
The ſafer ſenſe will ne're accommodate
His Maſter thus.
No, they cannot touch me for crying. I am the King himſelfe.
O thou ſide-piercing ſight!
Nature's aboue Art, in that reſpect. Ther's your Preſſe-money. That fellow handles his bow, like a Crow-keeper: draw mee a Cloathiers yard. Looke, looke, a Mouſe: peace, peace, this peece of toaſted Cheeſe will doo't. There's my Gauntlet, Ile proue it on a Gyant. Bring vp the browne Billes. O well flowne Bird: i' th' clout, i' th' clout: Hewgh. Giue the word.
Sweet Mariorum.
Paſſe.
I know that voice.
Ha! Gonerill with a white beard? They flatter'd me like a Dogge, and told mee I had the white hayres in my Beard, ere the blacke ones were there. To ſay I, and no, to euery thing that I ſaid: I, and no too, was no good Diuinity. When the raine came to wet me once, and the winde to make me chatter: when the Thunder would not peace at my bidding, there I found 'em, there I ſmelt 'em out. Go too, they are not men o' their words; they told me, I was euery thing: 'Tis a Lye, I am not Agu-proofe.
The tricke of that voyce, I do well remember:
Is't not the King?
I, euery inch a King.
When I do ſtare, ſee how the Subiect quakes,
I pardon that mans life. What was thy cauſe?
Adultery? thou ſhalt not dye: dye for Adultery?
No, the Wren goes too't, and the ſmall gilded Fly
Do's letcher in my ſight. Let Copulation thriue:
For Glouſters baſtard Son was kinder to his Father,
Then my Daughters got 'tweene the lawfull ſheets.
Too't Luxury pell-mell, for I lacke Souldiers.
Behold yond ſimpring Dame, whoſe face betweene her Forkes preſages Snow; that minces Vertue, & do's ſhake the head to heare of pleaſures name. The Fitchew, nor the ſoyled Horſe goes too't with a more riotous appetite▪ Downe from the waſte they are Centaures, though Women all aboue: but to the Girdle do the Gods inherit, beneath is all the Fiends. There's hell, there's darkenes, there is the ſulphurous pit; burning, ſcalding, ſtench, conſumption: Fye, fie, fie; pah, pah: Giue me an Ounce of Ciuet; good Apothecary ſweeten my immagination: There's money for thee.
O let me kiſſe that hand.
Let me wipe it firſt,
It ſmelles of Mortality.
O ruin'd peece of Nature, this great world
Shall ſo weare out to naught.
Do'ſt thou know me?
I remember thine eyes well enough: doſt thou ſquiny at me? No, doe thy worſt blinde Cupid, Ile not loue. Reade thou this challenge, marke but the penning of it.
Were all thy Letters Sunnes, I could not ſee.
I would not take this from report,
It is, and my heart breakes at it.
Read.
What with the Caſe of eyes?
Oh ho, are you there with me? No eies in your head, nor no mony in your purſe? Your eyes are in a heauy caſe, your purſe in a light, yet you ſee how this world goes.
I ſee it feelingly.
What, art mad? A man may ſee how this world goes, with no eyes. Looke with thine eares: See how yond Iuſtice railes vpon yond ſimple theefe. Hearke in thine eare: Change places, and handy-dandy, which is the Iuſtice, which is the theefe: Thou haſt ſeene a Farmers dogge barke at a Beggar?
I Sir.
And the Creature run from the Cur: there thou might'ſt behold the great image of Authoritie, a Dogg's obey'd in Office. Thou, Raſcall Beadle, hold thy bloody hand: why doſt thou laſh that Whore? Strip thy owne backe, thou hotly luſts to vſe her in that kind, for which thou whip'ſt her. The Vſurer hangs the Cozener. Thorough tatter'd cloathes great Vices do appeare: Robes, and Furr'd gownes hide all. Place ſinnes with Gold, and the ſtrong Lance of Iuſtice, hurtleſſe breakes: Arme it in ragges, a Pigmies ſtraw do's pierce it. None do's offend, none, I ſay none, Ile able 'em; take that of me my Friend, who haue the power to ſeale th' accuſers lips. Get thee glaſſe-eyes, and like a ſcuruy Politician, ſeeme to ſee the things thou doſt not. Now, now, now, now. Pull off my Bootes: harder, harder, ſo.
O matter, and impertinency mixt,
Reaſon in Madneſſe.
If thou wilt weepe my Fortunes, take my eyes.
I know thee well enough, thy name is Glouſter:
Thou muſt be patient; we came crying hither:
Thou know'ſt, the firſt time that we ſmell the Ayre
We wawle, and cry. I will preach to thee: Marke.
Alacke, alacke the day.
When we are borne, we cry that we are come
To this great ſtage of Fooles. This a good blocke:
It were a delicate ſtratagem to ſhoo
A Troope of Horſe with Felt: Ile put't in proofe,
And when I haue ſtolne vpon theſe Son in Lawes,
Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill.
Oh heere he is: lay hand vpon him, Sir▪
Your moſt deere Daughter —
No reſcue? What, a Priſoner? I am euen
The Naturall Foole of Fortune. Vſe me well,
You ſhall haue ranſome. Let me haue Surgeons,
I am cut to' th' Braines.
You ſhall haue any thing.
No Seconds? All my ſelfe?
Why, this would make a man, a man of Salt
To vſe his eyes for Garden water-pots. I wil die brauely,
Like a ſmugge Bridegroome. What? I will be Iouiall:
Come, come, I am a King, Maſters, know you that?
You are a Royall one, and we obey you.
Then there's life in't. Come, and you get it,
You ſhall get it by running: Sa, ſa, ſa, ſa.
A ſight moſt pittifull in the meaneſt wretch,
Paſt ſpeaking of in a King. Thou haſt a Daughter
Who redeemes Nature from the generall curſe
Which twaine haue brought her to.
Haile gentle Sir.
Sir, ſpeed you: what's your will?
Do you heare ought (Sir) of a Battell toward.
Moſt ſure, and vulgar:
Euery one heares that; which can diſtinguiſh ſound.
But by your fauour:
How neere's the other Army?
Neere, and on ſpeedy foot: the maine deſcry
Stands on the hourely thought.
I thanke you Sir, that's all.
Though that the Queen on ſpecial cauſe is here
Her Army is mou'd on.
I thanke you Sir.
You euer gentle Gods, take my breath from me,
Let not my worſer Spirit tempt me againe
To dye before you pleaſe.
Well pray you Father.
Now good ſir, what are you?
A moſt poore man, made tame to Fortunes blows
Who, by the Art of knowne, and feeling ſorrowes,
Am pregnant to good pitty. Giue me your hand,
Ile leade you to ſome biding.
Heartie thankes:
The bountie, and the benizon of Heauen
To boot, and boot.
A proclaim'd prize: moſt happie
That eyeleſſe head of thine, was firſt fram'd fleſh
To raiſe my fortunes. Thou old, vnhappy Traitor,
Breefely thy ſelfe remember: the Sword is out
That muſt deſtroy thee.
Now let thy friendly hand
Put ſtrength enough too't.
Wherefore, bold Pezant,
Dar'ſt thou ſupport a publiſh'd Traitor? Hence,
Leaſt that th' infection of his fortune take
Like hold on thee. Let go his arme.
Chill not let go Zir,
Without vurther 'caſion.
Let go Slaue, or thou dy'ſt.
Good Gentleman goe your gate, and let poore volke paſſe: and 'chud ha' bin zwaggerd out of my life, 'twould not ha'bin zo long as 'tis, by a vortnight. Nay, come not neere th' old man: keepe out che vor'ye, or ice try whither your Coſtard, or my Ballow be the harder; chill be plaine with you.
Out Dunghill.
Chill picke your teeth Zir: come, no matter vor your foynes.
Slaue thou haſt ſlaine me: Villain, take my purſe;
If euer thou wilt thriue, bury my bodie,
And giue the Letters which thou find'ſt about me,
To Edmund Earle of Glouſter: ſeeke him out
Vpon the Engliſh party. Oh vntimely death, death.
I know thee well. A ſeruiceable Villaine,
As duteous to the vices of thy Miſtris,
As badneſſe would deſire.
What, is he dead?
Sit you downe Father: reſt you.
Let's ſee theſe Pockets; the Letters that he ſpeakes of
May be my Friends: hee's dead; I am onely ſorry
He had no other Deathſman. Let vs ſee:
Leaue gentle waxe, and manners: blame vs not
To know our enemies mindes, we rip their hearts,
Their Papers is more lawfull.
LEt our reciprocall vowes be remembred. You haue manie opportunities to cut him off: if your will want not, time and place will be fruitfully offer'd. There is nothing done. If hee returne the Conqueror, then am I the Priſoner, and his bed, my Gaole, from the loathed warmth whereof, deliuer me, and ſupply the place for your Labour. Your (Wife, ſo I would ſay) affectionate Seruant. Gonerill.
Oh indinguiſh'd ſpace of Womans will,
A plot vpon her vertuous Husbands life,
And the exchange my Brother: heere, in rhe ſands
Thee Ile rake vp, the poſte vnſanctified
Of murtherous Letchers: and in the mature time,
With this vngracious paper ſtrike the ſight
Of the death-practis'd Duke: for him 'tis well,
That of thy death, and buſineſſe, I can tell.
The King is mad:
How ſtiffe is my vilde ſenſe
That I ſtand vp, and haue ingenious feeling
Of my huge Sorrowes? Better I were diſtract,
So ſhould my thoughts be ſeuer'd from my greefes,
And woes, by wrong imaginations looſe
The knowledge of themſelues.
Giue me your hand:
Farre off methinkes I heare the beaten Drumme.
Come Father, Ile beſtow you with a Friend.
O thou good Kent,
How ſhall I liue and worke
To match thy goodneſſe?
My life will be too ſhort,
And euery meaſure faile me.
To be acknowledg'd Madam is ore-pai'd,
All my reports go with the modeſt truth,
Nor more, nor clipt, but ſo.
Be better ſuited,
Theſe weedes are memories of thoſe worſer houres:
I prythee put them off.
Pardon deere Madam,
Yet to be knowne ſhortens my made intent,
My boone I make it, that you know me not,
Till time, and I, thinke meet.
Then be't ſo my good Lord:
How do's the King?
Madam ſleepes ſtill.
O you kind Gods!
Cure this great breach in his abuſed Nature,
Th' vntun'd and iarring ſenſes, O winde vp,
Of this childe-changed Father.
So pleaſe your Maieſty,
That we may wake the King, he hath ſlept long?
Be gouern'd by your knowledge, and proceede
I' th' ſway of your owne will: is he array'd?
I Madam: in the heauineſſe of ſleepe,
We put freſh garments on him.
Be by good Madam when we do awake him,
I doubt of his Temperance.
O my deere Father, reſtauratian hang
Thy medicine on my lippes, and let this kiſſe
Repaire thoſe violent harmes, that my two Siſters
Haue in thy Reuerence made.
Kind and deere Princeſſe.
Had you not bin their Father, theſe white flkes
Did challenge pitty of them. Was this a face
To be oppos'd againſt the iarring windes?
Mine Enemies dogge, though he had bit me,
Should haue ſtood that night againſt my fire,
And was't thou faine (poore Father)
To houell thee with Swine and Rogues forlorne,
In ſhort, and muſty ſtraw? Alacke, alacke,
'Tis wonder that thy life and wits, at once
Had not concluded all. He wakes, ſpeake to him.
Madam do you, 'tis fitteſt.
How does my Royall Lord?
How fares your Maieſty?
You do me wrong to take me out o' th' graue,
Thou art a Soule in bliſſe, but I am bound
Vpon a wheele of fire, that mine owne teares
Do ſcal'd, like molten Lead.
Sir, do you know me?
You are a ſpirit I know, where did you dye?
Still, ſtill, farre wide.
He's ſcarſe awake,
Let him alone a while.
Where haue I bin?
Where am I? Faire day light?
I am mightily abus'd; I ſhould eu'n dye with pitty
To ſee another thus. I know not what to ſay:
I will not ſweare theſe are my hands: let's ſee,
I feele this pin pricke, would I were aſſur'd
Of my condition.
O looke vpon me Sir,
And hold your hand in benediction o're me,
You muſt not kneele.
Pray do not mocke me:
I am a very fooliſh fond old man,
Foureſcore and vpward,
Not an houre more, nor leſſe:
And to deale plainely,
I feare I am not in my perfect mind.
Me thinkes I ſhould know you, and know this man,
Yet I am doubtfull: For I am mainely ignorant
What place this is▪ and all the skill I haue
Remembers not theſe garments: nor I know not
Where I did lodge laſt night. Do not laugh at me,
For (as I am a man) I thinke this Lady
To be my childe Cordelia.
And ſo I am: I am.
Be your teares wet?
Yes faith: I pray weepe not,
If you haue poyſon for me, I will drinke it:
I know you do not loue me, for your Siſters
Haue (as I do remember) done me wrong.
You haue ſome cauſe, they haue not.
No cauſe, no cauſe.
Am I in France?
In your owne kingdome Sir.
Do not abuſe me.
Be comforted good Madam, the great rage
You ſee is kill'd in him: deſire him to go in,
Trouble him no more till further ſetling.
Wilt pleaſe your Highneſſe walke?
You muſt beare with me:
Pray you now forget, and forgiue,
I am old and fooliſh.
Know of the Duke if his laſt purpoſe hold,
Or whether ſince he is aduis'd by ought
To change the courſe, he's full of alteration,
And ſelfe reprouing, bring his conſtant pleaſure.
Our Siſters man is certainely miſcarried.
'Tis to be doubted Madam.
Now ſweet Lord,
You know the goodneſſe I intend vpon you:
Tell me but truly, but then ſpeake the truth,
Do you not loue my Siſter?
In honour'd Loue.
But haue you neuer found my Brothers way,
To the fore-fended place?
No by mine honour, Madam.
I neuer ſhall endure her, deere my Lord
Be not familiar with her.
Feare not, ſhe and the Duke her husband.
Our very louing Siſter, well be-met:
Sir, this I heard, the King is come to his Daughter
With others, whom the rigour of our State
Forc'd to cry out.
Why is this reaſond?
Combine together 'gainſt the Enemie:
For theſe domeſticke and particurlar broiles,
Are not the queſtion heere.
Let's then determine with th' ancient of warre
On our proceeding.
Siſter you'le go with vs?
No.
'Tis moſt conuenient, pray go with vs.
Oh ho, I know the Riddle, I will goe.
If ere your Grace had ſpeech with man ſo poore,
Heare me one word.
Ile ouertake you, ſpeake.
Before you fight the Battaile, ope this Letter:
If you haue victory, let the Trumpet ſound
For him that brought it: wretched though I ſeeme,
I can produce a Champion, that will proue
What is auouched there. If you miſcarry,
Your buſineſſe of the world hath ſo an end,
And machination ceaſes. Fortune loues you.
Stay till I haue read the Letter.
I was forbid it:
When time ſhall ſerue, let but the Herald cry,
And Ile appeare againe.
Why farethee well, I will o're-looke thy paper.
The Enemy's in view, draw vp your powers,
Heere is the gueſſe of their true ſtrength and Forces,
By dilligent diſcouerie, but your haſt
Is now vrg'd on you.
We will greet the time.
To both theſe Siſters haue I ſworne my loue:
Each iealous of the other, as the ſtung
Are of the Adder. Which of them ſhall I take?
Both? One? Or neither? Neither can be enioy'd
If both remaine aliue: To take the Widdow,
Exaſperates, makes mad her Siſter Gonerill,
And hardly ſhall I carry out my ſide,
Her husband being aliue. Now then, wee'l vſe
His countenance for the Battaile, which being done,
Let her who would be rid of him, deuiſe
His ſpeedy taking off. As for the mercie
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,
The Battaile done, and they within our power,
Shall neuer ſee his pardon: for my ſtate,
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.
Heere Father, take the ſhadow of this Tree
For your good hoaſt: pray that the right may thriue:
If euer I returne to you againe,
Ile bring you comfort.
Grace go with you Sir.
Away old man, giue me thy hand, away:
King Lear hath loſt▪ he and his Daughter tane,
Giue me thy hand: Come on.
No further Sir, a man may rot euen heere.
What in ill thoughts againe?
Men muſt endure
Their going hence, euen as their comming hither,
Ripeneſſe is all come on.
And that's true too.
Some Officers take them away: good guard,
Vntill their greater pleaſures firſt be knowne
That are to cenſure them.
We are not the firſt,
Who with beſt meaning haue incurr'd the worſt:
For thee oppreſſed King I am caſt downe,
My ſelfe could elſe out-frowne falſe Fortunes frowne.
Shall we not ſee theſe Daughters, and theſe Siſters?
No, no, no, no: come let's away to priſon,
We two alone will ſing like Birds i' th' Cage:
When thou doſt aske me bleſſing, Ile kneele downe
And aske of thee forgiueneſſe: So wee'l liue,
And pray, and ſing, and tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded Butterflies: and heere (poore Rogues)
Talke of Court newes, and wee'l talke with them too,
Who looſes, and who wins; who's in, who's out;
And take vpon's the myſtery of things,
As if we were Gods ſpies: And wee'l weare out
In a wall'd priſon, packs and ſects of great ones,
That ebbe and flow by th' Moone.
Take them away.
Vpon ſuch ſacrifices my Cordelia,
The Gods themſelues throw Incenſe.
Haue I caught thee?
He that parts vs, ſhall bring a Brand from Heauen,
And fire vs hence, like Foxes: wipe thine eyes,
The good yeares ſhall deuoure them, fleſh and fell,
Ere they ſhall make vs weepe?
Weele ſee e'm ſtaru'd firſt: come.
Come hither Captaine, hearke.
Take thou this note, go follow them to priſon,
One ſtep I haue aduanc'd thee, if thou do'ſt
As this inſtructs thee, thou doſt make thy way
To Noble Fortunes: know thou this, that men
Are as the time is; to be tender minded
Do's not become a Sword, thy great imployment
Will not beare queſtion: either ſay thou'lt do't,
Or thriue by other meanes.
Ile do't my Lord.
About it, and write happy, when th' haſt done,
Marke I ſay inſtantly, and carry it ſo
As I haue ſet it downe.
Sir, you haue ſhew'd to day your valiant ſtraine
And Fortune led you well: you haue the Captiues
Who were the oppoſites of this dayes ſtrife:
I do require them of you ſo to vſe them,
As we ſhall find their merites, and our ſafety
May equally determine.
Sir, I thought it fit,
To ſend the old and miſerable King to ſome retention,
Whoſe age had Charmes in it, whoſe Title more,
To plucke the common boſome on his ſide,
And turne our impreſt Launces in our eies
Which do command them. With him I ſent the Queen:
My reaſon all the ſame, and they are ready
To morrow, or at further ſpace, t'appeare
Where you ſhall hold your Seſſion.
Sir, by your patience,
I hold you but a ſubiect of this Warre,
Not as a Brother.
That's as we liſt to grace him.
Methinkes our pleaſure might haue bin demanded
Ere you had ſpoke ſo farre. He led our Powers,
Bore the Commiſſion of my place and perſon,
The which immediacie may well ſtand vp,
And call it ſelfe your Brother.
Not ſo hot:
In his owne grace he doth exalt himſelfe,
More then in your addition.
In my rights,
By me inueſted, he compeetes the beſt.
That were the moſt, if he ſhould husband you.
Ieſters do oft proue Prophets.
Hola, hola,
That eye that told you ſo, look'd but a ſquint.
Lady I am not well, elſe I ſhould anſwere
From a full flowing ſtomack. Generall,
Take thou my Souldiers, priſoners, patrimony,
Diſpoſe of them, of me, the walls is thine:
Witneſſe the world, that I create thee heere
My Lord, and Maſter.
Meane you to enioy him?
The let alone lies not in your good will.
Nor in thine Lord.
Halfe-blooded fellow, yes.
Let the Drum ſtrike, and proue my title thine.
Stay yet, heare reaſon: Edmund, I arreſt thee
On capitall Treaſon; and in thy arreſt,
This guilded Serpent: for your claime faire Siſters,
I bare it in the intereſt of my wife,
'Tis ſhe is ſub-contracted to this Lord,
And I her husband contradict your Bane.
If you will marry, make your loues to me,
My Lady is beſpoke.
An enterlude.
Thou art armed Gloſter,
Let the Trmpet ſound:
If none appeare to proue vpon thy perſon,
Thy heynous, manifeſt, and many Treaſons,
There is my pledge: Ile make it on thy heart
Ere I taſte bread, thou art in nothing leſſe
Then I haue heere proclaim'd thee.
Sicke, O ſicke.
If not, Ile nere truſt medicine.
There's my exchange, what in the world lies
That names me Traitor, villain-like he lies,
Call by the Trumpet: he that dares approach;
On him, on you, who not, I will maintaine
My truth and honor firmely.
A Herald, ho.
Truſt to thy ſingle vertue, for thy Souldiers
All leuied in my name, haue in my name
Tooke their diſcharge.
My ſickneſſe growes vpon me.
She is not well, conuey her to my Tent.
Come hither Herald, let the Trumper ſound,
And read out this.
IF any man of qualitie or degree, within the liſts of the Army, will maintaine vpon Edmund, ſuppoſed Earle of Gloſter, that he is a manifold Traitor, let him appeare by the third ſound of the Trumpet: he is bold in his defence.
Againe.
Againe.
Aske him his purpoſes, why he appeares
Vpon this Call o' th' Trumpet.
What are you?
Your name, your quality, and why you anſwer
This preſent Summons?
Know my name is loſt
By Treaſons tooth: bare-gnawne, and Canker-bit,
Yet am I Noble as the Aduerſary
I come to cope.
Which is that Aduerſary?
What's he that ſpeakes for Edmund Earle of Gloſter?
Himſelfe, what ſaiſt thou to him?
Draw thy Sword,
That if my ſpeech offend a Noble heart,
Thy arme may do thee Iuſtice, heere is mine:
Behold it is my priuiledge,
The priuiledge of mine Honours,
My oath, and my profeſſion. I proteſt,
Maugre thy ſtrength, place, youth, and eminence,
Deſpiſe thy victor-Sword, and fire new Fortune,
Thy valor, and thy heart, thou art a Traitor:
Falſe to thy Gods, thy Brother, and thy Father,
Conſpirant 'gainſt this high illuſtirous Prince,
And from th' extremeſt vpward of thy head,
To the diſcent and duſt below thy foote,
A moſt Toad-ſpotted Traitor. Say thou no,
This Sword, this arme, and my beſt ſpirits are bent
To proue vpon thy heart, whereto I ſpeake,
Thou lyeſt.
In wiſedome I ſhould aske thy name,
But ſince thy out-ſide lookes ſo faire and Warlike,
And that thy tongue (ſome ſay) of breeding breathes,
What ſafe, and nicely I might well delay,
By rule of Knight-hood, I diſdaine and ſpurne:
Backe do I toſſe theſe Treaſons to thy head,
With the hell-hated Lye, ore-whelme thy heart,
Which for they yet glance by, and ſcarely bruiſe,
This Sword of mine ſhall giue them inſtant way,
Where they ſhall reſt for euer. Trumpets ſpeake.
Saue him, ſaue him.
This is practiſe Gloſter,
By th' law of Warre, thou waſt not bound to anſwer
An vnknowne oppoſite: thou art not vanquiſh'd,
But cozend, and be guild.
Shut your mouth Dame,
Or with this paper ſhall I ſtop it: hold Sir,
Thou worſe then any name, reade thine owne euill:
No tearing Lady, I perceiue you know it.
Say if I do, the Lawes are mine not thine,
Who can araigne me for't?
Moſt monſtrous! O, know'ſt thou this paper?
Aske me not what I know.
Go after her, ſhe's deſperate, gouerne her.
What you haue charg'd me with,
That haue I done,
And more, much more, the time will bring it out.
'Tis paſt, and ſo am I: But what art thou
That haſt this Fortune on me? If thou'rt Noble,
I do forgiue thee.
Let's exchange charity:
I am no leſſe in blood then thou art Edmond,
If more, the more th' haſt wrong'd me.
My name is Edgar and thy Fathers Sonne,
The Gods are iuſt, and of our pleaſant vices
Make inſtruments to plague vs:
The darke and vitious place where thee he got,
Coſt him his eyes.
Th' haſt ſpoken right, 'tis true,
The Wheele is come full circle, I am heere.
Me thought thy very gate did propheſie
A Royall Nobleneſſe: I muſt embrace thee,
Let ſorrow ſplit my heart, if euer I
Did hate thee, or thy Father.
Worthy Prince I know't.
Where haue you hid your ſelfe?
How haue you knowne the miſeries of your Father?
By nurſing them my Lord. Liſt a breefe tale,
And when 'tis told, O that my heart would burſt.
The bloody proclamation to eſcape
That follow'd me ſo neere, (O our liues ſweetneſſe,
That we the paine of death would hourely dye,
Rather then die at once) taught me to ſhift
Into a mad-mans rags, t'aſſume a ſemblance
That very Dogges diſdain'd: and in this habit
Met I my Father with his bleeding Rings,
Their precious Stones new loſt: became his guide,
Led him, begg'd for him, ſau'd him from diſpaire.
Neuer (O fault) reueal'd my ſelfe vnto him,
Vntill ſome halfe houre paſt when I was arm'd,
Not ſue, though hoping of this good ſucceſſe,
I ask'd his bleſſing, and from firſt to laſt
Told him our pilgrimage. But his flaw'd heart
(Alacke too weake the conflict to ſupport)
Twixt two extremes of paſſion, ioy and greefe,
Burſt ſmilingly.
This ſpeech of yours hath mou'd me,
And ſhall perchance do good, but ſpeake you on,
You looke as you had ſomething more to ſay.
If there be more, more wofull, hold it in,
For I am almoſt ready to diſſolue,
Hearing of this.
Helpe, helpe: O helpe.
What kinde of helpe?
Speake man.
What meanes this bloody Knife?
'Tis hot, it ſmoakes, it came euen from the heart of—O ſhe's dead.
Who dead? Speake man.
Your Lady Sir, your Lady; and her Siſter
By her is poyſon'd: ſhe confeſſes it.
I was contracted to them both, all three
Now marry in an inſtant.
Here comes Kent.
Produce the bodies, be they aliue or dead;
This iudgement of the Heauens that makes vs tremble.
Touches vs not with pitty: O, is this he?
The time will not allow the complement
Which very manners vrges.
I am come
To bid my King and Maſter aye good night.
Is he not here?
Great thing of vs forgot,
Speake Edmund, where's the King? and where's Cordelia?
Seeſt thou this obiect Kent?
Alacke, why thus?
Yet Edmund was belou'd:
The one the other poiſon'd for my ſake,
And after ſlew herſelfe.
Euen ſo: couer their faces.
I pant for life: ſome good I meane to do
Deſpight of mine owne Nature. Quickly ſend,
(Be briefe in it) to' th' Caſtle, for my Writ
Is on the life of Lear, and on Cordelia:
Nay, ſend in time.
Run, run, O run.
To who my Lord? Who ha's the Office?
Send thy token of repreeue.
Well thought on, take my Sword,
Giue it the Captaine.
Haſt thee for thy life.
He hath Commiſſion from thy Wife and me,
To hang Cordelia in the priſon, and
To lay the blame vpon her owne diſpaire,
That ſhe for-did her ſelfe.
The Gods defend her, beare him hence awhile.
Howle, howle, howle: O your are men of ſtones,
Had I your tongues and eyes, Il'd vſe them ſo,
That Heauens vault ſhould crack: ſhe's gone for euer.
I know when one is dead, and when one liues,
She's dead as earth: Lend me a Looking-glaſſe,
If that her breath will miſt or ſtaine the ſtone,
Why then ſhe liues.
Is this the promis'd end?
Or image of that horror.
Fall and ceaſe.
This feather ſtirs, ſhe liues: if it be ſo,
It is a chance which do's redeeme all ſorrowes
That euer I haue felt.
O my good Maſter.
Prythee away.
'Tis Noble Kent your Friend.
A plague vpon you Murderors, Traitors all,
I might haue ſau'd her, now ſhe's gone for euer:
Cordelia, Cordelia, ſtay a little. Ha:
What is't thou ſaiſt? Her voice was euer ſoft,
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
I kill'd the Slaue that was a hanging thee.
'Tis true (my Lords) he did.
Did I not fellow?
I haue ſeene the day, with my good biting Faulchion
I would haue made him skip: I am old now,
And theſe ſame croſſes ſpoile me. Who are you?
Mine eyes are not o' th' beſt, Ile tell you ſtraight.
If Fortune brag of two, ſhe lou'd and hated,
One of them we behold.
This is a dull ſight, are you not Kent?
The ſame: your Seruant Kent,
Where is your Seruant Caius?
He's a good fellow, I can tell you that,
He'le ſtrike and quickly too, he's dead and rotten.
No my good Lord, I am the very man.
Ile ſee that ſtraight.
That from your firſt of difference and decay,
Haue follow'd your ſad ſteps.
Your are welcome hither.
Nor no man elſe:
All's cheerleſſe, darke, and deadly,
Your eldeſt Daughters haue fore-done themſelues,
And deſperately are dead
I ſo I thinke.
He knowes not what he ſaies, and vaine is it
That we preſent vs to him.
Very bootleſſe.
Edmund is dead my Lord.
That's but a trifle heere:
You Lords and Noble Friends, know our intent,
What comfort to this great decay may come,
Shall be appli'd. For vs we will reſigne,
During the life of this old Maieſty
To him our abſolute power, you to your rights,
With boote, and ſuch addition as your Honours
Haue more then merited. All Friends ſhall
Taſte the wages of their vertue, and all Foes
The cup of their deſeruings: O ſee, ſee.
And my poore Foole is hang'd: no, no, no life?
Why ſhould a Dog, a Horſe, a Rat haue life,
And thou no breath at all? Thou'lt come no more,
Neuer, neuer, neuer, neuer, neuer.
Pray you vndo this Button. Thanke you Sir,
Do you ſee this? Looke on her? Looke her lips,
Looke there, looke there.
He faints, my Lord, my Lord.
Breake heart, I prythee breake.
Looke vp my Lord.
Vex not his ghoſt, O let him paſſe, he hates him,
That would vpon the wracke of this tough world
Stretch him out longer.
He is gon indeed.
The wonder is, he hath endur'd ſo long,
He but vſurpt his life.
Beare them from hence, our preſent buſineſſe
Is generall woe: Friends of my ſoule, you twaine,
Rule in this Realme, and the gor'd ſtate ſuſtaine.
I haue a iourney Sir, ſhortly to go,
My Maſter calls me, I muſt not ſay no.
The waight of this ſad time we muſt obey,
Speake what we feele, not what we ought to ſay:
The oldeſt hath borne moſt, we that are yong,
Shall neuer ſee ſo much, nor liue ſo long.