IS your pawne good and ſound ſir?
Ile pawne my life for that ſir;
Place your ſelfe there then, I will ſeeke to preferre it preſently: my Maiſter is very iealous of the peſtilence; marry the po ſits at meate and meale with him.
Lent the fift day of September to miſtreſſe Onſet vpon her gowne, Taffatie petticote with three broad ſiluer Laces, three pound fifteene ſhillings.
Lent to Iuſtice Cropſhin vpon both his Veluet Iackets, fiue pound ten ſhillings.
Lent priuately to my Lady New-cut, vpon her gilt Caſtingbottle, and her ſiluer Lye-pot, fiftie fiue ſhillings.
Sir.
Lent to Sir Oliuer Needy vpon his Taffatie cloake, Beuer hat, and perfumd lether-Ierkin, 6. pound 5. ſhillings.
May it pleaſe your worſhip—
Lent to maiſter Andrew Lucifer, vpon his flame-colourd doublet, and blew Taffity-hoſe—top the candle firrah, mee thinkes the light burnes blew-when came that ſuite in.
Tas laine aboue the yeare now?
Fire and brimſtone, cut it out into matches, the white linings will ſerue for tinder.
And with little helpe ſir, they are almoſt black ynough allready?—Sir here's an other come with a pawne;
Keepe him aſide awhile▪ and reach me hether the Bill of the laſt weeke;
Tere at hand ſir?
Now ſir what's your pawne?
The ſecond part of a Gentlewomans gowne ſir, the lower halfe I meane;
I apprehend you eaſily, the breeches of the gowne!
Very proper, for ſhee weares the doublet at home, a ghueſt that lies in my houſe ſir; ſhe lookes euery houre: for her couſine out at'h country.
Oh her couſine lies here a may miſtake in that? my firend of what pariſh is your pawne?
Pariſh why? Saint Clements ſir, -Ile come to you preſently,
What pariſh is your pawne my friend. Saint Brides 5. Saint Dunſts none; Saint Clements 3. 3. at Clements, away with your pawne ſir, your pariſh is infected, I will neither purchaſe the plague for ſix pence in the pound, and a groat Bill mony, nor venture my ſmal ſtocke into contagious pariſhes: you haue your anſwer fare-you-well, as faſt as you can ſir.
The pox arreſt you ſir at the ſuite of the Suburbs.
I welcome, welcome.
For I thinke plague ſcornes your company.
I rancke with chiefe Gallants, I loue to ſmell ſafely: lent in the vacation to maiſter Proctor vppon his Spirituall gowne, 5. angels; and vpon his Corporall doublet, 15. ſhillings. ſumme 3. pound 5. ſhillings.
Sir.
Now ſir.
Heer's one come in with a trunke of apparrell.
Whence comes it?
From Saint Martins in the field.
Saint Martins in the field,—Saint Mary Maudlin 2. Saint Martins none, her's an Honeſt fellow, let him appeare ſir.
You may come neere ſir,
Oh welcome, welcome what's your pawne ſir?
Faith a Gentlewomans whole ſuite ſir.
Whole ſuite? tis well.
A poore kinde ſoule, troubled with a bad husband; one that puts her to her ſhifts here.
Hee puts her from her ſhifts me thinkes when ſhe is faine to pawne her clothes?
Looke you ſir, a faire Sattin gowne; new Taffaty petticote.
Stay, this petticoate has bene turnd?
Often turnd vp and down & you wil, but neuer turnd ſir.
Cry you mercy indeed:
A fine white Beuer, pearle-band; 3. falls, Iha knowne her haue more in her daies.
Alaſſe and ſhe bee but a Gentlewoman of any count or charge, 3. faules are nothing, in theſe daies-Know that; tut the worlds chang'd, gentlewomans faules ſtand vpright now, no ſinne but has a Bolſter, that it may lye at eaſe: Well what do you borrow of theſe ſir?
Twelue pound and you will ſir.
How?
They were not hers for twenty.
Why ſo: our pawne is euer thrice the value of our mony vnles in plate and Iewells, how ſhould the moneths bee reſtor'd and the vſe elſe? we muſt caſt it for the twelue moneth, ſo many pounds, ſo many moneths, ſo many eighteene pences, then the vſe of theſe eighteene pences, then the want of the returne of thoſe pounds, all theſe muſt bee laid togither, which well conſidered, the valuation of the pawne had need to ſound treble: Can ſix pound pleaſure the Gentlewoman.
It may pleaſe her, but like a man of threeſcore in the Limbreſt degree.
I haue but one word more to ſay in't, twenty nobles is all and the vtmoſt that I will haxard vppon't.
ſhe muſt be content with't, the leſſe borrowed the better paid, come.
Arthur?
At hand ſir.
Tell out twenty nobles, and take her name in a Bill?
Im e ſatisfied ſir?
Welcome: good Saint Martins in the field, welcome, welcome, I know no other name?
What ſo hard at your praiers?
A litle ſir, ſumming vp my pawnes here: what Maiſter Primero? is it you ſir Gallant; and how does all the prety ſweete Ladies, thoſe plumpe, kinde, delicate bliſſes; ha? whom I kiſſe in my very thoughts: how do they Gallant?
Why Gallant? if they ſhould not doe well in my houſe, where ſhould it be done boy, haue I not a glorious Sctuation?
Oh a Gallant Receit, Violet ayre, curious garden, quaint walkes, fantaſticall Arbors, three back-doores and a Coachgate, nay tha'rt admirably ſeated, little furniture will ſerue thee, tha'rt neuer without moueables.
I praiſe my Starres; ah the goodly virginities that haue beene cut vp in my houſe, and the goodly patrimonies that haue laine like ſops in the grauie, and when thoſe ſops were eaten, yet the meate was kept whole for another, and another, and another, for as in one pie twenty may dip their ſippits, ſo vpon one woman forty may conſume their patrimonies.
Excellent, maſter Primero?
Wel, ile pray for women while I liue, the're the profitableſt fooles, ile ſay that for em, a mā can keepe about his houſe the pretieſt kinde fowle, ſo tame, ſo gentle e en to ſtrangers, hands, So ſoone familiar, ſuffer to be toucht, Of thoſe they nere ſaw twice: the Doues not like em.
Moſt certaine, for thats honeſt; but I haue a ſuite to you?
And ſo haue I to you.
That happens well,
Grant mine and ile grant yours?
A match.
Make me perfect in that tricke that got you ſo much at Primero.
Oh for the thred tied at your partners leg: the twich?
I that twich and you calt ſo.
That ſecret twich got me fiue hundred pound,
Ere twas firſt knowne and ſince I ha ſold it well
Fiue hundred pound laide downe ſhall not yet buy,
The f;ee ſimple of my twitch I would be here with't,
Twas a bleſt inuention, I had bene a beggar many alowſie yeare
But for my twitch. It was the prettieſt twitch?
Many ouer-cheated gulls, haue fatted
Mee with the bottome of their patrimonies
Ee'n to the laſt Sope, gapte while I fed em;
who now liue by that Art that firſt vndid e'm.
But I muſt ſweare you to be ſecret, cloſe,
As a maid, at Ten.
Had you ſworne but two yeares higher I would here h'a beleeu'd you.
Nay I let twelue alone,
For after twelue has ſtruck, mades looke for one.
I looke for one too and a maide I thinke.
What, to come hether?
Sure ſhe followes me? a pretie fat eyde wench, with a Venus in her cheeke, did but Rayment ſmile vpon her, ſhe were Nectar for great Dons, boy and thats my ſuite to thee.
And thats granted already: of what volume is this booke, that I may fit a couer too't?
Faith neither in folio, nor in Decimo ſexto, but in Octauo betweene both, a prety middle fizde trug.
Then I haue fitted her already: in my eye ifaith: here came a pawne in e'en now will make ſhift to ſerue her as fit, looke you ſir Gallants, Sattin, Taffety, Beuer, fall and all.
Is it new.
New? you ſee it beares her youth as freſhly,—
A prety ſuite of cloathes ifaith;—but put caſe the party ſhould come to redeeme em of a ſuddaine?
Puh then your wits ſickly, haue not I the policy thinke you to ſeeme treame bufie and defer em til the morrow, againſt which time that pawne ſhall bee ſecretly fetcht home, and another carried out to ſupply the place.
I like thy craft well there.
A generall courſe, oh Frippery is an vnknowne benefit ſir Gallant!
And what muſt I giue you for the hire now ifaith.
Of the whole ſuite, for the month?
I for the month.
Go to, you ſhall giue me but twelue pence a day, Maiſter Primero your a friend, and Ile vſe you ſo, tis got vp at your houſe in an after-noone ifaith, the hire of the whole month: yea muſt thinke I can diſtinguiſh ſpirits and put a difference betweene you and others: you pay no more ifaith.
I could haue offred you no leſſe, my ſelfe.
Tut, a man muſt vſe a friend, as a friend may vſe him; your houſe has beene a ſweete houſe to mee, both for pleaſure and profit: ile giue you your due, omne tulit punctum, you haue alwaies kept fine puncks in your houſe, thats for pleaſure, qui miſcuit vtile dulci, and I haue had ſweete pawnes from em, thats for profit now?
You flatter, you flatter ſir Gallant? but whiſt, here ſhee enters; I prethe queſtion her? oh y'are welcome.
Is this you new ſcholler Maiſter Primero?
Marry is ſhe ſir.
Ile commend your iudgement in a wench while I liue, that face will get money ifaith, twill bee a get peny I warrant you? got to? your fortune was choice prety Bliſſe to fall into the regard of ſo kinde a Gentleman.
I hope ſo ſir.
See, what his care has prouided already for you, youle be ſimply ſet out to the world: if you'l haue that care now to deſerue his paines oh that wil be acceptable: and theſe be the Rudiments you muſt chiefly point at: to counterfit cunningly, to winde in gentlemen with pourefull attraction, to keepe his houſe in name and cuſtome, to diſſemble with your owne brother, neuer to betray your fellowed imperfections, nor lay open the ſtate of their bodies to ſtrangers, to beleeue thoſe that giue you, to gul thoſe that beleeue you, to laugh at all vnder Taffety, and theſe be your rudiments.
Ther's e'en al i faith, weele trouble you with no more, nay you ſhal liue at eaſe inough: for nimming away iewells and fauours from Gentlemen (which are your chiefe vailes) hope that this page keyed by pfs wil come naturally inough to you, I need not inſtruct you, you'l haue that with, I truſt to make the moſt of your pleaſure.
I hope ones mother-wit will ſerue for that ſir.
Oh propreſt of all wench: it muſt bee a ſhee wit that does thoſe things, & thy mother was quick inough at it in her daies.
Giue me leaue ſiſter to examine you vpon 2. or 3. particulers: and you make you ready be no aſhamed, hers none but friends—are you a maide.
Yes, in the laſt quarter ſir.
Very proper, that e'en going out, a maide in the laſt quarter, thats a whore in the firſt;—let me ſee, new moone on Thurſday, ſheele be chande by that time too; are you willing to pleaſure gentlemen?
We are all borne to pleaſure our country forſooth.
Excellent, can you carry your ſelfe cunningly, and ſeeme often holy.
Oh feare not that ſir, my friends were all puritanes.
Ile nere try her furder.
She's done well ifaith, I feare not now to turne her looſe to any gentleman in Europe.
You need not ſir of her owne accord, I thinke ſhe'l bee looſe inough without turning — Arthur.
Here ſir.
Go make haſt, ſhift her into that ſuite preſently.
It ſhall be done.
Arthur do't neately Arthur?
Fear't not ſir.
Follow him wench.
With all my heart ſir—.
But maiſter
In what are we forgetfull al this while?
In what?
The wooing buſineſſe man.
Heart thats true.
The Gallants will preuent vs.
Are you certaine.
I can auouch it ther's a general meeting,
at the deceaſde knights houſe this afternoone
theres riualſhip inough.
No doubt in that?
Would either thou or I might beare her from em.
My hopes are not yet faint.
Nor mine.
Tut man?
nothing in womens hearts ſooner win place,
than a braue out ſide and an impudent face?
And for both thoſe weele fit it.
I if the deuill bee not int, make halt:
I follow ſtraight, vaniſh thou Fog, and Sinck beneath our brightneſſe,
Abaſhed at the ſplendar of ſuch beames:
We ſcorne thee, baſſe eclipſer of our glories,
That wouldſt haue hid our ſhine from nortalls eies,
Now Gallants, I am for you, I and perhaps before you▪
You can appearce but glorious from your ſelues,
And haue your beames but drawne from your owne light,
But mine from many, many make me bright.
Heres a dimond that ſometimes gracſt the finger of a counteſſe, here ſits a Ruby that neere lines bluſhing for the Party that pawnde it: here a Saphire, O prouidence and fortune! my beginning was ſo poore, I would faine forget it, and I take the only courſe, for I ſcorne to thinke ont. Slue to a trencher: obſeruer of a ſaltſeller, priuy to nothing, but a cloſe-ſtoole, or ſuch vnſauory ſecret: but as I ſtriue to forget the daes of my ſeruing, ſo I ſhall once remember the firſt ſtep of my rayſing, for hauing hardly rakte fiue marke togither, I reioyſt ſo in that ſmall ſtock, which moſt prouidently I venturde by water to Blackwall, among fiſhwiues, and in ſmall time, what by weekely returne, and gainefull reſtitution it rize to a great body, beſide a diſh of fiſh for a preſent, that ſtately preſerude mee a ſeauen-night: nor ceaſt it there but drew on greater profit, for I was held religious by thoſe that do profeſſe like abſtinence, and was ful often ſecretly ſupplied, by charitable Catholickes, Who cenſurd me ſincerely abſtinate, when merely I for hunger nor or zeale, eate vp the fiſh, & put their almes to vſelha, ha ha; but thoſe times are runne out, and for my ſake, zealous diſſemblance has ſince far'd the worſe; —let mee ſee now, whoſe cloake ſhall I weare to day to continue change,
Oh—Arthur.
Here ſir.
Bing downe ſir Oliuer Needies Taffety cloake. & Beuer hat, I am ſure he is faſt inough? & Andrew cifers Rapier and dagger, in the knights ard, with the embſt gitdle and hangers, for he's in his third ſweat by this time, ſipping of the doctos bottle, or picking the ninth part of a Rack of mutton drie roaſted, with a leaſh of night-caps on his head like the popes triple crowne, and as many pillowes cuſht to his back, with oh the needles, for he got the pox of a Seſter, and it prickt ſo much more naturally,—quick Arthur quick, now,
To the deceaſt knights daughter
Whome many Gallants ſue to, I mongſt many: fo
Since impudence gaines more reſpect then vertue,
And come them bloud which few can now deny,
who're your chiefe Gallants, then but ſuch as I.
You do your Beauties iniury, ſweete virgin,
To looſe the time they muſt reioyce in youth:
Theres no perfection in a woman placed
But waſts it ſelfe tho it be neuer waſted,
Then iudge your wrongs your ſelfe.
Good Maiſter Fitſgraue?
Through ſorrow or the knight my fathers death,
(Whoſe being was the perfections of myioye:
And crowne of my deſires,) I cannot yet,
But forcedly, on marriage fie my heart,
Yet heauen forbid I ſhould deiect your hopes
Conceiue not ofn eſo vncharitably,
I ſhould belie my ſoule if I ſhould ſay,
You are the man I neuer ſhould affect:
I vnderſtand you thus far, you'r a Gentleman
Whom your eſtate and vertues may command
To a farre worthier breſt, then this of mine,
O ceaſe, I dare not heare ſuch blaſphemy,
What is without you worthie, I neglect,
In you is placſt the worth that I reſpect:
Vouchſaſe vnequalld Virgin whereon I iuſtly kept,
Accept this worthleſſe fauor from your ſeruants arme, the hallowed beades,
The true and perfect number of my fighs.
Mine cannot equall yours, yet in exchange, accept and weare it for my ſake.
Euen as my ile rae it?
Heart? Fitſgraue in ſuch boſome ſingle-loues?
So cloſe, and priuate with her?
Obſerue hem, he growes proud and bould?
Why was not this a generall meeting?
By her owne conſent, Death how I could taſte his bloud?
See, the gentlemen, at my requeſt do all preſent them-ſelues?
Manifold bliſſes waite on her deſier,
whoſe beauty and whoſe minde ſo many honour?
I take your wiſhes thankfully? —kinde gentlemen!
all here aſſembled, ouer whoſe long ſuites,
I neare inſulted,
Not like that common ſicknes of our ſexe,
Grew proud in the aboundance of my ſuiters,
Or number of the dayes they ſu'd vnto me.
Dutifull ſorrow for my fathers death,
Not willfull coyneſſe hath my howers detaind
So long in ſilence:
Im'e left to mine owne ehoyce, ſo much the more
My care calls on me If I erre through loue,
Tis I muſt chide my ſelfe, I cannot ſhift
The fault vnto my parents, they're at reſt,
And I ſhall ſooner erre through loue, then wealth.
Good.
Excellent.
That likes me well?
Hope ſtill.
And my affections do pronounce you all▪
Worthy their pure and moſt intire deſerts,
Yet they can chooſe but one,
Nor doe I diſwade any of his hopes,
(Becauſe my heart is not yet throughly fixt,
On marriage, or the man,)
But craue the quiet reſpite of one moneth,
The moneth vnto this night, againſt which tim,
I doe inuite you all to that election,
Which on my vnſtained faith, and Virgin promiſe,
Shall light amongſt no ſtrangers, but your ſelues:
May this content you?
Glad, and content.
'Tis a good time to leaue,
Till then, commend vs to your gentleſt thoughts.
Inough.
Ough.
Hiſt, maiſter Hiſt.
Boye? how now?
Looke you ſir.
Her Chaine of Pearle.
I ſeckt it away fiely.
Actiue boy, thy maiſters beſt reuenew, his life & ſoule
Thou keepſt 'em both together? whip, away,
Fall back, fall belly, I muſt be maintaind,
Hope is no purchaſe, nor care I if I miſſe her, why I ranck
In this deſiegne with gallants, there's fu'l cauſe
Policie enuites me to it, 'tis not for loue, or for her ſake alone:
It keepes my ſtate ſuſpectele and vnknowne.
Their lookes run through, & through me, & the ſtgs
Of their Snake-hiſſing whiſpers pierſt my hearing:
They're mad ſhe gracd me with one priuate minute,
Aboue their fortunes, I haue obſerud em often,
Moſt ſpightfully aſpected toward my happineſſe,
Beyond all others: but the use I know not,
A quiet moneth the Virgin has encloſde
Vnto her ſelfe: ſuiters ſtand without till then,
In which ſpace cunningly lle winde my ſelfe,
Into their Boſomes. I haue be-thought the ſhape,
Some credulous Scholler, eaſily infected
With faſhion▪ time, and humor. vnto ſuch
Their deepeſt thoughts, will like to wanton fiſhe,
Play aboue water, and be all parts ſeene:
Fr ſince▪ me their enuie pies ile ſee
Whether their liues from touch of blame ſit free.
Miſtreſſe New-cut, welcome, here will bee choyſe of Gallants for you anon.
Is all cleare, may I venture? am I not ſeene of the wicked?
Strange abſurdity, that you ſhould come into my houſe and aske if you be not ſeene of the wicked, puſh, I takt vnkindly ifaith, what thinke you of my houſe, 'tis no ſuch common receptacle.
Forgiue me ſweete maiſter Primero, I can bee content to haue my pleaſure as much as another, but I muſt haue a care of my credit, I would not bee ſeene; any thing elſe; my huſbands at Sea, and a woman ſhall haue an ill report in this world let her carry her ſelfe neuer ſo ſecretly: you know't maiſter Primero: and what choiſe of Gallants bee they? will they bee proper Gentlemen thinke you?
Nay ſure they are as proper as they will be already.
I muſt haue choiſe you know, I come for no gaine, but for ſheere pleaſure and affection.
You ſee your old ſpy-hole yonder, take you ſtand, pleaſe your owne eye, Ile worke it ſo, the Gallants ſhall preſent themſelues before you and in the moſt conſpicuous faſhion.
That's all I can deſire—till better come? looke you.
What meane you Lady?
A trifle ſir, to buy you ſiluer Spurs: good ſir accept it.
Siluer Spurs, a pritty embleme, marke it, all her gifts are about riding ſtill; the other day ſhee ſent mee Boote-hoſe wrought in ſilke and golde, now ſiluer spurres; well, goe the waies, thou'rt as profitable a ſpirit as ere lighted into my houſe; come Ladies come, 'tis late, to Muſick, when?
Y'are beſt command vs: ſir, our pimp's growne proud.
To fooles, and ſtrangers theſe are Gentlewomen
of ſort, and worſhip: Knights heires, great in portions,
Boorded here for their Muſicke,
And often time 'tas beene ſo cunningly carried,
That I haue had two ſtolne away at once,
And married at Sauoy and prou'd honeſt ſhop-keepers;
And I may ſafely ſweare they practiſ'd Muſicke:
Their naturall at prick-ſong, a ſmall miſt
Will dazle a fooles eye, and thats the world,
So I can thump my hand vpon the table,
With an Auſtere grace and cry 1 2 and 3,
Fret, ſtamp and curſſe, foh twill paſſe well for me?
How now ſirrah?
They'r comming in ſir, & ſtrangers in their company,
Tune apace Ladies, be ready for the Song ſirrah?
Nay I beſeech you gallants be more inward with this,
Gentleman his parts deſerue it,
Whence come he ſir?
Piping hotte from the Vniuerſity, hee ſmells of buttered loaues yet, an excellent ſcholler, but the arranteſt Aſſe, for this our Soliciter, hee's a rare fellow fiue and fortie myle hence, beleeue that: his friends are of the olde faſhion, all in their graues, and now has hee the leyſure to follow all faſhions, plye the Brothels, Practiſe ſalutes and Cringes.
Oh!
Now deere acquaintance,
Ile bring you to ſee faſhions.
What houſe is this ſir?
Oh of great name here muſick is profeſt,
Here ſome-times Ladies practiſe, and the meaneſt,
Daughters to men of worſhip,
Whom Gentlemen, ſuch as our ſelues may viſit,
Court, clip and exerciſe our wits vpon,
It is a profeſt curteſie.
A prety recreation yfaith.
I ſeldome ſaw ſo few here, you ſhall haue'em ſometimes in euery corner of the houſe, with their Violls betwixt their legs, and play the ſweeteſt ſtroaks twould een filch your ſoule allmoſt out of your boſome.
Pax on't: we ſpoile our ſelues for want of theſe things at Vniuerſity?
You haue no ſuch natural happines, let's draw neere,
Gentlemen you are all moſt reſpectiuely welcome:
We are bold and inſatiate Suiters ſir to the breath of your muſicke, & the deere ſight of thoſe Ladies.
And what our poore skill can inuite you to,
You are kindly welcome: you muſt pardon 'em Gentlemen,
Virgins and baſhfull, beſides new beginners,
Tis not a whole moneth ſince they were firſt entred.
Seauen yeare in my knowledg▪
They bluſh at their very leſſons, they will not indure,
To heare of a Stop, a Pricke, or a Semy-quauer,
O out vpon you:
La I tell you, youle beare me witnes Gentlemen,
If their complaints come to their parents eares,
Their words of Art, I teach 'em nought but Art.
Why tis moſt certaine.
For all Schollers know, that Muſica eſt Ars.
O beaſtly word?
Looke to the Ladies, Gentlemen;
Kiſſe agen?
Come an other?
this a good Interim?
what haue you done ſir?
why? what haue I done,
Saw you their ſtomacks queaſie, and come with ſuch groſſe meate!
Why iſt not lattin ſir,
Lattin? hy then let the next too't be lattin too:
So ynough?
Nay I can aſſure you thus farre, I that neuer knew the language hae heard ſo much that Ars, is lattin for Art, and it' may wel be too, or ther's more art int now a daies thē euer was:
iſt poſſible? I am ſorry then I haue follow'd it ſo farr.
A Scholler call you him,
Muſicke muſt not iarre; the offence is ſatisfied, come to the Song, begn ſir.
Not a whole moneth ſince you were entred Ladies?
None that ſhall ſee their cunning will beleeue it,
It is no affliction Gentlemen?
I care not much yfaith, if I write downe to my father preſently, to ſend vp my ſiſter in all haſte, that I may place her here at this Muſicke ſchoole.
Slid tis the foole my couſin, I would not for the value of three recreations he had ſeene me here?
How like you your new prize;
Pray giue me leaue, I haue not yet ſufficiently admir▪d her
My wits muſt not ſtand idle, Slife hee's in a ſicke trance?
A cheat or two among theſe miſtreſſes,
Would not be ill beſtow'd, I affect none,
But for my pray ſuch are their affections,
I know it, how could drabs and cheaters liue elſe,
Then ſince the world rowles on diſſimulation,
Ile be the firſt diſſembler.
Prethy loue, comfort, choice, my onely wiſh in thee
I am confinde, deny me any thing a ſlight chaine of pearle,
Nay an't be but ſlight—
Being denied,
I prize it ſlight; but giuen mee by my loue,
Light ſhall not be ſo deere vnto my eye;
Mine eye vnto the body as the gift,
How haue I power to deny this to you,
That commandall my fortunes are thy ſeruants,
And thou the Miſtreſſe both of them and me.
The trueſt that ere breathd.
To a Gentleman,
That thus ſo long and has ſo ſincerely lou'de you,
As I my ſelfe, nere was leſſe pitty ſhowne.
Why I neuer was held cruell.
But to me.
Nor to you.
Go too, 'tas ſcarde you much,
I'me ſorry your concet is ſo vnkinde,
To thinke me ſo.
When had I other argument,
I'ue often tendred you my loue and ſeruice,
And that in no meane faſhion:
Yet were you nere that requtefull Miſtreſſe,
That grac▪ſt me with one fauour,
Slight, not ſo much as ſuch a prety ring, pax on't,
T'as almoſt broke my heart.
Has tooke it off, Sfoot maiſter Bouſer,
Nay where a man loues moſt, there to be ſcanted.
My Ring, come, come.
What reckon I a Sattin gowne or two,
If ſhe were wiſe.
Life my Ring ſir, come.
Haue you the face yfaith.
Giue me my Ring.
Prethee hence, by this light you get none on't.
How?
I hold your fauours of more pure eſteeme,
Then to part from 'em, aith I doe,
How ere you thinke of me.
Puſh, pray ſir,
Harke you, go too, you haue loſt much by vnkindneſſe, goe your wayes.
Sfoot.
But yet there's no time paſt, you may redeeme it.
Come, I cannot miſſe it ifaith; beſide the Gentleman that beſtowde it on me▪ ſwore to me it coſt him twenty nobles.
Twenty nobles▪ pox of twenty nobles,
But you muſt coſt me more, you pritty villaine,
Ah you little roague.
Come come, I know y'are but in ieſt,
In ieſt no you ſhall ſee.
No way will get it.
As good giue it him now, and hope for ſome-what.
I ru loue made ieſt.
I did but trye thy faith, how faſt thou'dſt hold it,
Now I ſee a woman may venture worthy fauours to thy truſt,
and haue 'em truly kept, and I proteſt, had I drawn't from thee,
I ſhould nere ha lou'de thee, I know that.
Sfoote I was nere ſo wrongd in my life,
Thinke you I am in ieſt with you, what with my loue?
I could finde ghter ſubiects you ſhall ſee,
And time will ſhew, how much you iniure me.
The Ring wer't thrice worth I freely giue,
For I know you will requite it.
Will I liue.
Ynough.
Why this was well come off now,
Wheres my old Seruingman? not yet returnde,
Oh heere he peepes: now ſirrah?
May it pleaſe your worſhip—they're done artificiallyyfaith boy.
Both the great Beakers.
Both Lad.
Iuſt the ſame ſize.
I and the markes as iuſt.
So fall off reſpectiuely now.
My Lord deſires your worſhip of all loue.
His Lordſhip muſt hold me excuſd till morning,
Ile not breake company to night,
Where ſup we Gallants?
At Ma-maide.
Sp there who liſt, I haue forſworne the houſe.
Seruing. For the truth is this plot muſt take effect t Miter.
Faith Ime indifferent.
So are we Gentlemen.
Name the place maiſter Goldſtone.
Why the Miter in my minde,
For neate attendance, diligent boyes and, puſh, excels it faire.
Agreed, the Miter then: Boye, ſome goodneſſe toward, the Boyes whipt away.
The Iewell, heart the Iewell.
How now ſir? what mou'de you?
Nothing ſir, a ſpice of poetrie, a kinde a furie,
A diſeaſe runs among Schollers.
Maſſe it made you ſtampe.
Whoo, till make ſome ſtampe and ſtare, make a ſtrange noyſe,
Curſe ſweare, beate Tire-men, and kick players boyes,
The effects are very fearfull.
Bleſſe me from't.
Oh you need not feare it ſir—hell of this luck.
Harke, hee's at it againe.
Some pageant plot, or ſome deuice for the Tilt-yeard:
Diſturbe him not.
How can I gaine her loue, when I haue loſt her fauour.
What money haſt about thee?
Looke you ſir, I muſt be faine to pawne a faire Stone here, for ordinary expences: a pox of my tennants, I giue 'em twenty dayes after the quarter, and they cut out forty.
Why you might take the forfeiture of their leaſes then.
I know I might, but whats their courſe? the roagues comes me vp all together, with Geeſe and Capons, and petitions in pigs ſhoutes, which would moue any man yfaith, were his ſtomack nere ſo great, and to ſee how pittifully the pullen will looke, it makes me after relent, and turne my anger into a quick fire to roaſt 'em—nay toucht and ſpare it not.
Tis right, well, what do's your worſhip borrow of this ſir?
The Stone's twenty nobles.
Nay hardly.
As I am a right Gentleman.
It comes neere it indeed: well here's fiue pound in gold vpon't.
Twill ſerue, and the Ring ſafe and ſecret,
As a Virgins.
I wiſh no hyer: what Gallants▪ are you conſtant,
Does the place hold?
The Miter.
Sir, in regard of our continued boldneſſe, & trouble, (which loue to your Muſick hath made vs guilty of) ſhal we intreate your worſhips company, with theſe ſweete Ladies, your profeſt Schollers, to take part of a poore Supper with my ſelfe and theſe Gentlemen at the Miter.
Pray maiſter Primere.
I beſeech you ſir let it be ſo.
Oh pardon me ſweet Gentlemen, the worlds apt to cenſure, I haue the charge of them, they'r left in truſt, they'r Virgins, and I dare not hazard their fames, the leaſt touch mars 'em, and what would their right worſhipfull parents thinke, if the report ſhould flie to them, that they were ſeene with Gentlemen in a Tauerne.
All this may be preuented, what ſerues your coach for,
They may come coacht and maskt.
You put me too't ſir,
Yet I muſt ſay agen, I feare the Drawers,
And Vintners boyes will be familier with them,
And thinke 'em Miſtreſſes.
There are thoſe places where reſpect ſeemes ſlighter,
More cenſure is belonging to the Miter, you know that ſir?
Gentlemē you preuaile.
Weel all expect you there.
And weele not faile.
The diuil wil nere diſſemble with them ſo, as you for thē.
Come ſir.
What elſe, lets go,
How cheere you ſir?
Faith like the Moone, more bright,
Decreaſt in body▪ but re-made in light,
Here thou ſhalt ſhare ſome of my brightneſſe with me.
By my faith they are comfortable beames ſir.
Come, where haue you ſpent the time now from my ſight,
Ime iealious of thy action.
Puſh I did but walke, a turne or two in the garden.
What made you there?
Nothing but cropt a flower.
Some womans honor I beleeue.
Foh, is this a womans honor.
Much about one?
When both are pluckt their ſweetneſſe is ſoone gon.
Prethe be true to me.
When did I faile.
Yet I am euer doubtfull, that your ſinne.
I do account the world but as my ſpoile, to adorne thee,
My loue is artificiall to all others,
But purity to thee,—doſt thou want gold?
Here take this chaine of pearle, ſupply thy ſelfe,
Be thou but conſtant, firme and iuſt to mee,
Rich heires ſhall want, ere want come neere to thee.
Vpon thy lip I ſeale ſincerity.
Was this your vowe to mee?
Pox, whats a kiſſe to be quite rid of her, ſhee's ſued ſo long I was aſhamde of her, twas but her cheeke I kiſt neither, to ſaue her longing.
Tis not a kiſſe I weigh.
Had you weighed this,
T'ad lackt aboue fiue ounces of a true one:
No kiſſe that ere weighed lighter.
Tis thy loue that I ſuſpect.
My loue, why by this,—what ſhall I ſweare by?
Sweare by this iewell, keepe thy oth, keepe that▪
By this iewell then, no creature can bee perfect in my loue, but thy▪ deere ſelfe.
I reſt.
Ha, ha, ha, lets laugh at em ſweete ſoule.
I, they may laugh at me, I was a nouice, and beleiude your oths,
Why what do you thinke of me, make I no difference,
Turne ſeauen yeares proſtitution, and ſeauen daies,
Why you're but in the waine of a maide yet:
You wronge my health in thinking I loue them,
Do not I know their populous imperfections.
Why they cannot liue till Eaſter, let em ſhew
The faireſt ſide to'th world like hundreds more, whoſe clothes
E'en ſtand vpright in ſiluer, when theire bodie,
Are ready to drop through em, ſuch there be,
They may deceiue the world, they nere ſhall mee.
Forgiue my doubts, and for ſome ſatiſfaction were this ing,
From which I vow de nere, but to the, to part.
With which thou euer bindſt me to thy heart.
My pocket pickt, this was no brohe-houſe,
A muſick ſchoole; damnation has fine ſhapes,
I paide inoug for'th ſong, I haue loſt a iewell
To me more pretious then their ſoules to them,
That gaue conſent to filch it, ile hunt hard:
Waſt time and money, trace and wheele about,
But I wil find theſe ſecret miſchiefes out-how now, whats he:
Oh a ſeruant to my loue, being thus diſguizde,
Ile learne ſome newes, now ſir; you belong to me.
I Do ſir, but I cannot ſtay to ſay, ſo, nay good ſir detaine me not I am going in al haſt to enquire or lay waite for a chain of pearle nimd out of her pocket the fift of Nouember, a diſmall day.
Ha a chaine of pearle ſaiſt thou.
A chaine of pearle ſir, which one Maiſter Fitſgraue a gentleman and a ſuiter faſtned vpon her as a pleadge of his loue.
Ha?
Vrge me no more I haue no more to ſay,
Your friend Ieronio Bedlam.
Thou 'rt a mad fellow indeed, ſome comfort yet,
Thats hers is miſſing too, I feele my ſoule at much more eaſe: both ſtolne.
When griefes haue partners they are better borne.
Oh the parting of vs twaine,
Hath cauſde me mickle paine, and I ſhall nere be married,
Vntill I ſee my muggle againe.
Hiſt?
Ha.
The nimble gentleman, in the cleſtiall ſtockins.
Has the beſt ſmock fortune, to be belou'd of women?
Valle loo lo lille lo lilo, vallee loo lee lo lillo.
Vallee loo lo lillee lilo, Vallee loo le lo lil'o.
Ah ſweete gentleman, he keepes it vp ſtately.
Well held ifaith ſir—maſſe and now I remember too, I thinke you nere ſaw my little banquiting, box aboue, ſince I alterd it.
Why haue you alterd that?
Oh diuinely ſir: the pictuers are all new run ouer againe.
Fie.
For what had the painter done thinke you, drew mee, Venus naked, which is the grace of a mans Roome you know, & when he had done, drew a number of Oken-leaues before her, had not lawne beene a hundred times ſofter, made a better ſhew, and beene more gentlewoman like?
More ladie-like, a great dea'e.
Come, you ſhall ſee how tis alterd now? I do not thinke but you'le like her.
Where be your liueries?
They attend without.
Go, call the Coach! Gentlemen, you haue exceld in kindneſſe as we in bouldneſſe.
So you thinke amiſſe ſir?
Kind Ladies we commit you to ſweete dreames,
Our ſelues vnto the fortune of the dice, dice ho?
You reſt firme mine.
E'en al my ſoule to thee.
You keepe your vowes.
Why do I breathe, or ſee?
Is your loue conſtant.
I to none but thes now gon, I, now I loue nor them nor thee, ſlife, I ſhould be cloide, ſhould I loue one in three.
Oh heres maiſter Bowſer now.
Saue you ſweete Gentlemen.
Sweete maiſter Bowſer? welcome?
When come theſe dice.
Yet anon, anon ſir.
Haſt thou ſhowne art in em.
You ſhall be iudge ſir, here be the Tauerne Beakers, And here peepe out the fine Alchimy knaues, looking like, wel ſir, moſt of our Gallants, that ſeeme what they are not.
Peace villaine, am not I in preſence.
Why that puts me in minde of the ieſt ſir.
Agen, you quarter her.
Nay, compare 'em, and ſpare 'em not.
The bigneſſe of the bore, iuſt the ſame ſize, The markes, no difference: away, put money in thy pocket, and offer to draw in vpon the leaſt occaſion.
I am no babe ſir.
Hiſt.
Whats the matter now?
Giue me a paire of falſe Dice, ere you goe.
Pax on't, you're ſo troubleſome too, you cannot remember a thing before, if I ſtay a little longer, I ſhall be ſtaid anon.
Here be Dice for your worſhips.
Oh come, come.
The Vintner himſelfe,
Ilo ſhift away theſe beakets by a ſlight.
Maiſter Goldſtone?
How now you coniuring raskall?
Bleſſe your good worſhip, you're in humors me thinks.
Humors: ſay that agen.
I ſaid no ſuch wond ſir,—would I had my beakers out on's fingers.
Whats thy name Vintner?
Iack and pleaſe your worſhip.
Turne Knight like thy companions, ſcoundrell, liue vpō vſury, weare thy gilt ſpurs at thy girdle for feare of ſlubbering.
O no, I hope I ſhall haue more grace then ſo ſir:
Pray let me helpe your worſhip.
Cannot I puſh 'em together without your helpe?
O I beſeech your worſhip, they're the two ſtandards of my houſe.
Standards, there lie your Standards.
Good your worſhip; I am glad they are out of his fingers, my wife ſhall lock 'em vp preſently, they ſhall ſee no ſunne this twelue-months day for this trick.
Let me come to the ſight of your Standards agen.
Your worſhip ſhall pardon mee, now you ſhall not ſee em in haſt I warrant yee.
I do not deſire't; ha, ha.
Why maiſter Goldſtone?
I am for you Gallants—Maiſter Boxeer cry you mercy ſir, why ſupt you from vs?
Faith ſir, I met with a couple of my fellow pupils at Vniuerſitie, & ſo we renew'd our acquaintance & ſupt together.
Fie, thats none of the neweſt faſhion, I muſt tell you that maiſter Bouſer, you muſt neuer take acquaintance of any ath' Vniuerſity, when you are at London, nor any of London when you're at Vniuerſity you muſt be more forgetfull yfaith, euery place miniſters his acquaintance aboundantly.
He tels you true ſir.
I warrant you here's a Gentleman will nere commit ſuch an abſurdity.
Who I, no, 'tis well knowne, if I be diſpoſde, Ile forget any man in a ſeauen-night, and yet looke him in the face: nay let him ride but ten mile from mee, and come home againe, it ſhall be at my choiſe whether Ile remember him or no, I haue tryed that.
This is ſtrange ſir.
'Tis as a man giues his minde too 't ſir: and now you bring me in; I remember 'twas once my fortune to be coozned of all my clothes, and with my clothes my money; a poore Shepheard pitting me, tooke me in, and relieu de me.
'Twas kindly done of him ifaith,
Nay you ſhall ſee now, 'twas his fortune likewiſe not long after, to come to mee in much diſtreſſe ifaith, and with weeping eyes, and do you thinke I remembred him.
You could not chooſe.
By my troth not , I ſorgot him quite, and neuer remembred him to this houre.
And yet knew who he was.
As well as I know you ifaith—
'Tis a gift giu'n to ſome aboue others.
To fooles and knaues they neuer miſſe on't.
Do's any make ſuch a wonder at this; why alas tis nothing to forget others; what ſay you to thoſe that forget themſelues?
Nay then to Dice: come ſet me Gallants, ſet.
I, fall too 't Gentlemen. I ſhall heere ſome newes from ſome of you anon: I haue th'art to know which looſe and nere looke on; Ile bee ready with all the worſt money I can finde about me, Arthur!
Here ſir.
Stand ready.
Feare not me ſir.
Theſe are mine ſir.
Here's a waſht Angell, it ſhall away: Here's Miſtreſſe Roſe-noble has loſt her maiden-head, crackt in the Ring, ſhoe's good enough for gaimſters, and to paſſe from man to man: for gold preſents at Dice your harlot, in one houre wone and loſt thrice, euery man has a fling at her.
Agen pax of theſe dice
Tis ill to curſe the dead ſir.
Mew, where ſhould I wiſh the pox, but among bones.
He tels you right ſir.
I nere haue any luck at theſe odde hands,
None here to make vs fixe—why Maiſter Frip.
I am very well here I thanke you ſir, I had rather be telling my money my ſelfe, then haue others count it for mee; tis the ſcuruieſt muſick in the world me thinkes, to heare my mony gingle in other mens pockets, I neuer had any mind toot ifaith.
Slud play ſix or play foure, Ile play no more.
Sfoot you ſee, there's none here to draw in.
Rather then you ſhould be deſtitute gentlemen, ile play my ten pound, if my maiſters worſhip will giue me leaue.
Come.
He ſhall, he ſhall.
Pray excuſe me Gentlemen: ſoot how now goodmā Raſcall, what? becauſe you ſeru'd my Grand-father when hee went Ambaſſador, & got ſome ten pound by'th hand, has that put ſuch ſpirit in you, to offer to draw in among Gentlemen of worſhip, knaue.
Pray ſir, lets intreate ſo much for once.
'Tis a vſuall grace ifaith ſir,
Yo'ue many gentlemen will play with their men.
I and with their Maides to yfaith.
Good ſir giue him leaue.
Yes, come, and you be weary on't, I pray draw nere ſir.
Not ſo ſir.
Come foole, feare nothing, I warrant toe, h'as giuen thee leaue, ſtand here by me, come now, ſet round Gentlemen, ſet,
How the poore fellow ſhakes: throw luſtily man.
At all gentlemen.
Well ſaid ifaith.
The're all mine.
By my troth I am glad the fellow has ſuch luck, t will encourage him well.
At my maiſters worſhip alone.
Now ſit ſlaue?
At my maiſters worſhip alone.
So, ſawcy raskall.
At my maiſters worſhip alone.
You're a roague and will be euer be one?
By my troth Gentlemen at all agen for once.
Take em to the boy, take em to thee, thou'rt worthy of em ifaith.
Gentlemen faith I am angry with you, goe and ſuborne my knaue againe me here; to make him proud & peremptory.
Troth thats but your conceite ſir, the fellowes an honeſt fellow and knowes his duty, I dare ſweare for him.
Heart, I am ſick already.
Whether goes Maiſter—
Play on, ile take my turne ſi?—boye?
Maiſter.
Piſt?—a ſupply, cary't cloſely my little fooker,—how much—
Three pound ſir.
Good boye,—take out another leſſon? how now gentlemen?
Deuills int did you ere ſee ſuch a hand?
I ſet you theſe three angells.
My maiſter may ſet hie? —for all his ſtakes are drawne out of other mens pockets.
As I ſaid gentlemen?
Dues Ace.
At all your right worſhipfull worſhips.
Death and vengance!
Hell, darkeneſſe,
Hold ſir.
Maiſter Goldſtone.
Hinder me not ſweete gentlemen—you raskall—I baniſh thee the boord.
Yfaith but you ſhall not ſir?
Touch a Die and thou darſt, come you in with your lowzie ten pound, you ſlaue among gentlemen of worſhippe, and win thirty at a hand.
Why will you kick agen luck ſir?
As long as the poore fellow ventures the loſſe of his owne money, who can be offended at his fortunes.
I haue a Maiſter here? many a Gentleman would bee glad to ſee his man come forward aha.
Prey be perſwaded ſir:
'Slife, here's none cuts my throate in play but he I haue obſerude it, an vnluckly ſlaue tis.
Me thinkes his lucks good inough ſir.
Vpon condition Gentlemen that I may euer bar him frō the boord hereafter I am content to winck at him.
Faith, vſe your owne pleaſure hereafter, has won our mony now! come to'th table ſir your maſter's friends with you.
Pray Gentlemen.
The fiends int I thinke, I left a faire chaine of pearle at my lodging too, like an aſſe and nere remembred it; that would ha bin a good pawn now, ſpeake what do you lend vpon theſe Maiſter Frip? I care not much if you take my Beuer hat too, for I perceiue tis darke inough already, & it dos but troble me here.
Very well ſir why now I can lend you 3. pound ſir—
Prethe do't quickly then?▪
There tis in ſix angels.
Very compendiouſly.
Here Arthur, runne away with theſe preſently, ile enter em into'th ſhop-booke to morrow. Item one gilt hatcht rapier and dagger, with a faire imbrodered girdle, and hangers, with which came alſo a Beuer hat, with a correſpondent band.
Puſh, ifaith ſir your to blame, you haue ſnibd the poore fellow too much, hee can ſcarce ſpeake, hee cleaues his words with ſobbing.
Haff haff, haff, haff at al Gentlemen.
Ah roague, ile make you know your ſelfe.
At the fayreſt.
Out ifaith—two Aces.
I am glad of that, come pay me al theſe good-man cloakebag:
Why are you the fayreſt ſir?
You neede not doubt of that ſir—fiue. angells you Scoundrell.
Fie ath theſe Dice, not one hand to night,—there they go Gentlemen at al ifaith.
Pay all with 2. treas and a quater.
Al curſes follow em, pay your ſelues withall, ile pawne my ſelfe to't, but ile ſee a hand to night, not once hold in? here Maiſter Frip, lend me your hand, quick, quick, So.
What do you borrow of this doublet now?
Nere ſaw the world three daies.
Go too, in regard your a continuall cuſtomer, ile vſe you well, and pleaſure you with fiue angels vpon't.
Let me not ſtand too long ith cold for them:
Had euer country gentleman ſuch fortune?
All ſwoopt away ide, neede repaire to'th Brokers,
If you be in that minde ſir there ſits a Gentleman will furniſh you vpon any pawne, as well as the publickſt broker of em all:
Say you ſo ſir, there's comfort in that ifaith.
Item, vpon his oringe tawny ſattin doublet, fiue angells,
But by your leaue ſir? next comes the breeches,—.
Oh I haue tongue fit for any thing—
Sauing your taile ſir? tis giuen me to vnderſtand that you are a Gentleman ith hundred, and deale in the premiſes aforeſaide.
Maiſter Bungler, Maiſter Bungler, y'are mightily miſtooke, I am content to do a gentleman a pleaſure for once, ſo his pawne be neate and ſufficient.
Why what ſay you to my Grandfathers ſeale ring here
I marry ſir, this is ſomewhat like.
Nay view it well, an antient armes, I can tell you.
Whats this ſir?
The great codpeice with nothing int.
How?
The word about it, partur iunt montes.
Whats that I pray ſir?
You promiſe to mount vs.
And belike he was not ſo good as his word.
So it ſhould ſeeme by the Story, for ſo our names came to be Bunglers▪
A lamentable hearing that ſo great a houſe ſhould ſhrink and fall to ruine.
Two quaters and yet looſe it heart, boy? ▪ifaith? what iſt?
Fiue pound ſir.
By my troth this boy goes forward well, yee ſhall ee him come to his preferment ith' end!
Why how now, whoſe that gentlemen, a barge-man?
I neuer haue any luck Gallants, till my doublets off, Ime not halfe nimble inough, at this old finquanter driuelbeard:
Your worſhip muſt pay me al theſe ſir?
There, and feaſt the deuill with em.
Hel gnawe theſe dice.
What do you giue ouer Gallants.
Iſt not time.
I proteſt, I haue but one angell left to guid me home to my lodging.
How much thinkſt?
Some foureſcore angells, ſir.
Peace, weele ioyne powers anon, and ſee how ſtrong w are in the whole number, maſſe, yon guilt Goblet ſtands ſo full in mine eye, the whorſon tempts me, it comes like cheeſe after a great feaſt, to diſgeſt the reſt, he wil hardly ſcape mee ifaith I ſee that by him already; back for a parting blow now,▪boy?
Anon anon ſir:
Fetch a penneworth of ſoft wax to ſeale letters.
I will ſir?
Nay had not I ſtrange caſting, thrice togither, 2. quaters and a dews.
Why was not I as often haunted with two treas, and a quater:
Ther's wax for your worſhip—anon, anon, ſir.
Screene me a little you whorſon old croſſe biter.
Why whats the buſines? fil chiton hb Goblet.
And what has maiſter Bowſer loſt?
Faith not very deepely ſir, inough for a ſcholler, ſome halfe a ſcore royals.
Sfoot I haue loſt as many with ſpurs at their heeles.
Come Gallants ſhall we ſtumble:
Whats a clock.
Heres none ont Dick, the Goblets carried downe.
Nay tis vpon the point of three, boy, Drawer, whats to be done ſirs?
All's paid, and your worſhips are welcome, Onely there's a Goblet miſſing Gentlemen, and cannot bee found about houſe.
How a Goblet:
What manner a one▪
A guilt Goblet ſir, of an indifferent ſize.
Sfoote I ſaw ſuch a one lately.
It cannot be found now ſir.
Came there no ſtrangers here?
No ſir.
This a meruelous matter, that a Goblet ſhould bee gone, and none but wee in the roome, the loſſe is meere all, heere as we are; keepe the doore Vintner.
No I beſeech your worſhip.
By my troth Vintner weele haue a priuy ſearch for this; What? we are not all one womans children.
I beſeech yee Gentlemen, haue not that conceit of me, that I ſuſpect your worſhips.
Tut, you are an Aſſe; do you know euery mans nature: There's a Broker ith' company.
Slife you haue not ſtole the Goblet, boy, haue you?
Not I ſir.
I was afraide,—tis a good cauſe ifaith, let each man ſearch his fellow, weele begin with you.
I ſhall ſaue ſome body a labour Gentlemen, for Ime halfe ſearcht already.
I thought the Goblet had hung heere ifaith—none heere, nor heere.
Seeke about flower,—What was the Goblet worth Vintne.
Three pound ten ſhlings ſir no more.
Pox on't Gentlemen, tis but Angels a peece, it ſhall be a brace of mine, rather then I would haue our reputations breathed vpon by all commers, for you muſt thinke theile talke ont in all companies; ſuch a night, in ſuch a company, ſuch a Goblet, Sfoote it may growe to a gangrene in our credits and bee incurable.
Faith I am content.
So am I.
There's my Angell too.
So, and mine, Ile tell thee what, the miſſing of this goblet has diſmaide the Gentlemen much.
I am ſory for that ſir.
Yet they ſend thee this comfort by me, if they ſee thee but reſt ſatisfied, and depart away contented, which will appeare in thy countenance; not three times thrice the worth of the Goblet ſhall hang betweene them and thee, both in their continuall cuſtome, and all their acquaintances.
I thanke their worſhips all▪I am ſatisfied.
Say it againe: do you heare Gentlemen?
I thanke your worſhips all I am ſatiſfied.
Why la, was not this better then hazarding our reputations vpon trifles, and in ſuch publicke as a Tauerne, ſuch a queſtionable place.
True.
Faith it was well thought on. Nay keepe your way Gentlemē: I haue ſworne maiſter Bowcer, I will bee laſt ifaith▪ Raſcall the goblet.
Where ſir?
Peepe yon ſir vnder.
Heere ſir.
My husband is rode from home, make us delay', I know if your will bee as free as your horſe, you will ſee 'ee yet re dinner: From Kingston this eleuenth of Nouvember▪ Ha? theſe womē are ſuch creatures ſuch importunate ſweet ſoules: theile ſcaſe giue a mā leaue to be ready, that's their onely fault ifaith, if they be once ſet vpon a thing, why there's no remoouing of em, till their pritty wils be fulfild—O pitty thy poore oppreſſed client here ſweete Cupid, that has ſcarce ſixe houres vacation in a moneth, his cauſes hang in ſo many Courts, yet neuer ſuffer my French aduerſary, nor his big ſwolne confederates to ouerthrow me,▪Who without mercy would my bloud carouſe, And lay me in priſon in a Doctors houſe:
Thy clemencie great Cupid: peace, who comes here?
Sir Gallant, well encountred.
I both ſalute, and take my leaue together.
Why whether ſo faſt ſir▪
Excuſe me pray, lme in a little haſt,
My horſe waites for me.
What ſome iourney toward?
A light one ifaith ſir.
I am ſorry that my buſineſſe ſo commands me,
I cannot ride with you; but I make no queſtion,
You haue company inough.
Alaſſe not any—nor do I deſire it,
Why 'tis but to Kingſton yonder.
O cry you mercy ſir,
Scape but one reach, there's little danger thether.
True a little of Come-parke.
You'ue namde the place ſir, that's all I feare ifaith,
Farewell ſweere maiſter Taylebee,
This fell out happily; Ile call this purchaſe mine, before I greete him,
Een where his feare lyes moſt, there will I meete him: Boy.
Sir.
Walke my horſe behinde yon thicket, giue a word, if you diſcrie.
I haue all perfect ſir.
So, he cannot now belong: What with my boyes dexterity at Ordinaries, and my Geldings celerity ouer hedge and ditch, but we make pritty ſhift to rub out, a Gallant, for I haue learnt theſe principles.
Stoope thou toth' world, 'twill on thy boſome tread,
It ſtoopes to thee, if thou aduance thy head:
The minde beeing farre more excellent then fate,
Tis fit our minde then be aboue our ſtate;
Why ſhould I write my catremitics in my brow,
To make them loath me, that reſpect me now,
If euery man were in his courſes knowne;
Legs that now honor him, might ſpurne him downe.
To conclude, nothing ſeemes as it is but honeſty, & that makes it ſo little regarded amongſt vs.
Eela, ha, ho.
The Boye: hee's hard at hand, Ile croſſe him ſuddenly: and here he comes; ſtand.
Ha!
Deliuer your purſe ſir.
I fear'd none but this place ifaith, nay when my minde giues me a thing once.
Quick, quick ſir, quick.
I muſt diſpatch three robberies yet ere night.
I'me glad you haue ſuch good doings by my troth ſir.
Youle fare neuer a whit the better for your flattery I warrant you ſir.
I ſpeake ſincearly, 'tis pitty ſuch a proper-parted gentleman ſhould want; nor ſhall you, as long as I haue't about me, nay ſearch and ſpare not: there's a purſe in my left pocket as I take it, with fifteene pound in gold in't, and there's a faire chaine of pearle in the other: nay I'e deale truly with you; it greeues me yfaith when I ſee ſuch goodly men in diſtreſſe, Ile rather want it my ſelfe then they ſhould go with-out it.
And that shewes a good nature ſir.
Nay tho I ſay it, I haue beene alwaies accounted a man of a good nature, I might haue hangd my ſelfe ere this time els▪ Pray vſe me like a gentleman, take all, but iniury not my body.
You muſt pardon me ſir, I muſt a little play the Vſurer, and binde you, for mine owne ſecurity.
Alaſſe ther's no conſcience in that ſir, ſhall I enter into bond, and pay money too.
Tut, I muſt not be betrayd.
Here me but what I ſay ſir, I do proteſt I would not be he that ſhould betray a man, to be Prince of the world.
Maſſe that's the diuill, I thanke you heartily, for hee's cal'd prince ath' world.
You take me ſtill at worſt.
Sweare on this ſword then, to ſet ſpurs to your horſe, not to looke back, to giue no markes to any paſſenger.
Markes, why I thinke you haue left me nere a peny ſir.
I meane no markes of any.
I vnderſtand you ſir.
Sweare then.
Ifaith I do ſir:
Away.
Ime gon ſir, by my troth of a fierce theefe he ſeemes to be a very honeſt Gentleman.
Why this was well aduentured, trim a Gallant:
Now with a courteous and long thuſting eye,
Let me behold my purchaſe, & try the ſoundues of my bones with laughter, how? is nt this the chaine o pearle I gaue to that periurde halat, tis, Sfoot tis, the very chaine, oh damned miſtreſſe, ha; and this the purſe, which not fiue daies before I ſene▪ her fild with faire ſpur-royalls—heart; the very gold?—ſlife is this no robbery, how many othes flew toward heauen,
Which nere came halfe way thether; but like fire drakes,
Mounted a little, gaue a cracke, and fell;
Fainde othes bound vp to ſinke more deepe to hell.
What folded papers this? death—tis her hand.
Maiſter Taylbee, you know with what affection I loue you, You do:
I count the world but as my pray to maintaine you, The more diſſembling queane you I muſt tell you,
I haue ſent you an embroderd purſe here with fifty faire ſpurroyalls int—A pox on you for your labour wench: And I deſire you of all loues to keepe that chaine of pearle from Maiſter Purſnets ſight—
He cannot ſtrumpet, I behold it now, vnto thy ſecret torture:
So fare thee well, but be conſtant and want nothing.
As long as I ha't ifayth? me thinkes it ſhould haue gon ſo,—well; what a horrible age do we liue in, that a man cannot haue a queane to himſelfe let him but turne his back the beſt of her is chipt away like a Court loafe, that whē a man comes himſelf, has nothing but bumbaſt; & theſe are 2. ſimple chippings here, do's my boy pick, & I ſteale, to enrich my ſelfe, to keepe her, to maintaine him: why this is right the ſequence of the world,—A. L. maintaines her, ſhe maintaines a Knight, he maintaines a Whore, ſhee maintaines a captaine. So in like manner, the pocket keepes my boye, hee keepes me, I keepe her, ſhee keepes him, it runs like quick-ſiluer, from one to another; Sfoote I perceiue I haue beene the chiefe vpholder of this Gallant all this while; it appeares true, we that pay deereſt for our paſture are euer likely worſe-uſde, Sfoot he has a Nag can run for nothing, has his choiſe, nay and gets by the running of him;—oh fine world ſtrange deuills, and prety damnable affections.
Lela ha, ho?
There boy, agen, what newes there?
Maiſter, piſt, maſter?
How now boye.
I haue diſcride a prize.
Another lad?
The gull, the ſcholler?
Maiſter Bowſer:
I, comes a long this way:
Without company.
As ſure, as he is your owne.
Back to thy place boye,
I haue the luck to day, to rob in ſafety:
Two pretious cowards, whiſt: I heare him—ſtand
You lie, I came forth to goe.
Deliuer your purſe.
Tis better in my pocket.
How now, at diſputations, ſignior foole.
I'ue ſo much logick to conute a knaue, a thiefe, a rogue-
Hold, hold, ſir, and you be a gentleman hold, let mee riſe.
Heart tis the curtizy of his ſcarf vnaskt him to me,
Aboue the lip by chance, ile counterfit,
Light, becauſe I am a ſcholler, you thinke belike that ſchollers haue no mettal in em, but you ſhal finde,—I haue not don with you couſin.
As you're a Gentleman:
As you're a roague?
Keepe on vpon your way ſir:
You bad me ſtand?
I haue beene once downe for that:
And then deliuer?
Deliuer mee from you ſir—oh pax on't, has wounded me Eela, ha, ho my horſe, my horſe boye:
Haue you your boy ſo ready: oh thou world,
How art thou muffled in deceitfull fonnes:
There's ſuch a miſt of theſe, and ſtill hath beene,
The brightneſſe of true Gentry is ſcarce ſeene:
This iourney was moſt happily aſſignde,
I haue found him droſſe both in his meanes and minde: what
papers this he dropt? ile looke on't as I goe.
A gull call you him, let me alwaies ſet vpon wiſemen, theyle be afread of their liues, they haue a feeling of their inniquities, and knowes what tis to die with fighting▪ sfoote this gull laies on without feare, or wit, how deepe's it ſayſt thou boye?
By my faith three inches ſir.
La, this was long of you, you roague:
Of me ſir.
Forgiue me deere boy, my wound akte, and I grewe angry, there's hope of life boy, is there not?
Puh, my life for yours.
A comfortable boye in mans extreames! I was nere ſo afread in my life but the foole would haue ſeene my face, hee had mee at ſuch aduantage, hee might haue commanded my Scaf, Iſcapt well there tad choakt mee; my reputation had beene paſt recouery, yet liue I vnſuſpected, and ſtil fit for Gallants choice ſocieties—but here I vowe, if ere I ſee this Bowſer when hee cannot ſee mee, either in by-lane, priuiledge place, Court, Alley, or come bekinde him when hees ſtanding, or take him when heereeles from a Tauerne late, piſſing againe a Cundit, Wall, or Gate, when hee's in ſuch a plight and cleere from me, ile do that I am aſhamde to ſpeake till then.
Nay reade forward, I haue found 3. of your Gallants, like your bewitching ſhame meerely ſophiſticall, there's your Bawde-Gallant, your pocket-Gallant, & your Whore-Gallant.
Maiſter Taylbee.
Thats he
I count the world but as my prey, to maintaine you?
Thats iuſt the phraze and ſtil of em all, to him: they meete altogither in one effect, and it may well hold too, for they all iumpe vpon one cauſe, ſubands lechery.
What ſhapes can flattery take, let me entreate you,
Both in the virgins right, and our good hopes
Since your houres are ſo fortunate, to proceede.
Why he's baſe that faires, vntil he crowne his deed.
See that diſſembling deuill, that periurde ſtrumpet.
Welcome my ſoules beſt wiſh,—oh out alaſle▪ thy arme bound in a ſcarfe, I ſhall ſowne inſtantly,
Heart and ile fetch you agen in the ſame tune,
O my vnmatched loue, if any ſparke of life remaine,
Looke vp, my comfort, my delight, my—
O good, o good?
The organ of her voice is tunde agen,
Theres hope in women, when their ſpeech returnes▪
See like the Moone after a black ecclipſe,
She by degrees recouers her pure light:
How cheeres my loue?
As one new wah't out of a deadly trance,
The fit ſcarce quiet.
Twas terrible for the time, Ide much ado to fetch you.
Shrew your fingers,
How came my comfort wounded, ſpeake?
Faith in a fray laſt night.
In a fray? will you looſe your bloud ſo vainely,
Many a poore creature lacks it, tell me how?
What was the quarrell?
Loath to tell you that.
Loath to tell me.
Yet twas my cauſe of comming.
Why then, muſt not I know it:
Since you vrge it, you ſhall,
Y'are a ſtrumpet.
O newes abroad ſir?
Say you ſo.
Why you knew that the firſt night you lay with me.
Nay not to me, onely but to the world.
Speake within compaſſe man.
Faith you know none, you ſaile without.
I haue the better skill then.
At my firſt ſtep into a Tauerne-roome, to ſpie that chaine of pearle wound on a ſtrangers arme you begd of me.
How, you miſlooke it ſure.
By heauen the very ſelfe ſame chaine▪
O cry you mercy, tis true, ide forgot it, tis S. Georges day to morrow, I lent it to my couzin onely to grace his arme before his mſis.
Notable cunning.
And is this all now ifaith.
Not, I durſt goe further.
Why, let me neuer poſſeſſe your loue, if you ſee not that againe a Thurſday morning, I tak't vnkindly yfaith you ſhould fall out with me for ſuch atrifle.
Better and better.
Come, a kiſſe and friends.
Away.
By this hand Ile ſpoile your atme and you will not.
More for this then the Diuell.
Yee, at your booke ſo hard.
Againſt my will, are you there Signior Logick,
A pox of you ſir.
Why how now, what has fate ſent vs here, in the name of Venus goddeſſe of Cypreſſe.
A Free-booters pinck ſir, three or foure inches deepe.
No more, thats conſcionable yfaith.
Troth Ime ſory for't, pray how came ir ſir?
Faith by a paltry fray, in Colman-ſtreete.
Coome-parke he would ſay.
No leſſe then three at once ſir, made a Triangle with their Swords and Daggers, and all oppoſing me.
And amongſt thoſe three, onely one hurt you ſir.
Ex for ex.
Troth and Ile tell you what luck I had too, ſince I parted from you laſt.
What I pray?
The day you offered to ride with mee, I wiſh now Ide had your company, Sfoote I was ſet vpon in Coome-parke by three too.
Bah.
Robd by this light of as much gold and Iewels, as I valued at forty pound,
Sure Saturne is in the fifth houſe.
I know not that, hee may be in the ſixt and he will for me, I am ſure they were in my pocket whereſoeuer they were: but Ile nere refuſe a Gentlemans company agen when 'tis offered me, I warrant you.
I muſt remember you, 'tis Miter-night Ladies.
Maſſe 'tis indeed, Friday to day, Ide quite forgot, when a womans buſie, how the time runs away.
Oh y'aue betraid vs both.
I vnderſtand you not.
Y'aue let him ſee, the chaine of Pearle I gaue you.
Who him: will you beleeue me,
By this hand he neuer ſaw it.
Vpon a ſtrangers arme he ſwore to me,
Maſſe that may be, for the truh is ifaith,
I was robd on't `at Coome-parke.
Twas that betraid it,
I would had ſtaide him,
He was no ſtranger, he was a theefe yfaith,
For theeues will be no ſtrangers.
How ſhall I excuſe it?
Nay I haue you faſt inough boy, you roague.
Good ſir, I beſeech you ſir, let me go.
A pick-pocket, nay you ſhall to Newgate luck you: is this your Boy ſir.
How now boy? a monſter? thy arme linde faſt in an others pocket, where learnt you that manners; what company haue you kept alate, that you are ſo tranſformd into a roage, that ſhape I know nt, beleeue me ſir I much wonder at the alteration of this boy, where he ſhould get this nature: as good a childe to ſee to, and as vertuous, hee has his Creed by heart, reads me his chapter duly euery night; hee will not miſſe you one tittle in the nine commandements.
Theres ten of em.
I feare he skips ore one; thou ſhalt not ſteale.
Maſſe like enough.
Elſe grace and memory, would quite abaſh the boy. Thou graceleſſe impe, ah thou prodigious child, begot at ſome ec ipſe, degenerate rogue. Shame to thy friends, and to thy maiſter eke: how far digreſſing from the noble minde of thy braue Anceſters that lie in Marble, with their coate aors ore em.
Had he ſuch friends?
The boy is well diſcended, though he be a rogue and has no feeling ont, yet for my ſake, & for my reputations ſeeke not the bloud of the boy, his neere allyed to many men of worſhip now yet liuing, a fine old man to his father, it would kill his heart yfaith, heed away like a Cryſom.
Alaſſe good gentleman?
Ah ſhameles villaine, complainſt thou? doſt thou want?
No, no, no, no.
Art not well clad, thy hunger well reſiſted.
Yes, yes, yes, yes,
But thou ſhalt ſtraight to Bridewell.
Sweet maiſter.
Liue vpon bread and water, and chap choake.
I beſeech your worſhip.
Come Ile be his ſuerty for once:
You ſhall excuſe me indeed ſir?
He will mend, a may proue an honeſt man for all this, I know gallant Gentlemen now, that haue done as much as this comes too in their youth.
Say you ſo ſir?
And as for Bridewell, that will but make him worſe, a will learne more knauery there in one weeke, then will furniſh him and his heires for a hundreth yeare.
Deliuer the boy.
Nay I tell you true Sir, ther's none goes in there a queane, but ſhe comes out an arrant whore I warrant you.
The boy comes not there for a million.
No you had better forgiue him by ten parts.
True, but a muſt not know it comes from me, downe a your knees you rogue, and thanke this gentleman has got your pardon.
O I thanke your worſhip:
A pox on you for a rogue, you put me to my ſette ſpeech onee a quarter:
Nay gentlemen you quite forget your houre, ead maiſter Bowſer
Let me go you'r a diſſembler
How.
Did not you promiſe me a new gowne?
Did I not? yes faith did I, and thou ſhalt haue it, goe firrah runne for a Tayler preſently.
Let me ſee for the coulour now; Orange tawny, Peach colour, what ſayſt to a Watchet Sattin?
O tis the onely colour I affect.
A very orient colour, ant pleaſe your worſhips, I made a gowne ont for a Gentlewoman tother day, and it does paſſing well vpon her.
A Watchet Sattin gowne.
There your worſhip left ſir.
Laid about Tayler.
Very good Sir.
With foure faire Laces.
That will be coſtly ſir.
How you rogue coſtly, out ath'houſe, you ſlip-ſhood, ſhamlegd, browne-thred, penny-skeand raſcall.
Nay my ſweete loue.
Hang him rogue, he's but a Botcher neither, come Ile ſend thee a fellow worth a hundred of this, if the ſlaue were cleane inough.
Who knocks.
A Chriſtian: pray is not this maiſter Taylbees lodging, I was directed het her.
Yes, this is my maiſters lodging.
Cry you mercy ſir. Is he yet ſtirring.
Hee's awake, but not yet ſtirring, for he plaide away halfe his clothes laſt night
My miſtreſſe commends her ſecrets vnto him, and preſents him by me with a new Sattin ſuite here.
Maſſe that comes happily.
And ſhe hopes the faſhion will content him.
Ther's no doubt to be had of that ſir—your miſtreſſe name I pray? y'are much pretiouſly welcome.
I thanke you vncommonly ſir.
The ſuite ſhall be accepted I warrant you ſir.
Thats all my Miſtreſſe deſires ſir.
Fare you well ſir.
Fare you well ſir.
This will make my maiſter leape out of the bed for ioy, and dance Wigmois galliard in his ſhift about the chamber?
Came this ſuit from miſtris Cleueland?
She ſent it ſecretly ſir.
A pritty requitefull ſquall, I like that woman, that can remember a good turne 3 moneths a'er the date, it ſhewes both a good memory, and a very feeling ſpirit.
This came fortunately ſir, after all your ill lucke laſt night.
I'de beaſtly caſting Iacke.
Oh abom nable ſir, you had the ſcuruieſt hand—the old Seruingman ſwoopt vp all;
I am glad the fortune lighted vpon the poore fellow by my troth, tmade his maiſter nad?
Did you marke that ſir, warrant hee has the doggedſt maiſter of any poore fellow vnder the dog-ſigne, Ide rather ſerue your worſhip, Ile ſay that behinde vour backe ir, for nothing, as indeed I haue no ſtanding wages at all, your worſhip knowes.
Oh but your vailes Iacke your vailes conſidered, when you run too and fro betweene me and miſtreſſes.
I muſt confeſſe my vailes are able to keepe an honeſt man go I where I lift.
go to then Iacke.
But thoſe vailes ſtand with the ſtate of your body ſir as long as you hold vp your head, if that droop once, farewell you, farewell I, farewell all, and droop it will, though all the caudles in Europe ſhould put to their helping hands toot; tis ee'n as vncertaine as playing now vu now downe, for if the Bill riſe to aboue thirty, heer's no place for players, ſo if your yeares riſe to aboue ty, ther's no roome for old lechers.
and thats the rea on all roomes are taken vp for young Temp'ers?
y'are in the right ſir?
pize ont I pawnd a good beuer hat to maiſter Frip laſt night Iacke,
I feele the want of it now, —harke whoſe that knockes;
I maiſter Taylbee ſtirring?
Whats your pleaſure with him, he walks hereith hall.
Giue our worſhip good morrow,
Welcome honeſt lad;
A letter from my miſtrſſe.
Whoſe th miſtreſſe?
Miſtreſſe blocke.
Miſtreſſ new-blocke my ſincere loue how do's ſhe?
Faith onely n the wait of your ſight.
Aaſſe eere ſweet, Iu'e had ſuch buiſines, I proteſt I nere ſtood ſtill ſince I ſaw her.
She has ſent your worſhip a Beuer hat heere, with a band beſt in faſhion.
How ſhall I requite this deere ſoule?
Tit not a thing fit for mee to tell you ſir, for I haue three yeares to ſerue yet: your worſhip knowes how I warrant you;
I know the drift of her letter, and for the Beuer, ſay, I accept it highly.
O ſhee will be a proud woman of that ſir.
And harke thee tell thy miſtreſſe as lm'e a Gentleman, Ile diſpatch her out of hand, the firſt thing I do a my credit, canſt thou remember theſe words now?
Yes ſiras you are a Gentleman you'le diſpatch her out of hand the firſt thing you do
Ia my credit.
Oh of your credit, I thought not of that fir.
Remember that good boy?
Feare it not now fir.
I dreamt to nighe Iacke, I ſhould haue a ſecret ſupply out a'th Citty
Your dreame craules out partly well ſir,—what newes there now?
I haue an arrant no maiſter Taylbee—
Yonder walks my maiſtr;
Miſtres Tiffany commends her to your worſhip and h'as ſent you your ten pound in gold backe gaine, and ſayes ſhee cannot furniſh you of the ſame Lawne you deſire, till after all hollantide—
Thanke her ſhe would let me vnderſtand ſo much? ha, ha,—this wench wil liue, why this was ſent like a worke woman now, the reſt are borchers to her, faith I commend her cunning, ſhees a foole, that makes her ſeruant fellowe to her heart, it robs her of reſpect, dams vp all duty, keepes her in awe e'en of the ſlaue ſhee keepes.
This takes a wiſe courſe I commend her more,
Sends back the gold, I neuer ſawe before:
Well women are my beſt friends ifaith,
Takes lands giue me good legs:
Firme back white hand black eye, browne haire,
And ad but to theſe fiue a comly ſtature,
Let others liue by art and I by nature.
Maiſter Bowſer Maiſtr Bowſer, ha, ha, ho, maiſter Bowſer.
Holla:
What not out of thy kennel, Maiſter Bowſer.
Maiſter Goldſtone, your an early Gallant ſir?
A faire cloake yonder ifaith,—by my troth a bed Maiſter Bowſer, you remember your promiſe well ore night.
Why whats a clock ſir?
Do you aske that now, why the chimes are ſpent at Saint Brides.
Tis a Gentlemans houre, ſaith Maiſter Goldſtone ile bee ready in a trice.
Away theres no truſt to you:
Faith ile come inſtantly?
Nay chuſe whether you will or no, by my troth your cloake ſhall goe before you—
Nay Maiſter Goldſtore I ha ſworke—do you heare ſir:
Away, away, faith Ime angry with you, pox, a bed now Ime aſhamde of it.
Foote my cloake, my cloake Maiſter Goldſtone, ſlife what meant you by this ſir you'le bring it back agen, I hope, no not yet, by my troth I care very little for ſuch kinde of ieſting, me thinkes this familiarity now extends a little too far, vnleſſe it be a new faſhion come forth this morning▪ ſecreetly yeſterday twould haue ſhowne vnmannerly, and ſawcily; I ſcarce know yet what to thinke on't, well there's no great profit in ſtanding in my ſhirt, ile on with my cloathes, has bound mee to follow the ſuite, my cloakes a ſtranger hee was made but yeſterday, & I do not loue to truſt him alone in company.
What may I coniecture of this Goldſtone? hee has not onely pawnde to me this cloake, but the verie Diamond and Saphire, which I beſtowde vpon my new loue at Maiſter Primeroes houſe; the cloakes new and comes fitly, to do me great grace at a wedding this morning, to which I was ſolemnly enuited. I can continue change more thē the proudeſt Gallant of em all; yet neuer beſtowe pennie of my ſelfe, my pawnes do ſo kindly furniſh mee: but the ſight of theſe iewells is able to cloy me, di I nor preſerue my ſtomack the better for the wedding dinner, a guift could neuer haue come in a more patient hure, nor to be better diſgeſted; is ſhe prou'd falſe,—but ile not fiet to day no▪ chafe my bloud.
Ha, yonder goes Bowſer, the place is fit:—boy ſtand with my horſe at Corner, I owe you for a Pinck 3. inches deepe ſir?
On—o—o;
Take that in part of payment; for Coome-parke:
On—o—o?
How now, whoſe this? sfoote one of our Gallants, knockt downe like a Calfe, is there ſuch a plauge of em here at London, they begun to knock em ath head already:
Oh Maiſter Bowſer, prayrend me your hand ſir; I am ſlaine:
Slaine and aliue? oh cruell execution?
What man ſo ſauage-ſpirited durſt preſume,
To ſtrike downe attin on two taffeties cut:
O lie his hand againſt a Beuer hat.
Some roague that owes me money, and had no other meanes
To a wedding dinner: I muſt be dreſt myſelf me thinkes.
How why this my cloake, life how came my cloake hether?
Is it yours ſir,? Maiſter Goldſtone pawnde it to me this morning freſh and aing▪ and borrowed fiue pound vpon't.
How, pawnde i? pray let me neare out this ſtory, come, and ile lend you to the next barbers-ſurgeons;—pawnde my cloake?
How now Maraduke whats the wager;
Nay my care is at end ſir, now I am come to the ſight of you? my miſtris your couzin entreates you to take part of a dinner with her at home at her houſe, and bring what Gentleman you pleaſe to accompany you.
Thanke my ſweet couze, ile munch with her ſay.
Ile tell her ſo.
Marmaduke—
Sir?
Will there be any ſtock-fiſh thinkſt thou?
How ſir?
Tell my couze I'ue a great appetite to ſtock-fiſh ifaith—Maiſter Goldſtone ile intreate you to bee the gentleman that ſhall accompany me.
No? me ſir?
You ſir.
By my troth concluded, what ſtate beares thy couze irrah?
Oh a fine Merchants wife,—
Or rather a Merchants fine wife—
Truſt me and thats the roperer phraze here at London, and tis as abſurd too, to call him ine Merchant, for being at ſea, a man knowes not what pickle he is in.
Why true—
Yet my couze will be ſerude in plate I can tell you, ſhe has her ſiluer lug and her guilt Tankards.
Fie.
Nay you ſhall ſee a houſe dreſt v ifaith, you muſt not thinke o tread ath ground when you come there.—
No, how ther?
Why vpon paths made of fig-frailes, & white blankets cut out in ſteakes.
Away—I haue thought of a deuice, where ſhal we meete an houre hence.
In Powles.
Agreed.
The Broker-Gallant, and the Cheating-Gallant,
Now I haue found 'em all, I ſo reioyce,
That the redeeming of my cloake I wey not:
I haue ſpyed him.
Pax here's Boucer.
Maiſter Goldſtone, my cloake, come wher's my cloake ſir?
Oh y'are a ſure Gentleman; eſpecially if a man ſtand in need of you, he may bee ſlaine in a morning to breakfaſt, ere you vouchſafe to peepe out of your lodging.
How?
No leſſe then foure Gallants, as Ime a gentleman, drew all vpon me at once, and oppoſde mee ſo ſpightfully, that I not onely loſt your cloake ith' fray.
Cmes it in there?
But my tice Hangers, ſirrah, I thinke thou haſt ſeene e.
Neuer iah ſir.
Thoſe with the two Vnicornes, all wrought in Pearle and gold pex on't it frets me ten times more then the loſſe of the platty cloake; prethee and thou lou'ſt me ſpeake no more ont, it brings the Vnicornes into my minde, and thou wouldſt not thinke how the conceit greeues me: I will not do thee that diſgrace ifaith, to offer thee any ſatisfaction, for in my ſoule I thinke thou ſcornſt it thou bearſt that minde in my conſcience▪ I haue alwaies ſaid ſo of thee; fare thee well, when ſhall I ſee thee at my chamber, when?
Euery day ſhortly.
I haue ine toyes to ſhow thee.
You win my heart then:
The Diuill ſcarce knew what a portion hee gaue his children, when he allowde 'em large impudence to liue vpon, & ſo turnd em into th'world, ſurely he gaue away the third part of the riches of his kingdome, reuenues are but fooles too't; the filed tongue and the vndaunted fore-head,
Are mighty patrimonies, wealthier then thoſe
The Citty-Sire, or the Court-father leaues,
In theſe behold it, riches oft like flaues
Reuolt, they beare their fore-heads to their graues,
What ſooneſt graſps aduancement, me great ſuites
Trips downe rich widowes, gaines repute and name,
Makes way where ere it comes, bewitches all
Thou impudence, the minion of our dayes
On whoſe pale cheekes fauor and fortune playes!
Call you theſe your fiue Gallants, truſt me they'r rare fellowes
They liue on nothing; many cannot liue on ſomething,
Heere they may take example;—Suſpectleſſe virgin!
How eaſie had thy Goodneſſe bene beguilde
Now onely reſts, that as to me they'r knowne,
So to the world their baſe Arts may be ſhowne.
Art ſure thou ſaw'ſt him receiu't boy?
Forty pound in gold as Im'e a gentleman borne,
Thy father gaue the Rams-head boy?
No you'r deceiu'd my mother gaue that ſir.
whats thy mothers, is thy fathers;
Im'e ſorry it holds in the Rams-head, ſee heere he walkes, I was ſure hee came into Powles, the gold had bene yours maiſter long ere this, but that he weares both his hands in his pockets:
How vnfortunately is my purpoſe ſeated, what the deuill ſhould come in his minde to keepe in his hands ſo long, the biting but of a paultry louſe would do me great kindnes now, I knew not how to requite t, will no raſcall creature aſſiſt mee, ſtay, what i I did impudently ſalute 'em out, good, boy be redy boy.
vpon the leaſt aduantage ſir?
You'r moſt deuoutly met in Powles ſir?
So are you, but I ſcarce remember you ſir.
Oh I cry you mercy ſir, I pray pardō me I feare I haue tendred an offence ſir, troth I tooke you at the firſt for one maiſter Dumplin a Norfolke gentleman.
Ther's no harme done yet ſir?
I hope hee is there by this time, how now boy, haſt it?
No by troth haue I not, this labours loſt, 'tis in the right pocket, and he kept that hand in ſure enough.
Vnpractizd Gallant, ſalute me but with one hand, like a counterfeit ſouldier, O times and manners? are wee growne beaſts, doe wee ſalute by halfes, are not our limbes at leiſure, wheres comely nurture, the Italian kiſſe, or the French cringe, with the Polonian waſte: are all forgot, then miſery followes—Surely fate forbad it, had hee imploide but his right hand, Ide had it:—It muſt be an euerlaſting deuiſe I thinke, that procures both his hands out at once: do you walke ſir.
No I ſtay a little for a Gentlemans comming too.
Farewell then ſir, I haue forty pound in gold about me, which I muſt preſently ſend downe into the countrey.
Fare you well ſir: I wonder Maiſter Goldſtone ſpares my company ſo long, 'tis now about the nauill of the day, vpon the belly of noone.
See where he walkes, be ſure you let off at a twinckling now.
When did I miſſe you,—your worſhip has forgot, you promiſt Miſtreſſe Newcut your cozen, to dine with her this day.
Maſſe that was well remembred.
I am bold to ſalute you ſir.
Sir.
Is Miſtreſſe New-cut your coozen ſir.
Yes, ſhee's a coozen of mine ſir.
Then I am a coozen of yours, by the Siſters ſide.
Let me ſalute you then, I ſhall be glad of your farther acquaintance.
I am a bidden gueſt here too.
Indeed ſir?
Faith inuited this morning.
Your good company, sall be kindly imbrac'd ſir.
I walke a turne or two here for a Gentleman, but I thinke heele either ouer-take me, or be before me.
Tis very likely ſir; there ſirrah, go to dinner, & about two waite for mee?
Nay let him come betweene two and three coozen, for we loue to ſit long at dinner ith' Citty.
Come ſweete coozen.
Nay coozen, keepe your way coozen,
Good coozen I will not yfaith coozen.
Why how now ſirtah, vpon twelue of the clock, & not the cloth laide yet—muſt we needs keepe Exchange time ſtill.
I am about it forſooth.
Y'are about it forſooth; y'are ſtill about many things, but you nere do one well, I am an Aſſe to keep thee inth' houſe now my husbands at ſea, thou haſt no audacity with thee, a fooliſh dreaming lad, fitter to be in the garret, thē in any place elſe, no grace, nor manly behauiour; when didſt thou euer come to mee, but with thy head hanging downe, oh decheerefull prentize, vncomfortable ſeruant: pray heauen the Gull my coozen has ſo much wit left, as to bring maiſter Taylbee along with him; my comfort, my delight, for that was the chiefeſt cauſe I did inuite him, I bad him bring what Gentlemen he pleazd to accompany him, as farre as I durſt goe, why may hee not then make choiſe of maiſter Taylbee, had hee my wit or feeling hee would doo't.
Wher's my ſweet coozen here, dos ſhe lack any gueſſe?
Euer ſuch gueſſe as you, y'are welcome coozen.
I am rude Lady.
Y'are moſt welcome ſir.
There will be a gallant here anon cooze,
Hee promiſt faithfully.
Who iſt maiſter Taylbee?
Maiſter Taylbee, no maiſter Goldſtone.
Maiſt. Goldſtone; I could thinke well of that Goldſtone, wert not for one vilde trick he has.
Whats that Lady?
In ieſt, he will pawne his punc es for ſuppers.
Thats a vilde part in him ifaith, & he were my brother.
Pray gentlemen ſit a while, your dinner ſhall come preſently.
Yee miſtreſſe New-cut, at firſt giue me a trip,
A cloſe bite alwayes askes a ſecret nip.
My coozen here is a very kind natur'd ſoule ifaith, in her humor.
Puh you know her not ſo wel as I cooze, I haue obſeru'd her in all her humors you nere ſaw her a little waſpiſh I thinke.
I haue Ifaith.
Puh, then yea nere ſawe prety humor in your life, I ca bring her into't when I liſt.
Would you could ifaith.
Would I could? by my troth and I were ſure thou couldſt keepe thy countenance couze, what a prety ieſt haue I thought vpon already to entertaine time before dinner.
Preche couze what iſt, I loue a ieſt a life ifaith.
Ah but I am iealious you will not keepe your countenance ifaith.
Why yea ſhall ſee a prety ſtory of a humor.
Faith ile try you for once, you know my couzin will wonder when ſhe comes in to ſee the cloath layd and nere a ſalt vpon the boord.
Thats true ifaith.
Now will I ſtand a while out of ſight with it, and giue her humour play a little.
Couze doſt thou loue mee, and thou wilt euer doe any thing for me, do't.
Marry I build vpon you countenance.
Why doſt thou thinke Ime an aſſe couze?
I would be loath to vndertake it elſe, for if you ſhould burſt out preſently, couze the ieſt would be ſpoild.
Why do not I know that, away, ſtand cloſe, ſo, ſo mum couzen? a merry companion ifaith, here will be good ſport anon,—whiſt ſhe comes?
I make you ſtray long for a bad dinner, here couzen, if Maiſter Goldſtone were come, the meates e'en ready.
Some great buſines detaines him couzin, but heele not be long now?
Why how now, cuds my life,—
Why?
Was euer miſtris ſo plaugd with a ſhetle-headed ſeruant—why Marmaduke.
I come forſooth:
Able to ſhame me from generation to generation.
Did you call forſooth?
Come hether forſooth—did you lay this cloth?
Yes forſooth:
Do you vſe to lay a cloth without a ſalt, a ſalt, a ſalt, a ſalt, a ſalt, a ſalt.
How many ſalts would you haue, Ime ſure I ſet the beſt ith houſe vpon the boore.
How? couzen:—ſings—couzen, couzen, did call couze.
Did you ſee a ſalt vpon the boord when you came in.
Puh.
Come, come, I thought as much, beſhrew your ſingers, where iſt now?
Your couzen yonder.
Why the mans mad.
Couzen, hiſt couzen.
What ſay you.
Puh, I call not you, I call my couzen, come forth with th' ſalt couzen: ha, how, nobody: why wa not he that came in e'en now your couzen?
My couzen: O my bell ſalt, O my great bell ſalt.
The tenor bell ſalt; oh here comes Maiſter Goldſtone now couzen, he may tell vs ſome newes on him. Did you not meete a fellow about doore, with a great ſiluer ſalt vnder his arme.
No ſure, I met none ſuch.
Pardon me ſir, I forgot all this while to bid you welcome. I ſhall loth this roome for euer. Take hence the cloth you vnlucky maple-fac'd raſcall, come you ſhall dine in my chamber ſir.
No better place lady.
No leſſe then forty pound in faire gold at one lift, the next ſhall ſowne, and ſowne agen till the diuill fetch him ere I ſet hand to him, heart, nothing vexes mee ſo much▪ but that I payde the Goldſmith for the change too not an houre before, had I let it alone in the chaine of ſiluer as it was at firſt, it might haue giuen mee ſome notice at his departure, sfoote I could fight with a win-mill now, ſure twas ſome vnlucky villaine, why ſhould he come and ſalute mee wrongfully too miſtake me at noone day, now I thinke ont in cold bloud? it could not be but an induction to ſome villanous purpoſe, well, I ſhal meete him—
This forty pound came fortunately to redeeme my chaine of pearle from morgage, I would not care how often I ſowned to haue ſuch a good cawdle to comfort me, gold and pearle is very reſtoratiue.—
See yonders the roague I ſuſpect for fowle play, ile walke muffled by him, offer ſome offence or cauſe of a quarrel, only to try his temper, if he be a coward, he's the likelier to be a roague, an infallible note.
What a pox aile you ſir, would I had beene aware of you.
Sir, ſpeake you to me?
Not I ſir, pray keepe on your way I haue nothing to ſay to you.
Y'are a raskall.
You may, ſay your pleaſure ſir,—but I hope I goe not like a raskall.
Are you▪ faine to flie to your cloathes, becauſe yae Gallant, why theres no raskall, like your Callat raskall beleeue that.
You haue tooke mee at ſuch an houre, faith you may call me e'en what you pleaſe, nothing wil mooue me.
No, ile make ſomewhat n ooue you? drawe? I ſuſpected you were a roague, & you haue purſt it vp wel with a coward?
Who my Patron.
Keepe out you raskall.
The geſt that did me the kindneſſe in Powles,
Hold as you are a gentleman, youle giue me breath ſir.
Are you there with mee, a vengeance ſtop you, you haue found breath inough to run away from mee I will neuer meete this ſlaue hereafter in a morning but I will breath my ſelfe vpon him, ſince I can haue no other ſatisfaction, hee ſhail ſaue me that forty pound in fence-ſchoole.
When things are clenly carried, ſigne of iudgement,
I was the welcomſt Gallant to her aliue,
After the ſalt was ſtolne; then a good dinner,
A fine prouoking meale which drewe on apace,
The pleaſure of a day-bed, and I had it:
This here one ring can witneſſe, when I parted,
Who but ſeewte Maiſter Goldſtone, I left her in that trance.
What cannot wit ſo it be impudent
Deuiſe and compaſſe? I would faine know that fellow now,
That would ſuſpect me but for what I am.
He liues not,; 'Tis all in the conueyance, what? Thou lookſt not like a begger, what makſt thou on the groūd, I haue a hand to help thee vp, a faire chaine of pearle, ſurely a marchants wife giues lucky bandſell; they that finde pearle may wear't at a cheape rate, mary my Lady dropt it from her arme for a deuice to toale me to her bed, Iu'e ſeene as great a matter—who be theſe? Ile be to crafty for you, oh mounſier Primero, Signior Fr, is it you gallants.
Sweet maiſter Goldſtone?
euery bawd exceeds mee in fortune: maiſter Primero was rob'd of a Carkanet vpon monday laſt▪ laid the goldſmiths and found it. I h'a laid goldſmits Ieweller, Burniſher Broker, and the deuill and all I thinke, yet could neuer ſo much as here of that chaine of pearle, he was a notable theefe, hee workes cloſe; peace, who be theſe, halet mee ſee, by this light there it 'tis backe leaſt they ſee thee; a happy minute, Goldſtone what an age do we breath in, who, that ſaw him now would thinke hee were maintaind by purſes: ſo, who, that meets me, would thnke I were maintaind by wenches, as far as I can ſee tis all one caſe, and holds both in one Court, wee are both maintaind by the common roade way? Keep thou thine owne heart, thou liu'ſt vnſuſpected, I leeſe you againe now.
But I pray you tell me,
met you no Gentlewomen by the way you came?
Not any what ſhould they be?
Nay I do but aſke,
Becauſe a Gentlewomans gloue was found,
Neere to the place I met you?
Faith we ſaw none ſir.
good officers, vpon ſuſpition of fellony.
Very good ſir
What call you the theefs name you do ſuſpect?
Maiſter Iuſtinian Goldstone.
Remember, maiſter Iuſtice Goldſtone, a terrible world the whilſt, my Maiſters.
Looke you that's he; vpon him officers.
I ſee him not yet, which is he ſir.
Why that.
He a theefe ſir, who that Gentleman ith' Satt in?
Een hee.
Farewell ſir, y'are a merry Gentleman.
As you will anſwer it officers, Ile beare you out, Ile be your warrant.
Nay and you ſay ſo, what's his name then.
Iuſtinian Goldſtone.
Maiſter Iuſtinian Goldſtone, wee apprehend you ſir vpon ſuſpition of fellonie.
Mee.
You ſir.
I charge you in the Kings name gentlemen to aſſiſt vs.
Maiſter Taylbee?
The ſame man ſir.
Life whats the newes?
Ha you forgot Come-parke?
Come-parke? no, tis in Kingſtone way.
I beleeue youle finde it ſo.
I not deny it.
Beare witneſſe has confeſt.
What haue I confeſt, paire of cockſcombes indubitable?
I was robd finely of this chaine of Pearle there,
And forty faire Spur-Royals.
Did I rob you?
There where I finde my goods I may ſuſpect ſir.
I dreamt this would be his end.
See how I am wrongd Gentlemen:
As I haue a ſoule, I found this chaine of pearle,
Not three yeards from this place, iuſt when I met you.
Ha, ha!
Yet the law's ſuch, if he but ſweare 'tis you, y'are gon.
Pox ont, that ere I ſaw't.
Can you but ſweare 'tis he, do but that, and you tickle him yfaith?
Nay and it come once to ſwearing let me alone:
Say and hold, hee call'd my Iewells counterfet, and ſo cheated the poore wench of 'em:
Come bring him away, come?
T will call my ſtate in queſtion!
I thinke what's got by theft doth neuer proſper, Now loſt my chaine of pearle—come maiſter Goldſtone, lets go this mine yfaith,
The chaine of pearle?
By my trothit's mine;
By my troth much good do't you ſir?
Im'e glad in my ſoule ſie—Gnawes,
Deliuer your weapons,
How?
You're apprehended vpon ſupition of fellony?
Fellony? whats that'
Was it you yfaith, ſir all this while, that did me that kindnes to eaſe both my pockets at Coom-parke:
I ſi? pray gentlemen draw neere, lets talke among our ſelues, ſtand a part Scoundrell;—muſt euery gentleman be vp braided in publike that flies out now and then vpon neceſſity, to be Theames for pedlers and weauers? this ſhoud not bee, twas neuer ſeene among the Romaines; nor read we of it in the time of Brute▪ are wee more Brutiſh now? did I liſt to blab, do not I know your courſe of liſe maiſter Taylbee to bee as baſe as the baſeſt, maintaind by mee, by him by all of vs, and a ſecond hand from miſtreſſes, Iu'e their letters heere to ſhow?
Why ſhould you be ſo violent to ſtrip naked
Anothers Reputation, to the world knowing your owne ſo leprous, Beſide this naiie of pearle and thoſe ſpur-royals came to you fa ſe y for ſhe broke her faith, and made her ſoule a ſtrumpet with her body, when ſhe ſent thoſe; they were euer iuſtly mine? Pray what moues you ſir, why ſhould yo ſhake your head, you'r cleere, ſure I ſhould know you ſir, pray are not you ſometimes a pandar, & oftner a bawd ſir, haue I neuer Sin'd in your ban-quetting boxes, your bowers and towers? you ſlaue, that keeps fornication vpon the tops of trees, the very Birds cannot in gender in quiet for you, why rogue, that goes in good clothes made out of wenches caſt gownes.
Nothing goes ſo neere my heart as that?
Do you ſhake your ſlaues nodle?
And heer's a raskall lookt aſway too, (ſauing the pre, ſeace of maiſter Goldſtone;) a filthy-ſlymy-louſie-nitticall broker, prickt vp in pawnes from the hat-band to the ſhooſtringa neceſſary hooke to hang gentlemens ſuites ont it'h Aire, leaſt they ſhould grow muſty with long lying? which his pawnes ſeldome are guilty off, a fellow of ſeuerall ſents and Seeamea; French, Duch, Italian, Engliſh, and therefore his lice muſt needs be mungrells. why Bill mony?
I am ſorry to heere this among you, y'aue all deceiu'd me, truly I tooke you for other Spirits, you muſt pardon mee hence-forward, I haue a reputation to looke to, I muſt bee no more ſeene in your companies;
Nay, nay, nay, nay, maiſter Golſtone, you muſt not ſcape ſo yfaith, one word before you go ſir,
Pray diſpatch then, I would not for halfe my reuenewes yfaith now, that any gallants ſhould paſſe by in the meane time, and finde me in your companies, nay as quicke as you can ſir.
You did not take away maiſter Bowcers cloake other morning, pawnd it to me and borrowed fiue pound vppon't;
Ha?
'Twas not you neither that finely cheated my little Nouice at maiſter Primeroes houſe, of a Diamond and Saphire, and ſwore they were counterfet, both glaſſe, meere glaſſe as you were a right gentleman;
Slife, why were we ſtrangers all this while? ſoot I perceicue wee are all naturall Brothers? a pox ons all are we found yfaith?
A cheater?
A theeſe, a lecher, a bawd and a Broker?
What meane they to bee ſo merry, Im'e afraid they laugh at vs and make fooles on's.
Puſh, leaue it to me—how now: who would you ſpeake withall?
Speak withall? haue wee waited all this while, for a ſuſpected theefe
How? your'r ſcarce awake yet I thinke, looke well, does any appeare like a theefe in this company▪ away you ſlaues, you ſtand loytring, when you ſhould looke to the common wealth? you catch knaues apace now, do you not? they may walke by your noſe, your as kalls?
Sweete Maiſter Goldſtone.
You lackt ſpirit in your company, till I came among you▪ here ee iue on's, lets but glew together, why now the world ſhall not come betweene vs.
If we be true among our ſelues.
Why true; we cannot lack to be rich; for we cannot lack riches, nor can our wenches want, nor we want wenches.
Let me alone to furniſh you with them.
And me.
Theres one care paſt: and as for the Knights daughter,
Our chiefeſt buſineſſe, and leaſt thought vpon.
Thats true ifaith.
How ſhall we agree for her.
With as much eaſe as for the reſt: to morrow brings the night, lets all appeare in the beſt ſhape we may; troth is, we haue need on't, and when amongſt vs fiue ſhe makes election, as one ſhe ſhall chooſe.
True, ſhe cannot chooſe.
That one ſo fortunate amongſt vs fiue,
Shall beare himſelfe more portly, liue regarded,
Keepe houſe, and be a countenance to the reſt.
Admirall.
For inſtance, put caſe your ſelfe after ſome robbery done
Were purſu'de hardly; why there were your ſhelter,
You know your Sanctuary: nay ſay you were taken,
His letter to the Iuſtice will ſtrik't dead,
'Tis policie to receiue one for the head.
Lets hug thee Goldſtone.
What haue I begot?
What Sir?
I muſt plot for you all, it likes me rarely.
Prethee what iſt ſir?
'Twould ſtrike Fitſgraue pale,
And make the other Suiters appeare blanckes.
For our vnited miſteries.
What if we fiu: preſented our full ſhapes
In a Strange-gallant, and conceited maske?
In a maske, your thoughts and mine wte wins.
So the deuice were ſubtle nothing like it.
Some Post muſt ▪
Poet? youle take the direct lne to haue vs ſta'gde? why what lacks Bowſer, are you too well, too ſafe, an abſolute ſcholler, eaſie to be wrought, o danger in the operation.
But haue you ſo much intereſt▪
What in Bowſer? why my leaſt woo com him:
Then no man fitte.
And there's Maiſter Frip too, sh vs of making ſie ow.
Vpon ſufficient pawne I thinke I can ſir
Pawne? Iwe, here take my ainepa wes among brothers? we ſhall thriue? but wee muſt ſtill expect one ongue in fiue, and thinke vs happy too.
Laſt man we ſpoke on, Maiſter Bowſer.
Little maiſter Bowſer, ſweete maiſter Bowſer welcome ifaith?
Are your fathers dead▪ gentlemen, y'are ſo mrry.
By my troth a good ieſt, did not I cond his wit to you gentlemen, harke rm Rafe Bowſer, co Bowſer ifaith? thers a kind of portion in towne, a girle of 15 hundred, whom we al powrefully affect, and determine to preſent our parts to her in a Maske.
In a Maske!
Right ſir, now a little of thy braine for a deuice to preſent vs firme, which wee ſhall neuer bee able to do our ſelues thou knowſt that; and with a kind of ſpeech wherein thou mayſt expreſſe what gallants are▪ brauely;
Puh, how can I expreſſe em otherwiſe but brauely: now for a Mercury and al were fitted.
Could not a boy ſupply it?
Why none better.
I haue a boy ſhal put down al the Mercuries ith towne,
A will play a Mercury naturally, at his fingers end ifaith.
Why then wee are ſuted; for torch-bearers and ſheeldboies, theſe are alwaies the writers properties; y'are not troubled with them.
Come my little Bowſer; do't finely now, to the life.
I warrant you gentlemen.
Hiſt; giue me a little touch aboue the and you can poſſible, for I meane to preſent this chaine of pearle to her.
Now I know that let me aoe to fit you.
Come forth you ry priuate—why ſpring ſtrumpet haue we found your cloſſe. haunts, your priuate watchtowers, and your till meanes.
How then?
You can ſteale ſecretly hether, you miſticall queane you, at twylight, you haue a priviledge from your hat forſooth, to walke without a man, and no ſuſpition, But gentlewomen that goe in Ties Haue no ſuch liberty we cannot do thus▪ Cuſtome grants that to you thats ſhame in vs.
Haue you donne yet?
You broke the backe of one husband already & nowth' others dead with griefe at ſea, with your ſecret expences, cloſe elths cunning filches, and continued banquets in corners; then forſooth you muſt haue your milke-baths to white you, your oſe-leaues to ſweeten you, your beane-floure bags, to ſleeke you, and make you ſoft, ſmoothe, & delicate, for laſciuious entertainement.
So, and you thinke all this while you dance like a theeſe in a ſt y'are ſafe, no body can finde you; pray were not you a Plmogers daughter at firſt, that runne away with a new Courtiar for the loue of Gentlewomens clothes, and bought the faſhion at a deere rate, with the loſſe of your name & credit, why what are all of you, but ruſticall inſides, and citty fleſh, the bloud of yeomn, and the bm of gentlewomen—
What ſhall wee ſuffer a changeable forepart to outtongue vs, take that.
Murder, murder—
How now? why Ladies, a retreate, come, you haue ſhowne your ſpirits ſufficiently, y are all land captaines, and ſo they ſhall finde that come in your quarters, but haue you the law free now to fight and ſcrath among your ſelues and let your Gallants run away with vs.
How?
Good.
Sweete maiſter Bowſer.
Another?
Why then I perceiue you know nothing: why they are in the way of marriage:
A knights daughter here in towne makes her election among em this night.
This night?
This very night, and they all preſent themſelues in a maske before her, know you not this?
O traitor Maiſter Goldſtone.
Periurde Maiſter Tayleer
Without ſoule?
She will chaſe him.
You haue more cauſe to ioyne, and play the grounds of friendſhip mongſt your ſelues, then raſhly run diuiſional could tell you a meanes to pleaſure you:
Good maiſter Bowſer.
But that y'are women and are hardly ſecret.
We vow it ſeriouſly?
You ſhould be all there in preſence▪
See all, heare all, and yet not they percieue you.
So that—
Sweete maiſter Bowſer,—I
I can ſtand you in ſtead,
For I frame the deuice,—
If euer—
Will you do't—harke you—
Content.
And ile make one.
And I another,
Weele marre the match,
When that good newes came of my husbands death,
Goldſtone promiſt me marriage.
and Sweare to me.
Ile bring his oths in queſtion▪
So will:
Agree among your ſelues, for ſhame.
Are we reſolude?
In this who would not faine,
Friends all for my part,
Heer's my lip for thine▪
Round let it go,
All wrath thus quencht,
And I conclude it ſo.
How all euents ſtrike euen with my wiſhes, Their owne inuention damnes them,—now Gentlemen? ſtands your aſſiſtance firme?
Why 'tis our owne caſe,
Ime ſorry you ſhould doubt.
Weele furniſh you?
Are theſe our Gallants?
Are our Gallants theſe?
Heere be fiue ſhields sir?
Finiſht already, thats well? Ile ſee thy maiſter ſhortly▪
Ime ſatisfied.
Prithee lets ſee maiſter Fitſgraue,
I haue blaz'd them,
Whats this;
Fooh, you ſhould be a gallant too, for you'r no vniuerſity Scholler?
Looke this is Purſuit:, the deuice, a purſe wide open, and the mouth downeward. The wood, Alienis ee rnis.
Whats that?
One that liues out of other mens pockets,
Thats right?
Heer's Goldſtones three ſiluer dice,
They run hye, two ſincks and a quater?
They'r hye men fit for his purpoſes—The word,
Nay he will cheat his owne brother, nay his owne father ifaith?
So much the word imports—Maiſter Primero,
Pox what ſaies he now?
The deuice, an vnuallued pearle, hid in a caue. The word, Occulos vendit honores,
Whats that▪
One that ſells maidenheads by whole-ſale;
Excellently proper?
Maiſter Frip?
That pythagoricall raskall, in a gentlemans ſuite to day, in a knights to morrow:
The deuiſe for him; a Cuckow ſitting on a tree? The word, Enauis ex aibs; one bird made of many; for you know as the Sparrow hatches the Cuckow, ſo the Gentleman fethers the Broker?
Let me admire thee, maiſter Fitſgraue?
They will ſcorne gentlemen: and to aſſiſt them the better, Purſnets boy that little pretious pick-pocket, has a compend ous ſpeech in lattin, and like a Mercury preſents their their diſpoſitions more liberally:
Neuer were poore gallants ſo abuſed?
Hang 'em, their counterfets, no honeſt ſpirit will pitty 'em▪
This is my Crowne,
So good men ſmile I dread no raskalls frowne.
Away, beſtow your ſelues ſecretly, ore'head, this is the place appointed for the rehearſall, to practiſe their behauiours.
We are vaniſht.
Maiſter Bowcer,
Welſaid yfaith, off with your cloakes gallants, let's fall roundly to our buſines:
Is the boy perfect?
That's my credit ſir, I warrant you?
If our little Mercury ſhould bee out, wee ſhould ſcarce be knowne what we are▪
I haue tooke a courſe for that, feare it not ſir; looke you firſt heere be your Sheilds:
I Where be our Sheilds?
which is mine?
Which is mine maiſter Bowcer? this?
I pray be contained a little gentlemen, they'l come all time ynough to you, I warrant:
This Frip is growne ſo violent;
Yours to begin withall ſir?
welſaid maiſter Bowcer, firſt the Deuice, a fair purſe wide open, the mouth downeward, the word Allinis ecce crumenis?
Whats that prithee?
Your bounty powres it ſelfe forth to all men.
And ſo it does ifaith? that's all my fault, bountifull?
Maiſter Goldſtone heers yours ſir, 3. ſiluer Dice, the word, Fratrem que Patrem que ?
And whats that?
Fortune of my ſide?
Welſaid little Bowcer yfaith?
What ſay you to me ſir?
For the deuice A Candle in a corner; the word, Conſumptio, Victus:
The meaning of that ſir?
My light is yet in darknes, till inoy her, right ſir?
Now mine ſir?
The Deuice an vnuallued pearle hid in a Caue.
Ah ha ſirs?
The word, Occultes vendit honores;
Very-good I warrant,
A black mans a pearle in a faire Ladyes eye,
I ſaid twas ſome ſuch thing;
My turne muſt needs come now; am I fitted Maiſter Bowcer?
Truſt to me, your deuice here is a Cuckow ſitting on a tree,
The Welſh Lidger, good.
The word, En Anis ex Aibs.
I marry ſir.
Why do you know what 'tis ſir.
No by my troth not yet ſir▪
Oh, I keepe one tune, I ecant not.
I me like the Cuckow in that indeed, where I loue I hold.
Did I not promiſe you I would fit you.
They re all very well done ifaith, and very Schollerlike, tho I ſay't before thy face little Bowcer, but I would not haue thee proud ont now: come if this be performde well.
Who the Boy, he has performd deeper matters then this.
I a pox on him, I thinke was in my pocket now, and truth were knowne.
I caught him once in mine.
Suppoſe the ſhields are preſented, then you begin boy.
I repreſenting Mercury, am a Pick-pocket, and haue his part at my fingers ends, Page I am to that great and ſecret theefe, magno illo et Secret Latroni.
There you make your honor ſir▪
At Latroni.
You haue it ſir.
Latroni, thats mine.
He confeſles the Theefe's his.
Remember boy, you point Latroni to me.
To you Maiſter, proceede▪
Theſe foure are his companions, the one a notable cheater, that will cooſen his owne father.
Maiſter Goldſtone.
Let mee alone maiſter Boucer, I can take mine owne turne.
Why.
Peace.
The ſecond an notorious letcher maintained by harlots cuius virtus conſumptio corpus.
Thats I maiſter Bowcer.
There you remember your honor ſir.
Ille leno pretioſiſſis, Virgineos ob lucrum vendens honores.
It ſounds very well yfaith.
Poſtremus ill, quamuis apparatuſplendidus, is no otherwiſe but a Broker, theſe fethers are not his owne, ſed anis ex Auibus; all which to bee nothing but truth, will appeare by the euent.
Ifaith here's all now Gentlemen.
Short and pithy.
A good boy yfaith and a pregnant.
I dare put truſt in the Boy ſir; forget not firrah at any ▪hand to point that ſame Latroni to me.
I warrant you maiſter.
Come Gentlemen the time beckons vs away.
I, furniſh Gentlemen, furniſh.
Harke one word maiſter Boucer, what's the ſame Latroni, I haue a good minde to that word ifaith.
Latroni? why Sheerfe of the Sheere.
Ifaith? and I haue ſhuen ſome ſheeres in my daies.
Now gentlemen are you ſatsfied and pleaſd?
Neue: more amply▪
Amongſt vs now falls that deſired lot,
For we ſhall blaſt fiue riualls with one plot.
Graue gentlemen, in whoſe approued boſomes,
My deceaſt father did repoſe much faith
Your deerely welcome: pray ſit, command muſick,
See nothing want to beautifie this night,
That holds my election in her peacefull armes,
Feaſts, Muſick, Hymnes, thoſe ſweete celeſtiall ſwarmes.
May you be bleſt in this election.
That content, may meete perfection.
Sound Lute. Bandra, Gitterne,
Uioll, Virginalls and Sithron!
Uoices ſpring and lift alowde,
Her name that makes the Muſick proud:
this night perfection,
makes her election:
Follow, follow follow, follow round,
Looke you to that, nay you to that, nay you to that:
Anon, you will be found, anon you will bee found, anon you will bee found.
Alienis ecce crumenis.
Bowes to her.
Fratremque, Patremque.
Bowes to her.
Conſumptio victus.
Bowes to her.
Occultos vendit honores.
Bowes to her.
A Cuckow: en anis ex aibus.
Bowes to her.
Are you all as the ſpeech and ſhields diſplay you?
Wee ſhall prooue ſo.
The very chaine of Pearle was filcht from me.
Hold ſtop th boy there.
Will none lay hands on him.
How now.
Alas Ime but a broker, 'twas pawnd to me in my ſhop.
Ha, Fitſgraue?
Peamot and the reſt.
Where's Boucer?
Heere.
Wee are all betraide.
Betrayde▪ e new forth to betrayde, you haue not ſo much worth: nay ſtruggle not with the net, you are caught for this world.
Would we were out.
'Twas I fram'd your deuiſe: do you ſee 'twas I;
The whole aſſembly has tooke notice of it,
That you are a gallant cheator,
So much the pawning of my cloake containes▪
You a baſe theefe, thinke of Coome-parke and tell me that your a hired Smokſter, heres her letter. In which we are certified that you are a Bawde.
The broker has confeſt it.
So has the boy.
That boy wilbe hangd, he ſtole the chaine at firſt and has thus long maintainde his maiſters Gallantry.
All which we here preſent like captiue ſlaues,
Waiting that doome which their preſumption craues.
How eaſily may our ſuſpectleſſe ſexe,
With faire appeering ſhadowes be deluded:
Deare ſir, you haue the worke ſo well begun,
That tooke from you ſmall glory would be wonne.
Since tis your pleaſure to refer to me,
The doome of theſe; I haue prouided ſo:
They ſhall not altogither looſe their coſt;
See I haue brought wiues for em.
Heart, the ſtrumpets—out, out▪
Hauing aſſum'd out of their impudence,
The ſhape of ſheeld-boyes.
To heapefull confuſion.
Rather confine vs to ſtrikt chaſtity▪
A meere impoſſible taske then to wed theſe:
Whom we loth worſe then the ful'ſt deſeaſe.
O grant em their requeſtes.
The doome is paſt,
So ſince your aime was mariage:
Either imbrace it in theſe Curtizans,
Or haue your baſe acts, and felloous liue
Proclaimd to the indignation of the law,
Which will prouide a publike puniſhment:
As for the boy, and that infectious Bawde,
We put forth thoſe to whipping.
Whipping? you finde not that in the ſtatute to whip ſattin.
Away with him.
Since all our ſhifts are diſcouered, as farre as I can ſee tis our beſt courſe to marry em: weele make them get our liuings.
He ſaies true.
You ſee how we are threatened, by my troth wenches be rul'd by me, lets many em and it bee but to plauge em; for when we haue husbands we are vnder couert-baron, and may lie with whom wee liſt; I haue tri'd that in my tother husbands daies.
A match.
Ile be no more deerd▪ come, when do you ioyne:
Theſe forc'd marriages do neuer come to good.
How can they, when the come to ſuch as you?
The often prooue the ruine of great houſes,
Nor Virgin do I in this ſeeke to entice:
All glory to my ſelfe; theſe Gentlemen,
To whome I am bound to loue for kinde aſſiſtance,
Had great affinity in the plot with me.
To them I giue my thankes: my ſelfe to thee,
Thrice worthy Fitſgraue.
I ha ll my wiſhes.
And I preſume ther's none but thoſe can frowne,
Whoſe nus like the ruſhes we tread downe.