SOnnes, hopefull buddes of fruitfull Italy,
Hauing baniſht war which like a prodigall▪
Kept waſtfull reuells with our ſubiects blond:
Since proude Anthonio our arch-enemy
Is in his iourney towards th'vnderworld,
Or houers in the ſhade of baniſhment;
Let vs in peace ſmile at our victory▪
And euery breſt paſſe his opinion
What paſtime beſt becomes a conqueror.
What ſport but conqueſt for a conqueror,
Then with our wounds vndreſt▪ our ſteeds ſtill nd,
Branded with ſteele ere we wipe of the bloud
Of conquerd foes, lets with our ſhriller bugles
Summon the ſurly Landlord of the forreſt,
The Kingly Lyon to a bloudy parle,
Combat the Hart, the Leopard or the Bore,
In ſingle and aduenturous hardyment:
The ſpirit of mirth in manly action reſts,
Hauing queld men lets now go concuer beaſts.
Manly reſolu'd; Hippolitoes aduiſe▪
Rather like ſouldiers, and Octanioes ſonnes,
Lets throw a generall challenge through the world,
For a proud turney, at the which our ſelues
Conſorted with a hundred of our knights,
Accoutred like ſo many Gods of warre,
VVill keepe the liſts gainſt all aduenturers,
VVhich like the ſuns light ſigurd in a ſtar,
Should be a briefe Epitome of war.
Noble and royall, your opinion daughter.
Faith I ſhall anger ſouldiers, I woulde poure
Spirit of life▪ Aurum Potabile
Into the iawes of chap-falne ſchollerſhip,
That haue ſince amorous Quid was exild,
Lyen in a ſowne, y aue many holds for war,
I would once view a garriſon for witte:
Twere heauenly ſport to ſee a traine of ſchollers
Like old traind ſoldiers fkitiſh in the ſchooles▪
Trauerſe their Ergoes and diſcharge their ieſts
Like peales of ſmall-ſhot, were this motion granted
My ſelfe would be free woman of their hall,
And ſit as ſiſter at their feſtiual.
Haue we not Padua
Yes, but the commaunders
Deale with our graduates, as the generall
Doth with his ſouldier, giues him place for fauoure,
Not for deſeruing, looke intoo't your ſelfe,
You haue Courts for tennis, and me thinkes t'were meet,
Learning ſhould not ſtand balling in the ſtreet
For want of houſeroome: oh tis much vnfit
Courtiers ſhould be all pleaſure and ſmall wit.
All that you ſpeake is but what we command
But Officers fother cannot vnderſtand
Their Lords at firſt: wert not a gallant ſight,
To ſee wits army royall come from fight?
Some crownd with gold, others with wreath of bayes,
And whilſt they hold their ſolemn holydaies,
Muſick ſhould like a louer court the ſkies,
And from the world wreſt ringing plaudities.
My ſiſter would make a rare beggar.
True, ſhee's parcell Poet, parcell fidler already, and they commonly ſing three parts in one.
Wrong neither art nor muſicke, they are twins
Borne and begot in heate, your thought of both.
I thinke my Lord that muſick is diuine,
Whoſe ſacred ſtraines haue power to combine
The ſoule and body; and it reaſon beares,
For it is ſaid that the Celeſtiall ſpheres,
Dance to Apolloes lyre whoſe ſprightly fires
Haue tamd rude beaſts and charmd mens wild deſires:
The author was immortall, the firſt ſtrings,
Made by a King, therefore an art for Kings:
The world's a body, euery liberall art
A needfull member, muſick the ſoule and hart.
VVell for hir ſex hath Flormell diſcourſe
Of heauenly muſicke, and ſince all conclude
It is an art diuine, we were too rude
Should we reiect it, muſick, I take great pride,
To heare ſoft muſick and thy ſhrill voice chide.
To pleaſe your grace, though J want voice and skill,
Ile ſhew my ſelfe obedient to your will.
This would haue done rare at a ſchollers window,
How do you like it father?
Highly my boies, I relliſh all delight▪
For when the fiery ſpirit of hot youth
Kept houſe within me, I was all delight:
Then could I take my loue, no loue more fayre
By the ſmooth hand, and gazing in loues ayre
Tell her her beauty beautifide the skie,
And that the ſunne ſtole luſtre from her eye.
I do admire to heare my princely father thus mertilie diſcourſe of trifling loue.
Nay more my boyes, when J was at your yeares,
I went a pilgrimage through Italie,
to find the ſhrine of ſome loue-hallowed ſaynt.
Deuote to beauty, I would pray for loue,
Deſiring beauty I would ſue for loue,
Admiring beauty I would ſerue for loue:
Pray, ſue, and ſerue, till beauty graunted loue.
If ſhe denyd me, I would ſweare ſhe graunted,
Jf ſhe did ſweare that ſhe could neuer loue me,
Then would I ſweare ſhe could not chuſe but loue me:
Let her ſweare nere ſo much, ſtill haue I ſworne,
Till ſhe had ſaid, I ſhould not be forſworne.
I marry brothers, here was cunning loue,
Learne like good ſchollers, heele make you wiſe in loue:
He was a man in loue, were you ſuch men,
Then were you men indeed, but boyes till then.
To pleaſe my Father, ile inqueſt of beauty,
And neuer make returne till I haue found,
A loue ſo faire, ſo rich, ſo honorable,
As fits the honor of Octanioes ſonnes.
The like (you pleaſd) vowes young Hippolito.
Doe boyes, and I will teach you how to chuſe them.
Elect not mongſt whole troupes of Courtly dames,
For amongſt many, ſome muſt needs be ill:
The ſeld ſeene Phoenix euer ſits alone,
Ioue courted Danac when ſhe was alone:
Alone my boyes, that is the onely way,
Ladies yeeld that alone, they els ſay nay.
An expert ſouldier; how ſhall they chooſe them Father?
If her bright eye dim not the Diamond,
Say it is bright, but brighter iems delight you,
Jf that her breath do not perfume the ayre;
Say it is ſweet, but ſweeter ſweets content you.
Jf that her cheeke compared to the Lilly,
Make not the Lilly black with whiter whiteneſſe;
Say it is Lilly white, but black to white,
When your choe white muſt haue ſuch high exceeds.
Father you do exceed things poſſible,
Faith ſay how many Ladyes haue you ſeene,
Much fayrer then my ſelfe, in all your trauayle?
Should the Crow teach me, then no Lady fayrer,
If iudgement tell me, then a many fayrer:
Thou art myne owne, J muſt thinke well of thee,
Yet Florimella many doe excell thee.
Should the Crow teache, I am not all Crowblacke.
Though iudgement; J not all perfection black,
Though you haue ſeene Ladyes that dim the day,
Yet will J thinke my ſelfe as fayre as they.
Doe Florimella, and ile one day get,
A husband for thee that ſhall thinke thee fayre.
And tyme ifaith, that prety ſport would be,
Wiue it for them, you ſhall not huſband me.
Yet you will take my counſell in your choiſe.
Yes, if I had not yeares ynough to chooſe,
Would you direct me as you doe your ſonnes?
With daughter take a man with ſuch a noſe,
With ſuch an eye, with ſuch a colour beard,
Thus big, thus tall, with all his teeth afore;
Thus lipt, thus legd, thus handſome, thus apparrelld,
Were not this pittifull! o pittifull:
Now by the ſoule of ſoule▪commaunding loue,
I will not ſtoope to ſuch obedience,
I muſt be bid to bluſh when I am kiſt,
Bid my loue welcome, and I thanke you ſir,
With no indeed, I know not what loue is,
I neuer heard ſo much of loue before,
I pray take heede, nay fie you goe too far,
With ſuch a rabble of preſcriptions,
As neuer mayd of a Conceiuing ſpirit,
Will follow them, yet brothers goe you on,
Take you good counſell, Florsmell will none.
I daughter? are you ſo experiened?
An elder woman might haue ſpoken leſſe,
Yet by your leaue mynion, ile watch you ſo,
Your I ſhall ſtill be gouernd by my no.
But come my ſonnes take patterne of great Ioue,
Early ith' morning ſuit your ſelues for loue.
Go daughters with your Angels to the brooke,
And ſee if any ſiluer-coated fiſh,
Will nibble at your worme-emboweldhooks:
Decciue the waty ſubiects, yet the name
Of foule deceit me thinks ſhould fray them from you,
Alack, alack, I cannot blame the world,
That in the world there is ſo much deceipt;
When this poore ſimple trade muſt vſe deceipt.
But with what conſcience can J make this net,
Within whoſe meſhes all are caught that come:
They couſen one at once, this couſens many,
I will vndoo't it ſhall not couſen any.
But daughters go practiſe that little ſinne,
Ile mend this great fault re the fault begin.
O couſening fortune how haſt thou deceiu'd me,
Turning me out a doores to baniſhment,
And made another Lord of Mantua.
I that was Lord now ſlaue to miſery.
Take comfort yet deare father.
Comfort? no:
My breſt's turnd priſon, my proude iaylor woe,
Locks out all comfort: whers your valiant brother?
All diſcontent like to a wounded lyon
He forrages the woods, daring proude fortune
At her beſt weapon, he accounts this ſmart,
As a ſlight hurt, but far off from the hart.
How holds his humour?
The ſame faſhion ſtill:
But ſomwhat dder-colourd death may end
But neuer change him, ſee our words haue raiſd him.
Fitly applide for a walks like a ghoſt▪ Why how now ſonne?
Peace.
Brother.
Good now peace,
VVake me not as you loue me.
VVhat a ſleepe?
I, in a moſt ſweet ſleepe, bliſters o'your tongues for waking me.
Thou forgetteſt thy ſelfe.
J ſhould not be a Courtierels, mee thought J was at a ſtrange wedding?
Prithee what wedding?
Of a young Lawyer and old Madam Conſcience.
I ſcarce beleeue that.
Nor J neither, becauſe it was a dreame, but mee thought the yong man doted on the old woman exceedingly.
That was miraculous! did they liue together?
In the country they did, and agreed paſſing well, all the long vacation, and but for two things he would haue carried her vp to the erme with him.
VVhat things were thoſe?
One was, becauſe her gowne was of the old faſhion, the other was cauſe he would not haue her by when he tooke fees▪
His reaſon for that?
For feare if a bribe had bin offered, ſhe being by he ſhold haue had the bad conſcience to take it.
His wife and he liued together.
Conſcience and the Lawyer, as louingly as men and their wiues do, one fleſh but neither medle nor make one with another
Man and wife part, thats ſtrange!
O lord ſit, profit can part the ſoule and the body, and why not man and wife, now you haue had my dreame father, let me vnderſtand yours.
How can he dreame, that neuer ſleeps my ſonne▪
O beſt of all: why, your whole world doth nothing but dreame, your machiauell he dreames of ſtate, depoſing kings, grounding new monarchies: the louer hee dreames of kiſſes, amorous embraces: the newe-married wife dreames, that rid of her young husband ſhe hugs her old loue, and likes her dreame well ynough too: the Country gentle woman dreams that when her firſt husband's dead, ſhe marries a knight, and the name of Lady ſticks ſo in her mind, that ſhees neuer at heartseaſe till ſhe get her husband dub'd; the Captaine, he dreames of oppreſſing the ſouldiers, deuiſing ſtratagēs, to keep his dreame, and that dreame wakes in the pate of Octauio your Arch-enemy▪ who is not content to hurle vs into the whirlepoole of baniſhment, but binds waights at our heeles leaden pouerty, to ſinke vs to the very depth that we ſhould neuer riſe againe.
Then ſince all dreame, let vs dreame of reuenge.
I marry ſiſter, that were a dreame worth dreaming, and ile ſleepe out my braines but ile compaſſe it.
Pretty content; we kill our foes in dreames.
Vds foot, ile doe it waking then.
Aſpero.
At Counſell table.
Heare me.
In his Dutches armes, twere baſe to go diſguiſd,
No, my reuenge ſhall weare an open brow;
J will not play the coward, kill him firſt
And ſend my challenge after; ile make knowne
My name, and cauſe of comming, if I thought
Griefe like a painter had ſo ſpoyl'd mmy viſage
He could not know me, on my breaſt ide write
How ere I am diſfigured through woe,
J am the thing was made for Aſpero.
Speake not, I am as conſtant as the Center,
Some fortune good or bad doth beckon me,
And I will run, bitter reuenge taſts ſweete,
Jf nere on earth farewell, in heauen weele meete.
Attendance ſitra, your low Commedie,
Craues but few Actors, weele breake company.
As many bleſſings as the ſea hath ſands
Attend thee in thine honorable iourney:
Come pretty maides we haue not wrought to day,
Or fiſh, or faſt, our neede muſt needs obey.
Now ſirra what haue you been about?
About my liuing ſit.
Whats that? feeding?
No ſir, looking into the vnderofficers about the Court.
Canſt get any liuing out of them?
I ſir, my betters get good liuings out of officers, and why not I? but to be plaine, I haue bin ſeeking your good Lordſhip.
But your boyſhip hath ſo ſought vs, that wee haue found you.
VVill you ſell your findings my Lord?
They are ſcarce worth giuing.
Yes, a boxe to keepe them in, for feare you looſe them againe.
And I were a man as I am no woman, id'e pepper your box for that ieaſt.
You ieaſt.
In earneſt law I would Madam.
VVell ſir, no more, here comes our royall Father.
How now my boyes? prouided for your iourney?
Beauty conduct you: what, attyrd like ſhepheards?
I thought t'haue ſeene you mounted on your ſteeds,
Whoſe fiery ſtomackes from their noſtrills breath
The ſmoke of courage, and whoſe wanton mouthes
Do proudely play vpon their yron bits:
And you in ſtead of theſe poore weeds in robes,
Richer then that which Ariadne wroughte,
Or Cytharaes aery-mouing veſtment.
Thus ſhould you ſeeme like louers ſuited thus,
y'oude draw faire Ladies harts into their eies,
And ſtrike the world dead with aſtoniſhment.
Father ſuch coſt doth paſſe your ſons reuenues
We take example from immortall Ioue,
Who like a ſhepheard would repaire to loue.
And gentle loue conduct you both my ſonnes,
Daughter go bring them onward in their way,
Were not we cald back by important buſines,
We would not leaue you thus: Hortenſio
Is my diſguiſe prepard, for J vnknowne
VVill ſee how they behaue themſelues in loue.
Tis done my Lord.
Once more my boyes adieu:
He ſends you forth that meanes to follow you.
Now brothers you muſt amongſt theſe wenches,
Faith for a wager which ſhall get the faireſt?
Ile gage a 100. crownes mine proues the faireſt.
A match, ile venter twice ſo much of mine.
And ile lay gainſt you both, that both your loues Get them when you can where you can, or how you can, ſhall not be able to compare with me in beauty.
That wager ile take for tis ſurely won.
Las thou art but a ſtar to beauties ſun.
Star me no ſtars, go you and ſtare for loue,
Ile ſtay at home, and with my homely beauty
Purchaſe a loue, ſhall thinke my looks as faire,
As thoſe faire loues that you ſhall fetch ſo far;
But take your courſe, fate ſend you both faire lucke.
How if't be fowle?
Nay ift be forked, you muſt beare it off with head and ſhoulders.
Oh ſtale, that ieaſt runs oth'lees.
You muſt conſider tis drawne out of the bottome of my witte.
O ſhallow wit, at the bottome ſo ſoone.
Deepe ynough to lay you in the mire.
Orels tis ſhallow indeede, for they are foundred already,
but I muſt play dun, and draw them all out o'th mire,
Whats a clock my Lord?
Which of them doſt aske? thou ſeeſt they are two.
VVhat two are they Madam?
VVhy two fooles.
Is it not paſt two, doth it not come ſomewhat neere three ſiſter:
Shew perryall and tak't, but come my Lord you haue ſtood fooling long ynough, will you about your buſines in good earneſt?
Indeed we will.
And they are deeds you muſt truſt too, for women will reſpect your words but ſlitely without deeds.
VVhy, are women called Angells but becauſe they delight in good deeds, and loue heauen, but that it will not be won without them.
They ſhall haue deeds.
Brother, and good deeds too:
They are tongues that men muſt ſpeake with when they wo.
That tongue weel practiſe, ſiſter to loue we leaue you.
Louers take heed leaſt cunning loue deceiue you.
NO more; thus ſuted ile attend my ſonnes,
Impute it not to any ruffian vaine,
But to a fathers wakefull prouidence,
Louers like bees are priuiledgd to taſt,
All buds of beauty: ſhould they chance to light
Vpon ſome worthles weed ile hinder it:
The eies of youth will now and then dwell there,
Whereas they ſhould not glance, this doubt I feare.
And well aduiſd my liege ſhould they incline
To loue not fitting their eſtates and births,
You with your preſent counſell may preuent them.
Thats my intent, and further in my abſence
I leaue my land and daughter to thy charge,
The girle is wanton, if ſhe gad abroad
Reſtraine her, bound her in hir chamber dore;
My word's thy warrant, let her know ſo much:
Farewell, at home I leaue my feare with thee
And follow doubt abroad.
Ile carefull be.
Now to my buſines, I haue a ſtrange habit, and I muſt cut out an humour ſutable to it, and humours are pickt ſo neere the bone, a man can ſcarce get humour ynough to giue a flea his breakfaſt, but I am a ſtale ruffian, my habit is braue, and ſo ſhall my humor be, and here comes one to giue me earneſt of it.
Send him a letter that I come to kill him.
Twere great valor but little pollicy my Lord.
How long haue you bin a matchiauilian boy?
Euer ſince I practiſd to play the knaue my Lord,
Then policy and knauery are ſomewhat a kin.
As neere, as penury and gentry, a degree and half remou'de no more.
How came in the kindred twixt gentry and penury?
Shall I tell you ſir▪
Firſt tell me what thou art?
Lyme and haire: playſter of Paris, kneaded together with rye dowe and goats milke, I am of a hot conſtitution, wonnot freeze.
Thy profeſſion.
A foole or a knaue chooſe you which.
Then thou art fit for any gentlemans company.
True boye, for your ſweete foole and your fine knaue are like a paire of vpright ſhooes, that gentlemen weare ſo long now of one foote, then of another, till they leaue them neuer a good ſoale.
That makes your foole & your knaue haue ſuch bad ſoales; but what doſt thou ſeeke?
Mine owne vndoing ſir, ſeruice.
Indeed ſeruice is like the common law, it vndoes any one that followes it long, canſt deſcribe ſeruice?
Yes, tis a vacant place, fild vp with a compleate knaue, a miſerable pandar, or an abſolute beggar.
your opinion boy.
I ſay a ſeruingman is an Antecedent.
Becauſe he ſits before a Cloakebag.
He is likewiſe a nominatiue Caſe, and goes before his miſtriſſe.
Thats when the verbe he goes before his miſtriſſe and he can agree togither.
If not, he turnes Aocuſatiue and followes his maſter.
Woot follow me fellow.
To a tauerne, and thou woot pay for my ordenary.
My buſineſſe is more ſerious, thou doſt not know me.
Nor my ſelfe neither ſo long as I haue maintenance.
Didſt neuer heare of the wars betwixt Venice and Mantua.
I cut ſome few of the Mantuans throates.
And wert not a knaue for't.
No, J was a Venetian commander, a great man: the reaſon of this queſtion.
Doſt know the Duke of Venice?
I am his right hand.
Woot do me a meſſage to him▪
VVhat is't?
Tell him J hate him, my name's Aſpero, has baniſht my father, vſurps his Duke dome, and I come to be reuengd.
Anthonioes ſonne? vesfoot haſt any gold.
Thy reaſon.
Shalt be reuengd, giue me money, ile be thy ſnaile & ſcore out a ſiluer path to his confuſion.
No, my reuenge ſhall be like my fathers wrongs in Apert lend me any honeſt aide.
Pax of honeſty, it goes a begging vpon crutches, and can get reliefe out of few but ſchollers, I ſhall not kill him?
Jde be thy death firſt.
Yet you ſay you hate him.
Equall with my ſhame.
Make him chew a bullet then.
No, though my ſtate with pouerty be tainted,
Mine acts and honor ſhall liue ſtill acquainted.
True moulded honor I admire the temper
Of thy mild patience, that not all the wrongs
J layd vpon thee can enforce thy ſpleene
To fowle requitall, had thy comming tane
Any baſe leuell, it had coſt thy life,
But beeing free and full of honour liue,
Thy vertues teach me honor freely goe,
A ſecret friends worſe then an open for:
You are too honeſt for my attendance, farewell ſir.
And thou too knauiſh for my employment.
But here comes more company.
Boy, let your attendance waite further of▪
Vnder this ſhade J meane to take a ſleepe.
And may you madam like a ſouldier ſleepe.
How boy in alarums.
No Ladye but in armes, and you had neede of them too, for ſee the enemy comes downe, ſhall I ſound a parlee▪
Peace wag.
Peace, O coward, offer peace and but two to two of them.
Boy doſt know what gentleman it is?
Gentle madam no, but he is a man.
Beleeue me boy he is a proper man.
Man is a proper name to a man, and ſo he may be a proper man.
I loue him hees a very proper man.
She loues him for his properties, and indeede many women loue men only to make properties of them.
Pray gentleman if no more, tell mee where you were born.
Faire virgine if ſo much, no where ſome where any where, where you would haue me.
Faith I would haue it.
Marry and you ſhall haue it Ladie.
VVhat ſhall J haue ſir.
VVhy a kiſſe.
Nothing els: we Courtiers▪ count them trifles, not woorth taking.
VVhy then beſtow one of mee ile take it moſt thankfully▪
I wil not ſtand with you for a trifle, ſir pray where were you borne?
In Italy, but neuer yet in Venice.
You may in Venice, gentle ſir adieu.
Gentle Lady thrice as much to you.
Farewell ſweet heart.
God a mercy bagpudding.
You may in Venice gentle ſir adieu? this begets wonder.
Yare not wiſe then▪ what do you take her for?
Some great woman▪
Some woman great with child, be ruld, ſhees a pynk board her.
But how▪ the meanes.
Make but a ſhotte of flattery at hir broad ſide, and ſheele ſtrike ſaile preſently.
Flattery▪
I flattery, women are like fidlers, ſpeake them faire theile play of any inſtrument.
I, that they can play of▪
Shees a botcher cannot play a little of all▪
And to common that wil play too much of any, but come ile vſe meanes to get her.
Nay you muſt firſt haue meanes to giue her.
Why in the courſe of ſchollerſhip, the genitiue Caſe goes before the Datiue.
The Grammarians are fooles that plac'de them ſo; for in Rerum Natura, the Datiue goes before the genetiue, you muſt alwayes giue before you can get, louers are fooles, and fooles muſt be liberall.
VVill not women reſpect a man for his good parts?
yes, ſome few; but all for his good guiftes, a gentleman with his good guifts ſit at the vpper end of the table on a chayre and a cuſhion, when a ſcholler with his good partes will be gladde of a ioynd ſtoole in the Lobby with the Chambermaids.
I will haue good guifts & ſhew my ſelfe liberall to, though I beg for't.
I thinke that will be the end, for penury has tane a leafe of your pocket to keep Court in this Chriſtmaſſe.
Well, how ſo ere, ſhee's faire and courteous,
And courteous faire, is a faire guift in Ladies:
She may bee well diſcended, if ſhee be,
Shee's ſit for loue, and why not then for me.
And you be not fitted in Venice tis ſtraunge, for tis counted the beſt fleſh ſhambles in Italie: but heer's no notable coward, that hauing ſuffered wrong by a man, ſeeks to right himſelfe of a woman.
Looke you ſir, I am like an iriſh beggar, and an Engliſh bur, will ſticke cloſe where I finde a good nap, I muſt and will dwell with you.
What canſt do:
Still Aquanit, ſtampe Crabs, and make muſtard, I can do as much as all the men you keepe▪
Prithee what?
Why vndo you, and twenty could do no more, but buſines, come my wits grow ruſty for imployment.
Canſt keepe counſell▪
My mother was a midwife.
Haſt any ſkill in Loue?
I am one of Cpids ageats, haue Ouids are aandi ad vngues, know and can apply emedium, and miniſter effectum to a haire, but why do you aske▪ haue you traueſt an action in loues ſpirituall court▪
Not to diſſemble, we haue.
And without diſſembling youle neuer out of it, but tell me true, are you in loue already▪ or ha you deſe to bee in loue
Indeed I am in loue to be in loue.
And I deſire to liue in fond deſire,
And yet I doubt to ch blind ancie fe.
Tis good to doubt, but ts not good to feare,
Yet ſtill to doubt, will at the leſt proue feare;
Doubt loue, tis good, but tis not good to feare it,
Loue hurts them moſt, that leaſt of all come neere it.
Then to doubt loue is the net way to loue▪
Doubtles it is if you ſ doubt not loue▪
Doubt and miſdoubt? what difference is there here?
Yes, much: when men miſdoubt, tis ſayd they feare▪
But is it good in loue to be in doubt▪
No not in loue, doubt then i
Tis good to doubt before you be i loue,
Doubt counſell, how loues miſery.
Your doubtfull counſell counſells vs to loue.
To equall loue, I like experience ſpeake.
Experiend louer, you haue ſpoken well.
Experince wanting louers, truth I tell,
Yong wits be wife, in loue liue conſtant ſtill,
You need nor doubt good hap not miſdoubt ill.
And ſee your diſcourſe has coniurd vp beauty in the likeneſſe of two countrimaides, but you ſhall not come in the circles of their armes if J can keepe you ou.
Theſe are too meane for loue, brother lets leaue them.
What? ſpeechles? will you make dumbe virgins of them?
Oh we are ſonnes of a great father.
So is the ſun of heauen, yet hee ſmiles on the bramble aſwell as the Lilly, kiſſes the checke of a beggar as louingly as a gentlewoman, and tis good to imitate, him tis good.
Say ſiſter, had we not fine ſport to day?
VVe had, if death may be accounted play.
VVhy tis accounted pleaſure to kill fiſh.
A pleaſure nothing pleaſant to the fiſh.
Yet fiſhes were created to be kild.
Cruell creation then to haue liues ſpild.
Their bodies being food, maintaine our breath.
What bodies then haue we to liue by death?
Come, come, you vainely argue, it is good.
What is it good to kill? oh god oh god?
If it be ſin, then you your ſelf's a ſinner.
I thank proud fortune fort, my woes beginner.
Foot are yee not aſhad to ſtaud by like idle iphers, & ſuch places of account voyde? and they had bin rich offices and you poore Courtiers, you would haue bin in them in ale the time.
Though againſt ſtomack.—
Nothing againſt ſtomack and you loue me.
Faire maids if ſo▪ you be you are well met.
Shepheards or be what els you are well met.
Tis well, if that well met we be to you.
If not to vs you are vnto your ſelues.
We did not meet, you ſavs come togither.
VVhat ere we ſaw▪ you et ere you came hither.
VVe did, we mtn kindred, we are brothers.
So ſhepheards we did meet for we are ſiſters.
Then ſiſters, let vs brothers husbands e.
So brothers without our leaues you well may be.
Say we deſire to husband it with you.
Know we deſire no husbands ſuch as you▪
A ſhepheatd is an honeſt trade of life.
Yet honeſt ſhepheard has with honeſt trade ſome ſtrife.
He ſeldome ſweares but by his honeſty.
So honeſt men do too aſwell as he.
But will you truſt a ſhepheard when he vowes,
No neuer, if his oath be that he loues.
Yet if I ſweare, that needs muſt be mine oath,
Sweare not, for we are misbeleeuers both.
Let vs perſwade you to beleeue we loue you.
Firſt we intreat you giue vs time to proue you.
Take time, meane time weele praiſe yee to our powers.
Oh time, ſometime ſhepheards haue idle howers.
Ile ſay thy cheek no naturall beauty lacks,
Good, if it had bin ſpoke behind our backs.
Ile ſay this is the heauen of heauenly graces.
O heauen, how they can flatters to our faces. Exeunt.
Brother the laſt is fayreſt in my eie.
I but the firſt brother is firſt in beauty▪
Firſt in your choice, but not in beauty ſir.
Come yee ſo neere as choice: then tis time for mee to ſtop for feare the muſick run too far out of tune, how now gallants? in dumps.
No, but in loue.
Thats a dumpe, loues nothing but an Jtalian dumpe or a
French brawle.
Me thinkes tis ſweeter muſicke.
And twere in tune I confeſſe it, but you take your parts too low, you are trebble Courtiers, and will neuer agree with theſe Country Mynnikins, the muſickes too baſe, neuer meddle in't.
Peace doatard, peace, thy ſight of loue is done,
Thou canſt not ſee the glory of loues ſunne.
Spent age with froſty clowds thy ſight doth dim,
That thou art blind to ſee and apt to ſin.
Is it accounted ſin to ſpeake the truth.
And worſe, when age ſpits poyſon againſt youth.
They do not fit your callings, let them go.
Yet they are faire: we loue, thou art loues foe.
J am your friend, and wiſh you from this loue.
Canſt thou heaue hills? then thou my thoughts maiſt mon ▪ but neuer els.
Neuer!
No neuer.
Stay.
We are bound for loue.
Hate.
Hinder not our way.
J boyes? will Eagles Eglets turne to baſtards.
Then muſt J change my vaine, and once more proue,
To teach you how to hate aſwell as loue.
SWeet hony candy madam, if it be no forfeit to tell tales out of Cupids free ſchoole, tell what proficient your louer Aſpero proues.
Now ſo loue helpe me lot, a paſſing weake one and verye vnready.
The better, for women would haue their louers vnreadye chooſe.
ready you are to play the knaue? but to Aſpero
not thinke but thers good muſick in him, your tongue harps ſo much vpon his name▪
J ſhall neuer forget him.
I faith Lady then I know what J know▪
What do you know I prey?
Marry that if you neuer forget him, you ſhall euer remember him, was he neuer in your chamber▪
Yes, but he ſhewed himſelfe the ſtrangeſt foole: And by my troth loe. J am ſorry for't to, J had as good an appetite to maintaine diſcourſe; but here acomes, if euer I chooſe a man by the fulneſſe of his Calfe, or a cock by the crowing, looke and the aſhfull foole do not bluſh already.
You may do well to kiſſe him, and make him bold Madam.
Boy, go know what ſtrange gentleman that is▪
Slid what a ſtrange Lady's this madam though I ſeeme a ſtranger to you, J lay with one laſt night that's well acquainted with you.
Acquainted with me?
And knowes you, and loues you, and you loue him, & haue beſtowed kind fauours of him to.
I beſtow fauors? what fauours?
Though twere but a triffle he tooke it as kindly as ſome would haue done a kiſſe▪
Lord what a while this ieſt has bin a brooding? and it proues but addle too now it is hatched.
Tis a pig of your owne ſow madam, and I hope your wit will beſtow the nurſing of it.
So it had need, I thinke tis like to haue but a drie nurſe of yours.
O drie ieaſt, all the wit in your head will ſcarce make ſippits in't, what a ground? and ſuch a faire landing place? get a ſhore, or be ranke amongſt fooles for euer.
And faith ist not pitty ſuch a proper man ſhould keep company with a foole.
I keepe company with none but you Lady.
You keepe mine againſt my will.
So do I the fooles I proteſt; but take away yours, ile ſoone ſhift away the fooles.
I haue not ſeene a foole ſo handſomely ſhifted in Venice.
But come, ſhall the foole and you bee friends?
The foole and J? y'are too familiar.
Why, J hope a foole may be a Ladies familiar at all times▪
Come y'are too ſaucy.
Indeed tis a fooles part of Ione to be in the ſauce afore my
Lady; otherwiſe I am neither foole nor ſaucy.
Not, proude ſir?
Not, coy Lady; come why ſhould your tongue make ſo many falſe fiers that neuer come from your heart: you loue me, I know you loue me, your ſpirit, your looke, your countenance bewrayes it.
You ieaſt.
Jn earneſt you do, and you ſhall know't in earneſt too, lend me this iewell.
Iewell? away you ſharking companion.
How?
Wandring ſtrauagant, that like a droane flies humming from one land to another.
Slight and thou haſt any wit, now ſhew her thy ſting.
And lightſt vpon euery dayry maid and kitchen-wench.
And now and then on a Ladies lip as—
You did of mine you would ſay, and J am hart ſory you can ſay it, and when by your buzzing flattery, you haue ſuckt the ſmalleſt fauour from them, you preſently make wing for another.
Marry buz.
Double the zard and take the whole meaning for your labour.
The buzzards wit's not ſo bald yet I tro.
A word in your eare, madam the buzzard will anger you.
VVith ſtaying you do.
VVith going I ſhall.
Away.
I away, neuer intreat, tis too late, if you ſend after me, I wil not come back, if you write to me, I will not anſwer, drowne your eyes in teares, I will not wipe them, breake your heart with ſighes, J will not pitty you: neuer looke, ſignes cannot moue me, if you ſpeake, tis too late, if you intreate, tis bootles, if you hang vpon me, tis needleſſe, I offred loue & you ſcornd it, my abſence will be your death, and I am proud ot▪
Js he gon boy?
Yes faith Madam.
Cleane out of ſight?
And out of mind to, or els you haue not the mind of a true woman.
Thou readſt a falſe comment boy, call him againe; yet doe not, my heart ſhall breake ere it bend.
Or els it holdes not the true temper of woman▪ hood, but faith tell me Madam, do you loue him?
As a Welchman doth toaſted cheeſe, I cannot dine without him, hee's my pillow I cannot ſleep quietly without him; my reſt, I cannot liue without him.
O that he knew Lady.
He does, he would neuer haue left me els, he
You calld him foole, but me thinks he prooues a phyſitian, has found the diſeaſe of your liuer, by the complexion of your lookes, but ſee he returnes.
And now me thinks J loath him more then I lou'd him▪ goe run for Hortenſio my guardian, bid him come armd, thet's intent of treaſon tell him.
My Lady cannot chooſe but dance well, ſhees ſo full of prety changes.
I wonder you dare come in my ſight, conſidering the wrong you did me.
I came I confeſſe, but with no intent to ſee you J proteſt, and that ſhall be manifeſted by the ſhortnes of my ſtay.
Tis too long and twere ſhorter then tis, will he not court me? not? no ſpeak to me neither? nay neuer ask pardon▪ tis to late, we ſhal ha'you come to my window one of theſe mornings with muſicke, but doe not, my patience is to much out of tune, out of my ſight I hate thee, worſe then I loath painting, I hate thee, out of my ſight.
Inough, will you be a quiet woman yet? will you, ſpeake afore my reſolue take ſtrength? will you, do but ſay you are ſorry I aske no mends but a kiſſe, kindly, come: ſhall I hat'e?
Ile kiſſe a toad firſt.
You will, remember this another time, a toade you will: J know thou lou'ſt me, and J ſee the pride of thy humour; I doe, and thou ſhalt know I doe; halfe an hower hence wee ſhall haue you weeping on your knees, with O my Aſpero would I had died when I reiected thee, but doe, weepe till J pitty thee; a tooad! ile make thee creepe on thy knees for a kiſſe.
you will.
Thy bare knees, J will, and goe without it to.
Out humourd? O I would ſell my part of immortality.
But to touch my hand, thou wouldſt, I know thou woldſt,
O how ſpleene ſwells mee? helpe Hortenſio, creepe a my knees? Hotenſio.
How fares my beautious charge? weeping Lady? the law ſhall fetch red water from his veynes that hath drawne bloud of your eies, is this the traytor?
Traytor? in thy diſloyall throte thou lieſt.
O monſtrous, a wiſhes you choakt my Lord.
How! choakt?
I choakt? for a wiſhes the traytor in your throate, and hee's a very ſmall traytor that is not able to choake a wiſer man then your Lordſhip.
Downe with him.
I, downe with him, if he ſtick in your throat, and ſpare not.
Do not kill him, though hee deſerues death yet doe not kill him, onely diſweapon him; ſo.
But madam.
I will not heare him, keepe him; but keepe him ſafe on your liues, if he get away or miſcarry in priſon: as I am heire of Venice ile haue your heads for't.
I warne you madam, if yrons will hold him.
Fie, fie, with a cord? here, bind him with my ſcarfe, that wil hold, and yet ſtand away, ile doo't my ſelfe, I cannot truſt him with you, leaſt you ſhould let him ſometime ſcape free: beſides, you cannot vſe him according to the quality of his offence, and becauſe ile glory in his bondage my chamber ſhall bee his priſon, let him haue neither light meat nor drinke, but what J prouide him my ſelfe.
Your will's a law, we obey it madam.
She knowes me ſure; well, though my ioyes be thrall,
My comforts this, a ſpeedy death ends all.
Oh you are not gone then.
Heer's a newe kinde of courting, neuer ſeene before J thinke.
He would anger me.
Nay you take a courſe, to anger him firſt J thinke.
Should J haue let him go, (as I could no other way detaine him in modeſty) and he had ſet his loue on ſome other, t'would haue fretted my hart ſtrings a ſunder.
Why did you ſet him ſo light then?
Not for any hate, but in pride of my humour.
VVhy did you commaund him cloſe priſoner to your chamber.
That I may feede mine eie with the ſight of him, and be ſure no other beauty can rob me of his company: I will ha't all, I will not looſe an ynch of him: And in this, I but imitate our Italian dames, who cauſe their friends to clap their iealous huſbands in priſon, that if they haue occaſion to vſe them within fortie weekes and a day, they may ſurely know where to find them.
If I had any knauēry in mee, as J am all honeſty, I could make a notable ſceane of mirth betwixt theſe two Amoriſts.
Early ſorrow, art got vp ſo ſoone?
What? ere the Sun aſcendeth in the Eaſt?
O what an early waker art thou growne?
But ceaſe diſcourſe, and cloſe vnto thy worke;
Vnder this drooping mirtle will I ſit,
And worke a while vpon my corded net;
And as I worke, record my ſorrowes paſt,
Asking old Time, how long my woes ſhall laſt:
And firſt, but ſtay alas what do J ſee?
Moiſt gum like teares, drop from this mournfull tree
And ſee, it ſticks like birdlyme; twill not part;
Sorrow is euen ſuch birdlyme at my hart.
Alas poore tree, doſt thou want company?
Thou doſt, I ſee't, and J will weepe with thee,
Thy ſorrowes make thee dumb, and ſo ſhall mine.
It ſhall be tongueles, and ſo ſeeme like thine;
Thus will I reſt my head vnto thy barke,
Whilſt my ſighes tell my ſorrowes; harke tree, harke.
Fie, fie, how heauy is light loue in me?
How ſlow runs ſwift deſire?
This leaden ayre,
This pondrous feather, merry Melancholy.
This paſſion, which, but in paſſion
Hath not his perfect ſhape.
And ſhapeleſſe loue
Hath in his watch of loue oreſlept himſelfe.
Then ſleepy wakers, let theſe graue lets wander
And waite th'aſcenſion of beauties wonder:
But ſtay, a man ſtriuing twixt life and death.
Nay then tis ſo, my heauenly loue's gone by,
And ſtruck him dead with her loue-darting eye.
If ſpeech-bereauing loue will let thee ſpeake,
Then ſpeechles man, ſpeake with the tongue of loue,
And tell me, if thou ſaw'ſt not Cynthia
Seeking Endimion in theſe flowry dales.
Dales for Endimion and faire Cynthia fit,
But neuer heauenly goddeſſe bleſt this groue,
Theſe woods are conſecrate to griefe, not loue.
Out Atheiſt, thou prophan▪ſt loues deity,
For, falſe-reporter, I in them haue ſeene
A loue that makes a Negro of Loues Queene:
One that when as the ſunne keeps holliday,
Hir beauty clads him in his beſt array,
Now truly ſhepheard none ſuch ſoiourn here
Pleaſe you ſuruey the Cell, go in and ſee,
I'me hearſt, and none but ſorrowe lies with me.
Call you this ſorrowes caue?
Rather a Cell,
Where pleaſure growes, and none but Angels dwell.
To what compare ſhall I compare thee to?
Vncomparable beauties Paragon.
I will compare her beauty to the ſunne,
For her bright luſtre giues the morning light.
Jle ſay ſhe is like Cynthia when day's done,
Or Lady to the miſtriſſe of the night.
O ſpeake but to me, and J ſhall be bleſt.
One ſmile would lay my iarring thoughts at reſt.
How now faire ſiſter? you are hard beſet.
Nymph.
Goddeſſe.
Saynt, once more, y'are both well met.
O ſhe is faire.
She fairer.
Both more faire
Then rocks of pearle, or the chaſt euening ayre.
Say ſweet, intend you not to fiſh to day?
No, ſhepheards, now fiſh do not bite but play.
VVhat time, ſweet loue, keepe fiſhes when they bite?
Early ith' morning, or els late at night.
Come, will you talke with me till time of fiſhing?
My father, ſir, will chide if I be miſſing.
The match is made, th'are euen vpon going.
VVhat ſhould we do?
Why as poore parents and dutifull ſeruants ſhould doe, run amongſt the buſhes and catch flies.
Stay forward daughters whether are yee going▪
Father, I thinke theſe ſhepheards come a wooing.
A wooing daughters? nere imagine ſo:
What man's ſo mad to marry griefe and woe?
Why where liues ſad griefe? heer's all ſpeaking ioy.
O I would liue and die with ſuch annoy.
But they are poore, and pouerty is deſpiſde:
No, they are faire, beauty is highly prizde.
Twill be a match, they are beating the price already.
They once were faire, ſorrow from that hath changd them
They once knew wealth, but chance hath much eſtrangd them,
Haue they bin faire? what fayrer then they are?
VVhy tis not poſſible, this heauenly faire
Hath only in it ſelfe beauties exceed,
O then rich, fayre, and onely ſelues exceed.
Come daughters, and come ſhepheards, if you pleaſe,
Ile leade you to the lodge of little eaſe,
Where I will feaſt you with what cheere I may,
Griefe ſhall turne mirth, and keepe high holliday.
A word with you, you meane to marry theſe wenches,
VVe doe.
And are going to contract your ſelues.
VVe are.
And what ſay you to this?
God ſpeede you: I would haue you marry on ſaint Lukes day.
VVhy?
Becauſe J would offer at your wedding.
Come, th'art all enuy, feed vpon thy hate,
This day our queſt of loue ſhall terminate.
Not if I liue, this maladie of loue,
Js grown ſo ſtrong, it will not be driuen out.
To ſee the folly of a doating father;
What toyle I had to faſhion them to loue,
And how tis doubled to misfaſhion them.
They ſhall not wed, yet how ſhall J preuent it?
Fearing th'euent I haue forethought a meanes,
And here it lies, ſwaggering becomes not age,
Now like the Fox, ile goe a pilgrimage.
Frollick my boyes, I come to mar your ſport,
Your Country muſicke muſt not play at Court.
But firſt, ile write back to Hortenſio
For apprehenſion of yong Aſpero:
They haue not yet dynde, ile bid my ſelfe their gueſt
Religion beg? a faſhion in requeſt.
Art ſure ſhe hates me boy.
More then hir death, J haue bin in hir boſome ſir, and this day ſhe intends your execution.
My execution! the reaſon of hir hate?
Hir humour, nothing but a kind of ſtrange croſſe humor in that you reiected hir loue.
Thats not capitall.
Not to croſſe a great ones humour? no treaſon more▪ great perſonages humours are puritanes, thei'l as liue indure the diuel as ſoone as a croſſe, and can away with him better.
I will ſubmit, aske pardon on my knee.
Is your proud humour come down ifaith, your high humor that would not ſtoop an ynch of the knees; ile help't vp againe, and't be but to vphold the ieaſt; I muſt bring her as low ere I haue done; O baſe, J woulde rather lay my necke vnder the Axe of her hate, then my ſporte vnder the feete of hir humor; but be counſelld, ile teach you to preuent both, & perchance make her vpſtart humor ſtoope gallant too.
Ile hold thee my beſt iewell and thou doſt.
And pawne me as poore Lords do their iewells too, will you not? receiue me; you ſhall counterfet your ſelfe dead.
The life of that ieaſt.
It may be ſhe diſſembles all this while, loues you, and puts on this ſhew of hate of purpoſe to humble you: ſhe may, and I beleeue—
What?
That moſt intelligencers are knaues, and ſome women diſſēblers; being thought dead (as let me alone to buz that into the credulous eare of the Court) if ſhe haue any ſparkes of loue, theil kindle and flame bright through the cinders of her hart.
If not,
If not, twill be a meanes for your eſcape: ile ſay you requeſted at your death to be buried at your natiue Citty: and what Courtier, if a Chriſtian can deny that?
I am all thine, my humor's thy patient.
And if I do not kill it, I am not worthy to be your phyſitian.
I mary Lady; why now you credit your ſex: a womans honor or humour ſhould be like a ſhip vnder ſayle, ſplit her keele ere ſhe vaile.
Ile ſplit my heart ere my humor ſtrike ſaile: here comes his Page, how now boy? how doth your maſter.
Well madam he.
VVell?
Very well.
VVhere is he?
VVhere none of your proude ſex will euer come, I thinke: in heauen.
Is he dead?
See madam, and ſeeing bluſh, and bluſhing ſhame, that your vngentle humor ſhould be the death of ſo good and generous a ſpirit.
My Aſpero dead!
Boy See madam, what a mutation
I ſee too much, and curſe my proud humour that was the cauſe of it: Aſpero, kind ſoule, proud ſullen Florimell, diſdainefull humor, that in one minute haſt eternally vndone me: I would not kiſſe the liuing ſubſtance, that being dead doate on thy picture: oh I lou'd thee euer with my ſoule: O let me kiſſe this ſhrowd of beauty: I would not accept thee liuing, that being dead on my knees adore thee: could kiſſes recouer thee, I would dwell on thy lips: kneele till my knees grew to the ground, deere gentle Aſpero ſhe that procurde thy death will die with thee,
And craue no heauen, but ſtill to lie with thee.
I take you at your word Lady:
Nay neuer recant, I haue witnes on't now: is your proud humor come downe? could you not haue ſaid ſo at firſt? and ſau'd me a labour of dying?
Liues Aſpero?
Liue quotha? ſfoot what man would bee ſo mad to lye in his colde graue alone, and may lie in a warme bed with ſuch a beautifull wife as this will be? haue I tane your humour napping yfaith?
Am I ore reacht?
In your humour Madam, nothing els, and I am as proude on't.
Do not flowt me; and you doe, I ſhall grow into my humour againe.
In ieaſt.
In earneſt I ſhall, and then I know what I know.
You may▪ but and you do, I ſhall die againe.
In ieaſt.
Nay in earneſt madam, and then—
No more, thou haſt driuen mee cleane out of conceite with my humor, I loue thee, I confeſſe it, ſhalt be my husband, ile liue with thee, thou art my life, and ile die with thee.
VVhat more I meane is coated in my looke,
If thou acceptſt it, ſweare,
I kiſſe the booke.
Boy, run to the maſter of my Gundelo, and will him attend me after ſupper at the garden ſtaires, I meane to take the euening ayre, tell him.
It ſhall be done madam.
Nay if I ſay the word, it ſhall be done Aſpero▪
Look to your elfe my Lord, I lay my life, my Lady means to ſteale you away to night.
Away? ile call Hortenſio, ile not be acceſſary to your fellony madam.
The foole comes without calling.
You ſhall know him by theſe ſignes.
Good figure, very good figure, for as the houſe is found out by the ſigne, ſo muſt this traytor be ſented out by the token, vp with the firſt ſigne good Aſſiſtance.
A proper man without a beard.
How? a proper man without a beard? we ſhall ſcarce finde that ſigne in all Venice: for the properneſſe of a man liues altogether in the faſhion of his beard, good Aſſiſtance the next.
Faire ſpoken and well conditioned.
More ſtraunge: you ſhall haue many proper men fayreſpoken, but not one amongſt twenty well condicioned, but ſoft, this ſhould be the houſe by the ſigne, I muſt pick it out of him by wit.
As good ſay ſteale my Lord, what mary-bone of witte is your iudgement going to pick now?
I muſt, like a wiſe Iuſtice of peace, picke treaſon out of this fellow.
Treaſon?
I, treaſon madam; know you this hand?
My roiall fathers:
Then whilſt you and your fathers letters talke togither, let me examine this fellow: are you a proper man without a beard?
My propernes ſir contents me: for my beard, indeed that was bitten the laſt great froſt, and ſo were a number of Juſtices of peace beſides.
Tis rumourd about the Court that your name is Aſpero.
I am call'd Aſpero.
Sonne to the Duke of Mantua that was.
The duke of Mantuaes ſonne that is.
Then the Duke of Mantua has a traytor to his ſonne, lay hands of him and to cloſe priſon with him.
Can he be cloſer then in my cuſtody?
I do not thinke ſo madam, but your father has impoſde the truſt vpon me.
And dare not you truſt mee?
With my head if you were my wife, but not with my profit, if you were my mother: will you along ſi?
VVith all my heart ſir, ſee what your humour's come to now go my Lord? as willingly as a ſlaue from the gallies: for as I ſhall haue a ſtronger priſon, ſo J ſhall bee ſure of a kinder and a wiſer iaylor.
Do you obſerue how he flowts you my Lord? that I had bin his keeper but one night longer▪ but keepe him cloſe, if he eſcape (though againſt thy will) as I am a mayd,
A maide againſt your will.
Shalt pay as deere for't as thou didſt for thy office.
If he ſcape, hang me.
I ſhall wiſh thee hangd, if he do not: treaſon! I may thanke my peeuiſh humor fort.
Madam the Gundelo is ready.
Thou bringſt phyſicke when the patient's dead boy: out ieaſt's turnd earneſt.
Is a dead in earneſt?
As good, or rather worſe, hee's buried quick.
O madam, many a good thing has bin buried quick and ſuruiu'd againe, I would bee buried quicke my ſelfe, and I might chooſe my graue.
Hee's buried in cloſe priſon boy, hee's knowne for the duke of Mantuaes ſonne, and by my fathers letter ached for a traytor.
Good gentleman, and I be not ſorrie for him: who is his keeper?
The teſtie aſſe Hortenſio.
Vds foot lets enlarge him,
Not poſſible boy.
Not poſſible weele coufen his keeper.
We cannot.
Cannot! we can: your father made a Lord of him, but be rul'd by me, his daughter ſhall make a foole of him: you are not the firſt woman has made a foole of a wiſer Lord then he is.
Shall he be couſend?
As palpably as at the Lotterie, my brains are in labour of the ſtratagem alreadie.
Sons of Octanio if your princely thoughts
Can ſtoope to ſuch meane beauty, from this hand
Receiue your wiues, but ſhould the Duke your father—
Feare not old man, he was the meanes that breath'd this ſpirit into vs.
Wood vs to this courſe.
But ſhould he proue Apoſtata, denie
Loue which he firſt enforcd vs to profes,
So firme are our inſeparate affections,
To winne our loues weed looſe the names of ſonne.
Your father thanks you, but hot-ſprighted you that,
Take counſell from experience, ere yee tie
The gordian knot which none but heauen can looſe,
Craue his conſent: when an imperiall
Shakes a weake ſhed, the building
Not ſtand? it ſhall: not Iou the ground▪worke loue▪
Not Ioue!
Not Ioue,
Should a ſpeak
Ourloue admits no
Then to your loue is
As
As
And your ▪
And ours,
And ours,
Then lend me all your hands,
Whilſt thus a fathers tongue forbids the bands,
Forgetfull boyes, but moſt audacious traytor,
That durſt in thought conſent to wrong thy Prince,
Out of my fight; no Land that calls me Lord,
Shall beare a waight ſo hatefull as they ſelfe:
Liue euer baniſhd, if (three daies expirde)
Thou or theſe luſtfull ſtrumpets.
Father.
Boyes;
If you be mine ſhow't in obedience:
If (three daies paſt) you liue within my dukedome,
Thee as a ſlaue ile doome vnto the gallies,
And theſe thy brats as common proſtitutes▪
Shall drie their luſtfull veynes in the
Come boyes, to Court; he that firſt liues,
VVill to your births prouide you equall
They haue our loues.
Our oathes.
Our hearts and hands.
Tut, louers othes, like toyes writ down in
Are ſoone blowne ore, contracts are common wiles,
Tintangle fooles, Ioue himſelfe ſits and ſmiles
At louers periuries, bawd, ſtrumpets hence,
My boſome's chargde, giue way to violence:
Come doe not mind them.
How? not minde them father?
When in your Court you courted vs to loue,
You red another lecture, women then▪
Were angells.
True, but that was before Angells
Had power to make them diuells; they were then
Fiend to themſelues, and Angells vnto men.
VVen vpon Po thou find'ſt a cole-black ſwan,
Th'aſt found a woman conſtant to a man.
And not afore?
Neuer afore.
Your tongue
V ſpeaks your former ſpeech.
It doth; new theames
Muſt haue new change of Rhetorique; all ſtreames
Flow not alike one way; when I ſpake like a louer,
Jt was to breake you from your ſouldiers humour;
Hauing made you louers, I, like Enuy, ſpeak
To make you hate loue; Art ſtill ſtriues to breake
Bad to make better:
You haue your wiſh.
Then onward to the Court,
Make vs of loue, as ſchoole-boyes do of ſport.
Call out the iaylor boy, yet doe not; haſt got a beard like Hortenſio?
Yes, madam, J haue got his hayre, if I coulde come as eaſily by his wit.
VVouldſt rob him of his wit?
If I ſhold, he could not hang me for ▪ tis not worth thirteen pence halfe penny▪ but what ſhall I do with it?
Put it on boy.
That ſhall J madam, O forward age, I am a man already: how do you like me Lady?
Very ill, and my plot worſe.
Then leaue't of, if you be grounded in the plot,
You will but marre the Comedy.
I purpoſde, thou in the habit of Hortenſio, ſhouldſt vnder pretence of remouing Aſpero to a new priſon, haue freed him out of the old one.
Tut, J can tell you a trick, worth two of that: madam, your eare, take ſome care in the managing, and let me alone to prepare it.
Vdſfoot breake priſon my Lorde, tis but ſwimming the Riuer.
Breake priſon? twere both diſhonour to my name, and treaſon to my loue, what benefit wer't for me to free my body, & leaue my heart in bondage? ile die, ere ile harbour a diſloyall thought.
Jt beares no relliſh of diſloyaltie: being in priſon you liue as far from loue as liberty: being abroad, you may by letters, or a thouſand meanes purchaſe hir company, and compaſſe your content.
Shalt be my Lawyer boy and counſell me.
Ile looke for my Fee then.
If thy Counſell proſpers.
Thats an exception Lawyers neuer reſpect, but come my lord, leape, as we haue riſen togither, weele fall togither,
Blame me not loue,
Vdſfoot your iaylor my lord▪
Am I preuented?
Yes faith, there had bin a Counſellors fee caſt away now.
You haue heard his vſage Lady, ſeene his lodging, and if it pleaſe you, you both may and ſhall confer with him.
Prithee call him.
My Lord, your keeper hath brought a Lady or two to ſee you.
To ſee me? why am I turnd monſter? doth he take money to ſhew me? what doth a take a peece troe?
VVhy how now gallant, not gone yet?
Not, I thanke you Lady, and yet I was neer't.
How do you man?
Muſty for want of ayring.
VVeele haue you hangd out i'the freſh ayre, one of theſe mornings.
Youd be glad to take me in then.
Yes, when you had hangd abroad a little: but my Lorde Hortenſio (for I think I muſt be your Lady when all's done) what ſport? I would be merry a purpoſe to make him mad; the room's priuate and fit for any exerciſe.
Vdſfoot to her, can a woman offer fairer for't?
VVhy ſhall we go to ſpan-counter madam?
To ſpan-counter, beſt ask her and ſheele go to Coits.
No, I loue ſome ſtirring exerciſe, my body's condiciond like the ſun; it would neuer be out of motion.
I hau't yfaith, when I was ſtudent in Padua,
VVe vſde a moſt ingenious paſtime.
The name my Lord.
I cannot giue it a name equall to the merit.
Tis vulgarly calld Blindmans buffe.
Blind mans buffe? ha, ha, ha,
Do you laugh at it?
At the happines of your wit my Lord, that you ſhoulde hit vpon that ſport, which of all other I delight in.
VVill you heare an Apology I made in the commendation of it?
Weele haue the thing it ſelfe firſt; and as we like that, weel heare your Apologie after: who ſhall be hud-winckt ſirſt?
Who but the Author?
I, I, none ſhall be blind but I; helpe of with my gown boy.
What ſhall we haue to blind him?
My ſcarfe, take my ſcarfe my Lord.
There's a ſimple fauour for you.
And moſt fit, for indeed nothing blinds louers ſooner then Ladies fauors, but who ſhall blind me.
Mary that will I my Lord, let me alone to blind you.
Good againe; for who ſhould blind men, but beautious women? come ſweet madam.
But how if you take me? as I know that will be your ayme,
Jf J take you priſoner madam, you muſt either bee hudwinckt your ſelfe, or giue your conqueror a kiſſe for your ranſome.
An eaſie ranſome: ile not be priſoner long, if a kiſſe will enlarge me.
Lord what ſcambling ſhift has he made for a kiſſe and cannot get in neither; a little higher, ſo, ſo, ſo, are you blind my Lord?
As a purblind Poet: haue amongſt you blind Harpers.
Me thinks he looks for all the world like God Cupid.
Take heed of his dart madam, he comes vpon you,
He cannot come to faſt, O I am taken priſoner.
Your ranſome's but a kiſſe.
Is that your law of armes?
Yes madam, but ile take it on your lips.
My lips like faithfull Treaſurers ſhall ſee it diſchargde.
And here are my honeſt receiuers to take it.
Am I freed now?
As if you had ſeru'd ſeauen yeare for't: ſweete kiſſe, rare lippe.
Has ſhe not a ſweet breath my Lord?
As perfume.
And a ſoft lip?
And ſmooth as veluet: I could ſcarce diſcerne it from veluet: ide pawne my office for the fellow on't, madam.
Here.
Here Aſpero, on with this beard and gowne: I thinke hee followes me by the ſent, his hat, ſo: a narrowe miſſe yfaith my Lord?
Gone madam?
Euen vpon going, one of you counterfet my voice, there I deceiud you my Lord.
Haue you deceiu'd me madam?
Not yet, but I will, and you look not the better too't, buſie him till you thinke we are out of the Court, and then followe vs: you ſhall find vs at the ſouth port, now or neuer my Lord.
Why then twill neuer be Lady.
Here.
Where?
Here.
Scapt againe?
Shee's ſcapt indeed my Lord, you may caſt your cap after her, for I ſee you can do no other good vpon hir.
What haue I catchd you?
Kiſſe her and let her goe.
Kings truce till I breath a little.
And you had neede ſo, for I thinke you are almoſt out of breath, if you be not, you ſhall be, and thats as good, but breathe and ſpare not.
Did you euer conuerſe with a more ſtraunger diſſolute, madam?
Peremptory iacke, iaylor, as you reſpect your office, lay ſpeciall watch that none of what degree ſoeuer haue acceſſe to him.
Without me.
Or your ſignet.
Signet mee no ſignets, your goldſmiths ſhop is like your Swans neaſt, has a whole brood of ſignets, and all of a feather, & amongſt many, one may be like another, let none enter vpon the ſtage where Aſpero playes the madam, without Hortenſio.
Is he mad my Lord?
As the Lord that gaue all to his followers, and beg'd more for himſelfe.
If he call for me, tell him I ſcorne him.
If he counterfet my voice (as mad fellowes will counterfet great mens hands, and their tongues too) rate him for't, threaten him with the whip.
But come not at him.
Jf he call for meat promiſe him faire;
But giue him none.
If for light.
He may fire the houſe, let him haue none.
Jf he chafe, laugh.
If he rayle, ſing.
Jf he ſpeake fayre, flowt him.
Do any thing to vexe him.
But nothing to content him, you heare my charge, as you reſpect your office regard it.
I warne you my Lord, let mee alone, and we knew not how to abuſe a priſoner, we were not worthy to be a Iaylor.
Are you in breath my Lord?
As a bruers horſe, and as long-winded; look to your ſelfe madam, I come vpon you.
J am ready for you ſir; O for a bul-ruſh to run a tilt at's noſe.
A fayre miſſe yfaith.
Ile mend it next courſe you ſhall ſee.
In the corner of the left hand; vdſfoot ware ſhins my Lord,
Madam.
Here.
Where?
Helpe me vp Madam,
O ſtrange, cannot you get vp without helpe? there's my gloue, but come no neerer, as you loue me.
I do loue you madam.
Oh blind loue.
True madam; your beauty has made me blind.
Indeed loues ſonnes like ſpaniells are all borne blind,
But they will ſee.
Not till they be nyne daies old my Lord,
But will you giue mee the fingers that hold this gloue madam?
And the whole body to pleaſure you my Lord, but let me go a little.
I will not looſe you yet Lady.
But you ſhall my Lord; hiſt, then keepe me ſtill.
He faſtens the gloue to a poſt.
Faith let go my Lord, for ſhe growes ſullen, and you had as good talke to a poſt, and as good anſwer twould make you.
Nay but deere madam, doe but anſwer me, may I preſume, vppon my knees I beg it; but to take a fauour from your ſweet lips? ſhall I? las I am not the firſt man, that loue has blinded, may I preſume' I would be loth to offend your milde patience ſo much, as with an vnreuerend touch: ſpeake; if I ſhall reape the harueſt of my honeſt defires, make me bleſt in propoſing the time when; what? not a word? are you diſpleaſed? or ſhall I take your ſilence for a conſent? ſhall I? ſpeake; or if modeſty locke in your ſyllables, ſeale my aſſurance with a kiſſe: not? neither? ſhall I haue neither your word nor your bond? nay then I muſt make bold with modeſty; by this kiſſe madam, O my hard fortune? haue I made ſuit to a poaſt all this while? what block but I, would haue bin ſo ſenceleſſe? my excule is, 'twas but to make my Lady ſport: and: Madam? how? Lady? madam? boy; madam, Aſpero▪ but whiſt, I haue the conceit, 'twas excellent in my Lady, and J applaudit, ſuppoſe my Lady and hir priſoner had an intent of priuate buſines in the next roome; was it not better in her to blinde me, then I ſhould as gentlemen vſhers (caſes ſo ſtanding) haue blinded my ſelfe? againe, J applaud her, and adore my ſtarres that made me rather a blind then a ſeeing dore-keeper: ſhall I interrupt them? no: madam? they haue not done yet, ſure they haue not: what haue we here? a baſe violl! though J cannot tickle the mynnikyn within, ile (though it be ſome what baſe) giue them a ſong without, and the name of the Ditty ſhall be;
The Gentleman Vſhers Voluntarie.
Peace, peace, peace, make no noyſe,
Pleaſure and feare lie ſleeping?
End, end, end your idletoyes,
Iealous eies will be peeping.
Kiſſe, kiſſe and part, though not for hate for pittie,
Ha done, ha done, ha done, for I ha done my dittie.
And if you haue not done now too, let me be as baſe as my fiddle, if I rowze you not: madam for ſhame, what doe you meane to make of me, how? ſfoote what haue you made of me already? all gone? Iaylor?
How now? who calls?
VVhy ſaucie knaue tis J.
You, what you?
A ſingle V, I came in double, but I thanke them, they are gone out, and left me here a ſingle.—
Foole, and ſo I leaue you.
Knaue, I am Hortenſio, I charge thee let me out.
Foole, you lye, you are Aſpero, and I haue charge to keepe you in.
From whom?
From my Lord Hortenſio.
Sfoot knaue J tell thee I am hee, and thou wilt not beleeue me, truſt thine eies, come in and ſee.
'Twill not ſerue your turne, J like a whole ſkinne better then a pinkt one: content your ſelfe to night, and in the morning ile tell you more.
Where's my Lady, ſend hir hither,
Shee's buſie with my Lord Hortenſio, but if you haue any vſe for a woman, ile ſend you one of the Laundreſſes: fare you well ſir, bee content, you ſhall want nothing of any thing you haue.
Hortenſio gone outland my Ladie buſie with Hortenſio▪ I am gulld, palpably guld: whilſt I like a blocke ſtood courting the poſt, Aſpero is m my appatrell eſcapde: villains, traytors, open the doore, te Duke's abuſd, his daughter's fled: I proclaime yee all traytors that hinder me in the purſuit.
O for a reaſonable audience to applaud this ſceane of merryment: ile goe call my Lady and my Lord Hortenſio.
Blindmans buffe? I haue bufft it fairely, and mine owne gullery grieues me not halfe ſo much as the Dukes diſpleaſure, iaylor, not a word? iaylor, there's no way to pleaſe a knaue but fayre words, and gold: honeſt kinde iaylor, here's gold for thee: doe but take pittie vpon me, a miſerable cony-catchd Courtier: not? neither fayre nor foule? thou art a degree worſe then a woman; what ſhall I doe? I can compare my fortune and my vnfortunate ſelfe to nothing ſo fitlie as my Baſe here, wee ſuffer euerie foole to play vpon vs for their pleaſure: and indeede 'twas the intent of our Creator that made fiddles and ſeruitors to nothing but to be playd vpon, and playd vpon wee ſhall be, till our heart ſtrings crack, and then they either caſt vs aſide or hang vs vp, as worthy no other imployment; well, if I can worke my meanes, of eſcape, ſo: if not, I muſt lie by it.
MY daughter fled? and with Hortenſio,
It beares no formall ſhape of likelyhood,
Hir Eagle ſpirit ſoard to proud a pitch,
To ſeixe ſo baſe a prey; let priuy ſearche
Look through the citties boſome till they find her:
For gone ſhe is not.
Has not Anthonies ſonne
Sent them by ſome baſe practiſe to their death?
His breaſts too full of honor; truſty Iulio?
What waighty buſineſſe drawes thee from thy charge?
Came not the cauſe afore me? the proud Manuan
Baſely reuolt, depoſde me from the ſeate
And chayre of Regentſhip, ſending in queſt
Of proude Anthonio their late-bani Duke,
Him if they find or Aſpero his ſonne
Theile reinſtall him in the regiment▪
Him let them ſeeke in the vaſt ſhades of death, as for his ſonne.
Hee's ſure ynough my Lord, he was a mad knue when he came in, but J thinke, I haue made a tme ſoole of him by this time: for a has neither had bread nor water theſe foure and forty houres.
More villain thou.
My Lord, Hortenſio was the villain, he left ſuch command with mee, hee's the wheele that turnes about, and I a Country Iack muſt ſtrike when I am commanded.
Although my foe, hee's honorably tempred,
Yet armd againſt my life goe▪ call him forth,
Guard in my ſafety with ring of ſteele,
And marke how proudly heele demeane reuenge.
Goblins, ſpirits, furie, feryes, the priſon is haunted.
With a knaue is't not?
Yes, and an olde foole my Lord, in the likeneſſe of Hortenſio.
Villain where's Aſpero.
I know not my Lord: I let him in and my Lady to laugh at him, and it ſeemes, he conſented to treaſon, and let him out in his apparrell.
They conſented togither to couſen me, for taking delight (as my betters may doe) in a fooliſh paſtime called Blindmans buffe, they ſtole away my gowne, eſcapt the priſon, and left mee in fooles paradice, where, what ſong I haue playd, my Violl can witneſſe, they made me a little better then a bawd my Lord.
In act:
Not meerly in act: ſed cogitatione, & id ſatis eſt vt inquit Suetonius.
Js hee eſcapt▪ and Florimell with him?
Hortenſio thy head ſhall anſwerit.
I pray let my tongue be my heads Atturney, and pleade my excuſe.
Vrge no excuſe, away with him to priſon.
It ſhall be done my Lord.
Nay you ſir too, ſhall taſte of the ſame ſauce, away with both,
Come my ſonnes,
Lets leauy preſent armes gaynſt Mantua.
Being ſcarce come home we muſt abroad againe,
The Common good's a catefull Princes payne.
You that in all my baniſht pilgrimage,
Would neuer alienate your naturall loues,
But in deſire to ſee me reinſtalld,
Haue thruſt out proude Octauices ſubſtitute,
And ſeated me in antient dignity,
I am yours, and ready at your beſt diſpoſe.
Your owne, my liege, we like inferiour lights
Take life from your reflection, for like ſtars
Vnto the ſunne, are Counſellours to Kings▪
He feeds their orbes with fier, and their ſhine
Contend to make his glory more diuine.
And ſuch are we to great Anthonio.
The veynes and arteries of Anthonio
Through which the bloud of greatneſſe flows in vs.
Our life, and cauſe efficient of our ſtate,
And theſe our prety partners in exile.
We ha yet performd but the leaſt part of duetie,
Your reinſtalment: it reſts, that with our bloud,
VVe keepe out innouaſiue violence.
You new-create me, and breath ſecond life
Into my dying boſome, knew my ſoone
Of this vnlookt-for Fortune, but ill Fate
Has playd the Traytor, and giuen vp his life
To coward treaſon.
Vdſfoot what offence haue I committed againſt the ſtate, that theſe yron-handed Plebeians ſo applaud me for?
Tis a ſigne they loue you▪
I had rather thy ſhould hate me, it makes mee ſuſpect my boſome, for they loue none, but the maſters of factions, treaſons, and innouaſions.
Then you doe not loue the Commons.
Yes, as wiſe men doe their flattering wiues, only for ſhow: the popular voyce is like a crie of bauling hounds, and they get the foote of a fantaſticke and popular-affecting ſtateſman, they neuer leaue him, till they haue chac'd him into diſgrace, & then, like hounds, are at a loſſe, and with their loſſe, ſee, I haue found my father, ſafety attend you.
Welcome thou hope of Mantua and of vs,
VVe now are honors new beginners boy,
And may we better thriue then heretofore.
Neuer doubt it father, I hau attractiue ſtuffe that will draw cuſtomers.
VVhat Lady's that.
One that has playd the part of a Conſtable, brought you home a Runaway.
A friend of mine Father, but daughter to your Archenemy.
Octauioes daughter?
Yes faith, you are out with the Father, and ile ſee if I can fall in with the daughter.
And am I not a good child to leaue my fathers loue at ſixe and ſeauen, and hazard my honor vpon your ſonnes naked promiſe, and your hopefull acceptance.
She has followed me through much danger.
The better welcome, I loue her for't.
Like her and you pleaſe, id'e haue no body loue her but my ſelfe.
And Lady, though your Father be our foe,
The vertuous loue betwixt our ſonne and you,
May neretheleſſe retaine his ſimpathie.
Shall neretheleſſe retaine his ſimpathy,
Anthonio know I am loues reſolute,
Confirmd and grounded in affection:
I lou'd your ſonne, not for he was a Prince,
But one no better then his preſent fortunes,
Ile loue him ſtill, ſince firſt I lou'd him ſo,
Let Father, friends, and all the world ſay no.
There's mettle Father, how can wee chooſe but get cocking children, when father and mother too are both of the game.
To armes my Lord, Octauio comes in armes
To giue a proud aſſault vnto the Citty.
Proud his aſſault, as proud be our reiſt,
Vye ſhot for ſhot, and ſtake downe life for life,
Our breſt's as bold as theirs, our bloud as deepe,
All that wee'l looſe, or this our gettings keepe.
Come brother, talke not of deuouring war,
Say meſſenger, comes not Octauioes ſonnes?
They do, as proudly as the morning Sunne
Beating the azurd pauement of the heauen.
Then feare not father, my ſiſter and my ſelfe,
Will be your champions and defend the Citty.
Why Ladies, haue you ſuch large intereſt in our brothers.
Princeſſe, we haue, within there: reach our ſhields,
When beauty fights, the God of battaile yeelds.
They offer parlee, let mee anſwer them.
Brothers, how now? who made you ſouldiers?
Faith een my father as he made you louers▪
What? hath he chang'd your ſhepheards hooks to ſwords?
Of Amoradoes made you armed knights?
O ſeld-ſeene metamorphoſis! J haue knowne
Souldiers turne louers, but for amorous louers
To re-aſſume their valour, tis a change,
Like winter-thunder, and a thing as ſtrange.
Our ſiſter priſoner?
Tell me Florimell,
Doſt thou liue there enforc'd, or of free-will?
Free will, brothers, mine owne freewill, all free in Mantua, here's freewill yfaith, ſpeake am I not a free-woman?
As if you had ſeru'd for't, any man may ſet vp vnder hir copy without a protection.
J wag? are you there too?
Yes faith my Lord, my Lady has had my attendaunce to a hayre.
You lie boy.
If not mine, ſome bodies els: there's one has done—
What haue I done ſirra?
Nay nothing, but what my Lady was very well content with.
VVhy ſiſter, ſhame you not to ſet your loue
On one, that is our Fathers enemie.
Shame? not a whit: but come, your wenches brothers,
I make no queſtion, I haue won my wager:
Are they as faire as I?
Leaue that to triall.
Aſpero make ſurrender of our ſiſter.
And haue her in quiet poſſeſſion? what do you thinke me.
We thinke thee a proud villain and our foe.
By heauen, th'are villains all that thinke him ſo,
Why doe you loue him.
I ſhould curſe my ſelfe
if I ſhould hate him:
Bring the ladders forth,
Brauely aſſault to ſeparate their liues,
As they are ſealing the walls, the Ladies come forth.
Stand proud Franciſco.
Sand! O excellent word in a woman!
Hold Hippolito.
Hold! vp with that word, and tis as good as the other.
VVhat nymphe or god deſſe in my Hermiaes ſhape,
Stands to debar my entrance to the towne:
Madam, I wonder they enter not.
Why boy it ſeemes they dare not,
O cowards and haue two ſuch fayre breaches already,
Immortall Pallas that art more diuine,
In my loues beautie that thou cloth'ſt thee in,
With drawe thy ſelfe, and giue our fury limits.
I will, but firſt Franciſco take my ſhielde.
And mine as challenge to a ſingle combat,
Read the conditions and returne your anſwers.
VVell done yfaith wenches, O that the olde gray-beard my Father were here, ide haue about with him as I am honourable.
VVhats here!
A ſhepheard wooing of a Country maide,
As ſhe ſits angling by a Riuers ſide,
By them an aged man making a net!
The Motto▪ Sic! this Emblems morrall is,
The former loue I had with Lucida,
And this hope tells me that's faire▪ Lucida.
Brother, my ſhield the like preſents to me,
But holds far more familiar reference,
Here doth the amorous ſhepheard kiſſe the Nymph;
Which ſhe with a chaſt bluſh conſents vnto:
And ſee, a gloomy man, clad like a pilgrim
Comes in, and ſeperates their ſweete delights:
The Motto, Sie! I ſo my Father came,
and baniſht me from beautious Hermia,
and this hope tells me is faire Hermia.
The more I looke, the more me thinkes tis ſhe.
The more I think the more I find tis ſhe.
VVhat ſhould I thinke to proue it is not ſhe?
Looke, thinke, find, proue, doe what you can,
Theſe are the wenches that you courted than:
Then hony bees lay by your ſmarting ſtings,
and buz ſweet loue into your Ladies eares,
Tell them of kiſſes, and ſuch prety things,
Theſe drumming dub adubs loues pleaſure feares.
O heauen, oh fortune, and moſt happie ſtars,
Do I find loue, where I expected wars?
I that but now was all for war and death,
am made all loue, wars humour's out of breath.
How, my ſonnes loue the daughters of my foe! it cannot be,
Then queſtion them your ſelfe.
VVhy how now ſonnes, is this your worth in armes.
VVhy are we not in armes father.
Yes, and in ſuch armes as no Coward, but woulde venture life to march in.
Then boies, you loue the daughters of Anthonio.
VVe lik'd them firſt.
VVelep th liking ſtill.
And you will loue them.
Fatherinfaith they will.
I, run away are you there? whome ha your Ladyſhip got to your husband?
One that I ſtumbled on at Blindman buffe, a proper man, a man euery ynch of him: and you would ſay ſo, and you knewe but aſmuch as I—meane to know ere I haue done with him▪
Is he not ſonne vnto Anthonio?
Great Duke I am, and proſtrate on my kne,
Ibeg a peace, which if your ſpleene deny,
I proudlie ſtand where erſt I mildly kneel'd,
and eaſt downe bold defiance from theis walls.
Nomore your loues make my proudhart aſham'd,
Your conſort's ſweet, and ile not be a meane
To make it iar: what my ſonnes like ſhall ſtand,
By my conſent, allowed and perfected;
all hate is baniſht, and reuenge lies dead.
Then ſtead of ſpeares, let Hymens torches flame
VVith hallowed incence, and the God of ſpright,
Swell vp your vaines with amorous delight:
an ſo that vp our ſingle Comedy,
Plaiu phraſe: Si places, landite.