SOund, sound aloud
The welcome of the orient Floud,
Into the West;
Fayre, NIGER, sonne to great OCEANVS,
Now honord, thus,
With all his beauteous race:
though but black in face,
Yet, are they bright,
And full of life, and light.
To proue that Beauty best,
Which not the colour, but the feature
Assures vnto the creature.
BE silent, now the Ceremonies done.
And NIGER, say, how comes it, louely Sonne,
That thou, the AETHIOPES Riuer, so farre East,
Art seene to fall into th' extreamest West
Of me, the King of flouds, OCEANVS,
And, in mine Empires heart, salute me, thus?
My ceaselesse current, now amazed stands!
To see thy labor, through so many lands,
Mixe thy fresh billow, with my brackishe streame;
And, in thy sweetnesse, stretch thy diademe,
To these farre distant, and vn-equall'd skies
This squared Circle of coelestiall bodies:
Diuine OCEANVS, tis not strange at all,
That (since the immortal soules of creatures mortal,
Mixe with their bodies, yet reserue for euer
A powre of seperation) I should seuer
My fresh streames, from thy brackish (like things fixed)
Though, with thy powerful saltnes, thus far mixed.
" Vertue, though chain'd to earth, will still liue free;
" And Hell it selfe must yeeld to industry.
BVt, what's the end of thy Herculean labors,
Extended to these calme, and blessed shores?
TO do a kind, and carefull Fathers part,
In satisfiyng euery pensiue heart
Of these my Daughters, my most loued birth:
Who though they were the first form'd Dames of earth,
And in whose sparckling, and refulgent eyes,
The glorious Sunne did still delight to rise;
Though he (the best Iudge, and most formall Cause
Of all Dames beauties) in their firme hewes, drawes
Signes of his feruent'st Loue; and thereby shewes
That, in their black, the perfectst beauty growes;
Since the fix't colour of their curled haire,
(Which is the highest grace of dames most faire)
No cares, no age can change; or there display
The fearefull tincture of abhorred Gray;
Since Death hir selfe (hir selfe being pale & blew)
Can neuer alter their most faith-full hew;
All which are arguments, to proue, how far
Their beauties conquer, in great Beauties warre;
And more, how neere Diuinity they be,
That stand from passion, or decay so free.
Yet, since the fabulous voyces of some few
Poore brain-sicke men, stil'd Poets, here with you,
Haue, with such enuy of their graces, sung
The painted Beauties, other Empires sprung;
Letting their loose, and winged fictions fly
To infect all clymates, yea our purity;
As of one PHAETON, that fir'd the world
And, that, before his heedles flames were hurld
About the Globe, the Aethiopes were as faire,
As other Dames; now blacke, with blacke dispaire:
And in respect of their complexctions chang'd,
Are each where, since, for luckles creatures rang'd.
Which, when my Daughters heard, (as women are
Most iealous of their beauties) feare, and care
Posess'd them whole; yea, and beleeuing them,
They wept such ceasles teares, into my streame,
That it hath, thus far, ouerflow'd his shore
To seeke them patience: who haue since, ere more
As the Sunne riseth, chardg'd his burning throne
With volleys of reuilings; cause he shone
On their scorch'd cheekes, with such intemperate fires,
And other Dames, made Queenes of all desires.
To frustrate which strange error, oft, I sought,
(Though most in vaine, against a setled thought
As womens are) till they confirm'd at length
By miracle, what I, with so much strength
Of argument resisted; els they fain'd:
For in the Lake, where their first spring they gain'd,
As they sate, cooling their soft Limmes, one night,
Appear'd a Face, all circumfus'd with light;
(And sure they saw't, for Aethiopes neuer dreame)
Wherein they might decipher through the streame,
These words.
That they a Land must forthwith seeke,
Whose termination (of the Greeke)
Sounds TANIA; where bright Sol, that heat
Their blouds, doth neuer rise, or set,
But in his Iourney passeth by,
And leaues that Clymat of the sky,
To comfort of a greater Light,
Who formes all beauty, with his sight.
In search of this, haue we three Princedomes past,
That speake out Tania, in their accents last;
Blacke Mauritania, first; and secondly,
Swarth Lusitania; next, we did descry
Rich Aquitania: and, yet, cannot find
The place vnto these longing Nymphes design'd.
Instruct, and ayde me, great OCEANVS,
What Land is this, that now appeares to vs?
This Land, that lifts into the temperate Ayre
His snowy cliffe, is Albion the fayre;
So call'd of Neptunes Son, who ruleth here:
For whose deare guard, my selfe, (foure thousand yeare)
Since old Deucalion's daies, haue walk'd the round
About his Empire, proud, to see him crown'd
Aboue my waues.
— O see, our siluer Starre!
Whose pure, auspicious light greetes vs, thus farre!
Great Aethiopia, Goddesse of our shore,
Since, with particular worshippe we adore
Thy generall brightnesse, let particular grace
Shyne on my zealous Daughters: Shew the place,
Which, long, their Longings vrdg'd their eyes to see.
Beautifie them, which long haue Deified thee.
NIGER, be glad: Resume thy natiue cheare.
Thy Daughters labors haue their period here,
And so thy errors. I was that bright Face
Reflected by the Lake, in which thy Race
Read mysticke lines; (which skill PITHAGORAS
First taught to men, by a reuerberate glasse)
This blessed Isle doth with that TANIA end,
Which there they saw inscrib'd, and shall extend
Wish'd satisfaction to their best desires.
BRITANIA, which the triple world admires,
This Isle hath now recouered for her name;
Where raigne those Beauties, that with so much fame
The sacred MVSES Sonnes haue honored,
And from bright HESPERVS to EOVS spred.
With that great name BRITANIA, this blest Isle
Hath wonne her ancient dignitie, and stile,
A World, diuided from the world: and tri'd
The abstract of it, in his generall pride.
For were the World, with all his wealth, a Ring,
BRITANIA (whose new name makes all tongues sing)
Might be a Diamant worthy to inchase it,
Rul'd by a SVNNE, that to this height doth grace it:
Whose Beames shine day, and night, and are of force
To blanche an AETHIOPE, and reuiue a Cor's.
His light scientiall is, and (past mere nature)
Can salue the rude defects of euery creature.
Call forth thy honor'd Daughters, then;
And let them, 'fore the Brittaine men,
Indent the Land, with those pure traces
They flow with, in their natiue graces.
Inuite them, boldly, to the shore,
Their Beauties shalbe scorch'd no more:
This Sunne is temperate, and refines
All things, on which his radiance shines.
Come away, come away,
We grow iealous of your stay:
If you do not stop your eare,
We shall haue more cause to feare
Syrens of the land, then they
To doubt the Syrens of the Sea.
DAughters of the subtle Flood,
Do not let Earth longer intertayne you;
Let Earth longer intertaine you.
Longer intertaine you.
'Tis to them, inough of good,
That you giue this litle hope, to gaine you
Giue this litle, hope to gaine you.
Little hope, to gaine you.
If they loue,
You shall quickly see;
For when to flight you mooue,
They'll follow you, the more you flee
follow you, the more you flee.
The more you flee.
If not, impute it each to others matter;
They are but Earth, & what you vowd was Water.
but earth & what you vowd was Water.
earth & what you vowd was Water.
And what you vow'd was Water.
You vow'd was Water.
I Nough, bright Nymphes, the night growes old,
And we are greiu'd, we can not hold
You longer light: But comfort take.
Your Father, onely, to the Lake
Shall make returne: Your selues with feasts,
Must here remaine the Ocean's guests.
Nor shall this vayle, the Sunne hath cast
Aboue your bloud, more Summers last.
For which, you shall obserue these rites.
Thirteene times thrise, on thirteene nightes,
(So often as I fill my Sphaere
With glorious light, throughout the yeare)
You shall (when all things els do sleepe
Saue your chast thoughts) with reuerence, steepe
Your bodies in that purer brine,
And wholsome dew call'd Ros-marine:
Then with that soft, and gentler fome,
Of which the Ocean, yet, yeelds some,
Whereof bright Venus, Beauties Queene,
Is sayd to haue begotten beene,
You shall your gentler limmes ore-laue,
And for your paynes, perfection haue.
So that, this night, the yeare gone round,
You do againe salute this ground;
And, in the beames of yond' bright Sunne,
Your faces dry, and all is done.
NOw Dian, with her burning face,
Declines apace:
By which our Waters know
To ebbe, that late did flow.
Backe Seas, backe Nymphes; but, with a forward grace,
Keepe, still, your reuerence to the place:
And shout with ioy of fauor, you haue wonne,
in sight of Albion, Neptunes Sonne.