WHich, among these is Albion, Neptunes Sonne?
WHat ignorance dares make that question?
Would any aske, who Mars were, in the wars?
Or, which is Hesperus, among the starres?
Of the bright Planets, which is Sol? Or can
A doubt arise, 'mong creatures, which is man?
Behold, whose eyes do dart Promethean fire
Throughout this all; whose precepts do inspire
The rest with duty; yet commanding, cheare:
And are obeyed, more with loue, then feare.
WHat Power art thou, that thus informest me?
DOst thou not know me? I, to well, know thee
By thy rude voyce, that doth so hoarcely blow,
Thy haire, thy beard, thy wings, ore-hil'd with snow,
Thy Serpent feet, to be that rough North-winde,
Boreas, that, to my raigne, art still vnkinde.
I am the Prince of Months, call'd Ianuary;
Because by me Ianus the yeare doth vary,
Shutting vp warres, proclayming peace, & feasts,
Freedome, & triumphes: making Kings his guests.
TO thee then, thus, & by thee, to that King,
That doth thee present honors, do I bring
Present remembrance of twelue Aethiope Dames:
Who, guided hither by the Moones bright flames,
To see his brighter light, were to the Sea
Enioyn'd againe, and (thence assign'd a day
For their returne) were in the waues to leaue
Theyr blacknesse, and true beauty to receaue.
WHich they receau'd, but broke theyr day: & yet
Haue not return'd a looke of grace for it,
Shewing a course, and most vnfit neglect.
Twise haue I come, in pompe here, to expect
Theyr presence; Twise deluded, haue bene faine
With other rites my Feasts to intertayne:
And, now the Third time, turn'd about the yeare
Since they were look'd for; and, yet, are not here.
IT was nor Will, nor Sloth, that caus'd theyr stay;
For they were all prepared by theyr day,
And, with religion, forward on theyr way:
When PROTEVS, the gray Prophet of the Sea,
Met them, and made report, how other foure
Of their blacke kind, (whereof theyr Sire had store)
Faithfull to that great wonder, so late done
Vpon theyr Sisters, by bright Albion,
Had followed them to seeke BRITANIA forth,
And there, to hope like fauor, as like worth.
Which Night envy'd, as done in her despight,
And (mad to see an Aethiope washed white)
Thought to preuent in these; least men should deeme
Her coulor, if thus chang'd, of small esteeme.
And so, by mallice, and her magicke, tost
The Nymphes at Sea, as they were allmost lost,
Till, on an Iland, they by chance arriu'd,
That floted in the mayne; where, yet, she' had giu'd sight.
Them so, in charmes of darknes, as no might)
Should loose them thence, but theyr chang'd Sisters
Whereat the Twelue (in piety mou'd, & kind)
Streight, put themselues in act, the place to finde;
Which was the Nights sole trust they so will do,
That she, with labor, might confound them too.
For, euer since, with error hath she held
Them wandring in the Ocean, and so quell'd
Their hopes beneath their toyle, as (desperat now
Of any least successe vnto their vow;
Nor knowing to returne to expresse the grace,
Wherewith they labor to this Prince, and place)
One of them, meeting me at Sea, did pray,
That for the loue of my ORYTHYIA,
(Whose very name did heate my frosty brest,
And make me shake my Snow-fill'd wings, & crest)
To beare this sad report I would be wonne,
And frame their iust excuse: which here I haue done.
WOuld thou hadst not begun, vnluckie Winde,
That neuer yet blew'st goodnes to mankind;
But with thy bitter, and too piercing breath,
Strik'st horrors through the ayre, as sharp as death.
ALL horrors vanish, and all name of Death,
Bee all things here as calme as is my breath.
A gentler Wind, Vulturnus, brings you newes
The Ile is found, & that the Nymphs now vse
Their rest, & ioy. The Nights black charmes are flowne.
For, being made vnto their Goddesse knowne,
Bright Aethiopia, the Siluer Moone,
As she was Hecate, she brake them soone:
And now by vertue of their light, and grace,
The glorious Isle, wherein they rest, takes place
Of all the earth for Beauty. There, their Queen
Hath raysed them a Throne, that still is seene
To turne vnto the motion of the World;
Wherein they sit, and are, like Heauen, whirld
About the Earth; whilst, to them contrary,
(Following those nobler torches of the Sky)
A world of little Loues, and chast Desires,
Do light their beauties, with still mouing fires.
And who to Heauens consent can better moue,
Then those that are so like it, Beauty and Loue?
Hether, as to theyr new Elysium,
The spirits of the antique Greekes are come,
Poets, and Singers, Linus, Orpheus, all
That haue excell'd in knowledge musicall;
Where, set in Arbrs made of myrtle, and gold,
They liue, againe, these Beautyes to behold.
And thence, in flowry mazes walking forth
Sing hymnes in celebration of their worth.
Whilst, to theyr Songs, two Fountaynes flow, one hight
Of lasting Youth, the other chast Delight,
That at the closes, from theyr bottomes spring,
And strike the Ayre to eccho what they sing.
But, why do I describe what all must see?
By this time, nere thy coast, they floating be;
For, so their vertuous Goddesse, the chast Moone,
Told them, the Fate of th' Iland should, & soone
Would fixe it selfe vnto thy continent,
As being the place, by Destiny fore-ment,
Where they should slow forth, drest in her attyres:
And, that the influence of those holy fires,
(First rapt from hence) being multiplied vpon
The other foure, should make their Beauties one.
Which now expect to see, great Neptunes Sonne,
And loue the miracle, which thy selfe hast done.
WHen Loue, at first, did mooue
From out of Chaos, brightned
So was the world, and lightned,
As now! As now! As now!
Yeeld Night, then, to the light,
As Blacknesse hath to Beauty;
Which is but the same duety.
It was for Beauty, that the World was made,
And where shee raignes, Loues lights admit no shade.
Loues lights admit no shade.
Admit no shade.
RIse aged Thames, and by the hand
Receiue these Nymphes, within the land:
And, in those curious Squares, and Rounds,
Wherewith thou flow'st betwixt the grounds
Of fruictfull Kent, and Essex faire,
That lend thee gyrlands for thy haire;
Instruct their siluer feete to tread,
Whilst we, againe to sea, are fled.
SO Beauty on the waters stood,
(When Loue had seuer'd earth, from flood!
So when he parted ayre, from fire,
He did with concord all inspire!
And then a Motion he them taught,
That elder then himselfe was thought.
Which thought was, yet, the child of earth,
For Loue is elder then his birth.
IF all these Cupids, now, were blind
As is their wanton Brother;
Or play should put it in their mind
To shoot at one another:
What pretty battayle they would make
If they their obiects should mistake
And each one wound his Mother!
IT was no politie of Court,
Albee' the place were charmed,
To let in earnest, or in sport,
So many Loues in, armed.
For say, the Dames should▪ with their eyes,
Vpon the hearts, here, meane surprize;
Were not the men like harmed?
YEs, were the Loues or false, or straying;
Or Beauties not their beauty waighing:
But here, no such deceipt is mix'd,
Their flames are pure, their eyes are fix'd:
They do not warre, with different darts,
But strike a musique of like hearts.
HAd those, that dwell in error foule,
And hold that women haue no soule,
But seene these moue; They would haue, then
Sayd, Women were the soules of Men.
So they do moue each heart, and eye
With the Worlds soule, true Harmonie.
YOur grace is great, as is your Beauty, Dames;
Inough my Feasts haue prou'd your thankfull flames.
Now vse your Seate: that seate which was, before,
Thought stray'ing, vncertayne, floting to each shore,
And to whose hauing euery Clime layd clayme,
Each Land, and Nation vrged as the ayme
Of their ambition, Beauties perfect Throne,
Now made peculiar, to this place, alone;
And that, by'impulsion of your destenies,
And his attractiue beames, that lights these Skies:
Who (though with th'Ocean compass'd) neuer wets
His hayre therein, nor weares a beame that sets.
Long may his light adorne these happy rites
As I renew them; and your gratious sights
Enioy that happinesse, eu'en to envy, 'as when
Beauty, at large, brake forth, and conquer'd men.
STill turne, and imitate the Heauen
In motion swift and euen;
And as his Planets goe,
Your brighter lights do so:
May Youth and Pleasure euer flow.
But let your State, the while,
Be fixed as the Isle.
So all that see your Beauties sphaere
May know the Elysian Fields are here.
Th'Elysian feilds are here.
Elysian feilds are here.