WHich, among these, is ALBION, NEPTVNES sonne?
WHat ignorance dares make that question?
Would any aske, who MARS were, in the wars?
Or, which is HESPERVS, among the starres?
Of the bright Planets, which is SOL? Or can
A doubt arise, 'mong creatures, which is Man?
Behold, whose eyes doe dart Promethean fire
Throughout this all; whose precepts do inspire
The rest with dutie; yet commanding, cheare:
And are obeyed, more with loue, then feare.
WHat Power art thou, that thus informest me?
DO'st thou not know me? I too well know thee
By thy rude voice, that doth so hoarcely blow;
Thy haire, thy beard, thy wings, ore-hil'd with snow,
Thy serpent feet, to be that rough North-wind,
BOREAS, that to my raigne art still vnkind.
I am the Prince of Months, call'd IANVARIE;
Because by me IANVS the yeare doth varie,
Shutting vp warres, proclayming peace, and feasts,
Freedome, and triumphs; making Kings his guests.
TO thee then, thus, and by thee, to that King,
That doth thee present honors, doe I bring
Present remembrance of twelue Aethiope Dames:
Who, guided hither by the Moones bright flames,
To see his brighter light, were to the Sea
Enioyn'd againe, and (thence assign'd a day
For their returne) were in the waues to leaue
Their blacknesse, and true beautie to receiue.
WHich they receiu'd, but broke their day: and yet
Haue not return'd a looke of grace for it,
Shewing a course, and most vnfit neglect.
Twice haue I come, in pompe here, to expect
Their presence; Twice deluded, haue beene faine
With other Rites my Feasts to entertaine:
And, now the third time, turn'd about the yeare,
Since they were look'd for; and, yet, are not here.
IT was nor Will, nor Sloth, that caus'd their stay;
For they were all prepared by their day,
And, with religion, forward on their way:
When PROTEVS, the gray Prophet of the Sea,
Met them, and made report, how other foure
Of their blacke kind (whereof their Syre had store)
Faithfull to that great wonder, so late done
Vpon their Sisters, by bright Albion,
Had followed them to seeke BRITANIA forth,
And there to hope like fauor, as like worth.
Which NIGHT enui'd, as done in her despight,
And (mad to see an Aethiope washed white)
Thought to preuent in these; lest men should deeme
Her colour, if thus chang'd, of small esteeme.
And so, by malice, and her magicke, tost
The Nymphes at sea, as they were almost lost,
Till, on an Iland, they by chance arriu'd,
That floted in the mayne; where, yet, she'had giu'd
Them so, in charmes of darknesse, as no might
Should loose them thence, but their chang'd Sisters sight.
Whereat the Twelue (in pietie mou'd, and kind)
Streight put themselues in act, the place to find;
Which was the NIGHTS sole trust they so will doe,
That she, with labor, might confound them too.
For euer since with error hath she held
Them wandring in the Ocean, and so quell'd
Their hopes beneath their toyle, as (desperat now
Of any least successe vnto their vow;
Nor knowing to returne to expresse the grace,
Wherewith they labor to this Prince, and place)
One of them, meeting me at sea, did pray,
That for the loue of my ORYTHYIA,
(Whose verie name did heat my frostie brest,
And make me shake my snow-fill'd wings and crest)
To beare this sad report I would be wonne,
And frame their iust excuse; which here I haue done.
WOuld thou had'st not begun, vnluckie Wind,
That neuer yet blew'st goodnesse to mankind;
But with thy bitter, and too piercing breath,
Strik'st horrors through the ayre, as sharpe as death.
ALl horrors vanish, and all name of Death,
Be all things here as calme as is my breath.
A gentler Wind, VVLTVRNVS, brings you newes
The Ile is found, and that the Nymphs now vse
Their rest, and ioy. The Nights black charmes are flowne.
For, being made vnto their Goddesse knowne,
Bright AETHIOPIA, the siluer Moone,
As she was HECATE, she brake them soone:
And now by vertue of their light, and grace,
The glorious Isle, wherein they rest, takes place
Of all the earth for Beautie. There, their Queene
Hath raised them a Throne, that still is seene
To turne vnto the motion of the World;
Wherein they sit, and are, like Heauen, whirl'd
About the Earth; whil'st, to them contrarie,
(Following those nobler torches of the Skie)
A world of little Loues, and chast Desires,
Doe light their beauties, with still mouing fires.
And who to Heauens consent can better moue,
Then those that are so like it, Beautie and Loue?
Hither, as to their new Elysium,
The spirits of the antique Greekes are come,
Poets and Singes, Linus, Orpheus, all
That haue excell'd in knowledge musicall;
Where, set in arbors made of myrtle, and gold,
They liue, againe, these beauties to behold.
And thence in flowry mazes walking forth,
Sing hymnes in celebration of their worth.
Whilst, to their songs, two fountaines flow, one height
Of lasting Youth, the other chast Delight,
That at the closes, from their bottomes spring,
And strike the ayre to eccho what they sing.
But, why doe I describe what all must see?
By this time, neere the coast, they floating be;
For, so their vertuous Goddesse, the chast Moone,
Told them, the fate of th'Iland should, and soone
Would fixe it selfe vnto thy continent,
As being the place, by destiny fore-ment,
Where they should flow forth, drest in her attyres:
And, that the influence of those holy fires,
(First rapt from hence) being multiplied vpon
The other foure, should make their beauties one.
Which now expect to see, great Neptunes sonne,
And loue the miracle, which thy selfe hast done.
As now! Eccho. As now! Ecch. As now!
Yeeld Night, then, to the light,
As Blacknesse hath to Beautie;
Which is but the same duety.
It was for Beauty, that the World was made,
And where she raignes, Loues lights admit no shade.
Ecch. Loues lights admit no shade.
Eccho. Admit no shade.
RIse aged Thames, and by the hand
Receiue these Nymphes, within the land:
And, in those curious Squares, and Rounds,
Where with thou flow'st betwixt the grounds
Of fruitfull Kent, and Essex faire,
That lend thee gyrlands for thy hayre;
Instruct their siluer feete to tread,
Whilst we, againe to sea, are fled.
SO beautie on the waters stood,
(When loue had seuer'd earth, from flood!
So when he parted ayre, from fire▪
He did with concord all inspire!
And then a motion he them taught,
That elder then himselfe was thought.
Which thought was, yet, the child of earth,
For loue is elder then his birth.
IF all these CVPIDS, now, were blind
As is their wanton brother;
Or play should put it in their mind
To shoot at one another:
What prettie battaile they would make,
If they their obiects should mistake
And each one wound his mother!
IT was no politie of court,
Albee' the place were charmed,
To let in earnest, or in sport,
So many Loues in, armed.
For say, the Dames should, with their eyes,
Vpon the hearts, here, meane surprize;
Were not the men like harmed?
YEs, were the Loues or false, or straying;
Or beauties not their beautie waighing:
But here, no such deceipt is mix'd,
Their flames are pure, their eyes are fix'd:
They doe not warre, with different darts,
But strike a musique of like harts.
HAd those, that dwell in error foule,
And hold that women haue no soule,
But seene these moue; they would haue, then
Said, Women were the soules of men.
So they doe moue each heart, and eye
With the worlds soule, true harmony.
YOur grace is great, as is your beautie, Dames;
Inough my feasts haue prou'd your thankfull flames.
Now vse your seate: that seate which was, before,
Thought stray'ing, vncertayne, floting to each shore,
And to whose hauing euery clime laid clayme,
Each land, and nation vrged as the ayme
Of their ambition, beauties perfect throne,
Now made peculiar, to this place, alone;
And that, by'impulsion of your destinies,
And his attractiue beames, that lights these skies:
Who (though with th'Ocean compass'd) neuer wets
His hayre therein, nor weares a beame that sets.
Long may his light adorne these happy rites
As I renew them; and your gracious sights
Enioy that happinesse, eu'en to enuy, 'as when
Beautie, at large, brake forth, and conquer'd men.
STill turne, and imitate the heauen
In motion swift and euen;
And as his Planets goe,
Your brighter lights doe so:
May youth and pleasure euer flow.
But let your state, the while,
Be fixed as the Isle.
CHO. So all that see your beauties sphaere,
May know the'Elysian fields are here.
Ecch. Th'Elysian fields are here.
Ecch. 'Elysian fields are here.