IT is no common cause, yee will conceiue,
My louely Graces, makes your goddesse leaue
Her state in heauen, to night, to visit earth.
Loue late is fled away, my eldest birth,
CVPID, whom I did ioy to call my sonne;
And, whom long absent, VENVS is vndone.
Spie, if you can, his foot-steps on this greene;
For here (as I am told) he late hath beene.
With diuers of his brethren, lending light
From their best flames, to guild a glorious night;
Which I not grudge at, being done for her,
Whose honors, to mine owne, I still prefer.
But he, not yet returning, I'am in feare,
Some gentle grace, or innocent beautie here,
Be taken with him: or he hath surpris'd
A second PSYCHE, and liues here disguis'd.
Find yee no tract of his stray'd feet?
Not I.
Nor I.
Nor I.
Stay nymphs, we then will trie
A neerer way. Looke all these ladies eyes,
And see if there he not concealed lyes;
Or in their bosomes, 'twixt their swelling brests:
(The wag affects to make himselfe such nests)
Perchance, he'hath got some simple heart, to hide
His subtle shape in: I will haue him cry'd.
And all his vertues told. That, when they know
What spright he is, shee soone may let him goe,
That guards him now; and thinke her selfe right blest,
To be so timely rid of such a guest.
Begin soft GRACES, and proclaime reward
To her that brings him in. Speake, to be heard.
Beauties, haue yee seene this toy,
Called loue, a little boy,
Almost naked, wanton, blind,
Cruell now; and then as kind?
If he be amongst yee, say;
He is VENVS run-away.
Shee, that will but now discouer
Where the winged wag doth houer,
Shall, to night, receiue a kisse,
How, or where her selfe would wish:
But, who brings him to his mother,
Shall haue that kisse, and another.
H' hath of markes about him plentie:
You shall know him, among twentie.
All his body is a fire,
And his breath a flame entire,
That being shot, like lightning, in,
Wounds the heart, but not the skin.
At his sight, the sunne hath turned,
NEPTVNE in the waters, burned;
Hell hath felt a greater heate:
IOVE himselfe forsooke his seate:
From the center, to the skie,
Are his trophaees reared hie.
Wings he hath, which though yee clip,
He will leape from lip, to lip,
Ouer liuer, lights, and heart,
But not stay in any part;
And, if chance his arrow misses,
He will shoot himselfe, in kisses.
He doth beare a golden Bow
And a Quiuer, hanging low,
Full of arrowes, that out-braue
DIAN'S shafts: where, if he haue
Any head more sharpe then other,
With that first he strikes his mother.
Still the fairest are his fuell.
When his daies are to be cruell,
Louers hearts are all his food;
And his bathes their warmest bloud:
Nought but wounds his hand doth season;
And he hates none like to Reason.
Trust him not: his words, though sweet,
Seldome with his heart doe meet.
All his practise is deceit;
Euerie gift it is a bait;
Not a kisse, but poyson beares;
And most treason in his teares.
Idle minutes are his raigne;
Then, the straggler makes his gaine,
By presenting maids with toyes,
And would haue yee thinke 'hem ioyes:
'Tis the ambition of the elfe,
To 'haue all childish, as himselfe.
If by these yee please to know him,
Beauties, be not nice, but show him.
Though yee had a will, to hide him,
Now, we hope, yee'le not abide him.
Since yee heare his falser play;
And that he is VENVS Run-away.
COme my little iocound sports,
Come away; the time now sorts
With your pastime: This same night
Is CVPID'S day. Aduance your light.
With your Reuell fill the roome,
That our triumphs be not dumbe.
WEll done Antiques: Now, my Bow,
And my Quiuer beare to show;
That these Beauties, here, may know,
By what armes this feat was done,
That hath so much honor wonne,
Vnto VENVS, and her Sonne.
WHat feat, what honor is it, that you boast,
My little straggler? I had giuen you lost,
With all your games, here.
Mother?
Yes sir, she.
What might your glorious cause of triumph be?
Ha'you shot MINERVA, or the Thespian dames?
Heat aged OPS againe, with youthfull flames?
Or haue you made the colder Moone to visit
Once more, a sheepe-cote? Say, what conquest is it
Can make you hope such a renowne to winne?
Is there a second HERCVLES brought to spinne?
Or, for some new disguise, leaues IOVE his thunder?
NOr that, nor those, and yet no lesse a wonder;
Which to tell, I may not stay:
HYMEN'S presence bids away;
'Tis, alreadie, at his night,
He can giue you farther light.
You, my sports may here abide,
Till I call, to light the Bride.
VENVS, is this a time to quit your carre?
To stoope to earth? to leaue, alone, your starre,
Without your influence? and, on such a night,
Which should be crown'd with your most chearing sight?
As you were ignorant of what were done
By CVPIDS hand, your all-triumphing Sonne?
Looke on this state; and if you yet not know,
What Crowne there shines, whose Scepter here doth grow;
Thinke on thy lou'd AENEAS, and what name,
MARO, the golden trumpet of his fame,
Gaue him, read thou in this. A Prince, that drawes
By'example more, then others doe by lawes:
That is so iust to his great act, and thought,
To doe, not what Kings may, but what Kings ought.
Who, out of pietie, vnto peace, is vow'd;
To spare his subiects, yet to quell the proud,
And dares esteeme it the first fortitude,
To haue his passions, foes at home, subdued.
That was reseru'd, vntill the Parcae spunne
Their whitest wooll; and then, his thred begun.
Which thred, when Treason would haue burst, a soule
(To day renown'd, and added to my roule)
Oppos'd; and, by that act, to his name did bring
The honor, to be Sauer of his King.
This King, whose worth (if gods for vertue loue)
Should VENVS with the same affections moue,
As her AENEAS; and no lesse endeare
Her loue to his safetie, then when she did cheare,
( After a tempest) long afflicted Troy,
Vpon the Lybian shore; and brought them ioy.
I Loue, and know his vertues, and doe boast
Mine owne renowne, when I renowne him most.
My CVPID'S absence I forgiue, and praise,
That me to such a present grace could raise.
His champion shall, hereafter, be my care;
But speake his bride, and what her vertues are.
SHe is a noble virgin, styl'd the maid
Of the Red-cliffe, and hath her dowrie waigh'd;
No lesse in vertue, bloud, and forme, then gold.
Thence, where my Pillar's rear'd, you may behold,
(Fill'd with Loues Trophaes) doth she take her name.
Those Pillars did vxorious VVLCAN frame,
Against this day, and vnderneath that hill,
He, and his Cyclopes, are forging still
Some strange, and curious peece, t'adorne the night,
And giue these graced Nuptials greater light.
WHich I haue done; the best of all my life:
And haue my end, if it but please my wife,
And she commend it, to the labor'd worth.
Cleaue solid Rock, and bring the wonder forth.
IT'is a spheare, I'haue formed round, and euen,
In due proportion to the spheare of heauen,
With all his lines, and circles; that compose
The perfect'st forme, and aptly doe disclose
The heauen of marriage: which I title it.
Within whose Zodiack, I haue made to sit,
In order of the signes, twelue sacred powers,
That are praesiding at all nuptiall howers: 1. The first, in ARIES place, respecteth pride Of youth; and beauty; graces in the bride. 2. In TAVRVS, he loues strength, and manlinesse; The vertues, which the bridegrome should professe. 3. In GEMINI, that noble power is showne, That twins their hearts; and doth, of two, make one. 4. In CANCER, he that bids the wife giue way With backward yeelding, to her husbands sway. 5. In LEO, he that doth in still the heate Into the man: which, from the following seate, 6. Is tempred so, as he that lookes from thence Sees, yet, they keepe a VIRGIN innocence. 7. In LIBRA'S roome, rules he that doth supply All happy beds with sweet aequality. 8. The SCORPIONS place he fills, that make the iarres, And stings in wedlocke; little strifes, and warres: 9. Which he, in th' ARCHERS throne, doth soone remoue By making, with his shafts, new wounds of loue. 10. And those the follower, with more heate, inspires, As, in the GOATE, the sun renewes his fires. 11. In wet AQVARIVS stead, reignes he, that showres Fertilitie vpon the geniall bowres. 12. Last, in the FISHES place, sits he, doth say; In married ioyes, all should be dumbe, as they. And this hath VVLCAN, for his VENVS, done, To grace the chaster triumph of her sonne.
ANd for this gift, will I to heauen returne,
And vowe, for euer, that my lampe shall burne
With pure and chasest fire; or neuer shine,
But when it mixeth with thy spheare, and mine.
Loues common wealth consists of toyes;
His councell are those antique boyes,
Games, laughter, sports, delights,
That triumph with him on these nights:
To whom we must giue way,
For now their raigne beginnes, and lasts till day.
They sweeten HYMENS warre,
And, in that iarre,
Make all, that married bee,
Perfection see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished starre.
Why stayes the Bride-grome to inuade
Her, that would be a matron made?
Good night, whilst yet we may
Good-night, to you a virgin, say:
To morrow, rise the same
Your mother is, and vse a nobler name.
Speed well in HYMEN'S warre,
That, what you are,
By your perfection, wee
And all may see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished starre.
To night is VENVS vigil kept.
This night no Bride-grome euer slept;
And if the faire Bride doo,
The married say, 'tis his fault, too.
Wake then; and let your lights
Wake too: for they'l tell nothing of your nights:
But, that in HYMENS warre,
You perfect are.
And such perfection, wee
Doe pray, should bee.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished starre.
That, ere the rosy-fingerd morne
Behold nine moones, there may be borne
A babe, t'vphold the fame
Of RADCLIFFES blood, and RAMSEY'S name:
That may, in his great seed,
Weare the long honors of his fathers deed.
Such fruits of HYMENS warre
Most perfect are;
And all perfection, wee
Wish, you should see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth, thou wished starre.