CAll heere my varlet, Ile vnarme againe,
Why should I warre without the walls of Troy:
That finde such cruell battell here within,
Each Troyan that is maister of his heart,
Let him to field Troylus alas hath none.
Will this geere nere be mended?
The Greeks are strong and skilfull to their strength
Fierce to their skill, and to their fiercenesse valiant,
But I am weaker then a womans teare;
Tamer then sleepe; fonder then ignorance,
Lesse valiant then the Virgin in the night,
And skillesse as vnpractiz'd infancy:
Well, I haue told you enough of this; for my part ile not meddle nor make no farther; hee that will haue a cake out of the wheate must tarry the grynding.
Haue I not tarried?
I the grindin; but you must tarry the boulting.
Haue I not tarried?
I the boulting; but you must tarry the leauening.
Still haue I tarried.
I, to the leauening, but heares yet in the word hereafter, the kneading, the making of the cake, the heating the ouen, and the baking, nay you must stay the cooling too, or yea may chance burne your lippes.
Pacience her selfe, what Godesse ere she be,
Doth lesser blench at suffrance then I do:
At Priams royall table do I sit
And when faire Cressid comes into my thoughts,
So traitor then she comes when she is thence.
Well shee lookt yesternight fairer then euer I saw her looke, or any woman els.
I was about to tell thee when my heart,
As edged with a sigh would riue in twaine,
Least Hector or my father should perceiue mee:
I haue (as when the Sunne doth light a score)
Buried this sigh in wrincle of a smyle,
But sorrow that is coucht in seemin gladnesse,
Is like that mirth fate turnes to suddaine sadnesse.
And her haire were not some-what darke then Hllns, well go to, there were no more comarison betweene the women but for my part she is my kinswoman, I would not as they tearme it praise her, but I would som-body had heard her talke yester-day as I did, I will not dispraie your sister Cassandras wit, but—
Oh Pandarus I tell thee Pandarus,
When I do tel hee there may hopes lie drown'd
Reply not in how many sadomes deepe,
They lie indrench'd I tell thee I am madde:
In Cressids loue? thou answest she is faire,
Powrest in the open vlcer of my heart:
Her eyes, her haire her cheeke, her gate, her voice,
Handlest in thy discourse: O that her hand
In whose comparion all whites are ynke
Writing their owne reproch; to whose soft seisure,
The cignets downe is harsh, and spiit of sence:
Hard as th palme of plow-man; this thou telst me,
As true thou telt me, when I say I loue her,
But saing thus in steed of oyle and balme,
Thou layst in euery gash that loue hath giuen mee
The knife that made it.
I speake no morethen truth.
Thou dost not speake so much.
Faith Ile not meddle in it, let her bee as shee is, if she bee faie tis the better for her, and shee bee not, she has the meds in her owne hands.
Good Pandarus. how now Pandarus
I haue had my labur for my trauell, ill thought on of her, and ill thought of you, go betweene and betweene, but smal thanks for my labour.
What are thou angry Pandarus? what with me?
Because she's kin to me therefore shee's not so faire as Hllen, and she were kin to me, she wold be as faire a Friday as Hellen, is on Sunday, but what I? I care not and shee were a black eamore, tis all one to mee.
Say I she is not faire?
I do not care whether you do or no, she's a foole to stay behinde her father let her to the Greekes, and so Ile tell her the next time I see her for my part Ile meddle nor make no more ith'matter.
Pandarus.
Not I.
Sweete Pandraus.
Pray you speake no more to mee I will leaue all as I found it and there an end.
Peace you vnracious clamors, peace ude sounds,
Fooles on both sides, Helle must needes be faire,
When with yor bloud you daylie paint her thus,
I cannot fight vpon this argument:
It is too staru'd a subiect for my sword,
But Pandaus: O gods▪ how do you plague me
I cannot come to Cressid but by Pandar,
And he's as teachy to be wood to woe,
As she is stubborne, chast, again all suite.
Tell me Apollo for thy Daphnes loue
What Cressid is, what Pandar, and what we:
Her bed is India there she lies, a pearle,
Betweene our Ilium, and where shee reides
Let it be cald the wild and wandring stood:
Our ele the Marchant, and this sayling Pandar,
Our doubtfull hope, our conuoy and our barke.
How now prince Troylus, wherefore not a field,
Because not there; this womans answer sorts,
For woman it is to be from thence.
What newes Aeneas from the field to day?
That Paris returned home and hurt.
By whom Aeneas?
Troylus by Menelaus.
Let Paris bleed tis but a scar to scorne,
Paris gor'd with Menelaus horne.
Harke what good sport is out of towne to day.
Better at home, if would I might were may:
But to the sport abrode are you bound thither?
In all swift hast.
Come goe wee then togither.
Who were those went by?
Queene Hecuba, and Hellen.
And whether goe they?
Vp to the Easterne tower,
Whose hight commands as subiect all the vaile,
To see the battell: Hector whose pacience,
Is as a vertue fixt, to day was mou'd:
Hee chid Adrmache and strooke his armoer,
And like as there were husbandry in warre
Before the Sunne rose, hee was harnest lyte,
And to the field goes he; where euery flower
Did as a Prophet weepe what it foresawe,
In Hectors wrath.
What was his cause of anger.
The noise goes this, there is amonge the Greekes,
A Lord of Troian bloud, Nephew to Hector.
They call him. Aiax.
Good; and what of him,
They say hee is a very man perse and stands alone.
So do all men vnlesse the are dronke, sicke, or haue no legges.
This man Lady, hath rob'd many beasts of their particular additions, hee is as valiant as the Lyon, churlish as the Beare, slowe as the Elephant: a man into whome nature hah so crowded humors, that his valour is crusht into folly, his folly sauced with discretion: there is no man hath a vertue, that he hath not a glimpse of, nor any mā an attaint, but he carries some staine of it. Hee is melancholy without cause and merry against the haire, hee hath the ioynts of euery thing, but euery thing so out of ioynt, that hee is a gowtie Briareus, many hands, & no vse: or purblinde Argus, al eyes, and no sight.
But how should this man that makes me smile, make Hector angry.
They say hee yesterday cop't Hector in the battell and stroke him downe, the disdaine and shame wheeof hath euer since kept Hector fasting and waking.
Who comes here.
Maddam your vncle Pandarus.
Hector a gallant man.
As may be in the world Lady.
Whats that? whats that?
Good morrow vncle Pandarus.
Good morrow cozen Cressid: what doe you talke of? good morrow Alexander: how doe you cozen when were you at Illum?
This morning vncle.
What were you talking of when I came? was Hector arm'd and gon ere yea came to Illium, Hellen was not vp was she?
Hector was gone but Hellen was not vp?
E'ene so, Hector was stirring early.
That were wee talking of, and of his anger.
Was he angry?
So he saies here.
True hee was so; I know the cause to, heele lay about him to day I can tel them that, & ther's Troylus wil not come farre behind him, let them take hede of Troylus; I can tell them that too.
What is he angry too?
Who Troylus? Troylus is the better man of the two:
Oh Iupiter ther's no comparison.
What not betweene Troylus and Hector? do you know a man if you see him?
I, if I euer saw him before and knew him:
Well I say Troylus is Troylus:
Then you say as I say, for I am sure hee is not Hector,
No not Hector is not Troylus in some degrees.
Tis iust, to each of them he is himselfe.
Himselfe, alas poore Troylus I would he were.
So he is.
Condition I had gone bare-foot to India.
He is not Hector.
Himselfe? no? hee's not himselfe, would a were himselfe, well the Gods are aboue, time must friend or endwell Troylus well, I would my heart were in her body; no, Hector is not a better man then Troylus.
Excuse me.
He is elder.
Pardon me, pardon me.
Th'others not come too't, you shall tell me another tale when th'others come too't, Hector shall not haue his will this yeare.
He shall not neede it if he haue his owne.
Not his qualities.
No matter.
Nor his beautie.
Twould not become him, his own's better.
You haue no iudgement neece; Hellen her selfe swore th'other day that Troylus for a bowne fauour (for so tis I must confesse) not browne neither.
No, but browne.
Faith to say truth, browne and not browne.
To say the truth, true and not true.
She praisd his complexion aboue Paris.
Why Paris hath colour inough.
So he has.
Then Trylus should haue too much, if shee praizd him aboue, his complexion is higher then his, hee hauing colour enough, and the other higher, is too flaming a praise for a good complexion, I had as lieue Helens golden tongue had commended Troylus for a copper nose.
I sweare to you I thinke Helen loues him better then Paris.
Then shees a merry greeke indeed.
Nay I am sure she dooes, she came to him th'other day into the compast window, and you know hee has not past three or foure haires on his chinne.
Indeed a Tapsters Arithetique may soone bring his particulars therein to a totall.
Why he is very yong, and yet will he within three pound liste as much as his brothers Hector.
Is he so yong a man, and so old a lifter.
But to prooue to you that Hellen loues him, shee came and puts mee her white hand to his clouen chin.
haue mercy, how came it clouen?
Why, you know tis dimpled, I thinke his smyling becomes him better then any man in all Phigia.
Oh he smiles valianty.
Dooes hee not?
Oh yes, and twere a clowd in Autumne.
Why go to then, but to proue to you that Hellen loues Troylus.
Troylus wil stand to thee proofe if youle prooue it so.
Troylus, why hee esteemes her no more then I esteeme and addle egge:
If you loue and addle egge as well as you loue and idle head you would eate chickens ith shell.
I cannot chuse but laugh to thinke how she ticled his chin, indeed shee has a marel's white hand I must needs confesse.
Without the rack.
And shee takes vpon her to spie a white heare on his chinne.
Alas poore chin many a wart is ritcher.
But there was such laughing, Queene Hecuba laught that her eyes ran ore.
With milstones.
And Cassandra laught.
But there was a more temperate fire vnder the por of her eyes: did her eyes run ore to?
And Hector laught.
At what was all this laughing.
Marry at the white heare that Hellen spied on Troylus chin.
And t'had beene a greene heare I should haue laught too.
They laught not so much at the heare as at his pretty answere.
What was his answere?
Quoth shee heere's but two and fifty heires on your chinne; and one of them is white.
This is her question.
Thats true, make no question of that, two and fiftie heires quoth hee, and one white, that white heire is my father, and all the rest are his sonnes. Iupiter quoth shee, which of these heires is Paris my husband? the orked one quoth he, pluckt out and gue it him: but there was such laughing, and Helen so blusht, and Paris so chaft, and all the rest so laught that it past.
So let it now for it has beene a great while going by.
Wel cozen I ould you a thing yesterday, think on't.
So I doe.
Ile be sworne tis true, he will weepe you an'twere a man borne in Aprill
And Ile spring vp in his tears an'twere a nettle against May.
Harke they are comming from the field, shall we stand vp here and see them as they passe toward Ilion, good Neece do, sweete Neece Cresseida.
At your pleasure.
Heere, here, here's an excellent place, here wee may see most brauely, iletell you them all by their names, as they posse by, but marke Troylus aboue the rest.
Speake not so lowde.
Thats Aeneas, is not that a braue man, hees one of the flowers of Troy I can tell you, but marke Troylus, you shal see anon.
Who's that?
Thats Antenor, he has a shrow'd wit I can tell you, and hee's man good enough, hees one o'th soundest iudgements in Troy whosoeuer, and a proper man of person, when comes Troylus, ile shew you Troylus anon, if hee see me, you shall see him nod at mee.
Will he giue you the nod:
You shall see:
If he do the ritch shall haue more.
Thats Hector, that, that, looke you hat, thers a fellow! goe thy way Hector, ther's a braue man Neece, O braue Hector, looke how hee lookes, theres a countenance, ist not a braue man?
O a braue man.
Is a not? it dooes a man heart good, looke you what hacks are on his helmet, looke you yonder, do you see, looke you there, thers no iesting, thers laying on, takt off, who will as they say, there be hacks.
Be those with swords.
Swords, anything he cares not, and the diuell come to him, its all one, by Gods lid it dooes ones heart good. Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris, looke yee yonder Neece, ist not a gallant man to, ist not, why this is braue now, who said he came hurt home to day. Hee's not hurt, why this will do Hellens heart good now ha? would I could see Troylus now, you shall see Troylus anon.
Whose that?
Thats Helenus, I maruell where Troylus is, thats Helenus, I hinke he went not forth to day, thats Helenus.
Can Helenus. fight vncle?
Helenus no: yes heele fight indifferent, well, I maruell where Troylus is; harke doe you not here the people crie Troylus? Helenus is a priest;
What seaking fellow comes yonder?
Where? yonder? thats Deihobus. Tis Troylus! theres a man Neece▪ hem? braue Troylus the Prince of chiualrie.
Peace for shame peace.
Marke him, note him: O braue Troylus, looke well vpon him Neece, looke you how his sword is bloudied, and his helme more hackt then Hectors, and how hee lookes, and how hee goes? O admirable youth, hee neuer saw three and twenty, go thy way Troylus, go thy way, had I a sister were a grace, or a daughter a Goddesse, hee should take his choice, O admiable man! Paris? Paris is durt to him, and I warrant Hellen to change would giue an eye to boote.
Here comes more.
Asses, fooles, doults, chaff & bran, chaff & bran, porredge after meate, I could liue and die in the eyes of Troylus, nere looke, nere looke, the Eagles are gonne, crowes and dawes, crowes and dawes, I had rather bee such a man as Troylus, then Agamemnon and all Greece.
There is amongst the Greekes Achilles a better man then Troylus.
Achilles, a dray-man, a porter, a very Cammell.
Well well:
Well, well, why haue you any discretion, haue you any eyes, doe you know what a man is? is not birth, beauty, good shape, discourse, man-hood, learning, gentlensse, vertue youth, liberallity and such like, the spice & salt that season a man.
I a minst man, and then to bee bak't with no date in the pie, for then the mans date is out:
You are such a woman a man knowes not at what ward you lie:
Vpon my backe to defend my bellie, vpon my wit to defend my wiles, vpon my secrecy to defend mine onesty, my maske to defend my beauty, and you to defend all these: and at al these wards I lie, at a thousand watches.
Say one of your watches.
Nay Ile watch you for that; and thats one of the chiefest of them two: If I cannot ward what I would not haue hit: I can watch you for teling how I tooke the blowe vnlesse it swell past hiding and then its past watching:
You are such another:
Sir my Lord would instantlie speake with you.
Where?
At your owne house there he vnarmes him:
Good boy tell him I come, I doubt he be hurt, fare ye well good Neice:
Adiew vncle:
I wil be with you Neice by and by:
To bring vncle:
I a token from Troylus:
By the same token you are a Bawde,
Word, vowes, guifts, teares and loues full sacrifize:
He offers in anothers enterprize,
But more in Troylus thousand fould I see,
Then in the glasse of Pandars praise may bee:
Yet hold I off: women are angels woing,
" Things woone are done, ioyes foule lies in the dooing.
That shee belou'd, knows naught that knows not this,
" Men price the thing vngaind more then it is,
That she was neuer yet that euer knew
Loue got so sweet, as when desire did sue,
Therefore this maxim out of loue I teach,
" Atchiuement is command; vngaind beseech,
Then though my hearts content firme loue doth beare,
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appeare.
Princes: what griefe hath set these Iaundies ore your cheekes?
The ample proposition that hope makes,
In all designes begun on earth below,
Failes in the promist largenesse, checks and disasters,
Grow in the vaines of actions highest reard.
As kno by the conlux of meeting sap,
Infects the sound Pine, and diuerts his graine,
Tortiue and errant from his course of growth.
Nor Princes is it matter new to vs,
That we come short of our suppose so farre,
That after seauen yeares siege, yet Troy walls stand,
Sith euer action that hath gone before,
Whereof we haue record, triall did draw,
Bias and thwart: not answering the ayme,
And that vnbodied figure of the thought,
That gau't surmised shape: why then you Princes,
Do you with cheekes abasht behold our workes,
And call them shames which are indeed naught else,
But the protractiue tryals of great loue,
To finde persistiue constancie in men.
The fnenesse of which mettall is not found,
In fortunes loue: for then the bould and coward,
The wise and soole, the Artist and vnread,
The hard and sft sem ll affn'd and in,
But in the winde and em est of her frowne,
Distinction with a brd and powerfull fan,
Puffing at all, winnowss the light away,
And what hath masse or matter by it selfe,
Lyes rich in vertue and vnmingled.
With due obseruance of the godlike seate,
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply
Thy latest words. In the reproofe of chance,
Lies the true proofe of men: the sea being smooth,
How many shallow bauble boate, dare aile,
Vpon her ancient brest, making their way
With those of nobler bulk?
But let the uffian Boreas once enrage
The gentle Tht is, and anon, behold
The strong ribbd barke through liquid mountaines cut,
Bounding betweene the two moyst elements,
Like Perseus horse. Where's then the sawcie boate,
Whose weake vntymberd sides but euen now
Corriuald greatnesse? either to harbot fled,
Or made a toste for Neptune: euen so
Doth valours shew, and valours worth deuide
In stormes of fortune; for in her ray and brightnesse
The heard hath more annoyance by the Bryze
Then by the Tyger, but when the splitting winde,
Makes flexible the knees of knotted Okes,
And Flies fled vnder shade, why then the thing of courage,
As rouzd with rage, with rage doth simpathize,
And with an accent tun'd in selfe same key,
Retires to chiding fortune.
Agamemnon,
Thou great Commander, nerues and bone of Greece,
Heat of our numbers, soule and onely spright,
In whom the tempers and the minds of all
Should be shut vp: heere what Vlisses speakes,
Besides th'applause and approbation,
The which most mighty (for thy place and sway
And thou most reuerend) for the stretcht out life,
I giue to both your speeches; which were such
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece,
Should hold vp high in brasse, and such againe
As venerable Nestor (hatcht in siluer)
Should with a bond of ayre strong as the Axel-tree,
(On which heauen rides) knit all the Greekish cares
To his experienc't tongue, yet let it please both
Thou great and wise, to heare Vlisses speake.
Troy yet vpon his bases had beene downe,
And the great Hectors sword had lackt a master
But for these instances.
The specialtie of rule hath beene neglected,
And looke how many Grecian tents do stand,
Hollow vpon this plaine, so many hollow factions,
When that the generall is not like the hiue,
To whom the forragers shall all repaire,
What honey is expected? Degree being visarded
Th'vnworthiest shewes as fairly in the maske.
The heauens them-selues, the plannets and this center
Obserue degree, prioritie and place,
In sisture, course, proportion, season forme,
Office and custome, in all line of order.
And therefore is the glorious planet Sol,
In noble eminence enthron'd and spherd,
Amidst the other; whose medcinable eye,
Corrects the influence of euill Planets,
And posts like the Commandment of a King,
Sans check to good and bad. But when the Planets,
In euill mixture to disorder wander,
What plagues, and what portents, what mutinie?
What raging of the sea, shaking of earth?
Commotion in the winds, frights, changes, horrors
Diurt and crack, rend and deracinate,
The vnitie and married clame of states
Quite from their fixure: O when degree is shakt,
Which is the ladder of all high designes,
The enterprise is sick. How could communities;
Degrees in schooles, and brother-hoods in Citties,
Peacefull commerce from deuidable shores,
The primogenitie and due of birth,
Prerogatiue of age, crownes, scepters, lawrels,
Bu by degree stand in authentique place:
Take but degree away, vntune that string,
And harke what discord followes, each thing melts
In meere oppugnancie: the bounded waters
Should lift their bosomes higher then the shores,
And make a sop of all this solid globe:
Strength should be Lord of imbecilitie,
And the rude sonne should strike his father dead.
Force should be right or rather right and wrong,
(Betweene whose endlesse iarre Iustice recides)
Should loose their names, and so should lustice to?
Then euery thing include it selfe in power,
Power into will will into appetite,
And appetite an vniuersall Woolfe,
(So doubly seconded with will and power)
Must make perforce an vniuersall prey,
And last eate vp himselfe.
Great Agamemnon,
This chaos when degree is suffocate,
Followes the choaking.
And this neglection of degree it is,
That by a pace goes backward with a purpose
It hath to clime. The generalls disdaind,
By him one step below, he by the next,
That next by him beneath, so euery step,
Exampl'd by the first pace that is sick
Of his superior, growes to an enuious feauer
Of pale and bloudlesse emulation,
And 'tis this feauer that keepes Troy on foote,
Not her owne sinnews. To end a tale of length,
Troy in our weaknesse stands not in her strength.
Most wisely hath Vlies here discouerd,
The feuer whereof all our power is sick.
The nature of the sicknesse found Vlisses
What is the remedie?
The great Achilles whom opinion crownes,
The sinnow and the fore-hand of our hoste,
Hauing his care full of his ayie same,
Growes dainty of his worth, and in his Tent
Lies mocking our designes: with him Patroclus
Vpon a lazie bed the liue-long day,
Breakes scurrell iests,
And with ridiculous and sillie action,
Which (slanderer) he Imitation calls,
He pageants vs. Some-time great Agamemnon,
Thy toplese deputation he puts on,
And like a strutting Player, whose conceit
Lyes in his ham-sting, and doth thinke it rich
To heere the woodden dialogue and sound,
Twixt his stretcht footing and the scoaffollage,
Such to be pitied and ore-rested seeming,
He act thy greatnesse in▪ And when he speakes,
Tis like a chime a mending, with termes vnsquae,
Which from the tongue of roaring Tiphon dropt,
Would seeme hiperboles, at this fustie stuffe,
The large Achilles on his prest bed lolling,
From his deepe chest laughes out alowd applause,
Cries excellent; 'tis Agmemnon right,
Now play me Nestr, hem and stroake thy beard,
As he being drest to some Oration,
That's done, as neere s the extremest ends
Of paralells as like as Vnlcan and his wife:
Yet god Achilles still cries excellent,
Tis Nestor right: now play him me Patroclus,
Arming to answer in a night alarme,
And then forsooth the faint defects of age,
Must be the scaene of myrth, to coffe and spit,
And with a palsie fumbling on his gorget,
Shake in and out the riuet, and at this sport
Sir valour dyes, cryes O enough Patrocls,
Or giue me ribbs of steele, I shall split all
In pleasure of my spleene, and in this fashion,
All our abilities guifts, natures shapes,
Seueralls and generalls of grace exact,
Atchiuements, plots, orders, preuentions,
Excitements to the field, or speech for truc,
Successe or losse, what is, or is not,
As stuffe for these two▪ to make paradoxes.
And in the imitation of these twaine,
Who as Vlisses sayes opinion crownes,
With an imperiall voyce: many aro infect,
Aiax is growne selfe-wild, and beares his head
In such a reyne, in full as proud a place
As broad Achilles: eepes his Tent like him,
Makes factious fasts, railes on our state of warre,
Bould as an Oracle, and sets Thersites
A slaue, whose gal coynes standers like a mint,
To match vin comparisons with durt,
To weaken our discredit, our exposure
How ranke so euer rounded in with danger,
They taxe our-pollicie; and call it cowardice;
Count wisdome as no member of the warre,
Forstall prescience, and esteeme no act
But that of hand, the stil and mentall parts,
That do contrie how many hands shall stike,
When fitnesse calls them on, and know by measure
Of their obserant royle the enemies waight,
Why this hath not a finges dignitie,
They call this bed-worke, mappry, Closet warre,
So that the Ram that batters downe the wall,
For the great swinge and rudenesse of his poise,
They place before his hand that made the engine,
Or those that with the of their soules,
By reason guide his execution.
Let this be granted, and Achilles horse
Makes many sonnes,
What trompet? looke Meels▪
From Troy.
What would you fore our tent
Is this great Agaenons tent I pray you?
Euen this.
May one that is a Herr'ald and a Prince,
Do a faire message to his Kingly eyes?
With surrty strong erth on Achilles
Fore all the Greekish heads, which with one voice,
Call Agamemnon head and generall.
Faire leaue and large security, how may
A stranger to those most imperiall lookes,
Know them from eyes of other mortals?
How?
I, I aske that I might waken reuerence,
And bid the cheeke b ready with a blush,
Modest as morning, when shee coldly eyes the youthfull Phoebus,
Which is that god, in ffice guiding men,
Which is the high and mighty Agamen.
This Troyan scornes vs, or the men of Troy,
Are cremonious Courtiers.
Courtiers as free as debonaire, vnarm'd
As bending Angels, thats their same in peace:
But when they would seeme soldiers, they haue galls,
Good armes, strong ioints, true sword, & great loes accord
Nothing so full of heart: but peace Aeneas,
Peace Troyan, lay thy finger on thy lips,
The worthinesse of praise distaines his worth,
If that the praisd him-selfe bring the praise forth.
But what the repining enemy commends,
That breath fame blowes, that praise sole pure transcends.
Sir you of Troy, call you your selfe Aeneas?
I Greeke, that is my name.
Whats your affaires I pray you?
Sir pardon, 'tis for Agamemnons cares.
He heeres ught priuately that comes from Troy.
Nor I from Troy come not to whisper with him,
I bring a trumpet to awake his are,
To set his seat on that attentiue bent,
And then to speake.
Speake frankly as the winde,
It is not Agamemnons sleeping houre;
That thou shalt know Troyan he is awake,
Hee tels thee so himselfe.
Trumpet blowe alowd,
Send thy brasse voyc through all these lazie tents,
And euery Greeke of mtrell let him a now,
What Troy meanes fairely, shall be spoke alowd,
We haue great herre in Troy,
A Prince calld Hect, is his father,
Who in his dull and long continued truce,
Is restie growne: H bad me take a Trumpet,
And to this speake, Kings, Princes, Lords,
If here be one among the fair'st of Greece,
That holds his honour higher then his case,
And feeds his praise, more then he feares his perilt,
That knowes his knowes not his feare,
That loues his more then in confession,
(With truant vowes to her owne lips he loues)
And dare avowe her beaie, and her worth,
In other armes then hes: to him this challenge;
Hector in view of Troyans and of Greekes,
Shall make it good or do his best to do it:
He hath a Lady, wiser, fairer, trer,
Then euer Greeke did couple in his armes,
And will to morrow with his Trumpet call;
Mid-way betweene your tents and walls of Troy,
To rouze a Greci that is true in le;
If only come; Hector shall honor him▪
If none, eele say in Troy wheir he ,
The Grecian dames are un-burnt, and not worth
The splinter of a Launce. Euen so much▪
This shall be told our louer Lord Aeneas,
If none of them haue soule in such a .
We them all at , we are souldiers,
And may that souldier a recreant prooue,
That meanes not, hath , or is not in loue:
If then one is, or hath a meanes to be,
That one meetes Hector: if none else I am .
Tell him of Nestor, was a man
When Hectors He is old now,
But if there be not in our Grecian hoste,
A noble man that hath no sparke of fire
To answer
Ile hide my siluer eard in a gould beauer,
And in my vambrace put, my braunes
And meeting him tell him that my Lady,
Was fairer then his grandam, and as chast,
As may bee in the world (his youth in flood)
Ile proue this troth with my three drps of bloud,
Now heauens for-send such of men▪
Amen▪ faire Lord Aeeas let me touch your had,
To our pauilion shall I leade you ;
Achilles shall hau word of this intent,
So shall each Lord of Greece from tent to tent,
Your selfe shall feast with vs before you goe,
And finde the welcome of a noble soe.
Nestor.
What saies Vlisses?
I haue a yong conception in my braine,
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.
What ist?
Blunt wodges true hard knos, the seeded pride,
That▪ hath to this matrity blowne vp
In ranke Achills, must or now be cropt,
Or shedding breede a noursery of like euill,
To ouer-bulk vs all.
Well and how?
This challeng that the gallant Hector sends,
How euer it is spread in generall name
Relates in purpose onely to Achilles.
True the purpose is perspicuous as substance,
Whose grofensse little characters sum vp▪
And in the publication make no straine,
But that Achilles weare his braine, as barren,
As banks of libi (though Apollo knowes
Tis dry enough) will with great speed of iudgement,
I with celerity finde Hectors purpose, pointing on him.
And wake him to the answere thinke you?
Why tis most meete; who may you ele oppose▪
That can from Hector bring those honours off,
If not Achilles: though't be a sportfull combat.
Yet in the triall much opinion dwells:
For here the Troyans tast our derst repute,
With their fin'st pallat, and tru to me Vlissis
Or imputation shalbe odly poizde
In this vilde action, for the successe,
Although perticuler shall giue a scantling
Of good or bad vnto the generall,
And in such indexes (although small pricks
To their subsequent volumes) there is seene,
The baby figure of the gyant masse,
Of things to come at large: It is suppos'd
He that meetes Hector, yssues from our choice,
And choice (being mutuall act of all our soules)
Makes merit her election, and doth boyle,
(As twere from forth vs all) a man distill'd
Out of our vertues, who miscarrying,
What heart receiues from hence a conquering part,
To steele a strong opinion to them selues.
Giue pardon to my speech? therefore tis meete,
Achilles meete not Hector, let vs like Marchants
First shew foule wares, and thinke perchance theile sell;
If not; the luster of the better shall exceed,
By shewing the wors first: do not consent,
That euer Hector and Achilles meet,
For both our honour and our shame in this, are dog'd with two strange followers.
I see them not with my old eyes what are they?
What glory our Achilles shares from Hector
Were he not proud, we all should share with him:
But he already is too insolent.
And it were better parch in Afrique Sunne,
Then in the pride and sault scorne of his eyes
Should he scape Hector faire. If he were foild,
Why then we do our maine opinion cush
In taint of our best man. No, make a lottry
And by deuise let blockish Aiax draw
The sort to fight with Hector, among our selues,
Giue him allowance for the better man,
For that will phisick the great Myrmidon,
Who broyles in loud applause, and make him fall,
His crest that prouder then blew Iris beds,
If the dull brainlesse Aiax come safe off
Weele dresse him vp in voices, if he faile
Yet go we vnder our opinion still,
That we haue better men, but hit or misse,
Our proiects ife this shape of sence assumes
Aiax imploy'd plucks downe Achilles plumes.
Now Vlisses I begin to relish thy aduise,
And I will giue a taste thereof forthwith,
To Agamemnon, go we to him straight
Two curres shall came each other, pride alone
Must arte the mastiffs on, as twere a hone.
Thersites.
Agamemnon, how if he had bies, full, all ouer, generally.
Thersites.
And those byles did run (say so), did not the generall run then, were not that a botchy coro.
Dogge.
Then would come some matter from him, I see none now.
Thou bitchwolfs son canst thou not heare, feele then.
The plague of Greece vpon thee thou mongrell beefe witted Lord.
Speake then thou vnsalted leauen, speake, I will beate thee into hansomnesse.
I shall sooner raile thee into wit and holinesse, but I thinke thy horse will sooner cunne an oration without booke, then thou learne praier without booke, thou cast strike canst thou? a red murrion ath thy Iades trickes.
Tde-stoole? learne me the proclamation.
Doost thou thinke I haue no sence thou strikest mee thus?
The proclamation.
Thou art proclaim'd foole I thinke.
Do not Porpentin, do not, my fingers itch:
I would thou didst itch from head to foote, and I had the scratching of the, I would make thee the lothsomest scab in Greece, when thou art forth in the incursions thou strikest as glow as another.
I say the proclamation.
Thou gromblest and raylest euery houre on Achills, and thou art as full of enuy at his greatnesse, as Crbrus is at Proserinas beauty, I that thou barkst at him.
Mistres Thersites.
Thou shouldst strike him. Hee would punne thee into shiuers with his fist, as a sayler breakes a bisket, you horson curre. Do? do?
Thou stoole for a witch:
I, Do? do? thou sodden witted Lord, thou hast no more braine then I haue in mine elbowes, an Asinico may cutor thee, you scuruy valiant asse, thou art heere but to thrash Troyans, and thou art bought and sould among those of any wit, like a Barbarian slaue. If thou vse to beate mee I will beginne at thy heele, and tell what thou art by ynches, thou thing of no bowells thou.
You dog:
You scuny Lord.
You curre.
Mars his Idiot, do rudenesse, do Camel, do, do.
Why how now Aiax wherefore do yee thus,
How now Thersites whats the matter man.
You see him there? do you?
I whats the matter.
Nay looke vpon him.
So I do, whats the matter?
Nay but regard him well.
Well, why so I do.
But yet yo looke o well vpon him, for who some euer you take him to be he is iax.
I know that foole.
I but that foole knowes not himselfe.
Therefore I be ate thee.
Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he vtters, his euasions haue eares thus long, I haue bobd his braine more then he has beate my bones. It will buy nine sparrowes for a penny, and his pia mater is not worth the ninth part of a sparrow: this Lord (Achilles) Aiax, who weares his wit in his belly, and his guts in his head, I tell you what I say of him.
What.
I say this Aiax.
Nay good Aiax.
Has not so much wit.
Nay I must hold you.
As will stop the eye of Hellens needle, for whom he comes to fight.
Peace foole?
I would haue peace and quietesse, but the foole will not, he there, that he: looke you there?
Oh thou damned cure I shall—
Will you set your wit to a fooles.
No I warrant you, the fooles will shame it.
Good words Thesites.
Whats the quarrell.
I bad the vile oule goe learne mee the enor of the proclamation, and he railes vpon me.
I serue thee not?
Well, go to, go to.
I serue here volutary.
Your last seruice was sffrance: twas not voluntary, no man is beaten volunary, Aiax was here the voluntary, and you as vnder an Impresse.
E'ene so, a great deale of your witte to, lies in your sinnewes, or els there bee hers, Hector shall haue a great catch and knocke at either of your beains, a were as good crack a sust nut with no kernell.
What with me to hersites.
Thes Vlisses and old Nestr, whose wit was moudy ere their grandsiets had nailes, yoke you like draught oxen, and make you plough vp the wars.
What? what?
Yes good sooth to Achill, to Aiax, to—
I shall ut out your to ue.
Tis no matter, I shall peake as much as thou afterwards.
No more words Thersites peace.
I will hold my peace when Aclles brooch bids me, shall I?
There's for you Patrolus.
I will see you hang'd like Clatpoles, ere I come any more to your tents, I will keepe where there is wit stirring, and leaue the faction of fooles.
A good riddance.
Marry this sir is proclaim'd through all our hosle,
That Hector by the first houre of the Sunne.
Will with a trumpet twixt our Tents and Troy,
To morrow morning call some Knight to armes,
That hath a stomack, and such a one that dare,
Maintaine I know not what, (tis ash) farewel—
Farewell, who shall answer him.
I know not, is put to lottry, otherwise,
He knew his man.
O meaning you? I will go learne more of it.
After so many houres, liues, speeches spent,
Thus once againe saies Nestor from the Greekes:
Deliuer Hellen, (and all domage els,
As honour, losse o time, trauell, expence,
Wounds, friends and what els dere that is conim'd
In hot digestion of this cormoraut warre)
Shalbe stroke off, Hector what say you to't?
Though no man lesser seares the Greekes then I
As sarre as toucheth my particular yet dread Priam
There is no Lady of more softer bowells,
More spungy to suck in the sence of feare:
More ready to cry out, who knowes what followes
Then Hector is: the ound of peace is surely
Surely secure, but modest doubt is calld,
The beon of the wise, the tent that serches,
Too'th bottome of the worst let Hellen go,
Since the first sword was drawne about this question
Euery tith soule 'mongst many thousand dismes,
Hath beene as deere as Hllen. I meane of os,
If we haue loste so many enthes of ours,
To guard a thing not ours, not worth to vs,
(Had it our name) the valew of one ten,
What merits in that reason which denies,
The yeelding, of her vp?
Fie, fie, my brother,
Way you the worth and honour of a King:
So great as our dread fathers in a scale
Of common ounces? will you with Comters summe,
The past proportion of his infinite
And buckle in, a waste most atholes,
With spanes and inches so dymiue▪
As feares and reasons: Fie for Godly shame?
No maruell though you bite so sharpe of reasons,
You are so empty of them should not our father;
Beare the great sway of his affaires with reason,
Because your speech hath none that tell him so?
You are for dreames and slumbers brother Priest,
You furre your gloues with reason, here are your reasons
You know an enemy intends you harme:
You know a sword imployde is perilous
And reason flies the obiect of all harme.
Who maruells then when Helenus beholds,
A Gretian and his sword, if he do set
The very wings of reason to his heeles,
And like chidden Merery from Ioe
Or like a starre disorbd? nay if we talke of reason,
Sets shut our gates and sleepe: man-hood and honour,
Should haue hare hearts, would they but fat their thoughts
With this cram'd reason, reason and respect,
Make lyuers pale, and lush hood deiect.
Brother, shee is not worth, what shee doth the keeping.
Whats aught but as tis valued.
But valew dwell not in perticuler will,
It holds his estimate and dignity,
As well wherein tis precious of it selfe
As in the prizer, tis madde Idolatry
To make the serice greaterthan the God,
And the will dotes that is attributiue;
To what' infectiously it selfe affects,
Without some image of th'affected merit,
I take to day a wise, and my election▪
Is led on in the conduct of my will,
My will enindled by mine eyes and eares,
Two traded pilots twixt the dangerous shore,
Of will and Iudgement: how may I auoyde?
(Although my will distast what it elected)
The wife I choose, there can be no uasion,
To blench from this and to stand firme by honor,
We turne not backe the silkes vpon the marchant
When we haue soild them, nor the remainder viands,
We do not throw in vnespectue siue,
Because we now are full, it was thught mete
Pais should do some vengeance on the Greekes.
Your breth with full consent bellied his ailes,
The seas and winds (old wranglers) tooke a tuce:
And did him seuice, hee toucht the ports desir'd▪
And for an old aunt whom the Greekes held Captiue,
He brought a Grecia Queene, whose youth and freshnesse,
Wrincle, Apolloes, and makes pale the morning.
Why keepe we her? the Grecians keepe our Aunt,
Is she worth keeping? why shee is a pearle
Whose price hath lansh' aboue a thousand ships:
And turn'd Kings to Marchants,
If youle twas wisdome Paris went,
As you mast needs, for you all cri'd go, go,
If youle confesse be brought home worthy prize:
As you must needs, for you all, clapt your hands,
why do you now
The ysse of your poper wisdomes rate,
And do a deed that neu fortune did,
Begger the estimation, which you
Ritcher then sea and land? O thest most base,
That wee haue stolne, what we do feare to keep,
But theeues vnwothy of so stone:
That in their country did them that disgrace,
We feare to warrant i our natiue place.
Cry Troyans cry:
What noe? what shrik is this?
Tis our madde I do know h voice.
Cry Troys.
It is Cassandra!
Cry oyans cry, thousand eyes,
And I will fill them with prophetick teares.
Peace sister peace▪
Virgins and boyes, mid-age, and wrinckled elders,
Soft inancie, that noting canst but cire,
Adde to my clamours: et vs pay be-times
A moytie of that masse of mone to come:
Crie Troyans crye, practise your eyes with teares,
Troy must not bee, nor goodly I lion stand.
Ou fire-brand brother Paris bunes vs all,
Crie Troaus cie, a Holen and a woe.
Crie, crie, Troy brnes, or else let Hllen goe.
Now youthfull Trylus, do not these high straines
Of diuination in our Sster, worke
Some touches of remorse? or is your bloud
So madly hot, that no discourse of reason,
Nor feare of bad uccesse in a bad caue,
Cn qualifie the same?
Why brother Hector,
We may not thinke the iustnesse of each act
Such, and no other then euent doth forme it,
Nor once deiect the courage of our mindes,
Because Cassandra's madde, her brain-sick raptures
Cannot distast the goodnesse of a quarrell,
Which hath our seuerall honors all engag'd,
To make it gratious. For my priuate part,
I am no more toucht then all Priams sonnes:
And Ioue forbid there should be done amongst vs,
Such things as might offend the weakest spleene,
To fight for and maintaine.
Else might the world conuince of leuitie,
As well my vnder-takings as you counsells,
But I attest the gods, your full consent,
Gaue wings to my propension, and cut off
All eares attending on so dire a protect,
For what (alas) can these my single armes?
What propugnation is in one mans valour
To stnd the push and enmitie of those
This quarrell woud excte? Yet I protest
Wee I alone to passe the difficulties,
And had as ample power, as I haue will,
Paris should nere etract, what he hath done,
Nor faint in the pursuite,
Paris you speake
Like one be-sotted on your sweet delights,
You haue the hony still, but these the gall,
So to be valiant, is no praise at all.
Sir, I propose not meerly to my selfe,
The plasures such a beautie brings with it,
But I would haue the soile of her faite rape,
Wip't of in honorable keeping her,
What reason were it to the ansackt queene,
Disgrace to your great worths, and shame to me▪
Now to deliuer her possssin vp
On tearmes of base compulsion? can it be,
That so degenerate a straine as this,
Should once set footing in your generous bosomes?
There's not the meanest spirit on our party,
Without a heart to dare, or sword to drawe,
When Helen is defended: nor none so noble,
Whose life were ill bestowd, or death vnfam'd,
Where Helen is the subiect. Then I say,
Well may we fight for her, whom we know well,
The worlds large spaces cannot paralell.
Paris and Troyls, you haue both said well,
And on the cause and question now in hand,
Haue glod, but superficially, not much
Vnlike young men, whom Aristotle thought
Vnfit to heere Mrrall Philosophie;
The reasons you alleadge, do more condue
To the hot passion of distempred blood,
Then to make vp a free detemination
Twixt right and wrong: for pleasure and reuenge,
Haue eares more deafe then Adders to the voyce
Of any true decision, Nature craues
All dues be rendered to their owners, Now
What neerer debt in all humanitie,
Then wife is to the husband▪ if this lawe
Of natue be corrupted through affection
And that great mindes of partiall indulgence,
To their benummed wills resist the same,
There is a lawe in each well-orderd nation,
To curbe those raging appetites that are
Most disobedient and refracturio;
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's King,
As it is knowne she is, these morrall lawes
Of nature and of nations, speake alowd
To haue her back returnd: thus to persist
In doing wrong, extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heauie. Hectors opinion
Is this in way of truth: yet nere the lesse,
My spritely brethren▪ I propend to you
In resolution to keepe Helen still,
For 'tis a cause that hath no meane dependance,
Vpon our ioynt and seuerall dignities.
Why there you toucht the life of our designer
Were it not glory that we more affected,
Then the performance of our heauing spleenes,
I would not wish a drop of Troy an bloud,
Spent more in her defence. But worthy Hector,
She is a theame of honour and renowne,
A spurre to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
Whose present courage may be ate downe our foes,
And fame in time to come canonize vs,
For I presume braue Hector would not loose
So rich aduantage of a promisd glory,
As smiles vpon the fore-head of this action,
For the wide worlds reuenew.
I am yours,
You valiant offspring of great Priamus,
I haue a roisting challenge sent amongst
The dull and factious nobles of the Greekes,
VVill shrike amazement to their drowsie spirits,
I was aduertizd, their great generall slept,
VVhilst emulation in the armie crept:
This I presume will wake him.
How now Thersites? what lost in the Labyrinth of thy furie? shall the Elephant Aiax carry it thus? he beates me, and I raile at him: O worthy satisfaction, would it were otherwise: that I could beate him, whilst hee raild at mee: Sfoote, Ile learne to coniure and raise Diuels, but Ile see some issue of my spitefull execrations. Then ther's Achilles, a rare inginer. If Troy bee not taken till these two vndermine it, the walls will stand till they fall of them-selues, O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus, forget that thou art Ioe the king of gods: and Mercury, loose all the Serpentine craft of thy Caduceus, if yee take not that little little lesse then little witte from the that they haue: which short-armd Ignorance it selfe knowes is so aboundant scarce, it will not in circumuention delurer a flie from a spider, without drawing their massie Irons▪ and cutting the web. After this the vengeance on the whole cape, or rather the Neopolitan bone-ache: for that me thinkes is the curse depending on those that warre for a packet. I haue said my praers, and diuell Enuie say Amen. What ho my Lord Acilles?
Whose there? Thersites? good Thersites come in and raile.
If I could a remembred a guilt counterfeit, thou couldst not haue slipt out of my contemplation: but it is no mater, thy selfe vpon thy selfe. The common curse of mankinde, Folly and Ignorance, be thine in great reuenew: Heauen blesse thee from a tutor, and discipline come not nere thee. Let thy bloud be thy direction till thy death: then if she that layes thee out sayes thou art not a faire course, Ile be sworne and sworne vpon't, shee neuer shrowded any bu lazars. Amen. Where's Achilles?
What art thou deuout? wast thou in prayer?
I the heauens heae me.
Amen.
Who's there?
Thertes my Lord.
Wher? where? O where? art thou coe why my cheese, my digestion, why hast thou not serued thy selfe into my table, so many meales, come what's Agamemnon?
Thy commander Achilles, then tell me Patroclus, whats Achilles?
Thy Lord Thersites. Then tell mee I pray thee, what's Thersites?
Thy knower, Patroclus: then tell me Patroclus, what art thou?
Thou must tell that knowest.
O tell, tell.
Ile decline the whole question. Agamemnon commands Achilles, Achilles is my Lord, I am Patroclus knower, and Patroclus is a foole.
Deriue this? come?
Agamemnon is a foole to offer to command Achilles, Achilles is a foole to be commanded. Thersites is a foole to serue such a foole, and this Patroclus is a foole positiue.
Why am I a foole?
Make that demand of the Prouer, it suffices mee thou art: looke you, who comes heere?
Come Patroclus, Ile speake with no body: come in with me Thersites.
Here is such patcherie, such iugling, and such knauery: all the argument is a whore, and a Cuckold, a good quarrell to draw emulus factions, & bleed to death vpon.
Where is Achilles?
Within his tent, but ill disposd my Lord.
Let it be knowne to him; hat we are heere,
He sate, our messengers and we lay by,
Our appertainings, visiting of him
Let him be told so, least perchance he thinke,
We dare not moue the question of our place,
Or know not what we are.
I shall say so to him.
We saw him at the opening of his tent,
Hee i not sick.
Yes Lion sick, sick of proud heart, you may call it melancholy if you will fauour the man. But by my head 'tis pride: but why, why, let him shew vs a cause?
What mooues Aiax thus to bay at him?
Achillis hath inuegled his foole from him,
Who Thersites?
He.
Thē will Aiax lack matter, if he haue lost his argumēt.
No you see he is his argument, that has his argument Achilles.
All the better, their fractiō is more our wish then thei faction, but it was a strōg composure a foole could disunite.
The amity that wisdom knits not, folly may easily vnty.
Heere comes Patroclus.
No Achilles with him.
The Elephant hath ioynts, but none for courtesie,
His legs are legs for necessity, not for flexure.
Achilles bids me say he is much sorry,
If any thing more then your sport and pleasure
Did mooue your greatnesse, and this noble state,
To call vpon him. He hopes it is no other
But for your health, and your disgestion sake,
An after dinners breath.
Heere you Paroclus:
We are too well acquinted with these answers,
But his cuasion winged thus swift with scorne,
Cannot out-flie our apprehensions,
Much attribute he hath, and much the reason
Why we ascribe it to him. Yet all his vertues,
Not vertuously on his owne part beheld,
Doe in our eyes begin to lose their glosse,
Yea like faire fruite in an vnholsome dish,
Are like to rott vntasted. Go and tell him,
We come to speake with him, and you shall not inne,
If you do say, we thinke him ouer-proud
And vnder-honest, in selfe assumption greater
Then in the note of iudgement. And worthier then himselfe
Heere tend the sauage strangenesse he puts on
Disguise, the holy strength of their commaund,
And vender-write in an obseruing kinde,
His humorous predominance: yea watch
His course, and time, his ebbs and flowes, and if
The passage, and wholest came of his commeacement,
Rode on his tide Goe tell him this, and adde,
That if he ouer-hold his price so much,
Weele' none of him, But let him like an engine,
Not portable, lye vnder this report.
Bring action hither, this cannot go to warre,
A stirring dwarfe we doe allowance giue,
Before a sleeping gyant. Tell him so.
I shall, and bring his answer presently.
In second voyce weele not be satisfied,
We come to speake with him: Vlisses entertaine.
What is he more then another.
No more then what he thinkes he is.
Is he so much: doe you not thinke he thinkes himselfe a better man then I am?
No question.
Will you subscribe his thought, and say he is.
No noble Aiax, you are as strong, as valiant, as wife, no lesse noble, much more gentle, and altogether more tractable.
Why should a man be proud? how doth pride grow? I know not what pride is.
Your minde is the cleerer, and your vertues the fairer, hee that is proud eates vp him-selfe: Pride is his owne glasse, his owne trumpet, his owne chronicle, and what euer praises it selfe but in the deed, deuoures the deed in the praise.
I do hate a proud man, as I do hate the ingendring of Toades.
And yet he loues himselfe, it not strange?
Achilles will not to the field to morrow.
Whats his excuse?
He doth rlye on none.
But carries on the streame of his dispose,
Without obseruance, or respect of any,
In will peculiar, and in selfe admission.
Why will he not vpon our faire request,
Vntent his person, and share th ayre with vs.
Things mall as nothing, for equests sake onely,
He makes important possest he is with greatnesse,
And speakes not to himselfe but with a pride,
That quarrels at selfe breath. Imagind worth,
Hods in his boud such swolne and hott discurse,
That twixt his mentall and his actiue parts,
Kingdom Achilles in commotion rages,
And batters downe himselfe. What should I say,
He is so plaguie proud, that the death tokens of it,
Crie no recouerie.
Let Aiax go to him,
Dere Lord, go you, and greete him in his tent,
'Tis said he holds you well, and will be lead,
At our request from himselfe.
O Agamemnon let it not be so,
Weele consecrate the steps that Aiax makes,
When they go from Achilles: shall the proud Lord
That bats his rrogance with his ownseame,
And neuer suffes matter of the world
Enter his thoghts, such as doth reuolue,
And uminate him-selfe: shall he be worshpt,
Of that we hold an idoll more then hee,
No this thrice worhy and right valiant Lord,
Shall nt so staule his palme noby acquird,
Nor by my will aslubiugate his merit,
As amply liked as Achilles is by going to Achilles,
That were to enlard his fat already pride,
And adde more coles to Cancer when he burnes,
With entertaining great Hiperi,
This Lod go to him. Iupiter forbid,
And sa in thunder Achilles go to him.
O this is well, he rubs the vaine of him.
And how his silence drinkes vp his applause,
If I go to him: with my armed fist il push him ore the ae.
O no, you shall not goe,
And he be proud with me, Ile phee his pride,
Let me go to him.
Not for the worth that hangs vpon our quarrell.
A paltry insolent fellow.
How he describes him selfe.
Can he not be sociable.
The Rauen chides blacknesse.
Ile tell his humorous bloud.
Hee wilbe the phisition, that should bee the pacient.
And all men were of my minde.
Wit would bee out of fashion.
A should not beare it so, a should eate swords first? shall pride carry it?
And tood yow'd carry halfe.
A would haue ten shares. I will kneade him, Ile make him supple he's not yet through warme?
Force him with praiers poue in, poure, his ambition is die.
My Lord you feed to much on this dislike,
Our noble generall do not do so?
You must prepare to fight without Achills.
Why tis this naming of him do's him harme,
H re is a man but tis before his face, I wilbe silent.
Wherefore should you so?
He is not emulous as Achilles is.
Know the whole world hee is as valiant —
A hoarson dog that shall palter with vs thus, would he were a Troyan?
What a vice were it in Aiax now:
If hee were proude.
Or couetous of praise.
I or surly borne.
Or strange or selfe affected.
Thank the heauens Lord, thou art of sweet composure
Praise him that gat thee, shee that gaue thee suck:
Fam'd be thy tutor, and thy parts of nature,
Thrice fam'd beyond all thy erudition:
But hee that disciplind thine armes to fight,
Let Mars diuide eternity in twaine,
And giue him halfe, and for thy vigour?
Bull-bearing Mil his addition yeeld,
To sinowy Aiax, I will not praise thy wisdome,
Which like a boord: a pale, a shore confines
This spacious and dilated parts, here's Nestor,
Instructed by the antiquay times:
He must, he is, he cannot but be wise,
But pardon father Nestor were your daies
As greene as Aiax, and your braine so temper'd,
You should not haue the emynence of him,
But be as Aiax.
Shall I call you father?
I my good Sonne.
Be ruld by him Lord Aiax.
There is no tarrying here the Hart Achilles,
Keepes thicket, please it our great generall,
To call together all his state of warre,
Fresh Kings are come to Troy, To morrow
We must with all our maine of power stand fast,
And here's a Lord come Knights from East to West
And call their flower, Aiax shall cope the best.
Go we to counsell, let Achiles sleepe,
Light boates saile swift, though greater hulkes draw deepe.
Friend you, pray you a word, doe you not follow the yong Lord Paris.
I sir when he goes before mee.
You depend vpon him I meane.
Sir I do depend vpon the Lord.
You depend vpon a notable gentleman I must needs praise him.
The Lord be praized?
You know me? oe you not?
Faith sir superficially.
Friend know mee better, I am the Lord Pandarus.
I hope I shall know your honour better?
I do desire it.
You are in the state of grace?
Grace? not so friend, honour and Lordship are my titles, what musicke is this?
I do but partly know sir, it is musick in partes.
Know you the musiciars?
Wholy sir.
Who play they to?
To the hearers sir.
At whose pleasure friend?
At mine sir, and theirs that loue musicke,
Command I meane:
Who shall I command sir?
Friend we vnderstand not one another, I am to cortly and thou to cunning, at whose request do these men play?
Thats to't indeed sir? marry sir, at the request of Paris my Lord, who is there in person, with him the mortall Venus, the heart bloud of beauty, loues inuisible soule:
Who my cozen Cressida,
No sir, Hellen, could not you finde out that by her attributes.
It should seeme fellow thou hast not seene the Lady Cressid I come to speake with Paris, from the Prince Troylus. I will make a complemental assault vpon, him for my businesse seeth's.
Sodden businesse, theirs a stew'd phrase indeed.
Faire be to you my Lord, and to al this faire company, faire desires in all faire measure fairlie guide them, especially to you faire Queene faire thoughts be your faire pillow.
Dere Lord you are full of faire words:
You speake your faire pleasure sweet Queene,
Faire Prince here is good broken musicke.
You haue broke it cozen: and by my life you shall make it whole againe, you shall peece it out with a peece of your performance.
he is full of harmony:
Truely Lady no:
O sir:
Rude in sooth, in good sooth very rude.
Well said my Lord, well, you say so in fits:
I haue businesse to my Lord deere Queene? my Lord will you vouchsafe me a word.
Nay this shall not hedge vs out, weele here you sing ertainly:
Well sweete Queene you are pleasant with mee, but, marry thus my Lord my deere Lord, and most esteemed friend your brother Troylus.
My Lord Pandarus hony sweet Lord,
Go too sweet Queene, go to?
Comends himselfe most affectionatly to you.
You shall not bob vs out of our melody,
If you do our melancholy vpon your head.
Sweet Queene, sweet Queene, thats a sweet Queene
I faith —
And to make a sweet Lady sad is a sower offence.
Nay that shall not serue your turne, that shall it not in truth la? Nay I care not for such words, no, no. And my Lord hee desires you that if the King ca for him at super. You will make his excuse.
My Lord Pandarus.
What saies my sweete Queenem,y very very sweet Queene?
What exploit's in hand, where suppes he to night?
Nay but my Lord?
What saies my sweet Queene? my cozen will fall out with you.
You must not know where he sups.
Ile lay my life with my disposer Cresseida.
No, no? no such matter you are wide, come your dispose is sicke.
Well ile makes excuse?
I good my Lord, why should you say Cresseida, no, your disposers sick.
I spie?
You spy? what doe you spie? come, giue mee an instrument now sweete Queene:
Why this is kindely done?
My Neece is horribly in loue with a thing you haue sweete Qeene.
Shee shall haue it my Lord, if it bee not my Lord Paris.
Hee? o? sheele none of him, they two are tawine.
Falling in after falling out may make them three.
Come, come, Ile heare no more of this, Ile sing you a song now.
I, I, prethee, now by my troth sweet lad thou haste a fine fore-head.
I you may, you may.
Let thy song be loue: this loue will vndoe vs all. Oh Cupid, Cupid, Cupid.
Loue? I that it shall yfaith.
I good now loue, loue, nothing but loue.
Loue, loue, nothing but loue, still loue still more
For o loues bow. Shoots Bucke and Doe.
The shafts confound not that it wounds
But ticles still the sore:
These louers cry, o ho they dye,
Yet that which seemes the wound to kill,
Doth turne oh ho, to ha ha he,
So dying loue liues still,
O ho a while, but ha ha ha,
O ho grones out for ha ha ha—hey ho,
In loue I faith to the very tip of the nose.
He eates nothing but doues loue, and that breeds hot blood, and hot bloud begets hot thoughts, and hot thoughts beget hot deedes, and hot deeds is loue.
Is this the generation of loue: hot bloud hot thoughts and hot deedes, why they are vipers, is loue a generation of vipers:
Sweete Lord whose a field to day?
Hector, Deiphobus, Helenus, Athenor, and all the gallantry of Troy. I would faine haue arm'd to day, but my Nell would not haue it so.
How chance my brother Troylus went not?
He hangs the lippe at something, you know al Lord Pandarus.
Not I hony sweete Queene, I long to heare how they sped to day:
Youle remember your brothers excuse?
To a hayre.
Farewell sweete Queene.
Commend me to your neece.
I will weet Queene.
Their come from the field: let v to Priames Hall
To greete the warriers. Sweet Helen I must woe you,
To helpe v-arme our Hector: his stubborne bucle
With this your white enchaunting fingers toucht;
Sha more obey then to the edge of steele▪
Or force of Greekish sinewes: you shall do more
Then all the Hand Kinges, disarme great Hector▪
Twil make vs proud to be his seruant Paris
Yea what he shall receiue of vs in duty,
Giues vs more palme in beauty then we haue.
Yea ouer shines our selfe.
Sweet above thought I loue her?
How now wher's thy maister, at my Cousin Cressdas?
No sir stayes for you to conduct him thether.
O heere he comes how now, how now?
Sirra walke off.
Haue you seene my Cousine?
No Pandarus, I stalke about her dor
Like to a strange soule vpon the Stigian banke
Staying for waftage. O be thou my Charn.
And giue me swift transportance to these fieldes,
VVhere I may wallow in the lilly beds
Proposd for the deseruer. O gentle Pandar,
From Cupis shoulder plucke his pained wings,
And flye with me to Cresid.
VValke heere ith'Orchard, le bring her straight▪
I am giddy; expectation whirles me round,
Th'ymaginary relish is so sweee,
That it inchaunts my sence: what will it be
When that the wary pallats aste indeed
Loues thrice repured Nectar? Death I feare me
Sounding distruction, or some ioy to fyne,
To subtill, potent, tun'd to sharp in sweetnesse
For the capacity of my ruder powers;
I feae it much, and I do feare beside
That I shall loose distinction in my ioyes
As doth a battaile, when they charge on heapes
The enemy flying.
Shees making her ready, sheele come straight, yo must be witty now, she does so blush, and fetches her wind so short as if shee were fraid with a spirite: Ile fetch her; it is the preiest villaine, she fetches her breath as short as a new ane sparrow.
Euen such a passion doth imbrace my bosome,
My heart beats thicker then a eauorous pulse,
And all my powers do their bestowing loose
Like vassalage at vnwares encountring the eye of maiesty.
Come, come, what need you blush?
Shames a babie; heere shee is now, sweare the othes now to her that you haue sworne to me: what are you gone againe, you must be watch re you be made ame, must you? come your waies come your waies, and you draw backward weele put you ih filles: why doe you not speake to her. Come draw this curtaine, and lets see your picture; alasse the day? how loath you are to offend day light; and twere darke youd close sooner: so so, rb on and kise the mistresse; how now a kisse in fee-fae: build there Carpenter▪ the ayre is sweet. Nay, you shall fight your hearts out ere I part you. The falcon, as the tercell: for all the ducks ih riue: go too, go too.
You haue bereft me of all wordes Lady.
Words pay no debts; giue her deeds: but sheele bereaue you ath' deeds too if she call our actiity in question: what billing again: heeres in witnesse whereof the parties interchangeably. Come in come in Ile go get a fire?
Will you walke in my Lord?
O Cressed how often haue I wisht me thus.
Wish my Lord? the gods graunt? O my Lord?
What should they graunt? what makes this pretty abruption: what to curou dreg espies my sweete lady in the fountaine of our loue?
More dregs then water if my teares haue eyes.
Feares make diuels of Cherubins, they neuer see truly.
Bind feae that seeing reason leads, finds safer foting, ten bind reasn, stumbling without feare: to feare the worst ot cures the worse.
O let my Lady apprechend no feare,
In all Cupids pageant there is presented no monster.
Nr nothing monstrous neither.
Nothing but our vndertakings, when wee vow wepe seas, liue in fire, eae rockes, ame Tygers, thinking it harder for our mistesse to deuise impoition ynough then for vs to vndergoe any difficulty imposed.—
This the monstruosity in loue Lady, that the will is infinite and the execution confind, that the desire is boundlesse, and the act a slaue to lymite.
They say all louers sweare more performance then they are able, and yet reserue an ability that they neuer performe: vowing more then the perfection of ten: and discharging lesse then the tenth part of one. They that haue the voyce of Lyons, and the act of Hares are they not monsters?
Are there such: such are not we; Praise vs as wee are tasted, allow vs as we proue: our head shall goe bare till merit louer part no affection in reuersion shall haue a praise in present: we will not name desert before his birth, and being borne, his addition shall bee humble: few wordes to faire faith. Troylus shall be such to Cressid, as what enuy can say worst shall bee a mocke for his truth, and what truth can speake truest not truer then Troylus.
Will you walke in my Lord?
What blushing still, haue you not done talking ye
VVell Vncle what folly I commit I dedicate to you.
I thanke you for that, if my Lord gette a boy of you, youle giue him me: be true to my Lord, if he inch chide me for it.
You know now your hostages, your Vncles word and my fime faith.
Nay Ile giue my word for her too: our kindred though they b long ere they bee woed▪ they are constant being wonne, they are burres I can tell you, theyle icke where they are throwne.
Bouldnesse comes to me now and brings me heart: Prince Troylus I haue loued you night and day, for many weary moneths.
Why was my Cressid then so hard to wy?
Hard to seeme wonne: but I was wonne my Lord
With the first glance; that euer pardon me
If I confesse much you will play the tyrant,
I lou you now, but till now not so much
But I might maister it; in faith I lye,
My thoughts were like vnbrideled children grone
Too headstrong for their mother: see wee fooles,
VVhy haue I blabd: ho shall be rue to vs
VVhen we ae so vnsecret to our selues.
But thugh I loue'd you well, I woed you not,
And yet good faith I wisht my selfe a man;
Or that we women had mens priuiledge
Of speaking first. Sweete bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture I shall surely speake
The thing I shall repent: see see your sylence
Comming in dumbnesse, from my weaknesse drawes
My very soule of councell. Stop my mouth.
And shall, albeit sweet musique issues thence.
Pretty yfaith.
My Lord I doe beseech you pardon me,
Twas not my purpose thus to begge a kisse:
I am asham'd; O Heauens what haue I done
For this time will I take my leaue my Lord.
Your leaue sweete Cressid:
Leaue: and you take leaue till to morrow morning.
Pray you content you.
What offends you Lady?
sir mine own company.
You cannot shun your selfe.
Let me goe and try:
I haue a kind of selfe recids with yo:
But an vnkinde selfe, that it selfe will leaue,
To be anothers oole. I would be gone:
Where is my wit? I know not what I speake,
Well know thy what they speake, that speake so wisely,
Perchance my Lord I show more craft then loue,
And fell so roundly to a large confession.
To angle for your thoughts, but you are wise,
Or else you loue not: for to be wise and loue,
Exceeds mans might that dwells with gods aboue,
O that I thougt it could be in a woman.
As if it can I will presume in you,
To feed for age her lampe and flames of loue.
To keepe her constancy in pligbt and youth.
Out-liuing beauties outward, with a mind,
That doth renew swifter then blood decays,
Or that persuasion could but thus conuince me▪
That my integrity and truth to you,
Might be affronted with the match and waight,
O such a winnowed purity in loue,
How were I then vp-lifted! but alasse,
I am as true as truths simplicity,
And simpler then th infancy of truth.
In that ile war with you,
Overtuous fight,
When right with right wares who sha'be most right,
True swins in loue shal in the world to come
Approue their trueth by Troylus, when their times,
Full of protest, of oath and big compare,
Wants imele's truth tyrd with iteration.
As true as steele, as plantage to the moone.
As sunne to day: as nle to her mate,
As Iron to Adamant: as Earth to th' Center,
After all comparisos of truth.
(As trhs anthentique author to be cited)
As rue as Troylus, shall croune vp the verse,
And sanctiie the nombers,
Prophet may you bee,
If I bee fale or swarue a hayre from ruth,
When time is ould or hath forgot it sele,
When water drops haue worne the stones of Troy,
And blind obliion swallowd Cites vp.
And mighty states character-les are grated,
To dusty nothing, yet let memory,
From falce to falce among falce mayds in loue,
Vpbraid my falcehood, when th'haue said as falce,
As ayre, as water, wind or sandy earth,
As Fox to Lambe; or Wolfeto Heifers Calfe,
Pard to the Hind, or stepdame to her Sonne▪
Yea let them say to sticke the heart of falsehood,
As false as Cressid.
Go to a bargaine made, scale it, seale it ile bee the witnes here I hold your hand, here my Cozens, if euer you proue false one, to another since I haue taken such paine to bring you together let all pittifull goers between be cald to the worlds end after my name, call them all Panders, let all constant men be Troylusses all fale woemen Cressids, and all brokers betweene panders; say Amen.
Amen.
Amen▪
Amen.
Wherevpon I will shew you a Chamber, which bed because it shall not speake of your prety encounters presse it to death; away.
And Cupid grant all tong-tide maydens here,
Bed, chamber, Pander to prouide this gere.
Now Princes for the eruice I haue done,
Th'aduantage of the time prompts me aloud,
To call for recompence: appere it to mind,
That through the sight I beare in things to loue,
I haue abandond Troy, left my possession,
Incurd a traytors name, exposd my selfe,
From certaine and poest conueniences,
To doubtfull fortunes sequestring from me all,
That time acqaintance, custome and condition,
Made ame, and most familiar to my nature:
And here to doe you seruice am become,
As new into the world, strange, vnacquainted.
I do beseech you as in way of tast,
To giue me now a little benefit.
Out of those many registred in promise,
Which you say liue to come in my behalfe
What wouldst thou of Troian? make demand
You haue a Troian prisoner cald Autor▪
Yesterday tooke, Troy holds him very deere.
Of haue you (ofen haue you thankes therefore)
Desird my Cressed in right great exchange.
Whom roy hath still deni'd, but thi Authr,
I know is such a wrest in their affaires:
That their negoiations all must slacke,
Waning his mannage and they will almost,
Giue v ▪ a Prince of blood a Sonne of Prya,
In change of him. Let him be sent great Princes,
And he shall buy my daghter: and her presence,
Shall quite strike of all seruice I haue done,
In most accepted paine.
Let Dimedes beare him,
And bring vs Cressid hither, Calcas shall haue
What he requests of vs▪ good Died
Furnish you farely for this enterchange,
Withall bring word If Hector will to morrow,
Bee answered in his challenge. Aiax is ready.
This shall I vndertake, and tis a buthen
Which I am proud to beare.
Achilles stands its entrance of his tent,
Please it our generall passe strangely by him:
As if he were forgot, and princes all,
ay negligent and looe regard vpon him,
I will come last, tis like hele question mee.
Why such vnpaulsiue eyes are bent? why urnd on him,
If so I haue derision me decinable,
To vse betweene your strange and his pride,
Which his owne will shall haue desire to drinke▪
It may doe good, pride hath no other glasse,
To show it selfe but pride: for supple knees,
Feed arrogance and are the proud mans fees,
Weele execute your purpose and put on,
A forme of strangnesse as e along▪
So do each Lord, and either greet him no
Or els disdaynflly, which shall shake him more:
Then if not lookt on. I will lead the way.
What comes the generall to speake with mee?
You know my minde IIe fight no more 'gainst roy:
What saies Achilles would he ought with vs?
Would you my Lord ought with the generall.
No.
Nothing my Lord:
The betes▪
Good day, good day:
How do you? how do you?
What dos the Ckould scorne me
How now Patroclus?
Good morrow Aiax?
Ha:
Good morrow.
I and good next day too.
What meane these fellowes know they not Achilles?
They passe by strangely: they were vs'd to bend,
To send thei smiles before them to Achilles:
To come as humbly as they vsd to creep, to holy altars:
What am I poore of late?
Tis certaine, greatnesse once falne out with fortune,
Mut fall out with men to, what the declin'd is,
He shall as soone reade in the eyes of others
As feele in his owne fall: for men like butter-flies,
Shew not their mealy wings but to the Summer,
And not a m m for being simply man,
Hath any honour, but honour for those honours
That are without him, as place, ritches, and auour,
Prizes of accident as oft as merit
Which when they fall as being slipery standers,
The loue that lean'd on them as slipery too,
Doth one pluck downe anotr, and together, die in the all,
But tis not so with mee,
Fortune and I are friends, I do enioy:
At ample point all that I did posssse,
Saue these mens lookes, who do me thinkes fide out:
Some thing not worth in me such ritch beholding,
As they haue often giuen. Here is Vlisses
Ile interrupt his reading, how now Vlisses?
Now great Thetis Sonne.
What are you reading?
A strange fellow here,
Writes me that man, how derely euer parted:
How much in hauing or without or in
Cannt, make bost to haue that which he hath,
Nor feeles not what he owes but by reflection
As when his vetues ayming vpon others,
Heate them and they retort that heate againe.
To the first giuers.
This is not strange Vlisses,
The beauty that is borne here in the face:
The bearer knowes not▪ but commends it selfe,
To others eyes, nor doth the eye it selfe
That most pure spirit of sence, behold it selfe
Not going from it selfe: but eye to eye opposed,
Sallutes each other, with each others forme▪
For speculation trnes not to it selfe,
Till it hath trauel'd and is married there?
Where it may see it selfe: this is not strange at all.
I do not straine at the position,
It is familiar, but at the authors drift,
Who in his circumstance expressly prooes,
That no man is the Lord of any thing:
Though in and of him there be much conisting,
Till he communicate his parts to others,
Nor doth hee of himselfe know them for aught:
Till he behold them formed in the applause.
Where th'are extended: who like an arch reuerb 'rate
The voice againe or like a gate of steele:
ronting the Sunne▪ receiues and renders back
His figure and his heate. I was much rap't i this,
And apprehended here immediately,
Th'vnknowne Aiax, heauens what a man is there?
A very horse, that has he knowes not what
Nature what things there are.
Most obiect in regard, and deere in vse,
What things again most deere in the esteeme:
And poore in worth, now shall we see to morrow,
An act that very chance doth throw vpon him
Aix renown'd? O heauens what some men doe,
While some men leaue to doe.
How some men creepe in skittish fortunes hall,
Whiles others play the Ideo in her eyes,
How one man eates into anothers pride,
While pride is fasting in his wntonesse.
To see these Grecian Lords, why euen already:
They clap the lubber Aiax on the shoulder
As if his foote were one braue Hectors best,
And great Troy shriking.
I doe beleeue it,
For they past by me as misers do by beggars,
Neither gaue to me good word nor looke:
What are my deeds forgot?
Time hath (my Lord) a wallet at his back,
Wherein he puts almes for obliuion:
A great siz'd monster of ingratitudes,
Those scraps are good deeds past,
Which are deuour'd as fast as they are made,
Forgot as soone as done, perseuerance deere my Lord▪
Keepes honour bright, to haue done, is to hang▪
Quite out of fashion like a ruty male,
In monumentall mockry? take the instant way,
For honour trauells in a straight so narrow:
Where on but goes a brest, keepe then the path
For emulation hath a thousand Sonnes,
That one by one pursue, if you giue way,
Or turne a side from the direct forth right:
Like to an entred tide they all rush by,
And leaue you him, most, then what they do in prsent:
Though lesse then yours in passe, must ore top yours.
For time is like a fashionable hoast,
That slightly shakes hi parting gust by th'hand,
And with his armes out-stretcht as he would flie,
Graspes in the comme: the welcome euer smiles,
And farewell goes out sighing. Let not vertue seeke,
Remueration for the thing it wa. For beauty, wit,
High bith, vigor of bone, desert in seruic
Loue, friendship, charity, are subiects al,
To enuous and calumniati gme,
One ouch of nture makes the whole world kin,
That all with one consent praise new-borne gaes,
Though they are made and moulded of things past,
And goe to dust, that is a little guilt,
More laud then guilt oe-dusted.
The present eye praises the present obiect.
Then maruell not hou great and complet man,
That all the Greekes begin to worship Aiax;
Since things in moion sooner catch the eye,
That what stirs not. The rie went oce on thee,
And still it might, and yet it may againe,
If thou wouldst not entombe thy selfe aliue,
And case y repuation in thy tent.
Whose glorious deeds but in ese filds of late,
Made emulous missions mongst the gods them selues,
And draue great Mars to faction.
Of this my priuaie,
I haue strong reasons.
But gainst your priuacie,
The reasons are more potent and heroycall:
Tis knowne Aches that you are in loue
With one of Pria daughters.
H? knowne.
Is that a wonder:
The prouidence th in ,
Knowes almost ery thing,
Findes boom in the vncomprehense depth,
Keepes place with thought and almost like the gods,
Do thoghts vnaile in their umbe
There is a mysterie (with whom relation
Durst neuer meddle) in the soule of state,
Which hath an operation more diuine,
Then breath or pen can giue expressure to:
All the commerse that you haue had with Troy,
As perfectly is ours, as yours my Lord,
And better would it fitt, Achilles much,
To throw downe Hector then Polixena.
But it must grieue young Pirs now at home,
When fame shall in our Ilands sound her trumpe,
And all the Greekish girles shall tripping sing,
Great Hectors sister did Achilles winne,
But our great Aiax brauely beate downe him:
Farewell my Lord: I as your louer speake,
The foole slides ore the Ice that you should breake.
To this effect Achilles haue I moou'd you,
A woman impudent and mannish growne,
Is not more loth'd then an effeminate man
In time of action: I stand condemnd for this
They thinke my little stomack to the warre,
And your great loue to me, restraines you thus,
Sweete rouse your selfe, and the weake wanton Cupid,
Shall from your neck vnloose his amorous fould,
And like dew drop from the Lions mane,
Be shooke to ayre.
Shall Aiax fight with Hector.
I and perhaps receiue much honor by him.
I see my reputation is at stake,
My fame is shrowdly gor'd.
O then beware.
Those wounds heale ill, that men do give themselues,
Omission to doe what is necessary.
Seales a commission to a blanke of danger,
And danger like an ague subtly taints
Euen then when they sit idely in the sunne.
Go call Thersites hether sweet Patroclus,
Ile send the foole to Aiax, and desire him
Tinue the Troyan lords after the combate,
To see vs heere vnarmd. I haue a womans longing,
An appetite that I am sick with-all,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace,
To talke with him, and to behold his visge,
Euen to my full of view. A labour sau'd.
A wonder.
What?
Aiax goes vp and downe the field asking for himselfe.
How so?
He must fight singly to morrow with Hector, and is so prophetically proud of an herycall udgeling, that e raues in saying nothing.
How can that be?
Why a stalkes vp and downe like a peacok, stride and a stand: ruminates like an hostsse, that hath no Arithmatique but her braine to set downe her reckoning: bites his lip with a politique regarde, as who should say there were witte in this head and woo'd out: and so there is. But it lyes as coldly in him, fire in a stin, which will not show without knocking, the mans vndone for euer, for if Hector breake not his neck ith' combate, hee'le brakt himselfe in vaine glory. Hee knowes not mee. I sayd good morrow Aiax: And hee replyes thankes Agamem. What thinke yu of this man that take mee for the Generall? Hees growne a very land-fish languagelesse, a monster, a plague of opinion, a man may weare it on both sides like a lether Ierkin.
Thou must be my Ambassador Thersit.
Who I: why heele answer no body: hee professes not answering, speaking is for beggers: he wares his tongue in's armes. I will put on his presence, let Patroclu make demands to me. You shall see the pgeant of Aiax.
To him Patroclus, tell him I humbly desire the v liant Aiax, to inuite the valorous Hector to come vnam'd to my tent, and to procure safe-conduct for his person, of the maganimous and most illustriou sixe or seauen times honour'd Captaine Generall of the armie. Agaeme, do this.
Iou besse gat Aiax.
Hum.
I come from the worthy Achill.
Ha?
Who most humbly dsires you to inuite Hector to his ent.
Hum?
And to procure safe conduct from .
Agamme?
I my Lord.
Ha?
What say you too't.
God buy you with all my hrt.
Your answer sir.
If to morrow be a faire day, by a euen of the clock it will goe one way or other, howsoeuer he shall pay for me ere hee ha's me.
Your answer sir.
Fare yee well with all my heart.
Why, but he is not in this tune, is he?
No: but out of tune thus, What musick will be i him, when Hector ha's knockt out his braines, I know not. But I am sure none, vnlesse the fidler Apollo get his sinnews to make Catlings on.
Come, thou shalt beare a letter to him straight.
Let mee heare another to his horse, for thats the more capable creaure.
My minde is troubled like a fountaine stird,
And I my selfe see not the bottome of it.
Would the fountaine of your minde were cleere Again, that I might water an Asse at it, I had rather be a ick in a sheepe, then such a valiant ignorance.
See ho? who is that there?
It is the Lord Aeeas.
Is the Prince there in person?
Had I so good occasion to lye long
As your pince Paris, nothing but heauenly businesse,
Should rob my bed mate of my company.
That's my minde too? good morrow Lord Aene.
A valiant Greeke Aene take his hand.
Witnesse the processe of your speech: wherein
You old how Dyomed a whole weeke by daies,
Did haunt you in the fie'd.
Health to you valiant sir,
During all question of the gentle truce:
But when I meete you arm'd, as black defiance,
As heart can thinke or courage execute.
The one and other Diomed embraces,
Our blouds are now in calme, and so long helth:
Lul'd when contention, and occasion mete,
By Ioue le play the hunter for thy life,
With all my force, pursuite, and pollicy.
And hou shalt hunt a Lyon that will flie,
With his face back-ward, in humane gentlenesse:
Welcome to Troy, now by Achses life,
Welcome indeed: by Ven hand I swere:
No man aliue can oue in such a ort,
The thing he meanes to kill, more excellently.
We simpathize. let Aen line
(If to my sword his fate be not the glory)
A thousand compleate courses of the Sunne,
But in mine elous honor let him die:
With euery ioynt a wound and that to morrow—▪
We know each other well?
We do and long to know each other worse.
This is the most despighull gentle greeting,
The noblest hatefull loue that ere I heard of, what busnesse
Lord so eaely▪
I was sent for to the King? but why I know no.
His purpose meetes you▪ twas to bring this Greeke,
To Calcho's house, and there to render him:
For the enfreed Ahenor the faire Cressid,
Lets haue your company, or if you please,
Hast there before vs. I constantly beleeue,
(Or rather call my thought a certaine knowledge)
My brother Troyls ges there to night,
Roufe him and giue him note of our approch▪
With the whole quality wherefore:
I feare we shall be much vnwelcom.
That I assure you: Trylhd rather Troy were borne to Greece, then Cressied borne from Troy.
There is no helpe.
The bitter disposition of the time will haue it so:
On Lord, weele follow you.
Good morrow all.
And tell me noble Died, faith tell me true,
Euen in soule of sound good fellowship,
Who in your thoughts, deserues faire Helen best,
My selfe, or Menlaus.
Both like▪
Hee merits well to haue her that doth seeke her,
Not making any scruple of her oyle,
With such hel of paine, and world of charg.
And you as well to keepe her, that defend her,
Not pallating the afte of her dishonour
With such a costly losse of wealth and friends,
He like a puling Cukold would drinke vp,
The les and dreg of a flat tamed peece:
You like a lecher out of whorish loynes,
Are pleasd to breed out your inheriors,
Both merits poyzd, each weighs nor lesse nor more,
But he as he, the huir for a whore.
You are too bitter to your country-woman▪
Shees bitter to her country▪ heare me Paris,
For euery fale dop in her bawdy veines,
A Grecians life hath for euery scruple
Of her contaminated cartion waght,
A Troyan hath beene slaine. Since she could speake,
Shee hath not giuen so many good words breath,
As for her Greeke and Troyans suffed death.
Faire Diomed you do as chapmen do,
Dispraise the thing that they de to buy,
But we in silence hold this vertue well,
Weele not commend, what wee inted to sell. Heere lyes our way.
Deere, trouble not your selfe, the morne is colde.
Then sweet my Lord ile call mine vnckle downe,
Hee shall vnbolt the
Trouble him not.
To bed to bed: sleepe kill those prity eyes,
And giue as soft aachment to thy sences,
As infants empty of all thought.
Good morrow then.
pithee now to bed.
Are you a weary of me?
O Cresseid! but that the buie da,
Wak't by the Larke hath rouzd the ribald Crowes,
And dreaming night will hide our ioyes no longer,
I would not from thee.
Night hath beene too briee.
Bshrew the witch I with venemous wight she stai
As ediously as hll, But flies the graspes of loue,
With wings more momentary swift then thought,
You will catch colde and crse me.
Prithee arry, you men will neuer tarry,
O foolish Cresseid▪ I might haue still held of,
And then you would haue tarried, Harke ther's one vp.
Whats al the door open heere▪
It is your Vncle.
A pestilence on him: now will he be mocking:
I shall haue such a life.
How now, how now, how go maiden-heads,
Here you maide, where's my cozin Cressid?
Go hang your selfe▪ you nughy mocking vncle▪
You bring me to doo—and th ▪ you floue me to.
To do what, to do what? let her say wha,
What haue I brought you to doe?
Come, come▪ eshrw your heart, youle re be good, not suffer others.
Ha▪ ha: ala poor wretch: a poore chipochi, hast not slept o night? would hee not (a naughty man) let it leepe, a bug-beare take him.
Did not I tell you? would he were ,
Who's that doore, good vnckle go and se.
My Lord, come you againe into my chamber,
You smile and mock me, as if I meant naughtily.
Ha, ha.
Come you are deceiued, I thinke of no such thing,
How earnestly they knock, pray you come in.
I would not for halfe Troy haue you seene here,
Who's there? what's the matter? will you beate downe the doore? How now, what's the matter?
Good morrow Lord, good morrow.
Who's there my Lord Aenea: by my troth I knew you not: what newes with you so early?
Is not Prince Troylus heere?
Here, what should he do here?
Come he is here, my Lord, do not deny him,
It doth import him much to speake with me.
Is he here say you▪ its more then I know ile be sworne For my owne part I came in late: what should hee doe hre?
Who, nay then! Come▪ come, youle do him wrong ere you are ware, youle be so true to him, o be false to him: Do not you know of him, but yet go fetch him hither, go.
How now, whats the matter?
My Lord, I scarce haue leisure to salute you,
My matter is so rash: there is at hand,
Paris your brother, and Deihobus,
The Grecian Diomed, and our Anthenor
Deliuer'd to him, and forth-with,
Ere the first sacrifice, within this houre,
We must giue vp to Diomedes hand
The Lady Cresseida▪
Is it so concluded?
By Priam and the generall state of Troy,
They are at hand, and ready to effect t.
How my atchiuement mock me▪
I will go meete them: and my Lord Aenea,
We met by chance, you did not finde me here.
Good, good, my lord, the secets of neighbor Pand
Haue not more guift in aciturnitie.
Ist possible: no sooner got but lot, the diuell ake Anthenor, the young Prince will go adde, a plague vpon Anthenor. I would they had brok's neck.
How now? what' the matter? who was heere?
Ah, ah!
Why igh you so profoundly, wher's my Lord? gone? tell me sweeet Vncle, whats the matter.
Would I wee as deepe vnder the earth as I am aboue.
O the Gods, whats the matter?
Pray thee get thee in: would thou hadst nere been boe, I knew thou wouldest be his death. O poore Gentleman, a plague vpon Atnor.
Good vnckle; I beseech you on my knees, whats the matter?
Thou must be gone wench, thou must be gone: thou art chang'd for Anthenor. Thou mut to thy father and bee gone from roylus, twill be his death, twill bee his bane, hee cannot beare it.
O you immortall Gods, I will not go.
Thou must.
I will not Vncle. I haue forgot my father,
I know no ouch of consanguinitie,
No kinne, no lou, no bloud, o soule so neere me
As the seete Troylus. O you gods diuine,
Make Cresseids name the very crowne of falsehood,
If euer she leaue Troyl. Time, force and death,
Do to this body what extreames you can:
But the strong base, and building of my loue,
Is as the very center of the earth,
Drawing all things to it. Ile go in and weepe.
Do, do.
Teae my bright haire, & scratch my praised cheekes,
Crack my cleare voyce with sobs, and breake my heart,
With sounding Troylu: I will not go from Troy.
It is great morning, and the houe prefixt,
For her deliuery to this valiant Greeke,
Comes fast vpon: good my brother Troylu
Tell you the Lady what she is to doe,
And hast her to the purpose.
Walke into her house,
Ile bing her to the Grecian presently:
And to his hand when I deliuer her,
Thinke it an altar, and thy brother Troylus
A priest there offring o it his owne heart.
I know what tis to loue,
And would, as I shall pitty I could helpe:
Please you walke in my Lords?
Be moderate, be moderate.
Why tell you me of moderation?
The greife i fine, full, perfect that I tast
And violenteth in a sence as strong
As that which causeth it, how can I moderate it?
If I could temporize with my affections,
Or brew it to a weake and coulder palat,
The like alayment could I giue my griefe:
My loue admittes no qualifiing drosse,
No more my griefe in such a precious losse.
Here, here, here he comes, a sweete ducks.
Oh Troylus, Troylus.
What a paire of spectacles is here, let me embrace too, Oh heart, as the goodly saying is, Oh heart, heauy heart, why sighst thou without breaking: where hee answers againe, because thou canst not ease thy smart by friendshippe nor by speaking: there was neuer a ime. Let vs cast away nothing, for wee may liue to haue need of such a verse, We see it, we see it, how now lambs?
Cressid I loue thee in so strain'd a purity,
That the blet Gods as angry with my fancy:
More bright in zeale then the deuotion, which
Cold lippes blow o their diies, take thee from me.
Haue the Gods eny?
I, I, I, I, tis to plaine a case.
And is it true that I must go from Troy?
A hatefull truth.
What and from Troylus to?
From Troy, and Troylus▪
Is't possible?
And suddenly, where iniury of chance
Pus back, leaue taking▪ iussles roughly by:
All time of pause: rudely beguiles our lippes
Of all reioyndue: forcibly preuent
Our lock't embrases, strangles our dere vowes,
uen in the birth of our owne laboring breath:
We two that with so many thousand sighes,
Did buy each other, must poorely sell our selues:
With the rude breuity, and discharge of one,
Iniurious time now with a robbers hast,
Cra's his itch thee'ry vp hee knowes not how.
As many farewells as be starres in heauen.
With distinct breath, and consignde kisses to them▪
He fumbles vp into a loose adewe:
And skats vs with a single famisht kisse,
Distasted with the salt of broken teares.
My Lord is the ady ready?
Harke, you are call'd, some say the Geni
Cries so to him that instantly must die,
Bid them haue pacience she shall come anon.
Where are my teares raine to lay this winde, or my heart wilbe blowne vp by my hrote.
I must then to the Grecians.
No remedy?
A wofull Cressid mogst the merry Greekes,
When shall we see againe.
Here mee loue? be thou but true of heart.
I true? how now? what wicked deme is this?
Nay we must vse expostulation kindely,
For it is parting from vs.
I speake not be thou true as fearing thee.
For I will throw my gloue to death himselfe,
That there is no maculaon in thy heart:
But bee tho true say I to fashon in▪
My sequent protestation; bee hou true, and I will ee thee.
Oh you shalbe exposd my Lord to dangrs,
As infinite as imminent; but ile be rue,
And ile grow friend with danger, were this sleeue.
And you this gloue, when shall I see you?
I will corrupt the Grecian centinells,
To giue thee nightly visitation, but yet be true.
Oh heaues be true againe?
Here why I speake it lou,
The Grecian youths are full of quality,
And swelling ore with arts and excercise:
How nouelty may moue, and parts with portion,
Alas a kinde of Godly iealousi,
(Which I besech you cal a vertous sinne,)
Makes me a feard.
Oh heauens you loue mee not!
Die I a villa then,
In this I do not call your faith in question:
So mainely as my merit. I cannot sing
Nor heele the high laot, nor sweeten talke,
Nor play at subtill games, faire vertues all:
To which the Grecians are most prompt and pregane▪
But I can tell that in each grace of these▪
There lurkes a still, and dumb-discourse diuell
That tempts most cunningly, but be not tempted.
Do you thinke I will?
No, but somthing may be done that we will not,
And sometimes weare diuells to our selues:
When we will tempt the fraily of our powers,
Presuming on their changefull potency.
Nay good my Lord?
Come kisse, and let vs part.
Brothr Troylus?
Good brother come you hithe?
And bring Eneas and the Grecian with you▪
My Lord will you be true?
Who I, alas it is my vice, my fault,
Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
I with great truth catch mere simplicity,
Whilst ome with cunning guild their copper crownes,
With truth and plainesse I do were mine bare:
Feare not my truth, the morrall of my wit,
Is plaine and true? ther's all the reach of it,
Welcome sir Diomed, here is the Lady,
Which for Atenor we delier you.
At the port (Lord) Ile giue her to thy hand,
And by the way possesse thee what she is
Entreate her faire, and by my soule faire Greeke,
If ere thou stand at mercy of my sword:
Name Crssd, and thy life shalbe as safe,
As Priam is in Illion?
Faire Ladie Cressid,
So please you saue the thankes this Prince expects:
The lustre in your eye, heauen in your cheeke,
Pleades your faire vsage, and to Diomed,
You shalbe mistres, and command him wholy.
Grecian thou do'st not vse me curteously,
To shame the seale of my petition to thee:
In praising her. I tell thee Lord of Greece,
She is as farre high soaring ore thy praises:
As thou vnworthy to be call'd her seuant,
I charge thee vse her well, euen for my charge:
For by the dreadfull Pluto, if thou dost not,
Though the great bulke Achilles be thy guard,
Ile cut thy throate.
Oh be not mou'd Prince Troylus,
Let me be priueledg'd by my place and message:
To be a speaker free? when I am hence,
Ile answer to my lust, and know you Lord
Ile nothing do on charge, to her owne worth,
Shee shalbe priz'd: but that you say be't so,
I speake it in my spirit and honour no.
Come to the port Ile el thee Diomed,
This braue shall oft make thee to hide thy head,
Lady giue me your hand, and as we walke,
To our owne selues bend we our needfull talke.
Harke Hectors trumpet?
How haue we spent thi mning?
The Prince must thinke me ardy nd reisse,
That swore to ride before him to the field,
Tis Troylus falte, come, come, to field with him.
Here art tho in appointmen fresh and faire,
Anticipating time. With starting courage,
Giue with thy trumpet a loude note to roy
Thou dreadfull Aiax that the appauled aire,
May pearce the head of the great Combaant, and hale him hither.
Thou, trumpet, ther's my purse,
Now cracke ty lungs, and split thy brasen pipe:
Blow villaine, till thy sphered Bias cheeke,
Out-swell the collick of puft Aquilo,
Come stretch thy chest, and let thy eyes spout bloud:
Thou blowest for Hector.
No trumpet answers.
Tis but early daies.
Is not yond Diomed with Calcas daughter.
Tis he, I ken the manner of his gae,
He rises on the too: that spirit of his
In aspiration lifts him from the earth.
Is this the Lady Cressid?
Euen she.
Most deerely welcome to the Greekes sweete Lady.
Our generall doth salute you with a kisse.
Yet is the kindnesse but perticular, twere better shee were kis in general.
And very courtly counsell. Ile beginne: so much for Nestor.
Ile take that winter from your lips faire Lady,
Achilles bids you welcome.
I had good argument for kissing once.
But thats no argument for kissing now,
For thus pop't Pais in his hardiment,
And parted thus, you and your argument.
Oh deadly gll and theame of all our scomes,
For which we loose our heads to guild his homes.
The first was ward kisse this mine,
Patrolus kisses you.
Oh this is trim.
Paris and I kisse euermore for him.
Ile haue my kisse sir? Lady by your leaue.
In kissing do you render or receie.
Both take and giue.
Ile make my match to liue,
The kisse you take is better then you giue: therefore no kisse.
Ile giue you boote, ile giue you three for one.
You are an od man giue euen or giue none.
An odde man Lady, euery man is odde.
No Paris is nor, for you know tis true,
That you are odde and he is euen with you.
You fillip me a'th head.
No ile besworne.
It were no match, your naile against his horne,
May I swee Lady begge a kisse of you.
You may.
I do desire it.
Why begge then.
Why then for Venus sake giue me a kisse▪
When Hellen is a maide againe and his—
I am your debtor, claime it when tis due.
Neuers my day, and then a kisse of you.
Lady a word, ile bring you to your father.
A woman of quick sence.
Fie, fie vpon her,
Thers language in her eye, her cheeke her lip,
Nay her foote speakes, her wanton spirits looke out
At euery ioynt and motiue of her body,
Oh these encounrerers so glib of tongue,
That giue a coasting welcome eroit comes,
And wide vnclapse the tables of their thoughts,
To euery ticklish reader, set them downe,
For sluttis spoiles of oprtunity:
And daughters of the game.
The Troyans trumpet.
Yonder comes the troup.
Haile all the state of Greece: what shalbe done,
To him that victory commands, or doe you purpose,
A victor shalbe knowne, will you the knights
Shall to the edge of all extremity
Pursue each other, or shall they be diuided,
By any voice or order of the field, Hector bad aske?
Which way would Hector haue it?
He cares not, heele obay conditions.
Tis done like Hector, but securely done,
A little proudly, and great deale misprising:
The knight oppos'd.
If not Achilles sir, what is your name?
If not Achiles nothing:
Therefore Achilles, but what ere know this,
In the extremity of great and little:
Valour and pride excell themselues in Hector
The one almost as infinite as all,
The other blanke as nothing, way him well.
And that which lookes like pride is cutesie,
This Aiax is halfe made of Hectors bloud,
In loue whereof, halfe Hector staies at home,
Halfe heart, halfe hand, halfe Hector comes to seeke:
This blended knight halfe Troyan, and halfe Greeke.
A maiden battell then, Oh I perceiue you.
Here is sir Diomed? go gentle knight,
Stand by our Aiax. As you and Lord Eneas
Conset vpon the order of their fight,
So be it, eiher to the vttermost,
Or els a breath, the combatants being kin,
Halfe stints thei strife, before their strokes begin.
Vlisses: what Troyan is that sme that lookes so heauy?
The yongest sonne of Priam, a true knight,
Not yet mature, yet matchesse firme of word,
Speaking deeds, and deedlesse in his tongue,
Not soone prouok't nor beeing soone calm'd,
His heart and hand both open and both free.
For what he has he giues, what thinkes he shewes,
Yet giues hee not till iudgement guide his bounty,
Nor dignifies an impare thought with breath;
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous,
Fr Hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes
To tender obiects, but he in heate of action,
Is more vindicatiue then iealous loue.
They call him Troylus, and on him erect,
A second hope as fairely built as Hector:
Thus saies Aeneas ou that knowes the youth,
Euen to his ynhes: and with priuate soule
Did in great Illion thus translate him to me.
They are in action.
Now Aiax hould thine owne.
Hector thou sleep'st awake thee.
His blowes well: dispo'd, there Aiax.
You must no more.
Princes enough so please you.
I am not warme yet, let vs fight againe.
As Hector pleases.
Why then will I no more,
Thou art great Lord my fathers sisters Sonne,
A couzen german to great Prianss feede,
The obligation of our bloud for bids,
A gory emulation twixt vs twaine:
Were thy Greeke and Troyan so,
That thou couldst say this hand is Grecian all:
And this is Troyan, the sinnewes of this legge
All Greeke, and this all Troy: my mothers bloud,
Runnes on the dexter cheeke, and this sinister
Bounds in my fathers. By lou multipotent
Thou shouldst not beare from mee a Greekish member,
Wherein my sword had not impressure made.
But the iust Gods gainsay,
That any day thou borrowd'st from thy mother,
My sacred Aunt, should by my mortal sword,
Be drained. Let me embrae thee Aiax:
By him that thunders thou hast lusty aimes,
Hector would haue them fall vpon him thus.
Cozen all honor to thee.
I thanke thee Hector,
Thou art to gentle, and too free a man,
I came to kill thee cozen, and beare hence,
A great addition earned in thy death▪
Not Neoptslymus so mirable,
On whose bright crest, fame with her lowdst (O yes)
Cries, this is he, could promise to himselfe,
A thought of added honor, torne from Hector.
There is expectance heere from both the sides,
What further you will do.
Weele answer it,
The issue is embracement, Aiax farewell.
If I might in entreaties finde successe,
As seld I haue the chance, I would desire,
My famous cosin to our Grecian tents.
Tis Agamemnous wish, and great Achilles
Doth long to see vnarm'd the valiant Hector.
Aeneas call my brother Troylus to me.
And signifie this louing enterview
To the expectors of our Troyan part,
Desire them home. Giue me thy hand my Cozen.
I will go eate with thee, and see your Knights
Great Agamemnon comes to meete vs heere.
The worthiest of them, tell me name by name:
But for Achilles my owne searching eyes,
Shall finde him by his large and portly size.
Worthy all armes as welcome as to one,
That would be rid of such an enemy.
From heart of very heart, great Hctor welcome.
I thanke thee most imperious Agamemno.
My well-fam'd Lord of Troy, no lesse to you.
Let me confirme my princely brothers greeting:
You brace of warlike brothers: welcome hether.
Who must we answer?
The noble Menelaus.
O you my Lord, by Mars his gauntlet thankes,
(Mock not thy affect, the vntraded earth)
Your quandrm wife sweares still by Venus gloue,
Shees well, but bad me not commend her to you.
Name her not now sir, shee's a deadly theame.
O pardon, I offend.
I haue thou gallant Troyan seene thee oft,
Laboring for destiny, make cruell way,
Through rankes of Greekish youth, and I haue seene thee
As hot as Perseus, spurre thy Phrigian steed,
Despising many forfaits and subduments,
When thou hast hung th'aduanced sword ith'ayre,
Not letting it decline on the declined,
That I haue said to some my standers by,
Loe Iupiter is yonder dealing life.
And I haue seene thee pause, and take thy breath,
When that a ring of Greekes haue shrupd thee in,
Like an Olympian wrastling. This haue I seene,
But this thy countenance still lockt in steele,
I neuer saw till now: I knew thy grand-fire,
And once fought with him, he was a soldier good,
But by great Mars the Captaine of vs all,
Neuer like thee: O let an old man embrace thee,
And worthy warriour welcome to our tents.
Tis the old Nestr.
Let me embrace thee good old Chronide,
That hast so long walkt hand in hand with time,
Most reuerend Nestr, I am glad to claspe thee.
I would my armes could match thee in contention.
I would they could.
Ha? by this white beard Ide fight with thee to morrow.
Well, welcome, welcome, I haue eene the time.
I wonder now how yonder Citty stands,
When we haue here her base and piller by vs?
I know your fauour lord Vlisses well,
Ah sir, there's many a Greeke and Troyan dead,
Since first I saw your sefe and Diomed,
In Illion on your Greekish embassie.
Sir I foretold you then what would ensue,
My prophecie is but halfe his iourney yet,
For yonder walls that pertly front your towne,
You towers, whose wanton tops do busse the clouds,
Must kisse their owne feete.
I must not beleeue you.
There they stand yet, and modestly I thinke▪
The fall of euery Phrigian stone will cost,
A drop of Gree an bloud: the end crownes all,
And that old common arbitrator Time, will one day end it.
So to him we leaue it.
Most gentle and most vaant Hector, welcome:
After the Generall, I beseech you next
To feast with me, and see me at my tent.
I shall forestall thee lord Vlisses thou:
Now Hector I haue fed mine eyes on thee, (by ioint.
I haue with exact view perude thee Hector, & quoted ioynt by ioint.
Is this Achilles?
I am Achilles.
Stand faire I pray thee, let me looke on thee,
Behold thy fill.
Nay I haue done already.
Thou art too briefe, I will the second time,
As I would buie thee, view thee lim by lim,
O like a booke of sport thou'lt read me ore:
But ther's more in me then thou vnderstan dst,
Why doost thou so oppresse me with thine eye.
Tell me you heauens, in which part of his body
Shall I destroy him: whether there, or there, or there,
Tat I may giue the locall wound a name,
And make distinct the very breach, whereout
Hectors great spiit flew: answer me heauens.
It would discredit the blest gods proud man,
To answer such a question: stand againe,
Thinkst thou to catch my life so pleasantly,
As to prenominate in nice coniecture,
Where thou hit me dead.
I tell hee yea.
Wert thou an Oracle to tell me so,
Ie not beleeue thee▪ Hence-forth gard thee well,
For Ile not kill thee there, nor there, no there,
But by the forge that stichied Mars his helme.
Ile kill thee euery where, yea ore and ore.
You wisest Grecians, pardon me this brag,
His insolence drawes folly from my lips,
But ile endeuour deeds to match these words,
Or may I neuer—
Do not chae thee cozen.
And you Achilles, let these threats alone,
Till accident or purpose bring you too't,
You may haue euery day enough of Hector,
If you haue stomack, The generall state I feare,
Can scarce entreate you to be odde with him.
I pray you let vs see you in the field,
We haue had pelting warres since you refusd, the Grecians cause.
Doost thou entreate me Hector?
To morow do I meet thee fell as death: to night all friends.
Thy hand vpon that match.
First all you Peeres of Greece, go to my ent,
There in the full conuiue we: afterwards
As Hectors leisure, and your bounties shall
Concurre together, seuerally entreate him
To taste your bounties, let the trumpets blowe,
That this great souldier may his welcome know.
My Lord Vlisses, tell me I beseech you,
In what place of the field doth Calcas keepe.
At Menelaus tent, most princely Troylus:
There Diomed doth feast with him to night,
Who neither lookes vpon the heauen nor earth,
But giues all gaze, and bent of amorous view,
On the faire Cresseid.
Shall I sweete Lord be bound to you so much,
After we part from tent,
To bring me theth.
You shall command me sir.
But gentle tell me of what honor was
This Cressids in Troy? had she no louer there
That wailes her absence?
O sir to such as bosting shew their skarres,
A mocke is due; will you walke on my Lord,
Shee was beloued my Lord, she is, and doth,
But still sweet loue is food for fortunes tooth.
Ile heate his blood with greekish wine to night,
Which with my Cemitar ile cool to morrow,
Patroclus let vs feast him to the hight
Here comes Thersites.
How now thou curre of enuy.
Thou cruly batch of nature whats the news?
Why thou picture of what thou seemest, and Idoll,
Of idiot wrshippes▪ heers a letter for thee.
From whence fragment.
Why thou full dish of foole from Troy,
Who keeps the tent now.
The Surgeons box or the pacients wound.
Well said aduersity, and what needs this tricks,
Prithee be silent box I profit not by thy talke,
Thou art said to be Achilles male varlot,
Male varlot you rogue whats that.
Why his masculine whore, now the ro'ten disases of the south, the guts griping ruptures: loades a grauell in the back, lethergies, could palsies, rawe eies, durtrott liuers, whissing lungs, bladders full of impostume, Sciaticaes lime. kills ith' palme, incurable bone-ach, and the riueled ee simple of the tetter, take and take againe such preposterous discoueries.
Why thou damnable box of enuy thou what meanes thou to curse thus.
do I curse thee.
Why no you ruinous but, you horson indistinguishable cur, no.
No why art thou then exasperate, thou idle immaterial skein of sleiue silke, thou greene sacenet lap for a sore eye, thou toslell of a prodigalls purse-thou ah how the poore world is pestred with such water flies, diminitiues of nature.
Out gall.
Finch egge.
My sweet Patroclus I am thwarted quite,
From my great purpose into morrowes battell,
Here is a letter from Queene ▪
A token from her daughter my faire loue
Both taxing me, and gaging me to keepe:
An oth that I haue sworne: I will not breake it,
Fall Greekes, fayle fame, honour or go or stay,
My maior vow lies hre; this ile obay,
Come, come, Thersites help to trim my tent?
This night in banquetting must al be spent, away Patroclus.
With to much bloud, and to little braine, these two may run mad, but if with to much braine and to little bloud they do ile be a curer of mad-men, her's Agamemnon, an honest fellow inough, and one that loues quailes, but hee has not so much braine as eare-wax, and the goodly transformation of Inpiter there, his be the Bull, the primitiue starue, and oblique memorial of cuck-olds, a thrifty shooing-horue in a chaine at his bare legge, to what forme but that hee is, should wit larded with malice, and malice faced with witte, turne him to: to an Asse, were nothing hee is both Asse and Oxe to an Oxe were nothing, her's both Oxe and Asse, to be a day, a Moyle, a Cat, a Fichooke, a Tode, a Lezard, an Oule, a Puttock, or a Herring without a rowe. I would not care, but to bee Menelaus I would conspire against desteny, aske me what I would be, if I were not Thersites, for I care not to be the Louse of a Lazar, so I were not Menelaus—hey-day sprites and fires.
We go wrong we goe wrong.
No, yonder tis there where we see the lights.
I trouble you.
No not a whit:
Here comes himselfe to guide you.
Welcome braue Hector, welcome Princes all.
So now faire Prince of Troy, I bid God night,
Aiax commands the guard to tend on you.
Thanks and good night to the Greekes generall.
Good night my Lord.
Good night sweet Lord Menelaus.
Sweet draught, sweet quoth a, sweet sinke, sweet sure.
Good night and welcome both to those that go or tarry.
Good night.
Old Nector tarries, and you to Diomed.
Keepe Hector company an houre or two.
I cannot Lord, I haue important businesse,
The tide whereof is now, good night great Hector.
Giue me your hand.
Follow his torch, he goes to Calcas tent, ile keepe you company.
Sweet sir you honor me?
And so good night.
Come, come, enter my tent.
That same Diomed a false hearted roague, a most vniust knaue, I will no more trust him when hee leeres, then I will a serpat when hee hisses, hee will spend his mouth and promise like brabler the , but when he performes, Astronomers forett it, is , there will come some change, the Some borrowe of the Moone when Diomed keepes his word, I will rather leaue to see Hector then not to dog him, they say hee keepes a Troyan drab, and vses the trayto Calcas tent, Ile after—nothing but let chery all incontinent varlots.
What are you vp here speake?
Who calls?
, Chalcs I thinke wher's your daughter?
She comes to you.
Stand, where the torch may not disceuer vs.
Cressid comes forth to him.
How now my charge.
Now my sweet gardian, harke a word with you.
Yea so samiliar?
Shee will sing any man at first sight.
And any man may sing her, if hee can take her Cliff, she's noted.
Will you remember?
Remember yes:
Nay but do then and let your minde be coupled with your words.
What shall she remember.
Lift?
Sweet hony Greeke tempt me no mor to folly.
Roguery.
Naythen.
Ile tell you what.
Fo, fo, come tell a pin you are forsworne.
In faith I cannot, what would you haue me do?
A rugling tricke to be secretly open,
What did you sweare you would bestow on me?
I prethee do not hold me to mine oath,
Bid me do any thing but that sweete Greeke.
Good night.
Hold patience.
How now Troyan.
Diomed.
No, no, good night Ile be your foole no more,
Thy better must,
Harke a wod in your eare.
O plague and madnesse!
You ae moued Prince, let vs depart I pray
Least your displeasure shuld inlarge it selfe
To wrathfull tearmes, this place is dangerous:
The time right dedly, I beseech you goe.
Behold I pray you.
Now good my Lord go off.
You flow to geat distruction, come my Lord.
I prethee stay.
You aue not patience, come.
I pray you stay; by hell, and all hells tormen ▪
I will not speake a word.
And so good night,
Nay bt you part in anger▪
Doth that grieue thee, O withered truth.
How now my Lord?
By loue I will be patient.
Gardian? why Greeke?
Fo fo you palter.
In faith I doe not, come hether once again.
You shake my Lord at something, wil you goe. you wil break out.
She stroakes his cheeke.
Come, come.
Nay stay, by Ioue I will not speake a word,
Therein betwne my will and all
A guard of patence, stay a little while,
How the diuell Luxury with his fat rumpe and potato finger, tickles together; frye lechery frye.
Will you then?
In faith I will lo, neuer trust me else.
Giue me some token for the surety of it.
Ile fetch you one.
You haue sworne patience:
Feare me not my Lord.
I will not be my selfe, not haue cognition
Of what I feele, I am all paience:
Now the pledge, now, now, now.
Heere Diomed keepe this sleeue.
O beauty where is thy faith▪
My Lord.
You looke vpon that sleeue behold it well,
Hee loued me (oh false wench) giu't me againe:
Whose wast?
It is no matter now I ha't againe.
I will not meete with you to morrow night:
I prethee Diomed visite me no more.
Now shee sharpens, well said Whetstone.
I shall haue it.
What this?
I that.
O all you gods; O pretty pretty pledge!
Thy maister now lyes thinking on his bed
Of thee and mee, and sighes, and takes my gloue,
And giues mmoriall dainty kisses to it, as I kisse thee.
Nay do not snatch it from me.
He that takes that doth take my heart withall.
I had your heart before, this followes it.
I did sweare patience.
You shall not haue it Diomed, faith you shall not,
Ile giue you something else.
I will haue this, whose was it?
It is no matter.
Come tell me whose it was?
Twas on's that lou'd me better then you will,
But now you haue it take it.
VVhose was it?
And by all Dias wayting women yond
And by her selfe I will not tell you whose.
To morrow will I weare it on my Helme,
And grieue his spirit that dares not challenge it.
VVert thou the diuell, and wor'st it on thy horne,
It should be challengd.
VVell, well, tis done, tis past: and yet it is not.
I will not keepe my word.
VVhy then farewell, thou neuer shalt mocke Diomed againe.
You shall not got: one cannot speake a word but it straight starts you.
I do not like this fooling.
Nor I by Plut; but that that likes not you, pleases me best.
VVhat shall I come? the houre—
I come; O Ione: do come, I shall be plagued.
Farewell till then.
Good night, I prethee cme:
Troylus farewell, one eye yet lookes on thee,
But with my heart the other eye doth see,
Ah poore cur sx, this fault in vs I find,
The error of our eye diects our mind,
VVhat error leads must erre: O then conclude,
" Mindes swayd by eyes are full of turpitude.
A proofe of strengh, she could not publish more,
Vnlesse shee said my is now turn'd whore.
All's done my Lord.
It is.
VVhy stay we ther?
To make a ecordation to my soule
Of euery sillable that here was spoke:
But if I tell how these two did Court,
Shall I not lye in publishing a truth,
Sith yet there is a credence in my heart,
An esperance so obstinatly strong,
That doth , attest of eyes and eares,
As if those organs were deceptions functions,
Created onely to calumniate. Was Cresseid heere?
I cannot coniure Troyan.
Shee was not sure.
Most sure she was.
Why my negation hath no taste of madnesse.
Nor mine my Lord: Cresseid was heere but now.
Let it not be beleeu'd for woman-hood.
Thinke we had mothers, do not giue aduantage
To stub borne Critiques apt without a theme
For deptauation, to requare the generall sex
By Cresseids rule, Rather thinke this not Cresseid.
What hath she done Prince that cā spoile our mothers.
Nothing at all, vnlesse that this were she.
Will a swagger himselfe out on's owne eyes.
This she, no this is Dieds Cresseid,
If beauty haue a soule this is not shee:
If soules guide vowes, if vowes be sanctimonies,
If sanctimony be the gods delight:
If there berule in vnitie it selfe,
This was not shee: O manesse of discourse,
That cause sets vp with and against it selfe,
By-found authority: where reason can reuol
Wthout perdition, and losse assume all reason,
Without reuolt▪ This is and is not Cresseid,
Within my foule there doth conduce a fight
Of this strange nature, that a thing inseparat,
Diuides more wider then the skie and earth:
And yet the spacious bredth of this diuision,
Admits no orifex for a point as subtle,
As Ariachra's broken wooe to enter,
Instance, O instance strong as Plus gates,
Cresseid is mine, tied with the bonds of heauen,
Instance, O instance, strong as heauen it selfe,
The bonds of heauen are slipt, dissolu'd and loosd,
And with another knot finde finger tied,
The fractions of her faith, orts of her loue.
The fragments, scraps, the bitts and greazie reliques.
Of her ore-eaten faith, are gluen to Diomed,
May worthy Troylus be halfe attached
With that which heere his passion doth expresse?
I Greeke, and that shall be divulged well
In Characters as red as Mars his heart
Inflam'd with Venus: neuer did young man fancy
With so eternall and so ixt a soule.
Harke Greeke, as much I do Cressid loue,
So much by waight, hate I her Diomed:
That sleeue is mine, that heele beare on his Helme:
VVere it a Caske compos'd by Vuleans skill
My sword should bite it: Not the dreadfull spout
VVhich Shipmen do the hurricano call,
Constringd in Masse by the almighty sunne
Shal dizzy with more clamour Neptunes eare, in his discent,
Then shall my prompted sword, alling on Diomed.
Heele ticle it for his concupie.
O Cressid, O false Cressid, false, false, false:
Let all vntruthes stand by thy sained name,
And theyle seeme glorious,
O containe your selfe;
Your passion drawes eares hether.
I haue beene seeking you this houre my Lord:
Hector by this is at ming him in Troy:
Aiax your guard stayes to conduct you home.
Haue with you Prince: my curteous Lord adiew,
Farewell reuoulted faire: and Diomed
Stand fast, and weare a Castle on thy head.
Ile bring you to the gates.
Accept distracted thankes.
VVould I could meete that roague Diomed I would croke like a Rauen. I would bode, I would bode Patroclus will giue me any thing for the inteligence of this whore: the Paot will not do more for an almond then he for a commodious drab: Lechery, lechery, still warres and lechery, nothing else holds fashion. A burning diuell take them.
When was my Lord so much vngently temperd,
To stop his eares against admonishment:
Vnarme vnarme, and do not fight to day.
You traine me to offend you, get you in,
By all the euerlasting gods Ile go.
My dreames will sure prooue ominous to the day.
No more I say.
Where is my brother Hector?
Here sister, arm'd and bloody in intent,
Consort with me in lowd and deere petition,
Pursue we him on knees: for I haue dreamt
Of bloudy turbulence, and this whole night
Hath nothing beene but shapes and formes of slaughter.
O tis true.
Ho? bid my trumpet sound.
No notes of sallie for the heauens sweete brother.
Begon I say, the gods haue heard me sweare.
The gods are dease to hoe and peeuish vowes,
They are polluted offrings more abhord,
Then spotted liuers in the sacrifice.
O be perswaded, do not count it holy,
It is the purpose that makes strong the vow,
But vowes to euery purpose must not hold:
Vnarme sweet Hector.
Hold you still I say,
Mine honor keepes the weather of my fate:
Life euery man holds deere but the deere man,
Holds honor sarre more precious deere then life,
How now yong man, meanest thou to fight to day.
Cassandra call my father to perswade.
No faith yong Troylus, dofe thy harnesse youth,
I am to day ith' vaine of chiualrie,
Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong,
And tempt not yet the brushes of the warre.
Vnarme thee go, and doubt thou not braue boy,
Ile stand to day for thee and me and Troy.
Brother, you haue a vice of mercy in you,
Which better fits a Lion then a man.
What vice is that? good Troylus chide mee for it.
When many times the captiue Grecian falls,
Euen in the fanne and winde of your faire sword.
You bid them rise and liue.
O tis faire play.
Fooles play by heauen Hector.
How now? how now?
For'th loue of all the gods
Lets leaue the Hermit Pitty with our Mother,
And when we haue our armors buckled on,
The venomd vengeance ride vpon our swords,
Spur them to ruthfull worke, raine them from ruth.
Fie sauage, fie.
Hector then 'tis warres.
Troylus I would not haue you fight to day.
Who should with-hold me?
Not ate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars,
Beckning with fierie trunchion my etire,
Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees,
Their eyes ore-galled with recourse of teares,
Nor you my brother, with your true sword drawne,
Opposd to hinder me, should stop my way,
Lay hold vpon him, Priam hold him fast,
He is thy crutch: now if thou loose thy stay,
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
Fall all together.
Come Hector, come, go back,
Thy wife hath dreamt, thy mother hath had visions,
Cassandra doth forcsee, and I my selfe,
Am like a prophet suddenly enapt,
To tell thee that this day is ominous:
Therefore come back.
Aeneas is a field,
And I do stand, engagd to many Greekes,
Euen in the faith of valour to appeare,
This morning to them.
I but thou shalt not goe.
I must not breake my faith,
You know me dutifall, therefore deere sir,
Let me not shame respect, but giue me leaue
To take that course by your consent and voice,
Which you do here forbid me royall Priam.
O Priam yeeld not to him.
Do not deere father.
Andromach I am offended with you,
Vpon the loue you beare me get you in.
This foolish dreaming superstitious girle,
Makes all these boements.
O farewell deere Hector.
Looke how thou dy'est looke how thy eye turnes pale.
Looke how thy wounds do bleed at many vents,
Harke how Troy roares, how Hecuba cries out,
How poore Andromache shrils her dolours foorth,
Behold destruction, frenzie, and amazement,
Like witlesle an iques one another meete,
And all cric Hector, Hectors dead, O Hector.
Away, away.
Farewell, yet soft: Hector I take my leaue,
Thou do'st thy selfe and all our Troy deceaue?
You are amaz'd my liege, at her excaime,
Goe in and cheere the towne,
Weele forth and fight,
Do deeds worth praise, and tell you them at night.
Farewell, the gods with safetie stand about thee.
They are at it harke proud Diomed beleeue.
I come to loose my arme or winne my sleeue.
Do you heere my
What now?
Heer's a letter come from yond poore gire.
Let me read,
A whorson tisick, a whorson rascally tisick, so troubles me, and the foolish fortune of this girle, and what one thing, what another, that I shall leaue you one ath's dayes: and I haue a rheume in mine eyes too, and such an ache in my bones, that vnlesse a man were curst I cannot tell what to thinke on't. What sayes she there?
Words, words, meere words, no matter frō the heart,
Th'effect doth operate another way.
Go winde to winde, there turne and change together:
My loue with words and errors still she feedes,
But ediies another with her deedes.
Now they are clapper-clawing one another: Ile go looke on, that dislembling abhomihable vatlet Diomede, has go that same scurnie dooting foolish knaues sleeue of Troy there in his helme. I would faine see them meete, that that same young Troy an asse that loues the whore there, might send that Greekish whore-masterly villaine with the fleeue, back to the dissembling luxurious drabbe of a sleeuelesse arrant. Ath' tother side, the pollicie of those cratie swearing raskalls; that stale old Mouse-eaten drye cheese Nestor: and that same dogge-foxe Vlisses, is not proou'd worth a Black-berry. They set mee vp in pollicie, that mongrill curre Aiax, against that dogge of as bad a kinde Achilles. And now is the curte Aiax, prouder then the curre Achilles, and will not arme to day. Where-vpon the Grecians began to proclaime barbarisme, and pollicie growes into an ill opinion. Soft here comes sleeue & tother.
lye not, for shouldst th take the uer Stix, I would swm after,
Thou doost miseall ree,
I doe not , but aduantagious care,
With-drew me from the ods of multitude, haue at thee?
Hold thy whore Grecian: now for thy whore Troian,
Now the sleeue, now the sleeue.
What art Greeke, art thou for Hectors match.
Art thou of bloud and honour.
No, no, I am a rascall, a scuruy rayling knaue, a very filthy roague.
I do beleue thee, liue.
God a mercy, that thou wilt beleeue me, but a plague breake thy neck—for frighting me: whats become of the wenching roagues? I thinke they haue swallowed one another. I would laugh at that miracle—yet in a sort lechery eates it selfe, ile seeke them.
Goe go, my seruant take thou Troylus horse,
Present the faire steed to my Lady Cressid,
Fellow commend my seruice to her beauty:
Tell her I haue chastis'd the amorous Troyan,
And am her knight by proofe.
I goe my Lord.
Renew, renew, the fierce Polidamas,
Hath beate downe Menon: bastard Margarelo,
Hath Doreus prisoner.
And stands Colossus wise wauing his beame,
Vpon the pashed corses of the Kings:
Epistropus and Cedus, Polixines is slaine,
Aphimacus and Thous deadly hurt,
Patroclus tane or slaine, and Palamedes
Sore hurt and bruised, the dreadfull Sagittary,
Appalls our numbers, hast we Diomed,
To re-enforcement or we perish all.
Go beare Patroclus body to Achilles,
And bid the snail-pac't Aiax arme for shame,
There is a thousand Hectors in the field:
Now here he fights on Galathe his horse,
And there lacks worke, anon he's there a foote
And there they flie or die, like sealing sculls,
Before the belching Whale, then is he yonder:
And there the strawy Greekes ipe for his edge
Fall downe before him like a mowers swath,
Here, there and cuery where, he leaues and takes.
Dextty so ob aying appeute,
That what he will he do's, and do's so much:
That proofe is call'd impossibility.
Oh courage, courage Princes, great Achilles,
Is atming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengcance,
Patroclus wounds haue rouz'd his drowzy bloud,
Together with his mangled Myrmidons
That noselesle, handlesse, hackt and chipt come to him.
Crying on Hector, Aiax hath loft a friend,
And oames at mouth, and hee is armde and at it.
Roaing for Troylus, who hath done to day,
Madde and fantastique execution:
Engaging and redeeming of himselfe
With such a carelesse force, and forcelesse care,
As if that lust in very spiht of cunning, bad him win all.
Troylus, thou coward Troylus.
I there, there?
So, so we draw together.
Where is this Hector?
Come, come, thou boy-queller shew thy face,
Know what it is to meete Achilles angry
Hector wher's Hector I will none but Hector.
Troylus thou coward Troylus shew thy head.
Troylus I say wher's Troylus?
What wouldst thou.
I wold correct him.
Were I the generall thou shouldst haue my office,
Ere that correction? Troylus I say what Troylus.
Oh traytor Domed, turne thy false face thou traytor,
And pay thy life thou owet me for my horse.
Ha art thou there?
Ile fight with him alone stand Diomed.
He is my prize, I will not looke vpon.
Come both you cogging Greekes haue at you both.
Yea Troylus, O well fought my yongest brother.
Now do I see thee ha, haue at thee Hector.
Pause if thou wit.
I do disdaine thy curtesie proud Troyan,
Be happy that my armes are our of vse:
My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
But thou anon shalt here of me againe:
Till when goe seke thy fortune.
Fare thee well.
I would haue beene much more a fresher man,
Had I expected thee, how now my brother.
Aiax hath tane Aeneas, shall it be,
No by the flame of yonder glorious heauen
He shall not carry him ile be tanoo,
Or bring him off, fate here me what I say:
I wreake not though I end my life to day.
Stand, stand thou Greeke, thou art a goodly marke,
No? wilt thou not. I like thy armor we'l,
Ile frush it and vnoc the rinets all:
But ile be maister of it, wilt thou not beast abide,
Why then flie on, ile hunt thee for thy hide.
Come here about me you my Myrmidous,
Marke what I say, attend me where I wheele:
Strike not a stroke, but keepe your selues in breth,
And when I haue the bloudy Hector found:
Empale him with your weapons round about,
In fellest manner execut your ames
Follow me sirs and my proceedings eye,
It is decreed Hector the great must die.
The cuck-old and the cock-old-maker are at it, now bull, now dogge lowe, Paris lowe, now my double hen'd spartan, lowe Paris, lowe the bull has the game, wate hornes ho?
Turne slane and fight.
What art thou?
A Bastard sonne of Priams.
I am a bastard too, I loue bastards. I am bastard be. got, bastard instructed, bastard in minde, bastard in va our, in cuery thing illigitimate, one beare wil not bite another, and wherefore should one bastard? take heed, the quarrells most ominous to vs, if the sonne of a whore ight for a whore, he tempts iudgement, farewell bastard.
The duell take thee coward.
Most putrified core so faire without,
Thy goodly armor thus hath cost thy life;
Now is my daies worke done ile take my breth▪
Rest sword thou hast thy fill of bloud and death.
Loke Hector how the Sunne begins to set,
How ougly night comes breathing at his heeles
Euen with the vaile and darkning of the Sunne,
To cose the day vp, Hectors life is done.
I am vnam'd sorgee this vantage Greeke.
Strike fellowes rike, this is the an I seeke,
So Illion fall thou next, come Troy sinke downe,
Here lles thy heart, thy sinne wes and thy bone.
On Myrmydous, and cry you all amaine,
Achilles hath the mighty Hector slaine,
Harke a retire vpon our Grecian prat.
The Troyans trumpet sound the like my Lord.
The dragon wing of night orespreds the earth,
And stickler-like the aimies separates.
My halse supt sword that frankly would haue fedde,
Pleas'd with this dainty bake: thus goes to bed:
Come tie his body to my horses taile,
Along the field I will the Troyan traile.
Hark, harke, what is this?
Peace drums.
Achilles, Achilles, Hectors slaine Achilles.
The bruite is Hectors slaine and by Achilles.
If it be so yet braglesse let it bee,
Great Hector was as good a man as he.
March patiently along: let one bee sent,
To pray Achiles see vs at our tent:
If in his death the Gods haue vs befriended.
Great Troy is ours, and our sharpe wars are ended.
Stand ho? yet are we masters of the field,
Neuer goe home, here starue we out the night,
Hector is slaine.
Hector! the gods forbid.
Hee's dead and at the murtherers horses taile,
In bestly sort dragd through the shamefull field:
Frowne on you heauens, effect your rage with speed,
Sit gods vpon you thrones, and smile at Troy.
I say at once, let your breese plagues be mercy,
And linger not our sure destructions on.
My Lord you doe discomfort all the host.
You vnderstand me not that tell me so,
I do not speake of flight, of feare of death
But dare all immynence that gods and men
Addresse their daungers in. Hector is gone:
Who shall tell Priam so or Hecuba?
Let him that will a scrich-ould aye be call'd,
Goe into Troy and say their Hectors dead,
There is a word will Priam turne to stone,
Make wells and Niebe's of the maides and wiues:
Could statues of the youth and in a word,
Scarre Troy out of it selfe, there is no more to say,
Stay yet you proud abhminable tents:
Thus proudly pitcht vpon our Phrigian plaines,
Let Tytan rise as earely as he dare;
Ile through, and through you, and thou great siz'd coward,
No space of earth shall sunder out two hates:
Ile haunt thee like a wicked conscience still,
That moulderth goblins swift as fienzes thoughts,
Strike a free march, to Troy with comfort goe
Hope of reueng shall hide our ward woe.
But here you, here you.
Hence broker, lacky, ignomyny, shame,
Pursue thy life, and hue aye with thy name.
A goodly medicine for my asking bones, Oh world, world—thus is the poore agent despis'd, Oh traitors and bawds, how earnestly are you set a worke, and how ill requited, why should our endeuour bee so lou'd and the performance so loathed, what verse for it? What instance for it?
Let me see,
Full merrily the humble Bee doth sing,
Till he hath lost his hony and his sting.
And being once sub dude in armed taile,
Sweet hony, and sweet notes together faile.
Good traiders in the flesh, set this in your painted cloathes,
As many as be here of Pandars, ,
Your eyes halfe out weepe out at Pandars fall.
Or if you cannot weepe yet giue some grones,
Though not for me yet for my aking bones:
Brethren and sisters of the hold-ore trade,
Some two monthes hence my will shall here be made▪
It should be now but that my feare is this,
Some gauled goose of Winchester would hisse.
Till then ile sweat and seeke about for cases,
And at that time bequeath you my diseases.