IN Troy there lyes the Scene From Iles of Greece
The Princes Orgillous, their high blood chaf'd
Haue to the Port of Athens ſent their ſhippes
Fraught with the miniſters and inſtruments
Of cruell Warre: Sixty and nine that wore
Their Crownets, Regall, from th' Athenian bay
Put forth toward Phrygia, and their vow is made
To ranſacke Troy, within whoſe ſtrong emures
The rauiſh'd Helen, Menelaus Queene,
With wanton Paris ſleepes, and that's the Quarrell.
To Tenedos they come,
And the deepe-drawing Barke do there diſgorge
Their warlike frautage: now on Dardan Plaines
The freſh and yet vnbruiſed Greekes do pitch
Their braue Pauillions. Priams ſix-gated City,
Dardan and Timbria, Helias, Chetas, Troien,
And Antenonidus with maſsie Staples
And correſponſiue and fulfilling Bolts
Stirre vp the Sonnes of Troy.
Now Expectation tickling skittiſh ſpirits,
On one and other ſide, Troian and Greeke,
Sets all on hazard▪ And hither am J come,
A Prologue arm'd, but not in confidence
Of Authors pen, or Actors voyce; but ſuited
Jn like conditions, as our Argument;
To tell you (faire Beholders) that our Play
Leapes ore the vaunt and firſtlings of thoſe broyles,
Beginning in the middle: ſtarting thence away,
To what may be digeſted in a Play:
Like, or finde fault, do as your pleaſures are,
Now good, or bad, 'tis but the chance of Warre.
CAll here my Varlet, Ile vnarme againe.
Why ſhould I warre without the wals of Troy
That finde ſuch cruell battell here within?
Each Troian that is maſter of his heart,
Let him to field, Troylus alas hath none.
Will this geere nere be mended?
The Greeks are ſtrong, & skilful to their ſtrength,
Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceneſſe Valiant:
But I am weaker then a womans teare;
Tamer then ſleepe, fonder then ignorance;
Leſſe valiant then the Virgin in the night,
And skilleſſe as vnpractis'd Infancie.
Well, I haue told you enough of this: For my part, Ile not meddle nor make no farther. Hee that will haue a Cake out of the Wheate, muſt needes tarry the grinding.
Haue I not tarried?
I the grinding; but you muſt tarry the bolting.
Haue I not tarried?
I the boulting; but you muſt tarry the leau'ing.
Still haue I tarried.
I, to the leauening: but heeres yet in the word hereafter, the Kneading, the making of the Cake, the heating of the Ouen, and the Baking; nay, you muſt ſtay the cooling too, or you may chance to burne your lips.
Patience her ſelfe, what Goddeſſe ere ſhe be,
Doth leſſer blench at ſufferance, then I doe:
At Priams Royall Table doe I ſit;
And when faire Creſſid comes into my thoughts,
So (Traitor) then ſhe comes, when ſhe is thence.
Well:
She look'd yeſternight fairer, then euer I ſaw her looke,
Or any woman elſe.
I was about to tell thee, when my heart,
As wedged with a ſigh, would riue in twaine,
Leaſt Hector, or my Father ſhould perceiue me:
I haue (as when the Sunne doth light a-ſcorne)
Buried this ſigh, in wrinkle of a ſmile:
But ſorrow, that is couch'd in ſeeming gladneſſe,
Is like that mirth, Fate turnes to ſudden ſadneſſe.
And her haire were not ſomewhat darker then Helens, well go too, there were no more compariſon betweene the Women. But for my part ſhe is my Kinſwoman, I would not (as they tearme it) praiſe it, but I wold ſome-body had heard her talke yeſterday as I did: I will not diſpraiſe your ſiſter Caſſandra's wit, but—
Oh Pandarus! I tell thee Pandarus;
When I doe tell thee, there my hopes lye drown'd:
Reply not in how many Fadomes deepe
They lye indrench'd. I tell thee, I am mad
In Creſſids loue. Thou anſwer'ſt ſhe is Faire,
Powr'ſt in the open Vlcer of my heart,
Her Eyes, her Haire, her Cheeke, her Gate, her Voice,
Handleſt in thy diſcourſe. O that her Hand
(In whoſe compariſon, all whites are Inke)
Writing their owne reproach; to whoſe ſoft ſeizure,
The Cignets Downe is harſh, and ſpirit of Senſe
Hard as the palme of Plough-man. This thou tel'ſt me;
As true thou tel'ſt me, when I ſay I loue her:
But ſaying thus, inſtead of Oyle and Balme,
Thou lai'ſt in euery gaſh that loue hath giuen me,
The Knife that made it.
I ſpeake no more then truth.
Thou do'ſt not ſpeake ſo much.
Faith, Ile not meddle in't: Let her be as ſhee is, if ſhe be faire, 'tis the better for her: and ſhe be not, ſhe ha's the mends in her owne hands.
Good Pandarus: How now Pandarus?
I haue had my Labour for my trauell, ill thought on of her, and ill thought on of you: Gone betweene and betweene, but ſmall thankes for my labour.
What art thou angry Pandarus? what with me?
Becauſe ſhe's Kinne to me, therefore ſhee's not ſo faire as Helen, and ſhe were not kin to me, ſhe would be as faire on Friday, as Helen is on Sunday. But what care I? I care not and ſhe were a Black-a-Moore, 'tis all one to me.
Say I ſhe is not faire?
I doe not care whether you doe or no. Shee's a Foole to ſtay behinde her Father: Let her to the Greeks, and ſo Ile tell her the next time I ſee her: for my part, Ile meddle nor make no more i' th' matter.
Pandarus?
Not I.
Sweete Pandarus.
Pray you ſpeake no more to me, I will leaue all as I found it, and there an end.
Peace you vngracious Clamors, peace rude ſounds,
Fooles on both ſides, Helen muſt needs be faire,
When with your bloud you daily paint her thus.
I cannot fight vpon this Argument:
It is too ſtaru'd a ſubiect for my Sword,
But Pandarus: O Gods! How do you plague me?
I cannot come to Creſſid but by Pandar,
And he's as teachy to be woo'd to woe,
As ſhe is ſtubborne, chaſt, againſt all ſuite.
Tell me Apollo for thy Daphnes Loue
What Creſſid is, what Pandar, and what we:
Her bed is India, there ſhe lies, a Pearle▪
Between our Ilium, and where ſhee recides
Let it be cald the wild and wandring flood,
Our ſelfe the Merchant, and this ſayling Pandar,
Our doubtfull hope, our conuoy and our Barke.
How now Prince Troylus?
Wherefore not a field?
Becauſe not there; this womans anſwer ſorts.
For womaniſh it is to be from thence:
What newes Aeneas from the field to day?
That Paris is returned home, and hurt.
By whom Aeneas?
Troylus by Menelaus.
Let Paris bleed, 'tis but a ſcar to ſcorne,
Paris is gor'd with Menelaus horne.
Harke what good ſport is out of Towne to day.
Better at home, if would I might were may:
But to the ſport abroad, are you bound thither?
In all ſwift haſt.
Come goe wee then togither.
Who were thoſe went by?
Queene Hecuba, and Hellen.
And whether go they?
Vp to the Eaſterne Tower,
Whoſe height commands as ſubiect all the vaile,
To ſee the battell: Hector whoſe pacience,
Is as a Vertue fixt, to day was mou'd:
He chides Andromache and ſtrooke his Armorer,
And like as there were husbandry in Warre
Before the Sunne roſe, hee was harneſt lyte,
And to the field goe's he; where euery flower
Did as a Prophet weepe what it forſaw,
In Hectors wrath.
What was his cauſe of anger?
The noiſe goe's this;
There is among the Greekes,
A Lord of Troian blood, Nephew to Hector,
They call him Aiax.
Good; and what of him?
They ſay he is a very man per ſe and ſtands alone.
So do all men, vnleſſe they are drunke, ſicke, or haue no legges.
This man Lady, hath rob'd many beaſts of their particular additions, he is as valiant as the Lyon, churliſh as the Beare, ſlow as the Elephant: a man into whom nature hath ſo crowded humors, that his valour is cruſht into folly, his folly ſauced with diſcretion: there is no man hath a vertue, that he hath not a glimpſe of, nor any man an attaint, but he carries ſome ſtaine of it. He is melancholy without cauſe, and merry againſt the haire, hee hath the ioynts of euery thing, but euery thing ſo out of ioynt, that hee is a gowtie Briareus, many hands and no vſe; or purblinded Argus, all eyes and no ſight.
But how ſhould this man that makes me ſmile, make Hector angry?
They ſay he yeſterday cop'd Hector in the battell and ſtroke him downe, the diſdaind & ſhame whereof, hath euer ſince kept Hector faſting and waking.
Who comes here?
Madam your Vncle Pandarus.
Hectors a gallant man.
As may be in the world Lady.
What's that? what's that?
Good morrow Vncle Pandarus.
Good morrow Cozen Creſſid: what do you talke of? good morrow Alexander: how do you Cozen? when were you at Illium?
This morning Vncle.
What were you talking of when I came? Was Hector arm'd and gon ere yea came to Illium? Hellen was not vp? was ſhe?
Hector was gone but Hellen was not vp?
E'ene ſo; Hector was ſtirring early.
That were we talking of, and of his anger.
Was he angry?
So he ſaies here.
True he was ſo; I know the cauſe too, heele lay about him to day I can tell them that▪ and there's Troylus will not come farre behind him, let them take heede of Troylus; I can tell them that too.
What is he angry too?
Who Troylus?
Troylus is the better man of the two.
Oh Iupiter; there's no compariſon.
What not betweene Troylus and Hector? do you know a man if you ſee him?
I, if I euer ſaw him before and knew him.
Well I ſay Troylus is Troylus.
Then you ſay as I ſay,
For I am ſure he is not Hector.
No not Hector is not Troylus in ſome degrees.
'Tis iuſt, to each of them he is himſelfe.
Himſelfe? alas poore Troylus I would he were.
So he is.
Condition I had gone bare-foote to India.
He is not Hector.
Himſelfe? no? hee's not himſelfe, would a were himſelfe: well, the Gods are aboue, time muſt friend or end: well Troylus well, I would my heart were in her body; no, Hector is not a better man then Troylus.
Excuſe me.
He is elder.
Pardon me, pardon me.
Th' others not come too't, you ſhall tell me another tale when th' others come too't: Hector ſhall not haue his will this yeare.
He ſhall not neede it if he haue his owne.
Nor his qualities.
No matter.
Nor his beautie.
'Twould not become him, his own's better.
You haue no iudgement Neece; Hellen her ſelfe ſwore th' other day, that Troylus for a browne fauour (for ſo 'tis I muſt confeſſe) not browne neither.
No, but browne.
Faith to ſay truth, browne and not browne.
To ſay the truth, true and not true.
She prais'd his complexion aboue Paris.
Why Paris hath colour inough.
So, he has.
Then Troylus ſhould haue too much, if ſhe prasi'd him aboue, his complexion is higher then his, he hauing colour enough, and the other higher, is too flaming a praiſe for a good complexion, I had as lieue Hellens golden tongue had commended Troylus for a copper noſe.
I ſweare to you,
I thinke Hellen loues him better then Paris.
Then ſhee's a merry Greeke indeed.
Nay I am ſure ſhe does, ſhe came to him th' other day into the compaſt window, and you know he has not paſt three or foure haires on his chinne.
Indeed a Tapſters Arithmetique may ſoone bring his particulars therein, to a totall.
Why he is very yong, and yet will he within three pound lift as much as his brother Hector.
Is he is ſo young a man, and ſo old a lifter?
But to prooue to you that Hellen loues him, ſhe came and puts me her white hand to his clouen chin.
Iuno haue mercy, how came it clouen?
Why, you know 'tis dimpled,
I thinke his ſmyling becomes him better then any man in all Phrigia.
Oh he ſmiles valiantly.
Dooes hee not?
Oh yes, and 'twere a clow'd in Autumne.
Why go to then, but to proue to you that Hellen loues Troylus.
Troylus wil ſtand to thee
Proofe, if youle prooue it ſo.
Troylus? why he eſteemes her no more then I eſteeme an addle egge.
If you loue an addle egge as well as you loue an idle head, you would eate chickens i' th' ſhell.
I cannot chuſe but laugh to thinke how ſhe tickled his chin, indeed ſhee has a maruel's white hand I muſt needs confeſſe.
Without the racke.
And ſhee takes vpon her to ſpie a white haire on his chinne.
Alas poore chin? many a wart is richer.
But there was ſuch laughing, Queene Hecuba laught that her eyes ran ore.
With Milſtones.
And Caſſandra laught.
But there was more temperate fire vnder the pot of her eyes: did her eyes run ore too?
And Hector laught.
At what was all this laughing?
Marry at the white haire that Hellen ſpied on Troylus chin.
And t' had beene a greene haire, I ſhould haue laught too.
They laught not ſo much at the haire, as at his pretty anſwere.
What was his anſwere?
Quoth ſhee, heere's but two and fifty haires on your chinne; and one of them is white.
This is her queſtion.
That's true, make no queſtion of that, two and fiftie haires quoth hee, and one white, that white haire is my Father, and all the reſt are his Sonnes. Iupiter quoth ſhe, which of theſe haires is Paris my husband? The forked one quoth he, pluckt out and giue it him: but there was ſuch laughing, and Hellen ſo bluſht, and Paris ſo chaft, and all the reſt ſo laught, that it paſt.
So let it now,
For is has beene a great while going by.
Well Cozen,
I told you a thing yeſterday, think on't.
So I does.
Ile be ſworne 'tis true, he will weepe you an'twere a man borne in Aprill.
And Ile ſpring vp in his teares, an'twere a nettle againſt May.
Harke they are comming from the field, ſhal we ſtand vp here and ſee them, as they paſſe toward Illium, good Neece do, ſweet Neece Creſſida.
At your pleaſure.
Heere, heere, here's an excellent place, heere we may ſee moſt brauely, Ile tel you them all by their names, as they paſſe by, but marke Troylus aboue the reſt.
Speake not ſo low'd.
That's Aeneas, is not that a braue man, hee's one of the flowers of Troy I can you, but merke Troylus, you ſhal ſee anon.
Who's that?
That's Antenor, he has a ſhrow'd wit I can tell you, and hee's a man good inough, hee's one o' th ſoundeſt iudgement in Troy whoſoeuer, and a proper man of perſon: when comes Troylus? Ile ſhew you Troylus anon, if hee ſee me, you ſhall ſee him him nod at me.
Will he giue you the nod?
You ſhall ſee.
If he do, the rich ſhall haue, more.
That's Hector, that, that, looke you, that there's a fellow. Goe thy way Hector, there's a braue man Neece, O braue Hector! Looke how hee lookes? there's a countenance; iſt not a braue man?
O braue man!
Is a not? It dooes a mans heart good, looke you what hacks are on his Helmet, looke you yonder, do you ſee? Looke you there? There's no ieſting, laying on, tak't off, who ill as they ſay, there be hacks.
Be thoſe with Swords?
Swords, any thing he cares not, and the diuell come to him, it's all one, by Gods lid it dooes ones heart good. Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris: looke yee yonder Neece, iſt not a gallant man to, iſt not? Why this is braue now: who ſaid he came hurt home to day? Hee's not hurt, why this will do Hellens heart good now, ha? Would I could ſee Troylus now, you ſhall Troylus anon.
Whoſe that?
That's Hellenus, I maruell where Troylus is, that's Helenus, I thinke he went not forth to day: that's Hellenus.
Can Hellenus fight Vncle?
Hellenus no: yes heele fight indifferent, well, I maruell where Troylus is; harke, do you not haere the people crie Troylus? Hellenus is a Prieſt.
What ſneaking fellow comes yonder?
Where? Yonder? That's Daphobus. 'Tis Troylus! Ther's a man Neece, hem▪ Braue Troylus, the Prince of Chiualrie.
Peace, for ſhame peace.
Marke him, not him: O braue Troylus: looke well vpon him Neece, looke you how his Sword is bloudied, and his Helme more hackt then Hectors, and how he lookes, and how he goes. O admirable youth! he ne're ſaw three and twenty. Go thy way Troylus, go thy way, had I a ſiſter were a Grace, or a daughter a Goddeſſe, hee ſhould take his choice. O admirable man! Paris? Paris is durt to him, and I warrant, Helen to change, would giue money to boot.
Heere come more.
Aſſes, fooles, dolts, chaffe and bran, chaffe and bran; porredge after meat. I could liue and dye i' th' eyes of Troylus. Ne're looke, ne're looke; the Eagles are gon, Crowes and Dawes, Crowes and Dawes: I had rather be ſuch a man as Troylus, then Agamemnon, and all Greece.
There is among the Greekes Achilles, a better man then Troylus.
Achilles? a Dray-man, a Porter, a very Camell.
Well, well.
Well, well? Why haue you any diſcretion? haue you any eyes? Do you know what a man is? Is not birth, beauty, good-ſhape, diſcourſe, manhood, learning, gentleneſſe, vertue, youth, liberality, and ſo forth: the Spice, and ſalt that ſeaſons a man?
I, a minc'd man, and then to be bak'd with no Date in the pye, for then the mans dates out.
You are ſuch another woman, one knowes not at what ward you lye.
Vpon my backe, to defend my belly; vpon my wit, to defend my wiles; vppon my ſecrecy, to defend mine honeſty; my Maske, to defend my beauty, and you to defend all theſe: and at all theſe wardes I lye at, at a thouſand watches.
Say one of your watches.
Nay Ile watch you for that, and that's one of the cheefeſt of them too: If I cannot ward what I would not haue hit, I can watch you for telling how I took the blow, vnleſſe it ſwell paſt hiding, and then it's paſt watching.
You are ſuch another.
Sir, my Lord would inſtantly ſpeake with you.
Where?
At your owne houſe.
Good Boy tell him I come, I doubt he bee hurt.
Fare ye well good Neece.
Adieu Vnkle.
Ile be with you Neece by and by.
To bring Vnkle.
I, a token from Troylus.
By the ſame token, you are a Bawd.
Words, vowes, gifts, teares, & loues full ſacrifice,
He offers in anothers enterpriſe:
But more in Troylus thouſand fold I ſee,
Then in the glaſſe of Pandar's praiſe may be;
Yet hold I off. Women are Angels wooing,
Things won are done, ioyes ſoule lyes in the dooing:
That ſhe belou'd, knowes nought, that knowes not this;
Men prize the thing vngain'd, more then it is.
That ſhe was neuer yet, that euer knew
Loue got ſo ſweet, as when deſire did ſue:
Therefore this maxime out of loue I teach;
"Atchieuement, is command; vngain'd, beſeech.
That though my hearts Contents firme loue doth beare,
Nothing of that ſhall from mine eyes appeare.
Princes:
What greefe hath ſet the Iaundies on your cheekes?
The ample propoſition that hope makes
In all deſignes, begun on earth below
Fayles in the promiſt largeneſſe: checkes and diſaſters
Grow in the veines of actions higheſt rear'd.
As knots by the conflux of meeting ſap,
Infect the ſound Pine, and diuerts his Graine
Tortiue and erant from his courſe of growth▪
Nor Princes, is it matter new to vs,
That we come ſhort of our ſuppoſe ſo farre,
That after ſeuen yeares ſiege, yet Troy walles ſtand,
Sith euery action that hath gone before,
Whereof we haue Record, Triall did draw
Bias and thwart, not anſwering the ayme:
And that vnbodied figure of the thought
That gaue't ſurmiſed ſhape. Why then (you Princes)
Do you with cheekes abaſh'd, behold our workes,
And thinke them ſhame, which are (indeed) nought elſe
But the protractiue trials of great Ioue,
To finde perſiſtiue conſtancie in men?
The fineneſſe of which Mettall is not found
In Fortunes loue: for then, the Bold and Coward,
The Wiſe and Foole, the Artiſt and vn-read,
The hard and ſoft, ſeeme all affin'd, and kin.
But in the Winde and Tempeſt of her frowne,
Diſtinction with a lowd and powrefull fan,
Puffing at all, winnowes the light away;
And what hath maſſe, or matter by it ſelfe,
Lies rich in Vertue, and vnmingled.
With due Obſeruance of thy godly ſeat,
Great Agamemnon, Neſtor ſhall apply
Thy lateſt words.
In the reproofe of Chance,
Lies the true proofe of men: The Sea being ſmooth,
How many ſhallow bauble Boates dare ſaile
Vpon her patient breſt, making their way
With thoſe of Nobler bulke?
But let the Ruffian Boreas once enrage
The gentle Thetis, and anon behold
The ſtrong ribb'd Barke through liquid Mountaines cut,
Bounding betweene the two moyſt Elements
Like Perſeus Horſe. Where's then the ſawcy Boate,
Whoſe weake vntimber'd ſides but euen now
Co-riual'd Greatneſſe? Either to harbour fled,
Or made a Toſte for Neptune. Euen ſo,
Doth valours ſhew, and valours worth diuide
In ſtormes of Fortune.
For, in her ray and brightneſſe,
The Heard hath more annoyance by the Brieze
Then by the Tyger: But, when the ſplitting winde
Makes flexible the knees of knotted Oakes,
And Flies fled vnder ſhade, why then
The thing of Courage,
As rowz'd with rage, with rage doth ſympathize,
And with an accent tun'd in ſelfe-ſame key,
Retyres to chiding Fortune.
Agamemnon.
Thou great Commander, Nerue, and Bone of Greece,
Heart of our Numbers, ſoule, and onely ſpirit,
In whom the tempers, and the mindes of all
Should be ſhut vp: Heare what Vlyſſes ſpeakes,
Beſides the applauſe and approbation
The which moſt mighty for thy place and ſway,
And thou moſt reuerend for thy ſtretcht-out life,
I giue to both your ſpeeches: which were ſuch,
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece
Should hold vp high in Braſſe: and ſuch againe
As venerable Neſtor (hatch'd in Siluer)
Should with a bond of ayre, ſtrong as the Axletree
In which the Heauens ride, knit all Greekes eares
To his experienc'd tongue: yet let it pleaſe both
(Thou Great, and Wiſe) to heare Vlyſſes ſpeake.
Speak Prince of Ithaca, and be't of leſſe expect:
That matter needleſſe of importleſſe burthen
Diuide thy lips; then we are confident
When ranke Therſites opes his Maſticke iawes,
We ſhall heare Muſicke, Wit, and Oracle.
Troy yet vpon his baſis had bene downe,
And the great Hectors ſword had lack'd a Maſter
But for theſe inſtances.
The ſpecialty of Rule hath beene neglected;
And looke how many Grecian Tents do ſtand
Hollow vpon this Plaine, ſo many hollow Factions.
When that the Generall is not like the Hiue,
To whom the Forragers ſhall all repaire,
What Hony is expected? Degree being vizarded,
Th' vnworthieſt ſhewes as fairely in the Maske.
The Heauens themſelues, the Planets, and this Center,
Obſerue degree, priority, and place,
Inſiſture, courſe, proportion, ſeaſon, forme,
Office, and cuſtome, in all line of Order:
And therefore is the glorious Planet Sol
In noble eminence, enthron'd and ſphear'd
Amid'ſt the other, whoſe med'cinable eye
Corrects the ill Aſpects of Planets euill,
And poſtes like the Command'ment of a King,
Sans checke, to good and bad. But when the Planets
In euill mixture to diſorder wander,
What Plagues, and what portents, what mutiny?
What raging of the Sea? ſhaking of Earth?
Commotion in the Windes? Frights, changes, horrors,
Diuert, and cracke, rend and deracinate
The vnity, and married calme of States
Quite from their fixure? O, when Degree is ſhak'd,
(Which is the Ladder to all high deſignes)
The enterprize is ſicke. How could Communities,
Degrees in Schooles, and Brother-hoods in Cities,
Peacefull Commerce from diuidable ſhores,
The primogenitiue, and due of Byrth,
Prerogatiue of Age, Crownes, Scepters, Lawrels
(But by Degree) ſtand in Authentique place?
Take but Degree away, vn-tune that ſtring,
And hearke what Diſcord followes: each thing meetes
In meere oppugnancie. The bounded Waters,
Should lift their boſomes higher then the Shores,
And make a ſoppe of all this ſolid Globe:
Strength ſhould be Lord of imbecility,
And the rude Sonne ſhould ſtrike his Father dead:
Force ſhould be right, or rather, right and wrong,
(Betweene whoſe endleſſe iarre, Iuſtice recides)
Should looſe her names, and ſo ſhould Iuſtice too.
Then euery thing includes it ſelfe in Power,
Power into Will, Will into Appetite,
And Appetite (an vniuerſall Wolfe,
So doubly ſeconded with Will, and Power)
Muſt make perforce an vniuerſall prey,
And laſt, eate vp himſelfe.
Great Agamemnon:
This Chaos, when Degree is ſuffocate,
Followes the choaking:
And this neglection of Degree, is it
That by a pace goes backward in a purpoſe
It hath to climbe. The Generall's diſdain'd
By him one ſtep below; he, by the next,
That next, by him beneath: ſo euery ſtep
Exampled by the firſt pace that is ſicke
Of his Superiour, growes to an enuious Feauer
Of pale, and bloodleſſe Emulation.
And 'tis this Feauer that keepes Troy on foote,
Not her owne ſinewes. To end a tale of length,
Troy in our weakneſſe liues, not in her ſtrength.
Moſt wiſely hath Vlyſſes heere diſcouer'd
The Feauer, whereof all our power is ſicke.
The Nature of the ſickneſſe found (Ʋlyſſes)
What is the remedie?
The great Achilles, whom Opinion crownes,
The ſinew, and the fore-hand of our Hoſte,
Hauing his eare full of his ayery Fame,
Growes dainty of his worth, and in his Tent
Lyes mocking our deſignes. With him, Patroclus,
Vpon a lazie Bed, the liue-long day
Breakes ſcurrill Ieſts,
And with ridiculous and aukward action,
(Which Slanderer, he imitation call's)
He Pageants vs. Sometime great Agamemnon,
Thy topleſſe deputation he puts on;
And like a ſtrutting Player, whoſe conceit
Lies in his Ham-ſtring, and doth thinke it rich
To heare the woodden Dialogue and ſound
'Twixt his ſtretcht footing, and the Scaffolage,
Such to be pittied, and ore-reſted ſeeming
He acts thy Greatneſſe in: and when he ſpeakes,
'Tis like a Chime a mending. With tearmes vnſquar'd,
Which from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropt,
Would ſeemes Hyperboles. At this fuſty ſtuffe,
The large Achilles (on his preſt-bed lolling)
From his deepe Cheſt, laughes out a lowd applauſe,
Cries excellent, 'tis Agamemnon iuſt.
Now play me Neſtor; hum, and ſtroke thy Beard
As he, being dreſt to ſome Oration:
That's done, as neere as the extreameſt ends
Of paralels; as like, as Vulcan and his wife,
Yet god Achilles ſtill cries excellent,
'Tis Neſtor right. Now play him (me) Patroclus,
Arming to anſwer in a night-Alarme,
And then (forſooth) the faint defects of Age
Muſt be the Scene of myrth, to cough, and ſpit,
And with a palſie fumbling on his Gorget,
Shake in and out the Riuet: and at this ſport
Sir Valour dies; cries, O enough Patroclus,
Or, giue me ribs of Steele, I ſhall ſplit all
In pleaſure of my Spleene. And in this faſhion,
All our abilities, gifts, natures, ſhapes,
Seuerals and generals of grace exact,
Atchieuments, plots, orders, preuentions,
Excitements to the field, or ſpeech for truce,
Succeſſe or loſſe, what is, or is not, ſerues
As ſtuffe for theſe two, to make paradoxes.
And in the imitation of theſe twaine,
Who (as Vlyſſes ſayes) Opinion crownes
With an Imperiall voyce, many are infect:
Aiax is growne ſelfe-will'd, and beares his head
In ſuch a reyne, in full as proud a place
As broad Achilles, and keepes his Tent like him;
Makes factious Feaſts, railes on our ſtate of Warre
Bold as an Oracle, and ſets Therſites
A ſlaue, whoſe Gall coines ſlanders like a Mint,
To match vs in compariſons with durt,
To weaken and diſcredit our expoſure,
How ranke ſoeuer rounded in with danger.
They taxe our policy, and call it Cowardice,
Count Wiſedome as no member of the Warre,
Fore-ſtall preſcience, and eſteeme no acte
But that of hand: The ſtill and mentall parts,
That do contriue how many hands ſhall ſtrike
When fitneſſe call them on, and know by meaſure
Of their obſeruant toyle, the Enemies waight,
Why this hath not a ſingers dignity:
They call this Bed-worke, Mapp'ry, Cloſſet-Warre:
So that the Ramme that batters downe the wall,
For the great ſwing and rudeneſſe of his poize,
They place before his hand that made the Engine,
Or thoſe that with the fineneſſe of their ſoules,
By Reaſon guide his execution.
Let this be granted, and Achilles horſe
Makes many Thetis ſonnes.
What Trumpet? Looke Menelaus.
From Troy.
What would you 'fore our Tent?
Is this great Agamemnons Tent, I pray you?
Euen this.
May one that is a Herald, and a Prince,
Do a faire meſſage to his Kingly eares?
With ſurety ſtronger then Achilles arme,
'Fore all the Greekiſh heads, which with one voyce
Call Agamemnon Head and Generall.
Faire leaue, and large ſecurity. How may
A ſtranger to thoſe moſt Imperial lookes,
Know them from eyes of other Mortals?
How?
I: I aske, that I might waken reuerence,
And on the cheeke be ready with a bluſh
Modeſt as morning, when ſhe coldly eyes
The youthfull Phoebus:
Which is that God in office guiding men?
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?
This Troyan ſcornes vs, or the men of Troy
Are ceremonious Courtiers.
Courtiers as free, as debonnaire; vnarm'd,
As bending Angels: that's their Fame, in peace:
But when they would ſeeme Souldiers, they haue galles,
Good armes, ſtrong ioynts, true ſwords, & Ioues accord,
Nothing ſo full of heart. But peace Aeneas,
Peace Troyan, lay thy finger on thy lips,
The worthineſſe of praiſe diſtaines his worth:
If that he prais'd himſelfe, bring the praiſe forth.
But what the repining enemy commends,
That breath Fame blowes, that praiſe ſole pure tranſcēds.
Sir, you of Troy, call you your ſelfe Aeneas?
I Greeke, that is my name.
What's your affayre I pray you?
Sir pardon, 'tis for Agamemnons cares▪
He heares nought priuatly
That comes from Troy.
Nor I from Troy come not to whiſper him,
I bring a Trumpet to awake his eare,
To ſet his ſence on the attentiue bent,
And then to ſpeake.
Speake frankely as the winde.
It is not Agamemnons ſleeping houre;
That thou ſhalt know Troyan he is awake,
He tels thee ſo himſelfe.
Trumpet blow loud,
Send thy Braſſe voyce through all theſe lazie Tents,
And euery Greeke of mettle, let him know,
What Troy meanes fairely, ſhall be ſpoke alowd.
We haue great Agamemnon heere in Troy,
A Prince calld Hector, Priam is his Father:
Who in this dull and long-continew'd Truce
Is ruſty growne. He bad me take a Trumpet,
And to this purpoſe ſpeake: Kings, Princes, Lords,
If there be one among'ſt the fayr'ſt of Greece,
That holds his Honor higher then his eaſe,
That ſeekes his praiſe, more then he feares his perill,
That knowes his Valour, and knowes not his feare,
That loues his Miſtris more then in confeſſion,
(With truant vowes to her owne lips he loues)
And dare a vow her Beauty, and her Worth,
In other armes then hers: to him this Challenge.
Hector, in view of Troyans, and of Greekes,
Shall make it good, or do his beſt to do it.
He hath a Lady, wiſer, fairer, truer,
Then euer Greeke did compaſſe in his armes,
And will to morrow with his Trumpet call,
Midway betweene your Tents, and walles of Troy,
To rowze a Grecian that is true in loue.
If any come, Hector ſhal honour him:
If none, hee'l ſay in Troy when he retyres,
The Grecian Dames are ſun-burnt, and not worth
The ſplinter of a Lance: Euen ſo much.
This ſhall be told our Louers Lord Aeneas,
If none of them haue ſoule in ſuch a kinde,
We left them all at home: But we are Souldiers,
And may that Souldier a meere recreant proue,
That meanes not, hath not, or is not in loue:
If then one is, or hath, or meanes to be,
That one meets Hector; if none elſe, Ile be he.
Tell him of Neſtor, one that was a man
When Hectors Grandſire ſuckt: he is old now,
But if there be not in our Grecian mould,
One Noble man, that hath one ſpark of fire
To anſwer for his Loue; tell him from me,
Ile hide my Siluer beard in a Gold Beauer,
And in my Vantbrace put this wither'd brawne,
And meeting him, wil tell him, that my Lady
Was fayrer then his Grandame, and as chaſte
As may be in the world: his youth in flood,
Ile pawne this truth with my three drops of blood.
Now heauens forbid ſuch ſcarſitie of youth.
Amen.
Faire Lord Aeneas,
Let me touch your hand:
To our Pauillion ſhal I leade you firſt:
Achilles ſhall haue word of this intent,
So ſhall each Lord of Greece from Tent to Tent:
Your ſelfe ſhall Feaſt with vs before you goe,
And finde the welcome of a Noble Foe.
Nestor.
What ſayes Vlyſſes?
I haue a young conception in my braine,
Be you my time to bring it to ſome ſhape.
What is't?
This 'tis:
Blunt wedges riue hard knots: the ſeeded Pride
That hath to this maturity blowne vp
In ranke Achilles, muſt or now be cropt,
Or ſhedding breed a Nurſery of like euil
To ouer-bulke vs all.
Wel, and how?
This challenge that the gallant Hector ſends,
How euer it is ſpred in general name,
Relates in purpoſe onely to Achilles.
The purpoſe is perſpicuous euen as ſubſtance,
Whoſe groſſeneſſe little charracters ſumme vp,
And in the publication make no ſtraine,
But that Achilles, were his braine as barren
As bankes of Lybia, though (Apollo knowes)
'Tis dry enough, wil with great ſpeede of iudgement,
I, with celerity, finde Hectors purpoſe
Pointing on him.
And wake him to the anſwer, thinke you?
Yes, 'tis moſt meet; who may you elſe oppoſe
That can from Hector bring his Honor off,
If not Achilles; though't be a ſportfull Combate,
Yet in this triall, much opinion dwels.
For heere the Troyans taſte our deer'ſt repute
With their fin'ſt Pallate: and truſt to me Vlyſſes,
Our imputation ſhall be oddely poiz'd
In this wilde action. For the ſucceſſe
(Although particular) ſhall giue a ſcantling
Of good or bad, vnto the Generall:
And in ſuch Indexes, although ſmall prickes
To their ſubſequent Volumes, there is ſeene
The baby figure of the Gyant-maſſe
Of things to come at large. It is ſuppos'd,
He that meets Hector, iſſues from our choyſe;
And choiſe being mutuall acte of all our ſoules,
Makes Merit her election, and doth boyle
As 'twere, from forth vs all: a man diſtill'd
Out of our Vertues; who miſcarrying,
What heart from hence receyues the conqu'ring part
To ſteele a ſtrong opinion to themſelues,
Which entertain'd, Limbes are in his inſtruments,
In no leſſe working, then are Swords and Bowes
Directiue by the Limbes.
Giue pardon to my ſpeech:
Therefore 'tis meet, Achilles meet not Hector:
Let vs (like Merchants) ſhew our fowleſt Wares,
And thinke perchance they'l ſell: If not,
The luſter of the better yet to ſhew,
Shall ſhew the better. Do not conſent,
That euer Hector and Achilles meete:
For both our Honour, and our Shame in this,
Are dogg'd with two ſtrange Followers.
I ſee them not with my old eies: what are they?
What glory our Achilles ſhares from Hector,
(Were he not proud) we all ſhould weare with him:
But he already is too inſolent,
And we were better parch in Affricke Sunne,
Then in the pride and ſalt ſcorne of his eyes
Should he ſcape Hector faire. If he were foyld,
Why then we did our maine opinion cruſh
In taint of our beſt man. No, make a Lott'ry,
And by deuice let blockiſh Aiax draw
The ſort to ſight with Hector: Among our ſelues,
Giue him allowance as the worthier man,
For that will phyſicke the great Myrmidon
Who broyles in lowd applauſe, and make him fall
His Creſt, that prouder then blew Iris bends.
If the dull brainleſſe Aiax come ſafe off,
Wee'l dreſſe him vp in voyces: if he faile,
Yet go we vnder our opinion ſtill,
That we haue better men. But hit or miſſe,
Our proiects life this ſhape of ſence aſſumes,
Aiax imploy'd, pluckes downe Achilles Plumes.
Now Vlyſſes, I begin to relliſh thy aduice,
And I wil giue a taſte of it forthwith
To Agamemnon, go we to him ſtraight:
Two Curres ſhal tame each other, Pride alone
Muſt tarre the Maſtiffes on, as 'twere their bone.
Therſites?
Agamemnon, how if he had Biles (ful) all ouer generally.
Therſites?
And thoſe Byles did runne, ſay ſo; did not the General run, were not that a botchy core?
Dogge.
Then there would come ſome matter from him:
I ſee none now.
Thou Bitch-Wolfes-Sonne, canſt yu not heare?
Feele then.
The plague of Greece vpon thee thou Mungrel beefe-witted Lord.
Speake then you whinid'ſt leauen ſpeake, I will beate thee into handſomneſſe.
I ſhal ſooner rayle thee into wit and holineſſe: but I thinke thy Horſe wil ſooner con an Oration, then yu learn a prayer without booke: Thou canſt ſtrike, canſt thou? A red Murren o' th thy Iades trickes.
Toads ſtoole, learne me the Proclamation.
Doeſt thou thinke I haue no ſence thou ſtrik'ſt me thus?
The Proclamation.
Thou art proclaim'd a foole, I thinke.
Do not Porpentine, do not; my fingers itch.
I would thou didſt itch from head to foot, and I had the ſcratching of thee, I would make thee the lothſom'ſt ſcab in Greece.
I ſay the Proclamation.
Thou grumbleſt & raileſt euery houre on Achilles, and thou art as ful of enuy at his greatnes, as Cerberus is at Proſerpina's beauty. I, that thou barkſt at him.
Miſtreſſe Therſites.
Thou ſhould'ſt ſtrike him.
Coblofe.
He would pun thee into ſhiuers with his fiſt, as a Sailor breakes a bisket.
You horſon Curre.
Do, do.
Thou ſtoole for a Witch.
I, do, do, thou ſodden-witted Lord: thou haſt no more braine then I haue in mine elbows: An Aſinico may tutor thee. Thou ſcuruy valiant Aſſe, thou art heere but to threſh Troyans, and thou art bought and ſolde among thoſe of any wit, like a Barbarian ſlaue. If thou vſe to beat me, I wil begin at thy heele and tel what thou art by inches, thou thing of no bowels thou.
You dogge.
You ſcuruy Lord.
You Curre.
Mars his Ideot: do rudenes, do Camell, do, do.
Why how now Aiax? wherefore do you this?
How now Therſites? what's the matter man?
You ſee him there, do you?
I, what's the matter.
Nay looke vpon him.
So I do: what's the matter?
Nay but regard him well.
Well, why I do ſo.
But yet you looke not well vpon him: for who ſome euer you take him to be, he is Aiax.
I know that foole.
I, but that foole knowes not himſelfe.
Therefore I beare thee.
Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he vtters: his euaſions haue eares thus long. I haue bobb'd his Braine more then he has beate my bones: I will buy nine Sparrowes for a peny, and his Piamater is not worth the ninth part of a Sparrow. This Lord (Achilles) Aiax who wears his wit in his belly, and his guttes in his head, Ile tell you what I ſay of him.
What?
I ſay this Aiax—
Nay good Aiax.
Has not ſo much wit.
Nay, I muſt hold you.
As will ſtop the eye of Helens Needle, for whom he comes to fight.
Peace foole.
I would haue peace and quietnes, but the foole will not: He there, that he, looke you there.
O thou damn'd Curre, I ſhall—
Will you ſet your wit to a Fooles.
No I warrant you, for a fooles will ſhame it.
Good words Therſites.
What's the quarrell?
I bad thee vile Owle, goe learne me the tenure of the Proclamation, and he rayles vpon me.
I ſerue thee not.
Well, go too, go too.
I ſerue heere voluntary.
Your laſt ſeruice was ſufferance, 'twas not voluntary, no man is beaten voluntary: Aiax was heere the voluntary▪ and you as vnder an Impreſſe.
E'neſo, a great deale of your wit too lies in your ſinnewes, or elſe there be Liars Hector ſhall haue a great catch, if he knocke out either of your braines, he were as good cracke a fuſtie nut with no kernell.
What with me to Therſites?
There's Vlyſſes, and old Neſtor, whoſe Wit was mouldy ere their Grandſires had nails on their toes, yoke you like draft-Oxen, and make you plough vp the warre.
What? what?
Yes good ſooth, to Achilles, to Aiax, to—
I ſhall cut out your tongue.
'Tis no matter, I ſhall ſpeake as much as thou afterwards.
No more words Therſites.
I will hold my peace when Achilles Brooch bids me, ſhall I?
There's for you Patroclus.
I wil ſee you hang'd like Clotpoles ere I come any more to your Tents; I will keepe where there is wit ſtirring, and leaue the faction of fooles.
A good riddance.
Marry this Sin is proclaim'd through al our hoſt,
That Hector by the ſift houre of the Sunne,
Will with a Trumpet, 'twixt our Tents and Troy
To morrow morning call ſome Knight to Armes,
That hath a ſtomacke▪ and ſuch a one that dare
Maintaine I know not what: 'tis traſh. Farewell.
Farewell? who ſhall anſwer him?
I know not, 'tis put to Lottry: otherwiſe
He knew his man.
O meaning you, I wil go learne more of it.
After ſo many houres, liues, ſpeeches ſpent,
Thus once againe ſayes Neſtor from the Greekes,
Deliuer Helen, and all damage elſe
(As honour, loſſe of time, trauaile, expence,
Wounds, friends, and what els deere that is conſum'd
In hot digeſtion of this comorant Warre)
Shall be ſtroke off. Hector, what ſay you too't.
Though no man leſſer feares the Greeks then I,
As farre as touches my particular: yet dread Priam,
There is no Lady of more ſofter bowels,
More ſpungie, to ſucke in the ſenſe of Feare,
More ready to cry out, who knowes what followes
Then Hector is: the wound of peace is ſurety,
Surety ſecure: but modeſt Doubt is cal'd
The Beacon of the wiſe: the tent that ſearches
To' th' bottome of the worſt. Let Helen go,
Since the firſt ſword was drawne about this queſtion,
Euery tythe ſoule 'mongſt many thouſand diſmes,
Hath bin as deere as Helen: I meane of ours:
If we haue loſt ſo many tenths of ours
To guard a thing not ours, nor worth to vs
(Had it our name) the valew of one ten;
What merit's in that reaſon which denies
The yeelding of her vp.
Fie, fie, my Brother;
Weigh you the worth and honour of a King
(So great as our dread Father) in a Scale
Of common Ounces? Wil you with Counters ſumme
The paſt proportion of his infinite,
And buckle in a waſte moſt fathomleſſe,
With ſpannes and inches ſo diminutiue,
As feares and reaſons? Fie for godly ſhame?
No maruel though you bite ſo ſharp at reaſons,
You are ſo empty of them, ſhould not our Father
Beare the great ſway of his affayres with reaſons,
Becauſe your ſpeech hath none that tels him ſo.
You are for dreames & ſlumbers brother Prieſt
You furre your gloues with reaſon: here are your reaſons
You know an enemy intends you harme,
You know, a ſword imploy'd is perillous,
And reaſon flyes the obiect of all harme.
Who maruels then when Helenus beholds
A Grecian and his ſword, if he do ſet
The very wings of reaſon to his heeles:
Or like a Starre diſorb'd. Nay, if we talke of Reaſon,
And flye like chidden Mercurie from Ioue,
Let's ſhut our gates and ſleepe: Manhood and Honor
Should haue hard hearts, wold they but fat their thoghts
With this cramm'd reaſon: reaſon and reſpect,
Makes Liuers pale▪ and luſtyhood deiect.
Brother, ſhe is not worth
What ſhe doth coſt the holding.
What's aught, but as 'tis valew'd?
But value dwels not in particular will,
It holds his eſtimate and dignitie
As well, wherein 'tis precious of it ſelfe,
As in the prizer: 'Tis made Idolatrie,
To make the ſeruice greater then the God,
And the will dotes that is inclineable
To what infectiouſly it ſelfe affects,
Without ſome image of th' affected merit.
I take to day a Wife, and my election
Is led on in the conduct of my Will;
My Will enkindled by mine eyes and eares,
Two traded Pylots 'twixt the dangerous ſhores
Of Will, and Iudgement. How may I auoyde
(Although my will diſtaſte what it elected)
The Wife I choſe, there can be no euaſion
To blench from this, and to ſtand firme by honour.
We turne not backe the Silkes vpon the Merchant
When we haue ſpoyl'd them; nor the remainder Viands
We do not throw in vnreſpectiue ſame,
Becauſe we now are full. It was thought meete
Paris ſhould do ſome vengeance on the Greekes;
Your breath of full conſent bellied his Sailes,
The Seas and Windes (old Wranglers) tooke a Truce,
And did him ſeruice; he touch'd the Ports deſir'd,
And for an old Aunt whom the Greekes held Captiue,
He brought a Grecian Queen, whoſe youth & freſhneſſe
Wrinkles Apolloes, and makes ſtale the morning.
Why keepe we her? the Grecians keepe our Aunt:
Is ſhe worth keeping? Why ſhe is a Pearle,
Whoſe price hath launch'd aboue a thouſand Ships,
And turn'd Crown'd Kings to Merchants.
If you'l auouch, 'twas wiſedome Paris went,
(As you muſt needs, for you all cride, Go, go:)
If you'l confeſſe, he brought home Noble prize,
(As you muſt needs) for you all clapt your hands,
And cride ineſtimable; why do you now
The iſſue of your proper Wiſedomes rate,
And do a deed that Fortune neuer did?
Begger the eſtimation which you priz'd,
Richer then Sea and Land? O Theft moſt baſe!
That we haue ſtolne what we do feare to keepe.
But Theeues vnworthy of a thing ſo ſtolne,
That in their Country did them that diſgrace,
We feare to warrant in our Natiue place.
Cry Troyans, cry.
What noyſe? what ſhreeke is this?
'Tis our mad ſiſter, I do know her voyce.
Cry Troyans.
It is Caſſandra.
Cry Troyans cry; lend me ten thouſand eyes,
And I will fill them with Propheticke teares.
Peace ſiſter, peace.
Virgins, and Boyes; mid-age & wrinkled old,
Soft infancie, that nothing can but cry,
Adde to my clamour: let vs pay betimes
A moity of that maſſe of moane to come.
Cry Troyans cry, practiſe your eyes with teares,
Troy muſt not be, nor goodly Illion ſtand,
Our fire-brand Brother Paris burnes vs all.
Cry Troyans cry, a Helen and a woe;
Cry, cry, Troy burnes, or elſe let Helen goe.
Now youthfull Troylus, do not theſe hie ſtrains
Of diuination in our Siſter, worke
Some touches of remorſe? Or is your bloud
So madly hot, that no diſcourſe of reaſon,
Nor feare of bad ſucceſſe in a bad cauſe,
Can qualifie the ſame?
Why Brother Hector,
We may not thinke the iuſtneſſe of each acte
Such, and no other then euent doth forme it,
Not once deiect the courage of our mindes;
Becauſe Caſſandra's mad, her brainſicke raptures
Cannot diſtaſte the goodneſſe of a quarrell,
Which hath our ſeuerall Honours all engag'd
To make it gracious. For my priuate part,
I am no more touch'd, then all Priams ſonnes,
And loue forbid there ſhould be done among'ſt vs
Such things as might offend the weakeſt ſpleene,
To fight for, and maintaine.
Elſe might the world conuince of leuitie,
As well my vnder-takings as your counſels:
But I atteſt the gods, your full conſent
Gaue wings to my propenſion, and cut off
All feares attending on ſo dire a proiect.
For what (alas) can theſe my ſingle armes?
What propugnation is in one mans valour
To ſtand the puſh and enmity of thoſe
This quarrell would excite? Yet I proteſt,
Were I alone to paſſe the difficulties,
And had as ample power, as I haue will,
Paris ſhould ne're retract what he hath done,
Nor faint in the purſuite.
Paris, you ſpeake
Like one be-ſotted on your ſweet delights;
You haue the Hony ſtill, but theſe the Gall,
So to be valiant, is no praiſe at all.
Sir, I propoſe not meerely to my ſelfe,
The pleaſures ſuch a beauty brings with it:
But I would haue the ſoyle of her faire Rape
Wip'd off in honourable keeping her.
What Treaſon were it to the ranſack'd Queene,
Diſgrace to your great worths, and ſhame to me,
Now to deliuer her poſſeſsion vp
On termes of baſe compulſion? Can it be,
That ſo degenerate a ſtraine as this,
Should once ſet footing in your generous boſomes?
There's not the meaneſt ſpirit on our partie,
Without a heart to dare, or ſword to draw,
When Helen is defended: nor none ſo Noble,
Whoſe life were ill beſtow'd, or death vnfam'd,
Where Helen is the ſubiect. Then (I ſay)
Well may we fight for her, whom we know well,
The worlds large ſpaces cannot paralell.
Paris and Troylus, you haue both ſaid well:
And on the cauſe and queſtion now in hand,
Haue gloz'd, but ſuperficially; not much
Vnlike young men, whom Ariſtotle thought
Vnfit to heare Morall Philoſophie.
The Reaſons you alledge▪ do more conduce
To the hot paſſion of diſtemp'red blood,
Then to make vp a free determination
'Twixt right and wrong: For pleaſure, and reuenge,
Haue eares more deafe then Adders, to the voyce
Of any true deciſion. Nature craues
All dues be rendred to their Owners: now
What neerer debt in all humanity,
Then Wife is to the Husband? If this law
Of Nature be corrupted through affection,
And that great mindes of partiall indulgence,
To their benummed wills reſiſt the ſame,
There is a Law in each well-ordred Nation,
To curbe thoſe raging appetites that are
Moſt diſobedient and refracturie.
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's King
(As it is knowne ſhe is) theſe Morall Lawes
Of Nature, and of Nation, ſpeake alowd
To haue her backe return'd. Thus to perſiſt
In doing wrong, extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heauie. Hectors opinion
Is this in way of truth: yet nere the leſſe,
My ſpritely brethren, I propend to you
In reſolution to keepe Helen ſtill;
For 'tis a cauſe that hath no meane dependance,
Vpon our ioynt and ſeuerall dignities.
Why? there you toucht the life of our deſigne:
Were it not glory that we more affected,
Then the performance of our heauing ſpleenes,
I would not wiſh a drop of Troian blood,
Spent more in her defence. But worthy Hector,
She is a theame of honour and renowne,
A ſpurre to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
Whoſe preſent courage may beate downe our foes,
And fame in time to come canonize vs.
For I preſume braue Hector would not looſe
So rich aduantage of a promiſ'd glory,
As ſmiles vpon the fore-head of this action,
For the wide worlds reuenew.
I am yours,
You valiant off-ſpring of great Priamus,
I haue a roiſting challenge ſent among'ſt
The dull and factious nobles of the Greekes,
Will ſtrike amazement to their drowſie ſpirits,
I was aduertiz'd, their Great generall ſlept,
Whil'ſt emulation in the armie crept:
This I preſume will wake him.
How now Therſites? what loſt in the Labyrinth of thy furie? ſhall the Elephant Aiax carry it thus? he beates me, and I raile at him: O worthy ſatisfaction, would it were otherwiſe: that I could beate him, whil'ſt he rail'd at me: Sfoote, Ile learne to coniure and raiſe Diuels, but Ile ſee ſome iſſue of my ſpitefull execrations. Then ther's Achilles, a rare Enginer. If Troy be not taken till theſe two vndermine it, the wals will ſtand till they fall of themſelues. O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus, forget that thou art Ioue the King of gods: and Mercury, looſe all the Serpentine craft of thy Caduceus, if thou take not that little little leſſe then little wit from them that they haue, which ſhort-arm'd ignorance it ſelfe knowes, is ſo abundant ſcarſe, it will not in circumuention deliuer a Flye from a Spider, without drawing the maſſie Irons and cutting the web: after this, the vengeance on the whole Camp, or rather the bone-ach, for that me thinkes is the curſe dependant on thoſe that warre for a placket. I haue ſaid my prayers and diuell, enuie, ſay Amen: What ho? my Lord Achilles?
Who's there? Therſites. Good Therſites come in and raile.
If I could haue remembred a guilt counterfeit, thou would'ſt not haue ſlipt out of my contemplation, but it is no matter, thy ſelfe vpon thy ſelfe. The common curſe of mankinde, follie and ignorance be thine in great reuenew; heauen bleſſe thee from a Tutor, and Diſcipline come not neere thee. Let thy bloud be thy direction till thy death, then if ſhe that laies thee out ſayes thou art a faire coarſe, Ile be ſworne and ſworne vpon't ſhe neuer ſhrowded any but Lazars, Amen. Wher's Achilles?
What art thou deuout? waſt thou in a prayer?
I, the heauens heare me.
Who's there?
Therſites, my Lord.
Where, where, art thou come? why my cheeſe, my digeſtion, why haſt thou not ſeru'd thy ſelfe into my Table, ſo many meales? Come, what's Agamemnon?
Thy Commander Achilles, then tell me Patroclus, what's Achilles?
Thy Lord Therſites: then tell me I pray thee, what's thy ſelfe?
Thy knower Patroclus: then tell me Patroclus, what art thou?
Thou maiſt tell that know'ſt.
O tell, tell.
Ile declin the whole queſtion: Agamemnon commands Achilles, Achilles is my Lord, I am Patroclus knower, and Patroclus is a foole.
You raſcall.
Peace foole, I haue not done.
He is a priuiledg'd man, proceede Therſites.
Agamemnon is a foole, Achilles is a foole, Therſites is a foole, and as aforeſaid, Patroclus is a foole.
Deriue this? come?
Agamemnon is a foole to offer to command Achilles, Achilles is a foole to be commanded of Agamemon, Therſites is a foole to ſerue ſuch a foole: and Patroclus is a foole poſitiue.
Why am I a foole?
Make that demand to the Creator, it ſuffiſes me thou art. Looke you, who comes here?
Patroclus, Ile ſpeake with no body: come in with me Therſites.
Here is ſuch patcherie, ſuch iugling, and ſuch knauerie: all the argument is a Cuckold and a Whore, a good quarrel to draw emulations, factions, and bleede to death vpon: Now the dry Suppeago on the Subiect, and Warre and Lecherie confound all.
Where is Achilles?
Within his Tent, but ill diſpoſ'd my Lord.
Let it be knowne to him that we are here:
He ſent out Meſſengers, and we lay by
Our appertainments, viſiting of him:
Let him be told of, ſo perchance he thinke
We dare not moue the queſtion of our place,
Or know not what we are.
I ſhall ſo ſay to him.
We ſaw him at the opening of his Tent,
He is not ſicke.
Yes, Lyon ſicke, ſicke of proud heart; you may call it Melancholly if will fauour the man, but by my head, it is pride; but why, why, let him ſhow vs the cauſe? A word my Lord.
What moues Aiax thus to bay at him?
Achillis hath inueigled his Foole from him.
Who, Therſites?
He.
Then will Aiax lacke matter, if he haue loſt his Argument.
No, you ſee he is his argument that has his argument Achilles.
All the better, their fraction is more our wiſh then their faction; but it was a ſtrong counſell that a Foole could diſunite.
The amitie that wiſedome knits, not folly may eaſily vntie.
Here comes Patroclus.
No Achilles with him?
The Elephant hath ioynts, but none for curteſie:
His legge are legs for neceſſitie, not for ſlight.
Achilles bids me ſay he is much ſorry:
If any thing more then your ſport and pleaſure,
Did moue your greatneſſe, and this noble State,
To call vpon him; he hopes it is no other,
But for your health, and your digeſtion ſake;
An after Dinners breath.
Heare you Patroclus:
We are too well acquainted with theſe anſwers:
But his euaſion winged thus ſwift with ſcorne,
Cannot outflye our apprehenſions.
Much attribute he hath, and much the reaſon,
Why we aſcribe it to him, yet all his vertues,
Not vertuouſly of his owne part beheld,
Doe in our eyes, begin to looſe their gloſſe;
Yea, and like faire Fruit in an vnholdſome diſh,
Are like to rot vntaſted: goe and tell him,
We came to ſpeake with him; and you ſhall not ſinne,
If you doe ſay, we thinke him ouer proud,
And vnder honeſt; in ſelfe-aſſumption greater
Then in the note of iudgement: & worthier then himſelfe
Here tends the ſauage ſtrangeneſſe he puts on,
Diſguiſe the holy ſtrength of their command:
And vnder write in an obſeruing kinde
His humorous predominance, yea watch
His pettiſh lines, his ebs, his flowes, as if
The paſſage and whole carriage of this action
Rode on his tyde. Goe tell him this, and adde,
That if he ouerhold his price ſo much,
Weele none of him; but let him, like an Engin
Not portable, lye vnder this report.
Bring action hither, this cannot goe to warre:
A ſtirring Dwarfe, we doe allowance giue,
Before a ſleeping Gyant: tell him ſo.
I ſhall, and bring his anſwere preſently.
In ſecond voyce weele not be ſatisfied,
We come to ſpeake with him, Ʋliſſes enter you.
What is he more then another?
No more then what he thinkes he is.
Is he ſo much, doe you not thinke, he thinkes himſelfe a better man then I am?
No queſtion.
Will you ſubſcribe his thought, and ſay he is?
No, Noble Aiax, you are as ſtrong, as valiant, as wiſe, no leſſe noble, much more gentle, and altogether more tractable
Why ſhould a man be proud? How doth pride grow? I know not what it is.
Your minde is the cleerer Aiax, and your vertues the fairer; he that is proud, eates vp himſelfe; Pride is his owne Glaſſe, his owne trumpet, his owne Chronicle, and what euer praiſes it ſelfe but in the deede, deuoures the deede in the praiſe.
I do hate a proud man, as I hate the ingendring of Toades.
Yet e oues himſelfe: Is't not ſtrange?
Achilles will not to the field to morrow.
What's his excuſe?
He doth relye on none,
But carries on the ſtreame of his diſpoſe,
Without obſeruance or reſpect of any,
In will peculiar, and in ſelfe admiſſion.
Why, will he not vpon our faire requeſt,
Vntent his perſon, and ſhare the ayre with vs?
Things ſmall as nothing, for requeſts ſake onely
He makes important; poſſeſt he is with greatneſſe,
And ſpeakes not to himſelfe, but with a pride
That quarrels at ſelfe-breath. Imagin'd wroth
Holds in his bloud ſuch ſwolne and hot diſcourſe,
That twixt his mentall and his actiue parts,
Kingdom'd Achilles in commotion rages,
And batters gainſt it ſelfe; what ſhould I ſay?
He is ſo plaguy proud, that the death tokens of it,
Cry no recouery.
Let Aiax goe to him.
Deare Lord, goe you and greete him in his Tent;
'Tis ſaid he holds you well, and will be led
At your requeſt a little from himſelfe.
O Agamemnon, let it not be ſo.
Weele conſecrate the ſteps that Aiax makes,
When they goe from Achilles; ſhall the proud Lord,
That baſtes his arrogance with his owne ſeame,
And neuer ſuffers matter of the world,
Enter his thoughts: ſaue ſuch as doe reuolue
And ruminate himſelfe. Shall he be worſhipt,
Of that we hold an Idoll, more then hee?
No, this thrice worthy and right valiant Lord,
Muſt not ſo ſtaule his Palme, nobly acquir'd,
Nor by my will aſſubingate his merit,
As amply titled as Achilles is: by going to Achilles,
That were to enlard his fat already, pride,
And adde more Coles to Cancer, when he burnes
With entertaining great Hiperion.
This L. goe to him? Iupiter forbid,
And ſay in thunder, Achilles goe to him.
O this is well, he rubs the veine of him.
And how his ſilence drinkes vp this applauſe.
If I goe to him, with my armed fiſt, Ile paſh him ore the face.
O no, you ſhall not goe.
And a be proud with me, ile pheſe his pride: let me goe to him.
Not for the worth that hangs vpon our quarrel.
A paultry inſolent fellow.
How he deſcribes himſelfe.
Can he not be ſociable?
The Rauen chides blackneſſe.
Ile let his humours bloud.
He will be the Phyſitian that ſhould be the patient.
And all men were a my minde.
Wit would be out of faſhion.
A ſhould not beare it ſo, a ſhould eate Swords firſt: ſhall pride carry it?
And 'twould, you'ld carry halfe.
A would haue ten ſhares.
I will knede him, Ile make him ſupple, hee's not yet through warme.
Force him with praiſes, poure in, poure in: his ambition is dry.
My L. you feede too much on this diſlike.
Our noble Generall, doe not doe ſo.
You muſt prepare to fight without Achilles.
Why, 'tis this naming of him doth him harme.
Here is a man, but 'tis before his face,
I will be ſilent.
Wherefore ſhould you ſo?
He is not emulous, as Achilles is.
'Know the whole world, he is as valiant.
A horſon dog, that ſhal palter thus with vs, would he were a Troian.
What a vice were it in Aiax now—
If he were proud.
Or couetous of praiſe.
I, or ſurley borne.
Or ſtrange, or ſelfe affected.
Thank the heauens L. thou art of ſweet compoſure;
Praiſe him that got thee, ſhe that gaue thee ſucke:
Fame by thy Tutor, and thy parts of nature
Thrice fam'd beyond, beyond all erudition;
But he that diſciplin'd thy armes to fight,
Let Mars deuide Eternity in twaine,
And giue him halfe, and for thy vigour,
Bull-bearing Milo: his addition yeelde
To ſinnowie Aiax: I will not praiſe thy wiſdome,
Which like a bourne, a pale, a ſhore confines
Thy ſpacious and dilated parts; here's Neſtor
Inſtructed by the Antiquary times:
He muſt, he is, he cannot but be wiſe.
But pardon Father Neſtor, were your dayes
As greene as Aiax, and your braine ſo temper'd,
You ſhould not haue the eminence of him,
But be as Aiax.
Shall I call you Father?
I my good Sonne.
Be rul'd by him Lord Aiax.
There is no tarrying here, the Hart Achilles
Keepes thicker: pleaſe it our Generall,
To call together all his ſtate of warre,
Freſh Kings are come to Troy; to morrow
We muſt with all our maine of power ſtand faſt:
And here's a Lord, come Knights from Eaſt to Weſt,
And cull their flowre, Aiax ſhall cope the beſt.
Goe we to Counſaile, let Achilles ſleepe;
Light Botes may ſaile ſwift, though greater bulkes draw deepe.
Friend, you, pray you a word: Doe not you follow the yong Lord Paris?
I ſir, when he goes before me.
You depend vpon him I meane?
Sir, I doe depend vpon the Lord.
You depend vpon a noble Gentleman: I muſt needes praiſe him.
The Lord be praiſed.
You know me, doe you not?
Faith ſir, ſuperficially.
Friend know me better, I am the Lord Pandarus.
I hope I ſhall know your honour better.
I doe deſire it.
You are in the ſtate of Grace?
Grace, not ſo friend, honor and Lordſhip are my title: What Muſique is this?
I doe but partly know ſir: it is Muſicke in parts.
Know you the Muſitians.
Wholly ſir.
Who play they to?
To the hearers ſir.
At whoſe pleaſure friend?
At mine ſir, and theirs that loue Muſicke.
Command, I meane friend.
Who ſhall I command ſir?
Friend, we vnderſtand not one another: I am too courtly, and thou art too cunning. At whoſe requeſt doe theſe men play?
That's too't indeede ſir: marry ſir, at the requeſt of Paris my L. who's there in perſon; with him the mortall Venus, the heart bloud of beauty, loues inuiſible ſoule.
Who? my Coſin Creſſida.
No ſir, Helen, could you not finde out that by her attributes?
It ſhould ſeeme fellow, that thou haſt not ſeen the Lady Creſſida. I come to ſpeake with Paris from the Prince Troylus: I will make a complementall aſſault vpon him, for my buſineſſe ſeethes.
Sodden buſineſſe, there's a ſtewed phraſe indeede.
Faire be to you my Lord, and to all this faire company: faire deſires in all faire meaſure fairely guide them, eſpecially to you faire Queene, faire thoughts be your faire pillow.
Deere L. you are full of faire words.
You ſpeake your faire pleaſure ſweete Queene: faire Prince, here is good broken Muſicke.
You haue broke it cozen: and by my life you ſhall make it whole againe, you ſhall peece it out with a peece of your performance. Nel, he is full of harmony.
Truely Lady no.
O ſir.
Rude in ſooth, in good ſooth very rude.
Well ſaid my Lord: well, you ſay ſo in fits.
I haue buſineſſe to my Lord, deere Queene: my Lord will you vouchſafe me a word.
Nay, this ſhall not hedge vs out, weele heare you ſing certainely.
Well, ſweete Queene you are pleaſant with me, but, marry thus my Lord, my deere Lord, and moſt eſteemed friend your brother Troylus.
My Lord Pandarus, hony ſweete Lord.
Go too ſweete Queene, goe to.
Commends himſelfe moſt affectionately to you.
You ſhall not bob vs out of our melody:
If you doe, our melancholly vpon your head.
Sweete Queene, ſweete Queene, that's a ſweete Queene I faith—
And to make a ſweet Lady ſad, is a ſower offence.
Nay, that ſhall not ſerue your turne, that ſhall it not in truth la. Nay, I care not for ſuch words, no, no. And my Lord he deſires you, that if the King call for him at Supper, you will make his excuſe.
My Lord Pandarus?
What ſaies my ſweete Queene, my very, very ſweete Queene?
What exploit's in hand, where ſups he to night?
Nay but my Lord?
What ſaies my ſweere Queene? my cozen will fall out with you.
You muſt not know where he ſups.
With my diſpoſer Creſsida.
No, no; no ſuch matter, you are wide, come your diſpoſer is ſicke.
Well, Ile make excuſe.
I good my Lord: why ſhould you ſay Creſsida? no, your poore diſpoſer's ſicke.
I ſpie.
You ſpie, what doe you ſpie: come, giue me an
Inſtrument now ſweete Queene.
Why this is kindely done?
My Neece is horrible in loue with a thing you haue ſweete Queene.
She ſhall haue it my Lord, if it be not my Lord Paris.
Hee? no, ſheele none of him, they two are twaine.
Falling in after falling out, may make them three.
Come, come, Ile heare no more of this, Ile ſing you a ſong now.
I, I, prethee now: by my troth ſweet Lord thou haſt a fine fore-head.
I you may, you may.
Let thy ſong be loue: this loue will vndoe vs al.
Oh Cupid Cupid▪ Cupid.
Loue? I that it ſhall yfaith.
I, good now loue, loue, no thing but loue.
In good troth it begins ſo.
Loue, loue, nothing but loue, ſtill more:
For O loues Bow,
Shootes Bucke and Doe:
The Shaft confounds not that it wounds,
But tickles ſtill the ſore:
Theſe Louers cry, oh ho they dye;
Yet that which ſeemes the wound to kill,
Doth turne oh ho, to ha ha he:
So dying loue liues ſtill,
O ho a while, but ha ha ha,
O ho grones out for ha ha ha—hey ho.
In loue yfaith to the very tip of the noſe.
He eates nothing but doues loue, and that breeds hot bloud, and hot bloud begets hot thoughts, and hot thoughts beget hot deedes, and hot deedes is loue.
Is this the generation of loue? Hot bloud, hot thoughts, and hot deedes, why they are Vipers, is Loue a generation of Vipers?
Sweete Lord whoſe a field to day?
Hector, Deiphoebus, Helenus, Anthenor, and all the gallantry of Troy. I would faine haue arm'd to day, but my Nell would not haue it ſo.
How chance my brother Troylus went not?
He hangs the lippe at ſomething; you know all Lord Pandarus?
Not I hony ſweete Queene: I long to heare how they ſped to day:
Youle remember your brothers excuſe?
To a hayre.
Farewell ſweete Queene.
Commend me to your Neece.
I will ſweete Queene.
They're come from fielde: let vs to Priams Hall
To greete the Warriors. Sweet Hellen, I muſt woe you,
To helpe vnarme our Hector: his ſtubborne Buckles,
With theſe your white enchanting fingers toucht,
Shall more obey then to the edge of Steele,
Or force of Greekiſh ſinewes: you ſhall doe more
Then all the Iland Kings, diſarme great Hector.
'Twill make vs proud to be his ſeruant Paris:
Yea what he ſhall receiue of vs in duetie,
Giues vs more palme in beautie then we haue:
Yea ouerſhines our ſelfe.
Sweete aboue thought I loue thee.
How now, where's thy Maiſter, at my Couzen Creſsidas?
No ſir, he ſtayes for you to conduct him thither.
O here he comes: How now, how now?
Sirra walke off.
Haue you ſeene my Couſin?
No Pandarus: I ſtalke about her doore
Like a ſtrange ſoule vpon the Stigian bankes
Staying for waftage. O be thou my Charon,
And giue me ſwift tranſportance to thoſe fields,
Where I may wallow in the Lilly beds
Propos'd for the deſeruer. O gentle Pandarus,
From Cupids ſhoulder plucke his painted wings,
And flye with me to Creſsid.
Walke here ith' Orchard, Ile bring her ſtraight.
I am giddy; expectation whirles me round,
Th' imaginary reliſh is ſo ſweete,
That it inchants my ſence: what will it be
When that the watry pallats taſte indeede
Loues thrice reputed Nectar? Death I feare me
Sounding diſtruction, or ſome ioy too fine,
Too ſubtile, potent, and too ſharpe in ſweetneſſe,
For the capacitie of my ruder powers;
I feare it much, and I doe feare beſides,
That I ſhall looſe diſtinction in my ioyes,
As doth a battaile, when they charge on heapes
The enemy flying.
Shee's making her ready, ſheele come ſtraight; you muſt be witty now, ſhe does ſo bluſh, & fetches her winde ſo ſhort, as if ſhe were fraid with a ſprite: Ile fetch her; it is the prettieſt villaine, ſhe fetches her breath ſo ſhort as a new tane Sparrow.
Euen ſuch a paſſion doth imbrace my boſome:
My heart beates thicker then a feauorous pulſe,
And all my powers doe their beſtowing looſe,
Like vaſſlage at vnawares encountring
The eye of Maieſtie.
Come, come, what neede you bluſh?
Shames a babie; here ſhe is now, ſweare the oathes now to her, that you haue ſworne to me. What are you gone againe, you muſt be watcht ere you be made tame, muſt you? come your wayes, come your wayes, and you draw backward weele put you i' th fils: why doe you not ſpeak to her? Come draw this curtaine, & let's ſee your picture. Alaſſe the day, how loath you are to offend day light? and 'twere darke you'ld cloſe ſooner: So, ſo▪ rub on, and kiſſe the miſtreſſe; how now, a kiſſe in fee-farme? build there Carpenter, the ayre is ſweete. Nay, you ſhall fight your hearts out ere I part you. The Faulcon, as the Tercell, for all the Ducks ith Riuer: go too▪ go too.
You haue bereft me of all words Lady.
Words pay no debts; giue her deedes: but ſheele bereaue you 'oth' deeds too, if ſhee call your actiuity in queſtion: what billing againe? here's in witneſſe whereof the Parties interchangeably. Come in, come in, Ile go get a fire?
Will you walke in my Lord?
O Creſsida, how often haue I wiſht me thus?
Wiſht my Lord? the gods grant? O my Lord.
What ſhould they grant? what makes this pretty abruption: what too curious dreg eſpies my ſweete Lady in the fountaine of our loue?
More dregs then water, if my eares haue eyes.
Feares make diuels of Cherubins, they neuer ſee truely.
Blinde feare, that ſeeing reaſon leads, findes ſafe footing, then blinde reaſon, ſtumbling without feare: to feare the worſt, oft cures the worſe.
Oh let my Lady apprehend no feare,
In all Cupids Pageant there is preſented no monſter.
Not nothing monſtrous neither?
Nothing but our vndertakings, when we vowe to weepe ſeas, liue in fire, eate rockes, tame Tygers; thinking it harder for our Miſtreſſe to deuiſe impoſition inough, then for vs to vndergoe any difficultie impoſed. This is the monſtruoſitie in loue Lady, that the will is infinite, and the execution confin'd; that the deſire is boundleſſe, and the act a ſlaue to limit.
They ſay all Louers ſweare more performance then they are able, and yet reſerue an ability that they neuer performe: vowing more then the perfection of ten; and diſcharging leſſe then the tenth part of one. They that haue the voyce of Lyons, and the act of Hares: are they not Monſters?
Are there ſuch? ſuch are not we: Praiſe vs as we are taſted, allow vs as we proue: our head ſhall goe bare till merit crowne it: no perfection in reuerſion ſhall haue a praiſe in preſent: wee will not name deſert before his birth, and being borne his addition ſhall be humble: few words to faire faith. Troylus ſhall be ſuch to Creſſid, as what enuie can ſay worſt, ſhall be a mocke for his truth; and what truth can ſpeake trueſt, not truer then Troylus.
Will you walke in my Lord?
What bluſhing ſtill? haue you not done talking yet?
Well Vnckle, what folly I commit, I dedicate to you.
I thanke you for that: if my Lord get a Boy of you, youle giue him me: be true to my Lord, if he flinch, chide me for it.
You know now your hoſtages: your Vnckles word and my firme faith.
Nay, Ile giue my word for her too: our kindred though they be long ere they are wooed, they are conſtant being wonne: they are Burres I can tell you, they'le ſticke where they are throwne.
Boldneſſe comes to mee now, and brings mee heart: Prince Troylus, I haue lou'd you night and day, for many weary moneths.
Why was my Creſsid then ſo hard to win?
Hard to ſeeme won: but I was won my Lord
With the firſt glance; that euer pardon me,
If I confeſſe much you will play the tyrant:
I loue you now, but not till now ſo much
But I might maiſter it; in faith I lye:
My thoughts were like vnbrideled children grow
Too head-ſtrong for their mother: ſee we fooles,
Why haue I blab'd: who ſhall be true to vs
When we are ſo vnſecret to our ſelues?
But though I lou'd you well, I woed you not,
And yet good faith I wiſht my ſelfe a man;
Or that we women had mens priuiledge
Of ſpeaking firſt. Sweet, bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture I ſhall ſurely ſpeake
The thing I ſhall repent: ſee, ſee, your ſilence
Comming in dumbneſſe, from my weakeneſſe drawes
My ſoule of counſell from me. Stop my mouth.
And ſhall, albeit ſweete Muſicke iſſues thence.
Pretty yfaith.
My Lord, I doe beſeech you pardon me,
'Twas not my purpoſe thus to beg a kiſſe:
I am aſham'd; O Heauens, what haue I done!
For this time will I take my leaue my Lord.
Your leaue ſweete Creſſid?
Leaue: and you take leaue till to morrow morning.
Pray you content you.
What offends you Lady?
Sir, mine owne company.
You cannot ſhun your ſelfe.
Let me goe and try:
I haue a kinde of ſelfe recides with you:
But an vnkinde ſelfe, that it ſelfe will leaue,
To be anothers foole. Where is my wit?
I would be gone: I ſpeake I know not what.
Well know they what they ſpeake, that ſpeakes ſo wiſely.
Perchance my Lord, I ſhew more craft then loue,
And fell ſo roundly to a large confeſſion,
To Angle for your thoughts: but you are wiſe,
Or elſe you loue not: for to be wiſe and loue,
Exceedes mans might, that dwels with gods aboue.
O that I thought it could be in a woman:
As if it can, I will preſume in you,
To feede for aye her lampe and flames of loue.
To keepe her conſtancie in plight and youth,
Out-liuing beauties outward, with a minde
That doth renew ſwifter then blood decaies:
Or that perſwaſion could but thus conuince me,
That my integritie and truth to you,
Might be affronted with the match and waight
Of ſuch a winnowed puriritie in loue:
How were I then vp-lifted! but alas,
I am as true, as truths ſimplicitie,
And ſimpler then the infancie of truth.
In that Ile warre with you.
O vertuous fight,
When right with right wars who ſhall be moſt right:
True ſwaines in loue, ſhall in the world to come
Approue their truths by Troylus, when their rimes,
Full of proteſt, of oath and big compare;
Wants ſimiles, truth tir'd with iteration,
As true as ſteele, as plantage to the Moone:
As Sunne to day: as Turtle to her mate:
As Iron to Adamant: as Earth to th' Center:
Yet after all compariſons of truth,
(As truths authenticke author to be cited)
As true as Troylus, ſhall crowne vp the Verſe,
And ſanctifie the numbers.
Prophet may you be:
If I be falſe, or ſwerue a haire from truth,
When time is old and hath forgot it ſelfe:
When water drops haue worne the Stones of Troy;
And blinde obliuion ſwallow'd Cities vp;
And mightie States characterleſſe are grated
To duſtie nothing; yet let memory,
From falſe to falſe, among falſe Maids in loue,
Vpbraid my falſehood, when they'aue ſaid as falſe,
As Aire, as Water, as Winde, as ſandie earth;
As Foxe to Lambe; as Wolfe to Heifers Calfe;
Pard to the Hinde, or Stepdame to her Sonne;
Yea, let them ſay, to ſticke the heart of falſehood,
As falſe as Creſſid.
Go too, a bargaine made: ſeale it, ſeale it, Ile be the witneſſe here I hold your hand: here my Couſins, feuer you proue falſe one to another, ſince I haue taken ſuch paines to bring you together, let all pittifull goers betweene be cal'd to the worlds end after my name: call them all Panders; let all conſtant men be Troyluſſes, all falſe women Creſſids, and all brokers betweene, Panders: ſay, Amen.
Amen.
Amen.
Amen.
Whereupon I will ſhew you a Chamber, which bed, becauſe it ſhall not ſpeake of your prettie encounters, preſſe it to death: away.
And Cupid grant all tong-tide Maidens heere,
Bed, Chamber, and Pander, to prouide this geere.
Now Princes for the ſeruice I haue done you,
Th' aduantage of the time promps me aloud,
To call for recompence: appeare it to your minde,
That through the ſight I beare in things to loue,
I haue abandon'd Troy, left my poſſeſſion,
Incur'd a Traitors name, expoſ'd my ſelfe,
From certaine and poſſeſt conueniences,
To doubtfull fortunes, ſequeſtring from me all
That time, acquaintance, cuſtome and condition,
Made tame, and moſt familiar to my nature:
And here to doe you ſeruice am become,
As new into the world, ſtrange, vnacquainted.
I doe beſeech you, as in way of taſte,
To giue me now a little benefit:
Out of thoſe many regiſtred in promiſe,
Which you ſay, liue to come in my behalfe.
What would'ſt thou of vs Troian? make demand?
You haue a Troian priſoner, cal'd Anthenor,
Yeſterday tooke: Troy holds him very deere,
Oft haue you (often haue you, thankes therefore)
Deſir'd my Creſſid in right great exchange.
Whom Troy hath ſtill deni'd: but this Anthenor,
I know is ſuch a wreſt in their affaires;
That their negotiations all muſt ſlacke,
Wanting his mannage: and they will almoſt,
Giue vs a Prince of blood, a Sonne of Priam,
In change of him. Let him be ſent great Princes,
And he ſhall buy my Daughter: and her preſence,
Shall quite ſtrike off all ſeruice I haue done,
In moſt accepted paine.
Let Diomedes beare him,
And bring vs Creſſid hither: Calcas ſhall haue
What he requeſts of vs: good Diomed
Furniſh you fairely for this enterchange;
Withall bring word, if Hector will to morrow
Be anſwer'd in his challenge. Aiax is ready.
This ſhall I vndertake, and 'tis a burthen
Which I am proud to beare.
Achilles ſtands i' th entrance of his Tent;
Pleaſe it our Generall to paſſe ſtrangely by him,
As if he were forgot: and Princes all,
Lay negligent and looſe regard vpon him;
I will come laſt, 'tis like heele queſtion me,
Why ſuch vnplaſiue eyes are bent? why turn'd on him?
If ſo, I haue deriſion medicinable,
To vſe betweene your ſtrangeneſſe and his pride,
Which his owne will ſhall haue deſire to drinke;
It may doe good, pride hath no other glaſſe
To ſhow it ſelfe, but pride: for ſupple knees,
Feede arrogance, and are the proud mans fees.
Weele execute your purpoſe, and put on
A forme of ſtrangeneſſe as we paſſe along,
So doe each Lord, and either greete him not,
Or elſe diſdainfully, which ſhall ſhake him more,
Then if not lookt on. I will lead the way.
What comes the Generall to ſpeake with me?
You know my minde, Ile fight no more 'gainſt Troy.
What ſaies Achilles, would he ought with vs?
Would you my Lord ought with the Generall?
No.
Nothing my Lord.
The better.
Good day, good day.
How doe you? how doe you?
What, do's the Cuckold ſcorne me?
How now Patroclus?
Good morrow Aiax?
Ha.
Good morrow.
I, and good next day too.
What meane theſe fellowes? know they not Achilles?
They paſſe by ſtrangely: they were vſ'd to bend
To ſend their ſmiles before them to Achilles:
To come as humbly as they vs'd to creepe to holy Altars.
What am I poore of late?
'Tis certaine, greatneſſe once falne out with fortune,
Muſt fall out with men too: what the declin'd is,
He ſhall as ſoone reade in the eyes of others,
As feele in his owne fall: for men like butter-flies,
Shew not their mealie wings, but to the Summer:
And not a man for being ſimply man,
Hath any honour; but honour'd for thoſe honours
That are without him; as place, riches, and fauour,
Prizes of accident, as oft as merit:
Which when they fall, as being ſlippery ſtanders;
The loue that leand on them as ſlippery too,
Doth one plucke downe another, and together
Dye in the fall. But 'tis not ſo with me;
Fortune and I are friends, I doe enioy
At ample point, all that I did poſſeſſe,
Saue theſe mens lookes: who do me thinkes finde out
Something not worth in me ſuch rich beholding,
As they haue often giuen. Here is Ʋliſſes,
Ile interrupt his reading: how now Vliſſes?
Now great Thetis Sonne.
What are you reading?
A ſtrange fellow here
Writes me, that man, how dearely euer parted,
How much in hauing, or without, or in,
Cannot make boaſt to haue that which he hath;
Nor feeles not what he owes, but by reflection:
As when his vertues ſhining vpon others,
Heate them, and they retort that heate againe
To the firſt giuer.
This is not ſtrange Vliſſes:
The beautie that is borne here in the face,
The bearer knowes not, but commends it ſelfe,
Not going from it ſelfe: but eye to eye oppos'd
Salutes each other with each others forme:
For ſpeculation turnes not to it ſelfe,
Till it hath trauail'd, and is married there
Where it may ſee it ſelfe: this is not ſtrange at all.
I doe not ſtraine it at the poſition,
It is familiar; but at the Authors drift,
Who in his circumſtance, expreſly proues
That no may is the Lord of any thing,
(Though in and of him there is much conſiſting,)
Till he communicate his parts to others:
Nor doth he of himſelfe know them for ought,
Till he behold them formed in th' applauſe,
Where they are extended: who like an arch reuerb'rate
The voyce againe; or like a gate of ſteele,
Fronting the Sunne, receiues and renders backe
His figure, and his heate. I was much rapt in this,
And apprehended here immediately:
The vnknowne Aiax;
Heauens what a man is there? a very Horſe,
That has he knowes not what. Nature, what things there are.
Moſt abiect in regard, and deare in vſe.
What things againe moſt deere in the eſteeme,
And poore in worth: now ſhall we ſee to morrow,
An act that very chance doth throw vpon him?
Aiax renown'd? O heauens, what ſome men doe,
While ſome men leaue to doe!
How ſome men creepe in skittiſh fortunes hall,
Whiles others play the Ideots in her eyes:
How one man eates into anothers pride,
While pride is feaſting in his wantonneſſe
To ſee theſe Grecian Lords; why, euen already,
They clap the lubber Aiax on the ſhoulder,
As if his foote were on braue Hectors breſt,
And great Troy ſhrinking.
I doe beleeue it:
For they paſt by me, as my ſers doe by beggars,
Neither gaue to me good word, nor looke:
What are my deedes forgot?
Time hath (my Lord) a wallet at his backe,
Wherein he puts almes for obliuion:
A great ſiz'd monſter of ingratitudes:
Thoſe ſcraps are good deedes paſt,
Which are deuour'd as faſt as they are made,
Forgot as ſoone as done: perſeuerance, deere my Lord,
Keepes honor bright, to haue done, is to hang
Quite out of faſhion, like a ruſtie male,
In monumentall mockrie: take the inſtant way,
For honour trauels in a ſtraight ſo narrow,
Where one but goes a breaſt, keepe then the path:
For emulation hath a thouſand Sonnes,
That one by one purſue; if you giue way,
Or hedge aſide from the direct forth right;
Like to an entred Tyde, they all ruſh by,
And leaue you hindmoſt:
Or like a gallant Horſe falne in firſt ranke,
Lye there for pauement to the abiect, neere
Ore-run and trampled on: then what they doe in preſent,
Though leſſe then yours in paſt, muſt ore-top yours:
For time is like a faſhionable Hoſte,
That ſlightly ſhakes his parting Gueſt by th' hand;
And with his armes out-ſtretcht, as he would flye,
Graſpes in the commer: the welcome euer ſmiles,
And farewels goes out ſighing: O let not vertue ſeeke
Remuneration for the thing it was: for beautie, wit,
High birth, vigor of bone, deſert in ſeruice,
Loue, friendſhip, charity, are ſubiects all
To enuious and calumniating time:
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin:
That all with one conſent praiſe new borne gaudes,
Though they are made and moulded of things paſt,
And goe to duſt, that is a little guilt,
More laud then guilt ore duſted.
The preſent eye praiſes the preſnt obiect:
Then maruell not thou great and compleat man,
That all the Greekes begin to worſhip Aiax;
Since things in motion begin to catch the eye,
Then what not ſtis: the cry went out on thee,
And ſtill it might, and yet it may againe,
If thou would'ſt not entombe thy ſelfe aliue,
And caſe thy reputation in thy Tent;
Whoſe glorious deedes, but in theſe fields of late,
Made emulous miſſions 'mongſt the gods themſelues,
And draue great Mars to faction.
Of this my priuacie,
I haue ſtrong reaſons.
But 'gainſt your priuacie
The reaſons are more potent and heroycall:
'Tis knowne Achilles, that you are in loue
With one of Priams daughters.
Ha? knowne?
Is that a wonder?
The prouidence that's in a watchfull State,
Knowes almoſt euery graine of Plutoes gold;
Findes bottome in th' vncomprehenſiue deepes;
Keepes place with thought; and almoſt like the gods,
Doe thoughts vnuaile in their dumbe cradles:
There is a myſterie (with whom relation
Durſt neuer meddle) in the ſoule of State;
Which hath an operation more diuine,
Then breath or pen can giue expreſſure to:
All the commerſe that you haue had with Troy,
As perfectly is ours, as yours, my Lord.
And better would it fit Achilles much,
To throw downe Hector then Polixena.
But it muſt grieue yong Pirhus now at home,
When fame ſhall in her Hand ſound her trumpe;
And all the Greekiſh Girles ſhall tripping ſing,
Great Hectors ſiſter did Achilles winne;
But our great Aiax brauely beate downe him.
Farewell my Lord: I as your louer ſpeake;
The foole ſlides ore the Ice that you ſhould breake.
To this effect Achilles haue I mou'd you;
A woman impudent and manniſh growne,
Is not more loth'd, then an effeminate man,
In time of action: I ſtand condemn'd for this;
They thinke my little ſtomacke to the warre,
And your great loue to me, reſtraines you thus:
Sweete, rouſe your ſelfe; and the weake wanton Cupid
Shall from your necke vnlooſe his amorous fould,
And like a dew drop from the Lyons mane,
Be ſhooke to ayrie ayre.
Shall Aiax fight with Hector?
I, and perhaps receiue much honor by him.
I ſee my reputation is at ſtake,
My fame is ſhrowdly gored.
O then beware:
Thoſe wounds heale ill, that men doe giue themſelues:
Omiſſion to doe what is neceſſary,
Seales a commiſſion to a blanke of danger,
And danger like an ague ſubtly taints
Euen then when we ſit idely in the ſunne.
Goe call Therſites hither ſweet Patroclus,
Ile ſend the foole to Aiax, and deſire him
T' inuite the Troian Lords after the Combat
To ſee vs here vnarm'd: I haue a womans longing,
An appetite that I am ſicke withall,
To ſee great Hector in his weedes of peace;
To talke with him, and to behold his viſage,
Euen to my full of view. A labour ſau'd.
A wonder.
What?
Aiax goes vp and downe the field, asking for himſelfe.
How ſo?
Hee muſt fight ſingly to morrow with Hector, and is ſo prophetically proud of an heroicall cudgelling, that he raues in ſaying nothing.
How can that be?
Why he ſtalkes vp and downe like a Peacock, a ſtride and a ſtand: ruminates like an hoſteſſe, that hath no Arithmatique but her braine to ſet downe her reckoning: bites his lip with a politique regard, as who ſhould ſay, there were wit in his head and twoo'd out; and ſo there is: but it lyes as coldly in him, as fire in a flint, which will not ſhew without knocking. The mans vndone for euer; for if Hector breake not his necke i' th' combat, heele break't himſelfe in vaine-glory. He knowes not mee: I ſaid, good morrow Aiax; And he replyes, thankes Agamemnon, What thinke you of this man, that takes me for the Generall? Hee's growne a very land-fiſh, languageleſſe, a monſter: a plague of opinion, a man may weare it on both ſides like a leather Ierkin.
Thou muſt be my Ambaſſador to him Therſites.
Who, I: why▪ heele anſwer no body: he profeſſes not anſwering; ſpeaking is for beggers: he weares his tongue in's armes: I will put on his preſence; let Patroclus make his demands to me, you ſhall ſee the Pageant of Aiax.
To him Patroclus; tell him, I humbly deſire the valiant Aiax, to inuite the moſt valorous Hector, to come vnarm'd to my Tent, and to procure ſafe conduct for his perſon, of the magnanimious and moſt illuſtrious, ſixe or feauen times honour'd Captaine, Generall of the Grecian Armie Agamemnon, &c. doe this.
Ioue bleſſe great Aiax.
Hum.
I come from the worthy Achilles.
Ha?
Who moſt humbly deſires you to inuite Hector to his Tent.
Hum.
And to procure ſafe conduct from Agamemnon.
Agamemnon?
I my Lord.
Ha?
What ſay you too't.
God buy you with all my heart.
Your anfwer ſir.
If to morrow be a faire day, by eleuen a clocke it will goe one way or other; howſoeuer, he ſhall pay for me ere he has me.
Your anſwer ſir.
Fare you well withall my heart.
Why, but he is not in this tune, is he?
No, but he's out a tune thus: what muſicke will be in him when Hector has knockt out his braines, I know not: but I am ſure none, vnleſſe the Fidler Apollo get his ſinewes to make catlings on.
Come, thou ſhalt beare a Letter to him ſtraight.
Let me carry another to his Horſe; for that's the more capable creature.
My minde is troubled like a Fountaine ſtir'd,
And I my ſelfe ſee not the bottome of it.
Would the Fountaine of your minde were cleere againe, that I might water an Aſſe at it: I had rather be a Ticke in a Sheepe, then ſuch a valiant ignorance.
See hoa, who is that there?
It is the Lord Aeneas.
Is the Prince there in perſon?
Had I ſo good occaſion to lye long
As you Prince Paris, nothing but heauenly buſineſſe,
Should rob my bed-mate of my company.
That's my minde too: good morrow Lord Aeneas.
A valiant Greeke Aeneas, take his hand,
Witneſſe the proceſſe of your ſpeech within;
You told how Diomed, in a whole weeke by dayes
Did haunt you in the Field.
Health to you valiant ſir,
During all queſtion of the gentle truce:
But when I meete you arm'd, as blacke defiance,
As heat can thinke, or courage execute.
The one and other Diomed embraces,
Our blouds are now in calme; and ſo long health:
But when contention, and occaſion meetes,
By Ioue, Ile play the hunter for thy life,
With all my force, purſuite and pollicy.
And thou ſhalt hunt a Lyon that will flye
With his face backward, in humaine gentleneſſe:
Welcome to Troy; now by Anchiſes life,
Welcome indeede: by Venus hand I ſweare,
No man aliue can loue in ſuch a ſort,
The thing he meanes to kill, more excellently,
We ſimpathize. Ioue let Aeneas liue
(If to my ſword his fate be not the glory)
A thouſand compleate courſes of the Sunne,
But in mine emulous honor let him dye:
With euery ioynt a wound, and that to morrow.
We know each other well.
We doe, and long to know each other worſe.
This is the moſt, deſpightful'ſt gentle greeting;
The nobleſt hatefull loue, that ere I heard of.
What buſineſſe Lord ſo early?
I was ſent for to the King; but why, I know not.
His purpoſe meets you; it was to bring this Greek
To Calcha's houſe; and there to render him,
For the enfreed Anthenor, the faire Creſſid:
Lets haue your company; or if you pleaſe,
Haſte there before vs. I conſtantly doe thinke
(Or rather call my thought a certaine knowledge)
My brother Troylus lodges there to night.
Rouſe him, and giue him note of our approach,
With the whole quality whereof, I feare
We ſhall be much vnwelcome.
That I aſſure you:
Troylus had rather Troy were borne to Greece,
Then Creſſid borne from Troy.
There is no helpe:
The bitter diſpoſition of the time will haue it ſo.
On Lord, weele follow you.
Good morrow all.
And tell me noble Diomed; faith tell me true,
Euen in the ſoule of ſound good fellowſhip,
Who in your thoughts merits faire Helen moſt?
My ſelfe, or Menelaus?
Both alike.
He merits well to haue her, that doth ſeeke her,
Not making any ſcruple of her ſoylure,
With ſuch a hell of paine, and world of charge.
And you as well to keepe her, that defend her,
Not pallating the taſte of her diſhonour,
With ſuch a coſtly loſſe of wealth and friends:
He like a puling Cuckold, would drinke vp
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed peece:
You like a letcher, out of whoriſh loynes.
Are pleaſ'd to breede out your inheritors:
Both merits poyz'd, each weighs no leſſe nor more,
But he as he, which heauier for a whore.
You are too bitter to your country-woman.
Shee's bitter to her countrey: heare me Paris,
For euery falſe drop in her baudy veines,
A Grecians life hath ſunke: for euery ſcruple
Of her contaminated carrion weight,
A Troian hath beene ſlaine. Since ſhe could ſpeake,
She hath not giuen ſo many good words breath,
As for her, Greekes and Troians ſuffred death.
Faire Diomed, you doe as chapmen doe,
Diſpraiſe the thing that you deſire to buy:
But we in ſilence hold this vertue well;
Weele not commend, what we intend to ſell.
Here lyes our way.
Deere trouble not your ſelfe: the morne is cold.
Then ſweet my Lord, Ile call mine Vnckle down;
He ſhall vnbolt the Gates.
Trouble him not:
To bed, to bed: ſleepe kill thoſe pritty eyes,
And giue as ſoft attachment to thy ſences,
As Infants empty of all thought.
Good morrow then.
I prithee now to bed.
Are you a weary of me?
O Creſſida! but that the buſie day
Wak't by the Larke, hath rouz'd the ribauld Crowes,
And dreaming night will hide our eyes no longer:
I would not from thee.
Night hath beene too briefe.
Beſhrew the witch! with venemous wights ſhe ſtayes,
As hidiouſly as hell; but flies the graſpes of loue,
With wings more momentary, ſwift then thought:
You will catch cold, and curſe me.
Prithee tarry, you men will neuer tarry;
O fooliſh Creſſid, I might haue ſtill held off,
And then you would haue tarried. Harke, ther's one vp?
What's all the doores open here?
It is your Vnckle.
A peſtilence on him: now will he be mocking:
I ſhall haue ſuch a life.
How now, how now? how goe maiden-heads?
Heare you Maide: wher's my cozin Creſſid?
Go hang your ſelf, you naughty mocking Vnckle:
You bring me to doo—and then you floute me too.
To do what? to do what? let her ſay what:
What haue I brought you to doe?
Come, come, beſhrew your heart: youle nere be good, nor ſuffer others.
Ha, ha: alas poore wretch: a poore Chipochia, haſt not ſlept to night? would he not (a naughty man) let it ſleepe: a bug-beare take him.
Did not I tell you? would he were knockt ith' head. Who's that at doore? good Vnckle goe and ſee.
My Lord, come you againe into my Chamber:
You ſmile and mocke me, as if I meant naughtily.
Ha, ha.
Come you are deceiu'd, I thinke of no ſuch thing.
How earneſtly they knocke: pray you come in.
I would not for halfe Troy haue you ſeene here.
Who's there? what's the matter? will you beate downe the doore? How now, what's the matter?
Good morrow Lord, good morrow.
Who's there my Lord Aeneas? by my troth I knew you not: what newes with you ſo early?
Is not Prince Troylus here?
Here? what ſhould he doe here?
Come he is here, my Lord, doe not deny him:
It doth import him much to ſpeake with me.
Is he here ſay you? 'tis more then I know, Ile be ſworne: For my owne part I came in late: what ſhould he doe here?
Who, nay then: Come, come, youle doe him wrong, ere y' are ware: youle be ſo true to him, to be falſe to him: Doe not you know of him, but yet goe fetch him hither, goe.
How now, what's the matter?
My Lord, I ſcarce haue leiſure to ſalute you,
My matter is ſo raſh: there is at hand,
Paris your brother, and Deiphoebus,
The Grecian Diomed, and our Anthenor
Deliuer'd to vs, and for him forth-with,
Ere the firſt ſacrifice, within this houre,
We muſt giue vp to Diomeds hand
The Lady Creſſida.
Is it concluded ſo?
By Priam, and the generall ſtate of Troy,
They are at hand, and ready to effect it.
How my atchieuements mocke me;
I will goe meete them: and my Lord Aeneas,
We met by chance; you did not finde me here.
Good, good, my Lord, the ſecrets of nature
Haue not more gift in taciturnitie.
Is't poſſible? no ſooner got but loſt: the diuell take Anthenor; the yong Prince will goe mad: a plague vpon Anthenor; I would they had brok's necke.
How now? what's the matter? who was here?
Ah, ha!
Why ſigh you ſo profoundly? wher's my Lord? gone? tell me ſweet Vnckle, what's the matter?
Would I were as deepe vnder the earth as I am aboue.
O the gods! what's the matter?
Prythee get thee in: would thou had'ſt nere been borne; I knew thou would'ſt be his death. O poore Gentleman: a plague vpon Anthenor.
Good Vnckle I beſeech you, on my knees, I beſeech you what's the matter?
Thou muſt be gone wench, thou muſt be gone; thou art chang'd for Anthenor: thou muſt to thy Father, and be gone from Troylus: 'twill be his death: 'twill be his baine, he cannot beare it▪
O you immortall gods! I will not goe.
Thou muſt.
I will not Vnckle: I haue forgot my Father:
I know no touch of conſanguinitie:
No kin, no loue, no bloud, no ſoule, ſo neere me,
As the ſweet Troylus: O you gods diuine!
Make Creſſids name the very crowne of falſhood!
If euer ſhe leaue Troylus: time, orce and death,
Do to this body what extremitie you can;
But the ſtrong baſe and building of my loue,
Is as the very Center of the earth,
Drawing all things to it. I will goe in and weepe.
Doe, doe.
Teare my bright heire, and ſcratch my praiſed cheekes,
Cracke my cleere voyce with ſobs, and breake my heart
With ſounding Troylus. I will not goe from Troy.
It is great morning, and the houre prefixt
Of her deliuerie to this valiant Greeke
Comes faſt vpon: good my brother Troylus,
Tell you the Lady what ſhe is to doe,
And haſt her to the purpoſe.
Walke into her houſe:
Ile bring her to the Grecian preſently;
And to his hand, when I deliuer her,
Thinke it an Altar, and thy brother Troylus
A Prieſt, there offring to it his heart.
I know what 'tis to loue,
And would, as I ſhall pittie, I could helpe.
Pleaſe you walke in, my Lords.
Be moderate, be moderate.
Why tell you me of moderation?
The griefe is fine, full perfect that I taſte,
And no leſſe in a ſenſe as ſtrong
As that which cauſeth it. How can I moderate it?
If I could temporiſe with my affection,
Or brew it to a weake and colder pallat,
The like alaiment could I giue my griefe:
My loue admits no qualifying croſſe;
No more my griefe, in ſuch a precious loſſe.
Here, here, here, he comes, a ſweet ducke.
O Troylus, Troylus!
What a paire of ſpectacles is here? let me embrace too: oh hart, as the goodly ſaying is; O heart, heauie heart, why ſigheſt thou without breaking? where he anſwers againe; becauſe thou canſt not eaſe thy ſmart by friendſhip, nor by ſpeaking: there was neuer a truer rime; let vs caſt away nothing, for we may liue to haue neede of ſuch a Verſe: we ſee it, we ſee it: how now Lambs?
Creſſid: I loue thee in ſo ſtrange a puritie;
That the bleſt gods, as angry with my fancie,
More bright in zeale, then the deuotion which
Cold lips blow to their Deities: take thee from me.
Haue the gods enuie?
I, I, I, I, 'tis too plaine a caſe.
And is it true, that I muſt goe from Troy?
A hatefull truth.
What, and from Troylus too?
From Troy, and Troylus.
Iſt poſſible?
And ſodainely, where iniurie of chance
Puts backe leaue-taking, iuſtles roughly by
All time of pauſe; rudely beguiles our lips
Of all reioyndure: forcibly preuents
Our lockt embraſures; ſtrangles our deare vowes,
Euen in the birth of our owne laboring breath.
We two, that with ſo many thouſand ſighes
Did buy each other, muſt poorely ſell our ſelues,
With the rude breuitie and diſcharge of our
Iniurious time; now with a robbers haſte
Crams his rich theeuerie vp, he knowes not how.
As many farwels as be ſtars in heauen,
With diſtinct breath, and conſign'd kiſſes to them,
He fumbles vp into a looſe adiew;
And ſcants vs with a ſingle famiſht kiſſe,
Diſtaſting with the ſalt of broken teares.
My Lord, is the Lady ready?
Harke, you are call'd: ſome ſay the genius ſo
Cries, come to him that inſtantly muſt dye.
Bid them haue patience: ſhe ſhall come anon.
Where are my teares? raine, to lay this winde, or my heart will be blowne vp by the root.
I muſt then to the Grecians?
No remedy.
A wofull Creſſid 'mong'ſt the merry Greekes.
When ſhall we ſee againe?
Here me my loue: be thou but true of heart.
I true? how now? what wicked deeme is this?
Nay, we muſt vſe expoſtulation kindely,
For it is parting from vs:
I ſpeake not, be thou true, as fearing thee:
For I will throw my Gloue to death himſelfe,
That there's no maculation in thy heart:
But be thou true, ſay I, to faſhion in
My ſequent proteſtation: be thou true,
And I will ſee thee.
O you ſhall be expoſ'd, my Lord to dangers
As infinite, as imminent: but Ile be true.
And Ile grow friend with danger;
Weare this Sleeue.
And you this Gloue.
When ſhall I ſee you?
I will corrupt the Grecian Centinels,
To giue thee nightly viſitation.
But yet be true.
O heauens: be true againe?
Heare why I ſpeake it; Loue:
The Grecian youths are full of qualitie,
Their louing well compos'd, with guift of nature,
Flawing and ſwelling ore with Arts and exerciſe:
How nouelties may moue, and parts with perſon.
Alas, a kinde of godly iealouſie;
Which I beſeech you call a vertuous ſinne:
Makes me affraid.
O heauens, you loue me not!
Dye I a villaine then:
In this I doe not call your faith in queſtion
So mainely as my merit: I cannot ſing,
Nor heele the high Lauolt; nor ſweeten talke;
Nor play at ſubtill games; faire vertues all;
To which the Grecians are moſt prompt and pregnant:
But I can tell that in each grace of theſe,
There lurkes a ſtill and dumb-diſcourſiue diuell,
That tempts moſt cunningly: but be not tempted.
Doe you thinke I will:
No, but ſomething may be done that we wil not:
And ſometimes we are diuels to our ſelues,
When we will tempt the frailtie of our powers,
Preſuming on their changefull potencie.
Nay, good my Lord?
Come kiſſe, and let vs part.
Brother Troylus?
Good brother come you hither,
And bring Aeneas and the Grecian with you.
My Lord, will you be true?
Who I? alas it is my vice, my fault:
Whiles others fiſh with craft for great opinion,
I, with great truth, catch meere ſimplicitie;
Whil'ſt ſome with cunning guild their copper crownes,
With truth and plainneſſe I doe weare mine bare:
Feare not my truth; the morrall of my wit
Is plaine and true, ther's all the reach of it.
Welcome ſir Diomed, here is the Lady
Which for Antenor, we deliuer you.
At the port (Lord) Ile giue her to thy hand,
And by the way poſſeſſe thee what ſhe is.
Entreate her faire; and by my ſoule, faire Greeke,
If ere thou ſtand at mercy of my Sword,
Name Creſſid, and thy life ſhall be as ſafe
As Priam is in Illion?
Faire Lady Creſsid,
So pleaſe you ſaue the thankes this Prince expects:
The luſtre in your eye, heauen in your cheeke,
Pleades your faire viſage, and to Diomed
You ſhall be miſtreſſe, and command him wholly.
Grecian, thou do'ſt not vſe me curteouſly,
To ſhame the ſeale of my petition towards,
I praiſing her. I tell thee Lord of Greece:
Shee is as farre high ſoaring o're thy praiſes,
As thou vnworthy to be cal'd her ſeruant:
I charge thee vſe her well, euen for my charge:
For by the dreadfull Pluto, if thou do'ſt not,
(Though the great bulke Achilles be thy guard)
Ile cut thy throate.
Oh be not mou'd Prince Troylus;
Let me be priuiledg'd by my place and meſſage,
To be a ſpeaker free? when I am hence,
Ile anſwer to my luſt: and know my Lord;
Ile nothing doe on charge: to her owne worth
She ſhall be priz'd: but that you ſay, be't ſo;
Ile ſpeake it in my ſpirit and honor, no.
Come to the Port. Ile tell thee Diomed,
This braue, ſhall oft make thee to hide thy head:
Lady, giue me your hand, and as we walke,
To our owne ſelues bend we our needefull talke.
Harke, Hectors Trumpet.
How haue we ſpent this morning
The Prince muſt thinke me tardy and remiſſe,
That ſwore to ride before him in the field.
'Tis Troylus fault: come, come, to field with him.
Let vs make ready ſtraight.
Yea, with a Bridegroomes freſh alacritie
Let vs addreſſe to tend on Hectors heeles:
The glory of our Troy doth this day lye
On his faire worth, and ſingle Chiualrie.
Here art thou in appointment freſh and faire,
Anticipating time. With ſtarting courage,
Giue with thy Trumpet a loud note to Troy
Thou dreadfull Aiax, that the appauled aire
May pierce the head of the great Combatant,
And hale him hither.
Thou, Trumpet, ther's my purſe;
Now cracke thy lungs, and ſplit thy braſen pipe:
Blow villaine, till thy ſphered Bias cheeke
Out-ſwell the collicke of puft Aquilon:
Come, ſtretch thy cheſt, and let thy eyes ſpout bloud:
Thou bloweſt for Hector.
No Trumpet anſwers.
'Tis but early dayes.
Is not yong Diomed with Calcas daughter?
'Tis he, I ken the manner of his gate,
He riſes on the toe: that ſpirit of his
In aſpiration lifts him from the earth.
Is this the Lady Creſſid?
Euen ſhe.
Moſt deerely welcome to the Greekes, ſweete Lady.
Our Generall doth ſalute you with a kiſſe.
Yet is the kindeneſſe but particular; 'twere better ſhe were kiſt in generall.
And very courtly counſell: Ile begin. So much for Neſtor.
Ile take that winter from your lips faire Lady Achilles bids you welcome.
I had good argument for kiſſing once.
But that's no argument for kiſſing now;
For thus pop't Paris in his hardiment.
Oh deadly gall, and theame of all our ſcornes,
For which we looſe our heads, to gild his hornes.
The firſt was Menelaus kiſſe, this mine:
Patroclus kiſſes you.
Oh this is trim.
Paris and I kiſſe euermore for him.
Ile haue my kiſſe ſir: Lady by your leaue.
In kiſſing doe you render, or receiue.
Both take and giue.
Ile make my match to liue,
The kiſſe you take is better then you giue: therefore no kiſſe.
Ile giue you boote, Ile giue you three for one.
You are an odde man, giue euen, or giue none.
An odde man Lady, euery man is odde.
No, Paris is not; for you know 'tis true,
That you are odde, and he is euen with you.
You fillip me a' th' head.
No, Ile be ſworne.
It were no match, your naile againſt his horne:
May I ſweete Lady beg a kiſſe of you?
You may.
I doe deſire it.
Why begge then?
Why then for Venus ſake, giue me a kiſſe:
When Hellen is a maide againe, and his—
I am your debtor, claime it when 'tis due.
Neuer's my day, and then a kiſſe of you.
Lady a word, Ile bring you to your Father.
A woman of quicke ſence.
Fie, fie, vpon her:
Ther's a language in her eye, her cheeke, her lip;
Nay, her foote ſpeakes, her wanton ſpirites looke out
At euery ioynt, and motiue of her body:
Oh theſe encounterers ſo glib of tongue,
That giue a coaſting welcome ete it comes;
And wide vnclaſpe the tables of their thoughts,
To euery tickling reader: ſet them downe,
For ſluttiſh ſpoyles of opportunitie;
And daughters of the game.
The Troians Trumpet.
Yonder comes the troope.
Haile all you ſtate of Greece: what ſhalbe done
To him that victory commands? or doe you purpoſe,
A victor ſhall be knowne: will you the Knights
Shall to the edge of all extremitie
Purſue each other▪ or ſhall be diuided
By any voyce, or order of the field: Hector bad aske?
Which way would Hector haue it?
He cares not, heele obey conditions.
'Tis done like Hector, but ſecurely done,
A little proudly, and great deale diſpriſing
The Knight oppos'd.
If not Achilles ſir, what is your name?
If not Achilles, nothing.
Therefore Achilles: but what ere, know this.
In the extremity of great and little:
Valour and pride excell themſelues in Hector;
The one almoſt as infinite as all;
The other blanke as nothing: weigh him well:
And that which lookes like pride, is curteſie:
This Aiax is halfe made of Hectors bloud;
In loue whereof, halfe Hector ſtaies at home:
Halfe heart, halfe hand, halfe Hector, comes to ſeeke
This blended Knight, halfe Troian, and halfe Greeke.
A maiden battaile then? O I perceiue you.
Here is ſir, Diomed: goe gentle Knight,
Stand by our Aiax: as you and Lord Aeneas
Conſent vpon the order of their fight,
So be it: either to the vttermoſt,
Or elſe a breach: the Combatants being kin,
Halfe ſtints their ſtrife, before their ſtrokes begin.
They are oppos'd already.
What Troian is that ſame that lookes ſo heauy?
The yongeſt Sonne of Priam;
A true Knight; they call him Troylus;
Not yet mature, yet matchleſſe, firme of word,
Speaking in deedes, and deedeleſſe in his tongue;
Not ſoone prouok't, nor being prouok't, ſoone calm'd;
His heart and hand both open, and both free:
For what he has, he giues; what thinkes, he ſhewes;
Yet giues he not till iudgement guide his bounty,
Nor dignifies an impaire thought with breath:
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous;
For Hector in his blaze of wrath ſubſcribes
To tender obiects; but he, in heate of action,
Is more vindecatiue then iealous loue.
They call him Troylus; and on him erect,
A ſecond hope, as fairely built as Hector.
Thus ſaies Aeneas, one that knowes the youth,
Euen to his inches: and with priuate ſoule,
Did in great Illion thus tranſlate him to me.
They are in action.
Now Aiax hold thine owne.
Hector, thou ſleep'ſt, awake thee.
His blowes are wel diſpos'd there Aiax.
You muſt no more.
Princes enough, ſo pleaſe you.
I am not warme yet, let vs fight againe.
As Hector pleaſes.
Why then will I no more:
Thou art great Lord, my Fathers ſiſters Sonne;
A couſen german to great Priams ſeede:
The obligation of our bloud forbids
A gorie emulation 'twixt vs twaine:
Were thy commixion, Greeke and Troian ſo,
That thou could'ſt ſay, this hand is Grecian all,
And this is Troian: the ſinewes of this Legge,
All Greeke, and this all Troy: my Mothers bloud
Runs on the dexter cheeke, and this ſiniſter
Bounds in my fathers: by Ioue multipotent,
Thou ſhould'ſt not beare from me a Greekiſh member
Wherein my ſword had not impreſſure made
Of our ranke feud: but the iuſt gods gainſay,
That any drop thou borrwd'ſt from thy mother,
My ſacred Aunt, ſhould by my mortall Sword
Be drained. Let me embrace thee Aiax:
By him that thunders, thou haſt luſtie Armes;
Hector would haue them fall vpon him thus.
Cozen, all honor to thee.
I thanke thee Hector:
Thou art too gentle, and too free a man:
I came to kill thee Cozen, and beare hence
A great addition, earned in thy death.
Not Neoptolymus ſo mirable,
On whoſe bright creſt, fame with her lowd'ſt (O yes)
Cries, This is he; could'ſt promiſe to himſelfe,
A thought of added honor, torne from Hector.
There is expectance here from both the ſides,
What further you will doe?
Weele anſwere it:
The iſſue is embracement: Aiax, farewell.
If I might in entreaties finde ſucceſſe,
As ſeld I haue the chance; I would deſire
My famous Couſin to our Grecian Tents.
'Tis Agamemnons wiſh, and great Achilles
Doth long to ſee vnarm'd the valiant Hector.
Aeneas, call my brother Troylus to me:
And ſignifie this louing enterview
To the expecters of our Troian part:
Deſire them home. Giue me thy hand, my Couſin:
I will goe eate with thee, and ſee your Knights.
Great Agamemnon comes to meete vs here.
The worthieſt of them, tell me name by name:
But for Achilles, mine owne ſerching eyes
Shall finde him by his large and portly ſize.
Worthy of Armes: as welcome as to one▪
That would be rid of ſuch an enemie.
But that's no welcome: vnderſtand more cleere
What's paſt, and what's to come, is ſtrew'd with huskes
And formeleſſe ruine of obliuion:
But in this extant moment, faith and troth,
Strain'd purely from all hollow bias drawing:
Bids thee with moſt diuine integritie.
From heart of very heart, great Hector welcome.
I thanke thee moſt imperious Agamemnon.
My well-fam'd Lord of Troy, no leſſe to you.
Let me confirme my Princely brothers greeting,
You brace of warlike Brothers, welcome hither.
Who muſt we anſwer?
The Noble Menelaus.
O, you my Lord, by Mars his gauntlet thanks,
Mocke not, that I affect th' vntraded Oath,
Your quondam wife ſweares ſtill by Venus Gloue
Shee's well, but bad me not commend her to you.
Name her not now ſir, ſhe's a deadly Theame.
O pardon, I offend.
I haue (thou gallant Troyan) ſeene thee oft
Labouring for deſtiny, make cruell way
Through rankes of Greekiſh youth: and I haue ſeen thee
As hot as Perſeus, ſpurre thy Phrygian Steed,
And ſeene thee ſcorning forfeits and ſubduments,
When thou haſt hung thy aduanced ſword i' th' ayre,
Not letting it decline, on the declined:
That I haue ſaid vnto my ſtanders by,
Loe Iupiter is yonder, dealing life.
And I haue ſeene thee pauſe, and take thy breath,
When that a ring of Greekes haue hem'd thee in,
Like an Olympian wreſtling. This haue I ſeene,
But this thy countenance (ſtill lockt in ſteele)
I neuer ſaw till now. I knew thy Grandſire,
And once fought with him; he was a Souldier good,
But by great Mars, the Captaine of vs all,
Neuer like thee. Let an oldman embrace thee,
And (worthy Warriour) welcome to our Tents.
'Tis the old Neſtor.
Let me embrace thee good old Chronicle,
That haſt ſo long walk'd hand in hand with time:
Moſt reuerend Neſtor, I am glad to claſpe thee.
I would my armes could match thee in contention
As they contend with thee in courteſie.
I would they could.
Ha? by this white beard I'ld fight with thee to morrow. Well, welcom, welcome: I haue ſeen the time.
I wonder now, how yonder City ſtands,
When we haue heere her Baſe and pillar by vs.
I know your fauour Lord Vlyſſes well.
Ah ſir, there's many a Greeke and Troyan dead,
Since firſt I ſaw your ſelfe, and Diomed
In Illion, on your Greekiſh Embaſſie.
Sir, I foretold you then what would enſue,
My propheſie is but halfe his iourney yet;
For yonder wals that pertly front your Towne,
Yond Towers, whoſe wanton tops do buſſe the clouds,
Muſt kiſſe their owne feet.
I muſt not beleeue you:
There they ſtand yet: and modeſtly I thinke,
The fall of euery Phrygian ſtone will coſt
A drop of Grecian blood: the end crownes all,
And that old common Arbitrator, Time,
Will one day end it.
So to him we leaue it.
Moſt gentle, and moſt valiant Hector, welcome;
After the Generall, I beſeech you next
To Feaſt with me, and ſee me at my Tent.
I ſhall foreſtall thee Lord Vlyſſes, thou:
Now Hector I haue fed mine eyes on thee,
I haue with exact view perus'd thee Hector,
And quoted ioynt by ioynt.
Is this Achilles?
I am Achilles.
Stand faire I prythee, let me looke on thee.
Behold thy fill.
Nay, I haue done already.
Thou art to breefe, I will the ſecond time,
As I would buy thee, view thee, limbe by limbe.
O like a Booke of ſport thou'lt reade me ore:
But there's more in me then thou vnderſtand'ſt.
Why doeſt thou ſo oppreſſe me with thine eye?
Tell me you Heauens, in which part of his body
Shall I deſtroy him? Whether there, or there, or there,
That I may giue the locall wound a name,
And make diſtinct the very breach, where-out
Hectors great ſpirit flw. Anſwer me heauens.
It would diſcredit the bleſt Gods, proud man,
To anſwer ſuch a queſtion: Stand againe;
Think'ſt thou to catch my life ſo pleaſantly,
As to prenominate in nice coniecture
Where thou wilt hit me dead?
I tell thee yea.
Wert thou the Oracle to tell me ſo,
I'ld not beleeue thee: henceforth guard thee well,
For Ile not kill thee there, nor there, nor there,
But by the forge that ſtythied Mars his helme,
Ile kill thee euery where, yea, ore and ore.
You wiſeſt Grecians, pardon me this bragge,
His inſolence drawes folly from my lips,
But Ile endeuour deeds to match theſe words,
Or may I neuer—
Do not chafe thee Coſin:
And you Achilles, let theſe threats alone
Till accident, or purpoſe bring you too't.
You may euery day enough of Hector.
If you haue ſtomacke. The generall ſtate I feare,
Can ſcarſe intreat you to be odde with him.
I pray you let vs ſee you in the field,
We haue had pelting Warres ſince you refus'd
The Grecians cauſe.
Doſt thou intreat me Hector?
To morrow do I meete thee fell as death,
To night, all Friends.
Thy hand vpon that match.
Firſt, all you Peeres of Greece go to my Tent,
There in the full conuiue you: Afterwards,
As Hectors leyſure, and your bounties ſhall
Concurre together, ſeuerally intreat him.
Beate lowd the Taborins, let the Trumpets blow,
That this great Souldier may his welcome know.
My Lord Ʋlyſſes, tell me I beſeech you,
In what place of the Field doth Calchas keepe?
At Menelaus Tent, moſt Princely Troylus,
There Diomed doth feaſt with him to night,
Who neither lookes on heauen, nor on earth,
But giues all gaze and bent of amorous view
On the faire Creſſid.
Shall I (ſweet Lord) be bound to thee ſo much,
After we part from Agamemnons Tent,
To bring me thither?
You ſhall command me ſir:
As gentle tell me, of what Honour was
This Creſſida in Troy, had ſhe no Louer there
That wailes her abſence?
O ſir, to ſuch as boaſting ſhew their ſcarres,
A mocke is due: will you walke on my Lord?
She was belou'd, ſhe lou'd; ſhe is, and dooth;
But ſtill ſweet Loue is food for Fortunes tooth.
Ile heat his blood with Greekiſh wine to night,
Which with my Cemitar Ile coole to morrow:
Patroclus, let vs Feaſt him to the hight.
Heere comes Therſites.
How now, thou core of Enuy?
Thou cruſty batch of Nature, what's the newes?
Why thou picture of what thou ſeem'ſt, & I doll of Ideot-worſhippers, here's a Letter for thee.
From whence, Fragment?
Why thou full diſh of Foole, from Troy.
Who keepes the Tent now?
The Surgeons box, or the Patients wound.
Well ſaid aduerſity, and what need theſe tricks?
Prythee be ſilent boy, I profit not by thy talke, thou art thought to be Achilles male Varlot.
Male Varlot you Rogue? What's that?
Why his maſculine Whore. Now the rotten diſeaſes of the South, guts-griping Ruptures, Catarres, Loades a grauell i' th' backe, Lethargies, cold Palſies, and the like, take and take againe, ſuch prepoſtrous diſcoueries.
Why thou damnable box of enuy thou, what mean'ſt thou to curſe thus?
Do I curſe thee?
Why no, you ruinous But, you whorſon indiſtinguiſhable Curre.
No? why art thou then exaſperate, thou idle, immateriall skiene of Sleyd ſilke; thou greene Sarcenet flap for a ſore eye, thou taſſell of a Prodigals purſe thou:
Ah how the poore world is peſtred with ſuch water-flies, diminutiues of Nature.
Out gall.
Finch Egge.
My ſweet Patroclus, I am thwarted quite
From my great purpoſe in to morrowes battell:
Heere is a Letter from Queene Hecuba,
A token from her daughter, my faire Loue,
Both taxing me, and gaging me to keepe
An Oath that I haue ſworne. I will not breake it,
Fall Greekes, faile Fame, Honor or go, or ſtay,
My maior vow lyes heere; this Ile obay:
Come, come Therſites, helpe to trim my Tent,
This night in banquetting muſt all be ſpent.
Away Patroclus.
With too much bloud, and too little Brain, theſe two may run mad: but if with too much braine, and too little blood, they do, Ile be a curer of madmen. Heere's Agamemnon, an honeſt fellow enough, and one that loues Quailes, but he has not ſo much Braine as eare-wax; and the goodly transformation of Iupiter there his Brother, the Bull, the primatiue Statue, and oblique memoriall of Cuckolds, a thrifty ſhooing-horne in a chaine, hanging at his Brothers legge, to what forme but that he is, ſhold wit larded with malice, and malice forced with wit, turne him too: to an Aſſe were nothing; hee is both Aſſe and Oxe; to an Oxe were nothing, hee is both Oxe and Aſſe: to be a Dogge, a Mule, a Cat, a Fitchew, a Toade, a Lizard, an Owle, a Puttocke, or a Herring without a Roe, I would not care: but to be Menelaus, I would conſpire againſt Deſtiny. Aske me not what I would be, if I were not Therſites: ſot I care not to bee the lowſe of a Lazar, ſo I were not Menelaus. Hoy-day, ſpirits and fires.
We go wrong, we go wrong.
No yonder'tis, there where we ſee the light.
I trouble you.
No, not a whit.
Heere comes himſelfe to guide you?
Welcome braue Hector, welcome Princes all.
So now faire Prince of Troy, I bid goodnight,
Aiax commands the guard to tend on you.
Thanks, and goodnight to the Greeks general.
Goodnight my Lord.
Goodnight ſweet Lord Menelaus.
Sweet draught: ſweet quoth-a? ſweet ſinke, ſweet ſure.
Goodnight and welcom, both at once, to thoſe that go, or tarry.
Goodnight.
Old Neſtor tarries, and you too Diomed,
Keepe Hector company an houre, or two.
I cannot Lord, I haue important buſineſſe,
The tide whereof is now, goodnight great Hector.
Giue me your hand.
Follow his Torch, he goes to Chalcas Tent,
Ile keepe you company.
Sweet ſir, you honour me.
And ſo good night.
Come, come, enter my Tent.
That ſame Diomed's a falſe-hearted Rogue, a moſt vniuſt Knaue; I will no more truſt him when hee leeres, then I will a Serpent when he hiſſes: he will ſpend his mouth & promiſe, like Brabler the Hound; but when he performes, Aſtronomers foretell it, that it is prodigious, there will come ſome change; the Sunne borrowes of the Moone when Diomed keepes his word. I will rather leaue to ſee Hector, then not to dogge him: they ſay, he keepes a Troyan Drab, and vſes the Traitour Chalcas his Tent. Ile after—Nothing but Letcherie? All incontinent Varlets.
What are you vp here ho? ſpeake?
Who cals?
Diomed, Chalcas (I thinke) wher's you Daughter?
She comes to you.
Stand where the Torch may not diſcouer vs.
Creſsid comes forth to him.
How now my charge?
Now my ſweet gardian: harke a word with you.
Yea, ſo familiar?
She will ſing any man at firſt ſight.
And any man may finde her, if he can take her life: ſhe's noted.
Will you remember?
Remember? yes.
Nay, but doe then; and let your minde be coupled with your words.
What ſhould ſhe remember?
Liſt?
Sweete hony Greek, tempt me no more to folly.
Roguery.
Nay then.
Ile tell you what.
Fo, fo, come tell a pin, you are a forſworne.—
In faith I cannot: what would you haue me do?
A iugling tricke, to be ſecretly open.
What did you ſweare you would beſtow on me?
I prethee do not hold me to mine oath,
Bid me doe not any thing but that ſweete Greeke.
Good night.
Hold, patience.
How now Troian?
Diomed.
No, no, good night: Ile be your foole no more.
Thy better muſt.
Harke one word in your eare.
O plague and madneſſe!
You are moued Prince, let vs depart I pray you,
Leſt your diſpleaſure ſhould enlarge it ſelfe
To wrathfull tearmes: this place is dangerous;
The time right deadly: I beſeech you goe.
Behold, I pray you.
Nay, good my Lord goe off:
You flow to great diſtraction; come my Lord?
I pray thee ſtay?
You haue not patience, come.
I pray you ſtay? by hell and hell torments,
I will not ſpeake a word.
And ſo good night.
Nay, but you part in anger.
Doth that grieue thee? O withered truth!
Why, how now Lord?
By Ioue I will be patient.
Gardian? why Greeke?
Fo, fo, adew, you palter,
In faith I doe not: come hither once againe.
You ſhake my Lord at ſomething; will you goe? you will breake out.
She ſtroakes his cheeke.
Come, come.
Nay ſtay, by Ioue I will not ſpeake a word.
There is betweene my will, and all offences,
A guard of patience; ſtay a little while.
How the diuell Luxury with his fat rumpe and potato finger, tickles theſe together: frye lechery, frye.
But will you then?
In faith I will lo; neuer truſt me elſe.
Giue me ſome token for the ſurety of it.
Ile fetch you one.
You haue ſworne patience.
Feare me not ſweete Lord.
I will not be my ſelfe, nor haue cognition
Of what I feele: I am all patience.
Now the pledge, now, now, now.
Here Diomed, keepe this Sleeue.
O beautie! where is thy Faith?
My Lord.
I will be patient, outwardly I will.
You looke vpon that Sleeue? behold it well:
He lou'd me: O falſe wench: giue't me againe.
Whoſe was't?
It is no matter now I haue't againe.
I will not meete with you to morrow night:
I prythee Diomed viſite me no more.
Now ſhe ſharpens: well ſaid Whetſtone.
I ſhall haue it.
What, this?
I that.
O all you gods! O prettie, prettie pledge;
Thy Maiſter now lies thinking in his bed
Of thee and me, and ſighes, and takes my Gloue,
And giues memoriall daintie kiſſes to it;
As I kiſſe thee.
Nay, doe not ſnatch it from me.
He that takes that, rakes my heart withall.
I had your heart before, this followes it.
I did ſweare patience.
You ſhall not haue it Diomed; faith you ſhall not:
Ile giue you ſomething elſe.
I will haue this: whoſe was it?
It is no matter.
Come tell me whoſe it was?
'Twas one that lou'd me better then you will.
But now you haue it, take it.
Whoſe was it?
By all Diana waiting women yond:
And by her ſelfe, I will not tell you whoſe.
To morrow will I weare it on my Helme,
And grieue his ſpirit that dares not challenge it.
Wert thou the diuell, and wor'ſt it on thy horne.
It ſhould be challeng'd.
Well, well, 'tis done, 'tis paſt; and yet it is not:
I will not keepe my word.
Why then farewell,
Thou neuer ſhalt mocke Diomed againe.
You ſhall not goe: one cannot ſpeake a word,
But it ſtrait ſtarts you.
I doe not like this fooling.
Nor I by Pluto: but that that likes not me, pleaſes me beſt.
What ſhall I come? the houre.
I, come: O Ioue! doe, come: I ſhall be plagu'd.
Farewell till then.
Good night: I prythee come:
Troylus farewell; one eye yet lookes on thee;
But with my heart, the other eye, doth ſee.
Ah poore our ſexe; this fault in vs I finde:
The errour of our eye, directs our minde.
What errour leads, muſt erre: O then conclude,
Mindes ſwai'd by eyes, are full of turpitude.
A proofe of ſtrength ſhe could not publiſh more;
Vnleſſe ſhe ſay, my minde is now turn'd whore.
Al's done my Lord.
It is.
Why ſtay we then?
To make a recordation to my ſoule
Of euery ſyllable that here was ſpoke:
But if I tell how theſe two did coact;
Shall I not lye, in publiſhing a truth?
Sith yet there is a credence in my heart:
An eſperance ſo obſtinately ſtrong,
That doth inuert that teſt of eyes and eares;
As if thoſe organs had deceptious functions,
Created onely to calumniate.
Was Creſſed here?
I cannot coniure Troian.
She was not ſure.
Moſt ſure ſhe was.
Why my negation hath no taſte of madneſſe?
Nor mine my Lord: Creſſid was here but now.
Let it not be beleeu'd for womanhood:
Thinke we had mothers; doe not giue aduantage
To ſtubborne Criticks, apt without a theame
For deprauation, to ſquare the generall ſex
By Creſſids rule. Rather thinke this not Creſſid.
What hath ſhe done Prince, that can ſoyle our mothers?
Nothing at all, vnleſſe that this were ſhe.
Will he ſwagger himſelfe out on's owne eyes?
This ſhe? no, this is Diomids Creſſid :
If beautie haue a ſoule, this is not ſhe:
If ſoules guide vowes; if vowes are ſanctimonie;
If ſanctimonie be the gods delight:
If there be rule in vnitie it ſelfe,
This is not ſhe: O madneſſe of diſcourſe
That cauſe ſets vp, with, and againſt thy ſelfe
By foule authoritie: where reaſon can reuolt
Without perdition, and loſſe aſſume all reaſon,
Without reuolt. This is, and is not Creſſid:
Within my ſoule, there doth conduce a fight
Of this ſtrange nature, that a thing inſeperate,
Diuides more wider then the skie and earth:
And yet the ſpacious bredth of this diuiſion▪
Admits no Orifex for a point as ſubtle,
As Ariachnes broken woofe to enter:
Inſtance, O inſtance! ſtrong as Plutoes gates:
Creſſid is mine, tied with the bonds of heauen;
Inſtance, O inſtance, ſtrong as heauen it ſelfe:
The bonds of heauen are ſlipt, diſſolu'd, and loos'd,
And with another knot fiue finger tied,
The fractions of her faith, orts of her loue:
The fragments, ſcraps, the bits, and greazie reliques,
Of her ore-eaten faith, are bound to Diomed
May worthy Troylus be halfe attached
With that which here his paſſion doth expreſſe?
I Greeke: and that ſhall be divulged well
In Characters, as red as Mars his heart
Inflam'd with Ʋenus: neuer did yong man fancy
With ſo eternall, and ſo fixt a ſoule.
Harke Greek: as much I doe Creſſida loue;
So much by weight, hate I her Diomed,
That Sleeue is mine, that heele beare in his Helme:
Were it a Caske compos'd by Vulcans skill,
My Sword ſhould bite it: Not the dreadfull ſpout,
Which Shipmen doe the Hurricano call,
Conſtring'd in maſſe by the almighty Fenne,
Shall dizzie with more clamour Neptunes eare
In his diſcent; then ſhall my prompted ſword,
Falling on Diomed.
Heele tickle it for his concupie.
O Creſſid! O falſe Creſſid! falſe, falſe, falſe:
Let all vntruths ſtand by thy ſtained name,
And theyle ſeeme glorious.
O containe your ſelfe:
Your paſſion drawes eares hither.
I haue beene ſeeking you this houre my Lord:
Hector by this is arming him in Troy.
Aiax your Guard, ſtaies to conduct you home.
Haue with you Prince: my curteous Lord adew:
Farewell reuolted faire: and Diomed,
Stand faſt, and weare a Caſtle on thy head.
Ile bring you to the Gates.
Accept diſtracted thankes.
Would I could meete that roague Diomed, I would croke like a Rauen: I would bode, I would bode: Patroclus will giue me any thing for the intelligence of this whore: the Parrot will not doe more for an Almond, then he for a commodious drab: Lechery, lechery, ſtill warres and lechery, nothing elſe holds faſhion. A burning diuell take them.
When was my Lord ſo much vngently temper'd,
To ſtop his eares againſt admoniſhment?
Vnarme, vnarme, and doe not fight to day.
You traine me to offend you: get you gone.
By the euerlaſting gods, Ile goe.
My dreames will ſure proue ominous to the day.
No more I ſay.
Where is my brother Hector?
Here ſiſter, arm'd, and bloudy in intent:
Conſort with me in loud and deere petition:
Purſue we him on knees: for I haue dreampt
Of bloudy turbulence; and this whole night
Hath nothing beene but ſhapes, and formes of ſlaughter.
O, 'tis true.
Ho? bid my Trumpet ſound.
No notes of ſallie, for the heauens, ſweet brother.
Begon I ſay: the gods haue heard me ſweare.
The gods are deafe to hot and peeuiſh vowes;
They are polluted offrings, more abhord
Then ſpotted Liuers in the ſacrifice.
O be perſwaded, doe not count it holy,
To hurt by being iuſt; it is as lawfull:
For we would count giue much to as violent thefts,
And rob in the behalfe of charitie.
It is the purpoſe that makes ſtrong the vowe;
But vowes to euery purpoſe muſt not hold:
Vnatme ſweete Hector.
Hold you ſtill I ſay;
Mine honour keepes the weather of my fate:
Life euery man holds deere, but the deere man
Holds honor farre more precious, deere, then life.
How now yong man? mean'ſt thou to fight to day?
Caſſandra, call my father to perſwade.
No faith yong Troylus; doffe thy harneſſe youth:
I am to day ith' vaine of Chiualrie:
Let grow thy Sinews till their knots be ſtrong;
And tempt nor yet the bruſhes of the warre.
Vnarme thee, goe; and doubt thou not braue boy,
Ile ſtand to day, for thee, and me, and Troy.
Brother, you haue a vice of mercy in you;
Which better fits a Lyon, then a man.
What vice is that? good Troylus chide me for it.
When many times the captiue Grecian fals,
Euen in the fanne and winde of your faire Sword:
You bid them riſe, and liue.
O 'tis faire play.
Fooles play, by heauen Hector.
How now? how now?
For th' loue of all the gods
Let's leaue the Hermit Pitty with our Mothers;
And when we haue our Armors buckled on,
The venom'd vengeance ride vpon our ſwords,
Spur them to ruthfull worke, reine them from ruth.
Fie ſauage, fie.
Hector, then 'tis warres.
Troylus, I would not haue you fight to day.
Who ſhould with-hold me?
Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars,
Beckning with fierie trunchion my retire;
Not Priamus, and Hecuba on knees;
Their eyes ore-galled with recourſe of teares;
Nor you my brother, with your true ſword drawne
Oppoſ'd to hinder me, ſhould ſtop my way:
But by my ruine.
Lay hold vpon him Priam, hold him faſt:
He is thy crutch; now if thou looſe thy ſtay,
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
Fall all together.
Come Hector, come, goe backe:
Thy wife hath dreampt: thy mother hath had viſions;
Caſſandra doth foreſee; and I my ſelfe,
Am like a Prophet ſuddenly enapt, to tell thee that this day is ominous:
Therefore come backe.
Aeneas is a field,
And I do ſtand engag'd to many Greekes,
Euen in the faith of valour, to appeare
This morning to them.
I, but thou ſhalt not goe,
I muſt not breake my faith:
You know me dutifull, therefore deare ſir,
Let me not ſhame reſpect; but giue me leaue
To take that courſe by your conſent and voice,
Which you doe here forbid me, Royall Priam.
O Priam, yeelde not to him.
Doe not deere father.
Andromache I am offended with you:
Vpon the loue you beare me, get you in.
This fooliſh, dreaming, ſuperſtitious girle,
Makes all theſe bodements.
O farewell, deere Hector:
Looke how thou dieſt; looke how thy eye turnes pale:
Looke how thy wounds doth bleede at many vents:
Harke how Troy roares; how Hecuba cries out;
How poore Andromache ſhrils her dolour forth;
Behold diſtraction, frenzie, and amazement,
Like witleſſe Antickes one another meete,
And all cry Hector, Hectors dead: O Hector!
Away, away.
Farewell: yes, ſoft: Hector I take my leaue;
Thou do'ſt thy ſelfe, and all our Troy deceiue.
You are amaz'd, my Liege, at her exclaime:
Goe in and cheere the Towne, weele forth and fight:
Doe deedes of praiſe, and tell you them at night.
Farewell: the gods with ſafetie ſtand about thee.
They are at it, harke: proud Diomed, beleeue
I come to looſe my arme, or winne my ſleeue.
Doe you heare my Lord? do you heare?
What now?
Here's a Letter come from yond poore girle.
Let me reade.
A whorſon tiſicke, a whorſon raſcally tiſicke, ſo troubles me; and the fooliſh fortune of this girle, and what one thing, what another, that I ſhall leaue you one o' th's dayes: and I haue a rheume in mine eyes too; and ſuch an ache in my bones; that vnleſſe a man were curſt, I cannot tell what to thinke on't. What ſayes ſhee there?
Words, words, meere words, no matter from the heart;
Th' effect doth operate another way.
Goe winde to winde, there turne and change together:
My loue with words and errors ſtill ſhe feedes;
But edifies another with her deedes.
Why, but heare you?
Hence brother lackie; ignomie and ſhame
Purſue thy life, and liue aye with thy name.
Now they are clapper-clawing one another, Ile goe looke on: that diſſembling abhominable varlet Diomede, has got that ſame ſcuruie, doting, fooliſh yong knaues Sleeue of Troy, there in his Helme: I would faine ſee them meet; that, that ſame yong Troian aſſe, that loues the whore there, might ſend that Greekiſh whore-maiſterly villaine, with the Sleeue, backe to the diſſembling luxurious drabbe, of a ſleeueleſſe errant. O' th' tother ſide, the pollicie of thoſe craftie ſwearing raſcals; that ſtole old Mouſe-eaten dry cheeſe, Neſtor: and that ſame dog-foxe Vliſſes is not prou'd worth a Black-berry. They ſet me vp in pollicy, that mungrill curre Aiax, againſt that dogge of as bad a kinde, Achilles. And now is the curre Aiax prouder then the curre Achilles, and will not arme to day. Whereupon, the Grecians began to proclaime barbariſme; and pollicie growes into an ill opinion.
Soft, here comes Sleeue, and th' other.
Flye not: for ſhould'ſt thou take the Riuer Stix,
I would ſwim after.
Thou do'ſt miſcall retire:
I doe not flye; but aduantagious care
Withdrew me from the oddes of multitude:
Haue at thee?
Hold thy whore Grecian: now for thy whore Troian: Now the Sleeue, now the Sleeue.
What art thou Greek? art thou for Hectors match?
Art thou of bloud, and honour?
No, no: I am a raſcall: a ſcuruie railing knaue: a very filthy roague.
I doe beleeue thee, liue.
God a mercy, that thou wilt beleeue me; but a plague breake thy necke—for frighting me: what's become of the wenching rogues? I thinke they haue ſwallowed one another. I would laugh at that miracle—yet in a ſort, lecherie eares it ſelfe: Ile ſeeke them.
Goe, goe, my ſeruant, take thou Troylus Horſe;
Preſent the faire Steede to my Lady Creſſid:
Fellow, commend my ſeruice to her beauty;
Tell her, I haue chaſtiſ'd the amorous Troyan.
And am her Knight by proofe.
I goe my Lord.
Renew, renew, the fierce Polidamus
Hath beate downe Menon: baſtard Margarelon
Hath Doreus priſoner.
And ſtands Caloſſus-wiſe wauing his beame,
Vpon the paſhed courſes of the Kings:
Epiſtropus and Cedus, Polixines is ſlaine;
Amphimacus, and Thous deadly hurt;
Patroclus tane or ſlaine, and Palamedes
Sore hurt and bruiſed; the dreadfull Sagittary
Appauls our numbers, haſte we Diomed
To re-enforcement, or we periſh all.
Coe beare Patroclus body to Achilles,
And bid the ſnaile-pac'd Aiax arme for ſhame;
There is a thouſand Hectors in the field:
Now here he fights on Galathe his Horſe,
And there lacks worke: ano he's there a foote,
And there they flye or dye, like ſcaled ſculs,
Before the belching Whale; then is he yonder,
And there the ſtraying Greekes, ripe for his edge,
Fall downe before him, like the mowers ſwath;
Here, there, and euery where, he leaues and takes;
Dexteritie ſo obaying appetite,
That what he will, he does, and does ſo much,
That proofe is call'd impoſſibility.
Oh, courage, courage Princes: great Achilles
Is arming, weeping, curſing, vowing vengeance;
Patroclus wounds haue rouz'd his drowzie bloud,
Together with his mangled Myrmidons,
That noſeleſſe, handleſſe, hackt and chipt, come to him;
Crying on Hector. Aiax hath loſt a friend,
And foames at mouth, and he is arm'd, and at it:
Roaring for Troylus; who hath done to day.
Mad and fantaſticke execution;
Engaging and redeeming of himſelfe,
With ſuch a careleſſe force, and forceleſſe care,
As if that luck in very ſpight of cunning, bad him win all.
Troylus, thou coward Troylus.
I, there, there.
So, ſo, we draw together.
Where is this Hector?
Come, come, thou boy-queller, ſhew thy face:
Know what it is to meete Achilles angry.
Hector, wher's Hector? I will none but Hector.
Troylus, thou coward Troylus, ſhew thy head.
Troylus, I ſay, wher's Troylus?
What would'ſt thou?
I would correct him.
Were I the Generall,
Thou ſhould'ſt haue my office,
Ere that correction: Troylus I ſay, what Troylus?
Oh traitour Diomed!
Turne thy falſe face thou traytor,
And pay thy life thou oweſt me for my horſe.
Ha, art thou there?
Ile fight with him alone, ſtand Diomed.
He is my prize, I will not looke vpon.
Come both you coging Greekes, haue at you both.
Yea Troylus? O well fought my yongeſt Brother.
Now doe I ſee thee; haue at thee Hector.
Pauſe if thou wilt.
I doe diſdaine thy curteſie, proud Troian;
Be happy that my armes are out of vſe:
My reſt and negligence befriends thee now,
But thou anon ſhalt heare of me againe:
Till when, goe ſeeke thy fortune.
Fare thee well:
I would haue beene much more a freſher man,
Had I expected thee: how now my Brother?
Aiax hath tane Aeneas; ſhall it be?
No, by the flame of yonder glorious heauen,
He ſhall not carry him: Ile be tane too,
Or bring him off: Fate heare me what I ſay;
I wreake nor, though thou end my life to day.
Stand, ſtand, thou Greeke,
Thou art a goodly marke:
No? wilt thou not? I like thy armour well,
Ile fruſh it, and vnlocke the riuets all,
But Ile be maiſter of it: wilt thou not beaſt abide?
Why then flye on, Ile hunt thee for thy hide.
Come here about me you my Myrmidons:
Marke what I ſay; attend me where I wheele:
Strike not a ſtroake, but keepe your ſelues in breath;
And when I haue the bloudy Hector found,
Empale him with your weapons round about:
In felleſt manner execute your arme.
Follow me ſirs, and my proceedings eye;
It is decreed, Hector the great muſt dye.
The Cuckold and the Cuckold maker are at it: now bull, now dogge, lowe; Paris lowe; now my double hen'd ſparrow; lowe Paris, lowe; the bull has the game: ware hornes ho?
Turne ſlaue and fight.
What art thou?
A Baſtard Sonne of Priams.
I am a Baſtard too, I loue Baſtards, I am a Baſtard begot, Baſtard inſtructed, Baſtard in minde, Baſtard in valour, in euery thing illegitimate: one Beare will not bite another, and wherefore ſhould one Baſtard? take heede, the quarrel's moſt ominous to vs: if the Sonne of a whore fight for a whore, he tempts iudgement: farewell Baſtard.
The diuell take thee coward.
Moſt putrified core ſo faire without:
Thy goodly armour thus hath coſt thy life.
Now is my daies worke done; Ile take good breath:
Reſt Sword, thou haſt thy fill of bloud and death.
Looke Hector how the Sunne begins to ſet;
How vgly night comes breathing at his heeles,
Euen with the vaile and darking of the Sunne.
To cloſe the day vp, Hectors life is done.
I am vnarm'd, forgoe this vantage Greeke.
Strike fellowes, ſtrike, this is the man I ſeeke.
So Illion fall thou: now Troy ſinke downe;
Here lyes thy heart, thy ſinewes, and thy bone.
On Myrmidons, cry you all a maine,
Achilles hath the mighty Hector ſlaine.
Harke, a retreat vpon our Grecian part.
The Troian Trumpets ſounds the like my Lord.
The dragon wing of night ore-ſpreds the earth
And ſtickler-like the Armies ſeperates
My halfe ſupt Sword, that frankly would haue fed,
Pleas'd with this dainty bed; thus goes to bed.
Come, tye his body to my horſes tayle;
Along the field, I will the Troian traile.
Harke, harke, what ſhout is that?
Peace Drums.
Achilles, Achilles, Hector's ſlaine, Achilles.
The bruite is, Hector's ſlaine, and by Achilles.
If it be ſo, yet bragleſſe let it be:
Great Hector was a man as good as he.
March patiently along; let one be ſent
To pray Achilles ſee vs at our Tent.
If in his death the gods haue vs befrended,
Great Troy is ours, and our ſharpe wars are ended.
Stand hoe, yet are we maiſters of the field,
Neuer goe home; here ſtarue we out the night.
Hector is ſlaine.
Hector? the gods forbid.
Hee's dead: and at the murtherers Horſes taile,
In beaſtly ſort, drag'd through the ſhamefull Field▪
Frowne on you heauens, effect your rage with ſpeede:
Sit gods vpon your throanes, and ſmile at Troy.
I ſay at once, let your briefe plagues be mercy,
And linger not our ſure deſtructions on.
My Lord, you doe diſcomfort all the Hoſte.
You vnderſtand me not, that tell me ſo:
I doe not ſpeake of flight, of feare, of death,
But dare all imminence that gods and men,
Addreſſe their dangers in. Hector is gone:
Who ſhall tell Priam ſo? or Hecuba?
Let him that will a ſcreechoule aye be call'd,
Goe in to Troy, and ſay there, Hector's dead:
There is a word will Priam turne to ſtone;
Make wels, and Niobes of the maides and wiues;
Coole ſtatues of the youth: and in a word,
Scarre Troy out of it ſelfe. But march away,
Hector is dead: there is no more to ſay.
Stay yet: you vile abhominable Tents,
Thus proudly pight vpon our Phrygian plaines:
Let Titan riſe as early as he dare,
Ile through, and through you; & thou great ſiz'd coward:
No ſpace of Earth ſhall ſunder our two hates,
Ile haunt thee, like a wicked conſcience ſtill,
That mouldeth goblins ſwift as frenſies thoughts.
Strike a free march to Troy, with comfort goe:
Hope of reuenge, ſhall hide our inward woe.
But heare you? heare you?
Hence broker, lackie, gnomy, and ſhame
Purſue thy life, and liue aye with thy name.
A goodly medcine for mine aking bones: oh world, world, world! thus is the poore agent diſpſde: Oh traitours and bawdes; how earneſtly are you ſet aworke, and how ill requited? why ſhould our indeuour be ſo deſir'd, and the performance ſo loath'd? What Verſe for it? what inſtance for it? let me ſee.
Full merrily the humble Bee-doth ſing,
Till he hath loſt his hony, and his ſting.
And being once ſubdu'd in armed taile,
Sweete hony, and ſweete notes together faile.
Good traders in the fleſh, ſet this in your painted cloathes;
As many as be here of Panders hall,
Your eyes halfe out, weepe out at Pandar's fall:
Or if you cannot weepe, yet giue ſome grones;
Though not for me yet for your aking bones:
Brethren and ſiſters of the hold-dore trade,
Some two months hence, my will ſhall here be made:
It ſhould be now, but that my feare is this:
Some galled Gooſe of Wincheſter would hiſſe:
Till then, Ile ſweate, and ſeeke about for eaſes;
And at that time be queath you my diſeaſes.