THe Night is gon: and dredfull day
begins at length t'appeere:
And Phoebus all bedim'e with Clowdes,
himſelfe aloft doth reere.
And glyding forth with deadly hue,
a dolefull blaſe in Skies
Doth beare: Great terror & diſmay
to the beholders Eyes.
Now ſhall the houſes voyde bee ſeene, with Plague deuoured quight?
And ſlaughter that the night hath made, ſhall day bring forth to light.
Doth any man in Princely throne reioyce? O brittle Ioy,
How many ills? how fayre a Face? and yet how much annoy
In thee doth lurke, and hidden lies? what heapes of endles ſtrife?
They iudge amiſſe, that deeme the Prince to haue the happy life.
For as the Mountaynes huge and bie, the bluſtring wiudes withſtand.
And craggy Rocks, the belching fluds do daſh, and driue fro land:
Though that the Seas in quiet are, and calme on euery ſide:
So kingdoms great all Windes and Waues of Fortune muſt abide.
How well ſhund I my Father deare Polybius Scepters late?
Exil'de, bereft of carefull feare, in Pilgrims happy ſtate:
I call the Gods to witnes this, and Stars that glyde in Skyes.
A Kingdome is befauln to mee. I frare leaſt thereof ryſe
A miſchiefe, (mighty Ioue,) to great I feare, alas I feare
Leaſt theſe my handes haue ret the life, or thee my Father deare.
Apollo byds mee this beware, and yet a miſchiefe more Foretels.
Can any greater bee than that you tolde before?
Of Father ſlayne by ſonnes own hand?
(O thrice vnhappy ſtate.)
With horror all diſmaide I ſtand in dred of threatned fate.
I am aſhamed my deſtinies fowle (O Queene) to thunder out,
And openly to blaſe my feare my trembling minde doth dout:
Yet out it goes. Phoebus me bids my Mothers Bed to fly.
As though that I her Sonne, with her inceſtuouſly ſhould ly.
This feare, and onely this me cauſde my fathers kingdome great
For to forſake. I fled not thence when feare the minde doth beat.
The reſtleſſe thought ſtill dreds the thing, it knows can neuer chaunce.
Such fanſies now torment my heart, my ſafety to aduaunce,
And eke thyne euer ſacred lawes (O Nature) for to keepe
A ſtately Scepter I forſooke, yet ſecret feare doth creepe
Within my breaſt: and frets it ſtill with doubt and diſcontent,
And inward pangues which ſecretly my thoughts a ſunder rent.
So though no cauſe of dred I ſee, yet feare and dred I all,
And ſcant in credit with my ſelfe, my thoughts my minde appall
That I cannot perſwaded be though reaſon tell mee no,
But that the Web is weauing ſtill of my decreed wo.
For what ſhould I ſuppoſe the cauſe? a Plague that is ſo generall,
And Cadmus country wholy ſpoyles, and ſpreds it ſelfe through all?
Should mee, amongeſt ſo huge a heape of plagued Bodies ſpare?
And we alone amongſt the reſt reſerude to miſchiefes are?
O heauy hap. And bide I ſtil alone the ſpoyle to ſee?
Of Cities great, of men, of beaſts, by plague that waſted bee?
And thou amongſt ſo many ils, a happy lyfe to lead,
Couldſt once perſwade thy ſelfe (O wretch) without all feare or dread.
Of Phoebus ſecret Iudgements to, and that in Kinges eſtate?
Thou, thou, infected haſt the ayre, in ſuch a filthy rate.
Thou art the onely cauſe of woe: by thee theſe euils riſe,
By thee to graue on ſuch a ſorte, this wretched people plies.
The firy flaming frying heate, afflicted hearts that waſts,
Is not relieude as wont it was by cold and pleaſaunt blaſts.
The gentle weſtern windes haue left with healthfull puffes to blow,
And now the fiery Dog with blaſe of boyling heate doth glow.
The Sunne in Leo burns ſo hoate, and ſo the earth doth broyle,
That fluds and hearbes are dryed vp, and nought remaynes but ſoyle,
So throughly ſchorcht and ſtued with heate, that moiſture all is gone,
And now amongſt ſo many fluds, remaynes alas not one.
The places dry are onely ſeene the ſtreames are drunken vp.
And water that doth yet remayne: the ſoaking Earth doth ſup.
The Moone with clowds quight over caſt, all ſadly ſhe glides,
And dolefull darkſom ſhades of night the who worlde ouer hides.
No Star on high at all doth ſhine, but black and hue
Hath ouerſhaded all the Skyes, whence deadly miſts enſue.
The corne that wonted was to growe and fruitfully to ſpring,
Now to the voyded Barnes nought els, but empty ſtalkes doth bring.
No part of all our kingdome is free from deſtruction:
But all together run and ruſh, to vtter confuſion.
The old men with the yong (alas:) the with the chylde
The plague conſumes. Both man & wife, all beaſts both tame & wylde
Are ſpoyled by the Peſtilence. No pompe at all remaynes,
That wonted was in Funeralles, to eaſe the mourners paynes.
Alas this ſpoile of people made, by plague hath dryde myne eyes:
And ſecretly within my breaſt, the griefe it boyling fryes.
And that, that wonted is to hap, in moſt extremeſt ills:
My tearees are dry and glutting griefe my wretched breaſt it fills.
The craſed father beares the ſon, vnto theyr dampiſh graues:
And after him with burden like, the Mother comes and raues:
And euen lamenting as they ſtand, both they fall,
And mourners new in like eſtate, for them they call.
Who likewiſe in the midſt of all their oyle and paynfull payne
Do drop into the graue they digd, and ſo the place doe gayne
That was prepar' de for others erſt. A hell it were to heere
The horror, and the miſeries that euery where appere.
A Tombe is made for noble men, faſt on the people die,
And in, their burdens fling. Great Pieres all vnregarded lye.
For lack of Graues, to Aſhes cleane their bodyes ſome doe waſt▪
And ſome halfe burnt doe leaue them there, and home away for haſt
They run, & more they fetch, and then wood, fier, graue, and all
Doth want. And downe for very griefe the wretched myſers fall.
No prayers auaile. No Arte can help this raging Plague t'appeaſe:
For none almoſt is left aliue each others woe to eaſe.
Before thine aulters heere O God my feeble hands I hold,
Requiring all my deſtinies, at once with courage bold.
And that by death I may preuent, my Countrey preſt to fall.
For this, and only this (O God) vpon thy name I call.
Let mee not be the laſt that dies: The laſt that goes to Graue.
Graunt this, and then (O mighty Ioue) my full requeſt I haue.
O cruell Gods vnkinde: O more than thriſe vnhappy Fates:
That onely mee denied is, that lyghtes on all Eſtates.
I meane a ſpeedy death (alas) theſe euils to preuent
And deadly woe rage itorment.
Leaue of thy blubbring kingdomes foylde
With rotten plagues & bile, and graves ech where diſpoylde.
All which diſeaſes thou vnhappy gueſt didſt bring with thee
Diſpatch. Away. Gpe hence. At leaſt, vnto thy parents flee.
What bootes it , great wt piteous plaints to aggreate.
Stoutly to beare aduerſ, eſtate.
When dred and daunger moſt aſſay ▪ when cruell Cares doe cruſh
Thy princely breaſt, spant thou moſt to beare and bide the puſh.
It is no poin of courage ſlout to yeelde to fortunes frown.
Nay, Fear could nu cauſe mee ſloupe nor Fortune caſt mee down.
My manly winds was neuer thraule to vaine and peauh feares,
But euermore in each courage beares.
No not a thouſand gliſterg ſwords, nor Mars himſelfe in fielde.
Can once diſmay my Countenuance, or cauſe my heart to yeelde.
The very Giaunts fierce and huge in fight withſtand I dare.
That Monſter Sohinx whoſe riddels through the world renowmed are▪
Could not diſmay my deedles heart, nor cauſe my courage ſlide
For all the terrors I behold. I did that Fury byde.
I ſaw him belching Gbs of bloud, I vwde full well the fielde
That all to lay with bloud, and bones quight ouerheelde.
And when y• he on Mountaynes top with mouth full huge to ſee.
Stoode gaping all with greedy Iawes to feede and pray on mee,
Oft fluttering with his fearefull wynges and ſhaking oft his rayſe,
Began full like a Lyon with threates mee to aſſayle.
Of whom ſtraight way the Riddell I, it ruſh into myne ares
With roring ſound His winges he claps, the Rock for haſt hee teares.
Deſtring with my Bowels ſtill his greedy Iawes to glu:
But I full ſoone aſſoyled had the queſtion that he put.
And all the ſubtile poincts ther of, and twiſted knos vntwinde.
What makes you wiſh for death to late, and waue your wordes in wind.
You might haue died than (you know) for Sphinx ſo nobly ſlain.
This kingdom vnto you, and yours for euer ſhall remain.
The aſhes of that Monſter vile, agaynſt vs doth rebell.
That vile miſhapen lothſome Beaſt, that raging Feend of Hell.
Is cauſe of all the plague that doth this mournfull City ſmight.
Now only this remaynes alone, if Phoebus heauenly might,
Can any meanes inuent for vs, or way of mercy make:
Whereby theſe burning Plagues at length may haply chaſice to ſlake.
O More then thriſe renowied Stock
of auncient Cadmus Race.
O mighty Thebes City grear,
O heauy ruthfull Caſe.
Loe now you lye all deſolate,
with Plague deuoured quight.
Both you and all your Huſbandmen.
(Oh miſerable ſight.)
O fowle and feareful Fate (alas) what cauſeth all this aid?
O God whence ſprings this Peſtylence that vs ſo?
No age, no ſhape, no forme is ſparde, but all confounded lye.
Thus happieſt now y• man I count, whoſe chaunce was firſt to dye.
For hee hath ſhund a thouſand ils, which wretched Eyes haue ſeene:
And miſchiefes great that vs doe prſſe from him are taken cleane.
O God withhold thy fury great, thy Plagues from vs redu.
Ceaſſe of afflicted Soules to ſcourge, who thee, nd oue.
Powre downe on them diſeaſes fowle, that them deſerued haue.
A Guerdon iuſt for ſinne (Oh God) this this of thee wee aue,
And onely this. We aſke no more, the cauſe and all is thyne,
A thing not vſde of Gods it is, from pity to declyne.
My heart doth vant, and trembling cold through all my lims doth run,
As oft as I remembring, count the noble Stockes vun,
By death and dolfull deſtenies that ouerwhelmed lye,
And yet alas the people ſtil to Graue doe faſter hye.
In long Aray all in a rancke by thouſandes on ao,
On euery ſide, in euery ſtreate to buriall faſt, they goe.
The ſeuen broade wyde open Gates, are not forway,
But throngd the people peſtred ſtand ſtill in a fearefull ſtay,
And in the mydſt of all theyr toyle with corſes on their backes,
The number that before doth poaſt the hinder number ſlackes▪
The corſes in the ſtreates doe lye and Graue on Graue is made.
But all in vayne. For nought it boots the plague beſtayde.
The ſacrifices don to Gods hae to to ill ſucceſſe.
And ſuch ſtraunge ſights & ſignes doe riſe that nought els I can geſſe,
But that at hand with gaſtly pawes, is vtter deſtruction,
With thouſand ills accompayned and extreme confuſion.
The ſheepe of rot by heapes as thick, as dogges doe fall and de▪
And belching out their waſted lunges, on grounde doe ſprawling lye.
And I my ſelfe of late did ſee: (a ſight vnſeene before,)
As our high prieſt ſtoode ſacrifiſing at the Temple dore,
And ſtrake with grieuous bloudy wound the golden horned Bull
When downe with liueles lump he drop and members made full dull.
And all the woude wide bleeding gapes & black goars bloud out ſpues.
And yet the blade vnſprinckled was. The bloud it buying
And bubbles on the ground. Alas what do theſe things porend?
Oh mighty Ioue at length vouchſafe ſome good and hay end.
At length withhold thy hd (O God) and health vnto vs ſend.
Nothing (alas) remaynes at all, in woed old eſtate,
But all are tued to pt downe, quight voyd and deſolate
The famting horſe for banck his burden tats.
Aud after on :
Who cries for help that bide
Unkept: vnknowen wayes and pathe do raunge and ouerſtride.
The Bull and me ae in field all faintyng lyes.
And, all his flocke , fely Shephard dyes.
The his zatal breath expiers
And to the hisfaſt eſters.
The do lyue in aretched peace.
The rage, and wrathful founds of ramping Lions ceaſe.
The vengeaunce Beares are now as ame as ſheepe
The vgly Serpent that was wont▪ the Rocky Denes to keepe.
Oft quaffing poiſoned in inward hea. ſhee boyles,
for lenger lye ſhe toyles.
The woods are withfreſh and lyuely hue▪
The wonted ſhades are gon. All things are quight out of their Que:
No greeniſh graſſe on ground doth grow, the earth no moiſture ſoupes.
The Vine withoute ap, his drowſy head down drowpes.
What ſhal I ſay? all but of courſe,
And as they worſ and worſe.
O mighty yls?
When ceaſe loud thus fierce and raging ſpils?
I thinck but we almoſt alyue, there do no men remayne:
Whom Darrs on earth haue left vnſlayne.
I thinke ſhades of hell where filthy fluds do flow,
Where plages and vile diſeaſes too, where dredfull horrors grow,
And miſchiefes on vs throw,
With Botch & blae of ſundry kindes which ſother blaſts do blow,
And wrekful vexed hagges of hell do dreath and on vs bringe:
The angry feddes of hell I thinke their vengeace, on vs flinge
And out their mortall poyſon ſpue which they agaynſt vs beare.
Lo ſee how greedy death on vs with ſcowling eyes doth leare.
See, ſee. Oh Ioue how faſt hee throwes his Dartes. Not one he ſpares
But all confounds. His thretning force, withſtand no Creature dares.
No doubt the lothſom Feryman the ſinfull ſoules that traynes
Through ſtincking fluds, his labour loths that he for vs ſuſtaynes.
Such preſſe by plūps to him is made which ſtill renews his paynes.
But harke yet mōſters more thē theſe, the Fame abroade doth fly
That helliſhe Dogges wt bawling ſound were heard to howle and cry,
And y• the ground with trembling ſhooke, and vnder feele did moue.
And dreadfull blaſing Comets bright were ſeene in Skies aboue.
And gaſtly ſhapes of men beſides, to wander on the ground.
And wood, and trees on euery ſyde, did fearefully reſound.
Beſides all this ſtraūg Ghoſts were ſeene in places where they ſtoode.
And Ryuers more then one or two, that ran all blacke goorb bloode.
O cruell plague, O vile diſcaſe, farre worſe then ſpeedy death.
O wee vnhappy thriſe and more, who doe prolonge our breath.
In theſe accurſed dayes and tymes. But harke to mee a while.
When firſt this Iothſome plague begins theſe Myſers to defile,
It takes them thus. A feareful Cold through al their bones doth rn,]
And Cold and Heate togeather mixt, their ſees all benome.
Than litle lothſome markes appeare, and all their bodies ſpot.
And all their members ſlaming glow, and burning faſt doe rot.
The Lights, the Lungs, the heart, the Guts, and all that inwarde lies.
And all the ſecret partes iſcorcht, with deadly, I fier fries.
The bloud all clotterd in their Cheekes, in cluſter lies by lumps.
And it and heate together makes, great, ſtraung, and ruddy bumps.
And bloud and fleſh congeled ſtands, in Face as ſtiffe as ſtake.
And Eyes in head faſt fixed ſet, and often trickling make.
And downe apace whole fluds they ſteame, and clots & drops doe trill,
And all the ſkin from of their Face, by flakes and ſcales doth pill.
A thouſand fearefull ſounds at once, into their eares doe ruſh.
And lothſome bloud out of their Noſe, by ſtilling ſtreames doth guſh.
The very anguiſh of their heart doth cauſe them for to ſhake.
And what with payne & heale, and feare, their weried lims doe quake.
Then ſome the rūning Ryuers haunt, and ſome on grond ce .
And ſome agayne their thirſt to ſlake, cold water gulping .
Thus all our country oſt with plague in Griefy it waltering .
And ſtill deſiring for to dye, a thouſand deathes it dyes.
But God to heare them then is preſt: and death to none .
Beſydes al this, the church ſome do frequent: but not to pray,
But onely for to glut the Gods, with that that they do ſay.
But who is this that comes to Court in haſt with poaſting pace?
What? iſt Creon that noble Prince (for deedes and ſtately race?)
Or doth my mynd oppreſt with care thinges falſe for true contriue?
Creon it is long looked for, his ſight doth me reuyue.
FOr feare my body chilles, alas,
and trembling all I ſtand
In quakinge dread. I ſeke and toyle,
theſe miſchiefes to withſtand.
But al in vayne I ſpend my thoughtes
it wil not be, I ſee,
As long as all my ſences thus
by cares diſtracted bee.
My mynd deſyrous ſtil (Oh God,) the truth for to vnfold,
With doubtful Dread is daunted ſo, that it can ſcant vpholde
It ſelfe. O Brother beare, if way or meane of health thou know,
Declare it out and ſticke not all the truth to me to ſhow.
The Oracle (moſt noble king) ys darke, and hidden lies.
Who doubtful health to ſicke men brings, all health to thē denies.
Apolloes vſe yt is the troth in darkeſome dens to hold.
And Oedipus of Gods it hath thinges hidden to vnfold:
Speake out, tell all, and ſpare not man: all doubtes I can diſcus.
Apollo then (moſt noble King) himſelfe commaundeth thus.
By exile purge the Princes ſeat, and plague vvith vengeance due
That haples vvretch, vvhoſe bloudy handes of late King Laius ſlue:
Before that this perfourmed bee, no hope of milder ayer:
Wherfore do this (O King) or elſe All hope of helpe diſpayre.
Durſt any man on earth attem pte, that noble Prince to ſlay?
Shew me the man that I may him diſpatch out of the way.
God graunt I may it ſafely tel: the hearyng was to terrible,
My ſenſes all amaſed are: it is a thing ſo horrible,
That I abhorre to vtter it (oh God) for feare I quake
And euen at the very thought my lims beginne to ſhake.
Aſſoone as I Appollos Church, had entred in affrayd,
Vppon my face flat downe I fell, and thus to him I prayd.
Oh God if euer thou didſt rue, on wretched misers ſtate,
If euer men oppreſt thou eaſd, or didſt their cares abate,
If euer thou in preſent neede didſt preſent helpe declare,
If euer thou afflicted Hartes with cares conſumd didſt ſpare:
Shew now thy wonted elemency and pitty knowne of yore.
Scant had I ſayd: Refounding all the mountaynes thondring rore:
And filthy feendes ſpout out their flames out of their darkſome caues.
And woods do quake, and hilles do moue, and vp the ſurging waues
Do mount vnto the ſkies aloft, and I amaſed ſtand.
Still looking for an aunſweare at Apollos ſacred hand.
When out with ruffled hayre diſguiſdth: Prophet comes at laſt:
And when that ſhee had felt the heate of mighty Phoebus blaſt.
All puffyng out ſhe ſwelles in rage, and pattring ſtill ſhe raues,
And ſcant ſhe entred had into Apollos ſhyning caues,
When out a thundring voyce doth bruſt that's farre aboue mans reach.
So dreadful ſeemed then to me the mighty Phoebus ſpeach.
Than thus he ſpake aud thus at length into myne cares he ruſht
Whyle ſprawling ſtil the Prophet lay before the doores in duſt.
The Thebane City neuer ſhal be free frō plagues (quoth he,)
Except from thenſe the Kingkiller forthwith expulſed bee:
Vnto Apollo knowen he was, or euer he was borne.
Do this: or elſe no hope of health, to this, the gods haue ſworn.
And as for thee, thou ſhalt not long in quiet ſtate indure,
But with thy ſelf wage war thou ſhalt & war thou ſhalt procure
Vnto thy children deare: & crepe agayn thou ſhalt into thy mothers wombe.
Loke what the Gods commaunded haue accompliſhed ſhalbe.
Nor neuer ſhal theſe eyes of myne abyde the day to ſee,
A King of kingdome ſpoyld by force, by guyle or craſt ſuppreſt.
A kinge to kinges the prop ought be, and chiefeſt cauſe of reſt:
No man regardes his death at all whom liuing he doth feare,
Great cauſe makes mee my Princes death conceale and cloſiy beare
Ought any cauſe of feare or griefe, the duty for to let?
The threatning of the propheſyes, do ſtil my breaſt beſet.
Let vs (ſith God cōmaunds) forthwith ſome good attonement make
If any way, or meanes there be their wrathful rage to ſlake.
Thou God that ſits on ſeate on high, and al the world doſt guide,
And thou by whoſe commaundement the Starres in Skies do glide:
Thou, thou that onely ruler art of Seas, of Floods, and all.
On thee and on thy Godhead great, for theſe requeſtes I call.
Who ſo hath ſlayne king Laius, oh Ioue I do thee pray.
Let thouſand ils vpon him fall, before his dying day.
Let him no health ne comfort haue, but al to cruſht with cares,
Conſume his wretched yeares in griefe, & though that death him ſpares
Awhyle. Yet miſchiefes all, at length vppon him light.
With all the euils vnder Sun, that vgly monſter ſmight.
In exile let him liue a Slaue, the rated courſe of life.
In ſhame, in care, in peuury in daunger and in ſtrife.
Let no man on him pity take, let all men him reuyle.
Let him his Mothers ſacred Bed inceſtuouſly defyle.
Lim him his father kill. And yet let him do miſchiefes more.
What thing more haynous can I wiſh then that I wiſht before?
Let him do all thoſe illes I ſay, that I haue ſhund and paſt.
All thoſe and more (if more may be) oh God vpon him caſt.
Let him no hope of pardon haue: but ſue and all in vayne.
All helliſh Furies on him light, for to encreaſe his payne.
O Ioue powre downe thy fury greate, thy thūdring thumpes out throw
Let Boreas boyſterous blaſtes and ſtormy plagues vpon him blow
Conſume him quight. Fre out his guttes wt pockes and botches vile
Let all diſeaſes on him light that wretched bodyes fyle.
Let theſe and more (if more may be) vppon that Monſter fall.
Let Harpies pawes and greedy paunche deuure his members all.
Let no man him regard: or ſeeke his limmes in grade to lay:
But let him dye ten thouſand deathes before his dying day.
By this my Kingdome I do ſweare, and Kingdome that I left
By al my Countrey Gods that bene in Temples cloſely kept,
I ſweare, I vow, I do proteſt, and thereto witnes take:
The Starres, the Seas, the Earth and all that ere thy hand did make.
Except that I my ſelfe forthwith this bloudy monſter find,
To wreake the wrath of God ſome way with ſolemyne oth I bynde.
And ſo my father, Polybius his happy dayes out lyue.
And ſo my mother Merope, no mariage new contriue:
As he ſhall dye that did this deede, and none ſhal him excuſe.
Whoſo he be here I proteſt for that he ſhortly rues:
But where this wicked deede was don Creon now tell me playne:
Both by what meanes? & where: and how Ring Laius was ſlayne.
Creon. Paſſing through Caſtalia woods & mountayns heapt with ſuoe
Where groues and ſcrubs, and buſhes thicke & brambles ſharp do groe.
A threepathd crooked way there is that diuerſly doth goe.
One vnto Bacchus citty bends that Phoce doth hight,
The other to Olenius, forth ſtretcheth out aright:
The third that reacheth through the vales and by the riuers lyes
Tends downe vnto the Bancks wherby Elea, water plyes
There vnawares (O piteous chaunce) a troup of theues entraps
The noble prince, and murders him hence ſpring theſe great miſhaps
which heape you realms with hideous woes and plagues on euery ſide,
By iuſt decree of heauenly powers which can no murder bide.
But ſee Tireſias where he coms with old and trembling pace.
I thincke Apolloes heauenly might haue brought him to this place.
See where he comes▪ and Manto too, his ſteps directing ſtayes
Tis he who for your grace (O king) and for your countrie prayes
COme holy prieſt (to Phoebus next)
theſe doubtfull aunſwers Ioſe:
And whom that deſtnies will to dye,
Straightwayes to me diſcloſe.
Renowmed Prince, though ſtill I ſtand
in ſilence dūme diſmayde:
And though by inwarde feare of mynde
my lingring tonge is ſtayde:
Yet pardon me (O noble Prince,) and geue me leaue a while.
From lack of ſight ſprings Ignoraunce which powre hath to exile
Vnſpotted Truth frō doubtfull breaſts. This thing ful well you knoes,
But whither God and Countrey calles, with willing minde I goe.
Let deadly fatall deſtentes, be boulted out at length.
O King if I of greener yeares had now my wonted ſtrength:
This matter ſoone diſcuſt ſhould be, and I would take in hande,
My ſelfe in preſence of the Gods, in temple for to ſtande.
A mighty Oxe all coulourd white, vp on the Aulters reare,
Which neuer yet on weried necke, the croked yoake did beare.
And Manto thou, O daughter mine, mine onely prop and ſtay:
The ſecret hidden miſteries, and ſacred ſignes out ſay.
M A. The beaſt before the Aulter ſtands.
To Gods a prayer make,
And on the holy Aulters cke, ſome pleaſaunt odors ſhake.
Tis done. And all the fiers fieice, with incence bright doe flame.
O Manto now what ſignes ſeeſt thou? how doe thy matters frame?
What? doth the fire, the Sacrifice encompas rounde about?
Not ſo. But firſt it mounts aloſt, and ſtreight it flaſheth out.
Well Yet, how doth the ſacred flame all ſhining bright and cleare
It ſelfe on high vnto the Sktes, with ſparkelting flakes vreare?
Or doeh it oft rebounding backe, it ſelfe, from Skyes vnfould?
Or all with rumbling roring noyſe, about the place iſt rould?
Or dim'd with ſmoke, iſt toſt from place, to place, now heere, now theare?
Not one. But diuerſe, colours mixt the flame doth with it beare.
Much like vnto the Rainbow, which with ſundry paynted hues
Foreſhewes vnto the huſbandmen the weather that enſues.
What colour it wants, or what it hath, to me is like vncertayne.
Now is it black, now blue, now red, and euen now agayne
Quight out it is. Yet once agayn, all fierce it flaſhing flames:
But lo, yet miſchiefs more then this, vnluckely it frames.
The fier quight a ſunder parts, and flame with flame doth fight.
O father I abhorre to ſee, this vgly lothſome ſight.
The Wyne to blud is turned quight, and all the Prynces hed,
With thicke black clouds encōpaſt is, with ſmoke all ouerſpred.
O father tell what this portends?
What ſhould I tell alas?
My mynde for feare aſtonied ſtands, and trembling cold doth pas
Through all my lims. What ſhall I ſay? or where ſhall I begin?
O cruell Plagues, O wrekfull Gods, O vengeaūce due for ſin.
Some dyre and blouddy deed (Alas) theſe hydeous ſignes declare.
Whats that the Gods would haue reuealde, and yet doe bid beware
To vtter it? By certaine ſignes their wrath is oft deſcride:
Such ſignes appeere, and yet they ſeeme their fury great to hide.
They are aſhamde: I wot nere what. Come hither, quickly bring
Some ſalt with thee, and it vpon the ſacrifice goe fling.
What? are their lookes pleaſant and milde, and doe they gently bide
The touching of thy ſacred hands?
What may this thing betide?
The Bull (a wonder great to ſee) his head on hie he lifts
And turned ſtill vnto the Eaſt, from thence it alway ſhifts,
Still lothing as hee ſeemes to me, of heauen to ſee the light,
Oft ſcouling with his blearing eyes with gaſtely ruthfull ſight.
But doth one blow thē driue to groūd, or more the one they haue?
The Heifer as it ſeemde, enflamd with courage ſtoute and braue
Vpon the mortall Blade did ruſh, and there hirſelfe deſtries:
When out the bloud it foming ſpoutes, and mounts vnto the Skies.
The brawny Bull twiſe ſtroke or thriſe, with groueling groning tyres,
And toyling vp and down he moyles. And ſtill to liue deſires.
And yet at length with much ado, his brutiſh breath expiers.
What? doth the wounde wide open gape, or is it cloſed vp?
Or doth the deepnes of the hole, the bloud in ſoking ſup?
Out of the wounded Heifers breaſt Black bluiſh waters ruſh.
As for the Bull, but little bloud, out of his wounds doth guſh.
t back rebounds, and from his Mouth & Eyes by ſtreames oth flow.
But what theſe dreadfull ſignes portend the Gods aloane doc know.
By this vnhappy Sacrifice, great feares within mee riſe.
But tell mee now: In the inner parts, what ſecret hidden lies?
O Father what meanes this (alas) that more then wonted guiſe
The Inwards ſtir? and ſhake my hands, and heauing oft ariſe,
The bloud by ſtreames out of the vaynes, full ſtraungly ſkips aloft.
The heart all ſchorcht and hidden lies, and ſtrykes are ſeene full oft,
Of Colour very wan and pale: The chiefeſt parts doe want.
The Lyuer blakiſh gall out ſpurts, and ſomwhat ryſing pants.
And that, that myſchiefes great, to kingdoms doth foreſhow:
Tw heads are ſeene, and yet both heads one ſkin doth ouergow
And ouerheales them quight, But yet the ſkin, it is ſo thin
That eaſely one may diſcerne what lieth hid therein.
And that which horror doth encreaſe, a man may plainly ſee
How both the heart, the Lights, and Lungs, and all diſturbed bee.
The fearefull noyſe and ſound you heere is not of beaſts, but fier
That roaring on the Alters makes, preſaging wrekefull yre
Of angry Gods who doe foretell ſome purpoſe that they haue,
For to reuenge ſome foule miſdeede that vengeance iuſt doth craue.
No part his proper place obſerues, nor keepes his order due:
But altogether quight diſguiſde, with an vnwonted hue.
Miſhapen, out of frame, tranſformde, diſplaced quight (alas)
What thing is that the Gods entend ere long to brng to pas?
Why than declare from whēce, and why theſe deadly ſignes ariſe,
With courage ſtout I will it heare, it ſhall not once aggriſe
By valiaunt mynd. Extremeſt ils haue power to baniſh feare.
You will wiſhe that vnhard which you ſo much deſyre to heare.
Yet ſence the Gods wil haue him known tell me (I ſay) his name
That ſiue your King.
Nor wing, nor womb of Bird or beaſt ye ſame
Can tell (O king) new ſacrifice, new meanes we muſt inuent.
From dredfull darke infernall damps ſome Fury muſt be ſent
Theſe miſchifes great for to vnfolde. Or els King Ditis hee,
That Empyre keepes on griſly Ghoſts, entreated needes muſt bee
Theſe things forthwith for to diſcloſe. Tell who ſhall haue the charge,
A King thou art, than maiſt not thou go through thoſe kingdoms large.
Than noble Creon thou ſhalt goe, this payne is firſt for thee:
Who muſt this crown and kingdome great enioy after mee.
THough that thy Face where ſadnes ſits
in heauy mourning guiſe,
Nought els portend, but dedly griefes,
and miſchiefes ſtil to ryſe:
Yet tel ſome meanes wherby at length
the Gods we may appeaſe,
And purchaſē to our Kingdomes waſt,
ſome hope of health and eaſe.
Alas you byd me that diſcloſe which feare doth byd me hyde.
It that the Thebane Citties great, by doleful plagues deſtryde.
Perce not thy hart a: et oughteſt thou▪ theſe Kingdomes for to rue,
Which were vnto thy brothers houſe, of auncient title due.
You wiſh y• thing to know, which you wil wiſh vnknown at length.
Why ſo? a ſimple remedy of litle force and ſtrength
Is ignoraunce of our eſtate when daungers vs betyde.
But what? wit thou ſo great a good for common ſafety hide?
Irkeſome Medcines and perilous in ſcknes I abhorre▪
And I likewyſe at Subiects hands diſdayne to take a dorre,
Speake out with ſpeed, or elſe by proofe of torment thou ſhalt find
How daungerous a caſe it is to gawle a Princes mynd.
Kinges often vſe to wiſh vntolde, which they bad tel before.
Go to, diſpatch and ceaſe in time to vexe me any more.
Except that thou forthwith to me this einous deede iſcloſe:
The gods I do proteſt, to death for al thou onely goes.
O pardon me moſt noble king. O let me hold my pes,
Of al the gracis Princes graunt, what fauour may be leſſe?
As though y• ſilence hurts not more both king and countries weale:
Then ſpech oft tymes: which ſubiects thoughts to Prices both reueale?
Diſpatch at once, ſtir me no more thou knowſt my guiſe of olde.
Silence denied, what priuileage may ſlly Subiect holde?
A iraytor he is, who ſtlēce keepes, whē king cōmaunds to ſpeake.
Then pardon my conſtrayned ſpeach, ſlth ſilence for to breake
You me compell. A dolefull tale (O king) my tongue muſt tell,
And which I feare your maieſty will not interpret well.
Was euer man rebukt for that, that he was bid to ſay?
Well than ſince needes I muſt: I am contented to obay.
A wood there is from City farre, enhaunſt with ſtately trees:
Where many a plant, and her be doth grow, which Phoebus neuer ſees:
With euer during buſhes greene, the Typreſſe there doth ryſe,
And puts his alde aud leffty had withing the cloude Skyes.
The auncient Time eaten Oke with crooked beded lims.
The Tel tree flue: The Alder which in Neptunes kingdoms ſwims,
The Bayes with bitter beries eke the Elmes deere fiends to Vyn
And many a noble tree beſides, as Mrtels,
Amidſt them all, one tree there is with large out
Whoſe roring ſound, & craking noyſe the leſſer woods
And ouerſhades them all: a Tree of monſtrous huge ,
Beſet with fearefull woods: there is that dyre, and dreadfull gate,
That leades to lothſome Lymbo Lake, and pyts that euer flowe.
Where choked miry mud doth ſtreame with ſlimy courſe full flowe.
Here when the prieſt was entred in with comely pace,
He ſtayed not: No neede there was, for night was ſtill in place.
Than all the ground wyde open gapes, & ſmouthe ring apours ryſe,
And fyre and ſmoke, & ſtyfling ſtink, mounts vp vnto the Shyes.
The Prieſt with wayling werde clad, his fatall red out ooke:
And entring in, in blacke Aray, full often times it ſhooke.
With heauy cheere and dolful pace: his hoary hare was twynde
With bowes of mortall Ewe. A tree wherewith the mourners winde,
Theyr mourning heads, & Garlands make. In this guiſe all arayde,
The ſacred Prieſt doth enter in, with trembling lims diſmayde:
Than in the Sheepe and Oxen blacke, by backwarde courſe are drawn▪
And odoures ſweete, & Frankencence, on flaming fyres are thrown.
The beaſts on burning, Altars caſt, do quake with ſchorched lims:
And bloudy ſtreames with fyre mixt, about the Aultars .
Than on the darke internall Gods, and him that rules them all:
With deadly ſhriking voyce aloude, the Prophet gins to call.
And rouls the Magick verſe in mouth, and hidden Artes doth proue:
Which eyther power haue to appeaſe or els the Gods to moue,
Thair bloudy ſtreaming Lycours black, with broyling heate doe boyle:
And all the Beaſts conſume and burn. The Prophet than to toyle
Begins▪ And mixed wyne and Mylke vpon the Aultars throwes.
And all the Dongeon darke, and wyde with ſtreamin blod it flowes.
Than out with thundring voyce agayne the Prophet calles and cryes.
And ſtraight as much wt mumbling mouth he champs in ſecret wyſe
The trees do turne▪ The Riuers ſā . The ground with roring ſhakes.
And all the world as ſeemes to mee, with fearefull trembling quakes.
I am heard, I am heard, than out aloude the Prieſt began to cry:
Whan all the damped foles by heapes abrode outruſhing fly.
Then woods with rumbling noyſe, doe oft reſounding make.
And Heauen, and Earth together goe. And bowes and trees do crake.
And Thūders roore. And Lightnings flaſh. And waues aloft doe fly.
And ground retyres: and Dogs doe bawl: and Beaſtes are heard to cry.
And whyther long of Acheron, that lothſom Flud that lowes
All ſtinking ſtreames: or of the earth, that out her Bowels throwes,
Free place to Sprights to geue: or of that fierce infernall Hound,
That at ſuch times doth buſtling make wt chayns, & railing ſound.
The Earth al wide it open gaes. And I did ſee on ground,
The Gods with colour pale and wan, that thoſe dark kingdoms keepe.
And very night I ſaw in deede, and thouſand ſhapes to creepe,
From out thoſe filthy ſtinking Lakes, and lothſom pits of Hell.
Where all the euils vnder Son, in darkſom ſhades doe dwell.
So quaking all for feare I ſtoode with minde right ſore apalde,
Whilſt on thoſe Gods wt trembling mouth the Prieſt full often calde.
Who all at once, out of theyr dens did ſkip with griely Face.
And Monſters grim, and ſtinging Snakes ſeemd wander in that place.
And all the fowleſt Feendes of Hell, and Furies all were theare.
And all trāſformed Ghoſts & ſprights, that euer Hell did beare.
With Cares, ahd all Diſeaſes vyle, that mortall mynds doe cruſh,
All thoſe, and more I ſawe out of thoſe Dangeons deepe to ruſh,
And Age I ſawe, with riueled Fae, and Neede, & Feare, and Death.
And Fyre, and flames, & thouſand ills out fro thoſe Pits to breath.
Then I was gon: and quight amazd. The wenche in worſer caſe.
And yet of olde, acquaynted with her Fathers Artes ſhe was.
The Prieſt himſelfe vnmooued ſtoode, and boldly cited owt:
Whole Armies of king Ditis men, who cluſtring in a Rowt:
All flittring thin like Cloudes, diſperſt abrode in Ayre doe fly.
And bearing ſundry ſhapes and formes doe ſcd abou in Sky,
A thouſand woods I thinke haue not ſo many leaues on trees.
Ten thouſand medowes freſh haue not ſo many flowers for bees.
Ten hundred thouſand riuers not ſo many Foule can ſhow:
Nor all the drops and ſtreams, and gulphes that in the Seas do flow▪
If that they might be wayed, can ſure ſo great a number make
As could thoſe ſhapes and formes that flew from out of Limbo lake.
Both Tantalus and Zetus too, and pale Amphions Ghoſt:
And A gaue, and after her ten thouſand Sprightes do poſt.
Than Pentheus, and more and more, in like eſtate enſue:
Til out at length comes Laius with foule and griſly hue:
Vncomly breſt in wretched plight with fylth all ouergrowne:
All perſt with wounds, (I loth to ſpeake) with bloud quight ouerflown
A Miſer ryght as ſeemd to me, and moſt of Miſers all:
Thus in this caſe, at length he ſpake, and thus began to call.
O Cadmus cruel Citty vle, that ſtil delightſte in bloud,
O Cadmus thou, which kinſmens death, accountſt as chiefeſt good▪
Teare out the bloudy Bowels of your Children, learne of me,
Do that, and rather more, then you would byde the day to ſee
Like ills as late on mee are light. Loe mothers loue (alas)
Hath cauſd the greateſt miſery that ere in Theba was.
The Countrey with the wrath of Gods at this tyme is not toſt.
Nor yearth nor ayre infect is not the cauſe that all bene loſt.
No No. A bloudy King is cauſe of all theſe miſchiefes great:
A bloudy wretch: A wretched child that ſits in Fathers Seate:
And Mothers bed defyles (O wretch) and entreth in agayne,
In places whence he came from once and doubleth ſo her payne,
Whilſt that hee ils the haples wombe wher in himſelfe did lie
With graceles ſeede and cauſeth her twiſe childbirthes pangues to try:
Vnhappy Sonne, but Father worſe and moſt vnhappy hee,
By whom the lawes of ſacred ſhame ſo ſore confounded bee.
For that that very beſtes (almoſt) do all abhrre to do,
Euen of his mothers body he hath brothers gotten two.
O miſchiefe great: O dredful deede, then Sphinx, O mōſter more:
Example vnto ages all of Gods foretold before.
But I thee, thee, that Scepter boldſt, thy Father wil purſue,
And wreacke my ſelfe on thee and thyne with plagues & vengeance due.
All reſtles rage of ſpite and paiue I will vppon thee blow,
And all the furies foule of hell vppon thee I will throw.
I wil ſubuert thy Houſes cleane, for this thy lothſome luſt:
I wil do this thou wretch: And thee, and thyne conſume to duſt.
Wherfore diſpatch at once (I ſay) into exile driue your King.
That ground y• firſt of all he leaues, with freſh grene graſſe ſhall ſpring.
And ſweete, and pleaſaunt Ayre, and healthfull blaſts ſhall ryſe,
And all the euills vnder Sun, that mortall men ſurpriſe:
The Pocks, the Piles, the Botch, the blaine, & death with him ſhall fly.
And with him miſchiefs all ſhall paſſe, and Monſters vnder Sky.
And as for him I know hee would depart with willing mynde:
But I will clog his Fec, and hands, hſs way he ſhall not finde.
But groping with his aged ſtaffe, ſhall paſſe from place to place.
This ſhall he doe. And none ſhall rue vpon his ruthfull caſe.
Rid you the Monſter from the Earth, for Heauen let mee alone.
No ſooner ſayd, but ſtraight away, his dreadfull Ghoſt was gone.
And faſt by thouſands after him, th'other Sprights in hyde:
Than Cold & trembling feare began through all my bones to glyde.
The thing I alwayes fearde, I ſee vpon mee now is layde:
But ſlender props they are (God wot) whereby your Treaſon is ſtayde.
Meropa my Mother deare, ſhall mee from this defend:
Polybius eke ſhall purge mee quight, from Actions all, that tend
To murder, or to inceſt vile, they both ſhall mee excuſe.
In ſuch a caſe no meanes at all of tryall I refuſe.
Lay what you can vnto my charge. No fault in mee remayns.
The Thebanes long or I came heere, of Laius death complayns.
My Mother yet alyue, my Father ſtill in like eſtate.
No, no, this is ſome doliſhe drift, of yo falſe Prophets pate.
Or elſe ſome mighty God aboue, doth beare me no good will,
And ſeekes by Plagues on mee to wreke, his wrathfull vengeaunce ſtil.
Ah Sir I am glad at length I ſmell your drifts and fetches fyne.
I know the whole confederacy your ſleights I can vntwyne.
That beaſtly Prieſt, that blearayed wretch beelyes the Gods and mee:
And thee thou Traytour in my place hath promiſt king to bee.
Alas would I my Siſter of, her lawfull kingdome ſpoyle?
Thinke you ſuch treaſon may haue place in brothers breaſt to boyle?
Yf that myne Oth could me not keepe content with my degree:
But that contemning meane eſtate, I would clme aloft to bee.
Yet ſhould ill Fortune mee deter, from ſuch attempts I trowe:
Whoſe guiſe it is on Princes heads, huge heapes of Caes to throwe.
I would aduiſe your grace betimes this charge from you to caſt:
Leaſt lingring long all vnawares, you be oppreſt at laſt.
Aſſure your ſelfe, in baſer ſtate, more ſafer you may liue:
And ſhun a thouſand Cares, & Geſs: which Princes hearts doe riue.
And doſt thou me exhort thou laue my kingdome for to leaue?
O ſaythleſſe head. O ſhameleſſe heart, y• could ſuch treaſons weaue?
Darſt thou attempt thou villayae vile this thing, to me to breake?
And fearſt thou not in ſuch a cauſe ſo boldly for to ſpeake.
I would perſwade them ſo (O King) who freely might poſſeſſe
Their Realmes ſuch piteous cares I ſee, do Prynces hearts oppreſſe:
But as for you of force you muſt your Fortunes chainge abyde.
The ſureſt way for them that gape for kingdoms large, & wyde,
Is firſt things meane, and reſt, and peace, and baſe eſtate to prayſe:
And yet with Tooth and Nayle, to toyle to mount aloft alwayes.
So often times, moſt reſtleſſe beaſtes doe chiefly reſt commend.
Shall not my ſeruice long ſuffice my truth for to defend?
Time is the onely meanes for ſuch, as thou to worke theyr will.
It is ſo ſyr, but as for mee, of goods I haue my fill.
A great reſort. A pleaſaunt life: from Princely cares exempt.
All theſe might (ſurely) mee diſſwade from ſuch a foule attempt.
There is no day almoſt (O King) the whale yeare thorow out,
Where in ſome royall gyfts are not from countreys round about
Vnto mee ſent, both Golde, and pearles, and things of greater coſt,
Which I let paſſe, leaſt I ſhould ſeeme but vainly for to boſt.
Beſides the life of many a man hath bin preſerude by mee.
In ſuch a bliſull ſtate (O King) what can there wanting bee?
(Good Fortune can no meane obſerue, but ſtil ſhe preaſeth higher.)
Shall I than guiltleſſe die (alas,) my cauſe and all vntryde?
Were vnto you at any time my life, my deedes diſcride?
Did any man defend mee yet? or els my cauſes pleade?
And guiltleſſe yet I am condemn'de to this you doe mee leade,
And mee expreſſe example giue, which I entend to take.
What meaſure you doe meat to mee, lyke meaſure muſt I make.
The minde which cauſeleſſe dred appawls, true cauſe of feare bewraies
That cōſciēce is not guiltles ſure, which euery blaſt diſmates.
Hee that in midſt of perilles deepe, and daūgers hath bene caſt,
Doth ſeeke all meanes to ſhun like ills as hee hath ouerpaſt.
So hatreds ryſe.
Hee that to much doth vſe ill will to feare,
Unſkilfull is: and knowes not how, hee ought him ſelfe to beare
In kings eſtate. For feare alone doth Kingdomes chiefly keepe.
Than hee that thus doth arme himſelfe from feare all free may ſleepe.
Who ſo the cruell tyrant playes, and guiltleſſe men doth ſmight,
Hee dreadeth them that him doe dread, ſo feare doth chiefly light
On cauſers chiefe. A iuſt reuenge for bloudy mindes at laſt.
Come take this traytor vile away, In dongeon deepe him faſt
Encloſe. There for his due deſerts, let him abide ſuch payne
And ſcourge of minde (as meete it is) falſe traytors to ſuſtayne.
SEt, ſee, the myſerable State,
of Prynces carefull lyfe.
What raging ſtorms? what bloudy broyles?
what toyle? what endleſſe ſtryfe
Doe they endure? (O God) what plagues?
what griefe do they ſuſtayne?
A Princely lyfe: No. No. (No doubt)
an euer duringe payne.
A ſtate ene fit for men on whom Fortune woulde wreke her will.
A place for Cares to couch them in. A doore wyde open ſtill
For griefes and daungers all that ben to enter when they liſt.
A king theſe Mates muſt euer haue, it bootes not to reſiſt.
Whole fluds of priuy pinching feare, great anguiſhe of the minde:
Apparant plagues, & dayly griefes. Theſe playfayres Princes finde.
And other none, with whom they ſpend, and paſſe theyr wretched dayes.
Thus hee that Princes liues, and baſe Eſtate together wayes:
Shall finde the one a very hell, a perfect infelicity:
The other eke a heauen right, exempted quight from myſery.
Let OEdipus example bee of this vnto you all,
A Mirrour meete. A Patern playne, of Princes carefull thrall.
Who late in perfect Ioy as ſeem'de, and euerlaſting blis,
Triumphantly his life out led, a Myſer now hee is,
And moſt of wretched Miſers all, euen at this preſent tyme,
With doubtfull waues of feare Itoſt, ſubiect to ſuch a Cryme
Whereat my tongue amaſed ſtayes, God graunt that at the laſt,
It fall not out as Creon tolde. Not yet the worſt is paſt,
MY mynde with doubtfull waues of dread,
is toſſed to and fro,
I wot not what to ſay (Alas)
I am tormented ſo.
For all the Gods on me doe cry,
for paynes and vengeaunce due.
They ſay that theſe my guiltleſſe hands.
king Laius lately ſlue.
But this my conſcience voyde of crime
and mynde from miſchiefe free:
To Gods vntried, to mee well known denies it ſo to bee:
Full well I doe remember ce▪ by chaunce I did diſpatch,
A man who ſought by force with mee preſumptuouſly to match.
His purpoſe was (a fond attempt) my Chariot for to ſtay,
This I remember well enough, the ſtrife was in the way.
And he a man well ſteept in yeares, and I a luſty bloud,
And yet of meere diſdayne and pride in vayne hee mee withſtood.
But this from, Thebes farre was done, a croked three pathd way,
That was the place in which we fought: it hard by Phocis lay.
Deare Wyfe reſolue my doubts at once, and mee expreſly tell.
How old was Laius the King whan this miſchaunce befell?
Was he of freſh and luſty yeares? or ſtricken well in age
When he was kilde? O eaſe my thoughts of this tormenting rage.
Betwixt an old man an a yong: but nearer to an olde.
Were there great Bands of men wt him his Perſon to vpholde?
Some by the way deceiued were, and ſome deterd by payne.
A fewe by toyle and labour long, did with their Prince remayne.
Were any ſlayne in his defence?
Of one report is rife,
Who coſtant in his princes cauſe full ſtoutly loſt his lyfe.
It is enough, I knowe the man that hath this miſchiefe done.
The number and the place agrees. The time vntried alone
Remaynes: Than tell what time hee died, and when that he was ſlaine.
Tis ten yeares ſince: you now reuiue my chifeſt cares againe.
THe Corinth people all (O King)
in Fathers place to rayn
Doe call your Grace: Polybius doth
eternall reſt obtayn.
O God what Fortune vyle doth mee
oppreſſe on euery ſide?
How doe my ſorrowes ſtill encreaſe?
Tell how my Father dide.
No ſickneſſe (ſir) but very age did of his life him reaue.
And is hee dead: in deede? not ſlayne? what ioy may I tonceaue?
How may I now triumph? the Gods to witneſſe I doe call,
To whom are known my hidden thoughts and ſecret workings al:
Now may I li to ſkyes my hands, my hands from miſchiefe free.
But yet the chiefeſt aſe of feare remayneth ſtill to mee.
Your Fathers kingdom ought al dred out of your mind to driue.
That I cōfeſſe. But ſecret thoughts my trembling heart do riue
With inward doubt of deepe diſtreſſe, my Mother I do feare.
This grudge is that continually my heart doth rent and teare.
Do you your Mother feare? on your return that onely ſlayes.
I feare not her: but from her ſight, a godly zeale mee frayes.
What will you her a Wydow leaue?
Now, now, thou wfiſt heart.
This, this, and onely this (alas,) is cauſe of all my ſmart.
Tell me (O king) what doubtfull feare? doth preſſe thy princely breſt:
Kings coūcels I can well cōceale that en with Cares oppreſt.
Leaſt as Apollo hath forefolde, I ſhould a Mariage make
With myne owne Mother: only this fowle feare doth make me quake.
Such vayne & peuyſh feares, at length from out your breaſt exyle.
Meropa your Mother is not in deede, you do your ſelfe beguil.
What vauntage ſhould it be to her adopted Sonnes to haue?
A kingdom ſhe ſhall gayne thereby. Her Husband layde in graue.
The chiefeſt prop to ſay her Realmes from preſent confuſion,
In children for to haue: and hope of lawfull ſucceſſion.
What are the meanes whereby thou doſt theſe ſecrets vnderſtād.
My ſelfe (your grace) an Infant gaue into your fathers hand.
Didſt thou me to my Father geue? Who than gaue me to thee?
A Sheparde ſtr; that wnted on Cytheron Hills to bee.
What made thee in thoſe woods to raūge? what hadſt thou there to do?
Vpon thoſe Hils my Beaſts I kept, ſomtime a Sheepeherde to.
What nots, what priuy marks haſt thou, wherby thou doſt me kno?
The holes y• through your feete are borde frō whēce your name did gro.
Declare forthwith what was his name y• gaue me vnto thee.
The kings chief Shephard than that was, deliuered you to mee.
What was his name?
O king old mens remēbrance ſoone doth fayle:
Obliuton for the chieteſt part, doth boary heads aſſayle.
And drowns their former memory of things long out of mynde.
What? canſt thou know y• man by ſight?
Perhaps I ſhould him finde,
And know by Face. Things ouer whelmd by time, and quight oppreſt.
A ſmall marke oft to mynde reuokes, and freſh renues in breſt.
Sirs bid the Herdmen forth wt driue theyr Beaſts to Aulters all.
Away with ſpeede, make haſt, the Maſter Sheepherds to mee call.
Sith that your deſny this doth hyde, and Fortune it detayue
And cloſely keepe▪ let it be ſo, from opening that refrayne.
That long canceald hath hidden lyen, that ſeeke not to diſcloſe▪
Such things outſercht and foūd oftimes agaynſt the ſercher goes.
Can any miſchiefe greater be? than this that now I feare.
Aduiſe you wel remembre fyrſt what weight this thing doth beare:
That thus you goe about to ſcarch, and ſlit with Tooth and Nayle,
Obſerue the golden meane: beware beare ſtill and equall ſayle.
Your Coūtreys wealth (O King) your lyfe, and all vpon this lyes.
Though you ſtir not, bee ſure at length your Fortune you eſcryes.
A happy ſtate for to diſturbe doth nought at all behoue.
When things be at the worſt, of them a man may ſafely moue.
Can you haue ought more excellent? than is a Prynces ſtate?
Beware leaſt of your Parents found it you repent to late.
No (father) no I warrant that: repent not I (I trow.)
I ſeeke it not to that entent. I haue decreed to know,
The matter at the full. Wherefore I will it now purſus.
Lo Phorbas: where hee trembling coms, with comely aged h.
To whom of all the kinges flack than, the care and charge was due.
Doſt thou his name, his ſpeach his Face, or yet his perſon know?
Me thinks I ſhould haue ſeene his Face, and yet I cannot ſhow
The places where I haue him ſeene, ſmall time brings ſuch a chainge,
As well acquaynted Faces oſt, to vs appeare ſtill ſtrainge.
This looke is neyther throughly known, nor yet vnknown to mee,
I cannot tell: I doubt it much, and yet it may bee hee.
In Laius tyme long ſince when hee theſe Kindomes great did keepe?
Waſt thou not on Citheron hils chiefe Shepard to his ſheepe?
SOmetime a charge of ſheepe I had,
vnworthy though I weer.
And did vpon thoſe hills chiefe rule
on other Shepards beare.
Knowſt thou not me.
I cannot tell.
Didſt thou once geue this man
A Childe. Speake out, why doſt thou ſtay?
if ſo, declare it than.
Why doſt thou bluſh and doubting ſtand,
troth ſeeketh no delay?
Things out of minde you call agayne, almoſt quight worne away.
Confeſſe thou ſlaue, orels I ſweare, thou that conſtrayned bee
In deede I doe remembre once, an Infant yong by mee,
Delyuered was vnto this Man: but well I wot in vayne,
I know he could not long endure, nor yet alyue remayne.
Long ſince he is dead (I know it well) hee liues not at this day.
Eo? God ſorbid, he liues no doubt, and long may liue I pray.
Why doſt thou ſay the child is dead, that thou this man didſt giue?
With Irons ſharp his feete were board, I know he could not liue,
For of the ſore a ſwelling roſe, I ſaw the bloud to guſh
From out of both the wounds: and down by powring ſtreames to fluſh.
Now ſtay (O king) p farther now, you know almoſt the troth.
Whoſe child was tell e forthw.
I dare not for mine Othe.
Thine Oth thou ſlaue? Some fyre here. Ile charme thine Othe and thee,
With fyre & flames: except forthwith thou tell the troth to mee.
O pardon me, though rade I ſeeme, I ſeeke nor to withſtand name?
Your graces minde: (moſt noble king.) My life is in your hand.
Tell me y• troth, what child, & whoſe, What was his Mothers
Born of your wyfe.
O gaping earth deuour my body quight:
Or elſe thou God that art of houſes voyde of light,
To Hell my Saule with thunder boltes to Hell my Soule down dryue.
Where grieſly Ghoſts in darke neſſe deepe, and endleſſe payne do lyue.
For thee alone, theſe Plagues doe rage. For thee theſe miſchiefes ryſe.
For thee, the Earth lyes deſolate. For thee thou wretch the Skies
Infected are. For thee, for thee, and for the ſlithy luſt,
A hundred thouſand guiltleſſe men, conſumed are to duſt.
O people throw: caſt heapes of ſtones vpon this hatefull Hed:
Bath all your ſwords within my breſt: you furies ouerſhed
My reſtleſſe thoughts, with raging woes and plungde in ſeas of pain.
Let mee thoſe hōrrors ſtill endure, which damned ſoules ſuſtain.
You citizens of Stately Thebes vex me with torments dile.
Let Father, Son, and Wyfe, and all with vengeance me rſue.
Let thoſe that for my ſake alone with plagues bee
Throw dars, caſt ſtones, fling fer▪ and ſlames, and tortures all on mee.
O ſhame: O ſlaunder of the World: O hate of Gods aboue.
Confounder O of Nature thou to lawes of ſacred loue,
Euen from thy birth an open Foe. Thou didſt deſerue to dye
As ſoone as thou waſt born. Go, go, vnt the Court thee hye,
There with thy Mother (ſlaue) triumph reioyce as thou maiſt do.
Who haſt thy houſe encreaſed with vnhappy children ſo.
Make haſte with ſpeede, away, ſome thing thy miſchiefs worthy finde.
And on thy ſelfe wrecke all the ſpight of thy reuenging minde.
FOrtune the guide of humaine lyfe doth al things chaūge at will.
And ſtirrīg ſtil, wt reſtles thoughts our wretched mīdes doth fill.
In vayn men ſtriue their ſtats to kepe whē hidrous tēpeſts riſe:
And bluſtring windes of daungers deepe ſets death before their eyis.
Who ſaith he doth her fauning feele? & chaūgeth not his minde,
When fickle fight of Fortunes wheele doth turne by courſe of kinde.
Theſe greuous plagues frō priuat houſe to princely Thrones do flow,
And oft thier minds with cares they ſouſe and thick vpon thē ſtrow.
Whole heapes of griefe and dyre debate, a wofull thing to ſee:
A Princely lyfe to myſers ſtate, conuerted for to bee.
O OEdipus thy fatall fall, thy dreadfull miſchiefs ryght.
Thy dolfull ſtate, thy myſery, thy thriſe vnhappy plight:
Theſe things ſhall blaſe through all y• world: what heart may thē reioyce
At thy diſtreſſe? I can no more: my teares doe ſtop my voyce.
But what is he that yonder ſtamps? and raging puffs and blowes.
And often ſhakes his vexed head, ſome miſchiefe great hee knowes.
Good ſir your countnaunce doth import ſome great and fearefull thing,
Tell vs therefore (if that you may) what newes from Court you bring.
VVhen OEdipus accurſed wretch,
his fatall fals had ſpied,
To hell be damnd his wretched ſoule
and on the Gods he cryed
For vengeaunce due. And poſting faſt
with franticke moode grieſly hue,
Vnto his dole full Court hee went,
his thoughts for to purſue.
Much like a Lion ramping wylde, his furtous head that ſhakes.
And roares with thundring mouth aſowd, and often gnaſhing makes,
None otherwiſe this miſer farde. A lothſome ſight to ſee.
Beſides himſelfe for very rage, he ſtill deſires to dye.
And rowling round his wretched Eyes with vyſage pale and wan:
Ten thouſand Curſers out he powres. Himſelfe the vnhappieſt man
Of all that liue, he doth account: as iuſtly he may doe.
A wretch, a ſlaue, a caitſe vyle. The cauſe of all our woe.
And in this caſe enflamd with ſpight he crtes, he ſtamps, he raues.
And boyling in his ſecret thoughts, he ſtill deſyres to haue
All torments vnder ſun that may his Cares conceiude encreaſe.
O wretched wyght, what ſhould hee doe? What man may him releaſe?
Thus foming all for rage at mouth, with ſighes, and ſobs, & grones,
His damned head ten thouſand times, as oft his weryed bones
He beats. And often puffing makes, and roares, and ſwels, & ſweats.
And on the Gods for death hee calles, for Death hee ſtill entreats,
Three times he did begin to ſpeake: and thryſe his tong did ſtay.
At length he cried out alowd: O wretch. Away, away.
Away thou monſtrous Beaſt (he ſayd:) wilt thou prolong thy lyfe?
Nay rather ſome man ſtrike this breaſt with ſtrooke of bloudy knyfe.
Or all you Gods aboue on mee your flaming fiers outcaſt:
And dints of Thunderbolts down throw. This is my prayer laſt.
What greedy vile deuouring Gripe, vpon my guts will gnaw?
That Tigre fierce my hatefull limmes will quight a lunder draw?
Loe, here I am you Gods: Lee, heere, wreke now on me your will.
Now, now you fyry Feendes of Hell, of vengeaunce take your fill.
Send out ſome wilde outragious beaſt ſend Dogs mee to deuoure.
Or els all ils you can deuiſe, at once vpon me powre.
O wofull ſoule. O ſinfull wretch. Why doſt thou feare to dye?
Death only rids frō woes thou knowſt. Than ſtoutly Death defle.
With that his bloudy fatall Blade, from out his ſheath he drawes.
And lowd he rores, wt thūdring voice. Thou beaſt why doſt thou pawſe?
Thy Father curſed caitife thou, thy Father thou haſt ſlayne
And in thy Mothers bed haſt left an euerduring ſlayne.
And Brothers thou haſt got: nay Sons thou lieſt: thy Brothers all
They are. Thus for thy monſtrous luſt thy Countrey down doth fall.
And thinkſt thou than for all theſe ils enough ſo ſhort a payne?
Thynkſt thou the Gods will be apeaſde, if thou forth with be ſlayne?
So many miſchiefes don: and iſt enough one ſtroke to bydt?
Account'ſte thou it ſufficient paynes, that once thy ſword ſhould glide
Quight through thy guilty breaſt for all? why than diſpatch and dye.
So maiſt thou recompence thy Fathers death ſufficiently.
Let it be ſo: what mends vnto thy Mother will thou make
Vnto thy children what? theſe plagues (O wretch) how wilt thou ſlake?
That thus for thee thy countrey maſtes? Ohe push ſhall ende them all.
A proper fetch. A fie deuiſe. For thee a worthy fall.
Inuent thou monſtrous beaſt forthwith: a fall euen worthy for
Thy ſelfe inuent: whom all men hate and loth, and doe abhor.
And as dame Natures lawfull courſe is broke (O wretch) by thee.
So let to ſuch a miſchiefe great, thy Death agreeing bee.
O that I might a thouſand times, my wretched lyfe renewe.
O that I might reuyue and dye by courſe in order dewe.
Ten hundred thouſand times & more: than ſhould I vengeance take
Vpon this wretched head. Than I perhaps in part ſhould make
A meete amends in deede, for this my fowle and lothſom Sin.
Than ſhould the proofe of payne reproue the life that I liue in.
The choyſe is in thy hand thou wretch, than vſe thine owne diſcretion.
And finde a meanes, whereby thou maiſt come to extreame confuſion.
And that, that oft thou maiſt not doe, let it prolonged bee.
Thus, thus, maiſt thou procure at length an endleſſe death to thee.
Serch out a death whereby thou mayſt perpetuall ſhame obtayne:
And yet not dye. But ſtill to liue in euerlaſting payne.
Why ſtayſt thou man? Go to I ſay: what meane theſe blubbring teares?
Why weepſt thou thus? Alas to late. Leaue of thy foolyſh feares.
And iſt enough to weepe thinkſt thou? ſhall teares and wayling ſerue?
No wretch it ſhall not be. Thou doſt ten thouſand deaths deſerue.
Myne eyes doe dally with mee I ſee, and teares doe ſtill out powre.
Shall teares ſuffice? No, no, not ſo I ſhall them better ſcowre,
Out with thine Eyes (he ſayd:) and than with fury fierce enflam'de.
Like to a bloudy raging Feend and monſtrous beaſt vntam, de.
With fiery flaming ſpotted Cheekes his breaſt he often beats.
And ſcratch, and teare his Face hee doth and Skin a ſunder freats.
That ſcarſe his eyes in head could ſtand ſo ſore he them beſets.
With furious fierce outrageous minde hee ſtamps and cries alowd:
And roares & rayles, with ramping rage. Thus in this caſe he ſtood,
Perplext, and vexed ſore in minde, with deadly ſighs and teares.
When ſodenly all franticklike himſelfe from ground hee reares.
And rooteth out his wretched Eyes, and ſight a ſunder teares.
Than gnaſheth bee his bloudy Teeth, and bites, and gnawes, & champs,
His Eyes all bathd and brude in bloud, for fury fierce he ſtamps.
And raging more than needes (alas,) his Eyes quight rooted out:
The very holes in vayne hee ſcrapes ſo ſore the wretch doth dout:
Leaſt ſight ſhould chaunce for to remayne he rents and mangels quight
His Face, his Noſe, his Mouth, and all whereon his hands do light
Hee rygs and ryues. Thus fowly rayd (alas) in piteous plight:
At length his head aloft he lifts, and therewith geues a ſhright.
And whan he ſees that all is gone, both light, and ſight, and all.
Than ſchriching out: he thus begins vpon the Gods to call.
Now ſpare you Gods, now ſpare at length my countrey preſt to fall.
I haue done that you did cōmand: Your wraths reuenged bee.
This wretched looke, this mangled face, is fitteſt now for mee.
Thus ſpeaking, down the blackiſh bloud by ſtreams doth guſhing flow
Into his mouth. And clottred lumps of fleſh the place doth ſtrow
Wherein hee ſtandes.
Beware betimes, by him beware, I ſpeake vnto you all.
Learne Iuſtice, truth, and feare of God by his vnhappy fall.
MAns lyfe wt tumbling fatal courſe of fortunes wheele is rowld,
To it giue place for it doth run all ſwifily vncontrowld.
And Cares & teares are ſpent in vayn, for it cannot be ſlayed:
Syth hi decree of heauenly powers perforce muſt be obayed.
What mankind byded or does on earth it cōmeth from aboue,
Then wayling grones powrd out in griefe do nought at all behoue.
Our life muſt haue her pointed courſe, (alas) what ſhall I ſay.
As fates decree, ſo things do run, no man can make them ſtay.
For at our byrth to Gods is known our latter dying day.
No Prayer, no Arte, not God himſelfe may fatall fates reſiſt.
But faſtned all in fixed courte, vnchaunged they perſiſt.
Such ende them ſtill enſues as they appointed were to haue,
Than fly all feare of Fortunes cng, leeke hot to lyue a ſlaue
Enthrald in bondage vyle to feare. For feare doth often bring
Deſtnies that dreaded ben and miſchiefs feard vpon vs fling.
Yea many a man hath come vnto his fatall ende by feare.
Wherefore ſet peuiſh feare aſide, and worthy courage beare.
And thou that ſubiect art to death. Regard thy latter day.
Thinke no man bleſt before his ende. Aduiſe thee well and ſtay.
Be ſure his lyfe, and death, and all, be quight exempt from myſery:
Ere thou do once preſume to ſay: this man is bleſt and happy.
But out alas, ſee where he coms: a wretch withouten Guide,
Bereft of ſight. Halfe ſpoyld of lyfe: without all Pomp, and Pride
(That vnto Kings Eſtate belonge.)
WEll, well, tis done: more yet? No, no,
no miſchiefs more remaynee.
My Fathers Rytes performed are.
What God on Myſers paynes
That rues within this Cloud hath rolde,
and wrapt my wretched Pate.
Ah ſir: this is a life alone.
This is a happy State.
This is a caſe ene fit for thee,
for thee thou wretch, for thee.
From whoſe accurſed ſight the Sun, the Stars and all doe flee.
Yet miſchiefs more, who giues to doe? The dreadfull day I haue
Eſcapt. Thou filthy Paracide: thou vile miſchieuous Slaue.
Vnto thy right hand nought thou owſt, all things performed bee.
O woe is mee that euer I liu'de this luckleſſe day to ſee.
Where am I now? Alas, alas, the light and all doth mee
Abhor: O wretched OEdipus this looke is firſt for thee.
See, ſee, where Iocaſta coms, with fierce and furious moode,
Quight paſt her ſelfe. For very rage ſhee frets and waxeth woode.
Much like to Cadmus daughter mad, who late hir Sonne did kill.
Fayne would ſhe ſpeake her mynde: for ſeare (alas) ſhe dares not: ſtill
Shee ſtayes, and yet from out her breaſt theſe ills haue quight exilde
All ſhame faſtnes. See how ſhee lookes, with coū 'naunce fierce & wilde.
Fayne would I ſpeake, I am afraide. For what ſhould I thee call
My Son? doubt not. Thou art my Son. My Son thou art for all
Theſe miſchiefs great: alas, alas I ſhame my Son to ſee.
O cruell Son. Where doſt thou turn thy Face? Why doſt thou ſlee
From me. From me thy Mother deare? Why doſt thou ſhun my ſight?
And leaue me thus in miſery, with Cares conſumed quight.
Who troubles me? Let me alone. I thought not to be founde:
Who now reſtores myne Eyes to mee, Mother? or Mothers ſounde?
Our labour all is ſpent in vayne, now may wee meete no more.
The Seas deuide thoſe meetings vile that wee haue had before.
The gaping earth deuide vs both, th'one from th'other quight.
Still let our feete repugnant bee. So ſhall I ſhun the light
That moſt of all me grieues. So ſhall I ſpace obtaine to wayle
Theſe bleeding woes on euery ſide, that doe my thoughtes aſſayle.
The Deſtentes are in fault. Blame them, Alas, alas, not wee.
Spare now. Leaue of to ſpeake in vayne, ſpare now O Mother mee,
By theſe Reliques of my diſmembred body I thee pray.
By myne vnhappy Children pledges left. What ſhall I ſay?
By all the Gods I thee beſeech. By all that in my name
Is good or bad, let mee alone. Alas you are to blame
To trouble mee. You ſee what hell my hapleſſe heart doth payne.
You ſee that in my Conſcience ten thouſand horrors raine.
O dying heart: O ſindrownd ſoule. Why doſt thou faint alas?
Why doſt thou ſeeke and toyle in vayne theſe ills to ouerpas?
What meane theſe ſighes, & ſcalding teares? why doſt thou death refuſe?
Thou mate of all his miſchiefs thou, by whoſe meanes onely rues
The law of nature all: by whom, Ah, Ah, confounded lies,
Both God, and man, and beaſt, and all that eyther liues or dies.
Die thou, diſpatch at once thruſt through thy vile inceſtuous breſt:
Thou haſt none other meanes (alas) to ſet thine heart at reſt.
Not thou, if God him ſelfe, if he his flaming fiers ſhould throw
On thee, or miſchiefs all by heapes vpon thy body ſtrow
Couldſt once for thy deſerued ills due paines or vengeaunce pay:
Some meanes therefore to wreak Gods wrath vpon thy ſelfe aſſay.
Death, death now beſt contenteth mee, then ſeeke a way to dye.
So maiſt thou yet at length finde end for all thy miſery.
O Son lend mee thy hand: ſith that thou art a Paracyde.
This labour laſt of all remaynes, this labour thee doth byde.
Diſpatch rid mee thy mother deare from all my deadly woe
It will not be: no prayers auaile. Thy ſelfe this deede muſt doe.
Take vp this ſword. Goe to, with this thy huſbande late was ſlayne.
Huſband? thou term'ſt him falſe: hee was thy ſyer: O deadly payne.
Shal I quight through my breſt it driue? or through my throte it thruſt?
Canſt thou not chooſe thy wound? away: die, die, (alas) thou muſt.
This hateful womb then woūd (O wretch) this, this wt thine own hand
Strike, ſtrike it hard: (O ſpare it not) ſith both a huſband, and
(The ſame a Son it bare.)
Alas, alas, ſhee is ſlaine, ſhe is ſlayne, diſpatched with a puſh:
Who euer ſawe the like to this: ſee how the bloud doth guſh.
O heauy doulfull caſe: who can this dyrefull ſight enduer
Which for the hideouſneſſe thereof might teares of ſtones procuer.
Thou God, thou teller out of Fates. On thee, on thee, I call,
My Father onely I did owe, vnto the Deſtnies all.
Now twiſe a Paracide, and worſe than I did feare to bee:
My Mother I haue ſlayne. (Alas) the fault is all in mee.
O OEdipus accurſed wretch, lament thine owne Calamity,
Lament thy ſtate, thy griefe lament, thou Caitife borne to miſery.
Where wilt thou now become (alas?) thy Face where wilt thou hyde:
O myſerable Slaue, canſt thou ſuch ſhamefull tormentes byde?
Canſt thou which haſt thy Parents ſlain? Canſt thou prolong thy life?
Wilt thou not dye? deſeruing Death: thou cauſe of all the griefe,
And Plagues, and dreadfull miſchiefs all that Thebane City preaſe.
Why doſt thou ſeeke by longer life, thy ſorrowes to encreaſe?
Why doſt thou toyle and labour thus in vayne? It will not bee.
Both God, and man: and beaſt, and all abhorre thy Face to ſee
O Earth why gapſt thou not for me why doe you not vnfolde
You gates of hell mee to receaue? why doe you hence withholde?
The fierce Infernall Feends from me, from me ſo wretched wight?
Why breake not all the Furyes loſe this hatefull head to ſmight
With Plagues? which them deſerued hath (alas) I am left alone,
Both light, and ſight, and comfort all from mee (O wretch) is gone.
O curſed head: O wicked wight, whom all men deadly hate.
O Beaſt, what meanſt thou ſtill to liue in this vnhappy ſtate?
The Skies doe bluſh and are aſhamd, at theſe thy miſchiefes great
The Earth laments, y• Heauens weepe, the Seas for rage doe freat.
And bluſtring riſe, and ſtormes doe ſtir, and all thou wretch for thee.
By whoſe inceſt, and bloudy deedes all things diſturbed bee.
Quight out of courſe, diſplaced quight, O curſed fatall day.
O miſchiefes great, O dreadfull times, O wretch, away, away.
Exile thy ſelfe from all mens ſight, thy life halfe ſpent in miſery,
Goe end conſume it now outright in thriſe as great calamity.
O lying Phoebe thine Oracles my ſin, and ſheme ſurmount:
My Mothers death amongſt my deedes; thou neuer didſt recount.
A meete Exploict for me that a to Nature deadly Foe.
With trembling fearefull pace goe forth, thou wretched monſter goe,
Grope out thy wayes on knees in darke thou miſerable Slaue.
So maiſt thou yet in tract of time due paynes, and vengeaunce haue,
For thy miſcheuous lyfe. Thus, thus, the Gods themſelues decree.
Thus, thus, thy Fates: thus, thus, the ſkyes appoint it for to bee.
Then headlong hence, with a miſchiefe hence, thou caitife vyle away.
Away, away, thou monſtrous Beaſt. Goe, Run. Stand, ſtay,
Leaſt on thy Mother thou doe fall.
All you that wearyed bodies haue, with ſtickeneſſe ouerpreſt.
Loe, now I fly: I fly away, the cauſe of your vnreſt.
Lift vp your heads: a better ſtate of Ayre ſhall ſtrayght enſewe
Whan I am gone: for whom alone, theſe dreadfull myſchiefs grewe.
And you that now, halfe dead yet liue in wretched miſers caſe.
Help thoſe whō preſent torments preſſe forth, hye you on apace.
For loe, with me I cary hence, all miſchiefes vnder Skyes.
All cruell Fates, Diſeaſes all that for my ſake did ryſe,
With mee they goe: with me both griefe, Plague, Pocks, Botch, & all
The ills that eyther now you preſſe, or euer after ſhall.
With me they goe, with me: theſe Mates bin meetſt of all for mee.
Who am the moſt vnhappieſt wretch that euer Sun did ſee.