SIsters, stay, we want our Dame;
Call vpon her by her name,
And the charme we vse to say,
That shee quickly anoynt, and come away.
DAME, DAME, the watch is set:
Quickly come, we all are met.
From the lakes, and from the fens,
From the rocks, and from the dens,
From the woods, and from the caues,
From the church-yards, from the graues,
From the dungeon, from the tree
That they die on, here are wee.
Comes shee not yet?
Strike another heate.
THe weather is fayre, the wind is good,
Vp DAME, o'your horse of wood:
Or else, tucke vp your gray frock,
And saddle your goate, or your greene cock,
And make his bridle a bottome of thrid,
To rowle vp how many miles you haue rid.
Quickly come away;
For we, all, stay.
Nor yet? Nay, then,
Wee'll trie her agen.
THe owle is abroad, the bat, and the toad,
And so is the cat-a-mountayne,
The ant, and the mole sit both in a hole,
And frog peepes out o' the fountayne;
The dogs, they doe bay, and the timbrels play,
The spindle is now a turning;
The moone it is red, and the starres are fled,
But all the skie is a burning:
The ditch is made, and our nayles the spade,
With pictures full, of waxe, and of wooll;
Their liuers I sticke, with needles quicke;
There lacks but the bloud, to make vp the floud.
Quickly DAME, then, bring your part in,
Spurre, spurre, vpon little MARTIN,
I Haue beene, all day, looking after
A Rauen, feeding vpon a quarter;
And, soone, as she turn'd her beake to the South,
I snatch'd this morsell out of her mouth.
I Haue beene gathering Wolues haires,
The mad Dogges foame, and the Adders eares;
The spurging of a dead mans eyes,
And all since the euening starre did rise.
I, Last night, lay all alone
O'the ground, to heare the Mandrake grone;
And pluckt him vp, though he grew full low;
And, as I had done, the Cocke did crow.
ANd I ha'beene choosing out this scull,
From Charnell houses, that were full;
From priuate Grots, and publike Pits,
And frighted a Sexten out of his wits.
VNder a cradle I did creepe,
By day; and, when the child was asleepe,
At night, I suck'd the breath; and rose,
And pluck'd the nodding Nurse by the nose.
I Had a dagger: what did I with that?
Kill'd an infant, to haue his fat.
A Piper it got, at a Church-ale,
I bad him, againe blow wind i'the taile.
A Murderer, yonder, was hung in chaines,
The Sunne and the wind had shrunke his veines;
I bit off a sinew, I clipp'd his haire,
I brought off his ragges, that danc'd i'the ayre.
THe Scrich-owles egges, and the feathers blacke,
The bloud of the Frogge, and the bone in his backe,
I haue beene getting; and made of his skin
A purset, to keepe Sir CRANION in.
ANd I ha'beene plucking (plants among)
Hemlock, Henbane, Adders-tongue,
Night-shade, Moone-wort, Libbards-bane;
And twise, by the dogges, was like to be tane.
I, From the iawes of a Gardiners bitch,
Did snatch these bones, and then leap'd the ditch;
Yet went I backe to the house againe,
Kill'd the blacke Cat, and here's the braine.
I Went to the Toad breedes vnder the wall,
I charm'd him out, and he came at my call;
I scratch'd out the eyes of the Owle before,
I tore the Batts wing; what would you haue more?
YEs, I haue brought (to helpe our vowes)
Horned Poppie, Cypresse boughes,
The Fig-tree wild, that growes on tombes,
And iuice, that from the Larch-tree comes,
The Basiliskes bloud, and the Vipers skin:
And, now, our Orgies let's begin.
YOu Fiends and Furies (if yet any bee
Worse then our selues) you, that haue quak'd to see
These knots vntied; and shrunke, when we haue charm'd.
You, that (to arme vs) haue your selues disarm'd,
And to our powers, resign'd your whips and brands,
When we went forth, the scourge of men and lands.
You, that haue seene me ride, when HECATE
Durst not take chariot; when the boistrous se,
Without a breath of wind, hath knock'd the skie;
And that hath thundred, IOVE not knowing why:
When we haue set the elements at warres,
Made midnight see the sunne, and day the starres;
When the wing'd lightning, in the course, hath staid;
And swiftest riuers haue run backe, afraid,
To see the corne remoue, the groues to range,
Whole places alter, and the seasons change,
When the pale moone, at the first voice downe fell
Poison'd, and durst not stay the second spell.
You, that haue oft, beene conscious of these sights;
And thou three-formed starre, that, on these nights
Art onely powerfull, to whose triple name
Thus we incline, once, twice, and thrise the same;
If now with rites prophane, and foule inough,
We doe inuoke thee; darken all this roofe,
With present fogges▪ Exhale earths rott'nest vapors,
And strike a blindnesse through these blazing tapers.
Come, let a murmuring charme resound,
The whilst we bury all, i' the ground.
But first, see euery foote be bare;
And euery knee. HAG. Yes, dame, they are.
DEepe, O deepe, we lay thee to sleepe;
We leaue thee drinke by, if thou chance to be dry;
Both milke, and bloud, the dew, and the floud.
We breathe in thy bed, at the foot, and the head;
We couer thee warme, that thou take no harme:
And when thou dost wake,
Dame earth shall quake,
And the houses shake,
And her belly shall ake,
As her backe were brake,
Such a birth to make,
As is the blue drake:
Whose forme thou shall take.
NEuer a starre yet shot?
Where be the ashes? HAG. Here i'the pot.
DAM. Cast them vp; and the flint stone
Ouer the left shoulder bone:
Into the west. HAG. It will be best.
THe stickes are a-crosse, there can be no losse,
The sage is rotten, the sulphur is gotten
Vp to the sky, that was i'the ground.
Follow it then, with our rattles, round;
Vnder the bramble, ouer the brier,
A little more heat will set it on fire:
Put it in mind, to doe it kind,
Flow water, and blow wind.
Rouncy is ouer, Robble is vnder,
A flash of light, and a clap of thunder,
A storme of raine, another of hayle.
We all must home, i'the gge-shell sayle;
The mast is made of a great pin,
The tackle of cobweb, the sayle as thin,
And if we goe through and not fall in —
STay. All our charmes doe nothing winne
Vpon the night; our labour dies!
Our Magicke-feature will not rise;
Nor yet the storme! We must repeate
More direfull voyces farre, and beate
The ground with vipers, till it sweate.
BArke dogges, wolues howle,
Seas roare, woods roule,
Cloudes cracke, all be blacke,
But the light our charmes doe make.
NOt yet? my rage beginnes to swell;
Darkenesse, deuills, night, and hell,
Doe not thus delay my spell.
I call you once, and I call you twise;
I beat you againe, if you stay my thrise:
Thorough these cranyes, where I peepe,
I'le let in the light to see your sleepe.
And all the secrets of your sway
Shall lie as open to the day,
As vnto me. Still are you deafe?
Reach me a bough, that ne're bare leafe,
To strike the aire; and Aconite,
To hurle vpon this glaring light;
A rustie knife, to wound mine arme;
And, as it drops, I'le speake a charme,
Shall cleaue the ground, as low as lies
Old shrunk-vp CHAOS, and let rise,
Once more, his darke, and reeking head,
To strike the world, and nature dead,
Vntill my magicke birth be bred.
BLacke goe in, and blacker come out;
At thy going downe, we giue thee a shout.
Hoo!
At thy rising againe, thou shalt haue two,
And if thou dost what, we would haue thee doe,
Thou shalt haue three, thou shalt haue foure,
Thou shalt haue ten, thou shalt haue a score.
Hoo. Har. Har. Hoo!
A Cloud of pitch, a spurre, and a switch,
To haste him away, and a whirlewind play,
Before, and after, which thunder for laughter,
And stormes for ioy, of the roaring boy;
His head of a drake, his taile of a snake.
ABout, about, and about,
Till the mist arise, and the lights lie out,
The images neither be seene, nor felt;
The wollen burne, and the waxen melt;
Sprinkle your liquors vpon the ground,
And into the ayre; around, around.
Around, around,
Around, around,
Till a musique sound,
And the pase be found,
To which we may daunce,
And our Charmes aduance.
SO should, at FAMES lowd sound, and VERTVES sight,
All darke, and enuious witchcraft flie the light.
I did not borrow HERMES wings, nor aske
His crooked sword, nor put on PLVTO'S caske,
Nor on mine arme, aduanc'd wise PALLAS shield,
(By which, my face auers'd, in open field
I slue the GORGON) for an emptie name:
When VERTVE cut off TERROR, he gat FAME.
And, if when FAME was gotten, TERROR di'de,
What black ERYNNIS, or more hellish pride,
Durst arme these HAGS, now shee is growne, and great,
To thinke they could her glories once defeat?
I was her parent, and I am her strength.
Heroique Vertue sinkes not vnder length
Of yeeres, or ages; but is still the same,
While he preserues, as when he got good FAME.
My daughter, then, whose glorious house you see
Built of all sounding brasse, whose columnes bee
Men making Poets, and those well-made Men,
Whose strife it was, to haue the happyest pen
Renowne them to an after-life, and not
With pride, to scorne the Muse, and die forgot;
Shee, that inquireth into all the world,
And hath, about her vaulted Palace, hoorl'd
All rumors and reports, or true, or vaine,
What vtmost lands, or deepest seas containe;
(But only hangs great actions, on her file)
Shee, to this lesser world, and greatest Ile,
To night sounds Honor, which shee would haue seene
In yond' bright BEVIE each of them a Queene.
Eleuen of them are of times, long gone.
PENTHESILEA, the braue Amazon,
Swift foot CAMILLA, Queene of Volscia,
Victorious THOMYRIS of Scythia,
Chast ARTEMISIA, the Carian dame,
And fayre-hayr'd BERONICE, Aegypts fame,
HYPSICRATEA, glorie of Asia,
CANDACE, pride of Aethiopia.
The Brittane honor, VOADICEA,
The vertuous PALMYRENE, ZENOBIA,
The wife, and warlike Goth, AMALASVNTA,
And bold VALASCA, of Bohemia.
Her house is all of echo made,
Where neuer dyes the sound;
And, as her browes the cloudes inuade,
Her foot doe strike the ground.
Sing then good Fame, that's out of Vertue borne:
For, who doth Fame neglect, doth Vertue scorne.
WHen all the Ages of the earth
Were crown'd, but in this famous Birth;
And that, when they would boast their store
Of Worthy Queenes, they knew no more:
How happier is that Age, can giue
A Queene, in whom all they doe liue!
WHo, Vertue, can thy power forget,
That sees these liue, & triumph yet?
Th' Assyrian pompe, the Persian pride,
Grekes glory, and the Romanes di'de:
And who yet imitate
Their noyses, tarry the same fate.
Force greatnesse all the glorious waies
You can, it soone decaies;
But so good Fame shall neuer:
Her triumphs, as their causes, are for euer.