YOV wofull wights giue eare a while,
And marke the tenor of my ſtile,
Which ſhall ſuch trembling hearts vnfold
As ſeldome hath to fore bene told.
Such chances rare and dolefull newes
Peace a Gods name.
As may attempt your wits to muſe.
A pox a God on you.
And cauſe ſuch trickling teares to paſſe,
Except your hearts be flint or braſſe:
To heare the newes which I ſhall tell,
That in Caſtella once befell.
Sbloud, where didſt thou learne to corrupt a man in the midſt of a verſe, ha?
Gods lid man, ſeruice is ready to go vp man, you muſt ſlip on your coate and come in, we lacke waiters pittyfully.
A pittifull hearing, for now muſt I of a merry Cobler become mourning creature.
Well youle come.
Preſto. Go to, a word to the wiſe, away, flie? vaniſh: Lye there the weedes that I diſdaine to weare.
God ſaue you Maiſter Iuniper.
What Signior Antonio Balladino, welcome ſweet Ingle,
And how do you ſir?
Faith you ſee, put to my ſhifts here as poore retainers be oftentimes, ſirrah Antony ther's one of my fellowes mightely enamored of thee, and I faith you ſlaue, now your come I'le bring you together, i'ts Peter Onion, the groome of the hal, do you know him.
No not yet, I aſſure you.
O he is one as right of thy humour as may be, a plaine ſimple Raſcal, a true dunce, marry he hath bene anotable vilaine in his time: he is in loue, ſirrah, with awench, & I haue preferd thee to him, thou ſhalt make him ſome prety Paradox or ſome Aligory, how does my coate ſit? well.
I very well.
Na Gods ſo, fellow Iuniper, come away.
Art thou there mad ſlaue, I come with a powder?. Sirrah fellow Onion. I muſt haue you peruſe this Gentleman well, and doe him good offices of reſpect and kindneſſe, as inſtance ſhall be giuen.
Nay good maiſter Onion what do you meane, I pray you ſir you are to reſpectue in good faith.
I would not you ſhould thinke ſo ſir, for though I haue no learning, yet I honour a ſcholer in any ground of the earth ſir,
Shall I requeſt your name ſir?
My name is Antonio Balladino.
Balladino? you are not Pageant Poet to the City of Millaine ſir▪ are you.
I ſupply the place ſir: when aworſe cannot be had ſir.
I crie you mercy ſir, I loue you the better for that ſir, by Ieſu you muſt pardon me, I knew you not, but Il'd pray to be better acquainted with you ſir, I haue ſeene of your works.
I am at your ſeruice good Maiſter Onion, but concerning this maiden that you loue ſir? what is ſhe,
O did my fellow Iuniper tell you? marry ſir, ſhe is as one may ſay, but a poore mans child indeede, and for mine owne part I am no Gentleman borne I muſt confeſſe, but my mind to me a kingdome is truly.
Truly a very good ſaying.
T'is ſomewhat ſtale, but that's no matter.
O t'is the better, ſuch things euer are like bread, which the ſtaler it is, the more holeſome.
This is but a hungry compariſon in my iudgement.
Why, I'le tell you, M. Onion, I do vſe as much ſtale ſtuffe, though I ſay it my ſelfe, as any man does in that kind I am ſure. Did you ſee the laſt Pageant, I ſet forth?
No faith ſir, but there goes a huge report on't.
Why, you ſhal be one of my Maecen-aſſes, I'le giue you one of the bookes, O you'le like it admirably.
Nay that's certaine, I'le get my fellow Iuniper to read it.
Reade it ſir, I'le reade it to you.
Tut then I ſhall not chuſe but like it.
Why looke you ſir, I write ſo plaine, and keepe that old Decorum, that you muſt of neceſſitie like it; mary you ſhall haue ſome now (as for example, in plaies) that will haue euery day new trickes, and write you nothing but humours: indeede this pleaſes the Gentlemen: but the common ſort they care not for't, they know not what to make on't, they looke for good matter, they, and are not edified with ſuch toyes.
You are in the right, I'le not giue a halfepeny to ſee a thouſand on'hem. I was at one the laſt Tearme, but & euer I ſee a more roguiſh thing, I am a peece of cheeſe, & no onion, nothing but kings & princes in it, the foole came not out a lot.
True ſir, they would haue me make ſuch plaies, but as I tell hem, and they'le giue me twenty pound a play, I'le not raiſe my vaine.
No, it were a vaine thing, and you ſhould ſir.
Tut giue me the penny, giue me the peny, I care not for the Gentlemen I, let me haue a good ground, no matter for the pen the plot ſhall carry it.
Indeed that's right, you are in print already for the beſt plotter.
I, I might as well ha bene put in for a dumb ſhew too.
I marry ſir, I marle you were not, ſtand aſide ſir a while:
How now friend, what are you there? be vncouered, Would you ſpeake with any man here?
I, or elſe I muſt Ira' returnd you no anſwer.
Friend, you are ſomewhat to peremptory, let's craue your abſence: nay neuer ſcorne it, I am a little your better in this place.
I do acknowledge it.
Do you acknowledge it? nay then you ſhall go forth, Ile teach you how ſhall acknowledge it another time; go to, void, I muſt haue the hall purg'd, no ſetting vp of a reſt here, packe, begone.
I pray you ſir is not your name Onion?
Your friend as you may vſe him, and M. Onion, ſay on.
M. Onion with a murraine, come come put off this Lyons hide, your eares haue diſcouered you, why Peter! do not I know you Peter?
Gods ſo, Valentine!
O can you take knowledge of me now ſir?
Good Lord, ſirra, how thou art altred with thy trauell?
Nothing ſo much as thou art with thine office, but ſirra, Onion is the Count Ferneze at home?
I Bully, he is aboue; and the Lord Paulo Ferneze, his ſon, and Maddam Aurelia, & maddam Phaenixella, his daughters, But O Valentine?
How now man, how doſt thou?
Faith ſad, heauy, as a man of my coate ought to be.
Why man, thou wert merry inough euen now.
True, but thou knoweſt
All creatures here ſoiorning, vpon this wretched earth,
Sometimes haue a fit of mourning, as well as a fit of mirth.
O Valentine, mine old Lady is dead, man.
Dead!
I faith.
When dyed ſhe?
Mary, to morrow ſhall be three months, ſhe was ſeene going to heauen they ſay, about ſome fiue weekes agone! how now? trickling teares, ha?
Faith thou haſt made me weepe with this newes.
Faith thou haſt made me weepe with this newes.
Why I haue done but the parte of an Onion, you muſt pardon me.
What Valentiue? fellow Onion, take my diſh I prithee you rogue ſirrah, tell me, how thou doſt, ſweet Ingle.
Faith, Iuniper, the better to ſee thee thus frolicke.
Nay, ſlid I am no changling, I am Iuniper ſtill. I keepe the priſtmate ha, you mad Hierogliphick, when ſhal we ſwagger.
Hierogliphick, what meaneſt thou by that.
Meane? Gods ſo, iſt not a good word man? what? ſtand vpon meaning with your freinds. Puh, Abſconde.
Why, but ſtay, ſtay, how long has this ſprightly humor haunted thee?
Foe humour, a fooliſh naturall gift we haue in the Aequinoctiall.
Naturall, ſlid it may be ſupernaturall, this?
Valentine, I prithee ruminate thy ſelfe welcome. What fortuna de la Guerra.
O how pittifully are theſe words forc't.
As though they were pumpt out on's belly.
Sirrah Ingle, I thinke thou haſt ſeene all the ſtrange countries in Chriſtendome ſince thou wentſt?
I haue ſeene ſome Iuniper.
You haue ſeene Conſtantinople?
I, that I haue.
And Ieruſalem, and the Indies, and Goodwine ſands, and the tower of Babylon, and Venice and all.
I all; and he haue a nimble tong, if he practiſe to vault thus from one ſide of the world to another.
O it's a moſt heauenly thing to trauel, & ſee countries, eſpecially at ſea, and a man had a pattent not to be ſicke.
O ſea ſicke leſt, and full of the ſcuruie.
Valentine? welcome I faith how doſt ſirra?
How do you good Valentine.
Troth, Valentine, I am glad to ſee you.
Welcome ſweet rogue.
Before God he neuer lookt better in his life.
And how iſt man? what, Alla Coragio.
Neuer better gentlemen I faith.
S'will here comes the ſteward.
Why how now fellowes all here? and nobody to waight aboue now they are ready to riſe? looke vp one or two Signior Franceſco Colomia's man how doo's your good maiſter.
In health ſir he will be here anon.
Is he come home, then?
I ſir he is not paſt ſixe miles hence, he ſent me before to learne if Count Ferneze were here and returne him word.
Yes, my Lord is here; and you may tel your maiſter he ſhal come very happily to take his leaue of Lord Paulo Ferneze: who is now inſtantly to depart with other noble gentlemen, vpon ſpeciall ſeruice.
I will tell him ſir.
I pray you doe, fellowes make him drinke.
Sirs, what ſeruice iſt they are imployed in?
Why againſt the French they meane to haue a fling at Millaine againe they ſay.
Who leades our forces, can you tell?
Marry that do's Signior Maximilian? he is aboue, now.
Who, Maximilian of Vicenza?
I he? do you know him?
Know him? O yes he's an excellent braue ſoldier.
I ſo they ſay, but one of the moſt vaine glorious men in Europe.
He is indeed, marry exceeding valient.
And that is rare.
What.
Why to ſee a vaineglorious man valient.
Well he is ſo I aſſure you.
What no further yet, come on you precious raſcall, ſir Valentine, Ile giue you a health I faith, for the heauens you mad Capriceio, hold hooke and line.
Boy.
My Lord.
Sirrah go vp to Signior Angelio,
And pray him (if he can) deuiſe ſome meanes,
To leaue my father, and come ſpeake with me.
I will my Lord.
Well heauen, be auſpicious in the euent;
For I do this againſt my Genius,
And yet my thoughts cannot propoſe a reaſon.
Why I ſhould feare, or faint thus in my hopes,
Of one ſo much endeered to my loue.
Some ſparke it is, kindled within the ſoule:
Whoſe light yet breaks not to the outward ſence,
That propagates this tymerous ſuſpect;
His actions neuer carried any face
Of change, or weaknes: then I iniury him?
In being thus cold conceited of his faith,
O here he comes.
How now ſweet Lord, whats the matter?
Good faith his preſence makes me halfe aſhamd.
Of my ſtraid thoughts. Boy. Beſtow your ſelfe.
Where is my father, Signior Angelio.
Marry in the galery, where your Lordſhip left him.
Thats well. Then Angelio I will be briefe.
Since time forbids the vſe of circumſtance,
How well you are receiued in my affection,
Let it appeare by this one inſtance, onely
That now I will deliuer to your truſt,
The deereſt ſecrets, treaſurd in my boſome,
Deare Angelio. You are not euery man,
But one, whome my election hath deſign'd,
As the true proper obiect of my ſoule:
I vrge not this t'inſinuate my deſert,
Or ſupple your tri'd temper, with ſoft phraſes;
True frendſhip lothes ſuch oyly complement:
But from th'aboundance of that loue, that flowes
Through all my ſpirits, is my ſpeech enforc'd.
Before your Lordſhip do proceed too far,
Let me be bould to intimate thus much;
That what ſo ere your wiſedome hath t'expoſe,
Be it the waightieſt and moſt rich affaire,
That euer was included in your breaſt,
My faith ſhall poiſe it, if not—
O no more,
Thoſe words haue rapt me with their ſweet effects,
So freely breath'd, and ſo reſponſible,
To that which I endeuoured to extract,
Arguing a happy mixture of our ſoules.
Why were there no ſuch ſympathy ſweete Lord?
Yet the impreſſure of thoſe ample fauours,
I haue deriu'd from your vnmatched ſpirit,
Would bind my faith to all obſeruances.
How! fauours Angello, ô ſpeake not of them,
They are meere paintings, and import no merit,
Lookes my loue well? thereon my hopes are plac't:
Faith, that is bought with fauours, cannot laſt.
My Lord.
How now?
You are ſought for all about the houſe, within,
The Count your father cals for you.
God, what croſſe euents do meet my purpoſes?
Now will he violently fret and grieue
That I am abſent. Boy, ſay I come preſently:
Sweet Angello, I cannot now inſiſt
Vpon particulars, I muſt ſerue the time
The maine of all this is, I am in loue.
Why ſtarts your Lordſhip?
I thought I heard my father comming hither ward, liſt, ha?
I heare not any thing, it was but your imagination ſure.
No?
No, I aſſure your Lordſhip.
I would worke ſafely.
Why, has he no knowledge of it then?
O no, no creature yet pertakes it but your ſelfe
In a third perſon, and beleeue me friend,
The world containes not now another ſpirit,
To whom I would reueile it. Harke, harke,
A pox vpon thoſe brazen throated ſlaues,
What are they mad, trow?
Alas, blame not them,
Their ſeruices are (clock-like) to beſet,
Backward and forward, at their Lords command,
You know my father's wayward, and his humour
Muſt not receiue a check, for then all obiects,
Feede both his griefe and his impatience,
And thoſe affections in him, are like powder,
Apt to enflame with euery little ſparke,
And blow vp reaſon, therefore Angelo, peace.
He is comming this way, let's withdraw a little.
VVHere ſhould he be, trow? did you looke in the armory?
No my Lord.
No, why there? ô who would keepe ſuch drones? How now, ha ye found him?
No my Lord.
No my Lord, I ſhall haue ſhortly all my family
Speake nought, but no my Lord, where is Chriſtophero,
Looke how he ſtands, you ſleep y knaue,
What is he not in the Garden?
No my good Lord.
Your good Lord, ô how this ſmels of fennell. You haue bene in the garden it appeares, well, well.
We cannot find him my Lord.
He is not in the armory.
He is not, he is no where, is he?
Count Ferneze.
Signior.
Preſerue your patience honorable Count.
Patience? a Saint would looſe his patience to be croſt,
As I am with a ſort of motly braines,
See ſee, how like a neſt of Rookes they ſtand,
Gaping on one another! now Diligence, what news bring you?
Ant pleaſe your honour.
Tut, tut, leaue pleaſing of my honour Diligence, you double with we, come.
How: does he find fault with Pleaſe his Honour. S'wounds it has begun a ſeruing mans ſpeech, euer ſince I belongd to the blew order: I know not how it may ſhew, now I am in blacke, but—
Whats that, you mutter ſir? will you proceed?
Ant like your good Lordſhip.
Yet more; Gods precious.
What, do not this like him neither?
What ſay you ſir knaue?
Mary I ſay your Lordſhip were beſt to ſet me to ſchoole againe, to learne how to deliuer a meſſage.
What do you take exceptions at me then.
Exception? I take no exceptions, but by Gods ſo your humours—
Go to you are a Raskall, hold your tongue.
Your Lordſhips poore ſeruant, I.
Tempt not my patience.
Why I hope I am no ſpirit, am I?
My Lord, command your Steward to correct the ſlaue.
Correct him, S'bloud come you and correct him and you haue a minde to it, correct him, that's a good ieſt I faith, the Steward and you both, come and correct him.
Nay ſee, away with him, pull his cloth ouer his eares.
Cloth? tell me of your cloth, here's your cloth, nay and I mourne a minute longer, I am the rotteneſt Onion that euer ſpake with a tongue.
What call your hind's count Ferneze?
His name is Onion Signior,
I thought him ſome ſuch ſawcy companion.
Signior Maximillian.
Sweet Lord.
Let me intreat you, you would not regard
Any contempt flowing from ſuch a ſpirit,
So rude, ſo barbarous.
Moſt noble Count vnder your fauour—
Why Ile tell you Signior,
Heele bandy with me word for word, nay more,
Put me to ſilence, ſtrike me perfect dumb;
And ſo amaze me, that oftentimes I know not,
Whether to check or cheriſh his preſumption:
Therefore good Signior.
Sweet Lord ſatisfie your ſelfe, I am not now to learn how to manage my affections, I haue obſeru'd, and know the difference betweene a baſe wretch and a true man, I can diſtinguiſh them, the property of the wretch is, he would hurt and cannot, of the man, he can hurt, and will not.
Go to, my merry daughter, ô theſe lookes,
Agree well with your habit, do they not?
Tut, let me alone. By your fauour, this is the Gentleman I thinke, Sir you appeare to be an honorable Gentleman, I vnderſtand, and could wiſh (for mine owne part) that things were conden't otherwiſe then they are: but (the world knowes) a fooliſh fellow, ſomewhat procliue, and haſty, he did it in a preiudicate humour; mary now vpon better computation, he wanes; he melts; his poore eyes are in a cold ſweat. Right noble Signior, you can haue but compunction, I loue the man, tender your compaſſion.
Doth any man here vnderſtand this fellow?
O God ſir, I may ſay fruſtra to the comprehenſion of your intellection.
Before the Lord, he ſpeakes all riddle, I thinke.
I muſt haue a comment ere I can conceiue him.
Why he ſues to haue his fellow Onion pardon'd,
And you muſt grant it Signior.
O with all my ſoule my Lord, is that his motion?
I ſir, and we ſhall retort theſe kinde fauours with all allacrity of ſpirit, we can ſir, as may be moſt expedient, as well for the quality as the cauſe, till when in ſpight of this complement: I reſt a poore Cobler, ſeruant to my honorable Lord here, your friend and Iuniper.
How Iuniper?
I Signior.
He is a ſweete youth, his tongue has a happy turne when he ſleepes.
I for then it reſts, O Sir your welcome,
Why God be thanked you are found at laſt.
Signior Coloma truly you are welcome,
I am glad to ſee you ſir ſo well returned.
I gladly thanke your honour, yet indeed
I am ſory for ſuch cauſe of heauineſſe,
As hath poſſeſt your Lordſhip in my abſence.
O Franciſco' you knew her what ſhe was!
She was a wiſe and honorable Lady.
I was ſhe not! well weepe not ſhe is gone,
Paſſons duld eye can make two grieues of one,
Whom death marke out, vertue, nor bluod can ſaue,
Princes, as beggers, all muſt feed the graue.
Are your horſe ready Lord Paulo,
I ſignior the ſtay for vs at the gate.
Well tis good. Ladies I will take my leaue of you,
Be your fortunes as your ſelues? faire. Come let vs to horſe,
Count Ferneze I beare a ſpirit full of thanks for all your honorable courteſies.
Sir I could wiſh the number and value of them more in reſpect of your deſeruings. But Signior Maximillian. I pay you a word in priuate.
I Faith brother you are fitted for a generall yonder, Beſhrow my heart (If I had Fortunatus hat here) and I would not wiſh my ſelfe a man and go with you, only t'enioy his preſence.
Why do you loue him ſo well ſiſter.
No by my troth, but I haue ſuch an odde prety apprehenſion of his humour me thinks: that I am eene tickled with the conceite of it.
O he is a fine man.
And me thinks another may be as fine as he.
O Angelio, do you thinke I do vrge any compariſon againſt you? no, I am not ſo ill bred, as to be a deprauer of your worthines: beleeue me, if I had not ſome hope of your abiding with vs, I ſhould neuer deſire to go out of black whilſt I liued: but learne to ſpeake i'the noſe, and turne puritan preſently.
I thanke you Lady: I know you can flout.
Come doe you take it ſo? I faith you wrong me.
I, but Maddame,
Thus to diſclaime in all the effects of pleaſure,
May make your ſadneſſe ſeeme to much affected,
And then the proper grace of it is loſt.
Indeed ſir, if I did put on this ſadneſſe
Onely abroad, and in Society,
And were in priuate merry; and quick humor'd;
Then might it ſeeme affected and abhord:
But as my lookes appeare, ſuch is my ſpirit,
Drown'd vp with confluence of griefe, and melancholy,
That like to riuers run through all my vaines,
Quenching the pride and feruour of my bloud.
My honorable Lord? no more.
There is the honour of my bloud ingag'd,
For your ſonnes ſafety.
Signior, blame me not,
For tending his ſecurity ſo much,
He is mine onely ſonne, and that word onely,
Hath with his ſtrong, and reprecuſſiue ſound,
Stroke my heart cold, and giuen it a deepe wound.
Why but ſtay, I beſeech you, had your Lordſhip euer any more ſonnes then this.
Why haue not you knowen it Maximilian?
Let my Sword faile me then.
I had one other yonger borne then this,
By twiſe ſo many how ers as would fill
The circle of a yeare, his name Camillo,
Whome in that blacke, and fearfull night I loſt,
(Tis now a nineteene yeares agone at leaſt,
And yet the memory of it fits as freſh
Within my braine as twere but yeſterday)
It was that night wherein the great Chamont,
The generall for France ſurpriſed Vicenza,
Me thinks the horrour of that clamorous ſhout
His ſouldiers gaue 'when they attaind the wall,
Yet tingles in mine eare, me thinkes I ſee
With what amazed lookes, diſtracted thoughts,
And minds confuſ'd, we, that were citizens,
Confronted one another: euery ſtreet
Was fild with bitter ſelfe tormenting cries,
And happy was that foote, that firſt could preſſe,
The flowry champaigne, bordering on Verona
Heere I (imploy'd about my deare wiues ſafety)
Whoſe ſoule is now in peace) loſt my Camillo.
Who ſure was murdered by the barbarous Souldiers,
Or elſe I ſhould haue heard—my heart is great.
Sorrow is faint? and paſſion makes me ſweat.
Grieue not ſweet Count: comfort your ſpirts, you haue a ſonne a noble gentleman, he ſtands in the face of honour: For his ſafety let that be no queſtion. I am maiſter of my fortune, and he ſhall ſhare with me. Farewell my honorable Lord. Ladies once more adiew, for your ſelfe maddam you are a moſt rare creature, I tell you ſo, be not proud of it, I loue you: come Lord Paulo to horſe.
Adiew good Signior Franceſco: farewell ſiſter.
How ſhall we rid him hence.
Why well inough? ſweet Signior Maximilian.
I haue ſome ſmall occaſion to ſtay:
If it may pleaſe you but take horſe afore
Ile ouer take you, ere your troopes be ranged.
Your motion hath taſt wel: Lord Ferneze I go
Now if my loue faire Rachel, were ſo happy,
But to looke forth. See fortune doth me grace.
Before I can demaund? how now loue.
Where is your father?
Gone abroad my Lord:
Thats well,
I but I feare heele preſently returne,
Are you now going my moſt honored Lord?
I my ſweet Rachel.
Before God, ſhe is a ſweet wench.
Rachel I hope I ſhall not need to vrge,
The ſacred purity of our effects,
As if it hung in triall or ſuſpence:
Since in our hearts, and by our mutuall vowes,
It is confirmd and ſeald in ſight of heauen.
Nay doe not weepe, why ſtarte you? feare not, Loue.
Your father cannot be returned ſo ſoone,
I prithee doe not looke ſo heauily
Thou ſhalt want nothing
No is your preſence nothing,
I ſhall want that, and wanting that, want all
For that is all to me.
Content thee ſweet
I haue Made choiſe here of a conſtant friend
This gentleman? one, whoſe zealous loue
I doe repoſe more, then on all the world,
Thy beauteous ſelfe excepted: and to him,
Haue I committed my deere care of thee,
As to my genius, or my other ſoule.
Rsceiue hi gentle loue and what deffects,
My abſence proues, his preſence ſhall ſupply.
The time is enuious of our longer ſtay.
Farewell deere Rachel.
Moſt deere Lord, adew,
Heauen and honour crowne your deeds, and you,
Faiah tell me Angelio how doſt thou like her?
Troth well my Lord, but ſhall I ſpeake my mind.
I prithee doe.
She is deriud too meanely to be wife
To ſuch a noble perſon, in my iudgement.
Nay then thy iudgement is to meene, I ſe
Didſt thou neare read in difference of good
Tis more to ſhine in vertue then in bloud.
Come you are ſo ſententious my Lord.
Here comes her father. How doſt thou good Iaques?
God ſaue thee Iaques.
What ſhould this meane? Rachel open the dore.
Sbloud how the poore ſlaue lookes, as though
He had bene hauuted by the ſpirit Lar,
Or ſeene the ghoſt of ſome great Satrapas.
In an vnſauory ſheet.
I muſe he ſpake no, belike he was amazd
Comming ſo ſuddenly and vnprepard? Well lets go:
SO now inough my heart, beat now no more;
At leaſt for this afright, what a could ſweat,
Flow'd on my browes, and ouer all my boſome!
Had I not reaſon? to behold my dore
Beſet with vnthrifts, and my ſelfe abroad?
Why Iaques? was their nothing in the houſe
Worth a continuall eye, a vigelent thought,
Whoſe head ſhould neuer nod, nor eyes once wincke?
Looke on my coate; my thoughts; worne quite thred bare,
That time could neuer couer with a nappe,
And by it learne, neuer with nappes of ſleepe,
To ſmother your conceipts of that you keepe.
But yet, I maruell, why theſe gallant youths
Spokeine ſo faire, and I eſteemd a beggar?
The end of flattery, is gaine, or lechery:
If they ſeeke gaine of me, they thinke me rich,
But that they do not: for their other obiect:
Tis in my handſome daughter, if it be.
And by your leaue, her handſomneſſe may tell them
My beggery counterfeits, and, that her neatneſſe,
Flowes from ſome ſtore of wealth, that breakes my coffers,
With this ſame engine, loue to mine owne breed.
But this is anſwered: Beggers will keepe fine,
Their daughters, being faire, though themſelues pine.
Well then, it is for her, I, t'is ſure for her,
And I make her ſo briske for ſome of them,
That I might liue alone once with my gold.
O t'is a ſweet companion! kind and true,
A man may truſt it when his father cheats him;
Brother, or friend, or wife, ô wondrous pelfe,
"That which makes all men falſe, is true it ſelfe.
But now this maid, is but ſuppos'd my daughter:
For I being Steward to a Lord of France,
Of great eſtate, and wealth, called Lord Chammount,
He gone into the warres, I ſtole his treaſure,
(But heare not, any thing) I ſtole his treaſure,
And this his daughter, being but two yeares old,
Becauſe it lou'd me ſo, that it would leaue
The nurſe her ſelfe, to come into mine armes,
And had I left it, it would ſure haue dyed.
Now herein I was kinde, and had a conſcience;
And ſince her Lady mother that did dye
In child-bed of her, loued me paſſing well,
It may be nature faſhiond this affection,
Both in the child and her: but hees ill bred,
That ranſackes tombes, and doth deface the dead.
I'le therefore ſay no more: ſuppoſe the reſt,
Here haue I chang'd my forme, my name and hers.
And liue obſurely, to enioy more ſafe
My deereſt treaſure. But I muſt abroad, Rachel.
VVhat is your pleaſure ſir?
Rachel I muſt abroad.
Lock thy ſelfe in, but yet take out the key,
That whoſoeuer peepes in at the key-hole,
May yet imagine there is none at home.
I will ſir.
But harke thee Rachel: ſay a theefe ſhould come,
And miſſe the key, he would reſoule indeede
None were at home, and ſo breake in the rather:
Ope the doore Rachel, ſet it open daughter;
But ſit in it thy ſelfe: and talke alowd,
As if there were ſome more in houſe with thee:
Put out the fire, kill the chimnies hart,
That it may breath no more then a dead man,
The more we ſpare my child, the more we gaine.
What ſayes my fellow Onion? come on.
All of a houſe ſir, but no fellowes, you are my Lords Steward, but I pray you what thinke you of loue, ſir?
Of loue Onion? Why it's a very honourable humor.
Nay if it be but worſhipfull I care not.
Go to, it's honorable, checke not at the conceit of the Gentleman.
But in truth ſir, you ſhall do well to think well of loue:
For it thinkes well of you, in me, I aſſure you.
Gramercy fellow Onion: I do thinke well, thou art in loue, art thou?
Partly ſir, but I am aſham'd to ſay wholy.
Well, I will further it in thee to any honeſt woman, or maiden, the beſt I can.
Why now you come neere him ſir, he doth vaile,
He doth remunerate, he doth chaw the cud in the kindneſſe
Of an honeſt imperfection to your worſhip.
But who is it thou loueſt fellow Onion?
Mary a poore mans daughter, but none of the honeſteſt, I hope.
Why, wouldſt thou not haue her honeſt?
O no, for then I am ſure ſhe would not haue me. T'is Rachel de Prie.
Why, ſhe hath the name of a very vertuous mayden.
So ſhee is ſir, but the fellow talkes in quiddits, he.
What wouldſt thou haue me do in the matter?
Do nothing ſir, I pray you, but ſpeake for me.
In what maner?
My fellow Iuniper can tell you ſir.
Why as thus ſir. Your worſhip may commend him for a fellow fit for conſanguinity, and that he ſhaketh with defire of procreation, or ſo.
That were not ſo good, me thinkes.
No ſir, why ſo ſir? what if you ſhould ſay to her, correborate thy ſelfe ſweete ſoule, let me diſtinguiſh thy pappes with my fingers, diuine Mumps, prety Paſtorella? lookeſt thou ſo ſweet and bounteous? comfort my friend here.
Well I perceiue you wiſh, I ſhould ſay ſomething may do him grace, and further his deſires, and that be ſure I will.
I thanke you ſir, God ſaue your life, I pray God ſir.
Your worſhip is too good to liue long: youle contaminate me no ſeruice.
Command thou wouldeſt ſay, no good Iuniper.
Health and wealth ſir.
This wench wil ſolicite for my ſelfe,
Making my Lord and maiſter priuy to it;
And if he ſecond me with his conſent,
I will proceede, as hauing long ere this,
Though her a worthy choyce to make my wife.
Roome for a caſe of matrons coloured blacke,
How motherly my mothers death hath made vs?
I would I had ſome girles now to bring vp;
O I could make a wench ſo vertuous,
She ſhould ſay grace to euery bit of meate,
And gape no wider then a wafers thickneſſe:
And ſhe ſhould make French curſies, ſo moſt low,
That euery touch ſhould turne her ouer backward.
Siſter, theſe words become not your atrire,
Nor your eſtate: our vertuous mothers death
Should print more deepe effects of ſorrow in vs,
Then may be worne out in ſo little time.
Siſter, faith you take too much Tobacco,
It makes you blacke within, as y'are without.
What true-ſtich ſiſter? both your ſides alike?
Be of a ſleighter worke: for of my word,
You ſhall be ſold as deere or rather deerer?
Will you be bound to cuſtomes and to rites?
Shed profitable teares, weepe for aduantage;
Or elſe, do all things, as you are enclynd.
Hate when your ſtomacke ſerues (ſaith the Phyſitian)
Not at eleuen and ſixe. So if your humour
Be now affected with this heauineſſe.
Giue me the reines and ſpare not, as I do,
In this my pleaſurable appetite,
It is Praeciſianiſme to alter that
With auſtere iudgement, that is giuen by nature.
I wept you ſaw too, when my mother dyed:
For then I found it eaſier to do ſo,
And fitter with my moode, then not to weepe.
But now tis otherwiſe, another time
Perhaps I ſhall haue ſuch deepe thoughts of her,
That I ſhall weepe a freſh, ſome twelue month hence,
And I will weepe, if I be ſo diſpos'd,
And put on blacke, as grimly then, as now;
Let the minde go ſtill with the bodies ſtature,
Iudgement is fit for Iudges, giue me nature.
See Signior Angelo here are the Ladies,
Go you and comfort one, Ile to the other.
Therefore I come ſir, I'le to the eldeſt.
God ſaue you Ladies, theſe ſad moodes of yours,
That make you chooſe theſe ſolitary walkes,
Are hurtfull for your beauties.
If we had them.
Come, that condition might be for your hearts,
When you proteſt faith, ſince we cannot ſee them.
But this ſame heart of beauty, your ſweet face
Is in mine eye ſtill.
O you cut my heart with your ſharpe eye.
Nay Lady thats not ſo, your heart's to hard.
My beauties hart?
O no.
I meane that regent of affection, Maddam,
That tramples on al loue with ſuch contempt n this faire breaſt.
No more, your drift is ſauour'd,
I had rather ſeeme hard hearted
Then hard fauour'd,
Is that your meaning, Lady?
Go too ſir.
Your wits are freſh I know, they need no ſpur,
And therefore you wil ride them.
Say I doe.
They will not tire I hope?
No not with you, hark you ſweet Lady.
Tis much pitty Maddam.
You ſhould haue any reaſon to retaine
This ſigne of griefe, much leſſe the thing diſignde.
Griefes are more fit for Ladies then their pleaſures.
That is for ſuch as follow nought but pleaſures.
But you that temper them ſo wel with vertues,
Vſing your griefes ſo it would prooue them pleaſures.
And you would ſeeme in cauſe of griefes & pleaſures equally pleaſant.
Sir ſo I do now.
It is the exceſſe of either that I ſtriue
So much to ſhun in all my proou'd endeauours,
Although perhaps vnto a generall eye,
I may appeare moſt wedded to my griefes,
Yet doth my mind forſake no taſt of pleaſure,
I meane that happy pleaſure of the ſoule,
Deuine and ſacred contemplation
Of that eternall, and moſt glorious bliſſe.
Propoſed as the crowne vnto our ſoules.
I will be ſilent, yet that I may ſerue
But as a Decade in the art of memory
To put you ſtil in mind of your owne vertues
When your too ſerious thoughts make you too ſad)
Accept me for your ſeruant honored Lady.
Thoſe cerimonies are too comon ſignior Francis,
For your vncommon grauitie, and iudgement,
And fits them onely, that are nought but cerimony.
Come, I will not ſue, ſtally to be your ſeruant,
But a new tearme, will you be my refuge?
Your refuge, why ſir.
That I might fly to you, when all elſe faile me.
And you be good at flying, be my Plouer.
Nay take away the P.
Tut, then you cannot fly.
Ile warrant you. Ile borrow Cupids wings.
Maſſe then I feare me youle do ſtrange things:
I pray you blame me not, if I ſuſpect you,
Your owne confeſſion ſimply doth detect you,
Nay and you be ſo great in Cupids bookes,
T'will make me Iealous. you can with your lookes
(I warrant you) enflame a womans heart,
And at your pleaſure take loues golden dart,
And wound the breſt of any vertous maide.
Would I were hence: good Faith I am affraid,
You can conſtraine one ere they be aware,
To run mad for your loue?
O this is rate.
Cloſe with my daughters gentlemen? wel done,
Tis like your ſelues: nay luſty Angelo,
Let not my preſence make you bauke your ſport,
I will not breake a minute of diſcourſe
Twixt you and one of your faire Miſtreſſes.
One of my miſtreſſes? why thinks your Lordſhip I haue ſo many
Many? no Angelo.
I do not thinke th'aſt many, ſome fourteene
I here thou haſt, euen of our worthieſt dames,
Of any note, in Millaine:
Nay good my Lord fourteene: it is not ſo.
By'th the Maſſe that iſt, here are their names to ſhew
Fourteene, or fifteene t'one. Good Angelo.
You need not be aſhamd of any of them,
They are gallants all.
Sbloud you are ſuch a Lord.
Nay ſtay ſweet Angelo, I am diſpoſed
A little to be pleaſant paſt my couſtome,
He's gone? he's gone, I haue diſgraſt him ſhrewdly,
Daughters take heede of him, he's a wild youth,
Looke what he ſayes to you beleeue him not,
He will ſweare loue to euery one he ſees.
Franciſco, giue them councell, good Franciſco,
I dare truſt thee with both, but him with neither.
Your Lordſhip yet may truſt both them with him.
Well goe your waies away; how now Chriſtopher,
What newes with you?
I haue an humble ſuit to your good Lordſhip.
A ſuit Chriſtopher? what ſuit I prithee?
I would craue pardon at your Lordſhips hands,
If it ſeeme vaine or ſimple in your ſight.
Ile pardon all ſimplicity, Chriſtopher,
What is thy ſuit?
Perhaps being now ſo old a batcheler,
I ſhall ſeeme halfe vnwiſe, to bend my ſelfe
In ſtrict affection to a poore yong maide.
What? is it touching loue Chriſtopher?
Art thou diſpoſt to marry, why tis well.
I, but your Lordſhip may imagine now
That I being ſteward of your honours houſe.
If I be maried once, will more regard
The maintenance of my wife and of my charge,
Then the due diſcharge of my place and office.
No, no, Chriſtopher, I know thee honeſt.
Good faith my Lord, your honour may ſuſpect it▪ but—
Then I ſhould wrong thee, thou haſt euer been
Honeſt and true, and will be ſtill I knowe.
I but this marriage alters many men:
And you may feare, it will do me my Lord,
But ere it do ſo? I will vndergoe
Ten thouſand ſeuerall deaths.
I know it man.
Who wouldſt thou haue I prithee?
Rachel de prie,
If your good Lordſhip, graunt me your conſent.
Rachel de prie? what the poore beggers daughter?
Shees a right handſome maide, how poore ſoeuer,
And thou haſt my conſent, with all my hart.
I humbly thanke your honour. Ile now aſke her father.
Do ſo Chriſtofero thou ſhalt do well.
Tis ſtrange (ſhe being ſo poore) he ſhould affect her,
But this is more ſtrange that my ſelfe ſhould loue her.
I ſpide her, lately, at her fathers doore,
And if I did not ſee in her ſweet face
Gentry and nobleneſſe, nere truſt me more:
But this perſwaſion, fancie wrought in me,
That fancie being created with her lookes,
For where loue is he thinke his baſeſt obiect
Gentle and noble: I am farre in loue,
And ſhall be forc'd to wrong my honeſt ſteward,
For I muſt ſue, and ſeeke her for my ſelfe;
How much my duetie to my late dead wife,
And my owne deere renowne ſo ere it ſwaies,
He to her father ſtraight. Loue hates delays.
Come on Ifaith, lets to ſome exerciſe or other my hearts: Fetch the hilts fellow Iuniper, wilt thou play:
I cannot reſolue you? tis as I am fitted with the ingenuity, quantity, or quality of the cudgell.
How doſt thou baſtinado the poore cudgell with tearmes?
O Ingle, I haue the phraſes man, and the Anagrams and the Epitaphs, fitting the miſtery of the noble ſcience.
Ile be hangd & he were not misbegotten of ſome fencer.
Sirrah Valentine, you can reſolue me now, haue they their maiſters of defence in other countries as we haue here in Italy?
O Lord, I, eſpecially they in Vtopia, there they performe their prizes and chalenges, with as great cerimony as the Italian or any nation elſe.
Indeed? how is the manner of it (for gods loue) good Valeniine?
Ingle? I prithee make recourſe vnto vs, wee are thy friends and familiars: ſweet Ingle.
Why thus ſir.
God a mercy good Valentine, nay go on.
Silentium bonus ſocius Onionus, good fellow Onion be not ſo ingenious, and turbulent: ſo fir? and how? how ſweete Ingle?
Marry, firſt they are brought to the publicke Theater:
What? ha? they Theater there
Theaters? I and plaies to: both tragidy and comedy & ſet foorth with as much ſtate as can be imagined?
By Gods ſo; a man is nobody, till he has trauelled.
And how are their plaies? as ours are? extemporall?
O no? all premeditated things, and ſome of them very good I faith, my maiſter vſed to viſite them often when he was there.
Why how are they in a place where any man may ſee them?
I, in the common Theaters, I tell you. But the ſport is at a new play to obſerue the ſway and variety of oppinion that paſſeth it. A man ſhall haue ſuch a confus'd mixture of iudgement, powr'd out in the throng there, as ridiculous, as laughter it ſelfe: one ſaies he likes not the writing, another likes not the plot, another not the playing. And ſometimes a fellow that comes not there paſt once in fiue yeare at a Parliament time or ſo, will be as deepe myr'd in cenſuring as the beſt, and ſweare by Gods foote he would neuer ſtirre his foote to ſee a hundred ſuch as that is.
I muſt trauell to ſee theſe things, I ſhall nere think well of my ſelfe elſe.
Fellow Onion, Ile beare thy charges and thou wilt but pilgrimize it along with me, to the land of Vtopia.
Why but me thinkes ſuch rookes as theſe ſhould be aſham'd to iudge.
Not a whit? the rankeſt ſtinkard of them all, will take vpon him as peremptory, as if he had writ himſelfe in artibus magiſter.
And do they ſtand to a popular cenſure for any thing they preſent.
I euer, euer, and the people generally are very acceptiue and apt to applaud any meritable worke, but there are two ſorts of perſons that moſt commonly are infectious to a whole auditory.
What be they?
I come lets know them.
It were good they were noted.
Marry? one is the rude barbarous crue, a people that haue no braines, and yet grounded iudgements, theſe will hiſſe any thing that mounts aboue their grounded capacities. But the other are worth the obſeruation, I faith.
What be they? what be they?
Faith a few Caprichious gallants.
Caprichious? ſtay, that word's for me.
And they haue taken ſuch a habit of diſlike in all things, that they will approue nothing, be it neuer ſo conceited or elaborate, but ſit diſperſt, making faces, and ſpitting, wagging their vpright eares and cry filthy, filthy. Simply vttering their owne condition, and vſing their wryed countenances in ſtead of a vice, to turne the good aſpects of all that ſhall ſit neere them, from what they behold.
O that's well ſayd, lay them downe, come ſirs.
Who plaies, fellow Iuniper, Sebaſtian, Balthaſar:
Some body take them vp, come.
Ingle Valentine?
Not I ſir, I profeſſe it not.
Sebaſtian.
Balthaſar.
Who? I?
Come, but one bout, Ile giue hem thee, I faith.
Why, heres Martino.
Foe he, alas he cannot play a whit, man.
That's all one: no more could you in ſtata quo prius, Martino, play with him, euery man has his beginning and conduction.
Will you not hurt me fellow Onion?
Hurt thee, no? and I do, put me among pot-hearbs, And chop me to peeces, come on?
By your fauor ſweet bullies giue them roome, back, ſo, Martino, do not looke ſo thin vpon the matter.
Ha, well plaid, fall ouer to my legge now? ſo, to your guard againe, excellent, to my head now, make home your blow: ſpare not me, make it home, good, good a gaine.
Why how now Peter?
Gods ſo, Onion has caught a bruiſe.
Couragio? be not caprichious? what?
Caprichious? not I, I ſcorn to be caprichious for a ſcrach, Martino muſt haue another bout, come.
No, no, play no more, play no more.
Foe, tis nothing a philip, a deuiſe, fellow Iuniper prithee get me a Plantan, I had rather play with one that had skil by halfe.
By my troth, fellow Onion, twas againſt my will.
Nay that's not ſo, twas againſt my head,
But come, weele ha one bout more.
Not a bout, not a ſtroke.
No more, no more.
Why Ile giue you demonſtration, how it came, Thou openeſt the dagger to falſifie ouer with the back ſword frick, and he interrupted, before he could fall to the cloſe.
No, no, I know beſt how it was better thē any man here, I felt his play preſently: for looke you, I gathered vpon him thus, thus do you ſee? for the double locke, and tooke it ſingle on the head.
He ſayes very true, he tooke it ſingle on the head.
Come lets go.
Here fellow Onion, heres a cob-web.
How? a cob-web Martino, I will haue another bout with you? S'wounds do you firſt breake my head, and then giue me a plaiſter in ſcorne? come to it, I will haue a bout.
God's my witneſſe.
Tut! your witneſſe cannot ſerue.
S'bloud? why what, thou art not lunatike, art thou? and thou bee'ſt auoide Mephoſtophiles. Say the ſigne ſhoud be in Aries now: as it may be for all vs, where were your life? Anſwere me that?
Hee ſayes well, Onion.
I indeed doo's he.
Come, come, you are a fooliſh Naturaliſt, go, get a white a of an egge, and a little flax, and cloſe the breach of the head, it is the moſt conducible thing that can be. Martino, do not inſinuate vpon your good fortune, but play an honeſt part and beare away the bucklers.
My yong and ſimple friend, Paulo Ferneze,
Bound me with mighty ſolemne coniurations,
To be true to him, in his loue, to Rachel,
And to ſolicite his remembrance ſtill,
In his enforced abſence, much, I faith.
True to my friend in caſes of affection?
In womens caſes? what a ieſt it is?
How ſilly he is, that imagines it!
He is an aſſe that will keepe promiſe ſtricktly
In any thing that checkes his priuate pleaſure;
Chiefly in loue. S'bloud am not I a man?
Haue I not eyes that are as free to looke?
And bloud to be enflam'd as well as his?
And when it is ſo, ſhall I not purſue
Mine owne loues longings, but preferre my friends?
I tis a good foole, do ſo, hang me then,
Becauſe I ſwore, alas, who doo's not know,
That louers periuries are ridiculous?
Haue at thee Rachel: Ile go court her ſure:
For now I know her father is abroad.
S'bloud ſee, he is here, ô what damn'd lucke is this?
This labour's loſt, I muſt by no meanes ſee him.
Miſchiefe and hell, what is this man a ſpirit,
Haunts he my houſes ghoſt? ſtill at my doore?
He has beene at my doore, he has beene in,
In my deere doore: pray God my gold be ſafe.
Gods pitty, heres another. Rachel, ho Rachel.
God ſaue you honeſt father.
Rachel, Gods light, come to me, Rachel, Rachel!
Now in Gods name what ayles he? this is ſtrange!
He loues his daughter ſo, Ile lay my life,
That hee's afraid, hauing beene now abroad,
I come to ſeeke her loue vnlawfully.
Tis ſafe, tis ſafe, they haue notrob'd my treaſure.
Let it not feeme offenſiue to you ſir.
Sir, Gods my life, ſir, ſir, call me ſir.
Good father here me.
You are moſt welcome ſir,
I meant almoſt; and would your worſhip ſpeake?
Would you abaſe your ſelfe to ſpeake to me?
Tis no abaſing father: my intent
Is to do further honour to you ſir
Then onely ſpeake: which is to be your ſonne.
My gold is in his noſtrels, he has ſmelt it,
Breake breaſt, breake heart, fall on the earth my entrailes,
With this ſame burſting admiration!
He knowes my gold, he knowes of all my treaſure,
How do you know ſir? whereby do you gueſſe?
At what ſir? what iſt you meane?
I aske, an't pleaſe your Gentle worſhip, how you know?
I meane, how I ſhould make your worſhip know
That I haue nothing —
To giue with my poore daughter? I haue nothing:
The very aire, bounteous to euery man,
Is ſcant to me, ſir.
I do thinke good father, you are but poore,
He thinkes ſo, harke, but thinke ſo:
He thinkes not ſo, he knowes of all my treaſure.
Poore man he is ſo ouerioyed to heare
His daughter may be paſt his hopes beſtowed,
That betwixt feare and hope (if I meane ſimply)
He is thus paſſionate.
Yet all is ſafe within, is none without?
No body breake my walles?
What ſay you father, ſhall I haue your daughter?
I haue no dowry to beſtow vpon her.
I do expect none, father.
That is well,
Then I beſeech your worſhip make no queſtion
Of that you wiſh, tis too much fauour to me.
Ile leaue him now to giue his paſſions breath,
Which being ſetled, I will fetch his daughter:
I ſhall but moue too much, to ſpeake now to him.
So, hee's gone, would all were dead and gone,
That I might liue with my deere gold alone.
Here is the poore old man.
Out of my ſoule another, comes he hither?
Be not diſmaid old man, I come to cheere you.
To me by heauen,
Turne ribs to braſſe, turne voice into a trumpet,
To rattle out the battels of my thoughts,
One comes to hold me talke, while th'other robbes me.
He has forgot me ſure: what ſhould this meane?
He feares authority, and my want of wife
Will take his daughter from him to defame her:
He that hath naught on earth but one poore daughter,
May take this extaſie of care to keepe her.
And yet tis ſafe: they meane not to vſe force,
But fawning comming. I ſhall eaſly know
By his next queſtion, if he thinke me rich,
Whom ſee I? my good Lord?
Stand vp good father, I call thee not father for thy age,
But that I gladly wiſh to be thy ſonne,
In honoured marriage with thy beauteous daughter.
O, ſo, ſo, ſo, ſo, ſo, this is for gold,
Now it is ſure, this is my daughters neatneſſe,
Makes them beleeue me rich. No, my good Lord,
Ile tell you all; how my poore hapleſſe daughter
Got that attire ſhe weares from top to toe.
Why father, this is nothing.
O yes, good my Lord.
Indeed it is not.
Nay ſweet Lord pardon me? do not diſſemble,
Heare your poore beadſ-man ſpeake; tis requiſite
That I (ſo huge a beggar) make account
Of things that paſſe my calling: ſhe was borne
T'enioy nothing vnderneath the ſonne:
But that, if ſhe had more then other beggars
She ſhould be enuied: I will tell you then
How ſhe had all ſhe weares, her warme ſhooes (God wot)
A kind maide gaue her, ſeeing her go barefoot
In a cold froſty morning; God requite her;
Her homely ſtockings
Father, Ile heare no more, thou mou'ſt too much
With thy too curious anſwere for thy daughter,
That doth deſerue a thouſand times as much,
Ile be thy Sonne in law, and ſhe ſhall weare
Th'attire of Counteſſes.
O good my Lord,
Mock not the poore, remembers not your Lordſhip,
That pouerty is the precious gift of God.
As well as riches, tread vpon me, rather
Then mocke my poorenes.
Riſe I ſay:
When I mocke poorenes, then heauens make me poore.
See heres the Count Ferneze, I will tell him
The hapleſſe accident of his braue ſonne,
That hee may ſeeke the ſooner to redeeme him,
God ſaue your Lordſhip.
You are right welcome ſir.
I would I brought ſuch newes as might deſerue it.
What, bring you me ill newes?
Tis ill my Lord,
Yet ſuch as vſuall chance of warre affoords,
And for which all men are prepar'd that vſe it,
And thoſe that vſe it not, but in their friends,
Or in their children.
Ill newes of my ſonne?
My deere and onely ſonne, Ile lay my ſoule,
Ay me accurs'd, thought of his death doth wound me,
And the report of it will kill me quite.
Tis not ſo ill my Lord.
How then?
Hee's taken priſoner, and that's all.
That's enough, enough,
I ſet my thoughts on loue, on ſeruile loue,
Forget my vertuous wife, feele not the dangers,
The bands and wounds of mine owne fleſh and bloud,
And therein am a mad man: therein plagu'd,
With the moſt iuſt affliction vnder heauen.
Is Maximilian taken priſoner to?
My good my Lord, he is return'd with priſoners.
Iſt poſſible, can Maximilian?
Returne, and view my face without my ſonne,
For whom he ſwore ſuch care as for himſelfe?
My Lord no care can change the euents of war.
O! in what tempeſts do my fortunes ſaile,
Still wrackt with winds more foule and contrary,
Then any northen gueſt, or Southerne flawe?
That euer yet inforc't the ſea to gape,
And ſwallow the poore Marchants traffique vp?
Firſt in Vieenza, loſt I my firſt ſonne;
Next here in Millaine my moſt deere lou'd Lady:
And now my Paulo, priſoner to the French,
Which laſt being printed with my other griefes,
Doth make ſo huge a volume, that my breſt
Cannot containe them. But this is my loue▪
I muſt make loue to Rachel, heauen hath throwne,
This vengeance on me moſt deſeruedly:
Were it for nought but wronging of my ſteward.
My Lord ſince onely mony may redreſſe
The worſt of this miſfortune, be not griued,
Prepare his ranſome and your noble ſonne
Shall greete your cheered eyes, with the more honour.
I will prepare his ranſome: gratious heauen
Grant his impriſonment may be his worſt,
Honored and ſouldier-like impriſonment,
And that he be not manacled and made
A drudge to his proude foe. And here I vow,
Neuer to dreame of ſeeme-les amorous toyes,
Nor aime at other ioy on earth,
But the fruition of my onely ſonne.
He's gone: I knew it; this is our hot louer,
I will beleeue them! I! they may come in
Like ſimple woers, and be arrant theeues,
And I not know them! tis not to be told,
What ſeruile villanies, men will do for gold,
O it began to haue a huge ſtrong ſmell,
Which lying ſo long together in a place;
Ile giue it vent, it ſhall ha ſhift inough,
And if the diuell, that enuies all goodneſſe,
Haue told them of my gold, and where I kept it,
Ile ſet his burning noſe once more a worke,
To ſmell where I remou'd it, here it is:
Ile hide and couer it with this horſe-dung:
Who will ſuppoſe that ſuch a precious net
Is crownd with ſuch a dunghill excrement?
In my deere life, ſleepe ſweetly my deere child.
"Scarce lawfully begotten, but yet gotten,
"And thats enough. Rot all hands that come neere thee
Except mine owne. Burne out all eyes that ſee thee,
Except mine owne. All thoughts of thee be poyſon
To their enamor'd harts, except mine owne,
Ile take no leaue, ſweet Prince great Emperour,
But ſee thee euery minute, King of Kings,
Ile not be rude to thee, and turne my backe,
In going from thee, but go backward out:
With my face toward thee, with humble curteſies,
None is within. None ouerlookes my wall.
To haue gold, and to haue it ſafe, is all.
Lord Chamount and your valient friend there, I cannot ſay welcome to Millaine: your thoughts and that word are not muſicall, but I can ſay you are come to Millaine.
Mort diew.
Gar ſoone.
Gentlemen (I would cal an Emperour ſo) you are now my priſoners, I am ſorry, marry this, ſpit in the face of your fortunes, for your vſage ſhall be honorable.
Wee know it ſignior Maximilian,
The fame of al your actions ſounds nought elſe,
But perfect honour from her ſwelling cheeks.
It ſhall do ſo ſtill I aſſure you, and I will giue you reaſon, there is in this laſt action (you know) a noble gentleman of our party, & a right valient; ſemblably priſoner to your general, as your honor'd ſelfe's to me, for whoſe ſafety, this tongue hath giuen warrant to his honorable father, the Count Ferneze. You conceiue me.
I ſignior.
Well? then I muſt tell you your ranſomes be to redeeme him, what thinke you? your anſwer.
Marry with my Lords leaue here I ſay ſignior,
This free & ample offer you haue made,
Agrees well with your honour, but not ours:
For I thinke not but Chamount is aſwell borne
As is Ferneze, then if I miſtake not,
He ſcornes to haue his worth ſo vnderpriſed,
That it ſhould neede an adiunct, in exchange,
Of any equall fortune, Noble Signior?
I am a ſouldier, and I loue Chamount,
Ere I would bruſe his eſtimation,
With the leaſt ruine of mine owne reſpect,
In this vild kind, theſe legs ſhould rot with irons,
This body pine in priſon, till the fleſh
Dropt from my bones in flakes, like withered leaues,
In heart of Autumne, from a ſtubborne Oke.
Mounſieur Gaſper (I take it ſo is your name) miſpriſe me not, I wil trample on the hart, on the ſoule of him that ſhall ſay, I will wrong you: what I purpoſe, you cannot now know; but you ſhall know, and doubt not to your contentment. Lord Chamount, I will leaue you, whileſt I go in and preſent my ſelfe to the honorable Count, till my regreſſion ſo pleaſe you, your noble feete may meaſure this priuate, pleaſant and moſt princely walke, Souldiers regard them and reſpect them.
O Ver bon: excellenta gull, he tak'a my Lord Chamoun for Mounſieur Gaſpra, & Mounſieur Gaſpra for my Lord Chamont, ô dis be braue for make a me laugh'a, ha, ha, ha, ô my heart tickla.
I but your Lordſhip knowes not what hard fate
Might haue purſued vs, therefore howſoere
The changing of our names was neceſſary
And we muſt now be carefull to maintaine
This error ſtrongly, which our owne deuiſe,
Hath thruſt into their ignorant conceits,
For ſhould we (on the taſte of this good fortune)
Appeare our ſelues, t'would both create in them
A kinde of iealouſie, and perchaunce inuert
Thoſe honourable courſes they intend.
True my deere Gaſper: but this hang by here,
Will (at one time or other) on my ſoule
Diſcouer vs: A ſecret in his mouth
Is like a wild bird put into a cage,
Whoſe doore no ſooner opens, but tis out.
But ſirra, if I may but know
Thou vtterſt it
Vtteria? vat Mounſieur?
That he is Gaſper, and I true Chamont.
O pardone moy, fore my tongue ſhall put out de ſecreta,
Shall breede de cankra in my mouth.
Speake not ſo loud Pacue.
Foe, you ſhall not heare foole, for all your long eare, Reguard Mounſieur: you be de Chamont, Chamont be Gaſpra.
Peace, here comes Maximilian.
O belike that's the Count Ferneze, that old man.
Are thoſe his daughters, trow?
I ſure, I thinke they are.
Fore God the taller is a gallant Lady.
So are they both beleeue me.
True my honorable Lord, that Chamont was the father of this man.
O that may be, for when I loſt my ſonne,
This was but yong it ſeemes.
Faith had Camillo liued,
He had beene much about his yeares, my Lord.
He had indeed, well, ſpeake no more of him.
Signior perceiue you the errour? twas no good office in vs to ſtretch the remembrance of ſo deere a loſſe. Count Ferneze, let ſommer ſit in your eye, looke cheerefully ſweete Count, will you do me the honour to confine this noble ſpirit within the circle of your armes?
Honor'd Chamont reach me your valiant hand,
I could haue wiſht ſome happier accident
Had made the way vnto this mutuall knowledge,
Which either of vs now muſt take of other,
But ſure it is the pleaſure of our fates,
That we ſhould thus be wrack't on Fortunes wheele,
Let vs prepare with ſteeled patience
To tread on torment, and with mindes confirm'd
Welcome the worſt of enuy.
Noble Lord, tis thus. I haue here (in mine honour) ſet this gentleman free, without ranſome, he is now himſelfe, his valour hath deſeru'd it, in the eye of my iudgement. Mounſieur Gaſper you are deere to me: fortuna non mutuat genus. But to the maine, if it may ſquare with your Lordſhips liking, and his loue, I could deſire that he were now inſtantly imployed to your noble Generall in the exchange of Ferneze for your ſelfe, it is the buſineſſe that requires the tender hand of a friend.
I, and it would be with more ſpeed effected,
If he would vndertake it.
True my Lord. Mounſieur Gaſper, how ſtand you affected to this motion?
My duty muſt attend his Lordſhips will.
What ſayes the Lord Chamont?
My will doth then apprroue what theſe haue vrg'd.
Why there is good harmony, good muſicke in thise Mounſieur Gaſper, you ſhall protract no time, onely I will giue you a bowle of rich wine to the health of your Generall, another to the ſucceſſe of your iourney, and a third to the loue of my ſword. Paſſe.
Why how now ſiſter in a motley muſe?
Go to, thers ſomewhat in the wind, I ſee.
Faith this browne ſtudy ſuites not with your blacke,
Your habit and your thoughts are of two colours.
Good faith me thinkes that this young Lord Chamont fauours my mother, ſiſter, does he not?
A mothelry conceite, ô blind excuſe,
Blinder then loue himſelfe. Well ſiſter, well.
Cupid hath tane his ſtand in both your eyes, The caſe is alterd.
And what of that?
Nay nothing but a Saint.
Another Bridget, one that for a face
Would put downe Veſta, in whoſe lookes doth ſwim,
The very ſweeteſt creame of modeſty.
You to turne tippet? fie, fie, will you giue
A packing penny to Virginity.
I thought youl'd dwell ſo long in Cypres Ile,
You'd worſhip Maddam Venus at the length;
But come, the ſtrongeſt fall, and why not you?
Nay, do not frowne.
Go. go, you ſoole. Adiew.
Well I may ieſt, or ſo: but Cupid knowes
My taking is as bad, or worſe then hers.
O Mounſieur Gaſper? if thou bee'ſt a man,
Be not affraid to court me, do but ſpeake,
Challenge thy right and weare it: for I ſweare
Till thou arriud'ſt, nere came affection here.
Come on my ſweet finicall Pacue, the very prime
Of Pages, heres an excellent place for vs to practiſe in,
No body fees vs here, come lets to it.
Contenta: Reguarde, vou le Preimer.
Sirra Finio?
Mort deiu le peſant.
Didſt thou ſee Valentine?
Valentine? no.
No?
No. Sirrah Onion, whither goeſt?
O I am vext, he that would truſt any of theſe lying trauellers.
I prithee ſtay good Onion.
Mounſieur Onion, vene ca, come hidera, Ie vou prey. By gar me ha ſee two, tree, foure hundra towſand of your Couſan hang. Lend me your hand, ſhall prey for know you bettra.
I thanke you good ſignior Parla vou? O that I were in an other world, in the Ingies, or ſome where, that I might haue roome to laugh.
A we fort boon: ſtand? you be deere now, me come, Boon iour Mounſieur.
God morrow good ſignior.
By gar, be muſh glad for ſee you.
I returne you moſt kind thanks ſir.
How? how? Sbloud this is rare?
Nay, ſhall make you ſay rare by and by, Reguard Mounſieur Finio,
Signior Pache.
Dieu vou gard Mounſieur.
God ſaue you ſweet ſignior
Mounſieur On ion? is not fort boon.
Beane? quoth he, would I were in debt of a pottle of beanes I could do as much.
Welcome ſignior, whats next?
O here, Void de grand admiration, as ſhould meet perchance Mounſieur Finio,
Mounſieur Pacue
Ieſu? by Gar who thinke wee ſhall meete here?
By this hand I am not a little proud of it, ſir
This trick is onely for the the chamber, it cannot be cleanly done abroad,
Well what ſay you for dis den? Mounſieur:
Nay pray, ſir.
Par ma foy vou bein encounters?
What doe you meane ſir, let your gloue alone.
Comen, ſe porte la ſante.
Faith exceeding well ſir.
Trot, be muſh ioy for heire.
And how iſt with you ſweet ſignior Pache.
Fat comme vou voyer.
Yong gentlemen? ſpirits of bloud, if euer youle taſt of a ſweet peece of mutton, do Onion a good turne now.
Que que, parla Mounſeir, what iſt.
Faith teach me one of theſe tricks.
O me ſhall doe preſently, ſtand you deere, you ſignior deere, my ſelfe is here: ſo fort bein, now I parle to Mounſeir Onion, Onion pratla to you, you ſpeaka to me, ſo, and as you parle chang the bonet, Mounſeir Onion.
Mounſeiur Finio.
Mounſeur Pacue.
Pray be couera.
Nay I beſeech you ſir.
What do you meane.
Pardon moy, ſhall be ſo,
O God ſir.
Not I in good faith ſir.
By gar you muſt.
It ſhall be yours.
Nay then you wrong me,
Well and euer I come to be great.
You be big enough for de Onion already,
I meane a great man.
Then thou'dſt be a monſter.
Well God knowes not what fortune may doe, commaund me, vſe me from the ſoule to the crowne, and the crowne to the ſoule: meaning not onely from the crowne of the head, and the ſole of the foot, but alſo the foote of the mind and the crownes of the purſe, I cannot ſtay now yong gentlemen but — time was, time is, and time ſhall be.
Sweet Iaſper I am ſorry we muſt part,
But ſtrong neceſſity enforceth it.
Let not the time ſeeme long vnto my friend,
Till my returne for by our loue I ſweare
(The ſacred ſpheare wherein our ſoules are knit)
I will endeauour to effect this buſines
With all induſtrious care and happy ſpeed.
My Lord theſe circumſtances would come well,
To one leſſe capable of your deſert
Then I: in whom your mirrit is confirmed
With ſuch authenticall and grounded proues.
Well I will vſe no more. Gaſper adiew.
Farewell my honored Lord.
Commend me to the Lady, my good Gaſper.
I had remembred that had not you vrgd it.
Once more adiew ſweet Gaſper.
My good Lord.
Thy vertues are more precious then thy name,
Kind gentleman I would not ſell thy loue,
For all the earthly obiects that mine eyes,
Haue euer taſted, ſure thou art nobly borne,
How euer fortune hath obſcurd thy birth:
For natiue honour ſparkles in thine eyes,
How may I bleſſe the time wherein Chamont
My honored father did ſurpriſe vicenza,
Where this my friend (knowen by no name) was found,
Being then a child and ſcarce of power to ſpeake,
To whom my father gaue this name of Gaſper,
And as his owne reſpected him to death,
Since when wee two haue ſhard our mutuall fortunes,
With equall ſpirits, and but deathes rude hand,
No violence ſhall diſſolue this ſacred band.
Fellow Iuniper, no more of thy ſongs and ſonets, ſweet Iuniper, no more of thy hymnes and madrigals, thou ſing'ſt, but I ſigh.
Whats the matter Peter ha? what in an Academy ſtill, ſtill in ſable, and coſtly black array? ha?
Prithee riſe mount, mount ſweet Iuniper, for I goe downe the wind, and yet I puffe: for I am vext.
Ha Bully? vext? what intoxicate? is thy braine in a quinteſcence? an Idea? a metamorphoſis? an Apology? ha rogue? come this loue feeds vpon thee, I ſee by thy cheekes, and drinkes healthes of vermilion, teares I ſee by thine eyes.
I confeſſe Cupids carouſe, he plaies ſuper negulum with my liquor of life
Tut, thou art a gooſe to be Cupids gull, go to, no more of this contemplations, & calculations, mourne not, for Rachels thine owne
For that let the higher powers worke: but ſweet Iuniper, I am not ſad for her, and yet for her in a ſecond perſon, or f not ſo yet in a third.
How ſecond perſon? away, away, in the crotchets already Longitude and Latitude? what ſecond? what perſon? ha?
Iuniper, Ile bewray my ſelfe before thee, for thy company is ſweet vnto me, but I muſt entreat thy helping hand in the caſe.
Tut? no more of this ſurquedry; I am thine owne? ad vngem vpſie freeze: pell mell, come, what caſe? what caſe?
For the caſe it may be any mans caſe, aſwell as mine, Rachel I meane, but Ile medle with her anon, in the meane time, lentine is the man hath wrongd me.
How my Ingle wrong thee, iſt poſſible?
Your Ingle, hang him infidell, well and if I be not reuengd one him let Peter Onion (by the infernall Gods) be turned to al eeke or a ſcalion, I ſpake to him for a ditty for this handkerchier.
Why, has he not done it?
Done it, not a verſe by this hand.
O in dichus illis, O prepoſterous, wel come be blith, the eſt iud of the l is ſomtimes dul, fellow Onion pardon mine Iugle: he is a man, has in pefections and declinations, as other men haue, his maſſe ſomtimes cannot carnet nor progniſticat and come of, as it ſhould, no matter, Ile hammer our a paralraſe for thee my ſelfe.
No ſweet Iuniper, no danger breed delay, loue makes me chollericke I can beare no longer.
Not beare? what my mad Meridian ſlaue? not be are? what?
Cupids burden: tis to heauy, to tollerable, and as for the handkerchire and the poſie: I will not trouble thee: but if thou wilt goe with me into her fathers backſide, old Iaques backſide, and ſpeake for me to Rachel, I wil not being ratitude, the old man is abroad and all.
Art thou ſure on't.
As ſure as an obligation.
Lets away then, come we ſpend time in a vaine circumference, trade caſhire thee til to morrow, fellow Onion for thy ſake I fini this workiday.
God a mercy, and for thy ſake Ile at any time make a holiday.
Nay I prithee Rachel, I come to comfort thee, Be not ſo ſad.
O ſignior Angelo,
No comfort but his preſence can remoue,
This ſadneſſe from my heart.
Nay then y'are fond,
And want that ſtrength of iudgement and election,
That ſhould be attendent on your yeares and forme,
Will you, becauſe your Lord is taken priſoner,
Blubber and weepe and keepe a peeuiſh ſtirre,
As though you would turne turtle with the newes,
Come, come, be wiſe. Sblood ſay your Lord ſhould die:
And you goe marre your face as you begin,
What would you doe trow? who would care for you;
But this it is, when nature will beſtow
Her gifts on ſuch as know not how to vſe them,
You ſhall haue ſome that had they but one quarter
Of your faire beauty? they would make it ſhew
A little otherwiſe then you do this,
Or they would ſee the painter twice an hower,
And I commend them I, that can vſe art,
With ſuch iudiciall practiſe.
You talke iedly,
If this be your beſt comfort keepe it ſtill,
My ſences cannot feede on ſuch ſower cates.
And why ſweet heart.
Nay leaue good ſignior.
Come I haue ſweeter vyands yet in ſtore.
I in any caſe miſtres Rachel.
Rachel?
Gods pitty ſignior Angelo, I here my father, away for Gods ſake.
S'bloud, I am betwixt, I thinke, this is twice now, I haue been ſerued thus.
Pray God he meet him not.
O braue? ſhe's yonder, O terrible ſhee's gone.
Yea? ſo nimble in your Dilemma's, and your Hiperbole's Hay my loue? O my loue, at the firſt ſight: By the maſſe.
O how ſhe ſkudded, O ſweet ſcud, how ſhe tripped, O delicate trip and goe.
Come thou art enamored with the influence of her profundity, but ſirrah harke a little.
O rare, what? what? paſſing Ifaith, what iſt? what iſt?
What wilt thou ſay now, if Rachel ſtand now, and play hity tity through the key hole, to behold the equipage of thy perſon:
O ſweet equipage, try good Iuniper, tickle her, talke, talke, O? rare
Miſtris Rachel (watch then if her father come) Rachel? Madona? Rachel? No.
Say I am here, Onion or Peter or ſo.
No, Ile knock, weele not ſtand vpon Horizons, and tricks, but fall roundly to the matter.
Well ſaid ſweet Iuniper: Horizons? hang hem? knock, knock.
Whoſe there? father.
Father no? and yet a father, if you pleaſe to be a mother.
Well ſaid Iuniper, to her againe, a ſmack or two more of the mother
Do you here? ſweet ſoule, ſweet radamant? ſweet mathauell one word Melpomine? are you at leaſure.
At leaſure? what to doe?
To doe what, to doe nothing, but to be liable to the extaſie of true loues exigent, or ſo, you ſmell my meaning.
Smell, filthy, fellow Iuniper filthy? ſmell? O moſt odious.
How filthy.
Filthy, by this finger? ſmell? ſmell a rat, ſmel a pudding, away theſe tricks are for truls, a plaine wench loues plaine dealing, ile vpon my ſelfe, ſmel to march paine wench.
With all my heart, Ile be legitimate and ſilent as anapple-ſquire, Ile ſee nothing, and ſay nothing.
Sweet hart, ſweet hart?
And bag pudding, ha, ha, ha?
What Rachel my girle what Rachel;
Gods lid▪
What Rachel,
Here I am
What rakehell cals Rachel: O treaſon to my loue.
Its her father on my life, how ſhall wee entrench and edifie our ſelues from him?
O conni-catching▪ Cupid.
How in my back ſide? where? what come they for?
Where are they? Rachel? theeues, theeues?
Stay villaine ſlaue: Rachel? vntye my dog.
Nay theife thou canſt not ſcape.
I pray you ſir.
A pitifull Onion, that thou hadſt a rope.
Why Rachel: when I ſay: let looſe my dog? garlique my maſtiue, let him looſe I ſay.
For Gods ſake here me ſpeake, keepe vp your cur.
I feare not garlique, heele not bite Onion his kinſman pray God he come out, and then theile not ſmell me.
well then deliuer, come deliuer ſlaue?
What ſhould I deliuer?
O thou wouldſt haue me tell thee? wouldſt thou ſhew me thy hands, what haſt thou in thy hands?
Here be my hands.
Stay are not thy fingers ends begrimd with durt, no thou haſt wipt them.
Wipt them?
I thou villaine? thou art a ſubtile knaue, put off thy ſhewes, come I will ſee them, giue me a knife here Rachel, Ile rip the ſoles.
No matter he's a cobler, he can mend them.
What are you mad? are you deteſtable, would you make an Anatomy of me, thinke you I am not true Ortographie?
Ortographie, Anatomy?
For Gods ſake be not ſo inuiolable, I am no ambuſcado, what predicament call you this, why do you intimate ſo much.
I can feele nothing.
Bir Lady but Onion feeles ſomething.
Soft ſir, you are not yet gon, ſhake your legs, come, and your armes, be briefe, ſtay let me ſee theſe drums, theſe kilderkins, theſe bombard ſlops, what is it crams hem ſo.
Nothing but haire.
Thats true, I had almoſt forgot this rug, this hedghogs neſt, this hay mowe, this beares ſkin, this heath, this firſbuſh.
O let me goe, you teare my haire, you reluolue my braines and vnderſtanding.
Heart, thou art ſomewhat eas'd? halfe of my feare
Hath tane his leaue of my, the other halfe
Still keepes poſſeſſion in diſpight of hope,
Vntill theſe amorous eyes, court my faire gold:
Deare I come to thee: friend, why art not gone?
Auoid my ſoules vexation, Sathan hence?
Why doeſt thou ſtare on me, why doeſt thou ſtay?
Why por'ſt thou on the ground with theeuiſh eyes?
What ſee'ſt thou there, thou curre? what gap'ſt thou at?
Hence from my houſe, Rachel, ſend garlick forth.
I am gone ſir, I am gone, for Gods ſake ſtay.
Pack, and thanke God thou ſcap'ſt ſo well away.
If I ſcape this tree, deſtinies, I defie you.
I cannot ſee by any Characters
Writ on this earth, that any fellon foote
Hath tane acquaintance of this hallowed ground.
None ſees me: knees do homage to your Lord.
Tis ſafe, tis ſafe, it lyes and ſleepes ſo ſoundly,
Twould do one good to looke on't. If this bliſſe
Be giuen to any man that hath much gold,
Iuſtly to ſay tis ſafe, I ſay tis ſafe.
O what a heauenly round theſe two words dance
Within me and without me: Firſt I thinke hem,
And then I ſpeake hem, then I watch their ſound,
And drinke it greedily with both mine eares,
Then thinke, then ſpeake, then drinke their ſound againe,
And racket round about this bodies court.
Theſe two ſweet words: tis ſafe: ſtay I will feed
My other ſences, ô how ſweet it ſmels
I mar'le he ſmels not Onion, being ſo neere it.
Downe to thy graue againe, thou beauteous Ghoſt,
Angels men ſay, are ſpirits: Spirits be
Inuiſible, bright angels are you ſo?
Be you inuiſible to euery eye.
Saue onely theſe: Sleepe, Ile not breake your reſt,
Though you breake mine: Deare Saints adiew, adiew:
My feete part from you, but my ſoule dwels with you.
Is he gone? ô Fortune my friend, & not fortune my foe,
I come downe to embrace thee, and kiſſe thy great toe.
Fellow Onion? Peter.
Fellow Iuniper. What's the old panurgo gone? departed, coſmografied, ha?
O I, and harke Sirrah. Shall I tell him? no.
Nay, be briefe and declare, ſtand not vpon conodrums now, thou knoweſt what contagious ſpeeches I haue ſufferd for thy ſake and he ſhould come againe and inuent me here.
He ſaies true, it was for my ſake, I will tell him.
Sirra Iuniper? and yet I will not.
What ſayeſt thou ſweete Onion?
And thou hadſt ſmelt the ſent of me when I was in the tree, thou wouldeſt not haue ſaid ſo: but Sirra, The caſe is alterd with me, my heart has giuen loue a box of the eare, made him kicke vp the heeles I faith.
Sayeſt thou me ſo, wad Greeke? how haps it? how chances it.
I cannot hold it, Iuniper, haue an eye, looke, haue an eye to the doore, the old prouerb's true, I ſee: gold is but mucke. Nay Gods ſo Iuniper to the doore, an eye to the maine chance, here you ſlaue, haue an eye.
O inexorable! ô infallible! ô infricate deuine, and ſuperficiall fortune.
Nay, it will be ſufficient anon, here, looke heere.
O inſolent good lucke! How didſt thou produce th'intelligence of the gold' mynerals.
Ile tell you that anon, heere, make ſhift, conuey, cramme.
Ile teach you how you ſhall call for garlike againe I faith.
S'bloud what ſhall we do with all this? we ſhall nere bring it to a conſumption.
Conſumption? why weele bee moſt ſumptuouſly attir'd, man.
By this gold, I will haue three or foure moſt ſtigmaticall ſuites preſently.
Ile go in my foot-cloth, Ile turne Gentleman.
So will I.
But what badge ſhall we giue, what culliſon?
As for that lets vſe the infidelity and commiſeration of ſome harrot of armes, he ſhall giue vs a gudgeon.
A gudgeon? a ſcutheon thou wouldſt ſay, man.
A ſcutcheon or a gudgeon, all is one.
Well, our armes be good inough, lets looke to our legges.
Content, weele be iogging.
Rachel? we retire: garlike God boy ye.
Farewell ſweete Iaques.
Farewell ſweete Rachel, ſweet dogge adiew.
Nay but ſweet Count.
Away, Ile heare no more,
Neuer was man ſo palpably abuld,
My ſonne ſo baſely marted; and my ſelfe
Am made the ſubiect of your mirth and ſcorne.
Count Ferneze you tread to hard vpon my patience,
Do not perſiſt I aduiſe your Lordſhip.
I will perſiſt, and vnto thee I ſpeake.
Thou. Maximilian thou haſt iniur'd me.
Before the Lord:
Sweet ſignior.
O my father.
Lady let your father thank your beauty.
By gar me ſhall be hang for tella dis ſame,
Metella madamoy ſelle, ſhe tell her ſadera.
The true Chamount ſet free, and one left here
Of no deſcent, clad barely in his name.
Sirrah boy come hither, and be ſure, you ſpeake the ſimple truth:
O pardone moy mounſieur,
Come leaue your pardons, and directly ſay.
What villaine is the ſame that hath vſurpt,
The honor'd name and perſon of Chamount:
O Mounſieur, no point villaine, braue Cheualier, Mounſieur Gaſper.
Mounſieur Gaſper, on what occaſion did they change their names, what was their policy, or their pretext.
Me canno tell, par ma foy Mounſieur.
My honorable Lord.
Tut tut, be ſilent.
Silent? Count Ferneze, I tell thee if Amurath the great
Turke were here I would ſpeake, and he ſhould here me.
So will not I.
By my fathers hand, but thou ſhalt Count, I ſay till this inſtant, I was neuer toucht in my reputation: here me you ſhall knowe that you haue wrongd me, and I will make you acknowledge it, if I cannot my ſword ſhall.
By heauen I will not, I will ſtop mine eares,
My ſences loath the Sauiour of thy breath.
Tis poyſon to me, I ſay I will not heare.
What ſhall I know, tis you haue iniurd me,
What will you make? make me acknowledge it.
Fetch forth that Gaſper, that lewd counterfeit.
Ile make him to your face approue your wrongs.
Come on falſe ſubſtance, ſhadow to Chamont:
Had you none elſe to worke vpon but me,
Was I your fitteſt proiect? well confeſſe,
What you intended by this ſecret plot.
And by whoſe policy it was contriu'd,
Speake truth, and be intreated courteouſly,
But double with me, and reſolue to proue
The extremeſt rigor that I can inflict.
My honor'd Lord, heare me with patience,
Nor hope of fauour, not the feare of torment,
Shall ſway my tongue, from vttring of a truth.
Tis well, proceed then.
The morne before this battell did begin,
Wherein my Lord Chamount and I were tane,
We vow'd one mutuall fortune, good or bad,
That day ſhould be imbraced of vs both,
And vrging that might worſt ſucceede our vow,
We there concluded to exchange our names.
Then Maximilian tooke you for Chamount.
True noble Lord.
Tis falſe, ignoble wretch,
Twas but a complot to betray my ſonne.
Count, thou lyeſt in thy boſome, Count▪
Lye?
Nay I beſeech you honor'd gentlemen,
Let not the vntimely ruine of your loue,
Follow theſe ſleight occurents; be aſſured
Chamounts returne will heale theſe wounds againe,
And breake the points of your too piercing thoughts.
Returne? I when? when will Chamount returne?
Heele come to fetch you, will he? I tis like,
Youl'd haue me thinke ſo, that's your policy.
No, no, yong gallant, your deuice is ſtale,
You cannot feed me with ſo vaine a hope.
My Lord, I feede you not with a vaine hope,
I know aſſuredly he will returne,
And bring your noble ſonne along with him.
I, I dare pawne my ſoule he will returne.
O impudent diriſion? open ſcorne?
Intollerable wrong? is't not inough?
That you haue plaid vpon me all this while;
But ſtill to mocke me, ſtill to ieſt at me?
Fellowes, away with him, thou ill-bred ſlaue,
That ſets no difference twixt a noble ſpirit,
And thy owne ſlauiſh humour, do not thinke
But ile take worthy vengeance on thee, wretch?
Alas, theſe threats are idle, like the wind,
And breed no terror in a guiltleſſe mind.
Nay, thou ſhalt want no torture, ſo reſolue, bring him away.
Welcome the worſt, I ſuffer for a friend,
Your tortures will, my loue ſhall neuer end.
Alas poore gentleman, my fathers rage
Is too extreame, too ſterne and violent
O that I knew with all my ſtrongeſt powers,
How to remoue it from thy patient breaſt,
But that I cannot, yet my willing heart,
Shall miniſter in ſpight of tyranny
To thy miſfortune, ſomething there is in him,
That doth enforce this ſtrange affection,
With more then common rapture in my breaſt:
For being but Gaſper, he is ſtill as deare
To me, as when he did Chamount appeare.
But in good ſadneſſe Signior, do you thinke Chamount will returne?
Do I ſee your face, Lady?
I ſure, if loue haue not blinded you.
That is a queſtion, but I will aſſure you no, I can ſee, and yet loue is in mine eye: well, the Count your father ſimply hath diſhonor'd me: and this ſteele ſhall engraue it on his burgonet.
Nay, ſweet Signior.
Lady, I do preferre my reputation to my life,
But you ſhall rule me, come lets march.
Ile follow Signior, ô ſweet Queene of loue!
Soueraigne of all my thoughts, and thou faire fortune,
Who (more to honour my affections)
Haſt thus tranſlated Gaſper to Chamount.
Let both your flames now burne in one bright ſpeare;
And giue true light to my a ſpiring hopes,
Haſten Chamounts returne, let him affect me,
Though father, friends, and all the world reiect me.
Sigh for a woman, would I fould mine armes,
Raue in my ſleepe, talke idly being awake,
Pine and looke pale, make loue-walkes in the night,
To ſteale cold comfort from a day-ſtarres eyes.
Kit, thou art a foole, wilt thou be wiſe? then lad
Renounce this boy-gods nice idolatry,
Stand not on complement, and wooing trickes,
Thou loueſt old Iaques daughter, doeſt thou?
Loue her?
Come, come, I know't, be rul'd and ſhees thine owne,
Thou't ſay her father Iaques, the old begger,
Hath pawnd his word to thee, that none but thou,
Shalt be his ſonne in law.
He has.
He has? wilt thou beleeue him, and be made a kooke,
To waite on ſuch an antique wether cocke;
Why he is more inconſtant then the ſea,
His thoughts, Cameleon-like, change euery minute:
No Kit, worke ſoundly, ſteale the wench away,
Wed her, and bed her, and when that is done,
Then ſay to Iaques, ſhall I be your ſonne?
But come to our deuiſe, where is this gold?
Heere Signior Angelo.
Beſtow it, bid thy hands ſhed golden drops,
Let theſe bald french crownes be vncouered,
In open ſight, to do obeyſance
To Iaques ſtaring eyes when he ſteps forth,
The needy beggar will be glad of gold.
So, now keepe thou alooſe, and as he treades
This guilded path, ſtretch out his ambling hopes,
With ſcattring more & more, & as thou go'ſt, cry Iaques, Iaques
Tuſt, let me alone.
Firſt ile play the ghoſt, Ile cal him out, Kit keep aloofe.
But Signior Angelo. Where wil your ſelfe and Rachel ſtay for me, after the ieſt is ended?
Maſſe, that's true, at the old Priory behinde S. Foyes.
Agreed, no better place, ile meete you there.
Do good foole, do, but ile not meet you there.
Now to this geere, Iaques, Iaques, what Iaques?
Who cals? whoſe there?
Iaques.
Who cals?
Steward, he comes, he comes Iaques.
What voice is this? no body here, was I not cald? I was.
And one cride Iaques with a hollow voyce,
I was deceiu'd, no I was not deceiu'd,
See ſee, it was an Angell cald me forth,
Gold, gold, man▪ making gold, another ſtarre,
Drop they from heauen, no, no, my houſe I hope
Is haunted with a Fairy. My deere Lar,
My houſhold God, My Fairy on my knees.
Iaques.
My Lar doth call me, ô ſweet voyce.
Muſicall as the ſpheares, ſee, ſee, more gold.
Iaques.
What Rachel, Rachel, lock my doore, looke to my houſe.
Iaques.
Shut faſt my doore, a golden crowne, Iaques ſhall be a king.
To a fooles paradice that path will bring
Thee and thy houſhold Lar.
What means my father, I wonder what ſtrange humor.
Come ſweete ſoule, leaue wondring, ſtart not, twas I laid this plot to get thy father forth.
O Angelo.
O me no oo's, but heare, my Lord your loue,
Paulo Ferneze is returnd from warre,
Lingers at Pont Valeria, and from thence
By poſt at midnight laſt, I was coniur'd
To man you thither, ſtand not on replies,
A horſe is ſadled for you, will you go,
And I am for you, if you will ſtay, why ſo.
O Angelo, each minute is a day till my Ferneze come, come weele away ſir.
Sweet ſoule I gueſſe thy meaning by thy lookes,
At pot Valerio thou thy loue ſhalt ſee,
But not Ferneze, Steward fare you well.
You wait for Rachel to, when can you tell?
O in what golden circle haue I dan'ſt?
Millaine theſe od'rous and enfloured fields
Are none of thine, no heres Elizium,
Heere bleſſed ghoſts do walke, this is the Court
And glorious palace where the God of gold
Shines like the ſonne, of ſparkling maieſty;
O faire fethered, my red-breſted birds,
Come flye with me, ile bring you to a quier,
Whoſe conſort being ſweetned with your ſound:
The muſique will be fuller, and each hower
Theſe eares ſhall banquet with your harmony ô, ô, ô,
At the old priorie, behind Saint Foyes,
That was the place of our appointment ſure:
I hope he will not make me looſe my gold,
And mock me to, perhaps they are within: Ile knock.
O God, the caſe is alterd.
Rachel?
Signior Angelo?
Angels? I where? mine Angels? wher's my gold?
Why Rachel? O thou theeuiſh Canibal,
Thou eateſt my fleſh in ſtealing of my gold.
What gold?
What gold? Rachel call help, come forth,
Ile rip thine entrailes, but ile haue my gold:
Rachel why comes thou not? I am vndone,
Ay me ſhe ſpeakes not, thou haſt ſlaine my child.
What is the man poſſeſt trow? this is ſtrange,
Rachel I ſee is gone with Angelo:
Well ile once againe vnto the priory,
And ſee if I can meete them.
Tis too true,
Th'aſt made away my child, how haſt my gold:
O what Hienna cald me out of dores,
The theife is gone: my gold's gone, Rachels gone,
Al's gone? ſaue I that ſpend my cries in vaine,
But ile hence too, and die or end this paine.
Swonds, let me goe, hay catſo, catch him aliue,
I call, I call, boy, I come, I come ſweet heart.
Page hold my rapier, while I hold my freind here.
O heer's a ſweet metamorphoſis, a cupple of buzzards turn'd to a paire of peacocks.
Signior Onion, lend me thy boy to vnhang my rapier. On. Signior Iuniper for once or ſo, but troth is, you muſt inueigle, as I haue done, my Lords page here a poor folower of mine.
Hei ho, your page then ſha'not be ſuper intendent vpon me? he ſhall not be addicted? he ſhall not be incident? he ſhall not be incident? he ſhall not be incident, ſhall he?
O ſweet ſignior Iuniper.
Iuni Sbloud ſtand away princocks? do not aggrauate my ioy.
Nay good Maiſter. Onion.
Nay and he haue the heart to draw my bloud, let him come.
Ile ſlice you Onion, Ile ſlice you?
Ile cleaue you Iuniper.
Why hold, hold, hough? what do you meane?
Let him come Ingle, ſtand by boy, his allebaſter blad cannot feare me.
Why heare you ſweet ſignior, let not there be any contētion, betweene my Maiſter & you, about me, if you want a page ſir, I can helpe you to a proper ſtripling.
Canſt thou? what parentage? what anceſtry? what genealogy is he?
A french boy ſir.
Has he his French linguiſt? has he?
I, ſir.
Then tranſport him: her's a cruſado for thee.
You will not, imbecell my ſeruant with your beneuolence will you, hold boy their's a portmantu for thee.
Lord ſir.
Do take it boy, its three pounds ten ſhill. a portmantu.
I thanke your Lordſhip.
Sirrah Ningle: thou art a traueller, and I honour thee.
I prithee diſcourſe? cheriſh thy muſe? diſcourſe?
Of what ſir?
Of what thou wilt. Sbloud? hang ſorrow?
Prithy Valentine aſſoile me one thing.
Tis pitty to ſoile you ſir, your new apparell.
Maſſe thou ſaiſt true, aparel makes a man forget himſelf.
Begin, find your tongue Ningle.
Now will gull theſe ganders rarely:
Gentlemen hauing in my peregrinatiō through Meſopotamia.
Speake legibly, this gam's gone, without the great mercy of God,
Heres a fine tragedy indeed. Thers a Keiſars royall.
By Gods lid, nor King nor Keiſar ſhall?
Where? where? Finio, where be they.
Go to, ile be with you anon.
O her's the page ſignior Iuniper:
What ſayth monſier Onion, boy.
What ſay you ſir.
Tread out boy.
Take vp, you meane ſir.
Tread out I ſay, ſo, I thanke you, is this the boy.
Aue mounſieur.
Who gaue you that name.
Giue me de name, vat name:
He thought your name had been, we yong gentlemen, you muſt do more then his legges can do for him, beare with him ſir.
Sirrah giue me inſtance of your carriage? youle ſerue my turne, will you?
What? turne vpon the toe.
O ſignior no.
Page will you follow me, ile giue you good exhibition.
By gar, ſhal not alone follow you, but ſhal leade you to.
Plaguie boy, he ſooths his humour? theſe french villaines ha pockie wits.
Here? diſarme me? take my ſemitary.
O rare, this would be a rare man, and he had a little trauell, Balthaſar, Martino, put off your ſhooes, and bid him coble them.
Freinds, friends, but pardon me for fellows, no more in occupation, no more in corporation, tis ſo pardon me, the caſe is alterd, this is law, but ile ſtand to nothing.
Fat ſo me tinke.
Well then God ſaue the dukes Maieſty, is this any harme now? ſpeake, is this any harme now.
No nor good neither, Sbloud?
Do you laugh at me? do you laugh at me? do you laugh at me?
I ſir, we do.
You do indeed?
I indeed ſir.
Tis ſufficient, Page carry my purſe, dog me?
Gentlemen leaue him not, you ſee in what caſe he is, he is not in aduerſity, his purſe is full of money, leaue him not?
Nay gentle Rachel?
Away? forbeare? vngentle Angelo,
Touch not my body, with thoſe impious hands,
That like hot Irons ſeare my trembling heart,
And it hiſſe, at your diſloyalty.
Wa your drift? to vſe Fernezes name?
Was he your fitteſt ſtale, ô wild diſhonor!
Stay noble ſir▪
Sbloud how like a puppet do you talke now?
Diſhonor? what diſhonor? come, come, foole,
Nay then I ſee y'are peeuiſh, S'heart diſhonor?
To haue you a toprieſt and marry you,
And put you in an honorable ſtate.
To marry me? ô heauen, can it be?
That men ſhould liue with ſuch vnfeeling ſoules,
Without or touch or conſcience of religion,
Or that their warping appetites ſhould ſpoile
Thoſe honor'd formes, that the true ſeale of friendſhip
Had ſet vpon their faces.
Do you heare? what needs all this? ſay, will you haue me, or no?
Il'e haue you gone, and leaue me, if you would.
Leaue you? I was accurſt to bring you hither,
And make ſo faire an offer to a foole.
A pox vpon you, why ſhould you be coy,
What good thing haue you in you to be proud of?
Are y'any other then a beggars daughter?
Becauſe you haue beauty. O Gods light a blaſt.
I Angelo.
You ſcornefull baggage, I lou'd thee not ſo much, but now I hate thee.
Vpon my knees, you heauenly powers, I thanke you,
That thus haue tam'd his wild affections.
This will not do, I muſt to her againe,
Rachel, ô that thou ſawſt my heart, or didſt behold,
The place from whence that ſcalding figh euented.
Rachel, by Ieſu I loue thee as my ſoule, Rachel, ſweet Rachel.
What againe returnd vnto this violent paſſion.
Do but heare me, by heauen I loue you Rachel.
Pray forbeare, ô that my Lord Ferneze were but here.
Sbloud and he were, what would he do.
This would he do baſe villaine.
My deere Lord,
Thou monſter, euen the ſoule of trechery!
O what diſhonord title of reproch,
May my tongue ſpit in thy deſerued face?
Me thinkes my very preſence ſhould inuert,
The ſteeled organs of thoſe traytrous eyes,
To take into thy heart, and pierce it through:
Turn'ſt thou them on the ground? wretch, dig a graue,
With their ſharp points, to hide th'abhorred head;
Sweet loue, thy wrongs haue beene too violent
Since my departure from thee, I perceiue:
But now true comfort ſhall againe appeare,
And like an armed angell guard thee ſafe
From all th'aſſaults of couered villany.
Come Mounſieur, let's go, & leaue this wretch to his deſpaire.
My noble Ferneze.
What canſt thou ſpeake to me, and not thy tongue,
Forc't with the torment of thy guilty ſoule
Breake that infected circle of thy mouth,
Like the rude clapper of a crazed bell.
I, that in thy boſome lodg'd my ſoule,
With all her traine of ſecrets, thinking them
To be as ſafe, and richly entertained,
As in a Princes court, or tower of ſtrength,
And thou to proue a traitor to my truſt,
And baſely to expoſe it, ô this world!
My honorable Lord.
The very owle, whō other birds do ſtare & wonder at,
Shall hoot at thee, and ſnakes in euery buſh
Shall deafe thine eares with their—
Nay good my Lord, giue end vnto your paſſions.
You ſhall ſee, I will redeeme your loſt opinion.
My Lord beleeue him.
Come, be ſarisfied, ſweet Lord you know our haſte,
Let vs to horſe, the time for my engaged returne is paſt;
Be friends againe, take him along with you.
Come ſignior Angelo, hereafter proue more true.
Tut Maximillian, for your honor'd ſelfe,
I am perſwaded, but no words ſhall turne
The edge of purpoſd vengeance on that wretch,
Come, bring him forth to execution.
Ile hang him for my ſonne, he ſhall not ſcape,
Had he an hundred liues: Tell me vile ſlaue,
Thinkeſt thou I loue my ſonne? is he my fleſh?
Is he my bloud, my life? and ſhall all theſe be torturd for thy
ſake, and not reueng'd? truſſe vp the villaine.
My Lord, there is no law to confirme this action.
Tis diſhonorable.
Diſhonorable? Max imillian?
It is diſhonorable in Chamount, the day of his prefixt returne is paſt, and he ſhall pay fort.
My Lord, my Lord,
Vſe your extreameſt vengeance, ile be glad
To ſuffer ten times more, for ſuch a friend.
O reſolute and peremptory wretch!
My honored Lord, let vs intreat a word.
Ile heare no more, I ſay he ſhall not liue,
My ſelfe will do it. Stay, what forme is this
Stands betwixt him and me, and holds my hand.
What miracle is this? tis my owne fancy,
Carues this impreſſion in me, my ſoft nature,
That euer hath retaind ſuch fooliſh pitty,
Of the moſt abiect creatures miſery,
That it abhorres it, what a child am I
To haue a child? Ay me, my ſon, my ſon.
O my deere loue, what is become of thee?
What vniuſt abſence layeſt thou on my breſt,
Like waights of lead, when ſwords are at my backe,
That run me through with thy vnkind flight,
My gentle diſpoſition waxeth wild,
I ſhall run frantike, ô my loue, my loue.
My gold, my gold, my life, my ſoule, my heauen,
What is become of thee? ſee, ile impart
My miſerable loſſe to my good Lord,
Let me haue ſearch my Lord, my gold is gone.
My ſonne, Chriſtophero, thinkſt it poſſible,
I euer ſhall behold his face againe.
O father wher's my loue, were you ſo careleſſe
To let an vnthrift ſteale away your child.
I know your Lordſhip may find out my gold,
For Gods ſake pitty me, iuſtice, ſweet Lord.
Now they haue yong Chamount? Chriſtophero?
Surely they neuer will reſtore my ſonne.
Who would haue thought you could haue beene ſo careleſſe to looſe your onely daughter.
Who would thinke,
That looking to my gold with ſuch hares eyes,
That euer open, I euen when thy ſleepe,
I thus ſhould looſe my gold, my noble Lord, what ſaies your
Lordſhip?
O my ſonne, my ſonne.
My deereſt Rachel?
My moſt hony gold.
Heare me Chriſtophero.
Nay heare me Iaques.
Heare me moſt honor'd Lord.
What rule is here?
O God that we ſhould let Chamount eſcape.
I and that Rachel, ſuch a vertuous mayd, ſhould be thus ſtolne away.
And that my gold, being ſo hid in earth, ſhould bee found out.
O confuſion of languages, & yet no tower of Babel!
Ladies, beſhrew me, if you come not fit to make a iangling conſort, will you laugh to ſee three conſtant paſſions.
Stand by, I will vrge them, ſweet Count, will you be comforted.
It cannot be but he is handled the moſt cruelly,
That euer any noble priſoner was.
Steward, go cheere my Lord:
Well, if Rachel tooke her flight willingly?
Sirrah, ſpeake you touching your daughters flight?
O that I could ſo ſoone forget to know the thiefe againe, that had my gold, my gold.
Is not this pure▪
O thou baſe wretch, ile drag thee through the ſtreets.
And as a monſter, make thee wondred at, how now.
Sweet Gentleman? how too vnworthily
Art thou thus tortured, braue Maximillian,
Pitty the poore youth and appeaſe my father,
How, my ſonne returnd? O Maximillian,
Franciſco, daughters? bid him enter here.
Doſt thou not mocke me? O my deere Paulo welcome.
My Lord Chamount?
My Gaſper.
Rachel.
My gold Rachel? my gold?
Some body bid the begger ceaſe his noiſe.
O ſignior Angelo, would you deceiue
Your honeſt friend, that ſimply truſted you?
Well Rachel: I am glad tho' art here againe.
I faith ſhe is not for you ſteward.
I beſeech you maddam vrge your father.
I will anon? good Iaques be content.
Now God a mercy fortune, and ſweet Venus,
Let Cupid do his part, and all is well.
Me thinks my heart's in heauen with this comfort.
Is this the true Italian courteſie.
Ferneze were you torturd thus in France? by my ſoules ſafety.
My moſt noble Lord? I do beſeech your Lordſhip.
Honored Count, wrong not your age with flexure of a knee,
I do impute it to thoſe cares and griefes,
That did torment you in your abſent ſonne.
O worthy gentlemen, I am a ſhamd
That my extreame affection to my ſonne,
Should giue my honour ſo vncur'd a maine,
But my firſt ſonne, being in Vicenza loſt.
How in Vicenza? loſt you a ſonne there?
About what time my Lord?
O the ſame night, wherein your noble father tooke the towne.
How long's that ſince my Lord? can you remember.
Tis now well nie vpon the twentith yeare.
And how old was he then?
I cannot tel, betweene the yeares of three and ſoure, I take it.
Had he no ſpeciall note in his attire,
Or otherwiſe, that you can call to mind.
I cannot well remember his attire,
But I haue often heard his mother ſay:
He had about his necke a tablet,
Giuen to him by the Emperour Sigiſmund.
His Godfather, with this inſcription,
Vnder the figure of a ſiluer Globe: En minimo, mundus.
How did you call your ſonne my Lord?
Camillo Lord Chamount.
Then no more my Gaſper? but Camillo,
Take notice of your father, gentlemen:
Stand not amazd? here is a tablet,
With that inſcription? found about his necke
That night, and in Vicenza by my father,
(Who being ignorant, what name he had)
Chriſtned him Gaſper, nor did I reueale,
This ſecret till this hower to any man.
O happy reuelation? ô bleſt hower? ô my Camillo.
O ſtrange my brother.
Maximilion? behold how the aboundance of his ioy Drownds him in teares of gladneſſe.
O my boy? forgiue thy fathers late auſterity:
My Lord? I deliuered as much before, but your honour would not be perſwaded, I will heareafter giue more obſeruance to my viſions? I drempt of this.
I can be ſtill no longer, my good Lord,
Do a poore man ſome grace mongſt all your ioyes.
Why whats the matter Iaques.
I am robd, I am vndone my Lord, robd and vndone:
A heape of thirty thouſand golden crownes,
Stolne from me in one minnte, and I feare:
By her confedracy, that cals me father,
But ſhe's none of mine, therefore ſweet Lord:
Let her be tortured to confeſſe the truth.
More wonders yet.
How Iaques is not Rachel then thy daughter.
No, I diſclaime in her, I ſpit at her,