TO sing a Song that old was sung,
From ashes, auntient Gower is come,
Assuming mans infirmities,
To glad your eare, and please your eyes:
It hath been sung at Feastiuals,
On Ember eues, and Holydayes:
And Lords and Ladyes in their liues,
Haue red it for restoratiues:
The purchase is to make men glorious,
Et bonum quo Antiquius o melius:
If you, borne in those latter times,
When Witts more ripe, accept my rimes;
And that to heare an old man sing,
May to your Wishes pleasure bring:
I life would wish, and that I might
Waste it for you, like Taper light.
This Antioch, then Antiochus the great,
Buylt vp this Citie, for his chiefest Seat;
The fayrest in all Syria.
I tell you what mine Authors saye:
This King vnto him tooke a Peere,
Who dyed, and left a female heyre,
So bucksome, blith▪ and full of face,
As heauen had lent her all his grace:
With whom the Father liking tooke,
And her to Incest did prouoke:
Bad child, worse father, to intice his owne
To euill, should be done by none:
But custome what they did begi,
Was with long vse, account'd no sinne▪
The beautie of this sinfull Dame,
Made many Princes thither frame,
To seeke her as a bedfellow,
In maryage pleasures, playfellow:
Which to preuent, he made a Law,
To keepe her still, and men in awe:
That who so askt her for his wife,
His Riddle tould, not lost his life:
So for her many of wight did die,
As yon grimme lookes do testifie.
What now ensues, to the iudgement of your eye,
I giue my cause, who best can iutifie.
Young Prince of Tyre, you haue at large receiued
The danger of the taske you vndertake.
I haue (Antiochus) and with a soule emboldned
With the glory of her prayse, thinke death no hazard,
In this enterprise.
Musicke bring in our daughter, clothed like a bride,
For embracements euen of oue himselfe;
At whose conception, till Lucina rained,
Nature this dowry gaue; to glad her presence,
The Seanate house of Planets all did sit,
To knit in her, their best perfections.
See where she comes, appareled like the pring,
Graces her subiects▪ and her thoughts the King,
Of euery Vertue giues renowne to men:
Her face the booke of prases, where is read,
Nothing but curious pleasures▪ as from thence,
Sorrow were euer racte, and teastie wrath
Could neuer be her milde companion.
You Gods that made me man, and sway in loue;
That haue enflamde desire in my breast,
To taste the fruite of yon celestiall tree,
(Or die in th'aduenture) be my helpes,
As I am sonne and seruant to your will,
To compasse such a bondlesse happinesse.
Prince Pericles.
That would be sonne to great Antiochus.
Before thee standes this faire Hesperides,
With golden fruite, but dangerous to be toucht:
For Death like Dragons heere affright thee hard:
Her face like Heauen, inticeth thee to view
Her countlesse glory; which desert must gaine:
And which without desert, because thine eye
Presumes to reach, all the whole heape must die:
Yo sometimes famous Princes, like thy selfe,
Drawne by report, aduentrous by desire,
Tell thee with speachlesse tongues, and semblance pale,
That without couering, saue yon field of Starres,
Heere they stand Martyrs slaine in Cupids Warres:
And with dead cheekes, aduise thee to desist,
For going on deaths net, whom none resist.
Antiochus, I thanke thee, who hath taught,
My frayle mortalitie to know it selfe;
And by those fearefull obiectes, to prepare
This body, like to them, to what I must:
For Death remembered should be like a myrrour,
Who tels vs, life's but breath, to trust it errour:
Ile make my Will then, and as sicke men doe,
Who know the World, see Heauen, but feeling woe,
Gripe not at earthly ioyes as arst they did;
So I bequeath a happy peace to you,
And all good men, as eury Prince should doe;
My ritches to the earth, from whence they came;
But my vnspotted fire of Loue, to you:
Thus ready for the way of lie or death,
I wayte the sharpest blow (Antiochus)
Scorning aduice; read the conclusion then:
Which read and not expounded, tis decreed,
As these before thee, thou thy selfe shalt bleed.
Of all sayd yet, mayst thou prooue prospero,
Of all sayd yet, I wish thee happinesse.
Like a bold Champion I assume the Listes,
Nor aske aduise of any other thought,
But faythfulnesse and courage.
I am no Viper, yet I feed
On mothers flesh which did me breed:
I sought a Husband, in which labour,
I found that kindness in a Father;
Hee's Father, Sonne, and Husband mild;
I, Mother, Wife; and yet his Child:
How they may be, and yet in two,
As you will liue resolue it you.
Sharpe Phisicke is the last: But ô you powers!
That giues heauen countlesse eyes to view mens actes▪
Why cloude they not their sights perpetually,
If this be true, which makes me pale to read it?
Faire Glasse of light, I lou'd you, and could still,
Were not this glorious Casket stor'd with ill:
But I must tell you, now my thoughts reuolt,
For hee's no man on whom perfections waite,
That knowing sinne within, will touch the gate.
You are a faire Violl, and your sense, the stringes;
Who finger'd to make man his lawfull musicke,
Would draw Heauen downe, and all the Gods to haken:
But being playd vpon before your time,
Hell onely daunceth at so harsh a chime:
Good sooth, I care not for you.
Prince Pericls, touch not, vpon thy life;
For that's an Article within our Law,
As dangerous as the rest: your time's expir'd,
Either expound now, or receiue your sentene.
Great King,
Few loue to heare the sinnes they loue to act,
T'wold brayde your selfe too neare for me to tell it:
Who has a booke of all that Monarches doe,
Hee's more secure to keepe it shut, then showne.
For Vice repeated, is like the wandring Wind,
Blowes dust in others eyes to spread it selfe;
And yet the end of all is bought thus deare,
The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see cleare:
To stop the Ayre would hurt them, the blind Mole cast
Copt hilles towards heauen, to tell the earth is throng'd
By mans oppression, and the poore Worme doth die for't:
Kinges are earths Gods; in vice, their law's their will:
And if oue stray, who dares say, oue doth ll:
It is enough you know, and it is fit;
What being more knowne, growes worse, to smother it.
All loue the Wombe that their first beeing bred,
Then giue my tongue like leaue, to loue my head.
Heauen, that I had thy head; he ha's found the meaning:
But I will gloze with him. Young Prince of Tyre,
Though by the tenour of your strict edict,
Your exposition misinterpreting,
We might proceed to counsell of your dayes;
Yet hope, succeeding from so faire a tree
As your faire selfe, doth tune vs otherwise;
Fourtie dayes longer we doe respite you,
If by which time, ou cret be vndone,
This mercy shewes, weele ioy in such a Sonne:
And vntill then, your entertaine shall bee
As doth befit our honour and your worth.
How courtesie would seeme to couer sinne,
When what is done, is like an hipocrite,
The which is good in nothing but in sight.
If it be true that I interpret false,
Then were it certaine you were not so bad,
As with foule Incest to abuse your soule:
Where now you both a Father and a Sonne,
By your vntimely claspings with your Child,
(Which pleasures fittes a husband, not a father)
And shee an eater of her Mothers flesh,
By the defiling of her Parents bed,
And both like Serpents are; who though they feed
On sweetest Flowers, yet they Poyson breed.
Antioch farewell, for Wisedome sees those men,
Blush not in actions blacker then the night,
Will shew no course to keepe them from the light:
One sinne (I know) another doth prouoke;
Murther's as neere to Lust, as Flame to Smoake:
Poyson and Treason are the hands of Sinne,
I, and the targets to put off the shame,
Then least my life be cropt, to keepe you cleare,
By flight, Ile shun the danger which I feare.
He hath found the meaning,
For which we meane to haue his head:
He must not liue to trumpet foorth my infane,
Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sinne
In such a loathed manner:
And therefore instantly this Prince must die,
For by his fall, my honour must keepe hie.
Who attends vs there?
Doth your highnes call?
Thaliar, you are of our Chamber, Thalird,
And our minde pertakes her priuat actions,
To your secrecie; and for your faythfulnes,
We will aduaunce you, Thliard:
Behold, heere's Poyson, and heere's Gold:
Wee hate the Prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him;
It fittes thee not to aske the reason why?
Because we bid it: say, is it done?
My Lord, tis done.
Enough. Let your breath coole your selfe, telling your haste.
My Lord, Prince Pericles is fled.
As thou wilt liue flie after, and like an arrow shot from a well experienst Archer hits the marke his eye doth leuell at: so thou neuer returne vnlesse thou say Prince Pericles is dead.
My Lord, if I can get him within my Pistols length, Ile make him sure enough, so farewell to your highnesse.
Thaliard adieu, till Pericles be dead,
My heart can lend no succour to my head.
Let none disturb vs, why shold this chāge of thoughts
The sad companion dull eyde melancholie,
By me so vsde a guest, as not an houre
In the dayes glorious walke or peacefull night,
The tombe where griefe stould sleepe can breed me quiet,
Here pleasures court mine eies, and mine eies shun them,
And daunger which I fearde is at Antioch,
Whose arme seemes farre too short to hit me here,
Yet neither pleasures Art can ioy my spirits,
Nor yet the others distance comfort me,
Then it is thus, the passions of the mind,
That haue their first conception by misdread,
Haue after nourishment and life, by care
And what was first but feare, what might be done,
Growes elder now, and cares it be not done.
And so with me the great Antiochus,
Gainst whom I am too little to contend,
Since hee's so great, can make his will his act,
Will thinke me speaking, though I sweare to silence,
Nor bootes it me to say, I honour,
If he suspct I may dishonour him.
And what may make him blush in being knowne,
Heele stop the course by which it might be knowne,
With hostile forces heele ore-spread the land,
And with the stint of warre will looke so huge,
Amazement shall driue courage from the state,
Our men be vanquisht ere they doe resist,
And subiects punisht that nere thought offence,
Which care of them, not pittie of my selfe,
Who once no more but as the tops of trees,
Which fence the rootes they grow by and defend them,
Makes both my bodie pine, and soule to languish,
And punish that before that he would punish.
Ioy and all comfort in your sacred brest.
And keepe your mind till you returne to vs peacefull and comfortable.
Peace, peace, and giue experience tongue,
They doe abuse the King that flatter him,
For flatterie is the bellowes blowes vp sinne,
The thing the which is flattered, but a sparke,
To which that sparke giues heate, and stronger
Glowing, whereas reproofe obedient and in order,
Fits kings as they are men, for they may erre,
When signior sooth here does proclaime peace,
He flatters you, makes warre vpon your life.
Prince paadon me, or strike me if you please,
I cannot be much lower then my knees.
All leaue vs else: but let your cares ore-looke,
What shipping, and what ladings in our hauen,
And then returne to vs, Hellicans thou hast
Mooude vs, what eest thou in our lookes?
An angrie brow, dread Lord.
If there be such a dart in Princes frownes,
How durst thy tongue moue anger to our face?
How dares the plants looke vp to heauen,
From whence they haue their nourishment?
Thou knowest I haue power to take thy life from thee▪
I haue ground the Axe my selfe,
Doe but you strike th blowe.
Rise, prethee rise, sit downe, thou art no flatterer,
I thanke thee fort, and heaue forbid
That kings should let their ares heare their faults hid.
Fit Counsellor, and seruant for a Prince▪
Who by thy wisdome makes a Prince thy seruant,
What wouldst thou haue me doe?
To beare with patience such griefes as you your selfe doe lay vpon your selfe.
Thou speakst like a Physition Hellicanus,
That ministers a potion vnto me:
That thou wouldst tremble to receiue thy selfe,
Attend me then, I went to Antioch,
Whereas thou knowst against the face of death,
I sought the purchase of a glorious beautie,
From whence an issue I might propogate,
Are armes to Princes, and bring ioies to subiects,
Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder,
The rest harke in thine eare, as blacke as incest,
Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father
Seemde not to strike, but smooth, but thou knowst this,
Tis time to feare when tyrants seemes to kisse.
Which feare so grew in me I hither fled,
Vnder the couering of a carefull night,
Who seemd my good protector, and being here▪
Bethought what was past, what might succeed,
I knew him tyrannous, and tyrants feare
Decrease not, but grow faster then the yeares,
And should he doo't, as no doubt he doth,
That I should open to the listning ayre,
How mny worthie Princes blouds were shed,
To keepe his bed of blacknesse vnlayde ope,
To lop that doubt, hee'le fill this land with armes,
And make pretence of wrong that I haue done him,
When all for mine, if I may call offence,
Must feel wars blow, who spares not innocence,
Which lou to all of which thy selfe art one,
Who now reprou'dst me fort.
Alas sir.
Drew sleep out of mine eies, blood frō my cheekes,
Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts
How I might stop this tempest ere it came,
And finding little comfort to relieue them,
I thought it princely charity to griue for them.
Well my Lord, since you haue giuen mee leaue to speake▪
Freely will I speake, Antiochus you feare,
And iustly too, I thinke you feare the tyrant,
Who either by publike warre, or priuat treason,
Will take away your life: therfore my Lord, go trauell for a while, till that his rage and anger be forgot, or till the Destinies doe cut his threed of life: your rule direct to anie, if to me, day serues not light more faithfull then Ile be.
I doe not doubt thy faith.
But should he wrong my liberties in my absence?
Weele mingle our bloods togither in the earth,
From whence we had our being, and our birth.
Tyre I now looke from thee then, and to Tharsus
Intend my trauaile, where Ile heare from thee,
And by whose Letters Ile dispose my selfe.
The care I had and haue of subiects good,
On thee I lay, whose wisdomes strength can beare it,
Ile take thy word, for faith not aske thine oath,
Who shuns not to breake one, will cracke both.
But in our orbs will liue so round, and safe,
That time of both this truth shall nere conuince,
Thou shewdst a subiects sine, I a true Prince.
So this is Tyre, and this the Court, heere must I kill King Pericles, and if I doe it not, I am sure to be hang'd at home: t'is daungerous.
Well, I perceiue he was a wie fellowe, and had good disreton, that beeing bid to aske what hee would of the King, desired he might knowe none of his secrets.
Now doe I see hee had some reason for't: for if a king bidde a man bee a villaine, hee's bound by the indenture of his oath to bee one.
Husht, heere comes the Lords of Tyre.
You shall not neede my fellow-Pees of Tyre▪ further to question mee of your kings departure: his sealed Commission left in trust with mee, does speake sufficiently hee's gone to trauaile.
How? the King gone?
If further yet you will be satisfied, (why as it were vnlicensed of your loues) he would depart? Ile giue some light vnto you, beeing at Antioch.
What from Antioch?
Royall Antiochus on what cause I knowe ot, tooke some displeasure at him, at least hee iudg' so: and doubting let hee had rr'de or sinn' de, to shewe his sorrow, hee'de correct himselfe; so puts himselfe vnto the Shipmans toyle, with whome eache minute threatens life or death.
Well, I perceiue I shall not be hang'd now, although I would, but since he's gone, the Kings as must please: scap'te the Land to perish at the Sea, present my selfe. Peace to the Lords of Tyre.
Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.
From him I come with message vnto princely Pericles, but since my landing, I haue vnderstood your Lord has betake himselfe to vnknowne trauailes, now message must returne from whence it came.
Wee haue no reason to desire it, commended to our maister not to vs, yet ere you shall depart, this wee desire as friends to Antioch wee may feast in Tyre.
My Dyoniza shall wee rest vs heere,
And by relating tales of others griefes,
See if t'will each vs to forget our own?
That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it,
For who digs hills because they doe aspire?
Throwes downe one mountaine to cast vp a higher:
O my distressed Lord, euen such our griefes are,
Heere they are but felt, and seene with mischiefs eyes,
But like to Groues, being topt, they higher rise.
O Diniza.
Who wanteth food, and will not say hee wants it,
Or can conceale his hunger till hee famish?
Our toungs and sorrowes to sound deepe:
Our woes into the aire, our exes to weepe.
Till toungs fetch breath that may proclaime
Them louder, that if heauen slumber, while
Their creatures want, they may awake
Their helpers, to comfort them.
Ile then discourse our woes felt seuerall yeares,
And wanting breath to speake, helpe mee with teares.
Ile doe my best Syr.
This Tharsus ore which I haue the gouernement,
A Cittie on whom plentie held full hand:
For riches strew'de her selfe euen in her streetes,
Whose towers bore heads so high they kist the clowds,
And strangers nere beheld, but wondred at,
Whose men and dames so jetted and adorn'de,
one anothers glasse to trim them by,
Their tables were stor'de full to glad the sight,
And not so much to feede on as delight,
All pouertie was scor'nde, and pride so great,
The name of helpe grewe odious to repeat.
O t'is too true.
But see what heauen can doe by this our change,
These mouthes who but of late, earth sea, and ayre,
Were all too little to content and please,
Although thy gaue their creatures in abundance,
As houses are defil'de for want of vse,
They are now staru'de of exercise,
Those pallats who not yet too sauers younger,
Must haue inuentions to delight the tast,
Would now be glad of bread and beg for it,
Those mothers who to nouzell vp their babes,
Thought nought too curious, are readie now
To eat those little darlings whom they lou'de,
So sharpe are hungers teeth, that man and we,
Drawe lots who first shall die, to lengthen life.
Heere stands a Lord, and there a Ladie weeping:
Heere manie sincke, yet those which see them fall,
Haue scarce strength left to giue them buryall.
Is not this true?
Our cheekes and hollow eyes doe witnesse it.
O let those Cities that of plenties cup,
And her prosperities so largely taste,
With their superfluous riots heare these teares,
The miserie of Tharsus may be theirs.
Wheres the Lord Gouernour?
Here, speake out thy sorrowes, which thee bringst
n hast, for comfort is too farre for vs to expect.
Wee haue descryed vpon our neighbouring shore, a portlie saile of ships make hitherward.
I thought as much.
One sorrowe neuer comes but brings an heire,
That may succcede as his inheritor:
And so ours, some neighbouring nation,
Taking aduantage of our miserie,
That stut't the hollow vessels with their power,
To beat vs downe, the which are downe alreadie,
And make a conquest of vnhappie mee,
Whereas no glories got to ouercome.
That's the least feare.
For by the semblance of their white flagges displayde, they bring vs peace, and come to vs as fauourers, not as foes.
Thou speak'st like himnes vntuterd to repeat,
Who makes the fairest showe, meanes most deceipt.
But bring they what they will, and what they can,
What need wee leaue our grounds the lowest?
And wee are halfe way there: Goe tell their Generall wee attend him heere, to know for what he comes, and whence he comes, and what he craues?
I goe my Lord.
Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist,
If warres, wee are vnable to resist.
Lord Gouernour, for so wee heare you are,
Let not our Ships and number of our men,
Be like a beacon fier'de, t'amaze your eyes,
Wee haue heard your miseries as farre as Tyre,
And seene the desolation of your streets,
Nor come we to adde sorrow to your teares,
But to relieue them of their heauy loade,
And these our Ships you happily may thinke,
Are like the Troian Horse, was stuft within
With bloody veines expecting ouerthrow,
Are stor'd with Corne▪ to make your needie bread,
And giue them life, whom hunger-staru'd halfe dead.
The Gods of Greece protect you,
And wee'le pray for you.
Arise I pray you, rise; we do not looke for reuernce,
But for loue▪ and harborage for our selfe, our ships, & men.
The which when any shall not gratifie,
Or pay you with vnthankfulnesse in thought,
Be it our Wiues, our Children, or our selues,
The Curse of heauen and men succeed their euils:
Till when the which (I hope) shall neare be seene:
Your Grace is welcome to our Towne and vs.
Which welcome wee'le accept, feast here awhile,
Vntill our Starres that frowne, lend vs a smile.
Heere haue you seene a mightie King,
His child 'ws to incest bring:
A better Prince, and benigne Lord,
That Will proue awfull both in deed and word:
Be quiet then as men should bee,
Till he hath past necessitie:
I'le shew you those in troubles raigne;
Loosing a Mite, a Mountaine gaine:
The good in conuersation,
To whom I giue my benizon:
Is still at Tharstill, where each man,
Thinkes all is writ, he spoken can:
And to remember what he does,
Build his Statue to make him glorious:
But tidinges to the contrarie,
Are brought your eyes, what need speake I.
Good Helicon that stayde at home,
Not to eate Hony like a Drone,
From others labours; for though he striue
To killen bad, keepe good aliue:
And to fulfill his prince desire,
Sau'd one of all, that haps in Tyre:
How Thalirt came full bent with sinne,
And had in tent to murder him;
And that in Tharsis was not best,
Longer for him to make his rest:
He doing so, put foorth to Seas;
Where when men been, there's seldome ease,
For now the Wind begins to blow,
Thunder aboue, and deepes below,
Makes such vnquiet, that the Shippe,
Should house him safe; is wrackt and split,
And he (good Prince) hauing all lost,
By Waues, from coast to coast is tost:
All perishen of man of pelfe,
Ne ought escaped but himselfe;
Till Fortune tir'd with doing bad,
Threw him a shore, to giue him glad:
And heere he comes: what shall be next,
Pardon old Gower, this long's the text.
Yet cease your ire you angry Starres of heauen,
Wind, Raine, and Thunder, remember earthly man
Is but a substaunce that must yeeld to you:
And I (as fits my nature) do obey you.
Alasse, the Seas hath cast me on the Rocks,
Washt me from shore to shore, and left my breath
Nothing to thinke on, but ensuing death:
Let it suffize the greatnesse of your powers,
To haue bereft a Prince of all his fortunes;
And hauing throwne him from your watry grau,
Heere to haue death in peace, is all hee'le craue.
What, to pelch?
Ha, come and bring away the Nets.
What Patch-breech, I say.
What say you Maister?
Looke how thou stirr'st now:
Come away, or Ile fetch'th with a wanion.
Fayth Maister, I am thinking of the poore men,
That were cast away before vs euen now.
Alasse poore soules, it grieued my heart to heare,
What pittifull cryes they made to vs, to helpe them,
When (welladay) we could scarce helpe our selues.
Nay Maister, sayd not I as much,
When I saw the Porpas how he bounst and tumbled?
They say they're halfe fish, halfe flesh:
A plague on them, they nere come but I looke to be washt.
Maister, I maell how the Fishes liue in the Sea?
Why, as Men a-land;
The great ones eate vp little ones:
I can compare our rich Misers o nothing so fitly,
As to a Whale; a playes and tumbles,
Dryuing the poore Fry before him,
And at last, deuowre them all at a mouthfull:
Such Whales haue I heard on, a'th land,
Who neuer leaue gaping, till they swallow'd
The whole Parish, Church, Steeple, Belles and all.
A prettie morall.
But Maister, if I had been the Sexton,
I would haue been that day in the belfrie.
Why, Man?
Because he should haue swallowed mee too,
And when I had been in his belly,
I would haue kept such a iangling of the Belles,
That he should neuer haue left,
Till he cast Belles▪ Steeple, Church and Parish vp againe:
But if the good King Simonides were of my minde.
Simonides?
We would purge the land of these Drones,
That robbe the Bee of her Hony.
How from the fenny subiect of the Sea,
These Fishers tell the infirmities of men,
And from their watry empire recollect,
All that may men approue, or men detect.
Peace be at your labour, honest Fisher-men.
Honest good fellow what's that, if it be a day fits you
Search out of the Kalender, and no body looke after it?
May see the Sea hath cast vpon your coast:
What a drunken Knaue was the Sea,
To cast thee in our way?
A man whom both the Waters and the Winde,
In that vast Tennis-court▪ hath made the Ball
For them to play vpon, intreates you pittie him:
Hee askes of you, that neuer vsd to begge.
No friend, cannot you begge?
Heer's them in our countrey of reece,
Gets more with begging, then we can doe with working.
Canst thou catch any Fishes then?
I neuer practizde it.
Nay then thou wilt starue sure: for heer's nothing to be got now-adayes, vnlesse thou canst fish for't.
What I haue been, I haue forgot to know;
But what I am, want teaches me to thinke on:
A man throng'd vp with cold, my Veines ar chill,
And haue no more of life then may suffize,
To giue my tongue that heat to aske your helpe:
Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead,
For that I am a man, pray you see me buried.
Di, ke-tha; now Gods forbid't, and I haue a Gowne heere, come put it on, keepe thee warme: now afore mee a handsome fellow: Come, thou shalt goe home, and wee'le haue Flesh for all day, Fish for fasting-dayes and more; or Puddinges and Flap-iackes, and thou shalt be welcome.
I thanke you sir.
Harke you my friend: You sayd you could not beg?
I did but craue.
But craue?
Then Ile turne Crauer too, and so I shall scape whipping.
Why, are you Beggers whipt then?
Oh not all, my friend, not all: for if all your Beggers were whipt, I would wish no better office, then to be Beadle: But Maister, Ile goe draw vp the Net.
How well this honest mirth becomes their labour?
Harke you sir; doe you know vvhere yee are?
Not ell.
Why e tell you, this I cald Pantapoles,
And our King, the good Symonides.
The good Symonides, doe you call him?
I sir, and he deserues so to be cal'd,
For his peaceable raigne, and good gouernement.
He is a happy King, since he gaines from
His subiects the name of good, by his gouernment.
How farre is his Court distant from this shore?
Mary sir, halfe a dayes iourney: And Ile tell you,
He hath a faire Daughter, and to morrow is her birth-day,
And there are Princes and Knights come from all partes of the World to Iust and Turney for her loue.
Were my fortunes equall to my desires,
I could wish to make one there.
O sir, things must be as they may: and what a man can not get, he may lawfully dale for his Wiues soule.
Helpe Maister helpe; heere's a Fish hanges in the Net,
Like a poore mans right in the law: t'will hardly come out.
Ha bots on't, tis come at last; & tis turnd to a rusty Armour.
An Armour friends; I pray you let me see it?
Thankes Fortune, yeat that after all crosses,
Thou giuest me somewhat to repaire my selfe:
And though it was mine owne part of my heritage,
Which my dead Father did bequeath to me,
With this strict charge euen as he left his life,
Keepe it my Percls, it hath been a Shield
Twixt me and death, and poynted to this brayse,
For that it saued me, keepe it in like necessitie:
The which the Gods protect thee, Fame may defend thee:
It kept where I kept, I so dearely lou'd it,
Till the rough Seas, that spares not any man,
Tooke it in rage, though calm'd, haue giuen 't againe:
I thanke thee for't, my shipwracke now's no ill,
Since I haue heere my Father gaue in his Will.
What meane you sir?
To begge of you (kind friends) this Coate of worth,
For it was sometime Target to a King;
I know it by this marke: he loued me dearely,
And for his sake, I wish the hauing of it;
And that you'd guide me to your Soueraignes Court,
Where with it, I may appeare a Gentleman:
And if that euer my low fortune's better,
Ile pay your bounties; till then, rest your debter.
Why wilt thou turney for the Lady?
Ile shew the vertue I haue borne in Armes.
Why di'e take it: and the Gods giue thee good an't.
I but harke you my friend, t'was wee that made vp this Garment through the rough seames of the Waters: there are certaine Condolements, certaine Vailes: I hope sir, if you thriue, you'le remember from whence you had them.
eleeue't, I will:
By your furtherance I am cloth'd in Steele,
And spight of all the rupture of the Sea,
This Iewell holdes his buylding on my arme:
Vnto thy value I will mount my selfe
Vpon a Courser, whose delight steps,
Shall make the gazer ioy to see him tread;
Onely (my friend) I yet am vnprouided of a paire of Bases.
Wee'le sure prouide, thou shalt haue▪
My best Gowne to make thee a paire;
And Ile bring thee to the Court my selfe.
Then Honour be but a Goale to my Will,
This day Ile rise, or else adde ill to ill.
Are the Knights ready to begin the Tryumph?
They are my Leidge, and stay your comming,
To present them selues.
Returne them, We are ready, & our daughter heere▪
In honour of whose Birth▪ these Triumphs are,
Sits heere like Beauties child, whom Nature gat,
For men to see; and seeing▪ woonder at.
It pleaseth you (my royall Father) to expresse
My Commendations great, whose merit's lesse.
It's it it should be so, for Princes are
A modell which Heauen makes like to it selfe:
As Iewels loose their glory, if neglected,
So Princes their Renownes, if not respected:
T'is now your honour (Daughter) to entertaine
The labour of each Knight, in his deuice.
Which to preserue mine honour, I'le performe.
Who is the first, that doth preferre himselfe?
A Knight of Sparta (my renowned father)
And the deuice he beares vpon his Shield,
Is a blacke Ethyope reaching at the Sunne:
The word: Luxtuvimihi.
He loues you well, that holdes his life of you.
Who is the second, that presents himselfe?
A Prince of Macedon (my royall father)
And the deuice he beares vpon his Shield,
Is an Armed Knight, that's conquered by a Lady:
The motto thus in Spanish. Pue Per dolecra kee per orsa.
Knight.
And with the third?
The third, of Antioch; and his deuice,
A wreath of Chiually: the word: Me Pompey prouexit apex.
Knight.
What is the fourth.
A burning Torch that's turned vpside downe;
The word: Qui me alit me extingui.
Which shewes that Beautie hath his power & will,
Which can as well enflame, as it can kill.
Knight.
The fift, an Hand enuironed with Clouds,
Holding out Gold, that's by the Touch-stone tride:
The motto thus: Si spctaa▪ fides.
Knight.
And what's the sixt, and last; the which,
The knight himself with such a graceful courtesie deliuered?
Hee seemes to be a Stranger: but his Present is
A withered Branch, that's onely greene at top,
The motto: In hac sp viuo.
A pretty morrall frō the deiected state wherein he is,
He hopes by you, his fortunes et may flourish.
He had need meane better, then his outward shew
Can any way speake in his iust commend:
For by his rustie outside▪ he appeares,
To haue practis'd more the Whipstocke, then the Lauce.
He well may be a Stranger, for he comes
To an honour'd tryumph, strangly furnisht.
And on set purpose let his Armour rust
Vntill this day, to scowre it in the dust.
Opinion's but a foole, that makes vs scan
The outward habit, by the inward man.
But stay, the Knights are comming,
We will with-draw into the Gallerie.
Knights, to say you're welcome, were superfluous.
I place vpon the volume of your deedes,
As in a Title page, your worth in armes,
Were more then you expect, or more then's fit,
Since euery worth in shew commends it selfe:
Prepare for mirth, for mirth becomes a Feast.
You are Princes, and my guestes.
But you my Knight and guest,
To whom this Wreath of victorie I giue,
And crowne you King of this dayes happinesse.
Tis more by Fortune (Lady) then my Merit.
Call it by what you will, the day is your,
And here (I hope) is none that enuies it:
In framing an Artist, art hath thus decreed,
To make some good, but others to exceed,
And you are her labourd scholler: come Queene a th'feast,
For (Daughter) so you are; heere take your place:
Martiall the rest, as they deserue their grace.
We are honour'd much by good Smonides.
Your presence glads our dayes, honour we loue,
For who hates honour, hates the Gods aboue.
Sir, yonder is your place.
Some other is more fit.
Contend not sir, for we are Gentlemen,
Hae neither in our hearts, nor outward eyes,
Enuies the great, nor shall the low despise.
You are right courtious Knights.
Sit sir, sit.
By oue (I wonder) that is King of thoughts,
These Cates resist mee, hee not thought vpon.
By Iuno (that is Queene of mariage)
All Viands that I eate do seeme vnsauery,
Wishing him my meat: sure hee's a gallant Gentleman.
Hee's but a countrie Gentleman: ha's done no more
Then other Knights haue done, ha's broken a Staffe,
Or so; so let it passe.
To mee he seemes like Diamond, to Glasse.
You Kings to mee, like to my fathers picture,
Which tels in that glory once he was,
Had Princes sit like Starres about his Throne,
And hee the Sunne for them to reuerence;
None that beheld him, but like lesser lights,
Did vaile their Crownes to his supremacie;
Where now his sonne like a Gloworme in the night,
The which hath Fire in darknesse, none in light:
Whereby I see that Time's the King of men,
Hee's both their Parent, and he is their Graue,
And giues them what he will, not what they craue.
What▪ are you merry, Knights?
Who can be other, in this royall presence.
Heere, with a Cup that's stur'd vnto the brim,
As do you loue, fill to your Mistris lippes,
Wee drinke this health to you.
We thanke your Grace.
Yet pause awhile, yon Knight doth sit too melancholy,
As if the entertainement in our Court,
Had not a shew might counteruaile his worth:
Note it not you, Thaisa.
What is't to me, my father?
O attend my Daughter,
Princes in this, should liue like Gods aboue,
Who freely giue to euery one that come to honour them:
And Princes not doing so, are like to Gnats,
Which make a sound, but kild, are wondred at:
Therefore to make his entraunce more sweet,
Heere, say wee drinke this standing boule of wine to him.
Alas my Father, it befits not mee,
Vnto a stranger Knight to be so bold,
He may my profer take for an offence,
Since men take womens giftes for impudenc.
How? doe as I bid you, or you'le mooue me else.
Now by the Gods, he could not please me better.
And furthermore tell him, we desire to know of him
Of whence he is, his name, and Parentage?
The King my father (sir) has drunke to you.
I thanke him.
Wishing it so much blood vnto your life.
I thanke both him and you, and pledge him freely.
And further, he desires to know of you,
Of whence you are, your name and parentage?
A Gentleman of Tyre, my name Pericles,
My education beene in Artes and Armes:
Who looking for aduentres in the world,
Was by the rough Seas reft of Ships and men,
and after shipwracke, driuen vpon this shore.
He thankes your Grace; names himselfe Pericles,
A Gentleman of Tyre: who onely by misfortune of the seas,
Bereft of Shippes and Men, cast on this shore.
Now by the Gods, I pitty his misfortune,
And will awake him from his melancholy.
Come Gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles,
And waste the time which lookes for other reuels;
Euen in your Armours as you are addrest,
Will well become a Souldiers daunce:
I will not haue excuse with saying this,
Lowd Musicke is too harsh for Ladyes heads,
Since they loue men in armes, as well as beds.
So, this was well askt, t'was so well perform'd.
Come sir, heer's a Lady that wants breathing too,
And I haue heard, you Knights of Tyre,
Are excellent in making Ladyes trippe;
And that their Measures are as excellent.
In those that practize them, they are (my Lord)
Oh that's as much, as you would be denyed
Of your faire courtesie: vnclaspe, vnclaspe.
Thankes Gentlemen to all, all aue done well;
But you the best: Pages and lights, to conduct
These Knights vnto their seuerall Lodgings:
Yours sir, we haue giuen order be next our owne.
I am at your Graces pleasure.
Princes, it is too late to talke of Loe.
And that's the marke I know, you leuell at:
Therefore each one betake him to his rest,
To morrow all for speeding do their best.
No Escanes, know this of mee,
Antiochus from incest liued not free:
For which the most high Gods not minding,
Longer to with-hold the vengeance that
They had in store, due to this heynous
Capitall offence, euen in the height and pride
Of all his glory, when he was seated in
A Chariot of an inestimable value, and his daughter
With him; a fire from heauen came and shriueld
Vp those bodyes euen to lothing, for they so stounke,
That all those eyes ador'd them, ere their fall,
Scorne now their hand should giue them buriall.
T'was very strange.
And yet but iustice; for though this King were great,
His greatnesse was no gard to barre heauens shaft,
But sinne had his reward.
Tis very true.
See, not a man in priuate conference,
Or counsaile, ha's respect with him but hee.
It shall no longer grieue, without reprofe.
And curst be he that will not second it.
Follow me then: Lord Hellicane, a word.
With mee? and welcome happy day, my Lords.
Know, that our griefes are risen to the top,
And now at length they ouer-flow their bankes.
Your griefes, for what?
Wrong not your Prince, you loue.
Wrong not your selfe then, noble Hellican,
But if the Prince do liue, let vs salute him,
Or know what ground's made happy by his breath:
If in he liue, wee'le seeke him out:
If in his raue he rest, wee'le find him there,
And be resolued he liues to gouerne vs:
Or dead, giu's cause to mourne his funerall,
And leaue vs to our free election.
Whose death in deed, the strongest in our sensure,
And knowing this Kingdome is without a head,
Like goodly Buyldings left without a Roofe,
Soone fall to ruine: your noble selfe,
That best know how to rule, and how to raigne,
Wee thus submit vnto our Soueraigne.
Liue noble Hellicane.
Try honours cause; forbeare your suffrages:
If that you loue Prince Pericles, forbeare,
(Take I your wish, I leape into the seas,
Where's howerly trouble, for a minuts ease)
A twelue-month longer, let me intreat you
To forbeare the absence of your King;
If in which time expir'd, he not returne,
I shall with aged patience beare your yoake:
But if I cannot wne you to this loue,
Goe search like nobles, like noble subiects,
And in your search, spend your aduenturous worth,
Whom if you find, and winne vnto returne,
You shall like Diamonds it about his Crowne.
To wisedome, hee's a foole, that will not yeeld:
And since Lord Hellicane enioyneth vs,
We with our trauels will endeauour.
Then you loue vs, we you, & wee'le claspe hands:
When Peeres thus knit, a Kingdome euer stands.
Good morrow to the good Simuies.
Knights, from my daughter this I let you know▪
That for this twelue-month, shee'le not vndertake
A maried life: her reason to her selfe is onely knowne,
Which from her, by no meanes can I get.
May we not get accesse to her (my ?)
Fayth, by no meanes, she hath so strictly
Tyed her to her Chamber, that t'is impossible:
One twelue Moones more shee'le weare Dianas liuerie:
This by the eye of Cinthya hath she vowed,
And on her Virgin honour, will not breake it.
Loth to bid-farewell, we take our leaues.
So, they are well dispatcht:
Now to my daughters Letter; she telles me heere,
Shee'le wedde the stranger Knight;
Or neuer more to view nor day nor light.
T'is well Mistris, your choyce agrees with mine:
I like that well: nay how absolute she's in't,
Not minding whether I dislike or no.
Well, I do commend her choyce, and will no longer▪
Haue it be delayed: Soft, heere he comes,
I must dissemble it.
All fortune to the good Symids.
To you as much: Sir, I am behoulding to you
For your sweete Musicke this last night:
I do protest, my eares were neuer better fedde
With such delightfull pleasing harmonie.
It is your Graces pleasure to commend,
Not my desert.
Sir, you are Musickes maister.
The worst of all her schollers (my good Lord.)
Let me aske you one thing:
What do you thinke of my Daughter, sir?
A most vertuous Princesse.
And she is faire too, is she not?
As a faire day in Sommer: woondrous faire.
Sir, my Daughter thinkes very well of you,
I so well, that you must be her Maister,
And she will be your Scholler; therefore looke to it.
I am vnworthy for her Scholemaister.
She thinkes not so: peruse this writing else.
What's here, a letter that she loues the knight of Tyre▪
T'is the Kings subtiltie to haue my life:
Oh seeke not to intrappe me, gracious Lord,
A Stranger, and distressed Gentleman,
That neuer aymed so hie, to loue your Daughter,
But bent all offices to honour her.
Thou hast bewitcht my daughter,
And thou art a villaine.
By the Gods I haue not; neuer did thought
Of mine leuie offence; nor neuer did my actions
Yet commence a deed might gaine her loue,
Or your displeasure.
Traytor, thou lyest.
Traytor?
I, traytor.
Euen in his throat, vnlesse it be the King,
That cals me Traytor, I returne the lye.
Now by the Gods, I do applaude his courage.
My actions are as noble as my thoughts.
That neuer relisht of a base discent:
I came vnto your Court for Honours cause,
And not to be a Rebell to her state:
And he that otherwise accountes of mee,
This Sword shall prooue, hee's Honours enemie.
Noheere comes my Daughter, she can witnesse it.
Then as you are as vertuous, as faire,
Resolue your angry Father, if my tongue
Did ere solicite, or my hand subscribe
To any sillable that made loue to you?
Why sir, say if you had, who take offence?
At that, would make me glad?
Yea Mistris, are you so peremptorie?
I am glad on't with all my heart,
Ile tame you; Ile bring you in subiection.
Will you not, hauing my consent,
Bestow your loue and your affections,
Vpon a Stranger? who for ought I know,
May be (nor can I thinke the contrary)
As great in blood as I my selfe:
Therefore, heare you Mistris, either frame
Your will to mine: and you sir, heare you;
Either be rul'd by mee, or Ile make you,
Man and wife: nay come, your hands,
And lippes must seale it too: and being ioynd,
Ile thus your hopes destroy, and for further griefe:
God giue you ioy; what are you both pleased?
Yes, if you loue me sir?
Euen as my life, my blood that fosters it.
What are you both agreed?
Yes, if't please your Maiestie.
It pleaseth me so well, that I will see you wed,
And then with what haste you can, get you to bed.
Now sleepe y slacked hath the rout,
No din but snores about the house,
Made louder by the orefed breast,
Of this most pompous maryage Feast:
The Catte with eyne of burning cole,
Now coutches from the Mouses ole;
And Cricket sing at the Ouens mouth,
Are the blyther for their drouth:
Hymen hath brought the Bride to bed,
Whereby the lose of may denhead,
A Babe is moulded: be attent,
And Time that is so briefly spent,
With your fine fancies quaintly each,
What's dumbe in shew, I'le plaine with speach.
By many a dearne and painefull pearch
Of Perycles the carefull search,
By the ower opposing Crignes,
Which the world togeather ioynes,
Is made with all due diligence,
That horse and sayle and hie expence,
Can steed the quest at last from Tyre:
Fame answering the most strange enquire,
To'th Court of King Symonides,
Are Letters brought, the tenour these:
Antichus and his daughter dead,
The men of Tyrus, on the head
Of Helycanus would set on
The Crowne of Tyre, bt he will none:
The mutanie, hee there hastes t'oppresse,
Sayes to'em, if King Pericles
Come not home in twise sixe Moones,
He obedient to their doomes,
Will take the Crowne: the summe of this,
Brought hither to Penlapolis,
Irany shed the regions round,
And euery one with claps can ound,
Our heyre apparant is a King:
Who dreampt? who thought of such a thing?
Briefe he must hence depart to Tyre,
His Queene with child, makes her desire,
Which who shall crosse along to goe,
Omit we all their dole and woe:
her Nurse she takes,
And so to Sea; their vessell shakes,
On Neptune billow, halfe the flood,
Hath their Keele cut: but fortune mou'd,
Varies againe, the grisled North
Disgorges such a tempest forth,
That as a Ducke for life that diues,
So vp and downe the pooe Ship driues:
The Lady shreekes, and wel-a-neare,
Do's fall in trauayle with her feare:
And what ensues in this fell storme,
Shal for it selfe, it selfe performe:
I nll relate, action may
Conueniently the rest conuay;
Which might not? what by me is told,
In your imagination hold:
This Stage, the Ship, vpon whose Decke
The seas tost Pericles appeares to speake.
The God of this great Vast, rebuke these surges,
Which wash both heauen and hell, and thou that hast
Vpon the Windes commaund, bind them in Brasse;
Hauing call'd them from the deepe, ô still
Thy deanng dreadfull thunders gently quench
Thy ble sulphirous flashes: ô How Lychorida!
How does my Queene then? storme venomously,
Wilt thou seat all thy selfe? the sea-mans Whistle
Is as a whiper in the eares of death,
Vnheard Lyhria? , oh!
Diuinest patrionesse, and my wife gentle
To those that cry by night▪ conuey thy deitie
Aboard our dauncing Boat make swift the pangues
Of my Queenes trauayles? now Lychori.
Heere is a thing too young for such a place,
Who if it had conceit, would die, as I am like to doe:
Take in your armes this peece of your dead Queene.
How? how Lychoria?
Patience (good sir) do not assist the storme,
Heer's all that is left liuing of your Queene;
A litle Daughter: for the sake of it,
Be manly, and take comfort.
O you Gods!
Why do you make vs loue your goodly gyfts,
And snatch them straight away? we heere below,
Recall not what we giue, and therein may
Vse honour with you.
Patience (good sir) euen for this charge.
Now mylde may be thy life,
For a more blusterous birth had neuer Babe:
Quiet and gentle thy conditions; for
Thou art the rudelyest welcome to this world,
That euer was Princes Child: happy what followes,
Thou hast as chiding a natiuitie▪
As Fire, Ayre, Water, Earth, and Heauen can make,
To harould thee from the wombe:
Euen at the first, thy losse is more then can
Thy portage quit, with all thou canst find heere:
Now the good Gods throw their best eyes vpon't.
What courage sir? God saue you.
Courage enough, I do not feare the law,
It hath done to me the worst: yet for the loue
Of this poore Infant, this fresh new sea-farer,
I would it would be quiet.
Slacke the bolins there; thou wilt not wilt thou:
Blow and split thy selfe.
But Sea-roome, and the brine and cloudy billow
Kisse the Moone, I care not.
Sir your Queene must ouer board, the sea workes hie,
The Wind is lowd, and will not e till the Ship
Be cleard of the dead.
That's your superstition.
Pardon vs, sir; with vs at Sea it hath bin still obserued.
And we are strong in easterne, therefore briefly yeeld'er,
As you thinke meet; for she must ouer board straight;
Most wretched Queene.
Heere she lyes sir.
A terrible Child-bed hast thou had (my deare,
No light, no fire, th'vnfriendly elements,
Forgot thee vtterly, nor haue I time
To giue thee hallowd to thy graue, but straight,
Must cast thee scarcly Cossind, in oare,
Where for a monument vpon thy bones,
The ayre remayning lampes, the belching Whale,
And humming Water must orewelme thy corpes,
Lying with simple shels: ô Lychorida,
Bid Nesor bring me Spices, Incke, and Taper,
My Casket, and my lewels; and bid Nicander
Bring me the Sattin Coffin: lay the Babe
Vpon the Pillow; hie thee whiles I say
A priestly farewell to her: sodainely, woman.
Sir, we haue a Chist beneath the hatches,
Caulkt and bittumed ready.
I thanke thee: Mariner say, what Coast is this?
Wee are neere .
Thither gentel Mariner,
Alter thy course for : When canst thou reach it?
By breake of day, if the Wind cease.
O make for Thsus,
There will I visit Cler, for the Babe
Cannot hold out to ; there le leaue it
At carefull nursing: goe thy wayes good Mariner,
Ile bring the body presently.
Phylemon, hoe.
Doth my Lord call?
Get Fire and meat for these poore men,
T'as been a turbulent and stormie night.
I haue been in many; but such a night as this,
Till now, I neare endured.
Your Maister will be dead ere you returne,
There's nothing can be ministred to Nature,
That can recouer him: giue this to the Pothecary,
And tell me how it workes.
Good morrow.
Good morrow to your Lordship,
Gentlemen, why doe you stirre so early?
Sir, our lodgings standing bleake vpon the sea▪
Shooke as the earth did quake:
The very principals did seeme to rend and all to topple:
Pure surprize and feare, made me to quite the house.
That is the cause we trouble you so early,
Tis not our husbandry.
O you say well.
But I much maruaile that your Lordship,
Hauing rich tire about you, should at these early howers,
Shake off the golden slumber of repose; tis most strang
Nature should be so conuersant with Paine,
Being thereto not compelled.
I hld it euer Vertue and Cunning,
Were endowments greater, then Noblenese & Riches;
Carelesse Heyres, may the two latter darken and expend;
But Immortalitie attendes the former,
Making a man a god:
T'is knowne, I euer haue studied Physicke:
Through which secret Art, by turning ore Authorities,
I haue togeather with my practize, made famyliar,
To me and to my ayde, the blest infusions that dwels
In Vegetiues, in Mettals, Stones: and can speake of the
Disturbances that Nature works, and of her cures;
which doth giue me a more content in course of true delight
Then to be thirsty after tottering honour, or
Tie my pleasure vp in silken Bagges,
To please the Foole and Death.
Your honour has through Ehesus,
Poured foorth your charitie, and hundreds call themselues,
Your Creatures; who by you, haue been restored;
And not your knowledge, our personall payne,
But euen your Purse still open, hath built Lord Cerimn,
Such strong renowne, as time shall neuer.
So, lift there.
What's that?
Sir, euen now did the sea tosse vp vpon our shore
This Chist; tis of some wracke.
Set't downe, let's looke vpon't.
T'is like a Coin, sir.
What ere it be, t'is woondrous heauie;
Wrench it open straight:
If the Seas stomacke be orecharg'd with Gold,
T'is a good constraint of Fortune it belches vpon vs.
T'is so, my Lord.
How close tis caulkt & bottomed, did the sea cast it vp?
I neuer saw so huge a billow sir▪ as tost it vpon shore.
Wrench it open soft; it smels most sweetly in my sense.
A delicate Odour.
As euer lt m nostrill: so, vp with it.
Oh you most potent Gods! what's here, a Corse?
Most strange.
Shrowded in Cloth of state, balmed and entreasured with full bagges of Spices, a Pasport to Apollo, perfect mee in the Characters:
Heere I giue to vnderstand,
If er this Coffin driues alaud;
I King Pericles haue lost
This Queen, worth all our mundaine cost:
Who finds her, giue her burying,
She was the Daughter of a King:
Besiaes, this Treasure for a ee,
The Gos requit his charitie.
If thou liuest Pericles, thou hast a heart,
That euer cracks for woe, this chaunc'd to night.
Most likely sir.
Nay certainely to night, for looke how fresh she looks
They were too rough, that threw her in the sea.
Make a Fire within; fetch hither all my Boxes in my Closet,
Death may vsurpe on Nature many howers, and yet
The fire of life kindle againe the ore-prest spirits;
I heard of an Egiptian that had 9. howers lien dead,
Who was by good applyaunce recouered.
Well sayd, well sayd; the fire and clothes: the rough and
Wofull Musick that we haue, cause it to sound beseech you:
The Violl once more; how thou stirrst thou blocke?
The Musicke there: I pray you giue her ayre:
Gentlemen, this Queene will liue,
Nature awakes a warmth breath out of her;
She hath not been entranc'st aboue fiue howers:
See how she ginnes to blow into lifes flower againe.
The Heauens, through you, encrease our wonder,
And sets vp your ame for euer.
She is alie, behold her eylids
Cases to those heaunly iewels which Pericles hath lost,
Begin to part their fringes of bright gold,
The Diamonds of a most praysed water doth appeare,
T make the world twise rich, liue, and make vs weepe.
To heare your fat, ure creature, rare as you seeme to bee.
O deare Dian, where am I? where's my Lord?
What wold is this?
Is not this strange?
Most rare.
Hush (my gentle neighbours) lend me your hands,
To the next Chamber beare her: get linnen:
Now this matter must be lookt to for her relapse
Is mortall: come, come; and guide vs.
Most honor'd Clon, I must need be gone, my twelue months are expir'd, and standes in alitigious peace:
You and your Lady take from my heart all thankfulnesse,
The Gods make vp the rest vpon you.
Your shakes of fotune, though they hant you mortally
Yet glaunce full wondringly on vs.
O your sweet Queene! that the strict fates had pleas'd, you had brought her hither to haue blest mine eies with her.
We cannot but obey the powers aboue vs;
Could I rage and rore as doth the sea she lies in,
Yet the end must be as tis: my gentle babe Marina,
Whom, for she was borne at sea, I haue named so,
Here I charge your charitie withall; leauing her
The infant of your care, beseeching you to giue her
Princely training, that she may be manere'd as she is borne.
Feare not (my Lord) but thinke your Grace,
That fed my Countrie with your Corne; for which,
The peoples prayers still fall vpon you, must in your child
Be thought on if neglection should therein make me vile,
The common body by you relieu'd,
Would force me to my duety: but if to that,
My nature neede a spurre, the Gods reuenge it
Vpon me and mine, to the end of generation.
I beleee you, your honour and your goodnes,
Teach me too't without your vowes, till she be maried,
Madame by bright Diana, whom we honour,
All vnsule shall this heyre of mine remayne,
Though I shew will in't; so I take my leaue:
Good Madame, make me blessed in your care
In bringing vp my Child.
I haue one my selfe, who shall not be more deere to my respect then yours, my Lord.
Madam, my thanks and prayers.
Weel bring your Grace ene to the edge th shore, then giue you vp to the mask'd Neptune, and the gentlest winds of heauen.
I will imbrace your offer, come deerest Madame, O no teares Licherida, no teares, looke to your litle Mistris, on whose grace you may depend hereafter: come my Lord.
Madam, this Letter, and some certaine Iewels,
Lay with you in your Coffer, which are at your command:
Know you the Charecter?
It is my Lords, that I was shipt at sea I well remember, euen on my learning time, but whether there deliuered, by the holie gods I cannot rightly say: but since King Pericles my wedded Lord, I nere shall see againe, a vastall liuerie will I take me to, and neuer more haue ioy.
Madam, if this you purpose as ye speake,
Dianaes Temple is not distant farre,
Where you may abide till your date expire,
Moreouer if you please a Neece of mine,
Shall there attend you.
My recompence is thanks, thats all,
Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.
Imagine Pericles arriude at Tyre,
Welcomd and setled to his owne desire:
His wofull Queene we leaue at Ephesus;
Vnto Diana ther's a Votarisse.
Now to Marina bend your mind,
Whom our fast growing seene must finde
At Thasus▪ and by Cln traind
In Muicks letters, who hath gaind
Of education all the grace,
Whch makes hie both the art and place
Of gene all wonder: but alacke
Tht moster wracke
Of praise, arin ife
Seeke to take off by treasons knife,
And in this kinde, our Clon hath
Oe daughter and a full growne wench,
Euen right for marriage ight: this Maid
and it is said
For certaine in our storie, shee
Would er with Marina bee.
Beet when they weaue the eded silke,
Wth fingers long, small, white as milke,
Or when she would with sharpe needle wound,
The Cambricke which she made more sound
By hurting it or when too'th Lue
She sung, and made the night bed mute,
That stll records with mone, or when
She would with rich and constant pen,
Vle to her Mistresse Dan still,
Ths Phylaten contends in skill
With absolute Marina: so
The Doue of Papos might with the cro
Vie feathers white, Marina gets
All prayses, which are paid as debts,
And not as guen, this so darkes
In Phylten all gracefull markes,
That Clns wife with Enuie rare,
A present murderer does prepare
For good Marina, that her daughter
Might stand peerlesse by this slaughter.
The sooner her vile thoughts to stead,
our nurse is dead,
And cursed Doza hath
The pregnant instrument of wrath.
Prest for this blow, the vnboreuent,
I doe commend to your content,
Onely I carrid winged Time,
Post one the lame ete of my rime,
Which neuer coul I so conuy,
Vnlsse your thoughts went on my way,
Dioniza oes appeare,
With Leoin a murthrer.
Thy oath remember, thou hast sworne to doo't, tis but a blowe which neuer all bee knowne, thou canst not doe a thing in the worlde so soone to yeelde the so much prote: let not conence which is but cold, in aning, thy loue bosome, enflame too nicelie, nor let pittie which euen woen haue cast off, melt thee, but be a souldier to thy purpo.
I will doo', ut yet she is a goodly creature.
The tter then the Gods should haue her.
Here she comes weping or her onely Mistrese death,
Thou art resolude.
I am resolude.
No: I will ob Tlls of her weede to strowe thy greene wth Flowes, the yellowes, blewes, the purple Violets, and Marigolds, shall as a Carpet hang vpon thy graue, while Sommer dayes doth last: Aye me poore maid, borne in a tempest, when my mother dide, this world to me is a lasting storme, whirring me from my friends.
How now Marina, why doe you keep alone?
How chaunce my daughter is not with you?
Doe not conume your bloud with sorrowing,
Haue you a nurse of me? Lord how your fauour▪
Changd with this vnprofitable woe:
Come giue me your flowers, ere the sea marre it,
Walke with Leonine, the ayre is quicke there,
And it perces and sharpens the stomacke,
Come Leonine take her by the arme, walke with her.
No I pray you, Ile not bercau you of your seru ̄t.
Come, come, I loue the king your father, and your selfe, with more then forraine heart, we euery day expect him here, when he shall com and find our Paragon to all reports thus blasted,
He will repent the breadth of his great voyage, blame both my Lord and me, that we haue taken no care to your best courses, go I pray you, walke and be chearfull once againe, reserue that excellent complexion, which did steale the eyes of yong and old. Care not for me, I can ge home alone.
Well, I will goe, but yet I haue no desire too it.
Come, come, I know tis good for you, walke halfe an houre Leonine, at the least, remember what I haue sed.
I warrant you Madam.
Ile leaue you my sweete Ladie, for a while, pray walke softly, doe not heate your bloud, what, I must haue care of you.
My thanks sweete Madame, Is this wind Westerlie that blowes?
Southwest.
When I was borne the wind was North.
Wast so?
My father, as nuse ses, did neuer feare, but cryed good sea-men to the Saylers, galling his kingly hands haling ropes, and clasping to the Mast, endured a sea that almost burst the decke.
When was this?
When I was borne, neuer was waues nor winde more violent, and from the ladder tackle, washes off a canuas clymer, ha ses one, wolt out? and with a dropping industrie they skip from sterne to sterne, the Boarswaine whistles, and the Master calles and trebles their confusion.
Come say your prayers.
What meane you?
If you require a little space for praier, I graunt it, pray, but bee not tedious, for the Gods are quicke of ar, and I am sworne to do my worke with haste.
Why will you kill me?
To satisfie my Ladie.
Why would shee haue mee kild now? as I can remember by my troth, I neuer did her hurt in all my life, I neuer spake bad worde, nor did ill turne to anie liuing creature: Beleeue me law, I neuer killd a Mouse, nor hurt a Fly: I trode vpon a worme against my will, but I wept fort. How haue I offended, wherein my death might yeeld her an profit, or my life imply her any danger?
My Commission is not to reason of the deed, but doo't.
You will not doo't for all the world I hope: you are well fauoured, and your lookes foreshew you haue a gentle heart, I saw you latelie when you caught hurt in parting two that fought: good sooth it shewde well in you, do so now, your Ladie seekes my life Come, you betweene, and saue poore mee the weaker.
I am sworne and will dispatch.
Hold villaine.
A prize, a prize.
Halfe part mates, halfe part. Come lets haue her aboord sodainly.
These rogueing theeues serue the great Pvrat Valdes, and they haue seizd Marina, let her goe, ther's no hope shee will returne, Ile sweare shees dead, and throwne into the Sea, see further: perhappes they will but please themselues vpon her, not carrie her aboord, if shee remaine
Whome they haue rauisht, must by mee be slaine.
Boult.
Sir.
Searche the market narrowely, Mttlyne is full of gallants, wee lost too much much money this mart by beeing too wenchlesse.
Wee were neuer so much out of Creatures, we hue but poore three, and they ca doe no more then they can doe, and they with continull , are euen as good as rotten.
Therefore lets haue fresh ones what ere wee pay for them, if there bee not a conscience to be vsde in eurie trade, wee shall neur prosper.
Thou sayst true, tis not our bringing vp of poore bastards, as I thinke. I hau brought vp some .
I to eleuen, and brought them downe againe, but shall I searche the markt?
What else ma? he stuffe we haue, a strong winde will blowe it to peeces, they are so pittifuly sudden.
Thou sayest true, ther's two unwholesome a conscience, the poore Transiluanian is dead that laye with the little baggadge.
I, shee quickly poupt him, she made him roaste-meate for wormes, but Ile goe search the market
Three or foure thousande Checkins were as prettie a proportion to liue quietly, and so giue ouer.
Why to giue ouer I pray you? Is it a shame to get when wee are olde?
Oh our credite comes not in like the commoditie nor the commoditie wages not with the daunger: therefore if in our youthes we could picke up some prettie estate, 't were not amisse to keepe our doore hatch't, besides the fore tearmes we stand upon with the gods wil be strong with us for giuing ore.
Come other sorts offend as well as wee.
As well as wee, I, and better too, wee offende worse, neither is our profession any trade, It's no calling, but here comes Boult
Come your wayes my maisters, you say shee's a virgin.
O Sir, wee doubt it not.
Master, I haue gone through for this peece you see, if you like her so, if not, I haue lost my earnest.
Boult has shee any qualities?
Shee has a good face, speakes well, and has excellent good cloathes: theres no farther necessitie of qualities can make her be refuz'd.
What's her price Boult?
I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand peeces.
Well, follow me my maisters, you shall haue your money presently, wife take her in, instruct her what she has to doe, that she may not be rawe in her entertainment.
Boult, take you the markes of her, the colour of her haire, complexion, height, her age, with warrant of her virginitie and crie. He that will giue most shal haue her first, such a maydenhead were no cheape thing, if men were as they haue beene: get this done as I command you.
Performance shall follow.
Alacke that Leonine was so slacke, so slow, he should haue strooke, not spoke or that these Pirates, not enough barbarous, had not oreboord thrown me, for to seeke my mother.
Why lament you prettie one?
That I am prettie.
Come, the Gods haue done their part in you.
I accuse them not.
You are light into my hands, where you are like to liue.
The more my fault, to scape his handes, where I was to die.
I, and you shall liue in pleasure.
No.
Yes indeed shall you, and taste Gentlemen of all fashions, you shall fare well, you shall haue the difference of all complexions, what doe you stop your eares?
Are you a Woman?
What would you haue mee be, and I bee not a woman?
An honest woman, or not a woman.
Marie whip the Gosseling, I think I shall haue something to doe with you, come you'r a young foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would haue you
The Gods defend me.
If it please the Gods to defend you by men, then men must comfort you, men must feed you, men stir you vp: Boults returnd. Now sir, hast thou cride her through the Market?
I haue cryde her almost to the number of her haires, I haue drawne her picture with my voice.
And I prethee tell me, how dost thou find the inclination of the people, especially of the yonger sort?
Faith they listened to mee, as they would haue harkened to their fathers testament, there was a Spaniards mouth watred, and he went to bed to her verie description.
We shall haue him here to morrow with his best ruffe on.
To night, to night, but Mistresse doe you knowe the French knight, that cowres ethehams?
Who, Mounsieur Verollus?
I, he, he offered to cut a caper at the proclamation, but he made a groan at it, and swore he would see her to morrow.
Well, well, as for him, hee brought his disease hither, here he does but repaire it, I knowe hee will come in our shadow, to scatter his crownes in the Sunne.
Well, if we had of euerie Nation a traueller, wee should lodge them with this signe.
Pray you come hither a while, you haue Fortunes comming vppon you, marke mee, you must seeme to doe that fearefully, which you commit willingly, despise profite, where you haue most gaine, to weepe that you liue as yee doe, makes pittie in your Louers seldome, but that pittie begets you a good opinion, and that opinion a meere profite.
I vnderstand you not.
O take her home Mistresse, take her home, these blushes of hers must bee quencht with some present practise.
Thou sayest true yfaith, so they must, for your Bride goes to that with shame, which is her way to goe with warrant.
Faith some doe, and some doe not▪ but Mistresse if I haue bargaind for the ioynt.
Thou maist cut a morsell off the spit.
I may so.
Who should denie it?
Come young one, I like the manner of your garments well.
I by my faith, they shall not be changd yet.
Boult, spend thou that in the towne: repo what a soiournr we haue, youle loose nothing by cuome. When Nature framde this peece, hee meant thee a good ture, therefore say what a parrago she is, and thou hast the haruest out of thine owne report.
I warrant you Mistresse, thunder shall not so awake the beds of Eles▪ as my giuing out her beautie stirs vp the lewdly enclined, Ile bring home some to night.
Come your wayes, follow me.
If fires be hote, kniues sharpe, or waters deepe,
Vntide I still my virgin knot will keepe.
Diana ayde my purpose.
What haue we to doe with Diana, pray you will you goe with vs?
Why ere you foolish, can it be vndone?
O Dioniza, such a peece of slaghter,
The Sunne and Moone nere lookt vpon.
I thinke youle urne a chidle agen.
Were I chiefe Lord of all this spacious world, Ide giue it to vndo the deede. O Ladie much lesse in bloud then vertue, yet a Princes to equall any single Crowne ath earthih lustice of compare, O villaine, Leonine whom thou hast poisned too, if thou hadst drunke to him tad beene a kindnesse becomming well thy face, what canst thou say when noble Pericles shall demaund his child?
That shee is dead, Nurses are not the fates to foster it, not euer to preserue, she dide at night, Ile say so, who can crosse it vnlesse you play the impious Innocent, and for an honest attribute, crie out shee dyde by foule play.
O goe too, well, well, of all the faults beneath the heauens, the Gods doe like this worst.
Be one of those that thinkes the pettie wrens of Tharsus will flie hence, and open this to Pericles. I do shame to thinke of what a noble straine you ar, and of how coward a spirit.
To such proceeding who euer but his approbation added, though not his pnce consent, he did not flow from honourable courses.
Be it so then, yet none does knowe but you how shee came dead, nor none can knowe Leoine being gone. Shee did disdaine my childe, and stoode betweene her and her fortunes: none woulde looke on her, but cast their gazes on Marianas face, whilest urs was blurted at, and helde a Mawkin not worth the time of day. It pierst me thorow, and though you call my course vnnaturall, you not your childe well louing, et I finde it greetmee as an enterprize of kindnesse performed to your sole daughter.
Heauens forgiue it.
And as for Prles, what should hee say, we wept after her hearse, & yet we mourne, her monument is almost finished, & her epitaphs in glittring golde characters expres a generrall prayse to her, and are in vs at whose expence tis done.
Thou art like the Harpie,
Which to betray, doest with thine Angells face cea with thine Eagles talents.
Yere like one that supersticiously,
Doe sweare too'th Gods, that Winter kills
The Fliis, but yet I know, youle doe as I aduise.
Thus time we waste, & long league▪ make short,
Saile seas in Cockles, haue and wish but fort,
Making to take our imagination,
From bourne to bourne, region to region,
By you being pardoned we commit no crime,
To vse one language, in each seuerall clime,
Where our sceanes seemes to liue,
I doe beseech you
To learne of me who stand with gappes
To teach you.
The stages of our storie Pericles
Is now againe thwarting thy wayward sea,
Attended on by many a Lord and Knight,
To see his daughter all his liues delight.
Old Helicanus goes along behind,
Is left to gouerne it, you beare in mind.
Old Escenes, whom Hellicanus late
Aduancde in time to great and hie estate.
Well sayling ships, and bounceous winds
Haue brought
This king to Tharsus, thinke this Pilat thougt
So with his sterage, shall your thoughts grone
To fetch his daughter home, who first is gone
Like moats and shadowes, see them
Moue a while,
Your eares vnto your eyes Ile reconcile.
See how beleefe may suffer by fowle showe,
This borrowed passion stands for true olde woe:
And Pericles in sorrowe all deuour'd,
With sighes shot through, and biggest teares ore-showr'd.
Leaues Tharsus, and againe imbarques, hee sweares
Neuer to wash his face, nor cut his hayres:
Hee put on sack-cloth, and to Sea he beares,
A Tempest which his mortall vessell teares.
And yet hee rydes it out, Nowe please you wit:
The Epitaph is for Marina writ, by wicked Dioniza.
The fairest, sweetest, and best lyes heere,
Who withered in her spring of yeare:
She was of Tyrus the Kings daughter,
On whom fowle death hath made this slaughter.
Marina was shee cald, and at her byrth,
Thetis bein prowd, swallowed some part th'earth:
Therefore the earth fearing to be ore-flowed,
Hath Thetis byrh-childe on the heauens bestowed.
Wherefor she does and sweares sheele neuer stit,
Make raging Battery vpon shores of flint.
No vizor does become blacke villanie,
So well as soft and tender flatterie:
Let Pericles beleeue his daughter's dead,
And beare his courses to be ordered;
By Lady Fortune, while our Steare must play,
His daughters woe and heauie welladay.
In her vnholie seruice: Patience then,
And thinke you now are all in Mittelin.
Did you euer heare the like?
No, nor neuer shall doe in such a place as this, shee beeing once gone.
But to haue diuiitie preach't there, did you euer dreame of such a thing?
No, no, come, I am for no more bawdie houses, shall's goe heare the Vestails sing?
Ile doe any thing now that is vertuous, but I am out of the road of rutting for euer.
Well, I had rather then twice the worth of her shee had nere come heere.
Fye, fe, vpon her, shee's able to freze the god Pripu, and vndoe a whole generation, we must either get her raished, or be rid of her, when she should doe for Clyents her fitment, and doe mee the kindenesse of our profession, shee has me her quirks, her reasons▪ her master reasons, her prayers, her knees, that shee would make a Puritaine of the diuell, if hee should cheapen a kisse of her.
Faith I must rauish her, or shee'le disfurnish vs of all our Caualereea, and make our swearers priests.
Now the poxe vpon her greene sicknes for mee.
Faith ther's no way to be ridde on' but by the way to the po. Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.
Wer should haue both Lorde and Lowne, if the peeuish baggadge would but giue way to customers.
How now, how a douzen of virginities?
Now the Gods to blesse your Honour.
I am glad to see our in good health.
You may, so t'is the better for you that your resorters stand vpon sound legges, how now▪ whosome iniquitie haue you, that a man may deale withall, and defie the Surgion?
Wee haue heere one Sir, if shee would, but there neuer came her like in Mtline.
If shee'd doe the deedes of darknes thou wouldst say.
Your Honor knows wha t'is to say wel enough.
Well, call forth, call forth.
For flesh and bloud Sir, white and red, you shall see a rose, and she were a rose indeed, if shee had but.
What prithi?
O Sir, I can be modest.
That dignities the renowne of a Bawde, no lesse then it giues a good report to a number to be chaste.
Heere comes that which growes to the stalke,
Neuer pluckt yet I can assure you.
Is shee not a aire creature?
Faith shee would serue after a long voyage at Sea,
Well theres for you, leaue vs.
I beseeche your Honor giue me leaue a word,
And Ile haue done presently.
I beseech you doe.
First, I would haue you note, this is an Honorable man.
I desire to finde him so, that I may worthilie not him.
Next hees the Gouernor of this countrey, and a man whom I am bound too.
If he gouerne the countrey you are bound to him indeed, but how honorable hee is in that, I knowe not.
Pray you without anie more virginall fencing, will you vse him kindly? he will lyne your apron with gold.
What hee will doe gratiously, I will thankfully receiue.
Ha you done?
My Lord shees not pac'ste yet, you must take some paines to worke her to your mannage, come wee will leaue his Honor, and her together, goe thy wayes.
Now prittie one, how long haue you beene at thi trade?
What trade Sir?
Why, I cannot name but I shall offend.
I cannot be offended with my trade, please you to name it.
How long haue you bene of this profession?
Ere since I can remember.
Did you goe too't so young, were you a gameste at fiue, or at seuen?
Earlyer too Sir, if now I bee one.
Why? the house you dwell in proclaimes you to be a Creature of sale.
Doe you knowe this house to be a place of such resort, and will come intoo't? I heare say you're of honourable parts, and are the Gouernour of this place.
Wh, hath your principall made knowne vnto you who I am?
Who is my principall?
Why, your hearbe-woman, she that sets seeds and rootes of shame and iniquitie.
O you haue heard something of my power, and so stand aloft for more serious wooing, but I protest to thee prettie one, my authoritie shall not see thee, or else looke friendly vpon thee, come bring me to some priuate place Come, come.
If you were borne to honour, shew it now, if put vpon you, make the iudgement good, that thought you worthie of it.
How's this? how's this? some more, be sage.
For me that am a maide, though most vngentle Fortune haue plac't mee in this Stie, where since I came, diseases haue beene solde deerer then phisicke, that the gods would set me free from this vnhalowed place, though they did chaunge mee to the meanest byrd that flyes th purer ayre.
I did not thinke thou couldst haue spoke so well, nre dremp't thou could'st, had I brought hither corrupted minde, thy speeche had altered it, holde, heeres golde for thee, perseuer in that cleare way thou goest and the gods strengthen thee.
The good Gods preserue you.
For me be you thoughten, that I came with no ill intent, for to me the very dores and windows auor , fare thee well, thou art a peece of vertue, & I doubt not hy trainig hath bene noble, hold, heeres more golde for thee, a cuse vpon him, die he like a theefe that robs thee of thy goodnes, if thou doest heare from me it shalbe for thy good.
I beseeche your Honor one peece for me.
Auaunt thou damned dore-keeper, your house but for this virgin that doeth prop it, would and ouerwhelme you. Away.
How's this? wee must take another course with you? if your peeuish chastitie, which is not worth a breake-fast in the cheapest coutrey vnder the coap, shall vndoe a whole houshold, let me be gelded like a spaniel, come your wayes.
would you haue mee?
I must haue your mayden-head taken off, or the cōmon hāg-man shal execute it, come our way, weele haue no more Gentlemen driuen away, come your wayes I say.
How now, ats the atter?
Worse and worse is, shee has heere spoken holie words to the Lor .
O .
He makes our profession as it were to, afore the face of the gods
hang her vpforuer
The Nobleman would aue dealt with her like a Noble man, and shee sent him away as as a Soweball, saying his prayers too.
Boult take her away, vse her at thy pleasure, crck the glasse of her virginitie, and make the rest maliale.
And if shee were a thornyer of ground then shee is, shee shall be plowed.
Harke, harke you Gods.
She conures, away with her, would she had neuer come within my doores, Marrie hang you: shee borne to vndoe vs, will you not goe the way of wemen-kinde? Marry come vp my dish of chastitie with rosemary & bas.
Come mistris, come your way with mee.
Whither wilt thou haue mee?
To take from you the Iewell you hold so deer.
Prithee tell mee one thing first.
Come now your one thing.
What canst thou wish thine enemie to be.
Why, I could wish him to bee my master, or rather my mistris.
Neither of these are so bad as thou art, since they doe better thee in their command, thou hold'st a place for which the painedst feende of hell would not in reputation change: Thou art the damned doore-keeper to euery c sterell that comes enquiring for his Tib. To the cholerike fisting of euery rogue, thy care is lyable, thy foode is such as hath beene belch't on by infected lungs.
What wold you haue me do? go to the wars, wold you? wher a man may serue 7. yeers for the losse of a leg, & haue not money enough in the end to buy him a woodden one?
Doe any thing but this thou doest, emptie olde receptacles, or common-shores of filthe, serue by indenture, to the common hang-man, anie of these wayes yet better then this: for what thou professest, a Baboone could he speak, would owne a name too deere, that the gods wold safely deliuer me from this place: here, heers gold for thee, if that thy master would gaine by me, proclaime that I can sing, weaue, sow, & dance, with other vertues, which Ile keep from boast, and will vndertake all these to teache. I doubt not but this populous Cittie will yeelde manie schollers.
But can you teache all this you speake off▪
Prooue that I cannot, take mee home againe, And prostitute mee to th basest groome that doeth frequent your house.
Well I will see what I can doe for thee: if I can place thee I will.
But amongst honest woman.
Faith my acquaintance lies little amongst them. But since my master and mistris hath bought you, theres no going but by their consent: therefore I will make them acquainted with your purpose, and I doubt not but I shall finde them tractable enough. Come, Ile doe for thee what I can, come your wayes.
Marina thus the Brothell scapes, and chaunces
Into an Honest-house our Storie sayes:
Shee sings like one immortall, and shee daunces
As Goddesse-like to her admired layes.
Deepe clearks she dumb's, and with her neele composes,
Natures owne shape, of budde▪ bird, branche, or berry.
That euen her art sisters the naturall Roses
Her Inckle, Silke Twine, with the rubied Cherrie,
That puples lackes she none of noble race,
Who powre their bountie on her: and her gaine
She giues the cursed Bawd, here wee her place,
And to hir Father turne our thoughts againe,
Where wee left him on the Sea, wee there him left,
Where driuen before the windes, hee is arriu'de
Heere where his daughter dwels, and on this coast,
Suppose him now at Aucr: the Citi striu'de
God Neptunes Annull feast to keepe, from whence
our Tyrian Shippe espics,
Hi banners Sable, trim'd with rich expence,
And to him in his Barge with feruor hyes,
In your supposing once more put your sight,
Of heauy Pericles, thinke this his Barke:
Where what is done in action, more if might
Shalbe discourd, please you sit and harke.
Where is Lord Helicanus? hee can resolue you, O here he is Sir, there is a barge put off from Metaline, and in it is the Gouernour, who craues to come aboord, what is your will?
That hee haue his, call vp some Gentlemen.
Ho Gentlemen, my Lord calls.
Doeth your Lordship call?
Gentlemen there is some of worth would come aboord, I pray greet him fairely.
Sir, this is the man that can in ought you would resolue you.
Hayle reuerent Syr, the Gods preserue you.
And you to out-liue the age I am, and die as I would doe.
You wish mee well, beeing on shore, honoring of Neptunes triumphs, seeing this goodly vessell ride before vs, I made to it, to knowe of whence you are.
First what is your place?
I am the Gouernour of this place you lie before.
Syr our vessell is of Tyre, in it the King, a man, who for this three moneths hath not spoken to anie one, nor taken sustenance, but to prorogue his griefe.
Vpon what ground i his distemperature?
Twould be too tedious to repeat, but the mayne griefe springs frō the losse of a beloued daughter & a wife.
May wee not see him?
You may, but bootlesse. Is your sight, hee will not speake to any, yet let me obtaine my wish.
Behold him, this was a goodly person.
Till the disaster that one mortall wight droue him to this.
Sir King all haile, the Gods preserue you, haile royall sir.
It is in vaine, he will not speake to you.
Sir we haue a maid in , I durst wager woul'd win some words of him.
Tis well bethought, she questionlesse with her sweet harmonie, and other chosen attractions, would allure and make a battrie through his deend parts, which now are midway stopt, shee is all happie as the fairest of all, and her fellow maides, now vpon the leauie shelter that abutts against the Islands side.
Sure all effectlesse, yet nothing weele omit that beares recoueries name. But since your kindnesse wee hae stretcht thus farre, let vs beseech you, that for our we may prouision haue, wherein we are not destitute for want, but wearie for the stalenesse.
O sir, a curtesie, which if we should denie, the mst iust God for euery graffe would send a Caterpillar, and so inflict our Prouince: yet once more let mee intreate t knowe at large the cause of your kings sorrow.
Sit sir, I will recount it to you, but see I am preuented.
O hee'rs the Ladie that I sent for▪
Welcome faire one, ist not a goodly present?
Shee's a gallant Ladie.
Shee's such a one, that were I well assurde
Came of a gentle kinde, and noble stocke, I do wish
No better choise, and thinke me rrely to wed,
Faire on all goodnesse that cosists in beautie,
Expect euen here, where is a kingly patient,
If that thy prosperous and artificiall fae,
Can draw him but to answere thee in ought,
Thy sacred Physicke shall receiue such pay,
As thy desires can wish.
Sir I will vse my vtmost skill in his reouerie, prouided that none but I and my companion maid be suffered to come neere him.
Come, let vs leaue her, and the Gods make her prosperous.
Marke he your Musicke?
No nor lookt on vs.
See she will speake to him.
Haile sir, my Lord lend eare.
Hum, ha.
I am a maid, my Lorde, that nere before inuited eyes, but haue beene gazed on like a Comet: She speaks my Lord, that may be, hath endured a griefe might equall yours, if both were iustly wayde, though wayward fortune did maligne my state, my deriuation was from ancestors, who stood equiuolent with mightie Kings, but time hath rooted out my parentage, and to the world, and augward casualties, bound me in seruitude, I will desist, but there is something glowes vpon my cheek, and whispers in mine eare, go not till he speake.
My fortunes, parentage, good parentage, to equall mine, was it not thus, what say you?
I sed my Lord, if you did know my parentage, you would not do me violence.
I do thinke so, pray you turne your eyes vpon me, your like something that, what Countrey women heare of these shewes?
No, nor of any shewes, yet I was mortally brought forth, and am no other then I appeare.
I am great with woe, and shall deliuer weeping: my dearest wife was like this maid, and such one my daghter might haue beene: My Queenes square browes, her stature to an inch, as wandlike-straight, as siluer voyst, her eyes as Iewell-like, and caste as richly, in pace an other . Who starues the eares shee feedes, and makes them hungrie, the more she giues them speech, Where doe you liue?
Where I am but a straunger from the decke, you may discerne the place.
Where were you bred? and how atchieu'd you these indowments which you make more rich to owe?
If I should tell my hystorie, it would seeme like lies disdaind in the reporting.
Prethee speake, falsnesse cannot come from thee, for thou lookest modest as iustice, & thou seemest a Pallas for the crownd truth to dwell in, I wil beleeue thee & make senses credit thy relation, to points that seeme impossible, for thou lookest like one I loued indeede: what were thy friends? didst thou not stay when I did push thee backe, which was when I perceiu'd thee that thou camst from good discending.
So indeed I did.
Report thy parentage, I think thou saidst thou hadst beene tost from wrong to iniurie, and that thou thoughts thy griefs might equall mine, if both were opened.
Some such thing I sed, and sed no more, but what my thoughts did warrant me was likely.
Tell thy storie, if thine considered proue the thousand part of my enduraunce, thou art a man, and I haue suffered like a girle, yet thou doest looke like patience, gazing on Kings graues, and smiling extremitie out of act, what were thy friends? howe lost thou thy name, my most kinde Virgin? recount I doe beseech thee, Come sit by mee.
My name is Marina.
Oh I am mockt, and thou by some insenced God sent hither to make the world to laugh at me.
Patience good sir: or here Ile cease.
Nay Ile be patient: thou little knowst howe thou doest startle me to call thy selfe Marina.
Th name was giuen mee by one that had some power, my father, and a King.
How, a Kings daughter, and cald Marina?
You sed you would beleeue me, but not to bee a troubler of your peace, I will end here.
But are you flesh and bloud?
Haue you a working pule, and are no Fairie?
Motion well, speake on, where were you borne?
And wherefore calld Marina?
Calld Marina▪ for I was borne at sea.
At sea, what mother?
My mother was the daughter of a King, who died the minute I was borne, as my good Nurse hath oft deliuered weeping.
O stop there a little, this is the rarest dreame
That ere duld sleepe did mocke sad fooles withall,
This cannot be my daughter, buried, well, where were you bred? Ile heare you more oo'th bottome of your stone, and neuer interrupt you.
You sorne, beleeue me twere best I did giue ore.
I will beleeue ou by the syllable of what you shall deliuer, yet giue me leaue, how came you in these parts? where were you bred?
The King my father did in Tharus leaue me,
Till ,
Did seeke to murther me: and hauing wooed a villaine,
To attempt it, who hauing drawne to doo't,
A crew of came and rescued me,
Brought me to Metaline,
But good sir whither wil you haue me? why doe you weep? It may be you thinke mee an imposture, no good fayth: I am the dughter to King Pricls, if goo king Pricles be.
Hoe, Hellicas?
Calls my Lord.
Thou art a graue and noble Counseller,
Most wise in generall, tell me if thou canst, what this mayde is, or what is like to bee, that thus hath made me weepe.
I know not, but heres the Regent sir of Metalin, speakes nobly of her.
She neuer would tell her parentage,
Being demaunded, that she would sit still and weepe.
Oh Hellicanus, strike me honored sir, giue mee a gash, put me to present paine, least this great sea of ioyes rushing vpon me, ore-beare the shores of my mortalitie, and drowne me with their sweetnesse: Oh come hither, thou that begest him that did thee beget,
Thou that wast borne at sea, buried at Tharsus,
And found at sea agen, O Hellicanus,
Downe on thy knees, thanke the holie Gods as loud
As thunder threatens vs, this is Marina.
What was thy mothers name? tell me, but that
for truth can neuer be confirm'd inough,
Though doubts did euer sleepe.
Frist sir, I pray what is your title?
I am Pericles of Tyre, but tell mee now my
Drownd Queenes name, as in the rest you sayd,
Thou hast beene God-like perfit, the heir of kingdomes,
And an other like to Pericles thy father.
Is it no more to be your daughter, then to say, my mothers name was Thaisa, Thaisa was my mother, who did end the minute I began.
Now blessing on thee, rise th'art my child.
Giue me fresh garments, mine owne Hellicanus, shee is not dead at Tharsus as shee should haue beene by sauage Clo, she shall tell thee all, when thou shalt kneele, and iustifie in knowledge, she is thy verie Princes, who is this?
Sir, tis the gouernor of Mline, who hearing of your me lancholie state, did come to see you.
I embrace you, giue me my robes.
I am lde in my beholding, O heauens blesse my girle,
But harke what Musicke tell, my Marina.
Tell him ore point by point, for yet he seemes to dot.
How sure you are my daughter, but what musicke?
My Lord I heare none.
None, the Musicke of the Spheres, list my Marina.
It is not good to crosse him, giue him way.
sounds, do ye not heare?
Musicke my Lord? I heare▪
Most heauenly Musicke.
It ips me vnto stning, and thicke slumber
Hags vpon mine eyes, let me rest.
A Pillow for his head, so leaue him all.
Wll my companion friends, if this but answere to my beliefe, Ile well remember you.
My Temple stands in Ephesus,
Hie thee tither, and doe vppon mine Altar sacrifice, There when my maiden priests are met together before the people all, reueale how thou at sea didst loose thy wife, to mourne thy crosses with thy daughters, call, & giue them repetition to the like, or performe my bidding, or thou liuest in woe: doo't, and happie, by my siluer bow, awake and tell thy dreame.
Celestiall Dian, Goddesse Argentine▪
I will obey thee Hellicanus.
Sir.
My purpose was for Tharsus, there to strike,
The inhospitable Cleon, but I am for other seruice first,
Toward Ephesus turne our blowne sayles,
Eftsoones lle tell thee why, shall we refresh vs sir vpon your shore, and giue you golde for such prouision as our intents will neede.
Sir, with all my heart, and when you come a shore,
I haue another sleight.
You shall preuaile were it to wooe my daughter, for it seemes you haue beene noble towards her.
Sir, lend me your arme.
Come my Marina.
Now our sands are almost run,
More a little, and then dum.
This my last boone giue mee,
For such kindnesse must relieue mee:
That you aptly will suppose,
What pageantry, what feats, what showes,
What minstrelsie, and prettie din,
The Regent made in Metalin,
To greet the King, so he thriued,
That he is promisde to be wined
To faire Marina, but in no wise,
Till he had done his sacrifice.
As Dian bad, whereto being bound,
The Interim pray, you all confound.
In fetherd briefenes sayles are fild,
And wishes fall out as they'r wild,
At Ephesus the Temple see,
Our King and all his companie.
That he can hither come so soone,
Is by your fancies thankfull doome.
Haile Dian, to performe thy iust commau,
I here confee my selfe the King of Tyre,
Who frighted from my countrey did ed at Ptapolis, the faire , at Sea in childbed died she, but brougt forth a Mayd child cald Marina▪ whom O Goddesse wears yet thy siluer liuerey, hee at Tharsus was nurst with , who at fourteene yeares he sought to murder, but her better sars brought her to Meteline, gainst whose shore ryding, her Forunes brought the mayde aboord vs, where by her owne most cleere remembrance, shee made knowne her selfe my Daughter.
Voyce and fauour, you are, you are, O royall Pericles.
What meanes the mum? shee die's, helpe Gentemen.
Noble Sir, if you haue tolde Dianaes Altar true, this is your wife?
Ruerent appearer no, I threwe her ouer-boord with these verie ames.
Vpon this coast, I warrant you.
T'is most certaine.
Looke to the Ladie, O shee's but ouer-joyde, Earlie in butering morne this Ladie was throwne vpon this shore.
I op't the coffin, found there rich Iewells, recouered her, and plac'ste her heere in Dianaes temple.
May we see them?
Great Sir, they shalbe brought you to my house, whither I inuite you, looke Thaisa is recouered.
O let me looke if hee be none of mine, my sanctitie will o my sense bende no licentious eare, but curbe it spight of seeing: O my Lord are you not Pericles? like him you spake, like him you are, did you not name a tempest, a birth, and death?
The voyce of dead Thaisa.
That Thaisa am I, supposed dead and drownd.
I mortall ian.
Now I knowe you better, when wee with teares parted Pentpolis, the king my father gaue you such a ring.
This, this, no more, you gods, your present kindenes makes my past miseries sports, you shall doe well that on the touching of her lips I may melt, and no more be seene, O come, be buried a secod time within these ares.
My heart leaps to be gone into my mothers bosome.
Looke who kneeles here, flesh of thy flesh Thaisa, thy burden at the Sea, and call'd Marina, for she was yeelded there.
Blest, and mine owne.
Hayle Madame, and my Queene.
I knowe you not.
You haue heard mee say when I did flie from Tyre, I left behind an ancient substitute, can you remember what I call'd the man, I haue nam'de him oft.
Twas then.
Still confirmation, imbrace him deere Thaisa, this is hee, now doe I long to heare how you were found? how possiblie preerued? and who to thanke (besides the gods) for this great miracle?
Lord Cerimon, my Lord, this man through whom the Gods haue showne their power, that can from first to last resolue you.
Rucrent Syr, the gods can haue no mortall officer more like a god then you, will you deliuer how this dead Queene reliues?
I will my Lord, beseech you first, goe with mee to my house, where shall be showne you all was found with her. How shee came plac'ste heere in the Temple, no needfulll thing omitted.
Pure Dian blesse thee for thy vision, and will offer night oblations to thee Thaia, this Prince, the aire betrothed of your daughter, shall marrie her at Pentapolis, and now this ornament makes mee looke dismall, will I clip to forme, and what his fourteene yeeres no razer touch't, to grace thy marridge-day, Ile beautifie.
Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit. Sir, my father's dead.
make a Starre of him, yet there my Queene, celebrate their Nuptialls, and our selues will in that kingdome spend our following daie, our sonne and daughter shall in Tyrus raigne.
Lord wee doe our longing stay,
To heare the rest vntolde, Sir lead's the way.
In Antiochus and his daughter you haue heard
Of monstrous lust, the due and iust reward:
In Pericles his Queene and Daughter seene,
Although assayl'de with Fortune fierce and keene.
Vertue preferd from fell destructions blast,
Lead on by heauen, and crown'd with ioy at last.
In Helycanus may you well descrie,
A figure of trueth, of faith, of loyaltie:
In reuerend Crimon there well appeares,
The worth that learned charitie aye weares.
For wicked Cleon and his wife, when Fame
Had spred his cursed deede, the honor'd name
Of Pericles, to rage the Cittie turne,
That him and his they in his Pallace burne:
The gods for murder seemde so content,
To punish, although not done, but meant.
So on your Patience euermore attending,
New ioy wayte on you, heere our play has ending.