GRacious Prince, and great Duke of Cornewall, I, the good Angell or Genius of Corinea, Queene to Brutes noble Companion Corineus, the firſt of fayre Britaynes Regions, and your owne worthie Dukedome; in honor of this generall reioycing day, and to expreſſe the endeared affections of Londons Lord Maior, his Bretheren the Aldermen, and all theſe worthie Cittizens, Merchants that holde Commerce with me and the wide worlde, in our very beſt and richeſt commodities: doe thus vſher them the way, to applaude in this Triumphe, and to let you knowe their willing readines, by all meanes poſsible to loue and honor you.
The ſhortnes of time, hath bin no meane bridle to their zealous forwardnes, which (elſe) would haue appeared in more flowing and aboundant manner. Neuertheleſſe, out of this little limitation, let me humbly entreate you to accept their boundleſſe loue, which is like to Iaacobs Ladder, reaching from Earth to Heauen. Whereon, their hourelie, holie and deuoute deſires (like to ſo many bleſſed Angelles) are continually aſcending and deſcending: For their Royall Soueraigne your Father, his Queene your peerleſſe Mother, your ſacred ſelfe, and the reſt of their illuſtrous race. That vnpolluted ſoules may be euer about yee, falſe harts or foule hands neuer to come neere yee; but the Hoaſte of Heauē, alwayes to defend yee.
ROyall PRINCE of Wales, in this figure of Muſicall Amphion vpon his Dolphin, we perſonate the Carracter of Wales your Principalitie. Who hauing with my faire Siſter Corinea thus farre attended you, on behalfe of Londons Lord Major, his worthie Bretheren, and this goodly Fleete of well affected Cittizens; we are all now forced to an vnwilling departure.
See how our Streamers hang the head, as lothe to leaue you: Our Bardges lagge and ſeeme lumpiſhe, as greeuing to forgoe you: Our Trompets and other Muſicks appeare tongue-leſſe, the worde of farewell is ſo offenſiue to them. And except you put ſpirit into them all, with a gracious acceptaunce of this their loue and loyaltie: the boſome of fayre Thames ſhrinkes, and they feare ſwallowing.
But the Sunne of true-borne Majeſtie ſhines in your bright eye, and your more ſerious affaires calling you hence, ſpeakes bothe your loue to them, and liking of their humble dutie at their diſmiſsion.
Home againe then fayre Fleete, you haue brought a Royall freight to landing, ſuch a burdē as hath made the Riuer not meanely proude to beare. And ſince we muſt needs parte, in our lowdeſt voyce of Drommes, Trompets and Ordenaunce, be this our laſt accent: Long liue our Prince of Wales, the Royall Henrie.