YOuth of the spring, milde Zephirus blow faire,
And breath the ioyfull ayre,
Which Tethys wishes may attend this day,
Who comes her selfe to pay
The vowes her heart presents,
To these faire complements.
Breath out new flowers, which yet were neuer knowne
Vnto the Spring, nor blowne
Before this time, to bewtifie the earth,
And as this day giues birth
Vnto new types of State,
So let it blisse create.
Beare Tethys message to the Ocean King,
Say how she ioyes to bring
Delight vnto his Ilands and his Seas,
And tell Meliades
The of-spring of his bood,
How she applaudes his good.
FRom that intelligence which moues the Sphere
Of circling waues (the mightie Tethys, Queene
Of Nymphes and riuers, who will straight appeare,
And in a humane Character be seene)
We haue in charge to say, that euen as Seas
And lands, are grac'd by men of worth and might,
So they returne their fauours; and in these
Exalting of the good seeme to delight.
Which she, in glory, lately visiting
The sweete, and pleasant Shores of Cambria, found
By an vnvsuall, and most forward Spring
Of comfort, wherewith all things did abound,
For ioy of the Inuestiture at hand
Of their new Prince, whose Rites, with acts renownd
Were here to be solemniz'd on this Strand:
And therefore streight resolues t'adorne the day
With her al-gracing presence, and the traine,
Of some choice Nymphs she pleas'd to call away
From seuerall Riuers which they entertaine.
And first the louely Nymphe of stately Thames,
(The darling of the Ocean) summond is:
Then those of Trent and Aruns gracefull streames,
Then Darwent next with cleare-wau'd worthinesse.
The beauteous Nymph of Chrystall-streaming Lee
Giues next attendance: Then the Nymph of Ayr
With modest motion makes her sweete repaire.
The Nymph of Seuerne follows in degree,
With ample streames of grace: and next to her
The cheerefull Nymph of Rother doth appaere
With comely Medway, th'ornament of Kent,
And then foure goodly Nymphes that beutifie
Cambers faire shores, and all that Continent
The graces of cleere Vske, Olwy, Dulesse, Wy
All these within the goodly spacious Bay
Of manifold inharboring Milord meete,
The happy Port of Vnion, which gaue way
To that great Heros HENRY, and his fleete,
To make the blest coniunction that beg at
A greater, and more glorious far then that.
From hence she sends her deare lou'd Zephirus;
To breath out her affection and her zeale
To you great Monarch of Oceanus,
And to present this Trident as the seale
And ensigne of her loue and of your right.
And therewithall she wils him, greete the Lord
And Prince of th' Iles (the hope and the delight,
Of all the Northerne Nations) with this sword
Which she vnto Astraea sacred found,
And not to be vnsheath'd but on iust ground.
Herewith, sayes she, deliuer him from mee
This skarffe, the zone of loue and Amitie,
Tingird the same; wherein he may suruay,
Infigur'd all the spacious Emperie
That he is borne vnto another day.
Which, tell him, will be world enough to yeeld
All workes of glory euer can be wrought.
Let him not passe the circle of that field,
But thinke Alcides pillars are the knot
For there will be within the large extent
Of these my waues, and watry Gouernement
More treasure, and more certaine riches got
Then all the Indies to Iberus brought,
For Nereus will by industry vnfold
A Chimicke secret, and turne fish to gold.
This charge she gaue, and lookes ith such a cheere
As did her comfort and delight bewray,
Like cleere Aurora when she doth appeare
In brightest roabes to make a glorious day.
WAs euer houre brought more delight
To mortall sight,
Then this, wherein faire Tethys daignes to shew
Her, and her Nymphes arow
In glory bright?
See how they bring their flowers,
From out their watry bowers,
To decke Apollos Tree,
The tree of victory.
About whose verdant bowes,
They Sacrifice their vowes,
And wish an euerlasting spring
Of glory, to the Oceans King.
IF ioy had other figure
Then soundes, and wordes, and motion,
To intimate the measure,
And height of our deuotion:
This day it had beene show'd
But what it can, it doth performe,
Since nature hath bestowd
No other letter,
To expresse it better,
Then in this forme;
Our motions, soundes, and wordes,
Tun'd to accordes,
Must shew the well-set partes,
Of our affections and our harts,
ARe they shadowes that we see?
And can shadowes pleasure giue?
Pleasures onely shadowes bee
Cast by bodies we conceiue,
And are made the thinges we deeme,
In those figures which they seeme.
But these pleasures vanish fast,
Which by shadowes are exprest
Pleasures are not, if they last,
In their passing, is their best.
Glory is most bright and gay
In a flash, and so away.
Feed apace then greedy eyes
On the wonder you behold.
Take it sodaine as it flies
Though you take it not to hold:
When your eyes haue done their part,
Thought must length it in the hart.
BEhold the Post of heauen, bright Mercury
Is sent to sommon and recall againe,
Imperial Tethys with her company,
Vnto her watry Mansion in the maine:
And shift those firmes, wherein her power did daigne
T inuest her selfe and hers, and to restore
Them to themselues whose beauteous shapes they wore.
ANd now bright Starre the Guidon of this state,
And you great Peeres the ornaments of power
With all these glittering troupes that haue the fate,
To be spectators of this blessed houre.
Be pleasd to sit a while, and you shall see
A transfirmation of farre more delight
And apter drawne to nature, then can be
Discrib'd in an imaginary sight.
FAire branch of power, in whose sweete feature here
Milde Zephirus a figure did present
Of youth and of the spring-time of the yeare
I sommon you, and six of high discent
T attend on you (a hopefull worthyes borne
To shield the Honour and the cleare Renowne
Of Ladies) that you presently returne
And bring backe those, in whose faire shapes were showne
The late-seene Nymphes in figures of their owne
Whom you shall finde hard by within a groue
And Garden of the spring addrest to Ioue.
Pretulerim scriptor delirus inersque videri
Dum mea delectant mala me, vel denique fallant,
Quam sapere & ringi.