WHence breaks this warlike thunder of lowd drummes,
(Clarions and Trumpets) whose shrill eccho comes
Vp to our Watery Court, and calles from thence
Vs, and our Trytons? As if violence
Weere to our Siluer-footed Sister done
(Of Flouds the Queene) bright Thamesis, who does runne
Twice euery day to our bosome, and there hides
Her wealth, whose Streame in liquid Christall glides
Guarded with troopes of Swannes? what does beget
These Thronges? this Confluence? why do voyces beate
The Ayre with acclamations of applause,
Good wishes, Loue, and Praises? what is't drawes
All Faces this way? This way Rumor flyes,
Clapping her infinite wings, whose noyse the Skyes
From earth receiue, with Musicall rebounding,
And strike the Seas with repercussiue sounding.
Oh! now I see the cause: vanish vaine feares,
*Isis no danger feeles: for her head weares
Crowns of Rich Triumphes, which This day puts on,
And in Thy Honor all these Rites are done.
Whose Name when Neptune heard, t'was a strange Spell,
Thus farre-vp into th' Land to make him swell
Beyond his Bownds, and with his Sea-troops wait
Thy wish't arriuall, to congratulate.
Goe therefore on, goe boldly: thou must saile
In rough Seas (now) of Rule: and euery Gale
Will not perhaps befriend thee: But (how blacke
So ere the Skyes looke) dread not Thou a Wracke,
For when Integrity and Innocence sit
Steering the Helme, no Rocke the Ship can split.
Nor care the Whales (neuer so great) their Iawes
Should stretch to swallow thee: Euery good mans cau
Is in all stormes his Pilot: He thats sound
To himselfe (in Conscience) nere can run-a-ground.
Which that thou mayst do, neuer looke on't still:
For (Spite of Fowle gusts) calmer Windes shall fill
Thy Sayles at last. And see! they home haue brought
A Ship which Bacchus (God of Wines) hath fraught
With richest Iuiee of Grapes, which thy Friends shall
Drinke off in Healths to this Great Festiuall.
If any at Thy happinesse repine,
They gnaw but their Owne hearts, and touch not Thine.
Let Bats and Skreech-Owles murmure at bright Day,
Whiles Prayers of Good-men Guid. Thee on the way.
Sownd old Oceanus Trumpeters, and lead on.
HAile (worthy Pretor) stay, and do Me grace,
(Who still haue cald thee Patron) In this place
To take from me heap'd welcomes, who combine
These peoples hearts in one, to make them thine.
Bright Vertues name thou know'st and heau'nly birth,
And therefore (spying thee) downe she leapd to earth
Whence vicious men had driuen her: On her throne
The Liberall Arts waite: from whose brests do runne
The milke of Knowledge: on which, Sciences feed,
Trades and Professions: And by Them, the seed
Of Ciuill, Popular gouernment, is sowne;
Which springing vp, loe! to what heigth tis growne
In Thee and These is seene. And (to maintaine
This Greatnesse) Twelue strong Pillars it sustaine;
Vpon whose Capitals, Twelue Societies stand,
(Graue and well-ordred) bearing chiefe Command
Within this City, and (with Loue) thus reare
Thy fame, in free election, for this yeare.
All arm'd, to knit their Nerues (in One) with Thine,
To guard this new Troy: And, (that She may shine
In Thee, as Thou in Her) no Misers kay
Has bard the Gold vp; Light flies from the Day
Not of more free gift, thau from them their Cost:
For whats now spar'd, that only they count Lost.
As then their Ioynd-hands lift Thee to thy Seate.
(Changing thereby thy Name for one More Great
And as this City, with her Loud, Full Voice,
(Drowning all spite that murmures at the Choice,
If at least such there be) does Thee preferre,
So art thou bound to loue, both Them and Her.
For Know, thou art not like a Pinnacle, plac'd
Onely to stand aloft, and to be grac'd
With wondring eyes, or to haue caps and knees
Heape worship on thee: for that Man does leeze
Himselfe and his Renowne, whose growth being Hye
In the weale-publicke (like the Cypres tree)
Is neither good to Build-with, nor beare Fruit;
Thou must be now, Stirring, and Resolute.
To be what thou art Sworne, (a waking Eye)
A farre off (like a Beacon) to descry
What stormes are comming, and (being come) must thn
Shelter with spred armes, the poor'st Citizen.
Set Plenty at thy Table, at thy Gate
Bounty, and Hospitality: hee's most Ingrate
Into whose lap the Publicke-weale hauing powr'd
Her Golden shewers, from Her his wealth should hoord.
Be like those Antient Spirits, that (long agon)
Could thinke no Good deed sooner, than twas Don;
Others to pleasure. Hold it Thou more Glory,
Than to be pleas'd Thy Selfe. And be not sory
If Any striue (in best things) to exceed thee,
But glad, to helpe thy Wrongers, if they need thee.
Nor feare the Stings of Enuy, nor the Threates
Of her inuenomd Arrowes, which at the Seates
Of those Who Best Rule, euermore are shot,
But the Aire blowes off their fethers, and they hit not.
Come therefore on; nor dread her, nor her Sprites,
The poyson she spits vp, on her owne Head lights.
On, on, away.
ADders shoote, hysse speckled Snakes;
Sloth craule vp, see Oppression wakes;
(Baine to learning) Ignorance
Shake thy Asses eares, Disdaine, aduance
Thy head Luciferan: Ryot split
Thy ribbes with curses: Calumny spit
Thy rancke-rotten gall vp: See, See, See,
That Witch, whose bottomelesse Sorcery
Makes fooles runne mad for her; that Hag
For whom your Dam pines, hangs out her flag
Our Den to ransacke: Vertue, that whore;
See, see, how braue shee's, I am poore.
On, on, the beames of Vertue, are so bright,
They dazle Enuy, on: the Hag's put to flight.
Snakes, from your virulent spawne ingender
Dragons, that may peece-meale rend her,
Adders shoote your stings like quils
Of Porcupines, (Stiffe) hot Aetnean hils
Vomit sulphure to confound her,
Fiendes and Furies (that dwell vnder)
Lift hell gates from their hindges: come
You clouen-foote-broode of Barrathrum,
Stop, stay her, fright her, with your shreekes,
And put fresh bloud in Enuies cheekes.
On, on, the beames of Vertue, are so bright,
They dazle Enuy: on the Hag's put to flight.
Shoote, Shoote, &c. All that are with Enuy.
VVElcome to Fames high Temple: here fix fast
Thy footing; for the wayes which thou hast past
Will be forgot and worne out, and no Tract
Of steps obseru'd, but what thou now shalt Act.
The booke is shut of thy precedent deedes,
And Fame vnclaspes another, where shee reades
(Aloud) the Chronickle of a dangerous yeare,
For Each Eye will looke through thee, and Each Eare
Way-lay thy Words and Workes. Th'hast yet but gon
About a Pyramid's foote; the Top's not won,
That's glasse; who slides there, fals, and once falne downe
Neuer more rises: No Art cures Renowne
The wound being sent to 'th Heart. Tis kept from thence
By a strong Armor, Vertues influence;
She guides thee, Follow her. In this Court of Fame
None else but Vertue can enrole thy Name.
Erect thou then a Serious Eye, And looke
What Worthies fill vp Fames Voluminous booke,
That now (thine owne name read there) none may blot
Thy leafe with soule inke, nor thy Margent quoate
With any Act of Thine, which may disgrace
This Citties choice, thy selfe, or this thy Place:
Or, that which may dishonour the high Merits
Of thy Renown'd Society: Roiall Spirits
Of Princes holding it a grace to weare
That Crimson Badge, which these about them beare,
Yea, Kings themselues 'mongst you haue Fellowes bene,
Stil'd by the Name of a Free-citizen:
For instance, see, seuen English Kings there plac'd,
Cloth'd in your Liuery, The first Seate being grac'd
By second Richard: next him Bullingbrooke:
Then, that Fift (thundring) Henry: who all France shook:
By him, his sonne (sixth Henry) By his side
Fourth Edward: who the Roses did diuide:
Richard the third, next him, and then that King,
Who made both Roses in one Branch to spring:
A Spring of which Branch, (Highest now but One)
Is Henry Prince of Wales, followed by none:
Who of this Brotherhood, last and best steps forth,
Honouring your Hall: To Heighthen more your worth.
I can a Register show of seuenteene more,
(Princes and Dukes All:) entombed long before,
Yet kept aliue by Fame; Earles thirty one,
And Barons sixty six that path hue gone:
Of Visecounts onely one, your Order tooke:
Turne ouer one leafe more in our vast booke
And you may reade the Names of Prelates there,
Of which one Arch-bishop your cloth did weare.
And Byshops twenty foure: of Abbots seue,
As many Priors, to make the number euen:
Of forty Church men, I, one sub prior adde,
You from all these, These from you honour had:
Women of high bloud likewise laid aside
Their greater State so to be dignified:
Of which a Queene the first was, then a paire
of Dukes wiues: And to leaue the Roll more faire
Fiue Countesses and two Ladies are the last,
Whose Birth & Beauties haue your Order gracd.
But I too long spin out this Thrid of Gold;
Here breakes it off. Fame hath them All en-rold
On a Large File (with Others,) And their Story
The world shall reade, to Adde vnto thy Glory,
Which I am loath to darken: thousand eyes
Yet aking till they enioy thee, win then that prise
Which Vertue holds vp for thee, And (that done)
Fame shall the end crowne, as she hath begun.
Set forward.
HOnor, eldest Child of Fame,
Thou farre older then thy Name,
Waken with my Song, and see
One of thine, here waiting thee.
Sleepe not now
But thy brow
Chac't with Oliues, Oke and Baies
And an age of happy dayes
Vpward bring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus altogether,
Welcome, welcome, welcome hither.
Longing round about him stay
Eyes, to make another day,
Able with their vertuous Light
Vtterly to banish Night.
All agree
This is hee
Full of bounty, honour, store
And a world of goodnesse more
Yet to spring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus altogether,
Welcome, welcome, welcome hither.
Enuy angry with the dead,
Far from this place hide thy head:
And Opinion, that nere knew
What was either good or true
Fly, I say
For this day
Shall faire Iustice, Truth, and Right,
And such happy sonnes of Light
To vs bring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus altogether,
Welcome, welcome, welcome hither.
Goe on nobly, may thy Name,
Be as old, and good as Fame.
Euer be remembred here
Whilst a blessing, or a teare
Is in store
With the pore
So shall SVVINERTON nere dye,
But his vertues vpward flye
And still spring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus ceasing neuer,
He is liuing, liuing euer.
FIends and Furies that dwell vnder,
Lift Hell-gates from their hindges: Come
You clouen-footed-brood of Barathrum,
Stop, stony her, fright her with your shreekes,
And put fresh bloud in Enuyes cheekes.
On, on, the beames of Vertue are so bright,
They dazzle Enuy: On, the Hag's put to flight.
MY This-dayes-sworne-protector, welcome home,
If Iustice speake not now, be she euer dumbe:
The world giues out shee's blinde; but men shall see,
Her Sight is cleere, by influence drawne from Thee.
For One-yeare therefore, at these Gates shee'l sit,
To guid thee In and Out: thou shalt commit
(If Shee stand by thee) not One touch of wrong:
And though I know thy wisdome built vp strong,
Yet men (like great ships) being in storms, most neere
To danger, when vp all their sailes they beare.
And since all Magistrates tread still on yce,
From mine owne Schoole I reade thee this aduice:
Do good for no mans sake (now) but thine owne,
Take leaue of Friends & foes, both must be knowne
But by one Face: the Rich and Poore must lye
In one euen Scale: All Suiters, in thine Eye
Welcome alike; Euen Hee that seemes most base,
Looke not vpon his Clothes, but on his Case.
Let not Oppression wash his hands ith' Teares
Of Widowes, or of Orphans: Widowes prayers
Can pluck downe Thunder, & poore Orphans cries
Are Lawrels held in fire; the violence flyes
Vp to Heauen-gates, and there the wrong does tell,
Whilst Innocence leaues behind it a sweet smell.
Thy Conscience must be like that Scarlet Dye;
One fowle spot staines it All: and the quicke Eye
Of this prying world, will make that spot thy scorne.
Tha Collar (which about thy Necke is worne)
Of Golden Esses, bids thee so to knit
Men hearts in Loue, and make a Chayne of it.
That Sword is seldome drawne, by which is meant,
It should strike seldome: neuer th'innocent.
Tis held before thee by anothers Hand,
But the point vpwards (heauen must that cōmand)
Snatch it not then in Wrath; it must be giuen,
But to cut none, till warranted by Heauen.
The Head, the politike Body must aduance
For which thou hast this Cap of Maintenance,
And since the most iust Magistrate often erres,
Thou guarded art about with Officers,
Who knowing the athes of Others that are gone,
Should teach thee what to do, what leaue vndone.
Nights Candles lighted are, and burne amaine,
Cut therefore here off, Thy Officious Traine
Which Loue and Custome lend thee: All Delight
Crowne both this Day and Citty: A good Night
To Thee, and these Graue Senators, to whom
My last Fare-wels, in these glad wishes come,
That thou & they (whose strength the City beares)
May be as old in Goodnesse as in Yeares.
—Non displcuisse mretur,
Festinat (Praetor) Qui placuisse Tibi▪