FORTVNE, that fauours fooles, these two short houres
We wish away; both for your sakes, and ours,
Iudging Spectators: and desire in place,
To th'Author iustice, to our selues but grace.
Our Scene is London, 'cause we would make knowne,
No countries mirth is better then our owne.
No clime breeds better matter, for your whore,
Bawd, squire, impostor, many persons more,
Whose manners, now call'd humors, feed the stage:
And which haue still beene subiect, for the rage
Or spleene of comick-writers. Though this pen
Did neuer aime to grieue, but better men;
How e'er the age, he liues in, doth endure
The vices that shee breeds, aboue their cure.
But, when the wholsome remedies are sweet,
And, in their working, gaine, and profit meet,
He hopes to find no spirit so much diseas'd,
But will, with such faire correctiues be pleas'd.
For here, he doth not feare, who can apply.
If there be any, that will sit so nigh
Vnto the streame, to looke what it doth run,
They shall find things, they'ld thinke, or wish, were done;
They are so naturall follies, but so showne,
As euen the doers may see, and yet not owne.
BEleeu't, I will.
Thy worst. I fart at thee.
Ha' you your wits? Why gentlemen! for loue—
Sirrah, I'll strip you—
What to doe? lick sigs
Out at my—
Rogue, rogue, out of all your sleights.
Nay, looke yee! Soueraigne, Generall, are you mad-men?
O, let the wild sheepe loose. Ile gumme your silkes
With good strong water, an'you come.
Will you haue
The neighbours heare you? Will you betray all?
Harke, I heare some body.
Sirrah—
I shall marre
All that the taylor has made, if you approch.
You most notorious whelpe, you insolent slaue.
Dare you doe this?
Yes faith, yes faith.
Why! who
Am I, my mungrill? Who am I?
I'll tell you,
Since you know not your selfe—
Speake lower, rogue.
Yes. You were once (time's not long past) the good,
Honest, plaine, liuery-three-pound-thrum; that kept
Your masters worships house, here, in the friers,
For the vacations—
Will you be so lowd?
Since, by my meanes, translated suburb-Captayne.
By your meanes, Doctor dog?
Within mans memorie,
All this, I speake of.
Why, I pray you, haue I
Beene countenanc'd by you? or you, by me?
Doe but collect, sir, where I met you first.
I doe not heare well.
Not of this, I thinke it.
But I shall put you in mind, sir, at pie-corner.
Taking your meale of steeme in, from cookes stalls,
Where, like the father of hunger, you did walke
Piteously costiue, with your pinch'd-horne-nose,
And your complexion, of the romane wash,
Stuck full of black, and melancholique wormes,
Like poulder-cornes, shot, at th'artillerie-yard.
I wish, you could aduance your voice, a little.
When you went pinn'd vp, in the seuerall rags,
Yo'had rak'd, and pick'd from dung-hills, before day,
Your feet in mouldie slippers, for your kibes,
A felt of rugg, and a thin thredden cloake,
That scarce would couer your no-buttocks—
So, sir!
When all your alchemy, and your algebra,
Your mineralls, vegetalls, and animalls,
Your coniuring, cosning, and your dosen of trades,
Could not relieue your corps, with so much linnen
Would make you tinder, but to see a fire;
I ga'you count'nance, credit for your coales,
Your stills, your glasses, your materialls,
Built you a fornace, drew you customers,
Aduanc'd all your black arts; lent you, beside,
A house to practise in—
Your masters house?
Where you haue studied the more thriuing skill
Of bawdrie, since.
Yes, in your masters house.
You, and the rats, here, kept possession.
Make it not strange. I know, yo' were one, could keepe
The buttry-hatch still lock'd, and saue the chippings,
Sell the dole-beere to aqua-vitae-men,
The which, together with your christ-masse vailes,
At post and paire, your letting out of counters,
Made you a pretty stock, some twentie markes,
And gaue you credit, to conuerse with cob-webs,
Here, since your mistris death hath broke vp house.
You might talke softlier, raskall.
No, you scarabe,
I'll thunder you, in peeces. I will teach you
How to beware, to tempt a furie againe
That carries tempest in his hand, and voice.
The place has made you valiant.
No, your clothes.
Thou vermine, haue I tane thee, out of dung,
So poore, so wretched, when no liuing thing
Would keepe thee companie, but a spider, or worse?
Rais'd thee from broomes, and dust, and watring pots?
Sublim'd thee, and exalted thee, and fix'd thee
I' the third region, call'd our state of grace?
Wrought thee to ſpirit, to quinteſſence, with paines
Would twiſe haue won me the philoſophers worke?
Put thee in words, and faſhion? made thee fit
For more then ordinarie fellowſhips?
Giu'n thee thy othes, thy quarrelling dimenſions?
Thy rules, to cheat at horſe-race, cock-pit, cardes,
Dice, or what euer gallant tincture, elſe?
Made thee a ſecond, in mine owne great art?
And haue I this for thanke? Doe you rebell?
Doe you flie out, i' the proiection?
Would you be gone, now?
Gentlemen, what meane you?
Will you marre all?
Slaue, thou hadſt had no name —
Will you vn-doe your ſelues, with ciuill warre?
Neuer beene knowne, paſt equi clibanum,
The heat of horſe-dung, vnder ground, in cellars,
Or an ale-houſe, darker then deafe IOHN's: beene loſt
To all mankind, but laundreſſes, and tapſters,
Had not I beene.
Do'you know who heares you, Soueraigne?
Sirrah—
Nay, Generall, I thought you were ciuill—
I ſhall turne deſperate, if you grow thus lowd.
And hang thy ſelfe, I care not.
Hang thee, colliar,
And all thy pots, and pans, in picture I will,
Since thou haſt mou'd me. —
(O, this'll ore-throw all.)
Write thee vp bawd, in Paules; haue all thy tricks
Of coſning with a hollow cole, duſt, ſcrapings,
Searching for things loſt, with a ſiue, and ſheeres,
Erecting figures, in your rowes of houſes,
And taking in of ſhaddowes, with a glaſſe,
Told in red letters: And a face, cut for thee,
Worſe then GAMALIEL RATSEY'S.
Are you ſound?
Ha' you your ſenſes, maſters?
I will haue
A booke, but barely reckoning thy impoſtures,
Shall proue a true philoſophers ſtone, to printers.
Away, you trencher-raskall.
Out you dog-leach,
The vomit of all priſons—
Will you be
Your owne deſtructions, gentlemen?
Still ſpew'd out
For lying too heauy o'the basket.
Cheater.
Bawd.
Cow-herd.
Coniurer.
Cut-purſe.
Witch.
O me!
We are ruin'd! loſt! Ha'you no more regard
To your reputations? Where's your iudgement? S'light,
Haue yet, ſome care of me, o'your republique—
Away this brach. I'll bring thee, rogue, within
The statute of ſorcerie, triceſimo tertio.
Or HARRY the eight: I, and (perhaps) thy necke
Within a nooze, for laundring gold, and barbing it.
You'll bring your head within a cocks-combe, will you?
And you, ſir, with your menſtrue, gather it vp.
S'death, you abominable paire of ſtinkards,
Leaue off your barking, and grow one againe,
Or, by the light that ſhines, I'll cut your throats.
I'll not be made a prey vnto the marſhall,
For ne're a ſnarling dog-bolt o'you both.
Ha' you together coſſen'd all this while,
And all the world, and ſhall it now be ſaid
Yo' haue made moſt courteous ſhift, to coſen your ſelues?
You will accuſe him? You will bring him in
Within the ſtatute? Who ſhall take your word?
A whore-ſonne, vpſtart, apocryphall captayne,
Whom not a puritane, in black-friers, will truſt
So much, as for a feather! And you too,
Will giue the cauſe, forſooth? You will inſult,
And claime a primacie, in the diuiſions?
You muſt be chiefe? as if you, onely, had
The poulder to proiect with? and the worke
Were not begun out of equalitie?
The venter tripartite? All things in common?
Without prioritie? S'death, you perpetuall curres,
Fall to your couples againe, and coſſen kindly,
And heartily, and louingly, as you ſhould,
And looſe not the begining of a terme,
Or, by this hand, I ſhall grow factious too,
And, take my part, and quit you.
'T is his fault,
He euer murmures, and obiects his paines,
And ſayes, the weight of all lyes vpon him.
Yes, but they are not equall.
Why, if your part exceed to day, I hope
Ours may, to morrow, match it.
I, they may.
May, murmuring maſtiffe? I, and doe. Death on me!
Helpe me to thrattell him.
DOROTHEE, miſtris DOROTHEE,
O'ds preciuos, I'll doe anything. What doe you meane?
Becauſe o'your fermentation, and cibation?
Not I, by heauen—
Your Sol, and Luna—helpe me.
Would I were hang'd then. I'll conforme my ſelfe.
Will you, ſir, doe ſo then, and quickly: ſweare.
What ſhould I ſweare?
To leaue your faction, ſir.
And labour, kindly, in the commune worke.
Let me not breath, if I meant ought, beſide.
I onely vs'd thoſe ſpeeches, as a ſpurre
To him.
I hope we need no ſpurres, ſir. Doe we?
'Slid, proue to day, who shall sharke best.
Agreed.
Yes, and worke close, and friendly.
'Slight, the knot
Shall grow the stronger, for this breach, with me.
Why so, my good babounes! Shall we goe make
A sort of sober, sciruy, precise neighbours,
(That scarse haue smil'd twise, sin' the king came in)
A feast of laughter, at our follies? raskalls,
Would runne themselues from breath, to see me ride,
Or you t'haue but a hole, to thrust your heads in,
For which you should pay eare-rent? No, agree.
And may Don Prouost ride a feasting, long,
In his old veluet ierken, and stayn'd scarfes,
(My noble Soueraigne, and worthy Generall)
Ere we contribute a new crewell garter
To his most worsted worship.
Royall DOL!
Spoken like CLARIDIANA, and thy selfe!
For which, at supper, thou shalt sit in triumph,
And not be stil'd DOL Common, but DOL Proper,
DOL Singular: the longest cut, at night,
Shall draw thee for his DOL Particular.
Who's that? one rings. To the windo',
Pray heau'n,
The master doe not trouble vs, this quarter.
O, feare not him. While there dyes one, a weeke,
O'the plague, hee's safe, from thinking toward London.
Beside, hee's busie at his hop-yards, now:
I had a letter from him. If he doe,
Hee'll send such word, for ayring o' the house
As you shall haue sufficient time, to quit it:
Though we breake vp a fortnight, 'tis no matter.
Who is it, DOL?
A fine yong quodling.
O,
My Lawyers clarke, I lighted on, last night,
In Hol'bourne, at the dagger. He would haue
(I told you of him) a familiar,
To rifle with, at horses, and winne cups.
O, let him in.
Stay. Who shall doo't?
Get you
Your robes on. I will meet him, as going out.
And what shall I doe?
Not be seene, away.
Seeme you very reseru'd.
Inough.
God b'w'you, sir.
I pray you, let him know that I was here.
His name is DAPPER. I would gladly haue staid, but—
CAptaine, I am here.
Who's that? He's come, I think, Doctor.
Good faith, sir, I was going away.
In truth,
I'am very sorry, Captaine.
But I thought
Sure, I should meet you.
I, I'am very glad.
I'had a sciruy writ, or two, to make,
And I had lent my watch last night, to one
That dines, to day, at the shrieffs: and so was rob'd
Of my passe-time. Is this the cunning-man?
This is his worship.
Is he a Doctor?
Yes.
And ha'you broke with him, Captain?
I.
And how?
Faith, he do's make the matter, sir, so daintie,
I know not what to say—
Not so, good Captaine.
Would I were fairely rid on't, beleeue me.
Nay, now you grieue me, sir. Why should you wish so?
I dare assure you. I'll not be vngratefull.
I cannot thinke you will, sir. But the law
Is such a thing— And then, he sayes, Reade's matter
Falling so lately—
Reade? He was an asse,
And dealt, sir, with a foole.
It was a clarke, sir.
A clarke?
Nay, heare me, sir, you know the law
Better, I thinke—
I should, sir, and the danger.
You know I shew'd the statute to you?
You did so.
And will I tell, then? By this hand, of flesh,
Would it might neuer wright good court-hand, more,
If I discouer. What doe you thinke of me,
That I am a Chiause?
What's that?
The Turke was, here—
As one would say, doe you thinke I am a Turke?
I'll tell the Doctor so.
Doe, good sweet Captaine.
Come, noble Doctor, 'pray thee, let's preuaile,
This is the gentleman, and he is no Chiause.
Captaine, I haue return'd you all my answere.
I would doe much, sir, for your loue— But this
I neither may, nor can.
Tut, doe not say so.
You deale, now, with a noble fellow, Doctor,
One that will thanke you, richly, and h'is no Chiause:
Let that, sir, moue you.
Pray you, forbeare—
He has
Foure angels, here—
You doe me wrong, good sir.
Doctor, wherein? To tempt you, with these spirits?
To tempt my art, and loue, sir, to my perill.
'Fore heau'n, I scarse can thinke you are my friend,
That ſo would draw me to apparant danger.
I draw you? A horſe draw you, and a halter,
You, and your flies together—
Nay, good Captayne.
That know no difference of men.
Good wordes, ſir.
Good deeds, ſir, Doctor dogs-meate. 'Slight I bring you
No cheating CLIM-o' the-CLOVGHS, or CLARIBELS,
That looke as bigge as fiue-and-fiftie, and fluſh,
And ſpit out ſecrets, like hot cuſtard—
Captayne.
Nor any melancholike vnder-ſcribe,
Shall tell the Vicar: but, a ſpeciall gentle,
That is the heire to fortie markes, a yeere,
Conſorts with the ſmall poets of the time,
Is the ſole hope of his old grand-mother,
That knowes the law, and writes you ſixe faire hands,
Is a fine clarke, and has his cyphring perfect,
Will take his oath, o'the greeke XENOPHON,
If need be, in his pocket: and can court
His miſtris, out of OVID.
Nay, deare Captayne.
Did you not tell me, ſo?
Yes, but I'ld ha' you
Vſe maſter Doctor, with ſome more reſpect.
Hang him proud ſtagge, with his broad veluet head.
But, for your ſake, I'ld choake, ere I would change
An article of breath, with ſuch a puck-fiſt—
Come let's begone.
Pray you, le'me ſpeake with you.
His worſhip calls you, Captayne.
I am ſorry,
I e're imbarqu'd my ſelfe, in ſuch a buſineſſe.
Nay, good ſir. He did call you.
Will he take, then?
Firſt, heare me—
Not a ſyllable, 'leſſe you take.
Pray ye', ſir—
Vpon no termes, but an aſſumpſit.
Your humor muſt be law.
Why now, ſir, talke.
Now, I dare heare you with mine honour. Speake.
So may this gentleman too.
Why, ſir—
No whiſpring.
'Fore heau'n, you doe not apprehend the loſſe
You doe you ſelfe, in this.
Wherein? For what?
Mary, to be ſo'importunate for one,
That, when he has it, will vn-doe you all:
Hee'll winne vp all the money i'the towne.
How!
Yes. And blow vp gamſter, after gamſter,
As they doe crackers, in a puppit-play.
If I doe giue him a familiar,
Giue you him all you play for; neuer ſet him:
For he will haue it.
Y'are miſtaken, Doctor.
Why, he do's aske one but for cups, and horſes,
A rifling flye: none o'your great familiars.
Yes, Captayne, I would haue it, for all games.
I told you ſo.
'Slight, that's a new buſineſſe!
I vnderſtood you, a tame bird, to flie
Twiſe in a terme, or ſo; on friday-nights,
When you had left the office: for a nagge,
Of fortie, or fiftie ſhillings.
I, 'tis true, ſir,
But I doe thinke, now, I ſhall leaue the law,
And therefore—
Why, this changes quite the caſe!
Do'you thinke, that I dare moue him?
If you pleaſe, ſir,
All's one to him, I ſee.
What! for that money?
I cannot with my conſcience. Nor ſhould you
Make the request, me thinkes.
No, ſir, I meane
To adde conſideration.
Why, then, ſir,
I'll trie. Say, that it were for all games, Doctor?
I ſay, then, not a mouth ſhall eate for him
At any ordinarie, but o'the ſcore,
That is a gaming mouth, conceiue me.
Indeed!
Hee'll draw you all the treaſure of the realme,
If it be ſet him.
Speake you this from art?
I, ſir, and reaſon too: the ground of art.
H'is o'the onely beſt complexion,
The queene of Fairy loues.
What! is he!
Peace.
Hee'll ouer-heare you. Sir, ſhould ſhee but ſee him—
What?
Do not you tell him.
Will he win at cards too?
The ſpirits of dead HOLLAND, liuing ISAAC,
You'ld ſweare, were in him: ſuch a vigorous luck
As cannot be reſiſted. 'Slight hee'll put
Sixe o'your gallants, to a cloke, indeed.
A ſtrange ſucceſſe, that ſome man ſhall be borne too!
He heares you, man—
Sir, Ile not be ingratefull.
Faith, I haue a confidence in his good nature:
You heare, he ſayes, he will not be ingratefull.
Why, as you pleaſe, my venture followes yours.
Troth, doe it, Doctor. Thinke him truſtie, and make him.
He may make vs both happy in an houre:
Win ſome fiue thouſand pound, and ſend vs two on't.
Beleeue it, and I will, ſir.
And you ſhall, ſir.
You haue heard all?
No, what was't? nothing, I ſir.
Nothing?
A little, ſir.
Well, a rare ſtarre
Raign'd, at your birth.
At mine, ſir? no.
The Doctor
Sweares that you are—
Nay, Captaine, yo'll tell all, now.
Allyed to the queene of Faerie.
Who? that I am?
Beleeue it, no ſuch matter—
Yes, and that
Yo'were borne with a caule o'your head.
Who ſaies ſo?
Come.
You know it well inough, though you diſſemble it.
I-fac, I doe not. You are miſtaken.
How!
Sweare by your fac? and in a thing so knowne
Vnto the Doctor? How shall we, sir, trust you
I'the other matter? Can we euer thinke,
When you haue wonne fiue, or sixe thousand pound,
You'll send vs shares in't, by this rate?
By IOVE, sir,
I'll winne ten thousand pound, and send you halfe.
I-fac's no oath.
No, no, he did but iest.
Goe too. Goe, thanke the Doctor. He's your friend
To take it so.
I thanke his worship.
So?
Another angell.
Must I?
Must you? Slight,
What else is thankes? will you be triuiall? Doctor,
When must he come, for his familiar?
Shall I not ha'it with me?
O, good sir!
There must a world of ceremonies passe,
You must be bath'd, and fumigated, first;
Besides, the Queene of Faerie do's not rise,
Till it be noone.
Not, if she daunc'd, to night.
And she must blesse it.
Did you neuer see
Her royall Grace, yet?
Whom?
Your aunt of Faerie?
Not, since she kist him, in the cradle, Captayne,
I can resolue you that.
Well, see her Grace,
What ere it cost you, for a thing that I know!
It will be somewhat hard to compasse: but,
How euer, see her. You are made, beleeue it,
If you can see her. Her Grace is a lone woman,
And very rich, and if she take a phant'sye,
She will doe strange things. See her, at any hand.
'Slid, she may hap to leaue you all she has!
It is the Doctors feare.
How will't be done, then?
Let me alone, take you no thought. Doe you
But say to me, Captayne, I'll see her Grace.
Captain, I'll see her Grace.
Inough.
Who's there?
Anone. (Conduct him forth, by the backe way)
Sir, against one a clock, prepare your selfe.
Till when you must be fasting; onely, take
Three drops of vinegar, in, at your nose;
Two at your mouth; and one, at either eare;
Then, bath your fingers endes; and wash your eyes;
To sharpen your fiue senses; and, cry hum,
Thrise; and then buz, as often; and then, come.
Can you remember this?
I warrant you.
Well, then, away. 'Tis, but your bestowing
Some twenty nobles, 'mong her Graces seruants;
And, put on a cleane shirt▪ You doe not know
What grace her Grace may doe you in cleane linnen.
COme in (Good wiues, I pray you forbeare me, now.
Troth I can doe you no good, till after-noone)
What is your name, say you, ABEL DRVGGER?
Yes, sir.
A seller of tabacco?
Yes, sir.
'Vmh.
Free of the Grocers?
I, and't please you.
Well—
Your businesse, ABEL?
This, and't please your worship,
I'am a yong beginner, and am building
Of a new shop, and't like your worship; iust,
At corner of a street: (Here's the plot on't.)
And I would know, by art, sir, of your worship,
Which way I should make my dore, by necromancie.
And, where my shelues. And, which should be for boxes.
And, which for pots. I would be glad to thriue, sir.
And, I was wish'd to your worship, by a gentleman,
One Captaine FACE, that say's you know mens planets,
And their good angels, and their bad.
I doe,
If I doe see 'hem—
What! my honest ABEL?
Thou art well met, here!
Troth, sir, I was speaking,
Iust, as your worship came here, of your worship.
I pray you, speake for me to master Doctor.
He shall doe any thing. Doctor, doe you heare?
This is my friend, ABEL, an honest fellow,
He lets me haue good tabacco, and he do's not
Sophisticate it, with sack-lees, or oyle,
Nor washes it in muscadell, and graines,
Nor buries it, in grauell, vnder ground,
Wrap'd vp in greasie leather, or piss'd clouts:
But keeps it in fine lilly-pots, that open'd,
Smell like conserue of roses, or french beanes.
He has his maple block, his siluer tongs,
Winchester pipes, and fire of iuniper.
A neate, spruce-honest-fellow, and no gold-smith.
H'is a fortunate fellow, that I am sure on—
Alreadie, sir, ha' you found it? Lo'thee ABEL!
And, in right way to'ward riches—
Sir.
This summer,
He will be of the clothing of his companie:
And, next spring, call'd to the scarlet. Spend what he can.
What, and so little beard?
Sir, you must thinke,
He may haue a receipt, to make haire come.
But hee'll be wise, preserue his youth, and fine for't:
His fortune lookes for him, another way.
'Slid, Doctor, how canſt thou know this ſo ſoone?
I'am amus'd, at that!
By a rule, Captaine,
In metapoſcopie, which I doe worke by,
A certaine ſtarre i'the fore-head, which you ſee not.
Your cheſt-nut, or your oliue-colour'd face
Do's neuer faile: and your long eare doth promiſe.
I knew't, by certaine ſpots too, in his teeth,
And on the naile of his mercurial finger.
Which finger's that?
His little finger. Looke.
Yo'were borne vpon a wenſday?
Yes, indeed, ſir.
The thumbe, in chiromantie, we giue VENVS;
The fore-finger to IOVE; the midſt, to SATVRNE;
The ring to SOL; the leaſt, to MERCVRIE:
Who was the lord, ſir, of his horoſcope,
His houſe of life being Libra, which fore-ſhew'd,
He ſhould be a merchant, and ſhould trade with ballance.
Why, this is ſtrange! Is't not, honeſt NAB?
There is a ſhip now, comming from Ormus,
That ſhall yeeld him, ſuch a commoditie
Of drugs— This is the weſt, and this the ſouth?
Yes, ſir;
And thoſe are your two ſides?
I, ſir.
Make me your dore, then ſouth; your broad ſide, weſt:
And, on the eaſt-ſide of your ſhop, aloft,
Write Mathlai, Tarmiel, and Baraborat;
Vpon the north-part, Rael, Velel, Thiel.
They are the names of thoſe Mercurial ſpirits,
That doe fright flyes from boxes.
Yes, ſir.
And
Beneath your threſhold, bury me a load-ſtone
To draw in gallants, that weare ſpurres: The reſt,
They'll ſeeme to follow.
That's a ſecret NAB!
And, on your ſtall, a puppet, with a vice,
And a court-fucus, to call city-dames.
You ſhall deale much, with mineralls.
Sir, I haue,
At home, alreadie—
I, I know, you'haue arſnike,
Vitriol, ſal-tartre, argaile, alkaly,
Cinoper: I know all. This fellow, Captaine,
Will come, in time, to be a great diſtiller,
And giue a ſay (I will not ſay directly,
But very faire) at the phioſophers ſtone.
Why, how now, ABEL! Is this true?
Good Captaine,
What muſt I giue?
Nay, Ile not counſell thee.
Thou hearſt, what wealth (he ſayes, ſpend what thou canſt)
Th'art like to come too.
I would gi'him a crowne.
A crowne! 'nd toward ſuch a fortune? Hart,
Thou ſhalt rather gi'him thy ſhop. No gold about thee?
Yes, I haue a portague, I ha' kept this halfe yeere.
Out on thee, NAB, S'light, there was ſuch an offer—
'Shalt keepe't no longer, I'll gi'it him for thee?
Doctor, NAB prayes your worſhip, to drinke this: and ſweares
He will appeare more gratefull, as your skill
Do's raiſe him in the world.
I would intreat
Another fauour of his worſhip.
What is't, NAB?
But, to looke ouer, ſir, my almanack,
And croſſe out my ill-dayes, that I may neither
Bargaine, nor truſt vpon them.
That he ſhall, NAB.
Leaue it, it ſhall be done, 'gainſt after-noone.
And a direction for his ſhelues.
Now, NAB?
Art thou well pleas'd, NAB?
Thanke, ſir, both your worſhips.
Away.
Why, now, you ſmoky perſecuter of nature!
Now, doe you ſee, that ſome-thing's to be done,
Beſide your beech-coale, and your cor'ſiue waters,
Your croſſe-lets, crucibles, and cucurbites?
You muſt haue ſtuffe, brought home to you, to worke on?
And, yet, you thinke, I am at no expence,
In ſearching out theſe veines, then following 'hem,
Then trying 'hem out. 'Fore god, my intelligence
Coſts me more money, then my ſhare oft comes too,
In theſe rare workes.
You're pleaſant, ſir. How now?
WHat ſay's, my daintie DOLKIN?
Yonder fiſh-wife
Will not away. And there's your gianteſſe,
The bawd of Lambeth.
Hart, I cannot ſpeake with 'hem.
Not, afore night, I haue told 'hem, in a voice,
Thorough the trunke, like one of your familiars.
But I haue ſpied ſir EPICVRE MAMMON‐
Where?
Comming along, at far end of the lane,
Slow of his feet, but earneſt of his tongue,
To one, that's with him.
FACE, goe you, and ſhift,
DOL, you muſt preſently make readie, too—
Why, what's the matter?
O, I did looke for him
With the ſunnes riſing: 'Maruaile, he could ſleepe!
This is the day, I am to perfect for him
The magiſterium, our great worke, the ſtone;
And yeeld it, made, into his hands: of which,
He has, this month, talk'd, as he were poſſeſs;d.
And, now, hee's dealing peeces on't, away.
Me thinkes, I see him, entring ordinaries,
Dispensing for the poxe; and plaguy-houses,
Reaching his dose; walking more-fields for lepers;
And offring citizens-wiues pomander-bracelets,
As his preseruatiue, made of the elixir;
Searching the spittle, to make old bawdes yong;
And the high-waies, for beggars, to make rich:
I see no end of his labours. He will make
Nature asham'd, of her long sleepe: when art,
Who's but a step-dame, shall doe more, then shee,
In her best loue to man-kind, euer could.
If his dreame last, hee'll turne the age, to gold.
COme on, sir. Now, you set your foot on shore
In nouo orbe; Here's the rich Peru:
And there within, sir, are the golden mines,
Great SALOMON'S Ophir! He was sayling to't,
Three yeeres, but we haue reach'd it in ten months.
This is the day, wherein, to all my friends,
I will pronounce the happy word, be rich.
This day, you shall be spectatissimi.
You shall no more deale with the hollow die,
Or the fraile card. No more be at charge of keeping
The liuery-punke, for the yong heire, that must
Seale, at all houres, in his shirt. No more
If he denie, ha' him beaten to't, as he is
That brings him the commoditie. No more
Shall thirst of satten, or the couetous hunger
Of veluet entrailes, for a rude-spun cloke,
To be displaid at Madame AVGVSTA'S, make
The sonnes of sword, and hazzard fall before
The golden calfe, and on their knees, whole nights,
Commit idolatrie with wine, and trumpets:
Or goe a feasting, after drum and ensigne.
No more of this. You shall start vp yong Vice-royes,
And haue your punques, and punquettees, my SVRLY.
And vnto thee, I speake it first, be rich.
Where is my SVBTLE, there? Within hough?
Hee'll come to you, by and by.
That's his fire-drake,
His lungs, his Zephyrus, he that puffes his coales,
Till he firke nature vp, in her owne center.
You are not faithfull, sir. This night, I'll change
All, that is mettall, in thy house, to gold.
And, early in the morning, will I send
To all the plumbers, and the pewterers,
And buy their tin, and lead vp: and to Lothbury,
For all the copper.
What, and turne that too?
Yes, and I'll purchase Deuonshire, and Cornwaile,
And make them perfect Indies! You admire now?
No faith.
But when you see th'effects of the great med'cine!
Of which one part proiected on a hundred
Of Mercurie, or Venus, or the Moone,
Shall turne it, to as many of the Sunne;
Nay, to a thousand, so ad infinitum:
You will beleeue me.
Yes, when I see't, I will.
But, if my eyes doe cossen me so (and I
Giuing 'hem no occasion) sure, I'll haue
A whore, shall pisse 'hem out, next day.
Ha! Why?
Doe you thinke, I fable with you? I assure you,
He that has once the flower of the sunne,
The perfect ruby, which we call elixir,
Not onely can doe that; but by it's vertue,
Can confer honour, loue, respect, long life,
Giue safetie, valure: yea, and victorie,
To whom he will. In eight, and twentie dayes,
I'll make an old man, of fourescore, a childe.
No doubt, hee's that alreadie.
Nay, I meane,
Restore his yeeres, renew him, like an eagle,
To the fifth age; make him get sonnes, and daughters,
Yong giants; as our Philosophers haue done
(The antient Patriarkes afore the floud)
But taking, once a weeke, on a kniues point,
The quantitie of a graine of mustard, of it:
Become stout MARSES, and beget yong CVPIDS.
The decay'd Vestall's of Pickt-hatch would thanke you,
That keepe the fire a-liue, there.
'Tis the secret
Of nature, naturiz'd 'gainst all infections,
Cures all diseases, comming of all causes,
A month's griefe, in a day; a yeeres, in twelue:
And, of what age soeuer, in a month.
Past all the doses, of your drugging Doctors.
I'll vndertake, withall, to fright the plague
Out o'the kingdome, in three months.
And I'll
Be bound, the players shall sing your praises, then,
Without their poets.
Sir, I'll doo't. Meane time,
I'll giue away so much, vnto my man,
Shall ſerue th'whole citie, with preſeruatiue,
Weekely, each houſe his doſe, and at the rate—
As he that built the water-worke, do's with water?
You are incredulous.
Faith, I haue a humor,
I would not willingly be gull'd. Your ſtone
Cannot tranſmute me.
PERTINAX, SVRLY,
Will you beleeue antiquitie? recordes?
I'll ſhew you a booke, where MOSES, and his ſiſter,
And SALAMON haue written, of the art;
I, and a treatiſe penn'd by ADAM.
How!
O'the Philoſophers ſtone, and in high-Dutch.
Did ADAM write, ſir, in high-Dutch?
He did:
Which proues it was the primitiue tongue.
What paper?
On cedar board.
O that, indeed (they ſay)
Will laſt 'gainſt wormes.
'Tis like your Iriſhwood,
'Gainſt cob-webs. I haue a peece of IASONS fleece, too,
Which was no other, then a booke of alchemie,
Writ in large ſheepe-skin, a good fat ram-vellam.
Such was PYTHAGORA'S thigh, PANDORA's tub;
And, all that fable of MEDEAS charmes,
The manner of our worke: The Bulls, our fornace,
Still breathing fire; our argent-viue, the Dragon:
The Dragons teeth, mercury ſublimate,
That keepes the whiteneſſe, hardneſſe, and the biting;
And they are gather'd, into IASON's helme,
(Th'alembeke) and then ſow'd in MARS his field,
And, thence, ſublim'd ſo often, till they are fix'd.
Both this, th'Heſperian garden, CADMVS ſtorie,
IOVE's ſhower, the boone of MIDAS, ARGVS eyes,
BOCCACE his Demogorgon, thouſands more,
All abſtract riddles of our ſtone. How now?
DOe wee ſucceed? Is our day come? and hold's it?
The euening will ſet red, vpon you, ſir;
You haue colour for it, crimſon: the red ferment
Has done his office. Three houres hence, prepare you
To ſee proiection.
PERTINAX, my SVRLY,
Againe, I ſay to thee, aloud, be rich.
This day, thou ſhalt haue ingots: and to morrow,
Giue lords th'affront. Is it, my ZEPHYRVS, right?
Bluſhes the bolts-head?
Like a wench with child, ſir,
That were, but now, diſcouer'd to her maſter.
Excellent wittie Lungs! My onely care is,
Where to get ſtuffe, inough now, to proiect on,
This towne will not halfe ſerue me.
No, ſir? Buy
The couering of o' churches.
That's true.
Yes.
Let 'hem ſtand bare, as doe their auditorie.
Or cap 'hem, new, with ſhingles.
No, good thatch:
Thatch will lie light vpo' the rafters, Lungs.
Lungs, I will manumit thee, from the fornace;
I will reſtore thee thy complexion, Puffe,
Loſt in the embers; and repaire this braine,
Hurt wi' the fume o' the mettalls.
I haue blowne, ſir,
Hard, for your woſhip; throwne by many a coale,
When 'twas not beech; weigh'd thoſe I put in, iuſt,
To keepe your heat, ſtill euen; Theſe bleard-eyes
Haue wak'd, to reade y our ſeuerall colours, ſir,
Of the pale citron, the greene lyon, the crow,
The peacocks taile, the plumed ſwan.
And, laſtly,
Thou haſt deſcryed the flower, the ſanguis agni?
Yes, ſir.
Where's maſter?
At's praiers, ſir, he,
Good man, hee's doing his deuotions,
For the ſucceſſe.
Lungs, I will ſet a period,
To all thy labours: Thou ſhalt be the maſter
Of my ſeraglia.
Good, ſir.
But doe you heare?
I'll geld you, Lungs.
Yes, ſir.
For I doe meane
To haue a liſt of wiues, and concubines,
Equall with SALOMON; who had the ſtone
Alike, with me: and I will make me, a back
With the elixir, that ſhall be as tough
As HERCVLES, to encounter fiftie a night.
Th'art ſure, thou ſaw'ſt it bloud?
Both bloud, and ſpirit, ſir.
I will haue all my beds, blowne vp; not ſtuft:
Downe is too hard. And then, mine oual roome,
Fill'd with ſuch pictures, as TIBERIVS tooke
From ELEPHANTIS: and dull ARETINE
But coldly imitated. Then, my glaſſes,
Cut in more ſubtill angles, to diſperſe,
And multiply the figures, as I walke
Naked betweene my ſuccubae. My miſts
I'le haue of perfume, vapor'd 'bout the roome,
To looſe our ſelues in; and my baths, like pits
To fall into: from whence, we will come forth,
And rowle vs drie in goſſamour, and roſes.
(Is it arriu'd at ruby?) — Where I ſpie
A wealthy citizen, or rich lawyer,
Haue a sublim'd pure wife, vnto that fellow
I'll send a thousand pound, to be my cuckold.
And I shall carry it?
No. I'll ha' no bawds,
But fathers, and mothers. They will doe it best.
Best of all others. And, my flatterers
Shall be the pure, and grauest of Diuines,
That I can get for money. My mere fooles,
Eloquent burgesses, and then my poets
The same that writ so subtly of the fart,
Whom I will entertaine, still, for that subiect.
The few, that would giue out themselues, to be
Court, and towne-stallions, and, each where, belye
Ladies, who are knowne most innocent, for them;
Those will I begge, to make me eunuchs of:
And they shall fan me with ten estrich tailes
A piece, made in a plume, to gather wind.
We will be braue, Puffe, now we ha' the med'cine.
My meat, shall all come in, in Indian shells,
Dishes of agate, set in gold, and studded,
With emeralds, saphyres, hiacynths, and rubies.
The tongues of carpes, dormise, and camels heeles,
Boil'd i'the spirit of SOL, and dissolu'd pearle,
(APICIVS diet, 'gainst the epilepsie)
And I will eate these broaths, with spoones of amber,
Headed with diamant, and carbuncle.
My foot-boy shall eate phesants, caluerd salmons,
Knots, godwits, lamprey's: I my selfe will haue
The beards of barbels, seru'd, in stead of sallades;
Oild mushromes; and the swelling vnctuous paps
Of a fat pregnant sow, newly cut off,
Drest with an exquisite, and poynant sauce;
For which, Ile say vnto my cooke, there's gold,
Goe forth, and be a knight.
Sir, I'll goe looke
A little, how it heightens.
Doe. My shirts
I'll haue of taffata-sarsnet, soft, and light
As cob-webs; and for all my other rayment
It shall be such, as might prouoke the Persian;
Were he to teach the world riot, a new.
My gloues of fishes, and birds-skins, perfum'd
With gummes of paradise, and easterne aire—
And do'you thinke to haue the stone, with this?
No, I doe thinke, t'haue all this, with the stone.
Why, I haue heard, he must be homo frugi,
A pious, holy, and religious man,
One free from mortall sinne, a very virgin.
That makes it, sir, he is so. But I buy it.
My venter brings it me. He, honest wretch,
A notable, superstitious, good soule,
Has worne his knees bare, and his slippers bald,
With prayer, and fasting for it: and, sir, let him
Do'it alone, for me, still. Here he comes,
Not a prophane word, afore him: 'Tis poyson.
GOod morrow, father.
Gentle sonne, good morrow,
And, to your friend, there. What is he, is with you?
An heretique, that I did bring along,
In hope, sir, to conuert him.
Sonne, I doubt
Yo'are couetous, that thus you meet your time
I'the iust point: preuent your day, at morning.
This argues something, worthy of a feare
Of importune, and carnall appetite.
Take heed, you doe not cause the blessing leaue you,
With your vngouern'd hast. I should be sorry,
To see my labours, now, e'ene at perfection,
Got by long watching, and large patience,
Not prosper, where my loue, and zeale hath plac'd 'hem.
Which (heauen I call to witnesse, with your selfe,
To whom, I haue pour'd my thoughts) in all my ends,
Haue look'd no way, but vnto publique good,
To pious vses, and deere charitie,
No growne a prodigie with men. Wherein
If you, my sonne, should now preuaricate,
And, to your owne particular lusts, employ
So great, and catholique a blisse: be sure,
A curse will follow, yea, and ouertake
Your subtle, and most secret wayes.
I know, sir,
You shall not need to feare me. I but come,
To ha'you confute this gentleman.
Who is,
Indeed, sir, somewhat caustiue of beliefe
Toward your stone: would not be gull'd.
Well, sonne,
All that I can conuince him in, is this,
The worke is done: Bright SOL is in his robe.
We haue a med'cine of the triple Soule,
The glorified spirit. Thankes be to heauen,
And make vs worthy of it. Ulen spiegel.
Anone, sir.
Looke well to the register,
And let your heat, ſtill, leſſen by degrees,
To the Aludels.
Yes, ſir.
Did you looke
O'the Bolts-head yet?
Which on D. ſir?
I,
What's the complexion?
Whitiſh.
Infuſe vinegar,
To draw his volatile ſubſtance, and his tincture:
And let the water in Glaſſe E. be feltred,
And put into the Gripes egge. Lute him well;
And leaue him clos'd in balneo.
I will, ſir.
What a braue language here is? next to canting?
I'haue another worke; you neuer ſaw, ſonne,
That, three dayes ſince, paſt the Philoſophers wheele,
In the lent heat of Athanor; and's become
Sulphur o'nature.
But 'tis for me?
What need you?
You haue inough, in that is, perfect.
O, but —
Why, this is couetiſe!
No, I aſſure you,
I ſhall employ it all, in pious vſes,
Founding of colledges, and grammar ſchooles,
Marrying yong virgins, building hoſpitalls,
And now, and then, a church.
How now?
Sir, pleaſe you,
Shall I not change the feltre?
Mary, yes.
And bring me the complexion of Glaſſe B.
Ha' you another?
Yes, ſonne, were I aſſur'd
Your pietie were firme, we would not want
The meanes to glorifie it. But I hope the beſt:
I meane to tinct C. in ſand-heat, to morrow,
And giue him imhibition.
Of white oile?
No, ſir, of red. F. is come ouer the helme too,
I thanke my Maker, in S. MARIES bath,
And ſhewes lac Virginis. Bleſſed be heauen.
I ſent you of his faeces there, calcin'd.
Out of that calx, I' ha' wonne the ſalt of MERCVRY.
By powring on your rectified water?
Yes, and reuerberating in Athanor.
How now? What colour ſaies it?
The ground black, ſir.
That's you crowes-head?
Your cocks-comb's, is't not?
No, 'tis not perfect, would it were the crow.
That worke wants ſome-thing.
(O, I look'd for this.
The hay is a pitching.)
Are you ſure, you loos'd 'hem
I' their owne menſtrue?
Yes, ſir, and then married 'hem,
And put 'hem in a Bolts-head, nipp'd to digeſtion,
According as you bad me; when I ſet
The liquor of MARS to circulation,
In the ſame heat.
The proceſſe, then, was right.
Yes, by the token, ſir, the Retort brake,
And what was ſau'd, was put into the Pellicane,
And ſign'd with HERMES ſeale.
I thinke 'twas ſo.
We ſhould haue a new amalgama.
(O, this ferret
Is ranke as any pole-cat.)
But I care not.
Let him e'ene die; we haue enough beſide,
In embrion. H ha's his white ſhirt on?
Yes, ſir,
Hee's ripe for inceration: He ſtands warme,
In his aſh-fire. I would not, you ſhould let
Any die now, if I might counſell, ſir,
For lucks ſake to the reſt. It is not good.
He ſaies right.
I, are you bolted?
Nay, I know't, ſir,
I'haue ſeene th'ill fortune. What is ſome three ounces
Of freſh materialls?
Is't no more?
No more, ſir,
Of gold, t'amalgame, with ſome ſixe of Mercurie.
Away, here's money. What will ſerue?
Aske him, ſir.
How much?
Giue him nine pound: you may gi'him ten.
Yes, twentie, and be coſſend, doe.
There 'tis.
This needs not. But that you will haue it, ſo,
To ſee concluſions of all. For two
Of our inferiour workes, are at fixation.
A third is in aſcenſion. Goe your waies.
Ha' you ſet the oile of Luna in kemia?
Yes, ſir.
And the philoſopers vinegar?
I.
We ſhall haue a ſallad.
When doe you make proiection?
Sonne, be no haſtie, I exalt our med'cine,
By hanging him in balneo vaporoſo;
And giuing him ſolution; then congeale him;
And then diſſolue him; then againe congeale him;
For looke, how oft I iterate the worke,
So many times, I adde vnto his vertue.
As, if at firſt, one ounce conuert a hundred,
After his ſecond looſe, hee'll turne a thouſand;
His third ſolution, ten; his fourth, a hundred.
After his fifth, a thouſand thouſand ounces
Of any imperfect mettall, into pure
Siluer, or gold, in all examinations,
As good, as any of the naturall mine.
Get you your ſtuffe here, againſt after-noone,
Your braſſe, your pewter, and your andirons.
Not thoſe of iron:
Yes. You may bring them, too.
Wee'll change all mettall's.
I beleeue you, in that.
Then I may ſend my ſpits?
Yes, and your racks.
And dripping-pans, and pot-hangers, and hookes?
Shall he not?
If he pleaſe.
To be an aſſe.
How, ſir!
This gent'man, you muſt beare withall.
I told you, he had no faith.
And little hope, ſir,
But, much lesse charitie, should I gull my selfe.
Why, what haue you obseru'd, sir, in our art,
Seemes so impossible?
But your whole worke, no more.
That you should hatch gold in a fornace, sir,
As they doe egges, in Egypt!
Sir, doe you
Beleeue that egges are hatch'd so?
If I should?
Why, I thinke that the greater miracle.
No egge, but differs from a chicken, more,
Then mettalls in themselues.
That cannot be.
The egg's ordain'd by nature, to that end:
And is a chicken in potentia.
The same we say of lead, and other mettalls,
Which would be gold, if they had time.
And that
Our art doth furder.
I, for 'twere absurd
To thinke that nature, in the earth, bred gold
Perfect, i' the instant. Something went before.
There must be remote matter.
I, what is that?
Mary, we say—
I, now it heats: stand Father.
Pound him to dust—
It is, of the one part,
A humide exhalation, which we call
Materia liquida, or the vnctuous water;
On th'other part, a certaine crasse, and viscous
Portion of earth; both which, concorporate,
Doe make the elementarie matter of gold:
Which is not, yet, propria materia,
But commune to all mettalls, and all stones.
For, where it is forsaken of that moysture,
And hath more drynesse, it becomes a stone;
Where it retaines more of the humid fatnesse,
It turnes to sulphur, or to quick-siluer:
Who are the parents of all other mettalls.
Nor can this remote matter, sodainly,
Progresse so from extreme, vnto extreme,
As to grow gold, and leape ore all the meanes.
Nature doth, first, beget th'imperfect; then
Proceedes shee to the perfect. Of that ayrie,
And oily water, mercury is engendred;
Sulphure o'the fat, and earthy part: the one
(Which is the last) supplying the place of male,
The other of the female, in all mettalls.
Some doe beleeue hermaphrodeitie,
That both doe act, and suffer. But, these two
Make the rest ductile, malleable, extensiue.
And, euen in gold, they are; for we doe find
Seedes of them, by our fire, and gold in them:
And can produce the species of each mettall
More perfect thence, then nature doth in earth.
Beside, who doth not see, in daily practice,
Art can beget bees, hornets, beetles, waspes,
Out of the carcasses, and dung of creatures;
Yea, scorpions, of an herbe, being ritely plac'd:
And these are liuing creatures, far more perfect,
And excellent, then mettalls.
Well said, father!
Nay, if he take you in hand, sir, with an argument,
Hee'll bray you in a morter.
'Pray you, sir, stay.
Rather, then I'll be brai'd, sir, I'll beleeue,
That Alchemie is a pretty kind of game,
Somewhat like tricks o' the cards, to cheat a man,
With charming.
Sir?
What else are all your termes,
Whereon no one o'your writers grees with other?
Of your elixir, your lac virginis,
Your stone, your med'cine, and your chrysosperme,
Your sal, your sulphur, and your mercurie,
Your oyle of height, your tree of life, your bloud,
Your marchesite, your tutie, your magnesia,
Your toade, your crow, your dragon, and your panthar,
Your sunne, your moone, your firmament, your adrop,
Your lato, azoch, zernich, chibrit, heautarit,
And then, your red man, and your white woman,
With all your broths, your menstrues, and materialls,
Of pisse, and egge-shells, womens termes, mans bloud,
Haire o'the head, burnt clouts, chalke, merds, and clay,
Poulder of bones, scalings of iron, glasse,
And worlds of other strange ingredients,
Would burst a man to name?
And all these, nam'd,
Intending but one thing: which art our writers
Vs'd to obscure their art.
Sir, so I told him,
Because the simple idiot should not learne it,
And make it vulgar.
Was not all the knowledge
Of the Egyptians writ in mystick symboles?
Speake not the Scriptures, oft, in parables?
Are not the choisest fables of the Poets,
That were the fountaines, and first springs of wisedome,
Wrapt in perplexed allegories?
I vrg'd that,
And clear'd to him, that SISIPHVS was damn'd
To roule the ceaslesse stone, onely, because
He would haue made ours common. Who is this?
God's precious—What doe you meane? Goe in, good lady,
Let me intreat you. Where's this varlet?
Sir?
You very knaue! doe you vse me, thus?
Wherein, sir?
Goe in, and ſee, you traitor. Goe.
Who is it, ſir?
Nothing, ſir. Nothing.
What's the matter? good, ſir!
I haue not ſeene you thus diſtemp'red. Who is't?
All arts haue ſtill had, ſir, their aduerſaries,
But ours the moſt ignorant. What now?
'Twas not m;y fault, ſir, ſhee would ſpeake with you.
Would ſhe, ſir? Follow me.
Stay, Lungs.
I dare not, ſir.
How! 'Pray thee ſtay?
She's mad, ſir, and ſent hether—
Stay man, what is ſhee?
A lords ſiſter, ſir.
(Hee'll be mad too.
I warrant thee.) Why ſent hether?
Sir, to be cur'd.
Why, raskall!
Loe you. Here, ſir.
'Fore-god, a BRADAMANTE, a braue piece.
Hart, this is a bawdy-houſe! I'll be burnt elſe.
O, by this light, no. Doe not wrong him. H'is
Too ſcrulous, that way. It is his vice.
No, h'is a rare phyſitian, doe him right.
An excellent Paracelſian! and has done
Strange cures with minerall phyſicke. He deales all
With ſpirits, he. He will not heare a word
Of GALEN, or his tedious recipe's.
How now, Lungs!
Softly, ſir, ſpeake ſoftly. I meant
To ha' told your worſhip all. This muſt not heare.
No, he will not be gull'd; let him alone.
Y'are very right, ſir, ſhee is a moſt rare ſchollar;
And is gone mad, with ſtudying BRAVGHTONS workes.
If you but name a word, touching the Hebrew,
Shee falls into her fit, and will diſcourſe
So learnedly of genealogies,
As you would runne mad, too, to heare her, ſir.
How might one doe t'haue conference with her, Lungs?
O, diuers haue runne mad vpon the conference.
I doe not know, ſir: I am ſent in haſt,
To fetch a violl.
Be not gull'd, ſir MAMMON.
Wherein? 'Pray yee, be patient.
Yes, as you are.
And truſt confederate knaues, and bawdes, and whores.
You are too foule, beleeue it. Come, here, Ulen.
One word.
I dare not, in good faith.
Stay, knaue.
H'is extreme angrie, that you ſaw her, ſir.
Drinke that. What is ſhee, when ſhee's out of her fit?
O, the moſt affableſt creature, ſir! ſo merry!
So pleaſant! ſhee'll mount you vp, like quick-siluer,
Ouer the helme; and circulate, like oyle,
A very vegetall: diſcourſe of ſtate,
Of mathematiques, bawdry, any thing—
Is ſhee no way acceſſible? no meanes,
No trick, to giue a man a taſt of her — wit —
Or ſo? — Ulen.
I'll come to you againe, ſir.
SVRLY, I did not thinke, one o' your breeding
Would traduce perſonages of worth.
Sir EPICVRE,
Your friend to vſe: yet ſtill, loth to be gull'd.
I doe not like your philoſophicall bawdes.
Their ſtone is lecherie inough, to pay for,
Without this bait.
'Hart, you abuſe your ſelfe.
I know the lady, and her friends, and meanes,
The originall of this diſaſter. Her brother
H'as told me all.
And yet, you n'ere ſaw her
Till now?
O, yes, but I forgot. I haue (beleeue it)
One o' the trecherou'ſt memories, I doe thinke,
Of all mankind.
What call you her, brother?
My lord—
He wi' not haue his name knowne, now I thinke on 't.
A very trecherous memorie!
O' my faith—
Tut, if you ha' it not about you, paſſe it,
Till we meet next.
Nay, by this hand, 't is true.
Hee's one I honour, and my noble friend,
And I reſpect his houſe.
Hart! can it be,
That a graue ſir, a rich, that has no need,
A wife ſir, too, at other times, ſhould thus
With his owne oathes, and arguments, make hard meanes
To gull himſelfe? And, this be your elixir,
Your lapis mineralis, and your lunarie,
Giue me your honeſt trick, yet, at primero,
Or gleeke; and take your lutum ſapientis,
Your menſtruum ſimplex: I'll haue gold, before you,
And, with leſſe danger of the quick-ſiluer;
Or the hot ſulphur.
Here's one from Captain FACE, ſir,
Deſires you meet him i' the Temple-church,
Some halfe houre hence, and vpon earneſt buſineſſe.
SIr, if you pleaſe to quit vs, now; and come,
Againe, within two houres: you ſhall haue
My maſter buſie examining o' the workes;
and I will ſteale you in, vnto the partie,
That you may ſee her conuerſe. Sir, ſhall I ſay,
You'll meet the Captaines worſhip?
Sir, I will.
But, by attorney, and to a ſecond purpoſe.
Now, I am ſure, it is a bawdy-houſe;
I'll ſweare it, were the Marſhall here, to thanke me:
The naming this Commander, doth confirme it.
Don FACE! Why, h' is the moſt autentique dealer
I' theſe commodities! The Superintendent
To all, the queinter traffiquers, in towne.
He is their Visiter, and do's appoint
Who lyes with whom; and at what houre; what price;
Which gowne; and in what smock; what fall; what tyre.
Him, will I proue, by a third person, to find
The subtilties of this darke labyrinth:
Which, if I doe discouer, deare sir MAMMON,
You'll giue your poore friend leaue, though no Philosopher,
To laugh: for you that are, 'tis thought, shall weepe.
Sir. He do's pray, you'll not forget.
I will not, sir.
Sir EPICVRE, I shall leaue you?
I follow you, streight.
But doe so, good sir, to auoid suspicion.
This gent'man has a par'lous head.
But wilt thou, Ulen,
Be constant to thy promise?
As my life, sir.
And wilt thou insinuate what I am? and praise me?
And say I am a noble fellow?
O, what else, sir?
And, that you'll make her royall; with the stone,
An Empresse; and your selfe king of Bantam.
Wilt thou doe this?
Will I, sir?
Lungs, my Lungs!
I loue thee.
Send your stuffe, sir, that my master
May busie himselfe, about proiection.
Th'hast witch'd me, rogue: Take, goe.
Your iack, & all, sir.
Thou art a villaine—I will send my iack;
And the weights too. Slaue, I could bite thine eare.
Away, thou dost not care for me.
Not I, sir?
Come, I was borne to make thee, my good weasell;
Set thee on a bench: and, ha' thee twirle a chaine
With the best lords vermine, of'hem all.
Away, sir.
A Count, nay, a Count-palatine—
Good sir, goe.
Shall not aduance thee, better: no, nor faster.
HAs he bit? Has he bit?
And swallow'd too, my SVBTLE.
I ha' giu'n him line, and now he playes, I faith.
And shall we twitch him?
Thorough both the gills.
A wench is a rare bait, with which a man
No sooner's taken, but he straight firkes mad.
DOL, my lord WHA'TS'HVMS sister, you must now
Beare your selfe statelich.
O, let me alone.
I'll not forget my race, I warrant you.
I'll keepe my distance, laugh, and talke aloud;
Haue all the tricks of a proud sciruy ladie,
And be as rude'as her woman.
Well said, Sanguine.
But will he send his andirons?
His iack too;
And's iron shooing-horne: I ha' spoke to him. Well,
I must not loose my wary gamster, yonder.
O Monsieur Caution, that will not be gull'd?
I, if I can strike a fine hooke into him, now,
The Temple-church, there I haue cast mine angle.
Well, pray for me. I'll about it.
What, more gudgeons!
DOL, scout, scout; stay FACE, you must goe to the dore:
'Pray god, it be my Anabaptist. Who is't, DOL?
I know him not. He lookes like a gold-end-man.
Gods so! 'tis he, he said he would send. What call you him?
The sanctified Elder, that should deale
For MAMMONS iack, and andirons! Let him in.
Stay, helpe me of, first, with my gowne. Away
Ma-dame, to your with-drawing chamber. Now,
In a new tune, new gesture, but old language.
This fellow is sent, from one negotiates with me
About the stone, too; for the holy Brethren
Of Amsterdam, the exil'd Saints: that hope
To raise their discipline, by it. I must vse him
In some strange fashion, now, to make him admire me.
WHere is my drudge?
Sir.
Take away the recipient,
And rectifie your menstrue, from the phlegma.
Then powre it, o'the Sol, in the cucurbite,
And let'hem macerate, together.
Yes, sir.
And saue the ground?
No. Terra damnata
Must not haue entrance, in the worke. Who are you?
A faithfull Brother, if it please you.
What's that?
A Lullianist? a Ripley? Filius artis?
Can you sublime, and dulcefie? calcine?
Know you the sapor pontick? sapor slipstick?
Or, what is homogene, or heterogene?
I vnderstand no heathen language, truely.
Heathen, you KNIPPER-DOLING? Is Ars sacra,
Or Chrysopoeia, or Spagirica,
Or the pamphysick, or panarchick knowledge,
A heathen language?
Heathen Greeke, I take it.
How? heathen Greeke?
All's heathen, but the Hebrew.
Sirah, my varlet, stand you forth, and speake to him
Like a Philosopher: Answere, i'the language.
Name the vexations, and the martyrizations
Of mettalls, in the worke.
Sir, Putrefaction,
Solution, Ablution, Sublimation,
Cohobations, Calcination, Ceration, and
Fixation.
This is heathen Greeke, to you, now?
And when comes Viuification?
After Mortification.
What's Cohobation?
'T is the powring on
Your Aqua Regis, and then drawing him off,
To the trine circle of the ſeuen ſpheares.
What's the proper paſſion of mettalls?
Malleation.
What's your vltimum ſupplicium auri?
Antimonium.
This's heathen Greeke, to you? And, what's your Mercury?
A very fugitiue, he will be gone, ſir.
How know you him?
By his viſcoſitie,
His oleoſitie, and his ſuſcitabilitie.
How doe you ſublime him?
With the calce of egge-ſhels,
White marble, talck.
Your magiſterium, now?
What's that?
Shifting, ſir, your elements,
Drie into cold, cold into moiſt, moiſt into hot, hot into drie.
This's heathen Greeke to you, ſtill?
Your lapis philoſophicus?
'Tis a ſtone, and not
A ſtone; a ſpirit, a ſoule, and a body:
Which, if you doe diſſolue, it is diſſolu'd,
If you coagulate, it is coagulated,
If you make it to flye, it flyeth.
Inough.
This's heathen Greeke, to you? What are you, ſir?
Pleaſe you, a ſeruant of the exil'd Brethren,
That deale with widdowes, and with orphanes goods;
And make it a iuſt account, vnto the Saints:
A Deacon.
O, you are ſent from maſter WHOLSOME,
Your teacher?
From TRIBVLATION WHOLSOME,
Our very zealous Paſtor.
Good. I haue
Some orphanes goods to come here.
Of what kind, ſir?
Pewter, and braſſe, andirons, and kitchin ware,
Mettalls, that we muſt vſe our med'cine on:
Wherein the Brethren may haue a penn'orth.
For readie money.
Were the orphanes parents
Sincere profeſſors?
Why do you aske?
Becauſe
We then are to deale iuſtly, and giue (in truth)
Their vtomoſt valew.
"Slid, you'ld coſſen, elſe,
And, if their parents were not of the faithfull?
I will not truſt you, now I thinke on't,
Till I ha' talk'd with your Pastor. Ha' you brought money
To buy more coales?
No, ſurely.
No? How ſo?
The Brethren bid me ſay vnto you, ſir.
Surely, they will not venter any more,
Till they may ſee >proiection.
How!
Yo'haue had,
For the inſtruments, as bricks, and lome, and glaſſes,
Alreadie thirtie pound; and, for materialls,
They ſay, ſome ninetie more: And, they haue heard, ſince,
That oe, at Heidelberg, made it, of an egge,
And a ſmall paper of pin-duſt.
What's your name?
My name is ANANIAS.
Out, the varlet
That coſſend the Apostles! Hence, away,
Flee Miſchiefe; had your holy Conſiſtorie
No name to ſend me, of another ſound;
Then wicked ANANIAS? Send your Elders,
Hither, to make atonement for you, quickly.
And gi'me ſatisfaction; or out-goes
The fire: and downe th'alembekes, and the fornace.
Piger Henricus, or what not. Thou wretch,
Both Sericon, and Bufo, ſhall be loſt,
Tell 'hem. All hope of rooting out the Biſhops,
Or th' Antichriſtian Hierarchie ſhall periſh,
If they ſtay threeſcore minutes. The Aqueitie,
Terrestie, and Sulphureitie
Shall runne together againe, an all be annull'd
Thou wicked ANANIAS. This will fetch 'hem,
And make 'hem haſt towards their gulling more.
A man muſt deale like a rough nurſe, and fright
Thoſe, that are froward, to an appetite.
H'Is buſie with his ſpirits, but wee'll vpon him.
How now! What mates? What Bairards ha' wee here?
I told you, he would be furious. Sir, here's NAB,
Has brought yo' another old piece of gold, to looke on:
(We muſt appeaſe him. Giue it me) and prayes you,
You would deuiſe (what is it NAB?)
A ſigne, ſir.
I, a good lucky one, a thriuing ſigne, Doctor.
I was deuiſing now.
('Slight, doe not ſay ſo,
He will repent he ga' you any more.)
What ſay you to his conſtellation, Doctor?
The Ballance?
Not, that way is ſtale, and common.
A townes-man, borne in Taurus, giues the bull
Or the bulls-head: in Aries, the ram.
A poor deuice. No, I will haue nis name
Form'd in some mystick character; whose radij,
Striking the senses of the passers by,
Shall, by a vertuall influence, breed affections,
That may result vpon the partie ownes it:
As thus—
NAB!
He first shall haue a bell, that's ABEL;
And, by it, standing one, whose name is DEE,
In a rugg gowne; there's D. and Rug, that's DRVG:
And, right anenst him, a Dog snarling Er;
There's DRVGGER, ABEL DRVGGER. That's his signe.
And here's now mysterie, and hieroglyphick!
ABEL, thou art made.
Sir, I doe thanke his worship.
Sixe o'thy legs more, will not doe it, NAB.
He has brought you a pipe of tabacco, Doctor.
Yes, sir:
I haue another thing, I would impart—
Out with it, NAB.
Sir, there is lodg'd, hard by me,
A rich yong widdow—
Good! a bona roba?
But nineteene, at the most.
Very good, ABEL.
Mary, sh'is not in fashion, yet; shee weares
A hood: but 't stands a cop.
No matter, ABEL.
And, I doe, now and then giue her a fucus—
What! dost thou deale, NAB?
I did tell you, Captaine.
And physick too sometime, sir: for which shee trusts me
With all her mind. Shee's come vp here, of purpose
To learne the fashion.
Good (his match too!) on, NAB.
And shee do's strangely long to know her fortune.
Gods lid, NAB, Send her to the Doctor, hether.
Yes, I haue spoke to her of his worship, alreadie:
But shee's afraid, it will be blowne abroad
And hurt her marriage.
Hurt it? 'Tis the way
To heale it, if 'twere hurt; to make it more
Follow'd, and sought: NAB, thou shalt tell her this.
Shee'll be more knowne, more talk'd of, and your widdowes
Are ne'er of any price till they be famous;
Their honour is their multitude of sutors:
Send her, it may be thy good fortune. What?
Thou dost not know.
No, sir, shee'll neuer marry
Vnder a knight. Her brother has made a vow.
What, and dost thou despaire, my little NAB,
Knowing, what the Doctor has set downe for thee,
And, seeing so many, o'the citie, dub'd?
One glasse o'thy water, with a Madame, I know,
Will haue it done,
What's her brother? a knight?
No, sir, a gentleman, newly warme in 'his land, sir,
Scarse cold in his one and twentie; that do's gouerne
His sister, here: and is a man himselfe
Of some three thousand a yeere, and is come vp
To learne to quarrell, and to liue by his wits,
And will goe downe againe, and dye i' the countrey.
How! to quarrell?
Yes, sir, to carry quarrells,
As gallants doe, and manage 'hem, by line.
'Slid, NAB! The Doctor is the onely man
In Christendome for him. He has made a table,
With Mathematicall demonstrations,
Touching the Art of quarrells. He will giue him
An instrument to quarrell by. Goe, bring 'hem, both:
Him, and his sister. And, for thee, with her
The Doctor happ'ly may perswade. Goe to.
'Shalt giue his worship, a new damaske suite
Vpon the premisses.
O, good Captaine.
He shall,
He is the honestest fellow, Doctor. Stay not,
No offers, bring the damaske, and the parties.
I'll trie my power, sir.
And thy will too, NAB.
'Tis good tabacco this! What is't an ounce?
He'll send you a pound, Doctor.
O, no.
He will do't.
It is the gooddest soule. ABEL, about it.
(Thou shalt know more anone. Away, be gone.)
A miserable rogue, and liues with cheese,
And has the wormes. That was the cause indeed
Why he came now. He dealt with me, in priuate,
To get a med'cine for'hem.
And shall, sir. This workes.
A wife, a wife, for one on'vs, my deare SVBTLE:
Wee'll eene draw lots, and he, that failes, shall haue
The more in goods, the other has in taile.
Rather the lesse. For shee may be so light
Shee may want graines.
I, or be such a burden,
A man would scarse endure her, for the whole.
Faith, best let's see her first, and then determine.
Content. But DOL must ha' no breath on't.
Mum.
Away, you to your SVRLY yonder, catch him.
'Pray god, I ha' not stai'd too long.
I feare it.
THese chastisements are common to the Saints,
And such rebukes we of the Separation
Must beare, with willing shoulders, as the trialls
Sent forth, to tempt our frailties.
In pure zeale,
I doe not like the man: He is a heathen.
And ſpeakes the language of Canaan, truely.
I thinke him a prophane perſon, indeed.
He beares
The viſible marke of the Beast, in his fore-head.
And for his Stone, it is a worke of darkneſſe,
And, with Philiſophie, blinds the eyes of man.
Good Brother, we muſt bend vnto all meanes,
That may giue furtherance, to the holy cauſe.
Which his cannot: The ſanctified cauſe
Should haue a ſanctified courſe.
Not alwaies neceſſary.
The children of perdition are oft-times,
Made inſtruments euen of the greateſt workes.
Beſide, we ſhould giue ſomewhat to mans nature,
The place he liues in, ſtill about the fire,
And fume of mettalls, that intoxicate
The braine of man, and make him prone to paſſion.
Where haue you greater Atheiſts, then your Cookes?
Or more prophane, or cholerick then your Glaſſe-men?
More Antichriſtian, then your Bell-founders?
What makes the Deuill ſo deuilliſh, I would aske you,
Sathan, our common enemie, but his being
Perpetually about the fire, and boyling
Brimſtone, and arſnike? We muſt giue, I ſay,
Vnto the motiues, and the ſtirrers vp
Of humours in the bloud. It may be ſo.
When as the worke is done, the ſtone is made,
This heate of his may turne into a zeale,
And ſtand vp for the beauteous diſcipline,
Againſt the menſtruous cloth, and ragg of Rome.
We muſt await his calling, and the comming
Of the good ſpirit. You did fault, t'vpbraid him
With the Brethrens bleſſing of Heidelberg, waighing
What need we haue, to haſten on the worke,
For the reſtoring of the ſilenc'd Saints,
Which ne'er will be, but by the Philoſophers ſtone.
And, ſo a learned Elder, one of Scotland,
Aſſur'd me; Aurum potabile being
The onely med'cine, for the ciuill Magiſtrate,
T'incline him to a feeling of the cauſe:
And muſt be daily vs'd, in the diſeaſe.
I haue not edified more, truely, by man;
Not, ſince the beautifull light, firſt, ſhone on me:
And I am ſad, my zeale hath ſo offended.
Let vs call on him, then.
The motion's good,
And of the ſpirit; I will knock firſt: Peace be within.
O, Are you come? 'Twas time. Your threeſcore minutes
Were at the laſt thred, you ſee; and downe had gone
Furnus acediae, Turris circulatorius:
Lembeke, Bolts-head, Retort, and Pellicane
Had all beene cinders. Wicked ANANIAS!
Sir, be appeaſed, he is come to humble
Himſelfe in ſpirit, and to aske your patience,
And, then, the turning of this Lawyers pewter
To plate, at Christ-masse—
Christ-tide, I pray you.
Yet, ANANIAS?
I haue done.
Or changing
His parcell guilt, to massie gold. You cannot
But raise you friends. With all, to be of power
To pay an armie, in the field, to buy
The king of France, out of his realmes; or Spaine;
Out of his Indies: What can you not doe,
Against lords spirituall, or temporall,
That shall oppone you?
Verily, 'tis true.
We may be temporall lords, our selues, I take it.
You may be any thing, and leaue off to make
Long-winded exercises: or suck vp,
Your ha, and hum, in a tune. I not denie,
But such as are not graced, in a state,
May, for their ends, be aduerse in religion,
And get a tune, to call the flock together:
For (to say sooth) a tune do's much, with women,
And other phlegmatick people, it is your bell.
Bells are prophane: a tune may be religious.
No warning with you? Then, farewell my patience.
'Slight, it shall downe: I will not be thus tortur'd.
I pray you, sir.
All shall perish. I haue spoke it.
Let me find grace, sir, in your eyes; the man
He stands corrected: neither did his zeale
(But as your selfe) allow a tune, some-where.
Which, now, being to'ard the stone, we shall not need.
No, nor your holy vizard, to winne widdowes
To giue you legacies; or make zealous wiues
To rob their husbands, for the common cause:
Nor take the start of bonds, broke but one day,
And say, they were forfeited, by prouidence.
Nor shall you need, ore-night to eate huge meales,
To celebrate your next daies fast the better:
The whilst the Brethren, and the Sisters, humbled,
Abate the stiffenesse of the flesh. Nor cast
Before your hungrie hearers, scrupulous bones,
As whether a Christian may hawke, or hunt;
Or whether, Matrons, of the holy assembly,
May lay their haire out, or weare doublets:
Or haue that idoll Starch, about their linnen.
It is, indeed, an idoll.
Mind him not, sir.
I doe command thee, spirit (of zeale, but trouble)
To peace within him. Pray you, sir, goe on.
Nor shall you need to libell 'gainst the Prelates,
And shorten so your eares, against the hearing
Of the next wire-drawne grace. Nor, of necessitie,
Raile against playes, to please the Alderman,
Whose daily custard you deuoure. Nor lie
With zealous rage, till you are hoarse. Not one
Of these so singular arts. Nor call your selues,
By names of TRIBVLATION, PERSECVTION,
RESTRAINT, LONG-PATIENCE, and such like, affected
By the whole family, or wood of you,
Onely for glorie, and to catch the eare
Of the Disciple.
Truely, sir, they are
Wayes, that the godly Brethren haue inuente
For propagation of the glorious cause,
As very notable meanes, and whereby, also,
Themselues grow soone, and profitably famous.
O, but the stone, all's idle to'it! nothing!
The art of Angels, Natures miracle,
The diuine secret, that doth flye in clouds,
From east to west: and whose tradition
Is not from men, but spirits.
I hate Traditions:
I do not trust them—
Peace.
They are Popish, all.
I will not peace. I will not—
ANANIAS.
Please the prophane, to grieue the godly: I may not.
Well, ANANIAS, thou shalt ouer-come.
It is an ignorant zeale, that haunts him, sir.
But truely, else, a very faithfull Brother,
A botcher: and a man, by reuelation,
That hath a competent knowledge of the truth.
Has he a competent summe, there, i' the bagg,
To buy the goods, within? I am made guardian,
And must, for charitie, and conscience sake,
Now, see the most be made, for my poore orphane:
Though I desire the Brethren, too, good gayners.
There, they are, within. When you haue view'd, & bought'hem,
And tane the inuentorie of what they are,
They are readie for proiection; there's no more
To doe: cast on the med'cine, so much siluer
As there is tinne there, so much gold as brasse,
I'll gi'it you in, by waight.
But how long time,
Sir, must the Saints expect, yet?
Let me see,
How's the moone, now? Eight, nine, ten dayes hence
He will be siluer potate; then, three dayes,
Before he citronise: some fifteene dayes,
The Magisterium will be perfected.
About the second day, of the third weeke,
In the ninth month?
Yes, my good ANANIAS.
What will the orphanes goods arise to, thinke you?
Some hundred markes; as much as fill'd three carres,
Vnladed now: you'll make sixe millions of 'hem.
But I must ha' more coales laid in.
How!
Another load,
And then we ha' finish'd. We must now encrease
Our fire to ignis ardens, we are past
Fimus equinus, Balnei, Cineris,
And all those lenter heats. If the holy purse
Should, with this draught, fall low, and that the Saints
Doe need a present summe, I haue trick
To melt the pewter, you all buy now, instantly,
And, with a tincture, you as good Dutch dollers,
As any are in Holland.
Can you so?
I, and shall bide the third examination.
It will be ioyfull tidings to the Brethren.
But you must carry it, secret.
I, but stay,
This act of coyning, is it lawfull?
Lawfull?
We know no Magistrate. Or, if we did,
This's forraine coyne.
It is no coyning, sir.
It is but casting.
Ha? you distinguish well.
Casting of money may be lawfull.
'Tis, sir.
Truely, I take it so.
There is no scruple,
Sir, to be made of it; beleeue ANANIAS:
This case of conscience he is studied in.
I'll make a question of it, to the Brethren.
The Brethren shall approue it lawfull, doubt not.
Where shall't be done?
For that wee'll talke, anone.
There's some to speake with me. Goe in, I pray you,
And view the parcells. That's the inuentorie.
I'll come to you straight. Who is it? FACE! Appeare.
HOw now? Good prise?
Good poxe! Yond' caustiue cheater
Neuer came on.
How then?
I ha' walk'd the round,
Till now, and no such thing.
And ha' you quit him?
Quit him? and hell would quit him too, he were happy.
'Slight would you haue me stalke like a mill-iade.
All day, for one, that will not yeeld vs graines?
I know him of old.
O, but to ha' gull'd him,
Had beene a maistry.
Let him goe, black Boy,
And turne thee, that some fresh newes may possesse thee.
A noble Count, a Don of Spaine (my deare
Delicious compeere, and my partie-bawd)
Who is come hether, priuate, for his conscience,
And brought munition with him, sixe great slopps,
Bigger then three Dutch hoighs, beside round trunkes,
Furnish'd with pistolets, and pieces of eight,
Will straight be here, my rogue, to haue thy bath
(That is the colour,) and to make his battry
Vpon our DOL, our Castle, our cinque-Port,
Our Douer pire, our what thou wilt. Where is shee?
Shee must prepare perfumes, delicate linnen,
The bath in chiefe, a banquet, and her wit,
For shee must milke his Epididimis.
Where is the Doxie?
I'll send her to thee:
And but dispatch my brace of little IOHN LEYDENS,
And come againe my selfe.
Are they within then?
Numbring the summe.
How much?
A hundred marks, Boy.
Why, this's a lucky day! Ten pounds of MAMMON!
Three o' my clarke! A portague o' my grocer!
This o' the Brethren! beside reuersions,
And states, to come i' the widdow, and my Count!
My share, to day, will not be bought for fortie—
What?
Pounds, daintie DOROTHEE, art thou so neere?
Yes, say lord Generall, how fares our campe?
As, with the few, that had entrench'd themselues
Safe, by their discipline, against a world, DOL:
And laugh'd, within those trenches, and grew fat
With thinking on the booties, DOL, brought in
Daily, by their small parties. This deare houre,
A doughtie Don is taken, with my DOL;
And thou maist make his ransome, what thou wilt,
My Dousabell: He shall be brought here, fetter'd
With thy faire lookes, before he see's thee; and throwne
In a downe-bed, as darke as any dungeon;
Where thou shalt keepe him waking, with thy drum;
Thy drum, my DOL; thy drum; till he be tame
As the poore black-birds were i' the great frost,
Or bees are with a bason: and so hiue him
I' the swan-skin couerlid, and cambrick sheets,
Till he worke honey, and waxe, my little Gods-guift.
What is he, Generall?
An Adalantado,
A Grande, girle. Was not my DAPPER here, yet?
No.
Nor my DRVGGER?
Neither.
A poxe on 'hem.
They are so long a furnishing! Such stinkards
Would not be seene, vpon these festiuall dayes.
And gallants, yet. Here's a yong gentleman,
Is borne to nothing, fortie markes a yeere,
Which I count nothing. H'is to be initiated,
And haue a flye o'the Doctor. He will winne you
By vnresistable lucke, within this fortnight,
Inough to buy a baronie. They will set him
Vpmost, at the Groome-porters, all the Christmasse!
And, for the whole yeere through, at euerie place,
Where there is play, present him with the chaire;
The best attendance, the best drinke, sometimes
Two glasses of canarie, and pay nothing;
The purest linnen, and the sharpest knife,
The partrich next his trencher: and, somewhere,
The daintie bed, in priuate, with the daintie.
You shall ha' your ordinaries bid for him,
As play-houses for a poet; and the master
Pray him, aloud, to name what dish he affects,
Which must be butterd shrimps: and those that drinke
To no mouth else, will drinke to his, as being
The goodly, president mouth of all the boord.
Doe you not gull one?
'Od's my life! Do you thinke it?
You shall haue a cast commander, (can but get
In credit with a glouer, or a spurrier,
For some two paire, of eithers ware, afore-hand)
Will, by most swift posts, dealing with him,
Arriue at competent meanes, to keepe himselfe,
His punke, and naked boy, in excellent fashion.
And be admir'd for't.
Will the Doctor teach this?
He will doe more, sir, when your land is gone,
(As men of spirit hate to keepe earth long(
In a vacation, when small monie is stirring,
And ordinaries suspended till the tearme,
Hee'll shew a perspectiue, where on one side
You shall behold the faces, and the persons
Of all sufficient yong heires, in towne,
VVhose bonds are currant for commoditie;
On th'other side, the marchants formes, and others,
(That, without helpe of any second broker,
(VVho would expect a share) will trust such parcels:
In the third square, the verie street, and signe
VVhere the commoditie dwels, and do's but wait
To be deliuer'd, be it pepper, sope,
Hops, or tabacco, oat-meale, woad, or cheeses.
All which you may so handle, to enioy,
To your owne vse, and neuer stand oblig'd.
I'faith! Is he such a fellow?
Why, NAB here knowes him.
And then for making matches, for rich widdowes,
Yong gentlewomen, heyres, the fortunat'st man!
Hee's sent too, farre, and neere, all ouer England,
To haue his counsell, and to know their fortunes.
Gods will, my suster shall see him.
I'll tell you, sir,
What he did tell me of NAB. It's a strange thing!
(By the way you must eate no cheese, NAB, it breeds melancholy:
And that same melancholy breeds wormes) but passe it,
He told me, honest NAB, here, was ne'er at tauerne,
But once in's life!
Truth, and no more I was not.
And, then he was so sick—
Could he tell you that, too?
How should I know it?
In troth we had beene a shooting,
And had a piece of fat ram-mutton, to supper,
That lay so heauy o' my stomack—
And he has no head
To beare any wine; for, what with the noise o' the fiddlers,
And care of his shop, for he dares keepe no seruants—
My head did so ake—
As he was faine to be brought home,
The Doctor told me. And then, a good old woman—
(Yes faith, shee dwells in Sea-coale-lane) did cure me,
With sodden ale, and pellitorie o' the wall:
Cost me but two pence. I had another sicknesse,
Was worse then that.
I, that was with the griefe
Thou took'st for being sess'd at eighteene pence,
For the water-worke.
In truth, and it was like
T'haue cost me almost my life.
Thy haire went off?
Yes, sir, 'twas done for spight.
Nay, so sayes the Doctor.
Pray thee, tabacco-Boy, goe fetch my suster,
I'll see this learned Boy, before I goe:
And so shall shee.
Sir, he is busie now:
But, if you haue a sister to fetch hether,
Perhaps, your owne paines may command her sooner;
And he, by that time, will be free.
I goe.
DRVGGER, shee's thine: the damaske. (SVBTLE, and I
Must wrastle for her.) Come on, master DAPPER.
You see, how I turne clients, here, away,
To giue your cause dispatch. Ha'you perform'd
The ceremonies were inioyn'd you?
Yes, o' the vinegar,
And the cleane shirt.
'Tis well: that shirt may doe you
More worship then you thinke. Your aunt's a fire
But that shee will not shew it, t'haue a sight on you.
Ha'you prouided for her Graces seruants?
Yes, here are sixe-score EDWARD shillings.
Good.
And an old HARRY'S soueraigne.
Very good.
And three IAMES shillings, and an ELIZABETH groat,
O, Sir, yo'are come i' the onely, finest time—
Where's master?
Now preparing for proiection, sir.
Your stuffe will b' all chang'd shortly.
Into gold?
To gold, and siluer, sir.
Siluer, I care not for.
Yes, sir, a little to giue beggars.
Where's the lady?
At hand, here. I ha' told her such braue things, o' you,
Touching your bountie and your noble spirit—
Hast thou?
As shee is almost in her fit to see you.
But, good sir, no diuinitie i' your conference,
For feare of putting her in rage—
I warrant thee.
Sixe men will not hold her downe. And, then
If the old man should heare, or see you—
Feare not.
The very house, sir, would runne mad. You know it
How scrupulous he is, and violent,
'Gainst the least act of sinne. Physick, or Mathematiques,
Poetrie, State, or Bawdry (as I told you)
Shee will endure, and neuer startle: But
No word of controuersie.
I am school'd, good Ule.
And you must praise her house, remember that,
And her nobilitie.
Let me, alone:
No Herald, no nor Antiquarie, Lungs,
Shall doe it better. Goe.
Why, this is yet
A kind of moderne happinesse, to haue
DOL Common for a great lady.
Now, EPICVRE,
Heighten thy selfe, talke to her, all in gold;
Raine her as many showers, as IOVE did drops
Vnto his DANAE: Shew the God a miser,
Compar'd with MAMMON. What? the stone will do't.
Shee shall feele gold, tast gold, heare gold, sleepe gold:
Nay, we will concumbere gold. I will be puissant,
And mightie in my talke to her! Here shee comes.
To him, DOL, suckle him. This is the noble knight,
I told your ladiship—
Madame, with your pardon,
I kisse your vesture.
Sir, I were vn-ciuill
If I would suffer that, my lip to you, sir.
I hope, my lord your brother be in health, lady?
My lord, my brother is, though I no ladie, sir.
(Well said my Guiny-bird.)
Right noble madame—
(O, we shall haue most fierce idolatrie!)
'Tis your prerogatiue.
Rather your courtesie.
Were there nought else t'inlarge your vertues, to me,
These answeres speake your breeding, and your bloud▪
Bloud we boast none, sir, a poore Baron's daughter.
Poore! and gat you? Prophane not. Had your father
Slept all the happy remnant of his life
After that act, lyen but there still, and panted,
H' had done inough, to make himselfe, his issue,
And his posteritie noble.
Sir, although
We may be said to want the guilt, and trappings,
The dresse of honor; yet we striue to keepe
The seedes, and the materialls.
I doe see
The old ingredient, vertue, was not lost,
Nor the drug money, vs'd to make your compound.
There is a strange nobilitie, i' your eye,
This lip, that chin! Me thinks you doe resemble
One o' the Austriack princes.
Very like,
Her father was an Irish costar-monger.
The house of Valois, iust, had such a nose.
And such a fore-head, yet, the Medici
Of Florence boast.
Troth, and I haue beene lik'ned
To all these Princes.
I'll be sworne, I heard it.
I know not how! it is not any one,
But ee'n the very choise of all their features.
I'll in, and laugh.
A certaine touch, or aire,
That sparkles a diuinitie, beyond
An earthly beautie!
O, you play the courtier.
Good lady, gi' me leaue—
In faith, I may not,
To mock me, sir.
To burne i' this sweet flame:
The Phoenix neuer knew a nobler death.
Nay, now you court the courtier: and destroy
What you would build. This art, sir, i' your words,
Calls your whole faith in question.
By my soule—
Nay, oathes are made o' the same aire, sir.
Nature
Neuer bestow'd vpon mortalitie,
A more vnblam'd, a more harmonious feature:
Shee play'd the step-dame in all faces, else.
Sweet madame, le' me be particular—
Particular, sir? I pray you, know your distance.
In no ill sense, sweet lady, but to aske
How your faire graces passe the houres? I see
Yo'are lodg'd, here, i' the house of a rare man,
An excellent Artist: but, what's that to you?
Yes, sir. I studie here the mathematiques,
And distillation.
O, I crie your pardon.
H' is a diuine instructer! can extract
DOst thou not laugh?
Yes. Are they gone?
All's cleare.
The widdow is come.
And your quarrelling disciple?
I.
I must to my Captaine-ship againe, then.
Stay, bring 'hem in, first.
So I meant. What is shee?
A Bony-bell?
I know not.
Wee'll draw lots,
You'll stand to that?
What else?
O, for a suite,
To fall now, like a cortine: flap.
To th'dore, man.
You'll ha' the first kisse, 'cause I am not readie.
Yes, and perhaps hit you through both the nostrils.
Who would you speak with?
Wher's the Captaine?
Gone, sir,
About some businesse.
Gone?
Hee'll returne straight.
But master Doctor, his Lieutenant, is here.
Come neere, my worshipfull Boy, my terrae Fili,
That is, my Boy of land; make thy approches:
Welcome, I know thy lusts, and thy desires,
And I will serue, and satisfie 'hem. Beginne,
Charge me from thence, or thence, or in this line;
Here is my center: Ground thy quarrell.
You lie.
How, child of wrath, and anger! the loud lie?
For what, my sodaine Boy?
Nay, that looke you too,
I am afore-hand.
O, this's no true Grammar,
And as ill Logick! You must render causes, child,
Your first, and second Intentions, know your canons,
And your diuisions, moodes, degrees, and differences,
Your praedicaments, substance, and accident,
Series externe, and interne, with their causes
Efficient, materiall, formall, finall,
And ha' your elements perfect—
What is this!
The angrie tongue he talkes in?
That false precept,
Of being afore-hand, has deceiu'd a number;
And made 'hem enter quarrells, often-times,
Before they were aware: and, afterward,
Against their wills.
How must I doe then, sir?
I crie this lady mercy. Shee should, first,
Haue beene saluted. I doe call you lady,
Because you are to be one, ere't be long,
My soft, and buxome widdow.
Is shee, i-faith?
Yes, or my art is an egregious lyar.
How know you?
By inspection, on her fore-head,
And subtiltie of her lip, which must be tasted
Often, to make a iudgement. 'Slight, shee melts
Like a Myrobalane! Here is, yet, a line
In riuo frontis, tells me, he is no knight.
What is he then, sir?
Let me see your hand.
O, your linea Fortunae makes it plaine;
And stella, here, in monte Veneris:
But, most of all, iunctura annularis.
He is a souldier, or a man of art, lady:
But shall haue some great honour, shortly.
Brother,
Hee's a rare man, beleeue me!
Hold your peace.
Here comes the tother rare man. 'Saue you Captaine.
Good master KASTRIL. Is this your sister?
I, sir.
Please you to kusse her, and be proud to know her?
I shall be proud to know you, ladie.
Brother,
He calls me ladie, too.
I, peace. I heard it.
The Count is come.
Where is he?
At the dore.
Why, you must entertaine him.
What'll you doe
With these the while?
Why, haue 'hem vp, and shew 'hem
Some fustian booke, or the darke glasse.
'Fore god,
Shee is a delicate dab-chick! I must haue her.
Must you? I, if your fortune will, you must.
Come sir, the Captaine will come to vs presently.
I'll ha' you to my chamber of demonstrations,
Where I'll shew you both the Grammar, and Logick,
And Rhetorick of quarrelling; my whole method,
Drawne out in tables: and my instrument,
That hah the seuerall scale vpon't, shall make you
Able to quarrell, at a strawes breadth, by Moone-light.
And, lady, I'll haue you looke in a glasse,
Some halfe an houre, but to cleare your eye-sight,
Against you see your fortune: which is greater,
Then I may iudge vpon the sodaine, trust me.
WHere are you, Doctor?
I'll come to you presently▪
I will ha' this same widdow, now I ha' seene her,
On any composition.
What doe you say?
Ha' you dispos'd of them?
I ha' sent 'hem vp.
SVBTLE, in troth, I needs must haue this widdow.
Is that the matter?
Nay, but heare me.
Goe to,
If you rebell once, DOL shall know it all.
And scrub'd, and fub'd, deare Don, before you goe.
You shall, in faith, my sciruie babioun Don:
Be curried, claw'd, and flaw'd, and taw'd, indeed.
I will the heartilier goe about it now,
And make the widdow a punke, so much the sooner,
To be reueng'd on this impetuous FACE:
The quickly doing of it is the grace.
COme ladie: I knew, the Doctor would not leaue,
Till he had found the very nick of her fortune.
To be a Countesse, say you? A Spanish Countesse, sir.
Why? is that better then an English Countesse?
Better? 'Slight, make you that a question, ladie?
Nay, shee is a foole, Captaine, you must pardon her.
Aske from your courtier, to your innes of court-man,
To your mere millaner: they will tell you all,
Your Spanish iennet is the best horse. Your Spanish
Stoupe is the best garbe. Your Spanish beard
Is the best cut. Your Spanish ruffes are the best
Weare. Your Spanish Pauin the best daunce.
Your Spanish titillation in a gloue
The best perfume. And, for your Spanish pike,
And Spanish blade, let your poore Captaine speake.
Here comes the Doctor.
My most honor'd ladie,
(For so I am now to stile you, hauing found
By this my scheme, you are to vnder-goe
An honorable fortune, very shortly.)
What will you say now, if some—
I ha' told her all, sir.
And her right worshipfull brother, here, that shee shall be
A Countesse: doe not delay 'hem, sir. A Spanish Countesse.
Still, my scarse worshipfull Captaine, you can keepe
No secret. Well, since he has told you, madame,
Doe you forgiue him, and I doe.
Shee shall doe that, sir.
I'le looke to't, 'tis my charge.
Well then. Nought rests
But that shee fit her loue, now, to her fortune.
Truely, I shall neuer brooke a Spaniard.
No?
Neuer, sin' eighty-eight could I abide 'hem,
And that was some three yeere afore I was borne, in truth.
Come, you must loue him, or be miserable:
Choose, which you will.
By this good rush, perswade her,
Shee will crie straw-berries else, within this twelue-month.
Nay, shads, and mackrell, which is worse.
Indeed, sir?
Gods lid, you shall loue him, or Ile kick you.
Why?
Ile doe as you will ha' me, brother.
Doe,
Or by this hand, I'll maull you.
Nay, good sir,
Be not so fierce.
No, my enraged child,
Shee will be rul'd. What, when shee comes to tast
The pleasures of a Countesse! to be courted—
And kist, and ruffled!
I, behind the hangings.
And then come orth in pomp!
And know her state!
Of keeping all th'idolaters o' the chamber
Barer to her, then at their prayers!
Is seru'd
Vpon the knee!
And has her pages, huishers,
Foot-men, and coaches—
Her sixe mares—
Nay, eight!
To hurry her through London, to th'Exchange,
Bet'lem, the China-houses—
Yes, and haue
The citizens gape at her, and praise her tyres!
And my-lords goose-turd bands, that rides with her!
Most braue! By this hand, you are not my suster,
If you refuse.
I will not refuse, brother.
Que es esto, Sennores, que non se venga?
Esta tardanza me mata!
It is the Count come!
The Doctor knew he would be here, by his art.
En gallanta Madama, Don! gallantissima!
Por tódos los dioses, la mas acabada
Hermosura, que he visto en mi vida!
Is't not a gallant language, that they speake?
An admirable language! Is't not French?
No, Spanish, sir.
It goes like law-French,
And that, they say, is the court-liest language.
List, sir.
El Sol ha perdido su lumbre, con el
Resplandor, que tràe esta dama. Valga me dios!
He' admires your sister.
Must not shee make curtsie?
'Ods will, shee must goe to him, man; and kisse him!
It is the Spanish fashion, for the women
To make first court.
'Tis true he tells you, sir:
His art knowes all.
Por que no se acùde?
He speakes to her, I thinke?
That he do's sir.
Por el amor de dios, que es esto, que se tàrda?
Nay, see: shee will not vnderstand him! Gull.
Noddy.
What say you brother?
Asse, my suster,
Goe kusse him, as the cunning man would ha' you,
I'll thrust a pinne i' your buttocks else.
O, no sir.
Sennora mia, mi persona muy indigna esta
Alle gar à tànta Hermosura.
A peck of coales, or so, which is cold comfort, sir.
O my voluptuous mind! I am iustly punish'd.
And so am I, sir.
Cast from all my hopes—
Nay, certainties, sir.
By mine owne base affections.
O, the curst fruits of vice, and lust!
Good father,
It was my sinne. Forgiue it.
Hangs my roofe
Ouer vs still, and will not fall, Ô iustice,
Vpon vs, for this wicked man!
Nay, looke, sir,
You grieue him, now, with staying in his sight:
Good sir, the noble man will come too, and take you,
And that may breed a tragoedie.
I'll goe.
I, and repent at home, sir. It may be,
For some good penance, you may ha'it, yet,
A hundred pound to the boxe at Bet'lem—
Yes.
For the restoring such as ha' their wits.
I'll do't.
Ile send one to you to receiue it.
Doe.
Is no proiection left?
All flowne, or stinks, sir.
Will nought be sau'd, that's good for med'cine, thinkst thou?
I cannot tell, sir. There will be, perhaps,
Something, about the scraping of the shardes,
Will cure the itch: though not your itch of mind, sir.
It shall be sau'd for you, and sent home. Good sir,
This way: for feare the lord should meet you.
FACE.
I.
Is he gone?
Yes, and as heauily
As all the gold he hop'd for, were in his bloud.
Let vs be light, though.
I, as balls, and bound
And hit our heads against the roofe for ioy:
There's so much of our care now cast away.
Now to our Don.
Yes, your yong widdow, by this time
Is made a Countesse, FACE: Sh' has beene in trauaile
Of a yong heire for you.
Good, sir.
Off with your case,
And greet her kindly, as a bride-groome should,
After these common hazards.
Very well, sir.
Will you goe fetch Don DIEGO off, the while?
And fetch him ouer too, if you'll be pleas'd, sir:
Would DOL were in her place, to pick his pockets now.
Why, you can doe it as well, if you would set to't.
I pray you proue your vertue.
For your sake, sir.
LAdy, you see into what hands, you are falne;
Mongst what a nest of villaines! and how neere
Your honor was t'haue catch'd a certaine clap
(Through your credulitie) had I but beene
So punctually forward, as place, time,
And other circumstance would ha' made a man:
For yo'are a handsome woman: would yo' were wise, too.
I am a gentleman, come here disguis'd,
Onely to find the knaueries of this Citadell,
And where I might haue wrong'd your honor, and haue not,
I claime some interest in your loue. You are,
They say, a widdow, rich: and I am a batcheler,
Worth nought: Your fortunes may make me a man,
As mine ha' preseru'd you a woman. Thinke vpon it,
And whether, I haue deseru'd you, or no.
I will, sir.
And for these houshold-rogues, let me alone,
To treat with them.
How doth my noble DIEGO?
And my deare madame, Countesse? Hath the Count
Beene courteous, lady? liberall? and open?
Donzell, me thinkes you looke melancholike,
After your coitum, and scuruy! True-ly,
I doe not like the dulnesse of your eye:
It hath a heauy cast, 'tis vpsee Dutch,
And say's you are a lumpish whore-master.
Be lighter, I will make your pockets so.
Will you, Don bawd, and pick-purse? How now? Reele you?
Stand vp sir, you shall find since I am so heauy,
I'll gi' you equall weight.
Helpe, murder!
No, sir.
There's no such thing intended. A good cart,
And a cleane whip shall ease you of that feare.
I am the Spanish Don, that should be cossened,
Doe you see? cossened? Where's your Captayne FACE?
That parcell-broker, and whole-bawd, all raskall.
How, SVRLY!
O, make your approach, good Captaine.
I'haue found, from whence your copper rings, and spoones
Come, now, wherewith you cheate abroad in tauernes.
'Twas here, you learn'd t'anoint your boot with brimstone,
Then rub mens gold on't, for a kind of touch,
And say 'twas naught, when you had chang'd the colour,
That you might ha't for nothing? And this Doctor,
I know not, NAB: thou shalt, if I can helpe it.
HIERONYMO'S old cloake, ruffe, and hat will serue,
Ile tell thee more, when thou bringst 'hem.
Sir, I know
The Spaniard hates the Brethren, and hath spies
Vpon their actions: and that this was one
I make no scruple. But the holy Synode
Haue beene in prayer, and meditation, for it.
And 'tis reueal'd no lesse, to them, then me,
That casting of money is most lawfull.
True.
But here, I cannot doe it; if the house
Should chance to be suspected, all would out,
And we be lock'd vp, in the tower, for euer,
To make gold there (for th'state) neuer come out:
And, then, are you defeated.
I will tell
This to the Elders, and the weaker Brethren,
That the whole companie of the Separation
May ioyne in humble prayer againe.
And fasting.)
Yea, for some fitter place. The peace of mind
Rest with these walls.
Thanks, courteous ANANIAS.
What did he come for?
About casting dollers,
Presently, out of hand. And so, I told him,
A Spanish minister came here to spie,
Against the faithfull—
I conceiue. Come SVBTLE,
Thou art so downe vpon the least disaster!
How wouldst tho' ha' done, if I had not helpt thee out?
I thanke thee FACE, for the angrie Boy, i-faith.
Who would ha' lookt, it should ha' beene that raskall?
SVRLY? He had dy'd his beard, and all. Well, sir,
Here's damaske come, to make you a suit.
Where's DRVGGER?
He is gone to borrow me a Spanish habite,
Ile be the Count, now.
But where's the widdow?
Within, with my lords sister: Madame DOL
Is entertayning her.
By your fauour, FACE,
Now shee is honest, I will stand againe.
You will not offer it?
Why?
Stand to your word,
Or—here comes
She knowes—
Yo'are tyrannous still.
Strict for my right. How now, DOL? Hast'told her,
The Spanish Count will come?
Yes, but another is come,
You little look'd for!
Who's that?
Your master:
The master of the house.
How, DOL!
Shee lies.
This is some trick. Come, leaue your quiblins, DOROTHEE.
Looke out, and see.
Art thou in earnest?
'Slight,
Fortie o' the neighbours are about him, talking.
'Tis he, by this good day.
'Twill proue ill day,
For some on vs.
We are vndone, and taken.
Lost, I'am afraid.
You said he would not come,
While there dyed one a weeke, within the liberties.
No: 'twas within the walls.
Was't so? Cry' you mercy:
I thought the liberties. What shall we doe now, FACE?
Be silent: not a word, if he call, or knock.
I'll into mine old shape againe, and meet him,
Of IEREMIE, the butler. I' the meane time,
Doe you two pack vp all the goods, and purchase,
That we can carry i'the two trunkes. I'll keepe him
Off for to day, if I cannot longer: and then
At night, Ile ship you both away to Ratcliffe,
Where wee'll meet to morrow, and there wee'll share.
Let MAMMON'S brasse, and pewter keepe the cellar:
Wee'll haue another time for that. But, DOL,
'Pray thee, goe heate a little water, quickly,
SVBTLE must shaue me. All my Captaines beard
Must off, to make me appeare smooth IEREMIE.
You'll do't?
Yes, Ile shaue you, as well as I can.
And not cut my throte, but trim me?
You shall see, sir.
HAs there beene such resort, say you?
Daily, sir.
And nightly, too.
I, some as braue as lords.
Ladies, and gentlewomen.
Citizens wiues.
And knights.
In coches.
Yes, & oyster-women.
Beside other gallāts.
Sailors wiues.
Tabacco-men.
Another Pimlico!
What should my knaue aduance,
To draw this companie? He hung out no banners
Of a strange Calfe, with fiue legs, to be seene?
Or a huge Lobster, with sixe clawes?
No, sir.
We had gone in then, sir.
He has no guift
Of teaching i'the nose, that ere I knew of!
You saw no Bills set vp, that promis'd cure
Of agues, or the tooth-ach?
No such thing, sir.
Nor heard a drum strooke, for Babiouns, or Puppets?
Neither, sir.
What deuice should he bring forth now!
I loue a teeming wit, as I loue my nourishment.
'Pray god he ha' not kept such open house,
That he hath sold my hangings, and my bedding:
I left him nothing else. If he haue eate 'hem,
A plague o' the moath, say I. Sure he has got
Some bawdy pictures, to call all this ging;
Should be to day pronounc'd, to all your friends.
And where be your andirons now? and your brasse pots?
That should ha' beene golden flaggons, and great wedges?
Let me but breath. What! They ha' shut their dores,
Methinks!
I, now, 'tis holy-day with them.
Rogues,
Coseners, impostors, bawds.
What meane you, sir?
To enter if we can.
Another mans house?
Here is the owner, sir. Turne you to him,
And speake your businesse.
Are you, sir, the owner?
Yes, sir.
And are those knaues, within, your cheaters?
What knaues? what cheaters?
SVBTLE, and his Lungs.
The gentleman is distracted, sir! No lungs,
Nor lights ha' beene seene here these three weekes, sir,
Within these dores, vpon my word!
Your word,
Groome arrogant?
Yes, sir, I am the house-keeper,
And know the keyes ha' not beene out o' my hands.
This's a new FACE?
You doe mistake the house, sir!
What signe was't at?
You raskall! This is one
O' the confederacie. Come, let's get officers,
And force the dore.
'Pray you stay, gentlemen.
No, sir, wee'll come with warrant.
I, and then,
We shall ha' your dores open.
What meanes this?
I cannot tell, sir!
These are two o'the gallants,
That we doe thinke we saw.
Two o' the fooles?
You talke as idly as they. Good faith, sir,
I thinke the Moone has cras'd 'hem all! (O me,
The angrie Boy come too? Hee'll make a noyse,
And nere away till he haue betray'd vs all.)
What rogues, bawds, slaues, you'll open the dore anone,
Punque, cocatrice, my suster. By this light
I'll fetch the marshall to you. You are a whore,
To keepe your castle—
Who would you speake with, sir?
The bawdy Doctor, and the cosening Captaine,
And PVS my suster.
This is something, sure!
Vpon my trust, the dores were neuer open, sir.
I haue heard all their tricks, told me twice ouer,
By the fat knight, and the leane gentleman.
Here comes another.
ANANIAS too?
And his Pastor?
The dores are shut against vs.
Come forth, you seed of sulphure, sonnes of fire,
Your stench, it is broke forth: abomination
Is in the house.
I, my suster's there.
The place,
It is become a cage of vncleane birds.
Yes, I will fetch the scauenger, and the constable.
You shall doe well.
Wee'll ioyne, to weede them out.
You will not come then? punque, deuice, my suster!
Call her not sister. Shee is a harlot, verily.
I'll raise the street.
Good gentlemen, a word.
Sathan, auoid, and hinder not our zeale.
The world's turn'd Bet'lem.
These are all broke loose,
Out of S. KATHER'NES, where they vse to keepe,
The better sort of mad-folkes.
All these persons
We saw goe in, and out, here.
Yes, indeed, sir.
These were the parties.
Peace, you drunkards. Sir,
I wonder at it! Please you, to giue me leaue
To touch the dore, I'll trie, an'the lock be chang'd.
It mazes me!
Good faith, sir, I beleeue,
There's no such thing. 'Tis all deceptio visus.
Would I could get him away.
Master Captayne, master Doctor.
Who's that?
(Our clark within, that I forgot!) I know not, sir.
For gods sake, when wil her Grace be at leisure?
Ha!
Illusions, some spirit o'the aire: (his gag is melted,
And now he sets out the throte.)
I am almost stiffled—
Would you were altogether.)
'Tis i'the house.
Ha! List.
Beleeue it, sir, i' the aire!
Peace, you—
Mine aunts Grace do's not vse me well.
You foole,
Peace, you'll marre all.
Or you will else, you rogue.
O, is it so? Then you conuerse with spirits!
Come sir. No more o'your tricks, good IEREMIE,
The truth, the shortest way.
Dismisse this rabble, sir.
What shall I doe? I am catch'd.
Good neighbours,
I thanke you all. You may depart. Come sir,
You know that I am an indulgent master:
And therefore, conceale nothing. What's your med'cine,
To draw so many seuerall sorts of wild-fowle?
Sir, you were wont to affect mirth, and wit:
(But here's no place to talke on't i'the street.)
Giue me but leaue, to make the best of my fortune,
And onely pardon me th'abuse of your house:
It's all I begge. I'll helpe you to a widdow,
In recompence, that you shall gi' me thankes for,
Will make you seuen yeeres yonger, and a rich one.
'Tis but your putting on a Spanish cloake,
I haue her within. You need not feare the house,
It was not visited.
But by me, who came
Sooner then you expected.
It is true, sir.
'Pray you forgiue me.
Well: let's see your widdow.
HOw! ha' you eaten your gag?
Yes faith, it crumbled
Away i' my mouth.
You ha' spoil'd all then.
No,
I hope my aunt of Faery will forgiue me.
Your aunt's a gracious lady: but in troth
You were to blame.
The fume did ouer-come me,
And I did do't to stay my stomack. 'Pray you
So satisfie her Grace. Here comes the Captaine.
How now! Is his mouth downe?
I! he has spoken!
(A poxe, I heard him, and you too.) Hee's vn-done, then.
(I haue beene faine to say, the house is haunted
With spirits, to keepe churle back.
And hast thou done it?
Sure, for this night.
Why, then triumph, and sing
Of FACE so famous, the precious king
Of present wits.
Did you not heare the coyle,
About the dore?
Yes, and I dwindled with it.)
Shew him his aunt, and let him be dispatch'd:
I'll send her to you.
Well sir, your aunt her Grace,
Will giue you audience presently, on my sute,
And the Captaines word, that you did not eate your gag,
In any contempt of her Highnesse.
Not I, in troth, sir.
Here shee is come. Downe o'your knees, and wriggle:
Shee has a stately presence. Good. Yet neerer,
And bid, God saue you.
Madame.
And your aunt.
And my most gracious aunt, god saue your Grace.
Nephew, we thought to haue beene angrie with you:
But that sweet face of yours, hath turn'd the tide,
And made it flow with ioy, that eb'd of loue.
Arise, and touch our veluet gowne.
The skirts,
And kisse 'hem. So.
Let me now stroke that head,
Much, nephew, shalt thou win; much shalt thou spend;
Much shalt thou giue away: much shalt thou lend.
(I, much, indeed.) Why doe you not thanke her Grace?
I cannot speake, for ioy.
See, the kind wretch!
Your Graces kins-man right.
Giue me the Bird.
Here is your Fly in a purse, about your neck, cosen,
Weare it, and feed it, about this day seu' night,
On your right wrist—
Open a veine, with a pinne,
And let it suck but once a weeke: till then,
You must not looke on't.
No. And, kins-man,
Beare your selfe worthy of the bloud you come on.
Her grace would ha'you eate no more Wool-sack pies,
Nor Dagger frume'ty.
Nor breake his fast,
In heauen, and hell.
Shee's with you euery where!
Nor play with Costar-mongers, at mum-chance, tray-trip.
God make you rich, (when as your aunt has done it:) but keepe
The gallant'st company, and the best games—
Yes, sir.
Gleeke and primero: and what you get, be true to vs.
By this hand, I will.
You may bring's a thousand pound,
Before to morrow night, (if but three thousand,
Be stirring) an' you will.
I sweare, I will then.
Your Ply will learne you all games.
Ha' you done there?
Your grace will command him no more duties?
No:
But come, and see me often. I may chance
To leaue him three or foure hundred chests of treasure,
And some twelue thousand acres of Faerie land:
If he game well, and comely, with good gamesters.
There's a kind aunt! kisse her departing part.
But you must sell you fortie marke a yeare, now:
I, sir, I meane.
Or, gi't away: pox on't.
I'le gi't mine aunt. Ile goe and fetch the writings.
'Tis well, away.
Where's SVBTLE?
Here. What newes?
DRVGGER is at the doore, goe take his suite,
And bid him fetch a Parson, presently:
Say, he shall marrie the widdow. Thou shalt spend
A hundred pound by the seruice! Now, queene DOL,
Ha' you pack'd vp all?
Yes.
And how doe you like
The lady PLYANT?
A good dull innocent.
Here's your HIERONIMO'S cloake, and hat.
Giue mee 'hem.
And the ruffe too?
Yes, I'll come to you presently.
Now, he is gone about his proiect, DOL,
I told you of, for the widow.
'Tis direct
Against our articles.
Well, wee'll fit him, wench.
Hast thou gull'd her of her iewels, or her bracelets?
No, but I will do't.
Soone at night, my DOLLY,
When we are shipt, and all our goods aboord,
East-ward for Ratcliffe; we will turne our course
To Brainford, westward, if thou'saist the word:
And take our leaues of this ore-weaning raskall,
This peremtorie FACE.
Content, I'am weary of him.
Tho 'hast cause, when the slaue will runne a wiuing, DOL,
Against the instrument, that was drawne betweene vs.
I'll plucke his bird as bare as I can.
Yes, tell her,
She must by any meanes, addresse some present
To th' cunning man; make him amends, for wronging
His art with her suspition; send a ring;
Or chaine of pearle; shee will be tortur'd else
Extremely in her sleepe, say: and ha' strange things
Come to her. Wilt thou?
Yes.
My fine flitter-mouse,
My bird o' the night; wee'll tickle it at the pigeons,
When we haue all, and may vn-lock the trunkes,
And say, this's mine, and thine, and thine, and mine—
What now, a billing?
Yes, a little exalted
In the good passage of our stock-affaires.
DRVGGER has brought his Parson, take him in, SVBTLE,
And send NAB back againe, to wash his face.
I will: and shaue himselfe?
If you can get him.
You are hot vpon it, FACE, what ere it is!
A trick, that DOL shall spend ten pound a month by.
Is he gone?
The Chaplaine waits you i' the hall, sir.
I'll goe bestow him.
Hee'll now marry her, instantly.
He cannot, yet, he is not readie. Deare DOL,
Cosen her of all thou canst. To deceiue him
Is no deceipt, but iustice, that would breake
Such an inextricable tye as ours was.
Let me alone to fit him.
Come, my venturers,
You ha' pack'd vp all? Where be the trunkes? Bring forth.
Here.
Let's see 'hem. Where's the money?
Here,
In this.
MAMMONS ten pound: eight score before.
The Brethrens money, this. DRVGGERS, and DAPPERS.
What paper's that?
The iewell of the waiting maides,
That stole it from her lady, to know certaine—
If shee should haue precedence of her mistris?
Yes.
What boxe is that?
The fish-wiues rings, I thinke:
And th'ale-wiues single money. Is't not DOL?
Yes: and the whistle, that the saylors wife
Brought you, to know, and her husband were with WARD.
Wee'll wet it to morrow: and our siluer-beakers,
And tauerne cups. Where be the French petti-coats,
And girdles, and hangers?
Here, i' the trunke,
And the bolts of lawne.
Is DRVGGERS damaske, there?
And the tabacco?
Yes.
Giue me the keyes.
Why you the keyes!
No matter, DOL: because
We shall not open 'hem, before he comes.
'Tis true, you shall not open them, indeed:
Nor haue 'hem forth. Doe you see? Not forth, DOL.
No!
No, my smock-rampant. The right is, my master
Knowes all, has pardon'd me, and he will keepe 'hem,
Doctor, 'tis true (you looke) for all your figures:
I sent for him, indeed. Wherefore, good partners,
Both hee, and shee, be satisfied: for, here
Determines the indenture tripartite,
Twixt SVBTLE, DOL, and FACE. All I can doe
Is to helpe you ouer the wall, o' the back-side;
Or lend you a sheet, to saue your veluet gowne, DOL.
Here will be officers, presently; bethinke you,
Of some course sodainely to scape the dock:
For thether you'll come else. Harke you, thunder.
You are a precious fiend!
Open the dore.
DOL, I am sorry for thee i-faith. But hearst thou?
It shall goe hard, but I will place thee some-where:
Thou shalt ha' my letter to mistris AMO.
Hang you—
Or madame Caesarean.
Poxe vpon you, rogue,
Would I had but time to beat thee.
SVBTLE,
Let's know where you set vp next; I'll send you
A customer, now and then, for old acquaintance:
What new course ha'you?
Rogue, I'll hang my selfe:
That I may walke a greater diuell, then thou,
And haunt thee i' the flock-bed, and the buttery.
WHat doe you meane, my masters?
Open your dore,
Cheaters, bawds, coniurers.
Or wee'll breake it open.
What warrant haue you?
Warrant inough, sir, doubt not:
If you'll not open it.
Is there an officer, there?
Yes, two, or three for fayling.
Haue but patience,
And I will open it straight.
Sir, ha' you done?
Is it a marriage? perfect?
Yes, my braine.
Off with your ruffe, and cloake then, be your selfe, sir.
Downe with the dore.
'Slight, ding it open.
Hold.
Hold gentlemen, what meanes this violence?
Where is this Colliar?
And my Captaine FACE?
These day-Owles.
That are birding in mens purses.
Madame Suppository.
Doxey, my sister.
Locusts
Of the foule pit.
Profane as BEL, and the Dragon.
Worse then the Grasse-hoppers, or the Lice of Egypt.
Good gentlemen, heare me. Are you officers,
And cannot stay this violence?
Keepe the peace.
Gentlemen, what is the matter? Whom doe you seeke?
Be patient ANANIAS.
I am strong,
And will stand vp, well girt, against an host,
That threaten GAD in exile.
I shall send you
To Amsterdam, to your cellar.
I will pray there,
Against thy house: may dogs defile thy walls,
And waspes, and hornets breed beneath thy roofe,
This seat of false-hood, and this caue of cos'nage.
Another too?
Not I sir, I am no Brother.
Away you HARRY NICHOLAS, doe you talke?
No, this was ABEL DRVGGER. Good sir, goe,
And satisfie him; tell him, all is done:
He stay'd too long a washing of his face.
The Doctor, he shall heare of him at Westchester;
And of the Captayne, tell him at Yarmouth: or
Some good port-towne else, lying for a winde.
If you get off the angrie Child, now, sir—
Come on, you yew, you haue match'd most sweetly, ha' you not?
Did not I say, I would neuer ha' you tupt
But by a dub'd Boy, to make you a lady-Tom?
'Slight, you are a mammet! O, I could touse you, now.
Death, mun' you marry with a poxe?
You lie, Boy;
As sound as you: and I am afore-hand with you.
Anone?
Come, will you quarrell? I will feize you, sirrah.
Why doe you not buckle to your tooles?
Gods light!
This is a fine old Boy, as ere I saw!
What, doe you change your copy, now? Proceed,
Here stands my doue: stoupe at her, if you dare.
'Slight I must loue him! I cannot choose, i-faith!
And I should be hang'd for't. Suster, I protest,
I honor thee, for this match.
O, doe you so, sir?
Yes, and thou canst take tabacco, and drinke, old Boy,
I'll giue her fiue hundred pound more, to her marriage,
Then her owne state.
Fill a pipe-full, IEREMIE.
Yes, but goe in, and take it, sir.
We will.
I will be rul'd by thee in any thing, IEREMIE.
'Slight, thou art not hide-bound! thou art a Iouy' Boy!
Come let's in, I pray thee, and take our whiffes.
Whiffe in with your sister, brother Boy. That master
That had receiu'd such happinesse by a seruant,
In such a widdow, and with so much wealth,
Were very vngratefull, if he would not be
A little indulgent to that seruants wit,
And helpe his fortune, though with some small straine
Of his owne candor. Therefore, gentlemen,
And kind Spectators, if I haue out-stript
An old mans grauitie, or strict canon, thinke
What a yong wife, and a good braine may doe:
Stretch ages truth sometimes, and crack it too.
Speake for thy selfe, knaue.
So I will, sir. Gentlemen,
My part a little fell in this last Scene,
Yet 'twas decorum. And though I am cleane
Got off, from SVBTLE, SVRLY, MAMMON, DOL,
Hot ANANIAS, DAPPER, DRVGGER, all
With whom I traded; yet I put my selfe
On you, that are my countrey: and this pelfe,
Which I haue got, if you doe quit me, rests
To feast you often, and inuite new ghests.