TRuth ſayes, of old, the art of making Playes
Was to content the people; and their prayſe
Was to the Poet money, wine, and bayes.
But in this age, a ſect of Writers are,
That, onely, for particular likings care,
And will taſte nothing that is populare.
With ſuch we mingle neither braynes, nor breſts;
Our wiſhes, like to thoſe (make publike feaſts)
Are not to pleaſe the Cookes taſtes, but the gueſts.
Yet, if thoſe cunning palates hether come,
They ſhall find gueſts entreatie, and good roome;
And though all relliſh not, ſure, there will be ſome,
That, when they leaue their ſeates, ſhall make 'hem ſay,
Who wrote that piece, could ſo haue wrote a Play:
But that, he knew, this was the better way.
For, to preſent all Cuſtard, or all Tart,
And haue no other meats, to beare a part,
Or to want bread, and ſalt, were but courſe art.
The Poet prayes you then, with better thought
To ſit; and, when his Cates are all in brought,
Though there be none farre fet, there will deare-bought
Be fit for Ladies: ſome for Lords, Knights, Squires,
Some for your waiting wench, and Citie-wires,
Some for your men, and daughters of White-Fryars.
Nor is it, onely, while you keepe your ſeate
Here, that his feaſt will laſt; but you ſhall eate
A weeke at Ord'narie, on his broken meate:
If his Muſe be true,
Who commends her to you.
THe ends of all, who for the Scene doe write,
Are, or ſhould be, to profit, and delight.
And ſtill 't hath beene the prayſe of all beſt times,
So perſons were not touch'd, to taxe the crimes.
Then, in this Play, which we preſent tonight,
And make the obiect of your eare, and ſight,
On forfeit of your ſelues, thinke nothing true,
Leſt ſo you make the maker to iudge you.
For he knowes, Poet neuer credit gain'd
By writing truths, but things (like truths) well fain'd.
If any, yet, will (with particular ſlight
Of application) wreſt what he doth write;
And that he meant or him, or her, will ſay:
They make a Libell, which he made a Play.
HA' you got the Song yet perfect I ga'you, Boy?
Yes, Sir.
Let me heare it.
You ſhall, Sir, but i'ſaith let no body elſe.
Why, I pay?
It will get you the dangerous name of a Poet in Towne, Sir, beſides me a perfect deale of ill will at the Manſion you wot of, whoſe Ladie is the Argument of it: where now I am the welcom'ſt thing vnder a man that comes there.
I think, and aboue a man too, if the truth were rack'd out of you.
No faith, I'll confeſſe before, Sir. The Gentlewomen play with me, and throw me o' the bed; and carry me into my Lady; and ſhee kiſſes me with her oyl'd face; and puts a Perruke o' my head; and askes mee an I will weare her Gowne; and I ſay, no: and then ſhee hits mee a blow o' the eare, and cals me Innocent, and lets me goe.
No maruell, if the doore bee kept ſhut againſt your Maſter, when the entrance is ſo eaſie to you—well Sir, you ſhall goe there no more, leſt I bee faine to ſeeke your voice in my Ladies Ruſhes, a fortnight hence, Sing, Sir.
Why, here's the man that can melt away his time, and neuer feeles it! what, betweene his Miſtris abroad, and his Engle at home, high Fare, ſoft Lodging, fine Clothes, and his Fiddle; he thinkes the houres ha'no wings, or the day no Poſt-horſe. Well, Sir Gallant, were you ſtrooke with the Plague this minute, or condemn'd to any capitall puniſhment to morrow, you would beginne then to thinke, and value euery Article o' your time, eſteeme it at the true rate, and giue all for't.
Why, what ſhould a man doe?
Why, nothing: or that, which when 'tis done, is as idle. Harken after the next Horſe-race, or Hunting-match; lay Wagers, prayſe Puppy, or Pepper-corne, White-foot, Franklin; ſwere vpon White-maynes party; ſpnd aloud, that my Lords may heare you; viſit my Ladies at night, and bee able to giue 'hem the Character of euery Bowler, or Better o' the Greene. Theſe be the things, wherein your faſhionable men exerciſe themſelues, and I for company.
Nay, if I haue thy authority, I'le not leaue yet. Come, the other are conſiderations, when wee come to haue gray heads, and weake hammes, moiſt eyes, and ſhrunke members. we thinke ſhee ſleepes: nor, when the doores are ſhut, ſhould men be inquiring, all is ſacred within, then. Is it for vs to ſee their Perrukes put on, their falſe Teeth, their Complexion, their Eye-browes, their Nailes? you ſee guilders will not worke, but inclos'd. They muſt not diſcouer, how little ſerue, with the helpe of arte, to adorne a great deale. How long did the Canuas hang afore Ald-gate? were the people ſuffer'd to ſee the Cities Loue, and Charitie, while they were rude ſtone, before they were painted, and burniſh'd? No. No more ſhould Seruants approch their Miſtreſſes, but when they are compleat, and finiſh'd.
Well ſaid, my True-wit.
And a wiſe Ladie will keepe a guard alwayes vpon the place, that ſhe may doe things ſecurely. I once followed a rude fellow into a Chamber, where the poore Madame, for haſte, and troubled, ſnatch'd at her Perruke, to couer her baldneſſe: and put it on, the wrong way.
O prodigie!
And the vn-conſcionable Knaue held her in Complement an houre, with that reuerſt face, when I ſtill look'd when ſhe ſhould talke from the t'other ſide.
Why, thou ſhould'ſt ha' releeu'd her.
No faith, I let her alone, as wee'll let this argument, if you pleaſe, and paſſe to another, When ſaw you Dauphine, Eugenie?
Not theſe three dayes. Shall we goe to him this morning? he is very melancholique, I heare.
Sicke o' the Vncle? is hee? I met that ſtiffe peece of Formalitie, his Vncle, yeſterday, with a huge Turbant of Night-Caps on his head, buckled ouer his eares.
O, that's his cuſtome when he walkes abroad. Hee can endure no noyſe, man.
So I haue heard. But is the diſeaſe ſo ridiculous in him, as it is made? they ſay, hee has beene vpon diuers Treaties with the Fiſh-wiues, and Orenge-women; and Articles propounded betweene them: marry, the Chimney-ſweepers will not be drawne in.
No, nor the Broome-men: They ſtand out ſtiffely. Hee cannot endure a Coſtard-monger, hee ſwounes if hee heare one.
Me thinkes, a Smith ſhould be ominous.
Or any Hammer-man. A Braſier is not ſuffer'd to dwell in the Pariſh, nor an Armorer. He would haue hang'd a Pewterers' prentice once vp on a Shroue-tueſdayes Ryot, for being o' that Trade, when the reſt were quit.
A Trumpet ſhould fright him terribly, or the Hau boyes?
Out of his ſenſes. The Waights of the Citie haue a Penſion of him, not to come neere that Ward. This Youth practis'd on him, one night, like the Bell-man; and neuer left till hee had brought him downe to the doore, with a Long-Sword: and there left him flouriſhing with the Ayre.
Why, Sir! hee hath choſen a ſtreet to lye in, ſo narrow at both ends, that it will receiue no Coaches, nor Carts, nor any of theſe common noyſes: and therefore, wee that loue him, deuiſe to bring him in ſuch as wee may, now and then, for his exerciſe, to breath him. Hee would grow reſtie elſe in his eaſe. His Vertue would ruſt without action. I entreated a Beare-ward, one day, to come downe with the Dogges of ſome foure Pariſhes that way, and I thanke him, he did; and cryed his Games vnder Maſter Moroſe's windore: till hee was ſent crying away, with his head made a moſt bleding Spectacle to the multitude. And, another time, a Fencer, marching to his Prize, had his Drumme moſt tragically runne thorow, for taking that ſtreet in his way, at my requeſt.
A good Wagge. How do's he for the Bells?
O, i' the Queenes time, he was woont to goe out of Towne euery Satterday at ten a clocke, or on Holy-day-eues. But now, by reaſon of the ſickneſſe, the perpetuitie of ringing has made him deuiſe a roome, with double walles, and treble feelings; the windores cloſe ſhut, and calle'd: and there he liues by Candle-light. Hee turn'd away a man laſt weeke, for hauing a paire of new Shooes, that creak'd. And this fellow wayts on him now, in Tennis-court Sockes, or Slippers ſol'd with Wooll: and they talke each to other, in a Trunke. See who comes here.
HOw now! what alle you Sirs? dumbe?
Strooke into ſtone almoſt, I am here, with Tales o' thine Vncle! There was neuer ſuch a Prodigie heard of.
I would you would once looſe this ſubiect, my maſters, for my ſake. They are ſuch as you are, that haue brought me into that predicament, I am, with him.
How is that?
Marry, that he will diſ-inherit mee, no more. Hee thinkes, I, and my companie are Authours of all the ridiculous Acts, and Moniments are told of him.
Slid, I would bee the Authour of more, to vexe him, that purpoſe deſerues it: it giues thee law of plaguing him. I'll tell thee what I would doe. I would make a falſe Almanake; get it printed: and then ha' him drawne out on a Coronation day to the Tower-Wharfe, and kill him with the noyſe of the Ordinance. Diſ-inherit thee! hee cannot, man. Art not thou next of bloud, and his Siſters Sonne?
I but hee will thruſt mee out of it, hee vowes, and marry.
How! that's a more portent. Can he endure no noiſe, and will venter on a Wife?
Yes: why, thou art a ſtranger, it ſeemes, to his beſt tricke, yet. He has imployd a fellow this halfe yeere, all ouer England, to harken him out a dumbe woman; be ſhe of any forme, or any qualitie, ſo ſhee be able to beare children: her ſilence is Dowrie enough, he ſayes.
But, I truſt to God, he has found none.
No, but he has heard of one that's lodg'd i' the next ſtreet to him, who is exceedingly ſoft-ſpoken; thrifty of her ſpeech; that ſpends but ſixe words a day. And her he's about now, and ſhall haue her.
Is't poſſible! who is his agent i' the buſineſſe?
Marry, a Barber, one Cut-berd: an honeſt fellow, one that tels Dauphine all here.
Why, you oppreſſe me with wonder! A woman, and a Barber, and loue no noyſe!
Yes faith. The fellow trims him ſilently, and has not the knacke with his Sheeres, or his fingers: and that continence in a Barber hee thinkes ſo emient a vertue, as it has made him chiefe of his counſell.
Is the Barber to be ſeene? or the Wench?
Y, that they are.
I pay thee, Dauphine, let's goe thether.
I haue ſome buſineſſe now: I cannot i' faith.
You ſhall haue no buſineſſe ſhall make you neglect this, Sir, wee'll make her talke, beleeue it; or if ſhe will not, wee can giue out, at leaſt ſo much as ſhall interrupt the Treaty: we will breake it. Thou art bound in conſcience, when he ſuſpects thee without cauſe to torment him.
Not I, by any meanes. I ll giue no ſuffrage to 't. Hee ſhall neuer ha that plea againſt mee, that I oppos'd the leaſt phant'ſie of his. Let it lye vpon my Starres to be guilty, I'll be innocent.
Yes, and be poore, and begge; doe, innocent: when ſome Groome of his has got him an Heire, or this Barber, if he himſelfe cannot. Innocent! I pray thee, Ned, where lyes ſhe? let him be innocent, ſtill.
Why, right ouer againſt the Barbers; in the houſe, where Sir Iohn Daw lyes.
You doe not meane to confound me!
Why?
Do's he, that would marry her, know ſo much?
Excellent! He was a fine youth laſt night, but now he is much finer! what is his chriſten-name? I ha' forgot.
Si Amorous La-foole.
The Gentleman is here below, that ownes that name.
Hart, hee's come, to inuite mee to Dinner, I hold my life.
Like enough: pray thee, let's ha' him vp.
Boy, marſhall him.
With a Truncheon, Sir?
A way, I beſeech you. I'le make him tell vs his Pedegree, now; and what meate hee has to Dinner; and, who are his Gueſts; and, the whole courſe of his fortunes: with a breath.
S'Aue, deare Sir Dauphine, honor'd Maſter Clerimont.
Sir Amorous! you haue very much honeſted my Lodging, with your preſence.
Good faith it is a fine Lodging! almoſt, as delicate a Lodging, as mine.
Not ſo, Sir.
Excuſe me, Sir, if it were i'the Strand, I aſſure you. I am come, Maſter Clermont, to entreat you wait vpon two or three Ladies, to dinner, to day.
How, Sir! wait vpon 'hem? did you euer ſee me carrie Diſhes?
No, Sir, diſpence with mee; I meant, to beare 'hem company.
O, that I will, Sir. The doubtfulneſſe o' your phraſe, beleeue it, Sir, would breed you a quarrell, once an houre, with the terrible Boyes, if you ſhould but keepe 'hem fellowſhip a day.
It ſhould be extremely againſt my will, Sir, if I conteſted with any man.
I beleeue it, Sir; where hold you your Feaſt?
At Tom Otters, Sir.
Tom Otter? what's he?
Captaine Otter, Sir; he is a kind of Gameſter: but he has had command, both by Sea, and by Land.
O, then he is animal amphibium?
I, Sir: his Wife was the rich China-woman, that the Courtiers viſited ſo often, that gaue the rare entertaynment. She commands all at home.
Then, ſhe is Captaine Otter?
You ſay very well, Sir: ſhe is my Kinſ-woman, a La-Foole by the Mother ſide, and will inuite, any great Ladies, for my ſake.
Not of the La-Fooles of Eſſex?
No, Sir, the La-Fooles of London.
Now, h'is in.
They all come out of our Houſe, the La-fooles o' the North, the La-fooles o' the Weſt, the La-Fooles of the Eaſt, and South—wee are as ancient a Family, as any is in Europe—but I my ſelfe am deſcended lineally of the French La-Fooles—and, wee doe beare for our Coat Yellow, or Or, checker'd Azure, and Gules, and ſome three or foure Colours more, which is a very noted Coate, and has, ſometimes beene ſolemnely worne by diuers Nobilitie of our Houſe—but let that goe, Antiquity is not reſpected now—I had a brace of fat Does ſent mee Gentlemen, and halfe a doſen of Pheſants, a doſen or two of God wits, and ſome other Fowle, which I would haue eaten, while they are good, and in good company—there will bee a grat Lady, or two, my Lady Haughty, my Lady Centaure, Miſtris Dol Mauis—and they come a'purpoſe, to ſee the ſilent Gentlewoman, Miſtris Epicoene, that honeſt Sir Iohn Daw has promis'd to bring thether—and then, Miſtris Truſty, my Ladies Woman, will be there too, and this Honourable Knight, Sir Dauphine, with your ſelfe, Maſter Clerimont—and wee'll be very merry, and haue Fidlers, and daunce—I haue beene a madde Wag, in my time, and haue ſpent ſome Crownes ſince I was a Page in Court, to my Lord Lofty, and after, my Ladies Gentleman-vſher, who got me knighted in Ireland, ſince it pleas'd my elder Brother to dye—I had as faire a gold Ierkin on that day, as any was worne in the Iland-Voyage, or at Caliz, none diſprays'd, and I came ouer in it hither, ſhow'd my ſelfe to my friends, in Court, and after went downe to my Tenants, in the Countrey, and ſuruai'd my Lands, let new Leaſes, tooke their Money, ſpent it in the eye o' the Land here, vpon Ladies—and now I can take vp at my pleaſure.
Can you take vp Ladies, Sir?
O, let him breathe, he has not recouer'd.
Would I were your halfe, in that commoditie—
No, Sir, excuſe mee: I meant Money, which can take vp any thing. I haue another Gueſt, or two, to inuite, and ſay as much to, Gentlemen. I'll take my leaue abruptly, in hope you will not faile—Your Seruant.
Wee will not faile you, Sir precious La-Foole; but ſhe ſhall, that your Ladies come to ſee: if I haue credit, afore Sir Daw.
Did you euer heare ſuch a Wind-fucker, as this?
Or, ſuch a Rooke, as the other! that will betray his Miſtris, to be ſeene. Come, 'tis time, we preuented it.
Goe.
CAnnot I, yet, finde out a more compendious method, then by this Trunke, to ſaue my Seruants the labour of ſpeech, and mine eares, the diſcord of ſounds? Let me ſee: all Diſcourſes, but mine owne, afflict mee, they ſeeme harſh, impertinent, and irkeſome. Is it not poſſible, that thou ſhould'ſt anſwere me, by Signes, and, I apprehend thee, fellow? ſpeake not, though I queſtion you. You haue taken the Ring, off from the ſtreet doore, as I bad you? anſwere mee not, by ſpeech, but by ſilence; vnleſſe, it be otherwiſe (—) very good. And, you haue faſtened on a thick quilt, or flockbed, on the out-ſide of the doore; that if they knocke with their Daggers, or with Brick-bats, they can make no noyſe? but with your legge, your anſwere, vnleſſe it bee otherwiſe (—) very good. This is not, onely, fit modeſtie in a Seruant, but good ſtate, and diſcretion in a Maſter. And you haue beene with Cutberd, the Barber, to haue him come to mee? (—) good. And, hee will come preſently? anſwere mee not but with your legge, vnleſſe it bee otherwiſe: if it bee otherwiſe, ſhake your head, or ſhrugge (—) ſo. Your Italian, and Spaniard, are wiſe in theſe! and it is a frugall, and comely grauitie. How long will it bee, ere Cutberd come? ſtay, if an houre, hold vp your whole hand; if halfe an houre, two fingers; if a quarter, one; (—) good: halfe a quarter? 'tis well. And haue you giuen him a Key, to come in without knocking? (—) good. And, is the Lock oyld, and the Hinges, to day? (—) good. And the Quilting of the ſtayres no where worne out, and bare (—) very good. I ſee, by much doctrine, and impulſion, it may be effected: ſtand by. The Turke, in this diuine diſcipline, is admirable, exceeding all the Potentates of the Earth; ſtill waited on by Mutes; and all his Commands ſo executed; yea, euen in the Warre (as I haue heard) and in his Marches, moſt of his Charges, and directions, giuen by Signes, and with ſilence: and exquiſite art! and I am heartily aſham'd, and angry oftentimes, that the Princes of Christendome, ſhould ſuffer a Barbarian, to tranſcend 'hem in ſo high a point of felicitie. I will practize it, hereafter. How now? oh! oh! what Villaine? what Prodigie of Mankinde is that? looke. Oh! cut his throat, cut his throat: what Murderer, Hell-hound, Deuill can this be?
It is a Poſt from the Court—
Out Rogue, and muſt thou blow thy Horne, too?
Alas, it is a Poſt from the Court, Sir, that ſayes, hee muſt ſpeake with you, paine of death—
Paine of thy life, be ſilent.
BY your leaue, Sir (I am a ſtranger here) is your name, Maſter Moroſe? is your name, Maſter Moroſe? Fſhes! Pythagoreans all! this is ſtrange! What ſay you, Sir, nothing? Has Harpocrates been here, with his Club, among you? well Sir, I will beleeue you to be the man, at this time: I will venter vpon you, Sir. Your friends at Court commend 'hem to you, Sir—
And are extremely ſollicitous for you, Sir.
Whoſe Knaue are you!
Mine owne Knaue, and your Compere, Sir.
Fetch me my Sword—
You ſhall taſte the one halfe of my Dagger, if you do (Groome) and you, the other, if you ſtirre, Sir: be patient, I charge you, in the Kings Name, and heare me without inſurrection. They ſay, you are to marrie? to marry! doe you marke, Sir?
How then, rude companion!
Marry, your friends doe wonder, Sir, the Thames being ſo neere, wherein you may drowne ſo handſomely; or London-bridge, at a low fall, with a fine leape, to hurry you downe the ſtreame; or, ſuch a delicate Steeple, i' the Towne, as Bow, to vault from; or, a brauer height, as Pauls, or, if you affected to doe it neerer home, and a ſhorter way, an excellent Garret Windore, into the ſtreet; or, a Beame, in the ſaid Garret, with this Halter; which they haue ſent, and deſire, that you would ſooner commit your graue head to this knot, then to the Wed-locke nooze; or, take a little Sublimate, and goe out of the World, like a Rat; or a Flye (as one ſaid) with a Straw i' your Arſe: any way, rather, then to follow this Goblin Matrimonie. Alas, Sir, doe you euer thinke to find a chaſte Wife, in theſe times? now? when there are ſo many Maſques, Playes, Puritane Preachings, Mad-folkes, and other ſtrange fights to be ſeene daily, priuate and publique? if you had liu'd in King Etheldred's time, Sir, or Edward the Confeſſors, you might, perhaps haue found in ſome cold Countrey-Hamlet, then, a dull froſtrie Wench, would haue beene contented with one man: now, they will as ſoone be pleas'd with one legge, or one eye. I'll tell you, Sir, the monſtrous hazards you ſhall runne with a Wife.
Good Sir! haue I euer coſen'd any friends of yours of their Land? bought their Poſſeſſions? taken forfeit of their Morgage? begg'd a Reuerſion from 'hem? baſtarded their Iſſue? what haue I done, that may deſerue this?
Nothing, Sir, that I know, but your itch of Marriage.
Why? if I had made an Aſſaſſinate vpon your Father; vitiated your Mother; rauiſhed your Siſters —
I would kill you, Sir, I would kill you, if you had.
Why? you doe more in this, Sir: It were a vengeance centuple, for all facinorous Acts, that could be nam'd, to doe that you doe—
Alas, Sir, I am but a Meſſenger: I but tell you, what you muſt heare. It ſeemes, your friends are carefull after your ſoules health, Sir, and would haue you know the danger (but you may doe your pleaſure, for all them, I perſwade not, Sir) If, after you are marryed, your Wife doe run away with a Vaulter, or the Frenchman that walkes vpon Ropes, or him that daunces the Ijg, or a Fencer for his skill at his Weapon, why it is not their fault; they haue diſcharged their conſciences: when you know what may happen. Nay, ſuffer valiantly, Sir, for I muſt tell you, all the perils that you are obnoxious too. If ſhee be faire, and young, vegetous, no Sweet-meates euer drew more Flyes; all the Yellow Doublets, and great Roſes i' the Towne will bee there. If foule, and crooked, ſhee'll bee with them, and buy thoſe Doublets and Roſes, Sir. If rich, and that you marry her Dowry, not her; ſhee'll raigne in your Houſe, as imperious as a Widow. If Noble, all her Kindred will be your Tyrannes. If fruitfull, as proud as May, and humorous as April; ſhe muſt haue her Doctors, her Mid-wiues, her Nurſes, her longings euerie houre: though it be for the deareſt morſell of man. If learned, there was neuer ſuch a Parrat; all your Patrimonie will be too little for the Gueſts, that muſt be inuited, to heare her ſpeake Latine and Greeke: and you muſt lye with her in thoſe Languages too, if you will pleaſe her. If preciſe, you muſt feaſt all the ſilenc'd Brethren, once in three dayes; ſalute the Siſters; entertayne the whole Family, or Wood of 'hem; and heare long-winded Exerciſes, Singings, and Catechiſings, which you are not giuen to, and yet muſt giue for: to pleaſe the zealous Matron your Wife, who, for the holy cauſe, will coſen you, ouer and aboue. You begin to ſweat, Sir? but this is not halfe, i'faith: you may doe your pleaſure notwithſtanding, as I ſaid before, I come not to perſwade you. Vpon my faith, Maſter Seruingman, if you doe ſtirre, I will beate you.
O, what is my ſinne! what is my ſinne?
Then, if you loue your Wife, or rather, dote on her, Sir: O, how ſhee'll torture you! and take pleaſure i' your torments! you ſhall lye with her but when ſhee liſts; ſhee will not hurt her beauty, her complexion: or it muſt bee for that Iewell, or that Pearle, when ſhee do's; euery halfe houres pleaſure muſt be bought anew: and with the ſame paine, and charge, you woo'd her at firſt. Then, you muſt keepe what Seruants ſhe pleaſe; what company ſhee will; that friend muſt not viſit you without her licence; and him ſhee loues moſt ſhee will ſeeme to hate eagerlieſt, to decline your iealouſie; or, faigne to bee iealous of you firſt; and for that cauſe goe liue with her ſhe-friend, or Coſen at the Colledge, that can inſtruct her in all the Myſteries, of writing Letters, corrupting Seruants, taming Spyes; where ſhee muſt haue that rich Gowne for ſuch a great day; a new one for the next; a richer for the third; be ſeru'd in ſiluer; haue the Chamber fill'd with a ſucceſſion of Groomes, Foot-men, Vſhers, and other Meſſengers; beſides Embroyderers, Iewellers, Tyre-women, Sempſters, Fether-men, Perfumers; while ſhe feeles not how the Land drops away; nor the Acres melt; nor foreſees the change, when the Mercer has your Woods for her Veluets; neuer weighes what her Pride coſts, Sir: ſo ſhe may kiſſe a Page, or a ſmooth chinne, that has the deſpayre of a Beard; be a Stateſ-woman, know all the Newes, what was done at Salisbury, what at the Bath, what at Court, what in Progreſſe; or, ſo ſhee may cenſure Poets, and Authors, and ſtiles, and compare'hem, Daniel with Spenſer, Iohnſon with the tother youth, and ſo foorth; or, be thought cunning in Controuerſies, or the very knots of Diuinitie; and haue, often in her mouth, the ſtate of the queſtion: and then skip to the Mathematiques, and demonſtration and anſwere, in Religion to one; in ſtate, to another, in baud'ry to a third.
O, ô!
All this is very true, Sir. And then her going in diſguiſe to that Coniurer, and this cunning woman: where the firſt queſtion is, how ſoone you ſhall die? next, if her preſent Seruant loue her? next that, if ſhe ſhall haue a new Seruant? and how many? which of her Family would make the beſt Baud, Male, or Female? what precedence ſhe ſhall haue by her next match? and ſets downe the anſweres, and beleeues 'hem aboue the Scriptures. Nay, perhaps ſhee'll ſtudy the Art.
Gentle Sir, ha' you done? ha' you had your pleaſure o' me? I'll thinke of theſe things.
Yes Sir: and then comes reeking home of vapor and ſweat, with going afoot, and lyes in, a moneth, of a new face, all Oyle, and Bird-lime; and riſes in Aſſes Milke, & is clenſ'd with a new fucus: God b'w'you, Sir. One thing more (which I had almoſt forgot.) This too, with whom you are to marry, may haue made a conuayance of her Virginitie afore-hand, as your wiſe Widdowes doe of their ſtates, before they marry, in truſt to ſome friend, Sir: who can tell? or if ſhe haue not done it yet, ſhe may doe, vpon the Wedding day, or the night before, and antidate you Cuckold. The like has bin heard of, in nature. 'Tis no deuis'd impoſſible thing, Sir. God b'w'you: I'll be bold to leaue this Rope with you, Sir, for a remembrance. Farewell Mute.
Come, ha' mee to my Chamber: but firſt ſhut the doore. O, ſhut the doore, ſhut the doore: Is he come again?
'Tis I, Sir, your Barber.
O Cutberd, Cutberd, Cutberd! here has beene a cutthroate with me: helpe me in to my bed, and giue me Phyſick with thy counſell.
NAy, and ſhe will, let her refuſe, at her owne charges: 'tis nothing to me, Gentlemen. But ſhe will not be inuited to the like Feaſts, or Gueſts, euery day.
O, by no meanes, ſhee may not refuſe— to ſtay at home, if you loue your reputation: 'Slight, you are inuited thither o' purpoſe to bee ſeene, and laught at by the Lady of the Colledge, and her ſhadowes. This Trumpeter hath proclym'd you.
You ſhall not goe; let him bee laught at in your ſtead, for not bringing you: and put him to his extemporall facultie of fooling, and talking loud to ſatisfie the company.
He will ſuſpect vs, talke aloud. 'Pray, Miſtris Epicoene, let's ſee your Verſes; wee haue Sir Iohn Daw's leaue: doe not conceale your Seruants merit, and your owne glories.
They'll prooue my Seruants glories, if you haue his leaue ſo ſoone.
His vaine glories, Ladie!
Shew 'hem, ſhew 'hem, Miſtris, I dare owne 'hem.
Iudge you, what glories?
Nay, I'll reade 'hem my ſelfe, too: an Author muſt recite his owne Worke. It is a Madrigall of Modeſtie.
Modeſt, and faire, for faire and good are neere
Neighbours, how ere.—
Very good.
I, Is't not?
No noble vertue euer was alone,
But two in one.
Excellent!
That againe, I pray 'Sir Iohn.
It has ſome thing in't like rare wit, and ſenſe.
Peace.
No noble vertue euer was alone,
But two in one.
Then, when I prayſe ſweet Modestie, I prayſe
Bright Beauties rayes:
And hauing prays'd both Beauty' and Modestee,
I haue prays'd thee.
Admirable!
How it chimes, and cryes tinke i' the cloſe, diuinely!
I, 'tis Seneca.
No, I thinke 'tis Plutarch.
The dor on Plutarch, and Seneca, I hate it: they are mine owne imaginations, by that light. I wonder thoſe fellowes haue ſuch credit with Gentlemen!
They are very graue Authors.
Graue Aſſes! meere Eſſaiſts! a few looſe Sentences, and that's all. A man would talke ſo, his whole age, I doe vtter as good things euery houre, if they were collected, and obſeru'd, as either of 'hem.
Indeed! Sir Iohn?
Hee muſt needes, liuing among the Wits, and Braueries too.
I, and being Preſident of 'hem, as he is.
There's Ariſtotle, a mere common place-fellow; Plato, a Diſcourſer; Thucidides, and Liuic, tedious and drie; Tacitus, an entyre knot: ſometimes worth the vntying, very ſeldome.
What doe you thinke of the Poets, Sir Iohn?
Not worthy to be nam'd for Authors. Homer, an old tedious prolixe Aſſe, talkes of Curriers, and Chines of Beefe. Ʋirgil, of dunging of Land, and Bees. Horace, of I know not what.
I thinke ſo.
And ſo Pindarus, Lycophron, Anacreon, Catullus, Seneca the Tragoedian, Lucan, Propertius, Tibullus, Martiall, Iuuenal, Auſonius, Statius, Politian, Valerius Flaccus, and the reſt—
What a ſacke-full of their names he has got!
And how he powres 'hem out! Politian, with Valerius Flaccus!
Was not the Character right, of him?
As could be made, i'faith.
And Perſius, a crabbed Cockeſcombe, not to bee endur'd.
Why? whom doe you account for Authors, Sir Iohn Daw?
Syntagma Iuris Ciuilis, Corpus Iuris Ciuilis, Corpus Iuris Canonici, the King of Spaines Bible.
Is the King of Spaines Bible an Author?
Yes, and Syntagma.
What was that Syntagma, Sir?
A Ciuill Lawier, a Spaniard.
Sure, Corpus was a Dutch-man.
I, both the Corpuſſes, I knew 'hem: they were verie corpulent Authors.
And, then there's Vatablus, Pomponatius, Symancha, the other are not to bee receiu'd, within the thought of a Scholler.
Fore God, you haue a ſimple learn'd Seruant, Ladie, in Titles.
I wonder that hee is not called to the Helme, and made a Councellor!
He is one extraordinary.
Nay, but in Ordinarie! to ſay truth, the State wants ſuch.
Why, that will follow.
I muſe, a Miſtris can bee ſo ſilent to the dotes of ſuch a Seruant.
'Tis her Vertue, Sir. I haue written ſomewhat of her ſilence too.
In Verſe, Sir Iohn?
What elſe?
Why? how can you iuſtifie your owne being of a Poet, that ſo ſlight all the old Poets?
Why? euery man, that writes in Verſe, is not a Poet; you haue of the Wits, that write Verſes, and yet are no Poets: they are Poets that liue by it, the poore fellowes that liue by it.
Why? would not you liue by your Verſes, Sir Iohn?
No, 'twere pittie he ſhould. A Knight liue by his Verſes? he did not make 'hem to that end, I hope.
And yet the noble Sidney liues by his, and the Noble Family not aſham'd.
I, he profeſt himſelfe; but Sir Iohn Daw has more caution: hee'll not hinder his owne riſing i' the ſtate ſo much! doe you thinke he will? Your Verſes, good Sir Iohn, and no Poems.
Silence in woman, is like ſpeech in man,
Deny't who can.
Not I, beleeue it: your reaſon, Sir.
Nor i'ſt a Tale,
That Female Vice ſhould be a Vertue Male,
Or Maſculine Ʋice, a Female Vertue be:
You ſhall it ſee
Prou'd with increaſe,
I know to ſpeake, and ſhe to hold her peace.
Doe you conceiue me Gentlemen?
No faith, how meane you with increaſe, Sir Iohn?
Why, with increaſe is, when I court her for the common cauſe of Mankind; and ſhe ſayes nothing, but conſentire videtur: and in time is grauida.
Then, this is a Ballad of Procreation?
A Madrigall of Procreation, you miſtake.
'Pray giue me my Verſes againe, Seruant.
If you you'll aske 'hem aloud, you ſhall.
See, here's Tru-wit againe!
WHere haſt thou beene, in the name of madneſſe! thus accoutred with thy Horne?
Where the ſound of it might haue pierc'd your ſenſes, with gladneſſe, had you beene in eare-reach of it. Dauphine, fall downe and worſhip me: I haue forbid the Banes, Lad. I haue beene with thy vertuous Vncle, and haue broke the match.
You ha'not, I hope.
Yes faith; and thou ſhouldſt hope otherwſſe, I ſhould repent me: this Horne got mee entrance, kiſſe it. I had no other way to get in, but by fayning to be a Poſt; but when I got in once, I prou'd none, but rather the contrary, turn'd him into a Poſt, or a Stone, or what is ſtiffer, with thundring into him the incommodities of a Wife, and the miſeries of Marriage. If euer Gorgon were ſeene in the ſhape of a woman, he hath ſeene her in my deſcription. I haue put him off o' that ſent, for euer. Why doe you not applaud, and adore me, Sirs? why ſtand you mute? Are you ſtupid? you are not worthy o' the benefit.
Did not I tell you? miſchiefe! —
I would you had plac'd this benefit ſomewhere elſe.
Why ſo?
Slight you haue done the moſt inconſiderate, raſh, weake thing, that euer man did to his friend.
Friend! if the moſt malicious enemy I haue, had ſtudied to inflict an iniury vpon mee, it could not bee a greater.
Wherein? for gods ſake! Gent, come to your ſelues againe.
But I preſag'd thus much afore, to you.
Would my lips had beene ſoldred, when I ſpake on't. Slight, what mou'd you to be thus impertinent?
My Maſters, doe not put on this ſtrange face to pay my courteſic: off with this Viſor. Haue good turnes done you and thanke 'hem this way?
Fore Heau'n, you haue vndone me. That, which I haue plotted for, and beene maturing now theſe foure Moneths, you haue blaſted in a minute: now I am loſt, I may ſpeake. This Gentlewoman was lodg'd here by mee o' purpoſe, and, to be put vpon my Vncle, hath profeſt this obſtinate ſilence for my ſake, being my entyre friend; and one, that for the requitall of ſuch a fortune, as to marry him, would haue made me very ample conditions: where now, all my hopes are vtterly miſcarryed by this vnlucky accident.
Thus 'tis, when a man will be ignorantly officious; doe ſeruices, and not know his why: I wonder what curteous itch poſſeſſ'd you! you neuer did abſurder part i' your life, nor a greater treſpaſſe to friendſhip, to humanitie.
Faith, you may forgiue it, beſt: 'twas your cauſe principally.
I know it, would it had not.
How now, Cutberd? what newes?
The beſt, the happieſt that euer was, Sir. There has beene a mad Gentleman with your Vncle, this morning, (I thinke this be the Gentleman) that has almoſt talk'd him out of his wits, with threatning him from Marriage—
On, I pray thee.
And your Vncle, Sir, he thinkes 'twas done by your procurement; therefore he will ſee the partie, you wot of, preſently: and if hee like her, hee ſayes, and that ſhee be ſo inclining to dombe, as I haue told him, he ſweares, hee will marry her, to day, inſtantly, and not deferre it a minute longer.
Excellent! beyond our expectation!
Beyond your expectation? by this light, I knew, it would be thus.
Nay, ſweet Tru-wit, forgiue me.
No, I was ignorantly officious, impertinent: this was the abſurd, weake part.
Wilt thou aſcribe that to merit, now, was meere fortune?
Fortune? meere Prouidence. Fortune had not a finger in't. I ſaw it muſt neceſſarily in nature fall out ſo: my genius is neuer falſe to me in theſe things. Shew mee, how it could be otherwiſe.
Nay, Gentlemen, contend not, tis well now.
Alaſſe, I let him goe on with inconſiderate, and raſh, and what he pleas'd.
Away thou ſtrange inſtifier of thy ſelfe, to bee wiſer then thou wert, by the euent.
Euent! By this light, thou ſhalt neuer perſwade me, but I fore-ſaw it, aſwell as the Starres themſelues.
Nay, Gentlemen, 'tis well now doe you two entertaine Sir Iohn Daw, with diſcourſe, while I ſend her away with inſtructions.
I'll be acquainted with her, firſt, by your favour.
Maſter Tru-wit, Lady, a friend of ours.
I am ſorry, I haue not knowne you ſooner, Lady, to celebrate this rare vertue of your ſilence.
Faith, an' you had come ſooner, you ſhould ha' ſeene, and heard her well celebrated in Sir Iohn Daw's Madrigalls.
Iacke Daw, God ſaue you, when ſaw you La-Foole?
Not ſince laſt night, Maſter Tru-wit.
That's Miracle! I thought you two had beene inſeparable.
He's gone to inuite his Gueſts.
Gods ſo! tls true! what a falſe memory haue I towards that man! I am one: I met him e'ne now, vpon that he calls his delicate fine blacke Horſe, rid into a foame, with poſting from place to place, and perſon to perſon, to giue hem the cue—
Left they ſhould forget?
Yes: there was neuer poore Captaine tooke more paines at a Muſter to ſhow men, then hee, at this meale, to ſhew friends.
It is his Quarter-feaſt, Sir.
What! doe you ſay ſo, Sir Iohn?
Nay, Iacke Daw will not be out, at the beſt friends he has, to the Talent of his wit: where's his Miſtris, to heare and applaud him? is ſhe gone!
Is Miſtris Epicoene gone?
Gone afore, with Sir Dauphine, I warrant to the place.
Gone afore! that were a manifeſt iniurie; a diſgrace and a halfe: to refuſe him at ſuch a Feſtiuall time, as this, being a Brauery, and a Wit too.
Tut, hee'll ſwallow it like Creame: hee's better read in Iure Ciuili, then to eſteeme any thing a diſgrace is offer'd him from a Miſtris.
Nay, let her eene goe; ſhee ſhall ſit alone, and bee dumbe in her Chamber, a Weeke together, for Iohn Daw, I warrant her: do's ſhe refuſe me?
No, Sir, doe not take it ſo to heart: ſhee do's not refuſe you, but a little neglect you. Good faith, Tru-wit, you were too blame to put it into his head, that ſhee do's refuſe him.
Shee do's refuſe him, Sir, palpably: how euer you mince it. An' I were as he, I would ſweare to ſpeake ne're a word to her, to day, for't.
By this light, no more I will not.
Nor to any body elſe, Sir.
Nay, I will not ſay ſo, Gentlemen.
It had beene an excellent happy condition for the company, if you could haue drawne him to it.
I'll be very melancholique, i'faith.
As a Dogge, if I were as you, Sir Iohn.
Or a Snaile, or a Hog-louſe: I would roule my ſelfe vp for this day, introth, they ſhould not vnwind mee.
By this Pick-tooth, ſo I will.
'Tis well done: hee beginnes already to bee angry with his teeth.
Will you goe, Gentlemen?
Nay, you muſt walke alone, if you bee right melancholique, Sir Iohn.
Yes Sir, wee'll dogge you, wee'll follow you a farre off.
Was there euer ſuch a two yards of Knight-hood, meaſur'd out by Time, to be ſold to laughter?
A meere talking Mole! no Muſhrome was euer ſo freſh. A fellow ſo vtterly nothing, as he knowes not what he would be.
Let's follow him: but firſt, let's goe to Dauphine, hee's houering about the Houſe, to heare what newes.
Content.
WElcome Cutberd; draw neer with your faire charge: and, in her eare, ſoftly intreat her to vnmaſque (—) So. Is the doore ſhut? (—) inough. Now, Cutberd, with the ſame diſcipline I vſe to my Family, I will queſtion you. As I conceiue, Cutberd, this Gentlewoman is ſhee, you haue prouided, and brought, in hope ſhee will fit mee in the place and perſon of a Wiſe? Anſwere mee not, but with your legge, vnleſſe it bee otherwiſe: (—) very well done, Cutberd. I conceiue, beſides, Cutberd, you haue beene preacquainted with her birth, education, and qualities, or elſe you would not preferre her to my acceptance, in the waighty conſequence of Marriage. (—) this I conceiue, Cutberd. Anſwer me not but with your legge, vnleſſe it be otherwiſe. (—) Very well done Cutberd. Giue aſide now a little, and leaue me to examine her condition, and aptitude to my affection. Shee is exceeding faire, and of a ſpeciall good fauour; a ſweete compoſition, or harmony of limmes: her temper of beauty has the true height of my bloud. The Knaue hath exceedingly well fitted me without: I will now try her within. Come neere, faire Gentlewoman: let not my behauiour ſeeme rude, though vnto you, being rare, it may happily appeare ſtrange. (—) Nay, Lady, you may ſpeake, though Cutberd, and my man, might not: for, of all ſounds, onely, the ſweet voyce of a faire Lady has the juſt length of mine eare. I beſeech you, ſay Lady, out of the firſt fire of meeting eyes, (they ſay) loue is ſtricken; doe you feele any ſuch motion, ſodenly ſhot into you, from any part you ſee in me? ha, Lady? (—) Alaſſe, Lady, theſe anſwers by ſilent curt'ſies, from you, are too courtleſſe, and ſimple. I haue euer had my breeding in Court: and ſhee tat ſhall be my Wife, muſt be accompliſhed with Courtly, and audacious ornaments. Can you ſpeake, Lady?
Iudge you, forſooth.
What ſay you, Lady? ſpeake out, I beſeech you.
Iudge you, forſooth.
O' my iudgement, a diuine ſoftneſſe! but can you naturally, Lady, as I enioyne theſe by doctrine and induſtry, referre your ſelfe to the ſearch of my iudgement, and (not taking pleaſure in your tongue, which is a womans chiefeſt pleaſure) thinke it plauſible, to anſwere mee by ſilent geſtures, ſo long as my ſpeeches iumpe right, with what you conceiue? (—) Excellent! Diuine! if it were poſſible, ſhee ſhould hold out thus! Peace, Cutherd, thou art made for euer, as thou haſt made mee, if this felicity haue laſting: but I will try her further. Deare Lady, I am Courtly, I tell you, and I muſt haue mine eares banqueted with pleaſant, and witty Conferences, pretty Girds, Scoffes, and Dalliance in her, that I meane to chooſe for my Bed-pheere. The Ladies in Court, thinke it a moſt deſperate impayre to their quickneſſe of wit, and good carriage, if they cannot giue occaſion for a man to court 'hem; and, when an amorous Diſcourſe is ſet on foot, miniſter as good matter to continue it, as himſelfe: and doe you alone ſo much differ from all them, that, what they (with ſo much circumſtance) affect, and toyle for, to ſeeme learn'd, to ſeeme iudicious, to ſeeme ſharpe, and conceited, you can bury in your ſelfe, with ſilence? and rather truſt your graces to the faire conſcience of Vertue, then to the Worlds, or your owne Proclamation?
I ſhould be ſorrie elſe.
What ſay you, Lady? good Lady, ſpeake out.
I ſhould be ſorrie, elſe
That ſorrow doth fill me with gladneſſe! O Moroſe! thou art happie aboue Mankind! pray that thou mayeſt contayne thy ſelfe. I will onely put her to it once more, and it ſhall be with the vtmoſt touch, and teſt of their Sex. But heare me, faire Lady, I doe alſo loue to ſee her, whom I ſhall chooſe for my Heicfar, to be the firſt and principall in all Faſhions; praecede all the Dames at Court, by a ſortnight; haue her Counſell of Taylors, Linneners, Lace-women, Embroyderers, and ſit with 'hem ſometimes twiſe a day, vpon French Intelligences; and then come foorth, varyed like Nature, or oftner then ſhee, and better, by the helpe of Art, her aemulous Seruant. This doe I affect. And how will you bee able, Lady, with this frugalitie of ſpeech, to giue the manifold (but neceſſarie) inſtructions, for that Bodies, theſe Sleeues, thoſe Sirkts, this Cut, that Stitch, this Embroydery, that Lace, this Wire, thoſe Knots, that Ruffe, thoſe Roſes, this Girdle, that Fanne, the tother Skarfe, theſe Gloues? ha! what ſay you, Ladie.
I'll leaue it to you, Sir.
How, Lady? pray you, riſe a note.
I leaue it to Wiſdome, and you, Sir.
Admirable Creature! I will trouble you no more: I will not ſinne againſt ſo ſweet a ſimplicity. Let me now be bold to print, on thoſe diuine lips, the ſeale of being mine. Cutberd, I giue thee the Leaſe of thy Houſe free: thanke me not, but with thy legge (—) I know what thou wouldſt ſay, ſhe's poore, and her friends deceaſed; ſhe has brought a wealthy dowrie in her ſilence, Cutberd: and in reſpect of her pouertie, Cutberd, I ſhall haue her more louing, and obedient, Cutberd. Goe thy wayes, and get me a Miniſter preſently, with a ſoft, low voyce to marry vs, and pray him he will not be impertinent, but briefe as he can; away: ſoftly, Cutberd. Sirrah, conduct your Miſtris into the dining Roome, your now-Miſtris. O my felicity! how I ſhall bee reueng'd on mine inſolent Kinſman, and his plots to fright mee from marrying! This night I will get an Heire, and thruſt him out of my bloud like a Stranger; hee would bee knighted, forſooth, and thought by that meanes to raigne ouer mee, his Title muſt doe it: no Kinſman, I will now make you bring me the tenth Lords, and the ſixteenth Ladies Letter, Kinſman; and it ſhall doe you no good, Kinſman. Your Knight-hood it ſelfe ſhall come on it's knees, and it ſhall bee reiected; it ſhall bee ſued for it's fees to execution, and not be redeem'd; it ſhall cheat at the twelue-peny Ordinary, it Knight-hood, for it's Dyet all the Terme-time, and tell Tales for it in the Vacation, to the Hoſteſſe: or it Knight-hood ſhall doe worſe; take Sanctuary in Cole-harbor, and faſt. It ſhall fright all it friends, with borrowing Letters, and when one of the foure-ſcore hath brought it Knight-hood tenne ſhillings, it Knight-hood ſhall go to the Cranes, or the Beare at the Bridge-foot, and be drunke in feare: it ſhall not haue money to diſcharge one Tauerne reckoning, to inuite the old Creditors, to forbeare it Knight-hood; or the new, that ſhould bee, to truſt it Knight-hood. It ſhall bee the tenth name in the Bond, to take vp the commodity of Pipkins and ſtone Iugs; and the part thereof ſhall not furniſh it Knight-hood forth, for the attempting of a Bakers Widdow, a brown Bakers Widdow. It ſhall giue it Knight-hoods name, for a ſtallion, to all gameſome Citizens Wiues, and bee refus'd; when the Maſter of a Dauncing Schoole, or (How doe you call him) the worſt Reueller in the Towne is taken: it ſhall want Clothes, and by reaſon of that, wit, to foole to Lawyers. It ſhall not haue hope to repaire it ſelfe by Constantinople, Ireland, or Virginia; but the beſt, and laſt fortune to it Knight-hood ſhall bee, to make Dol Teare-ſheet, or Kate-Common, a Lady: and ſo, it Knight-hood may eate.
ARe you ſure he is not gone by?
No, I ſtaid in the ſhop euer ſince.
But, he may take the other end of the Lane.
No, I told him I would be here at this end: I appointed him hether.
What a Barbarian it is to ſtay then!
Yonder he comes.
And his charge left behinde him, which is a verie good ſigne, Dauphine.
How now Cutberd, ſucceeds it, or no?
Paſt imagination, Sir, omnia ſecunda; you could not haue pray'd, to haue had it ſo well: Saltat ſenex, as it is i'the Prouerbe, hee do's triumph in his felicity; admires the party! hee has giuen mee the Leaſe of my Houſe too! and, I am now going for a ſilent Miniſter to marry 'hem, and away.
Slight, get one o' the ſilenc'd Miniſters, a zealous Brother would torment him purely.
Cum priuilegio, Sir.
O, by no meanes, let's doe nothing to hinder it now when 'tis done and finiſhed, I am for you: for any deuiſe of vexation.
And that ſhall be within this halfe houre, vpon my dexteritie, Gentlemen. Contriue what you can, in the meane time, bonis auibus.
How the Slaue doth Latine it!
It would be made a Ieſt to Poſteritie, Sirs, this daies mirth, if ye will.
Be ſhrew his heart that will not, I pronounce.
And, for my part. What is't?
To tranſlate all La-Fooles company, and his Feaſt hether, to day, to celebrate this Bride-ale.
I marry, but how will't be done?
I'll vndertake the directing of all the Ladie-Gueſts thether, and then the meat muſt follow.
For Gods ſake, let's effect it: it will be an excellent Comoedy of affliction, ſo many ſeuerall noyſes.
But are they not at the other place already, thinke you?
I'll warrant you for the Colledge-honours: one o' their faces has not the priming colour laid on yet, nor the other her Smocke ſleek'd.
O, but they'll riſe earlier then ordinary, to a Feaſt.
Beſt goe ſee, and aſſure our ſelues.
Who knowes the Houſe?
I'll lead you, were you neuer there yet?
Not I.
Nor I.
Where ha' you liu'd then? not know Tom Otter!
No: for Gods ſake, what is he?
An excellent Animal, equall with your Daw, or La-Foole, if not tranſcendent; and do's Latine it as much as your Barber: he is his Wifes Subiect, hee calls her Princeſſe, and at ſuch times as theſe, followes her vp and downe the Houſe like a Page, with his Hat off, partly for heate, partly for reuerence. At this inſtant, he is marſhalling of his Bull, Beare, and Horſe.
What be thoſe, in the name of Sphinx?
Why Sir? hee has beene a great man at the Beare-Garden in his time: and from that ſubtle ſport, has tane the witty denomination of his chiefe carouſing Cups. One he calls his Bull, another his Beare, another his Horſe. And then he has his leſſer Glaſſes, that he calls his Deere, and his Ape; and ſeuerall degrees of 'hem too: and neuer is well, nor thinkes any entertaynment perfect, till theſe be brought out, and ſet o' the Cupbord.
For Gods loue! wee ſhould miſſe this, if wee ſhould not goe.
Nay, hee has a thouſand things as good, that will ſpeake him all day. He will raile on his Wife, with certaine common places, behind her backe; and to her face—
No more of him. Let's goe ſee him, I petition you,
NAy, good Princeſſe, heare me pauca verba.
By that light, I'll a' you chain'd vp, with your Bul-dogges, and Beare-dogges, if you be not ciuill the ſooner. I'll ſend you to kennell, i'faith. You were beſt bait me with your Bull, Beare, and Horſe? Neuer a time, that the Courtiers, or Collegiates come to the Houſe, but you make it a Shrouetueſday! I would haue you get your Whitſontie-Veluet-Cap, and your ſtaffe i'your hand, to entertaine 'hem: yes in troth, doe.
Not ſo Princeſſe, neither, but vnder correction, ſweet Princeſſe, gi'me leaue—theſe things I am knowne to the Courtiers by. It is reported to them for my humour, and they receiue it ſo, and doe expect it. Tom Otters Bull, Beare, and Horſe is knowne all ouer England, in rerum natura.
Fore me, I will na-ture 'hem ouer to Paris-Garden, and na-ture you thether too, if you pronounce them againe. Is a Beare a fit Beaſt, or a Bull, to mixe in ſocietie with great Ladies? thinke i'your diſcretion, in any good politie.
The Horſe then, good Princeſſe.
Well, I am contented for the Horſe: they loue to be well hors'd, I know. I loue it my ſelfe.
And it is a delicate fine Horſe. Poetarum Pegaſus. Vnder correction, Princeſſe, Iupiter did turne himſelfe into a—Taurus, or Bull, vnder correction, good Princeſſe.
By my integritiy, I'll ſend you ouer to the Banke-ſide, I'll commit you to the Maſter of the Garden, if I heare but a ſillable more. Muſt my houſe, or my roofe, bee polluted with the ſcent of Beares, and Buls, when it is perfum'd for great Ladies? Is this according to the inſtrument, when I marryed you? That I would be Princeſſe, and raigne in mine owne Houſe: and you would bee my ſubiect, and obey me? What did you bring me, ſhould make you thus peremptory? Doe I allow you your halfe-crowne a day, to ſpend, where you will, among your Gameſters, to vexe and torment me, at ſuch times as theſe? Who giues you your maintenance, I pray you? who allowes you your Horſemeat, and Mans-meat? your three Sutes of Apparell a yeere? your foure paire of Stockings, one Silke, three Worſted? your cleane Linnen, your Bands, and Cuffes when I can get you to weare 'hem? 'Tis mar'l you ha'hem on now. Who graces you with Courtiers, or great Perſonages, to ſpeake to you out of their Coaches, and come home to your Houſe? Were you euer ſo much as look'd vpon by a Lord, or a Lady, before I marryed you: but on the Eaſter, or Whitſon-holy-dayes? and then out at the Banquetting-houſe windore, when Ned Whiting, or George Stone, were at the ſtake?
(For Gods ſake, let's goe ſtaue her off him.)
Anſwere mee to that. And did not I take you vp from thence, in an olde Greaſie Buffe-Doublet, with Points; and Greene Vellet Sleeues, out at the elbowes? you forget this.
(Shee'll worry him, if we helpe not in time.)
O, here are ſome o' the Gallants! Goe to, behaue your ſelfe diſtinctly, and with good moralitie; Or, I proteſt, I'll take away your exhibition.
BY your leaue, faire Miſtris Otter, I'll bee bold to enter theſe Gentlemen in your acquaintance.
It ſhall not be obnoxious, or difficill, Sir.
How do's my noble Captaine? Is the Bull, Beare, and Horſe, in rerum natura ſtill?
Sir. Sic viſum ſuperis.
I would you would but intimate 'hem, doe. Goe your wayes in, and get Toſts, and Butter, made for the Wood-cocks. That's a fit Prouince for you.
Alas, what a tyrannie, is this poore fellow marryed too.
O, but the ſport will be anon, when wee get him looſe.
Dares be euer ſpeake?
No Anabaptiſt euer rail'd with the like licence: but marke her Language in the meane-time, I beſeech you.
Gentlemen, you are very aptly come. My Coſin, Sir Amorous, will be here briefly.
In good time, Lady. Was not Sir Iohn Daw here, to aske for him, and the company?
I cannot aſſure you, Mr. Tru-wit. Here was a very melancholy Knight in a Ruffe, that demanded my ſubiect for ſome body, a Gentleman, I thinke.
I, that was he, Lady.
But he departed ſtraight, I can reſolue you.
What an excellent choice phraſe, this Lady expreſſes in?
O, Sir! ſhe is the onely authenticall Courtier, that is not naturally bred one, in the Citie.
You haue taken that report vpon truſt, Gentlemen.
No, I aſſure you, the Court gouernes it ſo, Lady, in your behalfe.
I am the Seruant of the Court, and Courtiers, Sir.
They are rather your Idolaters.
Not ſo, Sir.
How now, Cutberd? Any croſſe?
and indeed, ſo aſhamed of her iniurie to you, that ſhee deſires you to forgiue her, and but grace her Wedding with your preſence to day—She is to be marryed to a very good fortune, ſhee ſayes, his Vncle, old Moroſe: and ſhee will'd mee in priuate to tell you, that ſhee ſhall be able to doe you more fauours, and with more ſecuritie now, then before.
Did ſhe ſay ſo, i'faith?
Why, what doe you thinke of mee, Sir Iohn! aske Sir Dauphine.
Nay, I beleeue you. Good Sir Dauphine, did ſhee deſire me to forgiue her?
I aſſure you, Sir Iohn, ſhe did.
Nay then, I doe with all my heart, and I'll bee iouiall.
Yes, for looke you Sir, this was the iniurie to you. La-Foole intended this Feaſt to honour her Bridale day, and made you the propertie to inuite the Colledge Ladies, and promiſe to bring her: and then at the time, ſhee ſhould haue appear'd (as his friend) to haue giuen you the dor. Whereas now, Sir Dauphine has brought her to a feeling of it, with this kind of ſatisfaction, that you ſhall bring all the Ladies to the place where ſhe is, and be very iouiall; and there ſhee will haue a Dinner, which ſhall be in your name: and ſo diſappoint La-Foole, to make you good againe, and (as it were) a ſauer i'the man.
As I am a Knight, I honour her, and forgiue her heartily.
About it then preſently, Tru-wit is gone before to confront the Coaches, and to acquaint you with ſo much, if he meet you. Ioyne with him, and 'tis well. See, heere comes your Antagonist, but take you no notice, but be verie iouiall.
Are the Ladies come, Sir Iohn Daw, and your Miſtris? Sir Dauphine! you are exceeding welcome, and honeſt Maſter Clerimont. Where's my Coſſen? did you ſee no Collegiats, Gentlemen?
Collegiats! Doe you not heare, Sir Amorous, how you are abus'd?
How Sir!
Will you ſpeake ſo kindly to Sir Iohn Daw, that has done you ſuch an affront?
Wherein Gentlemen? let mee be a Sut or to you to know, I beſeech you!
Why Sir, his Miſtris is marryed to day, to Sir Dauphines Vncle, your Coſens Neighbour, and hee has diuerted all the Ladies, and all your company thether, to fruſtrate your prouiſion, and ſticke a diſgrace vpon you. He was here, now, to haue intic'd vs away from you too: but wee told him his owne, I thinke.
Has Sir Iohn Daw wrong'd mee ſo in-humanely?
Hee has done it, Sir Amorous, moſt maliciouſly, and trecherouſly: but if you'll be rul'd by vs, you ſhall quit him i'faith.
Good Gentlemen! I'll make one, beleeue it. How I pray?
Marry Sir, get mee your Pheſants, your Godwits, and your beſt meate, and diſh it in Siluer Diſhes of your Coſens preſently, and ſay nothing, but clap me a cleane Towell about you, like a Sewer; and bare-headed, march afore it with a good confidence ('tis but ouer the way, hard by) and wee'll ſecond you, where you ſhall ſet o' the Boord, and bid 'hem welcome to't, which ſhall ſhow 'tis yours, and diſgrace his preparation vtterly: and, for your Coſen, whereas ſhee ſhould be troubled here at home with care of making and giuing welcome, ſhe ſhall transferre all that labour thether, and be a principall gueſt her ſelfe, ſit rank'd with the Colledge-Honors, and bee honor'd, and haue her Health drunke as often, as bare, and as lowd as the beſt of 'hem.
I'll goe tell her preſently. It ſhall bee done, that's reſolu'd.
I thought hee would not heare it out, but 'twould take him.
Well, there bee Gueſts, and meat now; how ſhall we doe for Muſique?
The ſmell of the Veniſon, going through the Street, will inuite one noyſe of Fidlers, or other.
I would it would call the Trumpeters thether.
Faith, there is hope, they haue intelligence of all Feaſts. There's good correſpondence betwixt them, and the London-Cookes. 'Tis twenty to one but we haue 'hem.
'Twill be a moſt ſolemne day for my Vncle, and an excellent fit of mirth for vs.
I, if we can hold vp the aemulation betwixt Foole and Daw, and neuer bring them to expoſtulate.
Tut, flatter 'hem both (as Tru-wit ſayes) and you may take their vnderſtandings in a Purſe-net. They'll beleeue themſelues to be iuſt ſuch men as we make 'hem, neither more nor leſſe. They haue nothing, not the vſe of their ſenſes, but by tradition.
See! Sir Amorous has his Towell on already. Haue you perſwaded your Coſſen?
Yes, 'tis very faeſible: ſhee'll doe any thing, ſhee ſayes, rather then the La-Fooles ſhall be diſgrac'd.
She is a Noble Kinſwoman. It will be ſuch a peſt'-ling deuice, Sir Amorous! It will pound all your enemies practiſes to poulder, and blow him vp with his owne mine, his owne traine.
Nay, wee'll giue fire, I warrant you.
But you muſt carry it priuately, without any noyſe, and take no notice by any meanes—
Gentlemen, my Princeſſe ſayes, you ſhall haue all her Siluer Diſhes, festinate: and ſhe's gone to alter her Tyre a little, and goe with you—
And your ſelfe too, Captaine Otter.
By any meanes, Sir.
Yes Sir, I doe meane it: but I would entreate my Coſen Sir Amorous, and you Gentlemen, to be Sutors to my Princeſſe, that I may carry my Bull, and my Beare, as well as my Horſe.
That you ſhall doe, Captaine Otter.
My Coſen will neuer conſent, Gentlemen.
She muſt conſent, Sir Amorous, to reaſon.
Why, ſhe ſayes they are no decorum among Ladies.
But they are decora, and that's better, Sir.
I, ſhee muſt heare argument. Did not Paſiphae, who was a Queene, loue a Bull? and was not Caliſto, the Mother of Arcas, turn'd into a Beare, and made a Starre, Miſtris Ʋrſula, i'the Heauens?
O God! that I could ha' ſaid as much! I will haue theſe Stories painted i' the Beare-garden, Ex Ouidij Metamorphoſi.
Where is your Princeſſe, Captaine? pray' be our Leader.
That I ſhall, Sir.
Make haſte, good Sir Amorous.
SIr, there's an Angell for your ſelfe, and a brace of Angels for your cold. Muſe not at this mannage of my bounty, It is fit, we ſhould thanke Fortune, double to Nature, for any benefit ſhe conferres vpon vs; beſides, it is your imperfection, but my ſolace.
I thanke your Worſhip, ſo is it mine, now.
What ſayes he, Cutberd?
Hee ſayes, Praeſto, Sir, whenſoeuer your Worſhip needs him, he can be readie with the like. Hee got this cold with ſitting vp late, & ſinging Catches with Cloth-workers.
No more. I thanke him.
God keepe your Worſhip, and giue you much ioy with your faire Spouſe. (Vmh, vmb.)
O, ô, ſtay Cutberd! let him giue me fiue ſhillings of my money back. As it is bounty to reward benefits, ſo is it equity to mulct iniuries. I will haue it. What ſayes he?
He cannot change it, Sir
It muſt be chang'd.
Cough againe.
What ſayes he?
He will cough out the reſt, Sir.
(Vmh, vmh, vmh.)
Away, away with him, ſtop his mouth, away, I forgiue it.—
Fye, Maſter Moroſe, that you will vſe this violence to a man of the Church.
How!
It do's not become your grauitie, or breeding, (as you pretend in Court) to haue offer'd this out-rage on a water-man, or any more boyſtrous creature, much leſſe on a man of his ciuill Coat.
You can ſpeake then!
Yes, Sir.
Speake out I meane.
I Sir. Why, did you thinke you had marryed a Statue? or a Motion, onely? one of the French Puppets, with the eyes turn'd with a Wire? or ſome innocent out of the Hoſpitall that would ſtand with her hands thus, and a playſe mouth, and looke vpon you.
O immodeſtie! a manifeſt woman! what Cutberd?
Nay, neuer quarrell with Cutberd, Sir, it is too late now. I confeſſe, it doth bate ſomewhat of the modeſtie I had, when I writ ſimply Maide: but I hope, I ſhall make it a ſtocke ſtill competent, to the eſtate, and dignitie of your Wife.
She can talke!
Yes indeed, Sir.
What, Sirrah. None of my Knaues there? where is this Impoſtor, Cutberd?
Speake to him, fellow, ſpeake to him, I'll haue none of this coacted, vnnaturall dumbneſſe in my houſe, in a Family where I gouerne.
She is my Regent already! I haue marryed a Pentheſilea, a Semiramis, ſold my liberty to a Diſtaffe!
VVHere's Maſter Moroſe?
Is he come againe! Lord haue mercie vpon mee.
I wiſh you all ioy, Miſtris Epicoene, with your graue and honourable match.
I returne you the thankes, Maſter Tru-wit, ſo friendly a wiſh deſerues.
She has acquaintance, too!
God ſaue you Sir, and giue you all contentment in your faire choice, here. Before I was the Bird of night to you, the Owle but now I am the Meſſenger of Peace, a Doue, and bring you the glad wiſhes of many friends, to the celebration of this good houre.
What houre, Sir?
Your Marriage houre Sir. I commend your reſolution, that (notwithſtanding all the dangers I laid afore you, in the voice of a Night-Crow) would yet goe on, and bee your ſelfe. It ſhewes you are a man conſtant to your, owne ends, and vpright to your purpoſes, that would not bee put off with left-handed cryes.
How ſhould you arriue at the knowledge of ſo much!
Why, did you euer hope, Sir committing the ſecrecie of it to a Barber, that leſſe then the whole Towne ſhould know it? you might as well ha' told it to the Conduit, or the Bake-houſe, or the Infant'ry that follow the Court, and with more ſecuritie. Could your Grauitie forget ſo old and noted a remnant, as, lippis & tonſoribus notum, Well Sir, forgiue it your ſelfe now, the fault, and bee communicable with your friends. Here will bee three or foure faſhionable Ladies, from the Colledge to viſit you preſently, and their trayne of Minions, and Followers.
Barre my doores! barre my doores! where are all my eaters? my mouthes now? baire vp my doores, you Varlets.
He is a Varlet, that ſtirres to ſuch an office. Let 'hem ſtand open. I would ſee him that dares mooue his eyes toward it. Shall I haue a Barricado made againſt my friends, to be barr'd of any pleaſure they can bring in to me with honorable viſitation.
O Amazonian impudence!
Nay faith, in this, Sir, ſhee ſpeakes but reaſon: and me thinkes is more continent then you. Would you goe to bed ſo preſently, Sir, afore noone? a man of your head, and haire, ſhould owe more to that reuerend Ceremony, and not mount the Marriage-bed, like a Towne-Bull, or a Mountayne-Goate; but ſtay the due ſeaſon; and aſcend it then with Religion, and feare. Thoſe delights are to bee ſtēep'd in the humor, and ſilence of the night; and giue the day to other open pleaſures, and iollities of Feaſt, of Mufique, of Reuels, of Diſcourſe: wee'll haue all, Sir, that may make your Hymen high, and happy.
O, my torment, my torment!
Nay, if you indure the firſt halfe houre, Sir, ſo tediouſly, and with this irkſomneſſe; what comfort, or hope, can this faire Geutlewoman make to her ſelfe hereafter, in the conſideration of ſo many yeeres as are to come—
Of my affliction. Good Sir, depart, and let her doe it alone.
I haue done, Sir.
That curſed Barber!
(Yes faith, a curſed Wretch indeed, Sir.)
I haue marryed his Citterne, that's common to all men. Some plague aboue the plague—
(All Egypts ten Plagues)
Reuenge me on him.
'Tis very well, Sir. If you laid on a curſe or two, more, I'll aſſure you hee'll beare 'hem. As, that hee may get the Poxe with ſeeking to cure it, Sir? Or, that while he is curling another mans haire, his owne may drop off? Or, for burning ſome Male-baudes Locke, he may haue his braine beat out with the Curling-Iron?
No, let the Wretch liue wretched. May hee get the Itch, and his Shop ſo louſie, as no man dare come at him, nor he come at no man.
(I, and if he would ſwallow all his Balles for Pils, let not them purge him)
Let his Warming-Pan be euer cold.
(A perpetuall Froſt vnderneath it, Sir)
Let him neuer hope to ſee fire againe.
(But in Hell, Sir)
His Chayres bee alwayes empty, his Sciſſors ruſt, and his Combes mould in their Caſes.
Very dreadfull that! (And may he looſe the inuention, Sir, of caruing Lanternes in Paper)
Let there bee no Baud carted that yeere, to employ a Baſon of his: but let him be glad to eate his Sponge, for Bread.
And drinke lotium to it, and much good doe him.
Or, for want of Bread—
Eate Eare-Waxe, Sir. I'll helpe you. Or draw'his owne Teeth, and adde them to the Lute-ſtring.
No, beate the olde ones to poulder, and make Bread of them.
(Yes, make meale o' the Milſtones.)
May all the Botches, and Burnes, that he has cur'd on others, breake out vpon him.
And he now forget the cure of 'hem in himſelfe, Sir: or, if hee doe remember it, let him ha' ſcrap'd all his Linnen into Lint for't, and haue not a ragge left him, to ſet vp with.
That falls out often, Madame, that hee that thinkes himſelfe the Maſter-wit, is the Maſter-foole. I aſſure your Ladiſhip, ye cannot laugh at her.
No, wee'll haue her to the Colledge: and ſhe haue wit, ſhe ſhall be one of vs.! ſhall ſhee not Centaure? wee'll make her a Collegiate.
Yes faith, Madame, and Mauis, and ſhee will ſet vp a ſide.
Beleeue it Madame, and Miſtris Mauis, ſhee will ſuſtaine her part.
I'll tell you that, when I haue talk'd with her, and try'd her.
Ʋſe her very ciuilly, Mauis.
So I will, Madame.
Bleſſed minute, that they would whiſper thus euer.
In the the meane time, Madame, would but your Ladiſhip helpe to vexe him a little: you know his diſeaſe, talke to him about the Wedding Ceremonies, or call for your Gloues, or—
Let me alone. Centaure, helpe mee. Maſter Bride-groome, where are you?
O, it was too miraculouſly good to laſt!
We ſee no Enſignes of a Wedding, here; no Character of a Brideale: where be our Skarfes, and our Gloues? I pray you, giue 'hem vs. Let's know your Brides Colours, and yours, at leaſt.
Alas, Madame, he has prouided none.
Had I knowne your Ladiſhips Painter, I would.
He has giuen it you, Centaure, yfaith. But doe you heare Maſter Moroſe, a Ieſt will not abſolue you in this manner. You that haue ſuck'd the Milke of the Court, and from thence haue beene brought vp to the very ſtrong meates, and Wine, of it; beene a Courtier from the Biggen, to the Night-Cap: (as wee may ſay) and you, to offend in ſuch a high point of Ceremonie, as this and let your Nuptialls want all markes of ſolemnitie! How much Plate haue you loſt to day (if you had but regarded your profit) what gifts, what friends, through your meere Ruſticitie?
Madame—
Pardon me, Sir, I muſt inſinuate your errors to you. No Gloues? no Garters? no Skarfes? no Epithalamium? no Maſque?
Yes, Madame, I'll make an Epithalamium, I promis'd my Miſtris, I haue begunne it already: will your Ladiſhip heare it?
I, good Iack Daw.
Will it pleaſe your Ladiſhip command a Chamber, and bee priuate with hour friend? you ſhall haue your choice of Roomes, to retyre to after: my whole Houſe is yours. I know, it hath beene your Ladiſhis errand, into the Citie, at other times, how euer now you haue beene vnhappily diuerted vpon mee▪ but I ſhall bee loth to breake any honorable cuſtome of your Ladiſhips. And therefore, good Madame—
Come, you are a rude Bride-groome, to entertayne Ladies of honour in this faſhion.
He is a rude Groome, indeed.
By that light, you deſerue to grafted, and haue your Hornes reach from one ſide of the Iland, to the other. Doe not miſtake mee, Sir, I but ſpeake this, to giue the Ladies ſome heart againe, not for any malice to you.
Is this your Brau, Ladies?
As God helpe mee, if you vtter ſuch another word, I'll take Miſtris Bride in and begin to you, in a very ſad cup, doe you ſee? Goe too, know your friends, and ſuch, as loue you.
BY your leaue, Ladies. Doe you want any Muſique? I haue brought you varietie of noyſes. Play, Sirs, all of you.
O, a plot, a plot, a plot, a plot vpon me! This day, I ſhall bee their Anuile to worke on, they will grate mee aſunder. 'Tis worſe then the noyſe of a Saw.
No, they are Haire, Roſin, and Guts. I can giue you the Receipt.
Peace, Boyes.
Play, I ſay.
Peace, Raſcals. You ſee who's your friend now, Sir? Take courage, put on a Martyrs reſolution. Mocke downe all their attemptings, with patience. 'Tis but a day, and I would ſuffer heroically. Should an Aſſe exceed mee in fortitude? No. You betray your infirmitie with your hanging dull eares, and make them inſult: beare vp brauely, and conſtantly. Looke you here, Sir, what honour is done you vnexpected, by your Nephew; a Wedding Dinner come, and a Knight Sewer before it, for the more reputation: and fine Miſtris Otter, your Neighbour, in the Rump, or Tayle of it.
Is that Gorgon, that Meduſa come? Hide mee, hide me.
I warrant you, Sir, ſhee will not transforme you. Looke vpon her with a good courage. Pray you entertayne her, and conduct your Gueſts in, No? Miſtris Bride, will you entreat in the Ladies? your Bridegroome is ſo ſhame-fac'd, here—
Will it pleaſe your Ladiſhip, Madame?
With the benefit of your companie, Miſtris.
Seruant, pray you performe your duties.
And glad to be commanded, Miſtris.
How like you her wit, Mauis.
Very prettily, abſolutely well.
'Tis my place.
You ſhall pardon me, Miſtris Otter.
Why, I am a Collegiate.
But not in ordinary.
But I am.
Wee'll diſpute that within.
Would this had laſted a little longer.
And that they had ſent for the Heralds. Captayne Otter, what newes?
I haue brought my Bull, Beare, and Horſe, in priuate, and yonder are the Trumpetters without, and the Drum, Gentlemen.
O, ô, ô.
And we will haue a rouſe in each of 'hem, anon, for bold Britons, yfaith.
Follow, follow, follow.
WAs there euer poore Bride-groome ſo tormented? or man indeed?
I haue not read of the like, in the Chronicles of the Land.
Sure, he cannot but goe to a place of reſt, after all this Purgatorie.
He may preſume it, I thinke.
The ſpitting, the coughing, the laughter, the neeſing, the farting, dauncing, noyſe of the Muſique, and her maſculine, and lowd commanding, and vrging the whole Family, makes him thinke he has marryed a Furie.
And ſhe carries it vp brauely.
I, ſhe takes any occaſion to ſpeake: that's the height on't.
And how ſo berly Dauphine labours to ſatisfie him, that it was none of his plot!
And has almoſt brought him to the faith, i' the article. Here he comes. Where is he now? what's become of him, Dauphine?
O, hold me vp a little, I ſhall goe away i' the ieſt elſe. Hee has got on his whole Neſt of Night-caps, and lock'd himſelfe vp, i' the top o' the Houſe, as high as euer he can climbe from the noyſe. I peep'd in at a cranny, and ſaw him ſitting ouer a croſſe-beame o' the roofe, like him o' the Sadiers Horſe in Fleetstreet, vp-right: and hee will ſleepe there.
But where are your Collegiates?
With-drawne with the Bride in priuate.
O, they are inſtructing her i' the Colledge-Grammar. If ſhee haue grace with them, ſhee knowes all their ſecrets inſtantly.
Mee thinkes, the Lady Haughty lookes well to day, for all my diſprayſe of her i' the morning. I thinke, I ſhall come about to thee againe, Tru-wit.
Beleeue it, I told you right. Women ought to repayre the loſſes, time and yeeres haue made i' their features, with dreſſings. And an intelligent Woman, if ſhee know by her ſelfe the leaſt defect, will bee moſt curious, to hide it: and it becomes her. If ſhee bee ſhort, let her ſit much, leſt when ſhe ſtands, ſhe be thought to ſit. If ſhe haue an ill foot, let her weare her Gowne the longer, and her Shoo the thinner. If a fat Hand, and ſcald Nailes, let her carue the leſſe, and act in Gloues. If a ſowre breath, let her neuer diſcourſe faſting: and alwayes talke at her diſtance. If ſhe haue black and rugged Teeth, let her offer the leſſe at laughter, eſpecially if ſhe laugh wide, and open.
O, you ſhall haue ſome women, when they laugh, you would thinke they bray'd, it is ſo rude, and—
I, and others, that will ſtalke i'their gait like an Eſtrich, and take huge ſtrides. I cannot endure ſuch a ſight. I loue meaſure i' the feet, and number i' the voyce: they are Gentleneſſes, thaa oft-times draw no leſſe then the face.
How cam'ſt thou to ſtudie theſe Creatures ſo exactly? I would thou would'ſt make me a Proficient.
Yes, but you muſt leaue to liue i' your Chamber then a month together vpon Amadis de Gaule, or Don Quixote, as you are wont; and come abroad where the matter is frequent, to Court, to Tiltings, publique Showes, and Feaſts, to Playes, and Church ſometimes: thither they come to ſhew their new Tyres too, to ſee, and to be ſeene. In theſe places a mn ſhall find whome to loue, whome to play with, whome to touch once, whom to hold cuer. The varietie arreſts his iudgement. A Wench to pleaſe a man comes not downe dropping from the ſeeling, as hee lyes on his backe droning a Tobacco Pipe. He muſt goe where ſhe is.
Yes, and be neuer the neere.
Out Heretique. That diffidence makes thee worthy, it ſhould be ſo.
He ſayes true to you, Dauphine.
Why?
A man ſhould not doubt to ouer come any Woman. Thinke hee can vanquiſh 'hem, and he ſhall, for though they denie, their deſire is to bee tempted. Penelope her ſelfe cannot hold out long. Oſtend, you ſaw, was taken at laſt. You muſt perſeuer, and hold to your purpoſe. They would ſollicite vs, but that they are afraid. Howſoeuer, they wiſh in their hearts wee ſhould ſollicite them. Prayſe hem, flatter. 'hem, you ſhall neuer want Eloquence, or truſt: euen the chaſteſt delight to feele themſelues that way rub'd. With Prayſes you muſt mixe Kiſſes too. If they take them, they'll take more. Though they ſtriue, they would bee ouercome.
O, but a man muſt beware of force.
It is to them an acceptable violence, and has ofttimes the place of the greateſt courteſie. Shee that might haue beene forc'd, and you let her goe free without touching though ſhe then ſeeme to thanke you, will euer hate you after: and glad i' the face, is aſſuredly ſad at the heart.
But all women are not to be taken alwayes.
'Tis true. No more then all Birds, or all Fiſhes. If you appeare learned to an ignorant Wench, or iocund to a ſad, or witty to a fooliſh, why ſhee preſently beginnes to miſtruſt herſelfe. You muſt approch them i' their owne height, their owne line: for the contrary makes many that feare to commit themſelues to noble and worthy fellowes, runne into the imbraces of a Raſcall. If ſhe loue Wit, giue Verſes, though you borrow 'hem of a friend, or buy 'hem, to haue good. If Valour, talke of your Sword, and be frequent in the mention of Quarrels, though you be ſtaunch in fighting. If actiuity be ſeen o'your Barbary often, or leaping ouer ſtooles, for the credit of your back. If ſhe loue good clothes or dreſſing haue your learned Counſel about you euery morning, your French Taylor, Barber, Linnener, &c. Let your Poulder, your Glaſſe, and your Combe, be your deareſt acquaintance. Take more care for the ornament of your head, then the ſafetie: and wiſh the Common-wealth rather troubled, then a haire about you. That will take her. Then if ſhee bee couetous and crauing, doe you promiſe any thing, and performe ſparingly: ſo ſhall you keepe her in appetite ſtill. Seeme as you would giue, but be like a barren field that yeelds little, or vnlucky Dice, to fooliſh, and hoping Gameſters. Let your gifts be flight, and daintie, ra her then precious. Let cunning be aboue coſt. Giue Cherries at time of yeere, or Apricots; and ſay they were ſent you out of the Countrey, though you bought 'hem in Cheap-ſiae. Admire her Tyres; like her in all faſhions; compare her in euery habit to ſome Deitie; inuent excellent Dreames to flatter her, and Riddles; or, if ſhee bee a great one, performe alwayes the ſecond parts to her: like what ſhe likes, prayſe whom ſhee prayſes, and faile not to make the Houſhold and Seruants yours, yea the whole Family, and ſalute 'hem by their names: ('tis but light coſt if you can purchaſe' hem ſo) and make her Phyſician your Penſioner, and her chiefe woman. Nor will it bee out of your gaine to make loue to her too, ſo ſhe follow, not vſher, her Ladies pleaſure. All blabbing is taken away, when ſhe comes to be a part of the crime.
On what Courtly lap haſt thou late ſlept, to come forth ſo ſudden and abſolute a Courtling?
Good faith, I ſhould rather queſtion you, that are ſo harkening after theſe Myſteries. I begin to ſuſpect your diligence, Dauphine. Speake, art thou in loue in earneſt?
Yes by my troth am I: 'twere ill diſſembling before thee.
With which of 'hem, I pray thee?
With all the Collegiates.
Out on thee. Wee'll keepe you at home, beleeue it, i' the Stable, and you be ſuch a Stallion.
No, I like him well. Men ſhould loue wiſely, and all women: ſomeone for the face, and let her pleaſe the eye; another for the skin, and let her pleaſe the touch; a third for the voyce, and let her pleaſe the eare; and where the Obiects mixe, let the ſenſes ſo too. Thou wouldſt thinke it ſtrange, if I ſhould make 'hem all in loue with thee a fore Night!
I would ſay thou had'ſt the beſt Philtre i' the World, and couldſt doe more then Madame Medea, or Doctor Foreman.
If I doe not, let me play the Mounte-banke for my meate while I liue, and the Bawd for my drinke.
So be it, I ſay.
O Lord, Gentlemen, how my Knights and I haue miſt you here!
Why, Captaine, what Seruice? what Seruice?
To ſee mee bring vp my Bull, Beare, and Horſe to fight.
Yes faith, the Captaine ſayes we ſhall be his Dogs to bait 'hem.
A good imployment.
Come on, let's ſee a courſe then.
I am afraid my Couſin will bee offended if ſhee come.
Be afraid of nothing. Gentlemen, I haue plac'd the Drumme and the Trumpets, and one to giue 'hem the ſigne when you are readie. Here's my Bull for my ſelfe, and my Beare for Sir Iohn Daw, and my Horſe for Sir Amorous. Now ſet your foot to mine, and yours to his, and—
Pray God my Couſin come not.
Saint George, and Saint Andrew, feare no Couſins. Come, ſound, ſound. Et rauco ſtrepuerunt cornuacantu.
Well ſaid, Captaine, yfaith: well fought at the Bull.
Well held at the Beare.
Low, low, Captaine.
O' the Horſe has kickt off his Dogge alreadie.
I cannot drinke it, as I am a Knight.
Gods ſo, off with his Spurres, ſome-body.
It goes againe my conſcience. My Couſin will be angry with it.
I ha' done mine.
You fought high and faire, Sir Iohn.
At the head.
Like an excellent Beare-Dogge.
You take no notice of the buſineſſe I hope.
Not a word, Sir, you ſee we are iouiall.
Sir Amorous, you muſt not aequiuocate. It muſt bee pull'd downe, for all my Couſin.
Sfoot, if you take not your drinke, they'll thinke you are diſcontented with ſome thing: you'll betray all, if you take the leaſt notice.
Not I, I'll both drinke, and talke then.
You muſt pull the Horſe on his knees, Sir Amorous: feare no Couſins. Iacta est alea.
O, now hee's in his vaine, and bold. The leaſt hint giuen him of his Wife now will make him raile deſperately.
Speake to him of her.
Doe you, and I'll fetch her to the hearing of it.
Captaine hee-Otter, your ſhee-Otter is comming, your Wife.
Wife! Buz. Titinilitium. There's no ſuch thing in nature. I confeſſe, Gentlemen, I haue a Cooke, a Laundreſſe, a Houſe-Drudge, that ſerues my neceſſary turnes, and goes vnder that title: But hee's an Aſſe that will bee ſo vxorious, to tye his affections to one Circle. Come, the name duls appetite. Here, repleniſh againe: another bout. Wiues are naſty, ſluttiſh Animalls.
O, Captaine.
As euer the Earth bare, tribus verbis. Where's Maſter Tru-wit?
Hee's ſlipt aſide, Sir.
But you muſt drinke, and be iouiall,
Yes, giue it me.
And me, too.
Let's be iouiall.
As iouiall as you will.
Agreed. Now you ſhall ha' the Beare, Couſin, and Sir Iohn Daw the Horſe, and I'll ha' the Bull ſtill. Sound Tritons o' the Thames. Nunc eſt bibedum, nunc pede libero—
Villaines, Murderers, Sonnes of the Earth, and Traytors, what doe you there?
O, now the Trumpets haue wak'd him, wee ſhall haue his company.
A Wife is a ſciruy Clogdogdo; an vnlucky thing, a very fore-ſaid Beare-whelpe, without any good faſhion or breeding: mala bestia.
Why did you marry one then, Captaine?
A poxe—I marryed with ſixe thouſand pound, I. I was in loue with that. I ha' not kiſt my Furie theſe fortie weekes.
The more to blame you, Captaine.
Nay, Miſtris Otter, heare him a little firſt.
Shee has a breath worſe then my Grand-mothers, profecto.
O trecherous Lyar. Kiſſe mee ſweete Maſter Tru-wit, and proue him a ſlandring Knaue.
I'll rather beleeue you, Lady.
And ſhee has a Perruke, that's like a pound of Hempe, made vp in Shoo-thrids.
O Viper, Mandrake!
A moſt vile face! and yet ſhe ſpends me fortie pound a yeere in Mercurie, and Hogs-bones. All her Teeth were made i'the Blacke-Friers: both her eye-browes i'the Strand, and her Haire in Siuer-ſtreet. Euery part o' the Towne ownes a piece of her.
I cannot hold.
Shee takes her ſelfe aſunder ſtill when ſhee goes to bed, into ſome twentie Boxes; and about next day noone is put together againe, like a great Germane Clocke: and ſo comes forth and rings a tedious larum to the whole Houſe, and then is quiet againe for an houre, but for her quarters. Ha' you done me right, Gentlemen?
No, Sir, I'll doe you right with my quarters, with my quarters.
O, hold, good Princeſſe.
Sound, ſound.
A battell, a battell.
You notorious ſtinkardly Beareward, do's my breath ſmell?
Vnder correction, deare Princeſſe: looke to my Beare, and my Horſe, Gentlemen.
Doe I want Teeth, and Eye-browes, thou Bul-Dogge?
Sound, ſound ſtill.
No, I proteſt, vnder correction—
I, now you are vnder correction, you proteſt: but you did not proteſt before correction, Sir. Thou Iudas, to offer to betray thy Princeſſe! I'll make thee an example—
I will haue no ſuch examples in my Houſe, Lady Otter.
Ah—
Mistris Mary Ambree, your examples are dangerous. Rogues, Hell-hounds, Stentors, out of my doores, you ſonnes of noyſe and tumult, begot on an ill May-day, or when the Gally-foiſt is a-float to Weſtminſter! A Trumpetter could not be conceiu'd but then!
What ailes you, Sir?
They haue rent my Roofe, Walles, and all my Windores aſunder, with their brazen throates.
Beſt follow him, Dauphine.
So I will.
Where's Daw, and La-Foole?
They are both runne away, Sir. Good Gentlemen, helpe to pacifie my Princeſſe, and ſpeake to the great Ladies for mee. Now muſt I goe lye with the Beares this fortnight, and keepe out o' the way, till my peace bee made, for this ſcandale ſhee has taken. Did you not ſee my Bull-head, Gentlemen?
Is't not on, Captaine?
No: but hee may make a new one, by that, is on.
O, here 'tis. And you come ouer, Gentlemen, and aske for Tom Otter, wee'll goe downe to Ratcliffe, and haue a courſe yfaith: for all theſe diſaſters. There's bona ſpet left.
Away, Captaine, get off while you are well.
I am glad we are rid of him.
You had neuer beene, vnleſſe wee had put his Wife vpon him. His humour is as tedious at laſt, as it was ridiculous at firſt.
WE wondred why you ſhreek'd ſo, Miſtris Otter.
O God, Madame, hee came downe with a huge long naked Weapon in both his hands, and look'd ſo dreadfully! Sure, hee's beſide himſelfe.
Why, what made you there, Miſtris Otter?
Alas, Miſtris Mauis, I was chaſtiſing my ſubiect, and thought nothing of him.
Faith, Miſtris, you muſt doe ſo too. Learne to chaſtize. Miſtris Otter corrects her Husband ſo, hee dares not ſpeake, but vnder correction.
And with his Hat off to her: 'twould doe you good to ſee.
In ſadneſſe 'tis good, and mature counſell: practize it, Moroſe. I'll call you Moroſe ſtill now, as I call Centaure, and Mauis: we foure will be all one.
And you'll come to the Colledge, and liue with vs?
Make him giue Milke, and Honey.
Looke how you manago him at firſt, you ſhall haue him euer after.
Let him allow you your Coach, and foure Horſes, your Woman, your Chamber-maid, your Page your Gentleman-Vſher, your French Cooke, and foure Groomes.
And goe with vs, to Bed'lem, to the China Houſes, and to the Exchange.
It will open the gate to your fame.
Here's Centaure has immortaliz'd her ſelfe, with taming of her wilde Male.
I, ſhee has done the Miracle of the Kingdome.
But Ladies, doe you count it lawfull to haue ſuch pluralitie of Seruants, and doe 'hem all graces?
Why not? why ſhould women denie their Fauours to men? Are they the poorer, or the worſe?
Is the Thames the leſſe for the Dyers Water, Miſtris?
Or a Torch, for lighting many Torches?
Well ſaid, La-Foole; what a new one hee has got!
They are emptie loſſes, women feare, in this kind.
Beſides, Ladies ſhould bee mindfull of the approch of age, and let no time want his due vſe. The beſt of our dayes paſſe firſt.
We are Riuers, that cannot bee call'd backe, Madame: ſhee that now excludes her Louers, may liue to lye a forſaken Beldame, in a frozen Bed.
'Tis true, Mauis: and who will wait on vs to coach then? or write, or tell vs the newes then? Make Anagrams of our names, and inuite vs to the Cock-pit, and kiſſe our hands all the Play-time, and draw their weapons for our honours?
Not one.
Nay, my Miſtris is not altogether vn-intelligent of theſe things; here bee in preſence haue taſted of her fauours.
What a neighing Hobby-horſe is this!
But not with intent to boaſt 'hem againe, Seruant. And haue you thoſe excellent Receits, Madame, to keepe your ſelues from bearing of Children?
now to comfort a poore Gentlewoman? Ay me! what fortune had I to marrie a diſtracted man?
I'll tell you, Miſtris—
How rarely ſhee holds it vp!
What meane you, Gentlemen?
What will you tell me, Seruant?
The Diſeaſe in Greeke, is called Mayia, in Latine, Inſania, Furor, vel Ecſtaſis melancholica, that is, Egreſſio, when a man ex melancholico, euadit fanaticus.
Shall I haue a Lecture read vpon me aliue?
But he may be but Phreneticus, yet, Miſtris? and Phrenetis is only delirium, or ſo—
I, that is for the Diſeaſe, Seruant: but what is this to the cure? we are ſure enough of the Diſeaſe.
Let me goe.
Why, wee'll intreat her to hold her peace, Sir.
O, no. Labour not to ſtop her. Shee is like a Conduit-pipe, that will guſh out with more force, when ſhee opens againe.
I'll tell you, Moroſe, you muſt talke Diuinitie to her altogether, or morall Philoſophy.
I, and there's an excellent Booke of morall Philoſophy, Madame, of Raynard the Foxe, and all the Beaſts, call'd Dones Philoſophy.
There is, indeed, Sir Amorous La-Foole.
O miſery!
I haue read it, my Lady Centaure, all ouer to my Couſin, hers.
I, and 'tis a very good Booke as any is, of the Modernes.
Tut, he muſt haue Seneca read to him, and Plutarch, and the Ancients; the Modernes are not for this Diſeaſe.
Why, you diſcommended them too, to day, Sir Iohn
I, in ſome Caſes: but in theſe they are beſt, and Ariſtotles Ethicks.
Say you ſo, Sir Iohn? I thinke you are decelu'd: you tooke it vpon truſt.
Where's Trusty, my woman? I'll end this difference. I pr'y thee, Otter, call her. Her Father and Mother were both mad, when they put her to mee.
I thinke ſo. Nay, Gentlemen, I am tame. This is but an exerciſe, I know a Marriage Ceremonie, which I muſt endure.
And one of 'hem (I know not which) was cur'd with the Sick-mans Salue; and the other with Greens Groats-worth of wit.
A very cheape Cure, Madame.
I, it's very faeſible.
My Lady call'd for you, Miſtris Truſty: you muſt decide a Controuerſie.
O Truſty, which was it you ſaid, your Father, or your Mother, that was cur'd with the Sick-mans Salue?
My Mother, Madame, with the Salue.
Then it was the Sick-womans Salue.
And my Father with the Groats-worth of wit. But there was other meanes vs'd: we had a Preacher that would preach folke aſleepe ſtill; and ſo they were preſcrib'd to goe to Church, by an old Woman that was their Phyſician, thriſe a Weeke—
To ſleepe?
Yes forſooth: and euery night they reade themſelues aſleepe on thoſe Bookes.
Good faith, it ſtands with great reaſon. I would I knew where to procure thoſe Bookes.
Oh.
I can helpe you with one of 'hem, Miſtris Moroſe, the Groats-worth of wit.
But I ſhall disfurniſh you, Sir Amorous: can you ſpare it?
O, yes, for a Weeke, or ſo; I'll reade it my ſelfe to him.
No, I muſt doe that, Sir: that muſt be my office.
Sure, hee would doe well inough, if hee could ſleepe.
No, I ſhould doe well inough, if you could ſleepe. Haue I no friend that will make her drunke? or giue her a little ladanum? or opium?
Why, Sir, ſhee talkes tenne times worſe in her ſleepe.
How!
Doe you not know that, Sir? neuer ceaſes all night.
And ſnores like a Porcpiſce.
O, redeeme me, Fate, redeeme me, Fate. For how how many cauſes may a man be diuorc'd, Nephew?
I know not truly, Sir.
Some Diuine muſt reſolue you in that, Sir, or Canon Lawyer.
I will not reſt, I will not thinke of any other hope or comfort till I know.
Alas, poore man.
You'll make him mad indeed, Ladies, if you purſue this.
No, wee'll let him breathe, now a quarter of an houre, or ſo.
By my faith, a large Truce.
Is that his keeper, that is gone with him?
It is his Nephew, Madame.
Sir Dauphine, Eugenie.
He lookes like a very pittifull Knight—
As can bee. This Marriage, has put him out of all.
He has not a penny in his Purſe, Madame—
He is ready to cry all this day.
A very Sharke, hee ſet me i'the nicke t'other night at Primero.
How theſe Swabbers talke!
I, Otters Wine has ſwell'd their humours aboue a Spring-tide.
Good Moroſe, let's goe in againe. I like your couches exceeding well: wee'll goe lie, and talke there.
I wait on you, Madame.
'Slight, I will haue 'hem as ſilent as Signes, and their Poſts too, e're I ha' done. Doe you heare, Ladie-Bride? I pray thee now, as thou art a noble Wench, continue this Diſcourſe of Dauphine within: but prayſe him exceedingly. Magnifie him with all the height of affection thou canſt. (I haue ſome purpoſe in't) and but beate off theſe two Rookes, Iack Daw, and his fellow, with any diſcontentment hether, and I'll honour thee for euer.
I was about it, here. It angred me to the ſoule, to heare 'hem beginne to talke ſo malepert.
Pray thee performe it, and thou win'ſt mee an Idolater to thee, euerlaſting.
Will you goe in, and heare me doe it?
No, I'll ſtay heere. Driue 'hem out of your companie, 'tis all I aske: which cannot bee any way better done, then by extolling Dauphine, whome they haue ſo ſlighted.
I warrant you: you ſhall expect one of 'hem preſently.
What a caſt of Kaſtrils are theſe, to hawke after Ladies, thus?
I, and ſtrike at ſuch an Eagle as Dauphine.
Hee will bee madde, when wee will tell him. Here he comes.
O Sir, you are welcome.
Where's thine Vncle?
Runne out o'doores in's Night-caps, to talke with a Caſuiſt, about his Diuorce. It workes admirably.
Thou would'ſt ha' ſaid ſo, and thou had'ſt been here! The Ladies haue laught at thee, moſt Comically, ſince thou wentſt, Dauphine.
And askt, if thou wert thine Vncles keeper?
And the brace of Babouns anſwer'd, yes; and ſaid, thou wert a pittifull poore fellow, and did'ſt liue vpon poſts: and had'ſt nothing but three Sutes of Apparell, and ſome few Beneuolences that Lords ga'thee to foole to hem, and ſwagger.
Let mee not liue, I'll beate 'hem. I'll binde 'hem both to grand Madames Bed. poſtes, and haue 'hem bayted with Monkeyes.
Thou ſhalt not need, they ſhall bee beaten to thy hand, Dauphine. I haue an Execution to ſerue vpon 'hem, I warrant thee ſhall ſerue: truſt my plot.
I, you haue many plots! So you had one, to make all the Wenches in loue with mee.
Why, If I doe not yet afore night, as neere as 'tis; and that they doe not euery one inuite thee, and bee ready to ſcratch for thee: take the morgage of my wit.
'Fore God, I'll bee his witneſſe; thou ſhalt haue it, Dauphine: thou ſhalt bee his Foole for euer, if thou doeſt not.
Agreed. Perhaps 'twill bee the better eſtate. Doe you obſerue this Gallerie? or rather Lobby, indeed? Here are a couple of Studies, at each end one: here will I act ſuch a Tragi-comoedy betweene the Cuelphes, and the Ghibellines, Daw and La-Foole—which of 'hem comes out firſt, will I ſeize on: (you two ſhall be the Chorus behind the Arras, and whip out betweene the Acts, and ſpeake.) If I doe not make 'hem keepe the peace, for this remnant of the day, if not of the yeere, I haue faild once—I heare Daw comming: Hide, and doe not laugh, for Gods ſake.
Which is the way into the Garden, trow?
O, Iack Daw! I am glad I haue met with you. In good faith, I muſt haue this matter goe no furder betweene you. I muſt ha' it taken vp.
What matter, Sir? Betweene whom?
Come, you diſguiſe it—Sir Amorous and you. If you loue me, Iack, you ſhal make vſe of your Philoſophy now, for this once, and deliuer me your Sword. This is not the Wedding the Centaures were at, though there be a ſhee-one here. The Bride has entreated mee I will ſee no bloud ſhed at her Bridall, you ſaw her whiſper me ere-while.
As I hope to finiſh Tacitus, I intend no Murder.
Doe you not wait for Sir Amorous?
Not I, by my Knight-hood.
And your Schollerſhip too?
And my Schollerſhip too.
Goe to, then I returne you your Sword, and aske you mercy; but put it not vp, for you will bee aſſaulted. I vnderſtood that you had apprehended it, and walkt here to braue him: and that you had held your life contemptible, in regard of your honour.
No, no, no ſuch thing I aſſure you. He and I parted now, as good fileds as could be.
Truſt not you to that Viſor. I ſaw him ſince Dinner with another face: I haue knowne many men in my time vex'd with loſſes, with doeths, and with abuſes, but ſo offended a Wight as Sir Amorous, did I neuer ſee, or read of. For taking away his Gueſts, Sir, to day, that's the cauſe: and he declares it behind your back; with ſuch threatnings and centempts—Hee ſaid to Dauphine, you were the errandſt Aſſe—
I, he may ſay his pleaſure.
And ſweares you are ſo proteſted a Coward, that hee knowes you will neuer doe him any manly or ſingle right, and therefore he will take his courſe.
I'll giue him any ſatisfaction, Sir—but fighting.
I, Sir, but who knowes what ſatisfaction hee'll take? bloud hee thirſts for, and bloud hee will haue: and where-abouts on you he will haue it, who knowes but himſelfe?
I pray you, Maſter Tru-wit, be you a Mediator.
Well, Sir, conceale your ſelfe then in this ſtudie, till I returne. Nay, you muſt bee content to bee lock'd in: for, for mine owne reputation I would not haue you ſeene to receiue a publique diſgrace, while I haue the matter in managing. Gods ſo, here hee comes: keepe your breath cloſe, that he doe not heare you ſigh. In good faith, Sir Amorous, he is not this way, I pray you be mercifull, doe not murder him; hee is a Chriſtian as good as you: you are arm'd as if you ſought a reuenge on all his Race. Good Dauphine, get him away from this place. I neuer knew a mans choller ſo high, but hee would ſpeake to his friends, he would heare reaſon. Iack Daw, Iack Daw! a-ſleepe?
Is he gone, Maſter Tru-wit?
I, did you heare him?
O God, yes.
What a quicke eare feare has?
But is he ſo arm'd, as you ſay?
Arm'd? did you euer ſee a fellow, ſet out to take poſſeſſion?
I, Sir.
That may giue you ſome light, to conceiue of him: but 'tis nothing to the principall. Some falſe Brother i'the houſe has furniſh'd him ſtrangely. Or, if it were out o' the houſe, it was Tom Otter.
Indeed, hee's a Captaine, and his Wife is his Kinſwoman.
Hee has got ſome-bodies old two-hand-ſword to mow you off at the knees. And that Sword hath ſpawn'd ſuch a Dagger!—but then he is ſo hung with Pikes, Halberds, Peitroells, Calliuers, and Muskets, that hee lookes like a Iuſtice of Peace's Hall: a man of two thouſand a yeere, is not ſeſſ'd at ſo many weapons, as he has on. There was neuer Fencer challeng'd at ſo many ſeuerall Foyles. You would think he meant to murder all Saint Pulehres Pariſh. If he could but victuall himſelfe for halfe a yeere, in his breeches, he is ſufficiently arm'd to ouer-runne a Countrie.
Good Lord, what meanes he, Sir! I pray you Maſter Tru-wit, be you a Mediator?
Well, I'll try if he will be appeas'd with a Legge or an Arme, if not you muſt die once.
I would be loth to looſe my right Arme, for writing Madrigalls.
Why, if hee will bee ſatisfied with a thumb, or a little finger, all's one to me. You muſt think, I'll do my beſt.
Good Sir, doe.
What haſt thou done?
He will let me doe nothing, man, hee do's all afore me, he offers his left arme.
His left wing, for a Iack Daw.
Take it, by all meanes.
How! Maime a man for euer, for a ieſt? what a conſcience haſt thou?
'Tis no loſſe to him: hee has no employment for his Armes, but to eat ſpoone-meat. Beſide, as goods maime his bodie as his reputation.
Hee is a Scholler, and a Wit, and yet hee do's not thinke ſo. But he looſes no reputation with vs, for we all reſolu'd him an Aſſe before. To your places againe.
I pray thee, let me be in at the other a little.
Looke, you'll ſpoyle all: theſe be euer your tricks.
No, but I could hit of ſomethings that thou wilt miſſe, and thou wilt ſay are good ones.
I warrant you. I pray forbeare, I'll leaue it off, elſe.
Come away, Clerimont.
Sir Amorous!
Maſter Tru-wit.
Whither were you going?
Downe into the Court, to make water.
By no meanes, Sir, you ſhall rather tempt your breeches.
Why, Sir?
Enter here, if you loue your life.
Why! why!
Queſtion till your throat be cut, doe: dally till the enraged ſoule find you.
Who's that?
Daw it is: will you in?
I, I, I'll in: what's the matter?
Nay, if hee had beene coole inough to tell vs that, there had beene ſome hope to attone you, but hee ſeemes ſo implacably enrag'd.
'Slight, let him rage. I'll hide my ſelfe.
Doe, good Sir. But what haue you done to him within, that ſhould prouoke him thus? you haue broke ſome Ieſt vpon him, a-fore the Ladies—
Not I, neuer in my life, broke Ieſt vpon any man. The Bride was prayſing Sir Dauphine, and he went away in ſnuffe, and I followed him, vnleſſe he tooke offence at me, in his drink ere while, that I would not pledge al the horſe full.
By my faith, and that may be, you remember well: but he walkes the round vp and down, through euery roome o'the houſe, with a Towell in his hand, crying, where's La-Foole? who ſaw La-Foole? and when Dauphine, and I, demanded the cauſe, wee can force no anſwere fom him, but (ô reuenge, how ſweete art thou! I will ſtrangle him in this Towell) which leads vs to coniecture, that the maine cauſe of his furie is for bringing your meate to day, with a Towell about you, to his diſcredit.
Like inough. Why, and he be angry for that. I'll ſtay here, till his anger be blowne ouer.
A good becomming reſolution, Sir. If you can put it on o' the ſudden.
Yes, I can put it on. Or, I'll away into the Countrey preſently.
How will you get out o'the houſe, Sir? Hee knowes you are i' the houſe, and hee'll watch you this ſe'n-night but hee'll haue you. Hee'll out-wait a Seriant for you.
Why, then I'll ſtay here.
You muſt thinke, how to victuall your ſelfe in time, then.
Why, ſweet Maſter Tru-wit, will you entreat my Couſin Otter, to ſend me a cold Veniſon Paſty, a Bottle or two of Wine, and a Chamber Pot.
A ſtoole were better, Sir, of Sir A-iax his inuention.
I, that will be better indeed: and a Pallat to lye on.
O, I would not aduiſe you to ſleepe by any meanes.
Would you not, Sir? why, then I will not.
Yet, there's another feare—
Is there, Sir? What is't?
No, hee cannot breake open this doore with his foote, ſure.
I'll ſet my backe againſt it, Sir. I haue a good backe.
But, then if he ſhould batter.
Batter! if he dare, I'll haue an Action of Batt'ry, againſt him.
Caſt you the worſt. Hee has ſent for poulder alreadie, and what he will doe with it, no man knowes: perhaps blow vp the corner o'the houſe where bee ſuſpects you are. Here he comes, in quickly. I proteſt, Sir Iohn Daw, he is not this way: what will you doe? before God, you ſhall hag no petar de here. I'll dye rather Will you not take my word? I neuer knew one but would be ſatisfied. Sir Amorous, there's no ſtanding out. Hee has made a petarde of an olde braſſe Pot, to force your doore. Thinke vpon ſome ſatisfaction or termes, to offer him.
Sir, I'll giue him any ſatisfaction. I dare giue any termes.
You'll leaue it to me, then?
I, Sir. I'll ſtand to any conditions.
How now, what thinke you, Sirs? were't not a difficult thing to determine, which of theſe two fear'd moſt.
Yes, but this feares the braueſt: the other a whiniling daftard, Iack Daw: but La-Foole, a braue heroique coward! and is afraid in a great looke, and a ſtout accent. I like him rarely.
Had it not beene pitty, theſe two ſhould ha'beene conceal'd?
Shall I make a motion?
Briefly. For I muſt ſtrike while 'tis hot.
Shall I goe fetch the Ladies to the Catastrophe?
Vmh? I, by my troth.
By no mortall meanes. Let them continue in the ſtate of ignorance, and erre ſtill: thinke 'hem wits, and fine fellowes, as they haue done. 'Twere ſinne to reforme them.
Well, J will haue 'hem fetch'd, now I thinke on't, for a priuate purpoſe of mine: doe, Clerimont, fetch 'hem, and diſcourſe to 'hem all that's paſt, and bring 'hem into the Gallery here.
This is thy extreme vanitie, now: thou think'ſt thou wert vndone, if euery Ieſt thou mak'ſt were not publiſh'd.
Thou ſhalt ſee, how vniuſt thou art, preſently. Clerimont, ſay it was Dauphine's plot. Truſt mee not, if the whole drift bee not for thy good. There's a Carpet i' the next roome, put it on, with this Scarfe ouer thy face, and a Cuſhion o' thy head, and be ready when I call Amorous. Away—.Iohn Daw.
What good newes, Sir?
Faith, I haue followed, and argued with him hard for you. I told him, you were a Knight, and a Scholler; and that you knew fortitude did conſiſt magis patiendo quam faciendo, magis ferendo quam feriendo.
It doth ſo indeed, Sir.
And that you would ſuffer, I told him: ſo, at firſt he demanded, by my troth, in my conceipt, too much.
What was it, Sir.
Your vpper lip, and ſix o' your fore-teeth.
'Twas vnreaſonable.
Nay, I told him plainly, you could not ſpare 'hem all. So after long argument (pro & con, as you know) I brought him downe to your two Butter-teeth, and them he would haue.
O, did you ſo? why, he ſhall haue 'hem.
But he ſhall not, Sir, by your leaue. The concluſion is this, Sir, becauſe you ſhall be very good friends hereafter, and this neuer to be remembred, or vpbrayded; beſides, that he may not boaſt, he has done any ſuch thing to you in his owne perſon: hee is to come here in diſguiſe, giue you fiue kicks in priuate, Sir, take your Sword from you, and lock you vp in that Studie, during pleaſure. Which will be but a little while, wee'll get it releas'd preſently.
Fiue kicks? he ſhall haue ſix, Sir, to be friends.
Beleeue me, you ſhall not ouer-ſhoot your ſelfe, to ſend him that word by me.
Deliuer it, Sir. He ſhall haue it with all my heart, to be friends.
Friends? Nay, and he ſhould not be ſo, and heartily too, vpon theſe termes, he ſhall haue me to enemie while I liue. Come, Sir, beare it brauely.
O God, Sir, 'tis nothing.
Tru. What's ſix kicks to a man, that reades Seneca?
I haue had a hundred, Sir.
Sir Amorous. No ſpeaking one to another, or rehearſing old matters.
One, two, three, foure, fiue. I proteſt, Sir Amorous, you ſhall haue ſix.
Nay, I told you ſhould not talke. Come giue him ſix, and he will needs. Your Sword. Now returne to your ſafe cuſtody: you ſhall preſently meete afore the Ladies, and be the deareſt friends one to another—Giue mee the Scarfe, now, thou ſhalt beat the other bare-fac'd. Stand by, Sir Amorous.
What's here? A Sword.
I cannot helpe it, without I ſhould take the quarrell vpon my ſelfe: here he has ſent you his Sword—
I ll receiue none on't.
And hee wils you to faſten it againſt a wall, and breake your head in ſome few ſeuerall places againſt the Hilts.
I will not: tell him roundly. I cannot endure to ſhed my owne bloud.
Will you not?
No. I ll beat it againſt a faire flat wall, if that will ſatisfie him: If not, he ſhall beat it himſelfe, for Amorous.
Why, this is ſtrange ſtarting off, when a man vndertakes for you! I offered him another condition: will you ſtand to that?
Yes, I am content, at the blunt.
Then you muſt ſubmit your ſelfe to bee hood-wink'd in this Skarſe, and bee led to him, where hee will take your Sword from you, and make you beare a blow, ouer the Mouth, Gules, and tweakes by the Noſe, Sans numbre.
I am content. But why muſt I be blinded?
That's for your good, Sir: becauſe, if hee ſhould grow inſolent vpon this, and publſh it hereafter to your diſgrace (which I hope hee will not doe) you might ſweare ſafely and proteſt, hee neuer beate you to your knowledge.
O, I conceiue.
I doe not doubt, but you'll bee perfect good friends vpon't, and not dare to vtter an ill thought one of another, in future.
Not I, as God helpe me, of him.
Nor he of you, Sir. If he ſhould—Come, Sir. All hid, Sir Iohn.
Oh, Sir Iohn, Sir Iohn. Oh, ô-ô ô ô ô Oh—
Good Sir Iohn, leaue tweaking, you'll blow his Noſe off. 'Tis Sir Iohn's pleaſure, you ſhould retyre into the Studie. Why, now you are friendes. All bitterneſſe betweene you, I hope, is buried; you ſhall come forth by and by, Damon and Pythias vpon't: and embrace with all the rankneſſe of Friendſhip that can bee. I truſt, we ſhall haue 'hem tamer i'their Language hereafter. Dauphine, I worſhip thee. Gods will, the Ladies haue ſurpris'd vs!
CEntaure, how our iudgements were impos'd on by theſe adulterate Knights!
Nay, Madame, Mauis was more deceiu'd then wee, 'twas her commendation vtter'd 'hem in the Colledge.
I commended but their wits, Madame, and their braueries. I neuer look'd toward their valours.
Sir Dauphine is valiant, and a wit too, it ſeemes.
And a brauery too.
Was this his proiect?
So Maſter Clerimont intimates, Madame.
Good Moroſe, when you come to the Colledge, will you bring him with you? Hee ſeemes a very perfect Gentleman.
He is ſo Madame, beleeue it.
But when will you come, Moroſe?
Three or foure dayes hence, Madame, when I haue got me a Coach, and Horſes.
No, to morrow, good Moroſe, Centaure ſhall ſend you her Coach.
Yes faith, doe, and bring Sir Dauphine with you.
Shee has promis'd that Mauis.
Hee is a very worthy Gentleman, in his exteriors, Madame.
I, he ſhowes he is iudiciall in his clothes.
And yet not ſo ſuperlatiuely neat as ſome, Madame, that haue their faces ſet in a Brake!
I, and haue euery haire in forme!
That weare purer Linnen then our ſelues, and profeſſe more neatneſſe, then the French Hermaphrodite!
I Ladies, they, what they tell one of vs, haue tolde a thouſand, and are the only Theeues of our fame: that thinke to take vs with that Perfume, or with that Lace, and laugh at vs vn-conſcionably when they haue done.
But, Sir Dauphines careleſneſſe becomes him.
I could loue a man, for ſuch a Noſe!
Or ſuch a Legge!
He has an exceeding good eye, Madame!
And a very good Lock!
Good Moroſe, bring him to my Chamber firſt.
Pleaſe your Honours, to meete at my Houſe, Madame?
See, how they eye thee, man! they are taken I warrant thee.
You haue vnbrac'd our brace of Knights, heere, Maſter Tru-wit.
Not I, Madame, it was Sir Dauphines inginer: who, if he haue disfurniſh'd your Ladiſhip of any guard, or ſeruice by it, is able to make the place good againe, in himſelf.
There's no ſuſpition of that, Sir.
God ſo, Mauis, Haughty is kiſſing.
Let vs goe too, and take part.
But I am glad of the fortune (beſide the diſcouerie of two ſuch emptie Caskets) to gaine the knowledge of ſo rich a Mine of Vertue, as Sir Dauphine.
Wee would bee all glad to ſtile him of our friendſhip, and ſee him at the Colledge.
Hee cannot mixe with a ſweeter ſocietie, I'll propheſie, and I hope he himſelfe will thinke ſo.
I ſhould be rude to imagine otherwiſe, Ladie.
Did not I tell thee, Dauphine? Why, all their actions are gouerned by crude opinion, without reaſon or cauſe; they know not why they doe any thing: but as they are inform'd, beleeue, iudge, prayſe, condemne, loue, hate, and in aemulation one of another, doe all theſe things alike. Onely, they haue a naturall inclination ſwayes 'hem generally to the worſt, when they are left to themſelues. But, purſue it, now thou haft 'hem.
Shall we goe in againe, Moroſe?
Yes, Madame.
Wee'll entreate Sir Dauphines company.
Stay, good Madame, the inter-view of the two friends, Pylades and Oreſtes: I'll fetch 'hem out to you ſtraight.
Will you, Maſter Tru-wit?
I, but noble Ladies, do not confeſſe in your countenance, or outward bearing to 'hem any diſcouerie of their follies, that wee may ſee, how they will beare vp againe, with what aſſurance, and erection.
We will not, Sir Dauphine.
Mau. Vpon our honours, Sir Dauphine.
Sir Amorous, Sir Amorous. The Ladies are here.
Are they?
Yes, but ſlip out by and by, as their backes are turn'd, and meet Sir Iohn here, as by chance, when I call you. Iack Daw.
What ſay you, Sir?
Whip out behinde mee ſuddenly: and no anger i' your lookes to your Aduerſarie. Now, now.
Noble Sir Iohn Daw! where ha' you beene?
To ſeeke you, Sir Amorous.
Me! I honour you.
I preuent you▪ Sir.
They haue forgot their Rapiers!
O, they meet in peace, man.
Where's your Sword, Sir Iohn?
And yours, Sir Amorous?
Mine! my Boy had it forth, to mend the handle, cene now.
And my gold handle was broke too, and my Boy had it forth.
Indeed, Sir? How their excuſes meet!
What a conſent there is, i' the handles?
Nay, there is ſo i' the points too, I warrant you.
O me! Madame, hee comes againe, the madde man, away.
WHat make theſe naked weapons here, Gentlemen?
O, Sir! here hath like to beene muder ſince you went! A couple of Knights fallen out about the Brides fauours: we were faine to take away their weapons, your houſe had beene begg'd by this time elſe—
For what?
For Man ſlaughter, Sir, as being acceſſary.
And, for her fauours?
I, Sir, heretofore, not preſent. Clerimont, carrie 'hem their Swords, now. They haue done all the hurt they will doe.
Ha' you ſpoke with a Lawyer, Sir?
O, no! there is ſuch a noyſe i' the Court, that they haue frighted me home, with more violence then I went! ſuch ſpeaking, and counter-ſpeaking, with their ſeuerall voyces of Citations, Appellations, Allegations, Certificates, Attachments, Intergatories, References, Conuictions, and Afflictions indeed, among the Doctors and Proctors! that the noyſe here is ſilence too't! a kind of mid-night!
Why, Sir, if you would bee reſolu'd indeed, I can bring you hither a very ſufficient Lawyer, and a Learned Diuine, that ſhall inquire into euery leaſt ſcruple for you.
Can you Maſter Tru-wit?
Yes, and are very ſober graue perſons, that will diſpatch it in a Chamber, with a whiſper, or two.
Good Sir, ſhall I hope this benefit from you, and truſt my ſelfe into your hands?
Alas, Sir! your Nephew, and I, haue beene aſham'd, and oft-times mad ſince you went, to thinke how you are abus'd. Goe in, good Sir, and locke your ſelfe vp till we call you, wee'll tell you more anon, Sir.
Doe your pleaſure with mee, Gentlemen; I beleeue in you: and that deſerues no deluſion—
You ſhall find none, Sir: but heapt, heapt plentie of vexation.
What wilt thou doe now, Wit?
Recouer me hither Otter, and the Barber if you can, by any meanes, preſently.
Why? to what purpoſe?
O, I'll make the deepeſt Diuine, and graueſt Lawyer, out o' them two, for him—
Thou canſt not man, theſe are waking Dreames.
Doe not feare mee. Clap but a Ciuill Gowne with a Welt, o' the one; and a Canonicall Cloke with Sleeues, o' the other: and giue 'hem a few termes i' their mouthes, if there come not forth as able a Doctor, and compleat a Parſon, for this turne, as may bee wiſh'd, truſt not my Election. And, I hope without wronging the dignitie of eyther Profeſſion, ſince they are but perſons put on, and for mirths ſake, to torment him. The Barber ſmatters Latine, I remember.
Yes, and Otter too.
Well then, if I make 'hem not wrangle out this Caſe, to his no comfort, let mee bee thought a lack Daw, or La-Foole, or any thing worſe, Goe you to your Ladies, but firſt ſend for them.
I will.
WHere had you our Swords, Maſter Clerimont?
Why, Dauphine tooke 'hem from the madman.
And hee tooke 'hem from our Boyes, I warrant you?
Very like, Sir.
Thanke you good Maſter Clerimont. Sir Iohn Daw, and I are both beholden to you.
Would I knew how to make you ſo, Gentlemen:
Sir Amorous, and I are your Seruants, Sir.
Gentlemen, haue any of you a Pen-and-Inke. I would faine write out a Riddle in Italian, for Sir Dauphine, to tranſlate.
Not I, in troth Lady, I am no Scriuener.
I can furniſh you, I thinke, Lady.
He has it in the Haft of a Knife, I beleeue!
No, he has his Boxe of Inſtruments.
Like a Surgean!
For the Mathematiques: his Squire, his Compaſſes, his Braſſe Pens, and Black-lead, to draw Maps of euery place, and perſon, where he comes.
How, Maps of perſons!
Yes, Sir, of Nomentack, when he was here, and of the Prince of Moldauia, and of Miſtris, Miſtris Epicane.
Away! he has not found our her Latitude, I hope.
You are a pleaſant Gentleman, Sir.
Faith, now we are in priuate, let's wanton it a little, and talke waggiſhly. Sir Iohn, I am telling Sir Amorous here, that you two gouerne the Ladies, where e're you come. you carry the Feminine Gender afore you.
They ſhall rather carry vs afore them, if they will, Sir.
Nay, I beleeue that they doe, withall—But, that you are the prime-men in their affections, and direct all their actions—
Not I: Sir Amorous is.
I proteſt, Sir Iohn is.
As I hope to riſe i' the ſtate, Sir Amorous, you ha' the perſon.
Sir Iohn, you ha' the perſon, and the Diſcourſe too.
Not I, Sir. I haue no diſcourſe—and then you haue actiuitie beſide.
I proteſt, Sir Iohn, you come as high from Tripoly, as I doe euery whit: and lift as many ioyn'd ſtooles, and leape ouer 'hem, if you would vſe it—
Well, agree on't together Knights; for betweene you, you diuide the Kingdome, or Common-wealth of Ladies affections: I ſee it, and can perceiue a little how they obſerue you, and fear you, indeed. You could tell ſtrange Stories, my Maſters, if you would, I know.
Faith, we haue ſeene ſomewhat, Sir.
That we haue—Vellet Petticoates, and wrought Smocks, or ſo.
I, and—
Nay, out with it, Sir Iohn: doe not enuie your friend the pleaſure of hearing, when you haue had the delight of taſting.
Why—a—doe you ſpeake, Sir Amorous.
No, doe you, Sir Iohn Daw.
I'faith, you ſhall.
I'faith, you ſhall.
Why, we haue beene—
In the great Bed at Ware together in our time. On, Sir Iohn.
Nay, doe you, Sir Amorous.
And theſe Ladies with you, Knights?
No, excuſe vs, Sir.
We muſt not wound reputation.
No matter—they were theſe, or others. Our bath coſt vs fifteene pound, when we came home.
Doe you heare, Sir Iohn, you ſhall tell mee but one thing truly, as you loue me.
If I can, I will, Sir.
You lay in the ſame houſe with the Bride, here?
Yes, and conuerſt with her hourely, Sir.
And what humour is ſhe of? is ſhee comming, and open, free?
O, exceeding open, Sir. I was her Seruant, and Sir Amorous was to be.
Come, you haue both had fauours from her? I know, and haue heard ſo much.
O, no, Sir.
You ſhall excuſe vs, Sir: we muſt not wound reputation.
Tut, ſhe is marryed, now; and you cannot hurt her with any report, and therefore ſpeake plainly: how many times, yfaith? which of you lead firſt? Ha?
Sir Iohn had her Mayden-head, indeed.
O, it pleaſes him to ſay ſo, Sir, but Sir Amorous knowes what's what, as well.
Do'ſt thou yfaith, Amorous?
In a manner, Sir.
Why, I commend you Lads. Little knowes Don Bride groome of this. Nor ſhall he, for me.
Hang him, mad Oxe.
Speake ſoftly: here comes his Nephew, with the Ladie Haughty. Hee'll get the Ladies from you, Sirs, if you looke not to him in time.
Why, if he doe, wee'll fetch 'hem home againe, I warrant you.
IAſſure you, Sir Dauphine, it is the price and eſtimation of your vertue only, that hath embarqu'd mee to this aduenture, and I could not but make out to tell you; nor can I repent me of the act, ſince it is alwayes an argument of ſome vertue in our ſelues, that wee loue and affect it ſo in others.
Your Ladiſhip ſets too high a price, on my weakneſſe.
Sir, I can diſtinguiſh Gemmes from Peebles—
(Are you ſo skilfull in Stones?)
And, howſoever I may ſuffer in ſuch a iudgement as yours, by admitting equality of ranke, or ſocietie, with Centaure or Mauis—
You doe not, Madame, I perceiue they are your mere Foyles.
Then are you a friend to truth, Sir. It makes mee loue you the more. It is not the outward, but the inward man that I affect. They are not apprehenſiue of an eminent perfection, but loue flat, and dully.
Where are you, my Lady Haughty.
I come preſently, Centawe. My Chamber, Sir, my Page ſhall ſhow you; and Trusty, my woman, ſhall be euer a wake for you: you neede not feare to communicate any thing with her, for ſhee is a Fidelia. I pray you weare this Iewell for my ſake, Sir Dauphine. Where's Mauis, Centaure?
Within, Madame, a writing. I'll follow you preſently. I'll but ſpeake a word with Sir Dauphine.
With me, Madame?
Good Sir Dauphine, doe not truſt Haughty, nor make any credit to her, what euer you doe beſides. Sir Dauphine, I giue you this caution, ſhee is a perfect Courtier; and loues no body, but for her vſes: and for her vſes, ſhe loues all. Beſides, her Phiſicians giue her out to be none o'the cleereſt, whether ſhe pay 'hem or no, Heau'n knowes: and ſhe's abode fiftie too, and pargets! See her in a fore-noone. Heere comes Mauis, a worſe face then ſhee! you would not like this, by Candle-light. If you'll come to my Chamber one o' theſe Mornings early, or late in an Euening, I'll tell you more. Where's Haughty, Mauis?
Within, Centaure.
What ha' you, there?
An Italian Riddle for Sir Dauphine, (you ſhall not ſee it yfaith, Centaure.) Good Sir Dauphine, ſolue it for me. I'll call for it anon.
How now, Dauphine? how do'ſt thou quit thy ſelfe of theſe Females?
'Slight, they haunt meelike Fayries, and giue mee Iewels here, I cannot be rid of 'hem,
O, you muſt not tell, though.
Maſſe, I forgot that: I was neuer ſo aſſaulted. One loues for vertue, and bribes mee with this. Another loues mee with caution, and ſo would poſſeſſe mee. A third brings mee a Riddle here, and all are iealous: and raile each at other.
A Riddle? pray le' mee ſee't? Sir Dauphine, I choſe this way of intimation for priuacie. The Ladies here, I know, haue both hope, and purpoſe, to make a Collegiate and Seruant of you. If I might bee ſo honour'd, as to appeare at any end of ſo noble a Worke, I would enter into a fame of taking Phiſicke to morrow, and continue you it foure or fiue dayes, or longer, for your viſitation. Mauis. By my faith, a ſubtle one! Call you this a Riddle? What's their plaine dealing, trow?
We lack Tru-wit, to tell vs that.
Wee lacke him for ſomewhat elſe too: his Knights reformados are wound vp as high, and inſolent, as euer they were.
You ieſt.
No Drunkards, either with Wine or Vanitie, euer confeſſ'd ſuch Stories of themſelues. I would not giue a Flyes legge, in ballauce againſt all the womens reputations here, if they could be but thought to ſpeake truth: and, for the Bride, they haue made their affidauit againſt her directly—
What, they haue lyen with her?
Yes, and tell times, and circumſtances, with the cauſe why, and the place where. I had almoſt brought 'hem to affirme that they had done it, to day.
Not both of 'hem.
Yes faith: with a ſooth or two more I had effected it. They would ha' ſet it downe vnder their hands.
Why, they will bee our ſport, I ſee, ſtill! whether we will, or no.
O, Are you here? Come Dauphine, Goe call your Vncle preſently. I haue fitted my Diuine, and my Canoniſt, dyed their Beards and all: the Knaues doe not know themſelues they are ſo exalted, and alter'd. Preferment changes any man. Thou ſhalt keepe one doore, and I another, and then Clerimont in the midſt, that hee may haue no meanes of eſcape from their cauilling, when they grow hot once againe. And then the women (as I haue giuen the Bride her inſtructions) to breake in vpon him, i' the l'enuoy. O, 'twill bee full and twanging! Away, fetch him. Come, Maſter Doctor, and Maſter Parſon, looke to your parts now, and diſcharge 'hem brauely: you are well ſet forth, performe it as well. If you chance to be out, doe not confeſſe it with ſtanding ſtill, or humming, or gaping one at another: but go on, and talke alowd, and eagerly, vſe vehement action, and onely remember your termes, and you are ſafe. Let the matter goe where it will: you haue many will doe ſo. But at firſt, be very ſolemne, and graue like your garments, though you loſe your ſelues after, and skip out like a brace of Iugglers on a Table. Here he comes! ſet your faces, and looke ſuperciliouſly, while I preſent you.
Are theſe the two learned men?
Yes, Sir, pleaſe you ſalute 'hem?
Salute 'hem? I had rather doe any thing, then weare out time ſo vnfruitfully, Sir. I wonder, how theſe common formes, as God ſaue you, and you are well-come, are come to be a habit in our liues! or, I am glad to ſee you! when I cannot ſee, what the profit can be of theſe words, ſo long as it is no whit better with him, whoſe affaires are ſad, and grieuous, that he heares this ſalutation.
'Tis true, Sir, wee'll goe to the matter then. Gentlemen, Maſter Doctor, and Maſter Parſon, I haue acquainted you ſufficiently with the buſineſſe, for which you are come hither. And you are not now to enforme your ſelues in the ſtate of the queſtion, I know. This is the Gentleman, who expects your reſolution, and therefore, when you pleaſe, begin.
Pleaſe you, Maſter Doctor.
Pleaſe you, good Maſter Parſon.
I would heare the Canon law ſpeake firſt.
It muſt giue place to poſitiue Diunitie, Sir.
Nay, good Gentlemen, doe not throw me into circumſtances. Let your comforts ariue quickly at me, thoſe that are. Be ſwift in affoording mee my peace, if ſo I ſhall hope any. I loue not your Diſpurations, or your Court-tumults. And that it be not ſtrange to you, I will tell you. My Father, in my education, was woont to aduiſe mee, that I ſhould alwayes collect, and contayne my mind, not ſuffring it to flow looſely; that I ſhould looke to what things were neceſſarie to the carriage of my life, and what not: embracing the one and eſchewing the other. In ſhort, that I ſhould endeare my ſelfe to reſt, and auoid turmoile: which now is growne to bee another nature to mee. So that I come not to your publike pleadings, or your places of noyſe; not that I neglect thoſe things, that make for the dignitie of the Common-wealth: but for the meere auoyding of clamours, and impertinences of Orators, that know not how to bee ſilent. Aud for the cauſe of noyſe, am I now a ſutor to you You doe not know in what a miſerie I haue beene exercis'd this day, what a torrent of euill! My very Houſe turnes round with the tumult! I dwell in a Wind-mill! The perpetuall about motion is here, and not at Eltham.
Well, good Maſter Doctor, will you breake the ice? Maſter parſon will wade after.
Sir, though vnworthy, and the weaker, I will preſume.
'Tis no preſumption, Domine Doctor.
Yet againe!
Your queſtion is, for how many cauſes a man may haue diuortium legitimum, a lawfull Diuorce. Firſt, you muſt vnderſtand the nature of the word Diuorce, a diuertendo—
No excurſions vpon words, good Doctor, to the queſtion briefly.
I anſwere then, the Canon-law affords Diuorce but in few caſes, and the principall is in the common caſe, the adulterous caſe. But there are duodecim impedimenta, twelue impediments (as wee call 'hem) all which doe not dirimere contractum, but irritum reddere matrimonium, as wee ſay in the Canon-law, not take away the bond, but cauſe a nullitie therein.
I vnderſtood you, before: good Sir, auoyd your impertinencie of Tranſlation.
He cannot open this too much, Sir, by your fauour.
Yet more!
O, you muſt giue the learned men leaue, Sir. To your impediments, Maſter Doctor.
The firſt is impedimentum erroris.
Of which there are ſeuerall ſpecies.
I, as error perſonae.
If you contract your ſelfe to one perſon, thinking her another.
Then, error fortunae.
If ſhe be a Begger, and you thought her rich.
Then, error qualitatis.
If ſhee prooue ſtubborne, or head-ſtrong, that you thought obedient.
How? is that, Sir, a lawfull impediment? One at once, I pray you Gentlemen.
I, ante copulam, but not post copulam, Sir.
Maſter Parſon ſayes right. Nec poſt nuptiarum benedictionem. It doth indeed but irrita reddere ſponſalia, annull the Contract: after Marriage it is of no obſtancy.
Alas, Sir, what a hope are wee fall'n from, by this time!
The next is conditio: if you thought her free borne, and ſhee prooue a bond-woman, there is impediment of eſtate and condition.
I, but Maſter Doctor, thoſe ſeruitudes are ſublae, now, among vs Chriſtians.
By your fauour, Maſter Parſon—
You ſhall giue me leaue, Maſter Doctor.
Nay, Gentlemen, quarrell not in that queſtion; it concernes not my caſe: paſſe to the third.
Well then, the third is votum. If either partie haue made a vow of Chaſtitie. But that practice, as Maſter Parſon ſaid of the other, is taken away among vs, thankes bee to diſcipline. The fourth is cognatio: if the perſons bee of kinne, within the degrees.
I: doe you know, what the degrees are, Sir?
No, nor I care not, Sir: they offer me no comfort in the queſtion, I am ſure,
But, there is a branch of this impediment may, which is cognatio ſpiritualis. If you were her Godfather, Sir, then the Marriage is inceſtuous.
That comment is abſurd, and ſuperſtitious, Maſter Doctor. I cannot endure it. Are wee not all Brothers and Siſters, and as much a kinne in that, as God-fathers, and God-daughters?
O me! to end the Controuerſie, I neuer was a Godfather, I neuer was a God-father id my life, Sir. Paſſe to the next.
The ſift is crimen adulterij: the knowne Caſe. The ſixt, cultus diſparitas, difference of Religion: haue you euer examin'd her what Religion ſhe is of?
No, I would rather ſhee were of none, then bee put to the trouble of it!
You may haue it done for you, Sir.
By no meanes, good Sir, on to the reſt: ſhall you euer come to an end, thinke you?
Yes, he has done halfe, Sir. (On, to the reſt) be patient, and expect, Sir.
The ſeuenth is, vis: if it were vpon compulſion, or force.
O no, it was too voluntary, mine: too voluntary.
The eighth is, ordo: if euer ſhee haue taken holy Orders.
That's ſuperſtitious, too.
No matter, Maſter Parſon: would ſhe would goe into a Nunnerie yet.
The ninth is, ligamen: if you were bound, Sir, to any other before.
I thruſt my ſelfe too ſoone into theſe Fetters.
The tenth is, publica honestas: which is inchoata quaedam affinitas.
I, or affinitas orta ex ſponſalibus: and is but leue impedimentum.
I feele no ayre of comfort blowing to mee, in all this.
The eleuenth is, affinitas ex fornicatione.
Which is no leſſe vera affinitas, then the other Maſter Doctor.
True, quae oritur ex legitimo matrimonio.
You ſay right, venerable Doctor. And, naſcitur ex co, quod per coniugium duae perſonae efficiuntur vna caro—
Hey-day, now they beginne.
I conceiue you, Maſter Parſon. Ita per fornicationem aeque est verus pater, qui ſic generat—
Et vere filius qui ſic generatur—
What's all this to me?
Now it growes warme.
The twelfth, and laſt is, ſi forte coire nequibis.
I, that is impedimentum grauiſſimum. It doth vtterly annull, and annihilate, that. If you haue manifestam frigiditatem, you are well, Sir.
Why, there is comfort come at length, Sir. Confeſſe your ſelfe but a man vnable, and ſhee will ſue to be diuorc'd firſt.
I, or if there be morbus perpetuus, & inſanabilis, as Paralyſis, Elephantiaſis, or ſo—
O, but frigiditas is the fairer way, Gentlemen.
You ſay troth, Sir, and as it is in the Canon Maſter Doctor.
I conceiue you, Sir.
Before he ſpeakes.
That a Boy, or child, vnder yeeres, is not fit for marriage, becauſe he cannot reddere debitum. So your omnipotentes—
Your impotentes, you whorſon Lobſter.
Your impotentes, I ſhould ſay, are minime apti ad contrahenda matrimonium.
Matrimonium? We ſhall haue moſt vn-matrimoniall Latin, with you: Matrimonia, and be hang'd.
You put 'hem out, man.
But then there will ariſe a doubt, Maſter Parſon, in our Caſe, post Matrimonium: that frigiditate praeditus (doe you conceiue me, Sir?)
Very well, Sir.
Who cannot vti vxore pro vxore, may habere cam pro ſorore.
Abſurd, abſurd, abſurd, and meerly Apostaticall.
You ſhall pardon me, Maſter Parſon, I can proue it.
You can prooue a Will, Maſter Doctor, you can prooue nothing elſe. Do's not the Verſe of your owne Caxan ſay, Haec ſocianda vetant connubia, facta retractant—
I grant you, but how doe they retractare, Maſter Parſon?
(O, this was it, I fear'd.)
In aeternum, Sir.
That's falſe in Diuinitie, by your fauour.
'Tis falſe in humanitie, to ſay ſo. Is hee not prorſus inutilis ad Thorum? Can he praeſtare fidem datam? I would faine know.
Yes: how if he doe conualere?
He cannot connulere, it is impoſſible.
Nay, good Sir, attend the learned men, they'll thinke you neglect 'hem elſe.
Or, if he doe ſimulare himſelfe frigidum, odio vxoris, or ſo?
I ſay, he is adulter manifestus, then.
(They diſpute it very learnedly, yfaith.)
And proſtitutor vxoris, and this is poſitiue.
Good Sir, let me eſcape.
You will not doe me that wrong, Sir?
And therefore, if he be manifeste frigidus, Sir—
I, if he be manifeſte frigidus, I grant you—
Why, that was my concluſion.
And mine too.
Nay, heare the concluſion, Sir.
Then frigiditatis cauſa—
Yes, cauſa frigiditatis—
O, mine eares!
She may haue libellum diuortij, againſt you.
I, diuorty libellum ſhe will ſure haue.
Good Eccho's, forbeare.
If you confeſſe it.
Which I would doe, Sir—
I will doe any thing—
And cleere my ſelfe in Foro Conſcientiae—
Becauſe you wanc indeed—
Yet more?
Exercende potestate.
I Wil not endure it any longer. Ladies, I beſeech you helpe me. This is ſuch a wrong, as neuer was offer'd to poore Bride before. Vpon her Marriage day, to haue her Huſband conſpire againſt her, and a couple of Mercinary Companions, to be brought in for formes ſake, to perſwade a Separation! If you had bloud, or vertue in you, Gentlemen, you would not ſuffer ſuch Eare-wigs about a Husband, or Scorpions, to creepe betweene Man and Wife—
O, the varietie, and changes of my torment!
Let 'hem bee cudgell'd out of doores, by our Groomes.
I'll lend you my Foot-man.
Wee'll haue our men blanket 'hem i'the Hall.
As there was one, at our Houſe, Madame, for peeping in at the doore.
Content, yfaith.
Stay, Ladies, and Gentlemen, you'll heare, before uproceed?
I'lld ha' the Bride-groome blanketted, too.
Begin with him firſt.
Yes, by my troth.
O, Mankind Generation!
Ladies, for my ſake forbeare.
Yes, for Sir Dauphines ſake.
He ſhall command vs.
Hee is as fine a Gentleman of his inches, Madame, as any is about the Towne, and weares as good colours when he lift.
Bee briefe, Sir, and confeſſe your infirmitie, ſhee'll be a-fire to be quit of you, if ſhe but heare that nam'd once, you ſhall not entreat her to ſtay. Shee'll flye you, like one that had the markes vpon him.
Ladies, I muſt craue all your pardons—
Silence, Ladies.
For a wrong I haue done to your whole ſexe, in marrying this faire, and vertuous Gentlewoman—
Heare him, good Ladies.
Being guiltie of an infirmitie, which before I conferr'd with theſe learned men, I thought I might haue conceald—
But now being better inform'd in his conſcience by them, hee is to declare it, and giue ſatisfaction, by asking your publique forgiueneſſe.
I am no man, Ladies.
How!
Vtterly vn-abled in nature, by reaſon of frigiditie, to performe the duties, or any the leaſt office of a Husband.
Now, out vpon him, prodigious creature!
Bride-groome vn carnate.
And would you offer it to a yong Gentlewoman?
A Lady of her longings?
Tut, a deuice, a deuice, this, it ſmels rankly, Ladies. A mere comment of his owne.
Why, if you ſuſpect that, Ladies, you may haue him ſearch'd.
As the cuſtome is, by a Iurie of Phyſitians.
Yes faith, 'twill be braue.
O me, muſt I vndergoe that!
No, let women ſearch him, Madame: wee can doe it our ſelues.
Our on me, worſe!
No Ladies, you ſhall not need, I'll take him with all his faults.
Worſt of all!
Why, then 'tis no Diuorce, Doctor, if ſhee conſent not?
No, if the man be frigidus, it is de parte vxoris, that we grant Libellum diuorty, in the Law.
I, it is the ſame in Theologie.
Worſe, worſe then worſt!
Nay, Sir, be not vtterly diſ-heartned, wee haue yet a ſmall relike of hope left, as neare as our comfort is blowne out. Clerimont, produce your brace of Knights. What was that, Maſter Parſon, you told me in errore qualitatis e'ne now? Dauphine, whiſper the Bride, that ſhe carry it as if ſhe were guiltie, and aſham'd.
Mary Sir, in errore qualitatis (which Maſter Doctor did forbeare to vrge) if ſhe be found corupta, that is, vitiated or broken vp, that was pro virgine deſponſa, eſpous'd for a Maid—
What then, Sir?
It doth dirimere contractum, and irritum reddere too.
If this bee true, wee are happy againe, Sir, once more. Here are an honourable brace of Knights, that ſhall affirme ſo much.
Pardon vs, good Maſter Clerimont.
You ſhall excuſe vs, Maſter Clerimont.
Nay, you muſt make it good now, Knights, there is no remedie, I'll eate no words for you, nor no men: you know you ſpoke it to me?
Is this Gentleman-like-like, Sir?
Iack Daw, hee's worſe then Sir Amorous: fiercer a great deale. Sir Amorous, beware, there bee tenne Dawes in this Clerimont.
I'll confeſſe it, Sir.
Will you, Sir Amorous? will you wound reputation?
I am reſolu'd.
So ſhould you be too, Iack Daw: what ſhould keep you off? ſhee is but a woman, and in diſgrace. Hee'll bee glad on't.
Will he? I thought he would ha 'beene angry.
You will diſpatch, Knights, it muſt bee done, yfaith.
Why, an' it muſt it ſhall, Sir, they ſay. They'll ne're goe backe. Doe not tempt his patience.
It is true indeed, Sir.
Yes, I aſſure you, Sir.
What is true Gentlemen? what doe you aſſure me?
That we haue knowne your Bride, Sir—
In good faſhion. Shee was our Miſtris, or ſo—
Nay, you muſt bee plaine, Knights, as you were to mee.
I, the queſtion is, if you haue carnaliter, or no.
Carnaliter? what elſe, Sir?
It is enough: a plaine nullitie.
I am vn-done, I am vn-done!
O, let me worſhip and adore you, Gentlemen!
I am vndone!
Yes, to my hand, I thanke theſe Knights: Maſter Parſon, let me thanke you otherwiſe.
And, ha' they confeſs'd?
Now out vpon 'hem, Informers!
You ſee, what creatures you may beſtow your fauours on, Madames.
I would except againſt 'hem as beaten Knights, Wench, and not good Witneſſes in Law.
Poore Gentlewoman, how ſhe takes it!
Be comforted, Moroſe, I loue you the better for't.
So doe I, I proteſt.
But Gentlemen, you haue not knowne her, ſince matrimonium?
Not to day, Maſter Doctor.
No, Sir, not to day.
Why, then I ſay, for any act before, the matrimonium is good and perfect: vnleſſe, the worſhipfull Bridegroome did preciſely, before witneſſe demand, if ſhee were virgo ante nuptias.
No, that he did not, I aſſure you, Maſter Doctor.
If he cannot proue that, it is ratum coniugium, notwithſtanding the premiſes. And they doe no way impedire. And this is my Sentence, this I pronounce.
I am of Maſter Doctors reſolution too, Sir: if you made not that demand, ante nuptias.
O my heart! wilt thou breake? wilt thou breake? this is worſt of all worſt worſts! that Hell could haue deuis'd! Marry a Whore! and ſo much noiſe!
Come, I ſee now plaine confederacie in this Doctor, and this Parſon, to abuſe a Gentleman. You ſtudie his affliction. I pray' bee gone companions. And Gentlemen, I begin to ſuſpect you for hauing parts with 'hem. Sir, will it pleaſe you heare me?
O, doe not talke to me, take not from me the pleaſure of dying in ſilence, Nephew.
Sir, I muſt ſpeake to you. I haue beene long your poore deſpis'd Kinſ-man, and many a hard thought has ſtrength'ned you againſt me: but now it ſhall appeare if either I loue you or your peace, and preferre them to all the World beſide. I will not be long or grieuous to you, Sir. If I free you of this vnhappy match abſolutely, and inſtantly after all this trouble, and almoſt in your deſpaire, now—
(It cannot be.)
Sir, that you bee neuer troubled with a murmure of it more, what ſhall I hope for, or deſerue of you?
O, what thou wilt, Nephew! thou ſhalt deſerue me, and haue me.
Shall I haue your fauour perfect to mee, and loue hereafter?
That, and any thing beſide. Make thine owne conditions. My whole eſtate is thine. Manage it, I will become thy Ward.
Nay, Sir, I will not be ſo vnreaſonable.
Will Sir Dauphine be mine enemie too?
You know, I haue beene a long Suter to you, Vncle, that out of your eſtate, which is fifteen hundred a yeere, you would allow me but fiue hundred during life, and aſſure the reſt vpon mee after: to which I haue often, by my ſelfe and friends tendred you a writing to ſigne, which you would neuer conſent, or incline too. If you pleaſe to effect it now—
Thou ſhalt haue it, Nephew. I will doe it, and more.
If I quit you not preſently? and for-euer of this cumber, you ſhall haue power inſtantly, afore all theſe, to reuoke your act, and I will become, whoſe Slaue you will giue me to, for-euer.
Where is the Writing? I will ſeale to it, that, or to a Blanke, and write thine owne conditions.
O me, moſt vnfortunate wretched Gentlewoman!
Will Sir Dauphine doe this?
Good Sir, haue ſome compaſſion on me.
O, my Nephew knowes you belike: away Crocodile.
He do's it not ſure, without good ground.
Here, Sir.
Come Nephew: giue me the Pen. I will ſubſcribe to any thing, and ſeale to what thou wilt, for my deliuerance. Thou art my reſtorer. Here, I deliuer it thee as my Deed. If there bee a word in it lacking, or writ with falſe Orthographie, I proteſt before—I will not take the aduantage.
Then here is your releaſe, Sir: you haue marryed a Boy: a Gentlemans ſonne, that I haue brought vp this halfe yeere, at my great charges, and for this compoſition, which I haue now made with you. What ſay you, Maſter Doctor? this is iuſtum impedimentum, I hope, error perſonae?
Yes Sir, in primo gradu.
In primo graou.
I thanke you, good Doctor Cutberd, and Parſon Otter. You are beholden to 'hem, Sir, that haue taken this paines for you: and my friend, Maſter Tru-wit, who enabled 'hem for the buſineſſe. Now you may goe in and reſt, be as priuate as you will, Sir. I'll not trouble you, till you trouble me with your Funerall, which I care not how ſoone it come. Cutberd, I'll make your Leaſe good. Thanke me not, but with your legge, Cutberd. And Tom Otter, your Princeſſe ſhall be reconcil'd to you. How now, Gentlemen! doe you looke at me?
A Boy.
Yes, Miſtris Epicoene.
Well, Dauphine, you haue lurch'd your friends of the better halfe of the Garland, by concealing this part of the plot: but much good doe it thee, thou deſeru'ſt it, Lad. And Clerimont, for thy vnexpected bringing in theſe two to confeſſion, weare my part of it freely. Nay, Sir Daw, and Sir La-Foole, you ſee the Gentlewoman that has done you the fauours! we are all thankfull to you, and ſo ſhould the woman-kind here, ſpecially for lying on her, though not with her! You meant ſo, I am ſure? But, that wee haue ſtuck it vpon you to day, in your owne imagin'd perſons, and ſo lately; this Amazon, the Champion of the ſexe, ſhould beat you now thriftily, for the common ſlanders, which Ladies receiue from ſuch Cuckowes, as you are. You are they, that when no merit or fortune can make you hope to enioy their bodies, will yet lye with their reputations, and make their fame ſuffer. Away you common Moths of theſe, and all Ladies honours, Goe, trauaile to make legges and faces, and come home with ſome new matter to be laught at: you deſerue to liue in an Ayre as corrupted, as that wherewith you feed rumour. Madames, you are mute, vpon this new Metamorphoſis! but here ſtands ſhe, that has vindicated your fames. Take heed of ſuch inſectae hereafter. And let it not trouble you that you haue diſcouer'd any Myſteries to this yong Gentleman. He is (a'moſt) of yeeres, and will make a good Viſitant within this twelue-month. In the meane time, wee'l all vndertake for his ſecrecie, that can ſpeake ſo well of his ſilence. Spectators, if you like this Comoedie, riſe cheerfully, and now Moroſe is gone in, clap your hands. It may bee, that noyſe will cure him, at leaſt pleaſe him.