STay, Stay.
Stay light foot Iris, for thou striuest in vaine,
My wings are nimbler then thy feete.
Away,
Dissembling Mercury; my messages
Aske honest haste, not like those wanton ones
Your thundring father sends.
Stay foolish Maid,
Or I will take my rise vpon a hill,
When I perceiue thee seated in a cloud,
In all the painted glorie that thou hast,
And neuer cease to clap my willing wings,
Till I catch hold of thy discolour'd Bow,
And shiuer it beyond the angry power
Of your curst Mistresse, to make vp againe.
Hermes forbeare, Iuno will chide and strike;
Is great Ioue iealous that I am imploy'd
On her loue errands? she did neuer yet
Claspe weake mortalitie in her white armes,
As he hath often done: I onely come
To celebrate the long wisht Nuptials,
Heere in Olympia, which are now perform'd
Betwixt two goodly Riuers, which haue mixt
Their gentle rising waues, and are to grow
Into a thousand streames, great as themselues;
I need not name them, for the sound is lowde
In heauen and earth, and I am sent from her
The Queene of Mariage, that was present heere,
And smil'd to see them ioyne, and hath not chid
Since it was done: good Hermes let me go.
Nay you must stay, Ioues message is the same,
Whose eies are lightning, and whose voice is thunder,
Whose breath is any winde, he will, who knowes
How to be first on earth as well as heauen.
But what hath he to doe with Nuptiall rights?
Let him keepe state vpon his starry throne,
And fright poore mortals with his thunderbolts,
Leauing to vs the mutuall darts of eyes.
Alas, when euer offer'd he t'abridge
Your Ladies power, but onely now in these,
Whose match concernes his generall gouernment?
Hath not each god a part in these high ioyes?
And shall not he the King of gods presume
Without proud Iunoes licence? let her know
That when enamor'd Ioue first gaue her power
To linke soft hearts in Vndissolued bonds,
He then foresaw, and to himselfe reseru'd
The honor of this Mariage: thou shalt stand
Still as a Rocke, while I to blesse this feast
Will summon vp with my all charming rod,
The Nymphes of fountains, from whose watry locks
Hung with the dew of blessing and encrease,
The greedie Riuers take their nourishment.
You Nymphes, who bathing in your loued springs,
Beheld these Riuers in their infancie,
And ioy'd to see them, when their circled heads
Refresht' the aire, and spread the ground with flowers:
Rise from your Wells, and with your nimble feete
Performe that office to this happie paire;
Which in these plaines, you to Alpheus did;
When passing hence through many seas vnmixt,
He gain'd the fauour of his Arethuse.
IS Hermes growne a louer, by what power
Vnknowne to vs, calls he the Naiades?
Presumptuous Iris, I could make thee daunce
Till thou forgott'st thy Ladies messages,
And rann'st backe crying to her, thou shalt know
My power is more, onely my breath, and this
Shall moue fix'd starres, and force the firmament
To yeeld the Hyades, who gouerne showers,
And dewic clouds, in whose dispersed drops
Thou form'st the shape of thy deceitfull Bow.
You maids, who yearely at appointed times,
Aduance with kindly teares, the gentle flouds,
Descend, and powre your blessing on these streames,
Which rolling downe from heauen aspiring hils,
And now vnited in the fruitfull vales;
Beare all before them rauisht with their ioy,
And swell in glorie till they know no bounds.
GReat witte and power hath Hermes to contriue
A liuelesse dance, which of one sexe consists.
Alas poore Iris, Venus hath in store
A secret Ambush of her winged boyes,
Who lurking long within these pleasant groues;
First strucke these Louers with their equall darts,
Those Cupids shall come forth, and ioyne with these,
To honor that which they themselues begun.
BEhold the Statuaes which wise Vulcan plac'd
Vnder the Altar of Olympian Ioue,
Shall daunce for ioy of these great Nuptialls:
And gaue to them an Artificiall life,
See how they moue, drawne by this heauenly ioy,
Like the wilde trees, which follow'd Orpheus Harpe.
ANd what will Iunoes Iris do for her?
Iust match this shew; or my Inuention failes,
Had it beene worthier, I would haue inuok'd
The blazing Comets, Clouds and falling Starres,
And all my kindred Meteors of the Ayre
To haue excell'd it, but I now must striue
To imitate Confusion, therefore thou
Delightfull Flora, if thou euer felt'st
Encrease of sweetnesse in those blooming plants,
On which the hornes of my faire bow decline;
Send hither all the Rurall company,
Which decke the May-games with their Countrey sports;
Iuno will haue it so.
IRis we striue,
Like windes at libertie, who should do worst
Ere we returne. If Iuno be the Queene
Of Mariage, let her giue happie way
To what is done, in honor of the State
She gouernes.
Hermes, so it may be done
Meerely in honor of the State, and these
That now haue prou'd it, not to satisfie
The lust of Iupiter, in hauing thankes
More then his Iuno, if thy snakie rod
Haue power to search the heauens, or found the sea,
Or call together all the ends of earth,
To bring in any thing that may do grace
To vs, and these; do it, we shall be pleas'd.
Then know that from the mouth of Ioue himselfe,
Whose words haue wings, and need not to be borne;
I tooke a message, and I bare it through
A thousand yeelding clouds, and neuer stai'd
Till his high will was done: the Olympian games
Which long haue slept, at these wish'd Nuptials,
He pleas'd to haue renew'd and all his Knights
Are gathered hither, who within their tents
Rest on this hill, vpon whose rising head.
Behold Ioues Altar, and his blessed Priests
Mouing about it: come you holy men,
And with your voices draw these youthes along,
That till Ioues musicke call them to their games,
Their actiue sports may giue a blest content
To those, for whom they are againe begun.
SHake off your heauy traunce,
And leape into a daunce,
Such as no mortals vse to treade,
Fit only for Apollo
To play to, for the Moone to lead,
And all the Starres to follow.
ON blessed youthes, for loue doth pause
Laying aside his grauer lawes
For this deuice,
And at the wedding such a paire,
Each daunce is taken for a praier,
Each song a sacrifice.
The Knights daunce their second Measure.
MOre pleasing were these sweet delights,
If Ladies mou'd as well as Knights;
Runne eu'ry one of you and catch
A Nymph in honor of this match;
And whisper boldly in her eare,
Ioue will but laugh, if you forsweare.
And this daye's sinnes he doth resolue
That we his Priests should all absolue.
YE should stay longer if we durst,
Away, alas that he that first
Gaue Time wilde wings to fly away,
Hath now no power to make him stay.
But though these games must needs be plaid,
I would this Paire, when they are laid,
And not a creature nie them,
Could catch his scythe, as he doth passe,
And cut his wings, and breake his glasse,
And keepe him euer by them.
PEace and silence be the guide
To the Man, and to the Bride,
If there be a ioy yet new
In mariage, let it fall on you,
That all the world may wonder.
If we should stay, we should doe worse,
And turne our blessing to a curse,
By keeping you asunder.