STay; whether you humane be or diuine; here is no passage; see you not the earth furrowed? the region solitarie? Cities and Courts fit tumultuous multitudes: this is a place of silence; heere a kingdome I enioy without people; my selfe commands, my selfe obeyes; Host, Cooke, and Guest my selfe; I reape without sowing, owe all to Nature, to none other beholding: my skinne is my coate, my ornaments these boughes and flowers, this Bower my house, the earth my bed, herbes my food, water my drinke; I want no sleepe, nor health; I enuie none, nor am enuied, neither feare I, nor hope, nor ioy, nor grieue: if this be happinesse, I haue it; which you all that depend on others seruice, or command, want: will you be happy? be priuate; turne Pallaces to Hermitages, noies to silence, outward felicitie, to inward content.
Whether trauels thy tongue ill nurtur'dman? thy manners shew madnesse, thy nakednesse pouertie, thy resolution folly; since none will vndertake thy presumption; let mee descend, that I may make thy ignorance know how much it hath injured sacred eares.
Naked I am, and so is truth; plaine, and so is honestie; I feare no mans encounter, since my cause deserues neither excuse, nor blame.
Shall I now chide or pitie thee? thou art as miserable in life, as foolish in thy opinion; answere me; doest thou thinke that all happinesse consists in solitarinesse?
I doe.
And are they vnhappy that abide in societie?
They are.
Doest thou esteeme it a good thing to liue?
The best of things.
Hadst thou not a Father and Mother?
Yes.
Did they not liue in societie?
They did.
And wert not thou one of their societie, when they bred thee, instructing thee to goe, and speake?
True.
Thy birth then and speech in spite of thy splene make thee sociable, goe, thou art but a vaine-glorious counterfait, and wanting that which should make thee happie, contemnest the meanes; view but the heau'ns, is there not aboue vs a Sunne and Moone, giuing and receiuing light? are there not millions of Starres that participate their glorious beames? is there any Element simple? is there not a mixture of all things? and wouldst thou only be singular? action is the end of life, vertue the crowne of action, society the subject of vertue, friendship the band of societie, solitarinesse the breach. Thou art yet yong, and faire enough, wert thou not barbarous; thy soule poore wretch is farre out of tune, make it musicall, come, follow me, and learne to liue.
I am conquered by reason, and humbly aske pardon for my error, henceforth my heart shall honour greatnesse, and loue societie; leade now, and I will follow as good a fellow as the best.
More then most welcome, renowned and gracious Queene, since your presence vouchsafes to beautifie these woods, whereof I am Keeper, be it your pleasure to accept such rude intertainment, as a rough Wood-man can yeeld. This is to vs a high holy-day, and henceforth yearly shall bee kept and celebrated with our Countrie sports, in honour of so Royall a guest; come friends and fellowes now prepare your voices, and present your ioyes in a Siluan dance.
DAnce now and sing the ioy, and loue we owe:
Let chearfull voices and glad gestures showe,
The Queene of grace is shee whom we receiue,
Honour and State are her guides,
Her presence they can neuer leaue.
Then in a stately Siluan forme salute
Her euer flowing grace.
Fill all the Woods with Ecchoed welcomes,
And strew with flowers this place:
Let eu'ry bow and plant fresh blossomes yeeld,
And all the aire refine.
Let pleasure striue to please our Goddesse,
For shee is all diuine.
Yet once againe, let vs our measures moue,
And with sweet notes record our ioyfull loue.
An obiect more diuine none euer had.
Beautie, and heau'n-borne worth,
Mixt in perfection neuer fade.
Then with a dance triumphant let vs sing
Her high aduanced praise,
And eu'n to heau'n our gladsome welcomes,
With wings of musick raise;
Welcome, O welcome, euer-honoured Queene,
To this now-blessed place,
That groue, that bowre, that house is happy
Which you vouchsafe to grace.
NO longer delay her,
'Twere sinne now to stay her
From her ease with tedious sport;
Then welcome still crying,
And swiftly hence flying,
Let vs to our homes resort.
Most magnificent and peerelesse Diety, loe I the surueyer of Lady Floras workes, welcome your grace with fragrant phrases into her Bowers, beseeching your greatnesse to beare with the late woodden entertainment of the Wood-men, for Woods are more full of weeds then wits, but gardens are weeded, and Gardners witty, as may appeare by me. I haue flowers for all fancies, Tyme for truth, Rosemary for remembrance, Roses for loue, Hartsease for ioy, and thousands more, which all harmoniously reioyce at your presence; but my selfe, with these my Paradisians heere, will make you such musick, as the wilde Wooddists shall bee ashamed to heare the report of it. Come sirs prune your pipes, and tune your strings, and agree together like birds of a feather.
VVElcome to this flowrie place,
Faire Goddesse and sole Queene of grace:
All eyes triumph in your sight,
Which through all this emptie space
Casts such glorious beames of light.
Paradise were meeter farre
To entertaine so bright a Starre:
But why erres my folly so?
Paradise is where you are
Heau'n aboue, and heau'n below.
Could our powers and wishes meete,
How well would they your graces greete,
Yet accept of our desire,
Roses of all flowers most sweete
Spring out of the silly brier.
Wonder not (great Goddesse) at the sweetnesse of our Garden-aire (though passing sweet it be) Flora hath perfumed it for you (Flora our mistresse, and your seruant) who enuites you yet further into her Paradise; shee inuisibly will leade your grace the way, and we (as our duetie is) visibly stay behinde.
O Ioyes exceeding?
From loue, frō power of your wisht sight proceeding!
As a faire morne shines diuinely,
Such is your view, appearing more diuinely.
Your steppes ascending,
Raise high your thoughts for your content contending;
All our hearts of this grace vaunting,
Now leape as they were moued by inchaunting.
A Hall, a hall for men of moment; Rationals, and Irrationals; but yet not all of one breeding. For I an Academicke am, refined by trauell that haue learn'd what to Courtship belongs, and so deuine a presence as this; if we presse past good manners, laugh at our follies, for you cannot shew vs more fauour, then to laugh at vs. If we proue ridiculous in your sights, we are gracious; and therefore wee beseech you to laugh at vs. For mine owne part (I thanke my Starres for it) I haue beene laught at in most parts of Christendome.
I can neither bragge of my Trauels, nor yet am ashamed of my profession; I make sweet walkes for faire Ladies; Flowers I prepare to adorne them; close Arbours I build wherein their Loues vnseene may court them; and who can doe Ladies better seruice, or more acceptable? when I was a Child and lay in my Cradle, (a very pretie Child) I remember well that Lady Venus appeared vnto me, and setting a Siluer Spade and Rake by my Pillow, bad me proue a Gardiner; I told my Mother of it (as became the duetie of a good Child) whereupon shee prouided straight for mee two great Platters full of Pappe; which hauing duetifully deuoured, I grew to this portrature you see, sprung fodainely out of my Cabine, and fell to my profession.
Verily by thy discourse thou hast Trauelled much, and I am asham'd of my selfe that I come so farre behind thee; as not once to haue yet mentioned Venus or Cupid, or any other of the gods to haue appeared to mee. But I will henceforth boast truely, that I haue now seene a Dietie as farre beyond theirs, as the beautie of light is beyond darknesse, or this Feast whereof we haue had our share, is beyond thy Sallets.
Sure I am, it hath stir'd vp strange thoughts in me; neuer knew I the difference betweene Wine and Water before. Bacchus hath opened mine eyes, I now see brauerie and admire it, beautie & adore it. I find my Armes naked, my discourse rude, but my heart soft as Waxe, ready to melt with the least beame of a faire eye; which (till this time) was as vntractable as Iron.
I much ioy in thy conuersion, thou hast long beene a mad fellow, and now proues a good fellow, let vs all therefore ioyne together sociably in a Song, to the honour of good fellowship.
A very Musicall motion, and I agree to it.
Sing that sing can, for my part I will onely while you sing, keepe time with my gestures. A la more du France.
NIght as well as brightest day hath her delight,
Let vs then with mirth and Musicke decke the night,
Neuer did glad day such store
Of ioy to night boqueath.
Her Starres then adore,
Both in Heau'n, and hore beneath.
Loue and beautie, mirth and Musicke yeeld true ioyes,
Though the Cynickes in their folly count them toyes.
Raise your spirits nere so high,
They will be apt to fall:
None braue thoughts enuie,
Who had ere braue thought at all.
Ioy is the sweete friend of life, the nurse of blood,
Patron of all health, and fountaine of all good:
Neuer may ioy hence depart,
But all your thoughts attend,
Nought can hurt the heart,
That retaines so sweete a friend.
Silence sirs, here comes Siluanus god of these Woods, whose presence is rare, and importes some noueltie.
Let vs giue place, for this place is fitter for Dieties then vs.
THat health which harbours in the fresh air'd groues,
Those pleasures which greene hill and valley moues,
Siluanus the commander of them all,
Here offers to this State Emperiall;
Which as a homager he visites now,
And to a greater power his power doth bow,
With all, thus much his duetie signifies:
That there are certaine Semideities,
Belonging to his Siluan walkes, who come
Led with the Musicke of a Spritely drome,
To keepe the night awake and honour you,
(Great Queene) to whom all Honours they hold due,
So rest you full of ioy, and wisht content,
Which though it be not giuen, 'tis fairely ment.
STay Goddesse, stay a little space,
Our poore Countrie loue to grace,
Since we dare not too long stay you,
Accept at our hands, we pray you,
These meane presents to expresse
Greater loue, then we professe,
Or can vtter now for woe
Of your parting hast'ned so.
Gifts these are, such as were wrought
By their hands, that them haue brought,
Home-bred things, which they presumed,
After I had them perfumed
With my flowrie incantation,
To giue you in presentation
At your parting, come feate Lasses
With fine cursies, and smooth faces,
Offer vp your simple toyes
To the Mistris of our ioyes;
While we the sad time prolong
With a mournefull parting song.
CAn you the Author of our ioy
So soone depart?
Will you reuiue, and straight destroy,
New mirth to teares conuert?
O that euer cause of gladnesse
Should so swiftly turne to sadnesse!
Now as we droupe, so will these flowers
Bard of your sight.
Nothing auaile them heau'nly showres
Without your heau'nly light.
When the glorious Sunne forsakes vs,
Winter quickly ouer-takes vs.
Yet shall our praiers your waies attend,
When you are gone;
And we the tedious time will spend,
Remembring you alone.
Welcome here shall you heare euer,
But the word of parting neuer.