AGen, agen, fresh kindle Phoebus sounds,
T'exhale Mania from her earthie den;
Allay the furie that her sense confounds,
And call her gently forth, sound, sound, agen.
What powerfull noise is this importunes me,
T'abandon darkenesse which my humour fits?
Ioues hand in it I feele, and euer he
Must be obai'd eu'n of the franticst wits.
Mania?
Hah.
Braine-sick, why start'st thou so?
Approch yet nearer, and thou then shalt know
The will of Ioue, which he will breath from me,
Who art thou? if my dazeled eyes can see,
Thou art the sweet Enchanter heau'nly Orpheus.
The same Mania, and Ioue greets thee thus,
Though seuerall power to thee, and charge he gaue,
T'enclose in thy Dominions such as raue
Through blouds distemper, how durst thou attempt
T'imprison Entheus, whose rage is exempt
From vulgar censure? it is all diuine
Full of celestiall rapture, that can shine
Through darkest shadowes, therefore Ioue by me
Commands thy power strait to set Entheus free.
How can I? Franticks, with him many more
In one caue are lockt vp, ope once the dore,
All will flie out, and through the world disturbe,
The peace of Ioue; for, what power then can curbe
Their rainelesse furie?—
—Let not feare in vaine
Trouble thy crazed fancie, all againe
Saue Entheus to thy safeguard shall retire,
For Ioue into our musick will inspire
The power of passion, that their thoughts shall bend
To any forme or motion we intend:
Obey Ioues willing then, go, set Entheus free.
I willing go, so Ioue obey'd must bee.
Let Musicke put on Protean▪ changes now,
Wilde beasts it once tam'd, now let Franticks bow.
Through these soft and calme sounds Mania passe
With thy Phantasticks hence; heere is no place
Longer for them or thee; Entheus alone
Must do Ioues bidding now, all else be gone.
Diuinest Orpheus, ô how all from thee
Proceed with wondrous sweetnesse, am I free?
Is my affliction vanish't?
—Too too long
Alas, good Entheus, hast thou brook't this wrong;
What? number thee with madmen? o mad age,
Sencelesse of thee, and thy celestiall rage.
For thy excelling rapture, eu'n through things
That seems most light, is borne with sacred wings:
Nor are these Musicks, Showes, or Reuels vaine,
When thou adorn'st them with thy Phoebean braine;
Th'are pallate sicke of much more vanitie,
That cannot taste them in their dignitie.
Ioue therefore lets thy prison'd spright obtaine
Her libertie and fiery scope againe:
And heere by me commands thee to create
Inuentions rare, this night to celebrate,
Such as become a nuptiall by his will
Begun and ended,—
—Ioue I honor still,
And must obey, Orpheus I feele the fires
Are reddy in my braine, which Ioue enspires,
Loe, through that vaile, I see Prometheus stand
Before those glorious lights, which his false hand
Stole out of heau'n, the dull earth to enflame
With the affects of Loue, and honor'd Fame,
I view them plaine in pompe and maiestie.
Such as being seene might hold riualitie,
With the best triumphes; Orpheus giue a call
With thy charm'd musicke, and discouer all.
Flie cheerfull voices, through the ayre, and clear
These clouds, that you hid beautie may appeare.
COme away; bring thy golden theft,
Bring bright Prometheus all thy lights,
Thy fires from Heau'n bereft
Shew now to humane sights.
Come quickly come; thy stars to our stars straight present,
For pleasure being too much defer'd, loseth her best cōtēt,
What fair dames wish, should swift as their own thoughts appeare,
To louing & to longing harts euery houre seemes a yeare.
See how faire; O how faire they shine,
What yeelds more pompe beneath the skies?
Their birth is yet diuine,
And such their forme implies.
Large grow their beames, their nere approch afford thēso
By nature sights that pleasing are, cānot too amply show,
O might these flames in humane shapes descēd this place,
How louely would their presence be, how full of grace!
Patron of mankinde, powerfull and bounteous,
Rich in thy flames, reuerend Prometheus,
In Hymens place aide vs to solempnize
These royall Nuptials, fill the lookers eyes
With admiration of thy fire and light,
And from thy hand let wonders flow to night.
Entheus and Orpheus names both deare to me,
In equall ballance I your Third will be
In this nights honour, view these heau'n borne Starres,
Who by my stealth are become Sublunars.
How well their natiue beauties fit this place,
Which with a chorall danee they first shall grace,
Then shall their formes to humane figures turne,
And these bright fires within their bosomes burne.
Orpheus apply thy musick for it well
Helps to induce a Courtly miracle.
Sound best of Musicks, raise yet higher our sprights,
While we admire Prometheus dancing lights.
ADuance your Chorall motions now
You musick-louing lights,
This night concludes the nuptiall vow,
Make this the best of nights,
So brauely Crowne it with your beames,
That it may liue in fame,
As long as Rhenus or the Thames
Are knowne by either name.
Once moue againe, yet nearer moue
Your formes at willing view,
Such faire effects of ioy and loue,
None can expresse but you,
Then reuell midst your ayrie Bowres
Till all the clouds doe sweat,
That pleasure may be powr'd in showres
On this triumphant Seat.
Long since hath louely Flora throwne
Her Flowers and Garlands here,
Rich Ceres all her wealth hath showne,
Prowde of her daintie cheare.
Chang'd then to humane shape descend,
Glad in familiar weede.
That euery eye may here commend
The kinde delights you breede.
So, pause awhile, and come yee fierie spirits,
Breake forth the earth-like sparks t'attend these Knights.
VVAit spirits wait, while through the clouds we
And by descending gaine a hier place. (pace,
SVpported now by Clouds descend,
Diuine Prometheus, Hymens friend,
Leade downe the new transformed fires,
And fill their breasts with loues desires:
That they may reuell with delight,
And celebrate this nuptiall night,
So celebrate this nuptiall night,
That all which see may stay.
They neuer viewed so faire a sight,
Euen on the cleerest day.
See, see Prometheus, foure of these first dames
Which thou long since out of thy purchac't flames,
Did'st forge with heau'nly fire, as they were then,
By Ioue transformed to Statues, so agen,
They suddenly appeare by his command
At thy arriuall, Loe how fixt they stand,
So did Ioues wrath too long, but now at last,
It by degrees relents, and he hath plac't
These Statues, that we might his ayde implore,
First for the life of these, and then for more.
Entheus, Thy councels are diuine and iust,
Let Orpheus decke thy Hymne, since pray we must.
POwerfull Ioue, that of bright starres,
Now hast made men fit for warres;
Thy power in these Statues proue,
And make them women fit for loue.
See Ioue is pleas'd, Statues haue life & moue,
Goe new-borne men, and entertaine with loue,
These new-borne women, though your number yet
Exceedes their's double, they are arm'd with wit,
To beare your best encounters, Court them faire:
When words and Musicke speake, let none despaire.
WOoe her, and win her, he that can,
Each woman hath two louers,
So shee must take and leaue a man,
Till time more grace discouers;
This doth Ioue to shew that want,
Makes beautie most respected;
If faire women were more skant,
They would be more affected.
Courtship and Musicke, suite with loue,
They both are workes of passion,
Happie is he whose words can moue,
Yet sweete notes helpe perswasion.
Mixe your words with Musicke then,
That they the more may enter;
Bold assaults are fit for men,
That on strange beauties venture.
Cease, cease your woing strife, see Ioue intends,
To fill your number vp, and make all friends,
Orpheus, and Eutheus, ioyne your skils once more,
And with a Hymne the Dietie implore.
POwerfull Ioue, that hast giuen fower,
Raise this number but once more,
That complete, their numerous feet
May aptly in iust measures meet.
The number's now complete, thankes be to Ioue,
No man needs feare a Riuall in his loue;
For, all are sped, and now begins delight,
To fill with glorie, this triumphant night.
BReath you now, while Io Hymen
To the Bride we sing:
O how many ioyes, and honors,
From this match will spring?
Euer firme the league will proue,
Where only goodnesse causeth loue.
Some for profit seeke
What their fancies most disleeke,
These loue for vertues sake alone:
Beautie and youth vnite them both in one.
Liue with thy Bridegroome happy, sacred Bride;
How blest is he, that is for loue enui'd.
BReath againe, while we with musicke
Fill the emptie space:
O but do not in your dances,
Your selues only grace.
Eu'ry one fetch out your Pheare,
Whom chiefely you will honor heere,
Sights most pleasure breed,
When their numbers most exceed:
Chuse then, for choice to all is free,
Taken or left, none discontent must bee.
Now in thy Reuels frolicke-faire delight,
To heape Ioy on this euer honored night.
CEase, cease you Reuels, rest a space,
New pleasures presse into this place,
Full of beautie and of grace.
Make cleare the passage to Sibilla's sight,
Who with her Trophee comes, to crowne this night,
And as her selfe with Musicke shall be led,
So shall shee pull on with a golden thread.
A high vast Obeliske, dedicate to fame,
Which immortalitie it selfe did frame.
Raise high your voices now, like Trumpets fill,
The roome with sounds of Triumph, sweete and shrill.
COme triumphing, come with state,
Old Sibilla, reuerend Dame,
Thou keep'st the secret key of fate,
Preuenting swiftest fame.
This night breath onely words of ioy,
And speake them plaine, now be not coy,
DEbetur alto iure, Principium Ioui,
Votis det ipse vim meis, dict is fidem.
Vtrin que decoris splendet egregium Iubar,
Medio triumphus mole stat dignus sua,
Coelum que summo Capite dilectum petit;
Quam pulchra pulchro sponsa respondet viro!
Quam plena numinis? Patrem vultu exprimit,
Parens futura masculae prolis, Parens
Regum, imperatorum: Additur Germaniae
Robur Britannicum. ecquid esse par potest?
Vtram que iunget vna mens gentem, fides,
Dei que Cultus vnus, & simplex amor.
Idem erit vtri que hostis, sodalis idem, idem
Votum periclitantium, at que eadem manus.
Fauebit illis Pax, fauebit bellica
Fortuna, semper aderit Adiutor Deus.
Sic, sic Sibilla; vocibus nec his deest
Pondus, nec hoc inane momumentum trahit.
Et aureum est, & quale nec flammas timet,
Nec fulgura, ipsi quippe sacratur Ioui.
The good old Sage is silenc't, her free tongue
That made such melodie, is now vnstrung:
Then grace her Trophee with a dance triumphant,
Where Orpheus is none can fit musick want.
DAnce, dance, and visit now the shadowes of our ioy,
All in height, and pleasing state, your changed formes imploy.
And as the bird of Ioue salutes, with loftie wing, the morn;
So mount, so flie, these Trophees to adorne.
Grace them with all the sounds and motions of delight,
Since all the earth cannot expresse a louelier sight,
View them with triumph, and in shades the truth adore,
No pompe or sacrifice can please Ioues greatnesse more.
Turne, turne, and honor now the life, these figures beare,
Loe, how heau'nly natures farre aboue all art appeare,
Let their aspects reuiue in you, the fire that shin'd so late,
Still mount and still retaine, your heauenly state.
Gods were with dance, and with musick seru'd of old,
Those happie daies deriu'd their glorious stile from gold:
This pair by Hymen ioyn'd, grace you with measures then,
Since they are both diuine, and you are more then men.
Let here Sybilla's Trophee stand,
Leade her now by either hand,
That shee may approch yet nearer,
And the Bride and Bridegroome heare her
Blesse them in her natiue tongue,
Wherein old prophesies shee sung,
Which time to light hath brought:
Shee speakes that which Ioue hath taught.
Well may he inspire her now,
To make a ioyfull and true vow.
Sponsam sponse tro tene pudicam,
Sponsum sponsa tene toro pudicum.
Non haec vnica nox datur beatis,
At vos perpetuò haec beabit vna
Prole multiplici, pari que amore.
Laeta, ac vera refert Sybilla, ab alto
Ipse Iuppiter annuit loquenti.
So be it euer, ioy and peace,
And mutuall loue giue you increase,
That your posteritie may grow
In fame, as long as Seas doe flow.
Liue you long to see your ioyes,
In faire Nymphs and Princely Boyes:
Breeding like the Garden flowers,
Which kinde heau'n drawes with her warme showers.
Enough of blessing, though too much
Neuer can be said to such;
But night doth wast, and Hymen chides,
Kinde to Bridegroomes and to Brides,
Then singing the last dance induce,
So let good night preuent excuse.
NO longer wrong the night,
Of her Hymenaean right,
A thousand Cupids call away,
Fearing the approching day,
The Cocks alreadie crow,
Dance then and goe,