VVElcome to the water, worthy Brother Draper. Imagine me to be the true reſemblance of olde S. Iohn Norman, ſometime Lord Maior of this famous Cittie, and the firſt that deuiſed this water honour, making my Barge at mine owne proper coſt, and rowed with ſiluer Oares to Weſtminſter, when (as you now) I then went to take mine oath. In regard whereof, I was the firſt Maior, that was preſented to the Barons, of the Exchecquer. The imaginarie ſhapes of the ſeauen liberall Sciences, each one diſtinguiſhed by their true charracter, are placed as my companions in my Barge: in memorie of the loue I euer bare to learning, and no meane bounties by me extended for the maintenance thereof. I ioy, that inuention would make vſe of my remembrance in this manner, to doe any ſeruice to ſo deſertfull a Brother, and to the Companie of Drapers which I dearly affected. On then my hearts, and as in thoſe elder dayes you declared your loue to olde Iohn Norman: ſo expreſſe ſomewhat nowe to delight my honourd Brother, ſinging cheerfully, Rowe thy Boate Norman.
VVHy gaze yee ſo vpon me! am I not a man fleſh, bloud, and bone, as you are? Or in theſe ſilken ſattin Townes, are poore plaine meaning Sheepheards woondred at, like Comets or blazing Starres▪ Or is it this goodly beaſt by me, that fills your eyes with admiration? If it be ſo, let me then reſolue ye, that it is an article of dutie which we Shepheards of Cotſwold owe to the old Drapers of Londō, for keping their flocks on the Cotſwold hills, that whē any worthy Brother of their Society comes to be L. Maior of this City, the very faireſt Ram in all their flocks is ſent vnto them as a ſolemne offring, as being the Creſt of their Companies Armes, and the chiefe maintainer of Wooll for cloathing. In which reſpect, my Father about ſome ſix and twenty yeares ſince, when S. Martin Calthrope (a Brother of the ſame Society) was Lord Maior, brought then the like goodly. Ramme as his oblation; and I hearing, that his man S. Thomas Hayes, and another Martin, Maiſter Martin Lumley (by the bleſſing of heauen and their owne vertuous endeauours) were the next choſen Brethren of the ſame Band, the one to ſucceed in the ſelfe ſame dignitie of the Maioraltie, and the other of the Shriuealty; haue brought this as my hearts free offring, in honour of them that ſo dearely affect them, and in my dutie to them both, with all my vtmoſt ſeruice beſide. For thus ſay we in Catſwolde.
From the Ramme
we haue the Lambe
From both our fineſt
woolles are ſhorne.
Wooll had thus from
the Ramme and Lambe,
Makes the beſt Cloath,
that can be worne.
Thanke then the Draper
that began:
To make ſuch Cloathing,
meete for man.
For, if wee haue no Ramme, wee are ſure to haue no Lambe: no Lambe, no Wooll: no wooll, no Cloth: no Cloth, no Draper.
Heauen graunt that we may neuer ſee theſe noes,
For we ſhall then feele twiſe as many woes:
But that of Ram, Lambe, Wooll, Cloth, ſtill we may haue ſtore:
So ſhall the Drapers then thriue more and more.
IN times of olde Antiquitie,
When men liu'd long and healthfully,
Deteſting ſloth and idleneſſe,
Which breeds but ſurfet and exceſſe.
When yea and nay was greateſt Oath,
And mens beſt weare, good woollen Cloath,
Yeleped Englands Draperie,
More worth then gaudie brauerie,
Of Silken twine, Siluer and Golde,
Nere knowen in thoſe bleſt daies of olde:
Then liu'd that graue and worthie man,
That Londons honour firſt began,
By title of the Maioralty,
A high and famous dignity:
Henrie Fitz-Alwine was his name,
Noble by birth, and of much fame.
Whoſe ſubſtance though his graue hath kept,
Foure hundred yeares, where he hath ſlept:
Yet is his ſhadowe raiſde in me,
To grace this daies ſolemnitie.
For he being firſt that held the ſway
Of Maior in London, iuſtly may
Challenge (by right) prioritie,
In honouring his owne Companie,
With all that ſacred Poeſie can
Deuiſe, to grace ſo good a man,
As firſt with hearts, hands, and free voice,
Was thought meet in the peoples choice
To rancke in that rich rowle of fame:
That honoured firſt the Drapers name.
And worthie Brother here ſuruay
Thoſe ſeuerall kinds of Londons ſway
Till royall Richard firſt in me,
Altered the rule to Maioraltie.
Portgreues held firſt by ſtrict command,
Next Prouoſts with a ſterner hand,
Such from the Conqueſt was the caſe
Of Londons awe, till milder grace
Made choice of Bayliffes, men thought fit
In the Kings iudgement Courts to ſit,
And right all cauſes of contention:
By vpright cenſure, or preuention.
Yet all this could not pleaſe the king,
In two mens rule grew varying,
By leaning to what part each liſted,
So might by might was still reſiſted.
Wrongs vnredreſt, offences flowing,
Garboyles & grudges each where growing.
Therefore as God had giuen him place,
Solely to rule, and iudge each caſe,
So would he plant a deputie,
To figure his authoritie,
In the true forme of Monarchie,
Then which, no better ſoueraigntie.
Which office being impoſde on me,
By ſuch a gracious Maieſtie:
I held it foure and twentie yeares,
(Yearely elected, as appeares.)
Vntill my verie dying day.
Since when (my Lord) I can well ſay,
The Science of olde Draperie,
(Our louing kind Society)
Hath yeelded many a Magiſtrate,
In the ſelfe-ſame degree of State.
And Time reſerueth in his ſtore,
For the like honour, many more.
On then before, for we muſt tend,
Till this daies triumph haue full end.
HOnorable Lord and Brother, it is impoſed on olde Iohn Norman, brieflie to diſcribe theſe two beautifull deuiſes to yee. In the firſt, which manifeſteth the Honor of Draperie, your well iudging eye may eaſily conceiue, each perſon by their apt diſtinguiſhment. The Mother, Olde Draperie, with her Daughters and attendants placed about her, doe deliuer the Drapers true antiquitie, and that which he and his onely performed, is ſince become the benifit of diuers trades or occupations. Carding, Spinning, Weauing, Fulling, Rowing, Shearing, Dreſſing, Dying, Tentering, and what elſe appertained to wollen cloath, was the auncient Drapers ſole profeſſion, and the chiefe honour of this famous Kingdome: flouriſhing thereby in ſo many happy bleſſings, and ſo fortefied by Peace, Plenty, Bountie, Councell and Diſcreete Zeale, that all other nations ſate and admired thereat. You haue a taſte of this felicity in that other Deuiſe, beautified with the chiefe Clothing Cities of this Land, for maintenance of auncient Draperie, whereof London ſitteth the higheſt aduaunced, as being his choyce Chamber that firſt made a Draper the onely Gouernor thereof. I am loath to hold yee long, and well I wot, more ample relation hath beene made vnto yee; and therefore to God and your good deuotions I heartily commend yee.
THe longeſt daies haue end at laſt,
And pleaſures pompe is but a blaſt,
You ſee my Lord that ſullen night,
Sworne enemie to daies delight,
(For all the pride theſe Tapers make,)
Whiſpers, that we muſt farewell take.
To doubt of your enſuing care,
Or to aduiſe yee, to prepare
For enuies ſtormes, or ſoothing ſmiles,
That wait on ſuch high place ſome whiles:
Longs not to me. For in your eie
Such true Charracters I eſpie
Of vertue, zeale, and vpright heed,
That you will prooue the man indeed,
Meet ſuch a charge to vndergoe:
Whereto heauens hand hath raiſde you ſo▪
And that you'le equall any yet
That in the ſelfe-ſame place hath ſet.
Such is the hope of all that loue yee,
Mongſt whom, I cannot chooſe but moue yee
With their remembrance, that this day
Haue done as much as men well may
In honouring this Solemnity,
The Drapers worthie Company.
Their loue and bountie hath expreſt,
How with their fauours you are bleſt:
For, as their kindneſſe hath not ſcanted:
So hath no needfull ſeruice wanted.
For this daies honour and delight:
And ſo my worthie Lord good night.