VFFE, where art thou?
Here at hand.
Where is this Cuffe?
Almoſt at your Elbow.
OH Band, art thou there? I thought thou haddeſt beene worne out of date by this time, or ſhrunke in the wetting at leaſt.
What? doe you thinke I am afraid of your great words? no, you ſhall know that there be men of faſhion in place, as well as your ſelfe.
Good Band, doe not fret ſo.
A ſcurvie ſhag-ragge Gentleman, new come out of the North, a Punie, a Freſhman, come vp hither to learne faſhions and ſeeke to expell me?
Nay: if you bee ſo broad with him, Band, we ſhall haue a fray preſently.
Sir, Ile pull downe your Choller from you.
It was fit time for mee to ſtay you vp, for I am ſure you were a falling Band.
Well, Band, for all you are ſo ſtiffe, Ile make you limber enough before I haue done with you.
No, Hodge Peake, its more then you can doe.
Sfoot, let mee come to him: well, Band, let mee catch you in another place, and I will make cut-worke of you.
Ther's ne're a Spaniſh Ruffe of you all can doe it.
Sfoot, if theſe two ſhould goe together by the cares and hurt one another, Ruffe would be in a fine plight: would he not?
Well, Band, looke to thy ſelfe, for if I meet thee, I will lace thee roundly.
Lace me? thou wouldeſt bee laced thy ſelfe, Ruffe, for this is the very truth, thou art a plaine Knaue.
If they talke of lacing, I were beſt looke about my ſelfe.
Dareſt thou meet me in the field?
In the field? why? thou art but an effeminate fellow, Ruffe; for all thou art ſo well ſet: but at what weapon?
Nay, I will giue thee that aduantage, bring thou what weapons thou wilt, I ſcorne to make any thing of thee, Band, but needle worke.
Sfoot, thou ſhalt know, a Gentleman and a Souldier ſcornes thy proffer.
A Souldier?
Did you not heare of the great Bands went ouer of late?
Where did you ſerue? in the Lowe Countries?
It may be ſo; for I am ſure he is a Holland Band.
Where I haue ſerued, it is no matter, but I am ſure I haue beene preſſed oft.
Truely, his Landreſſe will beare him witneſſe thereof.
Preſſe mee no preſſings, Ile make you know that Ruffe is ſteeled to the back, if I had my ſtick here, you ſhould feele it.
Nay bragger, it is not your great words can carrie it away ſo; giue Band but a hemme, and he will bee for you at any time, name the place, the time and houre of our meeting.
The place, the Paper mills, where I will teare thee into rags, before I haue done with thee: the time, to morrow in the after-noone about one: but doe you heare? wee will fight ſingle, you ſhall not be double, Band.
Now I perceiue, the Spaniard and the Hollander will to it roundly.
But doe you heare? once more doe not ſay at our next meeting you forgot the time.
No, I dare warrant you, there is no man more carefull of the time then he: for I am ſure hee hath alwaies at the leaſt a dozen Clocks about him.
Farewell then.
Then farewell.
Nay, you ſhall not part ſo, you will goe into the fields, and know not what fighting meanes: a couple of white liuered fellowes, your Landreſſe will make you both as white as a clout it ſhee liſt; If you lack beating, ſhee'l beat you Ile warrant you, ſhee'l ſo clap your ſides together, that they ſhall bee beaten out in once or twice hādling; why? I haue known her leaue her marke behinde her a whole weeke after, ſheell quickly beate you Blacke and Blew, for I am ſure ſhee'll ſcarce waſh white before ſhee ſtarch.
Well, remember the time and place, Ruffe.
Well, remember your ſclues and Miſteris Stichwell, one to whom you haue beene both beholding in your dayes.
Who? Miſtris Stichwell, by this light I know her not.
No, nor you neither.
Nor I, I ſweare by all the Gumme and Blew-ſtarch in Chriſtendome.
I thought ſo, why its the Semſter, one that both you had beene vndone had it not beene for her, but what talke you of vndoing? I ſay Miſter is Stichwell the Semſter was the very maker of you both, yet thus little doe you regard her, but it is the common cuſtome of you all, when you come to bee ſo great as you are, you forget from what houſe you come.
Sfoote Ruffe careth not a pinne for her.
Nor Band a button.
Well Band and Ruffe, you were beſt both of you to take heede of her, you knowe ſhee ſet you both in the Stocks once before, and if ſhee catch you againe, it is a hundreth to one, if ſhe hang you not both vp, for ſhe hath got ſtrings already.
Meet me, if thou dareſt?
The place the Paper-mils, the hower to morrow at one.
Since you will goe, goe; but heare me, if you goe, looke at me well; as little a fellow as I am, I will come and Cuffe you both out of the fields; if I doe not, ſay, Cuffe is no man of his hands.
Alas poore ſhrimpe, thou art nothing in my hands.
If you goe, you ſhall neuer ſay that Cuffe came of a ſleeueleſſe errand, Ile binde your hands (I warrant you) for ſtriking.
Say and hold.
Remember the Paper-mils.
And you bee ſo chollericke, Ile euen pinne you both in, as ſoone as I come home: can you not decide the quarrell betweene your ſelues without a field? I had thought you had beene a little more milde, Ruffe. You were a horrible Puritane the other day, a very preciſe Ruffe.
Hang him, baſe Raſcall: would hee not make any man mad, to ſee ſuch a—I durſt not ſcarce peep out before Coller came to Towne, now to ſwagger thus.
Come, you ſhall be friends, Band.
Friends with him? ſuch a baſe Raſcall? he is a very threed-bare fellow, I ſcorne, but my man Coller ſhould goe as well as hee euery day in the weeke, and be friends with him.
Thy man Coller? thy Maſter, thou wouldeſt haue ſaid, I am ſure hee is thy vp-holder.
Nay, ſurely he is his Maſter, at leaſt his Maker: for Bands, make rags; Rags make Paper; Paper makes Paſt-board; and Paſt-board makes Collar; and I thinke that this is a ſtiffe argument that he is his Maſter.
Well, be he what he will, if I catch his Collar, Ile cut him in iags, let mee but claſpe him, and Ile make him for ſtirring.
But you ſhall not fight: haue you not Friends & Neighbours enough to end this controuerſie, but you muſt goe into the fields, and there cut the threed of your liues? wee'l haue none of that, come chooſe you an Vmpire, Band, for it ſhall be ſo.
Since you will force me to it, if Ruffe be content, I am willing.
Ruffe, you ſhall be content.
If I ſhall then, I muſt, let him name him.
If I may chooſe, Ile haue Maſter Handkerchiefe.
Nay, ſtay there, he is a moſt filthy Sniveling fellow, and he will wipe your Noſe of all, if you put the caſe to him, but what ſay you to Shirt?
He is a ſhifting knaue, and one, to whom Band, a little before hath beene much beholding, they were ioyned a long time togither in friendſhip.
Why, then goe to Maſter Cap, the headman of the Towne.
No, I denie that, he is a very bad Iuſtice, you may haue him wrought on any ſide for monic.
Ile tell you what, then wee will goe to my Lord Corpus himſelfe.
He is not in Towne.
He is, for I ſaw Sock, his chiefe Footeman in Towne.
Heer's a doe with you, and my Lord Corpus, indeede I would you were both hanged about his neck for me, but I ſee, this ſtrife will neuer be ended, till I bee Arbitrator my ſelfe, you know, I am equally allied to you both: ſhall I be Moderator betweene you?
Content.
Well then, Ruffe ſhall bee moſt accounted of amongſt the Clergie, for he is the graue Fellow (although I know, the Puritans will not greatly care for him, he hath ſuch a deale of ſetting, and they loue ſtanding very well.) As for you, Band, you ſhall bee moſt made of amongſt the young Gal ants, although ſometimes they ſhall vſe Ruffe, for a faſhion, but not otherwiſe; how euer, you neede not regard the gid die headed multitude, let them doe as they liſt, ſometimes reſpecting one, ſometimes the other: but when you come to the Counſailor, and men of Law, which know right from wrong, acknowledging Maſter Worths to bee equall, they ſhall preferre neither, but vſe the kindneſſe of you both, wearing both a Band and a Ruffe; how ſay you, are you both content?
We are.
Then goe before me to the next town, and Ile follow after with a Band of your friendſhip drawne, which I hope, theſe Gentlemen will ſeale with their hands.
Claw me, and Ile claw thee, the prouerb goes, Let it be true in that our Muſe here ſhoes, Cuffe graceth hand, Cuffes debtors hands remaine, Let hands clap me, and Ile Cuffe them againe.