CVFFE, where art thou?
Heere at hand.
WHere is this Cuffe?
Almoſt at your Elbow.
OH Band, art thou there? I thought thou haddeſt beene worne out of date by this time, or ſhrunke in the wetting at leaſt.
What? doe you thinke I am afraid of your great words? no, you ſhall know that there be men of faſhion in place, as well as your ſelfe.
Good Band, doe not fret ſo.
A ſcurvie ſhag-ragge Gentleman, new come out of the North, a Punie, a Freſhman, come vp hither to learne faſhions and ſeeke to expell me?
Nay: if you bee ſo broad with him, Band, we ſhall haue a fray preſently.
Sir, Ile pull downe you Coller from you.
It was fit time for mee to ſtay you vp, for I am ſure you were a falling Band.
Well, Band, for all you are ſo ſtiffe, Ile make you limber enough before I haue done with you.
No, Hodge Poker, its more then you can doe.
Sfoot, let me come to him: well, Band, let mee catch you in another place, and I will make cut-worke of you.
Ther's ne're a Spaniſh Ruffe of you all can doe it.
Sfoot, if theſe two ſhould goe together by the eares and hurt one another, Cuffe would be in a fine plight: would he not?
Well, Band, looke to thy ſelfe, for if I meet thee, I will lace thee roundly.
Lace me? thou wouldeſt be laced thy ſelfe, Ruffe: for this is the very truth, thou art a plaine Knaue.
If they talke of lacing, I were beſt looke about my ſelfe.
Dareſt thou meet me in the field?
In the field? why? thou art but an efminate fellow, Ruffe; for all thou art ſo well ſet: but at what weapon?
Nay, I will giue thee that aduantage, bring thou what weapons thou wilt, I ſcorne to make any thing of thee, Band, but needle-worke.
Sfoot, thou ſhalt know, a Gentleman and a Souldier ſcornes thy proffer.
A Souldier?
Did you not heare of the great Bands went ouer of late?
Where did you ſerue? in the Lowe Countries?
It may be ſo, for I am ſure he is a Holland Band.
Where I haue ſerued, it is no matter: but I am ſure I haue beene preſſed oft.
Truely, his Landreſſe will beare him witneſſe thereof.
Preſſe mee no preſsings: Ile make you know that Ruffe is ſteeled to the backe, if I had my ſticke here, you ſhould feele it.
Nay, bragger, it is not your great words can carie it away ſo; giue Band but a hemme, and hee will be for you at any time, name the place, the time and houre of our meeting.
The place, the Paper-mills, where I wil teare thee into Rags, before I haue done with thee: the time, to morrow in the after-noone about one: but doe you heare? wee will fight ſingle, you ſhall not be double, Band.
Now I perceiue, the Spaniard and the Hollander will to it roundly.
But doe you heare? once more doe not ſay at our next meeting you forgot the time.
No, I dare warrant you, there is no man more carefull of the time then he: for I am ſure he hath alwayes at the leaſt a dozen Clockes about him.
Farewell then.
Then farewell.
Nay, you ſhall not part ſo, you will go into the fieldes, and know not what fighting meanes: a couple of white liuered fellowes, your Landreſſe will make you both as white as a clout if ſhee liſt; If you lacke beating, ſhee'l beate you, Ile warrant you, ſhee'l ſo clap your ſides together, that they ſhall bee beaten out in once or twice hādling; why? I haue known her leaue her markes behinde her a whole weeke after, ſheell quickely beate you Blacke and Blew, for I am ſure ſhee'll ſcarce waſh white before ſhee ſtarch.
Well, remember the time and place, Ruffe.
Well, remember your ſelues and Miſtris Stitchwel, one to whom you haue beene both beholding in your dayes.
Who? Miſtris Stitchwell, by this light I know her not.
No, nor you neither?
Nor I, I ſweare by all the Gumme and Blew-ſtarch in Chriſtendome.
I thought ſo, why its the Sempſter, one that both you had beene vndone, had it not bene for her: but what talke I of your vndoing? I ſay Miſtris Stitchwel the Sempſter was the very maker of you both, yet thus little doe you regard her: but it is the common cuſtome of you all, when you come to bee ſo great as you are, you forget from what houſe you come.
Sfoote, Ruffe careth not a pinne for her.
Nor Band a button.
Well, Band and Ruffe, you were beſt both of you to take heede of her, you knowe ſhee ſet you both in the Stockes once before, and if ſhee catch you againe, it is a hundreth to one, if ſhe hang you not both vp, for ſhe hath got ſtrings already.
Meet me, if thou dareſt.
The place the Paper-mils, the hower to morrow at one.
Since you will goe, goe; but heare me, if you goe, looke at me well; as little a fellow as I am, I will come and Cuffe you both out of the fields; if I doe not, ſay, Cuffe is no man of his hands.
Alas poore ſhrimpe, thou art nothing in my hands.
If you goe, you ſhall neuer ſay that Cuffe came of a ſleeueleſſe errand: Ile binde your hands (I warrant you) for ſtriking.
Say and hold.
Remember the Paper-mils.
And you bee ſo chollericke, Ile euen pinne you both in, as ſoone as I come home: can you not decide the quarrell betweene your ſelues without a field? I had thought you had beene a little more milde, Ruffe. You were a horrible Puritane the other day, and very preciſe, Ruffe.
Hang him, baſe Raſcall: would he not make any man mad, to ſee ſuch a — that durſt not (ſcarce) peepe out, before Collar came to Towne, now to ſwagger thus?
Come, you ſhall be friends, Band.
Friends with him? ſuch a baſe Raſcall? he is a very threed-bare fellow: I ſcorne, but my man Collar ſhould goe as well as hee euery day in the weeke, and be friends with him.
Thy man, Coller? thy Maſter, thou wouldeſt haue ſaid, I am ſure hee is thy vpholder.
Nay, ſurely he is his Maſter, at leaſt his Maker: for Bands make rags; Rags make Paper, Paper makes Paſt-board, and Paſt-board makes Collar; and I thinke that this is a ſtiffe argument that he is his Maſter.
Well, be he what he will, if I catch his Collar, Ile cut him in iags, let me but claſpe him, and Ile make him for ſtirring.
But you ſhall not. Haue you not Friends and Neighbours ynow to end this controuerſie, but you muſt goe into the fields, and there cut the threed of your liues? wee'l haue none of that: come chooſe you an Vmpire, Band, for it ſhall be ſo.
Since you will force me to it, if Ruffe be content, I am willing.
Ruffe, you ſhall be content.
If I ſhall, then I muſt, let him name him.
If I may chooſe, Ile haue Maſter Handkerchiefe.
Nay, ſtay there, he is a moſt filthy Sniveling fellow, & a notable lawyer; he will wipe your Noſe of all, if you put the caſe to him: but what ſay you to Shirt?
He is a ſhifting knaue, and one, to whom Band, a little before hath beene much beholding. Why, they were ioyned a long time together in friendſhip.
Why, then goe to Maſter Cap, the headman of the Towne.
No, I denie that, he is a very bad Iuſtice, you may haue him wrought on any ſide for monie.
Ile tell you what, then we will goe to my Lord Corpus himſelfe.
He is not in Towne.
He is, for I ſaw Sock, his chiefe Footeman heere yeſterday.
Heer's adoe with you, and my Lord Corpus, indeed, I would you were both hanged about his necke for me. But I ſee, this ſtrife will neuer be ended, til I be Arbitrator my ſelfe, you know, I am equally allied to you both: ſhall I be Moderator betweene you?
Content.
Well then, thus I pronounce. Ruffe ſhall be moſt accounted of amongſt the Clergie, for he is the grauer Fellow. (Although I know, the Puritans will not greatly care for him, hee hath ſuch a deale of ſetting, and they loue ſtanding better.) As for you, Band, you ſhall bee moſt made of amongſt the young Gallants (although ſometimes they ſhall vſe Ruffe, for a faſhion, but not otherwiſe;) how euer, you neede not regard the giddie headed multitude, let them doe as they liſt, ſometimes reſpecting one, ſometimes the other: but when you come to the Counſailors, and men of Law, which know right from wrong, acknowledging both your Worths to be equall, they ſhall preferre neither, but vſe the kindneſſe of you both, wearing both a Band and a Ruffe; how ſay you, are you both content?
We are.
Then goe before me to the next Tauerne, and Ile follow after with a Band of your friendſhip drawne, which I hope theſe Gentlemen will ſeale with their hands.
Claw me, and Ile claw thee, the prouerb goes,
Let it be true in that our Muſe here ſhoes,
Cuffe graceth hand, Cuffes debtors hands remaine,
Let hands clap me, and Ile Cuffe them againe.