NAy Rapier, come foorth, come forth I ſay, Ile giue thee a crowne, though it be but a crackt one: what wilt not? art ſo hard to be drawne forth Rapier?
S'foot thou ſhalt know that Rapier dares enter: nay Backe-Sword.
Whoſe this behinde me?
Tis Dagger ſir; what will you neuer leaue your quarrelling?
Well Sword, Dagger hath defended you a good many times; but tis no matter, another time ſhall ſerue: ſhall I get you out Sword alone, that I may haue you Single-ſword.
Yes if youle be ſingle Rapier too.
Nay Sword, put the Caſe of Rapiers aſide, that there were two of them, I hope you were able to buckle with them.
Ile tell you what, if I goe into the Field with him, hang Sword vp if I doe not cut Rapiers poynts, and laſh him when I haue done: nay, you ſhall finde Sword mettle to the very backe: 'sfoot, my teeth be an edge at him.
If you offer but to thruſt towards him Rapier, Ile ſtrike you downe.
Hang him, I defie him baſe Spaniard.
Defie me? ſirrha Sword, Rapier ſpits i'thy face: dar'ſt meete mee i'the fields, crauenly Capon?
Capon?
I Capon, ſo I ſay ſir.
Why any man may ſee that thou art well caru'd Sword; and yet mee thinks that Rapier ſhould not ſpeake of that, for it's an hundred to one if he be not gilt too.
Well Rapier, if thou goeſt into the fields with me, Ile make a Capon of you before I haue done with you, you ſhall nere come home vncut Ile warrant you.
Nay, you ſhall finde Sword a notable Cutter.
He a Cutter? alas he nere went into the fields yet, but he was ſoundly hackt before he came out
Nere talke you of hacking, for it's a hundred to one if you haue not the Foyle-Rapier.
'Sfoot if you be ſo Short-Sword, Rapier nere feares you: come a long.
Nay nere goe, for if you doe, Ile ſende one after you, which ſhall ſcowre you both. The Cutler can doe it. I haue ſeene him handle you both brauely.
The Cutler, Alas wee are the beſt Friends hee has, and if it were not for vs, the Cutler might ſoone ſhut vp his ſhoppe.
Alas Sword, you need not talke of his ſhutting vp of Shoppe, and if it had not beene for him, you had broken by this time Sword, Nay, nere talke: For you know hee can holde your noſe to the Grind-ſtone, when hee liſt.
And as for you Rapier, you knowe hee brought you vp firſt, and if you had ſtayed with him ſtill, it might haue bene better for you.
Better for mee? Alas hee knewe not how to vſe mee.
Hee vſde you too well indeede: for when you were with him he furniſht you with Siler and euery thing, but now you are worne out of all faſhion. You are euen like a Lapwing, you are no ſooner Hatcht Rapier, but you runne abroade preſently from him.
Yet I ſcorne to runne away from him.
But it were more wiſedome then to ſtand: For the Cutler is a man as well Armed as any man I knowe, and has as good skill ins weapons.
Ha Sworde, is the winde in that Doore? Faith nowe I ſee which waye you ſtand bent Sworde, you had rather ſleepe in a whole skinne, then goe into the Fields to trye your ſelfe.
Syr, Sword has bene proou'd before now, and yet heele prooue himſelfe againe with you, if you dare follow him.
Doe you heare Sworde? If you goe, looke for Dagger at your backs preſentlie; For I am a Iuſtice of Peace, and am ſworne to keepe and defend the Peace.
Syr, wee will fight, and doe you take it in Dudgeon Dagger if you pleaſe: if you once offer to hinder vs, Ile ſo Pummell you Dagger, that you were neuer better Pummeld in your life; And howſoeuer, I hope theres Lawe againſt you as well as others, and Rapier can put vp a Caſe againſt you.
Alas I care not if you were both Plaintifes againſt mee, you ſhall finde Dagger your Defendant Ile warrant you: I, and if neede bee, I could put vp an Action of Batterie againſt you.
What talke you of Law? Sword ſcornes to haue any other Law then Martiall law, and that vpon you Rapier.
Away Sworde, the Time was indeed when thou waſt a notable Swaſh-buckler, but now thou art growne olde Sword.
I, you doe well, to excuſe his Cowardiſe.
Why Sir, tis well knowne that Sword has flouriſht in his dayes.
Flouriſht? yfaith Syr I, I haue ſeene Sword hang with nothing but Scarffes ere now.
With Scarffes? with a Halter, if he had beene well ſeru'de, For hees a notable Theefe.
A Theefe?
I, a Thiefe. Did you nere heare of Cutting-Dicke, this is the very ſame man.
Nay Rapier, nere hit Sword ith teeth with that: for you know you were both Indited for treaſon before now, and were in danger to be hangd, and drawn too, and had eſcapt well if you had not bene quarterd.
I hope knows how to keep his quarters
You are a craftie Foxe Sword: It were well if you knewe howe to keepe your friendſhip too, for Gentlemen and Friendes ſhould not fall out.
Rapier a Gentleman?
A Gentleman? and has Armes.
But mee thinkes Sworde by the very ſounding of his Name ſhould bee the better Gentleman, and has the better Armes too: for if the truth were well knowne, Rapier hath but one arme.
Sword beare Armes? Hees a baſe companion. Alas I haue knowne you beare a Basket Sword.
If you looke ith booke of Armorie, Ile warrant you, you ſhall finde Sworde of more antiquitie then you Rapier: Hee deriues his Pedigree from Morglay, Beuis of South-hamptons ſword; and that from S. George his ſword, that killd the Draggon.
I, the draggon in Suſſex, the other day: But Ile warrant you Rapiers of as good a blood as hee for his hart.
Byth maſſe, I thinke indeed, you are both wel ſanguind. Your both of one blood, only thers this difference, that ſword coms of the elder brother, & you Rapier of the yōger.
And oftentimes the younger brother prooues the better Souldier.
Nay, Dagger will defende you both for good Souldiers.
Rapier a Souldier? When did you ere knowe Rapier fight a Battell?
Yes Rapier is a Souldier, and a Man as well Armed at all poyntes as anie one.
No, no, its Sworde that's the notable Souldier; Why, theres none of all you Captaines could doe anie thing in Warre without him.
I hope Rapier hath not beene at Fencing-Schoole all this while for nothing.
Alas there's none Maiſter of Defence but Dagger: But yet if you ſpeake of Souldiers, the'rs Bow, Bill, and Gunne, worth twenty ſuch as wee are.
Indeed they ſay that Bow has bin an olde Souldier.
Yet hees not fit for a Souldier, any man may bende him as hee liſt.
And as for Bow-ſtring, I dare vndertake to whip him my ſelfe.
Then let mee alone to tickle Bowes ownes nocke yfaith.
But what ſay you to Bill? hees a notable ſturdy villaine.
Bill, Ile pay him ſoundly, if ere I reach him.
Its more then you can doe, Ime affraide; For Bill's a Tall-fellow ons hands, and will quickly be Wood: and then theres Gunne, ſuch another Bouncing-fellow too.
Gunne, Alas hees No-body: any little Boy will make him roare.
I haue made him goe off 'oth Fieldes, a good many times my ſelfe.
Well, is Gunne No-bodie? Ime ſure heel giue ſome blowes ſometimes.
Its' nere but when Powder ouercharges him, then indeed heel be ſomewhat hote oth matter.
I think that Powder is a vile bragger, he doth nothing but cracke.
Faith I knowe not what Souldier hee is, but they ſay, Hees an excellent pollitician.
Hee a Pollitician?
Why, hee has an excellent wit?
Piſh, Its nothing but a flaſh.
Ime ſure I can remember ſince he was a Parlement-man.
Hee a Parlement-man: For what Shyre?
Nay ber-lady, it was for the whole Countrey.
I wonder they ſhould chuſe him: Why he does euery thing on the ſudden.
Oh he plottes ſhrevvdly. If they had not look't too it, Hee had vndermined the vvhole parlement-houſe.
I but hees No-body now-adayes, Hees blovvne vp long agoe.
Well, if eyther you, or any body elſe ſhuld meete with Povvder, yet its a hundred to one, if he meete not vvith his match.
Nay, you ſhould let him alone Dagger, and you ſhould ſee that Swords' as notable a bragger as Povvder. He thinks hee ſhall nere be matcht too: but hee ſhall, and ouer-matcht too, by Rapier; I vvarrant him. Come Sworde, after your long Parley, Dare you goe into the Fieldes?
Dare I? You ſhall ſoone ſee that: Goe, and Ile follovv you.
Well ſaide, deſperate Dicke. Sword, You may be aſham'd to offer it. You knovve you are tvvo-handed-Sworde, and Rapier has but one hand (vnleſſe I helpe him) to do any good vvithall, and yet youde haue him go into the Fieldes vvith you. Come, theres neyther of you ſhall goe. Doe not you knovve that Duells are put downe?
Youle bee bound to'th Peace euer heere-after, if you ſtrike but one ſtroke. Therefore you had beſt let me decide your controuerſie for you.
Why, you are a backe-Friend to vs both Dagger.
Nay, you knowe Ime equally allyed to you both, and therefore ſhall proue an impartiall Iudge: How ſay you, will you be rulde by me?
Nay let him chooſe, Rapiers at a good poynt, whether he will or no.
Why are are you ſo long Sword before you ſpeake?
Are duells put downe? Then I am forc'de to be Friends: Speake then.
Then in briefe it ſhall bee thus. Sworde, you ſhall beare Chiefe force ith Campe, and be made Generall of the Field, to beare ſway euery where. As for you Rapier, ſince Duells are put downe, you ſhall liue quietly and peaceablie heere 'ith Court, and goe euery day in Veluet: You ſhall be Frendes with euerie one, and bee on euery ones ſide, that if occaſion ſerue, and Sworde be abſent, ſo that matters are driuē to a puſh, Rapier ſhall be the onely man to performe a Combate: And I my ſelfe will backe you both, as occaſion ſhall ſerue.
How ſay yee, are yee content?
Wee are.
Then goe before to my Houſe, to the Dagger in Cheape: and there weele conclude all.
A Long-Sword.
Our weapons drawne, and yet no hurt yee finde,
Did Dagger then defend vnto your minde?
Hee that defended others not long ſence,
At laſt hee dares not ſtand ins owne defence;
But this hee hopes, with you it will ſuffize,
To craue a pardon for a Schollers Prize.