IT is now a compleate yeere,
Since in the borrowed ſhape I beare
Of olde Fitz-Alwine, I was rayſde from reſt.
On that dayes Triumph fully was expreſt
The honour due by graue Antiquitie,
Then giuen to Londons Draperie,
By Royall RICHARD, who in me,
Firſt ſtilde the name of Maioraltie:
Which I held foure and twenty yeere,
As in good Records may appeare.
In all this time my labouring ſoule,
Not quitted from the high controule
Of diuine Poeſie; hath waited ſtill
Vpon her great commanding will;
By information, that another
Of mine owne band, a Draper Brother,
Was to ſucceed in dignitie;
Of Londons famous Maioraltie,
This was a motiue of ſuch might,
That made me houer day and night,
To honour this ſolemnitie,
With whatſoere remaines in me.
Two Drapers to ſucceede each other?
I beeing their firſt aduanced Brother▪
To both muſt my affection prooue
Of cordiall and ſincereſt loue.
Then Sir, as I am taught to know yee,
So doe theſe goodly Enſignes ſhew yee
Draper and Stapler; ſo was I,
And both but one Societie
In thoſe graue times when woollen Cloth
Seru'd beſt for King and ſubiect both.
The Draper and the Stapler then
I tell yee were right worthy men,
And did more needy ſoules maintaine,
Then I feare will be ſeene againe.
But times muſt haue their reuolution,
And each their ſeuerall execution.
But paſſe wee them; And come to ſay
What Honours now doe crowne this day▪
The Golden Fleece being the creſt
Of ancient Drapery; we digeſt
The ſtory of the Golden Fleece,
Fetcht by the Argonautes of Greece
From Cholcos in reſemblance here,
Where Iaſon and thoſe Greekes appeare,
Which in that trauaile did partake,
Both for his loue and honours ſake.
Medeas powerfull charmes preuailde,
And all thoſe dreadfull Monſters quailde,
That kept the Fleece in their protection,
Which then was wonne by her direction.
By way of Morall application,
Your Honour may make ſome relation
Vnto your ſelfe out of this ſtorie,
You are our Iaſon, Londons glorie,
Now going to fetch that fleece of Fame,
That euer muſt renowne your name.
An Oath of Faith and Fealtie
Vnto his ſacred Maieſtie,
That makes you his Great Deputie
Or Image of Authoritie.
No Monſters dare confront your way.
Imagine then, as well you may,
That all this faire and goodly Fleete,
Do in meere loue (on purpoſe) meete,
Like to thoſe Argonautes of Greece,
That then fetcht home their Golden Fleece,
To tend the Argoe where you ride,
Behind, before, on euery ſide
With all applauding melodie,
That beſt this day may dignifie.
Neptune and gracious Thameſis,
To honour ſuch a day as this,
Haue ſent out of their watry ſtore
Their owne Sea Chariot, which before
They nere would part with. But as now,
Their ſacred Deities allow
Our vſe thereof, which we employ,
To make more full this day of ioy.
Eight Royall Vertues take the paine
Eight honoured Enſignes to ſuſtaine
Of eight Lord Maiors, as you may ſee
Deſcribed by their Heraldrie,
Drapers, and Staplers Brethren kinde,
Leauing rare monuments behinde
Of their affection to this Citie,
For the poores good whom they did pittie.
Poultney, Cromer, Eyre, Wotton,
Sidney, Bullen, Capell, Champion.
Time checks me, that I may not tell
Their ſeuerall deedes. Nor fits it well
In ſerious buſineſſe to delay:
On then a Gods name, lets away.
HOnourable Lord, Time hath nothing elſe to tel you, but the briefe meaning of theſe ſeuerall inuentions. The water-deuices haue already ſufficiently ſpoken themſelues. This Ship, bearing your owne name, and called the IOEL, trafficking Englands Drapery with all other Countries, as by the goodly Ramme or golden Fleece of England appeareth, where two Houſwifely Virgins ſit carding and ſpinning, is (after many happie voyages) returned to honour the day of her worthie Owner, being ſafely brought home by Neptune and Thameſis, who (mounted on a Lyon and Sea-horſe) vouchſafe their attendance on your triumph. And in ſtead of that Sea Chariot, which waited on the Argoe in the morning, they bring another, graced with the ſame Royall Vertues, and Enſignes of Armes belonging to thoſe honourable Drapers. On the top is placed a Spheare or Globe, intimating the world, created for the vſe of man, and ſuch expence of time as is allotted him. It is ſupported by the foure Elements, Water, Earth, Ayre, and Fire, as their figures and Emblemes doe aptly declare. It runneth on ſeuen wheeles, deſcribing the ſeuen ages of man; his Infancie, Child-hood, Adoleſcency, or Stripling eſtate, Youth-hood, Man-hood, Age, and Ages extremity, or decrepit condition: all of them ſubiected to the power of the ſeuen Planets, as on each wheele they beare their Characters. It is drawne by two Lyons and two Horſes of the Sea, figuring what ſwift motion haſtneth on the minutes, houres, months and yeeres of our frailtie: and the whole frame or body guided by Time, as Coach-man to the life of man. That other goodly Monument or Pageant, with the glorious Sunne in continuall motion ouer it, appertaining to the Drapers Armory; preſents yee London in the ſupreme place of eminence, and the twelue Companies (her twelue Daughters) all ſeated about her in their due degrees, onely Drapery is neereſt to her, as being the firſt and chiefeſt honoured Society before all other. As ſupports to Londons flouriſhing happineſſe, and continuance of the ſame in true tranquilitie: foure goodly Mounts (as ſtrong and defenſiue bulwarkes) are rayſed about her, bearing Emblemes of thoſe foure eſpeciall qualities, which make any Common-wealth truly happy. Learned Religion, Militarie Diſcipline, Nauigation, and Homebred Husbandrie.
For thus, my Lord, I truely vnderſtand,
No greater Croſſe can hap to any Land,
Then lacke of Schollars, Souldiers, Saylers, Husband-men,
Long may we haue them all, Time ſayes Amen.
NOw honour'd Lord, ſince day is done,
And you to your owne houſe are come,
With all delight that we can make yee:
Me thinks we ſhould not yet forſake yee,
But that ſtrict Time will haue it ſo,
And parts vs, whether we will or no,
All then my Lord that I ſhall ſay,
Is, that your Honour would well weigh
Your worthie-minded Brethrens loue,
Who haue in firme affection ſtroue;
How beſt they might renowne this day:
In honouring you. And I dare ſay,
That neuer men did more deſire
To ſtretch their loue and bounty higher
Then they haue done, and could afford
For ſuch a worthy minded Lord,
Which they by me humbly commend
Still at your ſeruice: So I end.
SInce Graues may not their Dead containe,
Nor in their peacefull ſleepes remaine,
But Triumphes and great Showes muſt vſe them,
And we vnable to refuſe them:
It ioyes me that Earle Robert Hood,
Fetcht from the Forreſt of merrie Shirwood,
With theſe my Yeomen tight and tall,
Braue Huntſmen and good Archers all:
Muſt in this Iouiall day partake,
Prepared for your Honours ſake.
No ſooner was I rayſde from reſt,
And of my former ſtate poſſeſt
As while I liu'd: But being alone,
And of my Yeomen ſeeing not one:
I with my Bugle gaue a call,
Made all the Woods to ring withall.
Immediatly came little Iohn,
And Scathlock followed him anon,
With Much the honeſt Millars Sonne.
And ere ought elſe could be done,
The frollicke Frier came tripping in,
His heart vpon a merrie pinne.
Maſter (quoth he) in yonder brake,
A Deere is hid for Marians ſake,
Bid Scathlock, Iohn, or honeſt Brand,
That hath the happy hitting hand,
Shoote right and haue him. And ſee my Lord
The deed performed with the word.
For Robin and his Bow-men bolde,
Religiouſly did euer holde,
Not emptie-handed to be ſeene,
Were't but at feaſting on a Greene.
Much more then, when ſo high a day
Calls our attendance: All we may,
Is all too little, tis your grace,
To winke at weakeneſſe in this caſe.
So fearing to be ouer-long,
End all with our olde hunting Song.
But good Maſter ere they ſing,
Fauour me to moue one thing.
A boone, a boone, for Fryer Tuck,
Who begges it with a lowly ducke.
What is it Fryer?
Since we are thus rayſde from our reſt,
In honour of this famous feaſt,
And for his ſake that may commaund,
(Next to my Maſter) heart and hand,
Of mee and all theſe good Yeomen:
Ere we returne to ground agen,
Seeing iolly Chriſtmas drawes ſo neere,
When as our ſeruice may appeare,
Of much more merit then as now,
Which doth no larger ſcope allow,
Then that which is already done;
Your loue, my Lord, ſo much hath won
Vpon the Fryer and his Compeeres,
As we could wiſh to liue whole yeeres,
To yeeld you pleaſure and delight,
Be it by day, or be it by night.
For we haue choiſe delights in ſtore,
Command them, and I craue no more.
You heare (my Lord) the Fryers motion,
Out of meere loue, and pure deuotion.
You ſee beſide that all my men,
(For any ſeaſon, where or when,)
Second his ſute. May it pleaſe you then,
Not to diſlike his kinde requeſt,
Earle Robin frankly doth proteſt,
We will all ſtriue to do our beſt,
When any occaſion ſhall require,
The offer of our merry Fryer,
For ſuch a worthy minded Lord,
Robin Hood ſeales it with his word.
Thankes my deare Domine,
And to you noble Homine,
For to this Indenter,
Frier Tuck ſubſcribes Libenter.
Now leſt we offer wrong,
Fall to your Sing Song.
NOw wend we together, my merry men all,
Vnto the Forreſt ſide-a:
And there to ſtrike a Buck or a Doae,
Let our cunning all be tride-a.
Then goe we merrily, merrily on,
To the Green-wood to take vp our ſtand,
Where we will lye in waite for our Game,
With our bent Bowes all in our hand.
What life is there like to Robin Hood?
It is ſo pleaſant a thing a:
In merry Shirwood he ſpends his dayes,
As pleaſantly as a King a.
No man may compare with Robin Hood,
With Robin Hood, Scathlocke and Iohn:
Their like was neuer, nor neuer will be,
If in caſe that they were gone.
They will not away from merry Shirwood,
In any place elſe to dwell:
For there is neither City nor Towne,
That likes them halfe ſo well.
Our liues are wholly giuen to hunt,
And haunt the merrie Greene-wood:
Where our beſt ſeruice is daily ſpent,
For our Maſter Robin Hood.