BY vertue of this powerfull wand,
Which in a minute can command
Graues, Vaults, and deepes yeeld vp their dead,
How late or long time buried:
Thou Image of that worthy man,
That Londons Knight-hood firſt began,
In Office of the Mayraltie,
(A high and gracefull dignitie,)
Though yet thou ſleep'ſt in ſhade of death;
By me take power of life and breath.
Londons Genius giues thee leaue,
An ayrie ſubſtance to receiue.
Speech like to Spirits rayſde from reſt,
Triumphs and pleaſures to digeſt
By power of ſacred Poeſie.
And ſeeing this dayes ſolemnitie
Honours thine owne Societie
Of Fiſhmongers, a worthy band,
Fam'd both to Citie, and the Land,
By thy rare deed of loyaltie,
Vpon the Kings proud enemy:
Sir William Walworth, doe what may
Remaine in thee, to crowne this day▪
With generall fulneſſe of content:
For thereto all our hopes are bent.
HE that aboue two hundred yeeres,
(Free from diſturbance cares and feares,)
Hath ſilent ſlept, and rayſd this day,
To doe what gracefull helpe I may
Vnto that band of worthy men,
That were, and are my Brethren;
And you graue Fathers of this State,
Which I my ſelfe did propagate
Twice, as L. Maior: Oh, yet to ſee,
This ancient famous dignity
Flouriſh ſo fairely: And (as then)
Bleſt with as wiſe and worthy men;
Mooues teares of ioy, and bids me call
Gods beniſon light on you all.
Your Charracter, Office and place,
Well wot I by that Sword & Mace,
With ſuch a difference, as before
This day, once happened, and no more.
The Genius ſpeakes you in mine eare,
A Mayden-man, a Batcheler.
You being the ſecond, let me ſay,
This is a bleſſed marriage day
Of you to that great dignity
Of your dread Soueraignes Deptie,
No doubt, but your chaſte thoughts and life,
Will be as chaste to ſuch a Wife.
All happy bleſſings crowne (I pray,)
Londons and Lemans wedding day.
Obſeruing that faire Liuerie,
You are of mine owne Company.
How can I then, but ioy to ſee
Such eminence and high degree:
Grace ſtill our graue Society?
And ſee (my Lord) this Bower relates,
How many famous Magiſtrates,
From the Fiſhmongers ancient name,
Succeſſiuely to honour came
In Londons Maioraltie. Theſe faire Coats.
Their ſeuer all Armes and titles noates.
Turke, Louekin, Wroth, Pechie, Mordon,
Theſe before me were euery one:
Then I. Next, Exton, Aſcham, Faulconer.
Michel, Parneis, Reinwall, Foſter,
Hulin, Hampton, Oſtridge, Remington,
Kneiſworth, Coppinger. Theſe being gon
Succeeded Amcotes, Curtois, Allot,
And now Iohn Leman, who well I wot,
Welcome as any to this place,
With our kinde Brethrens loue and grace.
Aldermen we had many more
That neuer this high Office bore,
And therefore are not ranked heere;
But only ſuch as Lord Maiors were.
WAlworth, here ſtay: we may doe wrong,
And hold this worthy man too long
From thoſe great States, that at this eaſt
Are euery one a welcome Gueſt.
Thoſe Aldermen, that on the day,
(When the proud Rebel thou didſt ſlay,)
Were Knighted with thee in the field:
Are rayſde by me their loue to yeelde
With this faire Guard, and tend on thee,
In honouring this Solemnity.
Mount then thy Courſer, that we may
(In the remainder of this day,)
Doe more then time will now afford,
Set on then, Honourable Lord.
NOw worthy Lord, there is impos'd on me,
A briefe narration of each ſeuerall ſhew
Prouided for this Triumph, as you ſee,
In order to deſcribe them as they goe.
The Fiſhing Buſſe inſtructs you firſt to know
The toylſome trauell of poore Fiſher-men,
Subiected to all weathers, where and when.
In ſtormy tempeſts they omit no paine,
To bleſſe all lands with the Seas bounteous ſtore:
Their labour doth returne rich golden gaine,
VVhereof themſelues taſte leaſt by Sea or ſhore,
But (like good ſoules) contented euermore
VVith any benefit their toyle can bring;
The Fiſher well is term'd Contents true King.
This Embleme of the Dolphine, is the Armorie
Belonging to our brethren, and beſide
Speakes ſomewhat of that creatures qualitie,
By nature Muſicall, as hath been tryde:
Poeſie and Muſique therefore thus do ride
Vpon his back, in ſweete Arions ſhape,
VVho, by a Dolphine, thus did death eſcape:
The King of Moores thus mounted, and his traine,
Shewes your affection to that Company,
Which league with you in loue, and doth containe
The aptnes of your correſpondency
On either ſide, to hold inſeperably.
His Indian treaſure liberally is throwne:
To make his bounteous heart the better knowne.
This Leman Tree, your Honour may conceit
More, then I ſpeake, becauſe myſteriouſly
Some hidden ſecret thereon doth awayte
Knowne to your ſelfe. It ſpeakes ingeniouſly
The Character of your authoritie:
Figur'd in that faire Bird, foſtring her brood:
Though with the deare expence of her owne blood.
Continuall cares, and many broken ſleepes,
Heart-killing feares, which waite on Eminence
Hard at the heeles, and (tortringly) ſtill keeps
VVithin the ſoule imperious reſidence,
As whippes t'afflict both hope and patience;
Theſe in the Pellicane are figur'd heere:
And theſe you hardly will auoide this yeere.
But as the Sences ſit about the Tree,
And ſhewe you how their vertues are ſupplyed
Still with freſh vigor: So (no doubt) will be
Your buſieſt troubles ſweetly qualified,
By thoſe fiue helpes that hold vp dignitie,
Diſcretion, Policie, and Prouidence,
Courage, Correction, theſe barre all offence.
Laſtly, looke on a figure of that day,
VVhen by Heauens helpe, and Walworths happy hand,
That ſwarme of Rebells, who fought all to ſway,
And haue both King and Country at command:
Euen in their height of pride, I made them ſtand,
And, in my Soueraigns ſight, there I ſtrooke dead
Their chiefeſt Captaine and commanding head.
The reſt of that baſe rout, diſmayd thereby,
And all tumultuous troubles calmely ceaſt,
King Richard, to requite true loyaltie,
His gracious fauour preſently expreſt
In Royall manner, Knighting me and the reſt
Of Aldermen, that were in fielde with me.
London till then had not that dignitie.
As I, ſo theſe do repreſent the men
Knighted in field, on Corpus Chriſti day.
And as my Dagger ſlew the Rebell then,
So to renowne the deede; And I dare ſay,
To honor London more (if more it may)
The Red-Croſſe, in a Siluer-field before,
Had Walworths Dagger added to it more.
And now my Lord, this goodly Monument
Or▪ Chariot of Triumphall Victory
Some ſhape of that daies honour doth preſent,
By Heauens protection of True Maieſtie,
And beating downe Treaſon and Mutinie.
Adorning all the Throne with thoſe faire Graces:
That ought about a King to haue beſt places.
Truth, Vertue, Honour, ſober Temperance,
Fortitude, Zeale, Equitie, Conſcience,
Iuſtice, Authoritie, carefull Ʋigilance,
Peace, Plenty, Law, Councell, Obedience,
And Diſcipline, that whips all Errors hence,
Theſe (as beſt Pillars) do ſupport this State:
And euery Kingdome elſe doth propagate.
A bleſſed Bacheler are you my Lord,
By being your ſacred Soueraignes Deputie
In ſuch a State, where all theſe doe concord,
And truely do protect his Maieſtie
Figur'd in Richards great Authoritie.
As Walworth then, ſo Leman now may ſay▪
Neuer had Man a happier Wedding day.
PHoebus hath hid his golden head
In Thetis lappe. And now are ſpred
The ſable Curtaines of the night,
Our Euenings purpoſe to delight.
The twinkling Tapers of the Skie
Are turn'd to Torches; and apply
Their clearest radiance, to conuay
Our Mayden Bridegroome on his way
Home to his owne abiding place.
Our Triumphs pompe ſhortens apace,
That could affoord more time to ſpend,
But gladly would no way offend.
You mariage Rites ſolemnized
Bequeathes you to the Bridall bed:
Where you and your chaſtewife muſt reſt.
London (it ſeemes) did like you best,
(Although you are a Bacheler,)
To be her Husband for a yeere;
Loue her, delight her. Shee's a Bride,
Nere ſlept by ſuch a Husbands ſide
But once before. She hath had many,
And you may proue as good as any
Haue gone before you in this place.
Twill be your Brethrens ioy and grace,
That Fiſhmongers liue still in fame,
And ſtill renowned by your name.
Their hearty loue by me they ſend yee,
And pray the hand of heauen defend yee
In all your actions. May your Fame,
Crowne ſtill their ancient worthie name
To all posteritie. So, Londons Lord
And Virgin Husband, in a word:
Old Walworth muſt to rest againe,
Good-night to you, and all your trayne,