DEpartinge from the darkned dens
which Dicis low doth keepe,
Loe heere I am ſent out agayne,
from Tartar Dungeon deepe,
Thyeſtes I, that wheather coaſt
to ſhun doe ſtande in doubt,
Th'internall fiedes I fly, the foalke
of earth I chaſe about.
My conſcience lo abhors, that I ſhould heather paſſage make,
Appauled ſore with feare▪ and dread my trembling ſinewes ſhake:
My fathers houſe, or rather yet my brothers I eſpy,
This is the olde and antique porche of Pelops progeny.
Here firſt the Greekes on prynces heads doe place the royall crowne,
And heere in throne aloft they lye, that ietteth vp and downe,
With ſtately Scepter in theyr hand, eake heere theyr courts doe ly,
This is theyr place of banquetting, returne therefore will I.
Nay: better were it not to haunt the lothſome Limbo lakes,
Where as the Stygion porter doth aduaunce with luſty crakes
His tryple gorge be hong with Mane ſhag hatry, ruſty blacke:
Where xions Carkaſſe linked faſt, the whirling wheele doth racke,
And rowleth ſtill vpon him ſelfe: where as full oft in vayne
Much toyle is loſt, (the tottring ſtone down tumbling backe agayne)
Where growing guts the greedy gripe do gnaw with rauening bits.
Where parched vp with burning thirſt amid the waues he ſts,
And gapes to catch the flecting flood with hungry chaps beguilde,
That payes his parnefull puniſhment, whoſe feaſt the Gods defilde:
Yet that olde man ſo ſtept in yeares at length by trace of time,
How great a part belonges to mee and portion of his crime?
Account wee all the griſly ghoſtes, whom guilty founde of ill,
The Gnoſian Iudge in Plutoes pyts doth roſſe in torments ſtill:
Thyeſtes I in driery deedes will farre ſurmount the reſt,
Yet to my Brother yelde I, (though I gorgde my bloudy breſt)
And ſtuffed haue my pampred paunche euen with my chyldren three,
That crammed lye within my Rybs and haue theyr Toumbe in mee,
The bowels of my ſwallowed Babes, deuowred vp I haue,
Nor fickle Fortune mee alone the Father doth depraue,
But enterpryſing greater guilte then that is put in bre,
To file my Daughters bawdy Bed, my luſt ſhee doth alure.
To ſpeake theſe words I doe not ſpare, I wrought the haynous deede,
That therefore I through all my ſtocke, might parent ſtill proceede.
My Daughter driuen by force of Fates and deſtenyes deuyne,
Doth breede younge bones, & lades her wombe wt ſinfull ſeede of myne.
Loe, nature chaunged vpſide downe, and out of order tornde
This myngle mangle hath ſhee made, (O fact to be forlornde)
A Father and a Grandſyre loe, confuſedly I am,
My daughters huſband both become, and Father to the ſame.
Thoſe babes yt ſhould my Nephewes bee, when nature rightly runnes▪
She being tumbled doth confounde, and mingle with my ſonnes.
The chryſtall cleareneſſe of the day, and Phoebus beames ſo bryght,
Are myxed with the foggy cloudes, and darkeneſſe dim of nyght.
When wickednes had wearied vs, to late truce taken was,
Euen when our deteſtable deedes were done and brought to paſſe.
But valiaunt Agamemnon hee graund captayne of the Hoſte,
Who bare the ſway among the Kinges, and ruled all the roſte,
Whoſe flaunting Flag, and Banner braue, diſplayde in royall ſorte,
A thouſand ſayle of ſowſing ſhips did garde to Phrygian parte,
And with their ſwelling ſhatling ſayles the ſurging ſeas did hide▪
That beateth on the bankes of Troy, and floweth by her ſide:
When Phoebus Carte the Zodiack ten times had auer runne,
And waſte the battred Walles doe lye of Troy deſtroyde and woonne,
Returnde he is to yeelde his throate vnto his traytreſſe Wyfe.
That ſhall with force of bloudy blade bereue him of his lyfe.
The glytering Swerd, the hewing Axe, and wounding weapons moe,
With bloud for bloud new ſet abroche ſhall make the floore to flow.
With ſturdy ſtroke, and boyſtrous blow, of pithy Pollaxe geuen
His beaten braynes are paſh abroade, his cracked Skull is reuen.
Now myſchiefe marcheth on a pace, now falſhoode doth appeare,
Now Butchers ſlaughter doth approche, and muriher draweth neare.
In honour of thy natyue day Aegiſthus they prepare
The ſollemne feaſt with uncketing▪ and daynty tothſome fare.
Fy, what doth ſhame abaſhe thee ſo, and cauſe thy courage quayle?
Why doubts thy righthand what to doe? to ſmite why doth it fayle?
What he forecaſting might ſuſpect, why ſhouldſt thou take aduyſe?
Why freteeſt thou, demaunding if thou may it enterpryſe?
Nay: if a mother it beſeeme, thou rather mayſt ſurmyſe.
What now? how hapneth it that thus the ſming ſommers night,
When Phoebus from Th'antipodes ſhoulde render ſonne the lyght,
On ſudden chaung their turnes with nights that laſt and lynger longe,
When wynters Boreas bitter blaſtes, doth puffe the trees amonge?
Or what doth cauſe the glyding ſtarres to ſtay ſtill in the ſky?
Wee wayght for Phoebus: to the Worlde bryng day now by and by.
O Fortune, that doſt fayle the great eſtate of kinges,
On ſlippery ſliding ſeat thou placeſt lofty thinges
And ſetſt on tottring ſort, where perils do abound
Yet neuer kīgdome calme, nor quiet could be foūd:
No day to Scepters ſure doth ſhine, that they might ſay,
To morow ſhall wee rule, as wee haue done to day.
One clod of croked care another bryngeth in,
One hurly burly done, another doth begin:
Not ſo the raging Sea doth boyle vpon the Sande,
Where as the ſouthern winde that blowes in Afryck Lande,
One Waue vpon another doth heape wyth ſturdy blaſt:
Not ſo doth Euxine Sea, his ſwelling waues vp caſt:
Nor ſo his belching ſtreame from ſhallow bottom roll,
That borders hard vpon the yſyfroſen poall:
Where as Bootes bryght doth twyne his Wayne about,
And of the marble ſeas doth nothing ſtande in doubt.
O how doth Fortune toſſe and tomble in her wheele
The ſtaggring ſtates of Kynges, that readdy bee to reele?
Fayne woulde they dreaded bee, and yet not ſetled
When as they feared are, they feare, and lyue woe.
The ſilent Lady nyght ſo ſweete to man and beaſt,
Can not beſtow on them her ſafe and quiet reſt:
Sleepe that doth ouercome and breake the bonds of griefe,
It cannot eaſe theyr heartes, nor myniſter reliefe:
What caſtell ſtrongly buylt, what bulwarke, tower, or towne,
Is not by miſchyefes meanes, brought topſy turuye downe?
What ramperd walles are not made weake by wicked warre?
From ſtately courtes of Kings doth iuſtice fly afarre:
In pryncely Pallaces, of honeſty the lore,
And wedlocke vowe deuout, is ſet by lytle ſtore.
The bloudy Bellon thoſe doth haunt with gory hand,
Whoſe light and vaine conceipt in paynted pomp doth ſtand.
And thoſe Erinnys wood turmoyles with frenſyes fits,
That euer more in proud and hauty houſes ſits,
Which ficle Fortunes hand in twinkling of an eye,
From high and proude degre driues downe in duſt to lye.
Although that ſkyrmiſhe ceaſe, no banners be diſplayed
And though no wyles be wroughe, and pollecy be ſtayed,
Downe payſed with theyr waight the maſſy things do ſinke,
And from her burden doth vnable Fortune ſhrynke▪
The ſwelling Sayles puft vp with gale of weſtren wynde,
Doe yet myſtruſt thereof a rempeſt in theyr mynde:
The threatning tops (that touch the cloudes) of lofty towres
Bee ſoneſt payde, and bet with ſouth wynde rainy ſhowres:
The darkeſome woode doth ſee his tough and ſturdy Oke,
Well waynde in yeares to be cleane ouer thrown and broke:
The lyhhtnings flaſhing flame out breaking in the Sky,
Firſt lyghteth on the mounts, and hilles that are moſt hy.
The bodies corpulent and of the largeſt ſyſe
Are ryfeſt ſtyll to catch diſeaſes when they ryſe.
When as the flocke to graſe, in paſture fat is put,
Whoſe Necke is larded beſt▪ his throate ſhall firſt be cut:
What Fortune doth aduaunce and hoyſteth vp on hye,
Shee lets it vp to all agayne more greeuouſly.
The thinges of midle ſort, and of a meane degree,
Endure aboue the reſt and longeſt dayes do ſee:
The man of meane eſtate moſt happy is of all,
Who pleaſed with the lot that doth to him befall,
Doth ſayle on ſilent ſhore with calme and quiet tide,
And dreads with bruiſed barge on ſwelling Seas to ryde:
Nor launcing to the depe where bottom none is found,
May with his rudder ſearch, and reach the ſhallow ground.
O Drowſie oreaming doting ſoule,
what commeth in thy brayne
To ſeeke about for thy defence
what way thou mayſt attayne?
What ayels thy ſkittiſh waiward wits,
to wauer vp and downe?
The fitteſt ſhift preuented is,
the beſt path ouergrowne
Thou mighteſt once mayntayned haue
thy wedlocke chamber chaſt,
And eake haue ruld with maieſty, by fayth conioyned faſt:
Now nurtures lore neglected is, all ryght doth clean decay
Religion and dignity with faith are worne away:
And ruddy ſhame with bluſhing cheekes ſo farre god wot is paſt,
That when it would it cannot now come home againe at laſt.
O let me now at randon runne with bridle at my will:
The ſafeſt path to miſchiefe is by miſchiefe open ſtill
Now put in practiſe, ſeeke aboute, ſearch out and learne to find
The wylie traynes, and crafty guyles of wicked womankind:
What any diueliſh trayterous dame durſt do in working woe,
Or any wounded in her wits by ſhot of Cupids bowe.
What euer rigorous ſtepdame could commit with deſperat hand,
Or as the wench who flaming faſt by Venus poyſoning brand,
Was driuen by leud inceſtuous loue in ſhip of Theſſail land,
To ft away from Colchos yle, where Phaſis channel deepe.
With ſtiuer ſtreame downe from the hylles of Armenie doth ſweepe.
Get weapons good, get bylbowblades or temper poyſon ſtrong,
Or with ſome yonker trudge from Grece by theft the ſeas along:
Why doſt thou faynt to talke of theft, exile or prute flight?
Theſe came by hap, thou therfore muſt on greater miſchiefe light.
O worthy Oueene amonge the Greekes that beares the ſwinging ſway.
And borne of Ledas royall bloud, what muttring doſt thou ſay?
What fury fel inforceth thee, bereaued of thy wits.
To rage and raue with bedlam braynes, to fret withfranticke fittes?
Though madam thou do counſayle keepe, and not complayne thy caſe,
Thyne anguiſh playn appeareth in thy pale and wanny face.
Reueale therfore what is thy griefe, take leaſure good and ſtay,
What reaſon could not remedy, oft cured hath delay.
So grieuous is my careful caſe which plungeth me ſo ſore,
That deale I cannot with delay, nor linger any more.
The flaſhing flames▪ and furious force of fiery feruent heate,
Outraging in my boyling breſt, my burning bones doth beate:
It ſuckes the ſappy marow out the iuice it doth conuay,
It frets, it teares, it reuts, it gnaws, my guttes and gall away.
Now feble feare ſtil egges mee on (with dolor beyng preſt)
And cankred hate with thwacking thumpes doth bounce vpon my breſt
The blynded boy that louers hartes doth reaue with deadly ſtroake,
Entangled hath my linked mynd with leawd and wanton yoke:
Refuſing ſtil to take a foyle, or cleane to be confound:
Among theſe broyles, aud agonies my mynd beſeging round,
Loe feble, weary, batred downe, and vnder trode ſhame,
That wreſtleth, ſtriueth, ſtrugleth hard, and fighteth with the ſame.
Thus am I driuen to diuers ſhores and beat frow banke to banke,
And toſſed in the fomy floods that ſtriues with corage cranke.
As when here wynd, and their the ſtreame when both their force wil try,
From ſandes alow doth hoyſt and reare the ſeas with ſurges hye.
The walring waue doth ſtaggeryng ſtand not weting what to do,
But (houeryng) doubtes, whoſe furious force he beſt may yeld him to▪
My kingdome therfore I caſt of, my ſceptor I forſake
As anger, ſorrow, hope, me leade, that way I meane to take.
At all aduenture to the ſeas I yeld my beaten Barge,
At randon careles wil I runne, now wil I roue at large
Whereas my mynde to fancy fond dath gad and runne aſtray,
It is the beſt to chuſe that chaunce, and follow on that way.
This deſprat dotage doth declare, and raſhnes rude and blynde,
To chuſe out chaunce to be the guyde and ruler of thy mynd.
He that is driuen to vtter pinch and furtheſt ſhift of all,
What neede he doubt his doubtful lot or how his lucke befall?
In ſilent ſhore thou ſayleſt yet thy treſpas we may hyde,
If thou thy ſelfe detect it not, nor cauſe it be deſcryde.
Alas it is more blaſd abroade, and further it is blowen,
Then any cryme that euer in this princely court was ſowen.
Thy former fait with penſiue hart and ſorrow thou deſt rew.
And fondly yet thou goeſt about, to ſet abroch a newe,
It is a very foliſhnes to kepe a meane therein.
The thing he feares he doth augment who heapeth ſinne to ſinne.
But fire and ſwoard to cure the ſame the place of ſalue ſupply.
There is no man who at the firſt extremity wil trye.
In working miſchiefe men do take the redieſt way they fynde.
The ſacred name of wedlocke once reuoke and haue in mynd.
Ten yeares haue I bene deſolate, and led a widowes life.
Yet ſhall I entertayne a new my huſband as his wyfe?
Conſider yet thy ſonne and heire whom he of thee begot.
And eake my daughters wedding blaſe as yet forget I not.
Achilles eke my ſonne in law to mynd I do not ſpare,
How wel he kept his vow that he to me his mother ſware.
When as our nauy might not paſſe by wynd nor yet by ſtreame,
Thy daughters bloud in ſacrifyce their paſſage did redeme:
Shee ſturd and brake the ſluggiſh ſeas, whoſe water ſtil did ſtand,
Whoſe feble force might not hoyſe vp, the veſſels from the land.
I am aſhamed here withal, it maketh me repyne.
That Tyndaris (who from the Gods doth fecch her noble ligne
Should geue the ghoſt t'aſſwage the wrath of Gods and them appeaſe,
Wherby the Grekiſh nauy might haue paſſage free by ſeas.
My grudging mynd ſtil harpes vppon my daughters wedding day,
Whom he hath made for Pelops ſtock the bloudy raunſome pay.
When as with cruel countenaunce embrewd with gory bloud,
As at a wedding alter ſyde th'unpitiful parent ſtoodt,
It erked Calchas woful hart, who did abhorre the ſame.
His Oracle he rewd, and eke the backe reflicting flame
O wicked aud vngracious ſtocke that winneſt il with yll,
Tryumphing in thy filthy featse ncreaſyng leaudnes ſtill.
By bloud we win the waueryng windes, by death wee purchaſe warre
But by this meanes a thouſand ſhips at once releaſed are:
With lucky fate attempt the ſeas did not the loſed rout?
For Aulis Ile, th'ungracious fleete from port did tumble out:
As with a lewde vnlucky hand the warre he did beginne,
So Fortune fauored his ſucceſſe to thriue no more therin.
Her loue as captiue holdeth him whom captiue he did take
Not moued with the earneſt ſuite that could Achilles make,
Of Phoebus prelat Sminthicall he did retayne the ſpoyle:
When for the ſacred virgins loue his furious dreaſt doth boyle:
Achilles rough and thundring threats could not him qualify.
Nor he that doth direct the fates aboue the ſtarry ſkye.
To vs he is an Augur iuſte, and keepes his promiſe due,
But while he threats his captiue truls of word he is not true.
The ſauage people fierce in wrath once might not moue his ſpright,
Who did purloyne the kindled tentes with fyer blaſing bryght:
When ſlaughter great on Greekes was made in moſt extreameſt fyght
Without a foe he conquered, with leanes pines awaye,
In lewd and wantōn chamber trickes he ſpends the idle day,
And freſhly ſtill he fedes his luſt, leaſt that ſome other while
His chamber chaſt ſhould want a ſtewes, that might the ſame defile.
On Lady Briſes loue ag aine his fancy fonde doth ſtand,
Whom he hath got, that wreſted was out of Achilles hand.
And carnal copulation to haue he doth. not ſhame,
Though from her huſbands boſome he hath ſnacht the wicked dame,
Tuſhe, he that doth at Paris grudge, with wound but newly ſtroke
Eflamd with Phrygian Prophets loue, his boyling breſt doth ſmoke.
Now after Troyan boties braue, and Troy orewhelm'd he ſaw,
Retourned he is a pryſoners ſpouſe, and Pryams ſonne in law.
Now heart be bold, take corage good, of ſtomacke now be ſtowt,
A field that eaſely is not fought, to pitch thou goeſt about.
In practiſe miſchiefe thou muſt put, why hopſt thou for a day,
While Priams daughter come from Troy in Grece do beare the ſway.
But as for the poore ſely wreth, a wayteth at thy place
Thy wyddow, virgyns, and Oreſt his fatherlyke in face,
Conſyder theyr calamityes, to come, and cake their cares,
Whom all the peril of the broyle doth threat in thy affayres.
O curſed captiue, woful wretch why doſt thou loyter ſo?
Thy little brats a ſtepdame haue whoſe wrath wil worke their wo.
With gaſhing ſword (and if thou can none other way prouide),
Nor thruſt it through anothers ribbes then launch thy gory ſyde,
So murther twayne with brewed bloud, let bloud immixed be,
And by deſtroying of thy ſelfe deſtroy thy ſpouſe with thee.
Death is not ſawſt with ſoppes of Sorrow if ſome man els I haue,
Whoſe breathleſſe corſe I wiſh to paſſe with me to deadly graue.
Queene, brydle thyne affections, and wyſely rule thy rage,
Thy ſwelling moode now mittigate, thy choller ake aſſwage.
Way wel the wayghty enterpryſe that thou doſt take in hand,
Tryumphant victor he retures of mighty Aſia land
Auenging Europes iniury with him he bringes away.
The ſpoyles of ſacked Pargamy a huge and mighty pray.
In bondage eake he leades the foalke of long aſſaulted Troy,
Yet dareſt thou by pollecie attempt him to annoy?
Whom with the dynt of glittring ſword Achilles durſt not harme,
Although his raſh and deſperat dickes the froward Knight did arme:
Nor Aiax yet more hardy man vp yelding vitall breath,
Whom frantike fury fell enforſt to wound himſelfe to death:
Nor Hector he whoſe onely life procurde the Greekes delay,
And long in warre for victory enforced them to ſtay:
Nor Paris ſhaft, whoſe conning hand with ſhot ſo ſure did ayme:
Nor mighty Memnon ſwart and blacke, had power to hurt the ſame:
Nor Xanthus flood, where to and fro deade carkaſſes did ſwimme,
With armour hewd and therewith all ſome maymed broken limme:
Nor Symois, that purple wawmes with ſlaughter died-doth ſteare.
Nor Cygnus lilly whyte, the Sonne of fenny God ſo deare:
Nor yet the muſteryng Thraſian hoſt: nor warlike Rheſus kinge:
Nor Amazons, who to the warres did paynted Quiuers bring,
And bare theyr hatches in their handes with Target and with ſhield,
Yet had no powre with ghaſtly wound to foyle him in the field.
Syth he ſuch ſcouringes hath eſcapt and plungde of perilles paſt
Entendeſt thou to murther him returning home at laſt?
And ſacred alters to prophane with ſlaughters ſo vnpure?
Shal Greec thaduenger let this wronge long vnreuengde endure
The grym and fearce coragious horſe, the battayles, ſhoutes, & cryes,
The ſwelling ſeas which bruiſed barkes do dread when ſtormes aryſe,
Behold the fieldes with ſtreames of bloud oreflòwne & depely dround,
And al the cheualry of Troy in ſeruile bondage bounde,
Which Greekes haue writ in regiſters. Thy ſtubborne ſtomacke byud,
Suddue thy fond affections, and pacify thy mynde.
THe curſed tyme that euermore
my mynd did moſt deteſt,
The dayes that I abhorred haue
and hated in my breaſt,
Are come, are come, that myne eſtate
wil bring to vtter wracke:
Alas my hart why doſt thou fayle.
and faynting flyeſt backe?
What doſt thou meane at firſt aſſalte
from armour thus to flye,
Truſt this, the cruel Gods entend my doleful deſtenie,
To wrap thee in with perils round and catch thee in a band?
Endeuer drudge with all thy power their plagues for to withſtand:
With ſtomacke ſtoute rebellious to fyre and ſword appeale
It is no plague, if ſuch a death thy natiue deſtnies deale.
(O partners of my perils all begot of Leda thou)
Direct thy doynges after myne, and vnto thee I vow.
This droſel ſluggiſh ringleader, this ſtout ſtrong harted fire,
Sl pay thee ſo much bldud agayne as ſhe he bath in fyre
How haps it that his trembling cheekes to be ſo pale and whight,
Lying agaſt as in a traunce with faynting face vpright.
His conſcience wedlocke vow doth pricke & bringes him home again
Let vs returne the ſelfe ſame trade a new for to retayne,
To which at firſt we ſhould haue ſtucke and ought not to forſake,
To coenaunt continent a new let vs our ſelues betake:
To take the trade of honeſty at no tyme is to late:
He purged is from puniſhment whoſe hart the cryme doth hate.
Why whither wilt thou gad (o raſh and vnaduyſed dame?)
What doſt thou earneſtly beleeue, and firmly truſt the ſame,
That Agamemnons ſpouſall bed wil loyall be to thee?
That nought doth vnderprop thy mynd which might thy terrour bee?
His proud ſucceſſe puft vp to high with lucky blaſt of wynde,
Might make ſo cranke, and ſet aloft his hawty ſwelling mynd:
Among his peares he ſtately was ere Troyan turrets torne,
How thinke ye then his ſtomacke ſtoute by nature geuen to ſcorne,
In haughtines augmented is more in himſelfe to ioy,
Throughe this triumphant victory and conqueſt got of Troy?
Before his voyage Miceane King moſt mildly did he raygne,
But now a Tyrant truculent returnd he is agayne.
Good lucke and proude proſperity do make his hart ſo ryſe.
With what great preparation prepared ſolemne wyſ,
A rabblement of ſtrumpets come that clong about him al?
Bt yet the Propheteſſe of Thebe (whom God of truth we call)
Appeares aboue the reſt: ſhe keepes the King, ſhee doth him guyde:
Wilt thou in wedlocke haue a mate and not for it prouyde?
So would not ſhee, the greatteſt greefe this is vnto a wyfe,
Her huſbandes mimon in her houſe to leade an open life.
A Queenes eſtate cannot abyde her peete with her to raygne,
Ind ielous wedlocke wil not her companion ſuſtayne.
Aegiſt in deſprat moode agayn why ſeeſt thou mee a flote?
Why kindleſt thou the ſparkes of yre in imbers couered hot
If that the victors owne free will eleaſe his captiues care,
Why may not. I his Lady ſpouſe haue hope as wel to fare?
One law doth rule in royal throne, and po pous princclye Towres,
Among the vulgar ſorte, another in priuate ſimple bowers.
What though my grudging fancy force that at my huſbandes hand,
Sharpe execution of the law I ſtubbernly withſtand?
Recording this that haynouſly offended him I haue:
He gently wil me pardon graunt who neede the ſame to craue?
Euen ſo on this condition thou mayſt with him compound.
To pardon him if he agayne to pardon th be bounde.
The ſubtil ſcience of the law, the ſtatutes of our land,
(That long agoe decreed were) thou doſt not vnderſtand.
The Iudges be malicious men, they ſpyght and enuye vs,
But he ſhal haue them partiall his cauſes to diſcus.
This is the chiefeſt priuiledge that doth to Kinges belong.
What lawes forbiddth other men, they doe, and doe no wronge.
He pardned Helen, ſhe is wed to Menela agayne
Which Europe all with Aſia did plunge alike in payne.
No Ladies Luſt hath rauiſht yet Atrides in his life,
Nor priuily purloynd his hart betrothed to his wyfe.
To picke a quarrel he beginnes and matter thee to blame,
Suppoſe thou nothing haſt commit that worthy is of ſhame?
What boteth him whom Princes hate an honeſt life to frame?
He neuer doth complayne his wrong, but euer beares the blame.
Wilt thou repayre to Spart and to thy countrey trudge aryght?
Wilt thou become a ronnagate from ſuch a worthy wight?
Deuorcement made from Kinges wil not ſo let the matter ſcape.
Thou eaſeſt feare by fickle hope, that falſly thou doſt ſhape:
My treſpas is diſcloſd to none, but to a truſty wight:
At princes gates fidelity yet neuer enter might.
I wil corrupt and feede him ſo with ſiluer and with gold.
That I by bribing bynd him ſhall no ſecrets to vnfold:
The truſt that hyred is and bought by brybes and moneis fee,
Thy counſell to bewray agayne with brybes entyſte wil be
The remnaunt left of ſhamefaſtnes of thoſe vngracious trickes,
Wherin of late I did delyght, my conſcience freſhly prickes.
Why kep'ſt thou ſuch a buſie ſturre and with thy flatring ſpeach,
Enſtructing me with lewd aduyſe doſt wicked counſell preach
Shall I forſooth of royal bloud with al the ſpeede I can
Refuſe the King of Kinges, and wed an outcaſt baniſht man
Why ſhould you thinke in that Thieſt was father vnto mee.
And Agamemnon Atreus ſonne he ſhould my better be?
If that be but a tryfle ſmall, and nephew to the ſame.
I am of Phoebus linage borne, wherof I do not ſhame.
Why makſte thou Phoebus author of thy wicked pedagrew,
Whom out of heauen ye forſt to flye when bridle backe he drew,
When Lady Night with mantel blacke did ſpread her ſoden ſhade,
Why makeſt thou the Gods in ſuch reproachfulnes to wade?
Whoſe father hath thee conning made by ſleight and ſubtil guyle
To make thy kinſman Cockold whyle his wyfe thou do defyle.
What man is he whom we do know to be thy fathers mate,
Abuſing luſt of Lechery in ſuch vnlawful rate?
Auaunt, go packe thee hence in haſt, diſpatch out of my ſight
This infamy, whoſe blemiſh ſtaynes this bloud of worthy wyght.
This is no new exile to me that wickednes do hannt,
But if that thou (O worthy Queene) commaund me to auaunt,
I wil not only ſtrayght auoyde the houſe the towne and field
My life on ſword at thy requeſt I ready am to yeeld
This heynous dede permit ſhall I (moſt churliſh cruell drab)
Agaynſt my wil though I offend, the fault I ſhould not blabbe:
Nay, rather come apart with mee, and let vs ioyne our wittes
To wrap our ſelues out of this woe and parlous threatning fits.
NOw chaunt it luſty laddes,
Apollos prayſe ſubborne,
To thee the frolicke flocke
their crowned heads adorne.
To thee King Inachs ſtocke
of wedlocke chamber voyde,
Brayd out their virgins lockes
and theron haue employd
Theyr ſauory garlandes greene Itwiſt of laurell bow.
Draw neare with vs O Thebes our dauncing follow thou.
Come alſo ye that drinck of Iſmen bubling flood,
VVheras the Laurell treeful thicke on bankes doth bood.
Eake ye whom Mando mild, the Propheteſſe diuine,
(Foreſeyng fate) and borne of high Tireſias lygne,
Hath ſtird to celebrate with ſacred vſe and right.
Appollo and Dian borne of Latona bright.
O Victor Phaebe vnbend thy noked bow agayne.
Syth quie tnes and peace anew we do retayne.
And let thy twanckling harpe make melody ſo ſhril,
Whyle that thy nimble hand ſtryke quauers with thy quill.
No curious deſcant I nor luſty muſick craue,
No iolly rumbling note, nor trouling tune to haue.
But on thy treble Lute (according to thy vſe)
Stryke vp a playnſong note as when thy learned muſe
Thy leſſons do record, though yet on baſer ſtring
It lyketh thee to play the ſong that thon did ſinge:
As when from fyery heauen the dint of lightning flue,
Sent downe by wrath of Gods the Titans ouerthrew
Or elſe when mountaynes were on mountaynes heaped hie
That rayſe for Giauntes fell theyr ſteppes into the ſkye,
The mountayne Oſſa ſtoode on top of Pelion layd,
Olymp (wheron the Pynes theyr budding braunches braide)
Downe paiſed both: drawe nere O Iuno noble dame,
Both ſpouſe of mighty Ioue and ſiſter to the ſame.
Thou that doſt rule with him made ioynter of his mace,
Thy people we of Grece geue honor to thy grate.
Thou onely doſt protect from per illes Aigos land,
That euer careful was to haue thyne honour ſtand,
Moſt ſupplient thereunto thou alſo with thy might
Doſt order ioyful peace and battails fearce of fyght
Accept O conquering Queene theſe braunches of the bayes
That Agamemnon here doth yeld vnto thy prayſe:
The hollow boxen pype (that doth with holes abound)
In ſynging vnto the doth geue a ſolemne ſound:
To thee the Damſels eake that play vppon the ſtringes,
With conning harmony melodious muſicke ſinges.
The matrons eke of Greece by ryper years more graue,
To thee the Taper pay that vowed oft they haue,
The Heyferd young and whyte companion of the Bull.
Vnſkilful yet by proofe the paynful plow to pull.
VVhoſe neck was neuer worne nor gald with print of yoke,
Is in thy temple ſlame receiuing deadly ſtroke.
O Lady Pallas thou of moſt renoumed hap
Bred of the brayne of Ioue that ſmites with thunder clap.
Thou lofty Troian towres of craggy knotty flint
Haſt bet with battring blade, and ſtroke with iaueling dint:
The elder matrones with the dames that yonger be
Together in myngled heapes do honour due to thee,
VVhen thou approching nighe thy comming is eſpyde,
The prieſt vnbarres the gate, and opes the Temple wide:
By cluſtring thronges the flocks thine altars haunt apace,
Bedeckte with twiſted crownes ſo trim with comely grace.
The olde and auncient men well ſtept and grown in yeares,
VVhoſe feeble trembling age procureth hory hayres
Obtayning their requeſt crau de of thy grace deuine,
Do offer vp to thee their ſacrify ſed wyne,
O bright Dian whoſe blaſe ſheds light three ſondry waies
VVemyndful are of thee, and render thankefull prayſe,
Delon thy natiue ſoyle thou diddeſt fyrmely bynde,
That to and fro was wont to wander with the wynde:
VVhich with foūdation ſure mayn ground forbyds to paſſe
For Nauies (after which to ſwim it wonted was)
It is become a road defying force of wynd,
The mothers funeralles of Tantalus his kinde.
The daughters ſeuen by death thou victreſſe doſt accompt.
VVhoſe mother Niobe abydes on Sipil mount
A lamentable rocke and yet vnto this howre
Her teares new guſhing, out the marble old doth powre.
The Godhead of the Twins in ſumpteous ſolemne wyſe,
Both man and wyfe adore with ſauory ſacrifyce,
But thee aboue the reſt O father great and guide,
VVhoſe mighty force is by the burninglightning tryde:
Who when thou gaueſt a becke and ddſt thy head but ſhake
At once thextremeſt poales of heauen and earth did quake,
O Iupiter the roote that of our lynage arte.
Accept theſe offered gifts and take them in good parte:
And thou O graundſire great to thy poſteritie.
Haue ſome remorſe, that do not ſwarue in chyualrie.
But yonder lo with ſtiuing ſteps the ſouldier comes amayne
In all poſt haſt, with token that good newes declareth plaine
A Lawrell braunch, that hangeth on his ſpeare head he doth bringe
Eurybates is come, who hath ben truſty to the kynge.
SOre tyred after many yeares
with trauayle and wyth toyle
Scant credityng my ſelfe, the Gods
of thys my natyue ſoyle,
The temple, and the alters of
the ſaincts that rule the ſkye,
In kumble ſort wyth reuerence
deuoutly worſhip I.
Now pay your vowes vnto the Gods▪
returned is agayne
Vnto his countrey court, where wont he was to rule, and reigne,
Prynce Agamemnon, victor he, of Grece the great renoume.
The tydings of a meſſage good vnto mine eares is blowne.
Where ſtayes my ſpouſe whō longing for ten yeres I haue out ſcand?
What doth he yet ſayle on the ſeas, or he is come a land?
Yet hath he fyxt and ſet his foote bauck ſtepping home agayne.
Vppon the ſandy ſhore, that longe he wiſhed to attayne
And doth he ſtyll enioy his health enhauncte in glory great,
And painted out in pompe of prayes whoſe fame the ſky doth beate?
Bleſſe we with burning ſacrifice at length this lucky day
And eke the Gods though gracious, yet dealing long delay:
Declare if that my brothers wyfe enioy the vytall ayre
And tel me to what kind of Coaſt my ſiſter doth repayre.
God graunt, & geue vs better newes then this that thou doſt craue
The heauy hap of fyghting flouds forbiddes the truth to haue,
Our scattred fleete the ſwelling ſeas attemptes in ſuch a plight,
That ſhip from ſhip was taken cleane out of each others ſight.
Atrides in the waters wyde torwoyld and ſtraying farre
More vyolence by ſeas ſuſtaynd then by the bloudy warre
And as it were a conquerd man eſcaping home al weete
Now bringeth in his company of ſuch a mighty fleete,
A ſort of bruſed broken barkes, beſhaken, torne, and rent.
Shew what vnlucky chaunce it is that hath our nauy ſpent.
What ſtorme of ſeas diſperſed hath our Captaynes hear and there
Thou willeſt me to make report of heauy woful geare.
Thou biddeſt me moſt greeuous newes with tydinges good to part:
For vttring of this woeful hap my feeble mynd doth ſtart.
And horribly appauled is with this ſo monſtruous ill.
Speake out and vtter it: himſelfe with terrour he doth fill,
Whoſe hart his owne calamity and carke doth loath to know:
The hart whom doubted domage dulles with greater griefe doth glow
When Troyan buildings blaſing bright did burne away and broyle,
Enkindled firſt by Grekiſh brand, they fall to part the ſpoyle:
Repayring faſt vnto the ſeas agayne we come aboord,
And now the ſouldiers weary loynes were eaſed of his ſword,
Their bucklers caſt aſide, vppon the hatches lie aboue.
Their warlike handes in practiſe put, and Oers learne to moue:
Ech litle hindraunce ſeemes to much to them in haſty plight,
When of recourſe the Admirall gaue watchword by his light,
And trumpet blaſt beganne to cal our army from delay,
The paynted Pup with gilded ſnowt did firſt guyde on the way:
And cut the courſe, which following on a thouſand ſhippes did ryue,
Then firſt a wynd with pipling puffes our launcing ſhips did dryue,
Which glyded downe vpon our ſayles the water beyng calme
With breath of weſterne wynd ſo myld ſcant moued any walme.
The ſhyning ſeas beſpred about with ſhippes doth gliſter bright,
And alſo couerd with the ſame lay hid from Phoebus lyght:
It doth vs good to gaſe vppon the naked ſhore of Troy:
The deſart Phrygian plots ſo bare to vew we hop for ioye:
The yeuth each one beſturres themſelues, and ſtriking altogeather,
They tough their oers & with their toyle they helpe the wynd & weather
They ug and chearely row by courſe, the ſpiring ſeas vp daſh,
Agaynſt the atling ibs of ſhips the flapping floods do flaſh
The hory froth of wreſtling waues which ores aloft doth rayſe,
Do draw and trace a furrow through the marblefaced ſeas.
When ſtronger blaſt with belly ſwolne our hyſted ſayles did fil,
They row no more, but let the Pup to goe with wynd at wil,
Their ſheryng oers layd aſſyde our Pilot doth eſpye,
How farre from any land aloofe our ſayles reculing flye,
Or bloudy battels doth diſplay the threats of Hector ſtout,
Or of his ratling waggings tels, wherein he rode about.
Or how his gaſhed carkas ſlayne and traynd about the field
To funeral flan es and obit rightes for coyne agayne was yeld.
How Iupiter embathed was al in his royall bloud.
The frolicke fiſh diſpoſed was to mirth in Tyrren floud,
And fetching friſkes both in and out playes on the waters brim,
And on his broade and fynny backe about the ſeas doth ſwim,
With gambals quicke in ringes around and ſde to ſide enclynd,
Erwhyle he ſportes afront the pup, and whips agayne behynd,
Now fidling on the ſnout before the dalying wanton route
With iocundary ioly tryckes doth ſkip the fleete about.
Sometyme he ſtandeth gaſing on and eyes the veſſels bright,
Now euery ſhore is couered cleane, and land is out of ſight,
The parlous poynt of Ida rocke in ſight doth open lye,
And that alone eſpie we could with fyrmly fixed eye,
A duſkye clowde of ſtifling ſmoake from Troy did ſmolter blacke,
When Titan from the weary neckes the heauy yokes did ſlacke.
The fading light did groueling bend, and downe the day did ſhrowd,
Agaynſt the Starres amounting vp a litle miſty clowde
Came belching out in yrkſome Iompe, and Phoebus galland beams
He ſpewd vppon, beſtayning them duct downe in Weſterne ſtreams.
The Sunne ſet ſwaruing in ſuch ſort with diuers chaunge of face,
Did geue vs cauſe to haue miſtruſt of Neptunes doubted grace.
The euening firſt did burniſh bright, and paynt with ſtarres the ſky.
The wyndes were layed, and cleane forſooke our ſayles that quiet lie.
When cracking, ratling, rumbling noyſe, tuſht down wt thundring ſway
From top of hills, which greatter ſturre doth threaten and bewraye.
With bellowinges, and yellinges lowde, the ſhores do grunt & grone,
The craggy clyues and roaring rocks do howle in hollow ſtone.
The bubling waters ſwelles vpreard before the wraſtling wynd,
When ſodaynly the lowring light of Mone is hid and blynd.
The glymſing ſtarres do goe to glade, the ſurging ſeas are toſt
Euen to the ſkyes among the clowdes the light of heauen is loſt.
More nightes in one compacted are with ſhadow dim and blacke,
One ſhadow vpon another doth more darknes heape and packe,
And euery ſparke of light conſum'd the waues and ſkyes do meete,
The ruffling windes range on the ſeas, through euery coaſt they fit.
They heaue it vp with violence, oreturnde from bottom low,
The weſterne wynd flat in the face of Eaſterne wynd doth blow.
With hurley burley Boreas ſet ope his blaſting mouth,
And girdeth out his boyſteous breth agaynſt the ſtormy ſouth,
Each wynd with al his might doth blow, and worketh daungers deepe,
They ſhake the floods, a ſturdy blaſt along the ſeas do ſweepe.
That rolles and rumbles waue on waue, a northren tempeſt ſtronge,
Aboundance great of flacky ſnow doth hurle our ſhippes amonge.
The ſouthwynd out of Libia, doth rage vppon a ſhold,
And with the puiſſant force therof the quickſandes vp be rold,
Nor bydeth in the ſouth which doth with tempeſt lumpe and lower,
And force the flowing floods to riſe by powring out a ſhower.
The ſtubberne Eurus, Earthquakes made, and ſhoke the coūtries Eaſt,
And Eos coſt where Phoebus firſt aryſeth from his reſt.
How violent Corus ſtretcht and tare his yawning breaſt ful wyde?
A man would ſure haue thought the world did from his center ſlyde,
And that the frames of Heauen broke vp the Gods adowne would fall
And Chaos darke confuſed heape would ſhade and couer all.
The ſtreame ſtraue with the wynd, the wynd dyd beate it downe againe.
The ſpringing ſea within his bankes can not it ſelfe contayne,
The raging ſhowre his trilling droppes doth mingle with the ſeas,
And yet in all this miſery the fynd not ſo much eaſe,
To ſee and know what ill it is, that worketh theyr decay.
The darknes dim oppreſſeth ſtill and keepes the light away:
The blackfaſt night with Hellicke hue was clad of Stygian lake
And yet ful oft with glimſing beames the ſparkling fyre out brake,
The clowde doth cracke, and beyng rent the lightning leapeth out,
The wretches like the ſame ſo well it ſhyning them about,
That ſtil they wiſh ſuch light to haue (although God wot but yll)
The nauy ſwaying downe it ſelfe doth caſt away, and ſpill.
One ſide with other ſide is crackt, and helme is rent with helme,
The ſhip it ſelfe the gulping ſeas do headlong ouerwhelme.
Erwhyle a greedy gaping gulph doth ſup it vp amayne,
Then by and by oſt vp aloft it ſpewes it out againe,
She with her ſwagging full of ſea to bottome lowe doth ſinke
And drencheth deepe aſyde in floods her totring broken brinke.
That vnderneath a doſen waues lay drowned out of ſight,
Her broken plankes ſwim vp and downe, ſpoyld is her tackle quight,
Both ſayle and Oers cleane are loſt, the mayne maſt eke is gone.
That wonted was to beare vpright the ſayle yard thereuppon,
The timber and the broken bordes lye on the waters brim,
When cold and ſhiuering feare in vs doth ſtrike through euery lim,
The wyſeſt wits entockſicate dare nothing enterpriſe,
And cunning practiſe naught auayles when feareful ſtormes aryſe,
The mareners letting duty ſlip ſtand ſtaring all agaſt,
Their ſcoping ores ſodaynly out of their handes are wraſt.
To prayer then apace we fall, when other hope is none,
The Greekes and Troyans to the Gods alyke do make their mone.
Alacke what ſuccour of the fates may wee poore wretches fynd?
Agaynſt his father Pyrhus beares a ſpyteful cankred mynd,
At Ayax grudge Vliſſes doth, king Menela doth hate
Great Hector: Agamemnon is with Priam at debate.
O happy man is he that doth lye ſlayne in Troyan ground,
And hath deſerude by handy ſtroake to take his fatall wound,
Whom ſame preſerueth, taking vp his tombe in conquerd land
Thoſe momes whoſe melting cowardes hart durſt neuer take in hand
Or enterpriſe no noble acte, thoſe force of foods ſhall drowne
But fate forbearing long, wil take ſtoute Brutes of high renoume,
Ful wel we may aſhamed be, in ſuch a ſort to dye,
If any man his ſpyteful mynd yet can not ſatiſfye,
With theſe outragious plunging plagues that downe frō Gods are ſēt,
Appeaſe at length thy wrathful God agayne and take relent.
Euen Troy for pity would haue wept, to ſee our woefull caſe,
But if that in thy boyling breaſt black rancour ſtill haue place,
And that the Greekes to ruin run, it bee thy purpoſe bent,
Why doe theſe Troyans goe to wrack? for whom thus are wee ſpent?
Aſſwage the rygaur of the ſea that threarning hilles vp reares:
This drenched Fleete the Troyan folke and Greekes together beares.
Then from theyr prayers are they put, theyr foultring tonges doe ſtay,
The roring ſeas doth drowne their voyce and caryes their cries away.
Then mighty Pallas armed with the lepping lightning ſyre,
That teaſty Ioue doth vſe to hurle prouokt to ſwelling yre,
With threatning Iaueling in her hand, her proweſſe meanes to try.
And eke her force whoſe boyling breaſt with Gorgon fits doth fry,
Or what with Target ſhe can doe, and with her Fathers fyre.
Then from the Skyes another ſtorme begins abroade to ſpyre,
But Aiax nothing yet diſmaide all force withſtandeth ſtout,
Whom when hee ſpred his ſwelling ſayles with Cable ſtretched out,
She lighting downe did wryng him hard, and wrapt him in her flame,
And ſlang another flaſſhing dint of lightning on the ſame,
With all her force and violence her hand brought back agayne,
She toſt him out, as late that feate her father tought her playne.
Both ouer Aiax and his Pup ſhe flyeth ouerthwart,
And renting man and ſhyp, of both ſhee beares away a part,
His corage nought abated yet hee all to ſingde doth ſeeme,
Euen like a ſlubberne ragged Rocke amid the ſtriuing ſtreame,
Hee traynes along the roaring ſeas and eke the waltering waue
By ſhouing on his bourly breaſt in ſunder quite he draue,
The Barke with hand he caught, and on it ſelfe did rype it ouer,
Yet Aiax fhyneth in the floud which darkneſſe blinde doth couer.
At length attayning to a rocke his thundring crakes were theſe,
I conquered haue the force of fyre and rage of fighting ſeas,
It doth mee good, to mayſter thus the anger of the ſkye,
With Pallas wrath, the lightning flames and floods tumultyng hye.
The terrour of the warlyck god once could not make me flye,
The force of Mars and Hector both at once ſuſtaynd haue I.
Nor Phoebus dartes could me conſtrayne, from him one foote to ſhoon,
All theſe beſide the Phrygians ſubdued we haue, and woon.
When other Mecocks flinges his darts ſhall I not them withhis ſtand?
Yea, what if Phoebus came himſelfe, to pytch them with his hande?
When in hys melancholy moode he boaſted without meane.
Then father Neptune lyft his heat about the waters cleane.
The beaten rocke with for led mce he vndermyning pluckte
From bottom looſe, and ſuncke it downe, when downe himſelfe he ducke.
There Aiax lay, by land, by fyre, and ſtorme of ſeas deſtroid
But we by ſuffering ſhypwrack; are with greater plagues aoyd.
A ſubtyle ſhallow floud there is flowne on a ſtony ſhold,
Where crafty Caphar out of ſyght the lurking rocks doth hold,
Vppon whoſe ſharpe and ragged tops the ſwelling ſide doth flow,
The boyling waues do beat thereon ſtill ſweaing to and fro:
A turrret nodding ouer it doth hange with fallyng ſway,
From whence on either ſide from height proſpect eſpy wee may
Two ſeas: and on this hand the coaſt where Pelops once did raygne,
And Iſthmus floud in narrow creeke, reculing back agayne,
Doth ſtop Ionian ſea, leaſt into Helleſpont it run,
On th'other part is Lemnon floud that fame by bloudſhed woon.
On th'other ſide Calcedon to one doth ſtand agaynſt this forte,
And Aulis Ile that ſtayde out ſhips that thyther did reſorte.
This Caſtell heere inhabyte doth our Palimedes ſier,
Whoſe curſed hand helde in the top a brand of flaming fier.
That did alure our fleete, to turne on lurking rockes a ryght,
Entyſing them with with blaze to come vnto the lyght.
All into fitters ſhaken are the veſſels on the ſholde,
But other ſome doe ſwym, and ſome vpon the rockes are roulde.
And other lipping backe agayne ſo to eſchew the Rocks,
His bruſed Ryb, and ratling ſides agaynſt eche other knocks,
Whereby the other hee doth breake, and broken is himſelfe,
Then woulde they launee into the deepe, for now they dread the ſhelfe,
This perk of troubles thauct to hap in dawning of the day.
But when the Gods (beought of vs) began the rage to ſtay,
And Phoebus golden beames began a freſhe to render lyght,
The dolefull day diſcried all the domage done by nyght.
O whether may I now lament, and weepe with wayling ſad?
Or ſhall I els in that my Spouſe returned is bee glad?
I doe reioyce, and yet I am compelled to bewayle
My countreyes great calamity that doth the ſame aſſayle.
O Father great whoſe maieſty doth thundring Scepters ſhake,
The ſowring Gods vnto the Greekes now fauourable make,
With garlands greene let euery head reioyſing now be crounde.
To thee the pype in ſacryfice melodiouſly doth ſounde,
And on thyne aulter lyeth ſlayne an Heyferd lilly whight,
Before the ſame doe preſent ſtand with hanging lockes vndight,
A carefull Troyan company in heauy wofull plight,
On whom frō high the Lawrell tree with ſpredding braunch doth ſhyne,
Whoſe vertue hath inſpyred them with Phoebus grace diuine,
ALas the cruell ſting of loue
how ſweetely doth it taſte,
A miſery is mortall man
annext whyle lyfe doth laſt?
The pathe of miſchiefe for to flye,
now ſith there is a gap,
And wretched ſoules be franckly calde
From euery wofull hap,
By death, a pleaſaunt port, for aye in reſt them ſelues to ſhroude,
Where dreadfull tumultes neuer dwell nor ſtormes of Fortune proude:
Nor yet the burning firy flakes of Ioue the ſame doth doubt,
When wrongfully with thwacking thumpes be raps his thunder out:
Heere Lady Peace th'inhabitours doth neuer put in flight,
Nor yet the victors threatning wrath approching right to fight,
No whyrling weſternwynde doth vrge the ramping ſeas to praunce,
No duſty cloude that rayſed is by ſauage Dimilaunce,
On horſeback riding rancke, by rancke no fearce and cruell hoſt,
No people ſlaughtred, with their townes cleane ropſie turuey toſt:
Whyle that the foe with flaming fyre doth ſpoyle and waſte the wall,
Vntamed and vnbridled Mars deſtroyes and batters all:
That man alone who forceth not the fickle fates a ſtrawe,
The vyſage grim of Acheront whoſe eyes yet neuer ſawe,
Who neuer vewd with heauy cheare the vgſome Limbo lake,
And putting lyfe in haſarde, dare to death him ſelfe betake.
That perſon is a Prynces peare, and lyke the Gods in myght,
Who knoweth not what death doth meane is in a pitious plight
The ruthfull ruin of our natyue countrey wee behelde:
That wofull nyght, in which the roofes of houſes ouerquelde,
In Dardans City blaſing bryght with flaſſhing fiery flames.
When as the Greekes with burning brandes enkindle did the frames,
That: Troy whom war & beedes of armes might not ſubdue and take.
As once did mighty Hercules, whoſe Ouyuer cauſde it quake,
Which neither he that ſonne, and ſonne to Thetis was,
Nor whom Achilles loued to wel, could euer brynge to paſſe,
When glytesing bright in field he ware ale armour on his back,
And counterfayting fearſe Achill the Troyans draue to wrack.
Nor when Achilles he hym ſelfe his minde from ſorow wraſt,
And Troyan women to the walles did ſcuddyng leape in haſt.
In myſerte ſhe loſt her proud eſtate, and faſt renoume,
By being ſtoutly ouercome, and hardly pulled downe.
Yeares fyue & fyue did Troy reſiſe, that yet muſt,
In one nyghts ſpace by deſtenie he layed in the duſt.
Theyr fained giftes well haue we tried that huge and fatall gin,
We lyght of credit, with our owne ryght hand haue haled in,
That fatall gyft of Greeckes: what yme at entry of the gap
The hugye hors did ſhyueryng ſtand, where in the in ſelues did wrap
The captaynes cloſe, in holow vautes with bloudy war yreight.
When lawfully we might haue tryde, and ſerched their deceit:
So by theyr owne contryued ſnares the grekes had bin confound:
The braſen bucklers being ſhooke did gyue a clattring ſound.
A priuy whyſpering often tymes came tyckling in our ear.
And Pyrrhus (in a murreynes name ſo ready for to heare.
The crafty councell picked out of falſa Vlifſſes brayne,)
Did angle in the halow Vaut that range thereof agayne.
But fearing and ſuſpecting nought the heady youth of Troy
Layde handes vpon the ſacred ropes, to hale and pull with ioy,
On this ſyde younge Aſtyanax came garded with his trayne,
On th'other part Pollixena diſponſed to bee ſlayne
Vpon Achilles tombe, ſhe coms with maydes, and hee with men,
A ioly flocke with equall yeares as younge as they were then.
Theyr vowd oblations to the gods in holy day attyre,
The matrons bryng and ſo to church repayreth euecry ſyre.
And all the city did alyke, yea Hecuba our queene
(That ſynce the woful Hectors death or now was neuer fene)
She mery is: O griefe accurſt, of all thy ſorowes depe
For whych that firſt, or laſt befell entendeſt thou to wepe?
Our battred walles which heauenly hands cected haue and framde?
Or els the burning temples which vpon their Idols flamde?
Lamenting theſe calamyties wee haue not time and ſpace,
O mighty parent Pryam we poore Troyans wayle thy caſe.
The olde mans thratling throate I ſawe, (alas) I ſaw yborde
With cruell Pyrrhus blade, that ſcante with any bloud was gorde:
Refraine your teares yt down your cheekes ſhould tricle euermore
With woefull waylings piteouſly your pryuate friendes deplore
My myſeries refuſe a mate, ſo much accurſt as I:
To rewe my carefull caſe, refrayne your lamentable cry.
As for myne owne diſtreſſe to moorne, I ſhall ſuffice alone.
To mingle teares with other teares it doth vs good to mone:
In thoſe the burning teary ſtreames more ardently doe boyle,
Whom ſecret thoughts of lurking cares in priuy breaſt turmoyle:
Though that thou were a Goſſop ſtout, that brooke much ſorrow may
I warraunt thee, thou myghteſt well, lament this ſore decay,
Not ſad and ſolemne Aedon that in the woodes doth ſinge
Her ſugred Ditties finely tunde on ſweete and pleaſaunt ſtringe:
Recording Irys woefull hap in diuers kynde of note,
Whom Progne though he were her chylde and of her wombe begot,
For to reueng his fathers fault, ſhe did not ſpare to kill:
And gaue his fleſh and bloude for foode the fathers Maw to fill.
Nor Progne who in Swallowes ſhape: vpon the rydges hye,
Of houſes ſits in Biſton towne bewayling piteouſly,
With chattering throate, of Tereus her ſpouſe the cruell act,
(Who did by ſtrength and force of armes a ſhamefull brutiſhe fact.
Defile the ſyſter of his wyfe, fayre Philomel by name,
And eke cut out her tonge, leaſt ſhee ſhould blab it to his ſhame)
Though Progne this her huſbandes rape lamenting very ſore
Doe wayle, and weepe with piteous plaint, yet can ſhee not deplore
Sufficiently, though that ſhee woulde, our countreyes piteous plight:
Though he himſelfe among the Swans ſyr Cygnus lilly whight.
Who dwelles in ſtreame of Iſter floud, and Tanais channell coulde,
His weeping voyce moſt erneſtly though vtter out her woulde:
Although the morning Halcyons with dolefull ſighes doe wayle,
At ſuch time as the fighting floudes their Cyex did aſſayle,
Or raſhly wexing boulde attempt the Seas now layde at reſt,
Or being very fearefull feede their broode in tottring neſt,
Although as ſquemiſhe hearted men thoſe prieſtes in bedlem rage,
Whom mother Cyble being borne on high in lofty ſtage,
Doth mooue, to play on ſhalmes, Atys the Phrygian to lament,
Yet can not they this lot bewayle, though brawn frō armes they rent.
Caſſandra, in our teares there is no meaſure to refrayne,
Thoſe miſeryes all meaſure paſſe, that plunged vs in payne.
The ſacred fillets from thy heads, why doſt thou hale and pull?
They chiefly ought to worſhip God, whoſe hearts with griefe be dull.
My feare by this affliction is cleane abaled all,
Nor praying to the heauenly Ghoſtes for mercy will I call.
Although they were diſpoſde to chae and fret in fuſten fumes,
They nothing haue me to diſpleaſe, Fortune her force conſumes.
Her ſpyte is worne vnto the ſtumpes, what countrey haue I left?
Where is my Syre? am I of all my ſyſters quite bereft.
The ſacred tombes and alter ſtones our bloud haue drunke & ſwylde,
Where are my brethren bleſſed knor? deſtroyed in the fylde.
All widdow Wyues of Priams ſonnes may eaſly now beholde,
The Pallace voyde and caſt of court of ſilly Priam olde.
And by ſo many marriages ſo many Wyddowes are,
But onely Hellen comming from the coaſt of Lacon farre.
That Hecuba the mother of ſo many a pryncely wyght,
Whoſe fruitfull Wombe did breede the brand, of fyer blaſing bryght:
Who alſo bare the ſwinge in Troy, by practiſe now doth learne,
New lawes and guiſe of deſteny in bondage to diſcerne.
On her ſhee takath heart of grace with lookes ſo ſterne and wylde,
And barketh as a bedlem bitch about her ſtrangled chylde
Deare Polidor, the remnaunt left, and onely hope of Troy,
Hector, and Priam to reuenge, and to reſtore her ioy.
The ſacred Phoebus Prophet is with ſodayne ſilence huſht:
A quaking trembling ſhiuering feare throughout her Isms hath ruſht:
Her Face as pale as Aſhes is, her Fillits ſtande vpryght,
The ſoft and gentle goldilockes ſtarte vp of her affright.
Her panting breathing breaſt ſtuft vp within doth grunt and grone.
Her glaring bryghe and ſteaming Eyes are hether and thyther throwne.
Now glauncing vp and downe they roll: now ſtanding ſtiffe they ſtare.
She ſtretcheth vp her head more ſtreyght then commonly ſhe bare,
Boult vp ſhe goes, her wraſtling Iawes that faſt together clinge,
She doth attempt by diuers meanes, on ſunder how to wringe.
Her mumbling words in gabling mouth ſhut vp ſhe doth aſſwage,
As Menas mad that Bacchus aares doth ſerue in furious rage.
How doth it hap (O ſacred tops of high Parnaſſus hill)
That me berapt of ſence, with prickes of fury freſh yee fiill?
Why doe you me with ghoſt inſpyre, that am beſyde my wits?
O Phoebus none of thyne I am, releaſſe me from the ſits:
Infixed in my burning breaſtes the flames extinguiſh out,
Who forceth me with fury fell to gad and trot about?
Or for whoſe ſake inſpyrde with ſpryte mad mumbling make muſt I?
Why play I now the Prophet colde, ſith Troy in duſt doth ly?
The day doth ſhrynke for dread of warre, the night doth dim mine eyes.
With mantell blacke of darkneſſe deepe cleane couerd is the ſkyes:
But loe two ſhining Sunnes at once in heauen appeareth bryght,
Two Grecian houſes muſter doe their armies twayne to fight.
Amonge the mighty Goddeſis in Ida woodes I ſee,
The fatall ſheepherd in his throne as vmpier plaſt to bee:
I doe aduiſe you to beware, beware (I ſay) of kynges,
(A kindred in whoſe cancred heartes olde priuy grudges ſpringes)
That countrey clowne Aegiſthus he this ſtocke ſhall overthrowe,
What doth this fooliſh deſpret dame her naked weapons ſhowe?
Whoſe crowne entendeth ſhee to cracke in weede of Lacon lande,
With Hatchet (by the Amazons inuented firſt) in hand?
What face of mighty maieſty be witched hath myne eyes?
The conquerour of ſaluage beaſtes Marmarick Lyon lyes,
Whoſe noble necke is wurried with curriſh fange and tooth
The curliſh ſnaps of eger Lyoneſle abyde hee dooth.
Alacke yee ghoſtes of all my friendes why ſhould yee ſay that I,
Among the reſt am onely ſafe, from perils farre to ly?
Fayne father follow thee I would, Troy being layde in duſt.
O brother terrour of the Greekes, O Troyans ayde and truſt.
Our auncient pomp I doe not ſee, nor yet thy warmed handes,
(That fearce on Greekiſh flaming fleete did fling the fyry brandes)
But mangled members, ſchorched corps, and ſake thy valiaunt armes,
Hard pimond and bounde in bands ſuſtayning greeuous harmes:
O Troyolus, a match vnfit encountering with Achill
(That myghty man of armes) to ſoone come vnto thee I will.
I doe delight, to ſayle with them on ſtinking Siygian flood.
To vew the churliſhe maſtife cur of hell, it doth mee good.
And gaping mouthed Kingdome darke of greedy Ditis raygne.
The Barge of filthy Phlegethon this day ſhall entertayne,
Mee conquering, and conquered, and Prynces ſoules with all.
You flitering ſhades I you beſeeche, and cake on thee I call,
O Stygian poole (whereon the Gods theyr ſolemne othes doe take
Vnbolt a whyle the Braſne bars of darkſome Lymoo lake.
Whereby the Phrygian folke in hell may Mican ſtate beholde.
Looke vp yee ſilly wretched ſoules, the fates are backward roulde.
The ſqally ſiſters doe approch, and deale their bloudy ſtrokes,
Their ſmultring taggots in their handes halfe bruie to aſhes ſmokes.
Their vyſages ſo pale doe burne, with fyry flaming eyes:
A garment blacke theyr gawed guts doth gyrde in mourning gyſe.
Dire dread of night begins to howle, the bones of body baſt
With lying long doe rot corrupt in miry pudle caſt.
Beholde, the wery aged man his burning thyrſt forgot▪
The waters dalying at his lippes to catch endeuors not:
But mourneth for the funerall, that ſhall enſue anen.
The Troyan Prynce his royall robes tryumphant putteth on.
The furious rage cleane ouerpaſt begins it ſelfe to ſlake.
And ſlyps away, euen as a Bull that deadly wounde doth take
On gaſſhed neck afront the aares: come let vs eaſe at laſt
Her lymbes, that of the ſpryte of God hath felt the mighty blaſt.
Returning home agayne at length and crounde with Lawrell bow
(A ſigne of worthy victory) is Agamemnon now.
The Wyfe to meete her Huſband, doth her ſpeedy paſſage ply,
Returning hand in hand, and foote by foote moſt louingly.
AT length I doe arryue agayne
vppon my natiue ſoyle:
God ſaue thee O deare loued Lande,
to thee ſo huge a ſpoyle
So many barbarous people yeelde:
the flowre of Aſia. Troy:
To beare thy yoake ſubmits her ſelfe,
that longe did liue in ioy.
Why doth this Prophet (on the grounde her ſprawling body layde)
Thus reele and ſtagger on her necke, all trembling and diſmayde?
Sirs, take her vp, with Lycour warme let her bee cheariſhed.
Now peepes ſhe vp agayne, with drouping eyes ſonke in her head:
Plucke vp thy ſpryte, heere is the porte wiſht for in miſery:
This day is feſtiuall.
At Troy ſo was it wont to bee.
Let vs to Th'alters worſhip gyue.
At Th'alters died my ſire:
A, Pray wee to Ioue.
To loue whoſe grace diuine doth me inſpire?
Doſt thou ſuppoſe that Troy thou ſeeſt?
And Priam eke I ſee.
Troy is not heere.
where Helen is there take I Troy to bee,
Feare not as maide to ſerue thy dame.
Nay fredome draweth ny.
Take thou no thought how thou ſhalt Iue.
All cares for to defy,
Death giues a courage vnto mee.
Yet ſay I once agayne
There is no daunger left, whereby thou mighteſt hurt ſuſtayne.
But yet much troublous daūger both hang ouer thy head I wot.
What miſchiefe may a victor dread?
Euen y• hee dreadeth not.
Yee truſty meny of my men come cary her away,
Till of the ſpryte ſhee ryd her ſelfe, leaſt fury force her ſay
That may be preiudiciall, her tongue ſhe cannot frame.
To thee O Father flinging forth the lightnings flaſſhing flame,
That doſt diſperſe the cloudes, and rule the courſe of euery ſtarre,
And guyde the Globe of Earth, to whom the boottes woon by warre
With triumphe victors dedicate: to thee O Iuno hight
The ſyſter deare of doughty Ioue, (thy huſband full of might)
Both I and Greece with fleſh and bloude, and eke our vowed beaſt,
And gorgious gyftes of Arabie, giue worſhip to thy heſt.
O GREECE by noble Gentlemen
in honour ſhyning cleare,
O GREECE to wrathfull IVNO thou
that art the darling deare,
Some iolly worthy luſty bloude
thou foſters euermore,
Thou haſt made euen the Gods, that were
a number odde before.
That puiſſaunt mighty Hercules a noble Impe of thyne
Defered by his trauels twelue, rapt vp in heauen to ſhyne.
For whom the heauens did alter courſe, and Iupiter with all
Did iterate the howres of nyght, when dampiſhe dewe doth fall.
And charged Phoebus chariot ſwyfte to trot with ſlower pace,
And leaſurely bright lady Moone thy homwarde Wayne to trace,
Bryght Lucier that yeare by yeare his name a newe doth chaunge,
Came backe agayne, to whom the name of Heſper ſeemed ſtraunge.
Aurora to her common courſe her reared head addreſt,
And couching backward downe agayne the ſame ſhee did areſ,
Vpon the ſhoulder of her ſpouſe, whoſe yeares with age are worne
The eaſt did feele, ſo felt the weſt, that Hercules was borne.
Dame nature coulde not cleae diſpatch, to vtter in one night,
That boyſtous lad: the whyrling worlde did wayght for ſuch a wight.
O babe whoſe ſhoulders vnderprop, the ample ſpactous ſky,
In claſped armes thy preweſſe did the cruſſhed Lyon try.
Who from his fyry yawning throate ſpwes out his broyling brande,
The nimble hynde in Menall mount hath knowne thy heauy hande▪
The Bore hath felt thy fyſt, which did Arcadia deſtroy.
The monſtrous conquerde Bull hath rorde that Creta did anoy.
The Dragon dyre that breeding beaſt in Lerna poole he ſlewe,
And chopping of one head forbad thereof to ryſe anewe.
With clubbed bruſing battring batte he crankly did ſubdew.
(The brethren twins y• tewde vn Teate) whereof three monſters grew.
Of tryple formed Gerion the ſpoyle into the eaſt,
A droue of ECttell Hercules did fetch out of the weaſt.
Away from tyraunt Diomede the Thracian horſe he led,
Which neyther with the graſſe that grew by Styrmon floud he fed,
Nor yet on Heber bankes, but them the vlayne did refreſh
His greedy mounching cramming tades with aliaunts bloud and fleſh.
Their rawfed Iawes imbrewde were with the carmans bloud at laſt,
The ſpoyles and ſhaftes Hipolyte ſaw from her boſome wraſt
As ſone as he with clattring ſhaft the duſky cloude did ſmite,
The Stymphall byrde that ſhadowed the ſunne, did take her flight.
The fertill tree that apples beares of golde, did feare him ſore,
Which neuer yet acquayntaunce had with Taſters ooth before.
But whipping vp with liuely twigges into the ayre ſhe flys,
And whyle the chinking plate doth found then Argos full of eyes,
The watchman ſhrinking cloſe for colde that ſleepe yet neuer knew,
Doth heare the noyſe whyle Hercules with mettall of yellow hew
Well loden packs away, and left the groue befliched cleae.
The hound of hell did holde his tongue drawne by in tryple cheane,
Nor barke with any boughinge throate, nor coulde abyde the heme,
Or colour of the heauenly lyght, whoſe beames hee neuer knewe.
When thou wert captayne Generall, and didſt conduct our Hoſte,
(They that) of Dardans Lygne, to come theyr Stocke doe falſly boſte,
Were vanquiſhed by force of armes and ſince they felt agayne
Thy Gray gooſe winge, whoſe bitterneſſe to feare might thē conſtrayne.
WIthin a reuell rexe is kept,
as ſore as euer was,
Euen at the ten yeares ſiege of Troy:
What thing is this? (alas)
Get vp my ſoule, and of the rage
auengmeent worthy craue:
Though Phrygians wee bee vanquiſhed,
the victory we haue.
The matter well is brought aboute:
vp Troy thou ryſeſt now,
Thou flat on floore haſt pulde down Greece, to ly as low as thou.
Thy Conquerour doth turne his Face: my propheſying ſpright
Did neuer yet diſcloſe to mee ſo notable a ſight:
I ſee the ſame, and am thereat, and buſied in the broyle,
No viſion fond fantaſticall my ſenſes doth beguile:
Such fare as Prygians feaſtes with on laſt vnhappy night
At Agamemnons royall courte full daintily they dight:
With purple hangings all adornde the brodred Beds doe ſhyne,
In olde Aſſaracks goblets gylt they ſwincke and ſwill the wyne.
The King in gorgyous royall robes on chayre of State doth ſit,
And pranckt with pryde of Pryams pomp of whom he conquerd it.
Put of this hoſtile weede, to him, (the Queene, his Wyfe gan ſay,)
And of thy louing Lady wrought weare rather thys aray.
This garment knit. It makes mee loth, that ſhiuering heere I ſtande.
O ſhall a King be murthered, by a baniſht wretches hande?
Out, ſhall Th'adulterer deſtroy the huſbande of the Wyfe?
The dreadfull deſtinies approcht, the foode that laſt in lyfe
He taſted of before his death, theyr mayſters bloud ſhall ſee,
The gubs of bloude downe dropping on the wynde ſhall powred bee.
By traytrous tricke of trapping weede his death is brought about,
Which being put vpon his heade his handes coulde not get out▪
The ſtopped poake with mouth ſet ope his muffled head doth hyde,
The mankinde dame with trembling hand the ſwed drew from her ſide,
Nor to the vtmoſt of her might it in his fleſh ſhee thraſt,
But in the gieuing of the ſtroke ſhee ſtayed all agaſt,
Hee as it were a briſtled Bore entangled in the net
Among the bryars in buſſhy woodes yet tryeth out to get.
With ſtrugling much the ſhrinking bands more ſtreightly he doth bind.
He ſtryues in vayne, and would ſly of the ſnare that doth him blind.
Which catcheth holde on euery ſyde. But yet th'entangled wreatch
Doth grope about, his ſubtle foes with griping hand to catch.
But furious Tyndaris preparde the Pollaxe in her hande,
And as the prieſt to ſacrifice at Th'alter ſide doth ſtande,
And vewes with eye the Bullockes necke, eare that with Axe he ſmite,
So to and fro ſhee heaues her hand to ſtryke and leauell right.
He hath the ſtroke: diſpatcht it is: not quite fhopt of the head
It hangeth by a litle crop: heere from the Carkaſſe dead
The ſpouting bloude came guſſhing out: and there the head doth lye,
With wallowing, bobling, mumbling tongue: nor they do by and bye
Forſake him ſo: the breathleſſe coarſe Aegiſt doth all to coyle:
And mangled hath the gaſſhed corpes: whyle thus hee doth him ſpoyle,
She putteth to her helping hand: by deteſtable deede
They both accorde vnto the kynde, whereof they doe proceede.
Dame Helens ſyſter right ſhee is, and hee Thyeſtes ſonne:
Loe doubtfull Titan ſtandeth ſtill the day now being donne,
Not knowing whether beſt to keepe ſtill on his wonted way,
Or turne his wheeles vnto the path of dyre Thyeſtes day.
O Thou whom of our Fathers death
the onely helpe wee haue,
Fly, fly, from force of furious foes,
make haſt thy ſelfe to ſaue:
Our houſe is opſey turuey toſt,
our Stocke is caſt away,
Our ruthfull realmes to ruin ronne, our kingdomes doe decay.
Who cometh heere in Chariot ſwift thus galloping a mayne?
Brother, diſguiſed in thy weede let mee thy perſon fayne.
O Buſſard blynde, what doſt thou meane from forrayne folke to fly?
Whom doſt thou ſhun? it doth behoue to feare this family.
Oreſtes now bee boulde, and ſet all ſhiuering feare a ſide,
The certayne ſuccour of a truſty friende I haue eſpide.
WIth ſolemne Pompe I Strophilus
forſaking Phocis lande,
Bearing a braunch of Paulme, that growes
at Eli, in my hand,
Returned backe I am, the cauſe
that wild mee heather wend,
Is with theſe gyftes to gratefie
and welcome home my frend,
Whoſe valiaunt army ſhale, and ſhooke
the tattred Troyan walles,
Who wearied with the ten yeares warre, now flat on floore ſhee falles.
What wofull wight is this that ſtaynes her mourning face with teares,
And drowned deepe in drouſp dumpes oppreſſed is with eares?
I know full well this damſell is of Prynces lynage borne.
What cauſe Electra hath this ioyfull family to morne?
By treaſon that my mother wrought, my Father lieth ſlayne,
And drincking of their fathers cup the chyldren doe complayne.
Aegiſt engroceth Caſtes got by fornication.
A lack that of ſo longe a tyme, filicity is none.
I thee requeſt euen for the Ioue my father thou doeſt owe,
And for the honour of the crowne, whoſe brute abrode both growe
In euery coaſt: and by the Gods that diuerſly doe deale,
Take into thy tuicion, conuey away, and ſteale,
This poore Oreſt: ſuch kinde of theft is piety in deede.
Although that Agamemnoas death doth teach mee to take heede,
Yet will I vndertake the ſame, and with all diligence
Oreſtes ſhall I goe about with ſtrength to haue thee hence.
Proſperity requireth faith, but trouble exacts the ſame,
Haue heere a pryce for thoſe that doe contende and wage in game.
An Ornament with comely grace ordaynde to deck the brow,
And let thy heade be couerde with this greene and pleaſaunt bow.
And cary this victorious triumphant braunche in hand.
God graunt this Paulme that planted was in fertill Piſa land,
(Where ſolemne games were celebrate Ioues honour to expreſſe)
May both a ſauegarde bee to thee, and bring thee good ſucceſſe.
Thou that beſtryds thy fathers ſteedes, as he before hath done,
Goe ſtryke a league of amity with Pylades my ſonne.
Now nimble Nagges let Greece heereof recording teſtify,
With headlong ſcouring courſe amayne this traytrous country fly.
Hee is eſcapte ad gone, and with vnmeaſurable might
The Chariot horſe with rayne at will doe ſcud out of my ſight.
Now free from perill on my foes attendaunce will I make.
And offer willingly my head the deadly wounde to take.
The cruell conquereſſe of her ſpouſe is come, whoſe ſpotted weede
With ſprinkels (ſigne of ſlaughter) doe beare recorde of her deede.
Her goary handes new bathde in bloude as yet they bee not dry,
Her rough and churliſhe rigorous lookes the fact doe notify.
Unto the Temple will I trudge. Caſſandra ſuffer mee,
Oppreſt with egall griefe, take parte of ſacrifice with thee.
O Thou thy Mothers Enemy,
vngracious ſaucy face.
After what ſorre doſt thou a mayde
appeare in publyque plate?
I haue wyth my virginity
the bowres of Baudes forſooke.
What man is het, that euer thee to bee a vyrgin tooke?
What your own daughter?
With thy mother more modeſt ſhould,
Doe you at length begin to preach, ſuch godlines to me. thou be.
A marily ſtomacke ſtout thou baſt with ſwelling hawty hart.
Subdued with ſorrow learne thou ſhall to play a womans part.
A ſwerd and buckler very well a woman doth beſeeme,
(Except I dote.)
Thy ſelfe doſt thou haylefellowe wt vs eſteeme?
What Agamemnoon new is this, whom thou haſt got of late?
Hereafter ſhall I tame, and teach thy gyrliſh tongue to prate.
And make thee know, how to a Queene thy taunting to forbeare.
The whilſt (thou Wyddow) aūſware me directly to this geare.
Thy huſband is bereued quight of breath, his lyfe is donne.
Enquter where thy brother is, ſo ſeeke about my ſonne.
Hee is departed out of Greece.
Goe fetch him out of hande.
Fetch thou my father vnto mee.
Giue me to vnderſtande,
Where doth he lurking hyde his head? where is he ſhrunke away?
All plunge of perills paſt hee is, and at a quiet ſtay,
And in another Kyngdome where no harme hee doth miſtruſt,
This aunſwere were ſufficient, to pleaſe a Parent tuſt.
But one whoſe breaſt doth boyle in wrath, it cannot ſatiſefy.
To day by death thou ſhalt receyue thy fatall deſtiny.
On this condition am I pleaſde, the Aulter to forſake,
If that this hanc ſhall doe the deede, my death when I ſhall take.
Or els if in my throate to bath thy blade, thou doe delight,
Moſt willingly I yeelde my throate, and giue thee leaue to ſmite.
Or if thou will chop of my heade in brutiſhe beaſtly guiſe,
My necke a wayting for the wounde out ſtretched ready lies.
Thou haſt committed ſinfully a great and grieuous guilt.
Goe purge thy hardned hands, the which thy huſbands bloud haue ſpilt.
O thou that of my perills all doſt ſuffer part with mee,
And in my realme doſt alſo rule with egall dignity,
Aegiſthus, art thou glad at this? (as doth her not behoue,)
With checks and taunts y• daughter doth her mothers mallice moue.
Shee keepes her brothers counſell cloſe conueyde out of the way.
Thou malpert and wtleſſe wenche, thyne cluiſhe prating ſtay,
Refrayne thoſe wordes vnfit thy Mothers glowing cares to vex.
What ſhall the breeder of this broyle controll me with his checks,
Whoſe fathers gutit hath cauſed him to haue a doubtfull name,
Who both is to his ſiſter, ſonne, and Nephew to the ſame?
To ſnap her head of with thy ſwerd Aegiſt doſt thou refrayne?
Let her giue vp the ghoſt: or bryng her brother ſtraight agayne:
Let her be lockt in dungeon darck, and let her ſpend her dayes,
In Caues & Rocks, with painefull pangues, torment her euery wayes.
I hope him whom ſhe hidden hath ſhee will agayne diſcry,
Through being clapt in pryſon ſtrong and ſuffring pouerty
With yrkſome and vnſauory ſmells on euery ſyde annoyde,
Enforſt to weare a wyddowes weede, er wedding day enioyde:
Put in exile and baniſhment when eche man doth her hate:
So ſhall ſhe bee by miſery compeld to yeelde to late,
Prohibyted of holſome ayre fruition to haue.
Graunt me my dome by meanes of death to paſſe vnto my graue.
I would haue graunted it to thee, if thou ſhould it deny.
Unſkilfull is the tyraunt, who by ſuffring wretches dy
Doth ende theyr paynes.
what after death doth any thing remayne?
And if thou doe deſyre to dye, the ſame ſee you refrayne.
Lay hands ſis on this wondrous wretch, whom being caryed on,
Euen to the furtheſt corner of my iuriſdiction.
Farre out beyond Mycoenas land in bonds let her be bound,
With darkneſſe diui in hiddeous holde let her be cloſed round.
This captiue Spouſe and wicked Queane, the Trull of Prynces bed
Shall pay her paynes, and ſuffer death by ſong of her head.
Come, hale her on, that ſhe may followe, that way my ſpouſe is gon,
Whoſe loue from mee entiſed was.
Doe not thus hale mee on.
I will before you take the way, theſe tydings firſt to tell
Vnto my countrey men of Troy beneath in loweſt hell.
How ouerquelmed ſhips ech where are ſpread the ſeas vppon:
And Mcoene countrey conquerde, is brought in ſubiection.
He that of thouſand captaynes was graunde captayne generall,
Come to as great calamity as Troy it ſelfe did fall,
Entrapped was by traytrous trayne, and whoredome of his Wyfe,
And by a gyft receaued of her, depriued of his Lyfe.
Let vs not linger: on with mee, and thankes I doe you giue.
I oy, that it might be my hap, thus after Troy to liue.
Go to, prepare thy ſelfe to dye thou frantique raging wight.
The franſy fits of fury fell on you ſhall alſo light.
ALas yee hatefull helliſh Hagges,
yee furies foule and fell,
Why cauſe yee ruſty rancours rage
in noble heartes to dwell?
And cancred hate in boyling breaſtes
to grow from age to age?
Coulde not the graundſtres paynefull pangues
the childrens wrath aſſwage?
Nor famyne faynt of pyning paunche, with burning thyrſt of hell,
Amid the blackeſt ſtreame of Sticks where poyſning breathes do dwel.
Where vapors bile parbraking out from dampiſhe myry mud,
Encreaſe the paynes of Tantalus deſerude by guiltles bloud,
Could not thine owne offence ſuffice Thyeſtes in thy Lyfe,
To file thy brothers ſpouſall Bed, and to abuſe his Wyfe?
But after breath from body fled, and Lyfe thy Lymmes hath left,
Can not remembraunce of reuenge out of thy breaſt be reft?
What, yet haſt thou not layde thy lips, taiaſte of Lethes floude?
Now afte death why doſt thou come to moue thy ſonne to bloude?
Coulde cruell Ditis graunt to thee thy paſporte backe agayne?
To worke this woe vpon the world, and make ſuch rigour raygne,
That Clytemneſtra is become the fifty ſiſter dyre
Of Danaus daughters, that did once theyr huſbands death conſpyre.
Loe here how fickle fortune giues but brytle fading ioy.
Lot, hee who late a Conquerour tryumphed ouer Troy,
Enduring many ſrtudy ſtormes with mighty toyle and payne
To ſowe the ſeede of fame, hath reapt ſmall fruite thereof agayne.
When as his honour budding forth with flowre began to bloome,
(Alas) the ſtocke was hewed downe and ſent to deadly doome.
And they that of his victory and comming home were glad,
To ſodayne mourning chaunge their myrth with heauineſſe beſtad.
The luſty pompe of royall courte is deade: (O dolefull day)
The people mone theyr prynces death with woe and weale away:
With howling crying, wringing hands, with ſobs, wt ſighes, & teares,
And wt their fiſts they beate their breaſts, they pull & hale their heares.
And as the ſheepe amaſed run, and rampe aboute the fielde,
When as theyr ſhepherd to the Wolfe his goary throate doth yeelde
Euen ſo as mad they rage and raue throughout Micoenas land,
Depriued of theyr Prynce, they feare the bloudy Tyrauntes hand.
While thus were woefull waylings hard in euery place about,
The good Caſſandra (come from Troy) to death is haled out.
Like as the Swan, who when the time of death approcheth nye,
By nature warned is thereof, and pleaſed well to dye,
Doth celebrate her funerall with dirge and ſolemne ſonge:
Euen ſo the noble vyrgin who in woe hath liued longe,
Moſt ioyfull goes ſhe to her death with milde and pleaſaunt face,
Stout bouiſtring out her burly breaſt with pryncely porte and grace.
Nothing diſmayde with courage bolde, and chearefull countenaunce,
On ſtage ordeyned for her death ſhee gan her ſelfe aduaunce:
As though ſhe had not thyther come, to leaue her lothſome lyfe,
As though ſhe had not come, to taſte the ſtroke of fatall knyfe.
But euen as it in brydale bed her iourney were to meete
Corebus deare, not hauing mynde of death, nor winding ſheete,
When looking rounde on euery ſide ſhe tooke her leaue of all,
From vapourde eyes of younge and olde the trickling teares doe fall.
The Greekes them ſelues to griefe are moude to ſee this heauy ſight,
So pity pearſt the headmans heart, that thriſe aboute to ſmite
He ſtayde the ſmot: with ſhiuering hand yet once agayne he tryed.
And from her ſhoulders ſtroke her heade. And thus the vyrgin dyed.
But now the Greekes another cauſe of mourning haue in hand:
Oreſters, Agamemnon ſome, is forſt to fly the land.
Amonge olde rotten ragged Rockes there lies an vgly place.
A Dungeon deepe, as darke as hell, vnknowne to Phoebus face.
An holow huge wyde gaping hole, with way ſtill bending downe,
Whoſe mouth with venonous wythred weedes is hid and ouergrowne,
Where ſtinking ſmels come belching out from filthy durty dyke.
Where Verment vyle doe creepe and craule, in hell is not the lyke.
Ilfauourde, foule miſſhapen bugges, doe lucke about this caue,
With dreadfull ſounds, and roaring noyſe withing the pit they raue.
Euen heather is Electra ſent, in darckeneſſe deepe to lye,
In pouerty, and comfortleſſe without the lyght of ſkye,
Faſt clogde with Yron boults and Chaynes, thus by her mother layde
In torments, till by her to death Oreſtes be betrayde:
Who (as Caſſandra telleth) ſhall reuenge his fathers death,
Depryue with ſwerd th'adulterour, and Mother both of breath.
So after all theſe bloudy broyle, Greece neuer ſhall bee free:
But bloud for bloud, and death by turnes, the after age ſhall ſee.