I Was iealous of the ſhadowing of my grace,
But that I know this is my time and place;
Where ha's not Induſtry a noble friend,
In this Aſſembly, euen the beſt extend
Their grace and loue to me, (ioyde or amazde)
Who, of true Fame poſſeſt but I haue rayſde,
And after added Honors to his dayes,
For Induſtry is the life-bloud of praiſe,
To riſe without mee, is to ſteale to glory,
And who ſo abiect to leaue ſuch a ſtory,
It is as cleere as Light, as bright as truth,
Fame waytes their age, whom Induſtry their youth.
Behold this Ball of Gold, vpon which ſtands
A golden Cupid wrought with curious hands,
The mighty power of Induſtry it ſhowes,
That gets both wealth, and loue, which ouerflows
With ſuch a ſtreame of Amity an a peace,
(Not onely to it ſelfe adding increaſe)
But ſeverall nations where commerce abounds
Taſte the harmonious peace, ſo ſweetly ſounds,
For inſtance, let your gracious eye be fixt,
Ʋpon a Ioye, true, though ſo ſtrangely mixt.
IT is my ioy chiefly, (and I ſtand for thouſands) to ſee the glory of this triumphant day, which in ſome meaſure requires the noble worthineſſe of the Honourable Society of Grocers, to whom and to my Lord Mayor I wiſh all good ſucceſſes.
NOne of all theſe Nations, conceiue more true ioy at this triumphant day, then my ſelf, to my Lord Mayor all faire and noble fortunes, and to the worthy Society of Grocers, all happy wiſhes, and I pray heauen, that all the yeere following may be as happy and ſucceſſefull, as this firſt entrance to your dignity.
VVElcome to Fames bright Caſtle, take thy place,
This ſeate's reſerud to doe thy vertues grace.
TRue, but not yet to be poſſeſt, heare me,
Iuſtice muſt flow through him, before that bee,
Great works of Grace muſt be requird and done,
Before the honor of this Seate be won.
A whole yeeres reuerend care in righting wrongs,
And guarding Innocence from malicious tongues.
Muſt be imployde in Vertues ſacred right,
Before this place be fild; tis no meane fight,
That wins this Palme, truth, and a vertuous care,
Of the oppreſſed, thoſe the Loadſtones are,
That will gainſt Enuies power drawe him forth,
To take this merit in this ſeat of worth:
Where all the memorable worthies ſhine,
In works of brightneſſe, able to refine,
All the beholders minds, and ſtrike new fire,
To kindle an induſtrious deſire,
To imitate their actions, and their Fame,
Which to this Caſtle addes that glorious Name.
Wherefore Reward, free as the Ayre or Light,
There muſt be Merit, or our work's not right.
IF there were any error twas my loue,
And if it be a fault to be too free,
Reward commits but once ſuch hereſie.
How ere, I know your worth will ſo extend,
Your fame will fill this ſeat at twelue months end.
THere is no humane glory or renowne,
But haue their euening & their ſure ſun-ſetting,
Which ſhews that we ſhould vpward ſeeke our Crown
And make but vſe of time for our hopes bettering,
So to be truely mindfull of our owne,
Is to performe all parts of good in one;
The cloſe of this triumphant day is come,
And Honor ſtayes to bid you welcome home,
All I deſire for my Grace and good,
Is but to be remembred in your bloud,
With Honor to accompliſh the faire time,
Which power hath put into your hands; A crime
As great as euer came into ſins band,
I doo entitle a too ſparing hand,
Nothing deads Honor more, then to behold
Plenty coopt vp; and Bounty faint and cold;
Which ought to be the free life of the yeere,
For bounty twas ordaynd, to make that cleere
Which is the light of goodneſſe and of Fame,
And puts by Honor from the cloude of ſhame.
Great coſt and loue hath nobly bin beſtowd,
Ʋpon thy triumph, (which this day hath ſhowd:
Embrace 'em in thy heart, till times afford
Fuller expresſion; in one abſolute word,
All the content that euer made man bleſt,
This triumph done, make a triumphant breſt.