GRacious Spectators, not to vexe your eares
With ſome old Negatiue Prologue, ſaying, Here's
No Souldier, no Paraſite, no Whore,
No Baud (for many vnderſtand no more
Then ſuch cheape ſtage-ware) to vnfold our Scene,
And without vaile to Open what we meane
Behold. Our Poet knowing our free hearts
Has here inuited Heau'n and All the Artes
To entertayne His Theater, and does bring
What he prepar'd for our Platonique King:
Deeming Your iudgements able to ſupply
The abſence of So Great a Maieſty.
But his free conſcience does proteſt, the mirth
Of this his night was but a Fiue-weekes birth;
Yet no Abortiue; if your courteous hands
Shall wrap the Infant in his ſwathing bands.
It Speakes Already and each Arte, to raiſe
Delight, does vſe it's Owne Diſtinguiſht phraſe.
Lend your Purg'd eares. If any doe looke grim,
Our Author ſayes they wrong the Artes not Him:
He ſtriues to Pleaſe. But yet he ſcornes to be
So vile, to Bargaine for a Plaudite;
And from your ſeates, at a Compacted clap,
Hugge an Abuſing ioy. If 'tis his hap
To haue your Free applauſe, to This he ſtands,
The Artes ſhall not more crowne him, then Your Hands.
PHANTASTES, leaue vs.
I might very well be here, Sir, at a wooing match; but, I goe: yet I will not be farre off.
Come, now you ſhall, Aſtronomia.
What ſhall I, Geographus?
Kiſſe.
What? a' ſpight of my teeth?
No not ſo, I hope you doe not vſe to kiſſe with your teeth.
Marry and I hope I doe not vſe to kiſſe without them.
I, but (my fine Wit-catcher) I meane you doe not Show your teeth when you kiſſe: — 't is thy Ambroſiake lippe (ſweete Nymph) which thus I ſalute after the fine French— thus, the gracious Spaniſh, — (hold ſtill) thus the ſlauering Dutch — (nay, I will) and thus the deuouring Italian faſhion — I'me a Courtier ſweet Nymph, I'me a Courtier; pardon my (you know the Court-humor) boldnes.
What? is't the Court humour then to kiſſe a Mayde out of breath?
No, ſweet chucke, but to kiſſe them In breath; to make them long-breath'd in kiſſing, and able to endure a Smothering and Reuiue againe.
Faith for my part Sir Courtier, then I am not acquainted with a long breath; though, I thinke, they that vſe kiſſing much, are acquainted with long breaths, for, I warrant them, they may be ſmelt farre enough off.
Come, my Heau'n, I muſt take off your Zone; ſhall Aſtronomia bee in girt with a Zone, and not Geographus? eſpecially ſince all we Louers liue vnder Zona torrida.
If it bee So Sir, then I pray you keepe you there ſtill; for My Zone, Ile aſſure you, as yet is a Temperate one; pardon me Sir, Ʋngirt Ʋnbleſt: if I am not Faſt, I'me Looſe, vntye the Heauens and take away their Zones, we ſhould haue braue Skie-falling.
Geog. I, and braue Larke-catching, (prettie Bird) ah! were they all ſuch as Thee, it ſhould bee my Firſt wiſh.
I perceiue Sir, then you Courtiers are readie to take a Mayde at the Fall; Well Sir, but let goe your hand from my girdle, he that has that, ſhall haue me and all.
With all my heart (my double ſoule) I have Alreadie trauel'd ouer the whole Earth, and am now againe in Trauell to be Deliuered of a ſecond Attempt, the Peregrination of the Heauens; which to effect, I know no more expedite Courſe, then to haue Recourſe to Aſtronomia.
Pray le bee; be Modeſt yet; I thinke youle force me to ſay be Honeſt, leaue, or Ile Cry.
I, but Ile make you Laugh.
Nay, pray you, bee not Elephantine; I ſuppoſe you haue beene in India, and pierce the Phraſe.
Nay, but Nymph, Won't you then?
Won't I? what?
Bee kind.
Bee kind? how?
(The plague of Louers! croſſing in the point; Yonder comes thy mother Phyſica) why bee kinde as ſhee has beene.
Marry—
It may be ſhee won't conſent.
O Sir, your apprehenſion it too nimble; I was ſaying, marry gracious are the Fates, to deliuer a Mayd from the violence of a Rauiſher.
Nay, good loue, thinke this but an exiliencie of my affection, or rather thinke not out at all, but onely (O my Venus lipp'd) of this Wooers modeſt kiſſe, that is but lent till the next meeting: but farewell, I ſee thy Mothers aged brow wrinkled alreadie; and I had rather againe vndertake my performed iourney about the World, then thou ſhould'ſt bee ſhent for me; once more farewell, Geographus his Aſtronomia.
I muſt behaue my ſelfe now as demurely, as a Gentlewoman when ſhee's eating an Egge, well Ile preuent her, and goe meete Her, or elſe ſhe will be Meete with Me.
FOrſooth, and 't pleaſe you—
Who was that?
And pleaſe you forſooth it was—
I, who was it? that's the queſtion I aske.
It was forſooth and pleaſe you—
Yes, it pleaſes me to know, though I feare when I doe know it will ſcarce pleaſe me.
Why then forſooth ſince it pleaſes you—
Oh, is the excuſe made now?
Alas forſooth, I was comming o' mine accord, to tell you forſooth.
Well, now I hope forſooth, ſo many forſooths haue made vp one excuſe by this time.
It was forſooth—.
Yet againe?
My Vncle Ethicus.
That came to teach you manners belike, and that's the reaſon you vſe ſo many mannerly forſooths.
No forſooth, hee came to inuite mee to his Houſe to a Banquet.
To a Banquet? Indeed you are better fed then taught.
And maruail'd that you and I were ſo great ſtrangers at his houſe.
Nay, that's not ſtrange, now-adayes, for the neerer kinne, the farther off in friendſhip, and therefore the greater ſtrangers.
But I promis'd, for my ſelfe, my oftener preſence hereafter, and bid Ethicus perſwade himſelfe, that though you did not come to him in perſon, yet that your loue and beſt Affections dwelt alwaies with him; and I did my beſt to make part of an excuſe for you.
As you doe now for your Selfe: but Minion doe you expect a thanke of mee, for your excuſe? I beleeue rather, youle ſtand more in neede of an excuſe your ſelfe; it ſeemes your are well skill'd in the framing of them. What? who bid you put on this apparell to day? you muſt be in your skie-colour'd Gowne euery day, in your beſt apparell holy-dayes and working-dayes: and had you neuer a worſe head-tyre to put on to day but this with colour'd Ribbands tyed like Starres? but, Minion, the myſtery of the truth; come, I muſt know it: Does your Vncle Ethicus looke o' that faſhion? is he a Courtier? a Trauellour? a Puppet? does he make himſelfe a verier Foole then the Taylour makes him? has hee a Iury of Nations come in to giue their verdict, for the making vp of one ſute of apparell for him? is hee for your long Hat, ſhort Cloke, little Band? are his olde hammes growne ſupple againe? is he for your knee-congey? the throwing of a wauering head off his ſhoulders in a ſalutation? or the breaking of his high-heeld Shooes, or (which is better) ſometimes of his crazie legs, when in a wanton pride they cannot ſtand vpon his giddie feete? you'd make a fine creature of your Vncle; but, my fine Minion, my Periphraſis has incircled your companion, as his armes did your middle euen now: you apprehend? ah Aſtronomia, thy face was neuer made for the colouring of a lye; oh how this one vntruth has Ecclips'd thy beautie? thou neuer receiu'dſt ſuch a vile Nature from thy Mother Phyſica: no; no; I know from whom this corruption proceedes; 'tis that falſe, that vile Aſtrologia, that infects thee thus, and whom I obſerue, ſtill to follow at thy heeles: but I fret mine olde age too much, which is enough anguiſh to it ſelfe: in, in you light Huſwife—.
LEt Geometres neuer vſe Meaſure more, if hee loues not his deareſt Magus beyond meaſure: Oh, the Gods! that you and I could neuer know one another before! but Firſt it ſhould be my lucke to be acquainted with Aſtronomia, Then with your Selfe! Sir, if your occaſions can make vſe of my beſt indeuours, the imployment ſhall bee a fauour: if at any time you want any Characters, and ſtrange Figures for your Circles, or Circles themſelues, for the confining of your Spirits, know Sir, They ſhall not be more obedient vnto You, then My officious gratitude, imploy Mee Sir, I proteſt I'me growne Infinite in loue with the faireſt Aſtronomia, with your ſelfe.
Sir, let mee neuer vſe my Great Arte more, if my loue to You bee not greater then my Arte: the Spirits that I Command, ſhall not bee ſo quicke in my Ambaſſages, as the Spirit of my Loue, in the effecting your deſires, ti's as my Circle, moſt capacious and without End.
Well, Sir: I need not then you thinke to feare Geographus; for indeed though he be proud, yet I am ſure Aſtronomia is much more Highminded: and yet were her Altitude as high as Heauen, could not I Meaſure it? beſides what can ſhe count of him, but as of a giddie fellow, whoſe Head is Guided by his Heeles? but for Me, it is well knowne, I haue the Rule of my ſelfe: indeed there's Poeta, him I feare, for he playes at his Miſtres with his Hexameter, and Pentameter, as a Fencer lyes at his Rapier and Dagger-foile; but from Him you ſay Youl' Ward me.
I warrant you Sir, as ſecurely as with an Inchanted ſhield: (and now Sir to Deſcend to Realities) I will briefely acquaint you with ſome of the Myſteries of our Sacred Science; and firſt with this. There are three wayes, by one of which your deſire may be effected, the firſt i Faſcination; the ſecond Coniuration, and the third Medicine. The firſt can bee wrought onely by oportunitie, by being in companie with Aſtronomia.
Alas! that's the Vnmeaſurable Depth of my griefe, for I can neuer almoſt get into her company, but yet Sir acquaint mee with the deuice that I may not loſe occaſion it offer'd.
I will Sir; This Faſcination is, when one does worke loue in a woman by looking on her.
But is that poſſible?
O, Sir, in a moderate ſort verie familiar; I haue knowne a man and a woman by an earneſt looking one vpon another, when they fell in loue, both become ſtarke blind.
Strange! Wonderfull! but if that ſhould happen me, how ſhould I enioy the ſight of her beautie?
Sir, my care ſhall exempt you from that feare; but to vnfolde vnto you the manner of this admirable operation —
I Sir, I deſire to know what Proportion it can beare with truth.
It is thus: The inſtrument of faſcination is a vapour pure, and ſubtile, ariſing from the heate of the heart, out of the purer blud, which through the eyes doth proiect beames like it ſelfe; thoſe beames doe carrie with them a pure vapour, which ſometimes carrieth with it bloud, (as wee ſee in bleare-ey'd folkes, who hurt by looking on) which being eiaculated vpon the eyes of a woman (being ſent forth with a labouring violence) enter into her eye, pierce her heart, infect the bloud and Spirits, then by a continuance of the eiaculation, produce an aſſimilation in the obiect.
Sir, this is Deepe; but is this Rule infallible?
There are a ſort of your Philoſophers that denie this; but (alas!) vnexperienc'd fellowes, that neuer went beyond the Circle of their Science; but wee men of practice correct and ſurpaſſe the narrow bounds of their emptie Speculations: and now Sir for the guarding of your ſelfe, and the more powerfull operation, I will furniſh you with an Vnction of Doues, or Sparrowes bloud.
Doue, nor Sparrow is ſo hot, as my loue to you, deareſt Magus: but you made mention of a ſecond, Coniuration.
Sir, by that I can preſent vnto you, your loue.
Preſently?
Preſently.
Will you?
What will I not for you?
I am yours Soule and Body.
Well, ſtay you here then, Ile but ſtep forth.
That euer thou waſt borne! that euer thou waſt borne, Diuine Magus! well, the Deuill take me if I doe not turne Magician, what euer it coſt me. O Aſtronomia!—
Come, Sir, ſtand you heere, and moue not beyond this Circle, and ſpeake not a word; and now prepare your ſelfe to be ſatisfied with the beautie of your Loue.
Bael, Agares, Marbas, Pruflas.
Loray, Valefar, Morax, Nberus.
Good Magus leaue off, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, I ſhall neuer be able to endure.
Claſsialabolas—
Oh, Ile cry out if yee won't leaue.
Amduſcias, Zagan, Elauros, Orobas.
Oh, I ſhall—
Hagaenti, Vual, Zaleos.
I cannot endure it, oh I cannot endure it.
What a faint-hearted Louer is this? I muſt ſend them away againe, before they are come.
Va, Va, Va, Acim, Acim, Acim,
Ei, Ei, Ei: Hau, Hau, Hau.
Procul hinc, procul ite profani; redite, redite. Come, Sir, will you riſe to ſee your Loue?
Is ſhe gone yet?
Why? Doe you loue her ſo well, that you would haue her gone?
Oh! I cannot endure it.
Not endure her? Marry you loue her well then t'is likely.
Well, I beſecch you, Sir, fall to your laſt remedy, Medicine: for this is intolerable.
Well, Sir, that do's not belong to you.
No? why? Muſt not I take Phyſicke to make her fall in loue with me?
No, Geometres: what deuice doſt thou think ſhould be in that?
Nay alas I can't tell, I doe but aske; come I pray, let's be gon hence, I cannot endure to ſtay here, wee'l talke further of this in ſome other place. Good Magus, let me hold by you till we are gone a prettie way hence.
Come, you're a braue Mars for a Venus!
COme, Laſſes: i'faith I haue beene arraign'd, condemn'd and executed, without holding vp my hand at a Barre.
Why? Didſt thou euer offend the Heauens in thy life, Aſtronomia?
No. But it ſeemes I haue offended Nature; for Ime ſure my mother Phyſica has powr'd out her affection toward me.
As how, I prethee?
Nay, I haue beene held vpon her Items: Item, for being in company with Geographus: Item, for being in company with Aſtrologia —
With me?
Item, for wearing my beſt clothes euery day: Alas, alas, do's my Mother thinke All Natures deſire the ſame things? It pleaſeth Her in Summer to weare one kind of garment; in Winter another; in Autumne and Spring as different: another perhaps would count this pride in her: I weare alwayes the ſame, which me thinks her age (but that, Age is froward) might interpret, as a three-ſold vertue, Humilitie, Thrift, and Conſtancy: but —
Oh! I can eaſily gueſſe why ſhee ſpeakes againſt me: I perceiue all eminency of gifts is attended on by enuy: but uſh, Olde — I ſay no worſe: let her chide the gods that gaue me my Fore-knowledge of things aboue her apprehenſion: beleeue mee, I ſaw this great contention before, in the preſent Coniunction of Saturne and Mars: But for Geographus, I would wiſh your Height of worth, Aſtronomia, would not Deſcend vnto his Baſeneſſe.
You abuſe me, Aſtrologia: baſeneſſe?
Nay, then I perceiue there is ſomewhat of fate in loue; and that the Starres doe not rule men, but men the Starres; why there's no Proportion of worth betweene him and Geometres, a man cut out by the very Square of all vertue.
I, and let Arithmetica be caſt out of the Number of the Sciences; if in his very face (I ſpeake it freely behind his back) appeare not to my eye the very Figure of ſincerity.
Alas! would you Paralell Geometres with Geographus? you may as well liken the Middle of the Earth to the whole Circumference: or, but ſome Angle to a whole Mappe.
Nay, you are the whole Heauen-wide, Aſtronomia, on the contrary part; for though Geometres thinke there bee too great Diſparity betweene him and me, and that Arithmetica ſtands now but for a Cipher in his account; yet, that conceit of his ſhall neuer make a Fraction or Diuiſion in my loue, but as hee was once mine Intire, ſo ſhall I euer hold it the golden Rule of friendſhip, rather to Adde vnto, then Subſtract from my firſt affection: but let vs not multiply words: Muſica, prethee what doſt thou thinke of this?
Truely, I thinke Geographus to be a liberall Gentleman, and therefore may not conſent vnto Aſtrologia, when ſhe calls him baſe, yet I thinke hee has ſome Crotchets now and then of a Traueller: and for Geometres, I take him for a plaine Solid fellow: but in my conceit, in his diſcourſe hee's ſomewhat obtuſe, blunt, blunt.
I, that's but thy conceit.
Indeed I muſt confeſſe I haue more conceit then iudgement: But in my fancy, there's Poeta, h'as more loue in's little finger, then both they in their whole bodyes.
Marry thou ſay'ſt true, for I thinke there hee is indeed. Come, let's begon; for I thinke euery one now a Spy: for my mother told me ſhee'd ſet more Eyes beſide Muſicaes to attend mee hereafter: but Muſica, doe thou turne that way and meet him, that if he be one, I may know whom to thanke for my mothers next kind ſalutation.
FA, la, la, la, la, Sol, la, mi, fa.
How now my Treble, my Minikin, art thou ſo pleaſant?
Oh ſir, I ſee you keepe your old Tenor ſtill: you are alwaies Deſcanting.
But my little Fidde, where haſt thou beene?
Sounding your Harmonious vertues, to a Conſort of Ladies.
Mine? If I had not call'd thee my Fiddle before, I might now call thee my Trumpet, but I will yet call thee my Pipe, my Syrinx, a peece of Pan's Reed: but prethee, ſirrah, who were they? O Melancholico! here's a Wench, if her Miſtris would part with her, would make thee liue one ſeuen yeeres longer, but to be in her company.
'Tis a merry Wench indeed.
Why, there was my Lady, with Aſtrologia, and Arithmetica.
Thy Lady? Indeede I haue heard thy Lady loues Muſicke well, and for that reſpect I haue had a conceit to Her my ſelfe.
A conceit? Well, I can't ſtay or elſe I could ſay more.
Hold her, Melancholico, ſhe ſhall not begon yet.
Why how now Sir? Faith, Poeta, your man lookes as if hee would fall in loue with me. Fa, la, la, la, la, ſol, la, mi, fa.
Nay, prethee Muſica, tell me how thou cameſt to attend on Astronomia firſt.
Alas, 'tis beyond my remembrance to tell that: onely I haue heard a certaine Philoſopher that was in loue with Aſtronomia, beſtow'd mee vpon her when I was but a childe: but I'me ſure ſhe entertaines me ſo well, that I care for no other ſeruice now vnder Heauen, ſhee's a Diuine Lady, A Diuine Lady, and ſince my comming thither, ſhee has made rare deuices, rare deuices to cauſe Harmony: but I muſt bee gone, I can't ſtay. Fa, la, la, la, la, ſol, la, mi, fa.
'Tis a merry Wench.
But a Diuine Lady! but a Diuine Lady! I cannot tell what ayles me, but I am not very well. Follow me in, Melancholico.
I follow, Sir.
WHat ſhould I cry out now againſt the iniquitie of the , for wrapping vp all in blinde Fortune, and for the vnequall diſtribution of their gifts? I haue indeed beene about all the world, and brought home nothing but a World of care. I could cry, I confeſſe, but that I can't find in my hart to be ſuch a foole, vnleſſe my teares would turne to gold, as thoſe of Phaetons ſiſters did to Amber; and then yfaith I'd turne a moſt deuout penitent: but, Phantaſtes, put vp the Siquis, put vp the Siquis.
I will, I will.
Faith I'me almoſt extracted, I'me come to the Mercury already; there's nothing left but my wits: but what if I can get no cuſtomers now?
Faith you had beſt turne Paper-man, & ſell Maps; and yet that trade is almoſt downe the wind now: or you may get a pretty young—one—and ſet vp a Tabacco-ſhop.
Foh! that's a ſtinking trade.
Oh your fatteſt ſoiles are moſt full of dirt; and I haue knowne a fellow, that was not worth a haire of his head, nay, that had not an haire of an honeſt man, gather more gold out of this dung-hill, then euer Maro did out of his Ennius; that now he cares not for any man in the Pariſh: Oh! this is the trade that yeelds è fumo fulgorem; Gold out of ſmoke.
Oh, Aſtronomia! there's my chiefeſt griefe, I confeſſe; for as 'tis held policy in rich men to loue; ſo I feare it will proue ridiculous in me, if once I grow poore.
Sir, not many yeeres ſince, before I vndertooke with you our iourney about the wide world, I was my ſelfe driuen to the like ſtreights; I meane, Sir, in that Cod-piece-ago, when the innocency of men did not bluſh to ſhew all that Nature gaue them, indeed, becauſe they did no more, then, that taught them: then, when they wore doublets with crawes, and ſleeues with pockets, then (I ſay) the faſhion was ſo long at a ſtand, that I had like to haue beene at a fall: then your Philoſopher in the Vniuerſitie, ſcorn'd nothing but (the vniuſt cauſe of ſcorne) fine apparell, ſhewing the ſeuerity of his profeſſion, by the ruggedneſſe of his gowne: but ſince, I thinke, I haue faſhion'd them all; though, of late, ſome of your gor-belli'd country-chuffes, haue caſt themſelues into their frieze jerkins, with great tinn'd buttons ſiluer'd or'e, rather out of a proud niggardlineſſe then an honeſt thrift.
Well, but what courſe ſhall I take, if I get mony?
Mary, Sir, this: weare apparell of the beſt, be merry, wanton, toying, bold; affront any man: get a faire-falſe-diamond — on your finger, and by all meanes haue a gilt watch, which ſometimes, to know how the day paſſes, you muſt draw out in the Market-place, though peraduenture there be a Clocke hard by within the view of your eye; 'twill imply, you reckon not your day by the peoples Dyall: or ſometimes you may draw it forth before a rich mans doore, (you know in our trauailes wee obſeru'd the like in a Gentleman at Venice) and aſſure your ſelfe, at the next meeting, hee'l giue you the ſalutation.
Oh! thou haſt a rare wit, my fine Phantaſtes! well, let's commit it to the heauens, and if my ſtars bleſſe me but to obtaine Aſtronomia; Ile count it as an enioying of the whole world, which I haue yet but ſeene.
ANd did ſhee not ſay, Melancholico, ſhee was a diuine Lady?
Yes, ſhee did.
And did ſhe not ſay ſhe had made rare deuices, rare deuices (for ſhe repeated it) to cauſe Harmony?
Yes, ſhee did.
Fa, la, la, la, la, ſol, la, mi, fa, hum—and did ſhee not ſay ſhee would not change her ſeruice for any vnder Heauen?
Yes, ſhee did.
Hum. And did ſhee not ſay ſhee could ſay more?
Yes, ſhee did.
Fa, la, la, la, la, ſol, la, mi, fa, pretty little Muſica! Fa, la, la, la, la, ſol, la, mi, fa, for ſhee ſung it three times I remember, pretty Muſica; diuine Aſtronomia!—the iuyce of the Gods Nepenthe were vineger to one of her kiſſes: diuine Aſtronomia!
Vniuſt, blind god of loue, or not enfire
My breſt; or, if thou doſt, crowne my deſire. What Siquis is that?
Ile reade it, Sir.
If there be any Gentleman, that, for the accompliſhing of his natural indowments, intertaynes a deſire of learning the languages, eſpecially, the nimble French, maieſtike Spaniſh, courtly Italian, maſculine Dutch, happily-compounding Greeke, myſticall Hebrew, and phyſicall Arabicke; or that is otherwiſe transported with the admirable knowledge of forraine policies, complementall behauiour, naturall dispoſitions, or whatſoeuer elſe belongs to any people or country vnder heauen; he ſhall, to his abundant ſatisfaction, be made happy in his expectation and ſucceſſe, if he pleaſe to repaire to the ſigne of the Globe.
Good, good; Ile monopolize this commodity; when I ſhall haue ſo many tongues to woo, I will not doubt to obtayne Aſtronomia.
SIr, you did that by a Poetica licentia.
SO, Grammaticus, you'd faine Rule me ſtill:— Et nos ergo manum ferulae ſubduximus.
Nay, Poeta, you muſt not abuſe him that hath beene your Maſter, he hath beene your Maſter, Ergo, you muſt not abuſe him.
Why, how now, Logicus? will you be the Neptune, to calme theſe Seas with your three-fork'd Mace? I thought you could ſpet nothing but Ariſtotle.
Ariſtotle? ſawcy boy? Ariſtotelis libri ſunt omne genus elegantia referti; pro Omnis generis.
Nay, Poeta, we muſt grant you the eloquence: Nobis non licet eſſe tam diſertis diſertos.
Why how, no, Logicus? haſt thou caught the itch of Grammaticus? I ſhould rather haue thought, thou wouldſt haue infected him.
How now? boyes talke? by the ſoule of Priſcian, A praeceptore vapulabis.
Nay, then yfaith: Atrepido vix abſtinetira Magiſtro.
What? inſolent? Faciam vt mei que ac huius diei, ac loci, ſemper memineris.
Melancholico, doe thou cracke an argument with clog-head, there.
Ile doe my beſt to cracke his pate, if I can.
He bites, he bites: O, do you ſcratch, you coward?
Yes, Sir, becauſe you haue the itch.
To him, Melancholico.
Nay, let me alone, I warrant you: we are at it, tooth and naile.
Well, Poeta, Refero ad Senatum.
Will you come againe, Sir!
Nn ſi me obſecres.
I beleeue thee, yfaith; Logicus, will you returne?
I ſee no reaſon for it: Ergo, I won't.
O, haue we broke off one of the forks of your Mace? he moſt valiantly now runnes away vpon two feet: Stay, here comes Choler, Grammaticus his man.
Who was that ran away laſt there? Logicus?
Yes.
Did you beate him?
Yes.
And who was the other? my Maſter?
Yes
Did you beate him?
Yes, Sir: what ſay you to that?
What ſay I to that? mary, I ſay, I would haue fought as long as I could haue ſtood, if you had not left beating of my Maſter.
Oh! is that all! Domini ſimilis es; farewell, valiant Champion.
Oh! is that all? Domini ſimilis es; farewell, valiant Champion.
How? bafled? by my maſters Ferula, Ile quarrell with the next man I meet, who er'e he be: and yonder comes Sanguis, Medicus his man; but hee lookes as if hee would ſay ſomewhat; Ile therefore ſtand aſide firſt, and heare what hee'll ſay.
MY Maſter is now in a conſumption; he is come to putting vp a Si-quis already for want of cuſtome; and if hee had not lately beene more beholding to Ʋenus then to Mars, he had beene quite ſpent, long er'e this: Shee indeed now and then ſends him in, thoſe cuſtomers that are ſicke in her quarters; for moſt men now preuent phyſicke, either by death or warineſſe; either by running vpon violent and quick deathes, and ſo dying er'e phyſicke comes; or if they fall out, neuer comming to bloud-ſhed, but onely to a few fooliſh wordes in their idle choler.
What? does he ſpeake of me? nay, that's enough.
But I'le put vp my Siquis and pray moſt deuoutly to Aeſculapius, or elſe my Maſter will be the firſt that will haue ſo much need of his owne phyſicke, as Salus her ſelfe will be ſcarce able to ſaue him.
Soft, Sir, did not you miſvſe me, behind my backe?
Miſvſe thee? alas! I thought not on thee.
No! did not you ſay, Idle Choler? you ſhall know I am not idle.
Why, how now Choler, are you ſo hot?
Yes, Sanguis, as hot as you for your bloud.
I ſhall be about your eares, ſtraight.
I ſhall vexe all the veines in your heart then.
O, my head! my head's broke.
'Tis no matter, Sanguis; ther's cuſtome for thy Maſter, beyond his expectation.
And beyond mine too; I'll pray no more this good while for this tricke; the gods are quicke of hearing, I perceiue; Aeſculapius has ſent my Maſter a patient too ſoone, but the gods know 'tis a ſorry one; but I ſhall remember you, Choler.
Doe, doe; I gaue you a remembrance on purpoſe; but, what had the Rogue in this Si-quis? I'll put it together againe.
If there be any man woman, or child, that's affected with any diſeaſe, whether it be luxation or diſlocation of the bones, rupture, inflammation, obſtruction, impoſtumation, conſumption, or any vlcer, whether it be poxe, plague, or peſtilence, or any deſtruction of nature, as dumbneſſe, deafneſſe, blindneſſe, whether temporary and by accident, or continued from the birth; or whatſoeuer diſeaſe incident to the body of man, that hath beene euer yet counted vncurable; may it pleaſe him, or her, or that child, to repaire to the ſigne of the Vrinall, and they ſhall find a ſpeedy ſaluation.
Why? doe not I know Medicus? and did I euer know that he knew this before? well, he that performes all this, muſt be a god or a deuill: but now I thinke on't better, I'me halfe ſorry I broke Sanguis his head; for if my Maſter be hurt, he muſt repaire to this Medicus; and then will Sanguis either pay my Maſter for my ſake; or make my Maſter pay me for his ſake: I ſee, he that ſtrikes in his choler, doth but repent afterwards; well, I'le correct his haſtineſſe of nature.
WEll, Hiſtoria, I ſee loue's unruly euen in the wiſeſt; you may doe what you will; but if you would be rul'd by your friends, my counſell ſhould be that you would neuer fancie this Poeta, a fellow of that kinde of profeſſion, which all Wiſe men haue euer baniſh'd out of the common-wealth, as being the Mother of lyes, the Nurſe of abuſe, and at the Beſt, but the worſt of knowledge; perhaps you may thinke Polites vſes this diſſwaſion becauſe Poeta's poore; (which alſo I confeſſe in the Policy of an ordinary Diſcretion is to be conſidered) but I profeſſe I'me chiefly moued at the vncertainty of his courſes; which I thinke would not very aptly conſort with your ſober conſiſtency and ſtayedneſſe of life: but Ile ſay no more; good Ethicus, ſupply my roome.
Reuerend Polites—
Nay, nay—
Nay? nay? nay truly Ethicus, 'tis good manners, to let her anſwere in her owne defence.
Nay, Rhetorica, we know you haue words at will; euery woman has two tongues, and you haue Foure, 'twill come to a fine paſſe in a while, if wee ſuffer euery young pert thing to be prachant, eſpecially towards their elders, I may be thy father, wench, and I will ſpeake. Thou art a greene-head, Hiſtoria; I ſay that Poeta's a licentious fellow, a Drinker, a Dicer, a Wencher, a Ballad-maker, a Seducer of young minds, a Scoffer, a Libeller, a Sharker, an Humoriſt, an Epicure; proud, phantaſticall, ſullen, ſlothfull, lewd, irreligious, and in a word an enemy to all the Gods and Vertues.
Ha' you done? you haue ſtucke cloues enow in your Orange to make it ſmell.
Nay, thou wench, I like thee better, though thou haſt a ſhrewd Tongue: for thou haſt ſet thine affection vpon Logicus, a fellow of ſome vnderſtanding, and though hee has ſome of thy fault (as a piece of thy tongue) yet 'tis likely hee'l make a good Houſe-keeper; hee's thrifty, thrifty, and I like that.
Nay, pray Hiſtoria, take Oeconoma's counſell, or (at leaſt) heare it, Ile ſpeake moderately.
I ſhall the rather heare you then.
Indeed I thinke that Poeta will neuer proue a good houſe-keeper; for he muſt haue nothing (vnleſſe it be himſelfe) out of Order in his houſe; but euery thing forſooth ſo neate, ſo trim, as if folkes had nothing to doe but wait vpon his humorous ſloth: but we that keepe houſes (by cocke a'py) muſt ha' roome for baking, brewing, ſpinning, carding, waſhing, wringing, ſtarching, ſetting, ſleeking, pinning, folding, ſmoothing; here a chaire, there a tub; here a pan, there a kettle; here a wheele, there a reele; and a hundred ſuch clutterments.
It ſeemes you keepe a cleanely houſe; but I pray, how long haue you beene married?
Married? why, thirtie fiue yeeres laſt Valentines day; next Valentines day 'twill be—iuſt as can be—thirtie ſixe yeeres full, bleſſed be the day when it comes.
You may then indeed haue forgot loue-ſports by this time; well, you are not angrie with me for hearing you? are you?
No.
Why then, I muſt pray you likewiſe that you will not be offended, if I doe not follow what I heare.
Well, you may (if you will) let your owne yong head guide you; fare you well, fare you well Shrewes; Ile pray, that you may haue good Houſe-keepers to your Huſbands.
And I, that you may haue good Citizens.
And I, that you may haue Honeſt men: farewell Shrewes.
Fare you well; you haue had a time to loue and woo, and ſo muſt we haue. Theſe olde folkes thinke their Olde Age muſt carrie it away, as if they had wonne as cleere a Victorie from vs, as can be; alas! Ile giue them leaue to vſe their Dead Precepts, but if they once come to liuely Examples, Ile vndertake my Selfe to conuince their beſt Experience. Poeta's loue indeed of late is much alienated from me, but as long I loue him, Ile ſpeake in his defence; did you ſee how Polites did onely ſpeake an Accuſation againſt him? and Ethicus Abuſe his froward Age; and Oeconoma Chafe out her weake coniecture? and then, (when they had rather ſhewed the Weakneſſe of their Age; then the Strength of their Reaſon,) flung away, as if their Obiections could not be Anſwered, becauſe they would not Heare an Anſwere. I would enquire of Polites (if my Anceſtors haue not miſ-inform'd mee in Antiquitie) whether in the Time of Herodotus, and after that, of Zenophon (and ſince of many others) there has not bin a like coniunction to Poeta's and Hiſtoria's; and whether your chiefeſt Common-wealths-men, either of Former times as Plato; or of Later, as the great Solon of the Ʋtopian Common-wealth, haue not made a Poeticall inuention their chiefeſt glorie? but there is no diſcourſing with Age; eſpecially, when it is poſſſſed with a peruerſe preiudice.
And did you marke with what a Strength of Heate, his Cold Feebleneſſe ſet vpon me? and I was Miſtris Tongue; and I was Nimble-tongu'd, and I had Foure tongues. But if the Eie of Age bee not ſo Dimme, but that it may Reflect vpon it ſelfe: if the Eare of Age be not ſo Peruerſe, but that it may Admit a free Attention; if the Reaſon of Age, will but yeeld to Reaſon; then ſhall his Eie, his Eare, his Reaſon, bring in their ſeuerall informations againſt his Age. If wee ſhould inquire with whom does reſide the moſt refined Expolition of Language; would it bee anſwered with Olde-folkes? if we ſhould inquire with whom does abide the moſt nimble vigour of pureſt Apprehenſion; would it be anſwer'd with Old-folkes? if we ſhould inquire who are moſt tryed for Quicke Diſpatch of weightie Affaires, would it be anſwer'd your Old-folkes? whoſe Age brings Care, Care Weakneſſe, Weaknes Frowardnes, Frowardneſſe Diſtraction, Diſtraction Childiſhneſſe: and thus running Round in the Circle of Time, growing Giddie, they fall downe vpon all Foure againe, like Children: Children I may call them for their Impotencie, not Innocencie: for their Peruerſeneſſe, not Hopefulneſſe; for their Impatience, not Tenderneſſe; for then would they afford a more Tender cenſure, of our more Tender loues: but let's bee gone, and though they Chide, yet will wee Loue; and I will ſooner confeſſe my Tongue to want Eloquence, then my Loue of Logicus to want Reaſon.
And I will truly acknowledge Hiſtoria Vnhappie in her loue, but neuer Poeta, vnworthy of her loue.
I Perceiue yet I am not ſo Haſtie-natur'd, but there bee ſome as Haſtie; why, I would haue ſworne Logicus had bin a fellow of Reaſon and very ſtayed, but (Heauen defend me) I almoſt quake to thinke what a thundering he kept, when he came to my Maſters Houſe, one while hee would Fight with Poeta, that hee would; then hee would haue him in the Law, then againe he would Fight with him, then againe hee would goe to Law with him; at the laſt hee reſolues to doe both, though I know not whether hee will Performe either: if hee goe to Law; my Maſter (in Policie) will let his Owne cauſe fall, to come in as a Witneſſe for Logicus; but i' the meane time I muſt ſerue for a Meſſenger to Carry this Challenge from Logicus to Poeta; which I muſt ſee, that if I haue occaſion to ſend one to Sanguis, I may know how to draw Bloud of him, before we e're come into the Field; let's ſee.
O Poeta, thou Poeta, baſe Nayle-byter, Deske-thumper, Head-ſcratcher: O Poeta, thou Poeta; the very Bottle-Ale of frothy Humour, and, the floting Corke of Spungie Vanitie; ſince thou haſt (though not per te, but, per alium) by thy man Melancholico, (but woe to thy man Melancholico!) with moſt audacious and iniurious indignitie flowne vp into my face (but, oh dreadfull flying vp into my face!) know, if thou doeſt not make thy peace with mee, by a reconciling ſubmiſſion (which you may doe, and I had rather you ſhould doe, then fight. I neuer prouoked you) I doe to thy perdition (O ſpeedy perdition! thinke vpon that, and let mee not fight, I doe not prouoke you) challenge thee O Poeta, thee Poeta, thy very ſelfe (marke that) to ſingle Combat at any of theſe ſeuerall Weapons, (for I onely grant thee the choice of thy death) Battle-Axe, Single Rapier, Caſe of Ponyards, Caſe of Piſtols, Bodkins, or Pinnes: but know that by my arte beforehand, I do Define thee a man of death; &, for the executing of that dire-full iudgement, which yet thou mayſt preuent (and ô preuent by not prouoking me to fight) I will cleaue thee from the crowne of thy head downe to thy girdle, with the fury of a Diuiſion. Briefly if thou art not reconcil'd, I ſhall gore thee with the Hornes of this Dilemma. If thou Come, Mine Innocencie will ouercome thee, if thou do'ſt Not Come, thine Owne Cowardlineſſe: farewell till our next meeting with horrour, and then eternally thy ordain'd Deſtroyer;
But I will not name my ſelfe, leſt the ſound thereof ſhould kill thee with an aſtoniſhing feare, and ſo ſnatch thee from the terrour of my prodigious furie.
Well, Ile goe carry Poeta this Letter of Commiſſion for his Execution, and if he haue the heart to reade it through, without fallng into halfe a dozen ſounds, Ile ſay hee has a good heart; but I muſt haſte, or elſe I thinke Logicus himſelfe will ouertake me.
O The ſoule of Ariſtotle! I was neuer in ſuch a Praedicament before in all my life: well, Ile to Cauſidicus, they ſay his houſe is here about, and I thinke this bee it: ho, who's within?
Who's there?
There's an anſwere indeede; when I aske who's within? he askes, who's without?
O, ſaue you Sir, do's not one Maſter Cauſidicus dwell here?
Yes, what would you haue Sir?
Haue Sir! nay, I haue more alreadie then I would haue.
If you haue any buſineſſe, you may impart it to me.
Buſineſſe? then I perceiue you are all for Buſineſſe, you haue but little entertainment for a friend; well Sir, are not you a Lawyer?
I may not denie my profeſſion, Sir.
If then you are a Lawyer Sir, you are either a Ciuill Lawyer, or an vnciuill, you muſt admit a Diuiſion, Sir, for your Lawyers are Aequiuocall, and therefore carefully to be diſtinguiſhed before you be defin'd.
Sir, I muſt confeſſe, I am not a Ciuill Lawyer, yet I truſt not an Vnciuill.
Nay, Sir, my Diuiſion holds; I prooue it; Either you are a Ciuill Lawyer, or you are not a Ciuill Lawyer: But you confeſſe you are not a Ciuill Lawyer: Ergo, you are an Vnciuill Lawyer.
Well then, Sir, if you would haue it ſo, I am an Vnciuill Lawyer.
Marrie Sir, I then feare you will ſcarce plead my cauſe well: for my complaint is gainſt an Vnciuill fellow, and therefore I much ſuſpect your vprightneſſe: but yet ſince I cannot make choice, I muſt vſe you; but Sir, you muſt giue me leaue to holde you a little longer vpon ſome Interrogatories: if you are an Vnciuill Lawyer, then you are either an Extraordinarie Lawyer or a Common Lawyer.
Faith, I am no extraordinarie Lawyer, and therefore (if you will) a Common Lawyer.
Indeed had you bin an Extraordinarie Lawyer, you had bin a Diſorderly Lawyer: for, though they are called Canon Lawyers, yet are they moſt Extrauagant. But againe Sir, if you are a Common Lawyer, you are to be ſuſpected; for commonly your Common Lawyers are to be ſuſpected.
But who comes yonder? Phlegmatico, my valiant Armor-bearer.
'Fore loue moſt Meteorologicall Tobacco! (againe) Pure Indian! (againe) Not a lot Sophiſticated (againe) A Tobacco-pipe is the Chimney of perpetuall Hoſpitalitie (againe) 'Fore loue moſt Metropolitane Tobacco!
TObacco's a Muſician
And in a Pipe delighteth;
It deſcends in a Cloſe,
Through the Organ of the noſe,
With a Relliſh that inuiteth.
This makes me ſing So ho, ho, So ho ho boyes,
Ho boyes ſound J loudly;
Earth ne're did breed
Such a iouiall weed
Whereof to boaſt ſo proudly.
Tobacco is a Lawyer,
His pipes doe loue Long Caſes:
When our braines it enters,
Our feete doe make Indentures,
Which we Seale with ſtamping paces.
This makes me ſing, So ho, &c.
Tobacco's a Phyſician
Good both for Sound and Sickly:
T'is a Hot Perfume
That expells Cold Rhewme,
And makes it flow downe quickly.
This makes me ſing, &c.
Tobacco is a Trauellour
Come from the Indies Hether;
It paſs'd Sea and Land
Ere it came to my hand,
And ſcap'd the Wind, and Wether.
This makes me ſing, &c.
Tobacco is a Critticke,
That ſtill Old Paper Turneth;
Whoſe Labour, and Care
Is as Smoke in the Aire,
That aſcends from a rag when it burneth.
This makes me ſing, &c.
Tobacco's an Ignis fatuus,
A Fat and Fyrie vapour;
That leads men about
Till the Fire be Out,
Conſuming like a Taper,
This makes me ſing, &c.
Tobacco is a Whiffler,
And cryes Huff Snuff with furie;
His Pipe's his Club and Linke;
Hee's the viſor that does drinke;
Thus arm'd I feare not a Iurie.
This makes me ſing So ho ho, So ho ho boyes,
Ho boyes ſound I loudly:
Earth ne're did breed
Such a Iouiall weed,
Whereof to boaſt ſo proudly.
'Faith 'tis my man Phlegmatico, hee's at his rheumatike antidote; but Ile —
My Maſter, and I ſaw him not!
Nay, neuer put vp your pipe, you ſhall not be gon ſo. A fire burne this Tobacco.
It would, if you would haue let it alone, Sir.
You're my Target-bearer, ſirrah, are you not? a preſent defence at a deſperate combat: beare this alſo home with you, till I bring you more my ſelfe, you ſlauering rogue. Looke Maſter Cauſidicus, I haue by Action expreſt, what my Paſsion before would ſcarce haue afforded words to deliuer; I my ſelfe was in like ſort beaten by a Varlet, but vpon an vnlike cauſe, moſt iniuriouſly; and now I come to you to be my aduocate, and if you will ſtand my friend, I ſhall not bee wanting to content you in any reaſonable ſort; and, becauſe you Lawyers are ſomewhat Tongue-tide, ſuffer me to be the Midwife to cut the ſtring thereof, with this Siluer Penny. Nay, 'pray Sir be not womaniſh, you ſhall take it.
Sir, I count my Profeſsion Crown'd, when I plead moſt cauſes: and ſince I haue at this preſent Sir, ſome importunate auocation of buſineſſes; I will promiſe you a meditated defence, and when you pleaſe but to intimate the inſtant of your neceſſitie, I ſhall fly to you as ſwiftly, as with the wings of Angels. Sir, I partly know you, is not your name Maſter Logicus?
I am called ſo, Sir.
Then fare you well, good Maſter Logicus.
Fare you well good Maſter Cauſidicus. Now looke to thy ſelfe Poeta, for I ſhall make thee fly to thy rayling Iambicks: but looke to thy ſelfe, I ſay, for I haue put a ſword into a mad-mans hand againſt thee.
I Perceiue to what Center all the lines of your Circle tend.
You would rather ſay to what Circumference all the lines runne from my Center.
Loe, now you haue confes'd: and is't Aſtronomia that muſt ſo Out-ſhine Arithmetica? well, were her beauties as the Starres, Ile make them want the beautie of all beauties, Number; that they ſhall onely bee vncertainely gaz'd vpon, vnder an Indefinite multitude.
You're out, you're out in your Account Arithmetica, beleeue mee you are: I onely intimated your ſuſpicion, not expres'd mine owne deſires.
Well, Geometres, I haue knowne the time when your loue to Arithmetica was more Solid, and not thus Superficiall; the time was when Geometres would not doe any thing without Arithmetica; not meaſure a Foote of ground, but aske of Arithmetica how many Inches it was; not an Inch but inquire of Arithmetica how many Graines were in't: but now forſooth the pride of his deſires is rais'd to an Higher pitch; and now Aſtronomia is the Starre vpon which his eye is fixt, and now Aſtronomia is the Magneti que Pole, after which the Load-ſtone of his heart doth turne. And Aſtronomia—
Peace.
VVhat? can't you endure to heare the name of your deareſt Aſtronomia?
Not from that mouth.
Becauſe I cannot praiſe her Infinitely? why then me thinks not from your owne, becauſe you cannot praiſe her without Meaſure; well, Geometres, forgiue me, but I muſt loue thee. Come, deareſt; Ile be a Globe, be thou the Axle-tree: Ile be a Circle, be thou the Diameter: Ile be —
A chaſte virgin! I thinke ſhee'l get her ſelfe with childe by an imagination, without marrying; for ſhee doth already, me thinks, Multiply exceedingly, and Bring foorth: well, Ile leaue you, or elſe there is no way, Arithmetica, to ſtay your Progreſſion.
VVell, Geometres, know, when thou once forſakeſt Number, thou then run'ſt headlong into confuſion; but this is the miſery of inthral'd affections; yet ſince I cannot diſſettle them, I will mitigate them; and ſo long count them at leaſt ſupportable, as they ſhall not exceede Number and Meaſure.
HIſt, Melancholico, paſſion o' me! I had almoſt forgot the maine point of the buſineſſe: heere— giue that to Cauſidicus. A man may as well open an Oiſter without a knife, as a Lawyers mouth without a fee; but if he were halfe dead, that would (like ſtrong-water to a dying man) make him Gape, though he could not ſpeake. O the Serpentine ingratitude of man! that theſe ſnakes, whom I haue nouriſhed in my boſome, ſhould now ſting me! This Logicus, a baſe, dry-brain'd kecks-witted clinch-fiſt, not long agoe, perceiuing his fortunes to bee brought to a deſperate praecipitation; through the incomprehenſible difficultie of his Artleſſe curioſities, moſt fawningly emboſomes himſelfe into my acquaintance, vpon a former conſideration of my alluring faculty; and in the duſtie termes of ſome cob-web eloquence, blunderingly ſtammerd out his extreme, his extreme wants: for he had onely ſo much enforc'd rhetoricke, as to bring out thoſe words twice, & ſo by chance light vpon a ſorry Figure; then brutiſhly he expres'd the reſt, rather by crying then ſpeaking; (& indeed he had no more moiſture elſe in him, then only to bewaile his owne miſerie) when asking what was his requeſt, he anſwer'd, that I would turne his vnpleaſant rules into pleaſant Verſe: I ſtraight out of the open freenes of my nature and an effuſe goodneſſe, preuented the repetition of his ſute, by a quicke conſent; thereupon ſet my ſelfe a worke, and after ſome trauaile perform'd it: Some Trauaile I ſay; for by the Nine Muſes, I thinke I was aboue Nine Moneths in trauaile with that monſtrous birth: If one but conſider what ſplay-footed verſes they were, a man would ſweare, that ſome infernall hagge, not a Muſe (though vnwilling) had beene the mother of them; which vnhappy labour when I had ſhew'd vnto him, the reuiuing wretch falles on's knees, admires the worke, calles me the Aeſculapius of his ſaluation, and with hands lifted vp, vowes to pay his vowes at the Muſes altar; that I now more admir'd at his admiration, then at the deformities of mine owne Worke: for, by Ioue, they are ſuch vnbleſt, ſuch vnluckie verſes, that, beſides the loſſe of cuſtome, which they may iuſtly procure the Authour, they are able to make a man bee ſuſpected for a Coniurer; there wants nothing but a Circle to make a complete coniuration. Fecana, Caieti, Dafenes, Hebare, Gedaco, Gebali ſtant, non ſtant, Febas, Hebas, Hecas. Sure I thinke it ſhould haue beene Hecate. VVell, he enioyes them; and vpon the happineſſe of this ſucceſſe came Grammaticus to me with the like ſute: 'faith I did it, and caſt moſt of his Rules likewiſe into Verſe: but by Ioue, ſince the proud Schoole-maſter has ſhow'd himſelfe thus vngracious and ſtiffe-necked towards me, Ile bee euen with him; and now I thinke on't, there's all his Syntaxis yet to doe; but by this hand, if euer I turne line of it into Verſe, let me hereafter bee a meere Heteroclite, and the very Aptoton of a foole per omnes caſus.
LEt's ſet vpon him. The gods preſerue you Sir, from the blacke dragon of the night.
The broad eye of the Heauens ſtill attend you Sir.
And grant that the ſweet Fairies may nightly put money in your ſhooes Sir.
And ſweepe your houſe cleane Sir.
And make you the rich husband of many wiues.
And the bleſt father of many children.
The gods of the night ſend you happy dreames.
And that you may neuer pare your nailes vpon a Friday.
And that the horſe-ſhoo may neuer bee pul'd from your threſhold.
And that your Stables may bee alwaies free from the queene of the Goblins.
That your noſe may neuer bleed only three drops at a time.
That a yellow Death-mould may neuer appeare vpon your hand, or any part of your body.
That you may neuer ſtumble at your going out in the morning.
That you may—
Be ridde of you Varlets. What Aegyptian darknes has ſeaz'd vpon your faces?
Wee are indeed from Aegypt-land, and't pleaſe your good vrſhip: Brother, by the Ruffian, I thinke this is a quier coue, he cuts ſuch quier whidds: Good Sir, if you be a Gentry coue, vouchſafe ſome ſmall Win or but a Make, for wee haue neither Lowre, nor Libbeg, nor Libkin.
No by Salomon, vnleſſe it be Strommell ſometimes in a Skipper; wee had rather Mawnd then Mill to keepe vs from Trining.
Good Gentry coue vouchſafe vs a little Lowre, or ſome old Duddes, as a Caſtir or a Commiſsion.
Marry if I had a Commiſſion▪ I knew what to doe with you.
Ah, your good vrſhip, to couer our Quarommes, that our wants may not driue vs to the Chates — let me ſee your Famble good Maſter.
My Famble Villaine? This is almoſt as bad as the language of Logicus.
Ah your good vrſhip! it is the Gypſy language: the vrſhip of the gods bleſſe your faire Glaſiers, and looke out with your mercifull eyne.
Gentle Ruler of this place, if ſo you be, vouchſafe to fauour vs in the way of truth for the gods cauſe.
Somewhat towards a meales meate, Well and Wiſely beſtow vpon vs, and the Go-ads reward you for't.
Ah good Maſter well and wiſely, giue mee but an old ſheete againſt the cold, or an old Petticoat or ſmocke of my Miſtres's (Heauen ſaue her life) for my poore Doxy.
Good Sir giue but a cuppe of your beſt drinke well and wiſely. The gods ſaue the King and his Counſell, and the gouernours of this place; you ſhall haue a faire wife Maſter, and many children.
Ha! a faire wife and many children? how know'ſt thou that? what's thy name?
Phyſiognomus, good Maſter.
And thine?
Cheiromantes, and't like your good vrſhip.
Phyſiognomus, and Cheiromantes? Why what can you doe?
We can tell the will of the Heauens good Maſter; we can tell your fortune, Maſter.
We can tell the will of the Heauens good Maſter; we can tell your fortune, Maſter.
My fortune? why what's my fortune?
You ſhall haue a very faire wife.
Shall haue? thou mean'ſt, Would haue.
No Hiſtorie euer made mention of ſo faire a one; ſhe ſhall be as beautifull as the Starres.
Ha! as beautifull as the Starres? and no Hiſtorie euer made mention of ſo faire a one? why that is, it ſhall not be Hiſtoria but Aſtronomia. I'me crown'd! Sirrah, you flatter mee.
It is the decree of the gods Sir.
Why now my dreame's out.
You ſhall haue many children, and one of them ſhall be borne with Teeth in his head, and his name ſhalbe Satyrico.
Nay, Ile beare with any misfortune in my children, ſo I may bee happy in my wife. O diuine Aſtronomia, why? was not this my very dreame?
ME thought as on a ſhadie banke I lay,
The whilſt a murm'ring Brooke did gently play
With his ſoft ſliding waues, and did complaine
How Aſtronomia did my loue diſdaine;
A Ladie, like my Loue, in Heau'n did ſtand,
The Sunne and Moone waiting on either hand:
And when I ſpake, ſhee Frown'd: and, when I cri'd,
Shee, with a wanton ſmile, ſeem'd to deride.
At laſt the Sunne and Moone did both deſcend,
And vnto me, me thought, their courſe did bend.
But when they were drawne nigh, they both appear'd
Cole-blacke; that with the wonder I was fear'd.
They came and kiſs'd me, and then ſuddainly
They both did vaniſh from my trembling eye.
The Lady then, ſeeming to ſmile, did make
A ſigne vnto me, and did bid me take
The Teian Poet, ſweet Anacreon,
My indiuiduall companion,
And in my natiue language to tranſlate
His Niobe, and as it was her fate
To turne into a ſtone; ſo I by this
Should find a ſtranger Metamorphoſis:
And ſhee, that I did loue, ſhould change her heart
Of ſtone, and by her loue releaſe my ſmart.
I tooke my booke and ſtraight tranſlated it;
(Lines ſoone are pen'd when Loue doth dictate wit)
With that me thought ſhee pull'd me vp vnto her,
And ſaid; Ile now refreſh thee my grieu'd wooer.
Shee pull'd me vp, and when I was eu'n crown'd
With Heau'n, ſhee let me fall backe to the ground.
When with the fall me thought I loſt my deare
Anacreon, and that increas'd my feare.
Then with this double feare I ſtraight awake,
And my faint ioynts with a chill horror ſhakt.
Ile comment thus: that face that from aboue
Appear'd, was the faire image of my loue,
Bright Aſtronomia: and the darkned Sun
And Moone that graciouſly vouchſaft to run
From their owne Spheare to kiſſe me, were theſe two
Blacke, but glad meſſengers (if this be true
They doe pronounce) and therefore they were ſent
From heau'n, becauſe they knew the gods intent.
The turning of Anacreon doth imply
I ſhall obtaine her loue by Poëſie.
And, ere I roſe, this morne I made my quill
Expreſſe Anacreons Iönian skill.
Verſes can draw the Moone from Heau'n; then may
My lines, if bleſt, winne Aſtronomia.
Her letting me fall downe, was not true ſtory,
But fain'd by enuious ſleepe to make me ſorry.
So was the loſing my Anacreon:
But deareſt friend, as yet thou art not gone:
No, no, my hopes and ioyes are too too great;
And theſe doe flatter me too much—
But ſtay—O my Anacreon, my Anacreon, I haue loſt my Anacreon: Varlets, Villaines, I'me deluded, my pockets are pickt; I haue loſt my Anacreon: did I dreame? or did I make Verſes? or was I mad? now my dreame's out, 'tis out indeed, all; for now I remember me, I left out the worſt part vnexpounded, and that was their vaniſhing from me: well, this 'tis to be a Starre-gazer, and fall into a pit; I was thinking of Aſtronomia, when I was by promiſe to haue met with Geographus: well, Ile purſue my firſt intendment, and to Geographus for the learning of the languages; and feare ne're a corriuall vnder Heauen, now Mithridates, and Scaliger are dead.
I, But Medicus, who brought you word that Poeta was ſicke?
Why, Historia has ſent one vnto mee, now to intreat me to miniſter vnto him my beſt phyſicke; and the meſſenger told me (as he heard, it ſeemes) the occaſion thereof, which was, that Hiſtoria who was in loue with him, hearing that he was hurt in a fray with Logicus and Grammaticus, out of the iealous feare of her abundant loue, ſent to me thus carefully, vpon the ſuſpicion of his hurt.
Why, Phyſiognomus, did Poeta ſeeme to you, to be well?
Yes, ifaith; or if hee were ſicke 'twas more in mind then in body.
Well, Medicus, where's the meſſenger?
Why, at my houſe expecting my returne.
Backe then, in all haſte, and by her ſeruant ſend him poyſon, that if he be ſicke he may die: and ſo one may be remou'd out of Geometres his way. And if the poyſon chance to be diſcouer'd, thou maiſt pretend 'twas her treachery, becauſe he does not loue her, and that thy phyſicke was good.
Let mee alone, I warrant you; but if I can but once come to the handling of him my ſelfe, Ile giue him but a clyſter, & blow him vp with a Pouder, I warrāt him.
But, Phyſiognomus, are you ſure 'twas he? did not you miſtake him?
Faith, neither of vs knew him very well; but Cheiromantes has brought ſome teſtimonies from him.
What, I prethee? what?
Mary, Sir, a booke, and that I thinke is a ſigne of a Scholer; but I haue a purſe too, and that, I thinke, is not a ſigne of a Scholer.
What's in't? what's in't?
Nay, Ile ſweare, wee both ran ſince I Nimb'd it, that wee durſt not be ſo bold yet, as to take leiſure to looke in't, but now Ile ſee.
What's this? Anacreon? an old bawdy Poet? a fit companion for ſuch a Gallant.
A fire burne it; here's nothing but a ſcuruy paper.
But a murren, how couldſt thou poſſibly get theſe things from him?
Faith, Cheiromantes, by the ſlight of the Hand did it very neatly.
I, 'faith, I ha' the tricke on't: for (a rapture of loue ſeizing on him, and caſting him into an extaſie) hee fell a talking to himſelfe of a dreame he had: I ſeeing he was falne into a Dreame, perſwaded my ſelfe he was faſt aſleepe; and ſo preſumptuouſly diu'd into his pockets, whence I brought theſe ſpoiles.
Good, good, prethee let's ſee the paper.
Anacreons Niobe, or his Lyricks to his loue, beginning with the daughter of Tantalus or Niobe, thus, . Tranſlated by mee this morning vpon occaſion of my celeſtiall viſion.
Prettie, prettie, why theſe Poets, they are all of them borne, I thinke, vpon Friday at the ſixt houre, for then Ʋenus has the dominion of the Day, & Mars of the Houre; now the Planet of the Day does chiefly gouerne their Actions, and the Planet of the Houre does admixe a Subordinate Influence, and that's the reaſon that your Poets haue more of Venus in them then Mars; yet ſometimes they are in combats, as lately Poeta: ſo on the other ſide your Warriors for the moſt part are borne vpon Tueſdaies at the third houre, for then Mars has the dominion of the Day, and Venus of the Houre, and therefore your Warriors haue more of Mars then Venus.
Well, let's reade them.
NIOBE, as they ſay, once ſtood
Turn'd to a ſtone by Phrygian flood,
PANDIONS daughter (ſo fame ſings)
Chang'd to a Swallow had ſwift wings,
But I a Looking-glaſſe would bee,
Still to be lookt vpon by Thee:
Or I (my Loue) would be thy Gowne,
By Thee to be worne vp and downe.
Or a pure Well full to the brimmes,
That I might waſh Thy purer limmes.
Or I'd be precious Balme to 'Noynt
With choiſest care each Choiſeſt ioynt.
Or, if I might, I would be (faine)
About Thy necke thy happy Chaine.
Or would it were my bleſſed hap
To be the Lawne o're Thy faire Pap.
Or would I were thy Shoo to bee
Daily but Trod vpon by Thee.
Prettie, prettie, by the dimpled chin of my Astrologia, prettie; Ile giue the raſcall his Anacreon againe (becauſe I cannot tell what to doe with it) for this tricke, and tell him I found it, and ſo make him fall in loue with mee moſt poetically; well, my little raſcals, expect a better bootie of ſome richer bodie the next time; be gone: but be in readineſſe, there is to be a banquet at Ethicus his houſe, for the reconciling of Logicus, Grammaticus, and this Poeta, if hee can be there, and I with Aſtrologia are inuited thither, wherefore if there ſhould be any occaſion of imployment for you, be at hand.
Wee warrant you.
Now, Aſtrologia, take that powder, and according to my inſtructions at the banquet, ſee that Aſtronomia drinke it off, and I warrant her then, 'twill make her loue our more lou'd Geometres.
Feare not, I know alreadie by the Starres 'twill take effect.
Farewell; I muſt to Geometres, or elſe i'faith he'll Coniure me for ſtaying.
FOr the learning of your languages, Sir, I muſt confeſſe, I doe highly approue of it, but I ſee no ſuch neceſſitie of trauailing, beſide the danger and expence that muſt be vndergone.
O, Sir, I could tell you ſuch wonders, as would inflame you with a deſire.
As what, I pray you, Sir?
Sir, I can impart ſuch rarities of relation vnto you, as would amaze you; and yet they are familiar to a Trauailour. In a City of Greece, I remember I ſaw the admired net, which Vulcan made to entangle Mars and Venus; and 'tis hang'd vp in a Temple dedicated to the ſame god, and by himſelfe was giuen thereunto, to the terror of all Cuckold-makers for euer.
O ſtrange! but, Sir, as I remember that net was inuiſible.
Hum—oh—true Sir, it was inuiſible, but, Now Sir— it is to be ſeene.
Sir, I will take leaue to helpe a little my Maſters memorie, not his inuention; for by Ioue, Sir, and by the Artemiſian Mauſoleum, which theſe eyes, not without amazement, haue beheld, 'tis true; thus 'twas, Sir: it can be ſeene by any honeſt man; but if any Adulterer caſts his eyes towards it, he preſently loſes his ſight, and therefore it is their manner of Triall for thoſe that are accus'd of adulterie.
O wonderfull!
Nay, Sir, in another place of Greece there is a round, cloſe Valley, incompaſſed with exceeding high Hills; only on one ſide there is a narrow entrance into it & through the middeſt of it runnes a delicate ſtreame, by the banke of which if a man ſtand, he ſhall as perfectly heare the Muſike of the Spheares, as if he were amongſt them: and the cauſe of this, by the inhabitants is thought to be the height of the Hills: which keeping-in the ſound, and bringing it down to the water, does by an aëriall reſultancy produce a moſt reciprocall repreſentation of the diuine harmonie.
Oh, that I was not made a trauailour!
Nay, Sir, moreouer it is ſo ſweet, that the hearer can neuer leaue hearing of his owne accord, but ſtands ſtill.
O wonderfull! but then I pray, Sir, how does hee come away?
Hum—faith I was told the deuice of that, but I haue forgot.
O, Sir, I perfectly remember it, 'twas thus: The inhabitants haue, at the foot of the out-ſide of the Hill, dig'd forth an entrance, and vnderneath haue made a Vault which reaches iuſt to the banke of the Riuer, all along the ſide of which, they haue made a many trap-doores, and ſo when a man has heard enough, they vnbolt the trap-doores within, and let him ſlide downe gently.
Oh admirable! but mee thinks when the doore is open, they ſhould heare it below likewiſe in the Vault, and ſtand ſtill there too.
Well, Sir, by my Mothers ſoule (that oath I learn't in Spaine) 'tis a truth; and the reaſon it cannot be heard lower, is, becauſe the ſound does not deſcend below the water.
Indeed, that's an excellent reaſon.
Nay, by Ioue, Sir, I ſcorne to lie; I ſcorne to ſpeake any thing without reaſon, by Ioue; by Ioue, Ile giue as good a reaſon of thoſe things I know, as any man vnder the cope of Heauen; I will, by Ioue.
Why, I haue ſeene white beares with faces would make you fall in loue with them.
O ſtrange! white beares! and yet indeed I haue heard that a late in America there are white beares, but they are moſt terrible.
Nay, Sir, and theſe haue long tailes.
That's ſomewhat worth the admiration; and yet I thinke all Beares at firſt had long tailes, or elſe why ſhould the Beare in the heauens haue one!
'Tis true; yet (if you marke it) 'tis broken.
O, that came thus; when Iupiter pull'd him vp to heauen by the taile, the waight of his body broke it, whereupon Iupiter caught him by the rumpe, and ſo tyed his taile together againe, & that is the reaſon of the knot in the middle of it, and ſo it has euer ſince hung ſlopeling downe-ward, if you marke it.
Againe, Sir, in my trauailes in Tuſcany, I beheld a moſt curious piece of Architecture; it was an hall built in the forme of a croſſe, that, which way ſoeuer the wind ſate, or the ſunne ſhin'd, a man might alwayes goe to one of the ends, and ſo decline the preſent violence of the ſeaſon: and as in an arbour vnto which the Sun has acceſſe, you ſhall ſee boughes at the top correſpondently repreſented on the ground in the ſhaddow: ſo whatſoeuer curious work was ſeene in the roofe of this building, the ſame vnderneath was expreſt in the Floore.
I fancie the conceit prettily.
Nay, Sir; Ile tell you a wonder, wee met with a Trauailour that could ſpeake ſome ſixe languages at the ſame inſtant.
How? at the ſame inſtant! that's impoſſible.
Nay, Sir, the actualitie of the performance puts it beyond all contradiction. With his tongue hee'd vowell you out as ſmooth Italian, as any man breathing: with his Eye he would ſparkle forth the proud Spaniſh: with his Noſe blow out moſt Robuſtious Dutch: the Creaking of his High-heel'd Shoo would articulate exact Polonian: The knocking of his ſhin-bones Foeminine French: and his Belly would grumble moſt pure and Scholer-like Hungary.
How? his Belly ſpeake?
Alas, that's the leaſt wonder, for at what time Pythagoras flouriſh'd, that was a familiar thing with his Scholers: and I may confirme it by a perſwaſiue induction drawne from your Pythoniſſes, and your new-faſhion'd Lutes that ſound from within, Sir, from within: nay, beſides all this, Sir, at the ſame time his Eares could ſing, and his Braines crow; and he could Laugh till the teares ſtood in's Eyes.
O wonderfull! wonderfull!
If you pleaſe, Sir, now to imploy mee, not onely my Wants, but alſo my Loue ſhall make mee diligently reſpectfull.
Sir, I courteouſly accept your offered indeuours.
Ah, deareſt Aſtronomia, 'tis for thy ſake I doe thus.
How? for Aſtronomia's? [hee ſpake that to himſelfe] Sir, I am on a ſuddaine leſſe well affected, wherefore pardon, I pray you, an abrupt intreating of your preſent departure, and ſome ſpeedie occaſion ſhall ſhortly offer a ſecond meeting.
Well Sir, we thanke you; Apollo be alwayes the Patrone of your Muſe and Health.
For Aſtronomia's ſake? why? is he in loue with her? (For Aſtronomia's ſake!) or is hee in loue with mee! I woun't torture my ſelfe, Ile expound gently; Hee's in loue with mee, and becauſe (it may be) he heares I loue her, hee accounts (it may bee) that hee does this, that I may obtaine her: and thus (it may be) hee meanes hee does this for Her: This is Scuruie; Maſter Geographus you haue marr'd your owne Market; my ſtomacke's turn'd; I haue Tongues enow for a wiſe-man; thouſands before me haue got Wife and Children, more then thy could keepe, without learning the Languages; and therefore from hence-forth, for feare of the worſt, you may, Maſter Geographus, (if you pleaſe) vndertake a ſecond Trauell.
BE not farre off.
That nothing is entire!
Nothing all-bleſt! but ſtill ſome new deſire
Brings a new torture! and this Fate does lie,
An heauie weight on all mortalitie!
It does; thus was not lately my affection
Chain'd to Hiſtoria by a ſtrong ſubiection?
Did I not pule, and pine, intreate, and crie?
Pretend a ſickneſſe? threaten I would die,
If ſhe not lou'd me? did I not act all
The frantike parts wherewith Loue does inthrall
His Rebell-Subiects? Did I not looke Sad
If ſhee but Frown'd; and, if ſhee Smil'd, looke Glad?
I did; and tooke delight to be inchain'd
To her, Hope ſaid at laſt ſhee might be gain'd.
Yet ſee the wheele of change! I now doe ſcorne
Her teares, and now ſhe thinkes her ſelfe forlorne.
Pardon my intruſion Sir, Hiſtoria
Hearing you were hurt lately in a Fray,
Has in her iealouſie of loue ſent here
Some Phyſicke, to preuent a greater feare.
She ſhould haue ſent me Poyſon, far from her
I count it ſo; yet let the Meſſenger
Returne our courteous gratitude. Begon.
Lo, thus vexations neuer come alone;
Well, I wount loue her; nay, Ile ha her more
Hence-forth; ſhe plagues me worſe then before.
Pardon once more, Sir, here comes ſent by her,
Medicus, Seruant to adminiſter
The Phyſicke.
—Why, I prethee know I lacke
No Phyſicke, there 'tis, thou maiſt carry't backe.
The Gods forbid, Sir, this is Poyſon.
— How!
'Tis Poyſon, Sir.
—Why? it was ſent but now
From my Loue-ſicke Historia.
—So 't may be:
They'ue chang'd my Maſters Phyſicke.
—Oh to ſee
The Treacherie of women! well, conceale
The fact as yet; iuſt time ſhall all reueale.
O Women, Witches, Monſters, Furies Deuils,
The impure extract of a World of euils;
Natures great Errour; the obliquitie
Of the Gods Wiſdome; and th' Anomalie
From all that's good; I'l curſe you all below
The Center, and, if I could, then further throw
Your curſed heads; and if any ſhould gaine
A place in Heau'n, Ile time 'em downe againe
To a worſe ruine; yet me thinkes I heare
How Aſtronomia whiſpers in mine eare,
And begs a Pardon for them; well; to thee
I'l yeeld, thou ſtand'ſt aboue mortalitie.
Aſpire, my gentle Muſe, inflame my breſt;
Then thus my gracefull loue ſhall be expreſt.
Her Brow is like a braue Heroicke line,
That does a ſacred Maieſtie inſhrine.
Her Noſe Phaleuciake-like in comely ſort
Ends in a Trochie, or a long and ſhort.
Her Mouth is like a prettie Dimeter;
Her Eie-browes like a little-longer Trimeter.
Her Chinne is an Adonicke; and her Tongue—
Is an Hyprmeter, ſomewhat too-long.
Her Eies, I may compare them vnto two
Quick-turning Dactyles, for their nimble View.
Her Necke Aclepiad-like turnes round about
Behind, before a little bone ſtands out.
Her Ribs like Staues of Sapphickes doe deſcend
Thither, which but to name were to offend.
Her Armes like two Iambickes rais'd on hie,
Doe with her Brow beare equall Maieſtie.
Her Legs like two ſtrait Spondies, keep a pace
Slow as two Scazons, but with ſtately grace.
Thankes to my Muſe; yet why doe I admire
Her thus, whom I enioy but by deſire?
For more I neuer ſhall; this is my waight
Of griefe, and this my preordained Fate.
Come, come, thou part of Heau'n, companion
Of all my woes and loues, thou that alone
Doſt in the mid'ſt of ſorrowes yeeld reliefe,
And though not take away, make leſſe my griefe.
My deareſt Lute, Apoollo's beſt inuention
Wherewith he does compoſe the wilde diſſention
Of our vntun'd deſires, which would confound
Vs quite, but that they breake forth with a ſound!
Sighes frō our breſts are like ſounds frō thy wombe,
Borne dead, and buri'd in an aërie Tombe.
Sigh then to Cupid, tell him he's too blame
Not raiſing in my loue a mutuall flame.
Ho, Melancholico.
—Here Sir.
—Begon.
Did you not call me Sir?
—Sirrah, begon.
Ho, Melancholico.
—Sir.
Dance, I ſay, Dance.
—I can't.
—Sirrah, dance that which I play.
Begon: Sirrah, begon.
—Away, away,
Charmer, Inchanter, tis a truth to ſay,
Our bodies caſt their ſhapes into the Ayre,
And can appeare when they are gon; ſo rare
Philoſophers haue held, and ſo I hold:
Pardon, great Aſtronomia, I was bold,
Too-bold, I doe confeſſe, but my dimme ſight
Could not before behold thee though ſo bright.
But now mine eyes are cleer'd; on my bow'd knee,
I aske a Pardon of thy Maieſtie.
Pardon thy Poet, and vouchſafe this grace,
That thy rich beauties he may thus imbrace.
And now, deare Loue, adde hereunto one kiſſe,
And then thou ſhalt in heau'n my ſoule with bliſſe.
Maro, thy Riddle's ſolu'd: I thus vntye
The knot, which thou didſt knit, mens wits to try.
Dic quibus in terris (& eris mihi magnus APOLLO)
Tres pateat Coeli ſpatium (non amplius) vlnas?
Maro, 'tis here; here's Aſtronomia;
Here's Heau'n clos'd in thoſe narrow limits; nay,
Here's Deitie, the obiect of all loues,
Enough to make a thouſand Heau'ns of Ioues.
See, ſee, how ſhe aſcends! mount, mount, great Queene
Of Heau'n, and in full luſtre be thou ſeene
Mortalities amazement; ſee, ſhe's gone
To mount yet higher to a ſtately Throne,
Plac'd on the Azure pauement of the Starres,
Guarded by Dayes, Monthes, Houres, then ſees the warres
Of Pygmie-mortals—.
—Sir, here's Ethicus
Is come, and ſayes hee'd ſpeake with you.
—With vs?
Admit him in.
—Hay! ſcarce dreſt yet! how ſo?
What? comes your froward age to chide vs?
—No.
But to inuite you to a Feaſt, my ſelfe your friend,
Deſirous of your peace, to ſet an end
To your contentions with Grammaticus
And Logicus, to night doe purpoſe thus
To make you friends.
But—
—Nay, no buts: Be there.
I will.
—Why thankes. Welcome ſhall be your cheere.
Well then, Ile in and dreſſe me, and ſo come,
Yet better purchance you had my roome.
o deale with ſpirits?
ly a Grometrician, it is lawfull for you to deale only with bodies: but if you will vndertake Our Superiour facultie, 'tis not onely lawfull, but moſt honourable; why Sir, 'tis one of the greateſt gifts of the Gods to haue command ouer Spirits; but for the approbation of it, you may only looke backe vnto the antiquitie thereof, which is drawne from more then eight hundred yeeres before the Siege of Troy, in the time of Agonaces, and of the renowned Zoroaſter a King of the Bactrians, who deſcribed the high Myſterie of this Diuine Science in an hundred thouſand verſes; after theſe there flouriſhed Iobeth, Toluſcol, Zamolxis, whoſe admired fame was afterwards emulated by Almadal, Alchindus, and Hipocus Arabians: Apuſcorus, Zaratus, and Cobares, Medians: Marmaridius, a Babylonian: Zarmocenidas, an Aſſyrian, Abbaris, an Hyperborean, Theſphetion, an Aethiopian, Arnuphis, an Aegyptian, Theurgus, a Chaldean: with theſe I may recite Cambyſes, Zamares, Charondas, Damgorgon, Gobrias, Arbatel, Apollonius, Gog, Hoſtanes, Atyr, Choaſtes—
Good Sir, doe not coniure.
No Sir, theſe are nothing but the names of the Sacred Profeſſours of this Diuine Science.
I but it may be Sir, they had coniuring names.
Alas, Sir! 'tis not ſo eaſie a matter to worke effectually in our Sacred Science, as moſt men thinke it is, and as I will moſt manifeſtly declare vnto you; for this is a rule, you muſt be firſt an Abſolute Aſtrologian; vpon which fundamentall Suppoſition I thus proceed: before you can obtaine the knowledge of Aſtrologie, you muſt be a moſt Grounded Philoſopher, a ſound Phyſician, and an exquiſite Mathematician; by the helpes of which Sciences you ſhall know the courſes of the Starres; the number of the Orbes; your Poles; the Circles; the Verticall and Pedall points; the Azimuth, or Verticall Circle; the Almucantarath or Circles of Altitude; the Concentricitie and Excentricitie of the Orbes; the Aſcendent, and Deſcendent Knots, or Syndeſmes, that Cut the Ecliptike; your Orbes Aequant, Epicyclicall, and Deferent of the Apogeum, and Perigeum, or of the Higheſt and Loweſt Abſis; the Planetarie Aſpects, or Configurations, either Right as Coniunction and Oppoſition, or Collaterall as Sextile, Quadrate, and Trine; the Direct motion of the Planets, their Retrogradation & Station; then Sir, your Aſtrologie is either Canonicall for the Influence of the Starres, or Thematicall for the Erection of a Scheme of the Heauens, wherein is to bee knowne the Order of the Domicils, and the Inſcription. Then there is your Iudiciarie, which is either Genethliacall, or Catholike inſtructing in predictions, either Idiomaticall or Symptomaticall; the eight and twentie Manſions of the Moone; the Symbolization of Occult qualities in Herbs, with the Planets; Signacles, Pentacles, Planetarie Suffumigations, Vnctions, Pailters, Rings, Alligations, Suſpenſions; the twelue Scales of the Numbers; the Duodenarie Scale, either Cabaliſticall or Orphicall; the Characters, Seales, and Bands of Spirits—
You'l giue me all this in writing Sir; woun't you?
Yes Sir, yes. Then are there diuers kinds of your Magicke, as Necromancie, Anthropomancie, Gaſtromancie, Cheiromancie, Coſcinomancy,—
I pray, doe you your ſelfe know how many there are in all?
Sir, One and twentie. Ile begin them ouer againe, if you will. Necromancie, Anthropomancie—
Nay, good Sir hold, we haue enough alreadie: But I perceiue you Magicians haue admirable memories to get hard words by heart; I maruaile you doe not turne Dictionarie-makers: Why? I warrant there's no hard word but you can tell the meaning on't: you'd put all their noſes out of ioynt quite.
I, and put them out of their wits, if wee liſt: But then, Sir, to know the Spirit of Euerie Day, and Houre; his Name, Power, and Legions vnder him, his Forme of appearing, whether like a Dragon, or an Horſe, or a Wolfe, or a flame of fire; the Region whence he comes; the Gift hee beſtowes, whether Learning, Riches, Beautie; his Name, his Characters: theſe, theſe, are the wonders, the amazements of our Spirituall Science; Spirituall I may iuſtly call in, ſince euerie Art receiues an Excellencie from its Obiect; and yet (alas!) I confeſſe, I am but young in it yet, and haue ſcarce ſerued a 'prentice-ſhip in it, if it may bee call'd a ſeruitude, wherein there is ſuch Freeneſſe, and Euagation of ſpirit in ſuch exquiſite knowledge; nay, Dominion ouer Spirits.
Young ſay you? marry, I thinke, you are abſolutely grounded in it, that can know all theſe Myſteries; ah, were it the will of the gods, I had but halfe of this skill, I'de giue all that I haue, and get more as I could; but can you doe all theſe Wonders?
Farre ſtranger, farre ſtranger; moſt amazing tranſformations; why, there was Apuleius ſo skilfull in this Arte, that he turn'd himſelfe into an Aſſe, and Lucian was turn'd into an Aſſe, before he ſtudi'd it.
O ſtrange! but can a Spirit giue Learning?
Oh, there was Hermolaus Barbarus, when he ſtudied Philoſophie, and leſſe vnderſtood any place, hee would call vp a Spirit to inſtruct him; ſo the famous Cardans father carryed one alwaies in a Ring on his finger; and Agrippa had his Dogge with a Characteriz'd Collar.
But can you by your Art, tell mee whether or no I ſhall haue Aſtronomia?
Any thing.
How!
Why, I can doe it by Coſcinomancie.
What's that?
By the turning of a Siue.
But I haue heard, that's onely for things ſtolne.
Ah, 'tis more generall, and that you ſhall ſee; ſtay here, Ile but ſtep forth.
Well, this is the man whom the Heauens haue ordain'd to make me happie; O Ʋenus, be fauourable vnto me, and Ile build thee a fayrer Temple then euer the Epheſians directed to Diana.
Come Sir, here are Sheeres and a Siue; I muſt faſten the Sheeres? now doe as I bid you; Hold vp the ſide of the Sheeres with your finger. Nay, come, your middle-finger: So; now muſt I ſay a myſticall forme of powerfull words, and then name thoſe that wee ſuſpect ſhall haue her; and amongſt them name you alſo; and at whoſe name the Siue turnes, he ſhall haue her.
If it do's not turne at mine, I ſhall die: 'pray make it turne at mine.
Nay, then it muſt goe for nothing, for it muſt turne of its owne accord. Be ſilent now. Dies mies, Ieſchet, bene doefet, Dowim, Enitemaus. Who ſhall haue Aſtronomia? Shall Poeta? Who ſhall haue Aſtronomia? Shall Logicus?
Hee's not in loue with her, Sir; 'pray doe not you put in him too.
O vile! peace; now muſt I begin againe. Diet mies, Ieſchet, Bene doefet, Dowima, Enitemaus. Who ſhall haue Aſtronomia? Shall Poeta? Who ſhall haue Aſtronomia? Shall Logicus? Who ſhall haue Aſtronomia? Shall Geographus? Who ſhall haue Aſtronomia? Shall Geometres? Shall he obtaine her by Coniuration? Shall hee obtaine her by Medicine? Shall hee obtaine her by Faſcination?
Magus, what's mine is yours, goods, life, ſoule, and all: Ʋenus, thy temple ſhall be a mile in length; thy Image in't ſhall be greater then the Coloſſus at Rhodes, it ſhall bee all white Marble: The temple at Millaine ſhall looke like pale-fac'd llow to it; it ſhall haue as many pillars, as there are houres in the yeere, and as many windowes as there are minutes; and the Spire ſhall be higher then Tenariffa, or the Tower of Babylon by eight ſcore Meaſured ſurlongs at the leaſt. Magus, I haue enough, I haue enough.
Nay but, Sir, you muſt Meaſure your ioy; diuers haue died with ouer-much reioycing, and ſo may you; and then you'd both breake your vow to the Goddeſſe, and loſe your Loue beſides.
You ſay true.
Beſides, you muſt vſe a meanes you ſee, Faſcination; which you ſhall vſe at the Banquet, which (you know) we are inuited vnto.
Nay, let mee alone for looking on her; Ile looke thorow her, and thorow her; and make her as Perſpectiue, as I am Solid.
Beſides, there was a little moouing, you ſaw, at the name of Geographus: to ſignifie hee will bee faire for her too. And againe, there was a little moouing at the word Medicine, and therefore that muſt bee vs'd too: but for that take you no care.
Well, you learned men put ſo many doubts—but I care not, I ſhall haue her in the end: come, I'ue enough, now let's goe.
Meaſure your ioy, I ſay.
Thou'rt mine, thou'rt mine, Aſtronomia, I'me in Heau'n already; Geographus may goe trauaile againe, and Poeta, in ſtead of Baies, may goe weare a Willow-garland.
Come, let's in.
MArry, and I bee thus troubled with you when you woo me, and ſeeke to pleaſe; what ſhould I expect and wee were married once?
Nay, deareſt Logicus, let not the excellencie of your reaſon bee ſo ſeuere, but that it may admit a gracious apprehenſion of a ſmiling loue; let not the exactnes of your wiſedome be ſo regulated, but that it may expreſſe a courteous acceptance of a Louers admiration; let not—
Nay, and you once fall to Set ſpeeches, I am gone; I perceiue you are not for common talke; I wonder, now I thinke on't, in what Praedicament a womans tongue is; let's ſee: yet, what if I make it a Tranſcendent? and yet it can't be ſo, for 'tis neither vnum, nor verum, nor honum: 'faith, and't bee in any Praedicament, it ſhall bee in Quantitate Continua, and that's oppoſite to Diſcreta; or rather, ſince 'tis ſo irregular, and therefore can hardly bee admitted into any Order, I will count it that Monſter in Nature, and Contradiction of Philoſophie, Infinitum in acta.
Why lo, now your ſelfe has made a ſet ſpeech; and thus whilſt you Reprehend, you Offend: whilſt you Direct, you Neglect: whilſt you Reforme, you Deforme: whilſt you—
Hey day! this is tick-tack: Here's another ſhorter tricke: well, I perceiue there's no other courſe — which is your way?
Which is your way?
Doe you ſpeake firſt.
Nay, doe you ſpeake firſt, you are the better Man.
VVhy, mine lies this way.
VVhy ſo does mine; weele goe together.
I, But I muſt go this way to doe a little buſineſſe firſt.
VVhy ſo muſt I.
But I muſt walke here alone a little to thinke on't firſt.
VVhy, and I muſt walke here alone a little firſt.
Why, then fare you well; I can thinke on my buſines by the way.
Why, and I can very well thinke on my buſineſſe by the way.
Why, you woun't follow me? I am going to a Feaſt.
Why, and I am going to a Feaſt.
I am going to Ethicus.
Why, and I am going to Ethicus.
O you gods! which of you will come to deliuer me? Well, if wee muſt together, and if you will ſticke ſo cloſe vnto me; yet, good Miſtres Tongue, do not cleaue to the roofe of my Mouth.
No, no; your lippe is all that I deſire.
TAra, ding de ding, ding de ding, lan, tan, dan, dido.
How now my nimble Crotchet? who was the firſt Fiddle-maker?
Thats's a queſtion, Sir.
Why, for that reaſon I propos'd it.
Why, for that reaſon you might haue propos'd many more.
I, but Anſwere.
I, but I muſt know firſt; 'tis a great controuerſie.
What then was the firſt kinde of Inſtrument?
Why, that's as hard.
Why, I can tell.
What?
An Harpe.
I but you're deceiu'd, I rather thinke 'twas a Bagge-pipe.
A Bag-pipe? why prethee?
Why? marry, firſt vnderſtand this reaſon, and then Ile ſhew you: You know euery Art both drawes it's imitation from Nature, and labours to perfect it, which it does by finding comforts to preſerue it: Muſicke then at the firſt was found out as an antidote againſt griefe: and by this meanes, when men were grieued, they cried Oh, and there was one Note: then Hey-ho, there were two Notes more. So, when they laught, they obſeru'd three more by Ha, ha, ho. Theſe being firſt ioyn'd together, and afterwards variouſly intermixt, were the firſt harmonie in voice; which being repeated vnto grieued mindes, were as it were a prettie deluding of their ſorrowes; and theſe by obſeruation were afterwards reduc'd to inſtrument—
I conceit it, Muſica.
Thus, men perceiuing that theſe notes were conceiu'd in the bellie, and afterwards, (as it were) form'd in the paſſage of the throat, ſowed Leather in the forme of a Bellie, or bagge; and wth a Reed made a long Necke vnto it, and a Winde-pipe; which when they blew full of winde, and perceiu'd it gaue no ſound, they cut many holes in the reed to let it out, and then alternately ſtopping the holes, they found an admirable varietie of harmony; and as the holes ſerue for diſtinction of notes in a Winde-inſtrument, ſo doe your frets on a String'd-inſtrument.
Indeede I thinke this a truth; for as the voice was before the Inſtrument, ſo the Winde-inſtrument before the ſtring'd. But then how came your Trumpet vp?
Why, on this manner: When Triton came to helpe the gods in the Warres of the Gyants, he wanted a weapon, and finding the ſhell of a Fiſh, he did blow in't, which yeelded a moſt hideous noiſe: the Gyants thinking it had beene ſome terrible beaſt, fled away affrighted, and ſince by a perfecting imitation, men haue alter'd both the matter, and the forme of that Inſtrument.
Nay, I do beleeue there is a great vertue in Muſicke.
O Sir, 'tis your onely medicine of the minde.
Indeed I thinke ſo, and that's the reaſon, 'tis likely, why Apollo is the god both of Muſicke and Phyſicke: and now I remember it, in one place where we came, in our trauailes, there were no Phyſicions, but all their ſicke folks were cur'd by Muſicke; where was it, Phantaſtes? I haue quite forgot.
Why 'twas in Creet Sir, where Iupiter was nurs'd, and the Muſicke was made with thoſe Kettle-drums, which they ſounded to drowne the crying of Iupiter, when he was in his ſwathe-bands: in reward of which loue, hee procur'd of Apollo, in the fauour of the Cretians, that at the ſound of thoſe Kettle-drummes all ſicke folkes, whoſe time of death was not come, ſhould without any languiſhing ſicknes immediately recouer; and therefore the order is, when any one is ſicke, they carry him preſently in a Litter to the Temple where theſe Drums are kept; and if hee does not ſtraight-wayes recouer, they carry him home againe, as a man that muſt dye, and ſo prouide for his funerall.
Where is this Sir? in Creet?
Yes, in Creet.
I, but I haue heard, the Cretians are mightie liars.
Vpon the Faith of a Trauellour, the Honeſtie of a Courtier, and the Word of a Gentleman, 'tis a moſt confirm'd truth.
Indeed theſe three are much about one valew.
VVell, Muſica, I could talke with thee all day—
I, and all night too.
But I cannot ſtay now; I'me afraid they ſtay for me at the banquet. Is thy Miſtris there?
Yes, I thinke, by this time.
Well, farewell till anon: you'll meet vs at ſupper? woun't you?
Yes, yes; I'me going for Muſike.
Come, my prettie Pigeon, let's bill a little; is't poſſible, Phantaſtes and Muſica ſhould meet, and part without a kiſſe?—now farewell.
Ah: theſe Courtiers are lycouriſh-lip'd: but I muſt goe fetch the Muſike, To ra ding de ding, ding de ding, lan, tan dan dido.
WElcome, welcome, all of you; i'good faith, I'm e'en young againe, to ſee ſuch a jolly company of my friends together: but, paſſion o' me! why, Oeconoma?
I, I, preſently, preſently, wee'r making all haſte wee can.
Ah, there's a good huſwife, neither meat oth' table, nor cloth laid, nor any thing in a readineſſe. Good friends pardon vs, wee are ſomewhat vnmannerly to make you ſtay thus; wee'll talke till ſupper is ſeru'd in; but where's Geographus? Oh here is; welcome, welcome.
Thanks, courteous Ethicus—ſaue you gallants— faire Ladies—
Phantaſtes, and Choler, and thou Muſica, now thou art come, be a little forward to make a ſupply for our backwardneſſe, and ſtep in to my wife to help out ſupper quickly: why 'tis well, 'tis well, now 'tis as it ſhould be, all friends, all friends: but where's Hiſtoria?
Hiſtoria? why, aske Poeta.
Mee?
I, you; they ſay ſhee's ſicke of loue.
Poeta, where's your man Melancholico?
Faith, when I was comming hither, hee was in a dump, and therefore I thinking him not fit to come to a banquet, left him behind me; and indeed that's his fault, hee will not commonly be merry in company.
Logicus, where's your man Phlegmatico?
Faith, as I was comming, my Slauerer was at his Tobacco, but, I thinke, I made him ſmoke for his labour, and ſo would not let him come, for hee would nothing but haue ſpawl'd in your roome, and haue turn'd your ſtomakes.
Well, remember this Phantaſtes.
What?
That you carry in the march-pane and not I, but Ile—
What? amn't I the better man?
Would ſupper were done: I'd bumme you.
What's the matter?
Why, Sir, he's angrie that I brought in the marchpane.
Come, be mannerly.
Why, ſirrah, Choler, will you ſtill be quarrelling?
You ſhould let him be my man a little; faith I ſhould be as froward as he; we two ſhould haue a bickering once a day.
I would ſupper were done once for your ſake.
Why, ſirrah, are you ſtill grumbling?
Come, friends, you are all welcome, we haue made you ſtay here too-long for a little ſorry cheere; come husband will you place the gueſts?
Sit downe, you know your places; ſit downe wife, bid them welcome.
You are all heartily welcome, heartily welcome.
Why, Muſica, where are the Muſicians?
Here, Sir, here.
Come on, play, feed you our eares, whilſt we ſeed our bellyes.
O Happie state
'Boue pow'r of fate
Which you, bleſt Artes, enioy!
You were little Gods,
If you fell not at ods,
And did not your ſelues annoy.
But when pride does once tickle,
It makes vs too fickle
And vaine:
Till ſome good Old-men
Do temper vs then,
And bring vs in tune againe.
Then learne of mee
Thus wiſe to bee
To haue a yeelding mind;
With weather-cocke art
To play well your part
And turne with each ſtrong wind.
So you ſhall by preuention
Eſcape all contention
And iars:
So you ſhall be ſecure,
And neuer endure
Th' affliction of Learned wars.
O harmleſſe feaſt
With Mirth increaſt,
Where Muſicke and Loue do meet!
Where the Piper does find
A more delicate wind
To make his pipe ſound more ſweet:
Whiles his ſticke does belabour
The head of his Tabour
Amaine.
Where the Wine in the boules,
And eu'ry tongue roules,
Yet neuer diſturbs the braine.
Ioues Troian boy
Was no ſuch ioy,
Nor all his Heau'nly whores:
There's no ſuch delight
By day or by night
E're felt by feigning wooers;
As is the ſoft pleaſure
At ſuch honeſt leaſure
To ſport:
When all are ſo merry,
They ſing till they're weary,
And trippe it in comely ſort.
Here, Logicus, you ſhall drinke to Poeta,
I accept your Propoſition, Sir; Poeta, to ſet a Concluſion to our former diſſentions, and to make a plaine Demonſtration of reconcilement, I drinke to you.
With the moſt ingenuous freedome of a Poet, I accept it: Grammaticus, that our contention ending in loue, may make a Tragike-Comedie, I drinke to you.
I proteſt to you, Sir, I doe put all former wrongs in the praeter-plu-perfect Tence, and am glad of this happy Coniunction, and that we are all of vs in ſuch a merry Mood: but by the way, my Maſters, theſe Noune-Adiectiues of the Foeminine gender, ſit all this while vn-drunke to: Aſtronomia. —
Intruth, Grammaticus, I am not in Caſe to pledge you: I pledg'd Aſtrologia euen now, and I am not ſince halfe well.
Arithmetica—
If you Count again, you ſhal find that I drunk laſt.
Rhetorica—here's to moyſten your eloquent tongue.
An eloquent tongue is neuer drie, Aſtrologia will pledge you for me.
Aſtrologia—
In troth I haue been drinking my Belly full of Nectar; but iuſt now, my thoughts were vpon the preſent Coniunction of Mars and Ʋenus.
Why how now, Grammaticus! who doe you drinke to? faith thou art now a Noune Subſtantiue indeed, for thou ſtandſt alone by thy ſelfe, without being ioyn'd to any of theſe Adiectiues.
Nay, doe not you ieſt.
What? doſt thou make a Ieſter of me?
Nay, I Coniure you both; by our preſent meeting, that you goe not out of the Circle of harmeleſſe mirth.
Me thinks I ſee a Direct line paſſe from the Eye of Geometres to Aſtronomia's.
Nay, will you, Poeta? you make Aſtronomia bluſh.
Some Aqua vitae, I ſay, for Geometres.
Why, Poeta?
Why, hee's a dying I thinke, his eyes are fixt in's head alreadie.
It may be, Poeta, you meaſure Geometres his lookes by your owne.
Me thinks I ſee a Direct line paſſe from the Eye of Geometres to Aſtronomia's.
I'm eu'n ſtifled, I doe not vſe to be in ſuch a cloſe Roome, I loue the Open Aire.
Alas! Aſtronomia's extreme ill.
Friends, you are all heartily welcome, reſt you here I pray, and weele in with her.
Aſtrologia, follow her, and ſee you be neuer from her all the while ſhee's ſicke.
I ſaw this diſaſtrous chance in the ſtarres, for as Mars and Venus were ſporting, they were beheld by the reſt of the enuious gods.
Ile in too, to ſit and Talke with her, whiles ſhee's ſicke.
Ile in too, that I may —
Be made ſit downe againe.
Alas, my Miſtris!
Shee did not looke well.
Aſtronomia ſicke? then all the Heauen's awry, and my Muſike's quite out of tune.
'Twas, I feare me, a fit of an Ague.
Aſtronomia in a fit of an Ague? I neuer vnderſtood the Motus trepidationis of the Heauen before.
Muſicians, depart the roome. The Muſicians go out.
By Ioue I came to be merry, and I will be merry. Here's an health to Aſtronomia.
Here's a health to Aſtronomia.
Here's a health to Aſtronomia.
Sir, you wrong vs all, not to take off your full meaſure.
Oh, Sir, they that drinke with Meaſure, drinke without Meaſure.
I, indeed, for they that Number their cups, commonly Multiply their cups.
He loues not Aſtronomia, that does not pledge her a whole one.
Well, becauſe 'tis to her, Ile doo't,
I can't drinke.
Nor I.
Nor I.
You woun't, I know, require it of me.
Well, and you woun't, here's to you that will: A ſecond health to Aſtronomia.
A ſecond health to Aſtronomia.
A ſecond health to Aſtronomia.
By Ioue I muſt be merry, and I will be merry; can you ſing?
Beginne, wee'll follow.
Beginne, wee'll follow.
Haue at you then.
FIll up my boule to the brim-a,
That my lips in wine may ſwim-a;
That my Muſe may ſlow
And the world may it know:
Fill vp my boule to the brimme-a
That my Muſe may ſlow
And the world may it know:
Fill vp my bowle to the brimme-a.
Hee's a puny cannot ſwagger,
Carouſe and yet neuer ſtagger,
But be ſoberly drunke
And cloſely haue his punke:
Hee's a puny cannot ſwagger.
But he ſoberly drunke
And cloſely haue his punke:
Hee's a puny cannot ſwagger.
O my Iacobs ſtaffe is broken,
And thats a diſaſt'rous token,
My Compaſſes did ſlide,
My Ruler ſlipt aſide:
O my Iacobs ſtaffe is broken.
My Compaſſes did ſlide
My Ruler ſlipt aſide
O my Iacobs-ſtaffe is broken.
Come kiſſe, come kiſſe, my Corinna,
And ſtill that ſport wee'l beginn-a,
That our ſoules ſo may meet
In our lippes, while they greet:
Come kiſſe, come kiſſe, my Corinna.
That our ſoules ſo may meet
In our lippes, while they greet:
Come kiſſe, come kiſſe, my Corinna.
Here's a health to Aſtronomia.
Here's a health to Aſtronomia.
Here's a health to Aſtronomia. Prethee Poeta doe thou ſing a Catch alone, and wee'l ſing the Cloſe with thee.
A match, hay boyes.
THe blacke Jacke
The merry blacke Iacke
As it is toſt on by-a
Growes,
Flowes,
Till at laſt they fall to blowes,
And make their noddles cry-a.
—Growes,
Flowes,
Till at laſt the fall to blowes,
And make their noddles cry-a.
The browne bowle,
The merry browne bowle,
As it goes round about-a.
Fill
Still
Let the world ſay what it will
And drinke your drinke all out-a.
—Fill
Still
Let the world ſay what it will
And drinke your drinke all out-a.
The deepe Canne
The merry deepe Canne
As thou doſt freely quaffe a.
Sing.
Fling.
Be as merry as a King
And Sound a luſty laugh a.
Sing.
Fling.
Be as merry as a King
And ſound a luſty laugh a.
Here's a health to Aſtronomia.
Faith, I can drinke no more, Poeta.
Nor I.
How? not pledge me? Choler, fil the bowle againe; by Ioue, not pledge me? pledge me, pledge me, Geographus: for by Ioue—
What?
I will drinke with thee, and I will ſing with thee, and I will fight with thee.
Nay, 'pray let's haue no fighting.
By Ioue. I will drinke with thee, I will ſing with thee, and I will fight with thee.
By Ioue you're almoſt foxt.
By Ioue you lowſie-ſhirted rogue, you ſit aboue mee? did not you begge entertaynment of me tother day?
Sleepe, ſleepe, Poeta.
A rope of a drunken foole; I'ue loſt my ſupper by this: I muſt follow my Maſter.
Ten-toes, I know you're a good footman; Come, Geometres, I hope you'll ſit ſquarely to it ſtill.
Nay, if I cannot Rule others, I will Rule my ſelfe.
And if Geometres depart, Arithmetica will be none of the Number.
Farewell, Hoſteſſe; we ſhall be ſure to haue no reckoning now Arithmetica's gone: and yet Ile pay you ſomewhat, Clinch-fiſt. Hay tables! Hay!
Well, you drunken rogue, Ile haue an Oppoſition for you before Polites, that you ſhall not be able to Anſwere to.
Farewell block-head: now pae-da-gog, pa-da-gog: I muſt ſay my Part to you too.
I, but, I can't ſtay to Heare you, now.
Choler, wil not you fight for your Maſter, valiantly?
No, I thanke you, Sir, your moyſture does allay my heat.
Are you all gone? then, Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vaſto. I am King, I am King: by Tantalus I am as drie as an Horſe. O, ſome drinke, ſome drinke.
Alte dormi, Irioni, Chiriori, Eſſera, Chuder, Fere; Pax, Caspor, Prax, Melchior, Max, Balthaſar, Ymax, Adimax, Galbes, Galbat, Galdes, Galdat, Hax, pax, max, alte dormi. Poeta ſnores: Magus waues his rod ouer him, and runnes round about him. Oh, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho; O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. Dragons fly ſwiftly, Dragons fly ſwiftly.
O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.
YEe gods that dwell
In darkeſt cell
Of loweſt Hell,
Vouchſafe this grace
A little ſpace
To guard this place.
Let now a deepe
And moyſtning ſleepe
His watch here keepe.
We would obtaine
This, for this ſwaine,
Whom wine doth chaine.
That ſo ſince day
Is fled, we may
Make him our pray.
O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, hoy—
O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.
What a Rogue's this? hee laughes at vs in his Dreame.
O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho: Some drinke, Tantalus, ſome drinke, ſome drinke; or I will—
What will he doe?
By the—by the—
He's about to ſweare ſure by ſomewhat.
By the great—By the great—
He will ſweare by the Great.
By the great—By the great—
'Tis ſo great 'twoun't come out.
By the great Hogs-head at Heidelburge, Logicus is a Blockhead.
Well ſaid i'faith, I perceiue there is ſome remembrance of ones friends in Wine.
Corinna, will you kiſſe? will you kiſſe cockle-kiſſe? cloſe, cloſe, you Whore.
Oh, here's a braue Dreamer!
I will make this Verſe like a Nut-hooke-like a Nut-hooke-and then pull downe—pull downe the Moone with it.
Sure, Magus, you han't charm'd him well.
Let me alone; I warrant you.
Come kiſſe, my Pigeon, come kiſſe, my pretty Corinna, Nibble a little, my Loue; nibble againe, and againe.
Hay day! he's at's Hexameter and Pentameter Verſes in our tongue: 'ſaith I thinke in ſome ſuch humour this kind of Verſes was firſt made amongſt vs.
My purſe is richer thē th' Mines rich India brings forth.
You ſhall not neede to make a ſhort Verſe to that Sir: weele be very ſhort with you.
Take off your whole one, or take a ſowſe o' the chops.
Beſhrow his drunken fingers; Magus you ha' not charm'd him well.
Altè dormi, pax, prax, max; aliè dormi, Galbos, Galbat: Galdes, Galdat: pax, prax, max, alte dormi.
See what's in his pocket.
A murren on't, here's nothing but a Purſe with a paper in't.
Let's ſee it, why, whats here? Verſes!
Tranſlated by mee vpon occaſion of Ethicus his inuiting mee to Supper.
The fruitfull Earth does drinke the raine;
Trees drinkes the fruitfull Earth againe.
The Sea does drinke the liquid Ayre;
By the Sunnes beames the Sea-waues are
Drunke vp; which is no ſooner done,
But ſtraight the Moone drinkes vp the Sunne.
Why then, companions, doe you thinke
I may not with like freedome drinke?
This had beene loſt, if I had not giu'n the Rogue his Anacreon againe. Is this the rich Purſe? Come, 'ifaith wee'll e'en ſerue for a Voyder, and carrie him away, whiles hee is drunk, rid the roome of him.
Roome for a Poet, Roome for a Poet, Roome for a Poet.
ANd haue you beene in Italie too?
In the moſt parts of the World, Sir.
You haue diſpos'd your obſeruations by heads! haue you not?
They are yet Sir but a miſcellany, but I am now in reducing of them.
And what may the ſumme of them be?
Sir, they are principally drawne from the People, and Country: diſcourſing vpon the policie, and naturall diſpoſition of the firſt; as on the ſituation, and fertilitie of the ſecond.
Hum, the method is ſufficiently approoueable: but I like that very well that you place Policy firſt; and would wiſh you to proſecute that fully, with the moſt ſubtle examinations of your pureſt iudgement: 'twill be worth your trauaile: and 'tis a maine fault of your common Geographers, that now-a-dayes doe rather garniſh the margine of a Map, then materially deſcribe it; and onely draw a companie of lines through it; as if they had rid ouer the Countrie to take notice onely of the high-wayes; which yet a Carriers Horſe knowes better then they; neglecting in the meane time more ſolid obſeruations; whileſt their fancies (I will not ſay iudgements) are weakly ſatisfied with theſe fruitleſſe ſuperficialities; not vnlike your ſedentary Students, who for the attaining of a little glorie with ſome few leſſe iudicious of their owne Sect, ſtirred vp with a contemplatiue ambition, earneſtly proſecute thoſe ſtudies, which themſelues ſhall neuer reduce vnto practice, in the actions of their life.
Sir, the obſeruation of gouernment was my firſt and principall intendment, eſpecially in ſome ſecrets of ſtate, as yet (to my knowledge) not obſeru'd, at leaſt not reueal'd by any.
As what?
I will ſhew vnto you.
But how could you come vnto the knowledge of them?
You ſhall vnderſtand that too. The ſecret is concerning the happie detection of ſuch, as from enemy-ſtates, are vſually ſent to the ſubuerſion of a Land; my meanes of attayning to the knowledge of this Myſterie, was my acquaintance with a Gentleman in Italie, who hauing beene one of the moſt practis'd Intelligencers in Europe, vpon the death of his Lord, who imploy'd him, fell into great wants; when, out of the fulneſſe of a grieued mind, and the rather to excite in me a compaſſion of his griefes, vnfolded vnto mee the whole ſecret.
Proceed.
The Italian Lord, that imploy'd this Gentleman, furniſhed him alwayes with money, that hee might caſt himſelfe into what ſhape he would, then ſent him to the enemies Land, where liuing, (either concealing his owne Countrey, or profeſſing a diſlike of it) and inſinuating himſelfe into the acquaintance of men next to the beſt, would, commonly by entertaining their humours, and giuing occaſion of ſuch diſcourſe at any meeting, with much Art and eaſe, allure euery man, to diſcouer (euen for glory, to ſhow who could ſhow moſt) all intended and ſecret imployments into forraine Lands; by this meanes hee would learne the whole deſigne, agent, time, and whatſoeuer other neceſſarie circumſtance; then the perſon to be imploy'd, being commonly of eſtate not beyond himſelfe, hee would vpon ſome ſought (though but ſlight) occaſion, grow ſo farre acquainted with him, as to intreat the courteſie of Nations of him, to carry a Letter from him to that Countrey; which being with all courteſie granted, he would, againſt the time of his departure, prouide a Letter fairely written, containing nothing but ſome complement, or lighter buſineſſe to his friend —
Who? to his Lord?
No, Sir, but to another agent, whom his Lord imploy'd at home, as this Gentleman abroad.
Proceed then.
VVithall giuing his friend in charge, vpon their loue, to giue all courteous entertainment to the bearer thereof; as, to prouide him a fit lodging, with all other complements of friendſhip: then reading this Letter to the Gentleman, to free him from all ſuſpicion of falſe dealing, would ſeale it in his preſence, and deliuer it to him—
VVhat deuice was there-in this?
This Letter, Sir, being written by the Art of Steganography, contained the whole intendement of this imployd Meſſenger. That Art (as Trithemius has at large diſcouer'd, or rather taught it) proceeds vpon many deuices, as the putting together euery firſt letter of a word, or euery laſt, or euery ſecond, according to the compact before lay'd betweene theſe two friends. Vpon the receit of which, proceeded firſt a moſt courteous entertayning, and then vpon the maturitie of his intendements, an artificiall detection of al his deſignes.
All this beares a iuſt probabilitie of truth. VVell, Geographus, we ſhall take a further notice of your wants and worth; and ſince you haue ingeniouſly diſcouer'd both your free education, preſent ſtate, and vnauoydable affection to Aſtronomia, and, as you ſay, hers mutually to you, I ſhall, I truſt, effectually, in your behalfe, remooue the vnwillingneſſe of her Mother Phyſica. But withall, I hold it a courſe, not altogether without Policy, to inquire of Aſtronomia, the diſlikes, for which ſhe does except againſt you, and therein by a praeuenient diſcretion, exactly to manifeſt a reformation; for this time the expectation of ſome buſineſſe admits not a further continuance of our diſcourſe.
I ſhall reſt, Sir, at the bountie of your vertue.
A Gentleman of parts worth the taking notice of; well, ſuch wits muſt bee nouriſht: 'tis the ſaying of my Tacitus: Ingenia, ſtudi que oppreſſeris faciliùs quàm reuocaueris; & I remember he there ſhewes an analogie between mens wits and their bodies: They are (ſaith hee) both of them long a making, but ſoone marr'd. And indeed, young wittes that are worth the nouriſhing, when they ſee themſelues neglected, are too-too prone to fall to deſperate reſolutions, arguing thus with themſelues, That if Vertue and Learning cannot aduance them; by a reaſon from the contrary, neither Vice nor Ignorance can debaſe them; thus from bad premiſes drawing a worſe concluſion, they ouerthrow in a moment the workmanſhip of many yeeres. But my Kinſ-woman Hiſtoria ſayd ſhe would be here by this. Oh, here ſhe comes.
NOw Couſin, what? alwayes ſad? alwayes ſad?
Doe you admire at my ſadneſſe, when you know, nay when you are the cauſe of it?
I? Couſin? how? how?
Your continuall declamations, Sir, againſt my moſt lou'd Poeta, a man whoſe praiſes admit no Hyperbole; no, they tranſcend all; and whoſe worth we may admire rather then expreſſe.
Why Couſin? my declamations ha' beene onely againſt his faults, not his perſon, and ſo farre —
Nay, for your State-diſtinctions you may reſerue them to your ſelfe, you can loue and hate the ſame man at the ſame time by a diſtinction; I doe but plainely relate the truth vnto you, and I thinke there is hardly any man could more violently haue inueigh'd againſt him then your ſelfe; excepting old froward Ethicus; his age indeed muſt alwaies be correcting ſome body.
VVhy, but why ſhould you regard him, when it ſeemes he little regards you?
Marry, and little reaſon he hath, when he ſees the beſt of my friends, your ſelfe, and Ethicus to neglect him. But otherwiſe I'me ſure he did loue me once: there haue bin of the Hiſtorias that haue beene well belou'd by Poets, and thoſe the moſt renowned in all ages: as by admired Homer, the greateſt glory and Shame of Greece, the one for his worth, the other for his wants: then by diuine Maro, that beautifull wonder of Nature; and eſpecially by one Lucan, a worthy Gentleman of Rome, beſides many more; that if you would vouchſafe but to grace him, his Lawrel would be the crowne of your glory.
I but he beares loue to Aſtronomia.
I vnderſtand ſo much: but I think that rather the exiliency of ſome paſſion, then any conſiſtency of a ſettled deſire. I haue indeede heard alſo of ſome of the Aſtronomias that haue beene belou'd by Poets; as by Manilius, Pontanus, and ſome other, who haue written whole Bookes in the praiſe of their beauties; but it ſeemes their beauties had ſuch ſmall diuinity in them, that they could not raiſe, to any height of poeticke rapture, the wits of their admirers. And there was alſo one Lucretius, a Romane Gentleman, in former times that fell in loue with Phyſica, ſhee from whom Phyſica the mother of Aſtronomia deriues now both her name and linage, which Gentleman, in the paſſion of his loue, writ books in the praiſe of her beauty; but what wrinkle-fac'd Verſes they are, let the preſent age iudge; and if her beautie was like his lines, ſure ſhe was paſt her Three-ſcore, when hee fell in loue with her; but alas, there was neuer any of that family that euer came neere the Hiſtorias for beauty.
VVell, Couſin, then what is the imployment wherewith you will taske me?
VVhy, if you meane to haue mee aliue long, change your diſlike of Poeta into loue, and reforme him if you will, but not hate him; admoniſh him, intreat him, woo him, and in a word, winne him vnto mee; and thoſe hymnes of your praiſes, and relations of your glory ſhall bee put in the mouth of poſteritie; that ſooner ſhall the Common-wealth dye, then your fame.
Well, Couſin, you haue now enough admoniſht me, entreated me, woo'd mee, and in a word wonne me: referre the finding out of meanes, and the accompliſhing of your deſire to the priuacie of my meditations.
Reuerend Polites, pardon the vnmannerlineſſe of my diſordered paſſions; loue reſiſted growes rude and furious: but I will not inſtruct your wiſedome; onely remember my life lies in your hands.
And that ſhall not periſh if I can ſaue it. There are many accuſations in againſt this Poeta, and ſome of them I perceiue will be proſecuted; he has bad, and good parts; he has a wilde head, yet may be reform'd, and then there's a man ſau'd: a good purchaſe; nay, Hiſtoria is ſau'd, that's a double. Well, then ſince I muſt loue him, I will ſaue him: if hee proue good, I winne two; if bad, 'twill bee but the loſſe of one, of Hiſtoria; who already profeſſes, that, without him, ſhe ſhall be loſt.
OH, I'me ſo hot, I could drinke a whole Riuer of water.
Nay, if you talke of drinking, I could drinke my ſelfe halfe a doozen Helicons off at a draught: Muſica, fetch a flaggon of Wine.
Nay, let it be pure Water.
Haue a care what you doe: 'tis as much as your life's worth.
By Ioue wee will haue our liquor about vs. Goe Wench, why, Sir, ſhould not ſhe drinke?
Why, to drink in the heat of an Ague is preſent death; and I remember Galen in his Booke de conſuetudine, relates a Storie of Arius a Peripateticke, who dyed ſuddenly, being forc'd to drinke a full draught of colde water in the hea of his Feuer; though according to the preſcriptions of his Phyſicians: yet, I confeſſe, in him there was another adioyn'd cauſe, which Galen in the ſame place makes mention of, to wit, his ſtomake being alwayes very colde, hee reſolu'd on a perpetuall abſtinence from all colde nouriſhments, ſo that this aduentitious colde of the water hee dranke, wrought not onely againſt his diſeaſe, but alſo againſt his conſtitution.
Oh that was it, that was it; then fill out the liquor.
You Poets would make mad Phyſicians; or at the beſt but deſperate Paracelſians; But Aſtronomia, you ſtirre too much; and ſo the heate of your diſeaſe increaſes to an inflammation: you muſt reſt more, you muſt reſt more.
Nay, I ſhall neuer liue, if I leaue mouing.
I, but not ſo faſt; you walke as faſt as you do when you are in health.
Indeed, mee thinkes, ſhee keepes alwayes the ſame pace.
I, but if you marke it, 'tis not a direct Progreſſion, but a kind of giddie turning Round, which proceeds from a lightneſſe of the head, caus'd by her diſeaſe.
I diſlike your dyet; for in the verie hotteſt of Summer, when the Sunne is in Cancer, you eate the hotteſt meate, feeding altogether vpon Crab; which two concurrent heates of the Meat and of the Weather, are able to caſt any man into the inflammation of a Feuer.
Indeed, I confeſſe that; and 'tis at that ſeaſon, my only dyet.
I, but 'tis bad; and againe 'tis very good to feed vpon varietie of meate.
Say you ſo! marry, I thinke, you'l prooue a paradoxicall Paracelſian your ſelfe; if you hold ſuch Tenents: for you know, Sir, 'tis the moſt receiued opinion of Phyſicians, that varietie of meates diſturbes concoction.
Sir, I hold that opinion rather to argue the Authors ſuperſtition, then iudgement: for our nature delighteth in varietie, and thoſe meats which the ſtomake doth with pleaſure deſire, it doth moſt embracingly attract, and concoct moſt faithfully, beſides the ſubſtance of our bodies conſiſting of a various nature, as moyſture, ayre, and the like, one of theſe parts may be more ſpent then another, by labour, or other meanes; ſo that a man had need, for the vndoubted ſupply of all theſe parts, receiue a great varietie of nouriſhments, that there may be a reparation for whatſoeuer the bodie does euacuate.
I vnderſtand Sir.
Beſides, Aſtronomia, going abroad you neuer take care in what Ayre you walke.
Indeed, I confeſſe, I am too neglectiue of that.
Oh, that's a chiefe matter to bee prouided for; for the verie ſame ayre ſometimes is hurtfull for one part of the bodie, and good for another.
How? is that poſſible?
Sir, 'tis a truth obſeru'd by Guido Cauliacenſis; and in particular of the ayre of Paris; where, if the ſame man haue a wound in his head, and another in his thigh; it hurts the one and heales the other.
That's prettie i'faith: the reaſon, the reaſon, Maſter Phyſician.
'Tis thus, Sir, the ayre there is cold and moyſt, and therefore moſt hurtfull for the head; and againe, the ſame ayre by an obſcuration of the ſpirits, a degrauation of the bloud, and a condenſation of the humours, whereby they are made leſſe quicke to flow downe, does therefore make the wounds of the thighes more curable, whiles the courſe of the humours is intercepted, whoſe defluence or flowing downe would hinder the cure of the wound.
You Phyſicians, I perceiue, ſometimes haue ſome of Apollo in you.
Pray, Medicus, tell me one thing; you'r a Phyſician; I haue heard Geographus relate of a place in his Trauels, where the people are heal'd by Muſicke: is that poſſible?
O yes: Ile confirme it by mine owne experience: I knew a young Gentle man that marri'd a young Gentlewoman; who being extraordinarily faire, and he as melancholy, grew into a great iealouſie, that ſhee had made him a Cuckold, vpon which conceit, at the firſt but light, the ſtrength of his melancholy and iealouſie working together; he fell into a ſtrong perſwaſion that he had Hornes: the beſt Phyſicians were ſent for, vs'd all medicines and inuentions to cure him, nothing preuail'd, whereupon they left him, intreating his wife to be patient, and expect his recouerie in time. Away they went, and none but a little boy was left in the roome to tend the Gentleman, when vpon a ſuddaine there comes mee by, a Bag-pipe-player, at the ſound of whoſe Pipe the Gentleman ſuddainely aroſe, leapes about the Chamber, beates his head againſt the wall, ſo long, till at laſt he had broke his face in diuers places that the bloud guſhed out; vpon the effuſion of which melancholy bloud, that had corrupted his braine and phantaſie, the Gentlemans Hornes were beaten off againſt the wall, and the Gentlewoman became as honeſt a woman after that time, as any in Europe.
In good faith, you Phyſicians are the onely fellowes in the world to tell Tales by Gentlewomens Bed-ſides, whiles they are ſicke.
I, this Cure was by the effuſion of bloud, but they whom Geographus tolde of, were healed without any ſuch meanes.
Ile ſatisfie you in that by another particularitie of experience: I knew another Gentleman, who being very ſicke of a contagious diſeaſe, and finding no remedie by Medicine, the Phyſicians caus'd Muſicians to bee brought into the roome, and play; at the hearing of which Muſicke, hee ſuddainely leapes and continu'd dancing ſo long, till the laborious exagitation of his whole bodie, had by ſweat and breathing diſſipated the contagion.
I wonder you Phyſicians doe not turne Trauailors, you'd haue an aduantage beyond them all, by making good your Relations, by giuing a reaſon for them.
O by no meanes, Sir; for if wee ſhould trauaile into forraine Lands, our skill would there faile vs; by reaſon of the difference of the Countrie, and our ignorance of their conſtitutions and dyet.
Muſica, ſome drinke; mee thinkes, I haue not one iot of moyſture in me.
Muſica, fetch none, ſhee ſhall drinke no more.
I muſt drinke, the World was not in ſuch a combuſtion at Phaeton's driuing the Chariot of the Sunne, as I am in now.
Come, come, Medicus, the ſtrictneſſe of your preſcriptions muſt be diſpenc'd with, a little.
Will you ſpoile her, Aſtrologia?
Ile warrant you, ſhee'l neuer dye of this diſeaſe, I haue calculated her Natiuitie, to know ſo much beyond your Art: the ſixt Houſe of her Horoſcope, wherein all her diſeaſes are Prefiguratiuely regiſtred, promiſes a better iſſue of her ſickneſſe then ſo: beſides, ſhee ſhall haue an happie Wombe, for I find in her Horoſcope, Ʋenus in her Exaltation, to wit, in Piſces, and Iupiter in the fift Houſe, the Radiation of Ʋenus falling on the Firſt Houſe, and of Iupiter on the Eleuenth, Luna being in the Seuenth, illuſtrating the Fift Houſe with a Sextile Radiation; ſhee ſhall haue a beautifull Daughter, her name ſhall be Optica: there ſhall appeare at her Birth foure Sunnes, and as many Rain-bowes, and the Ayre ouer-againſt theſe Rain-bowes, ſhall ſeeme to bee full of Looking-glaſſes, and in the middle of each Raine-bow ſhall appeare a Peacockes taile, which being reflected from the Looking-glaſſes, ſhall proiect an infinitie of colours in the Ayre.
Aſtronomia, you goe too much, you'l neuer leaue your Walking, and if Copernicus were aliue againe, 'ifaith hee'd make you ſtand ſtill.
Some drinke.
Helpe, Aſtronomia fals.
Marie, Heauens forbid.
I, here's your drinke.
Ah, Aſtrologia, you made no Reckoning of this ſickneſſe, I ſhall ſcarce e're truſt you againe, as long as I know you: Come, let's haue her in, let's haue her in.
NOw my ſweet Deuils, I am euen ſicke with expecting when Medicus will come and viſit me: I feare, his phyſicke cannot worke vpon Poeta: that rogues Verſes, I thinke, are a counter-charme againſt all our coniurations: a rope on his ſixe-footed lowſie Hexameters: ſure, the ſlaues skin is inchanted; the quilting of Aiax ſhield was but a thin Cheu'rill to it.
Why, but doe you thinke 'tis impenetrable?
Oh, farre tougher then a Tanners: I haue heard of a Poet, that hauing beene buried a matter of two or three hundred yeeres, has beene taken vp againe whole, without the leaſt periſhing of his skinne, as faire as any Ʋellome.
Nay, by this Hand, I hold them to be euerlaſting villaines.
And I know by his lookes, if he once ſettle his affection vpon a wench, hee'll purſue her more ſwiftly then euer Apollo did Daphne; for hee'll ouertake her before her Metamorphoſis.
I, and I know the raſcall to haue a ſoft and moiſt Hand, by which I alſo infallibly know hee loues: for take a Poet without his wine & his wench; and if he make not drie, pitifull drie Verſes, Ile forſweare Fortune-telling as long as I liue.
But, I hope, that wench ſhall not be Aſtronomia.
Ne'r feare that: I haue ſeriouſly obſeru'd (taking an oportunitie the other day to looke on her) the whole compoſure of her Face; and firſt for her beautie, I muſt confeſſe it abſolute; for there are the two cauſes of all beautie; a moſt exquiſite Symmetrie, or correſpondent commenſuration of the parts; and an exact mixture of colours, which addes vnto the proportion an incomprehenſible pulchritude: ſince which time, I haue taken a like view of Geographus and Geometres; now for their heights, Geographus is ſomewhat lower then ſhee; but Geometres is of her pitch iuſt; for the lines of proportion in their faces, I muſt confeſſe, I can hardly iudge which is moſt like her, well, I hope yet 'twill be Geometres, or if Geographus doe win her, 'twill be by his comely deportment: 'faith I wiſh him well, but wee muſt worke for them that feele vs in the fiſt.
Well, Rauens, croke here, and whoſoe'r comes by, make a prey of him; in the meane time Ile to Aſtrologia, for I know not what's the reaſon on't, but my Spirits cannot informe me of any thing ſhee does, ſo that I muſt of neceſſitie to Aſtrologia, to know how things proceed: but there's one Galilaus an exquiſite Mathematicean, an Italian: whom I came very lately acquainted with, by admirable lucke; and he has promis'd to helpe me to a glaſſe, by which I ſhall ſee all things as perfectly repreſented in Aſtronomia's houſe, as if I were there: till which time I muſt take the paines to haue it by relation; but to your charge, to your charge; croke Rauens, croke.
HEre comes ſome body, Phyſiognomus; ſet a good Face on't and Affront him; and Ile ſet my Fingers a worke, preſently.
Hold thy Hands there, 'tis Sanguis, hee's of our ſide, ſtay a little.
Well, I ſhrowdly ſuſpect my Maſter for this phyſicke: but mum, I am o're-heard, I feare.
How now, Sanguis? why doeſt thou bluſh ſo?
Doe I bluſh?
I'me ſure thou look'ſt as red as fire; I thinke all the Bloud in thy body is in thy face.
Well, well, all your words will not make me a jot redder then I am: but, if you talke of bluſhing, I thinke you haue more need to bluſh, if you knew the report that goes of you.
Of vs?
I, of you; but eſpecially of Cheiromantes.
Of me? what?
Nothing, but that you are a Cut-purſe.
I defie mine accuſers, and I call honeſtie it ſelfe to witneſſe, that I get my liuing by my fingers ends.
Come, come, leaue theſe proteſtations: a bad cauſe is better defended by ſilence, then argument.
Faith 'tis true; let vs be friends: and ſince thy Maſter Medicus has taught thee to Kill, wee'll teach thee to Steale: but honeſtly, Sanguis, honeſtly.
We three will ſet vpon the next man we meet.
I would 'twere Choler that broke my head t'other day: o' that condition, I'd ſtay; but my Maſter has ſent me to Magus. I muſt begone.
Nay, ſtay a little longer now, Sanguis: who comes yonder? doe you know his Face?
Well, you wo vvill helpe me?
My Hand ſhal be alwaies readie to help my friend.
Choler, I'me Sanguis, and here's my head.
Sanguis, I'm Choler and here's my hand.
How? three againſt one? Hercules himſelfe could not fight with ſuch diſaduantage: there's no ingenuitie in this; Ile take his part for pittie-ſake at auenture, be it right or wrong.
O my noſe, my noſe—
Ile make you too Sanguis crie your Bloodie noſe before I ha' done.
O my hand! my hand! O you rogue, you bow it quite double almoſt.
Why men, beaſts, furies, what doe you meane?
Choler, Choler, draw thy knife, and flit Phyſiognomus his noſe.
Ah you dull rogue, doe you kicke?
Oh, Phlegmatico! thou'rt welcome; but prethee throw away thy pipe; vnleſſe 'twere one could make them dance after it, and ſo coole their furie.
Why, ho!
Orpheus, they ſay, by muſike held beaſts by the eares; let Muſica then hold the beaſtly furies of you, that are now by the eares.
Why, ho!
He has pickt my pocket. Sirrah, Cheiromantes, you rogue, where's my hand-kercher?
Nay, giue him his hand-kercher, I ſaw you take it: there, there is thy hand-kercher, Melancholico: why I thought thou hadſt beene no fighter.
'Faith, ingenuitie made me fight, when I ſaw three vpon one.
Come, come, for ſhame, be friends; you ſhall all be friends before you part.
Nay, I'm angrie with no body: I did but fight, to make them leaue fighting.
Nor we; for the quarrell was not ours.
Nor we; for the quarrell was not ours.
I thought 'twas Choler, and Sanguis, they ſtill are prouoking one another: What haſt thou in thy bottle, Muſica? Nepenthe to reconcile the Gods?
'Faith here's drinke to reconcile theſe furies, if they will?
Come, Muſica, doe you beginne, and wee'll all dance after thy pipe.
You haue ſpoke truer then you thinke, for there is a Piper comming after me, and ſomebody elſe; they'll be here anon: well, here's to you all then.
Phlegmatico, here's to thee.
Sanguis, here's to thee.
Choler, here's to thee.
Cheiromantes, haue at you.
Worke. (Choler drinks) Phyſiognomus, will you taſte this liquor?
Play off: (Cheiromantes drinks) Well then, I am laſt, Ile drinke to you all; Ile leaue ne'r a jot: (Hee drinks) there, Muſica, there's thy bottle.
Sanguis and Choler ſhake hands; are you friends?
With all my heart.
With all my heart.
Cheiromantes, they ſay, you can tell fortunes; is it true?
Trie me.
Let's know all our fortunes then.
Come on, let me ſee your hand, ſweet Muſica: you ſhall be belou'd of two, a Courtier and a Scholer; you ſhall loue the Courtier more; but the Scholer ſhall haue you; and it ſhall ſo come to paſſe, that the Courtier ſhall afterward be your ſeruant: your husband ſhall be exceeding melancholy: you ſhall haue three ſonnes; the firſt ſhall be call'd by his fathers name (but I know not what that ſhall be) and hee ſhall be extreme diſcontent and ſolitarie; and if he preuent a conſumption, he may liue till fortie; for longer he cannot, being of a cold and drie conſtitution: the ſecond ſhall be called Timido, and hee'll be indanger of being bit with a mad dogge; which if he ſcape, he may liue till fiftie: the third ſhall be called Iucundo; the other two tooke after their father; but hee'll take after his mother; hee will be exceedingly giuen to good cheere, muſike, and women: he will be in danger of a Surfet; and of Fire; and if he ſcape theſe two, eſpecially burning, he may liue to be an old man.
Tell me mine next.
You, Phlegmatico; 'twill be long ere you can get you a wife; yet you'll haue one, and one daughter; the child will die very young, of the blacke Iaundice, and your wife of the dropſie.
Sirrah, I ſaw you ſteale before, and now I heare you lie, you rogue.
Tell me mine next.
Ile tell you yours in your eare.
Thanks, deare Cheiromantes.
Nay, and fortunes be ſo good that are told in ones eare; Ile haue mine told in my care too.
Thus 'tis then.
Piſh, this is no ſuch fine fortune.
Tell me mine openly.
Why, this 'tis: You, Choler, ſhall be ſomewhat happy in your wife: her name ſhall be Poenitentia; you ſhall haue two children; and one ſhall take only after you, his name ſhall be Furioſo. He ſhal die in his young age, in an Ale-houſe, of a ſtab in at the mouth, which ſhal paſſe thorow his tongue, and braines. The other child ſhall be a daughter; ſhee ſhall take after her mother; her name ſhall be Lacryma, a modeſt ſober girle, and one that ſhall be well beloued by wiſe men.
Well, this is a prettie mixt fortune; now, what's thine owne fortune and thy fellowes?
Oh, ſtarke naught, ſtarke naught; Ile conceale them.
Then fare you well; I can ſtay no longer.
'Faith you ſhan't goe yet; what haue you in your packe?
What's that to you?
Prethec, Muſica, tell mee, what thou haſt in thy packe?
Why, becauſe you ſpeake kindly now, and intreat me, Ile ſhew you.
Hay, braue! what's here?
Morrice-bels?
And waſte-coates, and napkins?
Why, how cam'ſt thou by them?
Why, thus: my Miſtris had beene ill a good while, and becauſe I tended her very carefully; ſhee gaue mee leaue to recreate my ſelfe to day; and i'faith I light on merry companie, where they vs'd theſe jinglers: and when they had done, they pray'd mee to carrie them home with this bottle of drinke.
Faith, and there were enow, wee'd dance.
Enow? now I thinke on't, there's iuſt enow, there's ſixe paire.
Faith wee'll to it then, but what wouldſt thou doe, Muſica?
Why, Ile play the maid Marian.
A match, a match: dreſſe, dreſſe, wee'll haue braue jingling.
I can't dance.
Nay, prethee be not ſullen, good Melancholico.
If I doe, Ile weare no bels.
Why then lay one paire aſide.
But I woun't dance now.
Why, Melancholico?
I woun't dance, vnleſſe I haue one of the wrought waſte-coates.
Why, now they haue put them on.
I care not, I woun't dance elſe.
Come prethee, Cheiromantes, ſlip off thine againe and change with him; Melancholico muſt haue his ſullen humours. So, now vve want nothing but the Tabor wee talk't of: but 'tis no matter, ſince he does not come, wee'll ſing, and ſo make muſike to our ſelues. Who can tune the Morrice beſt?
Oh, here they are both, here they are both.
O my arme, my arme!
O my ſhinne!
Ah, murren on him; who the deuill's this?
I haue hurt my breſt.
O the ſide of my face!
A rope on you, muſt you throw me quite downe?
Prethee dance the morrice quietly with vs: vp, vp, ho, and wee'll dance.
A murren goe with you—Muſica, who play'd in the hobby-horſe?
No, I muſt not tell.
Come then, wee'l goe now to Barly-breake.
I but there's one odde: what ſhall he doe? ſit out euery time?
Yes faith, and giue a reaſon of the other three couples meeting.
Agreed: runne.
A murren on't, muſt I be the firſt man muſt ſit out? nothing angers me but that.
Nay Choler, thou't fret and chafe now —
Come Choler, your reaſons.
Why, thou and Muſica are met together—becauſe—Sanguine folkes are moſt fit for Muſicke and ſports. Phyſiognomus and Chieromantes met, becauſe they fear'd wee would haue ſuſpected they would haue pickt our pockets, if they had ioynd with any of vs—
We thanke you Choler, wee ſhall be euen with you, and't come to our turne.
Melancholico, and Phlegmatico ioyn'd; becauſe one's too dry; and the other's too moiſt: and ſo they'l ſerue for Medicines one for another: come runne againe: Ile be ſure to catch ſome bodie this time.
I can tell you Choler, you had almoſt mis't this ſame time too. Well, to my taske, ſince 'tis my lucke. Sanguis and Melancholico met, becauſe one's cold and dry, and the other's hot, and ſufficiently moiſt: Choler and Phlegmatico (haue at you Choler) are like a flap-dragon, or a piece of bread ſopt in Aqua-vitae, and then ſet a-fire—
Thanke you Phyſiognomus.
And Muſica met with Cheiromantes, becauſe the hand in this ſence, in reſpect of Muſicke, may moſt iuſtly bee call'd the Inſtrument of inſtruments: and therefore moſt fitly to be coupled with it.
I'faith Cheiromantes you are beholding to him, he has grac'd you.
Come, runne againe.
What? is't my courſe?
Hay! Melancholico will giue gallant reaſons.
I, hee'l be exceeding witty, I warrant you.
Nay, I beleeue hee'l giue incomparable reaſons.
Come on Melancholico.
Let's heare the firſt.
He lookes as if he would giue profound ones.
What? doe you meane to abuſe me? Ile giue none. Ile play no more.
That's a poore put-off i'faith; either play on, or elſe Ile call thee Block-head as long as I know thee.
Doe, doe.
Block-head, block-head.
Come, you ſawcy Aſſe, becauſe you are ſo hot, Ile take you downe: Ile propoſe a riddle.
Let it be a good one, and it ſhall bee for all the reaſons thou ſhouldſt haue giuen.
Yes faith, and't be a good one.
Well, take it as it is: Riddle me, riddle me, what's this? It is not, and yet we ſee it: 'tis like a picture, and yet 'tis no picture: and it was drawne by a blinde Painter.
This is impoſſible.
Nay Choler, you are too raſh in your iudgement— It is not, and yet we ſee it, — why, it may be you meane honeſty, which peraduenture you thinke is no-where truely: but ſeemes to be ſome-where.
No, no, your coniecture halts.
It is not, and yet we ſee it? — If it had beene, It is not, and yet wee heare it, I could haue giuen a reaſonable coniecture.
As how? I prethee.
Why, I could haue thought it to be Fame.
Indeed that had beene reaſonable: but you ſee it is not ſo propos'd; neither could that hold with the parts that follow: well, to the next.
'Tis like a picture, and yet no picture? Ile giue a very ſtrong coniecture at that.
Let's heare it.
Why, it may be a Gentlewomans face painted.
That coniecture is plauſible, but 'twill not hold with the reſt. To the laſt.
And it was drawne by a blinde Painter.
That's altogether impoſſible.
You're too quicke againe, Choler. I can conceiue how that may be.
How?
How? Why the Painter might loſe his ſight after he had drawne the picture, And ſo be a blinde Painter.
Pretty, pretty, pretty.
But you are out, Sir.
Well, what was't now?
Nay, ſince you are ſo hot, you ſhan't know.
Nay, prethee what is't.
No, I woun't tell it.
Nay what ſullenneſſe is this? Prethee tell. What is it?
I woun't.
A poxe on't, I long to know. Prethee what is't Melancholico?
Come, what is't, Melancholico?
Nay, I'me a block-head, I'me a block-head, Choler, 'pray what is't? your delicate wit, I doubt not can eaſily tell.
A rope of all ſullen noddies: hee ſees euery one greedy to know, and therefore out of a doggedneſſe conceales it.
A rope, if hee had neuer propos'd it, it would neuer haue anger'd me. Will you tell, Melancholico?
Alas, I'me a block-head.
Well, wee'l waite his leaſure.
I ſhall not ſleepe for thinking on't, if he does not tell me.
I ſhall dreame on't all night.
Good Melancholico, what is't?
Alas, I'me a block-head.
Piſh, why then Good block-head, what is't?
Nay, you wonn't tell who danc'd in the Hobby-horſe, you.
I' ſaith I will, if you'l tell this firſt, and ſweare you will not be angry with him, for throwing you downe.
Nay, Ile know that firſt, and without all conditions.
Doe prthee doe.
Ile tell you in your eare, Melancholico.
Nay, he haue it told openly, it concernes euery one as much as me.
Why then if you would know, 'twas Phantaſtes; that had bin at the ſame merry-making with me.
Phantaſtes! Indeed I haue heard hee's the onely fellow in the Countrey to dance in an Hobby-horſe: but hee might haue vs'd his friends the humours better.
But you'l forgiue him I hope now.
For thy ſake we will.
Well. Now Melancholico, what is't?
I but Muſica, you ſhall kiſſe me firſt.
Come on then.
Kiſſe me againe.
Why and againe.
And againe.
And againe.
Now you ſhall all recant the word Block-head, and ſay Melancholico is no block-head: ſay ſo.
Melancholico is No block-head.
So Muſica, kiſſe me once more, and then Ile tell.
Why thus I doe, ſweet Melancholico, that art no block-head.
Well ſaid, you little rogue. Why now I'l tell you, It is the Raine-bow deſcrib'd by Homer; but you ſhall haue it by parts: It is not, and yet we ſee it, — the colours in the Raine bow are not true and very colours, but onely ſeeme ſo to be; as I haue heard Phyſica often ſay. It is like a picture, and yet is no picture, —that's manifeſt. And it was drawne by a blinde Painter, — Homer was blinde and a Poet, now a Poet as I haue heard my Maſter ſay, may fitly bee call'd a Painter; as painting may be call'd Poēſie in picture.
The illation is ſuperfluous to apprehenſiue eares.
Ile remember this i'faith; where are my Bels, and Waſt-coates, and Napkins? Well, now fare you well all.
Farewell, Muſica.
Farewell, Gallants; my buſineſſe lyes this way too.
Who goes this way?
That doe I.
Come on then; farewell, Lads.
Fare you well: I'm glad they are all gone, I haue got ſome what.
What is't?
The paire of Bels which Melancholico would not weare.
I proteſt, I neuer perceiu'd, when thou did'ſt nimbe them.
Nor I.
Nay, I'ue the ſlight of the hand exactly; if I ſteale not ſome what where ere wee come, let me be hang'd: come, Boyes, wee'll haue ſome liquor for theſe Iinglers: i'faith, Sanguis, we muſt take a Cup or two before you goe to Magus.
I care not now for drinking.
Fie, fie, forſake thy liquor? 'twil breed good bloud: Sanguis, 'twill breed good bloud: Come along Boyes.
I Doe finde my ſelfe at this preſent affected with that which ſhould not touch a good Magiſtrate, an vnwillingneſſe to doe Iuſtice: yet I profeſſe it proceeds not from a deſire to bee iniurious, but mercifull; not for an ill-will to either, but a loue to both. Whileſt heretofore, I vnderſtood of this diſſention, as I was ſomewhat caſt downe with ſorrow, ſo I was raiſed with an hope of happie reconcilement, but now that hope alſo which before was the cauſe of an vncertaine ioy, is become the ground of my moſt certaine griefe; and the rather to ſee the ſtate of our moſt bleſſed Commonwealth (which the gods haue decreed ſhall be eternall, if our ſelues hinder not) to be thus torne with our ciuill Diſcords. You are not ignorant of the miraculous meanes which the gods haue vs'd in rayſing vs to this greatneſſe: not by riches, but pouertie; not by plentie, but want; that what to others has beene the occaſion of diſgrace, has to vs beene the meanes of our preſent honour: It is the obſeruation of the Grecians, Tacitus, and trueſt Oracle of Greece, Thucidides, that the Athenians Common-wealth was not rays'd to that glorie (like the reſt of Greece) by the fruitfulneſſe but barrenneſſe of the ſoyle: for which cauſe whileſt the Inhabitants liu'd ſecure from the inuaſion of Borderers, others growing rich, were at laſt conſum'd by their owne diſſentions: ſo that for the auoyding of publike diſturbance, when any were afflicted, they retyred to the Athenians, with what they had left, before all were loſt; who as they did partake of the Athenians ſecuritie, ſo mutually offer'd to the Athenians the participation of their wealth: the like I may ſay of our preſent eſtate; we haue not ſought vnto others; yet who haue not ſought to vs? we had nothing, yet what want we, vnleſſe it be a moderation of our felicitie? All other Mechanicke faculties, of whatſoeuer Corporations, haue they not forſooke themſelues to retyre to vs? and yeelded vp their eſtates, which they thought vnhappie, to receiue them as an happineſſe from our bountie? I ſpeake not theſe things vnto you as an inſtructer, but a remembrancer: Not to impoſe on you a new beliefe beyond your experience, but to imprint in your mindes a iuſt conſideration of your dangerous contention. I haue yet but begunne to ſpeake; but ſorrow is a bad Oratour, and I muſt continue my ſpeech with a ſilent Rhetorike.
Preſſe the abuſe throughly, as I inſtructed you.
I warrant you Sir.
How now, Sir! What doe you whiſpering with my Lawyer?
With yours? I'd laugh at that, i'faith.
With mine? I, mine, I'm ſure I gaue him a fee.
But I'm ſure I gaue him a couple.
How now! what new contention's this?
And't pleaſe you, he abuſes me before your face; hee bribes my Lawyer.
Yours! hee's mine.
Thine? he's none of thine. He's mine.
He can be Aduocate but for one: aske him whoſe he is.
Cauſidicus, are not you my Lawyer?
Yes.
How! thou Varlet! why? art thou not mine?
— Yes.
What new face of impudent villanie is this, which does appeare vnto vs? O thou Monſter of a double tongue and heart.
Pardon, honour'd Polites.
Varlet, thou prophaner of Iuſtice! pardon?
Honour'd Polites—
Varlet, abuſe not mine honeſt name with that mouth: with what face canſt thou aske for mercy, vnleſſe thou had'ſt another face too? with what tongue wilt thou begge for mercie, vnleſſe thou haſt a third! with what heart wilt thou manifeſt a truth of ſorrow, vnleſſe thou haſt a third alſo? doe not ſpeake, kneele, mutter; one Lawyer come to plead two cauſes? O new confidence! ſtand aſide, thy abſence peraduenture might ſooner cauſe vs to forget thy crime: then thy preſence, though with moſt fawning diſſimulation, to pardon it: Logicus, you are the accuſer; propoſe your owne cauſe; then ſhall Poeta anſwere for himſelfe; and laſtly, Grammaticus your witneſſe, ſhall alleage what he knowes. Beginne, Logicus.
And't pleaſe you, Grammaticus was ſoundly beaten by this fellow Poeta, and, I forſooth, by his man a clogge-headed Rogue; but that riming Raſcall ſet him on.
Fie, Logicus, fie, fie; how ſhamefully you wrong your ſelfe, by theſe vnſeemely tearmes? beſides, the Gentlemans worth is well knowne.
He's a Raſcall to Me I'am ſure.
Fie, Logicus, fie; you ſee I giue you ne'r a foule word, and that the goodneſſe of my Cauſe, moues eu'n the Iudge in my defence.
And't pleaſe you Polites, euery one counts him but a diſſolute Raſcall, and ſo hee has in all times beene held but for my facultie, what age euer flouriſht in which that flouriſht not?
Nay, Logicus, you haue little reaſon to ſay ſo, I can tel you: for if we take a view of the moſt illuſtrious Age, that euer the world inioy'd, which I thinke to be the time of the twelue Romane Caeſars; wherein Armes and Learning were at their height, you may obſerue Poetrie to haue beene moſt famous, embraced by Emperours, admired by all who laboured to haue their names amongſt the Learned. But for Logicians, alas, (I muſt ſpeake the truth) as their names were vnknowne, ſo were their endeuours buried in obſcuritie: Indeede thoſe times were thriftie, and actiue: but theſe, out of a wanton ſoftneſſe of a daintie ſloth, doe onely ſpinne out theſe Spider-webs of curioſitie; and it hath beene often my meditation, to haue an amputation of ſuch Excreſcencies, and to cauſe that our youth which is to bee inſtructed for future vſe, ſhould not conſume the ſtrength of their wits, in an iniurious labour of fruitleſſe vanities. I doe not denie a iuſt knowledge of your facultie, to be moſt neceſſarie, and our ſelues thereinto haue an aduantage of former times: but yet, alas! how many thouſand famous Oratours haue there beene without Logicke? how many eternall Poets without Logicke? whoſe diuine eloquence could ſpeake beyond all Logicke; without all Logicke.
Reuerend Polites, neceſſitie has impos'd a bad meſſage vpon me, though vnfit: Aſtronomia is in a trance, and onely the Heauens know whether or no ſhe will againe recouer. (I knew it boded no good lucke, that all my Luteſtrings crack't laſt night of their owne accord.)
All the gods forbid; ah deare Aſtronomia, griefe vpon griefe ſtill: Indeed Muſica, thou waſt an vnfit Meſſenger for ſuch ſad newes: for this contention, it muſt reſt vndecided till another occaſion. Cauſidicus, I warne you to bee in a readineſſe to appeare, when you are ſent for.
Pardon, good Polites, honour'd Polites, good Polites, pardon.
Grammaticus what thinkeſt thou of this departure? is it not prettie?
By my faith, I could make a bad Conſtruction of it: this may bee but a tricke; well, Poeta, I perceiue you haue ſome Inuention.
You abuſe the integritie of our Honorable Iudge.
Thou talke of integritie? goe, goe, thou art a crackt Pitcher, a broken Piſſe-pot, Polites talkes againſt Logicians; when as your Logicians are the onely Schollers in the world: but the beſt is he does but talke againſt them.
The onely Schollers? the onely Dunces.
Sirrah, Dunces?
Yes Logger-head, Dunces: doeſt thou murmure? thou know'ſt not the Letters of thy Alphabet yet.
How you Slaue?
Nay, neuer make a Vizard of thy ſcuruie face: I ſay thou know'ſt not the Letters of thy Alphabet: haue not I heard thee ſay? Omne A. eſt B. Omne Bſt C. Ergo Omne A. eſt C. and indeede I thinke there is a like reaſon, for A. may as well bee C. as B. but fare you well Blockhead, fare you well.
And my Choler were here, hee'd haue him by the eares: come let's begonne, here's nothing to be done: are theſe your Law-caſes? a murren on them, they are Datiue caſes to the Lawyers; but Ablatiue to the Clients.
Come, come; I'm ſure our caſe is in a fine Predicament: I thinke we haue beene put off long enough: i'ſaith all Law-caſes ſhall hereafter be no more put in the Predicament of Action; but of Quando, of Quando; a plague of theſe Lawyers.
WHy ſo; this is good: I haue brought my ſelfe into a fine caſe: I muſt be a Poyſoner, I: and to get my Liuing muſt loſe my Life; bleſſing on my wiſe pate in the meane while. And to obſerue the wittie reuenge of the gods; that this intended Murther ſhould come forth by mine owne man Sanguis, from whom in Policie I conceal'd it: well, I perceiue Bloud is Open-mouth'd and will tell all: but ſince it is not much knowne, and that I am not as yet accuſed to Polites, and now requeſted to helpe Astronomia, Ile take the happie occaſion, and vſe my beſt art to cure her, and ſo if ſhee ſcape, I may peraduenture ſcape too; obtayning pardon for my recompence— let me ſee—by this water I doe finde the ſtate of her bodie much alter'd, and her diſeaſe chang'd. There was an Aſtronomia that I once had in cure before now, and ſhe was of the very ſame conſtitution, had the like diſeaſe, and the like turning in her head; now ſhe dyed, and afterward we made a diſſection in her head, to ſee what was the diſaffection of her braine, which when we had done, we found all her braines turn'd to a matter much like cleere Ielly, or a Cryſtalline Orbe: but I hope all ſuch ſuſpicions of this Astronomia are Fables—but ſtay—what's the relliſh of her vrine? (hee taſtes it)—Pah, naught, naught: oh, who would be a Phyſician to taſte theſe things? 'tis worſe then to be a Salt-peeterman, and digge in a Priuie-houſe—but what ſmell has it? (he ſmels to it.) Foh, worſe, worſe, I cānot endure it, [he throwes away the Vrinall, and breakes it.] Aſtronomia's of a faire complexion her ſelfe, I wonder that her Vrine ſhould be ſo darke; 'tis of the colour of a Cloud. Well, I ſee ſhee's verie corrupt within, and I feare 'tis this Aſtrologia has powder'd her; to giue her a Potion at the mouth will not doe much good; for 'twill be ſo long in deſcending, that the power of it will bee much debilitated; I conclude then, it muſt bee a Clyſter, a Clyſter; and ſo Ile in, to adminiſter it: well, if I ſcape this Scowring cleanly; Ile neuer come in the like Pickle againe, whil'ſt I breathe.
YOu ſee, I haue in part deſcrib'd the worthy parts of Geographus; and doubtleſſe 'tis pitty any cowardly youngman ſhould ſpend the ſtrength of his beſt age in the murmurings of diſcontent. I can ſay no more, and you may—
Nay, I muſt needs approue of ſuch commendable parts in him; but I haue euer thought your Trauailers like vnto Meteors which wander in the Aire, and their loue in particular like the ſhooting ſtarre, which onely laſts till the fire is ſpent, and then fals downe againe with a ſwift precipitation: but I'm ſure my Aſtronomia is of a more Fixt deſire.
I, but I'm perſwaded he will be ſo regular, hee will neuer goe beyond the preſcribed bounds of her will; come, you ſhall ſee, ſhee will ſo encompaſſe him, that he ſhall neuer get out.
Hee muſt, and ſhall then turne away his man Phantaſtes, that has incited him to entertayne all his vncertayne courſes.
Will you be willing, on that condition, to yeeld your conſent, that he ſhall haue her?
I will.
Well then, Ile haſten a ſpeedie celebration of this marriage: for Ile make him diſcard his Phantaſtes immediately; 'twas ſomewhat tolerable to entertayne ſuch a giddie Counſellour, whileſt be was vnmarried; but hereafter aſſure your ſelfe he will be more ſtay'd: and conſider, Phyſica, that though he haue been a Trauailer, yet hee is now come home, and I hope not only to his Countrie, but to himſelfe.
Well, your wiſhes and my counſels will worke vpon him, I truſt; and Ile be ſure, he ſhall neuer ſtirre abroad, but Aſtronomia ſtill ſhall haue an eye to him.
Come then, let's in.
FAireſt Rhetorica, will the pride of your beautie ſtill tyrannize? will it be ſtill in the Imperatiue Mood? and ſhall my languiſhing deſire be alwaies in the vnhappy Optatiue? let me goe a little further, and come at laſt to the Potentiall.
Yes, faith, you ſhall goe further if you will, to the Infinitiue: I am not in the Mood to be wooed now.
Ah, deareſt Rhetorica, I cannot chooſe.
Omnia vincit Amor, & nos cedamus Amori.
I wonder at this, Grammaticus: that you hauing brought Loue vnder a Rule, cannot notwithſtanding rule it.
Hei mihi quod nullie Amor eſt medicabilis herbis.
But why ſhould you torture yourſelfe ſo with loue?
Torture? O but 'tis a ſweet, a ſweet torture.
—In Genitiuo
Id tibi dulcedo faciens dulcedinis, illud
Demonſtrat que propago, propaginis: adijce virgo
-we learne this in the very Schoole.
I thinke they are happy that neuer marry.
Oh, 'tis the right of nature: Funus iuſta petit, petit & ſponſalia virgo.
If then women deſire ſo much to marry, why is Amor of the Maſculine gender?
Becauſe women are not ſo much loue it ſelfe, as the cauſe of loue in men.
I, but me thinks, they ſhould be afraid of Actaeons fortune.
Indeed—Eſt cornus cura ſiniſtra: but that's not alwayes: 'tis but a Redundans, and therefore wee put it among the Heteroclites.
Well, Sir, my neceſſarie departure muſt cut off the End of your diſcourſe by an Apocope.
I, but 'tis a Protheſis to my diſcontent: O, ſee the ſcorne of loue: ſhee flies away.—Nec vult Panthera demari—well if I were rich enough, I durſt lay the loſſe of her, I'd gaine her: but 'tis mony muſt goe firſt; and therefore, now I thinke on't, it runnes ſo in the rule.—Diuitiae que Nuptiae item—for riches muſt be the Vſher,—Oh! but who would fall in loue? before, I had a little Vnderſtanding; then I fell mad in Loue, and now I doe nothing but waſte my ſelfe with a fruitleſſe Sloth; why this 'tis—Intelligo, diligo, Negligo tantum—and yet I can ſcarce hope, & yet I muſt loue. Naturam expellas furcâ licet, vſ que recurret.
MY great gods protect mee; but the laſt night was a-dreadfull night vnto me.
Why? had you any terrible dreames?
Worſe, worſe: my ſpirit Glaſſialabolas appear'd vnto me, and being skilful in the knowledge of future things, moſt louingly has foretold mee of great danger comming towards me; and hee ſaid it would happen when I did leaſt ſuſpect it, and amongſt my acquaintance too; hee appeared in his wonted ſhape like a Dogge with the wings of a Griffin, but he lookt moſt horridly, moſt horridly: and mee thought when hee vvent out, there followed him foure, iuſt like to vs foure for all the world.
Like to vs foure? alas!
Iuſt like to vs foure; and they cryed exceedingly as they went: and I ventured to call him backe againe, but he vvould not come.
I vvonder I vvakt not; why did you not tell me of it before?
I proteſt I was in a doubt whether I ſhould tel thee at all or no, it was ſo terrible.
Why you're of my mind iuſt: for I had an vntoward dreame, and was verily reſolu'd not to tell you, but now I will: mee thought I and Aſtronomia fell out exceedingly about Geographus, becauſe ſhee kiſt him, and mee thought ſhee-forbade forbade me her houſe, and that her mother Phyſica did ſoreioyce at it, which anger'd mee moſt of all. Indeed I doe not like the effect which I ſee the heauens likely to produce ere long, againſt ſome-body, but I hope 'twill not be to vs.
In good faith, I had the prettieſt dreame that e're you heard, mee thought as I was about to picke a fellowes pocket, hee ſtrooke mee quite thorow the hand with a knife, and leauing the knife in my hand, thruſt his hand into my pocket and pickt it, and ſo puniſht me, as I haue puniſht others many a time.
Troth, and as I was going to bed laſt night, there ſtood in the chamber window a looking-glaſſe; and as I came by, chance to lay my hand downe there, the candle not ſtanding farre off, I ſaw my face in the glaſſe, but in good faith me thought I lookt ſo wanly and ſo ſcuruily—and indeed I haue heard them often ſay, 'tis ill lucke to ſee ones face in a glaſſe by candle-light.
Well, let then all our ill lucke come together, if it will: indeed Aſtronomia's perfectly recouer'd, and I ſaw but now Geographus and her with Polites; which can bode no good: and afterwards I met with Geometres, and he paſſed by, without ſaluting me, but lookt ſullenly towards me: I know not what's the matter; but I feare me, hee has ſcarce learn'd the Rule of friendſhip, to keepe ſecrets. Well; come what will, we will not accuſe our ſelues by a fooliſh retiredneſſe or feare; and if we ſhould chance to be conuented, wee muſt be very obedient, and that will argue an innocency: and let them proue what they can, it may be they can proue nothing, and then we are free; if they proue the worſt they can, and condemne vs to death, we'll patiently heare our ſentence of condemnation; but when they are about to carry vs to priſon, then you ſhall ſee my art: See, here are foure rings, there's each of you one, and here's a fourth for my ſelfe: put them in your pockets, and when your condemnation is pronounc'd, and they thinke to carry vs away, priuily ſlip thoſe rings on your little-fingers, and then crie aloud Glaſſialabolas three times, and we ſhall all foure immediately become inuiſible.
Hay braue! we ſtand aboue fate, and the heauens.
Come, now let's goe ſecurely.
Long may great Magus liue: long may great Magus liue.
I Proteſt, Phantaſtes, I'm ſorry for thee; but thou know'ſt I haue a man alreadie, and one that loues mee very well, Melancholico.
Yet, deareſt Poeta, if you will vouchſafe another alſo intertaynment, Phantaſtes ſhall be readie at your command.
How farre haſt thou trauail'd with Geographus?
Too farre, Sir, to be caſt off now: why, about the world, Sir; or to ſpeake the truth, I haue gone further then he.
Say'ſt thou ſo?
Yes, Ile aſſure you, Sir: and I can acquaint you, Sir, if you pleaſe, with one particular attempt of mine, whereby I out-ventur'd him.
What's that?
Why, Sir, in our North-voyage being come to the vtmoſt part in all Finmarchia, to the North-cape (the Longitude thereof is well-nigh fiftie degrees, and the Latitude almoſt 73.) being then paſt the Articke-circle about ſixe degrees, and ſo by conſequent being in a paralell Spheare, Geographus durſt not venture any further; and there was, Sir, at that time in our company, a great Magician (I haue forgot of what Vniuerſitie) which Magician and I, leauing Geographus vpon the Land, vnder-tooke (being ſo neere) to diſcouer the parts directly vnder the Pole.
But what was your deuice againſt the cold?
Why, Sir, beſides excellent furres we had, we had alſo hot waters to preſerue our heate within: but at laſt wee were come ſo farre, that wee were faine to come out of our ſhip vpon the ice, and then the Magician being alſo an exquiſite Geometrician, got the ſhip vpon the Ice, and then made wheeles for it, and an artificiall Engine to make it goe of it ſelfe; you may ſee proportionally the like deuice in your Puppets that will goe and turne of themſelues. The ice then being ſmooth, the ſhip went forward of its owne accord, till wee found our ſelues to haue paſt the Articke circle twenty three degrees full. Then were we halfe a degree iuſt from the Pole: there we met with a moſt furious ſea, that ſcornes to yeeld to the vſurping cold; when the Geometrician takes me off the wheeles, and forth we lanched, and ſo ſail'd till wee came to haue the Pole it ſelfe for our Zenith; and then we beheld a dreadfull rocke.
How did yee then?
Why thus, Sir: when the Magician ſaw this, he immediately drawes a booke out of his Pocket, and falles to reading; when ſtraight-way all the ſea about vs was as calme as a freſh water riuer amongſt vs: and the ſhip went no faſter then we would haue it our ſelues; and ſo without any danger we came to the rocke; vnto which making a ſhift to faſten our ſhippe, we aſcended: it ſeem'd as blacke as any Pitch: vpon the top of which (for we went to the top) there aſcended an huge Piller: which on the lower parts ſeem'd as blacke as the rocke; but ſtill in the Aſcent it grew whiter, and whiter; and indeed the whole piller ſeem'd to vs very Ice, but that it was at the lower part blacker, and it was as bigge as ordinarily any tower among vs; and at the bottome of it there was a paſſage to go in. We went in, and being entred, there were two paire of ſtaires, the one deſcending, the other aſcending: for we found the piller to be hollow, and our ſight could not diſcouer without-ſide how high it was: wee went downe wards ſome dozen or twenty ſtaires, where wee heard a moſt hideous noiſe, that our hearts failing vs we came vp againe.
And what did you come away then?
No, Sir, we then went vpwards, and in our aſcent we ſtill found open places to giue vs light and Aire; as bigge commonly as a doore; and we aſcended ſo far, that at laſt the Sunne ſhin'd vpon vs, as it does here, & then it grieu'd vs to thinke we were to go backe ſuch an vncouth way againe; wel, we went ſtill higher, & at laſt looking out at theſe doores, and ſeeing that part of the world that lay towards vs, (being a fine Sun-ſhine day,) we ſaw a very terrible battell, fought betweene the Turke and the Perſian, wherein the Turke was put to the worſt: but now the Magician growing weary, and deſirous to knowe how farre this Piller aſcended, he held by the ſide of the doore, and lookt vpwardes, but with the feare ſuddainely fell downe: and there was the vnhappy end of my companion. This piller doubtles we coniectur'd to be the Pole, and the way to heauen; and the ſtaires that deſcended, the way to hell, and to the other Pole. With this accident I being halfe affrighted, with a trembling at the wonders of the gods, humbly deſcended.
Alas! what did you doe in that caſe being alone?
Why, Sir, when I was come downe, the ſea was ſtill calme; and ſo I vnfaſtening the ſhip, ſaild the Ice, and according to the inſtruction I had learn'd of the Magician, I got it ouer the Ice; & without any danger return'd to Geographus.
Mee thinkes you ſhould haue had but Cold Comfort to be in that place alone.
I proteſt vnto you, Sir, ſimple as I ſtand here now, I did it then. Now, Sir, whereſoeuer Geographus comes, he equally bragges of this attempt as his alſo; but I vow by my former dangers and preſent griefes, the diſcouerie was made onely by Magus, and Phantaſtes; and the relation by Phantaſtes onely.
And is this the reward which Geographus hauing now gotten enough giues vnto you? eſpecially you hauing ſau'd his credit hitherto in not diſcouering alſo his lying arrogancie? 'tis inhumane ingratitude.
Ethicus (to Phantaſtes) How now weather-cocke? what winde blew you this way? (to Poeta) Why, wiſe man, haue you neuer a fitter Companion then this trauailing gallant? [to Phantaſtes] Pray be ſo mannerly as to trauaile a little aſide; I muſt ſpeake with Poeta.
Alas ſir, I'le not diſturbe you; when a man's once downe, I perceiue he ſhall be trod vpon.
Hovv novv? vvhat vvould this fellovv haue vvith you?
A ſeruice.
Yes faith, you ſhould entertaine euery mans caſtoff. Come, are you ready vvith your Maske you promis'd Polites at the Celebration of Aſtronomia's marriage? all the chiefe of the Common-vvealth vvill bee there.
Yes I wil attend vpon their ioy and mine owne griefe: I haue made a maske aforehand; for I foreſavv long agoe Geographus ſhould haue her; I haue kept my promiſe; but 'tis but ſhort, as my diſcontent vvould giue me leaue: and the boyes that are to acte it, haue learned it at once reading ouer, and Melancholico has dreſt them by this time I thinke.
Come, let's in: I hope ere long to come to your wedding and Hiſtoria's.
Mine? alas! I'le reſolue now to liue and die a maide: Hiſtoria ſhall regiſter me vp among her examples of virginitie.
I, and thy verſe make her immortall: come, let's goe, but thou mak'ſt me laugh, a Poet die a maide? I neuer knew any of the brood yet, ſo chaſte.
NAy Cauſidicus, your ſtate cannot be worſe then mine; for I'm in a terrible quandarie, more ſhaking then an Ague: 't had bin better I had taken the poyſon my ſelfe, for ſo I might haue tooke a Vomit, and peraduenture got it vp againe; but I ſhall neuer be able to Purge my ſelfe of this infamy.
'Faith Medicus, and I thinke no mans caſe can be likely worſe then mine owne: for it had bene better for mee if I had pleaded ne'r a cauſe, rather then two. Well, I feare by this double fee, I ſhall purchaſe the fee-ſimple of a knaue, as long as I liue.
Indeed I doe not well ſee how you will be euer able to plead againe now your tongue's clouen; and yet I remember there was a famous Lawyer, that riding to plead two or three cauſes (iuſt as you would haue done now) vnhappily fell off his horſe, and falling on his chinne, his tongue by chance doubling in his mouth, he bit it quite thorow, and yet by good lucke I cur'd him.
Nay, for my tongue, that will doe well enough: but 'tis my eares that I feare: I would I had but a Leaſe of mine owne life for them.
'Faith, witty great crimes are like a conſumption, they are eaſily to be cur'd when they begin, but hardly diſcouer'd; and eaſily diſcouered when they are ripe, but hardly cur'd: and therefore I feare we ſhall be both cut off as deſperate Members.
Well, yet let's keepe poſſeſſion of our ſtates as long as we can; and that muſt be by this meanes. If we be call'd to our accounts, not preſently to confeſſe, for the verieſt thief will at the firſt plead, Not Guiltie: and yet wee will not too-ſtiffely ſtand in our innocency, that ſo there may be a way left for our pardon.
Well, let's haſten in to the celebration of the marriage; for wee're expected before this time; my heart's almoſt at my mouth with feare, and Dances, me thinks, as if it were at the wedding alreadie.
This Polites is a ſubtill fellow, and he'l take vs when we little thinke on't; but wee'll goe voluntarily, and ſo hee ſhall not need to ſend out a Capias ad respondendum, for vs.
Well, I thinke when all comes to all, our beſt meanes to waſh away theſe faults, will be our Diſtillation of teares.
ALl happineſſe attend the Nuptials.
All happineſſe attend the Nuptials.
Phyſica, you now behold the bleſt vnion of your deareſt child.
And with ioy, thanks to the gods and moſt honor'd Polites.
How now, ſirrah? what doe you here? you ſerue no body here, get you our againe.
I woun't, Sir: they ſay here's a maske to be ſeene.
Woun't you, Sir? Ile trie that.
What's the matter there?
Why, and't pleaſe you, Sir, Phantaſtes is ſhifted in here to ſee a maske, which he ſayes, he heard ſhould be here, but he is deceiu'd, and I'd haue him out againe.
Come, let him alone, let him alone, this once; hee'll ſooner ſhift to ſee ſuch a toy then a better thing: but wiſemens marriages now-adayes can be thriftily celebrated without Fiddlers.
Sirrah, now I will ſtand here in ſpight of your teeth.
You may thanke Polites, or elſe i'faith I'd ha' trounc'd you.
Silence: Since the gods haue afforded vs the happineſſe of ſo frequent an Aſſembly, I thinke it the next happineſſe to vſe a preuenient diſcretion, vpon this offred occaſion, for the reformation of ſome dangerous abuſes, which moſt ſtealingly haue crept into the common-wealth: and therefore are the more dangerous, by how much they are the more ſecret. Magus and Aſtrologia, depart the Bench.
Wee?
Wee?
Obey, or iuſtice ſhall be violent to inforce you. Choler, are the two rogues, Phyſiognomus, and Cheiromantes apprehended, as I gaue command?
Yes, Sir, and at hand.
Let them be brought in then; and with them Cauſidicus.
I? who's my accuſer?
Thine owne actions, and thy man Sanguis ſhall cry lowd againſt thee.
O the gods! and't pleaſe you, Polites, this little rogue Cheiromantes being vnwilling to come, as I was drawing him, pickt my pocket. 'Sbones, theſe Varlets are worſe then witches, for they ſay when they are in hold, they muſt leaue their deuill, but a man had as leife haue the deuill in hold as theſe, for they'l haue his mony in hold, or it ſhall ſcape 'hem hardly.
Phyſiognomus, and Cheiromantes, doe you know this Gentleman?
Yes, Sir.
Yes, Sir.
And did you neuer know a purſe of his?
I proteſt vnto your Honour, there was nothing but a few idle papers in't, but not a peny of mony.
Oh the impudence of villany! by the reputation of a Gentleman, I put fiue pounds of gold into it the morning before I came forth; or elſe Poeta's a Feigner.
Sure then, Sir, you put it forth againe before you came forth.
Well, your owne confeſſion proclaimes your guilt; Iuſtice, therefore awards you this ſentence. Thou Phyſioguemus, that thou maiſt neuer looke any man in the Face more, ſhalt be burnt in the fore-head for a Rogue, that ſo euery one may know thee by thy Phyſiognomie—Cheiromantes, ſince thou haſt had a Hand in this matter too, thou ſhalt bee burnt in the hand, and then both of you ſhall be baniſhed the Common-wealth of the Sciences.—Choler, take them away.
Tuſh, Ile but paint my Face afterwards.
And Ile quickly bite it out of my hand againe.
Wee ſcorne to ſcape this puniſhment.
Wee ſcorne to ſcape this puniſhment.
Geometres, did not Magus offer by Magike and loue-cups to procure you the loue of Aſtronomia?
Yes, Sir, he did.
And Geometres, did not you ſee Aſtrologia at the Banquet at Ethicus his houſe, caſt a powder into Aſtronomia's drinke?
I did Sir.
Why then, iuſtice muſt proceed vpon you.
We yeeld our ſelues to your Honours mercie.
We yeeld our ſelues to your Honours mercie.
Melancholico and Sanguis lay ands vpon them preſently, ſearch their pockets, and take out certaine Rings if they haue any.
Glaſsialabolas, Glaſsialabolas, Glaſsialabolas. Oh violence! Oh violence!
Glaſsialabolas, Glaſsialabolas, Glaſsialabolas. Oh violence! Oh violence!
Here's one Sir.
And here's another.
I, theſe are they. Magus himſelfe acquainted mee with this deuice: for, theſe Rings put on their little-fingers, and thoſe words repeated thrice, would haue made them inuiſible immediately.
O ſtrange!
Now honour'd Polites, you may proceed.
Magus, becauſe thy profoundeſt villanie was wrought by a Circle; in ſtead of an endleſſe puniſhment like thy Circle, here thou ſhalt bee broken vpon a wheele, and afterwards the gods no doubt will adiudge thee for euer to ſupply Ixions roome, by turning his wheele. Thou Aſtrologia, ſhalt not as yet be determin'd on, but caſt into a cloſe Priſon, that thou maiſt neuer more behold the Heau'ns, but bee tortur'd continually with a perpetuall anxietie, and expectation of thy fate.
Nay, honour'd Polites, let mee begge Magus his life.
I; and I, that Aſtrologia may enioy the benefit of the Heauens, libertie.
I may not without a danger to the Common-wealth.
Then let Geographus obtaine the requeſt on this condition, that they vndertake a voluntarie trauaile, in ſtead of an inforc'd baniſhment.
Depart then the Common-wealth for euer.
Wee goe. Heauen and Hell conſpite Magus and Aſtrologia's ruine; and yet they will not ruine vs.
Wee goe. Heauen and Hell conſpite Magus and Aſtrologia's ruine; and yet they will not ruine vs.
Medicus, did not you ſend Poyſon in ſtead of Phyſicke to Poeta being ſicke?
And't pleaſe you, I know not whether it were Poyſon or not: I ſent Hiſtoria's owne ſeruant with a Recipe, to Galli-pot mine Apothecarie: and if it were bad, 'twas his villanie.
Well, as if he had any reaſon to haue done ſo, without vnder-hand notice from you? doe not depriue your ſelfe of an hope of pardon by an vniuſt pretence of innocencie.
Good Polites.
What canſt thou ſay for thy ſelfe, that iudgement ſhould not proceed againſt thee?
Honour'd Polites, vouchſafe to heare mee ſpeake: with griefe I acknowledge mine offence, but it was need firſt made mee bad: I was at the firſt an Apothecaries man, and keeping a note of Recipe's that came to my Maſter, and inquiring of the bearers the diſeaſe of the Patient, I afterward turn'd Phyſician, but I neuer adminiſtred any Phyſicke but ſuch as I found in my Papers: and then, for faſhion, I fell to reading ſome Phyſick-bookes: and though I could not iudge of them, and make vſe of them, yet I by them did learne to talke with my Patients in their ſickneſſe.
Oh, the confident ignorance of beggerly Emperickes! Well, ſtand aſide a little: Cauſidicus, can thy two tongues, make one honeſt defence for the iuſtifying of thy ſelfe? what canſt thou alleage that iudgement ſhould not proceed againſt thee?
My Booke, honour'd Polites.
Thou canſt not haue it.
Hnour'd Polites—
Thou canſt not haue it.
Then vouchſafe, I beſeech you, to heare me ſpeake. I likewiſe muſt accuſe Pouertie of my firſt guilt; 'twas need alſo that firſt made mee bad: I was at the firſt a Sumner, then got to be a Scriuener, then a Lawyers Clarke; and theſe were the firſt ſteps of my fortune: and ſince I haue beene a Lawyer, (alas!) ſuch haue beene my wants, that hauing no Clyents to ſaue my credit, I haue pretended buſineſſe, and gone vp and downe with a Pen and Inke-horne by my ſide, as earneſtly as if I had a dozen Cauſes to plead: when (alas!) I had ſcarce bread to liue on, that, I proteſt vnto your honour, Fortune had quite out-law'd my eſtate.
Well then, I award thee this mercifull iudgement: becauſe, Cauſidicus, after ſeuen yeeres practice of the Law (for ſo long thou haſt, I know not how iuſtly, gone vnder that title) thou haſt deſeru'd to hold vp thy hand at the Barre, when thou ſhouldſt haue beene the defender of Iuſtice, thou ſhalt hence-forth be call'd a Barrister; till by thy honeſt pleading you redeeme your ſelfe from that name; and hereafter when any of thy Profeſſion plead Cauſes, they ſhall, in the admoniſhing remembrance of thy crime, plead at a Barre—; and that thy pleading of two Cauſes may bee remembred, thou ſhalt weare, &c.—For you, Medicus, becauſe you did happily recouer Aſtronomia—
Indeed he gaue me a very good Clyſter, Heauen knowes.
Wee pardon your offence: and thus vpon your Good-behauiour wee will ſuffer you both in the Common-wealth; but with this caution, that if euer you come by your Learning to any degrees in the Vniuerſitie of our Common-wealth, (that you may for euer bee diſtinguiſhed from other men) becauſe you haue not beene found Viri quadrati, Square and vpright men; you ſhall bee enioyn'd to weare Round Caps.
A like mercie ſtill attend Polites.
A like mercie ſtill attend Polites.
But, Medicus, ſee you loue your man Sanguis, though this your crime was detected by him: I ſay, Sanguis is an honeſt ſeruant, and more faithfull to the whole Bodie of the Common-wealth, then any one Corrupt Member. Depart, and hence-forth abuſe not our mercie.
Long may Polites liue moſt honour'd; long may Polites liue moſt honour'd.
Long may Polites liue moſt honour'd; long may Polites liue moſt honour'd.
Thus, as in a naturall bodie, the firſt way to health, is by remoouing all more dangerous corruptions; and the ſecond, by reducing the humours to a compos'd temperature: the firſt is alreadie perform'd, and now it remaines that wee temper our ſelues. Moſt honour'd Citizens, I am not ignorant either of your contentions or loues: the firſt of which, as I would labour to diſſolue: ſo to vnite the laſt; if your ſelues will be pleas'd but to referre the compoſing of your differences to my vnpartiall cenſure.
We are pleas'd, Reuerend Polites.
The gods adde the happineſſe of ſucceſſe to my determinations. Firſt, then Poeta, Logicus, and Grammaticus, you ſhall bury all former contentions in a perpetuall , or obliuion, and then I thus proceed: For you Geometres, I am ſorrie that that Villaine Magus did ſo farre ſeduce you; but we all reioyce at your recouerie: and ſince Geographus has obtain'd Aſtronomia, embrace you courteouſly the loue of Arithmitica. I'm ſure euer ſince you haue both beene of yeeres of diſcretion, you haue beene acquainted: and beſides, Geometres, there is not any man in the World, whom ſhee makes more account of then your ſelfe: and therefore I will not ſay, vt ameris ama, loue her, that ſhe may loue you; but Quia amaris ama. Loue becauſe you are firſt lou'd; nay, 'tis a iuſt gratitude, which alſo is a loue, and ſo you ſhall double it. Briefly, if there be any point, Geometres, which you ſtand vpon, know you remaine ſtill at Ods; but if you embrace the loue of Arithmetica, you'l be at a perfect vnitie.
Well, Polites, Geometres ſhall bee Rul'd by you this once; come, Wench, ſure I muſt loue thee, I euen long to take thine Altitude.
And I truſt we two ſhall be alwaies Euen.
Poeta, you haue partly yeelded to mee in priuate a conſent to the imbracing of Hiſtoria's loue, which if you ſhall publikely confeſſe, and ſo confirme, you ſhall not only get a Wife, but a friend; and what honour Polites may doe, to Poeta, loue and oportunitie ſhall vnitedly performe.
I; conſent, wild-head, conſent: ſhee'l make thee more ſtay'd.
I yeeld: Hiſtoria, my loue ſhall more inſeparably follow thee, then the Hexameter the Pentameter; or the Adonicke, the Sapphicke.
Why, thus did Xenophon and his Loue ioyne together.
As for you, Grammaticus, I vnderſtand of your great affection to Rhetorica; who though ſhee loues Logicus, yet becauſe hee loues not her mutually (which muſt be required betweene ſuch paires) and that Rhetorica had ſhewed ſome kind of affection toward Grammaticus, with my beſt deſires I will ioyne you two; and the rather to induce a willingneſſe in you, Rhetorica, I would haue you not forget, how Grammaticus and you haue beene brought vp from Children together, and Schoole-fellowes, and take this for a rule: Change not an old friend. Yeeld Rhetorica, yeeld, let Phyſica intreate thee.
Why then, Grammaticus, at this double requeſt, without any Circumlocutions or Figures, I plainely offer vnto thee my loue.
Why then, deareſt Rhetorica, Qua noſtros vidiſti flentis ocallos. Thou doeſt not onely gratifie Polites, but alſo Phyſica, and Nature her ſelfe: for, Commune omnium animantium eſt coniunctionis appetitus procreandi cauſâ.
You Logicus, if you'l leaue your contentions, hauing no deſire, as I perceiue, to marrie—
I care not for marrying; I ſee no good Foundation, for any ſuch Relation.
Wee will aſſume you for your approued vnderſtanding—
I, I ſhould be ſorry if I had not a good vnderſtanding—
As an aſſiſtant to our ſelfe. For your man Phlegmatico, if he will win Polites his loue, let him leaue his Tobacco.
I, and learne more, manners, for I am ſure he wants them.
And Grammaticus, for your man, let him bridle his Choler. Now my counſell ſhall be, that you, Ethicus, and Oeconoma, would vouchſafe to giue good aduice to Poeta and Hiſtoria: and you, honour'd Phyſica, to your happy children Geographus and Aſtronomia: for Grammaticus and Rhetorica their Tongues will alwayes agree, and then I thinke they can hardly fall out: and for Geometres and Arithmetica, I likewiſe know they will be very Regular, and now all's compos'd; and yet, now I think on't, it is not, for yonder Melancholico ſtands ſad, and alone, amongſt all theſe matches: and yet it is better thought on; yonder's Muſica too: now ſurely a ſit match; but they ſhal be henceforth for their ingenuitie, both exempt from ſeruitude, and made ioynt fellowes with our ſelues.
Thankes to Polites: come, my little Minikin, thou and I will be play-fellowes.
'Faith Ile haue Dancing at my wedding, what ere comes on't.
I beſeech you, Polites, ſuffer not a ſeruant through want to be loſt, and come to an ignominious death.
I (alas!) Polites, let Poeta obtayne ſo much for Phantaſtes: that hee may be ſeruant to Melancholico and Muſica.
I yeeld vnto it.
And I truſt I ſhall pleaſe my Maſter, and Miſtris, beyond imagination.
And now moſt honour'd Citizens, when our aged and retired Prince Metaphyſicus (whoſe Deputie only I am, and from whom, as from our Soueraigne, wee hold all wee haue) when, I ſay, he ſhall heare of theſe happy combinations, what a content may we conceiue he wil conceit at the report? and for your ſelues, you may more eaſily enioy your felicitie, then I expreſſe it; and my endeuours alſo ſhall not receiue a ſmall encouragement, when the Royall bountie of his Maieſtie ſhall take notice, that theſe things were done by me. Poeta, you ſhall giue me leaue, for concluſion of my ſpeech, to vſurpe two Verſes, which I haue heard you often ſpeake.
IVdicious Hearers, you that apprehend
What taske it is to make the Artes deſcend
To Popular cares; you whoſe pure iudgement knowes,
How to diſtinguiſh betweene Arte and Showes;
Our Author now ſalutes. And does compare
His Comedie vnto his Theater;
Where ſome play Artes, ſome Humors; and thus fits
Himſelfe, to all variety of wits.
If any yet ſhall aske why he does bring
A Hobby-horſe, or ſuch a nimble thing
To raiſe an Ignorant laugh: It was his Art
That ſaid, This will expreſſe Phantaſtes part;
And thus he Scorn'd and Ʋs'd it. He did feare
Indeed, there was a People too, eu'n Here.
Therefore his Courteous Comedie did ſpeake
And act Some things to ſatisfie the Weake
Shee Academickes; and to make Them ſmile,
Brought in Impoſtors, Gypſies, and ſuch vile
Pedlars of Artes: yet does he not from Theſe
Hope for a Tin-foil'd glory: or ſo pleaſe
Himſelfe, by a Reflection. Here to ſtay,
And in a Looking glaſſe behold his play;
Nor does he promiſe to himſelfe, in high
Conceit, a Sawcy Immortalitie.
Yet This he ſayes: Let no man iudge his Aarts,
But he that firſt can iudge of All the Artes.
But I forget one meſſage; Fate of life▪
Poore Melancholico has loſt his wife.
For whilſt, within, he on the Humours tended,
Pure Muſike with the Artes to Heau'n aſcended.
Which makes the poore man ſad, that now hee's growne
Into a Dump, thus to be left Alone.
Yet ſince he cannot call Her backe againe,
He does intreat this grace he may obtaine;
That You would, to repaire his Marriage bands,
Create Another Muſica with Your Hands.