Where are you Mate?
Here Sir, at hand,
To doe what ere the Maiſter ſhall command.
This goodly Canon, forged for this day
In Lemnos, where great Mulciber beares ſway,
Hee and his Cyclops vſing all their skill,
To frame it in beſt forme, and for good will
They beare vnto that ancient Company,
For whom their Hammers walke continually,
Still to ſupply them from their plenteous Myne
With Steele and Iron: which as they refine
From the earths Oare; So to all Lands they ſend,
And all Artes elſe do bounteouſly befrend.
Becauſe, where Steele and Iron goe to wrack:
Thoſe Lands doe feele a lamentable lack.
Now Mate, thou ſeeſt, this is a Iouiall day,
And euery Trade triumphes as beſt it may,
(By yearly cuſtome) gladly to expreſſe,
Their free affection, in full chearfulneſſe.
Be not we idle then, Seeing to our charge,
This Cannon is committed: But at large
Declare our dilligence. Our Gunners Arte,
In this Triumphall day muſt beare a part.
Fall to thy paines.
Maiſter, with all my heart.
And no men ſhall deliuer (more then we)
How much we honour this dayes dignity.
Firſt then, Ile Spunge her, as ſhe ought to be,
Then Lade her, to Report her luſtily.
Next Ramme her. Now this Bullet paſſeth in,
Which Ramd againe, lowder Report ſhall win.
And ſhooting not Point blanck, but out at length:
Ile mount her higher on her Carriage ſtrength.
Now I haue done Sir.
Then will I giue Fire;
And may all ſpeed no worſe then we deſire.
BLithe and bonny bin yee aw,
And meckle bliſſings ſtill be faw
Vpon ſo faire and gudly meany,
As thilke like, nere ſawe I eny.
A Brittiſh Barde, that long hath ſlept,
And in his Graue would ſtill ha kept:
But that the ſpirit of Poeſie
(Which haudeth higheſt Soueraigntie)
Hath raiſde me from my ſilent reſt,
To make ene in this Iouiall Feaſte.
Aw for your ſeke, moſt worthy man,
(Lowting as lowly as I can)
To creue your fauour, that I may,
For your Society ſomewhat ſey,
Of thilke their buxome looue to you▪
Which they preſent but as your due.
As often they haue done befere,
To mickle of their Bretheren mere.
Among wha was your Fether one,
Which this high charge did vndergone.
O, let me ſey it to your fece,
It is a ſigne of ſpeciall grece,
ee to ſupply your Fethers plece:
In ſike an encient femous Citty,
Vnder yer King, chiefe Deputie.
And let me tell yee ey thing mere,
Of Records haue I read good ſtere;
Yet neere could find the like befere,
As now hath hapt. Thilke dignitie,
Of Meire and Shrieffes authoritie,
Whilke London yearely greants to three▪
Eyne letter H beginnes them aw,
And in ſo ſoote concordance faw:
That Heruey, Herne and Hemerſley,
Maken ey pleaſing Sympheny.
Eyne Enegreme ilke neme mey bliſſe,
With Honor, Heale and Happineſſe.
Honor to be ſele Steffe and ſtey,
Heale to vphaude all eirie wey,
And Happineſſe ſa to attend.
Yer yeare may heue a happy end.
Thaeſe Shewes and Emblems ta expreſſe,
Mayne trouble yee with tediouſnes.
And ay, wha wud na way offend,
Yer kenning of them doe commend
Vntill thilke Buke, whilke ſpeeks them aw,
Mere large than to my lot does faw.
Sa, Honor, Heale and Happineſſe,
Giue aw yer actions gud ſucceſſe.
THilke eye of day, whilke grec'de our ſpart,
Being claſed vp, mekes his reſarte
Till vnder-dwellers. Seble-night,
Was gledly lengthen ant delight:
But ſtandeth fearefull of offending,
Becauſe aw ioyes mun heue an ending.
Not, that we deſire to lieue yee,
But for yar awne heme mun receiue yee.
And, thereto maken bauide intiuſion,
Was claſe vp aw with rude confuſion.
Whilke fare my Leard, my perting is,
Wiſbing yee mickle yeares of bliſſe,
That Iuſtice, Zeale and Payetie,
Mayne ſhine in yee with Meieſty,
That he wha puts yee in thilke truſt,
Mey finde yer rule ſa true and iuſt,
That efter times may talke, and ſey
Whan Heruey, Herne and Hemerſley
As Meire and Sheriffes did beare ſwey:
True Honor, Helth and Heppineſſe,
Thilke yeare did their endeauours bliſſe.
Yer Bretherens loue I mun commend
To yer acceptance, ſa I end.