I Haue ſeene the old yeere fairely buried,
Good Gentleman he was, but toward his end
Full of Diſeaſes, he kept no good Diet,
He Lou'd a wench in Iune, (which we' count Vilde,
And got the latter end of May with childe;
That was his fault, and many an old yeere ſmels on't.
How now? who's t'is? oh, one ath' Faſting-dayes
That followed him to his graue;
I know him by his gauntnes, his thin chitterlings,
He would vndoe a Tripe-wiſe; Faſting-day!
Why art ſo heauie?
Oh, ſweete Doctor Almanacke,
I haue loſt a deare old Maſter, beſide Sir,
I haue beene out of ſeruice, all this Kerſmas;
No-body minds Faſting day, I haue ſcarce bin thought vpon a' Fryday nights;
And becauſe Kerſmas this yeere fell vpon't,
The Frydayes haue beene euer ſince ſo proud
They ſcorne my companie, the Butchers boyes
At Temple-Barre, ſet their great Dogges vpon me,
I dare not walke abroad, nor be ſeene yet,
The very Poulters Girles throw rotten Egges at me,
Nay Fiſhſtreete loues me, e'en but frō teeth outward,
(The neereſt Kin I haue) lookes ſhye vpon me,
As if t'ad forgot me, I met Plumporridge now,
My big-ſwolne Enemie, hee's plumpe and luſtie,
The onely man in place, ſweete Maſter Doctor,
Preferre me to the New-Yeere, you can doo't.
When can I doo't ſir? you muſt ſtay til Lent.
Till Lent, you kil my heart, ſweet M. Doctor, Thruſt me into Candlemas Eue, I doe beſeech you.
Away, Candlemas Eue will neuer beare thee i' theſe dayes, 'tis ſo frampole, the Puritanes will neuer yeeld to't.
Why th'are fat enough.
Here comes Plumporridge.
I, hee's ſure of wel-come; me thinkes hee moues like one of the great Porridge Tubs, going to the Counter.
Oh killing cruel ſight, yonder's a Faſting day: A leane ſpinie Raſcall with a Dogge in's belly, his very Bowels barke with hunger; auaunt, thy Breath ſtinkes, I doe not loue to meete thee faſting, thou art nothing but wind, thy Stomack's full of Farts, as if they had loſt their way, and thou made with the wrong end vpward, like a Dutch Mawe, that diſcharges ſtill into 'th Mouth!
Why thou whorſon Breakefaſt, Dinner, Nuntions, Supper and Beuer, Celler, Hall, Kitchin, and Wet-larder.
Sweete Maſter Doctor, looke quickly vpon his Water, that I may breake the Vrinall about his pate.
Nay friendſhip, friendſhip.
Neuer Maſter Doctor, with any Faſtingday, perſwade me not.
Nor any thing belongs to Ember-weeke.
And if I take againſt a thing, I'me ſtomackfull,
I was borne an Anabaptist, a fell foe,
To fiſh and Fridayes, Pig's my abſolute Sweetheart.
And ſhall I wrong my Loue, and cleaue to Saltfiſh!
Commit adulterie with an Egge and Butter?
Well ſetting this apart, whoſe water's this ſir?
On, thereby hangs a tale, my M. Kerſmaſſes.
It is his water, ſir, hee's drawing on.
Kerſmas? why let me ſee,
I ſaw him very luſtie a Twelfe-night.
I, that's true, ſir, but then he tooke his bane,
With chuſing King and Queene;
Ha's made his Will already, here's the Copie.
And what ha's he giuen away, let mee ſee, Plumbroth.
He could not giue away much, ſir, his children haue ſo conſumed him before hand.
IN primis I giue and bequeath to my ſecond Sonne In, and In; his perpetuall Lodging i'the Kingſbench, and his Ordinarie out of the Basket.
A ſweete allowance for a ſecond brother.
Item, I giue to my yongeſt Sonnes Gleeke and Priminiſte, the full conſuming of Nights and Dayes, and Wiues and Children, together with one ſecret gift, that is, neuer to giue ouer, while they haue a pennie.
And if e're they doe, Ile be hanged.
For the poſſeſſion of all my Lands, Mannors, Mannor-houſes, I leaue them full and wholly to my eldeſt Sonne, Noddie, whom during his minoritie, I commit to the cuſtodie of a paire of Knaues and one and thirtie?
There's Knaues enow a conſcience to coozen one Foole.
Item, I giue to my eldeſt Daughter, Tickle mee quickly, and to her ſiſter my Ladies Hole, free leaue to ſhift for themſelues, either in Court, City, or Country.
We thanke him heartily.
Item, I leaue to their old Aunt, my Sow h'as Pigd, a Litter of Curtizans to breede vp for Shroue-tide.
They wil be good ware in Lent, when fleſh is forbid by Proclamation.
Item, I giue to my Nephew Gambols, commonly cald by the name of Kerſmas Gambols, all my Cattle, Horſe and Mare, but let him ſhooe 'em himſelfe.
I ha' ſeene him ſhooe the Mare fortie times ouer.
Alſo, I bequeath to my Coozen-Germane Waſſel-Bowle, borne of Dutch Parents, the Priuiledge of a free Denizen, that is, to be drunke with Scotch-Ale, or Engliſh-Beere: and laſtly, I haue giuen by word of mouth, to poore Blind man Buffe, a flap with a Foxetayle.
I, ſo h'as giuen 'em all for ought I ſee. But now what thinke you of his Water, ſir?
Well he may linger out till Candlemas: But ne're recouer it.
Would he were gone once, I ſhould be more reſpected.
Here's New-yeere?
I haue ne're a gift to giue him, Ile be gone.
Mirth & a healthful time fil all your dayes. Looke freſhly, Sir.
I cannot, Maſter Doctor.
My fathers death ſets the Spring backward i'me.
For ioy and comfort yet, I'me now betweene
Sorrow and ioy, the Winter and the Spring.
And as Time gathers freſhneſſe in it's ſeaſon,
No doubt Affects will be ſubdued with reaſon.
Y'aue a braue mind to work on, vſe my rules,
And you ſhall cut a Caper in Nouember,
When other yeeres your Grandfathers lay bedrid.
What's he, that lookes ſo piteouſly, and ſhakes ſo?
A Faſting-day?
How's that?
A fooliſh Faſting-day,
An vnſeaſonable cock ſcomb, ſeeks now for a ſeruice,
Ha's hunted vp and downe, ha's beene at Court,
And the Long-Porter broke his head a'croſſe there,
He had rather ſee the Deuill, for this he ſayes,
He ne're grew vp ſo tall with Faſting-dayes,
I would not for the price of all my Almanacks;
The Guard had tooke him there, they would ha beate out his braines with Bombards.
I bade him ſtay till Lent, and now he whimpers;
He would to Rome forſooth, that's his laſt refuge,
But would trie awhile,
How well he ſhould be vſde in Lancaſhire.
He was my Fathers ſeruant, That he was, ſir.
Tis here vpon Record.
I ſeru'd him honeſtly, and coſt him little.
I, Ile beſworne for that.
Thoſe were the Times, ſir,
That made your Predeceſſors rich, and able
To lay vp more for you, and ſince poore Faſting-daies
Were not made reckoning on, the pampered fleſh
H'as plaide the knaue, Maides haue had fuller bellies,
Thoſe meales that once were ſau'd, haue ſtird, & lept,
And bègot Baſtards, and they muſt be kept,
Better keepe Faſting-dayes, your ſelfe may tell you,
And for the profit of purſe, backe and belly?
I neuer yet heard Truth better whin'de out.
Thou ſhalt not al be loſt, not for vainglorie
Greedily welcom'd, wee'le begin with Vertue,
As we may hold with't, that do's Vertue right,
Set him downe, Sir, for Candlemas Eue at night.
Well, better late then neuer.
This is my comfort, I ſhall come to make
All the Fat Rogues goe to bed ſupperleſſe,
Get dinners where they can.
How now? what's he?
Tis old Time, Sir, that belongd To all your Predeceſſors.
Oh I honour
That Reuerend Figure, may I euer thinke
How precious thou 'rt in youth, how rarely
Redeemed in Age.
Time Obſerue, you haue Times ſeruice.
There's all in briefe.
Hah? Doctor? What are theſe?
Time The Rabble that I pitie, theſe I haue ſeru'd too,
But few or none haue euer obſeru'd me,
Amongſt this diſſolute Route, Candlemas day!
I'me ſorie to ſee him ſo ill aſſociated?
Why that's his cauſe of cōming to cōplaine,
Becauſe Shrouetueſday this yeere dwels ſo neere him.
But ti's his place he cannot be remou'd.
You muſt be patient, Candlemas, and brooke it.
This Rabble, Sir, Shrouetueſday, hungrie Lent,
Ill May-day, Midſummer Eue, and the firſt Dogge-day,
Come to receiue their places due by cuſtome,
And that they build vpon.
Giu'em their charge, and then admit'em.
I will doo't in Cone.
Stand forth Shrouetueſday, one'a the ſilenc'ſt Bricke-Layers,
Tis in your charge to pull downe Bawdyhouſes,
To ſet your Tribe aworke, cauſe ſpoyle in Shorditch,
And make a Dangerous Leake there, deface Turnbul,
And tickle Codpiece Rowe, ruine the Cockpit, the
Poore Players ne're thriud in't, a my Cōſcience ſome
Queane piſt vpon the firſt Bricke;
For you, leane Lent, be ſure you vtter firſt
Your rotten Herrings and keepe vp your beſt
Till they be rotten, then ther's no deceit
When they be all alike. You Ill-Mayday,
Be as vnruly a Raſcall as you may,
To ſtirre vp Deputy Double Diligence,
That comes perking forth with Halberts:
And for you Midſomer Eue, that watches warmeſt,
Be but ſufficiently drunke, and y'are well harneſt,
You Dogday!
Woh.
A churliſh maundring Rogue,
You muſt both beg and rob, curſe and collogue,
In cooler Nights the Barne with Doxies fill,
In Harueſt lye in Haycock with your Iill.
They haue all their charge.
You haue gin't at the wrong end,
To bid'em ſin's the way to make e'm mend,
For what they are forbid, they run to head-long.
I ha' caſt their Inclinations, now your ſeruice,
To draw freſh bloud into your Mrs. cheekes, ſlaues!
What ſcornfull lookes the Abuſiue Villaines threw,
Vpon the reuerend forme and face of Time!
Me thought it appear'd ſorry, and went angry.
'Tis ſtill your ſeruant.
How now? what are theſe?
Theſe are your Good Dayes, and your Bad Dayes, Sir,
Thoſe your Indifferent dayes, nor good, nor bad.
But is here all?
A wonder there's ſo many.
How theſe broke looſe, euery one ſtops their paſſage,
And makes inquiry after 'em.
This Farmer will not caſt his ſeed ith' ground
Before he looke in Bretnor, there he finds
Some word which hee hugs happily, as, Ply the Box,
Make Hay betimes, It falls into thy Mouth.
A punctuall Lady will not paint forſooth
Vpon his Criticall dayes, twill not hold well,
Nor a nice Citie-Wedlocke eate freſh Herring,
Nor Perriwinkles;
Although ſhe long for both, if the word be that day,
Gape after Gudgins, or ſome fiſhing phraſe.
A Scriueners Wife wil not intreat the Mony-maſter
That lyes ith' houſe, and gets her Huſbands children
To furniſh a poore Gentlemans Extremes,
If ſhe find, Nihil in a Bagge, that morning,
And ſo of thouſand follies, theſe ſuffice
To ſhew you Good, Bad, and Indifferent Dayes,
And all haue their Inſcriptions, here's, Cock a Hoop,
This the Geere cottens, and this, Faint Heart, neuer▪
Theſe, noted Blacke for Badneſſe, Rods in piſſe.
This, Poſt for Puddings, this Put vp thy Pipes,
Theſe blacke and white indifferently inclining
To both their natures, neither Full nor Faſting,
In Dock, out Nettle,—Now to your motion,
Blacke Knaues, and white Knaues, and you parcell Raſcals,
Two hypocriticall party-colord Varlets,
That play o'both hands.
I ſee theſe pleaſures of low Births and Natures,
Adde little freſhneſſe to your cheeks, I pittie you,
And can no longer now conceale from you,
Your happy Omen, Sir, Bleſſings draw neere you,
I will diſcloſe a Secret in Aſtrologie,
By the ſweet Induſtry of Harmonie,
Your white and glorious friend;
Eu'n very Deities haue conſpir'd, to grace
Your faire Inauguration, here I find it,
Tis cleere in Art,
The minute, nay, the point of Time's ariu'd,
Me thinkes the bleſſings touch you, now they're felt, Sir.
NEw-yeere, New-yeere! harke, harken to me, I am ſent downe To crowne, Thy wiſhes, with me, Thy faire deſires in Vertues Court are fil'de, The goodneſſe of thy thought, This bleſſed worke hath wrought, Time ſhall be reconcilde: Thy Spring ſhall in all ſweets abound, Thy Sommer ſhall be cleere and ſound, Thy Autumne ſwell the Barne and Loft, With Corne and fruits, ripe, ſweet and ſoft, And in thy Winter, when all goe, Thou ſhalt depart as white as Snow. Behold, behold, harke, harken to me, Glories come downe, To crowne Thy wiſhes, with me, Bright Heroes in laſting Honour ſpher'd Vertues eternall Spring, (By making Time their King.) See, they're beyond Time reard. Yet in their loue to humane good, In which eſtate themſelues once ſtood, They all deſcend to haue their worth Shine, to Imitation, forth: And by their Motion, Light and Loue, To Show how after Times ſhould moue!
MOue on, Moue on, be ſtill the ſame, You Beauteous Sonnes of Brightneſſe, You adde to Honour Spirit and Flame, To Vertue, Grace, and Vhiteneſſe; You, whoſe euery little motion May learne Strictneſſe more Deuotion, Euery Pace, of that high worth, It treades a faire Example forth; Quickens a Vertue, makes a Storie, To your owne Heroick Glorie. May your three times thrice Bleſt Number Rayſe Merit from his Ancient S'umber; Moue on, Moue on, &c.
SEe, whether Fate hath lead you, (Lamps of Honour) (Fog Goodneſſe brings her owne reward vpon her) Looke, turne your Eyes, & then conclude, commending, And ſay, you haue lost no Worth by your Deſcending, Behold a Heauen about you, Spheres more plentie, There, for one Luna, here ſhines Ten, And for one Venus, Twentie; Then Heroes, double both your Fame and Light, Each chuſe his Starre, and full adorne this Night.
The Morning gray,
Bids, come away,
Euery Lady ſhould begin
To take her Chamber, for the Stars are in:
Liue Long the Miracles of Times and Yeeres,
Till with thoſe Heroes, You ſit fixt in Spheres.