HOnor and Ioy double their B,
I, the Dayes Loue, the Cities ger all Loue.
Salute thee in the Sweetneſſe
All▪ that behold me worthily, may ſe ▪
How full mine eye ſtands of the Ioy
The more, becauſe I may with Confidence ſay,
Deſert and Loue will be well matcht too day:
And herein the great'ſt pitty will appeare,
This match can luſt no longer then a yeare.
T let not that diſcourage thy good wayes,
Mens Loues will laſt to crowne thy end of dayes,
If thoſe ſhould fuile, which cannot eaſly dye,
Thy good workes wed thee to Aeternity.
Let not the ſhortneſſe then of Time diſmay
The largeneſſe of thy worth; gaine euery day,
So many yeares Thou gainſt, that ſome haue loſt;
For they that thinke their Care is at great coſt
If they do any good, in Time ſo ſmall,
They make their Yeare but a poore Day in all.
For as a Learned Man, will comprehend
In Compaſſe of his Howre, Doctrine ſo ſound,
Which giue another a whole yeare to mend,
He ſhall not equall, vpon any ground:
So the Iudicious vvhen he comes to beare
This powerfull Office, ſtrucke vvith Diuine feare,
Collects his ſpirits, redeemes his howres with care,
Thinkes of his Charge, and Oath, what Tyes they are,
And with a Vertuous Reſolution then
Workes more good in one yeare, then ſome in Ten.
Nor is this ſpoken any to detract,
But all t'encourage to put Truth in Act.
Me thinkes I ſee Oppreſſion hang the head,
Falſhood and Iniury with their guilt ſtrucke dead
At this Tryumphant Hovvre, Ill Cauſes hide
Their Leprous Faces, daring not t'abide
The Brightneſſe of this day; and in mine eare
Me thinkes the Graces Siluer Chimes I heare.
Good vviſhes are at vvorke novv in each hart,
Throughout this ſphere of Brotherhood play their part,
Chiefly thy Noble owne Fraternity,
As neere in hart, as they're in place to thee.
The Enſignes of whoſe loue Bounty diſplayes,
Yet eſteemes all their Coſt ſhort of thy praiſe:
There will appeare elected Sonnes of Warre,
Which this faire City boaſts of for their Care,
Strength and experience, ſet in Truth of heart;
All great and glorious Maiſters in that Art
Which giues to man his Dignity, Name and Seale,
Prepar'd to ſpeake Loue in a Noble Peale.
Knowing two Tryumphs muſt on this day dwell,
For Magiſtrate, one, and one for Coronell,
Returne Lord Generall, that's the Name of State
The Souldier giues Thee; Peace, the Magiſtrate.
On then, Great Hope, here that good care begins,
Which now earths Loue and▪ Heauens hereafter wins.
GReat Lord, Example is the Cryſtall Glaſſe,
By which wiſe Magiſtracy ſets his face,
Fits all his Actions to their comlieſt Dreſſe,
For there he ſt honour and Seemelineſſe;
Tis not like flauring glaſſes, thoſe falſe Bookes
Made to ſet Age, back, in great Courliers Lookes;
Like Clocks on Reuelling nights, that nere goe right,
Becauſe the ſports may yeeld more full delight,
But when they breake off then they finde it Late,
The Time and Truth appeares, ſuch is their State,
Whoſe death by flatteries is ſet back, awhile,
But meetes'em in the midſt of then ſafe Smile.
Such horrors thſe forgetfull things end,
That onely minde their ends, but not their End;
Leaue them to their falſe Truſt; Liſt Thou to me,
Thy power is great, ſo let thy vertues be,
Thy care, thy watchfulneſſe, which are but things
Remembred to thy praiſe, from thence it ſprings,
And not from feare of any want in Thee,
For in this Truth I may be comely, free,
Neuer was man aduanc'd, yet waited on
With a more Noble Expectation;
That's a great Worke to perfect: and as Thoſe
That haue in Art a Maſtry, can oppoſe
All comers, and come off with Learned Fame,
Yet thinke not skorne ſtill of a Schollers name
(A Title which they had in ignorant youth:)
So he that deales in ſuch a weight of Truth
As th' execution of a Magiſtrates place,
Though neuer ſo exact informe and Grace,
Both from his owne Worth, and mans free Applauſe,
Yet may he cal'd a Labourer in the cauſe,
And be thought good to be ſo, in true care,
The Labour being ſo glorious, iuſt, and faire.
Behold then in a rough Example here
The Rude and thonny wayes thy care muſt cleare,
Such are the vices in a City ſprung,
As are yon' Thickets that grow cloſe and ſtrong:
Such is oppreſsion, Coſnage, Bribes, falſe Hires,
As are yon' catching and entangling Briers:
Such is Gout-Iuſtice, that's, Delay in Right,
Demurs in Suites, that are as cleare as Light.
Iuſt ſuch a Wilderneſſe is a Common-wealth,
That is vndreſt, vnpruin'd, wilde in her health;
And the rude multitude, the Beaſts a'th wood,
That know no lawes, but onely Will and Blood:
And yet by faire Example, Muſicall Grace,
Harmonious gouernment of the Man in place,
(Of faire Integrity, and wiſedome framde)
They ſtand as mine doe, rauiſht, charmde, and tamde.
Euery wiſe Magiſtrate that gouerns thus,
May well be cald a powerfull Orpheus.
Behold yon' Bird of ſtate, the vigilant Cocke,
The Mornings Herald, and the Plow-mans Clocke,
At whoſe ſhrill Crow the very Lyon trembles,
The ſturdieſt Prey-taker that here aſſembles;
How fitly d'os it match your Name, and power
Fixt in that Name now by this glorious Houre,
At your iuſt Voyce to ſhak the bold'ſt offence
And ſturdieſt ſinne, that ere had reſidence
Inſecure man, Yet with an equall Eie,
Matching graue Iuſtice with faire Clemency;
It being the property Hee chiefly ſhower,
To giue Wing-warning, ſtill before he Crowes,
To Crow before he ſtrike, by his clapt Wing,
To ſtir himſelfe vp firſt (which needfull thing
Is euery mans firſt duty) by his Crow
A gentle call, or warning, which ſhould flow
From euery Magiſtrate, before he extend
The Stroake of Iuſtice, he ſhould reprehend,
And trie the vertue of a powerfull word,
If that preuaile not, then the Spurre, the Sword.
See, herein honors to his Maieſtie
Are not forgotten, when I turne, and ſee,
The ſeuer all Countries, in thoſe faces, plaine,
Allowing Fealty to one Soueraigne,
The Noble Engliſh, the faire Thriuing Scot,
Plaine hearted Welch, the Frenchman bold and hot,
The ciuilly inſtructed Iriſh man,
And that kind Sauage, the Virginian;
All louingly aſſembled, n by Fate;
This thy Daies Honour to congratulate.
On then; and as your ſeruice fills this place,
So through the Citie doe his Lorſhip Grace.
FRom that rough Wildernes, which did late preſent
The perplext State, and cares of Gouernment,
Which euery painfull Magiſtrate muſt meete;
Here the Reward ſtands for thee, a chiefe Seate
In Fames faire Sanctuary, where ſome of old
Crownde with their Troubles now, are here enrolde
In Memories ſacred ſweetneſſe, to all ages;
And ſo much the Worlds Voyce of Thee preſages.
And theſe that ſit for many, with their graces
Freſh as the Buds of Roſes, though they ſleepe,
In thy Society had once high places,
Which in their good Workes they for euer keepe;
Life cald 'em in their Time, Honours faire Stars,
Large Benefactors, and ſweet Gouernors.
If here were not ſufficient Grace for Merit,
Next Obiect, I presume, will raiſe thy Spirit.
GRaue Citie Gouernor! ſo much honour doe me,
Vouchſafe thy preſence and thy patience to me,
And I'le Reward that Vertue with a Story,
That ſhall to thy Fraternity add Glory,
Then to thy Worth no meane part will ariſe,
That art ordaynde Chiefe for that glorious Prize.
Tis I, that keepe all the Records of Fame,
Mother of Truths, Antiquity, my Name;
No Yeare, Moneth, Day, or Houre, that brings in place
Good Workes and Noble, for the Cities Grace,
But I Record; that After Times may ſee
What Former, were, and how they ought to be,
Fruitfull, and Thankfull, in faire Actions flowing,
To meete Heauens bleſsings, to which much is owing;
For inſtance, Let all Gratefull Eyes be plac'ſt
Vpon this Mount of Royalty, by Kings, grac'ſt,
Queenes, Prince, Dukes, Nobles, more by numbring gain'd
Then can be in this narrow Sphere contain'd.
7. Kings, 5. Queenes, onely one Prince alone,
8. Dukes, 2. Earles, Plantagenets twenty one;
All theſe of this Fraternity made Free,
Brothers and Siſters of this Company;
And ſee with what propriety, the Fates
Haue to this Noble Brotherhood knit ſuch States;
For what Society, the whole Citie brings,
Can with ſuch Ornaments Adorne their Kings,
Their onely Robes of State, when they conſent
To ride moſt glorious, to High Parliament;
And marke in this their Royall intent ſtill,
For when it pleaſde the Goodneſſe of their Will,
To put the richeſt Robes of their Loues on
To the whole Citie, the Moſt, euer came
To this Society, which Records here proue,
Adorning their Adoruers, with their Loue;
Which was a Kingly AEquity:
Be carefull then, Great Lord, to bring forth Deedes,
To match that Honor, that from hence proceedes.
I Was the firſt, Graue Lord, that welcomde Thee
To this Dayes Honor, and I ſpake it free,
Iuſt as in euery heart I found it plac'ſt,
And tis my turne againe now to ſpeake laſt;
For loue is circular (like the bright Sunne,)
And takes delight to end where it begun,
Though indeed neuer ending, in true Will,
But rather may be ſayd beginning ſtill;
As all great workes are of Caeleſtiall Birth,
Of which, Loue is the Chiefe in Heauen and Earth.
To what Bleſt ſtate then are thy Fortunes come,
Since, That both brought thee forth, and brings thee home▪
Now, as in common courſe which cleeres things beſt,
Ther's no free gift but lookes for thankes at leaſt;
A Loue ſo bountifull, ſo free, ſo good
From the whole City, from thy Brotherhood,
(That Name I ought a while to dwell vpon,)
Expect ſome faire Requitall from the Man
They'ue all ſo largely Honord. What's deſirde?
That which in Conſcience ought to berequirde,
Oh thanke 'em in thy Iuſtice, in thy Care,
Zeale to right wrongs, Workes that are cleere & faire,
And will become thy Soule (whence Vertue ſprings)
As thoſe rich Ornaments thy Brother Kings.
And ſince we cannot ſeparate Loue and Care,
For where Care is, a Loue muſt needes be there,
And Care where Loue is; tis the Man and Wife,
Through euery Eſtate that's fixt in Life;
You are by this the Cities Bride-groome proou'd,
And She ſtands wedded to her beſt Belou'd;
Then be, according to your Morning-Vowes,
A Carefull Husband, to a Louing Spouſe;
And Heauen giue you great Ioy (both It and Thee;)
And to All Thoſe that ſhall Match after Yee.