O Gods whoſe grace doth guide their ghoſtes
that ioy in wedlocke pure,
O Iuno thou Lucina hight,
on whom the chary cure
Alotted is of thoſe, that grone
in paynfull chyldhed bandes,
O Pallas by whoſe heauenly arte,
Sir Typhis cunning handes
Haue learnde to bridle with his helme his newly framed boate,
Wherewith the force of fighting fluds hee breaking rides a floate.
O God whoſe forked Mace doth ſtormes in rigour rough appeas,
And cauſe the ruffling ſurges couch amid the rampinge Seas:
O Titan who vpon the ſwift and werling Hemiſphaer
Deuides the chearefull day and night by egall turnes t'appere,
O threefolde ſhapen Hecate that sendeſt forth thy light,
Vnto thy ſilent Sacrifice that offered is by night,
By whom my Iaſon ſware to mee O heauenly powers all,
And yee on whom Medea may with ſafer conſcience call,
O Dungeon darke, moſt dreadfull den of euerlaſting night,
O dampned Ghoſts: O kingdome ſet againſt the Gods aright:
O Lord of ſad and lowring lakes, O Lady dyre of Hell,
(Whom though that Pluto ſtale by force yet did his troth excell
The ficle fayth of Iaſons loue, that hee to mee doth beave,)
With curſed throate I coniure you, O griſly Ghoſtes appeare.
Come out, come out, yee helliſh hagges, feuenge this deede ſo dyre,
Bring in your ſcrauing pawrs a burning brand of deadly fyre.
Riſe vp yee hiddeous diueliſh Feendes, as dreadfull as yee weare,
When vnto me in wedlocke ſtate yee did ſometime appeare.
Worke yee, worke yee, the dolefull death of this new wedded Wyfe.
And martir yee this Father in lawe: depryue of breath and lyfe
King Creons ruthfull family: in plunge of paſſing payne
Torment yee mee, that on my ſpoule doe wiſhe this woe to raygne:
Preſerue my Iaſons life, but yet let him be bayted out
A myching, roging, rūnagate, in forren townes about.
To paſſe from dore to dore, with care to begge his needy bread,
Not knowing in what harbring place to couch his curſſed head:
A baniſht wretch, diſdaynde of all, and ſtill in feare of lyfe,
Then let him wiſh ten thouſand times for me agayne his Wyfe:
This famous geſt whom euery man will entertayne and haue,
Let him be driuē at ſtraungers gates the table ctūmes to craue.
And that my bytter bannings may with miſchiefe moſt abounde,
God graunt in gulph of like diſtreſſe his chyldren may be drounde,
To ſynke in ſorrowes ſtormes, that doe their mother ouerflowe:
Now, now, I haue, I haue the full reueng of all my woe,
I haue diſpatcht: my pyteous playnt and wordes in vayne I loſe:
What ſhall not I with vyolence get vp agaynſt my foes?
And wring out of theyr wreſted hands the wedding torch ſo bryght?
Shall I not force the firmament to loſe his ſhrinking lyght?
What doth my Graundſirs Phoebus face this heauy hap beholde?
And ſtandyng gaſyng at this geare yet weſtwarde is he rolde,
On glyſtring chariot hoyſted hyghe, and keepes his beaten Race,
Amid the chriſtall colourde ſkye, why turnes hee not his Face,
Retyring faſt into the Eaſt backe vp the day to twyne?
O Father Phoebe to me, to me, thy Chariot reynes reſigne,
That I aduaunced vp, about the marble ſkyes may ryde,
Bequearh thy brydle vnto mee, and giue me grace to guide
Thy yoked prauncing teame, with yerking laſſhe of burning whip,
That with thy feruent fyry beames on purple poale doe ſkip.
Let Corynth countrey burnt to duſt by force of flame and fyre
Gyue place, that both the iumbled ſeas may ioyne: whom to retyre
It doth compell, and daſſheth of from banke on eyther ſyde,
Leaſt meete in one their chanels might, whoſe ſtreames hee doth deuide,
No way to worke theyr deadly woe I haue but this at hande,
That to the wedding I ſhould beare a ruthſull brydall brande,
Anoying Creons careleſſe Court: when finiſhed I haue
Such ſolemne ſeruice, as that ryght of ſacrafice doth craue,
Then at the Aulters of the Gods my chyldren ſhalbe ſlayne,
With crimſen colourde bloud of Babes their Aulters will I ſtayne.
Through Lyners, Lungs, the Lights & Heart, through euery gut, & gal,
For vengeaunce breake away perforce, and ſpare no bloude at all:
If any luſty lyfe as yet within thy ſoule doe reſt,
It ought of auncient corage ſtill doe dwell within my breſt,
Exite all foolyſh Female feare, and pity from thy mynde,
And as th'untamed Tygers vſe to rage and raue vnkynde,
That haunt the croking combrous Caues, and clumpred froſen cliues,
And craggy Rockes of Caucaſus, whoſe bitter colde depryues
The ſoyle of all Inhabitours, permit to lodge and reſt,
Such ſaluage brutiſh tyranny within thy braſen breſt.
What euer hurly burly wrought doth Phaſis vnderſtand,
What mighty monſtrous bloudy feate I wrought by Sea or Land:
The like in Corynth ſhalbe ſeene in moſt outragious guife,
Moſt hyddious, hatefull, horrible, to heare, or ſee wyth eyes,
Moſt diueliſh, deſperate, dreadfull deede, yet neuer knowne before,
Whoſe rage ſhall force heauen, earth, and hell to quake and tremble ſore,
My burning breaſt that rowles in wrath, and doth in rancour boyle,
Sore thryſteth after bloud, and wounds with ſlaughter, death, & ſpoyle,
By renting racked lyms from lyms to driue them downe to graue:
Tuſh, theſe be but as Fleabytings, that mentioned I haue:
As weyghty things as theſe I did in greener girliſhe age,
Now ſorrowes ſmart doth rub the gall and frets with ſharper rage.
But ſith my wombe hath yeelded fruict, it doth mee well behoue,
The ſtrength and parlous puiſſaunce of weightier illes to prous.
Be ready wrath, with all thy might that fury kindle may,
Thy foes to their deſtruction bee ready to aſſay:
Of thy deuorſement let the Pryce to match, and counterpayſe
The proude & precious pryncely pomp of theſe new wedding dayes.
How wilt thou from thy ſpouſe depart? as him thou followed haſt
In bloud to bath thy bloudy handes and traytrous lyues to waſt.
Breake of in time theſe long delayes, abanden now agayne,
This lewd alliaunce, got by guilt, with greater guilt refrayne,
WHo hath not wiſt that windy words be vayne,
And that in talke of truſt is not the grounde,
Heere in a mirrour may hee ſee it playne,
Medea ſo by proofe the ſame hath founde.
Who being blind by blinded Venus Boy,
Her bleared Eyes could not beholde her bliſſe:
Nor ſpy the preſent poyſon of her Ioy,
While in the graſſe the Serpent lurked is,
The ſhaft that flew from Cupids golden bowe,
With feathers ſo hath dimd her daſeld Eyes,
That cannot ſee to ſhun the way of woe:
The ranckling head in dented heart that lyes,
So dulles the ſame, that can not vnderſtand
The cauſe that brought falſe Iaſon out of Greece,
To come vnto her fathers fertile Land,
Is not her loue, but loue of golden Fleece.
Yet was his ſpeache ſo pleaſaunt and ſo milde,
His tongue ſo filde, his promiſes ſo fayre,
Sweete was the fowlers Song that hath beguilde
The ſeely byrd, brought to the limed ſnare.
Faith, in his Face, truſt ſhined in his Eyes,
The bluſhing brow playne meaning ſeemde to ſhowe.
In double hearte blacke treaſon hydden lies,
Diſſembling thoughts that weaue the webbe of woe.
The honyed Lyppes, the tongue in ſuger dept
Doe ſweete the poyſon rancke within the breaſt,
In ſubtle ſhew of paynted ſheath is kept,
The ruſty knife of treaſon deemed leaſt:
Lyfe ſeemes the bayte to ſight that lyeth brim,
Death is the hooke that vnderlies the ſame,
The Candell blaſe delights with burning trim,
The Fly, till ſhee bee burned in the flame.
Who in ſuch ſhowes leaſt deemed any ills.
The hungry fyſhe feares not the bayte to Brooke,
Till vp the lyne doe pluck him by the gylls,
And faſt in throate hee feeles the deadly hooke.
Woe Iaſon, woe to thee moſt wretched man,
Or rather wretch Medea woe to thee,
Woe to the one that thus diſſemble can,
Woe to the other that trayned ſo might bee.
Thoughtſt thou Medea his eyes to bee the glaſſe,
Wherein thou might the Face of thoughts beholde?
That in his breaſt with wordes ſo couered was,
As cancred braſſe with gloſſe of yealow golde?
Did thou ſuppoſe that nature (more then kinde)
Had placde his heart his lying lyppes betweene,
His lookes to be the mirrour of his minde?
Fayth in fayre Face hath ſildome yet ben ſeene.
Who liſtneth to the flatering Maremaides note,
Muſt needes commit his tyred eyes to ſleepe,
Yeelding to her the taking of his boate,
That meanes vnware to drowne him in the deepe.
What booteth thee Medea to betray
The golden Fleece, to fawning Isaſons hande,
From Dragons teeth him ſafely to conuay,
And fyry Bulles the warders of the lande?
Why for his ſake from father haſt thou fled,
And thruſt thy ſelfe out from thy natiue ſoyle?
Thy brothers bloud what ayled thee to ſhed,
With Iaſon thus to trauell and to toyle?
Beholde the meede of this thy good deſarte,
The recompence that hee to thee doth gyue.
For pleaſure, payne, for ioy, moſt eger ſmarte,
With clogging cares in baniſhment to liue.
Thou, and thy Babes, are like to begge and ſtarue.
In Nation ſtraunge, (O myſerable lyfe)
Whyle Iaſon from his promyſes doe ſwarue,
And takes delight in his new wedded Wyfe,
O Ground vngrate; that when the huſband man
Hath tilled it, to recompence his toyle
No Corne, but Weedes, and Thyſtles render can,
To ſtinge his handes, that Fruict ſeekes of his Soyle.
Such venome growes of pleaſaunt coloured flower:
Loe, Prynces loe, what deadly poyſon ſup
Of Bane, erſt ſweete, now turned into ſower,
Medea dranke out of a goulden Cup,
AYe mee, (alas) I am vndone,
For at the Brydall cheare,
The warble note of wedding ſonge
reſounded in mine eare.
Yet for all this ſcant I my ſelfe,
yet ſcant beleue I can,
That Iaſon would play ſuch a prancke,
as moſt vnthāckfull man,
Both of my Countrey, and my Syre, and kingdome me to ſpoyle,
And yet forſake mee wretch forlorne, to ſtray in forrein ſoyle.
O hath he ſuch a ſtony heart, that doth no more eſteeme,
The great good turnes, and benefits that I imployde on him?
Who knowes, that I haue lewdly vſed enchauntments for his ſake,
The rigour rough, and ſtormy rage, of ſwelling Seas to ſlake.
The grunting firy foming Bulles, whoſe ſmoking guts were ſtuft,
With ſmoltring fumes, that frō theyr Iawes, & noſthrils out they puft.
I ſtopt their gnaſhīg moūching mouths, I quēcht their burning breath,
And vapors hot of ſtewing paunch, that els had wrought his death,
Or feedes hee thus his ſanſy, fond, to thinke my ſkill of charme,
Abated is, and that I haue no power to doe him harme?
Brſtract of wits, with wauering minde perplext on euery part,
I toſſed, and turmoyled am, wyth wayward craſy hart.
Now this, now that, and neyther now, but now another way,
By diuers meanes I toyle, that ſo my wrong reueng I may,
I would the wretch a brother had: but what? he hath a Wyfe.
Goe cut her throate, with gaſtly wounds bereue her of her lyfe.
On her ile worke my deadly ſpight: her, her alone I craue,
To quit ſuch bitter ſowſing ſtormes, as I ſuſtayned haue.
If any graund noorious guilt in all Pelaſga Land
Be put in practiſe, yet vnknowne vnto thy harming hand,
Thereof to get experience the time doth now begin:
Thy former feates doe byd thee take good hope, to thryue herein:
Let all thy guilts with thronging thick aſſemble thee to ayde,
The golden Fleece (the chiefe Nouell) of Colchis Ile betrayde.
My tender Brother eke, that with my Syer did mee purſue,
Whom with his ſecret partes cut of, I wicked Virgin ſlewe,
Whoſe ſhreaded and diſmembred corps, with ſword in gobbits hewd,
(A wofull Coarſe toth' Fathers heart) on Pontus ground I ſtrewd.
How hory headded Pelias his wythred age to ſhyft
To greener yeares, for longer lyfe: his daughters by my dryft
His members all and mangled fleſh with licour ſcalding hot
Yſodden, and perboyled haue, in ſeething braſen pot.
How oft in haynous bloud haue theſe my cruell handes bene dyed?
And neuer any guilt as yet by wrath inflamde I tryed.
But now the parlous poyſning wound of Cupids percing dart,
Doth boyle and rage within my breaſt, it ranckles at my hart.
But how could Iaſon it redreſſe, whom fortunes froward wyll
Hath yeelde vnto anothers hande, at luſt to ſaue or ſpill?
O rage of ruſty cancred minde, this ſclaundrous talke amende,
If Fortunes grace will graunt it thus, let him vnto his ende
Lyue ſtill my Iaſon as he was: but if not Iaſon myne,
Yet caytife ſuffer Iaſon liue, though Iaſon none of thyne:
Who being mindefull ſtill of vs ſome fauour let him ſhowe,
For theſe good turnes that our good will could earſt on him beſtowe:
King Creon is in all the fault, and onely worthy blame,
Who puffed vp with Scepter proude, vnable for to frame
His tickle minde to modeſty, made breach twixt vs agayne,
Whom Hymens bands, and link of loue had made but one of twayne,
By whom eke from her tender brats the mother (wretch) is drawne,
Hee breakes the vowe, that gaged is with ſuch a precious pawne.
Seeke after ſuch a villaynes bloud, in daunting pangs of ſmart
Let him alone bee ſurely dowſt, ſuch is his due deſart,
A dungell hept of Cinders burnt his Pallayce make I ſhall,
That Malea where in winding ſtrights, the lingring ſhips due crall,
Shall gaſe on ſmolthring turrets tops turmoylde in crackling flame.
For godſake (Madame) I you pray your tongue to ſilence frame.
Eke hyde your priuy languiſhing and greefe in ſecret vayne:
Who with a modeſt minde abides the Spurs of pricking payne,
And ſuffereth ſorrowes paciently, may it repay agayne.
Who beares a priuy grudge in breaſt, and keepes his malyce cloſe,
When leaſt ſuſpection is thereof, may moſt annoy his Foes.
He leeſeth oportunity who vengeaunce doth requyre,
That ſhewes by open ſparkes the flame the heate of kindled fyre.
Small is the grype of griefe that can to reaſons lore obay,
And ſneking downe with ſtealing ſteps can ſlyly ſlip away.
But they that throughly ſowſed are with ſhowers of greater payne,
Can not digeſt ſuch corſyes ſharpe, but caſt it vp agaye:
Fayne would I giue them trouncing girds.
Good daughter deare aſſwage
Th'unbrydled ſway, and boyling heate of this thy gyddy rage:
Scant maiſt thou purchaſe quietneſſe, although thou hold thy tongue.
The valiaunt heart dame Fortune yet durſt neuer harme wt wrōg,
But dreading daſtards downe ſhe driues.
It any corage dure,
And harbred be in noble breaſt, now put the ſame in vre.
The ſhow of ſturdy valiaut heart, at any time doth ſhyne.
No hope doth in aduerſity thy way to ſcape aſſygne.
Hee that hath none affiaunce left, nor any hope at all.
Yet let him not myſtruſt the luck of ought that may befall.
Thy Countrey cleane hath caſt thee of, to let thee ſinke or ſwim,
As for thy huſband Iaſon bee, there is no truſt in him:
Of all the wealth, and worldly mucke wherewith thou didſt abounde:
No porcion remaynes at all, whereby ſome helpe is founde.
Medea yet is left, (to much) and here thou mayſt eſpy
The Seas to ſuccour vs in flyght, and landes aloofe that ly:
Yea pron tooles, with burning brands we haue to worke them woe,
And Gods that with the thunder dint ſhall ouerquell our foe:
Who weares y• goldēcreſted crowne him dred with awe yee ſhould.
My Father was a King, yet I betrayed his Fleece of gould.
Can not the deadly vyolence of weapons make thee feare?
No, though ſuch griſly Lads they were, as whilom did appeare,
That bred of gargell Dragous teeth in holow gaping grounde,
When mutually in bloudy fight eche other did confounde.
Thē wilt thou caſt thy ſelf to death.
Would God ye I were dead.
Fly, fly to ſaue thy life.
Woe worth the time that once I fled.
What O Medea.
Why ſhall I fly?
A mother deere art thou,
Fly therefore for thy childrens ſake.
Yee ſee by whom, and how,
A wretched Mother I am made.
Thy lyfe by flight to ſaue
Doſt thou miſtruſt?
Nay, fly I will, but vengeaunce firſt ile haue.
Then ſome ſhall thee at heeles purſue, to wrecke the ſame agayne.
Perhap ile make his cōming ſhort.
Be ſtill, and now refrayne
O deſpret dame thy thundring threates, and ſlake your raging ire.
Apply, and frame thy froward will as time and tides requyre.
Full well may fortunes welting wheele to begging bring my ſtate,
As for my worthy corage, that ſhee, neuer ſhall abate.
Who bowncing at the Gates, doth cauſe the creaking dores to Iar?
It is the wretch (Creon his ſelfe,) whom princely power far
Hath lift aloft, with lordly looke, puft vp with pouncing pryde,
That hee may Corinth countrey, with the ſway of Scepter guide.
NEdea that vngracious Imp, king Aetas wicked chylde,
Yet hath not frō our careful realme her lingring foote exilde.
Som naughty drift ſhe goes about, her knacks of old we kno
Her iugling arts, her harming hāds are known wel long ago.
From whō will ſhee withhold her harme? whom will this cruell beaſt
Permit to liue, from perrill free, in quietneſſe and reſt?
Cleane to cut of this parlous plague it was our purpoſe bent,
But Iaſon by entreting hard, did cauſe vs to relent.
At his requeſt we graunted haue, her life ſhe ſhall enioy,
Let her acquit our countrey free from feare of all annoy:
Yea ſaufely let her pack her hence, in eger giddy fit,
With lumpiſh lowring looke ſhee comes in talke with me to knit:
Sirs keepe her of and ſet her hence, leaſt vs ſhe touch perhap,
And driue her backe from cōming nigh commaunde her keepe her clap.
And let her learne at length, how that her ſelfe ſubmit ſhe may,
The puiſſaunt payſe and maieſty of Princes to obay.
Run, hie thee quickly, trudge apace, haue hence out of my ſight
This horrible, moſt odious quean, this monſtrous wicked wight.
My ſoueraygne liege, what greater crime haue I or leſſe offence
Commit againſt thy maieſty, to be exled hence?
Alas, the guiltleſſe woman doth demaunde a reaſon why:
If thou be Iudge indifferent, ordaynde my cauſe to try,
Conſider then my doubtfull caſe, and wey the ground of it:
If thou be king, cōmaund a Iudge for ſuch a matter fit.
The princes powre thou ſhalt obey, b'it eyther right or wrong.
The proſperous pryde of wronging crownes cannot endeuer long.
Auaunt, & yell out thy complaynts at Colchis, get thee hence.
Full gladly will I get mee home, if he that brought me thence,
Vouchſafe to beare me back agayne.
Alas, to late aryſe
Entreating wordes, when as decree is taken otherwiſe.
He that not hearing eyther part, pronounceth his decree,
Vnrighteous man accoumpted is, though ryght his ſentence bee.
Whyle Pclias truſted to thy talke, from lyfe to death hee fell.
Go to, begyn, we gyue you leaue your goodly tale to tell.
That type of Regall maieſty, that erſt by Fortunes hand,
Aduaunced to I dyd attayne, hath taught mee vnderſtand,
How hard a thing it is of wrath the rygour to aſſwage,
When burning heate of boyling breaſt in flames begins to rage.
Eke for th'aduan̄cement of their power more to diſplay in ſight
Theyr kingly corage bolſtred out with maieſty of might.
They deeme it doth import aſway, and hath a greater grace,
Whome ſtately ſcepter cauſde to climbs aloft to prouder place.
To perſeuer with fanſye fonde, in that to reaſons ſpyght,
Whoſe greedy choyce attaynted fyrſt his minde with vayne delight.
For though in pireous plyght I lye, throwne downe to great decay,
With heauy hap, and ruthfull chaunce, to myſerable ſtay,
Thus hunted out from place to place, forſoke and left alone,
A wyddow while my huſband liue, with cauſe to wayle and mone,
Perplext in maze of miſery, wyth cloying cares ſo ryfe,
Yet whylom I in golden trone haue led in happy lyfe.
By high and noble parentage my bryght renowne doth ſhyne.
From Phoebus take my Graundſire great deryued is my ligue.
Whear ſyluer ſtreamed Phaſis flood his waſſhing waues doth ſhed,
Or with contrary croking wayes his bathing channell ſpred,
What euer wandring coaſt ſtretcht out is eft aloofe behynde,
From whence the roaming Scithyan Sea his channell forth doth fynde,
Where as Maeotis fenny plaſhe with pure freſh water ſprynges,
Doth ſeaſon ſweete the briny Sea, that tyde in thyther brynges.
Eke all the coaſtes enuyroued and kept within the bankes
Of Thermodon, where warlike troupes, & armed wyddowes ranckes,
With paynted bucklers on their armes holde all the land in feare,
With rigour rough of threatning ſword, with force of denting ſpeare.
So farre to all theſe wandring coaſtes and countreyes round about,
My Fathers ample regiment at large is ſtretched out.
I being thus of noble Race, and in an happy plight,
With glorious gloſſe of pryncely pomp in honour ſhining bright,
Then peareleſſe Peares my Spouſall bed did ſeeke and ſue to haue,
But thoſe to be theyr louing Feeres, now other Ladyes craue:
Raſhe, ticle, peuiſh, vndiſcreete, and wauering Fortunes wheele,
Hath caſt me out, the cruſſhing cares of baniſhment to feele.
In Scepter proude and hauty Crowne fix thine affyaunce faſt.
Sith vpſidowne with welkin wheele, whole mounts of wealth is caſt.
This Prynces doe poſſeſſe, that ſhould theyr royalty diſplay,
Whoſe fame ſhall neuer razed be, with ſtorme of lowring day,
To ſuccour thoſe whom miſery in pit of paynes doth ſouſe,
To ſhield and harber ſuppliaunts in roof of loyall houſe.
This onely brought I from my Realme, the precious golden Fleece,
That Iewell chiefe, and eke the flower of Chyualry in Greece,
The ſturdy prop, the Rampter ſtrong the bulwarke of your wealth,
And Hercules the boyſtrous Imp of Ioue I kept in health.
It was by meanes of my good will that Orpheus did eſcape,
Whoſe harmony the liueleſſe Rocks with ſuch delight did rape,
That forced euen the clottred lumpes with hobling prickt to praunce,
And eke the iocond nodding woods with footing fine to daunce.
And that theſe heauenly twins Caſtor, and Pollux did not by,
My dew deſart is doubled twiſe, ſith them preſerued I.
Of Boreas bluſtring out with puffed Cheekes, his blaſting Breath,
His wynged Sons I kept aliue both Calais, and Zeath.
And Linceus that with pearcing beames, and ſharper ſight of Eye,
Could Nauies on the farther banke of Sicill ſhore eſpy.
And all the Mynians that did come the golden Fleece to win.
As for the Prince of Princes all, I will not bring him in.
With ſilence Iaſon will I paſſe, for whom though him I ſaue,
Yet is not Greece in debt to mee, no recompence I craue.
To no man him I doe impute, the reſt I brought agayne
For your ayle, that you thereby ſome profit might attayne.
But onely on my Iaſon deare, him for my owne loues ſake
I kept in ſtore, that hee of mee his wedded Wyfe ſhould make.
None other fault (God wot) yee haue to charge mee with but this,
That Argo Ship by meanes of mee returned ſaufely is.
If I a ſhamefaſt mayde had not with Cupids bayte bene caught,
If more my Fathers health to haue then Iaſons I had ſought,
Pelaſga land had bene vdone, and faine to great decay,
Th luſty valiaunt Capitaynes, had cleane bene caſt away:
And ioly Iaſon fyrſt of all this now thy ſonne in lawe,
The Buls had rent his ſwalowed lims in fiery chomping iawe.
Let Fortune fight agaynſt my caſe as liſt her eluiſh will,
Yet neuer ſhall it grieue my heart, repent my deede I nill,
That I ſhould for ſo many kings their reling honour ſaue,
The guerden due that I for this my crime commit muſt haue,
It lyeth Crecon in thy hande, if thus it lyketh thee,
Condemne my guilty ghoſt lo death, but render fyrſt to mee,
My fault that forced me offend, then Creon graunt I this,
Receauing Iaſon (cauſe of cryme) I guilty did amiſſe.
Thou knowſt that I was ſuch an one when couring low I lay,
Before thy feete in humble wiſe and did entreating pray,
Thy gracious goodnes mee to graunt ſome ſuccour at thy hande.
For me a wreatch and wreatched Babes I aſke within this lande
Some cotage baſe, in outcaſt hole, ſome couching corner vile,
If from the towne thou driue vs out to wander in exile,
The ſome by place aloofe within this realme let vs obtare.
How I am none that tyrant like with churliſh Scepter raygne,
Nor proudly or diſdaynfully, with hawty corage hie,
With vaūting foote doe ſtamp them downe that vndertroden lye,
And daunted are in carefull bale, thys playnly doth diſcloſe,
In that to mee of late I ſuch a ſonne in lawe haue choſe,
Who was a wandring pilgrim poore, with ſore afflictions fraight,
Diſmayde with terrour of his foe, that lay for him in wayght.
Becauſe Acaſtus hauing got the crowne of Theſſail lande,
Requyreth in thy guilty bloude to bath his wreackfull hande.
He doth bewayle that good olde man his feeble father ſlayne,
Whom waight of yeres with bowing back to ſtoupe alow conſtrayne
The godly mynded ſyſters, all yblinde with miſty vale
And cloking colour of thy craft durſt ventruſly aſſayle.
That mount of myſchiefe marueylous, to mangle heaw, and cut▪
Theyr Fathers dere vnioynted limmes in boyling Caldron put.
But for thy open guiltineſſe if thou can purge the ſame,
Strayght Iaſon can diſcharge him ſelfe from blot of guilty blame.
His gentle handes were neuer ſtaynde with goare of any bloude.
Aloofe from your conſpyracie refrayning farre hee ſtoode.
His harmeleſſe handes put not in vre with goary tooles to mell.
But thou that ſetſt on fyre fyrſt theſe mighty miſchiefes fell,
Whom ſhameleſſe womans wily braine and manly ſtomack ſtout
Doe ſet a God, for to attempt to bring all ils about.
And no regarde at all thou haſt, how ſounding trumpe of fame
With ringing blaſt of good or ill doe blowe abrode thy name:
Get out and clenſe my fyled realme, away together beare
Thyne hearbes vnilde of ſorcery, my Lyeges ryd fro feare.
Tranſporte thee to ſome other lande, whereas thou may at eaſe
With odious noyſe of diueliſh charme, the troubled Gods diſeaſe.
If needes thou wylt haue me auoyde my ſhyp to mee teſtore,
Or els my mate with whom I fyrſt aryued on this ſhore:
Why doſt thou bid that by my ſele I onely ſhould be gone?
I came not heather at fyrſt wythout my company alone.
If this do thee aggryeſe, that brunt of warres thou ſhalt ſuſtayne,
Commaund vs both the cauſe thereof to ſhun thy realme agayne:
Sith both are guilty of one art, why doſt thou part vs twayne?
For Iaſons ſake not for myne owne, poore Pelias was ſlayne.
Annex vnto my traytrous flight the conquerde booty braue,
My hoary headded naturall ſier, whom I forſaken haue,
With brothers bloudy fleſh that mangled was with caruing knife,
Or ought of Iaſons forged lies he gabbes vnto his wyfe.
Theſe dreary deedes are none of myne, ſo oft as I offend,
Not for myne owne cōmodity, to come thereby in thende.
Time is expierd, by which thou ought to haue bene gone away,
Wyth keeping ſuch a chat, why doſt thou make ſo long delay?
Yet of thy bounty ere I goe, this one boone will I craue.
Although the mother baniſhed, ſo ſore offended haue,
Let not the vengeaunce of my fault through wrathfull deadly hate,
Myne innocent and guiltleſſe Babes torment in wreached ſtate.
Away: with louing friendly grype thy children I embrace,
And as a father naturall take pity on theyr caſe.
Euen for the proſperous good encreace of fertill ſpouſall bed,
Of Glauce bright thy Daughter deare, whom Iaſon late hath wed.
And by the hope of fruictfull ſeede, whoſe flowre in time ſhall bloome.
By th'onour of thy glyſtring crowne, ythralde to fortunes doome,
Whych ſhee ſo full of chop and chaunge, with ticle turning wheele
Whirls vp and downe, in ſtaggring ſtate makes to and fro to reele.
I thee beſeech, ſith to exile I am departing now
O Creon but a litle pawſe for mercy mee alow,
Whyle of my mourning brts with kyſſe, my laſt farewell I take.
Whyle gaſpe of fayling breath perhap my ſhyuering lyms forſake.
With craft entending ſome deceipt thou craueſt this delay.
What falſhode for ſo litle time be cauſe of terrour may?
No tot of time is ſhort ynough diſpleaſure to preuent.
Can not one io to weeping Eyes, and trylling teares be lent?
Although agaynſt thy erneſt ſuite vnlucky dread do ſtryue,
One day to ſettle thee away, content I am to gyue.
This is to much, and of the ſame ſomwhat abrydge yee may.
Make ſpeede apace if from our land thou get thee not away,
Ere Phoebus horſe with golden gleede theyr ſtreaming beames doe ſhed,
Of dawning lampe, thou art condemde to leeſe thy wretched hed.
The holy day, and brydall both doe call me hence away:
And wils mee at the ſacred aare of Hymeneus to pray.
LAuiſh of life and dreadleſſe was the wyght,
Attempting fyrſt in ſlender tottring Barge
Wyth ſliuing Ore theſlyced waue to ſmyte,
And durſt commit the dainty tender charge
Of hazered life to inconſtant courſe of wynde,
That turnes with chaunge of chaunces euermore,
To vew the land forſooke aloofe behynde,
And ſhoouing forthe the Ship fro ſafer ſhore,
And glauncing through the fomy Channell deepe
On ſunder cut with ſlender Stemme the waue,
Twixt hope of lyfe, and dread of death to ſweepe,
In narrow gut him ſelfe to ſpill or ſaue:
Experience yet of Planets no man had,
They needed not the wandring courſe to knowe
Of Starres, (wherewith the paynted ſky is clad,)
Not Pleiads, (which returne of ſayling ſhow)
Nor Hyads (that with ſhowrs the Seas doe beate)
No nor the ſterne Amaltheas horned head
(Who gaue the lyppes of ſucking Ioue the Teate)
Were wont to put the blundering ſhips in dread.
They feared not the northerne Iſy wayne,
Whych lazy olde bootes wieldes behinde,
And twynes about, no name yet could they fayne
For Boreas rough, nor ſmother weſtern wynde.
Yet Typhys bould on open ſeas durſt ſhow
His hoyſted ſayles, and for the wyndes decree
New lawes: as now full gale aloofe to blow,
Now tackle turride to take ſyde wynde alee,
Now vp to farle the croſſayle on the maſt,
There ſafe to hang, the topſayle now to ſpred,
Now miſſel ſayle, and drabler out to caſt,
VVhen dagling hanges his ſhottring tackle red
VVhyle ſtearſman ſtur, and buſye neuer blin,
VVith pyth to pull all ſayles eke to diſplay,
VVith tooth and nayle all foree of winde to wyn,
To ſheare the ſeas, and quick to ſcud awaye.
The golden worlde our fathers haue poſſeſt,
VVhere banyſht fraude durſt neuer come in place,
All were content to liue at home in reſt,
VVith horye head, gray beard, and ſurrowed face.
VVhych tract of time within his countrey brought.
Riche hauing lytle, for more they did not toyle,
No vente for wares, nor Traficque far they ſought,
No wealth that ſprange beyond theyr natiue ſoyle,
The Theſſail ſhyp together now hath ſet,
The Theſſail ſhip together now hath ſet,
The Worlde that well with Seas diſſeuered lay,
It biddes the fluds with Oares to be bet,
And ſtreames vnknowen with ſhipwrack vs to fray
That wicked Keele was loſt by ruthfull wrack
Ytoſſed through ſuch perylles paſſing great,
Where Cyane Rocks gan rore as thunder crack,
Whoſe bouncing boult the ſhaken ſoyle doth beat.
The ſowſing Surges daſſhed euery ſtarre,
The peſterd ſeas the cloudes aloft berayde,
This ſcuffling did bould TYPHIS minde detarre,
Hys helme did ſlip from trembling hande diſmayde.
The ORPHEVS with his drowping Harp was mum
Dead in her dumpes the flaunting ARGOS glee,
All huſht in reſt with ſilence wexed dum,
What hardy heart aſtound heere would not bee?
To ſee at once eche yawning mouth to gape,
Of Syllas gulph compact in wallowing paunch,
Of dogges, who doth not loth her mongrell ſhape,
Her viſage, breaſt, and hyddeous vgly haunch:
Whom erketh not the ſcoulde with barking ſtill?
To here the Mermaydes dyre who doth not quayle,
That lure the Eares with pleaſaunt ſinging ſhrill
Of ſuch as on Auſonius Sea doe ſayle:
When ORPHEVS on his tanckling Harpe did play,
That earſt the Muſe Callio gaue to him
Almoſt thoſe Nymphes that wonted was to ſtay
The ſhyps, he cauſd faſt following him to ſwim.
How deerely was that wicked iourney bought?
MEDEA accurſt, and eke the golden Feece,
That greater harme then ſtorme of ſeas hath wrought
Rewarded well that voyage firſt of Greece.
Now ſeas controulde doe ſuffer paſſage free,
The Argo proude erected by the hand
Of PALLA firſt, doth not complayne that ſhee,
Conueyde hath back, the kynges vnto theyr land
Eche whirry boate now ſcuddes aboute the deepe,
All ſtynts and warres are taken cleane away,
The Cities frame new walles themſelues to keepe,
The open worlde lettes nought reſt where it lay:
The Hoyes of Ind Arexis lukewarme leake,
The Perſeans ſtout in Rhene and Albis ſtreame
Doth bath their Barkes, time ſhall in fine out breake
When Ocean waue ſhall open euery Realme.
The wandring World at will ſhall open lye.
And TYPHIS vvill ſome nevve founde Land ſuruay
Some trauelers ſhall the Countreys farre eſcrye,
Beyonde ſmall Thule, knovven furtheſt at this day.
WHy trotſt thou fiſking in and out
ſo raſh from place to place?
Stand ſtyll, and of thyne eger wrath
ſuppreſſe the ruthfull race,
The rigour rough of ramping rage
from burning breaſt out caſt,
As Bacchus bedlem prieſtes that of
his ſpryte haue felt the blaſt,
Run franticke, hoyting vp and downe
with ſcitiſh wayward wits,
Not knowing any place of reſt, ſo prickt with frowarde fits,
On cloudy top of Pindus Mounte all hyd with Snow ſo chyll:
Or els vpon the lofty riddge of braunched Niſa hyll:
Thus ſtarting ſtill with frounced mynde ſhe walters to and froe,
The ſignes pronouncing proofe of pangues her frenſy Face doth ſhow
With glowing cheekes, and bloud red Face with ſhort & gaſping breath,
Shee fetcheth deepe aſcending ſighes from ſobbing heart beneath,
Now blyth ſhe ſmiles, ech rūbled thought in pondring braine ſhe beats,
Now ſtandes ſhe in a mammering, now myſchiefe ſore ſhe threats.
With chafing fume ſhe burnes in wrath, and nowe ſhe doth cōplayne,
With blubbering teares a freſh byliue ſhee weepes & wayles agayne.
Where will this lumpiſh loade of cares with headlong ſway allight?
On whom entendeth ſhee to worke the threates of her deſpight?
Where will this huge tempeſtious ſurge ſlake downe it ſelfe agayne?
Enkindled fury new in breaſt begins to boyle a mayne.
Shee ſecretly entendes no miſchiefe ſmall nor meane of ſſe
To paſſe her ſelfe in wickednes her buſy braynes deuiſe.
The token olde of pinching ire full well ere this know I:
Some haynous, huge, outragious great, and dredfull ſtorme is nye:
Her firy, ſcowling, ſteaming Eyes, her hanging Groyne I ſee,
Her powling, puffed, frowning Face, that ſignes of freatting bee.
O myghty Ioue be guile my feare.
O wretch if thou deſire,
What meaſure ought to payſe thy wrath then learne by Cupids fire,
To hate as ſore as thou didſt loue, ſhall I not them anoy
That doe vnite in ſpouſall bed, theyr wanton luſt t'enioy?
Shall Phoebus fiery footed horſe goe lodge in weſtern waue
The drowping day, that late I did with humble crowching craue,
And with ſuch erneſt buſie ſuite ſo hardly graunted was?
Shall it depart ere I can bring my deuyliſh dryſt to paſſe?
Whyle houering heauen doth counterpayſed hang with egall ſpace,
Amid the marble Hemiſpheares, whyle rounde with ſtinted race,
The gorgeous Sky aboue the Earth doth ſpinning roll about,
Whyles that the number of the ſandes, lyes hid vnſerched out,
While dawning day doth keepe his courſe with Phoebus blaſe ſo bright,
While twinkling ſtarres in golden traynes doe garde the ſlūbry nyght,
While Iſle vnder propping poale with whyrling ſwyng ſo ſwift,
The ſhyning Beares vnbathde about the froſen Sky doe lift,
While fluſhing floudes the frothy ſtreames to ruſtling Seas doe ſend,
To gird them gript with plonging pangues my rage ſhall neuer end.
With greater heate it ſhall reboyle, lyke as the brutiſhe beaſt,
Whoſe tyranny moſt horrible, exceedeth all the reſt,
What greedy gaping whyrle poole wide what parlous gulph vnmilde,
What Sylla coucht in roring Rockes, or what Charybdes wylde,
(That Sicill, and Ionium Sea by frothy waues doth ſup)
What Aetna bolking ſtfling flames, and duſky vapours vp,
(Whoſe heauy payſe wt ſtewing heate doth ſmoldring cruſh beneath
Encelades, that fiery flakes from choked throte doth breath)
Can with ſuch dreadfull menaces in ſweeting fury fry?
No ryuer ſwift no troubled ſurge of ſtormy Sea ſo hye,
Nor ſturdy ſeas (whom ruffling winds with raging force to rore)
Nor puiſſaunt flaſh of fyre, whoſe might by boyſtrous blaſt is more,
May byde my angers violence: my fury ſhall it foyle:
His court Ile ouer hourle, and lay it leauell with the ſoyle.
My Iaſons heart did quake for feare of Creon cruell king.
And leaſt the king of Theſſaly would warre vpon him bring.
But loyall loue that hardens hearts makes no man be afright.
But beete, that he conuict hath yeelde himſelfe to Creons might.
Yet once hee might haue viſited, and come to me his wyfe,
To talke, and take his laſt farewell, if daunger of his life
In doing this (hard harted wretch moſt cruell) he ſhould feare,
He being Creons ſonne in law, for him it efull were,
To haue proroged ſomwhat yet my heauy baniſhment,
To take my leaue of chyldren twayne one onely day is lent:
Yet doe I not complayne, as though the time to ſhort I thought,
As proofe ſhall playne pronounce, to day, to day, it ſhall bee wrought,
The memory whereof no tract of time ſhall wype away.
With malice bent agaynſt the Gods my wrath ſhall them aſſay:
And rifling euery thing, both good, and bad, I will turmoyle.
Madame thy minde that troubled is, and toſt with ſuch abroyle
Of ſwarming ills▪ thy vexed breaſt now ſet at reſt agayne,
The peniſh fond affections all of troubled mynde refrayne.
Then onely can I be at reſt, when euery thing I ſee
Throwne headlong topſte turuey downe to ruthfull ende with mee.
With mee let all things cleane decay: thy ſelfe if thou doe ſpill,
Thou miſt driue to deſtruction what els with thee thou will:
It in this folly ſtiffe thou ſtand, beholde what after clappes
Are to bee fearde, none dare contriue for Prynces trayning trappes.
O Luckleſſe lot of frowarde Fates, O cruell Fortunes hap,
Both whē ſhe liſt to ſmite, or ſpare, in woe ſhe doth vs wrap
A like, the ſalue y• God hath geuen ſo oft, to cure our griefe,
More noyeth then the ſore it ſelfe, and ſendeth leſſe reliefe:
If for her good deſerts: o me, amendment I ſhould make,
I hazard ſhould my ventrous lyfe to leeſe it for her ſake.
If I will ſhun my diſmall day, and will not for her dy,
Then want the loue of loyalty, O wretched man muſt I.
No daſtards dread my ſtomacke ſtout can cauſe to droupe & ſhrynke,
But meere remorſe appaulleth me, when on my babes I thynke.
For why? when carefull parents are once reft of lyfe and breath,
Some after them their wretched ſeede are drawne to dolefull death.
O Sacred righteouſneſſe (if thou enioye thy worthy place
In perfect bliſſe of happy heauen) I call vpon thy grace,
And thee for witneſſe here alledge, how for my childrens part
With pity prickt I haue commit theſe things agaynſt my hart.
And ſo I thinke Medea her ſelfe the Mother rather had,
(Though frantickly as now ſhe ares with rage of heart ſo mad
And doth abhor with paynfull yoke of combrous cares to toyle)
Her ſpouſall bed, then that her ſeede ſhould take the plunging foyle.
I did determine in my minde, to goe her to entreate
With gentle wordes, & pray her ceaſe, in feruent wrath to freate.
And loe, on me when once ſhe caſte the beames of glauncing Eye,
Full blythe ſhe leapes, ſhe tumpes for ioy, in fis ſhe ginnes to fry.
Deepe deadly blackiſh hate ſhe ſeemes in outwarde brow to beare,
And wholly in her frowning face doth glutting griefe appeare.
I packing, packing, Iaſon am: this ſtill to chop, and chaunge
The fleeting ſoyle of my abode, to mee it is not ſtraunge.
The cauſe of my departure yet (to me is ſtraung) and new.
I wonted was in followinge thee all places to eſchew:
I will depart, and get me hence, to whom for helping hande
Entendeſt thou to ſende vs forth, whom hence to fly the land
Thou doſt compell with thine alies? ſhall I repayre agayne▪
To Phaſis flood, to Colchis Iſle, or to my fathers raygne?
Or goary ſweeting fieldes, that with my brothers blood do reeke?
What harbring lands aloofe doſt thou commaund vs out to ſeeke?
What ſeas appoint yee me to paſſe? ſhall I my iourney dryue,
Vppon the parlous hatefull iawes of Pontus to arriue,
By which I did ſaufe conduct home kings valiaunt armies great,
Where roaring rocks with thundring noiſe the flapping waues do beate
Or on the narrow wrackfull ſhore, of Simplegades twayne?
Or els to ſmall Hiolcos towne can I retourne agayne?
Or toyle, the gladſome pleaſaunt lands of Tempe to attayne?
All places that I opened haue vnto thy paſſage free,
I ſhut them vp agaynſt my ſelfe, now whether ſendſte thou mee?
A baniſht wretch to baniſhment thou wouldeſt haue encline,
Yet to the place of her exyle, thou canſt not her aſſygne.
Yet for all that without delay I muſt depart and go:
And why? forſoth the king his ſonne in law commaundeth ſo.
Well: nothing will I ſtand againſt, with grypes of paſſing payne
Let me be ſcourgde, of my deſarts ſuch is the gotten gayne.
Let Creon in his pryncely ruffe lay to his heauy handes,
To whyp an whore in torments ſharp, with iron giues, and bandes
Let her be chaynd, in hydeous hole of night for aye her locke:
Let her be cloyed with peſtring payſe of reſtleſſe rowling rocke.
Yet leſſe than I deſerued haue, in all this ſhall I finde:
O thou vncurteous Gentleman, conſider in thy mynde
The flamy puffes, and firy gaſpes of gaſtly gaping bull,
And Aetas catell rych with Fleece of gorgeous golden wooll,
That went to graze amid ſo great and mighty feares in fielde,
Of vncontrouled Nation, whoſe ſoyle doth armies yeelde.
Reuoke to minde the deadly dartes of ſodayne ſtarting foe,
When gaſtly warriour (Tellus broode) to ground agayne did goe,
Through ſlaughter red of mutuall launce, to this yet further paſſe,
The lurched Fleece of Phrixes Ramme, that all thine errand was.
And vgſome Argos ſlumberleſſe, whom faſt I cauſde to keepe
His wery watching winking eyes with vnaquaynted ſleepe.
My brother eke, whoſe fatall twiſt of feeble lyfe I ſhred,
And guilt that wrought ſo many guiltes when as with thee I fled.
The daughters whom I ſet on worke entrapt in wily trayne,
To ſlay theyr ſire, that ſhall not ryſe to quickned lyfe agayne.
And how to trauell other realmes, I ſet myne owne at nought.
By that good hope which of thy ſeede conceaued is in thought,
Eake by thy ſtable Manſion place, and mighty monſters, that
Downe beaten for thy health, I cauſde before thy feete to ſquat,
And by theſe drudging hands of myne vnſpared for thy ſake,
For dread of daungers ouer paſt that cauſed thee to quake,
By heauens aboue, and ſeas belowe, that witneſſe bearers bee,
To knitting of our maryage vp, thy mercy vayle to mee.
Of all the heapes of treaſure great ſo farre of being fet,
Which Aetas ſauage Scythians dyd trauell for to get,
From Ind, where Phoebus ſcorching blaſe doth dye the people blacke.
Of all this golde which in our dowers wee coulde not well compacke.
But tricke and trym wee garniſhed our groues with golde ſo gay,
I baniſht wretch of all this ſtuffe gat nought with mee away,
Except my brothers ſlaughtred fleſh, yet I employed the ſame
On thee: the cares of countreyes health, my honeſty and ſhame.
My Father, and my brother both hath yeelded place to thee,
This is the dowry that thou had my wedded ſpouſe to bee.
To her whom thou doſt abrogate reſtore her goods agayne▪
When Creon in malicious moode had thought thee to haue ſlayne,
Entreated with my teares, exyle and life he gaue to thee.
I tooke it for a puniſhment, but ſurely as I ſee
This baniſhment is now become a friendly good rewarde.
While thou haſt time to goe, be gone, for moſt ſeueare, and harde
The kings diſpleaſure euer is.
thus wouldſt thou dodge mee out?
Thy hated trull caſt of thou doſt, that pleaſe Creuſe thou mought.
Doſt thou Medea vpbrayde mee with the breach vnkynde of loue?
And ſlaughter vyle, with trechery, whereto thou didſt mee moue.
When all is done what canſt thou ſay my guiltines to ſtayne?
Euen whatſoeuer I haue done.
Yet more this doth remayne:
That thy vngracious wickednes of harme ſhould mee accuſe.
Thine, thine, they are, they are all thine what euer I did vſe,
Who that of lewdneſſe reapes the fruict, is grafter of the ſame.
Let euery one with infamy thy wretched Spouſe defame,
Yet doe thou onely take her part, her onely doe thou call
A iuſt and vndefiled wight, without offence at all.
If any man ſhall for thy ſake polute his hand with ill,
To thee let him an innocent yet be accompted ſtill,
The life is lothſome that doth worke his ſhame who hath it choſe.
The life whoſe choyſe doth worke thy ſhame thou ought againe to loſe.
Let reaſon rule thy eger mynde ſo vext with crabbed ire,
And for thy tender childrens eaſe to bee at reſt requyre.
I doe defy it, wholy I deteſt it, I forſweare,
That bretheren bred vnto my barnes Creuſas wombe ſhall beare.
It will be trim, when as a Queene of maieſty and myght
Hath iſſue, kinne vnto the ſeede of thee a baniſhe wight.
So curſed day ſhall neuer on my wretched children ſhine,
To mingle baſe borne baſterdes with the bloud of noble Lygue.
Shall Phoebus ſtocke (that beares the lamp of heauen in ſtarry throne)
Be macht with drudging Siſiphus that roules in hell the ſtone?
What meaneſt thou wretch, both thee & mee in baniſhment to yoke?
I pray then hence.
When humbly I my mynde to Creon broke,
Hee gaue an eare vnto my ſuite.
What lyeth in my myght
To doe for thee?
If no good turne, then doe thy worſt diſpyght.
On this ſide with his ſwerd in hand king Creon doth mee carre:
On other part with armed hoaſt Acaſt doth mee detarre.
Medea eke to coape with theſe, that more apaull vs may:
Go to, to ſkyrmiſhe let vs fall, let Iaſon be the pray:
I yeelde whom ſore aduerſities haue tyerd with heauy ſway.
Learne thou to dred thy lucleſſe lot that ofte doth thee aſſay.
I euermore haue rulde the ſwinge of fortunes wauering will.
Achaſtus is at hand, and nygh is Creon thee to ſpyll:
Take thou thy heeles to ſcape them both, I doe not thee aduiſe,
That thou agaynſt thy father in lawe in traytrous armes ſhould ryſe.
Nor in Achaſt thy coſens bloud thy wounding handes to gore,
The vowes vnto Medea made, doe trouble thee ſo ſore.
Whyle yet thou haſt not ſpilt there bloud, yet fly with mee away.
When armies twayne their banners of defiance ſhall diſplay,
And marching forth in fielde to fyght ſeeke battayle at my hande,
Who then for vs encounter ſhall their puiſſaunce to withſtand?
If Creon and Achaſtus king encampe together ſhall.
Admit that theſe in one with them ſhould ioyne their powers all
My Countreymen of Colchis Ile, and AEtas luſty kyng,
Suppoſe the Scythians ioyne with Greekes, to ground I wil thē bring,
Cleane put to foile.
The puiſſaunt power of hawty mace I feare.
Take heede, leaſt more thou do affect the ſame, then for to cleare,
Thy ſelfe of Creons ſeruile yoke.
Leaſt ſome ſuſpicion grow,
Of this our tatling long here let vs make an ende and goe.
Now Ioue hurle out thy flames & force thy thundring bolts to fly,
With fiery drakes bright brandiſhing diſparſt in burning ſky:
Strayne forth thy dreadfull threatning arme, diſpoſe in due aray
The roſſing dint of lightning flaſhe, that wrecke our quarrell may.
With rumbling cracke of renting cloud cauſe all the world to quake,
And Ieuell not thy houering hand to ſtryke with firy flake
Uppon my paſht and cruſhed corpes, or Iaſons Carcaſſe ſlayne:
For whether of vs thou ſmight to death his due rewarde ſhall gayne,
Thy thumps of thwacking boltes on vs amiſſe they cannot light.
Fy, let thy mynde on matters runne that ſeeme a modeſt wight.
And vſe to haue more cheerefull talke, if any thing thou craue,
Within my fathers houſe to eaſe thy flyght, thou ſhalt it haue.
Thou knowſt my minde bath can, & eke is wont, to doe no leſſe,
Then to contemne the brittell wealth that Prynces doe poſſeſſe.
This, this ſhalbe the onely boone that at thy hande I craue,
As mates with me in baniſhment, my children let mee haue,
That reſting on theyr ſighing breaſtes my carefull mourning hed,
I may my chryſtall teary ſtreames into theyr boſomes ſhed.
But as for thee, new gotten ſonnes of wife new wed doe ſtay.
I graunt that vnto thy requeſt I wiſhe I might obey:
But nature mee with pity pryckes, that needes I muſt deny.
For though both Creon and Achaſt, in torments force mee lye,
I could not yeelde vnto theyr willes: on this my lyfe doth reſt:
In times of teares, this is the ioy of dull afflicted breſt
For better farre I can abyde the wante of vitall breath,
And ſuccour of my lymmes, or looſe, the light of worlde by death.
What Ioue vnto his ſeely Babes is deeply graft in him?
This worketh well I haue him tript, loe now there lyeth brim.
An open place whereby receaue a venny ſoone hee may.
Let mee or I departe, vnto my ſeely children ſay.
Theſe leſſons of my laſt adewe, and graunt to mee the ſpace,
With tender grype of colling laſt theyr louing limmes t'embrace:
This wilbe comforte to my heart: yet at the latter woorde
I aſke no more but onely that you ſhoulde mee this afoorde.
If eger anguiſh cauſe my tongue to caſt out woords vnkinde,
Let all thing fly, let nothing be engraued in your minde
But let remembraunce otherwhyle of mee to touch your thought,
Let other thinges be wypte away that byle of wrath hath wrought.
I haue forgotten euery whit God graunt thou may of ſhake,
Theſe ſurging qualmes of frounced minde & milder mayſte it make:
For quietneſſe doth worke theyr eaſe that dented are with woe:
What is he ſlily ſlypt and gon? falles out the matter ſo?
O Iaſon doſt thou ſneake away, not hauing minde of mee,
Nor of thoſe former great good turnes that I haue done for thee?
With thee now am I cleane forgot: but I will bryng about
That from thy carefull ſighing minde ſhall not bee baniſht out:
Apply to bring this to effect, call home thy wits agayne,
And all thy wyly fetches farre, eache artificiall trayne.
This is the perfect fruict that may to thee of miſchiefe ſpryng,
To preſuppoſe that miſchiefe is not graft in any thing.
Scant haue I oportunity for my pretenſed guile,
Becauſe wee are miſtruſted ſore: but try I will the whyle
To ſet vpon them in ſuch ſort, as none can deeme my ſleyght:
March forth, now venture on, fall to, both what lyeth in thy myght.
And alſo what doth paſſe thy power. O faythfull nourſe and mate
Of all my heauy heart breaking, and dyuers curſed fate.
Come help our ſimple meane deuice. Remayning yet I haue
A robe of Pall the preſent that our heauenly Graundſire gaue,
Chiefe monument of Cholchis Ile, which Phoebus did beſlow
On Aetas for a pledge, that him his father he might know.
A precious fulgent gorget eake, that brauely glytters bryght,
And with a ſeemely ſhyning ſeame of golden thryds is dight,
Through wrought betwene the row of pirles doe ſtand in borders roūd,
Wherewith my golden criſpen Locks is wonted to be croūd.
My lytle children they ſhall beare theſe preſents to the Bryde,
That firſt with ſlibber ſlabbar ſoſſe of chauntments ſhalbe tryde.
Requeſt the ayde of Hecate in redineſſe prepare
The lamentable ſacrifice, vpon the bloudy Aare.
Enforce the fiers catching holde vpon the rafters hye
With crackling noyſe of flamy ſparkes rebound in azur ſky.
NOffers force, nor rūbling rage of boiſtrus bluſtring winde,
No dart ſhot whirling in the ſkies, ſuch terrour to y• minde
Can driue, as when y• ireful wife doth boile in burning hate
Dpriued of her ſpouſall bed, and comfort of her mate,
Nor where the ſtormy ſoutherne winde with dankiſh dabby face,
Of hoary winter ſendeth out the guſſhing ſhowres apace.
Where veighment Iſters waumbling ſtreame comes waltring downe amayne,
Forbidding both the banks to meete, & cannot oft contayne
Him ſelfe within his channels ſcoupe, but further breakes his way,
Nor Rodanus whoſe ruſſhing ſtreame doth launch into the ſea,
Or when amid the floured ſpring with hotter burning ſunne,
The winters ſnowes diſolude with heate downe to the ryuers runne:
The clottred top of Haemus hill to water thin doth turne,
Such deſperate gogin flame is wrath that inwardly doth burne,
And modeſt rule regardeth not, nor brydeis can abyde,
Nor dreading death, doth wiſh on dinte of naked blade to ſlyde.
O Gods be gratious vnto vs, for pardon we do craue,
That him who tamde the ſcuffling waues, vauchſafe yee would to ſaue.
But Neptune yet the Lord of Seas with frowning face will lower,
That ouer his ſecond Scepter men to tryumph haue the power.
The boy that raſhly durſt attempt that great vnweldy charge
Of Phoebus euerlaſting Carte, and rouing out at large,
Not bearing in his reckleſſe breaſt his fathers warnings wyſe,
Was burned with the flames which hee did ſcatter in the Skyes.
None knew the coſtly glimſing glades, where ſtraggling Phaëton rode,
Paſſe not the path, where people ſafe in former tyme haue trode.
O fondling, wilfull, wanton boy, doe not diſſolue the frame
Of heauen, ſith Ioue with ſacred hand hath halowed the ſame.
Who rowde with valiaunt Oares tough, that were for Argo made,
Hath powled naked Pelion mounte of thycke compacted ſhade.
Who entred hath the fleeting rockes and ſerched out the toyle
And tyring trauels of the ſeas, and hath on ſaluage ſoyle
Knit faſt his ſtretched Cable rope, and going forth to land.
To cloyne away the forren golde with greedy ſnatching hand.
Vnto the ſeas (becauſe that hee tranſgreſt theyr lawes deuine)
By this vnlucky ende of his, he payes his forfeyte fine.
The troubled ſeas of theyr vnreſt for vengeaunce howle and weepe.
Syr Typhis who did conquer fyrſt the daunger of the deepe,
Hath yeelded vp the cunning rule of his vnweldy ſterne,
To ſuch a guide, as for that vſe hath neede as yet to learne.
Who giuing vp his Ghoſt aloofe from of his natiue lande,
In forreyn more lyes buryed vile with durty ſoddes in ſande.
He ſits among the flitiring ſoules that ſtraungers to him weare.
And Aulis Iſle that in her minde her maſters loſſe doth beare,
Held in the Ships, to ſtand and wayle in croking narrow nocke:
That Orpheus Calliops ſonne who ſtayde the running Brooke,
Whyle he recordes on heauenly Harpe with twanckling finger ſine,
The wynde layde downe his pipling blaſtes: his harmony diuine
Procurde the woods to ſtyr them ſelues, and trees in traynes along
Came forth with byrds that held their layes and liſtned to his ſong.
With lims on ſunder rent in fielde of Thrace he lyeth dead.
Vp to the top of Heber floude, eke haled was his head.
Gone downe he is to Stygian dampes, which ſeene hee had before,
And Tartar boyling pits, from whence returne hee ſhall no more.
Alcydes banging hat did bringe the Northern laddes to grounde.
To Achelo of ſundry ſhapes he gaue his mortall wounde.
Yet after he could purchaſe peace both vnto ſea and land,
And after Ditis dungeon blacke rent open by his hand,
He lyuing ſpred himſelfe along on burning Oetas hill:
His members in his proper flame the wretch did thruſt to ſpill:
His bloud he brewd with Neſtors bloud, and loſt his lothſome lyfe
By traytrous gyft that poyſoned ſhyrt receaued of his wyfe.
With tuſke of briſtled groyning Bore Anceus lyms were torne.
O Meleagar (wicked wight) to graue by thee were borne
Thy mothers brethren twayne, and ſhee, for it with ruthfull hand,
Hath wrought thy dolefull deſteny, to burne thy fatall brand.
The raſh attempting Argonantes deſerued all the death
That Hylas whom Alcides loſt bereft of fading breath.
That ſpringall which in ſowſing waues of waters drowned was:
Goe now yee luſty bloudes, the Seas: with doubtfull lot to paſſe.
Though Idmon had the calking ſkyll of deſtentes before,
The ſerpent made him leaue his lyfe in tombe of Liby ſhore.
And Mopſus that to other men could well theyr fates eſcry,
Yet onely did deceyue him ſelfe vncertayne where to dy,
And he that could the ſecret hap of things to come vnfoulde,
Yet dyde not in his counrey Thebes. Dame, Theris huſband oulde
Did wander like an outlawde man Our Palimedes ſyre
Did headlong whelm him ſelfe in ſeas. Who at the Greekes retyre
From Troy, to ruſhe on rockes did them alure with wily light,
Stout Aiax Oleus did ſuſtayne the dint of thunder bright,
And cruell ſtorme of ſurging ſeas, to quite the haynous guilt,
That by his countrey was commit, in ſeas he lyeth ſpilt.
Alceſte to redeeme her huſbands Phereus lyfe from death,
The godly Wyfe vpon her ſpouſe beſtowed her panting breath.
Proude Pelias that wretch him ſelfe who bad them firſt aſſay
The golden Fleece that booty braue by ſhip to fetch away,
Perboylde in glowing cauldron hoate with feruent heate hee fryes,
And fleering peece meale vp and downe in water thin he lyes.
Inough, inough, reuenged are O Gods the wronges of ſeas,
Be good to Iaſon, doing that hee did, his Eame to pleaſe.
MY ſhiuering minde amazed is, agaſt, and ſore diſmayde:
My chilliſh lims with quaking colde do tremble all afrayde,
Such plagus & vengeāce is at hand, in what exceding wiſ
Do ſharp aſſaults of greedy griefe ſtill more & more ariſe,
And of it ſelfe in ſmothering breaſt enkindleſſe greater heate?
Oft haue I ſeene how ramping rage hath forced her to freate.
With franticke fits, mad, bedlem wiſe, againſt the Gods to rayle,
And eke bewitched ghoſts of heauen in plunging plagues to trayle:
But now Medea beates her buſie brayne to bring to paſſe
A myſchiefe greater, greater farre, then euer any was.
Erewhile when hence ſhe tript away aſtoniſhed ſo ſore,
And of her poyſon cloſſet cloſe ſhee entred had the dore:
Shee powreth out her Iewels all, abrode to light ſhee brings
That which ſhe dreading athed long▪ moſt irkſome vgly things:
She mumbling coniures vp by names of ills the rable rout,
In hugger mugger cowched long, kept cloſe, vnſerched out:
All peſtlent plagues ſhe calles vpon, what euer Libie lande,
In frothy boyling ſtream doth worke, or muddy belching ſande:
What tearing torments Taurus breedes, with ſnowes vnthawed ſtill
Where winter flawes, and hory froſt knit hard the craggy hill,
She layes her croſſing hands vpon each monſtrous coniurde thing,
And ouer it her magicke verſe with chat ming doth ſhe ſing:
A mowſte, rowſte, ruſty route with cancred Scales Iclad
From muſty, fuſty, duſty dens where lurked long they had,
Doe craull: a wallowing ſerpent huge, his cōbrous Corps out drags,
In fiery foming blaring mouth his forked tongue hee wags.
He ſtares about with ſparkling eyes, if ſome he might eſpy,
Whom ſnapping at with ſtinging ſpit he might conſtrayne to dy:
But hearing once the magycke verſe he huſht as all a gaſt,
His body boalne big, wrapt in lumps on twining knots hee caſt.
And wambling to and fro his tayle in linkes he rowles it round.
Not ſharp enough (quoth ſhe) the plagues & tooles that hollow groūd
Engenders for my purpoſe are, to heauen vp will I call,
To reach me ſtronger poyſon down, to frame my feate with all.
Now is it at the very poynt, Medea thou aſſay,
To bring about ſome farther fetch, then common Witches may.
Let downe, let downe, that ſprawling Snake that doth his body ſpred,
As doth a running brooke abroade his myghty channell ſed.
Whoſe ſwelling knobs of wondrous ſe & buyſtrous bobbing bumpes
Doth thumpe the great & leſſer beare that feete his heauy lumpes.
The bygger beare with golden gleede the greekiſh fleete doth guyde:
But by the leſſe the Sidon ſhips their paſſage haue eſpide.
He that with pinch of griping fiſt doth bruſe the adders twayne,
His ſtrening hard & claſping hande, let him vnknit agayne.
And cruſhe their ſqueaſed venome out, come further thou our charme
O flymy ſerpent Python, whom Dame Iuno ſent to harme
Diana, and Apollo both, (thoſe heauenly ſpyrites twayne)
With whom Latona traueling did grone with pynching payne.
O Hydra whom in Lerna poole Alcides gaue the foyle,
And all the noyſome vermen vyle that Hercules did ſpoyle.
Which when on ſunder they were cut with ſlyſing deadly knyfe,
Can knit agayne their ſodred partes, and ſo recouer lyfe.
Help wakefull Dragon Argos, whom firſt magicke wordes of myne
Made Morpheus locke thy ſleepy liddes, and ſhut thy ſlugring eyne.
Then hauing brought aboue the ground of Serpents all the rout,
Of filthy weedes the ranckeſt bane ſhee pyckes, and gathers out,
That ſpryng on knotty Eryx hill where paſſage none is founde,
Among the ragged Rockes, or what on Caucaſus his grounde
Doth grow that ſtill is clad in Coate of hoary moary froſt.
That euermore vnmelt abydes, whoſe ſpattred fylde is ſoſte
With gubbs of bloud, y• ſpowteth from Prometheus gaping maw,
Whoſe guts with twitching talent out the gaſtly gripe doth draw.
Or any other venemous herbe amonge the Medes that growes,
That with their ſheafe of arowes ſharp in field do ſcare their foes.
Or what the light held Parthian to ſerue her turne can ſende,
Or els the rych Arabians, that dyp theyr arrowes ende
In poyſon ſtrong: the iuyce of all Medea out doth wrynge,
That vnderneath the froſen poale in Svveuia land doth ſprynge.
Whoſe noble ſtate Hircinus woode doth high enhaunce and reare▪
Or what the pleaſaunte ſoyle doth yeelde in pryme of ſmiling veare,
When nature byddes the byrd begin her ſhrowding neſt to builde,
Or when the churlyſhe Boreas blaſt ſharpe winter hath exilde,
The trym aray of braunche and bough to cloth the naked tree,
And euery thinge with bitter coulde of Snowe congealed bee.
In any peſtilent flower on ſtalke of any hearbe doth growe,
Or noyſome iuyce doth lye in rotten wrythen rootes alowe,
Hath any force in breading bane, thoſe takes ſhee in her hande.
Some plaugy hearbes did Athos yeelde that mount of. Theſſayle lande.
And other Pindus roches hye and ſome vppon the top
Of Pingeus, but tender twigges the cruell Sythe did lop:
Theſe Tigris ryuer noriſht vp, that choakes his whyrlpoale deepe
With ſtronger ſtreame. Danubius thoſe in foſtring waue did keepe.
Thoſe did Hidaſpus myniſter, who by the parching zone
With lukewarme ſiluer channell runnes, ſo ryth with precious ſtone.
And Bethis ſonne, who gaue the name vnto his countrey great,
And with his ſhallowe oarde agaynſt the Spanyſhe ſeas doth beat
This hearbe aboade the edge of knyfe in dawning of the day
Ere Phoebus Face gan peepe, bedect with glittring goulden ſpray
His ſlender ſtalke was ſuepped of in deepe of ſilent nyght,
His corne was cropt, whyle ſhe wt charme her poyſned nayles did dight.
Shee chops the deadly hearbes, & wrings the ſqueſed clottered bloud
Of Serpentes out: and filthy byrdes of irkeſome miry mud:
She tempers with the ſame and eake: ſhe brayes the heart of Owle
Foreſhewing death with glaring Eyes, and moaping Vyſage foule,
Of ſhryke Owle hoarce alyue ſhe takes the durty ſtinking guts,
All theſe the framer of this feate in dyuers percels puts.
This hath in it deuouring force of greedy ſpoyling flame,
The froſen yſle dulling coulde engenders by the ſame.
Shee chauntes on thoſe the magicke verſe, that workes no leſſer harme,
With buſtling frantickely ſhee ſtampes, and ceaſeth not to charme.
O Flittring Flockes of griſly. ghoſtes
that ſit in ſilent ſeat
O ougſome Bugges, O Gobblins grym
of Hell I you intreat:
O lowryng Chaos dungeon blynde,
and dreadfull darkned pit,
Where Ditis muffled vp in Clowdes
of blackeſt ſhades doth ſit,
O wretched wofull wawling ſoules your ayde I doe implore,
That linked lye with gingling Chaynes on wayling Limbo ſhore,
O moſſy Den where death doth couche his gaſtly carrayne Face:
Releſſe your pangues, O ſpryghts, and to this wedding hye apace.
Cauſe yee the ſnaggy wheele to pawſe that rentes the Carkas bound,
Permit Ixions racked Lymmes to reſt vpon the ground:
Let hungry bytten Tantalus wyth gawnt and pyned panche
Soupe vp Pirenes gulped ſtreame his ſwelling thyrſt to ſtaunche.
Let burning Creon yde the brunt aud gyrdes of greater payne,
Let payſe of ſlyppery ſlyding ſtone type ouer backe agayne
His moylyng Father Siſyphus, amonges the craggy Rockes.
Yee daughters dyre of Danaus whom perced Pychers morckes
So oft with labour loſt in vayne this day doth long for you
That in your lyfe with bloudy blade at once your huſband ſlewe.
And thou whoſe aares I honored haue, O torch and lampe of night,
Approche O Lady myne with moſt deformed vyſage dight:
O three folde ſhapē Dame that knitſt more threatning browes then one,
According to the countrey guiſe with dagling locks vndone
And naked foote, the ſecrete groue about I halowed haue,
From duſky dry vnmoyſty cloudes the ſhowers of rayne I craue.
Through me the chinked gaping ground the ſoked ſeas hath drunk.
And mayner ſtreame of th'ocian floud beneath the earth is ſunk,
That ſwelteth out through hollow gulph with ſtronger guſhing rage.
Then were his ſuddy wambling waues whoſe power it doth aſſwage
The heauens with wrong diſturbed courſe and out of order quight,
The darkned ſonne, & glimmering ſtars at once hath ſhewed theyr light,
And drēched Charles his ſtragling wayne hath ducie in daſſhing waue,
The framed courſe of roaming time racte out of frame I haue.
So my enchauntments haue it wrought, that when the flaming ſunne
In ſommer bakes the parched ſoyle then hath the twigges begunne,
With ſprowting bloſſom freſh to blome, and haſty winter corne
Hath out of harueſt ſeene the fruite to barnes on ſudde borne.
Into a ſhallowe foorde his ſture diſtreame hath Phaſi waſt,
And Iſters channell being in ſo many braunches caſt,
Abaed hath his wrackfull waues, on euery ſilent ſhore
He lyeth calme: The tumbled flouds with thundring noyſe did rore,
When couched clo the winde were not mouing pippling ſoft,
With working waue the prauncing ſeas haue ſwolne & leapt aloft,
Whereas the wood in alder time with thicke and braunched bowe
Di ſpread his ſhade on gladſome ſoyle no ſhade remayneth now.
I rolling vp the magicke verſe at noone time Phoebus ſtay,
Amyd the darkned Sky, when fled was light of drowſy day.
Eke at my charme the watry flockes of Heyaeds went to glade.
Time is it Phoeba to reſpect the ſeruice to thee made:
To the with cruell bloudy hands theſe garlands greene were twynde
Which with his folding circles nyne the ſerpent rough did bynde.
Haue here Tiphoias fleſhe, that doth in Aetnas Foruace grone,
That ſhoke with baitery violent king Ioues aſſaulted trone.
This is the Centaures poyſoned bloud which Neſſus villayne vyle
Who made a rape of Dianire entending her to fyle,
Bequethed her when newly wounde he gaſping lay for breath,
While Hercles ſhaft ſtack in his Ribs, whoſe laūce did worke his death:
Beholde the Funerall cinders heere which vp the poyſon dryed
Of Hercules who in his fyre on Oeta mountayne dyed:
Loe heere the fatall brand, which late the fatall ſiſters three
Conſpyred at Meleagers byrth, ſuch ſhould his deſny bee,
To ſaue alyue his brethyng corpes, while that might whole remayne,
Which ſaufe his mother Althe kept, till he his vncles twyne,
(That from Atlanta would haue had the head of coquered Bore,)
Had reft of lye whoſe ſpightfull death Althea tooke ſo ſore,
That both ſhe ſhewed her feruentneſſe in ſyſters godly loue,
When to reuenge her brothers death meere nature did her moue,
But yet as mother moſt vnkynde, of nature moſt vnmylde,
To haſten the vntymely graue of her beloued chylde,
Whyle Meleagers fatall brande ſhe waſted in the flame,
Whoſe ſwelting guts and bowels moult conſumed as the ſame,
Theſe plumes the Harpyes rauening fowles for haſt did leaue behinde,
In hidden hole whoſe cloaſe acceſſe no mortall wight can fynd.
When faſt from Zethes chaſing them with ſpeedy flight they fled.
Put vno theſe the fethers which the Symphal byrde did ſhed,
Whom duſkyng Phoebus dymned lyght ſyr Hercules did ſtynge,
And galied with the ſhafte, that he in Hydraes hyde did flynge.
You Aares haue yeelde a clattring noyſe I knowe, I knowe of olde,
How vnto mee my Oracles are wonted to bee toulde,
That when ye tremlng flowre doth ſhake then hath my Goddes great,
Vouchſafe to graunt mee my requeſt as I did her intreate,
I ſee Dianas waggon ſwife, not that whereon ſhee glydes,
When all the night in darkned Sky with Face full ope ſhee rydes:
With countnaunce bright and blandiſhing but when with heauy cheare,
With duſky ſhimmering wanny globe, her lampe doth pale appeare.
Or when ſhee trots bout the heauens wyth horſecheade rayned ſtrayte,
When Theſſayle Witches with threats of charming her doe bayte.
So with thy dumpiſh dulled blaſe, thy cloudy faynting lght,
Sende out, amid the lowring ſky, the heart of people ſmyght
Wyth agonies of ſuddeyne dread, in ſtraung and fearfull wyſe,
Compell the pretious braſen pannes with iarrig noyſe to ryſe
Through Corinth countrey uery where, to ſhielde the frō tie harme,
Leaſt headlong rawne thou be from heauen to earth by force of charme.
An holy ſolempne ſacryfice to worſhip thee wee make,
Imbrewed with a bloudy turphe the kindled Torche doth take
Thy ſacred burning night fyre at the dampiſhe mory graue.
Sore charged with thy troubled ghoſt my head I ſhaken haue,
And ducking downe my Necke alowe wt ſhryking lowde haue ſhrigh
And groueling flat on floore in traunce haue lyen in deadmans plight.
My ruffled Lockes about myne eares downe dagling haue ben bownd.
Tuckt vp about my temples twayne with gladſome garland crownde▪
A drery braunche is offred thee from filthy Stigis flood.
As is the guiſe of Bacchus prieſtes the Coribanthes wood,
With naked breaſt and dugges layde out Ile pricke with ſacred blad
Myne arme, that for the bubling bloude an iſſue may bee made,
With trilling ſtreames my purple bloude let drop on Th'aulter ſtones.
My tender Childrens cruſſhed fleſhe, and broken brooſed bones
Lerne how to brooke with hardned heart: in practiſe put the trade
To floriſhe fearce, and keepe a coyle, with naked glittring blade:
I ſprinkled holy water haue, the launce once being made,
If tyred thou complayneſt that my cryes thee ouerlade,
Giue pardon to my erneſt ſuite, O Perſeus ſiſter deare,
Still Iaſon is the onely cauſe that vrgeth mee to reare
With ſqueking voyce thy noyſome beames, that ſting like ſhot of bo
So ſeaſon thou thoſe ſawced robes to worke Creuſas woe,
Whert with when ſhee ſhall pranke her ſelfe the poyſon by and by
To rot her inward mary out, within her bones may fry,
The ſecret fyer bleares their eyes with gloſſe of yeallow golde,
The which Prometheus gaue to mee that fyer fylcher bolde.
On whom for robbery that he did in heauens aboue commit,
With maſſy payſe great Caucaſus th'unweldy hill doth ſit.
Where vnder with vnwaſted wombe he lyes, and payes his payne,
To feede the crāming foule with gubs of guts that growes agayne.
He taught mee with a prety ſleyght of conning, how to hyde
The ſtrength of fyer cloſe kept in, may not be eſpyde,
This lyuely tinder Mulciber hath forged for my ſake,
That tempred is with brymſtone quick at fyrſt touch and take.
Eke of my Coſen Phaëton a wyldefyer flake I haue
His flames the monſtrous ſtaghard rough Chimera to mee gaue,
In head and breaſt a Lyon grim, and from the Rump behynde
He ſweepes the flower with lagging Tayl of Serpent fearce by kynde
In Rybbes, and Loynes along his paunche yſhaped lyke a Goate.
Theſe Fumes that out the Bull perbrakte from fyry ſpewinge throat
I gotten haue and brayde it with Meduſas bitter gall
Commaunding it in ſecret ſorte to duſke and coer all:
Breath on theſe venoms Hecae with deadly myght inſpyre,
Preſerue the touching poulder of my ſecret couert fyre,
O graunt that theſe my cloked craftes ſo may bewitch theyr Eyes,
That lykelyhoode of treaſon none they may heerein ſurmyſe:
So worke that they in handling it may feele no kynde of heate:
Her ſtewing breaſt, her ſeathing vaynes, let ſeruent fyer freate
And force her roſted pyning lymmes, to drop and melt away,
Let ſmoke her rotten broyling bones: enflame this bryde to day
To caſt a lyght with grater gleede on fryſeled blaſing heare
Then is the ſhyning flame that doth the wedding torches beare.
My ſuite is harde, thryſe Hecare a dreadfull barking gaue
From dolefull cloude a ſacred flaſh of flamy ſparkes ſhee draue.
Eche poyſons pryde fulfilled is: call forth my chyldren deare,
By whom vnto the curſed Bryde theſe preſentes you may beare:
Goe forth, goe forth my lytle Babes, your mothers curſed fruite,
Goe, goe, employ your paynes with brybe and earneſt humble ſuite
To purchaſe grace, and eke to earne you fauour in her ſight.
That both a mother is to you, and rules with Ladies might.
Goe on, apply your charge apace, and hye you home agayne,
That with embracing you I may my laſt farewell attayne.
WHat ſharpe aſſaultes of cruell CVPIDS flame
Wyth gyddie heade thus toſſeth to and froe,
This bedlem Wyght, and diuelyſh deſpret dame
What rouing rage her pricks to worke this woe?
Rough rancours vile congeales her froſen face,
Her hawty breaſt bumbaſted is vvyth pryde,
Shee ſhakes her heade, ſhee ſtalkes vvyth ſtately pace.
Shee threates our king more then doth her betyde.
Who would her deeme to bee a baniſht wyght,
Whoſe ſkarlet Cheekes doe glowe with roſy red?
In faynting Face, with pale and wanny whyght
The ſangayne hewe exyled thence is fled
Her chaunging lookes no colour longe can holde.
Her ſhifting feete ſtill trauaſſe to and froe.
Euen as the fearce and rauening Tyger olde
That doth vnware his ſucking whelpes forgoe,
Doth rampe, and rage, moſt eger ferce and wood,
Among the ſhrubs and buſſhes that doe growe
On Ganges ſtronde that golden ſanded flood,
Whoſe ſiluer ſtreame through India doth flowe.
Euen ſo MEDEA ſometime vvantes her wits
To rule the rage of her vnbrydeled ire,
Nowe VENVS Sonne, wyth buſie froward fits,
Nowe Wrath, and Loue enkyndle both the fire.
What ſhall ſhee doe? when will this heynous wyght
With forwarde foote bee packing hence away,
From Greece? to eaſe our Realme of terrour quight,
And prynces twayne whom ſhe ſo ſore doth fray:
Nowe Phoebus lodge thy Charyot in the Weſt,
Let neyther Raynes, nor Brydle ſtay thy Race,
Let groueling light with Dulceat nyght oppreſt
In cloking Cloudes wrapt vp his muffled Face,
Let Heſperus the loadeſman of the nyght,
In Weſtern floode drench deepe the day ſo bryght.
ALl things are topſy turuy turnde,
and waſted cleane to nought.
To paſſing great calamity
our Kingdome State is brought.
The Syre, and Daughter burnt to duſt
in blendred Cynders lye.
What trayne hath them entrapt?
Such as
are made for Kinges to dye,
Falſe traitrous gifts.
What priuy guile could wrapped be in thoſe?
And I doe meruayle at this thing and ſkant I can ſuppoſe
That ſuch a miſchiefe might be wrought by any ſuch deuice
Report how this deſtruction and ruine ſhould aryſe
The fyzzing flame moſt egerly doth ſcoure with ſweeping ſway
Eache corner of the Prynces court, as though it ſhould obay.
Commaunded therevnto ſo flat on flowre the Pallace falles:
Wee are in dread leaſt further it will take the towniſhe walles.
Caſt quenching water on it then to ſlake the greedy flame.
And this that ſeemeth very ſtraunge doe happen in the ſame,
The water feedes the fier faſt, the more that wee doe toyle
It to ſuppreſſe, with hotter rage the heate begins to boyle:
Thoſe thinges that wee haue gotten for our help it doth enioy.
Medea thou that doeſt ſo ſore king Pelops lande anoy,
Twine hence in haſt thy forwarde foote, at all aſſayes depart
To any other kinde of coaſte.
Can I finde in my hart
To ſhun this lande? if hence I had firſt falne away by flight,
I would haue traueled backe agayne, to gaſe at ſuch a ſight.
To ſtande and ſee this weddiug new, why ſtayſt thou doting mynde?
Apply, apply, thy ſore attempt, that good ſucceſſe doth finde.
What great exployt is this, that thou of vengeaunce doſt enioy?
Still art thou blynded witleſſe wench with vale of Venus boy?
Is this ſuffiſaunce for the griefe? is roote of rancour ded,
If Iaſon leade a ſingle lyfe in ſolitary bed?
Some netling, thorny, ſtinging plagues vnpractiſed deuiſe:
Prepare thy ſelfe in redines and fall to on this wyſe:
Let all bee fiſhe that commes to Net, haue no reſpect of ryghte,
From mynde on miſchiefe fixed faſt let ſhame be vaniſht quyte:
The vengeaunce they receaued at my lytle chyldrens hand,
Is nothing worth: in earneſt ire ententiue muſt thou ſtand.
When heate of wrath begins to coole, cheere vp thy ſelfe agayne:
Rayſe vp thoſe touches olde that wonted were in thee to raygne,
That buried deepe in breaſt doe lye: and as for all the ſame
That yet is wrought: Of godlineſſe let it vſurpe the name:
Doe this, and I ſhall teach them learne, what tryfling caſt it was,
And common practiſde flimflam trick that erſt I brought to paſſe.
By this my raging malady a preamble hath made,
To ſhew what howgier heapes of harmes ſhall ſhortly them inuade
What durſt my rude vnſkilfull hand aſſay that was of wayght?
Wha could the mallice of a Gyrle inuent her foes to bayte?
Still conuerſaunt with wicked feates Medea am I made.
My blunt and dulled braynes hath ſo ben beate about this trade.
O ſo I ioy, I ioy, that I ſmote of my brothers head,
And ſlaſht his members of: eake that from parents had I fled:
And filched haue the priuy fleece, loe Mars that ſacred was.
It glads my heart that I to bring olde Pelias death to paſſe:
Haue ſet his daughters all on worke: O griefe picke out a way
Not any guilt thou ſhalt with vnacquainted hand aſſay
Againſt whom wrath entendeſt thou to bend thyne Irefull might?
Or with what weapon doſt thou meane thy trayterous foes to ſmight?
I know not what my wrathfull minde conſulted hath within,
And to be wray it to himſelfe, I dare not yet begin.
O raſh and vnaduiſed foole, I make to haſty ſpeede:
O that my Foe had gotten of his Harlots body Seede:
But what ſo euer thou by him enioyeſt, ſuppoſe the ſame
To bee Creuſas Babes, of them let her enioy the name.
This vengeaunce, this doth like mee well good reaſon is there, why,
The laſt attempt of is, thou muſt with ſtomacke ſtout apply.
Aas yee litle ſeely fooles that erſt my children were,
The plaguing price of Fathers fault ſubmit your ſelues to beare.
O, horrour huge with ſodayne ſtroke my heart doth ouercom:
With ycie dulling colde congealde my Members all benun.
My ſhiuering lims appauled ſore for gaſtly feare doe quake,
And baniſht rage of malice hoate begins it ſelfe to ſlake:
The hatefull heart of wife agaynſt her Spouſe hath yeelded place,
And pitious mothers mercy milde reſtoreth natures face.
O ſhall I ſhed their guiltleſſe bloude? ſhall I the frame vnfoulde
Of that, which louing natures hande hath wrought in me her moulde?
O doting fury chaunge thy minde, conceiue a better thought,
Let not this haynous ſauage deede by meanes of mee be wrought.
What cryme haue they (poore fooles) cōmit, for which they ſhould abye?
Vpon theyr Father Iaſon right all blot of blame ſhould lye.
Medea yet theyr Mother I am worſer farre then hee.
Tuſh let them frankly goe to wracke no kith nor kin to mee
They are: diſpatch them out of hand: holde, holde, my babes they be
God wot, moſt harmeleſſe lambes they are, no crime nor fault haue they
Alas they bee mere innocents, I doe not this denay:
So was my brother whom I ſlew: O falſe reuolting mynde,
Why doſt thou ſtaggring to and fro ſuch chaunge of fancies fynde?
Why is my Face be ſprent with teares, what makes mee falter ſo,
That wrath & loue with ſtriuing thoughts doe leade mee to and fro?
Such fighting fancies bickringe ſtormes my ſwaruing minde detarre,
As when betwene the wreſtling windes is rayſed wrangling warre,
Eche where the tumbling wallowing waues, are hoyſt and reared hye
Amid the iuſtling ſwolues of ſeas, that hot in fury frye:
Euē ſo my hart with ſtrugling thoughts now ſinks, now ſwells amaine,
Wrath ſometyme chaſeth vertue out, and vertue wrath agayne.
O yeelde thee, yeelde, a griſing griefe, to vertue yeelde thy place:
Thou onely comforte of our ſtocke in this afflicted caſe,
Come heather, come deere loued Impe, with colling mee imbrace,
Whyle that by me your mother deere ſweete Boyes yee are enioyed,
So long God graunt your Father may you kepe from harme vncloyed.
Exile and flight approach on mee, and they ſhall by and by
Be pulde perforce out of myne armes, with vapourde weeping Eye,
Sore languiſhing with mourning heart, yet let them goe to graue
Before their fathers Face, as they before their mothers haue:
Now rancorus griefe, with firy fits begins to boyle agayne,
The quenched coales of deadly hate do freſſher force attayne.
The ruſty rancour harbred long within my cancred breſt
Starts vp, and ſtirres my hand anew in miſchiefe to bee preſt.
O that the rablement of brats which ſwarmde aboute the ſyde
Of Niobe that ſcornefull Dame, who periſht by her pryde
Had taken lyfe out of his lymmes, O that the fates of heauen
A fruictfull mother had me made of chyldren ſeuen and ſeuen.
My barreyne wombe for my reuenge hath yeelded litle ſtore:
Yet for my ſre and brother, twayne I haue, there needes no more:
Whom ſeeke this rufflyng rowt of Feendes with gargell Viſage dight
Where will they deale theyr ſtripes, or whō with whips of fier ſmight?
Or whom with cruell ſcorching brande and Stygian faggot fell,
With miſchief great to cloy, entendes this army black of hell?
A chopping Adder gan to hiſſe with wrethings wrapped rounde,
As ſoone as did the laſſhing whyp flerte out with yerking ſounde.
Whom bumping with thy rapping poſt Megaera wilt thou cruſh?
Whoſe ghoſt doth heare miſhapt from hell with ſcatered members ruſh?
My ſlaughtred brothers ghoſt it is that vengeaunce coms to craue:
According to his dyre requeſt due vengeaunce ſhall hee haue.
But flap thou fearce the fierbrandes full daſſahed in myne Eyes,
Dig, rent, ſcrape, burne, and ſqueas them out, loe ope my breaſt it lyes,
To fighting furies bobbing ſtrokes, O brother, brother bid
Theſe royles, that preaſſe to worrey mee, them ſelues away to rid.
Dawne to the ſlent ſoules alowe not taking any care:
Let mee be left heare by my ſelfe alone, and doe not ſpare,
To baſt, and capperclaw theſe armes that drewe the bloudy blade:
To quench the furies of thy ſprite, that thus doe mee inuade,
With this right hand the ſacrifice on thaulter ſhalbe made.
What meanes this ſudden trampling noyſe? a band of men in Armes
Come buſtling towarde vs, that mee will cloy with deadly harmes.
To ende this ſlaughter ſet vpon I will my ſelfe conuay
Vp to the garrets of our houſe, come Nurce with me away,
Beſtow thy body hence with mee from daunger of our foes.
Now thus my mynde on miſchiefe ſet thou muſt thy ſelfe diſpoſe,
Let not the flickering fame and prayſe in darkeneſſe bee exilde
Of ſtomack ſtout, that you did vſe in murthering of thy childe.
Proclaime in peoples eares the prayſe of cruell bloudy hand.
If any faythfull man here bee, whom ruine of his land,
And ſlaughter of his Prynce doe cauſe in penſue heart to bleede,
Step forth that yee may take the wretch that wrought this deadly deede.
Heere, heere, yee ioly champions lay loade with weapons heere,
Haue now, hoyſt vp this houſe, from low Foundacion vp it reare.
Now, now my Scepter guilt I haue recouered once agayne:
My Fathers wronges reuenged are, and eke my brother ſlayne:
The gouldens cattels Fleece returnde is to my natiue land,
Poſſeſſion of my realme I haue reclaymed to my hand:
Come home is my virginity, that whilom went aſtray.
O Gods as good as I coulde wiſſhe, O ioyfull wedding day,
Goe ſhrowde thy ſelfe in darkneſſe him, diſpacht I haue this feate:
Yet vengeaunce is not done inough, to coole our thriſty heate.
O ſoule why doſt thou make delay? Why doſt thou doubting ſtade?
Goe foreward with it yet thou mayſt, whyle doing is thy hande:
The wrath that might ſhould myniſter doth qualefy his flame:
The pryckes of ſorrow twitch my heart attaynt with bluſſhing ſhame:
Through rygour of thy heynous gore, O wretch, what haſt thou done?
Though I repent a caityfe vile I am, to ſle a my ſonne:
Alas I haue committed it, importunate delight,
Still egged on my frowarde mynde that did againſt it fight:
And loe the vayne coniect of this delight increaſeth ſtill,
This onely is the thing, that wants vnto my wicked will,
That Iaſons eyes ſhoulde ſee this ſight as yet I doe ſuppoſe,
Nothing it is that I haue done, my trauell all I loſe,
That I employde in dyry deedes, vnleſſe hee ſee the ſame.
Loe heere ſhee looketh out, and leanes vpon the houſes frame,
That pitchlong hanges with falling ſway: heere heape your fiers faſt,
Whereby the flames that ſhee her ſelfe enkindled, may her waſt.
Goe Iaſon, goe the obit rights the windinge ſheete and graue
Make ready for thy ſonne, as laſt behoueth him to haue,
Thy ſpouſe and eke thy father in lawe that are entomde by mee
Receiued haue the dutyes that to deade mens ghoſtes agree.
This childe hath felt the deadly ſtroke and launce of fatall knife,
And this with waileſome murther like ſhall loſe her tender life.
By all the ſacred ghoſtes of heauen, and by thy oft exile,
And ſpouſall bed, which breach of loue in mee did not defile,
Now ſpare, and ſaue the life of him my childe and alſo thyne:
What euer cryme committed is, I graunt it to be myne:
Make mee a bloudy ſacrifice to dew deſerued death,
Take from my ſinfull guilty head the vſe of vitall breath.
Nay ſith thou wilt not haue it ſo as greeues thy pynched minde,
Heere way to wreck my vengeaunce fell, my burning blade ſhall finde.
Auaunt, now hence thou peſaunt prowd employ thy buſy payne,
To reape the fruites of virgins bed, and caſt them of agayne
When mothers they are made.
Let one for dew reuenge ſuffice.
If greedy thyrſt of hungry handes that ſtil for vengeaunce cries.
Myght quenched bee with bloude of one, then aſke I none at all,
And yet to ſtaunche my hungry griefe the number is to ſmall,
If onely twayne I ſlea, if pleadge of loue lye ſecrete made,
My bowels Ile vnbreaſt, and ſearch my wombe with poking Blade.
Now finiſh out thy deadly deede, that enterpriſed is,
No more entreataunce will I vſe, yet onely graunt mee this,
Delay awhyle his dolefull death, that I may take my flyght.
Leaſt that myne eyes wt bleeding hearte ſhould vew that heauy ſight.
Yet linger eger anguiſhe yet to ſlea this chylde of thyne.
Ronne not to raſhe with haſty ſpeede, this dolefull day is myne:
The time that wee obtayned haue of Creon, wee enioy.
O vile malitious mynded wretch my lothſome life deſtroy.
In crauing this thou ſpeakſt, that I ſhould ſhew thee ſome releefe,
Well goodinough, all this is done: O ruthfull giddy greefe,
This is the onely ſacrifice that I can thee prouide,
Vnthankfull Iaſon hether caſt thy coyeſh lookes aſyde.
Loe heare doſt thou beholde thy wyfe? thus euery wonted I,
When murther I had made, to ſcape, my way doth open lye
That I may ſpring into the ſkyes: the flying ſerpents twayne
Submted haue theyr ſcaly Neckes to yoake of ratling wayne,
Thon Father haue thy ſonnes agayne, I in the wandring Skye
In nymble wheeled Waggon ſwyfte, will ryde aduaunced hye,
Goe through the ample ſpaces wyde, infect the poyſoned Ayre,
Beare witneſſe, grace of God is none in place of thy repayre.