NOw that Aurore with glitteryng ſtreames,
The glading ſtarres from ſkye doth chaſe,
Syr Phoebus pert, with ſpouting beames,
From dewy neaſt doth mount apace:
And with his cheerefull lookes doth yeeld,
Vnto the world a gladſome day.
Go to, O wretch, with ample Fielde
Of heauy cares oppreſſed aye,
Thy grieuous wonted playntes recount:
Do not alone with ſighes and howles,
The Seayſh Aloyones ſurmounte,
But alſo paſſe the Pandyon foules:
More yrkſome is thy ſtate then theirs▪
O Mother deare whoſe death by fits,
I nyll lament but ſtill ſhed teares,
My ground of griefe in thee it ſits.
If that in ſhade of darkſome denne,
Perceiuing ſence at al remayne,
Heare out at large, O mother then,
My great complayntes, and grieuous payne
O that immortall Clothos wriſt,
Had torne in twayne my vitall thred:
Ere I vnto my griefe had wiſt
Thy woundes, and face of ſanguine red.
O day which aye doth me annoy:
Since that tyme did I more deſyre,
The feareful darknes to enioy,
Than Phoebus freſh with fayre attyre.
I haue abode the bitter heſt
Of ſtepdame dire, in mothers place,
I haue abode her cruell breaſt,
Hir ſtomake ſtout, and fighting face.
She, Shee, for ſpyte vnto my caſe,
A doleful, and a graue Eryn,
To Bridegromes chamber ſpouſall ſpace,
The Stygian flaſhing flames brought in.
And thee, (alas) moſt piteous Syre,
With traytrous traynes hath ſhee bereft
Of breathing ſoule with poyſoned myre:
To whom ere whyle, the world all left
Vnvanquiſht from the Ocean Seas
By martiall feats did freely yeeld:
And didſt ſubdue with wondrous eaſe,
The Brittayne brutes that fledde the fielde:
Whom liuing at their propre ſwaye:
No Romayne power did earſt inuade.
Now lo (ful wel lament I may)
Thy Spouſe deceypte thy prowes hath lade
And now thy court and child of yore,
With homage ſerue a Tyrantes lore.
WHom ſo the gliſtering pompe of royal place,
With ſoden ſight ynumd doth quite diſgrace,
Who ſo at courtly fleeting ebbing blaſe,
Aſtonied ſore, himſelfe doth much amaſe:
Lo ſee of late the great and mighty ſtocke,
By lurking Fortunes ſodayne forced knocke,
Of Claudius quite ſubuert and cleane extinct:
Tofore, who held the world in his precinct:
The Brittayne Ocean coaſt that long was free,
He ruld at wil, and made it to agree,
Their Romaine Gallies great for to embrace.
Lo, he that Tanais people firſt did chaſe,
And Seas vnknowen to any Romayne wight
With luſty ſheering ſhippes did ouerdight,
And ſafe amid the ſauage freakes did fight,
And ruffling ſurging ſeas hath nothing dread,
By cruel ſpouſes gilt doth lye all dead.
Her ſonne likewyſe more fiend then Tigre fierce,
Of naturall mother makes a funerall her ſe,
Whoſe brother drenched deepe with poyſoned cup.
Pore Britannick, his ſenſeles ſoule gaue vp
Octauia ſiſter and vnhappy make,
Doth ſore lament her caſe for Britans ſake,
Ne can her ruthful piteous ſorrow ſlake,
Though Neros wrath do ſore conſtrayne her grace
She nil eſteemes the ſecrete cloſet place:
But boyling ſtil with equal peyſd diſdayne.
With mutuall hate gaynſt him doth burne agayne.
My true and truſty loue that I do beare,
In vayne I ſee doth ſtriue to comfort her,
Reuenging greedy griefe doth ſtreight repriue,
T'appeaſe her ſmarte the counſel that I giue,
Nor flame of worthy breaſt doth once relent
But heaps of greefe, her courage do augment.
Alas, what grieſely deedes for to enſue
My feare foreſeeth: God graunt it be not true.
O Staggering ſtate, O peereleſſe yll:
With eaſe Electra I repeate,
And call to mynd thy mourning will.
With watred eies like ſmartīg ſweat
Thou mightſt lament thy father ſlain,
Stil hoping that thy brother myght,
That deadly deede reuenge agayne.
Whom thou O tender louing wight
Didſt ſafely ſhield from bloudy foe,
And naturall loue did cloſely kepe:
But Neroes dreaded viſage loe,
Doth feare me that I dare not weepe,
Nor wayle my parentes ruchful caſe,
By cruell lot this ſlaughter cought:
Ne ſuffers mee this geniall face,
To daſh with teares to dearely bought
With brothers bloud: who onely was
Myne onely hope in all my griefe,
And of ſo many miſchieues, as
My comfort greate, and ſole reliefe.
Now loe reſerud for greater care,
And to abyde more lingring payne,
Of noble famous lineage bare,
A drouping ſhade I do remayne.
My Ladyes heauye voyce mee thought
Within my liſtning eares can ſounde,
And ſnayliſh age in going ſoft,
Vnto her thews in not ybounde.
O Nurſe our dolours witnes ſure
By curroll cheekes diſtilling rayne,
And heauy heartes complaynt endure.
Alas, what day ſhall ridde of payne,
With care your welnye waſted heart?
That ſends this guiltles ghoſt to graue
This talke (good madame) ſet apart.
In rule my ſtate theire deſtenies haue,
And not thy prayers, (O matrone) iuſt.
The doune ſoft eaſy God ſhall geue,
Your troubled mynd a tyme I truſt,
More ſweete then euer you did liue.
With feuell fayre as one content,
And gloſed face, but onely pleaſe
Your man, and make, he will relent.
The Lyon fierce I ſhall appeale,
And ſooner tame the Tygre ſtoute,
Then mankynd Tyrantes brutiſh breaſt,
He ſpytes the noble raced out,
Contemmes hygh powers, diſdaynes the leaſt:
Ne can wel vſe that princely weede,
Which venemous parent wrapt him in
By huge vnſpeakeable grieſly deede.
Although that wight vnthankful, grynne,
In Kingly throne that hee doth raygne,
Throughe cruel curſed mothers ayde:
Although hee pay with Death agayne
So greate a gift, it ſhal be ſayde
And after fates in long ſpent age,
That woman wight ſhal haue alwaye,
This eloge yet and ſaying ſage,
That he by her doth beare the ſway,
Let not your ragious mynde ſo walke,
But doe compreſſe your moody talke.
THough much I beare that boyling breſt do beate
And tollerably take diuor cements threate,
Deathes only deadly darte, I ſee an end,
Of al my broyle and pinching payne can ſend,
What pleaſant light to me (O wretch) is left,
My natural Mother ſlayne, and Syre be reft,
Of breathing life, by treaſon, and by gilt:
Of Brother eake depriude: with miſeryes ſpilt:
And wayling ouercome: kept downe with care,
Enuyed of Make, which I dare not declare.
To mayden ſubiect now, and now defied:
What pleaſant light can me (O wretch) abyde,
With feareful hart ſuſpecting always ought:
Becauſe I would no wicked deede were wroughte:
Not that I feare Deathes grieſly gyrning face,
God graunt I do not ſo reuenge my caſe,
A better deede to dye: for to behold
The Tyrantes viſage grie, with browes vprolde
And with ſoft tender lippes my foe to kiſſe,
And ſtand in awe of beckes and noddes of his,
Whoſe will to pleaſe my griefe with cares yfirde
Since brothers death by wicked wyle conſpirde,
Could neuer once vouchſafe for to ſuſtayne,
Leſſe griefe to die, then thus to liue in payne.
His Empyre Nero rules and ioyes in blood:
The cauſe and ground of death that Tirant wood.
How oft (alas) doth Fanſie fondly fayne.
Whē ſlumber ſwete in penſiue parts doth raigne,
And ſleepe in eyes, all tyrd with teares doth reſt,
I apprehend deare Brittans liuely breſt:
Ere whyle me thinkes his feble ſhiuering hands
He fenſeth ſure with deadly blaſing brandes,
And fiercely on his brother Neros face,
With ſturdy ſtinging ſtroakes he flies apace.
Ere whyle thilke wretch recoyleth backe▪ agayne,
And to my thewes for aide retyres amayne:
Him foming foe purſues with haſt to haue:
And whyle my brother I deſire to ſaue,
And in my claſped armes to ſhield him free,
His goary bloudied falchion keene I ſee.
The boyſterous raumping fiend to ugge, & hale
Through out my hiuering limmes, as aſhes pale.
Forthwith a mighty trembling chattering quake
From weary lims all ſouple ſleepe doth ſhake,
And makes me woeful wretch for to recount,
My wayling ſobbing ſorrowes that ſurmount.
Hereto, put to that gorgeous ſtately ouſe,
All gliſtring bright, with ſpoyles of Claudius houſe
His parent deare in bubling boate did douſe,
That wicked ſonne, this fiſking dame to pleaſe.
Whom yet eſcaping daungers great of Seas.
He fiercer freake than waues that ſcantly reſt,
VVith bloudy blade hir bowels did vnbreſt.
VVhat hope of health, can me, O wretch, abyde,
That after them thilke way I ſhould not ryde?
My ſpeciall foe, triumphant wiſe doth weight,
VVith naked nates to preſſe by louers ſleight,
Our ſpouſall, pure, and cleane vnſpotied bed:
Gainſt whom, ſhe burns, with deadly foode bloud red.
And, for a meede of filthy ſtrumpets ſport,
She cauſeth Make from ſpouſe for to diuort.
O auncient Syre, ſtep forth from Limbo lake,
Thy daughters heauy troublous cares to ſlake:
Or your twygated hellyſh porche vnfolde,
That downe through gaping ground I may bee rolde.
O piteous wretch, in vaine, (alas) in vaine
Thou calſt vpon thy fathers ſenſeleſſe ſprite:
In whome, God wot, there doth no care remaine
Of mortall broode, that here doth take delight.
Shall he, thinke you, aſſwage your ſory cheere,
Or ſhape you forth ſome ſleight, t appall your paine,
That could preferre, before his Brittan deere,
Th'imperiall throne, a ſtraunge begotten ſwaine?
And with inceſtiall loue benummed quyte
His brother Germanicks daughter that could plyght,
And ioyne to him in ſolemne mariage rites,
VVith woefull, and vnlucky louers lightes?
Here ſprang the roale of hurly burly great,
Here beaſtly veuomous ſlaughter gan to ſweate,
Here wylie treaſons traines appeared firſt,
Here rules deſire, and brutiſh bloudy thirſt.
Syllanus firſt Prince Claudius ſonne in lawe,
A bloudy mangled offring fall we ſawe,
That in our graces Hymaenea bed,
Ymatcht with you, he might not couche his hed.
O monſtrous ſlaughter, worthy endleſſe blame:
In ſteade of gift vnto that wanton dame,
A Carkaſſe colde pore ſoule, and cureleſſe corſe,
Sillane was giuen againſt his will perforce.
And falſly then attacht of traitors crime,
As one conſpyring death in Claudius time,
VVith lothſome ſtreakes ſpewde out vpon the wall,
He all bedaſht your fathers princely hall.
Eft ſtepped into ſeruile Pallace ſtroke,
To filthy vices lore, one eaſly broke.
Of Diueliſh wicked with this Princocks proude:
By ſtepdames wyle prince Claudius Sonne auoude.
VVhome deadly damme did bloudy match ylight:
And thee, againſt thy will, for feare did plight.
Through which ſucceſſe this Dame of corage fine,
Durſt venture, mighty Ioue to vndermine.
VVho can ſo many curſed kindes report
Of wicked hopes, and actes in any ſort,
Or ſuch a womans gloſed guyles can name,
That raumpes at rule, by all degrees of ſhame?
Then holy ſacred zeale put out of grace,
Her ſtagring ſteppes, directed forth apace,
And ſterne Erinnis in with deadly ſteps,
To Claudius Court, all deſert left yleps.
And with hir dririe drakes of Stygian fort,
Hath quite diſtainde the ſacred princely port.
And raging riuen in twaine both natures lore,
And right to wrongs miſhapen fourme hath tore.
That haughty minded dame firſt gaue her make,
A deadly poyſoned cup, his thyrſt to ſlake.
Straight wayes againe through viſe vnkindly touch,
Her Nero cauſde with him in hell to couch.
And thee, vnhappy Britt, in all that broyle,
Till that of breth, and life he did diſpoyle,
Thilk greedie bloudy tyraunt neuer ſtent:
VVhoſe dolefull death for aye we may lament.
Ere whyle, vnto the world the ſtarre that ſhone,
And was the ſtay of princely court alone,
Now loe, light aſhes eaſly puft aforne,
And grieſly goaſt to graue with torche yborne.
VVhom bleſſed Babe, thy ſtepdame did lament:
Nor from hir guſhing teares, did ſcarce relent,
VVhen as ſhee gaue eche trimme appointed parte,
And goodly portraide limmes with natures arte,
Of flaming ſtacke to be deuoured quite,
And ſawe the ſcortching feruent fire in ſight
Thy naked ioynts to rauin vp a pace
And like the flittring God thy comely face.
Diſpatch he me leaſt with this hand he fall.
That power you, nature graunted not at all.
But wondrous dolor, great and wrathfull yre,
And miſeries will it graunt without deſyre.
Nay rather cauſe your angry moody make,
VVith ſouple cheere his fury for to ſlake.
VVhat, that he will by guilt once ſlaine before,
Aliue againe my brother mee reſtore?
Nay, ſafe that you may liue and iſſue beare:
Your fathers auncient court for to repayre.
That court doth wayte another broode they ſay.
And poore Britts death tugges me another way.
Yet let the cities loue vnto your grace,
Your troubled minde confirme but for a ſpace.
Their mindes ſo preſt to pleaſure me, I know
Great comfort brings: but do not ſlake my wo.
Of mighty power the people haue bene aye.
But princes force doth beare the greater ſway.
He will reſpect his lawfull wedded wife,
His mynion braue can not ſo leade her life.
Of no man ſhee eſteemde.
But dear to make▪
She can not truely yet of wifehood crake.
Ere longe ſhe ſhall a mother eke be made.
So farre therein I dare moſt boldly wade.
His youthfull heate at firſt in filthy loue,
With luſty, cruſty pangs doth boyle aboue:
Thylke corage quickly colde in luſt apace
As vapour ſone extinct in flame giues place.
But holy, louing, chaſte vnſpotted ſpouſe,
Her loue endureth aye with ſacred vowes.
That wanton firſt that there durſt couch hir hed,
And tumbling ſtayned quite your ſpouſall bed,
And being but your mayde hath ruled longe,
Hir ſoueraine Lord, with beauties grace beſtong,
That pranked Paramour pert ſhal croutch with pain,
VVhen ſhe your grace ſhall ſee preferd againe.
For Poppie ſubiect is, and meeke of ſpright,
And now begins her goaſtly tombs to dight:
VVhereby ſhe cloſely graunting doth bewray,
Hir ſecret hidden feare eche other day.
That ſwift, vnconſtant, double winged lad
With cloute, before his blinded eyes, yclad,
That fickle brayned God, thunhappy boy,
Shall leaue hir in the midſt of all hir ioy:
Although for beauty bright the bell ſhe beare,
And goodly gliſtring garments new ſhe weare,
And now do vaunt her ſelfe in gorgeous geere,
Shee ſhall not long enioy this gladſome cheere.
Be not diſmayde, Madame, for ſuch like paine,
The queene of gods was forced to ſuſtaine,
VVhen to ech pleaſaunt ſhape the heauenly guide,
And ſyre of Gods yurnde, from ſkyes did glyde.
The ſwannes white wings, to ſe how they could fadge
He did on him, and ruckoldes bullyſh badge,
That God ſhone bright in Golden raynie ſhowre
To Danaes breſt through top of fortred towre.
The twinckling ſtarres the twinnes of Laeda bright,
Whom Pollux, ſome, and Caſtor, call aryght,
In large and ample ſpace of ſtarry ſcope,
With criſtal glimering faces ſhyne wyde ope.
And Semeles ſonne, whom Bacchus we do call,
In heauenly byrthright doth himſelfe yſtall.
And Hercules that puiſſant Champion ſtoute,
His ſturdy brawnes, his Hebe wyndes aboute.
Nor once regardes how Goddeſſe Iuno fare:
Whoſe lowring ſtepdame now ſhe is yframde,
That whyle on earth his prowes he did declare,
Agaynſt that maryage, aye, was ſore inflamd.
Yet loe her wiſe, and cloſly couched greefe,
Debonaire face, obeiſaunce to her leefe,
Cauſde him at length his mynd for to remoue,
Through mortall feeres eſtraundge from Iunos loue.
And now that mighty heauenly Goddeſſe great,
No more adred of mortall ſtrumpets feat,
Aloft alone in cloudy bowre contentes
The thundring Lord, which now to her relentes.
Nor now with earthly Ladyes beauty bright
Yfyred, leaues his ſtarry ſpecked right.
Now madam ſith on earth your powre is pight
And haue on earth Queene Iunos princely place,
And ſiſter are, and wyfe to Neroes grace,
Your wondrous reſtles dolours great appeaſe.
Nay, ſooner ſhall the roaring froathy ſeas,
And mounting flaſhing flawes ymatch the ſkye,
And ſmoaking, ſtifling parching fyer drye
With dankiſh pooles agree and watrye fenne:
And grieſly Plutoes filthy feltred denne,
With ſtarbright heauen ſhal ſooner coupled be,
And ſhyning light with glomy ſhades agree,
And with the cleere drye day the dewy night,
Than vnto ſeruile lore of huſbande wight,
That brutiſh wyſe in bloud takes his delight,
My heauy woeful mynd can I addreſſe,
Whyle brothers death my heart doth ſtil poſſeſſe.
O that of heauenly powers the prince and ſyre,
That ſhogges and ſhakes the earth with thūdring fyre,
And with his wondrous, feareful, curſed crackes,
And ſtraunge miſhapen monſters which he makes,
Our feareful muſing myndes doth ſore amaſe,
Would coyne ſome cureles burning wildfyre blaſe,
To pelt and paſh with thumping fyer bright,
That diueliſh pate, that cruell curſed wight.
We ſaw from heauen, with beames forthſhoting farre
Doubtles a dreadful heary, blaſing ſtarre:
That ſpouted out a mortall fiery flake,
Whoſe force a princes bloud can only ſlake:
Euen where that hayting carman ſloe Boote
With chilling cold al ſtarcke of froſen pole,
Doth guyde aright Charles whirling running rote,
In ſteade of night that neuer away doth role.
Loe now the open ayre in euery ſtreate,
With doggiſh tyrantes breath, is poyſoned, quite,
And dreadful ſtarres ſome ſodayne death do threate.
To people rulde, by wicked Neroes ſpright.
So ſterne a freake, or mankynd tyrant ſtoute,
Not Tellus with the Gods diſpleaſd brought out,
When mighty Ioue neglected ſhe vphorlde
Huge, vgly, monſtrous Typhon to the worlde.
A ſorer plague, a cleaner ſcouryng ſcourge,
With bloudy pawes that cityes boundes doth purge,
Is Nero dyre, this cruell curſed wyght.
That doth himſelfe gaynſt God and man ydyght:
And thruſtes from ſacred ſhrynes their quiet porte,
And goodly temples gay he ſancted ſort:
That cittyes dwellers puts from countries fort:
That hath bereft his brother of his lyfe,
And launcht his mothers ſides with goary knyfe:
Yet doth this preſent lightſome day enioye
And leades his lyfe, that doth vs ſore annoy.
O Father of heauen, in vayne why doſt thou throwe
Thy great vnuanquiſht ratling thundring blowe
Vppon the whiſtling woods and ample ſeas,
With force of princely power thy wrath t'appeaſe?
Ou ſuch an hurtful and pernicious freake,
Thy due and iuſt conceyued yre to wreake.
Why ſtay thy mighty puiſſaunt braunds ſo long,
Ere thou fling downe thy ratling cracking throng?
O Lord, that Nero once might pay the price,
Of all his deuiliſh deedes, and euery vyce,
Th'whole wyde worlds tyrant ſterne wher he a ſtroke
Doth beare: which he ouerlades with burdnous yoke
Of princely ſyre yborne, but doth defame,
With beaſtly manners vyle his princely name:
Vnworth he is your ſpouſall chamber place:
But yet your deſtnies force, you muſt imbrace,
And wel, abyde your fortunes crooked race:
Nor moue vnkyndly Neroes gauly yre.
One day perchaunce, there wil as I deſyre,
Some God reuenge your lamentable caſe:
And once I truſt a gladſome day ſhal be,
When you ſhal ioy a freſh in wonted place.
Ah. no, now, long this court (alas) we ſee
With heauy wrath of Gods diſpleaſed yre
Hath ouercharged bene: which Venus dyre
With Meſſalinas monſtrous ramping luſt,
Shee firſt hath brought adowne into the duſt.
Who madly maryed to prince Claudius grace,
But little myndful then of that ſame caſe,
And not regarding much thappoynted payne,
With curſed creſſets maried once againe.
To which vnlucky inceſtuall brydall bed,
That droſell dyre that furious ſlut Erin,
With hanging hayre aboute her helliſh hed,
And gyrt with ſnakes with deadly ſtep went in.
And flaming brandes from ſpouſall chamber cought,
In both their blouds ybathd, hath quenched cleane:
And hath incenſt prince Claudius burning thought
In bloudy thratling ſtroake to paſſe all meane.
My mother firſt of wretches all the moſt,
With ſtripe of deadly ſword gaue vp her ghoſt.
And now extinguiſht quite, left me forlorne,
With dolours pyning panges and mourning worne.
And after her in helliſh teame doth hayle,
Vnto the ſenſeles ſoules of Plutoes iaile
Her make, and Brittannick her ſonne that way:
And firſt this ruinous court did ſhe betray.
Let be, Madame, with teares your face to dight:
Ne ſo renew your bitter wayling iuſt:
Ceaſſe troubling now your parents piteous ſpright,
That payed hath the price of raging luſt.
God graunt the talke wee hearde of late,
To rashly truſted euery where,
And blowne abroad through each eſtate,
No badge of truth that it may beare.
And that no fresh eſpouſed dame,
Our Princes thewes do enter in,
But that OCTAVIA keepe the ſame,
And that the ſeede of GLADIV Skin,
May once bringforth ſome pledge of peace:
That to the world reſt may redowne,
And wrangling ſtryfe may eaſly ceaſe,
And Rome retayne her great renowne.
The peerleſſe Princeſſe Iuno hight,
Her brothers wedlocke yoke retaynes:
VVhy is AVGVSTVS ſister bright,
VVhere like betroathed league remaynes,
From ſtately pompe of court reiect,
VVhat doth deuoutnes her auayle?
To ſayncted ſyre who hath reſpectt?
VVhat doth her Virgins life preuayle?
And CLAVDIV Snow in ground ylayed,
Euen wee to much vnmyndefull be:
VVhoſe worthy ſteme we haue betrayed
Throught feare that made vs to agree.
In breaſt our elders did embrace,
The perfect Romayne puiſſaunce,
The true vnſtayned worthy race,
And bloud of Mars they did aduaunce.
The proude and lofty ſtomackt trayne
Of luſty hauty mynded Kinges,
They could not ſuffer to remayne
VVithin this noble Cities winges.
And iuſtly they reuengd thy death,
O Virgin chaſt, VIRGINIA pure,
Depriude by ſyre of vitall breath,
That bondage thou mightſt not endure:
And that his ſhameles brutish lust,
So good a meede might not enioy:
Although by filthy force vniust
Thy chaſtity he would annoy.
Thee likewyſe whom thyne owne right hande,
VVith ſword did pearce, LVCRETIA true,
VVho tyrantes rape could not withſtand,
Did bloudy broyles and warres enſue▪
ANd with her proude diſdaynfull Make
Lord TARQVIN ympe of curſed ſeede,
Correction due doth TVLLIA take
For her vnkindly ſhameles deede,
VVho on her Fathers mangled corſe,
To miſchiefe bent, and wicked bane,
The Carman shee to driue did force,
His cruell bruſing wombling wane.
And quite agaynst all natures law,
Euen from her owne diſmembred yre,
The ſacred rytes she did withdraw,
Denaying wonted burial fire
This griefe our woeful age doth feele,
Through monſtruous act agaynst all kinde,
VVhen as in deadely crafty keele,
To TYRRHEN ſeas, and wrastling wynd,
The proude preſuming Prince did put,
His mother trapt in ſubtil ſort▪
The Mariners appoynted cut,
The ſwelling Seas from pleaſaunt port.
The clash reſoundes with ſtroake of Ores,
The Ship out launcht apace doth ſpinne,
In ſurging froath aloofe from ſhores,
And ample courſe of ſeas doth winne.
VVhich glydyng forth with leuſned plankes,
In preſſed ſtreames with peyſed weight,
The riftes do open cloſed crankes,
That hidden were with ſecrete ſleight:
And gulpeth vp the leaking waue
The woeful roaring noyſe and crye,
VVith womans shrikes themſelues to ſaue▪
Do reach and beate the ſtarry ſkye.
Then griely preſent death doth daunce
Before their eyes with pyning Cheekes:
VVhoſe deadly ſtroake and heauy chaunce
For to auoyde, then each man ſeekes:
On ryuened ribs ſome naked lie,
And cutte the beating waues in twayne:
And ſome theyr ſkilful ſwimming trye,
To get vnto the shore agayne.
The greateſt part that ſayled there,
By deſtnies dire to men prefixt,
In whirling ſwallowes drowned were,
The brinkes of Seas and ground betwixt.
Queene AGRIPPYNE her garments rendes,
Shee teares her ruffled lockes of hayre
Abundant blubbring teares she ſpendes,
Through deepe diſtreſſe of faynting feare.
VVho when no hope of health shee ſpies,
Enflamde with wrath, which woes appeaſde,
O ſonne, for ſo greate giftes, ſhee cryes,
Hast thou with ſuch reward me pleaſd?
This keele I haue deſerued ſure,
That bare and brought thee first to light:
VVho empyre witles did procure,
And CAESARS title for thy ryght.
Shew forth thy feareful ſpritish face,
O CLADIVS now from Limbo lake,
And of thy wyfe in wretched caſe,
Reuenge and due correction take.
Thy deth I cauſeles did conſpyre,
VVhich now I rue with woeful harte:
I dreſſed eake a funerall fyre
Vnto thy ſonne by deadly ſmart.
Lo now as I deſerued haue,
Vntombde go to thy guiltles Ghoſt,
Encloaſd in ſeas in ſtead of graue,
And wreſtling waues of Romayne coaſt.
The flaſshing flawes do flappe her face,
And on her ſpeaking mouth do beate,
Anone shee ſinkes a certayne ſpace,
Depreſſed downe with ſurges grea:
Anone shee fleetes on weltring brim,
And pattes them of with tender handes
Through faynting feare then taught to ſwim
Approaching death, and fates withſtandes
At length on troubled Seas diſplayde
Shee geuing ouer working vayne
And tyrd with streames is weary layd,
Not able toyling ſtrength to strayne
In cloſe and ſecrete ſilent breaſtes,
Of mates with her to ſea that yode,
In whom no feare of death there restes
True fayth vnto theyr Queene abode.
Theyr Ladyes weather beaten limmes
To helpe, ſome freely venter dare,
Some in the combrous waters ſwymmes
And deſperate daunger do not ſpare.
VVith cheereful voyce they comfort her,
Though drawling dragling limmes ſhee drew,
To lift her vp with helpe they ſtirre,
And nummed corpes to ſtrength renew.
VVhat bootesit thee the death to shonne
Of roaring raging rauening waues.
From deadly ſword of wicked ſonne,
Alas pore wretch thee nothing ſaues?
VVhoſe huge and heinous curſed rage,
Agaynſt all courſe of natures lore,
Our after ſlow beleeuing age,
VVil ſcarce beleene it done before,
The deuilliſh man repynde with griefe
VVhen he is mother ſaued ſawe,
From ſwallowing ſeas haue ſafe releefe,
And that she vitall breath did draw,
He grudgde with griefe and in his heate,
He huger miſchiefe heapes to this:
He doth not once delay his feate,
But headlong raſhly caryed is
Vpon her death. A ſouldiour ſent,
Diſpatcheth that he had in charge,
His Ladies breaſt his blade doth rent:
Shee yeelding vp her ſoulde at large,
From wretched corpes for to entombe
Her ſlaughter man ſhe then beſought,
That bloudy blade within her wombe,
That fyrſt this woe to her had brought,
This, this accurſed breast (quoth ſhee)
VVhich this vnkindly monſter bare,
From pinching payne may not be free:
Digge, ſlaſh the ſame, no miſchiefe ſpare.
VVhen this with foltring tounge was ſayde,
At laſt her ſad and trembling ghoſt,
VVith latter ſobbing ſighes vnſtayd,
Through goryd woundes leaues vitall coaſt.
ON me with like conſent why didſt thou ſmile,
With gloſed lookes deluding mee a whyle,
O fortune much of might and princely powre?
To lift aloft to noble royall bowre?
To the'nde that I to honours court extold,
From ſtately ſeate might haue the greater fall,
And round aboute in euery place beholde,
Such dreadful, threating daungers to vs all,
I ſafer lay aloofe from enuyes knockes,
Remou'd among the craggy corſicke rockes:
Where as my mynd there free at proper ſway,
With leyſure did repeate my ſtudies aye.
A gladſome ioy alone it was to viewe,
And earneſtly to marke the heauens ſo blew:
And ſacred Phoebus double wheeled wayne:
And eake the worldes ſwift whirling motion mayne.
The Sunne ſo euen his ſecond courſe to keepe:
And Phoebes glyding globe ſo ſwiftly ſweepe:
Whom wondrous ſtarting ſtarres encompaſſe round.
And to behold that ſhynes in euery ſtound,
The gliſtring beauty bright of welkin wyde:
Than which in al the world nothing beſyde.
Of all this huge and endles worke the guyde,
More wondrous nature fram'de that Ieſpyde,
For all the bumping bignes it doth beare;
Yet waxing old is like agayne to weare,
And to be chaungde to an vnwyldy lumpe.
Now preſt at hand this worldes laſt day doth iumpe,
With boyſtrous fall, and tumbling ruſh of ſkye.
To ſqueaſe and make this curſed kynd abye.
That ſpringing once agayne, it may yeeld out
An other ſtraunge renued vertuous route,
As once before it did, new ſprong agayne,
What tyme Saturnus held his golden raygne.
That blameleſſe, chaſt, vnſpotted Virgin cleere
A goddeſſe much of might clept Iuſtice heere,
With ſacred ſooth ſent downe from heauenly ſpace,
At eaſe on earth did rule the mortal race.
That people playne knew not of warlicke feates.
Nor trembling trompets tunes that rendes and beates▪
The ſouldiers eares: nor chaſhing armont bright,
That warring wightes defend in field and fight.
Nor wonted was with walles to rampyre round,
Their open cityes ſet in any ſtound.
To each man paſſage free lay open than:
Nothing there priuate was to any man.
And then the ground it ſelfe and fertil ſoyle,
Hir fruitful boſome baard all voyd of toyle,
Into ſuch bounden barnes a Matrone good,
And peaceable vnto ſo iuſt a broode.
But then an other ſecond race aroſe,
Perceyued not to be ſo meeke as thoſe.
A third more wyſe and witty ſort vp ſtartes,
Of nature forged fit, t'inuent new artes:
As yet vnſpotted quite with filthy vyce.
Soone after thoe, they raungd with new deuyce,
That boldly venture dare in ſcudding race,
Vnweldy beaſtes for to purſue apace.
And mighty weying ſtrugling fiſhes great,
With watry coats yclad with fiſhers feat,
With net in window wyſe draw forth, and ſtreeke
With craft of quill, the nibling fyſſhes cheeke.
And ſilly byrdes begylde with pyning trayne:
And light foote deare for lyfe that flyng amayne
Intangling gins entrapt, that ſafely hold.
And ſturdy ſcouling viſage buls controld,
On fleſhye fillet neckes, make weare the yoake:
And earth ere that vngrubbed vp that broake:
Which then turnd vp with Plowmans ſhyning ſhare,
In ſacred boſome deepe, her fruits kept thare.
But now this age much worſe then all the reſt,
Hath lept into her mothers broken breaſt:
And ruſty lumpiſh yron and maſſye Gold,
Hath digged out, that was quite hid with mold.
And fighting fiſtes haue armd without delay:
And drawing forth their bondes for rule to ſtay,
Haue certayne ſeuerall ioly kingdomes made,
And cities new haue rayſde now rulde with blade,
And fenſeth eyther with their proper force
Straūge ſtoundes or them aſſaults the which is worſe.
The Starry ſpecked virgin flowre of ſkies.
Which Iuſtice hight, that guilty folke diſcries,
Now lightly eſteemd of mortall people here,
Each earthly ſtound is fled, and comes not neere
The ſauage mannerd route, and beaſtly rude,
With dabbed wriſtes in goary bloud embrude.
The great deſyre of grieſly warre is ſprong:
And raping thurſt of gold, it is not young.
Throughout the worlde a mighty monſtruous vice,
Fowle, filthy, monſtruous luſt hath got the price,
A pleaſaunt tickling plague, whom longer ſpace,
And errour deepe haue foſtred vp apace.
The heaps of vyce rakte vp in yeares long paſt,
Abounding flowe in theſe our dayes at laſt.
And this ſame troublous tyme, and combrous age,
Oppreſſeth all men ſore, both yong and ſage.
Wherein thoſe wicked wayes that be do raygne,
And cruell, raumping woodnes boyles agayne.
Luſt ſtrong in filthy touch, doth beare a ſway.
And Princes, ryot, now doth catch away
With greedy pawes, to bring it to decay.
Th whole worldes vncredible wealth, without delay.
But loe, which ſtaggring ſteppes where Nero flinges,
And viſage grymme, I feare what newes hee brynges.
DIſpatch with ſpeede that we commaunded haue:
Go, ſend forthwith ſome one or other ſlaue,
That Plautius cropped ſcalpe and Sillas eke,
May bring befor our face: goe ſome man ſeeke.
I nill protract your noble graces heſt:
But to their campes to goe am ready preſt.
Gaynſt lynage naught ſhould raſhly poynted bee.
A light thing tis for to be iuſt, I ſee
For him, whoſe heart is voyd of ſhrinking feare.
A ſoueraigne ſalue for feare is for to beare
Your ſelfe debonair to your ſubiectes all.
Our foes to ſlea, a cheftaynes vertue call.
A worthier vertue tis in countries ſyre,
His people to defend with ſword and fyre.
It wel beſeemes ſuch aged wightes, to teach,
Vnbridled ſpringolles yong, and not to preache,
Both to a man and prince of ryper yeares.
May, rather frolicke youthful bloud appeares,
To haue more neede of counſell wyſe and graue
This age ſufficient reaſon ought to haue.
That heauenly powers your doinges may allow.
A madnes t'were to Gods for me to bow,
When I my ſelfe can make ſuch Gods to be:
As Claudius now ycounted is we ſee.
So much the more becauſe ſo much you may.
Our power permittes vs all without denay.
Geue ſlender truſt to Fortunes flattring face:
She topſie turuy turnes her wheele apace.
A patch he is that knoweth not what he may.
A Princes prayſe I compted haue alway,
To do that ſame which with his honor ſtoode,
Not that which franticke fancy counteth good.
If that I were a meacocke or a ſlouch,
Each ſtubborne, clubbiſh daw would make mee couch.
And whom they hate, with force they ouerquell.
Then dynt of ſword the prince defendeth well.
But fayth more ſure defence doth ſeeme to mee.
Ful meete it is that Caeſar dreaded be.
More meete of ſubiectes for to be belou'd
From ſubiects myndes, feare muſt not be remou'd
What ſo by force of armes you do wringe out,
A grieuous worke it is to bring aboute.
Well hardly then our will let them obay.
Will nothing then, but that which wel you may.
We wil decree what we ſhall beſt ſuppoſe.
What peoples voyce doth ioyntly bynd or loſe.
Let that confirmed ſtand.
Swordes bloudy dynt,
Shal cauſe them elſe at me to take their hint.
God ſheeld, and far that facte from you remoue.
What then, why Senec do you that approue,
That we contemnde, deſpyſde and ſet at nought,
With finger put in hole (ful wyſely wrought)
Our bodies bloud to ſeeke ſhould them abyde,
That they might vs ſometyme deſtroy vnſpyde?
Their natiue countrey boundes to baniſht bee,
Nor Plautius breſt nor Scillas eake we ſee
Hath broke or camd: whoſe cankred churliſh yre,
Shapes bloudy freakes to quench our bodyes fyre.
And chiefly when theſe trayterous abſent clounes,
Such wondrous fauour fynd in cityes bownes,
Which thoſe ſame exiles lingring hope doth feede:
Suſpected foes with ſword we wil out weede.
And ſo Octauia ſhall that ioly dame,
Continue after them their bloudy game.
And wend that way her nowne whyte brother went,
Such hye miſtruſted thinges muſt needes be bent.
It is (O Prince) a worthy famous thing,
Amids redoubted Lordes alone to ring:
And wyſely worke your countries prayſe to ſaue:
And wel your ſelfe to captiue folke behaue:
From cruell brutiſh ſlaughter to abſtayne,
And voyde of moode to wreake your angry payne:
And to the world a quiet calme to geue,
That al your age in peace their liues may liue.
This is a Princes prayſe without al cryme:
This is the path to heauen wherby we clyme.
So is Auguſtus prince and father cald
Of countrie firſt in ſtarbright throne yſtald.
Whom as a God in minſters we adorne,
Yet troublous fortune toſſed him beforne,
A great while long on lands and ruffling ſeas,
Vntil his fathers foes he could appeaſe,
And throught wars diuerſe courſe could quel them quite.
To you did fortune yeelde her power, and might,
And raynes of rule without all bloud, and fight.
And to your beck both land, and ſeas hath bent.
Grim deadly enuye daunted doth relent.
The Senate Lordes gaue place with free conſent:
The battaylous route of knights with willing hartes
(That ſame decree from ſager ſires departes)
Vnto the lay mens choyſe do well agree.
Your grace the ſpring of peace they count to bee.
And choſen Iudge, and guyde of mortal ſtocke.
Your grace, your countreys ſacred ſyre, doth rocke
And rule with princely gorgeous tytle bright,
The cyrcled world in rundel wyſe ydight.
Which mighty mounting name to keepe ſo great,
This noble citty Rome doth you entreat:
And doth commend vnto your royall grace
Her liuely limmes in charge for your liues pace.
The gyft of Gods it is, as we diſcus,
That Rome with Senafe ſorte doth honor vs,
And that the feare of our diſpleaſure great,
From cankred enuyous ſtomackes maketh ſweat
Both humble talke and ſupplications meeke.
And were not feare all theſe would be to ſeeke.
Vnweldy, combrous cityes, members ill,
That Prince and countrey both do ſeeke to ſpill,
To leaue alyue (which ſwell, and puffed bee,
Bycauſe of lynage great. and high degre)
What madnes meere is it when as we may,
Euen with a word, ſuch freakes diſpatch away▪
Sir Brutus ſterne, his brawnes and armes did dight,
His ſoueraygne liege to ſlayne by force and might,
That erſt had holpen him, and geuen him health,
And had endued him with princely wealth,
In brunt of raging warre vndaunted out,
That vanquiſht many people ſtrong and ſtoute,
Prince Caeſar matcht by great degrees of power
To loue, in ſtately chayre of ſtarry bower,
By diu'liſh citizens wicked wyle was ſlayne.
What ſtore of bloudy ſtiffling ſtreames on molde.
Did tatred Rome, of her owne lims, beholde?
He by his noble vertues worthy prayſe,
Whō peoples, common bruite to heauē doth raiſe.
Auguſt among the Gods yſayncted well,
How many noble breaſtes did he compel,
How many ſpringoldes young, and hoary heads,
Each where diſperſt to lig in molded heds?
How many men did he bereaue of breath
Tofore proſcript that were condemnd to death?
When for the grieſly feare of deadly dart
From propre home they were conſtraind to part
And flye Octauius force, and Lepidus might,
And not abyde ſterne Marke Antonius ſight,
Which then the ample world at once did guyde,
That into kingdomes three they did deuyde,
To dumpiſh ſadded ſyres, with heauy cheere,
Their childrens griely cropped pates appeere,
Hong out beforne the Senates iudgement ſeate,
For each man to behold in open ſtreate:
Ne durſt they once lament their piteaus caſe,
Nor inward ſeeme to mourne to Claudius face,
The market ſtead with bloud from bodies ſpued,
And lothſome mattrie ſtreames, is all imbrued:
And quite throughout their faces foule arayed,
The piteous gubbes of bloud drop downe vnſtayd.
Nor here did this ſame ſlaughterous bloudſhed ſtay.
Phillyps Pharſalia gaſtly fieldes each day,
The cromming rauening foules, and cruell beaſtes
Long fed, with gobbes bigge of manlye breaſtes,
Beſyde all this, the coſt he ſcoured quite▪
Of Sicill ſea and ſhips to ware ydyght
With force of armes did win, and hauocke made
Of propper ſnbiectes ſlayne with his owne blade.
The rundle round of landes with mighty mayne
Of noble Chieftaynes ſtroake reboyles agayne.
Antonius ouercome in Nauale fight,
To Egipt poaſtes in ſhippes preparde to flight:
Not looking long to liue nor hoping life.
Inceſteous Egipt (through Antonius wyfe)
That worthy Romayne princes bloud did ſucke▪
And couerd lye their ghoſtes with durty mucke.
Long wicked, waged ciuil warre there ſtayed,
In Marcke Antonius graue with him ylayed.
Auguſtus at the laſt of conqueſt greate
His dulled ſwords that wounded ſoules did beate,
In peaceable ſheathes repoſd hath layd at reſt:
And feare doth rule, and guyde his kingdome beſt
By ready force of armes at all aſſayes,
And Captaynes fayth he ſhieldes him ſelfe alwaies
Whō now his ſōnes moſt worthy vertuous praiſe,
To heauen a conſecrated God doth rayſe,
And cauſeth all, in Churches for to place
The ſacred Picture of Prince Claudius grace,
And vs the ſtarry raigne of Gods ſhall bide
If firſt with dreadful ſword about vs wyde
We wype away what ſo our perſon ſtayne:
And found our court with worthy ſtem agayne.
Your noble ſpouſe, ſprong forth of ſaincted peer
Of Claudius ſtocke, the ſtarbright diamond cleere,
That Goddeſſe Iuno wiſe her brothers bed▪
Partaking, preſſed downe with buttockes red,
Your graces princely court ſhal garniſh gay,
With wondrous heauenly fayre deſcended ſtay.
Inceſtuous maryed dames, from ſtocke & ſtem,
Detract all hope, that we ſhould haue of them.
Nor vs, could ſhe once loue that we could ſee,
Nor with our perſon once at all agree
In tender budding yeares, when loue ſuppreſt
With bluſſhing hydes the flames of burning breaſt,
Scant playne appeares the loue they bare indeed.
Thus wee our ſelues with hope in vaine did feede:
Although vndoubted ſignes, as bodye wryed,
And frowning lookes, which we haue oft eſpyed,
Her ſpyteful hating ſtomacke did bewray
Which ſhee doth beare, whom duty byndes t'obaye.
Which yet at laſt, big, boyling, grieuous payne,
With death determind hath tauenge agayne,
Wee haue found out, for byrth and beauties grace.
A worthy make for ſuch an Empreſſe place:
To whom that louely goddeſſe Venus bright,
And mighty Ioue his ſpouſe that Iuno hight,
and goddeſſe fierce in boyſterous warlike artes,
Geues place for bodyes ſeemly portrayd partes.
Fayth, meeknes, manners mild, & baſhfull ſhame▪
Of ſpouſe, thoſe ought an huſband to reclayme.
The perles of iudging mynd, alone remayne,
Not ſubiect once to any rulers raygne.
The paſſing pryde of beautyes numming grace
Each day appals, and bleamiſheth apace.
What prayſes woman wights haue in them cloſd▪
All thoſe in her alone hath God repode,
And ſuch a peerleſſe peere, the guydes of lyfe,
The deſtnies would haue borne to be our wyfe,
O noble prince ſuch blynd vnlawful loue,
(Do raſhly credite naught) from you remoue.
Whom Ioue can not repell that rules the cloudes,
And pearcing raging floods, therein him ſhroudes,
And raungeth through the raigne of Plutoes pit,
And pulleth downe in welkin hie that ſit
The mighty powers of heauen, the God of loue?
And can I then his force from me remoue?
Swift winged loue, mens fancy fond, in vayne
A mercy wanting God to bee, doth fayne:
And armes his handes with woundinge weapons keen
And bowes with burning brondes, for louers greene:
Of Venus to be ſprong they al accorde,
and blyndly forgde of thunders limping Lorde.
Bland loue the myndes great torment ſore appeares,
And buddeth firſt in frolicke youthful yeares.
Who while we drinke of Fortunes pleaſaunt cuppe,
With layſie pampring ryot, is neſled vp:
Whom if to toſter vp you leaue at length
It fleeting, falles away with broken ſtrength.
This is in all our life (as I ſuppoſe)
The greatteſt cauſe how pleaſure firſt aroſe.
Which ſith mankind by broodyng bydeth aye,
Through gladſom loue y• fierce wild beaſtes doth ſway
It neuer can from manly breaſt depart.
This ſelfe ſame God I wiſh withall my hart
The wedlocke lightes to beare before our grace,
And faſten Poppie ſure in our bed place.
The peoples griefe might neuer yeeld to it:
Nor verue can the ſame at all permit.
Shall I alone to do, forbidden be
That euery patch may do? that grieueth mee
No tryfling toyes the people lookes to haue
Of him, that ought to rule with wiſdome graue.
It pleaſeth vs with daunted power to trye,
If peoples raſh conceiued rage will flie.
Seeke rather for to pleaſe and calme their moode.
Ill ruled is that raygne where people wood,
Their ſubiect Price doth weld, as they thinke good
When nought that they require they can obtayne,
They iuſtly then agrieued are agayne.
That gentle prayers cannot win with eaſe,
By force to wring it out, it doth vs pleaſe.
An hard thing tis the people not to haue
That of theyr Prince, which they do iuſtly craue.
And horrible 'tis a Prince to be conſtraynd.
Let not your ſubiectes then ſo ſore be raynd.
Why then the common brute abroade wil be.
How that the people haue ſubdued mee.
That no man truſtes that is of credite light.
Be it ſo, yet many it markes with deadly ſpyghte.
With countrie peeres to medle it is afrayd,
To quip and frump, 'tis nothing leſſe diſmayd.
Your grace may eaſly couch that budding bruite
Let Sayncted ſires deſertes with pliant ſute,
Your graces mynd remoue: let ſpouſes age,
And curteous baſhfull ſhame diſrumpe your rage.
Leaue off (I ſay) that we entend to grutch.
For now your talke our pacience moueth much:
I pray you let it lawful be to do,
That Senec geueth not aduyſe vnto.
And we our peoples wiſhes do defer,
While Poppie feele in wombling wombe to ſterre,
The pledge of faythful loue to me and her.
Why do we not appoynt the morrow next,
When as our mariage pompe may be context?
THrough paunch of riuened earth, from Plutoes raigne
With ghoſtly ſteps, I am returnd agayne.
In writhled wriſtes, that bloud do moſt deſyre,
Forguyding wedlocke vyle with Stygian fire.
Let Poppie, which theſe creſſets coupled ſure,
Vnto my ſonne be ioynd in mariage pure:
Whom mothers griefe, and hand reuenging wrackes,
Shal ſend with heaue and hoe to funeral ſtackes
I always do remember wel beneath
Where piteous, ghoſtly, crauling ſoules do breath,
Th'unkindly ſlaughterous deede, which to our ſpright
Yet vnreuengd is grieuous and of right:
And for the good I did a cruell priſe,
That deadly framed ſhip in crafty wyſe:
And due reward that he gaue me agayne,
For helping him to rule of Empyres raygne:
And eake that night, when as I did bewayle,
Both loſſe of ſhippe wherin we then did ſayle,
And mates vnhappye death, and whyle I thoughte,
For this accurſed deede to haue beſought
The Gods to trickling teares he gaue ſcant tyme
But twice encreaſed hath his deuilliſh cryme.
Quite ſlayne with ſword, thruſt through my bodyes boundes
And ſilthy layed through goary mattring woundes,
Deliuered ſafe from ſeas, deuouring ſup,
In antique court my ghoſt I yeelded vp.
Nor yet his cancred, and vnſatiate hate.
For all this bloud doth Nero once abate.
That Tyrant dyre doth rage at mothers name.
And ſeeketh wayes my deedes for to defame.
Who threating death to them that doe withſtand,
My ſhapes he dingeth downe in euery land:
My princely tytles large hee ſcrapeth out
In euery place, the whole wydeworld aboute,
Which my vnlucky parentes loue did geue,
To much vnto my paine whyle I did liue,
Vnto a boy to guyde, which now I rue.
My poyſoned make, my Ghoſt doth oft purſue:
And in my face with burning brondes doth flye.
He ſtayes a ſpace with earneſt talke hard by,
And threatneth ſore, and doth impute his death
And tombe he ſhould haue had to mee beneath.
And now deſyres to haue ſome factious wight,
That dare deſpayle my ſonne of breathing ſpright.
Let be you ſhall haue one to worke this cryme,
I do require no long delayed tyme.
Reuenging ſpright Erin, a death doth coine,
Of life, that wicked tyrant to purloyne.
Sore ſmarting leaden ſtrypes and ſhameful flight,
And pyning panges with thurſt and hunger dight:
That Tantalus ſpungelike thurſty mouth befurde,
And Siſyphus toyle ſhal paſſe, and Tityus burde,
And Ixions paynful wombling wheele aboute,
That teareth all his bodyes partes throughout.
Although that Tyrant proude and ſcornful wight,
His court with marble ſtone do ſtrongly dyght,
And princelike garniſh it with gliſtring golde:
Though troupes of ſouldiours ſhielded ſure, vpholde
Their chieftaynes princely porch: and though yet ſtill
The world drawne drye with taſkes euen to his will,
Great heapes of riches yeeld themſelues to ſaue,
Although his bloudy helpe the Parthians craue,
And Kingdomes bring, and goods al that they haue,
The tyme and day ſhall come, when as he ſhall
Forlorne, and quite vndone, and wanting all.
Vnto his curſed deedes his life and more,
Vnto his foes his bared throate reſtore.
Alas, vnto what ende is all my payne?
Or in what caſe do now my vowes remayne?
Wherto doth now thy rage and deſtnies ſpyte?
Draw thee O Sonne, with brayne benummed quite?
That to ſuch monſtruous heapes of ylles thy dame
(Whom thou with curſed miſchiefe ouercame)
Hir wrath ſhould yeeld? O that ere to the light
A ſucking babe I brought thee foorth in ſight,
And fedd thee fyne with pappe as princely borne,
The fierce, wild, ſauage beaſtes had rent and torne
My wombe and bloudy entrails all beforne.
Without all cryme, and wanting reaſons pride,
Mine own deere dādling child thou ſhouldſt haue dide.
And faſtned ſure to me ſhouldſt aye beholde,
The quiet place, where Ghoſtly ſoules be rolde:
And ſee thy graundſyres great of worthy fame,
And ſyre Domitius eake of princely name,
Whom now both ſhame and wayling doth abyde,
That whyle they dure, from them ſhal neuer ſlyde.
For which both thee, O curſed Barne, they may,
And mee, that thee haue borne geeue thankes for aye.
But why ceaſſe I, with hel to hyde my face,
Wyfe, ſtepdame, mother dire, in my life ſpace?
DO not, alas, thus ſore lament,
But rather yet your mourning ſtay,
Sith that the city whole is bent
To celebrate this ioyful day:
Leaſt your great loue and fauour both,
Which I do count to be moſt ſure,
The more cauſe Nero me to loth,
And eake his bitter wrath procure:
And I fal out to be the ground
To you of many miſchieues vyle,
This ſame is not the firſt deepe wounde,
That I haue felt now this good whyle:
Farre worſe then this haue I abode:
But of theſe troublous cares this day
Shall make an end I truſt in God,
Although with Death he do me pay,
No man to ſee ſhal me conſtrayne
His bended browes knit furrowyſe,
Nor ſtep within the Chamber ragyne
Of mayde dreſt vp in brydall guiſe
Auguſtus ſiſter I wil bee,
And not his wyfe as wont I was:
But onely paynes remoue from mee,
And feare of death I wil not paſſe.
Yet canſt thou piteous wreth once truſt,
Thy cruell huſbandes father law,
Or theſe few thinges to haue ſo luſt
Whyle miſchieues yet in mynd are rawe?
Now long reſerud, vntil this day,
And theſe ſame maryage rytes be paſt,
Thou ſhalt poore wretch without delay,
A bloudy offring dye at laſt.
Why thus with teares diſfigured ſore
Thy wonted home doſt thou behold?
Make haſt to ſhunne this deadly ſhore
And leaue this ſtraughtrous Princes fold.
Lo ſee that day ſuſpecttd long
And whiſpered Fame in all mens eares,
With gliſteryng pompe of brydall throng,
To vs pore wretches now appeares.
And Claudius broode Octauias grace,
From Neroes wedlocke place expelde,
Departed is, whoſe ſpouſall ſpace,
Hath Poppie conquerour long tyme helde.
The whyle, our pyety couched lyes
Kept downe with heauy, combrous feare.
And ſlow reuenging grief likewyſe:
Where doth the peoples power appeare,
That brake the force of Princes great,
That conquerous city lawes hath framde,
That worthy men to honours eat
Preferd, that warre and peace proclaymd,
That ſauage people ſtraunge did tame
That Kinges and Princes caught in fight
Shut ſurely vp in priſon frame
To keepe them cloſe from all mens ſight
Loe, which wee cannot once abyde,
To ſee wher Poppies ymage trym,
Conioyned vnto Neroes ſyde
All gliſtring bright ſhynes very brim.
Let force of Armes pul downe that frame
And match with grounde that Ladyes face
Too likely carued to his name,
And ſnatch her downe from beddig place,
And let it forthwith flye with brandes▪
With Dartes and Iauelins fiercely flonge,
From pythy braunes and ſturdy handes
Vnto the princes courtly throng.
FRom out of ſpouſal bower diſmayd with feare,
Whither go you? what ſecrets daughter deare
Vnknowen, makes you to looke ſo drouſely?
Why ſpungelike lokes your face wt tears frō eye
That fell? of truth the tyme deſyred long,
And wiſhed for by prayers, and vowes among
Hath ſhyned bright. Caeſars wedlock are you:
Your golden grace, whereof he tooke the view.
Him priſoner caught, and did him ſurely bynde,
So much the more, how much Senec his mynd
Did ſeeke to chaunge, and wild from loue to weeld.
And Venus chiefe in loue hath made him yeeld.
O in beauty paſſing all, what beds then downe
More ſoft, haue borne thy weight when thou with crowne
Didſt ſit in middes of court the Senate all.
At thy great beauty agaſt, thou didſt appall.
Whylſt thou the Goddes with perfume ſendeſt fyne,
And ſacred alters drencht with thankful wyne,
Thy head attyrd with veyle of yellow hiew
By Caeſars ſide thou wentſt as princeſſe new:
When he aloft extold aboue the reſt,
With hauty courage merily went to feaſt.
Like as kyng Peleus went ſometymes to take
Queene Tethis, whom ſalt ſeas fome bred, his make.
Whoſe bridinge chambers, banquet wiſe ydreſt,
The Gods vouchſaft to hallow with their heſt,
Both they that rule in ſkyes and eake in Seas.
But tel, O Lady, tell, if it you pleaſe,
What ſodayne chaūce doth ſhade your beautyes light.
What meanes your colour chaūge from red to white?
What moues thoſe trickling tears, how ſtandes your plight?
With dreames, and grieſly ſightes, this laſt night, Nurſe,
My mynd was troubled ſore, but frayd much worſe.
For when ſir Phoebe his weary courſe had ryd,
Whyle quiet reſtyng night each thing ſhadid,
My ſences weary fel in ſlumber deepe,
Whyle Nero me within his armes did cleepe.
Reſoluing lims, at length gan ſleepe diſcharge,
And long I reſt not vnder quiets targe,
For loe, I ſaw a route that brought me feare,
Come to my chaumber with diſheueled hayre:
The Matrons ſage of Latin land did mourne,
And ſounded ſhryking ſighes as though forlorne
They were, the dolefulſt wightes that liue on ground.
And oft among the warlike trumpets ſound,
I ſawe my huſbands mother teribly ſtand,
With threatning looke berayed with boud in hand
A light fyre brand ſhe bare which oft ſhe ſhooke,
And made mee goe with her through feareful loke.
When downe we came through op'ned earth ſhee led
The way, I after went with bowing hed,
And muſing much therat, marke what I ſay,
My bed, me thought I ſaw, wherin I laye,
When firſt eſpouſde I was to Rufe Chriſpyne▪
And hee me thought, with firſt ſonne of his lyne,
With many following them agaynſt me faſt
Did come, and me to cleepe did ſwift his haſt,
And as he wonted was he ki me oft,
Then ruſht into my houſe with pace not ſoft
Amaſed Nero ſore, in Chryſpines breaſt
That hidde his faulchion ene: feare ſhakte of ret
From mee: I trembling ſtode with quiuering feare,
And breſt diſmayd to ſpeake made me forbeare.
Til now (O Nurſe) I met with thee, whſe truſt,
And fayth into theſe wordes haue made me bruſt.
Alas, what threatneth mee eche grieſly ſpright?
What meanes of huſbands bloud that doleful ight?
he hidden ſacred vayne that moueth ſwift,
Which fantaſie we call by ſecret drift,
When we do take our reſt doth ſhew agayne,
The thinges both good and bad that broyle in brayne:
You maruel that you ſaw your make, and bower,
His ghoſtly funerall ſtackes, at that ſame hower
Round claſped cloſe in armes of huſband new:
Hereto, the beaten breaſtes with handes mou'd you,
And maydens hayre, on mariage day diſplayd:
Octauias friendes with heauy hartes bewrayed,
Amids hir brothers both and fathers hall
Their heauy cheere for her vnluckye fall.
That dreadful blaſing flame of fyre forborne
In Agryppynas hand your grace beforne.
Which you did follow ſtreigth declares renowne
To you, though enuye ſtryue to keepe it owne:
The ſeat you ſaw beneath doth promiſe you
Your ſtae to ſtand ful ſure not chaunging new:
That Nero prince in Criſpins throat did hyde
His ſword, it telles that he in peace ſhall byde,
Vnknowen to bloudy ruthful warre for aye.
Therfore (Madam) plucke vp your hart I pray:
Receiue both mirth and glee caſt feare aſyde,
With ioy, and eaſe you may in bowre abide.
To temples hie where mighty Gods do dwell,
I wil repayre, and offringes to them fell
In humble wyſe their heauy wrath t'ppeaſe,
And me of mighty ſight, and dreams to eaſe.
My ſecond wiſh ſhal be, that this feare all
Vppon my foes as ſodayne chaunce may fall.
O Nurſe pray thou for mee ſome vowes do make
Toth' Gods, that ghoſtly feare his flight my take.
IF ſtealth diſcloaſde by blabbing fame,
And luſty, pleaſaunt, thankfull loue,
Of IOVE be true: who fourme did frame
Of ſwan to come from ſkies aboue,
And did enioy the ſweete conſent
Of Ladye LEDAS loues delight:
VVho like a Bull his labour ſpent,
Through flowing floods to cary quite,
EVROPA ſlylie ſtolne awaye:
Hee will no doubt leaue raygne of Skye
And POPPIES loue diſguiſd aſſaye▪
If hee her ſoueraygne beauty ſpye.
VVhich hee might wel preferre before
Fayre LAEDAS ſugred ſweete delight:
And DANAE whom hee wonne of yore,
Amaſde with golden shoure ſo bright:
Let SPARTE now for HELENS ſake
Of beauty bragging fame vprayſe:
Admit the TROIAN heardman make
Of gayned ſpoyle tryumphant prayſe:
Fayre HELEN here is ſtayned quight:
VVhoſe beauty bredde ſuch boyling yre,
That earth was matched euen in ſight
VVith TROIAN towres conſumde with fyre.
But who is this that runnes with feare oppreſt?
Or els what newes bringes he in panting breaſt?
WHat ſturdy champion ſtoute doth ioy with glee
Our chieftaynes royal bower ſafe to ſee,
Then to his court I counſel him to wend,
Gainſt which the populus rout their force doth bend.
The rulers runne amaſde to fetch the gard,
And armed troupes of men, theyr towne to ward.
Nor woodnes raſhly cought through feare doth ceaſſe,
But more and more, their power doth encreaſe.
What ſodain rage doth beat their brling braine?
The gariſons great with fury aſtonde againe,
And ſturred vp for Queene Octauias ſake
With monſtrous miſchiefe vile, their rage to ſlake,
They rumbling ruſh into the Pallace farre.
What dare they do, their counſailers who are?
Aduaunce their Empreſſe old, ſuburt the new:
And graunt hir, brothers beds as is hir due.
Which Poppie now, with hole conſent doth hold?
Yea that vnbrideled rage in breſt vprold,
Sets them agog, and makes them wondrous wood.
What euer ymage grauen in marble ſtood,
If Poppies badge it bare, or if in ſight,
It tended for to ſhew hir beauty bryght,
Though it on heauenly altares braue did ſtand,
They break, or pull it down, with ſword or hand.
Some parts with ropes ſure tide, they trayle thē forth
Which ſpurnd wt durty feete, as though naught worth
With thy ſtinking myre, they it all beray.
And with their deedes their talke doth iumpe agree,
Which mine amaſed minde, thinks true to bee
For fierie flames they threat for to prepare,
Wherewith to waſte, the princes Pallace faire,
Vnleſſe, vnto their furious moode he giue
His ſecond wife, and with Octauia liue,
But he by me ſhall know in what hard ſtay
The City ſtands: the rulers Ile obay.
A lack, what made you cruell warres, in vaine
To moue, ſith priſoner loue you can not gaine
You can not him ouercome, your fiery flame
He recketh not: his ſyre ouercomes the ſame.
He darkened hath thoſe thundring thumps that ſhake
Heauen, Earth, Hel, ſea, al things y• makes to quake.
Yea mighty Ioue, in heauen that weares chief crowne
His flames from welkin hie hath brought adowne.
And you, not victors now, but vanquiſhed,
Shall rauſome pay, the price of hearts bloud red.
Loue, pacient can not be, but hote in rage,
No eaſie thing it is, his wrath t'aſwage,
Achilles worthy ight, that was ſo ſtout,
To twang the Harpe he made in Ladies rout,
Prince Agamemnon ſterne that boy benund,
And rable rude of Greekes with loue bronds bumd.
King Priams raigne he topſie tuuie toſt,
Aud goodly Cities great he chiefly loſt.
And now my minde ore frighted ſtands agaſt,
What Cupides furious force brings vs at laſt.
AH, ah, our captaines ſle diſpatching coyle,
And our long ſuffring ye in ſuch a broyle,
That ſtreames of bloud yet do not uē h their rage
Which thei againſt our propre perſon wage
And that all Rome, with corſes ſtrewd about,
Thoſe cruell villaines bloud, doth not ſweat out.
But deedes already done, with death to pay.
A ſmall thing t'is, a greater ſlaughtrous day
The peoples curſed crime, and eke that dame,
Whom I did aye ſuſpect, deſerues the ſame.
whome, to yelde thoſe peaſaunts would me make:
At laſt ſhe ſhall, with life our ſorow ſlake,
And with hir bodies bloud ſhall quench our yre.
Then, ſhall their houſes fall by force of fyre:
What burning both, and buildings fayre decay,
What beggerly want, and wayling hunger may
Thoſe villaines ſhal be ſure, to haue ech day.
Ah, Proueder pricks that vile rebellious race
Ne can they once our fauour well embrace,
Nor be content, with peace in quiet ſtate,
But broyling raumpe about with troubled gate.
Hereon with boldneſſe ſtraight, hereon they flie,
With harebraind raſhneſſe hedlong by and by.
Well, they muſt tamed be with heauy ſtroke,
And downe be kept with peiſe of weighty yoke:
That they, with like attempt, do not ariſe,
Nor once caſt vp their deadly peaſaunts eyes,
Againſt our louing ſpouſes golden lookes:
Firſt puniſh them ſure, then feare ſhal be their bookes,
To teache them, at their Princes beck t'obay
But ſee at hand, whom fayth, and vertue rare,
Lieuetenant chiefe of camps, appointed thare.
THe vulgare peoples raſh vnruly rage
The ſlaughter of a fewe did ſone aſſwage,
Which long wtſtode our valiant force in vain▪
To tel your grace this newes, I come againe▪
And is this then ynough, doſt thou ſo well▪
O ſouldiour marke what doth thy captaine tell?
Haſt thou with held thy hand frou bloudy yre?
Is this the due reuenge that we requyre?
The captaine guides of treaſon payd their hyre,
By deſperate death of bloudy ſword in fight.
The route which ſought with flaming fyre to light,
Our royall Pallace great, who would aſſigne
Their Prince what he ſhould doe: and pull in fine
Our mate from vs diſſoluing wedlocke bandes:
Whoſe hardy ſlaunderous tongs, & wicked handes,
Hir princely grace reprochfully withſtandes,
From due reuenge, are they diſmiſſed free?
Shall ſubiectes payne, by griefe aſſigned bee?
It ſhall aſſigne which time ſhall neuer weare.
Which neither wrath may end, nor yet your fear▪
Shee ſhall appeaſe our hie diſpleaſed minde,
Who fiyrſt, our wrath deſerued due to finde.
Declare whoſe death your moode doth moſt require
Let not my hande be ſtayde from your deſire.
It ſeekes our ſiſters death, and trayterous hed.
Thoſe words through all my luns, hath ſtifneſſeſpred,
Oppreſt with grieſty feare.
Vs to obay.
Stands thou in doubt:
On fayth why do you lay
So great a fault?
Bycauſe thou ſparedſt our foe.
Deſerues a woman to be termed ſo?
If treaſon ſhe begin.
Is any man
So ſure, that hit accuſe of creaſon can:
The peoples rage:
Thoſe madde vnweldye wights
Who order could?
Who could ſtir vp their ſprits?
No creature as I thincke.
A woman could,
In whome a mind Dame nature hath vpfould,
To miſchiefe prone: ſhee armed hath hir heart,
To hurt by wyles: yet ſtrength ſhee ſet apart,
Leaſt ſhee vndaunted force with hir ſhould beare:
But now hir ſlender power with doubting feare,
Is quickly quaylde, or elſe with puniſhment,
Which hir condenmed ſtate to miſchiefe bent
To late doth ende: away with graue aduiſe,
Vs with entreating ſeeke not to entyſe.
Diſpatch that we commund on ſhipboorde horne,
Farre off to ſhore aloofe with daſhing worne,
Commaund ſhee be: that tunlike ſwelling breſt
At length in ſtorming ſtomack may take reſt.
ALack the peoples bitter loue,
And dyre good will to many one,
Which, when they hoyſted ſayles aboue,
With pleaſaunt blaſtes it made to grone,
And caried them from quiet ſhore,
That faynting, leaues them in the deepe,
And tumbling, raging waters rore.
Cornelia piteous wretch did weepe,
And ſore bewayle hir ſonnes eſtate:
The peoples loue did vndoe them,
And wondrous fauour, bred them hate:
Great worthy peeres of noble ſtem:
Of high renowne for vertues prayſe:
In fayth and eloquence did pas
Their ſtomacks ſtout their fame did rayſe:
Ith lawes eche one moſt excellent was.
And Scipio, thee did Fortune yeelde
Vnto lyke death, and curſſed wracke,
Whom neyther honours pompe coulde ſheelde,
Nor fenced houſe thy foes keepe backe.
Moe to repeate, although I coulde,
Pure preſent griefe forbiddeth ſore:
Ere whyle to whom the people woulde,
Her Fathers antique Courte reſtore,
And Brothers wedlocke once againe,
Now weeping, wringing hands poore wretch,
Vnto hir cruell, deadly payne,
The armed ſouldiours doe hir fetch.
How ſafe doth pouerty lye content,
In thetched houſe ſafe ſhrouded there?
High rayſed towers with blaſts are bent,
Which often tymes them ouer beare.
Where pull you mee poore wretch? alas,
Into what baniſht exiles place,
Woulde Nero haue mee for to paſſe,
Or Fortune bids, with frowning face?
If now with faynting ſtrength quite coolde,
And with my broyles all wearied ceaſſe,
And longer lyfe ſhee graunt mee woolde,
If that ſhee worke for to increaſe,
My ſorrowes great with deadly dart,
Why is ſhe then ſo much my foe,
In country that I may not part,
And leaue my life before I goe?
But now no helpe of health I feele,
Alas I ſee my Brothers boate:
This is the ſame, whoſe vaulted keele,
His Mother once did ſet a clote.
And now his piteous Siſter I,
Excluded cleane from ſpouſall place,
Shall be ſo caried by and by:
No force hath vertue in this caſe.
No Gods there be my woes to wrecke.
The griefly, dreadfull drab Eryn,
Doth weld the worlde at nod and becke,
Who can lament my ſtate, wherein
I am, alas, ſufficientlie?
How can Aedon duely playne,
My ſmarting ſtreames at beares that I
Do ſhedde? whoſe wings I would be fame,
If deſtnies would them graunt, to weare.
Then would I leaue my mourning mates,
As ſwiftly fled, as wings could beare,
Aud ſo auoyde theſe bloudy pates.
Then ſitting ſole in ſhirwood ſhirle,
And hanging ſure, by dandling twigge
VVith plaintiue pipe I might out twarle
My heauy tuned note ſo bigge.
The mortalt broode the deſtnies guide:
Themſelues they nothing can aſſure,
That certainly doth ſtedfaſt bide:
VVhich our laſt day of life, procure,
(VVhere of we alwayes ſhould beware,)
Much daungerous chaunces for to try:
Vnto your troubled minde with care,
Now many ſaumples do applys,
Which your accurſed court hath brought,
To holden you in all your broyle:
For what hath more your troubles wrought,
What doth againſt you ſorer toyle,
Than fortune doth? the firſt of all,
Agrippas childe brought forth to life,
Whome we Tyberius daughter call,
By lawe, and eke Prince Caeſars wife,
Of many ſonnes a carefull dame,
I cannot choſe but now recount,
Whoſe worthy, glorious ample name,
Throughout the world doth much ſurmount.
So oft with belly bolne that bare
Deſyred fruicts, and peaces pledge,
Ere long thou ſufferedſt exiles care,
Strypes, chaines, and boltes of yron wedge,
And mourning much, which ſo did frame,
That death they cauſde thee to abyde.
So Liuia, Druſus lucky name
In male kinde babes, did hedling ſlyde,
Into a cruell monſtrous deede,
And death ſore pearcing deadly dart.
Hir mothers fates doth Iulia ſpeede,
To folow ſtreight with all hir heart,
Who after longer waſted time
With bloudy fauchion kene, was ſlaine,
Although for no iuſt cauſe or crime.
Your mother eke that once did raigne,
Who then eſteemd of Claudius well,
Did wiſely weld his court at will,
And fruitfull was, as you can tell,
What could not her deſire fulfill:
Shee ſometime ſubiect to hir ſlaue,
To death was put with ſouldiours blade.
VVhat ſhee, that eaſly hope might haue,
Toth ſkies, hir raigne to riſe haue made,
Prynce Neroes luſty Parent great?
Firſt toſt with ſhipmans boyſterous force,
Then torne with ſword in Prynces heat,
Did ſhee not lye a ſenceles corſe,
Loe mee the tyrant ſtern will ſend
To yrckſome ſhades and helliſh ſprits.
Why wretch doe I the tyiue thus ſpend?
Draw mee to death you to whoſe myghts,
Falſe Fortune hath bequeathed mee.
I witneſſe now the heauenly powre.
What doſt thou bedlame? leaue to flee,
With prayer to Gods, who on thee lowre.
I call to witneſſe Tartar deepe,
And ſprytes of Hell reuenging freakes
Of haynous facts, in Dgeon ſteepe,
And Syre whom death deſerued wreakes.
I doe not now repyne to dye,
Deck vp your Ship, and hoyſe your Sayle,
On frothing ſeas to windes on hye:
Let him that guides the Helm not fayle,
To ſeeke the ſhore of Pharian Land.
O pippling puffe of weſtern wynde,
Which ſacrifice didſt once with ſtand,
Of Iphigen to death aſfignde
And cloſe in Cloude congealed clad,
Did cary hir from ſmòking aaes,
Which angry, cruell Virgin had:
This Prynce alſo oppreſt, with cares,
Saue from this paynefull puniſhment,
To Dians temple ſafely horne:
The harbarous Moores torueneſſe bent,
Then Prynces Courtes in Rome forlorne,
Haue farre more Cyuile curtſie:
For there doth ſtraungers death appeaſe
The angry Gods in heauens on hie,
But Romayne bloude, our Rome muſt pleaſe.