HAh? let me cleare mine Eyes, me thinks I ſee
Comforts approach, as if They came to me;
I am not vſde to e'm; I ha beene long without,
How comes the Vertue of the Times about?
Ha's Ancient Cuſtome yet a Friend? of Weight?
So many? rare I Goodneſſe is wak't alate
Out of her long Sleepe ſure; that ha's laine ſtill
Many a deere Day, charm'd with Neglect and Will,
I thought I'de beene forſaken, quite forſooke,
For none theſe 7. yeares, ha's beſtow'd a Looke
Vpon my watry Habitation here;
I meane, of Power, that ought to ſee Me cleere,
For yon'd faire Cities health, which Sweetnes bleſſe
And Vertue in full Strength, euer poſſeſſe;
Well fare thy Viſitation, Noble Lord,
And this moſt Graue Aſſembly; that accord
In wayes of Charity and Care with Thee;
Ioyes viſit You, as Your Loues viſit Me:
The Water ſtands ſo full now in mine Eyes
I cannot chuſe but weepe; but the Teares riſe
From Gladneſſe, not from Sorrow, for that's loſt
Now I ſee you, Vnkindneſſe yet ha's coſt
Many a deere Drop, ſince I beheld the Face
Of the laſt Magiſtrate, in Power and Place;
I h'a done good Seruice; t'is no boaſting part
In one forgot, to ſpeake her owne deſert:
I grant my kind and louing Siſters both
Chadwell and Amwell, haue expreſt no Sloth
In their Pipe-Pilgrimage, but fairely proou'd
Moſt excellent Seruants, houſ'de, and welbelou'd;
And haue, when hard Neceſſity requires,
Giuen happy Quench to many mercileſſe Fires;
Therefore am I neglected? An old Friend?
The Head? that to the Heart a'th City ſend
My beſt and cleereſt Seruice, take Delight
To be at hand, make your Dames Pure and White;
Who for their ciuill Neatneſſe, are proclaim'd
Mirrours of women, through all Kingdoms fam'd;
Can I be ſo forgot? and daily heare
The noiſe of Water-bearers din your care?
Thoſe are my Almes folkes, trotting in a Ring,
And liue vpon the bounty of my Spring,
Yet like dull wormes that haue no ſence at all,
Lick vp the Dewes, ne're look from whēce they fal,
The head's not minded, whēce the goodnes flows:
So with the worlds condition right it goes;
``Bleſſings are ſwallowed with a greedy loue,
``But Thanks flye ſlowly to yon'd place Aboue,
From whence the Euerliuing Waters ſpring,
Which to your ſoules eternall comforts bring:
The Dewes of Heauen fal on you, proſperous Fates
Like fruitfull Riuers, flow into your States.