FRee Loue, full welcome, bounty fayre, & cleere,
E'en as it flowes from Heauen, inhabit here,
And with your Liberall Vertues bleſſe the yeare,
Make this thy Pallace thou ſmooth youth of Feaſts,
Comus! and put Ioy into all the Gueſts,
That they may truely taſte in feweſt words,
Th' Abundant welcome yon'd Kind Lord affords,
Eſpecially to You, aboue the reſt,
Of all moſt worthy to be Firſt and Beſt;
You challenge two Reſpects, in Brotherhood, one,
Which had deſert enough came it alone,
Without a ſecond Vertue, but to adde
Vnto Your Worthineſſe, Your Loue was clad
With Honor, Coſt, and Care, and how applide,
The late triumphant Day beſt teſtified,
Stands in no need of my applauſe and praiſe,
Your Worth can of it ſelfe, it ſelfe beſt raiſe;
So much for Noble Action in your Right,
Which I preſume his goodneſſe will require:
Now for Himſelfe, (not far to wade or ſwim)
I borrow of your Honours to fit him,
Which both preſerues me in my firſt bounds ſtill,
And may agree beſt with his Loue and Will:
Behold in this rare Symbole of Renowne,
The Embleme of all Iuſtice, and the Crowne
The faire reward for't, euer freſh and greene;
Which imitates thoſe Ioyes Eye hath not ſeene;
Theſe Armes, that for their nakedneſſe reſemble
E'en Truth it ſelfe, no couering, to diſſemble,
Nor ſhift for Bribe, but open, plaine, and bare,
Shows, Men of Power ſhould keep their conſcience
And were their Acts tranſparēt, without vaile (faire
Diſguize or Vizard, and ſuch neuer faile;
Obſerue this more, tis not one Arme alone
That beares this Laurell, but two ioyn'd in one,
Mercy and Iustice, the two Props of State,
They muſt be both fixt in the Magiſtrate;
If wanting either, ſubiect to much harme,
For he that ha's but one, ha's but one Arme;
Iudge then the Imperfection; marke agen,
They breake both through a Cloud; which inſtructs Men
How they ſhould place their Reuerence and their Loue,
Seeing all lawfull power, comes from Aboue;
And as the Laurell (which is now your due)
Bring due to Honour, therefore moſt to you▪
Feares no iniurious Weather the Yeare brings,
But ſpite of Storms looks euer greene and ſprings,
Apolloes Tree, which Lightnings neuer blaſt,
So (Honor'd Lord) ſhould burning Malice caſt,
Her pitchy Fires at your Triumphant State;
You are Apolloes Tree, a (Magiſtrate,)
Which no foule Guſt of Enuy can offend,
Nor may it euer to your Lordſhips End,
Health and a Noble Courage bleſſe your Dayes;
To this your worthy Brotherhood, fame and praiſe
WHy well ſaid, thus ſhould Chriſtmas be
Lightſome, Iocond, blithe and free,
Now it lookes like Bounties Pallace,
Where euery Cup ha's his full Ballace,
Drowne Cares with Iuice that Grapes haue bled,
And make Times cheeke looke freſh and red,
Let nothing now but Healths goe round,
And no ſooner off, but crown'd
With ſparkling Liquors, bounding vp,
Quicke in Pallet, as in Cup:
To be heauy, to be dull,
Is a fault ſo pittifull,
We bar it from the courſe of Reaſon,
Care muſt not peep abroad this Seaſon,
Nor a ſad looke dare appeare
Within ten Mile of Chriſtmas cheere;
Sighes are baniſht ten leagues farder,
Either Cellar, Hall or Larder;
To be Iouiall then and blithe
Is truely to pay (Chriſtmas) Tithe,
And where free Mirth is and impartiall,
Chriſtmas there h'as made me Marſhiall.
Why how now? know you where you are? rude thing;
Bold and vnmanner'd Licence, dare you bring
Your free Speech hither, before me begin?
Who let this Skittiſh thing of Lightneſſe in?
Some call the Porter hither, yet ſtay, ſtay,
I'ue power in words to chaſe this toy away;
I wonder that the Muſique ſuffers thee
To come into their roome?
Why Nicety?
Beleeue me honeſt Me (what e're yoube)
She's able to ſpoyle all your Harmony,
Corrupt your ayres with Lightneſſe.
Oh fie, fie,
How ill you blaze my Coate, Seuerity?
Is this a place for you? can Lightneſſe here
Vnder the Hazard of her Shame appeare?
Why thou dull lumpiſh Thing, void of all faſhion,
Mirths poyſon, Enemy to Recreation,
Thou Melancholly wretch, ſo fil'd with ſpite
Thou eat'ſt thy heart, when others take delight,
I muſt be merry, tis my nature—
Foole.
Dull dogbolt.
Skit.
What? this a Scolding Schoole,
How now? ſo hie got? and ſo lowd withall?
Whoſe doing wa'ſt plac'ſt you two there to braule?
Pray marke the Aſſembly, looke vppon e'm well,
Thinke where you are, and let that rude thought quell
Your vnbeſeeming difference, tis not heere
As at a Pit, here's Reuerence, Worth, and Feare.
She ſayes this place and ſeaſon ſuites not me.
She ſayes but right in that,
O Leuity,
No, nor you neither,
You may be gon too,
Y'are Both Extreames, therefore no place for you,
Lightnes becomes not, nor Seuerity,
It muſt me betweene both, and I am Shee,
Too Light, is bad, and too Seuere as Vilde,
But both well temperd, makes the mixture milde,
As I ſtand now betweene you, ſo it makes
A perfect Vertue vp, when it pertakes
Of each, and comes no neerer then I doo,
And Vertue made, We haue no neede of you,
Vaniſh, be gon.
I giue glace willingly
To You, but not to Her.
Nor I to Thee,
So, Thus things ſhould haue their becomming grace,
For Temperance fits the Reuerence of this place:
Graue Senators, in goodnes ſtill encreaſt!
Long may you Liue to celebrate this Feaſt,
This bleſſed Seaſon of true Ioy compilde
In which faire Heauen and Man were reconcilde▪
Muſique? thou modeſt Seruant to this place,
Raiſe chaſt Delight, to doe this Seaſon grace.
Eccho! Eccho! by thy loue once to Narciſſus, I now coniure thee not to miſſe vs, But make thy Sound Vppon the Woods rebound And Mountains—Ecch: And mountaines, And to thy neighbouring Siſters cal,—Siſters cal, Log'd in Caue or hollow Wall And thoſe reſounding neere faire Fountaines Ecch: Neere faire Fountaines, Let e'm call to one another—To one another —one another— And one Siſter rayſe vp tother Ecch.—vp tother— Let it goe from me to you—From me to you —Mee▪ To you, From you to them, be iuſt and true —Iuſt and True Neuer ceaſe your Voyces Flight, Till you raiſe vp chaſt Delight ——Vp chaſt Delight, Delight—Who calls me from my Caue Twas I—Twas I, Twas I; This is no Time in ſilence now to lye Delight—Who I? O I; This is a Seaſon of all I oy compilde, In which faire Heauen and Man were reconcilde Ecch—Heauen and Man were reconcilde, Ecch-Reconcilde, Behold how many a worthy Guest Are met to celebrate this Feast. Delight—I ſee it plaine, O blame me then, I ne're will ſhowe ſuch Sloth agen; For whoſe delight am I now raiſde? Oh for the Citties! Delight—How? for the Citties? Ecch—For the Citties: Del. To faile a Miſtris ſo renown'd it were a thouſand pitties, Ecch—Thouſand pitties. Thoſe are her Honor'd Sonnes you now behold, Del. Heauen bleſſe them all, with Graces manifold. Temp. So! Tis thankfully accepted, y'haue expreſt, Your ſeruice well and fully to this Feaſt: Adorn'd and honor'd in each happy part, With thoſe moſt reuerend Patrons to Deſert: Ioy neuer faile your meetings, good ſucceſſe All your Endeuours, and your Fortunes bleſſe, Gladnes of heart dwell euer in your Breſts, And Peace of faire Workes bring you glorious Reſts.