FLora, Flora! We call thee heere, We call thee heere, From forth thy fragrant Bower, Thou Queene of euery laughing Flower, Appeare! Appeare to vs, To vs appeare: Thou Banquet of the Yeare, Or if a Name may be more ſweet, more deere. Harke, Summer harke, Marke, Autumne, marke, How coughing Winter mournes to ſee This ſmiling Houre, Would it were nipt for me, But ſoft I feele no ſuch decay But I may liue to kiſſe faire May, And in the Morne and Euening howers, Leaue my cold ſweats vpon the Flowers. Alaſſe poore Mumps, at thy weake power We laugh, —Oh—Oh—O— He's ſtrucke cold At Floraes firſt appearing, Looke, in a Sound, Will drop to'th ground. Helpe, helpe, helpe, he wants your cheering. Oh I confeſſe Feild Empereſſe, The Beauty of thy power amazes, I am content to ioyne With thoſe three Friends of thine, And helpe to chant thy prayſes; Now all the Seaſons of the Yeare agree To giue, (Faire Flora) the prime place to Thee. Where's Hyacinth! the Boy Appollo loude, And turnde into a Flower? Here, Queene of ſweetnes. Adonis! thou that for thy beauteous chaſtity, Wert turnde into the chaſteſt of all Flowers, (The cloſſe-infolded Roſe) blowen into Bluſhes It is ſo mayden-modeſt, What's thy pleaſure Faire Empreſſe of ſweete Odours, Willing Seruants! I haue Employment for you both, and ſpeedy, We waite with much Ioy to receiue the charge on't; Haſt, to the two Aſſiſting Magiſtrates, Thoſe worthy Citty Conſulls, Beare our ſweete wiſhes to e'm, and ſpeake Ioy From vs, to both their Feaſts, And to that part of their Graue-worthy Gueſſe Which here we miſſe to day, though here be thoſe Whom we ought more eſpecially to Honor, Say though we cannot there our ſelfe appeare, Becauſe we owe our greater ſeruice here, Yet that they ſhal not faile of all their due, We ſend the wiſhes of our Heart by you. Which ſhall be faithfully tendred, Tis preſum'd; But to this faire Aſſembly preſent now I, and theſe yeelding Sweets all their heads bow In honour of this Feaſt, of the Day, chiefe, Made ſolemne by the workes of your Reliefe, Your Cares, your Charities, the holy Vſe Of pious exerciſe; all which infuſe Bleſſings into your Fortunes, you abound In temporall things, cauſe bleſſed fruits are found Vpon the Stocks you graft on, marke the Encreaſe; You plant poore Orphans in a ground of Peace, And carefully prouide, when fruit time comes, You gather Heauens Ioyes for't, in infinite Summer; This day you view'd the Garden of thoſe Deeds, That bleſſe the Founders; and all thoſe ſucceeds In Zeale and Imitation; you ſaw there, Vertues true Paradiſe, dreſt with your Care; (Your moſt religious Care) and thoſe Blew Sets, They are the Cities Bancke of Violets That ſmels moſt ſweet to Heauen; neuer ceaſe then You worthy Praeſidents for Times and Men, Till Charitie ſpring, (by your Examples giuen) As thick on Earth, as Rewards ſtand in Heauen; If there were ſloth or faintnes tow'ard good works; (As bleſt be Heauen there is not) Time inſtructs, The Seaſon of the Yeare, for as the Ground, The heauieſt and dul'ſt Creature can be found, Yet now begins both in her Meades and Bowers To offer vp her Sacrifice, in Flowers, How much more ought that Earth with a Soule bleſt, Which is of euery of you here poſſeſt, To ſpring forth Workes of Piety and Loue, To gratifie thoſe Dewes fall from Aboue; And as the humbleſt Flower that euer grew, Ha's not his Sent alone, but Vertue too, Good for Mans griefes; ſo tis not Mans full Fame To haue a Chriſtian Sauour, or a Name, An empty voice of Charity and Reliefe, He muſt apply Eaſe to his Brothers griefe; 'Faith is the Sent and Odour of the Flower, 'But Work's the Vertue, that makes good the power; Tis like the Tincture of thoſe Roabes you weare, In which cleare Veſture you to me appeare Like Borders of faire Roſes; and worne hie Vpon the Cities forehead; that rich Dye As it is reuerend, honourable, graue, So it is pretious, wholeſome; which doth craue A double Vertue at the Wearers hands, Iuſtice and Mercy; by which goodneſſe ſtands: Thus Honour ſtill claimes Vertue for his Due, And may both euer lay iuſt claime to you: What? the foure Seaſons of the Yeare ſtruck dumbe? I lookt for a kind Welcome, now Im'e come.
WElcome, O welcome, Queene of ſweetnes welcome, in the nobleſt manner, With all thy Flowers, thy ſweete breath't Maides of Honour; Flower guntle! I begin with Thee, Fayre Flower of Chryſtall! that's for me, Apples of Loue! there ſweetneſſe dwels; Puh, giue me Canterbury Bels; Faire double-Gold cups, griefes expelling, Agnus Caſtus, all excelling, Venus Bath! the louelieſt pride of Iune, Giue me that Flower, cald, Go to bed at noone, Bleſſed Thiſtle, fam'd for good, Shepheards Pouch, for ſtanching blood, Faire yallow Knight-wort, for a foule relapſe, And Ladies▪ Mantle, good for Maydens Paps, Tuft Hyacinth! that crownes the Bower, Cald of ſome, the Virgins Flower; Take that for me, more good I feele In Ruffling Robin, and Larkes Heele. There is a Sweete, Vnnamed yet, The root is white, the Marke of pure Delight, Bearing his Flowers faire and hie, The colour like a purple Dye: What is the name tis bleſt withall? Liue-long! it ſo the Shepheards call; Liue-long? tis Vertues promis'd Due And may it Long remaine with You Honor'd Patrons, Vertuous Matrons, Whoſe Lifes and Acts this City graces, Daily ſtriuing, And reuiuing Workes worthy your renowne and places. So ya're confirm'd; from your harmonious Cloſes May Sweetneſſe drop, as Hony-Dew from Roſes, A bleſſed Health poſſeſſe you, and a long, That in this latter Spring of your graue yeares, You may be greene in Vertues, and grow ſtrong In works of Grace, which ſoules to Heauen endeers; your good Cares, here, Iuſtice, and well ſpent houres Crowne you hereafter with eternall Flowers.
THe goddeſſe Flora, Empreſſe of the Spring,
Chuſing (this Feaſt) her Flowry Soiourning,
Vnder the Roofe of the chiefe Magiſtrate,
Whoſe power layes iuſt claime to the greateſt ſtate,
Hath ſent me forth, not meaneſt in her Grace,
To breath forth her ſweet wiſhes to this place;
Firſt to the Maſter of this bounteous Feaſt,
To ſpeake her ioy; next, to each worthy Gueſt;
And though ſhe cannot now her Selfe appeare,
Becauſe ſhe owes her greater Seruice there,
Yer her Hearts Loue to euery one I bring,
To whom ſh'as ſent a Preſent of the Spring.