AM I ſo happy to be bleſt agen?
With Theſe! the choice of many thouſand
For Royall Truſt ſelected, and a Care
That makes you Sacred; may the world compare men,
A Confidence with yours? from ſo compleate
And excellent a Maſter? Or ſo great
And free a Loue can any Nation ſhowe
In Subiect to the Soueraigne, then doth flow
From this moſt thankfull Citty? Waues of Loue
Ee'n ouerwhelme each other, as they moue,
All ſtriuing to be firſt, they runne in one
To'th Oceans Breſt! (the Kings Affection.)
And you of Honor! that doe oft appeare
In preſence of a Maieſty ſo cleere,
So mighty in Heauens bleſſings, be ſo kind
To grace with Words what He ſhall euer find,
And tis a glorious Truth, and well beſeemes
Places and Perſons of your faire Eſteemes,
Not all the Kingdomes of the Earth, containe
A Citty freer to her Soueraigne,
More faithfull, and more carefull; obſerue here
His Highnes excellent Tryall; Loue and Feare
Make vp a Subiects duty, to his King,
As Iuſtice and ſweete Mercy makes vp Him;
So two fold Uertue two-fold Dutie, cheeres,
He knew their lones, now came & toucht their fears
To try their Temper, (O bleſt Heauen) he found
It was the Feare he lookt for, had it's ground
Vpon Religion, Reuerence, ſweete Reſpect,
Loue lookt not Louelier, nor Diuinelier deckt,
Each reprehenſiue word He did impart
Flewe, and cleaude faſt to their obedient Heart,
Twas fire within their boſome, 'could not reſt,
Till in ſome ſerious manner, they'de expreſt
Their duteous Care, with all ſpeede put in Act
Their Soueraignes ſacred pleaſure, to coact
Where manners failde, and force, as with a Pill
From Humours rude, the Venom of the Ill;
'A Kings owne Admonition, againſt Crimes,
'Is Phiſicke to the Body of the Times.
And herein did He Imitate the Higheſt,
(To whom it beſt becomes Him to be nigheſt)
To chaſten, where he loues, it is the Seale
Of the Almighties fauour, He doth deale
So with his Choſen, doe not languiſh then,
Thou Prince of Citties, cauſe the King of Men
Diuinely did reprooue thee, Know, tis Loue,
Thou art his Choſen Cittie, and wilt prooue
(As thou haſt euer beene) faithfull and free,
The Chamber of his ſweete Security:
Then in a Health of loy your Hearts expreſſe,
Whilſt I breath welcome to thoſe Noble Gueſſe.
A Truſt of Honor, and a Noble Care
Still to diſcharge that Truſt, Keepe your Fames faire,
You haue proceeded carefully; goe on,
And a full Praiſe Crowne your Progreſſion.