NEuer tell me, I take it much vnkindly
That thou (Iago) who haſt had my purſe,
As if ye ſtrings were thine, ſhould'ſt know of this.
But you'l not heare me. If euer I did dream
Of ſuch a matter, abhorre me.
Thou told'ſt me,
Thou did'ſt hold him in thy hate.
Deſpiſe me
If I do not. Three Great-ones of the Cittie,
(In perſonall ſuite to make me his Lieutenant)
Off-capt to him: and by the faith of man
I know my price, I am worth no worſſe a place.
But he (as louing his owne pride, and purpoſes)
Euades them, with a bumbaſt Circumſtance,
Horribly ſtufft with Epithites of warre,
Non-ſuites my Mediators. For certes, ſaies he,
I haue already choſe my Officer. And what was he?
For-ſooth, a great Arithmatician,
One Michaell Caſſio, a Florentine,
(A Fellow almoſt damn'd in a faire Wife)
That neuer ſet a Squadron in the Field,
Nor the deuiſion of a Battaile knowes
More then a Spinſter. Vnleſſe the Bookiſh Theoricke:
Wherein the Tongued Conſuls can propoſe
As Maſterly as he. Meere pratle (without practiſe)
Is all his Souldierſhip. But he (Sir) had th' election;
And I (of whom his eies had ſeene the proofe
At Rhodes, at Ciprus, and on others grounds
Chriſten'd, and Heathen) muſt be be-leed, and calm'd
By Debitor, and Creditor. This Counter-caſter,
He (in good time) muſt his Lieutenant be,
And I (bleſſe the marke) his Mooreſhips Auntient.
By heauen, I rather would haue bin his hangman.
Why, there's no remedie.
'Tis the curſſe of Seruice;
Preferment goes by Letter, and affection,
And not by old gradation, where each ſecond
Stood Heire to' th' firſt. Now Sir, be iudge your ſelfe,
Whether I in any iuſt terme am Affin'd
To loue the Moore?
I would not follow him then.
O Sir content you.
I follow him, to ſerue my turne vpon him.
We cannot all be Maſters, nor all Maſters
Cannot be truely follow'd. You ſhall marke
Many a dutious and knee-crooking knaue;
That (doting on his owne obſequious bondage)
Weares out his time, much like his Maſters Aſſe,
For naught but Prouender, & when he's old Caſheer'd.
Whip me ſuch honeſt knaues. Others there are
Who trym'd in Formes, and viſages of Dutie,
Keepe yet their hearts attending on themſelues,
And throwing but ſhowes of Seruice on their Lords
Doe well thriue by them.
And when they haue lin'd their Coates
Doe themſelues Homage.
Theſe Fellowes haue ſome ſoule,
And ſuch a one do I profeſſe my ſelfe. For (Sir)
It is as ſure as you are Rodorigo,
Were I the Moore, I would not be Iago:
In following him, I follow but my ſelfe.
Heauen is my Iudge, not I for loue and dutie,
But ſeeming ſo, for my peculiar end:
For when my outward Action doth demonſtrate
The natiue act, and figure of my heart
In Complement externe, 'tis not long after
But I will weare my heart vpon my ſleeue
For Dawes to pecke at; I am not what I am.
What a fall Fortune do's the Thicks-lips owe
If he can carry't thus?
Call vp her Father:
Rowſe him, make after him, poyſon his delight,
Proclaime him in the Streets. Incenſe her kinſmen,
And though he in a fertile Clymate dwell,
Plague him with Flies: though that his Ioy be Ioy,
Yet throw ſuch chances of vexation on't,
As it may looſe ſome colour.
Heere is her Fathers houſe, Ile call aloud.
Doe, with like timerous accent, and dire yell,
As when (by Night and Negligence) the Fire
Is ſpied in populus Citties.
What hoa: Brabantio, Siginor Brabantio, hoa.
Awake: what hoa, Brabantio: Theeues, Theeues.
Looke to your houſe, your daughter, and your Bags,
Theeues, Theeues.
Aboue. What is the reaſon of this terrible
Summon? What is the matter there?
Signior is all your Familie within?
Are your Doores lock'd?
Why? Wherefore ask you this?
Sir, y' are rob'd, for ſhame put on your Gowne,
Your heart is burſt, you haue loſt halfe your ſoule
Euen now, now, very now, an old blacke Ram
Is tupping your white Ewe. Ariſe, ariſe,
Awake the ſnorting Cittizens with the Bell,
Or elſe the deuill will make a Grand-ſire of you.
Ariſe I ſay.
What, haue you loſt your wits?
Moſt reuerend Signior, do you know my voice?
Not I: what are you?
My name is Rodorigo.
The worſſer welcome:
I haue charg'd thee not to haunt about my doores:
In honeſt plaineneſſe thou haſt heard me ſay,
My Daughter is not for thee. And now in madneſſe
(Being full of Supper, and diſtempring draughtes)
Vpon malitious knauerie, doſt thou come
To ſtart my quiet.
Sir, Sir, Sir.
But thou muſt needs be ſure,
My ſpirits and my place haue in their power
To make this bitter to thee.
Patience good Sir.
What tell'ſt thou me of Robbing?
This is Venice: my houſe is not a Grange.
Moſt graue Brabantio,
In ſimple and pure ſoule, I come to you.
Sir: you are one of thoſe that will not ſerue God, if the deuill bid you. Becauſe we come to do you ſeruice, and you thinke we are Ruſſians, you'le haue your Daughter couer'd with a Barbary horſe, you'le haue your Nephewes neigh to you, you'le haue Courſers for Cozens: and Gennets for Germaines.
What prophane wretch art thou?
I am one Sir, that comes to tell you, your Daughter and the Moore, are making the Beaſt with two backs.
Thou art a Villaine.
You are a Senator.
This thou ſhalt anſwere. I know thee Rodorigo.
Sir, I will anſwere any thing. But I beſeech you
If't be your pleaſure, and moſt wiſe conſent,
(As partly I find it is) that your faire Daughter,
At this odde Euen and dull watch o' th' night
Tranſported with no worſe nor better guard,
But with a knaue of common hire, a Gundelier,
To the groſſe claſpes of a Laſciuious Moore:
If this be knowne to you, and your Allowance,
We then haue done you bold, and ſaucie wrongs.
But if you know not this, my Manners tell me,
We haue your wrong rebuke. Do not beleeue
That from the ſence of all Ciuilitie,
I thus would play and trifle with your Reuerence.
Your Daughter (if you haue not giuen her leaue)
I ſay againe, hath made a groſſe reuolt,
Tying her Dutie, Beautie, Wit, and Fortunes
In an extrauagant, and wheeling Stranger,
Of here, and euery where: ſtraight ſatisfie your ſelfe.
If ſhe be in her Chamber, or your houſe,
Let looſe on me the Iuſtice of the State
For thus deluding you.
Strike on the Tinder, hoa:
Giue me a Taper: call vp all my people,
This Accident is not vnlike my dreame,
Beleefe of it oppreſſes me alreadie.
Light, I ſay, light.
Farewell: for I muſt leaue you.
It ſeemes not meete, nor wholeſome to my place
To be producted, (as if I ſtay, I ſhall,)
Againſt the Moore. For I do know the State,
(How euer this may gall him with ſome checke)
Cannot with ſafetie caſt-him. For he's embark'd
With ſuch loud reaſon to the Cyprus Warres,
(Which euen now ſtands in Act) that for their ſoules
Another of his Fadome, they haue none,
To lead their Buſineſſe. In which regard,
Though I do hate him as I do hell apines,
Yet, for neceſſitie of preſent life,
I muſt ſhow out a Flag, and ſigne of Loue,
(Which is indeed but ſigne) that you ſhal ſurely find him
Lead to the Sagitary the raiſed Search:
And there will I be with him. So farewell.
It is too true an euill. Gone ſhe is,
And what's to come of my deſpiſed time,
Is naught but bitterneſſe. Now Rodorigo,
Where didſt thou ſee her? (Oh vnhappie Girle)
With the Moore ſaiſt thou? (Who would be a Father?)
How didſt thou know 'twas ſhe? (Oh ſhe deceaues me
Paſt thought:) what ſaid ſhe to you? Get moe Tapers▪
Raiſe all my Kindred. Are they married thinke you?
Truely I think they are.
Oh Hean: how got ſhe out?
Oh treaſon of the blood.
Fathers, from hence truſt not your Daughters minds
By what you ſee them act. Is there not Charmes,
By which the propertie of Youth, and Maidhood
May be abus'd? Haue you not read Rodorigo,
Of ſome ſuch thing?
Yes Sir: I haue indeed.
Call vp my Brother: oh would you had had her.
Some one way, ſome another. Doe you know
Where we may apprehend her, and the Moore?
I thinke I can diſcouer him, if you pleaſe
To get good Guard, and go along with me.
Pray you lead on. At euery houſe Ile call,
(I may command at moſt) get Weapons (hoa)
And raiſe ſome ſpeciall Officers of might:
On good Rodorigo, I will deſerue your paines.
Though in the trade of Warre I haue ſlaine men,
Yet do I hold it very ſtuffe o' th' conſcience
To do no contriu'd Murder: I lacke Iniquitie
Sometime to do me ſeruice. Nine, or ten times
I had thought t'haue yerk'd him here vnder the Ribbes.
'Tis better as it is.
Nay but he prated,
And ſpoke ſuch ſcuruy, and prouoking termes
Againſt your Honor, that with the little godlineſſe I haue
I did full hard forbeare him. But I pray you Sir,
Are you faſt married? Be aſſur'd of this,
That the Magnifico is much belou'd,
And hath in his effect a voice potentiall
As double as the Dukes: He will diuorce you.
Or put vpon you, what reſtraint or greeuance,
The Law (with all his might, to enforce it on)
Will giue him Cable.
Let him do his ſpight;
My Seruices, which I haue done the Signorie
Shall out-tongue his Complaints. 'Tis yet to know,
Which when I know, that boaſting is an Honour,
I ſhall promulgate. I fetch my life and being,
From Men of Royall Seige. And my demerites
May ſpeake (vnbonnetted) to as proud a Fortune
As this that I haue reach'd. For know Iago,
But that I loue the gentle Deſdemona,
I would not my vnhouſed free condition
Put into Circumſcription, and Confine,
For the Seas worth. But looke, what Lights come yond?
Thoſe are the raiſed Father, and his Friends:
You were beſt go in.
Not I: I muſt be found.
My Parts, my Title, and my perfect Soule
Shall manifeſt me rightly. Is it they?
By Ianus, I thinke no.
The Seruants of the Dukes?
And my Lieutenant?
The goodneſſe of the Night vpon you (Friends)
What is the Newes?
The Duke do's greet you (Generall)
And he requires your haſte, Poſt-haſte appearance,
Enen on the inſtant.
What is the matter, thinke you?
Something from Cyprus, as I may diuine:
It is a buſineſſe of ſome heate. The Gallies
Haue ſent a dozen ſequent Meſſengers
This very night, at one anothers heeles:
And many of the Conſuls, rais'd and met,
Are at the Dukes already. You haue bin hotly call'd for,
When being not at your Lodging to be found,
The Senate hath ſent about three ſeuerall Queſts,
To ſearch you out.
'Tis well I am found by you:
I will but ſpend a word here in the houſe,
And goe with you.
Aunciant, what makes he heere?
Faith, he to night hath boarded a Land Carract,
If it proue lawfull prize, he' made for euer.
I do not vnderſtand.
He's married.
To who?
Marry to — Come Captaine, will you go?
Haue with you.
Here comes another Troope to ſeeke for you.
It is Brabantio: Generall be aduis'd,
He comes to bad intent.
Holla, ſtand there.
Signior, it is the Moore.
Downe with him, Theefe.
You, Rodorigoc? Cme Sir, I am for you.
Keepe vp your bright Swords, for the dew will ruſt them. Good Signior, you ſhall more command with yeares, then with your Weapons.
Oh thou foule Theefe,
Where haſt thou ſtow'd my Daughter?
Damn'd as thou art, thou haſt enchaunted her
For Ile referre me to all things of ſenſe,
(If ſhe in Chaines of Magick were not bound)
Whether a Maid, ſo tender, Faire, and Happie,
So oppoſite to Marriage, that ſhe ſhun'd
The wealthy curled Deareling of our Nation,
Would euer haue (t'encurre a generall mocke)
Run from her Guard age to the ſootie boſome,
Of ſuch a thing as thou: to feare, not to delight?
Iudge me the world, if 'tis not groſſe in ſenſe,
That thou haſt practis'd on her with foule Charmes,
Abus'd her delicate Youth, with Drugs or Minerals,
That weakens Motion. Ile haue't diſputed on,
'Tis probable, and palpable to thinking;
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee,
For an abuſer of the World, a practiſer
Of Arts inhibited, and out of warrant;
Lay hold vpon him, if he do reſiſt
Subdue him, at his perill.
Hold your hands
Both you of my inclining, and the reſt.
Were it my Cue to fight, I ſhould haue knowne it
Without a Prompter. Whether will you that I goe
To anſwere this your charge?
To Priſon, till fit time
Of Law, and courſe of direct Seſſion
Call thee to anſwer.
What if do obey?
How may the Duke be therewith ſatisfi'd,
Whoſe Meſſengers are heere about my ſide,
Vpon ſome preſent buſineſſe of the State,
To bring me to him.
'Tis true moſt worthy Signior,
The Dukes in Counſell, and your Noble ſelfe,
I am ſure is ſent for.
How? The Duke in Counſell?
In this time of the night? Bring him away;
Mine's not an idle Cauſe. The Duke himſelfe,
Or any of my Brothers of the State,
Cannot but feele this wrong, as 'twere their owne:
For if ſuch Actions may haue paſſage free,
Bond-ſlaues, and Pagans ſhall our Stateſmen be.
There's no compoſition in this Newes,
That giues them Credite.
Indeed, they are diſproportioned;
My Letters ſay, a Hundred and ſeuen Gallies.
And mine a Hundred fortie.
And mine two Hundred:
But though they iumpe not on a iuſt accompt,
(As in theſe Caſes where the ayme reports,
'Tis oft with difference) yet do they all confirme
A Turkiſh Fleete, and bearing vp to Cyprus.
Nay, it is poſſible enough to iudgement:
I do not ſo ſecure me in the Error,
But the maine Article I do approue
In fearefull ſenſe.
What hoa, what hoa, what hoa.
A Meſſenger from the Gallies.
Now? What's the buſineſſe?
The Turkiſh Preparation makes for Rhodes,
So was I bid report here to the State,
By Signior Angelo.
How ſay you by this change?
This cannot be
By no aſſay of reaſon. 'Tis a Pageant
To keepe vs in falſe gaze, when we conſider
Th' importancie of Cyprus to the Turke;
And let our ſelues againe but vnderſtand,
That as it more concernes the Turke then Rhodes,
So may he, with more facile queſtion beare it,
For that it ſtands not in ſuch Warrelike brace,
But altogether lackes th' abilities
The Rhodes is dreſs'd in. If we make thought of this,
We muſt not thinke the Turke is ſo vnskillfull,
To leaue that lateſt, which concernes him firſt,
Neglecting an attempt of eaſe, and gaine
To wake, and wage a danger profitleſſe.
Nay, in all confidence he's not for Rhodes.
Here is more Newes.
The Ottamites, Reueren'd, and Gracious,
Steering with due courſe toward the Ile of Rhodes,
Haue there inioynted them with an after Fleete.
I, ſo I thought: how many, as you gueſſe?
Of thirtie Saile: and now they do re-ſtem
Their backward courſe, bearing with frank appearance
Their purpoſes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
Your truſtie and moſt Valiant Seruitour,
With his free dutie, recommends you thus,
And prayes you to beleeue him.
'Tis certaine then for Cyprus:
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in Towne?
He's now in Florence.
Write from vs,
To him, Poſt, Poſt-haſte, diſpatch.
Here comes Brabantio, and the Valiant Moore.
Valiant Othello, we muſt ſtraight employ you,
Againſt the generall Enemy Ottoman.
I did not ſee you: welcome gentle Signior,
We lack't your Counſaile, and your helpe to night.
So did I yours: Good your Grace pardon me.
Neither my place, hor ought I heard of buſineſſe
Hath rais'd me from my bed; nor doth the generall care
Take hold on me. For my perticular griefe
Is of ſo flood-gate, and ore-bearing Nature,
That it engluts, and ſwallowes other ſorrowes,
And it is ſtill it ſelfe.
Why? What's the matter?
My Daughter: oh my Daughter!
Dead?
I, to me.
She is abus'd, ſtolne from me, and corrupted
By Spels, and Medicines, bought of Mountebanks;
For Nature, ſo prepoſtrouſly to erre,
(Being not deficient, blind, or lame of ſenſe,)
Sans witch-craft could not.
Who ere he be, that in this foule proceeding
Hath thus beguil'd your Daughter of her ſelfe,
And you of her; the bloodie Booke of Law,
You ſhall your ſelfe read, in the bitter letter,
After your owne ſenſe: yea, though our proper Son
Stood in your Action.
Humbly I thanke your Grace,
Here is the man; this Moore, whom now it ſeemes
Your ſpeciall Mandate, for the State affaires
Hath hither brought.
We are verie ſorry for't.
What in your owne part, can you ſay to this?
Nothing, but this is ſo.
Moſt Potent, Graue, and Reueren'd Signiors,
My very Noble, and approu'd good Maſters;
That I haue tane away this old mans Daughter,
It is moſt true: true I haue married her;
The verie head, and front of my offending,
Hath this extent; no more. Rude am I, in my ſpeech,
And little bleſs'd with the ſoft phraſe of Peace;
For ſince theſe Armes of mine, had ſeuen yeares pith,
Till now, ſome nine Moones waſted, they haue vs'd
Their deereſt action, in the Tented Field:
And little of this great world can I ſpeake,
More then pertaines to Feats of Broiles, and Battaile,
And therefore little ſhall I grace my cauſe,
In ſpeaking for my ſelfe. Yet, (by your gratious patience)
I will a round vn-varniſh'd Tale deliuer,
Of my whole courſe of Loue.
What Drugges, what Charmes,
What Coniuration, and what mighty Magicke,
(For ſuch proceeding I am charg'd withall)
I won his Daughter.
A Maiden, neuer bold:
Of Spirit ſo ſtill, and quiet, that her Motion
Bluſh'd at her ſelfe, and ſhe, in ſpight of Nature,
Of Yeares, of Country, Credite, euery thing
To fall in Loue, with what ſhe fear'd to looke on;
It is a iudgement main'd, and moſt imperfect.
That will confeſſe Perfection ſo could erre
Againſt all rules of Nature, and muſt be driuen
To find out practiſes of cunning hell
Why this ſhould be. I therefore vouch againe,
That with ſome Mixtures, powrefull o're the blood,
Or with ſome Dram, (coniur'd to this effect)
He wtought vp on her.
To vouch this, is no proofe,
Without more wider, and more ouer Teſt
Then theſe thin habits, and poore likely-hoods
Of moderne ſeeming, do prefer againſt him.
But Othello, ſpeake,
Did you, by indirect, and forced courſes
Subdue, and poyſon this yong Maides affections?
Or came it by requeſt, and ſuch faire queſtion
As ſoule, to ſoule affordeth?
I do beſeech you,
Send for the Lady to the Sagitary.
And let her ſpeake of me before her Father;
If you do finde me foule, in her report,
The Truſt, the Office, I do hold of you,
Not onely take away, but let your Sentence
Euen fall vpon my life.
Fetch Deſdemona hither.
Aunciant, conduct them:
You beſt know the place.
And tell ſhe come, as truely as to heauen,
I do confeſſe the vices of my blood,
So iuſtly to your Graue eares, Ile preſent
How I did thriue in this faire Ladies loue,
And ſhe in mine.
Say it Othello.
Her Father lou'd me, oft inuited me:
Still queſtion'd me the Storie of my life,
From yeare to yeare: the Battaile, Sieges, Fortune,
That I haue paſt.
I ran it through, euen from my boyiſh daies,
To th' very moment that he bad me tell it.
Wherein I ſpoke of moſt diſaſtrous chances:
Of mouing Accidents by Flood and Field,
Of haire-breadth ſcapes i' th' imminent deadly breach;
Of being taken by the Inſolent Foe,
And ſold to ſlauery. Of my redemption thence,
And portance in my Trauellours hiſtorie.
Wherein of Antars vaſt, and Deſarts idle,
Rough Quarries, Rocks, Hills, whoſe head touch heauen,
It was my hint to ſpeake. Such was my Proceſſe,
And of the Canibals that each others eate,
The Antropophague, and men whoſe heads
Grew beneath their ſhoulders. Theſe things to heare,
Would Deſdemona ſeriouſly incline:
But ſtill the houſe Affaires would draw her hence:
Which euer as ſhe could with haſte diſpatch,
She'l'd come againe, and with a greedie eare
Deuoure vp my diſcourſe. Which I obſeruing,
Tooke once a pliant houre, and found good meanes
To draw from her a prayer of earneſt heart,
That I would all my Pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels ſhe had ſomething heard,
But not inſtinctiuely: I did conſent,
And often did beguile her of her teares,
When I did ſpeake of ſome diſtreſſefull ſtroke
That my youth ſuffer'd: My Storie being done,
She gaue me for my paines a world of kiſſes:
She ſwore in faith 'twas ſtrange: 'twas paſſing ſtrange,
'Twas pittifull: 'twas wondrous pittifull.
She wiſh'd ſhe had not heard it, yet ſhe wiſh'd
That Heauen had made her ſuch a man. She thank'd me,
And bad me, if I had a Friend that lou'd her,
I ſhould but teach him how to tell my Story,
And that would wooe her. Vpon this hint I ſpake,
She lou'd me for the dangers I had paſt,
And I lou'd her, that ſhe did pitty them.
This onely is the witch-craft I haue vs'd.
Here comes the Ladie: Let her witneſſe it.
I thinke this tale would win my Daughter too,
Good Brabantio, take vp this mangled matter at the beſt:
Men do their broken Weapons rather vſe,
Then their bare hands.
I pray you heare her ſpeake?
If ſhe confeſſe that ſhe was halfe the wooer,
Deſtruction on my head, if my bad blame
Light on the man. Come hither gentle Miſtris,
Do you perceiue in all this Noble Companie,
Where moſt you owe obedience?
My Noble Father,
I do perceiue heere a diuided dutie.
To you I am bound for life, and education:
My life and education both do learne me,
How to reſpect you. You are the Lord of duty,
I am hitherto your Daughter. But heere's my Husband;
And ſo much dutie, as my Mother ſhew'd
To you, preferring you before her Father:
So much I challenge, that I may profeſſe
Due to the Moore my Lord.
God be with you: I haue done.
Pleaſe it your Grace, on to the State Affaires;
I had rather to adopt a Child, then get it.
Come hither Moore;
I here do giue thee that with all my heart,
Which but thou haſt already, with all my heart
I would keepe from thee. For your ſake (Iewell)
I am glad at ſoule, I haue no other Child;
For thy eſcape would teach me Tirranie
To hang clogges on them. I haue done my Lord.
Let me ſpeake like your ſelfe:
And lay a Sentence,
Which as a griſe, or ſtep may helpe theſe Louers.
When remedies are paſt, the griefes are ended
By ſeeing the worſt, which late on hopes depended.
To mourne a Miſcheefe that is paſt and gon,
Is the next way to draw new miſchiefe on.
What cannot be preſern'd, when Fortune takes:
Patience, her Iniury a mock'ry makes.
The rob'd that ſmiles, ſteales ſomething from the Thiefe,
He robs himſelfe, that ſpends a booteleſſe griefe.
So let the Turke of Cyprus vs beguile,
We looſe it not ſo long as we can ſmile:
He beares the Sentence well, that nothing beares,
But the free comfort which from thence he heares.
But he beares both the Sentence, and the ſorrow,
That to pay griefe, muſt of poore Patience borrow.
Theſe Sentences, to Sugar, or to Gall,
Being ſtrong on both ſides, are Equiuocall.
But words are words, I neuer yet did heare:
That the bruized heart was pierc'd through the eare.
I humbly beſeech you proceed to th' Affaires of State.
The Turke with a moſt mighty Preparation makes for Cyprus: Othello, the Fortitude of the place is beſt knowne to you. And though we haue there a Subſtitute of moſt allowed ſufficiencie; yet opinion, a more ſoueraigne Miſtris of Effects, throwes a more ſafer voice on you: you muſt therefore be content to ſlubber the gloſſe of your new Fortunes, with this more ſtubborne, and boyſtrous expedition.
The Tirant Cuſtome, moſt Graue Senators,
Hath made the flinty and Steele Coach of Warre
My thrice-driuen bed of Downe. I do agnize
A Naturall and prompt Alacartie,
I finde in hardneſſe: and do vndertake
This preſent Warres againſt the Ottamites.
Moſt humbly therefore bending to your State,
I craue fit diſpoſition for my Wife,
Due reference of Place, and Exhibition,
With ſuch Accomodation and beſort
As leuels with her breeding.
Why at her Fathers?
I will not haue it ſo.
Nor I.
Nor would I there recide,
To put my Father in impatient thoughts
By being in his eye. Moſt Grcaious Duke,
To my vnfolding, lend your proſperous eare,
And let me finde a Charter in your voice
T'aſſiſt my ſimpleneſſe.
What would you Deſdemona?
That I loue the Moore, to liue with him,
My downe-right violence, and ſtorme of Fortunes,
May trumpet to the world. My heart's ſubdu'd
Euen to the very quality of my Lord;
I ſaw Othello's viſage in his mind,
And to his Honours and his valiant parts,
Did I my ſoule and Fortunes conſecrate▪
So that (deere Lords) if I be left behind
A Moth of Peace, and he go to the Warre,
The Rites for why I loue him, are bereft me:
And I a heauie interim ſhall ſupport
By his deere abſence. Let me go with him.
Let her haue your voice.
Vouch with me Heauen, I therefore beg it not
To pleaſe the pallate of my Appetite:
Nor to comply with heat the yong affects
In my defunct, and proper ſatisfaction.
But to be free, and bounteous to her minde:
And Heauen defend your good ſoules, that you thinke
I will your ſerious and great buſineſſe ſcant
When ſhe is with me. No, when light wing'd Toyes
Of feather'd Cupid, ſeele with wanton dulneſſe
My ſpeculatiue, and offic'd Inſtrument:
That my Diſports corrupt, and taint my buſineſſe:
Let Houſe-wiues make a Skillet of my Helme,
And all indigne, and baſe aduerſities,
Make head againſt my Eſtimation.
Be it as you ſhall priuately determine,
Either for her ſtay, or going: th' Affaire cries haſt:
And ſpeed muſt anſwer it.
You muſt away to night.
With all my heart.
At nine i' th' morning, here wee'l meete againe.
Othello, leaue ſome Officer behind
And he ſhall our Commiſſion bring to you:
And ſuch things elſe of qualitie and reſpect
As doth import you.
So pleaſe your Grace, my Ancient,
A man he is of honeſty and truſt:
To his conueyance I aſſigne my wife,
With what elſe needfull, your good Grace ſhall think
To be ſent after me.
Let it be ſo:
Good night to euery one. And Noble Signior,
If Vertue no delighted Beautie lacke,
Your Son-in-law is farre more Faire then Blacke.
Adieu braue Moore, vſe Deſdemona well.
Looke to her (Moore) if thou haſt eies to ſee:
She ha's deceiu'd her Father, and may thee.
My life vpon her faith. Honeſt Iago,
My Deſdemona muſt I leaue to thee:
I prythee let thy wife attend on her,
And bring them after in the beſt aduantage.
Come Deſdemona, I haue but an houre
Of Loue, of wordly matter, and direction
To ſpend with thee. We muſt obey the the time.
Iago.
What ſaiſt thou Noble heart?
What will I do, think'ſt thou?
Why go to bed and ſleepe.
I will incontinently drowne my ſelfe.
If thou do'ſt, I ſhall neuer loue thee after. Why thou ſilly Gentleman?
It is ſillyneſſe to liue, when to liue is torment: and then haue we a preſcription to dye, when death is our Phyſition.
Oh villanous: I haue look'd vpon the world for foure times ſeuen yeares, and ſince I could diſtinguiſh betwixt a Benefit, and an Iniurie: I neuer found man that knew how to loue himſelfe. Ere I would ſay, I would drowne my ſelfe for the loue of a Gynney Hen, I would change my Humanity with a Baboone.
What ſhould I do? I confeſſe it is my ſhame to be ſo fond, but it is not in my vertue to amend it.
Vertue? A figge, 'tis in our ſelues that we are thus, or thus. Our Bodies are our Gardens, to the which, our Wills are Gardiners. So that if we will plant Nettels, or ſowe Lettice: Set Hiſope, and weede vp Time▪ Supplie it with one gender of Hearbes, or diſtract it with many: either to haue it ſterrill with idleneſſe, or manured with Induſtry, why the power, and Corrigeable authoritie of this lies in our Wills. If the braine of our liues had not one Scale of Reaſon, to poize another of Senſualitie, the blood, and baſeneſſe of our Natures would conduct vs to moſt prepoſtrous Concluſions. But we haue Reaſon to coole our raging Motions, our carnall Stings, or vnbitted Luſts: whereof I take this, that you call Loue, to be a Sect, or Seyen.
It cannot be.
It is meerly a Luſt of the blood, and a permiſſion of the will. Come, be a man: drowne thy ſelfe? Drown Cats, and blind Puppies. I haue profeſt me thy Friend, and I confeſſe me knit to thy deſeruing, with Cables of perdurable toughneſſe. I could neuer better ſteed thee then now. Put Money in thy purſe: follow thou the Warres, defeate thy fauour, with an vſurp'd Beard. I ſay put Money in thy purſe. It cannot be long that Deſdemona ſhould continue her loue to the Moore. Put Money in thy purſe: nor he his to her. It was a violent Commencement in her, and thou ſhalt ſee an anſwerable Sequeſtration, put but Money in thy purſe. Theſe Moores are changeable in their wils: fill thy purſe with Money. The Food that to him now is as luſhious as Locuſts, ſhalbe to him ſhortly, as bitter as Coloquintida. She muſt change for youth: when ſhe is ſated with his body ſhe will find the errors of her choice. Therefore, put Money in thy purſe. If thou wilt needs damne thy ſelfe, do it a more delicate way then drowning. Make all the Money thou canſt: If Sanctimonie, and a fraile vow, betwixt an erring Barbarian, and ſuper-ſubtle Venetian be not too hard for my wits, and all the Tribe of hell, thou ſhalt enioy her: therefore make Money: a pox of drowning thy ſelfe, it is cleane out of the way. Seeke thou rather to be hang'd in Compaſſing thy ioy, then to be drown'd, and go without her.
Wilt thou be faſt to my hopes, if I depend on the iſſue?
Thou art ſure of me: Go make Money: I haue told thee often, and I re-tell thee againe, and againe, I hate the Moore. My cauſe is hearted; thine hath no leſſe reaſon. Let vs be coniunctiue in our reuenge, againſt him. If thou canſt Cuckold him, thou doſt thy ſelfe a pleaſure, me a ſport. There are many Euents in the Wombe of Time, which wilbe deliuered. Trauerſe, go, prouide thy Money. We will haue more of this to morrow. Adieu.
Where ſhall we meete i' th' morning?
At my Lodging.
Ile be with thee betimes.
Go too, farewell. Do you heare Rodorigo?
Ile ſell all my Land.
Thus do I euer make my Foole, my purſe:
For I mine owne gain'd knowledge ſhould prophane
If I would time expend with ſuch Snpe,
But for my Sport, and Profit: I hate the Moore,
And it is thought abroad, that 'twixt my ſheets
She ha's done my Office. I know not if't be true,
But I, for meere ſuſpition in that kinde,
Will do, as if for Surety. He holds me well,
The better ſhall my purpoſe worke on him:
Caſſio's a proper man: Let me ſee now,
To get his Place, and to plume vp my will
In double Knauery. How? How? Let's ſee.
After ſome time, to abuſe Othello's eares,
That he is too familiar with his wife:
He hath a perſon, and a ſmooth diſpoſe
To be ſuſpected: fram'd to make women falſe.
The Moore is of a free, and open Nature,
That thinkes men honeſt, that but ſeeme to be ſo,
And will as tenderly be lead by' th' Noſe
As Aſſes are:
I haue't: it is engendred: Hell, and Night,
Muſt bring this monſtrous Birth, to the worlds light.
What from the Cape, can you diſcerne at Sea?
Nothing at all, it is a high wrought Flood:
I cannot 'twixt the Heauen, and the Maine,
Deſcry a Saile.
Me thinks, the wind hath ſpoke aloud at Land,
A fuller blaſt ne're ſhooke our Battlements:
If it hath ruffiand ſo vpon the Sea,
What ribbes of Oake, when Mountaines melt on them,
Can hold the Morties. What ſhall we heare of this?
A Segregation of the Turkiſh Fleet:
For do but ſtand vpon the Foaming Shore,
The chidden Billow ſeemes to pelt the Clowds,
The winde-ſhak'd-Surge, with high & monſtrous Maine
Seemes to caſt water on the burning Beare,
And quench the Guards of th' euer-fixed Pole:
I neuer did like molleſtation view
On the enchafed Flood.
If that the Turkiſh Fleete
Be not enſhelter'd, and embay'd, they are drown'd,
It is impoſſible to beare it out.
Newes Laddes: our warres are done:
The deſperate Tempeſt hath ſo bang'd the Turkes,
That their deſignement halts. A Noble ſhip of Venice,
Hath ſeene a greeuous wracke and ſufferance
On moſt part of their Fleet.
How? Is this true?
The Ship is heere put in: A Verenneſſa, Michael Caſſio
Lieutenant to the warlike Moore, Othello,
Is come on Shore▪ the Moore himſelfe at Sea,
And is in full Commiſſion heere for Cyprus.
I am glad on't:
'Tis a worthy Gouernour.
But this ſame Caſſio, though he ſpeake of comfort,
Touching the Turkiſh loſſe, yet he lookes ſadly,
And praye the Moore be ſafe; for they were ted
With fowle and violent Tempeſt.
Pray Heauens he be:
For I haue ſeru'd him, and the man commands
Like a full Soldier. Let's to the Sea-ſide (hoa)
As well to ſee the Veſſell that's come in,
As to throw-out our eyes for braue Othello,
Euen till we make the Maine, and th' Eriall blew,
An indiſtinct regard.
Come, let's do ſo;
For euery Minute is expectancie
Of more Arriuancie.
Thankes you, the valiant of the warlike Iſle,
That ſo approoue the Moore: Oh let the Heauens
Giue him defence againſt the Elements,
For I haue loſt him on a dangerous Sea.
Is he well ſhip'd?
His Barke is ſtoutly Timber'd, and his Pylot
Of verie expert, and approu'd Allowance;
Therefore my hope's (not ſurfetted to death)
Stand in bold Cure.
A Saile, a Saile, a Saile.
What noiſe?
The Towne is empty; on the brow o' th' Sea
Stand rankes of People, and they cry, a Saile.
My hopes do ſhape him for the Gouernor.
They do diſcharge their Shot of Courteſie,
Our Friends, at leaſt.
I pray you Sir, go forth,
And giue vs truth who 'tis that is arriu'd.
I ſhall.
But good Lieutenant, is your Generall wiu'd?
Moſt fortunately: he hath atchieu'd a Maid
That paragons deſcription, and wilde Fame:
One that excels the quirkes of Blazoning pens,
And in th' eſſentiall Veſture of Creation,
Do's tyre the Ingeniuer.
How now? Who ha's put in?
'Tis one Iago, Auncient to the Generall.
Ha's had moſt fauourable, and happie ſpeed:
Tempeſts themſelues, high Seas, and howling windes,
The gutter'd-Rockes, and Congregated Sands,
Traitors enſteep'd, to enclogge the guiltleſſe Keele,
As hauing ſence of Beautie, do omit
Their mortall Natures, letting go ſafely by
The Diuine Deſdemona.
What is ſhe?
She that I ſpake of:
Our great Captains Captaine,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
Whoſe footing heere anticipates our thoughts,
A Senights ſpeed. Great Ioue, Othello guard,
And ſwell his Saile with thine owne powrefull breath,
That he may bleſſe this Bay with his tall Ship,
Make loues quicke pants in Deſdemonaes Armes,
Giue renew'd fire to our extincted Spirits.
Oh behold,
The Riches of the Ship is come on ſhore:
You men of Cyprus, let her haue your knees.
Haile to thee Ladie: and the grace of Heauen,
Before, behinde thee, and on euery hand
Enwheele thee round.
I thanke you, Valiant Caſſio,
What tydings can you tell of my Lord?
He is not yet arriu'd, nor know I ought
But that he's well, and will be ſhortly heere.
Oh, but I feare:
How loſt you company?
The great Contention of Sea, and Skies
Parted our fellowſhip. But hearke, a Saile.
A Saile, a Saile.
They giue this greeting to the Cittadell:
This likewiſe is a Friend.
See for the Newes:
Good Ancient, you are welcome. Welcome Miſtris:
Let it not gaule your patience (good Iago)
That I extend my Manners. 'Tis my breeding,
That giues me this bold ſhew of Curteſie.
Sir, would ſhe giue you ſo much of her lippes,
As of her tongue ſhe oft beſtowes on me,
You would haue enough.
Alas: ſhe ha's no ſpeech.
Infaith too much:
I finde it ſtill, when I haue leaue to ſleepe.
Marry before your Ladyſhip, I grant,
She puts het tongue a little in her heart,
And chides with thinking.
You haue little cauſe to ſay ſo.
Come on, come on: you are Pictures out of doore: Bells in your Parlours: Wilde-Cats in your Kitchens: Saints in your Iniuries: Diuels being offended: Players in your Huſwiferie, and Huſwiues in your Beds.
Oh, fie vpon thee, Slanderer.
Nay, it is true: or elſe I am a Turke,
You riſe to play, and go to bed to worke.
You ſhall not write my praiſe.
No, let me not.
What would'ſt write of me, if thou ſhould'ſt praiſe me?
Oh, gentle Lady, do not put me too't,
For I am nothing, if not Criticall.
Come on, aſſay.
There's one gone to the Harbour?
I Madam.
I am not merry: but I do beguile
The thing I am, by ſeeming otherwiſe.
Come, how would'ſt thou praiſe me?
I am about it, but indeed my inuention comes from my pate, as Birdlyme do's from Freeze, it pluckes out Braines and all. But my Muſe labours, and thus ſhe is deliuer'd.
If ſhe be faire, and wiſe: faireneſſe, and wit,
The ones for vſe, the other vſeth it.
Well prais'd:
How if ſhe be Blacke and Witty?
If ſhe be blacke, and thereto haue a wit,
She'le find a white, that ſhall her blackneſſe fit.
Worſe, and worſe.
How if Faire, and Fooliſh?
She neuer yet was fooliſh that was faire,
For euen her folly helpt her to an heire.
Theſe are old fond Paradoxes, to make Fooles laugh i' th' Alehouſe. What miſerable praiſe haſt thou for her that's Foule, and Fooliſh.
There's none ſo foule and fooliſh thereunto,
But do's foule pranks, which faire, and wiſe-ones do.
Oh heauy ignorance: thou praiſeſt the worſt beſt. But what praiſe could'ſt thou beſtow on a deſeruing woman indeed? One, that in the authorithy of her merit, did iuſtly put on the vouch of very malice it ſelfe.
She that was euer faire, and neuer proud,
Had Tongue at will, and yet was neuer loud:
Neuer lackt Gold, and yet went neuer gay,
Fled from her wiſh, and yet ſaid now I may.
She that being angred, her reuenge being nie,
Bad her wrong ſtay, and her diſpleaſure flie:
She that in wiſedome neuer was ſo fraile,
To change the Cods-head for the Salmons taile:
She that could thinke, and neu'r diſcloſe her mind,
See Suitors following, and not looke behind:
She was a wight, (if euer ſuch wightes were)
To do what?
To ſuckle Fooles, and chronicle ſmall Beere.
Oh moſt lame and impotent concluſion. Do not learne of him Aemillia, though he be thy husband. How ſay you (Caſſio) is he not a moſt prophane, and liberall Counſailor?
He ſpeakes home (Madam) you may relliſh him more in the Souldier, then in the Scholler.
He takes her by the palme: I, well ſaid, whiſper. With as little a web as this, will I enſnare as great a Fly as Caſſio. I ſmile vpon her, do: I will giue thee in thine owne Courtſhip. You ſay true, 'tis ſo indeed. If ſuch tricks as theſe ſtrip you out of your Lieutenantrie, it had beene better you had not kiſs'd your three fingers ſo oft, which now againe you are moſt apt to play the Sir, in. Very good: well kiſs'd, and excellent Curtſie: 'tis ſo indeed. Yet againe, your fingers to your lippes? Would they were Cluſter-pipes for your ſake.
The Moore I know his Trumpet.
'Tis truely ſo.
Let's meete him, and recieue him.
Loe, where he comes.
O, my faire Warriour.
My deere Othello.
It giues me wonder great, as my content
To ſee you heere before me.
Oh my Soules Ioy:
If after euery Tempeſt, come ſuch Calmes,
May the windes blow, till they haue waken'd death:
And let the labouring Barke climbe hills of Seas
Olympus high: and duck againe as low.
As hell's from Heauen. If it were now to dye,
'Twere now to be moſt happy. For I feare,
My Soule hath her content ſo abſolute,
That not another comfort like to this,
Succeedes in vnknowne Fate.
The Heauen's forbid
But that our Loues
And Comforts ſhould encreaſe
Euen as our dayes do grow.
Amen to rhat (ſweet Powers)
I cannot ſpeake enough of this content,
It ſtoppes me heere: it is too much of ioy.
And this, and this the greateſt diſcords be
That ere our hearts ſhall make.
Oh you are well tun'd now: But Ile ſet downe the peggs that make this Muſicke, as honeſt as I am.
Come: let vs to the Caſtle.
Newes (Friends) our Warres are done:
The Turkes are drown'd.
How do's my old Acquaintance of this Iſle?
(Hony) you ſhall be well deſir'd in Cyprus,
I haue round great loue among'ſt them. Oh my Sweet,
I prattle out of faſhion, and I do ate
In mine owne comforts. I prythee, good Iago,
Go to the Bay, and diſimbarke my Coffers:
Bring thou the Maſter to the Cittadell,
He is a good one, and his worthyneſſe
Do's challenge much reſpect. Come Deſdemona,
Once more well met at Cyprus.
Do thou meet me preſently at the Harbour. Come thither, if thou be'ſt Valiant, (as they ſay baſe men being in Loue, haue then a Nobilitie in their Natures, more then is natiue to them) lift-me; the Lieutenant to night watches on the Court of Guard. Firſt, I muſt tell thee this: Deſdemona, is directly in loue with him.
With him? Why, 'tis not poſſible.
Lay thy finger thus: and let thy ſoule be inſtructed. Marke me with what violence ſhe firſt lou'd the Moore, but for bragging, and telling her fantaſticall lies. To loue him ſtill for prating, let not thy diſcreet heart thinke it. Her eye muſt be fed. And what delight ſhall ſhe haue to looke on the diuell? When the Blood is made dull with the Act of Sport, there ſhould be a game to enflame it, and to giue Satiety a freſh appetite. Louelineſſe in fauour, ſimpathy in yeares, Manners, and Beauties: all which the Moore is defectiue in. Now for want of theſe requir'd Conueniences, her delicate tenderneſſe wil finde it ſelfe abus'd, begin to heaue the, gorge, diſrelliſh and abhorre the Moore, very Nature wil inſtruct her in it, and compell her to ſome ſecond choice. Now Sir, this granted (as it is a moſt pregnant and vnforc'd poſition) who ſtands ſo eminent in the degree of this Forune, as Caſſio do's: a knaue very voluble: no further conſcionable, then in putting on the meere forme of Ciuill, and Humaine ſeeming, for the better compaſſe of his ſalt, and moſt hidden looſe Affection? Why none, why none: A ſlipper, and ſubtle knaue, a finder of occaſion: that he's an eye can ſtampe, and counterfeit Aduantages, though true Aduantage neuer preſent it ſelfe. A diueliſh knaue: beſides, the knaue is handſome, young: and hath all thoſe requiſites in him, that folly and greene mindes looke after. A peſtilent compleat knaue, and the woman hath found him already.
I cannot beleeue that in her, ſhe's full of moſt bleſs'd condition.
Bleſs'd figges-end. The Wine ſhe drinkes is made of grapes. If ſhee had beene bleſs'd, ſhee would neuer haue lou'd the Moore: Bleſs'd pudding. Didſt thou not ſee her paddle with the palme of his hand? Didſt not marke that?
Yes, that I did: but that was but curteſie.
Leacherie by this hand: an Index, and obſcure prologue to the Hiſtory of Luſt and foule Thoughts. They met ſo neere with their lippes, that their breathes embrac'd together. Villanous thoughts Rodorigo, when theſe mutabilities ſo marſhall the way, hard at hand comes the Maſter, and maine exerciſe, th' incorporate concluſion: Piſh. But Sir, be you rul'd by me. I haue brought you from Venice. Watch you to night: for the Command, Ile lay't vpon you. Caſſio knowes you not: Ile not be farre from you. Do you finde ſome occaſion to anger Caſſio, either by ſpeaking too loud, or tainting his diſcipline, or from what other courſe you pleaſe, which the time ſhall more fauorably miniſter.
Well.
Sir, he's raſh, and very ſodaine in Choller: and happely may ſtrike at you, prouoke him that he may: for euen out of that will I cauſe theſe of Cyprus to Mutiny. Whoſe qualification ſhall come into no true taſte againe, but by the diſplanng of Caſſio. So ſhall you haue a ſhorter iourney to your deſires, by the meanes I ſhall then haue to preferre them. And the impediment moſt profitably remoued, without the which there were no expectation of our proſperitie.
I will do this, if you can bring it to any opportunity.
I warrant thee. Meete me by and by at the Cittadell. I muſt fetch his Neceſſaries a Shore. Farewell.
Adieu.
That Caſſio loues her, I do well beleeu't:
That ſhe loues him, 'tis apt, and of great Credite.
The Moore (how beit that I endure him not)
Is of a conſtant, louing Noble Nature,
And I dare thinke, he'le proue to Deſdemona
A moſt deere husband. Now I do loue her too,
Not out of abſolute Luſt, (though peraduenture
I ſtand accomptant for as great a ſin)
But partely led to dyet my Reuenge,
For that I do ſuſpect the luſtie Moore
Hath leap'd into my Seate. The thought whereof,
Doth (like a poyſonous Minerall) gnaw my Inwardes:
And nothing can, or ſhall content my Soule
Till I am eeuen'd with him, wife, for wift.
Or fayling ſo, yet that I put the Moore,
At leaſt into a Ielouzie ſo ſtrong
That iudgement cannot cure. Which thing to do,
If this poore Traſh of Venice, whom I trace
For his quicke hunting, ſtand the putting on,
Ile haue our Michael Caſſio on the hip,
Abuſe him to the Moore, in the right garbe
(For I feare Caſſio with my Night-Cape too)
Make the Moore thanke me, loue me, and reward me,
Fo making him egregiouſly an Aſſe,
And practiſing vpon his peace, and quiet,
Euen to madneſſe. 'Tis heere: but yet confus'd,
Knaueries plaine face, is neuer ſeene, till vs'd.
It is Othello's pleaſure, our Noble and Valiant Generall. That vpon certaine tydings now arriu'd, importing the meere perdition of the Turkiſh Fleete: euery man put himſelfe into Triumph. Some to daunce, ſome to make Bonfires, each man, to what Sport and Reuels his addition leads him. For beſides theſe beneficiall Newes, it is the Celebration of his Nuptiall. So much was his pleaſure ſhould be proclaimed. All offices are open, & there is full libertie of Feaſting from this preſent houre of fiue, till the Bell haue told eleuen. Bleſſe the Iſle of Cyprus, and our Noble Generall Othello.
Good Michael, looke you to the guard to night.
Let's teach our ſelues that Honourable ſtop,
Not to out-ſport diſcretion.
Iago, hath direction what to do.
But notwithſtanding with my perſonall eye
Will I looke to't.
Iago, is moſt honeſt:
Michael, goodnight. To morrow with your earlieſt,
Let me haue ſpeech with you. Come my deere Loue,
The purchaſe made, the fruites are to enſue,
That profit's yet to come 'tweene me, and you.
Goodnight.
Welcome Iago: we muſt to the Watch.
Not this houre Lieutenant: 'tis not yet ten o' th' clocke. Our Generall caſt vs thus earely for the loue of his Deſdemona: Who, let vs not therefore blame; he hath not yet made wanton the night with her: and ſhe is ſport for Ioue.
She's a moſt exquiſite Lady.
And Ile warrant her, full of Game.
Indeed ſhes a moſt freſh and delicate creature.
What an eye ſhe ha's?
Methinkes it ſounds a parley to prouocation.
An inuiting eye:
And yet me thinkes right modeſt.
And when ſhe ſpeakes,
Is it not an Alarum to Loue?
She is indeed perfection.
Well: happineſſe to their Sheetes. Come Lieutenant, I haue a ſtope of Wine, and heere without are a brace of Cyprus Gallants, that would faine haue a meaſure to the health of blacke Othello.
Not to night, good Iago, I haue very poore, and vnhappie Braines for drinking. I could well wiſh Curteſie would inuent ſome other Cuſtome of entertainment.
Oh, they are our Friends: but one Cup, Ile drinke for you.
I haue drunke but one Cup to night, and that was craftily qualified too: and behold what inouation it makes heere. I am infortunate in the infirmity, and dare not taske my weakeneſſe with any more.
What man? 'Tis a night of Reuels, the Gallants deſire it.
Where are they?
Heere, at the doore: I pray you call them in.
Ile do't, but it diſlikes me.
If I can faſten but one Cup vpon him
With that which he hath drunke to night alreadie,
He'l be as full of Quarrell, and offence
As my yong Miſtris dogge.
Now my ſicke Foole Rodorigo,
Whom Loue hath turn'd almoſt the wrong ſide out,
To Deſdemona hath to night Carrows'd.
Potations, pottle-deepe; and he's to watch.
Three elſe of Cyprus, Noble ſwelling Spirites,
(That hold their Honours in a wary diſtance,
The very Elements of this Warrelike Iſle)
Haue I to night fluſter'd with flowing Cups,
And they Watch too.
Now 'mongſt this Flocke of drunkards
Am I put to our Caſſio in ſome Action
That may offend the Iſle. But here they come.
If Conſequence do but approue my dreame,
My Boate ſailes freely, both with winde and Streame.
'Fore heauen, they haue giuen me a rowſe already.
Good-faith a litle one: not paſt a pint, as I am a Souldier.
Some Wine hoa.
And let me the Cannakin clinke, clinke:
And let me the Cannakin clinke.
A Souldiers a man: Oh, mans life's but a ſpan,
Why then let a Souldier drinke.
Some Wine Boyes.
'Fore Heauen: an excellent Song.
I learn'd it in England: where indeed they are moſt potent in Potting. Your Dane, your Germaine, and your ſwag-belly'd Hollander, (drinke hoa) are nothing to your Engliſh.
Is your Engliſhmen ſo exquiſite in his drinking?
Why, he drinkes you with facillitie, your Dane dead drunke. He ſweates not to ouerthrow your Almaine. He giues your Hollander a vomit, ere the next Pottle can be fill'd.
To the health of our Generall.
I am for it Lieutenant: and Ile do you Iuſtice.
Oh ſweet England.
King Stephen was and-a worthy Peere,
His Breeches coſt him but a Crowne,
He held them Six pence all to deere,
With that he cal'd the Tailor Lowne:
He was a wight of high Renowne,
And thou art but of low degree:
'Tis Pride that pulls the Country downe,
And take thy awl'd Cloake about thee.
Some Wine hoa.
Why this is a more exquiſite Song then the other.
Will you heare't againe?
No: for I hold him to be vnworthy of his Place, that do's thoſe things. Well: heau'ns aboue all: and there be ſoules muſt be ſaued, and there be ſoules muſt not be ſaued.
It's true, good Lieutenant.
For mine owne part, no offence to the Generall, nor any man of qualitie: I hope to be ſaued.
And ſo do I too Lieutenant.
I: (but by your leaue) not before me. The Lieutenant is to be ſaued before the Ancient. Let's haue no more of this: let's to our Affaires. Forgiue vs our ſinnes: Gentlemen let's looke to our buſineſſe. Do not thinke Gentlemen, I am drunke: this is my Ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left. I am not drunke now: I can ſtand well enough, and I ſpeake well enough.
Excellent well.
Why very well then: you muſt not thinke then, that I am drunke.
To th' Platforme (Maſters) come, let's ſet the Watch.
You ſee this Fellow, that is gone before,
He's a Souldier, fit to ſtand by Caeſar,
And giue direction. And do but ſee his vice,
'Tis to his vertue, a iuſt Equinox,
The one as long as th' other. 'Tis pittie of him:
I feare the truſt Othello puts him in,
On ſome odde time of his infirmitie
Will ſhake this Iſland.
But is he often thus?
'Tis euermore his prologue to his ſleepe,
He'le watch the Horologe a double Set,
If Drinke rocke not his Cradle.
It were well
The Generall were put in mind of it:
Perhaps he ſees it not, or his good nature
Prizes the vertue that appeares in Caſſio,
And lookes not on his euills: is not this true?
How now Rodorigo?
I pray you after the Lieutenant, go.
And 'tis great pitty, that the Noble Moore
Should hazard ſuch a Place, as his owne Second
With one of an ingraft Infirmitie,
It were an honeſt Action, to ſay ſo
To the Moore.
Not I, for this faire Iſland,
I do loue Caſſio well: and would do much
To cure him of this euill, But hearke, what noiſe?
You Rogue: you Raſcall.
What's the matter Lieutenant?
A Knaue teach me my dutie? Ile beate the
Knaue into a Twiggen-Bottle.
Beate me?
Doſt thou prate, Rogue?
Nay, good Lieutenant:
I pray you Sir, hold your hand.
Let me go (Sir)
Or Ile knocke you o're the Mazard.
Come, come: you're drunke.
Drunke?
Away I ſay: go out and cry a Mutinie.
Nay good Lieutenant. Alas Gentlemen:
Helpe hoa. Lieutenant. Sir Montano:
Helpe Maſters. Heere's a goodly Watch indeed.
Who's that which rings the Bell: Diablo, hoa:
The Towne will riſe. Fie, fie Lieutenant,
You'le be aſham'd for euer.
What is the matter heere?
I bleed ſtill, I am hurt to th' death. He dies.
Hold for your liues.
Hold hoa: Lieutenant, Sir Montano, Gentlemen:
Haue you forgot all place of ſenſe and dutie?
Hold. The Generall ſpeaks to you: hold for ſhame.
Why how now hoa? From whence ariſeth this?
Are we turn'd Turkes? and to our ſelues do that
Which Heauen hath forbid the Ottamittes.
For Chriſtian ſhame, put by this barbarous Brawle:
He that ſtirs next, to carue for his owne rage,
Holds his ſoule light: He dies vpon his Motion.
Silence that dreadfull Bell, it frights the Iſle,
From her propriety. What is the matter, Maſters?
Honeſt Iago that lookes dead with greeuing,
Speake: who began this? On thy loue I charge thee?
I do not know: Friends all, but now, euen now.
In Quarter, and in termes like Bride, and Groome
Deueſting them for Bed: and then, but now:
(As if ſome Planet had vnwitted men)
Swords out, and tilting one at others breaſtes,
In oppoſition bloody. I cannot ſpeake
Any begining to this peeuiſh oddes.
And would, in Action glorious, I had loſt
Thoſe legges, that brought me to a part of it.
How comes it (Michaell) you are thus forgot?
I pray you pardon me, I cannot ſpeake.
Worthy Montano, you were wont to be ciuill:
The grauitie, and ſtillneſſe of your youth
The world hath noted. And your name is great
In mouthes of wiſeſt Cenſure. What's the matter
That you vnlace your reputation thus,
And ſpend your rich opinion, for the name
Of a night-brawler? Giue me anſwer to it.
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger,
Your Officer Iago, can informe you,
While I ſpare ſpeech which ſomething now offends me.
Of all that I do know, nor know I ought
By me, that's ſaid, or done amiſſe this night,
Vnleſſe ſelfe-charitie be ſometimes a vice,
And to defend our ſelues, it be a ſinne
When violence aſſailes vs.
Now by Heauen,
My blood begins my ſafer Guides to rule,
And paſſion (hauing my beſt iudgement collied)
Aſſaies to leade the way. If I once ſtir,
Or do but lift this Arme, the beſt of you
Shall ſinke in my rebuke. Giue me to know
How this foule Rout began: Who ſet it on,
And he that is approu'd in this offence,
Though he had twinn'd with me, both at a birth,
Shall looſe me. What in a Towne of warre,
Yet wilde, the peoples hearts brim-full of feare,
To Manage priuate, and domeſticke Quarrell?
In night, and on the Court and Guard of ſafetie?
'Tis monſtrous: Iago, who began't?
If partially Affin'd, or league in office,
Thou doſt deliuer more, or leſſe then Truth.
Thou art no Souldier.
Touch me not ſo neere,
I had rather haue this tongue cut from my mouth,
Then it ſhould do offence to Michaell Caſſio.
Yet I perſwade my ſelfe, to ſpeake the truth
Shall nothing wrong him. This it is Generall:
Montano and my ſelfe being in ſpeech,
There comes a Fellow crying out for helpe,
And Caſſio following him with determin'd Sword
To execute vpon him. Sir, this Gentleman,
Steppes in to Caſſio, and entreats his pauſe:
My ſelfe, the crying Fellow did purſue,
Leaſt by his clamour (as it ſo fell out)
The Towne might fall in fright. He, (ſwift of foote)
Out-ran my purpoſe: and I return'd then rather
For that I heard the clinke▪ and fall of Swords,
And Caſſio high in oath: Which till to night
I nere might ſay before. When I came backe
(For this was briefe) I found them cloſe together
At blow, and thruſt, euen as againe they were
When you your ſelfe did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report.
But Men are Men: The beſt ſometimes forget,
Though Caſſio did ſome little wrong to him,
As men in rage ſtrike thoſe that wiſh them beſt,
Yet ſurely Caſſio. I beleeue receiu'd
From him that fled, ſome ſtrange Indignitie,
Which patience could not paſſe.
I know Iago
Thy honeſtie, and loue doth mince this matter,
Making it light to Caſſio: Caſſio, I loue thee,
But neuer more be Officer of mine.
Looke if my gentle Loue be not rais'd vp:
Ile make thee an example.
What is the matter (Deere?)
All's well, Sweeting:
Come away to bed. Sir for your hurts,
My ſelfe will be your Surgeon. Lead him off:
Iago, looke with care about the Towne,
And ſilence thoſe whom this vil'd brawle diſtracted.
Come Deſdemona, 'tis the Soldiers life,
To haue their Balmy ſlumbers wak'd with ſtrife.
What are you hurt Lieutenant?
I, paſt all Surgery.
Marry Heauen forbid.
Reputation, Reputation, Reputation: Oh I haue loſt my Reputation. I haue loſt the immortall part of myſelfe, and what remaines is beſtiall. My Reputation, Iago, my Reputation.
As I am an honeſt man I had thought you had receiued ſome bodily wound; there is more ſence in that then in Reputation. Reputation is an idle, and moſt falſe impoſition; oft got without merit, and loſt without deſeruing. You haue loſt no Reputation at all, vnleſſe you repute your ſelfe ſuch a looſer. What man, there are more wayes to recouer the Generall againe. You are but now caſt in his moode, (a puniſhment more in policie, then in malice) euen ſo as one would beate his offenceleſſe dogge, ro affright an Imperious Lyon. Sue to him againe, and he's yours.
I will rather ſue to be deſpis'd, then to deceiue ſo good a Commander, with ſo ſlight, ſo drunken, and ſo indiſcreet an Officer. Drunke? And ſpeake Parrat? And ſquabble? Swagger? Sweare? And diſcourſe Fuſtian with ones owne ſhadow? Oh thou inviſible ſpirit of Wine, if thou haſt no name to be knowne by, let vs call thee Diuell.
What was he that you follow'd with your Sword? What had he done to you?
I know not.
Is't poſſible?
I remember a maſſe of things, but nothing diſtinctly: a Quarrell, but nothing wherefore. Oh, that men ſhould put an Enemie in their mouthes, to ſteale away their Braines? that we ſhould with ioy, pleaſance, reuell and applauſe, transforme our ſelues into Beaſts.
Why? But you are now well enough: how came you thus recouered?
It hath pleas'd the diuell drunkenneſſe, to giue place to the diuell wrath, one vnpefectneſſe, ſhewes me another to make me frankly deſpiſe my ſelfe.
Come, you are too ſeuere a Moraller. As the Time, the Place, & the Condition of this Country ſtands I could hartily wiſh this had not befalne: but ſince it is, as it is, mend it for your owne good.
I will aske him for my Place againe, he ſhall tell me, I am a drunkard: had I as many mouthes as Hydra, ſuch an anſwer would ſtop them all. To be now a ſenſible man, by and by a Foole, an preſently a Beaſt. Oh ſtrange! Euery inordinate cup is vnbleſs'd, and the Ingredient is a diuell.
Come, come: good wine, is a good famillar Creature, if it be well vs'd: exclaime no more againſt it. And good Lieutenant, I thinke, you thinke I loue you.
I haue well approued it, Sir. I drunke?
You, or any man liuing, may be drunke at a time man. I tell you what you ſhall do: Our General's Wife, is now the Generall. I may ſay ſo, in this reſpect, for that he hath deuoted, and giuen vp himſelfe to the Contemplation, marke: and deuotement of her parts and Graces. Confeſſe your ſelfe freely to her: Importune her helpe to put you in your place againe. She is of ſo free, ſo kinde, ſo apt, ſo bleſſed a diſpoſition, ſhe holds it a vice in her goodneſſe, not to do more then ſhe is requeſted. This broken ioynt betweene you, and her husband, entreat her to ſplinter. And my Fortunes againſt any lay worth naming, this cracke of your Loue, ſhall grow ſtronger, then it was before.
You aduiſe me well.
I proteſt in the ſinceritie of Loue, and honeſt kindneſſe.
I thinke it freely: and betimes in the morning, I will beſeech the vertuous Deſdemona to vndertake for me: I am deſperate of my Fortunes if they check me.
You are in the right: good night Lieutenant, I muſt to the Watch.
Good night, honeſt Iago.
And what's he then,
That ſaies I play the Villaine?
When this aduiſe is free I giue, and honeſt,
Proball to thinking, and indeed the courſe
To win the Moore againe.
For 'tis moſt eaſie
Th' inclyning Deſdemona to ſubdue
In any honeſt Suite. She's fram'd as fruitefull
As the free Elements. And then for her
To win the Moore, were to renownce his Baptiſme,
All Seales, and Simbols of redeemed ſin:
His Soule is ſo enfetter'd to her Loue,
That ſhe may make, vnmake, do what ſhe liſt,
Euen as her Appetite ſhall play the God,
With his weake Function. How am I then a Villaine,
To Counſell Caſſio to this paralell courſe,
Directly to his good? Diuinitie of hell,
When diuels will the blackeſt ſinnes put on,
They do ſuggeſt at firſt with heauenly ſhewes,
As I do now. For whiles this honeſt Foole
Plies Deſdemona, to repaire his Fortune,
And ſhe for him, pleades ſtrongly to the Moore,
Ile powre this peſtilence into his eare:
That ſhe repeales him, for her bodies Luſt.
And by how much ſhe ſtriues to do him good,
She ſhall vndo her Credite with the Moore.
So will I turne her vertue into pitch,
And out of her owne goodneſſe make the Net,
That ſhall en-maſh them all.
How now Rodorigo?
I do follow heere in the Chace, not like a Hound that hunts, but one that filles vp the Crie. My Money is almoſt ſpent; I haue bin to night exceedingly well Cudgell'd: And I thinke the iſſue will bee, I ſhall haue ſo much experience for my paines; And ſo, with no money at all, and a little more Wit, returne againe to Venice.
How poore are they that haue not Patience?
What wound did euer heale but by degrees?
Thou know'ſt we worke by Wit, and not by Witchcraft
And Wit depends on dilatory time:
Dos't not go well? Caſſio hath beaten thee,
And thou by that ſmall hurt hath caſheer'd Caſſio:
Though other things grow faire againſt the Sun,
Yet Fruites that bloſſome firſt, will firſt be ripe:
Content thy ſelfe, a-while. Introth 'tis Morning;
Pleaſure, and Action, make the houres ſeeme ſhort.
Retire thee, go where thou art Billited:
A way, I ſay, thou ſhalt know more heereafter:
Nay get thee gone.
Two things are to be done:
My Wife muſt moue for Caſſio to her Miſtris:
Ile ſet her on my ſelfe, a while, to draw the Moor apart,
And bring him iumpe, when he may Caſſio finde
Soliciting his wife: I, that's the way:
Dull not Deuice, by coldneſſe, and delay.
Maſters, play heere, I wil content your paines,
Something that's briefe: and bid, goodmorrow General.
Why Maſters, haue your Inſtruments bin in Naples, that they ſpeake i' th' Noſe thus?
How Sir? how?
Are theſe I pray you, winde Inſtruments?
I marry are they ſir.
Oh, thereby hangs a tale.
Whereby hangs a tale, ſir?
Marry ſir, by many a winde Inſtrument that I know. But Maſters, heere's money for you: and the Generall ſo likes your Muſick, that he deſires you for loues ſake to make no more noiſe with it.
Well Sir, we will not.
If you haue any Muſicke that may not be heard, too't againe. But (as they ſay) to heare Muſicke, the Generall do's not greatly care.
We haue none ſuch, ſir.
Then put vp your Pipes in your bagge, for Ile away. Go, vaniſh into ayre, away.
Doſt thou heare me, mine honeſt Friend?
No, I heare not your honeſt Friend:
I heare you.
Prythee keepe vp thy Quillets, ther's a poore peece of Gold for thee: if the Gentlewoman that attends the Generall be ſtirring, tell her, there's one Caſſio entreats her a little fauour of Speech. Wilt thou do this?
She is ſtirring ſir: if ſhe will ſtirre hither, I ſhall ſeeme to notifie vnto her.
In happy time, Iago.
You haue not bin a-bed then?
Why no: the day had broke before we parted.
I haue made bold (Iago) to ſend in to your wife:
My ſuite to her is, that ſhe will to vertuous Deſdemona
Procure me ſome acceſſe.
Ile ſend her to you preſently:
And Ile deuiſe a meane to draw the Moore
Out of the way, that your conuerſe and buſineſſe
May be more free.
I humbly thanke you for't. I neuer knew
A Flontine more kinde, and honeſt.
Goodmorrow (good Lieutenant) I am ſorrie
For your diſpleaſure: but all will ſure be well.
The Generall and his wife are talking of it,
And ſhe ſpeakes for you ſtoutly. The Moore replies,
That he you hurt is of great Fame in Cyprus,
And great Affinitie: and that in wholſome Wiſedome
He might not but refuſe you. But he proteſts he loues you
And needs no other Suitor, but his likings
To bring you in againe.
Yet I beſeech you,
If you thinke fit, or that it may be done,
Giue me aduantage of ſome breefe Diſcourſe
With Deſdemon alone.
Pray you come in:
I will beſtow you where you ſhall haue time
To ſpeake your boſome freely.
I am much bound to you.
Theſe Letters giue (Iago) to the Pylot,
And by him do my duties to the Senate:
That done, I will be walking on the Workes,
Repaire there to mee.
Well, my good Lord, Ile doo't.
This Fortification (Gentlemen) ſhall we ſee't?
Well waite vpon your Lordſhip.
Be thou aſſur'd (good Caſſio) I will do
All my abilities in thy behalfe.
Good Madam do:
I warrant it greeues my Husband,
As if the cauſe were his.
Oh that's an honeſt Fellow, Do not doubt Caſſio
But I will haue my Lord, and you againe
As friendly as you were.
Bounteous Madam,
What euer ſhall become of Michael Caſſio,
He's neuer any thing but your true Seruant.
I know't: I thanke you: you do loue my Lord:
You haue knowne him long, and be you well aſſur'd
He ſhall in ſtrangeneſſe ſtand no farther off,
Then in a politique diſtance.
I, but Lady,
That policie may either laſt ſo long,
Or feede vpon ſuch nice and wateriſh diet,
Or breede it ſelfe ſo out of Circumſtances,
That I being abſent, and my place ſupply'd,
My Generall will forget my Loue, and Seruice.
Do not doubt hat: before Aemilia here,
I giue thee warrant of thy place. Aſſure thee,
If I do vow a friendſhip, Ile performe it
To the laſt Article. My Lord ſhall neuer reſt,
Ile watch him tame, and talke him out of patience;
His Bed ſhall ſeeme a Schoole, his Boord a Shrift,
Ile intermingle euery thing he do's
With Caſſio's ſuite: Therefore be merry Caſſio,
For thy Solicitor ſhall rather dye,
Then giue thy cauſe away.
Madam, heere comes my Lord.
Madam, Ile take my leaue.
Why ſtay, and heare me ſpeake.
Madam, not now: I am very ill at eaſe,
Vnfit for mine owne purpoſes.
Well, do your diſcretion.
Hah? I like not that,
What doſt thou ſay?
Nothing my Lord; or if—I know not what.
Was not that Caſſio parted from my wife?
Caſſio my Lord? No ſure, I cannot thinke it
That he would ſteale away ſo guilty-like,
Seeing your comming.
I do beleeue 'twas he.
How now my Lord?
I haue bin talking with a Suitor heere,
A man that languiſhes in your diſpleaſure.
Who is't you meane?
Why your Lieutenant Caſſio: Good my Lord,
If I haue any grace, or power to moue you,
His preſent reconciliation take.
For if he be not one, that truly loues you,
That erres in Ignorance, and not in Cunning,
I haue no iudgement in an honeſt face.
I prythee call him backe.
Went he hence now?
I ſooth; ſo humbled,
That he hath left part of his greefe with mee
To ſuffer with him. Good Loue, call him backe.
Not now (ſweet Deſdemon) ſome other time.
But ſhall't be ſhortly?
The ſooner (Sweet) for you.
Shall't be to night, at Supper?
No, not to night.
To morrow Dinner then?
I ſhall not dine at home:
I meete the Captaines at the Cittadell.
Why then to morrow night, on Tueſday morne,
On Tueſday noone, or night; on Wenſday Morne.
I prythee name the time, but let it not
Exceed three dayes. Infaith hee's penitent:
And yet his Treſpaſſe, in our common reaſon
(Saue that they ſay the warres muſt make example)
Out of her beſt, is not almoſt a fault
T' encurre a priuate checke. When ſhall he come?
Tell me Othello. I wonder in my Soule
What you would aske me, that I ſhould deny.
Or ſtand ſo mam'ring on? What? Michael Caſſio,
That came a woing wirh you? and ſo many a time
(When I haue ſpoke of you diſpraiſingly)
Hath tane your part, to haue ſo much to do
To bring him in? Truſt me, I could do much.
Prythee no more: Let him come when he will:
I will deny thee nothing.
Why, this is not a Boone:
'Tis as I ſhould entreate you weare your Gloues,
Or feede on nouriſhing diſhes, or keepe you warme,
Or ſue to you, to do a peculiar profit
To your owne perſon. Nay, when I haue a ſuite
Wherein I meane to touch your Loue indeed,
It ſhall be full of poize, and difficult waight,
And fearefull to be granted.
I will deny thee nothing.
Whereon, I do beſeech thee, grant me this,
To leaue me but a little to my ſelfe.
Shall I deny you? No: farewell my Lord.
Farewell my Deſdemona, Ile come to thee ſtrait.
Aemilia come; be as your Fancies teach you:
What ere you be, I am obedient.
Excellent wretch: Perdition catch my Soule
But I do loue thee: and when I loue thee not,
Chaos is come againe.
My Noble Lord.
What doſt thou ſay, Iago?
Did Michael Caſſio
When he woo'd my Lady, know of your loue?
He did, from firſt to laſt:
Why doſt thou aske?
But for a ſatisfaction of my Thought,
No further harme.
Why of thy thought, Iago?
I did not thinke he had bin acquainted with hir.
O yes, and went betweene vs very oft.
Indeed?
Indeed? I indeed. Diſcern'ſt thou ought in that?
Is he not honeſt?
Honeſt, my Lord?
Honeſt? I, Honeſt.
My Lord, for ought I know.
What do'ſt thou thinke?
Thinke, my Lord?
Thinke, my Lord? Alas, thou ecchos't me;
As if there were ſome Monſter in thy thought
Too hideous to be ſhewne. Thou doſt mean ſomthing:
I heard thee ſay euen now, thou lik'ſt not that,
When Caſsio left my wife. What didd'ſt not like?
And when I told thee, he was of my Counſaile,
Of my whole courſe of wooing; thou cried'ſt, Indeede?
And didd'ſt contract, and purſe thy brow together,
As if thou then hadd'ſt ſhut vp in thy Braine
Some horrible Conceite. If thou do'ſt loue me,
Shew me thy thought.
My Lord, you know I loue you.
I thinke thou do'ſt:
And for I know thou'rt full of Loue, and Honeſtie,
And weigh'ſt thy words before thou giu'ſt them breath,
Therefore theſe ſtops of thine, fright me the more:
For ſuch things in a falſe diſloyall Knaue
Are trickes of Cuſtome: but in a man that's iuſt,
They're cloſe dilations, working from the heart,
That Paſſion cannot rule.
For Michael Caſsio,
I dare be ſworne, I thinke that he is honeſt.
I thinke ſo too.
Men ſhould be what they ſeeme,
Or thoſe that be not, would they might ſeeme none.
Certaine, men ſhould be what they ſeeme.
Why then I thinke Caſsio's an honeſt man.
Nay, yet there's more in this?
I prythee ſpeake to me, as to thy thinkings,
As thou doſt ruminate, and giue thy worſt of thoughts
The worſt of words.
Good my Lord pardon me,
Though I am bound to euery Acte of dutie,
I am not bound to that: All Slaues are free:
Vtter my Thoughts? Why ſay, they are vild, and falce?
As where's that Palace, whereinto foule things
Sometimes intrude not? Who ha's that breaſt ſo pure,
Wherein vncleanly Apprehenſions
Keepe Leetes, and Law-dayes, and in Seſſions ſit
With meditations lawfull?
Thou do'ſt conſpire againſt thy Friend (Iago)
If thou but think'ſt him wrong'd, and mak'ſt his eare
A ſtranger to thy Thoughts.
I do beſeech you,
Though I perchance am vicious in my gueſſe
(As I confeſſe it is my Natures plague
To ſpy into Abuſes, and of my iealouſie
Shapes faults that are not) that your wiſedome
From one, that ſo imperfectly conceits,
Would take no notice, nor build your ſelfe a trouble
Out of his ſcattering, and vnſure obſeruance:
It were not for your quiet, nor your good,
Nor for my Manhood, Honeſty, and Wiſedome,
To let you know my thoughts.
What doſt thou meane?
Good name in Man, & woman (deere my Lord)
Is the immediate Iewell of their Soules;
Who ſteales my purſe, ſteales traſh:
'Tis ſomething, nothing;
'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has bin ſlaue to thouſands:
But he that filches from me my good Name,
Robs me of that, which not enriches him,
And makes me poore indeed.
Ile know thy Thoughts.
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
Nor ſhall not, whil'ſt 'tis in my cuſtodie.
Ha?
Oh, beware my Lord, of iealouſie,
It is the greene-ey'd Monſter, which doth mocke
The meate it feeds on. That Cuckold liues in bliſſe,
Who certaine of his Fate, loues not his wronger:
But oh, what damned minutes els he ore,
Who dotes, yet doubts: Suſpects, yet ſoundly loues?
O miſerie.
Poore, and Content, is rich, and rich enough,
But Riches fineleſſe, is as poore as Winter,
To him that euer feares he ſhall be poore:
Good Heauen, the Soules of all my Tribe defend
From Iealouſie.
Why? why is this?
Think'ſt thou, I'ld make a Life of Iealouſie;
To follow ſtill the changes of the Moone
With freſh ſuſpitions? No: to be once in doubt,
Is to be reſolu'd: Exchange me for a Goat,
When I ſhall turne the buſineſſe of my Soule
To ſuch exufflicate, and blow'd Surmiſes,
Matching thy inference. Tis not to make me Iealious,
To ſay my wife is faire, feeds well, loues company,
Is free of Speech, Sings, Playes, and Dances:
Where Vertue is, theſe are more vertuous.
Nor from mine owne weake merites, will I draw
The ſmalleſt feare, or doubt of her reuolt,
For ſhe had eyes, and choſe me. No Iago,
Ile ſee before I doubt; when I doubt, proue;
And on the proofe, there is no more but this,
Away at once with Loue, or Iealouſie.
I am glad of this: For now I ſhall haue reaſon
To ſhew the Loue and Duty that I beare you
With franker ſpirit. Therefore (as I am bound)
Receiue it from me. I ſpeake not yet of proofe:
Looke to your wife, obſerue her well with Caſsio,
Weare your eyes, thus: not Iealious, nor Secure:
I would not haue your free, and Noble Nature,
Out of ſelfe-Bounty, be abus'd: Looke too't:
I know our Country diſpoſition well:
In Venice, they do let Heauen ſee the prankes
They dare not ſhew their Husbands.
Their beſt Conſcience,
Is not to leaue't vndone, but kept vnknowne.
Doſt thou ſay ſo?
She did deceiue her Father, marrying you,
And when ſhe ſeem'd to ſhake, and feare your lookes,
She lou'd them moſt.
And ſo ſhe did.
Why go too then:
Shee that ſo young could giue out ſuch a Seeming
To ſeele her Fathers eyes vp, cloſe as Oake,
He thought 'twas Witchcraft.
But I am much too blame:
I humbly do beſeech you of your pardon
For too much louing you.
I am bound to thee for euer.
I ſee this hath a little daſh'd your Spirits:
Not a iot, not a iot.
Truſt me, I feare it has:
I hope you will conſider what is ſpoke
Comes from your Loue.
But I do ſee y'are moou'd:
I am to pray you, not to ſtraine my ſpeech
To groſſer iſſues, nor to larger reach,
Then to Suſpition.
I will not.
Should you do ſo (my Lord)
My ſpeech ſhould fall into ſuch vilde ſucceſſe,
Which my Thoughts aym'd not.
Caſſio's my worthy Friend:
My Lord, I ſee y'are mou'd.
No, not much mou'd:
I do not thinke but Deſdemona's honeſt.
Long liue ſhe ſo;
And long liue you to thinke ſo.
And yet how Nature erring from it ſelfe.
I, there's the point:
As (to be bold with you)
Not to affect many propoſed Matches
Of her owne Clime, Complexion, and Degree,
Whereto we ſee in all things, Nature tends:
Foh, one may ſmel in ſuch, a will moſt ranke,
Foule diſproportions, Thoughts vnnaturall.
But (pardon me) I do not in poſition
Diſtinctly ſpeake of her, though I may feare
Her will, recoyling to her better iudgement,
May fal to match you with her Country formes,
And happily repent.
Farewell, farewell:
If more thou doſt perceiue, let me know more:
Set on thy wife to obſerue.
Leaue me Iago.
My Lord, I take my leaue.
Why did I marry?
This honeſt Creature (doubtleſſe)
Sees, and knowes more, much more then he vnfolds.
My Lord, I would I might intreat your Honor
To ſcan this thing no farther: Leaue it to time,
Although 'tis fit that Caſſio haue his Place;
For ſure he filles it vp with great Ability;
Yet if you pleaſe, to him off a-while:
You ſhall by that perceiue him, and his meanes:
Note if your Lady ſtraine his Entertainment
With any ſtrong, or vehement importunitie,
Much will be ſeene in that: In the meane time,
Let me be thought too buſie in my feares,
(As worthy cauſe I haue to feare I am)
And hold her free, I do beſeech your Honor.
Feare not my gouernment.
I once more take my leaue.
This Fellow's of exceeding honeſty,
And knowes all Quantities with a learn'd Spirit
Of humane dealings. If I do proue her Haggard,
Though that her leſſes were my deere heart-ſtrings,
I'ld whiſtle her off, and let her downe the winde
To prey at Fortune. Haply, for I am blacke,
And haue not thoſe ſoft parts of Conuerſation
That Chamberers haue: Or for I am declin'd
Into the vale of yeares (yet that's not much)
Shee's gone. I am abus'd, and my releefe
Muſt be to loath her. Oh Curſe of Marriage!
That we can call theſe delicate Creatures ours,
And not their Appetites? I had rather be a Toad,
And liue vpon the vapour of a Dungeon,
Then keepe a corner in the thing I loue
For others vſes. Yet 'tis the plague to Great-ones,
Prerogatiu'd are they leſſe then the Baſe,
'Tis deſtiny vnſhunnable, like death:
Euen then, this forked plague is Fated to vs,
When we do quicken. Looke where ſhe comes:
If ſhe be falſe, Heauen mock'd it ſelfe:
Ile not beleeue't.
How now, my deere Othello?
Your dinner, and the generous Iſlanders
By you inuited, do attend your preſence.
I am too blame.
Why do you ſpeake ſo faintly?
Are you not well?
I haue a paine vpon my Forehead, heere.
Why that's with watching, 'twill away againe.
Let me but binde it hard, within this houre
It will be well.
Your Napkin is too little:
Let it alone: Come, Ile go in with you.
I am very ſorry that you are not well.
I am glad I haue found this Napkin:
This was her firſt remembrance from the Moore,
My wayward Husband hath a hundred times
Woo'd me to ſteale it. But ſhe ſo loues the Token,
(For he coniur'd her, ſhe ſhould euer keepe it)
That ſhe reſerues it euermore about her,
To kiſſe, and talke too. Ile haue the worke tane out,
And giu't Iago: what he will do with it
Heauen knowes, not I:
I nothing, but to pleaſe his Fantaſie.
How now? What do you heere alone?
Do not you chide: I haue a thing for you.
You haue a thing for me?
It is a common thing —
Hah?
To haue a fooliſh wife.
Oh, is that all? What will you giue me now
For that ſame Handkerchiefe.
What Handkerchiefe?
What Handkerchiefe?
Why that the Moore firſt gaue to Deſdemona,
That which ſo often you did bid me ſteale.
Haſt ſtolne it from her?
No: but ſhe let it drop by negligence,
And to th' aduantage, I being heere, took't vp:
Looke, heere 'tis.
A good wench, giue it me.
What will you do with't, that you haue bene ſo earneſt to haue me filch it?
Why, what is that to you?
If it be not for ſome purpoſe of import,
Giu't me againe. Poore Lady, ſhee'l run mad
When ſhe ſhall lacke it.
Be not acknowne on't:
I haue vſe for it. Go, leaue me.
I will in Caſſio's Lodging looſe this Napkin,
And let him finde it. Trifles light as ayre,
Are to the iealious, confirmations ſtrong,
As proofes of holy Writ. This may do ſomething.
The Moore already changes with my poyſon:
Dangerous conceites, are in their Natures poyſons,
Which at the firſt are ſcarſe found to diſtaſte:
But with a little acte vpon the blood,
Burne like the Mines of Sulphure. I did ſay ſo.
Looke where he comes: Not Poppy, nor Mandragora,
Nor all the drowſie Syrrups of the world
Shall euer medicine thee to that ſweete ſleepe
Which thou owd'ſt yeſterday.
Ha, Ha, falſe to mee?
Why how now Generall? No more of that.
Auant, be gone: Thou haſt ſet me on the Racke:
I ſweare 'tis better to be much abus'd,
Then but to know't a little.
How now, my Lord?
What ſenſe had I, in her ſtolne houres of Luſt?
I ſaw't not, thought it not: it harm'd not me:
I ſlept the next night well, fed well, was free, and merrie.
I found not Caſſio's kiſſes on her Lippes:
He that is robb'd, not wanting what is ſtolne,
Let him not know't, and he's not robb'd at all.
I am ſorry to heare this?
I had beene happy, if the generall Campe,
Pyoners and all, had taſted her ſweet Body,
So I had nothing knowne. Oh now, for euer
Farewell the Tranquill minde; farewell Content;
Farewell the plumed Troopes, and the bigge Warres,
That makes Ambition, Vertue! Oh farewell;
Farewell the neighing Steed, and the ſhrill Trumpe,
The Spirit-ſtirring Drum, th' Eare-piercing Fife,
The Royall Banner, and all Qualitie,
Pride, Pompe, and Circumſtance of glorious Warre:
And O you mortall Engines, whoſe rude throates
Th' immortall Ioues dread Clamours, counterfet,
Farewell: Othello's Occupation's gone.
Is't poſſible my Lord?
Villaine, be ſure thou proue my Loue a Whore;
Be ſure of it: Giue me the Occular proofe,
Or by the worth of mine eternall Soule,
Thou had'ſt bin better haue bin borne a Dog
Then anſwer my wak'd wrath.
Is't come to this?
Make me to ſee't: or (at the leaſt) ſo proue it,
That the probation beare no Hindge, nor Loope,
To hang a doubt on: Or woe vpon thy life.
My Noble Lord.
If thou doſt ſlander her, and torture me,
Neuer pray more: Abandon all remorſe
On Horrors head, Horrors accumulate:
Do deeds to make Heauen weepe, all Earth amaz'd;
For nothing canſt thou to damnation adde,
Greater then that.
O Grace! O Heauen forgiue me!
Are you a Man? Haue you a Soule? or Senſe?
God buy you: take mine Office. Oh wretched Foole,
That lou'ſt to make thine Honeſty, a Vice!
Oh monſtrous world! Take note, take note (O World)
To be direct and honeſt, is not ſafe.
I thanke you for this profit, and from hence
Ile loue no Friend, ſith Loue breeds ſuch offence.
Nay ſtay: thou ſhould'ſt be honeſt.
I ſhould be wiſe; for Honeſtie's a Foole,
And looſes that it workes for.
By the World,
I thinke my Wife be honeſt, and thinke ſhe is not:
I thinke that thou art iuſt, and thinke thou art not:
Ile haue ſome proofe. My name that was as freſh
As Dians Viſage, is now begrim'd and blacke
As mine owne face. If there be Cords, or Kniues,
Poyſon, or Fire, or ſuffocating ſtreames,
Ile not indure it. Would I were ſatisfied.
I ſee you are eaten vp with Paſſion:
I do repent me, that I put it to you.
You would be ſatisfied?
Would? Nay, and I will.
And may: but how? How ſatisfied, my Lord?
Would you the ſuper-viſion groſſely gape on?
Behold her top'd?
Death, and damnation. Oh!
It were a tedious difficulty, I thinke,
To bring them to that Proſpect: Damne them then,
If euer mortall eyes do ſee them boulſter
More then their owne. What then? How then?
What ſhall I ſay? Where's Satisfaction?
It is impoſſible you ſhould ſee this,
Were they as prime as Goates, as hot as Monkeyes,
As ſalt as Wolues in pride, and Fooles as groſſe
As Ignorance, made drunke. But yet, I ſay,
If imputation, and ſtrong circumſtances,
Which leade directly to the doore of Truth,
Will giue you ſatisfaction, you might haue't.
Giue me a liuing reaſon ſhe's diſloyall.
I do not like the Office.
But ſith I am entred in this cauſe ſo farre
(Prick'd too't by fooliſh Honeſty, and Loue)
I will go on. I lay with Caſſio lately,
And being troubled with a raging tooth,
I could not ſleepe. There are a kinde of men,
So looſe of Soule, that in their ſleepes will mutter
Their Affayres: one of this kinde is Caſſio:
In ſleepe I heard him ſay, ſweet Deſdemona,
Let vs be wary, let vs hide our Loues,
And then (Sir) would he gripe, and wring my hand:
Cry, oh ſweet Creature: then kiſſe me hard,
As if he pluckt vp kiſſes by the rootes,
That grew vpon my lippes, laid his Leg ore my Thigh,
And ſigh, and kiſſe, and then cry curſed Fate,
That gaue thee to the Moore.
O monſtrous! monſtrous!
Nay, this was but his Dreame.
But this denoted a fore-gone concluſion,
'Tis a ſhrew'd doubt, though it be but a Dreame.
And this may helpe to thicken other proofes,
That do demonſtrate thinly.
Ile teare her all to peeces.
Nay yet be wiſe; yet we ſee nothing done,
She may be honeſt yet: Tell me but this,
Haue you not ſometimes ſeene a Handkerchiefe
Spotted with Strawberries, in your wiues hand?
I gaue her ſuch a one: 'twas my firſt gift.
I know not that: but ſuch a Handkerchiefe
(I am ſure it was your wiues) did I to day
See Caſſio wipe his Beard with.
If it be that.
If it be that, or any, it was hers.
It ſpeakes againſt her with the other proofes.
O that the Slaue had forty thouſand liues:
One is too poore, too weake for my reuenge.
Now do I ſee 'tis true. Looke heere Iago,
All my fond loue thus do I blow to Heauen. 'Tis gone,
Ariſe blacke vengeance, from the hollow hell,
Yeeld vp (O Loue) thy Crowne, and hearted Throne
To tyrannous Hate. Swell boſome with thy fraught,
For 'tis of Aſpickes tongues.
Yet be content.
Oh blood, blood, blood.
Patience I ſay: your minde may change.
Neuer Iago. Like to the Ponticke Sea,
Whoſe Icie Current, and compulſiue courſe,
Neu'r keepes retyring ebbe, but keepes due on
To the Proponticke, and the Helleſpont:
Euen ſo my bloody thoughts, with violent pace
Shall neu'r looke backe, neu'r ebbe to humble Loue,
Till that a capeable, and wide Reuenge
Swallow them vp. Now by yond Marble Heauen,
In the due reuerence of a Sacred vow,
I heere engage my words.
Do not riſe yet:
Witneſſe you euer-burning Lights aboue,
You Elements, that clip vs round about,
Witneſſe that heere Iago doth giue vp
The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
To wrong'd Othello's Seruice. Let him command,
And to obey ſhall be in me remorſe,
What bloody buſineſſe euer.
I greet thy loue,
Not with vaine thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
And will vpon the inſtant put thee too't.
Within theſe three dayes let me heare thee ſay,
That Caſſio's not aliue.
My Friend is dead:
'Tis done at your Requeſt.
But let her liue.
Damne her lewde Minx:
O damne her, damne her.
Come go with me a-part, I will withdraw
To furniſh me with ſome ſwift meanes of death
For the faire Diuell.
Now art thou my Lieutenant.
I am your owne for euer.
Do you know Sirrah, where Lieutenant Caſſio lyes?
I dare not ſay he lies any where.
Why man?
He's a Soldier, and for me to ſay a Souldier lyes, 'tis ſtabbing.
Go too: where lodges he?
To tell you where he lodges, is to tel you where I lye.
Can any thing be made of this?
I know not where he lodges, and for mee to deuiſe a lodging, and ſay he lies heere, or he lies there, were to lye in mine owne throat.
Can you enquire him out? and be edified by report?
I will Catechize the world for him, that is, make Queſtions, and by them anſwer.
Seeke him, bidde him come hither: tell him, I haue moou'd my Lord on his behalfe, and hope all will be well.
To do this, is within the compaſſe of mans Wit, and therefore I will attempt the doing it.
Where ſhould I looſe the Handkerchiefe, Aemilia?
I know not Madam.
Beleeue me, I had rather haue loſt my purſe
Full of Cruzadoes. And but my Noble Moore
Is true of minde, and made of no ſuch baſeneſſe,
As iealious Creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill-thinking.
Is he not iealious?
Who, he? I thinke the Sun where he was borne,
Drew all ſuch humors from him.
Looke where he comes.
I will not leaue him now, till Caſſio be
Call'd to him. How is't with you, my Lord?
Well my good Lady. Oh hardnes to diſſemble!
How do you, Deſdemona?
Well, my good Lord.
Giue me your hand.
This hand is moiſt my Lady.
It hath felt no age, nor knowne no ſorrow.
This argues fruitfulneſſe, and liberall heart:
Hot, hot, and moyſt. This hand of yours requires
A ſequeſter from Liberty: Faſting, and Prayer,
Much Caſtigation, Exerciſe deuout,
For heere's a yong, and ſweating Diuell heere
That commonly rebels: 'Tis a good hand,
A franke one.
You may (indeed) ſay ſo:
For 'twas that hand that gaue away my heart.
A liberall hand. The hearts of old, gaue hands:
But our new Heraldry is hands, not hearts.
I cannot ſpeake of this:
Come, now your promiſe.
What promiſe, Chucke?
I haue ſent to bid Caſſio come ſpeake with you.
I haue a ſalt and ſorry Rhewme offends me:
Lend me thy Handkerchiefe.
Heere my Lord.
That which I gaue you.
I haue it not about me.
Not?
No indeed, my Lord.
That's a fault: That Handkerchiefe
Did an Aegyptian to my Mother giue:
She was a Charmer, and could almoſt read
The thoughts of people. She told her, while ſhe kept it,
'T would make her Amiable, and ſubdue my Father
Intirely to her loue: But if ſhe loſt it,
Or made a Guift of it, my Fathers eye
Should hold her loathed, and his Spirits ſhould hunt
After new Fancies. She dying, gaue it me,
And bid me (when my Fate would haue me Wu'd)
To giue it her. I did to; and take heede on't,
Make it a Darling, like your precious eye:
To looſe't, or giue't away, were ſuch perdition,
As nothing elſe could match.
Is't poſſible?
'Tis true: There's Magicke in the web of it:
A Sybill that had numbred in the world
The Sun to courſe, two hundred compaſſes,
In her Prophetticke furie ſow'd the Worke:
The Wormes were hallowed, that did breede the Silke,
And it was dyde in Mummey, which the Skilfull
Conſeru'd of Maidens hearts.
Indeed? Is't true?
Moſt veritable, therefore looke too't well.
Then would to Heauen, that I had neuer ſeene't?
Ha? wherefore?
Why do you ſpeake ſo ſtartingly and raſh?
Is't loſt? Is't gon? Speak, is't out o' th' way?
Bleſſe vs.
Say you?
It is not loſt: but what and if it were?
How?
I ſay it is not loſt.
Fetcht, let me ſee't.
Why ſo I can: but I will not now:
This is a tricke to put me from my ſuite,
Pray you let Caſſio be receiu'd againe.
Fetch me the Handkerchiefe,
My minde miſ-giues.
Come, come: you'l neuer meete a more ſufficient man.
The Handkerchiefe.
A man that all his time
Hath founded his good Fortunes on your loue;
Shar'd dangers with you.
The Handkerchiefe.
Inſooth, you are too blame.
Away.
Is not this man iealious?
I neu'r ſaw this before.
Sure, there's ſome wonder in this Handkerchikfe,
I am moſt vnhappy in the loſſe of it.
'Tis not a yeare or two ſhewes vs a man:
They are all but Stomackes, and we all but Food,
They eate vs hungerly, and when they are full
They belch vs.
Looke you, Caſſio and my Husband.
There is no other way: 'tis ſhe muſt doo't:
And loe the happineſſe: go, and importune her.
How now (good Caſſio) what's the newes with you?
Madam, my former ſuite. I do beſeech you,
That by your vertuous meanes, I may againe
Exiſt, and be a member of his loue,
Whom I, with all the Office of my heart
Intirely honour, I would not be delayd.
If my offence, be of ſuch mortall kinde,
That nor my Seruice paſt, nor preſent Sorrowes,
Nor purpos'd merit in futurity,
Can ranſome me into his loue againe,
But to know ſo, muſt be my benefit:
So ſhall I cloath me in a forc'd content,
And ſhut my ſelfe vp in ſome other courſe
To Fortunes Almes.
Alas (thrice-gentle Caſſio)
My Aduocation is not now in Tune;
My Lord, is not my Lord; nor ſhould I know him,
Were he in Fauour, as in Humour alter'd.
So helpe me euery ſpirit ſanctified,
As I haue ſpoken for you all my beſt,
And ſtood within the blanke of his diſpleaſure
For my free ſpeech. You muſt awhile be patient:
What I can do, I will: and more I will
Then for my ſelfe, I dare. Let that ſuffice you.
Is my Lord angry?
He went hence but now:
And certainly in ſtrange vnquietneſſe.
Can he be angry? I haue ſeene the Cannon
When it hath blowne his Rankes into the Ayre,
And like the Diuell from his very Arme
Puff't his owne Brother: And is he angry?
Something of moment then: I will go meet him,
There's matter in't indeed, if he be angry.
I prythee do ſo. Something ſure of State,
Either from Venice, or ſome vnhatch'd practiſe
Made demonſtrable heere in Cyprus, to him,
Hath pudled his cleare Spirit: and in ſuch caſes,
Mens Natures wrangle with inferiour things,
Though great ones are their obiect. 'Tis euen ſo.
For let our finger ake, and it endues
Our other healthfull members, euen to a ſenſe
Of paine. Nay, we muſt thinke men are not Gods,
Nor of them looke for ſuch obſeruancie
As fits the Bridall. Beſhrew me much, Aemilia,
I was (vnhandſome Warrior, as I am)
Arraigning his vnkindneſſe with my ſoule:
But now I finde, I had ſuborn'd the Witneſſe,
And he's Indited falſely.
Pray heauen it bee
State matters, as you thinke, and no Conception,
Nor no Iealious Toy, concerning you.
Alas the day, I neuer gaue him cauſe.
But Iealious ſoules will not be anſwer'd ſo;
They are not euer iealious for the cauſe,
But iealious, for they're iealious. It is a Monſter
Begot vpon it ſelfe, borne on it ſelfe.
Heauen keepe the Monſter from Othello's mind.
Lady, Amen.
I will go ſeeke him. Caſſio, walke heere about:
If I doe finde him fit, Ile moue your ſuite,
And ſeeke to effect it to my vttermoſt.
I humbly thanke your Ladyſhip.
'Saue you (Friend Caſſio.)
What make you from home?
How is't with you, my moſt faire Bianca?
Indeed (ſweet Loue) I was comming to your houſe.
And I was going to your Lodging, Caſſio.
What? keepe a weeke away? Seuen dayes, and Nights?
Eight ſcore eight houres? And Louers abſent howres
More tedious then the Diall, eight ſcore times?
Oh weary reck'ning.
Pardon me, Bianca:
I haue this while with leaden thoughts beene preſt,
But I ſhall in a more continuate time
Strike off this ſcore of abſence. Sweet Bianca
Take me this worke out.
Oh Caſſio, whence came this?
This is ſome Token from a newer Friend,
To the felt-Abſence: now I feele a Cauſe:
Is't come to this? Well, well.
Go too, woman:
Throw your vilde geſſes in the Diuels teeth,
From whence you haue them. You are iealious now,
That this is from ſome Miſtris, ſome remembrance;
No, in good troth Bianca.
Why, who's is it?
I know not neither:
I found it in my Chamber,
I like the worke well; Ere it be demanded
(As like enough it will) I would haue it coppied:
Take it, and doo't, and leaue me for this time.
Leaue you? Wherefore?
I do attend heere on the Generall,
And thinke it no addition nor my wiſh
To haue him ſee me woman'd.
Why, I ptay you?
Not that I loue you not.
But that you do not loue me.
I pray you bring me on the way a little,
And ſay, if I ſhall ſee you ſoone at night?
'Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
For I attend heere: But Ile ſee you ſoone.
'Tis very good: I muſt be circumſtanc'd.
Will you thinke ſo?
Thinke ſo, Iago?
What, to kiſſe in priuate?
An vnauthoriz'd kiſſe?
Or to be naked with her Friend in bed,
An houre, or more, not meaning any harme?
Naked in bed (Iago) and not meane harme?
It is hypocriſie againſt the Diuell:
They that meane vertuouſly, and yet do ſo,
The Diuell their vertue tempts, and they tempt Heauen.
If they do nothing, 'tis a Veniall ſlip:
But if I giue my wife a Handkerchiefe.
What then?
Why then 'tis hers (my Lord) and being hers,
She may (I thinke) beſtow't on any man.
She is Protectreſſe of her honor too:
May ſhe giue that?
Her honor is an Eſſence that's not ſeene,
They haue it very oft, that haue it not.
But for the Handkerchiefe.
By heauen, I would moſt gladly haue forgot it:
Thou ſaidſt (oh, it comes ore my memorie,
As doth the Rauen o're the infectious houſe:
Boading to all) he had my Handkerchiefe.
I: what of that?
That's not ſo good now.
What if I had ſaid, I had ſeene him do you wrong?
Or heard him ſay (as Knaues be ſuch abroad,
Who hauing by their owne importunate ſuit,
Or voluntary dotage of ſome Miſtris,
Conuinced or ſupply'd them cannot chuſe
But they muſt blab.)
Hath he ſaid any thing?
He hath (my Lord) but be you well aſſur'd,
No more then he'le vn-ſweare.
What hath he ſaid?
Why, that he did: I know not what he did.
What? What?
Lye.
With her?
With her? On her: what you will.
Lye with her? lye on her? We ſay lye on her, when they be-lye-her. Lye with her: that's fullſome: Handkerchiefe: Confeſſions: Handkerchiefe. To confeſſe, and be hang'd for his labour. Firſt, to be hang'd, and then to confeſſe: I tremble at it. Nature would not inueſt her ſelfe in ſuch ſhadowing paſſion, without ſome Inſtruction. It is not words that ſhakes me thus, (piſh) Noſes, Eares, and Lippes: is't poſſible. Confeſſe? Handkerchiefe? O diuell.
Worke on,
My Medicine workes. Thus credulous Fooles are caught,
And many worthy, and chaſt Dames euen thus,
(All guiltleſſe) meete reproach: what hoa? My Lord?
My Lord, I ſay: Othello.
How now Caſſio?
What's the matter?
My Lord is falne into an Epilepſie,
This is his ſecond Fit: he had one yeſterday.
Rub him about the Temples.
The Lethargie muſt haue his quyet courſe:
If not, he foames at mouth: and by and by
Breakes out to ſauage madneſſe. Looke, he ſtirres:
Do you withdraw your ſelfe a little while,
He will recouer ſtraight: when he is gone,
I would on great occaſion, ſpeake with you.
How is it Generall? Haue you not hurt your head?
Doſt thou mocke me?
I mocke you not, by Heauen:
Would you would beare your Fortune like a Man.
A Horned man's a Monſter, and a Beaſt.
Ther's many a Beaſt then in a populous Citty,
And many a ciuill Monſter.
Did he confeſſe it?
Good Sir, be a man:
Thinke euery bearded fellow that's but yoak'd
May draw with you. There's Millions now aliue,
That nightly lye in thoſe vnproper beds,
Which they dare ſweare peculiar. Your caſe is better.
Oh, 'tis the ſpight of hell, the Fiends Arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in a ſecure Cowch;
And to ſuppoſe her chaſt. No, let me know,
And knowing what I am, I know what ſhe ſhall be.
Oh, thou art wiſe: 'tis certaine.
Stand you a while apart,
Confine your ſelfe but in a patient Liſ,
Whil'ſt you were heere, o're-whelmed with your griefe
(A paſſion moſt reſulting ſuch a man)
Caſſio came hither. I ſhifted him away,
And layd good ſcuſes vpon your Extaſie,
Bad him anon returne: and heere ſpeake with me,
The which he promis'd. Do but encaue your ſelfe,
And marke the Fleeres, the Gybes, and notable Scornes
That dwell in euery Region of his face.
For I will make him tell the Tale anew;
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath, and is againe to cope your wife.
I ſay, but marke his geſture: marry Patience,
Or I ſhall ſay y' are all in all in Spleene,
And nothing of a man.
Do'ſt thou heare, Iago,
I will be found moſt cunning in my Patience:
But (do'ſt thou heare) moſt bloody.
That's not amiſſe,
But yet keepe time in all: will you withdraw?
Now will I queſtion Caſſio of Bianca,
A Huſwife, that by ſelling her deſires
Buyes her ſelfe Bread, and Cloath. It is a Creature
That dotes on Caſſio, (as 'tis the Strumpets plague
To be-guile many, and be be-guil'd by one)
He, when he heares of her, cannot reſtraine
From the exceſſe of Laughter. Heere he comes.
As he ſhall ſmile, Othells ſhall go mad:
And his vnbookiſh Ielouſie muſt conſerue
Poore Caſſio's ſmiles, geſtures, and light behauiours
Quite in the wrong. How do you Lieutenant?
The worſer, that you giue me the addition,
Whoſe want euen killes me.
Ply Deſdemona well, and you are ſure on't:
Now, if this Suit lay in Bianca's dowre,
How quickely ſhould you ſpeed?
Alas poore Caitiffe.
Looke how he laughes already.
I neuer knew woman loue man ſo.
Alas poore Rogue, I thinke indeed ſhe loues me.
Now he denies it faintly: and laughes it out.
Do you heare Caſſio?
Now he importunes him
To tell it o're: go too, well ſaid, well ſaid.
She giues it out, that you ſhall marry her.
Do you intend it?
Ha, ha, ha.
Do ye triumph, Romaine? do you triumph?
I marry. What? A cuſtomer; prythee beare
Some Charitie to my wit, do not thinke it
So vnwholeſome. Ha, ha, ha.
So, ſo, ſo, ſo: they laugh, that winnes.
Why the cry goes, that you marry her.
Prythee ſay true.
I am a very Villaine elſe.
Haue you ſcoar'd me? Well.
This is the Monkeys owne giuing out:
She is perſwaded I will marry her
Out of her owne loue & flattery, not out of my promiſe.
Iago becomes me: now he begins the ſtory.
She was heere euen now: ſhe haunts me in euery place. I was the other day talking on the Sea-banke with certaine Venetians, and thither comes the Bauble, and falls me thus about my neck.
Crying oh deere Caſſio, as it were: his ieſture imports it.
So hangs, and lolls, and weepes vpon me:
So ſhakes, and pulls me. Ha, ha, ha.
Now he tells how ſhe pluckt him to my Chamber: oh, I ſee that noſe of yours, but not that dogge, I ſhall throw it to.
Well, I muſt leaue her companie.
Before me: looke where ſhe comes.
'Tis ſuch another Fitchew: marry a perfum'd one?
What do you meane by this haunting of me?
Let the diuell, and his dam haunt you: what did you meane by that ſame Handkerchiefe, you gaue me euen now? I was a fine Foole to take it: I muſt take out the worke? A likely piece of worke, that you ſhould finde it in your Chamber, and know not who left it there. This is ſome Minxes token, & I muſt take out the work? There, giue it your Hobbey-horſe, whereſoeuer you had it, Ile take out no worke on't.
How now, my ſweete Bianca?
How now? How now?
By Heauen, that ſhould be my Handkerchiefe.
If you'le come to ſupper to night you may, if you will not, come when you are next prepar'd for.
After her: after her.
I muſt, ſhee'l rayle in the ſtreets elſe.
Will you ſup there?
Yes, I intend ſo.
Well, I may chance to ſee you: for I would very fame ſpeake with you.
Prythee come: will you?
Go too: ſay no more.
How ſhall I murther him, Iago.
Did you perceiue how he laugh'd at his vice?
Oh, Iago.
And did you ſee the Handkerchiefe?
Was that mine?
Yours by this hand: and to ſee how he prizes the fooliſh woman your wife: ſhe gaue it him, and he hath giu'n it his whore.
I would haue him nine yeeres a killing:
A fine woman, a faire woman, a ſweete woman?
Nay, you muſt forget that.
I, let her ot and periſh, and be damn'd to night, for ſhe ſhall not liue. No, my heart is turn'd to ſtone: I ſtrike it, and it hurts my hand. Oh, the world hath not a ſweeter Creature: ſhe might lye by an Emperours ſide, and command him Taskes.
Nay, that's not your way.
Hang her, I do but ſay what ſhe is: ſo delicate with her Needle: an admirable Muſitian. Oh ſhe will ſing the Sauageneſſe out of a Beare: of ſo high and plenteous wit, and inuention?
She's the worſe for all this.
Oh, a thouſand, a thouſand times:
And the of ſo gentle a condition?
I too gentle.
Nay that's certaine:
But yet the pitty of it, Iago: oh Iago, the pitty of it Iago.
If you are ſo fond ouer her iniquitie: giue her pattent to offend, for if it touch not you, it comes neere no body.
I will chop her into Meſſes: Cuckold me?
Oh, 'tis foule in her.
With mine Officer?
That's fouler.
Get me ſome poyſon, Iago, this night. Ile not expoſtulate with her: leaſt her body and beautie vnprouide my mind againe: this night Iago.
Do it not with poyſon, ſtrangle her in her bed,
Euen the bed ſhe hath contaminated.
Good, good:
The Iuſtice of it pleaſes: very good.
And for Caſſio, let me be his vndertaker:
You ſhall heare more by midnight.
Excellent good: What Trumpet is that ſame?
I warrant ſomething from Venice,
'Tis Lodouico, this, comes from the Duke.
See, your wife's with him.
Saue you worthy Generall.
With all my heart Sir.
The Duke, and the Senators of Venice greet you.
I kiſſe the Inſtrument of their pleaſures.
And what's the newes, good cozen Lodouico?
I am very glad to ſee you Signior:
Welcome to Cyprus.
I thanke you: how do's Lieutenant Caſſio?
Liues Sir,
Cozen, there's falne betweene him, & my Lord,
An vnkind breach: but you ſhall make all well.
Are you ſure of that?
My Lord?
This faile you not to do, as you will —
He did not call: he's buſie in the paper,
Is there deuiſion 'twixt my Lord, and Caſſio?
A moſt vnhappy one: I would do much
T' attone them, for the loue I beare to Caſſio.
Fire, and brimeſtone.
My Lord.
Are you wiſe?
What is he angrie?
May be th Letter mou'd him.
For as I thinke, they do command him home,
Deputing Caſsio in his Gouernment.
Truſt me, I am glad on't.
Indeed?
My Lord?
I am glad to ſee you mad.
Why, ſweete Othello?
Diuell.
I haue not deſeru'd this.
My Lord, this would not be beleeu'd in Venice,
Though I ſhould ſweare I ſaw't. 'Tis very much,
Make her amends: ſhe weepes.
Oh diuell, diuell:
If that the Earth could teeme with womans teares,
Each drop ſhe falls, would proue a Crocodile:
Out of my ſight.
I will not ſtay to offend you.
Truely obedient Lady:
I do beſeech your Lordſhip call her backe.
Miſtris.
My Lord.
What would you with her, Sir?
Who I, my Lord?
I, you did wiſh, that I would make her turne:
Sir, ſhe can turne, and turne: and yet go on
And turne againe. And ſhe can weepe, Sir, weepe.
And ſhe's obedient: as you ſay obedient.
Very obedient: proceed you in your teares.
Concerning this Sir, (oh well-painted paſſion)
I am commanded home: get you away:
Ile ſend for you anon. Sir I obey the Mandate,
And will returne to Venice. Hence, auaunt:
Caſſio ſhall haue my Place. And Sir, to night
I do entreat, that we may ſup together.
You are welcome Sir to Cyprus.
Goates, and Monkeys.
Is this the Noble Moore, whom our full Senate
Call all in all ſufficient? Is this the Nature
Whom Paſſion could not ſhake? Whoſe ſolid vertue
The ſhot of Accident, nor dart of Chance
Could neither graze, nor pierce?
He is much chang'd.
Are his wits ſafe? Is he not light of Braine?
He's that he is: I may not breath my cenſure.
What he might be: if what he might, he is not,
I would to heauen he were.
What? Strike his wife?
'Faith that was not ſo well: yet would I knew
That ſtroke would proue the worſt.
Is it his vſe?
Or did the Letters, worke vpon his blood,
And new create his fault?
Alas, alas:
It is not honeſtie in me to ſpeake
What I haue ſeene, and knowne. You ſhall obſerue him,
And his owne courſes will deonte him ſo,
That I may ſaue my ſpeech: do but go after
And marke how he continues.
I am ſorry that I am deceiu'd in him.
You haue ſeene nothing then?
Nor euer heard: nor euer did ſuſpect.
Yes; you haue ſeene Caſſio, and ſhe together.
But then I ſaw no harme: and then I heard,
Each ſyllable that breath made vp betweene them.
What? Did they neuer whiſper?
Neuer my Lord.
Nor ſend you out o' th' way?
Neuer.
To fetch her Fan, her Gloues, her Mask, nor nothing?
Neuer my Lord.
That's ſtrange.
I durſt (my Lord) to wager, ſhe is honeſt:
Lay downe my Soule at ſtake: If you thinke other,
Remoue your thought. It doth abuſe your boſome:
If any wretch haue put this in your head,
Let Heauen requit it with the Serpents curſe,
For if ſhe be not honeſt, chaſte, and true,
There's no man happy. The pureſt of their Wiues
Is foule as Slander.
Bid her come hither: go.
She ſaies enough: yet ſhe's a ſimple Baud
That cannot ſay as much. This is a ſubtile Whore:
A Cloſſet Locke and Key of Villanous Secrets,
And yet ſhe'le kneele, and pray: I haue ſeene her do't.
My Lord, what is your will?
Pray you Chucke come hither.
What is your pleaſure?
Let me ſee your eyes: looke in my face.
What horrible Fancie's this?
Some of your Function Miſtris:
Leaue Procreants alone, and ſhut the doore:
Cough, or cry hem; if any body come:
Your Myſtery, your Myſtery: May diſpatch.
Vpon my knee, what doth your ſpeech import▪
I vnderſtand a Fury in your words.
Why? What art thou?
Your wife my Lord: your true and loyall wife.
Come ſweare it: damne thy ſelfe, leaſt being like one of Heauen, the diuells themſelues ſhould feare to ceaze thee. Therefore be double damn'd: ſweare thou art honeſt.
Heauen doth truely know it.
Heauen truely knowes, that thou art falſe as hell.
To whom my Lord?
With whom? How am I falſe?
Ah Deſdemon, away, away, away.
Alas the heauy day: why do you weepe?
Am I the motiue of theſe teares my Lord?
If happely you my Father do ſuſpect,
An Inſtrument of this your calling backe,
Lay not your blame on me: if you haue loſt him,
I haue loſt him too.
Hadt pleas'd Heauen,
To try me with Affliction, had they rain'd
All kind of Sores, and Shames on my bare-head:
Steep'd me in pouertie to the very lippes,
Giuen to Captiuitie, me, and my vtmoſt hopes,
I ſhould haue found in ſome place of my Soule
A drop of patience. But alas, to make me
The fixed Figure for the time of Scorne,
To point his ſlow, and mouing finger at.
Yet could I beare that too, well, very well:
But there where I haue garnerd vp my heart,
Where either I muſt liue, or beare no life,
The Fountaine from the which my currant runnes,
Or elſe dries vp: to be diſcarded thence,
Or keepe it as a Ceſterne, for foule Toades
To knot and gender in. Turne thy complexion there:
Patience, thou young and Roſe-lip'd Cherubin,
I heere looke grim as hell.
I hope my Noble Lord eſteemes me honeſt.
Oh I, as Sommer Flyes are in the Shambles,
That quicken euen with blowing. Oh thou weed:
Who art ſo louely faire, and ſmell'ſt ſo ſweete,
That the Senſe akes at thee,
Would thou had'ſt neuer bin borne.
Alas, what ignorant ſin haue I committed?
Was this faire Paper? This moſt goodly Booke
Made to write Whore vpon? What commited,
Committed? Oh, thou publicke Commoner,
I ſhould make very Forges of my cheekes,
That would to Cynders burne vp Modeſtie,
Did I but ſpeake thy deedes. What commited?
Heauen ſtoppes the Noſe at it, and the Moone winks:
The baudy winde that kiſſes all it meetes,
Is huſh'd within the hollow Myne of Earth
And will not hear't. What commited?
By Heauen you do me wrong.
Are not you a Strumpet?
No, as I am a Chriſtian.
If to preſerue this veſſell for my Lord,
From any other foule vnlawfull touch
Be not to be a Strumpet, I am none.
What, not a Whore?
No, as I ſhall be ſau'd.
Is't poſſible?
Oh Heauen forgiue vs.
I cry you mercy then.
I tooke you for that cunning Whore of Venice,
That married with Othello. You Miſtris,
That haue the office oppoſite to Saint Peter,
And keepes the gate of hell. You, you: I you.
We haue done our courſe: there's money for your paines:
I pray you turne the key, and keepe our counſaile.
Alas, what do' this Gentleman conceiue?
How do you Madam? how do you my good Lady?
Faith, halfe a ſleepe.
Good Madam,
What's the matter with my Lord?
With who?
Why, with my Lord, Madam?
Who is thy Lord?
He that is yours, ſweet Lady.
I haue none: do not talke to me, Aemilia,
I cannot weepe: nor anſweres haue I none,
But what ſhould go by water. Prythee to night,
Lay on my bed my wedding ſheetes, remember,
And call thy husband hither.
Heere's a change indeed.
'Tis meete I ſhould be vs'd ſo: very meete.
How haue I bin behau'd, that he might ſticke
The ſmall'ſt opinion on my leaſt miſvſe?
What is your pleaſure Madam?
How is't with you?
I cannot tell: thoſe that do teach yong Babes
Do it with gentle meanes, and eaſie taskes.
He might haue chid me ſo: for in good faith
I am a Child to chiding.
What is the matter Lady?
Alas (Iago) my Lord hath ſo bewhor'd her,
Throwne ſuch diſpight, and heauy termes vpon her
That true hears cannot beare it.
Am I that name, Iago?
What name (faire Lady?)
Such as ſhe ſaid my Lord did ſay I was.
He call'd her whore: a Begger in his drinke:
Could not haue laid ſuch termes vpon his Callet.
Why did he ſo?
I do not know: I am ſure I am none ſuch.
Do not weepe, do not weepe: alas the day.
Hath ſhe forſooke ſo many Noble Matches?
Her Father? And her Country? And her Friends?
To be call'd Whore? Would it not make one weepe?
It is my wretched Fortune.
Beſhrew him for't:
How comes this Tricke vpon him?
Nay, Heauen doth know.
I will be hang'd, if ſome eternall Villaine,
Some buſie and inſinuating Rogue,
Some cogging, cozening Slaue, to get ſome Office,
Haue not deuis'd this Slander: I will be hang'd elſe.
Fie, there is no ſuch man: it is impoſſible.
If any ſuch there be, Heauen pardon him.
A halter pardon him:
And hell gnaw his bones.
Why ſhould he call her Whore?
Who keepes her companie?
What Place? What Time?
What Forme? What liklyhood?
The Moore's abus'd by ſome moſt villanous Knaue,
Some baſe notorious Knaue, ſome ſcuruy Fellow.
Oh Heauens, that ſuch companions thou'd'ſt vnfold,
And put in euery honeſt hand a whip
To laſh the Raſcalls naked through the world,
Euen from the Eaſt to th' Weſt.
Speake within doore.
Oh fie vpon them: ſome ſuch Squire he was
That turn'd your wit, the ſeamy-ſide without,
And made you to ſuſpect me with the Moore.
You are a Foole: go too.
Alas Iago,
What ſhall I do to win my Lord againe?
Good Friend, go to him: for by this light of Heauen,
I know not how I loſt him. Heere I kneele:
If ere my will did treſpaſſe 'gainſt his Loue,
Either in diſcourſe of thought, or actuall deed,
Or that mine Eyes, mine Eares, or any Sence
Delighted them: or any other Forme.
Or that I do not yet, and euer did,
And euer will, (though he do ſhake me off
To beggerly diuorcement) Loue him deerely,
Comfort forſweare me. Vnkindneſſe may do much,
And his vnkindneſſe may defeat my life,
But neuer taynt my Loue. I cannot ſay Whore,
It do's abhorre me now I ſpeake the word,
To do the Act, that might the addition earne,
Not the worlds Maſſe of vanitie could make me.
I pray you be content: 'tis but his humour:
The buſineſſe of the State do's him offence.
If 'twere no other.
It is but ſo, I warrant,
Hearke how theſe Inſtruments ſummon to ſupper:
The Meſſengers of Venice ſtaies the meate,
Go in, and weepe not: all things ſhall be well.
How now Rodorigo?
I do not finde
That thou deal'ſt iuſtly with me.
What in the contrarie?
Euery day thou dafts me with ſome deuiſe Iago, and rather, as it ſeemes to me now, keep'ſt from me all conueniencie, then ſupplieſt me with the leaſt aduantage of hope: I will indeed no longer endure it. Nor am I yet perſwaded to put vp in peace, what already I haue fooliſhly ſuffred.
Will you heare me Rodorigo?
I haue heard too much: and your words and Performances are no kin together.
You charge me moſt vniuſtly.
With naught but truth: I haue waſted my ſelfe out of my meanes. The Iewels you haue had from me to deliuer Deſdemona, would halfe haue corrupted a Votariſt. You haue told me ſhe hath receiu'd them, and return'd me expectations and comforts of ſodaine reſpect, and acquaintance, but I finde none.
Well, go too: very well.
Very well▪ go too: I cannot go too, (man) nor tis not very well. Nay I think it is ſcuruy: and begin to finde my ſelfe fopt in it.
Very well.
I tell you, 'tis not very well: I will make my ſelfe knowne to Deſdemona. If ſhe will returne me my Iewels, I will giue ouer my Suit, and repent my vnlawfull ſolicitation. If not, aſſure your ſelfe, I will ſeeke ſatisfaction of you.
You haue ſaid now.
I: and ſaid nothing but what I proteſt intendment of doing.
Why, now I ſee there's mettle in thee: and euen from this inſtant do build on thee a better opinion then euer before: giue me thy and Rodorigo. Thou haſt taken againſt me a moſt iuſt exception: but yet I proteſt I haue dealt moſt directly in thy Affaire.
It hath not appeer'd.
I grant indeed it hath not appeer'd: and your ſuſpition is not without wit and iudgement. But Rodorigo, if thou haſt that in thee indeed, which I haue greater reaſon to▪ beleeue now then euer (I meane purpoſe, Courage, and Valour) this night ſhew it. If thou the next night following enioy not Deſdemona, take me from this world with Treacherie, and deuiſe Engines for my life.
Well: what is it? Is it within, reaſon and compaſſe?
Sir, there is eſpeciall Commiſſion come from Venice to depute Caſſio in Othello's place.
Is that true? Why then Othello and Deſdemona returne againe to Venice.
Oh no: he goes into Mauritania and taketh away with him the faire Deſdemona, vnleſſe his abode be lingred heere by ſome accident. Wherein none can be ſo determinate, as the remouing of Caſſio.
How do you meane remouing him?
Why, by making him vncapable of Othello's place: knocking out his braines.
And that you would haue me to do.
I: if you dare do your ſelfe a profit, and a right. He ſups to night with a Harlotry: and thither will I go to him. He knowes not yet of his Honourable Fortune, if you will watch his going thence (which I will faſhion to fall out betweene twelue and one) you may take him at your pleaſure. I will be neere to ſecond your Attempt, and he ſhall fall betweene vs. Come, ſtand not amaz'd at it, but go along with me: I will ſhew you ſuch a neceſſitie in his death, that you ſhall thinke your ſelfe bound to put it on him. It is now high ſupper time: and the night growes to waſt. About it.
I will heare further reaſon for this.
And you ſhalbe ſatisfi'd.
I do beſeech you Sir, trouble your ſelfe no further.
Oh pardon me: 'twill do me good to walke.
Madam, good night: I humbly thanke your Ladyſhip.
Your Honour is moſt welcome.
Will you walke Sir? Oh Deſdemona.
My Lord.
Get you to bed on th' inſtant, I will be return'd forth with: diſmiſſe your Attendant there: look't be done.
I will my Lord.
How goes it now? He lookes gentler then he did.
He ſaies he will returne incontinent,
And hath commanded me to go to bed,
And bid me to diſmiſſe you.
Diſmiſſe me?
It was his bidding: therefore good Aemilia,
Giue me my nightly wearing▪ and adieu.
We muſt not now diſpleaſe him.
I, would you had neuer ſeene him.
So would not I: my loue doth ſo approue him,
That euen his ſtubborneſſe, his checks, his frownes,
(Prythee vn-pin me) haue grace and fauour.
I haue laid thoſe Sheetes you bad me on the bed.
All's one: good Father, how fooliſh are our minds?
If I do die before, prythee ſhrow'd me
In one of theſe ſame Sheetes.
Come, come: you talke.
My Mother had a Maid call'd Barbarie,
She was in loue: and he ſhe lou'd prou'd mad,
And did forſake her. She had a Song of Willough,
An old thing 'twas: but it expreſs'd her Fortune,
And ſhe dy'd ſinging it. That Song to night,
Will not go from my mind: I haue much to do,
But to go hang my head all at one ſide
And ſing it like poore Brabarie: prythee diſpatch.
Shall I go fetch your Night-gowne?
No▪ va-pin me here,
This Lodouico is a proper man.
A very handſome man.
He ſpeakes well.
I know a Lady in Venice would haue walk'd barefoot to Paleſtine for a touch of his nether lip.
The poore Soule ſat ſinging, by a Sicamour tree.
Sing all a greene Willough:
Her hand on her boſome her head on her knee,
Sing Willough, Willough, Willough.
The freſh Streames ran by her, and murmur'd her moanes
Sing Willough, &c.
Her ſalt teares fell from her, and ſoftned the ſtones,
Sing Willough, &c. (Lay by theſe)
Willough, Willough. (Prythee high thee: he'le come anon)
Sing all a greene Willough muſt be my Garland.
Let no body blame him, his ſcorne I approue.
(Nay that's not next. Harke, who is't that knocks?
It's the wind.
I call'd my Loue falſe Loue: but what ſaid he then?
Sing Willough, &c.
If I court mo women, you'le couch with mo men.
So get thee gone, good night: mine eyes do itch:
Doth that boade weeping?
'Tis neyther heere, nor there.
I haue heard it ſaid ſo. O theſe Men, theſe men!
Do'ſt thou in conſcience thinke (tell me Aemilia)
That there be women do abuſe their husbands
In ſuch groſſe kinde?
There be ſome ſuch, no queſtion.
Would'ſt thou do ſuch a deed for all the world?
Why, would not you?
No, by this Heauenly light.
Nor I neither, by this Heauenly light:
I might doo't as well i' th' darke.
Would'ſt thou do ſuch a deed for al the world?
The world's a huge thing:
It is a great price, for a ſmall vice.
Introth, I thinke thou would'ſt not.
Introth I thinke I ſhould, and vndoo't when I had done. Marry, I would not doe ſuch a thing for a ioynt Ring, nor for meaſures of Lawne, nor for Gownes, Petticoats, nor Caps, nor any petty exhibition. But for all the whole world: why, who would not make her husband a Cuckold, to make him a Monarch? I ſhould venture Purgatory for't.
Beſhrew me, if I would do ſuch a wrong
For the whole world.
Why, the wrong is but a wrong i' th' world; and hauing the world for your labour, 'tis a wrong in your owne world, and you might quickly make it right.
I do not thinke there is any ſuch woman.
Yes, a dozen: and as many to' th' vantage, as would ſtore the world they plaid for.
But I do thinke it is their Husbands faults
If Wiues do fall: (Say, that they ſlacke their duties,
And powre our Treaſures into forraigne laps;
Or elſe breake out in peeuiſh Iealouſies,
Throwing reſtraint vpon vs: Or ſay they ſtrike vs,
Or ſcant our former hauing in deſpight)
Why we haue galles: and though we haue ſome Grace,
Yet haue we ſome Reuenge. Let Husbands know,
Their wiues haue ſenſe like them: They ſee, and ſmell,
And haue their Palats both for ſweet, and ſowre,
As Husbands haue. What is it that they do,
When they change vs for others? Is it Sport?
I thinke it is: and doth Affection breed it?
I thinke it doth. Is't Frailty that thus erres?
It is ſo too. And haue not we Affections?
Deſires for Sport? and Frailty, as men haue?
Then let them vſe vs well: elſe let them know,
The illes we do, their illes inſtruct vs ſo.
Good night, good night:
Heauen me ſuch vſes ſend,
Not to picke bad, from bad; but by bad, mend.
Heere, ſtand behinde this Barke,
Straight will he come:
Weare thy good Rapier bare, and put it home:
Quicke, quicke, feare nothing; Ile be at thy Elbow,
It makes vs, or it marres vs, thinke on that,
And fixe moſt firme thy Reſolution.
Be neere at hand, I may miſcarry in't.
Heere, at thy hand: Be bold, & take thy ſtand.
I haue no great deuotion to the deed,
And yet he hath giuen me ſatisfying Reaſons:
'Tis but a man gone. Forth my Sword: he dies.
I haue rub'd this yong Qat almoſt to the ſenſe,
And he growes angry. Now, whether he kill Caſſio,
Or Caſſio him, or each do kill the other,
Euery way makes my gaine. Liue Rodorigo,
He calles me to a reſtitution large
Of Gold, and Iewels, that I bob'd from him,
As Guifts to Deſdemona.
It muſt not be: If Caſſio do remaine,
He hath a dayly beauty in his life,
That makes me vgly: and beſides, the Moore
May vnfold me to him: there ſtand I in much perill:
No, he muſt dye. But ſo, I heard him comming.
I know his gate, 'tis he: Villaine thou dyeſt.
That thruſt had beene mine enemy indeed,
But that my Coate is better then thou know'ſt:
I will make proofe of thine.
Oh, I am ſlaine.
I am maym'd for euer:
Helpe hoa: Murther, murther.
The voyce of Caſſio▪ Iago keepes his word.
O Villaine that I am.
It is euen ſo.
Oh helpe hoa: Light, a Surgeon.
'Tis he: O braue Iago, honeſt, and iuſt,
That haſt ſuch Noble ſenſe of thy Friends wrong,
Thou teacheſt me. Minion, your deere lyes dead,
And your vnbleſt Fate highes: Strumpet I come:
For of my heart, thoſe Charmes thine Eyes, are blotted.
Thy Bed luſt-ſtain'd, ſhall with Luſts blood bee ſpotted.
What hoa? no Watch? No paſſage?
Murther, Murther.
'Tis ſome miſchance, the voyce is very direfull.
Oh helpe.
Hearke.
Oh wretched Villaine.
Two or three groane. 'Tis heauy night;
Theſe may be counterfeits: Let's think't vnſafe
To come into the cry, without more helpe.
Nobody come: then ſhall I bleed to death.
Hearke.
Here's one comes in his ſhirt, with Light, and Weapons.
Who's there?
Who's noyſe is this that cries on murther?
We do not know.
Do not you heare a cry?
Heere, heere: for heauen ſake helpe me.
What's the matter?
This is Othello's Ancient, as I take it.
The ſame indeede, a very valiant Fellow.
What are you heere, that cry ſo greeuouſly?
Iago? Oh I am ſpoyl'd, vndone by Villaines:
Giue me ſome helpe.
O mee, Lieutenant!
What Villaines haue done this?
I thinke that one of them is heereabout▪
And cannot make away.
Oh treacherous Villaines:
What are you there? Come in, and giue ſome helpe.
O helpe me there.
That's one of them.
Oh murd'rous Slaue! O Villaine!
O damn'd Iago! O inhumane Dogge▪
Kill men i' th' darke?
Where be theſe bloody Theeues?
How ſilent is this Towne? Hoa, murther, murther.
What may you be? Are you of good, or euill?
As you ſhall proue vs, praiſe vs.
Signior Lodouico?
He Sir.
I cry you mercy: here's Caſſio hurt by Villaines.
Caſſio?
How is't Brother?
My Legge is cut in two.
Marry heauen forbid:
Light Gentlemen, Ile binde it with my ſhirt.
What is the matter hoa? Who is't that cry'd?
Who is't that cry'd?
Oh my deere Caſſio,
My ſweet Caſſio: Oh Caſſio, Caſſio, Caſſio.
O notable Strumpet. Caſſio, may you ſuſpect
Who they ſhould be, that haue thus mangled you?
No.
I am ſorry to finde you thus;
I haue beene to ſeeke you.
Lend me a Garter. So:—Oh for a Chaire
To beare him eaſily hence.
Alas he faints. Oh Caſſio, Caſſio, Caſſio.
Gentlemen all, I do ſuſpect this Traſh
To be a party in this Iniurie.
Patience a while, good Caſſio. Come, come;
Lend me a Light: know we this face, or no?
Alas my Friend, and my deere Countryman
Rodorigo? No: Yes ſure: Yes, 'tis Rodorigo.
What, of Venice?
Euen he Sir: Did you know him?
Know him? I.
Signior Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon:
Theſe bloody accidents muſt excuſe my Manners,
That ſo neglected you.
I am glad to ſee you.
How do you Caſſio? Oh▪ a Chaire, a Chaire.
Rodorigo?
He, he, 'tis he:
Oh that's well ſaid, the Chaire.
Some good man beare him carefully from hence,
Ile fetch the Generall's Surgeon. For you Miſtris,
Saue you your labour. He that lies ſlaine heere (Caſſio)
Was my deere friend. What malice was between you?
None in the world: nor do I know the man?
What? looke you pale? Oh beare him o' th' Ayre.
Stay you good Gentlemen. Looke you pale, Miſtris?
Do you perceiue the gaſtneſſe of her eye?
Nay, if you ſtare, we ſhall heare more anon.
Behold her well: I pray you looke vpon her:
Do you ſee Gentlemen? Nay, guiltineſſe will ſpeake
Though tongues were out of vſe.
Alas, what is the matter?
What is the matter, Husband?
Caſſio hath heere bin ſet on in the darke
By Rodorigo, and Fellowes that are ſcap'd:
He's almoſt ſlaine, and Rodorigo quite dead.
Alas good Gentleman: alas good Caſsio.
This is the fruits of whoring. Prythe Aemilia,
Go know of Caſſio where he ſupt to night.
What, do you ſhake at that?
He ſupt at my houſe, but I therefore ſhake not.
O did he ſo? I charge you go with me.
Oh fie vpon thee Strumpet.
I am no Strumpet, but of life as honeſt,
As you that thus abuſe me.
As I? Fie vpon thee.
Kinde Gentlemen:
Let's go ſee poore Caſſio dreſt.
Come Miſtris, you muſt tel's another Tale.
Aemilia, run you to the Cittadell,
And tell my Lord and Lady, what hath happ'd:
Will you go on afore? This is the night
That either makes me, or foredoes me quight.
It is the Cauſe, it is the Cauſe (my Soule)
Let me not name it to you, you chaſte Starres,
It is the Cauſe. Yet Ile not ſhed her blood,
Nor ſcarre that whiter skin of hers, then Snow▪
And ſmooth as Monumentall Alablaſter:
Yet ſhe muſt dye, elſe ſhee'l betray more men:
Put out the Light, and then put out the Light:
If I quench thee, thou flaming Miniſter,
I can againe thy former light reſtore,
Should I repent me. But once put out thy Light,
Thou cunning'ſt Patterne of excelling Nature,
I know not where is that Promethae heate
That can thy Light re-Lume.
When I haue pluck'd thy Roſe,
I cannot giue it vitall growth againe,
It needs muſt wither. Ile ſmell thee on the Tree.
Oh Balmy breath, that doſt almoſt perſwade
Iuſtice to breake her Sword. One more, one more:
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
And loue thee after. One more, and that's the laſt.
So ſweet, was ne're ſo fatall. I muſt weepe,
But they are cruell Teares: This ſorrow's heauenly,
It ſtrikes, where it doth loue. She wakes.
Who's there? Othello?
I Deſdemona.
Will you come to bed, my Lord?
Haue you pray'd to night, Deſdemon?
I my Lord.
If you bethinke your ſelfe of any Crime
Vnreconcil'd as yet to Heauen, and Grace,
Solicite for it ſtraight.
Alacke, my Lord,
What may you meane by that?
Well, do it, and be breefe, I will walke by:
I would not kill thy vnprepared Spirit,
No, Heauens fore-fend) I would not kill thy Soule.
Talke you of killing?
I, I do.
Then Heauen haue mercy on mee.
Amen, with all my heart.
If you ſay, I hope you will not kill me.
Humh.
And yet I feare you: for you're fatall then
When your eyes rowle ſo.
Why I ſhould feare, I know not,
Since guiltineſſe I know not: But yet I feele I feare.
Thinke on thy ſinnes.
They are Loue I beare to you.
I, and for that thou dy'ſt.
That death's vnnaturall, that kils for louing.
Alas, why gnaw you ſo your nether-lip?
Some bloody paſſion ſhakes your very Frame:
Theſe are portent: but yet I hope, I hope,
They do not point on me.
Peace, and be ſtill.
I will ſo: What's the matter?
That Handkerchiefe
Which I ſo lou'd, and gaue thee, thou gau'ſt to Caſſio.
No by my Life, and Soule: ſend for the man,
And aske him.
Sweet Soule, take heed, take heed of Periury,
Thou art on thy death-bed.
I, but not yet to dye.
Preſently.
Therefore confeſſe thee freely of thy ſinne:
For to deny each Article with Oath,
Cannot remoue, nor choake the ſtrong Conception
That I do grone withall. Thou art to dye.
O Heauen haue mercy on me.
I ſay, Amen.
And haue you mercy too. I neuer did
Offend you in my life: neuer lou'd Caſſio,
But with ſuch generall warrantie of Heauen,
As I might loue. I neuer gaue him Token.
By Heauen I ſaw my Handkerchiefe in's hand.
O periur'd woman, thou do'ſt ſtone my heart,
And makes me call, what I intend to do,
A Murther, which I thought a Sacrifice.
I ſaw the Handkerchiefe.
He found it then:
I neuer gaue it him: Send, for him hither:
Let him confeſſe a truth.
He hath confeſt.
What, my Lord?
That he hath vs'd thee.
How? vnlawfully?
I.
He will not ſay ſo.
No: his mouth is ſtopp'd:
Honeſt Iago hath 'tane order for't.
Oh, my feare interprets. What is he dead?
Had all his haires bin liues, my great Reuenge
Had ſtomacke for them all.
Alas, he is betray'd, and I vndone.
Out Strumpet: weep'ſt thou for him to my face?
O baniſh me, my Lord, but kill me not.
Downe Strumpet.
Kill me to morrow, let me liue to night.
Nay, if you ſtriue.
But halfe an houre.
Being done, there is no pawſe.
But while I ſay one prayer.
It is too late.
My Lord, my Lord? What hoa?
My Lord, my Lord.
What noiſe is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead?
I that am cruell, am yet mercifull,
I would not haue thee linger in thy paine?
So, ſo.
What hoa? my Lord, my Lord?
Who's there?
Oh good my Lord, I would ſpeake a word with you.
Yes: 'Tis Aemilia: by and by. Shee's dead.
'Tis like ſhe comes to ſpeake of Caſſio's death:
The noiſe was high. Hah, no more moouing?
Still as the Graue. Shall he come in? Wer't good?
I thinke ſhe ſtirres againe. No, what's beſt to do?
If ſhe come in, ſhee'l ſure ſpeake to my wife:
My wife, my wife: what wife? I haue no wife.
Oh inſupportable! Oh heauy houre!
Me thinkes, it ſhould be now a huge Eclipſe
Of Sunne, and Moone; and that th' affrighted Globe
Did yawne at Alteration.
I do beſeech you
That I may ſpeake with you. Oh good my Lord.
I had forgot thee: oh come in Aemilia.
Soft, by and by, let me the Curtaines draw.
Where art thou? What's the matter with thee now?
Oh my good Lord, yonders foule Murthers done.
What? now?
But now, my Lord.
It is the very error of the Moone,
She comes more neerer Earth then ſhe was wont,
And makes men mad.
Caſſio, my Lord, hath kill'd
A young Venetian, call'd Rodorigo.
Rodorigo kill'd? and Caſſio kill'd?
No▪ Caſſio is not kill'd.
Not Caſſio kill'd? Then Murther's out of tune,
And ſweet Reuenge growes harſh.
O falſely, falſely murder'd.
Alas! what cry is that?
That? What?
Out, and alas, that was my Ladies voice.
Helpe, helpe hoa, helpe. Oh Ladie ſpeake againe,
Sweet Deſdemona, oh ſweet Miſtris, ſpeake.
A guiltleſſe death, I dye.
Oh who hath done this deed?
No body: I my ſelfe, farewell:
Commend me to my kinde Lord: oh farewell.
Why, how ſhould ſhe be murdred?
Alas: who knowes?
You heare her ſay her ſelfe, it was not I.
She ſaid ſo: I muſt needs report the truth.
She's like a Liar gone to burning hell,
'Twas I that kill'd her.
Oh the more Angell ſhe, and you the blacker Diuell.
She turn'd to folly: and ſhe was a whore.
Thou do'ſt bely her, and thou art a diuell.
She wa falſe as water.
Thou at raſh as fire, to ſay
That ſhe was falſe. Oh ſhe was heauenly true.
Caſſio did top her: Ask thy husband elſe.
O, I were damn'd beneath all depth in hell:
But that I did proceed vpon iuſt grounds
To this extremity. Thy Husband knew it all.
My Husband?
Thy Husband.
That ſhe was falſe to Wedlocke?
I, with Caſſio: had ſhe bin true,
If Heauen would make me ſuch another world,
Of one entyre and perfect Chryſolite,
I'ld not haue ſold her for it.
My Husband?
I, 'twas he that told me on her firſt,
An honeſt man he is, and hates the ſlime
That ſtickes on filthy deeds.
My Husband?
What needs this itterance, Woman?
I ſay, thy Husband.
Oh Miſtris,
Villany hath made mockes with loue:
My Husband ſay ſhe was falſe?
He, Woman;
I ſay thy Husband: Do'ſt vnderſtand the word?
My Friend, thy Husband; honeſt, honeſt Iago.
If he ſay ſo, may his pernicious Soule
Rot halfe a graine a day: he lyes to' th' heart,
She was too fond of her moſt filthy Bargaine.
Hah?
Do thy worſt:
This deede of thine is no more worthy Heauen,
Then thou was't worthy her.
Peace, you were beſt.
Thou haſt not halfe that powre to do me harm,
As I haue to be hurt. Oh Gull, oh dolt,
As ignorant as durt: thou haſt done a deed
(I care not for thy Sword) Ile make thee known,
Though I loſt twenty liues. Helpe, helpe, hoa, helpe:
The Moore hath kill'd my Miſtris. Murther, murther.
What is the matter? How now Generall?
Oh, are you come, Iago: you haue done well,
That men muſt lay their Murthers on your necke.
What is the matter?
Diſproue this Villaine, if thou bee'ſt a man:
He ſayes, thou told'ſt him that his wife was falſe:
I know thou did'ſt not: thou'rt not ſuch a Villain.
Speake, for my heart is full.
I told him what I thought,
And told no more
Then what he found himſelfe was apt, and true.
But did you euer tell him,
She was falſe?
I did.
You old a Lye an odious damned Lye:
Vpon my Soule, a Lye; a wicked Lye.
Shee falſe with Caſſio?
Did you ſay with Caſſio?
With Caſſio, Miſtris?
Go too, charme your tongue.
I will not charme my Tongue;
I am bound to ſpeake,
My Miſtris heere lyes murthered in her bed.
Oh Heauens, foreſend.
And your reports haue ſet the Murder on.
Nay ſtare not Maſters,
It is true indeede.
'Tis a ſtrange Truth.
O monſtrous Acte.
Villany, villany, villany:
I thinke vpon't, I thinke: I ſmel't: O Villany:
I thought ſo then: Ile kill my ſelfe for greefe.
O villany! villany!
What, are you mad?
I charge you get you home.
Good Gentlemen, let me haue leaue to ſpeake:
'Tis proper I obey him; but not now:
Perchance Iago, I will ne're go home.
Oh, oh, oh.
Nay, lay thee downe, and roare:
For thou haſt kill'd the ſweeteſt innocent,
That ere did lift vp eye.
Oh ſhe was fowle!
I ſcarſe did know you Vnkle, there lies your Neece,
Whoſe breath (indeed) theſe hands haue newly ſtopp'd:
I know this acte ſhewes horrible and grim.
Poore Deſdemon:
I am glad thy Father's dead,
Thy Match was mortall to him: and pure greefe
Shore his old thred in twaine. Did he liue now,
This ſight would make him do a deſperate turne:
Yea, curſe his better Angell from his ſide,
And fall to Reprobance.
'Tis pittifull: but yet Iago knowes
That ſhe with Caſſio, hath the Act of ſhame▪
A thouſand times committed. Caſſio confeſt it,
And ſhe did gratifie his amorous workes
With that Recognizance and pledge of Loue
Which I firſt gaue her: I ſaw it in his hand:
It was a Handkerchiefe, an Antique Token
My Father gaue my Mother.
Oh Heauen! oh heauenly Powres!
Come, hold your peace.
'Twill out, 'twill out▪ I peace?
No, I will ſpeake as liberall as the North;
Let Heauen, and Men, and Diuels, let them all,
All, all, crie ſhame againſt me, yet Ile ſpeake.
Be wiſe, and get you home.
I will not.
Fye, your Sword vpon a Woman.
Oh thou dull Moore,
That Handkerchiefe thou ſpeak'ſt of
I found by Fortune, and did giue my Husband:
For often, with a ſolemne earneſtneſſe,
(More then indeed belong'd to ſuch a Trifle)
He begg'd of me, to ſteale't.
Villanous Whore.
She giue it Caſſio? No, alas I found it,
And I did giu't my Husband.
Filth, thou lyeſt.
By Heauen I do not, I do not Gentlemen:
Oh murd'rous Coxcombe, what ſhould ſuch a Foole
Do with ſo good a wife?
Are there no ſtones in Heauen,
But what ſerues for the Thunder?
Precious Villaine.
The woman falles:
Sure he hath kill'd his Wife.
I, I: oh lay me by my Miſtris ſide.
Hee's gone, but his wife's kill'd.
'Tis a notorious Villain: take you this weapon
Which I haue recouer'd from the Moore:
Come guard the doore without, let him not paſſe,
But kill him rather. Ile after that ſame villaine,
For 'tis a damned Slaue.
I am not valiant neither:
But euery Punie whipſter gets my Sword.
But why ſhould Honor out-liue Honeſty?
Let it go all.
What did thy Song boad Lady?
Hearke, canſt thou heare me? I will play the Swan,
And dye in Muſicke: Willough, Willough, Willough.
Moore, ſhe was chaſte: She lou'd thee, cruell Moore,
So come my Soule to bliſſe, as I ſpeake true:
So ſpeaking as I thinke, alas, I dye.
I haue another weapon in this Chamber,
It was a Sword of Spaine, the Ice brookes temper:
Oh heere it is: Vnkle I muſt come forth.
If thou attempt it, it will coſt thee deere;
Thou haſt no weapon, and perforce muſt ſuffer.
Looke in vpon me then, and ſpeake with me,
Or naked as I am I will aſſault thee.
What is the matter?
Behold, I haue a weapon:
A better neuer did it ſelfe ſuſtaine
Vpon a Soldiers Thigh. I haue ſeene the day,
That with this little Arme, and this good Sword,
I haue made my way through more impediments
Then twenty times your ſtop. But (oh vaine boaſt)
Who can controll his Fate? 'Tis not ſo now.
Be not affraid, though you do ſee me weapon'd:
Heere is my iournies end, heere is my butt
And verie Sea-marke of my vtmoſt Saile.
Do you go backe diſmaid? 'Tis a loſt feare:
Man but a Ruſh againſt Othello's breſt,
And he retires. Where ſhould Othello go?
Now: how doſt thou looke now? Oh ill-Starr'd wench,
Pale as thy Smocke: when we ſhall meete at compt,
This looke of thine will hurle my Soule from Heauen,
And Fiends will ſnatch at it. Cold, cold, my Girle?
Euen like thy Chaſtity. O curſed, curſed Slaue!
Whip me ye Diuels,
From the poſſeſſion of this Heauenly ſight:
Blow me about in windes, roaſt me in Sulphure,
Waſh me in ſteepe-downe gulfes of Liquid fire.
Oh Deſdemon! dead Deſdemon: dead. Oh, oh!
Where is this raſh, and moſt vnfortunate man?
That's he that was Othello: heere I am.
Where is that Viper?
Bring the Villaine forth.
I look down towards his feet; but that's a Fable,
If that thou bee'ſt a Diuell, I cannot kill thee.
Wrench his Sword from him.
I bleed Sir, but not kill'd.
I am not ſorry neither, Il'd haue thee liue:
For in my ſenſe, 'tis happineſſe to die.
Oh thou Othello, that was once ſo good,
Falne in the practiſe of a curſed Slaue,
What ſhall be ſaide to thee.
Why any thing:
An honourable Murderer, if you will:
For nought I did in hate, but all in Honour.
This wretch hath part confeſt his Villany:
Did you and he conſent in Caſſio's death.
I.
Deere Generall, I neuer gaue you cauſe.
I do beleeue it, and I aske your pardon:
Will you, I pray, demand that demy-Diuell,
Why he hath thus enſnar'd my Soule and Body.
Demand me nothing: what you know, you know:
From this time forth, I neuer will ſpeake word.
What? not to pray?
Torments will ope your lips.
Well, thou doſt beſt.
Sir,
You ſhall vnderſtand what hath befalne,
(Which, as I thinke, you know not) heere is a Letter
Found in the pocket of the ſlaine Rodorigo,
And heere another, the one of them imports
The death of Caſſio, to be vndertooke
By Rodorigo.
O Villaine!
Moſt Heatheniſh, and moſt groſſe.
Now, heere's another diſcontented paper
Found in his pocket too: and this it ſeemes
Rodorigo meant t' haue ſent this damned villaine:
But that (belike) Iago in the interim
Came in, and ſatisfi'd him.
Oh thou pernitious Caitiffe;
How came you (Caſſio) by that Handkerchiefe
That was my wiues?
I found it in my Chamber:
And he himſelfe confeſt it but euen now,
That there he dropt it for a ſpeciall purpoſe,
Which wrought to his deſire.
O Foole, foole, foole!
There is beſides, in Rodorigo's Letter,
How he vpbraides Iago, that he made him
Braue me vpon the Watch: whereon it came
That I was caſt: and euen but now he ſpake
(After long ſeeming dead) Iago hurt him,
Iago ſet him on.
You muſt forſake this roome, and go with vs:
Your Power, and your Command is taken off,
And Caſſio rules in Cyprus. For this Slaue,
If there be any cunning Crueltie,
That can torment him much, and hold him long,
It ſhall be his. You ſhall cloſe Priſoner reſt,
Till that the Nature of your fault be knowne
To the Venetian State. Come, bring away.
Soft you; a word or two before you goe:
I haue done the State ſome ſeruice, and they know't:
No more of that. I pray you in your Letters,
When you ſhall theſe vnluckie deeds relate,
Speake of me, as I am. Nothing extenuate,
Nor ſet downe ought in malice.
Then muſt you ſpeake,
Of one that lou'd not wiſely, but too well:
Of one, not eaſily Iealious, but being wrought,
Perplexed in the extreame: Of one, whoſe hand
(Like the baſe Iudean) threw a Pearle away
Richer then all his Tribe: Of one, whoſe ſubdu'd Eyes,
Albeit vn-vſed to the melting moode,
Drops teares as faſt as the Arabian Trees
Their Medicinable gumme. Set you downe this:
And ſay beſides, that in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant, and a Turbond-Turke
Beate a Venetian, and traduc'd the State,
I tooke by th' throat the circumciſed Dogge,
And ſmoate him, thus.
Oh bloody period.
All that is ſpoke, is marr'd.
I kiſt thee, ere I kill'd thee: No way but this,
Killing my ſelfe, to dye vpon a kiſſe.
This did I feare, but thought he had no weapon:
For he was great of heart.
Oh Sparton Dogge:
More fell then Anguiſh, Hunger, or the Sea:
Looke on the Tragicke Loading of this bed:
This is thy worke:
The Obiect poyſons Sight,
Let it be hid. Gratiano, keepe the houſe,
And ſeize vpon the Fortunes of the Moore,
For they ſucceede on you. To you, Lord Gouernor,
Remaines the Cenſure of this helliſh villaine:
The Time, the Place, the Torture, oh inforce it:
My ſelfe will ſtraight aboord, and to the State,
This heauie Act, with heauie heart relate.