COme, now my head's in, Ile even venture the whole: I ha ſeene the Lyons ere now, and he that hath ſeene them may ſee the King.
I think he may; but have a care you go not too high (neighbour Notch) leaſt you chance to have a Tally made of your pate, and bee clawed with a cudgell; there is as much danger going too neere the King, as the Lyons.
Whither? whither now gameſters? what is the buſineſſe? the affaire? ſtop I beſeech you.
This muſt be an Officer, or nothing, he is ſo peart and breife in his demands! a pretty man! and a pretty man is a little o'this ſide nothing; howſoever we muſt not be daunted now, I am ſure I am a greater man than he out of the Court, and I have loſt nothing of my Sire ſince I came to it.
Hey-da! what's this? A hogſhead of beere broake out of the Kings buttery, ro ſome Dutch Hulke! whether are you bound? The winde is againſt you, you muſt backe; doe you know where you are?
Yes ſir, if we bee not miſtaken, we are at the Court, and would be glad to ſpeake with ſomething of leſſe authority, and more wit, that knowes a little in the place.
Sir, I know as little as any man in the place; ſpeake, what is your buſineſſe? I am an Officer, Groome of the Revels, that is my place.
To fetch Bonge of Court a parcell of inviſible bread, and beere for the Plaiers (for they never ſee it) or to miſtake ſixe Torches from the Chandry, and give them one.
How ſir?
Come, this is not the firſt time you have carried coales to your owne houſe, I meane that ſhould have warm'd them.
Sir, I may doe it by my place, and I muſt queſtion you farther.
Be not ſo muſty ſir, our deſire is only to know whether the Kings Majeſty, and the Court expect any diſguiſe here to night.
Diſguiſe! what meane you by that? doe you thinke that his Majeſty ſits here to expect drunkards?
No, if hee did, I beleeve you would ſupply that place better then you do this: Diſguiſe was the old Engliſh word for a Maſque ſir, before you were an implement belonging to the Revels.
There is no ſuch word in the Office now I aſſure you ſir, I have ſerv'd here, man, and boy a Prentiſhip or twaine, and I ſhould know. But, by what name ſo ever you call it, here will be a Maſque, and ſhall be a Maſque, when you and the reſt of your Comrogues ſhall ſit diſguiſ'd in the ſtocks.
Sure by your language you were never meant for a Courier, howſoever it hath beene your ill fortune to be taken out of the neſt young; you are ſome Conſtables egge, ſome ſuch Widgin of Authoritie, you are ſo eaſily offended! Our comming was to ſhew our loves ſir, and to make a little merry with his Majeſty to night, and we have brought a Maſque with us, if his Majeſtie had not beene better provided.
Who you? you a Maſque? why you ſtincke like ſo many bloat-herrings newly taken out of the chimney! In the name of Ignorance, whence came you? or what are you? you have beene hang'd in the ſmoake ſufficiently, that is ſmelt out alreadie.
Sir, we doe come from among the Brewhouſes in Saint Katherines, that's true, there you have ſmoak'd us (the Docke comfort your noſthrills,) and we may have lived in a miſt there, and ſo miſt our purpoſe; but for mine owne part I have brought my properties with me to expreſſe what I am; the keyes of my calling hang here at my girdle, and this the Regiſter booke of my function ſhewes mee no leſſe then a Clarke at all points, and a Brewers Clarke, and a Brewers head Clarke.
A man of accompt ſir! I cry you mercie.
I ſir, I knew him a fine Merchant, a merchant of Hops, till all hopt into the water.
No more of that, what I have beene, I have beene; what I am, I am: I Peter Notch, Clarke, hearing the Chriſtmas invention was drawne drie at Court; and that neither the KINGS Poet, nor his Architect had wherewithall left to entertaine ſo much as a Baboone of quality, nor ſcarce the Welſh Embaſſadour if hee ſhould come there: Out of my allegiance, to wit, drew in ſome other friends that have as it were preſumed out of their own naturalls, to fill up the vacuum with ſome pretty preſentation, which we have addreſſed, and conveighed hither in a Lighter at the generall charge, and landed at the backe doore of the Buttery, through my neighbour Slug's credit there.
A poore Lighter-man ſir, one that hath had the honour ſometimes to lay in the Kings beere there; and I aſſure you I heard it in no worſe place then the very Buttry, for a certaine, there would bee no Maſque, and from ſuch as could command a jacke of beere, two, or three.
Dat is all true, exceeding true, de inventors be barren, loſt, two, dre, vour mile, I know that from my ſelven; dey have no ting, no ting van deir owne, but dat dey take vrom de eard, or de zea, or de heaven, or de hell, or de reſt van de veir Clementen, de place a, dat be ſo common as de vench in de Burdello. Now me would bring in ſome dainty new ting, dat never was, nor never ſall be in de rebus natura; dat has neder van de materia, nor de forma, nor de hoffen, nor de voote, but a mera deviſa of de braine—
Hey-da! what Hans Flutter kin is this? what Dutchman doe's build or frame Caſtles in the Aire?
He is no Dutch man ſir, he is a Brittaine borne, but hath learn'd to miſuſe his owne tongue in travell, and now ſpeakes all languages in ill Engliſh; a rare Artiſt he is ſir, and a Projector of Maſques. His Project in ours is, that we ſhould all come from the three dancing Beares in Saint Katherines (you may hap know it ſir) hard by where the Prieſt fell in, which Alehouſe is kept by a diſtreſſed Lady; whoſe name (for the honour of Knighthood) will not bee knowne; yet ſhe is come in perſon here Errant, to fill up the adventure with her two women that draw drinke under her, Gentlewomen borne all three, I aſſure you.
And were three of thoſe Gentlewomen that ſhould have acted in that famous matter of Englands joy in ſixe hundred and three.
What talke you of England's joy, Gentlemen? you have another matter in hand I wis, Englands ſport and delight if you can manage it. The poore Cattle yonder are paſſing away the time, with a cheat loafe, and a bumbard of broken beere, how will ye diſpoſe of them?
Cattle! what cattle doe's ſhe meane?
No worſe then the Kings game I aſſure you; The Beares, Beares both of qualitie and faſhion, right Beares, true Beares.
A deviſe only to expreſſe the place from whence we come (my Ladies houſe) for which we have borrowed three very Beares that (as her Ladyſhip aforeſayd ſayes) are well bred, and can dance to preſent the ſigne, and the Beareward to ſtand for the ſigne-poaſt.
That is prettie; but are you ſure you have ſufficient Beares for the purpoſe.
Very ſufficient Beares as any are in the Ground, the Pariſh-Garden, and can dance at firſt ſight, and play their owne tunes if need bee. Iohn Vrſon the Beare-ward, offers to play them with any Citie-dancers chriſtned, for a ground meaſure.
Marry, for lofty tricks, or dancing on the Ropes hee will not undertake, it is out of their element he ſayes. Sir, all our requeſt is ſince we are come, we may be admitted, if not for a Maſque, for an Antickmask; and as we ſhall deſerve therein, we deſire to be returned with credit to the Buttry from whence we came, for reward, or to the Porters Lodge with diſcredit, for our puniſhment.
To be whipt with your Beares? Well, I could bee willing to venture a good word in behalfe of the Game, if I were aſſured the aforeſayd game would be cleanly, and not fright the Ladies.
For that ſir, the Bear-ward hath put in ſecuritie, by warranting my Ladie and her Women to dance the whole changes with them in ſafety; and for their abuſing the place you ſhall not need to feare, for he hath given them a kinde of Dyet-bread to binde them to their good behaviour.
Well, let them come; if you need one, Ile helpe you my ſelfe.
THough it may ſeeme rude
For me to intrude,
With theſe my Beares by chance-a;
'Twere ſport for a King,
If they could ſing
As well as they can dance-a
Then to put you out
Of feare or doubt,
We came from St. Katharin-a;
Theſe dancing three,
By the helpe of mee,
Who am the Poſt of the ſigne-a
We ſell good ware,
And we need not care
Though Court, and Country knew it:
Our Ale's o' the beſt,
And each good gueſt
Prayes for their ſouls that brew it.
For any Ale-houſe,
We care not a lowſe,
Nor Taverne in all the Towne-a;
Nor the Vintry Cranes,
Nor St. Clements Danes,
Nor the Devill can put us down-a,
Who has once there beene,
Comes thither agen,
The liquour is ſo mighty;
Beere ſtrong and ſtale,
And ſo is our Ale,
And it burnes like Aquavita.
To a ſtranger there,
If any appeare,
Where never before he has bin;
We ſhew th' yron Gate,
The wheele of St. Kate,
And the place where the Prieſt fel in.
The Wives of Wapping
They trudge to our tapping,
And ſtill our Ale deſire;
And there ſit and drinke,
Till the ſpue, and ſtinke,
And often piſſe out our fire.
From morning to night,
And about to day-light,
They ſit and never grudge it;
Till the Fiſh-wives joyne
Their ſingle coyne,
And the Tinker pawnes his budget.
If their braines be not well,
Or their bladders doe ſwell,
To eaſe them of their burden;
My Ladie will come
With a bowle and a broome,
And her Hand-mayd with a Iorden.
From Court we invite
Lord, Ladie, and knight;
Squire, gentlman, yeoman and groom.
And all our ſtiffe drinkers,
Smiths, Porters, and Tinkers,
And the beggars ſhall give ye roome.
How like you? how like you?
Excellent! The Beares have done learnedly, and ſweetly.
Tis noting, tis noting; vill you ſee ſometing? Ick ſall bring in de Turkchen, met all zin Baſhawes, and zin dirty towſand Yanitſaries met all zin Whooren Cunuken, all met an auder, de Sofie van Perſia, de Tartar Cham met de great King of Mogull, and make deir men, and deir horſe, and deir Elephant en be ſeene fight in de ayre, and be all killen, and aliven, and no ſuch ting. And all dis met de Ars van de Catropricks, by de refleſbie van de glaſſen.
Oh, he is an admirable Artiſt.
And a halfe ſir.
But where will he place his glaſſes?
Fow, dat is all ean, as it be two, dree, veir, vife touſand Mile off: Ick ſall multipliren de vizioun, met an ander ſecret dat Ick heb: Spreck, vat vil you haben?
Good ſir put him toot, bid him doe ſomething that is impoſſible; he will undertake it I warrant you.
I doe not like the Mogul, nor the great Turke, nor the Tartar, their names are ſomewhat to big for the Roome; marry if he could ſhew us ſome Countrey Plaiers, ſtrolling about in ſeverall Shires, without licence from the Office, that would pleaſe I know whom, or ſome Welſh Pilgrims.
Pilgrim? now yow talke of de Pilgrim, it come in my head, Ick vill ſhew yow all de whole brave Pilgrim o'de Vorld: de Pilgrim dat goe now, now at de inſtant, two, dre towſand Mile to de great Mahomet, at de Mecha, or here, dere, every where, make de fine Labyrints, and ſhew all de brave error in de vorld.
And ſhall we ſee it here?
Yau, here, here, here in dis Roome, tis very Roome: vel vat is dat to yow if Ick doe de ting? vat an devill, vera boten devill?
Nay, good ſir be not angry.
'Tis a diſeaſe that followes all excellent men, they cannot governe their paſſions; but let him alone, try him one 'bout.
I would try him, but what has all this to doe with our Maske?
O Sir, all de better vor an Antick-maske, de more abſurd it be, and vrom de purpoſe, it be ever all de better. If it goe from de nature of de ting, it is de more Art: for deare is Art, and deare is Nature, yow ſall ſee. Hochos-pochos, Paucos, Palabros.
IT is no dreame, you all doe wake, and ſee;
Behold, who comes! far-ſhooting Phoebus he
That can both hurt and heale; and with his voyce
Reare Townes, and make ſocieties rejoyce;
That taught the Muſes all their harmonie,
And men the tunefull Art of Augurie.
Apollo ſtoopes, and when a God deſcends,
May Mortalls thinke he hath no vulgar ends.
LInus, and Orpheus, Branchus, Idmon, all
My ſacred Sons, riſe at your Fathers call
From your immortall Graves; where ſleepe, not death,
Yet bindes your powers.
Here.
Here.
What ſacred breath
Doth re-inſpire us?
Who is this we feele?
What heat creepes through me, as when burning ſteele
Is dipt in water?
I, Phoemonoe,
Thy Father Phoebus's fury filleth thee;
Confeſſe my Godhead; once againe I call,
Let whole Apollo enter in you all,
And follow me.
We flie, we doe not tread,
The Gods doe uſe to raviſh whom they lead.
BEhold the love and care of all the Gods
Of the Ocean, and the happie Iles;
That whilſt the World about him is at ods,
Sits Crowned Lord here of himſelfe, and ſmiles.
To ſee the erring mazes of mankinde;
Who ſeeke for that, doth puniſh them to finde.
PRince of thy Peace, ſee what it is to love
The Powers above!
Jove hath commanded me
To viſit thee;
And in thine honour with my Muſique reare
a Colledge here,
Of tunefull Augures, whoſe divining skill,
ſhall waite thee ſtill,
And be the Heralds of his higheſt will.
The worke is done,
And I have made their Preſident thy Sonne;
Great Mars too, on theſe nights,
hath added Salian rites.
Yond, yond afarre,
They cloſed in their Temple are,
And each one guided by a ſtarre.
Haſte, haſte, to meet them, and as they advance
'twixt every Dance;
Let us interpret their Prophetick trance.
WHich way, and whence the lightning flew,
Or how it burned, bright, and blew,
Deſigne, and figure by your lights:
Then forth, and ſhew the ſeverall flights
Your Birds have made, or what the wing
Or voyce in Augurie doth bring.
Which hand the Crow cried on, how high
The Vulture, or the Erne did flie,
What wing the Swan made, and the Dove,
The Storke, and which did get above:
Shew all the Birds of food or Prey,
But paſſe by the unluckie Jay,
The Night-Crow, Swallow, or the Kite
Let thoſe have neither right, CHOR. Nor part,
In this nights art.
THe Signes are luckie all, and right
There hath not beene a voyce, or flight
Of ill Preſage. Linus. The bird that brings
Her Augurie alone to Kings
The Dove, hath flowne. Orpheus. And to thy peace
Fortunes and the Fates increaſe.
Minerva's Hernſhaw and her Owle,
Doe both proclaime, thou ſhalt controle
The courſe of things. Idmon. As now they be
With tumult carried: Apollo. And live free
From hatred, faction, or the feare,
To blaſt the Olive thou doſt weare.
More is behind, which theſe doe long to ſhow,
And what the Gods to ſo great vertue owe.
Still, ſtill the Auſpice is ſo good,
We wiſh it were but underſtood;
It even puts Apollo
To all his ſtrengths of art, to follow,
The flights, and to devine
What's meant by every Signe.
Thou canſt not leſſe be, then the charge
of every Dietie.
That thus art left here to inlarge,
And ſhield their pietie!
Thy neighbours at thy fortune long have gaz'd,
But at thy wiſdome, all doe ſtand amaz'd.
And wiſh to be,
O'recome, or governed by thee!
Safetie it ſelfe ſo ſides thee, where thou goeſt,
And Fate ſtill offers what thou covet'ſt moſt!
Doe not expect to heare of all
Your good at once, leſt it foreſtall
A ſweetneſſe would be new:
Some things the Fates would have conceal'd
From us the Gods, leſt being reveal'd
Our powers ſhall envy you.
It is enough your people learne
The reverence of your peace
As well as Strangers doe diſcerne
The Glories, by th'increaſe
And that the princely Augur here, your Sonne
Doe by his Fathers lights his courſes run.
Him ſhall you ſee triumphing over all
Both foes and vices: and your young and tall
Nephewes, his Sonnes grow up in your imbraces,
To give this Iland Princes in long races.
SEE heaven expecteth my returne▪
The forked fire begins to burne,
Jove beckons to me come.
Though Phoebus be the god of Arts,
Hee muſt not take on him all parts:
But leave his Frather ſome.
My arts are only to obey. JOVE. And mine to ſway
Jove is that one, whom firſt, midſt, laſt, you call
The power that governes, and conſerveth all;
Earth, Sea, and Ayre, are ſubject to our checke,
And Fate with heaven, moving at our beck.
Till Jove it ratifie,
It is no Augurie,
Though uttered by the mouth of Deſtinie.
Deare father, give the Signe, and ſeale it then.
It is the ſuit of Earth and Men.
What doe their Mortals crave without our wrong?
That Jove will lend us this our Soveraigne long;
Let our grand-children, and not wee,
His want or Abſence ever ſee.
Your wiſh is bleſt.
Jove knocks his Chin againſt his breſt,
And firmes it with the reſt.
Sing then his fame, through all the orbes; in even
Proportions, riſing ſtill, from Earth to Heaven:
And of the laſting of it leave to doubt,
The power of time ſhall never put that out.
This done, the whole Scaene ſhut, and the Maskers danced their laſt Dance.