GIue eare, the worthy, heare what Time proclaimes.
What? what? I'ſt worth our eares?
Or eies?
Or noſes?
For we are curious, Fame: indeed, the Curious.
We come to ſpie.
And hearken.
And ſmell out.
More then you vnderſtand, my hot Inquiſitors.
Is it not ſo?
We cannot tell.
It may be.
Howeuer, goe you on, let vs alone.
We may ſpie out, that, which you neuer mean't.
And noſe the thing you ſent not. Firſt, whēce come you?
I come from Saturne.
Saturne, what is he?
Some Proteſtant I warrant you, a Time-ſeruer,
As Fame her ſelfe is.
You are neere the right.
Indeed, he' is Time it ſelfe, and his name KRONOS.
How! Saturne! Chronos, and the Time it ſelfe.
You' are found: inough. A notable old Pagan.
One of their Gods, and eates vp his owne children.
A Fencer, and do's trauaile with a ſith
in ſtead of a long-ſword.
Hath bin oft call'd from it,
to be their Lord of miſrule.
As Cincinnatus
Was, from the plough, to be Dictator.
Yes.
Wee need no interpreter, on, what of Time?
The Time hath ſent me with my trumpe to ſummon
All ſorts of perſons worthy, to the view
Of ſome great ſpectacle he meanes, to night,
To' exhibite, and with all ſolemnity.
O, we ſhall haue his Saturnalia.
His dayes of feaſt, and liberty agen.
Where men might do, and talke all that they liſt.
Slaues of their lords.
The ſeruants of their maſters.
And ſubiects of their Soucraigne.
Not ſo lauiſh.
It was a braue time that.
This will be better.
I ſpie it comming, peace, all the impoſtures,
The prodigies, diſeaſes, and diſtempers,
The knaueries of the Time, we ſhall ſee all now.
And heare the paſſages, and ſeuerall humors
Of men, as they are ſwayd by their affections:
Some grumbling, and ſome mutining, ſome ſcoffing,
Some pleas'd, ſome pyning, at all theſe we laughing.
I haue it here, here, ſtrong, the ſweat of it,
And the confuſion (which I loue) I noſe it,
It tickles mee.
My foure eies itch for it.
And my eares tingle, would it would come forth:
This roome will not receaue it.
That's the feare.
What? what? my friends, will not this roome receaue?
That which the Time is preſently to ſhew vs.
The Time? Lo I the man, that hate the time
That is, that loue it not; and (though in ryme,
I here doe ſpeake it) with this whipp you ſee,
Doe laſh the Time, and am my ſelfe laſh-free.
Who's this?
'Tis Chronomaſtix, the braue Satyre,
The gentleman-like Satyre, cares for nobody,
His fore-head tip't with bayes, doe you not know him?
Yes Fame muſt know him, all the Towne admires him.
If you would ſee Time quake and ſhake, but name vs,
It is for that, we'are both belou'd, and famous.
We know, Sir: but the Time's now come about.
And promiſeth all liberty.
Nay licence.
We ſhall doe what we liſt.
Talke what we liſt.
And cenſure whom we liſt, and how we liſt.
Then I will looke on Time, and loue the ſame,
And drop my whip: who's this! my Miſtris! Fame!
The Lady whom I honor, and adore!
What lucke had I not to ſee her before!
Pardon me, Madam, more then moſt accurſt,
That did not ſpie your Ladiſhip at firſt,
To' haue giu'n the ſtoop, and to ſalute the skirts
Of her, to whom all Ladies elſe are flirts!
It is for you, I reuell ſo in rime,
Deare Miſtris, not for hope I haue the Time
Will growe the better by it. To ſerue Fame
Is all my end, and get my ſelfe a name.
Away I know thee not, wretched Impoſtor,
Creature of glory, Mountebanke of witt,
Selfe-louing Braggart, Fame doth ſound no trumpett
To ſuch vaine, empty fooles: 'Tis infamy
Thou ſeru'ſt, and follow'ſt, ſcorne of all the Muſes,
Goe reuell with thine ignorant admirers,
Let worthy names alone.
O, you the Curious,
Breath you to ſee a paſſage ſo iniurious,
Done with deſpight, and carried with ſuch tumor
'Gainſt me, that am ſo much the freind of rumor?
(I would ſay Fame?) whoſe Muſe hath rid in rapture
On a ſoft ambling verſe to euery capture,
From the ſtrong guard, to the weake child that reads me,
And wonder both of him that loues, or dread's me!
Who with the laſh of my immortall pen
Haue ſcourg'd all ſorts of vices, and of men!
Am I rewarded, thus? haue I, I ſay,
From Enuies ſelfe torne praiſe, and bayes away,
With which my glorious front, and word at large,
Triumphs in print at my admirers charge.
Rare! how he talkes in verſe, iuſt as he writes!
When haue I walk't the ſtreetes, but happy he
That had the finger firſt to point at mee,
Prentice, or Iourneyman! The ſhop doth know it!
The vnletter'd Clarke! maior and minor Poet!
The Sempſter hath ſate ſtill as I paſs'd by,
And dropt her needle! Fiſhwiues ſtaid their cry!
The Boy with buttons, and the Basket wench
To vent their wares, into my workes do trench!
A pudding-wife, that would deſpiſe the Times,
Hath vtterd' frequent pen' worths, through my rimes,
And, with them, diu'd into the Chamber-maid,
And ſhee vnto her Lady hath convayd
The ſeaſond morſels, who hath ſent me penſions,
To cheriſh and to heighten my inuentions.
Well, Fame ſhall know it yet, I haue my faction,
And freinds about me, though it pleaſe detraction
To do me this affront. Come forth that loue me,
And now, or neuer, ſpite of Fame, approue me.
How now! what's here? Is hell broke looſe?
You'l ſee.
That he ha's fauourers, Fame, and great ones too,
That vnctuous Bounty, is the Boffe of Belinſgate,
Who feaſts his Muſe with claret wine, and oyſters,
Growes big with Satyr,
Goes as long as an Elephant:
She labours, and lies in of his inuentions,
Ha's a male poem in her belly now,
Big as a colt,
That kicks at Time already,
And is no ſooner foald, but will neigh ſulphure:
The next?
A quondam Iuſtice, that of late
Hath bin diſcarded out 'o the pack o'the peace,
For ſome lewd leuitie he holds in capite,
But conſtantly loues him. In dayes of yore,
He vs'd to giue the charge out of his poems,
He carries him about him, in his pocket,
As Philip's Sonne did Homer, in a casket,
And cries, O happy Man, to the wrong party,
Meaning the Poet, where he meant the ſubiect:
What are this paire?
The ragged raſcalls?
Yes.
Meere rogues, you' world thinke'em rogues, but they are friends,
One is his Printer in diſguiſe, and keepes
His preſſe in a hollow tree, where to conceale him,
He works by glow-worme light, the Moone's too open.
The other zealous Ragg is the Compoſitor,
Who in an angle, where the ants inhabite,
(The Emblem's of his Labours) will ſit curl'd
Whole dayes, and nights, and worke his eyes out for him.
Strange arguments of loue! There is a Schoole maſter
Is turning all his workes too, into Latine,
To pure Satyricke Latine; makes his Boyes
To learne him; calls him the times Iuuenal;
Hangs all his Schoole with his ſharpe ſentences;
And o're the Execution place hath painted
Time whipt, for terror to the Infantery.
This Man ofwarre i'the rere, He is both Trumpet
And Champion to his Muſe.
For the whole City.
Ha's him by roat, recites him at the tables,
Where he doth gouern, ſweares him into name,
Vpon his word, and ſword, for the ſole youth
Dares make profeſsion of Poetick truth,
Now militant amongſt vs. To th'incredulous,
That dagger is an article he vſes,
To riuet his reſpect into their pates,
And make thē faithful, Fame, you'l find you' haue wrōgd him.
What a confederacy of Folly is here.
Now Fame, how like you this?
This fals vpon you
For your neglect.
He ſcornes you, and defies you,
H'as got a Fame on's owne, as well as a Faction.
And this will deifie him, to deſpite you.
I enuy not the .
'Twill prooue but deifying of a pompion.
Well, what is that the Time will now exhibite?
What gambols? what deuiſes? what new ſports?
You promis'd vs, we ſhould haue any thing.
That Time would giue vs all we could imagine.
You might imagine ſo, I neuer promis'd it.
Pox, then 'tis nothing. I had now a fancy
We might haue talk'd o' the King.
Or State.
Or all the World.
Cenſur'd the Counſell, e're they cenſure vs.
We do it in Paules.
Yes, and in all the tauernes.
A comely licence. They that cenſure thoſe
They ought to reuerence, meete they that old curſe,
To beg their bread, and feele eternall winter.
Ther's difference 'twixt liberty, and licence.
Why if it be not that, let it be this then
(For ſince you graunt vs freedome, we will hold it,)
Let's haue the giddy world turn'd the heeles vpward,
And ſing a rare black Sanctus, on his head,
Of all things out of order.
No, the Man
I' the moone dance a Corranto, his buſh
At's back, a fire; and his dog piping Lachrimae.
Or let's haue all the people in an vprore,
None knowing, why, or to what end: and in
The mid'ſt of all, ſtart vp an old mad woman
Preaching of patience.
No, no, I'ld ha' this-
What?
Any thing.
That could be monſtrous:
Inough, I meane. A Babel of wild humors.
I, all diſputing of all things they know not,
And talking of all men they neuer heard of,
And all together by the eares o' the ſuddaine,
And, when the matter is at hotteſt, then
All fall a ſleepe.
Agree among your ſelues,
And what it is youl'd haue, I'le anſwer you.
O, that wee ſhall neuer doe.
No, neuer agree.
Not vpon what. Something that is vnlawfull.
I, or vnreaſonable.
Or impoſſible.
Let 't be vnciuill inough, you hit vs right.
And a great noyſe.
To little, or no purpoſe.
And if there be ſome miſchief, 'twill become it.
But ſee, there be no cauſe, as you will anſwer it.
Theſe are meere Monſters.
I, all the better.
You doe abuſe the Time, theſe are fit freedomes
For lawleſſe prentices, on a Shrouetueſday,
When they compell the Time to ſerue their riot:
For drunken Wakes, and ſtrutting Beare-baytings,
That ſauor only of their owne abuſes.
Why, if not thoſe, then ſomething to make ſport.
Wee only hunt for nouelty, not truth.
I'le fit you, though the Time faintly permit it.
Why now they are kindly vs'd, like ſuch Spectators,
That know not what they would haue. Commonly,
The Curious are ill natur'd, and like flies,
Seeke Times corrupted part to blow vpon:
But may the ſound ones liue with fame, and honour,
Free from the moleſtation of theſe Inſects,
Who being fled, Fame now purſues her errand.
For you, great King, to whom the Time doth owe
All his reſpects, and reuerence, behold
How Saturne, vrged at requeſt of Loue,
Prepares the obiect to the place to night.
Within yon'd darkeneſſe, Venus bath found out
That Hecate (as ſhe is Queene of ſhades)
Keepes certaine glories of the Time obſcur'd,
There, for her ſelfe alone to gaze vpon,
As ſhe did once the faire Endimion.
Theſe, Time hath promis'd at Loues ſuit to free,
As being fitter to adorne the age,
By you reſtor'd on earth, moſt like his owne:
And fill this world of beautie here, your Court.
To which his bounty, ſee, how men prepare
To fit their votes below, and thronging come
With longing paſſion to enioy th' effect!
Harke, it is Loue begins to Time. Expect.
Beſide, that it is done for Loue,
It is a worke, great Time, will proue
Thy honor, as mens hopes aboue.
If Loue be pleaſed, ſo am I:
For Time could neuer yet deny
What Loue did aske, if Loue knew why.
She knew, and hath exprest it now,
And ſo doth euery publike vow
That heard her why, and waites thy how.
You ſhall not long expect; with eaſe
The things come foorth, are borne to pleaſe:
Looke, haue you ſeene ſuch lights as theſe?
Theſe, Theſe muſt ſure ſome wonders be!
O, what a glory 'tis to ſee
Mens wiſhes, Time, and Loue agree!
What griefe, or enuy had it beene,
That theſe, and ſuch had not bin ſeene,
but ſtill obſcur'd in ſhade!
Who are the glories of the Time,
Of youth, and feature too, the prime,
And for the light were made?
1 Their very number, how it takes!
2 What harmony their preſence makes!
3 How they inflame the place!
Now they are neerer ſeene, and view'd;
For whom could Loue haue better ſued?
or Time haue done the grace?
The night could not theſe glories miſſe,
Good Time, I hope, is ta'ne with this.
If Time were not, I' am ſure Loue is.
Betweene vs it ſhall be no ſtrife:
For now 'tis Loue, giues Time his life.
Let Time then ſo with Loue conſpire,
as ſtrait be ſent into the court
A little Cupid, arm'd with fire,
Attended by a iocund Sport,
To breed delight, and a deſire
of being delighted in the nobler ſort.
The wiſh is crown'd, as ſoone as made.
And CVPID conquers, e're he doth inuade.
His Victories of lighteſt trouble proue.
For there is neuer labour, where is Loue.
Take breath a while, yong Bloods, to bring
Your forces vp, whilst we goe ſing
Freſh charges, to the Beauties here.
Or, if they charge you, doe not feare,
Though they be better arm'd then you:
It is but ſtanding the first view,
And then they yeeld.
Or quit the field.
Nay, that they'l neuer doe,
They'l rather fall vpon the place
Then ſuffer ſuch diſgrace.
You are but Men at beſt, they ſay,
And they from thoſe ne're ran away.
You, Sir, that are the Lord of Time,
Receiue it not as any crime
'Gainſt Maieſty, that Loue and Sport
To night haue entred in your Court.
Sir, doubt him more of ſome ſurpriſe
Vpon your ſelfe. He hath his eyes.
You are the nobleſt obiect here,
And 'tis for you alone I feare:
For here are Ladyes, that would giue
A braue reward, to make Loue liue
Well, all his life, for ſuch a draught.
And therefore, looke to euery ſhaft,
The Wag's a Deacon in his Craft.
My Lords, the Honors of the Crowne,
Put off your ſowreneſſe, do not frowne,
Bid cares depart, and buſineſſe hence:
A little, for the Time diſpence.
Truſt nothing that the Boy lets fall,
My Lords, he hath plots vpon you all.
A penſioner vnto your wiues,
To keepe you in vxorious giues,
And ſo your ſenſe to faſcinate,
To make you quit all thought of ſtate,
His amorous queſtious to debate.
But, heare his Logicke, he will proue
There is no buſines, but to be in loue.
The words of Sport, my Lords, and courſe.
Your Ladies yet, will not thinke worſe
Of loue for this,, They ſhall command
My Bowe, my Quiuer, and my Hand.
What, here to ſtand
and kill the Flies?
Alas, thy ſeruice they deſpiſe.
One Beauty here, hath in her eyes,
More ſhafts then from thy bow ere flew,
Or that poore quiuer knew.
Theſe Dames
They need not Loue's, they 'haue Natures flames.
I ſee that Beauty, that you ſo report.
Cupid, you muſt not point in Court,
Where liue ſo many of a ſort.
Of Harmony theſe learn'd their ſpeech,
The Graces did them footing teach,
And, at the old Idalian bralls,
They daunc'd your Mother downe, ſhee calls.
Arme, arme then all.
Young Bloods come on,
And charge: Let euery Man take one.
And try his fate.
Theſe are faire warres,
And will be carried without ſcarres.
A ioyning, but of feet, and hands,
Is all the Time, and Loue commands.
Or if you doe their gloues off strip,
Or tast the nectar of the lip:
See, ſo you temper your deſires,
For kiſſes, that yee ſucke not fires.
The Courtly ſtrife is done, it ſhould appeare,
Betweene the Youths, and Beauties of the yeare,
We hope that now theſe lights will know their ſphere,
And ſtriue hereafter to ſhine euer here:
Like brightest Planets, ſtill to mooue
In th'eye of Time, and orbes of Loue.
Hippolitus, Hippolitus.
Diana?
Shee.
Be ready you, or CEPHALVS,
To waite on me.
Wee euer bee.
Your Goddeſſe hath bin wrong'd to night,
By Loues report vnto the Time.
The iniury it ſelfe will right
Which only Fame hath made a crime.
For Time is wiſe,
And hath his eares as perfect as his eyes.
Who's that deſcends? Diana?
Yes.
By like her troope ſhe hath begun to miſſe.
Let's meet, and queſtion what her errand is.
Shee will preuent thee, Saturne, not t' excuſe
Her-ſelfe vnto thee, rather to complaine
That thou and Venus both ſhould ſo abuſe
The name of Dian, as to entertayne
A thought, that ſhe had purpoſe to defraud
The Time, of any glories that were his:
To do Time honour rather, and applaud
His worth, hath bin her ſtudy,
And it is.
I call'd theſe youth's forth, in their blood, and prime,
Out of the honor, that I bore their parts;
To make them fitter ſo to ſerue the Time
By labour, riding, and thoſe ancient arts,
That firſt enabled men vnto the warres,
And furniſh'd Heauen with ſo many Starres:
As Perſeus, Caſtor, Pollux, and the reſt,
Who were of Hunters firſt, of Men the beſt,
Whoſe ſhades do yet remayne within yond' groues,
Themſelues there ſporting with their nobler loues:
And ſo may theſe doe, if the Time giue leane.
Chaſt Dians purpoſe we do now conceaue,
And yeeld thereto.
And ſo doth Loue.
All votes do in one circle moue.
Turne Hunters then,
agen.
Hunting, it is the nobleſt exerciſe,
Makes men laborious, actiue, wiſe,
Brings health, and doth the ſpirits delight,
It help's the hearing, and the ſight:
It teacheth Arts that neuer ſlip
The memory, good Horſmanſhip,
Search, ſharpnes, courage, and defence,
And chaſeth all ill habits thence.
Turne Hunters then,
agen,
But not of Men.
Follow his ample,
And iuſt example,
That hates all chace of malice, and of blood:
And ſtudies only wayes of good,
To keepe ſoft peace in breath.
Man ſhould not hunt Mankind to death,
But ſtrike the enemyes of Man;
Kill vices if you can:
They are your wildeſt beasts,
And when they thickest fall, you make the Gods true feasts: