GIve eare, the worthy, heare what Fame proclaimes.
What? what? I'ſt worth our eares?
Or eyes?
Or noſes?
For we are curious, Fame: indeed, the Curious.
We come to ſpie.
And hearken.
And ſmell out.
More than you underſtand, my hot Inquiſitors,
We cannot tell.
It may be.
However, goe you on, let us alone.
We may ſpie out, that, which you never mean't.
And noſe the thing you ſent not. Firſt, whence come you?
I came from Saturne.
Saturne, what is he?
Some Proteſtant I warrant you, a Time-ſerver,
As Fame her ſelfe is.
You are neere the right.
Indeed, he is Time it ſelfe, and his name KRONOS,
How! Saturne! Chronos! and the Time it ſelfe!
You're found: inough. A notable old Pagan!
One of their Gods, and eaes up his owne children.
A Fencer, and do's travell with a ſith
Inſtead of a long-ſword.
Hath beene oft call'd from it,
To be their Lord of miſrule.
As Cincinnatus
Was from the plough, to be Dictator.
Yes.
We need no interpreter, on, what of Time?
The Time hath ſent me with my Trumpe to ſummon
All ſorts of perſons worthy, to the view
Of ſome great ſpectacle he meanes to night,
T'exhibite; and with all ſolemnitie.
O, we ſhall have his Saturnalia.
His dayes of feaſt, and libertie agen.
Where men might doe, and talke all that they liſt.
Slaves of their lords.
The ſervants of their maſters!
And ſubjects of their Soveraigne.
Not ſo laviſh.
It was a brave time that!
This will be better:
I ſpie it comming, peace. All the impoſtures,
The prodigies, diſeaſes, and diſtempers,
The knaveries of the Time, we ſhall ſee all now.
And heare the paſſages, and ſeverall humors
Of men, as they are ſwayd by their affections:
Some grumbling, and ſome mutining, ſome ſcoffing,
Some pleas'd, ſome pyning, at all theſe we laughing.
I have it here, here, ſtrong, the ſweat of it,
And the confuſion (which I love) I noſe it,
It tickles mee.
My foure eies itch for it.
And my eares tingle, would it would come forth:
This roome will not receive it.
That's the feare.
What? what? my friends, will not this roome receive?
That which the Time is preſently to ſhew us.
The Time? Lo I the man, that hate the time
That is, that love it not; and (though in ryme,
I here doe ſpeake it) with this whipp you ſee,
Doe laſh the Time, and am myſelfe laſh-free.
Who's this?
'Tis Chronomaſtix, the brave Satyre,
The gentleman-like Satyre, cares for no body,
His fore-head tip't with bayes, doe you not know him?
Yes Fame muſt know him, all the Town admires him.
If you would ſee Time quake and ſhake, but name us,
It is for that, we are both belov'd, and famous.
We know, Sir. But the Time's now come about.
And promiſeth all libertie.
Nay licence.
We ſhall doe what we liſt.
Talke what we liſt.
And cenſure whom we liſt, and how we liſt.
Then I will looke on Time, and love the ſame,
And drop my whip: who's this! my Miſtris! Fame!
The lady whom I honour, and adore!
What lucke had I not to ſee her before!
Pardon me, Madam, more than moſt accurſt,
That did not ſpie your Ladiſhip at firſt,
T'have giv'n the ſtoop, and to ſalute the skirts
Of her, to whom all Ladies elſe are flirts!
It is for you, I revell ſo in rime,
Deare Miſtris, not for hope I have the Time
Will grow the better by it. To ſerve Fame
Is all my end, and get my ſelfe a name.
Away, I know thee not, wretched Impoſtor,
Creature of glory, Mountebanke of witte,
Selfe-loving Braggart, Fame doth ſound no trumpet
To ſuch vaine, empty fooles: 'Tis Infamy
Thou ſerv'ſt, and follow'ſt, ſcorne of all the Muſes,
Goe revell with thine ignorant admirers,
Let worthy names alone.
O, you the Curious,
Breath you to ſee a paſſage ſo injurious,
Done with deſpight, and carried with ſuch tumor
'Gainſt me, that am ſo much the friend of rumor?
(I would ſay Fame?) whoſe Muſe hath rid in rapture
On a ſoft ambling verſe to every capture,
From the ſtrong guard, to the weake childe that reades me,
And wonder both of him that loves, or dread's me!
Who with the laſh of my immortall pen
Have ſcourg'd all ſorts of vices, and of men!
Am I rewarded, thus? have I, I ſay,
From Envies ſelfe torne praiſe, and bayes away,
With which my glorious front, and word at large,
Triumphs in print at my admirers charge.
Rare! how he talkes in verſe, juſt as he writes!
When have I walk't the ſtreets, but happy he
That had the finger firſt to point at mee,
Prentice, or Journeyman! The ſhop doth know it!
The unletter'd Clarke! major and minor Poet!
The Sempſter hath ſate ſtill as I paſs'd by,
And dropt her needle! Fiſh-wives ſtaid their cry▪
The Boy with buttons, and the Basket wench!
To vent their wares into my workes do trench!
A pudding-wife that would deſpiſe the Times,
Hath utter'd frequent pen'worths, through my rimes,
And, with them, div'd into the Chamber-maid,
And ſhe unto her Lady hath convay'd
The ſeaſon'd morſels, who hath ſent me penſions,
To cheriſh, and to heighten my inventions.
Well, Fame ſhall know it yet, I have my faction,
And friends about me, though it pleaſe detraction,
To doe me this affront. Come forth that love me,
And now, or never, ſpight of Fame, approve me.
How now! what's here? Is hell broke looſe?
You'l ſee.
That he ha's favourers, Fame, and great ones too.
That unctuous Bounty, is the Boſſe of Belinſgate,
Who feaſts his Muſe with claret wine, and oyſters,
Growes big with Satyre;
Goes as long as an Elephant:
She labours, and lies in of his inventions,
Ha's a male-poem in her belly now,
Big as a colt,
That kicks at Time already,
And is no ſooner foald, but will neigh ſulphure:
The next?
A quondam Juſtice, that of late
Hath beene diſcarded out o'the pack o'the peace,
For ſome lewd levitie he holds in capite,
But conſtantly loves him. In dayes of yore,
He us'd to give the charge out of his poems,
He carries him about him, in his pocket,
As Philip's Sonne did Homer, in a casket,
And cries, O happy Man, to the wrong party,
Meaning the Poet, where he meant the ſubject:
What are this paire?
The ragged raſcalls?
Yes.
Meere rogues, you'ld thinke them rogues, but they are friends,
One is his Printer in diſguiſe, and keepes
His preſſe in a hollow tree, where to conceale him,
He workes by glow-worme light, the Moone's too open.
The other zealous ragge is the Compoſitor,
Who in an angle, where the ants inhabite,
(The emblem's of his labours) will ſit curl'd
Whole dayes, and nights, and worke his eyes out for him.
Strange arguments of love! There is a Schoolemaſter
Is turning all his workes too, into Latine,
To pure Satyricke Latine; makes his Boyes
To learne him; calls him the times Juvenal;
Hangs all his Schoole with his ſharpe ſentences;
And o're the Execution place hath painted
Time whipt, for terror to the Infantery.
This Man of warre, i'the rere, He is both Trumpet
And Champion to his Muſe.
For the whole City.
H'as him by roat, recites him at the tables,
Where he doth governe; ſweares him into name,
Upon his word, and ſword, for the ſole youth
Dares make profeſſion of Poetick truth,
Now militant amongſt us: To th'incredulous,
That dagger is an article he uſes,
To rivet his reſpect into their pates,
And make them faithful. Fame, you'l find you'ave wrongd him.
What a confederacie of Folly is here!
Now Fame, how like you this?
This falls upon you
For your neglect.
He ſcornes you, and defies you,
H'as got a Fame on's owne, as well as a Faction.
And theſe will deifie him, to deſpite you.
I envie not the .
'Twill prove but deifying of a Pompion.
Well, what is that the Time will now exhibite?
What gambols? what deviſes? what new ſports?
You promis'd us, we ſhould have any thing.
That Time would give us all we could imagine.
You might imagine ſo, I never promis'd it.
Pox, then 'tis nothing. I had now a fancie
We might have talk'd o'the King.
Or State.
Or all the World.
Cenſur'd the Counſell, e're they cenſure us.
We doe it in Pauls.
Yes, and in all the tavernes!
A comely licence. They that cenſure thoſe
They ought to reverence, meet they that old curſe,
To beg their bread, and feele eternall Winter.
Ther's difference 'twixt liberty, and licence.
Why if it be not that, let it be this then
(For ſince you grant us freedome, we will hold it,)
Let's have the giddy world turn'd the heeles upward,
And ſing a rare blacke Sanctus, on his head,
Of all things out of order.
No, the Man
I'the Moone daunce a Corranto, his buſh
At's backe, a fire; and his dogge piping Lachrimae.
Or let's have all the people in an uprore,
None knowing, why, or to what end: and in
The midd'ſt of all, ſtart up an old mad woman
Preaching of patience.
No, no, I'ld ha' this.
What?
Any thing.
That could be monſtrous:
Enough, I meane. A Babel of wild humours.
And all diſputing of all things they know not,
And talking of all men they never heard of,
And all together by the eares o'the ſudden,
And, when the matter is at hotteſt, then
All fall aſleepe.
Agree among your ſelves,
And what it is you'ld have, I'le anſwer you.
O, that we ſhall never doe.
No, never agree.
Not upon what. Something that is unlawfull.
I, or unreaſonable.
Or impoſſible.
Let 't be uncivill enough, you hit us right.
And a great noyſe.
To little, or no purpoſe.
And if there be ſome miſchiefe, 'twill become it.
But ſee, there be no cauſe, as you will anſwer it.
Theſe are meere Monſters.
I, all the better.
You doe abuſe the Time. Theſe are fit freedomes
For lawleſſe Prentices, on a Shrovetueſday,
When they compell the Time to ſerve their riot.
For drunken Wakes, and ſtrutting Beare-baytings,
That ſavour only of their owne abuſes.
Why, if not thoſe, then ſomething to make ſport.
Wee only hunt for novelty, not truth.
I'le fit you, though the Time faintly permit it.
Why now they are kindly us'd, like ſuch ſpectators,
That know not what they would have. Commonly,
The curious are ill natur'd, and like flies,
Seeke Times corrupted parts to blow upon:
But may the ſound ones live with fame, and honour,
Free from the moleſtation of theſe Inſects:
Who being fled, Fame now perſues her errand.
For you, great King, to whom the Time doth owe
All his reſpects, and reverence, behold
How Saturne, urged at requeſt of Love,
Prepares the object to the place to night.
Within yond' darkneſſe, Venus hath found out
That Hecate (as ſhe is Queene of ſhades)
Keepes certaine glories of the Time obſcur'd,
There, for her ſelfe alone to gaze upon,
As ſhe did once the faire Endimion.
Theſe, Time hath promis'd at Loves ſuit to free,
As being fitter to adorne the age,
By you reſtor'd on earth, moſt like his owne:
And fill this world of beautie here, your Court.
To which his bountie, ſee, how men prepare
To fit their votes below, and thronging come
With longing paſſion to enjoy th'effect!
Harke, it is Love begins to Time. Expect.
Beſide, that it is done for Love,
It is a worke, great Time, will prove
Thy honour, as mens hopes above.
If Love be pleaſed, ſo am I:
For Time could never yet deny
What Love did aske, if Love knew why.
Shee knew, and hath expreſt it now.
And ſo doth every publike vow
That heard her why, and waites thy how.
You ſhall not long expect: with eaſe
The things come forth, are borne to pleaſs:
Looke, have you ſeene ſuch lights as theſe?
Theſe, theſe muſt ſure ſome wonders bee!
O, what a glory 'tis to ſee
Mens wiſhes, Time, and Love agree
What griefe, or envie had it beene,
That theſe, and ſuch had not beene ſeene,
But ſtill obſcur'd in ſhade!
Who are the glories of the Time,
Of youth, and feature too, the prime,
And for the light were made!
1 Their very number, how it takes!
2 What harmony their preſence makes!
3 How they inflame the place!
Now they are neerer ſeene, and viewd;
For whom could Love have better ſu'd?
Or Time have done the grace?
The night could not theſe glories miſſe,
Good Time, I hope, is ta'ne with this.
If Time were not, I'am ſure Love is.
Betweene us it ſhall be no ſtrife:
For now 'tis Love, gives Time his life.
Let Time then ſo with Love conſpire,
as ſtraight be ſent into the court
A little Cupid, arm'd with fire,
Attended by a jocund Sport,
To breed delight, and a deſire
of being delighted, in the nobler ſort.
The wiſh is crown'd, as ſoone as made.
And CVPID conquers, e're he doth invade.
His victories of lighteſt trouble prove.
For there is never labour, where is Love.
Take breath awhile, young Blouds, to bring
Your forces up, whilſt we goe ſing
Freſh charges, to the Beauties here.
Or, if they charge you, doe not feare,
Though they be better arm'd then you:
It is but ſtanding the firſt view,
And then they yeeld.
Or quit the field.
Nay, that they'l never doe.
They'l rather fall upon the place,
Then ſuffer ſuch diſgrace.
You are but Men at beſt, they ſay,
And they from thoſe ne're ran away.
You, Sir, that are the Lord of Time,
Receive it not as any crime
'Gainſt Majeſty, that Love and Sport
Tonight have entred in your Court.
Sir, doubt him more of ſome ſurpriſe
Vpon your ſelfe. He hath his eyes.
You are the nobleſt object here,
And 'tis for you alone I feare:
For here are Ladyes, that would give
A brave reward, to make Love live
Well, all his life, for ſuch a draught.
And therefore, looke to every ſhaft,
The Wags a Deacon in his craft.
My Lords, the Honors of the Crowne,
Put off your ſowreneſſe, doe not frown,
Bid cares depart, and buſineſſe hence:
A little, for the Time diſpence.
Truſt nothing that the Boy lets fall,
My Lords, he hath plots upon you all.
A Penſioner unto your wives,
To keepe you inuxorious gives,
And ſo your ſenſe to faſcinate,
To make you quit all thought of ſtate,
His amorous queſtions to debate.
But, heare his Logicke, he will prove
There is no buſineſſe, but to be in love.
The words of Sport, my Lords, and courſe.
Your Ladyes yet, will not thinke worſe
Of Love for this: they ſhall command
My Bow, my Quiver, and my Hand.
What, here to ſtand
and kill the Flies?
Alas, thy ſervice they deſpiſe.
One Beauty here, hath in her eyes,
More ſhafts then from thy bow o're flew,
Or that poore quiver knew.
Theſe Dames,
They need not Love's, they have Natures flames:
I ſee the Beauty, that you ſo report.
Cupid, you muſt not point in Court;
Where live ſo many of a ſort.
Of Harmony theſe learn'd their ſpeech,
The Graces did them footing teach,
And, at the old Idalian bralls,
They daunc'd your Mother downe. Shee calls.
Arme, arme then all.
Young blouds come on,
And charge: Let every man take one.
And try his fate.
Theſe are faire warres.
And will be carried without ſcarres.
A joyning, but of feet, and hands.
Is all the Time, and Love commands.
Or if you doe their gloves off-ſtrip.
Or taſte the Nectar of the lip:
See, ſo you temper your deſires,
For kiſſes, that yee ſucke not fires.
The Courtly ſtrife is done, it ſhould appeare,
Betweene the Youths, and Beauties of the yeare,
Wee hope that now theſe lights will know their ſpheare,
And ſtrive hereafter to ſhine ever here:
Like brighteſt Planets, ſtill to move
In th'eye of Time, and orbes of Love.
Hippolitus, Hippolitus.
Diana?
Shee.
Be ready you, or Cephalus,
To waite on me.
Wee ever be.
Your Goddeſſe hath beene wrong'd to night,
By Loves report unto the Time.
The injury, it ſelfe will right,
Which only Fame hath made a crime.
For Time is wiſe,
And hath his eares as perfect as his eyes.
Who's that deſcends? Diana?
Yes.
By like her troope ſhee hath begun to miſſe.
Let's meet, and queſtion what her errand is.
Shee will prevent thee, Saturne, not t' uſ
Her-ſelfe unto thee, rather to complaine
That thou and Venus both ſhould ſo abuſe
The name of Dian, as to entertaine
A thought, that ſhe had purpoſe to defraud
The Time, of any glories that nere his:
To doe Time honour rather, and applaud
His worth, hath beene her ſtudy.
And it is.
I call'd theſe Youth's forth; in their bloud; and prime
(Out of the honour, th I bore their parts)
To make them fitter ſo to ſerve the Time
By labour, riding, and thoſe ancient arts,
That firſt enabled men unto the warres,
And furniſh'd Heaven with ſo many Starres:
As Perſeus, Caſtor, Pollux, and the reſt,
Who were of Hunters firſt, of Men the beſt;
Whoſe ſhades doe yet remaine within yond' groves,
Themſelves there ſporting with their nobler loves:
And ſo may theſe doe, if the Time give leave.
Chaſt Dians purpoſe we doe now conceive,
And yeeld thereto.
And ſo doth Love.
All Votes doe in one circle move.
Turne Hunters then,
agen.
Hunting, it is the nobleſt exerciſe,
Makes men laborious, active, wiſe,
Brings health, and doth the ſpirits delight,
It help's the hearing, and the ſight:
It teacheth arts that never ſlip
The memory, good horſmanſhip,
Search, ſharpneſſe, courage, and defence,
And chaſeth all ill habits thence.
Turne Hunters then,
agen,
But not of men.
Follow his ample;
And juſt example,
That hates all chace of malice, and of bloud:
And ſtudies only wayes of good,
To keepe ſoft Peace in breath.
Man ſhould not hunt Mankind to death,
But ſtrike the enemies of Man;
Kill vices if you can:
They are your wildeſt beaſts.
And when they thickeſt fall, you make the Gods true feaſts.