YOV are wel-come to your Country (deere Atoni )
You haue bin long in France, and you returne
A very formall French-man, in your habit.
How doe you like the French Court?
I admire it,
In seeking to reduce both State, and People
To a fix'd Order, there iuditious King
Begins at home: Quits first his Royall Pallace
Of flattring Sicophants of dissolute,
And infamous persons which he sweetely termes
His Masters Master-peece (the worke of Heauen)
Considring duely, that a Princes Court
Is like a common Fountaine, whence should flow,
Pure siluer-droppes ingenerall: But if 't chance
Some curs'd example poyson't neere the head,
"Death, and diseases through the whole land spread.
And what is't makes this blessed gouernment,
But a most prouident Councell, who dare freely
Informe him, the corruption of the times?
Though some oth'Court hold it presumption▪
To instruct Princes what they ought to doe,
It is a noble duety to informe them
What they ought to fore-see: Here comes Bosola
The onely Court-Gall: yet I obserue his rayling
Is not for simple loue of Piety:
Indeede he rayles at those things which he wants,
Would be as leacherous, couetous, or proud,
Bloody, or enuious, as any man,
If he had meanes to be so: Here's the Cardinall.
I doe haunt you still.
So.
I haue done you
Better seruice then to be slighted thus:
Miserable age, where onely the reward
Of doing well, is the doing of it.
You inforce your merrit to-much.
I fell into the Gallis in your seruice,
Where, for two yeares together, I wore two Towells in stead of
A shirt, with a knot on the shoulder, after the fashion of a
Romaine Mantle: Slighted thus? I will thriue some way:
Black-birds fatten best in hard weather: why not I,
In these dogge dayes?
Would you could become honest,
With all your diuinity, do but direct me the way to it, I
Haue knowne many trauell farre for it, and yet returne as
Arrant knaues, as they went forth; because they carried
Themselues alwayes a long with them; Are you gon?
Some fellowes (they say) are possessed with the diuell,
But this great fellow, were able to possesse the greatest
Diuell, and make him worse.
He hath denied thee some suit?
He, and his brother, are like Plum-trees (that grow crooked
Ouer standing-pooles) they are rich, and ore-laden with
Fruite, but none but Crowes, Pyes, and Catter-pillers feede
On them: Could I be one of their flattring Panders, I
Would hang on their eares like a horse-leach, till I were full, an
Then droppe off: I pray leaue me.
Who wold relie vpon these miserable dependances, in expectation to
Be aduanc'd to morrow? what creature, euer fed worse, then hoping
Tantalus? nor euer did any man more fearefully, then he that hop'd
For a pleadon: There are rewards for hawkes, and dogges, and
When they haue done vs seruice; but for a Souldier, that hazards his
Limbes in a battaile, nothing but a kind of Geometry, is his last Supportation.
Geometry?
I, to hang in a faire paire of slings, take his latter-swinge in the
World, vpon an honorable pare of Crowtches, from hospitall
To hospitall, fare ye well Sir. And yet do not you scorne vs, for
Places in the Court, are but likes beds in the hospitall, where this
Mans head lies at that mans foote, and so lower, and lower.
I knew this fellow (seauen yeares) in the Gallies,
For a notorious murther, and 'twas thought
The Cardinall suborn'd it: he was releas'd
By the French Generall (Gaston de Foux)
When he recouer'd Naples.
'Tis great pitty
He should be thus neglected, I haue heard
He's very valiant: This foule mellancholly
Will poyson all his goodnesse, for (i'le tell you)
If too immoderate sleepe, be truly sayd
To be an inward rust vnto the soule;
It then doth follow want of action
Breeds all blacke male-contents, and their close rearing
(Like mothes in cloath) doe hurt for want of wearing.
The Presence 'gins to fill, you promis'd me
To make me the partaker of the natures
Of some of your great Courtiers.
The Lord Cardinalls
And other strangers, that are now in Court,
I Shall: here comes the great Calabrian Duke.
Who tooke the Ring oftnest?
Antonia Bologna (my Lord)
Our Sister Duchesse great Master of her houshold?
Giue him the Iewell: when shall we leaue this sportiue-action,
And fall to action indeed?
Me thinkes (my Lord)
You should not desire to go to war, in person.
Now, for some grauity: why (my Lord?)
It is fitting a Souldier arise to be a Prince, but not necessary
A Prince descend to be a Captaine?
Noe?
No, (my Lord)
He were far better do it by a Deputy.
Why should he not aswell sleepe, or eate, by a Deputy?
This might take idle, offensiue, and base office from him,
Whereas the other depriues him of honour.
Beleeue my experience: that Realme is neuer long in quiet,
Where the Ruler, is a Souldier.
Thou toldst me
Thy wife could not endure fighting.
True (my Lord.)
And of a iest, she broke of a Captaine;
She met, full of wounds: I haue forgot it.
She told him (my Lord) he was a pittifull fellow, to lie,
Like the Children of Ismael all in Tents.
Why, there's a wit were able to vndoe
All the Chyrurgeons o'the City, for although
Gallants should quarrell, and had drawne their weapons,
And were ready to goe to it; yet her perswasions would
Make them put vp.
That she would (my Lord)
How doe you like my Spanish Gennit?
He is all fire.
I am of Pliny's opinion, I thinke he was begot by the wind,
He runs, as if he were ballass'd with Quick-siluer.
True (my Lord) he roles from the Tilt-often.
Ha, ha, ha.
Why do you laugh? Me thinks you that are Courtiers
Should be my touch-wood, take fire, when I giue fire;
That is, laugh when I laugh, were the subiect neuer so wity,
True (my Lord) I my selfe haue heard a very good iest,
And haue scorn'd to seeme to haue so silly a wit, as to vnderstand it.
But I can laugh at your Foole (my Lord▪)
He cannot speake (you know) but he makes faces,
My Lady cannot abide him.
Noe?
Nor endure to be in merry Company: for she saies
Too much laughing, and too much Company, fils her
Too full of the wrinckle.
I would then haue a Mathematicall Instrument made for
Her face, that she might not laugh out of compasse: I shall shortly
Visit you at Millaine (Lord Siluio.)
Your Grace shall arriue most wel-come.
You are a good Horse-man (Antonio) you haue excellent
Riders in France, what doe you thinke of good Horse-man-ship?
Noblely (my Lord) as out of the Grecian-horse, issued
Many famous Princes: So, out of braue Horse-man-ship,
Arise the first Sparkes of growing resolution, that raise
The minde, to noble action.
You haue be-spoake it worthely.
Your brother, the Lord Cardinall, and sister Dutchesse.
Are the Gallies come about?
They are (my Lord.)
Here's the Lord Siluio, is come to take his leaue.
Now (Sir) your promise: what's that Cardinall?
I meane his Temper? they say he's a braue fellow,
Will play his fiue thousand crownes, at Tennis, Daunce,
Court Ladies, and one that hath fought single Combats.
Some such flashes superficially hang on him, for forme:
But obserue his inward Character: he is a mellancholly
Church-man: The Spring in his face, is nothing but the
Ingendring of Toades: where he is iealious of any man.
He laies worse plots for them, then euer was impos'd on
Hercules: for he strewes in his way Flatters, Panders,
Intelligencers, A thiests,: and a thousand such politicall
Monsters: he should haue beene Pope: but in stead of
Comming to it, by the primatiue decensie of the church,
He did bestow bribes, so largely, and so impudently, as if he would
Haue carried it away without heauens knowledge. Some good he Hath done.
You haue giuen too much of him: what's his brother?
The Duke there? a most peruerse, and turbulent Nature,
What appeares in him mirth, is meerely outside,
If he laugh hartely, it is to laugh
All honesty out of fashion.
Twins?
In qualitie:
He speakes with others Tongues, and heares mens suites,
With others Eares: will seeme to sleepe o'th bench
Onely to intrap offenders, in their answeres;
Doombes men to death, by information,
Rewards, by heare-say.
Then the Law to him
Is like a fowle blacke cob-web, to a Spider,
He makes it his dwelling, and a prison
To entangle those shall feede him.
Most true:
He neu'r paies debts, vnlesse they be shewed turnes,
And those he will confesse, that he doth owe,
Last: for his brother, there, (the Cardinall)
They that doe flatter him most, say Oracles
Hang at his lippes: and verely I beleeue them:
For the Diuell speakes in them.
But for their sister, (the right noble Duchesse)
You neuer fix'd you eye, on three faire Meddalls,
Cast in one figure, of so different temper:
For her discourse, it is so full of Rapture,
You onely will begin, then to be sorry
When she doth end her speech: and wish (in wonder)
She held it lesse vaine-glory, to talke much
Then your pennance, to heare her: whilst she speakes,
She throwes vpon a man, so sweet a looke,
That it were able raise one to a Galliard
That lay in a dead palsey; and to doate
On that sweete countenance: but in that looke,
There speaketh so diuine a continence,
As cuts off all lasciuious, and vaine hope.
Her dayes are practis'd in such noble vertue,
That, sure her nights (nay more her very Sleepes)
Are more in Heauen, then other Ladies Shrifts.
Let all sweet Ladies, breake their flattring Glasses,
And dresse themselues in her.
Fye Antonia,
You play the wire-drawer with her commendations.
I'll case the picture vp: onely thus much,
All her particular worth, growes to this somme:
She staines the time past: lights the time to come,
You must attend my Lady, in the gallery,
Some halfe an houre hence.
I shall.
Sister, I haue a suit to you:
To me, Sir?
A Gentleman here: Daniel de Bosola:
One, that was in the Gallies.
Yes, I know him:
A worthy fellow h'is: pray let me entreat for▪
The prouisorship of your horse.
Your knowledge of him,
Commends him, and prefers him.
Call him heither,
Wee now vpon parting: Good Lord Siluio
Do vs commend to all our noble friends
At the Leagues.
Sir, I shall.
You are for Millaine?
I am:
Bring the Carroches: we'll bring you down to the Hauen.
Be sure you entertaine that Bosola
For your Intelligence: I would not be seeene in't.
And therefore many times I haue slighted him,
When he did court our furtherance: as this Morning.
Antonio, the great Master of her houshold
Had beene farre fitter:
You are deceiu'd in him,
His Nature is too honest for such businesse,
He comes: I'll leaue you:
I was lur'd to you.
My brother here (the Cardinall) could neuer abide you.
Neuer since he was in my debt.
May be some oblique character in your face, made him suspect you?
Doth he study Phisiognomie?
There's no more credit, to be giuen to th'face,
Then to a sicke mans vryn, which some call
The Physitians whore, because she cozens him:
He did suspect me wrongfully:
For that
You must giue great men leaue to take their times:
Distrust, doth cause vs seldome be deceiu'd;
You see, the oft shaking of the Cedar-Tree
Fastens it more at roote.
Yet take heed:
For to suspect a friend vnworthely,
Instructs him the next way to suspect you,
And prompts him to deceiue you.
There's gold.
So:
What followes? (Neuer raind such showres as these
Without thunderbolts i'th taile of them;) whose throat must I cut?
Your inclination to shed blood, rides post
Before my occasion to vse you: I giue you that
To liue i'th Court, here: and obserue the Duchesse,
To note all the particulars of her hauiour:
What suitors doe sollicite her for marriage
And whom she best affects: she's a yong widowe,
I would not haue her marry againe.
No, Sir?
Doe not you aske the reason: but be satisfied,
I say I would not.
It seemes you would create me
One of your familiars.
Familiar? vvhat's that?
Why, a very quaint inuisible Diuell, in flesh:
An Intelligencer.
Such a kind of thriuing thing
I would wish thee: and ere long, thou maist arriue
At a higher place by't.
Take your Diuels
Which Hell calls Angels: these curs'd gifts would make
You a corrupter, me an impudent traitor,
And should I take these they 'll'd take me Hell.
Sir, I'll take nothing from you, that I haue giuen:
There is a place, that I procur'd for you
This morning: (the Prouisor-ship o'th' horse)
Haue you heard out?
Noe.
'Tis yours, is't not worth thankes?
I would haue you curse your selfe now, that your bounty
(Which makes men truly noble) ere should make
Me a villaine: oh, that to auoid ingratitude
For the good deed you haue done me, I must doe
All the ill man can inuent: Thus the Diuell
Candies all sinnes are: and what Heauen termes vild,
That names he complementall.
Be your selfe:
Keepe your old garbe of melencholly: 'twill expresse
You enuy those that stand aboue your reach,
Yet striue not to come neere'em: This will gaine
Accesse, to priuate lodgings, where your selfe
May (like a pollitique dormouse,
As I haue seene some,
Feed in a Lords dish, halfe a sleepe, not seeming
To listen to any talke: and yet these Rogues
Haue cut his throat in a dreame: whats my place?
The Prouisors-ship o'th horse? say then my corruption
Grew out of horse-doong: I am your creature.
Away.
Let good men, for good deeds, couet good fame,
Since place, and riches oft are bribes of shame
Sometimes the Diuell doth preach.
We are to part from you: and your owne discretion
Must now be your director.
You are a Widowe:
You know already what man is: and therefore
Let not youth: high promotion, eloquence,
No, nor any thing without the addition, Honor,
Sway your high blood.
Marry? they are most luxurious,
Will wed twice.
O ie:
Their liuers are more spotted
Then Labans sheepe.
Diamonds are of most value
They say; that haue past through most Iewellers hands.
Whores, by that rule, are precious:
Will you heare me?
I'll neuer marry:
So most Widowes say:
But commonly that motion lasts no longer
Then the turning of an houreglasse, the funeral Sermon,
And it, end both together.
Now heare me:
You liue in a ranke pasture here, i'th Court,
There is a kind of honney-dew, that's deadly:
'Twill poyson your fame; looke too't: be not cunning:
For they whose faces doe bolye their hearts,
Are Witches, ere they arriue at twenty yeeres,
I: and giue the diuell sucke.
This is terrible good councell:
Hypocrisie is wouen of a fine small thred,
(Subtler, then Vulcans Engine: yet (beleeu't)
Your darkest actions: nay, your priuat'st thoughts,
Will come to light.
You may slatter your selfe,
And take your owne choice: priuately be married
Vnder the Eues of night.
Think't the best voyage
That ere you made; like the irregular Crab,
Which though't goes backward, thinkes that it goes, right,
Because it goes its owne way: but obserue;
Such weddings, may more properly be said
To be executed, then celibrated.
The marriage night
Is the entrance into some prison.
And those ioyes,
Those lustfull pleasures, are like heauy sleepes
Which doe fore-run mans mischiefe
Fare you well.
Wisdome begins at the end: remember it.
I thinke this speech betweene you both was studied,
It came so roundly off.
You are my sister,
This was my Fathers poyniard: doe you see,
I'll'd be loth to see't looke rusty, 'cause 'twas his:
I would haue you to giue ore these chargeable Reuels;
A Vizor, and a Masque are whispering roomes
That were neu'r built for goodnesse: fare ye well:
And woemen, like that part, which (like the Lamprey)
Hath neu'r a bone in't.
Fye Sir:
Nay,
I meane the Tongue: varietie of Courtship;
What cannot a neate knaue with a smooth tale,
Make a woman beleeue? farewell, lusty Widowe.
Shall this moue me? if all my royall kindred
Lay in my way, vnto this marriage:
I'll'd make them my low foote-steps: And euen now,
Euen in this hate (as men in some great battailes
By apprehending danger, haue atchieu'd
Almost impossible actions: I haue heard Souldiers say so,
So I, through frights, and threatnings, will assay
This dangerous venture: Let old wiues report
I wincked, and chose a husband: Cariola,
To thy knowne secricy, I haue giuen vp
More then my life, my fame:
Both shall be safe:
For I'll conceale this secret from the world
As warily as those that trade in poyson,
Keepe poyson from their children.
Thy protestation
Is ingenious, and hearty: I beleeue it.
Is Antonio come?
He attends you:
Good deare soule,
Leaue me: but place thy selfe behind the Arras,
Where thou maist ouer-heare vs: wish me good speed
For I am going into a wildernesse,
Where I shall find nor path, nor friendly clewe
To be my guide, I sent for you, Sir downe:
Take Pen and Incke, and write: are you ready?
Yes:
What did I say?
That I should write some-what.
Oh, I remember:
After this triumphs, and this large expence
It's fit (like thrifty husbands) we enquire
What's laid vp for to morrow:
So please your beauteous Excellence.
Beauteous? Indeed I thank you: I look yog for your sake.
You haue tane my cares vpon you.
I'le fetch your Grace the
Particulars of your reuinew, and expence.
Oh, you are an vpright treasurer: but you mistooke,
For when I said I meant to make enquiry,
VVhat's layd vp for to morrow: I did meane
VVhat's layd vp yonder for me.
VVhere?
In Heauen,
I am making my will, (as 'tis fit Princes should
In perfect memory) and I pray Sir, tell me
Were not one better make it smiling, thus?
Then in deepe groanes, and terrible ghastly lookes,
As if the guifts we parted with, procur'd
That violent distruction?
Oh, much better.
If I had a husband now, this care were quit:
But I intend to make yon Ouer-seer;
What good deede, shall we first remember? say.
Begin with that first good deed, began i'th'world,
After mans creation, the Sacrament of marriage,
I'ld haue you first prouide for a good husband,
Giue him all.
All?
Yes, your excellent selfe.
In a winding sheet?
In a cople.
St. Winfrid, that were a strange will.
'Twere strange if there were no will in you
To marry againe.
What doe you thinke of marriage?
I take't, as those that deny Purgatory,
It locally containes, or heauen, or hell,
There's no third place in't.
How doe you affect it?
My banishment, feeding my mellancholly,
VVould often reason thus.
Pray let's heare it.
Say a man neuer marry, nor haue children,
What takes that from him? onely the bare name
Of being a father, or the weake delight
To see the little wanton, ride a cocke-horse
Vpon a painted sticke, or heare him chatter
Like a taught Starling.
Fye, fie, what's all this?
One of your eyes is blood-shot, vse my Ring to't,
They say 'tis very soueraigne, 'twas my wedding Ring,
And I did vow neuer to part with it,
But to my second husband.
You haue parted with it now.
Yes, to helpe your eye-sight.
You haue made me starke blind.
How?
There is a sawcy, and ambitious diuell
Is dauncing in this circle.
Remooue him.
How?
There needs small coniuration, when your finger
May doe it: thus, is it fit?
What sayd you?
Sir,
This goodly roose of yours, it too low built,
I cannot stand vpright in't, nor discourse,
Without I raise it higher: raise your selfe,
Or if you please, my hand to helpe you: so.
Ambition (Madam) is a great mans madnes,
That is not kept in chaines, and close-pent-roomes,
But in faire lightsome lodgings, and is girt
With the wild noyce of pratling visitans,
Which makes it lunatique, beyond all cure,
Conceiue not, I am so stupid, but I ayme
Whereto your fauours tend: But he's a foole
That (being a cold) would thrust his hands i'th'fire
To warme them.
So, now the ground's broake,
You may discouer what a wealthy Mine,
I make you Lord off.
Oh my vnworthinesse.
You were ill to sell your selfe,
This darkning of your worth, is not like that
Which trades-men vse i'th'City, their false lightes
Are to rid bad wares off: and I must tell you
If you will know where breathes a compleat man,
(I speake it without flattery) turne your eyes,
And progresse through your selfe.
Were there nor heauen, nor hell,
I should be honest: I haue long seru'd vertue,
And neu'r tane wages of her.
Now she paies it,
The misery of vs, that are borne great,
We are forc'd to woe, because none dare woe vs:
And as a Tyrant doubles with his words,
And fearefully equiuocates: so we
Are forc'd to expresse our violent passions
In ridles, and in dreames, and leaue the path
Of simple vertue, which was neuer made
To seeme the thing it is not: Goe, go brag
You haue left me heartlesse, mine is in your bosome,
I hope 'twill multiply loue there: You doe tremble:
Make not your heart so dead a peece of flesh
To feare, more then to loue me: Sir, be confident,
What is't distracts you? This is flesh, and blood, (Sir,)
'Tis not the figure cut in Allablaster
Kneeles at my husbands tombe: Awake, awake (man)
I do here put of all vaine ceremony,
And onely doe appeare to you, a yong widow
That claimes you for her husband, and like a widow,
I vse but halfe a blush in't.
Truth speake for me,
I will remaine the constant Sanctuary
Of your good name.
I thanke you (gentle loue)
And 'cause you shall not come to me, in debt,
(Being now my Steward) here vpon your lippes
I signe your Quietus est: This you should haue beg'd now,
I haue seene children oft eate sweete-meates thus,
As fearefull to deuoure them too soone.
But for your Brothers?
Do not thinke of them,
All discord, without this circumference,
Is onely to be pittied, and not fear'd:
Yet, should they know it, time will easily
Scatter the tempest.
These words should be mine,
And a'l the parts you haue spoke, if some part of it
Would not haue sauour'd flattery.
Kneele.
Hah?
Be not amaz'd, this woman's of my Councell,
I haue heard Lawyers say, a contract in a Chamber,
(Per verba presenti) is absolute marriage:
Blesse (Heauen) this sacred Gordian, which, let violence
Neuer vntwine.
And may our sweet affections, (like the Sphears)
Be still in motion.
Quickning, and make
The like soft Musique.
That we may imitate the louing Palmes
(Best Embleme of a peacefull marriage)
That neu'r bore fruite deuided.
VVhat can the Church force more?
That Fortune may not know an accident
Either of ioy, or sorrow, to deuide
Our fixed wishes.
How can the Church build faster?
We now are man, and wife, and 'tis the Church
That must but eccho this: Maid, stand a part,
I now am blinde.
What's your conceit in this?
I would haue you leade your Fortune by the hand.
Vnto your marriage bed:
(You speake in me this, for we now are one)
We'll onely lie, and talke together, and plot
T'appease my humorous kindred; and if you please
(Like the old tale, in Alexander and Lodewicke)
Lay a naked sword betweene vs, keepe vs chast:
Oh, let me shrowd my blushes in your bosome,
Since 'tis the treasury of all my secrets.
Whether the spirit of greatnes, or of woman
Raigne most in her, I know not, but it shewes
A fearefull madnes, I owe her much of pitty.
You say you would faine be taken, for an eminent Courtice?
'Tis the very maine of my ambition.
Let me see, you haue a reasonable good face for't already,
And your night-cap expresses your eares sufficient largely,
I would haue you learne to twirle the strings of your band with a
Good grace; and in a set speech, (at th'end of euery sentence,)
To hum, three, or foure times, or blow your nose (till it smart againe,)
To recouer your memory, when you come to be a president in
Criminall causes, if you smile vpon a prisoner, hang him, but if
You frowne vpon him, and threaten him, let him be sure to scape
The Gallowes.
I would be a very merrie president,
Do not sup a nights, 'twill beget you an admirable wit.
Rather it would make me haue a good stomake to quarrel,
For they say, you roaring-boyes eate meate seldome,
And that makes them so valiant:
But how shall I know whether the people take me
For an eminent fellow.
I will teach a tricke to know it,
Giue out you lie a dying, and if you
Heare the common people curse you,
Be sure you are taken for one of the prime night-caps,
You come from painting now?
From what?
Why, from your scuruy face-physicke,
To behold thee not painted enclines somewhat neere
A miracle: These in thy face here, were deepe rutts,
And foule sloughes the last progresse:
There was a Lady in France, that hauing had the small pockes,
Flead the skinne off her face, to make it more leuell;
And whereas before she look'd like a Nutmeg-grater,
After she resembled an abortiue hedge-hog.
Doe you call this painting?
No, no but you call carreening of an old
Morphew'd Lady, to make her disembogue againe,
There's rough-cast phrase to your plastique.
It seemes you are well acquainted with my closset?
One would suspect it for a shop of witch-craft,
To finde in it the fat of Serpents; sawne of Snakes, Iewes spittle,
And their yong children ordures, and all these for the face:
I would sooner eate a dead pidgeon▪ taken from the soles of the feete
Of one sicke of the plague, then kisse one of you fasting:
Here are two of you, whose sin of your youth, is the very
Patrimony of the Physition, makes him renew his
Foote-cloth with the Spring, and change his
High-priz'd curtezan with the fall of the leafe:
I do wonder you doe not loath your selues,
Obserue my meditation now:
What thing is in this outward forme of man
To be belou'd? we account it ominous,
If Nature doe produce a Colt, or Lambe,
A Fawne, or Goate, in any limbe resembling
A Man; and flye from't as a prodegy.
Man stands amaz'd to see his deformity,
In any other Creature but himselfe.
But in our owne flesh, though we beare diseases
Which haue their true names, onely tane from beasts,
As the most vlcerous Woolfe, and swinish Meazeall;
Though we are eaten vp of lice, and wormes,
And though continually we beare about vs
A rotten and dead body, we delight
To hide it in rich tissew all our feare,
(Nay all our terrour) is, least our Phisition
Should put vs in the ground, to be made sweete.
Your wife's gone to Rome: you two cople, and get you
To the wels at Leuca, to recouer your aches.
I haue other worke on foote: I obserue our Duchesse
Is sicke a dayes, she puykes, her stomacke seethes,
The ins of her eie-lids, looke most teeming blew,
She waines i'th'cheeke, and waxes fat i'th'flanke;
And (contrary to our Italian fashion,)
Weares a loose-bodied Gowne, there's somewhat in't,
I haue a tricke, may chance discouer it
(A pretty one) I haue bought some Apicocks,
The first our Spring yeelds.
And so long since married?
You amaze me.
Let me seale your lipps for euer,
For did I thinke, that any thing but th'ayre,
Could carry these words from you, I should wish
You had no breath at all: Now Sir, in your contemplation?
You are studdying to become a great wise fellow?
Oh Sir, the opinion of wisedome, is a foule tettor,
That runs all ouer a mans body: if simplicity
Direct vs to haue no euill, it directs vs to a happy
Being: For the subtlest folly proceedes from the
Subtlest wisedome: Let me be simply honest.
I do vnderstand your in-side.
Do you so?
Because you would not seeme to appeare to th'world
Puff'd vp with your preferment: You continue
This out off shashion mellancholly, leaue it, leaue it.
Giue me leaue to be honest in any phrase, in any
Complement whatsoeuer, shall I confesse my selfe to you?
I looke no higher then I can reach:
They are the gods, that must ride on winged horses,
A Lawyers mule of a slow pace, will both surt
My disposition, and businesse: For (marke me)
When a mans mind rides faster then his horse can gallop,
They quickly both tyre.
You would looke vp to Heauen, but I thinke
The Diuell, that rules i'th'aire, stands in your light.
Oh (Sir) you are Lord of the ascendant,
Chiefe man with the Duchesse, a Duke was your
Cosen German, remou'd: Say you were lineally
Descended from King Pippin, or he himselfe,
What of this? search the heads of the greatest riuers in
The World, you shall finde them but bubles of water:
Some would thinke the soules of Princes were brought
Forth by some more weighty cause, then those of meaner persons,
They are deceiu'd, there's the same hand to them:
The like passions sway them, the same reason, that makes
A Vicar goe to Law for a tithe-pig,
And vndoe his neighbours, makes them spoile
A whole Prouince, and batter downe goodly
Cities, with the Cannon.
Your arme Antonio, do I not grow fat?
I am exceeding short-winded: Bosola,
I would haue you (Sir) prouide for me a Littor,
Such a one, as the Duchesse of Florence roade in.
The Duchesse vs'd one, when she was great with childe▪
I thinke she did: come hether, mend my ruffe,
Here, when? thou art such a tedious Lady; and
Thy breath smells of Lymmon pils, would thou hadst done,
Shall I ound vnder thy fingers? I am
So troubled with the mother.
I feare to much.
I haue heard you say, that the French Courries
Weare their hats on fore the King.
I haue seene it.
In the Presence?
Yes:
Why should not we bring vp that fashion?
'Tis ceremony more then duty, that consists
In the remoouing of a peece of felt:
Be you the example to the rest o'th' Court,
Put on your hat first.
You must pardon me:
I haue seene, in colder countries, then in France,
Nobles stand bare to th'Prince; and the distinction
My thought show'd reuerently.
I haue a present for your Grace.
For me sir?
Apricocks (Madam.)
O sir, where are they?
I haue heard of none to yeare.
Good, her colour rises.
Indeed I thanke you: they are wondrous faire ones:
What an vnskilfull fellow is our Gardiner?
We shall haue none this moneth.
Will not your Grace pare them?
No, they tast of muske (me thinkes) indeed they doe:
I know not: yet I wish your Grace had parde'em:
Why?
I forgot to tell you the knaue Gardne,
(Onely to raise his profit by them the sooner)
Did ripen them in horse-doung.
O you iest:
You shall iudge: pray tast one.
Indeed Madam,
I doe not loue the fruit.
Sir, you are loath
To rob vs of our dainties: 'tis a delicate fruit,
They say they are restoratiue?
'Tis a pretty
Art: this grafting.
'Tis so: a bettring of nature.
To make a pippin grow vpon a crab,
A dampson on a black thorne: how greedily she eats them?
A whirlewinde strike off these bawd-farthingalls,
For, but for that, and the loose-bodied gowne,
I should haue discouer'd apparently
The young spring-hall cutting a caper in her belly.
I thanke you (Bosola:) they were right good ones,
If they doe not make me sicke.
How now Madame?
This greene fruit: and may stomake are not friend
How they swell me?
Nay, you are too much swell'd already.
Oh, I am in an extreame cold sweat.
I am very sorry:
Lights to my chamber: O, good Antonio,
I feare I am vndone.
Lights there, lights.
O my most trusty Delio, we are lost:
I feare she's falne in labour: and ther's left
No time for her remoue.
Haue you prepar'd
Those Ladies to attend her? and procur'd
That politique safe conueyance for the Mid-wife
Your Dutchesse plotted.
I haue:
Make vse then of this forc'd occasion:
Giue out that Bosola hath poyson'd her,
With these Apricocks: that will giue some colour▪
For her keeping close.
Fye, fie, the Physitians
Will then flocke to her.
For that you may pretend
She'll vse some prepar'd Antidote of her owne,
Least the Physitians should repoyson her.
I am lost in amazement: I know not what to think on't.
So, so: ther's no question but her teatchiues
And most vulterous eating of the Apricocks, are apparant
Signes of breeding, now?
I am in hast (Sir.)
There was a young wayting-woman, had a monstrous desire
To see the Glasse-house.
Nay, pray let me goe:
And it was onely to know what strange instrument it was,
Should swell vp a glasse to the fashion of a womans belly.
I will heare no more of the Glasse-house,
You are still abusing woemen?
Who I? no, onely (by the way now and then) mention
Your fraileties. The Orrenge tree beare ripe and greene
Fruit▪ and blossoms altogether: And some of you giue entertainment
For pure loue: but more, for more precious reward. The lusty
Spring smels well: but drooping Autumne tasts well: If we
Haue the same golden showres, that rained in the time of Iupiter
The Thunderer: you haue the same Danes still, to hold vp their
Laps to receiue them: didst thou neuer study the Mathematiques?
What's that (Sir.)
Why, to know the trick how to make a many lines meete
In one center: Goe goe; giue your foster-daughters good councel
Tell them, that the Diuell takes delight to hang a womans girdle;
Like a false rusty watch that she cannot discerne how
The time passes.
Shht vp the Court gates:
Why sir? what's the danger?
Shut vp the Posternes presently: and call
All the Officers o'th' Court.
I shall instantly:
Who keepes the key o'th' Parke-gate?
Forobosco.
Let him bring't presently.
Oh, Gentlemen, o'th' Court, the fowlest treason.
If that these Apricocks should be poysond, now;
Without my knowledge.
There was taken euen now a Switzer
In the Duchesse Bed-chamber.
A Switzer?
With a Pistoll in his great cod-piece.
Hh, ha, ha.
The cod-piece was the case for't.
There was a cunning traitor.
Who would haue search'd his cod-piece?
True, if he had kept out of the Ladies chambers:
And all the mowldes of his buttons, were leaden bullets.
Oh wicked Caniball: a fire-lock in's cod-piece?
'Twas a French plot vpon my life.
To see what the Diuell can doe.
All the Offices here?
We are:
Gentlemen,
We haue lost much Plate you know; and but this euening
Iewels, to the value of foure thousand Duckets
Are missing in the Ducthesse Cabinet,
Are the Gates shut?
Yes.
'Tis the Duchesse pleasure
Each Officer be lock'd into his chamber
Till the Sun-rysing: and to send the keyes
Of all their chests, and of their outward doores
Into her bed-chamber: She is very sicke.
At her pleasure.
She intreates you take't not ill: The Innocent
Shall be the more approu'd by it.
Gentleman o'th' Wood-yard, where's your Switzer now?
By this hand 'twas creadably reported by one o'th' Black-guard.
How fares it with the Dutchesse?
She's expos'd
Vnto the worst of torture, paine, and feare;
Speake to her all happy comfort.
How I do play the foole with mine own danger?
You are this night (deere friend) to poast to Rome,
My life lies in your seruice.
Doe not doubt me,
Oh, 'Tis farre from me: and yet feare presents me
Somewhat that looke like danger.
Beleeue it,
'Tis but the shadow of your feare, no more:
How superstitiously we mind our euils?
The throwing downe salt, or crossing of a Hare;
Bleeding at nose, the stumbling of a horse:
Or singing of a Criket, are of powre
To daunt whole man in vs: Sir, fare you well:
I wish you all the ioyes of a bless'd Father;
And (for my faith) lay this vnto your brest,
Old friends (like old swords) still are trusted best.
Sir, you are the happy father of a sonne,
Your wife commends him to you.
Blessed comfort:
For heauen-sake tend her well: I'll presently
Goe set a figure for's Natiuitie.
Sure I did heare a woman shreike: list, hah?
And the sound came (if I receiu'd it right)
From the Dutchesse lodgings: ther's some stratagem,
In the conyning all our Courtiers
To their seuerall wards: I must haue part of it,
My Intelligence will freize else: List againe,
It may be 'twas the mellencholly bird,
(Best friend of silence, and of solitarines)
The Oowle, that schream'd so: hah? Antonio?
I heard some noyse: whose there? what art thou? speake.
Antonio? Put not your face; nor body
To such a forc'd expression of feare,
I am Bosola; your friend.
Bosola?
(This Moale do's vndermine me) heard you no
A noyce euen now?
From whence?
From the Duchesse lodging.
Not I: did you?
I did: or else I dream'd.
Let's walke towards it.
No: It may be, 'twas
But the rising of the winde:
Very likely:
Me thinkes 'tis very cold, and yet you sweat.
You looke wildly.
I haue bin sing a figure
For the Dutchesse Iewells;
Ah: and how falls your question?
Doe you ind it radicall?
What's that to you?
'Tis rather to be question'd what designe
(When all men were commanded to their lodgings)
Makes you a night-walker.
In sooth I'll tell you:
Now all the Court's asleepe, I thought the Diuell
Had least to doe here; I came to say my prayers,
And if it doe offend you, I doe so,
You are a fine Courtier.
This fellow will vndoe me;
You gaue the Dutchesse Apricocks to day,
Pray heauen they were not poysond?
Poysond? a spanish figge
For the imputation.
Traitors are euer confident,
Till they are discouer'd: There were Iewels stolne too,
In my conceit, none are to be suspected
More then your selfe.
You are a false steward.
Sawey slaue: I'll pull thee vp by the rootes;
May be the ruyne will crush you to peeces.
You are an impudent snake indeed (sir)
Are you scarce warme, and doe you shew your sting?
You Libell well (sir.)
No (sir,)
Copy it out: and I will set my hand to't.
My nose bleedes: One that were superstitious, would coun
This ominous: when it meerely comes by chance.
Two letters, that are wrought here, for my name
Are drown'd in blood: meere accedent: for you (sir) I'll take order:
I'th morne you shall be safe: 'tis that must colour
Her lying-in: sir, this doore you passe not:
I doe not hold it fit, that you come neere
The Dutchesse lodgings, till you haue quite your selfe;
The Great are like the Base; nay, they are the same.
When they seeke shamefull waies, to auoid shame.
Antonio here about, did drop a Paper,
Some of your helpe (falce-friend) oh, here it is:
What's here? a childes Natiuitie calculated?
The Dutchesse was deliuer'd of a Sonne, 'tweene the houres twelue, and one, in the night ▪ Anno Dom: 1504. (that's this yeere) decimo nono Decembris, (that's this night) taken according to the Meridian of Malfy (that's our Dutchesse: happy discouery) The Lord of the first house, being combust in the ascendant, signifies short life: and Mars being in a human igne, ioyn'd to the taile of the Dragon, in the eight house, doth threaten a violent death; Caeteta non scrutantur.
Why now 'tis most apparant: This precise fellow
Is the Dutchesse Bawde: I haue it to my wish:
This is a parcell of Intelligency
Our Courtiers were caside-vp for? It needes must follow,
That I must be committed, on pretence
Of poysoning her: which I'll endure, and laugh at:
If one could find the father now: but that
Time will discouer; Old Castruchio
I'th morning poasts to Rome; by him I'll send
A Letter, that shall make her brothers Galls
Ore-flowe their Liuours, this was a thrifty way.
Though Lust doe masque in nea'r so strange disguise,
She's oft found witty, but is neuer wise.
Sit: thou art my best of wishes, pre-thee tell me
What tricke didst thou inuent to come to Rome,
Without thy husband.
Why, (my Lord) I told him
I came to visit an old Anchorite
Heare, for deuotion
Thou art a witty false one:
I meane to him.
You haue preuailed with me
Beyond my strongest thoughts: I would not now
Find you inconstant.
Doe not put thy selfe
To such a voluntary torture: which proceedes
Out of your owne guilt.
How (my Lord?)
You feare my constancy, because you haue approou'd
Those giddy and wild turning in your selfe.
Did you ere find them?
Sooth generally for woemen;
A man might striue to make glasse male-able,
Ere he should make them fixed.
So, (my Lord)
We had need goe borrow that fantastique glasse
Inuented by Galileo the Florentine,
To view an other spacious world i'th' Moone,
And looke to finde a constant woman there.
This is very well (my Lord.)
Why do you weepe?
Are teares your iustification? the selfe-same teares
Will fall into your husbands bosome, (Lady)
With a loud protestation, that you loue him
Aboue the world: Come, i'll loue you wisely,
That's iealously, since I am very certaine
You cannot me make cuckould.
I'll go home
To my husband.
You may thanke me, (Lady)
I haue taken you off your mellancholly pearch,
Boare you vpon my fist, and shew'd you 'game,
And let you flie at it: I pray the kisse me,
VVhen thou was't with thy husband, thou was't watch'd
Like a tame Ellephant: (still you are to thanke me)
Thou hadst onely kisses from him, and high feeding,
But what delight was that? 'twas iust like one
That hath a little lingring on the Lute,
Yet cannot tune it: (still you are to thanke me.)
You told me of a piteous wound i'th'heart,
And a sicke liuour, when you woed me first,
And spake like one in physicke.
Who's that?
Rest firme, for my affection to thee,
Lightning moones low to't.
(Madam) a Gentleman
That's come post from Malfy, desires to see you.
Let him enter, i'll with-draw.
He sayes,
Your husband▪ (old Castruchio) is come to Rome,
Mst pittifully tyr'd with riding post.
Signior Delio? 'tis one of my old Suitors
I was bold to come and see you.
Sir, your are wel-come.
Do you lie here?
Sure, your owne experience
Will satisfie you no, our Romane Prelates
Do not keepe lodging, for Ladies.
Very well:
I haue brought you no comendations from your husband▪
For I know none by him.
I heare he's come to Rome?
I neuer knew man, and beast, of a horse, and a knight,
So weary of each other, if he had had a good backe,
He would haue vndertooke to haue borne his horse,
His breech was so pittifully sore.
Your laughter,
Is my pitty.
Lady, I know not whether
You want mony, but I haue brought you some.
From my husband?
No, from mine owne allowance.
I must heare the condition, ere I be bound to take it.
Looke on't, 'tis gold, hath it not a fine colour?
I haue a Bird more beautifull.
Try the sound on't.
A Lute-string far exceedes it,
It hath no smell, like Cassia, or Cyut,
Nor is it phisicall, though some fond Doctors
Perswade vs, seeth's in Cullisses, i'le tell you,
This is a Creature bred by—
Your husband's come,
Hath deliuer'd a letter to the Duke of Calabria, that,
To my thinking hath put him out of his wits.
Sir, you heare,
'Pray let me know your busines, and your suite,
As briefely as can be.
With good speed, I would wish you
(At such time, as you are non-resident
With your husband) my mistris.
Sir, i'le go aske my husband if I shall,
And straight returne your answere.
Very fine,
Is this her wit, or honesty that speakes thus?
I heard one say the Duke was highly mou'd
With a letter sent from Malfy: I doe feare
Antonio is betray'd: how fearefully
Shewes his ambition now, (vnfortunate Fortune)
"They passe through whirle-pooles, and deepe woes doe shun,
Who the euent weigh, ere the action's done.
I haue this night dig'd vp a man-drake.
Say you?
And I am growne mad with't.
What's the progedy?
Read there, a siter dampn'd, she's loose i'th'hilt:
Growne a notorious Strumpet.
Speake lower.
Lower?
Rogues do not whisper't now, but seeke to publish't,
(As seruants do the bounty of their Lords)
Aloud; and with a couetuous searching eye,
To marke who note them: Oh confusion sease her,
She hath had most cunning baudes to serue her turne,
And more secure conueyances for lust,
Then Townes of garrison, for Seruice.
Is't possible?
Can this be certaine?
Rubarbe, oh, for rubarbe
To purge this choller, here's the cursed day
To prompt my memory, and here'it shall sticke
Till of her bleeding heart, I make a spunge
To wipe it out.
Why doe you make your selfe
So wild a Tempest?
Would I could be one,
That I might tosse her pallace 'bout her eares,
Roote vp her goodly forrests, blast her meades,
And lay her generall territory as wast,
As she hath done her honors.
Shall our blood?
(The royall blood of Arragon, and Castile)
Be thus attaincted?
Apply desperate physicke,
We must not now vse Balsamum, but fire,
The smarting cupping-glasse, for that's the meane
To purge infected blood, (such blood as hers:)
There is a kind of pitty in mie eie,
I'll giue it to my hand-kercher; and now 'tis here,
I'll bequeath this to her Bastard.
What to do?
Why, to make soft lint for his mother wounds,
When I haue hewed her to peeces.
Curs'd creature,
Vnequall nature, to place womens hearts
So farre vpon the left-side.
Foolish men,
That ere will trust their honour in a Barke,
Made of so slight, weake-bull-rush, as is woman,
Apt euery minnt to sinke it?
Thus
Ignorance, when it hath purchas'd honour,
It cannot weild it.
Me thinkes I see her laughing,
Excellent Hyenna, talke to me somewhat, quickly,
Or my imagination will carry me
To see her, in the shamefull act of sinne.
VVith whom?
Happily, with some strong thigh'd Bargeman;
Or one th'wood-yard, that can quoit the sledge,
Or tosse the barre, or else some louely Squire
That carries cole vp, to her priuy lodgings.
You lie beyond your reason.
Goe to (Mistris.)
'Tis not your whores milke, that shall quench my wild-fire,
But your whore a blood.
How idlely shewes this rage?
VVhich carries you, as men conuai'd by witches, through the ayre,
On violent whirle-windes, this intemperate noyce,
Fitly resembles deafe-mens shrill discourse,
VVho talke aloud, thinking all other men
To haue their imperfection.
Haue not you,
My palsey?
Yes, I can be angry
VVithout this rupture, there is not in nature
A thing, that makes man so deform'd, so beastly,
As doth intemperate anger: chide your selfe,
You haue diuers men, who neuer yet exprest
Their strong desire of rest, but by vnrest,
By vexing of themselues: Come, put your selfe
In tune.
So, I will onely study to seeme
The thing I am not: I could kill her now,
In you, or in my selfe, for I do thinke
It is some sinne in vs, Heauen doth reuenge
By her.
Are you starke mad?
I would haue their bodies
Burn't in a coale-pit, with the ventage stop'd,
That their curs'd smoake might not ascend to Heauen:
Or dippe the sheetes they lie in, in pitch or sulphure,
Wrap them in't, and then light them like a match:
Or else to boile their Bastard to a cullisse,
And giue't his leacherous father, to renew
The sinne of his backe.
I'll leaue you.
Nay, I haue done,
I am confident, had I bin damn'd in hell,
And should haue heard of this, it would haue put me
Into a cold sweat: In, in, i'll go sleepe,
Till I know who leapes my sister, i'll not stirre:
That knowne, i'll finde Scorpions to string my whips,
And fix her in a generall ecclipse.
Our noble friend (my most beloued Delio)
Oh, you haue bin a stranger long at Court,
Came you along with the Lord Ferdinand?
I did Sir, and how faires your noble Duchesse?
Right fortunately well: She's an excellent
Feeder of pedegrees: since you last saw her,
She hath had two children more, a sonne, and daughter.
Me thinkes 'twas yester-day: Let me but wincke,
And not behold your face, which to mine eye
Is somewhat leaner, verily I should dreame
It were within this halfe houre.
You haue not bin in Law, (friend Delio)
Nor in prison, nor a Suitor at the Court
Nor beg'd the reuersion of some great mans place,
Nor troubled with an old wife, which doth make
Your time so inseucibly hasten.
'Pray Sir tell me,
Hath not this newes arriu'd yet to he eare;
Of the Lord Cardinall?
I feare it hath,
The Lord Ferdinand, (that's newly come to Court,)
Doth beare himselfe right dangerously.
Pray why?
He is so quiet, that he seemes to sleepe
The tempest out (as Dormise do in Winter,)
Those houses, that are haunted, are most still,
Till the diuell be vp.
What say the common people.
The common-rable, do directly say
She is a Strumpet.
And your grauer heades,
(Which would he pollitique) what censure they?
They do obserue, I grow to infinite purchase
The leaft-hand way, and all suppose the Duchesse
Would amend it, if she could: For, say they
Great Princes, though they grudge their Officers
Should haue such large, and vnconfined meanes
To get wealth vnder them, will not complaine
Least thereby they should make them odious
Vnto the people, for other obligation
Of loue, or marriage, betweene her and me,
They neuer dreame off.
The Lord Ferdinand
Is going to bed.
I'll instantly to bed,
For I am weary: I am to be be-speake
A husband for you.
For me (Sir?) 'pray who is't?
The great Count Malateste.
Fie vpon him,
A Count? he's a meere sticke of sugar-candy,
(You may looke quite thorough him) when I choose
A husband, I will marry for your honour.
You shall do well in't: How is't (worthy Antonio?)
But (Sir) I am to haue priuate conference with you,
About a scandalous report, is spread
Touching mine honour.
Let me be euer deafe to't:
One of Pasquils paper-bullets, court calumney,
A pestilent ayre, which Princes pallaces
Are seldome purg'd off: Yet, say that it were true,
I powre it in your bosome, my fix'd loue,
Would strongly excuse, extenuate, nay deny
Faults where they apparant in you: Goe be safe
In your owne innocency.
Oh bless'd comfort,
This deadly aire is purg'd.
Her guilt treads on
Hot burning cultures: Now Bosola,
How thriues our intelligence?
(Sir) vncertainly,
'Tis rumour'd she hath had three bastards, but
By whom, we may go read i'th' Starres.
Why some
Hold opinion, all things are written there.
Yes, if we could find Spectacles to read them,
I do suspect, there hath bin some Sorcery
Vs'd on the Duchesse.
Sorcery, to what purpose?
To make her doate on some desertles fellow,
She shames to acknowledge.
Can your faith, giue way
To thinke there's powre in potions, or in Charmes,
To make vs loue, whether we will or no?
Most certainely.
A way, these are meere gullcries, horred things
Inuented by some cheating mounte-banckes
To abuse vs: Do you thinke that hearbes, or charmes
Can force the will? Some trialls haue bin made
In this foolish practise; but the ingredients
Were lenatiue poysons, such as are of force
To make the patient mad; and straight the witch
Sweares (by equiuocation, they are in loue.
The witch-craft lies in her rancke bood: this night
I will force confession from her: You told me
You had got (within these two dayes) a false key
Into her Bed-chamber.
I haue.
As I would wish.
What doe you intend to doe?
Can you ghesse?
No:
Doe not aske then:
He that can compasse me, and know my drifts,
May say he hath put a girdle 'bout the world,
And sounded all her quick-sands.
I doe not
Thinke so.
What doe you thinke then? pray?
That you are
Your owne Chronicle too much: and grosly
Flatter your selfe.
Giue me thy hand, I thanke thee:
I neuer gaue Pention but to flatterers,
Till I entertained thee: farewell,
That Friend a Great mans ruine strongely checks,
Who railes into his beliefe, all his defects.
Bring me the Casket hither, and the Glasse;
You get no lodging here, to night (my Lord.)
Indeed, I must perswade one:
Very good:
I hope in time 'twill grow into a custome,
That Noble men shall come with cap, and knee,
To purchase a nights lodging, of their wiues.
I must lye here.
Must? you are a Lord of Misse-rule.
Indeed, my Rule is onely in the night.
To what vse will you put me,
Wee'll sleepe together:
la, what pleasure can two Louers find in sleepe?
My Lord, I lye with her often: and I know
She'll much disquiet you:
See, you are complain'd of.
For she's the sprawlingst bedfellow.
I shall like her the better for that.
Sir, shall I aske you a question?
I pray thee Cariola.
Wherefore still when you lie with my Lady
Doe you rise so early?
Labouring men,
Count the Clocke oftnest Cariola,
Are glad when their task's ended.
I'll stop your mouth.
Nay, that's but one, Venus had two soft Doues
To draw her Chariot: I must haue another:
When wilt thou marry, Cariola?
Neuer (my Lord.)
O sic vpon this single life: forgoe it:
We read how Daphne, for her peeuish slight
Became a fruitlesse Bay-tree: Siriux turn'd
To the pale empty Reede: Anaxarate
Was frozen into Marble: whereas those
Which married, or prou'd kind vnto their friends
Were, by a gracious influence, transhap'd
Into the Oliffe, Pomgranet, Mulbery:
Became Flowres, precious Stones, or eminent Starres.
This is a vaine Poetry: but I pray you tell me,
If there were propos'd me, Wisdome, Riches, and Beauty,
In three seuerall young men, which should I choose?
'Tis a hard question: This was Paris case
And he was blind in't, and there was great cause:
For how was't possible he could iudge right,
Hauing three amorous Goddesses in view,
And they starcke naked: 'twas a Motion
Were able to be-night the apprehention
Of the seueerest Counsellor of Europe.
Now I looke on both your faces, so well form'd
It puts me in mind of a question, I would aske.
What is't?
I doe wonder why hard-fauour'd Ladies
For the most part, keepe worse-fauour'd waieting women,
To attend them, and cannot endure faire-ones.
Oh, that's soone answer'd.
Did you euer in your life know an ill Painter
Desire to haue his dwelling next doore to the shop
Of an excellent Picture-maker? 'twould disgrace
His face-making, and vndoe him: I pre-thee
When were we so merry? my haire tangles.
'Pray-thee (Cariola) let's steale forth the roome,
And let her talke to her selfe: I haue diuers times
Seru'd her the like, when she hath chafde extreamely:
I loue to see her angry: softly Cariola.
Doth not the colour of my haire 'gin to change?
When I waxe gray, I shall haue all the Court
Powder their haire, with Arras, to be like me:
You haue cause to loue me, I entred you into my heart
Before you would vouchsafe to call for the keyes.
We shall one day haue my brothers take you napping:
Me thinkes his Presence (being now in Court)
Should make you keepe your owne Bed: but you'll say
Loue mixt with feare, is sweetest: I'll assure you
You shall get no more children till my brothers
Consent to be your Ghossips: haue you lost your tongue? 'tis welcome:
For know whether I am doomb'd to liue, or die,
I can doe both like a Prince.
Die then, quickle:
Vertue, where art thou hid? what hideous thing
Is it, that doth ecclipze thee?
'Pray sir heare me:
Or is it true, thou art but a bare name,
And no essentiall thing?
Sir:
Doe not speake.
No sir:
I will plant my soule in mine cares, to heare you.
Oh most imperfect light of humaine reason,
That mak'st so vnhappy, to fore see
What we can least preuent: Pursue thy wishes:
And glory in them: there's in shame no comfort,
But to be past all bounds, and sence of shame.
I pray sir, heare me: I am married,
So:
Happily, not to your liking: but for that
Alas: your sheeres doe come vntimely now
To clip the birds wings, that's already flowne:
Will you see my Husband?
Yes, if I
Could change eyes with a Basilisque:
Sure, you came hither
By his confideracy.
The howling of a Wolfe
Is musicke to the (schrech-Owle) pre'thee peace:
What ere thou art, that hast enioy'd my sister,
(For I am sure thou hearst me) for thine owne sake
Let me not know thee: I came hither, prepar'd
To worke thy discouery: yet am now perswaded
It would beget such violent effects
As would dampe vs both: I would not for ten Millions
I had beheld thee: therefore vse all meanes
I neuer may haue knowledge of thy name;
Enioy thy lust still, and a wretched life,
On that condition: And for thee (vilde woman,)
If thou doe wish thy Leacher may grow old
In thy Embracements, I would haue thee build
Such a roome for him, as our Anchorites
To holier vse enhabite: Let not the Sunne
Shine on him, till he's dead: Let Dogs, and Monkeys
Onely conuerse with him, and such dombe things
To whom Nature denies vse, to sound his name.
Doe not keepe a Paraqueto, least she learne it;
If thou doe loue him, cut out thine owne tongue
Least it bewray him.
Why might not I marry?
I haue not gone about, in this, to create
Any new world, or custome.
Thou art vndone:
And thou hast ta'ne that massiy sheete of lead
That hid thy husbands bones, and foulded it
About my heart.
Mine bleedes for't.
Thine? thy heart?
What should I nam't, vnlesse a hollow bullet
Fill'd with vnquenchable wild-fire?
You are, in this
Too strict: and were you not my Princely brother
I would say to wilfull: My reputation
Is safe.
Dost thou know what reputation is
I'll tell thee, to small purpose, since th'instruction
Comes now too late:
Vpon a time Reputation, Loue, and Death,
Would trauell ore the world: and it was concluded
That they should part, and take three seuerall wayes:
Death told them, they should find him in great Battailes:
Or Cities plagu'd with plagues: Loue giues them councell
To enquire for him 'mongst vnambitious shepheards,
Where dowries were not talk'd of: and sometimes
'Mongst quiet kindred, that had nothing left
By their dead Parents: stay (quoth Reputation)
Doe not forsake me: for it is my nature
If once I part from any man I meete
I am neuer found againe: And so, for you:
You haue shooked hands with Reputation,
And made him inuisible: So fare you well.
I will neuer see you more.
Why should onely I,
Of all the other Princes of the World
Be cas'de-vp, like a holy Relique? I haue youth,
And a litle beautie.
So you haue some Virgins,
Th are Wches: I will neuer see thee more.
You saw this apparition.
Yes: we are
Betraid; how came he hither? I should turne
This, to thee, for that.
Pray sir doe: and when
That you haue clft my heart, you shall read there,
Mine innocence:
That Gallery gaue him entrance.
I would this terrible thing would come againe,
That (standing on my Guard) I might relate
My warrantable loue: ha, what meanes this?
He left this with me:
And it seemes, did wish
You would vse it on your selfe?
His Action
Seem'd to intend so much.
This hath a handle to't,
As well as a point, turne it towards him,
And so fasten the keene edge, in his rancke gall:
How now? who knocks? more Earthquakes?
I stand
As if a Myne, beneath my feete, were ready
To be blowne vp.
'Tis Bosola:
Away,
Oh misery, me thinkes vniust actions
Should weare these masques, and curtaines; and not we:
You must instantly part hence: I haue fashion'd it already.
The Duke your brother is ta'ne vp in a whirle wind
Hath tooke horse, and's rid poast to Rome.
So late?
He told me, (as he mounted into th'sadle,)
You were vndone.
Indeed, I am very neere it.
What's the matter?
Antonio, the master of our house-hold
Hath dealt so falsely with me, in's accounts:
My brother stood engag'd with me for money
Ta'ne vp of certaine Neopolitane Iewes,
And Antonio let's the Bonds be forfeyt.
Sange: this is cunning:
And hereupon
My brothers Bills at Naples are protested
Against: call vp our Officers.
I shall.
The place that you must flye to, is Ancona,
Hire a house there. I'll send after you
My Treasure, and my Iewls: our weake safetie
Runnes vpon engenous wheeles: short sillables,
Must stand for periods: I must now accuse you
Of such a fained crime, as Tasso calls
Magnanima Mensogna: a Noble Lie,
'Cause it must shield our honors: harke they are comming.
Will your Grace heare me?
I haue got well by you: you haue yeelded me
A million of losse; I am like to inherit
The peoples curse for your Stewardship:
You had the tricke, in Audit time to be sicke,
Till I had sign'd your Quietus; and that cur'de you
Without helpe of a Doctor. Gentlemen,
I would haue this man be an example to you all:
So shall you hold my fauour: I pray let him;
For h'as done that (alas) you would not thinke of,
And (because I intend to be rid of him)
I meane not to publish: vse your fortune else-where.
I am strongely arm'd to brooke my ouer-throw,
As commonly men beare with a hard yeere:
I will not blame the cause on't; but doe thinke
The necessitie of my maleuolent starre
Procures this, not her humour: O the inconstant,
And rotten ground of seruice, you may see:
'Tis eu'n like him, that in a winter night
Takes a long slumber, ore a dying sie;
A-loth to part from't: yet parts thence as cold,
As when he first sat downe.
We doe confifcate
(Towards the satisfying of your accounts)
All that you haue.
I am all yours: and 'tis very fit
All mine should be so.
So, sir; you haue your Passe.
You may see (Gentlemen) what 'tis to serue
A Prince with body, and soule.
Heere's an example, for extortion; what moysture, is drawne out of the Sea, when fowle weather comes, powres downe, and runnes into the Sea againe.
I would know what are your opinions
Of this Antonio.
He could not abide to see a Pigges head gaping,
I thought your Grace would finde him a Iew:
I would you had bin his Officer, for your owne sake.
You would haue had more money.
He stop'd his eares with blacke wooll: and to (those came a woman.
To him for money) said he was thicke of hearing.
Some said he was an hermophrodite, for he could not abide
How scuruy prowd he would looke, when the Treasury was full:
Well, let him goe:
Yes, and the chippings of the Buttrey fly after him,
To scowre his gold Chaine.
Leaue vs: what doe you thinke of these?
That these are Rogues; that in's prosperitie,
But to haue waited on his fortune, could haue vvish'd
His dutty Stirrop rited through their noses:
And follow'd after's Mue, like a Beare in a Ring.
Would haue prostituted their daughters, to his Lust:
Made their first-borne and Intelligencers: thought none happy
But such as vvere borne vnder his bless'd Plannet:
And vvore his Liuory: and doe these Lyce drop off now?
Well, neuer looke to haue the like againe;
He hath left a sort of slattring rogues, behind him,
Their doombe must follow: Princes pay flatterers,
In their owne money: Flatterers dissemble their vices,
And they dissemble their lies, that's Iustice:
Alas, poore gentlemen,
Poore? he hath amply fill'd his coses.
Sure he was too honest: Pluto the god of riches,
When he's sent (by Iupiter) to any man
He goes limping, to signifie that wealth
That comes on god's name, comes slowly, but when he's sent
One the diuells arrand, he rides poast, and comes in by settles▪
Let me shew you, what a most vnlu'd iewell,
You haue (in a wanton humour) throwne away,
To blesse the man shall find him: He was an excellent
Courtier, and most faithfull, a souldier, that thought it
As beastly to know his owne value too little,
As deuillish to acknowledge it too much,
Both his vertue, and forme, deseru'd a farre better fortune:
His discourse rather delighted to iudge it selfe, then shew it selfe.
His breast was fill'd with all perfection,
And yet it seem'd a priuate whispring roome.
It made so little noyse of't.
But he was basely descended.
Will you make your selfe a mercinary herald,
Rather to examine mens pedegrees, then vertues?
You shall want him,
For know an honest states-man to a Prince,
Is like a Cedar, planted by a Spring,
The Spring bathes the trees roote, the gratefull tree,
Rewards it with his shadow: you haue not done so,
I would sooner swim to the Bermoothes on two Politisians
Rotten bladders, tide together with an Intelligence hart-string
Then depend on so changeable a Princes fauour.
Fare-thee-well (Antonio) since the mallice of the world
Would needes downe with thee, it cannot be sayd yet
That any ill happened vnto thee, considering thy all,
Was accompanied with vertue.
Oh, you render me excellent Musicke.
Say you?
This good one that you speake of, is my husband.
Do I not dreame? can this ambitious age
Haue so much goodnes in't, as to prefer
A man, meerely for worth: without these shadowes
Of wealth, and painted honors? possible?
I haue had three children by him.
Fortunate Lady,
For you haue made your priuate nuptiall bed
The humble, and faire Seminary of peace,
No question but: many an vnbenific'd Scholler
Shall pray for you, for this deed, and reioyce
That some preferment in the world can yet
Arise from merit. The virgins of your land
(That haue no dowries) shall hope, your example
Will raise them to rich husbands: Should you want
Souldiers 'twould make the very Turkes and Moores
Turne Christians, and serue you for this act.
Last, the neglected Poets of your time,
(In honour of this trophee of a man,
Rais'd by that curious engine, (your white hand)
Shall thanke you, in your graue for't; and make that
More reuerend then all the Cabinets
Of liuing Princes: For Antonio
His fame, shall likewise flow, from many a pen,
When Heralds shall want coates, to sell to men.
As I taste comfort, in this friendly speech,
So would I finde concealement.
O the secret of my Prince.
Which I will weare on th'in-side of my heart.
You shall take charge of all my coyne, and iewels,
And follow him, for he retires himselfe
To Ancona.
So.
Whether, within few dayes,
I meane to follow thee.
Let me thinke:
I would wish your Grace, to faigne a Pilgrimage
To our Lady of Loretto, (scarce seauen leagues
From faire Ancona) so may you depart
Your Country, with more honour, and your flight
Will seeme a Princely progresse, retaining
Your vsuall traine about you.
Sir, your direction
Shall lead me, by the hand.
In my opinion,
She were better progresse to the bathes
At Leuca, or go visit the Spaw
In Germany, for (if you will beleeue me)
I do not like this iesting with religion,
This faigned Pilgrimage.
Thou superstitious foole,
Prepare vs instantly for our departure:
Past sorrowes, let vs moderately lament them,
For those to come, seeke wisely, to preuent them.
A Polititian is the diuells quilted anvell,
He fashions all sinnes on him, and the blowes
Are neuer heard, he may worke in a Ladies Chamber,
(As here for proofe) what rests, but I reueale
All to my Lord? oh, this base quality
Of Intelligencer? why, euery Quality i'th'world
Preferres but gaine, or commendation:
Now for this act, I am certaine to be rais'd,
"And men that paint weedes, (to the life) are prais'd.
Must we turne Souldier then?
The Emperour,
Hearing your worth that way, (ere you attain'd
This reuerend garment,) ioynes you in commission
With the right fortunate souldier, the Marquis of Pescara,
And the famous Lanoy.
He that had the honour
Of taking the French King Prisoner?
The same,
Here's a plot drawne, for a new Fortification,
At Naples.
This great Count Malastete, I perceiue
Hath got employment?
No employment (my Lord)
A marginall note in the muster-booke, that he is
A voluntary Lord.
He's no Souldier?
He ha's worne gun-powder, in's hollow tooth, for the tooth-ache.
He comes to the leaguer, with a full intent,
To eate fresh beefe, and garlicke, meanes to stay
Till the sent begon, and straight returne to Court.
He hath read all the late seruice,
As the City Chronicle relates it,
And keepe two Pewterers going, onely to expresse
Battailes in modell.
Then hel; fight by the booke.
By the Almanacke, I thinke
To choose good dayes, and shun the Criticall▪
That's his mistris skarfe.
Yes, he protests
He would do much for that taffita,
I thinke he would run away from a battaile
To saue it from taking prisoner.
He is horribly afraid,
Gun-powder will spoile the perfume on't,
I saw a Duch-man breake his pate once
For calling him pot-gun, he made his head
Haue a boare in't, like a musket.
I would he had made a touch-hole to't.
He is indeede a guarded sumpter-cloath
Onely for the remooue of the Court.
Bosola arriu'd? what should be the businesse?
Some falling out amongst the Cardinalls.
These factions amongst great men, they are like
Foxes, when their heads are deuided
They carry fire in their tailes, and all the Country
About them, goes to wracke for't.
What's that Bosola?
I knew him in Padua, a fantasticall scholler,
Like such, who studdy to know how many knots was in
Hercules club, of what colour Ahilles beard was,
Or whether Hector were not troubled with the tooth-ach,
He hath studdied himselfe halfe bleare-ei'd, to know the
True semitry of Caesars nose by a shooing-horne, and this
He did to gaine the name of a speculatiue man.
Marke Prince Ferdinand,
A very Salamander liues in's eye,
To mocke the eager violence of fire.
That Cardinall hath made more bad faces with his oppression
Then euer Michael Angelo made good ones,
He lifts vp's nose, like a fowle Por-pisse before a storme,
The Lord Ferdinand laughes.
Like a deadly Cannon,
That lightens ere it smoakes.
These are your true pangues of death,
The pangues of life, that strugle with great states-men,
In such a deformed silence, witches whisper their charmes.
Doth she make religion her riding hood
To keepe her from the sun, and tempest?
That: that damnes her: Me thinkes her fault, and
Beauty blended together, shew like leaprosie
The whiter, the fowler: I make it a question
Whether her beggerly brats were euer christned.
I will instantly sollicite the state of Ancona
To haue them banish'd.
You are for Lorett?
I shall not be at your Ceremony: fare you well,
Write to the Duke of Malfy, my yong Nephew,
She had by her first husband, and acquaint him,
With's mothers honesty.
I will.
Antonio?
A slaue, that onely smell'd of yncke, and coumptets,
And neu'r in's like, look'd like a Gentleman,
But in the audit time, go, go presently,
Draw me out an hundreth and fifty of our horse,
And meete me at the fort-bridge.
I haue not seene a goodlier Shrine then this,
Yet I haue visited many.
The Cardinall of Arragon
Is, this day to resigne his Cardinals hat,
His sister Duchesse likewise is arriu'd
To pay her vow of Pilgrimage, I expect
A noble Ceremony.
No question: —They come.
Armes, and Honors, decke thy story,
To thy Fames eternall glory,
Aduerse Fortune euer flie-thee,
No disastrous fate come nigh-thee.
I alone will sing thy praises,
Whom to honour, vertue raises;
And thy study, that diuine-is,
Bent to Marshiall discipline-is:
Lay aside all those robes lie by thee,
Crown thy arts, with armes: they'll beautifie thee.
O worthy of worthiest name, adorn'd in this manner,
Lead brauely thy forces on, vnder wars warlike banner▪
O mayst thou proue fortunate, in all Marshiall courses:
Guide thou still, by skill, in artes, and forces:
Victory attend thee nigh whilst fame sings loud thy powres,
Triumphant conquest crowne thy head, and blessings powre downe showres.
Here's a strange turne of state, who would haue thought
So great a Lady, would haue match'd her selfe
Vnto so meane a person? yet the Cardinall
Beares himselfe much too cruell.
They are banish'd.
But I would aske what power hath this state
Of Ancona to determine of a free Prince?
They are a free state sir, and her brother shew'd
How that the Pope fore-hearing of her loosenesse,
Hath seaz'd into th'protection of the Church
The Dukedome, which she held as dowager.
But by what iustice?
Sure I thinke by none,
Only her brothers instigation.
What was it, with such violence he tooke
Of from her finger?
'Twas her wedding ring,
Which he vow'd shortly he would sacrifice
To his reuenge.
Alasse Antonio,
If that a man be thrust into a well,
No matter who sets hand to't, his owne weight
Will bring him sooner to th'bottome: Come, let's hence.
Fortune makes this conclusion generall,
"All things do helpe th'unhappy man to fall.
Banish'd Ancona?
Yes, you see what powre
Lightens in great mens breath.
Is all our traine
Shrunke to this poore remainder?
These poore men,
(Which haue got little in your seruice) vow
To take your fortune: But your wiser buntings
Now they are sledg'd are gon.
They haue done wisely,
This puts me in minde of death, Physitians thus,
With their hands full of money, vse to giue ore
Their Patients.
Right the fashion of the world,
From decaide fortunes, euery flatterer shrinkes,
Men cease to build, where the foundation sinkes.
I had a very strange dreame to night.
What was't?
Me thought I wore my Coronet of State▪
And on a sudaine all the Diamonds
Were chang'd to Pearles.
My Interpretation
Is, you'll weepe shortly, for to me, the pearles
Doe signifie your teares:
The Birds, that liue i'th field
On the wilde benefit of Nature, liue
Happier then we; for they may choose their Mates,
And carroll their sweet pleasures to the Spring:
You are happily ore-ta'ne.
From my brother?
Yes, from the Lord Ferdinand; your brother,
All loue, and safetie
Thou do'st blanch mischiefe
Wouldst make it white: See, see; like to calme weather
At Sea, before a tempest, false hearts speake faire
To those they intend most mischiefe.
A Letter. Send Antonio to me; I want his head in a busines: (a politicke equiuocation)
He doth not want your councell, but your head;
That is, he cannot sleepe till you be dead.
And here's annother Pitfall, that's strew'd ore
With Roses: marke it, 'tis a cunning one.
I stand ingaged for your husband, for seuerall debts at Naples: let not
That trouble him, I had rather haue his heart, then his mony.
And I beleeue so too.
What doe you beleeue?
That he so much distrusts my husbands loue,
He will by no meanes beleeue his heart is with him
Vntill he see it: The Diuell is not cunning enough
To circumuent vs in Ridles.
Will you reiect that noble, and free league
Of amitie, and loue which I present you?
Their league is like that of some politick Kings
Onely to make themselues of strength, and powre
To be our after-ruine: tell them so;
And what from you?
Thus tell him: I will not come.
And what of this.
My brothers haue dispers'd
Blood-hounds abroad; which till I heare are muzell'd
No truce, though hatch'd with nere such politick skill
Is safe, that hangs vpon our enemies will.
I'll not come at them.
This proclaimes your breeding.
Euery small thing, drawes a base mind to feare:
As the Adamant drawes yron: fare you well sir,
You shall shortly heare from's.
I suspect some Ambush:
Therefore by all my loue; I doe coniure you
To take your eldest sonne, and flye towards Millaine;
Let vs not venture all this poore remainder
In one vnlucky bottom.
You councell safely:
Best of my life, farewell: Since we must part
Heauen hath a hand in't: but no otherwise,
Then as some curious Artist, takes in sunder
A Clocke, or Watch, when it is out of frame
To bring't in better order.
I know not which is best,
To see you dead, or part with you: Farewell Boy.
Thou art happy, that thou hast not vnderstanding
To know thy misery: For all our wit
And reading, brings vs to a truer sence
Of sorrow: In the eternall Church, Sir,
I doe hope we shall not part thus.
Oh, be of comfort,
Make Patience a noble fortitude:
And thinke not how vnkindly we are vs'de:
"Man (like to Cassia) is prou'd best, being bruiz'd.
Must I like to a slaue-borne Russian,
Account it praise to suffer tyranny?
And yet (O Heauen) thy heauy hand is in't.
I haue seene my litle boy, oft scourge his top,
And compar'd my selfe to't: naught made me ere go right,
But Heauens scourge-sticke.
Doe not weepe:
Heauen fashion'd vs of nothing: and we striue,
To bring our selues to nothing: farewell Cariola,
And thy sweet armefull: if I doe neuer see thee more,
Be a good Mother to your litle ones,
And saue them from the Tiger: fare you well.
Let me looke vpon you once more: for that speech
Came from a dying father: your kisse is colder
Then that I haue seene an holy Anchorite
Giue to a dead mans skull.
My heart is turnde to a heauy lumpe of lead,
With which I sound my danger: fare you well.
My Laurell is all withered.
Looke (Madam) what a troope of armed men
Make toward vs.
O, they are very welcome:
When Fortunes wheele, is ouer-charg'd with Princes,
The waight makes it moue swift. I wonld haue my ruine
Be sudden: I am your aduenture, am I not.
You are, you must see your husband no more,
What Diuell art thou, that counterfeits heauens thunder?
Is that terrible? I would haue you tell me
Whether is that note worse, that frights the silly birds
Out of the corne or that which doth allure them
To the nets? you haue hearkned to the last too much.
O misery: like to a rusty ore-char'd Carnon,
Shall I neuer slye in peeces? come: to what Prison?
To one▪
Whether then?
To your Pallace.
I haue heard that Charons boate, serues to conuay
All ore the dismall Lake, but brings none backe againe.
Your brothers meane you, safety, and pitie.
Pitie? with such a pitie men preserue aliue
Pheasmes, and Quailes, when they are not fat enough
To be eaten.
These are your children?
Yes:
Can they pratle?
No:
But I intend, since they were borne accurd;
Cursses shall be their first language.
Fye (Madam)
Forget this base, low-fellow.
Were I a man:
I'll'd beat that counterfeit face, into thy other
One of no Birth.
Say that he was borne meane.
Man is most happy, when's owne actions
Be arguments, and examples of his Vertue.
A barren, beggerly vertue.
I pre-thee who is greatest, can you tell?
Sad tales befit my woe: I'll tell you one.
A Salmon, as she swam vnto the Sea,
Met with a Dog-fish; who encounters her
With this rough language: why art thou so bold
To mixe thy selfe with our high state of floods
Being no eminent Courtier, but one
That for the calmest, and fresh time o'th' yeere
Do'st liue in shallow Riuers, rank'st thy selfe
With silly Smylts, and Shrympes? and darest thou
Passe by our Dog-ship, without reuerence?
O (Quoth the Salmon) sister, be at peace:
Thanke Iupiter, we both haue pass'd the Net,
Our value neuer can be truely knowne,
Till in the Fishers basket we be showne,
I'th' Market then my price may be the higher,
Euen when I am neerest to the Cooke, and fire.
So, to Great men, the Morrall may be stretched.
,,Men oft are valued high, when th'are most wretch'd.
But come: whether you please: I am arm'd 'gainst misery:
Bent to all swaies of the Oppressors will.
There's no deepe Valley, but neere some great Hill.
How doth our sister Dutchesse beare her selfe
In her imprisonment?
Nobly: I'll describe her:
She's sad, as one long vs'd to't: and she seemes
Rather to welcome the end of misery
Then shun it: a behauiour so noble,
As giues a maiestie to aduersitie:
You may discerne the shape of louelinesse
More perfect, in her teares, then in her smiles;
She will muse foure houres together: and her silence,
(Me thinkes) expresseth more, then if she spake.
Her mellancholly seemes to be fortifide
With a strange disdaine.
'Tis so: and this restraint
(Like English Mastiffes, that grow feirce with tying)
Makes her too passionately apprehend
Those pleasures she's kept from.
Curse vpon her:
I will no longer study in the booke
Of anothers heart: informe her what I told you.
All comfort to your Grace;
I will haue none:
'Pray-thee, why do'st thou wrap thy poysond Pilles
In Gold, and Sugar?
Your elder brother the Lord Ferdinand
Is come to visite you: and sends you word
'Cause once he rashly made a solemne vowe
Neuer to see you more; he comes i'th' night:
And prayes you (gently) neither Torch, nor Taper
Shine in your Chamber: he will kisse your hand:
And reconcile himselfe: but, for his vowe,
He dares not see you:
At his pleasure:
Take hence the lights: he's come.
Where are you?
Here sir:
This darkenes suites you well.
I would aske you pardon:
You have it;
For I account it, the honorabl'st reuenge
Where I may kill, to pardon: where are your Cubbs?
Whom?
Call them your children;
For though our nationall law, distinguish Bastards
From true legitimate issue: compassionate nature
Makes them all equall.
Doe you visit me for this?
You violate a Sacrament o'th' Church
Shall make you howle in hell for't.
It had bin well,
Could you haue liu'd thus alwayes: for indeed
You were too much i'th' light: But no more,
I come to seale my peace with you: here's a hand,
To which you haue vow'd much loue: the Ring vpon't
You gaue.
I affectionately kisse it:
'Pray doe: and bury the print of it in your heart:
I will leaue this Ring with you, for a Loue-token:
And the hand, as sure as the ring: and doe not doubt
But you shall haue the heart too: when you need a friend
Send it to him, that ow'de it: you shall see
Whether he can ayd you.
You are very cold.
I feare you are not well after your trauell:
Hah? lights: oh horrible:
Let her haue lights enough
What witch-craft doth he practise, that he hath left
A dead-mans hand here?
Looke you: here's the peece, from which 'twas t'e;
He doth present you this sad spectacle,
That now you know directly they are dead,
Hereafter you may (wisely) cease to grieue
For that which cannot be recouered.
There is not betweene heauen, and earth one wish
I stay for after this: it wastes me more,
Then were't my picture, fashion'd out of wax,
Stucke with a magicall needle, and then buried
In some fowle dung-hill: and yond's an excellent property
For a tyrant, which I would account mercy,
What's that?
If they would bind me to that liueles truncke,
And let me freeze to death.
Come, you must liue.
That's the greatest torture soules feele in hell,
In hell: that they must liue, and cannot die:
Portia, I'll new kindle thy Coales againe,
And reuiue the rare, and almost dead example
Of a louing wife.
O sye: despaire? remember
You are a Christian.
The Church enioynes fasting:
I'll starue my selfe to death.
Leaue this vaine sorrow;
Things being at the worst, begin to mend:
The Bee when he hath shot his sting into your hand
May then play with your eye-lyd.
Good comfortable fellow
Perswade a wretch that's broke vpon the wheele
To haue all his bones new set: entreate him liue,
To be executed againe: who must dispatch me?
I account this world a tedious Theatre,
For I doe play a part in't 'gainst my will.
Come, be of comfort, I will saue your life.
Indeed I haue not leysure to tend so small a busines.
Now, by my life, I pitty you.
Thou art a foole then,
To wast thy pitty on a thing so wretch'd
As cannot pitty it: I am full of daggers:
Puffe: let me blow these vipers from one.
What are you?
One that wishes you long life.
I would thou wert hang'd for the horrible curse
Thou hast giuen me: I shall shortly grow one
Of the miracles of pitty: I'll goe pray: No,
I'll goe curse:
Oh fye:
I could curse the Starres.
Oh fearefull:
And those three smyling seasons of the yeere
Into a Russian winter: nay the world
To its first Chaos.
Looke you, the Starres shine still:
Oh, but you must remember, my curse hath a great way to goe:
Plagues, (that make lanes through largest families)
Consume them:
Fye Lady:
Let them like tyrants
Neuer be remembred, but for the ill they haue done:
Let all the zealous prayers of mortefied
Church-men forget them,
O vncharitable:
Let heauen, a little while, cease crowning Martirs
To punish them: Goe, howle them this: and say I long to bleed
,,It is some mercy, when men kill with speed.
Excellent; as I would wish: she's plagu'd in Art.
These presentations are but fram'd in wax.
By the curious Master in that Qualitie,
Vincentio Lauriola, and she takes them
For true substantiall Bodies.
Why doe you doe this?
To bring her to despaire.
'Faith, end here:
And go no farther in your cruelty,
Send her a penetentiall garment, to put on,
Next to her delicate skinne, and furnish her
With beades, and prayer bookes.
Damne her, that body of hers,
While that my blood ran pure in't, was more worth
Then, that which thou wouldst comfort, (call'd a soule)
I will send her masques of common Curtizans,
Haue her meate seru'd vp by baudes, and ruffians,
And ('cause she'll needes be mad) I am resolu'd
To remoue forth the common Hospitall,
All the mad-folke, and place them neere her lodging:
There let them practise together, sing, and daunce,
And act their gambols to the full o'th'moone:
If she can sleepe the better for it, let her,
Your worke is almost ended.
Must I see her againe?
Yes.
Neuer.
You must.
Neuer in mine owne shape,
That's forfeited, by my intelligence,
And this last cruell lie: when you send me next,
The businesse shalbe comfort.
Very likely,
Thy pity is nothing of kin to thee: Antonio,
Lurkes about Millaine, thou shalt shortly thither,
To feede a fire, as great as my reuenge,
Which neu'r will slacke, till it haue spent his fuell,
"Intemperate agues, make Physitians cruell.
Wha oyse was that?
Of Mad-men (Lady) which your Tyrant brother
Hath plac'd about your lodging: This tyranny,
I thinke was neuer practis'd till this howre.
Indeed I thanke him: nothing but noyce, and folly
Can keepe me in my right wits, whereas reason
And silence, make me starke mad: Sit downe,
Discourse to me some dismall Tragedy.
O 'twill encrease your mellancholly.
Thou art deceiu'd,
To heare of greater griefe, would lessen mine,
This is a prison?
Yes, but you shall liue
To shake this durance off.
Thou art a foole,
The Robin red-brest, and the Nightingale,
Neuer liue long in cages.
Pray drie your eyes.
What thinke you of Madam?
Of nothing▪
When I muse thus, I sleepe.
Like a mad-man, with your eyes open?
Do'st thou thinke we shall know one an other,
In th'other world?
Yes, out of question.
O that it were possible we might
But hold some two dayes conference with the dead.
From them, I should learne somewhat I am sure
I neuer shall know here: I'll tell thee a miracle,
I am not mad yet, to my cause of sorrow.
Th'heauen ore my head, seemes made of molton brasse.
The earth of flaming sulphure, yet I am not mad:
I am acquainted with sad misery,
As the tan'd galley-slaue, is with his Oare,
Necessity makes me suffer constantly,
And custome makes it easie, who do I looke like now?
Like to your picture in the gallery,
A deale of life in shew, but none in practise:
Or rather like some reuerend monument
Whose ruines, are euen pittied.
Very proper:
And Fortune seemes onely to haue her eie-sight,
To behold my Tragedy: How now,
What noyce is that?
I am come to tell you,
Your brother hath entended you some sport:
A great Physitian, when the Pope was sicke
Of a deepe mellancholly, presented him
With seuerall sorts of mad-men, which wilde obiect
(Being full of change, and sport,) forc'd him to laugh,
And so th'impost-hume broke: the selfe same cure,
The Duke intends on you.
Let them come in.
There's a mad Lawyer, and a secular Priest,
A Doctor that hath forfeited his wits
By iealousie: an Astrologian,
That in his workes, sayd such a day o'th'moneth,
Should be the day of doome; and fayling of't,
Ran mad: an English Taylor, crais'd i'th'braine,
With the studdy of new fashion: a gentleman vsher
Quite beside himselfe, with care to keepe in minde,
The number of his Ladies salutations;
Or how do you, she employ'd him in each morning:
A Farmer too, (an excellent knaue in graine)
Mad, 'cause he was hindred transportation,
And let one Broaker, (that's mad) loose to these,
Youl'd thinke the diuell were among them.
Sit Cariola: let them loose when you please,
For I am chain'd to endure all your tyranny.
O let vs howle, some heauy note,
some deadly-dogged howle,
Sounding, as from the threatning throat,
of beastes, and fatall fowle.
As Rauens, Schrich-owles, Bulls, and Beares,
We'll bill, and bawle our parts,
Till yerk some noyce haue cloy'd your eares,
and coasiu'd your hearts.
At last when as our quire wants breath,
our bodies being blest,
We'll sing like Swans, to welcome death,
and die in loue and rest.
Doomes-day not come yet? I'll draw it neerer by a perspectiue, or make a glasse, that shall set all the world on fire vpon an instant: I cannot sleepe, my pillow is stuff't with a littour of Porcupines.
Hell is a meere glasse-house, where the diuells are continually blowing vp womens soules, on hollow yrons, and the fire neuer goes out.
I will lie with euery woman in my parish the tenth night:
I will tithe them ouer like hay-cockes.
Shall my Pothecary out-go me, because I am a
Cuck-old? I haue found out his roguery: he makes allom
Of his wiues vrin, and sells it to Puritaines, that haue sore
Throates with ouer-strayning.
I haue skill in Harroldry.
Hast?
You do giue for your creast, a wood-cockes head, with the
Braines pickt out on't, you are a very ancient Gentleman.
Greeke is turn'd Turke, we are onely to be sau'd by the
Heluetian translation.
Come on Sir, I will lay the law to you.
Oh, rather lay a coraziue, the law will eate to the bone.
He that drinkes but to satisfie nature is damn'd.
If I had my glasse here, I would shew a sight should make
All the women here, call me mad Doctor.
What's he, a rope-maker?
No, no, no, a snufling knaue, that while he shewes the
Tombes, will haue his hand in a wenches placket.
Woe, to the Caroach, that brought home my wife from
The Masque, at three a clocke in the morning, it had a large
Feather-bed in it.
I haue paired the diuells nayles forty times, roasted them
In Rauens egges, and cur'd agues with them.
Get me three hundred milch bats, to make possets▪
To procure sleepe.
All the Colledge may throw their caps at me, I haue made a
Soape-boyler costiue, it was my master-peece:
Is he mad to?
'Pray question him: I'll leaue you.
I am come to make thy tombe.
Hah, my tombe?
Thou speak'st, as if I lay vpon my death bed,
Gasping for breath: do'st thou perceiue me sicke?
Yes, and the more dangerously, since thy sicknesse is insensible.
Thou art not mad sure, do'st know me?
Yes.
Who am I?
Thou art a box of worme-seede at best, but a saluatory
Of greene mummey: what's this flesh? a little cruded milke,
Phantasticall puffe-paste: our bodies are weaker then those
Paper prisons boyes vse to keepe flies in: more contemptible:
Since ours is to preserue earth-wormes: didst thou euer see
A Larke in a cage? such is the soule in the body: this world
Is like her little turfe of grasse, and the Heauen ore our heades,
Like her looking glasse, onely giues vs a miserable knowledge
Of the small comsse of our prison.
Am not I, thy Duchesse?
Thou art some great woman sure, for riot begins to sit on thy
Fore-head (clad in gray haires) twenty yeares sooner, then on a
Merry milke mydes. Thou sleep'st worse, then if a mouse
Should be forc'd to take vp her lodging in a cats eare:
A little infant, that breedes it's teeth, should it lie with thee, would
Crie out, as if thou wert the more vnquiet bed-fellow.
I am Duchesse of Malfy still.
That makes thy sleepes so broken:
"Glories (like glowe-wormes) a farre off, shine bright,
But look'd to neere, haue neither heate, nor light.
Thou art very plaine.
My trade is to flatter the dead, not the liuing
I am a tombe-maker.
And thou com'st to make my tombe?
Yes.
Let me be a little merry,
Of what stuffe wilt thou make it?
Nay, resolue me first, of what fashion?
Why, do we grow phantasticall in our death-bed?
Do we affect fashion in the graue?
Most ambitiously: Princes images on their tombes,
Do not lie, as they were wont, seeming to pray,
Vp to heauen: but with their hands vnder their cheekes,
(As if they died of the tooth-ache) they are not carued
With their eies, fix'd vpon the starres; but as their
Mindes were wholy bent vpon the world,
The selfe-same way they seeme to turne their faces.
Let me know fully therefore the effect
Of this thy dismall preparation,
This talke, fit for a charnell?
Now, I shall,
Here is a present from your Princely brothers,
And may it arriue wel-come, for it brings
Last benefit, last sorrow.
Let me see it,
I haue so much obedience, in my blood,
I wish it in ther veines, to do them good.
This is your last presence Chamber.
O my sweete Lady.
Peace, it affrights not me.
I am the common Bell-man,
That vsually is sent to condemn'd persons▪
The night before they suffer:
Euen now thou said'st,
Thou wast a tombe-maker?
'Twas to bring you
By degree to mortification: Listen.
Hearke, now euery thing is still,
The Schritch-Owle, and the whistler shrill,
Call vpon our Dame, aloud,
And bid her quickly don her shrowd:
Much you had of Land and rent,
Your length in clay's now competent.
A long war, disturb'd your minde,
Here your perfect peace is sign'd,
Of what is't, fooles make such vaine keeping?
Sin their conception, their birth, weeping:
Their life, a generall mist of error,
Their death, a hideous storme of terror,
Strew your haire, with powders sweete:
D'on cleane linnen, bath your feete,
And (the foule feend more to checke)
A crucifixe let blesse your necke,
'Tis now full tide, 'tweene night, and day,
End your groane, and come away.
Hence villaines, tyrants, murderers: alas!
What will you do with my Lady? call for helpe.
To whom, to our next neighbours? they are mad-folkes.
Remooue that noyse.
Farwell Cariola,
In my last will, I haue not much to giue
A many hungry guests, haue fed vpon me,
Thine will be a poore reuersion.
I will die with her.
I pray-thee looke thou giu'st my little boy
Some sirrop, for his cold, and let the girle
Say her prayers, ere she sleepe. Now what you please,
What death?
Strangling, here are your Executioners.
I forgiue them:
The apoplexie, cathar, or cough o'th'loongs,
Would do as much as they do.
Doth not death fright you?
Who would be afraid on't?
Knowing to meete such excellent company
In th'other world.
Yet, me thinkes,
The manner of your death should much afflict you,
This cord should terrifie you?
Not a whit,
What would it pleasure me, to haue my throate cut
With diamonds? or to be smothered
With Cssia? or to be shot to death, with pearles?
I know death hath ten thousand seuerall doores
For men to take their Exits: and 'tis found
They go on such strange geometricall hinges,
You may open them both wayes: any way, (for heauen sake)
So I were out of your whispering: Tell my bothers,
That I erceiue death, (now I am well a wake)
Best guift is, they can giue, or I can take,
I would faine put off my last womans-fault,
Il'd not be tedious to you.
We are ready.
Dispose my breath, how please you, but my body
Bestow vpon my women, will you?
Yes.
Pull, and pull strongly, for your able strength,
Most pull downe heauen vpon me:
Yet stay, heauen gates are not so highly arch'd
As Princes pallaces, they that enter there
Must go vpon their knees: Come violent death,
Serue for Mandragora, to make me sleepe;
Go tell my brothers, when I am laid out,
They then may feede in quiet.
Where's the waiting woman?
Fetch her: Some other strangle the children:
Looke you, there sleepes your mistris.
Oh you are damn'd
Perpetually for this: My turne is next,
Is't not so ordered?
Yes, and I am glad
You are so well prepar'd for't.
You are deceiu'd Sir,
I am not prepar'd for't, I will not die,
I will first come to my answere; and know
How I haue offended.
Come, dispatch her:
You kept her counsell, now you shall keepe ours.
I will not die, I must not, I am contracted
To a young Gentle-man.
Here's your wedding Ring.
Let me but speake with the Duke: I'll discouer
Treason to his person.
Delayes: throttle-her.
She bites: and scratches:
If you kill me now
I am damn'd: I haue not bin at Confession
This two yeeres:
When.
I am quicke with child.
Why then,
Your credit's sau'd: beare her in toth' next roome:
Let this lie still.
Is she dead?
Shee is what
You'll'd haue her: But here begin your pitty,
Alas, how haue these offended?
The death
Of young Wolffes, is neuer to be pittied.
Fix your eye here:
Constantly.
Doe you not weepe?
Other sinnes, onely speake; Murther shreikes out:
The Element of water, moistens the Earth,
But blood flies vpwards, and bedewes the Heauens.
Couer her face: Mine eyes dazell she di'd yong.
I thinke not so: her infelicitie
Seem'd to haue yeeres too many.
She, and I were Twinnes:
And should I die this instant, I had liu'd
Her Time to a Mynute.
It seemes she was borne first:
You haue bloodely approu'd the auncient truth,
That kindred commonly doe worse agee
Then remote strangers.
Let me see her face againe;
Why didst not thou pitty her: what an excellent
Honest man, might'st thou haue bin
If thou hadst borne her to some Sactuary?
Or (bold in a good cause) oppos'd thy selfe
With thy aduanced sword aboue thy head,
Betweene her Innocence, and my Reuenge?
I bad thee, when I was distracted of my wits▪
Goe kill my dearest friend, and thou hast don't.
For let me but examine well the cause;
What was the meanenes of her match to me▪
Onely I must confesse, I had a hope
(Had she continu'd widow) to haue gain'd
An infinite masse of Treasure by her death:
And that was the mayne cause; her Marriage,
That drew a streame of gall, quite through my heart;
For thee, (as we obserue in Tragedies
That a good Actor many times is curss'd
For playing a villaines part) I hate thee for't:
And (for my sake) say thou hast done much ill, well:
Let me quicken your memory: for I perceiue
You are falling into ingratitude: I challenge
The reward due to my seruice.
I'll tell thee,
What I'll giue thee,
Doe:
I'll giue thee a pardon
For this murther:
Hh?
Yes: and 'tis
The largest bounty I can studie to doe thee.
By what authority did'st thou execute
This bloody sentence?
By your
Mine? was I her Iudge?
Did any ceremoniall forme of Law,
Doombe her to not-Being? did a compleat Iury
Deliuer her conuiction vp i'th Court?
Where shalt thou find this Iudgement registerd
Vnlesse in hell? See: like a bloody foole
Th'hast forfeyted thy life, and thou shalt die for't.
The Office of Iustice is peruerted quite
When one Thiefe hangs another: who shall dare
To reueale this:
Oh, I'll tell thee:
The Wolfe shall finde her Graue, and scrape it vp:
Not to deuoure the corpes, but to discouer
The horrid murther.
You; not I shall quake for't.
Leaue me:
I will first receiue my Pention.
You are a villaine:
When your Ingratitude
Is Iudge, I am so;
O horror!
That not the feare of him, which bindes the diuels
Can prescribe man obedience.
Neuer looke vpon me more.
Why fare thee well▪
Your brother, and your selfe, are worthy men;
You haue a paire of hearts, are hollow Graues,
Rotten, and rotting others: and your vengeance,
(Like two-chain'd bullets) still goes arme in arme,
You may be Brothers: for treason, like the plague,
Doth take much in a blood: I stand like one
That long hath ta'ne a sweet, and golden dreame.
I am angry with my selfe, now that I wake.
Get thee into some vnknowne part o'th▪ world
That I may neuer see thee.
Let me know
Wherefore I should be thus neglected? sir,
I seru'd your tyranny: and rather stroue,
To satisfie your selfe, then all the world;
And though I loath'd the euill, yet I lou'd
You that did councell it: and rather sought
To appeare a true seruant, then an honest man.
I'll goe hunt the Badger by Owle-light:
'Tis a deed of darkenesse.
He's much distracted: Off my painted honour,
While with vaine hopes, our faculties we tyre,
We seeme to sweate in yee, and freeze in fire;
What would I doe, wee this to doe againe?
I would not change my peace of conscience
For all the wealth of Europe: She stirres; here's life:
Returne (faire soule) from darkenes, and lead mine
Out of this sencible Hell: She's warme, she breathes:
Vpon thy pale lips I will melt my heart
To store them with fresh colour: who's there?
Some cordiall drinke: Alas! I dare not call:
So pitty, would destroy pitty: her Eye opes,
And heauen in it, seemes to ope, (that late was shut)
To take me vp to merry.
Antonio.
Yes (Madam) he is liuing,
The dead bodies you saw, were but faign'd statues;
He's reconcil'd to your brothers: the Pope hath wrought
The attonement.
Mercy.
Oh, she's gone againe: there the cords of life broake:
Oh sacred Innocence, that sweetely sleepes
On Turtles feathers: whil'st a guilty conscience
Is a blacke Register, wherein is writ
All our good deedes, and bad: a Perspectiue
That showes vs hell; that we cannot be suffer'd
To doe good when we haue a mind to it?
This is manly sorrow:
These teares, I am very certaine, neuer grew
In my Mothers Milke. My estate is suncke
Below the degree of feare: where were
These penitent fountaines, while she was liuing?
Oh, they were frozen vp: here is a sight
As direfull to my soule, as is the sword
Vnto a wretch hath slaine his father: Come, I'll beare thee hence.
And execute thy last will; that's deliuer
Thy body to the reuerend dispose
Of some good women: that the cruell tyrant
Shall not denie me: Then I'll poast to Millaine,
Where some what I will speedily enact
Worth my deiection.
What thinke you of my hope of reconcilement
To the Aragonian brethren?
I misdoubt it
For though they haue sent their letters of safe conduct
For your repaire to Millaine, they appeare
But Nets, to entrap you: The Marquis of Pescara,
Vnder whom you hold certaine land in Cheit,
Much 'gainst his noble nature, hath bin mou'd
To ceize those lands, and some of his dependants
Are at this instant, making it their suit
To be inuested in your Reuenewes.
I cannot thinke, they meane well to your life,
That doe depriue you of your meanes of life,
Your liuing.
You are still an heretique.
To any safety, I can shape my selfe.
Here comes the Marquis: I will make my selfe
Petitioner for some part of your land,
To know whether it is flying.
I pray doe.
Sir, I haue a suit to you.
To me.
An easie one:
There is the Cittadell of St. Bennet,
With some demeasnes, of late in the possession
Of Antonio Bologna, please you bestow them on me?
You are my friend: But this is such a suit,
Nor fit for me to giue, nor you to take.
No sir?
I will giue you ample reason for't,
Soone in priuate: Here's the Cardinalls Mistris.
My Lord, I am growne your poore Petitioner,
And should be an ill begger, had I not
A Great mans letter, here (the Cardinalls)
To Court you in my fauour.
He entreates for you
The Cittadell of Saint Bennet, that belong'd
To the banish'd Bologna.
Yes:
I could not haue thought of a friend, I could
Rather pleasure with it: 'tis yours:
Sir, I thanke you:
And he shall know how doubly I am engag'd
Both in your gut, and speedinesse of giuing,
Which makes your graunt, the greater.
How they fortefie
Themselues with my ruine?
Sir: I am
Litle bound to you:
Why.
Because you denide this suit, to me, and gau't
To such a creature.
Doe you know what it was?
It was Antonios land: not forfeyted
By course of lawe; but rauish'd from his throate
By the Cardinals entreaty: it were not fit
I should bestow so maine a peece of wrong
Vpon my friend: 'tis a gratification
Onely due to a Strumpet: for it is iniustice;
Shall I sprinckle the pure blood of Innocents
To make those followers, I call my friends
Looke ruddier vpon me? I am glad
This land, (ta'ne from the owner by such wrong)
Returnes againe vnto so fowle an vse,
As Salary for his Lust. Learne, (good Delio)
To aske noble things of me, and you shall find
I'll be a noble giuer.
You instruct e well:
Why, here's a man, now, would fright impudence
From sawciest Beggers.
Prince Ferdinand's come to Millaine
Sicke (as they giue out) of an Appoplexie:
But some say, 'tis a frenzie; I am going
To visite him.
'Tis a noble old fellow:
What course doe you meane to take, Antonio?
This night, I meane to venture all my fortune
(Which is no more, then a poore lingring life)
To the Cardinals worst of mallice: I haue got
Priuate accesse to his chamber: and intend
To visit him, about the mid of night.
(As once his brother did our noble Dutchesse.)
It may be that the sudden apprehension
Of danger (for I'll goe in mine owne shape)
When he shall see it fraight with loue, and dutie,
May draw the poyson out of him, and worke
A friendly reconcilement; if it faile;
Yet, it shall rid me of this infamous calling,
For better fall once, then be euer falling.
I'll second you in all danger: and (how ere)
My life keepes rancke with yours
You are still my lou'd, and best friend.
Now Doctor; may I visit your Patient?
If't please your Lordship: but he's instantly
To take the ayre here in the Gallery,
By my direction.
'Pray-thee, what's his disease?
A very pestilent disease (my Lord)
They call Licanthropia.
What's that?
I need a Dictionary to't.
I'll tell you:
In those that are possess'd with't there ore-flowes
Such mellencholy humour, they imagine
Themselues to be transformed into Woolues,
Steale forth to Church-yards in the dead of night,
And dig dead bodies vp: as two nights since
One met the Duke, 'bout midnight in a lane
Behind St. Markes Church, with the leg of a man
Vpon his shoulder; and he howl'd fearefully:
Said he was a Woolffe: onely the difference
Was, a Woolffes skinne was hairy on the out-side,
His on the In-side: bad them take their swords,
Rip vp his flesh, and trie: straight I was sent for,
And hauing ministerd to him, found his Grace
Very well recouered.
I am glad on't,
Yet not without some feare
Of a relaps: if he grow to his fit againe
I'll goe a neerer way to worke with him
Then euer Paraclesus dream'd of: If
They'll giue me leaue I'll buffet his madnesse out of him.
Stand aside: he comes.
Leaue me.
Why doth your Lordship loue this solitarines?
Eagles cōmonly fly alone: They are Crowes, Dawes, and
Sterlings that flocke together: Looke, what's that,
Followes me?
Nothing (my Lord)
Yes:
'Tis your shadow.
Stay it, let it not haunt me.
Impossible; if you moue, and the Sun shine:
I will throtle it.
Oh, my Lord: you are angry with nothing.
You are a foole:
How is't possible I should catch my shadow
Vnlesse I fall vpon't? When I goe to Hell,
I meane to carry a bribe: for looke you
Good guifts euer-more make away, for the worst persons
Rise good my Lord.
I am studying the Art of Patience.
'Tis a noble Vertue;
To driue six Snailes before me, from this towne
To Mosco; neither vse Goad, nor Whip to them,
But let them take their owne time: (the patientst mani'th' world
Match me for an experiment) and I'll crawle after
Like a sheepe-biter.
Force him vp.
Vse me well, you were best:
What I haue don, I haue don: I'll confesse nothing▪
Now let me come to him: Are you mad
(My Lord?) are you out of your Princely wits?
What's he?
Your Doctor..
Let me haue his beard saw'd off, and his eye
Browes fil'd more ciuill.
I must do mad trickes with him,
For that's the onely way on't. I haue brought
Your grace a Salamanders skin, to keepe you
For sun-burning.
I haue cruell sore eyes.
The white of a Cockatrixes-egge is present remedy.
Let it be a new layd one, you were best:
Hide me from him: Phisitians are like Kings,
They brooke no contradiction.
Now he begins to feare me,
Now let me alone with him.
How now, put off your gowne?
Let me haue some forty vrinalls fill'd with Rose-water:
He, and I'll go pelt one an other with them,
Now he begins to feare me: Can you fetch a friske, sir?
Let him go, let him go vpon my perrill:
I finde by his eye, he stands in awe of me,
I'll make him, as tame as a Dormouse.
Can you fetch your friskes, sir: I will stamp him into a Cullice:
Flea off his skin, to couer one of the Anotomies,
This rogue hath set i'th'cold yonder, in Barber-Chyrurgeons hall:
Hence, hence, you are all of you, like beasts for sacrifice,
There's nothing left of you, but tongue, and belly,
Flattery, and leachery.
Doctor, he did not feare you throughly.
True, I was somewhat to forward.
Mercy vpon me, what a fatall iudgement
Hath falne vpon this Ferdinand?
Knowes your grace
What accident hath brought vnto the Prince,
This strange distraction?
I must faigne somewhat: Thus they say it grew.
You haue heard it rumor'd for these many yeares,
None of our family dies, but there is seene
The shape of an old woman, which is giuen
By tradition, to vs, to haue bin murther'd
By her Nephewes, for her riches: Such a figure
One night (as the Prince sat vp late at's booke)
Appear'd to him, when crying out for helpe,
The gentlemen of's chamber, found his grace
All on a cold sweate, alter'd much in face
And language: Since which apparition,
He hath growne worse, and worse, and I much feare
He cannot liue.
Sir, I would speake with you.
We'll leaue your grace,
Wishing to the sicke Prince, our noble Lord,
All health of minde, and body.
You are most welcome:
Are you come? so: this fellow must not know
By any meanes I had intelligence
In our Duchesse death: For (though I counsell'd it,)
The full of all th'ingagement seem'd to grow
From Ferdinand: Now sir, how fares our sister?
I do not thinke but sorrow makes her looke
Like to an ot-'d garment: She shall now
Tast comfort from me: why do you looke so wildely?
Oh, the fortune of your master here, the Prince
Deiects you, but be you of happy comfort:
If you'll do on thing for me, I'll entreate
Though he had a cold tombe-stone ore his bones,
I'll'd make you what you would be.
Any thing,
Giue it me in a breath, and let me slie to't:
They that thinke long, small expedition win,
For mung much o'th'end, cannot begin.
Sir, will you come in to Supper?
I am busie, leaue me.
What an excellent shape hath that fellow?
'Tis thus: Antonio lurkes here in Millaine,
Enquire him out, and kill him: while he liues,
Our sister cannot marry, and I haue thought
Of an excellent match for her: do this, and stile me
Thy aduancement.
But by what meanes shall I find him out?
There is a gentleman, call'd Delio
Here in the Campe, that hath bin long approu'd
His loyall friend: Set eie vpon that fellow,
Follow him to Masse, may be Antonio,
Although he do account religion
But a Schoole-name, for fashion of the world,
May accompany him, or else go enquire out
Delio's Confessor, and see i you can bribe
Him to reueale it: there are a thousand wayes
A man might find to trace him: As to know,
What fellowes haunt the Iewes, for taking vp
Great summes of money, for sure he's in want,
Or else to go to th'Picture-makers, and learne
Who brought her Picture lately, some of these
Happily may take —
Well, I'll not freeze i'th'businesse,
I would see that wretched thing, Antonio
Aboue all sightes i'th'world.
Do, and be happy.
This fellow doth breed Bazalisques in's eies,
He's nothing else, but murder: yet he seemes
Not to haue notice of the Duchesse death:
'Tis his cunning: I must follow his example,
There cannot be a surer way to trace,
Then that of an old Fox.
So, sir, you are well met.
How now?
Nay, the doores are fast enough:
Now Sir, I will make you confesse your treachery.
Treachery?
Yes, confesse to me
Which of my women 'twas you hyr'd, to put
Loue-powder into my drinke?
Loue powder?
Yes, when I was at Malfy,
Why should I fall in loue with such a face else?
I haue already suffer'd for thee so much paine,
The onely remedy to do me good,
Is to kill my longing.
Sue your Pistoll holds
Nothing but perfumes, or kissing comfits: excellent Lady,
You haue a pritty way on't to discouer
Your longing: Come, come, I'll disarme you,
And arme you thus, yet this is wondrous strange.
Compare thy forme, and my eyes together,
You'll ind my loue no such great miracle: Now you'll say,
I am wanton: This nice modesty, in Ladies
Is but a troublesome familiar,
That haunts them.
Know you me, I am a blunt souldier.
The better,
Sure, there wants fire, where there are no liuely sparkes
Of roughnes.
And I want complement.
Why ignorance in court-ship cannot make you do amisse,
If you haue a heart to do well.
You are very faire.
Nay, if you lay beauty to my charge,
I must plead vnguilty.
Your bright eyes
Carry a Quiuer of darts in them, sharper
Then Sun-beames.
You will mar me with commendation,
Put your selfe to the charge of courting me,
Whereas now I woe you.
I haue it, I will worke vpon this Creature,
Let vs grow most amorously familiar:
If the great Cardinall now should see me thus,
Would he not count me a villaine?
No, he might count me a wanton,
Not lay a scruple of offence on you:
For if I see, and steale a Diamond,
The fault is not i'th'stone, but in me the thiefe,
That purloines it: I am sudaine with you,
We that are great women of pleasure, vse to cut off
These vncertaine wishes, and vnquiet longings,
And in an instant ioyne the sweete delight
And the ptty excuse together: had you bin in'th'streete,
Vnder my chamber window, euen there
I should haue courted you.
Oh, you are an excellent Lady.
Bid me do somewhat for you presently,
To expresse I loue you.
I will, and if you loue me,
Faile not to effect it: The Cardinall is growne wondrous mellancholly,
Demand the cause, let him not put you off,
With faign'd excuse, discouer the maine ground on't.
Why would you know this?
I haue depended on him,
And I heare that he is falne in some disgrace
With the Emperour, if he be, like the mice
That forsake falling houses, I would shift
To other dependance.
You shall not neede follow the warres,
I'll be your maintenance.
And I your loyall seruant,
But I cannot leaue my calling.
Not leaue an
Vngratefull Generall, for the loue of a sweete Lady?
You are like some, cannot sleepe in feather-beds,
But must haue blockes for their pillowes.
Will you do this?
Cunningly.
To morrow I'll expect th'intelligence.
To morrow? get you into my Cabinet,
You shall haue it with you: do not delay me,
No more then I do you: I am like one
That is condemn'd: I haue my pardon promis'd.
But I would see it seal'd: Go, get you in,
You shall see me winde my tongue about his heart,
Like a skeine of silke.
Where are you?
Here.
Let none vpon your liues
Haue conference with the Prince Ferdinand,
Vnlesse I know it: In this distraction
He may reueale the murther:
Yond's my lingring consumption:
I am weary of her; and by any meanes
Would be qui off.
How now, my Lord?
What ailes you?
Nothing.
Oh, you are much alterd:
Come, I must be your Secretary, and remoue
This lead from off your bosome, what's the matter?
I may not tell you▪
Are you so farre in loue with sorrow,
You cannot part, with part of it? or thinke you
I cannot loue your grace, when you are sad,
As well as merry? or do you suspect
I, that haue bin a secret to your heart,
These many winters, cannot be the same
Vnto your tongue?
Satisie thy longing,
The onely way to make thee keepe my councell,
Is not to tell thee.
Tell your eccho this,
Or flatterers, that (like ecchoes) still report
What they heare (though most imperfect) and not me:
For, if that you be true vnto your selfe,
I'll know.
Will you racke me?
No, iudgement shall
Draw it from you: It is an equall fault,
To tell ones secrets, vnto all, or none.
The first argues folly.
But the last tyranny.
Very wel, why imagine I haue committed
Some secret deed, which I desire the world
May neuer heare of?
Therefore may not I know it?
You haue conceal'd for me, as great a sinne
As adultery: Sir, neuer was occasion
For perfect triall of my constancy
Till now: Sir, I beseech you.
You'll repent it.
Neuer.
It hurries thee to ruine: I'll not tell thee,
Be well aduis'd, and thinke what danger 'tis
To receiue a Princes secrets: they that do,
Had neede haue their breasts hoop'd with adamant
To containe them: I pray thee yet be satisfi'd,
Examine thine owne frailety, 'tis more easie
To tie knots, then vnloose them: 'tis a secret
That (like a lingring poyson) may chance lie
Spread in thy vaines, and kill thee seauen yeare hence▪
Now you dally with me.
No more, thou shalt know it.
By my appointment, the great Duchesse of Malfy,
And two of her young children, foure nights since
Were strangled.
Oh heauen! (sir) what haue you done?
How now? how setles this? thinke you your
Bosome will be a graue, darke and obscure enough
For such a secret?
You haue vndone your selfe (sir.)
VVhy?
It lies not in me to conceale it.
No? come, I will sweare you to't vpon this booke▪
Most religiously.
Kisse it.
Now you shall neuer vtter it, thy curiosity
Hath vndone thee: thou'rt poyson'd with that booke,
Because I knew thou couldst not keepe my councell,
I haue bound the to't by death.
For pitty sake, hold.
Ha, Bosola?
I forgiue you,
This equall peece of Iustice you haue done:
For I betraid your councell to that fellow,
He ouer heard it; that was the cause I said
It lay not in me, to conceale it.
Oh foolish woman,
Couldst not thou haue poyson'd him?
'Tis weakenesse,
Too much to thinke what should haue bin done,
I go, I know not whether.
Wherefore com'st thou hither?
That I might finde a great man, (like your selfe,)
Not out of his wits (as the Lord Ferdinand)
To remember my seruice.
I'll haue thee hew'd in peeces.
Make not your selfe such a promise of that life
Which is not yours, to dispose of.
Who plac'd thee here.
Her lust, as she intended.
Very well, now you know me for your fellow murderer▪
And wherefore should you lay faire marble colours,
Vpon your rotten purposes to me?
Vnlesse you imitate some that do plot great Treasons,
And when they haue done, go hide themselues i'th' graues,
Of those were Actors in't?
No more,
There is a fortune attends thee.
Shall I go sue to fortune any longer?
'Tis the fooles Pilgrimage.
I haue honors in store for thee.
There are a many wayes that conduct to seeming
Honor, and some of them very durty ones.
Throw to the diuell
Thy mellancholly, the fire burnes well,
VVhat neede we keepe a stirring of and make
A greater smoother? thou wilt kill Antonio?
Yes.
Take vp that body.
I thinke I shall
Shortly grow the common Beare, for Church-yards?
I will allow thee some dozen of attendants,
To aide thee in the murther.
Oh, by no meanes,
Phisitians that apply horse-leiches to any rancke swelling,
Vse to cut of their tailes, that the blood may run through them
The faster: Let me haue no traine, when I goe to shed blood,
Least it make me haue a greater, when I ride to the Gallowes.
Come to me after midnight, to helpe to remoue that body
To her owne Lodging: I'll giue out she dide o'th' Plague;
'Twill breed the lesse enquiry after her death.
Where's Castruchio, her husband?
He's rod to Naples to take possession
Of Antonio's Cittadell.
Beleeue me, you haue done a very happy turne.
Faile not to come: There is the Master-key
Of our Lodgings: and by that you may conceiue
What trust I plant in you.
You shall find me ready.
Oh poore Antonio, though nothing be so needfull
To thy estate, as pitty, Yet I finde
Nothing so dangerous: I must looke to my footing;
In such slippery ye-pauements, men had neede
To be frost-nayld well: they may breake their neckes else.
The President's here afore me: how this man
Beares vp in blood? seemes feareles? why, 'tis well:
Securitie some men call the Subuts of Hell,
Onely a dead wall betweene. Well (good Antonio)
I'll seeke thee out; and all my care shall be
To put thee into safety from the reach
Of these most cruell biters, that haue got
Some of thy blood already. It may be,
I'll ioyne with thee, in a most iust reuenge.
The weakest Arme is strong enough, that strikes
With the sword of Iustice: Still me thinkes the Dutchesse
Haunts me: there, there▪ 'tis nothing but my mellancholy.
O Penitence, let me truely tast thy Cup.
That throwes men downe, onely to raise them vp.
Yond's the Cardinall's window: This fortification
Grew from the ruines of an auncient Abbey:
And to yond fide o'th' riuer, lies a wall
(Peec of a Cloyster) which in my opinion
Giues the best Eccho, that you euer heard;
So hollow, and so dismall, and withall
So plaine in the destinction of our words,
That many haue supposde it is a Spirit
That answeres.
I doe loue these auncient ruynes▪
We neuer tread vpon them, but we set
Our foote vpon some reuerend History▪
And questionles, here in this open Court
(Which now lies naked to the iniuries
Of stormy weather) some men lye Enterr'd
Lou'd the Church so well, and gaue so largely to't,
They thought it should haue canopide their Bones
Till Doombes-day: But all things haue their end:
Churches, and Citties (which haue diseases like to men)
Must haue like death that we haue.
Like death that we haue.
Now the Eccho hath caught you:
It groan'd (me thought) and gaue
A very deadly Accent?
Deadly Accent.
I told you 'twas a pretty one: You may make it
A Huntes-man, or a Faulconer, a Musitian,
Or a Thing of Sorrow.
A Thing of Sorrow.
I sur that suites it best.
That suites it best.
'Tis very like my wiues voyce.
I, wifes-voyce.
Come: let's vs walke farther from't:
I Would not haue you go toth' Cardinalls to night:
Doe not.
Doe not.
Wisdome doth not more moderate, wasting Sorrow
Then time: take time for't: be mindfull of thy safety.
Be mindfull of thy safety.
Necessitie compells me:
Make scruteny throughout the passes
Of your owne life; you'll find it impossible
To flye your fate.
O flye your fate.
Harke: the dead stones seeme to haue pitty on you
And giue you good counsell.
Eccho, I will not talke with thee;
For thou art a dead Thing.
Thou art a dead Thing.
My Dutchesse is asleepe now,
And her litle-Ones, I hope sweetly: oh Heauen
Shall I neuer see her more?
Neuer see her more:
I mark'd not one repetition of the Eccho
But that: and on the sudden, a cleare light
Presented me a face folded in sorrow.
Your fancy; meerely.
Come: I'll be out of this Ague;
For to liue thus, is not indeed to liue:
It is a mockery, and aase of life,
I will not henceforth saue my selfe by halues,
Loose all, or nothing.
Your owne vertue saue you:
I'll fetch your eldest sonne; and second you:
It may be that the sight of his owne blood
Spred in so sweet a figure, may beget
The more compassion.
How euer, fare you well:
Though in our miseries, Fortune haue a part,
Yet, in our noble suffrings, she hath none,
Contempt of paine, that we may call our owne.
You shall not watch to night by the sicke Prince,
His Grace is very well recouer'd.
Good my Lord suffer vs.
Oh, by no meanes:
The noyce, and change of obiect in his eye,
Doth more distract him: I pray, all to bed,
And though you heare him in his violent fit▪
Do not rise, I intreate you.
So sir, we shall not,
Nay, I must haue you promise
Vpon your honors, for I was enioyn'd to't
By himselfe; and he seem'd to vrge it sencibly.
Let out honors bind this trifle.
Nor any of your followers.
Neither.
It may be to make triall of your promise
When he's a sleepe, my selfe will rise, and faigne
Some of his mad trickes, and crie out for helpe,
And faigne my selfe in danger.
If your throate were cutting,
I'll'd not come at you, now I haue protested against it.
Why, I thanke you.
'Twas a forle storme to night.
The Lord Ferdinand's chamber, shooke like an Ozier.
'Twas nothing but pure kindnesse in the Diuell,
To ocke his owne child.
The reason why I would not suffer these
About my brother, is, because at midnight
I may with better priuacy, conuay
Iulias body, to her owne Lodging: O, my Conscience!
I would pray now: but the Diuell takes away my heart
For hauing any confidence in Praier.
About this houre, I appointed Bosola
To fetch the body: when he hath seru'd my turne,
He dies.
Hah? 'twas the Cardinalls voyce: I heard him name,
Bosola, and my death: listen, I heare ones footing.
Strangling is a very quiein death.
Nay then I see, I must stand vpon my Guard.
What say' to that? whisper, softly: doe you agree to't?
So it must be done i'th' darke: the Cardinall
Would not for a thousand pounds, the Doctor should see it.
My death is plotted; here's the consequence of murther.
"We value not desert, nor Christian breath,
When we know blacke deedes, must be cur'de with death.
Here stay Sir, and be confident, I pray:
I'll fetch you a darke Lanthorne.
Could I take him at his prayers,
There were hope of pardon.
Fall right my sword:
I'll not giue thee so much leysure, as to pray.
Oh, I am gone: Thou hast ended a long suit,
In a mynut.
What art thou?
A most wretched thing,
That onely haue thy benefit in death,
To appeare my selfe.
Where are you Sir?
Very neere my home: Bosola?
Oh misfortune.
Smother thy pitty, thou art dead else: Antonio?
The man I would haue sau'de 'boue mine owne life?
We are meerely the Starres tennys-balls (strooke, and banded
Which way please them) oh good Antonio,
I'll whisper one thing in thy dying eare,
Shall make thy heart breake quickly: Thy faire Dutchesse
And two sweet Children.
Their very names
Kindle a litle life in me.
Are murderd!
Some men haue wish'd to die.
At the hearing of sad tydings: I am glad
That I shall do't in sadnes: I would not now
Wish my wounds balm'de, nor heal'd: for I haue no vse
To put my life to: In all our Quest of Greatnes;
(Like wanton Boyes, whose pastime is their care)
We follow after bubbles, blowne in th'ayre.
Pleasure of life, what is't? onely the good houres
Of an Ague: meerely a preparatiue to rest,
To endure vexation: I doe not aske
The processe of my death: onely commend me
To Delio.
Breake heart:
And let my Sonne, flie the Courts of Princes,
Thou seem'st to haue lou'd Antonio?
I brought him hether,
To haue reconcil'd him to the Cardinall.
I doe not aske thee that:
Take him vp, if thou tender thine owne life,
And beare him, where the Lady Iulia
Was wont to lodge: Oh, my fate moues swift.
I haue this Cardinall, in the forge already,
Now I'll bring him to th'hammer▪ (O direfull misprision:)
I will not Imitate things glorious,
No more then base: I'll be mine owne example.
On, on: and looke thou represent, for silence,
The thing thou bear'st.
I am puzzell'd in a question about hell:
He saies, in hell, there's one materiall fire,
And yet it shall not burne all men alike.
Lay him by: How tedious is a guilty conscience?
When I looke into the Fish-ponds, in my Garden,
Me thinkes I see a thing, arm'd with a Rake
That seemes to strike at me: Now? art thou come? thou look'st ghastly:
There sits in thy face, some great determination,
Mix'd with some feare.
Thus it lightens into Action:
I am come to kill thee.
Hah? helpe: our Guard.
Thou art deceiu'd:
They are out of thy howling.
Hold: and I will faithfully deuide
Reuenewes with thee.
Thy prayers, and proffers
Are both vnseasonable.
Raise the Watch: we are betraid.
I haue confinde your flight:
I'll suffer your retreyt to Iulias Chamber,
But no further.
Helpe: we are betraid.
Listen:
My Dukedome, for rescew.
Fye vpon his counterfeyting.
Why, 'tis nor the Cardinall.
Yes, yes, 'tis he:
But I'll see him hang'd, ere I'll goe downe to him.
Here's a plot vpon me, I am assaulted: I am lost▪
Vnlesse some rescew.
He doth this pretty well:
But it will not serue; to laugh me out of mine honour.
The sword's at my throat:
You would not bawle so lowd then.
Come, come: lets's goe to bed: he told vs thus much aforehand.
He wish'd you should not come at him: but beleeu't,
The accent of the voyce sounds not in iest.
I'll downe to him, howsoeuer, and with engines
Force ope the doores.
Let's follow him aloofe,
And note how the Cardinall will laugh at him.
There's for you first: 'cause you shall not vnbarracade the doore
To let in rescew.
What cause hast thou to pursue my life?
Looke there:
Antonio?
Slaine by my hand vnwittingly:
Pray, and be sudden: when thou kill'dst thy sister,
Thou tookst from Iustice her most equall bce,
And left her naught but her sword.
O mercy.
Now it seemes thy Greatnes was onely outward:
For thou fall'st faster of thy selfe, then calamitie
Can driue thee: I'll not wast longer time: There
Thou hast hurt me:
Againe:
Shall I die like a Leoret
Without any resistance? helpe, helpe, helpe:
I am slaine.
Th'allarum? giue me a fresh horse:
Rally the vaunt-guard: or the day is lost:
Yeeld, yeeld: I giue you the honour of Armes,
Shake my Sword ouer you, will you yeilde?
Helpe me, I am your brother.
The diuell?
My brother fight vpon the aduerse party?
There flies your ransome.
Oh Iustice:
I suffer now, for what hath former bin:
"Sorrow is held the eldest child of sin.
Now you're braue followes:
Caesars Fortune was harder then Pompeys:
Caesar died in the armes of prosperity,
Pompey at the feete of disgrace: you both died in the field,
The paine's nothing: paine many times, is taken away, with
The apprehension of greater, (as the tooth-ache with the ight
Of a Barbor, that comes to pull it out) there's Philosophy for you.
Now my reuenge is perfect: sinke (thou maine cause
Of my vndoing) the last part of my life,
Hath done me best seruice.
Giue me some wet hay, I am broken winded,
I do account this world but a dog-kennell:
I will vault credit, and affect high pleasures,
Beyond death.
He seemes to come to himselfe, now he's so neere the bottom▪
My sister, oh! my sister, there's the cause on't.
" Whether we fall by ambition, blood, or lust,
" Like Diamonds, we are cut with our owne dust.
Thou hast thy payment too.
Yes, I hold my weary soule, in my teeth,
'Tis ready to part from me: I do glory
That thou, which stood'st like a huge Piramid
Begun vpon a large, and ample base,
Shalt end in a little point a kind of nothing.
How now (my Lord?)
Oh sad disastre.
How comes this?
Reuenge, for the Duchesse of Malfy, murdered
By th'Aragonian brethren: for Antonio,
Slaine by his hand: for lustfull Iulia,
Poyson'd by this man: and lastly, for my selfe,
(That was an Actor in the maine of all,
Much 'gainst mine owne good nature, yet i'th'end
Neglected.)
How now (my Lord?)
Looke to my brother:
He gaue vs these large wounds, as we were strugling
Here i'th' rushes: And now, I pray, let me
Be layd by, and neuer thought of.
How fatally (it seemes) he did withstand,
His owne rescew?
Thou wretched thing of blood,
How came Antonio by his death?
In a mist: I know not how,
Such a mistake, as I haue often seene
In a play: Oh, I am gone,
We are onely like dead wals, or vaulted graues,
That ruin'd, yeildes no eccho: Fare you well,
It may be paine: but no harme to me to die,
In so good a quarrell: Oh this gloomy world,
In what a shadow, or deepe pit of darknesse,
Doth (womanish, and fearefull) mankind liue?
Let worthy mindes, nere stagge in distrust
To suffer death, or shame for what is iust,
Mine is an other voyage.
The noble Delio, as I came to th'Pallace,
Told me of Antonio's being here, and shew'd me
A pritty gentlemen his sonne and heire.
Oh Sir, you come to late.
I heard so, and
Was arm'd for't ere I came: Let vs make noble vse
Of this great ruine; and ioyne all our force
To establish this yong hopefull Gentleman
In's mothers right. These wretched eminent things
Leaue no more fame behind 'em, then should one
Fall in a frost, and leaue his print in snow,
As soone as the sun shines, it euer melts,
Both forme, and matter: I haue euer thought
Nature doth nothing so great, for great men,
As when she's pleas'd, to make them Lords of truth:
"Integrity of life, is fames best friend,
Which noblely (beyond Death) shall crowne the end.