CEaſe to perſwade▪ my louing Protheus;
Home-keeping youth; haue euer homely wits,
Wer't not affection chaines thy tender dayes
To the ſweet glaunces of thy honour'd Loue,
I rather would entreat thy company,
To ſee the wonders of the world abroad,
Then (liuing dully ſluggardiz'd at home)
Weare out thy youth with ſhapeleſſe idleneſſe.
But ſince thou lou'ſt; loue ſtill, and thriue therein,
Euen as I would, when I to loue begin.
Wilt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine ad ew,
Thinke on thy Protheus, when thou (hap'ly) ſeeſt
Some rare note-worthy obiect in thy trauaile.
With me partaker in thy happineſſe,
When thou do'ſt meet good hap; and in thy danger,
(If euer danger doe enuiron thee)
Commend thy grieuance to my holy prayers,
For I will be thy beadeſ-man, Valentine.
And on a loue-booke pray for my ſucceſſe?
Vpon ſome booke I loue, I'le pray for thee.
That's on ſome ſhallow Storie of deepe loue,
How yong Leander croſt the Helleſpont.
That's a deepe Storie, of a deeper loue,
For he was more then ouer-ſhooes in loue.
'Tis true; for you are ouer-bootes in loue,
And yet you neuer ſwom the Helleſpont.
Ouer the Bootes? nay giue me not the Boots.
No, I will not; for it boots thee not.
What?
To be in loue; where ſcorne is bought with grones:
Coy looks, with hart-ſore ſighes: one fading moments mirth,
With twenty watchfull, weary, tedious nights;
If hap'ly won, perhaps a hapleſſe gaine;
If loſt, why then a grieuous labour won;
How euer: but a folly bought with wit,
Or elſe a wit, by folly vanquiſhed.
So, by your circumſtance, you call me foole.
So, by your circumſtance, I feare you'll proue.
'Tis Loue you cauill at, I am not Loue.
Loue is your maſter, for he maſters you;
And he that is ſo yoked by a foole,
Me thinkes ſhould not be chronicled for wiſe.
Yet Writers ſay; as in the ſweeteſt Bud,
The eating Canker dwels; ſo eating Loue
Inhabits in the fineſt wits of all.
And Writers ſay; as the moſt forward Bud
Is eaten by the Canker ere it blow,
Euen ſo by Loue, the yong, and tender wit
Is turn'd to folly, blaſting in the Bud,
Looſing his verdure, euen in the prime,
And all the faire effects of future hopes.
But wherefore waſte I time to counſaile thee
That art a votary to fond deſire?
Once more adieu: my Father at the Road
Expects my comming, there to ſee me ſhip'd.
And thither will I bring thee Valentine.
Sweet Protheus, no: Now let vs take our leaue:
To Millaine let me heare from thee by Letters
Of thy ſucceſſe in loue; and what newes elſe
Betideth here in abſence of thy Friend:
And I likewiſe will viſite thee with mine.
All happineſſe be chance to thee in Millaine.
As much to you at home: and ſo farewell.
He after Honour hunts, I after Loue;
He leaues his friends, to dignifie them more;
I loue my ſelfe, my friends, and all for loue:
Thou Iulia▪ thou haſt metamorphis'd me:
Made me neglect my Studies, looſe my time;
Warre with good counſaile; ſet the world at nought;
Made Wit with muſing, weake; hart ſick with thought.
Sir Protheus: 'ſaue you: ſaw you my Maſter?
But now he parted hence to embarque for Millain.
Twenty to one then, he is ſhip'd already,
And I haue plaid the Sheepe in looſing him.
Indeede a Sheepe doth very often ſtray,
And if the Shepheard be awhile away.
You conclude that my Maſter is a Shepheard then, and I Sheepe?
I doe.
Why then my hornes are his hornes, whether I wake or ſleepe.
A ſilly anſwere, and fitting well a Sheepe.
This proues me ſtill a Sheepe.
True: and thy Maſter a Shepheard.
Nay, that I can deny by a circumſtance.
It ſhall goe hard but ile proue it by another.
The Shepheard ſeekes the Sheepe, and not the Sheepe the Shepheard; but I ſeeke my Maſter, and my Maſter ſeekes not me: therefore I am no Sheepe.
The Sheepe for fodder follow the Shepheard, the Shepheard for foode followes not the Sheepe: thou for wages followeſt thy Maſter, thy Maſter for wages followes not thee: therefore thou art a Sheepe.
Such another proofe will make me cry baâ.
But do'ſt thou heare: gau'ſt thou my Letter to Iulia?
I Sir: I (a loſt-Mutton) gaue your Letter to her (a lac'd-Mutton) and ſhe (a lac'd-Mutton) gaue mee (a loſt-Mutton) nothing for my labour.
Here's too ſmall a Paſture for ſuch ſtore of Muttons.
If the ground be ouer-charg'd, you were beſt ſticke her.
Nay, in that you are aſtray: 'twere beſt pound you.
Nay Sir, leſſe then a pound ſhall ſerue me for carrying your Letter.
You miſtake; I meane the pound, a Pinfold.
From a pound to a pin? fold it ouer and ouer,
'Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to your louer
But what ſaid ſhe?
I.
Nod-I, why that's noddy.
You miſtooke Sir: I ſay ſhe did nod;
And you aske me if ſhe did nod, and I ſay I.
And that ſet together is noddy.
Now you haue taken the paines to ſet it together, take it for your paines.
No, no, you ſhall haue it for bearing the letter.
Well, I perceiue I muſt be faine to beare with you.
Why Sir, how doe you beare with me?
Marry Sir, the letter very orderly,
Hauing nothing but the word noddy for my paines.
Beſhrew me, but you haue a quicke wit.
And yet it cannot ouer-take your ſlow purſe.
Come, come, open the matter in briefe; what ſaid ſhe.
Open your purſe, that the money, and the matter may be both at once deliuered.
Well Sir: here is for your paines: what ſaid ſhe?
Truely Sir, I thinke you'll hardly win her.
Why? could'ſt thou perceiue ſo much from her?
Sir, I could perceiue nothing at all from her;
No, not ſo much as a ducket for deliuering your letter:
And being ſo hard to me, that brought your minde;
I feare ſhe'll proue as hard to you in telling your minde.
Giue her no token but ſtones, for ſhe's as hard as ſteele.
What ſaid ſhe, nothing?
No, not ſo much as take this for thy pains:
To teſtifie your bounty, I thank you, you haue ceſtern'd me;
In requital whereof, henceforth, carry your letters your ſelfe; And ſo Sir, I'le commend you to my Maſter.
Go, go, be gone, to ſaue your Ship from wrack,
Which cannot periſh hauing thee aboarde,
Being deſtin'd to a drier death on ſhore:
I muſt goe ſend ſome better Meſſenger,
I feare my Iulia would not daigne my lines,
Receiuing them from ſuch a worthleſſe poſt.
But ſay Lucetta (now we are alone)
Would'ſt thou then counſaile me to fall in loue?
I Madam, ſo you ſtumble not on heedfully.
Of all the faire reſt of Gentlemen,
That euery day with par'd encounter me,
In thy opinion which is worthieſt loue?
Pleaſe you repeat their names, ile ſhew my minde,
According to my ſhallow ſimple skill.
What thinkſt thou of the faire ſir Eglamoure?
As of a Knight, well-ſpoken, neat, and fine;
But were I you, he neuer ſhould be mine.
What think'ſt thou of the rich Mercatio?
Well of his wealth; but of himſelfe, ſo, ſo.
What think'ſt thou of the gentle Protheus?
Lord, Lord: to ſee what folly raignes in vs.
How now? what meanes this paſſion at his name?
Pardon deare Madam, 'tis a paſſing ſhame,
That I (vnworthy body as I am)
Should cenſure thus on louely Gentlemen.
Why not on Protheus, as of all the reſt?
Then thus: of many good, I thinke him beſt.
Your reaſon?
I haue no other but a womans reaſon:
I thinke him ſo, becauſe I thinke him ſo.
And would'ſt thou haue me caſt my loue on him?
I: if you thought your loue not caſt away.
Why he, of all the reſt, hath neuer mou'd me.
Yet he, of all the reſt, I thinke beſt loues ye.
His little ſpeaking, ſhewes his loue but ſmall.
Fire that's cloſeſt kept, burnes moſt of all.
They doe not loue, that doe not ſhew their loue.
Oh, they loue leaſt, that let men know their loue.
I would I knew his minde.
Peruſe this paper Madam.
To Iulia: ſay, from whom?
That the Contents will ſhew.
Say, ſay: who gaue it thee?
Sir Valentines page: & ſent I think from Protheus;
He would haue giuen it you, but I being in the way,
Did in your name receiue it: pardon the fault I pray.
Now (by my modeſty) a goodly Broker:
Dare you preſume to harbour wanton lines?
To whiſper, and conſpire againſt my youth?
Now truſt me, 'tis an office of great worth,
And you an officer fit for the place:
There: take the paper: ſee it be return'd,
Or elſe returne no more into my ſight.
To plead for loue, deſerues more fee, then hate.
Will ye be gon?
That you may ruminate.
And yet I would I had ore-look'd the Letter;
It were a ſhame to call her backe againe,
And pray her to a fault, for which I chid her.
What 'foole is ſhe, that knowe I am a Maid.
And would not force the letter to my view?
Since Maides, in modeſty, ſay no, to that,
Which they would haue the profferer conſtrue, I.
Fie, fie: how way-ward is this fooliſh loue;
That (like a teſtie Babe) will ſcratch the Nurſe,
And preſently, all humbled kiſſe the Rod?
How churliſhly, I chid Lucetta hence,
When willingly, I would haue had her here?
How angerly I taught my brow to frowne,
When inward ioy enforc'd my heart to ſmile?
My pennance is, to call Lucetta backe
And aske remiſſion, for my folly paſt.
What hoe: Lucetta.
What would your Ladiſhip?
Is't neere dinner time?
I would it were,
That you might kill your ſtomacke on your meat,
And not vpon your Maid.
What is't that you
Tooke vp ſo gingerly?
Nothing.
Why didſt thou ſtoope then?
To take a paper vp, that I let fall.
And is that paper nothing?
Nothing concerning me.
Then let it lye, for thoſe that it concernes.
Madam, it will not lye where it concernes,
Vnleſſe it haue a falſe Interpreter.
Some loue of yours, hath writ to you in Rime.
That I might ſing it (Madam) to a tune:
Giue me a Note, your Ladiſhip can ſet
As little by ſuch toyes, as may be poſſible:
Beſt ſing it to the tune of Light O, Loue.
It is too heauy for ſo light a tune.
Heauy? belike it hath ſome burden then?
I: and melodious were it, would you ſing it,
And why not you?
I cannot reach ſo high.
Let's ſee your Song:
How now Minion?
Keepe tune there ſtill; ſo you will ſing it out:
And yet me thinkes I do not like this tune.
You doe not?
No (Madam) tis too ſharpe.
You (Minion) are too ſaucie.
Nay, now you are too flat;
And marre the concord, with too harſh a deſcant:
There wanteth but a Meane to fill your Song.
The meane is dround with you vnruly baſe.
Indeede I bid the baſe for Protheus.
This babble ſhall not henceforth trouble me;
Here is a coile with proteſtation:
Goe, get you gone: and let the papers lye:
You would be fingring them, to anger me.
She makes it ſtrāge, but ſhe would be beſt pleas'd
To be ſo angred with another Letter.
Nay, would I were ſo angred with the ſame:
Oh hatefull hands, to teare ſuch louing words;
Iniurious Waſpes, to feede on ſuch ſweet hony,
And kill the Bees that yeelde it, with your ſtings;
Ile kiſſe each ſeuerall paper, for amends:
Looke, here is writ, kinde Iulia: vnkinde Iulia,
As in reuenge of thy ingratitude,
I throw thy name againſt the bruzing-ſtones,
Trampling contemptuouſly on thy diſdaine.
And here is writ, Loue wounded Protheus.
Poore wounded name: my boſome, as a bed,
Shall lodge thee till thy wound be throughly heal'd;
And thus I ſearch it with a ſoueraigne kiſſe.
But twice, or thrice, was Protheus written downe:
Be calme (good winde) blow not a word away,
Till I haue found each letter, in the Letter,
Except mine own name: That, ſome whirle-winde beare
Vnto a ragged, fearefull, hanging Rocke,
And throw it thence into the raging Sea.
Loe, here in one line is his name twice writ:
Poore forlorne Protheus, paſſionate Protheus:
To the ſweet Iulia: that ile teare away:
And yet I will not, ſith ſo prettily
He couples it, to his complaining Names;
Thus will I fold them, one vpon another;
Now kiſſe, embrace, contend, doe what you will.
Madam: dinner is ready: and your father ſtaies.
Well, let vs goe.
What, ſhall theſe papers lye, like Tel-tales here?
If you reſpect them; beſt to take them vp.
Nay, I was taken vp, for laying them downe.
Yet here they ſhall not lye, for catching cold.
I ſee you haue a months minde to them.
I (Madam) you may ſay what ſights you ſee;
I ſee things too, although you iudge I winke.
Come, come, wilt pleaſe you goe.
Tell me Panthino, what ſad talke was that,
Wherewith my brother held you in the Cloyſter?
'Twas of his Nephew Protheus, your Sonne.
Why? what of him?
He wondred that your Lordſhip
Would ſuffer him, to ſpend his youth at home,
While other men, of ſlender reputation
Put forth their Sonnes, to ſeeke preferment out.
Some to the warres, to try their fortune there;
Some, to diſcouer Iſlands farre away:
Some, to the ſtudious Vniuerſities;
For any, or for all theſe exerciſes,
He ſaid, that Protheus, your ſonne, was meet;
And did requeſt me, to importune you
To let him ſpend his time no more at home;
Which would be great impeachment to his age,
In hauing knowne no trauaile in his youth.
Nor need'ſt thou much importune me to that
Whereon, this month I haue bin hamering.
I haue conſider'd well, his loſſe of time,
And how he cannot be a perfect man,
Not being tryed, and tutord in the world:
Experience is by induſtry atchieu'd,
And perfected by the ſwift courſe of time:
Then tell me, whether were I beſt to ſend him?
I thinke your Lordſhip is not ignorant
How his companion, youthfull Valentine,
Attends the Emperour in his royall Court.
I know it well.
'Twere good, I thinke, your Lordſhip ſent him thither,
There ſhall he practiſe Tilts, and Turnaments;
Heare ſweet diſcourſe, conuerſe with Noble-men,
And be in eye of euery Exerciſe
Worthy his youth, and nobleneſſe of birth.
I like thy counſaile: well haſt thou aduis'd:
And that thou maiſt perceiue how well I like it,
The execution of it ſhall make knowne;
Euen with the ſpeedieſt expedition,
I will diſpatch him to the Emperors Court.
To morrow, may it pleaſe you, Don Alphonſo,
With other Gentlemen of good eſteeme
Are iournying, to ſalute the Emperor,
And to commend their ſeruice to his will.
Good company: with them ſhall Protheus go:
And in good time: now will we breake with him.
Sweet Loue, ſweet lines, ſweet life,
Here is her hand, the agent of her heart;
Here is her oath for loue, her honors paune;
O that our Fathers would applaud our loues
To ſeale our happineſſe with their conſents.
Oh heauenly Iulia.
How now? What Letter are you reading there?
May't pleaſe your Lordſhip, 'tis a word or two
Of commendations ſent from Valentine;
Deliuer'd by a friend, that came from him.
Lend me the Letter: Let me ſee what newes.
There is no newes (my Lord) but that he writes
How happily he liues, how well-belou'd,
And daily graced by the Emperor;
Wiſhing me with him, partner of his fortune.
And how ſtand you affected to his wiſh?
As one relying on your Lordſhips will,
And not depending on his friendly wiſh.
My will is ſomething ſorted with his wiſh:
Muſe not that I thus ſodainly proceed;
For what I will, I will, and there an end:
I am reſolu'd, that thou ſhalt ſpend ſome time
With Valentinus, in the Emperors Court:
What maintenance he from his friends receiues,
Like exhibition thou ſhalt haue from me,
To morrow be in readineſſe, to goe,
Excuſe it not: for I am peremptory.
My Lord I cannot be ſo ſoone prouided,
Pleaſe you deliberate a day or two.
Look what thou want'ſt ſhalbe ſent after thee:
No more of ſtay: to morrow thou muſt goe;
Come on Panthino; you ſhall be imployd,
To haſten on his Expedition.
Thus haue I ſhund the fire, for feare of burning,
And drench'd me in the ſea, where I am drown'd.
I fear'd to ſhew my Father Iulias Letter,
Leaſt he ſhould take exceptions to my loue,
And with the vantage of mine owne excuſe
Hath he excepted moſt againſt my loue.
Oh, how this ſpring of loue reſembleth
The vncertaine glory of an Aprill day,
Which now ſhewes all the beauty of the Sun,
And by and by a clowd takes all away.
Sir Protheus, your Fathers call's for you,
He is in haſt, therefore I pray you go.
Why this it is: my heart accords thereto,
And yet a thouſand times it anſwer's no.
Sir, your Gloue.
Not mine: my Gloues are on.
Why then this may be yours: for this is but one.
Ha? Let me ſee: I, giue it me, it's mine:
Sweet Ornament, that deckes a thing diuine,
Ah Siluia, Siluia.
Madam Siluia: Madam Siluia.
How now Sirha?
Shee is not within hearing Sir.
Why ſir, who had you call her?
Your worſhip ſ, or elſe I miſtooke.
Well: you'll ſtill be too forward.
And yet I was laſt chidden for being too ſlow.
Goe to, ſir, tell me: do you know Madam Siluia?
Shee that your worſhip loues?
Why, how know you that I am in loue?
Marry by theſe ſpeciall markes: firſt, you haue learn'd (like Sir Protheus) to wreath your Armes like a Male-content: to relliſh a Loue-ſong, like a Robin-red-breaſt: to walke alone like one that had the peſtilence: to ſigh, like a Schoole-boy that had loſt his A. B. C. to weep like a yong wench that had buried her Grandam: to faſt, like one that takes diet: to watch, like one that feares robbing: to ſpeake puling, like a beggar at Hallow-Maſſe: You were wont, when you laughed, to crow like a cocke; when you walk'd, to walke like one of the Lions: when you faſted, it was preſently after dinner: when you look'd ſadly, it was for want of money: And now you are Metamorphis'd with a Miſtris, that when I looke on you, I can hardly thinke you my Maſter.
Are all theſe things perceiu'd in me?
They are all perceiu'd without ye.
Without me? they cannot.
Without you? nay, that's certaine: for without you were ſo ſimple, none elſe would: but you are ſo without theſe follies, that theſe follies are within you, and ſhine through you like the water in an Vrinall: that not an eye that ſees you, but is a Phyſician to comment on your Malady.
But tell me: do'ſt thou know my Lady Siluia?
Shee that you gaze on ſo, as ſhe ſits at ſupper?
Haſt thou obſeru'd that? euen ſhe I meane.
Why ſir, I know her not.
Do'ſt thou know her by my gazing on her, and yet know'ſt her not?
Is ſhe not hard-fauour'd, ſir?
Not ſo faire (boy) as well fauour'd.
Sir, I know that well enough.
What doſt thou know?
That ſhee is not ſo faire, as (of you) well-fauourd?
I meane that her beauty is exquiſite,
But her fauour infinite.
That's becauſe the one is painted, and the other out of all count.
How painted? and how out of count?
Marry ſir, ſo painted to make her faire, that no man counts of her beauty.
How eſteem'ſt thou me? I account of her beauty.
You neuer ſaw her ſince ſhe was deform'd.
How long hath ſhe beene deform'd?
Euer ſince you lou'd her.
I haue lou'd her euer ſince I ſaw her,
And ſtill I ſee her beautifull.
If you loue her, you cannot ſee her.
Why?
Becauſe Loue is blinde: O that you had mine eyes, or your owne eyes had the lights they were wont to haue, when you chidde at Sir Protheus, for going vngarter'd.
What ſhould I ſee then?
Your owne preſent folly, and her paſſing deformitie: for hee beeing in loue, could not ſee to garter his hoſe; and you, beeing in loue, cannot ſee to put on your hoſe.
Belike (boy) then you are in loue, for laſt morning
You could not ſee to wipe my ſhooes.
True ſir: I was in loue with my bed, I thanke you, you ſwing'd me for my loue, which makes mee the bolder to chide you, for yours.
In concluſion, I ſtand affected to her.
I would you were ſet, ſo your affection would ceaſe.
Laſt night ſhe enioyn'd me,
To write ſome lines to one ſhe loues.
And haue you?
I haue.
Are they not lamely writt?
No (Boy) but as well as I can do them:
Peace, here ſhe comes.
Oh excellent motion; oh exceeding Puppet:
Now will he interpret to her.
Madam & Miſtres, a thouſand good-morrows.
Oh, 'giue ye-good-ev'n: heer's a million of manners.
Sir Valentine, and ſeruant, to you two thouſand.
He ſhould giue her intereſt: & ſhe giues it him.
As you inioynd me; I haue writ your Letter
Vnto the ſecret, nameles friend of yours:
Which I was much vnwilling to proceed in,
But for my duty to your Ladiſhip.
I thanke you (gentle Seruant) 'tis very Clerkly-done.
Now truſt me (Madam) it came hardly-off:
For being ignorant to whom it goes,
I writ at randome, very doubtfully.
Perchance you think too much of ſo much pains?
No (Madam) ſo it ſteed you I will write (Pleaſe you command) a thouſand times as much: And yet —
A pretty period: well: I gheſſe the ſequell;
And yet I will not name it: and yet I care not.
And yet, take this againe: and yet I thanke you:
Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
And yet you will: and yet, another yet.
What meanes your Ladiſhip?
Doe you not like it?
Yes, yes: the lines are very queintly writ,
But (ſince vnwillingly) take them againe.
Nay, take them.
Madam, they are for you.
I, I: you writ them Sir, at my requeſt,
But I will none of them: they are for you:
I would haue had them writ more mouingly:
Pleaſe you, Ile write your Ladiſhip another.
And when it's writ: for my ſake read it ouer,
And if it pleaſe you, ſo: if not: why ſo:
If it pleaſe me, (Madam?) what then?
Why if it pleaſe you, take it for your labour;
And ſo good-morrow Seruant.
Oh Ieſt vnſeene: inſcrutible: inuiſible,
As a noſe on a mans face, or a Wethercocke on a ſteeple:
My Maſter ſues to her: and ſhe hath taught her Sutor,
He being her Pupill, to become her Tutor.
Oh excellent deuiſe, was there euer heard a better?
That my maſter being ſcribe,
To himſelfe ſhould write the Letter?
How now Sir?
What are you reaſoning with your ſelfe?
Nay: I was riming: 'tis you yt haue the reaſon.
To doe what?
To be a Spokeſ-man from Madam Siluia.
To whom?
To your ſelfe: why, ſhe woes you by a figure.
What figure?
By a Letter, I ſhould ſay.
Why ſhe hath not writ to me?
What need ſhe,
When ſhee hath made you write to your ſelfe?
Why, doe you not perceiue the ieſt?
No, beleeue me.
No beleeuing you indeed ſir:
But did you perceiue her earneſt?
She gaue me none, except an angry word.
Why ſhe hath giuen you a Letter.
That's the Letter I writ to her friend.
And yt letter hath ſhe deliuer'd, & there an end.
I would it were no worſe.
Ile warrant you, 'tis as well:
For often haue you writ to her: and ſhe in modeſty,
Or elſe for want of idle time, could not againe reply,
Or fearing els ſome meſſēger, yt might her mind diſcouer
Her ſelf hath taught her Loue himſelf, to write vnto her louer.
All this I ſpeak in print, for in print I found it.
Why muſe you ſir, 'tis dinner time.
I haue dyn'd.
I, but hearken ſir: though the Cameleon Loue can feed on the ayre, I am one that am nouriſh'd by my victuals; and would faine haue meate: oh bee not like your Miſtreſſe, be moued, be moued.
Haue patience, gentle Iulia:
I muſt where is no remedy.
When poſſibly I can, I will returne.
If you turne not: you will return the ſooner:
Keepe this remembrance for thy Iulia's ſake.
Why then wee'll make exchange;
Here, take you this.
And ſeale the bargaine with a holy kiſſe.
Here is my hand, for my true conſtancie:
And when that howre ore-ſlips me in the day,
Wherein I ſigh not (Iulia) for thy ſake,
The next enſuing howre, ſome foule miſchance
Torment me for my Loues forgetfulneſſe:
My father ſtaies my comming: anſwere not:
The tide is now: nay, not thy tide of teares,
That tide will ſtay me longer then I ſhould,
Iulia, farewell: what, gon without a word?
I, ſo true loue ſhould doe: it cannot ſpeake,
For truth hath better deeds, then words to grace it.
Sir Protheus: you are ſtaid for.
Goe: I come, I come:
Alas, this parting ſtrikes poore Louers dumbe.
Nay, 'twill bee this howre ere I haue done weeping: all the kinde of the Launce, haue this very fault: I haue receiu'd my proportion, like the prodigious Sonne, and am going with Sir Protheus to the Imperialls Court: I thinke Crab my dog, be the ſowreſt natured dogge that liues: My Mother weeping: my Father wayling: my Siſter crying: our Maid howling: our Catte wringing her hands, and all our houſe in a great perplexitie, yet did not this cruell-hearted Curre ſhedde one teare: he is a ſtone, a very pibble ſtone, and has no more pitty in him then a dogge: a Iew would haue wept to haue ſeene our parting: why my Grandam hauing no eyes, looke you, wept her ſelfe blinde at my parting: nay, Ile ſhew you the manner of it. This ſhooe is my father: no, this left ſhooe is my father; no, no, this left ſhooe is my mother: nay, that cannot bee ſo neyther: yes; it is ſo, it is ſo: it hath the worſer ſole: this ſhooe with the hole in it, is my mother: and this my father: a veng'ance on't, there 'tis: Now ſir, this ſtaffe is my ſiſter: for, looke you, ſhe is as white as a lilly, and as ſmall as a wand: this hat is Nan our maid: I am the dogge: no, the dogge is himſelfe, and I am the dogge: oh, the dogge is me, and I am my ſelfe: I; ſo, ſo: now come I to my Father; Father, your bleſſing: now ſhould not the ſhooe ſpeake a word for weeping: now ſhould I kiſſe my Father; well, hee weepes on: Now come I to my Mother: Oh that ſhe could ſpeake now, like a would-woman: well, I kiſſe her: why there 'tis; heere's my mothers breath vp and downe: Now come I to my ſiſter; marke the moane ſhe makes: now the dogge all this while ſheds not a teare: nor ſpeakes a word: but ſee how I lay the duſt with my teares.
Launce, away, away: a Boord: thy Maſter is ſhip'd, and thou art to poſt after with oares; what's the matter? why weep'ſt thou man? away aſſe, you'l looſe the Tide, if you tarry any longer.
It is no matter if the tide were loſt, for it is the vnkindeſt Tide, that euer any man tide.
What's the vnkindeſt tide?
Why, he that's tide here, Crab my dog.
Tut, man: I meane thou'lt looſe the flood, and in looſing the flood, looſe thy voyage, and in looſing thy voyage, looſe thy Maſter, and in looſing thy Maſter, looſe thy ſeruice, and in looſing thy ſeruice: — why doſt thou ſtop my mouth?
For feare thou ſhouldſt looſe thy tongue.
Where ſhould I looſe my tongue?
In thy Tale.
In thy Taile.
Looſe the Tide, and the voyage, and the Maſter, and the Seruice, and the tide: why man, if the Riuer were drie, I am able to fill it with my teares: if the winde were downe, I could driue the boate with my ſighes.
Come: come away man, I was ſent to call thee.
Sir: call me what thou dar'ſt.
Wilt thou goe?
Well, I will goe.
Seruant.
Miſtris.
Maſter, Sir Thurio frownes on you.
I Boy, it's for loue.
Not of you.
Of my Miſtreſſe then.
'Twere good you knockt him.
Seruant, you are ſad.
Indeed, Madam, I ſeeme ſo.
Seeme you that you are not?
Hap'ly I doe.
So doe Counterfeyts.
So doe you.
What ſeeme I that I am not?
Wiſe.
What inſtance of the contrary?
Your folly.
And how quoat you my folly?
I quoat it in your Ierkin.
My Ierkin is a doublet.
Well then, Ile double your folly.
How?
What, angry, Sir Thurio, do you change colour?
Giue him leaue, Madam, he is a kind of Camelion.
That hath more minde to feed on your bloud, then liue in your ayre.
You haue ſaid Sir.
I Sir, and done too for this time.
I know it wel ſir, you alwaies end ere you begin.
A fine volly of words, gentlemē, & quickly ſhot off
'Tis indeed, Madam, we thank the giuer.
Who is that Seruant?
Your ſelfe (ſweet Lady) for you gaue the fire,
Sir Thurio borrows his wit from your Ladiſhips lookes,
And ſpends what he borrowes kindly in your company
Sir, if you ſpend word for word with me, I ſhall make your wit bankrupt.
I know it well ſir: you haue an Exchequer of words,
And I thinke, no other treaſure to giue your followers:
For it appeares by their bare Liueries
That they liue by your bare words.
No more, gentlemen, no more:
Here comes my father.
Now, daughter Siluia, you are hard beſet.
Sir Valentine, your father is in good health,
What ſay you to a Letter from your friends
Of much good newes?
My Lord, I will be thankfull,
To any happy meſſenger from thence.
Know ye Don Antonio, your Countriman?
I, my good Lord, I know the Gentleman
To be of worth, and worthy eſtimation,
And not without deſert ſo well reputed.
Hath he not a Sonne?
I, my good Lord, a Son, that well deſerues
The honor, and regard of ſuch a father.
You know him well?
I knew him as my ſelfe: for from our Infancie
We haue conuerſt, and ſpent our howres together,
And though my ſelfe haue beene an idle Trewant,
Omitting the ſweet benefit of time
To cloath mine age with Angel-like perfection:
Yet hath Sir Protheus (for that's his name)
Made vſe, and faire aduantage of his daies:
His yeares but yong, but his experience old:
His head vn-mellowed, but his Iudgement ripe;
And in a word (for far behinde his worth
Comes all the praiſes that I now beſtow.)
He is compleat in feature, and in minde,
With all good grace, to grace a Gentleman.
Beſhrew me ſir, but if he make this good
He is as worthy for an Empreſſe loue,
As meet to be an Emperors Councellor:
Well, Sir: this Gentleman is come to me
With Commendation from great Potentates,
And heere he meanes to ſpend his time a while,
I thinke 'tis no vn-welcome newes to you.
Should I haue wiſh'd a thing, it had beene he.
Welcome him then according to his worth:
Siluia, I ſpeake to you, and you Sir Thurio,
For Ʋalentine, I need not cite him to it,
I will ſend him hither to you preſently.
This is the Gentleman I told your Ladiſhip
Had come along with me, but that his Miſtreſſe
Did hold his eyes, lockt in her Chriſtall lookes.
Be-like that now ſhe hath enfranchis'd them
Vpon ſome other pawne for fealty.
Nay ſure, I thinke ſhe holds them priſoners ſtil.
Nay then he ſhould be blind, and being blind
How could he ſee his way to ſeeke out you?
Why Lady, Loue hath twenty paire of eyes.
They ſay that Loue hath not an eye at all.
To ſee ſuch Louers, Thurio, as your ſelfe,
Vpon a homely obiect, Loue can winke.
Haue done, haue done: here comes ye gentleman.
Welcome, deer Protheus: Miſtris, I beſeech you
Confirme his welcome, with ſome ſpeciall fauor.
His worth is warrant for his welcome hether,
If this be he you oft haue wiſh'd to heare from.
Miſtris, it is: ſweet Lady, entertaine him
To be my fellow-ſeruant to your Ladiſhip.
Too low a Miſtres for ſo high a ſeruant.
Not ſo, ſweet Lady, but too meane a ſeruant
To haue a looke of ſuch a worthy a Miſtreſſe.
Leaue off diſcourſe of diſabilitie:
Sweet Lady, entertaine him for your Seruant.
My dutie will I boaſt of, nothing elſe.
And dutie neuer yet did want his meed.
Seruant, you are welcome to a worthleſſe Miſtreſſe.
Ile die on him that ſaies ſo but your ſelfe.
That you are welcome?
That you are worthleſſe.
Madam, my Lord your father wold ſpeak with you.
I wait vpon his pleaſure: Come Sir Thurio,
Goe with me: once more, new Seruant welcome;
Ile leaue you to confer of home affaires,
When you haue done, we looke too heare from you.
Wee'll both attend vpon your Ladiſhip.
Now tell me: how do al from whence you came?
Your frends are wel, & haue thē much cōmended.
And how doe yours?
I left them all in health.
How does your Lady? & how thriues your loue?
My tales of Loue were wont to weary you,
I know you ioy not in a Loue-diſcourſe.
I Protheus, but that life is alter'd now,
I haue done pennance for contemning Loue,
Whoſe high emperious thoughts haue puniſh'd me
With bitter faſts, with penitentiall grones,
With nightly teares, and daily hart-ſore ſighes,
For in reuenge of my contempt of loue,
Loue hath chas'd ſleepe from my enthralled eyes,
And made them watchers of mine owne hearts ſorrow.
O gentle Protheus, Loue's a mighty Lord,
And hath ſo humbled me, as I confeſſe
There is no woe to his correction,
Nor to his Seruice, no ſuch ioy on earth:
Now, no diſcourſe, except it be of loue:
Now can I breake my faſt, dine, ſup, and ſleepe,
Vpon the very naked name of Loue.
Enough; I read your fortune in your eye:
Was this the Idoll, that you worſhip ſo?
Euen She; and is ſhe not a heauenly Saint?
No; But ſhe is an earthly Paragon.
Call her diuine.
I will not flatter her.
O flatter me: for Loue delights in praiſes.
When I was ſick, you gaue me bitter pils,
And I muſt miniſter the like to you.
Then ſpeake the truth by her; if not diuine,
Yet let her be a principalitie,
Soueraigne to all the Creatures on the earth,
Except my Miſtreſſe.
Sweet: except not any,
Except thou wilt except againſt my Loue.
Haue I not reaſon to prefer mine owne?
And I will help thee to prefer her to:
Shee ſhall be dignified with this high honour,
To beare my Ladies traine, left the baſe earth
Should from her veſture chance to ſteale a kiſſe,
And of ſo great a fauor growing proud,
Diſdaine to roote the Sommer-ſwelling flowre,
And make rough winter euerlaſtingly.
Why Ʋalentine, what Bragadiſme is this?
Pardon me (Protheus) all I can is nothing,
To her, whoſe worth, make other worthies nothing;
Shee is alone.
Then let her alone.
Not for the world: why man, ſhe is mine owne,
And I as rich in hauing ſuch a Iewell
As twenty Seas, if all their ſand were pearle,
The water, Nectar, and the Rocks pure gold.
Forgiue me that I doe not dreame on thee,
Becauſe thou ſeeſt me doate vpon my loue:
My fooliſh Riuall that her Father likes
(Onely for his poſſeſſions are ſo huge)
Is gone with her along, and I muſt after,
For Loue (thou know'ſt is full of iealouſie.)
But ſhe loues you?
I, and we are betroathd: nay more, our mariage howre,
With all the cunning manner of our flight
Determin'd of: how I muſt climbe her window,
The Ladder made of Cords, and all the means
Plotted, and 'greed on for my happineſſe.
Good Protheus goe with me to my chamber,
In theſe affaires to aid me with thy counſaile.
Goe on before: I ſhall enquire you forth:
I muſt vnto the Road, to diſ-embarque
Some neceſſaries, that I needs muſt vſe,
And then Ile preſently attend you.
Will you make haſte?
I will.
Euen as one heate, another heate expels,
Or as one naile, by ſtrength driues out another.
So the remembrance of my former Loue
Is by a newer obiect quite forgotten,
It is mine, or Valentines praiſe?
Her true perfection, or my falſe tranſgreſſion?
That makes me reaſonleſſe, to reaſon thus?
Shee is faire: and ſo is Iulia that I loue,
(That I did loue, for now my loue is thaw'd,
Which like a waxen Image 'gainſt a fire
Beares no impreſſion of the thing it was.)
Me thinkes my zeale to Valentine is cold,
And that I loue him not as I was wont:
O, but I loue his Lady too-too much,
And that's the reaſon I loue him ſo little.
How ſhall I doate on her with more aduice,
That thus without aduice begin to loue her?
'Tis but her picture I haue yet beheld,
And that hath dazel'd my reaſons light:
But when I looke on her perfections,
There is no reaſon, but I ſhall be blinde.
If I can checke my erring loue, I will,
If not, to compaſſe her Ile vſe my skill.
Launce, by mine honeſty welcome to Padua.
Forſweare not thy ſelfe, ſweet youth, for I am not welcome. I reckon this alwaies, that a man is neuer vndon till hee be hang'd, nor neuer welcome to a place, till ſome certaine ſhot be paid, and the Hoſteſſe ſay welcome.
Come-on you mad-cap: Ile to the Ale-houſe with you preſently; where, for one ſhot of fiue pence, thou ſhalt haue fiue thouſand welcomes: But ſirha, how did thy Maſter part with Madam Iulia?
Marry after they cloas'd in earneſt, they parted very fairely in ieſt.
But ſhall ſhe marry him?
No.
How then? ſhall he marry her?
No, neither.
What, are they broken?
No; they are both as whole as a fiſh.
Why then, how ſtands the matter with them?
Marry thus, when it ſtands well with him, it ſtands well with her.
What an aſſe art thou, I vnderſtand thee not.
What a blocke art thou, that thou canſt not?
My ſtaffe vnderſtands me?
What thou ſaiſt?
I, and what I do too: looke thee, Ile but leane, and my ſtaffe vnderſtands me.
It ſtands vnder thee indeed.
Why, ſtand-vnder: and vnder-ſtand is all one.
But tell me true, wil't be a match?
Aske my dogge, if he ſay I, it will: if hee ſay no, it will: if hee ſhake his taile, and ſay nothing, it will.
The concluſion is then, that it will.
Thou ſhalt neuer get ſuch a ſecret from me, but by a parable.
'Tis well that I get it ſo: but Launce, how ſaiſt thou that that my maſter is become a notable Louer?
I neuer knew him otherwiſe.
Then how?
A notable Lubber: as thou reporteſt him to bee.
Why, thou whorſon Aſſe, thou miſtak'ſt me,
Why Foole, I meant not thee, I meant thy Maſter.
I tell thee, my Maſter is become a hot Louer.
Why, I tell thee, I care not, though hee burne himſelfe in Loue. If thou wilt goe with me to the Ale-houſe: if not, thou art an Hebrew, a Iew, and not worth the name of a Chriſtian.
Why?
Becauſe thou haſt not ſo much charity in thee as to goe to the Ale with a Chriſtian: Wilt thou goe?
At thy ſeruice.
To leaue my Iulia; ſhall I be forſworne?
To loue faire Siluia; ſhall I be forſworne?
To wrong my friend, I ſhall be much forſworne.
And ev'n that Powre which gaue me firſt my oath
Prouokes me to this three-fold periurie.
Loue bad mee ſweare, and Loue bids me for-ſweare;
O ſweet-ſuggeſting Loue, if thou haſt ſin'd,
Teach me (thy tempted ſubiect) to excuſe it.
At firſt I did adore a twinkling Starre,
But now I worſhip a celeſtiall Sunne:
Vn-heedfull vowes may heedfully be broken,
And he wants wit, that wants reſolued will,
To learne his wit, t' exchange the bad for better;
Fie, fie, vnreuerend tongue, to call her bad,
Whoſe ſoueraignty ſo oft thou haſt preferd,
With twenty thouſand ſoule-confirming oathes.
I cannot leaue to loue; and yet I doe:
But there I leaue to loue, where I ſhould loue.
Iulia I looſe, and Valentine I looſe,
If I keepe them, I needs muſt looſe my ſelfe:
If I looſe them, thus finde I by their loſſe,
For Valentine, my ſelfe: for Iulia, Siluia.
I to my ſelfe am deerer then a friend,
For Loue is ſtill moſt precious in it ſelfe,
And Siluia (witneſſe heauen that made her faire)
Shewes Iulia but a ſwarthy Ethiope.
I will forget that Iulia is aliue,
Remembring that my Loue to her is dead.
And Ʋalentine Ile hold an Enemie,
Ayming at Siluia as a ſweeter friend.
I cannot now proue conſtant to my ſelfe,
Without ſome treachery vs'd to Valentine.
This night he meaneth with a Corded-ladder
To climbe celeſtiall Siluia's chamber window,
My ſelfe in counſaile his competitor.
Now preſently Ile giue her father notice
Of their diſguiſing and pretended flight:
Who (all inrag'd) will baniſh Valentine:
For Thurio he intends ſhall wed his daughter,
But Valentine being gon, Ile quickely croſſe
By ſome ſlie tricke, blunt Thurio's dull proceeding.
Loue lend me wings, to make my purpoſe ſwift
As thou haſt lent me wit, to plot this drift.
Counſaile, Lucetta, gentle girle aſſiſt me,
And eu'n in kinde loue, I doe coniure thee,
Who art the Table wherein all my thoughts
Are viſibly Character'd, and engrau'd,
To leſſon me, and tell me ſome good meane
How with my honour I may vndertake
A iourney to my louing Protheus.
Alas, the way is weariſome and long.
A true-deuoted Pilgrime is not weary
To meaſure Kingdomes with his feeble ſteps,
Much leſſe ſhall ſhe that hath Loues wings to flie,
And when the flight is made to one ſo deere,
Of ſuch diuine perfection as Sir Protheus.
Better forbeare, till Protheus make returne.
Oh, know'ſt yu not, his looks are my ſoules food?
Pitty the dearth that I haue pined in,
By longing for that food ſo long a time.
Didſt thou but know the inly touch of Loue,
Thou wouldſt as ſoone goe kindle fire with ſnow
As ſeeke to quench the fire of Loue with words.
I doe not ſeeke to quench your Loues hot fire,
But qualifie the fires extreame rage,
Leſt it ſhould burne aboue the bounds of reaſon.
The more thou dam'ſt it vp, the more it burnes:
The Current that with gentle murmure glides
(Thou know'ſt) being ſtop'd, impatiently doth rage:
But when his faire courſe is not hindered,
He makes ſweet muſicke with th' enameld ſtones,
Giuing a gentle kiſſe to euery ſedge
He ouer-taketh in his pilgrimage.
And ſo by many winding nookes he ſtraies
With willing ſport to the wilde Ocean.
Then let me goe, and hinder not my courſe:
Ile be as patient as a gentle ſtreame,
And make a paſtime of each weary ſtep,
Till the laſt ſtep haue brought me to my Loue,
And there Ile reſt, as after much turmoile
A bleſſed ſoule doth in Elizium.
But in what habit will you goe along?
Not like a woman, for I would preuent
The looſe encounters of laſciuious men:
Gentle Lucetta, fit me with ſuch weedes
As may beſeeme ſome well reputed Page.
Why then your Ladiſhip muſt cut your haire.
No girle, Ile knit it vp in ſilken ſtrings,
With twentie od-conceited true-loue knots:
To be fantaſtique, may become a youth
Of greater time then I ſhall ſhew to be.
What faſhion (Madam) ſhall I make your breeches?
That fits as well, as tell me (good my Lord)
What compaſſe will you weare your Farthingale?
Why eu'n what faſhion thou beſt likes (Lucetta.)
You muſt needs haue thē with a cod-peece (Madam)
Out, out, (Lucetta) that wilbe illfauourd.
A round hoſe (Madam) now's not worth a pin
Vnleſſe you haue a cod-peece to ſtick pins on.
Lucetta, as thou lou'ſt me let me haue
What thou think'ſt meet, and is moſt mannerly.
But tell me (wench) how will the world repute me
For vndertaking ſo vnſtaid a iourney?
I feare me it will make me ſcandaliz'd.
If you thinke ſo, then ſtay at home, and go not.
Nay, that I will not.
Then neuer dreame on Infamy, but go:
If Protheus like your iourney, when you come,
No matter who's diſpleas'd, when you are gone:
I feare me he will ſcarce be pleas'd with all.
That is the leaſt (Lucetta) of my feare:
A thouſand oathes, an Ocean of his teares,
And inſtances of infinite of Loue,
Warrant me welcome to my Protheus.
All theſe are ſeruants to deceitfull men.
Baſe men, that vſe them to ſo baſe effect;
But truer ſtarres did gouerne Protheus birth,
His words are bonds, his oathes are oracles,
His loue ſincere, his thoughts immaculate,
His teares, pure meſſengers, ſent from his heart,
His heart, as far from fraud, as heauen from earth.
Pray heau'n he proue ſo when you come to him.
Now, as thou lou'ſt me, do him not that wrong,
To beare a hard opinion of his truth:
Onely deſerue my loue, by louing him,
And preſently goe with me to my chamber
To take a note of what I ſtand in need of,
To furniſh me vpon my longing iourney:
All that is mine I leaue at thy diſpoſe,
My goods, my Lands, my reputation,
Onely, in lieu thereof, diſpatch me hence:
Come; anſwere not: but to it preſently,
I am impatient of my tarriance.
Sir Thurio, giue vs leaue (I pray) a while,
We haue ſome ſecrets to confer about.
Now tell me Protheus, what's your will with me?
My gracious Lord, that which I wold diſcouer,
The Law of friendſhip bids me to conceale,
But when I call to minde your gracious fauours
Done to me (vndeſeruing as I am)
My dutie pricks me on to vtter that
Which elſe, no worldly good ſhould draw from me:
Know (worthy Prince) Sir Valentine my friend
This night intends to ſteale away your daughter:
My ſelfe am one made priuy to the plot.
I know you haue determin'd to beſtow her
On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates,
And ſhould ſhe thus be ſtolne away from you,
It would be much vexation to your age.
Thus (for my duties ſake) I rather choſe
To croſſe my friend in his intended drift,
Then (by concealing it) heap on your head
A pack of ſorrowes, which would preſſe you downe
(Being vnpreuented) to your timeleſſe graue.
Protheus, I thank thee for thine honeſt care,
Which to requite, command me while I liue.
This loue of theirs, my ſelfe haue often ſeene,
Haply when they haue iudg'd me faſt aſleepe,
And oftentimes haue purpos'd to forbid
Sir Ʋalentine her companie, and my Court.
But fearing leſt my iealous ayme might erre,
And ſo (vnworthily) diſgrace the man
(A raſhneſſe that I euer yet haue ſhun'd)
I gaue him gentle lookes, thereby to finde
That which thy ſelfe haſt now diſclos'd to me.
And that thou maiſt perceiue my feare of this,
Knowing that tender youth is ſoone ſuggeſted,
I nightly lodge her in an vpper Towre,
The key whereof, my ſelfe haue euer kept:
And thence ſhe cannot be conuay'd away.
Know (noble Lord) they haue deuis'd a meane
How he her chamber-window will aſcend,
And with a Corded-ladder fetch her downe:
For which, the youthfull Louer now is gone,
And this way comes he with it preſently.
Where (if it pleaſe you) you may intercept him.
But (good my Lord) doe it ſo cunningly
That my diſcouery be not aimed at:
For, loue of you, not hate vnto my friend,
Hath made me publiſher of this pretence.
Vpon mine Honor, he ſhall neuer know
That I had any light from thee of this.
Adiew, my Lord, Sir Valentine is comming.
Sir Valentine, whether away ſo faſt?
Pleaſe it your Grace, there is a Meſſenger
That ſtayes to beare my Letters to my friends,
And I am going to deliuer them.
Be they of much import?
The tenure of them doth but ſignifie
My health, and happy being at your Court.
Nay then no matter: ſtay with me a while,
I am to breake with thee of ſome affaires
That touch me neere: wherein thou muſt be ſecret.
'Tis not vnknown to thee, that I haue ſought
To match my friend Sir Thurio, to my daughter.
I know it well (my Lord) and ſure the Match
Were rich and honourable: beſides, the gentleman
Is full of Vertue, Bounty, Worth, and Qualities
Beſeeming ſuch a Wife, as your faire daughter:
Cannot your Grace win her to fancie him?
No, truſt me, She is peeuiſh, ſullen, froward,
Prowd, diſobedient, ſtubborne, lacking duty,
Neither regarding that ſhe is my childe,
Nor fearing me, as if I were her father:
And may I ſay to thee, this pride of hers
(Vpon aduice) hath drawne my loue from her,
And where I thought the remnant of mine age
Should haue beene cheriſh'd by her child-like dutie,
I now am full reſolu'd to take a wife,
And tur her out, to who will take her in:
Then let her beauty be her wedding dowre:
For me, and my poſſeſſions ſhe eſteemes not.
What would your Grace haue me to do in this?
There is a Lady in Verona heere
Whom I affect: but ſhe is nice, and coy,
And naught eſteemes my aged eloquence.
Now therefore would I haue thee to my Tutor
(For long agone I haue forgot to court,
Beſides the faſhion of the time is chang'd)
How, and which way I may beſtow my ſelfe
To be regarded in her ſun-bright eye.
Win her with gifts, if ſhe reſpect not words,
Dumbe Iewels often in their ſilent kinde
More then quicke words, doe moue a womans minde.
But ſhe did ſcorne a preſent that I ſent her,
A woman ſomtime ſcorns what beſt cōtents her.
Send her another: neuer giue her ore,
For ſcorne at firſt, makes after-loue the more.
If ſhe doe frowne, 'tis not in hate of you,
But rather to beget more loue in you.
If ſhe doe chide, 'tis not to haue you gone,
For why, the fooles are mad, if left alone.
Take no repulſe, what euer ſhe doth ſay,
For, get you gon, ſhe doth not meane away.
Flatter, and praiſe, commend, extoll their graces:
Though nere ſo blacke, ſay they haue Angells faces,
That man that hath a tongue, I ſay is no man,
If with his tongue he cannot win a woman.
But ſhe I meane, is promis'd by her friends
Vnto a youthfull Gentleman of worth,
And kept ſeuerely from reſort of men,
That no man hath acceſſe by day to her.
Why then I would reſort to her by night.
I, but the doores be lockt, and keyes kept ſafe,
That no man hath recourſe to her by night.
What letts but one may enter at her window?
Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground,
And built ſo ſheluing, that one cannot climbe it
Without apparant hazard of his life.
Why then a Ladder quaintly made of Cords
To caſt vp, with a paire of anchoring hookes,
Would ſerue to ſcale another Hero's towre,
So bold Leander would aduenture it.
Now as thou art a Gentleman of blood
Aduiſe me, where I may haue ſuch a Ladder.
When would you vſe it? pray ſir, tell me that.
This very night; for Loue is like a childe
That longs for euery thing that he can come by.
By ſeauen a clock, ile get you ſuch a Ladder.
But harke thee: I will goe to her alone,
How ſhall I beſt conuey the Ladder thither?
It will be light (my Lord) that you may beare it
Vnder a cloake, that is of any length.
A cloake as long as thine will ſerue the turne?
I my good Lord.
Then let me ſee thy cloake,
Ile get me one of ſuch another length.
Why any cloake will ſerue the turn (my Lord)
How ſhall I faſhion me to weare a cloake?
I pray thee let me feele thy cloake vpon me.
What Letter is this ſame? what's here? to Siluia?
And heere an Engine fit for my proceeding,
Ile be ſo bold to breake the ſeale for once.
My thoughts do harbour with my Siluia nightly,
And ſlaues they are to me, that ſend them flying.
Oh, could their Maſter come, and goe as lightly,
Himſelfe would lodge where (ſenceles) they are lying.
My Herald Thoughts, in thy pure boſome reſt-them,
While I (their King) that thither them importune
Doe curſe the grace, that with ſuch grace hath bleſt them,
Becauſe my ſelfe doe want my ſeruants fortune.
I curſe my ſelfe, for they are ſent by me,
That they ſhould harbour where their Lord ſhould be.
What's here? Siluia, this night I will enfranchiſe thee.
'Tis ſo: and heere's the Ladder for the purpoſe.
Why Phaeton (for thou art Merops ſonne)
Wilt thou aſpire to guide the heauenly Car?
And with thy daring folly burne the world?
Wilt thou reach ſtars, becauſe they ſhine on thee?
Goe baſe Intruder, ouer-weening Slaue,
Beſtow thy fawning ſmiles on equall mates,
And thinke my patience, (more then thy deſert)
Is priuiledge for thy departure hence.
Thanke me for this, more then for all the fauors
Which (all too much) I haue beſtowed on thee.
But if thou linger in my Territories
Longer then ſwifteſt expedition
Will giue thee time to leaue our royall Court,
By heauen, my wrath ſhall farre exceed the loue
I euer bore my daughter, or thy ſelfe.
Be gone, I will not heare thy vaine excuſe,
But as thou lou'ſt thy life, make ſpeed from hence.
And why not death, rather then liuing torment?
To die, is to be baniſht from my ſelfe,
And Siluia is my ſelfe: baniſh'd from her
Is ſelfe from ſelfe. A deadly baniſhment:
What light, is light, if Siluia be not ſeene?
What ioy is ioy, if Siluia be not by?
Vnleſſe it be to thinke that ſhe is by
And feed vpon the ſhadow of perfection.
Except I be by Siluia in the night,
There is no muſicke in the Nightingale.
Vnleſſe I looke on Siluia in the day,
There is no day for me to looke vpon.
Shee is my eſſence, and I leaue to be;
If I be not by her faire influence
Foſter'd, illumin'd, cheriſh'd, kept aliue.
I flie not death, to flie his deadly doome,
Tarry I heere, I but attend on death,
But flie I hence, I flie away from life.
Run (boy) run, run, and ſeeke him out.
So-hough, Soa hough —
What ſeeſt thou?
Him we goe to finde,
There's not a haire on's head, but t'is a Valentine.
Valentine?
No.
Who then? his Spirit?
Neither,
What then?
Nothing.
Can nothing ſpeake? Maſter, ſhall I ſtrike?
Who wouldſt thou ſtrike?
Nothing.
Villaine, forbeare.
Why Sir, Ile ſtrike nothing: I pray you.
Sirha, I ſay forbeare: friend Valentine, a word.
My eares are ſtopt, & cannot hear good newes,
So much of bad already hath poſſeſt them.
Then in dumbe ſilence will I bury mine,
For they are harſh, vn-tuneable, and bad.
Is Siluia dead?
No, Valentine.
No Valentine indeed, for ſacred Siluia,
Hath ſhe forſworne me?
No, Ʋalentine.
No Valentine, if Siluia haue forſworne me.
What is your newes?
Sir, there is a proclamation, yt you are vaniſhed.
That thou art baniſh'd: oh that's the newes,
From hence, from Siluia, and from me thy friend.
Oh, I haue fed vpon this woe already,
And now exceſſe of it will make me ſurfet.
Doth Siluia know that I am baniſh'd?
I, I: and ſhe hath offered to the doome
(Which vn-reuerſt ſtands in effectuall force)
A Sea of melting pearle, which ſome call teares;
Thoſe at her fathers churliſh feete ſhe tenderd,
With them vpon her knees, her humble ſelfe,
Wringing her hands, whoſe whitenes ſo became them,
As if but now they waxed pale for woe:
But neither bended knees, pure hands held vp,
Sad ſighes, deepe grones, nor ſiluer-ſhedding teares
Could penetrate her vncompaſſionate Sire;
But Valentine, if he be tane, muſt die.
Beſides, her interceſſion chaf'd him ſo,
When ſhe for thy repeale was ſuppliant,
That to cloſe priſon he commanded her,
With many bitter threats of biding there.
No more: vnles the next word that thou ſpeak'ſt
Haue ſome malignant power vpon my life:
If ſo: I pray thee breath it in mine eare,
As ending Antheme of my endleſſe dolor.
Ceaſe to lament for that thou canſt not helpe,
And ſtudy helpe for that which thou lament'ſt,
Time is the Nurſe, and breeder of all good;
Here, if thou ſtay, thou canſt not ſee thy loue:
Beſides, thy ſtaying will abridge thy life:
Hope is a louers ſtaffe, walke hence with that
And manage it, againſt deſpairing thoughts:
Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence,
Which, being writ to me, ſhall be deliuer'd
Euen in the milke-white boſome of thy Loue.
The time now ſerues not to expoſtulate,
Come, Ile conuey thee through the City-gate.
And ere I part with thee, confer at large
Of all that may concerne thy Loue-affaires:
As thou lou'ſt Siluia (though not for thy ſelfe)
Regard thy danger, and along with me.
I pray thee Launce, and if thou ſeeſt my Boy
Bid him make haſte, and meet me at the North-gate.
Goe ſirha, finde him out: Come Ʋalentine.
Oh my deere Siluia; hapleſſe Valentine.
I am but a foole, looke you, and yet I haue the wit to thinke my Maſter is a kinde of a knaue: but that's all one, if he be but one knaue: He liues not now that knowes me to be in loue, yet I am in loue, but a Teeme of horſe ſhall not plucke that from me: nor who 'tis I loue: and yet 'tis a woman; but what woman, I will not tell my ſelfe: and yet 'tis a Milke-maid: yet 'tis not a maid: for ſhee hath had Goſſips: yet 'tis a maid, for ſhe is her Maſters maid, and ſerues for wages. Shee hath more qualities then a Water-Spaniell, which is much in a bare Chriſtian: Heere is the Cate-log of her Condition. Inprimis. Shee can fetch and carry: why a horſe can doe no more; nay, a horſe cannot fetch, but onely carry, therefore is ſhee better then a Iade. Item. She can milke, looke you, a ſweet vertue in a maid with cleane hands.
How now Signior Launce? what newes with your Maſterſhip?
With my Maſterſhip? why, it is at Sea:
Well, your old vice ſtill: miſtake the word: what newes then in your paper?
The black'ſt newes that euer thou heard'ſt.
Why man? how blacke?
Why, as blacke as Inke.
Let me read them?
Fie on thee Iolt-head, thou canſt not read.
Thou lyeſt: I can.
I will try thee: tell me this: who begot thee?
Marry, the ſon of my Grand-father.
Oh illiterate loyterer▪ it was the ſonne of thy Grand-mother: this proues that thou canſt not read.
Come foole, come: try me in thy paper.
There: and S. Nicholas be thy ſpeed.
Inprimis ſhe can milke.
I that ſhe can.
Item, ſhe brewes good Ale.
And thereof comes the prouerbe: (Bleſſing of your heart, you brew good Ale.)
Item, ſhe can ſowe.
That's as much as to ſay (Can ſhe ſo?)
Item ſhe can knit.
What neede a man care for a ſtock with a wench,
When ſhe can knit him a ſtocke?
Item, ſhe can waſh and ſcoure.
A ſpeciall vertue: for then ſhee neede not be waſh'd, and ſcowr'd.
Item, ſhe can ſpin.
Then may I ſet the world on wheeles, when ſhe can ſpin for her liuing.
Item, ſhe hath many nameleſſe vertues.
That's as much as to ſay Baſtard-vertues: that indeede know not their fathers; and therefore haue no names.
Here follow her vices.
Cloſe at the heeles of her vertues.
Item, ſhee is not to be faſting in reſpect of her breath.
Well: that fault may be mended with a breakfaſt: read on.
Item, ſhe hath a ſweet mouth.
That makes amends for her ſoure breath.
Item, ſhe doth talke in her ſleepe.
It's no matter for that; ſo ſhee ſleepe not in her talke.
Item, ſhe is ſlow in words.
Oh villaine, that ſet this downe among her vices;
To be ſlow in words, is a womans onely vertue:
I pray thee out with't, and place it for her chiefe vertue.
Item, ſhe is proud.
Out with that too:
It was Eues legacie, and cannot be t'ane from her.
Item, ſhe hath no teeth.
I care not for that neither: becauſe I loue cruſts.
Item, ſhe is curſt.
Well: the beſt is, ſhe hath no teeth to bite.
Item, ſhe will often praiſe her liquor.
If her liquor be good, ſhe ſhall: if ſhe will not,
I will; for good things ſhould be praiſed.
Item, ſhe is too liberall.
Of her tongue ſhe cannot; for that's writ downe ſhe is ſlow of: of her purſe, ſhee ſhall not, for that ile keepe ſhut: Now, of another thing ſhee may, and that cannot I helpe. Well, proceede.
Item, ſhee hath more haire then wit, and more faults then haires, and more wealth then faults.
Stop there: Ile haue her: ſhe was mine, and not mine, twice or thrice in that laſt Article: rehearſe that once more.
Item, ſhe hath more haire then wit.
More haire then wit: it may be ile proue it: The couer of the ſalt, hides the ſalt, and therefore it is more then the ſalt; the haire that couers the wit, is more then the wit; for the greater hides the leſſe: What's next?
And more faults then haires.
That's monſtrous: oh that that were out.
And more wealth then faults.
Why that word makes the faults gracious:
Well, ile haue her: and if it be a match, as nothing is impoſſible.
What then?
Why then, will I tell thee, that thy Maſter ſtaies for thee at the North gate.
For me?
For thee? I, who art thou? he hath ſtaid for a better man then thee.
And muſt I goe to him?
Thou muſt run to him; for thou haſt ſtaid ſo long, that going will ſcarce ſerue the turne.
Why didſt not tell me ſooner? 'pox of your loue Letters.
Now will he be ſwing'd for reading my Letter; An vnmannerly ſlaue, that will thruſt himſelfe into ſecrets: Ile after, to reioyce in the boyes correctiō.
Sir Thurio, feare not, but that ſhe will loue you
Now Valentine is baniſh'd from her ſight.
Since his exile ſhe hath deſpis'd me moſt,
Forſworne my company, and rail'd at me,
That I am deſperate of obtaining her.
This weake impreſſe of Loue, is as a figure
Trenched in ice, which with an houres heare
Diſſolues to water, and doth looſe his forme.
A little time will melt her frozen thoughts,
And worthleſſe Valentine ſhall be forgot.
How now ſir Protheus, is your countriman
(According to our Proclamation) gon?
Gon, my good Lord.
My daughter takes his going grieuouſly?
A little time (my Lord) will kill that griefe.
So I beleeue: but Thurio thinkes not ſo:
Protheus, the good conceit I hold of thee,
(For thou haſt ſhowne ſome ſigne of good deſert)
Makes me the better to confer with thee.
Longer then I proue loyall to your Grace,
Let me not liue, to looke vpon your Grace.
Thou know'ſt how willingly, I would effect
The match betweene ſir Thurio, and my daughter?
I doe my Lord.
And alſo, I thinke, thou art not ignorant
How ſhe oppoſes her againſt my will?
She did my Lord, when Ʋalentine was here.
I, and peruerſly, ſhe perſeuers ſo:
What might we doe to make the girle forget
The loue of Valentine, and loue ſir Thurio?
The beſt way is, to ſlander Ʋalentine,
With falſehood, cowardize, and poore diſcent:
Three things, that women highly hold in hate.
I, but ſhe'll thinke, that it is ſpoke in hate.
I, if his enemy deliuer it.
Therefore it muſt with circumſtance be ſpoken
By one, whom ſhe eſteemeth as his friend.
Then you muſt vndertake to ſlander him.
And that (my Lord) I ſhall be loath to doe:
'Tis an ill office for a Gentleman,
Eſpecially againſt his very friend.
Where your good word cannot aduantage him,
Your ſlander neuer can endamage him;
Therefore the office is indifferent,
Being intreated to it by your friend.
You haue preuail'd (my Lord) if I can doe it
By ought that I can ſpeake in his diſpraiſe,
She ſhall not long continue loue to him:
But ſay this weede her loue from Valentine,
It followes not that ſhe will loue ſir Thurio.
Therefore, as you vnwinde her loue from him;
Leaſt it ſhould rauell, and be good to none,
You muſt prouide to bottome it on me:
Which muſt be done, by praiſing me as much
As you, in worth diſpraiſe, ſir Ʋalentine.
And Protheus, we dare truſt you in this kinde,
Becauſe we know (on Valentines report)
You are already loues firme votary,
And cannot ſoone reuolt, and change your minde.
Vpon this warrant, ſhall you haue acceſſe,
Where you, with Siluia, may conferre at large.
For ſhe is lumpiſh, heauy, mellancholly,
And (for your friends ſake) will be glad of you;
Where you may temper her, by your perſwaſion,
To hate yong Ʋalentine, and loue my friend.
As much as I can doe, I will effect:
But you ſir Thurio, are not ſharpe enough:
You muſt lay Lime, to tangle her deſires
By walefull Sonnets, whoſe compoſed Rimes
Should be full fraught with ſeruiceable vowes.
I, much is the force of heauen-bred Poeſie.
Say that vpon the altar of her beauty
You ſacrifice your teares, your ſighes, your heart:
Write till your inke be dry▪ and with your teares
Moiſt it againe: and frame ſome feeling line,
That may diſcouer ſuch integrity:
For Orpheus Lute, was ſtrung with Poets ſinewes,
Whoſe golden touch could ſoften ſteele and ſtones;
Make Tygers tame, and huge Leuiathans
Forſake vnſounded deepes, to dance on Sands.
After your dire-lamenting Elegies,
Viſit by night your Ladies chamber-window
With ſome ſweet Conſort; To their Inſtruments
Tune a deploring dumpe: the nights dead ſilence
Will well become ſuch ſweet complaining grieuance:
This, or elſe nothing, will inherit her.
This diſcipline, ſhowes thou haſt bin in loue.
And thy aduice, this night, ile put in practiſe:
Therefore, ſweet Protheus, my direction-giuer,
Let vs into the City preſently
To ſort ſome Gentlemen, well skil'd in Muſicke.
I haue a Sonnet, that will ſerue the turne
To giue the on-ſet to thy good aduiſe.
About it Gentlemen.
We'll wait vpon your Grace, till after Supper,
And afterward determine our proceedings.
Euen now about it, I will pardon you.
Fellowes, ſtand faſt: I ſee a paſſenger.
If there be ten, ſhrinke not, but down with 'em.
Stand ſir, and throw vs that you haue about 'ye.
If not: we'll make you ſit, and rifle you.
Sir we are vndone; theſe are the Villaines
That all the Trauailers doe feare ſo much.
My friends.
That's not ſo, ſir: we are your enemies.
Peace: we'll heare him.
I by my beard will we: for he is a proper man.
Then know that I haue little wealth to looſe;
A man I am, croſs'd with aduerſitie:
My riches, are theſe poore habiliments,
Of which, if you ſhould here disfurniſh me,
You take the ſum and ſubſtance that I haue.
Whether trauell you?
To Verona.
Whence came you?
From Millaine.
Haue you long ſoiourn'd there?
Some ſixteene moneths, and longer might haue ſtaid,
If crooked fortune had not thwarted me.
What, were you baniſh'd thence?
I was.
For what offence?
For that which now torments me to rehearſe;
I kil'd a man, whoſe death I much repent,
But yet I ſlew him manfully, in fight,
Without falſe vantage, or baſe treachery.
Why nere repent it, if it were done ſo;
But were you baniſht for ſo ſmall a fault?
I was, and held me glad of ſuch a doome.
Haue you the Tongues?
My youthfull trauaile, therein made me happy,
Or elſe I often had beene often miſerable.
By the bare ſcalpe of Robin Hoods fat Fryer,
This fellow were a King, for our wilde faction.
We'll haue him: Sirs, a word.
Maſter, be one of them:
It's an honourable kinde of theeuery.
Peace villaine.
Tell vs this: haue you any thing to take to?
Nothing but my fortune.
Know then, that ſome of vs are Gentlemen,
Such as the fury of vngouern'd youth
Thruſt from the company of awfull men.
My ſelfe was from Verona baniſhed,
For practiſing to ſteale away a Lady,
And heire and Neece, alide vnto the Duke.
And I from Mantua, for a Gentleman,
Who, in my moode, I ſtab'd vnto the heart.
And I, for ſuch like petty crimes as theſe.
But to the purpoſe: for we cite our faults,
That they may hold excus'd our lawleſſe liues;
And partly ſeeing you are beautifide
With goodly ſhape; and by your owne report,
A Linguiſt, and a man of ſuch perfection,
As we doe in our quality much want.
Indeede becauſe you are a baniſh'd man,
Therefore, aboue the reſt, we parley to you:
Are you content to be our Generall?
To make a vertue of neceſſity,
And liue as we doe in this wilderneſſe?
What ſaiſt thou? wilt thou be of our conſort?
Say I, and be the captaine of vs all:
We'll doe thee homage, and be rul'd by thee,
Loue thee, as our Commander, and our King.
But if thou ſcorne our curteſie, thou dyeſt.
Thou ſhalt not liue, to brag what we haue offer'd.
I take your offer, and will liue with you,
Prouided that you do no outrages
On ſilly women, or poore paſſengers.
No, we deteſt ſuch vile baſe practiſes.
Come, goe with vs, we'll bring thee to our Crewes,
And ſhow thee all the Treaſure we haue got;
Which, with our ſelues, all reſt at thy diſpoſe.
Already haue I bin falſe to Valentine,
And now I muſt be as vniuſt to Thurio,
Vnder the colour of commending him,
I haue acceſſe my owne loue to prefer.
But Siluia is too faire, too true, too holy,
To be corrupted with my worthleſſe guifts;
When I proteſt true loyalty to her,
She twits me with my falſehood to my friend;
When to her beauty I commend my vowes,
She bids me thinke how I haue bin forſworne
In breaking faith with Iulia, whom I lou'd;
And notwithſtanding all her ſodaine quips,
The leaſt whereof would quell a louers hope:
Yet (Spaniel-like) the more ſhe ſpurnes my loue,
The more it growes, and fawneth on her ſtill;
But here comes Thurio; now muſt we to her window,
And giue ſome euening Muſique to her eare.
How now, ſir Protheus, are you crept before vs?
I gentle Thurio, for you know that loue
Will creepe in ſeruice, where it cannot goe.
I, but I hope, Sir, that you loue not here.
Sir, but I doe: or elſe I would be hence.
Who, Siluia?
I, Siluia, for your ſake.
I thanke you for your owne: Now Gentlemen
Let's tune: and too it luſtily a while.
Now, my yong gueſt; me thinks your' allyeholly;
I pray you why is it?
Marry (mine Hoſt) becauſe I cannot be merry.
Come, we'll haue you merry: ile bring you where you ſhall heare Muſique, and ſee the Gentleman that you ask'd for.
But ſhall I heare him ſpeake.
I that you ſhall.
That will be Muſique.
Harke, harke.
Is he among theſe?
I: but peace, let's heare'm.
Who is Siluia? what is ſhe?
That all our Swaines commend her?
Holy, faire, and wiſe is ſhe,
The heauen ſuch grace did lend her, that ſhe might admired be.
Is ſhe kinde as ſhe is faire?
For beauty liues with kindneſſe:
Loue doth to her eyes repaire,
To helpe him of his blindneſſe:
And being help'd, inhabits there.
Then to Siluia, let vs ſing,
That Siluia is excelling;
She excels each mortall thing
Vpon the dull earth dwelling.
To her let vs Garlands bring.
How now? are you ſadder then you were before;
How doe you, man? the Muſicke likes you not.
You miſtake: the Muſitian likes me not.
Why, my pretty youth?
He plaies falſe (father.)
How, out of tune on the ſtrings.
Not ſo: but yet
So falſe that he grieues my very heart-ſtrings.
You haue a quicke eare.
I, I would I were deafe: it makes me haue a ſlow heart.
I perceiue you delight not in Muſique.
Not a whit, when it iars ſo.
Harke, what fine change is in the Muſique.
I: that change is the ſpight.
You would haue them alwaies play but one thing.
I would alwaies haue one play but one thing.
But Hoſt, doth this Sir Protheus, that we talke on,
Often reſort vnto this Gentlewoman?
I tell you what Launce his man told me,
He lou'd her out of all nicke.
Where is Launce?
Gone to ſeeke his dog, which to morrow, by his Maſters command, hee muſt carry for a preſent to his Lady.
Peace, ſtand aſide, the company parts.
Sir Thurio, feare not you, I will ſo pleade,
That you ſhall ſay, my cunning drift excels.
Where meete we?
At Saint Gregories well.
Farewell.
Madam: good eu'n to your Ladiſhip.
I thanke you for your Muſique (Gentlemen)
Who is that that ſpake?
One (Lady) if you knew his pure hearts truth,
You would quickly learne to know him by his voice.
Sir Protheus, as I take it.
Sir Protheus (gentle Lady) and your Seruant.
What's your will?
That I may compaſſe yours.
You haue your wiſh: my will is euen this,
That preſently you hie you home to bed:
Thou ſubtile, periur'd, falſe, diſloyall man:
Think'ſt thou I am ſo ſhallow, ſo conceitleſſe,
To be ſeduced by thy flattery,
That has't deceiu'd ſo many with thy vowes▪
Returne, returne and make thy loue amends:
For me (by this pale queene of night I ſweare)
I am ſo farre from granting thy requeſt,
That I deſpiſe thee, for thy wrongfull ſuite;
And by and by intend to chide my ſelfe,
Euen for this time I ſpend in talking to thee.
I grant (ſweet loue) that I did loue a Lady,
But ſhe is dead.
'Twere falſe, if I ſhould ſpeake it;
For I am ſure ſhe is not buried.
Say that ſhe be: yet Valentine thy friend
Suruiues; to whom (thy ſelfe art witneſſe)
I am betroth'd; and art thou not aſham'd
To wrong him, with thy importunacy?
I likewiſe heare that Valentine is dead.
And ſo ſuppoſe am I; for in her graue
Aſſure thy ſelfe, my loue is buried.
Sweet Lady, let me take it from the earth.
Goe to thy Ladies graue and call hers thence,
Or at the leaſt, in hers, ſepulcher thine.
He heard not that.
Madam: if your heart be ſo obdurate:
Vouchſafe me yet your Picture for my loue,
The Picture that is hanging in your chamber:
To that ile ſpeake, to that ile ſigh and weepe:
For ſince the ſubſtance of your perfect ſelfe
Is elſe deuoted, I am but a ſhadow;
And to your ſhadow, will I make true loue.
If 'twere a ſubſtance you would ſure deceiue it,
And make it but a ſhadow, as I am.
I am very loath to be your Idoll Sir;
But, ſince your falſehood ſhall become you well
To worſhip ſhadowes, and adore falſe ſhapes,
Send to me in the morning, and ile ſend it:
And ſo, good reſt.
As wretches haue ore-night
That wait for execution in the morne.
Hoſt, will you goe?
By my hallidome, I was faſt aſleepe.
Pray you, where lies Sir Protheus?
Marry, at my houſe:
Truſt me, I thinke 'tis almoſt day.
Not ſo: but it hath bin the longeſt night
That ere I watch'd, and the moſt heauieſt.
This is the houre that Madam Siluia
Entreated me to call, and know her minde:
Ther's ſome great matter ſhe'ld employ me in.
Madam, Madam.
Who cals?
Your ſeruant, and your friend;
One that attends your Ladiſhips command.
Sir Eglamore, a thouſand times good morrow.
As many (worthy Lady) to your ſelfe:
According to your Ladiſhips impoſe,
I am thus early come, to know what ſeruice
It is your pleaſure to command me in.
Oh Eglamoure, thou art a Gentleman:
Thinke not I flatter (for I ſweare I doe not)
Valiant, wiſe, remorſe-full, well accompliſh'd.
Thou art not ignorant what deere good will
I beare vnto the baniſh'd Ʋalentine:
Nor how my father would enforce me marry
Vaine Thurio (whom my very ſoule abhor'd.)
Thy ſelfe haſt lou'd, and I haue heard thee ſay
No griefe did euer come ſo neere thy heart,
As when thy Lady, and thy true-loue dide,
Vpon whoſe Graue thou vow'dſt pure chaſtitie:
Sir Eglamoure: I would to Valentine
To Mantua, where I heare, he makes aboad;
And for the waies are dangerous to paſſe,
I doe deſire thy worthy company,
Vpon whoſe faith and honor, I repoſe.
Vrge not my fathers anger (Eglamoure)
But thinke vpon my griefe (a Ladies griefe)
And on the iuſtice of my flying hence,
To keepe me from a moſt vnholy match,
Which heauen and fortune ſtill rewards with plagues.
I doe deſire thee, euen from a heart
As full of ſorrowes, as the Sea of ſands,
To beare me company, and goe with me:
If not, to hide what I haue ſaid to thee,
That I may venture to depart alone.
Madam, I pitty much your grieuances,
Which, ſince I know they vertuouſly are plac'd,
I giue conſent to goe along with you,
Wreaking as little what betideth me,
As much, I wiſh all good befortune you.
When will you goe?
This euening comming.
Where ſhall I meete you?
At Frier Patrickes Cell,
Where I intend holy Confeſſion.
I will not faile your Ladiſhip:
Good morrow (gentle Lady.)
Good morrow, kinde Sir Eglamoure.
When a mans ſeruant ſhall play the Curre with him (looke you) it goes hard: one that I brought vp of a puppy: one that I ſau'd from drowning, when three or foure of his blinde brothers and ſiſters went to it: I haue taught him (euen as one would ſay preciſely, thus I would teach a dog) I was ſent to deliuer him, as a preſent to Miſtris Siluia, from my Maſter; and I came no ſooner into the dyning-chamber, but he ſteps me to her Trencher, and ſteales her Capons-leg: O, 'tis a foule thing, when a Cur cannot keepe himſelfe in all companies: I would haue (as one ſhould ſay) one that takes vpon him to be a dog indeede, to be, as it were, a dog at all things. If I had not had more wit then he, to take a fault vpon me that he did, I thinke verily hee had bin hang'd for't: ſure as I liue he had ſuffer'd for't: you ſhall iudge: Hee thruſts me himſelfe into the company of three or foure gentleman-like-dogs, vnder the Dukes table: hee had not bin there (bleſſe the marke) a piſſing while, but all the chamber ſmelt him: out with the dog (ſaies one) what cur is that (ſaies another) whip him out (ſaies the third) hang him vp (ſaies the Duke.) I hauing bin acquainted with the ſmell before, knew it was Crab; and goes me to the fellow that whips the dogges: friend (quoth I) you meane to whip the dog: I marry doe I (quoth he) you doe him the more wrong (quoth I) 'twas I did the thing you wot of: he makes me no more adoe, but whips me out of the chamber: how many Maſters would doe this for his Seruant? nay, ile be ſworne I haue ſat in the ſtockes, for puddings he hath ſtolne, otherwiſe he had bin executed: I haue ſtood on the Pillorie for Geeſe he hath kil'd, otherwiſe he had ſufferd for't: thou think'ſt not of this now: nay, I remember the tricke you ſeru'd me, when I tooke my leaue of Madam Siluia: did not I bid thee ſtill marke me, and doe as I doe, when did'ſt thou ſee me heaue vp my leg, and make water againſt a Gentlewomans farthingale? did'ſt thou euer ſee me doe ſuch a tricke?
Sebaſtian is thy name: I like thee well,
And will imploy thee in ſome ſeruice preſently.
In what you pleaſe, ile doe what I can.
I hope thou wilt.
How now you whor-ſon pezant,
Where haue you bin theſe two dayes loytering?
Marry Sir, I carried Miſtris Siluia the dogge you bad me.
And what ſaies ſhe to my little Iewell?
Marry ſhe ſaies your dog was a cur, and tels you curriſh thanks is good enough for ſuch a preſent.
But ſhe receiu'd my dog?
No indeede did ſhe not:
Here haue I brought him backe againe.
What, didſt thou offer her this from me?
I Sir, the other Squirrill was ſtolne from me
By the Hangmans boyes in the market place,
And then I offer'd her mine owne, who is a dog
As big as ten of yours, & therefore the guift the greater.
Goe, get thee hence, and finde my dog againe,
Or nere returne againe into my ſight.
Away, I ſay: ſtayeſt thou to vexe me here;
A Slaue, that ſtill an end, turnes me to ſhame:
Sebaſtian, I haue entertained thee,
Partly that I haue neede of ſuch a youth,
That can with ſome diſcretion doe my buſineſſe:
For 'tis no truſting to yond fooliſh Lowt;
But chiefely, for thy face, and thy behauiour,
Which (if my Augury deceiue me not)
Witneſſe good bringing vp, fortune, and truth:
Therefore know thee, for this I entertaine thee.
Go preſently, and take this Ring with thee,
Deliuer it to Madam Siluia;
She lou'd me well, deliuer'd it to me.
It ſeemes you lou'd not her, not leaue her token:
She is dead belike?
Not ſo: I thinke ſhe liues.
Alas.
Why do'ſt thou cry alas?
I cannot chooſe but pitty her.
Wherefore ſhould'ſt thou pitty her?
Becauſe, me thinkes that ſhe lou'd you as well
As you doe loue your Lady Siluia:
She dreames on him, that has forgot her loue,
You doate on her, that cares not for your loue.
'Tis pitty Loue, ſhould be ſo contrary:
And thinking on it, makes me cry alas.
Well: giue her that Ring, and therewithall
This Letter: that's her chamber: Tell my Lady,
I claime the promiſe for her heauenly Picture:
Your meſſage done, hye home vnto my chamber,
Where thou ſhalt finde me ſad, and ſolitarie.
How many women would doe ſuch a meſſage?
Alas poore Protheus, thou haſt entertain'd
A Foxe, to be the Shepheard of thy Lambs;
Alas, poore foole, why doe I pitty him
That with his very heart deſpiſeth me?
Becauſe he loues her, he deſpiſeth me,
Becauſe I loue him, I muſt pitty him.
This Ring I gaue him, when he parted from me,
To binde him to remember my good will:
And now am I (vnhappy Meſſenger)
To plead for that, which I would not obtaine;
To carry that, which I would haue refus'd;
To praiſe his faith, which I would haue diſprais'd.
I am my Maſters true confirmed Loue,
But cannot be true ſeruant to my Maſter,
Vnleſſe I proue falſe traitor to my ſelfe.
Yet will I woe for him but yet ſo coldly,
As (heauen it knowes) I would not haue him ſpeed.
Gentlewoman, good day: I pray you be my meane
To bring me where to ſpeake with Madam Siluia.
What would you with her, if that I be ſhe?
If you be ſhe, I doe intreat your patience
To heare me ſpeake the meſſage I am ſent on.
From whom?
From my Maſter, Sir Protheus, Madam.
Oh: he ſends you for a Picture?
I, Madam.
Vrſula, bring my Picture there,
Goe, giue your Maſter this: tell him from me,
One Iulia, that his changing thoughts forget
Would better fit his Chamber, then this Shadow.
Madam, pleaſe you peruſe this Letter;
Pardon me (Madam) I haue vnaduis'd
Deliuer'd you a paper that I ſhould not;
This is the Letter to your Ladiſhip.
I pray thee let me looke on that againe.
It may not be: good Madam pardon me.
There, hold:
I will not looke vpon your Maſters lines:
I know they are ſtuft with proteſtations,
And full of new-found oathes, which he will breake
As eaſily as I doe teare his paper.
Madam, he ſends your Ladiſhip this Ring.
The more ſhame for him, that he ſends it me;
For I haue heard him ſay a thouſand times,
His Iulia gaue it him, at his departure:
Though his falſe finger haue prophan'd the Ring,
Mine ſhall not doe his Iulia ſo much wrong.
She thankes you.
What ſai'ſt thou?
I thanke you Madam, that you tender her:
Poore Gentlewoman, my Maſter wrongs her much.
Do'ſt thou know her?
Almoſt as well as I doe know my ſelfe.
To thinke vpon her woes, I doe proteſt
That I haue wept a hundred ſeuerall times.
Belike ſhe thinks that Protheus hath forſook her?
I thinke ſhe doth: and that's her cauſe of ſorrow▪
Is ſhe not paſſing faire?
She hath bin fairer (Madam) then ſhe is,
When ſhe did thinke my Maſter lou'd her well;
She, in my iudgement, was as faire as you.
But ſince ſhe did neglect her looking-glaſſe,
And threw her Sun-expelling Maſque away,
The ayre hath ſtaru'd the roſes in her cheekes,
And pinch'd the lilly-tincture of her face,
That now ſhe is become as blacke as I.
How tall was ſhe?
About my ſtature: for at Pentecoſt,
When all our Pageants of delight were plaid,
Our youth got me to play the womans part,
And I was trim'd in Madam Iulius gowne,
Which ſerued me as fit, by all mens iudgements,
As if the garment had bin made for me:
Therefore I know ſhe is about my height,
And at that time I made her weepe a good.
For I did play a lamentable part.
(Madam) 'twas Ariadne, paſſioning
For Theſus periury, and vniuſt flight;
Which I ſo liuely acted with my teares:
That my poore Miſtris moued therewithall,
Wept bitterly: and would I might be dead,
If I in thought felt not her very ſorrow.
She is beholding to thee (gentle youth)
Alas (poore Lady) deſolate, and left;
I weepe my ſelfe to thinke vpon thy words:
Here youth: there is my purſe; I giue thee this
For thy ſweet Miſtris ſake, becauſe thou lou'ſt her. Farewell.
And ſhe ſhall thanke you for't, if ere you know her.
A vertuous gentlewoman, milde, and beautifull.
I hope my Maſters ſuit will be but cold,
Since ſhe reſpects my Miſtris loue ſo much.
Alas, how loue can triſle with it ſelfe:
Here is her Picture: let me ſee, I thinke
If I had ſuch a Tyre, this face of mine
Were full as louely, as is this of hers;
And yet the Painter flatter'd her a little,
Vnleſſe I flatter with my ſelfe too much.
Her haire is Aburne, mine is perfect Yellow;
If that be all the difference in his loue,
Ile get me ſuch a coulour'd Perrywig:
Her eyes are grey as glaſſe, and ſo are mine:
I, but her fore-head's low, and mine's as high:
What ſhould it be that he reſpects in her,
But I can make reſpectiue in my ſelfe?
If this fond Loue, were not a blinded god.
Come ſhadow, come, and take this ſhadow vp,
For 'tis thy riuall: O thou ſenceleſſe forme.
Thou ſhalt be worſhip'd, kiſs'd, lou'd, and ador'd;
And were there ſence in his Idolatry,
My ſubſtance ſhould be ſtatue in thy ſtead.
Ile vſe thee kindly, for thy Miſtris ſake
That vs'd me ſo: or elſe by Ioue, I vow,
I ſhould haue ſcratch'd out your vnſeeing eyes,
To make my Maſter out of loue with thee.
The Sun begins to guild the weſterne skie,
And now it is about the very houre
That Siluia, at Fryer Patricks Cell ſhould meet me,
She will not faile; for Louers breake not houres,
Vnleſſe it be to come before their time,
So much they ſpur their expedition.
See where ſhe comes: Lady a happy euening.
Amen, Amen: goe on (good Eglamoure)
Out at the Poſterne by the Abbey wall;
I feare I am attended by ſome Spies.
Feare not: the Forreſt is not three leagues off,
If we recouer that, we are ſure enough.
Sir Protheus, what ſaies Siluia to my ſuit?
Oh Sir, I finde her milder then ſhe was,
And yet ſhe takes exceptions at your perſon.
What? that my leg is too long?
No, that it is too little.
Ile weare a Boote, to make it ſomewhat rounder.
But loue will not be ſpurd to what it loath.
What ſaies ſhe to my face?
She ſaies it is a faire one.
Nay then the wanton lyes: my face is blacke.
But Pearles are faire; and the old ſaying is,
Blacke men are Pearles, in beauteous Ladies eyes.
'Tis true, ſuch Pearles as put out Ladies eyes,
For I had rather winke, then looke on them.
How likes ſhe my diſcourſe?
Ill, when you talke of war.
But well, when I diſcourſe of loue and peace.
But better indeede, when you hold you peace.
What ſayes ſhe to my valour?
Oh Sir, ſhe makes no doubt of that.
She needes not, when ſhe knowes it cowardize.
What ſaies ſhe to my birth?
That you are well deriu'd.
True: from a Gentleman, to a foole.
Conſiders ſhe my Poſſeſſions?
Oh, I: and pitties them.
Wherefore?
That ſuch an Aſſe ſhould owe them.
That they are out by Leaſe.
Here comes the Duke.
How now ſir Protheus; how now Thurio?
Which of you ſaw Eglamoure of late?
Not I.
Nor I.
Saw you my daughter?
Neither.
Why then
She's fled vnto that pezant, Valentine;
And Eglamoure is in her Company:
'Tis true: for Frier Laurence met them both
As he, in pennance wander'd through the Forreſt:
Him he knew well: and gueſd that it was ſhe,
But being mask'd, he was not ſure of it.
Beſides ſhe did intend Confeſſion
At Patricks Cell this euen, and there ſhe was not.
Theſe likelihoods confirme her flight from hence;
Therefore I pray you ſtand, not to diſcourſe,
But mount you preſently, and meete with me
Vpon the riſing of the Mountaine foote
That leads toward Mantua, whether they are fled:
Diſpatch (ſweet Gentlemen) and follow me.
Why this it is, to be a peeuiſh Girle,
That flies her fortune when it followes her:
Ile after; more to be reueng'd on Eglamoure,
Then for the loue of reck-leſſe Siluia.
And I will follow, more for Siluas loue
Then hate of Eglamoure that goes with her.
And I will follow, more to croſſe that loue
Then hate for Siluia, that is gone for loue.
Come, come be patient:
We muſt bring you to our Captaine.
A thouſand more miſchances then this one
Haue learn'd me how to brooke this patiently.
Come, bring her away.
Where is the Gentleman that was with her?
Being nimble footed, he hath out▪ run vs.
But Moyſes and Valerius follow him:
Goe thou with her to the Weſt end of the wood,
There is our Captaine: Wee'll follow him that's fled,
The Thicket is beſet, he cannot ſcape.
Come, I muſt bring you to our Captains caue.
Feare not: he beares an honourable minde,
And will not vſe a woman lawleſly.
O Valentine: this I endure for thee.
How vſe doth breed a habit in a man?
This ſhadowy deſart, vnfrequented woods
I better brooke then flouriſhing peopled Townes:
Here can I ſit alone, vn-ſeene of any,
And to the Nightingales complaining Notes
Tune my diſtreſtes, and record my woes.
O thou that doſt inhabit in my breſt,
Leaue not the Manſion ſo long Tenant-leſſe,
Leſt growing ruinous, the building fall,
And leaue no memory of what it was,
Repaire me, with thy preſence, Siluia:
Thou gentle Nimph, cheriſh thy for-lorne ſwaine.
What hallowing, and what ſtir is this to day?
Theſe are my mates, that make their wills their Law,
Haue ſome vnhappy paſſenger in chace;
They loue me well: yet I haue much to doe
To keepe them from vnciuill outrages.
Withdraw thee Valentine: who's this comes heere?
Madam, this ſeruice I haue done for you
(Though you reſpect not aught your ſeruant doth)
To hazard life, and reskew you from him,
That would haue forc'd your honour, and your loue,
Vouchſafe me for my meed, but one faire looke:
(A ſmaller boone then this I cannot beg,
And leſſe then this, I am ſure you cannot giue.)
How like a dreame is this? I ſee, and heare:
Loue, lend me patience to forbeare a while.
O miſerable, vnhappy that I am.
Vnhappy were you (Madam) ere I came:
But by my comming, I haue made you happy.
By thy approach thou mak'ſt me moſt vnhappy.
And me, when he approcheth to your preſence
Had I beene ceazed by a hungry Lion,
I would haue beene a break-faſt to the Beaſt,
Rather then haue falſe Protheus reskue me:
Oh heauen be iudge how I loue Valentine,
Whoſe life's as tender to me as my ſoule,
And full as much (for more there cannot be)
I doe deteſt falſe periur'd Protheus:
Therefore be gone, ſollicit me no more.
What dangerous action, ſtood it next to death
Would I not vndergoe, for one calme looke:
Oh 'tis the curſe in Loue, and ſtill approu'd
When women cannot loue, where they're belou'd.
When Protheus cannot loue, where he's belou'd:
Read ouer Iulia's heart, (thy firſt beſt Loue)
For whoſe deare ſake, thou didſt then rend thy faith
Into a thouſand oathes; and all thoſe oathes,
Deſcended into periury, to loue me,
Thou haſt no faith left now, vnleſſe thou'dſt two,
And that's farre worſe then none: better haue none
Then plurall faith, which is too much by one:
Thou Counterfeyt, to thy true friend.
In Loue,
Who reſpects friend?
All men but Protheus.
Nay, if the gentle ſpirit of mouing words
Can no way change you to a milder forme;
Ile wooe you like a Souldier, at armes end,
And loue you 'gainſt the nature of Loue: force ye.
Oh heauen.
Ile force thee yeeld to my deſire.
Ruffian: let goe that rude vnciuill touch,
Thou friend of an ill faſhion.
Ʋalentine.
Thou cōmon friend, that's without faith or loue,
For ſuch is a friend now: treacherous man,
Thou haſt beguil'd my hopes; nought but mine eye
Could haue perſwaded me: now I dare not ſay
I haue one friend aliue; thou wouldſt diſproue me:
Who ſhould be truſted, when ones right hand
Is periured to the boſome? Protheus
I am ſorry I muſt neuer truſt thee more,
But count the world a ſtranger for thy ſake:
The priuate wound is deepeſt: oh time, moſt accurſt:
'Mongſt all foes that a friend ſhould be the worſt?
My ſhame and guilt confounds me:
Forgiue me Valentine: if hearty ſorrow
Be a ſufficient Ranſome for offence,
I tender't heere: I doe as truely ſuffer,
As ere I did commit.
Then I am paid:
And once againe, I doe receiue thee honeſt;
Who by Repentance is not ſatisfied,
Is nor of heauen, nor earth; for theſe are pleas'd:
By Penitence th' Eternalls wrath's appeas'd:
And that my loue may appeare plaine and free,
All that was mine, in Siluia, I giue thee.
Oh me vnhappy.
Looke to the Boy.
Why, Boy?
Why wag: how now? what's the matter? look vp: ſpeak.
O good ſir, my maſter charg'd me to deliuer a ring to Madam Siluia: wc (out of my neglect) was neuer done.
Where is that ring? boy?
Heere 'tis▪ this is it.
How? let me ſee.
Why this is the ring I gaue to Iulia.
Oh, cry you mercy ſir, I haue miſtooke:
This is the ring you ſent to Siluia.
But how cam'ſt thou by this ring? at my depart
I gaue this vnto Iulia.
And Iulia her ſelfe did giue it me,
And Iulia her ſelfe hath brought it hither.
How? Iulia?
Behold her, that gaue ayme to all thy oathes,
And entertain'd 'em deepely in her heart.
How oft haſt thou with periury cleft the roote?
Oh Protheus, let this habit make thee bluſh.
Be thou aſham'd that I haue tooke vpon me,
Such an immodeſt rayment; if ſhame liue
In a diſguiſe of loue?
It is the leſſer blot modeſty findes,
Women to change their ſhapes, then men their minds.
Then men their minds? tis true: oh heuen, were man
But Conſtant, he were perfect; that one error
Fils him with faults: makes him run through all th' ſins;
Inconſtancy falls-off, ere it begins:
What is in Siluia's face, but I may ſpie
More freſh in Iulia's, with a conſtant eye?
Come, come: a hand from either:
Let me be bleſt to make this happy cloſe:
'Twere pitty two ſuch friends ſhould be long foes.
Beare witnes (heauen) I haue my wiſh for euer.
And I mine.
A prize: a prize: a prize.
Forbeare, forbeare I ſay: It is my Lord the Duke.
Your Grace is welcome to a man diſgrac'd,
Baniſhed Valentine.
Sir Valentine?
Yonder is Siluia: and Siluia's mine.
Thurio giue backe; or elſe embrace thy death:
Come not within the meaſure of my wrath:
Doe not name Siluia thine: if once againe,
Ʋerona ſhall not hold thee: heere ſhe ſtands,
Take but poſſeſſion of her, with a Touch:
I dare thee, but to breath vpon my Loue.
Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I:
I hold him but a foole that will endanger
His Body, for a Girle that loues him not:
I claime her not, and therefore ſhe is thine.
The more degenerate and baſe art thou
To make ſuch meanes for her, as thou haſt done,
And leaue her on ſuch ſlight conditions.
Now, by the honor of my Anceſtry,
I doe applaud thy ſpirit, Valentine,
And thinke thee worthy of an Empreſſe loue:
Know then, I heere forget all former greefes,
Cancell all grudge, repeale thee home againe,
Plead a new ſtate in thy vn-riual'd merit,
To which I thus ſubſcribe: Sir Ʋalentine,
Thou art a Gentleman, and well deriu'd,
Take thou thy Siluia, for thou haſt deſeru'd her.
I thank your Grace, ye gift hath made me happy:
I now beſeech you (for your daughters ſake)
To grant one Boone that I ſhall aske of you.
I grant it (for thine owne) what ere it be.
Theſe baniſh'd men, that I haue kept withall,
Are men endu'd with worthy qualities:
Forgiue them what they haue committed here,
And let them be recall'd from their Exile:
They are reformed, ciuill, full of good,
And fit for great employment (worthy Lord.)
Thou haſt preuaild, I pardon them and thee:
Diſpoſe of them, as thou knowſt their deſerts.
Come, let vs goe, we will include all iarres,
With Triumphes, Mirth, and rare ſolemnity.
And as we walke along, I dare be bold
With our diſcourſe, to make your Grace to ſmile.
What thinke you of this Page (my Lord?)
I think the Boy hath grace in him, he bluſhes.
I warrant you (my Lord) more grace, then Boy.
What meane you by that ſaying?
Pleaſe you, Ile tell you, as we paſſe along,
That you will wonder what hath fortuned:
Come Protheus, 'tis your pennance, but to heare
The ſtory of your Loues diſcouered.
That done, our day of marriage ſhall be yours,
One Feaſt, one houſe, one mutuall happineſſe.