EScalus.
My Lord.
Of Gouernment, the properties to vnfold,
Would ſeeme in me t' affect ſpeech & diſcourſe,
Since I am put to know, that your owne Science
Exceedes (in that) the liſts of all aduice
My ſtrength can giue you: Then no more remaines
But that, to your ſufficiency, as your worth is able,
And let them worke: The nature of our People,
Our Cities Inſtitutions, and the Termes
For Common Iuſtice, y' are as pregnant in
As Art, and practiſe, hath inriched any
That we remember: There is our Commiſſion,
From which, we would not haue you warpe; call hither,
I ſay, bid come before vs Angelo:
What figure of vs thinke you, he will beare.
For you muſt know, we haue with ſpeciall ſoule
Elected him our abſence to ſupply;
Lent him our terror, dreſt him with our loue,
And giuen his Deputation all the Organs
Of our owne powre: What thinke you of it?
If any in Vienna be of worth
To vndergoe ſuch ample grace, and honour,
It is Lord Angelo.
Looke where he comes.
Alwayes obedient to your Graces will▪
I come to know your pleaſure.
Angelo:
There is a kinde of Character in thy life,
That to th' obſeruer, doth thy hiſtory
Fully vnfold: Thy ſelfe, and thy belongings
Are not thine owne ſo proper, as to waſte
Thy ſelfe vpon thy vertues; they on thee:
Heauen doth with vs, as we, with Torches doe,
Not light them for themſelues: For if our vertues
Did not goe forth of vs, 'twere all alike
As if we had them not: Spirits are not finely touch'd,
But to fine iſſues: nor nature neuer lends
The ſmalleſt ſcruple of her excellence,
But like a thrifty goddeſſe, ſhe determines
Her ſelfe the glory of a creditour,
Both thanks, and vſe; but I do bend my ſpeech
To one that can my part in him aduertiſe;
Hold therefore Angelo:
In our remoue, be thou at full, our ſelfe:
Mortallitie and Mercie in Vienna
Liue in thy tongue, and heart: Old Eſcalus
Though firſt in queſtion, is thy ſecondary.
Take thy Commiſſion.
Now good my Lord
Let there be ſome more teſt, made of my mettle,
Before ſo noble, and ſo great a figure
Be ſtamp't vpon it.
No more euaſion:
We haue with a leauen'd, and prepared choice
Proceeded to you; therefore take your honors:
Our haſte from hence is of ſo quicke condition,
That it prefers it ſelfe, and leaues vnqueſtion'd
Matters of needfull value: We ſhall write to you
As time, and our concernings ſhall importune,
How it goes with vs, and doe looke to know
What doth befall you here. So fare you well:
To th' hopefull execution doe I leaue you,
Of your Commiſſions.
Yet giue leaue (my Lord▪)
That we may bring you ſomething on the way.
My haſte may not admit it,
Nor neede you (on mine honor) haue to doe
With any ſcruple: your ſcope is as mine owne,
So to inforce, or qualifie the Lawes
As to your ſoule ſeemes good: Giue me your hand,
Ile priuily away: I loue the people,
But doe not like to ſtage me to their eyes:
Though it doe well, I doe not relliſh well
Their lowd applauſe, and Aues vehement:
Nor doe I thinke the man of ſafe diſcretion
That do's affect it. Once more fare you well.
The heauens giue ſafety to your purpoſes.
Lead forth, and bring you backe in happineſſe.
I thanke you, fare you well.
I ſhal deſire you, Sir, to giue me leaue
To haue free ſpeech with you; and it concernes me
To looke into the bottome of my place:
A powre I haue, but of what ſtrength and nature,
I am not yet inſtructed.
'Tis ſo with me: Let vs with-draw together,
And we may ſoone our ſatisfaction haue
Touching that point.
Ile wait vpon your honor.
If the Duke, with the other Dukes, come not to compoſition with the King of Hungary, why then all the Dukes fall vpon the King.
Heauen grant vs its peace, but not the King of Hungaries.
Amen.
Thou conclud'ſt like the Sanctimonious Pirat, that went to ſea with the ten Commandements, but ſcrap'd one out of the Table.
Thou ſhalt not Steale?
I, that he raz'd.
Why? 'twas a commandement, to command the Captaine and all the reſt from their functions: they put forth to ſteale: There's not a Souldier of vs all, that in the thankſ-giuing before meate, do ralliſh the petition well, that praies for peace.
I neuer heard any Souldier diſlike it.
I beleeue thee: for I thinke thou neuer was't where Grace was ſaid.
No? a dozen times at leaſt.
What? In meeter?
In any proportion. or in any language.
I thinke, or in any Religion.
I, why not? Grace, is Grace, deſpight of all controuerſie: as for example; Thou thy ſelfe art a wicked villaine, deſpight of all Grace.
Well: there went but a paire of ſheeres betweene vs.
I grant: as there may betweene the Liſts, and the Veluet. Thou art the Liſt.
And thou the Veluet; thou art good veluet; thou'rt a three pild-peece I warrant thee: I had as liefe be a Lyſt of an Engliſh Kerſey, as be pil'd, as thou art pil'd, for a French Veluet. Do I ſpeake feelingly now?
I thinke thou do'ſt: and indeed with moſt painfull feeling of thy ſpeech: I will, out of thine owne confeſſion, learne to begin thy health; but, whilſt I liue forget to drinke after thee.
I think I haue done my ſelfe wrong, haue I not?
Yes, that thou haſt; whether thou art tainted, or free.
Behold, behold, where Madam Mitigation comes. I haue purchaſ'd as many diſeaſes vnder her Roofe, As come to
To what, I pray?
Iudge.
To three thouſand Dollours a yeare.
I, and more.
A French crowne more.
Thou art alwayes figuring diſeaſes in me; but thou art full of error, I am ſound.
Nay, not (as one would ſay) healthy: but ſo ſound, as things that are hollow; thy bones are hollow; Impiety has made a feaſt of thee.
How now, which of your hips has the moſt profound Ciatica?
Well, well: there's one yonder arreſted, and carried to priſon, was worth fiue thouſand of you all.
Who's that I pray'thee?
Marry Sir, that's Claudio, Signior Claudio.
Claudio to priſon? 'tis not ſo.
Nay, but I know 'tis ſo: I ſaw him arreſted: ſaw him carried away: and which is more, within theſe three daies his head to be chop'd off.
But, after all this fooling, I would not haue it ſo: Art thou ſure of this?
I am too ſure of it: and it is for getting Madam Iulietta with childe.
Beleeue me this may be: he promis'd to meete me two howres ſince, and he was euer preciſe in promiſe keeping.
Beſides you know, it drawes ſomthing neere to the ſpeech we had to ſuch a purpoſe.
But moſt of all agreeing with the proclamatiō.
Away: let's goe learne the truth of it.
Thus, what with the war; what with the ſweat, what with the gallowes, and what with pouerty, I am Cuſtom-ſhrunke. How now? what's the newes with you.
Yonder man is carried to priſon.
Well: what has he done?
A Woman.
But what's his offence?
Groping for Trowts, in a peculiar Riuer.
What? is there a maid with child by him?
No: but there's a woman with maid by him you haue not heard of the proclamation, haue you?
What proclamation, man?
All howſes in the Suburbs of Vienna muſt bee pluck'd downe.
And what ſhall become of thoſe in the Citie?
They ſhall ſtand for ſeed: they had gon down to, but that a wiſe Burger put in for them.
But ſhall all our houſes of reſort in the Suburbs be puld downe?
To the ground, Miſtris.
Why heere's a change indeed in the Commonwealth: what ſhall become of me?
Come: feare not you: good Counſellors lacke no Clients: though you change your place, you neede not change your Trade: Ile bee your Tapſter ſtill; courage, there will bee pitty taken on you; you that haue worne your eyes almoſt out in the ſeruice, you will bee conſidered.
What's to doe heere, Thomas Tapſter? let's withdraw?
Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the Prouoſt to priſon: and there's Madam Iuliet.
Fellow, why do'ſt thou ſhow me thus to th' world? Beare me to priſon, where I am committed.
I do it not in euill diſpoſition, But from Lord Angelo by ſpeciall charge.
Thus can the demy-god (Authority)
Make vs pay downe, for our offence, by waight
The words of heauen▪ on whom it will, it will,
On whom it will not (ſoe) yet ſtill 'tis iuſt.
Why how now Claudio▪ whence comes this reſtraint.
From too much liberty, (my Lucio) Liberty
As ſurfet is the father of much faſt,
So euery Scope by the immoderate vſe
Turnes to reſtraint: Our Natures doe purſue
Like Rats that rauyn downe their proper Bane,
A thirſty euill, and when we drinke, we die.
If I could ſpeake ſo wiſely vnder an arreſt, I would ſend for certaine of my Creditors: and yet, to ſay the truth, I had as lief haue the foppery of freedome, as the mortality of impriſonment: what's thy offence, Claudio?
What (but to ſpeake of) would offend againe.
What, is't murder?
No.
Lecherie?
Call it ſo.
Away, Sir, you muſt goe.
One word, good friend:
Lucio, a word with you.
A hundred:
If they'll doe you any good: Is Lechery ſo look'd after?
Thus ſtands it with me: vpon a true contract
I got poſſeſſion of Iulietas bed,
You know the Lady, ſhe is faſt my wife,
Saue that we doe the denunciation lacke
Of outward Order. This we came not to,
Onely for propogation of a Dowre
Remaining in the Coffer of her friends,
From whom we thought it meet to hide our Loue
Till Time had made them for vs. But it chances
The ſtealth of our moſt mutuall entertainment
With Character too groſſe, is writ on Iuliet.
With childe, perhaps?
Vnhappely, euen ſo.
And the new Deputie, now for the Duke,
Whether it be the fault and glimpſe of newnes,
Or whether that the body publique, be
A horſe whereon the Gouernor doth ride,
Who newly in the Seate, that it may know
He can command; lets it ſtrait feele the ſpur:
Whether the Tirranny be in his place,
Or in his Eminence that fills it vp
I ſtagger in: But this new Gouernor
Awakes me all the inrolled penalties
Which haue (like vn-ſcowr'd Armor) hung by th' wall
So long, that ninteene Zodiacks haue gone round,
And none of them beene worne; and for a name
Now puts the drowſie and neglected Act
Freſhly on me: 'tis ſurely for a name.
I warrant it is: And thy head ſtands ſo tickle on thy ſhoulders, that a milke-maid, if ſhe be in loue, may ſigh it off: Send after the Duke, and appeale to him.
I haue done ſo, but hee's not to be found.
I pre'thee (Lucio) doe me this kinde ſeruice:
This day, my ſiſter ſhould the Cloyſter enter,
And there receiue her approbation.
Acquaint her with the danger of my ſtate,
Implore her, in my voice, that ſhe make friends
To the ſtrict deputie: bid her ſelfe aſſay him,
I haue great hope in that: for in her youth
There is a prone and ſpeechleſſe dialect,
Such as moue men: beſide, ſhe hath proſperous Art
When ſhe will play with reaſon, and diſcourſe,
And well ſhe can perſwade.
I pray ſhee may; aſwell for the encouragement of the like, which elſe would ſtand vnder greeuous impoſition: as for the enioying of thy life, who I would be ſorry ſhould bee thus fooliſhly loſt, at a game of ticke-tacke: Ile to her.
I thanke you good friend Lucio.
Within two houres.
Come Officer, away.
No: holy Father, throw away that thought,
Beleeue not that the dribling dart of Loue
Can pierce a compleat boſome: why, I deſire thee
To giue me ſecret harbour, hath a purpoſe
More graue, and wrinkled, then the aimes, and ends
Of burning youth.
May your Grace ſpeake of it?
My holy Sir, none better knowes then you
How I haue euer lou'd the life remoued
And held in idle price, to haunt aſſemblies
Where youth, and coſt, witleſſe brauery keepes.
I haue deliuerd to Lord Angelo
(A man of ſtricture and firme abſtinence)
My abſolute power, and place here in Ʋienna,
And he ſuppoſes me trauaild to Poland,
(For ſo I haue ſtrewd it in the common eare)
And ſo it is receiu'd: Now (pious Sir)
You will demand of me, why I do this.
Gladly, my Lord.
We haue ſtrict Statutes, and moſt biting Laws,
(The needfull bits and curbes to headſtrong weedes,)
Which for this foureteene yeares, we haue let ſlip,
Euen like an ore-growne Lyon in a Caue
That goes not out to prey: Now, as fond Fathers,
Hauing bound vp the threatning twigs of birch,
Onely to ſticke it in their childrens ſight,
For terror, not to vſe: in time the rod
More mock'd, then fear'd: ſo our Decrees,
Dead to infliction, to themſelues are dead,
And libertie, plucks Iuſtice by the noſe;
The Baby beates the Nurſe, and quite a thwart
Goes all decorum.
It reſted in your Grace
To vnlooſe this tyde-vp Iuſtice, when you pleaſ'd:
And it in you more dreadfull would haue ſeem'd
Then in Lord Angelo.
I doe feare: too dreadfull:
Sith 'twas my fault, to giue the people ſcope,
'T would be my tirrany to ſtrike and gall them,
For what I bid them doe: For, we bid this be done
When euill deedes haue their permiſſiue paſſe,
And not the puniſhment: therefore indeede (my father)
I haue on Angelo impos'd the office,
Who may in th' ambuſh of my name, ſtrike home,
And yet, my nature neuer in the fight
To do in ſlander: And to behold his ſway
I will, as 'twere a brother of your Order,
Viſit both Prince, and People: Therefore I pre'thee
Supply me with the habit, and inſtruct me
How I may formally in perſon beare
Like a true Frier: Moe reaſons for this action
At our more leyſure, ſhall I render you;
Onely, this one: Lord Angelo is preciſe,
Stands at a guard with Enuie: ſcarce confeſſes
That his blood flowes: or that his appetite
Is more to bread then ſtone: hence ſhall we ſee
If power change purpoſe: what our Seemers be.
And haue you Nuns no farther priuiledges?
Are not theſe large enough?
Yes truely; I ſpeake not as deſiring more,
But rather wiſhing a more ſtrict reſtraint
Vpon the Siſterſtood, the Votariſts of Saint Clare.
Hoa? peace be in this place.
Who's that which cals?
It is a mans voice: gentle Iſabella
Turne you the key, and know his buſineſſe of him;
You may; I may not: you are yet vnſworne:
When you haue vowd, you muſt not ſpeake with men,
But in the preſence of the Prioreſſe;
Then if you ſpeake, you muſt not ſhow your face;
Or if you ſhow your face, you muſt not ſpeake:
He cals againe: I pray you anſwere him.
Peace and proſperitie: who is't that cals?
Haile Virgin, (if you be) as thoſe cheeke-Roſes
Proclaime you are no leſſe: can you ſo ſteed me,
As bring me to the fight of Iſabella,
A Nouice of this place, and the faire Siſter
To her vnhappie brother Claudio?
Why her vnhappy Brother? Let me aske,
The rather for I now muſt make you know
I am that Iſabella, and his Siſter.
Gentle & faire: your Brother kindly greets you;
Not to be weary with you; he's in priſon.
Woe me; for what?
For that, which if my ſelfe might be his Iudge,
He ſhould receiue his puniſhment, in thankes:
He hath got his friend with childe.
Sir, make me not your ſtorie.
'Tis true; I would not, though 'tis my familiar ſin,
With Maids to ſeeme the Lap wing, and to ieſt
Tongue, far from heart: play with all Virgins ſo:
I hold you as a thing en-skied, and ſainted,
By your renouncement, an imortall ſpirit
And to be talk'd with in ſincerity,
As with a Saint.
You doe blaſpheme the good, in mocking me.
Doe not beleeue it: fewnes, and truth; tis thus,
Your brother, and his louer haue embrac'd;
As thoſe that feed, grow full: as bloſſoming Time
That from the ſeednes, the bare fallow brings
To teeming foyſon: euen ſo her plenteous wombe
Expreſſeth his full Tilth, and husbandry.
Some one with childe by him? my coſen Iuliet?
Is ſhe your coſen?
Adoptedly, as ſchoole-maids change their names By vaine, though apt affection.
She it is.
Oh, let him marry her.
This is the point.
The Duke is very ſtrangely gone from hence;
Bore many gentlemen (my ſelfe being one)
In hand, and hope of action: but we doe learne,
By thoſe that know the very Nerues of State,
His giuing-out, were of an infinite diſtance
From his true meant deſigne: vpon his place,
(And with full line of his authority)
Gouernes Lord Angelo; A man, whoſe blood
Is very ſnow-broth: one, who neuer feeles
The wanton ſtings, and motions of the ſence;
But doth rebate, and blunt his naturall edge
With profits of the minde: Studie, and faſt
He (to giue feare to vſe, and libertie,
Which haue, for long, run-by the hideous law,
As Myce, by Lyons) hath pickt out an act,
Vnder whoſe heauy ſence, your brothers life
Fals into forfeit: he arreſts him on it,
And followes cloſe the rigor of the Statute
To make him an example: all hope is gone,
Vnleſſe you haue the grace, by your faire praier
To ſoften Angelo: And that's my pith of buſineſſe
'Twixt you, and your poore brother.
Doth he ſo,
Seeke his life?
Has cenſur'd him already,
And as I heare, the Prouoſt hath a warrant
For's execution.
Alas: what poore Abilitie's in me, to doe him good.
Aſſay the powre you haue.
My power? alas, I doubt.
Our doubts are traitors
And makes vs looſe the good we oft might win,
By fearing to attempt: Goe to Lord Angelo
And let him learne to know, when Maidens ſue
Men giue like gods: but when they weepe and kneele,
All their petitions, are as freely theirs
As they themſelues would owe them.
Ile ſee what I can doe.
But ſpeedily.
I will about it ſtrait;
No longer ſtaying, but to giue the Mother
Notice of my affaire: I humbly thanke you:
Commend me to my brother: ſoone at night
Ile ſend him certaine word of my ſucceſſe.
I take my leaue of you.
Good ſir, adieu.
We muſt not make a ſcar-crow of the Law,
Setting it vp to feare the Birds of prey,
And let it keepe one ſhape, till cuſtome make it
Their pearch, and not their terror.
I, but yet
Let vs be keene, and rather cut a little
Then fall, and bruiſe to death: alas, this gentleman
Whom I would ſaue, had a moſt noble father,
Let but your honour know
(Whom I beleeue to be moſt ſtrait in vertue)
That in the working of your owne affections,
Had time coheard with Place, or place with wiſhing,
Or that the reſolute acting of our blood
Could haue attained th' effect of your owne purpoſe,
Whether you had not ſometime in your life
Er'd in this point, which now you cenſure him,
And puld the Law vpon you.
'Tis one thing to be tempted (Eſcalus)
Another thing to fall: I not deny
The Iury paſſing on the Priſoners life
May in the ſworne-twelue haue a thiefe, or two
Guiltier then him they try; what's open made to Iuſtice,
That Iuſtice ceizes; What knowes the Lawes
That theeues do paſſe on theeues? 'Tis very pregnant,
The Iewell that we finde, we ſtoope, and take't,
Becauſe we ſee it; but what we doe not ſee,
We tread vpon, and neuer thinke of it.
You may not ſo extenuate his offence,
For I haue had ſuch faults; but rather tell me
When I, that cenſure him, do ſo offend,
Let mine owne Iudgement patterne out my death,
And nothing come in partiall. Sir, he muſt dye.
Be it as your wiſedome will.
Where is the Prouoſt?
Here if it like your honour.
See that Claudio
Be executed by nine to morrow morning,
Bring him his Confeſſor, let him be prepar'd,
For that's the vtmoſt of his pilgrimage.
Well: heauen forgiue him; and forgiue vs all:
Some riſe by ſinne, and ſome by vertue fall:
Some run from brakes of Ice, and anſwere none,
And ſome condemned for a fault alone.
Come, bring them away: if theſe be good people in a Common-weale, that doe nothing but vſe their abuſes in common houſes, I know no law: bring them away.
How now Sir, what's your name? And what's the matter?
If it pleaſe your honour, I am the poore Dukes Conſtable, and my name is Elbow; I doe leane vpon Iuſtice Sir, and doe bring in here before your good honor, two notorious Benefactors.
Benefactors? Well: What Benefactors are they? Are they not Malefactors?
If it pleaſe your honour, I know not well what they are: But preciſe villaines they are, that I am ſure of and void of all prophanation in the world, that good Chriſtians ought to haue.
This comes off well: here's a wiſe Officer.
Goe to: What quality are they of? Elbow is your name?
Why do'ſt thou not ſpeake Elbow?
He cannot Sir: he's out at Elbow.
What are you Sir?
He Sir: a Tapſter Sir: parcell Baud: one that ſerues a bad woman: whoſe houſe Sir was (as they ſay) pluckt downe in the Suborbs: and now ſhee profeſſes a hot-houſe; which, I thinke is a very ill houſe too.
How know you that?
My wife Sir? whom I deteſt before heauen, and your honour.
How? thy wife?
I Sir: whom I thanke heauen is an honeſt woman.
Do'ſt thou deteſt her therefore?
I ſay ſir, I will deteſt my ſelfe alſo, as well as ſhe, that this houſe, if it be not a Bauds houſe, it is pitty of her life, for it is a naughty houſe.
How do'ſt thou know that, Conſtable?
Marry ſir, by my wife, who, if ſhe had bin a woman Cardinally giuen, might haue bin accus'd in fornication, adultery, and all vncleanlineſſe there.
By the womans meanes?
I ſir, by Miſtris Ouer-dons meanes: but as ſhe ſpit in his face, ſo ſhe defide him.
Sir, if it pleaſe your honor, this is not ſo.
Proue it before theſe varlets here, thou honorable man, proue it.
Doe you heare how he miſplaces?
Sir, ſhe came in great with childe: and longing (ſauing your honors reuerence) for ſtewd prewyns; ſir, we had but two in the houſe, which at that very diſtant time ſtood, as it were in a fruit diſh (a diſh of ſome three pence; your honours haue ſeene ſuch diſhes) they are not China-diſhes, but very good diſhes.
Go too: go too: no matter for the diſh ſir.
No indeede ſir not of a pin; you are therein in the right: but, to the point: As I ſay, this Miſtris Elbow, being (as I ſay) with childe, and being great bellied, and longing (as I ſaid) for prewyns: and hauing but two in the diſh (as I ſaid) Maſter Froth here, this very man, hauing eaten the reſt (as I ſaid) & (as I ſay) paying for them very honeſtly: for, as you know Maſter Froth, I could not giue you three pence againe.
No indeede.
Very well: you being then (if you be remembred) cracking the ſtones of the foreſaid prewyns.
I, ſo I did indeede.
Why, very well: I telling you then (if you be remembred) that ſuch a one, and ſuch a one, were paſt cure of the thing you wot of, vnleſſe they kept very good diet, as I told you.
All this is true.
Why very well then.
Come: you are a tedious foole: to the purpoſe: what was done to Elbowes wife, that hee hath cauſe to complaine of? Come me to what was done to her.
Sir, your honor cannot come to that yet.
No ſir, nor I meane it not.
Sir, but you ſhall come to it, by your honours leaue: And I beſeech you, looke into Maſter Froth here ſir, a man of foure-ſcore pound a yeare; whoſe father died at Hallowmas: Was't not at Hallowmas Maſter Froth?
Allhallond-Eue.
Why very well: I hope here be truthes: he Sir, ſitting (as I ſay) in a lower chaire, Sir, 'twas in the bunch of Grapes, where indeede you haue a delight to ſit, haue you not?
I haue ſo, becauſe it is an open roome, and good for winter.
Why very well then: I hope here be truthes.
This will laſt out a night in Ruſsia
When nights are longeſt there: Ile take my leaue,
And leaue you to the hearing of the cauſe;
Hoping youle finde good cauſe to whip them all.
I thinke no leſſe: good morrow to your Lordſhip. Now Sir, come on: What was done to Elbowes wife, once more?
Once Sir? there was nothing done to her once.
I beſeech you Sir, aske him what this man did to my wife.
I beſeech your honor, aske me.
Well ſir, what did this Gentleman to her?
I beſeech you ſir, looke in this Gentlemans face: good Maſter Froth looke vpon his honor; 'tis for a good purpoſe: doth your honor marke his face?
I ſir, very well.
Nay, I beſeech you marke it well.
Well, I doe ſo.
Doth your honor ſee any harme in his face?
Why no.
Ile be ſuppoſd vpon a booke, his face is the worſt thing about him: good then: if his face be the worſt thing about him, how could Maſter Froth doe the Conſtables wife any harme? I would know that of your honour.
He's in the right (Conſtable) what ſay you to it?
Firſt, and it like you, the houſe is a reſpected houſe; next, this is a reſpected fellow; and his Miſtris is a reſpected woman.
By this hand Sir, his wife is a more reſpected perſon then any of vs all.
Varlet, thou lyeſt; thou lyeſt wicked varlet: the time is yet to come that ſhee was euer reſpected with man, woman, or childe.
Sir, ſhe was reſpected with him, before he married with her.
Which is the wiſer here; Iuſtice or Iniquitie? Is this true?
O thou caytiffe: O thou varlet: O thou wicked Hanniball; I reſpected with her, before I was married to her? If euer I was reſpected with her, or ſhe with me, let not your worſhip thinke mee the poore Dukes Officer: proue this, thou wicked Hanniball, or ile haue mine action of battry on thee.
If he tooke you a box' oth' eare, you might haue your action of ſlander too.
Marry I thanke your good worſhip for it: what is't your Worſhips pleaſure I ſhall doe with this wicked Caitiffe?
Truly Officer, becauſe he hath ſome offences in him, that thou wouldſt diſcouer, if thou couldſt, let him continue in his courſes, till thou knowſt what they are.
Marry I thanke your worſhip for it: Thou ſeeſt thou wicked varlet now, what's come vpon thee. Thou art to continue now thou Varlet, thou art to continue.
Where were you borne, friend?
Here in Vienna, Sir.
Are you of foureſcore pounds a yeere?
Yes, and 't pleaſe you ſir.
So: what trade are you of, ſir?
A Tapſter, a poore widdowes Tapſter.
Your Miſtris name?
Miſtris Ouer-do.
Hath ſhe had any more then one husband?
Nine, ſir: Ouer-don by the laſt.
Nine? come hether to me, Maſter Froth; Maſter Froth, I would not haue you acquainted with Tapſters; they will draw you Maſter Froth, and you wil hang them: get you gon, and let me heare no more of you.
I thanke your worſhip: for mine owne part, I neuer come into any roome in a Tap-houſe, but I am drawne in.
Well: no more of it Maſter Froth: farewell: Come you hether to me, Mr. Tapſter: what's your name Mr. Tapſter?
Pompey.
What elſe?
Bum, Sir.
Troth, and your bum is the greateſt thing about you, ſo that in the beaſtlieſt ſence, you are Pompey the great; Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey; howſoeuer you colour it in being a Tapſter, are you not? come, tell me true, it ſhall be the better for you.
Truly ſir, I am a poore fellow that would liue.
How would you liue Pompey? by being a bawd? what doe you thinke of the trade Pompey? is it a lawfull trade?
If the Law would allow it, ſir.
But the Law will not allow it Pompey; nor it ſhall not be allowed in Ʋienna.
Do's your Worſhip meane to geld and ſplay all the youth of the City?
No, Pompey.
Truely Sir, in my poore opinion they will too't then: if your worſhip will take order for the drabs and the knaues, you need not to feare the bawds.
There is pretty orders beginning I can tell you: It is but heading, and hanging.
If you head, and hang all that offend that way but for ten yeare together; you'll be glad to giue out a Commiſſion for more heads: if this law hold in Vienna ten yeare, ile rent the faireſt houſe in it after three pence a Bay: if you liue to ſee this come to paſſe, ſay Pompey told you ſo.
Thanke you good Pompey; and in requitall of your propheſie, harke you: I aduiſe you let me not finde you before me againe vpon any complaint whatſoeuer; no, not for dwelling where you doe: if I doe Pompey, I ſhall beat you to your Tent, and proue a ſhrewd Caeſar to you: in plaine dealing Pompey, I ſhall haue you whipt; ſo for this time, Pompey, fare you well.
I thanke your Worſhip for your good counſell; but I ſhall follow it as the fleſh and fortune ſhall better determine. Whip me? no, no, let Carman whip his Iade, The valiant heart's not whipt out of his trade.
Come hether to me, Maſter Elbow: come hither Maſter Conſtable: how long haue you bin in this place of Conſtable?
Seuen yeere, and a halfe ſir.
I thought by the readineſſe in the office, you had continued in it ſome time: you ſay ſeauen yeares together.
And a halfe ſir.
Alas, it hath beene great paines to you: they do you wrong to put you ſo oft vpon't. Are there not men in your Ward ſufficient to ſerue it?
'Faith ſir, few of any wit in ſuch matters: as they are choſen, they are glad to chooſe me for them; I do it for ſome peece of money, and goe through with all.
Looke you bring mee in the names of ſome ſixe or ſeuen, the moſt ſufficient of your pariſh.
To your Worſhips houſe ſir?
To my houſe: fare you well: what's a clocke, thinke you?
Eleuen, Sir.
I pray you home to dinner with me.
I humbly thanke you.
It grieues me for the death of Claudio
But there's no remedie:
Lord Angelo is ſeuere.
It is but needfull.
Mercy is not it ſelfe, that oft lookes ſo,
Pardon is ſtill the nurſe of ſecond woe:
But yet, poore Claudio; there is no remedie.
Come Sir.
Hee's hearing of a Cauſe; he will come ſtraight, I'le tell him of you.
'Pray you doe; Ile know
His pleaſure, may be he will relent; alas
He hath but as offended in a dreame,
All Sects, all Ages ſmack of this vice, and he
To die for't?
Now, what's the matter Prouoſt?
Is it your will Claudio ſhall die to morrow?
Did not I tell thee yea? hadſt thou not order? Why do'ſt thou aske againe?
Leſt I might be too raſh:
Vnder your good correction, I haue ſeene
When after execution, Iudgement hath
Repented ore his doome.
Goe to; let that be mine,
Doe you your office, or giue vp your Place,
And you ſhall well be ſpar'd.
I craue your Honours pardon:
What ſhall be done Sir, with the groaning Iuliet?
Shee's very neere her howre.
Diſpoſe of her
To ſome more fitter place; and that with ſpeed.
Here is the ſiſter of the man condemn'd,
Deſires acceſſe to you.
Hath he a Siſter?
I my good Lord, a very vertuous maid,
And to be ſhortlie of a Siſter-hood,
If not alreadie.
Well: let her be admitted,
See you the Fornicatreſſe be remou'd,
Let her haue needfull, but not lauiſh meanes,
There ſhall be order for't.
'Saue your Honour.
Stay a little while: y' are welcome: what's your will?
I am a wofull Sutor to your Honour,
'Pleaſe but your Honor heare me.
Well: what's your ſuite.
There is a vice that moſt I doe abhorre,
And moſt deſire ſhould meet the blow of Iuſtice;
For which I would not plead, but that I muſt,
For which I muſt not plead, but that I am
At warre, twixt will, and will not.
Well: the matter?
I haue a brother is condemn'd to die,
I doe beſeech you let it be his fault,
And not my brother.
Heauen giue thee mouing graces.
Condemne the fault, and not the actor of it,
Why euery fault's condemnd ere it be done:
Mine were the verie Cipher of a Function
To fine the faults, whoſe fine ſtands in record,
And let goe by the Actor:
Oh iuſt, but ſeuere Law:
I had a brother then; heauen keepe your honour.
Giue't not ore ſo: to him againe, entreat him,
Kneele downe before him, hang vpon his gowne,
You are too cold: if you ſhould need a pin,
You could not with more tme tongue deſire it:
To him, I ſay.
Muſt he needs die?
Maiden, no remedie.
Yes: I doe thinke that you might pardon him,
And neither heauen, nor man grieue at the mercy.
I will not doe't.
But can you if you would?
Looke what I will not, that I cannot doe.
But might you doe't & do the world no wrong
If ſo your heart were touch'd with that remorſe,
As mine is to him?
Hee's ſentenc'd, tis too late.
You are too cold.
Too late? why no: I that doe ſpeak a word
May call it againe: well, beleeue this
No ceremony that to great ones longs,
Not the Kings Crowne; nor the deputed ſword,
The Marſhalls Truncheon, nor the Iudges Robe
Become them with one halfe ſo good a grace
As mercie does: If he had bin as you, and you as he,
You would haue ſlipt like him, but he like you
Would not haue beene ſo ſterne.
Pray you be gone.
I would to heauen I had your potencie,
And you were Iſabell: ſhould it then be thus?
No: I would tell what 'twere to be a Iudge,
And what a priſoner.
I, touch him: there's the vaine.
Your Brother is a forfeit of the Law,
And you but waſte your words.
Alas, alas:
Why all the ſoules that were, were forfeit once,
And he that might the vantage beſt haue tooke,
Found out the remedie: how would you be,
If he, which is the top of Iudgement, ſhould
But iudge you, as you are? Oh, thinke on that,
And mercie then will breathe within your lips
Like man new made.
Be you content, (faire Maid)
It is the Law, not I, condemne your brother,
Were he my kinſman, brother, or my ſonne,
It ſhould be thus with him: he muſt die to morrow.
To morrow? oh, that's ſodaine,
Spare him, ſpare him:
Hee's not prepar'd for death; euen for our kitchins
We kill the fowle of ſeaſon: ſhall we ſerue heauen
With leſſe reſpect then we doe miniſter
To our groſſe-ſelues? good, good my Lord, bethink you;
Who is it that hath di'd for this offence?
There's many haue committed it.
I, well ſaid.
The Law hath not bin dead, thogh it hath ſlept
Thoſe many had not dar'd to doe that euill
If the firſt, that did th' Edict infringe
Had anſwer'd for his deed. Now 'tis awake.
Takes note of what is done, and like a Prophet
Lookes in a glaſſe that ſhewes what future euils
Either now, or by remiſſeneſſe, new conceiu'd,
And ſo in progreſſe to be hatc'hd, and borne,
Are now to haue no ſucceſſiue degrees,
But here they liue to end.
Yet ſhew ſome pittie.
I ſhew it moſt of all, when I ſhow Iuſtice;
For then I pittie thoſe I doe not know,
Which a diſmis'd offence, would after gaule
And doe him right, that anſwering one foule wrong
Liues not to act another. Be ſatisfied;
Your Brother dies to morrow; be content.
So you muſt be ye firſt that giues this ſentence,
And hee, that ſuffers: Oh, it is excellent
To haue a Giants ſtrength: but it is tyrannous
To vſe it like a Giant.
That's well ſaid.
Could great men thunder
As Ioue himſelfe do's, Ioue would neuer be quiet,
For euery pelting petty Officer
Would vſe his heauen for thunder;
Nothing but thunder: Mercifull heauen,
Thou rather with thy ſharpe and ſulpherous bol
Splits the vn-wedgable and gnarled Oke,
Then, the ſoft Mertill: But man, proud man,
Dreſt in a little briefe authoritie,
Moſt ignorant of what he's moſt aſſur'd,
(His glaſsie Eſſence) like an angry Ape
Plaies ſuch phantaſtique tricks before high heauen,
As makes the Angels weepe: who with our ſpleenes,
Would all themſelues laugh mortall.
Oh, to him, to him wench: he will relent,
Hee's comming: I perceiue't.
Pray heauen ſhe win him.
We cannot weigh our brother with our ſelfe,
Great men may ieſt with Saints: tis wit in them,
But in the leſſe fowle prophanation.
Thou'rt i' th right (Girle) more o' that.
That in the Captaine's but a chollericke word,
Which in the Souldier is flat blaſphemie.
Art auis'd o' that? more on't.
Why doe you put theſe ſayings vpon me?
Becauſe Authoritie, though it erre like others,
Hath yet a kinde of medicine in it ſelfe
That skins the vice o' th top; goe to your boſome,
Knock there, and aske your heart what it doth know
That's like my brothers fault: if it confeſſe
A naturall guiltineſſe, ſuch as is his,
Let it not ſound a thought vpon your tongue
Againſt my brothers life.
Shee ſpeakes, and 'tis ſuch ſence
That my Sence breeds with it; fare you well.
Gentle my Lord, turne backe.
I will bethinke me: come againe to morrow.
Hark, how Ile bribe you: good my Lord turn back.
How? bribe me?
I, with ſuch gifts that heauen ſhall ſhare with you.
You had mar'd all elſe.
Not with fond Sickles of the teſted-gold,
Or Stones, whoſe rate are either rich, or poore
As fancie values them: but with true prayers,
That ſhall be vp at heauen, and enter there
Ere Sunne riſe: prayers from preſerued ſoules,
From faſting Maides, whoſe mindes are dedicate
To nothing temporall.
Well: come to me to morrow.
Goe to: 'tis well; away.
Heauen keepe your honour ſafe.
Amen.
For I am that way going to temptation,
Where prayers croſſe.
At what hower to morrow,
Shall I attend your Lordſhip?
At any time 'fore-noone.
'Saue your Honour.
From thee: euen from thy vertue.
What's this? what's this? is this her fault, or mine?
The Tempter, or the Tempted, who ſins moſt? ha?
Not ſhe: nor doth ſhe tempt: but it is I,
That, lying by the Violet in the Sunne,
Doe as the Carrion do's, not as the flowre,
Corrupt with vertuous ſeaſon: Can it be,
That Modeſty may more betray our Sence
Then womans lightneſſe? hauing waſte ground enough,
Shall we deſire to raze the Sanctuary
And pitch our euils there? oh fie, fie, fie:
What doſt thou? or what art thou Angelo?
Doſt thou deſire her fowly, for thoſe things
That make her good? oh, let her brother liue:
Theeues for their robbery haue authority,
When Iudges ſteale themſelues: what, doe I loue her,
That I deſire to heare her ſpeake againe?
And feaſt vpon her eyes? what is't I dreame on?
Oh cunning enemy, that to catch a Saint,
With Saints doſt bait thy hooke: moſt dangerous
Is that temptation, that doth goad vs on
To ſinne, in louing vertue: neuer could the Strumpet
With all her double vigor, Art, and Nature
Once ſtir my temper: but this vertuous Maid
Subdues me quite: Euer till now
When men were fond, I ſmild, and wondred how.
Haile to you, Prouoſt, ſo I thinke you are.
I am the Prouoſt: whats your will, good Frier?
Bound by my charity, and my bleſt order,
I come to viſite the afflicted ſpirits
Here in the priſon: doe me the common right
To let me ſee them: and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may miniſter
To them accordingly.
I would do more then that, if more were needfull
Looke here comes one: a Gentlewoman of mine,
Who falling in the flawes of her owne youth,
Hath bliſterd her report: She is with childe,
And he that got it, ſentenc'd: a yong man,
More fit to doe another ſuch offence,
Then dye for this.
When muſt he dye?
As I do thinke to morrow.
I haue prouided for you, ſtay a while
And you ſhall be conducted.
Repent you (faire one) of the ſin you carry?
I doe; and beare the ſhame moſt patiently.
Ile teach you how you ſhal araign your conſciēce
And try your penitence, if it be ſound,
Or hollowly put on.
Ile gladly learne.
Loue you the man that wrong'd you?
Yes, as I loue the woman that wrong'd him.
So then it ſeemes your moſt offence full act
Was mutually committed.
Mutually.
Then was your ſin of heauier kinde then his.
I doe confeſſe it, and repent it (Father.)
'Tis meet ſo (daughter) but leaſt you do repent
As that the ſin hath brought you to this ſhame,
Which ſorrow is alwaies toward our ſelues, not heauen,
Showing we would not ſpare heauen, as we loue it,
But as we ſtand in feare.
I doe repent me as it is an euill,
And take the ſhame with ioy.
There reſt:
Your partner (as I heare) muſt die to morrow,
And I am going with inſtruction to him:
Grace goe with you, Benedicite.
Muſt die tomorrow? oh iniurious Loue
That reſpits me a life, whoſe very comfort
Is ſtill a dying horror.
'Tis pitty of him.
When I would pray, & think, I thinke, and pray
To ſeuerall ſubiects: heauen hath my empty words,
Whilſt my Inuention, hearing not my Tongue,
Anchors on Iſabell: heauen in my mouth,
As if I did but onely chew his name,
And in my heart the ſtrong and ſwelling euill
Of my conception: the ſtate whereon I ſtudied
Is like a good thing, being often read
Growne feard, and tedious: yea, my Grauitie
Wherein (let no man heare me) I take pride,
Could I, with boote, change for an idle plume
Which the ayre beats for vaine: oh place, oh forme,
How often doſt thou with thy caſe, thy habit
Wrench awe from fooles, and tye the wiſer ſoules
To thy falſe ſeeming? Blood, thou art blood,
Let's write good Angell on the Deuills horne
'Tis not the Deuills Creſt: how now? who's there?
One Iſabell, a Siſter, deſires acceſſe to you,
Teach her the way: oh, heauens
Why doe's my bloud thus muſter to my heart,
Making both it vnable for it ſelfe,
And diſpoſſeſsing all my other parts
Of neceſſary fitneſſe?
So play the fooliſh throngs with one that ſwounds,
Come all to help him, and ſo ſtop the ayre
By which hee ſhould reuiue: and euen ſo
The generall ſubiect to a wel-wiſht King
Quit their owne part, and in obſequious fondneſſe
Crowd to his preſence, where their vn-taught loue
Muſt needs appear offence: how now faire Maid.
I am come to know your pleaſure.
That you might know it, wold much better pleaſe me,
Then to demand what 'tis: your Brother cannot liue.
Euen ſo: heauen keepe your Honor.
Yet may he liue a while: and it may be
As long as you, or I: yet he muſt die.
Vnder your Sentence?
Yea.
When, I beſeech you: that in his Reprieue
(Longer, or ſhorter) he may be ſo fitted
That his ſoule ſicken not.
Ha? fie, theſe filthy vices: It were as good
To pardon him, that hath from nature ſtolne
A man already made, as to remit
Their ſawcie ſweetnes, that do coyne heauens Image
In ſtamps that are forbid: 'tis all as eaſie,
Falſely to take away a life true made,
As to put mettle in reſtrained meanes
To make a falſe one.
'Tis ſet downe ſo in heauen, but not in earth.
Say you ſo: then I ſhall poze you quickly.
Which had you rather, that the moſt iuſt Law
Now tooke your brothers life, and to redeeme him
Giue vp your body to ſuch ſweet vncleanneſſe
As ſhe that he hath ſtaind?
Sir, beleeue this.
I had rather giue my body, then my ſoule.
I talke not of your ſoule: our compel'd ſins
Stand more for number, then for accompt.
How ſay you?
Nay Ile not warrant that: for I can ſpeake
Againſt the thing I ſay: Anſwere to this,
I (now the voyce of the recorded Law)
Pronounce a ſentence on your Brothers life,
Might there not be a charitie in ſinne,
To ſaue this Brothers life?
Pleaſe you to doo't,
Ile take it as a perill to my ſoule,
It is no ſinne at all, but charitie.
Pleaſ'd you to doo't, at perill of your ſoule
Were equall poize of ſinne, and charitie.
That I do beg his life, if it be ſinne
Heauen let me beare it: you granting of my ſuit,
If that be ſin, Ile make it my Morne-praier,
To haue it added to the faults of mine,
And nothing of your anſwere.
Nay, but heare me.
Your ſence purſues not mine: either you are ignorant,
Or ſeeme ſo crafty; and that's not good.
Let be ignorant, and in nothing good,
But graciouſly to know I am no better.
Thus wiſdome wiſhes to appeare moſt bright,
When it doth taxe it ſelfe: As theſe blacke Maſques
Proclaime an en-ſhield beauty ten times louder
Then beauty could diſplaied: But marke me,
To be receiued plaine, Ile ſpeake more groſſe:
Your Brother is to dye.
So.
And his offence is ſo, as it appeares,
Accountant to the Law, vpon that paine.
True.
Admit no other way to ſaue his life
(As I ſubſcribe not that, nor any other,
But in the leſſe of queſtion) that you, his Siſter,
Finding your ſelfe deſir'd of ſuch a perſon,
Whoſe creadit with the Iudge, or owne great place,
Could fetch your Brother from the Manacles
Of the all-building-Law: and that there were
No earthly meane to ſaue him, but that either
You muſt lay downe the treaſures of your body,
To this ſuppoſed, or elſe to let him ſuffer:
What would you doe?
As much for my poore Brother, as my ſelfe;
That is: were I vnder the tearmes of death,
Th' impreſſion of keene whips, I'ld weare as Rubies,
And ſtrip my ſelfe to death, as to a bed,
That longing haue bin ſicke for, ere I'ld yeeld
My body vp to ſhame.
Then muſt your brother die.
And 'twer the cheaper way:
Better it were a brother dide at once,
Then that a ſiſter, by redeeming him
Should die for euer.
Were not you then as cruell as the Sentence,
That you haue ſlander'd ſo?
Ignomie in ranſome, and free pardon
Are of two houſes: lawfull mercie,
Is nothing kin to fowle redemption.
You ſeem'd of late to make the Law a tirant,
And rather prou'd the ſliding of your brother
A merriment, then a vice.
Oh pardon me my Lord, it oft fals out
To haue, what we would haue,
We ſpeake not what vve meane;
I ſomething do excuſe the thing I hate,
For his aduantage that I dearely loue.
We are all fraile.
Elſe let my brother die,
If not a fedarie but onely he
Owe, and ſucceed thy weakneſſe.
Nay, women are fraile too.
I, as the glaſſes where they view themſelues,
Which are as eaſie broke as they make formes:
Women? Helpe heauen; men their creation marre
In profiting by them: Nay, call vs ten times fraile,
For we are ſoft, as our complexions are,
And credulous to falſe prints.
I thinke it well:
And from this teſtimonie of your owne ſex
(Since I ſuppoſe we are made to be no ſtronger
Then faults may ſhake our frames) let me be bold;
I do arreſt your words. Be that you are,
That is a woman; if you be more, you'r none.
If you be one (as you are well expreſt
By all externall warrants) ſhew it now,
By putting on the deſtin'd Liuerie.
I haue no tongue but one; gentle my Lord,
Let me entreate you ſpeake the former language.
Plainlie conceiue I loue you.
My brother did loue Iuliet,
And you tell me that he ſhall die for't.
He ſhall not Iſabell if you giue me loue.
I know your vertue hath a licence in't,
Which ſeemes a little fouler then it is,
To plucke on others.
Beleeue me on mine Honor,
My words expreſſe my purpoſe.
Ha? Little honor, to be much beleeu'd,
And moſt pernitious purpoſe: Seeming, ſeeming.
I will proclaime thee Angelo, looke for't.
Signe me a preſent pardon for my brother,
Or with an out-ſtretcht throate Ile tell the world aloud
What man thou art.
Who will beleeue thee Iſabell?
My vnſoild name, th' auſteereneſſe of my life,
My vouch againſt you, and my place i' th State,
Will ſo your accuſation ouer-weigh,
That you ſhall ſtifle in your owne report,
And ſmell of calumnie. I haue begun,
And now I giue my ſenſuall race, the reine,
Fit thy conſent to my ſharpe appetite,
Lay by all nicetie, and prolixious bluſhes
That baniſh what they ſue for: Redeeme thy brother,
By yeelding vp thy bodie to my will,
Or elſe he muſt not onelie die the death,
But thy vnkindneſſe ſhall his death draw out
To lingring ſufferance: Anſwer me to morrow,
Or by the affection that now guides me moſt,
Ile proue a Tirant to him. As for you,
Say what you can; my falſe, ore-weighs your true.
To whom ſhould I complaine? Did I tell this,
Who would beleeue me? O perilous mouthes
That beare in them, one and the ſelfeſame tongue,
Either of condemnation, or approofe,
Bidding the Law make curtſie to their will,
Hooking both right and wrong to th' appetite,
To follow as it drawes. Ile to my brother,
Though he hath falne by prompture of the blood,
Yet hath he in him ſuch a minde of Honor,
That had he twentie heads to tender downe
On twentie bloodie blockes, hee'ld yeeld them vp,
Before his ſiſter ſhould her bodie ſtoope,
To ſuch abhord pollution.
Then Iſabell liue chaſte, and brother die;
"More then our Brother, is our Chaſtitie.
Ile tell him yet of Angelo's requeſt,
And fit his minde to death, for his ſoules reſt.
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
The miſerable haue no other medicine
But onely hope: I' haue hope to liue, and am prepar'd to die.
Be abſolute for death: either death or life
Shall thereby be the ſweeter. Reaſon thus with life:
If I do looſe thee, I do looſe a thing
That none but fooles would keepe: a breath thou art,
Seruile to all the skyie-influences,
That doſt this habitation where thou keepſt
Hourely afflict: Meerely, thou art deaths foole,
For him thou labourſt by thy flight to ſhun,
And yet runſt toward him ſtill. Thou art not noble,
For all th' accommodations that thou bearſt,
Are nurſt by baſeneſſe: Thou'rt by no meanes valiant,
For thou doſt feare the ſoft and tender forke
Of a poore worme: thy beſt of reſt is ſleepe,
And that thou oft prouoakſt, yet groſſelie fearſt
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thy ſelfe,
For thou exiſts on manie a thouſand graines
That iſſue out of duſt. Happie thou art not,
For what thou haſt not, ſtill thou ſtriu'ſt to get,
And what thou haſt forgetſt. Thou art not certaine,
For thy complexion ſhifts to ſtrange effects,
After the Moone: If thou art rich, thou'rt poore,
For like an Aſſe, whoſe backe with Ingots bowes;
Thou bearſt thy heauie riches but a iournie,
And death vnloads thee; Friend haſt thou none.
For thine owne bowels which do call thee, fire
The meere effuſion of thy proper loines
Do curſe the Gowt, Sapego, and the Rheume
For ending thee no ſooner. Thou haſt nor youth, nor age
But as it were an after-dinners ſleepe
Dreaming on both, for all thy bleſſed youth
Becomes as aged, and doth begge the almes
Of palſied-Eld: and when thou art old, and rich
Thou haſt neither heate, affection, limbe, nor beautie
To make thy riches pleaſant: what's yet in this
That beares the name of life? Yet in this life
Lie hid moe thouſand deaths; yet death we feare
That makes theſe oddes, all euen.
I humblie thanke you.
To ſue to liue, I finde I ſeeke to die,
And ſeeking death, finde life: Let it come on.
What hoa? Peace heere; Grace, and good companie.
Who's there? Come in, the wiſh deſerues a welcome.
Deere ſir, ere long Ile viſit you againe.
Moſt bolie Sir; I thanke you.
My buſineſſe is a word or two with Claudio.
And verie welcom: looke Signior, here's your ſiſter.
Prouoſt, a word with you.
As manie as you pleaſe.
Bring them to heare me ſpeak, where I may be conceal'd.
Now ſiſter, what's the comfort?
Why,
As all comforts are: moſt good, moſt good indeede,
Lord Angelo hauing affaires to heauen
Intends you for his ſwift Ambaſſador,
Where you ſhall be an euerlaſting Leiger;
Therefore your beſt appointment make with ſpeed,
To Morrow you ſet on.
Is there no remedie?
None, but ſuch remedie, as to ſaue a head
To cleaue a heart in twaine:
But is there anie?
Yes brother, you may liue;
There is a diuelliſh mercie in the Iudge,
If you'l implore it, that will free your life,
But fetter you till death.
Perpetuall durance?
I iuſt, perpetuall durance, a reſtraint
Through all the worlds vaſtiditie you had
To a determin'd ſcope.
But in what nature?
In ſuch a one, as you conſenting too't,
Would barke your honor from that trunke you beare,
And leaue you naked.
Let me know the point.
Oh, I do feare thee Claudio, and I quake,
Leaſt thou a feauorous life ſhouldſt entertaine,
And ſix or ſeuen winters more reſpect
Then a perpetuall Honor. Dar'ſt thou die?
The ſence of death is moſt in apprehenſion,
And the poore Beetle that we treade vpon
In corporall ſufferance, finds a pang as great.
As when a Giant dies.
Why giue you me this ſhame?
Thinke you I can a reſolution fetch
From flowrie tenderneſſe? If I muſt die,
I will encounter darkneſſe as a bride,
And hugge it in mine armes.
There ſpake my brother: there my fathers graue
Did vtter forth a voice. Yes, thou muſt die:
Thou art too noble to conſerue a life
In baſe appliances. This outward ſainted Deputie,
Whoſe ſetled viſagn, and deliberate word
Nips youth i' th head, and follies doth new
As Falcon doth the Fowle, is yet a diuell:
His filth within being caſt, he would appeare
A pond, as deepe as hell.
The prenzie, Angelo?
Oh 'tis the cunning Liuerie of hell,
The damneſt bodie to inueſt, and couer
In prenzie gardes; doſt thou thinke Claudio,
If I would yeeld him my virginitie
Thou might'ſt be freed?
Oh heauens, it cannot be.
Yes, he would giu't thee; from this rank offence
So to offend him ſtill. This night's the time
That I ſhould do what I abhorre to name,
Or elſe thou dieſt to morrow.
Thou ſhalt not do't.
O, were it but my life,
I'de throw it downe for your deliuerance
As frankely as a pin.
Thankes deere Iſabell.
Be readie Claudio, for your death to morrow.
Yes. Has he affections in him,
That thus can make him bite the Law by th' noſe,
When he would force it? Sure it is no ſinne,
Or of the deadly ſeuen it is the leaſt.
Which is the leaſt?
If it were damnable, he being ſo wiſe,
Why would he for the momentarie tricke
Be perdurablie fin'de? Oh Iſabell.
What ſaies my brother?
Death is a fearefull thing.
And ſhamed life, a hatefull.
I, but to die, and go we know not where,
To lie in cold obſtruction, and to rot,
This ſenſible warme motion, to become
A kneaded clod; And the delighted ſpirit
To bath in fierie floods, or to recide
In thrilling Region of thicke-ribbed Ice,
To be impriſon'd in the viewleſſe windes
And blowne with reſtleſſe violence round about
The pendant world: or to be worſe then worſt
Of thoſe, that lawleſſe and incertaine thought,
Imagine howling, 'tis too horrible.
The wearieſt, and moſt loathed worldly life
That Age, Ache, periury, and impriſonment
Can lay on nature, is a Paradiſe
To what we feare of death.
Alas, alas.
Sweet Siſter, let me liue.
What ſinne you do, to ſaue a brothers life,
Nature diſpenſes with the deede ſo farre,
That it becomes a vertue.
Oh you beaſt,
Oh faithleſſe Coward, oh diſhoneſt wretch,
Wilt thou be made a man, out of my vice?
Is't not a kinde of Inceſt, to take life
From thine owne ſiſters ſhame? What ſhould I thinke,
Heauen ſhield my Mother plaid my Father faire:
For ſuch a warped ſlip of wilderneſſe
Nere iſſu'd from his blood. Take my defiance,
Die, periſh: Might but my bending downe
Repreeue thee from thy fate, it ſhould proceede.
Ile pray a thouſand praiers for thy death,
No word to ſaue thee.
Nay heare me Iſabell.
Oh fie, fie, fie:
Thy ſinn's not accidentall, but a Trade;
Mercy to thee would proue it ſelfe a Bawd,
'Tis beſt that thou dieſt quickly.
Oh heare me Iſabella.
Vouchſafe a word, yong ſiſter, but one word.
What is your Will.
Might you diſpenſe with your leyſure, I would by and by haue ſome ſpeech with you: the ſatiſfaction I would require, is likewiſe your owne benefit.
I haue no ſuperfluous leyſure, my ſtay muſt be ſtolen out of other affaires: but I will attend you a while.
Son, I haue ouer-heard what hath paſt between you & your ſiſter. Angelo had neuer the purpoſe to corrupt her; onely he hath made an aſſay of her vertue, to practiſe his iudgement with the diſpoſition of natures. She (hauing the truth of honour in her) hath made him that gracious deniall, which he is moſt glad to receiue: I am Confeſſor to Angelo, and I know this to be true, therfore prepare your ſelfe to death: do not ſatisfie your reſolution with hopes that are fallible, to morrow you muſt die, goe to your knees, and make ready.
Let me ask my ſiſter pardon, I am ſo out of loue with life, that I will ſue to be rid of it.
Hold you there: farewell: Prouoſt, a word with you.
What's your will (father?)
That now you are come, you wil be gone: leaue me a while with the Maid, my minde promiſes with my habit, no loſſe ſhall touch her by my company.
In good time.
The hand that hath made you faire, hath made you good: the goodnes that is cheape in beauty, makes beauty briefe in goodnes; but grace being the ſoule of your complexion, ſhall keepe the body of it euer faire: the aſſault that Angelo hath made to you, Fortune hath conuaid to my vnderſtanding; and but that frailty hath examples for his falling, I ſhould wonder at Angelo: how will you doe to content this Subſtitute, and to ſaue your Brother?
I am now going to reſolue him: I had rather my brother die by the Law, then my ſonne ſhould be vnlawfullie borne. But (oh) how much is the good Duke deceiu'd in Angelo: if euer he returne, and I can ſpeake to him, I will open my lips in vaine, or diſcouer his gouernment.
That ſhall not be much amiſſe: yet, as the matter now ſtands, he will auoid your accuſation: he made triall of you onelie. Therefore faſten your eare on my aduiſings, to the loue I haue in doing good; a remedie preſents it ſelfe. I doe make my ſelfe beleeue that you may moſt vprighteouſly do a poor wronged Lady a merited benefit; redeem your brother from the angry Law; doe no ſtaine to your owne gracious perſon, and much pleaſe the abſent Duke, if peraduenture he ſhall euer returne to haue hearing of this buſineſſe.
Let me heare you ſpeake farther; I haue ſpirit to do any thing that appeares not fowle in the truth of my ſpirit.
Vertue is bold, and goodnes neuer fearefull: Haue you not heard ſpeake of Mariana the ſiſter of Fredericke the great Souldier, who miſcarried at Sea?
I haue heard of the Lady, and good words went with her name.
Shee ſhould this Angelo haue married: was affianced to her oath, and the nuptiall appointed: between which time of the contract, and limit of the ſolemnitie, her brother Fredericke was wrackt at Sea, hauing in that periſhed veſſell, the dowry of his ſiſter: but marke how heauily this befell to the poore Gentlewoman, there ſhe loſt a noble and renowned brother, in his loue toward her, euer moſt kinde and naturall: with him the portion and ſinew of her fortune, her marriage dowry: with both, her combynate-husband, this well-ſeeming Angelo.
Can this be ſo? did Angelo ſo leaue her?
Left her in her teares, & dried not one of them with his comfort: ſwallowed his vowes whole, pretending in her, diſcoueries of diſhonor: in few, beſtow'd her on her owne lamentation, which ſhe yet weares for his ſake: and he, a marble to her teares, is waſhed with them, but relents not.
What a merit were it in death to take this poore maid from the world? what corruption in this life, that it will let this man liue? But how out of this can ſhee auaile?
It is a rupture that you may eaſily heale: and the cure of it not onely ſaues your brother, but keepes you from diſhonor in doing it.
Shew me how (good Father.)
This fore-named Maid hath yet in her the continuance of her firſt affection: his vniuſt vnkindeneſſe (that in all reaſon ſhould haue quenched her loue) hath (like an impediment in the Current) made it more violent and vnruly: Goe you to Angelo, anſwere his requiring with a plauſible obedience, agree with his demands to the point: onely referre your ſelfe to this aduantage; firſt, that your ſtay with him may not be long: that the time may haue all ſhadow, and ſilence in it: and the place anſwere to conuenience: this being granted in courſe, and now followes all: wee ſhall aduiſe this wronged maid to ſteed vp your appointment, goe in your place: if the encounter acknowledge it ſelfe heereafter, it may compell him to her recompence; and heere, by this is your brother ſaued, your honor vntainted, the poore Mariana aduantaged, and the corrupt Deputy ſcaled. The Maid will I frame, and make fit for his attempt: if you thinke well to carry this as you may, the doublenes of the benefit defends the deceit from reproofe. What thinke you of it?
The image of it giues me content already, and I truſt it will grow to a moſt proſperous perfection.
It lies much in your holding vp: haſte you ſpeedily to Angelo, if for this night he intreat you to his bed, giue him promiſe of ſatisfaction: I will preſently to S. Lukes, there at the moated-Grange recides this deiected Mariana; at that place call vpon me, and diſpatch with Angelo, that it may be quickly.
I thank you for this comfort: fare you well good father.
Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needes buy and ſell men and women like beaſts, we ſhall haue all the world drinke browne & white baſtard.
Oh heauens, what ſtuffe is heere.
Twas neuer merry world ſince of two vſuries the merrieſt was put downe, and the worſer allow'd by order of Law; a fur'd gowne to keepe him warme; and furd with Foxe and Lamb-skins too, to ſignifie, that craft being richer then Innocency, ſtands for the facing.
Come your way ſir: bleſſe you good Father Frier.
And you good Brother Father; what offence hath this man made you, Sir?
Marry Sir, he hath offended the Law; and Sir, we take him to be a Theefe too Sir: for wee haue found vpon him Sir, a ſtrange Pick-lock, which we haue ſent to the Deputie.
Fie, ſirrah, a Bawd, a wicked bawd,
The euill that thou cauſeſt to be done,
That is thy meanes to liue. Do thou but thinke
What 'tis to cram a maw, or cloath a backe
From ſuch a filthie vice: ſay to thy ſelfe,
From their abhominable and beaſtly touches
I drinke, I eate away my ſelfe, and liue:
Canſt thou beleeue thy liuing is a life,
So ſtinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.
Indeed, it do's ſtinke in ſome ſort, Sir:
But yet Sir I would proue.
Nay, if the diuell haue giuen thee proofs for ſin
Thou wilt proue his. Take him to priſon Officer:
Correction, and Inſtruction muſt both worke
Ere this rude beaſt will profit.
He muſt before the Deputy Sir, he ha's giuen him warning: the Deputy cannot abide a Whore-maſter: if he be a Whore-monger, and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.
That we were all, as ſome would ſeeme to bee
From our faults, as faults from ſeeming free.
His necke will come to your waſt, a Cord ſir.
I ſpy comfort, I cry baile: Here's a Gentleman, and a friend of mine.
How now noble Pompey? What, at the wheels of Caeſar? Art thou led in triumph? What is there none of Pigmalions Images newly made woman to bee had now, for putting the hand in the pocket, and extracting clutch'd? What reply? Ha? What ſaiſt thou to this Tune, Matter, and Method? Is't not drown'd i' th laſt raine? Ha? What ſaiſt thou Trot? Is the world as it was Man? Which is the vvay? Is it ſad, and few words? Or how? The tricke of it?
Still thus, and thus: ſtill vvorſe?
How doth my deere Morſell, thy Miſtris? Procures ſhe ſtill? Ha?
Troth ſir, ſhee hath eaten vp all her beefe, and ſhe is her ſelfe in the tub.
Why 'tis good: It is the right of it: it muſt be ſo. Euer your freſh Whore; and your pouder'd Baud, an vnſhun'd conſequence, it muſt be ſo. Art going to priſon Pompey?
Yes faith ſir.
Why 'tis not amiſſe Pompey: farewell: goe ſay I ſent thee thether: for debt Pompey? Or how?
For being a baud; for being a baud.
Well, then impriſon him: If impriſonment be the due of a baud, why 'tis his right▪ Baud is he doubtleſſe, and of antiquity too. Baud borne. Farwell good Pompey: Commend me to the priſon Pompey, you will turne good husband now Pompey, you vvill keepe the houſe.
I hope Sir, your good Worſhip wil be my baile?
No indeed vvil I not Pompey, it is not the wear: I will pray (Pompey) to encreaſe your bondage if you take it not patiently: Why, your mettle is the more: Adieu truſtie Pompey. Bleſſe you Friar.
And you.
Do's Bridge paint ſtill, Pompey? Ha?
Come your waies ſir, come.
You will not baile me then Sir?
Then Pompey, nor now: what newes abroad Frier? What newes?
Come your waies ſir, come.
Goe to kennell (Pompey) goe:
What newes Frier of the Duke?
I know none: can you tell me of any?
Some ſay he is with the Emperor of Ruſſia: other ſome, he is in Rome: but where is he thinke you?
I know not where: but whereſoeuer, I wiſh him well.
It was a mad fantaſticall tricke of him to ſteale from the State, and vſurpe the beggerie hee was neuer borne to: Lord Angelo Dukes it well in his abſence: he puts tranſgreſſion too't.
He do's well in't.
A little more lenitie to Lecherie would doe no harme in him: Something too crabbed that way, Frier.
It is too general a vice, and ſeueritie muſt cure it.
Yes in good ſooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is vvell allied, but it is impoſſible to extirpe it quite, Frier, till eating and drinking be put downe. They ſay this Angelo vvas not made by Man and Woman, after this downe-right vvay of Creation: is it true, thinke you?
How ſhould he be made then?
Some report, a Sea-maid ſpawn'd him. Some, that he vvas begot betweene two Stock-fiſhes. But it is certaine, that when he makes water, his Vrine is congeal'd ice, that I know to bee true: and he is a motion generatiue, that's infallible.
You are pleaſant ſir, and ſpeake apace.
Why, what a ruthleſſe thing is this in him, for the rebellion of a Cod-peece, to take away the life of a man? Would the Duke that is abſent haue done this? Ere he vvould haue hang'd a man for the getting a hundred Baſtards, he vvould haue paide for the Nurſing a thouſand. He had ſome feeling of the ſport; hee knew the ſeruice, and that inſtructed him to mercie.
I neuer heard the abſent Duke much detected for Women, he was not enclin'd that vvay.
Oh Sir, you are deceiu'd.
'Tis not poſſible.
Who, not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty: and his vſe was, to put a ducket in her Clack-diſh; the Duke had Crochets in him. Hee would be drunke too, that let me informe you.
You do him wrong, ſurely.
Sir, I vvas an inward of his: a ſhie fellow vvas the Duke, and I beleeue I know the cauſe of his vvithdrawing.
What (I prethee) might be the cauſe?
No, pardon: 'Tis a ſecret muſt bee looke within the teeth and the lippes: but this I can let you vnderſtand, the greater file of the ſubiect held the Duke to be vviſe.
Wiſe? Why no queſtion but he was.
A very ſuperficiall, ignorant, vnweighing fellow
Either this is Enuie in you, Folly, or miſtaking: The very ſtreame of his life, and the buſineſſe he hath helmed, muſt vppon a warranted neede, giue him a better proclamation. Let him be but teſtimonied in his owne bringings forth, and hee ſhall appeare to the enuious, a Scholler, a Stateſman, and a Soldier: therefore you ſpeake vnskilfully: or, if your knowledge bee more, it is much darkned in your malice.
Sir, I know him, and I loue him.
Loue talkes with better knowledge, & knowledge with deare loue.
Come Sir, I know what I know.
I can hardly beleeue that, ſince you know not what you ſpeake. But if euer the Duke returne (as our praiers are he may) let mee deſire you to make your anſwer before him: if it bee honeſt you haue ſpoke, you haue courage to maintaine it; I am bound to call vppon you, and I pray you your name?
Sir my name is Lucio, wel known to the Duke.
He ſhall know you better Sir, if I may liue to report you.
I feare you not.
O, you hope the Duke will returne no more: or you imagine me to vnhurtfull an oppoſite: but indeed I can doe you little harme: You'll for-ſweare this againe?
Ile be hang'd firſt: Thou art deceiu'd in mee Friar. But no more of this: Canſt thou tell if Claudio die to morrow, or no?
Why ſhould he die Sir?
Why? For filling a bottle with a Tunne-diſh: I would the Duke we talke of were return'd againe: this vngenitur'd Agent will vn-people the Prouince with Continencie. Sparrowes muſt not build in his houſeeeues, becauſe they are lecherous: The Duke yet would haue darke deeds darkelie anſwered, hee would neuer bring them to light: would hee were return'd. Marrie this Claudio is condemned for vntruſſing. Farwell good Friar, I prethee pray for me: The Duke (I ſay to thee againe) would eate Mutton on Fridaies. He's now paſt it, yet (and I ſay to thee) hee would mouth with a beggar, though ſhe ſmelt browne-bread and Garlicke: ſay that I ſaid ſo: Farewell.
No might, nor greatneſſe in mortality
Can cenſure ſcape: Back-wounding calumnie
The whiteſt vertue ſtrikes. What King ſo ſtrong,
Can tie the gall vp in the ſlanderous tong?
But who comes heere?
Go, away with her to priſon.
Good my Lord be good to mee, your Honor is accounted a mercifull man: good my Lord.
Double, and trebble admonition, and ſtill forfeite in the ſame kinde? This would make mercy ſweare and play the Tirant.
A Bawd of eleuen yeares continuance, may it pleaſe your Honor.
My Lord, this is one Lucio's information againſt me, Miſtris Kate Keepe-downe was with childe by him in the Dukes time, he promis'd her marriage: his Childe is a yeere and a quarter olde come Philip and Iacob: I haue kept it my ſelfe; and ſee how hee goes about to abuſe me.
That fellow is a fellow of much Licenſe: Let him be call'd before vs. Away with her to priſon: Goe too, no more words. Prouoſt, my Brother Angelo will not be alter'd, Claudio muſt die to morrow: Let him be furniſh'd with Diuines, and haue all charitable preparation. If my brother wrought by my pitie, it ſhould not be ſo with him.
So pleaſe you, this Friar hath beene with him, and aduis'd him for th' entertainment of death.
Good'euen, good Father.
Bliſſe, and goodneſſe on you.
Of whence are you?
Not of this Countrie, though my chance is now
To vſe it for my time: I am a brother
Of gracious Order, late come from the Sea,
In ſpeciall buſineſſe from his Holineſſe.
What newes abroad i' th World?
None, but that there is ſo great a Feauor on goodneſſe, that the diſſolution of it muſt cure it. Noueltie is onely in requeſt, and as it is as dangerous to be aged in any kinde of courſe, as it is vertuous to be conſtant in any vndertaking. There is ſcarſe truth enough aliue to make Societies ſecure, but Securitie enough to make Fellowſhips accurſt: Much vpon this riddle runs the wiſedome of the world: This newes is old enough, yet it is euerie daies newes. I pray you Sir, of what diſpoſition was the Duke?
One, that aboue all other ſtrifes,
Contended eſpecially to know himſelfe.
What pleaſure was he giuen to?
Rather reioycing to ſee another merry, then merrrie at anie thing which profeſt to make him reioice. A Gentleman of all temperance. But leaue wee him to his euents, with a praier they may proue proſperous, & let me deſire to know, how you finde Claudio prepar'd? I am made to vnderſtand, that you haue lent him viſitation.
He profeſſes to haue receiued no ſiniſter meaſure from his Iudge, but moſt willingly humbles himſelfe to the determination of Iuſtice: yet had he framed to himſelfe (by the inſtruction of his frailty) manie deceyuing promiſes of life, which I (by my good leiſure) haue diſcredited to him, and now is he reſolu'd to die.
You haue paid the heauens your Function, and the priſoner the verie debt of your Calling. I haue labour'd for the poore Gentleman, to the extremeſt ſhore of my modeſtie, but my brother-Iuſtice haue I found ſo ſeuere, that he hath forc'd me to tell him, hee is indeede Iuſtice.
If his owne life,
Anſwere the ſtraitneſſe of his proceeding,
It ſhall become him well: wherein if he chance to faile he hath ſentenc'd himſelfe.
I am going to viſit the priſoner, Fare you well.
Peace be with you.
He who the ſword of Heauen will beare,
Should be as holy, as ſeueare:
Patterne in himſelfe to know,
Grace to ſtand, and Vertue go:
More, nor leſſe to others paying,
Then by ſelfe-offences weighing.
Shame to him, whoſe cruell ſtriking,
Kils for faults of his owne liking:
Twice trebble ſhame on Angelo,
To vveede my vice, and let his grow.
Oh, what may Man within him hide,
Though Angel on the outward ſide?
How may likeneſſe made in crimes,
Making practiſe on the Times,
To draw with ydle Spiders ſtrings
Moſt ponderous and ſubſtantiall things?
Craft againſt vice, I muſt applie.
With Angelo to night ſhall lye
His old betroathed (but deſpiſed:)
So diſguiſe ſhall by th' diſguiſed
Pay with falſhood, falfe exacting,
And performe an olde contracting.
Take, oh take thoſe lips away, that ſo ſweetly were for ſworne,
And thoſe eyes: the breake of day lights that doe miſlead the Morne;
But my kiſſes bring againe, bring againe,
Seales of loue, but ſeal'd in vaine, ſeal'd in vaine.
Breake off thy ſong, and haſte thee quick away,
Here comes a man of comfort, whoſe aduice
Hath often ſtill'd my brawling diſcontent.
I cry you mercie, Sir, and well could wiſh
You had not found me here ſo muſicall.
Let me excuſe me, and beleeue me ſo,
My mirth it much diſpleaſ'd, but pleaſ'd my woe.
'Tis good; though Muſick oft hath ſuch a charme
To make bad, good; and good prouoake to harme.
I pray you tell me, hath any body enquir'd for mee here to day; much vpon this time haue I promiſ'd here to meete.
You haue not bin enquir'd after: I haue ſat here all day.
I doe conſtantly beleeue you: the time is come euen now. I ſhall craue your forbearance a little, may be I will call vpon you anone for ſome aduantage to your ſelfe.
I am alwayes bound to you.
Very well met, and well come:
What is the newes from this good Deputie?
He hath a Garden circummur'd with Bricke,
Whoſe weſterne ſide is with a Vineyard back't;
And to that Vineyard is a planched gate,
That makes his opening with this bigger Key:
This other doth command a little doore,
Which from the Vineyard to the Garden leades,
There haue I made my promiſe, vpon the
Heauy midle of the night, to call vpon him.
But ſhall you on your knowledge find this way?
I haue t'ane a due, and wary note vpon't,
With whiſpering, and moſt guiltie diligence,
In action all of precept, he did ſhow me
The way twice ore.
Are there no other tokens
Betweene you 'greed, concerning her obſeruance?
No: none but onely a repaire ith' darke,
And that I haue poſſeſt him, my moſt ſtay
Can be but briefe: for I haue made him know,
I haue a Seruant comes with me along
That ſtaies vpon me; whoſe perſwaſion is,
I come about my Brother.
'Tis well borne vp.
I haue not yet made knowne to Mariana
A word of this: what hoa, within; come forth,
I pray you be acquainted with this Maid,
She comes to doe you good.
I doe deſire the like.
Do you perſwade your ſelfe that I reſpect you?
Good Frier, I know you do, and haue found it.
Take then this your companion by the hand
Who hath a ſtorie readie for your eare:
I ſhall attend your leiſure, but make haſte
The vaporous night approaches.
Wilt pleaſe you walke aſide.
Oh Place, and greatnes: millions of falſe eies
Are ſtucke vpon thee: volumes of report
Run with theſe falſe, and moſt contrarious Queſt
Vpon thy doings: thouſand eſcapes of wit
Make thee the father of their idle dreame,
And racke thee in their fancies. Welcome, how agreed?
Shee'll take the enterprize vpon her father,
If you aduiſe it.
It is not my conſent,
But my entreaty too.
Little haue you to ſay
When you depart from him, but ſoft and low,
Remember now my brother.
Feare me not.
Nor gentle daughter, feare you not at all:
He is your husband on a pre-contract:
To bring you thus together 'tis no ſinne,
Sith that the Iuſtice of your title to him
Doth flouriſh the deceit. Come, let vs goe,
Our Corne's to reape, for yet our Tithes to ſow.
Come hither ſirha; can you cut off a mans head?
If the man be a Bachelor Sir, I can:
But iſ he be a married man, he's his wiues head,
And I can neuer cut off a womans head.
Come ſir, leaue me your ſnatches, and yeeld mee a direct anſwere. To morrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine: heere is in our priſon a common executioner, who in his office lacks a helper, if you will take it on you to aſſiſt him, it ſhall redeeme you from your Gyues: if not, you ſhall haue your full time of impriſonment, and your deliuerance with an vnpittied whipping; for you haue beene a notorious bawd.
Sir, I haue beene an vnlawfull bawd, time out of minde, but yet I will bee content to be a lawfull hang-man: I would bee glad to receiue ſome inſtruction from my fellow partner.
What hoa, Abhorſon: where's Abhorſon there?
Doe you call ſir?
Sirha, here's a fellow will helpe you to morrow in your execution: if you thinke it meet, compound with him by the yeere, and let him abide here with you, if not, vſe him for the preſent, and diſmiſſe him, hee cannot plead his eſtimation with you: he hath beene a Bawd.
A Bawd Sir? fie vpon him, he will diſcredit our myſterie.
Goe too Sir, you waigh equallie: a feather will turne the Scale.
Pray ſir, by your good fauor: for ſurely ſir, a good fauor you haue, but that you haue a hanging look: Doe you call ſir, your occupation a Myſterie?
I Sir, a Miſterie.
Painting Sir, I haue heard ſay, is a Miſterie; and your Whores ſir, being members of my occupation, vſing painting, do proue my Occupation, a Miſterie: but what Miſterie there ſhould be in hanging, if I ſhould be hang'd, I cannot imagine.
Sir, it is a Miſterie.
Proofe.
Euerie true mans apparrell fits your Theefe.
If it be too little for your theefe, your true man thinkes it bigge enough. If it bee too bigge for your Theefe, your Theefe thinkes it little enough: So euerie true mans apparrell fits your Theefe.
Are you agreed?
Sir, I will ſerue him: For I do finde your Hang-man is a more penitent Trade then your Bawd: he doth oftner aske forgiueneſſe.
You ſirrah, prouide your blocke and your Axe to morrow, foure a clocke.
Come on (Bawd) I will inſtruct thee in my Trade: follow.
I do deſire to learne ſir: and I hope, if you haue occaſion to vſe me for your owne turne, you ſhall finde me y' are. For truly ſir, for your kindneſſe, I owe you a good turne.
Call hether Barnardine and Claudio:
Th' one has my pitie; not a iot the other,
Being a Murtherer, though he were my brother.
Looke, here's the Warrant Claudio, for thy death,
'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to morrow
Thou muſt be made immortall. Where's Barnardine?
As faſt lock'd vp in ſleepe, as guiltleſſe labour,
When it lies ſtarkely in the Trauellers bones,
He will not wake.
Who can do good on him?
Well, go, prepare your ſelfe. But harke, what noiſe?
Heauen giue your ſpirits comfort: by, and by,
I hope it is ſome pardon, or repreeue
For the moſt gentle Claudio. Welcome Father.
The beſt, and wholſomſt ſpirits of the night,
Inuellop you, good Prouoſt: who call'd heere of late?
None ſince the Curphew rung.
Not Iſabell?
No.
They will then er't be long.
What comfort is for Claudio?
There's ſome in hope.
It is a bitter Deputie.
Not ſo, not ſo: his life is paralel'd
Euen with the ſtroke and line of his great Iuſtice:
He doth with holie abſtinence ſubdue
That in himſelfe, which he ſpurres on his powre
To qualifie in others: were he meal'd with that
Which he corrects, then were he tirrannous,
But this being ſo, he's iuſt. Now are they come.
This is a gentle Prouoſt, ſildome when
The ſteeled Gaoler is the friend of men:
How now? what noiſe? That ſpirit's poſſeſt with haſt,
That wounds th' vnſiſting Poſterne with theſe ſtrokes.
There he muſt ſtay vntil the Officer
Ariſe to let him in: he is call'd vp.
Haue you no countermand for Claudio yet?
But he muſt die to morrow?
None Sir, none.
As heere the dawning Prouoſt, as it is,
You ſhall heare more ere Morning.
Happely
You ſomething know: yet I beleeue there comes
No countermand: no ſuch example haue we:
Beſides, vpon the verie ſiege of Iuſtice,
Lord Angelo hath to the publike eare
Profeſt the contrarie.
This is his Lords man.
And heere comes Claudio's pardon.
My Lord hath ſent you this note,
And by mee this further charge;
That you ſwerue not from the ſmalleſt Article of it,
Neither in time, matter, or other circumſtance.
Good morrow: for as I take it, it is almoſt day.
I ſhall obey him.
This is his Pardon purchas'd by ſuch ſin,
For which the Pardoner himſelfe is in:
Hence hath offence his quicke celeritie,
When it is borne in high Authority.
When Vice makes Mercie; Mercie's ſo extended,
That for the faults loue, is th' offender friended.
Now Sir, what newes?
I told you:
Lord Angelo (be-like) thinking me remiſſe
In mine Office, awakens mee
With this vnwonted putting on, methinks ſtrangely:
For he hath not vs'd it before.
Pray you let's heare.
Whatſoeuer you may heare to the contrary, let Claudio be executed by foure of the clocke, and in the afternoone Bernardine: For my better ſatisfaction, let mee haue Claudios head ſent me by fiue. Let this be duely performed with a thought that more depends on it, then we muſt yet deliuer. Thus faile not to doe your Office, as you will anſwere it at your perill.
What ſay you to this Sir?
What is that Barnardine, who is to be executed in th' afternoone?
A Bohemian borne: But here nurſt vp & bred,
One that is a priſoner nine yeeres old.
How came it, that the abſent Duke had not either deliuer'd him to his libertie, or executed him? I haue heard it was euer his manner to do ſo.
His friends ſtill wrought Repreeues for him: And indeed his fact till now in the gouernment of Lord Angelo, came not to an vndoubtfull proofe.
It is now apparant?
Moſt manifeſt, and not denied by himſelfe.
Hath he borne himſelfe penitently in priſon?
How ſeemes he to be touch'd?
A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully, but as a drunken ſleepe, careleſſe, wreakleſſe, and feareleſſe of what's paſt, preſent, or to come: inſenſible of mortality, and deſperately mortall.
He wants aduice.
He wil heare none: he hath euermore had the liberty of the priſon: giue him leaue to eſcape hence, hee would not. Drunke many times a day, if not many daies entirely drunke. We haue verie oft awak'd him, as if to carrie him to execution, and ſhew'd him a ſeeming warrant for it, it hath not moued him at all.
More of him anon: There is written in your brow Prouoſt, honeſty and conſtancie; if I reade it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me: but in the boldnes of my cunning, I will lay my ſelfe in hazard: Claudio, whom heere you haue warrant to execute, is no greater forfeit to the Law, then Angelo who hath ſentenc'd him. To make you vnderſtand this in a manifeſted effect, I craue but foure daies reſpit: for the which, you are to do me both a preſent, and a dangerous courteſie.
Pray Sir, in what?
In the delaying death.
Alacke, how may I do it? Hauing the houre limited, and an expreſſe command, vnder penaltie, to deliuer his head in the view of Angelo? I may make my caſe as Claudio's, to croſſe this in the ſmalleſt.
By the vow of mine Order, I warrant you,
If my inſtructions may be your guide,
Let this Barnardine be this morning executed,
And his head borne to Angelo.
Angelo hath ſeene them both,
And will diſcouer the fauour.
Oh, death's a great diſguiſer, and you may adde to it; Shaue the head, and tie the beard, and ſay it was the deſire of the penitent to be ſo bar'de before his death: you know the courſe is common. If any thing fall to you vpon this, more then thankes and good fortune, by the Saint whom I profeſſe, I will plead againſt it with my life.
Pardon me, good Father, it is againſt my oath.
Were you ſworne to the Duke, or to the Deputie?
To him, and to his Subſtitutes.
You will thinke you haue made no offence, if the Duke auouch the iuſtice of your dealing?
But what likelihood is in that?
Not a reſemblance, but a certainty; yet ſince I ſee you fearfull, that neither my coate, integrity, nor perſwaſion, can with eaſe attempt you, I wil go further then I meant, to plucke all feares out of you. Looke you Sir, heere is the hand and Seale of the Duke: you know the Charracter I doubt not, and the Signet is not ſtrange to you?
I know them both.
The Contents of this, is the returne of the Duke; you ſhall anon ouer-reade it at your pleaſure: where you ſhall finde within theſe two daies, he wil be heere. This is a thing that Angelo knowes not, for hee this very day receiues letters of ſtrange tenor, perchance of the Dukes death, perchance entering into ſome Monaſterie, but by chance nothing of what is writ. Looke, th' vnfolding Starre calles vp the Shepheard; put not your ſelfe into amazement, how theſe things ſhould be; all difficulties are but eaſie vvhen they are knowne. Call your executioner, and off with Barnardines head: I will giue him a preſent ſhrift, and aduiſe him for a better place. Yet you are amaz'd, but this ſhall abſolutely reſolue you: Come away, it is almoſt cleere dawne.
I am as well acquainted heere, as I was in our houſe of profeſſion: one would thinke it vvere Miſtris Ouer-dons owne houſe, for heere be manie of her olde Cuſtomers. Firſt, here's yong Mr Raſh, hee's in for a commoditie of browne paper, and olde Ginger, nine ſcore and ſeuenteene pounds, of which hee made fiue Markes readie money: marrie then, Ginger was not much in requeſt, for the olde Women vvere all dead. Then is there heere one Mr Caper, at the ſuite of Maſter Three-Pile the Mercer, for ſome foure ſuites of Peach-colour'd Satten, which now peaches him a beggar. Then haue vve heere, yong Dizie, and yong Mr Deepe-vow, and Mr Copperſpurre, and Mr Starue-Lackey the Rapier and dagger man, and yong Drop-heire that kild luſtie Pudding, and Mr Forthlight the Tilter, and braue Mr Shootie the great Traueller, and wilde Halfe-Canne that ſtabb'd Pots, and I thinke fortie more, all great doers in our Trade, and are now for the Lords ſake.
Sirrah, bring Barnardine hether.
Mr Barnardine, you muſt riſe and be hang'd, Mr Barnardine.
What hoa Barnardine.
A pox o' your throats: who makes that noyſe there? What are you?
Your friends Sir, the Hangman:
You muſt be ſo good Sir to riſe, and be put to death.
Away you Rogue, away, I am ſleepie.
Tell him he muſt awake,
And that quickly too.
Pray Maſter Barnardine, awake till you are executed, and ſleepe afterwards.
Go in to him, and fetch him out.
He is comming Sir, he is comming: I heare his Straw ruſſle.
Is the Axe vpon the blocke, ſirrah?
Verie readie Sir.
How now Abhorſon?
What's the newes vvith you?
Truly Sir, I would deſire you to clap into your prayers: for looke you, the Warrants come.
You Rogue, I haue bin drinking all night,
I am not fitted for't.
Oh, the better Sir: for he that drinkes all night, and is hanged betimes in the morning, may ſleepe the ſounder all the next day.
Looke you Sir, heere comes your ghoſtly Father: do we ieſt now thinke you?
Sir, induced by my charitie, and hearing how haſtily you are to depart, I am come to aduiſe you, Comfort you, and pray with you.
Friar, not I: I haue bin drinking hard all night, and I will haue more time to prepare mee, or they ſhall beat out my braines with billets: I will not conſent to die this day, that's certaine.
Oh ſir, you muſt: and therefore I beſeech you
Looke forward on the iournie you ſhall go.
I ſweare I will not die to day for anie mans perſwaſion.
But heare you:
Not a word: if you haue anie thing to ſay to me, come to my Ward: for thence will not I to day.
Vnfit to liue, or die: oh grauell heart.
After him (Fellowes) bring him to the blocke.
Now Sir, how do you finde the priſoner?
A creature vnpre-par'd, vnmeet for death,
And to tranſport him in the minde he is,
Were damnable.
Heere in the priſon, Father,
There died this morning of a cruell Feauor,
One Ragozine, a moſt notorious Pirate,
A man of Claudio's yeares: his beard, and head
Iuſt of his colour. What if we do omit
This Reprobate, til he were wel enclin'd,
And ſatisfie the Deputie with the viſage
Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?
Oh, 'tis an accident that heauen prouides:
Diſpatch it preſently, the houre drawes on
Prefixt by Angelo: See this be done,
And ſent according to command, whiles I
Perſwade this rude wretch willingly to die.
This ſhall be done (good Father) preſently:
But Barnardine muſt die this afternoone,
And how ſhall we continue Claudio,
To ſaue me from the danger that might come,
If he were knowne aliue?
Let this be done,
Put them in ſecret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio,
Ere twice the Sun hath made his iournall greeting
To yond generation, you ſhal finde
Your ſafetie manifeſted.
I am your free dependant.
Quicke, diſpatch, and ſend the head to Angelo
Now wil I write Letters to Angelo.
(The Prouoſt he ſhal beare them) whoſe contents
Shal witneſſe to him I am neere at home:
And that by great Iniunctions I am bound
To enter publikely: him Ile deſire
To meet me at the conſecrated Fount,
A League below, the Citie: and from thence,
By cold gradation, and weale-ballanc'd forme.
We ſhal proceed with Angelo.
Heere is the head, Ile carrie it my ſelfe.
Conuenient is it: Make a ſwift returne,
For I would commune with you of ſuch things,
That want no eare but yours.
Ile make all ſpeede.
Peace hoa, be heere.
The tongue of Iſabell. She's come to know,
If yet her brothers pardon be come hither:
But I will keepe her ignorant of her good,
To make her heauenly comforts of diſpaire,
When it is leaſt expected.
Hoa, by your leaue.
Good morning to you, faire, and gracious daughter.
The better giuen me by ſo holy a man,
Hath yet the Deputie ſent my brothers pardon?
He hath releaſd him, Iſabell, from the world,
His head is off, and ſent to Angelo.
Nay, but it is not ſo.
It is no other,
Shew your wiſedome daughter in your cloſe patience.
Oh, I wil to him, and plucke out his eies.
You ſhal not be admitted to his ſight.
Vnhappie Claudio, wretched Iſabell,
Iniurious world, moſt damned Angelo.
This nor hurts him, nor profits you a lot,
Forbeare it therefore, giue your cauſe to heauen,
Marke what I ſay, which you ſhal finde
By euery ſillable a faithful veritie.
The Duke comes home to morrow: nay, drie your eyes,
One of our Couent, and his Confeſſor
Giues me this inſtance: Already he hath carried
Notice to Eſcalus and Angelo,
Who do prepare to meete him at the gates,
There to giue vp their powre: If you can pace your wiſdome,
In that good path that I would wiſh it go,
And you ſhal haue your boſome on this wretch,
Grace of the Duke, reuenges to your heart,
And general Honor.
I am directed by you.
This Letter then to Friar Peter giue,
'Tis that he ſent me of the Dukes returne:
Say, by this token, I deſire his companie
At Mariana's houſe to night. Her cauſe, and yours
Ile perfect him withall, and he ſhal bring you
Before the Duke; and to the head of Angelo
Accuſe him home and home. For my poore ſelfe,
I am combined by a ſacred Vow,
And ſhall be abſent. Wend you with this Letter:
Command theſe fretting waters from your eies
With a light heart; truſt not my holie Order
If I peruert your courſe: whoſe heere?
Good 'euen;
Frier, where's the Prouoſt?
Not within Sir.
Oh prettie Iſabella, I am pale at mine heart, to ſee thine eyes ſo red: thou muſt be patient; I am faine to dine and ſup with water and bran: I dare not for my head fill my belly. One fruitful Meale would ſet mee too't: but they ſay the Duke will be heere to Morrow. By my troth Iſabell I lou'd thy brother, if the olde fantaſtical Duke of darke corners had bene at home, he had liued.
Sir, the Duke is marueilous little beholding to your reports, but the beſt is, he liues not in them.
Friar, thou knoweſt not the Duke ſo wel as I do: he's a better woodman then thou tak'ſt him for.
Well: you'l anſwer this one day. Fare ye well.
Nay tarrie, Ile go along with thee,
I can tel thee pretty tales of the Duke.
You haue told me too many of him already ſir if they be true: if not true, none were enough.
I was once before him for getting a Wench with childe.
Did you ſuch a thing?
Yes marrie did I; but I was faine to forſwear it,
They would elſe haue married me to the rotten Medler.
Sir your company is fairer then honeſt, reſt you well.
By my troth Ile go with thee to the lanes end: if baudy talke offend you, we'el haue very litle of it: nay Friar, I am a kind of Burre, I ſhal ſticke.
Euery Letter he hath writ, hath diſuouch'd other.
In moſt vneuen and diſtracted manner, his actions ſhow much like to madneſſe, pray heauen his wiſedome bee not tainted: and why meet him at the gates and reliuer our authorities there?
I gheſſe not.
And why ſhould wee proclaime it in an howre before his entring, that if any craue redreſſe of iniuſtice, they ſhould exhibit their petitions in the ſtreet?
He ſhowes his reaſon for that: to haue a diſpatch of Complaints, and to deliuer vs from deuices heereafter, which ſhall then haue no power to ſtand againſt vs.
Well: I beſeech you let it bee proclaim'd betimes i' th' morne, Ile call you at your houſe: giue notice to ſuch men of ſort and ſuite as are to meete him.
I ſhall ſir: fare you well.
Good night.
This deede vnſhapes me quite, makes me vnpregnant
And dull to all proceedings. A deflowred maid,
And by an eminent body, that enforc'd
The Law againſt it? But that her tender ſhame
Will not proclaime againſt her maiden loſſe,
How might ſhe tongue me? yet reaſon dares her no,
For my Authority beares of a credent bulke,
That no particular ſcandall once can touch
But it confounds the breather. He ſhould haue liu'd,
Saue that his riotous youth with dangerous ſense
Might in the times to come haue ta'ne reuenge
By ſo receiuing a diſhonor'd life
With ranſome of ſuch ſhame: would yet he had liued.
Alack, when once our grace we haue forgot,
Nothing goes right, we would, and we would not.
Theſe Letters at fit time deliuer me,
The Prouoſt knowes our purpoſe and our plot,
The matter being a foote, keepe your inſtruction
And hold you euer to our ſpeciall drift,
Though ſometimes you doe blench from this to that
As cauſe doth miniſter: Goe call at Flauia's houſe,
And tell him where I ſtay: giue the like notice
To Valencius, Rowland, and to Craſſus,
And bid them bring the Trumpets to the gate:
But ſend me Flauius firſt.
It ſhall be ſpeeded well.
I thank thee Varrius, thou haſt made good haſt,
Come, we will walke▪ There's other of our friends
Will greet vs heere anon: my gentle Ʋarrius.
To ſpeak ſo in directly I am loath,
I would ſay the truth; but to accuſe him ſo
That is your part, yee I m aduis'd to doe it,
He ſaies, to vaile full purpoſe.
Be rul'd by him.
Beſides he tells me, that if peraduenture
He ſpeake againſt me on the aduerſe ſide,
I ſhould not thinke it ſtrange, for 'tis a phyſicke
That's bitter, to ſweet end.
I would Frier Peter
Oh peace, the Frier is come.
Come I haue found you out a ſtand moſt fit,
Where you may haue ſuch vantage on the Duke
He ſhall not paſſe you:
Twice haue the Trumpets ſounded.
The generous, and graueſt Citizens
Haue hent the gates, and very neere vpon
The Duke is entring:
Therefore hence away.
My very worthy Coſen, fairely met,
Our old, and faithfull friend, we are glad to ſee you.
Happy returne be to your royall grace.
Many and harty thankings to you both:
We haue made enquiry of you, and we heare
Such goodneſſe of your Iuſtice, that our ſoule
Cannot but yeeld you forth to publique thankes
Forerunning more requitall.
You make my bonds ſtill greater.
Oh your deſert ſpeaks loud, & I ſhould wrong it
To locke it in the wards of couert boſome
When it deſerues with characters of braſſe
A forted reſidence 'gainſt the tooth of time,
And razure of obliuion: Giue we your hand
And let the Subiect ſee, to make them know
That outward curteſies would faine proclaime
Fauours that keepe within: Come Eſcalus,
You muſt walke by vs, on our other hand:
And good ſupporters are you.
Now is your time
Speake loud, and kneele before him.
Iuſtice, O royall Duke, vaile your regard
Vpon a wrong'd (I would faine haue ſaid a Maid)
Oh worthy Prince, diſhonor not your eye
By throwing it on any other obiect,
Till you haue heard me, in my true complaint,
And giuen me Iuſtice, Iuſtice, Iuſtice, Iuſtice.
Relate your wrongs;
In what, by whom? be briefe:
Here is Lord Angelo ſhall giue you Iuſtice,
Reueale your ſelfe to him.
Oh worthy Duke,
You bid me ſeeke redemption of the diuell,
Heare me your ſelfe: for that which I muſt ſpeake
Muſt either puniſh me, not being beleeu'd,
Or wring redreſſe from you:
Heare me: oh heare me, heere.
My Lord, her wits I feare me are not firme:
She hath bin a ſuitor to me, for her Brother
Cut off by courſe of Iuſtice.
By courſe of Iuſtice.
And ſhe will ſpeake moſt bitterly, and ſtrange.
Moſt ſtrange: but yet moſt truely wil I ſpeake,
That Angelo's forſworne, is it not ſtrange?
That Angelo's a murtherer, is't not ſtrange?
That Angelo is an adulterous thiefe,
An hypocrite, a virgin violator,
Is it not ſtrange? and ſtrange?
Nay it is ten times ſtrange?
It is not truer he is Angelo,
Then this is all as true, as it is ſtrange;
Nay, it is ten times true, for truth is truth
To th' end of reckning.
Away with her: poore ſoule
She ſpeakes this, in th' infirmity of ſence.
Oh Prince, I coniure thee, as thou beleeu'ſt
There is another comfort, then this world,
That thou neglect me not, with that opinion
That I am touch'd with madneſſe: make not impoſſible
That which but ſeemes vnlike, 'tis not impoſſible
But one, the wickedſt caitiffe on the ground
May ſeeme as ſhie, as graue, as iuſt, as abſolute:
As Angelo, euen ſo may Angelo
In all his dreſſings, caracts, titles, formes,
Be an arch-villaine: Beleeue it, royall Prince
If he be leſſe, he's nothing, but he's more,
Had I more name for badneſſe.
By mine honeſty
If ſhe be mad, as I beleeue no other,
Her madneſſe hath the oddeſt frame of ſenſe,
Such a dependancy of thing, on thing,
As ere I heard in madneſſe.
Oh gracious Duke
Harpe not on that; nor do not baniſh reaſon
For inequality, but let your reaſon ſerue
To make the truth appeare, where it ſeemes hid,
And hide the falſe ſeemes true.
Many that are not mad
Haue ſure more lacke of reaſon:
What would you ſay?
I am the Siſter of one Claudio,
Condemnd vpon the Act of Fornication
To looſe his head, condemn'd by Angelo,
I, (in probation of a Siſterhood)
Was ſent to by my Brother; one Lucio
As then the Meſſenger.
That's I, and't like your Grace:
I came to her from Claudio, and deſir'd her,
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo,
For her poore Brothers pardon.
That's he indeede.
You were not bid to ſpeake.
No, my good Lord,
Nor wiſh'd to hold my peace.
I wiſh you now then,
Pray you take note of it: and when you haue
A buſineſſe for your ſelfe: pray heauen you then
Be perfect.
I warrant your honor.
The warrant's for your ſelfe: take heede to't.
This Gentleman told ſomewhat of my Tale.
Right.
It may be right, but you are i' the wrong
To ſpeake before your time: proceed,
I went
To this pernicious Caitiffe Deputie.
That's ſomewhat madly ſpoken.
Pardon it,
The phraſe is to the matter.
Mended againe: the matter: proceed.
In briefe, to ſet the needleſſe proceſſe by:
How I perſwaded, how I praid, and kneel'd,
How he refeld me, and how I replide
(For this was of much length) the vild concluſion
I now begin with griefe, and ſhame to vtter.
He would not, but by gift of my chaſte body
To his concupiſcible intemperate luſt
Releaſe my brother; and after much debatement,
My ſiſterly remorſe, confutes mine honour,
And I did yeeld to him: But the next morne betimes,
His purpoſe ſurfetting, he ſends a warrant
For my poore brothers head.
This is moſt likely.
Oh that it were as like as it is true.
By heauen (fond wretch) yu knowſt not what thou ſpeak'ſt,
Or elſe thou art ſuborn'd againſt his honor
In hatefull practiſe: firſt his Integritie
Stands without blemiſh: next it imports no reaſon,
That with ſuch vehemency he ſhould purſue
Faults proper to himſelfe: if he had ſo offended
He would haue waigh'd thy brother by himſelfe,
And not haue cut him off: ſome one hath ſet you on:
Confeſſe the truth, and ſay by whoſe aduice
Thou cam'ſt heere to complaine.
And is this all?
Then oh you bleſſed Miniſters aboue
Keepe me in patience, and with ripened time
Vnfold the euill, which is heere wrapt vp
In countenance: heauen ſhield your Grace from woe,
As I thus wrong'd, hence vnbeleeued goe.
I know you'ld faine be gone: An Officer:
To priſon with her: Shall we thus permit
A blaſting and a ſcandalous breath to fall,
On him ſo neere vs? This needs muſt be a practiſe;
Who knew of your intent and comming hither?
One that I would were heere, Frier Lodowick.
A ghoſtly Father, belike:
Who knowes that Lodowicke?
My Lord, I know him, 'tis a medling Fryer,
I doe not like the man: had he been Lay my Lord,
For certaine words he ſpake againſt your Grace
In your retirment, I had ſwing'd him ſoundly.
Words againſt mee? this 'a good Fryer belike
And to ſet on this wretched woman here
Againſt our Subſtitute: Let this Fryer be found.
But yeſternight my Lord, ſhe and that Fryer
I ſaw them at the priſon: a ſawcy Fryar,
A very ſcuruy fellow.
Bleſſed be your Royall Grace:
I haue ſtood by my Lord, and I haue heard
Your royall eare abus'd: firſt hath this woman
Moſt wrongfully accus'd your Subſtitute,
Who is as free from touch, or ſoyle with her
As ſhe from one vngot.
We did beleeue no leſſe.
Know you that Frier Lodowick that ſhe ſpeakes of?
I know him for a man diuine and holy,
Not ſcuruy, nor a temporary medler
As he's reported by this Gentleman:
And on my truſt, a man that neuer yet
Did (as he vouches) miſ-report your Grace.
My Lord, moſt villanouſly, beleeue it.
Well: he in time may come to cleere himſelfe;
But at this inſtant he is ſicke, my Lord:
Of a ſtrange Feauor; vpon his meere requeſt
Being come to knowledge, that there was complaint
Intended 'gainſt Lord Angelo, came I hether
To ſpeake as from his mouth, what he doth know
Is true, and falſe: And what he with his oath
And all probation will make vp full cleare
When ſoeuer he's conuented: Firſt for this woman,
To iuſtifie this worthy Noble man
So vulgarly and perſonally accus'd,
Her ſhall you heare diſproued to her eyes,
Till ſhe her ſelfe confeſſe it.
Good Frier, let's heare it:
Doe you not ſmile at this, Lord Angelo?
Oh heauen, the vanity of wretched fooles.
Giue vs ſome ſeates, Come coſen Angelo,
In this I'll be impartiall: be you Iudge
Of your owne Cauſe: Is this the Witnes Frier?
Firſt, let her ſhew your face, and after, ſpeake.
Pardon my Lord, I will not ſhew my face
Vntill my husband bid me.
What, are you married?
No my Lord.
Are you a Maid?
No my Lord.
A Widow then?
Neither, my Lord.
Why you are nothing then: neither Maid, Widow, nor Wife?
My Lord, ſhe may be a Puncke: for many of them, are neither Maid, Widow, nor Wife.
Silence that fellow: I would he had ſome cauſe to prattle for himſelfe.
Well my Lord.
My Lord, I doe confeſſe I nere was married,
And I confeſſe beſides, I am no Maid,
I haue known my husband, yet my husband
Knowes not, that euer he knew me.
He was drunk then, my Lord, it can be no better.
For the benefit of ſilence, would thou wert ſo to.
Well, my Lord.
This is no witneſſe for Lord Angelo.
Now I come to't, my Lord.
Shee that accuſes him of Fornication,
In ſelfe-ſame manner, doth accuſe my husband,
And charges him, my Lord, with ſuch a time,
When I'le depoſe I had him mine Armes
With all th' effect of Loue.
Charges ſhe moe then me?
Not that I know.
No? you ſay your husband.
Why iuſt, my Lord, and that is Angelo,
Who thinkes he knowes, that he nere knew my body,
But knows, he thinkes, that he knowes Iſabels.
This is a ſtrange abuſe: Let's ſee thy face.
My husband bids me, now I will vnmaske.
This is that face, thou cruell Angelo
Which once thou ſworſt, was worth the looking on:
This is the hand, which with a vowd contract
Was faſt belockt in thine: This is the body
That tooke away the match from Iſabell,
And did ſupply thee at thy garden-houſe
In her Imagin'd perſon.
Know you this woman?
Carnallie ſhe ſaies.
Sirha, no more.
Enoug my Lord.
My Lord, I muſt confeſſe, I know this woman,
And fiue yeres ſince there was ſome ſpeech of marriage
Betwixt my ſelfe, and her: which was broke off,
Partly for that her promis'd proportions
Came ſhort of Compoſition: But in chiefe
For that her reputation was diſ-valued
In leuitie: Since which time of fiue yeres
I neuer ſpake with her, ſaw her, nor heard from her
Vpon my faith, and honor.
Noble Prince,
As there comes light from heauen, and words frō breath,
As there is ſence in truth, and truth in vertue,
I am affianced this mans wife, as ſtrongly
As words could make vp vowes: And my good Lord,
But Tueſday night laſt gon, in's garden houſe,
He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
Let me in ſafety raiſe me from my knees,
Or elſe for euer be confixed here
A Marble Monument.
I did but ſmile till now,
Now, good my Lord, giue me the ſcope of Iuſtice,
My patience here is touch'd: I doe perceiue
Theſe poore informall women, are no more
But inſtruments of ſome more mightier member
That ſets them on. Let me haue way, my Lord
To finde this practiſe out.
I, with my heart,
And puniſh them to your height of pleaſure.
Thou fooliſh Frier, and thou pernicious woman
Compact with her that's gone: thinkſt thou, thy oathes,
Though they would ſwear downe each particular Saint,
Were teſtimonies againſt his worth, and credit
That's ſeald in approbation? you, Lord Eſcalus
Sit with my Cozen, lend him your kinde paines
To finde out this abuſe, whence 'tis deriu'd.
There is another Frier that ſet them on,
Let him be ſent for.
Would he were here, my Lord, for he indeed
Hath ſet the women on to this Complaint;
Your Prouoſt knowes the place where he abides,
And he may fetch him.
Goe, doe it inſtantly:
And you, my noble and well-warranted Coſen
Whom it concernes to heare this matter forth,
Doe with your iniuries as ſeemes you beſt
In any chaſtiſement; I for a while
Will leaue you; but ſtir not you till you haue
Well determin'd vpon theſe Slanderers.
My Lord, wee'll doe it throughly: Signior Lucio, did not you ſay you knew that Frier Lodowick to be a diſhoneſt perſon?
Cucullus non facit Monachum, honeſt in nothing but in his Clothes, and one that hath ſpoke moſt villanous ſpeeches of the Duke.
We ſhall intreat you to abide heere till he come, and inforce them againſt him: we ſhall finde this Frier a notable fellow.
As any in Vienna, on my word.
Call that ſame Iſabell here once againe, I would ſpeake with her: pray you, my Lord, giue mee leaue to queſtion, you ſhall ſee how Ile handle her.
Not better then he, by her owne report.
Say you?
Marry ſir, I thinke, if you handled her priuately She would ſooner confeſſe, perchance publikely ſhe'll be aſham'd.
I will goe darkely to worke with her.
That's the way: for women are light at midnight.
Come on Miſtris, here's a Gentlewoman,
Denies all that you haue ſaid.
My Lord, here comes the raſcall I ſpoke of,
Here, with the Prouoſt.
In very good time: ſpeake not you to him, till we call vpon you.
Mum.
Come Sir, did you ſet theſe women on to ſlander Lord Angelo? they haue confeſ'd you did.
'Tis falſe.
How? Know you where you are?
Reſpect to your great place; and let the diuell
Be ſometime honour'd, for his burning throne.
Where is the Duke? 'tis he ſhould heare me ſpeake.
The Duke's in vs: and we will heare you ſpeake,
Looke you ſpeake iuſtly.
Boldly, at leaſt. But oh poore ſoules,
Come you to ſeeke the Lamb here of the Fox;
Good night to your redreſſe: Is the Duke gone?
Then is your cauſe gone too: The Duke's vniuſt,
Thus to retort your manifeſt Appeale,
And put your triall in the villaines mouth,
Which here you come to accuſe.
This is the raſcall: this is he I ſpoke of.
Why thou vnreuerend, and vnhallowed Fryer:
Is't not enough thou haſt ſuborn'd theſe women,
To accuſe this worthy man? but in foule mouth,
And in the witneſſe of his proper eare,
To call him villaine; and then to glance from him,
To th' Duke himſelfe, to taxe him with Iniuſtice?
Take him hence; to th' racke with him: we'll towze you
Ioynt by ioynt, but we will know his purpoſe:
What? vniuſt?
Be not ſo hot: the Duke dare
No more ſtretch this finger of mine, then he
Dare racke his owne: his Subiect am I not,
Nor here Prouinciall: My buſineſſe in this State
Made me a looker on here in Vienna,
Where I haue ſeene corruption boyle and bubble,
Till it ore-run the Stew: Lawes, for all faults,
But faults ſo countenanc'd, that the ſtrong Statutes
Stand like the forfeites in a Barbers ſhop,
As much in mocke, as marke.
Slander to th' State:
Away with him to priſon.
What can you vouch againſt him Signior Lucio?
Is this the man that you did tell vs of?
'Tis he, my Lord: come hither goodman bald-pate, doe you know me?
I remember you Sir, by the ſound of your voice,
I met you at the Priſon, in the abſence of the Duke.
Oh, did you ſo? and do you remember what you ſaid of the Duke.
Moſt notedly Sir.
Do you ſo Sir: And was the Duke a fleſh-monger, a foole, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?
You muſt (Sir) change perſons with me, ere you make that my report: you indeede ſpoke ſo of him, and much more, much worſe.
Oh thou damnable fellow: did not I plucke thee by the noſe, for thy ſpeeches?
I proteſt, I loue the Duke, as I loue my ſelfe.
Harke how the villaine would cloſe now, after his treaſonable abuſes.
Such a fellow is not to be talk'd withall: Away with him to priſon: Where is the Prouoſt? away with him to priſon: lay bolts enough vpon him: let him ſpeak no more: away with thoſe Giglets too▪ and with the other confederate companion.
Stay Sir, ſtay a while.
What, reſiſts he? helpe him Lucio.
Come ſir, come ſir, come ſir: foh ſir, why you bald-pated lying raſcall: you muſt be hooded muſt you? ſhow your knaues viſage with a poxe to you: ſhow your ſheepe-biting face, and be hang'd an houre: will't not off?
Thou art the firſt knaue, that ere mad'ſt a Duke.
Firſt Prouoſt, let me bayle theſe gentle three:
Sneake not away Sir, for the Fryer, and you,
Muſt haue a word anon: lay hold on him.
This may proue worſe then hanging.
What you haue ſpoke, I pardon: ſit you downe,
We'll borrow place of him; Sir, by your leaue:
Ha'ſt thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
That yet can doe thee office? If thou ha'ſt
Rely vpon it, till my tale be heard,
And hold no longer out.
Oh, my dread Lord,
I ſhould be guiltier then my guiltineſſe,
To thinke I can be vndiſcerneable,
When I perceiue your grace, like powre diuine,
Hath look'd vpon my paſſes. Then good Prince,
No longer Seſſion hold vpon my ſhame,
But let my Triall, be mine owne Confeſſion:
Immediate ſentence then, and ſequent death,
Is all the grace I beg.
Come hither Mariana,
Say: was't thou ere contracted to this woman?
I was my Lord.
Goe take her hence, and marry her inſtantly.
Doe you the office (Fryer) which conſummate,
Returne him here againe: goe with him Prouoſt.
My Lord, I am more amaz'd at his diſhonor,
Then at the ſtrangeneſſe of it.
Come hither Iſabell,
Your Frier is now your Prince: As I was then
Aduertyſing, and holy to your buſineſſe,
(Not changing heart with habit) I am ſtill,
Atturnied at your ſeruice.
Oh giue me pardon
That I, your vaſſaile, haue imploid, and pain'd
Your vnknowne Soueraigntie.
You are pardon'd Iſabell:
And now, deere Maide, be you as free to vs.
Your Brothers death I know ſits at your heart:
And you may maruaile, why I obſcur'd my ſelfe,
Labouring to ſaue his life: and would not rather
Make raſh remonſtrance of my hidden powre,
Then let him ſo be loſt: oh moſt kinde Maid,
It was the ſwift celeritie of his death,
Which I did thinke, with ſlower foot came on,
That brain'd my purpoſe: but peace be with him,
That life is better life paſt fearing death,
Then that which liues to feare: make it your comfort,
So happy is your Brother.
I doe my Lord.
For this new-maried man, approaching here,
Whoſe ſalt imagination yet hath wrong'd
Your well defended honor: you muſt pardon
For Mariana's ſake: But as he adiudg'd your Brother,
Being criminall, in double violation
Of ſacred Chaſtitie, and of promiſe-breach,
Thereon dependant for your Brothers life,
The very mercy of the Law cries out
Moſt audible, euen from his proper tongue.
An Angelo for Claudio, death for death:
Haſte ſtill paies haſte, and leaſure, anſwers leaſure;
Like doth quit like, and Meaſure ſtill for Meaſure:
Then Angelo, thy fault's thus manifeſted;
Which though thou would'ſt deny, denies thee vantage.
We doe condemne thee to the very Blocke
Where Claudio ſtoop'd to death; and with like haſte.
Away with him.
Oh my moſt gracious Lord,
I hope you will not mocke me with a husband?
It is your husband mock't you with a husband,
Conſenting to the ſafe-guard of your honor,
I thought your marriage fit: elſe Imputation,
For that he knew you▪ might reproach your life,
And choake your good to come: For his Poſſeſſions,
Although by confutation they are ours;
We doe en-ſtate, and widow you with all,
To buy you a better husband.
Oh my deere Lord,
I craue no other, nor no better man.
Neuer craue him, we are definitiue.
Gentle my Liege.
You doe but looſe your labour.
Away with him to death: Now Sir, to you.
Oh my good Lord, ſweet Iſabell, take my part,
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come,
I'll lend you all my life to doe you ſeruice.
Againſt all ſence you doe importune her,
Should ſhe kneele downe, in mercie of this fact,
Her Brothers ghoſt, his paued bed would breake,
And take her hence in horror.
Iſabell:
Sweet Iſabel, doe yet but kneele by me,
Hold vp your hands, ſay nothing: I'll ſpeake all.
They ſay beſt men are moulded out of faults,
And for the moſt, become much more the better
For being a little bad: So may my husband.
Oh Iſabel: will you not lend a knee?
He dies for Claudio's death.
Moſt bounteous Sir.
Looke if it pleaſe you, on this man condemn'd,
As if my Brother liu'd: I partly thinke,
A due ſinceritie gouerned his deedes,
Till he did looke on me: Since it is ſo,
Let him not die: my Brother had but Iuſtice,
In that he did the thing for which he dide.
For Angelo, his Act did not ore-take his bad intent,
And muſt be buried but as an intent
That periſh'd by the way: thoughts are no ſubiects
Intents, but meerely thoughts.
Meerely my Lord.
Your ſuite's vnprofitable: ſtand vp I ſay:
I haue bethought me of another fault.
Prouoſt, how came it Claudio was beheaded
At an vnuſuall howre?
It was commanded ſo.
Had you a ſpeciall warrant for the deed?
No my good Lord: it was by priuate meſſage.
For which I doe diſcharge you of your office,
Giue vp your keyes.
Pardon me, noble Lord,
I thought it was a fault, but knew it not,
Yet did repent me after more aduice,
For teſtimony whereof, one in the priſon
That ſhould by priuate order elſe haue dide,
I haue reſeru'd aliue.
What's he?
His name is Barnardine.
I would thou hadſt done ſo by Claudio:
Goe fetch him hither, let me looke vpon him.
I am ſorry, one ſo learned, and ſo wiſe
As you, Lord Angelo, haue ſtil appear'd,
Should ſlip ſo groſſelie, both in the heat of bloud
And lacke of temper'd iudgement afterward.
I am ſorrie, that ſuch ſorrow I procure,
And ſo deepe ſticks it in my penitent heart,
That I craue death more willingly then mercy,
'Tis my deſeruing, and I doe entreat it.
Which is that Barnardine?
This my Lord.
There was a Friar told me of this man.
Sirha, thou art ſaid to haue a ſtubborne ſoule
That apprehends no further then this world,
And ſquar'ſt thy life according: Thou'rt condemn'd,
But for thoſe earthly faults, I quit them all,
And pray thee take this mercie to prouide
For better times to come: Frier aduiſe him,
I leaue him to your hand. What muffeld fellow's that?
This is another priſoner that I ſau'd,
Who ſhould haue di'd when Claudio loſt his head,
As like almoſt to Claudio, as himſelfe.
If he be like your brother, for his ſake
Is he pardon'd, and for your louelie ſake
Giue me your hand, and ſay you will be mine,
He is my brother too: But fitter time for that:
By this Lord Angelo perceiues he's ſafe,
Methinkes I ſee a quickning in his eye:
Well Angelo, your euill quits you well.
Looke that you loue your wife: her worth, worth yours
I finde an apt remiſſion in my ſelfe:
And yet heere's one in place I cannot pardon,
You ſirha, that knew me for a foole, a Coward,
One all of Luxurie, an aſſe, a mad man:
Wherein haue I ſo deſeru'd of you
That you extoll me thus?
Faith my Lord, I ſpoke it but according to the trick: if you will hang me for it you may: but I had rather it would pleaſe you, I might be whipt.
Whipt firſt, ſir, and hang'd after.
Proclaime it Prouoſt round about the Citie;
If any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow
(As I haue heard him ſweare himſelfe there's one whom he begot with childe) let her appeare,
And he ſhall marry her: the nuptiall finiſh'd,
Let him be whipt and hang'd.
I beſeech your Highneſſe doe not marry me to a Whore: your Highneſſe ſaid euen now I made you a Duke, good my Lord do not recompence me, in making me a Cuckold.
Vpon mine honor thou ſhalt marrie her,
Thy ſlanders I forgiue, and therewithall
Remit thy other forfeits: take him to priſon,
And ſee our pleaſure herein executed.
Marrying a punke my Lord, is preſſing to death,
Whipping and hanging.
Slandering a Prince deſerues it.
She Claudio that you wrong'd, looke you reſtore.
Ioy to you Mariana, loue her Angelo:
I haue confes'd her, and I know her vertue.
Thanks good friend, Eſcalus, for thy much goodneſſe,
There's more behinde that is more gratulate.
Thanks Prouoſt for thy care, and ſecrecie,
We ſhall imploy thee in a worthier place.
Forgiue him Angelo, that brought you home
The head of Ragozine for Claudio's,
Th' offence pardons it ſelfe. Deere Iſabell,
I haue a motion much imports your good,
Whereto if you'll a willing eare incline;
What's mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.
So bring vs to our Pallace, where wee'll ſhow
What's yet behinde, that meete you all ſhould know.