AS I remember Adam, it was vpon this faſhion bequeathed me by will, but poore a thouſand Crownes, and as thou ſaift, charged my brother on his bleſſing to breed mee well: and there begins my ſadneſſe: My brother Iaques he keepes at ſchoole, and report ſpeakes goldenly of his profit: for my part, he keepes me ruſtically at home, or (to ſpeak more properly) ſtaies me heere at home vnkept: for call you that keeping for a gentleman of my birth, that differs not from the ſtalling of an Oxe? his horſes are bred better, for beſides that they are faire with their feeding, they are taught their mannage, and to that end Riders deerely hir'd: but I (his brother) gaine nothing vnder him but growth, for the which his Animals on his dunghils are as much bound to him as I: beſides this nothing that he ſo plentifully giues me, the ſomething that nature gaue mee, his countenance ſeemes to take from me: hee lets mee feede with his Hindes, barres mee the place of a brother, and as much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my education. This is it Adam that grieues me, and the ſpirit of my Father, which I thinke is within mee, begins to mutinie againſt this ſeruitude. I will no longer endure it, though yet I know no wiſe remedy how to auoid it.
Yonder comes my Maſter, your brother.
Goe a-part Adam, and thou ſhalt heare how he will ſhake me vp.
Now Sir, what make you heere?
Nothing: I am not taught to make any thing.
What mar you then ſir?
Marry ſir, I am helping you to mar that which God made, a poore vnworthy brother of yours with idleneſſe.
Marry ſir be better employed, and be naught a while.
Shall I keepe your hogs, and eat huskes with them? what prodigall portion haue I ſpent, that I ſhould come to ſuch penury?
Know you where you are ſir?
O ſir, very well: heere in your Orchard.
Know you before whom ſir?
I, better then him I am before knowes mee: I know you are my eldeſt brother, and in the gentle condition of bloud you ſhould ſo know me: the courteſie of nations allowes you my better, in that you are the firſt borne, but the ſame tradition takes not away my bloud, were there twenty brothers betwixt vs: I haue as much of my father in mee, as you, albeit I confeſſe your comming before me is neerer to his reuerence.
What Boy.
Come, come elder brother, you are too yong in this.
Wilt thou lay hands on me villaine?
I am no villaine: I am the yongeſt ſonne of Sir Rowland de Boys, he was my father, and he is thrice a villaine that ſaies ſuch a father begot villaines: wert thou not my brother, I would not take this hand from thy throat, till this other had puld out thy tongue for ſaying ſo, thou haſt raild on thy ſelfe.
Sweet Maſters bee patient, for your Fathers remembrance, be at accord.
Let me goe I ſay.
I will not till I pleaſe: you ſhall heare mee: my father charg'd you in his will to giue me good education: you haue train'd me like a pezant, obſcuring and hiding from me all gentleman-like qualities: the ſpirit of my father growes ſtrong in mee, and I will no longer endure it: therefore allow me ſuch exerciſes as may become a gentleman, or giue mee the poore allottery my father left me by teſtament, with that I will goe buy my fortunes.
And what wilt thou do? beg when that is ſpent? Well ſir, get you in. I will not long be troubled with you: you ſhall haue ſome part of your will, I pray you leaue me.
I will no further offend you, then becomes mee for my good.
Get you with him, you olde dogge.
Is old dogge my reward: moſt true, I haue loſt my teeth in your ſeruice: God be with my olde maſter, he would not haue ſpoke ſuch a word. Ex. Orl. Ad.
Is it euen ſo, begin you to grow vpon me? I will phyſicke your ranckeneſſe, and yet giue no thouſand crownes neyther: holla Dennis.
Calls your worſhip?
Was not Charles the Dukes Wraſtler heere to ſpeake with me?
So pleaſe you, he is heere at the doore, and importunes acceſſe to you.
Call him in: 'twill be a good way: and to morrow the wraſtling is.
Good morrow to your worſhip.
Good Mounſier Charles: what's the new newes at the new Court?
There's no newes at the Court Sir, but the olde newes: that is, the old Duke is baniſhed by his yonger brother the new Duke, and three or foure louing Lords haue put themſelues into voluntary exile with him, whoſe lands and reuenues enrich the new Duke, therefore he giues them good leaue to wander.
Can you tell if Roſalind the Dukes daughter bee baniſhed with her Father?
O no; for the Dukes daughter her Coſen ſo loues her, being euer from their Cradles bred together, that hee would haue followed her exile, or haue died to ſtay behind her; ſhe is at the Court, and no leſſe beloued of her Vncle, then his owne daughter, and neuer two Ladies loued as they doe.
Where will the old Duke liue?
They ſay hee is already in the Forreſt of Arden, and a many merry men with him; and there they liue like the old Robin Hood of England: they ſay many yong Gentlemen flocke to him euery day, and fleet the time careleſly as they did in the golden world.
What, you wraſtle to morrow before the new Duke.
Marry doe I ſir: and I came to acquaint you with a matter: I am giuen ſir ſecretly to vnderſtand, that your yonger brother Orlando hath a diſpoſition to come in diſguis'd againſt mee to try a fall: to morrow ſir I wraſtle for my credit, and hee that eſcapes me without ſome broken limbe, ſhall acquit him well: your brother is but young and tender, and for your loue I would bee loth to foyle him, as I muſt for my owne honour if hee come in: therefore out of my loue to you, I came hither to acquaint you withall, that either you might ſtay him from his intendment, or brooke ſuch diſgrace well as he ſhall runne into, in that it is a thing of his owne ſearch, and altogether againſt my will.
Charles, I thanke thee for thy loue to me, which thou ſhalt finde I will moſt kindly require: I had my ſelfe notice of my Brothers purpoſe heerein, and haue by vnder-hand meanes laboured to diſſwade him from it; but he is reſolute. Ile tell thee Charles, it is the ſtubborneſt yong fellow of France, full of ambition, an enuious emulator of euery mans good parts, a ſecret & villanous contriuer againſt mee his naturall brother: therefore vſe thy diſcretion, I had as lieſe thou didſt breake his necke as his finger. And thou wert beſt looke to't; for if thou doſt him any ſlight diſgrace, or if hee doe not mightilie grace himſelfe on thee, hee will practiſe againſt thee by poyſon, entrap thee by ſome treacherous deuiſe, and neuer leaue thee till he hath tane thy life by ſome indirect meanes or other: for I aſſure thee, (and almoſt with teares I ſpeake it) there is not one ſo young, and ſo villanous this day liuing. I ſpeake but brotherly of him, but ſhould I anathomize him to thee, as hee is, I muſt bluſh, and weepe, and thou muſt looke pale and wonder.
I am heartily glad I came hither to you: if hee come to morrow, Ile giue him his payment: if euer hee goe alone againe, Ile neuer wraſtle for prize more: and ſo God keepe your worſhip.
Farewell good Charles. Now will I ſtirre this Gameſter: I hope I ſhall ſee an end of him; for my ſoule (yet I know not why) hates nothing more then he: yet hee's gentle, neuer ſchool'd, and yet learned, full of noble deuiſe, of all ſorts enchantingly beloued, and indeed ſo much in the heart of the world, and eſpecially of my owne people, who beſt know him, that I am altogether miſpriſed: but it ſhall not be ſo long, this wraſtler ſhall cleare all: nothing remaines, but that I kindle the boy thither, which now Ile goe about.
I pray thee Roſalind, ſweet my Coz, be merry.
Deere Cellia; I ſhow more mirth then I am miſtreſſe of, and would you yet were merrier: vnleſſe you could teach me to forget a baniſhed father, you muſt not learne mee how to remember any extraordinary pleaſure.
Heerein I ſee thou lou'ſt mee not with the full waight that I loue thee; if my Vncle thy baniſhed father had baniſhed thy Vncle the Duke my Father, ſo thou hadſt beene ſtill with mee, I could haue taught my loue to take thy father for mine; ſo wouldſt thou, if the truth of thy loue to me were ſo righteouſly temper'd, as mine is to thee.
Well, I will forget the condition of my eſtate, to reioyce in yours.
You know my Father hath no childe, but I, nor none is like to haue; and truely when he dies, thou ſhalt be his heire; for what hee hath taken away from thy father perforce, I will render thee againe in affection: by mine honor I will, and when I breake that oath, let mee turne monſter: therefore my ſweet Roſe, my deare Roſe, be merry.
From henceforth I will Coz, and deuiſe ſports: let me ſee, what thinke you of falling in Loue?
Marry I prethee doe, to make ſport withall: but loue no man in good earneſt, nor no further in ſport neyther; then with ſafety of a pure bluſh, thou maiſt in honor come off againe.
What ſhall be our ſport then?
Let vs ſit and mocke the good houſwife Fortune from her wheele, that her gifts may henceforth bee beſtowed equally.
I would wee could doe ſo: for her benefits are mightily miſplaced, and the bountifull blinde woman doth moſt miſtake in her gifts to women.
'Tis true, for thoſe that ſhe makes faire, ſhe ſcarce makes honeſt, & thoſe that ſhe makes honeſt, ſhe makes very ill fauouredly.
Nay now thou goeſt from Fortunes office to Natures: Fortune reignes in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments of Nature.
No; when Nature hath made a faire creature, may ſhe not by Fortune fall into the fire? though nature hath giuen vs wit to flout at Fortune, hath not Fortune ſent in this foole to cut off the argument?
Indeed there is fortune too hard for nature, when fortune makes natures naturall, the cutter off of natures witte.
Peraduenture this is not Fortunes work neither, but Natures, who perceiueth our naturall wits too dull to reaſon of ſuch goddeſſes, hath ſent this Naturall for our whetſtone▪ for alwaies the dulneſſe of the foole, is the whetſtone of the wits. How now Witte, whether wander you?
Miſtreſſe, you muſt come away to your father.
Were you made the meſſenger?
No by mine honor, but I was bid to come for you
Where learned you that oath foole?
Of a certaine Knight, that ſwore by his Honour they were good Pan-cakes, and ſwore by his Honor the Muſtard was naught: Now Ile ſtand to it, the Pancakes were naught, and the Muſtard was good, and yet was not the Knight forſworne.
How proue you that in the great heape of your knowledge?
I marry, now vnmuzzle your wiſedome.
Stand you both forth now: ſtroke your chinnes, and ſweare by your beards that I am a knaue.
By our beards (if we had them) thou art.
By my knauerie (if I had it) then I were: but if you ſweare by that that is not, you are not forſworn: no more was this knight ſwearing by his Honor, for he neuer had anie; or if he had, he had ſworne it away, before euer he ſaw thoſe Pancakes, or that Muſtard.
Prethee, who is't that thou means't?
One that old Fredericke your Father loues.
My Fathers loue is enough to honor him enough; ſpeake no more of him, you'l be whipt for taxation one of theſe daies.
The more pittie that fooles may not ſpeak wiſely, what Wiſemen do fooliſhly.
By my troth thou ſaieſt true: For, ſince the little wit that fooles haue was ſilenced, the little foolerie that wiſe men haue makes a great ſhew; Heere comes Monſieur the Beu.
With his mouth full of newes.
Which he vvill put on vs, as Pigeons feed their young.
Then ſhal we be newes-cram'd.
All the better: we ſhalbe the more Marketable. Boon-iour Monſieur le Beu, what's the newes?
Faire Princeſſe, you haue loſt much good ſport.
Sport: of what colour?
What colour Madame? How ſhall I aunſwer you?
As wit and fortune will.
Or as the deſtinies decrees.
Well ſaid, that was laid on with a trowell.
Nay, if I keepe not my ranke.
Thou looſeſt thy old ſmell.
You amaze me Ladies: I would haue told you of good wraſtling, which you haue loſt the ſight of.
Yet tell vs the manner of the Wraſtling.
I wil tell you the beginning: and if it pleaſe your Ladiſhips, you may ſee the end, for the beſt is yet to doe, and heere where you are, they are comming to performe it.
Well, the beginning that is dead and buried.
There comes an old man, and his three ſons.
I could match this beginning with an old tale.
Three proper yong men, of excellent growth and preſence.
With bils on their neckes: Be it knowne vnto all men by theſe preſents.
The eldeſt of the three, wraſtled with Charles the Dukes Wraſtler, which Charles in a moment threw him, and broke three of his ribbes, that there is little hope of life in him: So he ſeru'd the ſecond, and ſo the third: yonder they lie, the poore old man their Father, making ſuch pittiful dole ouer them, that all the beholders take his part with weeping.
Alas.
But what is the ſport Monſieur, that the Ladies haue loſt?
Why this that I ſpeake of.
Thus men may grow wiſer euery day. It is the firſt time that euer I heard breaking of ribbes was ſport for Ladies.
Or I, I promiſe thee.
But is there any elſe longs to ſee this broken Muſicke in his ſides? Is there yet another doates vpon rib-breaking? Shall we ſee this wraſtling Coſin?
You muſt if you ſtay heere, for heere is the place appointed for the wraſtling, and they are ready to performe it.
Yonder ſure they are comming. Let vs now ſtay and ſee it.
Come on, ſince the youth will not be intreated
His owne perill on his forwardneſſe.
Is yonder the man?
Euen he, Madam.
Alas, he is too yong: yet he looks ſucceſſefully
How now daughter, and Couſin:
Are you crept hither to ſee the wraſtling?
I my Liege, ſo pleaſe you giue vs leaue.
You wil take little delight in it, I can tell you there is ſuch oddes in the man: In pitie of the challengers youth, I would faine diſſwade him, but he will not bee entreated. Speake to him Ladies, ſee if you can mooue him.
Call him hether good Monſieuer Le Beu.
Do ſo: Ile not be by.
Monſieur the Challenger, the Princeſſe cals for you.
I attend them with all reſpect and dutie.
Young man, haue you challeng'd Charles the Wraſtler?
No faire Princeſſe: he is the generall challenger, I come but in as others do, to try with him the ſtrength of my youth.
Yong Gentleman, your ſpirits are too bold for your yeares: you haue ſeene cruell proofe of this mans ſtrength, if you ſaw your ſelfe with your eies, or knew your ſelfe with your iudgment, the feare of your aduenture would counſel you to a more equall enterpriſe. We pray you for your owne ſake to embrace your own ſafetie, and giue ouer this attempt.
Do yong Sir, your reputation ſhall not therefore be miſpriſed: we wil make it our ſuite to the Duke, that the wraſtling might not go forward.
I beſeech you, puniſh mee not with your harde thoughts, wherein I confeſſe me much guiltie to denie ſo faire and excellent Ladies anie thing. But let your faire eies, and gentle wiſhes go with mee to my triall; wherein if I bee foil'd, there is but one ſham'd that vvas neuer gracious: if kil'd, but one dead that is willing to be ſo: I ſhall do my friends no wrong, for I haue none to lament me: the world no iniurie, for in it I haue nothing: onely in the world I fil vp a place, which may bee better ſupplied, when I haue made it emptie.
The little ſtrength that I haue, I would it vvere with you.
And mine to eeke out hers.
Fare you well: praie heauen I be deceiu'd in you.
Your hearts deſires be with you.
Come, where is this yong gallant, that is ſo deſirous to lie with his mother earth?
Readie Sir, but his will hath in it a more modeſt working.
You ſhall trie but one fall.
No, I warrant your Grace you ſhall not entreat him to a ſecond, that haue ſo mightilie perſwaded him from a firſt.
You meane to mocke me after: you ſhould not haue mockt me before: but come your waies.
Now Hercules, be thy ſpeede yong man.
I would I were inuiſible, to catch the ſtrong fellow by the legge.
Oh excellent yong man.
If I had a thunderbolt in mine eie, I can tell who ſhould downe.
No more, no more.
Yes I beſeech your Grace, I am not yet well breath'd.
How do'ſt thou Charles?
He cannot ſpeake my Lord.
Beare him awaie:
What is thy name yong man?
Orlando my Liege, the yongeſt ſonne of Sir Roland de Boys.
I would thou hadſt beene ſon to ſome man elſe,
The world eſteem'd thy father honourable,
But I did finde him ſtill mine enemie:
Thou ſhould'ſt haue better pleas'd me with this deede,
Hadſt thou deſcended from another houſe:
But fare thee well, thou art a gallant youth,
I would thou had'ſt told me of another Father.
Were I my Father (Coze) would I do this?
I am more proud to be Sir Rolands ſonne,
His yongeſt ſonne, and would not change that calling
To be adopted heire to Fredricke.
My Father lou'd Sir Roland as his ſoule,
And all the world was of my Fathers minde,
Had I before knowne this yong man his ſonne,
I ſhould haue giuen him teares vnto entreaties,
Ere he ſhould thus haue ventur'd.
Gentle Coſen,
Let vs goe thanke him, and encourage him:
My Fathers rough and enuious diſpoſition
Sticks me at heart: Sir, you haue well deſeru'd,
If you doe keepe your promiſes in loue;
But iuſtly as you haue exceeded all promiſe,
Your Miſtris ſhall be happie.
Gentleman,
Weare this for me: one out of ſuites with fortune
That could giue more, but that her hand lacks meanes.
Shall we goe Coze?
I: fare you well faire Gentleman.
Can I not ſay, I thanke you? My better parts
Are all throwne downe, and that which here ſtands vp
Is but a quintine, a meere liueleſſe blocke.
He cals vs back: my pride fell with my fortunes,
Ile aske him what he would: Did you call Sir?
Sir, you haue wraſtled well, and ouerthrowne
More then your enemies.
Will you goe Coze?
Haue with you: fare you well.
What paſſion hangs theſe waights vpō my toong?
I cannot ſpeake to her, yet ſhe vrg'd conference.
O poore Orlando! thou art ouerthrowne
Or Charles, or ſomething weaker maſters thee.
Good Sir, I do in friendſhip counſaile you
Te leaue this place; Albeit you haue deſeru'd
High commendation, true applauſe, and loue;
Yet ſuch is now the Dukes condition,
That he miſconſters all that you haue done:
The Duke is humorous, what he is indeede
More ſuites you to conceiue, then I to ſpeake of.
I thanke you Sir; and pray you tell me this,
Which of the two was daughter of the Duke,
That here was at the Wraſtling?
Neither his daughter, if we iudge by manners,
But yet indeede the taller is his daughter,
The other is daughter to the baniſh'd Duke,
And here detain'd by her vſurping Vncle
To keepe his daughter companie, whoſe loues
Are deerer then the naturall bond of Siſters:
But I can tell you, that of late this Duke
Hath tane diſpleaſure 'gainſt his gentle Neece,
Grounded vpon no other argument,
But that the people praiſe her for her vertues,
And pittie her, for her good Fathers ſake;
And on my life his malice 'gainſt the Lady
Will ſodainly breake forth: Sir, fare you well,
Hereafter in a better world then this,
I ſhall deſire more loue and knowledge of you.
I reſt much bounden to you: fare you well.
Thus muſt I from the ſmoake into the ſmother,
From tyrant Duke, vnto a tyrant Brother.
But heauenly Roſaline.
Why Coſen, why Roſaline: Cupid haue mercie,
Not a word?
Not one to throw at a dog.
No, thy words are too precious to be caſt away vpon curs, throw ſome of them at me; come lame mee with reaſons.
Then there were two Coſens laid vp, when the one ſhould be lam'd with reaſons, and the other mad without any.
But is all this for your Father?
No, ſome of it is for my childes Father: Oh how full of briers is this working day world.
They are but burs, Coſen, throwne vpon thee in holiday foolerie, if we walke not in the trodden paths our very petty-coates will catch them.
I could ſhake them off my coate, theſe burs are in my heart.
Hem them away.
I would try if I could cry hem, and haue him.
Come, come, wraſtle with thy affections.
O they take the part of a better wraſtler then my ſelfe.
O, a good wiſh vpon you: you will trie in time in diſpight of a fall: but turning theſe ieſts out of ſeruice, let vs talke in good earneſt: Is it poſſible on ſuch a ſodaine, you ſhould fall into ſo ſtrong a liking with old Sir Roulands yongeſt ſonne?
The Duke my Father lou'd his Father deerelie.
Doth it therefore enſue that you ſhould loue his Sonne deerelie? By this kinde of chaſe, I ſhould hate him, for my father hated his father deerely; yet I hate not Orlando.
No faith, hate him not for my ſake.
Why ſhould I not? doth he not deſerue well?
Let me loue him for that, and do you loue him
Becauſe I doe. Looke, here comes the Duke.
With his eies full of anger.
Miſtris, diſpatch you with your ſafeſt haſte,
And get you from our Court.
Me Vncle.
You Coſen,
Within theſe ten daies if that thou beeſt found
So neere our publike Court as twentie miles,
Thou dieſt ſor it.
I doe beſeech your Grace
Let me the knowledge of my fault beare with me:
If with my ſelfe I hold intelligence,
Or haue acquaintance with mine owne deſires,
If that I doe not dreame, or be not franticke,
(As I doe truſt I am not) then deere Vncle,
Neuer ſo much as in a thought vnborne,
Did I offend your highneſſe.
Thus doe all Traitors,
If their purgation did conſiſt in words,
They are as innocent as grace it ſelfe;
Let it ſuffice thee that I truſt thee not.
Yet your miſtruſt cannot make me a Traitor;
Tell me whereon the likelihoods depends?
Thou art thy Fathers daughter, there's enough.
So was I when your highnes took his Dukdome,
So was I when your highneſſe baniſht him;
Treaſon is not inherited my Lord,
Or if we did deriue it from our friends,
What's that to me, my Father was no Traitor,
Then good my Leige, miſtake me not ſo much,
To thinke my pouertie is treacherous.
Deere Soueraigne heare me ſpeake.
I Celia, we ſtaid her for your ſake,
Elſe had ſhe with her Father rang'd along.
I did not then intreat to haue her ſtay.
It was your pleaſure, and your owne remorſe,
I was too yong that time to value her,
But now I know her: if ſhe be a Traitor,
Why ſo am I: we ſtill haue ſlept together,
Roſe at an inſtant, learn'd, plaid, eate together,
And whereſoere we went, like Iunos Swans,
Still we went coupled and inſeperable.
She is too ſubtile for thee, and her ſmoothnes;
Her verie ſilence, and per patience,
Speake to the people, and they pittie her:
Thou art a foole, ſhe robs thee of thy name,
And thou wilt ſhow more bright, & ſeem more vertuous
When ſhe is gone: then open not thy lips
Firme, and irreuocable is my doombe,
Which I haue paſt vpon her, ſhe is baniſh'd.
Pronounce that ſentence then on me my Leige,
I cannot liue out of her companie.
You are a foole: you Neice prouide your ſelfe,
If you out-ſtay the time, vpon mine honor,
And in the greatneſſe of my word you die.
O my poore Roſaline, whether wilt thou goe?
Wilt thou change Fathers? I will giue thee mine:
I charge thee be not thou more grieu'd then I am.
I haue more cauſe.
Thou haſt not Coſen,
Prethee be cheerefull; know'ſt thou not the Duke
Hath baniſh'd me his daughter?
That he hath not.
No, hath not? Roſaline lacks then the loue
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one,
Shall we be ſundred? ſhall we part ſweete girle?
No, let my Father ſeeke another heire:
Therefore deuiſe with me how we may flie
Whether to goe, and what to beare with vs,
And doe not ſeeke to take your change vpon you,
To beare your griefes your ſelfe, and leaue me out:
For by this heauen, now at our ſorrowes pale;
Say what thou canſt, Ile goe along with thee.
Why, whether ſhall we goe?
To ſeeke my Vncle in the Forreſt of Arden.
Alas, what danger will it be to vs,
(Maides as we are) to trauell forth ſo farre?
Beautie prouoketh theeues ſooner then gold.
Ile put my ſelfe in poore and meane attire,
And with a kinde of vmber ſmirch my face,
The like doe you, ſo ſhall we paſſe along,
And neuer ſtir aſſailants.
Were it not better,
Becauſe that I am more then common tall,
That I did ſuite me all points like a man,
A gallant curtelax vpon my thigh,
A bore-ſpeare in my hand, and in my heart
Lye there what hidden womans feare there will,
Weele haue a ſwaſhing and a marſhall outſide,
As manie other manniſh cowards haue,
That doe outface it with their ſemblances.
What ſhall I call thee when thou art a man?
Ile haue no worſe a name then Ioues owne Page,
And therefore looke you call me Ganimed.
But what will you by call'd?
Something that hath a reference to my ſtate:
No longer Celia, but Aliena.
But Coſen, what if we aſſaid to ſteale
The clowniſh Foole out of your Fathers Court:
Would he not be a comfort to our trauaile?
Heele goe along ore the wide world with me,
Leaue me alone to woe him; Let's away
And get our Iewels and our wealth together,
Deuiſe the fitteſt time, and ſafeſt way
To hide vs from purſuite that will be made
After my flight: now goe in we content
To libertie, and not to baniſhment.
Now my Coe-mates, and brothers in exile:
Hath not old cuſtome made this life more ſweete
Then that of painted pompe? Are not theſe woods
More free from perill then the enuious Court?
Heere feele we not the penaltie of Adam,
The ſeaſons difference, as the I cie phange
And churliſh chiding of the winters winde,
Which when it bites and blowes vpon my body
Euen till I ſhrinke with cold, I ſmile, and ſay
This is no flattery: theſe are counſellors
That feelingly perſwade me what I am:
Sweet are the vſes of aduerſitie
Which like the toad, ougly and venemous,
Weares yet a precious Iewell in his head:
And this our life exempt from publike haunt,
Findes tongues in trees, bookes in the running brookes,
Sermons in ſtones, and good in euery thing.
I would not change it, happy is your Grace
That can tranſlate the ſtubbornneſſe of fortune
Into ſo quiet and ſo ſweet a ſtile.
Come, ſhall we goe and kill vs veniſon?
And yet it irkes me the poore dapled fooles
Being natiue Burgers of this deſert City,
Should in their owne confines with forked heads
Haue their round banches goard.
Indeed my Lord
The melancholy Iaques grieues at that,
And in that kinde ſweares you doe more vſurpe
Then doth your brother that hath baniſh'd you:
To day my Lord of Amiens, and my ſelfe,
Did ſteale behinde him as he lay along
Vnder an oake, whoſe anticke roote peepes out
Vpon the brooke that brawles along this wood,
To the which place a poore ſequeſtred Stag
That from the Hunters aime had tane a hurt,
Did come to languiſh; and indeed my Lord
The wretched annimall heau'd forth ſuch groanes
That their diſcharge did ſtretch his leatherne coat
Almoſt to burſting, and the big round teares
Cours'd one another downe his innocent noſe
In pitteous chaſe: and thus the hairie foole,
Much marked of the melancholie Iaques,
Stood on th' extremeſt verge of the ſwift brooke,
Augmenting it with teares.
But what ſaid Iaques?
Did he not moralize this ſpectacle?
O yes, into a thouſand ſimilies.
Firſt, for his weeping into the needleſſe ſtreame;
Poore Deere quoth he, thou mak'ſt a teſtament
As worldlings doe, giuing thy ſum of more
To that which had too muſt: then being there alone,
Left and abandoned of his veluet friend;
'Tis right quoth he, thus miſerie doth part
The Fluxe of companie: anon a careleſſe Heard
Full of the paſture, iumps along by him
And neuer ſtai to greet him: I quoth Iaques,
Sweepe on you fat and greazie Citizens,
'Tis iuſt the faſhion; wherefore doe you looke
Vpon that poore and broken bankrupt there?
Thus moſt inuectiuely he pierceth through
The body of Countrie, Citie, Court,
Yea, and of this our life, ſwearing that we
Are meere vſurpers, tyrants, and whats worſe
To fright the Annimals, and to kill them vp
In their aſſign'd and natiue dwelling place.
And did you leaue him in this contemplation?
We did my Lord, weeping and commenting
Vpon the ſobbing Deere.
Show me the place,
I loue to cope him in theſe ſullen fits,
For then he's full of matter.
Ile bring you to him ſtrait.
Can it be poſſible that no man ſaw them?
It cannot be, ſome villaines of my Court
Are of conſent and ſufferance in this.
I cannot heare of any that did ſee her,
The Ladies her attendants of her chamber
Saw her a bed, and in the morning early,
They found the bed vntreaſur'd of their Miſtris.
My Lord, the royniſh Clown, at whom ſo oft,
Your Grace was wont to laugh is alſo miſſing,
Hiſperia the Princeſſe Gentlewoman
Confeſſes that ſhe ſecretly ore-heard
Your daughter and her Coſen much commend
The parts and graces of the Wraſtler
That did but lately foile the ſynowie Charles,
And ſhe beleeues where euer they are gone
That youth is ſurely in their companie.
Send to his brother, fetch that gallant hither,
If he be abſent, bring his Brother to me,
Ile make him finde him: do this ſodainly;
And let not ſearch and inquiſition quaile,
To bring againe theſe fooliſh runawaies.
Who's there?
What my yong Maſter, oh my gentle maſter,
Oh my ſweet maſter, O you memorie
Of old Sir Rowland; why, what make you here?
Why are you vertuous? Why do people loue you?
And wherefore are you gentle, ſtrong, and valiant?
Why would you be ſo fond to ouercome
The bonnie priſer of the humorous Duke?
Your praiſe is come too ſwiftly home before you.
Know you not Maſter, to ſeeme kinde of men,
Their graces ſerue them but as enemies,
No more doe yours: your vertues gentle Maſter
Are ſanctified and holy traitors to you:
Oh what a world is this, when what is comely
Enuenoms him that beares it?
Why, what's the matter?
O vnhappie youth,
Come not within theſe doores: within this roofe
The enemie of all your graces liues
Your brother, no, no brother, yet the ſonne
(Yet not the ſon, I will not call him ſon)
Of him I was about to call his Father,
Hath heard your praiſes, and this night he meanes,
To burne the lodging where you vſe to lye,
And you within it: if he faile of that
He will haue other meanes to cut you off;
I ouerheard him: and his practiſes:
This is no place, this houſe is but a butcherie;
Abhorre it, feare it, doe not enter it.
Why whether Adam would'ſt thou haue me go?
No matter whether, ſo you come not here.
What, would'ſt thou haue me go & beg my food,
Or with a baſe and boiſtrous Sword enforce
A theeuiſh liuing on the common rode?
This I muſt do, or know not what to do:
Yet this I will not do, do how I can,
I rather will ſubiect me to the malice
Of a diuerted blood, and bloudie brother.
But do not ſo: I haue fiue hundred Crownes,
The thriftie hire I ſaued vnder your Father,
Which I did ſtore to be my foſter Nurſe,
When ſeruice ſhould in my old limbs lie lame,
And vnregarded age in corners throwne,
Take that, and he that doth the Rauens feede,
Yea prouidently caters for the Sparrow,
Be comfort to my age: here is the gold,
All this I giue you, let me be your ſeruant,
Though I looke old, yet I am ſtrong and luſtie;
For in my youth I neuer did apply
Hot, and rebellious liquors in my bloud,
Nor did not with vnbaſhfull forehead woe,
The meanes of weakneſſe and debilitie,
Therefore my age is as a luſtie winter,
Froſtie, but kindely; let me goe with you,
Ile doe the ſeruice of a yonger man
In all your buſineſſe and neceſſities.
Oh good old man, how well in thee appeares
The conſtant ſeruice of the antique world,
When ſeruice ſweate for dutie, not for meede:
Thou art not for the faſhion of theſe times,
Where none will ſweate, but for promotion,
And hauing that do choake their ſeruice vp,
Euen with the hauing, it is not ſo with thee:
But poore old man, thou prun'ſt a rotten tree,
That cannot ſo much as a bloſſome yeelde,
In lieu of all thy paines and husbandrie,
But come thy waies, weele goe along together,
And ere we haue thy youthfull wages ſpent,
Weele light vpon ſome ſetled low content.
Maſter goe on, and I will follow thee
To the laſt gaſpe with truth and loyaltie,
From ſeauentie yeeres, till now almoſt foureſcore
Here liued I, but now liue here no more
At ſeauenteene yeeres, many their fortunes ſeeke
But at foureſcore, it is too late a weeke,
Yet fortune cannot recompence me better
Then to die well, and not my Maſters debter.
O Iupiter, how merry are my ſpirits?
I care not for my ſpirits, if my legges were not wearie.
I could finde in my heart to diſgrace my mans apparell, and to cry like a woman: but I muſt comfort the weaker veſſell, as doublet and hoſe ought to ſhow it ſelfe coragious to petty-coate; therefore courage, good Aliena.
I pray you beare with me, I cannot goe no further.
For my part, I had rather beare with you, then beare you: yet I ſhould beare no croſſe if I did beare you, for I thinke you haue no money in your purſe.
Well, this is the Forreſt of Arden.
I, now am I in Arden, the more foole I, when I was at home I was in a better place, but Trauellers muſt be content.
I, be ſo good Touchſtone: Look you, who comes here, a yong man and an old in ſolemne talke.
That is the way to make her ſcorne you ſtill.
Oh Corin, that thou knew'ſt how I do loue her.
I partly gueſſe: for I haue lou'd ere now.
No Corin, being old, thou canſt not gueſſe,
Though in thy youth thou waſt as true a louer
As euer ſigh'd vpon a midnight pillow:
But if thy loue were euer like to mine,
As ſure I thinke did neuer man loue ſo:
How many actions moſt ridiculous,
Haſt thou beene drawne to by thy fantaſie?
Into a thouſand that I haue forgotten.
Oh thou didſt then neuer loue ſo hartily,
If thou remembreſt not the ſlighteſt folly,
That euer loue did make thee run into,
Thou haſt not lou'd.
Or if thou haſt not ſat as I doe now,
Wearing thy hearer in thy Miſtris praiſe,
Thou haſt not lou'd.
Or if thou haſt not broke from companie,
Abruptly as my paſſion now makes me,
Thou haſt not lou'd.
O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe.
Alas poore Shepheard ſearching of they would,
I haue by hard aduenture found mine owne.
And I mine: I remember when I was in loue, I broke my ſword vpon a ſtone, and bid him take that for comming a night to Iane Smile, and I remember the kiſſing of her batler, and the Cowes dugs that her prettie chopt hands had milk'd; and I remember the wooing of a peaſcod inſtead of her, from whom I tooke two cods, and giuing her them againe, ſaid with weeping teares, weare theſe for my ſake: wee that are true Louers, runne into ſtrange capers; but as all is mortall in nature, ſo is all nature in loue, mortall in folly.
Thou ſpeak'ſt wiſer then thou art ware of.
Nay, I ſhall nere be ware of mine owne wit, till
I breake my ſhins againſt it.
Ioue, Ioue, this Shepherds paſſion,
Is much vpon my faſhion.
And mine, but it growes ſomething ſtale with mee.
I pray you, one of you queſtion yon'd man,
If he for gold will giue vs any foode,
I faint almoſt to death.
Holla; you Clowne.
Peace foole, he's not thy kinſman.
Who cals?
Your betters Sir.
Elſe are they very wretched.
Peace I ſay; good euen to your friend.
And to you gentle Sir, and to you all.
I prethee Shepheard, if that loue or gold
Can in this deſert place buy entertainment,
Bring vs where we may reſt our ſelues, and feed:
Here's a yong maid with trauaile much oppreſſed,
And faints for ſuccour.
Faire Sir, I pittie her,
And wiſh for her ſake more then for mine owne,
My fortunes were more able to releeue her;
But I am ſhepheard to another man,
And do not ſheere the Fleeces that I graze:
My maſter is of churliſh diſpoſition,
And little wreakes to finde the way to heauen
By doing deeds of hoſpitalitie.
Beſides his Coate, his Flockes, and bounds of feede
Are now on ſale, and at our ſheep-coat now
By reaſon of his abſence there is nothing
That you will feed on: but what is, come ſee,
And in my voice moſt welcome ſhall you be.
What is he that ſhall buy his flocke and paſture?
That yong Swaine that you ſaw heere but erewhile,
That little cares for buying any thing.
I pray thee, if it ſtand with honeſtie,
Buy thou the Cottage, paſture, and the flocke,
And thou ſhalt haue to pay for it of vs.
And we will mend thy wages:
I like this place, and willingly could
Waſte my time in it.
Aſſuredly the thing is to be ſold:
Go with me, if you like vpon report,
The ſoile, the profit, and this kinde of life,
I will your very faithfull Feeder be,
And buy it with your Gold right ſodainly.
Vnder the greene wood tree, who loues to lye with mee,
And turne his merrie Note, vnto the ſweet Birds throte:
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
Heere ſhall he ſee no enemie,
But Winter and rough Weather.
More, more, I pre'thee more.
It will make you melancholly Monſieur Iaques
I thanke it: More, I prethee more,
I can ſucke melancholly out of a ſong,
As a Weazel ſuckes egges: More, I pre'thee more.
My voice is ragged, I know I cannot pleaſe you.
I do not deſire you to pleaſe me,
I do deſire you to ſing:
Come, more, another ſtanzo: Cal you 'em ſtanzo's?
What you wil Monſieur Iaques.
Nay, I care not for their names, they owe mee nothing. Wil you ſing?
More at your requeſt, then to pleaſe my ſelfe.
Well then, if euer I thanke any man, Ile thanke you: but that they cal complement is like th' encounter of two dog-Apes. And when a man thankes me hartily, me thinkes I haue giuen him a penie, and he renders me the beggerly thankes. Come ſing; and you that wil not hold your tongues.
Wel, Ile end the ſong. Sirs, couer the while, the Duke wil drinke vnder this tree; he hath bin all this day to looke you.
And I haue bin all this day to auoid him:
He is too diſputeable for my companie:
I thinke of as many matters as he, but I giue
Heauen thankes, and make no boaſt of them.
Come, warble, come.
Who doth ambition ſhunne, and loues to liue i' th Sunne:
Seeking the food he eates, and pleas'd with what he gets:
Come hither, come hither, come hither,
Heere ſhall he ſee. &c.
Ile giue you a verſe to this note,
That I made yeſterday in deſpight of my Inuention.
And Ile ſing it.
Thus it goes.
If it do come to paſſe, that any man turne Aſſe:
Leauing his wealth and eaſe,
A ſtubborne will to pleaſe,
Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame:
Heere ſhall he ſee, groſſe fooles as he,
And if he will come to me.
What's that Ducdame?
'Tis a Greeke inuocation, to call fools into a circle. Ile go ſleepe if I can: if I cannot, Ile raile againſt all the firſt borne of Egypt.
And Ile go ſeeke the Duke,
His banket is prepar'd.
Deere Maſter, I can go no further:
O I die for food. Heere lie I downe,
And meaſure out my graue. Farwel kinde maſter.
Why how now Adam? No greater heart in thee:
Liue a little, comfort a little, cheere thy ſelfe a little.
If this vncouth Forreſt yeeld any thing ſauage,
I wil either be food for it, or bring it for foode to thee:
Thy conceite is neerer death, then thy powers.
For my ſake be comfortable, hold death a while
At the armes end: I wil heere be with thee preſently,
And if I bring thee not ſomething to eate,
I wil giue thee leaue to die: but if thou dieſt
Before I come, thou art a mocker of my labor.
Wel ſaid, thou look'ſt cheerely,
And Ile be with thee quickly: yet thou lieſt
In the bleake aire. Come, I wil beare thee
To ſome, ſhelter, and thou ſhalt not die
For lacke of a dinner,
If there liue any thing in this Deſert.
Cheerely good Adam.
I thinke he be transform'd into a beaſt,
For I can no where finde him, like a man.
My Lord, he is but euen now gone hence,
Heere was he merry, hearing of a Song.
If he compact of iarres, grow Muſicall,
We ſhall haue ſhortly diſcord in the Spheares:
Go ſeeke him, tell him I would ſpeake with him.
He ſaues my labor by his owne approach.
Why how now Monſieur, what a life is this
That your poore friends muſt woe your companie,
What, you looke merrily.
A Foole, a foole: I met a foole i' th Forreſt,
A motley Foole (a miſerable world:)
As I do liue by foode, I met a foole,
Who laid him downe, and bask'd him in the Sun,
And rail'd on Lady Fortune in good termes,
In good ſet termes, and yet a motley foole.
Good morrow foole (quoth I:) no Sir, quoth he,
Call me not foole, till heauen hath ſent me fortune,
And then he drew a diall from his poake,
And looking on it, with lacke-luſtre eye,
Sayes, very wiſely, it is ten a clocke:
Thus we may ſee (quoth he) how the world wagges:
'Tis but an houre agoe, ſince it was nine,
And after one houre more, 'twill be eleuen,
And ſo from houre to houre, we ripe, and ripe,
And then from houre to houre, we rot, and rot,
And thereby hangs a tale. When I did heare
The motley Foole, thus morall on the time,
My Lungs began to crow like Chanticleere,
That Fooles ſhould be ſo deepe contemplatiue:
And I did laugh, ſans intermiſſion
An houre by his diall. Oh noble foole,
A worthy foole: Motley's the onely weare.
What foole is this?
O worthie Foole: One that hath bin a Courtier
And ſayes, if Ladies be but yong, and faire,
They haue the gift to know it: and in his braiue,
Which is as drie as the remainder bisket
After a voyage: He hath ſtrange places cram'd
With obſeruation, the which he vents
In mangled formes. O that I were a foole,
I am ambitious for a motley coat.
Thou ſhalt haue one.
It is my onely suite,
Prouided that you weed your better iudgements
Of all opinion that growes ranke in them,
That I am wiſe. I muſt haue liberty
Wiithall, as large a Charter as the winde,
To blow on whom I pleaſe, for ſo fooles haue:
And they that are moſt gauled with my folly,
They moſt muſt laugh: And why ſir muſt they ſo?
The why is plaine, as way to Pariſh Church:
Hee, that a Foole doth very wiſely hit,
Doth very fooliſhly, although he ſmart
Seeme ſenſeleſſe of the bob. If not,
The Wiſe-mans folly is anathomiz'd
Euen by the ſquandring glances of the foole.
Inueſt me in my motley: Giue me leaue
To ſpeake my minde, and I will through and through
Cleanſe the foule bodie of th' infected world,
If they will patiently receiue my medicine.
Fie on thee. I can tell what thou wouldſt do.
What, for a Counter, would I do, but good?
Moſt miſcheeuous foule ſin, in chiding ſin:
For thou thy ſelfe haſt bene a Libertine,
As ſenſuall as the brutiſh ſting it ſelfe,
And all th' imboſſed ſores, and headed euils,
That thou with licenſe of free foot haſt caught,
Would'ſt thou diſgorge into the generall world.
Why who cries out on pride,
That can therein taxe any priuate party:
Doth it not flow as hugely as the Sea,
Till that the wearie verie meanes do ebbe.
What woman in the Citie do I name,
When that I ſay the City woman beares
The coſt of Princes on vnworthy ſhoulders?
Who can come in, and ſay that I meane her,
When ſuch a one as ſhee, ſuch is her neighbor?
Or what is he of baſeſt function,
That ſayes his brauerie is not on my coſt,
Thinking that I meane him, but therein ſuites
His folly to the mettle of my ſpeech,
There then, how then, what then, let me ſee wherein
My tongue hath wrong'd him: if it do him right,
Then he hath wrong'd himſelfe: if he be free,
why then my taxing like a wild-gooſe flies
Vnclaim'd of any▪ man But who come here?
Forbeare, and eate no more.
Why I haue eate none yet.
Nor ſhalt not, till neceſſity be ſeru'd.
Of what kinde ſhould this Cocke come of?
Art thou thus bolden'd man by thy diſtres?
Or elſe a rude deſpiſer of good manners,
That in ciuility thou ſeem'ſt ſo emptie?
You touch'd my veine at firſt, the thorny point
Of bare diſtreſſe, hath tane from me the ſhew
Of ſmooth ciuility: yet am I in-land bred,
And know ſome nourture: But forbeare, I ſay,
He dies that touches any of this fruite,
Till I, and my affaires are anſwered.
And you will not be anſwer'd with reaſon,
I muſt dye.
What would you haue?
Your gentleneſſe ſhall force, more then your force
Moue vs to gentleneſſe.
I almoſt die for food, and let me haue it.
Sit downe and feed, & welcom to our table
Speake you ſo gently? Pardon me I pray you,
I thought that all things had bin ſauage heere,
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of ſterne command'ment. But what ere you are
That in this deſert inacceſſible,
Vnder the ſhade of melancholly boughes,
Looſe, and neglect the creeping houres of time:
If euer you haue look'd on better dayes:
If euer beene where bels haue knoll'd to Church:
If euer ſate at any good mans feaſt:
If euer from your eye-lids wip'd a teare,
And know what 'tis to pittie, and be pittied:
Let gentleneſſe my ſtrong enforcement be,
In the which hope, I bluſh, and hide my Sword.
True is it, that we haue ſeene better dayes,
And haue with holy bell bin knowld to Church,
And ſat at good mens feaſts, and wip'd our eies
Of drops, that ſacred pity hath engendred:
And therefore ſit you downe in gentleneſſe,
And take vpon command, what helpe we haue
That to your wanting may be miniſtred.
Then but forbeare your food a little while:
Whiles (like a Doe) I go to finde my Fawne,
And giue it food. There is an old poore man,
Who after me, hath many a weary ſteppe
Limpt in pure loue: till he be firſt ſuffic'd,
Oppreſt with two weake euils, age, and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.
Go finde him out.
And we will nothing waſte till you returne.
I thanke ye, and be bleſt for your good comfort.
Thou ſeeſt, we are not all alone vnhappie:
This wide and vniuerſall Theater
Preſents more wofull Pageants then the Sceane
Wherein we play in.
All the world's a ſtage,
And all the men and women, meerely Players;
They haue their Exits and their Entrances,
And one man in his time playes many parts,
His Acts being ſeuen ages. At firſt the Infant,
Mewling, and puking in the Nurſes armes:
Then, the whining Schoole-boy with his Satchell
And ſhining morning face, creeping like ſnaile
Vnwillingly to ſchoole. And then the Louer,
Sighing like Furnace, with a wofull ballad
Made to his Miſtreſſe eye-brow. Then, a Soldier,
Full of ſtrange oaths, and bearded like the Pard,
Ielous in honor, ſodaine, and quicke in quarrell,
Seeking the bubble Reputation
Euen in the Canons mouth: And then, the Iuſtice,
In faire round belly, with good Capon lin'd,
With eyes ſeuere, and beard of formall cut,
Full of wiſe ſawes, and moderne inſtances,
And ſo he playes his part. The ſixt age ſhifts
Into the leane and ſlipper'd Pantaloone,
With ſpectacles on noſe, and pouch on ſide,
His youthfull hoſe well ſau'd, a world too wide,
For his ſhrunke ſhanke, and his bigge manly voice,
Turning againe toward childiſh trebble pipes,
And whiſtles in his ſound. Laſt Scene of all,
That ends this ſtrange euentfull hiſtorie,
Is ſecond childiſhneſſe, and meere obliuion,
Sans teeth, ſans eyes, ſans taſte, ſans euery thing.
Welcome: ſet downe your venerable burthen, and let him feede.
I thanke you moſt for him.
So had you neede,
I ſcarce can ſpeake to thanke you for my ſelfe.
Welcome, fall too: I wil not trouble you,
As yet to queſtion you about your fortunes:
Giue vs ſome Muſicke, and good Cozen, ſing.
Blow, blow, thou winter wind,
Thou art not ſo vnkinde, as mans ingratitude
Thy tooth is not ſo keene, becauſe thou art not ſeene, although thy breath be rude.
Heigh ho, ſing heigh ho, vnto the greene holly,
Moſt frendſhip, is fayning; moſt Louing, meere folly:
The heigh ho, the holly,
This Life is moſt iolly.
Freize, freize, thou bitter skie that doſt not bight ſo nigh as benefitts forgot:
Though thou the waters warpe, thy ſting is not ſo ſharpe, as freind remembred not.
Heigh ho, ſing, &c.
If that you were the good Sir Rowlands ſon,
As you haue whiſper'd faithfully you were,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witneſſe,
Moſt truly limn'd, and liuing in your face,
Be truly welcome hither: I am the Duke
That lou'd your Father, the reſidue of your fortune,
Go to my Caue, and tell mee, Good old man,
Thou art right welcome, as thy maſters is:
Support him by the arme: giue me your hand,
And let me all your fortunes vnderſtand.
Not ſee him ſince? Sir, ſir, that cannot be:
But were I not the better part made mercie,
I ſhould not ſeeke an abſent argument
Of my reuenge, thou preſent: but looke to it,
Finde out thy brother whereſoere he is,
Seeke him with Candle: bring him dead, or liuing
Within this tweluemonth, or turne thou no more
To ſeeke a liuing in our Territorie.
Thy Lands and all things that thou doſt call thine,
Worth ſeizure, do we ſeize into our hands,
Till thou canſt quit thee by thy brothers mouth,
Of what we thinke againſt thee.
Oh that your Highneſſe knew my heart in this:
I neuer lou'd my brother in my life.
More villaine thou. Well puſh him out of dores
And let my officers of ſuch a nature
Make an extent vpon his houſe and Lands:
Do this expediently, and turne him going.
Hang there my verſe, in witneſſe of my loue,
And thou thrice crowned Queene of night ſuruey
With thy chaſte eye, from thy pale ſpheare aboue
Thy Huntreſſe name, that my full life doth ſway.
O Roſalind, theſe Trees ſhall be my Bookes,
And in their barkes my thoughts Ile charracter,
That euerie eye, which in this Forreſt lookes,
Shall ſee thy vertue witneſt euery where.
Run, run Orlando, carue on euery Tree,
The faire, the chaſte, and vnexpreſſiue ſhee.
And how like you this ſhepherds life Mr Touchſtone?
Truely Shepheard, in reſpect of it ſelfe, it is a good life; but in reſpect that it is a ſhepheards life, it is naught. In reſpect that it is ſolitary, I like it verie well: but in reſpect that it is priuate, it is a very vild life. Now in reſpect it is in the fields, it pleaſeth mee well: but in reſpect it is not in the Court, it is tedious. As it is a ſpare life (looke you) it fits my humor well: but as there is no more plentie in it, it goes much againſt my ſtomacke. Has't any Philoſophie in thee ſhepheard?
No more, but that I know the more one ſickens, the worſe at eaſe he is: and that hee that wants money, meanes, and content, is without three good frends. That the propertie of raine is to wet, and fire to burne: That pood paſture makes fat ſheepe: and that a great cauſe of the night, is lacke of the Sunne: That hee that hath learned no wit by Nature, nor Art, may complaine of good breeding, or comes of a very dull kindred.
Such a one is a naturall Philoſopher:
Was't euer in Court, Shepheard?
No truly.
Then thou art damn'd.
Nay, I hope.
Truly thou art damn'd, like an ill roaſted Egge, all on one ſide.
For not being at Court? your reaſon.
Why, if thou neuer was't at Court, thou neuer ſaw'ſt good manners: if thou neuer ſaw'ſt good maners, then thy manners muſt be wicked, and wickednes is ſin, and ſinne is damnation: Thou art in a parlous ſtate ſhepheard.
Not a whit Touchſtone, thoſe that are good maners at the Court, are as ridiculous in the Countrey, as the behauiour of the Countrie is moſt mockeable at the Court. You told me, you ſalute not at the Court, but you kiſſe your hands; that courteſie would be vncleanlie if Courtiers were ſhepheards.
Inſtance, briefly: come, inſtance.
Why we are ſtill handling our Ewes, and their
Fels you know are greaſie.
Why do not your Courtiers hands ſweate? and is not the greaſe of a Mutton, as wholeſome as the ſweat of a man? Shallow, ſhallow: A better inſtance I ſay: Come.
Beſides, our hands are hard.
Your lips wil feele them the ſooner. Shallow agen: a more ſounder inſtance, come.
And they are often tarr'd ouer, with the ſurgery of our ſheepe: and would you haue vs kiſſe Tarre? The Courtiers hands are perfum'd with Ciuet.
Moſt ſhallow man: Thou wormes meate in reſpect of a good peece of fleſh indeed: learne of the wiſe and perpend: Ciuet is of a baſer birth then Tarre, the verie vncleanly fluxe of a Cat. Mend the inſtance Shepheard.
You haue too Courtly a wit for me, Ile reſt.
Wilt thou reſt damn'd? God helpe thee ſhallow man: God make inciſion in thee, thou art raw.
Sir, I am a true Labourer, I earne that I eate: get that I weare; owe no man hate, enuie no mans happineſſe: glad of other mens good content with my harme: and the greateſt of my pride, is to ſee my Ewes graze, & my Lambes ſucke.
That is another ſimple ſinne in you, to bring the Ewes and the Rammes together, and to offer to get your liuing, by the copulation of Cattle, to be baw'd to a Belweather, and to betray a ſhee-Lambe of a tweluemonth to a crooked-pated olde Cuckoldly Ramme, out of all reaſonable match. If thou bee'ſt not damn'd for this, the diuell himſelfe will haue no ſhepherds, I cannot ſee elſe how thou ſhouldſt ſcape.
Heere comes yong Mr Ganimed, my new Miſtriſſes Brother.
From the eaſt to weſterne Iude,
no iewel is like Roſalinde,
Hir worth being mounted on the winde,
through all the world beares Roſalinde.
All the pictures faireſt Linde,
are but blacke to Roſalinde:
Let no face bee kept in mind,
but the faire of Roſalinde.
Ile rime you ſo, eight yeares together; dinners, and ſuppers, and ſleeping hours excepted: it is the right Butter-womens ranke to Market.
Out Foole.
For a taſte.
If a Hart doe lacke a Hinde,
Let him ſeeke out Roſalinde:
If the Cat will after kinde,
ſo be ſure will Roſalinde:
Wintred garments muſt be linde,
ſo muſt ſlender Roſalinde:
They that reap muſt ſheafe and binde,
then to cart with Roſalinde.
Sweeteſt nut, bath ſowreſt rinde,
ſuch a nut is Roſalinde.
He that ſweeteſt roſe will finde,
muſt finde Loues pricke, & Roſalinde.
This is the verie falſe gallop of Verſes, why doe you infect your ſelfe with them?
Peace you dull folle, I found them on a tree.
Truely the tree yeelds bad fruite.
Ile graffe it with you, and then I ſhall graffe it with a Medler: then it will be the earlieſt fruit i' th country: for you'l be rotten ere you bee halfe ripe, and that's the right vertue of the Medler.
You haue ſaid: but whether wiſely or no, let the Forreſt iudge.
Peace, here comes my ſiſter reading, ſtand a ſide.
Why ſhould this Deſert bee, for it is vnpeopled? Noe:
Tonges Ile hang on euerie tree, that ſhall ciuill ſayings ſhoe.
Some, how briefe the Life of man runs his erring pilgrimage,
That the ſtretching of a ſpan, buckles in his ſumme of age.
Some of violated vowes, twixt the ſoules of friend, and friend:
But vpon the faireſt bowes, or at euerie ſentence end;
Will I Roſalinda write, teaching all that reade, to know
The quinteſſence of euerie ſprite, heauen would in little ſhow.
Therefore heauen Nature charg'd, that one bodie ſhould be fill'd
With all Graces wide enlarg'd, nature preſently diſtill'd
Helens cheeke, but not his heart,
Cleopatra's Maieſtie:
Attalanta's better part,
ſad Lucrecia's Modeſtie.
Thus Roſalinde of manie parts,
by Heauenly Synode was deuis'd,
Of manie faces, eyes, and hearts,
to haue the touches deereſt pris'd.
Heauen would that ſhee theſe gifts ſhould haue,
and I to liue and die her ſlaue.
O moſt gentle Iupiter, what tedious homilie of Loue haue you wearied your pariſhioners withall, and neuer cri'de, haue patience good people.
How now backe friends: Shepheard, go off a little: go with him ſirrah.
Come Shepheard, let vs make an honorable retreit, though not with bagge and baggage, yet with ſcrip and ſcrippage.
Didſt thou heare theſe verſes?
O yes, I heard them all, and more too, for ſome of them had in them more feete then the Verſes would beare.
That's no matter: the feet might beare ye verſes.
I, but the feet were lame, and could not beare themſelues without the verſe, and therefore ſtood lamely in the verſe.
But didſt thou heare without wondering, how thy name ſhould be hang'd and carued vpon theſe trees?
I was ſeuen of the nine daies out of the wonder, before you came: for looke heere what I found on a Palme tree; I was neuer ſo berim d ſince Pythagoras time that I was an Iriſh Rat, which I can hardly remember.
Tro you, who hath done this?
Is it a man?
And a chaine that you once wore about his neck: change you colour?
I, pre'thee who?
O Lord, Lord, it is a hard matter for friends to meete; but Mountaines may bee remoou'd with Earthquakes, and ſo encounter.
Nay, but who is it?
Is it poſſible?
Nay, I pre'thee now, with moſt petitionary vehemence, tell me who it is.
O wonderfull, wonderfull, and moſt wonderfull wonderfull, and yet againe wonderful, and after that out of all hooping.
Good my complection, doſt thou think though I am capariſon'd like a man, I haue a doublet and hoſe in my diſpoſition? One inch of delay more, is a South-ſea of diſcouerie. I pre'thee tell me, who is it quickely, and ſpeake apace: I would thou couldſt ſtammer, that thou might'ſt powre this conceal'd man out of thy mouth, as Wine comes out of a narrow-mouth'd bottle: either too much at once, or none at all. I pre'thee take the Corke out of thy mouth, that I may drinke thy tydings.
So you may put a man in your belly.
Is he of Gods making? What manner of man?
Is his head worth a hat? Or his chin worth a beard?
Nay, he hath but a little beard.
Why God will ſend more, if the man will bee thankful: let me ſtay the growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.
It is yong Orlando, that tript vp the Wraſtlers heeles, and your heart, both in an inſtant.
Nay, but the diuell take mocking: ſpeake ſadde brow, and true maid.
I' faith (Coz) tis he.
Orlando?
Orlando.
Alas the day, what ſhall I do with my doublet & hoſe? What did he when thou ſaw'ſt him? What ſayde he? How look'd he? Wherein went he? What makes hee heere? Did he aske for me? Where remaines he? How parted he with thee? And when ſhalt thou ſee him againe? Anſwer me in one vvord.
You muſt borrow me Gargantuas mouth firſt: 'tis a Word too great for any mouth of this Ages ſize, to ſay I and no, to theſe particulars, is more then to anſwer in a Catechiſme.
But doth he know that I am in this Forreſt, and in mans apparrell? Looks he as freſhly, as he did the day he Wraſtled?
It is as eaſie to count Atomies as to reſolue the propoſitions of a Louer: but take a taſte of my finding him, and relliſh it with good obſeruance. I found him vnder a tree like a drop'd Acorne.
It may vvel be cal'd Ioues tree, when it droppes forth fruite.
Giue me audience, good Madam.
Proceed.
There lay hee ſtretch'd along like a Wounded knight.
Though it be pittie to ſee ſuch a ſight, it vvell becomes the ground.
Cry holla, to the tongue, I prethee: it curuettes vnſeaſonably. He was furniſh'd like a Hunter.
O ominous, he comes to kill my Hart.
I would ſing my ſong without a burthen, thou bring'ſt me out of tune.
Do you not know I am a woman, when I thinke,
I muſt ſpeake: ſweet, ſay on.
You bring me out. Soft, comes he not heere?
'Tis he, ſlinke by, and note him.
I thanke you for your company, but good faith
I had as liefe haue beene my ſelfe alone.
And ſo had I: but yet for faſhion ſake
I thanke you too, for your ſocietie.
God buy you, let's meet as little as we can.
I do deſire we may be better ſtrangers.
I pray you marre no more trees vvith Writing Loue-ſongs in their barkes.
I pray you marre no moe of my verſes with reading them ill-fauouredly.
Roſalinde is your loues name?
Yes, Iuſt.
I do not like her name.
There was no thought of pleaſing you when ſhe was chriſten'd.
What ſtature is ſhe of?
Iuſt as high as my heart.
You are ful of prety anſwers: haue you not bin acquainted with goldſmiths wiues, & cond thē out of rings
Not ſo: but I anſwer you right painted cloath, from whence you haue ſtudied your queſtions.
You haue a nimble wit; I thinke 'twas made of Attalanta's heeles. Will you ſitte downe with me, and wee two, will raile againſt our Miſtris the world, and all our miſerie.
I wil chide no breather in the world but my ſelfe againſt whom I know moſt faults.
The worſt fault you haue, is to be in loue.
'Tis a fault I will not change, for your beſt vertue: I am wearie of you.
By my troth, I was ſeeking for a Foole, when I found you.
He is drown'd in the brooke, looke but in, and you ſhall ſee him.
There I ſhal ſee mine owne figure.
Which I take to be either a foole, or a Cipher.
Ile tarrie no longer with you, farewell good ſignior Loue.
I am glad of your departure: Adieu good Monſieur Melancholly.
I wil ſpeake to him like a ſawcie Lacky▪ and vnder that habit play the knaue with him, do you hear Forreſter.
Verie wel, what would you?
I pray you, what i'ſt a clocke?
You ſhould aske me what time o' day: there's no clocke in the Forreſt.
Then there is no true Louer in the Forreſt, elſe ſighing euerie minute and groaning euerie houre wold detect the lazie foot of time, as wel as a clocke.
And why not the ſwift foote of time? Had not that bin as proper?
By no meanes ſir; Time trauels in diuers paces, with diuers perſons: Ile tel you who Time ambles withall, who Time trots withal, who Time gallops withal, and who he ſtands ſtil withall.
I prethee, who doth he trot withal?
Marry he trots hard with a yong maid, between the contract of her marriage, and the day it is ſolemnizd: if the interim be but a ſennight, Times pace is ſo hard, that it ſeemes the length of ſeuen yeare.
Who ambles Time withal?
With a Prieſt that lacks Latine, and a rich man that hath not the Gowt: for the one ſleepes eaſily becauſe he cannot ſtudy, and the other liues merrily, becauſe he feeles no paine: the one lacking the burthen of leane and waſteful Learning; the other knowing no burthen of heauie tedious penurie. Theſe Time ambles withal.
Who doth he gallop withal?
With a theefe to the gallowes: for though hee go as ſoftly as foot can fall, he thinkes himſelfe too ſoon there.
Who ſtaies it ſtil withal?
With Lawiers in the vacation: for they ſleepe betweene Terme and Terme, and then they perceiue not how time moues.
Where dwel you prettie youth?
With this Shepheardeſſe my ſiſter: heere in the skirts of the Forreſt, like fringe vpon a petticoat.
Are you natiue of this place?
As the Conie that you ſee dwell where ſhee is kindled.
Your accent is ſomething finer, then you could purchaſe in ſo remoued a dwelling.
I haue bin told ſo of many: but indeed, an olde religious Vnckle of mine taught me to ſpeake, who was in his youth an inland man, one that knew Courtſhip too well: for there he fel in loue. I haue heard him read many Lectors againſt it, and I thanke God, I am not a Woman to be touch'd with ſo many giddie offences as hee hath generally tax'd their whole ſex withal.
Can you remember any of the principall euils, that he laid to the charge of women?
There were none principal, they were all like one another, as halfe pence are, euerie one fault ſeeming monſtrous, til his fellow-fault came to match it.
I prethee recount ſome of them.
No: I wil not caſt away my phyſick, but on thoſe that are ſicke. There is a man haunts the Forreſt, that abuſes our yong plants with caruing Roſalinde on their barkes; hangs Oades vpon Hauthornes, and Elegies on brambles; all (forſooth) defying the name of Roſalinde. If I could meet that Fancie-monger, I would giue him ſome good counſel, for he ſeemes to haue the Quotidian of Loue vpon him.
I am he that is ſo Loue-ſhak'd, I pray you tel me your remedie.
There is none of my Vnckles markes vpon you: he taught me how to know a man in loue: in which cage of ruſhes, I am ſure you act not priſoner.
What were his markes?
A leane cheeke, which you haue not: a blew eie and ſunken, which you haue not: an vnqueſtionable ſpirit, which you haue not: a beard neglected, which you haue not: (but I pardon you for that, for ſimply your hauing in beard, is a yonger brothers reuennew) then your hoſe ſhould be vngarter'd, your bonnet vnbanded, your ſleeue vnbutton'd, your ſhoo vnti'de, and euerie thing about you, demonſtrating a careleſſe deſolation: but you are no ſuch man; you are rather point deuice in your accouſtrements, as louing your ſelfe, then ſeeming the Louer of any other.
Faire youth, I would I could make thee beleeue I Loue.
Me beleeue it? You may aſſoone make her that you Loue beleeue it, which I warrant ſhe is apter to do, then to confeſſe ſhe do': that is one of the points, in the which women ſtil giue the lie to their conſciences. But in good ſooth, are you he that hangs the verſes on the Trees, wherein Roſalind is ſo admired?
I ſweare to thee youth, by the white hand of Roſalind, I am that he, that vnfortunate he.
But are you ſo much in loue, as your rimes ſpeak?
Neither rime nor reaſon can expreſſe how much.
Loue is meerely a madneſſe, and I tel you, deſerues as wel a darke houſe, and a whip, as madmen do: and the reaſon why they are not ſo puniſh'd and cured, is that the Lunacie is ſo ordinarie, that the whippers are in loue too: yet I profeſſe curing it by counſel.
Did you euer cure any ſo?
Yes one, and in this manner. Hee was to imagine me his Loue, his Miſtris: and I ſet him euerie day to woe me. At which time would I, being but a mooniſh youth, greeue, be effeminate, changeable, longing, and liking, proud, fantaſtical, apiſh, ſhallow, inconſtant, ful of teares, full of ſmiles; for euerie paſſion ſomething, and for no paſſion truly any thing, as boyes and women are for the moſt part, cattle of this colour: would now like him, now loath him: then entertaine him, then forſwear him: now weepe for him, then ſpit at him; that I draue my Sutor from his mad humor of loue, to a liuing humor of madnes, wc was to forſweare the ful ſtream of ye world, and to liue in a nooke meerly Monaſtick: and thus I cur'd him, and this way wil I take vpon mee to waſh your Liuer as cleane as a ſound ſheepes heart, that there ſhal not be one ſpot of Loue in't.
I would not be cured, youth.
I would cure you, if you would but call me Roſalind, and come euerie day to my Coat, and woe me.
Now by the faith of my loue, I will; Tel me where it is.
Go with me to it, and Ile ſhew it you: and by the way, you ſhal tell me, where in the Forreſt you liue: Wil you go?
With all my heart, good youth.
Nay, you muſt call mee Roſalind: Come ſiſter, will you go?
Come apace good Audrey, I wil fetch vp your
Goates, Audrey: and how Audrey am I the man yet?
Doth my ſimple feature content you?
Your features, Lord warrant vs: what features?
I am heere with thee, and thy Goats, as the moſt capricious Poet honeſt Ouid was among the Gothes.
O knowledge ill inhabited, worſe then loue in a thatch'd houſe.
When a mans verſes cannot be vnderſtood, nor a mans good wit ſeconded with the forward childe, vnderſtanding: it ſtrikes a man more dead then a great reckoning in a little roome: truly, I would the Gods hadde made thee poeticall.
I do not know what Poetical is: is it honeſt in deed and word: is it a true thing?
No trulie: for the trueſt poetrie is the moſt faining, and Louers are giuen to Poetrie: and what they ſweare in Poetrie, may be ſaid as Louers, they do feigne.
Do you wiſh then that the Gods had made me Poeticall?
I do truly: for thou ſwear'ſt to me thou art honeſt: Now if thou wert a Poet, I might haue ſome hope thou didſt feigne.
Would you not haue me honeſt?
No truly, vnleſſe thou wert hard fauour'd: for honeſtie coupled to beautie, is to haue Honie a ſawce to Sugar.
A materiall foole.
Well, I am not faire, and therefore I pray the Gods make me honeſt.
Truly, and to caſt away honeſtie vppon a foule ſlut, were to put good meate into an vncleane diſh.
I am not a ſlut, though I thanke the Goddes I am foule.
Well, praiſed be the Gods, for thy foulneſſe; ſluttiſhneſſe may come heereafter. But be it, as it may bee, I wil marrie thee: and to that end, I haue bin with Sir Oliuer Mar-text, the Vicar of the next village, who hath promis'd to meete me in this place of the Forreſt, and to couple vs.
I would faine ſee this meeting.
Wel, the Gods giue vs ioy.
Amen. A man may if he were of a fearful heart, ſtagger in this attempt: for heere wee haue no Temple but the wood, no aſſembly but horne-beaſts. But what though? Courage. As hornes are odious, they are neceſſarie. It is ſaid, many a man knowes no end of his goods; right: Many a man has good Hornes, and knows no end of them. Well▪ that is the dowrie of his wife, 'tis none of his owne getting; hornes, euen ſo poore men alone: No, no, the nobleſt Deere hath them as huge as the Raſcall: Is the ſingle man therefore bleſſed? No, as a wall'd Towne is more worthier then a village, ſo is the forehead of a married man, more honourable then the bare brow of a Batcheller: and by how much defence is better then no skill, by ſo much is a horne more precious then to want.
Heere comes Sir Oliuer: Sir Oliuer Mar-text you are wel met. Will you diſpatch vs heere vnder this tree, or ſhal we go with you to your Chappell?
Is there none heere to giue the woman?
I wil not take her on guift of any man.
Truly ſhe muſt be giuen, or the marriage is not lawfull.
Proceed, proceede: Ile giue her.
Good euen good Mr what ye cal't: how do you Sir, you are verie well met: goddild you for your laſt companie, I am verie glad to ſee you, euen a toy in hand heere Sir: Nay, pray be couer'd.
Wil you be married, Motley?
As the Oxe hath his bow ſir, the horſe his curb, and the Falcon her bels, ſo man hath his deſires, and as Pigeons bill, ſo wedlocke would be nibling.
And wil you (being a man of your breeding) be married vnder a buſh like a begger? Get you to church, and haue a good Prieſt that can tel you what marriage is, this fellow wil but ioyne you together, as they ioyne Wainſcot, then one of you wil proue a ſhrunke pannell, and like greene timber, warpe, warpe.
I am not in the minde, but I were better to bee married of him then of another, for he is not like to marrie me wel: and not being wel married, it wil be a good excuſe for me heereafter, to leaue my wife.
Goe thou with mee,
And let me counſel thee.
Come ſweete Audrey,
We muſt be married, or we muſt liue in baudrey:
Farewel good Mr Oliuer: Not O ſweet Oliuer, O braue Oliuer leaue me not behind thee: But winde away, bee gone I ſay, I wil not to wedding with thee.
'Tis no matter; Ne're a fantaſtical knaue of them all ſhal ſlout me out of my calling.
Neuer talke to me, I wil weepe.
Do I prethee, but yet haue the grace to conſider, that teares do not become a man.
But haue I not cauſe to weepe?
As good cauſe as one would deſire,
Therefore weepe.
His very haire
Is of the diſſembling colour.
Something browner then Iudaſſes:
Marrie his kiſſes are Iudaſſes owne children.
I' faith his haire is of a good colour.
An excellent colour:
Your Cheſſenut was euer the onely colour:
And his kiſſing is as ful of ſanctitie,
As the touch of holy bread.
Hee hath bought a paire of caſt lips of Diana: a Nun of winters ſiſterhood kiſſes not more religiouſlie, the very yee of chaſtity is in them.
But why did hee ſweare hee would come this morning, and comes not?
Nay certainly there is no truth in him.
Doe you thinke ſo?
Yes, I thinke he is not a picke purſe, nor a horſe-ſtealer, but for his verity in loue, I doe thinke him as concaue as a couered goblet, or a Worme-eaten nut.
Not true in loue?
Yes, when he is in, but I thinke he is not in.
You haue heard him ſweare downright he was.
Was, is not is: beſides, the oath of Louer is no ſtronger then the word of a Tapſter, they are both the confirmer of falſe reckonings, he attends here in the forreſt on the Duke your father.
I met the Duke yeſterday, and had much queſtion with him: he askt me of what parentage I was; I told him of as good as he, ſo he laugh'd and let mee goe. But what talke wee of Fathers, when there is ſuch a man as Orlando?
O that's a braue man, hee writes braue verſes, ſpeakes braue words, ſweares braue oathes, and breakes them brauely, quite trauers athwart the heart of his louer, as a puiſny Tilter, yt ſpurs his horſe but on one ſide, breakes his ſtaffe like a noble gooſe; but all's braue that youth mounts, and folly guides: who comes heere?
Miſtreſſe and Maſter, you haue oft enquired
After the Shepheard that complain'd of loue,
Who you ſaw ſitting by me on the Turph,
Praiſing the proud diſdainfull Shepherdeſſe
That was his Miſtreſſe.
Well: and what of him?
If you will ſee a pageant truely plaid
Betweene the pale complexion of true Loue,
And the red glowe of ſcorne and prowd diſdaine,
Goe hence a little, and I ſhall conduct you
If you will marke it.
O come, let vs remoue,
The ſight of Louers feedeth thoſe in loue:
Bring vs to this ſight, and you ſhall ſay
Ile proue a buſie actor in their play.
Sweet Phebe doe not ſcorne me, do not Phebe
Say that you loue me not, but ſay not ſo
In bitterneſſe; the common executioner
Whoſe heart th' accuſtom'd ſight of death makes hard
Falls not the axe vpon the humbled neck,
But firſt begs pardon: will you ſterner be
Then he that dies and liues by bloody drops?
I would not be thy executioner,
I flye thee, for I would not iniure thee:
Thou tellſt me there is murder in mine eye,
'Tis pretty ſure, and very probable,
That eyes that are the frailſt, and ſofteſt things,
Who ſhut their coward gates on atomyes,
Should be called tyrants, butchers, murtherers.
Now I doe frowne on thee with all my heart,
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee:
Now counterfeit to ſwound▪ why now fall downe,
Or if thou canſt not, oh for ſhame, for ſhame,
Lye not, to ſay mine eyes are murtherers:
Now ſhew the wound mine eye hath made in thee,
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remaines
Some ſcarre of it: Leane vpon a ruſh
The Cicatrice and capable impreſſure
Thy palme ſome moment keepes: but now mine eyes
Which I haue darted at thee, hurt thee not,
Nor I am ſure there is no force in eyes
That can doe hurt.
O deere Phebe,
If euer (as that euer may be neere)
You meet in ſome freſh cheeke the power of fancie,
Then ſhall you know the wounds inuiſible
That Loues keene arrows make.
But till that time
Come not thou neere me: and when that time comes,
Afflict me with thy mockes, pitty me not,
As till that time I ſhall not pitty thee.
And why I pray you? who might be your mother
That you inſult, exult, and all at once
Ouer the wretched? what though you hau no beauty
As by my faith, I ſee no more in you
Then without Candle may goe darke to bed:
Muſt you be therefore prowd and pittileſſe?
Why what meanes this? why do you looke on me?
I ſee no more in you then in the ordinary
Of Natures ſale-worke? 'ods my little life,
I thinke ſhe meanes to tangle my eies too:
No faith proud Miſtreſſe, hope not after it,
'Tis not your inkie browes, your blacke ſilke haire,
Your bugle eye-balls, nor your cheeke of creame
That can entame my ſpirits to your worſhip:
You fooliſh Shepheard, wherefore do you follow her
Like foggy South, puffing with winde and raine,
You are a thouſand times a properer man
Then ſhe a woman. 'Tis ſuch fooles as you
That makes the world full of ill-fauourd children:
'Tis not her glaſſe, but you that flatters her,
And out of you ſhe ſees her ſelfe more proper
Then any of her lineaments can ſhow her:
But Miſtris, know your ſelfe downe on your knees
And thanke heauen, faſting, for a good mans loue;
For I muſt tell you friendly in your eare,
Sell when you can, you are not for all markets:
Cry the man mercy, loue him, take his offer,
Foule is moſt foule, being foule to be a ſcoffer.
So take her to thee Shepheard, fare you well.
Sweet youth, I pray you chide a yere together,
I had rather here you chide, then this man wooe.
Hee falne in loue with your foulneſſe, & ſhee'll
Fall in loue with my anger. If it be ſo, as faſt
As ſhe anſweres thee with frowning lookes, ile ſauce
Her with bitter words: why looke you ſo vpon me?
For no ill will I beare you.
I pray you do not fall in loue with mee,
For I am falſer then vowes made in wine:
Beſides, I like you not: if you will know my houſe,
'Tis at the tufft of Oliues, here hard by:
Will you goe Siſter? Shepheard ply her hard:
Come Siſter: Shepheardeſſe, looke on him better
And be not proud, though all the world could ſee,
None could be ſo abus'd in ſight as hee.
Come, to our flocke.
Dead Shepheard, now I ſind thy ſaw of might,
Who euer lov'd, that lou'd not at firſt ſight?
Sweet Phebe.
Hah: what ſaiſt thou Siluius?
Sweet Phebe pitty me.
Why I am ſorry for thee gentle Siluius.
Where euer ſorrow is, reliefe would be:
If you doe ſorrow at my griefe in loue,
By giuing loue your ſorrow, and my griefe
Were both extermin'd.
Thou haſt my loue, is not that neighbourly?
I would haue you.
Why that were couetouſneſſe:
Siluius; the time was, that I hated thee;
And yet it is not, that I beare thee loue,
But ſince that thou canſt talke of loue ſo well,
Thy company, which erſt was irkeſome to me
I will endure; and Ile employ thee too:
But doe not looke for further recompence
Then thine owne gladneſſe, that thou art employd.
So holy, and ſo perfect is my loue,
And I in ſuch a pouerty of grace,
That I ſhall thinke it a moſt plenteous crop
To gleane the broken eares after the man
That the maine harueſt reapes: looſe now and then
A ſcattred ſmile, and that Ile liue vpon.
Knowſt thou the youth that ſpoke to mee yere-while?
Not very well, but I haue met him oft,
And he hath bought the Cottage and the bounds
That the old Carlot once was Maſter of.
Thinke not I loue him, though I ask for him,
'Tis but a peeuiſh boy, yet he talkes well,
But what care I for words? yet words do well
When he that ſpeakes them pleaſes thoſe that heare:
It is a pretty youth, not very prettie,
But ſure hee's proud, and yet his pride becomes him;
Hee'll make a proper man: the beſt thing in him
Is his complexion: and faſter then his tongue
Did make offence, his eye did heale it vp:
He is not very tall, yet for his yeeres hee's tall:
His leg is but ſo ſo, and yet 'tis well:
There was a pretty redneſſe in his lip,
A little riper, and more luſtie red
Then that mixt in his cheeke: 'twas iuſt the difference
Betwixt the conſtant red, and mingled Damaske.
There be ſome women Siluius, had they markt him
In parcells as I did, would haue gone neere
To fall in loue with him: but for my part
I loue him not, nor hate him not: and yet
Haue more cauſe to hate him then to loue him,
For what had he to doe to chide at me?
He ſaid mine eyes were black, and my haire blacke,
And now I am remembred, ſcorn'd at me:
I maruell why I anſwer'd not againe,
But that's all one: omittance is no quittance:
Ile write to him a very tanting Letter,
And thou ſhalt beare it, wilt thou Siluius?
Phebe, with all my heart.
Ile write it ſtrait:
The matter's in my head, and in my heart,
I will be bitter with him, and paſſing ſhort;
Goe with me Siluius.
I prethee, pretty youth, let me better acquainted with thee.
They ſay you are a melancholly fellow.
I am ſo: I doe loue it better then laughing.
Thoſe that are in extremity of either, are abhominable fellowes, and betray themſelues to euery moderne cenſure, worſe then drunkards.
Why, 'tis good to be ſad and ſay nothing.
Why then 'tis good to be a poſte.
I haue neither the Schollers melancholy, which is emulation: nor the Muſitians, which is fantaſticall; nor the Courtiers, which is proud: nor the Souldiers, which is ambitious: nor the Lawiers, which is politick: nor the Ladies, which is nice: nor the Louers, which is all theſe: but it is a melancholy of mine owne, compounded of many ſimples, extracted from many obiects, and indeed the ſundrie contemplation of my trauells, in which by often rumination, wraps me in a moſt humorous ſadneſſe.
A Traueller: by my faith you haue great reaſon to be ſad: I feare you haue ſold your owne Lands, to ſee other mens; then to haue ſeene much, and to haue nothing, is to haue rich eyes and poore hands.
Yes, I haue gain'd my experience.
And your experience makes you ſad: I had rather haue a foole to make me merrie, then experience to make me ſad, and to trauaile for it too.
Good day, and happineſſe, deere Roſalind.
Nay then God buy you, and you talke in blanke verſe.
Farewell Mounſieur Trauellor: looke you liſpe, and weare ſtrange ſuites; diſable all the benefits of your owne Countrie: be out of loue with your natiuitie, and almoſt chide God for making you that countenance you are; or I will ſcarce thinke you haue ſwam in a Gundello. Why how now Orlando, where haue you bin all this while? you a louer? and you ſerue me ſuch another tricke, neuer come in my ſight more.
My faire Roſalind, I come within an houre of my promiſe.
Breake an houres promiſe in loue? hee that will diuide a minute into a thouſand parts, and breake but a part of the thouſand part of a minute in the affairs of loue, it may be ſaid of him that Cupid hath clapt him oth' ſhoulder, but Ile warrant him heart hole.
Pardon me deere Roſalind.
Nay, and you be ſo tardie, come no more in my ſight, I had as liefe be woo'd of a Snaile.
Of a Snaile?
I, of a Snaile: for though he comes ſlowly, hee carries his houſe on his head; a better ioyncture I thinke then you make a woman: beſides, he brings his deſtinie with him.
What's that?
Why hornes: wr ſuch as you are faine to be beholding to your wiues for: but he comes armed in his fortune, and preuents the ſlander of his wife.
Vertue is no horne-maker: and my Roſalind is vertuous.
And I am your Roſalind.
It pleaſes him to call you ſo: but he hath a Roſalind of a better leere then you.
Come, wooe me, wooe mee: for now I am in a holy-day humor, and like enough to conſent: What would you ſay to me now, and I were your verie, verie Roſalind?
I would kiſſe before I ſpoke.
Nay, you were better ſpeake firſt, and when you were grauel'd, for lacke of matter, you might take occaſion to kiſſe: verie good Orators when they are out, they will ſpit, and for louers, lacking (God warne vs) matter, the cleanlieſt ſhift is to kiſſe.
How if the kiſſe be denide?
Then ſhe puts you to entreatie, and there begins new matter.
Who could be out, being before his beloued Miſtris?
Marrie that ſhould you if I were your Miſtris, or I ſhould thinke my honeſtie ranker then my wit.
What, of my ſuite?
Not out of your apparrell, and yet out of your ſuite:
Am not I your Roſalind?
I take ſome ioy to ſay you are, becauſe I would be talking of her.
Well, in her perſon, I ſay I will not haue you.
Then in mine owne perſon, I die.
No faith, die by Attorney: the poore world is almoſt ſix thouſand yeeres old, and in all this time there was not anie man died in his owne perſon (videlicet) in a loue cauſe: Trotlous had his braines daſh'd out with a Grecian club, yet he did what hee could to die before, and he is one of the patternes of loue. Leander, he would haue liu'd manie a faire yeere though Hero had turn'd Nun; if it had not bin for a hot Midſomer-night, for (good youth) he went but forth to waſh him in the Helleſpont, and being taken with the crampe, was droun'd, and the fooliſh Chronoclers of that age, found it was Hero of Ceſtos. But theſe are all lies, men haue died from time to time, and wormes haue eaten them, but not for loue.
I would not haue my right Roſalind of this mind, for I proteſt her frowne might kill me.
By this hand, it will not kill a flie: but come, now I will be your Roſalind in a more comming-on diſpoſition: and aske me what you will, I will grant it.
Then loue me Roſalind.
Yes faith will I, fridaies and ſaterdaies, and all.
And wilt thou haue me?
I, and twentie ſuch.
What ſaieſt thou?
Are you not good?
I hope ſo.
Why then, can one deſire too much of a good thing: Come ſiſter, you ſhall be the Prieſt, and marrie vs: giue me your hand Orlando: What doe you ſay ſiſter?
Pray thee marrie vs.
I cannot ſay the words.
You muſt begin, will you Orlando.
Goe too: wil you Orlando, haue to wife this Roſalind?
I will.
I, but when?
Why now, as faſt as ſhe can marrie vs.
Then you muſt ſay, I take thee Roſalind for wife.
I take thee Roſalind for wife.
I might aske you for your Commiſſion, But I doe take thee Orlando for my husband: there's a girle goes before the Prieſt, and certainely a Womans thought runs before her actions.
So do all thoughts, they are wing'd.
Now tell me how long you would haue her, after you haue poſſeſt her?
For euer, and a day.
Say a day, without the euer: no, no Orlando, men are Aprill when they woe, December when they wed: Maides are May when they are maides, but the sky changes when they are wiues: I will bee more iealous of thee, then a Barbary cocke-pidgeon ouer his hen, more clamorous then a Parrat againſt raine, more new-fangled then an ape, more giddy in my deſires, then a monkey: I will weepe for nothing, like Diana in the Fountaine, & I wil do that when you are diſpos'd to be merry: I will laugh like a Hyen, and that when thou art inclin'd to ſleepe.
But will my Roſalind doe ſo?
By my life, ſhe will doe as I doe.
O but ſhe is wiſe.
Or elſe ſhee could not haue the wit to doe this: the wiſer, the waywarder: make the doores vpon a womans wit, and it will out at the caſement: ſhut that, and 'twill out at the key-hole: ſtop that, 'twill flie with the ſmoake out at the chimney.
A man that had a wife with ſuch a wit, he might ſay, wit whether wil't?
Nay, you might keepe that checke for it, till you met your wiues wit going to your neighbours bed.
And what wit could wit haue, to excuſe that?
Marry to ſay, ſhe came to ſeeke you there: you ſhall neuer take her without her anſwer, vnleſſe you take her without her tongue: ô that woman that cannot make her fault her huſbands occaſion, let her neuer nurſe her childe her ſelfe, for ſhe will breed it like a foole.
For theſe two houres Roſalinde, I wil leaue thee.
Alas, deere loue, I cannot lacke thee two houres.
I muſt attend the Duke at dinner, by two a clock I will be with thee againe.
I, goe your waies, goe your waies: I knew what you would proue, my friends told mee as much, and I thought no leſſe: that flattering tongue of yours wonne me: 'tis but one caſt away: and ſo come death: two o'clocke is your howre.
I, ſweet Roſalind.
By my troth, and in good earneſt, and ſo God mend mee, and by all pretty oathes that are not dangerous, if you breake one iot of your, promiſe, or come one minute behinde your houre, I will thinke you the moſt patheticall breake-promiſe, and the moſt hollow louer, and the moſt vnworthy of her you call Roſalinde, that may bee choſen out of the groſſe band of the vnfaithfull: therefore beware my cenſure, and keep your promiſe.
With no leſſe religion, then if thou wert indeed my Roſalind: ſo adieu.
Well, Time is the olde Iuſtice that examines all ſuch offenders, and let time try: adieu.
You haue ſimply miſus'd our ſexe in your loue-prate: we muſt haue your doublet and hoſe pluckt ouer your head, and ſhew the world what the bird hath done to her owne neaſt.
O coz, coz, coz: my pretty little coz, that thou didſt know how many fathome deepe I am in loue: but it cannot bee ſounded: my affection hath an vnknowne bottome, like the Bay of Portugall.
Or rather bottomleſſe, that as faſt as you poure affection in, in runs out.
No, that ſame wicked Baſtard of Venus, that was begot of thought, conceiu'd of ſpleene, and borne of madneſſe, that blinde raſcally boy, that abuſes euery ones eyes, becauſe his owne are out, let him bee iudge, how deepe I am in loue: ile tell thee Aliena, I cannot be out of the ſight of Orlando: Ile goe finde a ſhadow, and ſigh till he come.
And Ile ſleepe.
Which is he that killed the Deare?
Sir, it was I.
Let's preſent him to the Duke like a Romane Conquerour, and it would doe well to ſet the Deares horns vpon his head, for a branch of victory; haue you no ſong Forreſter for this purpoſe?
Yes Sir.
Sing it: 'tis no matter how it bee in tune, ſo it make noyſe enough.
What ſhall he haue that kild the Deare?
His Leather skin, and bornes to weare:
Then ſing him home, the reſt ſhall beare this burthen;
Take thou no ſcorne to weare the horne,
It was a creſt ere thou waſt borne,
Thy fathers father wore it,
And thy father bore it,
The horne, the horne, the luſty horne,
Is not a thing to laugh to ſcorne.
How ſay you now, is it not paſt two a clock?
And heere much Orlando.
I warrant you, with pure loue, & troubled brain,
He hath t'ane his bow and arrowes, and is gone forth
To ſleepe: looke who comes heere.
My errand is to you, faire youth,
My gentle Phebe, did bid me giue you this:
I know not the contents, but as I gueſſe
By the ſterne brow, and waſpiſh action
Which ſhe did vſe, as ſhe was writing of it,
It beares an angry tenure; pardon me,
I am but as a guiltleſſe meſſenger.
Patience her ſelfe would ſtartle at this letter,
And play the ſwaggerer, beare this, beare all:
Shee ſaies I am not faire, that I lacke manners,
She calls me proud, and that ſhe could not loue me
Were man as rare as Phenix: 'od's my will,
Her loue is not the Hare that I doe hunt,
Why writes ſhe ſo to me? well Shepheard, well,
This is a Letter of your owne deuice.
No, I proteſt, I know not the contents,
Phebe did write it.
Come, come, you are a foole,
And turn'd into the extremity of loue.
I ſaw her hand, ſhe has a leatherne hand,
A freeſtone coloured hand: I verily did thinke
That her old gloues were on, but twas her hands:
She has a huſwiues hand, but that's no matter:
I ſay ſhe neuer did inuent this letter,
This is a mans inuention, and his hand.
Sure it is hers.
Why, tis a boyſterous and a cruell ſtile,
A ſtile for challengers: why, ſhe defies me,
Like Turke to Chriſtian: vvomens gentle braine
Could not drop forth ſuch giant rude inuention,
Such Ethiop vvords, blacker in their effect
Then in their countenance: vvill you heare the letter?
So pleaſe you, for I neuer heard it yet:
Yet heard too much of Phebes crueltie.
She Phebes me: marke how the tyrant vvrites.
Read. Art thou god, to Shepherd turn'd?
That a maidens heart hath burn'd.
Can a vvoman raile thus?
Call you this railing?
Read. Why, thy godhead laid a part,
War'ſt thou with a womans heart?
Did you euer heare ſuch railing?
Whiles the eye of man did wooe me,
That could do no vengeance to me.
Meaning me a beaſt.
If the ſcorne of your bright cine
Haue power to raiſe ſuch loue in mine,
Alacke, in me, what ſtrange effect
Would they worke in milde aſpect?
Whiles you chid me, I did loue,
How then might your praiers moue?
He that brings this loue to thee,
Little knowes this Loue in me▪
And by him ſeale vp thy minde,
Whether that thy youth and kinde
Will the faithfull offer take
Of me, and all that I can make,
Or elſe by him my loue denie,
And then Ile ſtudie how to die.
Call you this chiding?
Alas poore Shepheard.
Doe you pitty him? No, he deſerues no pitty: wilt thou loue ſuch a woman? what to make thee an inſtrument, and play falſe ſtraines vpon thee? not to be endur'd. Well, goe your way to her; (for I ſee Loue hath made thee a tame ſnake) and ſay this to her; That if ſhe loue me, I charge her to loue thee: if ſhe will not, I will neuer haue her, vnleſſe thou intreat for her: if you bee a true louer hence, and not a word; for here comes more company.
Good morrow, faire ones: pray you, (if you know)
Where in the Purlews of this Forreſt, ſtands
A ſheep-coat, fenc'd about with Oliue-trees.
Weſt of this place, down in the neighbor bottom
The ranke of Oziers, by the murmuring ſtreame
Left on your right hand, brings you to the place:
But at this howre, the houſe doth keepe it ſelfe,
There's none within.
If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Then ſhould I know you by deſcription,
Such garments, and ſuch yeeres: the boy is faire,
Of femall fauour, and beſtowes himſelfe
Like a ripe ſiſter: the woman low
And browner then her brother: are not you
The owner of the houſe I did enquire for?
It is no boaſt, being ask'd, to ſay we are.
Orlando doth commend him to you both,
And to that youth hee calls his Roſalind,
He ſends this bloudy napkin; are you he?
I am: what muſt we vnderſtand by this?
Some of my ſhame, if you will know of me
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
This handkercher was ſtain'd.
I pray you tell it.
When laſt the yong Orlando parted from you,
He left a promiſe to returne againe
Within an houre, and pacing through the Forreſt,
Chewing the food of ſweet and bitter fancie,
Loe vvhat befell: he threw his eye aſide,
And marke vvhat obiect did preſent it ſelfe
Vnder an old Oake, whoſe bows were moſs'd with age
And high top, bald with drie antiquitie:
A wretched ragged man, ore-gowne with haire
Lay ſleeping on his back; about his necke
A greene and guilded ſnake had wreath'd it ſelfe,
Who with her head, nimble in threats approach'd
The opening of his mouth: but ſodainly
Seeing Orlando, it vnlink'd it ſelfe,
And with indented glides, did ſlip away
Into a buſh, vnder which buſhes ſhade
A Lyonneſſe, with vdders all drawne drie,
Lay cowching head on ground, with catlike watch
When that the ſleeping man ſhould ſtirre; for 'tis
The royall diſpoſition of that beaſt
To prey on nothing, that doth ſeeme as dead:
This ſeene, Orlando did approach the man,
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
O I haue heard him ſpeake of that ſame brother,
And he did render him the moſt vnnaturall
That liu'd amongſt men.
And well he might ſo doe,
For well I know he was vnnaturall.
But to Orlando: did he leaue him there
Food to the ſuck'd and hungry Lyonneſſe?
Twice did he turne his backe, and purpos'd ſo:
But kindneſſe, nobler euer then reuenge,
And Nature ſtronger then his iuſt occaſion,
Made him giue battell to the Lyonneſſe:
Who quickly fell before him, in which hurtling
From miſerable ſlumber I awaked.
Are you his brother?
Was't you he reſcu'd?
Was't you that did ſo oft contriue to kill him?
'Twas I: but 'tis not I: I doe not ſhame
To tell you what I was, ſince my conuerſion
So ſweeetly taſtes, being the thing I am.
But for the bloody napkin?
By and by:
When from the firſt to laſt betwixt vs two,
Teares our recountments had moſt kindely bath'd,
As how I came into that Deſert place.
I briefe, he led me to the gentle Duke,
Who gaue me freſh aray, and entertainment,
Committing me vnto my brothers loue,
Who led me inſtantly vnto his Caue,
There ſtript himſelfe, and heere vpon his arme
The Lyonneſſe had torne ſome fleſh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted,
And cride in fainting vpon Roſalinde.
Briefe, I recouer'd him, bound vp his wound,
And after ſome ſmall ſpace, being ſtrong at heart,
He ſent me hither, ſtranger as I am
To tell this ſtory, that you might excuſe
His broken promiſe, and to giue this napkin
Died in this bloud, vnto the Shepheard youth,
That he in ſport doth call his Roſalind.
Why how now Ganimed, ſweet Ganimed.
Many will ſwoon when they do look on bloud.
There is more in it; Coſen Ganimed.
Looke, he recouers.
I would I were at home.
Wee'll lead you thither:
I pray you will you take him, by the arme.
Be of good cheere youth: you a man?
You lacke a mans heart.
I doe ſo, I confeſſe it:
Ah, ſirra, a body would thinke this was well counterfeited, I pray you tell your brother how well I counterfeited: heigh-ho.
This was not counterfeit, there is too great teſtimony in your complexion, that it was a paſſion of earneſt.
Counterfeit, I aſſure you.
Well then, take a good heart, and counterfeit to be a man.
So I doe: but yfaith, I ſhould haue beene a woman by right.
Come, you looke paler and paler: pray you draw homewards: good ſir, goe with vs.
That will I: for I muſt beare anſwere backe
How you excuſe my brother, Roſalind.
I ſhall deuiſe: ſomething: but I pray you commend my counterfeiting to him: will you goe?
We ſhall finde a time Awdrie, patience gentle Awdrie.
Faith the Prieſt was good enough, for all the olde gentlemans ſaying.
A moſt wicked Sir Oliuer, Awdrie, a moſt vile Mar-text. But Awdrie, there is a youth heere in the Forreſt layes claime to you.
I, I know who 'tis: he hath no intereſt in mee in the world: here comes the man you meane.
It is meat and drinke to me to ſee a Clowne, by my troth, we that haue good wits, haue much to anſwer for: we ſhall be flouting: we cannot hold.
Good eu'n Audrey.
God ye good eu'n William.
And good eu'n to you Sir.
Good eu'n gentle friend. Couer thy head, couer thy head: Nay prethee bee eouer'd. How olde are you Friend?
Fiue and twentie Sir.
A ripe age: Is thy name William?
William, ſir.
A faire name. Was't borne i' th Forreſt heere?
I ſir, I thanke God.
Thanke God: A good anſwer:
Art rich?
'Faith ſir, ſo, ſo.
So, ſo, is good, very good, very excellent good:
and yet it is not, it is but ſo, ſo:
Art thou wiſe?
I ſir, I haue a prettie wit.
Why, thou ſaiſt well. I do now remember a ſaying: The Foole doth thinke he is wiſe, but the wiſeman knowes himſelfe to be a Foole. The Heathen Philoſopher, when he had a deſire to eate a Grape, would open his lips when he put it into his mouth, meaning thereby, that Grapes were made to eate, and lippes to open. You do loue this maid?
I do ſit.
Giue me your hand: Art thou Learned?
No ſir.
Then learne this of me, To haue, is to haue. For it is a figure in Rhetoricke, that drink being powr'd out of a cup into a glaſſe, by filling the one, doth empty the other. For all your Writers do conſent, that ipſe is hee: now you are not ipſe, for I am he.
Which he ſir?
He ſir, that muſt marrie this woman: Therefore you Clowne, abandon: which is in the vulgar, leaue the ſocietie: which in the booriſh, is companie, of this female: which in the common, is woman: which together, is, abandon the ſociety of this Female, or Clowne thou periſheſt: or to thy better vnderſtanding, dyeſt; or (to wit) I kill thee, make thee away, tranſlate thy life into death, thy libertie into bondage: I will deale in poyſon with thee, or in baſtinado, or in ſteele: I will bandy with thee in faction, I will ore-run thee with police: I will kill thee a hundred and fifty wayes, therefore tremble and depart.
Do good William.
God reſt you merry ſir.
Our Maſter and Miſtreſſe ſeekes you: come away, away.
Trip Audry, trip Audry, I attend, I attend.
Is't poſſible, that on ſo little acquaintance you ſhould like her? that, but ſeeing, you ſhould loue her? And louing woo? and wooing, ſhe ſhould graunt? And will you perſeuer to enioy her?
Neither call the giddineſſe of it in queſtion; the pouertie of her, the ſmall acquaintance, my ſodaine woing, nor ſodaine conſenting: but ſay with mee, I loue Aliena: ſay with her, that ſhe loues mee; conſent with both, that we may enioy each other: it ſhall be to your good: for my fathers houſe, and all the reuennew, that was old Sir Rowlands will I eſtate vpon you, and heere liue and die a Shepherd.
You haue my conſent.
Let your Wedding be to morrow: thither will I
Inuite the Duke, and all's contented followers:
Go you, and prepare Aliena; for looke you,
Heere comes my Roſalinde.
God ſaue you brother.
And you faire ſiſter.
Oh my deere Orlando, how it greeues me to ſee thee weare thy heart in a ſcarfe.
It is my arme.
I thought thy heart had beene wounded with the clawes of a Lion.
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a Lady.
Did your brother tell you how I counterfeyted to ſound, when he ſhew'd me your handkercher?
I, and greater wonders then that.
O, I know where you are: nay, tis true: there was neuer any thing ſo ſodaine, but the fight of two Rammes, and Ceſars Thraſonicall bragge of I came, ſaw, and ouercome. For your brother, and my ſiſter, no ſooner met, but they look'd: no ſooner look'd, but they lou'd; no ſooner lou'd, but they ſigh'd: no ſooner ſigh'd but they ask'd one another the reaſon: no ſooner knew the reaſon, but they ſought the remedie: and in theſe degrees, haue they made a paire of ſtaires to marriage, which they will climbe incontinent, or elſe bee incontinent before marriage; they are in the verie wrath of loue, and they will together. Clubbes cannot part them.
They ſhall be married to morrow: and I will bid the Duke to the Nuptiall. But O, how bitter a thing it is, to looke into happines through another mans eies: by ſo much the more ſhall I to morrow be at the height of heart heauineſſe▪ by how much I ſhal thinke my brother happie, in hauing what he wiſhes for.
Why then to morrow, I cannot ſerue your turne for Roſalind?
I can liue no longer by thinking.
I will wearie you then no longer with idle talking. Know of me then (for now I ſpeake to ſome purpoſe) that I know you are a Gentleman of good conceit: I ſpeake not this, that you ſhould beare a good opinion of my knowledge: inſomuch (I ſay) I know you arc:neither do I labor for a greater eſteeme then may in ſome little meaſure draw a beleefe from you, to do your ſelfe good, and not to grace me. Beleeue then, if you pleaſe, that I can do ſtrange things: I haue ſince I was three yeare old conuerſt with a Magitian, moſt profound in his Art, and yet not damnable. If you do loue Roſalinde ſo neere the hart, as your geſture cries it out: when your brother marries Aliena, ſhall you marrie her. I know into what ſtraights of Fortune ſhe is driuen, and it is not impoſſible to me, if it appeare not inconuenient to you, to ſet her before your eyes to morrow, humane as ſhe is, and without any danger.
Speak'ſt thou in ſober meanings?
By my life I do, which I tender deerly, though I ſay I am a Magitian: Therefore put you in your beſt aray, bid your friends: for if you will be married to morrow, you ſhall: and to Roſalind if you will.
Looke, here comes a Louer of mine, and a louer of hers.
Youth, you haue done me much vngentleneſſe,
To ſhew the letter that I writ to you.
I care not if I haue: it is my ſtudie
To ſeeme deſpightfull and vngentle to you:
you are there followed by a faithful ſhepheard,
Looke vpon him, loue him: he worſhips you.
Good ſhepheard, tell this youth what 'tis to loue
It is to be all made of ſighes and teares,
And ſo am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganimed.
And I for Roſalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of faith and ſeruice,
And ſo am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganimed.
And I for Roſalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of fantaſie▪
All made of paſſion, and all made o hes,
All adoration, dutie, and obſeruan,
All humbleneſſe, all patience, and impatience,
All puritie, all triall, all obſeruance:
And ſo am I for Phebe.
And ſo am I for Ganimed.
And ſo am I for Roſalind.
And ſo am I for no woman.
If this be ſo, why blame you me to loue you?
If this be ſo, why blame you me to loue you?
If this be ſo, why blame you me to loue you?
Why do you ſpeake too. Why blame you mee to loue you.
To her, that is not heere, nor doth not heare.
Pray you no more of this, 'tis like the howling of Iriſh Wolues againſt the Moone: I will helpe you if I can: I would loue you if I could: To morrow meet me altogether: I wil marrie you, if euer I marrie Woman, and Ile be married to morrow: I will ſatisfie you▪ if euer I ſatisfi'd man, and you ſhall bee married to morrow. I wil content you, if what pleaſes you contents you, and you ſhal be married to morrow: As you loue Roſalind meet, as you loue Phebe meet, and as I loue no woman, Ile meet: ſo fare you wel: I haue left you commands.
Ile not faile, if I liue.
Nor I.
Nor I.
To morrow is the ioyfull day Audrey, to morow will we be married.
I do deſire it with all my heart: and I hope it is no diſhoneſt deſire, to deſire to be a woman of ye world? Heere come two of the baniſh'd Dukes Pages.
Wel met honeſt Gentleman.
By my troth well met: come, ſit, ſit, and a ſong.
We are for you, ſit i' th middle.
Shal we clap into't roundly, without hauking, or ſpitting, or ſaying we are hoarſe, which are the onely prologues to a bad voice.
I faith, y' faith, and both in a tune like two gipſies on a horſe.
It was a Louer, and his laſſe,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
That o're the greene corne feild did paſſe,
In the ſpring time, the onely pretty rang time.
When Birds do ſing, hey ding a ding, ding.
Sweet Louers loue the ſpring,
And therefore take the preſent time.
With a hey, & a ho, and a hey nonino,
For loue is crowned with the prime.
In ſpring time, &c.
Betweene the acres of the Rie,
With a hey, and a ho, & a hey nonino:
Theſe prettie Country folks would lie.
In ſpring time, &c.
This Carroll they began that houre,
With a hey and a ho, & a hey nonino:
How that a life was but a Flower,
In ſpring time, &c.
Truly yong Gentlemen, though there vvas no great matter in the dittie, yet ye note was very vntunable
you are deceiu'd Sir, we kept time, we loſt not our time.
By my troth yes: I count it but time loſt to heare ſuch a fooliſh ſong. God buy you, and God mend your voices. Come Audrie.
Doſt thou beleeue Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promiſed?
I ſometimes do beleeue, and ſomtimes do not,
As thoſe that feare they hope, and know they feare.
Patience once more, whiles our cōpact is vrg'd:
You ſay, if I bring in your Roſalinde,
You wil beſtow her on Orlando heere?
That would I, had I kingdoms to giue with hir.
And you ſay you wil haue her, when I bring hir?
That would I, were I of all kingdomes King.
You ſay, you'l marrie me, if I be willing.
That will I, ſhould I die the houre after.
But if you do refuſe to marrie me,
You'l giue your ſelfe to this moſt faithfull Shepheard.
So is the bargaine.
You ſay that you'l haue Phebe if ſhe will.
Though to haue her and death, were both one thing.
I haue promis'd to make all this matter euen:
Keepe you your word, O Duke, to giue your daughter,
You yours Orlando, to receiue his daughter:
Keepe you your word Phebe, that you'l marrie me,
Or elſe refuſing me to wed this ſhepheard:
Keepe your word Siluius, that you'l marrie her
If ſhe refuſe me, and from hence I go
To make theſe doubts all euen.
I do remember in this ſhepheard boy,
Some liuely touches of my daughters fauour.
My Lord, the firſt time that I euer ſaw him,
Me thought he was a brother to your daughter:
But my good Lord, this Boy is Forreſt borne,
And hath bin tutor'd in the rudiments
Of many deſperate ſtudies, by his vnckle,
Whom he reports to be a great Magitian.
Obſcured in the circle of this Forreſt.
There is ſure another flood toward, and theſe couples are comming to the Arke. Here comes a payre of verie ſtrange beaſts, which in all tongues, are call'd Fooles.
Salutation and greeting to you all.
Good my Lord, bid him welcome: This is the Motley-minded Gentleman, that I haue ſo often met in the Forreſt: he hath bin a Courtier he ſweares.
If any man doubt that, let him put mee to my purgation, I haue trod a meaſure, I haue flattred a Lady, I haue bin politicke with my friend, ſmooth with mine enemie, I haue vndone three Tailors, I haue had foure quarrels, and like to haue fought one.
And how was that tane vp?
'Faith we met, and found the quarrel was vpon the ſeuenth cauſe.
How ſeuenth cauſe? Good my Lord, like this fellow.
I like him very well.
Godild you ſir, I deſire you of the like: I preſſe in heere ſir, amongſt the reſt of the Country copulatiues to ſweare, and to forſweare, according as mariage binds and blood breakes: a poore virgin ſir, an il-fauor'd thing ſir, but mine owne, a poore humour of mine ſir, to take that that no man elſe will: rich honeſtie dwels like a miſer ſir, in a poore houſe, as your Pearle in your foule oyſter.
By my faith, he is very ſwift, and ſententious
According to the fooles bolt ſir, and ſuch dulcet diſeaſes.
But for the ſeuenth cauſe. How did you finde the quarrell on the ſeuenth cauſe?
Vpon a lye, ſeuen times remoued: (beare your bodie more ſeeming Audry) as thus ſir: I did diſlike the cut of a certaine Courtiers beard: he ſent me word, if I ſaid his beard was not cut well, hee was in the minde it was: this is call'd the retort courteous. If I ſent him word againe, it was not well cut, he wold ſend me word he cut it to pleaſe himſelfe: this is call'd the quip modeſt. If againe, it was not well cut, he diſabled my iudgment: this is called, the reply churliſh. If againe it was not well cut, he would anſwer I ſpake not true: this is call'd the reproofe valiant. If againe, it was not well cut, he wold ſay, I lie: this is call'd the counter-checke quarrelſome: and ſo to lye circumſtantiall, and the lye direct.
And how oft did you ſay his beard was not well cut?
I durſt go no further then the lye circumſtantial: nor he durſt not giue me the lye direct: and ſo wee meaſur'd ſwords, and parted.
Can you nominate in order now, the degrees of the lye.
O ſir, we quarrel in print, by the booke: as you haue bookes for good manners: I will name you the degrees. The firſt, the Retort courteous: the ſecond, the Quip-modeſt: the third, the reply Churliſh: the fourth, the Reproofe valiant: the fift, the Counterchecke quarrelſome: the ſixt, the Lye with circumſtance: the ſeauenth, the Lye direct: all theſe you may auoyd, but the Lye direct: and you may auoide that too, with an If. I knew when ſeuen Iuſtices could not take vp a Quarrell, but when the parties were met themſelues, one of them thought but of an If; as if you ſaide ſo, then I ſaide ſo: and they ſhooke hands, and ſwore brothers. Your If, is the onely peace-maker: much vertue in if.
Is not this a rare fellow my Lord? He's as good at any thing, and yet a foole.
He vſes his folly like a ſtalking-horſe, and vnder the preſentation of that he ſhoots his wit.
Then is there mirth in heauen,
When earthly things made eauen attone together.
Good Duke receiue thy daughter,
Hymen from Heauen brought her,
Yea brought her hether.
That thou mightſt ioyne his hand with his,
Whoſe heart within his boſome is.
To you I giue my ſelfe, for I am yours.
To you I giue my ſelfe, for I am yours.
If there be truth in ſight, you are my daughter.
If there be truth in ſight, you are my Roſalind.
If ſight & ſhape be true, why then my loue adieu
Ile haue no Father, if you be not he:
Ile haue no Husband, if you be not he:
Nor ne're wed woman, if you be not ſhee.
Peace hoa: I barre confuſion,
'Tis I muſt make concluſion
Of theſe moſt ſtrange euents:
Here's eight that muſt take hands,
To ioyne in Hymens bands,
If truth holds true contents.
You and you, no croſſe ſhall part;
You and you, are hart in hart:
You, to his loue muſt accord,
Or haue a Woman to your Lord.
You and you, are ſure together,
As the Winter to fowle Weather:
Whiles a Wedlocke Hymne we ſing,
Feede your ſelues with queſtioning:
That reaſon, wonder may diminiſh
How thus we met, and theſe things finiſh.
Wedding is great Iunos crowne,
O bleſſed bond of board and bed:
'Tis Hymen peoples euerie towne,
High wedlock then be honored:
Honor, high honor and renowns
To Hymen, God of euerie Towne.
O my deere Neece, welcome thou art to me,
Euen daughter welcome, in no leſſe degree.
I wil not eate my word, now thou art mine,
Thy faith, my fancie to thee doth combine.
Let me haue audience for a word or two:
I am the ſecond ſonne of old Sir Rowland,
That bring theſe tidings to this faire aſſembly.
Duke Frederick hearing how that euerie day
Men of great worth reſorted to this forreſt,
Addreſt a mightie power, which were on foote
In his owne conduct, purpoſely to take
His brother heere, and put him to the ſword:
And to the skirts of this wilde Wood he came;
Where, meeting with an old Religious man,
After ſome queſtion with him, was conuerted
Both from his enterprize, and from the world:
His crowne bequeathing to his baniſh'd Brother,
And all their Lands reſtor'd to him againe
That were with him exil'd. This to be true,
I do engage my life.
Welcome yong man:
Thou offer'ſt fairely to thy brothers wedding:
To one his lands with-held, and to the other
A land it ſelfe at large, a potent Dukedome.
Firſt, in this Forreſt, let vs do thoſe ends
That heere vvete well begun, and wel begot:
And after, euery of this happie number
That haue endur'd ſhrew'd daies, and nights with vs,
Shal ſhare the good of our returned fortune,
According to the meaſure of their ſtates.
Meane time, forget this new-falne dignitie,
And fall into our Ruſticke Reuelrie:
Play Muſicke, and you Brides and Bride-groomes all,
With meaſure heap'd in ioy, to' th Meaſures fall.
Sir, by your patience: if I heard you rightly,
The Duke hath put on a Religious life,
And throwne into neglect the pompous Court.
He hath.
To him will I: out of theſe conuertites,
There is much matter to be heard, and learn'd:
you to your former Honor, I bequeath
your patience, and your vertue, well deſerues it.
you to a loue, that your true faith doth merit:
you to your land, and loue, and great allies:
you to a long, and well-deſerued bed:
And you to wrangling, for thy louing voyage
Is but for two moneths victuall'd: So to your pleaſures,
I am for other, then for dancing meazures.
Stay, Iaques, ſtay.
To ſee no paſtime, I: what you would haue,
Ile ſtay to know, at your abandon'd caue.
Proceed, proceed: wee'l begin theſe rights,
As we do truſt, they'l end in true delights. —
It is not the faſhion to ſee the Ladie the Epilogue: but it is no more vnhandſome, then to ſee the Lord the Prologue. If it be true, that good wine needs no buſh, 'tis true, that a good play needes no Epilogue. Yet to good wine they do vſe good buſhes: and good playes proue the better by the helpe of good Epilogues: What a caſe am I in then, that am neither a good Epilogue, nor cannot inſinuate with you in the behalfe of a good play? I am not furniſh'd like a Begger, therefore to begge will not become mee. My way is to coniure you, and Ile begin with the Women. I charge you (O women) for the loue you beare to men, to like as much of this Play, as pleaſe you: And I charge you (O men) for the loue you beare to women (as I perceiue by your ſimpring, none of you hates them) that betweene you, and the women, the play may pleaſe. If I were a Woman, I would kiſſe as many of you as had beards that pleas'd me, complexions that lik'd me, and breaths that I defi'de not: And I am ſure, as many as haue good beards, or good faces, or ſweet breaths, will for my kind offer, when I make curt'ſie, bid me farewell.