IN deliuering my ſonne from me, I burie a ſecond husband.
And I in going Madam, weep ore my fathers death anew; but I muſt attend his maieſties command, to whom I am now in Ward, euermore in ſubiection.
You ſhall find of the King a husband Madame, you ſir a father. He that ſo generally is at all times good, muſt of neceſſitie hold his vertue to you, whoſe worthineſſe would ſtirre it vp where it wanted rather then lack it where there is ſuch abundance.
What hope is there of his Maieſties amendment?
He hath abandon'd his Phiſitions Madam, vnder whoſe practiſes he hath perſecuted time with hope, and finds no other aduantage in the proceſſe, but onely the looſing of hope by time.
This yong Gentlewoman had a father, O that had, how ſad a paſſage tis, whoſe skill was almoſt as great as his honeſtie, had it ſtretch'd ſo far, would haue made nature immortall, and death ſhould haue play for lacke of worke. Would for the Kings ſake hee were liuing, I thinke it would be the death of the Kings diſeaſe.
How call'd you the man you ſpeake of Madam?
He was famous ſir in his profeſſion, and it was his great right to be ſo: Gerard de Narbon.
He was excellent indeed Madam, the King very latelie ſpoke of him admiringly, and mourningly: hee was skilfull enough to haue liu'd ſtil, if knowledge could be ſet vp againſt mortallitie.
What is it (my good Lord) the King languiſhes of?
A Fiſtula my Lord.
I heard not of it before.
I would it were not notorious. Was this Gentlewoman the Daughter of Gerard de Narbon?
His ſole childe my Lord, and bequeathed to my ouer looking. I haue thoſe hopes of her good, that her education promiſes her diſpoſitions ſhee inherits, which makes faire gifts fairer: for where an vncleane mind carries vertuous qualities, there commendations go with pitty, they are vertues and traitors too: in her they are the better for their ſimpleneſſe; ſhe deriues her honeſtie, and atcheeues her goodneſſe.
Your commendations Madam get from her teares.
'Tis the beſt brine a Maiden can ſeaſon her praiſe in. The remembrance of her father neuer approches her heart, but the tirrany of her ſorrowes takes all liuelihood from her cheeke. No more of this Helena, go too, no more leaſt it be rather thought you affect a ſorrow, then to haue—
I doe affect a ſorrow indeed, but I haue it too.
Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead, exceſſiue greefe the enemie to the liuing.
If the liuing be enemie to the greefe, the exceſſe makes it ſoone mortall.
Maddam I deſire your holie wiſhes.
How vnderſtand we that?
Be thou bleſt Bertrame, and ſucceed thy father
In manners as in ſhape: thy blood and vertue
Contend for Empire in thee, and thy goodneſſe
Share with thy birth-right. Loue all, truſt a few,
Doe wrong to none: be able for thine enemie
Rather in power then vſe: and keepe thy friend
Vnder thy owne lifes key. Be checkt for ſilence,
But neuer tax'd for ſpeech. What heauen more wil,
That thee may furniſh, and my prayers plucke downe,
Fall on thy head. Farwell my Lord,
'Tis an vnſeaſon'd Courtier, good my Lord
Aduiſe him.
He cannot want the beſt
That ſhall attend his loue.
Heauen bleſſe him: Farwell Bertram.
The beſt wiſhes that can be forg'd in your thoghts be ſeruants to you: be comfortable to my mother, your Miſtris, and make much of her.
Farewell prettie Lady, you muſt hold the credit of your father.
O were that all, I thinke not on my father,
And theſe great teares grace his remembrance more
Then thoſe I ſhed for him. What was he like?
I haue forgott him. My imagination
Carries no fauour in't but Bertrams.
I am vndone, there is no liuing, none,
If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one,
That I ſhould loue a bright particuler ſtarre,
And think to wed it, he is ſo aboue me
In his bright radience and colaterall light,
Muſt I be comforted, not in his ſphere;
Th' ambition in my loue thus plagues it ſelfe:
The hind that would be mated by the Lion
Muſt die for loue. 'Twas prettie, though a plague
To ſee him euerie houre to ſit and draw
His arched browes, his hawking eie, his curles
In our hearts table: heart too capeable
Of euerie line and tricke of his ſweet fauour.
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancie
Muſt ſanctifie his Reliques. Who comes heere?
One that goes with him: I loue him for his ſake,
And yet I know him a notorious Liar,
Thinke him a great way foole, ſolie a coward,
Yet theſe fixt euils ſit ſo fit in him,
That they take place, when Vertues ſteely bones
Lookes bleake i' th cold wind: withall, full ofte we ſee
Cold wiſedome waighting on ſuperfluous follie.
Saue you faire Queene.
And you Monarch.
No.
And no.
Are you meditating on virginitie?
If you haue ſome ſtaine of ſouldier in you: Let mee aske you a queſtion. Man is enemie to virginitie, how may we barracado it againſt him?
Keepe him out.
But he aſſailes, and our virginitie though valiant, in the defence yet is weak: vnfold to vs ſome warlike reſiſtance.
There is none: Man ſetting downe before you, will vndermine you, and blow you vp.
Bleſſe our poore Virginity from vnderminers and blowers vp. Is there no Military policy how Virgins might blow vp men?
Virginity beeing blowne downe, Man will quicklier be blowne vp: marry in blowing him downe againe, with the breach your ſelues made, you loſe your Citty. It is not politicke, in the Common-wealth of Nature, to preſerue virginity. Loſſe of Virginitie, is rationall encreaſe, and there was neuer Virgin goe, till virginitie was firſt loſt. That you were made of, is mettall to make Virgins. Virginitie, by beeing once loſt, may be ten times found: by being euer kept, it is euer loſt: 'tis too cold a companion: Away with't.
I will ſtand for't a little, though therefore I die a Virgin.
There's little can bee ſaide in't, 'tis againſt the rule of Nature. To ſpeake on the part of virginitie, is to accuſe your Mothers; which is moſt infallible diſobedience. He that hangs himſelfe is a Virgin: Virginitie murthers it ſelfe, and ſhould be buried in highwayes out of all ſanctified limit, as a deſperate Offendreſſe againſt Nature. Virginitie breedes mites, much like a Cheeſe, conſumes it ſelfe to the very payring, and ſo dies with feeding his owne ſtomacke. Beſides, Virginitie is peeuiſh, proud, ydle, made of ſelfe-loue, which is the moſt inhibited ſinne in the Cannon. Keepe it not, you cannot chooſe but looſe by't. Out with't: within ten yeare it will make it ſelfe two, which is a goodly increaſe, and the principall it ſelfe not much the worſe. Away with't.
How might one do ſir, to looſe it to her owne liking?
Let mee ſee. Marry ill, to like him that ne're it likes. 'Tis a commodity wil loſe the gloſſe with lying: The longer kept, the leſſe worth: Off with't while 'tis vendible. Anſwer the time of requeſt, Virginitie like an olde Courtier, weares her cap out of faſhion, richly ſuted, but vnſuteable, iuſt like the brooch & the toothpick, which were not now: your Date is better in your Pye and your Porredge, then in your cheeke: and your virginity, your old virginity, is like one of our French wither'd peares, it lookes ill, it eates drily, marry 'tis a wither'd peare: it was formerly better, marry yet 'tis a wither'd peare: Will you any thing with it?
Not my virginity yet:
There ſhall your Maſter haue a thouſand loues,
A Mother, and a Miſtreſſe, and a friend,
A Phenix, Captaine, and an enemy▪
A guide, a Goddeſſe, and a Soueraigne,
A Counſellor, a Traitoreſſe, and a Deare:
His humble ambition, proud humility:
His iarring, concord: and his diſcord, dulcet:
His faith, his ſweet diſaſter: with a world
Of pretty fond adoptious chriſtendomes
That blinking Cupid goſſips. Now ſhall he:
I know not what he ſhall, God ſend him well,
The Courts a learning place, and he is one.
What one ifaith?
That I wiſh well, 'tis pitty.
What's pitty?
That wiſhing well had not a body in't,
Which might be felt, that we the poorer borne,
Whoſe baſer ſtarres do ſhut vs vp in wiſhes,
Might vvith effects of them follow our friends,
And ſhew what vve alone muſt thinke, which neuer
Returnes vs thankes.
Monſieur Parrolles,
My Lord cals for you.
Little Hellen farewell, if I can remember thee, I will thinke of thee at Court.
Monſieur Parolles, you were borne vnder a charitable ſtarre.
Vnder Mars I.
I eſpecially thinke, vnder Mars.
Why vnder Mars?
The warres hath ſo kept you vnder, that you muſt needes be borne vnder Mars.
When he was predominant.
When he was retrograde I thinke rather.
Why thinke you ſo?
You go ſo much backward when you fight.
That's for aduantage.
So is running away,
When feare propoſes the ſafetie:
But the compoſition that your valour and feare makes in you, is a vertue of a good wing, and I like the weare well.
I am ſo full of buſineſſes, I cannot anſwere thee acutely: I will returne perfect Courtier, in the which my inſtruction ſhall ſerue to naturalize thee, ſo thou wilt be capeable of a Courtiers councell, and vnderſtand what aduice ſhall thruſt vppon thee, elſe thou dieſt in thine vnthankfulnes, and thine ignorance makes thee away, farewell: When thou haſt leyſure, ſay thy praiers: when thou haſt none, remember thy Friends: Get thee a good husband, and vſe him as he vſes thee: So farewell.
Our remedies oft in our ſelues do lye,
Which we aſcribe to heauen: the fated skye
Giues vs free ſcope, onely doth backward pull
Our ſlow deſignes, when we our ſelues are dull.
What power is it, which mounts my loue ſo hye,
That makes me ſee, and cannot feede mine eye?
The mightieſt ſpace in fortune, Nature brings
To ioyne like, likes; and kiſſe like natiue things.
Impoſſible be ſtrange attempts to thoſe
That weigh their paines in ſence, and do ſuppoſe
What hath beene, cannot be. Who euer ſtroue
To ſhew her merit, that did miſſe her loue?
(The Kings diſeaſe) my proiect may deceiue me,
But my intents are fixt, and will not leaue me.
The Florentines and Senoys are by th' eares,
Haue fought with equall fortune, and continue
A brauing warre.
So tis reported ſir.
Nay tis moſt credible, we heere receiue it,
A certaintie vouch'd from our Coſin Auſtria,
With caution, that the Florentine will moue vs
For ſpeedie ayde: wherein our deereſt friend
Preiudicates the buſineſſe, and would ſeeme
To haue vs make deniall.
His loue and wiſedome
Approu'd ſo to your Maieſty, may pleade
For ampleſt credence.
He hath arm'd our anſwer,
And Florence is deni'de before he comes:
Yet for our Gentlemen that meane to ſee
The Tuſcan ſeruice, freely haue they leaue
To ſtand on either part.
It well may ſerue
A nurſſerie to our Gentrie, who are ſicke
For breathing, and exploit.
What's he comes heere.
It is the Count Roſignoll my good Lord,
Yong Bertram.
Youth, thou bear'ſt thy Fathers face,
Franke Nature rather curious then in haſt
Hath well compos'd thee: Thy Fathers morall parts
Maiſt thou inherit too: Welcome to Paris.
My thankes and dutie are your Maieſties.
I would I had that corporall ſoundneſſe now,
As when thy father, and my ſelfe, in friendſhip
Firſt tride out ſouldierſhip: he did looke farre
Into the ſeruice of the time, and was
Diſcipled of the braueſt. He laſted long,
But on vs both did haggiſh Age ſteale on,
And wore vs out of act: It much repaires me
To talke of your good father; in his youth
He had the wit, which I can well obſerue
To day in our yong Lords: but they may ieſt
Till their owne ſcorne returne to them vnnoted
Ere they can hide their leuitie in honour:
So like a Courtier, contempt nor bitterneſſe
Were in his pride, or ſharpneſſe; if they were,
His equall had awak'd them, and his honour
Clocke to it ſelfe, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him ſpeake: and at this time
His tongue obey d his hand. Who were below him,
He vs'd as creatures of another place,
And bow'd his eminent top to their low rankes,
Making them proud of his humilitie,
In their poore praiſe he humbled: Such a man
Might be a copie to theſe yonger times;
Which followed well, would demonſtrate them now
But goers backward.
His good remembrance ſir
Lies richer in your thoughts, then on his tombe:
So in approofe liues not his Epitaph,
As in your royall ſpeech.
Would I were with him he would alwaies ſay,
(Me thinkes I heare him now) his plauſiue words
He ſcatter'd not in eares, but grafted them
To grow there and to beare: Let me not liue,
This his good melancholly oft began
On the Cataſtrophe and heele of paſtime
When it was out: Let me not liue (quoth hee)
After my flame lackes oyle, to be the ſnuffe
Of yonger ſpirits, whoſe apprehenſiue ſenſes
All but new things diſdaine; whoſe iudgements are
Meere fathers of their garments: whoſe conſtancies
Expire before their faſhions: this he wiſh'd.
I after him, do after him wiſh too:
Since I nor wax nor honie can bring home,
I quickly were diſſolued from my hiue
To giue ſome Labourers roome.
You'r loued Sir,
They that leaſt lend it you, ſhall lacke you firſt.
I fill a place I know't: how long iſt Count
Since the Phyſitian at your fathers died?
He was much fam'd.
Some ſix moneths ſince my Lord.
If he were liuing, I would try him yet.
Lend me an arme: the reſt haue worne me out
With ſeuerall applications: Nature and ſickneſſe
Debate it at their leiſure. Welcome Count,
My ſonne's no deerer.
Thanke your Maieſty.
I will now heare, what ſay you of this gentlewoman.
Maddam the care I haue had to euen your content, I wiſh might be found in the Kalender of my paſt endeuours, for then we wound our Modeſtie, and make foule the clearneſſe of our deſeruings, whenof our ſelues we publiſh them.
What doe's this knaue heere? Get you gone ſirra: the complaints I haue heard of you I do not all beleeue, 'tis my ſlowneſſe that I doe not: For I know you lacke not folly to commit them, & haue abilitie enough to make ſuch knaueries yours.
'Tis not vnknown to you Madam, I am a poore fellow.
Well ſir.
No maddam,
'Tis not ſo well that I am poore, though manie of the rich are damn'd, but if I may haue your Ladiſhips good will to goe to the world, Isbell the woman and w will doe as we may.
Wilt thou needes be a begger?
I doe beg your good will in this caſe.
In what caſe?
In Isbels caſe and mine owne: ſeruice is no heritage, and I thinke I ſhall neuer haue the bleſſing of God, till I haue iſſue a my bodie: for they ſay barnes are bleſſings.
Tell me thy reaſon why thou wilt marrie?
My poore bodie Madam requires it, I am driuen onby the fleſh, and hee muſt needes goe that the diuell driues.
Is this all your worſhips reaſon?
Faith Madam I haue other holie reaſons, ſuch as they are.
May the world know them?
I haue beene Madam a wicked creature, as you and all fleſh and blood are, and indeede I doe marrie that I may repent.
Thy marriage ſooner then thy wickedneſſe.
I am out a friends Madam, and I hope to haue friends for my wiues ſake.
Such friends are thine enemies knaue.
Y' are ſhallow Madam in great friends, for the knaues come to doe that for me which I am a wearie of: he that eres my Land, ſpares my teame, and giues mee leaue to Inne the crop: if I be his cuckold hee's my drudge; he that comforts my wife, is the cheriſher of my fleſh and blood; hee that cheriſhes my fleſh and blood, loues my fleſh and blood; he that loues my fleſh and blood is my friend: ergo, he that kiſſes my wife is my friend: if men could be contented to be what they are, there were no feare in marriage, for yong Charbon the Puritan, and old Poyſam the Papiſt, how ſomere their hearts are ſeuer'd in Religion, their heads are both one, they may ioule horns together like any Deare i' th Herd.
Wilt thou euer be a foule mouth'd and calumnious knaue?
A Prophet I Madam, and I ſpeake the truth the next waie, for I the Ballad will repeate, which men full true ſhall finde, your marriage comes by deſtinie, your Cuckow ſings by kinde.
Get you gone ſir, Ile talke with you more anon.
May it pleaſe you Madam, that hee bid Hellen come to you, of her I am to ſpeake.
Sirra tell my gentlewoman I would ſpeake with her, Hellen I meane.
Was this faire face the cauſe, quoth ſhe,
Why the Grecians ſacked Troy,
Fond done, done, fond was this King Priams ioy,
With that ſhe ſighed as ſhe ſtood, bis
And gaue this ſentence then, among nine bad if one be good, among nine bad if one be good, there's yet one good in ten.
What, one good in tenne? you corrupt the ſong ſirra.
One good woman in ten Madam, which is a purifying ath' ſong: would God would ſerue the world ſo all the yeere, weed finde no fault with the tithe woman if I were the Parſon, one in ten quoth a? and wee might haue a good woman borne but ore euerie blazing ſtarre, or at an earthquake, 'twould mend the Lotterie well, a man may draw his heart out ere a plucke one.
Youle begone ſir knaue▪ and doe as I command you?
That man ſhould be at womans command, and yet no hurt done, though honeſtie be no Puritan, yet it will doe no hurt, it will weare the Surplis of humilitie ouer the blacke-Gowne of a bigge heart: I am going forſooth, the buſineſſe is for Helen to come hither.
Well now.
I know Madam you loue your Gentlewoman intirely.
Faith I doe: her Father bequeath'd her to mee, and ſhe her ſelfe without other aduantage, may lawfullie make title to as much loue as ſhee findes, there is more owing her then is paid, and more ſhall be paid her then ſheele demand.
Madam, I was verie late more neere her then I thinke ſhee wiſht mee, alone ſhee was, and did communicate to her ſelfe her owne words to her owne eares, ſhee thought, I dare vowe for her, they toucht not anie ſtranger ſence, her matter was, ſhee loued your Sonne; Fortune ſhee ſaid was no goddeſſe, that had put ſuch difference betwixt their two eſtates: Loue no god, that would not extend his might onelie, where qualities were leuell, Queene of Virgins, that would ſuffer her poore Knight ſurpris'd without reſcue in the firſt aſſault or ranſome afterward: This ſhee deliuer'd in the moſt bitter touch of ſorrow that ere I heard Virgin exclaime in, which I held my dutie ſpeedily to acquaint you withall, ſithence in the loſſe that may happen, it concernes you ſomething to know it.
You haue diſcharg'd this honeſtlie, keepe it to your ſelfe, manie likelihoods inform'd mee of this before, which hung ſo tottring in the ballance, that I could neither beleeue nor miſdoubt: praie you leaue mee, ſtall this in your boſome, and I thanke you for your honeſt care: I will ſpeake with you further anon.
Euen ſo it vvas vvith me when I was yong:
If euer vve are natures, theſe are ours, this thorne
Doth to our Roſe of youth righlie belong
Our bloud to vs, this to our blood is borne,
It is the ſhow, and ſeale of natures truth,
Where loues ſtrong paſſion is impreſt in youth,
By our remembrances of daies forgon,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none,
Her eie is ſicke on't, I obſerue her now.
What is your pleaſure Madam?
You know Hellen I am a mother to you.
Mine honorable Miſtris.
Nay a mother, why not a mother? when I ſed a mother
Me thought you ſaw a ſerpent, what's in mother,
That you ſtart at it? I ſay I am your mother,
And put you in the Catalogue of thoſe
That were enwombed mine, 'tis often ſeene
Adoption ſtriues vvith nature, and choiſe breedes
A natiue ſlip to vs from forraine ſeedes:
You nere oppreſt me with a mothers groane,
Yet I expreſſe to you a mothers care,
(Gods mercie maiden) dos it curd thy blood
To ſay I am thy mother? vvhat's the matter,
That this diſtempered meſſenger of wet?
The manie colour'd Iris rounds thine eye?
—Why, that you are my daughter?
That I am not.
I ſay I am your Mother.
Pardon Madam.
The Count Roſillion cannot be my brother:
I am from humble, he from honored name:
No note vpon my Parents, his all noble,
My Maſter, my deere Lord he is, and I
His ſeruant liue, and will his vaſſall die:
He muſt not be my brother.
Nor I your Mother.
You are my mother Madam, would you were
So that my Lord your ſonne were not my brother,
Indeede my mother, or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for, then I doe for heauen,
So I were not his ſiſter, cant no other,
But I your daughter, he muſt be my brother.
Yes Hellen, you might be my daughter in law,
God ſhield you meane it not, daughter and mother
So ſtriue vpon your pulſe; vvhat pale agen?
My feare hath catcht your fondneſſe! now I ſee
The miſtrie of your louelineſſe, and finde
Your ſalt teares head, now to all ſence 'tis groſſe:
You loue my ſonne, inuention is aſham'd
Againſt the proclamation of thy paſſion
To ſay thou dooſt not: therefore tell me true,
But tell me then 'tis ſo, for looke, thy cheekes
Confeſſe it 'ton tooth to th' other, and thine eies
See it ſo groſely ſhowne in thy behauiours,
That in their kinde they ſpeake it, onely ſinne
And helliſh obſtinacie tye thy tongue
That truth ſhould be ſuſpected, ſpeake, iſt ſo?
If it be ſo, you haue wound a goodly clewe:
If it be not, forſweare't how ere I charge thee,
As heauen ſhall worke in me for thine auaile
To tell me truelie.
Good Madam pardon me.
Do you loue my Sonne?
Your pardon noble Miſtris.
Loue you my Sonne?
Doe not you loue him Madam?
Goe not about; my loue hath in't a bond
Whereof the world takes note: Come, come, diſcloſe:
The ſtate of your affection, for your paſſions
Haue to the full appeach'd.
Then I confeſſe
Here on my knee, before high heauen and you,
That before you, and next vnto high heauen, I loue your Sonne:
My friends were poore but honeſt, ſo's my loue:
Be not offended, for it hurts not him
That he is lou'd of me; I follow him not
By any token of preſumptuous ſuite,
Nor would I haue him, till I doe deſerue him,
Yet neuer know how that deſert ſhould be:
I know I loue in vaine, ſtriue againſt hope:
Yet in this captious, and intemible Siue.
I ſtill poure in the waters of my loue
And lacke not to looſe ſtill; thus Indian like
Religious in mine error, I adore
The Sunne that lookes vpon his worſhipper,
But knowes of him no more. My deereſt Madam,
Let not your hate incounter with my loue,
For louing where you doe; but if your ſelfe,
Whoſe aged honor cites a vertuous youth,
Did euer, in ſo true a flame of liking,
Wiſh chaſtly, and loue dearely, that your Dian
Was both her ſelfe and loue, O then giue pittie
To her whoſe ſtate is ſuch, that cannot chooſe
But lend and giue where ſhe is ſure to looſe;
That ſeekes not to finde that, her ſearch implies,
But riddle like, liues ſweetely where ſhe dies.
Had you not lately an intent, ſpeake truely,
To goe to Paris?
Madam I had.
Wherefore? tell true.
I will tell truth▪ by grace it ſelfe I ſweare:
You know my Father left me ſome preſcriptions
Of rare and prou'd effects, ſuch as his reading
And manifeſt experience, had collected
For generall ſoueraigntie: and that he wil'd me
In heedefull'ſt reſeruation to beſtow them,
As notes, whoſe faculties incluſiue were,
More then they were in note: Amongſt the reſt,
There is a remedie, approu'd, ſet downe,
To cure the deſperate languiſhings whereof
The King is render'd loſt.
This was your motiue for Paris, was it, ſpeake?
My Lord, your ſonne, made me to think of this;
Elſe Paris, and the medicine, and the King,
Had from the conuerſation of my thoughts,
Happily beene abſent then.
But thinke you Hellen,
If you ſhould tender your ſuppoſed aide,
He would receiue it? He and his Phiſitions
Are of a minde, he, that they cannot helpe him:
They, that they cannot helpe, how ſhall they credit
A poore vnlearned Virgin, when the Schooles
Embowel'd of their doctrine, haue left off
The danger to it ſelfe.
There's ſomething in't
More then my Fathers skill, which was the great'ſt
Of his profeſſion, that his good receipt,
Shall for my legacie be ſanctified
By th' luckieſt ſtars in heauen, and would your honor
But giue me leaue to trie ſucceſſe, I'de venture
The well loſt life of mine, on his Graces cure,
By ſuch a day, an houre.
Doo'ſt thou beleeue't?
I Madam knowingly.
Why Hellen thou ſhalt haue my leaue and loue,
Meanes and attendants, and my louing greetings
To thoſe of mine in Court, Ile ſtaie at home
And praie Gods bleſſing into thy attempt:
Begon to morrow, and be ſure of this,
What I can helpe thee to, thou ſhalt not miſſe.
Farewell yong Lords, theſe warlike principles
Doe not throw from you, and you my Lords farewell:
Share the aduice betwixt you, if both gaine, all
The guift doth ſtretch it ſelfe as 'tis receiu'd,
And is enough for both.
'Tis our hope ſir,
After well entred ſouldiers, to returne
And finde your grace in health.
No, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
Will not confeſſe he owes the mallady
That doth my life beſiege: farwell yong Lords,
Whether I liue or die, be you the ſonnes
Of worthy French men: let higher Italy
(Thoſe bated that inherit but the fall
Of the laſt Monarchy) ſee that you come
Not to wooe honour, but to wed it, when
The braueſt queſtant ſhrinkes: finde what you ſeeke,
That fame may cry you loud: I ſay farewell.
Health at your bidding ſerue your Maieſty.
Thoſe girles of Italy, take heed of them,
They ſay our French, lacke language to deny
If they demand: beware of being Captiues
Before you ſerue.
Our hearts receiue your warnings.
Farewell, come hether to me.
Oh my ſweet Lord yt you wil ſtay behind vs.
'Tis not his fault the ſpark.
Oh 'tis braue warres.
Moſt admirable, I haue ſeene thoſe warres.
I am commanded here, and kept a coyle with,
Too young, and the next yeere, and 'tis too early.
And thy minde ſtand too't boy,
Steale away brauely.
I ſhal ſtay here the for-horſe to a ſmocke,
Creeking my ſhooes on the plaine Maſonry,
Till honour be bought vp, and no ſword worne
But one to dance with: by heauen, Ile ſteale away.
There's honour in the theft.
Commit it Count.
I am your acceſſary, and ſo farewell.
I grow to you, & our parting is a tortur'd body.
Farewll Captaine.
Sweet Mounſier Parolles.
Noble Heroes; my ſword and yours are kinne, good ſparkes and luſtrous, a word good mettals. You ſhall finde in the Regiment of the Spinij, one Captaine Spurio his ſicatrice, with an Embleme of warre heere on his ſiniſter cheeke; it was this very ſword entrench'd it: ſay to him I liue, and obſerue his reports for me.
We ſhall noble Captaine.
Mars doate on you for his nouices, what will ye doe?
Stay the King.
Vſe a more ſpacious ceremonie to the Noble Lords, you haue reſtrain'd your ſelfe within the Liſt of too cold an adieu: be more expreſſiue to them; for they weare themſelues in the cap of the time, there do muſter true gate; eat, ſpeake, and moue vnder the influence of the moſt receiu'd ſtarre, and though the deuill leade the meaſure, ſuch are to be followed: after them, and take a more dilated farewell.
And I will doe ſo.
Worthy fellowes, and like to prooue moſt ſinewie ſword-men.
Pardon my Lord for mee and for my tidings.
Ile ſee thee to ſtand vp.
Then heres a man ſtands that has brought his pardon,
I would you had kneel'd my Lord to aske me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could ſo ſtand vp.
I would I had, ſo I had broke thy pate
And askt thee mercy for't.
Good faith a-croſſe, but my good Lord 'tis thus,
Will you be cur'd of your infirmitie?
No.
O will you eat no grapes my royall foxe?
Yes but you will, my noble grapes, and if
My royall foxe could reach them: I haue ſeen a medicine
That's able to breath life into a ſtone,
Quicken a rocke, and make you dance Canari
With ſprightly fire and motion, whoſe ſimple touch
Is powerfull to arayſe King Pippen, nay
To giue great Charlemaine a pen in's hand
And write to her a loue-line.
What her is this?
Why doctor ſhe: my Lord, there's one arriu'd,
If you will ſee her: now by my faith and honour,
If ſeriouſly I may conuay my thoughts
In this my light deliuerance, I haue ſpoke
With one, that in her ſexe, her yeeres, profeſſion,
Wiſedome and conſtancy, hath amaz'd mee more
Then I dare blame my weakeneſſe: will you ſee her?
For that is her demand, and know her buſineſſe?
That done, laugh well at me.
Now good Lafew,
Bring in the admiration, that we with thee
May ſpend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wondring how thou tookſt it.
Nay, Ile fit you,
And not be all day neither.
Thus he his ſpeciall nothing euer prologues.
Nay, come your waies.
This haſte hath wings indeed.
Nay, come your waies,
This is his Maieſtie, ſay your minde to him,
A Traitor you doe looke like, but ſuch traitors
His Maieſty ſeldome feares, I am Creſſeds Vncle,
That dare leaue two together, far you well.
Now faire one, do's your buſines follow vs?
I my good Lord,
Gerard de Narbon was my father,
In what he did profeſſe, well found.
I knew him.
The rather will I ſpare my praiſes towards him,
Knowing him is enough on's bed of death,
Many receits he gaue me, chieflie one,
Which as the deareſt iſſue of his practice
And of his olde experience, th' onlie darling,
He bad me ſtore vp, as a triple eye,
Safer then mine owne two: more deare I haue ſo,
And hearing your high Maieſtie is toucht
With that malignant cauſe, wherein the honour
Of my deare fathers gift, ſtands cheefe in power,
I come to tender it, and my appliance,
With all bound humbleneſſe.
We thanke you maiden,
But may not be ſo credulous of cure,
When our moſt learned Doctors leaue vs, and
The congregated Colledge haue concluded,
That labouring Art can neuer ranſome nature
From her inaydible eſtate: I ſay we muſt not
So ſtaine our iudgement, or corrupt our hope,
To proſtitute our paſt-cure malladie
To empericks, or to diſſeuer ſo
Our great ſelfe and our credit, to eſteeme
A ſenceleſſe helpe, when helpe paſt ſence we deeme.
My dutie then ſhall pay me for my paines:
I will no more enforce mine office on you,
Humbly intreating from your royall thoughts,
A modeſt one to beare me backe againe.
I cannot giue thee leſſe to be cal'd gratefull:
Thou thoughtſt to helpe me, and ſuch thankes I giue,
As one neere death to thoſe that wiſh him liue:
But what at full I know, thou knowſt no part,
I knowing all my perill, thou no Art.
What I can doe, can doe no hurt to try,
Since you ſet vp your reſt 'gainſt remedie:
He that of greateſt workes is finiſher,
Oft does them by the weakeſt miniſter:
So holy Writ, in babes hath iudgement ſhowne,
When Iudges haue bin babes; great flouds haue flowne
From ſimple ſources: and great Seas haue dried
When Miracles haue by the great'ſt beene denied.
Oft expectation failes, and moſt oft there
Where moſt it promiſes: and oft it hits,
Where hope is coldeſt, and deſpaire moſt ſhifts.
I muſt not heare thee, fare thee wel kind maide,
Thy paines not vs'd, muſt by thy ſelfe be paid,
Proffers not tooke, reape thanks for their reward.
Inſpired Merit ſo by breath is bard,
It is not ſo with him that all things knowes
As 'tis with vs, that ſquare our gueſſe by ſhowes:
But moſt it is preſumption in vs, when
The help of heauen we count the act of men.
Deare ſir, to my endeauors giue conſent,
Of heauen, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an Impoſtrue, that proclaime
My ſelfe againſt the leuill of mine aime,
But know I thinke, and thinke I know moſt ſure,
My Art is not paſt power, nor you paſt cure.
Art thou ſo confident? Within what ſpace
Hop'ſt thou my cure?
The greateſt grace lending grace,
Ere twice the horſes of the ſunne ſhall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnall ring,
Ere twice in murke and occidentall dampe
Moiſt Heſperus, hath quench'd her ſleepy Lampe:
Or foure and twenty times the Pylots glaſſe
Hath told the theeuiſh minutes, how they paſſe:
What is infirme, from your ſound parts ſhall flie,
Health ſhall liue free, and ſickeneſſe freely dye.
Vpon thy certainty and confidence,
What dar'ſt thou venter?
Taxe of impudence,
A ſtrumpets boldneſſe, a divulged ſhame
Traduc'd by odious ballads: my maidens name
Seard otherwiſe, ne worſe of worſt extended
With vildeſt torture, let my life be ended.
Methinks in thee ſome bleſſed ſpirit doth ſpeak
His powerfull ſound, within an organ weake:
And what impoſſibility would ſlay
In common ſence, ſence ſaues another way:
Thy life is deere, for all that life can rate
Worth name of life, in thee hath eſtimate:
Youth, beauty, wiſedome, courage, all
That happines and prime, can happy call:
Thou this to hazard, needs muſt intimate
Skill infinite, or monſtrous deſperate,
Sweet practiſer, thy Phyſicke I will try,
That miniſters thine owne death if I die.
If I breake time, or flinch in property
Of what I ſpoke, vnpittied let me die,
And well deſeru'd: not helping, death's my ſee,
But if I helpe, what doe you promiſe me.
Make thy demand.
But will you make it euen?
I by my Scepter, and my hopes of helpe.
Then ſhalt thou giue me with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command:
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To chooſe from forth the royall bloud of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy ſtate:
But ſuch a one thy vaſſall, whom I know
Is free for me to aske, thee to beſtow.
Heere is my hand, the premiſes obſeru'd,
Thy will by my performance ſhall be ſeru'd:
So make the choice of thy owne time, for I
Thy reſolv'd Patient, on thee ſtill relye:
More ſhould I queſtion thee, and more I muſt,
Though more to know, could not be more to truſt:
From whence thou can'ſt, how tended on, but reſt
Vnqueſtion'd welcome, and vndoubted bleſt.
Giue me ſome helpe heere hoa, if thou proceed,
As high as word, my deed ſhall match thy deed.
Come on ſir, I ſhall now put you to the height of your breeding.
I will ſhew my ſelfe highly fed, and lowly taught, I know my buſineſſe is but to the Court.
To the Court, why what place make you ſpeciall, when you put off that with ſuch contempt, but to the Court?
Truly Madam, if God haue lent a man any manners, hee may eaſilie put it off at Court: hee that cannot make a legge, put off's cap, kiſſe his hand, and ſay nothing, has neither legge, hands, lippe, nor cap; and indeed ſuch a fellow, to ſay preciſely, were not for the Court, But for me, I haue an anſwere will ſerue all men.
Marry that's a bountifull anſwere that fits all queſtions.
It is like a Barbers chaire that fits all buttockes, the pin buttocke, the quatch-buttocke, the brawn buttocke, or any buttocke.
Will your anſwere ſerue fit to all queſtions?
As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an Atturney, as your French Crowne for your taffety punke, as Tibs ruſh for Toms fore-finger, as a pancake for Shroue-tueſday, a Morris for May-day, as the naile to his hole, the Cuckold to his horne, as a ſcolding queane to a wrangling knaue, as the Nuns lip to the Friers mouth, nay as the pudding to his skin.
Haue you, I ſay, an anſwere of ſuch fitneſſe for all queſtions?
From below your Duke, to beneath your Conſtable, it will fit any queſtion.
It muſt be an anſwere of moſt monſtrous ſize, that muſt fit all demands.
But a triflle neither in good faith, if the learned ſhould ſpeake truth of it: heere it is, and all that belongs to't. Aske mee if I am a Courtier, it ſhall doe you no harme to learne.
To be young againe if we could: I will bee a foole in queſtion, hoping to bee the wiſer by your anſwer.
I pray you ſir, are you a Courtier?
O Lord ſir theres a ſimple putting off: more, more, a hundred of them.
Sir I am a poore freind of yours, that loues you.
O Lord ſir, thicke, thicke, ſpare not me.
I thinke ſir, you can eate none of this homely meate.
O Lord ſir; nay put me too't, I warrant you.
You were lately whipt ſir as I thinke.
O Lord ſir, ſpare not me.
Doe you crie O Lord ſir at your whipping, and ſpare not me? Indeed your O Lord ſir, is very ſequent to your whipping: you would anſwere very well to a whipping if you were but bound too't.
I nere had worſe lucke in my life in my O Lord ſir: I ſee things may ſerue long, but not ſerue euer.
I play the noble huſwife with the time, to entertaine it ſo merrily with a foole.
O Lord ſir, why there't ſerues well agen.
And end ſir to your buſineſſe: giue Hellen this,
And vrge her to a preſent anſwer backe,
Commend me to my kinſmen, and my ſonne,
This is not much.
Not much commendation to them.
Not much imployement for you, you vnderſtand me.
Moſt fruitfully, I am there, before my legegs.
Haſt you agen.
They ſay miracles are paſt, and we haue our Philoſophicall perſons, to make moderne and familiar things ſupernaturall and cauſeleſſe. Hence is it, that we make trifles of terrours, enſconcing our ſelues into ſeeming knowledge, when we ſhould ſubmit our ſelues to an vnknowne feare.
Why 'tis the rareſt argument of wonder, that hath ſhot out in our latter times.
And ſo 'tis.
To be relinquiſht of the Artiſts.
So I ſay both of Galen and Paracelſus.
Of all the learned and authenticke fellowes.
Right ſo I ſay.
That gaue him out incureable.
Why there 'tis, ſo ſay I too.
Not to be help'd.
Right, as 'twere a man aſſur'd of a—
Vncertaine life, and ſure death.
Iuſt, you ſay well: ſo would I haue ſaid.
I may truly ſay, it is a noueltie to the world.
It is indeede if you will haue it in ſhewing, you ſhall reade it in what do ye call there.
A ſhewing of a heauenly effect in an earthly Actor.
That's it, I would haue ſaid, the verie ſame.
Why your Dolphin is not luſtier: fore mee
I ſpeake in reſpect—
Nay 'tis ſtrange, 'tis very ſtraunge, that is the breefe and the tedious of it, and he's of a moſt facinerious ſpirit, that will not acknowledge it to be the—
Very hand of heauen.
I, ſo I ſay.
In a moſt weake—
And debile miniſter great power, grear trancendence, which ſhould indeede giue vs a further vſe to be made, then alone then recou'ry of the king, as to bee
Generally thankfull.
I would haue ſaid it, you ſay well: heere comes the King.
Luſtique, as the Dutchman ſaies: Ile like a maide the Better whil'ſt I haue a tooth in my head: why he's able to leade her a Carranto.
Mor du vinager, is not this Helen?
Fore God I thinke ſo.
Goe call before mee all the Lords in Court,
Sit my preſeruer by thy patients ſide,
And with this healthfull hand whoſe baniſht ſence
Thou haſt repeal'd, a ſecond time receyue
The confirmation of my promis'd guift,
Which but attends thy naming.
Faire Maide ſend forth thine eye, this youthfull parcell
Of Noble Batchellors, ſtand at my beſtowing,
Ore whom both Soueraigne power, and fathers voice
I haue to vſe; thy franke election make,
Thou haſt power to chooſe, and they none to forſake.
To each of you, one faire and vertuous Miſtris;
Fall when loue pleaſe, marry to each but one.
I'de giue bay curtall, and his furniture
My mouth no more were broken then theſe boyes,
And writ as little beard.
Peruſe them well:
Not one of thoſe, but had a Noble father.
Gentlemen, heauen hath through me, reſtor'd the king to health.
We vnderſtand it, and thanke heauen for you.
I am a ſimple Maide, and therein wealthieſt
That I proteſt, I ſimply am a Maide:
Pleaſe it your Maieſtie, I haue done already:
The bluſhes in my cheekes thus whiſper mee,
We bluſh that thou ſhouldſt chooſe, but be refuſed;
Let the white death ſit on thy cheeke for euer,
Wee'l nere come there againe.
Make choiſe and ſee,
Who ſhuns thy loue, ſhuns all his loue in mee.
Now Dian from thy Altar do I fly,
And to imperiall loue, that God moſt high
Do my ſighes ſtreame: Sir, wil you heare my ſuite?
And grant it.
Thankes ſir, all the reſt is mute.
I had rather be in this choiſe, then throw Ameſ-ace for my life.
The honor ſir that flames in your faire eyes,
Before I ſpeake too threatningly replies:
Loue make your fortunes twentie times aboue
Her that ſo vviſhes, and her humble loue.
No better if you pleaſe.
My wiſh receiue,
Which great loue grant, and ſo I take my leaue.
Do all they denie her? And they were ſons of mine, I'de haue them whip'd, or I would ſend them to 'th Turke to make Eunuches of.
Be not afraid that I your hand ſhould take,
Ile neuer do you wrong for your owne ſake:
Bleſſing vpon your vowes, and in your bed
Finde fairer fortune, if you euer wed.
Theſe boyes are boyes of Ice, they'le none haue heere: ſure they are baſtards to the Engliſh, the French nere got em.
You are too young, too happie, and too good
To make your ſelfe a ſonne out of my blood.
Faire one, I thinke not ſo.
There's one grape yet, I am ſure thy father drunke wine. But if thou beſt not an aſſe, I am a youth of fourteene: I haue knowne thee already.
I dare not ſay I take you, but I giue
Me and my ſeruice, euer whilſt I liue
Into your guiding power: This is the man.
Why then young Bertram take her ſhee's thy wife.
My wife my Leige? I ſhal beſeech your highnes
In ſuch a buſines, giue me leaue to vſe
The helpe of mine owne eies.
Know'ſt thou not Bertram what ſhee ha's done for mee?
Yes my good Lord, but neuer hope to know why I ſhould marrie her.
Thou know'ſt ſhee ha's rais'd me from my ſickly bed.
But followes it my Lord, to bring me downe
Muſt anſwer for your raiſing? I knowe her well:
Shee had her breeding at my fathers charge:
A poore Phyſitians daughter my wife? Diſdaine
Rather corrupt me euer.
Tis onely title thou diſdainſt in her, the which
I can build vp: ſtrange is it that our bloods
Of colour, waight, and heat, pour'd all together,
Would quite confound diſtinction: yet ſtands off
In differences ſo mightie. If ſhe bee
All that is vertuous (ſaue what thou diſlik'ſt)
A poore Phiſitians daughter, thou diſlik'ſt
Of vertue for the name: but doe not ſo:
From loweſt place, whence vertuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by th' doers deede.
Where great additions ſwell's, and vertue none,
It is a dropſied honour. Good a lone,
Is good without a name? Vileneſſe is ſo:
The propertie by what is is, ſhould go,
Not by the title. Shee is young, wiſe, faire,
In theſe, to Nature ſhee's immediate heire:
And theſe breed honour: that is honours ſcorne,
Which challenges it ſelfe as honours borne,
And is not like the fire: Honours thriue,
When rather from our acts we them deriue
Then our fore-goers: the meere words, a ſlaue
Deboſh'd on euerie tombe, on euerie graue:
A lying Trophee, and as oft is dumbe,
Where duſt, and damn'd obliuion is the Tombe.
Of honour'd bones-indeed, what ſhould be ſaide?
If thou canſt like this creature, as a maide,
I can create the reſt: Vertue, and ſhee
Is her owne dower: Honour and wealth, from mee.
I cannot loue her, nor will ſtriue to doo't.
Thou wrong'ſt thy ſelfe, if thou ſhold'ſt ſtriue to chooſe.
That you are well reſtor'd my Lord, I'me glad:
Let the reſt go.
My Honor's at the ſtake, which to defeate
I muſt produce my power. Heere, take her hand,
Proud ſcornfull boy, vnworthie this good gift,
That doſt in vile miſpriſion ſhackle vp
My loue, and her deſert: that canſt not dreame,
We poizing vs in her defectiue ſcale,
Shall weigh thee to the beame: That wilt not know,
It is in Vs to plant thine Honour, where
We pleaſe to haue it grow. Cheeke thy contempt:
Obey Our will, which trauailes in thy good:
Beleeue not thy diſdaine, but preſentlie
Do thine owne fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy dutie owes, and Our power claimes,
Or I will throw thee from my care for euer
Into the ſtaggers, and the careleſſe lapſe
Of youth and ignorance: both my reuenge and hate
Looſing vpon thee, in the name of iuſtice,
Without all termes of pittie. Speake, thine anſwer.
Pardon my gracious Lord: for I ſubmit
My fancie to your eies, when I conſider
What great creation, and what dole of honour
Flies where you bid it: I finde that ſhe which late
Was in my Nobler thoughts, moſt baſe: is now
The praiſed of the King, who ſo ennobled,
Is as 'twere borne ſo.
Take her by the hand,
And tell her ſhe is thine: to whom I promiſe
A counterpoize: If not to thy eſtate,
A ballance more repleat.
I take her hand.
Good fortune, and the fauour of the King
Smile vpon this Contract: whoſe Ceremonie
Shall ſeeme expedient on the now borne briefe,
And be perform'd to night: the ſolemne Feaſt
Shall more attend vpon the coming ſpace,
Expecting abſent friends. As thou lou'ſt her,
Thy loue's to me Religious: elſe, do's erre.
Do you heare Monſieur? A word with you.
Your pleaſure ſir.
Your Lord and Maſter did well to make his recantation.
Recantation? My Lord? my Maſter?
I: Is it not a Language I ſpeake?
A moſt harſh one, and not to bee vnderſtoode without bloudie ſucceeding My Maſter▪
Are you Companion to the Count Roſillion?
To any Count, to all Counts: to what is man.
To what is Counts man: Counts maiſter is of another ſtile.
You are too old ſir: Let it ſatisfie you, you are too old.
I muſt tell thee ſirrah, I write Man: to which title age cannot bring thee.
What I dare too well do, I dare not do.
I did thinke thee for two ordinaries: to bee a prettie wiſe fellow, thou didſt make tollerable vent of thy trauell, it might paſſe: yet the ſcarffes and the bannerets about thee, did manifoldlie diſſwade me from beleeuing thee a veſſell of too great a burthen. I haue now found thee, when I looſe thee againe, I care not: yet art thou good for nothing but taking vp, and that th' ourt ſcarce worth.
Hadſt thou not the priuiledge of Antiquity vpon thee.
Do not plundge thy ſelfe to farre in anger, leaſt thou haſten thy triall: which if, Lord haue mercie on thee for a hen, ſo my good window of Lettice fare thee well, thy caſement I neede not open, for I look through thee. Giue me thy hand.
My Lord, you giue me moſt egregious indignity.
I with all my heart, and thou art worthy of it.
I haue not my Lord deſeru'd it.
Yes good faith, eu'ry dramme of it, and I will not bte thee a ſcruple.
Well, I ſhall be wiſer.
Eu'n as ſoone as thou can'ſt, for thou haſt to pull at a ſmacke a' th contrarie. If euer thou bee'ſt bound in thy skarfe and beaten, thou ſhall finde what it is to be proud of thy bondage, I haue a deſire to holde my acquaintance with thee, or rather my knowledge, that I may ſay in the default, he is a man I know.
My Lord you do me moſt inſupportable vexation.
I would it were hell paines for thy ſake, and my poore doing eternall: for doing I am paſt, as I will by thee, in what motion age will giue me leaue.
Well, thou haſt a ſonne ſhall take this diſgrace off me; ſcuruy, old, filthy, ſcuruy Lord: Well, I muſt be patient, there is no fettering of authority. Ile beate him (by my life) if I can meete him with any conuenience, and he were double and double a Lord. Ile haue no more pittie of his age then I would haue of—Ile beate him, and if I could but meet him agen.
Sirra, your Lord and maſters married, there's newes for you: you haue a new Miſtris.
I moſt vnfainedly beſeech your Lordſhippe to make ſome reſeruation of your wrongs. He is my good Lord, whom I ſerue aboue is my maſter.
Who? God.
I ſir.
The deuill it is, that's thy maſter. Why dooeſt thou garter vp thy armes a this faſhion? Doſt make hoſe of thy ſleeues? Do other ſeruants ſo? Thou wert beſt ſet thy lower part where thy noſe ſtands. By mine Honor, If I were but two houres yonger, I'de beate thee: meethink'ſt thou art a generall offence, and euery man ſhold beate thee: I thinke thou waſt created for men to breath themſelues vpon thee.
This is hard and vndeſerued meaſure my Lord.
Go too ſir, you were beaten in Italy for picking a kernell out of a Pomgranat, you are a vagabond, and no true traueller: you are more ſawcie with Lordes and honourable perſonages, then the Commiſsion of your birth and vertue giues you Heraldry. You are not worth another word, elſe I'de call you knaue. I leaue you.
Good, very good, it is ſo then: good, very good, let it be conceal'd awhile.
Vndone, and forfeited to cares for euer.
What's the matter ſweet-heart?
Although before the ſolemne Prieſt I haue ſworne, I will not bed her.
What? what ſweet heart?
O my Parrolles, they haue married me:
Ile to the Tuſcan warres, and neuer bed her.
France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits,
The tread of a mans foot: too 'th warres.
There's letters from my mother: What th' import is, I know not yet.
I that would be knowne: too 'th warrs my boy, too 'th warres:
He weares his honor in a boxe vnſeene,
That hugges his kickie wickie heare at home,
Spending his manlie marrow in her armes
Which ſhould ſuſtaine the bound and high curuet
Of Marſes fierie ſteed: to other Regions,
France is a ſtable, wee that dwell in't Iades,
Therefore too 'th warre.
It ſhall be ſo, Ile ſend her to my houſe,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
And wherefore I am fled: Write to the King
That which I durſt not ſpeake. His preſent gift
Shall furniſh me to thoſe Italian fields
Where noble fellowes ſtrike: Warres is no ſtrife
To the darke houſe, and the detected wife.
Will this Caprichio hold in thee, art ſure?
Go with me to my chamber, and aduice me.
Ile ſend her ſtraight away: To morrow,
Ile to the warres, ſhe to her ſingle ſorrow.
Why theſe bals bound, ther's noiſe in it. Tis hard
A yong man maried, is a man that's mard:
Therefore away, and leaue her brauely: go,
The King ha's done you wrong: but huſh 'tis ſo.
My mother greets me kindly, is ſhe well?
She is not well, but yet ſhe has her health, ſhe's very merrie, but yet ſhe is not well: but thankes be giuen ſhe's very well, and wants nothing i' th world: but yet ſhe is not well.
If ſhe be verie wel, what do's ſhe ayle, that ſhe's not verie well?
Truly ſhe's very well indeed, but for two things
What two things?
One, that ſhe's not in heauen, whether God ſend her quickly: the other, that ſhe's in earth, from whence God ſend her quickly.
Bleſſe you my fortunate Ladie.
I hope ſir I haue your good will to haue mine owne good fortune.
You had my prayers to leade them on, and to keepe them on, haue them ſtill. O my knaue, how do's my old Ladie?
So that you had her wrinkles, and I her money,
I would ſhe did as you ſay.
Why I ſay nothing.
Marry you are the wiſer man: for many a mans tongue ſhakes out his maſters vndoing: to ſay nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to haue nothing, is to be a great part of your title, which is within a verie little of nothing.
Away, th' art a knaue.
You ſhould haue ſaid ſir before a knaue, th' art a knaue, that's before me th' art a knaue: this had beene truth ſir.
Go too, thou art a wittie foole, I haue found thee.
Did you finde me in your ſelfe ſir, or were you taught to finde me?
The ſearch ſir was profitable, and much Foole may you find in you, euen to the worlds pleaſure, and the encreaſe of laughter.
A good knaue ifaith, and well fed.
Madam, my Lord will go awaie to night,
A verie ſerrious buſineſſe call's on him:
The great prerogatiue and rite of loue,
Which as your due time claimes, he do's acknowledge,
But puts it off to a compell'd reſtraint:
Whoſe want, and whoſe delay▪ is ſtrew'd with ſweets
Which they diſtill now in the curbed time,
To make the comming houre oreflow with ioy,
And pleaſure drowne the brim.
What's his will elſe?
That you will take your inſtant leaue a' th king,
And make this haſt as your owne good proceeding,
Strengthned with what Apologie you thinke
May make it probable neede.
What more commands hee?
That hauing this obtain'd, you preſentlie
Attend his further pleaſure.
In euery thing I waite vpon his will.
I ſhall report it ſo,
I pray you come ſirrah.
But I hope your Lordſhippe thinkes not him a ſouldier.
Yes my Lord and of verie valiant approofe.
You haue it from his owne deliuerance.
And by other warranted teſtimonie.
Then my Diall goes not true, I tooke this Larke for a bunting.
I do aſſure you my Lord he is very great in knowledge, and accordinglie valiant.
I haue then ſinn'd againſt his experience, and tranſgreſt againſt his valour, and my ſtate that way is dangerous, ſince I cannot yet find in my heart to repent: Heere he comes, I pray you make vs freinds, I will purſue the amitie.
Theſe things ſhall be done ſir.
Pray you ſir whoſe his Tailor?
Sir?
O I know him well, I ſir, hee ſirs a good workeman, a verie good Tailor.
Is ſhee gone to the king?
Shee is.
Will ſhee away to night?
As you'le haue her.
I haue writ my letters, casketted my treaſure,
Giuen order for our horſes, and to night,
When I ſhould take poſſeſſion of the Bride,
And ere I doe begin.
A good Trauailer is ſomething at the latter end of a dinner, but on that lies three thirds, and vſes a known truth to paſſe a thouſand nothings with, ſhould bee once hard, and thrice beaten. God ſaue you Captaine.
Is there any vnkindnes betweene my Lord and you Monſieur?
I know not how I haue deſerued to run into my Lords diſpleaſure.
You haue made ſhift to run into't, bootes and ſpurres and all: like him that leapt into the Cuſtard, and out of it you'le runne againe, rather then ſuffer queſtion for your reſidence.
It may bee you haue miſtaken him my Lord.
And ſhall doe ſo euer, though I tooke him at's prayers. Fare you well my Lord, and beleeue this of me, there can be no kernell in this light Nut: the ſoule of this man is his cloathes: Truſt him not in matter of heauie conſequence: I haue kept of them tame, & know their natures. Farewell Monſieur, I haue ſpoken better of you, then you haue or will to deſerue at my hand, but we muſt do good againſt euill.
An idle Lord, I ſweare.
I thinke ſo.
Why do you not know him?
Yes, I do know him well, and common ſpeech
Giues him a worthy paſſe. Heere comes my clog.
I haue ſir as I was commanded from you
Spoke with the King, and haue procur'd his leaue
For preſent parting, onely he deſires
Some priuate ſpeech with you.
I ſhall obey his will.
You muſt not meruaile Helen at my courſe,
Which holds not colour with the time, nor does
The miniſtration, and required office
On my particular. Prepar'd I was not
For ſuch a buſineſſe, therefore am I found
So much vnſetled: This driues me to intreate you,
That preſently you take your way for home,
And rather muſe then aske why I intreate you,
For my reſpects are better then they ſeeme,
And my appointments haue in them a neede
Greater then ſhewes it ſelfe at the firſt view,
To you that know them not. This to my mother,
'Twill be two daies ere I ſhall ſee you, ſo
I leaue you to your wiſedome.
Sir, I can nothing ſay,
But that I am your moſt obedient ſeruant.
Come, come, no more of that.
And euer ſhall
With true obſeruance ſeeke to eeke out that
Wherein toward me my homely ſtarres haue faild
To equall my great fortune.
Let that goe: my haſt is verie great. Farwell:
Hie home.
Pray ſir your pardon.
Well, what would you ſay?
I am not worthie of the wealth I owe,
Nor dare I ſay 'tis mine: and yet it is,
But like a timorous theefe, moſt faine would ſteale
What law does vouch mine owne.
What would you haue?
Something, and ſcarſe ſo much: nothing indeed,
I would not tell you what I would my Lord: Faith yes,
Strangers and foes do ſunder, and not kiſſe.
I pray you ſtay not, but in haſt to horſe.
I ſhall not breake your bidding, good my Lord:
Where are my other men? Monſieur, farwell.
Go thou toward home, where I wil neuer come,
Whilſt I can ſhake my ſword, or heare the drumme:
Away, and for our flight.
Brauely, Coragio.
So that from point to point, now haue you heard
The fundamentall reaſons of this warre,
Whoſe great deciſion hath much blood let forth
And more thirſts after.
Holy ſeemes the quarrell
Vpon your Graces part: blacke and fearefull
On the oppoſer.
Therefore we meruaile much our Coſin France
Would in ſo iuſt a buſineſſe, ſhut his boſome
Againſt our borrowing prayers.
Good my Lord,
The reaſons of our ſtare I cannot yeelde,
But like a common and an outward man,
That the great figure of a Counſaile frames,
By ſelfe vnable motion, therefore dare not
Say what I thinke of it, ſince I haue found
My ſelfe in my incertaine grounds to faile
As often as I gueſt.
Be it his pleaſure.
But I am ſure the yonger of our nature,
That ſurfet on their eaſe, will day by day
Come heere for Phyſicke.
Welcome ſhall they bee:
And all the honors that can flye from vs,
Shall on them ſettle: you know your places well,
When better fall, for your auailes they fell,
To morrow to 'th the field.
It hath happen'd all, as I would haue had it, ſaue that he comes not along with her.
By my troth I take my young Lord to be a verie melancholly man.
By what obſeruance I pray you.
Why he will looke vppon his boote, and ſing: mend the Ruffe and ſing, aske queſtions and ſing, picke his teeth, and ſing: I know a man that had this tricke of melancholy hold a goodly Mannor for a ſong.
Let me ſee what he writes, and when he meanes to come.
I haue no minde to Isbell ſince I was at Court. Our old Lings, and our Isbels a' th Country, are nothing like your old Ling and your Isbels a' th Court: the brains of my Cupid's knock'd out, and I beginne to loue, as an old man loues money, with no ſtomacke.
What haue we heere?
In that you haue there.
I haue ſent you a daughter-in-Law, ſhee hath recouered the King, and vndone me: I haue wedded her, not bedded her, and ſworne to make the not eternall. You ſhall heare I am runne away, know it before the report come. If there bee bredth enough in the world, I will hold a long diſtance. My duty to you. Your vnfortunate ſonne, Bertram.
This is not well raſh and vnbridled boy,
To flye the fauours of ſo good a King,
To plucke his indignation on thy head,
By the miſpriſing of a Maide too vertuous
For the contempt of Empire.
O Madam, yonder is heauie newes within betweene two ſouldiers, and my yong Ladie.
What is the matter.
Nay there is ſome comfort in the newes, ſome comfort, your ſonne will not be kild ſo ſoone as I thoght he would.
Why ſhould he be kill'd?
So ſay I Madame, if he runne away, as I heare he does, the danger is in ſtanding too't, that's the loſſe of men, though it be the getting of children. Heere they come will tell you more. For my part I onely heare your ſonne was run away.
Saue you good Madam.
Madam, my Lord is gone, for euer gone.
Do not ſay ſo.
Thinke vpon patience, pray you Gentlemen,
I haue felt ſo many quirkes of ioy and greefe,
That the firſt face of neither on the ſtart
Can woman me vntoo't. Where is my ſonne I pray you?
Madam he's gone to ſerue the Duke of Florence,
We met him thitherward, for thence we came:
And after ſome diſpatch in hand at Court,
Thither we bend againe.
Looke on his Letter Madam, here's my Paſport.
This is a dreadfull ſentence.
Brought you this Letter Gentlemen?
I Madam, and for the Contents ſake are ſorrie for our paines.
I prethee Ladie haue a better cheere,
If thou engroſſeſt, all the greefes are thine,
Thou robſt me of a moity: He was my ſonne,
But I do waſh his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my childe. Towards Florence is he?
I Madam.
And to be a ſouldier.
Such is his noble purpoſe, and beleeu't
The Duke will lay vpon him all the honor
That good conuenience claimes.
Returne you thither.
I Madam, with the ſwifteſt wing of ſpeed.
Till I haue no wife, I haue nothing in France,
'Tis bitter.
Finde you that there?
I Madame.
'Tis but the boldneſſe of his hand haply, which his heart was not conſenting too.
Nothing in France, vntill he haue no wife:
There's nothing heere that is too good for him
But onely ſhe, and ſhe deſerues a Lord
That twenty ſuch rude boyes might tend vpon,
And call her hourely Miſtris. Who was with him?
A ſeruant onely, and a Gentleman: whlch I haue ſometime knowne.
Parolles was it not?
I my good Ladie, hee.
A verie tainted fellow, and full of wickedneſſe,
My ſonne corrupts a well deriued nature
With his inducement.
Indeed good Ladie the fellow has a deale of that, too much, which holds him much to haue.
Y' are welcome Gentlemen, I will intreate you when you ſee my ſonne, to tell him that his ſword can neuer winne the honor that he looſes: more Ile intreate you written to beare along.
We ſerue you Madam in that and all your worthieſt affaires.
Not ſo, but as we change our courteſies,
Will you draw neere?
Till I haue no wife I haue nothing in France.
Nothing in France vntill he has no wife:
Thou ſhalt haue none Roſſillion, none in France,
Then haſt thou all againe: poore Lord, is't I
That chaſe thee from thy Countrie, and expoſe
Thoſe tender limbes of thine, to the euent
Of the none-ſparing warre? And is it I,
That driue thee from the ſportiue Court, where thou
Was't ſhot at with faire eyes, to be the marke
Of ſmoakie Muskts? O you leaden meſſengers,
That ride vpon the violent ſpeede of fire,
Fly with falſe ayme, moue the ſtill-peering aire
That ſings with piercing, do not touch my Lord:
Who euer ſhoots at him, I ſet him there.
Who euer charges on his forward breſt
I am the Caitiffe that do hold him too't,
And though I kill him not, I am the cauſe
His death was ſo effected: Better 'twere
I met the rauine Lyon when he roar'd
With ſharpe conſtraint of hunger: better 'twere,
That all the miſeries which nature owes
Were mine at once. No come thou home Roſſillion,
Whence honor but of danger winnes a ſcarre,
As oft it looſes all. I will be gone:
My being heere it is, that holds thee hence,
Shall I ſtay heere to doo't? No, no, although
The ayre of Paradiſe did fan the houſe,
And Angles offic'd all: I will be gone,
That pittifull rumour may report my flight
To conſolate thine eare. Come night, end day,
For with the darke (poore theefe) Ile ſteale away.
The Generall of our horſe thou art, and we
Great in our hope, lay our beſt loue and credence
Vpon thy promiſing fortune▪
Sir it is
A charge too heauy for my ſtrength, but yet
Wee'l ſtriue to beare it for your worthy ſake,
To th' extreme edge of hazard.
Then go thou forh,
And fortune play vpon thy proſperous helme
As thy auſpicious miſtris.
This very day
Great Mars I put my ſelfe into thy file,
Make me but like my thoughts, and I ſhall proue
A louer of thy drumme, hater of loue.
Alas! and would you take the letter of her:
Might you not know ſhe would do, as ſhe has done,
By ſending me a Letter. Reade it agen.
I am S. Iaques Pilgrim, thither gone:
Ambitious loue hath ſo in me offended,
That bare-foot plod I the cold ground vpon
With ſainted vow my faults to haue amended.
Write, write, that from the bloodie courſe of warre,
My deereſt Maſter your deare ſonne, may hie,
Bleſſe him at home in peace. Whilst I from farre,
His name with zealous feruour ſanctifie:
His taken labours bid him me forgiue:
I his deſpightfull Iuno ſent him forth,
From Courtly friends, with Camping foes to liue,
Where death and danger dogges the heeles of worth.
He is too good and faire for death, and mee,
Whom I my ſelfe embrace, to ſet him free.
Ah what ſharpe ſtings are in her mildeſt words?
Rynaldo, you did neuer lacke aduice ſo much,
As letting her paſſe ſo: had I ſpoke with her,
I could haue well diuerted her intents,
Which thus ſhe hath preuented.
Pardon me Madam,
If I had giuen you this at ouer-night,
She might haue beene ore-tane: and yet ſhe writes
Purſuite would be but vaine.
What Angell ſhall
Bleſſe this vnworthy husband, he cannot thriue,
Vnleſſe her prayers, whom heauen delights to beare
And loues to grant, repreeue him from the wrath
Of greateſt Iuſtice. Write, write Rynaldo,
To this vnworthy husband of his wife,
Let euerie word waigh heauie of her worth,
That he does waigh too light: my greateſt greefe,
Though little he do feele it, ſet downe ſharpely.
Diſpatch the moſt conuenient meſſenger,
When haply he ſhall heare that ſhe is gone,
He will returne, and hope I may that ſhee
Hearing ſo much, will ſpeede her foote againe,
Led hither by pure loue: which of them both
Is deereſt to me, I haue no skill in ſence
To make diſtinction: prouide this Meſſenger:
My heart is heauie, and mine age is weake,
Greefe would haue teares, and ſorrow bids me ſpeake.
Nay come,
For if they do approach the Citty,
We ſhall looſe all the ſight.
They ſay, the French Count has done
Moſt honourable ſeruice.
It is reported,
That he has taken their great'ſt Commander,
And that with his owne hand he ſlew
The Dukes brother: we haue loſt our labour,
They are gone a contrarie way harke,
you may know by their Trumpets.
Come lets returne againe,
And ſuffice our ſelues with the report of it.
Well Diana, take heed of this French Earle,
The honor of a Maide is her name,
And no Legacie is ſo rich
As honeſtie.
I haue told my neighbour
How you haue beene ſolicited by a Gentleman
His Companion.
I know that knaue, hang him, one Parolles, a filthy Officer he is in thoſe ſuggeſtions for the young Earle, beware of them Diana; their promiſes, entiſements, oathes, tokens, and all theſe engines of luſt, are not the things they go vnder: many a maide hath beene ſeduced by them, and the miſerie is example, that ſo terrible ſhewes in the wracke of maiden-hood, cannot for all that diſſwade ſucceſſion, but that they are limed with the twigges that threatens them. I hope I neede not to aduiſe you further, but I hope your owne grace will keepe you where you are, though there were no further danger knowne, but the modeſtie which is ſo loſt.
You ſhall not neede to feare me.
I hope ſo: looke here comes a pilgrim, I know ſhe will lye at my houſe, thither they ſend one another, Ile queſtion her. God ſaue you pilgrim, whether are bound?
To S. Iaques la grand.
Where do the Palmers lodge, I do beſeech you?
At the S. Francis heere beſide the Port.
Is this the way?
I marrie iſt. Harke you, they come this way:
If you will tarrie holy Pilgrime
But till the troopes come by,
I will conduct you where you ſhall be lodg'd,
The rather for I thinke I know your hoſteſſe
As ample as my ſelfe.
Is it your ſelfe?
If you ſhall pleaſe ſo Pilgrime.
I thanke you, and will ſtay vpon your leiſure.
you came I thinke from France?
I did ſo.
Heere you ſhall ſee a Countriman of yours
That has done worthy ſeruice.
His name I pray you?
The Count Roſſillion: know you ſuch a one?
But by the eare that heares moſt nobly of him:
His face I know not.
What ſomere he is
He's brauely taken heere. He ſtole from France
As 'tis reported: for the King had married him
Againſt his liking. Thinke you it is ſo?
I ſurely meere the truth, I know his Lady.
There is a Gentleman that ſerues the Count,
Reports but courſely of her.
What's his name?
Monſieur Parrolles.
Oh I beleeue with him,
In argument of praiſe, or to the worth
Of the great Count himſelfe, ſhe is too meane
To haue her name repeated, all her deſeruing
Is a reſerued honeſtie, and that
I haue not heard examin'd.
Alas poore Ladie,
'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife
Of a deteſting Lord.
I write good creature, whereſoere ſhe is,
Her hart waighes ſadly: this yong maid might do her
A ſhrewd turne if ſhe pleas'd.
How do you meane?
May be the amorous Count ſolicites her
In the vnlawfull purpoſe.
He does indeede,
And brokes with all that can in ſuch a ſuite
Corrupt the tender honour of a Maide:
But ſhe is arm'd for him, and keepes her guard
In honeſteſt defence.
The goddes forbid elſe.
So, now they come:
That is Anthonio the Dukes eldeſt ſonne,
That Eſcalus.
Which is the Frenchman?
Hee,
That with the plume, 'tis a moſt gallant fellow,
I would he lou'd his wife: if he were honeſter
He were much goodlier. Is't not a handſom Gentleman
I like him well.
'Tis pitty he is not honeſt: yonds that ſame knaue
That leades him to theſe places: were I his Ladie,
I would poiſon that vile Raſcall.
Which is he?
That Iacke an-apes with ſcarfes. Why is hee melancholly?
Perchance hes hurt i' th battaile.
Looſe our drum? Well.
He's ſhrewdly vext at ſomething. Looke he has ſpyed vs.
Marrie hang you.
And your curteſie, for a ring-carrier.
The troope is paſt: Come pilgrim, I wil bring you, Where you ſhall hoſt: Of inioyn'd penitents
There's foure or fiue, to great S. Iaques bound,
Alreadie at my houſe.
I humbly thanke you:
Pleaſe it this Matron, and this gentle Maide
To eate with vs to night, the charge and thanking
Shall be for me▪ and to requite you further,
I will beſtow ſome precepts of this Virgin,
Worthy the note.
Wee'l take your offer kindly.
Nay good my Lord put him too't: let him haue his way.
If your Lordſhippe finde him not a Hilding, hold me no more in your reſpect.
On my life my Lord▪ a bubble.
Do you thinke I am ſo farre
Deceiued in him.
Beleeue it my Lord, in mine owne direct knowledge, without any malice, but to ſpeake of him as my kinſman, hee's a moſt notable Coward, an infinite and endleſſe Lyar, an hourely promiſe-breaker, the owner of no one good qualitie, worthy your Lordſhips entertainment.
It were fit you knew him, leaſt▪ repoſing too farre in his vertue which he hath not, he might at ſome great and truſtie buſineſſe, in a maine daunger, fayle you.
I would I knew in what particular action to try him.
None better then to let him fetch off his drumme, which you heare him ſo confidently vndertake to do.
I with a troop of Florentines wil ſodainly ſurprize him; ſuch I will haue whom I am ſure he knowes not from the enemie: wee will binde and hoodwinke him ſo, that he ſhall ſuppoſe no other but that he is carried into the Leager of the aduerſaries, when we bring him to our owne tents: be but your Lordſhip preſent at his examination, if he do not for the promiſe of his life, and in the higheſt compulſion of baſe feare, offer to betray you, and deliuer all the intelligence in his power againſt you, and that with the diuine forfeite of his ſoule vpon oath, neuer truſt my iudgement in anie thing.
O for the loue of laughter, let him fetch his drumme, he ſayes he has a ſtratagem for't: when your Lordſhip ſees the bottome of this ſucceſſe in't, and to what mettle this counterfeyt lump of ours will be melted if you giue him not Iohn drummes entertainement, your inclining cannot be remoued. Heere he comes.
O for the loue of laughter hinder not the honor of his deſigne, let him fetch off his drumme in any hand.
How now Monſieur? This drumme ſticks ſorely in your diſpoſition.
A pox on't, let it go, 'tis but a drumme.
But a drumme: Iſt but a drumme? A drum ſo loſt. There was excellent command, to charge in with our horſe vpon our owne wings, and to rend our owne ſouldiers.
That was not to be blam'd in the command of the ſeruice: it was a diſaſter of warre that Caeſar him ſelfe could not haue preuented, if he had beene there to command.
Well, wee cannot greatly condemne our ſucceſſe: ſome diſhonor wee had in the loſſe of that drum, but it is not to be recouered.
It might haue beene recouered.
It might, but it is not now.
It is to be recouered, but that the merit of ſeruice is ſildome attributed to the true and exact performer, I would haue that drumme or another, or hic iacet.
Why if you haue a ſtomacke, too't Monſieur: if you thinke your myſterie in ſtratagem, can bring this inſtrument of honour againe into his natiue quarter, be magnanimious in the enterprize and go on, I wil grace the attempt for a worthy exploit: if you ſpeede well in it, the Duke ſhall both ſpeake of it, and extend to you what further becomes his greatneſſe, euen to the vtmoſt ſyllable of your worthineſſe.
By the hand of a ſouldier I will vndertake it.
But you muſt not now ſlumber in it.
Ile about it this euening, and I will preſently pen downe my dilemma's, encourage my ſelfe in my certaintie, put my ſelfe into my mortall preparation: and by midnight looke to heare further from me.
May I bee bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it.
I know not what the ſucceſſe wil be my Lord, but the attempt I vow.
I know th' art valiant,
And to the poſsibility of thy ſouldierſhip,
Will ſubſcribe for thee: Farewell.
I loue not many words.
No more then a fiſh loues water. Is not this a ſtrange fellow my Lord, that ſo confidently ſeemes to vndertake this buſineſſe, which he knowes is not to be done, damnes himſelfe to do, & dares better be damnd then to doo't.
You do not know him my Lord as we doe, certaine it is that he will ſteale himſelfe into a mans fauour, and for a weeke eſcape a great deale of diſcoueries, but when you finde him out, you haue him euer after.
Why do you thinke he will make no deede at all of this that ſo ſeriouſlie hee dooes addreſſe himſelfe vnto?
None in the world, but returne with an inuention, and clap vpon you two or three probable lies: but we haue almoſt imboſt him, you ſhall ſee his fall to night; for indeede he is not for your Lordſhippes reſpect.
Weele make you ſome ſport with the Foxe ere we caſe him. He was firſt ſmoak'd by the old Lord Lafew, when his diſguiſe and he is parted, tell me what a ſprat you ſhall finde him, which you ſhall ſee this verie night.
I muſt go looke my twigges,
He ſhall be caught.
Your brother he ſhall go along with me.
As't pleaſe your Lordſhip, Ile leaue you.
Now wil I lead you to the houſe, and ſhew you
The Laſſe I ſpoke of.
But you ſay ſhe's honeſt.
That's all the fault: I ſpoke with hir but once,
And found her wondrous cold, but I ſent to her
By this ſame Coxcombe that we haue i' th winde
Tokens and Letters, which ſhe did reſend,
And this is all I haue done: She's a faire creature,
Will you go ſee her?
With all my heart my Lord.
If you miſdoubt me that I am not ſhee,
I know not how I ſhall aſſure you further,
But I ſhall looſe the grounds I worke vpon.
Though my eſtate be falne, I was well borne,
Nothing acquainted with theſe buſineſſes,
And would not put my reputation now
In any ſtaining act.
Nor would I wiſh you.
Firſt giue me truſt, the Count he is my husband,
And what to your ſworne counſaile I haue ſpoken,
Is ſo from word to word: and then you cannot
By the good ayde that I of you ſhall borrow,
Erre in beſtowing it.
I ſhould beleeue you,
For you haue ſhew'd me that which well approues
Y' are great in fortune.
Take this purſe of Gold,
And let me buy your friendly helpe thus farre,
Which I will ouer-pay, and pay againe
When I haue found it. The Count he woes your daughter,
Layes downe his wanton ſiedge before her beautie,
Reſolue to carrie her: let her in fine conſent
As wee'l direct her how 'tis beſt to beare it:
Now his important blood will naught denie,
That ſhee'l demand: a ring the Countie weares,
That downward hath ſucceeded in his houſe
From ſonne to ſonne, ſome foure or fiue diſcents,
Since the firſt father wore it. This Ring he holds
In moſt rich choice: yet in his idle fire,
To buy his will, it would not ſeeme too deere,
How ere repented after.
Now I ſee the bottome of your purpoſe.
You ſee it lawfull then, it is no more,
But that your daughter ere ſhe ſeemes as wonne,
Deſires this Ring; appoints him an encounter;
In fine, deliuers me to fill the time,
Her ſelfe moſt chaſtly abſent: after
To marry her, Ile adde three thouſand Crownes
To what is paſt already.
I haue yeelded:
Inſtruct my daughter how ſhe ſhall perſeuer,
That time and place with this deceite ſo lawfull
May proue coherent. Euery night he comes
With Muſickes of all ſorts, and ſongs compos'd
To her vnworthineſſe: It nothing ſteeds vs
To chide him from our eeues, for he perſiſts
As if his life lay on't.
Why then to night
Let vs aſſay our plot, which if it ſpeed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawfull deede;
And lawfull meaning in a lawfull act,
Where both not ſinne, and yet a ſinfull fact.
But let's about it.
He can come no other way but by this hedge corner: when you ſallie vpon him, ſpeake what terrible Language you will: though you vnderſtand it not your ſelues, no matter: for we muſt not ſeeme to vnderſtand him, vnleſſe ſome one among vs, whom wee muſt produce for an Interpreter.
Good Captaine, let me be th' Interpreter.
Art not acquainted with him? knowes he not thy voice?
No ſir I warrant you.
But what linſie wolſy haſt thou to ſpeake to vs againe.
E'n ſuch as you ſpeake to me.
He muſt thinke vs ſome band of ſtrangers, i' th aduerſaries entertainment. Now he hath a ſmacke of all neighbouring Languages: therefore we muſt euery one be a man of his owne fancie, not to know what we ſpeak one to another: ſo we ſeeme to know, is to know ſtraight our purpoſe: Choughs language, gabble enough, and good enough. As for you interpreter, you muſt ſeeme very politicke. But couch hoa, heere hee comes, to beguile two houres in a ſleepe, and then to returne & ſwear the lies he forges.
Ten a clocke: Within theſe three houres 'twill be time enough to goe home. What ſhall I ſay I haue done? It muſt bee a very plauſiue inuention that carries it. They beginne to ſmoake mee, and diſgraces haue of late, knock'd too often at my doore: I finde my tongue is too foole-hardie, but my heart hath the feare of Mas before it, and of his creatures, not daring the reports of my tongue.
This is the firſt truth that ere thine own tongue was guiltie of.
What the diuell ſhould moue mee to vndertake the recouerie of this drumme, being not ignorant of the impoſſibility, and knowing I had no ſuch purpoſe? I muſt giue my ſelfe ſome hurts, and ſay I got them in exploit: yet ſlight ones will not carrie it. They will ſay, came you off with ſo little? And great ones I dare not giue, wherefore what's the inſtance. Tongue, I muſt put you into a Butter-womans mouth, and buy my ſelfe another of Baiazeths Mule, if you prattle mee into theſe perilles.
Is it poſſible he ſhould know what hee is, and be that he is.
I would the cutting of my garments wold ſerue the turne, or the breaking of my Spaniſh ſword.
We cannot affoord you ſo.
Or the baring of my beard, and to ſay it was in ſtratagem.
'Twould not do.
Or to drowne my cloathes, and ſay I was ſtript.
Hardly ſerue.
Though I ſwore I leapt from the window of the Citadell.
How deepe?
Thirty fadome.
Three great oathes would ſcarſe make that be beleeued.
I would I had any drumme of the enemies, I would ſweare I recouer'd it.
You ſhall heare one anon.
A drumme now of the enemies.
Throca movouſus, cargo, cargo, cargo.
Cargo, cargo, cargo, villianda par corbo, cargo.
O ranſome, ranſome,
Do not hide mine eyes.
Boskos thromuldo boskos.
I know you are the Mukos Regiment,
And I ſhall looſe my life for want of language.
If there be heere German or Dane, Low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him ſpeake to me,
Ile diſcouer that, which ſhal vndo the Florentine.
Boskos vauvado, I vnderſtand thee, & can ſpeake thy tongue: Kerelybonto ſir, betake thee to thy faith, for ſeuenteene ponyards are at thy boſome.
Oh.
Oh pray, pray, pray,
Manka reania dulche.
Oſcorbidulchos voliuorc.
The Generall is content to ſpare thee yet,
And hoodwinkt as thou art, will leade thee on
To gather from thee. Haply thou mayſt informe
Something to ſaue thy life.
O let me liue,
And all the ſecrets of our campe Ile ſhew,
Their force, their purpoſes: Nay, Ile ſpeake that,
Which you will wonder at.
But wilt thou faithfully?
If I do not, damne me.
Acordo linta.
Come on, thou are granted ſpace.
Go tell the Count Roſſillion and my brother,
We haue caught the woodcocke, and will keepe him mufled
Till we do heare from them.
Captaine I will.
A will betray vs all vnto our ſelues,
Informe on that.
So I will ſir.
Till then Ile keepe him darke and ſafely lockt.
They told me that your name was Fontybell.
No my good Lord, Diana.
Titled Goddeſſe,
And worth it with addition: but faire ſoule,
In your fine frame hath loue no qualitie?
If the quicke fire of youth light not your minde,
You are no Maiden but a monument
When you are dead you ſhould be ſuch a one
As you are now: for you are cold and ſterne,
And now you ſhould be as your mother was
When your ſweet ſelf ▪ was got.
She then was honeſt.
So ſhould you be.
No:
My mother did but dutie, ſuch (my Lord)
As you owe to your wife.
No more a' that:
I prethee do not ſtriue againſt my vowes:
I was compell'd to her, but I loue thee
By loues owne ſweet conſtraint, and will for euer
Do thee all rights of ſeruice.
I ſo you ſerue vs
Till we ſerue you: But when you haue our Roſes,
You barely leaue our thornes to pricke our ſelues,
And mocke vs with our bareneſſe.
How haue I ſworne.
Tis not the many oathes that makes the truth,
But the plaine ſingle vow, that is vow'd true:
What is not holie, that we ſweare not by,
But take the high'ſt to witneſſe: then pray you tell me.
If I ſhould ſweare by Ioues great attributes,
I lou'd you deerely, would you beleeue my oathes,
When I did loue you ill? This ha's no holding
To ſweare by him whom I proteſt to loue
That I will worke againſt him. Therefore your oathes
Are words and poore conditions, but vnſeal'd
At leſt in my opinion.
Change it, change it:
Be not ſo holy cruell: Loue is holie,
And my integritie ne're knew the crafts
That you do charge men with: Stand no more off,
But giue thy ſelfe vnto my ſicke deſires,
Who then recouers. Say thou art mine, and euer
My loue as it beginnes, ſhall ſo perſeuer.
I ſee that men make rope's in ſuch a ſcarre,
That wee'l forſake our ſelues. Giue me that Ring.
Ile lend it thee my deere; but haue no power
To giue it from me.
Will you not my Lord?
It is an honour longing to our houſe,
Bequeathed downe from manie Anceſtors,
Which were the greateſt obloquie i' th world,
In me to looſe.
Mine Honors ſuch a Ring,
My chaſtities the Iewell of our houſe,
Bequeathed downe from many Anceſtors,
Which were the greateſt obloquie i' th world,
In mee to looſe. Thus your owne proper wiſedome
Brings in the Champion honor on my part,
Againſt your vaine aſſault.
Heere, take my Ring,
My houſe, mine honor, yea my life be thine,
And Ile be bid by thee.
When midnight comes, knocke at my chamber window:
Ile order take, my mother ſhall not heare.
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you haue conquer'd my yet maiden-bed,
Remaine there but an houre, nor ſpeake to mee:
My reaſons are moſt ſtrong, and you ſhall know them,
When backe againe this Ring ſhall be deliuer'd:
And on your finger in the night, Ile put
Another Ring, that what in time proceeds,
May token to the future, our paſt deeds.
Adieu till then, then faile not: you haue wonne
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.
A heauen on earth I haue won by wooing thee.
For which, liue long to thank both heauen & me,
You may ſo in the end.
My mother told me iuſt how he would woo,
As if ſhe ſate in's heart. She ſayes, all men
Haue the like oathes: He had ſworne to marrie me
When his wife's dead: therfore Ile lye with him
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are ſo braide,
Marry that will, I liue and die a Maid:
Onely in this diſguiſe, I think't no ſinne,
To coſen him that would vniuſtly winne.
You haue not giuen him his mothers letter.
I haue deliu'red it an houre ſince, there is ſom thing in't that ſtings his nature: for on the reading it, he chang'd almoſt into another man.
He has much worthy blame laid vpon him, for ſhaking off ſo good a wife, and ſo ſweet a Lady.
Eſpecially, hee hath incurred the euerlaſting diſpleaſure of the King, who had euen tun'd his bounty to ſing happineſſe to him. I will tell you a thing, but you ſhall let it dwell darkly with you.
When you haue ſpoken it 'tis dead, and I am the graue of it.
Hee hath peruerted a young Gentlewoman heere in Florence, of a moſt chaſte renown, & this night he fleſhes his will in the ſpoyle of her honour: hee hath giuen her his monumentall Ring, and thinkes himſelfe made in the vnchaſte compoſition.
Now God delay our rebellion as we are our ſelues, what things are we.
Meerely our owne traitours. And as in the common courſe of all treaſons, we ſtill ſee them reueale themſelues, till they attaine to their abhorr'd ends: ſo he that in this action contriues againſt his owne Nobility in his proper ſtreame, ore-flowes himſelfe.
Is it not meant damnable in vs, to be Trumpeters of our vnlawfull intents? We ſhall not then haue his company to night?
Not till after midnight: for hee is dieted to his houre.
That approaches apace: I would gladly haue him ſee his company anathomiz'd, that hee might take a meaſure of his owne iudgements, wherein ſo curiouſly he had ſet this counterfeit.
We will not meddle with him till he come; for his preſence muſt be the whip of the other.
In the meane time, what heare you of theſe Warres?
I heare there is an ouerture of peace.
Nay, I aſſure you a peace concluded.
What will Count Roſſillion do then? Will he trauaile higher, or returne againe into France?
I perceiue by this demand, you are not altogether of his councell.
Let it be forbid ſir, ſo ſhould I bee a great deale of his act.
Sir, his wife ſome two months ſince fledde from his houſe, her pretence is a pilgrimage to Saint Iaques le grand; which holy vndertaking, with moſt auſtere ſanctimonie ſhe accompliſht: and there reſiding, the tenderneſſe of her Nature, became as a prey to her greefe: in fine, made a groane of her laſt breath, & now ſhe ſings in heauen.
How is this iuſtified?
The ſtronger part of it by her owne Letters, which makes her ſtorie true, euen to the poynt of her death: her death it ſelfe, which could not be her office to ſay, is come: was faithfully confirm'd by the Rector of the place.
Hath the Count all this intelligence?
I, and the particular confirmations, point from point, to the full arming of the veritie.
I am heartily ſorrie that hee'l bee gladde of this.
How mightily ſometimes, we make vs comforts of our loſſes.
And how mightily ſome other times, wee drowne our gaine in teares, the great dignitie that his valour hath here acquir'd for him, ſhall at home be encountred with a ſhame as ample.
The webbe of our life, is of a mingled yarne, good and ill together: our vertues would bee proud, if our faults whipt them not, and our crimes would diſpaire if they were not cheriſh'd by our vertues.
How now? Where's your maſter?
He met the Duke in the ſtreet ſir, of whom hee hath taken a ſolemne leaue: his Lordſhippe will next morning for France. The Duke hath offered him Letters of commendations to the King.
They ſhall bee no more then needfull there, if they were more then they can commend.
They cannot be too ſweete for the Kings tartneſſe, heere's his Lordſhip now. How now my Lord, i'ſt not after midnight?
I haue to night diſpatch'd ſixteene buſineſſes, a moneths length a peece, by an abſtract of ſucceſſe: I haue congied with the Duke, done my adieu with his neereſt; buried a wife, mourn'd for her▪ writ to my Ladie mother, I am returning, entertain'd my Conuoy, & betweene theſe maine parcels of diſpatch, affected many nicer needs: the laſt was the greateſt, but that I haue not ended yet.
If the buſineſſe bee of any difficulty, and this morning your departure hence, it requires haſt of your Lordſhip.
I meane the buſineſſe is not ended, as fearing to heare of it hereafter: but ſhall we haue this dialogue betweene the Foole and the Soldiour. Come, bring forth this counterfet module, has deceiu'd mee, like a double-meaning Propheſier.
Bring him forth, ha's ſate i' th ſtockes all night poore gallant knaue.
No matter, his heeles haue deſeru'd it, in vſurping his ſpurres ſo long. How does he carry himſelfe?
I haue told your Lordſhip alreadie: The ſtockes carrie him. But to anſwer you as you would be vnderſtood, hee weepes like a wench that had ſhed her milke, he hath confeſt himſelfe to Morgan, whom hee ſuppoſes to be a Friar, frō the time of his remembrance to this very inſtant diſaſter of his ſetting i' th ſtockes: and what thinke you he hath confeſt?
Nothing of me, ha's a?
His confeſſion is taken, and it ſhall bee read to his face, if your Lordſhippe be in't, as I beleeue you are, you muſt haue the patience to heare it.
A plague vpon him, muffeld; he can ſay nothing of me: huſh, huſh.
Hoodman comes: Portotartaroſſa.
He calles for the tortures, what will you ſay without em.
I will confeſſe what I know without conſtraint,
If ye pinch me like a Paſty, I can ſay no more.
Bosko Chimurcho.
Boblibindo chicurmurco.
You are a mercifull Generall: Our Generall bids you anſwer to what I ſhall aske you out of a Note.
And truly, as I hope to liue.
Firſt demand of him, how many horſe the Duke is ſtrong. What ſay you to that?
Fiue or ſixe thouſand, but very weake and vnſeruiceable: the troopes are all ſcattered, and the Commanders verie poore rogues, vpon my reputation and credit, and as I hope to liue.
Shall I ſet downe your anſwer ſo?
Do, Ile take the Sacrament on't, how & which way you will: all's one to him.
What a paſt-ſauing ſlaue is this?
Y'are deceiu'd my Lord, this is Mounſieur Parrolles the gallant militariſt, that was his owne phraſe that had the whole theoricke of warre in the knot of his ſcarfe, and the practiſe in the chape of his dagger.
I will neuer truſt a man againe, for keeping his ſword cleane, nor beleeue he can haue euerie thing in him, by wearing his apparrell neatly.
Well, that's ſet downe.
Fiue or ſix thouſand horſe I ſed, I will ſay true, or thereabouts ſet downe, for Ile ſpeake truth.
He's very neere the truth in this.
But I con him no thankes for't in the nature he deliuers it.
Poore rogues, I pray you ſay.
Well, that's ſet downe.
I humbly thanke you ſir, a truth's a truth, the Rogues are maruailous poore.
Demaund of him of what ſtrength they are a foot. What ſay you to that?
By my troth ſir, if I were to liue this preſent houre, I will tell true. Let me ſee, Spurio a hundred & fiftie, Sebaſtian ſo many, Corambus ſo many, Iaques ſo many: Guiltian, Coſmo, Lodowicke, and Gratij, two hundred fiftie each: Mine owne Company, Chitopher, Ʋaumond, Bentij, two hundred fiftie each: ſo that the muſter file, rotten and ſound, vppon my life amounts not to fifteene thouſand pole, halfe of the which, dare not ſhake the ſnow from off their Caſſockes, leaſt they ſhake themſelues to peeces.
What ſhall be done to him?
Nothing, but let him haue thankes. Demand of him my condition: and what credite I haue with the Duke.
Well that's ſet downe: you ſhall demaund of him, whether one Captaine Dumaine bee i' th Campe, a Frenchman: what his reputation is with the Duke, what his valour, honeſtie, and expertneſſe in warres: or whether he thinkes it were not poſſible with well-waighing ſummes of gold to corrupt him to a reuolt. What ſay you to this? What do you know of it?
I beſeech you let me anſwer to the particular of the intergatories. Demand them ſingly.
Do you know this Captaine Dumaine?
I know him, a was a Botchers Prentize in Paris, from whence he was whipt for getting the Shrieues fool with childe, a dumbe innocent that could not ſay him nay.
Nay, by your leaue hold your hands, though I know his braines are forfeite to the next tile that fals.
Well, is this Captaine in the Duke of Florences campe?
Vpon my knowledge he is, and lowſie.
Nay looke not ſo vpon me: we ſhall heare of your Lord anon.
What is his reputation with the Duke?
The Duke knowes him for no other, but a poore Officer of mine, and writ to mee this other day, to turne him out a' th band. I thinke I haue his Letter in my pocket.
Marry we'll ſearch.
In good ſadneſſe I do not know, either it is there, or it is vpon a file with the Dukes other Letters, in my Tent.
Heere 'tis, heere's a paper, ſhall I reade it to you?
I do not know if it be it or no.
Our Interpreter do's it well.
Excellently.
Dian, the Counts a foole, and full of gold.
That is not the Dukes letter ſir: that is an aduertiſement to a proper maide in Florence, one Diana, to take heede of the allurement of one Count Roſſillion, a fooliſh idle boy: but for all that very ruttiſh. I pray you ſir put it vp againe.
Nay, Ile reade it firſt by your fauour.
My meaning in't I proteſt was very honeſt in the behalfe of the maid: for I knew the young Count to be a dangerous and laſciuious boy, who is a whale to Virginity and deuours vp all the fry it finds.
Damnable both-ſides rogue.
When he ſweares oathes, hid him drop gold, and take it:
After he ſcores, he neuer payes the ſcore:
Halfe won is match well made, match and well make it,
He nere payes after debts, take it before,
And ſay a ſouldier (Dian) told thee this:
Men are to mell with, boyes are not to kis.
For count of this, the Counts a Fool I know it,
Who payes before, but not when he does owe it.
Thine as he vow'd to thee in thine eare,
He ſhall be whipt through the Armie with this rime in's forehead.
This is your deuoted friend ſir, the manifold Linguiſt, and the army-potent ſouldier.
I could endure any thing before but a Cat, and now he's a Cat to me.
I perceiue ſir by your Generals lookes, wee ſhall be faine to hang you.
My life ſir in any caſe: Not that I am afraide to dye, but that my offences beeing many, I would repent out the remainder of Nature. Let me liue ſir in a dungeon, i' th ſtockes, or any where, ſo I may liue.
Wee'le ſee what may bee done, ſo you confeſſe freely: therefore once more to this Captaine Dumaine: you haue anſwer'd to his reputation with the Duke, and to his valour. What is his honeſtie?
He will ſteale ſir an Egge out of a Cloiſter: for rapes and rauiſhments he paralels Neſſus. Hee profeſſes not keeping of oaths, in breaking em he is ſtronger then Hercules. He will lye ſir, with ſuch volubilitie, that you would thinke truth were a foole: drunkenneſſe is his beſt vertue, for he will be ſwine-drunke, and in his ſleepe he does little harme, ſaue to his bed-cloathes about him: but they know his conditions, and lay him in ſtraw. I haue but little more to ſay ſir of his honeſty, he ha's euerie thing that an honeſt man ſhould not haue; what an honeſt man ſhould haue, he has nothing.
I begin to loue him for this.
For this deſcription of thine honeſtie? A pox vpon him for me, he's more and more a Cat.
What ſay you to his expertneſſe in warre?
Faith ſir, ha's led the drumme before the Engliſh Tragedians: to belye him I will not, and more of his ſouldierſhip I know not, except in that Country, he had the honour to be the Officer at a place there called Mile-end, to inſtruct for the doubling of files. I would doe the man what honour I can, but of this I am not certaine.
He hath out-villain'd villanie ſo farre, that the raritie redeemes him.
A pox on him, he's a Cat ſtill.
His qualities being at this poore price. I neede not to aske you, if Gold will corrupt him to reuolt.
Sir, for a Cardceue he will ſell the fee-ſimple of his ſaluation, the inheritance of it, and cut th' intaile from all remainders, and a perpetuall ſucceſsion for it perpetually.
What's his Brother, the other Captain Dumain?
Why do's he aske him of me?
What's he?
E'ne a Crow a' th ſame neſt: not altogether ſo great as the firſt in goodneſſe, but greater a great deale in euill. He excels his Brother for a coward, yet his Brother is reputed one of the beſt that is. In a retreate hee outrunnes any Lackey; marrie in comming on, hee ha's the Crampe.
If your life be ſaued, will you vndertake to betray the Florentine.
I, and the Captaine of his horſe, Count Roſſillion.
Ile whiſper with the Generall, and knowe his pleaſure.
Ile no more drumming, a plague of all drummes, onely to ſeeme to deſerue well, and to beguile the ſuppoſition o' that laſciuious yong boy the Count, haue I run into this danger: yet who would haue ſuſpected an ambuſh where I was taken?
There is no remedy ſir, but you muſt dye: the Generall ſayes, you that haue ſo traitorouſly diſcouerd the ſecrets of your army, and made ſuch peſtifferous reports of men very nobly held, can ſerue the world for no honeſt vſe: therefore you muſt dye. Come headeſman, off with his head.
O Lord ſir let me liue, or let me ſee my death.
That ſhall you, and take your leaue of all your friends:
So, looke about you, know you any heere?
Good morrow noble Captaine.
God bleſſe you Captaine Parolles.
God ſaue you noble Captaine.
Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafew? I am for France.
Good Captaine will you giue me a Copy of the ſonnet you writ to Diana in behalfe of the Count Roſſillion, and I were not a verie Coward, I'de compell it of you, but far you well.
You are vndone Captaine all but your ſcarfe, that has a knot on't yet.
Who cannot be cruſh'd with a plot?
If you could finde out a Countrie where but women were that had receiued ſo much ſhame, you might begin an impudent Nation. Fare yee well ſir, I am for France too, we ſhall ſpeake of you there.
Yet am I thankfull: if my heart were great
'Twould burſt at this: Captaine Ile be no more,
But I will eate, and drinke, and ſleepe as ſoft
As Captaine ſhall. Simply the thing I am
Shall make me liue: who knowes himſelfe a braggart
Let him feare this; for it will come to paſſe,
That euery braggart ſhall be found an Aſſe.
Ruſt ſword, coole bluſhes, and Parrolles liue
Safeſt in ſhame: being fool'd, by fool'rie thriue;
There's place and meanes for euery man aliue.
Ile after them.
That you may well perceiue I haue not wrong'd you,
One of the greateſt in the Chriſtian world
Shall be my ſuretie: for whoſe throne 'tis needfull
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneele.
Time was, I did him a deſired office
Deere almoſt as his life, which gratitude
Through flintie Tartars boſome would peepe forth,
And anſwer thankes. I duly am inform'd,
His grace is at Marcellae, to which place
We haue conuenient conuoy: you muſt know
I am ſuppoſed dead, the Army breaking,
My husband hies him home, where heauen ayding,
And by the leaue of my good Lord the King,
Wee'l be before our welcome.
Gentle Madam,
You neuer had a ſeruant to whoſe truſt
Your buſines was more welcome.
Nor your Miſtris
Euer a friend, whoſe thoughts more truly labour
To recompence your loue: Doubt not but heauen
Hath brought me vp to be your daughters dower,
As it hath fated her to be my motiue
And helper to a husband. But O ſtrange men,
That can ſuch ſweet vſe make of what they hate,
When ſawcie truſting of the coſin'd thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night, ſo luſt doth play
With what it loathes, for that which is away,
But more of this heereafter: you Diana,
Vnder my poore inſtructions yet muſt ſuffer
Something in my behalfe.
Let death and honeſtie
Go with your impoſitions, I am yours
Vpon your will to ſuffer.
Yet I pray you:
But with the word the time will bring on ſummer,
When Briars ſhall haue leaues as well as thornes,
And be as ſweet as ſharpe: we muſt away,
Our Wagon is prepar'd, and time reuiues vs,
All's well that ends well, ſtill the fines the Crowne;
What ere the courſe, the end is the renowne.
No, no, no, your ſonne was miſled with a ſnipt taffata fellow there, whoſe villanous ſaffron wold haue made all the vnbak'd and dowy youth of a nation in his colour: your daughter-in-law had beene aliue at this houre, and your ſonne heere at home, more aduancd by the King, then by that red-tail'd humble Bee I ſpeak of.
I would I had not knowne him, it was the death of the moſt vertuous gentlewoman, that euer Nature had praiſe for creating. If ſhe had pertaken of my fleſh and coſt mee the deereſt groanes of a mother, I could not haue owed her a more rooted loue.
Twas a good Lady, 'twas a good Lady. Wee may picke a thouſand ſallets ere wee light on ſuch another hearbe.
Indeed ſir ſhe was the ſweete Margerom of the ſallet, or rather the hearbe of grace.
They are not hearbes you knaue, they are noſe-hearbes.
I am no great Nabuchadnezar ſir, I haue not much skill in grace.
Whether doeſt thou profeſſe thy ſelfe, a knaue or a foole?
A foole ſir at a womans ſeruice, and a knaue at a mans.
Your diſtinction.
I would couſen the man of his wife, and do his ſeruice.
So you were a knaue at his ſeruice indeed.
And I would giue his wife my bauble ſir to doe her ſeruice.
I will ſubſcribe for thee, thou art both knaue and foole.
At your ſeruice.
No, no, no.
Why ſir, if I cannot ſerue you, I can ſerue as great a prince as you are.
Whoſe that, a Frenchman?
Faith ſir a has an Engliſh maine, but his fiſnomie is more hotter in France then there.
What prince is that?
The blacke prince ſir, alias the prince of darkeneſſe, alias the diuell.
Hold thee there's my purſe, I giue thee not this to ſuggeſt thee from thy maſter thou talk'ſt off, ſerue him ſtill.
I am a woodland fellow ſir, that alwaies loued a great fire, and the maſter I ſpeak of euer keeps a good fire, but ſure he is the Prince of the world, let his Nobilitie remaine in's Court. I am for the houſe with the narrow gate, which I take to be too little for pompe to enter: ſome that humble themſelues may, but the manie will be too chill and tender, and theyle bee for the flowrie way that leads to the broad gate, and the great fire.
Go thy waies, I begin to bee a wearie of thee, and I tell thee ſo before, becauſe I would not fall out with thee. Go thy wayes, let my horſes be wel look'd too, without any trickes.
If I put any trickes vpon em ſir, they ſhall bee Iades trickes, which are their owne right by the law of Nature.
A ſhrewd knaue and an vnhappie.
So a is. My Lord that's gone made himſelfe much ſport out of him, by his authoritie hee remaines heere, which he thinkes is a pattent for his ſawcineſſe, and indeede he has no pace, but runnes where he will.
I like him well, 'tis not amiſſe: and I was about to tell you, ſince I heard of the good Ladies death, and that my Lord your ſonne was vpon his returne home. I moued the King my maſter to ſpeake in the behalfe of my daughter, which in the minoritie of them both, his Maieſtie out of a ſelfe gracious remembrance did firſt propoſe, his Highneſſe hath promis'd me to doe it, and to ſtoppe vp the diſpleaſure he hath conceiued againſt your ſonne, there is no fitter matter. How do's your Ladyſhip like it?
With verie much content my Lord, and I wiſh it happily effected.
His Highneſſe comes poſt from Marcellus, of as able bodie as when he number'd thirty, a will be heere to morrow, or I am deceiu'd by him that in ſuch intelligence hath ſeldome fail'd.
Ir reioyces me, that I hope I ſhall ſee him ere I die. I haue letters that my ſonne will be heere to night: I ſhall beſeech your Lordſhip to remaine with mee, till they meete together.
Madam, I was thinking with what manners I might ſafely be admitted.
You neede but pleade your honourable priuiledge.
Ladie, of that I haue made a bold charter, but I thanke my God, it holds yet.
O Madam, yonders my Lord your ſonne with a patch of veluet on's face, whether there bee a ſcar vnder't or no, the Veluet knowes, but 'tis a goodly patch of Veluet, his left cheeke is a cheeke of two pile and a halfe, but his right cheeke is worne bare.
A ſcarre nobly got,
Or a noble ſcarre, is a good liu'rie of honor,
So belike is that.
But it is your carbinado'd face.
Let vs go ſee
your ſonne I pray you, I long to talke
With the yong noble ſouldier.
Faith there's a dozen of em, with delicate fine hats, and moſt courteous feathers, which bow the head, and nod at euerie man.
But this exceeding poſting day and night,
Muſt wear your ſpirits low, we cannot helpe it:
But ſince you haue made the daies and nights as one,
To weare your gentle limbes in my affayres,
Be bold you do ſo grow in my requitall,
As nothing can vnroote you. In happie time,
This man may helpe me to his Maieſties eare,
If he would ſpend his power. God ſaue you ſir.
And you.
Sir, I haue ſeene you in the Court of France.
I haue beene ſometimes there.
I do preſume ſir, that you are not falne
From the report that goes vpon your goodneſſe,
And therefore goaded with moſt ſharpe occaſions,
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The vſe of your owne vertues, for the which
I ſhall continue thankefull.
What's your will?
That it will pleaſe you
To giue this poore petition to the King,
And ayde me with that ſtore of power you haue
To come into his preſence.
The Kings not heere.
Not heere ſir?
Not indeed,
He hence remou'd laſt night, and with more haſt
Then is his vſe.
Lord how we looſe our paines.
All's well that ends well yet,
Though time ſeeme ſo aduerſe, and meanes vnfit:
I do beſeech you, whither is he gone?
Marrie as I take it to Roſſillion,
Whither I am going.
I do beſeech you ſir,
Since you are like to ſee the King before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I preſume ſhall render you no blame,
But rather make you thanke your paines for it,
I will come after you with what good ſpeede
Our meanes will make vs meanes.
This Ile do for you.
And you ſhall finde your ſelfe to be well thankt what e're falles more. We muſt to horſe againe, Go, go, prouide.
Good Mr Lauatch giue my Lord Lafew this letter, I haue ere now ſir beene better knowne to you, when I haue held familiaritie with freſher cloathes: but I am now ſir muddied in fortunes mood, and ſmell ſomewhat ſtrong of her ſtrong diſpleaſure.
Truely, Fortunes diſpleaſure is but ſluttiſh if it ſmell ſo ſtrongly as thou ſpeak'ſt of: I will hencefoorth eate no Fiſh of Fortunes butt'ring. Pre thee alow the winde.
Nay you neede not to ſtop your noſe ſir: I ſpake but by a Metaphor.
Indeed ſir, if your Metaphor ſtinke, I will ſtop my noſe, or againſt any mans Metaphor. Prethe get thee further.
Pray you ſir deliuer me this paper.
Foh, prethee ſtand away: a paper from fortunes cloſe-ſtoole, to giue to a Nobleman. Looke heere he comes himſelfe.
Heere is a purre of Fortunes ſir, or of Fortunes Cat, but not a Muſcat, that ha's falne into the vncleane fiſh-pond of her diſpleaſure, and as he ſayes is muddied withall. Pray you ſir, vſe the Carpe as you may, for he lookes like a poore decayed, ingenious, fooliſh, raſcally knaue. I doe pittie his diſtreſſe in my ſmiles of comfort, and leaue him to your Lordſhip.
My Lord I am a man whom fortune hath cruelly ſcratch'd.
And what would you haue me to doe? 'Tis too late to paire her nailes now. Wherein haue you played the knaue with fortune that ſhe ſhould ſcratch you, who of her ſelfe is a good Lady, and would not haue knaues thriue long vnder? There's a Cardecue for you: Let the Iuſtices make you and fortune friends; I am for other buſineſſe.
I beſeech your honour to heare mee one ſingle word▪
you begge a ſingle peny more: Come you ſhall hat, ſaue your word.
My name my good Lord is Parrolles.
You begge more then word then. Cox my paſſion, giue me your hand: How does your drumme?
O my good Lord, you were the firſt that found mee.
Was I inſooth? And I was the firſt that loſt thee.
It lies in you my Lord to bring me in ſome grace for you did bring me out.
Out vpon thee knaue, doeſt thou put vpon mee at once both the offiee of God and the diuel: one brings thee in grace, and the other brings thee out. The Kings comming I know by his Trumpets. Sirrah, inquire further after me, I had talke of you laſt night, though you are a foole and a knaue, you ſhall eate, go too, follow.
I praiſe God for you.
We loſt a Iewell of her, and our eſteeme
Was made much poorer by it: but your ſonne,
As mad in folly, lack'd the ſence to know
Her eſtimation home.
'Tis paſt my Liege,
And I beſeech your Maieſtie to make it
Naturall rebellion, done i' th blade of youth,
When oyle and fire, too ſtrong for reaſons force,
Ore-beares it, and burnes on.
My honour'd Lady,
I haue forgiuen and forgotten all,
Though my reuenges were high bent vpon him,
And watch'd the time to ſhoote.
This I muſt ſay,
But firſt I begge my pardon: the yong Lord
Did to his Maieſty, his Mother, and his Ladie,
Offence of mighty note; but to himſelfe
The greateſt wrong of all. He loſt a wife,
Whoſe beauty did aſtoniſh the ſuruey
Of richeſt eies: whoſe words all eares tooke captiue,
Whoſe deere perfection, hearts that ſcorn'd to ſerue,
Humbly call'd Miſtris.
Praiſing what is loſt,
Makes the remembrance deere. Well, call him hither,
We are reconcil'd, and the firſt view ſhall kill
All repetition: Let him not aske our pardon,
The nature of his great offence is dead,
And deeper then obliuion, we do burie
Th' incenſing reliques of it. Let him approach
A ſtranger, no offender; and informe him
So 'tis our will he ſhould▪
I ſhall my Liege.
What ſayes he to your daughter,
Haue you ſpoke?
All that he is, hath reference to your Highnes.
Then ſhall we haue a match. I haue letters ſent me, that ſets him high in fame.
He lookes well on't.
I am not a day of ſeaſon,
For thou maiſt ſee a ſun-ſhine, and a haile
In me at once: But to the brighteſt beames
Diſtracted clouds giue way, ſo ſtand thou forth,
The time is faire againe.
My high repented blames
Deere Soueraigne pardon to me.
All is whole,
Not one word more of the conſumed time,
Let's take the inſtant by the forward top:
For we are old, and on our quick'ſt decrees
Th' inaudible, and noiſeleſſe foot of time
Steales, ere we can effect them. You remember
The daughter of this Lord?
Admiringly my Liege, at firſt
I ſtucke my choice vpon her, ere my heart
Durſt make too bold a herauld of my tongue:
Where the impreſſion of mine eye enfixing,
Contempt his ſcornfull Perſpectiue did lend me,
Which warpt the line, of euerie other fauour,
Scorn'd a faire colour, or expreſt it ſtolne,
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a moſt hideous obiect. Thence it came,
That ſhe whom all men prais'd, and whom my ſelfe,
Since I haue loſt, haue lou'd; was in mine eye
The duſt that did offend it.
Well excus'd:
That thou didſt loue her, ſtrikes ſome ſcores away
From the great compt: but loue that comes too late,
Like a remorſefull pardon ſlowly carried
To the great ſender, turnes a ſowre offence,
Crying, that's good that's gone: Our raſh faults,
Make triuiall price of ſerious things we haue,
Not knowing them, vntill we know their graue,
Oft our diſpleaſures to our ſelues vniuſt,
Deſtroy our friends, and after weepe their duſt:
Our owne loue waking, cries to ſee what's don,e
While ſhamefull hate ſleepes out the afternoone.
Be this ſweet Helens knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for faire Maudlin,
The maine conſents are had, and heere wee'l ſtay
To ſee our widdowers ſecond marriage day:
Which better then the firſt, O deere heauen bleſſe,
Or, ere they meete in me, O Nature ceſſe.
Come on my ſonne, in whom my houſes name
Muſt be digeſted: giue a fauour from you
To ſparkle in the ſpirits of my daughter,
That ſhe may quickly come. By my old beard,
And eu'rie haire that's on't, Helen that's dead
Was a ſweet creature: ſuch a ring as this,
The laſt that ere I tooke her leaue at Court,
I ſaw vpon her finger.
Hers it was not.
Now pray you let me ſee it. For mine eye,
While I was ſpeaking, oft was faſten'd too't:
This Ring was mine, and when I gaue it Hellen,
I bad her if her fortunes euer ſtoode
Neceſſitied to helpe, that by this token
I would releeue her. Had you that craft to reaue her
Of what ſhould ſtead her moſt?
My gracious Soueraigne,
How ere it pleaſes you to take it ſo,
The ring was neuer hers.
Sonne, on my life
I haue ſeene her weare it, and ſhe reckon'd it
At her liues rate.
I am ſure I ſaw her weare it.
You are deceiu'd my Lord, ſhe neuer ſaw it:
In Florence was it from a caſement throwne mee,
Wrap'd in a paper, which contain'd the name
Of her that threw it: Noble ſhe was, and thought
I ſtood ingag'd▪ but when I had ſubſcrib'd
To mine owne fortune, and inform'd her fully,
I could not anſwer in that courſe of Honour
As ſhe had made the ouerture, ſhe ceaſt
In heauie ſatisfaction, and would neuer
Receiue the Ring againe.
Platus himſelfe,
That knowes the tinct and multiplying med'cine,
Hath not in natures myſterie more ſcience,
Then I haue in this Ring. 'Twas mine, 'twas Helens,
Who euer gaue it you: then if you know
That you are well acquainted with your ſelfe,
Confeſſe 'twas hers, and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her. She call'd the Saints to ſuretie,
That ſhe would neuer put it from her finger,
Vnleſſe ſhe gaue it to your ſelfe in bed,
Where you haue neuer come: or ſent it vs
Vpon her great diſaſter.
She neuer ſaw it.
Thou ſpeak'ſt it falſely: as I loue mine Honor,
And mak'ſt connecturall feares to come into me,
Which I would faine ſhut out, if it ſhould proue
That thou art ſo inhumane, 'twill not proue ſo:
And yet I know not, thou didſt hate her deadly,
And ſhe is dead, which nothing but to cloſe
Her eyes my ſelfe, could win me to beleeue,
More then to ſee this Ring. Take him away,
My fore-paſt proofes, how ere the matter fall
Shall taze my feares of little vanitie,
Hauing vainly fear'd too little. Away with him,
Wee'l ſift this matter further.
If you ſhall proue
This Ring was euer hers, you ſhall as eaſie
Proue that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where yet ſhe neuer was.
I am wrapd in diſmall thinkings.
Gracious Soueraigne.
Whether I haue beene too blame or no, I know not,
Here's a petition from a Florentine,
Who hath for foure or fiue remoues come ſhort,
To tender it her ſelfe. I vndertooke it,
Vanquiſh'd thereto by the faire grace and ſpeech
Of the poore ſuppliant, who by this I know
Is heere attending: her buſineſſe lookes in her
With an importing viſage, and ſhe told me
In a ſweet verball breefe, it did concerne
Your Highneſſe with her ſelfe.
Ʋpon his many proteſtations to marrie mee when his wife was dead, I bluſh to ſay it, he wonne me. Now is the Count Roſſillion a Widdower, his vowes are forfeited to mee, and my honors payed to him. Hee ſtole from Florence, taking no leaue, and I follow him to his Countrey for Iuſtice: Grant it me, O King, in you it beſt lies, otherwiſe a ſeducer flouriſhes, and a poore Maid is vndone. Diana Capilet.
I will buy me a ſonne in Law in a faire, and toule for this. Ile none of him.
The heauens haue thought well on thee Lafew,
To bring forth this diſcou'rie, ſeeke theſe ſutors:
Go ſpeedily, and bring againe the Count.
I am a-feard the life of Hellen (Ladie)
Was fowly ſnatcht.
Now iuſtice on the doers.
I wonder ſir, ſir, wiues are monſters to you,
And that you flye them as you ſweare them Lordſhip,
Yet you deſire to marry. What woman's that?
I am my Lord a wretched Florentine,
Deriued from the ancient Capilet,
My ſuite as I do vnderſtand you know,
And therefore know how farre I may be pittied.
I am her Mother ſir, whoſe age and honour
Both ſuffer vnder this complaint we bring,
And both ſhall ceaſe, without your remedie.
Come hether Count, do you know theſe Women?
My Lord, I neither can nor will denie,
But that I know them, do they charge me further?
Why do you looke ſo ſtrange vpon your wife?
She's none of mine my Lord.
If you ſhall marrie
You giue away this hand, and that is mine,
You giue away heauens vowes, and thoſe are mine:
You giue away my ſelfe, which is knowne mine:
For I by vow am ſo embodied yours,
That ſhe which marries you, muſt marrie me,
Either both or none.
your reputation comes too ſhort for my daughter, you are no husband for her.
My Lord, this is a fond and deſperate creature,
Whom ſometime I haue laugh'd with: Let your highnes
Lay a more noble thought vpon mine honour,
Then for to thinke that I would ſinke it heere.
Sir for my thoughts, you haue them il to friend,
Till your deeds gaine them fairer: proue your honor,
Then in my thought it lies.
Good my Lord,
Aske him vpon his oath, if hee do's thinke
He had not my virginity.
What ſaiſt thou to her?
She's impudent my Lord,
And was a common gameſter to the Campe.
He do's me wrong my Lord: If I were ſo,
He might haue bought me at a common price.
Do not beleeue him. O behold this Ring,
Whoſe high reſpect and rich validitie
Did lacke a Paralell: yet for all that
He gaue it to a Commoner a' th Campe
If I be one.
He bluſhes, and 'tis hit:
Of ſixe preceding Anceſtors, that Iemme
Confer'd by teſtament to 'th ſequent iſſue
Hath it beene owed and worne. This is his wife,
That Ring's a thouſand proofes.
Me thought you ſaide
You ſaw one heere in Court could witneſſe it.
I did my Lord, but loath am to produce
So bad an inſtrument, his names Parrolles.
I ſaw the man to day, if man he bee.
Finde him, and bring him hether.
What of him:
He's quoted for a moſt pe fidious ſlaue
With all the ſpots a' th world, taxt and deboſh'd,
Whoſe nature ſickens: but to ſpeake a truth,
Am I, or that or this for what he'l vtter,
That will ſpeake any thing.
She hath that Ring of yours.
I thinke ſhe has; certaine it is I lyk'd her,
And boorded her i' th wanton way of youth:
She knew her diſtance, and did angle for mee,
Madding my eagerneſſe with her reſtraint,
As all impediments in fancies courſe
Are motiues of more fancie, and in fine,
Her inſuite comming with her moderne grace,
Subdu'd me to her rate, ſhe got the Ring,
And I had that which any inferiour might
At Market price haue bought.
I muſt be patient:
You that haue turn'd off a firſt ſo noble wife,
May iuſtly dyet me. I pray you yet,
(Since you lacke vertue, I will looſe a husband)
Send for your Ring, I will returne it home,
And giue me mine againe.
I haue it not.
What Ring was yours I pray you?
Sir much like the ſame vpon your finger.
Know you this Ring, this Ring was his of late.
And this was it I gaue him being a bed.
The ſtory then goes falſe, you threw it him
Out of a Caſement.
I haue ſpoke the truth.
My Lord, I do confeſſe the ring was hers.
You boggle ſhrewdly, euery feather ſtarts you:
Is this the man you ſpeake of?
I, my Lord.
Tell me ſirrah, but tell me true I charge you,
Not fearing the diſpleaſure of your maſter:
Which on your iuſt proceeding, Ile keepe off,
By him and by this woman heere, what know you?
So pleaſe your Maieſty, my maſter hath bin an honourable Gentleman. Trickes hee hath had in him, which Gentlemen haue.
Come, come, to' th' purpoſe: Did hee loue this woman?
Faith ſir he did loue her, but how.
How I pray you?
He did loue her ſir, as a Gent. loues a Woman.
How is that?
He lou'd her ſir, and lou'd her not.
As thou art a knaue and no knaue, what an equiuocall Companion is this?
I am a poore man, and at your Maieſties command.
Hee's a good drumme my Lord, but a naughtie Orator.
Do you know he promiſt me marriage?
Faith I know more then Ile ſpeake.
But wilt thou not ſpeake all thou know'ſt?
Yes ſo pleaſe your Maieſty: I did goe betweene them as I ſaid, but more then that he loued her, for indeede he was madde for her, and talkt of Sathan, and of Limbo, and of Furies, and I know not what: yet I was in that credit with them at that time, that I knewe of their going to bed, and of other motions, as promiſing her marriage, and things which would deriue mee ill will to ſpeake of, therefore I will not ſpeake what I know.
Thou haſt ſpoken all alreadie, vnleſſe thou canſt ſay they are maried, but thou art too fine in thy euidence, therefore ſtand aſide. This Ring you ſay was yours.
I my good Lord.
Where did you buy it? Or who gaue it you?
It was not giuen me, nor I did not buy it.
Who lent it you?
It was not lent me neither.
Where did you finde it then?
I found it not.
If it were yours by none of all theſe wayes,
How could you giue it him?
I neuer gaue it him.
This womans an eaſie gloue my Lord, ſhe goes off and on at pleaſure.
This Ring was mine, I gaue it his firſt wife.
It might be yours or hers for ought I know.
Take her away, I do not like her now,
To priſon with her: and away with him,
Vnleſſe thou telſt me where thou hadſt this Ring,
Thou dieſt within this houre.
Ile neuer tell you.
Take her away.
Ile put in baile my liedge.
I thinke thee now ſome common Cuſtomer.
By Ioue if euer I knew man 'twas you.
Wherefore haſt thou accuſde him al this while.
Becauſe he's guiltie, and he is not guilty:
He knowes I am no Maid, and hee'l ſweare too't:
Ile ſweare I am a Maid, and he knowes not.
Great King I am no ſtrumpet, by my life,
I am either Maid, or elſe this old mans wife.
She does abuſe our eares, to priſon with her.
Good mother fetch my bayle. Stay Royall ſir,
The Ieweller that owes the Ring is ſent for,
And he ſhall ſurety me. But for this Lord,
Who hath abus'd me as he knowes himſelfe,
Though yet he neuer harm'd me, heere I quit him.
He knowes himſelfe my bed he hath defil'd,
And at that time he got his wife with childe:
Dead though ſhe be, ſhe feeles her yong one kicke:
So there's my riddle, one that's dead is quicke,
And now behold the meaning.
Is there no exorciſt
Beguiles the truer Office of mine eyes?
Is't reall that I ſee?
No my good Lord,
'Tis but the ſhadow of a wife you ſee,
The name, and not the thing.
Both, both, O pardon.
Oh my good Lord, when I was like this Maid,
I found you wondrous kinde, there is your Ring,
And looke you, heeres your letter: this it ſayes,
When from my finger you can get this Ring,
And is by me with childe, &c. This is done,
Will you be mine now you are doubly wonne?
If ſhe my Liege can make me know this clearly,
Ile loue her dearely, euer, euer dearly.
If it appeare not plaine, and proue vntrue,
Deadly diuorce ſtep betweene me and you.
O my deere mother do I ſee you liuing?
Mine eyes ſmell Onions, I ſhall weepe anon:
Good Tom Drumme lend me a handkercher.
So I thanke thee, waite on me home, Ile make ſport with thee: Let thy curtſies alone, they are ſcuruy ones.
Let vs from point to point this ſtorie know,
To make the euen truth in pleaſure flow:
If thou beeſt yet a freſh vncropped flower,
Chooſe thou thy husband, and Ile pay thy dower.
For I can gueſſe, that by thy honeſt ayde,
Thou keptſt a wife her ſelfe, thy ſelfe a Maide▪
Of that and all the progreſſe more and leſſe,
Reſolduedly more leaſure ſhall expreſſe:
All yet ſeemes well, and if it end ſo meete,
The bitter paſt, more welcome is the ſweet.
THe Kings a Begger, now the Play is done,
All is well ended, if this ſuite be wonne,
That you expreſſe Content: which we will pay,
With ſtrift to pleaſe you, day exceeding day:
Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts,
Your gentle hands lends vs, and take our hearts.