HVng be ye heauens with black, yield day to night;
Comets importing change of Times and States,
Brandiſh your cryſtall Treſſes in the Skie,
And with them ſcourge the bad reuolting Stars,
That haue conſented vnto Henries death:
King Henry the Fift, too famous to liue long,
England ne're loſt a King of ſo much worth.
England ne're had a King vntill his time:
Vertue he had, deſeruing to command,
His brandiſht Sword did blinde men with his beames,
His Armes ſpred wider then a Dragons Wings:
His ſparkling Eyes, repleat with wrathfull fire,
More dazled and droue back his Enemies,
Then mid-day Sunne, fierce bent againſt their faces.
What ſhould I ſay? his Deeds exceed all ſpeech:
He ne're lift vp his Hand, but conquered.
We mourne in black, why mourn we not in blood?
Henry is dead, and neuer ſhall reuiue:
Vpon a Woodden Coffin we attend;
And Deaths diſhonourable Victorie,
We with our ſtately preſence glorifie,
Like Captiues bound to a Triumphant Carre.
What? ſhall we curſe the Planets of Miſhap,
That plotted thus our Glories ouerthrow?
Or ſhall we thinke the ſubtile-witted French,
Coniurers and Sorcerers, that afraid of him,
By Magick Verſes haue contriu'd his end.
He was a King, bleſt of the King of Kings.
Vnto the French, the dreadfull Iudgement-Day
So dreadfull will not be, as was his ſight.
The Battailes of the Lord of Hoſts he fought:
The Churches Prayers made him ſo proſperous.
The Church? where is it?
Had not Church-men pray'd,
His thred of Life had not ſo ſoone decay'd.
None doe you like, but an effeminate Prince,
Whom like a Schoole-boy you may ouer-awe.
Gloſter, what ere we like, thou art Protector,
And lookeſt to command the Prince and Realme.
Thy Wife is prowd, ſhe holdeth thee in awe,
More then God or Religious Church-men may.
Name not Religion, for thou lou'ſt the Fleſh,
And ne're throughout the yeere to Church thou go'ſt,
Except it be to pray againſt thy foes.
Ceaſe, ceaſe theſe Iarres, & reſt your minds in peace:
Let's to the Altar: Heralds wayt on vs;
In ſtead of Gold, wee'le offer vp our Armes,
Since Armes auayle not, now that Henry's dead,
Poſteritie await for wretched yeeres,
When at their Mothers moiſtned eyes, Babes ſhall ſuck,
Our Ile be made a Nouriſh of ſalt Teares,
And none but Women left to wayle the dead.
Henry the Fift, thy Ghoſt I inuocate:
Proſper this Realme, keepe it from Ciuill Broyles,
Combat with aduerſe Planets in the Heauens;
A farre more glorious Starre thy Soule will make,
Then Iulius Caeſar, bright—
My honourable Lords, health to you all:
Sad tidings bring I to you out of France,
Of loſſe, of ſlaughter, and diſcomfiture:
Guyen, Champaigne, Rheimes, Orleance,
Paris, Guyſors, Poictiers, are all quite loſt.
What ſay'ſt thou man, before dead Henry's Coarſe?
Speake ſoftly, or the loſſe of thoſe great Townes
Will make him burſt his Lead, and riſe from death.
Is Paris loſt? is Roan yeelded vp?
If Henry were recall'd to life againe,
Theſe news would cauſe him once more yeeld the Ghoſt.
How were they loſt? what trecherie was vs'd?
No trecherie, but want of Men and Money.
Amongſt the Souldiers this is muttered,
That here you maintaine ſeuerall Factions:
And whil'ſt a Field ſhould be diſpatcht and fought,
You are diſputing of your Generals.
One would haue lingring Warres, with little coſt;
Another would flye ſwift, but wanteth Wings:
A third thinkes, without expence at all,
By guilefull faire words, Peace may be obtayn'd.
Awake, awake, Engliſh Nobilitie,
Let not ſlouth dimme your Honors, new begot;
Cropt are the Flower-de-Luces in your Armes
Of Englands Coat, one halfe is cut away.
Were our Teares wanting to this Funerall,
Theſe Tidings would call forth her flowing Tides.
Me they concerne, Regent I am of France:
Giue me my ſteeled Coat, Ile fight for France.
Away with theſe diſgracefull wayling Robes;
Wounds will I lend the French, in ſtead of Eyes,
To weepe their intermiſſiue Miſeries.
Lords view theſe Letters, full of bad miſchance.
France is reuolted from the Engliſh quite,
Except ſome petty Townes, of no import.
The Dolphin Charles is crowned King in Rheimes:
The Baſtard of Orleance with him is ioyn'd:
Reynold, Duke of Aniou, doth take his part,
The Duke of Alanſon flyeth to his ſide.
The Dolphin crown'd King? all flye to him?
O whither ſhall we flye from this reproach?
We will not flye, but to our enemies throats.
Bedford, if thou be ſlacke, Ile fight it out.
Gloſter, why doubtſt thou of my forwardneſſe?
An Army haue I muſter'd in my thoughts,
Wherewith already France is ouer-run.
My gracious Lords, to adde to your laments,
Wherewith you now bedew King Henries hearſe,
I muſt informe you of a diſmall fight,
Betwixt the ſtout Lord Talbot, and the French.
What? wherein Talbot ouercame, is't ſo?
O no: wherein Lord Talbot was o'rethrown:
The circumſtance Ile tell you more at large.
The tenth of Auguſt laſt, this dreadfull Lord,
Retyring from the Siege of Orleance,
Hauing full ſcarce ſix thouſand in his troupe,
By three and twentie thouſand of the French
Was round incompaſſed, and ſet vpon:
No leyſure had he to enranke his men.
He wanted Pikes to ſet before his Archers:
In ſtead whereof, ſharpe Stakes pluckt out of Hedges
They pitched in the ground confuſedly,
To keepe the Horſemen off, from breaking in.
More then three houres the fight continued:
Where valiant Talbot, aboue humane thought,
Enacted wonders with his Sword and Lance.
Hundreds he ſent to Hell, and none durſt ſtand him:
Here, there, and euery where enrag'd, he ſlew.
The French exclaym'd, the Deuill was in Armes,
All the whole Army ſtood agaz'd on him.
His Souldiers ſpying his vndaunted Spirit,
A Talbot, a Talbot, cry'd out amaine,
And ruſht into the Bowels of the Battaile.
Here had the Conqueſt fully been ſeal'd vp,
If Sir Iohn Falſtaffe had not play'd the Coward.
He being in the Vauward, plac't behinde,
With purpoſe to relieue and follow them,
Cowardly fled, not hauing ſtruck one ſtroake.
Hence grew the generall wrack and maſſacre:
Encloſed were they with their Enemies.
A baſe Wallon, to win the Dolphins grace,
Thruſt Talbot with a Speare into the Back,
Whom all France, with their chiefe aſſembled ſtrength,
Durſt not preſume to looke once in the face.
Is Talbot ſlaine then? I will ſlay my ſelfe,
For liuing idly here, in pompe and eaſe,
Whil'ſt ſuch a worthy Leader, wanting ayd,
Vnto his daſtard foe-men is betray'd.
O no, he liues, but is tooke Priſoner,
And Lord Scales with him, and Lord Hungerfor:
Moſt of the reſt ſlaughter'd, or tooke likewiſe.
His Ranſome there is none but I ſhall pay.
Ile hale the Dolphin headlong from his Throne,
His Crowne ſhall be the Ranſome of my friend:
Foure of their Lords Ile change for one of ours.
Farwell my Maſters, to my Taske will I,
Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make,
To keepe our great Saint Georges Feaſt withall.
Ten thouſand Souldiers with me I will take,
Whoſe bloody deeds ſhall make all Europe quake.
So you had need, for Orleance is beſieg'd,
The Engliſh Army is growne weake and faint:
The Earle of Salisbury craueth ſupply,
And hardly keepes his men from mutinie,
Since they ſo few, watch ſuch a multitude.
Remember Lords your Oathes to Henry ſworne:
Eyther to quell the Dolphin vtterly,
Or bring him in obedience to your yoake.
I doe remember it, and here take my leaue,
To goe about my preparation.
Ile to the Tower with all the haſt I can,
To view th' Artillerie and Munition,
And then I will proclayme young Henry King.
To Eltam will I, where the young King is,
Being ordayn'd his ſpeciall Gouernor,
And for his ſafetie there Ile beſt deuiſe.
Each hath his Place and Function to attend:
I am left out; for me nothing remaines:
But long I will not be Iack out of Office▪
The King from Eltam I intend to ſend.
And ſit at chiefeſt Sterne of publique Weale.
Mars his true mouing, euen as in the Heauens,
So in the Earth, to this day is not knowne.
Late did he ſhine vpon the Engliſh ſide:
Now we are Victors, vpon vs he ſmiles.
What Townes of any moment, but we haue?
At pleaſure here we lye, neere Orleance:
Otherwhiles, the famiſht Engliſh, like pale Ghoſts,
Faintly beſiege vs one houre in a moneth.
They want their Porredge, & their fat Bul Beeues:
Eyther they muſt be dyeted like Mules,
And haue their Prouender ty'd to their mouthes,
Or pitteous they will looke, like drowned Mice.
Let's rayſe the Siege: why liue we idly here?
Talbot is taken, whom we wont to feare:
Remayneth none but mad-brayn'd Salisbury,
And he may well in fretting ſpend his gall,
Nor men nor Money hath he to make Warre.
Sound, ſound Alarum, we will ruſh on them.
Now for the honour of the forlorne French:
Him I forgiue my death, that killeth me,
When he ſees me goe back one foot, or flye.
Who euer ſaw the like? what men haue I?
Dogges, Cowards, Daſtards: I would ne're haue fled,
But that they left me 'midſt my Enemies.
Salisbury is a deſperate Homicide,
He fighteth as one weary of his life:
The other Lords, like Lyons wanting foode,
Doe ruſh vpon vs as their hungry prey.
Froyſard, a Countreyman of ours, records,
England all Oliuers and Rowlands breed,
During the time Edward the third did raigne:
More truly now may this be verified;
For none but Samſons and Goliaſſes
It ſendeth forth to skirmiſh: one to tenne?
Leane raw-bon'd Raſcals, who would e're ſuppoſe,
They had ſuch courage and audacitie?
Let's leaue this Towne,
For they are hayre-brayn'd Slaues,
And hunger will enforce them to be more eager:
Of old I know them; rather with their Teeth
The Walls they'le teare downe, then forſake the Siege.
I thinke by ſome odde Gimmors or Deuice
Their Armes are ſet, like Clocks, ſtill to ſtrike on;
Elſe ne're could they hold out ſo as they doe:
By my conſent, wee'le euen let them alone.
Be it ſo.
Where's the Prince Dolphin? I haue newes for him.
Baſtard of Orleance, thrice welcome to vs.
Me thinks your looks are ſad, your chear appal'd.
Hath the late ouerthrow wrought this offence?
Be not diſmay'd, for ſuccour is at hand:
A holy Maid hither with me I bring,
Which by a Viſion ſent to her from Heauen,
Ordayned is to rayſe this tedious Siege,
And driue the Engliſh forth the bounds of France:
The ſpirit of deepe Prophecie ſhe hath,
Exceeding the nine Sibyls of old Rome:
What's paſt, and what's to come, ſhe can deſcry.
Speake, ſhall I call her in? beleeue my words,
For they are certaine, and vnfallible
Goe call her in: but firſt, to try her skill,
Reignier ſtand thou as Dolphin in my place;
Queſtion her prowdly, let thy Lookes be ſterne,
By this meanes ſhall we found what skill ſhe hath.
Faire Maid, is't thou wilt doe theſe wondrous feats?
Reignier, is't thou that thinkeſt to beguile me?
Where is the Dolphin? Come, come from behinde,
I know thee well, though neuer ſeene before.
Be not amaz'd, there's nothing hid from me;
In priuate will I talke with thee apart:
Stand back you Lords, and giue vs leaue a while.
She takes vpon her brauely at firſt daſh.
Dolphin, I am by birth a Shepheards Daughter,
My wit vntrayn'd in any kind of Art:
Heauen and our Lady gracious hath it pleas'd
To ſhine on my contemptible eſtate.
Loe, whileſt I wayted on my tender Lambes,
And to Sunnes parching heat diſplay'd my cheekes,
Gods Mother deigned to appeare to me,
And in a Viſion full of Maieſtie,
Will'd me to leaue my baſe Vocation,
And free my Countrey from Calamitie:
Her ayde ſhe promis'd, and aſſur'd ſucceſſe.
In compleat Glory ſhee reueal'd her ſelfe:
And whereas I was black and ſwart before,
With thoſe cleare Rayes, which ſhee infus'd on me,
That beautie am I bleſt with, which you may ſee.
Aske me what queſtion thou canſt poſſible,
And I will anſwer vnpremeditated:
My Courage trie by Combat, if thou dar'ſt,
And thou ſhalt finde that I exceed my Sex.
Reſolue on this, thou ſhalt be fortunate,
If thou receiue me for thy Warlike Mate.
Thou haſt aſtoniſht me with thy high termes:
Onely this proofe Ile of thy Valour make,
In ſingle Combat thou ſhalt buckle with me;
And if thou vanquiſheſt, thy words are true,
Otherwiſe I renounce all confidence.
I am prepar'd: here is my keene-edg'd Sword,
Deckt with fine Flower-de-Luces on each ſide,
The which at Touraine, in S. Katherines Church-yard,
Out of a great deale of old Iron, I choſe forth.
Then come a Gods name, I feare no woman.
And while I liue, Ile ne're flye from a man.
Stay, ſtay thy hands, thou art an Amazon,
And fighteſt with the Sword of Debora.
Chriſts Mother helpes me, elſe I were too weake.
Who e're helps thee, 'tis thou that muſt help me:
Impatiently I burne with thy deſire,
My heart and hands thou haſt at once ſubdu'd.
Excellent Puzel, if thy name be ſo,
Let me thy ſeruant, and not Soueraigne be,
'Tis the French Dolphin ſueth to thee thus.
I muſt not yeeld to any rights of Loue,
For my Profeſſion's ſacred from aboue:
When I haue chaſed all thy Foes from hence,
Then will I thinke vpon a recompence.
Meane time looke gracious on thy proſtrate Thrall.
My Lord me thinkes is very long in talke.
Doubtleſſe he ſhriues this woman to her ſmock,
Elſe ne're could he ſo long protract his ſpeech.
Shall wee diſturbe him, ſince hee keepes no meane?
He may meane more then we poor men do know,
Theſe women are ſhrewd tempters with their tongues.
My Lord, where are you? what deuiſe you on?
Shall we giue o're Orleance, or no?
Why no, I ſay: diſtruſtfull Recreants,
Fight till the laſt gaſpe: Ile be your guard.
What ſhee ſayes, Ile confirme: wee'le fight it out.
Aſſign'd am I to be the Engliſh Scourge.
This night the Siege aſſuredly Ile rayſe:
Expect Saint Martins Summer, Halcyons dayes,
Since I haue entred into theſe Warres.
Glory is like a Circle in the Water,
Which neuer ceaſeth to enlarge it ſelfe,
Till by broad ſpreading, it diſperſe to naught.
With Henries death, the Engliſh Circle ends,
Diſperſed are the glories it included:
Now am I like that prowd inſulting Ship,
Which Caeſar and his fortune bare at once.
Was Mahomet inſpired with a Doue?
Thou with an Eagle art inſpired then.
Helen, the Mother of Great Conſtantine,
Nor yet S. Philips daughters were like thee.
Bright Starre of Venus, falne downe on the Earth,
How may I reuerently worſhip thee enough?
Leaue off delayes, and let vs rayſe the Siege.
Woman, do what thou canſt to ſaue our honors,
Driue them from Orleance, and be immortaliz'd.
Preſently wee'le try: come, let's away about it,
No Prophet will I truſt, if ſhee proue falſe.
I am come to ſuruey the Tower this day;
Since Henries death, I feare there is Conueyance:
Where be theſe Warders, that they wait not here?
Open the Gates, 'tis Gloſter that calls.
Who's there, that knocks ſo imperiouſly?
It is the Noble Duke of Gloſter.
Who ere he be, you may not be let in.
Villaines, anſwer you ſo the Lord Protector?
The Lord protect him, ſo we anſwer him,
We doe no otherwiſe then wee are will'd.
Who willed you? or whoſe will ſtands but mine?
There's none Protector of the Realme, but I:
Breake vp the Gates, Ile be your warrantize;
Shall I be flowted thus by dunghill Groomes?
What noyſe is this? what Traytors haue wee here?
Lieutenant, is it you whoſe voyce I heare?
Open the Gates, here's Gloſter that would enter.
Haue patience Noble Duke, I may not open,
The Cardinall of Wincheſter forbids:
From him I haue expreſſe commandement,
That thou nor none of thine ſhall be let in.
Faint-hearted Wooduile, prizeſt him 'fore me?
Arrogant Wincheſter, that haughtie Prelate,
Whom Henry our late Soueraigne ne're could brooke?
Thou art no friend to God, or to the King:
Open the Gates, or Ile ſhut thee out ſhortly.
Open the Gates vnto the Lord Protector,
Or wee'le burſt them open, if that you come not quickly.
How now ambitious Vmpheir, what meanes this?
Piel'd Prieſt, doo'ſt thou command me to be ſhut out?
I doe, thou moſt vſurping Proditor,
And not Protector of the King or Realme.
Stand back thou manifeſt Conſpirator,
Thou that contriued'ſt to murther our dead Lord,
Thou that giu'ſt Whores Indulgences to ſinne,
Ile canuas thee in thy broad Cardinalls Hat,
If thou proceed in this thy inſolence.
Nay, ſtand thou back, I will not budge a foot:
This be Damaſcus, be thou curſed Cain,
To ſlay thy Brother Abel, if thou wilt.
I will not ſlay thee, but Ile driue thee back:
Thy Scarlet Robes, as a Childs bearing Cloth,
Ile vſe, to carry thee out of this place.
Doe what thou dar'ſt, I beard thee to thy face.
What? am I dar'd, and bearded to my face?
Draw men, for all this priuiledged place,
Blew Coats to Tawny Coats, Prieſt, beware your Beard,
I meane to tugge it, and to cuffe you ſoundly.
Vnder my feet I ſtampe thy Cardinalls Hat:
In ſpight of Pope, or dignities of Church,
Here by the Cheekes Ile drag thee vp and downe.
Gloſter, thou wilt anſwere this before the Pope.
Wincheſter Gooſe, I cry, a Rope, a Rope.
Now beat them hence, why doe you let them ſtay?
Thee Ile chaſe hence, thou Wolfe in Sheepes array.
Out Tawney-Coates, out Scarlet Hypocrite.
Fye Lords, that you being ſupreme. Magiſtrates,
Thus contumeliouſly ſhould breake the Peace.
Peace Maior, thou know'ſt little of my wrongs:
Here's Beauford, that regards nor God nor King,
Hath here diſtrayn'd the Tower to his vſe.
Here's Gloſter, a Foe to Citizens,
One that ſtill motions Warre, and neuer Peace,
O're-charging your free Purſes with large Fines;
That ſeekes to ouerthrow Religion,
Becauſe he is Protector of the Realme;
And would haue Armour here out of the Tower,
To Crowne himſelfe King, and ſuppreſſe the Prince.
I will not anſwer thee with words, but blowes.
Naught reſts for me, in this tumultuous ſtrife,
But to make open Proclamation.
Come Officer, as lowd as e're thou canſt, cry:
Cardinall, Ile be no breaker of the Law:
But we ſhall meet, and breake our minds at large.
Gloſter, wee'le meet to thy coſt, be ſure:
Thy heart-blood I will haue for this dayes worke.
Ile call for Clubs, if you will not away:
This Cardinall's more haughtie then the Deuill.
Maior farewell: thou doo'ſt but what thou may'ſt.
Abhominable Gloſter, guard thy Head,
For I intend to haue it ere long.
See the Coaſt clear'd, and then we will depart.
Good God, theſe Nobles ſhould ſuch ſtomacks beare,
I my ſelfe fight not once in fortie yeere.
Sirrha, thou know'ſt how Orleance is beſieg'd,
And how the Engliſh haue the Suburbs wonne.
Father I know, and oft haue ſhot at them,
How e're vnfortunate, I miſs'd my ayme.
But now thou ſhalt not. Be thou rul'd by me:
Chiefe Maſter Gunner am I of this Towne,
Something I muſt doe to procure me grace:
The Princes eſpyals haue informed me,
How the Engliſh, in the Suburbs cloſe entrencht,
Went through a ſecret Grate of Iron Barres,
In yonder Tower, to ouer-peere the Citie,
And thence diſcouer, how with moſt aduantage
They may vex vs with Shot or with Aſſault.
To intercept this inconuenience,
A Peece of Ordnance 'gainſt it I haue plac'd,
And euen theſe three dayes haue I watcht,
If I could ſee them. Now doe thou watch,
For I can ſtay no longer.
If thou ſpy'ſt any, runne and bring me word,
And thou ſhalt finde me at the Gouernors.
Father, I warrant you, take you no care,
Ile neuer trouble you, if I may ſpye them.
Talbot, my life, my ioy, againe return'd?
How wert thou handled, being Priſoner?
Or by what meanes got's thou to be releas'd?
Diſcourſe I prethee on this Turrets top.
The Earle of Bedford had a Priſoner,
Call'd the braue Lord Ponton de Sautrayle,
For him was I exchang'd, and ranſom'd.
But with a baſer man of Armes by farre,
Once in contempt they would haue barter'd me:
Which I diſdaining, ſcorn'd, and craued death,
Rather then I would be ſo pil'd eſteem'd:
In fine, redeem'd I was as I deſir'd.
But O, the trecherous Falſtaffe wounds my heart,
Whom with my bare fiſts I would execute,
If I now had him brought into my power.
Yet tell'ſt thou not, how thou wert entertain'd.
With ſcoffes and ſcornes, and contumelious taunts,
In open Market-place produc't they me,
To be a publique ſpectacle to all:
Here, ſayd they, is the Terror of the French,
The Scar-Crow that affrights our Children ſo.
Then broke I from the Officers that led me,
And with my nayles digg'd ſtones out of the ground,
To hurle at the beholders of my ſhame.
My griſly countenance made others flye,
None durſt come neere, for feare of ſuddaine death.
In Iron Walls they deem'd me not ſecure:
So great feare of my Name 'mongſt them were ſpread,
That they ſuppos'd I could rend Barres of Steele,
And ſpurne in pieces Poſts of Adamant.
Wherefore a guard of choſen Shot I had,
That walkt about me euery Minute while:
And if I did but ſtirre out of my Bed,
Ready they were to ſhoot me to the heart.
I grieue to heare what torments you endur'd,
But we will be reueng'd ſufficiently.
Now it is Supper time in Orleance:
Here, through this Grate, I count each one,
And view the Frenchmen how they fortifie:
Let vs looke in, the ſight will much delight thee:
Sir Thomas Gargraue, and Sir William Glandſdale,
Let me haue your expreſſe opinions,
Where is beſt place to make our Batt'ry next?
I thinke at the North Gate, for there ſtands Lords.
And heere, at the Bulwarke of the Bridge.
For ought I ſee, this Citie muſt be famiſht,
Or with light Skirmiſhes enfeebled.
O Lord haue mercy on vs, wretched ſinners.
O Lord haue mercy on me, wofull man.
What chance is this, that ſuddenly hath croſt vs?
Speake Salisbury; at leaſt, if thou canſt, ſpeake:
How far'ſt thou, Mirror of all Martiall men?
One of thy Eyes, and thy Cheekes ſide ſtruck off?
Accurſed Tower, accurſed fatall Hand,
That hath contriu'd this wofull Tragedie.
In thirteene Battailes, Salisbury o' recame:
Henry the Fift he firſt trayn'd to the Warres.
Whil'ſt any Trumpe did ſound, or Drum ſtruck vp,
His Sword did ne're leaue ſtriking in the field.
Yet liu'ſt thou Salisbury? though thy ſpeech doth fayle,
One Eye thou haſt to looke to Heauen for grace.
The Sunne with one Eye vieweth all the World.
Heauen be thou gracious to none aliue,
If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands.
Beare hence his Body, I will helpe to bury it.
Sir Thomas Gargraue, haſt thou any life?
Speake vnto Talbot, nay, looke vp to him.
Salisbury cheare thy Spirit with this comfort,
Thou ſhalt not dye whiles—
He beckens with his hand, and ſmiles on me:
As who ſhould ſay, When I am dead and gone,
Remember to auenge me on the French.
Plantaginet I will, and like thee,
Play on the Lute, beholding the Townes burne:
Wretched ſhall France be onely in my Name.
What ſtirre is this? what tumult's in the Heauens?
Whence commeth this Alarum, and the noyſe?
My Lord, my Lord, the French haue gather'd head,
The Dolphin, with one Ioane de Puzel ioyn'd,
A holy Propheteſſe, new riſen vp,
Is come with a great Power, to rayſe the Siege.
Heare, heare, how dying Salisbury doth groane,
It irke his heart he cannot be reueng'd.
Frenchmen, Ile be a Salisbury to you.
Puzel or Puſſel, Dolphin or Dog-fiſh,
Your hearts Ile ſtampe out with my Horſes heeles,
And make a Quagmire of your mingled braines.
Conuey me Salisbury into his Tent,
And then wee'le try what theſe daſtard Frenchmen dare.
Where is my ſtrength, my valour, and my force?
Our Engliſh Troupes retyre, I cannot ſtay them,
A Woman clad in Armour chaſeth them.
Here, here ſhee comes. Ile haue a bowt with thee:
Deuill, or Deuils Dam, Ile coniure thee:
Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a Witch,
And ſtraightway giue thy Soule to him thou ſeru'ſt.
Come, come, 'tis onely I that muſt diſgrace thee.
Heauens, can you ſuffer Hell ſo to preuayle?
My breſt Ile burſt with ſtraining of my courage,
And from my ſhoulders crack my Armes aſunder,
But I will chaſtiſe this high-minded Strumpet.
Talbot farwell, thy houre is not yet come,
I muſt goe Victuall Orleance forthwith:
O're-take me if thou canſt, I ſcorne thy ſtrength.
Goe, goe, cheare vp thy hungry-ſtarued men,
Helpe Salisbury to make his Teſtament,
This Day is ours, as many more ſhall be.
My thoughts are whirled like a Potters Wheele,
I know not where I am, nor what I doe:
A Witch by feare, not force, like Hannibal,
Driues back our troupes, and conquers as ſhe liſts:
So Bees with ſmoake, and Doues with noyſome ſtench,
Are from their Hyues and Houſes driuen away.
They call'd vs, for our fierceneſſe, Engliſh Dogges,
Now like to Whelpes, we crying runne away,
Hearke Countreymen, eyther renew the fight,
Or teare the Lyons out of Englands Coat;
Renounce your Soyle, giue Sheepe in Lyons ſtead:
Sheepe run not halfe ſo trecherous from the Wolfe,
Or Horſe or Oxen from the Leopard,
As you flye from your oft-ſubdued ſlaues.
It will not be, retyre into your Trenches:
You all conſented vnto Salisburies death,
For none would ſtrike a ſtroake in his reuenge.
Puzel is entred into Orleance,
In ſpight of vs, or ought that we could doe.
O would I were to dye with Salisbury,
The ſhame hereof, will make me hide my head.
Aduance our wauing Colours on the Walls,
Reſcu'd is Orleance from the Engliſh.
Thus Ioane de Puzel hath perform'd her word.
Diuineſt Creature, Aſtrea's Daughter,
How ſhall I honour thee for this ſucceſſe?
Thy promiſes are like Adonis Garden,
That one day bloom'd, and fruitfull were the next.
France, triumph in thy glorious Propheteſſe,
Recouer'd is the Towne of Orleance,
More bleſſed hap did ne're befall our State.
Why ring not out the Bells alowd,
Throughout the Towne?
Dolphin command the Citizens make Bonfires,
And feaſt and banquet in the open ſtreets,
To celebrate the ioy that God hath giuen vs.
All France will be repleat with mirth and ioy,
When they ſhall heare how we haue play'd the men.
'Tis Ioane, not we, by whom the day is wonne:
For which, I will diuide my Crowne with her,
And all the Prieſts and Fryers in my Realme,
Shall in proceſſion ſing her endleſſe prayſe.
A ſtatelyer Pyramis to her Ile reare,
Then Rhodophe's or Memphis euer was.
In memorie of her, when ſhe is dead,
Her Aſhes, in an Vrne more precious
Then the rich-iewel'd Coffer of Darius,
Tranſported, ſhall be at high Feſtiuals
Before the Kings and Queenes of France.
No longer on Saint Dennis will we cry,
But Ioane de Puzel ſhall be France's Saint.
Come in, and let vs Banquet Royally,
After this Golden Day of Victorie.
Sirs, take your places, and be vigilant:
If any noyſe or Souldier you perceiue
Neere to the walles, by ſome apparant ſigne
Let vs haue knowledge at the Court of Guard.
Sergeant you ſhall. Thus are poore Seruitors
(When others ſleepe vpon their quiet beds)
Conſtrain'd to watch in darkneſſe, raine, and cold.
Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy,
By whoſe approach, the Regions of Artoys,
Wallon, and Picardy, are friends to vs:
This happy night, the Frenchmen are ſecure,
Hauing all day carows'd and banquetted,
Embrace we then this opportunitie,
As fitting beſt to quittance their deceite,
Contriu'd by Art, and balefull Sorcerie.
Coward of France, how much he wrongs his fame,
Diſpairing of his owne armes fortitude,
To ioyne with Witches, and helpe of Hell.
Traitors haue neuer other company.
But what's that Puzell whom they tear me ſo pure?
A Maid, they ſay.
A Maid? And be ſo martiall?
Pray God ſhe proue not maſculine ere long:
If vnderneath the Standard of the French
She carry Armour, as ſhe hath begun.
Well, let them practiſe and conuerſe with ſpirits.
God is our Fortreſſe, in whoſe conquering name
Let vs reſolue to ſcale their flinty bulwarkes.
Aſcend braue Talbot, we will follow thee.
Not altogether: Better farre I gueſſe,
That we do make our entrance ſeuerall wayes:
That if it chance the one of vs do faile,
The other yet may riſe againſt their force.
Agreed; Ile to yond corner.
And I to this.
And heere will Talbot mount, or make his graue.
Now Salisbury, for thee and for the right
Of Engliſh Henry, ſhall this night appeare
How much in duty. I am bound to both.
Arme, arme, the enemy doth make aſſault.
How now my Lords? What all vnreadie ſo?
Vnready? I and glad we ſcap'd ſo well.
'Twas time (I trow) to wake and leaue our beds,
Hearing Alarums at our Chamber doores.
Of all exploits ſince firſt I follow'd Armes,
Nere heard I of a warlike enterprize
More venturous, or deſperate then this.
I thinke this Talbot be a Fiend of Hell.
If not of Hell, the Heauens ſure fauour him.
Here commeth Charles, I maruell how he ſped?
Tut, holy Ioane was his defenſiue Guard.
Is this thy cunning, thou deceitfull Dame?
Didſt thou at firſt, to flatter vs withall,
Make vs partakers of a little gayne,
That now our loſſe might be ten times ſo much?
Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend?
At all times will you haue my Power alike?
Sleeping or waking, muſt I ſtill preuayle,
Or will you blame and lay the fault on me?
Improuident Souldiors, had your Watch been good,
This ſudden Miſchiefe neuer could haue falne.
Duke of Alanſon, this was your default,
That being Captaine of the Watch to Night,
Did looke no better to that weightie Charge.
Had all your Quarters been as ſafely kept,
As that whereof I had the gouernment,
We had not beene thus ſhamefully ſurpriz'd.
Mine was ſecure.
And ſo was mine, my Lord.
And for my ſelfe, moſt part of all this Night
Within her Quarter, and mine owne Precinct,
I was imploy'd in paſſing to and fro,
About relieuing of the Centinels.
Then how, or which way, ſhould they firſt breake in?
Queſtion (my Lords) no further of the caſe,
How or which way; 'tis ſure they found ſome place,
But weakely guarded, where the breach was made:
And now there reſts no other ſhift but this,
To gather our Souldiors, ſcatter'd and diſperc't,
And lay new Plat-formes to endammage them.
Ile be ſo bold to take what they haue left:
The Cry of Talbot ſerues me for a Sword,
For I haue loaden me with many Spoyles,
Vſing no other Weapon but his Name.
The Day begins to breake, and Night is fled,
Whoſe pitchy Mantle ouer-vayl'd the Earth.
Here ſound Retreat, and ceaſe our hot purſuit.
Bring forth the Body of old Salisbury,
And here aduance it in the Market-Place,
The middle Centure of this curſed Towne.
Now haue I pay'd my Vow vnto his Soule:
For euery drop of blood was drawne from him,
There hath at leaſt fiue Frenchmen dyed to night.
And that hereafter Ages may behold
What ruine happened in reuenge of him,
Within their chiefeſt Temple Ile erect
A Tombe, wherein his Corps ſhall be interr'd:
Vpon the which▪ that euery one may reade,
Shall be engrau'd the ſacke of Orleance,
The trecherous manner of his mournefull death,
And what a terror he had beene to France.
But Lords, in all our bloudy Maſſacre,
I muſe we met not with the Dolphins Grace,
His new-come Champion, vertuous Ioane of Acre,
Nor any of his falſe Confederates.
'Tis thought Lord Talbot, when the fight began,
Rows'd on the ſudden from their drowſie Beds,
They did amongſt the troupes of armed men,
Leape o're the Walls for refuge in the field.
My ſelfe, as farre as I could well diſcerne,
For ſmoake, and duskie vapours of the night,
Am ſure I ſcar'd the Dolphin and his Trull,
When Arme in Arme they both came ſwiftly running,
Like to a payre of louing Turtle-Doues,
That could not liue aſunder day or night.
After that things are ſet in order here,
Wee'le follow them with all the power we haue.
All hayle, my Lords: which of this Princely trayne
Call ye the Warlike Talbot, for his Acts
So much applauded through the Realme of France?
Here is the Talbot, who would ſpeak with him?
The vertuous Lady, Counteſſe of Ouergne,
With modeſtie admiring thy Renowne,
By me entreats (great Lord) thou would'ſt vouchſafe
To viſit her poore Caſtle where ſhe lyes,
That ſhe may boaſt ſhe hath beheld the man,
Whoſe glory fills the World with lowd report.
Is it euen ſo? Nay, then I ſee our Warres
Will turne vnto a peacefull Comick ſport,
When Ladyes craue to be encountred with.
You may not (my Lord) deſpiſe her gentle ſuit.
Ne're truſt me then: for when a World of men
Could not preuayle with all their Oratorie,
Yet hath a Womans kindneſſe ouer-rul'd:
And therefore tell her, I returne great thankes,
And in ſubmiſſion will attend on her.
Will not your Honors beare me company?
No, truly, 'tis more then manners will:
And I haue heard it ſayd, Vnbidden Gueſts
Are often welcommeſt when they are gone.
Well then, alone (ſince there's no remedie)
I meane to proue this Ladyes courteſie.
Come hither Captaine, you perceiue my minde.
I doe my Lord, and meane accordingly.
Porter, remember what I gaue in charge,
And when you haue done ſo, bring the Keyes to me.
Madame, I will.
The Plot is layd, if all things fall out right,
I ſhall as famous be by this exploit,
As Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus death.
Great is the rumour of this dreadfull Knight,
And his atchieuements of no leſſe account:
Faine would mine eyes be witneſſe with mine eares,
To giue their cenſure of theſe rare reports.
Madame, according as your Ladyſhip deſir'd,
By Meſſage crau'd, ſo is Lord Talbot come.
And he is welcome: what? is this the man?
Madame, it is.
Is this the Scourge of France?
Is this the Talbot, ſo much fear'd abroad?
That with his Name the Mothers ſtill their Babes?
I ſee Report is fabulous and falſe.
I thought I ſhould haue ſeene ſome Hercules,
A ſecond Hector, for his grim aſpect,
And large proportion of his ſtrong knit Limbes.
Alas, this is a Child, a ſilly Dwarfe:
It cannot be, this weake and writhled ſhrimpe
Should ſtrike ſuch terror to his Enemies.
Madame, I haue beene bold to trouble you:
But ſince your Ladyſhip is not at leyſure,
Ile ſort ſome other time to viſit you.
What meanes he now?
Goe aske him, whither he goes?
Stay my Lord Talbot, for my Lady craues,
To know the cauſe of your abrupt departure?
Marry, for that ſhee's in a wrong beleefe,
I goe to certifie her Talbot's here.
If thou be he, then art thou Priſoner.
Priſoner? to whom?
To me, blood-thirſtie Lord:
And for that cauſe I trayn'd thee to my Houſe.
Long time thy ſhadow hath been thrall to me,
For in my Gallery thy Picture hangs:
But now the ſubſtance ſhall endure the like,
And I will chayne theſe Legges and Armes of thine,
That haſt by Tyrannie theſe many yeeres
Waſted our Countrey, ſlaine our Citizens,
And ſent our Sonnes and Husbands captiuate.
Ha, ha, ha.
Laugheſt thou Wretch?
Thy mirth ſhall turne to moane.
I laugh to ſee your Ladyſhip ſo fond,
To thinke, that you haue ought but Talbots ſhadow,
Whereon to practiſe your ſeueritie.
Why? art not thou the man?
I am indeede.
Then haue I ſubſtance too.
No, no, I am but ſhadow of my ſelfe:
You are deceiu'd, my ſubſtance is not here;
For what you ſee, is but the ſmalleſt part,
And leaſt proportion of Humanitie:
I tell you Madame, were the whole Frame here,
It is of ſuch a ſpacious loftie pitch,
Your Roofe were not ſufficient to contayn't.
This is a Riddling Merchant for the nonce,
He will be here, and yet he is not here:
How can theſe contrarieties agree?
That will I ſhew you preſently.
How ſay you Madame? are you now perſwaded,
That Talbot is but ſhadow of himſelfe?
Theſe are his ſubſtance, ſinewes, armes, and ſtrength,
With which he yoaketh your rebellious Neckes,
Razeth your Cities, and ſubuerts your Townes,
And in a moment makes them deſolate.
Victorious Talbot, pardon my abuſe,
I finde thou art no leſſe then Fame hath bruited,
And more then may be gathered by thy ſhape.
Let my preſumption not prouoke thy wrath,
For I am ſorry, that with reuerence
I did not entertaine thee as thou art.
Be not diſmay'd, faire Lady, nor miſconſter
The minde of Talbot, as you did miſtake
The outward compoſition of his body.
What you haue done, hath not offended me:
Nor other ſatisfaction doe I craue,
But onely with your patience, that we may
Taſte of your Wine, and ſee what Cates you haue,
For Souldiers ſtomacks alwayes ſerue them well.
With all my heart, and thinke me honored,
To feaſt ſo great a Warrior in my Houſe.
Great Lords and Gentlemen,
What meanes this ſilence?
Dare no man anſwer in a Caſe of Truth?
Within the Temple Hall we were too lowd,
The Garden here is more conuenient.
Then ſay at once, if I maintain'd the Truth:
Or elſe was wrangling Somerſet in th' error?
Faith I haue beene a Traunt in the Law,
And neuer yet could frame my will to it,
And therefore frame the Law vnto my will.
Iudge you, my Lord of Warwicke, then betweene vs.
Between two Hawks, which flyes the higher pitch,
Between two Dogs, which hath the deeper mouth,
Between two Blades, which beares the better temper,
Between two Horſes, which doth beare him beſt,
Between two Girles, which hath the merryeſt eye,
I haue perhaps ſome ſhallow ſpirit of Judgement:
But in theſe nice ſharpe Quillets of the Law,
Good faith I am no wiſer then a Daw.
Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance:
The truth appeares ſo naked on my ſide,
That any purblind eye may find it out.
And on my ſide it is ſo well apparrell'd,
So cleare, ſo ſhining, and ſo euident,
That it will glimmer through a blind-mans eye.
Since you are tongue-ty'd, and ſo loth to ſpeake,
In dumbe ſignificants proclayme your thoughts:
Let him that is a true-borne Gentleman,
And ſtands vpon the honor of his birth,
If he ſuppoſe that I haue pleaded truth,
From off this Bryer pluck a white Roſe with me.
Let him that is no Coward, nor no Flatterer,
But dare maintaine the partie of the truth,
Pluck a red Roſe from off this Thorne with me.
I loue no Colours: and without all colour
Of baſe inſinuating flatterie,
I pluck this white Roſe with Plantagenet.
I pluck this red Roſe, with young Somerſet,
And ſay withall, I thinke he held the right.
Stay Lords and Gentlemen, and pluck no more
Till you conclude, that he vpon whoſe ſide
The feweſt Roſes are cropt from the Tree,
Shall yeeld the other in the right opinion.
Good Maſter Vernon, it is well obiected:
If I haue feweſt, I ſubſcribe in ſilence.
And I.
Then for the truth, and plainneſſe of the Caſe,
I pluck this pale and Maiden Bloſſome here,
Giuing my Verdict on the white Roſe ſide.
Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,
Leaſt bleeding, you doe paint the white Roſe red,
And fall on my ſide ſo againſt your will.
If I, my Lord, for my opinion bleed,
Opinion ſhall be Surgeon to my hurt,
And keepe me on the ſide where ſtill I am.
Well, well, come on, who elſe?
Vnleſſe my Studie and my Bookes be falſe,
The argument you held, was wrong in you;
In ſigne whereof, I pluck a white Roſe too.
Now Somerſet, where is your argument?
Here in my Scabbard, meditating, that
Shall dye your white Roſe in a bloody red.
Meane time your cheeks do counterfeit our Roſes:
For pale they looke with feare, as witneſſing
The truth on our ſide.
No Plantagenet:
'Tis not for ſcare, but anger, that thy cheekes
Bluſh for pure ſhame, to counterfeit our Roſes,
And yet thy tongue will not confeſſe thy error.
Hath not thy Roſe a Canker, Somerſet?
Hath not thy Roſe a Thorne, Plantagenet?
I, ſharpe and piercing to maintaine his truth,
Whiles thy conſuming Canker eates his falſehood.
Well, Ile find friends to weare my bleeding Roſes,
That ſhall maintaine what I haue ſaid is true,
Where falſe Plantagenet dare not be ſeene.
Now by this Maiden Bloſſome in my hand,
I ſcorne thee and thy faſhion peeuiſh Boy.
Turne not thy ſcornes this way, Plantagenet.
Prowd Poole, I will, and ſcorne both him and thee.
Ile turne my part thereof into thy throat.
Away, away, good William de la Poole,
We grace the Yeoman, by conuerſing with him.
Now by Gods will thou wrong'ſt him, Somerſet:
His Grandfather was Lyonel Duke of Clarence,
Third Sonne to the third Edward King of England:
Spring Creſtleſſe Yeomen from ſo deepe a Root?
He beares him on the place's Priuiledge,
Or durſt not for his crauen heart ſay thus.
By him that made me, Ile maintaine my words
On any Plot of Ground in Chriſtendome.
Was not thy Father Richard, Earle of Cambridge,
For Treaſon executed in our late Kings dayes?
And by his Treaſon, ſtand'ſt not thou attainted,
Corrupted, and exempt from ancient Gentry?
His Treſpas yet liues guiltie in thy blood,
And till thou be reſtor'd, thou art a Yeoman.
My Father was attached, not attainted,
Condemn'd to dye for Treaſon, but no Traytor;
And that Ile proue on better men then Somerſet,
Were growing time once ripened to my will.
For your partaker Poole, and you your ſelfe,
Ile note you in my Booke of Memorie,
To ſcourge you for this apprehenſion:
Looke to it well, and ſay you are well warn'd.
Ah, thou ſhalt finde vs ready for thee ſtill:
And know vs by theſe Colours for thy Foes,
For theſe my friends in ſpight of thee ſhall weare.
And by my Soule, this pale and angry Roſe,
As Cognizance of my blood-drinking hate,
Will I for euer, and my Faction weare,
Vntill it wither with me to my Graue,
Or flouriſh to the height of my Degree.
Goe forward, and be choak'd with thy ambition:
And ſo farwell, vntill I meet thee next.
Haue with thee Poole: Farwell ambitious Richard.
How I am brau'd, and muſt perforce endure it?
This blot that they obiect againſt your Houſe,
Shall be whipt out in the next Parliament,
Call'd for the Truce of Wincheſter and Glouceſter:
And if thou be not then created Yorke,
I will not liue to be accounted Warwicke.
Meane time, in ſignall of my loue to thee,
Againſt prowd Somerſet, and William Poole,
Will I vpon thy partie weare this Roſe.
And here I prophecie: this brawle to day,
Growne to this faction in the Temple Garden,
Shall ſend betweene the Red-Roſe and the White,
A thouſand Soules to Death and deadly Night.
Good Maſter Ʋernon, I am bound to you,
That you on my behalfe would pluck a Flower.
In your behalfe ſtill will I weare the ſame.
And ſo will I.
Thankes gentle.
Come, let vs foure to Dinner: I dare ſay,
This Quarrell will drinke Blood another day.
Kind Keepers of my weake decaying Age,
Let dying Mortimer here reſt himſelfe.
Euen like a man new haled from the Wrack,
So fare my Limbes with long Impriſonment:
And theſe gray Locks, the Purſuiuants of death,
Neſtor-like aged, in an Age of Care,
Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer.
Theſe Eyes, like Lampes, whoſe waſting Oyle is ſpent,
Waxe dimme, as drawing to their Exigent.
Weake Shoulders, ouer-borne with burthening Griefe,
And pyth-leſſe Armes, like to a withered Vine,
That droupes his ſappe-leſſe Branches to the ground.
Yet are theſe Feet, whoſe ſtrength-leſſe ſtay is numme,
(Vnable to ſupport this Lumpe of Clay)
Swift-winged with deſire to get a Graue,
As witting I no other comfort haue.
But tell me, Keeper, will my Nephew come?
Richard Plantagenet, my Lord, will come:
We ſent vnto the Temple, vnto his Chamber,
And anſwer was return'd, that he will come.
Enough: my Soule ſhall then be ſatisfied.
Poore Gentleman, his wrong doth equall mine.
Since Henry Monmouth firſt began to reigne,
Before whoſe Glory I was great in Armes,
This loathſome ſequeſtration haue I had;
And euen ſince then, hath Richard beene obſcur'd,
Depriu'd of Honor and Inheritance.
But now, the Arbitrator of Deſpaires,
Iuſt Death, kinde Vmpire of mens miſeries,
With ſweet enlargement doth diſmiſſe me hence:
I would his troubles likewiſe were expir'd,
That ſo he might recouer what was loſt.
My Lord, your louing Nephew now is come.
Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?
I, Noble Vnckle, thus ignobly vs'd,
Your Nephew, late deſpiſed Richard, comes.
Direct mine Armes, I may embrace his Neck,
And in his Boſome ſpend my latter gaſpe.
Oh tell me when my Lippes doe touch his Cheekes,
That I may kindly giue one fainting Kiſſe.
And now declare ſweet Stem from Yorkes great Stock,
Why didſt thou ſay of late thou wert deſpis'd?
Firſt, leane thine aged Back againſt mine Arme,
And in that eaſe, Ile tell thee my Diſeaſe.
This day in argument vpon a Caſe,
Some words there grew 'twixt Somerſet and me:
Among which tearmes, he vs'd his lauiſh tongue,
And did vpbrayd me with my Fathers death;
Which obloquie ſet barres before my tongue,
Elſe with the like I had requited him.
Therefore good Vnckle, for my Fathers ſake,
In honor of a true Plantagenet,
And for Alliance ſake, declare the cauſe
My Father, Earle of Cambridge, loſt his Head.
That cauſe (faire Nephew) that impriſon'd me,
And hath detayn'd me all my flowring Youth,
Within a loathſome Dungeon, there to pyne,
Was curſed Inſtrument of his deceaſe.
Diſcouer more at large what cauſe that was,
For I am ignorant, and cannot gueſſe.
I will, if that my fading breath permit,
And Death approach not, ere my Tale be done.
Henry the Fourth, Grandfather to this King,
Depos'd his Nephew Richard, Edwards Sonne,
The firſt begotten, and the lawfull Heire
Of Edward King, the Third of that Deſcent.
During whoſe Reigne, the Percies of the North,
Finding his Vſurpation moſt vniuſt,
Endeuour'd my aduancement to the Throne.
The reaſon mou'd theſe Warlike Lords to this,
Was, for that (young Richard thus remou'd,
Leauing no Heire begotten of his Body)
I was the next by Birth and Parentage:
For by my Mother, I deriued am
From Lionel Duke of Clarence, third Sonne
To King Edward the Third; whereas hee,
From Iohn of Gaunt doth bring his Pedigree,
Being but fourth of that Heroick Lyne.
But marke: as in this haughtie great attempt,
They laboured, to plant the rightfull Heire,
I loſt my Libertie, and they their Liues.
Long after this, when Henry the Fift
(Succeeding his Father Bullingbrooke) did reigne:
Thy Father, Earle of Cambridge, then deriu'd
From famous Edmund Langley, Duke of Yorke,
Marrying my Siſter, that thy Mother was;
Againe, in pitty of my hard diſtreſſe,
Leuied an Army, weening to redeeme,
And haue inſtall'd me in the Diademe:
But as the reſt, ſo fell that Noble Earle,
And was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers,
In whom the Title reſted, were ſuppreſt.
Of which, my Lord, your Honor is the laſt.
True; and thou ſeeſt, that I no Iſſue haue,
And that my fainting words doe warrant death:
Thou art my Heire; the reſt, I wiſh thee gather:
But yet be wary in thy ſtudious care.
Thy graue admoniſhments preuayle with me:
But yet me thinkes, my Fathers execution
Was nothing leſſe then bloody Tyranny.
With ſilence, Nephew, be thou pollitick,
Strong fixed is the Houſe of Lancaſter,
And like a Mountaine, not to be remou'd.
But now thy Vnckle is remouing hence,
As Princes doe their Courts, when they are cloy'd
With long continuance in a ſetled place.
O Vnckle, would ſome part of my young yeeres
Might but redeeme the paſſage of your Age.
Thou do'ſt then wrong me, as yt ſlaughterer doth,
Which giueth many Wounds, when one will kill.
Mourne not, except thou ſorrow for my good,
Onely giue order for my Funerall.
And ſo farewell, and faire be all thy hopes,
And proſperous be thy Life in Peace and Warre.
And Peace, no Warre, befall thy parting Soule.
In Priſon haſt thou ſpent a Pilgrimage,
And like a Hermite ouer-paſt thy dayes.
Well, I will locke his Councell in my Breſt,
And what I doe imagine, let that reſt.
Keepers conuey him hence, and I my ſelfe
Will ſee his Buryall better then his Life.
Here dyes the duskie Torch of Mortimer,
Choakt with Ambition of the meaner ſort.
And for thoſe Wrongs, thoſe bitter Iniuries,
Which Somerſet hath offer'd to my Houſe,
I doubt not, but with Honor to redreſſe.
And therefore haſte I to the Parliament,
Eyther to be reſtored to my Blood,
Or make my will th' aduantage of my good.
Com'ſt thou with deepe premeditated Lines?
With written Pamphlets, ſtudiouſly deuis'd?
Humfrey of Gloſter, if thou canſt accuſe,
Or ought intend'ſt to lay vnto my charge,
Doe it without inuention, ſuddenly,
As I with ſudden, and extemporall ſpeech,
Purpoſe to anſwer what thou canſt obiect.
Preſumptuous Prieſt, this place cōmands my patiēce,
Or thou ſhould'ſt finde thou haſt dis-honor'd me.
Thinke not, although in Writing I preferr'd
The manner of thy vile outragious Crymes,
That therefore I haue forg'd, or am not able
Ʋerbatim to rehearſe the Methode of my Penne.
No Prelate, ſuch is thy audacious wickedneſſe,
Thy lewd, peſtiſerous, and diſſentious prancks,
As very Infants prattle of thy pride.
Thou art a moſt pernitious Vſurer,
Froward by nature, Enemie to Peace,
Laſciuious, wanton, more then well beſeemes
A man of thy Profeſſion, and Degree.
And for thy Trecherie, what's more manifeſt?
In that thou layd'ſt a Trap to take my Life,
As well at London Bridge, as at the Tower.
Beſide, I feare me, if thy thoughts were ſifted,
The King, thy Soueraigne, is not quite exempt
From enuious mallice of thy ſwelling heart.
Gloſter, I doe defie thee. Lords vouchſafe
To giue me hearing what I ſhall reply.
If I were couetous, ambitious, or peruerſe,
As he will haue me: how am I ſo poore?
Or how haps it, I ſeeke not to aduance
Or rayſe my ſelfe? but keepe my wonted Calling.
And for Diſſention, who preferreth Peace
More then I doe? except I be prouok'd.
No, my good Lords, it is not that offends,
It is not that, that hath incens'd the Duke:
It is becauſe no one ſhould ſway but hee,
No one, but hee, ſhould be about the King;
And that engenders Thunder in his breaſt,
And makes him rore theſe Accuſations forth.
But he ſhall know I am as good.
As good?
Thou Baſtard of my Grandfather.
I, Lordly Sir: for what are you, I pray,
But one imperious in anothers Throne?
Am I not Protector, ſawcie Prieſt?
And am not I a Prelate of the Church?
Yes, as an Out-law in a Caſtle keepes,
And vſeth it, to patronage his Theft.
Vnreuerent Gloceſter.
Thou art reuerent,
Touching thy Spirituall Function, not thy Life.
Rome ſhall remedie this.
Roame thither then.
My Lord, it were your dutie to forbeare.
I, ſee the Biſhop be not ouer-borne:
Me thinkes my Lord ſhould be Religious,
And know the Office that belongs to ſuch.
Me thinkes his Lordſhip ſhould be humbler,
It fitteth not a Prelate ſo to plead.
Yes, when his holy State is toucht ſo neere.
State holy, or vnhallow'd, what of that?
Is not his Grace Protector to the King?
Plantagenet I ſee muſt hold his tongue,
Leaſt it be ſaid, Speake Sirrha when you ſhould:
Muſt your bold Verdict enter talke with Lords?
Elſe would I haue a fling at Wincheſter.
Vnckles of Gloſter, and of Wincheſter,
The ſpeciall Watch-men of our Engliſh Weale,
I would preuayle, if Prayers might preuayle,
To ioyne your hearts in loue and amitie,
Oh, what a Scandall is it to our Crowne,
That two ſuch Noble Peeres as ye ſhould iarre?
Beleeue me, Lords, my tender yeeres can tell,
Ciuill diſſention is a viperous Worme,
That gnawes the Bowels of the Common-wealth.
What tumult's this?
An Vprore, I dare warrant,
Begun through malice of the Biſhops men.
Oh my good Lords, and vertuous Henry,
Pitty the Citie of London, pitty vs:
The Biſhop, and the Duke of Gloſters men,
Forbidden late to carry any Weapon,
Haue fill'd their Pockets full of peeble ſtones;
And banding themſelues in contrary parts,
Doe pelt ſo faſt at one anothers Pate,
That many haue their giddy braynes knockt out:
Our Windowes are broke downe in euery Street,
And we, for feare, compell'd to ſhut our Shops.
We charge you, on allegeance to our ſelfe,
To hold your ſlaughtring hands, and keepe the Peace:
Pray' Vnckle Gloſter mittigate this ſtrife.
Nay, if we be forbidden Stones, wee'le fall to it with our Teeth.
Doe what ye dare, we are as reſolute.
You of my houſehold, leaue this peeuiſh broyle,
And ſet this vnaccuſtom'd fight aſide.
My Lord, we know your Grace to be a man
Iuſt, and vpright; and for your Royall Birth,
Inferior to none, but to his Maieſtie:
And ere that we will ſuffer ſuch a Prince,
So kinde a Father of the Common-weale,
To be diſgraced by an Inke-horne Mate,
Wee and our Wiues and Children all will fight,
And haue our bodyes ſlaughtred by thy foes.
I, and the very parings of our Nayles
Shall pitch a Field when we are dead.
Stay, ſtay, I ſay:
And if you loue me, as you ſay you doe,
Let me perſwade you to forbeare a while.
Oh, how this diſcord doth afflict my Soule.
Can you, my Lord of Wincheſter, behold
My ſighes and teares, and will not once relent?
Who ſhould be pittifull, if you be not?
Or who ſhould ſtudy to preferre a Peace,
If holy Church-men take delight in broyles?
Yeeld my Lord Protector, yeeld Wincheſter,
Except you meane with obſtinate repulſe
To ſlay your Soueraigne, and deſtroy the Realme.
You ſee what Miſchiefe, and what Murther too,
Hath beene enacted through your enmitie:
Then be at peace, except ye thirſt for blood.
He ſhall ſubmit, or I will neuer yeeld.
Compaſſion on the King commands me ſtoupe,
Or I would ſee his heart out, ere the Prieſt
Should euer get that priuiledge of me.
Behold my Lord of Wincheſter, the Duke
Hath baniſht moodie diſcontented fury,
As by his ſmoothed Browes it doth appeare:
Why looke you ſtill ſo ſterne, and tragicall?
Here Wincheſter, I offer thee my Hand.
Fie Vnckle Beauford, I haue heard you preach,
That Mallice was a great and grieuous ſinne:
And will not you maintaine the thing you teach?
But proue a chiefe offendor in the ſame.
Sweet King: the Biſhop hath a kindly gyrd:
For ſhame my Lord of Wincheſter relent;
What, ſhall a Child inſtruct you what to doe?
Well, Duke of Gloſter, I will yeeld to thee
Loue for thy Loue, and Hand for Hand I giue.
I, but I feare me with a hollow Heart.
See here my Friends and louing Countreymen,
This token ſerueth for a Flagge of Truce,
Betwixt our ſelues, and all our followers:
So helpe me God, as I diſſemble not.
So helpe me God, as I intend it not.
Oh louing Vnckle, kinde Duke of Gloſter,
How ioyfull am I made by this Contract.
Away my Maſters, trouble vs no more,
But ioyne in friendſhip, as your Lords haue done.
Content, Ile to the Surgeons.
And ſo will I.
And I will ſee what Phyſick the Tauerne affords.
Accept this Scrowle, moſt gracious Soueraigne,
Which in the Right of Richard Plantagenet,
We doe exhibite to your Maieſtie.
Well vrg'd, my Lord of Warwick: for ſweet Prince,
And if your Grace marke euery circumſtance,
You haue great reaſon to doe Richard right,
Eſpecially for thoſe occaſions
At Eltam Place I told your Maieſtie.
And thoſe occaſions, Vnckle, were of force:
Therefore my louing Lords, our pleaſure is,
That Richard be reſtored to his Blood.
Let Richard be reſtored to his Blood,
So ſhall his Fathers wrongs be recompenc't.
As will the reſt, ſo willeth Wincheſter.
If Richard will be true, not that all alone,
But all the whole Inheritance I giue,
That doth belong vnto the Houſe of Yorke,
From whence you ſpring, by Lineall Deſcent.
Thy humble ſeruant vowes obedience,
And humble ſeruice, till the point of death.
Stoope then, and ſet your Knee againſt my Foot,
And in reguerdon of that dutie done,
I gyrt thee with the valiant Sword of Yorke:
Riſe Richard, like a true Plantagenet,
And riſe created Princely Duke of Yorke.
And ſo thriue Richard, as thy foes may fall,
And as my dutie ſprings, ſo periſh they,
That grudge one thought againſt your Maieſty.
Welcome high Prince, the mighty Duke of Yorke.
Periſh baſe Prince, ignoble Duke of Yorke.
Now will it beſt auaile your Maieſtie,
To croſſe the Seas, and to be Crown'd in France:
The preſence of a King engenders loue
Amongſt his Subiects, and his loyall Friends,
As it diſ-animates his Enemies.
When Gloſter ſayes the word, King Henry goes,
For friendly counſaile cuts off many Foes.
Your Ships alreadie are in readineſſe.
I, we may march in England, or, in France,
Not ſeeing what is likely to enſue:
This late diſſention growne betwixt the Peeres,
Burnes vnder fained aſhes of forg'd loue,
And will at laſt breake out into a flame,
As feſtred members rot but by degree,
Till bones and fleſh and ſinewes fall away,
So will this baſe and enuious diſcord breed.
And now I feare that fatall Prophecie,
Which in the time of Henry, nam'd the Fift,
Was in the mouth of euery ſucking Babe,
That Henry borne at Monmouth ſhould winne all,
And Henry borne at Windſor, looſe all:
Which is ſo plaine, that Exeter doth wiſh,
His dayes may finiſh, ere that hapleſſe time.
Theſe are the Citie Gates, the Gates of Roan,
Through which our Pollicy muſt make a breach.
Take heed, be wary how you place your words,
Talke like the vulgar ſort of Market men,
That come to gather Money for their Corne.
If we haue entrance, as I hope we ſhall,
And that we finde the ſlouthfull Watch but weake,
Ile by a ſigne giue notice to our friends,
That Charles the Dolphin may encounter them.
Our Sacks ſhall be a meane to ſack the City
And we be Lords and Rulers ouer Roan,
Therefore wee'le knock.
Che la.
Peaſauns la pouure gens de Fraunce,
Poore Market folkes that come to ſell their Corne.
Enter, goe in, the Market Bell is rung.
Now Roan, Ile ſhake thy Bulwarkes to the ground.
Saint Dennis bleſſe this happy Stratageme,
And once againe wee'le ſleepe ſecure in Roan.
Here entred Pucell, and her Practiſants:
Now ſhe is there, how will ſhe ſpecifie?
Here is the beſt and ſafeſt paſſage in.
By thruſting out a Torch from yonder Tower,
Which once diſcern'd, ſhewes that her meaning is,
No way to that (for weakneſſe) which ſhe entred.
Behold, this is the happy Wedding Torch,
That ioyneth Roan vnto her Countreymen,
But burning fatall to the Talbonites.
See Noble Charles the Beacon of our friend,
The burning Torch in yonder Turret ſtands.
Now ſhine it like a Commet of Reuenge,
A Prophet to the fall of all our Foes.
Deferre no time, delayes haue dangerous ends,
Enter and cry, the Dolphin, preſently,
And then doe execution on the Watch.
France, thou ſhalt rue this Treaſon with thy teares,
If Talbot but ſuruiue thy Trecherie.
Pucell that Witch, that damned Sorcereſſe,
Hath wrought this Helliſh Miſchiefe vnawares,
That hardly we eſcap't the Pride of France.
God morrow Gallants, want ye Corn for Bread?
I thinke the Duke of Burgonie will faſt,
Before hee'le buy againe at ſuch a rate.
'Twas full of Darnell: doe you like the taſte?
Scoffe on vile Fiend, and ſhameleſſe Curtizan,
I truſt ere long to choake thee with thine owne,
And make thee curſe the Harueſt of that Corne.
Your Grace may ſtarue (perhaps) before that time.
Oh let no words, but deedes, reuenge this Treaſon.
What will you doe, good gray-beard?
Breake a Launce, and runne a-Tilt at Death,
Within a Chayre.
Foule Fiend of France, and Hag of all deſpight,
Incompaſs'd with thy luſtfull Paramours,
Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant Age,
And twit with Cowardiſe a man halfe dead?
Damſell, Ile haue a bowt with you againe,
Or elſe let Talbot periſh with this ſhame.
Are ye ſo hot, Sir: yet Pucell hold thy peace,
If Talbot doe but Thunder, Raine will follow.
God ſpeed the Parliament: who ſhall be the Speaker?
Dare yee come forth, and meet vs in the field?
Belike your Lordſhip takes vs then for fooles,
To try if that our owne be ours, or no.
I ſpeake not to that rayling Hecate,
But vnto thee Alanſon, and the reſt.
Will ye, like Souldiors, come and fight it out?
Seignior no.
Seignior hang: baſe Muleters of France,
Like Peſant foot-Boyes doe they keepe the Walls,
And dare not take vp Armes, like Gentlemen.
Away Captaines, let's get vs from the Walls,
For Talbot meanes no goodneſſe by his Lookes.
God b'uy my Lord, we came but to tell you
That wee are here.
And there will we be too, ere it be long,
Or elſe reproach be Talbots greateſt fame.
Vow Burgonie, by honor of thy Houſe,
Prickt on by publike Wrongs ſuſtain'd in France,
Either to get the Towne againe, or dye.
And I, as ſure as Engliſh Henry liues,
And as his Father here was Conqueror;
As ſure as in this late betrayed Towne,
Great Cordelions Heart was buryed;
So ſure I ſweare, to get the Towne, or dye.
My Vowes are equall partners with thy Vowes.
But ere we goe, regard this dying Prince,
The valiant Duke of Bedford: Come my Lord,
We will beſtow you in ſome better place,
Fitter for ſickneſſe, and for craſie age.
Lord Talbot, doe not ſo diſhonour me:
Here will I ſit, before the Walls of Roan,
And will be partner of your weale or woe.
Couragious Bedford, let vs now perſwade you.
Not to be gone from hence: for once I read,
That ſtout Pendragon, in his Litter ſick,
Came to the field, and vanquiſhed his foes.
Me thinkes I ſhould reuiue the Souldiors hearts,
Becauſe I euer found them as my ſelfe.
Vndaunted ſpirit in a dying breaſt,
Then be it ſo: Heauens keepe old Bedford ſafe.
And now no more adoe, braue Burgonie,
But gather we our Forces out of hand,
And ſet vpon our boaſting Enemie.
Whither away Sir Iohn Falſtaffe, in ſuch haſte?
Whither away? to ſaue my ſelfe by flight,
We are like to haue the ouerthrow againe.
What? will you flye, and leaue Lord Talbot?
I, all the Talbots in the World, to ſaue my life.
Cowardly Knight, ill fortune follow thee.
Now quiet Soule, depart when Heauen pleaſe,
For I haue ſeene our Enemies ouerthrow.
What is the truſt or ſtrength of fooliſh man?
They that of late were daring with their ſcoffes,
Are glad and faine by flight to ſaue themſelues.
Loſt, and recouered in a day againe,
This is a double Honor, Burgonie:
Yet Heauens haue glory for this Victorie.
Warlike and Martiall Talbot, Burgonie
Inſhrines thee in his heart, and there erects
Thy noble Deeds, as Valors Monuments.
Thanks gentle Duke: but where is Pucel now?
I thinke her old Familiar is aſleepe.
Now where's the Baſtards braues, and Charles his glikes?
What all amort? Roan hangs her head for griefe,
That ſuch a valiant Company are fled.
Now will we take ſome order in the Towne,
Placing therein ſome expert Officers,
And then depart to Paris, to the King,
For there young Henry with his Nobles lye.
What wills Lord Talbot, pleaſeth Burgonie.
But yet before we goe, let's not forget
The Noble Duke of Bedford, late deceas'd,
But ſee his Exequies fulfill'd in Roan.
A brauer Souldier neuer couched Launce,
A gentler Heart did neuer ſway in Court.
But Kings and mightieſt Potentates muſt die,
For that's the end of humane miſerie.
Diſmay not (Princes) at this accident,
Nor grieue that▪ Roan is ſo recouered:
Care is no cure, but rather corroſiue,
For things that are not to be remedy'd.
Let frantike Talbot triumph for a while,
And like a Peacock ſweepe along his tayle,
Wee'le pull his Plumes, and take away his Trayne,
If Dolphin and the reſt will be but rul'd.
We haue been guided by thee hitherto,
And of thy Cunning had no diffidence,
One ſudden Foyle ſhall neuer breed diſtruſt.
Search out thy wit for ſecret pollicies,
And we will make thee famous through the World.
Wee'le ſet thy Statue in ſome holy place,
And haue thee reuerenc't like a bleſſed Saint.
Employ thee then, ſweet Virgin, for our good.
Then thus it muſt be, this doth Ioane deuiſe:
By faire perſwaſions, mixt with ſugred words,
We will entice the Duke of Burgonie
To leaue the Talbot, and to follow vs.
I marry Sweeting, if we could doe that,
France were no place for Henryes Warriors,
Nor ſhould that Nation boaſt it ſo with vs,
But be extirped from our Prouinces.
For euer ſhould they be expuls'd from France,
And not haue Title of an Earledome here.
Your Honors ſhall perceiue how I will worke,
To bring this matter to the wiſhed end.
Hearke, by the ſound of Drumme you may perceiue
Their Powers are marching vnto Paris-ward.
There goes the Talbot with his Colours ſpred,
And all the Troupes of Engliſh after him.
Now in the Rereward comes the Duke and his:
Fortune in fauor makes him lagge behinde.
Summon a Parley, we will talke with him.
A Parley with the Duke of Burgonie.
Who craues a Parley with the Burgonie?
The Princely Charles of France, thy Countrey-man.
What ſay'ſt thou Charles? for I am marching hence.
Speake Pucell, and enchaunt him with thy words.
Braue Burgonie, vndoubted hope of France,
Stay, let thy humble Hand-maid ſpeake to thee.
Speake on, but be not ouer-tedious.
Looke on thy Country, look on fertile France,
And ſee the Cities and the Townes defac't,
By waſting Ruine of the cruell Foe,
As lookes the Mother on her lowly Babe,
When Death doth cloſe his tender-dying Eyes.
See, ſee the pining Maladie of France:
Behold the Wounds, the moſt vnnaturall Wounds,
Which thou thy ſelfe haſt giuen her wofull Breſt.
Oh turne thy edged Sword another way,
Strike thoſe that hurt, and hurt not thoſe that helpe:
One drop of Blood drawne from thy Countries Boſome,
Should grieue thee more then ſtreames of forraine gore.
Returne thee therefore with a floud of Teares,
And waſh away thy Countries ſtayned Spots.
Either ſhe hath bewitcht me with her words,
Or Nature makes me ſuddenly relent.
Beſides, all French and France exclaimes on thee,
Doubting thy Birth and lawfull Progenie.
Who ioyn'ſt thou with, but with a Lordly Nation,
That will not truſt thee, but for profits ſake?
When Talbot hath ſet footing once in France,
And faſhion'd thee that Inſtrument of Ill,
Who then, but Engliſh Henry, will be Lord,
And thou be thruſt out, like a Fugitiue?
Call we to minde, and marke but this for proofe:
Was not the Duke of Orleance thy Foe?
And was he not in England Priſoner?
But when they heard he was thine Enemie,
They ſet him free, without his Ranſome pay'd,
In ſpight of Burgonie and all his friends.
See then, thou fight'ſt againſt thy Countreymen,
And ioyn'ſt with them will be thy ſlaughter-men.
Come, come, returne; returne thou wandering Lord,
Charles and the reſt will take thee in their armes.
I am vanquiſhed:
Theſe haughtie wordes of hers
Haue batt'red me like roaring Cannon-ſhot,
And made me almoſt yeeld vpon my knees.
Forgiue me Countrey, and ſweet Countreymen:
And Lords accept this heartie kind embrace.
My Forces and my Power of Men are yours.
So farwell Talbot, Ile no longer truſt thee.
Done like a Frenchman: turne and turne againe.
Welcome braue Duke, thy friendſhip makes vs freſh.
And doth beget new Courage in our Breaſts.
Pucell hath brauely play'd her part in this,
And doth deſerue a Coronet of Gold.
Now let vs on, my Lords,
And ioyne our Powers,
And ſeeke how we may preiudice the Foe.
My gracious Prince, and honorable Peeres,
Hearing of your arriuall in this Realme,
I haue a while giuen Truce vnto my Warres,
To doe my dutie to my Soueraigne.
In ſigne whereof, this Arme, that hath reclaym'd
To your obedience, fiftie Fortreſſes,
Twelue Cities, and ſeuen walled Townes of ſtrength,
Beſide fiue hundred Priſoners of eſteeme;
Lets fall his Sword before your Highneſſe feet:
And with ſubmiſſiue loyaltie of heart
Aſcribes the Glory of his Conqueſt got,
Firſt to my God, and next vnto your Grace.
Is this the Lord Talbot, Vnckle Glouceſter,
That hath ſo long beene reſident in France?
Yes, if it pleaſe your Maieſtie, my Liege▪
Welcome braue Captaine, and victorious Lord.
When I was young (as yet I am not old)
I doe remember how my Father ſaid,
A ſtouter Champion neuer handled Sword.
Long ſince we were reſolued of your truth,
Your faithfull ſeruice, and your toyle in Warre:
Yet neuer haue you taſted our Reward,
Or beene reguerdon'd with ſo much as Thanks,
Becauſe till now, we neuer ſaw your face.
Therefore ſtand vp, and for theſe good deſerts,
We here create you Earle of Shrewsbury,
And in our Coronation take your place.
Now Sir, to you that were ſo hot at Sea,
Diſgracing of theſe Colours that I weare,
In honor of my Noble Lord of Yorke
Dar'ſt thou maintaine the former words thou ſpak'ſt?
Yes Sir, as well as you dare patronage
The enuious barking of your ſawcie Tongue,
Againſt my Lord the Duke of Somerſet.
Sirrha, thy Lord I honour as he is.
Why, what is he? as good a man as Yorke.
Hearke ye: not ſo: in witneſſe take ye that.
Villaine, thou knoweſt
The Law of Armes is ſuch,
That who ſo drawes a Sword, 'tis preſent death,
Or elſe this Blow ſhould broach thy deareſt Bloud.
But Ile vnto his Maieſtie, and craue,
I may haue libertie to venge this Wrong,
When thou ſhalt ſee, Ile meet thee to thy coſt.
Well miſcreant, Ile be there as ſoone as you,
And after meete you, ſooner then you would,
Lord Biſhop ſet the Crowne vpon his head.
God ſaue King Henry of that name the ſixt.
Now Gouernour of Paris take your oath,
That you elect no other King but him;
Eſteeme none Friends, but ſuch as are his Friends,
And none your Foes, but ſuch as ſhall pretend
Malicious practiſes againſt his State:
This ſhall ye do, ſo helpe you righteous God.
My gracious Soueraigne, as I rode from Calice,
To haſte vnto your Coronation:
A Letter was deliuer'd to my hands,
Writ to your Grace, from th' Duke of Burgundy.
Shame to the Duke of Burgundy, and thee:
I vow'd (baſe Knight) when I did meete the next,
To teare the Garter from thy Crauens legge,
Which I haue done, becauſe (vnworthily)
Thou was't inſtalled in that High Degree.
Pardon me Princely Henry, and the reſt:
This Daſtard, at the battell of Poictiers,
When (but in all) I was ſixe thouſand ſtrong,
And that the French were almoſt ten to one,
Before we met, or that a ſtroke was giuen,
Like to a truſtie Squire, did run away.
In which aſſault, we loſt twelue hundred men.
My ſelfe, and diuers Gentlemen beſide,
Were there ſurpriz'd, and taken priſoners.
Then iudge (great Lords) if I haue done amiſſe:
Or whether that ſuch Cowards ought to weare
This Ornament of Knighthood, yea or no?
To ſay the truth, this fact was infamous,
And ill beſeeming any common man;
Much more a Knight, a Captaine, and a Leader.
When firſt this Order was ordain'd my Lords,
Knights of the Garter were of Noble birth;
Valiant, and Vertuous, full of haughtie Courage,
Such as were growne to credit by the warres:
Not fearing Death, nor ſhrinking for Diſtreſſe,
But alwayes reſolute, in moſt extreames.
He then, that is not furniſh'd in this ſort,
Doth but vſurpe the Sacred name of Knight,
Prophaning this moſt Honourable Order,
And ſhould (if I were worthy to be Iudge)
Be quite degraded, like a Hedge-borne Swaine,
That doth preſume to boaſt of Gentle blood.
Staine to thy Countrymen, thou hear'ſt thy doom:
Be packing therefore, thou that was't a knight:
Henceforth we baniſh thee on paine of death.
And now Lord Protector, view the Letter
Sent from our Vnckle Duke of Burgundy.
What meanes his Grace, that he hath chaung'd his Stile?
No more but plaine and bluntly? (To the King.)
Hath he forgot he is his Soueraigne?
Or doth this churliſh Superſcription
Pretend ſome alteration in good will?
What's heere? I haue vpon eſpeciall cauſe,
Mou'd with compaſſion of my Countries wracke,
Together with the pittifull complaints
Of ſuch as your oppreſſion feedes vpon,
Forſaken your pernitious Faction,
And ioyn'd with Charles, the rightfull king of France.
O monſtrous Treachery: Can this be ſo?
That in alliance, amity, and oathes,
There ſhould be found ſuch falſe diſſembling guile?
What? doth my Vnckle Burgundy reuolt?
He doth my Lord, and is become your foe.
Is that the worſt this Letter doth containe?
It is the worſt, and all (my Lord) he writes.
Why then Lord Talbot there ſhal talk with him,
And giue him chaſticement for this abuſe.
How ſay you (my Lord) are you not content?
Content, my Liege? Yes: But yt I am preuented,
I ſhould haue begg'd I might haue bene employd.
Then gather ſtrength, and march vnto him ſtraight:
Let him perceiue how ill we brooke his Treaſon,
And what offence it is to flout his Friends.
I go my Lord, in heart deſiring ſtill
You may behold confuſion of your foes.
Grant me the Combate, gracious Soueraigne.
And me (my Lord) grant me the Combate too.
This is my Seruant, heare him Noble Prince.
And this is mine (ſweet Henry) fauour him.
Be patient Lords, and giue them leaue to ſpeak.
Say Gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaime,
And wherefore craue you Combate? Or with whom?
With him (my Lord) for he hath done me wrong.
And I with him, for he hath done me wrong.
What is that wrong, wherof you both complain
Firſt let me know, and then Ile anſwer you.
Croſſing the Sea, from England into France,
This Fellow heere with enuious carping tongue,
Vpbraided me about the Roſe I weare,
Saying, the ſanguine colour of the Leaues
Did repreſent my Maſters bluſhing cheekes:
When ſtubbornly he did repugne the truth,
About a certaine queſtion in the Law,
Argu'd betwixt the Duke of Yorke, and him:
With other vile and ignominious tearmes.
In confutation of which rude reproach,
And in defence of my Lords worthineſſe,
I craue the benefit of Law of Armes.
And that is my petition (Noble Lord:)
For though he ſeeme with forged queint conceite
To ſet a gloſſe vpon his bold intent,
Yet know (my Lord) I was prouok'd by him,
And he firſt tooke exceptions at this badge,
Pronouncing that the paleneſſe of this Flower,
Bewray'd the faintneſſe of my Maſters heart.
Will not this malice Somerſet be left?
Your priuate grudge my Lord of York, wil out,
Though ne're ſo cunningly you ſmother it.
Good Lord, what madneſſe rules in braineſicke men,
When for ſo ſlight and friuolous a cauſe,
Such factious aemulations ſhall ariſe?
Good Coſins both of Yorke and Somerſet,
Quiet your ſelues (I pray) and be at peace.
Let this diſſention firſt be tried by fight,
And then your Highneſſe ſhall command a Peace.
The quarrell toucheth none but vs alone,
Betwixt our ſelues let vs decide it then.
There is my pledge, accept it Somerſet.
Nay, let it reſt where it began at firſt.
Confirme it ſo, mine honourable Lord.
Confirme it ſo? Confounded be your ſtrife,
And periſh ye with your audacious prate,
Preſumptuous vaſſals, are you not aſham'd
With this immodeſt clamorous outrage,
To trouble and diſturbe the King, and Vs?
And you my Lords, me thinkes you do not well
To beare with their peruerſe Obiections:
Much leſſe to take occaſion from their mouthes,
To raiſe a mutiny betwixt your ſelues.
Let me perſwade you take a better courſe.
It greeues his Highneſſe,
Good my Lords, be Friends.
Come hither you that would be Combatants:
Henceforth I charge you, as you loue our fauour,
Quite to forget this Quarrell, and the cauſe.
And you my Lords: Remember where we are,
In France, amongſt a fickle wauering Nation:
If they perceyue diſſention in our lookes,
And that within our ſelues we diſagree;
How will their grudging ſtomackes be prouok'd
To wilfull Diſobedience, and Rebell?
Beſide, What infamy will there ariſe,
When Forraigne Princes ſhall be certified,
That for a toy, a thing of no regard,
King Henries Peeres, and cheefe Nobility,
Deſtroy'd themſelues, and loſt the Realme of France?
Oh thinke vpon the Conqueſt of my Father,
My tender yeares, and let vs not forgoe
That for a trifle, that was bought with blood.
Let me be Vmper in this doubtfull ſtrife:
I ſee no reaſon if I weare this Roſe,
That any one ſhould therefore be ſuſpitious
I more incline to Somerſet, than Yorke:
Both are my kinſmen, and I loue them both.
As well they may vpbray'd me with my Crowne,
Becauſe (forſooth) the King of Scots is Crown'd.
But your diſcretions better can perſwade,
Then I am able to inſtruct or teach:
And therefore, as we hither came in peace,
So let vs ſtill continue peace, and loue.
Coſin of Yorke, we inſtitute your Grace
To be our Regent in theſe parts of France:
And good my Lord of Somerſet, vnite
Your Troopes of horſemen, with his Bands of foote,
And like true Subiects, ſonnes of your Progenitors,
Go cheerefully together, and digeſt
Your angry Choller on your Enemies.
Our Selfe, my Lord Protector, and the reſt,
After ſome reſpit, will returne to Calice;
From thence to England, where I hope ere long
To be preſented by your Victories,
With Charles, Alanſon, and that Traiterous rout.
My Lord of Yorke, I promiſe you the King
Prettily (me thought) did play the Orator.)
And ſo he did, but yet I like it not,
In that he weares the badge of Somerſet.
Tuſh, that was but his fancie, blame him not,
I dare preſume (ſweet Prince) he thought no harme.
And if I wiſh he did. But let it reſt,
Other affayres muſt now be managed.
Well didſt thou Richard to ſuppreſſe thy voice:
For had the paſſions of thy heart burſt out,
I feare we ſhould haue ſeene decipher'd there
More rancorous ſpight, more furious raging broyles,
Then yet can be imagin'd or ſuppos'd:
But howſoere, no ſimple man that ſees
This iarring diſcord of Nobilitie,
This ſhouldering of each other in the Court,
This factious bandying of their Fauourites,
But that it doth preſage ſome ill euent.
'Tis much, when Scepters are in Childrens hands:
But more, when Enuy breeds vnkinde deuiſion,
There comes the ruine, there begins confuſion.
Go to the Gates of Burdeaux Trumpeter,
Summon their Generall vnto the Wall.
Engliſh Iohn Talbot (Captaines) call you forth,
Seruant in Armes to Harry King of England,
And thus he would. Open your Citie Gates,
Be humble to vs, call my Soueraigne yours,
And do him homage as obedient Subiects,
And Ile withdraw me, and my bloody power.
But if you frowne vpon this proffer'd Peace,
You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
Leane Famine, quartering Steele, and climbing Fire,
Who in a moment, eeuen with the earth,
Shall lay your ſtately, and ayre-brauing Towers,
If you forſake the offer of their loue.
Thou ominous and fearefull Owle of death,
Our Nations terror, and their bloody ſcourge,
The period of thy Tyranny approacheth,
On vs thou canſt not enter but by death:
For I proteſt we are well fortified,
And ſtrong enough to iſſue out and fight.
If thou retire, the Dolphin well appointed,
Stands with the ſnares of Warre to tangle thee.
On either hand thee, there are ſquadrons pitcht,
To wall thee from the liberty of Flight;
And no way canſt thou turne thee for redreſſe,
But death doth front thee with apparant ſpoyle,
And pale deſtruction meets thee in the face:
Ten thouſand French haue tane the Sacrament,
To ryue their dangerous Artillerie
Vpon no Chriſtian ſoule but Engliſh Talbot:
Loe, there thou ſtandſt a breathing valiant man
Of an inuincible vnconquer'd ſpirit:
This is the lateſt Glorie of thy praiſe,
That I thy enemy dew thee withall:
For ere the Glaſſe that now begins to runne,
Finiſh the proceſſe of his ſandy houre,
Theſe eyes that ſee thee now well coloured,
Shall ſee thee withered, bloody, pale, and dead.
Harke, harke, the Dolphins drumme, a warning bell,
Sings heauy Muſicke to thy timorous ſoule,
And mine ſhall ring thy dire departure out,
He Fables not, I heare the enemie:
Out ſome light Horſemen, and peruſe their Wings.
O negligent and heedleſſe Diſcipline,
How are we park'd and bounded in a pale?
A little Heard of Englands timorous Deere,
Maz'd with a yelping kennell of French Curres.
If we be Engliſh Deere, be then in blood,
Not Raſcall-like to fall downe with a pinch,
But rather moodie mad: And deſperate Stagges,
Turne on the bloody Hounds with heads of Steele,
And make the Cowards ſtand aloofe at bay:
Sell euery man his life as deere as mine,
And they ſhall finde deere Deere of vs my Friends.
God, and S. George, Talbot and Englands right,
Proſper our Colours in this dangerous fight.
Are not the ſpeedy ſcouts return'd againe,
That dog'd the mighty Army of the Dolphin?
They are return'd my Lord, and giue it out,
That he is march'd to Burdeaux with his power
To fight with Talbot as he march'd along.
By your eſpyals were diſcouered
Two mightier Troopes then that the Dolphin led,
Which ioyn'd with him, and made their march for Burdeaux
A plague vpon that Villaine Somerſet,
That thus delayes my promiſed ſupply
Of horſemen, that were leuied for this ſiege.
Renowned Talbot doth expect my ayde,
And I am lowted by a Traitor Villaine,
And cannot helpe the noble Cheualier:
God comfort him in this neceſſity:
If he miſcarry, farewell Warres in France.
Thou Princely Leader of our Engliſh ſtrength,
Neuer ſo needfull on the earth of France,
Spurre to the reſcue of the Noble Talbot,
Who now is girdled with a waſte of Iron,
And hem'd about with grim deſtruction:
To Burdeaux warlike Duke, to Burdeaux Yorke,
Elſe farwell Talbot, France, and Englands honor.
O God, that Somerſet who in proud heart
Doth ſtop my Cornets, were in Talbots place,
So ſhould wee ſaue a valiant Gentleman,
By forteyting a Traitor, and a Coward:
Mad ire, and wrathfull fury makes me weepe,
That thus we dye, while remiſſe Traitors ſleepe.
O ſend ſome ſuccour to the diſtreſt Lord.
He dies, we looſe: I breake my warlike word:
We mourne, France ſmiles: We looſe, they dayly get,
All long of this vile Traitor Somerſet.
Then God take mercy on braue Talbots ſoule,
And on his Sonne yong Iohn, who two houres ſince,
I met in trauaile toward his warlike Father;
This ſeuen yeeres did not Talbot ſee his ſonne,
And now they meete where both their liues are done.
Alas, what ioy ſhall noble Talbot haue,
To bid his yong ſonne welcome to his Graue:
Away, vexation almoſt ſtoppes my breath,
That ſundred friends greete in the houre of death.
Lucie farewell, no more my fortune can,
But curſe the cauſe I cannot ayde the man.
Maine, Bloys, Poytiers, and Toures, are wonne away,
Long all of Somerſet, and his delay.
Thus while the Vulture of ſedition,
Feedes in the boſome of ſuch great Commanders,
Sleeping neglection doth betray to loſſe:
The Conqueſt of our ſcarſe-cold Conqueror,
That euer-liuing man of Memorie,
Henrie the fift: Whiles they each other croſſe,
Liues, Honours, Lands, and all, hurrie to loſſe.
It is too late, I cannot ſend them now:
This expedition was by Yorke and Talbot,
Too raſhly plotted. All our generall force,
Might with a ſally of the very Towne
Be buckled with: the ouer-daring Talbot
Hath ſullied all his gloſſe of former Honor
By this vnheedfull, deſperate, wilde aduenture:
Yorke ſet him on to fight, and dye in ſhame,
That Talbot dead, great Yorke might beare the name.
Heere is Sir William Lucie, who with me
Set from our ore-matcht forces forth for ayde.
How now Sir William, whether were you ſent?
Whether my Lord, from bought & ſold L. Talbot,
Who ring'd about with bold aduerſitie,
Cries out for noble Yorke and Somerſet,
To beate aſſayling death from his weake Regions,
And whiles the honourable Captaine there
Drops bloody ſwet from his warre-wearied limbes,
And in aduantage lingring lookes for reſcue,
You his falſe hopes, the truſt of Englands honor,
Keepe off aloofe with worthleſſe emulation:
Let not your priuate diſcord keepe away
The leuied ſuccours that ſhould lend him ayde,
While he renowned Noble Gentleman
Yeeld vp his life vnto a world of oddes.
Orleance the Baſtard, Charles, Burgundie,
Alanſon, Reignard, compaſſe him about,
And Talbot periſheth by your default.
Yorke ſet him on, Yorke ſhould haue ſent him ayde.
And Yorke as faſt vpon your Grace exclaimes,
Swearing that you with-hold his leuied hoaſt,
Collected for this expidition.
York lyes: He might haue ſent, & had the Horſe:
I owe him little Dutie, and leſſe Loue,
And take foule ſcorne to fawne on him by ſending.
The fraud of England, not the force of France,
Hath now intrapt the Noble-minded Talbot:
Neuer to England ſhall he beare his life,
But dies betraid to fortune by your ſtrife.
Come go, I will diſpatch the Horſemen ſtrait:
Within ſixe houres, they will be at his ayde.
Too late comes reſcue, he is tane or ſlaine,
For flye he could not, if he would haue fled:
And flye would Talbot neuer though he might.
If he be dead, braue Talbot then adieu.
His Fame liues in the world. His Shame in you.
O yong Iohn Talbot, I did ſend for thee▪
To tutor thee in ſtratagems of Warre,
That Talbots name might be in thee reuiu'd,
When ſapleſſe Age, and weake vnable limbes
Should bring thy Father to his drooping Chaire.
But O malignant and ill-boading Starres,
Now thou art come vnto a Feaſt of death,
A terrible and vnauoyded danger:
Therefore deere Boy, mount on my ſwifteſt horſe,
And Ile direct thee how thou ſhalt eſcape
By ſodaine flight. Come, dally not, be gone.
Is my name Talbot? and am I your Sonne?
And ſhall I flye? O, if you loue my Mother,
Diſhonor not her Honorable Name,
To make a Baſtard, and a Slaue of me:
The World will ſay, he is not Talbots blood,
That baſely fled, when Noble Talbot ſtood.
Flye, to reuenge my death, if I be ſlaine.
He that flyes ſo, will ne're returne againe.
If we both ſtay, we both are ſure to dye.
Then let me ſtay, and Father doe you flye:
Your loſſe is great, ſo your regard ſhould be;
My worth vnknowne, no loſſe is knowne in me.
Vpon my death, the French can little boaſt;
In yours they will, in you all hopes are loſt.
Flight cannot ſtayne the Honor you haue wonne,
But mine it will, that no Exploit haue done.
You fled for Vantage, euery one will ſweare:
But if I bow, they'le ſay it was for feare.
There is no hope that euer I will ſtay,
If the firſt howre I ſhrinke and run away:
Here on my knee I begge Mortalitie,
Rather then Life, preſeru'd with Infamie.
Shall all thy Mothers hopes lye in one Tombe?
I rather then Ile ſhame my Mothers Wombe,
Vpon my Bleſſing I command thee goe.
To fight I will, but not to flye the Foe.
Part of thy Father may be ſau'd in thee.
No part of him, but will be ſhame in mee.
Thou neuer hadſt Renowne, nor canſt not loſe it.
Yes, your renowned Name: ſhall flight abuſe it?
Thy Fathers charge ſhal cleare thee from yt ſtaine.
You cannot witneſſe for me, being ſlaine.
If Death be ſo apparant, then both flye.
And leaue my followers here to fight and dye?
My Age was neuer tainted with ſuch ſhame.
And ſhall my Youth be guiltie of ſuch blame?
No more can I be ſeuered from your ſide,
Then can your ſelfe, your ſelfe in twaine diuide:
Stay, goe, doe what you will, the like doe I;
For liue I will not, if my Father dye.
Then here I take my leaue of thee, faire Sonne,
Borne to eclipſe thy Life this afternoone:
Come, ſide by ſide, together liue and dye,
And Soule with Soule from France to Heauen flye.
Saint George, and Victory; fight Souldiers, fight:
The Regent hath with Talbot broke his word,
And left vs to the rage of France his Sword.
Where is Iohn Talbot? pawſe, and take thy breath,
I gaue thee Life, and reſcu'd thee from Death.
O twice my Father, twice am I thy Sonne:
The Life thou gau'ſt me firſt, was loſt and done,
Till with thy Warlike Sword, deſpight of Fate,
To my determin'd time thou gau'ſt new date.
When frō the Dolphins Creſt thy Sword ſtruck fire,
It warm'd thy Fathers heart with prowd deſire
Of bold-fac't Victorie. Then Leaden Age,
Quicken'd with Youthfull Spleene, and Warlike Rage,
Beat downe Alanſon, Orleance, Burgundie,
And from the Pride of Gallia reſcued thee.
The irefull Baſtard Orleance, that drew blood
From thee my Boy, and had the Maidenhood
Of thy firſt fight, I ſoone encountred,
And interchanging blowes, I quickly ſhed
Some of his Baſtard blood, and in diſgrace
Beſpoke him thus: Contaminated, baſe,
And mis-begotten blood, I ſpill of thine,
Meane and right poore, for that pure blood of mine,
Which thou didſt force from Talbot, my braue Boy.
Here purpoſing the Baſtard to deſtroy,
Came in ſtrong reſcue. Speake thy Fathers care:
Art thou not wearie, Iohn? How do'ſt thou fare?
Wilt thou yet leaue the Battaile, Boy, and flie,
Now thou art ſeal'd the Sonne of Chiualrie?
Flye, to reuenge my death when I am dead,
The helpe of one ſtands me in little ſtead.
Oh, too much folly is it, well I wot,
To hazard all our liues in one ſmall Boat,
If I to day dye not with Frenchmens Rage,
To morrow I ſhall dye with mickle Age.
By me they nothing gaine, and if I ſtay,
'Tis but the ſhortning of my Life one day.
In thee thy Mother dyes, our Houſeholds Name,
My Deaths Reuenge, thy Youth, and Englands Fame:
All theſe, and more, we hazard by thy ſtay;
All theſe are ſau'd, if thou wilt flye away.
The Sword of Orleance hath not made me ſmart,
Theſe words of yours draw Life-blood from my Heart.
On that aduantage, bought with ſuch a ſhame,
To ſaue a paltry Life, and ſlay bright Fame,
Before young Talbot from old Talbot flye,
The Coward Horſe that beares me, fall and dye:
And like me to the peſant Boyes of France.
To be Shames ſcorne, and ſubiect of Miſchance.
Surely, by all the Glorie you haue wonne,
And if I flye, I am not Talbots Sonne.
Then talke no more of flight, it is no boot,
If Sonne to Talbot, dye at Talbots foot.
Then follow thou thy deſp'rate Syre of Creet,
Thou Icarus, thy Life to me is ſweet:
If thou wilt fight, fight by thy Fathers ſide,
And commendable prou'd, let's dye in pride.
Where is my other Life? mine owne is gone.
O, where's young Talbot? where is valiant Iohn?
Triumphant Death, ſmear'd with Captiuitie,
Young Talbots Valour makes me ſmile at thee.
When he perceiu'd me ſhrinke, and on my Knee,
His bloodie Sword he brandiſht ouer mee,
And like a hungry Lyon did commence
Rough deeds of Rage, and ſterne Impatience:
But when my angry Guardant ſtood alone,
Tendring my ruine, and aſſayl'd of none,
Dizzie-ey'd Furie, and great rage of Heart,
Suddenly made him from my ſide to ſtart
Into the cluſtring Battaile of the French:
And in that Sea of Blood, my Boy did drench
His ouer-mounting Spirit; and there di'de
My Icarus, my Bloſſome, in his pride.
O my deare Lord, loe where your Sonne is borne.
Thou antique Death, which laugh'ſt vs here to ſcorn,
Anon from thy inſulting Tyrannie,
Coupled in bonds of perpetuitie,
Two Talbots winged through the lither Skie,
In thy deſpight ſhall ſcape Mortalitie.
O thou whoſe wounds become hard fauoured death,
Speake to thy father, ere thou yeeld thy breath,
Braue death by ſpeaking, whither he will or no:
Imagine him a Frenchman, and thy Foe.
Poore Boy, he ſmiles, me thinkes, as who ſhould ſay,
Had Death bene French, then Death had dyed to day.
Come, come, and lay him in his Fathers armes,
My ſpirit can no longer beare theſe harmes.
Souldiers adieu: I haue what I would haue,
Now my old armes are yong Iohn Talbots graue.
Had Yorke and Somerſet brought reſcue in,
We ſhould haue found a bloody day of this.
How the yong whelpe of Talbots raging wood,
Did fleſh his punie-ſword in Frenchmens blood.
Once I encountred him, and thus I ſaid:
Thou Maiden youth, be vanquiſht by a Maide.
But with a proud Maieſticall high ſcorne
He anſwer'd thus: Yong Talbot was not borne
To be the pillage of a Giglot Wench:
So ruſhing in the bowels of the French,
He left me proudly, as vnworthy fight,
Doubtleſſe he would haue made a noble Knight:
See where he lyes inherced in the armes
Of the moſt bloody Nurſſer of his harmes.
Hew them to peeces, hack their bones aſſunder,
Whoſe life was Englands glory, Gallia's wonder.
Oh no forbeare: For that which we haue fled
During the life, let vs not wrong it dead.
Herald, conduct me to the Dolphins Tent,
To know who hath obtain'd the glory of the day.
On what ſubmiſſiue meſſage art thou ſent?
Submiſſion Dolphin? Ti a meere French word:
We Engliſh Warriours wot not what it meanes.
I come to know what Priſoner; thou haſt tane,
And to ſuruey the bodies of the dead.
For priſoners askſt thou? Hell our priſon is.
But tell me whom thou ſeek'ſt?
But where's the great Alcides of the field,
Valiant Lord Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury?
Created for his rare ſucceſſe in Armes,
Great Earle of Waſhford, Waterford, and Valence,
Lord Talbot of Goodrig and Vrchinfield,
Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdon of Alton,
Lord Cromwell of Wingefield, Lord Furniuall, of Sheffeild,
The thrice victorious Lord of Falconbridge,
Knight of the Noble Order of S. George,
Worthy S. Michael, and the Golden Fleece,
Great Marſhall to Henry the ſixt,
Of all his Warres within the Realme of France.
Heere's a ſilly ſtately ſtile indeede:
The Turke that two and fiftie Kingdomes hath,
Writes not ſo tedious a Stile as this.
Him that thou magnifi'ſt with all theſe Titles,
Stinking and fly-blowne lyes heere at our feete.
Is Talbot ſlaine, the Frenchmens only Scourge,
Your Kingdomes terror, and blacke Nemeſis?
Oh were mine eye-balles into Bullets turn'd,
That I in rage might ſhoot them at your faces.
Oh, that I could but call theſe dead to life,
It were enough to fright the Realme of France.
Were but his Picture left amongſt you here,
It would amaze the prowdeſt of you all.
Giue me their Bodyes, that I may beare them hence,
And giue them Buriall, as beſeemes their worth.
I thinke this vpſtart is old Talbots Ghoſt,
He ſpeakes with ſuch a proud commanding ſpirit:
For Gods ſake let him haue him, to keepe them here,
They would but ſtinke, and putrifie the ayre.
Go take their bodies hence.
Ile beare them hence: but from their aſhes ſhal be reard
A Phoenix that ſhall make all France affear'd.
So we be rid of them, do with him what yu wilt.
And now to Paris in this conquering vaine,
All will be ours, now bloody Talbots ſlaine.
Haue you perus'd the Letters from the Pope,
The Emperor, and the Earle of Arminack?
I haue my Lord, and their intent is this,
They humbly ſue vnto your Excellence,
To haue a godly peace concluded of,
Betweene the Realmes of England, and of France.
How doth your Grace affect their motion?
Well (my good Lord) and as the only meanes
To ſtop effuſion of our Chriſtian blood,
And ſtabliſh quietneſſe on euery ſide.
I marry Vnckle, for I alwayes thought
It was both impious and vnnaturall,
That ſuch immanity and bloody ſtrife
Should reigne among Profeſſors of one Faith.
Beſide my Lord, the ſooner to effect,
And ſurer binde this knot of amitie,
The Earle of Arminacke neere knit to Charles,
A man of great Authoritie in France,
Proffers his onely daughter to your Grace,
In marriage, with a large and ſumptuous Dowrie.
Marriage Vnckle? Alas my yeares are yong:
And fitter is my ſtudie, and my Bookes,
Than wanton dalliance with a Paramour.
Yet call th' Embaſſadors, and as you pleaſe,
So let them haue their anſweres euery one:
I ſhall be well content with any choyce
Tends to Gods glory, and my Countries weale.
What, is my Lord of Wincheſter inſtall'd,
And call'd vnto a Cardinalls degree?
Then I perceiue, that will be verified
Henry the Fift did ſometime propheſie.
If once he come to be a Cardinall,
Hee'l make his cap coequall with the Crowne.
My Lords Ambaſſadors, your ſeuerall ſuites
Haue bin conſider'd and debated on,
Your purpoſe is both good and reaſonable:
And therefore are we certainly reſolu'd,
To draw conditions of a friendly peace,
Which by my Lord of Wincheſter we meane
Shall be tranſported preſently to France.
And for the proffer of my Lord your Maſter,
I haue inform'd his Highneſſe ſo at large,
As liking of the Ladies vertuous gifts,
Her Beauty, and the valew of her Dower,
He doth intend ſhe ſhall be Englands Queene.
In argument and proofe of which contract,
Beare her this Iewell, pledge of my affection.
And ſo my Lord Protector ſee them guarded,
And ſafely brought to Douer, wherein ſhip'd
Commit them to the fortune of the ſea.
Stay my Lord Legate, you ſhall firſt receiue
The ſumme of money which I promiſed
Should be deliuered to his Holineſſe,
For cloathing me in theſe graue Ornaments.
I will attend vpon your Lordſhips leyſure.
Now Wincheſter will not ſubmit, I trow,
Or be inferiour to the proudeſt Peere;
Humfrey of Gloſter, thou ſhalt well perceiue,
That neither in birth, or for authoritie,
The Biſhop will be ouer-borne by thee:
Ile either make thee ſtoope, and bend thy knee,
Or ſacke this Country with a mutiny.
Theſe newes (my Lords) may cheere our drooping ſpirits:
'Tis ſaid, the ſtout Pariſians do reuolt,
And turne againe vnto the warlike French.
Then march to Paris Royall Charles of France,
And keepe not backe your powers in dalliance.
Peace be amongſt them if they turne to vs,
Elſe ruine combate with their Pallaces.
Succeſſe vnto our valiant Generall,
And happineſſe to his accomplices.
What tidings ſend our Scouts? I prethee ſpeak.
The Engliſh Army that diuided was
Into two parties, is now conioyn'd in one,
And meanes to giue you battell preſently.
Somewhat too ſodaine Sirs, the warning is,
But we will preſently prouide for them.
I truſt the Ghoſt of Talbot is not there:
Now he is gone my Lord, you neede not feare.
Of all baſe paſſions, Feare is moſt accurſt.
Command the Conqueſt Charles, it ſhall be thine:
Let Henry fret, and all the world repine.
Then on my Lords, and France be fortunate.
The Regent conquers, and the Frenchmen flye.
Now helpe ye charming Spelles and Periapts,
And ye choiſe ſpirits that admoniſh me,
And giue me ſignes of future accidents.
You ſpeedy helpers, that are ſubſtitutes
Vnder the Lordly Monarch of the North,
Appeare, and ayde me in this enterprize.
This ſpeedy and quicke appearance argues proofe
Of your accuſtom'd diligence to me.
Now ye Familiar Spirits, that are cull'd
Out of the powerfull Regions vnder earth,
Helpe me this once, that France may get the field.
Oh hold me not with ſilenee ouer-long:
Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,
Ile lop member off, and giue it you,
In earneſt of a further benefit:
So you do condiſcend to helpe me now.
No hope to haue redreſſe? My body ſhall
Pay recompence, if you will graunt my ſuite.
Cannot my body, nor blood-ſacrifice,
Intreate you to your wonted furtherance?
Then take my ſoule; my body, ſoule, and all,
Before that England giue the French the foyle.
See, they forſake me. Now the time is come,
That France muſt vale her lofty plumed Creſt,
And let her head fall into Englands lappe.
My ancient Incantations are too weake,
And hell too ſtrong for me to buckle with:
Now France, thy glory droopcth to the duſt.
Damſell of France, I thinke I haue you faſt,
Vnchaine your ſpirits now with ſpelling Charmes,
And try if they can gaine your liberty.
A goodly prize, fit for the diuels grace.
See how the vgly Witch doth bend her browes,
As if with Circe, ſhe would change my ſhape.
Chang'd to a worſer ſhape thou canſt not be:
Oh, Charles the Dolphin is a proper man,
No ſhape but his can pleaſe your dainty eye.
A plaguing miſcheefe light on Charles, and thee,
And may ye both be ſodainly ſurpriz'd
By bloudy hands, in ſleeping on your beds.
Fell banning Hagge, Inchantreſſe hold thy tongue.
I prethee giue me leaue to curſe awhile.
Curſe Miſcreant, when thou comſt to the ſtake
Be what thou wilt, thou art my priſoner.
Oh Faireſt Beautie, do not feare, nor flye:
For I will touch thee but with reuerend hands,
I kiſſe theſe fingers for eternall peace,
And lay them gently on thy tender ſide.
Who art thou, ſay? that I may honor thee.
Margaret my name, and daughter to a King,
The King of Naples, who ſo ere thou art.
An Earle I am, and Suffolke am I call'd.
Be not offended Natures myracle,
Thou art alotted to be tane by me:
So doth the Swan her downie Signets ſaue,
Keeping them priſoner vnderneath his wings:
Yet if this ſeruile vſage once offend,
Go, and be free againe, as Suffolkes friend.
Oh ſlay: I haue no power to let her paſſe,
My hand would free her, but my heart ſayes no.
As playes the Sunne vpon the glaſſie ſtreames,
Twinkling another counterfetted beame,
So ſeemes this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes.
Faine would I woe her, yet I dare not ſpeake:
Ile call for Pen and Inke, and write my minde:
Fye De la Pole, diſable not thy ſelfe:
Haſt not a Tongue? Is ſhe not heere?
Wilt thou be daunted at a Womans ſight?
I: Beauties Princely Maieſty is ſuch,
'Confounds the tongue, and makes the ſenſes rough.
Say Earle of Suffolke, if thy name be ſo,
What ranſome muſt I pay before I paſſe?
For I perceiue I am thy priſoner.
How canſt thou tell ſhe will deny thy ſuite,
Before thou make a triall of her loue?
Why ſpeak'ſt thou not? What ranſom muſt I pay?
She's beautifull; and therefore to be Wooed:
She is a Woman; therefore to be Wonne.
Wilt thou accept of ranſome, yea or no?
Fond man, remember that thou haſt a wife,
Then how can Margaret be thy Paramour?
I were beſt to leaue him, for he will not heare.
There all is marr'd: there lies a cooling card.
He talkes at randon: ſure the man is mad.
And yet a diſpenſation may bee had.
And yet I would that you would anſwer me:
Ile win this Lady Margaret. For whom?
Why for my King: Tuſh, that's a woodden thing.
He talkes of wood: It is ſome Carpenter.
Yet ſo my fancy may be ſatisfied,
And peace eſtabliſhed betweene theſe Realmes.
But there remaines a ſcruple in that too:
For though her Father be the King of Naples,
Duke of Aniou and Mayne, yet is he poore,
And our Nobility will ſcorne the match.
Heare ye Captaine? Are you not at leyſure?
It ſhall be ſo, diſdaine they ne're ſo much:
Henry is youthfull, and will quickly yeeld.
Madam, I haue a ſecret to reueale.
What though I be inthral'd, he ſeems a knight
And will not any way diſhonor me.
Lady, vouchſafe to liſten what I ſay.
Perhaps I ſhall be reſcu'd by the French,
And then I need not craue his curteſie.
Sweet Madam, giue me hearing in a cauſe.
Tuſh, women haue bene captiuate ere now.
Lady, wherefore talke you ſo?
I cry you mercy, 'tis but Quid for Quo.
Say gentle Princeſſe, would you not ſuppoſe
Your bondage happy, to be made a Queene?
To be a Queene in bondage, is more vile,
Than is a ſlaue, in baſe ſeruility:
For Princes ſhould be free.
And ſo ſhall you.
If happy England Royall King be free.
Why what concernes his freedome vnto mee?
Ile vndertake to make thee Henries Queene,
To put a Golden Scepter in thy hand,
And ſet a precious Crowne vpon thy head,
If thou wilt condiſcend to be my—
What?
His loue.
I am vnworthy to be Henries wife.
No gentle Madam, I vnworthy am
To woe ſo faire a Dame to be his wife,
And haue no portion in the choice my ſelfe.
How ſay you Madam, are ye ſo content?
And if my Father pleaſe, I am content.
Then call our Captaines and our Colours forth,
And Madam, at your Fathers Caſtle walles,
Wee'l craue a parley, to conferre with him.
See Reignier ſee, thy daughter priſoner.
To whom?
To me.
Suffolke, what remedy?
I am a Souldier, and vnapt to weepe,
Or to exclaime on Fortunes fickleneſſe.
Yes, there is remedy enough my Lord,
Conſent, and for thy Honor giue conſent,
Thy daughter ſhall be wedded to my King,
Whom I with paine haue wooed and wonne thereto:
And this her eaſie held impriſonment,
Hath gain'd thy daughter Princely libertie.
Speakes Suffolke as he thinkes?
Faire Margaret knowes,
That Suffolke doth not flatter, face, or faine.
Vpon thy Princely warrant, I deſcend,
To giue thee anſwer of thy iuſt demand.
And heere I will expect thy comming.
Welcome braue Earle into our Territories,
Command in Aniou what your Honor pleaſes.
Thankes Reignier, happy for ſo ſweet a Childe,
Fit to be made companion with a King:
What anſwer makes your Grace vnto my ſuite?
Since thou doſt daigne to woe her little worth,
To be the Princely Bride of ſuch a Lord:
Vpon condition I may quietly
Enioy mine owne, the Country Maine and Aniou,
Free from oppreſſion, or the ſtroke of Warre,
My daughter ſhall be Henries, if he pleaſe.
That is her ranſome, I deliuer her,
And thoſe two Counties I will vndertake
Your Grace ſhall well and quietly enioy.
And I againe in Henries Royall name,
As Deputy vnto that gracious King,
Giue thee her hand for ſigne of plighted faith.
Reignier of France, I giue thee Kingly thankes,
Becauſe this is in Trafficke of a King.
And yet me thinkes I could be well content
To be mine owne Atturney in this caſe.
Ile ouer then to England with this newes.
And make this marriage to be ſolemniz'd:
So farewell Reignier, ſet this Diamond ſafe
In Golden Pallaces as it becomes.
I do embrace thee, as I would embrace
The Chriſtian Prince King Henrie were he heere.
Farewell my Lord, good wiſhes, praiſe, & praiers,
Shall Suffolke euer haue of Margaret.
Farwell ſweet Madam: but hearke you Margaret,
No Princely commendations to my King?
Such commendations as becomes a Maide,
A Virgin, and his Seruant, ſay to him.
Words ſweetly plac'd, and modeſtie directed,
But Madame, I muſt trouble you againe,
No louing Token to his Maieſtie?
Yes, my good Lord, a pure vnſpotted heart,
Neuer yet taint with loue, I ſend the King.
And this withall.
That for thy ſelfe, I will not ſo preſume,
To ſend ſuch peeuiſh tokens to a King.
Oh wert thou for my ſelfe: but Suffolke ſtay,
Thou mayeſt not wander in that Labyrinth,
There Minotaurs and vgly Treaſons lurke,
Solicite Henry with her wonderous praiſe.
Bethinke thee on her Vertues that ſurmount,
Mad naturall Graces that extinguiſh Art,
Repeate their ſemblance often on the Seas,
That when thou com'ſt to kneele at Henries feete,
Thou mayeſt bereaue him of his wits with wonder.
Bring forth that Sorcereſſe condemn'd to burne.
Ah Ione, this kils thy Fathers heart out-right,
Haue I ſought euery Country farre and neere,
And now it is my chance to finde thee out,
Muſt I behold thy timeleſſe cruell death:
Ah Ione, ſweet daughter Ione, Ile die with thee.
Decrepit Miſer, baſe ignoble Wretch,
I am deſcended of a gentler blood.
Thou art no Father, nor no Friend of mine.
Out, out: My Lords, and pleaſe you, 'tis not ſo
I did beget her, all the Pariſh knowes:
Her Mother liueth yet, can teſtifie
She was the firſt fruite of my Bach'ler-ſhip.
Graceleſſe, wilt thou deny thy Parentage?
This argues what her kinde of life hath beene,
Wicked and vile, and ſo her death concludes.
Fye Ione, that thou wilt be ſo obſtacle:
God knowes, thou art a collop of my fleſh,
And for thy ſake haue I ſhed many a teare:
Deny me not, I prythee, gentle Ione.
Pezant auant. You haue ſuborn'd this man
Of purpoſe, to obſcure my Noble birth.
'Tis true, I gaue a Noble to the Prieſt,
The morne that I was wedded to her mother.
Kneele downe and take my bleſſing, good my Gyrle.
Wilt thou not ſtoope? Now curſed be the time
Of thy natiuitie: I would the Milke
Thy mother gaue thee when thou ſuck'ſt her breſt,
Had bin a little Rats-bane for thy ſake.
Or elſe, when thou didſt keepe my Lambes a-field,
I wiſh ſome rauenous Wolfe had eaten thee.
Doeſt thou deny thy Father, curſed Drab?
O burne her, burne her, hanging is too good.
Take her away, for ſhe hath liu'd too long,
To fill the world with vicious qualities.
Firſt let me tell you whom you haue condemn'd;
Not me, begotten of a Shepheard Swaine,
But iſſued from the Progeny of Kings.
Vertuous and Holy, choſen from aboue,
By inſpiration of Celeſtiall Grace,
To worke exceeding myracles on earth.
I neuer had to do with wicked Spirits.
But you that are polluted with your luſtes,
Stain'd with the guiltleſſe blood of Innocents,
Corrupt and tainted with a thouſand Vices:
Becauſe you want the grace that others haue,
You iudge it ſtraight a thing impoſsible
To compaſſe Wonders, but by helpe of diuels.
No miſconceyued, Ione of Aire hath beene
A Virgin from her tender infancie,
Chaſte, and immaculate in very thought,
Whoſe Maiden-blood thus rigorouſly effus'd,
Will cry for Vengeance, at the Gates of Heauen.
I, I: away with her to execution.
And hearke ye ſirs: becauſe ſhe is a Maide,
Spare for no Faggots, let there be enow:
Place barrelles of pitch vpon the fatall ſtake,
That ſo her torture may be ſhortned.
Will nothing turne your vnrelenting hearts?
Then Ione diſcouet thine infirmity,
That wartanteth by Law, to be thy priuiledge.
I am with childe ye bloody Homicides:
Murther not then the Fruite within my Wombe,
Although ye hale me to a violent death.
Now heauen forfend, the holy Maid with child?
The greateſt miracle that ere ye wrought
Is all your ſtrict preciſeneſſe come to this?
She and the Dolphin haue bin iugling,
I did imagine what would be her refuge.
Well go too, we'll haue no Baſtards liue,
Eſpecially ſince Charles muſt Father it.
You are deceyu'd, my childe is none of his,
It was Alanſon that inioy'd my loue.
Alanſon that notorious Macheuile?
It dyes, and if it had a thouſand liues.
Oh giue me leaue, I haue deluded you,
'Twas neyther Charles, nor yet the Duke I nam'd,
But Reignier King of Naples that preuayl'd.
A married man, that's moſt intollerable.
Why here's a Gyrle: I think ſhe knowes not wel
(There were ſo many) whom ſhe may accuſe.
It's ſigne ſhe hath beene liberall and free.
And yet forſooth ſhe is a Virgin pure,
Strumpet, thy words condemne thy Bra, and thee.
Vſe no intreaty, for it is in vaine.
Then lead me hence: with whom I leaue my curſe▪
May neuer glorious Sunne reflex his beames
Vpon the Countrey where you make abode:
But darkneſſe, and the gloomy ſhade of death
Inuiron you, till Miſcheefe and Diſpaire,
Driue you to break your necks, or hang your ſelues.
Breake thou in peeces, and conſume to aſhes,
Thou fowle accurſed miniſter of Hell.
Lord Regent, I do greete your Excellence
With Letters of Commiſſion from the King.
For know my Lords, the States of Chriſtendome,
Mou'd with remorſe of theſe out-ragious broyles,
Haue earneſtly implor'd a generall peace,
Betwixt our Nation, and the aſpyring French;
And heere at hand, the Dolphin and his Traine
Approacheth, to conferre about ſome matter.
Is all our trauell turn'd to this effect,
After the ſlaughter of ſo many Peeres,
So many Captaines, Gentlemen, and Soldiers,
That in this quarrell haue beene ouerthrowne,
And ſold their bodyes for their Countryes benefit,
Shall we at laſt conclude effeminate peace?
Haue we not loſt moſt part of all the Townes,
By Treaſon, Falſhood, and by Treacherie,
Our great Progenitors had conquered:
Oh Warwicke, Warwicke, I foreſee with greefe
The vtter loſſe of all the Realme of France.
Be patient Yorke, if we conclude a Peace
It ſhall be with ſuch ſtrict and ſeuere Couenants,
As little ſhall the Frenchmen gaine thereby.
Since Lords of England, it is thus agreed,
That peacefull truce ſhall be proclaim'd in France,
We come to be informed by your ſelues,
What the conditions of that league muſt be.
Speake Wincheſter, for boyling choller chokes
The hollow paſſage of my poyſon'd voyce,
By ſight of theſe our balefull enemies.
Charles, and the reſt, it is enacted thus:
That in regard King Henry giues conſent,
Of meere compaſſion, and of lenity,
To eaſe your Countrie of diſtreſſefull Warre,
And ſuffer you to breath in fruitfull peace,
You ſhall become true Liegemen to his Crowne.
And Charles, vpon condition thou wilt ſweare
To pay him tribute, and ſubmit thy ſelfe,
Thou ſhalt be plac'd as Viceroy vnder him,
And ſtill enioy thy Regall dignity.
Muſt he be then as ſhadow of himſelfe?
Adorne his Temples with a Coronet,
And yet in ſubſtance and authority,
Retaine but priuiledge of a priuate man?
This proffer is abſurd, and reaſonleſſe.
'Tis knowne already that I am poſſeſt
With more then halfe the Gallian Territories,
And therein reuerenc'd for their lawfull King.
Shall I for lucre of the reſt vn-vanquiſht,
Detract ſo much from that prerogatiue,
As to be call'd but Viceroy of the whole?
No Lord Ambaſſador, Ile rather keepe
That which I haue, than coueting for more
Be caſt from poſsibility of all.
Inſulting Charles, haſt thou by ſecret meanes
Vs'd interceſſion to obtaine a league,
And now the matter growes to compremize,
Stand'ſt thou aloofe vpon Compariſon.
Either accept the Title thou vſurp'ſt,
Of benefit proceeding from our King,
And not of any challenge of Deſert,
Or we will plague thee with inceſſant Warres.
My Lord, you do not well in obſtinacy,
To cauill in the courſe of this Contract:
If once it be neglected, ten to one
We ſhall not finde like opportunity.
To ſay the truth, it is your policie,
To ſaue your Subiects from ſuch maſſacre
And ruthleſſe ſlaughters as are dayly ſeene
By our proceeding in Hoſtility,
And therefore take this compact of a Truce,
Although you breake it, when your pleaſure ſerues.
How ſayſt thou Charles?
Shall our Condition ſtand?
It Shall:
Onely reſeru'd you claime no intereſt
In any of our Townes of Garriſon.
Then ſweare Allegeance to his Maieſty,
As thou art Knight, neuer to diſobey,
Nor be Rebellious to the Crowne of England,
Thou nor thy Nobles, to the Crowne of England.
So, now diſmiſſe your Army when ye pleaſe:
Hang vp your Enſignes, let your Drummes be ſtill,
For heere we entertaine a ſolemne peace.
Your wondrous rare deſcription (noble Earle)
Of beauteous Margaret hath aſtoniſh'd me:
Her vertues graced with externall gifts,
Do breed Loues ſetled paſſions in my heart,
And like as rigour of tempeſtuous guſtes
Prouokes the mightieſt Hulke againſt the tide,
So am I driuen by breath of her Renowne,
Either to ſuffer Shipwracke, or arriue
Where I may haue fruition of her Loue.
Tuſh my good Lord, this ſuperficiall tale,
Is but a preface of her worthy praiſe:
The cheefe perfections of that louely Dame,
(Had I ſufficient skill to vtter them)
Would make a volume of inticing lines,
Able to rauiſh any dull conceit.
And which is more, ſhe is not ſo Diuine,
So full repleate with choice of all delights,
But with as humble lowlineſſe of minde,
She is content to be at your command:
Command I meane, of Vertuous chaſte intents,
To Loue, and Honor Henry as her Lord.
And otherwiſe, will Henry ne're preſume:
Therefore my Lord Protector, giue conſent,
That Marg'ret may be Englands Royall Queene.
So ſhould I giue conſent to flatter ſinne,
You know (my Lord) your Highneſſe is betroath'd
Vnto another Lady of eſteeme,
How ſhall we then diſpenſe with that contract,
And not deface your Honor with reproach?
As doth a Ruler with vnlawfull Oathes,
Or one that at a Triumph, hauing vow'd
To try his ſtrength, forſaketh yet the Liſtes
By reaſon of his Aduerſaries oddes.
A poore Earles daughter is vnequall oddes,
And therefore may be broe without offence.
Why what (I pray) is Margaret more then that?
Her Father is no better than an Earle,
Although in glorious Titles he excell.
Yes my Lord, her Father is a King,
The King of Naples, and Ieruſalem,
And of ſuch great Authoritie in France,
As his alliance will confirme our peace,
And keepe the Frenchmen in Allegeance.
And ſo the Earle of Arminacke may doe,
Becauſe he is neere Kinſman vnto Charles.
Beſide, his wealth doth warrant a liberal dower,
Where Reignier ſooner will receyue, than giue.
A Dowre my Lords? Diſgrace not ſo your King,
That he ſhould be ſo abiect, baſe, and poore,
To chooſe for wealth, and not for perfect Loue.
Henry is able to enrich his Queene,
And not to ſeeke a Queene to make him rich,
So worthleſſe Pezants bargaine for their Wiues,
As Market men for Oxen, Sheepe, or Horſe.
Marriage is a matter of more worth,
Then to be dealt in by Atturney-ſhip:
Not whom we will, but whom his Grace affects,
Muſt be companion of his Nuptiall bed.
And therefore Lords, ſince he affects her moſt,
Moſt of all theſe reaſons bindeth vs,
In our opinions ſhe ſhould be preferr'd,
For what is wedloeke forced? but a Hell,
An Age of diſcord and continuall ſtrife.
Whereas the contrarie bringeth bliſſe,
And is a patterne of Celeſtiall peace.
Whom ſhould we match with Henry being a King,
But Margaret, that is daughter to a King:
Her peereleſſe feature, ioyned with her birth,
Approues her ſit for none, but for a King.
Her valiant courage, and vndaunted ſpirit,
(More then in women commonly is ſeene)
Will anſwer our hope in iſſue of a King.
For Henry, ſonne vnto a Conqueror,
Is likely to beget more Conquerors,
If with a Lady of ſo high reſolue,
(As is faire Margaret) he be link'd in loue.
Then yeeld my Lords, and heere conclude with mee,
That Margaret ſhall be Queene, and none but ſhee.
Whether it be through force of your report,
My Noble Lord of Suffolke: Or for that
My tender youth was neuer yet attaint
With any paſſion of inflaming Ioue,
I cannot tell: but this I am aſſur'd,
I feele ſuch ſharpe diſſention in my breaſt,
Such fierce alarums both of Hope and Feare,
As I am ſicke with working of my thoughts.
Take therefore ſhipping, poſte my Lord to France,
Agree to any couenants, and procure
That Lady Margaret do vouchſafe to come
To croſſe the Seas to England, and be crown'd.
King Henries faithfull and annointed Queene.
For your expences and ſufficient charge,
Among the people gather vp a tenth.
Be gone I ſay, for till you do returne,
I reſt perplexed with a thouſand Cares.
And you (good Vnckle) baniſh all offence:
If you do cenſure me, by what you were,
Not what you are, I know it will excuſe
This ſodaine execution of my will.
And ſo conduct me, where from company,
I may reuolue and ruminate my greefe.
I greefe I feare me, both at firſt and laſt.
Thus Suffolke hath preuail'd, and thus he goes
As did the youthfull Paris once to Greece,
With hope to finde the like euent in loue,
But proſper better than the Troian did:
Margaret ſhall now be Queene, and rule the King:
But I will rule both her, the King, and Realme.