GOod day Sir.
I am glad y'are well.
I haue not ſeene you long, how goes the World?
It weares ſir, as it growes.
I that's well knowne:
But what particular Rarity? What ſtrange,
Which manifold record not matches: ſee
Magicke of Bounty, all theſe ſpirits thy power
Hath coniur'd to attend.
I know the Merchant.
I know them both: th' others a Ieweller.
O 'tis a worthy Lord.
Nay that's moſt fixt.
A moſt incomparable man, breath'd as it were,
To an vntyreable and continuate goodneſſe:
He paſſes.
I haue a Iewell heere.
O pray let's ſee't. For the Lord Timon, ſir?
If he will touch the eſtimate. But for that—
When we for recompence haue prais'd the vild,
It ſtaines the glory in that happy Verſe,
Which aptly ſings the good.
'Tis a good forme.
And rich: heere is a Water looke ye.
You are rapt ſir, in ſome worke, ſome Dedication to the great Lord.
A thing ſlipt idlely from me.
Our Poeſie is as a Gowne, which vſes
From whence 'tis nouriſht: the fire i' th' Flint
Shewes not, till it be ſtrooke: our gentle flame
Prouokes it ſelfe, and like the currant flyes
Each bound it chaſes. What haue you there?
A Picture ſir: when comes your Booke forth?
Vpon the heeles of my preſentment ſir.
Let's ſee your peece.
'Tis a good Peece.
So 'tis, this comes off well, and excellent.
Indifferent.
Admirable: How this grace
Speakes his owne ſtanding: what a mentall power
This eye ſhootes forth? How bigge imagination
Moues in this Lip, to th' dumbneſſe of the geſture,
One might interpret.
It is a pretty mocking of the life:
Heere is a touch: Is't good?
I will ſay of it,
It Tutors Nature, Artificiall ſtrife
Liues in theſe toutches, liuelier then life.
How this Lord is followed.
The Senators of Athens, happy men.
Looke moe.
You ſee this confluence, this great flood of viſitors,
I haue in this rough worke, ſhap'd out a man
Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hugge
With ampleſt entertainment: My free drift
Halts not particularly, but moues it ſelfe
In a wide Sea of wax, no leuell'd malice
Infects one comma in the courſe I hold,
But flies an Eagle flight, bold, and forth on,
Leauing no Tract behinde.
How ſhall I vnderſtand you?
I will vnboult to you.
You ſee how all Conditions, how all Mindes,
As well of glib and ſlipp'ry Creatures, as
Of Graue and auſtere qualitie, tender downe
Their ſeruices to Lord Timon: his large Fortune,
Vpon his good and gracious Nature hanging,
Subdues and properties to his loue and tendance
All ſorts of hearts; yea, from the glaſſe-fac'd Flatterer
To Apemantus, that few things loues better
Then to abhorre himſelfe; euen hee drops downe
The knee before him, and returnes in peace
Moſt rich in Timons nod.
I ſaw them ſpeake together.
Sir, I haue vpon a high and pleaſant hill
Feign'd Fortune to be thron'd.
The Baſe o' th' Mount
Is rank'd with all deſerts, all kinde of Natures
That labour on the boſome of this Sphere,
To propagate their ſtates; among'ſt them all,
Whoſe eyes are on this Soueraigne Lady fixt,
One do I perſonate of Lord Timons frame,
Whom Fortune with her Iuory hand wafts to her,
Whoſe preſent grace, to preſent ſlaues and ſeruants
Tranſlates his Riuals.
'Tis conceyu'd, to ſcope
This Throne, this Fortune, and this Hill me thinkes
With one man becken'd from the reſt below,
Bowing his head againſt the ſteepy Mount
To climbe his happineſſe, would be well expreſt
In our Condition.
Nay Sir, but heare me on:
All thoſe which were his Fellowes but of late,
Some better then his valew; on the moment
Follow his ſtrides, his Lobbies fill with tendance,
Raine Sacrificiall whiſperings in his eare,
Make Sacred euen his ſtyrrop, and through him
Drinke the free Ayre.
I marry, what of theſe?
When Fortune in her ſhift and change of mood
Spurnes downe her late beloued; all his Dependants
Which labour'd after him to the Mountaines top,
Euen on their knees and hand, let him ſit downe,
Not one accompanying his declining foot.
Tis common:
A thouſand morall Paintings I can ſhew,
That ſhall demonſtrate theſe quicke blowes of Fortunes,
More pregnantly then words. Yet you do well,
To ſhew Lord Timon, that meane eyes haue ſeene
The foot aboue the head.
Impriſon'd is he, ſay you?
I my good Lord, fiue Talents is his debt,
His meanes moſt ſhort, his Creditors moſt ſtraite:
Your Honourable Letter he deſires
To thoſe haue ſhut him vp, which failing,
Periods his comfort.
Noble Ventidius well:
I am not of that Feather, to ſhake off
My Friend when he muſt neede me. I do know him
A Gentleman, that well deſerues a helpe,
Which he ſhall haue. Ile pay the debt, and free him.
Your Lordſhip euer bindes him.
Commend me to him, I will ſend his ranſome,
And being enfranchized bid him come to me;
'Tis not enough to helpe the Feeble vp,
But to ſupport him after. Fare you well.
All happineſſe to your Honor.
Lord Timon, heare me ſpeake.
Freely good Father.
Thou haſt a Seruant nam'd Lucilius.
I haue ſo: What of him?
Moſt Noble Timon, call the man before thee.
Attends he heere, or no? Lucillius.
Heere at your Lordſhips ſeruice.
This Fellow heere, L. Timon, this thy Creature,
By night frequents my houſe. I am a man
That from my firſt haue beene inclin'd to thrift,
And my eſtate deſerues an Heyre more rais'd,
Then one which holds a Trencher.
Well: what further?
One onely Daughter haue I, no Kin elſe,
On whom I may conferre what I haue got:
The Maid is faire, a' th' youngeſt for a Bride,
And I haue bred her at my deereſt coſt
In Qualities of the beſt. This man of thine
Attempts her loue: I prythee (Noble Lord)
Ioyne with me to forbid him her reſort,
My ſelfe haue ſpoke in vaine.
The man is honeſt.
Therefore he will be Timon,
His honeſty rewards him in it ſelfe,
It muſt not beare my Daughter.
Does ſhe loue him?
She is yong and apt:
Our owne precedent paſſions do inſtruct vs
What leuities in youth.
Loue you the Maid?
I my good Lord, and ſhe accepts of it.
If in her Marriage my conſent be miſſing,
I call the Gods to witneſſe, I will chooſe
Mine heyre from forth the Beggers of the world,
And diſpoſſeſſe her all.
How ſhall ſhe be endowed,
If ſhe be mated with an equall Husband?
Three Talents on the preſent; in future, all.
This Gentleman of mine
Hath ſeru'd me long:
To build his Fortune, I will ſtraine a little,
For 'tis a Bond in men. Giue him thy Daughter,
What you beſtow, in him Ile counterpoize,
And make him weigh with her.
Moſt Noble Lord,
Pawne me to this your Honour, ſhe is his.
My hand to thee,
Mine Honour on my promiſe.
Humbly I thanke your Lordſhip, neuer may
That ſtate or Fortune fall into my keeping,
Which is not owed to you.
Vouchſafe my Labour,
And long liue your Lordſhip.
I thanke you, you ſhall heare from me anon:
Go not away. What haue you there, my Friend?
A peece of Painting, which I do beſeech
Your Lordſhip to accept.
Painting is welcome.
The Painting is almoſt the Naturall man:
For ſince Diſhonor Traffickes with mans Nature,
He is but out-ſide: Theſe Penſil'd Figures are
Euen ſuch as they giue out. I like your worke,
And you ſhall finde I like it; Waite attendance
Till you heare further from me.
The Gods preſerue ye.
Well fare you Gentleman: giue me your hand.
We muſt needs dine together: ſir your Iewell
Hath ſuffered vnder praiſe.
What my Lord, diſpraiſe?
A meere ſaciety of Commendations,
If I ſhould pay you for't as 'tis extold,
It would vnclew me quite.
My Lord, 'tis rated
As thoſe which ſell would giue: but you well know,
Things of like valew differing in the Owners,
Are prized by their Maſters. Beleeu't deere Lord,
You mend the Iewell by the wearing it.
Well mock'd.
No my good Lord, he ſpeakes ye common toong
Which all men ſpeake with him.
Looke who comes heere, will you be chid?
Wee'l beare with your Lordſhip.
Hee'l ſpare none.
Good morrow to thee,
Gentle Apermantus.
Till I be gentle, ſtay thou for thy good morrow.
When thou art Timons dogge, and theſe Knaues honeſt.
Why doſt thou call them Knaues, thou know'ſt them not?
Are they not Athenians?
Yes.
Then I repent not.
You know me, Apemantus?
Thou know'ſt I do, I call'd thee by thy name.
Thou art proud Apemantus?
Of nothing ſo much, as that I am not like Timon
Whether art going?
To knocke out an honeſt Athenians braines.
That's a deed thou't dye for.
Right, if doing nothing be death by th' Law.
How lik'ſt thou this picture Apemantus?
The beſt▪ for the innocence.
Wrought he not well that painted it.
He wrought better that made the Painter, and yet he's but a filthy peece of worke.
Y' are a Dogge.
Thy Mothers of my generation: what's ſhe, if I be a Dogge?
Wilt dine with me Apemantus?
No: I eate not Lords.
And thou ſhould'ſt, thoud'ſt anger Ladies.
O they eate Lords;
So they come by great bellies.
That's a laſciuious apprehenſion.
So, thou apprehend'ſt it,
Take it for thy labour.
How doſt thou like this Iewell, Apemantus?
Not ſo well as plain-dealing, which wil not caſt a man a Doit.
What doſt thou thinke 'tis worth?
Not worth my thinking.
How now Poet?
How now Philoſopher?
Thou lyeſt.
Art not one?
Yes.
Then I lye not.
Art not a Poet?
Yes.
Then thou lyeſt:
Looke in thy laſt worke, where thou haſt fegin'd him a worthy Fellow.
That's not feign'd, he is ſo.
Yes he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thy labour. He that loues to be flattered, is worthy o' th flatterer. Heauens, that I were a Lord.
What wouldſt do then Apemantus?
E'ne as Apemantus does now, hate a Lord with my heart.
What thy ſelfe?
I.
Wherefore?
That I had no angry wit to be a Lord.
Art not thou a Merchant?
I Apemantus.
Traffick confound thee, if the Gods will not.
If Trafficke do it, the Gods do it.
Traffickes thy God, & thy God confound thee.
What Trumpets that?
'Tis Alcibiades, and ſome twenty Horſe
All of Companionſhip.
Pray entertaine them, giue them guide to vs.
You muſt needs dine with me: go not you hence
Till I haue thankt you: when dinners done
Shew me this peece▪ I am ioyfull of your ſights.
Moſt welcome Sir.
So, ſo; their Aches contract, and ſterue your ſupple ioynts: that there ſhould bee ſmall loue amongeſt theſe ſweet Knaues, and all this Curteſie. The ſtraine of mans bred out into Baboon and Monkey.
Sir, you haue ſau'd my longing, and I feed
Moſt hungerly on your ſight.
Right welcome Sir:
Ere we depart, wee'l ſhare a bounteous time
In different pleaſures.
Pray you let vs in.
What time a day is't Apemantus?
Time to be honeſt.
That time ſerues ſtill.
The moſt accurſed thou that ſtill omitſt it.
Thou art going to Lord Timons Feaſt.
I, to ſee meate fill Knaues, and Wine heat fooles.
Farthee well, farthee well.
Thou art a Foole to bid me farewell twice.
Why Apemantus?
Should'ſt haue kept one to thy ſelfe, for I meane to giue thee none.
Hang thy ſelfe.
No I will do nothing at thy bidding:
Make thy requeſts to thy Friend.
Away vnpeaceable Dogge,
Or Ile ſpurne thee hence.
I will flye like a dogge, the heeles a' th' Aſſe.
Hee's oppoſite to humanity.
Comes ſhall we in,
And aſte Lord Timons bountie: he out-goes
The verie heart of kindneſſe.
He powres it out: Plutus the God of Gold
Is but his Steward: no meede but he repayes
Seuen-fold aboue it ſelfe: No guift to him,
But breeds the giuer a returne: exceeding
All vſe of quittance.
The Nobleſt minde he carries,
That euer gouern'd man.
Long may he liue in Fortunes. Shall we in?
Ile keepe you Company.
Moſt honoured Timon,
It hath pleas'd the Gods to remember my Fathers age,
And call him to long peace:
He is gone happy and has left me rich:
Then, as in gratefull Vertue I am bound
To your free heart, I do returne thoſe Talents
Doubled with thankes and ſeruice, from whoſe helpe
I deriu'd libertie.
O by no meanes,
Honeſt Ventigius: You miſtake my loue,
I gaue it freely euer, and ther's none
Can truely ſay he giues, if he receiues:
If our betters play at that game, we muſt not dare
To imitate them: faults that are rich are faire.
A Noble ſpirit.
Nay my Lords, Ceremony was but deuis'd at firſt
To ſet a gloſſe on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,
Recanting goodneſſe, ſorry ere 'tis ſhowne:
But where there is true friendſhip, there needs none,
Pray ſit, more welcome are ye to my Fortunes,
Then my Fortunes to me.
My Lord, we alwaies haue confeſt it.
Ho ho, confeſt it? Handg'd it? Haue you not?
O Apermantus, you are welcome.
No: You ſhall not make me welcome:
I come to haue thee thruſt me out of doores.
Fie, th' art a churle, ye' haue got a humour there
Does not become a man, 'tis much too blame:
They ſay my Lords, Irafuror breuis eſt,
But yond man is verie angrie.
Go, let him haue a Table by himſelfe:
For he does neither affect companie,
Nor is he fit for't indeed.
Let me ſtay at thine apperill Timon,
I come to obſerue, I giue thee warning on't.
I take no heede of thee: Th' art an Athenian, therefore welcome: I my ſelfe would haue no power, prythee let my meate make thee ſilent.
I ſcorne thy meate, 'twould choake me: for I ſhould nere flatter thee. Oh you Gods! What a number of men eats Timon, and he ſees 'em not? It greeues me to ſee ſo many dip there meate in one mans blood, and all the madneſſe is, he cheeres them vp too.
I wonder men dare truſt themſelues with men.
Me thinks they ſhould enuite them without kniues,
Good for there meate, and ſafer for their liues.
There's much example for't, the fellow that ſits next him, now parts bread with him, pledges the breath of him in a diuided draught: is the readieſt man to kill him, 'Tas beene▪ proued, if I were a huge man I ſhould feare to drinke at meales, leaſt they ſhould ſpie my wind-pipes dangerous noates, great men ſhould drinke with harneſſe on their throates.
My Lord in heart: and let the health go round.
Let it flow this way my good Lord.
Flow this way? A braue fellow. He keepes his tides well, thoſe healths will make thee and thy ſtate looke ill, Timon.
Heere's that which is too weake to be a ſinner,
Honeſt water, which nere left man i' th' mire:
This and my food are equals, there's no ods,
Feaſts are to proud to giue thanks to the Gods.
Immortall Gods, I craue no pelfe,
I pray for no man but my ſelfe,
Graunt I may neuer proue ſo fond,
To truſt man on his Oath or Bond.
Or a Harlot for her weeping,
Or a Dogge that ſeemes aſleeping,
Or a keeper with my freedome,
Or my friends if I ſhould need 'em.
Amen.
So fall too't:
Richmen ſin, and I eat root.
Much good dich thy good heart, Apermantus
Captaine, Alcibiades, your hearts in the field now.
My heart is euer at your ſeruice, my Lord.
You had rather be at a breakefaſt of Enemies, then a dinner of Friends.
So they were bleeding new my Lord, there's no meat like 'em, I could wiſh my beſt friend at ſuch a Feaſt.
Would all thoſe Flatterers were thine Enemies then, that then thou might'ſt kill 'em: & bid me to 'em.
Might we but haue that happineſſe my Lord, that you would once vſe our hearts, whereby we might expreſſe ſome part of our zeales, we ſhould thinke our ſelues for euer perfect.
Oh no doubt my good Friends, but the Gods themſelues haue prouided that I ſhall haue much helpe from you: how had you beene my Friends elſe. Why haue you that charitable title from thouſands? Did not you chiefely belong to my heart? I haue told more of you to my ſelfe, then you can with modeſtie ſpeake in your owne behalfe. And thus farre I confirme you. Oh you Gods (thinke I,) what need we haue any Friends; if we ſhould nere haue need of' em? They were the moſt needleſſe Creatures liuing; ſhould we nere haue vſe for 'em? And would moſt reſemble ſweete Inſtruments hung vp in Caſes, that keepes there ſounds to themſelues. Why I haue often wiſht my ſelfe poorer, that I might come neerer to you: we are borne to do benefits. And what better or properer can we call our owne, then the richer of our Friends? Oh what a pretious comfort 'tis, to haue ſo many like Brothers commanding one anothers Fortunes. Oh ioyes, e'ne made away er't can be borne: mine eies cannot hold out wateme thinks▪ to forget their Faults. I drinke to you.
Thou weep'ſt to make them drinke, Timon.
Ioy had the like conception in our eies,
And at that inſtant, like a babe ſprung vp.
Ho, ho: I laugh to thinke that babe a baſtard.
I promiſe you my Lord you mou'd me much.
Much.
What meanes that Trumpe? How now?
Pleaſe you my Lord, there are certaine Ladies
Moſt deſirous of admittance.
Ladies? what are their wils?
There comes with them a fore-runner my Lord, which beares that office, to ſignifie their pleaſures.
I pray let them be admitted.
Haile to thee worthy Timon and to all that of his Bounties taſte: the fiue beſt Sencesa cknowledge thee their Patron, and come freely to gratulate thy plentiou boſome.
There taſt, touch all pleas'd from thy Table riſe:
They onely now come but to Feaſt thine eies.
They'r wecome all, let 'em haue kind admittance. Muſicke make their welcome.
You ſee my Lord, how ample y' are belou'd.
Hoyday,
What a ſweepe of vanitie comes this way.
They daunce? They are mad women,
Like Madneſſe is the glory of this life,
As this pompe ſhewes to a little oyle and roote.
We make our ſelues Fooles, to diſport our ſelues,
And ſpend our Flatteries, to drinke thoſe men,
Vpon whoſe Age we voyde it vp agen
With poyſonous Spight and Enuy.
Who liues, that's not depraued, or depraues;
Who dyes, that beares not one ſpurne to their graues
Of their Friends guift:
I ſhould feare, thoſe that dance before me now,
Would one day ſtampe vpon me: 'Tas bene done,
Men ſhut their doores againſt a ſetting Sunne.
You haue done our pleaſures
Much grace (faire Ladies)
Set a faire faſhion on our entertainment,
Which was not halfe ſo beautifull, and kinde:
You haue added worth vntoo't, and luſter,
And entertain'd me with mine owne deuice.
I am to thanke you for't.
My Lord you take vs euen at the beſt.
Faith for the worſt is filthy, and would not hold taking, I doubt me.
Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you,
Pleaſe you to diſpoſe your ſelues.
Moſt thankfully, my Lord.
Flauius.
My Lord.
The little Casket bring me hither.
Yes, my Lord. More Iewels yet?
There is no croſſing him in's humor,
Elſe I ſhould tell him well, y faith I ſhould;
When all's ſpent, hee'ld be croſt then, and he could:
'Tis pitty Bounty had not eyes behinde,
That man might ne're be wretched for his minde.
Where be our men?
Heere my Lord, in readineſſe.
Our Horſes.
O my Friends:
I haue one word to ſay to you: Looke you, my good L.
I muſt intreat you honour me ſo much,
As to aduance this Iewell, accept it, and weare it,
Kinde my Lord.
I am ſo farre already in your guifts.
So are we all.
My Lord, there are certaine Nobles of the Senate newly alighted, and come to viſit you.
They are fairely welcome.
I beſeech your Honor, vouchſafe me a word, it does concerne you neere.
Neere? why then another time Ile heare thee.
I prythee let's be prouided to ſhew them entertainment.
I ſcarſe know how.
May it pleaſe your Honor, Lord Lucius
(Out of his free loue) hath preſented to you
Foure Milke-white Horſes, trapt in Siluer.
I ſhall accept them fairely: let the Preſents
Be worthily entertain'd.
How now? What newes?
Pleaſe you my Lord, that honourable Gentleman Lord Lucullus, entreats your companie to morrow, to hunt with him, and ha's ſent your Honour two brace of Grey-hounds.
Ile hunt with him,
And let them be receiu'd, not without faire Reward.
What will this come to?
He commands vs to prouide, and giue great guifts, and all out of an empty Coffer:
Nor will he know his Purſe, or yeeld me this,
To ſhew him what a Begger his heart is,
Being of no power to make his wiſhes good.
His promiſes flye ſo beyond his ſtate,
That what he ſpeaks is all in debt, he ows for eu'ry word:
He is ſo kinde, that he now payes intereſt for't;
His Land's put to their Bookes. Well, would I were
Gently put out of Office, before I were forc'd out:
Happier is he that has no friend to feede,
Then ſuch that do e'ne Enemies exceede.
I bleed inwardly for my Lord.
You do your ſelues much wrong,
You bate too much of your owne merits.
Heere my Lord, a trifle of our Loue.
With more then common thankes
I will receyue it.
O he's the very ſoule of Bounty.
And now I remember my Lord, you gaue good words the other day of a Bay Courſer I rod on. Tis yours becauſe you lik'd it.
Oh, I beſeech you pardon mee, my Lord, in that.
You may take my word my Lord: I know no man can iuſtly praiſe, but what he does affect. I weighe my Friends affection with mine owne: Ile tell you true, Ile call to you.
O none ſo welcome.
I take all, and your ſeuerall viſitations
So kinde to heart, 'tis not enough to giue:
Me thinkes, I could deale Kingdomes to my Friends,
And nere be wearie. Alcibiades,
Thou art a Soldiour, therefore ſildome rich,
It comes in Charitie to thee: for all thy liuing
Is mong'ſt the dead: and all the Lands thou haſt
Lye in a pitcht field.
I, defil'd Land, my Lord.
We are ſo vertuouſly bound.
And ſo am I to you.
So infinitely endeer'd.
All to you. Lights, more Lights.
The beſt of Happines, Honor, and Fortunes
Keepe with you Lord Timon.
Ready for his Friends.
What a coiles heere, ſeruing of beckes, and iutting out of bummes. I doubt whether their Legges be worth the ſummes that are giuen for 'em.
Friendſhips full of dregges,
Me thinkes falſe hearts, ſhould neuer haue ſound legges.
Thus honeſt Fooles lay out their wealth on Curtſies.
Now Apermantus (if thou wert not ſullen)
I would be good to thee.
No, Ile nothing; for if I ſhould be brib'd too, there would be none left to raile vponthee, and then thou wouldſt ſinne the faſter. Thou giu'ſt ſo long Timon (I feare me) thou wilt giue away thy ſelfe in paper ſhortly. What needs theſe Feaſts, pompes, and Vaine-glories?
Nay, and you begin to raile on Societie once, I am ſworne not to giue regard to you. Farewell, & come with better Muſicke.
So: Thou wilt not heare mee now, thou ſhalt not then. Ile locke thy heauen from thee:
Oh that mens eares ſhould be
To Counſell deafe, but not to Flatterie.
And late fiue thouſand: to Varro and to Iſidore
He owes nine thouſand, beſides my former ſumme,
Which makes it fiue and twenty. Still in motion
Of raging waſte? It cannot hold, it will not.
If I want Gold, ſteale but a beggers Dogge,
And giue it Timon, why the Dogge coines Gold.
If I would ſell my Horſe, and buy twenty moe
Better then he; why giue my Horſe to Timon.
Aske nothing, giue it him, it Foles me ſtraight
And able Horſes: No Porter at his gate,
But rather one that ſmiles, and ſtill inuites
All that paſſe by. It cannot hold, no reaſon
Can ſound his ſtate in ſafety. Caphis hoa,
Caphis I ſay.
Heere ſir, what is your pleaſure.
Get on your cloake, & haſt you to Lord Timon,
Importune him for my Moneyes, be not ceaſt
With ſlight deniall; nor then ſilenc'd, when
Commend me to your Maſter, and the Cap
Playes in the right hand, thus: but tell him,
My Vſes cry to me; I muſt ſerue my turne
Out of mine owne, his dayes and times are paſt,
And my reliances on his fracted dates
Haue ſmit my credit. I loue, and honour him,
But muſt not breake my backe, to heale his finger.
Immediate are my needs, and my releefe
Muſt not be toſt and turn'd to me in words,
But finde ſupply immediate. Get you gone,
Put on a moſt importunate aſpect,
A viſage of demand: for I do feare
When euery Feather ſtickes in his owne wing,
Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
Which flaſhes now a Phoenix, get you gone.
I go ſir.
I go ſir?
Take the Bonds along with you,
And haue the dates in. Come.
I will Sir.
Go.
No care, no ſtop, ſo ſenſeleſſe of expence,
That he will neither know how to maintaine it,
Nor ceaſe his flow of Riot. Takes no accompt
How things go from him, nor reſume no care
Of what is to continue: neuer minde,
Was to be ſo vnwiſe, to be ſo kinde.
What ſhall be done, he will not heare, till feele:
I muſt be round with him, now he comes from hunting.
Fye, fie, fie, fie.
Good euen Varro: what, you come for money?
Is't not your buſineſſe too?
It is, and yours too, Iſidore?
It is ſo.
Would we were all diſcharg'd.
I feare it,
Heere comes the Lord.
So ſoone as dinners done, wee'l forth againe
My Alcibiades. With me, what is your will?
My Lord, heere is a note of certaine dues.
Dues? whence are you?
Of Athens heere, my Lord.
Go to my Steward.
Pleaſe it your Lordſhip, he hath put me off
To the ſucceſſion of new dayes this moneth:
My Maſter is awak'd by great Occaſion,
To call vpon his owne, and humbly prayes you,
That with your other Noble parts, you'l ſuite,
In giuing him his right.
Mine honeſt Friend,
I prythee but repaire to me next morning.
Nay, good my Lord.
Containe thy ſelfe, good Friend.
One Varroes ſeruant, my good Lord.
From Iſidore, he humbly prayes your ſpeedy payment.
If you did know my Lord, my Maſters wants.
'Twas due on forfeyture my Lord, ſixe weekes, and paſt.
Your Steward puts me off my Lord, and I
Am ſent expreſſely to your Lordſhip.
Giue me breath:
I do beſeech you good my Lords keepe on,
Ile waite vpon you inſtantly. Come hither: pray you
How goes the world, that I am thus encountred
With clamorous demands of debt, broken Bonds,
And the detention of long ſince due debts
Againſt my Honor?
Pleaſe you Gentlemen,
The time is vnagreeable to this buſineſſe:
Your importunacie ceaſe, till after dinner,
That I may make his Lordſhip vnderſtand
Wherefore you are not paid.
Do ſo my Friends, ſee them well entertain'd.
Pray draw neere.
Stay, ſtay, here comes the Foole with Apemantus, let's ha ſome ſport with 'em.
Hang him, hee'l abuſe vs.
A plague vpon him dogge.
How doſt Foole?
Doſt Dialogue with thy ſhadow?
I ſpeake not to thee.
No 'tis to thy ſelfe. Come away.
There's the Foole hangs on your backe already.
No thou ſtand'ſt ſingle, th' art not on him yet.
Where's the Foole now?
He laſt ask'd the queſtion. Poore Rogues, and Vſurers men, Bauds betweene Gold and want.
What are we Apemantus?
Aſſes.
Why?
That you ask me what you are, & do not know your ſelues. Speake to 'em Foole.
How do you Gentlemen?
Gramercies good Foole:
How does your Miſtris?
She's e'ne ſetting on water to ſcal'd ſuch Chickens as you are. Would we could ſee you at Corinth.
Good, Gramercy.
Looke you, heere comes my Maſters Page.
Why how now Captaine? what do you in this wiſe Company.
How doſt thou Apermantus?
Would I had a Rod in my mouth, that I might anſwer thee profitably.
Prythee Apemantus reade me the ſuperſcription of theſe Letters, I know not which is which.
Canſt not read?
No.
There will litle Learning dye then that day thou art hang'd. This is to Lord Timon, this to Alcibiades. Go thou was't borne a Baſtard, and thou't dye a Bawd.
Thou was't whelpt a Dogge, and thou ſhalt famiſh a Dogges death.
Anſwer not, I am gone.
E'ne ſo thou out-runſt Grace,
Foole I will go with you to Lord Timons.
Will you leaue me there?
If Timon ſtay at home.
You three ſerue three Vſurers?
I would they ſeru'd vs.
So would I:
As good a tricke as euer Hangman ſeru'd Theefe.
Are you three Vſurers men?
I Foole.
I thinke no Vſurer, but ha's a Foole to his Seruant. My Miſtris is one, and I am her Foole: when men come to borrow of your Maſters, they approach ſadly, and go away merry: but they enter my Maſters houſe merrily, and go away ſadly. The reaſon of this?
I could render one.
Do it then, that we may account thee a Whoremaſter, and a Knaue, which notwithſtanding thou ſhalt be no leſſe eſteemed.
What is a Whoremaſter Foole?
A Foole in good cloathes, and ſomething like thee. 'Tis a ſpirit, ſometime t' appeares like a Lord, ſomtime like a Lawyer, ſometime like a Philoſopher, with two ſtones moe then's artificiall one. Hee is verie often like a Knight; and generally, in all ſhapes that man goes vp and downe in, from foureſcore to thirteen, this ſpirit walkes in.
Thou art not altogether a Foole.
Nor thou altogether a Wiſe man,
As much foolerie as I haue, ſo much wit thou lack'ſt.
That anſwer might haue become Apemantus.
Aſide, aſide, heere comes Lord Timon.
Come with me (Foole) come.
I do not alwayes follow Louer, elder Brother, aad Woman, ſometime the Philoſopher.
Pray you walk en eere,
Ile ſpeake with you anon.
You make me meruell wherefore ere this time
Had you not fully laide my ſtate before me,
That I might ſo haue rated my expence
As I had leaue of meanes.
You would not heare me:
At many leyſures I propoſe.
Go too:
Perchance ſome ſingle vantages you tooke,
When my indiſpoſition put you backe,
And that vnaptneſſe made your miniſter
Thus to excuſe your ſelfe.
O my good Lord,
At many times I brought in my accompts,
Laid them before you, you would throw them off,
And ſay you ſound them in mine honeſtie,
When for ſome trifling preſent you haue bid me
Returne ſo much, I haue ſhooke my head, and wept:
Yea 'gainſt th' Authoritie of manners, pray'd you
To hold your hand more cloſe: I did indure
Not ſildome, nor no flight checkes, when I haue
Prompted you in the ebbe of your eſtate,
And your great flow of debts; my lou'd Lord,
Though you heare now (too late) yet nowes a time,
The greateſt of your hauing, lackes a halfe,
To pay your preſent debts.
Let all my Land be ſold.
'Tis all engag'd, ſome forfeyted and gone,
And what remaines will hardly ſtop the mouth
Of preſent dues; the future comes apace:
What ſhall defend the interim, and at length
How goes our reck'ning?
To Lacedemon did my Land extend.
O my good Lord, the world is but a word,
Were it all yours, to giue it in a breath,
How quickely were it gone.
You tell me true.
If you ſuſpect my Husbandry or Falſhood,
Call me before th' exacteſt Auditors,
And ſet me on the proofe. So the Gods bleſſe me,
When all our Offices haue beene oppreſt
With riotous Feeders, when our Vaults haue wept
With drunken ſpilth of Wine; when euery roome
Hath blaz'd with Lights, and braid with Minſtrelſie,
I haue retyr'd me to a waſtefull cocke,
And ſet mine eyes at flow.
Prythee no more.
Heauens haue I ſaid the bounty of this Lord:
How many prodigall bits haue Slaues and Pezants
This night englutted: who is not Timons,
What heart, head, ſword, force, meanes, but is L. Timons:
Great Timon, Noble, Worthy, Royall Timon:
Ah, when the meanes are gone, that buy this praiſe,
The breath is gone, whereof this praiſe is made:
Feaſt won, faſt loſt; one cloud of Winter ſhowres,
Theſe flyes are coucht.
Come ſermon me no further.
No villanous bounty yet hath paſt my heart;
Vnwiſely, not ignobly haue I giuen.
Why doſt thou weepe, canſt thou the conſcience lacke,
To thinke I ſhall lacke friends: ſecure thy heart,
If I would broach the veſſels of my loue,
And try the argument of hearts, by borrowing,
Men, and mens fortunes could I frankely vſe
As I can bid thee ſpeake.
Aſſurance bleſſe your thoughts.
And in ſome ſort theſe wants of mine are crown'd,
That I account them bleſſings. For by theſe
Shall I trie Friends. You ſhall perceiue
How you miſtake my Fortunes:
I am wealthie in my Friends.
Within there, Flauius, Seruilius?
My Lord, my Lord.
I will diſpatch you ſeuerally.
You to Lord Lucius, to Lord Lucullus you, I hunted with his Honor to day; you to Sempronius; commend me to their loues; and I am proud ſay, that my occaſions haue found time to vſe 'em toward a ſupply of mony: let the requeſt be fifty Talents.
As you haue ſaid, my Lord.
Lord Lucius and Lucullus? Humh.
Go you ſir to the Senators;
Of whom, euen to the States beſt health; I haue
Deſeru'd this Hearing: bid 'em ſend o' th' inſtant
A thouſand Talents to me.
I haue beene bold
(For that I knew it the moſt generall way)
To them, to vſe your Signet, and your Name,
But they do ſhake their heads, and I am heere
No richer in returne.
Is't true? Can't be?
They anſwer in a ioynt and corporate voice,
That now they are at fall, want Treature cannot
Do what they would, are ſorrie: you are Honourable,
But yet they could haue wiſht, they know not,
Something hath beene amiſſe; a Noble Nature
May catch a wrench; would all were well; tis pitty,
And ſo intending other ſerious matters,
After diſtaſtefull lookes; and theſe hard Fractions
With certaine halfe-caps, and cold mouing nods,
They froze me into Silence.
You Gods reward them:
Prythee man looke cheerely. Theſe old Fellowes
Haue their ingratitude in them Hereditary:
Their blood is cak'd, 'tis cold, it ſildome flowes,
'Tis lacke of kindely warmth, they are not kinde;
And Nature, as it growes againe toward earth,
Is faſhion'd for the iourney, dull and heauy.
Go to Ʋentiddius (prythee be not ſad,
Thou art true, and honeſt; Ingeniouſly I ſpeake,
No blame belongs to thee:) Ventiddius lately
Buried his Father, by whoſe death hee's ſtepp'd
Into a great eſtate: When he was poore,
Impriſon'd, and in ſcarſitie of Friends,
I cleer'd him with fiue Talents: Greet him from me,
Bid him ſuppoſe, ſome good neceſſity
Touches his Friend, which craues to be remembred
With thoſe fiue Talents; that had, giue't theſe Fellowes
To whom 'tis inſtant due. Neu'r ſpeake, or thinke,
That Timons fortunes 'mong his Friends can ſinke.
I would I could not thinke it:
That thought is Bounties Foe;
Being free it ſelfe, it thinkes all others ſo.
I haue told my Lord of you, he is comming down to you.
I thanke you Sir.
Heere's my Lord.
One of Lord Timons men? A Guift I warrant. Why this hits right: I dreampt of a Siluer Baſon & Ewre to night. Flaminius, honeſt Flaminius, you are verie reſpectiuely welcome ſir. Fill me ſome Wine. And how does that Honourable, Compleate, Free-hearted Gentleman of Athens, thy very bountifull good Lord and Mayſter?
His health is well ſir.
I am right glad that his health is well ſir: and what haſt thou there vnder thy Cloake, pretty Flaminius?
Faith, nothing but an empty box Sir, which in my Lords behal I come to intreat your Honor to ſupply: who hauing great and inſtant occaſion to vſe fiftie Talents, hath ſent to your Lordſhip to furniſh him: nothing doubting your preſent aſſiſtance therein.
La, la, la, la: Nothing doubting ſayes hee? Alas good Lord, a Noble Gentleman 'tis, if he would not keep ſo good a houſe. Many a time and often I ha din'd with him, and told him on't, and come againe to ſupper to him of purpoſe, to haue him ſpend leſſe, and yet he wold embrace no counſell, take no warning by my comming, euery man has his fault, and honeſty is his. I ha told him on't, but I could nere get him from't.
Pleaſe your Lordſhip, heere is the Wine.
Flaminius, I haue noted thee alwayes wiſe.
Heere's to thee.
Your Lordſhip ſpeakes your pleaſure.
I haue obſerued thee alwayes for a towardlie prompt ſpirit, giue thee thy due, and one that knowes what belongs to reaſon; and canſt vſe the time wel, if the time vſe thee well. Good parts in thee; get you gone ſirrah. Draw neerer honeſt Flaminius. Thy Lords a bountifull Gentleman, but thou art wiſe, and thou know'ſt well enough (although thou com'ſt to me) that this is no time to lend money, eſpecially vpon bare friendſhippe without ſecuritie. Here's three Solidares for thee, good Boy winke at me, and ſay thou ſaw'ſt mee not. Fare thee well.
Is't poſſible the world ſhould ſo much differ,
And we aliue that liued? Fly damned baſeneſſe
To him that worſhips thee.
Ha? Now I ſee thou art a Foole, and ſit for thy Maſter.
May theſe adde to the number yt may ſcald thee:
Let moulten Coine be thy damnation,
Thou diſeaſe of a friend, and not himſelfe:
Has friendſhip ſuch a faint and milkie heart,
It turnes in leſſe then two nights? O you Gods!
I feele my Maſters paſſion. This Slaue vnto his Honor,
Has my Lords meate in him:
Why ſhould it thriue, and turne to Nutriment,
When he is turn'd to poyſon?
O may Diſeaſes onely worke vpon't:
And when he's ſicke to death, let not that part of Nature
Which my Lord payd for, be of any power
To expell ſickneſſe, but prolong his hower.
Who the Lord Timon? He is my very good friend and an Honourable Gentleman.
We know him for no leſſe, thogh we are but ſtrangers to him. But I can tell you one thing my Lord, and which I heare from common rumours, now Lord Timons happie howres are done and paſt, and his eſtate ſhrinkes from him.
Fye no, doe not beleeue it: hee cannot want for money.
But beleeue you this my Lord, that not long agoe, one of his men was with the Lord Lucullus, to borrow ſo many Talents, nay vrg'd extreamly for't, and ſhewed what neceſſity belong'd too't, and yet was deny'de.
How?
I tell you, deny'de my Lord.
What a ſtrange caſe was that? Now before the Gods I am aſham'd on't. Denied that honourable man? There was verie little Honour ſhew'd in't. For my owne part, I muſt needes confeſſe, I haue receyued ſome ſmall kindneſſes from him, as Money, Plate, Iewels, and ſuch like Trifles; nothing comparing to his: yet had hee miſtooke him, and ſent to me, I ſhould ne're haue denied his Occaſion ſo many Talents.
See, by good hap yonders my Lord, I haue ſwet to ſee his Honor. My Honor'd Lord.
Seruilius? You are kindely met ſir. Farthewell, commend me to thy Honourable vertuous Lord, my very exquiſite Friend.
May it pleaſe your Honour, my Lord hath ſent—
Ha? what ha's he ſent? I am ſo much endeered to that Lord; hee's euer ſending: how ſhall I thank him think'ſt thou? And what has he ſent now?
Has onely ſent his preſent Occaſion now my Lord: requeſting your Lordſhip to ſupply his inſtant vſe with ſo many Talents.
I know his Lordſhip is but merry with me,
He cannot want fifty fiue hundred Talents.
But in the mean time he wants leſſe my Lord.
If his occaſion were not vertuous,
I ſhould not vrge it halfe ſo faithfully.
Doſt thou ſpeake ſeriouſly Seruilius?
Vpon my ſoule, 'tis true Sir.
What a wicked Beaſt was I to disfurniſh my ſelf againſt ſuch a good time, when I might ha ſhewn my ſelfe Honourable? How vnluckily it hapned, that I ſhold Purchaſe the day before for a little part, and vndo a great deale of Honour? Seruilius▪ now before the Gods I am not able to do (the more beaſt I ſay) I was ſending to vſe Lord Timon my ſelfe, theſe Gentlemen can witneſſe; but I would not for the wealth of Athens I had done't now. Commend me bountifully to his good Lordſhip, and I hope his Honor will conceiue the faireſt of mee, becauſe I haue no power to be kinde. And tell him this from me, I count it one of my greateſt afflictions ſay, that I cannot pleaſure ſuch an Honourable Gentleman. Good Seruilius, will you befriend mee ſo farre, as to vſe mine owne words to him?
Yes ſir, I ſhall.
Ile looke you out a good turne Seruilius.
True as you ſaid, Timon is ſhrunke indeede,
And he that's once deny'de, will hardly ſpeede.
Do you obſerue this Hoſtilius?
I, to well.
Why this is the worlds ſoule,
And iuſt of the ſame peece
Is euery Flatterers ſport: who can call him his Friend
That dips in the ſame diſh? For in my knowing
Timon has bin this Lords Father,
And kept his credit with his purſe:
Supported his eſtate, nay Timons money
Has paid his men their wages. He ne're drinkes,
But Timons Siluer treads vpon his Lip,
And yet, oh ſee the monſtrouſneſſe of man,
When he lookes out in an vngratefull ſhape;
He does deny him (in reſpect of his)
What charitable men affoord to Beggers.
Religion grones at it.
For mine owne part, I neuer taſted Timon in my life
Nor came any of his bounties ouer me,
To marke me for his Friend. Yet I proteſt,
For his right Noble minde, illuſtrious Vertue,
And Honourable Carriage,
Had his neceſſity made vſe of me,
I would haue put my wealth into Donation,
And the beſt halfe ſhould haue return'd to him,
So much I loue his heart: But I perceiue,
Men muſt learne now with pitty to diſpence,
For Policy ſits aboue Conſcience.
Muſt he needs trouble me in't? Hum.
'Boue all others?
He might haue tried Lord Lucius, or Lucullus,
And now Ventidgius is wealthy too,
Whom he redeem'd from priſon. All theſe
Owes their eſtates vnto him.
My Lord,
They haue all bin touch'd, and found Baſe-Mettle,
For they haue all denied him.
How? Haue they deny'de him?
Has Ventidgius and Lucullus deny'de him,
And does he ſend to me? Three? Humh?
It ſhewes but little loue, or iudgement in him.
Muſt I be his laſt Refuge? His Friends (like Phyſitians)
Thriue, giue him ouer: Muſt I take th' Cure vpon me?
Has much diſgrac'd me in't, I'me angry at him,
That might haue knowne my place. I ſee no ſenſe for't,
But his Occaſions might haue wooed me firſt:
For in my conſcience, I was the firſt man
That ere receiued guift from him.
And does he thinke ſo backwardly of me now,
That Ile requite it laſt? No:
So it may proue an Argument of Laughter
To th' reſt, and 'mong'ſt Lords be thought a Foole:
I'de rather then the worth of thrice the ſumme,
Had ſent to me firſt, but for my mindes ſake:
I'de ſuch a courage to do him good. But now returne,
And with their faint reply, this anſwer ioyne;
Who bates mine Honor, ſhall not know my Coyne.
Excellent: Your Lordſhips a goodly Villain: the diuell knew not what he did, when hee made man Politicke; he croſſed himſelfe by't: and I cannot thinke, but in the end, the Villanies of man will ſet him cleere. How fairely this Lord ſtriues to appeare foule? Takes Vertuous Copies to be wicked: like thoſe, that vnder hotte ardent zeale, would ſet whole Realmes on fire, of ſuch a nature is his politike loue.
This was my Lords beſt hope, now all are fled
Saue onely the Gods. Now his Friends are dead,
Doores that were ne're acquainted with their Wards
Many a bounteous yeere, muſt be imploy'd
Now to guard ſure their Maſter:
And this is all a liberall courſe allowes,
Who cannot keepe his wealth, muſt keep his houſe.
Well met, goodmorrow Titus & Hortenſius
The like to you kinde Varro.
Lucius, what do we meet together?
I, and I think one buſineſſe do's command vs all.
For mine is money.
So is theirs, and ours.
And ſir Philotus too.
Good day at once.
Welcome good Brother.
What do you thinke the houre?
Labouring for Nine.
So much?
Is not my Lord ſeene yet?
Not yet.
I wonder on't, he was wont to ſhine at ſeauen.
I, but the dayes are waxt ſhorter with him:
You muſt conſider, that a Prodigall courſe
Is like the Sunnes, but not like his recouerable, I feare:
'Tis deepeſt Winter in Lord Timons purſe, that is:
One may reach deepe enough, and yet finde little.
I am of your feare, for that.
Ile ſhew you how t' obſerue a ſtrange euent:
Your Lord ſends now for Money?
Moſt true, he doe's.
And he weares Iewels now of Timons guift,
For which I waite for money.
It is againſt my heart.
Marke how ſtrange it ſhowes,
Timon in this, ſhould pay more then he owes:
And e'ne as if your Lord ſhould weare rich Iewels,
And ſend for money for 'em.
I'me weary of this Charge,
The Gods can witneſſe:
I know my Lord hath ſpent of Timons wealth,
And now Ingratitude, makes it worſe then ſtealth.
Yes, mine's three thouſand Crownes:
What's yours?
Fiue thouſand mine.
'Tis much deepe, and it ſhould ſeem by th' ſum
Your Maſters confidence was aboue mine,
Elſe ſurely his had equall'd.
One of Lord Timons men.
Flaminius? Sir, a word: Pray is my Lord readie to come forth?
No, indeed he is not.
We attend his Lordſhip: pray ſignifie ſo much.
I need not tell him that, he knowes you are too diligent.
Ha: is not that his Steward muffled ſo?
He goes away in a Clowd: Call him, call him.
Do you heare, ſir?
By your leaue, ſir.
What do ye aske of me, my Friend.
We waite for certaine Money heere, ſir.
I, if Money were as certaine as your waiting,
'Twere ſure enough.
Why then preferr'd you not your ſummes and Billes
When your falſe Maſters eate of my Lords meat?
Then they could ſmile, and fawne vpon his debts.
And take downe th' Intreſt into their glutt'nous Mawes.
You do your ſelues but wrong, to ſtirre me vp,
Let me paſſe quietly:
Beleeue't, my Lord and I haue made an end,
I haue no more to reckon, he to ſpend.
I, but this anſwer will not ſerue.
If't 'twill not ſerue, 'tis not ſo baſe as you,
For you ſerue Knaues.
How? What does his caſheer'd Worſhip mutter?
No matter what, hee's poore, and that's reuenge enough. Who can ſpeake broader, then hee that has no houſe to put his head in? Such may rayle againſt great buildings.
Oh heere's Seruilius: now wee ſhall know ſome anſwere.
If I might beſeech you Gentlemen, to repayre ſome other houre, I ſhould deriue much from't. For tak't of my ſoule, my Lord leanes wondrouſly to diſcontent: His comfortable temper has forſooke him, he's much out of health, and keepes his Chamber.
Many do keepe their Chambers, are not ſicke:
And if it be ſo farre beyond his health,
Me thinkes he ſhould the ſooner pay his debts,
And make a cleere way to the Gods.
Good Gods.
We cannot take this for anſwer, ſir.
Seruilius helpe, my Lord, my Lord.
What, are my dores oppos'd againſt my paſſage?
Haue I bin euer free, and muſt my houſe
Be my retentiue Enemy? My Gaole?
The place which I haue Feaſted, does it now
(Like all Mankinde) ſhew me an Iron heart?
Put in now Titus.
My Lord, heere is my Bill.
Here's mine.
And mine, my Lord.
And ours, my Lord.
All our Billes.
Knocke me downe with 'em, cleaue mee to the Girdle.
Alas, my Lord.
Cut my heart in ſummes.
Mine, fifty Talents.
Tell out my blood.
Fiue thouſand Crownes, my Lord.
Fiue thouſand drops payes that.
What yours? and yours?
My Lord.
My Lord.
Teare me, take me, and the Gods fall vpon you.
Faith I perceiue our Maſters may throwe their caps at their money, theſe debts may well be call'd deſperate ones, for a madman owes 'em.
They haue e'ene put my breath from mee the ſlaues. Creditors? Diuels.
My deere Lord.
What if it ſhould be ſo?
My Lord.
Ile haue it ſo. My Steward?
Heere my Lord.
So fitly? Go, bid all my Friends againe,
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius Vllorxa: All,
Ile once more feaſt the Raſcals.
O my Lord, you onely ſpeake from your diſtracted ſoule; there's not ſo much left to, furniſh out a moderate Table.
Be it not in thy care:
Go I charge thee, inuite them all, let in the tide
Of Knaues once more: my Cooke and Ile prouide.
My Lord, you haue my voyce, too't,
The faults Bloody:
'Tis neceſſary he ſhould dye:
Nothing imboldens ſinne ſo much, as Mercy.
Moſt true; the Law ſhall bruiſe 'em.
Honor, health, and compaſſion to the Senate.
Now Captaine.
I am an humble Sutor to your Vertues;
For pitty is the vertue of the Law,
And none but Tyrants vſe it cruelly.
It pleaſes time and Fortune to lye heauie
Vpon a Friend of mine, who in hot blood
Hath ſtept into the Law: which is paſt depth
To thoſe that (without heede) do plundge intoo't.
He is a Man (ſetting his Fate aſide) of comely Vertues,
Nor did he ſoyle the fact with Cowardice,
(And Honour in him, which buyes out his fault)
But with a Noble Fury, and faire ſpirit,
Seeing his Reputation touch'd to death,
He did oppoſe his Foe:
And with ſuch ſober and vnnoted paſſion
He did behooue his anger ere 'twas ſpent,
As if he had but prou'd an Argument.
You vndergo too ſtrict a Paradox,
Striuing to make an vgly deed looke faire:
Your words haue tooke ſuch paines, as if they labour'd
To bring Man-ſlaughter into forme, and ſet Quarrelling
Vpon the head of Valour; which indeede
Is Valour miſ-begot, and came into the world,
When Sects, and Factions were newly borne.
Hee's truly Valiant, that can wiſely ſuffer
The worſt that man can breath,
And make his Wrongs, his Out-ſider,
To weare them like his Rayment, careleſſely,
And ne're preferre his iniuries to his heart,
To bring it into danger.
If Wrongs be euilles, and inforce vs kill,
What Folly 'tis, to hazard life for Ill.
My Lord.
You cannot make groſſe ſinnes looke cleare,
To reuenge is no Valour, but to beare.
My Lords, then vnder fauour, pardon me,
If I ſpeake like a Captaine.
Why do fond men expoſe themſelues to Battell,
And not endure all threats? Sleepe vpon't,
And let the Foes quietly cut their Throats
Without repugnancy? If there be
Such Valour in the bearing, what make wee
Abroad? Why then, Women are more valiant
That ſtay at home, if Bearing carry it:
And the Aſſe, more Captaine then the Lyon?
The fellow loaden with Irons, wiſer then the Iudge?
If Wiſedome be in ſuffering, Oh my Lords,
As you are great, be pittifully Good,
Who cannot condemne raſhneſſe in cold blood?
To kill, I grant, is ſinnes extreameſt Guſt,
But in defence, by Mercy, 'tis moſt iuſt.
To be in Anger, is impietie:
But who is Man, that is not Angrie.
Weigh but the Crime with this.
You breath in vaine.
In vaine?
His ſeruice done at Lacedemon, and Bizantium,
Were a ſufficient briber for his life.
What's that?
Why ſay my Lords ha's done faire ſeruice,
And ſlaine in fight many of your enemies:
How full of valour did he beare himſelfe
In the laſt Conflict, and made plenteous wounds?
He has made too much plenty with him:
He's a ſworne Riotor, he has a ſinne
That often drownes him, and takes his valour priſoner.
If there were no Foes, that were enough
To ouercome him. In that Beaſtly furie,
He has bin knowne to commit outrages,
And cherriſh Factions. 'Tis inferr'd to vs,
His dayes are foule, and his drinke dangerous.
He dyes.
Hard fate: he might haue dyed in warre.
My Lords, if not for any parts in him,
Though his right arme might purchaſe his owne time,
And be in debt to none: yet more to moue you,
Take my deſerts to his, and ioyne 'em both.
And for I know, your reuerend Ages loue Security,
Ile pawne my Victories, all my Honour to you
Vpon his good returnes.
If by this Crime, he owes the Law his life,
Why let the Warre receiue't in valiant gore,
For Law is ſtrict, and Warre is nothing more.
We are for Law, he dyes, vrge it no more
On height of our diſpleaſure: Friend, or Brother,
He forfeits his owne blood, that ſpilles another.
Muſt it be ſo? It muſt not bee:
My Lords, I do beſeech you know mee.
How?
Call me to your remembrances.
What.
I cannot thinke but your Age has forgot me,
It could not elſe be, I ſhould proue ſo bace,
To ſue and be deny'de ſuch common Grace.
My wounds ake at you.
Do you dare our anger?
'Tis in few words, but ſpacious in effect:
We baniſh thee for euer.
Baniſh me?
Baniſh your dotage, baniſh vſurie,
That makes the Senate vgly.
If after two dayes ſhine, Athens containe thee,
Attend our waightier Iudgement.
And not to ſwell our Spirit,
He ſhall be executed preſently.
Now the Gods keepe you old enough,
That you may liue
Onely in bone, that none may looke on you.
I'm worſe then mad: I haue kept backe their Foes
While they haue told their Money, and let out
Their Coine vpon large intereſt. I my ſelfe,
Rich onely in large hurts. All thoſe, for this?
Is this the Balſome, that the vſuring Senat
Powres into Captaines wounds? Baniſhment.
It comes not ill: I hate not to be baniſht,
It is a cauſe worthy my Spleene and Furie,
That I may ſtrike at Athens. Ile cheere vp
My diſcontented Troopes, and lay for hearts;
'Tis Honour with moſt Lands to be at ods,
Souldiers ſhould brooke as little wrongs as Gods.
The good time of day to you, ſir.
I alſo wiſh it to you: I thinke this Honorable Lord did but try vs this other day.
Vpon that were my thoughts tyring when wee encountred. I hope it is not ſo low with him as he made it ſeeme in the triall of his ſeuerall Friends.
It ſhould not be, by the perſwaſion of his new Feaſting.
I ſhould thinke ſo. He hath ſent mee an earneſt inuiting, which many my neere occaſions did vrge mee to put off: but he hath coniur'd mee beyond them, and I muſt needs appeare.
In like manner was I in debt to my importunat buſineſſe, but he would not heare my excuſe. I am ſorrie, when he ſent to borrow of mee, that my Prouiſion was out.
I am ſicke of that greefe too, as I vnderſtand how all things go.
Euery man heares ſo: what would hee haue borrowed of you?
A thouſand Peeces.
A thouſand Peeces?
What of you?
He ſent to me ſir—Heere he comes.
With all my heart Gentlemen both; and how fare you?
Euer at the beſt, hearing well of your Lordſhip.
The Swallow followes not Summer more willing, then we your Lordſhip.
Nor more willingly leaues Winter, ſuch Summer Birds are men. Gentlemen, our dinner will not recompence this long ſtay: Feaſt your eares with the Muſicke awhile: If they will fare ſo harſhly o' th' Trumpets ſound: we ſhall too't preſently.
I hope it remaines not vnkindely with your Lordſhip, that I return'd you an empty Meſſenger.
O ſir, let it not trouble you.
My Noble Lord.
Ah my good Friend, what cheere?
My moſt Honorable Lord, I am e'ne ſick of ſhame, that when your Lordſhip this other day ſent to me, I was ſo vnfortunate a Beggar.
Thinke not on't, ſir.
If you had ſent but two houres before.
Let it not cumber your better remembrance.
Come bring in all together.
All couer'd Diſhes.
Royall Cheare, I warrant you.
Doubt not that, if money and the ſeaſon can yeild it
How do you? What's the newes?
Alcibiades is baniſh'd: heare you of it?
Alcibiades baniſh'd?
'Tis ſo, be ſure of it.
How? How?
I pray you vpon what?
My worthy Friends, will you draw neere?
Ile tell you more anon. Here's a Noble feaſt toward
This is the old man ſtill.
Wilt hold? Wilt hold?
It do's: but time will, and ſo.
I do conceyue.
Each man to his ſtoole, with that ſpurre as hee would to the lip of his Miſtris: your dyet ſhall bee in all places alike. Make not a Citie Feaſt of it, to let the meat coole, ere we can agree vpon the firſt place. Sit, ſit. The Gods require our Thankes.
Vncouer Dogges, and lap.
What do's his Lordſhip meane?
I know not.
May you a better Feaſt neuer behold
You knot of Mouth-Friends: Smoke, & lukewarm water
Is your perfection. This is Timons laſt,
Who ſtucke and ſpangled you with Flatteries,
Waſhes it off, and ſprinkles in your faces
Your reeking villany. Liue loath'd, and long
Moſt ſmiling, ſmooth, deteſted Paraſites,
Curteous Deſtroyers, affable Wolues, meeke Beares:
You Fooles of Fortune, Trencher-friends, Times Flyes,
Cap and knee-Slaues, vapours, and Minute Iackes.
Of Man and Beaſt, the infinite Maladie
Cruſt you quite o're. What do'ſt thou go?
Soft, take thy Phyſicke firſt; thou too, and thou:
Stay I will lend thee money, borrow none.
What? All in Motion? Henceforth be no Feaſt,
Whereat a Villaine's not a welcome Gueſt.
Burne houſe, ſinke Athens, henceforth hated be
Of Timon Man, and all Humanity.
How now, my Lords?
Know you the quality of Lord Timons fury?
Puſh, did you ſee my Cap?
I haue loſt my Gowne.
He's but a mad Lord, & nought but humors ſwaies him. He gaue me a Iewell th' other day, and now hee has beate it out of my hat.
Did you ſee my Iewell?
Did you ſee my Cap.
Heere 'tis.
Heere lyes my Gowne.
Let's make no ſtay.
Lord Timons mad.
I feel't vpon my bones.
One day he giues vs Diamonds, next day ſtones.
Let me looke backe vpon thee. O thou Wall
That girdles in thoſe Wolues, diue in the earth,
And fence not Athens. Matrons, turne incontinent,
Obedience fayle in Children: Slaues and Fooles
Plucke the graue wrinkled Senate from the Bench,
And miniſter in their ſteeds, to generall Filthes.
Conuert o' th' Inſtant greene Virginity,
Doo't in your Parents eyes. Bankrupts, hold faſt
Rather then render backe; out with your Kniues,
And cut your Truſters throates. Bound Seruants, ſteale,
Large-handed Robbers your graue Maſters are,
And pill by Law. Maide, to thy Maſters bed,
Thy Miſtris is o' th' Brothell. Some of ſixteen,
Plucke the lyn'd Crutch from thy old limping Sire,
With it, beate out his Braines, Piety, and Feare,
Religion to the Gods, Peace, Iuſtice, Truth,
Domeſticke awe, Night-reſt, and Neighbour-hood,
Inſtruction, Manners, Myſteries, and Trades,
Degrees, Obſeruances, Cuſtomes, and Lawes,
Decline to your confounding contraries.
And yet Confuſion liue: Plagues incident to men,
Your potent and infectious Feauors, heape
On Athens ripe for ſtroke. Thou cold Sciatica,
Cripple our Senators, that their limbes may halt
As lamely as their Manners▪ Luſt, and Libertie
Creepe in the Mindes and Marrowes of our youth,
That 'gainſt the ſtreame of Vertue they may ſtriue,
And drowne themſelues in Riot. Itches, Blaines,
So we all th' Athenian boſomes, and their crop
Be generall Leproſie: Breath, infect breath,
That their Society (as their Friendſhip) may
Be meerely poyſon. Nothing Ile beare from thee
But nakedneſſe, thou deteſtable Towne,
Take thou that too, with multiplying Bannes:
Timon will to the Woods, where he ſhall finde
Th' vnkindeſt Beaſt, more kinder then Mankinde.
The Gods confound (heare me you good Gods all)
Th' Athenians both within and out that Wall:
And graunt as Timon growes, his hate may grow
To the whole race of Mankinde, high and low.
Amen.
Heare you M. Steward, where's our Maſter?
Are we vndone, caſt off, nothing remaining?
Alack my Fellowes, what ſhould I ſay to you?
Let me be recorded by the righteous Gods,
I am as poore as you.
Such a Houſe broke?
So Noble a Maſter falne, all gone, and not
One Friend to take his Fortune by the arme,
And go along with him.
As we do turne our backes
From our Companion, throwne into his graue,
So his Familiars to his buried Fortunes
Slinke all away leaue their falſe vowes with him
Like empty purſes pickt; and his poore ſelfe
A dedicated Beggar to the Ayre,
With his diſeaſe, of all ſhunn'd pouerty,
Walkes like contempt alone. More of our Fellowes.
All broken Implements of a ruin'd houſe.
Yet do our hearts weare Timons Liuery,
That ſee I by our Faces: we are Fellowes ſtill,
Seruing alike in ſorrow: Leak'd is our Barke,
And we poore Mates, ſtand on the dying Decke,
Hearing the Surges threat: we muſt all part
Into this Sea of Ayre.
Good Fellowes all,
The lateſt of my wealth Ile ſhare among'ſt you.
Where euer we ſhall meete, for Timons ſake,
Let's yet be Fellowes. Let's ſhake our heads, and ſay
As 'twere a Knell vnto our Maſters Fortunes,
We haue ſeene better dayes. Let each take ſome:
Nay put out all your hands: Not one word more,
Thus part we rich in ſorrow, parting poore.
Oh the fierce wretchedneſſe that Glory brings vs!
Who would not wiſh to be from wealth exempt,
Since Riches point to Miſery and Contempt?
Who would be ſo mock'd with Glory, or to liue
But in a Dreame of Friendſhip,
To haue his pompe, and all what ſtate compounds,
But onely painted like his varniſht Friends:
Poore honeſt Lord, brought lowe by his owne heart,
Vndone by Goodneſſe: Strange vnvſuall blood,
When mans worſt ſinne is, He do's too much Good.
Who then dares to be halfe ſo kinde agen?
For Bounty that makes Gods, do ſtill marre Men.
My deereſt Lord, bleſt to be moſt accurſt,
Rich onely to be wretched; thy great Fortunes
Are made thy cheefe Afflictions. Alas (kinde Lord)
Hee's flung in Rage from this ingratefull Seate
Of monſtrous Friends:
Nor ha's he with him to ſupply his life,
Or that which can command it:
Ile follow and enquire him out.
Ile euer ſerue his minde, with my beſt will,
Whilſt I haue Gold, Ile be his Steward ſtill.
O bleſſed breeding Sun, draw from the earth
Rotten humidity: below thy Siſters Orbe
Infect the ayre. Twin'd Brothers of one wombe,
Whoſe procreation, reſidence, and birth,
Scarſe is diuidant; touch them with ſeuerall fortunes,
The greater ſcornes the leſſer. Not Nature
(To whom all ſores lay ſiege) can beare great Fortune
But by contempt of Nature,
Raiſe me this Begger, and deny't that Lord,
The Senators ſhall beare contempt Hereditary,
The Begger Natiue Honor.
It is the Paſtour Lards, the Brothers ſides,
The want that makes him leaue: who dares? who dares
In puritie of Manhood ſtand vpright
And ſay, this mans a Flatterer. If one be,
So are they all: for euerie grize of Fortune
Is ſmooth'd by that below. The Learned pate
Duckes to the Golden Foole. All's obliquie:
There's nothing leuell in our curſed Natures
But direct villanie. Therefore be abhorr'd,
All Feaſts, Societies, and Throngs of men.
His ſemblable, yea himſelfe Timon diſdaines,
Deſtruction phang mankinde; Earth yeeld me Rootes,
Who ſeekes for better of thee, ſawce his pallate
With thy moſt operant Poyſon. What is heere?
Gold? Yellow, glittering, precious Gold?
No Gods, I am no idle Votariſt,
Roots you cleere Heauens. Thus much of this will make
Blacke, white; fowle, faire; wrong, right;
Baſe, Noble; Old, young; Coward, valiant.
Ha you Gods! why this? what this, you Gods? why this
Will lugge your Prieſts and Seruants from your ſides:
Plucke ſtout mens pillowes from below their heads.
This yellow Slaue,
Will knit and breake Religions, bleſſe th' accurſt,
Make the hoare Leproſie ador'd, place Theeues,
And giue them Title, knee, and approbation
With Senators on the Bench: This is it
That makes the wappen'd Widdow wed againe;
Shee, whom the Spittle-houſe, and vlcerous ſores,
Would caſt the gorge at. This Embalmes and Spices
To' th' Aprill day againe. Come damn'd Earth,
Thou common whore of Mankinde, that puttes oddes
Among the rout of Nations, I will make thee
Do thy right Nature.
Ha? A Drumme? Th' art quicke,
But yet Ile bury thee: Thou't go (ſtrong Theefe)
When Gowty keepers of thee cannot ſtand:
Nay ſtay thou out for earneſt.
What art thou there? ſpeake.
A Beaſt as thou art. The Canker gnaw thy hart
For ſhewing me againe the eyes of Man.
What is thy name? Is man ſo hatefull to thee,
That art thy ſelfe a Man?
I am Miſantropos, and hate Mankinde,
For thy part, I do wiſh thou wert a dogge,
That I might loue thee ſomething.
I know thee well:
But in thy Fortunes am vnlearn'd, and ſtrange.
I know thee too, and more then that I know thee
I not deſire to know. Follow thy Drumme,
With mans blood paint the ground Gules, Gules:
Religious Cannons, ciuill Lawes are cruell,
Then what ſhould warre be? This fell whore of thine,
Hath in her more deſtruction then thy Sword,
For all her Cherubin looke.
Thy lips rot off.
I will not kiſſe thee, then the rot returnes
To thine owne lippes againe.
How came the Noble Timon to this change?
As the Moone do's, by wanting light to giue:
But then renew I could not like the Moone,
There were no Sunnes to borrow of.
Noble Timon, what friendſhip may I do thee?
None, but to maintaine my opinion.
What is it Timon?
Promiſe me Friendſhip, but performe none. If thou wilt not promiſe, the Gods plague thee, for thou art a man: if thou do'ſt performe, confound thee, for thou art a man.
I haue heard in ſome ſort of thy Miſeries.
Thou ſaw'ſt them when I had proſperitie.
I ſee them now, then was a bleſſed time.
As thine is now, held with a brace of Harlots.
Is this th' Athenian Minion, whom the world Voic'd ſo regardfully?
Art thou Timandra?
Yes.
Be a whore ſtill, they loue thee not that vſe thee, giue them diſeaſes, leauing with thee their Luſt. Make vſe of thy ſalt houres, ſeaſon the ſlaues for Tubbes and Bathes, bring downe Roſe-checkt youth to the Pubfaſt, and the Diet.
Hang thee Monſter.
Pardon him ſweet Timandra▪ for his wits
Are drown'd and loſt in his Calamities.
I haue but little Gold of late, braue Timon,
The want whereof, doth dayly make reuolt
In my penurious Band. I haue heard and greeu'd
How curſed Athens, mindeleſſe of thy worth,
Forgetting thy great deeds, when Neighbour ſtates
But for thy Sword and Fortune trod vpon them.
I prythee beate thy Drum, and get thee gone.
I am thy Friend, and pitty thee deere Timon.
How doeſt thou pitty him whom yu doſt troble,
I had rather be alone.
Why fare thee well:
Heere is ſome Gold for thee.
Keepe it, I cannot eate it.
When I haue laid proud Athens on a heape.
Warr'ſt thou 'gainſt Athens.
I Timon, and haue cauſe.
The Gods confound them all in thy Conqueſt,
And thee after, when thou haſt Conquer'd.
Why me, Timon?
That by killing of Villaines
Thou was't borne to conquer my Country.
Put vp thy Gold. Go on, heeres Gold, go on;
Be as a Plannetary plague, when Ioue
Will o're ſome high-Vic'd City, hang his poyſon
In the ſicke ayre: let not thy ſword skip one:
Pitty not honour'd Age for his white Beard,
He is an Vſurer. Strike me the counterfet Matron,
It is her habite onely, that is honeſt,
Her ſelfe's a Bawd. Let not the Virgins cheeke
Make ſoft thy trenchant Sword: for thoſe Milke pappes
That through the window Barne bore at mens eyes,
Are not within the Leafe of pitty writ,
But ſet them down horrible Traitors. Spare not the Babe
Whoſe dimpled ſmiles from Fooles exhauſt their mercy;
Thinke it a Baſtard, whom the Oracle
Hath doubtfully pronounced, the throat ſhall cut,
And mince it ſans remorſe. Sweare againſt Obiects,
Put Armour on thine eares, and on thine eyes,
Whoſe proofe, nor yels of Mothers, Maides, nor Babes,
Nor ſight of Prieſts in holy Veſtments bleeding,
Shall pierce a iot. There's Gold to pay thy Souldiers,
Make large confuſion: and thy fury ſpent,
Confounded be thy ſelfe. Speake not, be gone.
Haſt thou Gold yet, Ile take the Gold thou giueſt me, not all thy Counſell.
Doſt thou or doſt thou not, Heauens curſe vpon thee.
Giue vs ſome Gold good Timon, haſt yu more?
Enough to make a Whore forſweare her Trade,
And to make Whores, a Bawd. Hold vp you Sluts
Your Aprons mountant; you are not Othable,
Although I know you'l ſweare, terribly ſweare
Into ſtrong ſhudders, and to heauenly Agues
Th' immortall Gods that heare you. Spare your Oathes:
Ile truſt to your Conditions, be whores ſtill.
And he whoſe pious breath ſeekes to conuert you,
Be ſtrong in Whore, allure him, burne him vp,
Let your cloſe fire predominate his ſmoke,
And be no turne-coats: yet may your paines ſix months
Be quite contrary, And Thatch
Your poore thin Roofes with burthens of the dead,
(Some that were hang'd) no matter:
Weare them, betray with them; Whore ſtill,
Paint till a horſe may myre vpon your face:
A pox of wrinkles.
Well, more Gold, what then?
Beleeue't that wee'l do any thing for Gold.
Conſumptions ſowe
In hollow bones of man, ſtrike their ſharpe ſhinnes,
And marre mens ſpurring. Cracke the Lawyers voyce,
That he may neuer more falſe Title pleade,
Nor ſound his Quillers ſhrilly: Hoare the Flamen,
That ſcold'ſt againſt the quality of fleſh,
And not beleeues himſelfe. Downe with the Noſe,
Downe with it flat, take the Bridge quite away
Of him, that his particular to foreſee
Smels from the generall weale. Make curld'pate Ruffians bald
And let the vnſcarr'd Braggerts of the Warre
Deriue ſome paine from you. Plague all,
That your Actiuity may defeate and quell
The ſourſe of all Erection. There's more Gold.
Do you damne others, and let this damne you,
And ditches graue you all.
More counſell with more Money, bounteous Timon.
More whore, more Miſcheefe firſt, I haue giuen you earneſt.
Strike vp the Drum towardes Athens, farewell Timon: if I thriue well, Ile viſit thee againe.
If I hope well, Ile neuer ſee thee more.
I neuer did thee harme.
Yes, thou ſpok'ſt well of me.
Call'ſt thou that harme?
Men dayly finde it. Get thee away,
And take thy Beagles with thee.
We but offend him, ſtrike.
That Nature being ſicke of mans vnkindneſſe
Should yet be hungry: Common Mother, thou
Whoſe wombe vnmeaſureable, and infinite breſt
Teemes and feeds all: whoſe ſelfeſame Mettle
Whereof thy proud Childe (arrogant man) is puft,
Engenders the blacke Toad, and Adder blew,
The gilded Newt, and eyeleſſe venom'd Worme,
With all th' abhorred Births below Criſpe Heauen,
Whereon Hyperions quickning fire doth ſhine:
Yeeld him, who all the humane Sonnes do hate,
From foorth thy plenteous boſome, one poore roote:
Enſeare thy Fertile and Conceptious wombe,
Let it no more bring out ingratefull man.
Goe great with Tygers, Dragons, Wolues, and Beares,
Teeme with new Monſters, whom thy vpward face
Hath to the Marbled Manſion all aboue
Neuer preſented. O, a Root, deare thankes:
Dry vp thy Marrowes, Vines, and Plough-torne Leas,
Whereof ingratefull man with Licouriſh draughts
And Morſels Vnctious, greaſes his pure minde,
That from it all Conſideration ſlippes —
More man? Plague, plague.
I was directed hither. Men report,
Thou doſt affect my Manners, and doſt vſe them.
'Tis then, becauſe thou doſt not keepe a dogge
Whom I would imitate. Conſumption catch thee.
This is in thee a Nature but infected,
A poore vnmanly Melancholly ſprung
From change of future. Why this Spade? this place?
This Slaue-like Habit, and theſe lookes of Care?
Thy Flatterers yet weare Silke, drinke Wine, lye ſoft,
Hugge their diſeas'd Perfumes, and haue forgot
That euer Timon was. Shame not theſe Woods,
By pacing on the cunning of a Carper.
Be thou a Flatterer now, and ſeeke to thriue
By that which ha's vndone thee; hindge thy knee,
And let his very breath whom thou'lt obſerue
Blow off thy Cap: praiſe his moſt vicious ſtraine,
And call it excellent: thou waſt told thus:
Thou gau'ſt thine eares (like Tapſters, that bad welcom)
To Knaues, and all approachers: 'Tis moſt iuſt
That thou turne Raſcall, had'ſt thou wealth againe,
Raſcals ſhould haue't. Do not aſſume my likeneſſe.
Were I like thee, I'de throw away my ſelfe.
Thou haſt caſt away thy ſelfe, being like thy ſelf
A Madman ſo long, now a Foole: what think'ſt
That the bleake ayre, thy boyſterous Chamberlaine
Will put thy ſhirt on warme? Will theſe moyſt Trees,
That haue out-liu'd the Eagle, page thy heeles
And skip when thou point'ſt out? Will the cold brooke
Candied with Ice, Cawdle thy Morning taſte
To cure thy o're-nights ſurfet? Call the Creatures,
Whoſe naked Natures liue in all the ſpight
Of wrekefull Heauen, whoſe bare vnhouſed Trunkes▪
To the conflicting Elements expos'd
Anſwer meere Nature: bid them flatter thee.
O thou ſhalt finde.
A Foole of thee: depart.
I loue thee better now, then ere I did.
I hate thee worſe.
Why?
Thou flatter'ſt miſery.
I flatter not, but ſay thou art a Caytiffe.
Why do'ſt thou ſeeke me out?
To vex thee.
Alwayes a Villaines Office, or a Fooles.
Doſt pleaſe thy ſelfe in't?
I.
What, a Knaue too?
If thou did'ſt put this ſowre cold habit on
To caſtigate thy pride, 'twere well: but thou
Doſt it enforcedly: Thou'dſt Courtier be againe
Wert thou not Beggar: willing miſery
Out-liues: incertaine pompe, is crown'd before:
The one is filling ſtill, neuer compleat:
The other, at high wiſh: beſt ſtate Contentleſſe,
Hath a diſtracted and moſt wretched being,
Worſe then the worſt, Content.
Thou ſhould'ſt deſire to dye, being miſerable.
Not by his breath, that is more miſerable.
Thou art a Slaue, whom Fortunes tender arme
With fauour neuer claſpt: but bred a Dogge.
Had'ſt thou like vs from our firſt ſwath proceeded,
The ſweet degrees that this breefe world affords,
To ſuch as may the paſſiue drugges of it
Freely command'ſt: thou would'ſt haue plung'd thy ſelf
In generall Riot, melted downe thy youth
In different beds of Luſt, and neuer learn'd
The Icie precepts of reſpect, but followed
The Sugred game before thee. But my ſelfe,
Who had the world as my Confectionarie,
The mouthes, the tongues, the eyes, and hearts of men,
At duty more then I could frame employment;
That numberleſſe vpon me ſtucke, as leaues
Do on the Oake, haue with one Winters bruſh
Fell from their boughes, and left me open, bare,
For euery ſtorme that blowes. I to beare this,
That neuer knew but better, is ſome burthen:
Thy Nature, did commence in ſufferance, Time
Hath made thee hard in't. Why ſhould'ſt yu hate Men?
They neuer flatter'd thee. What haſt thou giuen?
If thou wilt curſe; thy Father (that poore ragge)
Muſt be thy ſubiect; who in ſpight put ſtuffe
To ſome ſhee-Begger, and compounded thee
Poore Rogue, hereditary. Hence, be gone,
If thou hadſt not bene borne the worſt of men,
Thou hadſt bene a Knaue and Flatterer.
Art thou proud yet?
I, that I am not thee.
I, that I was no Prodigall.
I, that I am one now.
Were all the wealth I haue ſhut vp in thee,
I'ld giue thee leaue to hang It. Get thee gone:
That the whole life of Athens were in this,
Thus would I eate it.
Heere, I will mend thy Feaſt.
Firſt mend thy company, take away thy ſelfe.
So I ſhall mend mine owne, by' th' lacke of thine
'Tis not well mended ſo, it is but botcht;
If not, I would it were.
What would'ſt thou haue to Athens?
Thee thither in a whirlewind: if thou wilt,
Tell them there I haue Gold, looke, ſo I haue.
Heere is no vſe for Gold.
The beſt, and trueſt:
For heere it ſleepes, and do's no hyred harme.
Where lyeſt a nights Timon?
Vnder that's aboue me.
Where feed'ſt thou a-dayes Apemantus?
Where my ſtomacke findes meate, or rather where I eate it.
Would poyſon were obedient, & knew my mind
Where would'ſt thou ſend it?
To ſawce thy diſhes.
The middle of Humanity thou neuer kneweſt, but the extremitie of both ends. When thou waſt in thy Gilt, and thy Perfume, they mockt thee for too much Curioſitie: in thy Ragges thou know'ſt none, but art deſpis'd for the contrary. There's a medler for thee, eate it.
On what I hate, I feed not.
Do'ſt hate a Medler?
I, though it looke like thee.
And th' hadſt hated Medlers ſooner, yu ſhould'ſt haue loued thy ſelfe better now. What man didd'ſt thou euer know vnthrift, that was beloued after his meanes?
Who without thoſe meanes thou talk'ſt of, didſt thou euer know belou'd?
My ſelfe.
I vnderſtand thee: thou had'ſt ſome meanes to keepe a Dogge.
What things in the world canſt thou neereſt compare to thy Flatterers?
Women neereſt, but men: men are the things themſelues. What would'ſt thou do with the world Apemantus, if it lay in thy power?
Giue it the Beaſts, to be rid of the men.
Would'ſt thou haue thy ſelfe fall in the confuſion of men, and remaine a Beaſt with the Beaſts.
I Timon.
A beaſtly Ambition, which the Goddes graunt thee t' attaine to. If thou wert the Lyon, the Fox would beguile thee▪ if thou wert the Lambe, the Foxe would eate thee: if thou wert the Fox, the Lion would ſuſpect thee, when peraduenture thou wert accus'd by the Aſſe: If thou wert the Aſſe, thy dulneſſe would torment thee; and ſtill thou liu'dſt but as a Breakefaſt to the Wolfe. If thou wert the Wolfe, thy greedineſſe would afflict thee, & oft thou ſhould'ſt hazard thy life for thy dinner. Wert thou the Vnicorne, pride and wrath would confound thee, and make thine owne ſelfe the conqueſt of thy fury. Wert thou a Beare, thou would'ſt be kill'd by the Horſe: wert thou a Horſe, thou would'ſt be ſeaz'd by the Leopard: wert thou a Leopard, thou wert Germane to the Lion, and the ſpottes of thy Kindred, were Iurors on thy life. All thy ſafety were remotion, and thy defence abſence. What Beaſt could'ſt thou bee, that were not ſubiect to a Beaſt: and what a Beaſt art thou already, that ſeeſt not thy loſſe in transformation.
If thou could'ſt pleaſe me
With ſpeaking to me, thou might'ſt
Haue hit vpon it heere.
The Commonwealth of Athens, is become
A Forreſt of Beaſts.
How ha's the Aſſe broke the wall, that thou art out of the Citie.
Yonder comes a Poet and a Painter:
The plague of Company light vpon thee:
I will feare to catch it, and giue way.
When I know not what elſe to do,
Ile ſee thee againe.
When there is nothing liuing but thee,
Thou ſhalt be welcome.
I had rather be a Beggers Dogge,
Then Apemantus.
Thou art the Cap
Of all the Fooles aliue.
Would thou wert cleane enough
To ſpit vpon.
A plague on thee,
Thou art too bad to curſe.
All Villaines
That do ſtand by thee, are pure.
There is no Leproſie,
But what thou ſpeak'ſt.
If I name thee, Ile beate thee;
But I ſhould infect my hands.
I would my tongue
Could rot them off.
Away thou iſſue of a mangie dogge,
Choller does kill me,
That thou art aliue, I ſwoond to ſee thee.
Would thou would'ſt burſt.
Away thou tedious Rogue, I am ſorry I ſhall loſe a ſtone by thee.
Beaſt.
Slaue.
Toad.
Rogue, Rogue, Rogue.
I am ſicke of this falſe world, and will loue nought
But euen the meere neceſſities vpon't:
Then Timon preſently prepare thy graue:
Lye where the light Fome of the Sea may beate
Thy graue ſtone dayly, make thine Epitaph,
That death in me, at others liues may laugh.
O thou ſweete King-killer, and deare diuorce
Twixt naturall Sunne and fire: thou bright defilet
of Himens pureſt bed, thou valiant Mars,
Thou euer, yong, freſh, loued, and delicate wooer,
Whoſe bluſh doth thawe the conſecrated Snow
That lyes on Dians lap.
Thou viſible God,
That ſouldreſt cloſe Impoſſibilities,
And mak'ſt them kiſſe; that ſpeak'ſt with euerie Tongue
To euerie purpoſe: O thou touch of hearts,
Thinke thy ſlaue-man rebels, and by thy vertue
Set them into confounding oddes, that Beaſts
May haue the world in Empire.
Would 'twere ſo,
But not till I am dead. Ile ſay th' haſt Gold:
Thou wilt be throng'd too ſhortly.
Throng'd too?
I.
Thy backe I prythee.
Liue, and loue thy miſery.
Long liue ſo, and ſo dye. I am quit.
Mo things like men,
Eate Timon, and abhorre then.
Where ſhould he haue this Gold? It is ſome poore Fragment, ſome ſlender Ort of his remainder: the meere want of Gold, and the falling from of his Friendes, droue him into this Melancholly.
It is nois'd
He hath a maſſe of Treaſure.
Let vs make the aſſay vpon him, if he care not for't, he will ſupply vs eaſily: if he couetouſly reſerue it, how ſhall's get it?
True: for he beares it not about him:
'Tis hid.
Is not this hee?
Where?
'Tis his deſcription.
He? I know him.
Saue thee Timon.
Now Theeues.
Soldiers, not Theeues.
Both too, and womens Sonnes.
We are not Theeues, but men
That much do want.
Your greateſt want is, you want much of meat:
Why ſhould you want? Behold, the Earth hath Rootes:
Within this Mile breake forth a hundred Springs:
The Oakes beare Maſt, the Briars Scarlet Heps,
The bounteous Huſwife Nature, on each buſh,
Layes her full Meſſe before you. Want? why Want?
We cannot liue on Graſſe, on Berries, Water,
As Beaſts, and Birds, and Fiſhes.
Nor on the Beaſts themſelues, the Birds & Fiſhes,
You muſt eate men. Yet thankes I muſt you con,
That you are Theeues profeſt: that you worke not
In holier ſhapes: For there is boundleſſe Theft
In limited Profeſſions. Raſcall Theeues
Heere's Gold. Go, ſucke the ſubtle blood o' th' Grape,
Till the high Feauor ſeeth your blood to froth,
And ſo ſcape hanging. Truſt not the Phyſitian,
His Antidotes are poyſon, and he ſlayes
Moe then you Rob: Take wealth, and liues together,
Do Villaine do, ſince you proteſt to doo't.
Like Workemen, Ile example you with Theeuery:
The Sunnes a Theefe, and with his great attraction
Robbes the vaſte Sea. The Moones an arrant Theefe,
And her pale fire, ſhe ſnatches from the Sunne.
The Sea a Theefe, whoſe liquid Surge, reſolues
The Moone into Salt teares. The Earth's a Theefe,
That feeds and breeds by a compoſture ſtolne
From gen'rall excrement: each thing's a Theefe.
The Lawes, your curbe and whip, in their rough power
Ha's vncheck'd Theft. Loue not your ſelues, away,
Rob one another, there's more Gold, cut throates,
All that you meete are Theeues: to Athens go,
Breake open ſhoppes, nothing can you ſteale
But Theeues do looſe it: ſteale leſſe, for this I giue you,
And Gold confound you howſoere: Amen.
Has almoſt charm'd me from my Profeſſion, by perſwading me to it.
'Tis in the malice of mankinde, that he thus aduiſes vs not to haue vs thriue in our myſtery.
Ile beleeue him as an Enemy,
And giue ouer my Trade.
Let vs firſt ſee peace in Athens, there is no time ſo miſerable, but a man may be true.
Oh you Gods!
Is yon'd deſpis'd and ruinous man my Lord?
Full of decay and fayling? Oh Monument
And wonder of good deeds, euilly beſtow'd!
What an alteration of Honor has deſp'rate want made?
What vilder thing vpon the earth, then Friends,
Who can bring Nobleſt mindes, to baſeſt ends.
How rarely does it meete with this times guiſe,
When man was wiſht to loue his Enemies:
Grant I may euer loue, and rather woo
Thoſe that would miſcheefe me, then thoſe that doo.
Has caught me in his eye, I will preſent my honeſt griefe
vnto him; and as my Lord, ſtill ſerue him with my life.
My deereſt Maſter.
Away: what art thou?
Haue you forgot me, Sir?
Why doſt aske that? I haue forgot all men.
Then, if thou grunt'ſt, th' art a man.
I haue forgot thee.
An honeſt poore ſeruant of yours.
Then I know thee not:
I neuer had honeſt man about me, I all
I kept were Knaues, to ſerue in meate to Villaines.
The Gods are witneſſe,
Neu'r did poore Steward weare a truer greefe
For his vndone Lord, then mine eyes for you.
What, doſt thou weepe?
Come neerer, then I loue thee
Becauſe thou art a woman, and diſclaim'ſt
Flinty mankinde: whoſe eyes do neuer giue,
But thorow Luſt and Laughter: pittie's ſleeping:
Strange times yt weepe with laughing, not with weeping.
I begge of you to know me, good my Lord,
T' accept my greefe, and whil'ſt this poore wealth laſts,
To entertaine me as your Steward ſtill.
Had I a Steward
So true, ſo iuſt, and now ſo comfortable?
It almoſt turnes my dangerous Nature wilde.
Let me behold thy face: Surely, this man
Was borne of woman.
Forgiue my generall, and exceptleſſe raſhneſſe
You perpetuall ſober Gods. I do proclaime
One honeſt man: Miſtake me not, but one:
No more I pray, and hee's a Steward.
How faine would I haue hated all mankinde,
And thou redeem'ſt thy ſelfe. But all ſaue thee,
I fell with Curſes.
Me thinkes thou art more honeſt now, then wiſe:
For, by oppreſſing and betraying mee,
Thou might'ſt haue ſooner got another Seruice:
For many ſo arriue at ſecond Maſters,
Vpon their firſt Lords necke. But tell me true,
(For I muſt euer doubt, though ne're ſo ſure)
Is not thy kindneſſe ſubtle, couetous,
If not a Vſuring kindneſſe, and as rich men deale Guifts,
Expecting in returne twenty for one?
No my moſt worthy Maſter, in whoſe breſt
Doubt, and ſuſpect (alas) are plac'd too late:
You ſhould haue fear'd falſe times, when you did Feaſt.
Suſpect ſtill comes, where an eſtate is leaſt.
That which I ſhew, Heauen knowes, is meerely Loue,
Dutie, and Zeale, to your vnmatched minde;
Care of your Food and Liuing, and beleeue it,
My moſt Honour'd Lord,
For any benefit that points to mee,
Either in hope, or preſent, I'de exchange
For this one wiſh, that you had power and wealth
To requite me, by making rich your ſelfe.
Looke thee, 'tis ſo: thou ſingly honeſt man,
Heere take: the Gods out of my miſerie
Ha's ſent thee Treaſure. Go, liue rich and happy,
But thus condition'd: Thou ſhalt build from men:
Hate all, curſe all, ſhew Charity to none,
But let the famiſht fleſh ſlide from the Bone,
Ere thou releeue the Begger. Giue to dogges
What thou denyeſt to men. Let Priſons ſwallow 'em,
Debts wither'em to nothing, be men like blaſted woods
And may Diſeaſes licke vp their falſe bloods,
And ſo farewell, and thriue.
O let me ſtay, and comfort you, my Maſter.
If thou hat'ſt Curſes
Stay not: flye, whil'ſt thou art bleſt and free:
Ne're ſee thou man, and let me ne're ſee thee.
As I tooke note of the place, it cannot be farre where he abides.
What's to be thought of him?
Does the Rumor hold for true,
That hee's ſo full of Gold?
Certaine.
Alcibiades reports it: Phrinica and Timandylo
Had Gold of him. He likewiſe enrich'd
Poore ſtragling Souldiers, with great quantity.
'Tis ſaide, he gaue vnto his Steward
A mighty ſumme.
Then this breaking of his,
Ha's beene but a Try for his Friends?
Nothing elſe:
You ſhall ſee him a Palme in Athens againe,
And flouriſh with the higheſt:
Therefore, 'tis not amiſſe, we tender our loues
To him, in this ſuppos'd diſtreſſe of his:
It will ſhew honeſtly in vs,
And is very likely, to loade our purpoſes
With what they trauaile for,
If it be a iuſt and true report, that goes
Of his hauing.
What haue you now
To preſent vnto him?
Nothing at this time
But my Viſitation: onely I will promiſe him
An excellent Peece.
I muſt ſerue him ſo too;
Tell him of an intent that's comming toward him.
Good as the beſt.
Promiſing, is the verie Ayre o' th' Time;
It opens the eyes of Expectation.
Performance, is euer the duller for his acte,
And but in the plainer and ſimpler kinde of people,
The deede of Saying is quite out of vſe.
To Promiſe, is moſt Courtly and faſhionable;
Performance, is a kinde of Will or Teſtament
Which argues a great ſickneſſe in his iudgement
That makes it.
Excellent Workeman,
Thou canſt not paint a man ſo badde
As is thy ſelfe.
I am thinking
What I ſhall ſay I haue prouided for him:
It muſt be a perſonating of himſelfe:
A Satyre againſt the ſoftneſſe of Proſperity,
With a Diſcouerie of the infinite Flatteries
That follow youth and opulencie.
Muſt thou needes
Stand for a Villaine in thine owne Worke?
Wilt thou whip thine owne faults in other men?
Do ſo, I haue Gold for thee.
Nay let's ſeeke him.
Then do we ſinne againſt our owne eſtate,
When we may profit meete, and come too late.
True:
When the day ſerues before blacke-corner'd night;
Finde what thou want'ſt, by free and offer'd light.
Come.
Ile meete you at the turne:
What a Gods Gold, that he is worſhipt
In a baſer Temple, then where Swine feede?
'Tis thou that rigg'ſt the Barke, and plow'ſt the Fome,
Setleſt admired reuerence in a Slaue,
To thee be worſhipt, and thy Saints for aye:
Be crown'd with Plagues, that thee alone obay.
Fit I meet them.
Haile worthy Timon.
Our late Noble Maſter.
Haue I once liu'd
To ſee two honeſt men?
Sir:
Hauing often of your open Bounty taſted,
Hearing you were retyr'd, your Friends falne off,
Whoſe thankeleſſe Natures (O abhorred Spirits)
Not all the Whippes of Heauen, are large enough▪
What, to you,
Whoſe Starre-like Nobleneſſe gaue life and influence
To their whole being? I am rapt, and cannot couer
The monſtrous bulke of this Ingratitude
With any ſize of words.
Let it go,
Naked men may ſee't the better:
You that are honeſt, by being what you are,
Make them beſt ſeene, and knowne.
He, and my ſelfe
Haue trauail'd in the great ſhowre of your guifts,
And ſweetly felt it.
I, you are honeſt man.
We are hither come
To offer you our ſeruice.
Moſt honeſt men:
Why how ſhall I requite you?
Can you eate Roots, and drinke cold water, no?
What we can do,
Wee'l do to do you ſeruice.
Y' are honeſt men,
Y' haue heard that I haue Gold,
I am ſure you haue, ſpeake truth, y' are honeſt men.
So it is ſaid my Noble Lord, but therefore
Came not my Friend, nor I.
Good honeſt men: Thou draw'ſt a counterfet
Beſt in all Athens, th' art indeed the beſt,
Thou counterfet'ſt moſt liuely.
So, ſo, my Lord.
E'ne ſo ſir as I ſay. And for thy fiction,
Why thy Verſe ſwels with ſtuffe ſo fine and ſmooth,
That thou art euen Naturall in thine Art.
But for all this (my honeſt Natur'd friends)
I muſt needs ſay you haue a little fault,
Marry 'tis not monſtrous in you, neither wiſh I
You take much paines to mend.
Beſeech your Honour
To make it knowne to vs.
You'l take it ill.
Moſt thankefully, my Lord.
Will you indeed?
Doubt it not worthy Lord.
There's neuer a one of you but truſts a Knaue,
That mightily deceiues you.
Do we, my Lord?
I, and you heare him cogge,
See him diſſemble,
Know his groſſe patchery, loue him, feede him,
Keepe in your boſome, yet remaine aſſur'd
That he's a made-vp-Villaine.
I know none ſuch, my Lord.
Nor I.
Looke you,
I loue you well, Ile giue you Gold
Rid me theſe Villaines from your companies;
Hang them, or ſtab them, drowne them in a draught,
Confound them by ſome courſe, and come to me,
Ile giue you Gold enough.
Name them my Lord, let's know them.
You that way, and you this:
But two in Company:
Each man a part, all ſingle, and alone,
Yet an arch Villaine keepes him company:
If where thou art, two Villaines ſhall not be,
Come not neere him. If thou would'ſt not recide
But where one Villaine is, then him abandon.
Hence, packe, there's Gold, you came for Gold ye ſlaues:
You haue worke for me; there's payment, hence,
You are an Alcumiſt, make Gold of that:
Out Raſcall dogges.
It is vaine that you would ſpeake with Timon:
For he is ſet ſo onely to himſelfe,
That nothing but himſelfe, which lookes like man,
Is friendly with him.
Bring vs to his Caue.
It is our part and promiſe to th' Athenians
To ſpeake with Timon.
At all times alike
Men are not ſtill the ſame: 'twas Time and Greefes
That fram'd him thus. Time with his fairer hand,
Offering the Fortunes of his former dayes,
The former man may make him: bring vs to him
And chanc'd it as it may.
Heere is his Caue:
Peace and content be heere. Lord Timon, Timon,
Looke out, and ſpeake to Friends: Th' Athenians
By two of their moſt reuerend Senate greet thee:
Speake to them Noble Timon.
Thou Sunne that comforts burne,
Speake and be hang'd:
For each true word, a bliſter, and each falſe
Be as a Cantherizing to the root o' th' Tongue,
Conſuming it with ſpeaking.
Worthy Timon.
Of none but ſuch as you,
And you of Timon.
The Senators of Athens, greet thee Timon.
I thanke them,
And would ſend them backe the plague,
Could I but catch it for them.
O forget
What we are ſorry for our ſelues in thee:
The Senators, with one conſent of loue,
Intreate thee backe to Athens, who haue thought
On ſpeciall Dignities, which vacant lye
For thy beſt vſe and wearing.
They confeſſe
Toward thee, forgetfulneſſe too generall groſſe;
Which now the publike Body, which doth ſildome
Play the re-canter, feeling in it ſelfe
A lacke of Timons ayde, hath ſince withall
Of it owne fall, reſtraining ayde to Timon,
And ſend forth vs, to make their ſorrowed render,
Together, with a recompence more fruitfull
Then their offence can weigh downe by the Dramme,
I euen ſuch heapes and ſummes of Loue and Wealth,
As ſhall to thee blot out, what wrongs were theirs,
And write in thee the figures of their loue,
Eu to read them thine.
You witch me in it;
Surprize me to the very brinke of teares;
Lend me a Fooles heart, and a womans eyes,
And Ile be weepe theſe comforts, worthy Senators.
Therefore ſo pleaſe thee to returne with vs,
And of our Athens, thine and ours to take
The Captainſhip, thou ſhalt be met with thankes,
Allowed with abſolute power, and thy good name
Liue with Authoritie: ſo ſoone we ſhall driue backe
Of Alcibiades th' approaches wild,
Who like a Bore too ſauage, doth root vp
His Countries peace.
And ſhakes his threatning Sword
Againſt the walles of Athens.
Therefore Timon.
Well ſir, I will: therefore I will ſir thus:
If Alcibiades kill my Countrymen,
Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,
That Timon cares not. But if he ſacke faire Athens,
And take our goodly aged men by' th' Beards,
Giuing our holy Virgins to the ſtaine
Of contumelious, beaſtly, mad-brain'd warre:
Then let him know, and tell him Timon ſpeakes it,
In pitty of our aged, and our youth,
I cannot chooſe but tell him that I care not,
And let him tak't at worſt: For their Kniues care not,
While you haue throats to anſwer. For my ſelfe,
There's not a whittle, in th' vnruly Campe,
But I do prize it at my loue, before
The reuerends Throat in Athens. So I leaue you
To the protection of the proſperous Gods,
As Theeues to Keepers.
Stay not, all's in vaine.
Why I was writing of my Epitaph,
It will be ſeene to morrow. My long ſickneſſe
Of Health, and Liuing, now begins to mend,
And nothing brings me all things. Go, liue ſtill,
Be Alcibiades your plague; you his,
And laſt ſo long enough.
We ſpeake in vaine.
But yet I loue my Country, and am not
One that reioyces in the common wracke,
As common bruite doth put it.
That's well ſpoke.
Commend me to my louing Countreymen.
Theſe words become your lippes as they paſſe thorow them.
And enter in our eares, like great Triumphers
In their applauding gates.
Commend me to them,
And tell them, that to eaſe them of their greefes,
Their feares of Hoſtile ſtrokes, their Aches loſſes,
Their pangs of Loue, with other incident throwes
That Natures fragile Veſſell doth ſuſtaine
In lifes vncertaine voyage, I will ſome kindnes do them,
Ile teach them to preuent wilde Alcibiades wrath.
I like this well, he will returne againe.
I haue a Tree which growes heere in my Cloſe,
That mine owne vſe inuites me to cut downe,
And ſhortly muſt I fell it. Tell my Friends,
Tell Athens, in the ſequence of degree,
From high to low throughout, that who ſo pleaſe
To ſtop Affliction, let him take his haſte;
Come hither ere my Tree hath felt the Axe,
And hang himſelfe. I pray you do my greeting.
Trouble him no further, thus you ſtill ſhall Finde him.
Come not to me againe, but ſay to Athens,
Timon hath made his euerlaſting Manſion
Vpon the Beached Verge of the ſalt Flood,
Who once a day with his emboſſed Froth▪
The turbulent Surge ſhall couer; thither come,
And let my graue-ſtone be your Oracle:
Lippes, let foure words go by, and Language end:
What is amiſſe, Plague and Infection mend.
Graues onely be mens workes, and Death their gaine;
Sunne, hide thy Beames, Timon hath done his Raigne.
His diſcontents are vnremoueably coupled to Nature.
Our hope in him is dead: let vs returne,
And ſtraine what other meanes is left vnto vs
In our deere perill.
It requires ſwift foot.
Thou haſt painfully diſcouer'd: are his Files
As full as thy report?
I haue ſpoke the leaſt.
Beſides his expedition promiſes preſent approach.
We ſtand much hazard, if they bring not Timon.
I met a Currier, one mine ancient Friend,
Whom though in generall part we were oppos'd,
Yet our old loue made a particular force,
And made vs ſpeake like Friends. This man was riding
From Alcibiades to Timons Caue,
With Letters of intreaty, which imported
His Fellowſhip i' th' cauſe againſt your City,
In part for his ſake mou'd.
Heere come our Brothers.
No talke of Timon, nothing of him expect,
The Enemies Drumme is heard, and fearefull ſcouring
Doth choake the ayre with duſt: In, and prepare,
Ours is the fall I feare, our Foes the Snare.
By all deſcription this ſhould be the place.
Whoſe heere? Speake hoa. No anſwer? What is this?
Tymon is dead, who hath out-ſtretcht his ſpan,
Some Beaſt reade this; There do's not liue a Man.
Dead ſure, and this his Graue, what's on this Tomb,
I cannot read: the Charracter Ile take with wax,
Our Captaine hath in euery Figure skill;
An ag'd Interpreter, though yong in dayes:
Before proud Athens hee's ſet downe by this,
Whoſe fall the marke of his Ambition is.
Sound to this Coward, and laſciuious Towne,
Our terrible approach.
Till now you haue gone on, and fill'd the time
With all Licentious meaſure, making your willes
The ſcope of Iuſtice. Till now, my ſelfe and ſuch
As ſlept within the ſhadow of your power
Haue wander'd with our trauerſt Armes, and breath'd
Our ſufferance vainly: Now the time is fluſh,
When crouching Marrow in the bearer ſtrong
Cries (of it ſelfe) no more; Now breathleſſe wrong,
Shall ſit and pant in your great Chaires of eaſe,
And purſie Inſolence ſhall breake his winde
With feare and horrid flight.
Noble, and young;
When thy firſt greefes were but a meere conceit,
Ere thou had'ſt power, or we had cauſe of feare,
We ſent to thee, to giue thy rages Balme,
To wipe out our Ingratitude, with Loues
Aboue their quantitie.
So did we wooe
Transformed Timon, to our Citties loue
By humble Meſſage, and by promiſt meanes:
We were not all vnkinde, nor all deſerue
The common ſtroke of warre.
Theſe walles of ours,
Were not erected by rheir hands, from whom
You haue receyu'd your greefe: Nor are they ſuch,
That theſe great Towres, Trophees, & Schools ſhold fall
For priuate faults in them.
Nor are they liuing
Who were the motiues that you firſt went out,
(Shame that they wanted, cunning in exceſſe)
Hath broke their hearts. March, Noble Lord,
Into our City with thy Banners ſpred,
By decimation and a tythed death;
If thy Reuenges hunger for that Food
Which Nature loathes, take thou the deſtin'd tenth,
And by the hazard of the ſpotted dye,
Let dye the ſpotted.
All haue not offended:
For thoſe that were, it is not ſquare to take
On thoſe that are, Reuenge: Crimes, like Lands
Are not inherited, then deere Countryman,
Bring in thy rankes, but leaue without thy rage,
Spare thy Athenian Cradle, and thoſe Kin
Which in the bluſter of thy wrath muſt fall
With thoſe that haue offended, like a Shepheard,
Approach the Fold, and cull th' infected forth,
But kill not altogether.
What thou wilt,
Thou rather ſhalt inforce it with thy ſmile,
Then hew too't, with thy Sword.
Set but thy foot
Againſt our rampyr'd gates, and they ſhall ope:
So thou wilt ſend thy gentle heart before,
To ſay thou't enter Friendly.
Throw thy Gloue,
Or any Token of thine Honour elſe,
That thou wilt vſe the warres as thy redreſſe,
And not as our Confuſion: All thy Powers
Shall make their harbour in our Towne, till wee
Haue ſeal'd thy full deſire.
Then there's my Gloue,
Defend and open your vncharged Ports,
Thoſe Enemies of Timons, and mine owne
Whom you your ſelues ſhall ſet out for reproofe,
Fall and no more; and to attone your feares
With my more Noble meaning, not a man
Shall paſſe his quarter, or offend the ſtreame
Of Regular Iuſtice in your Citties bounds,
But ſhall be remedied to your publique Lawes
At heauieſt anſwer.
'Tis moſt Nobly ſpoken.
Deſcend, and keepe your words.
My Noble Generall, Timon is dead,
Entomb'd vpon the very hemme o' th' Sea,
And on his Graueſtone, this Inſculpture which
With wax I brought away: whoſe ſoft Impreſſion
Interprets for my poore ignorance.
Heere lies a wretched Coarſe, of wretched Soule bereft,
Seek not my name: A Plague conſume you, wicked Caitifs left:
Heere lye I Timon, who aliue, all liuing men did hate,
Paſſe by, and curſe thy fill, but paſſe and ſtay not here thy gate.
Theſe well expreſſe in thee thy latter ſpirits:
Though thou abhorrd'ſt in vs our humane griefes.
Scornd'ſt our Braines flow, and thoſe our droplets, which
From niggard Nature fall; yet Rich Conceit
Taught thee to make vaſt Neptune weepe for aye
On thy low Graue, on faults forgiuen. Dead
Is Noble Timon, of whoſe Memorie
Heereafter more. Bring me into your Citie,
And I will vſe the Oliue, with my Sword:
Make war breed peace; make peace ſtint war, make each
Preſcribe to other, as each others Leach.
Let our Drummes ſtrike.