HEnce: home you idle Creatures, get you home:
Is this a Holiday? What, know you not
(Being Mechanicall) you ought not walke
Vpon a labouring day, without the ſigne
Of your Profeſſion? Speake, what Trade art thou?
Why Sir, a Carpenter.
Where is thy Leather Apron, and thy Rule?
What doſt thou with thy beſt Apparrell on?
You ſir, what Trade are you?
Truely Sir, in reſpect of a fine Workman, I am but as you would ſay, a Cobler.
But what Trade art thou? Anſwer me directly.
A Trade Sir, that I hope I may vſe, with a ſafe Conſcience, which is indeed Sir, a Mender of bad ſoules.
What Trade thou knaue? Thou naughty knaue, what Trade?
Nay I beſeech you Sir, be not out with me: yet if you be out Sir, I can mend you.
What mean'ſt thou by that? Mend mee, thou ſawcy Fellow?
Why ſir, Cobble you.
Thou art a Cobler, art thou?
Truly ſir, all that I liue by, is with the Aule: I meddle with no Tradeſmans matters, nor womens matters; but withal I am indeed Sir, a Surgeon to old ſhooes: when they are in great danger, I recouer them. As proper men as euer trod vpon Neats Leather, haue gone vpon my handy-worke.
But wherefore art not in thy Shop to day?
Why do'ſt thou leade theſe men about the ſtreets?
Truly ſir, to weare out their ſhooes, to get my ſelfe into more worke. But indeede ſir, we make Holyday to ſee Caeſar, and to reioyce in his Triumph.
Wherefore reioyce?
What Conqueſt brings he home?
What Tributaries follow him to Rome,
To grace in Captiue bonds his Chariot Wheeles?
You Blockes, you ſtones, you worſe then ſenſleſſe things:
O you hard hearts, you cruell men of Rome,
Knew you not Pompey many a time and oft?
Haue you climb'd vp to Walles and Battlements,
To Towres and Windowes? Yea, to Chimney tops,
Your Infants in your Armes, and there haue ſate
The liue-long day, with patient expectation,
To ſee great Pompey paſſe the ſtreets of Rome:
And when you ſaw his Chariot but appeare,
Haue you not made an Vniuerſall ſhout,
That Tyber trembled vnderneath her bankes
To heare the replication of your ſounds,
Made in her Concaue Shores?
And do you now put on your beſt attyre?
And do you now cull out a Holyday?
And do you now ſtrew Flowers in his way,
That comes in Triumph ouer Pompeyes blood?
Be gone,
Runne to your houſes, fall vpon your knees,
Pray to the Gods to intermit the plague
That needs muſt light on this Ingratitude.
Go, go, good Countrymen, and for this fault
Aſſemble all the poore men of your ſort;
Draw them to Tyber bankes, and weepe your teares
Into the Channell, till the loweſt ſtreame
Do kiſſe the moſt exalted Shores of all.
See where their baſeſt mettle be not mou'd,
They vaniſh tongue-tyed in their guiltineſſe:
Go you downe that way towards the Capitoll,
This way will I: Diſrobe the Images,
If you do finde them deckt with Ceremonies.
May we do ſo?
You know it is the Feaſt of Lupercall.
It is no matter, let no Images
Be hung with Caeſars Trophees: Ile about,
And driue away the Vulgar from the ſtreets;
So do you too, where you perceiue them thicke.
Theſe growing Feathers, pluckt from Caeſars wing,
Will make him flye an ordinary pitch,
Who elſe would ſoare aboue the view of men,
And keepe vs all in ſeruile fearefulneſſe.
Calphurnia.
Peace ho, Caeſar ſpeakes.
Calphurnia.
Heere my Lord.
Stand you directly in Antonio's way,
When he doth run his courſe. Antonio.
Caeſar, my Lord.
Forget not in your ſpeed Antonio,
To touch Calphurnia: for our Elders ſay,
The Barren touched in this holy chace,
Shake off their ſterrile curſe.
I ſhall remember,
When Caeſar ſayes, Do this; it is perform'd.
Set on, and leaue no Ceremony out.
Caeſar.
Ha? Who calles?
Bid euery noyſe be ſtill: peace yet againe.
Who is it in the preſſe, that calles on me?
I heare a Tongue ſhriller then all the Muſicke
Cry, Caeſar: Speake, Caeſar is turn'd to heare.
Beware the Ides of March.
What man is that?
A Sooth-ſayer bids you beware the Ides of March
Set him before me, let me ſee his face.
Fellow, come from the throng, look vpon Caeſar.
What ſayſt thou to me now? Speake once againe.
Beware the Ides of March.
He is a Dreamer, let vs leaue him: Paſſe.
Will you go ſee the order of the courſe?
Not I.
I pray you do.
I am not Gameſom: I do lacke ſome part
Of that quicke Spirit that is in Antony:
Let me not hinder Caſſius your deſires;
Ile leaue you.
Brutus, I do obſerue you now of late:
I haue not from your eyes, that gentleneſſe
And ſhew of Loue, as I was wont to haue:
You beare too ſtubborne, and too ſtrange a hand
Ouer your Friend, that loues you.
Caſſius,
Be not deceiu'd: If I haue veyl'd my looke,
I turne the trouble of my Countenance
Meerely vpon my ſelfe. Vexed I am
Of late, with paſſions of ſome difference,
Conceptions onely proper to my ſelfe,
Which giue ſome ſoyle (perhaps) to my Behauiours:
But let not therefore my good Friends be greeu'd
(Among which number Caſſius be you one)
Nor conſtrue any further my neglect,
Then that poore Brutus with himſelfe at warre,
Forgets the ſhewes of Loue to other men.
Then Brutus, I haue much miſtook your paſſion,
By meanes whereof, this Breſt of mine hath buried
Thoughts of great value, worthy Cogitations.
Tell me good Brutus, Can you ſee your face?
No Caſſius:
For the eye ſees not it ſelfe but by reflection,
By ſome other things.
'Tis iuſt,
And it is very much lamented Brutus,
That you haue no ſuch Mirrors, as will turne
Your hidden worthineſſe into your eye,
That you might ſee your ſhadow:
I haue heard,
Where many of the beſt reſpect in Rome,
(Except immortall Caeſar) ſpeaking of Brutus,
And groaning vnderneath this Ages yoake,
Haue wiſh'd, that Noble Brutus had his eyes.
Into what dangers, would you
Leade me Caſſius?
That you would haue me ſeeke into my ſelfe,
For that which is not in me?
Therefore good Brutus, be prepar'd to heare:
And ſince you know, you cannot ſee your ſelfe
So well as by Reflection; I your Glaſſe,
Will modeſtly diſcouer to your ſelfe
That of your ſelfe, which you yet know not of.
And be not iealous on me, gentle Brutus:
Were I a common Laughter, or did vſe
To ſtale with ordinary Oathes my loue
To euery new Proteſter: if you know,
That I do fawne on men, and hugge them hard,
And after ſcandall them: Or if you know,
That I profeſſe my ſelfe in Banquetting
To all the Rout, then hold me dangerous.
What meanes this Showting?
I do feare, the People chooſe Caeſar
For their King.
I, do you feare it?
Then muſt I thinke you would not haue it ſo.
I would not Caſſius, yet I loue him well:
But wherefore do you hold me heere ſo long?
What is it, that you would impart to me?
If it be ought toward the generall good,
Set Honor in one eye, and Death i' th other,
And I will looke on both indifferently:
For let the Gods ſo ſpeed mee, as I loue
The name of Honor, more then I feare death.
I know that vertue to be in you Brutus,
As well as I do know your outward fauour.
Well, Honor is the ſubiect of my Story:
I cannot tell, what you and other men
Thinke of this life: But for my ſingle ſelfe,
I had as liefe not be, as liue to be▪
In awe of ſuch a Thing, as I my ſelfe.
I was borne free as Caeſar, ſo were you,
We both haue fed as well, and we can both
Endure the Winters cold, as well as hee.
For once, vpon a Rawe and Guſtie day,
The troubled Tyber, chaſing with her Shores,
Caeſar ſaide to me, Dar'ſt thou Caſſius now
Leape in with me into this angry Flood,
And ſwim to yonder Point? Vpon the word,
Accoutred as I was, I plunged in,
And bad him follow: ſo indeed he did.
The Torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it
With luſty Sinewes, throwing it aſide,
And ſtemming it with hearts of Controuerſie.
But ere we could arriue the Point propos'd,
Caeſar cride, Helpe me Caſſius, or I ſinke.
I (as Aeneas, our great Anceſtor,
Did from the Flames of Troy, vpon his ſhoulder
The old Anchyſes beare) ſo, from the waues of Tyber
Did I the tyred Caeſar: And this Man,
Is now become a God, and Caſſius is
A wretched Creature, and muſt bend his body,
If Caeſar careleſly but nod on him.
He had a Feauer when he was in Spaine,
And when the Fit was on him, I did marke
How he did ſhake: Tis true, this God did ſhake,
His Coward lippes did from their colour flye,
And that ſame Eye, whoſe bend doth awe the World,
Did looſe his Luſtre: I did heare him grone:
I, and that Tongue of his, that bad the Romans
Marke him, and write his Speeches in their Bookes,
Alas, it cried, Giue me ſome drinke Titinius,
As a ſicke Girle: Ye Gods, it doth amaze me,
A man of ſuch a feeble temper ſhould
So get the ſtart of the Maieſticke world,
And beare the Palme alone.
Another generall ſhout?
I do beleeue, that theſe applauſes are
For ſome new Honors, that are heap'd on Caeſar.
Why man, he doth beſtride the narrow world
Like a Coloſſus, and we petty men
Walke vnder his huge legges, and peepe about
To finde our ſelues diſhonourable Graues.
Men at ſometime, are Maſters of their Fates.
The fault (deere Brutus) is not in our Starres,
But in our Selues, that we are vnderlings.
Brutus and Caeſar: What ſhould be in that Caeſar?
Why ſhould that name be ſounded more then yours?
Write them together: Yours, is as faire a Name:
Sound them, it doth become the mouth aſwell:
Weigh them, it is as heauy: Coniure with 'em,
Brutus will ſtart a Spirit as ſoone as Caeſar.
Now in the names of all the Gods at once,
Vpon what meate doth this our Caeſar feede,
That he is growne ſo great? Age, thou art ſham'd.
Rome, thou haſt loſt the breed of Noble Bloods.
When went there by an Age, ſince the great Flood,
But it was fam'd with more then with one man?
When could they ſay (till now) that talk'd of Rome,
That her wide Walkes incompaſt but one man?
Now is it Rome indeed, and Roome enough
When there is in it but one onely man.
O! you and I, haue heard our Fathers ſay,
There was a Brutus once, that would haue brook'd
Th' eternall Diuell to keepe his State in Rome,
As eaſily as a King.
That you do loue me, I am nothing iealous:
What you would worke me too, I haue ſome ayme:
How I haue thought of this, and of theſe times
I ſhall recount heereafter. For this preſent,
I would not ſo (with loue I might intreat you)
Be any further moou'd: What you haue ſaid,
I will conſider: what you haue to ſay
I will with patience heare; and finde a time
Both meete to heare, and anſwer ſuch high things.
Till then, my Noble Friend, chew vpon this:
Brutus had rather be a Villager,
Then to repute himſelfe a Sonne of Rome
Vnder theſe hard Conditions, as this time
Is like to lay vpon vs.
I am glad that my weake words
Haue ſtrucke but thus much ſhew of fire from Brutus.
The Games are done,
And Caeſar is returning.
As they paſſe by▪
Plucke Caska by the Sleeue,
And he will (after his ſowre faſhion) tell you
What hath proceeded worthy note to day.
I will do ſo: but looke you Caſſius,
The angry ſpot doth glow on Caeſars brow,
And all the reſt looke like a chiden Traine;
Calphurni Cheek is pale, and Cicero
Lookes with ſuch er ▪ and ſuch fiery eyes
As we haue ſeene him in the Capitoll
Being croſt in Conference, by ſome Senators.
Caska will tell vs what the matter is.
Antonio.
Caeſar.
Let me haue men about me, that are fat,
Sleeke-headed men, and ſuch as ſleepe a-nights:
Yond Caſſius has a leane and hungry looke,
He thinkes too much: ſuch men are dangerous.
Feare him not Caeſar, he's not dangerous,
He is a Noble Roman, and well giuen.
Would he were fatter; But I feare him not:
Yet if my name were lyable to feare,
I do not know the man I ſhould auoyd
So ſoone as that ſpare Caſſius. He reades much,
He is a great Obſeruer, and he lookes
Quite through the Deeds of men. He loues no Playes,
As thou doſt Antony: he heares no Muſicke;
Seldome he ſmiles, and ſmiles in ſuch a ſort
As if he mock'd himſelfe, and ſcorn'd his ſpirit
That could be mou'd to ſmile at any thing.
Such men as he, be neuer at hearts eaſe,
Whiles they behold a greater then themſelues,
And therefore are they very dangerous.
I rather tell thee what is to be fear'd,
Then what I feare: for alwayes I am Caeſar.
Come on my right hand, for this eare is deafe,
And tell me truely, what thou think'ſt of him.
You pul'd me by the cloake, would you ſpeake with me?
I Caska, tell vs what hath chanc'd to day
That Caeſar lookes ſo ſad.
Why you were with him, were you not?
I ſhould not then aske Caska what had chanc'd.
Why there was a Crowne offer'd him; & being offer'd him, he put it by with the backe of his hand thus, and then the people fell a ſhouting.
What was the ſecond noyſe for?
Why for that too.
They ſhouted thrice: what was the laſt cry for?
Why for that too.
Was the Crowne offer'd him thrice?
I marry was't, and hee put it by thrice, euerie time gentler then other; and at euery putting by, mine honeſt Neighbors ſhowted.
Who offer'd him the Crowne?
Why Antony.
Tell vs the manner of it, gentle Caska.
I can as well bee hang'd as tell the manner of it: It was meere Foolerie, I did not marke it. I ſawe Marke Antony offer him a Crowne, yet 'twas not a Crowne neyther, 'twas one of theſe Coronets: and as I told you, hee put it by once: but for all that, to my thinking, he would faine haue had it. Then hee offered it to him againe: then hee put it by againe: but to my thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it. And then he offered it the third time; hee put it the third time by, and ſtill as hee refus'd it, the rabblement howted, and clapp'd their chopt hands, and threw vppe their ſweatie Night-cappes, and vttered ſuch a deale of ſtinking breath, becauſe Caeſar refus'd the Crowne, that it had (almoſt) choaked Caeſar: for hee ſwoonded, and fell downe at it: And for mine owne part, I durſt not laugh, for feare of opening my Lippes, and receyuing the bad Ayre.
But ſoft I pray you: what, did Caeſar ſwound?
He fell downe in the Market-place, and foam'd at mouth, and was ſpeechleſſe.
'Tis very like he hath the Falling ſickneſſe.
No, Caeſar hath it not: but you, and I,
And honeſt Caska, we haue the Falling ſickneſſe.
I know not what you meane by that, but I am ſure Caeſar fell downe. If the tag-ragge people did not clap him, and hiſſe him, according as he pleas'd, and diſpleas'd them, as they vſe to doe the Players in the Theatre, I am no true man.
What ſaid he, when he came vnto himſelfe?
Marry, before he fell downe, when he perceiu'd the common Heard was glad he refus'd the Crowne, he pluckt me ope his Doublet, and offer'd them his Throat to cut: and I had beene a man of any Occupation, if I would not haue taken him at a word, I would I might goe to Hell among the Rogues, and ſo hee fell. When he came to himſelfe againe, hee ſaid, If hee had done, or ſaid any thing amiſſe, he deſir'd their Worſhips to thinke it was his infirmitie. Three or foure Wenches where I ſtood, cryed, Alaſſe good Soule, and forgaue him with all their hearts: But there's no heed to be taken of them; if Caeſar had ſtab'd their Mothers, they would haue done no leſſe.
And after that, he came thus ſad away.
I.
Did Cicero ſay any thing?
I, he ſpoke Greeke.
To what effect?
Nay, and I tell you that, Ile ne're looke you i' th' face againe. But thoſe that vnderſtood him, ſmil'd at one another, and ſhooke their heads: but for mine owne part, it was Greeke to me. I could tell you more newes too: Murrellus and Flauius, for pulling Scarffes off Caeſars Images, are put to ſilence. Fare you well. There was more Foolerie yet, if I could remember it.
Will you ſuppe with me to Night, Caska?
No, I am promis'd forth.
Will you Dine with me to morrow?
I, if I be aliue, and your minde hold, and your
Dinner worth the eating.
Good, I will expect you.
Doe ſo: farewell both.
What a blunt fellow is this growne to be?
He was quick Mettle, when he went to Schoole.
So is he now, in execution
Of any bold, or Noble Enterprize,
How-euer he puts on this tardie forme:
This Rudeneſſe is a Sawce to his good Wit,
Which giues men ſtomacke to diſgeſt his words
With better Appetite.
And ſo it is:
For this time I will leaue you:
To morrow, if you pleaſe to ſpeake with me,
I will come home to you or if you will,
Come home to me, and I will wait for you.
I will doe ſo: till then, thinke of the World.
Well Brutus, thou art Noble: yet I ſee,
Thy Honorable Mettle may be wrought
From that it is diſpos'd▪ therefore it is meet,
That Noble mindes keepe euer with their likes:
For who ſo firme, that cannot be ſeduc'd?
Caeſar doth beare me hard, but he loues Brutus.
If I were Brutus now, and he were Caſſius,
He ſhould not humor me. I will this Night,
In ſeuerall Hands, in at his Windowes throw,
As if they came from ſeuerall Citizens,
Writings, all tending to the great opinion
That Rome holds of his Name: wherein obſcurely
Caeſars Ambition ſhall be glanced at.
And after this, let Caeſar ſeat him ſure,
For wee will ſhake him, or worſe dayes endure.
Good euen, Caska: brought you Caeſar home?
Why are you breathleſſe, and why ſtare you ſo?
Are not you mou'd, when all the ſway of Earth
Shakes, like a thing vnfirme? O Cicero,
I haue ſeene Tempeſts, when the ſcolding Winds
Haue riu'd the knottie Oakes, and I haue ſeene
Th' ambitious Ocean ſwell, and rage and foame,
To be exalted with the threatning Clouds:
But neuer till to Night, neuer till now,
Did I goe through a Tempeſt-dropping-fire.
Eyther there is a Ciuill ſtrife in Heauen,
Or elſe the World, too ſawcie with the Gods,
Incenſes them to ſend deſtruction.
Why, ſaw you any thing more wonderfull?
A common ſlaue, you know him well by ſight,
Held vp his left Hand, which did flame and burne
Like twentie Torches ioyn'd; and yet his Hand,
Not ſenſible of fire, remain'd vnſcorch'd.
Beſides, I ha'not ſince put vp my Sword,
Againſt the Capitoll I met a Lyon,
Who glaz'd vpon me, and went ſurly by,
Without annoying me. And there were drawne
Vpon a heape, a hundred gaſtly Women,
Transformed with their feare, who ſwore, they ſaw
Men, all in fire, walke vp and downe the ſtreetes.
And yeſterday, the Bird of Night did ſit.
Euen at Noone-day, vpon the Market place,
Howting, and ſhreeking. When theſe Prodigies
Doe ſo conioyntly meet, let not men ſay,
Theſe are their Reaſons, they are Naturall:
For I beleeue, they are portentous things
Vnto the Clymate, that they point vpon.
Indeed, it is a ſtrange diſpoſed time:
But men may conſtrue things after their faſhion,
Cleane from the purpoſe of the things themſelues.
Comes Caeſar to the Capitoll to morrow?
He doth: for he did bid Antonio
Send word to you, he would be there to morrow.
Good-night then, Caska:
This diſturbed Skie is not walke in.
Farewell Cicero.
Who's there?
A Romane▪
Caska▪ by your Voyce.
Your Eare is good.
Caſſius, what Night is this?
A very pleaſing Night ſen▪
Who euer knew the Heauens menace ſo?
Thoſe that haue knowne the Earth ſo full of faults.
For my part, I haue walk'd about the ſtreets,
Submitting me vnto the perillous Night;
And thus vnbraced, Caska, as you ſee,
Haue bar'd my Boſome to the Thunder-ſtone:
And when the croſſe blew Lightning ſeem'd to open
The Breſt of Heauen, I did preſent my ſelfe
Euen in the ayme, and very flaſh of it.
But wherefore did you ſo much tempt the Heauens?
It is the part of men, to feare and tremble,
When the moſt mightie Gods, by tokens ſend
Such dreadfull Heraulds, to aſtoniſh vs.
You are dull, Caska:
And thoſe ſparkes of Life, that ſhould be in a Roman,
You doe want, or elſe you vſe not.
You looke pale, and gaze, and put on feare,
And caſt your ſelfe in wonder,
To ſee the ſtrange impatience of the Heauens:
But if you would conſider the true cauſe,
Why all theſe Fires, why all theſe gliding Ghoſts,
Why Birds and Beaſts, from qualitie and kinde,
Why Old men, Fooles, and Children calculate,
Why all theſe things change from their Ordinance,
Their Natures, and pre-formed Faculties,
To monſtrous qualitie; why you ſhall finde,
That Heauen hath infus'd them with theſe Spirits,
To make them Inſtruments of feare, and warning,
Vnto ſome monſtrous State.
Now could I (Caska) name to thee a man,
Moſt like this dreadfull Night,
That Thunders, Lightens, opens Graues, and roares,
As doth the Lyon in the Capitoll:
A man no mightier then thy ſelfe, or me,
In perſonall action; yet prodigious growne,
And fearefull, as theſe ſtrange eruptions are.
'Tis Caeſar that you meane:
It is not, Caſſius?
Let it be who it is: for Romans now
Haue Thewes, and Limbes, like to their Anceſtors;
But woe the while, our Fathers mindes are dead,
And we are gouern'd with our Mothers ſpirits,
Our yoake, and ſufferance, ſhew vs Womaniſh.
Indeed, they ſay, the Senators to morrow
Meane to eſtabliſh Caeſar as a King:
And he ſhall weare his Crowne by Sea, and Land,
In euery place, ſaue here in Italy.
I know where I will weare this Dagger then;
Caſſius from Bondage will deliuer Caſſius:
Therein, yee Gods, you make the weake moſt ſtrong;
Therein, yee Gods, you Tyrants doe defeat.
Nor Stonie Tower, nor Walls of beaten Braſſe,
Nor ayre-leſſe Dungeon, nor ſtrong Linkes of Iron,
Can be retentiue to the ſtrength of ſpirit:
But Life being wearie of theſe worldly Barres,
Neuer lacks power to diſmiſſe it ſelfe.
If I know this, know all the World beſides,
That part of Tyrannie that I doe beare,
I can ſhake off at pleaſure.
So can I:
So euery Bond-man in his owne hand beares
The power to cancell his Captiuitie.
And why ſhould Caeſar be a Tyrant then?
Poore man, I know he would not be a Wolfe,
But that he ſees the Romans are but Sheepe:
He were no Lyon, were not Romans Hindes.
Thoſe that with haſte will make a mightie fire,
Begin it with weake Strawes. What traſh is Rome?
What Rubbiſh, and what Offall? when it ſerues
For the baſe matter, to illuminate
So vile a thing as Caeſar. But oh Griefe,
Where haſt-thou led me? I (perhaps) ſpeake this
Before a willing Bond-man: then I know
My anſwere muſt be made. But I am arm'd,
And dangers are to me indifferent.
You ſpeake to Caska, and to ſuch a man,
That is no flearing Tell-tale. Hold, my Hand:
Be factious for redreſſe of all theſe Griefes,
And I will ſet this foot of mine as farre,
As who goes fartheſt.
There's a Bargaine made.
Now know you, Caska, I haue mou'd already
Some certaine of the Nobleſt minded Romans
To vnder-goe, with me, an Enterprize,
Of Honorable dangerous conſequence;
And I doe know by this, they ſtay for me
In Pompeyes Porch: for now this fearefull Night,
There is no ſtirre, or walking in the ſtreetes;
And the Complexion of the Element
Is Fauors, like the Worke we haue in hand,
Moſt bloodie, fierie, and moſt terrible.
Stand cloſe a while, for heere comes one in haſte.
'Tis Cinna, I doe know him by his Gate,
He is a friend. Cinna, where haſte you ſo?
To finde out you: Who's that, Metellus Cymber?
No, it is Caska, one incorporate
To our Attempts. Am I not ſtay'd for, Cinna?
I am glad on't.
What a fearefull Night is this?
There's two or three of vs haue ſeene ſtrange ſights.
Am I not ſtay'd for? tell me.
Yes, you are. O Caſſius,
If you could but winne the Noble Brutus
To our party—
Be you content. Good Cinna, take this Paper,
And looke you lay it in the Pretors Chayre,
Where Brutus may but finde it: and throw this
In at his Window; ſet this vp with Waxe
Vpon old Brutus Statue: all this done,
Repaire to Pompeyes Porch, where you ſhall finde vs.
Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
All, but Metellus Cymber, and hee's gone
To ſeeke you at your houſe. Well, I will hie,
And ſo beſtow theſe Papers as you bad me.
That done, repayre to Pompeyes Theater.
Come Caska, you and I will yet, ere day,
See Brutus at his houſe: three parts of him
Is ours alreadie, and the man entire
Vpon the next encounter, yeelds him ours.
O, he ſits high in all the Peoples hearts:
And that which would appeare Offence in vs,
His Countenance, like richeſt Alchymie,
Will change to Vertue, and to Worthineſſe.
Him, and his worth, and our great need of him,
You haue right well conceited: let vs goe,
For it is after Mid-night, and ere day,
We will awake him, and be ſure of him.
What Lucius, hoe?
I cannot, by the progreſſe of the Starres,
Giue gueſſe how neere to day—Lucius, I ſay?
I would it were my fault to ſleepe ſo ſoundly.
When Lucius, when? awake, I ſay: what Lucius?
Call'd you, my Lord?
Get me a Tapor in my Study, Lucius:
When it is lighted, come and call me here.
I will, my Lord.
It muſt be by his death: and for my part,
I know no perſonall cauſe, to ſpurne at him,
But for the generall. He would be crown'd:
How that might change his nature, there's the queſtion?
It is the bright day, that brings forth the Adder,
And that craues warie walking: Crowne him that,
And then I graunt we put a Sting in him,
That at his will he may doe danger with.
Th' abuſe of Greatneſſe, is, when it dis-ioynes
Remorſe from Power: And to ſpeake truth of Caeſar,
I haue not knowne, when his Affections ſway'd
More then his Reaſon. But 'tis a common proofe,
That Lowlyneſſe is young Ambitions Ladder,
Whereto the Climber vpward turnes his Face:
But when he once attaines the vpmoſt Round,
He then vnto the Ladder turnes his Backe,
Lookes in the Clouds, ſcorning the baſe degrees
By which he did aſcend: ſo Caeſar may;
Then leaſt he may, preuent. And ſince the Quarrell
Will beare no colour, for the thing he is,
Faſhion it thus; that what he is, augmented,
Would runne to theſe, and theſe extremities:
And therefore thinke him as a Serpents egge,
Which hatch'd, would as his kinde grow miſchieuous;
And kill him in the ſhell.
The Taper burneth in your Cloſet, Sir:
Searching the Window for a Flint, I found
This Paper, thus ſeal'd vp, and I am ſure
It did not lye there when I went to Bed.
Get you to Bed againe, it is not day:
Is not to morrow (Boy) the firſt of March?
I know not, Sir.
Looke in the Calender, and bring me word.
I will, Sir.
The exhalations, whizzing in the ayre,
Giue ſo much light, that I may reade by them.
Brutus thou ſleep'ſt; awake, and ſee thy ſelfe:
Shall Rome, &c. ſpeake, ſtrike, redreſſe.
Brutus, thou ſleep'ſt: awake.
Such inſtigations haue beene often dropt,
Where I haue tooke them vp:
Shall Rome, &c. Thus muſt I piece it out:
Shall Rome ſtand vnder one mans awe? What Rome?
My Anceſtors did from the ſtreetes of Rome
The Tarquin driue, when he was call'd a King.
Speake, ſtrike, redreſſe. Am I entreated
To ſpeake, and ſtrike? O Rome, I make thee promiſe,
If the redreſſe will follow, thou receiueſt
Thy full Petition at the hand of Brutus.
Sir, March is waſted fifteene dayes.
'Tis good. Go to the Gate, ſome body knocks:
Since Caſſius firſt did whet me againſt Caeſar,
I haue not ſlept.
Betweene the acting of a dreadfull thing▪
And the firſt motion, all the Interim is
Like a Phantaſma, or a hideous Dreame:
The Genius, and the mortall Inſtruments
Are then in councell; and the ſtate of a man,
Like to a little Kingdome, ſuffers then
The nature of an Inſurrection.
Sir, 'tis your Brother Caſſius at the Doore,
Who doth deſire to ſee you.
Is he alone?
No, Sir, there are moe with him.
Doe you know them?
No, Sir, their Hats are pluckt about their Eares,
And halfe their Faces buried in their Cloakes,
That by no meanes I may diſcouer them,
By any marke of fauour.
Let 'em enter:
They are the Faction. O Conſpiracie,
Sham'ſt thou to ſhew thy dang'rous Brow by Night,
When euills are moſt free? O then, by day
Where wilt thou finde a Cauerne darke enough,
To maske thy monſtrous Viſage? Seek none Conſpiracie,
Hide it in Smiles, and Affabilitie:
For if thou path thy natiue ſemblance on,
Not Erebus it ſelfe were dimme enough,
To hide thee from preuention.
I thinke we are too bold vpon your Reſt:
Good morrow Brutus, doe we trouble you?
I haue beene vp this howre, awake all Night:
Know I theſe men, that come along with you?
Yes, euery man of them; and no man here
But honors you: and euery one doth wiſh,
You had but that opinion of your ſelfe,
Which euery Noble Roman beares of you.
This is Trebonius.
He is welcome hither.
This, Decius Brutus.
He is welcome too.
This, Caska; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus Cymber.
They are all welcome.
What watchfull Cares doe interpoſe themſelues
Betwixt your Eyes, and Night?
Shall I entreat a word?
Here lyes the Eaſt: doth not the Day breake heere?
No.
O pardon, Sir, it doth; and you grey Lines,
That fret the Clouds, are Meſſengers of Day.
You ſhall confeſſe, that you are both deceiu'd:
Heere, as I point my Sword, the Sunne ariſes,
Which is a great way growing on the South,
Weighing the youthfull Seaſon of the yeare.
Some two moneths hence, vp higher toward the North
He firſt preſents his fire, and the high Eaſt
Stands as the Capitoll, directly heere.
Giue me your hands all ouer, one by one.
And let vs ſweare our Reſolution.
No, not an Oath: if not the Face of men,
The ſufferance of our Soules, the times Abuſe;
If theſe be Motiues weake, breake off betimes,
And euery man hence, to his idle bed:
So let high-ſighted-Tyranny range on,
Till each man drop by Lottery. But if theſe
(As I am ſure they do) beare fire enough
To kindle Cowards, and to ſteele with valour
The melting Spirits of women. Then Countrymen,
What neede we any ſpurre, but our owne cauſe,
To pricke vs to redreſſe? What other Bond,
Then ſecret Romans, that haue ſpoke the word,
And will not palter? And what other Oath,
Then Honeſty to Honeſty ingag'd,
That this ſhall be, or we will fall for it.
Sweare Prieſts and Cowards, and men Cautelous
Old feeble Carrions, and ſuch ſuffering Soules
That welcome wrongs: Vnto bad cauſes, ſweare
Such Creatures as men doubt; but do not ſtaine
The euen vertue of our Enterprize,
Nor th' inſuppreſſiue Mettle of our Spirits,
To thinke, that or our Cauſe, or our Performance
Did neede an Oath. When euery drop of blood
That euery Roman beares, and Nobly beares
Is guilty of a ſeuerall Baſtordie,
If he do breake the ſmalleſt Particle
Of any promiſe that hath paſt from him.
But what of Cicero? Shall we ſound him?
I thinke he will ſtand very ſtrong with vs.
Let vs not leaue him out.
No, by no meanes.
O let vs haue him, for his Siluer haires
Will purchaſe vs a good opinion:
And buy mens voyces, to commend our deeds:
It ſhall be ſayd, his iudgement rul'd our hands,
Our youths, and wildeneſſe, ſhall no whit appeare,
But all be buried in his Grauity.
O name him not; let vs not breake with him,
For he will neuer follow any thing
That other men begin.
Then leaue him out.
Indeed, he is not fit.
Shall no man elſe be toucht, but onely Caeſar?
Decius well vrg'd: I thinke it is not meet,
Marke Antony, ſo well belou'd of Caeſar,
Should out-liue Caeſar, we ſhall finde of him
A ſhrew'd Contriuer. And you know, his meanes
If he improue them, may well ſtretch ſo farre
As to annoy vs all: which to preuent,
Let Antony and Caeſar fall together.
Our courſe will ſeeme too bloody, Caius Caſsius,
To cut the Head off, and then hacke the Limbes:
Like Wrath in death, and Enuy afterwards:
For Antony, is but a Limbe of Caeſar.
Let's be Sacrificers, but not Butchers Caius:
We all ſtand vp againſt the ſpirit of Caeſar,
And in the Spirit of men, there is no blood:
O that we then could come by Caeſars Spirit,
And not diſmember Caeſar! But (alas)
Caeſar muſt bleed for it. And gentle Friends,
Let's kill him Boldly, but not Wrathfully:
Let's carue him, as a Diſh fit for the Gods,
Not hew him as a Carkaſſe fit for Hounds:
And let our Hearts, as ſubtle Maſters do,
Stirre vp their Seruants to an acte of Rage,
And after ſeeme to chide 'em. This ſhall make
Our purpoſe Neceſſary, and not Enuious.
Which ſo appearing to the common eyes,
We ſhall be call'd Purgers, not Murderers.
And for Marke Antony, thinke not of him:
For he can do no more then Caeſars Arme,
When Caeſars head is off.
Yet I feare him,
For in the ingrafted loue he beares to Caeſar.
Alas, good Caſsius, do not thinke of him:
If he loue Caeſar, all that he can do
Is to himſelfe; take thought, and dye for Caeſar,
And that were much he ſhould: for he is giuen
To ſports, to wildeneſſe, and much company.
There is no feare in him; let him not dye,
For he will liue, and laugh at this heereafter.
Peace, count the Clocke.
The Clocke hath ſtricken three.
'Tis time to part.
But it is doubtfull yet,
Whether Caeſar will come forth to day, or no:
For he is Superſtitious growne of late,
Quite from the maine Opinion he held once,
Of Fantaſie, of Dreames, and Ceremonies:
It may be, theſe apparant Prodigies,
The vnaccuſtom'd Terror of this night,
And the perſwaſion of his Augurers,
May hold him from the Capitoll to day.
Neuer feare that: If he be ſo reſolu'd,
I can ore-ſway him: For he loues to heare,
That Vnicornes may be betray'd with Trees,
And Beares with Glaſſes, Elephants with Holes,
Lyons with Toyles, and men with Flatterers.
But, when I tell him, he hates Flatterers,
He ſayes, he does; being then moſt flattered.
Let me worke:
For I can giue his humour the true bent;
And I will bring him to the Capitoll.
Nay, we will all of vs, be there to fetch him▪
By the eight houre, is that the vttermoſt?
Be that the vttermoſt, and faile not then.
Caius Ligarius doth beare Caeſar hard,
Who rated him for ſpeaking well of Pompey;
I wonder none of you haue thought of him.
Now good Metellus go along by him:
He loues me well, and I haue giuen him Reaſons,
Send him but hither, and Ile faſhion him.
The morning comes vpon's:
Wee'l leaue you Brutus,
And Friends diſperſe your ſelues; but all remember
What you haue ſaid, and ſhew your ſelues true Romans.
Good Gentlemen, looke freſh and merrily,
Let not our lookes put on our purpoſes,
But beare it as our Roman Actors do,
With vntyr'd Spirits, and formall Conſtancie,
And ſo good morrow to you euery one.
Boy: Lucius: Faſt aſleepe? It is no matter,
Enioy the hony-heauy-Dew of Slumber:
Thou haſt no Figures, nor no Fantaſies,
Which buſie care drawes, in the braines of men;
Therefore thou ſleep'ſt ſo ſound.
Brutus, my Lord.
Portia: What meane you? wherfore riſe you now?
It is not for your health, thus to commit
Your weake condition, to the raw cold morning.
Nor for yours neither. Y' haue vngently Brutus
Stole from my bed: and yeſternight at Supper
You ſodainly aroſe, and walk'd about,
Muſing, and ſighing, with your armes a-croſſe:
And when I ask'd you what the matter was,
You ſtar'd vpon me, with vngentle lookes.
I vrg'd you further, then you ſcratch'd your head,
And too impatiently ſtampt with your foote:
Yet I inſiſted, yet you anſwer'd not,
But with an angry wafter of your hand
Gaue ſigne for me to leaue you: So I did,
Fearing to ſtrengthen that impatience
Which ſeem'd too much inkindled; and withall,
Hoping it was but an effect of Humor,
Which ſometime hath his houre with euery man.
It will not let you eate, nor talke, nor ſleepe;
And could it worke ſo much vpon your ſhape.
As it hath much preuayl'd on your Condtion,
I ſhould not know you Brutus. Deare my Lord,
Make me acquainted with your cauſe of greefe.
I am not well in health, and that is all.
Brutus is wiſe, and were he not in health,
He would embrace the meanes to come by it.
Why ſo I do: good Portia go to bed.
Is Brutus ſicke? And is it Phyſicall
To walke vnbraced, and ſucke vp the humours
Of the danke Morning? What, is Brutus ſicke?
And will he ſteale out of his wholſome bed
To dare the vile contagion of the Night?
And tempt the Rhewmy, and vnpurged Ayre,
To adde vnto hit ſickneſſe? No my Brutus,
You haue ſome ſicke Offence within your minde,
Which by the Right and Vertue of my place
I ought to know of: And vpon my knees,
I charme you, by my once commended Beauty,
By all your vowes of Loue, and that great Vow
Which did incorporate and make vs one,
That you vnfold to me, your ſelfe; your halfe
Why you are heauy: and what men to night
Haue had reſort to you: for heere haue beene
Some ſixe or ſeuen, who did hide their faces
Euen from darkneſſe.
Kneele not gentle Portia.
I ſhould not neede, if you were gentle Brutus.
Within tho Bond of Marriage, tell me Brutus,
Is it excepted, I ſhould know no Secrets
That appertaine to you? Am I your Selfe,
But as it were in ſort, or limitation?
To keepe with you at Meales, comfort your Bed,
And talke to you ſometimes? Dwell I but in the Suburbs
Of your good pleaſure? If it be no more,
Portia is Brutus Harlot, not his Wife.
You are my true and honourable Wife,
As deere to me, as are the ruddy droppes
That viſit my ſad heart.
If this were true, then ſhould I know this ſecret.
I graunt I am a Woman; but withall,
A Woman that Lord Brutus tooke to Wife:
I graunt I am a Woman; but withall,
A Woman well reputed: Cato's Daughter.
Thinke you, I am no ſtronger then my Sex
Being ſo Father'd, and ſo Husbanded?
Tell me your Counſels, I will not diſcloſe 'em:
I haue made ſtrong proofe of my Conſtancie,
Giuing my ſelfe a voluntary wound
Heere, in the Thigh: Can I beare that with patience,
And not my Husbands Secrets?
O ye Gods!
Render me worthy of this Noble Wife.
Harke, harke, one knockes: Portia go in a while,
And by and by thy boſome ſhall partake
The ſecrets of my Heart.
All my engagements, I will conſtrue to thee,
All the Charractery of my ſad browes:
Leaue me with haſt.
Lucius, who's that knockes.
Heere is a ſicke man that would ſpeak with you.
Caius Ligarius, that Metellus ſpake of.
Boy, ſtand aſide. Caius Ligarius, how?
Vouchſafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
O what a time haue you choſe out braue Caius
To weare a Kerchiefe? Would you were not ſicke.
I am not ſicke, if Brutus haue in hand
Any exploit worthy the name of Honor.
Such an exploit haue I in hand Ligarius,
Had you a healthfull eare to heare of it.
By all the Gods that Romans bow before,
I heere diſcard my ſickneſſe. Soule of Rome,
Braue Sonne, deriu'd from Honourable Loines,
Thou like an Exorciſt, haſt coniur'd vp
My mortified Spirit. Now bid me runne,
And I will ſtriue with things impoſſible,
Yea get the better of them. What's to do?
A peece of worke,
That will make ſicke men whole.
But are not ſome whole▪ that we muſt make ſicke?
That muſt we alſo. What it is my Caius,
I ſhall vnfold to thee, as we are going,
To whom it muſt be done.
Set on your foote,
And with a heart new-fir'd, I follow you,
To do I know not what: but it ſufficeth
That Brutus leads me on.
Follow me then.
Nor Heauen, nor Earth,
Haue beene at peace to night:
Thrice hath Calphurnia, in her ſleepe cryed out,
Helpe, ho: They murther Caeſar. Who's within?
My Lord.
Go bid the Prieſts do preſent Sacrifice,
And bring me their opinions of Succeſſe.
I will my Lord.
What mean you Caeſar? Think you to walk forth?
You ſhall not ſtirre out of your houſe to day.
Caeſar ſhall forth; the things that threaten'd me,
Ne're look'd but on my backe: When they ſhall ſee
The face of Caeſar, they are vaniſhed.
Caeſar, I neuer ſtood on Ceremonies,
Yet now they fright me: There is one within,
Beſides the things that we haue heard and ſeene,
Recounts moſt horrid ſights ſeene by the Watch.
A Lionneſſe hath whelped in the ſtreets,
And Graues haue yawn'd, and yeelded vp their dead;
Fierce fiery Warriours fight vpon the Clouds
In Rankes and Squadrons, and right forme of Warre
Which drizel'd blood vpon the Capitoll:
The noiſe of Battell hurtled in the Ayre:
Horſſes do neigh, and dying men did grone,
And Ghoſts did ſhrieke and ſqueale about the ſtreets.
O Caeſar, theſe things are beyond all vſe.
And I do feare them.
What can be auoyded
Whoſe end is purpos'd by the mighty Gods?
Yet Caeſar ſhall go ſorth: for theſe Predictions
Are to the world in generall, as to Caeſar.
When Beggers dye, there are no Comets ſeen,
The Heauens themſelues blaze forth the death of Princes
Cowards dye many times before their deaths,
The valiant neuer taſte of death but once:
Of all the Wonders that I yet haue heard,
It ſeemes to me moſt ſtrange that men ſhould feare,
Seeing that death, a neceſſary end
Will come, when it will come.
What ſay the Augurers?
They would not haue you to ſtirre forth to day.
Plucking the intrailes of an Offering forth,
They could not finde a heart within the beaſt.
The Gods do this in ſhame of Cowardice:
Caeſar ſhould be a Beaſt without a heart
If he ſhould ſtay at home to day ſor feare:
No Caeſar ſhall not; Danger knowes full well
That Caeſar is more dangerous then he.
We heare two Lyons litter'd in one day,
And I the elder and more terrible,
And Caeſar ſhall go foorth.
Alas my Lord,
Your wiſedome is conſum'd in confidence:
Do not go forth to day: Call it my feare,
That keepes you in the houſe, and not your owne.
Wee'l ſend Mark Antony to the Senate houſe,
And he ſhall ſay; you are not well to day:
Let me vpon my knee, preuaile in this.
Mark Antony ſhall ſay I am not well,
And for thy humor, I will ſtay at home.
Heere's Decius Brutus, he ſhall tell them ſo.
Caeſar, all haile: Good morrow worthy Caeſar,
I come to fetch you to the Senate houſe.
And you are come in very happy time,
To beare my greeting to the Senators,
And tell them that I will not come to day:
Cannot, is falſe: and that I dare not, falſer:
I will not come to day, tell them ſo Decius.
Say he is ſicke.
Shall Caeſar ſend a Lye?
Haue I in Conqueſt ſtretcht mine Arme ſo farre,
To be afear'd to tell Gray-beards the truth:
Decius, go tell them, Caeſar will not come.
Moſt mighty Caeſar let me know ſome cauſe,
Leſt I be laught at when I tell them ſo.
The cauſe is in my Will, I will not come,
That is enough to ſatisfie the Senate
But for your priuate ſatisfaction,
Becauſe I loue you, I will let you know.
Calphurnia heere my wife, ſtayes me at home:
She dreampt to night, ſhe ſaw my Statue,
Which like a Fountaine, with an hundred ſpouts
Did run pure blood: and many luſty Romans
Came ſmiling, & did bathe their hands in it:
And theſe does ſhe apply, for warnings and portents,
And euils imminent; and on her knee
Hath begg'd, that I will ſtay at home to day.
This Dreame is all amiſſe interpreted,
It was a viſion, faire and fortunate:
Your Statue ſpouting blood in many pipes,
In which ſo many ſmiling Romans bath'd,
Signifies, that from you great Rome ſhall ſucke
Reuiuing blood, and that great men ſhall preſſe
For Tinctures, Staines, Reliques, and Cogniſance.
This by Calphurnia's Dreame is ſignified.
And this way haue you well expounded it.
I haue, when you haue heard what I can ſay:
And know it now, the Senate haue concluded
To giue this day, a Crowne to mighty Caeſar.
If you ſhall ſend them word you will not come,
Their mindes may change. Beſides, it were a mocke
Apt to be render'd, for ſome one to ſay,
Breake vp the Senate, till another time:
When Caeſars wife ſhall meete with better Dreames.
If Caeſar hide himſelfe, ſhall they not whiſper
Loe Caeſar is affraid?
Pardon me Caeſar, for my deere deere loue
To your proceeding, bids me tell you this:
And reaſon to my loue is liable.
How fooliſh do your fears ſeeme now Calphurnia?
I am aſhamed I did yeeld to them.
Giue me my Robe, for I will go.
And looke where Publius is come to fetch me.
Good morrow Caeſar.
Welcome Publius.
What Brutus, are you ſtirr'd ſo earely too?
Good morrow Caska: Caius Ligarius,
Caeſar was ne're ſo much your enemy,
As that ſame Ague which hath made you leane.
What is't a Clocke?
Caeſar, 'tis ſtrucken eight.
I thanke you for your paines and curteſie.
See, Antony that Reuels long a-nights
Is notwithſtanding vp. Good morrow Antony.
So to moſt Noble Caeſar.
Bid them prepare within:
I am too blame to be thus waited for.
Now Cynna ▪ now Metellus: what Trebonius,
I haue an houres talke in ſtore for you:
Remember that you call on me to day:
Be neere me, that I may remember you.
Caeſar I will: and ſo neere will I be,
That your beſt Friends ſhall wiſh I had beene further.
Good Friends go in, and taſte ſome wine with me
And we (like Friends) will ſtraight way go together.
That euery like is not the ſame, O Caeſar,
The heart of Brutus earnes to thinke vpon.
Caeſar, beware of Brutus, take heede of Caſsius; come not neere Caska, haue an eye to Cynna, truſt not Trebonius, marke well Metellus Cymber, Decius Brutus loues thee not: Thou haſt wrong'd Caius Ligarius. There is but one minde in all theſe men, and it is bent againſt Caeſar: If thou beeſt not Immortall, looke about you: Security giues way to Conſpiracie. The mighty Gods defend thee. Thy Louer, Artemidorus.
Heere will I ſtand, till Caeſar paſſe along,
And as a Sutor will I giue him this:
My heart laments, that Vertue cannot liue
Out of the teeth of Emulation.
If thou reade this, O Caeſar, thou mayeſt liue;
If not, the Fates with Traitors do contriue.
I prythee Boy, run to the Senate-houſe,
Stay not to anſwer me, but get thee gone.
Why doeſt thou ſtay?
To know my errand Madam.
I would haue had thee there and heere agen
Ere I can tell thee what thou ſhould'ſt do there:
O Conſtancie, be ſtrong vpon my ſide,
Set a huge Mountaine 'tweene my Heart and Tongue:
I haue a mans minde, but a womans might:
How hard it is for women to keepe counſell.
Art thou heere yet?
Madam, what ſhould I do?
Run to the Capitoll, and nothing elſe?
And ſo returne to you, and nothing elſe?
Yes, bring me word Boy, if thy Lord look well,
For he went ſickly forth: and take good note
What Caeſar doth, what Sutors preſſe to him.
Hearke Boy, what noyſe is that?
I heare none Madam.
Prythee liſten well:
I heard a buſsling Rumor like a Fray,
And the winde brings it from the Capitoll.
Sooth Madam, I heare nothing.
Come hither Fellow, which way haſt thou bin?
At mine owne houſe, good Lady.
What is't a clocke?
About the ninth houre Lady.
Is Caeſar yet gone to the Capitoll?
Madam not yet, I go to take my ſtand,
To ſee him paſſe on to the Capitoll.
Thou haſt ſome ſuite to Caeſar, haſt thou not?
That I haue Lady, if it will pleaſe Caeſar
To b ſo good to Caeſar, as to heare me:
I ſhall beſeech him to befriend himſelfe.
Why know'ſt thou any harme's intended towards him?
None that I know will be,
Much that I feare may chance:
Good morrow to you, heere the ſtreet is narrow:
The throng that followes Caeſar at the heeles,
Of Senators, of Praetors, common Sutors,
Will crowd a feeble man (almoſt) to death:
Ile get me to a place more voyd, and there
Speake to great Caeſar as he comes along.
I muſt go in:
Aye me! How weake a thing
The heart of woman is? O Brutus,
The Heauens ſpeede thee in thine enterprize.
Sure the Boy heard me▪ Brutus hath a ſuite
That Caeſar will not grant. O, I grow faint:
Run Lucius, and commend me to my Lord,
Say I am merry; Come to me againe,
And bring me word what he doth ſay to thee.
The Ides of March are come.
I Caeſar, but not gone.
Haile Caeſar: Read this Scedule.
Trebonius doth deſire you to ore-read
(At your beſt leyſure) this his humble ſuite.
O Caeſar, reade mine firſt: for mine's a ſuite
That touches Caeſar neerer. Read it great Caeſar.
What touches vs our ſelfe, ſhall be laſt ſeru'd.
Delay not Caeſar, read it inſtantly.
What, is the fellow mad?
Sirra, giue place.
What, vrge you your Petitions in the ſtreet?
Come to the Capitoll.
I wiſh your enterprize to day may thriue.
What enterprize Popillius?
Fare you well.
What ſaid Popillius Lena?
He wiſht to day our enterprize might thriue:
I feare our purpoſe is diſcouered.
Looke how he makes to Caeſar: marke him.
Caska be ſodaine, for we feare preuention.
Brutus what ſhall be done? If this be knowne,
Caſſius or Caeſar neuer ſhall turne backe,
For I will ſlay my ſelfe.
Caſſius be conſtant:
Popillius Lena ſpeakes not of our purpoſes,
For looke he ſmiles, and Caeſar doth not change.
Trebonius knowes his time: for look you Brutus
He drawes Mark Antony out of the way.
Where is Metellus Cimber, let him go,
And preſently preferre his ſuite to Caeſar.
He is addreſt: preſſe neere, and ſecond him.
Caska, you are the firſt that reares your hand.
Are we all ready? What is now amiſſe,
That Caeſar and his Senate muſt redreſſe?
Moſt high, moſt mighty, and moſt puiſant Caeſar
Metellus Cymber throwes before thy Seate
An humble heart.
I muſt preuent thee Cymber:
Theſe couchings, and theſe lowly courteſies
Might fire the blood of ordinary men,
And turne pre-Ordinance, and firſt Decree▪
Into the lane of Children. Be not fond.
To thinke that Caeſar beares ſuch Rebell blood
That will be thaw'd from the true quality
With that which melteth Fooles, I meane ſweet words,
Low-crooked-curtſies, and baſe Spaniell fawning:
Thy Brother by decree is baniſhed:
If thou doeſt bend, and pray, and fawne for him,
I ſpurne thee like a Curre out of my way.
Know, Caeſar doth not wrong, nor without cauſe
Will he be ſatisfied.
Is there no voyce more worthy then my owne,
To ſound more ſweetly in great Caeſars eare,
For the repealing of my baniſh'd Brother?
I kiſſe thy hand, but not in flattery Caeſar:
Deſiring thee, that Publius Cymber may
Haue an immediate freedome of repeale.
What Brutus?
Pardon Caeſar: Caeſar pardon:
As lowe as to thy foote doth Caſſius fall,
To begge infranchiſement for Publius Cymber.
I could be well mou'd, if I were as you,
If I could pray to mooue, Prayers would mooue me:
But I am conſtant as the Northerne Starre,
Of whoſe true fixt, and reſting quality,
There is no fellow in the Firmament.
The Skies are painted with vnnumbred ſparkes,
They are all Fire, and euery one doth ſhine:
But, there's but one in all doth hold his place.
So, in the World; 'Tis furniſh'd well with Men,
And Men are Fleſh and Blood, and apprehenſiue;
Yet in the number, I do know but One
That vnaſſayleable holds on his Ranke,
Vnſhak'd of Motion: and that I am he,
Let me a little ſhew it, euen in this:
That I was conſtant Cymber ſhould be baniſh'd,
And conſtant do remaine to keepe him ſo.
O Caeſar.
Hence: Wilt thou lift vp Olympus?
Great Caeſar.
Doth not Brutus bootleſſe kneele?
Speake hands for me.
Et Tu Brutè?—Then fall Caeſar.
Liberty, Freedome; Tyranny is dead,
Run hence, proclaime, cry it about the Streets.
Some to the common Pulpits, and cry out
Liberty, Freedome, and Enfranchiſement.
People and Senators, be not affrighted:
Fly not, ſtand ſtill: Ambitions debt is paid.
Go to the Pulpit Brutus.
And Caſſius too.
Where's Publius?
Heere, quite confounded with this mutiny.
Stand faſt together, leaſt ſome Friend of Caeſars
Should chance —
Talke not of ſtanding. Publius good cheere,
There is no harme intended to your perſon,
Nor to no Roman elſe: ſo tell them Publius.
And leaue vs Publius, leaſt that the people
Ruſhing on vs, ſhould do your Age ſome miſchiefe.
Do ſo, and let no man abide this deede,
But we the Doers.
Where is Antony?
Fled to his Houſe amaz'd:
Men, Wiues, and Children, ſtare, cry out, and run,
As it were Doomeſday.
Fates, we will know your pleaſures:
That we ſhall dye we know, 'tis but the time
And drawing dayes out, that men ſtand vpon.
Why he that cuts off twenty yeares of life,
Cuts off ſo many yeares of fearing death.
Grant that, and then is Death a Benefit:
So are we Caeſars Friends, that haue abridg'd
His time of fearing death. Stoope Romans, ſtoope,
And let vs bathe our hands in Caeſars blood
Vp to the Elbowes, and beſmeare our Swords:
Then walke we forth, euen to the Market place,
And wauing our red Weapons o're our heads,
Let's all cry Peace, Freedome, and Liberty.
Stoop then, and waſh. How many Ages hence
Shall this our lofty Scene be acted ouer,
In State vnborne, and Accents yet vnknowne?
How many times ſhall Caeſar bleed in ſport,
That now on Pompeyes Baſis lye along,
No worthier then the duſt?
So oft as that ſhall be,
So often ſhall the knot of vs be call'd,
The Men that gaue their Country liberty.
What, ſhall we forth?
I, euery man away.
Brutus ſhall leade, and we will grace his heeles
With the moſt boldeſt, and beſt hearts of Rome.
Soft, who comes heere? A friend of Antonies.
Thus Brutus did my Maſter bid me kneele;
Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall downe,
And being proſtrate, thus he bad me ſay:
Brutus is Noble, Wiſe, Valiant, and Honeſt;
Caeſar was Mighty, Bold, Royall, and Louing:
Say, I loue Brutus, and I honour him;
Say, I fear'd Caeſar, honour'd him, and lou'd him.
If Brutus will vouchſafe, that Antony
May ſafely come to him, and be reſolu'd
How Caeſar hath deſeru'd to lye in death,
Mark Antony, ſhall not loue Caeſar dead
So well as Brutus liuing; but will follow
The Fortunes and Affayres of Noble Brutus,
Thorough the hazards of this vntrod State,
With all true Faith. So ſayes my Maſter Antony.
Thy Maſter is a Wiſe and Valiant Romane,
I neuer thought him worſe:
Tell him, ſo pleaſe him come vnto this place
He ſhall be ſatisfied: and by my Honor
Depart vntouch'd.
Ile fetch him preſently.
I know that we ſhall haue him well to Friend.
I wiſh we may: But yet haue I a minde
That feares him much: and my miſgiuing ſtill
Falles ſhrewdly to the purpoſe.
But heere comes Antony:
Welcome Mark Antony.
O mighty Caeſar! Doſt thou lye ſo lowe?
Are all thy Conqueſts, Glories, Triumphes, Spoiles,
Shrunke to this little Meaſure? Fare thee well.
I know not Gentlemen what you intend,
Who elſe muſt be let blood, who elſe is ranke:
If I my ſelfe, there is no houre ſo fit
As Caeſars deaths houre; nor no Inſtrument
Of halfe that worth, as thoſe your Swords; made rich
With the moſt Noble blood of all this World.
I do beſeech yee, if you beare me hard,
Now, whil'ſt your purpled hands do reeke and ſmoake,
Fulfill your pleaſure. Liue a thouſand yeeres,
I ſhall not finde my ſelfe ſo apt to dye.
No place will pleaſe me ſo, no meane of death,
As heere by Caeſar, and by you cut off,
The Choice and Maſter Spirits of this Age.
O Antony! Begge not your death of vs:
Though now we muſt appeare bloody and cruell,
As by our hands, and this our preſent Acte
You ſee we do: Yet ſee you but our hands,
And this, the bleeding buſineſſe they haue doe:
Our hearts you ſee not, they are pittifull:
And pitty to the generall wrong of Rome,
As fire driues out fire, ſo pitty; pitty
Hath done this deed on Caeſar. For your part,
To you, our Swords haue leaden points Marke Antony:
Our Armes in ſtrength of malice, and our Hearts
Of Brothers temper, do receiue you in,
With all kinde loue, good thoughts, and reuerence.
Your voyce ſhall be as ſtrong as any mans,
In the diſpoſing of new Dignities.
Onely be patient, till we haue appeas'd
The Multitude, beſide themſelues with feare,
And then, we will deliuer you the cauſe,
Why I, that did loue Caeſar when I ſtrooke him,
Haue thus proceeded.
I doubt not of your Wiſedome:
Let each man render me his bloody hand.
Frſt Marcus Brutus will I ſhake with you;
Next Caius Caſſius do I take your hand;
Now Decius Brutus yours; now yours Metellus;
Yours Cinna; and my valiant Caska, yours;
Though laſt, not leaſt in loue, yours good Trebonius
Gentlemen all: Alas, what ſhall I ſay,
My credit now ſtands on ſuch ſlippery ground,
That one of two bad wayes you muſt conceit me,
Either a Coward, or a Flatterer.
That I did loue thee Caeſar, O 'tis true:
If then thy Spirit looke vpon vs now,
Shall it not greeue thee deerer then thy death,
To ſee thy Antony making his peace,
Shaking the bloody fingers of thy Foes?
Moſt Noble, in the preſence of thy Coarſe,
Had I as many eyes, as thou haſt wounds,
Weeping as faſt as they ſtreame forth thy blood,
It would become me better, then to cloſe
In tearmes of Friendſhip with thine enemies.
Pardon me Iulius, heere was't thou bay'd braue Hart,
Heere did'ſt thou fall, and heere thy Hunters ſtand
Sign'd in thy Spoyle, and Crimſon'd in thy Lethee.
O World! thou waſt the Forreſt to this Hart,
And this indeed, O World, the Hart of thee.
How like a Deere, ſtroken by many Princes,
Doſt thou heere lye?
Mark Antony.
Pardon me Caius Caſſius:
The Enemies of Caeſar, ſhall ſay this:
Then, in a Friend, it is cold Modeſtie.
I blame you not for praiſing Caeſar ſo,
But what compact meane you to haue with vs?
Will you be prick'd in number of our Friends,
Or ſhall we on, and not depend on you?
Therefore I tooke your hands, but was indeed
Sway'd from the point, by looking downe on Caeſar.
Friends am I with you all, and loue you all,
Vpon this hope, that you ſhall giue me Reaſons,
Why, and wherein, Caeſar was dangerous.
Or elſe were this a ſauage Spectacle:
Our Reaſons are ſo full of good regard,
That were you Antony, the Sonne of Caeſar,
You ſhould be ſatisfied.
That's all I ſeeke,
And am moreouer ſutor, that I may
Produce his body to the Market-place,
And in the Pulpit as becomes a Friend,
Speake in the Order of his Funerall.
You ſhall Marke Antony.
Brutus, a word with you:
You know not what you do; Do not conſent
That Antony ſpeake in his Funerall:
Know you how much the people may be mou'd
By that which he will vtter.
By your pardon:
I will my ſelfe into the Pulpit firſt,
And ſhew the reaſon of our Caeſars death.
What Antony ſhall ſpeake, I will proteſt
He ſpeakes by leaue, and by permiſsion:
And that we are contented Caeſar ſhall
Haue all true Rites, and lawfull Ceremonies,
It ſhall aduantage more, then do vs wrong.
I know not what may fall, I like it not.
Mark Antony, heere take you Caeſars body:
You ſhall not in your Funerall ſpeech blame vs,
But ſpeake all good you can deuiſe of Caeſar,
And ſay you doo't by our permiſsion:
Elſe ſhall you not haue any hand at all
About his Funerall. And you ſhall ſpeake
In the ſame Pulpit whereto I am going,
After my ſpeech is ended.
Be it ſo:
I do deſire no more.
Prepare the body then, and follow vs.
O pardon me, thou bleeding peece of Earth:
That I am meeke and gentle with theſe Butchers.
Thou art the Ruines of the Nobleſt man
That euer liued in the Tide of Times.
Woe to the hand that ſhed this coſtly Blood.
Ouer thy wounds, now do I Propheſie,
(Which like dumbe mouthes do ope their Ruby lips,
To begge the voyce and vtterance of my Tongue)
A Curſe ſhall light vpon the limbes of men;
Domeſticke Fury, and fierce Ciuill ſtrife,
Shall cumber all the parts of Italy:
Blood and deſtruction ſhall be ſo in vſe,
And dreadfull Obiects ſo familiar,
That Mothers ſhall but ſmile, when they behold
Their Infants quartered with the hands of Warre:
All pitty choak'd with cuſtome of fell deeds,
And Caeſars Spirit ranging for Reuenge,
With Ate by his ſide, come hot from Hell,
Shall in theſe Confines, with a Monarkes voyce,
Cry hauocke, and let ſlip the Dogges of Warre,
That this foule deede, ſhall ſmell aboue the earth
With Carrion men, groaning for Buriall.
You ſerue Octauius Caeſar, do you not?
I do Marke Antony.
Caeſar did write for him to come to Rome.
He did receiue his Letters, and is comming,
And bid me ſay to you by word of mouth—
O Caeſar!
Thy heart is bigge: get thee a-part and weepe:
Paſsion I ſee is catching from mine eyes,
Seeing thoſe Beads of ſorrow ſtand in thine,
Began to water. Is thy Maſter comming?
He lies to night within ſeuen Leagues of Rome.
Poſt backe with ſpeede,
And tell him what hath chanc'd:
Heere is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
No Rome of ſafety for Octauius yet,
Hie hence, and tell him ſo. Yet ſtay a-while,
Thou ſhalt not backe, till I haue borne this courſe
Into the Market place: There ſhall I try
In my Oration, how the People take
The cruell iſſue of theſe bloody men,
According to the which, thou ſhalt diſcourſe
To yong Octauius, of the ſtate of things.
Lend me your hand.
We will be ſatisfied: let vs be ſatisfied▪
Then follow me, and giue me Audience friends.
Caſſius go you into the other ſtreete,
And part the Numbers:
Thoſe that will heare me ſpeake, let 'em ſtay heere;
Thoſe that will follow Caſſius, go with him,
And publike Reaſons ſhall be rendred
Of Caeſars death.
I will heare Brutus ſpeake.
I will heare Caſſius, and compare their Reaſons,
When ſeuerally we heare them rendred.
The Noble Brutus is aſcended: Silence.
Be patient till the laſt. Romans, Countrey-men, and Louers, heare mee for my cauſe, and be ſilent, that you may heare. Beleeue me for mine Honor, and haue reſpect to mine Honor, that you may beleeue. Cenſure me in your Wiſedom, and awake your Senſes, that you may the better Iudge. If there bee any in this Aſſembly, any deere Friend of Caeſars, to him I ſay, that Brutus loue to Caeſar, was no leſſe then his. If then, that Friend demand, why Brutus roſe againſt Caeſar, this is my anſwer: Not that I lou'd Caeſar leſſe, but that I lou'd Rome more. Had you rather Caeſar were liuing, and dye all Slaues; then that Caeſar were dead, to liue all Free-men? As Caeſar lou'd mee, I weepe for him; as he was Fortunate, I reioyce at it; as he was Valiant, I honour him: But, as he was Ambitious, I ſlew him. There is Teares, for his Loue: Ioy, for his Fortune: Honor, for his Valour: and Death, for his Ambition. Who is heere ſo baſe, that would be a Bondman? If any, ſpeak, for him haue I offended. Who is heere ſo rude, that would not be a Roman? If any, ſpeak, for him haue I offended. Who is heere ſo vile, that will not loue his Countrey? If any, ſpeake, for him haue I offended. I pauſe for a Reply.
None Brutus, none.
Then none haue I offended. I haue done no more to Caeſar, then you ſhall do to Brutus. The Queſtion of his death, is inroll'd in the Capitoll: his Glory not extenuated, wherein he was worthy; nor his offences enforc'd, for which he ſuffered death.
Heere comes his Body, mourn'd by Marke Antony, who though he had no hand in his death, ſhall receiue the benefit of his dying, a place in the Cōmonwealth, as which of you ſhall not. With this I depart, that as I ſlewe my beſt Louer for the good of Rome, I haue the ſame Dagger for my ſelfe, when it ſhall pleaſe my Country to need my death.
Liue Brutus, liue, liue.
Bring him with Triumph home vnto his houſe.
Giue him a Statue with his Anceſtors.
Let him be Caeſar.
Caeſars better parts,
Shall be Crown'd in Brutus.
Wee'l bring him to his Houſe,
With Showts and Clamors.
My Country-men.
Peace, ſilence, Brutus ſpeakes.
Peace ho.
Good Countrymen, let me depart alone,
And (for my ſake) ſtay heere with Antony:
Do grace to Caeſars Corpes, and grace his Speech
Tending to Caeſars Glories, which Marke Antony
(By our permiſſion) is allow'd to make.
I do intreat you, not a man depart,
Saue I alone, till Antony haue ſpoke.
Stay ho, and let vs heare Mark Antony.
Let him go vp into the publike Chaire,
Wee'l heare him: Noble Antony go vp.
For Brutus ſake, I am beholding to you.
What does he ſay of Brutus?
He ſayes, for Brutus ſake
He findes himſelfe beholding to vs all.
'Twere beſt he ſpeake no harme of Brutus heere?
This Caeſar was a Tyrant.
Nay that's certaine:
We are bleſt that Rome is rid of him.
Peace, let vs heare what Antony can ſay.
You gentle Romans.
Peace hoe, let vs heare him.
Friends, Romans, Countrymen, lend me your ears:
I come to bury Caeſar, not to praiſe him:
The euill that men do, liues after them,
The good is oft enterred with their bones,
So let it be with Caeſar. The Noble Brutus,
Hath told you Caeſar was Ambitious:
If it were ſo, it was a greeuous Fault,
And greeuouſly hath Caeſar anſwer'd it.
Heere, vnder leaue of Brutus, and the reſt
(For Brutus is an Honourable man,
So are they all; all Honourable mn)
Come I to ſpeake in Caeſars Funerall.
He was my Friend, faithfull, and iuſt to me;
But Brutus ſayes; he was Ambitious,
And Brutus is an Honourable man.
He hath brought many Captiues home to Rome▪
Whoſe Ranſomes, did the generall Coffers fill:
Did this in Caeſar ſeeme Ambitious?
When that the poore haue cry'de, Caeſar hath wept:
Ambition ſhould be made of ſterner ſtuffe,
Yet Brutus ſayes, he was Ambitious:
And Brutus is an Honourable man.
You all did ſee, that on the Lupercall,
I thrice preſented him a Kingly Crowne,
Which he did thrice refuſe. Was this Ambition?
Yet Brutus ſayes, he was Ambitious:
And ſure he is an Honourable man.
I ſpeake not to diſprooue what Brutus ſpoke,
But heere I am, to ſpeake what I do know;
You all did loue him once, not without cauſe,
What cauſe with-holds you then, to mourne for him?
O Iudgement! thou are fled to brutiſh Beaſts,
And Men haue loſt their Reaſon. Beare with me,
My heart is in the Coffin there with Caeſar,
And I muſt pawſe, till it come backe to me.
Me thinkes there is much reaſon in his ſayings.
If thou conſider rightly of the matter,
Caeſar ha's had great wrong.
Ha's hee Maſters? I feare there will a worſe come in his place.
Mark'd ye his words? he would not take ye Crown,
Therefore 'tis certaine, he was not Ambitious.
If it be found ſo, ſome will deere abide it.
Poore ſoule, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.
There's not a Nobler man in Rome then Antony.
Now marke him, he begins againe to ſpeake.
But yeſterday, the word of Caeſar might
Haue ſtood againſt the World: Now lies he there,
And none ſo poore to do him reuerence.
O Maiſters! If I were diſpos'd to ſtirre
Your hearts and mindes to Mutiny and Rage,
I ſhould do Brutus wrong, and Caſſius wrong:
Who (you all know) are Honourable men.
I will not do them wrong: I rather chooſe
To wrong the dead, to wrong my ſelfe and you,
Then I will wrong ſuch Honourable men,
But heere's a Parchment, with the Seale of Caeſar,
I found it in his Cloſſet, 'tis his Will:
Let but the Commons heare this Teſtament:
(Which pardon me) I do not meane to reade,
And they would go and kiſſe dead Caeſars wounds.
And dip their Napkins in his Sacred Blood;
Yea, begge a haire of him for Memory,
And dying, mention it within their Willes,
Bequeathing it as a rich Legacie
Vnto their iſſue.
Wee'l heare the Will, reade it Marke Antony.
The Will, the Will; we will heare Caeſars Will.
Haue patience gentle Friends, I muſt not read it.
It is not meete you know how Caeſar lou'd you:
You are not Wood, you are not Stones▪ but men:
And being men, hearing the Will of Caeſar,
It will inflame you, it will make you mad:
'Tis good you know not that you are his Heires,
For if you ſhould, O what would come of it?
Read the Will, wee'l heare it Antony:
You ſhall reade vs the Will, Caeſars Will.
Will you be Patient? Will you ſtay a-while?
I haue o're-ſhot my ſelfe to tell you of it,
I feare I wrong the Honourable men,
Whoſe Daggers haue ſtabb'd Caeſar: I do feare it.
They were Traitors: Honourable men?
The Will, the Teſtament.
They were Villaines, Murderers: the Will, read the Will.
You will compell me then to read the Will:
Then make a Ring about the Corpes of Caeſar,
And let me ſhew you him that made the Will:
Shall I deſcend? And will you giue me leaue?
Come downe.
Deſcend.
You ſhall haue leaue.
A Ring, ſtand round.
Stand from the Hearſe, ſtand from the Body.
Roome for Antony, moſt Noble Antony.
Nay preſſe not ſo vpon me, ſtand farre off.
Stand backe: roome, beare backe.
If you haue teares, prepare to ſhed them now.
You all do know this Mantle, I remember
The firſt time euer Caeſar put it on,
'Twas on a Summers Euening in his Tent,
That day he ouercame the Neruij.
Looke, in this place ran Caſſius Dagger through:
See what a rent the enuious Caska made:
Through this, the wel-beloued Brutus ſtabb'd,
And as he pluck'd his curſed Steele away:
Marke how the blood of Caeſar followed it,
As ruſhing out of doores, to be reſolu'd
If Brutus ſo vnkindely knock'd, or no:
For Brutus, as you know, was Caeſars Angel.
Iudge, O you Gods, how deerely Caeſar lou'd him:
This was the moſt vnkindeſt cut of all.
For when the Noble Caeſar ſaw him ſtab,
Ingratitude, more ſtrong then Traitors armes,
Quite vanquiſh'd him: then burſt his Mighty heart,
And in his Mantle, muffling vp his face,
Euen at the Baſe of Pompeyes Statue
(Which all the while ran blood) great Caeſar fell.
O what a fall was there, my Countrymen?
Then I, and you, and all of vs fell downe,
Whil'ſt bloody Treaſon flouriſh'd ouer vs.
O now you weepe, and I perceiue you feele
The dint of pitty: Theſe are gracious droppes.
Kinde Soules, what weepe you, when you but behold
Our Caeſars Veſture wounded? Looke you heere,
Heere is Himſelfe, marr'd as you ſee with Traitors.
O pitteous ſpectacle!
O Noble Caeſar!
O wofull day!
O Traitors, Villaines!
O moſt bloody ſight!
We will be reueng'd: Reuenge
About, ſeeke, burne, fire, kill, ſlay,
Let not a Traitor liue.
Stay Country-men.
Peace there, heare the Noble Antony.
Wee'l heare him, wee'l follow him, wee'l dy with him.
Good Friends, ſweet Friends, let me not ſtirre you vp
To ſuch a ſodaine Flood of Mutiny:
They that haue done this Deede, are honourable.
What priuate greefes they haue, alas I know not,
That made them do it: They are Wiſe and Honourable,
And will no doubt with Reaſons anſwer you.
I come not (Friends) to ſteale away your hearts,
I am no Orator, as Brutus is;
But (as you know me all) a plaine blunt man
That loue my Friend, and that they know full well,
That gaue me publike leaue to ſpeake of him:
For I haue neyther writ nor words, nor worth,
Action, nor Vtterance, nor the power of Speech,
To ſtirre mens Blood. I onely ſpeake right on:
I tell you that, which you your ſelues do know,
Shew you ſweet Caeſars wounds, poor poor dum mouths
And bid them ſpeake for me: But were I Brutus,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle vp your Spirits, and put a Tongue
In euery Wound of Caeſar, that ſhould moue
The ſtones of Rome, to riſe and Mutiny.
Wee'l Mutiny.
Wee'l burne the houſe of Brutus.
Away then, come, ſeeke the Conſpirators.
Yet heare me Countrymen, yet heare me ſpeake
Peace hoe, heare Antony, moſt Noble Antony.
Why Friends, you go to do you know not what:
Wherein hath Caeſar thus deſeru'd your loues?
Alas you know not, I muſt tell you then:
You haue forgot the Will I told you of.
Moſt true, the Will, let's ſtay and heare the Wil.
Heere is the Will, and vnder Caeſars Seale:
To euery Roman Citizen he giues,
To euery ſeuerall man, ſeuenty fiue Drachmaes.
Moſt Noble Caeſar, wee'l reuenge his death.
O Royall Caeſar.
Heare me with patience.
Peace hoe
Moreouer, he hath left you all his Walkes,
His priuate Arbors, and new-planted Orchards,
On this ſide Tyber, he hath left them you,
And to your heyres for euer: common pleaſures
To walke abroad, and recreate your ſelues.
Heere was a Caeſar: when comes ſuch another?
Neuer, neuer: come, away, away:
Wee'l burne his body in the holy place,
And with the Brands fire the Traitors houſes.
Take vp the body.
Go fetch fire.
Plucke downe Benches.
Plucke downe Formes, Windowes, any thing.
Now let it worke: Miſcheefe thou art a-foot,
Take thou what courſe thou wilt.
How now Fellow?
Sir, Octauius is already come to Rome.
Where is hee?
He and Lepidus are at Caeſars houſe.
And thither will I ſtraight, to viſit him:
He comes vpon a wiſh. Fortune is merry,
And in this mood will giue vs any thing.
I heard him ſay, Brutus and Caſſius
Are rid like Madmen through the Gates of Rome.
Belike they had ſome notice of the people
How I had moued them. Bring me to Octauius.
I dreamt to night, that I did feaſt with Caeſar,
And things vnluckily charge my Fantaſie:
I haue no will to wander foorth of doores,
Yet ſomething leads me foorth.
What is your name?
Whether are you going?
Where do you dwell?
Are you a married man, or a Batchellor?
Anſwer euery man directly.
I, and breefely.
I, and wiſely.
I, and truly, you were beſt.
What is my name? Whether am I going? Where do I dwell? Am I a married man, or a Batchellour? Then to anſwer euery man, directly and breefely, wiſely and truly: wiſely I ſay, I am a Batchellor.
That's as much as to ſay, they are fooles that marrie: you'l beare me a bang for that I feare: proceede directly.
Directly I am going to Caeſars Funerall.
As a Friend, or an Enemy?
As a friend.
That matter is anſwered directly.
For your dwelling: breefely.
Breefely, I dwell by the Capitoll.
Your name ſir, truly.
Truly, my name is Cinna.
Teare him to peeces, hee's a Conſpirator.
I am Cinna the Poet I am Cinna the Poet.
Teare him for his bad verſes, teare him for his bad Verſes.
I am not Cinna the Conſpirator.
It is no matter, his name's Cinna, plucke but his name out of his heart, and turne him going.
Teare him, tear him; Come Brands hoe, Firebrands: to Brutus, to Caſſius, burne all. Some to Decius Houſe, and ſome to Caska's; ſome to Ligarius: Away, go.
Theſe many then ſhall die, their names are prickt
Your Brother too muſt dye: conſent you Lepidus?
I do conſent.
Pricke him downe Antony.
Vpon condition Publius ſhall not liue,
Who is your Siſters ſonne, Marke Antony.
He ſhall not liue; looke, with a ſpot I dam him.
But Lepidus, go you to Caeſars houſe:
Fetch the Will hither, and we ſhall determine
How to cut off ſome charge in Legacies.
What? ſhall I finde you heere?
Or heere, or at the Capitoll.
This is a ſlight vnmeritable man,
Meet to be ſent on Errands: is it fit
The three-fold World diuided, he ſhould ſtand
One of the three to ſhare it?
So you thought him,
And tooke his voyce who ſhould be prickt to dye
In our blacke Sentence and Proſcription.
Octauius, I haue ſeene more dayes then you,
And though we lay theſe Honours on this man,
To eaſe our ſelues of diuers ſland'rous loads,
He ſhall but beare them, as the Aſſe beares Gold,
To groane and ſwet vnder the Buſineſſe,
Either led or driuen, as we point the way:
And hauing brought our Treaſure, where we will,
Then take we downe his Load, and turne him off
(Like to the empty Aſſe) to ſhake his eares,
And graze in Commons.
You may do your will:
But hee's a tried, and valiant Souldier.
So is my Horſe Octauius, and for that
I do appoint him ſtore of Prouender.
It is a Creature that I teach to fight,
To winde, to ſtop, to run directly on:
His corporall Motion, gouern'd by my Spirit,
And in ſome taſte, is Lepidus but ſo:
He muſt be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth:
A barren ſpirited Fellow; one that feeds
On Obiects, Arts, and Imitations.
Which out of vſe, and ſtal'de by other men
Begin his faſhion. Do not talke of him,
But as a property: and now Octauius,
Liſten great things. Brutus and Caſſius
Are leuying Powers; We muſt ſtraight make head:
Therefore let our Alliance be combin'd.
Our beſt Friends made, our meanes ſtretcht,
And let vs preſently go ſit in Councell,
How couert matters may be beſt diſclos'd,
And open Perils ſureſt anſwered.
Let vs do ſo: for we are at the ſtake,
And bayed about with many Enemies,
And ſome that ſmile haue in their hearts I feare
Millions of Miſcheefes.
Stand ho.
Giue the word ho, and Stand.
What now Lucillius, is Caſſius neere?
He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
To do you ſalutation from his Maſter.
He greets me well. Your Maſter Pindarus
In his owne change, or by ill Officers,
Hath giuen me ſome worthy cauſe to wiſh
Things done, vndone: But if he be at hand
I ſhall be ſatisfied.
I do not doubt
But that my Noble Maſter will appeare
Such as he is, full of regard, and Honour.
He is not doubted. A word Lucillius
How he receiu'd you: let me be reſolu'd.
With courteſie, and with reſpect enough,
But not with ſuch familiar inſtances,
Nor with ſuch free and friendly Conference
As he hath vs'd of old.
Thou haſt deſcrib'd
A hot Friend, cooling: Euer note Lucillius,
When Loue begins to ſicken and decay
It vſeth an enforced Ceremony.
There are no trickes, in plaine and ſimple Faith:
But hollow men, like Horſes hot at hand,
Make gallant ſhew, and promiſe of their Mettle:
But when they ſhould endure the bloody Spurre,
They fall their Creſts, and like deceitfull Iades
Sinke in the Triall. Comes his Army on?
They meane this night in Sardis to be quarter'd:
The greater part, the Horſe in generall
Are come with Caſſius.
Hearke, he is arriu'd:
March gently on to meete him.
Stand ho.
Stand ho, ſpeake the word along.
Stand.
Stand.
Stand.
Moſt Noble Brother, you haue done me wrong.
Iudge me you Gods; wrong I mine Enemies?
And if not ſo, how ſhould I wrong a Brother.
Brutus, this ſober forme of yours, hides wrongs,
And when you do them—
Caſſius, be content,
Speake your greefes ſoftly, I do know you well.
Before the eyes of both our Armies heere
(Which ſhould perceiue nothing but Loue from vs)
Let vs not wrangle. Bid them moue away:
Then in my Tent Caſſius enlarge your Greefes,
And I will giue you Audience.
Pindarus,
Bid our Commanders leade their Charges off
A little from this ground.
Lucillius, do you the like, and let no man
Come to our Tent, till we haue done our Conference.
Let Lucius and Titinius guard our doore.
That you haue wrong'd me, doth appear in this▪
You haue condemn'd, and noted Lucius Pella
For taking Bribes heere of the Sardians;
Wherein my Letters, praying on his ſide,
Becauſe I knew the man was ſlighted off.
You wrong'd your ſelfe to write in ſuch a caſe.
In ſuch a time as this, it is not meet
That euery nice offence ſhould beare his Comment.
Let me tell you Caſſius, you your ſelfe
Are much condemn'd to haue an itching Palme,
To ſell, and Mart your Offices for Gold
To Vndeſeruers.
I, an itching Palme?
You know that you are Brutus that ſpeakes this,
Or by the Gods, this ſpeech were elſe your laſt.
The name of Caſſius Honors this corruption,
And Chaſticement doth therefore hide his head.
Chaſticement?
Remember March, the Ides of March remēber:
Did not great Iulius bleede for Iuſtice ſake?
What Villaine touch'd his body, that did ſtab,
And not for Iuſtice? What? Shall one of Vs,
That ſtrucke the Formoſt man of all this World,
But for ſupporting Robbers: ſhall we now,
Contaminate our fingers, with baſe Bribes?
And ſell the mighty ſpace of our large Honors
For ſo much traſh, as may be graſped thus?
I had rather be a Dogge, and bay the Moone,
Then ſuch a Roman.
Brutus, baite not me,
Ile not indure it: you forget your ſelfe
To hedge me in. I am a Souldier, I,
Older in practice, Abler then your ſelfe
To make Conditions.
Go too: you are not Caſſius.
I am.
I ſay, you are not.
Vrge me no more, I ſhall forget my ſelfe:
Haue minde vpon your health: Tempt me no farther.
Away ſlight man.
Is't poſſible?
Heare me, for I will ſpeake.
Muſt I giue way, and roome to your raſh Choller?
Shall I be frighted, when a Madman ſtares?
O ye Gods, ye Gods, Muſt I endure all this?
All this? I more: Fret till your proud hart break.
Go ſhew your Slaues how Chollericke you are,
And make your Bondmen tremble. Muſt I bouge?
Muſt I obſerue you? Muſt I ſtand and crouch
Vnder your Teſtie Humour? By the Gods,
You ſhall digeſt the Venom of your Spleene
Though it do Split you. For, from this day forth,
Ile vſe you for my Mirth, yea for my Laughter
When you are Waſpiſh.
Is it come to this?
You ſay, you are a better Souldier:
Let it appeare ſo; make your vaunting true,
And it ſhall pleaſe me well. For mine owne part,
I ſhall be glad to learne of Noble men.
You wrong me euery way:
You wrong me Brutus:
I ſaide, an Elder Souldier, not a Better.
Did I ſay Better?
If you did, I care not.
When Caeſar liu'd, he durſt not thus haue mou'd me.
Peace, peace, you durſt not ſo haue tempted him.
I durſt not.
No.
What? durſt not tempt him?
For your life you durſt not.
Do not preſume too much vpon my Loue,
I may do that I ſhall be ſorry for.
You haue done that you ſhould be ſorry for.
There is no terror Caſſius in your threats:
For I am Arm'd ſo ſtrong in Honeſty,
That they paſſe by me, as the idle winde,
Which I reſpect not. I did ſend to you
For certaine ſummes of Gold, which you deny'd me,
For I can raiſe no money by vile meanes:
By Heauen, I had rather Coine my Heart,
And drop my blood for Drachmaes, then to wring
From the hard hands of Peazants, their vile traſh
By any indirection. I did ſend
To you for Gold to pay my Legions,
Which you deny'd me: was that done like Caſſius?
Should I haue anſwer'd Caius Caſſius ſo?
When Marcus Brutus growes ſo Couetous,
To locke ſuch Raſcall Counters from his Friends,
Be ready Gods with all your Thunder-bolts,
Daſh him to peeces.
I deny'd you not.
You did.
I did not. He was but a Foole
That brought my anſwer back. Brutus hath riu'd my hart:
A Friend ſhould beare his Friends infirmities;
But Brutus makes mine greater then they are.
I do not, till you practice them on me.
You loue me not.
I do not like your faults.
A friendly eye could neuer ſee ſuch faults.
A Flatterers would not, though they do appeare
As huge as high Olympus.
Come Antony, and yong Octauius come,
Reuenge your ſelues alone on Caſſius,
For Caſſius is a-weary of the World:
Hated by one he loues, brau'd by his Brother,
Check'd like a bondman, all his faults obſeru'd,
Set in a Note-booke, learn'd, and con'd by roate
To caſt into my Teeth. O I could weepe
My Spirit from mine eyes. There is my Dagger,
And heere my naked Breaſt: Within, a Heart
Deerer then Pluto's Mine, Richer then Gold:
If that thou bee'ſt a Roman, take it foorth.
I that deny'd thee Gold, will giue my Heart:
Strike as thou did'ſt at Caeſar: For I know,
When thou did'ſt hate him worſt, yu loued'ſt him better
Then euer thou loued'ſt Caſſius.
Sheath your Dagger:
Be angry when you will, it ſhall haue ſcope:
Do what you will, Diſhonor, ſhall be Humour.
O Caſſius, you are yoaked with a Lambe
That carries Anger, as the Flint beares fire,
Who much inforced, ſhewes a haſtie Sparke,
And ſtraite is cold agen.
Hath Caſſius liu'd
To be but Mirth and Laughter to his Brutus.
When greefe and blood ill temper'd, vexeth him?
When I ſpoke that, I was ill temper'd too.
Do you confeſſe ſo much? Giue me your hand.
And my heart too.
O Brutus!
What's the matter?
Haue not you loue enough to beare with me,
When that raſh humour which my Mother gaue me
Makes me forgetfull.
Yes Caſsius, and from henceforth
When you are ouer-earneſt with your Brutus,
Hee'l thinke your Mother chides, and leaue you ſo.
Let me go in to ſee the Generals,
There is ſome grudge betweene 'em, 'tis not meete
They be alone.
You ſhall not come to them.
Nothing but death ſhall ſtay me.
How now? What's the matter?
For ſhame you Generals; what do you meane?
Loue, and be Friends, as two ſuch men ſhould bee,
For I haue ſeene more yeeres I'me ſure then yee.
Ha, ha, how vildely doth this Cynicke rime?
Get you hence ſirra: Sawcy Fellow, hence.
Beare with him Brutus, 'tis his faſhion.
Ile know his humor, when he knowes his time:
What ſhould the Warres do with theſe ligging Fooles?
Companion, hence.
Away, away be gone.
Lucillius and Titinius bid the Commanders
Prepare to lodge their Companies to night.
And come your ſelues, & bring Meſſala with you Immediately to vs.
Lucius, a bowle of Wine.
I did not thinke you could haue bin ſo angry.
O Caſſius, I am ſicke of many greefes.
Of your Philoſophy you make no vſe,
If you giue place to accidentall euils.
No man beares ſorrow better. Portia is dead.
Ha? Portia?
She is dead.
How ſcap'd I killing, when I croft you ſo?
O inſupportable, and touching loſſe!
Vpon what ſickneſſe?
Impatient of my abſence▪
And greefe, that yong Octauius with Mark Antony
Haue made themſelues ſo ſtrong: For with her death
That tydings came. With this ſhe fell diſtract,
And (her Attendants abſent) ſwallow'd fire.
And dy'd ſo?
Euen ſo.
O ye immortall Gods!
Speak no more of her: Giue me a bowl of wine,
In this I bury all vnkindneſſe Caſsius.
My heart is thirſty for that Noble pledge.
Fill Lucius, till the Wine ore-ſwell the Cup:
I cannot drinke too much of Brutus loue.
Come in Titinius:
Welcome good Meſſala:
Now ſit we cloſe about this Taper heere,
And call in queſtion our neceſſities.
Portia, art thou gone?
No more I pray you
Meſſala, I haue heere receiued Letters,
That yong Octauius, and Mark Antony
Come downe vpon vs with a mighty power,
Bending their Expedition toward Philippi.
My ſelfe haue Letters of the ſelfe-ſame Tenure.
With what Addition.
That by proſcription, and billes of Outlarie,
Octauius, Antony, and Lepidus,
Haue put to death, an hundred Senators.
Therein our Letters do not well agree:
Mine ſpeake of ſeuenty Senators, that dy'de
By their proſcriptions, Cicero being one.
Cicero one?
Cicero is dead, and by that order of proſcription
Had you your Letters from your wife, my Lord?
No Meſſala.
Nor nothing in your Letters writ of her?
Nothing Meſſala.
That me thinkes is ſtrange.
Why aske you?
Heare you ought of her, in yours?
No my Lord.
Now as you are a Roman tell me true.
Then like a Roman, beare the truth I tell,
For certaine ſhe is dead, and by ſtrange manner.
Why farewell Portia: We muſt die Meſſala:
With meditating that ſhe muſt dye once,
I haue the patience to endure it now.
Euen ſo great men, great loſſes ſhold indure.
I haue as much of this in Art as you,
But yet my Nature could not beare it ſo.
Well, to our worke aliue. What do you thinke
Of marching to Philippi preſently.
I do not thinke it good.
Your reaſon?
This it is:
'Tis better that the Enemie ſeeke vs,
So ſhall he waſte his meanes, weary his Souldiers,
Doing himſelfe offence, whil'ſt we lying ſtill,
Are full of reſt, defence, and nimbleneſſe.
Good reaſons muſt of force giue place to better:
The people 'twixt Philippi, and this ground
Do ſtand but in a forc'd affection:
For they haue grug'd vs Contribution.
The Enemy, marching along by them,
By them ſhall make a fuller number vp,
Come on refreſht, new added, and encourag'd:
From which aduantage ſhall we cut him off.
If at Philippi we do face him there,
Theſe people at our backe.
Heare me good Brother.
Vnder your pardon. You muſt note beſide,
That we haue tride the vtmoſt of our Friends:
O Legions are brim full, our cauſe is ripe,
The Enemy encreaſeth euery day,
We at the height, are readie to decline.
There is a Tide in the affayres of men,
Which taken at the Flood, leades on to Fortune:
Omitted, all the voyage of their life,
Is bound in Shallowes, and in Miſeries.
On ſuch a full Sea are we now a-float,
And we muſt take the current when it ſerues,
Or looſe our Ventures.
Then with your will go on: wee'l along
Our ſelues, and meet them at Philippi.
The deepe of night is crept vpon our talke,
And Nature muſt obey Neceſſitie,
Which we will niggard with a little reſt:
There is no more to ſay.
No more, good night,
Early to morrow will we riſe, and hence.
Lucius my Gowne: farewell good Meſſala,
Good night Titinius: Noble, Noble Caſſius,
Good night, and good repoſe.
O my deere Brother:
This was an ill beginning of the night:
Neuer come ſuch diuiſion 'tweene our ſoules:
Let it not Brutus.
Euery thing is well.
Good night my Lord.
Good night good Brother.
Good night Lord Brutus.
Farwell euery one.
Giue me the Gowne. Where is thy Inſtrument?
Heere in the Tent.
What, thou ſpeak'ſt drowſily?
Poore knaue I blame thee not, thou art ore-watch'd.
Call Claudio, and ſome other of my men,
Ile haue them ſleepe on Cuſhions in my Tent.
Varrus, and Claudio.
Cals my Lord?
I pray you ſirs, lye in my Tent and ſleepe,
It may be I ſhall raiſe you by and by
On buſineſſe to my Brother Caſſius.
So pleaſe you, we will ſtand,
And watch your pleaſure.
I will it not haue it ſo: Lye downe good ſirs,
It may be I ſhall otherwiſe bethinke me.
Looke Lucius, heere's the booke I ſought for ſo:
I put it in the pocket of my Gowne.
I was ſure your Lordſhip did not giue it me.
Beare with me good Boy, I am much forgetfull.
Canſt thou hold vp thy heauie eyes a-while,
And touch thy Inſtrument a ſtraine or two.
I my Lord, an't pleaſe you.
It does my Boy:
I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
It is my duty Sir.
I ſhould not vrge thy duty paſt thy might,
I know yong bloods looke for a time of reſt.
I haue ſlept my Lord already.
It was well done, and thou ſhalt ſleepe againe:
I will not hold thee long. If I do liue,
I will be good to thee.
This is a ſleepy Tune: O Murd'rous ſlumbler!
Layeſt thou thy Leaden Mace vpon my Boy,
That playes thee Muſicke? Gentle knaue good night:
I will not do thee ſo much wrong to wake thee:
If thou do'ſt nod, thou break'ſt thy Inſtrument,
Ile take it from thee, and (good Boy) good night.
Let me ſee, let me ſee; is not the Leafe turn'd downe
Where I left reading? Heere it is I thinke.
How ill this Taper burnes. Ha! Who comes heere?
I thinke it is the weakeneſſe of mine eyes
That ſhapes this monſtrous Apparition.
It comes vpon me: Art thou any thing?
Art thou ſome God, ſome Angell, or ſome Diuell,
That mak'ſt my blood cold, and my haire to ſtare?
Speake to me, what thou art.
Thy euill Spirit Brutus?
Why com'ſt thou?
To tell thee thou ſhalt ſee me at Philippi.
Well: then I ſhall ſee thee againe?
I, at Philippi.
Why I will ſee thee at Philippi then:
Now I haue taken heart, thou vaniſheſt.
Ill Spirit, I would hold more talke with thee.
Boy, Lucius, Varrus, Claudio, Sirs: Awake:
Claudio.
The ſtrings my Lord, are falſe.
He thinkes he ſtill is at his Inſtrument▪
Lucius, awake.
My Lord.
Did'ſt thou dreame Lucus, that thou ſo cryedſt out?
My Lord, I do not know that I did cry.
Yes that thou did'ſt: Did'ſt thou ſee any thing?
Nothing my Lord.
Sleepe againe Lucius: Sirra Claudio, Fellow,
Thou: Awake.
My Lord.
My Lord.
Why did you ſo cry out ſirs, in your ſleepe?
Did we my Lord?
I: ſaw you any thing?
No my Lord, I ſaw nothing.
Nor I my Lord.
Go, and commend me to my Brother Caſſius:
Bid him ſet on his Powres betimes before,
And we will follow.
It ſhall be done my Lord.
Now Antony, our hopes are anſwered,
You ſaid the Enemy would not come downe,
But keepe the Hilles and vpper Regions:
It proues not ſo: their battailes are at hand,
They meane to warne vs at Philippi heere:
Anſwering before we do demand of them.
Tut I am in their boſomes, and I know
Wherefore they do it: They could be content
To viſit other places, and come downe
With fearefull brauery: thinking by this face
To faſten in our thoughts that they haue Courage;
But 'tis not ſo.
Prepare you Generals,
The Enemy comes on in gallant ſhew:
Their bloody ſigne of Battell is hung out,
And ſomething to be done immediately.
Octauius, leade your Battaile ſoftly on
Vpon the left hand of the euen Field.
Vpon the right hand I, keepe thou the left.
Why do you croſſe me in this exigent.
I do not croſſe you: but I will do ſo.
They ſtand, and would haue parley.
faſt Titinius, we muſt out and talke.
Mark Antony, ſhall we giue ſigne of Battaile?
No Caeſar, we will anſwer on their Charge.
Make forth, the Generals would haue ſome words.
Stirre not vntill the Signall.
Words before blowes: is it ſo Countrymen?
Not that we loue words better, as you do.
Good words are better then bad ſtrokes Octauius.
In your bad ſtrokes Brutus, you giue good words
Witneſſe the hole you made in Caeſars heart,
Crying long liue, Haile Caeſar.
Antony,
The poſture of your blowes are yet vnknowne;
But for your words, they rob the Hibla Bees,
And leaue them Hony-leſſe.
Not ſtingleſſe too.
O yes, and ſoundleſſe too:
For you haue ſtolne their buzzing Antony,
And very wiſely threat before you ſting.
Villains: you did not ſo, when your vile daggers
Hackt one another in the ſides of Caeſar:
You ſhew'd your teethes like Apes,
And fawn'd like Hounds,
And bow'd like Bondmen, kiſſing Caeſars feete;
Whil'ſt damned Caska, like a Curre, behinde
Strooke Caeſar on the necke. O you Flatterers.
Flatterers? Now Brutus thanke your ſelfe,
This tongue had not offended ſo to day,
If Caſſius might haue rul'd.
Come, come, the cauſe. If arguing make vs ſwet,
The proofe of it will turne to redder drops:
Looke, I draw a Sword againſt Conſpirators,
When thinke you that the Sword goes vp againe?
Neuer till Caeſars three and thirtie wounds
Be well aueng'd; or till another Caeſar
Haue added ſlaughter to the Sword of Traitors.
Caeſar, thou canſt not dye by Traitors hands,
Vnleſſe thou bring'ſt them with thee.
So I hope:
I was not borne to dye on Brutus Sword.
O if thou wer't the Nobleſt of thy Straine,
Yong-man, thou could'ſt not dye more honourable.
A peeuiſh School-boy, worthles of ſuch Honor
Ioyn'd with a Masker, and a Reueller.
Old Caſſius ſtill.
Come Antony: away:
Defiance Traitors, hurle we in your teeth.
If you dare fight to day, come to the Field;
If not, when you haue ſtomackes.
Why now blow winde, ſwell Billow,
And ſwimme Barke:
The Storme is vp, and all is on the hazard.
Ho Lucillius, hearke, a word with you.
My Lord.
Meſſala.
What ſayes my Generall?
Meſſala, this is my Birth-day: as this very day
Was Caſſius borne. Giue me thy hand Meſſala:
Be thou my witneſſe, that againſt my will
(As Pompey was) am I compell'd to ſet
Vpon one Battell all our Liberties.
You know, that I held Epicurus ſtrong,
And his Opinion: Now I change my minde,
And partly credit things that do preſage.
Comming from Sardis, on our former Enſigne
Two mighty Eagles fell, and there they pearch'd,
Gorging and feeding from our Soldiers hands,
Who to Philippi heere conſorted vs:
This Morning are they fled away, and gone,
And in their ſteeds, do Rauens, Crowes, and Kites
Fly ore our heads, and downward looke on vs
As we were ſickely prey; their ſhadowes ſeeme
A Canopy moſt fatall, vnder which
Our Army lies, ready to giue vp the Ghoſt.
Beleeue not ſo.
I but beleeue it partly,
For I am freſh of ſpirit, and reſolu'd
To meete all perils, very conſtantly.
Euen ſo Lucillius.
Now moſt Noble Brutus,
The Gods to day ſtand friendly, that we may
Louers in peace, leade on our dayes to age.
But ſince the affayres of men reſts ſtill incertaine,
Let's reaſon with the worſt that may befall.
If we do loſe this Battaile, then is this
The very laſt time we ſhall ſpeake together:
What are you then determined to do?
Euen by the rule of that Philoſophy,
By which I did blame Cato, for the death
Which he did giue himſelfe, I know not how:
But I do finde it Cowardly, and vile,
For feare of what might fall, ſo to preuent
The time of life, arming my ſelfe with patience,
To ſtay the prouidence of ſome high Powers,
That gouerne vs below.
Then, if we looſe this Battaile,
You are contented to be led in Triumph
Thorow the ſtreets of Rome.
No Caſſius, no:
Thinke not thou Noble Romane,
That euer Brutus will go bound to Rome,
He beares too great a minde. But this ſame day
Muſt end that worke, the Ides of March begun.
And whether we ſhall meete againe, I know not:
Therefore our euerlaſting farewell take:
For euer, and for euer, farewell Caſſius,
If we do meete againe, why we ſhall ſmile;
If not, why then this parting was well made.
For euer, and for euer, farewell Brutus:
If we do meete againe, wee'l ſmile indeede;
If not, 'tis true, this parting was well made.
Why then leade on. O that a man might know
The end of this dayes buſineſſe, ere it come:
But it ſufficeth, that the day will end,
And then the end is knowne. Come ho, away.
Ride, ride Meſſala, ride and giue theſe Billes
Vnto the Legions, on the other ſide.
Let them ſet on at once: for I perceiue
But cold demeanor in Octauio's wing:
And ſodaine puſh giues them the ouerthrow:
Ride, ride Meſſala, let them all come downe.
O looke Titinius, looke, the Villaines flye:
My ſelfe haue to mine owne turn'd Enemy:
This Enſigne heere of mine was turning backe,
I ſlew the Coward, and did take it from him.
O Caſſius, Brutus gaue the word too early,
Who hauing ſome aduantage on Octauius,
Tooke it too eagerly: his Soldiers fell to ſpoyle,
Whil'ſt we by Antony are all inclos'd.
Fly further off my Lord: flye further off,
Mark Antony is in your Tents my Lord:
Flye therefore Noble Caſſius, flye farre off.
This Hill is farre enough. Looke, look Titinius
Are thoſe my Tents where I perceiue the fire?
They are, my Lord.
Titinius, if thou loueſt me,
Mount thou my horſe, and hide thy ſpurres in him,
Till he haue brought thee vp to yonder Troopes
And heere againe, that I may reſt aſſur'd
Whether yond Troopes, are Friend or Enemy.
I will be heere againe, euen with a thought.
Go Pindarus, get higher on that hill,
My ſight was euer thicke: regard Titinius,
And tell me what thou not'ſt about the Field.
This day I breathed firſt, Time is come round,
And where I did begin, there ſhall I end,
My life is run his compaſſe. Sirra, what newes?
Aboue. O my Lord.
What newes?
Titinius is encloſed round about
With Horſemen, that make to him on the Spurre,
Yet he ſpurres on. Now they are almoſt on him:
Now Titinius. Now ſome light: O he lights too.
Hee's tane.
And hearke, they ſhout for ioy.
Come downe, behold no more:
O Coward that I am, to liue ſo long,
To ſee my beſt Friend tane before my face.
Come hither ſirrah: In Parthia did I take thee Priſoner,
And then I ſwore thee, ſauing of thy life,
That whatſoeuer I did bid thee do,
Thou ſhould'ſt attempt it. Come now, keepe thine oath,
Now be a Free-man, and with this good Sword
That ran through Caeſars bowels, ſearch this boſome.
Stand not to anſwer: Heere, take thou the Hilts,
And when my face is couer'd, as 'tis now,
Guide thou the Sword — Caeſar, thou art reueng'd,
Euen with the Sword that kill'd thee.
So, I am free,
Yet would not ſo haue beene
Durſt I haue done my will. O Caſſius,
Farre from this Country Pindarus ſhall run,
Where neuer Roman ſhall take note of him.
It is but change, Titinius: for Octauius
Is ouerthrowne by Noble Brutus power,
As Caſſius Legions are by Antony.
Theſe tydings will well comfort Caſſius.
Where did you leaue him.
All diſconſolate,
With Pindarus his Bondman, on this Hill.
Is not that he that lyes vpon the ground?
He lies not like the Liuing. O my heart!
Is not that hee?
No, this was he Meſſala,
But Caſſius is no more. O ſetting Sunne:
As in thy red Rayes thou doeſt ſinke to night;
So in his red blood Caſsius day is ſet.
The Sunne of Rome is ſet. Our day is gone,
Clowds, Dewes, and Dangers come; our deeds are done:
Miſtruſt of my ſucceſſe hath done this deed.
Miſtruſt of good ſucceſſe hath done this deed.
O hatefull Error, Melancholies Childe:
Why do'ſt thou ſhew to the apt thoughts of men▪
The things that are not? O Error ſoone conceyu'd,
Thou neuer com'ſt vnto a happy byrth,
But kil'ſt the Mother that engendred thee.
What Pindarus? Where art thou Pindarus?
Seeke him Titinius, whilſt I go to meet
The Noble Brutus, thruſting this report
Into his eares; I may ſay thruſting it:
For piercing Steele, and Darts inuenomed,
Shall be as welcome to the eares of Brutus,
As tydings of this ſight.
Hye you Meſſala,
And I will ſeeke for Pindarus the while:
Why did'ſt thou ſend me forth braue Caſsius?
Did I not meet thy Friends, and did not they
Put on my Browes this wreath of Victorie,
And bid me giue it thee? Did'ſt thou not heare their ſhowts?
Alas, thou haſt miſconſtrued euery thing.
But hold thee, take this Garland on thy Brow,
Thy Brutus bid me giue it thee, and I
Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,
And ſee how I regarded Caius Caſsius:
By your leaue Gods: This is a Romans part,
Come Caſsius Sword, and finde Titinius hart.
Where, where Meſſala, doth his body lye?
Loe yonder, and Titinius mourning it.
Titinius face is vpward.
He is ſlaine.
O Iulius Caeſar, thou art mighty yet,
Thy Spirit walkes abroad, and turnes our Swords
In our owne proper Entrailes.
Braue Titinius,
Looke where he haue not crown'd dead Caſsius.
Are yet two Romans liuing ſuch as theſe?
The laſt of all the Romans, far thee well:
It is impoſſible, that euer Rome
Should breed thy fellow. Friends I owe mo teares
To this dead man, then you ſhall ſee me pay.
I ſhall finde time, Caſsius: I ſhall finde time.
Come therefore, and to Tharſus ſend his body,
His Funerals ſhall not be in our Campe,
Leaſt it diſcomfort vs. Lucillius come,
And come yong Cato, let vs to the Field,
Labio and Flauio ſet our Battailes on:
'Tis three a clocke, and Romans yet ere night,
We ſhall try Fortune in a ſecond fight.
Yet Country-men: O yet, hold vp your heads.
What Baſtard doth not? Who will go with me?
I will proclaime my name about the Field.
I am the Sonne of Marcus Cato, hoe.
A Foe to Tyrants, and my Countries Friend.
I am the Sonne of Marcus Cato, hoe.
And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I,
Brutus my Countries Friend: Know me for Brutus.
O yong and Noble Cato, art thou downe?
Why now thou dyeſt, as brauely as Titinius,
And may'ſt be honour'd, being Cato's Sonne.
Yeeld, or thou dyeſt.
Onely I yeeld to dye:
There is ſo much, that thou wilt kill me ſtraight:
Kill Brutus, and be honour'd in his death.
We muſt not: a Noble Priſoner.
Roome hoe: tell Antony, Brutus is tane.
Ile tell thee newes. Heere comes the Generall,
Brutus is tane, Brutus is tane my Lord.
Where is hee?
Safe Antony, Brutus is ſafe enough:
I dare aſſure thee, that no Enemy
Shall euer take aliue the Noble Brutus:
The Gods defend him from ſo great a ſhame,
When you do finde him, or aliue, or dead,
He will be found like Brutus, like himſelfe.
This is not Brutus friend, but I aſſure you,
A prize no leſſe in worth; keepe this man ſafe,
Giue him all kindneſſe. I had rather haue
Such men my Friends, then Enemies. Go on,
And ſee where Brutus be aliue or dead,
And bring vs word, vnto Octauius Tent:
How euery thing is chanc'd.
Come poore remaines of friends, reſt on this Rocke.
Statillius ſhew'd the Torch-light, but my Lord
He came not backe: he is or tane, or ſlaine.
Sit thee downe, Clitus: ſlaying is the word,
It is a deed in faſhion. Hearke thee, Clitus.
What I, my Lord? No, not for all the World.
Peace then, no words.
Ile rather kill my ſelfe.
Hearke thee, Dardanius.
Shall I doe ſuch a deed?
O Dardanius.
O Clitus.
What ill requeſt did Brutus make to thee?
To kill him, Clitus: looke he meditates.
Now is that Noble Veſſell full of griefe,
That it runnes ouer euen at his eyes.
Come hither, good Ʋolumnius, liſt a word.
What ſayes my Lord?
Why this, Volumnius:
The Ghoſt of Caeſar hath appear'd to me
Two ſeuerall times by Night: at Sardis, once;
And this laſt Night, here in Philippi fields:
I know my houre is come.
Not ſo, my Lord.
Nay, I am ſure it is, Volumnius.
Thou ſeeſt the World, Volumnius, how it goes,
Our Enemies haue beat vs to the Pit:
It is more worthy, to leape in our ſelues,
Then tarry till they puſh vs. Good Volumnius,
Thou know'ſt, that we two went to Schoole together:
Euen for that our loue of old, I prethee
Hold thou my Sword Hilts, whileſt I runne on it.
That's not an Office for a friend, my Lord.
Fly, flye my Lord, there is no tarrying heere.
Farewell to you, and you, and you Volumnius.
Strato, thou haſt bin all this while aſleepe:
Farewell to thee, to Strato, Countrymen:
My heart doth ioy, that yet in all my life,
I found no man, but he was true to me.
I ſhall haue glory by this looſing day
More then Octauius, and Marke Antony,
By this vile Conqueſt ſhall attaine vnto.
So fare you well at once, for Brutus tongue
Hath almoſt ended his liues Hiſtory:
Night hangs vpon mine eyes, my Bones would reſt,
That haue but labour'd, to attaine this houre.
Fly my Lord, flye.
Hence: I will follow:
I prythee Strato, ſtay thou by thy Lord,
Thou art a Fellow of a good reſpect:
Thy life hath had ſome ſmatch of Honor in it,
Hold then my Sword, and turne away thy face,
While I do run vpon it. Wilt thou Strato?
Giue me your hand firſt. Fare you wel my Lord.
Farewell good Strato. —Caeſar, now be ſtill,
I kill'd not thee with halfe ſo good a will.
What man is that?
My Maſters man. Strato, where is thy Maſter?
Free from the Bondage you are in Meſſala,
The Conquerors can but make a fire of him:
For Brutus onely ouercame himſelfe,
And no man elſe hath Honor by his death.
So Brutus ſhould be found. I thank thee Brutus
That thou haſt prou'd Lucillius ſaying true,
All that ſeru'd Brutus, I will entertaine them.
Fellow, wilt thou beſtow thy time with me?
I, if Meſſala will preferre me to you.
Do ſo, good Meſſala.
How dyed my Maſter Strato?
I held the Sword, and he did run on it.
Octauius, then take him to follow thee,
That did the lateſt ſeruice to my Maſter.
This was the Nobleſt Roman of them all:
All the Conſpirators ſaue onely hee,
Did that they did, in enuy of great Caeſar:
He, onely in a generall honeſt thought,
And common good to all, made one of them.
His life was gentle, and the Elements
So mixt in him, that Nature might ſtand vp,
And ſay to all the world; This was a man.
According to his Vertue, let vs vſe him
Withall Reſpect, and Rites of Buriall.
Within my Tent his bones to night ſhall ly▪
Moſt like a Souldier ordered Honourably:
So call the Field to reſt, and let's away,
To part the glories of this happy day.