NAy, but this dotage of our Generals
Ore-flowes the meaſure: thoſe his goodly eyes
That o're the Files and Muſters of the Warre,
Haue glow'd like plated Mars:
Now bend, now turne
The Office and Deuotion of their view
Vpon a Tawny Front. His Captaines heart,
Which in the ſcuffles of great Fights hath burſt
The Buckles on his breſt, reneages all temper,
And is become the Bellowes and the Fan
To coole a Gypſies Luſt.
Looke where they come:
Take but good note, and you ſhall ſee in him
(The triple Pillar of the world) transform'd
Into a Strumpets Foole. Behold and ſee.
If it be Loue indeed, tell me how much.
There's beggery in the loue that can be reckon'd
Ile ſet a bourne how farre to be belou'd.
Then muſt thou needes finde our new Heauen, new Earth.
Newes (my good Lord) from Rome.
Grates me, the ſumme.
Nay heare them Anthony.
Fuluia perchance is angry: Or who knowes,
If the ſcarſe-bearded Caeſar haue not ſent
His powrefull Mandate to you. Do this, or this;
Take in that Kingdome, and Infranchiſe that:
Perform't, or elſe we damne thee.
How, my Loue?
Perchance? Nay, and moſt like:
You muſt not ſtay heere longer, your diſmiſſion
Is come from Caeſar, therefore heare it Anthony.
Where's Fuluias Proceſſe? (Caeſars I would ſay) both?
Call in the Meſſengers: As I am Egypts Queene,
Thou bluſheſt Anthony, and that blood of thine
Is Caeſars homager: elſe ſo thy cheeke payes ſhame,
When ſhrill-tongu'd Fuluia ſcolds. The Meſſengers.
Let Rome in Tyber melt, and the wide Arch
Of the raing'd Empire fall: Heere is my ſpace,
Kingdomes are clay: Our dungie earth alike
Feeds Beaſt as Man; the Nobleneſſe of life
Is to do thus: when ſuch a mutuall paire,
And ſuch a twaine can doo't in which I binde
One paine of puniſhment, the world to weete
We ſtand vp Peereleſſe.
Excellent falſhood:
Why did he marry Fuluia, and not loue her?
Ile ſeeme the Foole I am not. Anthony will be himſelfe.
But ſtirr'd by Cleopatra.
Now for the loue of Loue, and her ſoft houres,
Let's not confound the time with Conference harſh;
There's not a minute of our liues ſhould ſtretch
Without ſome pleaſure now. What ſport to night?
Heare the Ambaſſadors.
Fye wrangling Queene:
Whom euery thing becomes, to chide, to laugh,
To weepe: who euery paſſion fully ſtriues
To make it ſelfe (in Thee) faire, and admir'd.
No Meſſenger but thine, and all alone, to night
Wee'l wander through the ſtreets, and note
The qualities of people. Come my Queene,
Laſt night you did deſire it. Speake not to vs.
Is Caeſar with Anthonius priz'd ſo ſlight?
Sir ſometimes when he is not Anthony,
He comes too ſhort of that great Property
Which ſtill ſhould go with Anthony.
I am full ſorry, that hee approues the common Lyar, who thus ſpeakes of him at Rome; but I will hope of better deeds to morrow. Reſt you happy.
L. Alexas, ſweet Alexas, moſt any thing Alexas, almoſt moſt abſolute Alexas, where's the Soothſayer that you prais'd ſo to' th' Queene? Oh that I knewe this Husband, which you ſay, muſt change his Hornes with Garlands.
Soothſayer.
Your will?
Is this the Man? Is't you ſir that know things?
In Natures infinite booke of Secrecie, a little I can read.
Shew him your hand.
Bring in the Banket quickly: Wine enough,
Cleopatra's health to drinke.
Good ſir, giue me good Fortune.
I make not, but foreſee.
Pray then, foreſee me one.
You ſhall be yet farre fairer then you are.
He meanes in fleſh.
No, you ſhall paint when you are old.
Wrinkles forbid.
Vex not his preſcience, be attentiue.
Huſh.
You ſhall be more belouing, then beloued.
I had rather heate my Liuer with drinking.
Nay, heare him.
Good now ſome excellent Fortune: Let mee be married to three Kings in a forenoone, and Widdow them all: Let me haue a Childe at fifty, to whom Herode of Iewry may do Homage. Finde me to marrie me with Octauius Caeſar, and companion me with my Miſtris.
You ſhall out-liue the Lady whom you ſerue.
Oh excellent, I loue long life better then Figs.
You haue ſeene and proued a fairer former fortune, then that which is to approach.
Then belike my Children ſhall haue no names:
Prythee how many Boyes and Wenches muſt I haue.
If euery of your wiſhes had a wombe, & foretell euery wiſh, a Million.
Out Foole, I forgiue thee for a Witch.
You thinke none but your ſheets are priuie to your wiſhes.
Nay come, tell Iras hers.
Wee'l know all our Fortunes.
Mine, and moſt of our Fortunes to night, ſhall be drunke to bed.
There's a Palme preſages Chaſtity, if nothing els.
E'ne as the o're-flowing Nylus preſageth Famine.
Go you wilde Bedfellow, you cannot Soothſay.
Nay, if an oyly Palme bee not a fruitfull Prognoſtication, I cannot ſcratch mine eare. Prythee tel her but a worky day Fortune.
Your Fortunes are alike.
But how, but how, giue me particulars.
I haue ſaid.
Am I not an inch of Fortune better then ſhe?
Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better then I: where would you chooſe it.
Not in my Husbands noſe.
Our worſer thoughts Heauens mend.
Come, his Fortune, his Fortune. Oh let him mary a woman that cannot go, ſweet Iſis, I beſeech thee, and let her dye too, and giue him a worſe, and let worſe follow worſe, till the worſt of all follow him laughing to his graue, fifty-fold a Cuckold. Good Iſis heare me this Prayer, though thou denie me a matter of more waight: good Iſis I beſeech thee.
Amen, deere Goddeſſe, heare that prayer of the people. For, as it is a heart-breaking to ſee a handſome man looſe-Wiu'd, ſo it is a deadly ſorrow, to beholde a foule Knaue vncuckolded: Therefore deere Iſis keep decorum, and Fortune him accordingly.
Amen.
Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make mee a Cuckold, they would make themſelues Whores, but they'ld doo't.
Huſh, heere comes Anthony.
Not he, the Queene.
Saue you, my Lord.
No Lady.
Was he not heere?
No Madam.
He was diſpos'd to mirth, but on the ſodaine
A Romane thought hath ſtrooke him.
Enobarbus?
Madam.
Seeke him, and bring him hither: wher's Alexias?
Heere at your ſeruice.
My Lord approaches.
We will not looke vpon him:
Go with vs.
Fuluia thy Wife,
Firſt came into the Field.
Againſt my Brother Lucius?
I: but ſoone that Warre had end,
And the times ſtate
Made friends of them, ioynting their force 'gainſt Caeſar,
Whoſe better iſſue in the warre from Italy,
Vpon the firſt encounter draue them.
Well, what worſt.
The Nature of bad newes infects the Teller.
When it concernes the Foole or Coward: On.
Things that are paſt, are done, with me. 'Tis thus,
Who tels me true, though in his Tale lye death,
I heare him as he flatter'd.
Labienus (this is ſtiffe-newes)
Hath with his Parthian Force
Extended Aſia: from Euphrates his conquering
Banner ſhooke, from Syria to Lydia,
And to Ionia, whil'ſt —
Anthony thou would'ſt ſay.
Oh my Lord.
Speake to me home,
Mince not the generall tongue, name
Cleopatra as ſhe is call'd in Rome:
Raile thou in Fuluia's phraſe, and taunt my faults
With ſuch full Licenſe, as both Truth and Malice
Haue power to vtter. Oh then we forth weeds,
When our quicke windes lye ſtill, and our illes told vs
Is as our earing: fare thee well awhlle.
At your Noble pleaſure.
From Scicion how the newes? Speake there.
The man from Scicion,
Is there ſuch an one?
He ſtayes vpon your will.
Let him appeare:
Theſe ſtrong Egyptian Fetters I muſt breake,
Or looſe my ſelfe in dotage.
What are you?
Fuluia thy wife is dead.
Where dyed ſhe.
In Scicion, her length of ſickneſſe,
With what elſe more ſerious,
Importeth thee to know, this beares.
Forbeare me
There's a great Spirit gone, thus did I deſire it:
What our contempts doth of ten hurle from vs,
We with it ours againe. The preſent pleaſure,
By reuolution lowring, does become
The oppoſite of it ſelfe: ſhe's good being gon,
The hand could plucke her backe, that ſhou'd her on.
I muſt from this enchanting Queene breake off,
Ten thouſand harmes, more then the illes I know
My idleneſſe doth hatch.
How now Enobarbus.
What's your pleaſure, Sir?
I muſt with haſte from hence.
Why then we kill all our Women. We ſee how mortall an vnkindneſſe is to them, if they ſuffer our departure death's the word.
I muſt be gone.
Vnder a compelling an occaſion, let women die. It were pitty to caſt them away for nothing, though betweene them and a great cauſe, they ſhould be eſteemed nothing. Cleopatra catching but the leaſt noyſe of this, inſtantly: I haue ſeene her dye twenty times vppon fa orer moment: I do think there is mettle in death, which mits ſome louing acte vpon her, ſhe hath ſuch a celerity in dying.
She is cunning paſt mans thought.
Alacke Sir no, her paſſions are made of nothing but the fineſt part of pure Loue. We cannot cal her winds and waters, ſighes and teares: They are greater ſtormes and Tempeſts then Almanackes can report. This cannot be cunning in her; if it be, ſhe makes a ſhowre of Raine as well as Ioue.
Would I had neuer ſeene her.
Oh ſir, you had then left vnſeene a wonderfull peece of worke, which not to haue beene bleſt withall, would haue diſcredited your Trauaile.
Fuluia is dead.
Sir.
Fuluia is dead.
Fuluia?
Dead.
Why ſir, giue the Gods a thankefull Sacrifice: when it pleaſeth their Deities to take the wife of a man from him, it ſhewes to man the Tailors of the earth: comforting therein, that when olde Robes are worne out, there are members to make new. If there were no more Women but Fuluia, then had you indeede a cut, and the caſe to be lamented: This greefe is crown'd with Conſolation, your old Smocke brings foorth a new Petticoate, and indeed the teares liue in an Onion, that ſhould water this ſorrow.
The buſineſſe ſhe hath broached in the State,
Cannot endure my abſence.
And the buſineſſe you haue broach'd heere cannot be without you, eſpecially that of Cleopatra's, which wholly depends on your abode.
No more light Anſweres:
Let our Officers
Haue notice what we purpoſe. I ſhall breake
The cauſe of our Expedience to the Queene,
And get her loue to part. For not alone
The death of Fuluia, with more vrgent touches
Do ſtrongly ſpeake to vs: but the Letters too
Of many our contriuing Friends in Rome,
Petition vs at home. Sextus Pompeius
Haue giuen the dare to Caeſar, and commands
The Empire of the Sea. Our ſlippery people,
Whoſe Loue is neuer link'd to the deſeruer,
Till his deſerts are paſt, begin to throw
Pompey the great, and all his Dignities
Vpon his Sonne, who high in Name and Power,
Higher then both in Blood and Life, ſtands vp
For the maine Souldier. Whoſe quality going on,
The ſides o' th' world may danger. Much is breeding,
Which like the Courſers heire, hath yet but life,
And not a Serpents poyſon. Say our pleaſure,
To ſuch whoſe places vnder vs, require
Our quicke remoue from hence.
I ſhall doo't.
Where is he?
I did not ſee him ſince.
See where he is,
Whoſe with him, what he does:
I did not ſend you. If you finde him ſad,
Say I am dauncing: if in Myrth, report
That I am ſodaine ſicke. Quicke, and returne.
Madam, me thinkes if you did loue him deerly,
You do not hold the method, to enforce
The like from him.
What ſhould I do, I do not?
In each thing giue him way, croſſe him in nothing.
Thou teacheſt like a foole: the way to loſe him.
Tempt him not ſo too farre. I wiſh forbeare,
In time we hate that which we often feare.
But heere comes Anthony.
I am ſicke, and ſullen.
I am ſorry to giue breathing to my purpoſe.
Helpe me away deere Charmian, I ſhall fall,
It cannot be thus long, the ſides of Nature
Will not ſuſtaine it.
Now my deereſt Queene.
Pray you ſtand farther from mee.
What's the matter?
I know by that ſame eye ther's ſome good news.
What ſayes the married woman you may goe?
Would ſhe had neuer giuen you leaue to come.
Let her not ſay 'tis I that keepe you heere,
I haue no power vpon you: Hers you are.
The Gods beſt know.
Oh neuer was there Queene
So mightily betrayed: yet at the firſt
I ſaw the Treaſons planted.
Cleopatra.
Why ſhould I thinke you can be mine, & true,
(Though you in ſwearing ſhake the Throaned Gods)
Who haue beene falſe to Fuluia?
Riotous madneſſe,
To be entangled with thoſe mouth-made vowes,
Which breake themſelues in ſwearing.
Moſt ſweet Queene.
Nay pray you ſeeke no colour for your going,
But bid farewell, and goe:
When you ſued ſtaying,
Then was the time for words: No going then,
Eternity was in our Lippes, and Eyes,
Bliſſe in our browes bent: none our parts ſo poore,
But was a race of Heauen. They are ſo still,
Or thou the greateſt Souldier of the world,
Art turn'd the greateſt Lyar.
How now Lady?
I would I had thy inches, thou ſhould'ſt know
There were a heart in Egypt.
Heare me Queene:
The ſtrong neceſſity of Time, commands
Our Seruicles a-while: but my full heart
Remaines in vſe with you. Our Italy,
Shines o're with ciuill Swords; Sextus Pompeius
Makes his approaches to the Port of Rome,
Equality of two Domeſticke powers,
Breed ſcrupulous faction: The hated growne to ſtrength
Are newly growne to Loue: The condemn'd Pompey,
Rich in his Fathers Honor, creepes apace
Into the hearts of ſuch, as haue not thriued
Vpon the preſent ſtate, whoſe Numbers threaten,
And quietneſſe growne ſicke of reſt, would purge
By any deſperate change: My more particular,
And that which moſt with you ſhould ſafe my going,
Is Fuluias death.
Though age from folly could not giue me freedom
It does from childiſhneſſe. Can Fuluia dye?
She's dead my Queene.
Looke heere, and at thy Soueraigne leyſure read
The Garboyles ſhe awak'd: at the laſt, beſt,
See when, and where ſhee died.
O moſt falſe Loue!
Where be the Sacred Violles thou ſhould'ſt fill
With ſorrowfull water? Now I ſee, I ſee,
In Fuluias death, how mine receiu'd ſhall be.
Quarrell no more, but bee prepar'd to know
The purpoſes I beare: which are, or ceaſe,
As you ſhall giue th' aduice. By the fire
That quickens Nylus ſlime, I go from hence
Thy Souldier, Seruant, making Peace or Warre,
As thou affects.
Cut my Lace, Charmian come,
But let it be, I am quickly ill, and well,
So Anthony loues.
My precious Queene forbeare,
And giue true euidence to his Loue, which ſtands
An honourable Triall.
So Fuluia told me.
I prythee turne aſide, and weepe for her,
Then bid adiew to me, and ſay the teares
Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one Scene
Of excellent diſſembling, and let it looke
Like perfect Honor.
You'l heat my blood no more?
You can do better yet: but this is meetly.
Now by Sword.
And Target. Still he mends.
But this is not the beſt. Looke prythee Charmian,
How this Herculean Roman do's become
The carriage of his chafe.
Ile leaue you Lady.
Courteous Lord, one word:
Sir, you and I muſt part, but that's not it:
Sir, you and I haue lou'd, but there's not it:
That you know well, ſomething it is I would:
Oh, my Obliuion is a very Anthony,
And I am all forgotten.
But that your Royalty
Holds Idleneſſe your ſubiect, I ſhould take you
For Idleneſſe it ſelfe.
'Tis ſweating Labour,
To beare ſuch Idleneſſe ſo neere the heart
As Cleopatra this. But Sir, forgiue me,
Since my becommings kill me, when they do not
Eye well to you. Your Honor calles you hence,
Therefore be deafe to my vnpittied Folly,
And all the Gods go with you. Vpon your Sword
Sit Lawrell victory, and ſmooth ſucceſſe
Be ſtrew'd before your feete.
Let vs go.
Come: Our ſeparation ſo abides and flies,
That thou reciding heere, goes yet with mee;
And I hence fleeting, heere remaine with thee.
Away.
You may ſee Lepidus, and henceforth know,
It is not Caeſars Naturall vice, to hate
One great Competitor. From Alexandria
This is the newes: He fiſhes, drinkes, and waſtes
The Lampes of night in reuell: Is not more manlike
Then Cleopatra: nor the Queene of Ptolomy
More Womanly then he. Hardly gaue audience
Or vouchſafe to thinke he had Partners. You
Shall finde there a man, who is th' abſtracts of all faults,
That all men follow.
I muſt not thinke
There are, euils enow to darken all his goodneſſe:
His faults in him, ſeeme as the Spots of Heauen,
More fierie by nights Blackneſſe; Hereditarie,
Rather then purchaſte: what he cannot change,
Then what he chooſes.
You are too indulgent. Let's graunt it is not
Amiſſe to tumble on the bed of Ptolomy,
To giue a Kingdome for a Mirth, to ſit
And keepe the turne of Tipling with a Slaue,
To reele the ſtreets at noone, and ſtand the Buffet
With knaues that ſmels of ſweate: Say this becom him
(As his compoſure muſt be rare indeed,
Whom theſe things cannot blemiſh) yet muſt Anthony
No way excuſe his foyles, when we do beare
So great waight in his lightneſſe. If he fill'd
His vacancie with his Voluptuouſneſſe,
Full ſurfets, and the drineſſe of his bones,
Call on him for't. But to confound ſuch time,
That drummes him from his ſport, and ſpeakes as lowd
As his owne State, and ours, 'tis to be chid:
As we rate Boyes, who being mature in knowledge,
Pawne their experience to their preſent pleaſure,
And ſo rebell to iudgement.
Heere's more newes.
Thy biddings haue beene done, & euerie houre
Moſt Noble Caeſar, ſhalt thou haue report
How 'tis abroad. Pompey is ſtrong at Sea,
And it appeares, he is belou'd of thoſe
That only haue feard Caeſar: to the Ports
The diſcontents repaire, and mens reports
Giue him much wrong'd.
I ſhould haue knowne no leſſe,
It hath bin taught vs from the primall ſtate
That he which is was wiſht, vntill he were:
And the ebb'd man,
Ne're lou'd, till ne're worth loue,
Comes fear'd, by being lack'd. This common bodie,
Like to a Vagabond Flagge vpon the Streame,
Goes too, and backe, lacking the varrying tyde
To rot it ſelfe with motion.
Caeſar I bring thee word,
Menacrates and Menas famous Pyrates
Makes the Sea ſerue them, which they eare and wound
With keeles of euery kinde. Many hot inrodes
They make in Italy, the Borders Maritime
Lacke blood to thinke on't, and fluſh youth reuolt,
No Veſſell can peepe forth: but 'tis as ſoone
Taken as ſeene: for Pompeyes name ſtrikes more
Then could his Warre reſiſted.
Anthony,
Leaue thy laſciuious Vaſſailes. When thou once
Was beaten from Medena, where thou ſlew'ſt
Hirſius, and Pauſa Conſuls, at thy heele
Did Famine follow, whom thou fought'ſt againſt,
(Though daintily brought vp) with patience more
Then Sauages could ſuffer. Thou did'ſt drinke
The ſtale of Horſes, and the gilded Puddle
Which Beaſts would cough at. Thy pallat thē did daine
The rougheſt Berry, on the rudeſt Hedge.
Yea, like the Stagge, when Snow the Paſture ſheets,
The barkes of Trees thou brows'd. On the Alpes,
It is reported thou did'ſt eate ſtrange fleſh,
Which ſome did dye to looke on: And all this
(It wounds thine Honor that I ſpeake it now)
Was borne ſo like a Soldiour, that thy cheeke
So much as lank'd not.
'Tis pitty of him.
Let his ſhames quickely
Driue him to Rome, 'tis time we twaine
Did ſhew our ſelues i' th' Field, and to that end▪
Aſſemble me immediate counſell, Pompey
Thriues in our Idleneſſe.
To morrow Caeſar,
I ſhall be furniſht to informe you rightly
Both what by Sea and Land I can be able
To front this preſent time.
Til which encounter, it is my buſines too. Farwell.
Farwell my Lord, what you ſhal know mean time
Of ſtirres abroad, I ſhall beſeech you Sir
To let me be partaker.
Doubt not ſir, I knew it for my Bond.
Charmian.
Madam.
Ha, ha, giue me to drinke Mandragora.
Why Madam?
That I might ſleepe out this great gap of time:
My Anthony is away.
You thinke of him too much.
O 'tis Treaſon.
Madam, I truſt not ſo.
Thou, Eunuch Mardian?
What's your Highneſſe pleaſure?
Not now to heare thee ſing. I take no pleaſure
In ought an Eunuch ha's: Tis well for thee,
That being vnſeminar'd, thy freer thoughts
May not flye forth of Egypt. Haſt thou Affections?
Yes gracious Madam.
Indeed?
Not in deed Madam, for I can do nothing
But what in deede is honeſt to be done:
Yet haue I fierce Affections, and thinke
What Venus did with Mars.
Oh Charmion:
Where think'ſt thou he is now? Stands he, or ſits he?
Or does he walke? Or is he on his Horſe?
Oh happy horſe to beare the weight of Anthony!
Do brauely Horſe, for wot'ſt thou whom thou moou'ſt,
The demy Atlas of this Earth, the Arme
And Burganet of men. Hee's ſpeaking now,
Or murmuring, where's my Serpent of old Nyle▪
(For ſo he cals me:) Now I feede my ſelfe
With moſt delicious poyſon. Thinke on me
That am with Phoebus amorous pinches blacke,
And wrinkled deepe in time. Broad-fronted Caeſar,
When thou was't heere aboue the ground, I was
A morſell for a Monarke: and great Pompey
Would ſtand and make his eyes grow in my brow,
There would he anchor his Aspect, and dye
With looking on his life.
Soueraigne of Egypt, haile.
How much vnlike art thou Marke Anthony?
Yet comming from him, that great Med'cine hath
With his Tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my braue Marke Anthonie?
Laſt thing he did (deere Quene)
He kiſt the laſt of many doubled kiſſes
This Orient Pearle. His ſpeech ſtickes in my heart.
Mine eare muſt plucke it thence.
Good Friend, quoth he:
Say the firme Roman to great Egypt ſends
This treaſure of an Oyſter: at whoſe foote
To mend the petty preſent, I will peece
Her opulent Throne, with Kingdomes. All the Eaſt,
(Say thou) ſhall call her Miſtris. So he nodded,
And ſoberly did mount an Arme-gaunt Steede,
Who neigh'd ſo hye, that what I would haue ſpoke,
Was beaſtly dumbe by him.
What was he ſad, or merry?
Like to the time o' th' yeare, between ye extremes
Of hot and cold, he was nor ſad▪ nor merrie.
Oh well diuided diſpoſition: Note him,
Note him good Charmian, 'tis the man; but note him.
He was not ſad, for he would ſhine on thoſe
That make their lookes by his. He was not merrie,
Which ſeem'd to tell them, his remembrance lay
In Egypt with his ioy, but betweene both.
Oh heauenly mingle! Bee'ſt thou ſad, or merrie,
The violence of either thee becomes,
So do's it no mans elſe. Met'ſt thou my Poſts?
I Madam, twenty ſeuerall Meſſengers.
Why do you ſend ſo thicke?
Who's borne that day, when I forget to ſend to Anthonie, ſhall dye a Begger. Inke and paper Charmian. Welcome my good Alexas. Did I Charmian, euer loue Caeſar ſo?
Oh that braue Caeſar!
Be choak'd with ſuch another Emphaſis,
Say the braue Anthony.
The valiant Caeſar.
By Iſis, I will giue thee bloody teeth,
If thou with Caeſar Parago nagaine:
My man of men.
By your moſt gracious pardon,
I ſing but after you.
My Sallad dayes,
When I was greene in iudgement, cold in blood,
To ſay, as I ſaide then. But come, away,
Get me Inke and Paper,
he ſhall haue euery day a ſeuerall greeting, or Ile vnpeople Egypt.
If the great Gods be iuſt, they ſhall aſſiſt
The deeds of iuſteſt men.
Know worthy Pompey, that what they do delay, they not deny.
Whiles we are ſutors to their Throne, decayes the thing we ſue for.
We ignorant of our ſelues,
Begge often our owne harmes, which the wiſe Powres
Deny vs for our good: ſo finde we profit
By looſing of our Prayers.
I ſhall do well:
The people loue me, and the Sea is mine;
My powers are Creſſent, and my Auguring hope
Sayes it will come to' th' full. Marke Anthony
In Egypt ſits at dinner, and will make
No warres without doores. Caeſar gets money where
He looſes hearts: Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flatter'd: but he neither loues,
Nor either cares for him.
Caeſar and Lepidus are in the field,
A mighty ſtrength they carry.
Where haue you this? 'Tis falſe.
From Siluius, Sir.
He dreames: I know they are in Rome together
Looking for Anthony: but all the charmes of Loue,
Salt Cleopatra ſoften thy wand lip,
Let Witchcraft ioyne with Beauty, Luſt with both,
Tye vp the Libertine in a field of Feaſts,
Keepe his Braine fuming. Epicurean Cookes,
Sharpen with cloyleſſe ſawce his Appetite,
That ſleepe and feeding may prorogue his Honour,
Euen till a Lethied dulneſſe—
How now Varrius?
This is moſt certaine, that I ſhall deliuer:
Marke Anthony is euery houre in Rome
Expected. Since he went from Egypt, 'tis
A ſpace for farther Trauaile.
I could haue giuen leſſe matter
A better eare. Menas, I did not thinke
This amorous Surfetter would haue donn'd his Helme
For ſuch a petty Warre: His Souldierſhip
Is twice the other twaine: But let vs reare
The higher our Opinion, that our ſtirring
Can from the lap of Egypts Widdow, plucke
The neere Luſt-wearied Anthony.
I cannot hope,
Caeſar and Anthony ſhall well greet together;
His Wife that's dead, did treſpaſſes to Caeſar,
His Brother wan'd vpon him, although I thinke
Not mou'd by Anthony.
I know not Menas,
How leſſer Enmities may giue way to greater,
Were't not that we ſtand vp againſt them all:
'Twer pregnant they ſhould ſquare between themſelues,
For they haue entertained cauſe enough
To draw their ſwords: but how the feare of vs
May Ciment their diuiſions, and binde vp
The petty difference, we yet not know:
Bee't as our Gods will haue't; it onely ſtands
Our liues vpon, to vſe our ſtrongeſt hands
Come Menas.
Good Enobarbus, 'tis a worthy deed,
And ſhall become you well, to intreat your Captaine
To ſoft and gentle ſpeech.
I ſhall intreat him
To anſwer like himſelfe: if Caeſar moue him,
Let Anthony looke ouer Caeſars head,
And ſpeake as lowd as Mars. By Iupiter,
Were I the wearer of Anthonio's Beard,
I would not ſhaue't to day.
'Tis not a time for priuate ſtomacking.
Euery time ſerues for the matter that is then borne in't.
But ſmall to greater matters muſt giue way.
Not if the ſmall come firſt.
Your ſpeech is paſſion: but pray you ſtirre
No Embers vp. Heere comes the Noble Anthony.
And yonder Caeſar.
If we compoſe well heere, to Parthia:
Hearke Ventidius.
I do not know Mecenas, aske Agrippa.
Noble Friends:
That which combin'd vs was moſt great, and let not
A leaner action rend vs. What's amiſſe,
May it be gently heard. When we debate
Our triuiall difference loud, we do commit
Murther in healing wounds. Then Noble Partners,
The rather for I earneſtly beſeech,
Touch you the ſowreſt points with ſweeteſt tearmes,
Nor curſtnee grow to' th' matter.
'Tis ſpoken well:
Were we before our Armies, and to fight,
I ſhould do thus.
Welcome to Rome.
Thanke you.
Sit.
Sit ſir.
Nay then.
I learne, you take things ill, which are not ſo:
Or being, concerne you not.
I muſt be laught at, if or for nothing, or a little, I
Should ſay my ſelfe offended, and with you
Chiefely i' th' world. More laught at, that I ſhould
Once name you derogately: when to ſound your name
It not concern'd me.
My being in Egypt Caeſar, what was't to you?
No more then my reciding heere at Rome
Might be to you in Egypt: yet if you there
Did practiſe on my State, your being in Egypt
Might be my queſtion.
How intend you, practis'd?
You may be pleas'd to catch at mine intent,
By what did heere befall me. Your Wife and Brother
Made warres vpon me, and their conteſtation
Was Theame for you, you were the word of warre.
You do miſtake your buſines, my Brother neuer
Did vrge me in his Act: I did inquire it,
And haue my Learning from ſome true reports
That drew their ſwords with you, did he not rather
Diſcredit my authority with yours,
And make the warres alike againſt my ſtomacke,
Hauing alike your cauſe. Of this, my Letters
Before did ſatisfie you. If you'l patch a quarrell,
As matter whole you haue to make it with,
It muſt not be with this.
You praiſe your ſelfe, by laying defects of iudgement to me: but you patcht vp your excuſes.
Not ſo, not ſo:
I know you could not lacke, I am certaine on't,
Very neceſſity of this thought, that I
Your Partner in the cauſe 'gainſt which he fought,
Could not with gracefull eyes attend thoſe Warres
Which fronted mine owne peace. As for my wife,
I would you had her ſpirit, in ſuch another,
The third oth' world is yours▪ which with a Snaffle,
You may pace eaſie, but not ſuch a wife.
Would we had all ſuch wiues, that the men might go to Warres with the women.
So much vncurbable, her Garboiles (Caeſar)
Made out of her impatience: which not wanted
Shrodeneſſe of policie to: I greeuing grant,
Did you too much diſquiet, for that you muſt,
But ſay I could not helpe it?
I wrote to you, when rioting in Alexandria you
Did pocket vp my Letters: and with taunts
Did gibe my Miſie out of audience.
Sir, he fell vpon me, ere admitted, then:
Three Kings I had newly feaſted, and did want
Of what I was i' th' morning: but next day
I told him of my ſelfe, which was as much
As to haue askt him pardon. Let this Fellow
Be nothing of our ſtrife: if we contend
Out of our queſtion wipe him.
You haue broken the Article of your oath, which you ſhall neuer haue tongue to charge me with.
Soft Caeſar.
No Lepidus, let him ſpeake,
The Honour is Sacred which he talks on now,
Suppoſing that I lackt it: but on Caeſar,
The Article of my oath.
To lend me Armes, and aide when I requir'd them, the which you both denied.
Neglected rather:
And then when poyſoned houres had bound me vp
From mine owne knowledge, as neerely as I may,
Ile play the penitent to you. But mine honeſty,
Shall not make poore my greatneſſe, nor my power
Worke without it. Truth is, that Fuluia,
To haue me out of Egypt, made Warres heere,
For which my ſelfe, the ignorant motiue, do
So farre ake pardon, as befits mine Honour
To ſtoope in ſuch a caſe.
'Tis Noble ſpoken.
If it might pleaſe you, to enforce no further
The griefes betweene ye: to forget them quite,
Were to remember: that the preſent neede,
Speakes to attone you.
Worthily ſpoken Mecenas.
Or if you borrow one anothers Loue for the inſtant, you may when you heare no more words of Pompey returne it againe: you ſhall haue time to wrangle in, when you haue nothing elſe to do.
Thou art a Souldier, onely ſpeake no more.
That trueth ſhould be ſilent, I had almoſt forgot.
You wrong this preſence, therefore ſpeake no more.
Go too then: your Conſiderate ſtone.
I do not much diſlike the matter, but
The manner of his ſpeech: for't cannot be,
We ſhall remaine in friendſhip, our conditions
So diffring in their acts. Yet if I knew,
What Hoope ſhould hold vs ſtaunch from edge to edge
A th' world: I would perſue it.
Giue me leaue Caeſar.
Speake Agrippa.
Thou haſt a Siſter by the Mothers ſide, admir'd
Octauia. Great Mark Anthony is now a widdower.
Say not, ſay Agrippa; if Cleopater heard you, your proofe were well deſerued of raſhneſſe.
I am not marryed Caeſar: let me heere Agrippa further ſpeake.
To hold you in perpetuall amitie,
To make you Brothers, and to knit your hearts
With an vn-ſlipping knot, take Anthony,
Octauia to his wife: whoſe beauty claimes
No worſe a husband then the beſt of men: whoſe
Vertue, and whoſe generall graces, ſpeake
That which none elſe can vtter. By this marriage,
All little Ielouſies which now ſeeme great,
And all great feares, which now import their dangers,
Would then be nothing. Truth's would be tales,
Where now halfe tales be truth's: her loue to both,
Would each to other, and all loues to both
Draw after her. Pardon what I haue ſpoke,
For 'tis a ſtudied not a preſent thought,
By duty ruminated.
Will Caeſar ſpeake?
Not till he heares how Anthony is toucht,
With what is ſpoke already.
What power is in Agrippa,
If I would ſay Agrippa, be it ſo,
To make this good?
The power of Caeſar,
And his power, vnto Octauia.
May I neuer
(To this good purpoſe, that ſo fairely ſhewes)
Dreame of impediment: let me haue thy hand
Further this act of Grace: and from this houre,
The heart of Brothers gouerne in our Loues,
And ſway our great Deſignes.
There's my hand:
A Siſter I bequeath you, whom no Brother
Did euer loue ſo deerely. Let her liue
To ioyne our kingdomes, and our hearts, and neuer
Flie off our Loues againe.
Happily, Amen.
I did not think to draw my Sword 'gainſt Pompey,
For he hath laid ſtrange courteſies, and great
Of late vpon me. I muſt thanke him onely,
Leaſt my remembrance, ſuffer ill report:
At heele of that, defie him.
Time cals vpon's,
Of vs muſt Pompey preſently be ſought,
Or elſe he ſeekes out vs.
Where lies he?
About the Mount-Meſena.
What is his ſtrength by land?
Great, and encreaſing:
But by Sea he is an abſolute Maſter.
So is the Fame,
Would we had ſpoke together. Haſt we for it,
Yet ere we put our ſelues in Armes, diſpatch we
The buſineſſe we haue talkt of.
With moſt gladneſſe,
And do inuite you to my Siſters view,
Whether ſtraight Ile lead you.
Let vs Lepidus not lacke your companie.
Noble Anthony, not ſickeneſſe ſhould detaine me.
Welcome from Aegypt Sir.
Halfe the heart of Caeſar, worthy Mecenas. My honourable Friend Agrippa.
Good Enobarbus.
We haue cauſe to be glad, that matters are ſo well diſgeſted: you ſtaid will by't in Egypt.
I Sir, we did ſleepe day out of countenaunce: and made the night light with drinking.
Eight Wilde-Boares roſted whole at a breakfaſt: and but twelue perſons there. Is this true?
This was but as a Flye by an Eagle: we had much more monſtrous matter of Feaſt, which worthily deſerued noting.
She's a moſt triumphant Lady, if report be ſquare to her.
When ſhe firſt met Marke Anthony, ſhe purſt vp his heart vpon the Riuer of Sidnis.
There ſhe appear'd indeed: or my reporter deuis'd well for her.
I will tell you,
The Barge ſhe ſat in, like a burniſht Throne
Burnt on the water: the Poope was beaten Gold,
Purple the Sailes: and ſo perfumed that
The Windes were Loue-ſicke.
With them the Owers were Siluer,
Which to the tune of Flutes kept ſtroke, and made
The water which they beate, to follow faſter;
As amorous of their ſtrokes. For her owne perſon,
It beggerd all diſcription, ſhe did lye
In her Pauillion, cloth of Gold, of Tiſſue,
O're-picturing that Venns, where we ſee
The fancie out-worke Nature. On each ſide her,
Stood pretty Dimpled Boyes, like ſmiling Cupids,
With diuers coulour'd Fannes whoſe winde did ſeeme,
To gloue the delicate cheekes which they did coole,
And what they vndid did.
Oh rare for Anthony.
Her Gentlewoman, like the Nereides,
So many Mer-maides tended her i' th' eyes,
And made their bends adornings. At the Helme.
A ſeeming Mer-maide ſteeres: The Silken Tackle,
Swell with the touches of thoſe Flower-ſoft hands,
That yarely frame the office. From the Barge
A ſtrange inuiſible perfume hits the ſenſe
Of the adiacent Wharfes. The Citty caſt
Her people out vpon her: and Anthony
Enthron'd i' th' Market-place, did ſit alone,
Whiſling to' th' ayre: which but for vacancie,
Had gone to gaze on Cleopater too,
And made a gap in Nature.
Rare Egiptian.
Vpon her landing, Anthony ſent to her,
Inuited her to Supper: ſhe replyed,
It ſhould be better, he became her gueſt:
Which ſhe entreated, our Courteous Anthony,
Whom nere the word of no woman hard ſpeake,
Being barber'd ten times o're, goes to the Feaſt;
And for his ordinary, paies his heart,
For what his eyes eate onely.
Royall Wench:
She made great Caeſar lay his Sword to bed,
He ploughed her, and ſhe cropt.
I ſaw her once
Hop forty Paces through the publicke ſtreete.
And hauing loſt her breath, ſhe ſpoke, and panted,
That ſhe did make defect, perfection▪
And breathleſſe powre breath forth.
Now Anthony, muſt leaue her vtterly.
Neuer he will not:
Age cannot wither her, nor cuſtome ſtale
Her infinite variety: other women cloy
The appetites they feede, but ſhe makes hungry,
Where moſt ſhe ſatisfies. For vildeſt things
Become themſelues in her, that the holy Prieſts
Bleſſe her, when ſhe is Riggiſh.
If Beauty, Wiſedome, Modeſty, can ſettle
The heart of Anthony: Octauia is
A bleſſed Lottery to him.
Let vs go. Good Enobarbus, make your ſelfe my gueſt, whilſt you abide heere.
Humbly Sir I thanke you.
The world, and my great office, will
Sometimes deuide me from your boſome.
All which time, before the Gods my knee ſhall bowe my ptayers to them for you.
Goodnight Sir. My Octauia
Read not my blemiſhes in the worlds report:
I haue not kept my ſquare, but that to come
Shall all be done by th' Rule: good night deere Lady:
Good night Sir.
Goodnight.
Now ſirrah: you do wiſh your ſelfe in Egypt?
Would I had neuer come from thence, nor you thither.
If you can, your reaſon?
I ſee it in my motion: haue it not in my tongue,
But yet hie you to Egypt againe.
Say to me, whoſe Fortunes ſhall riſe higher Caeſars or mine?
Caeſars, Therefore (oh Anthony) ſtay not by his ſide
Thy Daemon that thy ſpirit which keepes thee, is
Noble, Couragious, high vnmatchable,
Where Caeſars is not. But neere him, hy Angell
Becomes a feare: as being o're-powr'd, therefore
Make ſpace enough betweene you.
Speake this no more.
To none but thee no more but: when to thee,
If thou doſt play with him at any game,
Thou art ſure to looſe: And of that Naturall lucke▪
He beats thee 'gainſt the oddes. Thy Luſter thickens,
When he ſhines by: I ſay againe, thy ſpirit
Is all affraid to gouerne thee neere him:
But he alway 'tis Noble.
Get thee gone:
Say to Ventigius I would ſpeake with him.
He ſhall to Parthia, be it Art or hap,
He hath ſpoken true. The very Dice obey him,
And in our ſports my better cunning faints,
Vnder his chance, if we draw lots he ſpeeds,
His Cocks do winne the Battaile, ſtill of mine,
When it is all to naught: and his Quailes euer
Beate mine (in hoop) at odd's. I will to Egypte:
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
I' th' Eaſt my pleaſure lies. Oh come Ventigius.
You muſt to Parthia, your Commiſſions ready:
Follow me, and reciue't.
Trouble your ſelues no further: pray you haſten your Generals after.
Sir▪ Marke Anthony, will e'ne but kiſſe Octauia, and weele follow.
Till I ſhall ſee you in your Souldiers dreſſe,
Which will become you both: Farewell.
We ſhall: as I conceiue the iourney, be at Mount before you Lepidus.
Your way is ſhorter, my purpoſes do draw me much about, you'le win two dayes vpon me.
Sir good ſucceſſe.
Farewell.
Giue me ſome Muſicke: Muſicke, moody foode of vs that trade in Loue.
The Muſicke, hoa.
Let it alone, let's to Billards: come Charmian.
My arme is ſore, beſt play with Mardian.
As well a woman with an Eunuch plaide, as with a woman. Come you'le play with me Sir?
As well as I can Madam.
And when good will is ſhewed,
Though't come to ſhort
The Actor may pleade pardon. Ile none now,
Giue me mine Angle, weele to' th' Riuer there
My Muſicke playing farre off. I will betray
Tawny fine fiſhes, my bended hooke ſhall pierce
Their ſlimy iawes: and as I draw them vp,
Ile thinke them euery one an Anthony,
And ſay, ah ha; y' are caught.
'Twas merry when you wager'd on your Angling, when your diuer did hang a ſalt fiſh on his hooke which he with feruencie drew vp.
That time? Oh times:
I laught him out of patience: and that night
I laught him into patience, and next morne,
Ere the ninth houre, I drunke him to his bed:
Then put my Tires and Mantles on him, whilſt
I wore his Sword Phillippan. Oh from Italie,
Ramme thou thy fruitefull tidings in mine eares,
That long time haue bin barren.
Madam, Madam.
Anthonyo's dead.
If thou ſay ſo Villaine, thou kil'ſt thy Miſtris:
But well and free, if thou ſo yeild him.
There is Gold, and heere
My bleweſt vaines to kiſſe: a hand that Kings
Haue lipt, and trembled kiſſing.
Firſt Madam, he is well.
Why there's more Gold.
But ſirrah marke, we vſe
To ſay, the dead are well: bring it to that,
The Gold I giue thee, will I melt and powr
Downe thy ill vttering throate.
Good Madam heare me.
Well, go too I will:
But there's no goodneſſe in thy face if Anthony
Be free and healthfull; ſo tart a fauour
To trumpet ſuch good tidings. If not well,
Thou ſhouldſt come like a Furie crown'd with Snakes,
Not like a formall man.
Wilt pleaſe you heare me?
I haue a mind to ſtrike thee ere thou ſpeak'ſt:
Yet if thou ſay Anthony liues, 'tis well,
Or friends with Caeſar, or not Captiue to him,
Ile ſet thee in a ſhower of Gold, and haile
Rich Pearles vpon thee.
Madam, he's well.
Well ſaid.
And Friends with Caeſar.
Th' art an honeſt man.
Caeſar, and he, are greater Friends then euer.
Make thee a Fortune from me.
But yet Madam.
I do not like but yet, it does alay
The good precedence, fie vpon but yet,
Bur yet is as a Iaylor to bring foorth
Some monſtrous Malefactor. Prythee Friend,
Powre out the packe of matter to mine eare,
The good and bad together: he's friends with Caeſar,
In ſtate of health thou ſaiſt, and thou ſaiſt, free.
Free Madam, no: I made no ſuch report,
He's bound vnto Octauia.
For what good turne?
For the beſt turne i' th' bed.
I am pale Charmian.
Madam, he's married to Octauia.
The moſt infectious Peſtilence vpon thee.
Good Madam patience.
What ſay you?
Hence horrible Villaine, o le ſpurne thine eyes
Like balls before me: Ile vnhaire thy head,
Thou ſhalt be whipt with Wyer, and ſtew'd in brine,
Smarting in lingring pickle.
Gratious Madam,
I that do bring the newes, made not the match.
Say 'tis not ſo, a Prouince I will giue thee,
And make thy Fortunes proud: the blow thou had'ſt
Shall make thy peace, for mouing me to rage,
And I will boot thee with what guift beſide
Thy modeſtie can begge.
He's married Madam.
Rogue, thou haſt liu'd too long.
Nay then Ile runne:
What meane you Madam, I haue made no fault.
Good Madam keepe your ſelfe within your ſelfe,
The man is innocent.
Some Innocents ſcape not the thunderbolt:
Melt Egypt into Nyle: and kindly creatures
Turne all to Serpents. Call the ſlaue againe,
Though I am mad, I will not byte him: Call?
He is afeard to come.
I will not hurt him,
Theſe hands do lacke Nobility, that they ſtrike
A meaner then my ſelfe: ſince I my ſelfe
Haue giuen my ſelfe the cauſe. Come hither Sir.
Though it be honeſt, it is neuer good
To bring bad newes: giue to a gratious Meſſage
An hoſt of tongues, but let ill tydings tell
Themſelues, when they be felt.
I haue done my duty.
Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worſer then I do,
If thou againe ſay yes.
He's married Madam.
The Gods confound thee,
Doſt thou hold there ſtill?
Should I lye Madame?
Oh, I would thou didſt:
So halfe my Egypt were ſubmerg'd and made
A Ceſterne for ſcal'd Snakes. Go get thee hence,
Had'ſt thou Narciſſus in thy face to me,
Thou would'ſt appeere moſt vgly: He is married?
I craue your Highneſſe pardon.
He is married?
Take no offence, that I would not offend you,
To punniſh me for what you make me do
Seemes much vnequall, he's married to Octauia.
Oh that his fault ſhould make a knaue of thee,
That art not what th' art ſure of. Get thee hence,
The Marchandize which thou haſt brought from Rome
Are all too deere for me:
Lye they vpon thy hand, and be vndone by em.
Good your Highneſſe patience.
In prayſing Anthony, I haue diſprais'd Caeſar.
Many times Madam.
I am paid for't now: lead me from hence,
I faint, oh Iras, Charmian: 'tis no matter.
Go to the Fellow, good Alexas bid him
Report the feature of Octauia: her yeares,
Her inclination, let him not leaue out
The colour of her haire. Bring me word quickly,
Let him for euer go, let him not Charmian,
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
The other wayes a Mars. Bid you Alexas
Bring me word, how tall ſhe is: pitty me Charmian,
But do not ſpeake to me. Lead me to my Chamber.
Your Hoſtages I haue, ſo haue you mine:
And we ſhall talke before we fight.
Moſt meete that firſt we come to words,
And therefore haue we
Our written purpoſes before vs ſent,
Which if thou haſt conſidered, let vs know,
If 'twill tye vp thy diſcontented Sword,
And carry backe to Cicelie much tall youth,
That elſe muſt periſh heere.
To you all three,
The Senators alone of this great world,
Chiefe Factors for the Gods. I do not know,
Wherefore my Father ſhould reuengers want,
Hauing a Sonne and Friends, ſince Iulius Caeſar,
Who at Phillippi the good Brutus ghoſted,
There ſaw you labouring for him. What was't
That mou'd pale Caſſius to conſpire? And what
Made all-honor'd, honeſt, Romaine Brutus,
With the arm'd reſt, Courtiers of beautious freedome,
To drench the Capitoll, but that they would
Haue one man but a man, and that his it
Hath made me rigge my Nauie. At whoſe burthen,
The anger'd Ocean fomes, with which I meant
To ſcourge th' ingratitude, that deſpightfull Rome
Caſt on my Noble Father.
Take your time.
Thou can'ſt not feare vs Pompey with thy ſailes.
Weele ſpeake with thee at Sea. At land thou know'ſt
How much we do o're-count thee.
At Land indeed
Thou doſt ore count me of my Fatherrs houſe:
But ſince the Cuckoo buildes not for himſelfe,
Remaine in't as thou maiſt.
Be pleas'd to tell vs,
(For this is from the preſent now you take)
The offers we haue ſent you.
There's the point.
Which do not be entreated too,
But waigh what it is worth imbrac'd
And what may follow to try a larger Fortune.
You haue made me offer
Of Cicelie, Sardinia: and I muſt
Rid all the Sea of Pirats. Then, to ſend
Meaſures of Wheate to Rome: this greed vpon,
To part with vnhackt edges, and beare backe
Our Targes vndinted.
That's our offer.
Know then I came before you heere,
A man prepar'd
To take this offer. But Marke Anthony,
Put me to ſome impatience: though I looſe
The praiſe of it by telling. You muſt know
When Caeſar and your Brother were at blowes,
Your Mother came to Cicelie, and did finde
Her welcome Friendly.
I haue heard it Pompey.
And am well ſtudied for a liberall thanks,
Which I do owe you.
Let me haue your hand:
I did not thinke Sir, to haue met you heere,
The beds i' th' Eaſt are ſoft, and thanks to you,
That cal'd me timelier then my purpoſe hither:
For I haue gamed by't.
Since I ſaw you laſt, ther's a change vpon you.
Well, I know not,
What counts harſh Fotune caſt's vpon my face,
But in my boſome ſhall ſhe neuer come,
To make my heart her vaſſaile.
Well met heere.
I hope ſo Lepidus, thus we are agreed:
I craue our compoſion may be written
And ſeal'd betweene vs,
That's the next to do.
Weele feaſt each other, ere we part, and lett's
Draw lots who ſhall begin.
That will I Pompey.
No Anthony take the lot: but firſt or laſt, your fine Egyptian cookerie ſhall haue the ſame, I haue heard that Iulius Caeſar, grew fat with feaſting there.
You haue heard much.
I haue faire meaning Sir.
And faire words to them.
Then ſo much haue I heard,
And I haue heard Appolodorus carried—
No more that: he did ſo.
What I pray you?
A certaine Queene to Caeſar in a Matris.
I know thee now, how far'ſt thou Souldier?
Well, and well am like to do, for I perceiue
Foure Feaſts are toward.
Let me ſhake thy hand,
I neuer hated thee: I haue ſeene thee fight,
When I haue enuied thy behauiour.
Sir, I neuer lou'd you much, but I ha' prais'd ye,
When you haue well deſeru'd ten times as much,
As I haue ſaid you did.
Inioy thy plainneſſe,
It nothing ill becomes thee:
Aboord my Gally, I inuite you all.
Will you leade Lords?
Shew's the way, ſir.
Come.
Thy Father Pompey would ne're haue made this Treaty. You, and I haue knowne ſir.
At Sea, I thinke.
We haue Sir.
You haue done well by water.
And you by Land.
I will praiſe any man that will praiſe me, thogh it cannot be denied what I haue done by Land.
Nor what I haue done by water.
Yes ſome-thing you can deny for your owne ſafety: you haue bin a great Theefe by Sea.
And you by Land.
There I deny my Land ſeruice: but giue mee your hand Menas, if our eyes had authority, heere they might take two Theeues kiſſing.
All mens faces are true, whatſomere their hands are.
But there is neuer a fayre Woman, ha's a true Face.
No ſlander, they ſteale hearts.
We came hither to fight with you.
For my part, I am ſorry it is turn'd to a Drinking. Pompey doth this day laugh away his Fortune.
If he do, ſure he cannot weep't backe againe.
Y' haue ſaid Sir, we look'd not for Marke Anthony heere, pray you, is he married to Cleopatra?
Caeſars Siſter is call'd Octauia.
True Sir, ſhe was the wife of Caius Marcellus.
But ſhe is now the wife of Marcus Anthonius.
Pray 'ye ſir.
'Tis true.
Then is Caeſar and he, for euer knit together.
If I were bound to Diuine of this vnity, I wold not Propheſie ſo.
I thinke the policy of that purpoſe, made more i the Marriage, then the loue of the parties.
I thinke ſo too. But you ſhall finde the band that ſeemes to tye their friendſhip together, will bee the very ſtrangler of their Amity: Octauia is of a holy, cold, and ſtill conuerſation.
Who would not haue his wife ſo?
Not he that himſelfe is not ſo: which is Marke Anthony: he will to his Egyptian diſh againe: then ſhall the ſighes of Octauia blow the fire vp in Caeſar, and (as I ſaid before) that which is the ſtrength of their Amity, ſhall proue the immediate Author of their variance. Anthony will vſe his affection where it is. Hee married but his occaſion heere.
And thus it may be, Come Sir, will you aboord?
I haue a health for you.
I ſhall take it ſir: we haue vs'd our Throats in Egypt.
Come, let's away.
Heere they'l be man: ſome o' th' their Plants are ill rooted already, the leaſt winde i' th' world wil blow them downe.
Lepidus is high Conlord.
They haue made him drinke Almes drinke.
As they pinch one another by the diſpoſition, hee cries out, no more; reconciles them to his entreatie, and himſelfe to' th' drinke.
But it raiſes the greatet warre betweene him & his diſcretion.
Why this it is to haue a name in great mens Fellowſhip: I had as liue haue a Reede that will doe me no ſeruice, as a Partizan I could not heaue.
To be call'd into a huge Sphere, and not to be ſeene to moue in't, are the holes where eyes ſhould bee, which pittifully diſaſter the cheekes.
Thus do they Sir: they take the flow o' th' Nyle
By certaine ſcales i' th' Pyramid: they know
By 'th 'height, the lowneſſe, or the meane: If dearth
Or Foizon follow. The higher Nilus ſwels,
The more it promiſes: as it ebbes, the Seedſman
Vpon the ſlime and Ooze ſcatters his graine,
And ſhortly comes to Harueſt.
Y' haue ſtrange Serpents there?
I Lepidus.
Your Serpent of Egypt, is bred now of your mud by the operation of your Sun: ſo is your Crocodile.
They are ſo.
Sit, and ſome Wine: A health to Lepidus.
I am not ſo well as I ſhould be:
But Ile ne're out.
Not till you haue ſlept: I feare me you'l bee in till then.
Nay certainly, I haue heard the Ptolomies Pyramiſis are very goodly things: without contradiction I haue heard that.
Pompey, a word.
Say in mine eare, what is't.
Forſake thy ſeate I do beſeech thee Captaine,
And heare me ſpeake a word.
Forbeare me till anon.
This Wine for Lepidus.
What manner o' thing is your Crocodile?
It is ſhap'd ſir like it ſelfe, and it is as broad as it hath bredth; It is iuſt ſo high as it is, and mooues with it owne organs. It liues by that which nouriſheth it, and the Elements once out of it, it Tranſmigrates.
What colour is it of?
Of it owne colour too.
'Tis a ſtrange Serpent.
'Tis ſo, and the teares of it are wet.
Will this deſcription ſatisfie him?
With the Health that Pompey giues him, elſe he is a very Epicure.
Go hang ſir, hang: tell me of that? Away:
Do as I bid you. Where's this Cup I call'd for?
If for the ſake of Merit thou wilt heare mee,
Riſe from thy ſtoole.
I thinke th' art mad: the matter?
I haue euer held my cap off to thy Fortunes.
Thou haſt ſeru'd me with much faith: what's elſe to ſay? Be iolly Lords.
Theſe Quicke-ſands Lepidus,
Keepe off, them for you ſinke.
Wilt thou be Lord of all the world?
What ſaiſt thou?
Wilt thou be Lord of the whole world?
That's twice.
How ſhould that be?
But entertaine it, and though thou thinke me poore. I am the man will giue thee all the world.
Haſt thou drunke well.
No Pompey, I haue kept me from the cup,
Thou art if thou dar'ſt be, the earthly Ioue:
What ere the Ocean pales, or skie inclippes,
Is thine, if thou wilt ha't.
Shew me which way?
Theſe three World-ſharers, theſe Competitors
Are in thy veſſell. Let me cut the Cable,
And when we are put off, fall to their throates:
All there is thine.
Ah, this thou ſhouldſt haue done,
And not haue ſpoke on't. In me 'tis villanie,
In thee, 't had bin good ſeruice: thou muſt know,
'Tis not my profit that does lead mine Honour:
Mine Honour it, Repent that ere thy tongue,
Hath ſo betraide thine acte. Being done vnknowne,
I ſhould haue found it afterwards well done,
But muſt condemne it now: deſiſt, and drinke.
For this, Ile neuer follow
Thy paul'd Fortunes more,
Who ſeekes and will not take, when once 'tis offer'd,
Shall neuer finde it more.
This health to Lepidus.
Beare him aſhore,
Ile pledge it for him Pompey.
Heere's to thee Menas.
Enobarbus, welcome.
Fill till the cup be hid.
There's a ſtrong Fellow Menas.
Why?
A beares the third part of the world man: ſeeſt not?
The third part, then he is drunk: would it were all, that it might go on wheeles.
Drinke thou: encreaſe the Reeles.
Come.
This is not yet an Alexandrian Feaſt.
It ripen's towards it: ſtrike the Veſſells hoa.
Heere's to Caeſar.
I could well forbear't, it's monſtrous labour when I waſh my braine, and it grow fouler.
Be a Child o' th' time.
Poſſeſſe it, Ile make anſwer: but I had rather faſt from all, foure dayes, then drinke ſo much in one.
Ha my braue Emperour, ſhall we daunce now the Egyptian Backenals, and celebrate our drinke?
Let's ha't good Souldier.
Come, let's all take hands,
Till that the conquering Wine hath ſteep't our ſenſe,
In ſoft and delicate Lethe.
All take hands:
Make battery to our eares with the loud Muſicke,
The while, Ile place you, then the Boy ſhall ſing.
The holding euery man ſhall beate as loud,
As his ſtrong ſides can volly.
Come thou Monarch of the Vine,
Plumpie Bacchus, with pinke eyne:
In thy Fattes our Cares be drown'd,
With thy Grapes our haires be Crown'd.
Cup vs till the world go round,
Cup vs till the world go round.
What would you more?
Pompey goodnight. Good Brother
Let me requeſt you of our grauer buſineſſe
Frownes at this leuitie. Gentle Lords let's part,
You ſee we haue burnt our cheekes. Strong Enobarbe
Is weaker then the Wine, and mine owne tongue
Spleet's what it ſpeakes: the wilde diſguiſe hath almoſt
Antickt vs all. What needs more words? goodnight.
Good Anthony your hand.
Ile try you on the ſhore.
And ſhall Sir, giues your hand.
Oh Anthony, you haue my Father houſe.
But what, we are Friends?
Come downe into the Boate.
Take heed you fall not Menas: Ile not on ſhore,
No to my Cabin: theſe Drummes,
Theſe Trumpets, Flutes: what
Let Neptune heare, we bid aloud farewell
To theſe great Fellowes. Sound and be hang'd, ſound out.
Hoo ſaies a there's my Cap.
Hoa, Noble Captaine, come.
Now darting Parthya art thou ſtroke, and now
Pleas'd Fortune does of Marcus Craſſus death
Make me reuenger. Beare the Kings Sonnes body,
Before our Army, thy Pacorus Orades,
Paies this for Marcus Craſſus.
Noble Ʋentidius,
Whil'ſt yet with Parthian blood thy Sword is warme,
The Fugitiue Parthians follow. Spurre through Media,
Meſapotamia, and the ſhelters, whether
The routed flie. So thy grand Captaine Anthony
Shall ſet thee on triumphant Chariots, and
Put Garlands on thy head.
Oh Sillius, Sillius,
I haue done enough. A lower place note well
May make too great an act. For learne this Sillius,
Better to leaue vndone, then by our deed
Acquire too high a Fame, when him we ſerues away.
Caeſar and Anthony haue euer wonne
More in their officer, then perſon. Soſſius
One of my place in Syria, his Lieutenant,
For quicke accumulation of renowne,
Which he atchiu'd by' th' minute, loſt his fauour.
Who does i' th' Warres more then his Captaine can,
Becomes his Captaines Captaine: and Ambition
(The Souldiers vertue) rather makes choiſe of loſſe
Then gaine, which darkens him.
I could do more to do Anthonius good,
But 'twould offend him. And in his offence,
Should my performance periſh.
Thou haſt Ventidius that, without the which a Souldier and his Sword graunts ſcarce diſtinction: thou wilt write to Anthony.
Ile humbly ſignifie what in his name,
That magicall word of Warre we haue effected,
How with his Banners, and his well paid ranks,
The nere-yet beaten Horſe of Parthia,
We haue iaded out o' th' Field.
Where is he now?
He purpoſeth to Athens, whither with what haſt
The waight we muſt conuay with's, will permit:
We ſhall appeare before him. On there, paſſe along.
What are the Brothers parted?
They haue diſpatcht with Pompey, he is gone,
The other three are Sealing. Octauia weepes
To part from Rome: Caeſar is ſad, and Lepidus
Since Pompey's feaſt, as Menas ſaies, is troubled
With the Greene-Sickneſſe.
'Tis a Noble Lepidus.
A very fine one: oh, how he loues Caeſar.
Nay but how deerely he adores Mark Anthony.
Caeſar? why he's the Iupiter of men.
What's Anthony, the God of Iupiter?
Spake you of Caeſar? How, the non-pareill?
Oh Anthony, oh thou Arabian Bird!
Would you praiſe Caeſar, ſay Caeſar go no further.
Indeed he plied them both with excellent praiſes.
But he loues Caeſar beſt, yet he loues Anthony:
Hoo, Hearts, Tongues, Figure,
Scribes, Bards, Poets, cannot
Thinke ſpeake, caſt, write, ſing, number: hoo,
His loue to Anthony. But as for Caeſar,
Kneele downe, kneele downe, and wonder.
Both he loues.
They are his Shards, and he their Beetle, ſo:
This is to horſe: Adieu, Noble Agrippa.
Good Fortune worthy Souldier, and farewell.
No further Sir.
You take from me a great part of my ſelfe:
Vſe me well in't. Siſter, proue ſuch a wife
As my thoughts make thee, and as my fartheſt Band
Shall paſſe on thy approofe: moſt Noble Anthony,
Let not the peece of Vertue which is ſet
Betwixt vs, as the Cyment of our loue
To keepe it builded, be the Ramme to batter
The Fortreſſe of it: for better might we
Haue lou'd without this meane, if on both parts
This be not cheriſht.
Make me not offended, in your diſtruſt.
I haue ſaid.
You ſhall not finde,
Though you be therein curious, the leſt cauſe
For what you ſeeme to feare, ſo the Gods keepe you,
And make the hearts of Romaines ſerue your ends:
We will heere part.
Farewell my deereſt Siſter, fare thee well,
The Elements be kind to thee, and make
Thy ſpirits all of comfort: fare thee well.
My Noble Brother.
The Aprill's in her eyes, it is Loues ſpring,
And theſe the ſhowers to bring it on: be cheerfull.
Sir▪ looke well to my Husbands houſe: and —
What Octauia?
Ile tell you in your eare.
Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
Her eart informe her tongue.
The Swannes downe feather
That ſtands vpon the Swell at the full of Tide:
And neither way inclines.
Will Caeſar weepe?
He ha's a cloud in's face.
He were the worſe for that were he a Horſe, ſo is he being aman.
Why Enobarbus:
When Anthony found Iulius Caeſar dead,
He cried almoſt to roaring: And he wept,
When at Phillippi he found Brutus ſlaine.
That year indeed, he was trobled with a rheume,
What willingly he did confound, he wail'd,
Beleeu't till I weepe too.
No ſweet Octauia,
You ſhall heare from me ſtill: the time ſhall not
Out-go my thinking on you.
Come Sir, come,
Ile wraſtle with you in my ſtrength of loue,
Looke heere I haue you, thus I let you go,
And giue you to the Gods.
Adieu, be happy.
Let all the number of the Starres giue light
To thy faire way.
Farewell, farewell.
Farewell.
Where is the Fellow?
Halfe afeard to come.
Go too, go too: Come hither Sir.
Good Maieſtie: Herod of Iury dare not looke vpon you, but when you are well pleas'd.
That Herods head, Ile haue: but how? When Anthony is gone, through whom I might commaund it: Come thou neere.
Moſt gratious Maieſtie.
Did'ſt thou behold Octauia?
I dread Queene.
Where?
Madam in Rome, I lookt her in the face: and ſaw her led betweene her Brother, and Marke Anthony.
Is ſhe as tall as me?
She is not Madam.
Didſt heare her ſpeake?
Is ſhe ſhrill tongu'd or low?
Madam, I heard her ſpeake, ſhe is low voic'd.
That's not ſo good: he cannot like her long.
Like her? Oh Iſis: 'tis impoſſible.
I thinke ſo Charmian: dull of tongue, & dwarfiſh
What Maieſtie is in her gate, remember
If ere thou look'ſt on Maieſtie.
She creepes: her motion, & her ſtation are as one.
She ſhewes a body, rather then a life,
A Statue, then a Breather.
Is this certaine?
Or I haue no obſeruance.
Three in Egypt cannot make better note.
He's very knowing, I do perceiu't,
There's nothing in her yet.
The Fellow ha's good iudgement.
Excellent.
Gueſſe at her yeares, I prythee.
Madam, ſhe was a widdow.
Widdow? Charmian, hearke.
And I do thinke ſhe's thirtie.
Bear'ſt thou her face in mind? is't long or round?
Round, euen to faultineſſe.
For the moſt part too, they are fooliſh that are ſo. Her haire what colour?
Browne Madam: and her forehead
As low as ſhe would wiſh it.
There's Gold for thee,
Thou muſt not take my former ſharpeneſſe ill,
I will employ thee backe againe: I finde thee
Moſt fit for buſineſſe. Go, make thee ready,
Our Letters are prepar'd.
A proper man.
Indeed he is ſo: I repent me much
That ſo I harried him. Why me think's by him,
This Creature's no ſuch thing.
Nothing Madam.
The man hath ſeene ſome Maieſty, and ſhould know.
Hath he ſeene Maieſtie? Iſis elſe defend: and ſeruing you ſo long.
I haue one thing more to aske him yet good Charmian: but 'tis no matter, thou ſhalt bring him to me where I will write; all may be well enough.
I warrant you Madam.
Nay, nay Octauia, not onely that,
That were excuſable, that and thouſands more
Of ſemblable import, but he hath wag'd
New Warres 'gainſt Pompey. Made his will, and read it,
To publicke eare, ſpoke ſcantly of me,
When perforce he could not
But pay me tearmes of Honour: cold and ſickly
He vented then moſt narrow meaſure: lent me,
When the beſt hint was giuen him: he not look't,
Or did it from his teeth.
Oh my good Lord,
Beleeue not all, or if you muſt beleeue,
Stomacke not all. A more vnhappie Lady,
If this deuiſion chance, ne're ſtood betweene
Praying for both parts:
The good Gods wil mocke me preſently,
When I ſhall pray: Oh bleſſe my Lord, and Husband,
Vndo that prayer, by crying out as loud,
Oh bleſſe my Brother. Husband winne, winne Brother,
Prayes, and diſtroyes the prayer, no midway
'Twixt theſe extreames at all.
Gentle Octauia,
Let your beſt loue draw to that point which ſeeks
Beſt to preſerue it: if I looſe mine Honour,
I looſe my ſelfe: better I were not yours
Then your ſo branchleſſe. But as you requeſted,
Your ſelfe ſhall go between's, the meane time Lady,
Ile raiſe the preparation of a Warre
Shall ſtaine your Brother, make your ſooneſt haſt,
So your deſires are yours.
Thanks to my Lord,
The Ioue of power make me moſt weake, moſt weake,
You reconciler: Warres 'twixt you twaine would be,
As if the world ſhould cleaue, and that ſlaine men
Should ſoader vp the Rift.
When it appeeres to you where this begins,
Turne your diſpleaſure that way, for our faults
Can neuer be ſo equall, that your loue
Can equally moue with them. Prouide your going,
Chooſe your owne company, and command what coſt
Your heart he's mind too.
How now Friend Eros?
Ther's ſtrange Newes come Sir.
What man?
Caeſar & Lepidus haue made warres vpon Pompey.
This is old, what is the ſucceſſe?
Caeſar hauing made vſe of him in the warres 'gainſt Pompey: preſently denied him riuality, would not let him partake in the glory of the action, and not reſting here, accuſes him of Letters he had formerly wrote to Pompey. Vpon his owne appeale ſeizes him, ſo the poore thir is vp, till death enlarge his Confine.
Then would thou hadſt a paire of chaps no more, and throw betweene them all the food thou haſt, they'le grinde the other. Where's Anthony?
He's walking in the garden thus, and ſpurnes
The ruſh that lies before him. Cries Foole Lepidus,
And threats the throate of that his Officer,
That murdred Pompey.
Our great Nauies rig'd.
For Italy and Caeſar, more Domitius,
My Lord deſires you preſently: my Newes
I might haue told heareafter.
'Twill be naught, but let it be: bring me to Anthony.
Come Sir,
Contemning Rome he ha's done all this, & more
In Alexandria: heere's the manner of't:
I' th' Market place on a Tribunall ſiluer'd,
Cleopatra and himſelfe in Chaires of Gold
Were publikely enthron'd: at the feet ſat
Caeſarion whom they call my Fathers Sonne,
And all the vnlawfull iſſue, that their Luſt▪
Since then hath made betweene them. Vnto her,
He gaue the ſtabliſhment of Egypt, made her
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia, abſolute Queene.
This in the publike eye?
I' th' common ſhew place, where they exerciſe,
His Sonnes hither proclaimed the King of Kings,
Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia
He gaue to Alexander. To Ptolomy he aſſign'd,
Syria, Silicia, and Phoenetia: ſhe
In th' abiliments of the Goddeſſe Iſis
That day appeer'd, and oft before gaue audience,
As 'tis reported ſo.
Let Rome be thus inform'd.
Who queazie with his inſolence already,
Will their good thoughts call from him
The people knowes it,
And haue now receiu'd his accuſations.
Who does he accuſe?
Caeſar, and that hauing in Cicilie
Sextus Pompeius ſpoil'd, we had not rated him
His part o' th' Iſle. Then does he ſay, he lent me
Some ſhipping vnreſtor'd. Laſtly, he frets
That Lepidus of the Triumpherate, ſhould be depos'd,
And being that, we detaine all his Reuenue.
Sir, this ſhould be anſwer'd.
'Tis done already, and the Meſſenger gone:
I haue told him Lepidus was growne too cruell,
That he his high Authority abus'd,
And did deſerue his change: for what I haue conquer'd,
I grant him part: but then in his Armenia,
And other of his conquer'd Kingdoms, I demand the like
Hee'l neuer yeeld to that.
Nor muſt not then be yeelded to in this.
Haile Caeſar, and my L haile moſt deere Caeſar.
That euer I ſhould call thee Caſt-away.
You haue not call'd me ſo, nor haue you cauſe.
Why haue you▪ ſtoln vpon vs thus? you come not
Like Caeſars Siſter, The wife of Anthony
Should haue an Army for an Vſher, and
The neighes of Horſe to tell of her approach,
Long ere ſhe did appeare. The trees by' th' way
Should haue borne men, and expectation fainted,
Longing for what it had not. Nay, the duſt
Should haue aſcended to the Roofe of Heauen,
Rais'd by your populous Troopes: But you are come
A Market-maid to Rome, and haue preuented
The oſtentation of our loue; which left vnſhewne,
Is often left vnlou'd: we ſhould haue met you
By Sea, and Land, ſupplying euery Stage
With an augmented greeting.
Good my Lord,
To come thus was I not conſtrain'd, but did it
On my free-will. My Lord Marke Anthony,
Hearing that you prepar'd for Warre, acquainted
My greeued eare withall: whereon I begg'd
His pardon for returne.
Which ſoone he granted,
Being an abſtract 'tweene his Luſt, and him.
Do not ſay ſo, my Lord.
I haue eyes vpon him,
And his affaires come to me on the wind: wher is he now?
My Lord, in Athens.
No my moſt wronged Siſter, Cleopatra
Hath nodded him to her. He hath giuen his Empire
Vp to a Whore, who now are leuying
The Kings o' th' earth for Warre. He hath aſſembled,
Bochus the King of Lybia, Archilaus
Of Cappadocia, Philadelphos King
Of Paplagonia: the Thracian King Adullas,
King Mauchus of Arabia, King of Pont,
Herod of Iewry▪ Mithridates King
Of Comagear, Polemen and Amintas,
The Kings of Mede, and Licoania,
With a more larger Liſt of Scepters.
Aye me moſt wretched,
That haue my heart parted betwixt two Friends,
That does afflict each other.
Welcom hither: your Letters did with-holde our breaking forth
Till we perceiu'd both how you were wrong led,
And we in negligent danger: cheere your heart,
Be you not troubled with the time, which driues
O're your content, theſe ſtrong neceſſities,
But let determind things to deſtinie
Hold vnbewayl'd their way. Welcome to Rome,
Nothing more deere to me: You are abus'd
Beyond the marke of thought: and the high Gods
To do you Iuſtice, makes his Miniſters
Of vs, and thoſe that loue you. Beſt of comfort,
And euer welcom to vs.
Welcome Lady.
Welcome deere Madam,
Each heart in Rome does loue and pitty you,
Onely th' adulterous Anthony, moſt large
In his abhominations, turnes you off,
And giues his potent Regiment to a Trull
That noyſes it againſt vs▪
Is it ſo ſir?
Moſt certaine: Siſter welcome: pray you
Be euer knowne to patience. My deer'ſt Siſter.
I will be euen with thee, doubt it not.
But why, why, why?
Thou haſt foreſpoke my being in theſe warres,
And ſay'ſt it it not fit.
Well: is it, is it.
If not, denounc'd againſt vs, why ſhould not we be there in perſon.
Well, I could reply: if wee ſhould ſerue with Horſe and Mares together, the Horſe were meerly loſt: the Mares would beare a Soldiour and his Horſe.
What is't you ſay?
Your preſence needs muſt puzle Anthony,
Take from his heart, take from his Braine, from's time,
What ſhould not then be ſpar'd. He is already
Traduc'd for Leuity, and 'tis ſaid in Rome,
That Photinus an Eunuch, and your Maides
Mannage this warre.
Sinke Rome, and their tongues rot
That ſpeake againſt vs. A Charge we beare i' th' Warre,
And as the preſident of my Kingdome will
Appeare there for a man. Speake not againſt it,
I will not ſtay behinde.
Nay I haue done, here comes the Emperor.
Is it not ſtrange Camidius,
That from Tarrentum, and Branduſium,
He could ſo quickly cut the Ionian Sea,
And take in Troine. You haue heard on't (Sweet?)
Celerity is neuer more admir'd,
Then by the negligent.
A good rebuke,
Which might haue well becom'd the beſt of men
To taunt at ſlackneſſe. Camidius, wee
Will fight with him by Sea.
By Sea, what elſe?
Why will my Lord, do ſo?
For that he dares vs too't.
So hath my Lord, dar'd him to ſingle fight.
I, and to wage this Battell at Pharſalia,
Where Caeſar fought with Pompey. But theſe offers
Which ſerue not for his vantage, he ſhakes off,
And ſo ſhould you.
Your Shippes are not well mann'd,
Your Marriners are Militers, Reapers▪ people
Ingroft by ſwift Impreſſe. In Caeſars Fleete,
Are thoſe, that often haue 'gainſt Pompey fought,
Their ſhippes are yare, yours heauy: no diſgrace
Shall fall you for refuſing him at Sea,
Being prepar'd for Land.
By Sea, by Sea.
Moſt worthy Sir, you therein throw away
The abſolute Soldierſhip you haue by Land,
Diſtract your Armie, which doth moſt conſiſt
Of Warre-markt-footmen, leaue vnexecuted
Your owne renowned knowledge, quite forgoe
The way which promiſes aſſurance, and
Giue vp your ſelfe meerly to chance and hazard,
From firme Securitie.
Ile fight at Sea.
I haue ſixty Sailes, Caeſar none better.
Our ouer-plus of ſhipping will we burne,
And with the reſt full mann'd, from th' head of Action
Beate th' approaching Caeſar. But if we faile,
We then can doo't at Land.
Thy Buſineſſe?
The Newes is true, my Lord, he is deſcried, Caeſar ha's taken Toryne.
Can he be there in perſon? 'Tis impoſſible
Strange, that his power ſhould be. Camidius,
Our nineteene Legions thou ſhalt hold by Land,
And our twelue thouſand Horſe. Wee'l to our Ship,
Away my Thetis.
How now worthy Souldier?
Oh Noble Emperor, do not fight by Sea,
Truſt not to rotten plankes: Do you miſdoubt
This Sword, and theſe my Wounds; let th' Egyptians
And the Phoenicians go a ducking: wee
Haue vs'd to conquer ſtanding on the earth,
And fighting foot to foot.
Well, well, away.
By Hercules I thinke I am i' th' right.
Souldier thou art: but his whole action growes
Not in the power on't: ſo our Leaders leade,
And we are Womens men.
You keepe by Land the Legions and the Horſe whole, do you not?
Marcus Octauius, Marcus Iuſteus,
Publicola, and Celius, are for Sea:
But we keepe whole by Land. This ſpeede of Caeſars
Carries beyond beleefe.
While he was yet in Rome.
His power went out in ſuch diſtractions,
As beguilde all Spies.
Who's his Lieutenant, heare you?
They ſay, one Towrus.
Well, I know the man.
The Emperor cals Camidius.
With Newes the times wit a Labour,
And throwes forth each minute, ſome.
Towrus?
My Lord.
Strike not by Land,
Keepe whole, prouoke not Battaile
Till we haue done at Sea. Do not exceede
The Preſcript of this Scroule: Our fortune lyes
Vpon this iumpe.
Set we our Squadrons on yond ſide o' th' Hill,
In eye of Caeſars battaile, from which place
We may the number of the Ships behold,
And ſo proceed accordingly.
Naught, naught, al naught, I can behold no longer:
Thantoniad, the Egyptian Admirall,
With all their ſixty flye, and turne the Rudder:
To ſee't, mine eyes are blaſted.
Gods, & Goddeſſes, all the whol ſynod of them!
What's thy paſſion.
The greater Cantle of the world, is loſt
With very ignorance, we haue kiſt away
Kingdomes, and Prouinces.
How appeares the Fight?
On our ſide, like the Token'd Peſtilence,
Where death is ſure. Yon ribaudred Nagge of Egypt,
(Whom Leproſie o're-take) i' th' midſt o' th' fight,
When vantage like a payre of Twinnes appear'd
Both as the ſame, or rather outs the elder;
(The Breeze vpon her) like a Cow in Inne,
Hoiſts Sailes, and flyes.
That I beheld:
Mine eyes did ſicken at the ſight, and could not.
Indure a further view.
She once being looft,
The Noble ruine of her Magicke, Anthony,
Claps on his Sea-wing, and (like a doting Mallard)
Leauing the Fight in heighth, flyes after her:
I neuer ſaw an Action of ſch ſhame;
Experience, Man-hood, Honor, ne're before,
Did violate ſo it ſelfe.
Alacke, alacke.
Our Fortune on the Sea is out of breath,
And ſinkes moſt lamentably. Had our Generall
Bin what he knew himſelfe, it had gone well:
Oh his ha's giuen example for our flight,
Moſt groſſely by his owne.
I, are you thereabouts? Why then goodnight indeede.
Toward Peloponneſus are they fled.
'Tis eaſie toot,
And there I will attend what further comes.
To Caeſar will I render
My Legions and my Horſe, ſixe Kings alreadie
Shew me the way of yeelding.
Ile yet follow
The wounded chance of Anthony, though my reaſon
Sits in the winde againſt me.
Hearke, the Land bids me tread no more vpon't,
It is aſham'd to beare me. Friends, come hither,
I am ſo lated in the world, that I
Haue loſt my way for euer. I haue a ſhippe,
Laden with Gold, take that, diuide it: flye,
And make your peace with Caeſar.
Fly? Not wee.
I haue fled my ſelfe, and haue inſtructed cowards
To runne, and ſhew their ſhoulders. Friends be gone,
I haue my ſelfe reſolu'd vpon a courſe,
Which has no neede of you. Be gone,
My Treaſure's in the Harbour. Take it: Oh,
I follow'd that I bluſh to looke vpon,
My very haites do mutiny: for the white
Reproue the browne for raſhneſſe, and they them
For feare, and doting. Friends be gone, you ſhall
Haue Letters from me to ſome Friends, that will
Sweepe your way for you. Pray you looke not ſad,
Nor make replyes of loathneſſe, take the hint
Which my diſpaire proclaimes. Let them be left
Which leaues it ſelfe, to the Sea-ſide ſtraight way;
I will poſſeſſe you of that ſhip and Treaſure.
Leaue me, I pray a little: pray you now,
Nay do ſo: for indeede I haue loſt command,
Therefore I pray you, Ile ſee you by and by.
Nay gentle Madam, to him, comfort him.
Do moſt deere Queene.
Do, why, what elſe?
Let me ſit downe: Oh Iuno.
No, no, no, no, no.
See you heere, Sir?
Oh fie, fie, fie.
Madam.
Madam, oh good Empreſſe.
Sir, ſir.
Yes my Lord, yes; he at Philippi kept
His ſword e'ne like a dancer▪ while I ſtrooke
The leane and wrinkled Caſſius, and 'twas I
That the mad Brutus ended: he alone
Dealt on Lieutenantry, and no practiſe had
In the braue ſquares of Warre: yet now: no matter.
Ah ſtand by.
The Queene my Lord, the Queene.
Go to him, Madam, ſpeake to him,
Hee's vnqualited with very ſhame.
Well then, ſuſtaine me: Oh.
Moſt Noble Sir ariſe, the Queene approaches,
Her head's declin'd, and death will ceaſe her, but
Your comfort makes the reſcue.
I haue offended Reputation,
A moſt vnnoble ſweruing.
Sir, the Queene.
Oh whether haſt thou lead me Egypt, ſee
How I conuey my ſhame, out of thine eyes,
By looking backe what I haue left behinde
Stroy'd in diſhonor.
Oh my Lord, my Lord.
Forgiue my fearfull ſayles, I little thought
You would haue followed.
Egypt, thou knew'ſt too well,
My heart was to thy Rudder tyed by' th' ſtrings,
And thou ſhould'ſt ſtowe me after. O're my ſpirit
The full ſupremacie thou knew'ſt, and that
Thy becke, might from the bidding of the Gods
Command mee.
Oh my pardon.
Now I muſt
To the young man ſend humble Treaties, dodge
And palter in the ſhifts of lownes, who
With halfe the bulke o' th' world plaid as I pleas'd,
Making, and marring Fortunes. You did know
How much you were my Conqueror, and that
My Sword, made weake by my affection, would
Obey it on all cauſe.
Pardon, pardon.
Fall not a teare I ſay, one of them rates
All that is wonne and loſt: Giue me a kiſſe,
Euen this repayes me.
We ſent our Schoolemaſter, is a come backe?
Loue I am full of Lead: ſome Wine
Within there, and our Viands: Fortune knowes,
We ſcorne her moſt, when moſt ſhe offers blowes.
Let him appeare that's come from Anthony.
Know you him.
Caeſar, 'tis his Schoolemaſter,
An argument that he is pluckt, when hither
He ſends ſo poore a Pinnion of his Wing,
Which had ſuperfluous Kings for Meſſengers,
Not many Moones gone by.
Approach, and ſpeake.
Such as I am, I come from Anthony:
I was of late as petty to his ends,
As is the Morn-dew on the Mertle leafe
To his grand Sea.
Bee't ſo, declare thine office.
Lord of his Fortunes he ſalutes thee, and
Requires to liue in Egypt, which not granted
He Leſſons his Requeſts, and to thee ſues
To let him breath betweene the Heauens and Earth
A priuate man in Athens: this for him.
Next, Cleopatra does confeſſe thy Greatneſſe,
Submits her to thy might, and of thee craues
The Circle of the Ptolomies for her heyres,
Now hazarded to thy Grace.
For Anthony,
I haue no eares to his requeſt. The Queene,
Of Audience, nor Deſire ſhall faile, ſo ſhee
From Egypt driue her all-diſgraced Friend,
Or take his life there. This if ſhee performe,
She ſhall not ſue vnheard. So to them both.
Fortune purſue thee.
Bring him through the Bands:
To try thy Eloquence, now 'tis time, diſpatch,
From Anthony winne Cleopatra, promiſe
And in our Name, what ſhe requires, adde more
From thine inuention, offers. Women are not
In their beſt Fortunes ſtrong; but want will periure
The ne're touch'd Veſtall. Try thy cunning Thidias,
Make thine owne Edict for thy paines, which we
Will anſwer as a Law.
Caeſar, I go.
Obſerue how Anthony becomes his flaw,
And what thou think'ſt his very action ſpeakes
In euery power that mooues.
Caeſar, I ſhall.
What ſhall we do, Enobarbus?
Thinke, and dye.
Is Anthony, or we in fault for this?
Anthony onely, that would make his will
Lord of his Reaſon. What though you fled,
From that great face of Warre, whoſe ſeuerall ranges
Frighted each other? Why ſhould he follow?
The itch of his Affection ſhould not then
Haue nickt his Captain-ſhip, at ſuch a point,
When halfe to halfe the world oppos'd, he being
The meered queſtion? 'Twas a ſhame no leſſe
Then was his loſſe, to courſe your flying Flagges,
And leaue his Nauy gazing.
Prythee peace.
Is that his anſwer?
I my Lord.
The Queene ſhall then haue courteſie,
So ſhe will yeeld vs vp.
He ſayes ſo.
Let her know't. To the Boy Caeſar ſend this grizled head, and he will fill thy wiſhes to the brimme,
With Principalities.
That head my Lord?
To him againe, tell him he weares the Roſe
Of youth vpon him: from which, the world ſhould note
Something particular: His Coine, Ships, Legions,
May be a Cowards, whoſe Miniſters would preuaile
Vnder the ſeruice of a Childe, as ſoone
As i' th' Command of Caeſar. I dare him therefore
To lay his gay Compariſons a-part,
And anſwer me declin'd▪ Sword againſt Sword,
Our ſelues alone: Ile write it: Follow me.
Yes like enough: hye battel'd Caeſar will
Vnſtate his happineſſe, and be Stag'd to' th' ſhew
Againſt a Sworder. I ſee mens Iudgements are
A parcell of their Fortunes, and things outward
Do draw the inward quality after them
To ſuffer all alike, that he ſhould dreame,
Knowing all meaſures the full Caeſar will
Anſwer his emptineſſe; Caeſar thou haſt ſubdu'de
His iudgement too.
A Meſſenger from Caeſar.
What no more Ceremony? See my Women,
Againſt the blowne Roſe may they ſtop their noſe,
That kneel'd vnto the Buds. Admit him ſir.
Mine honeſty, and I, beginne to ſquare.
The Loyalty well held to Fooles, does make
Our Faith meere folly: yet he that can endure
To follow with Allegeance a falne Lord,
Does conquer him that did his Maſter conquer,
And earnes a place i' th' Story.
Caeſars will.
Heare it apart.
None but Friends: ſay boldly.
So haply are they Friends to Anthony.
He needs as many (Sir) as Caeſar ha's,
Or needs not vs. If Caeſar pleaſe, our Maſter
Will leape to be his Friend: For vs you know,
Whoſe he is, we are, and that is Caeſars.
So. Thus then thou moſt renown'd, Caeſar intreats,
Not to conſider in what caſe thou ſtand'ſt
Further then he is Caeſars.
Go on, right Royall.
He knowes that you embrace not Anthony
As you did loue, but as you feared him.
Oh.
The ſcarre's vpon your Honor, therefore he
Does pitty, as conſtrained blemiſhes,
Not as deſerued.
He is a God,
And knowes what is moſt right. Mine Honour
Was not yeelded, but conquer'd meerely.
To be ſure of that, I will aske Anthony.
Sir, ſir, thou art ſo leakie
That we muſt leaue thee to thy ſinking, for
Thy deereſt quit thee.
Shall I ſay to Caeſar,
What you require of him: for he partly begges
To be deſir'd to giue. It much would pleaſe him,
That of his Fortunes you ſhould make a ſtaffe
To leane vpon. But it would warme his ſpirits
To heare from me you had left Anthony,
And put your ſelfe vnder his ſhrowd, the vniuerſal Landlord.
What's your name?
My name is Thidias.
Moſt kinde Meſſenger,
Say to great Caeſar this in diſputation,
I kiſſe his conqu'ring hand: Tell him, I am prompt
To lay my Crowne at's feete, and there to kneele.
Tell him, from his all-obeying breath, I hear
The doome of Egypt.
'Tis your Nobleſt courſe:
Wiſedome and Fortune combatting together,
If that the former dare but what it can,
No chance may ſhake it. Giue me grace to lay
My dutie on your hand.
Your Caeſars Father oft,
(When he hath mus'd of taking kingdomes in)
Beſtow'd his lips on that vnworthy place,
As it rain'd kiſſes.
Fauours? By Ioue that thunders. What art thou Fellow?
One that but performes
The bidding of the fulleſt man, and worthieſt
To haue command obey'd.
You will be whipt.
Approch there: ah you Kite. Now Gods & diuels
Authority melts from me of late. When I cried hoa,
Like Boyes vnto a muſſe, Kings would ſtart forth,
And cry, your will. Haue you no eares?
I am Anthony yet. Take hence this Iack, and whip him.
'Tis better playing with a Lions whelpe,
Then with an old one dying.
Moone and Starres,
Whip him: wer't twenty of the greateſt Tributaries
That do acknowledge Caeſar, ſhould I finde them
So ſawcy with the hand of ſhe heere, what's her name
Since ſhe was Cleopatra? Whip him Fellowes,
Till like a Boy you ſee him crindge his face,
And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence.
Marke Anthony.
Tugge him away: being whipt
Bring him againe, the Iacke of Caeſars ſhall
Beare vs an arrant to him.
You were halfe blaſted ere I knew you: Ha?
Haue I my pillow left vnpreſt in Rome,
Forborne the getting of a lawfull Race,
And by a Iem of women, to be abus'd
By one that lookes on Feeders?
Good my Lord.
You haue beene a boggeler euer,
But when we in our viciouſneſſe grow hard
(Oh miſery on't) the wiſe Gods ſeele our eyes
In our owne filth, drop our cleare iudgements, make vs
Adore our errors, laugh at's while we ſtrut
To our confuſion.
Oh, is't come to this?
I found you as a Morſell, cold vpon
Dead Caeſars Trencher: Nay, you were a Fragment
Of Gneius Pompeyes, beſides what hotter houres
Vnregiſtred in vulgar Fame, you haue
Luxuriouſly pickt out. For I am ſure,
Though you can gueſſe what Temperance ſhould be,
You know not what it is.
Wherefore is this?
To let a Fellow that will take rewards,
And ſay, God quit you, be familiar with
My play-fellow, your hand; this Kingly Seale,
And plighter of high hearts. O that I were
Vpon the hill of Baſan to out-roare
The horned Heard, for I haue ſauage cauſe,
And to proclaime it ciuilly, were like
A halter'd necke, which do's the Hangman thanke,
For being yare about him. Is he whipt?
Soundly, my Lord.
Cried he? and begg'd a Pardon?
He did aske fauour.
If that thy Father liue, let him repent
Thou was't not made his daughter, and be thou ſorrie
To follow Caeſar in his Triumph, ſince
Thou haſt bin whipt. For following him, henceforth
The white hand of a Lady Feauer thee,
Shake thou to looke on't. Get thee backe to Caeſar,
Tell him thy entertainment: looke thou ſay
He makes me angry with him. For he ſeemes
Proud and diſdainfull, harping on what I am,
Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry,
And at this time moſt eaſie 'tis to doo't:
When my good Starres, that were my former guides
Haue empty left their Orbes, and ſhot their Fires
Into th' Abiſme of hell. If he miſlike,
My ſpeech, and what is done, tell him he has
Hiparchus, my enfranhed Bondman, whom
He may at pleaſure whip, or hang, or torture,
As he ſhall like to quit me. Vrge it thou:
Hence with thy ſtripes, be gone.
Haue you done yet?
Alacke our Terrene Moone is now Eclipſt,
And it portends alone the fall of Anthony.
I muſt ſtay his time?
To flatter Caeſar, would you mingle eyes
With one that tyes his points.
Not know me yet?
Cold-hearted toward me?
Ah (Deere) if I be ſo,
From my cold heart let Heauen ingender haile,
And poyſon it in the ſourſe, and the firſt ſtone
Drop in my necke: as it determines ſo
Diſſolue my life, the next Caeſarian ſmile,
Till by degrees the memory of my wombe,
Together with my braue Egyptians all,
By the diſcandering of this pelleted ſtorme,
Lye graueleſſe, till the Flies and Gnats of Nyle
Haue buried them for prey.
I am ſatisfied:
Caeſar ſets downe in Alexandria, where
I will oppoſe his Fate. Our force by Land,
Hath Nobly held, our ſeuer'd Nauie too
Haue knit againe, and Fleete, threatning moſt Sea-like.
Where haſt thou bin my heart? Doſt thou heare Lady?
If from the Field I ſhall returne once more
To kiſſe theſe Lips, I will appeare in Blood,
I, and my Sword, will earne our Chronicle,
There's hope in't yet.
That's my braue Lord.
I will be trebble-ſinewed, hearted, breath'd,
And fight maliciouſly: for when mine houres
Were nice and lucky, men did ranſome liues
Of me for ieſts: But now, Ile ſet my teeth,
And ſend to darkeneſſe all that ſtop me. Come,
Let's haue one other gawdy night: Call to me
All my ſad Captaines, fill our Bowles once more:
Let's mocke the midnight Bell.
It is my Birth-day,
I had thought t' haue held it poore. But ſince my Lord
Is Anthony againe, I will be Cleopatra.
We will yet do well.
Call all his Noble Captaines to my Lord.
Do ſo, wee'l ſpeake to them,
And to night Ile force
The Wine peepe through their ſcarres.
Come on (my Queene)
There's ſap in't yet. The next time I do fight
Ile make death loue me: for I will contend
Euen with his peſtilent Syte.
Now hee'l out-ſtare the Lightning, to be furious
Is to be frighted out of feare, and in that moode
The Doue will pecke the Eſtridge; and I ſee ſtill
A diminution in our Captaines braine,
Reſtores his heart; when valour prayes in reaſon,
It eates the Sword it fights with: I will ſeeke
Some way to leaue him.
He calles me Boy, and chides as he had power
To beate me out of Egypt. My Meſſenger
He hath whipt with Rods, dares me to perſonal Combat.
Caeſar to Anthony: let the old Ruſſian know,
I haue many other wayes to dye: meane time]
Laugh at his Challenge.
Caeſar muſt thinke,
When one ſo great begins to rage, hee's hunted
Euen to falling. Giue him no breath, but now
Make boote of his diſtraction: Neuer anger
Made good guard for it ſelfe.
Let our beſt heads know,
That to morrow, the laſt of many Battailes
We meane to fight. Within our Files there are,
Of thoſe that ſeru'd Marke Anthony but late,
Enough to fetch him in. See it done,
And Feaſt the Army, we haue ſtore to doo't,
And they haue earn'd the waſte. Poore Anthony.
He will not fight with me, Domitian?
No?
Why ſhould he not?
He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
He is twenty men to one.
To morrow Soldier,
By Sea and Land Ile fight: or I will liue,
Or bathe my dying Honor in the blood
Shall make it liue againe. Woo't thou fight well.
Ile ſtrike, and cry, Take all.
Well ſaid, come on:
Call forth my Houſhold Seruants, lets to night
Be bounteous at our Meale. Giue me thy hand,
Thou haſt bin rightly honeſt, ſo haſt thou,
Thou, and thou, and thou: you haue ſeru'd me well,
And Kings haue beene your fellowes.
What meanes this?
'Tis one of thoſe odde tricks which ſorow ſhoots
Out of the minde.
And thou art honeſt too:
I wiſh I could be made ſo many men,
And all of you clapt vp together, in
An Anthony: that I might do you ſeruice,
So good as you haue done.
The Gods forbid.
Well, my good Fellowes, wait on me to night:
Scant not my Cups, and make as much of me▪
As when mine Empire was your Fellow too,
And ſuffer'd my command.
What does he meane?
To make his Followers weepe.
Tend me to night;
May be, it is the period of your duty,
Haply you ſhall not ſee me more, or if,
A mangled ſhadow. Perchance to morrow,
You'l ſerue another Maſter. I looke on you,
As one that takes his leaue. Mine honeſt Friends,
I turne you not away, but like a Maſter
Married to your good ſeruice, ſtay till death:
Tend me to night two houres, I aske no more,
And the Gods yeeld you for't.
What meane you (Sir)
To giue them this diſcomfort? Looke they weepe,
And I an Aſſe, am Onyon-ey'd; for ſhame,
Transforme vs not to women.
Ho, ho, ho:
Now the Witch take me, if I meant it thus.
Grace grow where thoſe drops fall (my hearty Friends)
You take me in too dolorous a ſenſe,
For I ſpake to you for your comfort, did deſire you
To burne this night with Torches: Know (my hearts)
I hope well of to morrow, and will leade you,
Where rather Ile expect victorious life,
Then death, and Honor. Let's to Supper, come,
And drowne conſideration.
Brother, goodnight: to morrow is the day.
It will determine one way: Fare you well.
Heard you of nothing ſtrange about the ſtreets.
Nothing: what newes?
Belike 'tis but a Rumour, good night to you.
Well ſir, good night.
Souldiers, haue carefull Watch.
And you: Goodnight, goodnight.
Heere we: and if to morrow
Our Nauie thriue, I haue an abſolute hope
Our Landmen will ſtand vp.
'Tis a braue Army, and full of purpoſe.
Peace, what noiſe?
Liſt liſt.
Hearke.
Muſicke i' th' Ayre.
Vnder the earth.
It ſignes well, do's it not?
No.
Peace I ſay: What ſhould this meane?
'Tis the God Hercules, whom Anthony loued,
Now leaues him.
Walke, let's ſee if other Watchmen
Do heare what we do?
How now Maiſters?
How now? how now do you heare this?
I, is't not ſtrange?
Do you heare Maſters? Do you heare?
Follow the noyſe ſo farre as we haue quarter.
Let's ſee how it will giue off.
Content: 'Tis ſtrange.
Eros, mine Armour Eros.
Sleepe a little.
No my Chucke. Eros, come mine Armor Eros.
Come good Fellow, put thine Iron on,
If Fortune be not ours to day, it is
Becauſe we braue her. Come.
Nay, Ile helpe too, Anthony.
What's this for? Ah let be, let be, thou art
The Armourer of my heart: Falſe, falſe: This, this,
Sooth-law Ile helpe: Thus it muſt bee.
Well, well, we ſhall thriue now.
Seeſt thou my good Fellow. Go, put on thy defences.
Briefely Sir.
Is not this buckled well?
Rarely, rarely:
He that vnbuckle this, till we do pleaſe
To daft for our Repoſe, ſhall heare a ſtorme.
Thou fumbleſt Eros, and my Queenes a Squire
More tight at this, then thou: Diſpatch. O Loue,
That thou couldſt ſee my Warres to day and knew'ſt
The Royall Occupation, thou ſhould'ſt ſee
A Workeman in't.
Good morrow to thee, welcome,
Thou look'ſt like him that knowes a warlike Charge:
To buſineſſe that we loue, we riſe betime,
And go too't with delight.
A thouſand Sir, early though't be, haue on their
Riueted trim, and at the Port expect you.
The Morne is faire: Good morrow Generall.
Good morrow Generall.
'Tis well blowne Lads.
This Morning, like the ſpirit of a youth
That meanes to be of note, begins betimes.
So, ſo: Come giue me that, this way, well-ſed.
Fare thee well Dame, what ere becomes of me,
This is a Soldiers kiſſe: rebukeable,
And worthy ſhamefull checke it were, to ſtand
On more Mechanicke Complement, Ile leaue thee.
Now like a man of Steele, you that will fight,
Follow me cloſe, Ile bring you too't: Adieu.
Pleaſe you retyre to your Chamber?
Lead me:
He goes forth gallantly: That he and Caeſar might
Determine this great Warre in ſingle fight;
Then Anthony; but now. Well on.
The Gods make this a happy day to Anthony.
Would thou, & thoſe thy ſcars had once preuaild
To make me fight at Land.
Had▪ſt thou done ſo,
The Kings that haue reuolted, and the Soldier
That has this morning left thee, would haue ſtill
Followed thy heeles.
Whoſe gone this morning?
Who? one euer neere thee, call for Enobarbus,
He ſhall not heare thee, or from Caeſars Campe,
Say I am none of thine.
What ſayeſt thou?
Sir he is with Caeſar.
Sir, his Cheſts and Treaſure he has not with him.
Is he gone?
Moſt certaine.
Go Eros, ſend his Treaſure after, do it,
Detaine no iot I charge thee: write to him,
(I will ſubſcribe) gentle adieu's, and greetings;
Say, that I wiſh he neuer finde more cauſe
To change a Maſter. Oh my Fortunes haue
Corrupted honeſt men. Diſpatch Enobarbus.
Go forth Agrippa, and begin the fight:
Our will is Anthony e tooke aliue:
Make it ſo knowne.
Caeſar, I ſhall.
The time of vniuerſall peace is neere:
Proue this a proſp'rous day, the three ook'd world
Shall beare the Oliue freely.
Anthony is come into the Field.
Go charge Agrippa,
Plant thoſe that haue reuolted in the Vant,
That Anthony may ſeeme to ſpend his Fury
Vpon himſelfe.
Alexas did reuolt, and went to Iewrij on
Affaires of Anthony, there did diſſwade
Great Herod to incline himſelfe to Caeſar,
And leaue his Maſter Anthony. For this paines,
Caeſar hath hang'd him: Camindius and the reſt
That fell away, haue entertainment, but
No honourable truſt: I haue done ill,
Of which I do accuſe my ſelfe ſo forely,
That I will ioy no more.
Enobarbus, Anthony
Hath after thee ſent all thy Treaſure, with
His Bounty ouer-plus. The Meſſenger
Came on my guard, and at thy Tent is now
Vnloading of his Mules.
I giue it you.
Mocke not Enobarbus,
I tell you true: Beſt you ſaf't the bringer
Out of the hoaſt, I muſt attend mine Office,
Or would haue done't my ſelfe. Your Emperor
Continues ſtill a Ioue.
I am alone the Villaine of the earth,
And feele I am ſo moſt. Oh Anthony,
Thou Mine of Bounty, how would'ſt thou haue payed
My better ſeruice, when my turpitude
Thou doſt ſo Crowne with Gold. This blowes my hart,
If ſwift thought breake it not: a ſwifter meane
Shall out-ſtrike thought, but thought will doo't. I feele
I fight againſt thee: No I will go ſeeke
Some Dith, wherein to dye: the foul'ſt beſt fits
My latter part of life.
Retire, we haue engag'd our ſelues too farre:
Caeſar himſelfe ha's worke, and our oppreſſion
Exceeds what we expected.
O my braue Emperor, this is fought indeed,
Had we done ſo at firſt, we had drouen them home
With clowts about their heads.
Thou bleed'ſt apace.
I had a wound heere that was like a T,
But now 'tis made an H.
They do retyre.
Wee'l beat 'em into Bench-holes, I haue yet
Roome for ſix ſcotches more.
They are beaten Sir, and our aduantage ſerues
For a faire victory.
Let vs ſcore their backes,
And ſnatch 'em vp, as we take Hares behinde,
'Tis ſport to maul a Runner.
I will reward thee
Once for thy ſprightly comfort, and ten-fold
For thy good valour. Come thee on.
Ile halt after.
We haue beate him to his Campe: Runne one
Before, & let the Queen know of our gueſts: to morrow
Before the Sun ſhall ſee's, wee'l ſpill the blood
That ha's to day eſcap'd. I thanke you all,
For doughty handed are you, and haue fought
Not as you ſeru'd the Cauſe, but as't had beene
Each mans like mine: you haue ſhewne all Hectors.
Enter the Citty, clip your Wiues, your Friends,
Tell them your feats, whil'ſt they with ioyfull teares
Waſh the congealement from your wounds, and kiſſe
The Honour'd-gaſhes whole.
Giue me thy hand,
To this great Faiery, Ile commend thy acts,
Make her thankes bleſſe thee. Oh thou day o' th' world,
Chaine mine arm'd necke, leape thou, Attyre and all
Through proofe of Harneſſe to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing.
Lord of Lords.
Oh infinite Vertue, comm'ſt thou ſmiling from▪
The worlds great ſnare vncaught.
Mine Nightingale,
We haue beate them to their Beds.
What Gyrle, though gray
Do ſomthing mingle with our yonger brown, yet ha we
A Braine that nouriſhes our Nerues, and can
Get gole for gole of youth. Behold this man,
Commend vnto his Lippes thy ſauouring hand,
Kiſſe it my Warriour: He hath fought to day,
As if a God in hate of Mankinde, had
Deſtroyed in ſuch a ſhape.
Ile giue thee Friend
An Armour all of Gold: it was a Kings.
He has deſeru'd it, were it Carbunkled
Like holy Phoebus Carre. Giue me thy hand,
Through Alexandria make a iolly March,
Beare our backt Targets, like the men that owe them.
Had our great Pallace the capacity
To Campe this hoaſt, we all would ſup together,
And drinke Carowſes to the next dayes Fate
Which promiſes Royall perill, Trumpetters
With brazen dinne blaſt you the Citties eare,
Make mingle with our ratling Tabourines,
That heauen and earth may ſtrike their ſounds together,
Applauding our approach.
If we be not releeu'd within this houre,
We muſt returne to' th' Court of Guard: the night
Is ſhiny, and they ſay, we ſhall embattaile
By 'th 'ſecond houre i' th' Morne.
This laſt day was a ſhrew'd one too's.
Oh beare me witneſſe night.
What man is this?
Stand cloſe, and liſt him.
Be witneſſe to me (O thou bleſſed Moone)
When men reuolted ſhall vpon Record
Beare hatefull memory: poore Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent.
Enobarbus?
Peace: Hearke further.
Oh Soueraigne Miſtris of true Melancholly,
The poyſonous dampe of night diſpunge vpon me,
That Life, a very Rebell to my will,
May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart
Againſt the flint and hardneſſe of my fault,
Which being dried with greefe, will breake to powder,
And finiſh all foule thoughts. Oh Anthony,
Nobler then my reuolt is Infamous,
Forgiue me in thine owne particular,
But let the world ranke me in Regiſter
A Maſter leauer, and a fugitiue:
Oh Anthony! Oh Anthony!
Let's ſpeake to him.
Let's heare him, for the things he ſpeakes
May concerne Caeſar.
Let's do ſo, but he ſleepes.
Swoonds rather, for ſo bad a Prayer as his
Was neuer yet for ſleepe.
Go we to him.
Awake ſir, awake, ſpeake to vs.
Heare you ſir?
The hand of death hath raught him.
Hearke the Drummes demurely wake the ſleepers:
Let vs beare him to' th' Court of Guard: he is of note:
Our houre is fully out.
Come on then, he may recouer yet.
Their preparation is to day by Sea,
We pleaſe them not by Land.
For both, my Lord.
I would they'ld fight i' th' Fire, or i' th' Ayre,
Wee'ld fight there too. But this it is, our Foote
Vpon the hilles adioyning to the Citty
Shall ſtay with vs. Order for Sea is giuen,
They haue put forth the Hauen:
Where their appointment we may beſt diſcouer,
And looke on their endeuour.
But being charg'd, we will be ſtill by Land,
Which as I tak't we ſhall, for his beſt force
Is forth to Man his Gallies. To the Vales,
And hold our beſt aduantage.
Yet they are not ioyn'd:
Where yon'd Pine does ſtand, I ſhall diſcouer all.
Ile bring thee word ſtraight, how 'ris like to go.
Swallowes haue built
In Cleopatra's Sailes their neſts. The Auguries
Say, they know not, they cannot tell, looke grimly▪
And dare not ſpeake their knowledge. Anthony,
Is valiant, and deiected, and by ſtarts
His fretted Fortunes giue him hope and feare
Of what he has, and has not.
All is loſt:
This fowle Egyptian hath betrayed me:
My Fleete hath yeelded to the Foe, and yonder
They caſt their Caps vp, and Carowſe together
Like Friends long loſt. Triple-turn'd Whore, 'tis thou
Haſt ſold me to this Nouice, and my heart
Makes onely Warres on thee. Bid them all flye:
For when I am reueng'd vpon my Charme,
I haue done all. Bid them all flye, be gone.
Oh Sunne, thy vpriſe ſhall I ſee no more,
Fortune, and Anthony part heere, euen heere
Do we ſhake hands? All come to this? The hearts
That pannelled me at heeles, to whom I gaue
Their wiſhes, do diſ-Candie, melt their ſweets
On bloſſoming Caeſar: And this Pine is barkt,
That ouer-top'd them all. Betray'd I am.
Oh this falſe Soule of Egypt! this graue Charme,
Whoſe eye beck'd forth my Wars, & cal'd them home:
Whoſe Boſome was my Crownet, my chiefe end,
Like a right Gypſie, hath at faſt and looſe
Beguil'd me, to the very heart of loſſe.
What Eros, Eros?
Ah, thou Spell! Auaunt.
Why is my Lord enrag'd againſt his Loue?
Vaniſh, or I ſhall giue thee thy deſeruing,
And blemiſh Caeſars Triumph. Let him take thee,
And hoiſt thee vp to the ſhouting Plebeians,
Follow his Chariot, like the greateſt ſpot
Of all thy Sex. Moſt Monſter-like be ſhewne
For poor'ſt Diminitiues, for Dolts, and let
Patient Octauia, plough thy viſage vp
With her prepared nailes.
'Tis well th' art gone,
If it be well to liue. But better 'twere
Thou fell'ſt into my furie, for one death
Might haue preuented many. Eros, hoa?
The ſhirt of Neſſus is vpon me, teach me
Alcides, thou mine Anceſtor, thy rage.
Let me lodge Licas on the hornes o' th' Moone,
And with thoſe hands that graſpt the heauieſt Club,
Subdue my worthieſt ſelfe: The Witch ſhall die,
To the young Roman Boy ſhe hath ſold me, and I fall
Vnder this plot: She dyes for't. Eros hoa?
Helpe me my women: Oh hee's more mad
Then Telamon for his Shield, the Boare of Theſſaly
Was neuer ſo imboſt.
To' th' Monument, there locke your ſelfe,
And ſend him word you are dead:
The Soule and Body riue not more in parting,
Then greatneſſe going off.
To' th' Monument:
Mardian, go tell him I haue ſlaine my ſelfe:
Say, that the laſt I ſpoke was Anthony,
And word it (prythee) pitteouſly. Hence Mardian,
And bring me how he takes my deah to' th' Monument.
Eros, thou yet behold'ſt me?
I Noble Lord.
Sometime we ſee a clowd that's Dragoniſh,
A vapour ſometime, like a Beare, or Lyon,
A toward Cittadell, a pendant Rocke,
A forked Mountaine, or blew Promontorie
Wh Trees vpon't, that nodde vnto the world,
And mocke our eyes with Ayre.
Thou haſt ſeene theſe Signes,
They are blacke Veſpers Pageants.
I my Lord.
That which is now a Horſe, euen with a thoght the Racke diſlimes, and makes it indiſtinct
As water is in water.
It does my Lord.
My good Knaue Eros, now thy Captaine is
Euen ſuch a body: Heere I am Anthony,
Yet cannot hold this viſible ſhape (my Knaue)
I made theſe warres for Egypt, and the Queene,
Whoſe heart I thought I had, for ſhe had mine:
Which whil'ſt it was mine, had annext vntoo't
A Million moe, (now loſt:) ſhee Eros has
Packt Cards with Caeſars, and falſe plaid my Glory
Vnto an Enemies triumph.
Nay, weepe not gentle Eros, there is left vs
Our ſelues to end our ſelues.
Oh thy vilde Lady, ſhe has rob'd me of my Sword.
No Anthony,
My Miſtris lou'd thee, and her Fortunes mingled
With thine intirely.
Hence ſawcy Eunuch peace, ſhe hath betraid me,
And ſhall dye the death.
Death of one perſon, can be paide but once,
And that ſhe ha's diſcharg'd. What thou would'ſt do
Is done vnto thy hand: the laſt ſhe ſpake
Was Anthony, moſt Noble Anthony:
Then in the midd'ſt a tearing grone did breake
The name of Anthony: it was diuided
Betweene her heart, and lips: ſhe rendred life
Thy name ſo buried in her.
Dead then?
Dead.
Vnarme Eros, the long dayes taske is done,
And we muſt ſleepe: That thou depart'ſt hence ſafe
Does pay thy labour richly: Go.
Off, plucke off,
The ſeuen-fold ſhield of Aiax cannot keepe
The battery from my heart. Oh cleaue my ſides.
Heart, once be ſtronger then thy Continent,
Cracke thy fraile Caſe. Apace Eros, apace;
No more a Soldier: bruiſed peeces go,
You haue bin Nobly borne. From me awhile.
I will o're-take thee Cleopatra, and
Weepe for my pardon. So it muſt be, for now
All length is Torture: ſince the Torch is out,
Lye downe and ſtray no farther. Now all labour
Marres what it does: yea, very force entangles
It ſelfe with ſtrength: Seale then and all is done.
Eros? I come my Queene. Eros? Stay for me,
Where Soules do couch on Flowers, wee'l hand in hand,
And with our ſprightly Port make the Ghoſtes gaze:
Dido, and her Aeneas ſhall want Troopes,
And all the haunt be ours. Come Eros, Eros.
What would my Lord?
Since Cleopatra dyed,
I haue liu'd in ſuch diſhonour, that the Gods
Deteſt my baſeneſſe. I, that with my Sword,
Quarter'd the World, and o're greene Neptunes backe
With Ships, made Cities; condemne my ſelfe, to lacke
The Courage of a Woman, leſſe Noble minde
Then ſhe which by her death, our Caeſar telles
I am Conqueror of my ſelfe. Thou art ſworne Eros,
That when the exigent ſhould come, which now
Is come indeed: When I ſhould ſee behinde me
Th' ineuitable proſecution of diſgrace and horror,
That on my command, thou then would'ſt kill me.
Doo't, the time is come: Thou ſtrik'ſt not me,
'Tis Caeſar thou defeat'ſt. Put colour in thy Cheeke.
The Gods with-hold me,
Shall I do that which all the Parthian Darts,
(Though Enemy) loſt ayme, and could not.
Eros,
Would'ſt thou be window'd in great Rome, and ſee
Thy Maſter thus with pleacht Armes, bending downe
His corrigible necke, his face ſubdu'de
To penetratiue ſhame; whil'ſt the wheel'd ſeate
Of Fortunate Caeſar drawne before him, branded
His Baſeneſſe that enſued.
I would not ſee't.
Come then: for with a wound I muſt be cur'd.
Draw that thy honeſt Sword, which thou haſt worne
Moſt vſefull for thy Country.
Oh ſir, pardon me.
When I did make thee free, ſwor'ſt yu not then
To do this when I bad thee? Do it at once,
Or thy precedent Seruices are all
But accidents vnpurpos'd. Draw, and come.
Turne from me then that Noble countenance,
Wherein the worſhip of the whole world lyes.
Loe thee.
My ſword is drawne.
Then let it do at once
The thing why thou haſt drawne it.
My deere Maſter,
My Captaine, and my Emperor. Let me ſay
Before I ſtrike this bloody ſtroke, Farwell.
'Tis ſaid man, and farewell.
Farewell great Chiefe. Shall I ſtrike now?
Now Eros.
Why there then:
Thus I do eſcape the ſorrow of Anthonies death.
Thrice-Nobler then my ſelfe,
Thou teacheſt me: Oh valiant Eros, what
I ſhould, and thou could'ſt not, my Queene and Eros
Haue by their braue inſtruction got vpon me
A Nobleneſſe in Record. But I will bee
A Bride-groome in my death, and run intoo't
As to a Louers bed. Come then, and Eros,
Thy Maſter dies thy Scholler; to do thus
I learnt of thee. How, not dead? Not dead?
The Guard, how? Oh diſpatch me.
What's the noiſe?
I haue done my worke ill Friends:
Oh make an end of what I haue begun.
The Starre is falne.
And time is at his Period.
Alas, and woe.
Let him that loues me, ſtrike me dead.
Not I.
Nor I.
Nor any one.
Thy death and fortunes bid thy folowers ſly
This ſword but ſhewne to Caeſar with this tydings▪
Shall enter me with him.
Where's Anthony?
There Diomed there.
Liues he: wilt thou not anſwer man?
Art thou there Diomed?
Draw thy ſword, and giue mee,
Suffiſing ſtrokes for death.
Moſt abſolute Lord:
My Miſtris Cleopatra ſent me to thee.
When did ſhee ſend thee?
Now my Lord.
Where is ſhe?
Lockt in her Monument▪ ſhe had a Propheſying feare
Of what hath come to paſſe: for when ſhe ſaw
(Which neuer ſhall be found) you did ſuſpect
She had diſpos'd with Caeſar, and that your rage
Would not be purg'd, ſhe ſent you word ſhe was dead:
But fearing ſince how it might worke, hath ſent
Me to proclaime the truth, and I am come
I dread, too late.
Too late good Diomed: call my Guard I prythee.
What hoa: the Emperors Guard,
The Guard, what hoa? Come, your Lord calles.
Beare me good Friends where Cleopatra bides,
'Tis the laſt ſeruice that I ſhall command you.
Woe, woe are we ſir, you may not liue to weare
All your true Followers out.
Moſt heauy day.
Nay good my Fellowes, do not pleaſe ſharp fate
To grace it with your ſorrowes. Bid that welcome
Which comes to puniſh vs, and we puniſh it
Seeming to beare it lightly. Take me vp,
I haue led you oft, carry me now good Friends,
And haue my thankes for all.
Oh Charmian, I will neuer go from hence.
Be comforted deere Madam.
No, I will not:
All ſtrange and terrible euents are welcome,
But comforts we diſpiſe; our ſize of ſorrow
Proportion'd to our cauſe, muſt be as great
As that which makes it.
How now? is he dead?
His death's vpon him, but not dead.
Looke out o' th other ſide your Monument,
His Guard haue brought him thither.
Oh Sunne,
Burne the great Sphere thou mou'ſt in, darkling ſtand
The varrying ſhore o' th' world. O Antony, Antony, Antony
Helpe Charmian, helpe Iras helpe: helpe Friends
Below, let's draw him hither.
Peace,
Not Caeſars Valour hath o're throwne Anthony,
But Anthonie's hath Triumpht on it ſelfe.
So it ſhould be,
That none but Anthony ſhould conquer Anthony,
But woe 'tis ſo.
I am dying Egypt, dying; onely
I heere importune death a-while, vntill
Of many thouſand kiſſes, the poore laſt
I lay vpon thy lippes.
I dare not Deere,
Deere my Lord pardon: I dare not,
Leaſt I be taken: not th' Imperious ſhew
Of the full-Fortun'd Caeſar, euer ſhall
Be brooch'd with me, if Knife, Drugges, Serpents haue
Edge, ſting, or operation. I am ſafe:
Your Wife Octauia, with her modeſt eyes,
And ſtill Concluſion, ſhall acquire no Honour
Demuring vpon me▪ but come, come Anthony,
Helpe me my women, we muſt draw the vp▪
Aſſiſt good Friends.
Oh quicke, or I am gone.
Heere's ſport indeede:
How heauy weighes my Lord?
Our ſtrength is all gone into heauineſſe,
That makes the waight. Had I great Iuno's power,
The ſtrong wing'd Mercury ſhould fetch thee vp,
And ſet thee by Ioues ſide. Yet come a little,
Wiſhers were euer Fooles. Oh come, come, come,
And welcome, welcome. Dye when thou haſt liu'd,
Quicken with kiſſing: had my lippes that power,
Thus would I weare them out.
A heauy ſight.
I am dying Egypt, dying.
Giue me ſome Wine, and let me ſpeake a little.
No, let me ſpeake, and let me rayle ſo hye,
That the falſe Huſwife Fortune, breake her Wheele,
Prouok'd by my offence.
One word (ſweet Queene)
Of Caeſar ſeeke your Honour, with your ſafety. Oh.
They do not go together.
Gentle heare me,
None about Caeſar truſt, but Proculeius.
My Reſolution, and my hands, Ile truſt,
None about Caeſar.
The miſerable change now at my end,
Lament nor ſorrow at: but pleaſe your thoughts
In feeding them with thoſe my former Fortunes
Wherein I liued. The greateſt Prince o' th' world,
The Nobleſt: and do now not baſely dye,
Not Cowardly put off my Helmet to
My Countreyman. A Roman, by a Roman
Valiantly vanquiſh'd. Now my Spirit is going,
I can no more.
Nobleſt of men, woo't dye?
Haſt thou no care of me, ſhall I abide
In this dull world, which in thy abſence is
No better then a Stye? Oh ſee my women:
The Crowne o' th' earth doth melt. My Lord?
Oh wither'd is the Garland of the Warre,
The Souldiers pole is falne: young Boyes and Gyrles
Are leuell now with men: The oddes is gone,
And there is nothing left remarkeable
Beneath the viſiting Moone.
Oh quietneſſe, Lady.
She's dead too, our Soueraigne.
Lady.
Madam.
Oh Madam, Madam, Madam.
Royall Egypt: Empreſſe.
Peace, peace, Iras.
No more but in a Woman, and commanded
By ſuch poore paſſion, as the Maid that Milkes,
And doe's the meaneſt chaes. It were for me,
To throw my Scepter at the iniurious Gods,
To tell them that this World did equall theyrs,
Till they had ſtolne our Iewell. All's but naught:
Patience is ſottiſh, and impatience does
Become a Dogge that's mad: Then is it ſinne,
To ruſh into the ſecret houſe of death,
Ere death dare come to vs. How do you Women?
What, what good cheere? Why how now Charmian?
My Noble Gyrles? Ah Women, women! Looke
Our Lampe is ſpent, it's out. Good ſirs, take heart,
Wee'l bury him: And then, what's braue, what's Noble,
Let's doo't after the high Roman faſhion,
And make death proud to take vs. Come, away,
This caſe of that huge Spirit now is cold.
Ah Women, Women! Come, we haue no Friend
But Reſolution, and the breefeſt end.
Go to him Dollabella, bid him yeeld,
Being ſo fruſtrate, tell him,
He mockes the pawſes that he makes.
Caeſar, I ſhall.
Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dar'ſt
Appeare thus to vs?
I am call'd Decretas,
Marke Anthony I ſeru'd, who beſt was worthie
Beſt to be ſeru'd: whil'ſt he ſtood vp, and ſpoke
He was my Maſter, and I wore my life
To ſpend vpon his haters. If thou pleaſe
To take me to thee▪ as I was to him,
Ile be to Caeſar: it yu pleaſeſt not, I yeild thee vp my life.
What is't thou ſay'ſt?
I ſay (Oh Caeſar) Anthony is dead.
The breaking of ſo great a thing, ſhould make
A greater cracke. The round World
Should haue ſhooke Lyons into ciuill ſtreets,
And Cittizens to their dennes. The death of Anthony
Is not a ſingle doome, in the name lay
A moity of the world.
He is dead Caeſar,
Not by a publike miniſter of Iuſtice,
Nor by a hyred Knife▪ but that ſelfe-hand
Which writ his Honor in the Acts it did,
Hath with the Courage which the heart did lend it,
Splitted the heart. This is his Sword,
I robb'd his wound of it: behold it ſtain'd
With his moſt Noble blood.
Looke you ſad Friends,
The Gods rebuke me, but it is Tydings
To waſh the eyes of Kings.
And ſtrange it is,
That Nature muſt compell vs to lament
Our moſt perſiſted deeds.
His taints and Honours, wag'd equal with him.
A Rarer ſpirit neuer
Did ſteere humanity: but you Gods will giue vs
Some faults to make vs men, Caeſar is touch'd.
When ſuch a ſpacious Mirror's ſet before him,
He needes muſt ſee him ſelfe.
Oh Anthony,
I haue followed thee to this, but we do launch
Diſeaſes in our Bodies. I muſt perforce
Haue ſhewne to thee ſuch a declining day,
Or looke on thine: we could not ſtall together,
In the whole world. But yet let me lament
With teares as Soueraigne as the blood of hearts,
That thou my Brother, my Competitor,
In top of all deſigne; my Mate in Empire,
Friend and Companion in the front of Warre,
The Arme of mine owne Body, and the Heart
Where mine his thoughts did kindle; that our Starres
Vnreconciliable, ſhould diuide our equalneſſe to this.
Heare me good Friends,
But I will tell you at ſome meeter Seaſon,
The buſineſſe of this man lookes out of him,
Wee'l heare him what he ſayes.
Whence are you?
A poore Egyptian yet, the Queen my miſtris
Confin'd in all, ſhe has her Monument
Of thy intents, deſires, inſtruction,
That ſhe preparedly may frame her ſelfe
To' th' way ſhee's forc'd too.
Bid her haue good heart,
She ſoone ſhall know of vs, by ſome of ours,
How honourable, and how kindely Wee
Determine for her. For Caeſar cannot leaue to be vngentle
So the Gods preſerue thee.
Come hither Proculeius. Go and ſay
We purpoſe her no ſhame: giue her what comforts
The quality of her paſſion ſhall require;
Leaſt in her greatneſſe, by ſome mortall ſtroke
She do defeate vs. For her life in Rome,
Would be eternall in our Triumph: Go,
And with your ſpeedieſt bring vs what ſhe ſayes,
And how you finde of her.
Caeſar I ſhall.
Gallus, go you along: where's Dolabella, to ſecond Proculeius?
Dolabella.
Let him alone: for I remember now
How hee's imployd: he ſhall in time be ready.
Go with me to my Tent, where you ſhall ſee
How hardly I was drawne into this Warre,
How calme and gentle I proceeded ſtill
In all my Writings. Go with me, and ſee
What I can ſhew in this.
My deſolation does begin to make
A better life: Tis paltry to be Caeſar:
Not being Fortune, hee's but Fortunes knaue,
A miniſter of her will: and it is great
To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
Which ſhackles accedents, and bolts vp change;
Which ſleepes, and neuer pallates more the dung,
The beggers Nurſe, and Caeſars.
Caeſar ſends greeting to the Queene of Egypt,
And bids thee ſtudy on what faire demands
Thou mean'ſt to haue him grant thee.
What's thy name?
My name is Proculeius.
Anthony
Did ell me of you, bad me truſt you, but
I do not greatly care to be deceiu'd
That haue no vſe for truſting. If your Maſter
Would haue a Queece his begger, you muſt tell him,
That Maieſty to keepe decorum, muſt▪
No leſſe begge then a Kingdome: If he pleaſe
To giue me conquer'd Egypt for my Sonne,
He giues me ſo much of mine owne, as I
Will kneele to him with thankes.
Be of good cheere:
Y' are falne into a Princely hand, feare nothing,
Make your full reference freely to my Lord,
Who is ſo full of Grace, that it flowes ouer
On all that neede. Let me report to him
Your ſweet dependacie, and you ſhall finde
A Conqueror that will pray in ayde for kindneſſe,
Where he for grace is kneel'd too.
Pray you tell him,
I am his Fortunes Vaſſall, and I ſend him
The Greatneſſe he has got. I hourely learne
A Doctrine of Obedience, and would gladly
Looke him i' th' Face.
This Ile report (deere Lady)
Haue comfort, for I know your plight is pittied
Of him that caus'd it.
You ſee how eaſily ſhe may be ſurpriz'd:
Guard her till Caeſar come.
Royall Queene.
Oh Cleopatra, thou art taken Queene.
Quicke, quicke, good hands.
Hold worthy Lady, hold:
Doe not your ſelfe ſuch wrong, who are in this
Releeu'd, but not betraid.
What of death too that rids our dogs of languiſh
Cleopatra, do not abuſe my Maſters bounty, by
Th' vndoing of your ſelfe: Let the World ſee
His Nobleneſſe well acted, which your death
Will neuer let come forth.
Where art thou Death?
Come hither come; Come, come, and take a Queene
Worth many Babes and Beggers.
Oh temperance Lady.
Sir, I will eate no meate, Ile not drinke ſir,
If idle talke will once be neceſſary
Ile not ſleepe neither. This mortall houſe Ile ruine,
Do Caeſar what he can. Know ſir, that I
Will not waite pinnion'd at your Maſters Court,
Nor once be chaſtic'd with the ſober eye
Of dull Octauia. Shall they hoyſt me vp,
And ſhew me to the ſhowting Varlotarie
Of cenſuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt.
Be gentle graue vnto me, rather on Nylus mudde
Lay me ſtarke-nak'd, and let the water-Flies
Blow me into abhorting; rather make
My Countries high pyramides my Gibbet,
And hang me vp in Chaines.
You do extend
Theſe thoughts of horror further then you ſhall
Finde cauſe in Caeſar.
Proculeius,
What thou haſt done, thy Maſter Caeſar knowes,
And he hath ſent for thee: for the Queene,
Ile take her to my Guard.
So Dolabella,
It ſhall content me beſt: Be gentle to her,
To Caeſar I will ſpeake, what you ſhall pleaſe,
If you'l imploy me to him.
Say, I would dye.
Moſt Noble Empreſſe, you haue heard of me.
I cannot tell.
Aſſuredly you know me.
No matter ſir, what I haue heard or knowne:
You laugh when Boyes or Women tell their Dreames,
Is't not your tricke?
I vnderſtand not, Madam.
I dreampt there was an Emperor Anthony.
Oh ſuch another ſleepe, that I might ſee
But ſuch another man.
If it might pleaſe ye.
His face was as the Heau'ns, and therein ſtucke
A Sunne and Moone, which kept their courſe, & lighted
The little o' th' earth.
Moſt Soueraigne Creature.
His legges beſtrid the Ocean, his rear'd arme
Creſted the world: His voyce was propertied
As all the tuned Spheres, and that to Friends:
But when he meant to quaile, and ſhake the Orbe,
He was as ratling Thunder. For his Bounty,
There was no winter in't. An Anthony it was,
That grew the more by reaping: His delights
Were Dolphin-like, they ſhew'd his backe aboue
The Element they liu'd in: In his Liuery
Walk'd Crownes and Crownets: Realms & Iſlands were
As plates dropt from his pocket.
Cleopatra.
Thinke you there was, or might be ſuch a man
As this I dreampt of?
Gentle Madam, no.
You Lye vp to the hearing of the Gods:
But if there be, nor euer were one ſuch
It's paſt the ſize of dreaming: Nature wants ſtuffe
To vie ſtrange formes with fancie, yet t' imagine
An Anthony were Natures peece, 'gainſt Fancie,
Condemning ſhadowes quite.
Heare me, good Madam:
Your loſſe is as your ſelfe, great; and you beare it
As anſwering to the waight, would I might neuer
Ore-take purſu'de ſucceſſe: But I do feele
By the rebound of yours, a greefe that ſuites
My very heart at roote.
I thanke you ſir:
Know you what Caeſar meanes to do with me?
I am loath to tell you what, I would you knew.
Nay pray you ſir.
Though he be Honourable.
Hee'l leade me then in Triumph.
Madam he will, I know't.
Make way there Caeſar.
Which is the Queene of Egypt.
It is the Emperor Madam.
Ariſe, you ſhall not kneele:
I pray you riſe, riſe Egypt.
Sir, the Gods will haue it thus,
My Maſter and my Lord I muſt obey,
Take to you no hard thoughts,
The Record of what iniuries you did vs,
Though written in our fleſh, we ſhall remember
As things but done by chance.
Sole Sir o' th' World,
I cannot proiect mine owne cauſe ſo well
To make it cleare, but do confeſſe I haue
Bene laden with like frailties, which before
Haue often ſham'd our Sex.
Cleopatra know,
We will extenuate rather then inforce:
If you apply your ſelfe to our intents,
Which towards you are moſt gentle, you ſhall finde
A benefit in this change: but if you ſeeke
To lay on me a Cruelty, by taking
Anthonies courſe, you ſhall bereaue your ſelfe
Of my good purpoſes, and put your children
To that deſtruction which Ile guard them from,
If thereon you relye. Ile take my leaue.
And may through all the world: tis yours, & we your Scutcheons, and your ſignes of Conqueſt ſhall Hang in what place you pleaſe. Here my good Lord.
You ſhall aduiſe me in all for Cleopatra.
This is the breefe: of Money, Plate, & Iewels
I am poſſeſt of, 'tis exactly valewed,
Not petty things admitted. Where's Seleucus?
Heere Madam.
This is my Treaſurer, let him ſpeake (my Lord)
Vpon his perill, that I haue reſeru'd
To my ſelfe nothing. Speake the truth Seleucus.
Madam; I had rather ſeele my lippes,
Then to my perill ſpeake that which is not.
What haue I kept backe.
Enough to purchaſe what you haue made known
Nay bluſh not Cleopatra, I approue
Your Wiſedome in the deede.
See Caeſar: Oh behold,
How pompe is followed: Mine will now be yours,
And ſhould we ſhift eſtates, yours would be mine.
The ingratitude of this Seleucus, does
Euen make me wilde. Oh Slaue, of no more truſt
Then loue that's hyt'd? What goeſt thou backe, yu ſhalt
Go backe I warrant thee: but Ile catch thine eyes
Though they had wings. Slaue, Soule-leſſe, Villain, Dog.
O rarely baſe!
Good Queene, let vs intreat you.
O Caeſar, what a wounding ſhame is this,
That thou vouchſafing heere to viſit me,
Doing the Honour of thy Lordlineſſe
To one ſo meeke, that mine owne Seruant ſhould
Parcell the ſumme of my diſgraces, by
Addition of his Enuy Say (good Caeſar)
That I ſome Lady trifles hae reſeru'd,
Immoment toyes, things of ſuch Dignitie
As we greet moderne Friends withall, and ſay
Some Nobler token I haue kept apart
For Lii and Octauia, to induce
Their mediation, muſt I be vnfolded
With one that I haue bred: The Gods! it ſmites me
Beneath the fall I haue. Prythee go hence,
Or I ſhall ſhew the Cynders of my ſpirits
Through th' Aſhes of my chance: Wer't thou a man,
Thou would'ſt haue mercy on me.
Forbeare Seleucus.
Be it known, that we the greateſt are miſ-thoght
For things that others do: and when we fall,
We anſwer others merits, in our name
Are therefore to be pittied.
Cleopatra,
Not what you haue reſeru'd, nor what acknowledg'd
Put we i' th' Roll of Conqueſt: ſtill bee't yours,
Beſtow it at your pleaſure, and beleeue
Caeſars no Merchant, to make prize with you
Of things that Merchants ſold. Therefore be cheer'd,
Make not your thoughts your priſons: No deere Queen,
For we intend ſo to diſpoſe you, as
Your ſelfe ſhall giue vs counſell: Feede, and ſleepe:
Our care and pitty is ſo much vpon you,
That we remain your Friend, and ſo adieu.
My Maſter, and my Lord.
Not ſo: Adieu.
He words me Gyrles, he words me,
That I ſhould not be Noble to my ſelfe.
But hearke thee Charmian.
Finiſh good Lady, the bright day is done,
And we are for the darke.
Hye the againe,
I haue ſpoke already, and it is prouided,
Go put it to the haſte.
Madam, I will.
Where's the Queene?
Behold ſir.
Dolabella.
Madam, as thereto ſworne, by your command
(Which my loue makes Religion to obey)
I tell you this: Caeſar through Syria
Intends his iourney, and within three dayes,
You with your Children will he ſend before,
Make your beſt vſe of this. I haue perform'd
Your pleaſure, and my promiſe.
Dolabella, I ſhall remaine your debter.
I your Seruant:
Adieu good Queene, I muſt attend on Caeſar.
Farewell, and thankes.
Now Iras, what think'ſt thou?
Thou, an Egyptian Puppet ſhall be ſhewne
In Rome aſwell as I: Mechanicke Slaues
With greazie Aprons, Rules, and Hammers ſhall
Vplift vs to the view. In their thicke breathes,
Ranke of groſſe dyet, ſhall we be enclowded,
And forc'd to drinke their vapour.
The Gods forbid.
Nay, 'tis moſt certaine Iras: ſawcie Lictors
Will catch at vs like Strumpets, and ſcald Rimers
Ballads vs out a Tune. The quicke Comedians
Extemporally will ſtage vs, and preſent
Our Alexandrian Reuels: Anthony
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I ſhall ſee
Some ſqueaking Cleopatra Boy my greatneſſe
I' th' poſture of a Whore.
O the good Gods!
Nay that's certaine.
Ile neuer ſee't? for I am ſure mine Nailes
Are ſtronger then mine eyes.
Why that's the way to foole their preparation,
And to conquer their moſt abſurd intents.
Now Charmian.
Shew me my Women like a Queene: Go fetch
My beſt Attyres. I am againe for Cidrus,
To meete Marke Anthony. Sirra Iras, go
(Now Noble Charmian, wee'l diſpatch indeede,)
And when thou haſt done this chare, Ile giue thee leaue
To play till Doomeſday: bring our Crowne, and all.
Wherefore's this noiſe?
Heere is a rurall Fellow,
That will not be deny'de your Highneſſe preſence,
He brings you Figges.
Let him come in.
What poore an Inſtrument
May do a Noble deede: he brings me liberty:
My Reſolution's plac'd, and I haue nothing
Of woman in me: Now from head to foote
I am Marble conſtant: now the fleeting Moone
No Planet is of mine.
This is the man.
Auoid, and leaue him.
Haſt thou the pretty worme of Nylus there,
That killes and paines not?
Truly I haue him: but I would not be the partie that ſhould deſire you to touch him, for his byting is immortall: thoſe that doe dye of it, doe ſeldome or neuer recouer.
Remember'ſt thou any that haue dyed on't?
Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of them no longer then yeſterday, a very honeſt woman, but ſomething giuen to lye, as a woman ſhould not do, but in the way of honeſty, how ſhe dyed of the byting of it, what paine ſhe felt: Truely, ſhe makes a verie good report o' th' worme: but he that wil beleeue all that they ſay, ſhall neuer be ſaued by halfe that they do: but this is moſt falliable, the Worme's an odde Worme.
Get thee hence, farewell.
I wiſh you all ioy of the Worme.
Farewell.
You muſt thinke this (looke you,) that the Worme will do his kinde.
I, I, farewell.
Looke you, the Worme is not to bee truſted, but in the keeping of wiſe people: for indeede, there is no goodneſſe in the Worme.
Take thou no care, it ſhall be heeded.
Very good: giue it nothing I pray you, for it is not worth the feeding.
Will it eate me?
You muſt not think I am ſo ſimple, but I know the diuell himſelfe will not eate a woman: I know, that a woman is a diſh for the Gods, if the diuell dreſſe her not. But truly, theſe ſame whorſon diuels doe the Gods great harme in their women: for in euery tenne that they make, the diuels marre fiue.
Well, get thee gone, farewell.
Yes forſooth: I wiſh you ioy o' th' worm.
Giue me my Robe, put on my Crowne, I haue
Immortall longings in me. Now no more
The iuyce of Egypts Grape ſhall moyſt this lip.
Yare, yare, good Iras; quicke: Me thinkes I heare
Anthony call: I ſee him rowſe himſelfe
To praiſe my Noble Act. I heare him mock
The lucke of Caeſar, which the Gods giue men
To excuſe their after wrath. Husband, I come:
Now to that name, my Courage proue my Title.
I am Fire, and Ayre; my other Elements
I giue to baſer life. So, haue you done?
Come then, and take the laſt warmth of my Lippes.
Farewell kinde Charmian, Iras, long farewell.
Haue I the Aſpicke in my lippes? Doſt fall?
If thou, and Nature can ſo gently part,
The ſtroke of death is as a Louers pinch,
Which hurts, and is deſir'd. Doſt thou lye ſtill?
If thus thou vaniſheſt, thou tell'ſt the world,
It is not worth leaue-taking.
Diſſolue thicke clowd, & Raine, that I may ſay
The Gods themſelues do weepe.
This proues me baſe:
If ſhe firſt meete the Curled Anthony.
Hee'l make demand of her, and ſpend that kiſſe
Which is my heauen to haue. Come thou mortal wretch,
With thy ſharpe teeth this knot intrinſicate,
Of life at once vntye: Poore venomous Foole,
Be angry, and diſpatch. Oh could'ſt thou ſpeake,
That I might heare thee call great Caeſar Aſſe, vnpolicied.
Oh Eaſterne Starre.
Peace, peace:
Doſt thou not ſee my Baby at my breaſt,
That ſuckes the Nurſe aſleepe.
O breake! O breake!
As ſweet as Balme, as ſoft as Ayre, as gentle.
O Anthony! Nay I will take thee too.
What ſhould I ſtay—
In this wilde World? So fare thee well:
Now boaſt thee Death, in thy poſſeſſion lyes
A Laſſe vnparalell'd. Downie Windowes cloze,
And golden Phoebus, neuer be beheld
Of eyes againe ſo Royall: your Crownes away,
Ile mend it, and then play —
Where's the Queene?
Speake ſoftly, wake her not.
Caeſar hath ſent
Too ſlow a Meſſenger.
Oh come apace, diſpatch, I partly feele thee.
Approach hoa,
All's not well: Caeſar's beguild.
There's Dolabella ſent from Caeſar: call him.
What worke is heere Charmian?
Is this well done?
It is well done, and fitting for a Princeſſe
Deſcended of ſo many Royall Kings.
Ah Souldier.
How goes it heere?
All dead.
Caeſar, thy thoughts
Touch their effects in this: Thy ſelfe art comming
To ſee perform'd the dreaded Act which thou
So ſought'ſt to hinder.
A way there, a way for Caeſar.
Oh ſir, you are too ſure an Augurer:
That you did fere, is done.
Braueſt at the laſt,
She leuell'd at our purpoſes, and being Royall
Tooke her owne way: the manner of their deaths,
I do not ſee them bleede.
Who was laſt with them?
A ſimple Countryman, that broght hir Figs:
This was his Basket.
Poyſon'd then.
Oh Caeſar:
This Charmian liu'd but now, ſhe ſtood and ſpake:
I found her trimming vp the Diadem;
On her dead Miſtris tremblingly ſhe ſtood,
And on the ſodaine dropt.
Oh Noble weakeneſſe:
If they had ſwallow'd poyſon, 'twould appeare
By externall ſwelling: but ſhe lookes like ſleepe,
As ſhe would catch another Anthony
In her ſtrong toyle of Grace.
Heere on her breſt,
There is a vent of Bloud, and ſomething blowne,
The like is on her Arme.
This is an Aſpickes traile,
And theſe Figge-leaues haue ſlime vpon them, ſuch
As th' Aſpicke leaues vpon the Caues of Nyle.
Moſt probable
That ſo ſhe dyed: for her Phyſitian tels mee
She hath purſu'de Concluſions infinite
Of eaſie wayes to dye. Take vp her bed,
And beare her Women from the Monument,
She ſhall be buried by her Anthony.
No Graue vpon the earth ſhall clip in it
A payre ſo famous: high euents as theſe
Strike thoſe that make them: and their Story is
No leſſe in pitty, then his Glory which
Brought them to be lamented. Our Army ſhall
In ſolemne ſhew, attend this Funerall,
And then to Rome. Come Dolabella, ſee
High Order, in this great Solmemnity.