Doe you heare, you, Creature of diligence, and buſineſſe! what is the affaire, that you plucke for ſo, under your cloake?
Nothing, but what I colour for, I aſſure you; and may encounter with, I hope, if Luck favour me, the Gamſters Goddeſſe.
You are a Votary of hers, it ſeemes by your language. What went you upon? may a man aske you?
Certainties, indeed Sir, and very good ones; the preſentation of a Maſque; you'll ſee't, anone.
Sir, this is my roome, and region too, the banquetting-houſe. And in matter of feaſt, the ſolemnitie, nothing is to be preſented here, but with my acquaintance, and allowance to it.
You are not his Majeſties Confectioner? Are you?
No, but one that has as good title to the roome, his Maſter-Cooke. What are you, Sir?
The moſt unprofitable of his ſervants, I, Sir, the Poet. A kind of a Chriſtmas Ingine? one, that is uſed, at leaſt once a yeare, for a trifling inſtrument, of wit, or ſo.
Were you ever a Cooke?
A Cooke? no ſurely.
Then you can be no good Poet: for a good Poet differs nothing at all from a Maſter-Cooke. Eithers Art is the wiſedome of the Mind.
As how, Sir?
Expect. I am by my place, to know how to pleaſe the palates of the gueſts; ſo, you, are to know the palate of the times: ſtudy the ſeverall taſtes, what every Nation, the Spaniard, the Dutch, the French, the Walloun, the Neapolitan, the Brittan, the Sicilian, can expect from you.
That were a heavie and hard taske, to ſatisfie Expectation, who is ſo ſevere an exactreſſe of duties; ever a tyrannous miſtreſſe: and moſt times a preſſing enemie.
She is a powerfull great Lady, Sir, at all times, and muſt be ſatisfied: So muſt her ſiſter, Madam Curioſitie, who hath as daintie a palate as ſhe, and theſe will expect.
But, what if they expect more then they underſtand?
That's all one, Mr. Poet. you are bound to ſatisfie them. For, there is a palate of the Underſtanding, as well as of the Senſes. The Taſte is taken with good reliſhes, the Sight with faire objects, the Hearing with delicate ſounds, the Smelling with pure ſents, the feeling with ſoft and plumpe bodyes, but the Underſtanding with all theſe: for all which you muſt begin at the Kitchin. There, the Art of Poetrie was learn'd, and found out, or no where: and the ſame day, with the Art of Cookery.
I ſhould have giv'n it rather to the Cellar, if my ſuffrage had bin askt.
O, you are for the Oracle of the Bottle, I ſee; Hogſhead Triſmegiſtus: He is your Pegaſus. Thence flowes the ſpring of your Muſes, from that hoofe.
Seduced Poet, I doe ſay to thee,—
A Boyler, Range, and Dreſſer were the fountaines
Of all the knowledge, in the Univerſe,
And that's the Kitchin. Where, a Maſter-Cooke!
Thou do'ſt not know the man! nor canſt thou know him!
Till thou haſt ſerv'd ſome yeares in that deepe ſchoole,
That's both the Nource, and Mother of the Arts,
And hear'ſt him read, interpret, and demonſtrate.
A Maſter-Cooke! why, he is the man of men,
For a Profeſſor! He deſignes, he drawes,
He paints, he carves, he builds, he fortifies,
Makes Citadels of curious fowle, and fiſh,
Some he dry-ditches, ſome motes round with broths;
Mounts marrow-bones; cuts fifty-angled cuſtards;
Reares bulwarke pies; and, for his outer workes,
He raiſeth ramparts of immortall cruſt;
And teacheth all the tacticks at one dinner:
What rankes, what files, to put his diſhes in
The whole Art Militarie! Then he knowes
The influence of the ſtarres, upon his meates;
And all their ſeaſons, tempers, qualities,
And ſo, to fit his reliſhes, and ſauces!
He, has Nature in a pot! 'bove all the Chemiſts,
Or bare-breech'd brethren of the Roſie-Croſſe!
He is an Architect, an Inginer,
A Souldier, a Phyſition, a Philoſopher,
A generall Mathematician!
It is granted.
And, that you may not doubt him for a Poet,
This Fury ſhewes, if there were nothing elſe.
And 'tis divine!
Then, Brother Poet,
Brother.
I have a ſuite.
What is it?
Your deviſe.
As you came in upon me, I was then
Offering the argument, and this it is.
Silence.
The mightie Neptune, mightie in his ſtyles,
And large command of waters, and of Iſles,
Not, as the Lord and Soveraigne of the Seas,
But, Chiefe in the art of riding, late did pleaſe
To ſend his Albion forth, the moſt his owne,
Upon diſcovery, to themſelves beſt knowne,
Through Celtiberia; and, to aſſiſt his courſe,
Gave him his powerfull MANAGER of Horſe,
With divine Proteus, Father of diſguiſe,
To waite upon them with his counſels wiſe,
In all extreames. His great commands being done,
And he deſirous to review his Sonne,
He doth diſpatch a floting Ile, from hence,
Unto the Heſperian ſhores, to waft him thence.
Where, what the arts were, us'd to make him ſtay,
And how the Syrens woo'd him, by the way,
What Monſters he encountred on the coaſt,
How neere our generall Joy was to be loſt,
Is not our ſubject now: though all theſe make
The preſent gladneſſe greater, for their ſake.
But what the triumphs are, the feaſt, the ſport,
And proud ſolemnities of Neptunes Court,
Now he is ſafe, and Fame's not heard in vaine,
But we behold our happie pledge againe.
That with him, loyall HIPPIVS is return'd,
Who for it, under ſo much envie, burn'd
With his owne brightneſſe, till her ſterv'd ſnakes ſaw
What Neptune did impoſe, to him was law.
But, why not this, till now?
—It was not time,
To mixe this Muſick with the vulgars chime.
Stay, till th'abortive, and extemporall dinne
Of balladry, were underſtood a ſinne,
Minerva cry'd: that, what tumultuous verſe,
Or proſe could make, or ſteale, they might rehearſe,
And every Songſter had ſung out his fit;
That all the Countrey, and the Citie-wit,
Of bells, and bonfires, and good cheere was ſpent,
And Neptunes Guard had drunke all that they meant;
That all the tales and ſtories now were old
Of the Sea-Monſter Archy, or growne cold:
The Muſes then might venter, undeterr'd,
For they love, then, to ſing, when they are heard.
I like it well, 'tis handſome: and I have
Some thing would fit this. How doe you preſent 'hem?
In a fine Iland, ſay you?
Yes, a Delus:
Such, as when faire Latona fell in travaile,
Great Neptune made emergent.
I conceive you.
I would have had your Ile brought floting in, now
In a brave broth, and of a ſprightly greene,
Juſt to the colour of the Sea; and then,
Some twentie Syrens, ſinging in the kettel,
With an Arion, mounted on the backe
Of a growne Conger, but in ſuch a poſture,
As, all the world ſhould take him for a Dolphin:
O, 'twould ha'made ſuch muſick! Ha'you nothing,
But a bare Iſland?
Yes, we have a tree too,
Which we doe call the Tree of Harmonie,
And is the ſame with what we read, the Sunne,
Brought forth in the Indian Muſicana firſt,
And thus it growes. The goodly bole, being got
To certaine cubits height, from every ſide
The boughes decline, which taking roote afreſh,
Spring up new boles, and thoſe ſpring new, and newer,
Till the whole tree become a Porticus,
Or arched Arbour, able to receive
A numerous troupe, ſuch as our Albion,
And the Companions of his journey are.
And this they ſit in.
Your prime Maſquers?
Yes.
But where's your Antimaſque now, all this while?
I hearken after them.
Faith, we have none.
None?
None, I aſſure you, neither doe I thinke them
A worthy part of preſentation,
Being things ſo heterogene, to all deviſe,
Meere By-workes, and at beſt Out-landiſh nothings.
O, you are all the heaven awrie! Sir.
For blood of Poetry, running in your veines,
Make not your ſelfe ſo ignorantly ſimple.
Becauſe Sir, you ſhall ſee I am a Poet,
No leſſe then Cooke, and that I find you want
A ſpeciall ſervice here, an Antimaſque,
I'le fit you with a diſh out of the Kitchin,
Such, as I thinke, will take the preſent palates,
A metaphoricall diſh! And, doe but marke,
How a good wit may jumpe with you. Are you ready, Child?
(Had there bin Maske, or no Maske, I had made it.)
Child of the boyling houſe.
Here, Father.
Bring forth the pot. It is an Olla Podrida,
But I have perſons, to preſent the meates.
Perſons!
Such as doe reliſh nothing, but di ſtato,
(But in another faſhion, then you dreame of)
Know all things the wrong way, talke of the affaires,
The clouds, the cortines, and the myſteries
That are a foot, and, from what hands they have'hem
(The maſter of the Elephant, or the Camels)
What correſpondences are held; the Poſts
That goe, and come, and know, almoſt, their minutes,
All but their buſineſſe: Therein, they are fiſhes.
But ha' their garlick, as the Proverb ſayes,
They are our Queſt of enquiry, after newes.
Together with their learned Authors?
Yes Sir,
And of the Epicoene gender, Hees, and Shees:
Amphibion Archy is the chiefe.
Good boy!
The Child is learned too. Note but the Kitchin.
Have you put him, into the pot, for Garlick?
One in his coate, ſhall ſtinke as ſtrong as he, Sir,
And his friend Giblets with him.
They are two,
That give a part of the ſeaſoning.
I coneeive
The way of your Gally-mawfrey.
You will like it,
When they come pouring out of the pot together.
O, if the pot had beene big enough!
What then, Child?
I had put in the Elephant, and one Camel, at leaſt, for Biefe.
But, whom ha'you for Partridge?
A brace of Dwarfes, and delicate plump birds!
And whom for Mutton, and Kid?
A fine lac'd Mutton,
Or two; and either has her frisking Husband:
That reades her the Corranto, every weeke.
Grave Mr. Ambler, Newes-maſter of Poules,
Supplies your Capon; and growne Captaine BuZ
(His Emiſſary) under-writes for Turky,
A gentleman of the Forreſt preſents Pheſant,
And a plump Poultrers wife, in Graces ſtreet,
Playes Hen with egges i' the belly, or a Coney,
Chooſe which you will.
But, where's the Bacon, Thom?
Hogrel the Butcher, and the Sow his wife,
Are both there.
It is well, goe, diſh'hem out.
Are they well boyld?
Podrida!
What's that? rotten?
O, that they muſt be. There's one maine ingredient
We have forgot, the Artichoke.
No Sir.
I have a Fruicterer, with a cold red noſe,
Like a blue fig, performes it.
The fruit lookes ſo.
Good child, goe poure'hem out; ſhew their concoction.
They muſt be rotten boyld, the broth's the beſt on't,
And that's the Dance. The ſtage here is the Charger.
And Brother Poet, though the ſerious part
Be yours, yet, envie not the Cooke his art.
Not I. Nam luſus ipſe Triumphus amat.
Well, now, expect the Scene it ſelfe; it opens!
Looke forth, the Shepherd of the Seas,
And of the Ports, that keep'ſt the keyes,
And to your Neptune tell,
His ALBION, Prince of all his Iſles,
For whom the ſea, and land ſo ſmiles,
Is home returned well.
And be it thought no common Cauſe,
That, to it, ſo much wonder drawes,
And all the Heav'ns conſent,
With HARMONY, to tune their notes,
In anſwer to the publike votes,
That, for it, up were ſent.
It was no envious Stepdames rage;
Or Tyrants malice of the age,
That did employ him forth.
But ſuch a Wiſdome, that would prove,
By ſending him, their hearts, and love
That elſe might feare his worth.
I! now the Pompe of Neptunes triumph ſhines!
And all the glories of his great deſignes
Are read, reflected, in his ſonnes returne!
How all the eyes, the lookes, the heart here burne
at his arrivall!
Theſe are the true fires.
Are made of joyes!
Of longing!
Of deſires!
Of hopes!
Of feares!
No intermitted blocks.
But pure affections, and from odorous ſtocks!
'Tis incenſe all, that flames!
And theſe materials ſcarce have names!
My King lookes higher, as he ſcorn'd the warres
Of windes, and with his trident touch'd the ſtarres.
There is no wrinkle in his brow, or frowne;
But, as his cares he would in Nectar drowne,
And all the ſilver-footed Nymphs were dreſt;
To waite upon him, to the Oceans feaſt.
Or, here in rowes upon the bankes were ſet,
And had their ſeverall hayres made into net
To catch the youths in, as they come on ſhore.
How! Galatea ſighing! O, no more.
Baniſh your feares.
And Doris dry your teares.
Albion is come:
And Haliclyon, too,
That kept his ſide, as he was charg'd to doe,
With wonder.
—And the Syrens have him not.
Though they no practiſe, nor no arts forgot,
That might have wonne him, or by charme, or ſong.
Or laying forth their treſſes all along
Upon the glaſsie waves;
Then diving:
Then,
Up with their heads, as they were mad of men.
And there, the higheſt-going billowes crowne,
Untill ſome luſtie Sea-god pull'd them downe.
See! He is here!
Great Maſter of the mayne,
Receive thy deare, and precious pawne againe.
SARON, PORTVNVS, PROTEVS, bring him thus,
Safe, as thy Subjects wiſhes gave him us:
And of thy glorious Triumph let it be
No leſſe a part, that thou their loves doeſt ſee,
Then, that his ſacred head's return'd to thee.
Spring all the Graces of the age,
And all the Loves of time;
Bring all the pleaſures of the ſtage,
And reliſhes of rime:
Adde all the ſoftneſſes of Courts
The lookes, the laughters, and the ſports.
And mingle all their ſweets, and ſalts,
That none may ſay, the Triumph halts.
Behold the Palace of Oceanus!
Hayle Reverend ſtructure! Boaſt no more to us
Thy being able, all the Gods to feaſts;
We have ſeene enough: our Albion was thy gueſt.
Now turne and view the wonders of the deepe,
Where Proteus herds, and Neptunes Orkes doe keepe,
Where all is plough'd, yet ſtill the paſture's greene
The wayes are found; and yet no pathes are ſeene.
Come noble Nymphs, and doe not hide
The joyes, for which you ſo provide:
If not to mingle with the men,
What doe you here? goe home agen.
Your dreſsing doe confeſſe,
By what we ſee, ſo curious parts
Of Pallas, and Arachnes arts,
That you could meane no leſſe.
Why doe you weare the Silke-wormes toyles;
Or glory in the ſhell-fiſh ſpoyles?
Or ſtrive to ſhew the graines of ore
That you have gather'd on the ſhore,
Whereof to make a ſtocke
To graft the greener Emerald on
Or any better-water'd ſtone?
Or Ruby of the rocke?
Why doe you ſmell of Amber gris,
Of which was formed Neptunes Neice,
The Queene of Love; unleſſe you can
Like Sea-borne Venus love a man?
Try, put your ſelves unto't.
Your lookes, your ſmiles, and thoughts that meet,
Ambroſian hands, and ſilver feet,
doe promiſe you will do't.
'Tis time, your eyes ſhould be refreſh'd at length
With ſomething new, a part of Neptunes ſtrength
See, yond', his fleete, ready to goe, or come,
Or fetch the riches of the Ocean home,
So to ſecure him both in peace, and warres,
Till not one ſhip alone, but all be ſtarres.
I have another ſervice for you, Brother Poet, a diſh of pickled Saylors, fine ſalt Sea-boyes, ſhall reliſh like Anchoves, or Caveare, to draw downe a cup of Nectar, in the skirts of a night.
Come away boyes, the Towne is ours, hay for Neptune, and our young Maſter.
He knowes the Compaſſe, and the Card,
While Caſtor ſits on the maine yard,
And Pollux too, to helpe your hayles;
And bright Leucothoe, fils your ſayles:
Arion ſings, the Dolphins ſwim,
And, all the way, to gaze on him.
Although we wiſh the Triumph ſtill might laſt
For ſuch a Prince, and his diſcovery paſt,
Yet now, great Lord of waters, and of Iſles,
Give Proteus leave to turne unto his wiles:
And, whilſt young Albion doth thy labours aſe,
Diſpatch Portunus to thy Ports,
And Saron to thy Seas:
To meet old Nereus, with his fifty girles,
From aged Indus laden home with Pearles,
And orient gummes, to burne unto thy name.
And may thy Subjects hearts be all on flame:
Whilſt thou doſt keepe the earth in firme eſtate,
And 'mongſt the winds doſt ſuffer no debate.
But both at Sea, and Land, our powers increaſe
With health, and all the golden gifts of peace.