WHat braue Sea Musicke bids vs Welcome, harke!
Sure this is Venice, and the day Saint Marke,
In which the Duke and Senats, their course hold▪
To wed our Empire with a Ring of Gold.
No Thetis y'are mistaken, we are led
W infinite delight from the Lands had:
In ken of goodly shipping and yo bridge,
Venice had neare the like suruey that ridge,
Of stately buildings which the riuer Hem,
And grace the siluer streame, as the streame them:
That beautious seate is London so much fam'd,
Where any Nauigable Sea is nam'd;
And in that bottome Eminent Marchants plac't,
As rich, and venturous as euer grac't,
Venice or Europe these two Riuers heare,
Our followers may tell you where we are;
This Thamesis, that Mid-way who are sent,
To you most worthy Pretor to present,
Acknowledgment of duty neare shall err,
From Stanes vnto the Ancient Rochester;
And now to grace their Tryumph in respect,
These pay vs tribute, we are pleasd to select
Seuen worthy Nauigators out by name,
Seated beneath▪ this Globe; whose ampl fame
In the remotest part a' the earth is found,
And some of them haue circled the Globe round:
These you obserue are liuing in your eye,
And so they ought, for worthy men neare dye:
Drake, Hawkins, Furbisher, Gilbert, braue Knights,
That brought home gold, and honor from sea fights,
Candish, Carlile, and Dauis, and to these,
So many worthies I could adde at Seas,
Of this bold Nation, it would enuy strike,
I th' rest ath' World, who cannot shew the like;
Tis action valews honor as the flint,
Looke blacke and feeles like ice, yet from within't,
Their ar strooke sparkes which to the darkest nights,
Yeeld quicke and pering food for seuerall lights.
You haue quickned well my memory, and now
Of this your gratefull Tryumph I allow,
Honor lookes cleare and spreads her beames at large,
From the graue Senate seated in that Barge,
Rich Lading swell your bottomes, a blest Gale▪
Follow your ventures that they neuer faile;
And may you liue successiuely to weare,
The Ioy of this day, each man his whole yeare.
HIstory, Truth, and Vertue seeke by name,
To celebrate the Merchant-Taylors fame▪
That Henry de Royall, this wee call
Worthy Iohn Yeacksley purchast first their Hall;
And thus from low beginnings their oft-springs
Societies claime Brother-hoods of Kings.
I Troynovant plac't eminent in the eye
Of these admire at my felicity:
Fiue Cities, Antwerpe and the spacious Paris,
Rome, Venice, and the Turkes Metropilis:
Beneath these, fiue learned Poets worthy men,
Who do eternize braue acts by their pen;
Chaucer, Gower, Lidgate, Moore and for our time
Sr. Phillip Sidney, glory of our clime,
These beyond death a fame to Monarckes giue,
And these make Cities and Societies liue.
TO Honor by our Wrightings Worthy men,
Flowes as a duty from a iudging pen,
And when we are emploid in such sweet praise,
Bees swarme and leaue their honey on our bayes:
Euermore Musically Verses runne,
When the loth'd vaine of flattery they shun.
Suruey most Noble Pretor what succeedes,
Vertue low bred aspiring to high deedes.
MY birth was meane, yet my deseruings grew
To eminence, and in France a high pitch flew,
From a poore common Souldier I attaind,
The stile of Captaine, and then Knight-hood gaind;
Srud the Blacke Prince in France in all his warrs;
Then went t'the Holy-land, thence brought my scars.
And wearied body which no danger feard.
To Florence where it nobly lyes Inteerd,
There Sir Iohn Hawkewoods memory doth liue,
And to the Merchant-Taylors fame doth giue.
VIew whence the Merchanttaylors honor springs
From this most Royall Conuenticle of Kings:
Eight that Successiuely wore Englands Crowne
Held it a speciall honor, and renowne:
(The Society was so worthy, and so good)
T'vnite themselues into their Brotherhood.
Thus Time, and Industry attaine the prise,
As Seas from Brookes, as brookes from Hillocks rise▪
Let all good men this sentence oft repeate,
By vnity the smallest things grow great.
By vnity the smallest things grow great.
TO expresse what happinesse the Country yeilds,
The Poets faign'd Heauen in th'Elizian fields;
We figure here a Garden, fresh and new,
In which the chiefest of our blessings grew:
This worthy Patriot here, Sr. Thomas White,
Whilst he was liuing had a dreame one night,
He had built a Colledge and giuen liuing too't,
Where two Elme-bodies sprang vp from on root;
And as he dreamt, most certaine tis he found,
The Elme neare Oxford, and vpon that Ground,
Built Saint Iohns Colledge, Truth can testifie
His merrit, whilst his Faith and Charity
Was the true compasse, measur'd euery part,
And tooke the latitude of his Christian heart;
Faith kept the center, Charity walkt this round,
Vntill a true circumference was found;
And may the Impression of this figure strike,
Each worthy Senator to do the like.
OF all the Triumphs which your eye has view'd
This the fayre Monument of Gratitud;
This cheefly should your eye, and eare Imploy
That was of al your Brother-hood the Ioy,
Worthy Prince Henry fames best president,
Cald to a higher Court of Parliament,
In his full strength of Youth and height of blood,
And which Crownd all, when he was truely good:
On Vertue, and on Worth he still was throwing
Most bounteous shewers, where er'e he found them growing,
He neuer did disguise his wayes by Art
But shooted his intents vnto his hart,
And lou'd to do good, more for goodnesse sake,
Then any retribution man could make.
Such was this Prince, such are the noble hearts;
who when they dye, yet dye not in all parts:
But from the Integrety of a Braue mind,
Leaue a most Cleere and Eminent Fame behind.
Thus hath this Iewell not quite lost his Ray,
Only cas'd vp 'gainst a more glorious day.
And bee't rememberd that our Company
Haue not forgot him who ought ner'e to dye:
Yet, wherfore should our sorrow giue him dead,
When a new Phnaeix springs vp in his stead:
That as he seconds him in euery grace,
May second him in Brother-hood, and place.
Good rest my Lord, Integrity that keeps
The safest Watch and breeds the soundest sleeps.
Make the last day of this your houlding seate,
Ioyfull as this▪ or rather more compleate.