HAile worthy Praetor, (Haile Graue Senators)
The Queene of Waues (leauing Gray Neptunes Bowres)
waites here (Faire Lord) to serue you. Fames Report,
(so farre as old Oceanus Christall Court)
what Tryumphes Ceremony forthwould Call
To Swell the Ioyes of This Grand Festiuall,
Iutic'de me with my Mermaydes and a Traine
Of Sea-Nymphes hither. Here (this day) shall Reigne
Pleasures in State Maiesticke: And to lend
A brighter Splendor to them, do Attend
Three of my Noblest Children, Humber, Trent,
And Seuerne (Glorious made by Punishment.)
The Siluer-footed Thames (my eldest sonne)
To Grace your Tryumphes, by your Barge shall runne.
Your Fortunes (led by a white-handed Fate
Vp to this High Fame) I Congratulate:
Glad am I to behold you Thus Set Round
With Glories, Thus with Acclamations Crownd,
So Circled, and Hembd in, on Euery side
With Ecchoing Musicke, Fishes euen take pride
To Swimme along, and listen, Goe, and Take
The Dignity stayes for you, whilst I make
Smooth way Before you, on This Glassy Floore,
Vshering your glad Arriuall to the Shore.
To Honors Temple now you haue not farre,
Hye, and Come backe more Great than yet you Are, On,
BEhold, the foure Elements waite vpon you to do you Honor: Water hath prouided Floating Tryumphes to Dance in the Aire: In the Aire are a Thousand Ecchoes with Musick in their Mouthes, to Intice you to heare them: On the Shore shall ten thousand paire of hands giue you Plaudits in the Citty: The Element of Fire, Thunders aloud your welcomes. Thronges of Subjects here, are glad to see the Graces Inthroand on your Forehead: All the Delicacies of Loue, playing on your Eye-lids, The Roses of England, and the Lillies of France, Kissing one Another on your cheekes. Be you healthfull as the Spring; Glorious as Summer: Fruitful as the Vine: Safety runne along your Chariot by Day; Golden Slumbers dresse vp your Chamber at Night.
Liue long,
Liue happy,
Liue beloude;
Goodnesse Guard you,
Vertues Crowne you,
Angels Guide you.
TEn thousand welcomes Greete you on the shore,
(My long expected Praetor,) O before
You looke on Others, fixe your eyes on Mee,
On Mee, your second Mother, (London.) Shee
Whom all Great Brittaines Citties, stile their Queene,
For still I am, and have her Darling beene.
The Christian World, in Me, reads Times best stories,
And Reading, fals blind at my dazling Glories,
But now the Snow of age, couers my head:
As therefore you, by Mee haue vp binbred▪
You (Sir) must Nurse me now: with a quicke eye
View then my Tree of Honor, branching high
For hundreds of past yeares, with 12. large Stems,
Twelue Noble Companies, which like 12. Iems
So shine, they adde new Sun beames to the Day:
Guard all these 12. maine-Boughes; but you must lay:
A soft hand, on the Topping-branch, for there
(Thriue the Roote well) your Selfe grows al this yeare:
The lesser twigges which lowly runne along
My tall Tree, Border, you must shield from wrong,
There the poore Bee, (the sweating Trades man) flies
From Flower to Flower, and home with Honey byes.
With me Minerua; and Bellona come,
For Artes aud Armes, must at your Board haue roome,
Your Gates will spred, the Rich to entertaine,
But whilst the Mightyones within remaine,
And feast: Remember at the same Gate stands
The Poore, with crying Papers in their hands,
To watch when Iustice vp the Glasse shall turne,
Let those sands runne, the Poore can neuer mourne.
Place in your eyes two Beacons, to descry
Dangers farre off, which strike ere home they flie;
Kisse Peace; let Order euer steere the Helme,
Left-handed Rule, a State does ouer-whelme.
You are your Soueraignes Gardner for one yeare,
The Plot of Ground, y'are trusted with, lies here,
(A Citty,) and your care must all bee spent,
To prune aud and dresse the Tree of Gouernment.
Lop off Disorders, Factions, Mutiny,
And Murmurations against those sit high,
May your yeares last day, end as this beginnes,
Sphar'd in the loues of Noble Citizens.
FAme's turne is now to Speake; for who but Fame
Can with her thousand Tongues abroad Proclaime,
Your this dayes Progresse (rising like the Sunne,)
Which through the yearely Zodiacke on must runne.
Fame hath brought hither from great Mosco's Court,
(The seauen-mouth'd Volga, spreading the report,)
Two Russian Princes, who to feast their eies,
With the rich Wonders of these rarities,
Ride in this glorious Chariot; How amazde
They looke, to see streetes throng'd, and windowes glaz'd
With beauties, from whose eyes such beames are sent,
Here moues a second starry Firmament.
Much, on them, startling admiration winnes,
To see these Braue, Graue, Noble Citizens,
So stream'd in mutitudes, yet flowing in State,
For all their Orders are Proportionate.
Russia, now enuies London, seeing (here) spent
Her richest Furres, in gracefull ornament,
More Braue and more Abounding, than her owne:
A golden Pen he earnes, that can make knowne
The vse of Furres, so Great, so Generall,
All men, may these, their VVinter Armors call.
Th'inuention of warme Furres the Sunne did fret,
For Russians lap'd in these, slighted his heate,
Which seene, his fiery Steedes he droue from thence,
And so the Muff has dwelt in cold ere since.
VVhat royalties, adde Furres to Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Earles, in the distinguishings,
Of all their seuerall Robes? The Furres worne here,
Aboue th'old Romane State make Ours appeare:
The reuerend Iudge, and all that climbe the trees
Of sacred Artes, ascend to their Degrees,
And by the colours chang'd of Furres are knowne:
VVhat Dignity, each Corporation
Puts on by Furres, witnesse these infinite eyes,
Thanke then the bringers of these Rarities.
I wish (Graue Praetor) that as Hand in Hand,
Plenty and Bounty bring you safe to Land,
So, Health may be chiefe Caruer at that Board,
To which you hasten. Bee as Good a Lord
I'th'eyes of Heauen, as this day you are Great
In Fames applause: Hye to your Honor'd Seate.
SHall the proud wife of Neptune, or shrill Fame,
Or Troynouant her selfe, Ring out your Name:
And I be Dumbe, or sparing, to Sound high,
The Glories of This Day? No, They shall Fly
Like Soaring Eagles, to That Curled Maine
whose Head my Rocky Bridle, In does Reyne:
The Great Britannia, Bred you in her Wombe,
Heare then a Mothers Counsell; You are Come
Aboard a Goodly Ship, where all your State,
Fame, Honor and Renowne (Imbarqu'd) must waite
The voyage of twelue Moones. High Amirall
You are to All That Fleete, which Thus you Call
To syle in This vast Ocean. Nor must you
Walke Heartlesse on the Hatches, I heres a New
State-Nauigation, to be studied Now,
With an High rear'd, Vndanted, Fixed Brow.
Be sue to haue Braue Ordnance, and chargd well;
In this your Sip, Trust None, For Officers Sell
Their Captaines Trust; let None but your owne Eyes,
Rule Chart and Compasse, There your Safety lyes.
Your Owne Hands steere the Helme, But strongly Steere,
And spite of stormes, be stoute when you stand There.
Embleme of Mercy! Your Keene sword does sleepe,
But why a Sword, if not to Kul, and Keepe
Vices (like Slaues) in Awe? Fulnesse of Wine
Is a Fowle Dropsie, That and Lust Entwine:
Pride a swolne Timpany, Sloth, the Beggars Goute,
(In Tradesmens Hands and Feete, It runnes about,)
No Cure for this! Oathes thicke as Small-shot flye
From Children, No Defence to Put this by!
You May, you Must. I Counsell not, but Reade
A Lesson of my loue; By which Loue led
Ile on, and Bring you to your Honord Chaire,
Whist Aues (Round about you) Dance i'th' Aire.
HEauens bright Orientall Gates I op'd this Morne,
And Hither wheeld my Chariot to adorne
These splendors with my Beames: nere did the Sun
In his Caelestiall Circle faster runne
Than Now, to see these Sights: O how I ioy
To view a Kingdome, and a New-built Troy
So flourishing so full, so faire, so deare
To th' Gods. they leaue Ioue's Court to reuell here.
All o're the VVorld, I trauell in one Day,
Yet oft am forc'd to leaue my beaten way,
Frighted with Vproares, Battailes, Massacres,
Famines, and all that Hellish brood of warres:
I meete no Peace but here. O blessed Land!
That seest fires kindling round, and yet canst stand
Vnburnt for all their flames; O Nation blest!
VVhen all thy Neighbours shrike, none wound thy brest.
To Crowne these ioyes, with me are come along,
The foure Lords of the yeare, who by a strong
Knit Charme, bring in this goodly Russian prize,
As earnest of a more rich Merchandize:
Halfe of our Race, Time, and my Houres haue runne,
Nor shall they giue o're till the Goale be wonne.
THe Sunne is mantled in thicke Clouds of Blacke,
And by his hidden Beames, threatens the wracke
Of all these Glories: Euery pleasure dyes
VVhen Rauen-winged Night, from her Caue flyes;
None but these Artificiall Starres keepe fire
To Light you Home, these burne with a desire
To lengthen your braue Triumphes; but their heate
Must coole, and dye at length, tho ne're so Great.
Peace therefore guide you on: Rest, charme your eyes,
And Honors waite to cheere you when you Rise.