THus Mounted, hither comes the King of waues,
Whoſe voyce Charmes rougheſt Billows into ſlaues,
Whoſe Foote, treades downe their necks with as much Eaſe
As in my ſhelly Coach, I reyne vp Theſe.
Lowd Ecchoes cald me from my glittering Throne
To ſee the Noble Thameſis;— A Sonne
To this my Queene and Me () whoſe Eare
Ne're Ieweld vp ſuch Muſick as ſounds Here.
For, our vnfaddomd World, Roares out with None
But Horrid Sea-fights, Nauies Ouerthrowne,
Ilands halfe-drownd in Bloud, Pyrates pell mell,
Turkes ſlauiſh tugging Oares, The Dunkerks Hell,
The Dutchmans Thunder, And the Spaniards Lightning,
To whom, the Sulphures Breath giues Heate & Heightning,
O! Theſe are the Dire Tunes my Conſort ſings,
But here! old Thame out ſhines the Beames of Kings.
This Citty Addes New Glories to Ioues Court.
And to All you, who to this Hall reſort,
This via (as a Path) is giuen,
Being Pld with Pearle, as that with Starres in heauen
I could (to wll my trayne) Becon the Rhine.
(But the wylde Boare ha tusked vp his vine.)
I could Swif Volga Call, whoſe curld head lies
On ſeauen pillowes, (But, in merchandizs
The Ruſſian, him imployes)-I could to theis
Call Ganges, Nilus, long haird Euphrates,
Tagus whoſe golden Hands claſpe Lisbone walles,
Him could J call too, But what neede theis calles?
Were they all here, they would weepe out there eyes,
Madde that new Troys high towers on tiptoe rize
To hit Heauens Roofe: Madde, to ſee Thames this day
(For all his age) in wanton windinges Play,
Before his, new Graue Praetor, and before
Theis ſenators, Best fathers of the poore.
That Grand Canale, where (ſtately) once a yeare
A Fleete of bridall Gondoletts appeare,
To marry with a golden Ring, (Thats Hurld,
Into the ſea) That minion of the world
Venice to Neptune,-A poore Lantſcip is,
To theſe full Brauereis of Thameſis.
Goe therefore vp to Caeaſars Court,-And clayme
What honors there are left to Campe-bels name
As by diſent, whilſt we tow vp a tyde
Which ſhall ronne ſweating vp by you barges ſide:
That done, Time ſhall Oceanus Name Inroll,
For guarding You to Londons Capitoll.
BRaue Jron! Braue Hammer! from your ſound,
The Art of Muſicke has her Ground,
On the Anuile, Thou keep'st Time,
Thy Knick-a-knock is a ſmithes Beſt Chyme,
Yet Thwick a-Thwack,
Thwick, Thwac-a-Thwac-Thwac,
Make our Brawny ſinewes Crack,
Then Pit a-pat-pat, pit-a-pat-pat,
Till thickeſt barres be beaten flat.
We ſhooe the Horſes of the Sunne,
Harneſſe the Dragons of the Moone,
Forge Cupids Quiuer, Bow, and Arrowes,
And our Dames Coach, thats drawne with Sparrowes.
Till thwick-a-thwack, &c.
Ioues Roaring Cannons, and his Rammers,
We beate out with our Lemnian Hammers,
Mars his Gauntlet, Helme and Speare,
And Gorgon Shield are all made here.
Till thwick-a-thwack, &c.
The Grate which (ſhut) the Day out-barres,
Thoſe golden ſtuddes which naile the ſtarres,
The Globes-caſe, and the Axletree,
Who can Hammer theſe but Wee.
Till thwick-a-thwack, &c.
A Warming-panne to heate Earth's bedde,
Lying ith frozen Zone halfe-dead,
Hob-nailes to ſerue the Man ith Moone,
And Sparrow-bils to cloute Pan's ſhoone.
Whoſe worke but ours? Till thwic-a-thwack, &c,
Venus Kettles, Pots and Pennes,
We make, or elſe ſhe Brawles and Bannes,
Tonges, Shouels, Andirons haue their places,
Elſe ſhee ſcratches all our faces.
Till thick a-thwack, &c.
Stop your Hammers: what ayles Ioue?
We are making arrowes for my ſlip-string ſonne,
Here, —reach him thoſe two dozen; I muſt now
A golden handle make for my wifes fann:
Worke my ſine Smugges.
Firſt heare; you ſhall not play,
The Fates would ſcold ſhould you keepe Holiday.
What then?
Command thy Brawny fiſted ſlaues to ſweate
At th' Anuile, and to duſt their Hammers beate,
To ſtuffe with Thunderbolts Ioues Armoryes,
For Vices (mountaine-like) in black heapes rize,
My ſinewes crack to fell them:— Ideot pride
Stalkes vpon ſtilts, — Ambition, by her ſide,
Climbing to catch Starres, breakes her necke it'h fall,
The Gallant Roares, — Roarers drinke oathes and gall,
The Beggar curſes, — Auarice eates gold
Yet ne're is fild, — Learning's awrangling ſcold,
Warre has a Fatall hand, — Peace, whoriſh Eyes,
Shall not Iove, beate downe ſuch Impieties?
Ist not high time, Iſt not true Iustice then
(Vulcan) for thee, and thy tough Hammer-men
To heate thy Anuile,—and blow fires to flames
To burnetheſe Broodes, who kill euen with their Names?
Yes Ioue, tis more then Time.
And what helpes this, but Iron! O then, how high
Shall this Great Troy, Text vp the Memory
Of you her Noble Praetor, and tall Thoſe
(Your worthy Brotherhood) through whoſe Care goes
That rare, rich prize of Iron, to the whole Land,
Iron! farre more worth then Tagus golden Sand.
Iron! beſt of Mettals! Pride of Minerals!
Hart of the Earth! Hand of the World, which fals
Heauy when it ſtrikes home: — By Irons ſtrong Charmes
Ryots lye bound: —Warre ſtops her rough Allarmes
Iron; Earthquakes strikes in Foes: — Knits friends in loue,
Iron's that maine Hinge, on which the World doth moue:
No Kingdomes Globe can turne, Euen, Smooth and Round,
But that his Axletree in Iron is found:
For, Armies wanting Iron, are puffes of wind,
And, but for Iron, who thrones of peace would mind?
Were there no gold nor ſiluer in the land:
Yet Nauigation (which on Jron does ſtand)
Could fetch it in —Gold's Darling to the Sunne,
But Iron, his hardy Boy, by whom is done
More than the Tother dare: The Merchants Gates
By Iron, barre out theeuiſh aſſaſsinates:
Iron is the Shop-keepers both Locke and Kay,
What are your Cours of Guard, when Iron's away?
How would the Cornepricke vp her golden Eares:
But that Iron Plough ſhares, all the labour beares
In Earth's ſtrange Midwiffry? Braue Jron! what praiſe
Deſerues it? More tis beate, more it obayes;
The more it ſuffers: More it ſmoothes offence:
In Drudgery, it ſhines with Patience.
This Fellowſhip, was then with Iudging Eyes
Vnited to the twelue great Companies:
It being farre more Worthy, than to Fill
A File inferiour; — You's the Sunne's guilt Hill:
On toot: Ioue guardes you on: Cyclopes a Ring
Make with your Hammers, to whoſe Muſicke Sing.
WElcome (great Praetor) Now heare Tytan ſpeake,
Whoſe beames to Crowne this Day, through Clouds thus Breake
My coach of beaten gold is ſet aſide,
My Horſes to Ambroſiall mangers tied,
Why is this done? why leaue I mine owne Sphere?
But here to circle You, for a whole Yeare:
Embrace then Tytans Counſell: —Now ſo Guide
The Chariot of your ſway in a Iust Pace,
That All (to come hereafter) may with Pride,
Say, None like you did Noblier quit the Place▪
Lower than Now you are in Fame, Neuer fall,
Note me (the Sunne) who in my Noone Careere,
Renders a ſhaddow, ſhort or None at all,
And ſo, ſince Honors Zodiac is your ſphaere,
A ſhrub to you muſt be the talleſt Pine,
On poore and rich you Equally muſt ſhine.
This if you Doe, my Armes ſhall euer ſpread
About thoſe Roomes you Feast in:—From her head
Flora, her garlands plucke (beeing Queene of Flowers)
To dreſſe your Parlors vp like ſummers Bowers:
Ceres, lay golden ſheaffes on your full boord,
With fruit you from Pomona ſhall be ſloard,
Whilſt Ver and Eſtas (Spring and Sommer) Driue
From this your Tempe, Winter, till he Diue
I'th frozen Zone, and Tytans Radiant ſhield
Guard Campe-bels Beuch ampe, Londons faireſt field.
APollo neuer ſtucke in Admiration till now: My Delphos is remouen hither; my Oracles are ſpoken here: Here the Sages vtter their wiſedome, Here the Sybels their diuine verſes.
I ſee Senators this day in Scarlet riding to the Capitoll, and to morrow the ſame men riding vp and downe the field in Armors Gowned Citizens, and Warlike Gowne-men. The Gunne here giues place, and the owne takes the vpper hand. The Gowne and the Gunne march in one File together.
Happy King that has ſuch people, happy Land in ſuch a King! Happy Pretor ſo grac'd with Honors! Happy Senators ſo obayed by Citizens. And happy Citizens that can command ſuch Triumphes.
Good in your full glories: whilſt Apollo, and theſe Miſtreſſes of the Learned Sciences, waft you to that Honourable ſhore; whither Time bids you haſten to arriue.
AFter the glorious troubles of this day,
Night bids you welcome home,—Night who does lay
All pompe, all Triumphs, by,-ſtate, now deſends,
Here or Officious Trayne their ſeruice ends,
And yet not all, for ſee: the golden Sunne,
Albeiu he had his dayes worke fully done,
Sits vp aboue his houre, and does his beſt
To keepe the ſtarres from lighting you to reſt,
Him will I take along to lay his head
In Tethys lape, Peace therefore Guard your bedds:
In your yeares Zediacke may you fairely moue,
Shin'd on by Angels, bleſt with goodnes loue.