GIue the word aloud?
Stand?
1. Stand! 2. Stand! 3. Stand!
Our motion has been ſwift: wee
out-march Time.
Verona, (which with the mornings dim eye
We ſeem'd to view like Landſchaip, afarre off)
Is our full obiect now. She muſt repent;
Our King is Steward vnto Fate; the world
Receiue from him their deſtinies.
Sure, the Gouernour ſleepes. My Lord, is' fit
We waite vpon ſuch Silkewormes, crepp'd in wooll?
Since we attaind the Towne not by aſſault,
But compoſition free, he ſhall expreſſe
Humilitie enough to meet vs at the Gate.
Here comes Hermegild.
Haile, young ſouldier! My noble Paradine!
The King muſt hold my nature much excus'd,
If I do greet his ſafe approach with loue,
Leſſe violent then I expreſſe to thy
Rich ſoule. I am reſolu'd thou art in health,
And fauour with thy ſtarres.
Ere I returne your kinde ſalute, I would
After your faire charge inquire. Say the Queene
Smiles in captiuitie, my Valdaura
Hurts not her health with griefe; then I haue heard
Enough to make me cheriſh life.
Rhodolinda doth become her title
And her birth. Since depriu'd of popular
Homage, ſhe hath been Queene ore her great ſelfe.
In this captiuity nere paſſionate
But when ſhe heares me name the King, and then
Her paſſions not of anger taſte, but loue:
Loue of her Conquerour: he that in fierce
Battaile (when the Cannons ſulpherous breath
Clouded the day) her noble Father ſlew:
Our Royall Maſter once; now ſunke into
His ſoyle; where like the Lilly wither'd,
He neuer ſhall renew his growth agen.
My memory diſturbes my Tongue! Your faire
Valdaura makes the Queene her rare and iuſt
Example, and is in patience skilfull.
Know, Hermegild, no haſty minute paſs'd
(Since their captiuitie) wherein I fail'd
To be a ſutor to the King for both.
But he's in kindneſſe prompt, and ſtill doth ſpeake
Like Muſicke, when he Rhodolinda names:
You heare tis his edict we call her Queene?
Thy vanquiſh'd Country owes vnto thy fame
A tall Pyramid! The captiu'd virgins
Of our Nation ſhall in their laſt Dirges
Sing thy prayſe with mirth. O, I could grow old
Within thy ſight. Something we now muſt talke
Together, and heauen will liſten to't,
As to the breath of Saints—
I knew we ſhould haue vſe of conference:
Which made me begge the leading of the Vanne,
The more t'aſſiſt our opportune meeting.
Afford your eares in priuat.
Though Paradine looke flouriſhing, and like
A thing new bruſh'd; a flame of triumph,
(As if his father ſurfetted in ſome
O're-growne City when he got him) yet he
Hath in him ſeeds of warre, bold thoughts, and we
I'th Campe, eſteeme him honeſt too.
He is our Kings Minion, ſleepes in his boſome.
True, & the Royall foole greets him with ſuch
Rauenous kiſſes, that you would thinke, he meant
To eate his lips.
The Captiue captiuates the Conquerour.
Three Moones haue not expir'd their vſuall change,
Since he was priſoner to the King; though now
His Fauorite.
Th'art too loud! If thou'lt talke ſafely, go get
A ſore throat; hoarce men ſpeake low.
The captiu'd Rhodolinda, (whoſe father
Albouine depriu'd of life and kingdome)
Hath with ſuch amorous ſubtiltie behau'd
Her geſture, that Albouine is now her
Priſoner. This martiall progreſſe was but made
To viſit her. She makes him guilty of
Idolatry, and knowes the thrifty vſe
Of time: as ſhe aſcends, her Countrimen
Muſt riſe.
You haue call'd that Hermegild her Creature?
He was her fathers Councellor; a man
Created in the darke: he walkes inuiſibly;
He dwels in Labyrinths; he loues ſilence:
But when he talkes, his language carries more
Promiſcuous ſenſe, then ancient Oracles.
So various in his ſhapes, that oft he is
Diſguz'd from his owne knowledge. An error
Much incident to humane Politicks,
Who ſtriue to know others more then themſelues.
Obſerue their complement.
Pox o' theſe French ligges? Courtiers alwaies dance.
This is to Hermegild meere lechery:
This wanton geſture doth obſcure
Thoughts of ſuch conſequence and weight, as hang
Like Plummets on his heart. Paradine is
A ſoft, eaſie foole, and muſt be guld.
O my ſweet Lord—
Now the Motion ſpeakes.
Such indeerements would too much impoueriſh
My gratitude: yet, tis meet our actions
Carry ſmooth equalitie: your conſent
Muſt further all my Sutes You are the Kings
Iewell, and hang richly in his eare.
You are precious vnto her, whom loud noiſe
Already calls our Queene: faire Rhodolinda!
We may (if they prooue naturall and kinde)
Gouerne the Nation that hath conquered vs;
Gaine our Countrey liberty, and yet
Not ſtray from noble Arts: ſuch hopes our free
Imbraces prophecy. The King.
Your Troopes (Sir) are ſo diuided into
Mix'd files, that to the City you doe march
Betweene thick walles of men.
Let my Horſe-guard bring vp the Rere. We'le ſport
With warre. We haue no vſe of ſafety now,
But of magnificence.
The order is already giuen. It was
Your Royall will, we haſten in our March,
Therefore each Squadron double their paces.
My Boy, I bring thee home my chiefe Trophy:
Thou doſt delight me more then victory.
Retire. I am in loue too violent.
My embraces cruſh thee, thou art but yet
Of tender growth—
My Countriman would kiſſe your Royal hands,
And then expect no greater happineſſe
Till he arriue in heauen. He hath done your
Rhodolinda ſeruice—
Rhodolinda is your humbleſt captiue.
She inſerts you often in her prayers,
And call'd it my chiefe duty to preſent
Her true ſeruice to your Maieſty.
Her name doth inrich our Language. My boy
Can witneſſe that I loue her: ſhe makes me
Prattle in my ſleepe: I'ue drunke Mandragora,
To become drowzie, in hope that I might
Dreame of her. Riſe, and expect Honour.
High and ſacred Maieſty! Verona
Hath vnhindg'd her wide Gates: proud to admit
The fate of Kingdomes. Our crooked Matrones
Forget their age: and (as the ragged Earth
At the Springs warme approach) look freſh, & young,
To intertaine you. Our timorous Virgins
(With the bold Youth) ioyne in one wanton Quire
To ſing your welcome.
How the Spaniell fawnes, 'cauſe he dares not barke?
Th'amorous Vine clips not the ſhady Poplar
With ſuch regard (about whoſe moſſie waſte
She hangs a ſmiling Louer.) Our City is
By the reflection of your bleſt approach
Like Pelion deck'd, whom Tython's Miſtreſſe
(Leauing the weeping Eaſt) with brightneſſe guilds.
There's not a wrinkle left in all Verona,
Wherein pale ſorrow, or rebellious enuy
Can finde their loathed Manſion. Flattering ioy
Swells big each loyall boſome. All implore
You as their ſafety; who hath huſh'd the noiſe
Of diſcord, and loud warre.
The Raſcall flatters, as if he had ſeru'd
His prentiſhip in Court.
Th'aſt done me iuſtice, Gouernor, & know'ſt
The way to make me thankefull, but not proud.
I vnderſtand thou haſt with honor'd ſafety
Preſeru'd thoſe Iewels to thy charge committed,
(My Rhodolinda, and my Boys Valdaura.)
And ſo increas'd new motiues of our thanks.
Heauen has made your memory too humble,
Thus to record your creatures ſeruice.
Let now the knotty Laborer ruſt with eaſe,
And aloud proclaime, that the vpland Boore
Releaſe his Teeme, and his induſtrious Plough.
Let him ſing glad Iös to the ruſtick
Powers that guard his fields, and vnto me.
It is by you we are: no warlike Ram,
Nor battering engine forc'd a bloody entrance
Through our thicke walls. It was the powerfull breath
Of your victorious fame, that conquer'd vs.
To that we yeelded: which as a rough blaſt
That poaſts from the cold Artick Pole, hath borne
Before it captiu'd Nations.
By heauen a good old man! if he be learn'd,
Ile haue him write my Annales.
Indeed he lookes like a Chronicler.
Paradine? Informe him of my deeds.
Thou haſt beheld my diſcipline full of
Shape and order, when confuſion did oppreſſe
The foe, and ſtifled them in throngs. Hah! Looke!
Rhodolinda's come to guild our Triumph!
And my Valdaura too! let Nature ſhew
A third obiect ſo delightfull, we'le ſweare
She is not old, nor her firſt materials
Waſted, but in creation ſtill retaines
Her former ſtrength and skill.
But why (my beautious Captiue) art thou ſtill
In Sables wrapp'd?
Your ſtarres bid you be happy. My croſſe fae
Like the Rauen, croaks a funerall note:
This ſwarthy habit, but paints forth the griefe
That chaines my ſoule in darkneſſe. And filiall loue
Commands me mourne for him, whom you too ſoone
Depriu'd of life, my conquer'd father.
Let his aſhes reſt
At quiet in their Vrne. His ghoſt long ſince
Hath waſh'd away the memory of his fate
In ſlow-pac'd Laethe. Take me, modeſt faire,
Into thy boſome. O hide me there!
My glad ſoule, how full is thy content?
Now thou fear'd thing, that guid'ſt the heauenly Empire,
Rend all the murmuring clouds, and dart
Thy Thunder at me: I am ſafe.
My captiuity muſt needs ſeeme eaſie,
Whilſt the Conquerour proues ſo kinde.
I could gaze thus on thee, till my wonder
Did conuert me into marble; and yet
My ſoule would in her ſelfe retaine a fire,
Liuely as that which bold Prometheus ſtole.
Were the Sea coagulate, and the world
Returnd to th' antick Chaos, a blinde Lumpe;
Thy looke would force the warring elements
Into a ſacred order; and beget
A harmony like this they now inioy.
You are too powerfull in you ſpeech.
Yet when I valew thus thy excellence,
Let me not forget my owne high being.
I'ue humbled all the Nations of the earth;
Brought home as ſpoyles the whole wealth of Nature:
Yet, Rhodolinda, nought like thee. Let me
Whiſper my content, for ſoft muſicke moſt
Delights the female eare.
Why, my deare Valdaura, doſt thou ſuſpect
My warme embraces? Let hungry death ceaze
On my honour, before it ceaze on me,
If in my breſt I intertaine a thought
Vnlawfull.
I eſteeme you (Sir) a friend to vertue,
And in that hope would cheriſh all your loue.
In thy faire brow, there's ſuch a Legend writ
Of timorous chaſtitie, that it doth blinde
Th'adulterous Eye. Not the Mountaine Ice,
(Congeal'd to Chriſtall) is ſo froſty chaſte
As thy victorious ſoule, which conquers Man,
And Mans proud Tyrant-paſſion. But I am
Too rough for Courtſhip, the ſoft harmony
Which wanton Peace inſtructs the Tongue to make,
I haue forgot. Truſt me (bright Maid!)
I loue thee dearely. Though I'ue found thy heart
Like Pibble, ſmooth, but ſtony.
I'ue heard my mother ſay: the curled Youth
Of Italy, were prompt in wanton ſtealths,
And ſinfull Arts. Till Time had giuen me
Aſſurance of your noble thoughts; 'twas ſafe
To doubt your loue. But now I wiſh I were
More worthy, and then would prooue more liberall
Of my ſelfe.
Let me enioy thy hand! that moyſt Adamant
That ſo attracts my ſoule! We will (ere night
Her black Curtaine drawes) make compleat this loue,
With marriage Rites.
How now, Boy! Is my intereſt ſo decay'd
In your young perſon, that you giue away your ſelfe
Without my leaue!
Humbly on my knee, I beg the vulgar
Priuiledge due to all hearts. To loue, and not enioy,
Is a torture, I cannot ſuffer long,
And ſtill remaine poſſeſs'd with breath.
Thou haſt ſhew'd me phyſick for my paſſion.
Take him, Valdaura, and be proud! Tis I
That loue him: nor ſhall your ioyes be ſingle.
Ile make the number yet more full. This day
We'le conſecrate to Hymens vſe. Behold
Your Queene (who though my Captiue) for her birth
And beauty, is the firſt of Queenes.
High Heauen increaſe your ioyes!
And may you liue together vntill Time
Shall ſicken with his age.
Conrad. Long liue Albouine, King of the Lombards!
Cry vp Rhodolinda too!
Conrad. Liue Rhodolinda, Queene of the Lombards!
Gouernor! Tis our will that you expect
Honour, and true ſafety. Your Cities loue
I ſhall perceiue by popular noiſe, and your
Behauiour in this great ſolemnitie.
Let the Sunne ſmile; the Winde ſport with our Plumes!
This day let ſick-men too forget to groane.
Let all glad Hymnes in one mix'd concord ſound,
And make the ecchoing heauen your mirth rebound.
The King's head muſt now conuert to rotten wood.
Why, Grimold?
That Court Earewiggs may liue there, and deuoure
His brains. Doſt not perceiue how they begin
To creepe into his eares?
Generous ſoules are ſtill moſt ſubiect to
Credulitie.
He is a Germane in his drinke: buſied
With a wanton pride, which his Flatterers
Admire for mirth, but his friends doe pitie.
He ſhould be told his ſinnes.
By whom? Vollterri, now the King forſakes
The Campe, he muſt maintaine luxurious mouthes,
Such as can vtter perfum'd breath, and theſe
Straite compoſe a faction, engroſſe his eares.
They limit ſtill his conuerſation.
Euen as the ſlow finger of the Diall
Doth in its motion circular remoue
To diſtant figures: ſo by a ſubtill
Leaſure, they doe prefix the houres,
When he muſt change his rotten Paraſite,
For one more skilfull, how t'admire, and praiſe.
No honeſt Tongue can euer interpoſe
To tell him he is mortall.
It is the chiefe miſery of Princes,
Nere to vnderſtand their owne crimes, to ſinne
In ignorance.
True, his Confeſſor, that in ſight externe
A Patriarke ſeemes, will gaine by flattery,
And ſuperſcribe vnto the King, as to the Pope
(His holineſſe.) But Gondibert,
Whom Conclaues here in Court doe canonize
For Saints, will ſcarce be admitted in heauen
For Angels.
Now Rhodolinda is become his Riuall
In high Soueraigntie, ſhe will permit
No errors but her owne: The King muſt mend
What ſhe miſlikes.
She giues vs leaſure to expect
Her character. Women make themſelues more known
When they doe rule, then when th'obey.
Valdaura is inrich'd with a ſweetneſſe
So religious, that Paradine muſt ſinne
In priuate, or need no mercy.
Th'aſt nam'd her! Though my obdurate ſufferance
In actiue warre hath quite depriu'd me of
All amorous geſture. Though not theſe forty
Winters, I haue ſeene any of her ſex
But Suttlers wiues, who, in ſtead of Fillets,
Wrap their ſooty haire in Horſes girts. Though
My marrow is frozen in my bones,
Yet I melt before her eyes. When I ſee her,
I grow proud below the Nauell. For ſhe
Is none o' th' French Nourſery, that practice
The ſublime friske. None o' your ijgging Girles,
That pearch Paraqueeto's on their fiſts,
And ride toth' Court like Venus Falconers.
Grimold, hoarce men ſpeake low, thou haſt not caught
A cold yet.
She's none of thoſe that on their heads aduance
High, ſwagg'ring Plumes, like a gay Forehorſe
In a Country Teeme. O, ſhe's worth the tempting!
Doſt thou ſo commend her vertues, and yet
Wouldſt thou tempt her vnto vice?
That's a trick I learnt of the deuill. Thoſe
That are vertuous, need his temptation,
The wicked haue power enough to damne themſelues.
Hark how they ſhowte! Away Grimold ▪ or we
Shall loſe the Triumph!
Roome for Cuckolds, whoſe hornes are ſo high▪
They bore the Moone, as ſhe friskes in the skie▪
This Peace makes me rotten, duſty
As a Cobweb. I liue like a Cricket
Ith'corner of an Ouen. Pox o' theſe oregrowne
Cities. To be valiant here, is to forfeit
The Statute: and theſe furr'd gownes hold,
There is no ſinne ſo great as pouerty.
Thou art as melancholy as a leane Iudge!
I, or a corrupted Officer, at the noiſe
Of a Parliament. In this diuiſion
Of vnualewed Tropheys, Territories
Vaſt and ample, (gain'd partly by my ſweat)
Not a ſingle Acre falls to my ſhare.
Beare back there! They thruſt as if they meant
To get me with child—
You ſirrah! d'ye get the Kings officer
With child?
Beare back there! or we'le put ye to the charge
Of Surgery—
Diſpatch▪ fellowes!
Is not that Cunymond?
The ſame. He is a great Aſtrologer.
The meere Anotamy i'th front o'th Kalender.
You may know where the Signe is, by ſome toy
In's habit, which he remoues, as the Signe
Remoues.
Frollo, did they enter here by your permiſſion?
Not by mine, Sir.
Nor yours, Conrade?
They are men of China for ought I know.
Then they muſt out. Gentlemen, pray auoide
The Preſence.
'S death Sir! d'ye make vs your Voyders?
Muſt we carry away your Cheeſe-parings?
Thruſt your Bodkins forth!
Draw i'th Preſence? Art thou mad?
How he ſtands? he is created of Starch,
And dares not vſe a boyſterous motion,
Leſt he ſhould fall in Rumples.
Sir, you may ſpeake like a Cannon! but you
Shall either goe, or—
Or what, Sir?
Or ſtay, Sir.
By heauen he ſhall doe one, Sir—
Nay, Captaine, doe not look, as if y'had drunk
Vineger. You muſt, or go, or—ſtay Sir—
Hey! we are tumbling in a Drum.
Fellowes o' the Guard, make way there! Officers!
Open the doore—
Beare back there! Gentlemen! what d'ye meane?
Pray' beare back—
Phoebus will be thought more raſh then Phaeton,
If now he haſten to the Weſt. Sir, this
Glorious day, merits well a longer age,
Then what is limitted to all within
Our Kalender.
Hermegild, thy free heart adds to our triumph!
Sir, I'ue ſome few words, I needs muſt vtter:
Since my laſt ſeruices in Hungary,
You remaine on my Tally ſix thouſand
Duckats: I'm loth to skore vp ſtill, and pay
My ſelfe with my owne Chalke.
Wouldſt haue thy Soule diſmiſſed a naturall way?
I would not ſtarue, looke, like a parch'd Anotamy
Sow'd in a Kid-skin. Pay your debts, Sir!
I neuer met with boldneſſe, vntill now!
My courage is quite puzled!
Do your eares bliſter to heare this? My breath is
Wholſome. I cannot tipple like a Duck
In a greene Poole. Nor feed on Berries in
A Hedge, like ſome loſt remnant o' my fathers
Scatterd luſt. Sir, pay your debts!
Sure, thou art ſome ſpirit! I cannot kill thee!
In this diuiſion of the Lands, I help'd
To conquer; I am not furniſh'd with
A Mole-hill for a pillow.
Hermegild ſat chiefe in the Committee
For diuiſion of thoſe Lands: bid him reward
Your ſeruice: beſides, I miſtake the cuſtome,
Or tis my Treaſurers office to pay
My debts, not mine.
No Sir, (thanks to your Royall thrift) it is
Your office to pay all; your Treaſurers
Cuſtome to pay nothing.
Do not interrupt my marriage Rites!
I cannot take your reference for paiment.
Would thou wert dead!
Sir, Ile make my Ghoſt, my Executor,
And walke after death, ere Ile loſe my mony.
Sit, my Rhodolinda: This is thy Spheare!
In th'abſence of the Sunne, we muſt receiue
Our light from thee. Paradine, thy Bride expects
Thy ſeruice.
Sh'as an ill bargaine on't, to rule one night,
And euer after to obey.
Captaine, though the King be prompt in mercy,
Yet hath he ſo much anger in him,
As will expreſſe him mortall. Tis for your
Safety, to auoid the Preſence.
Ile bribe your Lordſhip with a Ginny Toothpick!
You muſt repent this language.
He muſt not, Hermegild!
How, my Lord!
Theſe whom you number in your faction,
Enioy, by your aſſiſtance, proud ſtructures;
And fertill Granges, to maintaine their gaudy
Riot. Sir, you had a fraile memory,
Or a degenerate heart, when you forgot
His merit; might you incorporate thoſe in one,
The ſordid bulke could nere make vp his ſhadow.
I am preſcrib'd my diſcipline in Court!
Grimold, away! Tis my deſire you leaue
The Preſence.
I am obedient (Sir) to your deſire.
'Slight, thou haſt made a braue retreat.
I look'd when both of vs ſhould taſte
Of immortalitie.
He that inflam'd this fire, will ſcorch his buſie
Fingers. My Lord, it was vnkindly done
T'affront my anger thus: but I haue hope
It is your laſt fault.
I cannot reckon it among my faults.
Sir, you inuolue your meaning in your ſpeech.
The world ſhall finde me honeſt.
You are a Bridegroome now.
Hermegild, make your anger knowne,
For elſe your frownes will cauſe your loyaltie
To be ſuſpected. This night ſhould be as ſmooth
And pleaſant, as that to which we owe our bleſs'd
Natiuitie.
Sir, you are great on Earth! I am meerely
Your creation. My paſſions doe afford
Your high delight all ſympathy.
Old Time hath throwne his feathers from his heeles,
And ſlowly limps in's motion to prolong
This Triumph: but if Paradine affront
Hymen, and me with ſullen rage, it ſhall
Be call'd my piety to ſuffer.
How! your Excellence ought t'excuſe my ſpeech!
VVhen your victorious ſword depriu'd me of
My Father; I enter'd to captiuity,
As to th'oblique ſhade, where death inhabits.
Till you allowd me Hermegild; who with
His high Philoſophy did make
My bondage ſweete. My Father lou'd him well:
He was his nobleſt Seruant, and muſt not
For his vertues ſuffer, vntill your ſacred tongue
Forbid me ſhare with you in Soueraignty.
Boy, this was a bold crime. You muſt not giue
Me cauſe to chide my fond heart. Valdaura,
Vrge him to proffer friendſhip
Vnto Hermegild; you are powerfull
Ore his nature. I haue deſeru'd to loſe
My chiefe prerogatiue—
I am too timorous to deale with anger:
If he prooue ſterne of nature, my Marriage
Is my funerall. My Lord!
Paradine, I'ue an humble loue. I will
Preſent it firſt to your refuſall—
I want your phraſe, to make my manners ſeeme
Leſſe rugged. All that is loue, I cheriſh
With ſuch religious heate, as my Valdaura
Claimes, ſince our young Nuptiall—
This embracement is a ſacrifice
To thee my Queene: whoſe deity
Conſiſts of loue. Sit, and with your
Perſons, ſtraight intrench the Table. Some wine!
Fill in my Germane Plate; Ile drinke as when
I'm hot with victory. This to my Bride—
Sound high!
More wine, and noiſe! Now Boy, I celebrate
Valdaura's health —
Bid their Inſtruments ſpeake lowder.
They're afraid to wake the Neighbours.
This is legitimate blood of the rich
Corſick Grape: precious as thy teares
(My Royall Girle) when thou art penitent
To heauen.
Spare me in the next, and Ile eſteeme you
Courteous; ſo much wine will put me to the charge
Of Phyſicke.
Your Lordſhip ownes it as a prime vertue —
Shall the world bleed? but frowne, and thou renew'ſt
A Chaos. Maligne the pride of ſome farre
Eaſterne Queene, whom Trauellers bely,
And I will forage there, like loud thunder!
Or like the Northerne winde vpon the Maine,
Where lazie Hulkes are toſs'd like chips.
I merit no ſuch complement.
Ile do't. Tis thought, I am immortall.
The chiefe of my great Anceſtors, that made
A wilde incurſion ore this fertill ſoile,
Was but a tipe of me. More wine! — Thy breath
Is as the ſmoke of ſpices. I taſte thy
Melting lippes, and ſtraight ingender kiſſes.
Heart! Boy, you are too rauenous!
I euer held your Maieſty my beſt
Example. Kiſſes nimbly gather'd,
The faſter grow.
The Lombards vſe to ſhare this ſport!
Is not your name Pigwiggin?
Pigwiggin! your Grace was wont to call me
Cunymond: I am no Faery.
Nor I the King of Faeries. 'Slight, ſir, d'ye
Preſent me with a Cup, made, o'th bottome
Of an Akehorne, or Queene Mabbs Thimble?
Fill me a bowle, where I may ſwimme,
And bathe my head, then riſe like Phoebus from
The Ocean, ſhaking my dewy Locks.
A health to Ceſars memory. Boy, doe me
Iuſtice, or thou afrontſt my Triumph!
Conrade, the King will drowne vs all!
Y'haue now, Sir, but the moiety of his draught.
Though Fame lends you her Trumpet, giues you leaue
To ſpeake your owne praiſe, you cannot vtter more
Then my beliefe ſhall warrant.
Now thou whiſper'ſt like the amorous Lute!
I am the Broome of Heauen, whē th'world grows foule,
Ile ſweepe the Nations into'th Sea, like duſt.
Thy father was magnanimous, and great
King of the Girpides. Yet his title
Sat not ſo nobly on him, as my conqueſt.
Know, his vnkind fate, was his chiefe glory:
For it was I that ſlew him; and thou his
Captiu'd Daughter art my Queene.
Sir, if you continue this narration,
I ſhall weepe.
Doe, weepe! then on my heart-ſtrings I will thread
Thy teares in ſtead of Pearle: ſuch a wealthy
Bracelet, loue would preſent vnto his Queene:
And ſhe tuck vp her ſleeues, to ſhew her gawdy wriſts.
More wine! Bring vs the Bowle of Victory.
Sir, you ingag'd your Royall word, neuer
To preſent that fatall obiect.
Paradine, doe not reſiſt my pleaſure.
Ile cruſh thee into Ayre.
I am in my ambition vertuous,
If I deſire t'expire a ſacrifice
To loyaltie. Sir, ruine what you made,
But doe not violate your Vow.
Hence! I ſhall delight in fury!
Welcome, the horrid Trophey of my chiefe warre!
Rhodolinda, Ile try thy fortitude.
This was thy Fathers Skull: thou ſhalt pledge a health
Vnto his Ghoſt.
O fatall! my eies ſhrinke within my brow!
I gather Agues like the Spring, and tremble
Like the vnlick'd Lambe, newly yeand vpon
A ſheete of Snow.
Hide me, Paradine! the obiect doth ſo
Penetrate, that when I winke, I ſpie it
Through my Lids.
Tame, feeble Soule! Will ſhe not pledge
What we doe celebrate? Returne her perſon—
Madam, the King—
The King's a Tyrant, and thou his ſlaue.
That's a fauour, Signior.
I weare it as a Iewell in my eare.
Fly, deare Valdaura; ſweeten her cenſure
Of this act, and mediate for the King.
Theſina, prethee helpe me in diſcourſe;
My wonder (Wench) doth ſo diſturbe my ſpeech,
I feare I ſhall grow dumbe.
The work is pious we attempt.
The harmony of your ſweet tongue is his
Beſt phyſicke: diuorce him from thoſe black thoughts,
Whil'ſt I imploy my vtmoſt skill, to win
The Queene to his imbraces. She's great of Soule,
And may determine what my fond heart laments
To prophecy.
Y'are my beſt Countriman, kind and loyall.
So pale and timorous! Ile ſooner couple
With a Mandrake, and beget groanes.
My Royall Lord!
Hah! Am I alone? Haue they all left me?
Where is my Empire? Doe I gouerne in
The vacant Ayre?
Sir, am I loſt vnto your memory?
You were wont to truſt my ſeruice: the way
Vnto your Couch lyes here—
None ſhall be proud but I. My ſmiles reuiue
The dead: but when I frowne, the liuing ſtraight
Melt into Ghoſts.
Lights for the King there!
Cunymond, you are too officious! The Kings
Departure muſt be priuat.
The King is light enough himſelfe: he needs
No Torches.
And heauy enough! for he ſeemes to reele
With his owne weight.
No Maskes! No Epithelamion now!
Call for a Boneſetter, for Time hath ſprain'd
His feete, and goes awry.
O Hermegild! a generall eclips
In Nature, would not ſeeme ſo horrid!
To cut thoſe cordiall ſtrings which Hymen had
But newly ty'd.
I, there's the horror! whil'ſt his Vowes ſat warm
Vpon his Lips; his breath not mingled yet
With cooler Ayre; thus to perturbe by ſterne
Practice your ſweet reſt, was worſe then periury.
To preſent my Royall Fathers Skull,
In drunken Triumph.
Take heede! you will diſtract your memory.
There's a Record, Time ſtriues to loſe; and Fame
To hide beneath ſome oblique fold in her
Thicke Volume, as loth to diſcredit all
Mankind. Your father valewed you next to
His intereſt in heauen. I'ue ſeene the good
Old King ſearch for his picture in your eyes; then—
No more: Patience is ſinfull now. Thou art
Deepely read and wiſe: inſtruct me to be bold,
For Albouine hath taught me to be cruell.
Y'are now by holy Church incorporate;
Therefore Diuinitie forbids me vſe
My naturall motions. How e're I thinke
It fit, you giue him direfull cauſe, ſoone to
Repent: Repentance ſure is phyſick for his ſoule.
Paradine and 's young Bride! Your excellence
Shall pleaſe that we retire: whil'ſt I diſguize
My kind geſture, and ſeeme to flatter in
The Kings behalfe—
To bed ſoft modeſty! I will my ſelfe
Deliuer to the Queene the King's intent.
Sir, the King is cruell. Should you proue ſo
To me, I'ld ſoone diſtill my ſoule to teares,
And weepe an Ocean deepe enough to drowne
My ſorrowes, and my ſelfe.
'Twere ſterne guilt to doubt my nature. Faire Saint,
To bed, I long to loſe my Youth in warme
Embraces, and ere the pearly Morne appeare,
Make thee a teeming Mother. To bed! with winged haſt
Expect my preſence.
How ſmooth appeares the Brow of Youth!
Haile Rhodolinda! the Royall Miſtreſſe
Of this night. Thus Albouine (our great King) bade
Me ſay, Y'are dearer to his eyes then light.
Though euery Bride may claime from Hymen
Priuiledge to rule her Lord, till Heſperus
Appeare, and cancell her briefe Charter.
Yet he doth humbly beg, you'le not infringe
The Lombards cuſtome, whoſe Virgins neuer vow
A continence the Nuptiall night.
I yet want your meaning.
Tis his chiefe hope that you will ſtraight expect
His perſon in your bed.
How! lye with him? Ile ſooner chooſe a Manſion
In a ſepulcher: There commit inceſt
With the raw remnant of my fathers bones:
Sooner imbrace an ayrie Incubus:
Mingle Limmes with ſome vlcerous Cripple,
Able to infect an Hoſpitall.
O take heed! Take heed, faire Maieſty! let not
His raſh ſinne prouoke you to intend ſo dire
An abſtinence: ere yet the wine hath loſt
Th'vnruly operation. The King diſclaimes
His wanton pride, and mortifies himſelfe
VVith ſullen griefe.
Canſt thou ſuſpect, I will prooue inconſtant,
To what in cold temperance I determine?
Heauen auert you ſhould approue your error.
Ile kneele, and vow with all ſolemnitie—
O hold! 'twere blacke impietie in vs
To ſuffer ſuch a horrid crime. You may
Informe the King of my religious loyalty,
Already I haue vs'd perſwaſiue ſpeech
To reconcile this ods: but ſhe growes wilde,
Repugnant to all mercy.
As you eſteeme your Royall ſelfe, or vs,
Who (when kinder Planets rul'd) were ſeruants
To th'vnhappy King your father; cheriſh
No more this anger in your breſt, leſt Time
Afford it growth and violence, till it
Diſturbe the world.
He councels like a ſacred Oracle.
I will informe the King, your continence
You onely celebrate to this blacke night,
And giue him hope, that you'le hereafter ſmile,
His kinde inticements meet with equall heate,
And fertill loue. Though I'm vnhewne, and ſhap'd
In warre, this ſoftens all my faculties—
Stay, Paradine; didſt thou not name my Father?
I did with a deuout remembrance!
And thou know'ſt how thy good Country ſuffers?
I think on it, and my heart hangs heauy
On its ſtrings; galles them with its ſullen weight.
Hermegild oft receiues certificate
From ſome in bondage there, which writ in Proſe, doe,
I'th reading into Verſe diſſolue: ſo ſad
The buſineſſe is, ſo fit for elegie.
So ſad a Requiem yet was neuer ſung,
Though the hoarce Rauen, and the Whiſtler ſhrill,
The Howlet, and the euening Dorr made vp
The fatall Quire. The young men there are yoak'd
In payres, and ſtretch their ſinnews in a Teeme,
To draw the wealthy harueſt to the Grange,
Where th'inſulting foe reſides. The aged
(Heretofore in purple cloth'd) that diſpos'd
Of Law and Iuſtice; are now ſow'd vp
In dunghill clouts; and dwell on parched hills,
To tend the flocks; whoſe fleece the Victor weares
In gawdy triumph.
O harſh captiuitie! Our Country groanes!
Till now I thought the Conqueror gan to eaſe
Their bondage, not adde to the weight of their
Compell'd burdens.
The King's a ſterne Tyrant.
Yet he hath vs'd me ſtill with gentle power,
Ta'ne me from the cold Earth, and warm'd me in
His boſome: and Hermegild has full cauſe
To bleſſe his bounty. But you (now our Queene)
He valewes next to heauen; howe're this raſh
Error ſtriues to diſgrace his loue. We are
His captiues too; heretofore not heeded
By our Starres; though we now grow tall with titles
And his fauour.
My Lord, the King is kinde! Our memories
Were fraile, ſhould we forget what hath ſo much
Pertain'd vnto our knowledge. I'm ſo fond
O're my Religion, I dare not taſte
Ingratitude: yet giue me leaue to ſay,
You may miſtake his loue vnto the Queene.
The dry Tartar, who yoakes his females neck
With ruſty Yron, not with Carckanets
Of threaded Pearle; whom he preſerues for phyſick
More then increaſe; will the firſt night of their
Coniunction, feaſt her in's imbroader'd tent;
Call her Soueraigne; and like ſome amorous winde,
Sport with her haire.
But my Nuptiall the King did celebrate
In Golgotha, where Skulls, and duſty bones
Inhabit.
Y'are skilfull in the deeds that appertaine
To ſtrength and fury; but they that aime
At victory in Court, muſt practiſe ſmooth
And ſubtill Arts. Wiſe Fauourites doe walke
I'th darke, and vſe falſe lights. Nay, oft diſguize
Their breadth and ſtature; ſeeme leſſer then they are:
For know, the ſlender Worme, or nimble Grig,
May wriggle downe into th' oblique, and low
Deſcent o'th narrow hole; whilſt th'oregrowne Snake
Peepes at the brimme, but ne're can view the bottome.
Thinke on thy Country, Paradine! Is there
In Story no mention of ſome great Soule,
That did his Country prize aboue his owne
Mortalitie, and dy'd to gaine his Nation Freedome?
The Noble Brutus for his Countreys health,
Made Ceſar bleed; Caſsius was heroique too,
And had in warre loud Fame, which he increas'd
By mingling in this Act.— Tis wrought with skill,
And apt leaſure. His thoughts grow numerous,
And ingender horrid ſhapes; ſuch as fright
His fancy.
Paradine, good night!
Hymen and your Bride, will blame your tardy
Seruice. Sweet Lord, a thouſand times good night.
Falſe vnto me! when Thunder wakes the dead:
When the Skie looks ſwarthy: the clouds like inke
In water powr'd: when the Earth ſeemes to ſtand
As in a gloomy ſhade. When the winde blowes
Till it growes hoarce: till it conuert
And ſprinkle Seas euen to a Dew; then I
Shall try the King, and fathome his wide Soule.
If he ſtart, complaine of his mortalitie,
Kneele oft; and pray aloud, as Heauen
Were deafe: if thus, I will conclude him falſe.
For horrid ſtormes that Tyrants waking keepe,
Doe rock the noble Conſcience ſafe aſleepe.
I knew your Excellence did viſit me
For mirth and laughter.
So early vp? Your Lord is temperate.
I ſhould like their tempers better, if ſhe
Were downe, and her Lord vp.
Fye, Theſina, your tongue's vnruly.
The morning might haue ſhewne me too for mirth,
Had not the falſe King made the night ſo ſad.
Black fancy flye!
She moues as ſhe were ſicke, this skirmiſh has
Much weakened her.
Doſt thou call't a skirmiſh?
I, Madam, a French skirmiſh; where th' onſet
Is hot and fiery, but the retreat cold and tame.
Madam, the King?
Hah!
He greets your Excellence in a ſmooth phraſe,
And begs, you will permit his early viſit.
I'ld rather loſe my eyes then ſee him.
When you did triumph in your fathers Court,
My entreaty then had power to alter
Your commands; reward my young ſeruice
With kindneſſe to your ſelfe. When the tall
Cedar falls, with burly weight it ſtrikes
The neighbouring ſhrubs, low, into the ground:
So we that ſpring like Ruſhes neere your roote,
Muſt in your death receiue a funerall.
VVhat's this? D'ye moralize?
The King may haue his anger warranted.
For heauen forbids ſuch wilde diuiſion▪
'Tweene thoſe whom holy Church vnites.
Harke, Theſina! She has been goſſiping▪
VVith the holy Siſters: ſhe preaches to me
Of Matrimoniall zeale. Troth Valdaura,
If thy husband doe infuſe ſuch ſchiſme,
Ile practiſe a diuorce.
We Court Ladies grow ſo ſqueamiſh after
VVe haue taſted Man. Your Maieſty may
Much profit her behauiour, if you
A while deuide her from her Lord.
So ſoone? Ere Time permits them ſecond
Their imbraces?
I Hermegild. If thoſe imbraces doe
Include ſuch high delight, ſuch rapſody;
She makes me enuious then▪ ſince all my hopes
Are widdowed by the King. To night, Valdaura ▪
You are to ſleepe beneath my Roofe. This I
Impoſe as a command.
Is not this a harſh compulſion?
Sir, I willingly obey it. But as
Y'are Noble, vſe your ableſt skill, t'inſtruct▪
The Queene how of her anger to diſpoſe
A ſafer way, then 'gainſt the King.
Alas! I'ld rather cut my Eye-lids off
To preuent ſleepe then loſe one minute that
Could aduantage a deſigne ſo pious.
And be it part of your kinde charity,
T' indeere me to your Lord. Tis all the pride
In my ambition to doe him ſeruice.
Sir, he already knowes your worth, and thinks
Your friendſhip precious.
I kiſſe your faire hands. The King already come?
I muſt ſeeme penſiue as the night.
She's loſt, my Boy: blowne from my fiſt: her wings
Haue gather'd wind: they flye (like thoſe of Time)
Swiftly forward, but neuer backe returne.
Sir, I haue hope, ſhe will repent this breach
Of duty, and court your Royall ſmiles agen.
Is it a ſinne to drinke? Nature has giuen
To fiſhes a prerogatiue, greater
Then we inioy. They can euer tipple
And not be drunke.
Fiſhes are dumb (Sir) they neuer fox themſelues
With talke.
Slaue! thy mirth is treacherous! Paradine!
Thou haſt conſum'd to night the wealth of loue,
Waſted thy lips in moyſt kiſſes, imbrac'd
A warmth, that would giue life to marble.
Whilſt I, (like the ſolitary Phoenix)
Expect no heate but in my funerall flame:
And ſtriue t'ingender of my ſelfe. Yet Boy,
Thou canſt not make me enuious; thou art more
Delightfull; then my Rodolinda's ſinnes.
Let me ſuruay thoſe blue circles: his lids
Fall downe, as if weighty Plummets hung on
Their ſinnes. Thou art not temperate. Preſerue
Thy deare eyes. Loue was pictur'd blind, becauſe
It makes men blinde. I hugge thee as my health —
He bruis'd me in his armes. Can loue expreſſe
Such violence, and yet be falſe? Hermegild
Still whiſpers in my eare, the King doth hate
Thee, Paradine. But Hermegild is read in all
The Arts of Court, and ſtriues perhaps
My ſence to poyſon with leane iealouſie.
Sweet Lord! Y' appeare bluſhing like the Morne!
Something your Bride and you haue done t' increaſe
The number of the Worthies.
He courts me too! I want a Perſpectiue,
To draw theſe diſtant figures neere my ſight.
I ne're ſhall ſleepe agen.
Hermegild, thy aſpect ſhewes ominous!
How thriues our embaſie?
I haue conſum'd my breath, till I grew faint,
And wept to inuite her mercy; but teares
Were ſpilt like water in the Forge, onely
T' inrage the fire. She doth abiure your viſit.
Harſh, Iron, nature!
The King ſeemes fetter'd in his lims: he wreathes
His armes, as if he meant to bruiſe his heart.
And Paradine doth find my charmes predominant.
He that drinks, forfeits his mortalitie!
How Sir, muſt we not drink?
Souldier, to keepe thy bladder moyſt, I will
Permit thee gape i'th mornings face, and catch
Her mizzling teares.
If you'll extirpate this vice of drinking,
Giue order for a priuy ſearch i'th the Ocean;
There dwell the greateſt drinkers. The VVhale (Sir)
Drinks deeper let's hale her on ſhore, and impownd her
In a Ceſterne.
Good! we will imbarke for Sea. I preſſe thee vp
For this imployment.
Stay (Sir) ere I ingage my ſelfe in new
Seruices, pay me for my old. You reſt
Vpon my Ticket, ſix thouſand Duckats;
And I haue not ſeene your Maieſties face
In any other metall, but your owne
Fleſh and blood theſe three moneths.
Thou grumbleſt like a gray VVolfe.
Tis then for hunger, Sir.
Captaine, you miſtake the King. He's Royall
As his blood, and liberall as the Sunne
That ſhines on all. This vnruly breath, where
The Citie meete in councell, might perhaps▪
Blow their Purſe-ſtrings looſe, ſo fill the Exchequer.
And then you ſhall number your pay with your owne
Fingers.
I will out-rore thunder, or the Cannon!
Muſt they ſtill walke in wealthy Furres; whilſt men
Of merit here are cloth'd in Cabidge leaues?
Grimold, you indanger your friends.
My Lord, giue loſers leaue to ſpeake. I'ue loſt
My youth and blood ith'warres, and I want food,
A reuerend Aſſe beares my wife and her young egges
In Paniers vp and downe the ſtreets. I trauaile
Like a Tartar, with all my family
About me. Nay, nay, nay! you would be gon!
Art thou not yet dead?
You muſt not moue, till y'haue paid me. I know,
You may be angry with more ſafety then I.
Bid ſome Coloſſus of your Guard cleaue me
With his Falchon; yet I ſhall ſteale a paſſage
Ore the blacke Riuer, when Charon ſlumbers,
And fright your Grace.
I dare not ſtrike thee (old man) leſt thou ſhouldſt fall
To duſt, and choke me.
Good King, pay me. I loue thy Grace:
And will fight for thee, whilſt I'ue motion left
To ſtirre a feather. My want conſtraines me to't.
By this hand, I'm faine to eate Branne and Parſley
Like a tame Rabbit.
Lend me your eare, Captaine!
You'll intice me now t'enter into bond?
You look indeed like a young heire. Well, Sir,
Valew me according to my true rate.
I am your friend. You make ill choice of howers
For helpe of your deſigne. The King hath now
Sad and tumultuous thoughts about his heart.
Great men are alwayes ſad, when they ſhould pay
Their debts.
Sir, you interpret ill. Grow more ſober,
Then challenge all my power in your behalfe.
He that receiues a kindnes from the Diuell,
Shall bee ſure to loſe by his gaines.
Captaine, you ſhould chuſe a luckier minute:
The King is now in loue.
With whom?
With the Queene.
In loue with his owne wife! that's held inceſt
In Court: varietie is more luſcious.
Be powerfull in thy ſpeech, my Paradine,
Yet gentle too. She is the Starre that rules
My faculties.
The Queen will bleſſe your temperance, & repent.
Hermegild is too buſie: he muſt be more
At leaſure, and I more actiue.
Hermegild, weare thy ſences neere vs—
Your Maieſty has a fraile memory
To forget me ſo ſoone—
You'll forfeit me, and the Kings mercy! away!
Tis no piece of vnkindneſſe to wiſh thee
In hell, for all thy friends dwell there. Th'aſt none
Vpon the earth. Gentlemen will you be open to me?
In all parts, Sir, but our purſes.
Draw neere! let vs communicate our hearts!
Does not that wealth, which you disburſe for powders,
Perfumes, clothes, and phyſicke for the face,
Returne with gaine?
Expound your Riddle, Sir.
Haue you not each a Miſtreſſe that maintaines
You in expence and riot? Hah? Fame giues
It out, you ſmooth Gallants are much oblig'd
Vnto the ſinnes of Ladies.
Conrade can prattle ſomewhat, Sir, to that
Purpoſe.
Good faith you do me wrong. I'ue worne, Sir,
A Ladies ſlipper in my hat, or ſo.
Frollo is the man that gets their Pendants,
Armelets, Rings, and all the Toyes of valew.
Excuſe me, ſir, not I. Signior Cunymond
Has all the voyce at Court. We know, Sir, when,
And where, a certaine Dutcheſſe, Sir;
You copulate with Titles, you.
The Heralds are your Bawds.
Hold! grow particular in ſuch a Theame as this!
Well, Gentlemen, I muſt be furniſh'd too.
With a Miſtreſſe?
Yes, inquire me out ſome old Land-Carack.
I am content to ſtretch my loynes for a
Penſion.
At what rate doe you valew your ſelfe?
I was neuer pawn'd, Sir.
How, Captaine!
In this leane age, we valew all things
According to the rate, they pawne for.
But we muſt know, how much you would receiue
In price of your actiuitie?
You muſt neuer ſtray after freſh paſture.
Some eight; I, I, eight hundred Crownes a yeere will doe't.
I am deſirous of no more then will
Maintaine my Genet, and my Dwarfe.
Your excuſe procur'd, tis fit you now tell,
How farre in your defence I may ingage
My honour: is not your fleſh a little tainted!
Are you not vnwholſome?
O death, no; no, no, no! Do not thinke I haue
A conſcience ſo ill bred, to put my ſelfe
Vpon a Lady, when vnfit for the affaire.
Well, Captaine, now with your own eies ſuruay
Your limmes; what vſe can a Lady haue
Of you? To propagate the Cough o'th lungs?
Or beget Cripples, to people an Hoſpitall?
Or produce another Nation that may
Wage fierce battaile 'gainſt the Cranes?
Yet I can follow your bodies with rough
Motion, and not ſhed my limmes by the way—
I told ye, he'ld make a ieaſt on't.
But I will kick ye in earneſt,—kick ye
For my exerciſe and warmth—till my toes
Grow crooked—
Purſue Valdaura, Sir.
I hate theſe Iiggeries.
You know, I am materiall in my ſpeech,
Full of duty; you want the ſilken garbe,
That muſt indeere you to the Ladies eyes.
Yet I am louing in my drinke.
Greet her kindly, Sir: tis Paradines Bride.
You haue not ſeene her ſince ſhe indeuour'd
To increaſe the number of your ſubiects,
With loſſe of her virginitie.
Rhodolinda doth ſo ingroſſe my loue,
That on other Ladies I'ue but little
To beſtow.
Sir, practiſe but your Courtſhip here. In troth
You muſt affect the amorous Cringe, geſtures
Smooth and pliant; it will neuer doe elſe.
I'ue heard the Queene complaine, you are too rough:
And what theſe Ladies doe obſerue, will take
A ſudden flight vnto her eare. Strike but
Their ſences gently with your tongue. Often
Flatter'em, and with a vigorous breath;
They'll then implore the Queene in your behalfe:
And, Sir, th' indeuour of their praiſe will ſoone
Procure your peace.
If they would ſoften Rhodolinda's heart,
And reconcile me to her ſmiles, I would
Grow fond, and dally then with all the Sex.
Begin your triall. If you ſalute this,
(And other Ladies too) with ſome impreſſion on
Their lipps; with managing their fingers thus,—
With ſeyſure on her wriſt; as if you had
Some buſineſſe with her Pulſe: then you inchant.
Be flexiue in your ſmiles, and wanton like,
Seeke pictures in their eyes: and when they moue,
Then with perſonall conduct, guide their feet.
'Mongſt them you cannot ſeeme too cheape. They will
Admire you for't, and ſing your prayſes to
The Queene.
I ſhall be taught to ſpin, and ſtarch!
The engin's now compact; each wheele doth moue
With ſilent ſcrewes. The Mole's the ſubtle Pioner:
For when ſhe vndermines the earth, her ſlow
Motion makes no noiſe.
Y'are deuout, Vauldaura. Teach me to pray:
We haue no leaſure for't in warre; and 't has
Been long time out of faſhion here in Court.
I feare I make ſome breach of duty with
Your Excellence, to hinder thus
The paſſage of your Royall thoughts.
You teach me now, t'excuſe my owne abrupt
Demeanour; but I can doe't. My harſh Queene
(Whom the perſpicuous Eye of heauen forgiue)
Doth much miſtake the poſture of my limmes,
And geſture of my tongue among your Sex.
I neuer vſe, like rugged Polypheame,
To dandle Cubs. Thus, I can gently touch
A Ladies lips—yet make no battery on
Her teeth. Was it not an ayrie preſſure?
Tell my proud Queene, I'ue loſt my Iron garbe,
And now am growne thus fond and ſmooth.
O Royall Sir, her cruelty hath put
My eyes vnto th'expence of many teares.
I, but in vaine! Thoſe clouds muſt weep apace,
That meane to penetrate the Marble, or
The Flint. I weare no Gauntlet on my hand,
Why ſhould you thinke that I would bruiſe
Your fingers with my touch—
Is this Paradines Garden?
I Madam, and your Excellence may finde
A ſudden growth, in all that ſhadowes vs.
Hah I looke there!
What is 't your eyes ſo eagerly diſcerne?
The King! How ſportfull he is growne? how full
Of amarous game and dalliance?
I ſpie Valdaura there: but is that the King?
Thou doſt inquire, t'affront my ſight.
You muſt informe the Queene of this: Say, I
Am ſmooth, and muſicall, and trim, and that
I talke no more of warre, nor drinke.
Tis my duty to vrge all circumſtance,
That may credit you in her eſteeme.
It is a piece of courtſhip to ſalute
At parting—
Is that a ſafe coniunction in ſo hot a climate!
Hell and death! VVhat raw diſcipline is this?
I ſhould conduct her in her way—
So violent in purſuit of your game?
Let's follow, Hermegild?
Not for all the Sunne beholds in's iourney
Through the world—
VVhy? be nimble in thy ſpeech!
It ſhewes but ſilly art in induſtry,
To ſeeke what you would not finde.
I pre thee grow particular! Doſt thinke
They purpoſe ought ith' darke? or, was this ſame
But ceremonious forme! ſuch a greeting
As courtſhip will admit in publike interuiew?
The King was neuer giuen to complement,
You know. As for Valdaura—
What of her?
I thinke that ſhe is chaſte, but—
Doe not inuolue thy language thus
In periods of ſuſpence.
I wiſh the King had not deſeru'd to be
Depriu'd of your ſoft imbraces, then
He might haue kept his conſtitution tame.
O, is it ſo?
It ill becomes the garbe of Maieſty,
To run thus neighing (like a riotous Horſe)
After each female that he ſpies.
VVhy, does he vſe it?
Madam, you queſtion me, as if what I
Declare, were to your knowledge new and ſtrange.
By heauen and ſo it is.
O my officious Soule! muſt it be my crime
To giue the information vp? would I
Had knowne the King was here, you ſhould haue made
Another path, your walke.
Hermegild, you did mis-ſpend that breath.
Alas, you had enough of griefe before.
This addition will but ſhew a tyranny
In fate and me. It works with hight, like new
Mighty wine! as if 't would ſplit the Caske.
O periur'd, black, adulterous King! affront
My Fathers Ghoſt? Diſturbe his Aſhes in
His tombe? Whē drunk with pride, he mock'd me with
The gawdy title of a Queene, and now
I am become a ſtale for all his luſt.
Valdaura too! ſo pure of heart (forſooth)
That ſhe would bluſh to ſee her own hand, if nak'd:
They are proſcrib'd. Know, Hermegild,
Our Country ſhall be free.
This is a noble rage! Heauen knowes how I
Haue grieu'd at your decay of ſoule. 'T was my
Sad feare, that all the angry ſparkes, which were
By Iuſtice kindled in your breſt, had been
Extinguiſh'd quite, now they grow vp in flames.
You now like Phoebus ſhew, when he hath waſh'd
His face with Dew. Your influence doth infuſe
A noble heate, ſuch as would motion giue
Vnto aged Statues; make them pluck vp
Their Moſſie feet, and walke.
Thou giu'ſt my ſences pride! What in this great
Buſineſſe wilt thou doe, t' incourage hope?
I will mingle poyſon in my Inke, write
VVith a Rauens Quill! 't will be a fatall
Scripture: and ſhall charme like to thoſe wiſe Iigs
The Syrens ſing. Some muſt direction beare
T' our Penſioners, that in our Country rule
The ſterne Edicts of Law: ſome to Martiall
Spirits, who with their able skill doe leade
Thoſe Regiments, the King hath gariſon'd
I'th bordering Townes. They ſhall reuolt, my Queene,
And ſeate thee in thy Fathers Chaire: they muſt
Be drunke with the Elixir of my Gold.
VVhen firſt I choſe thee out for this great work,
I ſaw thee thorow a Perſpectiue reuerſs'd;
For thou didſt ſeeme much leſſer then thou art.
Kneele, and be happy!—Before
The Genius of this place, and what is here
Immortall, I vow to aſſiſt with my
Moſt actiue skill, all thy deſignements 'gainſt
The King; and when my iuſt hopes are finiſh'd,
To be thy Wife. Such as doe periur'd prooue,
Lightning will ſurely clothe with ſubtle flames,
And they ſhall burne like glimmering Tapers
In darke hell: pale, and ſickly as that fire
The Ghoſt of Nero makes.
This new ambition hath ſo exalted
All my faculties, that I ſeeme taller
Kneeling, then when I ſtood. But here with ſtrict
Solemnitie I vow to teach my Soule
New wayes of merit: to reuenge with ſterne,
And horrid wrath, the Kings proud tyranny.
To make your Greatneſſe abſolute, and high,
Or ſinke my ſelfe lower then a Plummet,
In the Baltick Sea. Should I not this performe,
The Starres would fall like Cinders on my head:
And winds impriſon'd in the Earth; breake forth,
In a wilde ruine, and ſhake me into ſand:
Then blow me in your Eyes; where if in teares
You drowne me, I am intomb'd in Pearle: and then
My obſequies requite my death.
Enough. I proffet to thy lip, the firſt
Taſte of my affection—
'T was moyſt and luſcious! I will cheriſh this
Indeerement. Trees that talleſt grow, doe take
The deepeſt roote; ſo I muſt firſt ſinke low
Ith' Earth; and after climbe to fathome clouds.
Firſt, praiſe her mimick laughter: when ſhe weepes,
Then gather vp with couetous regard
Her teares for ſcatter'd Pearle. Licke her ſpittle
From the ground: this diſguiz'd humilitie
Is both the ſwift, and ſafeſt way to pride—
Sure, Hermegild, I haue amaz'd thy ſence,
Thou look'ſt like ſome ore-growne Fiend, chain'd vp
Within a ſilent caue. Let vs retire, and Ile
Diſcouer how I'ue practis'd my reuenge.
I proiect to make you mighty! You ſhall
Aſcend my beautious Soueraigne, till you
Can reach the Moone, and pick thoſe ſeeds of light
(The leſſer Stars) from forth their wandring Spheares;
To weare as new imbroadery on your ſleeue.
I long to heare your fatall Arts. Let's mix
Our ſences, and contriue. A womans will,
Is not ſo ſtrong in anger, as her skill.
You bring no letters from Cracouia, Sir?
None, my Lord.
Nor from Sienna?
Your Lordſhip in thoſe few, receiues th'intire
Purpoſe of my iourney.
Alas, my Countrymen! Captiuitie
Is hoarce, they haue more griefs then tongue: they ſpeak
Not loud enough to wake the eare of heauen.
Henceforth to Hermegild bid them direct
Their ſighs; for I'm ſo dull, ſo weary, and
Neglectfull of ambitious ends, that I
Shall loſe my ſtrength, and fauour with the King.
My noble Lord, our prayers will ouer-rule that prophecy.
You may expect, whilſt I am able to
Performe. Boy, beſpeake the Gentleman a free
And bounteous welcome. Sir, I will haſten
Your diſpatch.
My Lord; I haue tyr'd my ſelfe in your ſearch.
The faire Theſina? You are rarely here
A viſitant! Where haue you left my Bride?
With the Queene, my Lord, who is ſo fond
Of her attendance, ſhe'le ſcarce allow her ſpace
To winke in her owne ſeruice, and to night
She lyes within her chamber.
Hah! ſo ſoone deuided! Th'approching night
Should helpe to ſecond our imbraces.
Y'are now to truſt my Art. For Valdaura
Sent me t'expreſſe her ioy, i'th deliuery
Of this meſſage. You ſhall lye with her to night.
How can my faith admit of this, ſince ſhe
Is billited where the Queene ſleepes?
Ile perfect my aſſurance; ſo you'll pleaſe
T'obey what I inioyne. When you approach
The Spheare, where your bright Phoebe rules, doe not
Occaſion ſo much noyſe, as ſhall expreſſe
You liuing. You muſt not ſpeake to her, nor
By your geſtures, inuite her ſpeech. All this
Performe, leſt you ſhould wake the Queene.
To be dumbe in copulation! This is
A fine receipt to get a ſilent Girle.
But I ſhall prooue obedient.
And (Sir) as y' are mercifull to Ladies
(Ripe in growth) doe not breathe too loud, leſt we
Ith' neighbouring roome, ore-heare the harmony,
And ſinne in wiſhes.
Feare not, Theſina: I ſhall be temperate.
But you young ſouldiers are ſo boyſterous,
You'll thinke anon, y'are battering ſome Towne-wall.
Follow, Sir, Ile direct ye to the place,
Where, when the darke howre arriues, you muſt
Addreſſe your viſit.
The early Lark climbes higher then his voice;
And whiſpers into Phoebus eare, a glad
Welcome; who ſmiles, and ſeemes to prophecy
A gawdy day. Valdaura? Madame? ſpeake,
Sweet Lady! or, if for concealement of
Our ſtolne rapture you ſilence ſtill aſſume;
Yet riſe, and bleſſe my eye-ſight with thy faire
Preſence. Come, and eclipſe the enuious day!
Not talke ith' buſineſſe, nor yet behold
The ground we till, as if we both were blinde
And dumbe. Ile no more by ſtealth ingender;
Cripples are got thus. Kind Valdaura, ſpeake!
See, a new day breakes in her hand! Theſe are
The roſie fingers of the Morne!
Hah! the Queene! Valdaura! Bride, where art thou?
In vaine thou call'ſt. The Cannons Iron throat,
Although high mounted on you' Pinacle,
Scarce could reach her eare. She's in Pauia now,
Two Leagues ſituate from hence.
Thou art myſterious as an Oracle!
I ſent her thither, with pretence ſhe ſhould
Suruay the modell of a Garden-worke.
But 'twas done, that Theſina might intice
With apter leaſure, thy perſon to my bed.
At noone thy wife returnes.
I'ue miſtaken then my warme embraces,
And ſinn'd with thee th' adulterous Queene!
Thou haſt inioy'd what Albouine with all
His Royall ſighs, his teares ſwolne bigger then
His eyes, deſpair'd to merit.
O horror! gape, rugged Earth! Suck me in
Like ſome old Pyramid, whoſe ponderous limmes
Haue been thy burden ſince the Flood, and now
Their owne foundation ſinke. Could you make
No choice to quench your rauenous luſt, but me?
Where were the broad-chin'd Zwitzers of your Guard?
This (Paradine) denotes a melting braine:
Which out of vulgar pity I forgiue.
'Twas not the wanton taſte of thy ſmooth limmes,
That could prouoke me vſe this ſtratagem.
But loue of my reuenge. I'ue ſtrongly now
Ingag'd thy power, to kill the King.
Hah!
Which do: and ere the Sun arriue ith'Weſt;
Or with diſheuell'd haire, my veſtments torne
(As if I'd wandred thorow ſome Hathorne hedge)
I will approach the Tyrant, acquaint him
With this deed, and call my owne adultery
Thy fowle rape.
Who 's within there, hoa! My Hogs-head's empty.
I was not borne with ſo much braines, as would
Bedew a clout, that my cold Noſthrill ſtopt.
Theſe Court ſmocks containe the very Deuill.
Good heauen! how leane ſhould I haue made my heart
With ſtudious thoughts, ere I the skill had reach'd
Of ſuch a damn'd proiection.
Collect thy ſcatter'd thoughts. What thy reſpect
To thy captiu'd Country, could ne're charme thee
To reuenge; be prompted to, by a kinde
Affection of thy owne deare life: reuenge
Vpon a Tyrant; One, that loues not me,
Nor thee; vnleſſe in ſpeech: he hath a ſmooth
Tongue, but a rugged heart. My Hermegild
Perceiues this truth, and can deliuer it
With all the pride of knowledge.
Sure Time growes humerous with age: for things
Doe differ much from the ſincereneſſe of
Their firſt creation. I will goe weepe
Till I am blind—
Stay, Paradine. If thou doſt mocke my hopes
With a ſlow motion in this iuſt deſigne,
Expect to finde my anger fatall. Ile to
The King, and make a forfeiture of both
Our liues: but if with hardy ſinnewes thou doſt march
To 's Throat, and ſlit the ſwarthy Pipe, I'le call
Thee then my Souldier. Beſides thy Countries thanks,
Thou ſhalt enioy me for thy Queene, thy Wife,
Paradine.
New Arts, t'inuolue imagination!
How can this be, and my owne wife ſtrongly
Poſſeſs'd of health and nature!
VVould'ſt thou imbrace ſo eminent a bliſſe,
VVithout ſome danger to thy ſoule?
My memory betrayes my skill! I know
There are a thouſand wayes to diſcard her,
From this foule, durty Orbe.
Alas, good eaſie Soule! She'le ne're be miſs'd
Among the liuing. Know, Valdaura's falſe.
How! Falſe!
She is a open whore, and hath taught me
This Art of luſt.
More horrible then Hell!
Now furniſh but my hands with an Hower-glaſſe,
And a long Dart, then ſeat me on ſome rotten
Monument for the picture of leane Death.
Make me the common Executioner
Of Nature. For ere long I ſhall become
The Sextons Penſioner to fill his Graues.
Valdaura falſe!
Wilt thou thus leaue me in a wilde ſuſpence,
Whether I ſhall finde thy courage actiue?
For credit of your owne humanitie,
Doe not infringe the vulgar priuiledge
Due to all hearts. Giue me but leaue to thinke;
And ne're doubt your buſineſſe! Though I'm a young
Sinner; yet I ſhall ſoone inquire the way
To hell. Tis a continu'd thorow-fare
From this Climate thither. Or let me but
Delay my iourney, till the triuiall rage
Of Chriſtian Princes, meete in horri'd battaile;
And then I ſhall haue company enough:
VVhole throngs to choke the throat of hell.
Good night, Madame.
Ere yet the Morne 's faire cheek hath loſt her teares,
Doſt call it night?
To me it ſeemes the Eye of heauen doth winke.
All things are cloath'd in darkeneſſe, blacke as your
Deſigne.
Stay, for elſe my rage will not permit
That we ſuruiue another meeting.
If thou ſuſpectſt we are too loud, I will
Diſtill my thoughts into thy eare.
Though t'aſſiſt my great hopes with opportune
Induction, I conſented to this act:
Yet now I chide my fond ſpirits. For who
Dares truſt th' vnruly appetite of youth?
What I decreed ſhe ſhould but taſte, ſhe may
Delight to ſurfeit on. It ſhewes fulſome!
Here's the precious medicine that muſt reſtore
Health to my hopes. Follow, gentle Lady.
You ſee 'em now?
Fall, fall, you thicke and ſpungy clouds, vntill
You choke my ſight. Doe not my eyes begin
To bleed at this obiect?
Marke how cloſe they meete: what variety
They vſe in luſt: now ſhe hath melted quite his lips
With her hot breath, ſhe hangs vpon his eare.
Suruay their geſtures ſtill. Now they depart.
Ile ſummon all the hierarchy of heauen
To cenſure'em!
VVho knowes but they are gone to wallow in
Their actiue ſweats agen? Alas, pure ſoule!
You perceiue theſe figures no Idea,
No obiect of the minde, or ayre incorporate
To cheate imaginary view.
Was this the cauſe, that made th'adulterous Queene
So ſtrictly vrge my ſwift iourney vnto
Pauia?
I, and the motiue that prouok'd my ſoft
Conſcience to haſten your returne, that you
Might tell ſad tales to heauen. For I
(That ſtill was nourc'd vpon a Sybils Lap)
Who with prophetick Milke did nouriſh me,
Can deepely gueſſe at th'ominous portent
Of ſinne. I hate ſuch looſe-rein'd Stallions;
Such laſciuious harmony in guilt.
So ſoone proue falſe? ere the celebration
Of our marriage Rites were fully ended?
Ere the Sunne in's iourney o're this Region
Had twice beheld thus incorporate
By holy Church, and ſmil'd vpon the hopes
Of our increaſe?
I, there's a contemplation that would crack
Euen heart-ſtrings made of wyer. Hymens Taper
But newly lighted, and he with rude breath
Blowes from the quickning weeke the gawdy flame.
Then in the darke, thus wilfully miſſe-takes
Your bed, and riots 'tweene vnlawfull ſheets.
Horror! horror!
O my ſiniſter Starres! Thus I ſhall weepe
Till I haue emptied all my veines.
What ſhould ſuch white and harmeleſſe ſoules as we
Do crawling o're this mountainous Earth? Alas,
We cannot drinke, till we intoxicate
A Whale, nor ſurfeit, till our greazie cheekes
Doe ſwell like Th'vdders of a Cow. Nor can
We kneele like warme Idolaters, vnto
The ruſty metall in a bag. We want
Theſe helpes to gaine vs honour and eſteeme.
I haue a reſolute intent to die,
And ſeeke my Manſion in a purer Orbe.
But ere you doe begin your laſt walke, ith' path
Inuiſible, ſome meritorious act
(Ioynd to the Charter of your Creed) ſhould helpe
T'aſſure your future bliſſe.
O name it, ere my ſorrow ſhall decay
Me ſtrength: for I would mix abilitie
With will.
Your Lord (foule, and ſinfull as mortalitie
Can make him) Salamander-like, ſhall bathe
In blue fires, vnleſſe by ſufferance here
On earth, he penetrate the hearth of heauen,
And ſoften their decree. It will be call'd
Your merit to reuenge his crime, euen with his death.
Would you haue me kill him?
Since I am ſtrict to vertue, I muſt needs
Be cruell vnto vice. Let him not liue
To increaſe his owne guilt, and betray more
Ladies.
But ſhall I iuſtice take from powerfull Heauen,
And vſe it with ſuch cruelty?
Beleeue me skill in ſacred Oracles,
My piety to warrant the deſigne
Nor will I fright the frailty of your Sex,
With horrid circumſtance; he ſhall not bleed,
This Violl doth containe a draught; which if
In's vſuall Beueridge powr'd, will coozen him
Of's leprous ſoule in his moſt quiet ſleepe.
I doe ſuſpect my courage!
Tak't, faire Pupill! think on't in your prayers.
If you but enioy one ſingle motion
That informes you it is good: do't with pride
And boldneſſe maſculine. Diſtinguiſh thus
Its operation. Foure dayes muſt fully take
Their room ith'Kalendar, ere it effect
Our hopes. Before that houre ariue, he muſt
Be wrought to kill the King.
The Violl liquid Lead containes, or elſe
Some farre more ponderous Metall: for whilſt
I beare it thus, the wieght ſeemes to infuſe
A Palſey in my hand. I tremble like
A ſtring touch'd on my Lute.
It is the Fiend, that would dehort you from
A pious act: truſt not his whiſpring charmes
But with a hardy courage, (more then is
Naturall in thy modeſt Sex) proceed
To merit heauen. And now requite my forward zeale
To vertue, with concealement of my name,
And intereſt in this act. Let not the Queene
Nor your falſe Lord, know me the Perſpectiue,
Through which you ſaw their rauenous luſts, but ſay,
The King reueal'd it to your eare. 'Twill make
Them wilde, and doubt their owne confedrate Bawds.
Thinke not I forbid it as a danger
To my perſon; for I affect not life.
So ſoft and eaſie-metald is my heart,
So well I loue your ſinfull Lord, that when
I heare the ſurly Bell proclaime his death,
Like ſome new weand Babe, I ſhall dye crying.
Would you haue him kill'd, yet loue him thus?
I, but I loue heauen better. Where, when
I come, troth I ſhall prooue too fond a Saint.
Thoſe Votaries that pray to me, ſhall finde
Their buſineſſe ſoone diſpatch'd: here, let this key
Obſcure ye in my Clozet vntill noone:
For then the Queene expects you will return
From Pauia. Farewell, the moſt abus'd,
But nobleſt Lady in the world.
This is the priuy Gallery: place the Chaire,
Vollterri, where it needs muſt interrupt
The Kings paſſage.
If thy diſguize ſhould faile vs, Gondibert
And I muſt be attach'd for Impoſtors.
And then be crop-card too, like Iriſh Nags.
You'le both prooue fleete in a Race, prouided
The foe charge ye in the Rere. Seate me with
Tender motion— This luxurious Citie
Hath made me ſo rotten, I dare not walke
Ith'winde, leſt I ſhould be blowne in pieces.
Quick now counterfeit! Here comes Hermegild. Grimold groanes.
Groane out like a Bore.
Who ownes that ſicke clamor?
One (Sir) preſented here to tempt compaſſion
From all charitable eyes.
Want hath betray'd him to hunger, hunger
To this diſeaſe.
O, O, O, the Crampe! the Crampe!
Where, Sir?
In my ſtomacke.
That's indeed a cleere ſymptome of famine.
I'ue eaten nothing this moneth but raw ayre,
And that giues but weake nouriſhment to age.
It is my wonder, in a State ſo rich
As ours, a climate ſtill befriended thus
By nature (flouriſhing with hopefull Springs,
And Summers chok'd with wealth) a Souldier ſhould
Be forc'd to make his hunger a diſeaſe.
A prodigie vnparaleld, that want
Should e're occaſion ſuch a dangerous faſt.
Waſt not deuotion made him thus abſtaine
From meate?
Pure want, Sir, I know ſmall deuotion, I.
For though I faſt much, I pray as little
As moſt Chriſtians of my Calling.
He muſt be ſent vnto ſome Hoſpitall,
There eate warmth broths, till he recouer health:
And then I will procure him from the State
Some thrifty penſion, to maintaine the ſhort
Remainder of his life in ſober works.
He ſhall ſing Hymnes, and pray to the kind Saints
In a blue gowne.
Alas, Sir, I am growne ſo hoarce, the Saints
Can hardly heare my Orizons.
He will prooue (my Lord) a chargeable Cure:
For the Phyſicions do preſcribe him nought
For med'cine, but Aurum-Palpabile.
The Elixir of Gold would ſurely much
Aſſwage the griefe in my ſtomacke—
He muſt needs be hungry, that like th'Oſtridge
Can digeſt Metall.
The King for his laſt ſeruices remaines
His debtor ſixe thouſand Duckats. My Lord,
You ſhall expreſſe much charity, if you
Procure it in a ſudden payment. The ſame will
Defray his ſickneſſe charge, and maintaine him
Well in's health.
Your Lordſhip ſhall ingage vs then to drowne
Your chiefe Title in the beſt Grape. Wee'le drinke
Your health, vntill we raiſe the price of wine.
Let him continue there his ſeate. Perhaps
They (whom I ſhall ſtraight conduct this way)
Will ſo commiſerate his want, that he
Will ſoone relieue't, though he increaſe his owne.
There is ſome Arte in this, which I muſt needs
Diſcouer, or forfeit my paines.
The Fiend is gone!
Will all the vaſt accruements I proiect
From this diſguize, conuert into
The ſlender purchaſe of an Hoſpitall?
Thou turne Votary?
He'le pray in no language but the High-Dutch,
The angry Tongue, which ſeemes to threaten more,
Then implore.
Six thouſand Duckats for a Manſion in
An hoſpitall, no bigger then a coffin:
Where like Carthuſians, we muſt feed, not to
Preuent hunger, but to hinder luſt. Princes
May eaſily pay their debts, when they inforce
Their Creditors to buy Titles and Place
At their owne rates.
Harke! there's ſomebody approaching hither.
Tis no ſafe game to ſport with Kings. I'le be gon.
Grimold, now truſt to your owne performance,
I may haue vſe for my eares, I would not
Yet leaue them in the Pillory.
Gondibert, Vollterri! forſake the ſtorme
Ere ye are wet? Weezels! Monkeys! Dogs!
Madame, you are now fully ſatisfied
Ith'intention of this viſit. I wiſh
You'ld be as free, and ſportiue with him, as
Your modeſty will giue you leaue.
Truſt my obedience, and my skill, Sir.
He lookes like a watchman in that Rugge.
Your Maieſty receiues new cauſe to doubt
The truth of his diſeaſe, from my Seruants
Information. Who ſweares, this very Morne
Hee hath been ſeene in all the violence
Of drinke, and ith' Burdelli too. For, Sir,
Though he be old, he's giuen much to propagation.
Let vs retire 'tweene th'Arras, and we
Shall ſhare, ith'whole diſcouery.
Alas, who is't, that ſo prouokes the tongue
Of pitty!
An old ſouldier o' the Kings—
Hah! Captaine Grimold! how come you thus
Impriſon'd in a Chaire? haue you the Gowte?
I am not rich enough t'inioy the Gowte.
What name then doe you giue to your diſeaſe!
The Phyſicions call it famine.
How? Heauen ſecure the State! I hope we are
Not guilty of a ſinne ſo horrible,
To deny a Souldier fit materials
For conſeruation of his life.
Tis fourteene dayes ſince I haue had a iuſt
Occaſion but to picke my teeth.
Alas the day!
Each of my thighes are dry'd, and hardned like
An old Weſt-Falia Flitch. All m'interals
Are ſhrunke vp. My bladder is no bigger then
A Pigs: and were my leane iawes vnmuffled,
You ſhould ſee me mumpe, like a Matrone that
Had loſt her teeth.
O cruell ſtarres! —
Hah! Does ſhe weepe?
Could you on this wide Earth, finde no obiect
For your fury, but braue Grimold? Or is't
Becauſe you ſaw, it was my chiefe vertue
To affect a Souldier?
If ſhe ſhould be in earneſt now?
I hope you doe not vtterly deſpaire of life?
I may linger out a ſcore of yeeres, or ſo;
But I cannot liue long.
Since you are mark'd for ſudden death, cold death
That ſilenceth all tongues: and ſince this place
Is ſo ſecure from neighbouring eares, I will
Diſcloſe, what vntill now my modeſty
Inforc'd me to conceale.
I ſhall forget to counterfeit!
Know, Sir, that I haue lou'd you long; lou'd you
With ſoft and tender paſſion.
O Rogue! VVhat doe I like the picture
Of VVinter, in this wither'd habit? I muſt
Recouer my health. But alas, Madame,
Doe not deride his deſtiny, that now
Is taking flight to reach that place, where your
Beſt Starre inhabits, and ſhall haue power
To tell loud tales: if you prooue thus cruell.
How could you e're loue me? I haue been old,
Euen ſince your firſt originall growth.
But if you will permit, I may expreſſe
A little vanity in loue, I can
Informe you, Sir, how much we Ladies prize
Age before Youth in Louers. Old men are
Diſcreet ſinners, and offend with ſilence.
But young men, when the game is done, doe crow
Like pregnant Cocks: boaſt to the world their ſtrength
In folly. Beſides (Sir) an authentick
Lady ſayes in her Problemes thus:
The Young and ſlender Graft is eaſly broke,
But who can ſhake, or bruiſe the aged Oke?
A rare Adage.
The Lady Author ſure, is o'th'Moddernes.
My ioy is turn'd to a diſeaſe; it makes
Me ſpeechleſſe! I euer thought theſe Court-Tits
Were much taken with my ſmooth lookes; but that
Their modeſty ſtill kept them from my reach.
Fooliſh modeſty! It has hindred my
Preferment much for ſince I left the Campe,
I haue been in loue with ſome three hundred
Of'em, yet neuer durſt lay claime to one.
Vh! vh! If Heauen ſhould ſo affect
Our mutuall appetites, as to reſtore
My health, would you continue ſtill to doate
Vpon an old ſinner?
O, I ſhould grow more fond; preſerue you long
Aliue with zealous Orizons!
Las! poore Maulkin! She's caught! I ſhall grow rich.
For I haue heard, theſe Court-Ladies allow
Large penſions to their Paramors. Helpe! helpe!
To mooue me higher in my ſeate—
Bleſſe vs! me thinks, Sir, you begin to vſe
Your legges with actiue ſtrength.
A precious Ape!
He will ſhew fine tricks anon!
Some ſtrange influence from your touch, hath giuen
A ſecond Youth vnto my faculties:
Before, I ſeem'd to crawle like to a Crab:
Now my ioynts grow ſupple, as if I were
Prouided for a Race. This hand inſpires my ſtrength—
I haue a Key, will giue vs paſſage here to th'Park!
Vnhand me, Sir, for I ſhall forfeit all
My fame elſe. They'll thinke, I am immodeſt—
Captaine Grimold!
He ſits like a Witch, ſayling in a ſiue.
Hah! ſicke! Gentlemen, auoid the windy ſide,
Leſt he infect ye with his breath. I know
His diſeaſe, and whence it came, ſhortly
You'le ſee him weare a Curtaine ſore his Noſe;
That's now the neweſt faſhion that came from Paris.
I, tis it: he has them growing on his
Temples here—They'll ſhortly be as bigge
As Turnips.
He muſt to Roterdam, to the fat Doctor there,
And be ſtew'd in a Stoue, vntill he ſpit
His venome out.
And whilſt you are in phyſick (Captaine)
You fare like Oberon. Tis a very
Slender diet. The leane thigh of a Waſpe
To dinner; and ſome two or three of your
Owne penitent teares for your beueridge.
I'ue but ſo much breath left, as would make vp
A ſhort prayer to ſecure my laſt iaunt:
Yet I will ſpend it in a hearty curſe
For your deare ſakes.
March on! If he doe finde himſelfe agrieu'd,
Let him ſend me a challenge after his death;
And I will meete him, Ith' Elizian Fields.
I will eate that Cunymond!
How prompt the Slaue is, in 's metamorphoſis?
To him agen, Madame?
Alas, deare Captaine, what bodily hope
Can a young Lady haue of your performance,
That fall ſo ſoone in a relapſe?
When you depriu'd me of your hand, you took
Away my ſtrength and heate: touch me agen,
And I ſhall walke ſtiffe as Cacus.
Take leaſure in your motion, Sir.
Looke, Madame. I creepe as other mortall do,
On the ſurface of the Earth—
Me thinks you ſtand vpright too.
I, a Ladies warme hand will make it ſtand.
A little phyſicke from your Lip, and then
My cure is quite finiſh'd — Hem! Sure this was
Neſtors receipt to recouer his Youth. Hem!—
I ſhall be fainted for this miracle.
I am as wholeſome as a Nut, and haue
As proud fleſh about me, as the youngeſt
Gameſter of 'em all.
Fye, Sir!
If this heate continue, I muſt e'en call
For a Iulip, or ſow my wilde Oates
In the next ſoyle I meete.
Your tongue is bliſter'd▪
When ſhall we ſolace our bodies?
Your meaning, Sir?
I meane ith' darke. Speak, prety Finch with the
Greene taile? Hah! Muſt we kiſſe cloſe, and often?
Wriggle vp and downe like young Eeles—
Captaine, I haue brought the King here to view,
And to commiſerate your leane ſickneſſe,
And your feeble wants.
Thou old rauenous Goate!
He lookes now like an Alchymiſt, that is
Broyling o'red Herrings.
Or like the brazen head, when 'twas about
To ſpeake—
You meane to hang me now!
Haſt thou deſeru'd an eaſier ſentence?
When I am dead, then all my debts are pay'd.
For I leaue ſmall Lands and Chattels behind me.
But hearke ye (my Liege) you may pay your debts
In your life time, ſo depriue your Executor
Of a trouble.
O what a triuiall exit ſhall I make
From my owne world? for when I die, I die
For loue.
And I for lechery. Sir, I would faine
Depart in quiet like other young Chryſomes:
Faine make all euen betweene the world and me.
I beſeech your Highneſſe diſcharge my areres
For my laſt ſeruice in Hungary,
Then hang me when you pleaſe.
Captaine, I will be a Sutor for your reprieue.
You ſhall onely forfeit what his Grace owes you;
And then your life's ſecur'd.
I will rather die twice. O Sir▪ pay me
Six thouſand Duckats, and then proclaime
Your ſentence here aloud. I would faine dye
Merrily. I haue not been drunke at my owne charge
This foure moneths.
Hermegild, iterate now thy ſweete raptures.
Speake to her; for, by th' gentle carriage of
Her eyes, I doe perceiue ſhe 'gins to penetrate.
Away Captaine! be gone whilſt you are yet
Mortall. I haue much power with Hermegild,
And will vpon your patient ſufferance
Redeeme my credit with your thoughts. Quick then,
Mooue with ſilence.
Madame, the feather'd Arrow ſings ith' Ayre,
Ere it ariue where it muſt wound; ſo this
Sweet harmony, I 'ld haue you counterfeit,
But tempts him to ſecurity in ſleepe,
Before his death.
I'm much oblig'd to that good ſoule.
True, my Royall Lady! yet now peruſe
The greatneſſe of his being▪ his fate in battailes,
And by your owne remembrance be inform'd
Of our captiuitie.
Honeſt Hermegild?
He was too cruell to a nature ſo
Remiſſe, and timorous as mine?
Alas, this crime he expiats with ſighs
So hot, that they would ſindge his Royall Beard,
Did not his numerous teares opportunely drop,
To quench the flame.
That's complement!
Theſe angry frownes vpon your browes make you
Appeare aged.
Could I aſſure my heart; he would no more
Triumph o're my deare Fathers memory;
I then ſhould meet his loue with too much paſſion.
When I am more my Chronicle, or ſpeake
My deeds with pride, may my tongue bliſter, till't
Infect my breath with Epidemick-heate.
You heare his vowes?—Seeme fond. If you can ſhead
A teare, or two, the more to credit this
Atonement, 'twill much aduantage our pretence.
Sir, now enioy what your indulgent griefe
Merits to keepe, e'en from the hands of death.
Good heart, ſee how ſhee weepes?
I'm ſoone o'recome in this ſoft warre. S'death all
Can thaw but I. I neuer wept, but when
Th'vnruly winde blew in my eyes; and tis
No argument for ſterne battaile: elſe I
Would fight. To teſtifie the ioy my ſoule
Conceiues, Ile drinke—
Sir, you neglect to vſe her like a Louer;
With amorous geſtures.
Fill me a Bowle with Negro's blood, congeal'd
Euen into Liuers! Tell her, Hermegild,
Ile ſwallow Tarre, to celebrate her health!
Sir, this dull Germane phraſe, makes her ſuſpect
Your temperance. Marke how ſhe trembles.
I muſt go learne to complement. Doſt heare?
Is't fit I proffer her to mingle limmes—Thou know'ſt—
Sir, not to night. That was a ſerious ſute
She bade me make, when firſt ſhe purpos'd this
Atonement.
I do obey. Though I haue thoughts would faine
Perſwade me to rebellion.
This was a ſubtill caution! elſe my hopes
Had twice been Cuckolded. Let'em reuell
With their ſalt Lippes. Th' other ſport is fulſome.
But Paradine diſturbes my ſleepe: he's young,
Enrich'd with all the fertill ſtrength of nature:
And needs muſt prooue more riotous in ſinne,
Then I. My darke practice, and vſe
Of ſilent contemplation; has made
My marrow thinne and black; like Inke within
My bones. I want the prompt alacrity. The Queene
Hath taſted him, and may (perhaps) ſtill to
Poſſeſſe his luſt; remooue Valdaura from
This foggy Soyle; then make him Lord of all
My hopes. This to preuent, I haue decreed,
Valdaura firſt ſhall miniſter his death.
I u'e taught her too; t' inſinnuate to his Creede,
That the King told her of 's adulterous luſt;
Good, for whē he thinks the King doth know that guilt,
His owne ſafety then, will ſoone prouoke him
Haſten our prodigious murther. This may
Be done, before the Poyſon operate
In dire effect; for that delays its power;
Till foureſcore houres expire their courſe: which then
No Antidote, nor humane skill reſiſts.
Mount, mount my thoughts, that I may tread on Kings,
Or if I chance to fall, thus ſoaring high;
I melt like Icarus, in the Sunnes Eye.
The Sun doth melt vs with his ſcorching beames.
Goe fill my vſuall Beuiridge: Ile drinke
Till I am cold.
The conſtitution of my Soule, agrees
Not with this Climate. I grow weary
Of mortalitie. Euen in my firſt growth
(Since my Corſelet was my loade) I haue tooke
My breeding in the Campe; where had I ſtill
Remain'd a dull practike ſouldier, and nere ſeene
A Woman, nor the Court, I might haue had
Some hope, to gaine by faith, but now I reach
At wilde deſpaire.
My Lady, Sir, commends her loue, and this
To your acceptance; ſhe made the mixture
With her owne hands.
The Queene preſcrib'd this houre for her returne.
That ſhe growes black with ſinne, peruerts my ſenſe,
I muſt ſeem not to know't. Say, I greet her health-drinks.
Hah! why, Valdaura, doſt thou appeare like
A funerall night, in darke, and ſwarthy weedes!
I mourne for you, ſince you muſt haſten your
Eternall abſence now from me, and all
That elſe are mortall.
Speak things, that are leſſe dangerous to my ſenſe.
This wonder will diſtract me.
Ere winged Time, ſhall with ſwift motion adde
Another houre, to th' life of this ſicke day;
Thou ſhalt begin thy laſt ſleepe.
A pale Swanne hath ſung my Dirge! O fatall
Muſick! but how comes this intelligence
To Eares of fleſh and blood? haue you of late
Been goſſiping with the grim Stygian Dames,
And ſeene their Ciſers gall my vitall Thread?
For to my owne ſenſe I need no Phyſicke.
My faculties enioy that pleaſant ſtrength
Which appertaines to youth and temperance;
Why ſhould I yet die?
How, Paradine? Art thou ſo full of guilt,
(Moſt vlcerous and deform'd) yet thinkſt to keepe
Thy life at Natures charge, t' exiſt till age
Makes thee a Cripple: then in thy bed,
(Like ſome good old Patriarke) thy ſoule diſmiſſe
With a diuine rapture? No, no; iuſt Heauen
Prouides more raſh and horrid deaths for ſuch,
As in adultery bathe their ſilken limmes.
Hah!
I know thy guilt; the King hath told me all.
'Twas wondrous ſtrange! Our vowes but new arriu'd
In heauen, that did obliege our mutuall Faiths
In loue: and thou with ſauage luſt to breake them?
Though griefe hath much conſum'd my teares, yet I
Haue ſome ſtill left t' expreſſe my pitty.
My adultery already knowne, both to
The King and her? why, theſe are prodigies
Indeed. How ſinne imboldens the aſpect!
She doth accuſe me for a guilt, which yet
Remaines vnpardon'd in her ſelfe. Mine was
A dire miſtake: but hers—that muſt be knowne,
And then her veines ſhall weepe.
You are poyſon'd, Paradine.
With that cold draught you ſent me now ith' Bowle?
The Vipers vomit, nor the blue ſteame,
Which fat Toades doe breathe in tired motion,
Beares not ſuch a dangerous enmitie
'Gainſt humane Nature, as that you drunke.
Stay! Me thinks I feele no inſurrection
In my blood, nor need an Iron Corſelet
To containe my fleſh; ſure it ſwels not yet.
It takes a ſubtill leaſure to diſperſe
Thorow all your Organs, and your Arteries,
That it may ſtraite with abler violence
Conſume your ſtrength.
And then I ſhall look goggle-ey'd! and ſtretch
Ith' cheekes, till my face ſhew like a Pompeon,
Round and yellow?
Farre, farre more deform'd.
Will't make my eies ſtart from my skull, or drop
Like bullets at my feete? Speake, ſhall I fome
At mouth like ſome young Courſer, that is hot
And angry with his bit?
Not the firſt Chaos was ſo vgly and
Confus'd, as you'll appeare, when this diſtilment works.
Yet I forgiue you all, e'en from my heart:
Whilſt my cogitations now are ſober,
And can diſtinguiſh things with pregnant ſenſe.
I doe applaude this cruell benefit.
Theſe ſubtill vanities of Court haue tyr'd
My obſeruation. I was nourc'd within
Some Armory, and tooke a proud delight
In actiue Warre; but ſince our Drummes haue ceas'd
Their noble clamour, I finde no buſineſſe
Vpon Earth for me; tis fit I grow immortall.
I did not thinke, his fancy, at this newes,
Could proue ſo temperate.
To ſleepe in cold earth, whilſt my dead neighbour
Neuer at my Coffin knocks, to inquire my health,
By way of viſit: for all are ſilent
In the graue. Harſh deſtiny! Such as I
Could ne'r expect from thee, Valdaura.
My nature you ſhall finde much different,
From what your knowledge heretofore diſcern'd.
I haue contriu'd another way to puniſh
Thy adulterous heate.
You find my ſufferance tame enough. Publiſh all!
To meet your ſin with apt reuenge, I'm growne
A foule looſe whore.
Hah! containe thy ſpeech. Expreſſe but ſo much
Modeſty, as may ſecure thy life: for
My death doth not concerne my rage ſo much,
As this foule murder of thy fame.
Tis truth: and I confirm't with pride.
Oh, oh! theſe are the Mandrakes groanes (fatall!)
For whoſo heares them, ſtraight incounters death.
Now ſmile (ſweet Heauen) ſince thus I but returne
Her owne iuſtice. For my adulterous act,
She takes my life, and ſhall I let that bold
Adultereſſe liue?—
Oh, oh! Hold, hold! Leaue me a little breath
To vſe in prayer.
I am not fraught with diuels ſpleene; I would
Not hurt thy ſoule: here ſolitary ſit,
Whilſt I ſend vp an humble ſacrifice,
That ſhall beſpeake a pardon for thy crime,
Ere thou ariue neere heauen.
Dare you truſt my laſt vtterance?
O ſpeak, ere thou doſt catch an euerlaſting cold,
And ſhalt be heard no more.
I am not falſe vnto your bed: I ne'r
In act, nor guilty thought, did violate
My Marriage vowes.
Art thou not a Whore?
No Veſtall that preſeru'd with quickning oyle,
The ſacred flame, was in her chaſtity
More cold, more timorous then I: nor are
You poyſon'd.
Hah! was not that a mixture of diſtill'd
Venome, which I drunke?
'Twas healthfull, as the blood of Grapes to age,
And all your faculties doe ſtill preſerue
Their wonted harmony.
Sweet ſpirit, doe not riddle thus with Heauen,
Nor ſport thy ſoule away. Why didſt accuſe
Thy ſelfe of ſterne murder, and pernicious luſt;
Yet art thus cleere from both?
'Twas to inrage your violence, with hope
To make you ſoone my executioner.
For hearing you were falſe, I found no ioy
In life: your hand hath ſeal'd my wiſhes.
New Arts t'increaſe my wonder: I'm orereach'd,
Where I thought my nature was moſt skilfull!
E'en in loue! O ſtay: had not diſtraction
Ceaz'd my memory; I ſhould at firſt haue told you
The miſtake, by which the ſinfull Queene
And Hermegild betray'd my chaſte Honour.
Nam'd you Hermegild, guilty of that ſinne?
He's then a horrid hypocrite: he did
Entice me by a poyſonous practice to
Contriue your death, but found my nature loyall.
New wonders ſtill!
I feele the frozen hand of death. Oh! oh! oh!
Valdaura! Bride! Onoble Girle!
Mercy! mercy!
Already turn'd a Ghoſt! There's rare muſicke
Now in heauen, ſince thou art gone t'increaſe
The ſacred Quire. I may behold thee in
The purple skie, mix'd there with other Starres,
But neuer on this ſoile agen. Be this
Thy Tombe awhile. The Curtaines ſoftly drawne—
Hermegild treacherous! with poyſon too?
That was her word. Tis fit I ſeeme t' haue drunke
The med'cine vp. Good! The rough young Souldier
May ſpie at laſt theſe ſpirits of the Court,
That walke in artificiall clouds: or if
Their high conceptions ſoare aboue my reach,
Yet they haue mortall hearts; ſuch as our owne
Country ſteele, may with feeble motion prick,
Pricke till they groane: for I haue now decreed,
Whom my dull ſenſe cannot ſubdue, ſhall bleed.
Shall I belye my owne ſilence?
Be ſudden in your ſpeech! confirme my words:
Then diſpoſe e'en of my wealth and perſon.
I will conſent to matrimony; make
Any vſe of this new intereſt.
Sir, you'll forget my merit in this danger?
Neuer.— My Lord, I haue diſcouer'd all.
See, how aguiſh her guilt hath made her.
How ſhe trembles like a froſty Ruſſian
On a hill. Nay, Lady, nere ſcatter thus
Your wilde lookes. Confeſſe the truth, and you'll gaine
Mercy. Valdaura (whoſe Soule Heauen keepe
From purging fires) hath told her Lord; the King
Knowes of his wanton ſtealth with our good Queene.
You were the Inſtrument that betray'd him
To th'miſtake, and whoſe ſecrecy to doubt
But yours, our reaſon cannot yet informe vs.
Thus kneeling, I confeſſe with penitence,
'T was I reueal'd it to the King.
Teare forth her eies, and let her then grope out
Her way to hell—
Stay, deare Madame!
Paradine is poyſon'd, who knowes, but ſhe
Doth amply ſhare in that guilt too?
At my humble ſute, containe your fury!
We ſhall diſcouer all. My noble Lord,
It is a griefe that will depriue my life
Of many yeeres, to thinke, I'm held by your
Suſpect, an Agent in that practice.
I haue reueal'd the euidence, that doth
Perſwade my Creede.
What, Lady, doe you know of this?—Speak with
Courage, I am your ſafety.
I ſaw the King reach to Valdaura's hand
A poyſonous violl; and with religious hints,
Taught her to mixe it in her husbands draught.
Hah!
Perſiſt in my inſtructions!
'T was that night when he enioy'd her perſon—
Inioy'd her! how?
As you inioy'd the Queene.
Heauen! will theſe miracles ne'r ceaſe?
I ſhall conuert to ſtone!
Now retire, Theſina, till I haue begg'd
Your free reſtorement to the Queene's mercy.
My Lord, you'll not forget your kind promiſe
Of matrimony.
I'ue nought elſe, to trouble my remembrance.
Away, Away!
What did remaine ſuſpence, is heere confirm'd:
My forehead feeles as rugged now as his.
Now Sir, y'haue heard ſuch reall circumſtance,
As needs muſt ſettle your beliefe, and free
My heart, from your vnkind diſlike.
Valdaura's damn'd! ſhe howles ſo loude, that ſhe
Diſturbes all hell! O periur'd Whore!
Now Paradine! Inſtruct thy ſelfe with thoughts.
Is't euident he euer could affect
Thy perſon with ſincere dotage, yet thus
Betray thy ſtrength in thy Fort? Where thy
Honor ſtill ſtood ſentinell?
I haue other motiues to teach you doubt
His loyaltie in loue. Which my fond heart
Cannot conceale, though't would aduantage much
My owne profit. He hath of late, hung thus—
Vpon my neck; vntill his amorous weight
Became my burden: and then lay ſlabbering o're
My lips; like ſome rhumatick Babe. This ſport
My ſerious braine abhor'd. 'Twas my wonder
(Since you are cal'd his Minion) he could ere
Affect my looke. I that am like coffing
Winter, old, and froward; you the darling
Of the luſty Spring.
Speak, is that Bag, that ſhould containe thy Gall,
Shrunke vp; haſt thou nothing bitter in thee?
Thou art farre, farre more opportunely ſtor'd
With time and place for thy reuenge, then wee.
Ith' middle age of day; when the bright Sunne
Moſt powerfully doth warme the world; in thy
Secret Clozet he takes his vſuall ſleepe.
Goe, drill his heart! and make the Couch whereon
He lyes, his eaſie monument.
And then enioy a Queene, with all that doth
Belong to her atchieuement, or her birth.
As for my ſeruices, they merit no
Reward. I know my owne creation much
Vnfit for Court affaires. If you but wrap
Me in a ſhirt of haire, then ſeate me in
A darke and gloomy Cell, where I may tumble o're
Some deepe voluminous Rabbin, you make
Me ſafe, and happy.
Doe't, Paradine! and Fame no Trumpet then
Shall neede to ſpeake thy praiſe. Thy Country will
Afford thee power to ſanctifie the chiefe
O'th' dayes within our Kalender.
And to thy memory high Statues build,
'Bout which our Nobleſt virgins once a yeere
Shall dance in Circles, and ſing, vntill they make
The Marble mooue, like to thoſe looſe Quarries;
Which ore-heard Orpheus and his Harp. Or if
Theſe cannot inſpire heroique fury,
Yet argue thus; you knew his Bed, but by
Miſtake; which was our guilt, not yours; and for
Our Countries benefit contriu'd. But he
Defil'd your ſheets in the ſalt pride of luſt.
Horror! this would incenſe the temperate Doue;
Turne all his moyſture into gall; teach him
To weare ſpurres on his heeles, and make him fierce
In Duell, as a Britiſh Cocke.
Fier! fier! and warme blood!
Follow, follow him, my deare Soueraigne!
Adde new heate vnto his rage. And d'ye heare!
Since he is poyſon'd, 'twere moſt fit, ſome learn'd
Phyſicion, did indeuour to ſecure
His health.
I heard him ſay, he is already furniſh'd
With a powerfull med'cine.
Should you now forget your Royall promiſe,
I loſe all my induſtrious merit,
And remaine a ſacrifice to loue.
Doſt thou grow iealous?
Valdaura now is ſeuer'd from her Soule:
And Paradine is abler in delights
Of Youth, more moyſt and amorous then I.
Away foole! I ſeale thy ſafety with my lip.
Thus Nurces huſh their froward babes aſleep.
Shortly ſhe'le preſent me with a Corall-club,
A Whiſtle ſtrung with Bells. Theſe femall Arts
Can ne'r my darke authenticke practice cheate.
Paradine muſt die! So I ſtill ſecure
My hopes. VVhen that ſad houre arriues,
Wherein the poyſonous draught muſt worke,
No charmed med'cine can reſiſt its ſtrength.
I hugge my Genius! 'T was a ſubtill reach,
To tell him, that the King hath horn'd his brow:
For that will more incenſe his wrath, and aggrauate
The Queenes reuenge. The weight I beare, doth make
My motion ſlow: ſlow as the Snaile I tread,
Who trauailes with his tenement on 's head.
The King has pay'd him all 's arreres.
'T was by Theſina's ſute to Hermegild:
The Snake has caſt his skin too now.
I, Sir, 'tis a poore Snake that cannot caſt,
His skin once in a Summer.
'Slight, here's Grimold! Didſt not thou ſay he was dead?
But I haue heard ſince, his ghoſt walks.
Look! 't has found the hiddē treaſure then, which
Made it walke; for the Ghoſt hath bought it ſelfe
New clothes.
Nay, nay, ſtay, Gentlemen! Let vs forget
Old quarrels, then end our new acquaintance.
We are for the Countrey now. Ile but tell ye
A few of your faults, and leaue th' amendment
To your owne leaſures: but you all thinke
Y'are wiſer then I.
VVe ſhould abuſe our iudgements elſe.
Mark! This is a new Court-thrift: when you are
Loth to maintaine flatterers, you publiſh
Your ſelues with your owne prayſe. Lay your fingers
Here—Not a word, leſt I returne ye a blow.
I know ye cannot ſpeake without a complement.
They vſe it in their prayers, they.
Cunymond, in one ſingle complement
So much waſted his Lungs, that I was faine
To call for Aqua vita to recouer
His breath.
I'ue heard you haue tranſported from Paris
The Geometricall cringe, and the Art
Of numbring the haires vpon your chins.
And of ſtarching your Beards.
Yes, and of perfuming your very ſhadowes.
And they ſay, it is your cuſtome to ſleepe
In Pomatum Maſques.
And that you paint your prety Vis'gnomies.
Yes, and colour them ſo red, that you ſeeme
To bluſh more, then the Signe of the Kings head
Before a Country Inne.
Y'abuſe Aſtrology too; for you clip
Black-Taffeta into Starres; and for a foile
To your beauty; fix 'em in ſeuerall Regions
Of your face.
Which makes it look, like the picture of Doomes-day;
When all the Planets are darkened.
Nay, nay, ſtay awhile!
Leaue off your ijgging motion, when you mix
Your ſelues in a ſalute; your bodyes ſeeme
To dance vpon your knees. You pinion vp
Your Elbowes thus:—like Pullets truſt vpon
A ſpit. Then wreath your Hammes in thus; and mooue
With a diſcreet leaſure, as if you meant
To number all the Pibbles in the ſtreet.
And then you fleere, as if y' had waſh'd your gummes
In vineger. This you admire for geſture
Of the neweſt faſhion. I ſay, 'tis skiruy!
For he that greets a Lady ſo, does looke
Like a Sope-boyler, vpon a Cloſe-ſtoole.
If you will take Phyſicke for your ſoules-health,
Retire into that part of the Kingdome
Which lies fartheſt from France.
He counſels well: for the French ayre hath made
Many of our Gentry drunke.
And now moue hence; but with your lips ſow'd vp,
For feare of a complement. You two ſhall ſtraite
Take horſe with me, and be billited in
My Quarter. Stay, Gentlemen! One word more!
This is a hot Climate: when you muſt needs
Marry to increaſe your Tribe, your beſt way
Is to goe a wooing in the Citie:
For certaine rich widdowes there, loue Court-fooles;
And vſe to play with their bables.
To make him bleed, and leaue his arteries
(VVhere the delighted ſpirits walke) ſhrunke vp,
Vntill they curle with heate. The wither'd frame
Straite to conuert to duſt. Then th' vmerous winde,
To fan it o're the world. Speake, iuſt Heauen!
Is this fit vſage for a King? Caſsius
VVas raſh: perhaps to gaine noiſe at's funerall;
Or in 's Elizian fields; beneath a pleaſant Hedge
To tell ſome prattling ghoſt what he had done—
Hah! but Brutus, noble Brutus! the pride
Of Arts and VVarre: ſo temperate, his ſoule
VVas more harmonious then the Spheares. Inſtruct
(Heroique Lord) thy young Pupill! VVhy did
The mighty Ceſar fall, by thy cold wrath?
All ſilent as the night! He ſleepes: before
Him too, thoſe papers that concerne my houſe
Affaires; and my Officiall rule in State.
Here he comments on my Letters! here with
Thrifty documents limits my expence.
Can this indulgent care be counterfeit?
And meerely carry a pretence of loue? he made
My wife a blacke adultereſſe. O horror!
Yet who knowes, but 'twas rather his reuenge,
Then luſt; a furious riot, after that
He knew I whor'd his Queene—
Sir! My Lord the King! Sir!
Hah! Paradine! VVhat witty emblem's this?
The more to certifie thy loue, doſt thou
Appeare blind.
O Sir, do not mocke my penitence, nor ſeeme
Thus to diſguize the knowledge of that crime,
VVhich hath defil'd my modeſt bloud, and makes
Me now aſham'd t' incounter with your eyes.
He is drunke! Maudlin drunke!
Sir, I could creepe aliue into my Tombe,
And mixe ſociety with Ghoſts, whilſt I
Haue yet warme motion left, could I but hide
My guilt from your perſpicuous ſight.
By heauen drunke with Cider, or with thinne Beere;
That lookes like th' vrine of a Babe: I'm ſure
The Corſicke Grape infuſeth no
Such whining paſſion.
Thoſe immateriall powers, that ſee the thoughts of men,
VVhen growing in their hearts, can witneſſe I
Abus'd your Royall bed, but by a dire
Miſtake.
Hah!
Your blacke adulterous Queene betray'd
Me to her luſt by wicked Arts.
This is a ſober paſſion, but implies
Something that is horrid.
Had not heroique warre taught me t' affect
No rage, but noble; ſhe and Hermegild
Had intic'd me now to lengthen this your ſleepe,
Vntill the day of generall accounts.
Suſpect muſt now be raſh. Make your face known!
He bluſhes like a Bride; whom through her thin
Curtaines, the peeping Sunne beholds in ſoft
Skirmiſh with her Lord. I muſt counterfeit,
And ſeeme to know all. Paradine, 'twas farre
From my coniecture, that a heart ſo much
Oblig'd vnto my loue as thine, ſhould wrong
My Honour in a ſenſe, which but to mould
In words would teach my tongue to ſtammer, and
Deafen all that heare it.
Thunder and ſulpherous fire ſnatch my cold limmes
From this dull earth. Sir, whilſt my ſoule affords
Me reaſon, and can direct me vnto whom
My true alleageance is a debt, kill me!
When I am mad, I ſhall forget all duty,
And refuſe t' obey your Royall Charter.
Thruſt your good Sword home, till my heart ſhall kiſſe
Your Hilts. Are you ſo ſlow in iuſtice? Thinke,
How by a darke miſtake, I whor'd your Queene:
Whor'd your Queene! O prodigious phraſe!
Houle, meager Wolues! empty Tygers! let the hoarce
Thracian Bull bellow, till he rent his throat;
And the hot mountaine-Lion rore, vntill
Their clamour wake the dead. The reſurrection
Is too long delayd, ſince we want horror
To celebrate this newes. Good! I haue now
Decreed it. Draw thy bright weapon!—
For what dire vſe?
That we may meet in ſingle battaile here,
And ſtruggle till we want our Soules.
Though this high inticement charmes my blood, like
The muſicke of the Drumme. Yet my remembrance
Calls you King; My Royall Maſter. I would
Not ioyne rebellion and ingratitude
To the prolixe number of my ſinnes.
O fond, indulgent Boy! I mourne at this
Decay of thy humanity and ſenſe.
Does it become my great being, and my
Glorious name in ſtory, to offend
Without reſiſtance? Draw: and be nimble
In thy motion—
I dare not ſo diſgrace my Religion,
And my loue.
Tis time that I were dead, for I ſhall elſe
Outliue my chiefe prerogatiue. I haue
Forgot how to command. Vnſheath thy Sword!
Or this breach of Duty ſhall teach me think,
I ne'r inioy'd thy reall loue, and 'twas
Not a miſtake, that vſher'd thee to ſinne betweene
My ſheetes, but a conſiderate luſt—
No prouocation like to this, could tempt
A danger from my Arme—
Why doſt thou dally thus with feeble motion?
Beare vp! and vſe more violence!
Some ſurgery from heauen! Are you hurt, Sir?
You willingly oppos'd your breſt againſt
My ſteele, and neuer ſought t' indanger me
With yours.
'Thaſt perform'd, what my wiſh did prophecy:
I'm prickd heere, about the heart; and my veines
Grow empty.
Then glorious war, and all proud circumſtance,
That giues a ſouldier noyſe, for euermore farewell—
Hold, Paradine. Tis my laſt ſute, that thou ſuruiue
To miniſter a iuſt reuenge on thoſe
Whom I proſcribe, helpe my quiuering Limmes,
And ſeate me in the Chaire—
Shall poſteritie read it in ſtory
And beleeue; a Prince that doth deſerue to be
The firſt ith' Liſt of thoſe, that gatherd noyſe
In warre, can be thus couetous t' expire
In ſilence darke. Fall on my fatall point,
And yet command that I ſuruiue the Tragedy!
'Twere in me an affectation triuiall
To cheriſh life, now Rhodolinda's falſe.
For ſhould I ſtill preſerue my ſoule in fleſh,
I know my mercy is ſo fond to her;
I ſhould forgiue her all: and wert thou dead,
My hope were then depriu'd of future iuſtice.
Liue to reuenge her falſhood. I know thy heart
So ſincere and noble, that I ſuſpect not thee
A ſharer in her guilt. When thou
Didſt firſt confeſſe th'adulterous crime, ioyn'd with
Thy owne miſtake, through Hermegilds deepe Art,
My faith conceiu'd the truth: for thy Nature
Is much too blunt, and credulous for Court.
Should I but ſpeak each cunning circumſtance—
Containe thy breath! To heare that told, would make
My ſoule wander in my laſt iourney.
'Till thy relation brought it to my Eare,
I neuer knew her falſe.
Still my amazement doth increaſe! Were you
Not told of this before!
My knowledge only learnt it of thy Tongue.
Stay! Nor with Valdaura, you did ne'r proiect
My death by poyſon?
Neuer.
Yet one reply, then make my ioy exceed
My wonder. Did you neuer in my bed,
Commit a luſtfull ſtealth?
Angels in that, are not more free from guilt.
What Potter made this earthy Skull! pardon
(Deare Valdaura) my dull ſuſpect! Sing out
Thy Hymnes in heauen▪ and neuer liſten more
To my fond ſpeech; for they haue made mee mad!
I cannot gripe the Ayre. Marke how it ſteales
Through all my knotty Fingers—
Extaſie!
Now my laſt, and ſhort minute is ariu'd;
I doe, reſigne my Crowne—
To whom ſir?
To him I hate. But be thou ſure, he weare
It not 'till neere his death: for it's a happineſſe
To liue enthron'd, but tis not ſafe to dye
A King.
He doth peruert my ſenſe.
Let the Drum ceaſe! Ile haue no more battailes.
He that to waſte his triuiall rage, doth fight
A battaile, rides a Hawking with the diuell.
Mad as the Northerne winde!
He ſends a thouſand drinking Animals
To take their flight ith' ayre, whilſt little blacke
Diuels (d'ye not ſee 'em?) They looke like Rauens.
Marke how they prey on thoſe immortall Fowle,
And plume 'em in their Talents! I doe not like
This Falconry: it is too ſad a game
For ſinners—Oh, oh, oh!—
There dy'd the nobleſt Trophey of our war!
The Lombards now haue loſt their victory.
So hardy of creation, his heart-ſtrings
Were as Cordage, tough; crack'd like a Cable,
When the frighted Barke ſtarts from the Anchor.
All that are nours'd in warre, ſhall mourne for thee.
Our Enſignes now we will of Cypreſſe make▪
Hah! It is the winde that whispers▪ he must
Be hid. I'm ſure this noyſe can neuer wake him—
O, are ye come?
Thou haſt a wilde aſpect! Is it done?
He has paid for his wharfage already,
And is now entring Charons Boate.
Th'art precious as my Soule!
There's the old Face.
He lookes like a pale Country Virgin
That long'd to eate Morter. Our chiefe deſigne
Is finiſh'd: but thou muſt adde one knot more
T' obliege my gratitude, and then we ſhall
Triumph with ſafety. Hermegild muſt die▪
He knowes too much.
It is as if the Parca ſpoke. If there
Be any other whom your enuy, or
Your hate would haue diſmiſt the world, make him
But knowne, and he is numbred with the dead.
Deare Paradine, I ſure ſhall thee,
My appetite is growne ſo fierce. Let me
Begin with thy moyſt lip—
Let's to't like Monkeys, or the reeking Goat.
Oh! oh! oh! Helpe! helpe!
Ceaſe your loud clamor, Royall Whore.
Thou didſt eate my lips.
Thy fleſh is ſowre, muſty; more tainted then
A Carion in a phlegmatick ditch for elſe
Like th' Anthropophagus, I had deuour'd thee vp.
This made Valdaura bleed, and muſt let forth
Thy ſwarthy ſoule—
Oh! oh! oh!—
For Albouine my Royall Maſter, this—
And this to pacifie Valdaura's Ghoſt—
Oh, oh, oh!
So hard and ſtony is thy heart, that it
Reuerts the point of my bright ſteele.
Mercy Heauen!
Since thou haſt receiu'd my iuſtice, I wiſh
Thee mercy too—
My Lord.
Tis Hermegild, now I ſhall end my chiefe
Diſcouery. What a full Sepulcher is this—
Now I muſt practiſe my diſguize. Reuert
The Springe twice, and you may enter.
My Lord, I haue loſt my honor in your ſeruice,
You may chuſe one that ſhall affect you worſe.
Lady, this is no time to woo: but
D'ye thinke I'm ſo prophane to violate
My vow? Nimbly depart, I doe coniure
Your abſence with this kiſſe—
If you ſhould proue falſe—
'Slight, theſe Wenches at
Fifteene, are as riotous as Elephants.
Marry a Court Kitten! There he ſits! Hah, ſick!
My ſweet Lord, how thriues your health? D'your pulſes
Still preſerue their temp'rate muſicke? haue you
Effected yet our great buſineſſe?
The King is dead, that ſanguine inſtrument
Did ſet his Soule at liberty.
The Lawrell, Mertle, and the Bay ſhall ſtill
Cold and naked ſtand before the Winters
Froſty breath; ſtill ſtrip their Boughes, to make
Your head triumphant wreathes. Where is the Queene?
Me thinks (my Lord) your body and your minde
Seeme much diſturb'd.
Oh, oh! the poyſon works—
Alas, my ſweet deare Lord! (precious med'cine!)
He cannot poſſibly ſuruiue the next
Minute. Does it deſtroy your ſtrength?
Oh, oh! It skorches all my entrailes vp:
As if like Porcia I had ſwallowed coales.
I ſpit ſcumme, ſuch as o're th' hot Caldron boyles—
And are you faſtned in the chaire with weaknes?
I cannot riſe. A ſtiffe conuulſion in
My Sinnewes fetters all my limmes—
Hah! hah! ha!
O heauen, will you permit him laugh?
I know th'Ingredients of thy poyſnous draught.
'Twas I that gaue it to thy wife. 'Twas I
Did counſell her to mingle it in thy wine,
When thou wert hot, and all thy Pores open
As thy mouth.
Oh, oh, oh!
Doe, groane, till thou raiſe an eccho in this
Square roofe. Ere long thy Ribs will ſtart from thy
Looſe Chine, thy lanke Belly ſwell into a hill.
O horror! horror! Is Heauen aſleepe?
The King ne'r knew of thy adultrous crime▪
'Twas I told it to Valdaura, and made
Her thinke, thy guilt proceeded not from a
Miſtake, but from thy wilfull luſt▪ I'ue ſtrung
Thy Noſthrill with a ſpinners thread, ſo led
Thee through ſubtill Labyrinths, t'inuolue
Thy ſenſes; and now I triumph o're thy fate.
This is Italian Spleene.
Had I but ſtrength to actuate my reuenge?
Good, dull Souldier! why didſt thou leaue the Camp,
Thy ruſty Moriō there; thy batter'd Corſelet;
And thy ſhiuer'd Lance, t' amble here at Court
In ſlippery ſilkes; to walke in cloudy miſts
Of perfum'd ayre? Tis I haue ſhak'd thy braines
That heretofore were thicke as Curds, into
A pale, thin whay.
Draw neere, and let me then but kill thee—
Troth, thou art ſo feeble now, that were I kill'd
By thee, I ſcarce ſhould thinke that I were dead.
No! that ſhall arriue vnto the . Dog! grim
As th'angry Fiend, that muſt deuoure thy ſoule!
I am not poyſon'd.
Hah! does he counterfeit?
See heere, what abiect ruines thou haſt made
O'the nobleſt ſtructures in the world—
The Queene there too! O triuiall Arts with my
Owne Myne I'ue blowne my ſelfe e'en into duſt!
I will now ſee, if thou canſt bleed like things mortall—
Depriu'd of my defence! If th'aſt a ſoule
(Great as thy fame) reſtore my Sword.
Thou bark'ſt againſt the Moone! I will requite
Thy owne tyrannous ſcorne. That deſtinie
Was iuſt, that thus betray'd thee to my mirth.
There, Stygian Dogge—
Oh, oh! whilſt I haue warmth, Ile moue with violence—
Where now are all the ſubtill Tropheys of
Thy braine? Plots, darke as hell! proiections grimme!
Such, as threatned Nature, and ſeem'd to fright
The Genius of the world. Now, now preuent
Theſe dire ſalutes—
Returne my Sword, then manage Steeples like
To Pikes; yet, Ile affront thy fury—
Hardy as the Scythians race, I greet thy heart—
I ſtagger, and am drunk with my owne blood!—
Take my laſt anger, and good night!
Oh, oh! thou haſt ſtuck Needles in my heart!
Now I doe ſwell with horror and ſterne rage:
I will diſtract the whole world. Fire! fire! fire!
Murder, Treaſon, & inceſtuous rapes! Fire! fire!
I ſpie
A white Soule houering in the ayre! one when
Corporeall, was ſure ſome humble Hermit
Here on earth. He's acquainted with the way
To Heauen: ſhould mine take flight alone, I feare
'T would ſtray! Hoa! you, you that aſcend the Spheares!
We ſinners ſtill ſeeme hoarce to Angels eares.
VVhat, hoa! he turnes not yet: who knowes but he
Still liu'd in low Valleyes, built his Manſion
In ſome ag'd wall? but my path euer lay
On hills, where the good Patriarkes neuer trod.
Vaine Arts! Ambition in all ſacred Schooles,
Is held the ſinne of Heathens, and of Fooles.
O dire and tragick ſight! The King, the Queene
And faire Valdaura ſlaine!
Heere's another obiect fit for wonder,
Though not for pitty.
Hah! he dead too? Whence ſhould theſe ſorrowes flow?
Lay hold on Paradine.
All ſtay. Ile bore his haggard ſoule that ſtriues
With ſawcy ſtrength, to captiuate my Limmes:
Harke, the bigge drumme recouers breath, and ſpeakes!
March on! The ſcatter'd foe retires, and all
The glorious Horſe are ſlaine. I am magnanimous,
And high! O ye vnkind falſe ſtarres! ye mocke
Poore Paradine! A few cleane Teares to waſh
My ſinnes away, and I am ſeene no more.
Ceaze on him; on forfeit of your liues!
Their liues are forfeited to me —
Heere, heere, it gauld my very heart!—
Conuay him gently in, and vſe all helpe
Of ſurgery to ſtop his wounds: for from
His mouth, wee muſt receiue the knowledge of
Theſe fatall deeds. Some giue th'Allarum to
The Ports! You Siginors, leade to th'Cittadell;
Where, we'le proclaime Albouines young Iſſue
By's former wife, to bee his lawfull heire.
Wilde Fancy may proiect things ſtrange and new:
But Time records no Tale ſo ſad, and true.