THis puzles my beliefe: the ſickly Moone
Hath not yet twice expir'd her vſuall
Since you did mingle Soules, and can
That ſhe ſo ſoone recoyles from grac
Harmonious quiet of your bed?
My Deare
Meruolle ſhe is loſt: As well may I
Collect the ſcatter'd windes into a bagge,
Or from the watry ſurface ſcrape the gilt
Reflections of the Sunne, as bring her heart
Within the quiet liſt of wiues that will
Obay and loue.
Can the Duke (her Vnkle)
Giue an encouragement to her reuolt,
Maintaine the females Charter 'gainſt the male?
Him, and his ſupreame title ſhe ſtill
To iuſtifie the glory of her birth,
And then recites the Vilages and wealth,
She brought to me for dowre, in parallell
With what I formerly poſſeſſ'd, ſhe doth
Affront my memorie with ſtories of
My leane and niggard fate, and vrging then
Her vaſt ſupplies, doeth challenge leaue to call
Her pride and rigour iuſt.
This griefe is of
Sad quality!
The heart hangs heauie on
The ſtrings, when it alone containes the cauſe
And knowledge of its weight: for troubled windes
In their diſperſion looſe their ſtrength; ſo griefes,
Whilſt th'are reueal'd, diminiſh from themſelues.
But the calamities, that doe perplex
The Nuptiall bed, are of a propertie
Recluſe, and muſt be hidden euen from friends:
For on ſuch ſecrets Fame doeth feede with fierce,
And meagre appetite▪ and as ſwift Fame
Doeth trauaile with them, they increaſe. So much
Comerce I haue with humane Arts, that I
Can ſteepe my Gall in my owne teares; and make
That ſalt which ſhe intended bitter; Shew
Her crime to ſpring, not from poyſon'd mallice,
But from the feminine miſtakes of wit:
For moderne Courts now preach, wit doeth reſide
In Ladies ſubtle riots, and their pride.
Behold your brother (ſir) whoſe ſafe returne,
This morne I mention'd to your eare—
Thy growth
Hath ſo orereach'd my ſight, that I'm eſtrang'd
To my beſt blood: and but, thy figure in
My heart I weare (by which my memory's
Enform'd) I ſhould not know I had thee heere—
I reckon this the chiefe delight I hae
Receiu'd on Earth. And (ſir) your loue is of
Such ſou'raigne qualitie, a little ſoone
Will ouercharge my ſenſe. Giue but a part
To me, the reſt conferre vpon my friends—
Who, though in witherd habits, doe deſerue,
Societie with Kings: for neuer yet,
Did bolder Souldiers liſtne to the Drumme.
Gentlemen, ye ſhall enrich my knowledge—
Noble Signior, vnprofitable loue
Is all our wealth—
But wee'le contriue our ſelues
For your beſt vſe.—
I'ue ſayd, conſider them
Within; their weedes are ouergrowne and cheape.
Brother (how ere wiſe fate may anſwere it)
Me thinks, theſe your owne robes are not o'th right
Tyrian dy; nor hath the rich weight of your
Tall Plume the Eſtridge rob'd of both her winges.
Euen thus (ſir) poore, and with ſmall victory
Am I return'd from our caſt Troopes. Our pay
Reſts in Areres, and Piſa's loſt: But you
(I heare) haue fond a Iewell, that containes
All price and luſtre; and you doe weare it
In your boſome: (a noble wife) whoſe birth
And beautie, are alike vnuallu'd as
Her dowre. This I encounterd on
The Lips of Fame; and I made haſte to ſhare
In your ſucceſſe, and put your bounty to
The teſt.
Florello, I haue loſt my ſleepe.
Things differ much from the ſinceritie
Of their firſt growth: Alteza hath forgot
Th'allegiance of a wife, ſhe doth practiſe
How with her riot to impoueriſh States,
And by her loftie pride, to iuſtifie
The immortalitie of fleſh: This Theame
Is ſad; but I will giue you cauſe t'expect
The vtmoſt ſtrength and power of my reliefe.
You teach my feeble wants a confidence.
If you a while obſcure your ſelfe (for feare
Your pouertie increaſe her ſcorne) you ſhall
Performe a rationall requeſt. Our young
Faire Siſter, is conceald for the ſame cauſe.
Your mention doth anticipate my loue.
Is our faire Siſter well?
Shee doth enioy
Rare beautie, and much health.
I heare your wife.
You and your friends, moue backe, and be not ſeene.
Trie Signior Allidore, Antonio's ſonne:
Vtruuio, or the rich Pirracco.
Gritalin, or old Contarini of
Placentia—
Madam, your husband hath
Proteſted 'gainſt your credit, euen to theſe.
Slaue, goe force an anſwere more delightfull.
I obay you Madam.
Is't come to this?
I'le be a crooked Spinſter firſt, and with
My ſpittle and my flaxe procure my bread.
What is the cauſe my Princeſſe thus delight
In frownes? Anger ſits on her brow like age.
Hence, I ſee thee, and my eyes ſhrinke into
My skull: the Rauen's not ſo ominous and blacke.
Yet vrge the cauſe (my Loue) why your
Defiance is ſo violent and lowd?
A Millainois ſhew'd me to day for ſale,
Bright and ſpacious Iewels; but in the darke,
Your puſill malice hath betrai'd my faith,
With Merchants. You haue now my credit wrought
So low, and cheape; I cannot ſtand depoſd
For th'triuiall loane of fortie thouſand crownes.
I would ſuruay a liſt of all your wants,
That I may ſo haue power to haſten the
Redreſſe: Doe you diſlike your properties
Of houſe, your Veſtments, or ſeruice of your
Table; Giue but a name vnto thy wiſh?
I would haue my Orchard—pau'd with Aggats.
O, and your garden walls raiſd high, t'hedge in
Paraquetos, and th'rhetoricall Dawe?
Thou haſt a rude heart, and a bliſterd tongue!
Well, the firſt day of your coniunction Sir,
I little thought you would haue vſd her thus.
Charintha's become her Siſters Pupill.
And I perceiue a maſculine itch beneath
Her left eye; ſhe longs to taſte man.
Come Loue,
Be gentle as thy bridall ſmiles: for by
Thy ſelfe I ſweare, my ſpeech did purpoſe nought▪
To tempt thy ſpleene. Lend me thy melting hand!
There— 'tis to reach backe the heart I gaue ye—
You ſpirits that ſecure the propertie
Of humane loue, be ſtill officiall heere!
Why ſhould we not for euer thus remaine,
Incorporate, and conioyn'd. Tis ſympathie,
And loue, that giues the world continuance
And life. Each ſpecies Loue preſerues. Tis loue
That makes th'eternall Wiſedome thus forbeare
The ſilly crimes of dull humanitie:
And ſuffers vs, like each delighted flie,
To play the triuiall wantons in his eye.
You preach of loue, but your obedience would
More pleaſure me.
This argues thy reuolt!
And is a ſtratagem againſt nature.
Thou wouldſt vſurpe the Charter of the male,
Tis my confeſſion, that thy dowre was vaſte
And opulent, and ſuch as may ſupport
Thy titles, and thy birth, with all the pride
And cunning of magnificence. Let my
Sincere phraſe inſtruct thy heart. Reaſſume
The bluſhes of thy youth; with timerous
Modeſtie behaue thy geſture and thy tongue,
And then, thou ſhalt ſtand vp exemplary
To all triumphant Courts: the enuie of
The Eaſterne Queenes: th'Aſtrologers miſtake,
Who ſhall direct their Opticks vnto thee,
As to a new and vnknowne Starre.
Siſter!—
The ſmall Muſitions of the aire (whom Queene
With mimicke falconrie doe pearch vpon
Their fiſts) ſhall be thy food. Thy maides ſhall eate
Young Pelicanes, and Squirils hearts.
Exc'lent!
Thy beuiridge ſhall be propheticke, and
Diuine; for thou ſhalt drinke that ſou'raigne dew,
That hangs vpon the frighted Lillies cheeke,
And brew'd with Syrens teares, ſuch as they ſhed
In reall obſequies.
O bounteous Sir!—
The ſoft entraile o'th Perſian worme, th'Ermines
Palefur, ſhall cloth thy limmes.
More precious ſtill!
Thoſe gums and ſpices which the Arabian bird,
Collects to make her tragicke piles, ſhall be
Thy winter fewell▪
Prettie Sir, proceed!
Thou ſhalt haue Marmaſets, and Dwarfs, the male
And female too, to procreate in thy houſe;
That thy delights may euer be renew'd.
Thy Iewels ſhall increaſe, as if the lou'd
Indies were thy Quarrie. Th'Almightie Sunne
Shall riſe, and ſee a nobler day breake from
Thy Cabinet, then yet the illuſtrious Eaſt
Ere knew.
But how will you performe theſe hopes?
The miracle, and power, doe both conſiſt,
In my large wealth.
Death on my Tribe! Your wealth?
I, my ſweet Loue.
Your wealth?
This iteration
Scarce will delight, if it be negatiue.
Canſt thou perſiſt in ſuch accurſed ſchiſme?
Did you not then intend, when you endow'd
Me with your wealth, that I ſhould call it mine?
By heauen not I. I forfeited the loue
O'th'great Duke (my Vnkle) to marry thee;
That wert a thing ſhrunke from thy fate, and loſt
Vnto the lippes and eyes of men; but yet
In moſt aſſured hope, that thou wouldſt prooue,
An humble and obedient husband.
Th'art more impudent, then the Baſiliske,
Who ſtares i'th bleſſed face of man, vntill
He kill him with his eyes.
Heare Altamont!
For I will giue ſolemnitie vnto
A vow, that ſhall for euermore, diuide
Thee from my bed—
Deare Madam hold! Each ſence
Of mine doth bluſh, that can perceiue, your wild,
Rebellious wrath. Hath not the Church nam'd him
Your husband, and your Lord?
M'opinions of
The Church, I'le tell to'th Conclaue, not to you—
Is this the helpe, Diuinitie gaue man?
Snuffe the Moone, ſhe burnes dimme. The Spheares are now
Ill tun'd, and aged nature backward reeles.
Thy anger's vaine. Heere I doe baniſh thee
My bed: And we will neuer more embrace.
Rebellious fiend.
I now diuide my houſe:
This ſide is mine, with the dimenſions that
Dependance haue on this ſquare frame: for heere
My familie and I will rule. That ſide
You, and your meagre ragged traine poſſeſſe.
Thou mayſt hencefoorth my neighbour, but no more
My husband be. Charintha, come away—
I muſt purſue, leſt ſhe her anger make
Too lowd, ſo we inuite the publike ſcorne.
Is not thy brothers wife a pure tame henne?
How doſt thou like her noyſe?
Were ſhe but mine,
I'ld teach her keepe a noyſe too after death.
How ſo?
I'ld ſtrippe her skinne o're her eares and
Make a drumme on't.
She was borne in a ſtorme!
And begot ſure with the Boeſwayns whiſtle.
Meruolle, you haue nam'd Charintha,
As a precious Virgine, of nature moſt
Remiſſe, a quiet tongue, and ſuch a heart,
As might become an able ſacrifice,
T'expiate the whole world?
This I eſteem'd
My iuſtice on her merits, but it ſeemes
Her Siſters documents ore rule her now.
Her dowry is of ample rate, and may
Deſerue the chiefe of our Italian youth.
What's Dandalo, that ſues to her for loue?
Dandalo, the Count of Millaine? A thing
Copoſd of ſpicery and ſtarch! Nature
Contriu'd him in her ſleepe. If's ignorance
Might anſwere for his ſinnes; he would accompt
Amongſt his wealth, the land he has in Heauen.
I heard you ſay, ſhe neuer ſaw him yet.
Neuer Sir: He wooes her by his letters.
She deſiring a perſonall ſuruay
Ere proſecution of the ſute, he ſent
Her word, he'ld make's addreſſe by ſtealth; but we
Expect him not ere'th'birth of the next Moon.
Will his ariuall be ſo long delay'd?—
Brother! — How thriues your patience ore your wife?
Some Philoſophicke hope remaines: the ſtorme
Can't laſt, becauſe 'tis ſtill more violent.
Sh'ath tane Caroch for the Pallace, and meanes
Straite to diſgrace me to the Duke
By her complaints.
Her vaines oreflow with Gall!
Florello, I deſire thou'lt not appeare
Before her eye, vntill thy habit's chang'd.
My preſent power ſummes but a thouſand crownes,
Which I haue brought, and proſtrate to thy vſe—
Sir it is fit your bleſſings were encreaſd;
And that your wife had read your worth.
My Art betrayes my hopes, or I haue found
A remedy to cure her pride: your helpe
Meruolle, I muſt craue, and with ſwift ſpeed:
Roſſa, Molard, (friends to my Soule and Braine)
Aduance your ſubtle Eyes! The ſou'raigne mine
Behold, that makes the ſolemne Patriarke dance,
And the anointed King to skippe, as doth
His limber Dwarfe.
Yellow as foot of Kite!
Shall we be tender natur'd, and diuide?
This is the portion will procure vs all
High dignitie and place. Roſſa, you muſt
Find cauſe to number theſe— Goe, ranſome out
Our captiue weedes, and the rich habit I
From Piſa brought: whilſt you (Mollard) with the
Aſſiſtance of theſe few—procure vs fit
Materials to adorne, and put in bright
Aſpect our Corps. Enquire for Pearles: Stones of
The cunningſt ſoyle, we'le like them, and disburſe.
Is there ſome aged veſſell now aſleepe
In the Docke, that will pay for her calking?
Florello, muſt we ſtop the publike leakes?
Ere long we ſhall be great, be able to
Aduance with ſmiles, and with our frownes deſtroy.
You Roſſa, I'le create a Magiſtrate.
Goe practiſe the auſteere Cough. Pale dilinquents
Thou ſhalt learne to ieere, and to ſleepe ore men
Condemn'd.
The calling (Sir) I doe vouchſafe.
Thou (my Molard) ſhalt rule in Villages,
Grow popular, and miſtake the Lawes. Thou ſhalt
Delight i'th Kallender: the Rubricke dayes
Thou ſhalt obſerue, and then deſtroy thy beefe.
Whilſt thy dull earthie Tennants feede vntill
They ſmell.
My Launcepreſado then ſhall ſop
His Cruſt in Cyder and in wine!
And my
Dread Corporall ſhall ſinne no more for Leekes,
His Girdle and his ſocks he ſhall vnpawne.
The ſolitarie Hoſteſſe ſhall no more
Boyle the Carion meate that ſhe muſt truſt,
In her owne teares; Nor with a Requiem bring
The ſeruice vp, as if it were the Haunch
Of her dead Husband.
I am intire flame!
The Geographicke Captaine ſhall no more
Studie the Towne Mappe, that's darke walkes may be
Contriu'd through ſlender Allies and through Lanes,
To ſcape his hungrie Creditors abroade.
Thy Prouince is Chaldea, thy Father
Was a Rabby!
And thy Aunt a Sybill!
Theſe are the victories of wit: by wit
We muſt atchieue our hopes; which to refine
And purifie, with paces doubled let's
Deſcend a Marble vault, there taſte the rich
Legitimate blood of the mighty Grape.
Tis precious as the milke of Queenes; ſuch as
Would teach dull Saturne laugh. It magnifies
The heart, and makes the agill ſpirits dance,
It drownds all thoughts adulterate and ſad;
Inſpires the Prophet, makes the Poet glad.
I Haue receiu'd a mandate from the Duke,
That will (I feare) increaſe her inſolence.
Like an old Tyrant he beſtowes his threats;
As if his anger did obay his will,
Not iuſtice, nor the Lawes.
Does your wife know
This preparation you haue made to cure
Her haughtineſſe?
All is diſcouerd to
Her eare: the newes hath taught her boyle her heart
In her owne blood. She now weepes vineger;
Boaſts of reuenge, as if the Thunder were
Her owne.
T'were fit your pretty Agent heere,
Receiu'd inſtructions how to ſhape her garbe
And port, iuſt as th'imployment doth require.
Her knowledge is already ſatisfi'd.
Alteza's threats ſhall onely mooue her ſcorne.
I will performe my beſt in your behalfe▪
But I doe feare I am not valiant Sir.
O, you! that call your ſinnes your duty, that
Obay your Ladies riots out o'zeale!—
Signior!—
Her honours ſpittle you preſerue
As a Reſtoratiue for your ſalt itch
I beſeech ye—
You thrid in Bracelets too,
The Pearles that drop from her authenticke noſe.
What meane you Sir?
To cleaue you from the ſcalpe
Vnto the twiſt: to make nine skittles of
Your boes, and winde your heratſtrings 'bout my thumbe—
O mercy Sir! So rotten are my Limmes
That when you ſtretch your Cheekes and blow on me,
I ſtrait am ſcatter'd into ſand—
Coward!
Creepe ſtrait into my Houreglaſſe then, and there
Eternally diſtinguiſh fatall time—
What ſlaue diſturbs the quiet of my Eare?
Nere looke Sir! I ſerue my Lady; and I
Doe ſcorne to yeeld—
D'ye briſtle Porcupine?—
Take heed!— I haue the mallady of France—
Stay Altamont! withdraw thy violence!
If thou diſorderſt but a haire, that doth
Belong to th'Eyebrow of my meaneſt Groome,
I will proclaime my ſuperioritie
And rule i'th'Streets.
Hell cannot miſſe thee long!
Inſult beneath thy owne low Roofe! This part
O'th'Houſe doth call me ſoueraigne
Retire!
Is that the Peece you haue ſo magnifi'd,
She you boaſt of for your paſtime Royall?
She clips the grey and ſhiuer'd wings of Time
to make him ſlow; that our imbraces like
Succeeding minutes then, may adde vnto
Their length. Let me ingender on thy lips—
So our progeny may ſtill be kiſſes—
A meeke and gentle heate, whilſt thus we bill
We imitate the ſober luſt of Doues—
That kiſſe (Sir) was ſo powerfull and moiſt,
That you haue robd my Lips of all their wealth!
Take backe thy wealth againe! —
Are ye ſo hot? —
Thy Lips are thin and lanke (Alteza) as
The Lids that cloſe thine Eyes. Hers gently ſwell
Like Eaſterne fruit, and are more ſoft then is
The fleecy Aire that clothes the Infant Morne.
Pray a word! Is there in this Pagentry
Ought like to truth? Diſcouer your intent!
I'le make my anger equall vnto thine,
And my reuenge aboue them both. This bright
Auſpicious Maid ſhall gouerne in my bed.
She is my Concubine: the Off ſpring of
Her wombe ſhall triumph heere, maugre thy ſight:
Whilſt enuie does conſume thy fleſh vntill
Thy bodie lighter grow then thy looſe mind.
How well my Starres behaue their influence?
Meruolle, goe! my Miſtreſſe guide vnto
Thoſe lodgings that oreuiew the Garden mount.
If you retard your preſence whilſt the Sunne
(In's race) fill vp one Howre, you'le find before
Your next reuiew, that griefe hath made me old,
And I ſhall looke more like a Matron then
A Bride; ſo much your abſence mortifies.
Thou art to euerie ſenſe I haue, a Spell.
Conduct her ſtrait (Meruolle) to ſome Throne!
Then are the vowes, the Eccleſiaſticke rites
With which the zealous Prieſt oblig'd vs to
Peculiar heate, to abſtinence from change,
And various loue, quite cancell'd by your luſt?
Accuſe thy pride!
Thou art a periur'd man!
Goe, thou art as light as feathers, or the Aire,
were but an Attome indiuiduall plac'd
With thee in ballance euen, t'would hoiſe thee vp
To th'Cloudes.
Thy breath is fulſome as that ſteame
Which Toades when they ingender vaporate.
Alteza, bath in penitentiall teares
Thy leprous heart, or when the Elements
Are mix'd and the ſad day ariues, that doomes
The world vnto eternitie of ioy,
Or paine, thou ſhalt (like to a glimmering Lampe)
Be hung vpon the ſootie walles of Hell.
I ſmile at thee, and thy thinne Arts; like to
Some homelie Village Leuite, thou doeſt preach
Of terrours ſtrange, to keepe dull faith in awe:
I pray ſtay; I am not angrie Sir.
No?
I practiſd all this while how t'indanger
your ſpleene (Sir) not my owne▪ which if my powers
Prooue iuſt, I ſhall, performe ere long.
Niente, ſend the partie in—
More wrath!
A ſlow deuice (Sir) but o'my owne Braine.
Who art thou?
A keene Gueſt, inuited heere—
To what?
To taſte—your wiues Gammons.
Bold ſlaue! be in thy ſpeech more euident.
I am come to get your children for you.
D'ye want a cleerer paraphraſe? He is
My ſeruant Sir, my ſtallion if I pleaſe.
A Courtly implement, and much in vſe
Among Ladies of my growth and Title.
O my cold Blood! My patience will be wrought
So low, that I ſhall learne t'mike a Heifer.
Since I'me ſo aptly furniſh'd with delight,
Your Concubine may feareleſſe walke about
The houſe, and ſhare the wholeſome Sunne in peace.
Thy tongue I doe neglect: but you (ſir) ſhall
Ere long complaine of your mortality:
The minutes you muſt waſte on Earth are few.
This I conſider Sir, and therefore make
Such haſte to mingle with your wife; that the
Kinde world may haue ſome iſſue from my Loynes.
If this prooue true, let Babes piſſe out my Eyes—
Hold Altamont, or elſe I wound thy heart—
If you aduance one inch beyond that ruſh
I'le amble through the Streets, and blow your Dirge
With the great Horne that growes vpon your Brow.
If there be Gall in Heauen, the gen'rall Bagge
Is opned, and it falls in Showres!
S'light Sir;
I come t'eaſe the labour of your Body;
And you want courtſhip to returne me thanks.
Hang him Ingrate!
But what hereafter I
Performe, ſhall be for your good Ladies ſake,
And not for yours.
Pray (ſir) let's interchange
A little breath: withall (if you conſent)
We'le put our Swords to a more quiet vſe—
Now Sir, you powre ſweet Caſſia in my Broath.
My Blood affects to skirmiſh more
With Ladies then with men. What would you ſpeake?
My true opinion ſir concerning you.
I know you doe but countrfeit this luſt,
This lawleſſe heate. You purpoſe not t'abuſe
the Charter of my Bed,
Who told ye ſo?
I read it in your noble feature and
Your lookes. You haue Religion in your ſhape.
And can it be, you ſhould ſo ſoone commit a crime
So much vnwholſome to the Angels ſight?
Let me now make a forfeiture of Eyes,
If euer I beheld a man that's more oblig'd
To Nature for his Limmes: A carnall frame
So full of equall ſtrength I neuer ſaw.
The better ſhap'd I am (Sir) the more cauſe
You'le find, to loue the Iſſue I ſhall get
Vpon your wife.
Doe not belie thy owne
True merits and comport! Th'adulterate fire
Did nere inflame thy ſober heart, I know
Thou ſcornſt to do't.
Not I beleeue it Sir!
Sir I will doe't. Is your Lady fruitfull?
I would be loath t'looſe my labour on her?
Peſtilence! and blood!
Fling a danger from
Thy arme, I'le ſummon ſtrait (with Trumpet and
with Drumme) the world to heare thy infamie—
O fie! You an Italian Sir, and thus
Behaue the knowledge of diſgrace with lowd
And popular diſlike?
Nay it becomes
You finelie, does it not?
You thinke becauſe
Y'are curſ'd, we'le allow you ſhort Hornes: I'le graft
Vpon your head a paire ſo tall, they ſhall
Goe neere to pricke the verie Planet (Sir)
Thet rul'd at your natiuitie.
He ſleepes.
Signior, goe! take downe a Cuſhion, and pray▪
You cannot chooſe but know the frailty of
The times: the ſurfeits of the wombe, and how
Great Ladies doe relieue their Appetites.
Your owne confeſſion of my parts commends
Your wife in her ſage choice. There be that ſinne
With feeble vſhers and the witherd Dwarfe.
He wants a iudgement to conſider this.
I merit better looks Sir, that muſt thraſh
All night for ye, and without wages Sir!
Dead as a monument! Let vs leaue him!—
Had he the Deuill for's Phyſitian choſe,
He could nere haue come by the like Cordiall.—
You ſwelling mountains (that oreuiew the Earth)
Fall now, make me eternally vnſeene!
Philoſophie contract thy meeke ſage brow:
Let Patience be no more thy Saint. As ſoone
Giue med'cines to the dead, teach ſtatues how
To walke, and angry windes to ſleepe i'th North.
As ſoone bid emptie Lions play with Kids;
And to the ſhaggie Scythian ſay, Goe weepe
As Virgines doe, when they their Loues interre:
The blind and ſhuffled Elements that firſt
In Chaos ſtroue, were not ſo oppoſite
As this Religious froſt vnto my heate.
Patience, thou art more fond then teeming wiues,
Tamer then ſſeepe! Diuinitie which calls
Our anger ſinne, and courage pride, hath ſent
This ſillie Cherubine on Earth, Patience,
(The Cowards ſword) which onlie doth diſarme
Dull ſleepe, that neither can nor would doe harme.
Florence knowes me well: I'm call'd Sciolto,
I needs muſt ſing my vſhers praiſe: he made
A moſt diſcreete election of a man.
Your mercie and your kindneſſe (Lady) thus
Aduance my ſhape; your pleaſure was I ſhould
deſpiſe your husbands frownes, and I behau'd
My ſelfe with terrour maſculine: but now
We are peculiar and reſeru'd, I know
Humilitie, a ſoft and quiet garbe;
A diſtance that ſhall well become the ſtate
So eminent and rich a beauty claimes.
Sir, that we doe expect, and then you ſhall
Ore take our noble Senſe, with newer loue.
Our husband is a trifle, ſuch as can
No way diſturbe your peace or ſafetie heere.
Madam, ſtore me with armes and weapons to
Reſiſt his perſonall aſſault, and I
Shall need no more protection then my ſelfe.
Actiue and bold! Niente thou haſt made
A choice out-parallels the world.
Madam,
See his horſe vaines: th'are large as Conduit pipes;
His Sinnews are like Cables.
Las! not mine!
Tis true, that if I like my Oppoſite,
I haue a tricke te giue an eaſie fall,
And ſtand to't ſtifly too when I ha'done—
I will aſſure your Ladiſhip, the Bawdes
Giue him good report.
Doe they Niente?
He's great with Ladies of all ages, all Degrees.
Excuſe me Sir, th'are great by me!
As how Sir?
Madam—They are all wi'child!
How Signior? Is your appetite ſo ſtrong?
Blame the humorous Planets that orerule
The blood. Ere yet this preſent Month expires;
(Let's ſee—I,!) Some three and forty Ladies
(Or there about) will quicken with male Twinnes.
All of your begetting?
So wiſe Fame ſings.
I will make bold to gather my firſt fruits—
Stay my pregnant Signior! Our loue is not
Yet ripe: there is a larger diſtance too
Belongs vnto our Lips.
How deare Lady?
I am too proud to haue my fauours ſoone
and eaſilie conferr'd. Such ſmiles are cheape.
I meane to procreate by preſcription Sir,
Make my luſt as phyſicall as my meales.
Death, I'm Sutor vnto Gallens widdow!
Madam, I know it not becomes the high
Demeanure of your birth to dance (iuſt like
A Kid) to th'muſicke of each wind that blowes.
Ere you admit of dalliance I ſhould vſe
Some induſtry of Tongue, and flexure of
the pliant Ioints, to court and wooe conſent.
And can your rudeneſſe couet then where your
Safe wit and knowledge warnes your abſtinence?
Only a little t'recreate the Chine—
Keepe backe, if you'le continue life. When I
Am pleaſd to be delighted Sir, I can
command the function of your Limmes.
Madam!
Siſter, I come. Throw him to his chamber—
Haſt no good booke, whoſe comfortable vſe
may fill th'expence of time?
What would you read?
Any o'th Moderns. Rablays i'th praiſe of
Midwiues. Aretine on copulation.
Or th'Odes of Theophile vnto his whore.
My Vſher in my cloſet can appoint
Your choice of theſe.
Thinke on the frailtie of
The fleſh; and be not long vnmercifull—
Siſter! Madam!
Away; I come, I come.
The Millaine Count (my Sutor) is ariu'd.
Signior Dandolo! Why 'tis yet a month
Ere he ſhould meet your expectation heere.
Tis he Madam, and ſuch a he as muſt
Be onely likened to himſelfe.
More rich,
And gaudie then the Eaſt. So lib'rall too,
That you would thinke he Natures Steward were.
He giues amongſt m ſlaues, as if vnto
Embaſſadours he did caſt Donatiues.
Milke him (my Charintha) oft I haue preach'd
Vnto thine Eare a ſou'raigntie ore man.
Take all he giues, it's princely faſhion now.
Could but thy acceptation begger him,
Thy little wit were euer magnifi'd.
You know I am o'th'wits, I haue bin ſworne
To begger Sutors, and ieere my husband.
Which is the Ladie that I come to wooe?
My name's Charintha—
Preſent me thy Lips!
I ſay aduance —
You are not vnderſtood—
My Lord, I ſcarcely owne deſert enough
T'intice this Iewell from your Cabinet.
A Stone, a Stone! the thing growes, I'ue enow—
So free? I am Charintha's Siſter Sir—
It may be ſo. A fine houſe, fine Towne too!
Were Florence mine, I would not giue it for
The beſt winter Seate my father left me.
Tis Sir, th'ambition of my loue, that you
Would know me for Charintha's Siſter!—
I ſhall. Roſſa, remember it!
My Lord!
I muſt know her for Charintha's Siſter.
Is there no tricke in ceremonie Sir,
To giue your memorie a better hint?
Kiſſe none but thee! A deuice i'th'blood! but
Princes haue one toy or other ſtill, t'make
Their deſcent knowne. — There, a Diamond that,
And that a Ruby.—
What meanes your Lordſhip?
Th'are none of mine. I haue enow, weare'em—
Your Lordſhip binds my great acknowledgement.
I'th leaſure of a winke, he'le giue away
An Empire.
I'm Charintha's woman Sir—
Who can helpe it? Miſtreſſe, wilt thou not bid
My ſeruants welcome? Th'are rich Choughs, th'aue ſtore
Of Villages, and plough'd Earth.
Their iudgement is
So kind (Sir) as to know they may command
The houſe.
We thanke your Ladiſhip.
This is my Paraſite, and this my Pimpe.
I'ue a Foole, a Dwarfe too at home. I made
My iaunt too early by a month, or elſe
My Traine had beene enlarg'd.
Th'are rarely fix'd,
If they import as much as you denominate.
I keepe my paraſite to cure the dull
Melancholy of State. He does admire
My wit and Beard. He ſayes I cannot ſinne.
Princes would ſtill be ſad out for ſuch worrmes.
But how (Sir) does your Pimpe adhere to vſe?
He is as pertinent to Lords as luſt.
My Foole I keepe to laugh at me. My Dwarfe
Is for my wife. I doe intend ſhe ſhall
Affect the Court, and then ſhe'le quickly learne.
To make the Toy vſefull.
My Lord, be pleaſd
To walke, and vſe th'aduantage of the Aire.
I'ue Inſtruments diſtinct, that take a charge
O'th ſeuerall quarters of my Frame, My Dwarfe
Doth dreſſe me vp vnto the knees, and when
His ſtature leaues his reach, young Virgines then
(Th'iſſue of decay'd Barons) do beginne
And gouerne to the Nauell. Whilſt vpwards
Barbars, Painters, and Paraſites are vſ'd.
But will your Lordſhip walke and ſee the ſpring?
We haue a Garden where it euer dwels.
And ſhall we be delighted and entranc'd?
We'le ſacrifice the vtmoſt of our wealth
And loue, t'expreſſe your welcome Sir.
Wilt'I faith.
There's a Saphyre Chaine: Tie thy Monkie in't—
Take it; for by this hand I am in haſte
And cannot offer twice.
If you ſhould chance
(My honourd Lord) to drop thoſe trifles heere,
I would be mannerly, and reach'em vp.
I will giue thee a Buſhell of Seed-Pearle
To imbroider thy Petticoate.
This way—
Your Lordſhip hath forgot to leaue notice for
Thoſe Princes in diguiſe that ſhall by chance
Demand ye at the gate.
Who does he meane?
A leaſh of Germane Dukes that walke in Rugge.
I ſhould conſult with'em'bout ſubuerſion
Of a State or two; but I'm not yet at
Leaſure.
My Lord, they ſhall be anſwerd ſo.
Your hypocriſie wants a little Art.
Your bounty will impoueriſh vs too ſoone.
Ye both doe lie, I weaue my cunning cloſe.
Fortune, redeeme the credit of thy Eyes.
Thou wilt (if thou art partiall now and kind)
But winke on me, though to the world th'art blind.
THis is the truth, therefore conſider now
my Fate. Hah! Sciolto!
What makes he there.
Tis Sciolto, the brute Adulterer,
He whom I lately mention'd in my ſpeech.
A ſlaue more ſalt then is the Balticke ware,
More hot then hell, a Satyre or a Goate.
And ſhall be ſtill ſo (Sir) vnleſſe your wife
Diſmiſſe her pride, and vouchſafe to coole me.
Deuils and death, I'm murderd through the Eare—
Take diſcipline awhile, Know if there be
A boiſterous motion vſd, I haue for each
Of you a round Synamon Plumme, and they
Shall enter your nice ſtomacks the wrong way—
Though thou wert hardy as the Lions race;
And arm'd with all th'Artillery on Earth,
I durſt aſſault thee as I am; but ſo
I cannot ſatisfie Reuenge.
Sciolto, now my memory begins
To know you better: for your riots bold
And lowd demeanure in this City hath
Beene long obſeru'd. I wonder much y'imploy
Your precious minutes in a courſe ſo vile.
What, as to copulate and increaſe kind?
It has beene a vocation euer ſince
The Sunne ſpi'd man thus crawling on the Earth—
But what excuſe canſt thou in honour vrge,
for wearing ſuch aduantagious defence,
Againſt his iuſt and ſingle violence?
I haue an odde humor, not to be kill'd.
O Alteza, had but my name beene hid
Beneath ſome fold in the voluminous
Darke booke of Fate, I might haue miſſ'd of my
Creation then, ſo I ſhould nere haue ſeene
Thy face.
My curſes (Sir) haue cauſe t'aſſault
Her more then yours: for ſhe has ſtaru'd me heere
With want of naturall delight. My free
Large growth and tincture of my haire denote,
My conſtitution cannot ſuffer me,
To weare a ſurpleſſe, or proceed Eunuch.
Though I ſhould bath and ſwimme in Iulips Sir,
I'ue ſtill vnrulie heate about my Chine.
A Salamander that doth feede and cloth
It ſelfe with flame, was thy Progenitor.
Haue I not equall reaſon to complaine?
In three Houres not ſo much as a drie kiſſe.
Th'old amorous Deacon that imbrac'd his Cow
Was not ſo deſtitute.
Fine calumny!
A Negro might be vſefull now, although
Sh'ad but one eye, and that fix'd on her heele.
I'le ſtrew vpon thy food the teeth of Snakes,
Signior, preſume no more vpon a fond
Eaſie nature. I haue beene abſtinent
Too long. Haſte, and with pliant ſteps preſent
Your wife; Ot elſe I'le aſſure ye you ſhall ſeeke
Some other man to Cuckold ye for me.
Sciolto, this is barbarous!
I'le ſhoot
Thy heart with needles, ſmall as ſplinters of
A haire that thou mayſt die, and yet not know
That thou art kild.
I thanke ye (Signior) but
We Florentines doe ſleepe like Leuorites,
With our Eyes open: how ere, I could vouchſafe
To ſhoot you now, and preuent your kindneſſe.—
Sciolto, hold. If eyther charge doe miſſe,
He that ſuruiues, ſhall grinde thy marble heart,
Betweene his teeth—
I meant not to giue fire.
There is a tricke of grauity i'th ſtate
Cald Law. Beſides, you dead, the children which
I chance to get vpon your buckſome wife,
I ſhould goe neere to keepe at my owne charge.
Africa breedes no monſter like to thee.
I'le to my chamber now, and fortifie
There, I remaine (during the pleaſure of
Your wife) your Tenant (Signior) in fee tayle. —
It is a cunning, and promiſcuous ſlaue.
This ſtory of Alteza's abſtinence,
He doth but counterfet, to gull my ſight.
Had the Diuell himſelfe crep't into fleſh,
And vndertooke this ſeruice to your wife,
She had poſſeſſd, the weaker Inſtrument.
He hath in 's Veynes, a moſt intemperat blood
His valour's ſo renown'd, that all the ſmooth,
The curl'd, and ſilken Nobles of the Towne,
Doe homage to his Sword; and by ſuch Actes
As theſe, he glorifies his truant youth.
Thy fayth was iealous, I ſeduc'd thy eare
To ſhare vntruths: but now, thou knowſt too much.
T'was my ſuſpect of Fame, and diſperſement
Of your deepe wrong, that manacled till now,
Your hands. My temp'rate Lectures ceaſe. Obey
Reuenge, and I will follow it, vntill
My wealth, and life, are forfeyted to Law.
Hah! wilt thou? O my quickened heart (entomb'd
Before within my breaſt) wilt thou? This, this
Then is the direfull night, wherein I'le giue
A ſtrict and cruell iuſtice to Reuenge.
This then is the night, wherein my bold loue
Shall merit me th'eternall name of friend.
Come ſweare, ſweare now (on this victorious ſword)
Thou wilt obey th'iniunctions of my wrath,
And yet in perſonall act, not mooue, but when
My will appoints a mixture of thy ſtrength.
My choice Religion, & the honors of my blood,
I heere doe pawne to ratifie the vow —
Now worke my iniurd ſpirits, till you make
Dull ſorrow riſe in nimble flame. Anger,
Is blood, pow'rd, and perplex'd into a froth,
But Mallice is, the wiſedome of our wrath.
Your Lordſhips letters were of a prompt ſtile!
This orient Roape is yours, and you muſt wear't;
I ſickne els, and grow a villager
In Elizium!
Your bounty choakes my thankes.
Take it. Afflict me Fame, if ere I knew
His parallell; he woes at Neroe's rate.
Madam, ther's a new Dandlo, a new
Count, lighted at the Gate, and craues entrance.
That's rare i'faith; haue I a ſhadow walkes
Without leaue o'the Sunne?
A conſpiracie.
Did not Meruolle ſay, t'would be a month,
Ere he ariu'd?
Be bold and meet your chance
Stand firme, and ſtiffely on your ſinewes then,
Auouch me ſtill, for the true Dandolo.
Charintha, 'tis ſome ſtratagem; but if
He Iewells bring, and in a hand as large,
And open as yon'eaſy ſnypes, thou haſt
Ill lucke if thou conſtraine him not to loſſe.
I'le ſmile no longer then theſe rich ſparkles
Shine in my Eies.
The Lady that is nam'd
Charintha heere, muſt be reueald; for Il'd
Exallt her Lippes, and make'em knowne to mine.
Slight, this is the great Cham. Hearke ye, Signior—
My Lord, I pray afford him leave to ſpeake.
What, is that ſawcy Groome? Does he ſell Egges?
I'le ſhew ye my Trade; A poore ſword-man, I—
Sir you deſtroy the quiett of my Howſe:
He ſhall haue ſafety heere, and leaue to ſpeake.
I'm call'd Charintha Sir; proceed to ſpeech.
I'le firſt doe ſpeciall grace vnto your Lip—
My Penne hath woo'd you oft; but now by ſtealth
Thus ſingle I'm arui'd, a Moone before
The time I did prefix.
I ſir, the cauſe.
T'was Winter when I ſpecifi'd the date
Of my aproach, and then my blood was cold;
But now the ſpring is come, Things would couple.
Theſe (Lady) are very ſerculare Pearle—
I ſir, and in ſuch Toyes, ſhe much delights:
Allthough her modeſty be loath, to make
Her fancys knowne. Would you had brought ſome few
To mach'em.
Doe you affect'em Lady?
I reioyce in all the workes of Nature!
I am inſtructed then.
As how, deare Sir?
That I did ill, to leaue my Pearles behind.
Siſter this Hulke, is neither rigg'd, nor fraught,
I'le haue no more of him, he is too coſtiue.
Sir a word. Me thinks you looke, like raw Porke.
Has not this houſe the priuiledge of peace?
Ladyes, this Impoſtor ſteales my Titles,
And my name, I aske leaue, to puniſh him.
Wee'le not protect his crimes, vſe your iuſtice.
Vnleſſe you are an Eſtridge, Sir, and can
Digeſt ſteele, coole your lungs, and calmely wayt
Th'inquiry I ſhall vrge.
Hence, and be dead!
Molard, reueale how long thou haſt bin Pimpe,
To the family of the Dandolos?
About ſome thirty yeeres (Sir.) I'ue procur'd
Both time and place, for your good Fathers game,
Ere ſince he was capable of woman.
He vſd the Trade (Sir) in his infancy.
I ſcare could walke, when I began't: the firſt
I brought him was my Nurſe.
Canſt point, at ought
He did ſome two and twenty yeeres agoe?
Diſtinctly Sir. I know that Gentleman,
He was got, on a Tripewife of Lucca.
O th'action of my fathers loynes!
My lord?
I'm an old ew at Genealogies.
This fellowes deſcent I know now, and where
He tooke 's creation too. By chance thus haue
I met forty of my Fathers Baſtards.
Th'are poore, and put me oft to charge. Brother,
Welcome.— Roſſa, giue him a Quardecuſ.
Bid Kings winde ſilke, and Princes meaſure oats.
Your trayne of Paraſite, Pimpe, Foole and Dwarfe,
Speake you at firſt, to be the true yong Lord.
Yet th'other has ſome markes, that doe belong
Vnto a Count, o'th laſt edition too:
D'you thinke y'are the Count?
I doe, thinke it, Sir.
Thought's free.
He ſhould be a Venetian,
By'th' wit, and policy of his courage.
Beauties, were you hands cleane, they ſhould be kil .
Bold illegitimate.
Sir, —you ſhall know,
No man ere got me, but my owne Father.
Beſognia ſpeake in my behalfe; I'le giue
Thee a Pearle then, big as a Pompeon.
Which, when your Lordſhip does, Ile returne ye
A pointed Diamond, big as a Steeple.
Y'on thrifty counterfet, has much perplex'd
Your ſeruants wit.
My Lord. Lets in, and ieere.
Slow method fooles obey. To th' ſtars aduance
His head, who thus reſiſts the power of Chance.
Like to my Genius he doth mooue about
The houſe. Our ſoules are ſurely neere ally'd—
Cals he her, his concubine? By this hand
There's not a Prince in all the Eaſt, has ſuch
Another. This Altamont ſtill gripes'em
In the flanke; he knowes to chuſe his cattell.
Be thou pleas'd, O yong and wholeſome Lady!
The Garden (Signior) doth containe more walks,
As penſatiue in ſhade as this. I doe
Beſeech you, change your path, and leaue me heere.
The fumes of ſpicery? you muſt not now —
My vowes haue promis'd you the ample truth
Of my intelligence. Behold, whom there,
Sciolto keepes in amorous whiſper.
Hah, Scoperta! Libid'nous Girle, what makes
She with that Horſe?
Shall I diſturbe their ſpeech?
No, let'em Knit and generate; my words
Shall neuer penetrate her Eare vntill
I am reueng'd for what my Eyes haue ſeene.
There is a generall tainture in the Sex.
She is proſcrib'd, I'ue fil'd her in the Liſt
With thoſe that taſte to Night a bitter fate.
Away, away. This obiect ruines all
My faculties.
I ſigh my firſt ſalute
Was ſo intempratly perform'd. But O!
The iuſtice of my Starres! My loue is now
Reueng'd vpon my luſt. With pure chaſte flame
I Court the Miſtreſſe vnto Altamont;
One heere reſeru'd for ſinfull vſe. Stay, ſtay!—
If I am ſeene, my life is forfeited—
Haſt thou not heard my vowes, whoſe violence
And number well might ſatisfie ſuſpect
in wayward Kings.
How dare I traficke thus
For loue with thee: when thy accompts with Heauen
Are yet not cleer'd that luſt betrai'd thee to?
With what aduice of modeſty canſt thou
Accuſe my blood; when in this Manſion th'art
Contain'd for the like ſinne?
Were I well knowne
Vnto the qualitie of thy new loue,
I would reueale my ſelfe, and take from thy
Beliefe the falſe opinion of my guilt.
If ere I practiſe impious heate agen,
Some long armd Fiend that in the Center dwels
Reach at my foot, and pull me into flames.
Beare witneſſe Immortalitie and Truth
That I'm officiall heere but by pretence,
My Vaines are cold and chaſte as Northerne ſnow.
Thy name, and then my doubts I will forſake?
Scoperta is my name. I Siſter am
To Altamont; not Miſtreſſe of his luſt.
O dire affinity! my loue is now
Alli'd vnto my hate. Yet Altamont
Nere merited my wrath. It is the wit
The policie of ſinne, to hate thoſe men
We haue abuſd. When firſt I ſpi'd the grace
And luſture of thy ſhape; me thought I lou'd,
And my ſicke heart enform'd me loue was good:
And you when I beheld, I ſaid to Heauen,
O make but his immortall part like to
The Garment Nature clothes it in, and hlle
Remaine a Type, from whom ſhall be deriu'd
The Prophets, and the Kings that rule the Earth.
Her beauties ſo increaſe; that they do make
My comprehenſion poore.
I ſhould haue vſ'd
More leaſure and nice Art, when I did giue
My loue away.
O ſtay, vntill my vowes
Affoord a larger warrant of my faith—
Our new ſociety muſt not be ſeene.
But if thy loue be free from carnall Arts,
(Such as the curled Youth of Italy
Doe vſe) make me thy ſudden ſtealth▪ Early,
(Ere the ſucceeding Sunne ariue i'th'Eaſt)
Appeare beneath my Caſements view, and I
Will follow thee along the ſpacious World.
Goe noble Maid, wert thou diuided from
My reach, by Sheets of Elementall fire,
By ſtreames of recking blood, by purple miſts
(Which Cannons in their acclamation breath)
Or winds (when met to blow each other from
The Earth) yet I would pull thee to my Heart.
Falſe luſt, I take of thee eternall leaue—
Conuey thoſe odors thither, and diſperſe
The coſtly ſmoke, about the roome.
I ſhall.
Place ſoft and eaſie finger'd Lutes, behind
The Arras; voyces feminine and yong.
And ſpread the Cowch, with the greene Perſian Quilt.
All is prepard.
For what are theſe deſignd?
I feele a ſlothfull grudging in my veynes,
And therefore meane to ſolace with a male.
Bruſh thy Beard, and follow me. —
Now am I
As raſcally a ſinner, as euer.
Why comſt thou not?
O Loue! A little grace.
Is not thy blood well? Kiſſe me Sciolto.
Shall we be wrap't in curlings intricate?
We'le haue our artificiall heates, and with our own
Panting coole vs to new, and yonger ſtrength.
And ſhall we 'tweene two ſhady Poplars hang
I'th Indian-Net, whoſe ſlippery cloſures may
Entangle vs ſo faſt, we n'ere ſhall be
Vntied agen▪
We'le grow as in one skin.
Yes, much! Not an inch.—
I want thy meaning.
And ſhall my action more. It mightineſſe
And ſtate, taught me to faſt from fleſh; and now,
I am well pleas'd to make't perpetuall Lent.
I like this well. My Male is witty growne.
Goe, kneele to your husband, and beg from him
Lawfull recreation: My ſelfe intend
To purchaſe a few Beades, and turne Vot'ry.
She'le nere moue hence, 'till I'ue inrag'd her ſpleene.
What motiue (Sir) perſwades ye, vſe me thus?
Why—ye are not handſome.
Trimme prodigie!
Queſtion your Glaſſe! Your Face was caru'd—out of
A Blew Cabidge; and 'tis contracted now
To one, oblique Wrinkle.
Villaine, thou ly'ſt.
Thy aged skull in ſtead of haire
Oregrowne with Moſſe, and lookes as if t'had binne,
A Thouſand yeares entoomb'd.
Adders, and ſnakes.
Thy ſollitary Teeth, in diſtance ſtand
Like the decayed Arches of a Bridge.
Better, th'adſt binne vnborne.
Wilt not yet goe?
Thy Fingers are all crook'd, like the Tallans
Of a Griffon. Thou walkſt on Cloven-feete.
Hoa! Niente.
Thy Bones are pil'd acroſſe▪
Much like the Stickes on a Coniurers fire.
Are my Groomes dead? what hoa! I'le impound ye.—
It muſt not be. For with theſe two (of which
I meane to rob your armorie) there ſhall
Be paſſage forc'd broad enough for a Teeme
Of Southerne Elephants. Farwell Oiſter! —
Where are my Groomes, my ſlaues? iniurious wolfe.
Barke at my precious feature, and thus ſtrew
My beautie ore, with infamie and duſt?
Strike my greene youth, with Epethites of age?
My Altamont nere vs'd me thus. He oft
Compar'd me to the Starres, m'Eies t' Eaſterne light,
When day ſmiles at her birth. O! I could curſe
The giddie iudgement of my blood; that thus
Seduc'd me to forſake that Saint, and mix
My knowledge with this Deuill. He's fled too,
Vntouch'd by my reuenge. Niente, hoa!
'Tis Alteza, I know her ſinfull voice,—
O Sir, if anguiſh, or diſtreſſe, can make,
An humble heart, behold your Lady now;
That ſhortens thus, her ſtature, at your feete.—
What may this forc'd humillitie portend?
Sciolto (cruell as the windes in March)
Hath ſtrooke, my womanhood, with tyranie,
And ſcorne. Can Fate preſent ſo large a teſt,
Of your true loue, (both to your ſelfe, and me)
As that you miniſter reuenge vpon
His Life. Goe, and ſalute his recreant Heart
With your bright Steele, and then obedience claime
Repleate with fonde Idolatrie, and loue.
The Fiends are ſurelie maried too; for there's
Noe torment like a Wife! falſe Alteza.
So ill I merit charitie: that all
My paſſions argue cunning and pretence.
This is a wiſe hypocriſie, to hide
Thy luſt, or ſnare me in ſome guilt, whereby
The Duke may claime my life, and thou receiue
More quiet ſpace, t'inioy Sciolto's limmes.
Thoſe angrie ſpirits that reſide below,
In flaming Ouens, are not more cruell in
Their enuie, then am I in hate to him.
So ſoone, doſt ſteepe him in thy gall, whom thou
Haſt waſht'i'th warme diſtilments of thy heart.
If ere I knew him, with more guilt, then what
My wiſhes and my thoughts containd; let wrath
Then make me her experiment, to trie
How much of paine, mortalitie can heare.
Thy periur'd atteſtations ceaſe; for though
The howres are few, ſince firſt you did conferre,
Yet you had both the pregnant thrift, to make
The time aduantagious to ſinne.
Expreſſe,
Some mercie in your faith, and heare me ſpeake.
Keepe thy deniall 'tweene thy bliſterd lippes.
I vtterd' thou art dead.
Loue is no more.
Doſt weepe? I ſooner thought t'haue ſeene the Flin
Supple as Spunge; th'obdurate Diamond melt
At the Glow-wormes pale eie.
How hath the pride
Of Courts miſſe-led my youth, that you ſhould thinke
I'ue loſt, all tender complements of grace?
Thou wert a Virgin ſweet, ſo precious in
Thy frame, that with the cordage of thy haire
Thou mightſt haue fetterd Kings. Thy voice has marr'd
The beauties of the night. When thou didſt ſing
The quiet ſtars, would fall aſleepe and winke.
Thou art all diſcord now: thy glorie's darke;
Thy thinne, and Roſiall blood, i turn'd to Inke.
I haue outliu'd the helpe of penitence,
And benefit of hope.
Oft haue I ſai'd
Let's leaue the falſe, the buiſie world and ſleepe
Beneath our vines; Nature (not cunning) then,
Augments our wealth; the dew of heauen is cheape,
Nor need we pay for'th Sunnes warme light, If kinde
Diuinitie allow t'each humane ſoule
A ſtarre; our iſſue w'ele increaſe, vntill
The bright and numerous throng be all imploi'd.
But I am ſterill as a wilderneſſe,
My name, is ſickeneſſe to your memorie.
Witneſſe you ſilent powers, the crime is not
Deriu'd from me. T'explaine my innocence,
Know, ſhe that heere I houſd, t'affront thy pride,
Was my chaſte ſiſter, not my Concubine.
Then you are loiall ſtill, t'oth Mariage vow.
But; ſhe treds the ſlimie path. Scoperta,
Is now thy Ruall in Sciolto's luſt.
All ſprings from the ambition of my guilt. —
Although thy penitence be raſh, it doth
Become thee well, and thou haſt quie diſſolu'd
The ſtonie corners of my heart. This night
I purpoſd thee a cruell death, but now
Riſe, and continue mortall ſtill—I'le lay
My mercy on thy Lip, and for it take
My laſt farewell—. I'le neuer ſee thee more.
This is a mercy that confounds the will
And ſtrength of all my gratitude. O ſad
Decree. You haue diuorc'd me from your Eyes.
Two neighboring Lillies whom rude winds diſperſe
'Mongſt reſtleſſe duſt, may ſooner meet vpon
Their ſtalkes agen, and kiſſe each other in
A ſecond growth, then we our loues renew.
Take heede (Sir) how you prophecy! For my
Humilitie with moiſt contrition ioyn'd,
May hope to waſh my leprous ſtaines away.
O no! my iealouſie is growne ſo ſicke, that my
Suſpect enformes me, it will nere be cur'd.
I creepe thus to my Toombe, indebted for
Your loue, till all the drowſie world ſhall riſe
To generall Accompts; and then my want
Of earlier gratitude will make my Debt
A ſinne—
O triuiall propertie of life!
Some doe attend the mighty warre, and make
Diuinitie their yoake; till for the ſport
Of Kings th'augment the number of the dead.
Some walke in ſlipprie paths of Court, and feede
On ſilent ſmiles; the grauitie of mirth.
Some trauaile in the ſearch of humane Arts,
But knowledge is reſeru'd: She ſits ſo high
In Cloudes, we cannot reach her with our Eye:
Or if with patient ſteps we to her climbe,
Death ſayes we cannot reach her with our time.
For witherd age ariues, when numbring on
Our griefs not yeeres; the tedious ſpace of life
We ſtraite accuſe. For life is like the ſpanne
Forc'd from a gowtie hand; which, as it gaines
Extent, and actiue length, the more it paines.
MY iourney was by ſtealth, elſe I had brought
With theſe, Legions of Dukes to ſpeake my birth.
My Lady'gins t'enquire (Sir) after ſleepe,
For it growes late.
My corporall method
I will diſorder, ere I'le miſſe her view.
This Britiſh Groate is thine; traficke for Pinnes.
Make the Deuill your Factor; Ther's a Stocke
To ſet vp with.
No bribes? I am belou'd.
Brother, I wiſh you would auoid my haunts.
Tis not for my credit, nor yet for our
Dead fathers, thus to make your perſon knowne,
Being y'are illegitimate begot,
By the motion of the euill Spirit.
Goe, let that fellow die.
Why, let him Sir.
Were we his heires, w'had cauſe to haſten his Deceaſe.
D'ye walke like Neptune in a maske,
Attended on by two o'th calme Windes?
Th'are Nobles of a ſupreame race. This is
Stocccata call'd, and that Punto. They both
Are come to warrant my creation good
Vpon the Gauntlet of a Giant or a Whale.
Maintaine your birth—Were you my fathers Bawdes?
Alas, you are young (Sir) you know not vs!
We cannot ſwell and rant like things that would
Be rather heard then felt: but we can thruſt
Our Whineards home, with ioy and quiet too.
Sweet heart; you are not read i'th'rudiments
Of wrath. You ſhall perceiue ſome that are lowd
And actiue with their Lungs; Courage in them
You may ſuſpect: but when you ſee a coole
And ſilent anger like to ours, then keepe
Your wandring hands at home. Soft Sir, beware!
Stay, woo't thou kill him (Punto) or ſhall I?
I'ue buiſneſſe now of a more ſerious garbe.
Diſpatch him thy ſelfe. Earlie to morrow
I'le doe as much for thee on the two Zwits.
D'ye make no more o'th'Infants o'the Earth?—
Fie Sir. Draw your weapon in a Ladies
Chamber? You ſtill diſplaie a courage ill
Brought vp, moſt vainlie nurturd (Sir) beleeue't.
Forbid it Heauen; but you ſhould haue free ſpace
T'imploy your beſt ſtrength in your defence.
But Sir, 'tis ſober patience makes vs ſafe.
If now on eithers Haunch you did conferre
A kicke; our ſecret wiſedome would direct
Vs how to beare it for the time, and in
Our owne aduantage too.
Is't poſſible?
Heare Sir th'aduice of an old ſhot. I'ue hit
The marke more then once in my time, and tam'd
Many a mad Boy too. If either of's
Vouchſafe to greete ye with a hand or foot,
Take it, and be thankfull: let by returne
Of wrath, worſe doe enſue.
Not I beleeue't.
He's young, Stoccata, carue him gentlie vp! —
They take me for a Capon. What Weapons
Fight ye with, Demiculuering or Drake?
Steele of Toledo is all we manage—
What then remaines but Roſſa and Molard,
Aſſault you two, I, my baſtard Brother—
Come Sir,—
We'le ierke you with our iron Rods—
Keepe your ſword warme, it 'longs to the ſcabbard—
O Sir, your vallor ſtill imports ſome want
Of a diſcreet and temperate breeding.
Tumultuous fights the veſtments marre.
His bountie nere will giue me cauſe t'aduance
My wit: he growes much troubleſome.
Lady! behold two Worthies here; Dragons
In fight. They come to preach my birth.
Th'are knowne to Fame.
Fame blew'em from her Breech!
I ſay th'are Potentates; and they doe awe—
The Chryſome Babe.
Signior, you ſtill forget
The quiet and the courteous wayes of ſpleene.
I will trie your polliticke patience Sir —
You ſee we ſtill are calme —
He has but thinne
Philoſophie that cannot ſuffer this —
You marmalet Count deſerues as much too.
I doe oppugne the motion with my ſcorne.
D'ye ſcorne (Sir) to be kick'd?
Pardon me Sir!
I ſay't alowd; The prowdeſt wight on Earth
Shall not kicke me, excepting your deare ſelfe.
I haue priuacies (Madam) for your Eare! —
You, and your fierce Champions ſtrait remoue;
Craule hence, and be not viſible agen:
Enhaunce our pay, we'le kill him in the dake.
Agreed, Six Duckts you ſhall number more.
The neighbours ſay, fortie Seriants waite his
Departure hence, who giue him a new name.
Hah! What doe they call him?
Florello, and
Report him brother vnto Altamont.
My Eies are infom'd, Two Faces more alli'd
In all deuotes of view I haue not ſeene.
The younger brother vnto Altamont;
Fantaſticke too as Winds, and ſillier then
A ſilenc'd Prieſt. Fate had much preferd me.
Madam, it muſt be he. I'ue tane a ſtrict
Suruay of's Noſe; 'tis ſo like Altamonts.
He is alreadie ſo exhauſt, that his
Wiſe bountie can no more be Argument
For wit: And now to haue this plea for his
Diſmiſſion is aboue my ioy. Signior!—
Sweet Loue, I haue beene bold to giue away
One or two of thy Farmes to theſe my Foll'wers,
They are kinde wretches both, and loue thee well.
Indeed?
Yes ſaith, They bid me rather then
Thou ſhouldſt thus pine for loue to marrie thee.
Stand off! More diſtant yet.
Wouldſt view my Limmes?—
When you doe make your Chriſtianitie
More knowne, you muſt be call'd Florello ▪
Hah!
Fortie blew Fiends wait to arreſt you in
Your paſſage home.
Madam, I am traduc'd.
Could your abuſiue Arts make choice of none
But me? Be ſure this viſit is your laſt.
I muſt not, dare not, leaue ye, till I'ue cleerd
The errours in this callumnie—
Returne,
Or you affront my power, and I ſhall thinke
Your loue, is, as your perſon, counterfeit.
The ſtrength of all my Charitie affoords
You but this Key, which in my Orchard Gate
You may imploy, and free you from th'Arreſt.
Beſognia, I'le to bed. —
A ſober truth.
Summes I ow'd when I imbark'd for Piſa. —
Now ſhall I, like a melancholie worme,
Feede on raw Rootes.—
Sing Canticles of woe!
I muſt e'en goe tagge points in a Garret. —
This Key, with reſcue o'th'young Rapiers of
The Law will bring vs home.
No moneis Sir?
Faith we muſt all diſrobe, our Veſtments old
Stitch on agen, and morgage theſe to raiſe
A Summe that may aſſiſt my librrtie.
Creepe in our Rags of Tinder, in our thinne
And duſtie webs agen.
I feele a heard
Of ſmall cattell graze on my left ſhoulder. —
O my forward bountie! There's but ſicke hope
My Iewels will returne; ſince cuſtome ſhewes;
What Ladies thus from ther dull Sutors get
They doe preſerue as Tribute to their wit.
The longer moitie of the Night's vnſpent.
Since time grew old, he ſlowly findes his ſteps
I'th darke: by day he ſwifter moues. Get thee
To bed; The Caſements of thine Eies are ſhut;
Impriſning their deare Light.
Madam, good night.
Come my Sciolto, and confirme the vertue of
Thy faith; or I diſperſe my Soule in Sighs,
And make this Chaire my eaſie monument.
All are departed that to Charintha
Made viſit: Your Seruants haue begunne
Their ſleepe, and Guards are plac'd vpon the Gates.
Are my bold Inſtruments in ambuſh laid,
And ſcatter'd for the beſt aduantage of
Their conceal'd action, and their view?
They are.
Expect me then beneath the Garden Mount.
You ſwelling Cloudes choake my afflicted ſight▪
The Starres like ſcatterd embers fall. The Teares
Of men doe meete in Seas, and Seas orewhelme
The Earth. Th'amazed Heards howle to the Sunne
For helpe; whoſe Beames ſucke moiſture vp, till he
Hath made the flood his draught; but vomits all
In Showres agen; ſuch as Deucalion ſaw!
Nature (it ſeemes) is frighted from her health.
Behold my Corall hands, they ſeeme to bluſh
With guilt of humane ſacrifice. Me thinkes
I looke like to a Memphian Prieſt, that had
Diſſection made of Hecatombs t'appeaſe
Their falſe Diuinitie. Alteza's dead.
I want pretence to ſooth my faith: Els I
Would hope your hands depriued her not of breath?
Fathers that feed on Sonnes, and Sonnes that drinke
Their mothers blood, reach not that cruelty
Which her ſterne guilt did throw into my Breaſt.
May ſome kinde Saint, weepe o're your Soule vntill
With holy dew, he waſh this ſinne away.
Thou doeſt mis-ſpend thy veſtall charitie.
I'th ſollitary age of Night I come,
To finde thoſe Angells that haue buſineſſe now
On Earth, in Synod heere with thee: hoping
I ſhall receiue reward for my iuſt Act.
The howers that gaue her opportunitie
To erre, were knowne ſo few; that my beliefe
Concludes her guiltleſſe of the actuall ſinne.
Before the hindmoſt part of her vex'd Soule
Forſooke her thrilling Lipps, ſhe did confeſſe,
Sciolto had perform'd all circumſtance
That doth ingender Man. Sciolto too,
Confirm'd her atteſtation as a truth.
Be deafe (ſweete heauen) to this. Did Sciolto
Iterate her foule ſpeech?
He did, which I,
Ore hear'd, and forc'd a paſſage to his Heart.
From its warme Throane, I ſnatch'd the aking Lumpe,
And threw it ſtraight vnto a hungry Fiend.
Is he dead too? The Genius of the world
Is ſicke, all Formes muſt ceaſe.
Doſt weepe for him?
O Sir, ſhould I reſtraine the flux, my Eies
Would drop from their looſe Stringes inſtead of Teares.
This obſequie, doth make Compaſſion ſinne.
O Sciolto. Art thou ſo early fled,
To taſt eternitie, and vnknowne fate.
Stint thy hoarce Dirge, pernicious Whore. I had
Some hope, the interuiew that you inioy'd
Might be enforc'd by his vnruly ſtrength:
But now, I finde it was with thy conſent
Procur'd. Y'haue ſtruggled in each others luſt.
All now is euident as light.
I bring
My innocence, to'th'cleere ſuruay of Heauen.
Though dull, to Men of harſh, ſtrict diſcipline,
Yet know, I haue ſome cunning in my rage.
I came to fright this ſecret from thy Heart:
M Hands I did not bath in humane blood,
Alteza, and Sciolto are aliue.
This ioy will make my Heart dance in my Breaſt.—
Sinke into th'Earth, where ſorrow dwells. Ere yon—
Dimme Morne ſhall adde one Howre vnto her Age,
Scioltos Sowle ſhall take a doubtfull flight:
It only ſtai'd to mingle company
With thine. My anger was ſo iuſt, I Would
Not proſecute thy life; vntill my doubts
Were cleer'd. Goe, goe, and number o're thy Beades.
Is there in all your vaines, no drop (vnmix'd
With Gaule) that from our Mother is deriu'd,
And ſo may tempt compaſſion from your Breaſt?
Alteza mournes, as if t'expiate
A Nation with her griefe. Hadſt thou reueald
Such penitence, it might haue ſoftned my
Decree. But thou art ſowre and ſterne of Soule.
No mercie, for our Noble Mothers ſake?
M Mother when ſhe lay, a cold paterne for
The figure on her Toombe, ſpent her laſt breath
In praiſe of thee. Quoth ſhe; For my ſake vſe
Thy Siſter well: th'acqaintance that ſhe hath
In Heauen is great. I'th bloſſome of her growth
She ſhall ore'come the Eies of men, and in
Her Age, ſhe ſhall haue skill in Prophecie.
But O falſe lore! Our Mother kind, (whom I
A Sybill held) thou now haſt proou'd a Witch.
I am too weake to force from your beliefe
Miſtakes ſo ſtrong.
Goe pray, the Howres are ſwift:
I'ue purpoſd thee a priſ'ner heere till my
Returne. — This is a ſicklie Rhume▪ and not
Compunction in my Eyes. —
The laſt of all
My merits ſhall be calld obedience to
Your will: If you doe owe a kindneſſe to
Your ſelfe; thinke on Religion and the Lawes.
Nature doe thou direct my ſpleene. The Lawes
Are ſinfullie contriu'd. Iuſtice ſhould weigh
The preſent crime, not future inforence
On Deedes. But now they cheapen blood: 'tis ſpilt
To puniſh the example, not the guilt.
Religion too, on our Italian Earth,
Growes like the Cedar big and high; but yeelds
No fruit. The abiect race of men ſhe doth
Confound with hope, and bids them not obay,
T'augment humilitie, but her owne ſway.
Your ſtrength does but intangle ye the more.
I'le not be truſ'd (Sir) like a Pullet thus—
Leaue nothing that can miniſter defence.
Diſarme him of his Pinnes.
Pare my nailes too.—
You ſhall be angerd ſtrait, till you beſtow
The time to bite'm off. Soone as we ſpi'd
You ſcaling ore the Orchard wall; we gueſſ'd
The hopes of your viſit. There haue beene ſnares
Lai'd for your feete, ere ſince you left the Houſe. —
There is ſome danger in this chance, my dull
Heart beates with ſlow, and ominous leaſure. —
Pale Planet ſhine! It muſt be he. My Eares
Perſwade me they oretooke his voice. Sir, Sir! —
Hah! Scoperta? A cruell deſtinie
Ha murdred all our ioy. endeuouring an
Add for ſtealth of thee, I was ſurpriſ'd,
Diſamd; euen heere 'ith preſence of my Starres.
There's not a Starre in all the Firmament
Belongs to vs.
O none! Or if there be,
Thei influence is ſo weake that at
This diſtance Babes may blow'em out. Sure ou
Creation we haue tooke vnknowne to Fate.
Our loue was of too nimble growth vnleſſe
Philoſophie giue hope, that after death
We may conuerſe; this is the laſt of all
Our interuiewes.
That fatall Prophecie
Will ſhake my Soule from out my fleſh; and like
Some tame Hermit I ſhall vnwounded die.
The word that's heard abreuiates our diſcourſe
And lie: the Sand that limits both is falne
Into the reach of number now: and I
Haue ſpent with thee the haſty time prefix'd
For a deuout imployment of my Beades.
The murderers are within.
Grimme wild horrour!
Haſt thou no weapons there that I may vſe
T'anihilate their vigor and their ſhape?
Vnto thy Lips I'ld throw a kiſſe; but with
The ſtrings of my poore ſolitary Lute
They'e bound my hands! —
O my hot rage! I could
Spit fire till I enkindle yonder Groue,
Raiſing a flame that might perplex the Earth,
And make'em thinke Heauen had dropp'd a Planet.
And I could weepe vntill I quench'd that ame,
And drew ſuſpition that a ſecond Flood
Was come to drowne mortallitie agen!
This ſudden eleuation of the Soule▪
Preſageth death: as if it practis'd how
To riſe, and climbe ere ſhe begins her flight.
Whence is that noiſe?
I'le be as calme as are Arabian winds.
Scoperta, ſtay; Vnheard we will conuerſe. —
They come, they come, deare loue, for euermore farewell▪
O for the Giant race, to helpe me heaue
Thoſe Mountaines vp; that I might burie this
Proud Structure and my ſelfe! Yon burlie Oake
(Whoſe Roots reach hell) I'le manage till I pownd
And batter all the Marble into Flowre.—
You haue oreheard, what will your knowledge grieue.
Her Soule is ill prepar'd▪
I gaue command
They ſhould awhile delay her death, leſt want
Of leaſure might deſtroy her penitence.
Remaine within the ſummons of my call:
And leaue me heere. I charge thee by thy Vow,
And our friendſhips deare vſe, that thou depart.
Speake what thou art?
Some call me Altamont.
I'ue ſeene thee walke armd like a Magazin▪
With ſmall Artillerie entrench'd: but thou
Art fitly now prepar'd for ſufferance.
Not thy tame ſacrifice, but victorie
I'le be. For naked as I am I will
Reſiſt my death; and ſince vnfurniſh'd to
Reuenge, yet I ſhall trouble thy beſt ſtrength.—
Sciolto, though, thou merit trechery▪
And opposition that, by darkeſt ſtealth,
of thy luxurious ſoule,
Yet I will giue thee faire and equall Game.
Falſe tyranie!
Stay. This I will performe▪
And 'tis to know the rigour of thy might,
What wondrous flame and ſpirits doe poſſeſſe
Thy ſpacious Breaſt.
There's reliſh of intent!
I'ld learne the prouidence and iuſtice of
My Fate; trie if they'll let me fall before
Th'incounter of thy beaſtiall ſtrength; thou that
Augments't thy ſinnes t'orecome the memorie
Of Heauen: in ſillie hope, th'accompts may be
Vnwillinglie ſurua'd, becauſe th'are long.
Receiue thy Sword. —
Miracle of bountie!
If whilſt we ſtruggle in the pride of hope
Thou canſt ſo weaken my defence, that I
Become diſarm'd; thy libertie is gain'd.
With ſolemne penitence I could accuſe
My crimes 'gainſt thee: but griefe's akinne to feare.
This great demeanue of thy ſpleene diuides
Th'intent of Gratitude. I know not which
T'affoord thee moſt, my enuie, or my loue.
The moone hath now put on her brighteſt Robe;
My anger too, doth carrie fire enough
To light vs to the charge▪ Guard well thy Heart. —
A little reſpite giue,— Muſt we needs ight?
You then would couſen me of my reuenge? —
Yet ſtay! — Know I doe loue thy Siſter well.
Marke (ſweet Heauen) with what exalted triumph
He boaſts the fowle remembrance of his ſinne.—
Stiffe as a columne! —
Th'Arcadian wraſtler told
Young Theſeus ſo; but he did yeeld as if
His ſinnewes had binne made of ſilke. So fierce?—
I'le worke thy ſtrength ſo low, that Virgins ſhall
Haue power to ſhakle thee with ſpinners Thrids—
Thus I will bore thy fleſh, till thou become
Tranſparant as a Sieve—
This cloſure hath
Intangled vs, let's make another charge?
Euen thus diuided Billowes part, that they
May meete in greater foame—
Wilt thou not bleede?
Not yet?—I skirmiſh with vnbodied Aire.
Thy guillt betrai's thy hand vnto miſtakes,
And thus my iniurd Spirits greete thy life—
That Wound gapes like to a yawning Giant.
So hot is thy laſciuious blood, that as
I ſprinkle it, it ſcaldes my hands—
I reele
Before thy breaſt, and ſtumble at a Wart—
Thy Sword's my Captiue now. Meruolle, hoa!
haue ſome courage yet, let in my Teeth,
If thou art kinde, come neerer with my Throate—
O the Celeſtiall powers are iuſt. See there,
He bleeds like to a Spring, that borders on
The Rubicke Sea, whilſt I remaine vntuch'd.
Has he not loſt the benefit of breath?
Stop all his wounds, and giue him time to ſpend
The reſt of's moiſture in repentant Teares—
My wounds cloſ'd vp, what meanes this courteſy?
That thou might'ſt leaſure haue to pray. Be ſure
when's deuotions haue ariu'd
Vnto a powerfull length; you ſtrangle him.
Can thy young honour ſtoope to ſuch low flight?
Vnto reſiſtance equall, I expoſd
My ſtrength, to try thy courage and my fate.
This was my iuſtie to my ſelfe: uſtice
I'le giue to thee: Thy crimes doe merit death.
O ſooth my laſt ambition then▪ be thou
My Executioner.
Thou art diſarm'd,
Thy blooming honors now are wither'd on
Thy Creſt. I ſhould depriue my Anger of
Her fame, to be thy actiue oppoſite.
Scoperta, ſtay. My Soule ſhall houer ſtraite
With thine. Stay for me in the Milky-path.
Let Italy avowch the iuſt demeane
Of my reuenge. Dull Brittaines know no wrath.
Th'vnskillfull youth, that equall Duell giue
To him that firſt incenſd the blood; but tempt
The curteſie of Fate, ſuch take delight
To ſtroke abuſe, pay Iniuries, with right.
This way (Sir) leades vnto your Graue. You ſhall
Haue ſpace, to gaine ſome friendſhip with the Saints —
A ſudden froſt congeales my Heart; I ſhrinke
Like crooked Age; I am vnwieldy on
My ioynts, as if my vaines were empty growne.—
Wounded. His point has ſtollne into my Breaſt.
Oh helpe. I'ue yet ſome vſe for life. Th'nice ſearch,
I made to know Heaun's ſecret iuſtice is
Aueng'd. (Bold Earth!) I weepe into the Sea,
And ſigh t'augment the windes. Repentance is
An immateriall Salue, it cures th'vnſound
Diſeaſed Soule, but not the Bodies wound.
A Guard vpon my Gates, and haue they there
Binne plac'd ere ſince the firſt ariuall of
The Night?
Meruolle keepes the Keyes, hole let
No ſeruant be awake about the houſe.
The Sunne begins to bath i'th'Mornings Teares▪
Haſt thou Lucio call'd, and bid Pytho mix
With him in a ſad Song?
I haue Madam.
No more (Niente) ſhalt thou ſeruice doe
For me: laſt night I told thee I had loſt
My vanitie: that courtly Lady ſerue
Who findes it firſt. But leaſt thy wants augment
Thy Sinnes, my charitie affoords thee this—
Well I'm reſolu'd to mend, or become worſe.
THis Lady, ripe, and calme, and freſh,
As Eaſterne Summers are;
Muſt now forſake both Time, and Fleſh,
T'adde Light to ſome ſmall Starre.
Whilſt yet aliue, each Starre decay'd▪
Shee may relieue with Light:
But Death leads Beauty to a ſhade
More cold more darke, then Night.
The ſawcy faith of man doth blind
His pride, 'till it conduce
To Deſtine all his abiect kind
For ſome Eternall vſe.
But aske not Bodies (doom'd to die)
To what abode they goe;
Since Knowledge is, but ſorrowes Spy,
It is not ſafe to know.
Howle, howle, vntill you wake the inhabitants
Of Graues! till you diſquiet all the Spheares;
And put harmonious Nature out of tune,
What meanes this fatall ſummon, that doth make
Amazement cold, as is Iberian Ice.
Great Altamont (your Lord) who ſtill was prompt
To curbe th'incitements of your wrath; threw wiſe
Aduantage from his reach, and ſtruggled with
The bold Sciolto, in an equall warre.
Downe holy flame. When Hope doth ſicken ſo,
I would not haue the power to prophecy.
The ſurly Lyon, and the teſty Bore,
Did nere maintaine, reſiſtance with like fierce
And ruinous returne of ſtrength: for from
Their Eyes ſuch Lightning flew, that Villagers
(Whoſe early labours till'd the Earth) did thinke
Raſh Phaeton did ſcourge the fiery Teeme
Agen. Sciolto chipp'd▪ gagged with wounds;
Did bleede away his ſtrength. This his falſe Sword
Your Husband bade me proſtrate at your feet—
And 'tis the laſt memoriall of his loue.
Ambiguous Hiſtory! He conquerour,
Yet this the laſt memoriall of his loue!
Wiſe Heauen did mocke your Altamont: for whilſt
Ore ioy'd with victory, he ſpies in's Breaſt
A large deepe wound, and thence his Soule tooke flight.
O my poore Lord! how ſoone haſt thou begunne
Thy immortalitie. The haſty Sparke
So vpard mounts, and then no more is ſeene.
I'th'laſt remainder of his dying ſpeech,
He briefly told his Teſtament; which doth
Containe imployments ſad, and ſuch as you
Muſt actuate ſtrait. To pleaſe his Ghoſt, ſhew now
A little loyaltie and loue, Riſe, and
Be conducted by my ſlow ſteps. I will
Enforme your knowledge all that he enioyn'd
Th'obedience which I canted to his life,
Vnto his memory I'le ſtrictly pay.
You haue a loſſe that doth out-ſpeake complai ▪
If ſweete and pliant diſcipline of Courts,
If feats of mighty Warre, or ſober Ats
Aduance th'eſteeme of humane qualiie;
'Tis fit your Altamont we ſtriue to raiſe,
Aboue the charitie or skill of praiſe▪
Who did aſſiſt your paſſage to this walke?
Meruolle Sir, with whom we vſ'd your name.
Doe you obſerue the Count, and his two leane
Ianizaries?
What in captiuity?
Certaine ſtratagems (Sir) haue binne leuel'd
'Gainſt the Prerogatiue of your lie roall.
Molard. Ere ſince the hpe of day▪ they waied your
Deſcent from the Cloyſter Bridge: but doubting
Their owne courage, and meeting vs diſguiſ'd,
Thus in our originall weedes; they would
Haue brib'd vs for two Piſtolets t'aſſiſt
The proſecution of your death. Our Grace
And ſtrength bound them to their good behauiour.
They walke like Caterpillers on a Leafe. —
Yeeld me the cauſe why you contriu'd my death.
Good faith (Sir) for no harme.
Giue me a Knife!—
Here is one belong'd to Hans van Geulicke.
Take your ſelfe ſolemnly aſide and cut
Your Throat! do't ſtrait, and neatly too, y'had beſt.
The motion I dſlike, 'tis dangerous.
Haue you three throats, can you reuiue as oft
As you are kill'd, to take new puniſhment,
That thus you mutinie 'gainſt kind reaſon?
Theſe thouſand yeeres 't has bn obſeru'd, th'eldeſt
Brothers of her houſe (Sir) could nere endure
To cut their Throates.
Tis fit (deare Count) that you
Muſt die; I'm els vniuſt vnto my ſelfe.
With ſapint Arts, we will proiect to ſaue
Th'reputation of your iſtice.
As how?
I will promulgate I am dead, and both,
My Champions heere ſhall ſwr't.
Wele venture one
Commandement to ſaue another ſir.
This cannot ſatiſfy. How ere (Sir Count)
If you will patiently accept your death.
I'le furniſh ye with Guides, for your laſt iaunt.
You Punto, and Stoccata too! No more
Of your phyloſophie. Fix Brow, to Brow,
Knock out, each others Braines, and ſhew your Lord
The way, vnto th'Elizian-Field. Doe it
At firſt encounter too; For I'm in haſte—
Slight Sir, I nere was in Elizium, I.
Nor ſhould I finde the way thither, though Signior
Argos, lent me Nintie Nine of his Eies.
Then Punto ſhall be conduct to ye both.
Good Signior, any curteſie but this
You may command. You ſtill doe moſt preſume
Vpon the calmeſt, and th'eaſie Nature.
They all are forfeittures to th'Law. If you'le
Beſtow'em but as priſners vnto us,
They ſhall ſuffer, or giue vs large ranſome.
How? a ranſome? Thſe Two are poorer then
Carthuſian-Monkes: leane as a Romiſh Lent.
Slaues, who pretend ſickneſſe, that they may lie
In Hoſpitalls to ſteale the Sheets. Achornes
They eate, ſuch as Weſtphalia-Hoggs doe ſcorne.
The Count (Sir) will vntie his Strings for'em.
Ranſome, I'le giue: for I doe hate to die.
The ranſome muſt
Be ſmall. Shuffle'em together: and pack
'Em hence. I will not heare a ſillable
Of thankes. Roſſa, ſee'em horſ'd for Millaine.
O diſmall change! does your victoous Sword
Hang now on aged Belt of Bandeleere?
Is your high Plume moulted to a ſprigge, ſmall,
As if 'twere made o'th wing of a Beetle.
Who can reſiſt the frownes of deſtiny?
My ſuffrance giues my merits their reward.
Your ſpeech was wont to be in a more high
Exalted Key: lowd as a Gulph! Your heart
Was full of ligges, and your feet did wander
Euen like Autumns duſt.
Affect ſo much
Humilitie as may imploy your thoughts
With more compaſſion on my ru'nou fall.
I threw on you perpetuall baniſhment.
I'm come to manifeſt the ſinne of my
Diſguiſe▪ though it proceeded more from hope
T'inioy your perſon then your wealth. Witneſſe
Each nimble Regiſter of humane Thoughts!
'Has got a ſweet and powerfull way in ſpeech.
This is my reall hape, in which I doe
Appeare, a thinne and witherd Souldier borne,
I'th'later age of warre: When glorie's ſicke,
And honour triuiall as the ſpleene of Babes.
He was not wont to vſe this Dialect.
Grant now (thou beautious wealth of Italy)
An expiation for my crimes; For know,
I would be cleane when I ſhall dedicate
My future vowes to th'abſent Altar of
Thy Heart: leſt I doe looſe the vſe of my
Idolatry; and make repentance ſinne.
Doe all harmonious gifts reſide within
Such courſe and humble weedes?
Deſtroy me not
With ſcorne: I know you Ladies moſt delight
I'th'fraile ſurface of the body, in name,
And guilded pompe, which was the fatall cauſe
I practis'd them on you:
Y' endeere the worſt
Of faſhion vnto vs, by making it
A cuſtome in your ſelues. If men did not
Prouide ſuch follies for our ſight, we knew
Not where to finde their vſe, for they digeſt
Them firſt, then they become our nouriſhment.
Vaine men. We alter our creation ſo
With female ſhapes, that Heauen ſcarce knowes its ſtam
And Nature (that diſtinction ſtill commands
T'each Sex) forgets the worke of her owne hands.
I nere beheld a feature maſculine
Till now: had you but thus appeard vnto
My firſt ſuruay, I might haue lou'd in haſte,
And yet excus'd the raſhneſſe of my eies.
I ginne to feele ſome danger in my ſtay.
Ere you depart, a ſmall memoriall from
Your hands, I craue, to weare vpon my creſt,
That it may tempt kinde fate to looke on me,
When I in glorious battell ſtriue; and
I will abſent my ſelfe for euermore.
I nothing keepe for ſuch ſad vſe, as to
Depriue me of ſo ſweet a miracle.
Grant my requeſt, or I'le purſue your ſteps
If you continue ſtill to beg, I feare
My bounty will prooue raſh: and I ſhall giue
So much of loue, as you can ne're repay. —
O my auſpicious ſtarres! Should I not now
Make vſe of your good influence, I were
Vnworthy of your care. —
The choice you make
Can nere deſerue your chaſte and lawfull fire
She is Florello of a heart and ſtraine
Too inſolent for nuptiall happineſſe:
Thou haſt bin cald my friend. But if thy ſpleene
Continue a diſlike of her, I'le blow thee from
My memory, and with my chiefeſt ſtrength
I'le puniſh thy miſſetake —
A des'late griefe
Will more become thy breaſt then this proud rage.
Thy brother's dead, and his deceaſe caus'd by
Her ſiſters pride.
My ſiſters husband dead.
Into my ares thou haſt a horror powr'd
That hath already ſtiffened euerie haire
On my amazed skull into a Reed.
Wilt thou neglect to cheriſh the ſwift growth
Of our new loues?
Like to her ſiſter ſhe
But counterfeits a paſſionate eſteeme,
That thy fond Nature ſhe might tempt beneath
Her rule. If Altamont be deare vnto
Thy thought, leaue her, and ſtraight attend his Hearſe,
That in the Chappell waits thy obſequie.
Th' inſpir'd Needle's not more true vnto
The North, the Sunne to his diurnall race,
Nor Riuers to the Maine; then I to thee.
Sorrow and loue, my ſenſes doe diuide.
If I remayne with thee, then only loue
I ſerue, if with ſad fleps, I tread the way
Vnto my Brothers Herſe, I both obey.
Thou doſt requite the skornes which I did throw
On thy firſt loue. My deſtiny muſt needs
Be tragicke now: ſince the contracted ſcope
Of all my ioy, reſts in diſeaſed hope.
Behold the Throne, your Lord commanded me
Prepare: and heere you muſt be pleas'd to ſit. —
Can this aduancement ought refer to your
Delight, or to my Lords laſt Teſtament?
Iuſtice hath laid her ſword within your reach:
And you haue power to ſhath it ſo; that where
You execute, you may a murder doe,
Or ſacrifice. Bring the delinquents in.
Sciolto and Scoperta ſtill aliue?
Thy ſpirit Altamont aſcended with
The loue of all my chiefeſt orizons.
Theſe two were by your husbands iealouſie▪
And hate, ordaind for death: but ere that we
Could actuate his will; his noble breaſt
Receiu'd a wound, that bad him ſtrait prouide
For 's owne eternity. The laſt of all
His ſpeech, referd them both vnto your power.
You may appoint them liue or die: and I'm
Oblig'd by vow, to ſee perform'd what you
Command.
O dire, ſiniſter accident!
Your Iewels, and your wealth, I haue pack'd vp,
To eaſe our flight, when we haue finiſh'd
This vſurpation of the Lawes. Let them
Inioy their eyes; that they may know their Iudge.
Hah, Sciolto!
Scoperta, O my Girle!
Keepe them diuided from each others reach▪
I thought thy beauties had beene darke and cold,
And th'adſt (ere this) begun an eaſie ſleepe
Within thy ſilent Graue.
And I ſuppoſ'd thee fled
A Harbenger to Heauen: with purpoſe to
Beſpeake my Billet neere to thine.
Since this ſad night, did blind the drowſi world,
They thus haue manacled my ſtrength. They'ue watch'd
My hardy violence ſo tame, that now
Each featherd Forreſter rooſts in my Beard.
We cannot (Sir) be mortall long; therefore
Receiue a hope our ſufferance will ceaſe.
Sciolto, now requite the leyſure I
Haue giuen thy penitence, by rendring ſtraight
Vnto the world, how farre thou didſt corrupt
Theſe Ladies with thy guilt. For know, I ſtill
Perſwaded Altamont thy luſt inioi'd
No more, then what concern'd wiſhes or hope.
And I was vſher'd to'th beliefe of this,
By knowledge of thoſe ſecret ſpies which he
Imploy'd to watch your perſonall remooues,
About the Houſe: whoſe labours euer miſs'd
Of finding that ſucceſſe he prophecy'd.
I doe confeſſe m'imagination once
Did ſinne againſt them both: but if it ere
Extended vnto act; let me loſe Heauen▪
If Altamont were now aliue, he would
Permit this vtterance cleere his fayth. Madam,
You heare that he Scoperta vindicates
By oath; though his owne crime doth carry an
Import more euident, and blacke; but yet
When you behold his feature, and his youth,
Your mercy may conceiue t'were pity that
He ſhould ſo ſoone depart from time and fleſh.
Sir, you haue skill to know my womanhood
Is weake as ignorance, or ſleepe. Why ſhould
You ſeat me heere, thus to diſpoſe of Law:
That ne're knew any iuſtice, but reuenge.
Your ſentence I am bound to execute.
Haue I not heard you ſay, my Husband did
Ordaine them both for death? T'would ill become
The duty of my knowledge t'alter his
Decree.
Keepe your intent, I will vſurpe
The office of your tongue. Mutes, ſtrangle them.
If in thy functions, gentle Nature claime
An intereſt, let vs imbrace, and vſe
Solemnity, before we doe forſake
Each others view.
I grant what you
Requeſt: make your performance ſhort; whilſt I
Reueale m'opinions (Lady) to your eare.
O Scoperta! this is the laſt of all
Our buſie dreames; what we poſſeſſe is but
Imaginary now: Thy ſhadow I,
Embrace, not thee: for like to it, thou'lt flie
From my enioyment, and no more be ſeene!—
So much of various fate, ſo ſoone expres'd
Two louers yet nere knew; ſince ſimpathy
Firſt dwelt on Earth.
Ere long we muſt be cold,
Cold, cold my Loue, and wrapp'd in ſtubborne ſheets
Of lead: hows'd in a deepe, a gloomy vault;
Where no ſociety will mix with vs,
But what ſhall quicken from our tainted limmes.
Whilſt ſtill ther's noiſe, and buſines in the world;
Whilſt ſtill the warres grow loud, and battels ioyne;
Whilſt Kings their Queenes ſalute in Iuory beds.
But O! how many Ages may ſucceed
In Heauens darke Kalender; ere we agen
Materiall be, and meet in our warme fleſh?
And whether that our ſoules, when they're prefer'd
To taſte eternity will euer thinke
Vpon the bargaines of our humane loue,
Is vnto me a deſolate ſuſpence.
Phyloſophie doth ſeeme to laugh vpon
Our hopes, and wiſe Diuinity belies
Our knowledge, with our Fayth: iealous Nature,
Hath lock'd, her ſecrets in a Cabinet,
Which Time nere ſaw: and he that in it prys
Vnto Religion forfeites his bold Eies.
Our Reaſon frights our Sences to diſtruſt.
My Lipps doe beage from thine a Legacie—
O ſad acomp. How is my bounty now
Exhauſt: This is the laſt I ere ſhall giue—
Blind them agen and ſtay their deaths awhile.
Madam, your knowledge is allready taught
Scoperta's innocence. Sciolto's deed
Stands nere your puniſhment; but diſtant far
From remedy. Marke, his goodly feature.
With what magnificence he's built? Beſides
This Morne▪ his Vnkle too (the wealthieſt of
Our Senators) is dead, and has bine pleaſd
T'intitle him his Heire.
Should I not chide?
Thinke how you lou'd him once. He will (to ſaue
His life) dſcard Scoperta's intereſt,
And marry you: a hapineſſe compleate
For both
Hah?
Slaues. Stretch now your Cordage out,
Pull till my Eies do ſtarte like Bulletts from my Skull,
Murdering where they flie—
Hold. hold. — Did my
dead Lord bid you performe, what I decree?
He did: and I aſured it with my Vowes.
Heare then without reſiſtan of my breath,
Sciolto is condemn'd by Law; as knowne
The fatall Inſtrument that did depriue
My Lord, of precious life; ſo he muſt die.
T'were fit my care affected mercie in
Scoperta's dome; ſhe's Siſter to my Lord:
But her ſweete innocence doth make her ſafe.
She muſt remaine among the liuing ſtill;
And in her rome, I doe condemne my ſelfe.
For my ſterne pride, was the originall cauſe
Of this blacke Tragedy. Kind
Eſteeme your Vowes, ſee my edic ▪
And giue me priiledge firſt to
its wrath—
This carries wonder in't
I'le not reſigne theſe bonds of Death, vnleſſe
Sciolto ſhare in the compaſſion too—
Giue me your pardon (gentle Mayd). I haue
Depriu'd you of a Brother that deſeru'd
More Pyramids, then all th'Egiptian Kings.
Inſtead of him, receaue my pray'rs, my wealth.
When o're his Herſſe you raiſe a Monument,
And fix my Marble-Figure neere to his,
Create me weeping.— I ſhall goe, with ſo
Much ſorow, to my Graue, that being dead,
My Aſhes will haue power to penetrate
The Stones. Releaſe this pious Lady and
Performe your execution vpon me—
Away you dreadfull Miniſters of death.
The Lawrell Sprigge, the Mirtle nicely wreath'd
In Coronets, my Loue deſerues; for ſhe
Is growne too good for Earth. —
My Altamont. —
This deceipt brings wonder, great as our ioy.
They that diuide vs now, muſt vſe the ſtrength
Of ſwelling floods, and helpe of Thunder too —
Put all thy beauties on agen, and ſmile
At the returne of our long abſent loue:
My wound is clos'd, and will hau inſtant cure —
The Earth groan'd at my fall, ſo heauie are
My ſinnes, ſo much they did increaſe my weight.
Riſe gently like a flame, from incenſe ſprung.
Meruolle, to appeaſe my iealouſie
Ordain'd me this diſguiſes that I might heare
How in your ſntence you behau'd your loue
To me: Hadſt thou continu'd falſe, I had
Increas'd the anger of thy fate: but now
Thou art indeer'd vnto my heart agen. —
Sir, I haue hope my future loyaltie
Will manifeſt, your mercie well beſtow'd.—
Scoperta, thou'lt excuſe the cariage of
My doubts, I look'd on thee with th'eies of loue,
And loue is ſtill too ſtrict in her ſuruay. —
My memorie woud ſinne, ſhould it record
Ought that might nouriſh my diſlike of you:
You made me taſte of ſorrow, not of wrath.
Tis I, that haue moſt eedfull vſe of your
Kind charitie: forget my errors paſt,
And to oblige my future gratitude
Giue Hymen leaue to know your ſiſter for
My wife. y Vnkles death hath lent me power
Still to maintaine her in ſuch qualitie
As ſhall become my deere reſpects to you,
The greatneſſe of her virtue, and her blood.
Take her, and be as tender of her health,
As Heauen hath o're thy wounds; which in their cure
Expreſſe much miracle. — My io's ſo ſwell
My breaſt, that I doe finde there's danger in
Delight. How bleſs'd Meruolle are thy Arts?
Some Angels care aſſiſted the ſucceſſe.
Not Altamont's returne to life, nor yet
Sciolto's and Scoperta's glad repriue
Nor all the ioyes in reconcilement of
Your loues expreſs'd, can my cold ſences pleaſe:
Florello is vnkinde. —
The little God
Hath lately prick'd her with his baudy ſhaft.
Tell me Charintha, is thy loue ſincere:
Such as i'th ſimple youth of Nature is
Exchang'd by louers with a harmeleſſe plight?
It is ſincere, as holy Hermits vowes,
And true, as their confeſſion at their death.
Appeare Florello, and receiue thy doome.
It was Meruolle's care thus to aſſure
Thy Miſtreſſe reall loue, and conſtancie
Ere thou ſhouldſt giue too much of thine away.
But now receiue her from Alteza's hand. —
Charintha, thy election is ſo ſafe
Thou neuer wilt repent the iudgement of
Thy ſight. He cannot be ſo neere alli'd
Vnto the blood of Altamont, but he
Muſt needs participate in virtue too.
We will embrace each other vntill Age,
Depriue our courteous ſinewes of extent. —
The gentle Turtle ſhall direct vs how
T'augment our loues; the Eagle to renew
Our youth, and we will ſtriue to imitate
The crooked Vine in our increaſe. —
Ioy, ioy!
The firmament is now vnmask'd, and each
Of vs, hath found his ſtarre.
My Lou'd Siſter,
I haue orchear'd the ſtory of your griefs,
And from this noble Signior, I muſt begge
A faith indeer'd, the name of Brother too.
You ſhall be precious to my eies as day.
The great Dandolo and his Giant whelpes
Are mounted on a Mule.
Naked they ride
As ſcoutes of Tartary they're victual'd with
A ſingle egge.
What are theſe, walking Drummes?
Th'are ſuch your knowledge ſhall affect: they muſt
Inioy what I atchieue. Dull men, o'war,
The Trophie of my victorie behold,
She's mine: bow, and doe homage to her lippe. —
Still thou doſt mourn (Alteza) like a Doue.
Hearke, hearke how the Roman-Organ ſeemes
T'inuoke the Thracian Lire; the Cymbals of
Iudea, call Caſtilian-Cornets foorth,
And German-Viols wake the Tuſcan Lute▪
The ſacred noiſe attend, that whilſt wee heare,
Our ſoules may dance into each others eare.