HAue you playd ouer all your old Leſſons o'the Virginals?
Yes.
Yes, you are a dull Mayd alate, me thinkes you had need haue ſomewhat to quicken your Greene Sickneſſe, doe you weepe? A Huſband. Had not ſuch a peece of Fleſh been ordayned, what had vs Wiues been good for? To make Sallets, or elſe cryd vp and downe for Sampier. To ſee the difference of theſe Seaſons, when I was of your youth, I was lightſome, and quicke, two yeeres before I was married. You fit for a Knights bed, drowſie browd, dull eyed, droſſie ſprited, I hold my life you haue forgot your Dauncing: When was the Dauncer with you?
The laſt weeke.
Laſt weeke, when I was of your bord, he miſt me not a night, I was kept at it, I tooke delight to learne, and he to teach me, prittie browne Gentleman, he tooke pleaſure in my company, but you are dull, nothing comes nimbly from you, you daunce like a Plummers Daughter, and deſerue two thouſand pound in Lead to your marriage, and not in Gold-Smithes Ware.
Now what's the din betwixt Mother and Daughter, ha?
Faith ſmall, telling your Daughter Mary of her Errors.
Errors, nay the Citie cannot hold you Wife, but you muſt needs fetch words from Weſtminſter, I ha done I faith, has no Atturneys Clarke beene here a late, and changed his Halfe-Crowne-peece his Mother ſent him, or rather cozend you with a guilded Two-pence, to bring the word in faſhion, for her faults or crackes, in dutie and obedience, terme em eeue ſo ſweet Wife. As there is no Woman made without a Flaw, your pureſt Lawnes haue Frayes, and Cambrickes Brackes.
But 'tis a Husband ſowders vp all Crackes.
What is he come Sir?
Sr Walters come.
He was met at Holbourne Bridge, and in his company, a proper faire young Gentlewoman, which I gueſſe by her red Hayre, and other ranke deſcriptions, to be his landed Neece, brought out of Wales, which Tim our Sonne (the Cambridge Boy) muſt marry.
'Tis a match of Sr Walters owne making to bind vs to him, and our Heires for euer.
We are honord then, if this Baggage would be humble, and kiſſe him with deuotion when he enters.
I cannot get her for my life to inſtruct her Hand thus, before and after, which a Knight will looke for, before and after.
I haue told her ſtill, 'tis the wauing of a Woman doſe often moue a Man, and preuailes ſtrongly.
But ſweet, ha you ſent to Cambridge, (has Tim word an't?)
Had word iuſt the day after when you ſent him the Siluer Spoone to eat his Broath in the Hall, amongſt the Gentlemen Commoners.
O 'twas timely.
How now?
A Letter from a Gentleman in Cambridge.
O one of Hobſons Porters, thou art well-come.
I told thee Maud we ſhould heare from Tim. Amantiſſimis chariſſimiſ que ambobus parentibus patri & matri.
What's the matter?
Nay by my troth, I know not, aske not me, he's growne too verball, this Learning is a great Witch.
Pray let me ſee it, I was wont to vnderſtand him.
Amantiſſimus chariſſimus, he has ſent the Carryers Man he ſayes: ambobus parentibus, for a paire of Boots: patri & matri, pay the Porter, or it makes no matter.
Yes by my faith Miſtris, there's no true conſtruction in that, I haue tooke a great deale of paines, and come from the Bell ſweating. Let me come to'te, for I was a Schollar forty yeers ago, 'tis thus I warrant you: Matri, it makes no matter: ambobus parentibus, for a paire of Boots: patri, pay the Porter: amantiſſimis chariſſimis, he's the Carryers Man, and his name is Sims, and there he ſayes true, forſooth my name is Sims indeed, I haue not forgot all my learning. A Money matter, I thought I ſhould hit on't.
Goe thou art an old Fox, ther's a Teſter for thee.
If I ſee your Worſhip at Gooſe Faire, I haue a Diſh of Birds for you.
Why doſt dwell at Bow?
All my life time Sir I could euer ſay Bo, to a Gooſe. Farewell to your Worſhip.
A merry Porter.
How can he chooſe but be ſo, comming with Cambridge Letters from our Sonne Tim?
What's here, maximus diligo, Faith I muſt to my learned Counſell with this geere, 'twill nere be diſcernd elſe.
Goe to my Couſen then, at Innes of Court.
Fye they are all for French, they ſpeake no Latine.
The Parſon then will doe it.
Nay he diſclaimes it, calles Latine Papiſtry, he will not deale with it. What iſt you lacke Gentleman?
Pray weigh this Chayne.
Now Wench thou art well-come to the Heart of the Citie of London.
Dugat a whee.
You can thanke me in Engliſh if you liſt.
I can Sir ſimply.
'Twill ſerue to paſſe Wench, 'twas ſtrange that I ſhould lye with thee ſo often, to leaue thee without Engliſh, that were vnnaturall, I bring thee vp to turne thee into Gold Wench, and make thy fortune ſhine like your bright Trade, a Gold-Smithes Shop ſets out a Citie Mayd. Dauy Dahanna, not a word.
Mum, mum Sir.
Here you muſt paſſe for a pure Virgine.
Pure Welch Virgine, ſhe loſt her Maydenhead in Brekenocke-Shire.
I heare you mumble Dauy.
I haue Teeth Sir, I need not mumble yet this forty yeeres.
The Knaue bites plaguely.
What's your price Sir?
A hundred pound Sir.
A hundred markes the vtmoſt, 'tis not for me elſe.
What Sr Walter Whorehound?
O Death.
Why Daughter.
Faith the Baggage a baſhful Girle Sir, theſe young things are ſhamefaſt, beſides you haue a preſence ſweet Sr Walter, able to daunt a Mayd brought vp i'the Citie,
A braue Court Spirit makes our Virgines quiuer, and kiſſe with trembling Thighes. Yet ſee ſhe comes Sir.
Why how now prettie Miſtris, now I haue caught you. What can you iniure ſo your time to ſtrey thus from your faithfull Seruant.
Piſh, ſtop your words good Knight, 'twill make her bluſh elſe, which wound to high for the Daughters of the Freedome, honor, and faithfull Seruant, they are complements for the Worthy's of Whitehall, or Greenwitch, eene plaine, ſufficient, ſubſidy words ſerues vs Sir. And is this Gentlewoman your worthy Neece?
You may be bold with her on theſe termes, 'tis ſhe Sir, Heire to ſome nineteene Mountaines.
Bleſſe vs all, you ouer-whelme me Sir with loue and riches.
And all as high as Pauls.
Here's worke I faith.
How ſayeſt thou Dauy?
Higher Sir by farre, you cannot ſee the top of 'em.
What Man? Maudline ſalute this Gentlewoman, our Daughter if things hit right.
My Knight with a brace of Footmen, is come and brought vp his Ewe Mutton, to find a Ram at London, I muſt haſten it, or elſe picke a Famine, her Bloods mine, and that's the ſureſt. Well Knight, that choyſe ſpoy is onely kept for me.
Sir?
Turne not to me till thou mayſt lawfully, it but whets my ſtomacke, which is too ſharpe ſet already. Read that note carefully, keepe me from ſuſpition ſtill, nor know my zeale but in thy Heart: read and ſend but thy liking in three words, I'le be at hand to take it.
O turne Sir, turne.
A poore plaine Boy, an Vniuerſitie Man, proceeds next Lent to a Batcheler of Art, he will be call'd Sr Yellowhammer then ouer all Cambridge, and that's halfe a Knight.
Pleaſe you draw neere, and taſt the well-come of the Citie Sir?
Come good Sr Walter, and your vertuous Neece here.
'Tis manners to take kindneſſe.
Lead 'em in Wife.
Your company Sir.
I'le giue't you inſtantly.
How ſtrangely buſie is the Diuell and riches,
Poore Soule kept in too hard, her Mothers Eye, is cruell toward her, being to him, 'twere a good mirth now to ſet him a worke to make her wedding Ring. I muſt about it.
Rather then the gaine ſhould fall to a Stranger, 'twas honeſtie in me to enrich my Father.
The Girle is wondrous peuiſh, I feare nothing, but that ſhe's taken with ſome other loue, then all's quite daſht, that muſt be narrowly lookt to, we cannot be too wary in our Children. What iſt you lack?
O nothing now, all that I wiſh is preſent.
I would haue a wedding Ring made for a Gentlewoman, with all ſpeed that may be.
Of what weight Sir?
Of ſome halfe ounce, ſtand faire and comely, with the Sparke of a Diamond.
Sir 'twere pittie to loſe the leaſt grace.
Pray let's ſee it, indeed Sir 'tis a pure one.
So is the Miſtris.
Haue you the wideneſſe of her Finger Sir?
Yes ſure I thinke I haue her meaſure about me, good faith 'tis downe, I cannot ſhow't you,
I muſt pull too many things out to be certaine.
Let me ſee, long, and ſlender, and neatly ioynted,
Iuſt ſuch another Gentlewoman that's your Daughter Sir.
And therefore Sir no Gentlewoman.
I proteſt I neuer ſaw two Maids handed more alike
I'le nere ſeeke farther, if you'le giue me leaue Sir.
If you dare venture by her Finger Sir.
I, and I'le bide all loſſe Sir.
Say you ſo Sir, let's ſee hether Girle.
Shall I make bold with your finger Gentlewoman?
Your pleaſure Sir.
That fits her to a haire Sir.
What's your Poſie now Sir?
Maſſe that's true, Poſie I faith eene thus Sir.
Loue that's wiſe, blinds Parents Eyes.
How, how, If I may ſpeake without offence Sir,
I hold my life
What Sir?
Goe too, you'le pardon me?
Pardon you? I Sir.
Will you I faith?
Yes faith I will.
You'le ſteale away ſome Mans Daughter, am I nere you?
Doe you turne aſide? You Gentlemen are mad Wage, I wonder things can be ſo warily carried, and Parents blinded ſo, but the're ſerued right that haue two Eyes, and were ſo dull a fight.
Thy doome take hold of thee.
To morrow noone ſhall ſhew your Ring well done.
Being ſo 'tis ſoone, thankes, and your leaue ſweet Gentlewoman
Sir you are well-come.
O were I made of wiſhes, I went with thee.
Come now we'le ſee how the rules goe within.
That robs my Ioy, there I looſe all I win.
Honeſtie waſh my Eyes, I haue ſpy'd a Witall.
What Dauy Dahanna, well-come from North Wales
I faith, and is Sr Walter come?
Now come to Towne Sir.
Into the Mayds ſweet Dauy, and giue order his Chamber be made ready inſtantly, my Wife's as great as ſhe can wallow Dauy, and longs for nothing but pickled Coucombers, and his comming, and now ſhe ſhall ha'te Boy.
She's ſure of them Sir.
Thy verie ſight will hold my Wife in pleaſure, till the Knight come himſelfe. Goin, in, in Dauy.
The Founders come to Towne, I am like a Man finding a Table furniſh't to his hand, as mine is ſtill to me, prayes for the Founder, bleſſe the right Worſhipfull, the good Founders life.
I thanke him, h'as maintain'd my Houſe this ten yeeres, not onely keepes my Wife, but a keepes me, and all my Family, I am at his Table, he gets me all my Children, and payes the Nurſe, monthly, or weekely, puts me to nothing, rent, nor Church duties, not ſo much as the Scauenger, the happieſt ſtate that euer Man was borne to.
I walke out in a morning, come to breake-faſt,
Find excellent Cheere, a good Fier in Winter,
Looke in my Coale-houſe about Midſommer-eeue,
That's full, fiue or ſixe Chaldorne, new layd vp,
Looke in my backe yeard, I ſhall find a ſteeple
Made vp with Kentiſh Fagot's, which o're-lookes
The Water-Houſe and the Wind-milles, I ſay nothing
But ſmile, and pin the doore, when ſhe lyes in,
As now ſhe's euen vpon the point of grunting,
A Lady lyes not in like her, there's her imboſſings,
Embrodring, ſpanglings, and I know not what,
As if ſhe lay withall the gaudy Shops
In Greſſams Burſſe about her, then her reſtoratiues,
Able to ſet vp a young Pothecarie,
And richly ſtocke, the Foreman of a Drug-ſhop.
Her Sugar by whole Loaues, her Wines by Rundlets.
I ſee theſe things, but like a happy Man,
I pay for none at all, yet Fooles think's mine,
I haue the name, and in his Gold I ſhine.
And where ſome Merchants would in Soule kiſſe Hell,
To buy a Paradice for their Wines, and dye
Their Conſcience in the Bloods of prodigall Heires,
To decke their Night-peece, yet all this being done,
Eaten with iealouſie to the inmoſt Bone,
As what affliction Nature more conſtraynes,
Then feed the Wife plumpe, for anothers veynes.
Theſe torments ſtand I freed of, I am as cleere
From iealouſie of a Wife, as from the charge.
O two miraculous bleſſings, 'tis the Knight
Hath tooke that labour, all out of my hands,
I may ſit ſtill and play, he's iealouſe for me,
Watches her ſteps, ſets ſpyes, I liue at eaſe,
He has both the coſt and torment, when the ſtrings
Of his Heart freats, I feed, laugh, or ſing,
La dildo, dildo la dildo, la dildo dildo de dildo.
What has he got a ſinging in his Head now?
Now's out of worke he falles to making Dildo's.
Now Sirs, Sr Walters come.
Is our Maſter come?
Your Maſter, what am I?
Doe not you know Sir?
Pray am not I your Maſter?
O you are but our Miſtreſſes Husband.
Ergo Knaue, your Maſter.
Negatur argumentum. Here comes Sr Walter, now a ſtands bare as well as we, make the moſt of him he's but one peepe aboue a Seruingman, and ſo much his Hornes make him.
How doſt Iacke?
Proud of your Worſhips health Sir.
How does your Wife?
Eene after your owne making Sir,
She's a tumbler a faith, the Noſe and Belly meets.
The 'ile part in time againe.
At the good houre, they will and pleaſe your worſhip.
Here Sirra, pull off my Boots. Put on, but on Iacke.
I thanke your kind worſhip Sir.
Slippers, Heart you are ſleepy.
The game begins already.
Piſh, put on Iacke.
Now I muſt doe it, or he'le be as angry now, as if I had put it on at firſt bidding, 'tis but obſeruing, 'tis but obſeruing a Mans humour once, and he may ha' him by the Noſe all his life.
What entertainment has layne open here,
No ſtrangers in my abſence?
Sure Sir not any.
His iealouſie begins, am not I happy now
That can laugh inward whil'ſt his Marrow melts?
How doe you ſatisfie me?
Good Sir be patient.
For two months abſence I'le be ſatisfied.
No liuing Creature entred.
Entred, come ſweare.
You will not heare me out Sir.
Yes I'le heare't out Sir.
Sir he can tell himſelfe.
Heart he can tell,
Doe you thinke I'le truſt him? As a Vſurer
With forfeited Lordſhips. Him, ô monſterous iniury!
Beleeue him, can the Diuell ſpeake ill of Darkeneſſe?
What can you ſay Sir?
Of my ſoule and conſcience Sir, ſhe's a Wife as honeſt of her Body to me, as any Lords proud Lady can be.
Yet by your leaue, I heard you were once offring to goe to bed to her.
No I proteſt Sir.
Heart if you doe, you ſhall take all, I'le marry.
O I beſeech you Sir,
That wakes the Slaue, and keepes his Fleſh in awe.
I'le ſtop that gap
Where e're I find it open, I haue poyſoned
His hopes in marriage already,
Some old rich Widdowes, and ſome landed Virgines,
And I'le fall to worke ſtill before I'le loſe him,
He's yet too ſweet to part from.
God-den Father.
Ha Villaine, peace.
God-den Father.
Peace Baſtard, ſhould he heare em. are two fooliſh Children, they doe not know the Gentleman that ſits there.
Oh Wat, how doſt Nick? Goe to Schoole,
Ply your Bookes Boyes, ha?
Where's your Legges Whore ſons? They ſhould kneele indeed if they could ſay their Prayers.
Let me ſee, ſtay,
How ſhall I diſpoſe of theſe two Brats now
When I am married, for they muſt not mingle
Amongſt my Children that I get in Wedlocke,
'Twill make foule worke that, and rayſe many ſtormes.
I'le bind Wat Prentice to a Goldſmith, my Father Yellowh.
As fit as can be. Nick with ſome Vintner, good, Goldſmith
And Vintner, there will be Wine in Boles I faith.
Sweet Knight
Welcome, I haue all my longings now in Towne,
Now well-come the good houre.
How cheeres my Miſtris?
Made lightſome, eene by him that made me heauy.
Me thinkes ſhe ſhewes gallantly, like a Moone at full Sir.
True, and if ſhe beare a Male child, there's the Man in the Moone Sir.
'Tis but the Boy in the Moone yet Goodman Calfe.
There was a Man, the Boy had neuer beene there elſe.
It ſhall be yours Sir.
No by my troth, I'le ſweare it's none of mine, let him that got it keepe it, thus doe I rid my ſelfe of feare, Lye ſoft, ſleepe hard, drinke Wine, and eat good cheere.
'Twill be ſo tedious Sir to liue from you,
But that neceſſitie muſt be obeyed.
I would it might not Wife, the tediouſneſſe
Will be the moſt part mine, that vnderſtand
The bleſſings I haue in thee, ſo to part
That driues the torment to a knowing Heart,
But as thou ſay'ſt, we muſt giue way to need
All liue awhile aſunder, our deſires
Are both too fruitfull for our barren fortunes.
How aduers runs the deſteny of ſome Creatures,
Some onely can get riches and no Children,
We onely can get Children and no riches,
Then 'tis the prudents part to checke our willes,
And till our ſtate riſe, make our Bloods lye ſtill.
'Life euerie yeere a Child, and ſome yeeres two,
Beſides, drinkings abroad, that's neuer reckon'd,
This geere will not hold out.
Sir for a time, I'le take the curteſie of my Vnkles Houſe
If you be pleas'd to like on't, till proſperitie
Looke with a friendly Eye vpon our ſtates.
Honeſt Wife I thanke thee, I ne're knew
The perfect treaſure thou brought'ſt with thee more
Then at this inſtant minute. A Man's happy
When he's at pooreſt that has match't his Soule
As rightly as his Body. Had I married
A ſenſuall Foole now, as 'tis hard to ſcape it
'Mongſt Gentlewomen of our time, ſhe would ha' hang'd
About my Necke, and neuer left her hold
Till ſhe had kiſt me into wanton buſineſſes,
Which at the waking of my better Iudgement
I ſhould haue curſt moſt bitterly,
And layd a thicker vengance on my act
Then miſerie of the Birth, which were enough
If it were borne to greatneſſe, whereas mine
Is ſure of beggerie, though it were got in Wine.
Fulneſſe of Ioy ſheweth the goodneſſe in thee,
Thou art a matchleſſe Wife, Farwell my Ioy.
I ſhall not want your ſight?
I'le ſee thee often,
Talke in mirth, and play at kiſſes with thee,
Any thing Wench but what may beget Beggers,
There I giue o're the Set, throw downe the Cards,
And dare not take them vp.
Your will be mine Sir.
This does not onely make her honeſtie perfect,
But her diſcretion, and approues her Iudgement.
Had her deſire beene wanton, they'd beene blameleſſe
In being lawfull euer, but of all Creatures
I hold that Wife a moſt vnmatched treaſure,
That can vnto her fortunes fixe her pleaſure,
And not vnto her Blood, this is like wedlocke,
The feaſt of marriage is not Luſt but Loue,
And care of the eſtate, when I pleaſe Blood,
Meerely I ſing, and ſucke out others, then
'Tis many a wiſemans fault, but of all Men
I am the moſt vnfortunate in that game
That euer pleas'd both Genders, I ne're play'd yet
Vnder a Baſtard, the poore Wenches curſſe me
To the Pit where e're I come, they were ne're ſerued ſo,
But vs'd to haue more words then one to a bargaine,
I haue ſuch a fatall Finger in ſuch buſineſſe
I muſt forth with't, chiefely for Countrey Wenches,
For euerie Harueſt I ſhall hinder Hay-making,
I had no leſſe then ſeuen lay in laſt Progreſſe,
Within three weekes of one anothers time.
O Snaphance, haue I found you.
How Snaphance?
Doe you ſee your workemanſhip,
Nay turne not from it, nor offer to eſcape, for if you doe,
I'le cry it through the Streets, and follow you.
Your name may well be called Tuchwood, a Pox on you,
You doe but touch and take, thou haſt vndone me,
I was a Mayd before, I can bring a Certificate for it,
From both the Church-Wardens.
I'le haue the Parſons Hand too, or I'le not yeeld to't.
Thou ſhalt haue more thou Villaine, nothing grieues me, but Ellen my poore couſen in Darbiſhiere, thou haſt crack't her marriage quite, ſhe'le haue a bout with thee.
Faith when ſhe will I'le haue a bout with her.
A Law bout Sir I meane.
True, Lawyers vſe ſuch bouts as other Men doe,
And if that be all thy griefe, I'le tender her a Husband,
I keepe of purpoſe two or three Gulls in pickle
To eat ſuch Mutten with, and ſhe ſhall chuſe one.
Doe but in courteſie faith Wench excuſe me,
Of this halfe yeard of Fleſh, in which I thinke it wants
A Nayle or two.
No, thou ſhalt find Villaine
It hath right ſhape, and all the Nayles it ſhould haue.
Faith I am poore, doe a charitable deed Wench,
I am a younger Brother, and haue nothing.
Nothing, thou haſt too much thou lying villaine
Vnleſſe thou wert more thankefull.
I haue no dwelling,
I brake vp Houſe but this morning, Pray thee pittie me,
I am a good Fellow, faith haue beene too kind
To people of your Gender, if I ha'te
Without my Belly, none of your Sexe ſhall want it,
That word has beene of force to moue a Woman.
There's trickes enough to rid thy Hand on't Wench,
Some rich-mans Porch, to morrow before day,
Or elſe anone i'the euening, twentie deuiſes,
Here's all I haue, I faith, take purſe and all,
And would I were rid of all the Ware i'the Shop ſo.
Where I find manly dealings I am pitifull,
This ſhall not trouble you.
And I proteſt Wench, the next I'le keepe my ſelfe.
Soft, let it be got firſt.
This is the fifth, if e're I venture more
Where I now goe for a Mayd, may I ride for a Whore.
what ſhift ſhele make now with this peece of fleſh
In this ſtrict time of Lent, I cannot imagine,
Fleſh dare not peepe abroad now, I haue knowne
This Citie now aboue this ſeuen yeers,
But I proteſt in better ſtate of gouernement,
I neuer knew it yet, nor euer heard of,
There has beene more religious wholeſome Lawes
In the halfe cirkle of a yeere erected
For common good, then memorie euer knew of,
Setting apart corruption of Promoters,
And other poyſonous Officers that infect
And with a venemous breath taint euerie goodneſſe.
O that e're I was begot, or bred, or borne.
Be content ſweet Wife.
What's here to doe now?
I hold my life ſhe's in deepe paſſion
For the impriſonment of Veale and Mutton
Now kept in Garets, weepes for ſome Calues Head now,
Me thinkes her Husbands Head might ſerue with Bacon.
Hiſt.
Patience ſweet Wife.
Brother I haue ſought you ſtrangely.
Why what's the buſineſſe?
With all ſpeed thou canſt procure a Licence for me.
How, a Licence?
Cuds-foot ſhe's loſt elſe, I ſhall miſſe her euer.
Nay ſure thou ſhalt not miſſe ſo faire a marke▪
For thirteene ſhillings foure pence.
Thankes by hundreds.
Nay pray thee ceaſe, I'le be at more coſt yet,
Thou know'ſt we are rich enough.
All but in bleſſings,
And there the Begger goes beyond vs. O, ô, ô,
To be ſeuen yeeres a Wife and not a Child, ô not a Child.
Sweet Wife haue patience.
Can any Woman haue a greater cut?
I know 'tis great, but what of that Wife?
I cannot doe with all, there's things making
By thine owne Doctors aduice at Poticaries,
I ſpare for nothing Wife, no if the price
Were fortie markes a ſpoone-full,
I'de giue a thouſand pound to purchaſe fruitfulneſſe,
'Tis but bating ſo many good workes
In the erecting of Bridewels and Spittle-houſes,
And ſo fetch it vp againe, for hauing none
I meane to make good deeds my Children.
Giue me but thoſe good deeds, and I'le find Children.
Hang thee, thou haſt had too many.
Thouly'ſt breuitie.
O horrible, dar'ſt thou call me breuitie?
Dar'ſt thou be ſo ſhort with me?
Thou deſerueſt worſe.
Thinke but vpon the goodly Lands and Liuings
That's kept backe through want on't.
Talke not on't pray thee,
Thou'lt make me play the Woman, and weepe too.
'Tis our dry barrenneſſe puffes vp Sr Walter,
None gets by your not-getting, but that Knight,
He's made by th' meanes, and fats his fortunes, ſhortly
In a great Dowry with a Gold-Smiths Daughter.
They may be all deceiued,
Be but you patient Wife.
I haue ſuffred a long time.
Suffer thy Heart out, a Poxe ſuffer thee.
Nay thee, thou deſertleſſe Slaue.
Come, come, I ha' done,
You'le to the Goſſiping of Mr Allwits Child?
Yes, to my much ioy,
Euerie one gets before me, there's my Siſter
Was married but at Bartholmew-eeue laſt,
And ſhe can haue two Children at a birth,
O one of them, one of them would ha' ſeru'd my turne.
Sorrow conſume thee, thou art ſtill croſſing me,
And know'ſt my nature.
O Miſtris, weeping or rayling,
That's our Houſe harmony.
What ſay'ſt Iugg?
The ſweeteſt newes.
What iſt Wench?
Throw downe your Doctors Drugges,
They're all but Heretikes, I bring certaine remedy
That has beene taught, and proued, and neuer fayl'd.
O that, that, that or nothing.
There's a Gentleman,
I haply haue his Name too, that has got
Nine Children by one Water that he vſeth,
It neuer miſes, they come ſo faſt vpon him,
He was faine to giue it ouer.
His name ſweet Iugg?
One Mr Tuchwood, a fine Gentleman,
But run behind-hand much with getting Children.
Iſt poſſible?
Why Sir, he'le vndertake,
Vſing that Water, within fifteene yeere,
For all your wealth, to make you a poore Man,
You ſhall ſo ſwarme with Children.
I'le venture that I faith.
That ſhall you Husband.
But I muſt tell you firſt, he's very deere.
No matter, what ſerues wealth for?
True ſweet Husband,
There's Land to come, Put caſe his Water ſtands me
In ſome fiue hundred pound a pint,
'Twill fetch a thouſand, and a Kerſten Soule.
I'le about it.
And that's worth all ſweet Husband.
I'le goe bid Goſſips preſently my ſelfe,
That's all the worke I'le doe, nor need I ſtirre,
But that it is my pleaſure to walke forth
And ayre my ſelfe a little, I am ty'd to nothing
In this buſineſſe, what I doe is meerely recreation,
Not conſtraint.
Here's running to and fro, Nurſe vpon Nurſe,
Three Chare women, beſides maids & neighbors children.
Fye, what a trouble haue I rid my Hands on,
It makes me ſweat to thinke on't.
How now Iacke?
I am going to bid Goſſips for your Wps child Sir,
A goodly Girle I faith, giue you ioy on her,
She looks as if ſhe had two thouſand pound to her portion
And run away with a Taylor, A fine plumpe black ei'd ſlut,
Vnder correction Sir,
I take delight to ſee her: Nurſe.
Doe you call Sir?
I call not you, I call the Wet Nurſe hither,
Giue me the wet Nurſe, I 'tis thou,
Come hither, come hither,
Lets ſee her once againe; I cannot chuſe
But buſſe her thrice an hower.
You may be proud on't Sir,
'Tis the beſt peece of worke that e're you did.
Think'ſt thou ſo Nurſe, What ſayeſt to Wat and Nicke?
They're pretie children both, but here's a wench
Will be a knocker.
Pup ſay'ſt thou me ſo, pup little Counteſſe,
Faith Sir I thanke your Worſhip for this Girle,
Ten thouſand times, and vpward.
I am glad I haue her for you Sir.
Here take her in Nurſe, wipe her, and giue her Spoone-meat.
Wipe your Mouth Sir.
And now about theſe Goſſips.
Get but two, I'le ſtand for one my ſelfe.
To your owne Child Sir?
The better pollicie, it preuents ſuſpition,
'Tis good to play with rumor at all weapons.
Troth I commend your care Sir, 'tis a thing
That I ſhould ne're haue thought on.
The more Slaue,
When Man turnes baſe, out goes his Soules pure flame,
The fat of eaſe o're-throwes the eyes of ſhame.
I am ſtudying who to get for Godmother
Sutable to your Worſhip, Now I ha' thought on't.
I'le eaſe you of that care, and pleaſe my ſelfe in't
My Loue the Goldſmithes Daughter, if I ſend,
Her Father will command her, Dauy Dahumma.
I'le fit your Worſhip then with a Male Partner.
What is he?
A kind proper Gentleman, Brother to Mr Tuchwood.
I know Tuchwood, has he a Brother liuing?
A neat Batchelor.
Now we know him, we'le make ſhift with him
Diſpatch the time drawes neere, Come hither Dauy.
In troth I pittie him, he ne're ſtands ſtill,
Poore Knight what paines he takes, ſends this way one,
That way another, has not an houres leaſure,
I would not haue thy toyle, for all thy pleaſure,
Ha, how now, what are theſe that ſtand ſo cloſe
At the Street-corner, pricking vp their Eares,
And ſnuffing vp their Noſes, like rich-mens Dogges
When the firſt Courſe goes in? By the maſſe Promoters,
'Tis ſo I hold my life, and planted there
To arreſt the dead Corps of poore Calues and Sheepe,
Like rauenous Creditors, that will not ſuffer
The Bodyes of their poore departed Debtors
To goe to' th' graue, but eene in Death to vex
And ſtay the Corps, with Billes of Middleſex,
This Lent will fat the whoreſons vp with Sweetbreds,
And lard their whores with Lambe-ſtones, what their gols
Can clutch, goes preſently to their Mols and Dols,
The Bawds will be ſo fat with what they earne,
Their Chins will hang like Vdders, by Eaſter-eeue,
And being ſtroak't, will giue the Milke of Witches,
How did the Mungrels heare my wife lyes in?
Well, I may baffle 'em gallantly, By your fauour Gentlemen
I am a ſtranger both vnto the Citie,
And to her carnall ſtricktneſſe.
Good, Your will Sir?
Pray tell me where one dwells that kils this Lent.
How kils? Come hither Dicke,
A Bird, a Bird.
What iſt that you would haue?
Faith any Fleſh,
But I long eſpecially for Veale and Greene-ſauce.
Greene-Gooſe, you ſhall be ſau'ſt.
I haue halfe a ſcornefull ſtomacke, no Fiſh will be admitted.
Not this Lent Sir?
Lent, what cares Colon here for Lent?
You ſay well Sir,
Good reaſon that the Colon of a Gentleman
As you were lately pleas'd to terme your worſhip Sir,
Should be fulfill'd with anſwerable food,
To ſharpen Blood, delight Health, and tickle Nature,
Were you directed hither to this Street Sir?
That I was, I marry.
And the Butcher belike
Should kill, and ſell cloſe in ſome vpper Roome?
Some Apple-loft as I take it, or a Cole-houſe,
I know not which I faith.
Either will ſerue,
This Butcher ſhall kifſe Newgate, leſſe he turne vp the
Bottome of the Pocket of his Apron,
You goe to ſeeke him?
Where you ſhall not find him,
I'le buy, walke by your Noſes with my Fleſh,
Sheepe-biting Mungrels, Hand-basket Free-booters,
My Wife lyes in, a footra for Promoters.
That ſhall not ſerue your turn, what a Rogue's this, how cunningly he came ouer vs?
Huſht, ſtand cloſe.
I haue ſcap't well thus farre, they ſay the Knaues are wondrous hot and buſie.
By your leaue Sir,
We muſt ſee what you haue vnder your Cloake there.
Haue? I haue nothing.
No, doe you tell vs that, what makes this lumpe ſticke out then, we muſt ſee Sir.
What will you ſee Sir, a paire of Sheets, and two of my Wiues foule Smocks, going to the Waſhers?
O we loue that ſight well, you cannot pleaſe vs better: What doe you gull vs, call you theſe Shirts and Smockes?
Now a Poxe choake you,
You haue cozend me and fiue of my Wiues kinred
Of a good Dinner, we muſt make it vp now
With Herrings and Milke-potage.
'Tis all Veale.
All Veale, Poxe the worſe lucke, I promis'd faithfully to ſend this morning a fat quarter of Lambe, to a kind Gentlewoman in Turnebull ſtreet that longs, and how I'me croſt.
Let's ſhare this, and ſee what hap comes next then.
Agreed, ſtand cloſe againe, another bootie,
What's he?
Sir, by your fauour.
Meaning me Sir?
Good Mr Oliuer, cry thee mercie, I faith.
What haſt thou there?
A Racke of Mutton Sir, and halfe a Lambe,
You know my Miſtriſſes dyet.
Goe, goe, we ſee thee not, away, keepe cloſe,
Heart let him paſſe, thou'lt neuer haue the wit
To know our benefactors.
I haue forgot him.
'Tis M. Beggerlands man the wealthy Merchant
That is in fee with vs.
Now I haue a feeling of him.
You know he purchaſt the whole Lent together
Gaue vs ten groats a peece on Aſh-wenſday.
True, true.
A Wench.
Why then ſtand cloſe indeed.
Women had need of wit, if they'le ſhift here,
And ſhe that hath wit, may ſhift any-where.
Looke, looke, poore Foole,
She has left the Rumpe vncouer'd too,
More to betray her, this is like a Murdrer,
That will out-face the deed with a bloody Band.
What time of the yeere iſt Siſter?
O ſweet Gentlemen, I am a poore Seruant,
Let me goe.
You ſhall Wench, but this muſt ſtay with vs.
O you vndoe me Sir,
'Tis for a welthy Gentlewoman that takes Phyſicke Sir,
The Doctor do's allow my Miſtris Mutton,
O as you tender the deere life of a Gentlewoman,
I'le bring my Maſter to you, he ſhall ſhew you
A true authoritie from the higher powers,
And I'le run euerie foot.
Well, leaue your Basket then,
And run and ſpare not.
Will you ſweare then to me,
To keepe it till I come.
Now by this light I will.
What ſay you Gentleman?
What a ſtrange Wench 'tis?
Would we might periſh elſe.
Nay then I run Sir.
And ne're returne I hope.
A politike Baggage,
She makes vs ſweare to keepe it,
I prethe looke what market ſhe hath made.
Imprimis Sir, a good fat Loyne of Mutton,
What comes next vnder this Cloath?
Now for a quarter of Lambe.
Not for a Shoulder of Mutton.
Done.
Why done Sir.
By the maſſe I feele I haue loſt,
'Tis of more weight I faith.
Some Loyne of Veale?
No faith, here's a Lambes Head,
I feele that plainly, why yet win my wager.
Ha?
Swounds what's here?
A Child.
A Poxe of all diſſembling cunning Whores.
Here's an vnlucky Breakefaſt.
What ſhal's doe?
The Queane made vs ſweare to keepe it too.
We might leaue it elſe.
Villanous ſtrange,
'Life had ſhe none to gull, but poore Promoters,
That watch hard for a liuing.
Halfe our gettings muſt run in Suger-ſope,
And Nurſes wages now, beſides many a pound of Sope,
And Tallow, we haue need to get Loynes of Mutton ſtill,
To ſaue Suet to change for Candles.
Nothing mads me, but this was a Lamb head with you, you felt it, ſhe has made Calues heads of vs.
Prethe no more on't,
There's time to get it vp, it is not come
To Mid-Lent Sunday yet.
I am ſo angry, I'le watch no more to day.
Faith nor I neither.
Why then I'le make a motion.
Well, what iſt?
Let's e'ne goe to the Checker at Queene-hiue and roſt the Loyne of Mutton, till young Flood, then ſend the Child to Branford.
'Tis a buſie day at our Houſe Dauy.
Alwayes the Kurſning day Sir.
Truſſe, truſſe me Dauy.
No matter and you were hang'd Sir.
How do's this Sute fit me Dauy?
Excellent neatly, my Maſters things were euer fit for you Sir, e'ne to a Haire you know.
Thou haſt hit it right Dauy,
We euer iumpt in one, this ten yeeres Dauy,
So well ſaid, what art thou?
Your Comfit-makers Man Sir.
O ſweet youth, into the Nurſe quicke,
Quicke, 'tis time I faith,
Your Miſtris will be here?
She was ſetting forth Sir.
Here comes our Goſſips now, O I ſhall haue ſuch kiſſing worke to day, Sweet Miſtris Ʋnderman welcome I faith.
Giue you ioy of your fine Girle Sir,
Grant that her education may be pure,
And become one of the faithfull.
Thankes to your Siſterly wiſhes Mr Ʋnderman.
Are any of the Brethrens Wiues yet come?
There are ſome Wiues within, and ſome at home.
Verily thankes Sir.
Verily you are an Aſſe forſooth,
I muſt ſit all theſe times, or there's no Muſicke,
Here comes a friendly and familier payer,
Now I like theſe Wenches well.
How do'ſt ſirra?
Faith well I thanke you Neighbor, and how do'ſt thou?
Want nothing, but ſuch getting Sir as thine.
My gettings wench, they are poore.
Fye that thou'lt ſay ſo,
Th'aſt as fine Children as a Man can get.
I as a Man can get,
And that's my Maſter.
They are pretie fooliſh things,
Put to making in minutes,
I ne're ſtand long about 'em,
Will you walke in Wenches?
The hapieſt meeting that our ſoules could wiſh for
Here's the Ring ready, I am beholding vnto your Fathers haſt, h'as kept his howre.
He neuer kept it better.
Backe, be ſilent.
Miſtris and Partner, I will put you both into one Cup.
Into one Cup, moſt proper,
A fitting complement for a Gold-ſmiths Daughter.
Yes Sir, that's he muſt be your Worſhips Partner
In this dayes buſineſſe, Mr Tuchwoods Brother.
I embrace your acquaintance Sir.
It vowes your ſeruice Sir.
It's neere high time, come Mr All-wit.
Ready Sir.
Wil't pleaſe you walke?
Sir I obey your time.
Good Mris Yellowhammer.
In faith I will not.
Indeed it ſhall be yours
I haue ſworne I ſaith.
I'le ſtand ſtill then.
So will you let the Child goe without company
And make me forſworne.
You are ſuch another Creature.
Before me, I pray come downe a little.
Not a whit, I hope I know my place.
Your place, great wonder ſure, are you any better then a Comfit-makers wife.
And that's as good at all times as a Pothicaries.
Ye lye, yet I forbeare you too.
Come ſweet Siſter, we goe in vnitie, and ſhew the fruits of peace like Children of the Spirit.
I loue lowlineſſe.
True, ſo ſay I, though they ſtriue more,
There comes as proud behind, as goes before.
Euerie inch I faith.
O Sir, if euer you felt the force of loue, pittie it in me.
Yes, though I ne're was married Sir,
I haue felt the force of loue from good mens daughters,
And ſome that will be Mayds yet three yeeres hence.
Haue you got a Licence?
Here 'tis ready Sir.
That's well.
The Ring and all things perfect, ſhe'le ſteale hither.
She ſhall be welcome Sir, I'le not be long
A clapping you together.
O here ſhe's come Sir.
What's he?
My honeſt Brother.
Quicke, make haſt Sirs.
You muſt diſpatch with all the ſpeed you can,
For I ſhall be miſt ſtraight, I made hard ſhift
For this ſmall time I haue.
Then I'le not linger,
Place that Ring vpon her Finger,
This the Finger playes the part,
Whoſe maſter Veine ſhoots from the Heart,
Now ioyne Hands.
Which I will ſeuer,
And ſo ne're againe meet neuer.
O we are betray'd.
Hard fate.
I am ſtrucke with wonder.
Was this the politike fetch, thou miſticall baggage
Thou diſobedient ſtrumpet,
And were ſo wiſe to ſend for her to ſuch an end,
Now I diſclaime the end, you'le make me mad.
And what are you Sir?
And you cannot ſee with thoſe two Glaſſes, put on a paire more.
I dreampt of anger ſtill, here take your Ring Sir,
Ha this, life 'tis the ſame, abhominable,
Did not I ſell this Ring?
I thinke you did, you receiued money for't.
Heart, harke you Knight,
Here's no inconſcionable villany,
Set me a worke to make the Wedding Ring,
And come with an intent to ſteale my Daughter,
Did euer run-a-way match it?
'This your Brother Sir?
He can tell that as well as I.
The verie Poeſie mockes me to my face,
Loue that's wiſe, blinds Parents eyes,
I thanke your wiſedome Sir for blinding of vs,
We haue good hope to recouer our ſight ſhortly,
In the meane time I will locke vp this baggage,
As carefully as my Gold, ſhe ſhall ſee as little Sunne
If a cloſe Roome or ſo can keepe her from the light on't.
O ſweet Father, for Loues ſake pittie me.
Away.
Farewell Sir, all content bleſſe thee,
And take this for comfort,
Though violence keepe me, thou canſt looſe me neuer,
I am euer thine although we part for euer.
I we ſhall part you Minkes.
Your acquaintance Sir, came verie lately,
Yet it came too ſoone,
I muſt here-after know you for no friend,
But one that I muſt ſhun like Peſtilence,
Or the Diſeaſe of Luſt.
Like enough Sir, you ha' tane me at the worſt time for words that e're ye pick't out, faith doe not wrong me Sir.
Looke after him and ſpare not, there he walkes
That neuer yet receiued baffling, you'r bleſt
More then e're I knew, goe take your reſt.
I pardon you, you are both looſers.
How iſt Woman, we haue brought you home
A Kurſen Soule.
I, I thanke your paines.
And verily well kurſend, i'the right way,
Without Idolatry or Superſtition,
After the pure manner of Amſterdam.
Sit downe good Neighbours, Nurſe.
At hand forſooth.
Looke they haue all low ſtooles
They haue forſooth.
Bring the Child hither Nurſe, how ſay you now
Goſſip, iſt not a chopping Girle, ſo like the Father?
As if it had beene ſpit out of his Mouth,
By'd, nos'd, and brow'd as like a Girle can be,
Onely indeed it has the Mothers Mouth.
The Mothers Mouth vp and downe, vp and downe.
'Tis a large Child, ſhe's but a little Woman.
No beleeue me, a verie ſpynie Creature, but all hart,
Well metteld, like the faithfull to endure
Her tribulation here, and rayſe vp ſeed.
She had a ſore labour on't I warrant you, you can tell Neighbour.
O ſhe had great ſpeed,
We were afrayd once,
But ſhe made vs all haue ioyfull hearts againe,
'Tis a good Soule I faith,
The Midwife found her a moſt cheerefull Daughter.
'Tis the ſpirit, the Siſters are all like her,
O here comes the chiefe Goſſip Neighbours.
The fatneſſe of your wiſhes to you all Ladyes.
O deer ſweet gentleman, what fine words he has
The fatneſſe of our wiſhes.
Calles vs all Ladyes.
I promiſe you a fine Gentleman, and a courteous.
Me thinkes her Husband ſhewes like a Clowne to him.
I would not care what Clowne my Husband were too, ſo I had ſuch fine Children.
She's all fine Children Goſſip.
I, and ſee how faſt they come.
Children are bleſſings, if they be got with zeale,
By the Brethren, as I haue fiue at home.
The worſt is paſt, I hope now Goſſip.
So I hope to good Sir.
Why then ſo hope I too for company,
I haue nothing to doe elſe.
A poore remembrance Lady,
To the loue of the Babe, I pray accept of it.
O you are at too much charge Sir.
Looke, looke, what has he giuen her, what Iſt Goſſip?
Now by my faith a faire high ſtanding Cup, and two great Poſtle Spoones, one of them gilt.
Sure that was Iudas then with the red Beard.
I would not feed my daughter with that ſpoone for all the World, for feare of colouring her Heyre, Red Hayre the Brethren like not, it conſumes them much, 'tis not the Siſters colour.
Well ſaid Nurſe,
About, about with them amongſt the Goſſips,
Now out comes all the taſſeld Handkerchers,
They are ſpred abroad betweene their Knees already,
Now in goes the long Fingers that are waſh't
Some thrice a day in Vrin, my Wife vſes it,
Now we ſhall haue ſuch pocketing,
See how they lurch at the lower end.
Come hither Nurſe.
Againe, ſhe has taken twice already.
I had forgot a Siſters Child that's ſicke.
A Pox it ſeemes your purity loues ſweet things well that puts in thrice together, had this beene all my coſt now I had beene beggerd, theſe Women haue no conſciences at ſweet meats, where e're they come, ſee and they haue not culd out all the long Plumbes too, they haue left nothing here but ſhort riggle-tayle-Comfits, not worth mouthing, no mar'le I heard a Citizen complaine once, that his Wiues Belly onely broke his Backe: Mine had beene all in fitters ſeuen yeeres ſince, but for this worthy Knight, that with a prop vpholds my Wife and me, and all my eſtate buried in Bucklers-berrie.
Here Mris Yellowhammer, and Neighbours,
To you all that haue taken paines with me,
All the good Wiues at once.
I'le anſwer for them,
They wiſh all health and ſtrength,
And that you may couragiouſly goe forward,
To performe the like and many ſuch,
Like a true Siſter with Motherly bearing.
Now the cups trole about to wet the goſſips whiſtles
It poures downe I faith, they neuer thinke of payment.
Fill againe Nurſe.
Now bleſſe thee, two at once, I'le ſtay no longer,
It would kill me and if I pay'd for't,
Will it pleaſe you to walke downe and leaue the women.
With all my Heart Iacke.
Troth I cannot blame you.
Sit you all merry Ladyes.
Thanke your Worſhip Sir.
Thanke your Worſhip Sir.
A Pox twice tipple ye, you are laſt & loweſt.
Bring hither that ſame Cup-Nurſe, I would faine driue away this hup Antichriſtian griefe.
See Goſſip and ſhe lyes not in like a Counteſſe,
Would I had ſuch a Husband for my Daughter.
Is not ſhe toward marriage?
O no ſweet Goſſip.
Why ſhe's nineteene?
I that ſhe was laſt Lammas,
But ſhe has a fault Goſſip, a ſecret fault.
A fault, what iſt?
I'le tell you when I haue drunke.
Wine can doe that I ſee, that friendſhip cannot.
And now I'le tell you Goſſip, ſhe's too free.
To free?
O I, ſhe cannot lye dry in her Bed.
What, and nineteene?
'Tis as I tell you Goſſip.
Speake with me Nurſe, who iſt?
A Gentleman from Cambridge,
I thinke it be your Soone forſooth.
'Tis my Soone Tim I faith,
Prethe call him vp among the Women,
'Twill imbolden him well,
For he wants nothing but audacitie,
'Would the Welch gentlewoman at home were here now.
Is your Sonne come forſooth?
Yes from the Vniuerſitie forſooth.
'Tis great ioy on yee.
There's a great marriage towards for him.
A marriage?
Yes ſure, a hughe Heire in Wales,
At leaſt to nineteene Mountaines,
Beſides her Goods and Cattell.
O, I'me betray'd.
What gone againe, run after him good Nurſe,
He's ſo baſhfull, that's the ſpoyle of youth,
In the Vniuerſitie they're kept ſtill to Men,
And ne're trayn'd vp to Womens company.
'Tis a great ſpoyle of youth indeed.
Your Mother will haue it ſo.
Why Sonne, why Tim,
What muſt I riſe and fetch you? For ſhame Sonne.
Mother you doe intreat like a freſh Woman,
'Tis againſt the Lawes of the Vniuerſitie,
For any that has anſwered vnder Batchelor
To thruſt 'mongſt married Wiues.
Come we'le excuſe you here.
Call vp my Tutor Mother, and I care not.
What is your Tutor come, haue you brought him vp?
I ha' not brought him vp, he ſtands at dore,
Negatur, there's Logicke to begin with you Mother.
Run call the gentleman nurſe, he's my ſons tutor
Here eat ſome Plumbes.
Come I from Cambridge, and offer me ſix plumbs?
Why how now Tim,
Will not your old trickes yet be left?
Seru'd like a Child,
When I haue anſwer'd vnder Batcheler?
You'le neuer lin till I make your Tutor whip you, you know how I ſeru'd you once at the Free Schoole in Pauls Church-yeard?
O monſtrous abſurditie,
Ne're was the like in Cambridge ſince my time,
'Life whip a Batcheler, yow'ld be laught at ſoundly,
Let not my Tutor heare you,
'Twould be a Ieſt through the whole Vniuerſitie,
No more words Mother.
Is this your Tutor Tim?
Yes ſurely Lady, I am the man that brought him in League with Logicke, and red the Dunces to him.
That did he Mother, but now I haue 'em all in my owne Pate, and can as well read 'em to others.
That can he Miſtris, for they flow naturally from him.
I'me the more beholding to your paynes Sir.
No ideo ſa.
True, he was an Ideot indeed,
When he went out of London, but now he's well mended▪
Did you receiue the two Gooſe-pies I ſent you?
And eat them hartely, thankes to your Worſhip.
'Tis my Sonne Tim, I pray bid him welcome Gentlewomen.
Tim, harke you Timothius Mother, Timothius.
How, ſhall I deny your Name? Timothius quoth he? Faith there's a name, 'tis my Sonne Tim forſooth.
You're welcome Mr Tim.
O this is horrible, ſhe wets as ſhe kiſſes,
Your Handkercher ſweet Tutor, to wipe them off, as faſt as they come on.
Welcome from Cambridge.
This is intollerable, This woman has a villanous ſweet breath, did ſhe not ſtinke of Comfits, Helpe me ſweet Tutor, or I ſhall rub my Lips off.
I'le goe kiſſe the lower end the whil'ſt.
Perhaps that's the ſweeter, and we ſhall diſpatch the ſooner.
Let me come next, Welcome from the Welſpring of diſcipline, that waters all the Brethren.
Hoyſt I beſeech thee.
O bleſſe the Woman, Mr Vnderman.
'Tis but the common affliction of the faithfull,
We muſt embrace our falles.
I'me glad I ſcap't it, it was ſome rotten kiſſe ſure,
It dropt downe before it came at me.
Here's a noyſe, not parted yet?
Hyda, a Looking-glaſſe, they haue drunke ſo hard in Plate,
That ſome of them had need of other Veſſels,
Yonder's the braueſt Shew.
Where? Where Sir?
Come along preſently by the Piſſing-conduit,
With two braue Drums and a Standert-bearer.
O Braue.
Come Tutor.
Farwell ſweet Goſſip.
I thanke you all for your paynes.
Feed and grow ſtrong.
You had more need to ſleepe then eat,
Goe take a nap with ſome of the Brethren, goe,
And riſe vp a well edified, boldified Siſter,
O here's a day of toyle well paſt o're,
Able to make a Citizen Hare mad,
How hot they haue made the Roome with their thicke Bums,
Do'ſt not feele it Dauy?
Monſtrous ſtrong Sir.
What's here vnder the Stooles?
Nothing but wet Sir, ſome Wine ſpilt here belike.
Iſt no worſe think'ſt thou?
Faire Needle worke Stooles, coſt nothing with them Dauy
Nor you neither I faith.
Looke how they haue layd them,
Ee'ne as they lye themſelues, with their Heeles vp,
How they haue ſhufflled vp the Ruſhes too Dauy
With their ſhort figging little ſhittle-corke-heels,
Theſe Women can let nothing ſtand as they find it,
But what's the ſecret thou'ſt about to tell me
My honeſt Dauy?
If you ſhould diſcloſe it Sir.
Life rip my Belly vp to the Throat then Dauy.
My Maſter's vpon Marriage.
Marriage Dauy, ſend me to hanging rather.
I haue ſtong him.
When, where, what is ſhe Dauy?
E'ne the ſame was Goſſip, and gaue the Spoone.
I haue no time to ſtay, nor ſcarce can ſpeake,
I'le ſtop thoſe wheeles, or all the worke will breake.
I knew 'twold pricke, Thus doe I faſhion ſtill
All mine owne ends by him and his ranke toyle,
'Tis my deſire to keepe him ſtill from marriage,
Being his poore neereſt Kinſman, I may fare
The better at his death, there my hopes build
Since my Lady Kixe is dry, and hath no Child.
Y'are in the happieſt way to enrich your ſelfe,
And pleaſure me Brother, as Mans feet can tread in,
For though ſhe be lock't vp, her vow is fix't onely to me;
Then time ſhall neuer grieue me, for by that vow,
E'ne abſent inioy her, aſſuredly confirm'd that none
Elſe ſhall, which will make tedious yeeres ſeeme gamefull
To me, In the meane ſpace loſe you no time ſweet brother,
You haue the meanes to ſtrike at this Knights fortunes,
And lay him leuell with his bankrout merit,
Get but his Wife with Child, perch at tree top,
And ſhake the golden fruit into her Lap,
About it before ſhe weepe her ſelfe to a dry ground,
And whine out all her goodneſſe.
Prethe ceaſe, I find a too much aptneſs in my blood
For ſuch a buſineſſe without prouocation,
You might 'well ſpar'd this banket of Oringoes,
Hartechokes, Potatoes, and your butter'd Crabbe,
They were fitter kept for your owne wedding dinner.
Nay and you'le follow my ſuit, & ſaue my purſe too
Fortune doats on me, he's in happy caſe
Finds ſuch an honeſt friend i'the Common place.
Life what makes thee ſo merry? thou haſt no cauſe
That I could heare of lately ſince thy croſſes,
Vnleſſe there be newes come, with new additions.
Why there thou haſt it right,
I looke for her this Euening Brother.
How's that, looke for her?
I will deliuer you of the wonder ſtreight Brother,
By the firme ſecreſie, and kind aſſiſtance
Of a good Wench i'the Houſe, who made of pittie,
Weighing the caſe her owne, ſhe's lead through Gutters,
Strange hidden wayes, which none but Loue could find,
Or ha' the Heart to venture, I expect her
Where you would little thinke.
I care not where, ſo ſhe be ſafe, and yours.
Hope telles me ſo,
But from your loue and time my peace muſt grow.
You know the worſt then brother, now to my Kix
The barren he and ſhe, they're i'the next Roome,
But to ſay which of their two humors hold them
Now at this inſtant, I cannot ſay truly.
Thou lyeſt Barrenneſſe.
O iſt that time of day, giue you ioy of your tongue
There's nothing elſe good in you, this their life
The whole day from eyes open to eyes ſhut,
Kiſſing or ſcolding, and then muſt be made friends,
Then rayle the ſecond part of the firſt fit out,
And then be pleas'd againe, no Man knowes which way,
Fall out like Giants, and fall in like Children,
Their Fruit can witneſſe as much.
'Tis thy fault.
Mine, Drouth and coldneſſe?
Thine, 'tis thou art barren.
I barren, ó life that I durſt but ſpeake now,
In mine owne Iuſtice, in mine owne Right, I barren,
'Twas otherwayes with me when I was at Court,
I was ne're call'd ſo till I was married.
I'le be deuorc't.
Be hang'd, I need not wiſh it,
That will come too ſoone to thee:
I may ſay, Marriage and hanging goes by deſtiny,
For all the goodneſſe I can find in't yet.
I'le giue vp Houſe, & keepe ſome fruitfull whore,
Like an old Batcheler in a Tradſmans Chamber,
She and her Children ſhall haue all.
Where be they?
Pray ceaſe,
When there are friendlier courſes tooke for you,
To get and multiply within your Houſe,
At your owne proper coſts in ſpight of cenſure,
Me thinkes an honeſt peace might be eſtabliſh't.
What with her? Neuer.
Sweet Sir.
You worke all in vaine.
Then he doth all like thee.
Let me intreat Sir.
Singleneſſe confound her,
I tooke her with one Smocke.
But indeed you came not ſo ſingle,
When you came from Shipboard.
Heart ſhe bit ſore there,
Prethe make's friends.
Iſt come to that, the peale begins to ceaſe.
I'le ſell all at an Out-cry.
Doe thy worſt Slaue,
Good ſweet Sir bring vs into loue againe.
Some would thinke this impoſſible to compaſſe,
Pray let this ſtorme fly ouer.
Good Sir pardon me, I'me Maſter of this Houſe,
Which I'le ſell preſently, I'le clap vp Billes this Euening.
Lady friends come?
If e're ye lou'd Woman, talke not on't Sir, what friends with him? good faith do you think I'me mad with one that's ſcarce the hinder quarter of a Man?
Thou art nothing of a Woman.
Would I were leſſe then nothing.
Nay prethe what do'ſt meane?
I cannot pleaſe you.
I faith thou art a good Soule, he lyes that ſayes it,
Buſſe, buſſe, pretie Rogue.
You care not for me.
Can any man tell now which way they came in?
By this light I'le be hang'd then.
Is the Drinke come?
Here's a little Viall of Almond-milke
That ſtood me in ſome three pence.
I hope to ſee thee wench within theſe few yeeres,
Cirkled with Children, pranking vp a Girle,
And putting Iewels in their little Eares,
Fine ſport I ſaith.
I had you beene ought Husband,
It had beene done ere this time.
Had I bin ought, hang thee, had'ſt thou bin ought,
But a croſſe thing I euer found thee.
Thou art a Grub to ſay ſo.
A Pox on thee.
By this light they are out againe at the ſame dore,
And no Man can tell which way,
Come here's your Drinke Sir.
I will not take it now Sir,
And I were ſure to get three Boyes ere Midnight.
Why there thou ſhew'ſt now of what breed thou com'ſt
To hinder generation, O thou Villaine,
That knowes how crookedly the World goes with vs,
For want of Heires, yet put by all good fortune.
Hang ſtrumpet, I will take it now in ſpight.
Then you muſt ride vpon't fiue houres.
I meane ſo, Within there?
Sir?
Saddle the white Mare,
I'le take a Whore along, and ride to Ware.
Ride to the Diuel.
I'le plague you euerie way,
Looke ye, doe you ſee, 'tis gone.
A Pox goe with it.
I curſe and ſpare not now.
Stirre vp and downe ſir, you muſt not ſtand.
Nay I'me not giuen to ſtanding.
So much the better ſir for the —
I neuer could ſtand long in one place yet,
I learnt it of my Father, euer figient,
How if I croſt this Sir?
O paſſing good Sir, and would ſhew well a Horſebacke: When you come to your Inne, If you leapt ouer a ioynt-ſtoole or two, 'twere not amiſſe although you brake your necke Sir.
What ſay you to a Table thus high Sir?
Nothing better Sir, if it be furniſhed with good Victuals. You remember how the bargaine runs about this buſineſſe?
Or elſe I had a bad Head: you muſt receiue Sir foure hundred pounds of me at foure ſeuerall payments:
One hundred pound now in hand.
Right, that I haue Sir.
Another hundred when my Wifes is quicke: the third when ſhe's brought a bed: and the laſt hundred when the Child cryes, For if it ſhould be ſtill borne, it doth no good Sir.
All this is euen ſtill, a little faſter Sir.
Not a whit Sir,
I'me in an excellent pace for any Phyſicke,
Your white Mares ready.
I ſhall vp preſently: One kiſſe, and farewell.
Thou ſhalt haue two Loue.
Expect me about three.
With all my Heart Sweet.
By this light they haue forgot their anger ſince,
And are as farre in againe as e're they were,
Which way the Diuell came they, Haart I ſaw 'em not,
Their wayes are beyond finding out. Come ſweet Lady.
How muſt I take mine Sir?
Cleane contrarie, yours muſt be taken lying.
A Bed Sir?
A Bed, or where you will for your owne eaſe,
Your Coach will ſerue.
The Phyſicke muſt needs pleaſe.
Negatur argumentum Tutor.
Probo tibi Pupill, ſtultus non eſt animal rationale.
Faller is ſane.
Quaſo v taceas, probo tibi.
Quomodo proba domine.
Stultus non habet rationem, ergo non eſt animal rationale.
Sic argumentaris domine, ſtultus non habet rationem, ergo non eſt animal rationale, negatur argumentum againe Tutor.
Argumentum itterum probo tibi domine, qui non participat de ratione nullo modo poteſt vocari rationalibus, but ſtultus non participat de ratione, ergo ſtultus nullo modo poteſt dicere rationalis.
Participat.
Sic diſputus, qui participat quomodo participat.
Ʋt homo, probabo tibi in ſilagiſmo.
Hunc proba.
Sic probo domine, ſtultus eſt homo ſicut tu & ego ſum, homo eſt animal rationele, ſicut ſtultus eſt animal rationale.
Here's nothing but diſputing all the day long with 'em.
Sic diſputus, ſtultus eſt homo ſicut tu & ego ſum homo eſt animal rationale, ſicut ſtultus eſt animal rationale.
Your reaſons are both good what e're they be
Pray giue them or'e, faith you'le tire your ſelues,
What's the matter betweene you?
Nothing but reaſoning about a Foole Mother.
About a Foole Son, alas what need you trouble your heads about that, none of vs all but knowes what a Foole is.
Why what's a Foole Mother?
I come to you now.
Why one that's married before he has wit.
'Tis prettie I faith, and well gueſt of a Woman neuer brought vp at the Vniuerſitie: but bring forth what Foole you will Mother, I'le proue him to be as reaſonable a Creature, as my ſelfe or my Tutor here.
Fye 'tis impoſſible.
Nay he ſhall do't forſooth.
'Tis the eaſieſt thing to proue a Foole by Logicke,
By Logicke I'le proue any thing.
What thou wilt not?
I'le proue a Whore to be an honeſt Woman.
Nay by my faith, ſhe muſt proue that her ſelfe, or Logicke will neuer do't.
'Twill do't I tell you.
Some in this Street would giue a thouſand pounds that you could proue their Wiues ſo.
Faith I can, and all their Daughters too, though they had three Baſtards. When comes your Taylor hither?
Why what of him?
By Logicke I'le proue him to be a Man,
Let him come when he will.
How hard at firſt was Learning to him? Truly
Sir I thought he would neuer a tooke the Latine Tongue.
How many Accidences doe you thinke he wore out e're he came to his Grammer?
Some three or foure.
Beleeue me Sir ſome foure and thirtie.
Piſh I made haberdins of 'em in Church porches
He was eight yeeres in his Grammer, and ſtucke horribly at a fooliſh place there call'd Aſſe in preſenti.
Pox I haue it here now.
He ſo ſham'd me once before an honeſt Gentleman that knew me when I was a Mayd
Theſe women muſt haue all out.
Quideſt Gramatica? Sayes the Gentleman to him (I ſhall remember by a ſweet ſweet token) but nothing could he anſwer.
How now Pupill, ha, Quid eſt Gramatica?
Grammatica? Ha, ha, ha.
Nay doe not laugh Sonne, but let me heare you ſay it now: There was one word went ſo prettily off the Gentlemans tongue, I ſhall remember it the longeſt day of my life.
Come, Quid eſt Gramatica?
Are you not aſham'd Tutor, Gramatica? Why Recte ſcribendi at que loquendi ars, ſer-reuerence of my Mother.
That was it I faith: Why now Sonne I ſee you are a deepe Scholler: And Mr Tutor a word I pray, let vs with-draw a little into my Husbands Chamber, I'le ſend in the North-Wales Gentlewoman to him, ſhe lookes for wooing: I'le put together both, and locke the Dore.
I giue great approbation to your concluſion.
I mar'le what this Gentlewoman ſhould be,
That I ſhould haue in marriage, ſhe's a ſtranger to me:
I wonder what my Parents meane I faith,
To match me with a ſtranger so:
A Mayd that's neither kiſſe nor kin to me:
Life doe they thinke I haue no more care of my Body,
Then to lye with one that I ne're knew,
A meere ſtranger,
One that ne're went to Schoole with me neither,
Nor euer play-fellowes together,
They'r mightily o're-ſeene in't me thinkes,
They ſay ſhe has Mountaines to her marriage,
She's full of Cattell, ſome two thouſand Runts,
Now what the meaning of theſe Runts ſhould be,
My Tutor cannot tell me,
I haue look't in Riders Dixcionarie for the Letter R,
And there I can heare no tydings of theſe Runts neither,
Vnleſſe they ſhould be Rumford Hogges,
I know them not,
And here ſhe comes,
If I know what to ſay to her now
In the way of marriage, I'me no Graduate,
Me thinkes I faith 'tis bouldly done of her
To come into my Chamber being but a ſtranger,
She ſhall not ſay I'me ſo proud yet, but I'le ſpeake to her,
Marry as I will order it,
She ſhall take no hold of my words I'le warrant her,
She lookes and makes a courſey,
Salue tu quo que puella puleherima,
Quid vis neſcio nec ſane curo,
Tully's owne phraſe to a Hart.
I know not what he meanes,
A Sutor quoth a?
I hold my life he vnderſtands no Engliſh.
Ferter me hercule tu virgo,
Wallia vt opibus abundis maximis.
What's this fertur and abundundis?
He mockes me ſure, and calles me a bundle of Farts.
I haue no Latine word now for their Runts, I'le make ſome ſhift or other: Itterum dico opibus abundat maximis montibus & fontibus & vt ita dicam Rontibus, attamen vero homauculus ego ſum natura ſimule arte bachalarius lecto profecto non parata.
This is moſt ſtrange, may be he can ſpeake Welch,
Auedera whee comrage, der due cog foginis.
Cog foggin, I ſcorne to cog with her, I'le tell her ſo too in a word neere her owne Language: Ego non cogo.
Rhegoſin a whiggin harle ron corid ambre.
By my faith ſhe's a good ſcholler, I ſee that already
She has the Tongues plaine, I hold my life ſhe has traueld,
What will folkes ſay? There goes the learned couple,
Faith if the truth were knowne, ſhe hath proceeded.
How now, how ſpeeds your buſineſſe?
I'me glad my Mothers come to part vs.
How doe you agree forſooth?
As well as e're we did before we met.
How's that?
You put me to a Man I vnderſtand not,
Your Sonne's no Engliſh Man me thinkes.
No Engliſh Man, bleſſe my Boy,
And borne i'the Heart of London?
I ha' been long enough in the chamber with him,
And I find neither Welch nor Engliſh in him.
Why Tim, how haue you vs'd the Gentlewoman?
As well as a Man might doe Mother, in modeſt Latine.
Latine Foole?
And ſhe recoyl'd in Hebrew.
In Hebrew Foole? 'Tis Welch.
All comes to one Mother.
She can ſpeake Engliſh too.
Who tould me ſo much?
Heart and ſhe can ſpeake Engliſh, I'le clap to her,
I thought you'ld marrie me to a ſtranger.
You muſt forgiue him, he's ſo inur'd to Latin,
He and his Tutor, that he hath quite forgot
To vſe the Proteſtant tongue.
'Tis quickly pardon'd forſooth.
Tim make amends and kiſſe her,
He makes towards you forſooth.
O delicious, one may diſcouer her Countrey by her kiſſing, 'Tis a true ſaying, there's nothing taſts ſo ſweet as your Welch Mutton: It was reported you could ſing.
O rarely Tim, the ſweeteſt Britiſh Songs.
And 'tis my mind I ſweare before I marrie,
I would ſee all my Wiues good parts at once,
To view how rich I were.
Thou ſhalt here ſweet Muſicke Tim.
Pray forſooth.
CVPID is VENVS onely Ioy,
But he is a wanton Boy,
A verie verie wanton Boy,
He ſhoots at Ladyes naked Breſts,
He is the cauſe of moſt Mens Creſts,
I meane vpon the Forehead,
Inuiſible but horrid,
'Twas he firſt taught vpon the way,
To keepe a Ladyes Lips in play.
Why ſhould not VENVS chide her Sonne,
For the prankes that he hath done,
The wanton prankes that he hath done?
He ſhoots his Firie Darts ſo thicke,
They hurt poore Ladyes to the quicke,
Ah me, with cruell wounding,
His Darts are ſo confounding,
That life and ſence would ſoone decay,
But that he keepes their Lips in play.
Can there be any part of bliſſe,
In a quickly fleeting kiſſe,
A quickly fleeting kiſſe,
To ones pleaſure, leaſures are but waſt,
The ſloweſt kiſſe makes too much haſt,
And looſe it ere we find it,
The pleaſing ſport they onely know,
That cloaſe aboue and cloaſe below.
I would not change my wife for a Kingdome,
I can doe ſomewhat too in my owne Lodging.
Why well ſayd Tim, the Bels goe merrily,
I loue ſuch peales alife, wife lead them in a while,
Here's a ſtrange Gentleman deſires priuate conference.
You'r welcome Sir, the more for your names ſake.
Good Mr Yellowhammer, I loue my name well,
And which a'the Yellowhammers take you deſcent from,
If I may be ſo bold with you, which I pray?
The Yellowhammers in Oxfordſhiere,
Neere Abbington.
And thoſe are the beſt Yellowhammers, and trueſt bred: I came from thence my ſelfe, though now a Citizen: I'le be bold with you, You are moſt welcome.
I hope the zeale I bring with me ſhall deſerue it.
I hope no leſſe, what is your will Sir?
I vnderſtand by rumors, you haue a Daughter,
Which my bold loue ſhall hence-forth title couſen.
I thanke you for her Sir.
I heard of her vertues, and other confirm'd graces.
A plaguy Girle Sir.
Fame ſets her out with richer ornaments,
Then you are pleas'd to boaſt of, 'Tis done modeſtly,
I heare ſhe's towards marriage.
You heare truth Sir.
And with a Knight in Towne, Sr Walter Whorehound.
The verie ſame Sir.
I am the ſorrier for't.
The ſorrier, Why couſen?
'Tis not too farre paſt iſt? It may be yet recal'd?
Recal'd, why good Sir?
Reſolue me in that point ye ſhall heare from me.
There's no Contract paſt.
I am verie ioyfull Sir.
But he's the Man muſt bed her.
By no meanes cus, ſhe's quite vndone then,
And you'le curſe the time that e're you made the match,
He's an arrant whoremaſter, conſumes his time and ſtate, —whom in my knowledge he hath kept this 7 yeres,
Nay cus, an other Mans Wife too.
O ahbominable!
Maintaines the whole houſe, apparels the husband,
Payes ſeruants wadges, not ſo much, but —
Worſe and worſe, & doth the husband know this?
Knowes? I and glad he may too, 'tis his liuing,
As other Trades thriue, Butchers by ſelling Fleſh,
Poulters by venting Connies, or the like cous.
What an incomparable Witall's this?
Tuſh, what cares he for that?
Beleeue me cous, no more then I doe.
What a baſe Slaue is that?
All's one to him, he feeds and takes his eaſe,
Was ne're the Man that euer broake his ſleepe,
To get a Child yet by his owne confeſſion,
And yet his Wife has ſeuen.
What, by Sr Walter?
Sr Walter's like to keepe 'em, and maintaine 'em,
In excellent faſhion, he dares doe no leſſe Sir.
Life has he Children too?
Children? Boyes thus high,
In their Cato and Cordelius.
What you ieſt Sir?
Why, one can make a Verſe,
And is now at Eaton Colledge.
O this newes has cut into my Heart cous.
It had eaten neerer if it had not beene preuented.
One Allwit's Wife.
Allwit? 'Foot I haue heard of him,
He had a Girle Kurſned lately?
I that worke did coſt the Knight aboue a hundred marke.
I'le marke him for a Knaue and Villaine for't,
A thouſand thankes and bleſſings, I haue done with him.
Ha, ha, ha, this Knight will ſticke by my ribs ſtill,
I ſhall not looſe him yet, no Wife will come,
Where e're he woos, I find him ſtill at home, Ha, ha,
Well grant all this, ſay now his deeds are blacke,
Pray what ſerues marriage, but to call him backe,
I haue kept a Whore my ſelfe, and had a Baſtard,
By Mris Anne, in Anno
I care not who knowes it, he's now a iolly fellow,
H'as beene twice Warden, ſo may his fruit be,
They were but baſe begot, and ſo was he,
The Knight is rich, he ſhall be my Sonne-in-Law,
No matter ſo the Whore he keepes be wholeſome,
My Daughter takes no hurt then, ſo let them wed,
I'le haue him ſweat well e're they goe to Bed.
O Husband, Husband.
How now Maudline?
We are all vndone, ſhe's gone, ſhe's gone.
Againe, Death which way?
Ouer the Houſes:
Lay the Water-ſide, ſhe's gone for euer elſe.
O ventrous Baggage!
Theeues, Theeues, my Siſter's ſtolne,
Some Thiefe hath got her:
O how myraculouſly did my Fathers Plate ſcape,
'Twas all left out Tutor.
Iſt poſſible?
Beſides three chaines of Pearle & a Box of Curral.
My Siſter's gone, let's looke at Trig-ſtaires for her,
My Mother's gone to lay the Common-ſtaires,
At Puddle-wharfe, and at the Docke below,
Stands my poore ſilly Father, Run ſweet Tutor, run.
I had beene taken Brother by eight Sergeants,
But for the honeſt Watermen, I am bound to them,
They are the moſt requiteful'ſt people liuing,
For as they get their meanes by Gentlemen,
They are ſtill the forwardeſt to helpe Gentlemen,
You heard how one ſcap't out of the Blacke-Fryers,
But a while ſince from two or three Varlets
Came into the Houſe with all their Rapiers drawne,
As if they'd daunce the Sword-dance on the Stage,
With Candles in their Hands like Chandlers Ghoſts,
Whil'ſt the poore Gentleman ſo purſued and banded,
Was by an honeſt paire of Oares ſafely landed.
I loue them with my Heart for't.
Your firſt Man Sir.
Shall I carrie you Gentlemen with a paire of Oares?
Theſe be the honeſt Fellowes,
Take one paire, and leaue the reſt for her.
Barne-Elmes.
No more Brother.
Your firſt man.
Shall I carrie your Worſhip?
Goe, and you honeſt watermen that ſtay,
Here's a French-crowne for you,
There comes a Mayd with all ſpeed to take water,
Row her luſtily to Barne-Elmes after me.
To Barne-Elmes, good Sir: make ready the boat Sam,
We'le wait below.
What made you ſtay ſo long?
I found the way more dangerous then I look't for.
Away quicke, there's a Boat waites for you,
And I'le take water at Pauls-wharfe, and ouer-take you.
Good Sir doe, we cannot be too ſafe.
Life, call you this cloſe keeping?
She was kept vnder a double locke.
A double Deuill.
That's a buffe Serieant Tutor, he'le ne're were out.
How would you haue Women lock't?
With Padlockes Father, the Venetian vſes it,
My Tutor reads it.
Heart, if ſhe were ſo lock't vp, how got ſhe out?
There was a little hole look't into the gutter,
But who would haue drempt of that?
A wiſer Man would.
He ſayes true Father, a wiſe man for loue will ſeeke euerie hole: my Tutor knowes it.
Verum poeta dicit.
Dicit Virgillius Father.
Prethee talke of thy Gills ſome-where elſe, ſhe's play'd the Gill with me: where's your wiſe Mother now?
Run mad I thinke, I thought ſhe would haue drown'd her ſelfe, ſhe would not ſtay for Oares, but tooke a Smelt-boat: ſure I thinke ſhe be gone a fiſhing for her.
She'le catch a goodly diſh of Gudgeons now,
Will ſerue vs all to Supper.
I'le tug thee home by the Hayre.
Good Miſtris ſpare her.
Tend your owne buſineſſe.
You are a cruell Mother.
O my Heart dyes!
I'le make thee an example for all the Neighbors Daughters.
Farwell life.
You that haue trickes can counterfeit.
Hold, hold Maudline.
I haue brought your Iewell by the Hayre.
She's here Knight.
Forbeare or I'le grow worſe.
Looke on her Tutor, ſhe hath brought her from the Water like a Mermayd, ſhe's but halfe my Siſter now, as farre as the Fleſh goes, the reſt may be ſold to Fiſhwiues.
Deſembling cunning baggage.
Impudent Strumpet.
Either giue ouer both, or I'le giue ouer:
Why haue you vſde me thus vnkind Miſtris?
Wherein haue I deſerued?
You talke too fondly Sir, we'le take another courſe and preuent all, we might haue don't long ſince, we'le looſe no time now, nor truſt to't any longer, to morrow morne as early as Sunne riſe we'le haue you ioyn'd.
O bring me Death to night, Loue pittying Fates,
Let me not ſee to morrow vp vpon the World.
Are you content Sir, till then ſhe ſhall be watch't?
Baggage you ſhall.
Why Father, my Tutor and I will both watch in Armour.
How ſhall we doe for Weapons?
Take you no care for that, if need be I can ſend for conquering mettall Tutor, ne're loſt day yet, 'tis but at Weſtminſter, I am acquainted with him that keepes the Monuments, I can borrow Harry the Fifth's Sword, 'twill ſerue vs both to watch with.
I neuer was ſo neere my wiſh, as this chance
Makes me, ere to morrow noone,
I ſhall receiue two thouſand pound in Gold,
And a ſweet Mayden-head
Worth fourtie.
O thy newes ſplits me.
Halfe drown'd, ſhe cruelly tug'd her by the Hayre,
Forc't her diſgracefully, not like a Mother.
Enough, leaue me like my Ioyes,
Sir ſaw you not a wretched Mayd paſſe this way?
Heart Villaine, is it thou?
Yes Slaue, 'tis I.
I muſt breake through thee then, there is no ſtop
That checkes my Tongue, and all my hopefull fortunes,
That Breaſt excepted, and I muſt haue way.
Sir I beleeue 'twill hold your life in play.
Sir you'le gaine the Heart in my Breſt at firſt?
There is no dealing then, thinke on the Dowrie for two thouſand pounds.
O now 'tis quit Sir.
And being of euen hand, I'le play no longer.
No longer Slaue?
I haue certaine things to thinke on,
Before I dare goe further.
But one bout?
I'le follow thee to death, but ha't out.
A miſerie of a Houſe.
What ſhall become of vs?
I thinke his wound be mortall.
Think'ſt thou ſo Dauy?
Then am I mortall too, but a dead Man Dauy,
This is no world for me, when e're he goes,
I muſt e'ne truſſe vp all, and after him Dauy,
A Sheet with two knots, and away.
O ſee Sir,
How faint he goes, two of my Fellowes lead him.
O me!
Hyday, my wife's layd downe too, here's like to be
A good Houſe kept, when we are altogether downe,
Take paynes with her good Dauy, cheere her vp there,
Let me come to his Worſhip, let me come.
Touch me not Villaine, my wound akes at thee,
Thou poyſon to my Heart.
He raues already,
His ſences are quite gone, he knowes me not,
Looke vp an't like your Worſhip, heaue thoſe Eyes,
Call me to mind, is your remembrance loſt?
Looke in my face, who am I an't like your Worſhip?
If any thing be worſe then Slaue or Villaine,
Thou art the Man.
Alas his poore Worſhips weakeneſſe,
He will begin to know me by little and little.
No Diuell can be like thee.
Ah poore Gentleman,
Me thinkes the paine that thou endureſt.
Thou know'ſt me to be wicked for thy baſeneſſe
Kept the Eyes open ſtill on all my ſinnes,
None knew the deere account my ſoule ſtood charg'd with
So well as thou, yet like Hels flattering Angel,
Would'ſt neuer tell me an't, let'ſt me goe on,
And ioyne with Death in ſleepe, that if I had not wak't
Now by chance, euen by a ſtrangers pittie,
I had euerlaſtingly ſlept out all hope
Of grace and mercie.
Now he is worſe and worſe,
Wife, to him wife, thou waſt wont to doe good on him.
How iſt with you Sir?
Not as with you,
Thou loathſome ſtrumpet: ſome good pittying Man
Remoue my ſinnes out of my ſight a little,
I tremble to behold her, ſhe keepes backe
All comfort while ſhe ſtayes, is this a time,
Vnconſcionable Woman, to ſee thee,
Art thou ſo cruell to the peace of Man,
Not to giue libertie now, the Diuell himſelfe
Shewes a farre fairer reuerence and reſpect
To goodneſſe then thy ſelfe, he dares not doe this,
But part in time of penitence, hides his Face,
When Man with-drawes from him, he leaues the place,
Haſt thou leſſe manners, and more impudence,
Then thy inſtructer, prethee ſhew thy modeſtie,
If the leaſt graine be left, and get thee from me,
Thou ſhould'ſt be rather lock't many Roomes hence,
From the poore miſerable ſight of me▪
If either loue or grace had part in thee.
He is loſt for euer.
Run ſweet Dauy quickly,
And fetch the Children hither, ſight of them,
Will make him cheerefull ſtraight.
O Death! Is this
A place for you to weepe? What teares are thoſe?
Get you away with them, I ſhall fare the worſe,
As long as they are a weeping, they worke againſt me,
There's nothing but thy appetite in that ſorrow,
Thou weep'ſt for Luſt, I feele it in the ſlackneſſe
Of comforts comming towards me,
I was well till thou began'ſt to vndoe me,
This ſhewes like the fruitleſſe ſorrow of a careleſſe mother
That brings her Sonne with dalliance to the Gallowes,
And then ſtands by, and weepes to ſee him ſuffer.
There are the children Sir, an't like your worſhip,
Your laſt fine Girle, in troth ſhe ſmiles,
Looke, looke, in faith Sir.
O my vengeance, let me for euer hide my curſed Face
From ſight of thoſe that darkens all my hopes,
And ſtands betweene me and the ſight of Heauen,
Who ſees me now, ho to and thoſe ſo neere me,
May rightly ſay, I am o're-growne with ſinne,
O how my offences wraſtle with my repentance,
It hath ſcarce breath,
Still my adulterous guilt houers aloft,
And with her blacke Wings beats downe all my prayers.
Ere they be halfe way vp, what's he knowes now,
How long I haue to liue? ô what comes then,
My taſt growes bitter, the round World, all Gall now,
Her pleaſing pleaſures now hath poyſon'd me,
Which I exchang'd my Soule for,
Make way a hundred ſighes at once for me.
Speake to him Nicke.
I dare not, I am afraid.
Tell him he hurts his wounds Wat, with making moane.
Wretched, death of ſeauen.
Come let's be talking ſomewhat to keepe him aliue
Ah ſira Wat, and did my Lord beſtow that Iewell on thee,
For an Epiſtle thou mad'ſt in Latine,
Thou art a good forward Boy, there's great ioy on thee.
O ſorrow!
Heart will nothing comfort him?
If he be ſo farre gone, 'tis time to moane,
Here's Pen, and Incke, and Paper, and all things ready,
Wil't pleaſe your Worſhip for to make your Will?
My Will? Yes, yes, what elſe? Who writes apace now?
That can your man Dauy an't like your Worſhip,
A faire, faſt, legible Hand.
Set it downe then:
Inprimis, I bequeath to yonder Witall,
Three times his weight in Curſes,
How?
All Plagues of Body and of Mind,
Write them not downe Dauy.
It is his Will, I muſt.
Together alſo,
With ſuch a Sickneſſe, ten dayes ere his Death.
There's a ſweet Legacie,
I am almoſt choak't with't.
Next I bequeath to that foule whore his Wife,
All barrenneſſe of Ioy, a drouth of Vertue,
And dearth of all repentance: For her end,
The common miſerie of an Engliſh Strumpet,
In French and Duch, beholding ere ſhe dyes
Confuſion of her Brats before her Eyes,
And neuer ſhed a teare for it.
Where's the Knight?
O Sir, the Gentleman you wounded, is newly departed.
Dead? Lift, lift, Who helpes me?
Let the Law lift you now, that muſt haue all,
I haue done lifting on you, and my Wife too.
You were beſt locke your ſelfe cloſe.
Not in my Houſe Sir,
I'le harbour no ſuch perſons as Men-ſlayers,
Locke your ſelfe where you will.
What's this?
Why Husband.
I know what I doe Wife.
You cannot tell yet,
For hauing kild the Man in his defence,
Neither his Life, nor eſtate will be touch't Husband.
Away Wife, heare a Foole, his Lands will hang him.
Am I deny'd a Chamber?
What ſay you forſooth?
Alas Sir, I am one that would haue all well,
But muſt obey my Husband. Prethee Loue
Let the poore Gentleman ſtay, being ſo ſore wounded,
There's a cloſe Chamber at one end of the Garret
We neuer vſe, let him haue that I prethee.
We neuer vſe, you forget ſickneſſe then,
And Phyſicke times: Iſt not a place for eaſement?
O Death! doe I heare this with part
Of former life in me? What's the newes now?
Troth worſe & worſe, you'r like to loſe your land
If the Law ſaue your life Sir, or the Surgeon.
Harke you there Wife.
Why how Sir?
Sr Oliuer Kixes Wife is new quickned,
That Child vndoes you Sir.
All ill at once.
I wonder what he makes here with his conſorts?
Cannot our Houſe be priuate to our ſelues,
But we muſt haue ſuch Gueſts? I pray depart Sirs,
And take your Murtherer along with you,
Good he were apprehended ere he goe,
H'as kild ſome honeſt Gentleman, ſend for Officers.
I'le ſoone ſaue you that labour.
I muſt tell you Sir,
You haue beene ſome-what boulder in my Houſe,
Then I could well like of, I ſuffred you
Till it ſtucke here at my Heart, I tell you truly
I thought you had beene familiar with my Wife once.
With me? I'le ſee him hang'd firſt, I defie him,
And all ſuch Gentlemen in the like extremitie.
If euer Eyes were open, theſe are they,
Gamſters farewell, I haue nothing left to play.
And therefore get you gone Sir.
Of all Wittalles,
Be thou the Head. Thou the grand whore of Spittles.
So, ſince he's like now to be rid of all,
I am right glad, I am ſo well rid of him.
I knew he durſt not ſtay, when you nam'd Officers
That ſtop't his Spirits ſtraight,
What ſhall we doe now Wife?
As we were wont to doe.
We are richly furniſh't wife, with Houſhold-ſtuffe
Let's let out Lodgings then,
And take a Houſe in the Strand.
In troth a match Wench:
We are ſimply ſtock't, with Cloath of Tiſſue Cuſſions,
To furniſh out bay-windows: Puſh, what not that's queint
And coſtly, from the top to the bottome:
Life, for Furniture, we may lodge a Counteſſe:
There's a Cloaſe-ſtoole of tawny Veluet too,
Now I thinke on't Wife.
There's that ſhould be Sir,
Your Noſe muſt be in euerie thing.
I haue done Wench,
And let this ſtand in euerie Gallants Chamber,
There's no Gamſter like a politike ſinner,
For who e're games, the Box is ſure a winner.
O Husband, husband, ſhe will dye, ſhe will dye
There is no ſigne but death.
'Twill be our ſhame then.
O how ſhe's chang'd in compaſſe of an houre:
Ah my poore girle! good faith thou wert too cruell
To dragge her by the Hayre.
You would haue done as much Sir,
To curbe her of her humor.
'Tis curb'd ſweetly, ſhe catch't her bane o'th water.
How now Tim.
Faith buſie Mother about an Epitaph,
Vpon my Siſters death.
Death! She is not dead I hope?
No: but ſhe meanes to be, and that's as good,
And when a thing's done, 'tis done,
You taught me that Mother.
What is your Tutor doing?
Making one too, in principall pure Latine,
Cul'd out of Ouid de Triſtibus.
How does your Siſter looke, is ſhe not chang'd?
Chang'd? Gold into white Money was neuer ſo chang'd,
As is my Siſters colour into paleneſſe.
O here ſhe's brought, ſee how ſhe looks like death
Lookes ſhe like Death, and ne're a word made yet,
I muſt goe beat my Braines againſt a Bed-poſt,
And get before my Tutor.
Speake, how do'ſt thou?
I hope I ſhall be well, for I am as ſicke at Heart,
As I can be.
'Las my poore Girle,
The Doctor's making a moſt ſoueraine drinke for thee,
The worſt Ingredience, diſſolu'd Pearle and Amber,
We ſpare no coſt Girle.
Your loue comes to late,
Yet timely thankes reward it: What is comfort,
When the poore Patients Heart is paſt reliefe?
It is no Doctors Art can cure my griefe.
All is caſt away then,
Prethee looke vpon me cheerfully.
Sing but a ſtraine or two, thou wilt not thinke
How 'twill reuiue thy Spirits: ſtriue with thy fit,
Prethee ſweet Moll.
You ſhall haue my good will Mother.
Why well ſaid Wench.
Weepe Eyes, breake Heart,
My Loue and I muſt part,
Cruell Fates, trew-loue doe ſooneſt ſeuer,
O, I ſhall ſee thee, neuer, neuer, neuer.
O happy is the Mayd, whoſe life takes end,
Ere it knowes Parents frowne, or loſſe of friend.
Weepe Eyes, breake Heart,
My Loue and I muſt part.
O, I could die with Muſicke: well ſung Girle.
If you call it ſo, It was.
She playes the Swan, and ſings her ſelfe to death.
By your leaue Sir.
What are you Sir? Or what's your buſineſſe pray?
I may be now admitted, tho the Brother
Of him your hate purſude, it ſpreads no further,
Your malice ſets in death, does it not Sir?
In Death?
He's dead: 'twas a deere Loue to him,
It coſt him but his life, that was all Sir:
He pay'd enough, poore Gentleman, for his Loue.
There's all our ill remou'd, if ſhe were well now:
Impute not Sir, his end to any hate
That ſprung from vs, he had a faire wound brought that.
That helpt him forward, I muſt needs confeſſe:
But the reſtraint of Loue, and your vnkindneſſe,
Thoſe were the wounds, that from his Heart drew Blood,
But being paſt helpe, let words forget it too:
Scarcely three Minutes, ere his Eye-lids clos'd,
And tooke eternall leaue of this Worlds light,
He wrot this Letter, which by Oath he bound me,
To giue to her owne Hands, that's all my buſineſſe.
You may performe it then, there ſhe ſits.
O with a following looke.
I truſt me Sir, I thinke ſhe'le follow him quickly.
Here's ſome Gold,
He wil'd me to diſtribute faithfully amongſt your Seruants.
'Las what doth he meane Sir?
How cheere you Miſtris?
I muſt learne of you Sir.
Here's a Letter from a Friend of yours,
And where that fayles, in ſatisfaction
I haue a ſad Tongue ready to ſupply.
How does he, ere I looke on't?
Seldome better, h'as a contented health now.
I am moſt glad on't.
Dead Sir?
He is: Now Wife let's but get the Gerle
Vpon her Legges againe, and to Church roundly with her.
O ſicke to Death he telles me:
How does he after this?
Faith feeles no paine at all, he's dead ſweet Miſtris.
Peace cloſe mine Eyes.
The Girle, looke to the Girle Wife.
Moll, Daughter, ſweet Girle ſpeake,
Look but once vp, thou ſhalt haue all the wiſhes of thy hart
That wealth can purchaſe.
O ſhe's gone for euer, that Letter broake her hart.
As good now then, as let here lye in torment,
And then breake it.
O Suſan, ſhe thou louedſt ſo deere, is gone.
O ſweet Mayd!
This is ſhe that help't her ſtill,
I'ue a reward here for thee
Take her in,
Remoue her from our ſight, our ſhame, and ſorrow.
Stay, let me helpe thee, 'tis the laſt cold kindneſſe
I can performe for my ſweet Brothers ſake.
All the whole Street will hate vs, and the World
Point me out cruell: It is our beſt courſe Wife,
After we haue giuen order for the Funerall,
To abſent our ſelues, till ſhe be layd in ground.
Where ſhall we ſpend that time?
I'le tell thee where Wench, goe to ſome priuate Church,
And marry Tim to the rich Brecknocke Gentlewoman.
Maſſe a match,
We'le not looſe all at once, ſome-what we'le catch.
Ho my Wiues quickned, I am a Man for euer,
I thinke I haue beſtur'd my ſtumps I faith:
Run, get your Fellowes altogether inſtantly,
Then to the Pariſh-Church, and ring the Belles.
It ſhall be done Sir.
Vpon my loue I charge you Villaine, that you make a Bon-fier before the Doore at night.
A Bon-fier Sir?
A thwacking one I charge you.
This is monſtrous.
Run, tell a hundred pound out for the Gentleman
That gaue my Wife the Drinke, the firſt thing you doe.
A hundred pounds Sir?
A bargaine, as our ioyes growes,
We muſt remember ſtill from whence it flowes,
Or elſe we proue vngratefull multiplyers:
The Child is comming, and the Land comes after,
The newes of this will make a poore Sr Walter.
I haue ſtrooke it home I faith.
That you haue marry Sir.
But will not your Worſhip goe to the Funerall
Of both theſe Louers?
Both, goe both together?
I Sir, the Gentlemans Brother will haue it ſo,
'Twill be the pittifulleſt ſight, there's ſuch running,
Such rumours, and ſuch throngs, a paire of Louers
Had neuer more ſpectators, more Mens pitties,
Or Womens wet Eyes.
My Wife helpes the number then?
There's ſuch drawing out of Handkerchers,
And thoſe that haue no Handkerchers, lift vp Aprons.
Her Parents may haue ioyfull Hearts at this,
I would not haue my crueltie ſo talk't on,
To any Child of mine, for a Monopoly.
I beleeue you Sir.
'Tis caſt ſo too, that both their Coffins meet,
Which will be lamentable.
Come, we'le ſee't.
Neuer could Death boaſt of a richer prize
From the firſt Parent, let the World bring forth
A paire of truer Hearts, to ſpeake but truth
Of this departed Gentleman, in a Brother,
Might by hard cenſure, be call'd flatterie,
Which makes me rather, ſilent in his right,
Then ſo to be deliuer'd to the thoughts,
Of any enuious hearer, ſtaru'd in vertue,
And therefore pining to heare others thriue.
But for this Mayd, whom Enuy cannot hurt
With all her Poyſons, hauing left to Ages,
The true, chaſt Monument of her liuing name,
Which no time can deface, I ſay of her
The full truth freely, without feare of cenſure
What Nature could there ſhine, that might redeeme
Perfection home to Woman, but in her
Was fully glorious, bewtie ſet in goodneſſe
Speakes what ſhe was, that Iewell ſo infixt,
There was no want of any thing of life,
To make theſe vertuous preſidents, Man and Wife.
Great pittie of their deathes.
Ne're more pittie.
It makes a hundred weeping Eyes, ſweet Goſſip.
I cannot thinke, there's any one amongſt you,
In this full faire aſſembly, Mayd, Man, or Wife,
Whoſe Heart would not haue ſprung with ioy & gladneſſe
To haue ſeene their marriage day?
It would haue made a thouſand ioyfull Hearts.
Vp then a pace, and take your fortunes,
Make theſe ioyfull Hearts, here's none but Friends.
Aliue Sir? ô ſweet deere Couple.
Nay, do not hinder 'em now, ſtand from about 'em,
If ſhe be caught againe, and haue this time,
I'le nere plot further for 'em, nor this honeſt chambermaid
That helpt all at a puſh.
Good Sir a pace.
Hands ioyne now, but Hearts for euer,
Which no Parents mood ſhall ſeuer.
You ſhall forſake all Widowes, Wiues, and Mayds:
You, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Men of Trades:
And if in haſt, any Article miſſes,
Goe inter-line it with a brace of kiſſes.
Here's a thing trould nimbly. Giue you ioy brother
Were't not better thou ſhould'ſt haue her,
Then the Mayd ſhould dye?
To you ſweet Miſtris Bride.
Ioy, ioy to you both.
Here be your Wedding Sheets you brought along with you, you may both goe to Bed when you pleaſe too.
My ioy wants vtterance.
Vtter all at night then Brother.
I am ſilent with delight.
Siſter, delight will ſilence any Woman,
But you'le find your Tongue againe, among Mayd Seruants,
Now you keepe Houſe, Siſter.
Neuer was houre, ſo fild with ioy and wonder.
To tell you the full ſtorie of this Chamber-Mayd,
And of her kindneſſe in this buſineſſe to vs,
'Twould aske an houres diſcourſe: In briefe 'twas ſhe,
That wrought it to this purpoſe cunningly.
We ſhall all loue her for't.
See who comes here now.
A ſtorme, a ſtorme, but we are ſheltred for it.
I will preuent you all, and mocke you thus,
You, and your expectations, I ſtand happy,
Both in your liues, and your Hearts combination.
Here's a ſtrange day againe.
The Knights prou'd Villaine,
Al's come out now, his Neece an arrant Baggage,
My poore Boy Tim, is caſt away this morning,
Euen before Breakefaſt: Married a Whore
Next to his Heart.
A Whore?
His Neece forſooth.
I thinke we rid our Hands in good time of him.
I knew he was paſt the beſt, when I gaue him ouer.
What is become of him pray Sir?
Who the Knight? he lies i'th' Knights ward now.
Your Belly Lady begins to bloſſom, ther's no peace for him
His Creditors are ſo greedy.
Mr Tuchwood, hear'ſt thou this newes?
I am ſo indeer'd to thee for my Wiues fruitfulneſſe,
That I charge you both, your Wife and thee,
To liue no more aſunder for the Worlds frownes,
I haue Purſe, and Bed, and Bord for you:
Be not afraid to goe to your buſineſſe roundly,
Get Children, and I'le keepe them.
Say you ſo Sir?
Proue me, with three at a birth, & thou dar'ſt now.
Take heed how you dare a Man, while you liue Sir
That has good skill at his Weapon.
'Foot, I dare you Sir.
Looke Gentlemen, if euer you ſay the picture
Of the vnfortunate Marriage, yonder 'tis.
Nay good ſweet Tim.
Come from the Vniuerſitie,
To marry a Whore in London, with my Tutor too?
O Tempora! O Mors!
Prethee Tim be pacient.
I bought a Iade at Cambridge,
I'e let her out to execution Tutor,
For eighteene pence a day, or Brainford Horſe-races,
She'le ſerue to carrie ſeuen Miles out of Towne well.
Where be theſe Mountaines? I was promis'd Mountaines,
But there's ſuch a Miſt, I can ſee none of 'em.
What are become of thoſe two thouſand Runts?
Let's haue about with them in the meane time.
A Vengeance Runt thee.
Good ſweet Tim haue patience.
Flectere ſi neguro Superos Acherouta mourbo, mother
I thinke you haue maried her in Logicke Tim.
You told me once, by Logicke you would proue
A Whore, an honeſt Woman, proue her ſo Tim
And take her for thy labour.
Troth I thanke you.
I grant you I may proue another Mans Wife ſo,
But not mine owne.
There's no remedy now Tim,
You muſt proue her ſo as well as you may.
Why then my Tutor and I will about her,
As well as we can.
Ʋxor non eſt Meritrix, ergo falacis.
Sir if your Logicke cannot proue me honeſt,
There's a thing call'd Marriage, and that makes me honeſt.
O there's a tricke beyond your Logicke Tim.
I perceiue then a Woman may be honeſt according to the Engliſh Print, when ſhe is a Whore in the Latine.
So much for Marriage and Logicke. I'le loue her for her Wit, I'le picke out my Runts there: And for my Mountaines, I'le mount vpon —
So Fortune ſeldome deales two Marriages
With one Hand, and both lucky: The beſt is,
One Feaſt will ſerue them both: Marry for roome,
I'le haue the Dinner kept in Gold-Smithes-Hall,
To which kind Gallants, I inuite you all.