Joy, ioy to mortals, the reioycing fires
Of gladnes, smile in your dilated hearts!
Whilst Loue presents a world of chast defires,
Which may produce a harmony of parts!
Loue is the right affection of the minde,
The noble appetite of what is best:
Desire of vnion with the thing design'd,
But in fruition of it cannot rest.
The Father plenty is, the Mother want,
Plenty the beauty, which it wanteth, drawes;
Want yeilds it selfe: affording what is scant.
So, both affections are the vnion's cause.
But, rest not here. For Loue hath larger scopes,
New ioyes, new pleasures, of as fresh a date
As are his minutes: and, in him no hopes
Are pure, but those hee can perpetuate.
To you that are by excellence a Queene!
The top of beauty! but, of such an ayre,
As, onely by the minds eye, may bee seene
Your enter-wouen lines of good, and fayre!
Vouchsafe to grace Loues triumph here, to night,
Through all the streetes of your Callipolis;
Which by the splendor of your rayes made bright
The seate, and region of all beauty is.
Loue, in perfection, longeth to appeare
But prayes, of fauour, he be not call'd on,
Till all the suburbes, and the skirts bee cleare
Of perturbations, and th'infection gon.
Then will he flow forth, like a rich perfume
Into your nostrils! or some sweeter sound
Of melting musique, that shall not consume
Within the eare, but run the mazes round.
Meane time, wee make lustration of the place,
And with our solemne fires, and waters proue
T'haue frighted, hence, the weake diseased race
Of those were tortur'd on the wheele of loue.
1 The glorious,2 whining,3 the aduenturous foole,
4 Phantastique,5 bribing, and the6 iealous asse
1 The sordid,2 scornefull,3 and the angry mule
4 The melancholique,5 dull, and envious masse,
With all the rest, that in the sensuall schoole
Of lust, for their degree of brute may passe.
All which are vapor'd hence.
No loues, but slaues to sense:
Meere cattell, and not men.
Sound, sound, and treble all our ioyes agen,
Who had the power, and vertueto remooue
Such monsters from the labyrinth of loue.
Heere, stay a while: This! this
The Temple of all Beauty is!
Heere, perfect Louers, you must pay
First-fruits; and on these altars lay
(The Ladies breast's) your ample vowes,
Such, as Loue brings, and Beauty best allowes!
For Loue, without his obiect, soone is gone:
Loue must haue answering loue, to looke vpon.
To you, best Iudge then, of perfection!
The Queene, of what is wonder, in the place!
Pure obiect, of Heroique Loue, alone!
The center of proportion—!
Sweetenesse.
Grace.?
Daigne to receiue all lines of loue in one.
And by reflecting of them fill this space.
Till it a circle of those glories proue,
Fit to be sought in Beauty, found by Loue.
Where Loue is mutuall, still
All things in order moue,
The circle of the will
Is the true spheare of Loue.
Aduance, you gentler Cupids, then aduance,
And shew your iust perfections in your daunce.
The Cupids dance their dance.
And the Masquers their-entry.
So loue, emergent out of Chaos brought the world to light!
And gently mouing on the waters, wrought all forme to fight!
Loues appetite
Did beauty first excite:
And left imprinted in the ayre,
Those signatures of good, and faire,
Which since haue flow'd, flow'd forth vpon the sense,
To wonder first, and then to excellence,
By vertue of diuine intelligence!
And Neptune too
Shewes what his waues can doe:
To call the Muses all to play,
And sing the birth of Venus day,
Which from the Sea flow'd, forth vpon the sense
To wonder first, and next to excellence,
By vertue of diuine intelligence!
Hast daughter Venus hast, and come away:
All powers, that gouerne mariage, pray That you will lend your light
Vnto the constellation of this night.
Hymen.
And Iuno.
And the Genius call,
Your father Iupiter,
And all
That blesse, or honnor holy nuptiall.
Here, here I present ame
Both in my grdle, and my flame:
Wherein are wouen all the powers
The Graces gaue me, or the Howres
(My nources once) with all the artes
Of gayning, and of holding hearts:
And these with I descend.
But, to your influences, first commend
The vow, I goe to take
On earth, for perfect loue and beauties sake!
Beauty and Loue, whose story is mysteriall,
In yonder Palme-tree, and the Crowne imperiall,
Doe from the Rose, and Lilly so delicious,
Promise a shade, shall euer be propitious
To both the Kingdomes. But to Brittaines Genius
The snaky rod, and serpents of Cyllenius
Bring not more peace, then these, who so united be
By Loue, as with it Earth and Heauen delighted be.
And who this King, and Queene would well historify,
Need onely speake their names: Those them will glorify.
MARY, and CHARLES, CHARLES, with his MARY, named are
And all the rest of Loues, or Princes famed are.