Joy, joy to mortals, the rejoycing fires
Of gladneſſe, ſmile in your dilated hearts!
Whilſt Love preſents a world of chaſt deſires,
Which may produce a harmony of parts!
Love is the right affection of the minde,
The noble appetite of what is beſt:
Deſire of union with the thing deſign'd,
But in fruition of it cannot reſt.
The Father plenty is, the Mother want.
Plenty the beauty, which it wanteth, drawes;
Want yeelds it ſelfe: affording what is ſcant.
So, both affections are the union's cauſe.
But, reſt not here. For Love hath larger ſcopes,
New joyes, new pleaſures, of as freſh a date
As are his minutes: and, in him no hopes
Are pure, but thoſe he can perpetuate.
To you that are by excellence a Queene!
The top of beauty! but, of ſuch an ayre,
As, onely by the minds eye, may be ſeene
Your enter-woven lines of good, and fayre!
Vouchſafe to grace Loves triumph here, to night,
Through all the ſtreetes of your Callipolis;
Which by the ſplendor of your rayes made bright
The ſeat, and region of all beauty is.
Love, in perfection, longeth to appeare,
But prayes of favour, he be not call'd on,
Till all the ſuburbs, and the skirts be cleare
Of perturbations, and th'infection gon.
Then will he flow forth, like a rich perfume
Into your noſtrils! or ſome ſweeter ſound
Of melting Muſique, that ſhall not conſume
Within the eare, but run the mazes round.
Meanetime, wee make luſtration of the place,
And with our ſolemne fires, and waters prove
T' have frighted hence, the weake diſeaſed race
Of thoſe were tortur'd on the wheele of love.
1 The glorious, 2 whining, 3 the adventurous foole,
4 Phantaſtique, 5 bribing, and the 6 jealous aſſe
1 The ſordid, 2 ſcornefull, 3 and the angry mule
4 The melancholique, 5 dull, and envious maſſe,
With all the reſt, that in the ſenſuall ſchoole
Of luſt, for their degree of brute may paſſe.
All which are vapour'd hence.
No loves, but ſlaves to ſenſe:
Meere cattell, and not men.
Sound, ſound, and treble all our joyes agen,
Who had the power, and vertue to remove
Such monſters from the labyrinth of love.
Here, ſtay a while: This! this
The Temple of all Beautie is!
Here, perfect Lovers, you muſt pay
Firſt-fruits; and on theſe altars lay
(The Ladyes breaſt's) your ample vowes,
Such, as Love brings, and Beauty beſt allowes!
For Love, without his object, ſoone is gone:
Love muſt have anſwering love, to looke upon.
To you, beſt Judge then, of perfection!
The Queene, of what is wonder, in the place!
Pure object, of Heroique Love, alone!
The center of proportion—!
Sweetneſſe.
Grace?
Daigne to receive all lines of love in one.
And by reflecting of them fill this ſpace.
Till it a circle of thoſe glories prove,
Fit to be ſought in Beauty, found by Love.
Where Love is mutuall, ſtill
All things in order move,
The circle of the will
Is the true ſpheare of Love.
Advance, you gentler Cupids, then advance,
And ſhew your juſt perfections in your daunce.
So love, emergent out of Chaos brought
The world to light!
And gently moving on the waters, wrought
All forme to ſight!
Loves appetite
Did beautie firſt excite:
And left imprinted in the ayre,
Thoſe ſignatures of good, and faire,
Which ſince have flow'd, flow'd forth upon the ſenſe
To wonder firſt, and then to excellence,
By vertue of divine intelligence!
And Neptune too,
Shewes what his waves can doe:
To call the Muſes all to play,
And ſing the birth of Venus day,
Which from the Sea flow'd forth upon the ſenſe
To wonder firſt, and next to excellence,
By vertue of divine intelligence!
Haſt daughter Venus, haſt, and come away:
All powers, that governe Mariage, pray
That you will lend your light
Unto the conſtellation of this night,
Hymen.
And Juno.
And the Genius call,
Your father Jupiter,
And all
That bleſſe, or honour holy nuptiall.
Here, here I preſent ame
Both in my girdle, and my flame.
Wherein are woven all the powers
The Graces gave me, or the Houres
(My nources once) with all the arts
Of gayning, and of holding hearts:
And theſe with I deſcend.
But, to your influences, firſt commend
The vow, I goe to take
On earth, for perfect love and beauties ſake!
Beauty and Love, whoſe ſtory is myſteriall,
In yonder Palme-tree, and the Crowne imperiall,
Doe from the Roſe, and Lilly ſo delicious,
Promiſe a ſhade, ſhall ever be propitious
To both the Kingdomes. But to Brittaines Genius
The ſnaky rod, and ſerpents of Cyllenius
Bring not more peace, then theſe, who ſo united be
By Love, as with it Earth and Heaven delighted be.
And who this King, and Queene would well hiſtorifie,
Need onely ſpeake their names: Thoſe them will glorifie.
MARY, and CHARLES, CHARLES with his MARY, named are
And all the reſt of Loves, or Princes famed are.