BEhold great Magistrate, on either hand
Sands, Shelves, and Syrtes, and upon them stand
Two dangerous rocks, your safety to ingage,
Boasting of nought save shipwrake spoyle and strage.
This Sylla, that Charibdis, (dangerous both)
Plac't in the way you rowe to take your oath.
Yet though a thousand monsters yawne and gape
To ingurdge and swallow you, ther's way to scape;
Vlisses by his wisedome found it, steare
You by his Compasse, and the way lyes cleare,
Will you know how? looke upward then; and sayle
By the signe Libra, that Celestiall scale,
In which (some write) the Sunne at his creation
First shone; and is to these times a relation
Of Divine Justice: It in justice shind,
Doe you so (Lord) and be like it divind.
Keepe the even Channell, and be neither swayde,
To the right hand nor left, and so evade
Malicious envie (never out of action,)
Smooth visadgd flattery, and blacke mouthd detraction,
Sedition, whisprings, murmuring, private hate,
All ambushing, the godlike Magistrate.
About these rockes and quick sands Syrens haunt,
One singes connivence, th'other would inchaunt
With partiall sentence; and a third ascribes,
In pleasing tunes, aright to gifts and bribes;
Sweetning the eare, and every other sence,
That place, and office, may with these dispence.
But though their tones be sweete, and shrill their notes,
They come from foule brests, and inpostum'd throats,
Sea monsters they be stiled, but much (nay more,
'Tis to be doubted,) they frequent the shoare.
Yet like Vlisses, doe but stop your eare
To their inchantments, with an heart sincere;
They fayling to indanger your estate,
Will from the rocks themselves precipitate.
Proceede then in your blest Inauguration,
And celebrate this Annuall Ovation;
Whilst you nor this way, nor to that way leane,
But shunne th' extreames, to keepe the golden meane.
This glorious City, Europs chiefest minion,
Most happy in so great a Kings dominion:
Into whose charge this day doth you invest,
Shall her in you, and you in her make blest.
IF Time (some say) have here bin oft in view,
Yet not the same, old Time is each day new,
Who doth the future lockt up houres inlarge,
To welcome you to this great Cities charge.
Time, who hath brought you hither (grave and great)
To inaugure you, in your Praetorium seate:
Thus much with griese doth of himselfe professe
Nothing's more precious, and esteemed lesse.
Yet you have made great use of me, to aspire
This eminence, by desert, when in full quire
Avees and Acclamations, with loud voyce,
Meete you on all sides, and with Time rejoyce.
This Hill, that Nimph apparreld like the Spring,
These Graces that attend her, (every thing)
As fruitfull trees, greene plants, flowers of choise smell,
All Emblems af a City governd well;
Which must be now your charge. The Labels here
Mixt with the leaves will shew what fruit they beare:
The feare of God, a Magistrate discreete,
Iustice, and Equity: when with these meete,
Obedience unto Rulers, Vnity,
Plaine and just dealing, Zeale, and Industry:
In such blest symptoms where these shall agree,
Cities, shall like perpetuall Summers bee.
You are now Generall, doe but bravely lead,
And (doubtlesse) all will march, as you shall tread:
You are the Captaine, doe but bravely stand
To oppose vice, see, all this goodly band
Now in their City Liveries will apply
Themselves to follow, where your Colours fly.
You are the chiefe, defend my daughter Truth,
And then both Health and Poverty, Age and Youth,
Will follow this your Standard, to oppose
Errour, Sedition, Hate, (the common foes.)
But pardon Time (grave Lord) who speaks to thee;
As well what thou now art, as ought to be.
See you this withered branch, by Time o're growne
A Cities Symbole, ruind, and trod downe.
A Tree that bare bad fruit; Dissimulation,
Pride, Malice, Envy, Atheisme, Supplantation,
Ill Government, Prophannes, Fraud, Oppressiō,
Neglect of vertue, Freedome to transgression,
Obedience, here with power did disagree,
All which faire London be still farre from thee.
You noble Citties of this generous Isle,
May these my two each Ladies ever smile.
(Justice, and mercy) on you. You we know
Are come to grace this our triumphant show.
And of your curtesy, the hand to kisse
Of London, this faire lands Metropolis.
Why sister Cittyes sit you thus amazd?
If to behold above you, windowes glas'd
With Diomonds'sted of glasse? Starres hither sent,
This day to deck our lower Firmament?
Is it to see my numerous Children round
Incompasse me? So that no place is found.
In all my large streets empty? My yssue spred
In number more then stones whereon they tread.
To see my Temples, Houses, even all places.
With people covered, as If, Tyl'd with faces?
Will you know whence proceedes this faire increase,
This joy? the fruits of a continued peace,
The way to thrive; to prosper in each calling,
The weake, and shrinking states, to keepe from falling,
Behold; my motto shall all this display,
Reade and observe it well: Serve and obay.
Obedience though it humbly doth begin,
It soone augments unto a Magozin
Of plenty, in all Citties'tis the grownd,
And doth like harmony in musicke sound:
Nations and Common weales, by it alone
Flourish: It incorporates, many into one,
And makes vnanimous peace content and joy,
Which pride, doth still Insidiate to destrsy.
And you grave Lord, on whom right honour cals,
Both borne and bredi'th circuit of my wals,
By vertue and example, have made plaine,
How others may like eminence attaine.
Persist in this blest concord, may we long,
That Citties to this City may still throng,
To view my annuall tryumphs, and so grace,
Those honored Pretors that supply this place.
A Souldier, by valour and martiall Discipline
A Churchman by Learning and degrees in scooles
A Statesman by Trauell and Language &c.
A Lord Maior by Commerce and Trafficke both
The Palace of Honour is thus governed
I Katherin, long since Sainted for true piety,
The Lady patronesse of this Society,
A queene, a Virgin, and a Martir: All
My Atributes: Inuite you to this Hall
Cald Honours pallace: nor is this my Wheele,
Blind Fortunes Embleame, she that makes to reel;
Kingdomes and Common weales, all turning round,
Some to aduance, and others to Confound:
Mine is the Wheele of Faith, (all wayes in motion)
Stedfast in Hope, and Constant in Deuotion.
It Imitates the Spheres swift agitation,
Orbicularly, still mouing to Saluation:
That's to the Primus motor: from whom Flowes,
All Goodnesse, Vertue: There; true Honour growes,
Which: If you will attaine must be your care.
(Crime Magistrate.) Instated as you are.
To keepe thu Curoular action, in your charge,
To Curbe the' opressor, the opprest to inlarge;
To be the Widdowes Husband, th' Orphants Father,
The blindmans oye, the lune mans foot: so gather
(A treasure beyond valew, by your place;
More then Earths Honour,) trew Caelestiall grace,
Ayme first at that▪ what other Honors be,
Honour Her selfe can best Instruct thats shee▪
The way to me though not debard,
Yet it is dificult and hard.
If Kings Arriue to my profection
Tis by Succession, or Election
When Fortitude doth Action grace,
The Souldier then with me takes place
When Stooddy, Knowledge and degree
Makes Scollers Eminent heere with mee;
They are listed with the Honored: and
The Trauilar, when many a land
He hath' peir'st for language, and much knowes
A great respected slatesman growes.
So you and such as you (Graue Lord)
Who weare this Scarlet, vse that Swoord
Collar, and Cap of Maintenance.
These are no things, that come by chance
Or got by sleeping but auerse
From these I am : by care, Commerce,
The hazarding of Goods, and men
To Pyrats Rocks, shelues, Tempest, when?
You through a Wildernesse of Seas,
Dangers of wrack, Surprise, Desease
Make new descoveryes, for a lasting story
Of this our Kingdomes fame and Nations glory
Thus is that Collar, and your Scarlet worne,
And for such cause, the Sworde before you Borne.
They are the emblems of your Power, and heere
Though curb'd within the Limmet of one yeare,
Yet manadge as they ought by your Indeuour
Shall make your name (as new) Honored for eur
Vnto which Pallace of peace, rest and blisse,
Supply of all things, where nought wanting is
Would these that shall succeede you know the way?
Tis plaine, God, the King Serue and Obay.
Night growes, Inuiting you to rest, prepare
To rise to morrrw to a whole Yeares care,
Enuy still waites on Honour, then prouide
Vlisses Wisdome may be still your guide
To stere you through all dangers: Husband Time
That this day brings you to a place sublime,
By the Supporture of his daughter Truth
This Ancient Citty in her pristine Youth,
Your sword may reestablish: and so bring
Her still to florish; like that lasting Spring
That London in whose Circuit you were bred
And borne therein, to be the Cheife and Head
Drawne by these two beasts in an Equall line
May in your Mercy and your Iustice shine,
So Honour who this day did you Inuite
Vnto Her palace bids you thus Good Night,
No following day but adde to your Renowne
And this your Charge▪ with numerous Blessings crowne.