Come forth, come forth, the gentle Spring,
And carry the glad newes, I bring,
To Earth, our common mother:
It is decreed, by all the Gods
The Heau'n, of Earth shall haue no odds,
But one shall loue another:
Their glories they shall mutuall make,
Earth looke on Heauen, for Heauens sake;
Their honour's shall bee euen:
All emulation cease, and iarres;
Ioue will haue Earth to haue her starres
And lights, no lesse then Heauen.
It is already done, in flowers
As fresh and new as are the howres,
By warmth of yonder Sunne.
But will be multipli'd on vs,
If from the breath of ZEPHYRVS
Like fauour we haue wonne.
Giue all to him: His is the dew,
The heate, the humor,
Beloued of the Spring!
The Sunne, the Wind, the Verdure!
That wisest Nature cause can call
Of quick'ning any thing.
Fayre Mayde, but are you come to dwell,
And tarry with ys here?
Fresh Fountaynes, I am come to tell
A tale in yond'soft eare,
Whereof the murmure will do well:
If you your parts will beare.
Our purlings wayte vpon the Spring.
Goe vp with me, then: helpe to sing
The story to the King.
Cupid hath ta'ne offence of late
At all the Gods, that of the State,
And in their Councell, he was so deserted,
Not to be call'd into their Guild
But slightly passd by, as a child.
Wherein hee thinkes his honour was peruerted.
And though his Mother seeke to season,
And rectifie his rage with reason,
By shewing he liues yet vnder her command,
Rebellious he, doth disobey,
And she hath forc'd his armes away.
To make him feele the Justice of her hand.
Whereat the Boy, in fury fell,
With all his speed, is gone to hell,
There to excite, and stirre vp lealousy,
To make a party 'gainst the Gods,
And set Heauen, Earth, and Hell at odds.
And rayse a chaos of calamity.
Hold my stirrop, my one Lacquey; and looke to my Curtall, the other: walke him well, Sirrah, while I expatiate my selfe here in the report of my office! oh the Furies! how I am ioyed with the title of it! Postillion of Hell! yet no Mercury. But a mere Cacodaemon, sent hether with a packet of newes! newes! neuer was Hell so furnished of the commodity of newes! Loue hath bin lately there, and so entertained by Pluto, and Proserpine, and all the Grandees of the place as, it is there perpetuall Holy-day: and a cessation of torment granted, and proclaimed for euer! Halfe-famish'd Tantalus is fallen to his fruit, with that appetite, as it threaten's to vndoe the whole company of Costardmungers, and ha's ariuer afore him, running excellent wine lxion is loos'd from his wheele, and turn'd Dancer, does nothing but cut capreols, fetch friskals, and leades Laualtos, with the Lamiae! Sisyphus ha's left rowling the stone, and is growne a Mr. bowler; challenges all the prime gamesters, Parsons in hell, and giues them odds: vpon Tityus his brest, that (for fixe of the nine aeres) is counted the subtlest bowling-ground in all Tartary. All the Furies are at a game call'd nine pins, or keilles, made of old vsurers bones, and their soules looking on with delight, and betting on the game. Neuer was there such freedome of sport. Danaus daughters haue broke their bottomelesse tubs, and made bonfires of them. All is turn'd triumph there. Had hell gates bin kep't with halfe that strictnesse as the entry here ha's bin to night, Pluto would haue had but a cola Court, & Proserpine a thinne presence, though both haue a vast territory We had such a stirre to get in, I and my Curtall, and my two Lacqueys all ventur'd through the eye of a Spanish needle, we had neuer come in else, & that was by the fauour of one of the guard who was a womans-tayler, and held ope the passage. Cupid by commission hath carried Iealoufie from Hell, Disdaine, Feare, and Dissimulation, with other Goblins, to trouble the Gods. And I am sent after post, to rayse Tempest, Windes, Lightnings, Thunder, Rayne, and Snow, for some new exployt they haue against the Earth, and the Goddesse Chloris, Queene of the flowers, and Mistris of the Spring. For ioy of which I will returne to my selfe, mount my Bidet, in a dance; and coruet vpon my Curtall.
Run out, all the Flouds, in ioy with your siluer feete;
And hast to meete, the enamour'd Spring;
For whom the warbling Fountaynes sing:
The story of the flowers; preserued by the Howers;
At Iuno's soft command, and Iris showers;
Sent to quench iealousie, and all those powers
Of Loues rebellious warre:
Whil'st Chloris sits a shining starre
To crowne, and grace our iolly song, made long,
To the notes, that we bring, to glad the Spring.
Tell a truth, gay Spring, let vs know
What feete they were, that so
Impres't the Earth, and made such various flowers to grow!
She that led, a Queene was at least,
Or a Goddesse, 'boue the rest:
And all their graces, in her selfe expres't!
O'it were a fame, to know her name!
Whether she were the roote;
Or they did take th'impression, from her foote.
Now Iuno, and the Ayre shall know
The truth of what is done below,
From our discolourd bow. Iris, what newes?
The ayre is cleare, your bow can tell,
Chloris renown'd, Spight fled to Hell;
The busines all is well. And Cupid sues-
For pardon. Do's hee?
Hee sheds teares
More then your Birds haue eyes.
The Gods haue eares.
Offences, made agaynst the Deities,
Are soone forgot-
If who offends, be wife.
Rise golden Fame, and giue thy name a birth
From great and generous actions, done on Earth.
The life of Fame is action.
Vnderstood
That action must be vertuous, great, and good!
Vertue it selfe by Fame is of't protected,
And dies despised—
Where the Fames neglected
Who hath not heard of Chloris, and her bowre
Fayre Iris act, employ'd by Iuno's power
To guard the Spring, and prosper euery flower,
Whom Iealousie and Hell thought to deuoure?
Great actions of't obscurd by time, may lye,
Or enuy—
But they last to memory.
Wee that sustaine thee, Learned Poesy
And I, her sister, seuere History.
With Architecture, who will rayse thee high,
And Sculpture, that can keepe thee from to dye.
All helpe lift thee to eternity.
And Iuno, through the ayre, doth make thy way,
By her serenest Messenger of Day.
Thus Fame ascend's, by all degrees, to Heauen:
And leaues a light, here, brighter, then the seuen.
Let all applaud the sight.
Ayre first, that gaue the bright
Reflections, Day or Night!
With these supports of Fame,
That keepe aliue her name!
The beauties of the Spring.
Fount's, Riuers, euery thing:
From the height of all,
To the Waters fall-
Resound, and sing
The honour's of his Chloris, to the King.
Chloris, the Queene of Flowers;
The sweetnesse of all Showres;
The ornament of Bowres;
The top of Par-amours!