Come forth, come forth, the gentle Spring,
And carry the glad newes, I bring,
To Earth, our common mother:
It is decreed, by all the Gods
The Heav'n, of Earth ſhall have no oddes,
But one ſhall love another:
Their glories they ſhall mutuall make,
Earth looke on Heaven, for Heavens ſake;
Their honour's ſhall be even:
All aemulation ceaſe, and jarres;
Jove will have Earth to have her ſtarres
And lights, no leſſe then Heaven.
It is already done, in flowers
As freſh, and new as are the houres,
By warmth of yonder Sunne.
But will be multiply'd on us,
If from the breath of ZEPHYRUS
Like favour we have wonne.
Give all to him: His is the dew,
The heate, the humour,
—All the true.
Beloved of the Spring!
The Sunne, the Wind, the Verdure!
—All,
That wiſeſt Nature cauſe can call
Of quick'ning any thing.
Fayre Maide, but are you come to dwell,
And tarry with us here?
Freſh Fountaines, I am come to tell
A tale in yond' ſoft eare,
Whereof the murmure will doe well:
If you your parts will beare.
Our purlings waite upon the Spring.
Goe up with me, then: helpe to ſing
The ſtory to the King.
Cupid hath ta'ne offence of late
At all the Gods, that of the State,
And in their Councell, he was ſo deſerted,
Not to be call'd into their Guild
But ſlightly paſs'd by, as a child.
Wherein he thinkes his honour was perverted.
And though his Mother ſeeke to ſeaſon,
And rectifie his rage with reaſon,
By ſhewing he lives yet under her command,
Rebellious he, doth diſobey,
And ſhe hath forc'd his armes away.
To make him feele the Juſtice of her hand.
Whereat the Boy, in fury fell,
With all his ſpeed, is gone to hell,
There to excite, and ſtirre up Jealouſie,
To make a party 'gainſt the Gods,
And ſet Heaven, Earth, and Hell at odds.
And rayſe a chaos of calamitie.
Hold my ſtirrop, my one Lacqucy; and looke to my Curtall, the other: walke him well, Sirrah, while I expatiate my ſelfe here in the report of my office! oh the Furies! how I am joyed with the title of it! Poſtilion of Hell! yet no Mercury. But a meere Cacodaemon, ſent hither with a packet of newes! newes! never was Hell ſo furniſhed of the commoditie of newes! Love hath beene lately there, and ſo entertained by Pluto, and Proſerpine, and all the Grandees of the place, as, it is there perpetuall Holy-day: and a ceſſation of torment granted, and proclaimed for ever! Halfe-famiſh'd Tantalus is fallen to his fruit, with that appetite, as it threaten's to undoe the whole company of Coſtard-mungers, and ha's a River afore him, running excellent Wine; Ixion is loos'd from his wheele, and turn'd Dancer, does nothing but cut capreols, fetch friskals, and leades Lavaltoes, with the Lamiae! Siſyphus ha's left rowling the ſtone, and is growne a Mr. bowler; challenges all the prime gameſters, Parſons in hell, and gives them odds: upon Tityus his breſt, that (for ſixe of the nine acres) is counted the ſubtleſt bowling-ground in all Tartary. All the Furies are at a game call'd nine-pins, or keilles, made of old Uſurers bones, and their ſoules looking on with delight, and betting on the game. Never was there ſuch freedome of ſport. Danaus Daughters have broke their bottomleſſe tubs, and made bonfires of them. All is turn'd triumph there. Had Hell gates beene kept with halfe that ſtrictneſſe, as the entry here ha's beene to night, Pluto would have had but a cold Court, and Proſerpine a thin preſence, though both have a vaſt territorie. Wee had ſuch a ſtirre to get in, I, and my Curtall, and my two Lacqueys all ventur'd through the eye of a Spaniſh needle, wee had never come in elſe, and that was by the favour of one of the guard who was a womans-taylor, and held ope the paſſage. Cupid by commiſsion hath carried Jealouſie from Hell, Diſdaine, Feare, and Diſsimulation, with other Goblins, to trouble the Gods. And I am ſent after poſt, to raiſe Tempeſt, Windes, Lightnings, Thunder, Rayne, and Snow, for ſome new exploit they have againſt the Earth, and the Goddeſſe Chloris, Queene of the flowers, and Miſtris of the Spring. For joy of which I will returne to my ſelfe, mount my Bidet, in a dance; and corvet upon my Curtall.
Run out, all the Flouds, in joy with your ſilver feet;
And haſt to meet, the enamour'd Spring;
For whom the warbling Fountaines ſing:
The ſtory of the flowers; preſerved by the Howres;
At Juno's ſoft command, and Iris ſhowers;
Sent to quench jealouſie, and all thoſe powers
Of Loves rebellious warre:
Whil'ſt Chloris ſits a ſhining ſtarre
To crowne, and grace our jolly ſong, made long,
To the notes, that we bring, to glad the Spring.
Tell a truth, gay Spring, let us know
What feet they were, that ſo
Impres't the Earth, and made ſuch various flowers to grow!
She that led, a Queene was at leſt,
Or a Goddeſſe, 'bove the reſt:
And all their graces, in her ſelfe expres't!
O, 'twere a fame, to know her name!
Whether ſhee were the root;
Or they did take th'impreſsion from her foot.
Now Juno, and the Ayre ſhall know
The truth of what is done below,
From our diſcoloured bow. Iris, what newes?
The ayre is cleare, your bow can tell,
Chloris renown'd, Spight fled to Hell;
The buſineſſe all is well. And Cupid ſues
For pardon. Do's hee?
Hee ſheds teares
More then your Birds have eyes.
The Gods have eares.
Offences, made againſt the Deities,
Are ſoone forgot-
If who offends, be wiſe.
Riſe golden Fame, and give thy name a birth
From great and generous actions, done on Earth.
The life of Fame is action.
Underſtood
That action muſt be vertuous, great, and good!
Vertue it ſelfe by Fame is oft protected,
And dies deſpiſed—
Where the Fame's neglected.
Who hath not heard of Chloris, and her Bowre
Fayre Iris act, employ'd by Juno's power
To guard the Spring, and proſper every flower,
Whom Jealouſie and Hell thought to devoure?
Great actions, oft obſcur'd by time, may lye,
Or envy—
But they laſt to memory.
We that ſuſtaine thee, Learned Poeſie,
And I, her ſiſter, ſevere Hiſtory.
With Architecture, who will rayſe thee high,
And Sculpture, that can keepe thee from to dye.
All helpe lift thee to eternity.
And Juno, through the ayre, doth make thy way,
By her ſereneſt Meſſenger of Day.
Thus Fame, aſcend's, by all degrees, to Heaven:
And leaves a light, here, brighter then the ſeven.
Let all applaud the ſight.
Ayre firſt, that gave the bright
Reflections, Day or night!
With theſe ſupports of Fame,
That keepe alive her name!
The beauties of the Spring.
Fount's, Rivers, every thing:
From the height of all,
To the Waters fall-
Reſound, and ſing
The honour's of his Chloris, to the King.
Chloris, the Queene of Flowers;
The ſweetneſſe of all Showres;
The ornament of Bowres;
The top of Par-amours!