Behold! I come not from above,
To hyde, or hunt out wanton Love,
Or doe what Man can doe:
But to spred all my nimble wings,
And like a God, doe Godlike things
Gratefull, and Gratious too.
Obserue! But see ye be not nyce,
Prepare to give, and take advice,
As wise-Men ought to doe:
Lest when your subtile witts haue done,
Your Notes, like Motes, thought in the Sunne
Proove farre beneath vs too.
Admyre! but censure not their Powers,
That sinke not with Times sandy howres,
As mortall Creatures doe.
And since the Shaft that is adrest,
At Heaven may hurt the Shooters breast,
Be pleas'a and please vs too.
Happy, thrice happy is that houre
Wherein a God descends,
Eyther in person, or in powre
And Mans poore state befriends.
Olimpian IOVE to the bright ALBA sends
No vulgar God to beare his deare Commends.
And with pure eyes, and a paternall hand,
This Vniverse having survey'd, and span'd,
In Councll with himselfe, he hath decreed,
From fayre ALBIPOLIS shall soone proceede
A Triumph: Mighty, as the Man design'd
To weare those Bayes; Heroicke, as his mind;
Iust, as his actions; Glorious, as his Reigne.
And like his Vertues, Infinite in Treyne.
Th' Immort all Swannes, contending for his Name,
Shall beare it singing, to the House of Fame.
And though at distance yet High IOVE is plea'd
Your laboring eyes shall with his sight be eas'd,
This from a God, vnto a Goddesse sent,
A God Relates, that could vse Complement:
But when such States, negotiate by such meanes
We speake in Acts, and scorne words trifling Scenes.
Ye Powers Divine make roome, prepare a Seate
On the Northside, for ALBANACT the Great,
Earth is not fruitless: nor your nombers full,
Ther's One to come will make some Starrs looke dull.
What mak's me so vnnimbly ryse, That did descend so fleete? There is no vp-hill in the skyes; Clouds stay not feathered feete. Thy wings are sing'd: and thou canst fly But slowly now, swift MERCVRY. Some Lady heere, is sure too blame That from Loves starry skyes, Hath shot some Beame, or sent some flame, Like Lghtning, from her Eyes. Taxe not the Starrs, with what the Sunne, Too neere aproch't (insens't) hath done. I'le rowle me in Auroras Dew, Or lye in Tethis bed; Or from coole Iris begge a few, Pure Opale shewrs new shed. Nor Dew, nor shewers, nor sea can slake Thy quenchlesse heate, but Lethes lake.
Though I have earn'd it with the sweat of my browes in Ianuary, yet I am glad I saw it, for there never was such a sight seene.
What sight Publius?
The Triumph.
Whose Tryumph?
The Triumph of ALBANACTVS.
Didst thou see it?
See it, yes, and feele it too. Every one there (I can assure you) went not vpon his owne feete.
No, I thinke, some rid.
They did so, for some rid me. Some trode on my toes. Some cryed, some kept it in; for my part, I confest all, for feare I should have beene pest to death.
Though thy body was pincht, thine eyes were feasted.
Were not yours so too?
Yes.
Where stood you?
I stood not,
You had the better friends sir, I pray where sate you?
In my studdy.
Is not your studdy backward? with a shop-light in it, where one can see nothing but the skye?
I confesse it, what of that?
Why then you saw no Triumph.
But I did, and a true one, thine was but a shew.
If what I saw was but a shew, what you saw was but a shadow, or at the most a Vision. For it seemes your body kept home, though your spirit walkt.
It did so. And travelled to better purpose then most men doe, that goe, and see, and say, but know nothing.
To confute that Heresie of yours, I have gone, and seene, and know, but I will say nothing.
That's impossible; The meate thou hast lately fed vpon, is so windy, out it must, thou wilt burst else.
Faith sir, I am very full indeede.
Purge then, and tell thy Doctor all.
ALBANACTVS CAESAR from his sumptuous Pallace, through the high-streets of ALBIPOLIS rid Triumphing, on a Chariot, made—
Of wood, perhaps guilt, perhaps gold. But I will save you all those charges, if you will goe on to the Persons, and let the Pagents alone.
Sir I saw him not as he was borne, naked, but since you affect such brevity, I saw the King and a great deale more, and so I turn'd my backe, and went away.
Nay good Publius, now thou art too briefe.
When you beginne to tell your dreames, I'le not iogge you, till you wake of your selfe.
Nay prethee be not angry.
I am not angry, but a little short-winded vpon occasion. Yet to give you some satisfaction because you have done me wrong. Before CAESAR March't Captive Kings, with their hands bound. And Ladies, with their Armes acrosse, furious wild Beasts, great Giants, and little Dwarfes with Lictors, and Pictors, and a number of Priets that were as you would have them, In their shirts. These with certaine Princes that were behind him: made vp a Triumph too great to come out of any mortall mans mouth.
That's most certaine.
I meane in words. But as you hunt me you would hunt a Hare off her leggs.
I confesse thou hast made more haste, then good speede: But for a supplement to thy lame Story, Know, I have seene this brave ALBANACIVS CAESAR, seene him with the eyes of vnderstanding, vew'd all his Actions; look't into his Mind: which I finde armed with so many morall vertues that he dayly Conquers a world of Vices, which are wild Beasts indeede.
For example Ambition, is a Lyon; Cruelty, a Beare; Avarice, a Wolfe. Yet He subdues them all. To be short, no Vyce is so small, to scape him: Nor so great, but he overcomes it: And in that fashion he Triumphes overall the Kings, and Queenes that went before him. All his Passions, are his true Subiects: And Knowledge, Iudgment, Merit, Bounty and the like, are fit Comma ders, for such a Generall, Thse Triumph with him, And these are the Princes you saw about him. And this Publius, is more then you can finde in the streete.
I graunt it, But yet graunt me one Request deare
Platonicus?
What's that?
Goe but with me to the Amphitheater.
To Gaze.
Yes.
Why beforehand I know there will be Gladiators, Saltators, and sights to please the People. Wert not thou better stay here, and see CAESAR present himselfe to this fayre Goddesse, seeking sweete rest, after all his labors.
I should sleepe at such a sight.
Then after a Play, thou art all for a Pryze.
All together, and so (I hope) are you
At this time, I am. For I will goe with thee, if it be but to teach thee to Reade in thy owne Booke. Outsides, have Insides, Shells, have Kernells in them. And vnder every Fable, nay (almost) vnder every thing, lyes a Morrall.
What art thou doing Publius.
Lifting vp the stone I stumbled at.
To what ende?
To see what lyes vnder it.
What should lye vnder a stone, but a Worme, or a
Hoglouse.
If there lye not a Morall vnder it, then have you taught me false Doctrine.
Such thankes have they that teach such Schllers. Come away Foole, they beginne to throng to the Theater.
Sit not secure, nor thinke in ease
Still vndispleas'd, your selues to please:
Diana, Chast Diana stoope,
And helpe to wound this war like troope.
Wants Love a Bowe, or shaft of mine?
This suit will make my Crescent shine.
Love is grown wise, and meanes to bring
To his smart Bowe, a double string.
Behold our Marke? taks't thou not pride
In such a Glory to devide?
I doe, I doe, since I am sure,
When we two ioyne, our flames are pure.
As pure, and Cleere, as ALBAS skin,
As her faire Fame, or thoughts within:
Pure as my selfe; nay pure like Thee,
Now Love is that which Love should be.
Bow bearing Gods, shoote, shoote, and hit,
And make our CAESAR greater yet:
Yet leave him with vs, Let him shine
Still heere; And make him all Devine
Ye Worthies of this Ile,
That led by your brave Chiefe,
In an Heroick style,
Have over done Beliefe:
Subdu'd by ALBAS eyes
Come downe, Loves Sacrifice!
It is no shame to yield,
Where t'is in veyne to strive:
The Gods would quit the field,
Should they these warres revive
Or Conquerd, by her Eyes,
Come downe Loves Sacrifice.
Streight Cedar, that hast stood,
The shock of many a wind:
The top of this Tall wood,
By a high hand design'd
Subdu'd by ALBAS Eyes,
Come downe Loves Sacrifice!
Great ALBA though eche Grande heere,
At this High Court of thine,
Like a true Liege Man doth appeere,
And offers at thy Shryne:
It is no Conquest for thine Eyes,
When petty Princes fall,
That are some single Beauties pryse,
Or a lone Vertues Thrall:
Heere comes the Trophe of thy prayse,
The Monarch of these Iles,
The Mirror of thy Cheerfull Rayes,
And Glory of thy Smyles:
The Vertues and the Graces all,
Must meete in one, when such Starrs full.
Bles't Payre whose prayers like Incence rise,
Opening, and pulling downe the Skies
Take your Reward! Iust as yee mett,
So hand in hand live many a Day,
And may your Vertuous minds beget
Issue that never shall decay,
And so be fruitfull every way.
May Plenty Proteus like appeare,
Varying your Pleasures every yeare:
Wee five come freely to impart,
Such favors as we can afforde:
One gives hisa Hand, the next hisb Heart,
The third herc Robe, the fourth herd Sword,
The fifth full many ae Suppliant Word.
And to fulfill your future Blisse,
Sweete Peace salutes you with a Kisse.
Frighted by Day; And in the Night diseas'd,
I fled to Heaven, and left the World displeas'd.
Fnd Men that strive more for a Province there,
Then looking vpward to possesse a Sphere.
Yet vanquish't and Victorious, both at last,
Their weary Limmes, on my soft Bed would cast.
Lyons, and Lambs togeather lye,
When Lovly Peace stands smiling by
Temples and Townes by thy stay'd hand,
First learne to Rise, And then to Stand.
'Tis not the Laurel Tree that brings,
Anointing Oyle for sacred Kings:
Those Princes see the happiest Dayes,
Whose Olive Branches stand for Bayes.
Armes are layd by: Earely and late,
The Traueller goes safe to Bed:
Men eate and Drinke in Massie Plate,
And are with Deinties dayly fed.
Why should this Ile aboue the rest,
Be made (great Gods) the Halcions nest?
Imperious Peace her selfe Descends
Then here our search, and wonder ends,
Wee'l steale away
Earths Rulers, stay!
Doth soft Peace call?
Yes: and will streight employ yee All.
How, and wherein?
Give eare, your Charge doth now begin.
Nptune to Sea, And let no Sayle,
Meete ALBIONS Fleete, But make it veile.
Bellona Arme, That Foes may see,
Their Lillies kept by Lyons be.
Their fruitfull fields (Cebele) make
Pay Centupl for all they take.
And let Both Indies (Pluto) meete,
And lay their wealth at ALBAS feete.
When Peace commands such pleasing things,
From Love and Time wee'l steale their wings.
Loaden with Wealth and Honor may,
These Gods returne to crowne this Day,
And MARY-CHARLES whose mindes within,
And Bodyes make but Hymens Twin,
Long live they so, And Brest, to Brest,
May Angels sing them to their Rest.