GEntlemen, haue a little patience, they are e'en vpon comming, inſtantly. He that ſhould beginne the Play, Maſter Littlewit, the Proctor, has a ſtitch new falne in his black ſilk ſtocking; 'twill be drawn vp ere you can tell twenty. He playes one o'the Arches, that dwels about the Hoſpitall, and hee has a very pretty part. But for the whole Play, will you ha'the truth on't? (I am looking, leſt the Poet heare me, or his man, Maſter Broome, behind the Arras) it is like to be a very conceited ſcuruy one, in plaine Engliſh. When't comes to the Fayre, once: you were e'en as good goe to Ʋirginia, for any thing there is of Smith-field. Hee has not hit the humors, he do's not know 'hem; hee has not conuers'd with the Bartholmew-birds, as they ſay; hee has ne're a Sword, and Buckler man in his Fayre, nor a little Dauy, to take toll o'the Bawds there, as in my time, nor a Kind-heart, if any bodies teeth ſhould chance to ake in his Play. Nor a Iugler with a wel-educated Ape to come ouer the chaine, for the King of England, and backe againe for the Prince, and ſit ſtill on his arſe for the Pope, and the King of Spaine! None o'theſe fine ſights! Nor has he the Canuas-cut 'ithe night, for a Hobby-horſe-man to creepe into his ſhe-neighbour, and take his leap there! Nothing! No, and ſome writer (that I know) had had but the penning o' this matter, hee would ha' made you ſuch a Iig-ajogge i'the boothes, you ſhould ha' thought an earthquake had beene i'the Fayre! But theſe Maſter-Poets, they will ha' their owne abſurd courſes; they will be inform'd of nothing! Hee has (ſirreuerence) kick'd me three, or foure times about the Tyring-houſe, I thanke him, for but offering to putt in, with my experience. I'le be iudg'd by you, Gentlemen, now, but for one conceit of mine! would not a fine Pumpe vpon the Stage ha' done well, for a property now? and a Punque ſet vnder vpon her head, with her Sterne vpward, and ha' beene ſous'd by my wity young maſters o'the Innes o' Court? what thinke you o'this for a ſhew, now? hee will not heare o'this! I am an Aſſe! I! and yet I kept the Stage in Maſter Tarletons time, I thanke my ſtarres. Ho! and that man had liu'd to haue play'd in Bartholmew Fayre, you ſhould ha' ſeene him ha' come in, and ha' beene coozened i'the Cloath-quarter, ſo finely! And Adams, the Rogue, ha leap'd and caper'd vpon him, and ha' dealt his vermine about, as though they had coſt him nothing. And then a ſubſtantiall watch to ha' ſtolne in vpon 'hem, and taken 'hem away, with miſtaking words, as the faſhion is, in the Stage-practice.
How now? what rare diſcourſe are you falne vpon? ha? ha' you found any familiars here, that you are ſo free? what's the buſineſſe?
Nothing, but the vnderſtanding Gentlemen o' the ground here, ask'd my iudgement.
Your iudgement, Raſcall? for what? ſweeping the Stage? or gathering vp the broken Apples for the beares within? Away Rogue, it's come to a fine degree in theſe ſpectacles when ſuch a youth as you pretend to a iudgement. And yet hee may, i'the moſt o'this matter i'faith: For the Author hath writ it iuſt to his Meridian, and the Scale of the grounded Iudgements here, his Play-fellowes in wit. Gentlemen; not for want of a Prologue, but by way of a new one, I am ſent out to you here, with a Scriuener, and certaine Articles drawne out in haſt betweene our Author, and you; which if you pleaſe to heare, and as they appeare reaſonable, to approue of; the Play will follow preſently. Read, Scribe, gi'me the Counterpaine.
ARTICLES of Agreement, indented, between the Spectators or Hearers, at the Hope on the Bankeſide, in the County of Surrey on the one party; And the Author of Bartholmew Fayre in the ſaid place, and County on the other party: the one and thirtieth day of Octob. 1614. and in the twelfth yeere of the Raigne of our Soueragine Lord, IAMES by the grace of God King of England, France, & Ireland, Defender of the faith. And of Scotland the ſeauen and fortieth.
INPRIMIS, It is couenanted and agreed, by and betweene the parties aboue ſaid, and the ſaid Spectators, and Hearers, aſwell the curious and enuious, as the fauouring and iudicious, as alſo the grounded Iudgements and vnderſtandings, doe for themſelues ſeuerally Couenant, and agree to remaine in the places, their money or friends haue put them in, with patience, for the ſpace of two houres and an halfe, and ſomewhat more. In which time the Author promiſeth to preſent them by vs, with a new ſufficient Play called BARTHOLMEW FAYRE, merry, and as full of noiſe, as ſport: made to delight all, and to offend none. Prouided they haue either, the wit or the honeſty to thinke well of themſelues.
It is further agreed that euery perſon here, haue his or their free-will of cenſure, to like or diſlike at their owne charge, the Author hauing now departed with his right: It ſhall bee lawfull for any man to iudge his ſix pen'orth his twelue pen'orth, ſo to hiseighteene pence, 2. ſhillings, halfe a crowne, to the value of his place: Prouided alwaies his place get not aboue his wit. And if he pay for halfe a dozen, hee may cenſure for all them too, ſo that he will vndertake that they ſhall bee ſilent. Hee ſhall put in for Cenſures here, as they doe for lots at the lottery: mary if he drop but ſixe pence at the doore, and will cenſure a crownes worth, it is thought there is no conſcience, or iuſtice in that.
It is alſo agreed, that euery man heere, exerciſe his owne Iudgement, and not cenſure by Contagion, or vpon trust, from anothers voice, or face, that ſits by him, be he neuer ſo firſt, in the Commiſsion of Wit: As alſo, that hee bee fixt and ſettled in his cenſure, that what hee approues, or not approues to day, hee will doe the ſame to morrow, and if to morrow, the next day, and ſo the next weeke (if neede be:) and not to be brought about by any that ſits on the Bench with him, though they indite, and arraigne Playes daily. Hee that will ſweare, Ieronimo, or Andronicus are the beſt playes, yet, ſhall paſſe vnexcepted at, heere, as a man whoſe Iudgement ſhewes it is conſtant, and hath ſtood ſtill, theſe fiue and twentie, or thirtie yeeres. Though it be an Ignorance, it is a vertuous and ſtay'd ignorance; and next to truth, a confirm'd errour does well; ſuch a one the Author knowes where to finde him.
It is further couenanted, concluded and agreed, that how great ſoeuer the expectation bee, no perſon here, is to expect more then hee knowes, or better ware then a Fayre will affoord: neyther to looke backe to the ſword and buckler-age of Smithfield, but content himſelfe with the preſent. In ſtead of a little Dauy, to take toll o'the Bawds, the Author doth promiſe a ſtrutting Horſe-courſer, with a leerc-Drunkard, two or three to attend him, in as good Equipage as you would wiſh. And then for Kinde-heart, the Tooth-drawer, a fine oyly Pig-woman with her Tapſter, to bid you welcome, and a conſort of Roarers for muſique. A wiſe Iuſtice of Peace meditant, in ſtead of a Iugler, with an Ape. A ciuill Cutpurſe ſearchant. A ſweete Singer of new Ballads allurant: and as freſh an Hypocrite, as euer was broach'd rampant. If there bee neuer a Seruant-monſter i'the Fayre; who can helpe it? he fayes; nor a neſt of Antiques? Hee is loth to make Nature afraid in his Playes, like thoſe that be get Tales, Tempeſts, and ſuch like Drolleries, to mixe his head with other mens heeles; let the concupiſence of Iigges and Dances, raigne as ſtrong as it will amongſt you: yet if the Puppets will pleaſe any body, they ſhall be entreated to come in.
In conſideration of which, it is finally agreed, by the foreſaid hearers, and ſpectators, that they neyther in themſelues conceale, nor ſuffer by them to be concealed any State-decipherer, or politique Picklocke of the Scene, ſo ſolemnly ridiculous, as to ſearch out, who was meant by the Ginger-bread-woman, who by the Hobby-horſe-man, who by the Costard-monger, nay, who by their Wares. Or that will pretend to affirme (on his owne inſpired ignorance) what Mirror of Magiſtrates is meant by the Iuſtice, what great Lady by the Pigge-woman, what conceal'd Stateſ-man, by the Seller of Mouſe-trappes, and ſo of the reſt. But that ſuch perſon, or perſons ſo found, be left diſcouered to the mercy of the Author, as a forfeiture to the Stage, and your laughter, aforeſaid. As alſo, ſuch as ſhall ſo deſperately, or ambitiouſly, play the foole by his place aforeſaid, to challenge the Author of ſcurrilitie, becauſe the language ſome where ſauours of Smithfield, the Booth, and the Pig-broath, or of prophaneneſſe, becauſe a Mad-man cryes, God quit you, or bleſſe you. In witneſſe whereof, as you haue prepoſterouſly put to your Seales already (which is your money) you will now adde the other part of ſuffrage, your hands, The Play ſhall preſently begin. And though the Fayre be not kept in the ſame Region, that ſome here, perhaps, would haue it, yet thinke, that therein the Author hath obſeru'd a ſpeciall Decorum, the place being as durty as Smithfield, and as ſtinking euery whit.
Howſoeuer, hee prayes you to beleeue, his Ware is ſtill the ſame, elſe you will make him iuſtly ſuſpect that hee that is ſo loth to looke on a Baby, or an Hobby-horſe, heere, would bee glad to take vp a Commodity of them, at any laughter, or loſſe, in another place.
A Pretty conceit, and worth the finding! I ha' ſuch lucke to ſpinne out theſe fine things ſtill, and like a Silke-worme, out of my ſelfe. Her's Maſter Bartholomew Cokes, of Harrow o'th hill, i'th County of Middleſex, Eſquire, takes forth his Licence, to marry Miſtreſſe Grace Wel-borne of the ſaid place and County: and when do's hee take it foorth? to day! the foure and twentieth of Auguſt! Bartholmew day! Bartholmew vpon Bartholmew! there's the deuice! who would haue mark'd ſuch a leap-frogge chance now? A very leſſe then Ames-ace, on two Dice! well, goe thy wayes Iohn Little-wit, Proctor Iohn Little-wit: One o'the pretty wits o' Pauls, the Little wit of London (ſo thou art call'd) and ſome thing beſide. When a quirk, or a quiblin do's ſcape thee, and thou doſt not watch, and apprehend it, and bring it afore the Conſtable of conceit: (there now, I ſpeake quib too) let'hem carry thee out o' the Archdeacons Court, into his Kitchin, and make a Iack of thee, in ſtead of a Iohn. (There I am againe la!) Win, Good morrow, Win. I marry Win! Now you looke finely indeed, Win! this Cap do's conuince! youl'd not ha' worne it, VVin, nor ha' had it veluet, but a rough countrey Beauer, with a copper-band, like the Conney-skinne woman of Budge-row? Sweete VVin, let me kiſſe it! And. her fine high ſhooes, like the Spaniſh Lady! Good VVin, goe a litle I would faine ſee thee pace, pretty VVin! By this fine Cap, I could neuer leaue kiſſing on't.
Come, indeede la, you are ſuch a foole, ſtill!
No, but halfe a one, Win, you are the tother halfe: man and wife make one foole, Win. (Good!) Is there the Proctor, or Doctor indeed, i'the Dioceſſe, that euer had the fortune to win him ſuch a Win! (There I am againe!) I doe feele conceits comming vpon mee, more then I am able to turne tongue too. A poxe o' theſe pretenders, to wit! your Three Cranes, Miter, and Mermaid men! Not a corne of true ſalt, nor a graine of right muſtard amongſt them all. They may ſtand for places or ſo, againe the next Wit fall, and pay two pence in a quart more for their Canary, then other men. But gi' mee the man, can ſtart vp a Iuſtice of Wit out of ſix-ſhillings beare, and giue the law to all the Poets, and Poet-ſuckers i' Towne, becauſe they are the Players Goſſips? 'Slid, other men haue wiues as fine as the Players, and as well dreſt. Come hither, Win.
VVHy, how now Maſter Little-wit! meaſuring of lips? or molding of kiſſes? which is it?
Troth I am a little taken with my Wins dreſſing here! Do'ſt not fine Maſter Win-wife? How doe you apprehend, Sir? Shee would not ha' worne this habit. I challenge all Cheapſide, to ſhew ſuch another: Morefields, Pimlico path, or the Exchange, in a ſommer euening, with a Lace to boot as this has. Deare Win, let Maſter Win-wife kiſſe you. Hee comes a wooing to our mother Win, and may be our father perhaps, Win. There's no harme in him, Win.
None i'the earth, Maſter Little-wit.
enuy no man, my delicates, Sir.
Alas, you ha' the garden where they grow ſtill! A wife heere with a Strawbery-breath, Chery-lips, Apricot-cheekes, and a ſoft veluet head, like a Melicotton.
Good y' faith! now dulneſſe vpon mee, that I had not that before him, that I ſhould not light on't, as well as he! Veluet head!
But my taſte, Maſter Little-wit, tends to fruict of a later kinde: the ſober Matron, your wiues mother.
I! wee know you are a Suitor, Sir. Win, and I both, wiſh you well: by this Licencc here, would you had her, that your two names were as faſt in it, as here are a couple. Win would faine haue a fine young father i' law, with a fether: that her mother might hood it, and chaine it, with Miſtris Ouer-doo. But, you doe not take the right courſe, Maſter Win-wife.
No? Maſter Litle-wit, why?
You are not madde enough.
How? Is madneſſe a right courſe?
I ſay nothing, but I winke vpon Win. You haue a friend, one (Maſter-Quarlous) comes here ſome times?
Why? he makes no loue to her, do's he?
Not a token worth that euer I ſaw, I aſſure you, But—
What?
He is the more Mad-cap o'the two. You doe not apprehend mee.
You haue a hot coale i'your mouth, now, you cannot hold.
Let mee out with it, deare Win.
I'll tell him my ſelfe.
Doe, and take all the thanks, and much do good thy pretty heart, Win.
Sir, my mother has had her natiuity-water caſt lately by the Cunning men in Cow-lane, and they ha' told her her fortune, and doe enſure her, ſhce ſhall neuer haue happy houre; vnleſſe ſhee marry within this ſen'night, and when it is, it muſt be a Madde-man, they ſay.
I, but it muſt be a Gentle-man Mad-man.
Yes, ſo the tother man of More-fields ſayes.
But do's ſhee beleeue 'hem?
Yes, and ha's beene at Bedlem twice ſince, euery day, to enquire if any Gentleman be there, or to come there, mad!
Why, this is a confederacy, a meere piece of practice vpon her, by theſe Impoſtors?
I tell her ſo; or elſe ſay I, that they meane ſome young-Madcap-Gentleman (for the diuell can equiuocate, as well as a Shop-keeper) and therefore would I aduiſe you, to be a little madder, then Maſter Quarlous, hereafter.
Where is ſhee? ſtirring yet?
Stirring! Yes, and ſtudying an old Elder, come from Banbury, a Suitor that puts in heere at meale-tyde, to praiſe the painefull brethren, or pray that the ſweet ſingers may be reſtor'd; Sayes a grace as long as his breath laſts him! Some time the ſpirit is ſo ſtrong with him, it gets quite out of him, and then my mother, or Win, are faine to fetch it againe with Malmeſey, or Aqua coeleſtis.
Yes indeed, we haue ſuch a tedious life with him for his dyet, and his clothes too, he breaks his buttons, and cracks ſeames at euery ſaying he ſobs out.
He cannot abide my Vocation, he ſayes.
No, he told my mother, a Proctor was a claw of the Beaſt, and that ſhe had little leſſe then committed abomination in marrying me ſo as ſhe ha's done.
Euery line (he ſayes) that a Proctor writes, when it comes to be read in the Biſhops Court, is a long blacke hayre, kemb'd out of the tayle of Anti-Chriſt.
When came this Proſelyte?
Some three dayes ſince.
O Sir, ha' you tane ſoyle, here? it's well, a man may reach you, after 3. houres running, yet! what an vnmercifull companion art thou, to quit thy lodging, at ſuch vngentle manly houres? None but a ſcatterd couey of Fidlers, or one of theſe Rag-rakers in dung-hills, or ſome Marrow-bone man at moſt, would haue beene vp, when thou wert gone abroad, by all deſcription. I pray thee what ayleſt thou, thou canſt not ſleepe? haſt thou Thornes i'thy eye-lids, or Thiſtles i'thy bed.
I cannot tell: It ſeemes you had neither i'your feet; that tooke this paine to finde me.
No, and I had, all the Lime-hounds o'the City ſhould haue drawne after you, by the ſent rather, Mr, Iohn Little-wit! God ſaue you, Sir. 'Twas a hot night with ſome of vs, laſt night, Iohn: ſhal we pluck a hayre o'the ſame Wolfe, to day, Proctor Iohn?
Doe you remember Maſter Quarlous, what wee diſcourſt on, laſt night?
Not I, Iohn: nothing that I eyther diſcourſe or doe, at thoſe times I forfeit all to forgetfulneſſe.
No? not concerning Win, looke you: there ſhee is, and dreſt as I told you ſhe ſhould be: harke you Sir, had you forgot?
By this head, I'le beware how I keepe you company, Iohn, when I drunke, and you haue this dangerous memory! that's certaine.
Why Sir?
Why? we were all a little ſtain'd laſt night, ſprinckled with a cup or two, and I agreed with Proctor Iohn heere, to come and doe ſomewhat with Win (I know not what 'twas) to day; and he puts mee in minde on't, now; hee ſayes hee was comming to fetch me: before Truth, if you haue that fearefull quality, Iohn, to remember, when you are ſober, Iohn, what you promiſe drunke, Iohn; I ſhall take heed of you, Iohn. For this once, I am content to winke at you, where's your wife? come hither Win.
Why, Iohn! doe you ſee this, Iohn? looke you! helpe me, Iohn.
O Win, fie, what do you meane, Win! Be womanly, Win; make an outcry to your mother, Win? Maſter Quarlous is an honeſt Gentleman, and our worſhipfull good friend, Win: and he is Maſter Winwifes friends, too: And Maſter Win-wife comes a Suitor to your mother Win; as I told you before, Win, and may perhaps, be our Father, Win, they'll do you no harme, Win, they are both our worſhipfull good friends. Maſter Quarlous! you muſt know Mr. Quarlous, Win; you muſt not quarrell with Maſter Quarlous, VVin.
No, wee'll kiſſe againe and fall in.
Yes, doe good Win.
Y'faith you are a foole, Iohn.
A Foole-Iohn ſhe calls me, doe you marke that, Gentlemen? pretty littlewit of veluet! a foole-Iohn!
She may call you an Apple-Iohn, if you vſe this.
Pray thee forbeare, for my reſpect ſomewhat.
Hoy-day! how reſpectiue you are become o'the ſudden! I feare this family will turne you reformed too, pray you come about againe. Becauſe ſhe is in poſſibility to be your daughter in law, and may aske you bleſſing hereafter, when ſhe courts it to Totnam to eat creame. Well, I will forbeare, Sir, but i'faith, would thou wouldſt leaue thy exerciſe of widdow-hunting once! this drawing after an old reuerend Smocke by the ſplay-foote: There cannot be an ancient Tripe or Trillibub i'the Towne, but thou art ſtraight noſing it, and 'tis a fine occupation thou'lt confine thy ſelfe to, when thou ha'ſt got one; ſcrubbing a piece of Buffe, as if thou hadſt the perpetuity of Pannyer-alley to ſtinke in; or perhaps, worſe, currying a carkaſſe, that thou haſt bound thy ſelfe to aliue. I'll beſworne, ſome of them, (that thou art, or haſt beene a Suitor to) are ſo old, as no chaſt or marryed pleaſure can euer become 'hem: the honeſt Inſtrument of procreation, has (forty yeeres ſince) left to belong to 'hem, thou muſt viſit 'hem, as thou wouldſt doe a Tombe, with a Torch, or three hand-fulls of Lincke, flaming hot, and ſo thou maiſt hap to make 'hem feele thee, and after, come to inherit according to thy inches. A ſweet courſe for a man to waſte the brand of life for, to be ſtill raking himſelfe a fortune in an old womans embers; we ſhall ha' thee after thou haſt beene but a moneth marryed to one of 'hem, looke like the quartane ague, and the black Iaundiſe met in a face, and walke as if thou had'ſt borrow'd legges of a Spinner, and voyce of a Cricket. I would endure to heare fifteene Sermons aweeke for her, and ſuch courſe, and lowd one's, as ſome of 'hem muſt be; I would een deſire of Fate, I might dwell in a drumme, and take in my ſuſtenance, with an old broken Tobacco-pipe and a Straw. Doſt thou euer thinke to bring thine eares or ſtomack, to the patience of a drie grace, as long as thy Tablecloth? and droan'd out by thy ſonne, here, (that might be thy father;) till all the meat o'thy board has forgot, it was that day i'the Kitchin? Or to brooke the noiſe made, in a queſtion of Predeſtination, by the good labourers and painefull eaters, aſſembled together, put to 'hem by the Matron, your Spouſe; who moderates with a cup of wine, euer and anone, and a Sentence out of Knoxe between? or the perpetuall ſpitting, before, and after a ſober drawne exhortation of ſix houres, whoſe better part was the hune-hahum? Or to heare prayers groan'd out, ouer thy iron-cheſts, as if they were charmes to breake 'hem? And all this for the hope of two Apoſtle-ſpoones, to ſuffer! and a cup to eate a cawdle in! For that will be thy legacy. She'll ha' conuey'd her ſtate, ſafe enough from thee, an' ſhe be a right widdow.
Alaſſe, I am quite off that ſent now.
How ſo?
Put off by a Brother of Banbury, one, that, they ſay, is come heere, and gouernes all, already.
What doe you call him? I knew diuers of thoſe Banburians when I was in Oxford.
Maſter Little-wit can tell vs.
Sir! good VVin, goe in, and if Maſter Bartholmew Cokes- his man come for the Licence: (the little old fellow) let him ſpeake with me; what ſay you, Gentlemen?
What call you the Reuerend Elder? you told me of? your Banbury-man.
Rabbi Buſy, Sir, he is more then an Elder, he is a Prophet, Sir.
O, I know him! a Baker, is he not?
Hee was a Baker, Sir, but hee do's dreame now, and ſee viſions, hee has giuen ouer his Trade.
I remember that too: out of a ſcruple hee tooke, that (in ſpic'd conſcience) thoſe Cakes hee made, were ſeru'd to Bridales, May-poles, Morriſſes, and ſuch prophane feaſts and meetings; his Chriſten-name is Zeale-of-the-land.
Yes, Sir, Zeale-of-the-land Buſye.
How, what a name's there!
O, they haue all ſuch names, Sir; he was Witneſſe, for Win, here, (they will not be call'd God-fathers) and nam'd her VVinne-the-fight, you thought her name had beene VVinnifred, did you not?
I did indeed.
Hee would ha' thought himſelfe a ſtarke Reprobate, if it had.
I, for there was a Blew-ſtarch-woman o'the name, at the ſame time. Anotable hypocriticall vermine it is; I know him. One that ſtands vpon his face, more then his faith, at all times; Euer in ſeditious motion, and reprouing for vaine-glory: of a moſt lunatique conſcience, and ſplene, and affects the violence of Singularity in all he do's: (He has vndone a Grocer here, in New-gate-market, that broke with him, truſted him with Currans, as errant a Zeale as he, that's by the way: by his profeſſion, hee will euer be i'the ſtate of Innocence, though; and child-hood; derides all Antiquity; defies any other Learning, then Inſpiration; and what diſcretion ſoeuer, yeeres ſhould afford him, it is all preuented in his Originall ignorance; ha' not to doe with him: for hee is a fellow of a moſt arrogant, and inuincible dulneſſe, I aſſure you; who is this?
BY your leaue, Gentlemen, with all my heart to you: and god you good morrow; Mr Little-wit, my buſineſſe is to you. Is this Licence ready?
Heere, I ha' it for you, in my hand, Maſter Humphrey.
That's well, nay, neuer open, or read it to me, it's labour in vaine, you know. I am no Clearke, I ſcorne to be ſau'd by my booke, i'faith I'll hang firſt; fold it vp o'your word and gi' it mee; what muſt you ha' for't?
We'll talke of that anon, Maſter Humphrey.
Now, or not at all, good Mr Proctor, I am for no anon's, I aſſure you.
Sweet VVin, bid Salomon ſend mee the little blacke boxe within, in my ſtudy.
I, quickly, good Miſtreſſe, I pray you: for I haue both egges o'the Spit, and yron i'the fire, ſay, what you muſt haue, good Mr Little-wit.
Why, you know the price, Mr Numps.
I know? I know nothing. I, what tell you mee of knowing? (now I am in haſt) Sir, I do not know, and I will not know, and I ſcorne to know, and yet, (now I think on't) I will, and do know, as well as another; you muſt haue a Marke for your thing here, and eight pence for the boxe; I could ha' ſau'd two pence i'that, an' I had bought it my ſelfe, but heere's foureteene ſhillings for you. Good Lord! how long your little wife ſtaies! pray God, Salomon, your Clerke, be not looking i'the wrong boxe, Mr Proctor.
Good i'faith! no, I warrant you, Salomon is wiſer then ſo, Sir.
Fie, fie, fie, by your leaue Maſter Little-wit, this is ſcuruy, idle, fooliſh and abominable, with all my heart; I doe not like it.
Doe you heare? Iacke Little-wit, what buſineſſe do's thy pretty head thinke, this fellow may haue, that he keepes ſuch a coyle with?
More then buying of ginger-bread i'the Cloyſter, here, (for that wee allow him) or a guilt pouch i'the Fayre?
Maſter Quarlous, doe not miſtake him: he is his Maſters both-hands, I aſſure you.
What? to pull on his boots, a mornings, or his ſtockings, do's hee?
Sir, if you haue a minde to mocke him, mocke him ſoftly, and looke to'ther way: for if hee apprehend you flout him, once, he will flie at you preſently. A terrible teſtie old fellow, and his name is Waſpe too.
Pretty Inſect! make much on him.
A plague o'this boxe, and the poxe too, and on him that made it, and her that went for't, and all that ſhould ha' ſought it, ſent it, or brought it! doe you ſee, Sir?
Nay, good Mr Waſpe.
Good Maſter Hornet, turd i'your teeth, hold you your tongue; doe not I know you? your father was a Pothecary, and ſold gliſters, more then hee gaue, I wuſſe: and turd i'your little wiues teeth too (heere ſhe come) 'twill make her ſpit as fine as ſhe is, for all her veluet-cuſterd on her head, Sir.
O! be ciuill Maſter Numpes.
Why, ſay I haue a humour not to be ciuill; how then? who ſhall compell me? you?
Here is the boxe, now.
Why a pox o'your boxe, once againe: let your little wife ſtale in it, and ſhe will. Sir, I would haue you to vnderſtand, and theſe Gentlemen too, if they pleaſe—
With all our hearts. Sir.
That I haue a charge. Gentlemen.
They doe apprehend, Sir.
Pardon me, Sir, neither they nor you, can apprehend mee, yet. (you are an Aſſe) I haue a young Maſter, hee is now vpon his making and marring; the whole care of his well doing, is now mine. His fooliſh ſcholemaſters haue done nothing, but runne vp and downe the Countrey with him, to beg puddings, and cake-bread, of his tennants, and almoſt ſpoyled him, he has learn'd nothing, but to ſing catches, and repeat rattle bladder rattle, and O, Madge. I dare not let him walke alone, for feare of learning of viſe tunes, which hee will ſing at ſupper, and in the ſermon-times! if hee meete but a Carman i'the ſtreete, and I finde him not talke to keepe him off on him, hee will whiſtle him, and all his tunes ouer, at night in his ſleepe! he has a head full of Bees! I am faine now (for this little time I am abſent) to leaue him in charge with a Gentlewoman; 'Tis true, ſhee is A Iuſtice of Peace his wife, and a Gentlewoman o'the hood, and his naturall ſiſter: But what may happen, vnder a womans gouernment, there's the doubt. Gentlemen, you doe not know him: hee is another manner of peece then you think for! but nineteen yeere old, and yet hee is taller then either of you, by the head, God bleſſe him.
Well, mee thinkes, this is a fine fellow!
He has made his Maſter a finer by this deſcription, I ſhould thinke.
'Faith, much about one, it's croſſe and pile, whether for a new farthing.
I'll tell you Gentlemen—
Will't pleaſe you drinke, Maſter VVaſpe?
Why, I ha' not talk 't ſo long to be drie, Sir, you ſee no duſt or cobwebs come out o' my mouth: doe you? you'ld ha' me gone, would you?
No, but you were in haſt e'en now, Mr Numpes.
What an' I were? ſo I am ſtill, and yet I will ſtay too; meddle you with your match, your Win, there, ſhe has as little wit, as her husband it ſeemes: I haue others to talke to.
She's my match indeede, and as little wit as I, Good!
We ha' bin but a day and a halfe in towne, Gentlemen, 'tis true; and yeſter day i'the afternoone, we walk'd London, to ſhew the City to the Gentlewoman, he ſhall marry, Miſtreſſe Grace; but, afore I will endure ſuch another halfe day, with him, I'll be drawne with a good Gib-cat, through the great pond at home, as his vncle Hodge was! why, we could not meet that heathen thing, all day, but ſtayd him: he would name you all the Signes ouer, as hee went, aloud: and where hee ſpi'd a Parrat, or a Monkey, there hee was pitch'd, with all the littl-long-coats about him, male and female; no getting him away! I thought he would ha' runne madde o'the blacke boy in Bucklers-bury, that takes the ſcury, roguy tobacco, there.
You ſay true, Maſter Numpes: there's ſuch a one indeed.
It's no matter, whether there be, or no, what's that to you?
He will not allow of Iohn's reading at any hand,
O Numpes! are you here Numpes? looke where I am, Numpes! and Miſtris Grace, too! nay, doe not looke angerly, Numpes: my Siſter is heere, and all, I doe not come without her.
What, the miſchiefe, doe you come with her? or ſhee with you?
We came all to ſeeke you, Numpes.
To ſeeke mee? why, did you all thinke I was loſt? or runne away with your foureteene ſhillings worth of ſmall ware, here? or that I had chang'd it i'the Fayre, for hobby-horſes? S'pretious—to ſeeke me!
Nay, good Mr Numpes, doe you ſhew diſcretion, though he bee exorbitant, (as Mr Ouer doo ſaies,) and't be but for conſeruation of the peace.
Mary gip, goody ſhe-Iuſtice, Miſtris French-hood! turd i'your teeth; and turd i'your French-hoods teeth, too, to doe you ſeruice, doe you ſee? muſt you quote your Adam to me! you thinke, you are Madam Regent ſtill, Miſtris Ouer-doo; when I am in place? no ſuch matter, I aſſure you, your raigne is out, when I am in, Dame.
I am content to be in abeyance, Sir, and be gouern'd by you; ſo ſhould hee too, if he did well; but 'twill be expected, you ſhould alſo gouerne your paſſions.
Will't ſo forſooth? good Lord! how ſharpe you are! with being at Bet'lem yeſterday? VVhetſton has ſet an edge vpon you, has hee?
Nay, if you know not what belongs to your dignity: I doe, yet, to mine.
Very well, then.
Is this the Licence, Numpes? for Loues ſake, let me ſee't. I neuer ſaw a Licence.
Did you not ſo? why, you ſhall not ſee't, then.
An' you loue mee, good Numpes.
Sir, I loue you, and yet I do not loue you, i'theſe fooleries, ſet your heart at reſt; there's nothing in't, but hard words: and what would you ſee't for?
I would ſee the length and the breadth on't, that's all; and I will ſee't now, ſo I will.
You ſha' not ſee it, heere.
Then I'll ſee't at home, and I'll looke vpo' the caſe heere.
Why, doe ſo, a man muſt giue way to him a little in trifles: Gentlemen. Theſe are errors, diſeaſes of youth: which he will mend, when he comes to iudgement, and knowledge of matters. I pray you conceiue ſo, and I thanke you. And I play you pardon him, and I thanke you againe.
Well, this dry-nurſe, I ſay ſtill, is a delicate man.
And I, am, for the Coſſet, his charge! Did you euer ſee a fellowes face more accuſe him for an Aſſe?
Accuſe him? it confeſſes him one without accuſing. What pitty 'tis yonder wench ſhould marry ſuch a Cokes?
'Tis true.
Shee ſeemes to be diſcreete, and as ſober as ſhee is handſome.
I, and if you marke her, what a reſtrain'd ſcorne ſhe caſts vpon all his behauiour, and ſpeeches?
Well, Numpes, I am now for another piece of buſineſſe more, the Fayre, Numpes, and then—
Bleſſe me! deliuer me, helpe, hold mee! the Fayre!
Nay, neuer fidge vp and downe, Numpes, and vexe it ſelfe. I am reſolute Bartholmew, in this; Il'e make no ſuite on't to you; 'twas all the end of my iourney, indeed, to ſhew Miſtris Grace my Fayre: I call't my Fayre, becauſe of Bartholmew: you know my name is Bartholmew, and Bartholmew Fayre.
That was mine afore, Gentlemen: this morning. I had that i'faith, vpon his Licence, beleeue me, there he comes, after me.
Come, Iohn, this ambitious wit of yours, (I am afraid) will doe you no good i'the end.
No? why Sir?
You grow ſo inſolent with it, and ouerdoing, Iohn: that if you looke not to it, and tie it vp, it will bring you to ſome obſcure place in time, and there 'twill leaue you.
Doe not truſt it too much, Iohn, be more ſparing, and vſe it, but now and then; a wit is a dangerous thing, in this age; doe not ouer buy it.
Thinke you ſo, Gentlemen? I'll take heed on't, hereafter.
Yes, doe Iohn.
A prety little ſoule, this ſame Miſtris Little-wit! would I might marry her.
So would I, or any body elſe, ſo I might ſcape you,
Numps, I will ſee it, Numpes, 'tis decreed: neuer be melancholy for the matter.
Why, ſee it, Sir, ſee it, doe ſee it! who hinders you? why doe you not goe ſee it? 'Slid ſee it.
The Fayre, Numps, the Fayre.
World the Fayre and all the Drums, and Rattles in't, were i'your belly for mee: they are already i'your braine: he that had the meanes to trauell you head, now, ſhould meet finer ſights then any are i'the Fayre; and make a finer voyage on't; to ſee it all hung with cockle-ſhels, pebbles, fine wheat-ſtrawes, and here and there a chicken's feather, and a cob-web.
Good faith, hee lookes, me thinkes an' you marke him, like one that were made to catch flies, with his Sir Cranion-legs.
And his Numpes, to flap 'hem away.
God, bew' you, Sir, there's your Bee in a box, and much good doo't, you.
Why, your friend, and Bartholmew; an' you be ſo contumacious.
What meane you, Numpes?
I'll not be guilty, I, Gentlemen.
You will not let him goe, Brother, and looſe him?
Who can hold that will away? I had rather looſe him then the Fayre, I wuſſe.
You doe not know the inconuenience, Gentlemen, you perſwade to: nor what trouble I haue with him in theſe humours. If he goe to the Fayre, he will buy of euery thing, to a Baby there; and houſhold-ſtuffe for that too. If a legge or an arme on him did not grow on, hee would loſe it i'the preſſe. Pray heauen I bring him off with one ſtone! And then he is ſuch a Rauener after fruite! you will not beleeue what a coyle I had, t'other day, to compound a buſineſſe betweene a Katerne-peare-woman, and him, about ſnatching! 'tis intolerable, Gentlemen.
O! but you muſt not leaue him, now, to theſe hazards, Numpes.
Nay, hee knowes too well, I will not leaue him, and that makes him preſume: well, Sir, will you goe now? if you haue ſuch an itch i'your feete, to foote it to the Fayre, why doe you ſtop, am I your Tarriars? goe, will you goe? Sir, why doe you not goe?
O Numps! haue I brought you about? come Miſtreſſe Grace, and Siſter, I am reſolute Batt, i'faith, ſtill.
Truely, I haue no ſuch fancy to the Fayre; nor ambition to ſee it; there's none goes thither of any quality or faſhion.
O Lord, Sir! you ſhall pardon me, Miſtris Grace, we are inow of our ſelues to make it a faſhion: and for qualities, let Numps alone, he'l finde qualities.
What a Rogue in apprehenſion is this! to vnderſtand her language no better.
I, and offer to marry to her? well, I will leaue the chaſe of my widdow, for to day, and directly to the Fayre. Theſe flies cannot, this hot ſeaſon, but engender vs excellent creeping ſport.
A man that has but a ſpoone full of braine, would think ſo. Farewell, Iohn.
Win, you ſee, 'tis in faſhion, to goe to the Fayre, Win: we muſt to the Fayre too, you, and I, Win. I haue an affaire i'the Fayre, Win, a Puppet-play of mine owne making, ſay nothing, that I writ for the motion man, which you muſt ſee, Win.
I would I might Iohn, but my mother will neuer conſent to ſuch a prophane motion: ſhe will call it.
Tut, we'll haue a deuice, a dainty one; (Now, Wit, helpe at a pinch, good Wit come, come, good Wit, and 't be thy will.) I haue it, Win, I haue it 'ifaith, and 'tis a fine one. Win, long to eate of a Pigge, ſweet Win, i'the Fayre; doe you ſee? i'the heart o'the Fayre; not at Pye-Corner. Your mother will doe any thing, Win, to ſatisfie your longing, you know, pray thee long, preſently, and be ſicke o'the ſudden, good Win. I'll goe in and tell her, cut thy lace i'the meane time, and play the Hypocrite, ſweet Win.
No, I'll not make me vnready for it. I can be Hypocrite enough, though I were neuer ſo ſtraight lac'd.
You ſay true, you haue bin bred i'the family, and brought vp to't. Our mother is a moſt elect Hypocrite, and has maintain'd us all this ſeuen yeere with it, like Gentle-folkes.
I, Let her alone, Iohn, ſhe is not a wiſe wilfull widdow for nothing, nor a ſanctified ſiſter for a ſong. And let me alone too, I ha' ſomewhat o'the mother in me, you ſhall ſee, fetch her, fetch her, ah, ah.
NOw, the blaze of the beauteous diſcipline, fright away this euill from our houſe! how now Win-the-fight, Child: how do you? Sweet child, ſpeake to me.
Yes, forſooth.
Looke vp, ſweet Win-the-fight, and ſuffer not the enemy to enter you at this doore, remember that your education has bin with the pureſt, what polluted one was it, that nam'd firſt the vncleane beaſt, Pigge, to you, Child?
(Vh, vh.)
Not I, o' my ſincerity, mother: ſhe long'd aboue three houres, ere ſhe would let me know it; who was it Win?
A prophane blacke thing with a beard, Iohn.
O! reſiſt it, Win-the-fight, it is the Tempter, the wicked Tempter, you may know it by the fleſhly motion of Pig, be ſtrong againſt it, and it's foule temptations, in theſe aſſaults, whereby it broacheth fleſh and blood, as it were, on the weaker ſide, and pray againſt it's carnall prouocations, good child, ſweet child, pray.
Good mother, I pray you; that ſhe may eate ſome Pigge, and her belly full, too; and doe not you caſt away your owne child, and perhaps one of mine, with your tale of the Tempter: how doe you, Win? Are you not ſicke?
Yes, a great deale, Iohn, (vh, vh.)
What ſhall we doe? call our zealous brother Buſy hither, for his faithfull fortification in this charge of the aduerſary; child, my deare childe, you ſhall eate Pigge, be comforted, my ſweet child.
I, but i'the Fayre, mother.
I meane i'the Fayre, if it can be any way made, or found lawfull; where is our brother Buſy? Will hee not come? looke vp, child.
Preſently, mother, as ſoone as he has cleanſ'd his beard. I found him, faſt by the teeth, i'the cold Turkey-pye, i'the cupbord, with a great white loafe on his left hand, and a glaſſe of Malmeſey on his right.
Slander not the Brethren, wicked one.
Here hee is, DO, purified, Mother.
O brother Buſy your helpe heere to edifie, and raiſe vs vp in a ſcruple; my daughter Win-the-fight is viſited with a naturall diſeaſe of women; call'd, A longing to eate Pigge.
I Sir, a Bartholmew-pigge: and in the Fayre.
And I would be ſatisfied from you, Religiouſly-wiſe, whether a widdow of the ſanctified aſſembly, or a widdowes daughter, may commit the act, without offence to the weaker ſiſters.
Verily, for the diſeaſe of longing, it is a diſeaſe, a carnall diſeaſe, or appetite, incident to women: and as it is carnall, and incident, it is naturall, very naturall: Now Pigge, it is a meat, and a meat that is nouriſhing, and may be long'd for, and ſo conſequently eaten; it may be eaten; very exceeding well eaten: but in the Fayre, and as a Bartholmew-pig, it cannot be eaten, for the very calling it a Bartholmew-pigge, and to eat it ſo, is a ſpice of Idolatry, and you make the Fayre, no better then one of the high Places. This I take it, is the ſtate of the queſtion. A high place.
I, but in ſtate of neceſſity: Place ſhould giue place, Mr Buſy, (I haue a conceit left, yet.)
Good Brother, Zeale-of-the-land, thinke to make it as lawfull as you can.
Yes Sir, and as ſoone as you can: for it muſt be Sir; you ſee the danger my little wife is in, Sir.
Truely, I doe loue my child dearely, and I would not haue her miſcarry, or hazard her firſt fruites, if it might be otherwiſe.
Surely, it may be otherwiſe, but it is ſubiect, to conſtruction, ſubiect, and hath a face of offence, with the weake, a great face, a foule face, but that face may haue a vaile put ouer it, and be ſhaddowed, as it were, it may be eaten, and in the Fayre, I take it, in a Booth, the tents of the wicked: the place is not much, not very much, we may be religious in midſt of the prophane, ſo it be eaten with a reformed mouth, with ſobriety, and humbleneſſe; not gorg'd in with gluttony, or greedineſſe; there's the feare: for, ſhould ſhe goe there, as taking pride in the place, or delight in the vncleane dreſſing, to feed the vanity of the eye, or the luſt of the palat, it were not well, it were not fit, it were abominable, and not good.
Nay, I knew that afore, and told her on't, but courage, Win, we'll be humble enough; we'll ſeeke out the homelieſt Booth i'the Fayre, that's certaine, rather then faile, wee'll eate it o' the ground.
I, and I'll goe with you my ſelfe, Win-the-fight, and my brother, Zeale-of-the-land, ſhall goe with vs too, for our better conſolation.
Vh, vh.
I, and Salomon too, Win, (the more the merrier) Win, we'll leaue Rabby Buſy in a Booth. Salomon, my cloake.
Here, Sir.
In the way of comfort to the weake, I will goe, and eat. I will eate exceedingly, and propheſie; there may be a good vſe made of it, too, now I thinke on't: by the publike eating of Swines fleſh, to profeſſe our hate, and loathing of Iudaiſme, whereof the brethren ſtand taxed. I will therefore eate, yea, I will eate exceedingly.
Good, i'faith, I will eate heartily too, becauſe I will be no Iew, I could neuer away with that ſtiffenecked generation: and truely, I hope my little one will be like me, that cries for Pigge ſo, i'the mothers belly.
Very likely, exceeding likely, very exceeding likely.
WEll, in Iuſtice name, and the Kings; and for the common-wealth! defie all the world, Adam Ouerdoo, for a diſguiſe, and all ſtory; for thou haſt fitted thy ſelfe, I ſweare; faine would I meet the Linceus now, that Eagles eye, that peircing Epidaurian ſerpent (as my Quint. Horace cal's him) that could diſcouer a Iuſtice of Peace, (and lately of the Quorum) vnder this couering. They may haue ſeene many a foole in the habite of a Iuſtice; but neuer till now, a Iuſtice in the habit of a foole. Thus muſt we doe, though, that wake for the publike good: and thus hath the wiſe Magiſtrate done in all ages. There is a doing of right out of wrong, if the way be found. Neuer ſhall I enough commend a worthy worſhipfull man, ſometime a capitall member of this City, for his high wiſdome, in this point, who would take you, now the habit of a Porter; now of a Carman; now of the Dog-killer, in this moneth of Auguſt; and in the winter, of a Seller of tinder-boxes; and what would hee doe in all theſe ſhapes? mary goe you into euery Alehouſe, and down into euery Celler; meaſure the length of puddings, take the gage of blacke pots, and cannes, I, and cuſtards with a ſticke; and their circumference, with a thrid; weigh the loaues of bread on his middle-finger; then would he ſend for 'hem, home; giue the puddings to the poore, the bread to the hungry, the cuſtards to his children; breake the pots, and burne the cannes, himſelfe; hee Would not truſt his corrupt officers; he would do't himſelfe. would all men in authority would follow this worthy preſident! For (alas) as we are publike perſons, what doe we know? nay, what can wee know? wee heare with other mens eares; wee ſee with other mens eyes? a fooliſh Conſtable, or a ſleepy Watchman, is all our information, he ſlanders a Gentleman, by the vertue of his place, (as he calls it) and wee by the vice of ours, muſt beleeue him. As a while agone, they made mee, yea me, to miſtake an honeſt zealous Purſiuant, for a Seminary: and a proper yong Batcheler of Muſicke, for a Bawd. This wee are ſubiect to, that liue in high place, all our intelligence is idle, and moſt of our intelligencers, knaues: and by your leaue, ourſelues, thought little better, if not errant fooles, for beleeuing 'hem. I Adam Ouerdoo, am reſolu'd therefore, to ſpare ſpy-money hereafter, and make mine owne diſcoueries. Many are the yeerely enormities of of this Fayre, in whoſe courts of Pye-pouldres I haue had the honour during the three dayes ſometimes to ſit as Iudge. But this is the ſpeciall day for detection of thoſe foreſaid enormities. Here is my blacke booke, for the purpoſe; this the cloud that hides me: vnder this couert I ſhall ſee, and not be ſeene. On Iunius Brutus. And as I began, ſo I'll end: in Iuſtice name, and the Kings; and for the Common-wealth.
THe Fayre's peſtlence dead, mee thinkes; people come not abroad, to day, what euer the matter is. Doe you heare, Siſter Traſh, Lady o'the Basket? ſit farther with your ginger-bread-progeny there, and hinder not the proſpect of my ſhop, or I'll ha' it proclaim'd i'the Fayre, what ſtuffe they are made on.
Why, what ſtuffe are they made on, Brother Leatherhead? nothing but what's wholeſome, I aſſure you.
Yes, ſtale bread, rotten egges, muſty ginger, and dead honey, you know.
I! haue I met with enormity, ſo ſoone?
I ſhall marre your market, old Ione.
Marre my market, thou too-proud Pedler? do thy worſt; I defie thee, I, and thy ſtable of hobby-horſes. I pay for my ground, as well as thou doſt, and thou wrong'ſt mee for all thou art parcell-poet, and an Inginer. I'll finde a friend ſhall right me, and make a ballad of thee, and thy cattell all ouer. Are you puſt vp with the pride of your wares? your Arſedine?
Goe to, old Ione, I'll talke with you anone▪ and take you downe too, afore Iuſtice Ouerdoo, he is the man muſt charme you, Ile ha' you i'the Piepouldres.
Charme me? I'll meet thee face to face, afore his worſhip, when thou dar'ſt: and though I be a little crooked o' my body, I'll be found as vpright in my dealing, as any woman in Smithfield, I, charme me?
I am glad, to heare, my name is their terror, yet, this is doing of Iuſtice.
What doe you lacke? what is't you buy? what do you lacke? Rattles, Drums, Halberts, Horſes, Babies o'the beſt? Fiddles o'th fineſt?
Buy any peares, peares, fine, very fine peares.
Buy any ginger-bread, guilt ginger-bread!
Hey, now the Fayre's a filling!
O, for a Tune to ſtartle
The Birds o'the Booths here billing;
Yeerely with old Saint Barthle!
The Drunkards they are wading,
The Punques, and Chapmen trading;
Who'ld ſee the Fayre without his lading? Buy any ballads; new ballads?
Fye vpon't: who would weare out their youth, and prime thus, in roaſting of pigges, that had any cooler vocation? Hell's a kind of cold cellar to't, a very fine vault, o'my conſcience! what Moone-calfe.
Heere. Miſtreſſe.
How now Vrſla? in a heate, in a heat?
My chayre, you falſe faucet you; and my mornings draught, quickly, a botle of Ale, to quench mee, Raſcall. I am all fire, and fat, Nightingale, I ſhall e'en melt away to the firſt woman, a ribbe againe, I am afraid. I doe water the ground in knots, as I goe, like a great Garden-pot, you may follow me by the S.S.s. I make.
Alas, good Vr's; was Zekiel heere this morning?
Zekiel? what Zekiel?
Zekiel Edgeworth, the ciuill cut-purſe, you know him well enough; hee that talkes bawdy to you ſtill: I call him my Secretary.
He promis'd to be heere this morning. I remember.
When he comes, bid him ſtay: I'll be backe againe preſently.
Beſt take your mornings dew in your belly, Nightingale, come, Sir, ſet it heere, did not I bid you ſhould get this chayre let out o'the ſides, for me, that my hips might play? you'll neuer thinke of any thing, till your dame be rumpgall'd; 'tis well, Changeling: becauſe it can take in your Graſſe-hoppers thighes, you care for no more. Now, you looke as you had been i' the corner o'the Booth, fleaing your breech, with a candles end, and ſet fire o'the Fayre. Fill, Stote: fill.
This Pig-woman doe I know, and I will put her in, for my ſecond enormity, ſhee hath beene before mee, Punke, Pinnace and Bawd, any time theſe two and twenty yeeres, vpon record i'the Pie-poudres.
Fill againe, you vnlucky vermine.
'Pray you be not angry, Miſtreſſe, I'll ha' it widen'd anone.
No, no, I ſhall e'en dwindle away to 't, ere the Fayre be done, you thinke, now you ha' heated me? A poore vex'd thing I am, I feele my ſelfe dropping already, as faſt as I can: two ſtone a ſewet aday is my proportion: I can but hold life & ſoule together, with this (heere's to you, Nightingale) and a whiffe of tobacco, at moſt. Where's my pipe now? not fill'd? thou errant Incubee.
Nay, Vrſla, thou'lt gall betweene the tongue and the teeth, with fretting, now.
How can I hope, that euer hee'll diſcharge his place of truſt, Tapſter, a man of reckoning vnder me, that remembers nothing I ſay to him? but looke too't, ſirrah, you were beſt, three pence a pipe full, I will ha' made, of all my whole halfe pound of tabacco, and a quarter of a pound of Coltsfoot, mixt with it too, to itch it out. I that haue dealt ſo long in the fire, will not be to ſeek in ſmoak, now. Then 6. and 20. ſhillings a barrell I will aduance o'my Beere; and fifty ſhillings a hundred o'my bottle-ale, I ha' told you the waies how to raiſe it. Froth your cannes well i'the filling, at length Rogue, and iogge your bottles o' the buttocke, Sirrah, then skinke out the firſt glaſſe, euer, and drinke with all companies, though you be ſure to be drunke; you'll miſ-reckon the better, and be leſſe aſham'd on't. But your true tricke, Raſcall, muſt be, to be euer buſie, and miſ-take away the bottles and cannes, in haſt, before they be halfe drunke off, and neuer heare any body call, (if they ſhould chance to marke you) till you ha' brought freſh, and be able to for ſweare 'hem. Giue me a drinke of Ale.
This is the very wombe, and bedde of enormitie! groſſe, as her ſelfe! this muſt all downe for enormity, all, euery whit on't.
Looke, who's there, Sirrah? fiue ſhillings a Pigge is my price, at leaſt; if it be a ſow-pig, ſix pence more: if ſhe be a great bellied wife, and long for't, ſix pence more for that.
O Tempora! O mores! I would not ha' loſt my diſcouery of this one grieuance, for my place, and worſhip o'the Bench, how is the poore ſubiect abus'd, here! well, I will fall in with her, and with her Moone-calfe, and winne out wonders of enormity. By thy leaue, goodly woman, and the fatneſſc of the Fayre: oyly as the Kings conſtables Lampe, and ſhining as his Shooing-horne! hath thy Ale vertue, or thy Beere ſtrength? that the tongue of man may be tickled? and his palat pleas'd in the morning? let thy pretty Nephew here, goe ſearch and ſee.
What new Roarer is this?
O Lord! doe you not know him, Miſtris, 'tis mad Arthur of Bradley, that makes the Orations. Braue Maſter, old Arthur of Bradley, how doe you? welcome to the Fayre, when ſhall wee heare you againe, to handle your matters? with your backe againe a Booth, ha? I ha' bin one o'your little diſciples, i'my dayes!
Let me drinke, boy, with my loue, thy Aunt, here; that I may be eloquent: but of thy beſt, leſt it be bitter in my mouth, and my words fall foule on the Fayre.
Why doſt thou not fetch him drinke? and offer him to ſit?
Is't Ale, or Beere? Maſter Arthur?
Thy beſt, pretty ſtripling, thy beſt; the ſame thy Doue drinketh, and thou draweſt on holy daies.
Bring him a ſixe penny bottle of Ale; they ſay, a fooles handſell is lucky.
Bring both, child. Ale for Arthur, and Beere for Bradley. Ale for thine Aunt, boy. My diſguiſe takes to the very wiſh, and reach of it. I ſhall by the benefit of this, diſcouer enough, and more: and yet get off with the reputation of what I would be. A certaine midling thing, betweene a foole and a madman.
VVHat! my little leane Vrſla! my ſhee-Beare! art thou aliue yet? with thy litter of pigges, to grunt out another Bartholmew Fayre? ha!
Yes, and to amble a foote, when the Fayre is done, to heare you groane out of a cart, vp the heauy hill.
Of Holbourne, Vrſla, meanſt thou ſo? for what? for what, pretty Vrſ?
For cutting halfe-penny purſes: or ſtealing little penny dogges, out o'the Fayre.
O! good words, good words Vrſ.
Another ſpeciall enormitie. A cutpurſe of the ſword! the boote, and the feather! thoſe are his marks.
You are one of thoſe horſleaches, that gaue out I was dead, in Turne-bull ſtreete, of a ſurfet of botle ale, and tripes?
No, 'twas better meat Vrs: cowes vdders; cowes vdders!
Well, I ſhall be meet with your mumbling mouth one day.
What? thou'lt poyſon mee with a neuft in a bottle of Ale, will't thou? or a ſpider in a tobacco-pipe, Vrs? Come, there's no malice in theſe fat folkes, I neuer feare thee, and I can ſcape thy leane Moonecalfe heere. Let's drinke it out, good Vrs, and no vapours!
Doſt thou heare, boy? (there's for thy Ale, and the remnant for thee) ſpeake in thy faith of a faucet, now; is this goodly perſon before vs here, this vapours, a knight of the knife?
What meane you by that, Maſter Arthur?
I meane a child of the horne-thumb, a babe of booty, boy; a cutpurſe.
O Lord, Sir! far from it. This is Maſter Dan. Knockhum: Iordane the Ranger of Turnebull. He is a horſe-courſer, Sir.
Thy dainty dame, though, call'd him cutpurſe.
Like enough, Sir, ſhee'll doe forty ſuch things in an houre (an you liſten to her) for her recreation, if the toy take her i'the greaſie kerchiefe: it makes her fat you ſee. Shee battens with it.
Here might I ha' beene deceiu'd, now: and ha' put a fooles blot vpon my ſelfe, if I had not play'd an after game o' diſcretion.
Alas poore Vrs, this's an ill ſeaſon for thee.
Hang your ſelfe, Hacney-man.
How? how? Vrs, vapours! motion breede vapours?
Vapours? Neuer tuske, nor twirle your dibble, good Iordane, I know what you'll take to a very drop. Though you be Captaine o'the Roarers, and fight well at the caſe of piſ-pots, you ſhall not fright me with your Lyon-chap, Sir, nor your tuskes, you angry? you are hungry: come, a pigs head will ſtop your mouth, and ſtay your ſtomacke, at all times.
Thou art ſuch another mad merry Vrs ſtill! Troth I doe make conſcience of vexing thee, now i'the dog-daies, this hot weather, for feare of foundring thee i'the bodie; and melting down a Piller of the Fayre. Pray thee take thy chayre againe, and keepe ſtate; and let's haue a freſh bottle of Ale, and a pipe of tabacco; and no vapours. I'le ha' this belly o'thine taken vp, and thy graſſe ſcour'd, wench; looke! heere's EZechiel Edgworth; a fine boy of his inches, as any is i'the Fayre! has ſtill money in his purſe, and will pay all, with a kind heart; and good vapours.
THat I will, indeede, willingly, Maſter Knockhum, fetch ſome Ale, and Tabacco.
What doe you lacke, Gentlemen? Maid: ſee a fine hobby horſe for your young Maſter; coſt you but a token a weeke his prouander.
Ha' you any cornes 'iyour feete, and toes?
Buy a Mouſe-trap, a Mouſe-trap, or a Tormentor for a Flea.
Buy ſome Ginger-bread.
Ballads, Ballads! fine new ballads:
Heare for your loue, and buy for your money.
A delicate ballad o' the Ferret and the Coney.
A preſeruatiue again' the Punques euill.
Another of Gooſe-greene-ſtarch, and the Deuill.
A dozen of diuine points, and the Godly garters.
The Fairing of good councell, of an ell and three quarters. What is't you buy?
The Wind-mill blowne downe by the witches fart!
Or Saint George, that O! did breake the Dragons heart!
Maſter Nightingale, come hither, leaue your mart a little.
O my Secretary! what ſayes my Secretarie?
Childe o'the bottles, what's he? what he?
A ciuill young Gentleman, Maſter Arthur, that keepes company with the Roarers, and disburſes all, ſtill. He has euer money in his purſe; He payes for them; and they roare for him: one do's good offices for another. They call him the Secretary, but he ſerues no body. A great friend of the Ballad-mans they are neuer aſunder.
What pitty 'tis, ſo ciuill a young man ſhould haunt this debaucht company? here's the bane of the youth of our time apparant. A proper penman, I ſee't in his countenance, he has a good Clerks looke with him, and I warrant him a quicke hand.
A very quicke hand, Sir.
All the purſes, and purchaſe, I giue you to day by conueyance, bring hither to Vrſla's preſently. Heere we will meet at night in her lodge, and ſhare. Looke you chooſe good places, for your ſtanding i'the Fayre, when you ſing Nightingale.
I, neere the fulleſt paſſages; and ſhift 'hem often.
And i'your ſinging, you muſt vſe your hawks eye nimbly, and flye the purſe to a marke, ſtill, where 'tis worne, and o' which ſide; that you may gi' me the ſigne with your beake, or hang your head that way i'the tune.
Enough, talke no more on't: your friendſhip (Maſters) is not now to beginne. Drinke your draught of Indenture, your ſup of Couenant, and away, the Fayre fils apace, company begins to come in, and I ha' ne'er a Pigge ready, yet.
Well ſaid! fill the cups, and light the tabacco: let's giue fire i'th' works, and noble vapours.
And ſhall we ha' ſmockes Vrſla, and good whimſies, ha?
Come, you are i'your bawdy vaine! the beſt the Fayre will afford, Zekiel, if Bawd Whit keepe his word; how doe the Pigges, Moone-calfe?
Very paſſionate, Miſtreſſe, on on 'hem has wept out an eye. Maſter Arthur o' Bradley is melancholy, heere, no body talkes to him. Will you any tabacco Maſter Arthur?
No, boy, let my meditations alone.
He's ſtudying for an Oration, now.
If I can, with this daies trauell; and all my policy, but reſcue this youth, here out of the hands of the lewd man, and the ſtrange woman. I will ſit downe at night; and ſay with my friend Ouid, Iam que opus exegi, quod nec Pouis ira, nec ignis, &c.
Here Zekiel; here's a health to Vrſla, and a kind vapour, thou haſt money i'thy purſe ſtill; and ſtore! how doſt thou come by it? Pray thee vapour thy friends ſome in a courteous vapour.
Halfe I haue, Maſter Dan. Knockhum, is alwaies at your ſeruice,
Ha, ſweete nature! what Goſhawke would prey vpon ſuch a Lambe?
Let's ſee, what 'tis, Zekiel! count it, come, fill him to pledge mee.
VVEe are heere before 'hem, me thinkes.
All the better, we ſhall ſee 'hem come in now.
What doe you lacke, Gentlemen, what is't you lacke? a fine Horſe? a Lyon? a Bull? a Beare? a Dog, or a Cat? an excellent fine Bartholmew-bird? or an Inſtrument? what is't you lacke?
S'lid! heere's Orpheus among the beaſts, with his Fiddle, and all!
Will you buy any comfortable bread, Gentlemen?
And Ceres ſelling her daughters picture, in Ginger-worke!
That theſe people ſhould be ſo ignorant to thinke vs chapmen for 'hem! doe wee looke as if wee would buy Ginger-bread? or Hobby-horſes?
Why, they know no better ware then they haue, nor better cuſtomers then come. And our very being here makes vs fit to be demanded, as well as others. Would Cokes would come! there were a true cuſtomer for 'hem.
How much is't? thirty ſhillings? who's yonder! Ned Winwife? and Tom Quarlous, I thinke! yes, (gi' me it all) (gi' me it all) Maſter Win-wife! Maſter Quarlous! will you take a pipe of tabacco with vs? do not diſcredit me now, Zekiel.
Doe not ſee him! he is the roaring horſe-courſer, pray thee let's auoyd him: turne downe this way.
S'lud, I'le ſee him, and roare with him, too, and hee roar'd as loud as Neptune, pray thee goe with me.
You may draw me to as likely an inconuenience, when you pleaſe, as this.
Goe to then, come along, we ha' nothing to doe, man, but to ſee ſights, now.
Welcome Maſter Quarlous, and Maſter Winwife! will you take any froth, and ſmoake with vs?
Yes, Sir, but you'l pardon vs, if we knew not of ſo much familiarity betweene vs afore.
As what, Sir?
To be ſo lightly inuited to ſmoake, and froth.
A good vapour! will you ſit downe, Sir? this is old Vrſla's manſion, how like you her bower? heere you may ha' your Punque, and your Pigge in ſtate, Sir, both piping hot.
I had rather ha' my Punque, cold, Sir.
There's for me, Punque! and Pigge!
What Moonecalfe? you Rogue.
By and by, the bottle is almoſt off Miſtreſſe, here Maſter Arthur.
I'le part you, and your play-fellow there, i'the garded coat, an' you ſunder not the ſooner.
Maſter Win-wife, you are proud (me thinkes) you doe not talke, nor drinke, are you proud?
Not of the company I am in, Sir, nor the place, I aſſure you.
You doe not except at the company! doe you? are you in vapours, Sir?
Nay, good Maſter Dan: Knockhum, reſpect my Miſtris Bower, as you call it; for the honour of our Booth, none o'your vapours, heere.
Why, you thinne leane Polcat you, and they haue a minde to be i'their vapours, muſt you hinder 'hem? what did you know Vermine, if they would ha' loſt a cloake, or ſuch a triflle? muſt you be drawing the ayre of pacification heere? while I am tormented, within, i'the fire, you Weaſell?
Good Miſtreſſe, 'twas in the behalfe of your Booth's credit, that I ſpoke.
Why? would my Booth ha' broake, if they had fal'ne out in't? Sir? or would their heate ha' fir'd it? in, you Rogue, and wipe the pigges, and mend the fire, that they fall not, or I'le both baſte and roaſt you, till your eyes drop out, like 'hem. (Leaue the bottle behinde you, and be curſt a while.)
Body o'the Fayre! what's this? mother o'the Bawds?
No, ſhe's mother o'the Pigs, Sir, mother o'the Pigs!
Mother o'the Furies, I thinke, by her firebrand.
Nay, ſhee is too fat to be a Fury, ſure, ſome walking Sow of tallow!
An inſpir'd veſſell of Kitchin-ſtuffe!
She'll make excellent geere for the Coach-makers, here in Smithfield, to anoynt wheeles and axell trees with.
I, I, Gameſters, mocke a plaine plumpe ſoft wench o' the Suburbs, doe, becauſe ſhe's iuicy and wholeſome: you muſt ha' your thinne pinch'd ware, pent vp i'the compaſſe of a dogge-collar, (or 'twill not do) that lookes like a long lac'd Conger, ſet vpright, and a greene feather, like fennell i'the Ioll on't.
Well ſaid Vrs, my good Vrs; to 'hem Vrs.
Is ſhee your quagmire, Dan: Knockhum? is this your Bogge?
We ſhall haue a quarrel preſently.
How? Bog? Quagmire? foule vapours! hum'h!
Yes, hee that would venture for't, I aſſure him, might ſinke into her, and be drown'd a weeke, ere any friend hee had, could find where he were.
And then he would be a fort' night weighing vp againe.
'Twere like falling into a whole Shire of butter: they had need be a teeme of Dutchmen, ſhould draw him out.
Anſwer 'hem, Vrs, where's thy Bartholmew-wit, now? Vrs, thy Bartholmew-wit?
Hang 'hem, rotten, roguy Cheaters, I hope to ſee 'hem plagu'd one day (pox'd they are already, I am ſure) with leane play-houſe poultry, that has the boany rumpe, ſticking out like the Ace of Spades, or the point of a Partizan, that euery rib of hem is like the tooth of a Saw: and will ſo grate 'hem with their hips, & ſhoulders, as (take 'hem altogether) they were as good lye with a hurdle.
Out vpon her, how ſhe drips! ſhe's able to giue a man the ſweating Sickneſſe, with looking on her.
Mary looke off, with a patch o'your face; and a doſen i'your breech, though they be o'ſcarlet, Sir. I ha' ſeene as fine outſides, as either o'yours, bring lowſie linings to the Brokers, ere now, twice a weeke?
Doe you thinke there may be a fine new Cuckingſtoole i'the Fayre, to be purchas'd? one large inough, I meane. I know there is a pond of capacity, for her.
For your mother, you Raſcall, out you Rogue, you hedge bird, you Pimpe, you pannier-mans baſtard, you.
Ha, ha, ha.
Doe you ſneerc, you dogs-head, you Trendle tayle! you looke as you were begotten a'top of a Cart in harueſt-time, when the whelp was hot and eager. Go, ſnuffe after your brothers bitch, Mrs Commodity, that's the Liuory you weare, 'twill be out at the elbows, ſhortly. It's time you went to't, for the to'ther remnant.
Peace, Vrs, peace, Vrs, they'll kill the poore Whale, and make oyle of her. Pray thee goe in.
I'le ſee 'hem pox'd firſt, and pil'd, and double pil'd.
Let's away, her language growes greaſier then her Pigs.
Dos't ſo, ſnotty noſe? good Lord! are you ſniueling? you were engendred on a ſhe-begger, in a barne, when the bald Thraſher, your Sire, was ſcarce warme.
Pray thee, let's goe.
No, faith: I'le ſtay the end of her, now: I know ſhee cannot laſt long; I finde by her ſimiles, ſhee wanes a pace.
Do's ſhee ſo? I'le ſet you gone. Gi' mee my Pig-pan hither a little. I'le ſcald you hence, and you will not goe.
Gentlemen, theſe are very ſtrange vapours! and very idle vapours! I aſſure you.
You are a very ſerious aſſe, wee aſſure you.
Humh! Aſſe? and ſerious? nay, then pardon mee my vapour. I haue a fooliſh vapour, Gentlemen: any man that doe's vapour me, the Aſſe, Maſter Quarlous—
What then, Maſter Iordan?
I doe vapour him the lye.
Faith, and to any man that vapours mee the lie, I doe vapour that.
Nay, then, vapours vpon vapours.
'Ware the pan, the pan, the pan, ſhee comes with the pan, Gentlemen. God bleſſe the woman.
Oh.
What's the matter?
Goodly woman!
Miſtreſſe!
Curſe of hell, that euer I ſaw theſe Feinds, oh! I ha' ſcalded my leg, my leg, my leg, my leg. I ha' loſt a limb in the ſeruice! run for ſome creame and ſallad oyle, quickly. Are you vnder-peering, you Baboun? rip off my hoſe, an' you be men, men, men.
Runne you for ſome creame, good mother Ione. I'le looke to your basket.
Beſt ſit vp i'your chaire, Vrſla. Helpe, Gentlemen.
Be of good cheere, Vrs, thou haſt hindred me the currying of a couple of Stallions, here, that abus'd the good race-Bawd o'Smithfield; 'twas time for 'hem to goe.
I faith, when the panne came, they had made you runne elſe. (this had beene a fine time for purchaſe, if you had ventur'd.)
Not a whit, theſe fellowes were too fine to carry money.
Nightingale, get ſome helpe to carry her legge out o'the ayre; take off her ſhooes; body o'me, ſhe has the Mallanders, the ſcratches, the crowne ſcabbe, and the quitter bone, i'the tother legge.
Oh! the poxe, why doe you put me in minde o'my leg, thus, to make it prick, and ſhoot? would you ha' me i'the Hoſpitall, afore my time?
Patience, Vrs, take a good heart, 'tis but a bliſter, as big as a Windgall; I'le take it away with the white of an egge, a little honey, and hogs greaſe, ha' thy paſternes well rol'd, and thou ſhall't paſe againe by to morrow. I'le tend thy Booth, and looke to thy affaires, the while: thou ſhalt ſit i'thy chaire, and giue directions, and ſhine Vrſa maior.
THeſe are the fruites of bottle-ale, and tabacco! the fome of the one, and the fumes of the other! Stay young man, and deſpiſe not the wiſedome of theſe few hayres, that are growne gray in care of thee.
Nightingale, ſtay a little. Indeede I'le heare ſome o' this!
Come, Numps, come, where are you? welcome into the Fayre, Miſtris Grace.
S'light, hee will call company, you ſhall ſee, and put vs into doings preſently.
Thirſt not after that frothy liquor, Ale: for, who knowes, when hee openeth the ſtopple, what may be in the bottle? hath not a Snaile, a Spider, yea, a Neuft bin found there? thirſt not after it, youth: thirſt not after it.
This is a braue fellow, Numps, let's heare him.
S'blood, how braue is he? in a garded coate? you were beſt trucke with him, e'en ſtrip, and trucke preſently, it will become you, why will you heare him, becauſe he is an Aſſe, and may be a kinnne to the Cokeſes?
O, good Numps!
Neither doe thou luſt after that tawney weede, tabacco.
Braue words!
Whoſe complexion is like the Indians that vents it!
Are they not braue words, Siſter?
And who can tell, if, before the gathering, and making vp thereof, the Alligarta hath not piſs'd thereon?
'Heart let 'hem be braue words, as braue as they will! and they were all the braue words in a Countrey, how then? will you away yet? ha' you inough on him? Miſtris Grace, come you away, I pray you, be not you acceſſary. If you doe loſe your Licence, or ſomewhat elſe, Sir, with liſtning to his fables: ſay, Numps, is a witch, with all my heart, doe, ſay ſo.
Avoyd i' your ſattin doublet, Numps.
The creeping venome of which ſubtill ſerpent, as ſome late writers affirme; neither the cutting of the perrillous plant, nor the drying of it, nor the lighting, or burning, can any way perſſway or, aſſwage.
Good, i'faith! is't not Siſter?
Hence it is, that the lungs of the Tabacconiſt are rotted, the Liuer ſpotted, the braine ſmoak'd like the backſide of the Pig-womans Booth, here, and the whole body within, blacke, as her Pan, you ſaw e'en now, without.
A fine ſimilitude, that, Sir! did you ſee the panne?
Yes, Sir.
Nay, the hole in the noſe heere, of ſome tabacco-takers, or the third noſtrill, (if I may ſo call it) which makes, that they can vent the tabacco out, like the Ace of clubs, or rather the Flower-de-lice, is cauſed from the tabacco, the meere tabacco! when the poore innocent pox, hauing nothing to doe there, is miſerably, and moſt vnconſcionably ſlander'd.
Who would ha' miſt this, Siſter?
Not any body, but Numps.
He do's not vnderſtand.
Nor you feele.
What would you haue, Siſter, of a fellow that knowes nothing but a basket-hilt, and an old Fox in't? the beſt muſique i'the Fayre, will not moue a logge.
In, to Vrſla, Nightingale, and carry her comfort: ſee it told. This fellow was ſent to vs by fortune, for our firſt fairing.
But what ſpeake I of the diſeaſes of the body, children of the Fayre?
That's to vs, Siſter. Braue i'faith!
Harke, O, you ſonnes and daughters of Smithfield! and heare what mallady it doth the minde: It cauſeth ſwearing, it cauſeth ſwaggering, it cauſeth ſnuffling, and ſnarling, and now and then a hurt.
He hath ſomething of Maſter Ouerdoo, mee thinkes, brother.
So mee thought, Siſter, very much of my brother Ouerdoo: And 'tis, when he ſpeakes.
Looke into any Angle o'the towne, (the Streights, or the Bermuda's) where the quarrelling leſſon is read, and how doe they entertaine the time, but with bottle-ale, and tabacco? The Lecturer is o'one ſide, and his Pupils o'the other; But the ſeconds are ſtill bottle-ale, and tabacco, for which the Lecturer reads, and the Nouices pay. Thirty pound a weeke in bottle-ale! forty in tabacco! and ten more in Ale againe. Then for a ſute to drinke in, ſo much, and (that being ſlauer'd) ſo much for another ſute, and then a third ſute, and a fourth ſute! and ſtill the bottle-ale ſlauereth, and the tabacco ſtinketh!
Heart of a mad-man! are you rooted heere? well you neuer away? what can any man finde out in this bawling fellow, to grow heere for? hee is a full handfull higher, ſin'he heard him, will you fix heere? and ſet vp a Booth? Sir?
I will conclude briefely—
Hold your peace, you roaring Raſcall, I'le runne my head i'your chaps elſe. You were beſt build a Booth, and entertaine him, make your Will, and you ſay the word, and him your heyre! heart, I neuer knew one taken with a mouth of a pecke, afore. By this light, I'le carry you away o' my backe, and you will not come.
Stay Numpes, ſtay, ſet mee downe: I ha' loſt my purſe, Numps, O my purſe! one o'my fine purſes is gone.
Is't indeed, brother?
I, as I am an honeſt man, would I were an errant Rogue, elſe! a plague of all roguy, damn'd cut-purſes for me.
Bleſſe 'hem with all my heart, with all my heart, do you ſee! Now, as I am no Infidell, that I know of, I am glad on't. I I am, (here's my witneſſe!) doe you ſee, Sir? I did not tell you of his fables, I? no, no, I am a dull malt-horſe, I, I know nothing. Are you not iuſtly ſeru'd i'your conſcience now? ſpeake i'your conſcience. Much good doe you with all my heart, and his good heart that has it, with all my heart againe.
This fellow is very charitable, would he had a purſe too! but, I muſt not be too bold, all at a time.
Nay, Numps, it is not my beſt purſe.
Not your beſt! death! why ſhould it be your worſt? why ſhould it be any, indeed, at all? anſwer me to that, gi' mee a reaſon from you, why it ſhould be any?
Nor my gold, Numps; I ha' that yet, looke heere elſe, Siſter.
Why ſo, there's all the feeling he has!
I pray you, haue a better care of that, brother.
Nay, ſo I will, I warrant you; let him catch this, that catch can. I would faine ſee him get this, looke you heere.
So, ſo, ſo, ſo, ſo, ſo, ſo, ſo! Very good.
I would ha' him come againe, now, and but offer at it. Siſter, will you take notice of a good ieſt? I will put it iuſt where th'other was, and if we ha' good lucke, you ſhall ſee a delicate fine trap to catch the cutpurſe, nibling.
Faith, and he'll trye ere you be out o'the Fayre.
Come, Miſtreſſe Grace, pre'thee be not melancholy for my miſ-chance; ſorrow wi'not keepe it, Sweet heart.
I doe not thinke on't, Sir.
'Twas but a little ſcuruy white money, hang it: it may hang the cutpurſe, one day. I ha' gold left to gi'thee a fayring, yet, as hard as the world goes: nothing angers me, but that no body heere, look'd like a cutpurſe, vnleſſe 'twere Numps.
How? I? I looke like a cutpurſe? death! your Siſter's a cutpurſe! and your mother and father, and all your kinne were cutpurſes! And here is a Rogue is the baud o'the cutpurſes, whom I will beat to begin with.
Numps, Numps.
Good Mr Humphrey.
You are the Patrico! are you? the Patriarch of the cutpurſes? you ſhare, Sir, they ſay, let them ſhare, this with you. Are you i'your hot fit of preaching again? I'le coole you.
Hold thy hand, childe of wrath, and heyre of anger, make it not Childermaſſe day in thy fury, or the feaſt of the French Bartholmew, Parent of the of the Maſſacre.
Murther, murther, murther.
NAy, tiſh all gone, now! diſh tiſh, phen tou vilt not be phitin call, Maſter Offiſher, phat iſh a man te better to liſhen out noyſhes for tee, & tou art in an oder 'orld, being very ſhuffiſhient noyſhes and gallantſh too, one o'their brabbleſh woud haue fed vſh all diſh fortnight, but tou art ſo buſhy about beggerſh ſtil, tou haſt no leſhure to intend ſhentlemen, and't be.
Why, I told you, Dauy Briſtle.
Come, come, you told mee a pudding, Toby Haggiſe; A matter of nothing; I am ſure it came to nothing! you ſaid, let's goe to Vrſla's, indeede; but then you met the man with the monſters, and I could not get you from him. An old foole, not leaue ſeeing yet?
Why, who would ha' thought any body would ha' quarrell'd ſo earely? or that the ale o'the. Fayre would ha' beene vp ſo ſoone.
Phy? phat a clocke toeſt tou tinke it iſh, man?
I cannot tell.
Tou art a viſhe vatchman, i'te meane teeme.
Why? ſhould the watch goe by the clocke, or the clock by the watch, I pray?
One ſhould goe by another, if they did well.
Tou art right now! phen didſt tou euer know, or heare of a ſhuffiſhient vatchman, but he did tell the clocke, phat buſhineſſe ſoeuer he had?
Nay, that's moſt true, a ſufficient watchman knowes what a clocke it is.
Shleeping, or vaking! aſh well as te clocke himſhelfe, or te lack dat ſhtrikes him!
Let's enquire of Maſter Leatherhead, or Ione Traſh heere. Maſter Leatherhead, doe you heare, Maſter Leatherhead?
If it be a Ledderhead, tiſh a very tick Ledderhead, tat ſho muſh noiſh vill not peirſh him.
I haue a little buſineſſe now, good friends doe not trouble me.
Phat? becauſe o'ty wrought neet cap, and ty pheluet ſherkin, Man? phy? I haue ſheene tee in ty Ledder ſherkin, ere now, Maſhter o'de hobby-Horſes, as buſhy and as ſtately as tou ſheem'ſt to be.
Why, what an' you haue, Captaine Whit? hee has his choyce of Ierkins, you may ſee by that, and his caps too, I aſſure you, when hee pleaſes to be either ſicke, or imploy'd.
God a mercy Ione, anſwer for me.
Away, be not ſheen i'my company, here be ſhentlemen, and men of vorſhip.
VVEe had wonderfull ill lucke, to miſſe this prologue o'the purſe, but the beſt is, we ſhall haue fiue Acts of him ere night: hee'le be ſpectacle enough! I'le anſwer for't.
O Creeſh! Duke Quarlous, how doſht tou? tou doſht not know me, I feare? I am te viſheſht man, but Iuſtiſh Ouerdoo, in all Bartholmew Fayre, now. Gi' me tweluepence from tee, I vill help tee to a vife vorth forty marks for't, and't be.
Away, Rogue, Pimpe away.
And ſhee ſhall ſhew tee as fine cut o'rke fort't in her ſhmock too, as tou canſht viſhe i'faith; vilt tou haue her, vorſhipfull Vin vife? I vill helpe tee to her, heere, be an't be, in te pig-quarter, gi'me ty twelpence from tee,
Why, there's twelpence, pray thee wilt thou be gone.
Tou art a vorthy man, and a vorſhipfull man ſtill.
Get you gone, Raſcall.
I doe meane it, man. Prinſh Quarlous if tou haſht need on me, tou ſhalt finde me heere, at Vrſla's, I vill ſee phat ale, and punque iſh i'te pig ſhty, for tee, bleſſe ty good vorſhip.
Looke! who comes heere! Iohn Little-wit!
And his wife, and my widdow, her mother: the whole family.
'Slight, you muſt gi'hem all fairings, now!
Not I, I'le not ſee 'hem,
They are going a feaſting. What Schole-maſter's that is with 'hem?
That's my Riuall, I beleeue, the Baker!
So, walke on in the middle way, fore-right, turne neyther to the right hand, nor to the left: let not your eyes be drawne aſide with vanity, nor your eare with noyſes.
O, I know him by that ſtart!
What do you lack? what do you buy, pretty Miſtris! a fine Hobby-Horſe, to make your ſonne a Tilter? a Drum to make him a Souldier? a Fiddle, to make him a Reueller? What is't you lack? Little Dogs for your Daughters! or Babies, male, or female?
Look not toward them, harken not: the place is Smithfield, or the field of Smiths, the Groue of Hobbi-horſes and trinkets, the wares are the wares of diuels. And the whole Fayre is the ſhop of Satan! They are hooks, and baites, very baites, that are hung out on euery ſide, to catch you, and to hold you as it were, by the gills; and by the noſtrills, as the Fiſher doth: therefore, you muſt not looke, nor turne toward them— The Heathen man could ſtop his eares with wax, againſt the harlot o'the ſea: Doe you the like, with your fingers againſt the bells of the Beaſt.
What flaſhes comes from him!
O, he has thoſe of his ouen! a notable hot Baker 'twas, when hee ply'd the peele: hee is leading his flocke into the Fayre, now.
Rather driuing 'hem to the Pens: for he will let 'hem looke vpon nothing.
Gentlewomen, the weather's hot! whither walke you? Haue a care o'your fine veluet caps, the Fayre is duſty. Take a ſweet delicate Booth, with boughs, here, i'the way, and coole your ſelues i'the ſhade: you and your friends. The beſt pig and bottle-ale i' the Fayre, Sir. Old Vrſla is Cooke, there you may read: the pigges head ſpeakes it. Poore ſoule, ſhee has had a Sringhalt, the Maryhinchco: but ſhee's prettily amended.
A delicate ſhow-pig, little Miſtris, with ſhweet ſauce, and crackling, like de bay-leafe i'de fire, la! Tou ſhalt ha'de cleane ſide o'de table-clot and di glaſſ vaſh'd with phaterſh of Dame Annesſh Cleare.
This's ſine, verily, here be the beſt pigs: and ſhee doe's roaſt 'hem as well as euer ſhe did; the Pigs head ſayes.
Excellent, excellent, Miſtris, with fire o' Iuniper and Roſe-mary branches! The Oracle of the Pigs head, that, Sir.
Sonne, were you not warn'd of the vanity of the eye? haue you forgot the wholeſome admonition, ſo ſoone?
Good mother, how ſhall we finde a pigge, if we doe not looke about for't? will it run off o'the ſpit, into our mouths thinke you? as in Lubberland? and cry, we, we?
No, but your mother, religiouſly wiſe, conceiueth it may offer it ſelfe, by other meanes, to the ſenſe, as by way of ſteeme, which I thinke it doth, here in this place (Huh, huh) yes, it doth. and it were a ſinne of obſtinacy, great obſtinacy, high and horrible obſtinacy, to decline, or reſiſt the good titillation of the famelick ſenſe, which is the ſmell. Therefore be bold (huh, huh, huh) follow the ſent. Enter the Tents of the vncleane, for once, and ſatisfie your wiues frailty. Let your fraile wife be ſatisfied: your zealous mother, and my ſuffering ſelfe, will alſo be ſatisfied.
Come, Win, as good winny here, as goe farther, and ſee nothing.
Wee ſcape ſo much of the other vanities, by our earely entring.
It is an aedifying conſideration.
This is ſcuruy, that wee muſt come into the Fayre, and not looke on't.
Win, haue patience, Win, I'le tell you more anon.
Moone-calfe; entertaine within there, the beſt pig i'the Booth; a Porklike pig. Theſe are Banbury-bloods, o'the ſincere ſtud, come a pigge-hunting. Whit, wait Whit, looke to your charge.
A pigge prepare, preſently, let a pigge be prepared to vs.
S'light, who be theſe?
Is this the good ſeruice, Iordan, you'ld doe me?
Why, Vrs? why, Vrs? thou'lt ha' vapours i'thy legge againe preſently, pray thee go in, 't may turne to the ſcratches elſe.
Hang your vapours, they are ſtale, and ſtinke like you, are theſe the gueſts o'the game, you promis'd to fill my pit withall, to day?
I what aile they Vrs?
Aile they? they are all ſippers, ſippers o'the City, they looke as they would not drinke off two penn'orth of bottle-ale amongſt 'hem.
A body may read that i'their ſmall printed ruffes.
Away, thou art a foole, Vrs, and thy Moone-calfe too, i'your ignorant vapours, now? hence, good gueſts, I ſay right hypocrites, good gluttons. In, and ſet a couple o'pigs o'the board, and halfe a dozen of the biggeſt bottles afore 'hem, and call Whit, I doe not loue to heare Innocents abus'd: Fine ambling hypocrites! and a ſtone-puritane, with a ſorrell head, and beard, good mouth'd gluttons: two to a pigge, away.
Are you ſure they are ſuch?
O'the right breed, thou ſhalt try 'hem by the teeth, Vrs, where's this Whit?
Behold, man and ſee, what a worthy man am ee!
With the fury of my ſword, and the ſhaking of my beard,
I will make ten thouſand men afeard.
Well ſaid, braue Whit, in, and feare the ale out o'the bottles, into the bellies of the brethren, and the ſiſters drinke to the cauſe, and pure vapours.
My Roarer is turn'd Tapſter, mee thinks. Now were a fine time for thee, Win-wife, to lay aboard thy widdow, thou'lt neuer be Maſter of a better ſeaſon, or place; ſhee that will venture her ſelfe into the Fayre, and a pig-boxe, will admit any aſſault, be aſſur'd of that.
I loue not enterpriſes of that ſuddenneſſe, though.
I'le warrant thee, then, no wife out o'the widdowes Hundred: if I had but as much Title to her, as to haue breath'd once on that ſtreight ſtomacher of hers, I would now aſſure my felfe to carrry her, yet, ere ſhewent out of Smithfield. Or ſhe ſhould carry me, which were the fitter ſight, I confeſſe. But you are a modeſt vndertaker, by circumſtances, and degrees; come, 'tis Diſeaſe in thee, not Iudgement, I ſhould offer at all together. Looke, here's the poore foole, againe, that was ſtung by the waſpe, ere while.
I will make no more orations, ſhall draw on theſe tragicall concluſions. And I begin now to thinke, that by a ſpice of collaterall Iuſtice, Adam Ouerdoo, deſeru'd this beating; for I the ſaid Adam, was one cauſe (a by-cauſe) why the purſe was loſt: and my wiues brothers purſe too, which they know not of yet. But I ſhall make very good mirth with it, at ſupper, (that will be the ſport) and put my little friend, Mr Humphrey Waſp's choler quite out of countenance. When, ſitting at the vpper end o'my Table, as I vſe, & drinking to my brother Cokes, and Mrs. Alice Ouerdoo, as I wil, my wife, for their good affectiō to old Bradley, I deliuer to'hem, it was I, that was cudgell'd, and ſhew 'hem the marks. To ſee what bad euents may peepe out o'the taile of good purpoſes! the care I had of that ciuil yong man, I tooke fancy to this morning, (and haue not left it yet) drew me to that exhortation, which drew the company, indeeede, which drew the cut-purſe; which drew the money; which drew my brother Cokes his loſſe; which drew on Waſp's anger; which drew on my beating: a pretty gradation! And they ſhall ha' it i'their diſh, i'faith, at night for fruit: I loue to be merry at my Table. I had thought once, at one ſpeciall blow he ga'me, to haue reuealed my ſelfe? but then (I thank thee fortitude) I remembred that a wiſe man (and who is euer ſo great a part, o'the Commonwealth in himſelfe) for no particular diſaſter ought to abandon a publike good deſigne. The husbandman ought not for one vnthankful yeer, to forſake the plough; The Shepheard ought not, for one ſcabb'd ſheep, to throw by his tar-boxe; The Pilot ought not for one leake i'the poope, to quit the Helme; Nor the Alderman ought not for one cuſterd more, at a meale, to giue vp his cloake; The Conſtable ought not to breake his ſtaffe, and forſweare the watch, for one roaring night; Nor the Piper o'the Pariſh (Vt paruis componere magna ſolebam) to put vp his pipes, for one rainy Sunday. Theſe are certaine knocking concluſions; out of which, I am reſolu'd, come what come can, come beating, come impriſonment, come infamy, come baniſhment, nay, come the rack, come the hurdle, (welcome all) I will not diſcouer who I am, till my due time; and yet ſtill, all ſhall be, as I ſaid euer, in Iuſtice name, and the King's, and for the Common-wealth.
What doe's he talke to himſelfe, and act ſo ſeriouſly? poore foole!
No matter what. Here's freſher argument, intend that.
COme, Miſtreſſe Grace, come Siſter, heere's more fine ſights, yet i'faith. Gods'lid where's Numps?
What doe you lacke, Gentlemen? what is't you buy? fine Rattles! Drummes? Babies? little Dogges? and Birds for Ladies? What doe you lacke?
Good honeſt Numpes, keepe afore, I am ſo afraid thou'lt loſe ſomewhat: my heart was at my mouth, when I miſt thee.
You were beſt buy a whip i'your hand to driue me.
Nay, doe not miſtake, Numps, thou art ſo apt to miſtake: I would but watch the goods. Looke you now, the treble fiddle, was e'en almoſt like to be loſt.
Pray you take heede you loſe not your ſelfe: your beſt way, were e'en get vp, and ride for more ſurety. Buy a tokens worth of great pinnes, to faſten your ſelfe to my ſhoulder.
What doe you lacke, Gentlemen? fine purſes, pouches, pincaſes, pipes? What is't you lacke? a paire o'ſmithes to wake you i'the morning? or a fine whiſtling bird?
Numps, here be finer things then any we ha' bought by oddes! and more delicate horſes, a great deale! good Numpes, ſtay, and come hither.
Will you ſcourſe with him? you are in Smithfield, you may fit your ſelfe with a fine eaſy-going ſtreet-nag, for your ſaddle again' Michaelmaſſe-terme, doe, has he ne'er a little odde cart for you, to make a Carroch on, i'the countrey, with foure pyed hobby horſes? why the meazills, ſhould you ſtand heere, with your traine, cheaping of Dogges, Birds, and Babies? you ha' no children to beſtow 'hem on? ha' you?
No, but again' I ha' children, Numps, that's all one.
Do, do, do, do; how many ſhall you haue, think you? an' I were as you, I'ld buy for all my Tenants, too, they are a kind o'ciuill Sauages, that wil part with their children for rattles, pipes, and kniues. You were beſt buy a hatchet, or two, & truck with 'hem.
Good Numps, hold that little tongue o'thine, and faue it a labour. I am reſolute Bat, thou know'ft.
A reſolute foole, you are, I know, and a very ſufficient Coxcombe; with all my heart; nay you haue it, Sir, and you be angry, turd i'your teeth, twice: (if I ſaid it not once afore) and much good doe you.
Was there euer ſuch a ſelfe-affliction? and ſo impertinent?
Alas! his care will goe neere to cracke him, let's in, and comfort him.
Would I had beene ſet i'the ground, all but the head on me, and had my braines bowl'd at, or threſh'd out, when firſt I vnderwent this plague of a charge!
How now, Numps! almoſt tir'd i'your Protectorſhip? ouerparted? ouerparted?
Why, I cannot tell, Sir, it may be I am, dos't grieue you?
No, I ſweare dos't not, Numps: to ſatisfie you.
Numps? S'blood, you are fine and familiar! how long ha' wee bin acquainted, I pray you?
I thinke it may be remembred, Numps, that? 'twas ſince morning ſure.
Why, I hope I know't well enough, Sir, I did not aske to be told.
No? why then?
It's no matter why, you ſee with your eyes, now, what I ſaid to you to day? you'll beleeue me another time?
Are you remouing the Fayre, Numps?
A pretty queſtion! and a very ciuill one! yes faith, I ha' my lading you ſee; or ſhall haue anon, you may know whoſe beaſt I am, by my burthen. If the pannier-mans Iacke were euer better knowne by his loynes of mutton, I'le be flead, and feede dogs for him, when his time comes.
How melancholi' Miſtreſſe Grace is yonder! pray thee let's goe enter our ſelues in Grace, with her.
Thoſe ſixe horſes, friend I'le haue—
How!
And the three Iewes trumps; and halfe a dozen o'Birds, and that Drum, (I haue one Drumme already) and your Smiths; I like that deuice o'your ſmiths, very pretty well, and foure Halberts —and (le'me ſee) that fine painted great Lady, and her three women for ſtate, I'le haue.
No, the ſhop; buy the whole ſhop, it will be beſt, the ſhop, the ſhop!
If his worſhip pleaſe.
Yes, and keepe it during the Fayre, Bobchin.
Peace, Numps, friend, doe not meddle with him, an' you be wiſe, and would ſhew your head aboue board: hee will ſting thorow your wrought night-cap, beleeue me. A ſet of theſe Violines, I would buy too, for a delicate young noiſe I haue i'the countrey, that are euery one a ſize leſſe then another, iuſt like your fiddles. I would faine haue a fine young Maſque at my marriage, now I thinke on't: but I doe want ſuch a number o'things. And Numps will not helpe me now, and I dare not ſpeake to him.
Will your worſhip buy any ginger-bread, very good bread, comfortable bread?
Ginger-bread! yes, let's ſee.
There's the tother ſprindge?
Is this well, goody Ione? to interrupt my market? in the midſt? and call away my cuſtomers? can you anſwer this, at the Piepouldres?
Why? if his Maſter-ſhip haue a minde to buy, I hope my ware lies as open as another's; I may ſhew my ware, as well as you yours.
Hold your peace; I'le content you both: I'le buy vp his ſhop, and thy basket.
Will you i'faith?
Why ſhould you put him from it, friend?
Cry you mercy! you'ld be ſold too, would you? what's the price on you? Ierkin, and all as you ſtand? ha' you any qualities?
Yes, good-man angry-man, you ſhall finde he has qualities, if you cheapen him.
Gods ſo, you ha' the ſelling of him! what are they? will they be bought for loue, or money?
No indeed, Sir.
For what then? victualls?
He ſcornes victuals, Sir, he has bread and butter at home, thanks be to God! and yet he will do more for a good meale, if the toy take him i'the belly, mary then they muſt not ſet him at lower end; if they do, he'll goe away, though he faſt. But put him a top o'the Table, where his place is, and hee'll doe you forty fine things. Hee has not been ſent for, and ſought out for nothing, at your great citty-ſuppers, to put downe Coriat, and Cokeley, and bin laught at for his labour; he'll play you all the Puppets i'the towne ouer, and the Players, euery company, and his owne company too; he ſpares no body!
I'faith?
Hee was the firſt, Sir, that euer baited the fellow i'the beare's skin, an't like your worſhip: no dog euer came neer him, ſince. And for fine motions!
Is hee good at thoſe too? can hee ſet out a Maſque trow?
O Lord, Maſter! ſought to farre, and neere, for his inuentions: and hee engroſſes all, hee makes all the Puppets i'the Fayre.
Do'ſt thou (in noth) old veluet Ierkin? giue mee thy hand.
Nay, Sir, you ſhall ſee him in his veluet Ierkin, and a ſcarfe, too, at night, when you heare him interpret Maſter Little-wit's Motion.
Speake no more, but ſhut vp ſhop preſently, friend. I'le buy both it, and thee too, to carry downe with me, and her hamper, beſide. Thy ſhop ſhall furniſh out the Maſque, and hers the Banquet: I cannot goe leſſe, to ſet out any thing with credit. what's the price, at a word, o'thy whole ſhop, caſe, and all as it ſtands?
Sir, it ſtands me in ſixe and twenty ſhillings ſeuen pence, halfe-peny, beſides three ſhillings for my ground.
Well, thirty ſhillings will doe all, then! And what comes yours too?
Foure ſhillings, and eleauen pence, Sir, ground, and all, an't like your worſhip.
Yes, it do's like my worſhip very well, poore woman, that's fiue ſhillings more, what a Maſque ſhall I furniſh out, for forty ſhillings? (twenty pound ſcotſh) and a Banquet of Ginger-bread? there's a ſtately thing! Numps? Siſter? and my wedding gloues too? (that I neuer thought on afore.) All my wedding gloues, Ginger-bread? O me! what a deuice will there be? to make 'hem eate their fingers ends! and delicate Brooches for the Bride-men! and all! and then I'le ha' this poeſie put to 'hem: For the beſt grace, meaning Miſtreſſe Grace, my wedding poeſie.
I am beholden to you, Sir, and to your Bartholmew-wit.
You doe not meane this, doe you? is this your firſt purchaſe?
Yes faith, and I doe not thinke, Numpes, but thou'lt ſay, it was the wiſeſt Act, that euer I did in my wardſhip.
Like inough! I ſhall ſay any thing, I!
I Cannot beget a Proiect, with all my politicall braine, yet; my Proiect is how to fetch off this proper young man, from his debaucht company: I haue followed him all the Fayre ouer, and ſtill I finde him with this ſongſter: And I begin ſhrewdly to ſuſpect their familiarity; and the young man of a terrible taint, Poetry! ith which idle diſeaſe, if he be infected, there's no hope of him, in a ſtate-courſe. Actum eſt, of him for a common-wealths-man: if hee goe to't in Rime, once.
Yonder he is buying o'Ginger-bread: ſet in quickly, before he part with too much on his money.
My maſters and friends, and good people, draw neere, &c.
Ballads! harke, harke! pray thee, fellow, ſtay a little, good Numpes, looke to the goods. What Ballads haſt thou? let me ſee, let me ſee my ſelfe.
Why ſo! hee's flowne'to another lime-buſh, there he will flutter as long more; till hee ha' ne'r a feather left. Is there a vexation like this, Gentlemen? will you beleeue mee now, hereafter? ſhall I haue credit with you?
Yes faith, ſhalt thou, Numps, and thou art worthy on't, for thou ſweateſt for't. I neuer ſaw a young Pimpe errant, and his Squire better match'd.
Faith, the ſiſter comes after 'hem, well, too.
Nay, if you ſaw the Iuſtice her husband, my Guardian, you were fitted for the Meſſe, hee is ſuch a wiſe one his way—
I wonder, wee ſee him not heere.
O! hee is too ſerious for this place, and yet better ſport then then the other three, I aſſure you, Gentlemen: where ere he is, though't be o'the Bench.
How doſt thou call it! A caueat againſt cutpurſes! a good ieſt, i'faith, I would faine ſee that Daemon, your Cutpurſe, you talke of, that delicate handed Diuell; they ſay he walkes hereabout; I would ſee him walke, now. Looke you ſiſter, here, here, let him come, ſiſter, and welcome. Ballad-man, do's any cutpurſes haunt hereabout? pray thee raiſe me one or two: beginne and ſhew me one.
Sir, this is a ſpell againſt 'hem, ſpicke and ſpan new; and 'tis made as 'twere in mine owne perſon, and I ſing it in mine owne defence. But 'twill coſt a penny alone, if you buy it.
No matter for the price, thou doſt not know me, I ſee, I am an odd Bartholmew.
Ha'ſt a fine picture, Brother?
O Siſter, doe you remember the ballads ouer the Nurſery-chimney at home o' my owne paſting vp, there be braue pictures. Other manner of pictures, than theſe, friend.
Yet theſe will ſerue to picke the pictures out o' your pockets, you ſhall ſee.
So, I heard 'hem ſay. Pray thee-mind him not, fellow: hee'll haue an oare in euery thing.
It was intended Sir, as if a purſe ſhould chance to be cut in my preſence, now, I may be blameleſſe, though: as by the ſequell, will more plainely appeare.
We ſhall find that i'the matter. Pray thee begin.
To the tune of Paggingtons Pound, Sir.
Fa, la la la, la la la, fa la la la. Nay, I'll put thee in tune, and all! mine owne country dance! Pray thee begin.
It is a gentle admonition, you muſt know, Sir, both to the purſe-cutter, and the purſe-bearer.
Not a word more, out o'the tune, an' thou lou'ſt mee: Fa, la la la, la la la, fa la la la. Come, when?
My maſters and friends, and good people draw neere,
And looke to your purſes, for that I doe ſay;
Ha, ha, this chimes! good counſell at firſt daſh.
And though little money, in them you doe beare.
It coſt more to get, then to loſe in a day.
You oft haue beene told,
Both the young and the old;
And bidden beware of the cutpurſe ſo bold:
Then if you take heed not, free me from the curſe,
Who both giue you warning, for and, the cutpurſe.
Youth, youth, thou hadſt better bin ſtaru'd by thy Nurſe,
Then liue to be hanged for cutting a purſe.
Good!
Well ſaid! hee were to blame that wold not i'faith.
Good i'faith, how ſay you, Numps? Is there any harme i'this?
It hath bin vpbrayded to men of my trade,
That oftē times we are the cauſe of this crime.
Alacke and for pitty, why ſhould it be ſaid?
As if they regarded or places, or time.
Examples haue been
Of ſome that were ſeen,
In Weſtminſter Hall, yea the pleaders between,
Then why ſhould the Iudges be free from this curſe,
More then my poore ſelfe, for cutting the purſe?
Youth, youth, thou hadſt better bin ſtaru'd by thy Nurſe,
Then liue to be hanged for cutting a purſe.
The more coxcōbes they that did it, I wuſſe.
God a mercy for that! why ſhould they be more free indeede?
That againe, good Ballad-man, that againe. O rare! I would faine rubbe mine elbow now, but I dare not pull out my hand. On, I pray thee, hee that made this ballad, ſhall be Poet to my Maſque.
At Worc'ter'tis knowne well, and euen i'the layle,
A Knight of good worſhip did there ſhew his face,
Againſt the foule ſinners, in zealè for to rayle,
And loſt (ipſo facto) his purſe in the place.
Nay, once from the Seat
Of Iudgement ſo great,
A Iudge there did loſe a faire pouch of veluete.
O Lord for thy mercy, how wicked or worſe,
Are thoſe that ſo venture their necks for a purſe! Youth, youth, &c.
Is it poſſible?
I'faith?
Youth, youth, &c? pray thee ſtay a little, friend, yet o'thy conſcience, Numps, ſpeake, is there any harme i'this?
To tell you true, 'tis too good for you, leſſe you had grace to follow it.
It doth diſcouer enormitie, I'le marke it more: I ha' not lik'd a paltry piece of poetry, ſo well a good while.
Youth, youth, &c! where's this youth, now? A man muſt call vpon him, for his owne good, and yet hee will not appeare: looke here, here's for him; handy-dandy, which hand will he haue? On, I pray thee, with the reſt, I doe heare of him, but I cannot ſee him, this Maſter Youth, the cutpurſe.
At Playes and at Sermons, and at the Seſſions,
'Tis daily their practice ſuch booty to make:
Yea, vnder the Gallowes, at Executions,
They ſticke not the Stare-abouts purſes to take.
Nay one without grace,
at a better place,
At Court, & in Chriſtmas, before the Kings face,
Alacke then for pitty muſt I beare the curſe,
That onely belongs to the cunning cutpurſe?
That was a fine fellow! I would haue him, now.
But where's their cunning, now, when they ſhould vſe it? they are all chain'd now, I warrant you. Youth, youth, thou hadſt better, &c. The Rat-catchers charme, are all fooles and Aſſes to this! A poxe on 'hem, that they will not come! that a man ſhould haue ſuch a deſire to a thing, and want it.
'Fore God, I'ld giue halfe the Fayre, and 'twere mine, for a cutpurſe for him, to ſaue his longing.
Looke you Siſter, heere, heere, where is't now? which pocket is't in? for a wager?
I beſeech you leaue your wagers, and let him end his matter, an't may be.
O, are you aedified Numps?
Indeed hee do's interrupt him, too much: There Numps ſpoke to purpoſe.
Siſter, I am an Aſſe, I cannot keepe my purſe: on, on; I pray thee, friend.
But O, you vile nation of cutpurſes all,
Relent and repent, and amend and be ſound,
And know that you ought not, by honeſt mens fall,
Aduance your owne fortunes, to die aboue ground,
And though you goe gay,
In ſilkes as you may,
It is not the high way to heauen, (as they ſay)
Repent then, repent you, for better, for worſe:
And kiſſe not the Gallowes for cutting a purſe.
Youth, youth, thou hadſt better bin ſteru'd by thy Nurſe,
Then liue to be hanged for cutting a purſe.
Will you ſee ſport? looke, there's a fellow gathers vp to him, marke.
Good, 'i faith ome has lighted on the wrōg pocket.
He has it, 'fore God hee is a braue fellow; pitty hee ſhould be detected.
An excellent ballad! an excellent ballad!
Friend, let mee ha' the firſt, let mee ha' the firſt, I pray you.
Pardon mee, Sir. Firſt come, firſt ſeru'd; and I'le buy the whole bundle too.
That conueyance was better then all, did you ſee't? he has giuen the purſe to the ballad-ſinger.
Has hee?
Sir, I cry you mercy; I'le not hinder the poore mans profit: pray you miſtake me not.
Sir, I take you for an honeſt Gentleman; if that be miſtaking, I met you to day afore: ha! humh! O God! my purſe is gone, my purſe, my purſe, &c.
Come, doe not make a ſtirre, and cry your ſelfe an Aſſe, thorow the Fayre afore your time.
Why, haſt thou it, Numpes? good Numpes, how came you by it? I mar'le!
I pray you ſeeke fome other gamſter, to play the foole with: you may loſe it time enough, for all your Fayre-wit.
By this good hand, gloue and all, I ha' loſt it already, if thou haſt it not: feele elſe, and Miſtris Grace's handkercher, too, out o'the tother pocket.
Why, 'tis well; very well, exceeding pretty, and well.
Are you ſure you ha' loſt it, Sir?
O God! yes; as I am an honeſt man, I had it but e'en now, at youth, youth.
I hope you ſuſpect not me, Sir.
Thee? that were a ieſt indeede! Doſt thou thinke the Gentleman is fooliſh? where hadſt thou hands, I pray thee? Away Aſſe, away.
I ſhall be beaten againe, if I be ſpi'd.
Sir, I ſuſpect an odde fellow, yonder, is ſtealing away.
Brother, it is the preaching fellow! you ſhall ſuſpect him. He was at your tother purſe, you know! Nay, ſtay, Sir, and view the worke you ha' done, an' you be benefic'd at the Gallowes, and preach there, thanke your owne handy-worke.
Sir, you ſhall take no pride in your preferment: you ſhall be ſilenc'd quickly.
What doe you meane? ſweet buds of gentility.
To ha' my peneworths out on you: Bud. No leſſe then two purſes a day, ſerue you? I thought you a ſimple fellow, when my man Numpes beate you, i'the morning, and pittied you—
So did I, I'll beſworne, brother; but now I ſee hee is a lewd, and pernicious Enormity: (as Maſter Ouerdoo calls him.)
Mine owne words turn'd vpon mee, like ſwords.
Cannot a man's purſe be at quiet for you, i'the Maſters pocket, but you muſt intice it forth, and debauch it?
Sir, Sir, keepe your debauch, and your fine Bartholmew-termes to your ſelfe; and make as much on'hem as you pleaſe. But gi'me this from you, i'the meane time: I beſeech you, ſee if I can looke to this.
Why, Numps?
Why? becauſe you are an Aſſe, Sir, there's a reaſon the ſhorteſt way, and you will needs ha' it; now you ha' got the tricke of loſing, you'ld loſe your breech, an't 'twere loofe. I know you, Sir, come, deliuer, you'll goe and cracke the vermine, you breed now, will you? 'tis very fine, will you ha' the truth on't? they are ſuch retchleſſe flies as you are, that blow cutpurſes abroad in euery corner; your fooliſh hauing of money, makes 'hem. An' there were no wiſer then I, Sir, the trade ſhoud lye open for you, Sir, it ſhould i'faith, Sir. I would teach your wit to come to your head, Sir, as well as your land to come into your hand, I aſſure you, Sir.
Alacke, good Numps.
Nay, Gentlemen, neuer pitty mee, I am not worth it: Lord ſend me at home once, to Harrow o'the Hill againe, if I trauell any more, call me Coriat; withall my heart.
Stay, Sir, I muſt haue a word with you in priuate. Doe you heare?
With me, Sir? what's your pleaſure? good Sir.
Doe not deny it. You are a cutpurſe, Sir, this Gentleman here, and I, ſaw you, nor doe we meane to detect you (though we can ſufficiently informe our ſelues, toward the danger of concealing you) but you muſt doe vs a piece of ſeruice.
Good Gentlemen; doe not vndoe me; I am a ciuill young man, and but a beginner, indeed.
Sir, your beginning ſhall bring on your ending, for vs. We are no Catchpoles nor Conſtables. That you are to vndertake, is this; you ſaw the old fellow, with the blacke boxe, here?
The little old Gouernour, Sir?
That ſame: I ſee, you haue flowne him to a marke already. I would ha' you get away that boxe from him, and bring it vs.
Would you ha' the boxe and all, Sir? or onely that, that is in't? I'le get you that, and leaue him the boxe, to play with ſtill: (which will be the harder o'the two) becauſe I would gaine your worſhips good opinion of me.
He ſayes well, 'tis the greater Maſtry, and 'twill make the more ſport when 'tis miſt.
I, and 'twill be the longer a miſſing, to draw on the ſport.
But looke you doe it now, ſirrah, and keepe your word: or—
Sir, if euer I breake my word, with a Gentleman, may I neuer read word at my need. Where ſhall I find you?
Some-where i'the Fayre, heereabouts. Diſpatch it quickly. I would faine ſee the carefull foole deluded! of all Beaſts, I loue the ſerious Aſſe. He that takes paines to be one, and playes the foole, with the greateſt diligence that can be.
Then you would not choſe, Sir, but loue my Guardian, Iuſtice Ouerdoo, who is anſwerable to that deſcription, in euery haire of him.
So I haue heard. But how came you, Miſtis Welborne, to be his Ward? or haue relation to him, at firſt?
Faith, through a common calamity, he bought me, Sir; and now he will marry me to his wiues brother, this wiſe Gentleman, that you ſee, or elſe I muſt pay value o'my land
S'lid, is there no deuice of diſparagement? or ſo? talke with ſome crafty fellow, ſome pick locke o'the Law! Would I had ſtudied a yeere longer i'the Innes of Court, and't had beene but i'your caſe.
I Maſter Quarlous, are you proffering?
You'ld bring but little ayde, Sir.
(I'le looke to you 'ifaith, Gamſter.) An vnfortunate fooliſh Tribe you are falne into, Lady, I wonder you can endure 'hem.
Sir, they that cannot worke their fetters off; muſt weare 'hem.
You ſee what care they haue on you, to leaue you thus.
Faith the ſame they haue of themſelues, Sir. I cannot greatly complaine, if this were all the plea I had againſt 'hem.
'Tis true! but will you pleaſe to withdraw with vs, a little, and make them thinke, they haue loſt you. I hope our manners ha' beene ſuch hitherto, and our language, as will giue you no cauſe, to doubt your ſelfe, in our company.
Sir, I will giue my ſelfe, no cauſe; I am ſo ſecure of mine owne manners, as I ſuſpect not yours.
Looke where Iohn Little-wit comes.
Away, I'le not be ſeene, by him.
No, you were not beſt, hee'ld tell his mother, the widdow.
Heatt, what doe you meane?
Cry you mercy, is the winde there? muſt not the widdow be nam'd?
DOe you heare Win, Win?
What ſay you, Iohn?
While they are paying the reckoning, Win, I'll tell you a thing Win, wee ſhall neuer ſee any ſights i'the Fayre, Win, except you long ſtill, Win, good Win, ſweet Win, long to ſee ſome Hobby-horſes, and ſome Drummes, and Rattles, and Dogs, and fine deuices, Win. The Bull with the fiue legs, Win; and the great Hog: now you ha' begun with Pigge, you may long for any thing, Win, and ſo for my Motion, Win.
But we ſha'not eat o'the Bull, and the Hogge, Iohn, how ſhall I long then?
O yes! Win: you may long to ſee, as well as to taſte, Win: how did the Pothecarie's wife, Win, that long'd to ſee the Anatomy, Win? or the Lady, Win, that deſir'd to ſpit i'the great Lawyers mouth, after an eloquent pleading? I aſſure you they long'd, VVin, good Win, goe in, and long.
I think we are rid of our new cuſtomer, brother Leatherhead, wee ſhall heare no more of him.
All the better, let's packe vp all, and be gone, before he finde vs.
Stay a little, yonder comes a company: it may be wee may take ſome more money.
Sir, I will take your counſell, and cut my haire, and leaue vapours: I ſee, that Tabacco, and Bottle-Ale, and Pig, and Whit, and very Vrſla, her ſelfe, is all vanity.
Onely Pigge was not comprehended in my admonition, the reſt were. For long haire, it is an Enſigne of pride, a banner, and the world is full of thoſe banners, very full of Banners. And, bottle-ale is a drinke of Sathan's, a diet-drinke of Sathans, deuiſed to puffe vs vp, and make vs ſwell in this latter age of vanity, as the ſmoake of tabacco, to keepe vs in miſt and error: But the fleſhly woman, (which you call Vrſla) is aboue all to be auoyded, hauing the marks vpon her, of the three enemies of Man, the World, as being in the Faire; the Deuill, as being in the fire; and and the Fleſh, as being her ſelfe.
Brother Zeale-of-the-land! what ſhall we doe? my daughter Win-the-fight, is falne into her fit of longing againe.
For more pig? there is no more, is there?
To ſee ſome ſights, i' the Faire.
Siſter, let her fly the impurity of the place, ſwiftly, leſt ſhee partake of the pitch thereof. Thou art the ſeate of the Beaſt, O Smithfield, and I will leaue thee. Idolatry peepeth out on euery ſide of thee.
An excellent right Hypocrite! now his belly is full, he falls a railing and kicking, the Iade. A very good vapour! I'll in, and ioy Vrſla, with telling, how her pigge works, two and a halfe he eate to his ſhare. And he has drunke a pailefull. He eates with his eyes, as well as his teeth.
What doe you lack, Gentlemen? What is't you buy? Rattles, Drumms, Babies.—
Peace, with thy Apocryphall wares, thou prophane Publican: thy Bells, thy Dragons, and thy Tobie's Dogges. Thy Hobby-horſe is an Idoll, a very Idoll, a feirce and rancke Idoll: And thou, the Nabuchadnezzar, the proud Nabuchadnezzar of the Faire, that ſet'ſt it vp, for children to fall downe to, and worſhip.
Cry you mercy, Sir, will you buy a fiddle to fill vp your noiſe.
Looke Win. doe, looke a Gods name, and ſaue your longing. Here be fine ſights.
I child, ſo you hate 'hem, as our Brother Zeale do's, you may looke on 'hem.
Or what do you ſay, to a Drumme. Sir?
It is the broken belly of the Beaſt, and thy Bellowes there are his lungs, and theſe Pipes are his throate, thoſe Feathers are of his taile, and thy Rattles, the gnaſhing of his teeth.
And what's my ginger-bread? I pray you.
The prouander that pricks him vp. Hence with thy baſket of Popery, thy neſt of Images: and whole legend of ginger-worke.
Sir if you be not quiet, the quicklier, I'll ha' you clapp'd fairely by the heeles, for diſturbing the Faire.
The ſinne of the Faire prouokes me, I cannot bee ſilent.
Good brother Zeale!
Sir, I'll make you ſilent, beleeue it.
Il'd giue a ſhilling, you could i'faith, friend.
Sir, giue me your ſhilling, I'll giue you my ſhop, if I do not, and I'll leaue it in pawne with you, i'the meane time.
A match i'faith, but do it quickly, then.
Hinder me not, woman. I was mou'd in ſpirit, to bee here, this day, in this Faire, this wicked, and foule Faire; and fitter may it be a called a foule, then a Faire: To proteſt againſt the abuſes of it, the foule abuſes of it, in regard of the afflicted Saints, that are troubled, very much troubled, exceedingly troubled, with the opening of the merchandize of Babylon againe, & the peeping of Popery vpon the ſtals, here, here, in the high places. See you not Goldylocks, the purple ſtrumpet, there? in her yellow gowne, and greene ſleeues? the prophane pipes, the tinckling timbrells? A ſhop of reliques!
Pray you forbeare, I am put in truſt with 'hem.
And this Idolatrous Groue of Images, this flasket of Idols! which I will pull downe—
O my ware, my ware, God bleſſe it.)
In my zeale, and glory to be thus exercis'd.
Here he is, pray you lay hold on his zeale, wee cannot ſell a whiſtle, for him, in tune. Stop his noyſe, firſt!
Thou canſt not: 'tis a ſanctified noiſe. I will make a loud and moſt ſtrong noiſe, till I haue daunted the prophane enemy. And for this cauſe.—
Sir, heer's no man afraid of you, or your cauſe. You ſhall ſweare it, i'the ſtocks, Sir.
I will thruſt my ſelfe into the ſtocks, vpon the pikes of the Land.
Carry him away.
What doe you meane, wicked men?
Let them alone; I feare them not.
Was not this ſhilling well ventur'd, Win? for our liberty? Now we may goe play, and ſee ouer the Fayre, where we liſt our ſelues; my mother is gone after him, and let her ee'n go, and looſe vs.
Yes Iohn, but I know not what to doe.
For what, Win?
For a thing, I am aſham'd to tell you, i'faith, and 'tis too farre to go home.
I pray thee bee not aſham'd, VVin. Come, i'faith thou ſhall not be aſham'd, is it any thing about the Hobby-horſe-man? an't be, ſpeake freely.
Hang him, baſe Bobehin, I ſcorne him; no, I haue very great, what ſha'call'um, Iohn.
ô! Is that all, Win? wee'll goe backe to Captaine Iordan; to the pig-womans, Win. hee'll helpe vs, or ſhe with a dripping pan, or an old kettle, or ſomething. The poore greaſie ſoule loues you, Win, and after we'll viſit the Fayre all ouer, Win, and, ſee my Puppet play, Win, you know it's a fine matter, Win.
Let's away, I counſell'd you to packe vp afore, Ione.
A poxe of his Bedlem purity. Hee has ſpoyl'd halfe my ware: but the beſt is, wee loſe nothing, if wee miſſe our firſt Merchant.
It ſhall be hard for him to finde, or know vs, when we are tranſlated, Ione.
MY Maſters, I doe make no doubt, but you are officers.
What then, Sir?
And the Kings louing, and obedient ſubiects.
Obedient, friend? take heede what you ſpeake, I aduiſe you: Oliuer Briſtle aduiſes you. His louing ſubiects, we grant you: but not his obedient, at this time, by your leaue, wee know our ſelues, a little better then ſo, wee are to command, Sr. and ſuch as you are to be obedient. Here's one of his obedient ſubiects, going to the ſtocks, and wee'll make you ſuch another, if you talke.
You are all wiſe enough i'your places, I know.
If you know it, Sir, why doe you bring it in queſtion?
I queſtion nothing, pardon me. I do only hope you haue warrant, for what you doe, and ſo, quit you, and ſo, multiply you.
What's hee? bring him vp to the ſtocks there. Why bring you him not vp?
If you haue Iuſtice Ouerdoo's warrant, 'tis well: you are ſafe; that is the warrant of warrants. I'le not giue this button, for any mans warrant elſe.
Like enough, Sir, but let me tell you, an' you play away your buttons, thus, you will want 'hem ere night, for any ſtore I ſee about you: you might keepe 'hem, and ſaue pinnes, I wuſſe.
What ſhould hee be, that doth ſo eſteeme, and aduance my warrant? he ſeemes a ſober and diſcreet perſon! it is a comfort to a good conſcience, to be follow'd with a good fame, in his ſufferings. The world will haue a pretty taſt by this, how I can beare aduerſity: and it will beget a kind of reuerence, toward me, hereafter, euen from mine enemies, when they ſhall ſee I carry my calamity nobly, and that it doth neither breake mee, nor bend mee.
Come, Sir, heere's a place for you to preach in. Will you put in your legge?
That I will, cheerefully.
O' my conſcience a Seminary!
Well my Maſters, I'le leaue him with you; now I ſee him beſtow'd, I'le goe looke for my goods, and Numps.
You may, Sir, I warrant you; where's the tother Bawler? fetch him too, you ſhall find 'hem both faſt enough.
In the mid'ſt of this tumult, I will yet be the Author of mine owne reſt, and not minding their fury, ſit in the ſtockes, in that calme, as ſhall be able to trouble a Triumph.
Doe you aſſure me vpon your words? may I vndertake for you, if I be ask'd the queſtion; that you haue this warrant?
What's this fellow, for Gods ſake?
Doe but ſhew me Adam Ouerdoo, and I am ſatisfied.
Hee is a fellow that is diſtracted, they ſay; one Trouble-all: hee was an officer in the Court of Pie-poulders, here laſt yeere, and put out on his place by Iuſtice Ouerdoo.
Ha!
Vpon which, he tooke an idle conceipt, and's runne mad vpon't. So that euer ſince, hee will doe nothing, but by Iuſtice Ouerdoo's warrant, he will not eate a cruſt, nor drinke a little, nor make him in his apparell, ready. His wife, Sirreuerence, cannot get him make his water, or ſhift his ſhirt, without his warrant.
If this be true, this is my greateſt diſaſter! how am I bound to ſatisfie this poore man, that is of ſo good a nature to mee, out of his wits! where there is no roome left for diſſembling.
If you cannot ſhew me Adam Ouerdoo, I am in doubt of you: I am afraid you cannot anſwere it.
Before me, Neighbour Briſtle (and now I thinke on't better) Iuſtice Ouerdoo, is a very parantory perſon.
O! are you aduis'd of that? and a ſeuere Iuſticer, by your leaue.
Doe I heare ill o'that ſide, too?
He will ſit as vpright o'the bench, an' you marke him, as a candle i'the ſocket, and giue light to the whole Court in euery buſineſſe.
But he will burne blew, and ſwell like a bile (God bleſſe vs) an' he be angry.
I, and hee will be angry too, when his liſt, that's more: and when hee is angry, be it right or wrong; hee has the Law on's ſide, euer. I marke that too.
I will be more tender hereafter. I ſee compaſſion may become a Iuſtice, though it be a weakneſſe, I confeſſe; and neerer a vice, then a vertue.
Well, take him out o' the ſtocks againe, wee'll goe a ſure way to worke, wee'll ha' the Ace of hearts of our ſide, if we can.
Come, bring him away to his fellow, there. Maſter Buſy, we ſhall rule your legges, I hope, though wee cannot rule your tongue.
No, Miniſter of darkeneſſe, no, thou canſt not rule my tongue, my tongue it is mine own, and with it I will both knocke, and mocke downe your Bartholmew-abhominations, till you be made a hiſſing to the neighbour Pariſhes, round about.
Let him alone, we haue deuis'd better vpon't.
And ſhall he not into the ſtocks then?
No, Miſtreſſe, wee'll haue 'hem both to Iuſtice Ouerdoo, and let him doe ouer 'hem as is fitting. Then I, and my goſſip Haggis, and my beadle Pocher are diſcharg'd.
O, I thanke you, bleſſed, honeſt men!
Nay, neuer thank vs, but thank this mad-man that comes heere, hee put it in our heads.
Is hee mad? Now heauen increaſe his madneſſe, and bleſſe it, and thanke it, Sir, your poore hand-maide thanks you.
Haue you a warrant? an' you haue a warrant, ſhew it.
Yes, I haue a warrant out of the word, to giue thankes for remouing any ſcorne intended to the brethren.
It is Iuſtice Ouerdoo's warrant, that I looke for, if you haue not that, keepe your word, I'le keepe mine. Quit yee, and multiply yee.
COme away Nightingale, I pray thee.
Whither goe you? where's your warrant?
Warrant, for what, Sir?
For what you goe about, you know how fit it is, an' you haue no warrant, bleſſe you, I'le pray for you, that's all I can doe.
What meanes hee?
A mad-man that haunts the Fayre, doe you not know him? it's maruell hee has not more followers, after his ragged heeles.
Beſhrew him, he ſtartled me: I thought he had knowne of our plot. Guilt's a terrible thing! ha' you prepar'd the Coſtardmonger?
Yes, and agreed for his basket of peares; hee is at the corner here, ready. And your Priſe, he comes downe, ſailing, that way, all alone; without his Protector: hee is rid of him, it ſeemes.
I, I know; I ſhould ha' follow'd his Protector-ſhip for a feat I am to doe vpon him: But this offer'd it ſelfe, ſo i'the way, I could not let it ſcape: heere he comes, whiſtle, be this ſport call'd Dorring the Dottrell.
Wh, wh, wh, wh, &c.
By this light, I cannot finde my ginger-bread-Wife, nor my Hobby-horſe-man in all the Fayre, now; to ha' my money againe. And I do not know the way out on't, to go home for more, doe you heare, friend, you that whiſtle; what tune is that, you whiſtle?
A new tune, I am practiſing, Sir.
Doſt thou know where I dwell, I pray thee? nay, on with thy tune, I ha' no ſuch haſt, for an anſwer: I'le practiſe with thee.
Buy any peares, very fine peares, peares fine.
Gods ſo! a muſſe, a muſſe, a muſſe, a muſſe.
Good Gentleman, my ware, my ware, I am a poore man. Good Sir, my ware.
Let me hold your ſword, Sir, it troubles you.
Doe, and my cloake, an'thou wilt; and my hat, too.
A delicate great boy! me thinks, he out-ſcrambles 'hem all. I cannot perſwade my ſelfe, but he goes to grammer-ſchole yet; and playes the trewant, to day.
Would he had another purſe to cut, Zekiel.
Purſe? a man might cut out his kidneys, I thinke; and he neuer feele 'hem, he is ſo earneſt at the ſport.
His ſoule is halfe way out on's body, at the game.
Away, Nightingale: that way.
I thinke I am furniſh'd for Catherne peares, for one vnder-meale: gi'me my cloake.
Good Gentleman, giue me my ware.
Where's the fellow, I ga' my cloake to? my cloake? and my hat? ha! Gods'lid, is he gone? thieues, thieues, helpe me to cry, Gentlemen.
Away, Coſtermonger, come to vs to Vrſla's. Talke of him to haue a ſoule? 'heart, if hee haue any more then a thing giuen him in ſtead of ſalt, onely to keepe him from ſtinking, I'le be hang'd afore my time, preſently, where ſhould it be trow? in his blood? hee has not ſo much to'ard it in his whole body, as will maintaine a good Flea; And if hee take this courſe, he will not ha' ſo much land left, as to reare a Calfe within this twelue mouth. Was there euer greene Plouer ſo pull'd! That his little Ouerſeer had beene heere now, and beene but tall enough, to ſee him ſteale peares, in exchange, for his beauer-hat, and his cloake thus? I muſt goe finde him out, next, for his blacke boxe, and his Patent (it feemes) hee has of his place; which I thinke the Gentleman would haue a reuerſion of; that ſpoke to me for it ſo earneſtly.
Would I might loſe my doublet, and hoſe, too; as I am an honeſt man, and neuer ſtirre, if I thinke there be any thing, but thieuing, and cooz'ning, i'this whole Fayre, Bartholmew-fayre, quoth he; an' euer any Bartholmew had that lucke in't, that I haue had, I'le be martyr'd for him, and in Smithfield, too. I ha' paid for my peares, a rot on 'hem, I'le keepe 'hem no longer; you were choake-peares to mee; I had bin better ha' gone to mum chance for you, I wuſſe. Me thinks the Fayre ſhould not haue vs'd me thus, and 'twere but for my names ſake, I would nor ha' vs'd a dog o'the name, ſo. O, Numps will triumph, now! Friend, doe you know who I am? or where I lye? I doe not my ſelfe, I'll beſworne. Doe but carry me home, and I'le pleaſe thee, I ha' money enough there, I ha' loſt my ſelfe, and my cloake and my hat; and my fine ſword, and my ſiſter, and Numps, and Miſtris Grace, (a Gentlewoman that I ſhould ha' marryed) and a cut-worke handkercher, ſhee ga' mee, and two purſes to day. And my bargaine. o'Hobby-horſes and Ginger-bread, which grieues me worſt of all.
By whoſe warrant, Sir, haue you done all this?
Warrant? thou art a wiſe fellow, indeed, as if a man need a warrant to loſe any thing, with.
Yes, Iuſtice Ouerdo's warrant, a man may get, and loſe with, I'le ſtand to't.
Iuſtice Ouerdoo? Doſt thou know him? I lye there, hee is my brother in Law, hee marryed my ſiſter: pray thee ſhew me the way, doſt thou know the houſe?
Sir, ſhew mee your warrant, I know nothing without a warrant, pardon me.
Why, I warrant thee, come along: thou ſhalt ſee, I haue wrought pillowes there, and cambricke ſheetes, and ſweete bags, too. Pray thee guide me to the houſe.
Sir, I'le tell you; goe you thither your ſelfe, firſt, alone; tell your worſhipfull brother your minde; and but bring me three lines of his hand, or his Clerkes, with Adam Ouerdoo, vnderneath; here I'le ſtay you, Ile obey you, and I'le guide you preſently.
S'lid, this is an Aſſe, I ha' found him, poxe vpon mee, what doe I talking to ſuch a dull foole; farewell, you are a very Coxcomb, doe you heare?
I thinke, I am, if Iuſtice Ouerdoo ſigne to it, I am, and ſo wee are all, hee'll quit vs all, multiply vs all.
GEntlemen, this is no way that you take: you do but breed one another trouble, and offence, and giue me no contentment at all. I am no ſhe, that affects to be quarell'd for, or haue my name or fortune made the queſtion of mens ſwords.
S'lood, wee loue you.
If you both loue mee, as you pretend, your owne reaſon will tell you, but one can enioy me; and to that point, there leads a directer line, then by my infamy, which muſt follow, if you fight. 'Tis true, I haue profeſt it to you ingenuouſly, that rather then to be yoak'd with this Bridegroome is appointed me, I would take vp any husband, almoſt vpon any truſt. Though Subtilty would ſay to me, (I know) hee is a foole, and has an eſtate, and I might gouerne him, and enioy a friend, beſide. But theſe are not my aymes, I muſt haue a husband I muſt loue, or I cannot liue with him. I ſhall ill make one of theſe politique wiues!
Why, if you can like either of vs, Lady, ſay, which is he, and the other ſhall ſweare inſtantly to deſiſt.
Content, I accord to that willingly.
Sure you thinke me a woman of an extreme leuity, Gentlemen, or a ſtrange fancy, that (meeting you by chance in ſuch a place, as this, both at one inſtant, and not yet of two hours acquaintance, neither of you deſeruing afore the other, of me) I ſhould ſo forſake my modeſty (though I might affect one more particularly) as to ſay, This is be, and name him.
Why, wherefore ſhould you not? What ſhould hinder you?
If you would not giue it to my modeſty, allow it yet to my wit; giue me ſo much of woman, and cunning, as not to betray my ſelfe impertinently. How can I iudge of you, ſo farre as to a choyſe, without knowing you more? you are both equall, and alike to mee, yet: and ſo indifferently affected by mee, as each of you might be the man, if the other were away. For you are reaſonable creatures, you haue vnderſtanding, and diſcourſe. And if fate ſend me an vnderſtanding husband, I haue no feare at all, but mine owne manners ſhall make him a good one.
Would I were put forth to making for you, then.
It may be you are, you know not what's toward you: will you conſent to a motion of mine, Gentlemen?
What euer it be, we'll preſume reaſonableneſſe, comming from you.
And fitneſſe, too.
I ſaw one of you buy a paire of tables, e'en now.
Yes, heere they be, and maiden ones too, vnwritten in.
The fitter for what they may be imployed in. You ſhall write either of you, heere, a word, or a name, what you like beſt; but of two, or three ſyllables at moſt: and the next perſon that comes this way (becauſe Deſtiny has a high hand in buſineſſe of this nature) I'le demand, which of the two words, he, or ſhe doth approue; and according to that ſentence, fixe my reſolution, and affection, without change.
Agreed, my word is conceiued already.
And mine ſhall not be long creating after.
But you ſhall promiſe, Gentlemen, not to be curious to know, which of you it is, taken; but giue me leaue to conceale that till you haue brought me, either home, or where I may ſafely tender my ſelfe.
Why that's but equall.
Wee are pleas'd.
Becauſe I will bind both your indeauours to work together, friendly, and ioyntly, each to the others fortune, and haue my ſelfe ſitted with ſome meanes, to make him that is forſaken, a part of amends.
Theſe conditions are very curteous. Well my word is out of the Arcadia, then: Argalus.
And mine out of the play, Palemon.
Haue you any warrant for this, Gentlemen?
WIN-W. Ha!
There muſt be a warrant had, beleeue it.
For what?
Fot whatſoeuer it is, any thing indeede, no matter what.
S'light, here's a fine ragged Prophet, dropt downe 'ithe nicke!
Heauen quit you, Gentlemen.
Nay, ſtay a little, good Lady, put him to the queſtion.
You are content, then?
QVAR. Yes yes.
Sir, heere are two names written—
Is Iudice Ouerdoo, one?
How, Sir? I pray you read 'hem to your ſelfe, it is for a wager betweene theſe Gentlemen, and with a ſtroake or any difference, marke which you approue beſt.
They may be both worſhipfull names for ought I know, Miſtreſſe, but Adam Ouerdoo had beene worth three of 'hem, I aſſure you, in this place, that's in plaine engliſh.
This man amazes mee! I pray you, like one of 'hem, Sir.
I doe like him there, that has the beſt warrant, Miſtreſſe, to ſaue your longing, and (multiply him) It may be this. But I am I ſtill for Iuſtice Ouerdoo, that's my conſcience. And quit you.
Is't done, Lady?
I, and ſtrangely, as euer I ſaw! What fellow is this trow?
No matter what, a Fortune-teller wee ha' made him. Which is't, which is't.
Nay, did you not promiſe, not to enquire?
S'lid, I forgot that, pray you pardon mee. Looke, here's our Mercury come: The Licence arriues i'the fineſt time, too! 'tis but ſcraping out Cokes his name, and 'tis done.
How now lime-twig? haſt thou touch'd.
Not yet, Sir, except you would goe with mee, and ſee't, it's not worth ſpeaking on. The act is nothing, without a witneſſe. Yonder he is, your man with the boxe falne into the fineſt company, and ſo tranſported with vapours, they ha' got in a Northren Clothier, and one Puppy, a Weſterne man, that's come to wraſtle before my Lord Maior, anone, and Captaine Whit, and one Val Cutting, that helpes Captaine Iordan to roare, a circling boy: with whom your Numps, is ſo taken, that you may ſtrip him of his cloathes, if you will. I'le vndertake to geld him for you; if you had but a Surgeon, ready, to ſeare him. And Miſtreſſe Iuſtice, there, is the goodeſt woman! ſhee do's ſo loue 'hem all ouer, in termes of Iuſtice, and the Stile of authority, with her hood vpright — that I beſeech you come away Gentlemen, and ſee't.
S light, I would not loſe it for the Fayre, what'll you doe, Ned?
Why, ſtay heere about for you, Miſtreſſe Welborne muſt not be ſeene.
Doe ſo, and find out a Prieſt i'the meane time, I'le bring the Licenſe. Lead, which way is't?
Here, Sir, you are o'the backeſide o'the Booth already, you may heare the noiſe.
VVHit, bid Vall Cutting continue the vapours for a lift, Whit, for a lift.
Il'e ne mare, Il'e ne mare, the eale's too meeghty.
How now! my Galloway Nag, the ſtaggers? ha! Whit, gi'him a ſlit i'the fore-head. Cheare vp, man, a needle, and threed to ſtitch his eares. I'ld cure him now an' I had it, with a little butter, and garlike, long-pepper, and graines. Where's my horne? I'le gi'him a maſh, preſently, ſhall take away this dizzineſſe.
Why, where are you zurs? doe you vlinch, and leaue vs i'the zuds, now?
I'le ne mare, I'is e'en as vull as a Paipers bag, by my troth, I.
Doe my Northerne cloth zhrinke i'the wetting? ha?
Why, well ſaid, old Flea-bitten, thou'lt neuer tyre, I ſee.
No, Sir, but he may tire, if it pleaſe him.
Who told dee ſho? that he vuld neuer teer, man?
No matter who told him ſo, ſo long as he knowes.
Nay, I know nothing, Sir, pardon me there.
They are at it ſtil, Sir, this they call vapours.
He ſhall not pardon dee, Captaine, dou ſhalt not be pardon'd. Pre'de ſhweete heart doe not pardon him.
S'light, I'le pardon him, an'I liſt, whoſoeuer ſaies nay to't.
Where's Numps? I miſſe him.
Why, I ſay nay to't.
O there he is!
To what doe you ſay nay, Sir?
To any thing, whatſoeuer it is, ſo long as I do not like it.
Pardon me, little man, dou muſht like it a little.
No, hee muſt not like it at all, Sir, there you are i'the wrong.
I tinke I be, he muſht not like it, indeede.
Nay, then he both muſt, and will like it, Sir, for all you.
If he haue reaſon, he may like it, Sir.
By no meanſh Captaine, vpon reaſon, he may like nothing vpon reaſon.
I haue no reaſon, nor I will heare of no reaſon, nor I will looke for no reaſon, and he is an Aſſe, that either knowes any, or lookes for't from me.
Yes, in ſome ſenſe you may haue reaſon, Sir.
I, in ſome ſenſe, I care not if I grant you.
Pardon mee, thou ougſht to grant him nothing, in no ſhenſh, if dou doe loue dy ſhelfe, angry man.
Why then, I doe grant him nothing; and I haue no ſenſe.
'Tis true, thou haſt no ſenſe indeed.
S'lid, but I haue ſenſe, now I thinke on't better, and I will grant him any thing, doe you ſee?
He is i'the right, and do's vtter a ſufficient vapour.
Nay, it is no ſufficient vapour, neither, I deny that.
Then it is a ſweet vapour.
It may be a ſweet vapour.
Nay, it is no ſweet vapour, neither, Sir, it ſtinkes, and I'le ſtand to't.
Yes, I tinke it doſh ſhtinke, Captaine. All vapour doſh ſhtinke.
Nay, then it do's not ſtinke, Sir, and it ſhall not ſtinke.
By your leaue, it may, Sir.
I, by my leaue, it may ſtinke, I know that.
Pardon me, thou knoweſht nothing, it cannot by thy leaue, angry man.
How can it not?
Nay, neuer queſtion him, for he is i'the right.
Yeſh, I am i'de right, I confeſh it, ſo iſh de little man too.
I'le haue nothing confeſt, that concernes mee. I am not i'the right, nor neuer was i'the right, nor neuer will be i'the right, while I am in my right minde,
Minde? why, heere's no man mindes you, Sir, nor any thing elſe.
Vreind, will you mind this that wee doe?
Call you this vapours? this is ſuch beltching of quarrell, as I neuer heard. Will you minde your buſineſſe, Sir?
You ſhall ſee, Sir.
I'le ne maire, my waimb warkes too mickle with this auready.
Will you take that, Maſter Waſpe, that no body ſhould minde you?
Why? what ha' you to doe? is't any matter to you?
No, but me thinks you ſhould not be vnminded, though,
Nor, I wu'not be, now I thinke on't, doe you heare, new acquaintance, do's no man mind me, ſay you?
Yes, Sir, euery man heere mindes you, but how?
Nay, I care as little how, as you doe, that was not my queſtion.
No, noting was ty queſtion, tou art a learned man, and I am a valiant man, i'faith la, tou ſhalt ſpeake for mee, and I vill fight for tee.
Fight for him, Whit? A groſſe vapour, hee can fight for himſelfe.
It may be I can, but it may be, I wu' not, how then?
Why, then you may chuſe.
Why, and I'le chuſe whether I'le chuſe or no.
I thinke you may, and 'tis true; and I allow it for a reſolute vapour.
Nay, then, I doe thinke you doe not thinke, and it is no reſolute vapour.
Yes, in ſome ſort he may allow you.
In no ſort, Sir, pardon me, I can allow him nothing. You miſtake the vapour.
He miſtakes nothing, Sir, in no ſort.
Yes, I pre dee now, let him miſtake.
A turd i'your teeth, neuer pre dee mee, for I will haue nothing miſtaken.
Turd, ha turd? a noyſome vapour, ſtrike Whit.
Why, Gentlemen, why Gentlemen, I charge you vpon my authority, conſerue the peace. In the Kings name, and my Husbands, put vp your weapons, I ſhall be driuen to commit you my ſelfe, elſe:
Ha, ha, ha.
Why doe you laugh, Sir?
Sir, you'll allow mee my chriſtian liberty. I may laugh, I hope.
In ſome ſort you may, and in ſome ſort you may not, Sir.
Nay in ſome ſort, Sir, hee may neither laugh, nor hope, in this company.
Yes, then he may both laugh, and hope in any ſort, an't pleaſe him.
Faith, and I will then, for it doth pleaſe mee exceedingly.
No exceeding neither, Sir.
No, that vapour is too lofty.
Gentlemen, I doe not play well at your game of vapours, I am not very good at it, but—
Doe you heare, Sir? I would ſpeake with you in circle?
In circle, Sir? what would you with me in circle?
Can you lend me a Piece, a Iacobus? in circle?
S'lid, your circle will proue more coſtly then your vapours, then. Sir, no, I lend you none.
Your beard's not well turn'd vp, Sir.
How Raſcall? are you playing with my beard? I'le breake circle with you.
NOR. Gentlemen, Gentlemen!
Gather vp, Whit, gather vp, Whit, good vapours.
What meane you? are you Rebells? Gentlemen? ſhall I ſend out a Serieant at Armes, or a Writ o'Rebellion, againſt you? I'le commit you vpon my woman-hood, for a Riot, vpon my Iuſtice-hood, if you perſiſt.
Vpon your Iuſtice-hood? Mary ſhite o'your hood, you'll commit? Spoke like a true Iuſtice of peace's wife, indeed, and a fine female Lawyer! turd i'your teeth for a fee, now.
Why, Numps, in Maſter Ouerdoo's name, I charge you.
Good Miſtreſſe Vnderdoo hold your tongue.
Alas! poore Numps.
Alas! and why alas from you, I beſeech you? or why poore Numps, goody Rich? am I come to be pittied by your tuft taffata now? why Miſtreſſe, I knew Adam, the Clerke, your husband, when he was Adam Scriuener, and writ for two pence a ſheet, as high as he beares his head now, or you your hood, Dame. What are you, Sir?
Wee be men, and no Infidells; what is the matter, here, and the noyſes? can you tell?
Heart, what ha' you to doe? cannot a man quarrell in quietneſſe? but hee muſt be put out on't by you? what are you?
Why, wee be his Maieſties Watch, Sir.
Watch? S'blood, you are a ſweet watch, indeede. A body would thinke, and you watch'd well a nights, you ſhould be contented to ſleepe at this time a day. Get you to your fleas, and your flocke-beds, you Rogues, your kennells, and lye downe cloſe.
Downe? yes, we will downe, I warrant you, downe with him in his Maieſties name, downe, downe with him, and carry him away, to the pigeon-holes.
I thanke you honeſt friends, in the behalfe o'the Crowne, and the peace, and in Maſter Ouerdoo's name, for ſuppreſſing enormities.
Stay, Briſtle, heere iſh a noder braſh o'drunkards, but very quiet, ſpeciall drunkards, will pay dee, fiue ſhillings very well. Take 'hem to dee, in de graiſh o' God▪ one of hem do's change cloth, for Ale in the Fayre, here, te toder iſh a ſtrong man, a mighty man, my Lord Mayors man, and a wraſtler. Hee has wraſhled ſo long with the bottle, heere, that the man with the beard, haſh almoſht ſtreeke vp hiſh heelſh.
S'lid, the Clerke o'the Market, has beene to cry him all the Fayre ouer, here, for my Lords ſeruice.
Tere he iſh, pre de taik him henſh, and make ty beſt on him. How now woman o' ſhilke, vat ailſh ty ſhweet faiſh? art tou melancholy?
A little diſtemper'd with theſe enormities; ſhall I intreat a curteſie of you, Captaine?
Intreat a hundred, veluet voman, I vill doe it, ſhpeake out.
I cannot with modeſty ſpeake it out, but—
I vill doe it, and more, and more, for dee. What Vrſla, and't be bitch, and't be baud and't be!
How now Raſcall? what roare you for? old Pimpe.
Heere, put vp de cloakes Vrſh; de purchaſe, pre dee now, ſhweet Vrſh, help dis good braue voman, to a Iordan, and't be.
S'lid call your Captaine Iordan to her, can you not?
Nay, pre dee leaue dy conſheits, and bring the veluet woman to de—
I bring her, hang her: heart muſt I find a common pot for euery punque i'your purlews?
O good voordſh, Vrſh, it iſh a gueſt o'veluet, i'fait la.
Let her ſell her hood, and buy a ſpunge, with a poxe to her, my veſſell, employed Sir. I haue but one, and 'tis the bottome of an old bottle. An honeſt Proctor, and his wife, are at it, within, if ſhee'll ſtay her time, ſo.
As ſoone aſh tou canſht ſhwet Vrſh. Of a valiant man I tinke I am the patientſh man i'the world, or in all Smithfield.
How now Whit? cloſe vapours, ſtealing your leaps? couering in corners, ha?
No fait, Captaine, dough tou beeſht a viſhe man, dy vit is a mile hence, now. I vas procuring a ſhmall courteſie, for a woman of faſhion here.
Yes, Captaine, though I am Iuſtice of peace's wife, I doe loue Men of warre, and the Sonnes of the ſword, when they come before my husband.
Say'ſt thou ſo Filly? thou ſhalt haue a leape preſently, I'le horſe thee my ſelfe, elſe.
Come, will you bring her in now? and let her talke her turne?
Gramercy good Vrſh, I tanke dee.
Maſter Ouerdoo ſhall thanke her.
Good Ga'mere Vrs; Win, and I, are exceedingly beholden to you, and to Captaine Iordan, and Captaine Whit. Win, I'le be bold to leaue you, i'this good company, Win: for halfe an houre, or ſo Win, while I goe, and ſee how my matter goes forward, and if the Puppets be perfect: and then I'le come & fetch you, Win.
Will you leaue me alone with two men, Iohn?
I, they are honeſt Gentlmen Win, Captaine Iordan, and Captaine Whit, they'll vſe you very ciuilly, Win, God b'w'you, Win.
What's her husband gone?
On his falſe, gallop, Vrs, away.
An' you be right Bartholmew-birds, now ſhew your ſelues ſo: we are vndone for want of fowle i'the Fayre, here. Here will be Zekiell Edgworth, and three or foure gallants, with him at night, and I ha' neither Plouer nor Qúaile for 'hem: perſwade this betweene you two, to become a Bird o'the game, while I worke the veluet woman, within, (as you call her.)
I conceiue thee, Vrs! goe thy waies, doeſt thou heare, Whit? is't not pitty, my delicate darke cheſtnut here, with the fine leane head, large fore-head, round eyes, euen mouth, ſharpe eares, long necke, thinne crſt, cloſe withers, plaine backe, deepe ſides, ſhort fillets, and full flankes: with a round belly, a plumpe buttocke, large thighes, knit knees, ſtreight legges, ſhort paernes, ſmooth hoofes, and ſhort heeles; ſhould lead a dull honeſt womans life, that might liue the life of a Lady?
Yes, by my fait, and trot, it is, Captaine: de honeſht womans life is a ſcuruy dull life, indeed, la.
How, Sir? is an honeſt womans life a ſcuruy life?
Yes fait, ſhweet heart, beleeue him, de leefe of a Bond-woman! but if dou vilt harken to me, I vill make tee a free-woman, and a Lady: dou ſhalt liue like a Lady, as te Captaine ſaiſh.
I, and be honeſt too ſometimes: haue her wiers, and her tires, her greene gownes, and veluet petticoates.
I, and ride to Ware and Rumford i'dy Coaſh, ſheede Players, be in loue vit 'hem; ſup vit gallantſh, be drunke, and coſt de noting.
Braue vapours!
And lye by twenty on'hem, if dou pleaſh ſhweet heart.
What, and be honeſt ſtill, that were fine ſport.
Tiſh common, ſhweet heart, tou may'ſt doe it by my hand: it ſhall be iuſtified to ty husbands faiſh, now: tou ſhalt be as honeſht as the skinne betweene his hornſh, la!
Yes, and weare a dreſſing, top, and top-gallant, to compare with ere a husband on 'hem all, for a fore-top: it is the vapour of ſpirit in the wife, to cuckold, now adaies; as it is the vapour of faſhion, in the husband, not to ſuſpect. Your prying cat-eyed-citizen, is an abominable vapour.
Lord, what a foole haue I beene!
Mend then, and doe euery ting like a Lady, heereafter, neuer know ty husband, from another man.
Nor any one man from another, but i'the darke.
I, and then it iſh no diſhgraſh to know any man.
Helpe, helpe here.
How now? what vapour's there?
O, you are a ſweet Ranger! and looke well to your walks. Yonder is your Punque of Turnbull, Ramping Ales, has falne vpon the poore Gentlewoman within, and pull'd her hood ouer her eares, and her hayre through it.
Helpe, helpe, i'the Kings name.
A miſchiefe on you, they are ſuch as you are, that vndoe vs, and take our trade from vs, with your tuft-taffata hanches.
How now Alice!
The poore common whores can ha' no traffique, for the priuy rich ones; your caps and hoods of veluet, call away our cuſtomers, and lick the fat from vs.
Peace you foule ramping Iade, you—
Od's foote, you Bawd in greace, are you talking?
VVhy, Alice, I ſay.
Thou Sow of Smithfield, thou.
Thou tripe of Turnebull.
Cat-a-mountaine-vapours! ha!
You know where you were taw'd lately, both laſh'd, and ſlaſh'd you were in Bridewell.
I, by the ſame token, you rid that weeke, and broake out the bottome o'the Cart, Night-tub.
VVhy, Lyon face! ha! doe you know who I am? ſhall I teare ruffe, ſlit waſtcoat, make ragges of petticoat? ha! goe to, vaniſh, for feare of vapours. Whit, a kick, Whit, in the parting vapour. Come braue woman, take a good heart, thou ſhalt be a Lady, too.
Yes fait, dey ſhal all both be Ladies, and write Madame. I vill do't my ſelfe for dem. Doe, is the vord, and D is the middle letter of Madame, D D, put 'hem together, and make deeds, without which, all words are alike, la.
'Tis true, Vrſla, take 'hem in, open thy wardrope, and fit 'hem to their calling. Greene-gownes, Crimſon-petticoats, green women! my Lord Maiors green women! gueſts o'the Game, true bred. I'le prouide you a Coach, to take the ayre, in.
But doe you thinke you can get one?
O, they are as common as wheelebarrowes, where there are great dunghills. Euery Pettifoggers wife, has 'hem, for firſt he buyes a Coach, that he may marry, and then hee marries that hee may be made Cuckold in't: For if their wiues ride not to their Cuckolding, they doe 'hem no credit. Hide, and be hidden; ride, and be ridden, ſayes the vapour of experience.
BY what warrant do's it ſay ſo?
Ha! mad child o'the Pye-pouldres, art thou there? fill vs a freſh kan, Vrſ, wee may drinke together.
I may not drinke without a warrant, Captaine.
S'lood, thou'll not ſtale without a warant, ſhortly. Whit, Giue mee pen, inke and paper. I'l draw him a warrant preſently.
It muſt be Iuſtice Ouerdoo's?
I know, man, Fetch the drinke, Whit.
I pre dee now, be very briefe, Captaine; for de new Ladies ſtay for dee.
O, as briefe as can be, here 'tis already. Adam Ouerdoo.
VVhy, now, I'le pledge you, Captaine.
Drinke it off. I'll come to thee, anone, againe.
Well, Sir. You are now diſcharg'd: beware of being ſpi'd, hereafter.
Sir, will it pleaſe you, enter in here, at Vrſla's; and take part of a ſilken gowne, a veluet petticoate, or a wrought ſmocke; I am promiſ'd ſuch: and I can ſpare any Gentleman a moity.
Keepe it for your companions in beaſtlineſſe, I am none of'hem, Sir. If I had not already forgiuen you a greater treſpaſſe, or thought you yet worth my beating, I would inſtruct your manners, to whom you made your offers. But goe your wayes, talke not to me, the hangman is onely fit to diſcourſe with you; the hand of Beadle is too mercifull a puniſhment for your Trade of life. I am ſorry I employ'd this fellow; for he thinks me ſuch: Facinus quos inquinat, aequat. But, it was for ſport. And would I make it ſerious, the getting of this Licence is nothing to me, without other circumſtances concurre. I do thinke how impertinently I labour, if the word bee not mine, that the ragged fellow mark'd: And what aduantage I haue giuen Ned Win-wife in this time now, of working her, though it be mine. Hee'll go neare to forme to her what a debauch'd Raſcall I am, and fright her out of all good conceipt of me: I ſhould doe ſo by him, I am ſure, if I had the opportunity. But my hope is in her temper, yet; and it muſt needs bee next to deſpaire, that is grounded on any part of a woman's diſcretion. I would giue by my troth, now, all I could ſpare (to my cloathes, and my ſword) to meete my tatter'd ſooth-ſayer againe, who was my iudge i'rhe queſtion, to know certainly whoſe word he has damn'd or ſau'd. For, till then, I liue but vnder a Repreiue. I muſt ſeeke him. Who be theſe?
Sir, you are a welſh Cuckold, and a prating Runt, and no Conſtable.
You ſay very well. Come put in his legge in the middle roundell, and let him hole there.
You ſtinke of leeks, Metheglyn, and cheeſe. You Rogue.
Why, what is that to you, if you ſit ſweetly in the ſtocks in the meane time? if you haue a minde to ſtinke too, your breeches ſit cloſe enough to your bumm. Sit you merry, Sir.
How now, Numps?
It is no matter, how; pray you looke off.
Nay I'll not offend you, Numps. I thought you had ſate there to be ſeen.
And to be ſold, did you not? pray you mind your buſineſſe, an' you haue any.
Cry you mercy, Numps. Do's your leg lie high enough?
How now, neighbour Haggiſe, what ſayes Iuſtice Ouerdo's worſhip, to the other offenders?
Why, hee ſayes iuſt nothing, what ſhould hee ſay? Or where ſhould he ſay? He is not to be found, Man. He ha' not been ſeen i'the Fayre, here, all this liue-long day, neuer ſince ſeuen a clocke i' the morning. His Clearks know not what to thinke on't. There is no Court of Pie-poulders yet. Heere they be return'd.
What ſhall be done with 'hem, then? in your diſcretion?
I thinke wee were beſt put 'hem in the ſtocks, in diſcretion (there they will be ſafe in diſcretion) for the valour of an houre, or ſuch a thing, till his worſhip come.
It is but a hole matter, if wee doe, Neighbour Haggiſe, come, Sir, heere is company for you, heaue vp the ſtocks.
I ſhall put a tricke vpon your welſh diligence, perhaps.
Put in your legge, Sir.
What, Rabby Buſy! is hee come?
I doe obey thee, the Lyon may roare, but he cannot bite. I am glad to be thus ſeparated from the heathen of the land, and put a part in the ſtocks, for the holy cauſe.
VVhat are you, Sir?
One that reioyceth in his affliction, and ſitteth here to propheſie, the deſtruction of Fayres and May-games, Wakes, and Whitſon-ales, and doth ſigh and groane for the reformation, of theſe abuſes.
And doe you ſigh, and groane too, or reioyce in your affliction?
I doe not feele it, I doe not thinke of it, it is a thing without mee: Adam, thou art aboue theſe battries, theſe contumelies. In te manca ruit fortuna, as thy friend Horace ſaies; thou art one, Quem neque pauperies, neque mors, neque vincula terrent,. And therefore as another friend of thine ſaies, (I thinke it be thy friend Perſius) Non te quaeſiueris extra.
What's heere! a Stoick i'the ſtocks? the Foole is turn'd Philoſopher.
Friend, I will leaue to communicate my ſpirit with you, if I heare any more of thoſe ſuperſtitious reliques, thoſe liſts of Latin, the very tags of Rome▪ and patches of Poperie.
Nay, an' you begin to quarrel, Gentlemen, I'll leaue you. I ha' paid for quarrelling too lately: looke you, a deuice, but ſhifting in a hand for a foot. God b'w'you.
Wilt thou then leaue thy brethren in tribulation?
For this once, Sir.
Thou art a halting Neutrall ſtay him there, ſtop him: that will not endure the heat of perſecution.
How now, what's the matter?
Hee is fled, he is fled, and dares not ſit it out.
What, has he made an eſcape, which way? follow, neighbour Haggiſe.
O me! in the ſtocks! haue the wicked preuail'd?
Peace religious ſiſter, it is my calling, comfort your ſelfe, an extraordinary calling, and done for my better ſtanding, my ſurer ſtanding, hereafter.
By whoſe warrant, by whoſe warrant, this?
O, here's my man! dropt in, I look'd for.
Ha!
O good Sir, they haue ſet the faithfull, here to be wonder'd at; and prouided holes, for the holy of the land.
Had they warrant for it? ſhew'd they Iuſticce Ouerdoo's hand? if they had no warrant, they ſhall anſwer it.
Sure you did not locke the ſtocks ſufficiently, neighbour Toby!
No! ſee if you can lock 'hem better.
They are very ſufficiently lock'd, and truely, yet ſome thing is in the mater.
True, your warrant is the matter that is in queſtion, by what warrant?
Mad man, hold your peace, I will put you in his roome elſe, in the very ſame hole, doe you ſee?
How! is hee a mad-man!
Shew me Iuſtice Ouerdoo's warrant. I obey you.
You are a mad foole, hold your tongue.
In Iuſtice Ouerdoo's name, I drinke to you, and here's my warrant.
Alas poore wretch! how it earnes my heart for him!
If hee be mad, it is in vaine to queſtion him. I'le try though, friend: there was a Gentlewoman, ſhew'd you two names, ſome houre ſince, Argalus and Palemon, to marke in a booke, which of 'hem was it you mark'd?
I marke no name, but Adam Ouerdoo, that is the name of names, hee onely is the ſufficient Magiſtrate; and that name I reuerence, ſhew it mee.
This fellowes madde indeede: I am further off, now, then afore.
I ſhall not breath in peace, till I haue made him ſome amends.
Well, I will make another vſe of him, is come in my head: I haue a neſt of beards in my Truncke, one ſome thing like his.
This mad foole has made mee that I know not whether I I haue lock'd the ſtocks or no, I thinke I lock'd 'hem.
Take Adam Ouerdoo in your minde, and feare nothing.
S'lid, madneſſe it ſelfe, hold thy peace, and take that.
Strikeſt thou without a warrant? take thou that.
Wee are deliuered by miracle; fellow in fetters, let vs not refuſe the meanes, this madneſſe was of the ſpirit: The malice of the enemy hath mock'd it ſelfe.
Mad doe they call him! the world is mad in error, but hee is mad in truth: I loue him o'the ſudden, (the cunning man ſayd all true) and ſhall loue him more, and more. How well it becomes a man to be mad in truth! O, that I might be his yoake-fellow, and be mad with him, what a many ſhould wee draw to madneſſe in truth, with vs!
How now! all ſcap'd? where's the woman? it is witchcraft! Her veluet hat is a witch, o' my conſcience, or my key! t'one. The mad-man was a Diuell, and I am an Aſſe; ſo bleſſe me, my place, and mine office.
WEll, Lucke and Saint Bartholmew; out with the ſigne of our inuention, in the name of Wit, and do you beat the Drum, the while; All the fowle i'the Fayre, I meane, all the dirt in Smithfield, (that's one of Maſter Littlewit's Carwhitchets now) will be throwne at our Banner to day, if the matter do's not pleaſe the people. O the Motions, that I Lanthorne Leatherhead haue giuen light to, i' my time, ſince my Maſter Pod dyed! Ieruſalem was a ſtately thing; and ſo was Niniue, and the citty of Norwich, and Sodom and Gomorrah; with the riſing o'the prentiſes; and pulling downe the bawdy houſes there, vpon Shroue-Tueſday; but the Gunpowder-plot, there was a get-penny! I haue preſented that to an eighteene, or twenty pence audience, nine times in an afternoone. Your home-borne proiects proue euer the beſt, they are ſo eaſie, and familiar, they put too much learning i'their things now o'dayes: and that I feare will be the ſpoile o'this. Little-wit? I ſay, Mickle-wit! if not too mickle! looke to your gathering there, good man Filcher.
I warrant you, Sir.
And there come any Gentlefolks, take two pence a piece, Sharkwell.
I warrant you, Sir, three pence, an'we can.
THis later diſguiſe, I haue borrow'd of a Porter, ſhall carry me out to all my great and good ends; which how euer interrupted, were neuer deſtroyed in me: neither is the houre of my ſeuerity yet come, to reueale my ſelfe, wherein cloud-like, I will breake out in raine, and haile, lightning, and thunder, vpon the head of enormity. Two maine works I haue to proſecute: firſt, one is to inuent ſome ſatisfaction for the poore, kinde wretch, who is out of his wits for my ſake, and yonder I ſee him comming, I will walke aſide, and proiect for it.
I wonder where Tom Quarlous is, that hee returnes not, it may be he is ſtrucke in here to ſeeke vs.
See, heere's our mad-man againe.
I haue made my ſelfe as like him, as his gowne, and cap will giue me leaue.
Sir, I loue you, and would be glad to be mad with you in truth.
How! my widdow in loue with a mad-man?
Verily, I can be as mad in ſpirit, as you.
By whoſe warrant? leaue your canting. Gentlewoman, haue I found you? (ſaue yee, quit yee, and multiply yee) where's your booke? 'twas a ſufficient name I mark'd, let me ſee't, be not afraid to ſhew't me.
What would you with it, Sir?
Marke it againe, and againe, at your ſeruice.
Heere it is, Sir, this was it you mark'd.
Palemon? fare you well, fare you well.
How, Palemon!
Yes faith, hee has diſcouer'd it to you, now, and therefore 'twere vaine to diſguiſe it longer, I am yours, Sir, by the benefit of your fortune.
And you haue him Miſtreſſe, beleeue it, that ſhall neuer giue you cauſe to repent her benefit, but make you rather to thinke that in this choyce, ſhe had both her eyes.
I deſire to put it to no danger of proteſtation.
Palemon, the word, and Win-wife the man?
Good Sir, vouchſafe a yoakefellow in your madneſſe, ſhun not one of the ſanctified ſiſters, that would draw with you, in truth.
Away, you are a heard of hypocriticall proud Ignorants, rather wilde, then mad. Fitter for woods, and the ſociety of beaſts thn houſes, and the congregation of men. You are the ſecond part of the ſociety of Canters, Outlawes to order and Diſcipline, and the onely priuiledg'd Church-robbers of Chriſtendome. Let me alone. Palemon, the word, and Winwife the man?
I muſt vncouer my ſelfe vnto him, or I ſhall neuer enioy him, for all the cunning mens promiſes. Good Sir, heare mee, I am worth ſixe thouſand pound, my loue to you, is become my racke, I'll tell you all, and the truth: ſince you hate the hyporiſie of the party-coloured brother-hood. Theſe ſeuen yeeres, I haue beene a wilfull holy widdow, onely to draw feaſts, and gifts from my intangled ſuitors: I am alſo by office, an aſſiſting ſiſter of the Deacons, and a deuourer, in ſtead of a diſtributer of the alms. I am a ſpeciall maker of marriages for our decayed Brethren, with our rich widdowes; for a third part of their wealth, when they are marryed, for the reliefe of the poore elect: as alſo our poore handſome yong Virgins, with our wealthy Batchelors, or Widdowers; to make them ſteale from their husbands, when I haue confirmed them in the faith; and got all put into their cuſtodies. And if I ha' not my bargaine, they may ſooner turne a ſcolding drab, in to a ſilent Miniſter, then make me leaue pronouncing reprobation, and damnation vnto them. Our elder, Zeale-of-the-land, would haue had me, but I know him to be the capitall Knaue of the land, making himſelfe rich, by being made Feoffee in truſt to deceaſed Brethren, and coozning their heyres, by ſwearing the abſolute gift of their inheritance. And thus hauing eas'd my conſcience, and vtter'd my heart, with the tongue of my loue: enioy all my deceits together. I beſeech you. I ſhould not haue reuealed this to you, but that in time I thinke you are mad, and I hope you'll thinke mee ſo too, Sir?
Stand aſide, I'le anſwer you, preſently. Why ſhould not I marry this ſixe thouſand pound, now I thinke on't? and a good trade too, that ſhee has beſide, ha? The tother wench, Winwife, is ſure of; there's no expectation for me there! here I may make my ſelfe ſome ſauer, yet, if ſhee continue mad, there's the queſtion. It is money that I want, why ſhould I not marry the money, when 'tis offer'd mee? I haue a Licenſe and all, it is but razing out one name, and putting in another. There's no playing with a man's fortune! I am reſolu'd! I were truly mad, an' I would not! well, come your wayes, follow mee, an' you will be mad, I'll ſhew you a warrant!
Moſt zealouſly, it is that I zealouſly deſire.
Sir, let mee ſpeake with you.
By whoſe warrant?
The warrant that you tender, and reſpect ſo; Iuſtice Ouerdoo's! I am the man, friend Trouble-all, though thus diſguis'd (as the carefull Magiſtrate ought) for the good of the Republique, in the Fayre, and the weeding out of enormity. Doe you want a houſe or meat, or drinke, or cloathes? ſpeake whatſoeuer it is, it ſhall be ſupplyed you, what want you?
Nothing but your warrant.
My warrant? for what?
To be gone, Sir.
Nay, I pray thee ſtay, I am ſerious, and haue not many words, nor much time to exchange with thee; thinke what may doe thee good.
Your hand and ſeale, will doe me a great deale of good; nothing elſe in the whole Fayre, that I know.
If it were to any end, thou ſhould'ſt haue it willingly.
Why, it will ſatisfie me, that's end enough, to looke on; an' you will not gi' it mee, let me goe.
Alas! thou ſhalt ha' it preſently▪ I'll but ſtep into the Scriueners, hereby, and bring it. Doe not go away.
Why, this mad mans ſhape, will proue a very fortunate one, I thinke! can a ragged robe produce theſe effects? if this be the wiſe Iuſtice, and he bring mee his hand, I ſhall goe neere to make ſome vſe on't. Hee is come already!
Looke thee! heere is my hand and ſeale, Adam Ouerdoo, if there be any thing to be written, aboue in the paper, that thou want'ſt now, or at any time hereafter; thinke on't; it is my deed, I deliuer it ſo, can your friend write?
Her hand for a witneſſe, and all is well.
With all my heart.
Why ſhould not I ha' the conſcience, to make this a bond of a thouſand pound? now, or what I would elſe?
Looke you, there it is; and I deliuer it as my deede againe.
Let vs now proceed in madneſſe.
Well, my conſcience is much eas'd; I ha' done my part, though it doth him no good, yet Adam hath offer'd ſatisfaction! The ſting is remoued from hence: poore man, he is much alter'd with his affliction, it has brought him low! Now, for my other worke, reducing the young man (I haue follow'd ſo long in loue) from the brinke of his bane, to the center of ſafety. Here, or in ſome ſuch like vaine place, I ſhall be ſure to finde him. I will waite the good time.
HOw now? what's here to doe? friend, art thou the Maſter of the Monuments?
'Tis a Motion, an't pleaſe your worſhip,
My phantaſticall brother in Law, Maſter Bartholmew Cokes!
A Motion, what's that? The ancient moderne hiſtory of Hero, and Leander, otherwiſe called The Touchſtone of true Loue, with as true a tryall of friendſhip, betweene Damon, and Pithias, two faithfull friends o'the Bankſide? pretty i'faith, what's the meaning on't? is't an Enterlude? or what is't?
Yes Sir, pleaſe you come neere, wee'll take your money within.
Backe with theſe children; they doe ſo follow mee vp and downe.
By your leaue, friend.
You muſt pay, Sir, an' you goe in.
Who, I? I perceiue thou know'ſt not mee: call the Maſter o'the Motion.
What, doe you not know the Author, fellow Filcher? you muſt take no money of him; he muſt come in gratis: Mr. Littlewit is a voluntary; he is the Author.
Peace, ſpeake not too lowd, I would not haue any notice taken, that I am the Author, till wee ſee how it paſſes.
Maſter Littlewit, how do'ſt thou?
Maſter Cokes! you are exceeding well met: what, in your doublet, and hoſe, without a cloake, or a hat?
I would I might neuer ſtirre, as I am an honeſt man, and by that fire; I haue loſt all i'the Fayre, and all my acquaintance too; did'ſt thou meet any body that I know, Maſter Littlewit? my man Numps, or my ſiſter Ouerdoo, or Miſtreſſe Grace? pray thee Maſter Littlewit, lend mee ſome money to ſee the Interlude, here. I'le pay thee againe, as I am a Gentleman. If thou'lt but carry mee home, I haue money enough there.
O, Sir, you ſhall command it, what, will a crowne ſerue you?
I think it well, what do we pay for comming in, fellowes?
Two pence, Sir.
Two pence? there's twelue pence, friend; Nay, I am a Gallant, as ſimple as I looke now; if you ſee mee with my man about me, and my Artillery, againe.
Your man was i'the Stocks, ee'n now, Sir.
Who, Numps?
Yes faith.
For what i' faith, I am glad o' that; remember to tell me on't anone; I haue enough, now! What manner of matter is this, Mr. Littlewit? What kind of Actors ha' you? Are they good Actors?
Pretty youthes, Sir, all children both old and yong, heer's the Maſter of'hem—
Call me not Leatherhead, but Lanterne.)
Maſter Lanterne, that giues light to the buſineſſe,
In good time, Sir, I would faine ſee 'hem, I would be glad drinke with the young company; which is the Tiring-houſe?
Troth, Sir, our Tiring-houſe is ſomewhat little, we are but beginners, yet, pray pardon vs; you cannot goe vpright in't.
No? not now my hat is off? what would you haue done with me, if you had had me, feather, and all, as I was once to day? Ha' you none of your pretty impudent boyes, now; to bring ſtooles, fill Tabacco, fetch Ale, and beg money, as they haue at other houſes? let me ſee ſome o'your Actors.
Shew him 'hem, ſhew him 'hem. Maſter Lanterne, this is a Gentleman, that is a fauorer of the quality.
I, the fauouring of this licencious quality, is the conſumption of many a young Gentleman; a pernicious enormity.
What, doe they liue in baskets?
They doe lye in a basket, Sir, they are o'the ſmall Players.
Theſe be Players minors, indeed. Doe you call theſe Players?
They are Actors, Sir, and as good as any, none diſprais'd, for dumb ſhowes: indeed, I am the mouth of'hem all!
Thy mouth will hold 'hem all. I thinke, one Taylor, would goe neere to beat all this company, with a hand bound behinde him.
I, and eate 'hem all, too, an' they were in cake-bread.
I thanke you for that, Maſter Littlewit, a good ieſt! which is your Burbage now?
What meane you by that, Sir?
Your beſt Actor. Your Field?
Good ifaith! you are euen with me, Sir.
This is he, that acts young Leander, Sir. He is extreamly belou'd of the womenkind, they doe ſo affect his action, the green gameſters, that come here, and this is louely Hero; this with the beard, Damon; and this pretty Pythias: this is the ghoſt of King Dionyſius in the habit of a ſcriuener: as you ſhall ſee anone, at large.
Well they are a ciuill company, I like 'hem for that; they offer not to fleere, nor geere, nor breake ieſts, as the great Players doe: And then, there goes not ſo much charge to the feaſting of'hem, or making 'hem drunke, as to the other, by reaſon of their littleneſſe. Doe they vſe to play perfect? Are they neuer fluſter'd?
No, Sir, I thanke my induſtry, and policy for it; they are as well gouern'd a company, though I ſay it—And here is young Leander, is as proper an Actor of his inches; and ſhakes his head like an hoſtler·
But doe you play it according to the printed booke? I haue read that.
By no meanes, Sir.
No? How then?
A better way, Sir, that is too learned, and poeticall for our audience; what doe they know what Helleſpont is? Guilty of true loues blood? or what Abidos is? or the other Seſtos height?
Th'art i'the right, I doe not know my ſelfe.
No, I haue entreated Maſter Littlewit, to take a little paines to reduce it to a more familiar ſtraine for our people.
How, I pray thee, good Mr Littlewit.
It pleaſes him to make a matter of it, Sir. But there is no ſuch matter I aſſure you: I haue onely made it a little eaſie, and moderne for the times, Sir, that's all; As, for the Helleſpont I imagine our Thames here; and then Leander, I make a Diers ſonne, about Puddle-wharfe: and Hero a wench o' the Banke-ſide, who going ouer one morning, to old fiſh-ſtreet; Leander ſpies her land at Trigſstayres, and falls in loue with her: Now do I introduce Cupid, hauing Metamorphos'd himſelfe into a Drawer, and he ſtrikes Hero in loue with a pint of Sherry, and other pretty paſſages there are, o' the friendſhip, that will delight you, Sir, and pleaſe you of Iudgement.
I'll be ſworne they ſhall; I am in loue with the Actors already, and I'le be allyed to them preſently. (They reſpect gentlemen, theſe fellowes) Hero ſhall be my fayring: But, which of my fayrins? (Le' me ſee) i' faith, my fiddle! and Leander my fiddle-ſticke: Then Damon, my Drum; and Pythias, my Pipe and the ghoſt of Dionyſius, my hobby-horſe. All fitted.
Looke yonder's your Cokes gotten in among his play-fellowes; I thought we could not miſſe him, at ſuch a Spectacle.
Let him alone, he is ſo buſie, he will neuer ſpie vs.
Nay, good Sir.
I warrant thee, I will not hurt her, fellow; what doſt think me vnciuill? I pray thee be not iealous: I am toward a wife.
Well good Maſter Lanterne, make ready to begin, that I may fetch my wife, and looke you be perfect, you vndoe me elſe, i'my reputation.
I warrant you Sir, doe not you breed too great an expectation of it, among your friends: that's the onely hurter of theſe things.
No, no, no.
I'll ſtay here, and ſee; pray thee let me ſee.
How diligent and troubleſome he is!
The place becomes him, me thinkes.
My ward, Miſtreſſe Grace in the company of a ſtranger? I doubt I ſhall be compell'd to diſcouer my ſelfe, before my time!
Two pence a piece Gentlemen, an excellent Motion.
Shall we haue fine fire-works, and good vapours!
Yes Captaine, and water-works, too.
I pree dee, take a care o'dy ſhmall Lady, there, Edgworth; I will looke to diſh tall Lady my ſelfe.
Welcome Gentlemen, welcome Gentlemen.
Predee, Maſhter o'de Monſhterſh, helpe a very ſicke Lady, here, to a chayre, to ſhit in.
Preſently, Sir.
Good fait now, Vrſla's Ale, and Aqua-vitae iſh to blame for't; ſhit downe ſhweet heart, ſhit downe, and ſhleep a little.
Madame, you are very welcom hither.
Yes, and you ſhall ſee very good vapours.
Here is my care come! I like to ſee him in ſo good company; and yet I wonder that perſons of ſuch faſhion, ſhould reſort hither!
This is a very priuate houſe, Madame.
Will it pleaſe your Ladiſhip ſit, Madame?
Yes good-man. They doe ſo all to be Madame mee, I thinke they thinke me a very Lady!
What elſe Madame?
Muſt I put off my maſque to him?
O, by no meanes.
How ſhould my husband know mee, then?
Husband? an idle vapour; he muſt not know you, nor you him; there's the true vapour.
Yea, I will obſerue more of this: is this a Lady, friend?
I, and dat is anoder Lady, ſhweet heart; if dou haſht a minde to 'hem giue me twelue pence from tee, and dou ſhalt haue oder-oder on 'hem!
I? This will prooue my chiefeſt enormity: I will follow this.
Is not this a finer life, Lady, then to be clogg'd with a husband?
Yes, a great deale. When will they beginne, trow? in the name o'the Motion?
By and by Madame, they ſtay but for company.
Doe you heare, Puppet. Maſter, theſe are tedious vapours; when begin you?
We ſtay but for Maſter Littlewit, the Author, who is gone for his wife; and we begin preſently.
That's I, that's I.
That was you, Lady; but now you are no ſuch poore thing.
Hang the Authors wife, a running vapour! here be Ladies, will ſtay for nere a Delia o'hem all.
But heare mee now, heere iſh one o'de Ladiſh, a ſhleep, ſtay till ſhee but vake man.
How now friends? what's heere to doe?
Two pence a piece, Sir, the beſt Motion, in the Fayre.
I beleeue you lye; if you doe, I'll haue my money againe, and beat you.
Numps is come!
Did you ſee a Maſter of mine, come in here, a tall yong Squire of Harrow o'the Hill; Maſter Bartholmew Cokes?
I thinke there be ſuch a one, within.
Looke hee be, you were beſt: but it is very likely: I wonder I found him not at all the reſt. I ha' beene at the Eagle, and the blacke Wolfe, and the Bull with the fiue legges, and two pizzles; (hee was a Calfe at Vxbridge Fayre, two yeeres agone) And at the dogges that daunce the Morrice, and the Hare o' the Taber; and miſt him at all theſe! Sure this muſt needs be ſome fine ſight, that holds him ſo, if it haue him.
Come, come, are you readie now?
Preſently, Sir.
Hoyday, hee's at worke in his Dublet, and hoſe; doe you heare, Sir? are you imploy'd? that you are bare-headed, and ſo buſie?
Hold your peace, Numpes; you ha' beene i'the ſtocks, I heare.
Do's he know that? nay, then the date of my Authority is out; I muſt thinke no longer to raigne, my gouernment is at an end. He that will correct another, muſt want fault himſelfe.
Sententious Numpes! I neuer heard ſo much from him, before.
Sure, Maſter Littlewit will not come; pleaſe you take your place, Sir, wee'll beginne.
I pray thee doe, mine eares long to be at it; and my eyes too. O Numpes, i'the ſtocks, Numps? where's your ſword, Numps?
I pray intend your game, Sir, let mee alone.
Well, then we are quit for all. Come, ſit downe, Numps; I'le interpret to thee: did you ſee Miſtreſſe Grace? it's no matter, neither, now, I thinke on't, tell me anon.
A great deale of loue, and care hee expreſſes.
Alas! would you haue him expreſſe more then hee has? that were tyranny.
Peace, ho; now, now.
Gentles, that no longer your expectations may wander,
Behold our chiefe Actor, amorous Leander.
With a great deale of cloth lap'd about him like a Scarfe,
For he yet ſerues his father, a Dyer at Puddle wharfe,
VVhich place wee'll make bold with, to call our Abidus,
As the Banke-ſide is our Seſtos, and let it not be deny'd vs.
Now, as hee is beating, to make the Dye take the fuller,
Who chances to come by, but faire Hero, in a Sculler;
And ſeeing Leanders naked legge, and goodly calfe,
Caſt at him, from the boat, a Sheepes eye, and a halfe.
Now ſhe is landed, and the Sculler come backe;
By and by, you ſhall ſee what Leander doth lacke.
Cole, Cole, old Cole.
That's the Scullers name without controle:
Cole, Cole, I ſay, Cole.
Wee doe heare you.
Old Cole.
Old Cole? is the Dyer turn'd Collier? how doe you ſell?
A pox o' you manners, kiſſe my hole here and ſmell.
Kiſſe your hole and ſmell? there's manners indeed.
VVhy, Cole, I ſay Cole.
It's the Sculler you need!
I, and be hang'd.
Be hang'd; looke you yonder,
Old Cole, you muſt go hang with Maſter Leander.
Where is he?
Here, Cole, what fayereſt of Fayers,
was that fare, that thou landedſt but now a Trigsſtayres?
What was that, fellow? Pray thee tell me, I ſcarſe vnderſtand 'hem.
Leander do's aske, Sir, what fayreſt of Fayers,
Was the fare thhe landed, but now, at Trigsſtayers?
It is loely Hero.
Nero?
No, Hero.
It is Hero.
Of the Bankſide, he ſaith, to tell you truthwith out erring,
Is come ouer into Fiſh-ſtreet to eat ſome freſh herring.
Leander ſayes no more, but as faſt as he can,
Gets on all his beſt cloathes; and will after to the Swan.
Moſt admirable good, is't not?
Stay, Sculler.
What ſay you?
You muſt ſtay for Leander,
and carry him to the wench.
You Rogue, I am no Pandar.
He ſayes he is no Pandar. 'Tis a fine language; I vnderſtand it, now.
Are you no Pandar, Goodman Cole? heer's no man ſayes you are,
You'll grow a hot Cole, it ſeemes, pray you ſtay for your fare.
Will hee come away?
What doe you ſay?
I'de ha' him come away.
VVould you ha' Leander come away? why 'pray' Sir, ſtay.
You are angry, Goodman Cole; I beleeue the faire Mayd
Came ouer w' you a' truſt: tell vs Sculler, are you paid.
Yes Goodman Hogrubber, o' Pickt-hatch.
How, Hogrubber, o' Pickt-hatch?
I Hogrubber o' Pickt-hatch. Take you that.
O, my head!
Harme watch, harme catch.
Harme watch, harme catch, he ſayes: verygood i' faith, the Sculler had like to ha' knock'd you, ſirrah.
Yes, but that his fare call'd him away.
Row apace, row apace, row, row, row, row, row.
You are knauiſhly loaden, Sculler, take heed where you goe.
Knaue i' your face, Goodman Rogue.
Row, row, row, row, row, row.
Hee ſaid knaue i' your face, friend.
I Sir, I heard him. But there's no talking to theſe water-men, they will ha' the laſt word
God's my life! I am not allied to the Sculler, yet; hee ſhall be Dauphin my boy. But my Fiddle-ſticke do's fiddle in and out too much; I pray thee ſpeake to him, on't: tell him, I would haue him tarry in my ſight, more.
I Pray you be content; you'll haue enough on him, Sir. Now gentles, I take it, here is none of you ſo ſtupid, but that you haue heard of a little god of loue, call'd Cupid. VVho out of kindnes to Leander, hearing he but ſaw her, this preſent day and houre, doth turne himſelfe to a Drawer. And becauſe, he would haue their firſt meeting to be merry, he ſtrikes Hero in loue to him, with a pint of Sherry. VVhich he tells her, from amorous Leander is ſent her, who after him, into the roome of Hero, doth venter.
A pint of ſacke, ſcore a pint of ſacke, i' the Conney.
Sack? you ſaid but ee'n now it ſhould be Sherry.
Why ſo it is; ſherry, ſherry, ſherry.
Sherry, ſherry, ſherry. By my troth he makes me merry. I muſt haue a name for Cupid, too. Let me ſee, thou mightſt helpe me now, an' thou wouldeſt, Numps, at a dead lift, but thou art dreaming o' the ſtocks, ſtill! Do not thinke on't, I haue forgot it: 'tis but a nine dayes wonder, man; let it not trouble thee.
I would the ſtocks were about your necke, Sir; condition I hung by the heeles in them, till the wonder were off from you, with all my heart.
Well ſaid reſolute Numps: but hearke you friend, where is the friendſhip, all this while, betweene my Drum, Damon; and my Pipe, Pythias?
You ſhall ſee by and by, Sir?
You thinke my Hobby-horſe is forgotten, too; no, I'll ſee 'hem all enact before I go; I ſhall not know which to loue beſt, elſe
This Gallant has interrupting vapours, troubleſome vapours, Whitt, puffe with him.
No, I pre dee, Captaine, let him alone. Hee is a Child i' faith, la'.
Now gentles, to the freinds, who in number, are two,
and lodg'd in that Ale-houſe, in which faire Hero do's doe.
Damon ('for ſome kindneſſe done him the laſt weeke)
is come faire Hero, in Fiſh-ſtreete, this morning to ſeeke:
Pythias do's ſmell the knauery of the meeting,
and now you ſhall ſee their true friendly greeting.
You whore-maſterly Slaue, you·
Whore-maſterly ſlaue, you? very friendly, & familiar, that.
Whore-maſter i' thy face,
Thou haſt lien with her thy ſelfe, I'll proue't i' this place.
Damon ſayes Pythias has lien with her, himſelfe, hee'll prooue't in this place.
They are Whore-maſters both, Sir, that's a plaine caſe.
You lye, like a Rogue.
Doe I ly, like a Rogue?
A Pimpe, and a Scabbe.
A Pimpe, and a Scabbe?
I ſay between you, you haue both but one Drabbe.
You lye againe.
Doe I lye againe?
Like a Rogue againe.
Like a Rogue againe?
And you are a Pimpe, againe.
And you are a Pimpe againe, he ſayes.
And a Scabbe, againe.
And a Scabbe againe, he ſayes.
And I ſay againe, you are both whore-maſters againe,
and you haue both but one Drabbe againe.
Do'ſt thou, do'ſt thou, do'ſt thou?
What, both at once?
Downe with him, Damon
Pinke his guts, Pythias:
What, ſo malicious?
will ye murder me, Maſters both, i' mine owne houſe?
Ho! well acted my Drum, well acted my Pipe, well acted ſtill.
Well acted, with all my heart.
Hld, hold your hands
I, both your hands, for my ſake! for you ha' both donewell.
Gramercy pure Pythias.
Gramercy, Deare Damon.
Gramercy to you both, my Pipe, and my drum.
Come now wee'll together to breakfaſt to Hero.
'Tis well, you can now go to breakfaſt to Hero,
you haue giuen mmy breakfaſt, with a hone and honero.
How is't friend, ha' they hurt thee?
O no!
Betweene you and I Sir, we doe but make ſhow.
Thus Gentles you perceiue, without any deniall,
'twixt Damon and Pythias here, friendſhips true tryall.
Though hourely they quarrell thus, and roare each with other,
they fight you no more, then do's brother with brother.
But friendly together, at the next man they meet,
they let fly their anger as here you might ſee't.
Well, we haue ſeen't, and thou haſt felt it, whatſoeuer thou ſayeſt, what's next? what's next?
This while young Leander, with faire Hero is drinking,
and Hero growne drunke, to any mans thinking!
Yet was it not three pints of Sherry could flaw her.
till Cupid diſtinguiſh'd like Ionas the Drawer,
From vnder his apron, where his lechery lurkes,
put loue in her Sacke. Now marke how it workes.
O Leander Leander, my deare my deare Leander,
I'le for euer be thy gooſe, ſo thou'lt be my gander▪
Excellently well ſaid, Fiddle, ſhee'll euer be his gooſe, ſo hee'll be her gander: was't not ſo?
Yes, Sir, but marke his anſwer, now:
And ſweeteſt of geeſe, before I goe to bed,
I'll ſwimme o're the Thames, my gooſe, thee to tread.
Braue! he will ſwimme o're the Thames, and tread his gooſe, too night, he ſayes.
I, peace, Sir, the'll be angry, if they heare you eaueſ-dropping, now they are ſetting their match.
But leſt the Thames ſhould be dark, my gooſe, my deare friend,
let thy window be prouided of a candles end.
Feare not my gander, I proteſt, I ſhould handle
my matters very ill, if I had not a whole candle.
Well then, looke to't, and kiſſe me to boote.
Now, heere come the friends againe, Pythias, aend Damon,
and vnder their clokes, they haue of Bacon, a gammon.
Drawer, fill ſome wine heere.
How, ſome wine there?
there's company already, Sir, pray forbeare!
'Tis Hero.
Yes, but ſhee will not be taken,
after acke, and freſh herring, with your Dunmow-bacon.
You lye, it's Weſtfabian.
Westphalian you ſhould ſay.
If you hold not your peace, you are a Coxcombe, I would ſay.
What's here? what's here? kiſſe, kiſſe, vpon kiſſe.
I, Wherefore ſhould they not? what harme is in this? 'tis Miſtreſſe Hero.
Miſtreſſe Hero's a whore.
Is ſhee a whore? keepe you quiet, or Sir Knaue out of dore.
Knaue out of doore?
Yes, Knaue, out of doore.
Whore out of doore.
I ſay, Knaue, out of doore.
I ſay, whore, out of doore.
Yea, ſo ſay I too.
Kiſſe the whore o'the arſe.
Now you ha' ſomething to doe:
you muſt kiſſe her o' the arſe ſhee ſayes:
So we will, ſo we will.
O my hanches, O my hanches, hold, hold.
Stand'ſt thou ſtill?
Leander, where art thou? ſtand'ſt thou ſtill like a ſot,
and not offer'ſt to breake both their heads with a pot?
See who's at thine elbow, there! Puppet Ionas and Cupid.
Vpon'hem Leander, be not ſo ſtupid.
You Goat-bearded ſlaue!
You whore-master Knaue.
Thou art a whore-maſter.
Whore-maſters all.
See, Cupid with a word has tane vp the brawle.
Theſe be fine vapours!
By this good day they fight brauely! doe they not, Numps?
Yes, they lack'd but you to be their ſecond, all this while.
This tragicall encounter, falling out thus to buſie vs,
It raiſes vp the ghoſt of their friend Dionyſius:
Not like a Monarch, but the Maſter of a Schoole,
in a Scriueners furr'd gowne, which ſhewes he is no foole.
for therein he hath wit enough to keepe himſelfe warme.
O Damon he cries, and Pythias; what harme,
Hath poore Dionyſius done you in his graue,
That after his death, you ſhould fall out thus, and raue,
And call amorous Leander whore-maſter Knaue?
I cannot, I will not, I promiſe you endure it.
Downe with Dagon, downe with Dagon; 'tis I, will no longer endure your prophanations.
What meane you, Sir?
I wil remoue Dagon there, I ſay, that Idoll, that heatheniſh Idoll, that remaines (as I may ſay) a beame, a very beame, not a beame of the Sunne, nor a beame of the Moone, nor a beame of a ballance, neither a houſe-beame, nor a Weauers beame, but a beame in the eye, in the eye of the brethren; a very great beame, an exceeding great beame; ſuch as are your Stage-players, Rimers, and Morriſe-dancers, who haue walked hand in hand, in contempt of the Brethren, and the Cauſe; and beene borne out by inſtruments, of no meane countenance.
Sir, I preſent nothing, but what is licens'd by authority.
Thou art all licenſe, euen licentiouſneſſe it ſelfe, Shimei!
I haue the Maſter of the Reuell's haud for't, Sir.
The Maſter of Rebells hand, thou haſt; Satan's! hold thy peace, thy ſcurrility ſhut vp thy mouth, thy profeſſion is damnable, and in pleading for it, thou doſt plead for Baal. I haue long opened my mouth wide, and gaped, I haue gaped as the oyſter for the tide, after thy deſtruction: but cannot compaſſe it by ſute, or diſpute; ſo that I looke for a bickering, ere long, and then a battell.
Good Banbury-vapours.
Friend, you'ld haue an ill match on't, if you bicker with him here, though he be no man o'the fiſt, hee has friends that will goe to cuffes for him, Numps, will not you take our ſide?
Sir, it ſhall not need, in my minde, he offers him a fairer courſe, to end it by diſputation! haſt thou nothing to ſay for thy ſelfe, in defence of thy quality?
Faith, Sir, I am not well ſtudied in theſe controuerſies, betweene the hypocrites and vs. But here's one of my Motion, Puppet Doniſius ſhall vndertake him, and I'le venture the cauſe on't.
Who? my Hobby-horſe? will he diſpute with him?
Yes, Sir, and make a Hobby-Aſſe of him, I hope.
That's excellent! indeed he lookes like the beſt ſcholler of'hem all. Come, Sir, you muſt be as good as your word, now.
I will not feare to make my ſpirit, and gifts knowne! aſſiſt me zeale, fill me, fill me, hat is, make me full.
What a deſperate, prophane wretch is this! is there any Ignorance, or impudence like his? to call his zeale to fill him againſt a Puppet?
I know no fitter match, then a Puppet to commit with an Hypocrite!
Firſt, I ſay vnto thee, Idoll, thou haſt no Calling.
You lie, I am call'd Dioniſius.
The Motion ſayes you lie, he is call'd Dioniſius ithe matter, and to that calling he anſwers.
I meane no vocation, Idoll, no preſent lawfull Calling.
Is yours a lawfull Calling?
The Motion asketh, if yours be a lawfull Calling?
Yes, mine is of the Spirit.
Then Idoll is a lawfull Calling.
He ſaies, then Idoll is a lawfull Calling! for you call'd him Idoll, and your Calling is of the ſpirit.
Well diſputed, Hobby-horſe!
Take not part with the wicked young Gallant. He neygheth and hinneyeth, all is but hinnying Sophiſtry. I call him Idoll againe. Yet, I ſay, his Calling, his Profeſſion is prophane, it is prophane, Idoll.
It is not prophane!
It is not prophane, he ſayes▪
It is prophane.
It is not prophane.
It is prophane.
It is not prophane.
Well ſaid, confute him with not, ſtill. You cannot beare him downe with your baſe noyſe, Sir.
Nor he me, with his treble creeking, though he creeke like the chariot wheeles of Satan; I am zealous for the Cauſe—
As a dog for a bone.
And I ſay, it is prophane, as being the Page of Pride, and the waiting woman of vanity.
Yea? what ſay you to your Tire-women, then?
Good.
Or feather-makers i' the Fryers, that are o' your faction of faith? Are not they with their perrukes, and their puffes, their fannes, and their huffes, as much Pages of Pride, and waiters vpon vanity? what ſay you? what ſay you? what ſay you?
I will not anſwer for them.
Becauſe you cannot, becauſe you cannot. Is a Bugle-maker a lawfull Calling? or the Confect-makers? ſuch you haue there: or your French Faſhioner? you'ld haue all the ſinne within your ſelues, would you not? would you not?
No, Dagon.
What then, Dagonet? is a Puppet worſe then theſe?
Yes, and my maine argument againſt you, is, that you are an abomination: for the Male, among you, putteth on the apparell of the Female, and the Female of the Male.
You lye, you lye, you lye abominably.
Good, by my troth, he has giuen him the lye thrice.
It is your old ſtale argument againſt the Players, but it will not hold againſt the Puppets; for we haue neyther Male nor Female amongst vs. And that thou may'ſt ſee, if thou wilt, like a malicious purblinde zeale as thou art!
By my faith, there he has anſwer'd you, friend; by playne demonſtration.
Nay, I'le proue, againſt ere a Rabbin of'hem all, that my ſtanding is as lawfull as his; that I ſpeak by inſpiration, as well as he; that I haue as little to doe with learning as he; and doe ſcorne her helps as much as he.
I am confuted, the Cauſe hath failed me.
Then be conuerted, be conuerted.
Be conuerted, I pray you, and let the Play goe on!
Let it goe on. For I am changed, and will become a beholder with you!
That's braue i'faith, thou haſt carryed it away, Hobby-horſe, on with the Play!
Stay, now do I forbid, I Adam Ouerdoo! ſit ſtill, I charge you.
What, my Brother i'law!
My wiſe Guardian!
Iuſtice Ouerdoo!
It is time, to take Enormity by the fore head, and brand it; for, I haue diſcouer'd enough.
Nay, come Miſtreſſe Bride. You muſt doe as I doe, now. You muſt be mad with mee, in truth. I haue heere Iustice Ouerdoo for it.
Peace good Trouble-all; come hither, and you ſhall trouble none. I will take the charge of you, and your friend too, you alſo, young man ſhall be my care, ſtand there.
Now, mercy vpon mee.
Would we were away, Whit, theſe are dangerous vapours, beſt fall off with our birds, for feare o'the Cage.
Stay, is not my name your terror?
Yeſh faith man, and it iſh fot tat, we would be gone man.
O Gentlemen! did you not ſee a wife of mine? I ha' loſt my little wife, as I ſhall be truſted: my little pretty Win, I left her at the great woman's houſe in truſt yonder, the Pig-womans, with Captaine Iordan, and Captaine Whit, very good men, and I cannot heare of her. Poore foole, I feare ſhee's ſtepp'd aſide. Mother, did you not ſee Win?
If this graue Matron be your mother, Sir, ſtand by her, Et digito compeſce labellum, I may perhaps ſpring a wife for you, anone. Brother Bartholmew, I am ſadly ſorry, to ſee you ſo lightly giuen, and ſuch a Diſciple of enormity: with your graue Gouernour Humphrey: but ſtand you both there, in the middle place; I will reprehend you in your courſe. Miſtreſſe Grace, let me reſcue you out of the hands of the ſtranger.
Pardon me, Sir, I am a kinſman of hers.
Are you ſo? of what name, Sir?
Winwife, Sir:
Maſter Winwife? I hope you haue won no wife of her, Sir. If you haue, I will examine the poſſibility of it, at fit leaſure. Now, to my enormities: looke vpon mee, O London! and ſee mee, O Smithfield; The example of Iuſtice, and Mirror of Magiſtrates: the true top of formality, and ſcourge of enormity. Harken vnto my labours, and but obſerue my diſcoueries; and compare Hercules with me, if thou dar'ſt, of old; or Columbus; Magellan; or our countrey man Drake of later times: ſtand forth you weedes of enormity, and ſpread. Firſt, Rabbi Buſy, thou ſuperlunaticall hypocrite, next, thou other extremity, thou prophane profeſſor of Puppetry, little better then Poetry: then thou ſtrong Debaucher, and Seducer of youth; witneſſe this eaſie and honeſt young man: now thou Eſquire of Dames, Madams, and twelue-penny Ladies: now my greene Madame her ſelfe, of the price. Let mee vnmaſque your Ladiſhip.
O my wife, my wife, my wife!
Is ſhe your wife? Redde te Harpocratem!
By your leaue, ſtand by my Maſters, be vncouer'd.
O ſtay him, ſtay him, helpe to cry, Nightingale; my pan, my panne.
What's the matter?
Hee has ſtolne gammar Vrſla's panne.
Yes, and I feare no man but Iuſtice Ouerdoo.
Vrſla? where is ſhe? O the Sow of enormity, this! welcome, ſtand you there, you Songſter, there.
An' pleaſe your worſhip, I'am in no fault: A Gentleman ſtripp'd him in my Booth, and borrow'd his gown, and his hat; and hee ranne away with my goods, here, for it.
Then this is the true mad-man, and you are the enormity!
You are i'the right, I am mad, but from the gowne outward.
Stand you there.
Where you pleaſe, Sir.
O lend me a baſon, I am ſicke, I am ſicke; where's Mr. Ouerdoo? Bridget, call hither my Adam.
How?
Dy very owne wife, i'fait, worſhipfull Adam.
Will not my Adam come at mee? ſhall I ſee him no more then?
Sir, why doe you not goe on with the enormity? are you oppreſt with it? I'le helpe you: harke you Sir, i'your eare, your Innocent young man, you haue tane ſuch care of, all this day, is a Cutpurſe; that hath got all your brother Cokes his things, and help'd you to your beating, and the ſtocks; if you haue a minde to hang him now, and ſhew him your Magiſtrates wit, you may: but I ſhould think it were better, recouering the goods, and to ſaue your eſtimation in him. I thank you Sr. for the gift of your Ward, Mrs. Grace: look you, here is your hand & ſeale, by the way. Mr. Win-wife giue you ioy, you are Palemon, you are poſſeſt o'the Gentlewoman, but ſhe muſt pay me value, here's warrant for it. And honeſt mad-man, there's thy gowne, and cap againe; I thanke thee for my wife. Nay, I can be mad, ſweet heart, when I pleaſe, ſtill; neuer feare me: And carefull Numps, where's he? I thanke him for my licence.
How!
'Tis true, Numps.
I'll be hang'd then.
Loke i'your boxe, Numps, nay, Sir, ſtand not you fixt here, like a ſtake in Finsbury to be ſhot at, or the whipping poſt i'the Fayre, but get your wife out o'the ayre, it wil make her worſe elſe; and remember you are but Adam, Fleſh, and blood! you haue your frailty, forget your other name of Ouerdoo, and inuite vs all to ſupper. There you and I will compare our diſcoueries; and drowne the memory of all enormity in your bigg'ſt bowle at home.
How now, Numps, ha' you loſt it? I warrant, 'twas when thou wert i'the ſtocks: why doſt not ſpeake?
I will neuer ſpeak while I liue, againe, for ought I know.
Nay, Humphrey, if I be patient, you muſt be ſo too; this pleaſant conceited Gentleman hath wrought vpon my iudgement, and preuail'd: I pray you take care of your ſicke friend, Miſtreſſe Alice, and my good friends all—
And no enormities.
I inuite you home, with mee to my houſe, to ſupper: I will haue none feare to go along, for my intents are Ad correctionem, non ad deſtructionem; Ad aedificandum, non ad diruendum: ſo lead on.
Yes, and bring the Actors along, wee'll ha'the reſt o'the Play at home.
YOur Maieſty hath ſeene the Play, and you
can beſt allow it from your eare, and view.
You know the ſcope of Writers, and what ſtore,
of leaue is giuen them, if they take not more,
And turne it into licence: you can tell
if we haue vs'd that leaue you gaue vs, well:
Or whether wee to rage, or licence breake,
or be prophane, or make prophane men ſpeake?
This is your power to iudge (great Sir) and not
the enuy of a few. Which if wee haue got,
Wee value leſſe what their diſlike can bring,
if it ſo happy be, t' haue pleas'd the King.