FOr your owne ſake, not ours—
Come Goſsip, be not aſham'd. The Play is the Staple of Newes, and you are the Miſtreſſe, and Lady of Tatle, let's ha' your opinion of it: Do you heare Gentleman? what are you? Gentleman-vſher to the Play? pray you helpe vs to ſome ſtooles here.
Where? o' the Stage, Ladies?
Yes, o' the Stage; wee are perſons of quality, I aſſure you, and women of faſhion; and come to ſee, and to be ſeene: My Goſſip Tatle here, and Goſsip Expectation, and my Goſsip Cenſure, and I am Mirth, the daughter of Chriſtmas, and ſpirit of Shrouetide. They ſay, It's merry when Goſſips meet, I hope your Play will be a merry one!
Or you will make it ſuch, Ladies. Bring a forme here, but what will the Noblemen thinke, or the graue Wits here, to ſee you ſeated on the bench thus?
Why, what ſhould they thinke? but that they had Mothers, as we had, and thoſe Mothers had Goſsips (if their children were chriſtned) as we are, and ſuch as had a longing to ſee Playes, and ſit vpon them, as wee doe, and arraigne both them, and their Poëts.
O! Is that your purpoſe? Why, Mrs. Mirth, and Madame Tatle, enioy your delights freely.
Looke your Newes be new, and freſh, Mr. Prologue, and vntainted, I ſhall find them elſe, if they be ſtale, or flye-blowne, quickly!
Wee aske no fauour from you, onely wee would entreate of Madame Expectation—
What, Mr. Prologue?
That your Ladi-ſhip would expect no more then you vnderſtand.
Sir, I can expect enough!
I feare too much, Lady, and teach others to do the like?
I can doe that too, if I haue cauſe.
Cry you mercy, you neuer did wrong, but with iuſt cauſe. What's this, Lady?
Curioſity, my Lady Cenſure.
O Curioſity! you come to ſee, who weares the new ſute to day? whoſe clothes are beſt penn'd, what euer the part be? which Actor has the beſt legge and foote? what King playes without cuffes? and his Queene without gloues? who rides poſt in ſtockings? and daunces in bootes?
Yes, and which amorous Prince makes loue in drinke, or doe's ouer-act prodigiouſly in beaten ſatten▪ and, hauing got the tricke on't, will be monſtrous ſtill, in deſpight of Counſell!
Mend your lights, Gentlemen. Maſter Prologue, beginne.
Ay me!
Who's that?
Nay, ſtart not Ladies, theſe carry no fire-workes to fright you, but a Torch i' their hands, to giue light to the buſineſſe. The truth is, there are a ſet of gameſters within, in trauell of a thing call'd a Play, and would faine be deliuer'd of it: and they haue intreated me to be their Man-Midwife, the Prologue; for they are like to haue a hard labour on't.
Then the Poet has abus'd himſelfe, like an Aſſe, as hee is.
No, his Actors will abuſe him enough, or I am deceiu'd. Yonder he is within (I was i' the Tiring-houſe a while to ſee the Actors dreſt) rowling himſelfe vp and downe like a tun, i' the midſt of 'hem, and ſpurges, neuer did veſſel of wort, or wine worke ſo! His ſweating put me in minde of a good Shrouing diſh (and I beleeue would be taken vp for a ſeruice of ſtate ſomewhere, an't were knowne) a ſtew'd Poet! He doth ſit like an vnbrac'd Drum with one of his heads beaten out: For, that you muſt note, a Poet hath two heads, as a Drum has, one for making, the other repeating, and his repeating head is all to pieces: they may gather it vp i' the tiring-houſe; for hee hath torne the booke in a Poeticall fury, and put himſelfe to ſilence in dead Sacke, which, were there no other vexation, were ſufficient to make him the moſt miſerable Embleme of patience.
The Prologue, peace.
GRamercie Letherleg: Get me the Spurrier,
And thou haſt fitted me.
I'll do't preſently.
Look to me, wit, and look to my wit, Land,
That is, looke on me, and with all thine eyes,
Male, Female, yea, Hermaphroditicke eyes,
And thoſe bring all your helpes, and perſpicills,
To ſee me at beſt aduantage, and augment
My forme as I come forth, for I doe feele
I will be one, worth looking after, ſhortly.
Now, by and by, that's ſhortly. 't ſtrikes! One, two,
Three, foure, fiue, ſix. Inough, inough, deare watch,
Thy pulſe hath beate inough. Now ſleepe, and reſt;
Would thou couldſt make the time to doe ſo too:
I'll winde thee vp no more. The houre is come
So long expected! There, there, drop my wardſhip,
My pupill age, and vaſſalage together.
And Liberty, come throw thy ſelfe about me,
In a rich ſuite, cloake, hat, and band, for now
I'le ſue out no mans Liuery, but miny owne,
I ſtand on my owne feete, ſo much a yeere,
Right, round, and ſound, the Lord of mine owne ground,
And (to ryme to it) threeſcore thouſand Pound!
Not come? Not yet? Taylor thou art a vermine,
Worſe then the ſame thou proſecut'ſt, and prick'ſt
In ſubtill ſeame— (Go too, I ſay no more)
Thus to retard my longings: on the day
I doe write man, to beat thee. One and twenty,
Since the clock ſtrooke, compleat! and thou wilt feele it
Thou fooliſh Animall! I could pitty him,
(An' I were not heartily angry with him now)
For this one peece of folly he beares about him,
To dare to tempt the Furie of an heyre,
T' aboue two thouſand a yeere; yet hope his cuſtome!
Well, Mr. Faſhioner, theres ſome muſt breake—
A head, for this your breaking. Are you come, Sir,
GOd giue your worſhip ioy.
What? of your ſtaying?
And leauing me to ſtalke here in my trowſes,
Like a tame Her'n-few for you?
I but waited
Below, till the clocke ſtrooke.
Why, if you had come
Before a quarter, would it ſo haue hurt you,
In reputation, to haue wayted here?
No, but your worſhip might haue pleaded nonage,
If you had got 'hem on, ere I could make
Iuſt Affidauit of the time.
That ieſt
Has gain'd thy pardon, thou had'ſt liu'd, condemn'd
To thine owne hell elſe, neuer to haue wrought
Stitch more for me, or any Peniboy,
I could haue hindred thee: but now thou art mine.
For one and twenty yeeres, or for three liues,
Chuſe which thou wilt, I'll make thee a Copy-holder,
And thy firſt Bill vnqueſtion'd. Helpe me on.
Preſently, Sir, I am bound vnto your worſhip.
Thou ſhalt be, when I haue ſeal'd thee a Leaſe of my Cuſtome.
Your worps. Barbar is without.
Who? Thom?
Come in Thom: ſet thy things vpon the Boord
And ſpread thy clothes, lay all forth in procinctu,
And tell's what newes?
O Sir, a ſtaple of newes!
Or the New Staple, which you pleaſe.
What's that?
An Office, Sir, a braue young Office ſet vp.
I had forgot to tell your worſhip.
For what?
To enter all the Newes, Sir, o' the time,
And vent it as occaſion ſerues! A place
Of huge commerce it will be!
Pray thee peace,
I cannot abide a talking Taylor: let Thom
(He's a Barber) by his place relate it,
What is't, an Office, Thom?
Newly erected
Here in the houſe, almoſt on the ſame floore,
Where all the newes of all ſorts ſhall be brought,
And there be examin'd, and then regiſtred,
And ſo be iſſu'd vnder the Seale of the Office,
As Staple Newes; no other newes be currant.
'Fore me, thou ſpeak'ſt of a braue buſines, Thom.
Nay, if you knew the brain that hatch'd it Sr—
I know thee wel inough: giue him a loaf, Thom—
Quiet his mouth, that Ouen will be venting elſe.
Proceed—
He tels you true Sr. Mr Cymbal,
Is Maſter of the Office, he proiected it,
Hee lies here i'the houſe: and the great roomes
He has taken for the Office, and ſet vp
His Deskes and Claſſes, Tables and his Shelues,
He's my Cuſtomer, and a Wit Sir, too.
But, h'has braue wits vnder him—
Yes, foure Emiſſaries,
Emiſſaries? ſtay, there's a fine new word, Thom!
'Pray God it ſignifie any thing, what are Emiſſaries?
Men imploy'd outward, that are ſent abroad
To fetch in the commodity.
From all regions
Where the beſt newes are made.
Or vented forth.
By way of exchange, or trade.
Nay, thou wilt ſpeak—
My ſhare Sr. there's enough for both.
Goe on then,
Speake all thou canſt: me thinkes, the ordinaries
Should helpe them much.
Sir, they haue ordinaries,
And extraordinaries, as many changes,
And variations, as there are points i'the compaſſe.
But the 4. Cardinall Quarters—
I, thoſe Thom—
The Court, Sir, Pauls, Exchange, and Weſtminſter-hall.
Who is the Chiefe? which hath preceedencie?
The gouernour o'the Staple, Maſter Cymball.
He is the Chiefe; and after him the Emiſſaries:
Firſt Emiſſary Court, one Maſter Fitton,
He's a Ieerer too.
What's that?
A Wit.
Or halfe a Wit, ſome of them are Halfe-wits,
Two to a Wit, there are a ſet of 'hem.
Then Maſter Ambler, Emiſſary Paules,
A fine pac'd gentleman, as you ſhall ſee, walke
The middle Ile: And then my Froy Hans Buz,
A Dutch-man; he's Emiſſary Exhange.
I had thought Mr. Burſt the Marchant had had it.
No,
He has a rupture, hee has ſprung a leake,
Emiſſarie Weſtminſter's vndiſpos'd of yet;
Then the Examiner, Regiſter, and two Clerkes,
They mannage all at home, and ſort, and file,
And ſeale the newes, and iſſue them.
Thom, deare Thom.
What may my means doe for thee, aske, and haue it,
I'd faine be doing ſome good. It is my birth-day.
And I'd doe it betimes, I feele a grudging
Of bounty, and I would not long lye fallow.
I pray thee thinke, and ſpeake, or wiſh for ſomething.
I would I had but one o' the Clerkes places,
I'this Newes Office,.
Thou ſhalt haue it, Thom,
If ſiluer, or gold will fetch it; what's the rate?
At what is't ſet i'the Mercat?
Fiftie pound, Sir.
An't were a hundred, Thom, thou ſhalt not want it.
O Noble Maſter!
How now Aeſops Aſſe!
Becauſe I play with Thom, muſt I needes runne
Into your rude embraces? ſtand you ſtill, Sir;
Clownes fawnings, are a horſes ſalutations.
How do'ſt thou like my ſuite, Thom?
Mr Faſhioner
Has hit your meaſures, Sir, h'has moulded you,
And made you, as they ſay.
No, no, not I,
I am an Aſſe, old Aeſops Aſſe.
Nay, Faſhioner,
I can doe thee a good turne too, be not muſty,
Though thou haſt moulded me, as little Thom ſayes,
(I thinke thou haſt put me in mouldy pockets.)
As good,
Right Spaniſh perfume, the Lady Eſtifania's,
They coſt twelue pound a payre.
Thy bill will ſay ſo.
I pray thee tell me, Faſhioner, what Authors
Thou read'ſt to helpe thy inuention? Italian prints?
Or Arras hangings? They are Taylors Libraries.
I ſcorne ſuch helps.
O, though thou art a ſilk-worme!
And deal'ſt in ſattins and veluets, and rich pluſhes,
Thou canſt not ſpin all formes out of thy ſelfe;
They are quite other things: I thinke this ſuite
Has made me wittier, then I was.
Belieue it Sir,
That clothes doe much vpon the wit, as weather
Do's on the braine; and thence comes your prouerbe;
The Taylor makes the man: I ſpeake by experience
Of my owne Cuſtomers. I haue had Gallants,
Both Court and Countrey, would ha' fool'd you vp
In a new ſuite, with the beſt wits, in being,
And kept their ſpeed, as long as their clothes laſted
Han'ſome, and neate; but then as they grew out
At the elbowes againe, or had a ſtaine, or ſpot,
They haue ſunke moſt wretchedly.
What thou reportſt,
Is but the common calamity, and ſeene daily;
And therefore you 'haue another anſwering prouerbe:
A broken ſleeue keepes the arme backe,
'Tis true, Sir.
And thence wee ſay, that ſuch a one playes at peepe-arme.
Doe you ſo? it is wittily ſayd. I wonder, Gentlemen,
And men of meanes will not maintaine themſelues
Freſher in wit, I meane in clothes, to the higheſt.
For hee that's out o' clothes, is out o'faſhion,
And out of faſhion, is out of countenance,
And out o' countenance, is out o' Wit.
Is not Rogue Haberdaſher come?
Yes, here, Sir.
I ha' beene without this halfe houre.
Giue me my hat.
Put on my Girdle. Raſcall, ſits my Ruffe well?
In print.
Slaue.
See your ſelfe.
Is this ſame hat
O'the blocke paſſant? Doe not anſwer mee,
I cannot ſtay for an anſwer. I doe feele
The powers of one and twenty, like a Tide
Flow in vpon mee, and perceiue an Heyre,
Can Coniure vp all ſpirits in all circles,
Rogue, Raſcall, Slaue, giue tradeſmen their true names,
And they appeare to 'hem preſently.
For profit.
Come, caſt my cloake about me, I'll goe ſee,
This Office Thom, and be trimm'd afterwards.
I'll put thee in poſſeſſion, my prime worke!
Gods ſo: my Spurrier! put 'hem on boy, quickly,
I'had like to ha loſt my Spurres with too much ſpeed.
Good morning to my Ioy, My iolly Peni-boy!
The Lord, and the Prince of plenty!
I come to ſee what riches, Thou beareſt in thy breeches,
The firſt of thy one and twenty:
What, doe thy pockets gingle? Or ſhall wee neede to mingle
Our ſtrength both of foote, and horſes!
Theſe fellows looke ſo eager, As if they would beleaguer
An Heyre in the midſt of his forces!
I hope they be no Serieants! That hang vpon thy margents.
This Rogue has the Ioule of a Iaylor!
O Founder, no ſuch matter, My Spurrier, and my Hatter,
My Linnen man, and my Taylor.
Thou ſhould'ſt haue beene brought in too, Shoomaker,
If the time had beene longer, and Thom Barber.
How do'ſt thou like my company, old Canter?
Doe I not muſter a braue troupe? all Bill-men?
Preſent your Armes, before my Founder here,
This is my Founder, this ſame learned Canter!
He brought me the firſt newes of my fathers death,
I thanke him, and euer ſince, I call him Founder,
Worſhip him, boyes, I'll read onely the ſummes.
And paſſe 'hem ſtreight.
Now Ale.
And ſtrong Ale bleſſe him.
Gods ſo, ſome Ale, and Sugar for my Founder!
Good Bills, ſufficient Bills, theſe Bills may paſſe.
I do not like thoſe paper-ſquibs, good Maſter.
They may vndoe your ſtore, I meane, of Credit,
And fire your Arſenall, if caſe you doe not
In time make good thoſe outerworkes, your pockets,
And take a Garriſon in of ſome two hundred,
To beat theſe Pyoners off, that carry a Mine
Would blow you vp, at laſt. Secure your Caſamates,
Here Maſter Picklocke, Sir, your man o' Law,
And learn'd Atturney, has ſent you a Bag of munition.
What is't?
Three hundred pieces.
I'll diſpatch 'hem.
Do, I would haue your ſtrengths lin'd, and perfum'd
With Gold, as well as Amber.
God a mercy,
Come, Ad ſoluendum, boyes! there, there, and there, &c.
I looke on nothing but Totalis.
See!
The difference 'twixt the couetous, and the prodigall!
"The Couetous man neuer has money! and
"The Prodigall will haue none ſhortly!
Ha,
What ſaies my Founder? I thanke you, I thanke you Sirs.
God bleſſe your worſhip, and your worſhips Chanter.
I ſay 't is nobly done, to cheriſh Shop-keepers,
And pay their Bills, without examining thus.
Alas! they haue had a pittifull hard time on't,
A long vacation, from their coozening.
Poore Raſcalls, I doe doe it out of charity.
I would aduance their trade againe, and haue them
Haſte to be rich, ſweare, and forſweare wealthily,
What doe you ſtay for, Sirrah?
To my boxe Sir,
Your boxe, why, there's an angel, if my Spurres
Be not right Rippon.
Giue me neuer a penny
If I ſtrike not thorow your bounty with the Rowells.
Do'ſt thou want any money Founder?
Who, Sr. I,
Did I not tell you I was bred i'the Mines,
Vnder Sir Beuis Bullion.
That is true,
I quite forgot, you Myne-men want no money,
Your ſtreets are pau'd with 't: there, the molten ſiluer
Runns out like creame, on cakes of gold.
And Rubies
Doe grow like Strawberries.
'Twere braue being there!
Come Thom, we'll go to the Office now.
What Office?
Newes Office, the New Staple; thou ſhalt goe too,
'Tis here i'the houſe, on the ſame floore, Thom. ſayes,
Come, Founder, let vs trade in Ale, and nutmegges.
WHat, are thoſe Desks fit now? ſet forth the Table,
The Carpet and the Chayre: where are the Newes
That were examin'd laſt? ha' you fil'd them vp?
Not yet, I had no time.
Are thoſe newes regiſtred,
That Emiſſary Buz ſent in laſt night?
Of Spinola, and his Egges?
Yes Sir, and fil'd.
What are you now vpon?
That our new Emiſſary
Weſtminſter, gaue vs, of the Golden Heyre.
Diſpatch, that's newes indeed, and of importance.
What would you haue good woman?
I would haue Sir,
A groatſworth of any Newes, I care not what,
To carry downe this Saturday, to our Vicar.
O! You are a Butterwoman, aske Nathaniel
The Clerke, there.
Sir, I tell her, ſhe muſt ſtay
Till Emiſſary Exchange, or Pauls ſend in,
And then I'll fit her.
Doe good woman, haue patience,
It is not now, as when the Captaine liu'd.
You'll blaſt the reputation of the Office,
Now i'the Bud, if you diſpatch theſe Groats,
So ſoone: let them attend in name of policie.
IN troth they are dainty roomes; what place is this?
This is the outer roome, where my Clerkes ſit,
And keepe their ſides, the Regiſter i'the midſt,
The Examiner, he ſits priuate there, within,
And here I haue my ſeuerall Rowles, and Fyles
Of Newes by the Alphabet, and all put vp
Vnder their heads.
But thoſe, too, ſubdiuided?
Into Authenticall, and Apocryphall.
Or Newes of doubtfull credit, as Barbers newes.
And Taylors Newes, Porters, and Watermens newes,
Whereto, beſide the Coranti, and Gazetti.
I haue the Newes of the ſeaſon.
As vacation newes,
Terme-nerves, and Chriſtmas-newes.
And newes O' the faction.
As the Reformed newes, Proteſtant newes,
And Pontificiall newes, of all which ſeuerall,
The Day-bookes, Characters, Precedents are kept.
Together with the names of ſpeciall friends—
And men of Correſpondence i'the Countrey—
Yes, of all ranks, and all Religions.—
Factors, and Agents—
Liegers, that lie out
Through all the Shires o'the kingdome.
This is fine!
And beares a braue relation! but what ſayes
Mercurius Britannicus to this?
O Sir, he gaines by't halfe in halfe.
Nay more
I'll ſtand to't. For, where he was wont to get
In, hungry Captaines, obſcure Stateſmen.
Fellowes
To drinke with him in a darke roome in a Tauerne,
And eat a Sawſage.
We ha' ſeen't,
As faine,
To keepe ſo many politique pennes
Going, to feed the preſſe.
And diſh our newes,
Were't true, or falſe.
Now all that charge is ſau'd
The publique Chronicler.
How, doe you call him there?
And gentle Reader.
He that has the maidenhead
Of all the bookes.
Yes, dedicated to him,
Or rather proſtituted.
You are right, Sir.
No more ſhall be abus'd, nor countrey-Parſons
O' the Inquiſition, nor buſie Iuſtices,
Trouble the peace, and both torment themſelues,
And their poore ign'rant Neighbours with enquiries
After the many, and moſt innocent Monſters,
That neuer came i'th' Counties they were charg'd with.
Why, me thinkes Sir, if the honeſt common people
Will be abus'd, why ſhould not they ha' their pleaſure,
In the belieuing Lyes, are made for them;
As you i'th' Office, making them your ſelues?
O Sir! it is the printing we oppoſe.
We not forbid that any Newes, be made,
But that 't be printed; for when Newes is printed,
It leaues Sir to be Newes. while 'tis but written —
Though it be ne're ſo falſe, it runnes Newes ſtill.
See diuers mens opinions! vnto ſome,
The very printing of them, makes them Newes;
That ha' not the heart to beleeue any thing,
But what they ſee in print.
I, that's an Error
Ha's abus'd many; but we ſhall reforme it,
As many things beſide (we haue a hope)
Are crept among the popular abuſes.
Nor ſhall the Stationer cheat vpon the Time,
By buttering ouer againe—
once, in Seuen Yeares,
As the age doates—
And growes forgetfull o'them,
His antiquated Pamphlets, with new dates.
But all ſhall come from the Mint.
Freſh and new ſtamp'd,
With the Office-Seale, Staple Commoditie.
And if a man will aſſure his Newes, he may:
Two-pence a Sheet he ſhall be warranted,
And haue a policie for't.
Sir, I admire
The method o' your place; all things within't
Are ſo digeſted, fitted, and compos'd,
As it ſhewes Wit had married Order.
Sir.
The beſt wee could to inuite the Times.
It ha's
Coſt ſweat, and freeſing.
And ſome broken ſleepes
Before it came to this.
I eaſily thinke it.
But now it ha's the ſhape—
And is come forth.
A moſt polite neat thing! with all the limbs,
As ſenſe can taſt!
It is Sir, though I ſay it,
As well-begotten a buſines, and as fairely
Helpt to the World.
You muſt be a Mid-wife Sir!
Or els the ſonne of a Mid-wife! (pray you pardon me)
Haue helpt it forth ſo happily! what Newes ha' you?
Newes o' this morning? I would faine heare ſome
Freſh, from the forge (as new as day, as they ſay.)
And ſuch we haue Sir.
Shew him the laſt Rowle,
Of Emiſſary Weſt-minſter's, The Heire.
Come nearer, Thom:
There is a braue yong Heire
Is come of age this morning, Mr. Peny-boy.
That's I!
His Father dy'd on this day ſeuenth-night.
True!
At ſixe o'the Clocke i'the morning, iuſt a weeke
Ere he was One and Twenty.
I am here, Thom!
Proceed, I pray thee.
An old Canting Begger
Brought him firſt Newes, whom he has entertain'd,
To follow him, ſince.
Why, you ſhall ſee him! Founder,
Come in; no Follower, but Companion,
I pray thee put him in, Friend. There's an Angell—
Thou do'ſt not know, hee's a wiſe old Fellow,
Though he ſeeme patch'd thus, and made vp o' peeces.
Founder, we are in, here, in, i'the Newes-Office!
In this dayes Rowle, already! I doe muſe
How you came by vs Sir's!
One Maſter Pick-locke
A Lawyer, that hath purchas'd here a place,
This morning, of an Emiſſary vnder me.
Emiſſarie Weſtminſter.
Gaue it into th'Office,
For his Eſſay, his peece.
My man o' Law!
Hee's my Attorney, and Sollicitour too!
A fine pragmaticke! what's his place worth?
A Nemo-ſcit, Sir.
'Tis as Newes come, in,
And as they are iſſued. I haue the iuſt meoytie
For my part: then the other moeytie
Is parted into ſeuen. The foure Emiſſaries;
Whereof my Cozen Fitton here's for Court,
Ambler for Pauls, and Buz for the Exchange,
Picklocke, for Weſtminſter, with the Examiner,
And Regiſter, they haue full parts: and then one part
Is vnder-parted to a couple of Clarkes;
And there's the iuſt diuiſion of the profits!
Ha' you thoſe Clarks Sir.
There is one Desk empty,
But it has many Suitors.
Sir, may I
Preſent one more and carry it, if his parts
Or Gifts, (which you will, call'hem)
Be ſufficient Sir.
What are your preſent Clarkes habilities?
How is he qualified?
A decay'd Stationer
He was, but knowes Newes well, can ſort and ranke 'hem.
And for a need can make 'hem.
True Paules bred,
I'the Church-yard.
And this at the Weſt-dore,
O'th other ſide, hee's my Barber Thom,
A pretty Scholler, and a Maſter of Arts,
Was made, or went out Maſter of Arts in a throng,
At the Vniuerſitie; as before, one Chriſtmas,
He got into a Maſque at Court, by his wit,
And the good meanes of his Cythern, holding vp thus
For one o'the Muſique, Hee's a nimble Fellow▪
And alike skil'd in euery liberall Science,
As hauing certaine ſnaps of all, a neat,
Quick-vaine, in forging Newes too. I doe loue him,
And promis'd him a good turne, and I would doe it.
Whats your price? the value?
Fifty pounds, Sr.
Get in Thom, take poſſeſſion, I inſtall thee;
Here, tell your money; giue thee ioy, good Thom;
And let me heare from thee euery minute of Newes,
While the New Staple ſtands, or the Office laſts,
Which I doe wiſh, may ne're be leſſe for thy ſake.
The Emiſſaries, Sir, would ſpeake with you,
And Maſter Fitton, they haue brought in Newes,
Three Bale together.
Sr, you are welcome, here.
So is your creature.
Buſineſſe calls vs off, Sir,
That may concerne the Office.
Keepe me faire, Sir,
Still i'your Staple, I am here your friend,
On the ſame flooer.
We ſhall be your ſeruants.
How doſt thou like it, Founder?
All is well,
But that your man o' law me thinks appeares not
In his due time. O! Here comes Maſters worſhip.
HOw do's the Heyre, bright Maſter Peniboy?
Is hee awake yet in his One and Twenty?
Why, this is better farre, then to weare Cypreſſe,
Dull ſmutting gloues, or melancholy blacks,
And haue a payre of twelue-peny broad ribbands
Laid out like Labells.
I ſhould ha' made ſhift
To haue laught as heartily in my mourners hood,
As in this Suite, if it had pleas'd my father
To haue beene buried, with the Trumpeters.
The Heralds of Armes, you meane.
I meane,
All noyſe, that is ſuperfluous!
All that idle pompe,
And vanity of a Tombe-ſtone, your wiſe father
Did, by his will, preuent. Your worſhip had—
A louing and obedient father of him,
I know it: a right, kinde-natur'd man,
To dye ſo opportunely.
And to ſettle
All things ſo well, compounded for your ward ſhip
The weeke afore, and left your ſtate entyre
Without any charge vpon't.
I muſt needes ſay,
I loſt an Officer of him, a good Bayliffe,
And I ſhall want him; but all peace be with him,
I will not wiſh him aliue, againe; not I,
For all my Fortune; giue your worſhip ioy
O'your new place, your Emiſſary-ſhip,
I'the Newes Office.
Know you, why I bought it Sr?
Not I.
To worke for you, and carry a myne
Againſt the Maſter of it, Maſter Cymball;
Who hath a plot vpon a Gentlewoman,
Was once deſign'd for you, Sir.
Me?
Your father,
Old Maſter Peni-boy, of happy memory,
And wiſdome too, as any i'the County,
Carefull to finde out a fit match for you,
In his owne life time (but hee was preuented)
Left it in writing in a Schedule here,
To be annexed to his Will; that you,
His onely Sonne, vpon his charge, and bleſſing,
Should take due notice of a Gentlewoman,
Soiourning with your vncle, Rieher Peni-boy.
A Corniſh Gentlewoman, I doe know her,
Miſtreſſe, Pecunia doe-all.
A great Lady,
Indeede ſhee is, and not of mortall race,
Infanta of the Mines; her Graces Grandfather,
Was Duke, and Couſin to the King of Ophyr,
The Subterranean, let that paſſe. Her name is,
Or rather, her three names are (for ſuch ſhee is)
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, A great Princeſſe,
Of mighty power, though ſhee liue in priuate
With a contracted family! Her Secretary—
Who is her Gentleman-vſher too.
One Broker,
And then two Gentlewomen; Miſtreſſe Statute,
And Miſtreſſe Band, with Waxe the Chambermaide,
And Mother Mortgage, the old Nurſe, two Groomes,
Pawne, and his fellow; you haue not many to bribe, Sir.
The worke is feizible, and th'approches eaſie,
By your owne kindred. Now, Sir, Cymball thinkes,
The Maſter here, and gouernor o'the Staple,
By his fine arts, and pompe of his great place
To draw her! He concludes, ſhee is a woman!
And that ſo ſoone as ſh' heares of the New Office,
Shee'll come to viſit it, as they all haue longings
After new ſights, and motions! But your bounty,
Perſon, and brauery muſt atchieue her.
Shee is
The talke o'the time! th'aduenture o'the age!
You cannot put your ſelfe vpon an action
Of more importance.
All the world are ſuiters to her.
All ſorts of men, and all profeſſions!
You ſhall haue ſtall-fed Doctors, cram'd Diuines
Make loue to her, and with thoſe ſtudied
And perfum'd flatteries, as no rome can ſtinke
More elegant, then where they are.
VVell chanted
Old Canter thou ſingſt true.
And (by your leaue)
Good Maſters worſhip, ſome of your veluet coate
Make corpulent curt'ſies to her, till they cracke for't.
There's Doctor Almanack wooes her, one of the Ieerers,
A fine Phyſitian.
Your Sea-captaine, Shun-field,
Giues out hee'll goe vpon the Cannon for her.
Though his lowd mouthing get him little credit,
Young Maſter Pyed-mantle, the fine Herrald
Profeſſes to deriuer her through all ages,
From all the Kings, and Queenes, that euer were.
And Maſter Madrigall, the crowned Poet
Of theſe our times, doth offer at her praiſes
As faire as any, when it ſhall pleaſe Apollo,
That wit and rime may meete both in one ſubiect.
And you to beare her from all theſe, it will be—
A work of fame.
Of honor.
Celebration.
Worthy your name.
The Peni-boyes to liue in't,
It is an action you were built for, Sir,
And none but you can doe it.
I'll vndertake it,
And carry it.
Feare me not, for ſince I came
Of mature age, I haue had a certaine itch
In my right eye, this corner, here, doe you ſee?
To doe ſome worke, and worthy of a Chronicle.
How now Goſsip! how doe's the Play pleaſe you?
Very ſcuruily, me thinks, and ſufficiently naught.
As a body would wiſh: here's nothing but a young Prodigall, come of age, who makes much of the Barber, buyes him a place in a new Office, i'the ayre, I know not where, and his man o' Law to follow him, with the Begger to boote, and they two helpe him to a wiſe.
I, ſhee is a proper piece! that ſuch creatures can broke for.
I cannot abide that naſty fellow, the Begger, if hee had beene a Court-Begger in good clothes; a Begger in veluet, as they ſay, I could haue endur'd him.
Or a begging ſcholler in blacke, or one of theſe beggerly Poets, goſsip, that would hang vpon a young heyre like a horſeleech.
Or a thred-bare Doctor of Phyſicke, a poore Quackeſaluer.
Or a Sea-captaine, halfe ſteru'd.
I, theſe were tolerable Beggers, Beggers of faſhion! you ſhall ſee ſome ſuch anon!
I would faine ſee the Foole, goſsip, the Foole is the fineſt man i'the company, they ſay, and has all the wit: Hee is the very Iuſtice o' Peace o' the Play, and can cemmit whom hee will, and what hee will, errour, abſurdity, as the toy takes him, and no man ſay, blacke is his eye, but laugh at him.
But they ha' no Foole i' this Play, I am afraid, goſsip.
It's a wiſe Play, then.
They are all fooles, the rather, in that.
Like enough.
My husband, (Timothy Tatle, God reſt his poore ſoule) was wont to ſay, there was no Play without a Foole, and a Diuell in't; he was for the Diuell ſtill, God bleſſe him. The Diuell for his money, would hee ſay, I would faine ſee the Diuell. And why would you ſo faine ſee the Diuell? would I ſay. Becauſe hee has hornes, wife, and may be a cuckold, as well as a Diuell, hee would anſwer: You are e'en ſuch another, husband, quoth I. Was the Diuell euer married? where doe you read, the Diuell was euer ſo honorable to commit Matrimony; The Play will tell vs, that, ſayes hee, wee'll goe ſee't to morrow, the Diuell is an Aſſe. Hee is an errant learn'd man, that made it, and can write, they ſay, and I am fouly deceiu'd, but hee can read too.
I remember it goſsip, I went with you, by the ſame token, Mrs. Trouble Truth diſwaded vs, and told vs, hee was a prophane Poet, and all his Playes had Diuels in them. That he kept ſchole vpo' the Stage, could coniure there, aboue the Schole of Weſtminſter, and Doctor Lamb too: not a Play he made, but had a Diuell in it. And that he would learne vs all to make our husbands Cuckolds at Playes: by another token, that a young married wife i'the company, ſaid, ſhee could finde in her heart to ſteale thither, and ſee a little o'the vanity through her maſque, and come practice at home.
O, it was, Miſtreſſe—
Nay, Goſsip, I name no body. It may be 'twas my ſelfe.
But was the Diuell a proper man, Goſsip?
As fine a gentleman, of his inches, as euer I ſaw truſted to the Stage, or any where elſe: and lou'd the common wealth, well as ere a Patriot of 'hem all: hee would carry away the Vice on his backe, quicke to Hell, in euery Play where he came, and reforme abuſes.
There was the Diuell of Edmonton, no ſuch man, I warrant you.
The Coniurer cooſen'd him with a candles end, hee was an Aſſe.
But there was one Smug, a Smith, would haue made a horſe laugh, and broke his halter, as they ſay.
O, but the poore man had got a ſhrewd miſchance, one day.
How, Goſsip?
He had dreſt a Rogue Iade i' the morning, that had the Staggers, and had got ſuch a ſpice of 'hem himſelfe, by noone, as they would not away all the Play time, doe what hee could, for his heart.
'Twas his part, Goſsip, he was to be drunke, by his part.
Say you ſo, I vnderſtood not ſo much.
Would wee had ſuch an other part, and ſuch a man in this play, I feare 'twill be an excellent dull thing.
Expect, intend it.
YOur Grace is ſad me thinks, and melancholy!
You doe not looke vpon me with that face,
As you were wont, my Goddeſſe, bright Pecunia:
Although your Grace be falne, of two i'the hundred,
In vulgar eſtimation; yet am I,
You Graces ſeruant ſtill: and teach this body,
To bend, and theſe my aged knees to buckle,
In adoration, and iuſt worſhip of you.
Indeed, I doe confeſſe, I haue no ſhape
To make a minion of, but I'm your Martyr,
Your Graces Martyr. I can heare the Rogues,
As I doe walke the ſtreetes, whiſper, and point,
There goes old Peni-boy, the ſlaue of money,
Rich Peni-boy, Lady Pecunia's drudge,
A ſordid Raſcall, one that neuer made
Good meale in his ſleep, but ſells the acates are ſent him,
Fiſh, Fowle, and veniſon, and preſerues himſelfe,
Like an old hoary Rat, with mouldy pye-cruſt.
This I doe heare, reioycing, I can ſuffer
This, and much more, for your good Graces ſake.
Why do you ſo my Guardian? I not bid you,
Cannot my Grace be gotten, and held too,
Without your ſelfe-tormentings, and your watches,
Your macerating of your body thus
With cares, and ſcantings of your dyet, and reſt?
O, no, your ſeruices, my Princely Lady,
Cannot with too much zeale of rites be done,
They are ſo ſacred.
But my Reputation.
May ſuffer, and the worſhip of my family,
When by ſo ſeruile meanes they both are ſought.
You are a noble, young, free, gracious Lady,
And would be euery bodie, in your bounty,
But you muſt not be ſo. They are a few
That know your merit, Lady, and can valew't.
Your ſelfe ſcarce vnderſtands your proper powers.
They are all-mighty, and that wee your ſeruants,
That haue the honour here to ſtand ſo neere you,
Know; and can vſe too. All this Nether-world
Is yours, you command it, and doe ſway it,
The honour of it, and the honeſty,
The reputation, I, and the religion,
(I was about to ſay, and had not err'd)
Is Queene Pecunia's. For that ſtile is yours,
If mortals knew your Grace, or their owne good.
Pleaſe your Grace to retire.
I feare your Grace
Hath ta'ne too much of the ſharpe ayre.
O no!
I could endure to take a great deale more
(And with my conſtitution, were it left)
Vnto my choice, what thinke you of it, Statute?
A little now and then does well, and keepes
Your Grace in your complexion.
And true temper.
But too much Madame, may encreaſe cold rheumes,
Nouriſh catarrhes, greene ſickneſſes, and agues,
And put you in conſumption.
Beſt to take
Aduice of your graue women, Noble Madame,
They know the ſtate o'your body, and ha'ſtudied
Your Graces health.
And honour. Here'll be viſitants,
Or Suitors by and by; and 'tis not fit
They find you here.
'Twill make your Grace too cheape
To giue them audience preſently.
Leaue your Secretary,
To anſwer them.
Waite you here, Broker.
I ſhal Madame.
And doe your Graces truſts with diligence.
WHat luck's this? I am come an inch too late,
Doe you heare Sir? Is your worſhip o'the family
Vnto the Lady Pecunia?
I ſerue her Grace, Sir,
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, the Infanta.
Has ſhe all thoſe Titles, and her Grace beſides,
I muſt correct that ignorance and ouer-ſight,
Before I doe preſent. Sir, I haue drawne
A Pedigree for her Grace, though yet a Nouice
In that ſo noble ſtudy.
A Herald at Armes?
No Sir, a Purſiuant, my name is Pyed-mantle.
Good Maſter Pyed-mantle.
I haue deduc'd her.—
From all the Spaniſh Mines in the Weſt-Indi'es,
I hope: for ſhe comes that way by her mother,
But, by her Grand-mother, ſhe's Dutches of Mines.
From mans creation I haue brought her.
No further?
Before Sr, long before, you haue done nothing elſe,
Your Mines were before Adam, ſearch your Office,
Rowle fiue and twenty, you will finde it ſo,
I ſee you are but a Nouice, Maſter Pyed-mantle.
If you had not told mee ſo.
Sir, an apprentiſe
In armoiry. I haue read the Elements,
And Accidence, and all the leading bookes,
And I haue, now, vpon me a great ambition,
How to be brought to her Grace, to kiſſe her hands.
Why, if you haue acquaintance with Miſtreſſe Statute,
Or Miſtreſſe Band, my Ladies Gentlewomen,
They can induce you. One is a Iudges Daughter,
But ſomewhat ſtately; th'other Miſtreſſe Band,
Her father's but a Scriuener, but ſhee can
Almoſt as much with my Lady, as the other,
Eſpecially, if Roſe Waxe the Chambermaid
Be willing. Doe you not know her, Sir, neither?
No in troth Sir.
She's a good plyant wench,
And eaſie to be wrought, Sir, but the Nurſe
Old mother Mortgage, if you haue a Tenement,
Or ſuch a morſell? though ſhee haue no teeth,
Shee loues a ſweet meat, any thing that melts
In her warme gummes, ſhe could command it for you
On ſuch a trifle, a toy. Sir, you may ſee,
How for your loue, and this ſo pure complexion,
(A perfect Sanguine) I ha' ventured thus,
The ſtraining of a ward, opening a doore
Into the ſecrets of our family:
I pray you let mee know, Sir, vnto whom
I am ſo much beholden; but your name.
My name is Broker, I am Secretary,
And Vſher, to her Grace.
Good Maſter Broker!
Good Mr. Pyed-mantle.
Why? you could do me,
If you would, now, this fauour of your ſelfe.
Truely, I thinke I could: but if I would,
I hardly ſhould, without, or Miſtreſſe Band,
Or Miſtreſſe Statute, pleaſe to appeare in it.
Or the good Nurſe I told you of, Miſtreſſe Mortgage.
We know our places here, wee mingle not
One in anothers ſphere, but all moue orderly,
In our owne orbes; yet wee are all Concentricks.
Well, Sir, I'll waite a better ſeaſon.
Doe,
And ſtudy the right meanes, get Miſtreſſe Band
To vrge on your behalfe, or little Waxe.
I haue a hope, Sir, that I may, by chance,
Light on her Grace, as ſhe's taking the ayre:
That ayre of hope, has blaſted many an ayrie
Of Caſtrills like your ſelfe: Good Maſter Pyed-mantle,
Well ſaid, Maſter Secretary, I ſtood behinde
And heard thee all. I honor thy diſpatches.
If they be rude, vntrained it our method
And haue not ſtudied the rule, diſmiſſe 'hem quickly,
Where's Lickfinger my Cooke? that vnctuous raſcall?
Hee'll neuer keepe his houre, that veſſell of kitchinſtuffe!
HEere hee is come, Sir.
Pox vpon him kidney,
Alwaies too late!
To wiſh 'hem you, I confeſſe,
That ha'them already.
What?
The pox!
The piles,
The plague, and all diſeaſes light on him,
Knowes not to keepe his word. I'ld keepe my word ſure!
I hate that man that will not keepe his word,
When did I breake my word?
Or I, till now?
And 'tis but halfe an houre.
Halfe a yeere:
To mee that ſtands vpon a minute of time.
I am a iuſt man, I loue ſtill to be iuſt.
Why? you thinke I can runne like light-foot Ralph,
Or keep a wheele-barrow, with a ſayle in towne here,
To whirle me to you: I haue loſt two ſtone
Of ſuet i'the ſeruice poſting hither,
You might haue followed me like a watering pot,
And ſeene the knots I made along the ſtreet;
My face dropt like the ſkimmer in a fritter panne,
And my whole body, is yet (to ſay the truth)
A roſted pound of butter, with grated bread in't!
Belieue you, he that liſt. You ſtay'd of purpose,
To haue my veniſon ſtinke, and my fowle mortify'd,
That you might ha' 'hem—
A ſhilling or two cheaper,
That's your iealouſie.
Perhaps it is.
Will you goe in, and view, and value all?
Yonder is veniſon ſent mee! fowle! and fiſh!
In ſuch abundance! I am ſicke to ſee it!
I wonder what they meane! I ha' told 'hem of it!
To burthen a weake ſtomacke! and prouoke
A dying appetite! thruſt a ſinne vpon me
I ne'r was guilty of! nothing but gluttony!
Groſſe gluttony! that will vndoe this Land!
And bating two i'the hundred.
I, that ſame's
A crying ſinne, a fearefull damn'd deuice,
Eats vp the poore, deuoures 'hem—
Sir, take heed
What you giue out.
Againſt your graue great Solons?
Numae Pompilij, they that made that Law?
To take away the poore's inheritance?
It was their portion: I will ſtand to't.
And they haue rob'd 'hem of it, plainly rob'd 'hem,
I ſtill am a iuſt man, I tell the truth.
When moneies went at Ten i'the hundred, I,
And ſuch as I, the ſeruants of Pecunia,
Could ſpare the poore two out of ten, and did it,
How ſay you, Broker?
Ask your Eccho)
You did it.
I am for Iuſtice, when did I leaue Iuſtice?
We knew 'twas theirs, they'had right and Title to't.
Now—
You can ſpare 'hem nothing.
Very little,
As good as nothing.
They haue bound our hands
With their wiſe ſolemne act, ſhortned our armes.
Beware thoſe worſhipfull eares, Sir, be not ſhortned,
And you play Crop i the fleete, if you vſe this licence.
What licence, Knaue? Informer?
I am Lickfinger,
Your Cooke.
A ſaucy Iacke you are, that's once;
VVhat ſaid I, Broker?
Nothing that I heard, Sir.
I know his gift, hee can be deafe when he liſt.
Ha' you prouided me my buſhell of egges?
I did beſpeake? I doe not care how ſtale,
Or ſtincking that they be; let 'hem be rotten:
For ammunition here to pelt the boyes,
That breake my windowes?
Yes Sir, I ha' ſpar'd 'hem
Out of the cuſtard politique for you, the Maiors.
'Tis well, goe in, take hence all that exceſſe,
Make what you can of it, your beſt: and when
I haue friends, that I inuite at home, prouide mee
Such, ſuch, and ſuch a diſh, as I beſpeake;
One a a time, no ſuperfluitie.
Or if you haue it not, returne mee money;
You know my waies.
They are a little crooked.
How knaue?
Becauſe you do indent.
'Tis true, Sir,
I do indent you ſhall returne me money.
Rather then meat, I know it: you are iuſt ſtill.
I loue it ſtill. And therefore if you ſpend
The red-Deere pyes i'your houſe, or ſell'hem forth, Sir,
Caſt ſo, that I may haue their coffins all,
Return'd here, and pil'd vp: I would be thought
To keepe ſome kind of houſe.
By the mouldie ſignes?
And then remember meat for my two dogs:
Fat flaps of mutton; kidneyes; rumps of veale;
Good plentious ſcraps; my maid ſhall eat the reliques.
VVhen you & your dogs haue din'd. A ſweet reuerſion.
VVho's here? my Courtier? and my little Doctor?
My Muſter-Maſter? and what Plouer's that
They haue brought to pull?
I know not, ſome green Plouer.
I'le find him out.
Doe, for I know the reſt,
They are the Ieerers, mocking, flouting Iackes.
HOw now old Money-Bawd? w'are come—
To ieere me,
As you were wont, I know you.
No, to giue thee
Some good ſecurity, and ſee Pecunia.
What is't?
Our ſelues.
Weel be one bound for another.
This noble Doctor here.
This worthy Courtier.
This Man o' war, he was our Muſter-Maſter.
But a Sea-Captaine now, braue Captaine Shun-field.
You ſnuffe the ayre now, as the ſcent diſpleas'd you?
Thou needſt not feare him man, his credit is ſound,
And ſeaſond too, ſince he tooke ſalt at Sea.
I doe not loue pickld ſecurity,
Would I had one good Freſh-man in for all;
For truth is, you three ſtinke.
You are a Rogue,
I thinke I am, but I will lend no money
On that ſecurity, Captaine.
Here's a Gentleman,
A Freſh-man i'the world, one Maſter Madrigall.
Of an vntainted credit; what ſay you to him?
Hee's gone me thinkes, where is he? Madrigall?
H has an odde ſinging name, is he an Heyre?
An Heyre to a faire fortune,
And full hopes:
A dainty Scholler, and a pretty Poët!
Y'aue ſaid enough. I ha' no money, Gentlemen,
An' he goe to't in ryme once, not a penny.
Why, hee's of yeares, though he haue little beard.
His beard has time to grow. I haue no money:
Let him ſtill dable in Poetry. No Pecunia
Is to be ſeene.
Come, thou lou'ſt to be coſtiue
Still i' thy curt'ſie; but I haue a pill,
A golden pill to purge away this melancholly.
Tis nothing but his keeping o'the houſe here,
With his two drowſie doggs.
A drench of ſacke
At a good tauerne, and a fine freſh pullet,
Would cure him.
Nothing but a yong Haire in white-broth,
I know his diet better then the Doctor.
What Lick-finger? mine old hoſt of Ram-Alley?
You ha' ſome mereat here.
Some doſſer of Fiſh
Or Fowle to fetch of.
An odde bargaine of Veniſon,
To driue.
Will you goe in, knaue?
I muſt needs,
You ſee who driues me, gentlemen.
Not the diuell.
Hee may be in time, hee is his Agent, now.
You are all cogging Iacks, a Couy o' wits,
The Ieerers, that ſtill call together at meales:
Or rather an Airy, for you are birds of prey:
And flie at all, nothing's too bigge or high for you.
And are ſo truely fear'd, but not belou'd
One of another: as no one dares breake
Company from the reſt, leſt they ſhould fall,
Vpon him abſent.
O! the onely Oracle
That euer peept, or ſpake out of a dublet.
How the rogue ſtinks, worſe then a Fiſhmonger ſleeues!
Or Curriers hands!
And ſuch a perboil'd viſage!
His face lookes like a Diers apron, iuſt!
A ſodden head, and his whole braine a poſſit curd!
I, now you ieere, ieere on; I haue no money.
I wonder what religion hee's of!
No certaine ſpecies ſure, A kinde of mule!
That's halfe an Ethnicke, halfe a Chriſtian!
I haue no monie, gentlemen.
This ſtocke.
He has no ſenſe of any vertue, honour,
Gentrie or merit.
You ſay very right,
My meritorious Captaine, (as I take it!)
Merit will keepe no houſe, nor pay no houſe rent.
Will Miſtreſſe Merit goe to mercat, thinke you?
Set on the pot, or feed the family?
Will Gentry cleare with the Butcher? or the Baker?
Fetch in a Pheſſant, or a brace of Partridges,
From good-wife Poulter, for my Ladies ſupper.
See! this pure rogue!
This rogue has money tho',
My worſhipfull braue Courtier has no money.
No, nor my valiant Captaine.
Hang you raſcall.
Nor you, my learned Doctor. I lou'd you
Whil you did hold your practice, and kill tripe wiues.
And kept you to your vrinall; but ſince your thombes
Haue greas'd the Ephemerides, caſting figures,
And turning ouer for your Candle-rents,
And your twelue houſes in the Zodiacke:
With your Almutens, Alma cantaras,
Troth you ſhall cant alone for Peny-boy.
I told you what we ſhould find him, a meere Bawd.
A rogue, a cheater.
What you pleaſe, gentlemen,
I am of that humble nature and condition,
Neuer to minde your worſhips, or take notice
Of what you throw away, thus. I keepe houſe here
Like a lame Cobler, neuer out of doores,
With my two dogs, my friends; and (as you ſay)
Driue a quicke pretty trade, ſtill. I get money:
And as for Titles, be they Rogue, or Raſcall,
Or what your worſhips fancy, let 'hem paſſe
As tranſitory things; they're mine to day,
And yours to morrow.
Hang thee dog.
Thou curre.
You ſee how I doe bluſh, and am aſham'd
Of theſe large attributes? yet you haue no money.
Well wolfe, Hyaena, you old pockie raſcall,
You will ha' the Hernia fall downe againe
Into your Scrotum, and I ſhall be ſent for.
I will remember then, that; and your Fiſtula
In ano, I cur'd you of.
Thanke your dog-leech craft.
They were 'holeſome piles, afore you meddl'd with'hem.
What an vngratefull wretch is this?
Hee minds
A curteſie no more, then London-bridge,
What Arch was mended laſt.
Hee neuer thinkes.
More then a logge, of any grace at Court,
A man may doe him: or that ſuch a Lord
Reach't him his hand.
O yes! if grace would ſtrike
The brewers Tally, or my good Lords hand,
Would quit the ſcores. But Sir, they will not doe it.
Here's a piece, my good Lord piece, doth all.
Goes to the Butehers. fetches in a muton,
Then to the Bakers, brings in bread, makes fires,
Gets wine, and does more reall Curteſies,
Then all my Lords, I know: My ſweet Lord peece!
You are my Lord, the reſt are cogging Iacks,
Vnder the Roſe.
Rogue, I could beat you now,
True Captaine, if you durſt beat any other.
I ſhould belieue you, but indeed you are hungry;
You are not angry Captaine, if I know you
Aright; good Captaine. No, Pecunia,
Is to be ſeene, though Miſtreſſe Band would ſpeake,
Or little Bluſhet-Waxe, be ne'r ſo eaſie,
I'll ſtop mine eares with her, againſt the Syrens,
Court, and Philoſophy. God be wi you, Gentlemen,
Prouide you better names. Pecunia is for you.
What a damn'd Harpy it is? where's Madrigall?
Is he ſneek'd hence.
Here he comes with Broker,
Pecunia's Secretary.
He may doe ſome good
With him perhaps. Where ha you beene Madrigall?
Aboue with my Ladies women, reading verſes.
That was a fauour. Good morrow, Maſter Secretary.
Good morrow, Maſter Vſher.
Sir, by both
Your worſhipfull Titles, and your name Mas Broker.
Good morrow.
I did aske him if hee were
Amphibion Broker.
Why?
A creature of two natures,
Becauſe hee has two Offices.
You may ieere,
You ha' the wits, young Gentlemen. But your hope
Of Helicon, will neuer carry it, heere,
With our fat family; we ha' the dulleſt,
Moſt unboar'd Eares for verſe amongſt our females.
I grieu'd you read ſo long, Sir, old Nurſe Mortgage,
Shee ſnoar'd i'the Chaire, and Statute (if you mark'd her)
Fell faſt a ſleepe, and Miſtreſſe Band, ſhee nodded,
But not with any conſent to what you read.
They muſt haue ſomwhat elſe to chinke, then rymes.
If you could make an Epitaph on your Land,
(Imagine it on departure) ſuch a Poem
Would wake 'hem, and bring Waxe to her true temper.
I faith Sir, and I will try.
'Tis but earth,
Fit to make brickes and tyles of.
Pocks vpon't
'Tis but for pots, or pipkins at the beſt.
If it would keepe vs in good tabacco pipes,
'Twere worth keeping.
Or in porc'lane diſhes
There were ſome hope.
But this is a hungry ſoile,
And muſt be helpt.
Who would hold any Land
To haue the trouble to marle it.
Not a gentleman.
Let clownes and hyndes affect it, that loue ploughes,
And carts, and harrowes, and are buſie ſtill,
In vexing the dull element.
Our ſweete Songster
Shall rarifie t into ayre.
And you Mas. Broker
Shall haue a feeling.
So it ſupple, Sir,
The nerues.
O! it ſhall be palpable,
Make thee runne thorow a hoope, or a thombe-ring,
The noſe of a tabacco pipe, and draw
Thy ductile bones out, like a knitting needle,
To ſerue my ſubtill turnes.
I ſhall obey Sir,
And run a thred, like an houre-glaſſe.
Where is Broker?
Are not theſe flies gone yet? pray quit my houſe,
I'le ſmoake you out elſe.
O! the Prodigall!
Will you be at ſo much charge with vs, and loſſe?
I haue heard you ha' offered Sir, to lock vp ſmoake,
And cauke your windores, ſpar up all your doores,
Thinking to keepe it a cloſe priſoner wi'you,
And wept, when it went out, Sir, at your chimney.
And yet his eyes were dryer then a pummiſe.
A wretched raſcall, that will binde about
The noſe of his bellowes, leſt the wind get out
When hee's abroad.
Sweepes downe no cobwebs here,
But ſells 'hem for cut-fingers. And the ſpiders,
As creatures rear'd of duſt, and coſt him nothing,
To fat old Ladies monkeyes.
Hee has offerd
To gather vp ſpilt water, and preſerue
Each haire falls from him to ſtop balls with all.
A ſlaue, and an Idolater to Pecunia!
You all haue happy memories, Gentlemen,
In rocking my poore cradle. I remember too,
When you had lands, and credit, worſhip, friends,
I, and could giue ſecurity: now, you haue none,
Or will haue none right ſhortly. This can time,
And the viciſſitude of things. I haue
All theſe▪ and money too, and doe poſſeſſe 'hem,
And am right heartily glad of all our memories,
And both the changes.
Let vs leaue the viper.
Hee's glad he is rid of his torture, and ſo ſoone.
Broker, come hither, vp, and tell your Lady,
Shee muſt be readie preſently, and Statute,
Band, Mortgage, VVax. My prodigall young kinſman
Will ſtreight be here to ſee her; 'top of our houſe,
The flouriſhing, and flanting Peny-boy.
Wee were but three of vs in all the world,
My brother Francis, whom they call'd Franck Peny-boy,
Father to this: hee's dead. This Peny-boy,
Is now the heire! I, Richer Peny-boy,
Not Richard, but old Harry Peny-boy,
And (to make rime) cloſe, wary Peny-boy
I ſhall haue all at laſt, my hopes doe tell me.
Goe, ſee all ready; and where my dogs haue falted,
Remoue it with a broome, and ſweeten all
VVith a ſlice of iuniper, not too much, but ſparing,
VVe may be faultie our ſelues elſe, and turne prodigall,
In entertaining of the Prodigall.
Here hee is! and with him—what! a Clapper Dudgeon!
That's a good ſigne; to haue the begger follow him,
So neere at his firſt entry into fortune.
HOw now old Vncle? I am come to ſee thee.
And the braue Lady, here, the daughter of Ophir,
They ſay thou keepſt.
Sweet Nephew, if ſhe were
The daughter o' the Sunne, ſhee's at your ſeruice,
And ſo am I, and the whole family,
Worſhipfull Nephew.
Sai'ſt thou ſo, deare Vncle?
Welcome my friends then: Here is, Domine Picklocke:
My man o'Law, ſollicits all my cauſes.
Followes my buſineſſe, makes, and compounds my quarrells,
Betweene my tenants and mee, ſowes all my ſtrifes,
And reapes them too, troubles the country for mee,
And vexes any neighbour, that I pleaſe.
But with commiſſion?
Vnder my hand & ſeale.
A worſhipfull place!
I thanke his worſhip for it.
But what is this old Gentleman?
A Rogue,
A very Canter, I Sir, one that maunds
Vpon the Pad, wee ſhould be brothers though:
For you are neere as wretched as my ſelfe,
You dare not vſe your money, and I haue none.
Not vſe my money, cogging Iacke, who vſes it
At better rates? lets it for more i'the hundred,
Then I doe, Sirrah?
Be not angry vncle.
What? to diſgrace me, with my Queene? as if
I did not know her valew.
Sir, I meant
You durſt not to enioy it.
Hold your peace,
You are a Iacke.
Vncle, he ſhall be a Iohn,
And, you goe to that, as good a man as you are.
An' I can make him ſo, a better man,
Perhaps I will too. Come, let vs goe.
Nay, kinſman,
My worſhipfull kinſman; and the top of our houſe;
Doe not your penitent vncle that affront,
For a raſh word, to leaue his ioyfull threſhold,
Before you ſee the Lady that you long for.
The Venus of the time, and ſtate, Pecunia!
I doe perceiue, your bounty loues the man,
For ſome concealed vertue, that he hides
Vnder thoſe rags.
I owe my happineſſe to him,
The waiting on his worſhip, ſince I brought him
The happy Newes, welcome to all young heires.
Thou didſt indeed, for which I thanke thee yet,
Your Fortunate Princeſſe, Vncle, is long a comming.
She is not rigg'd, Sir, ſetting forth ſome Lady,
Will coſt as much as furniſhing a Fleete,
Here ſhe's come at laſt, and like a Galley
Guilt i'the prow.
Is this Pecunia?
Vouchſafe my toward kinſman, gracious Madame,
The fauour of your hand.
Nay, of my lips, Sir,
To him.
She kiſſes like a mortall creature,
Almighty Madame, I haue long'd to ſee you.
And I haue my deſire, Sir, to behold
That youth, and ſhape, which in my dreames and wakes,
I haue ſo oft contemplated, and felt
Warme in my veynes, and natiue as my blood.
When I was told of your arriuall here,
I felt my heart beat, as it would leape out,
In ſpeach; and all my face it was a flame,
But how it came to paſſe I doe not know.
O! beauty loues to be more proud then nature,
That made you bluſh. I cannot ſatisfie
My curious eyes, by which alone I'am happy,
In my beholding you.
They paſſe the complement
Prettily well.
I, he does kiſſe her, I like him.
My paſſion was cleare contrary, and doubtfull,
I ſhooke for feare, and yet I danc'd for ioy,
I had ſuch motions as the Sunne-beames make
Againſt a wall, or playing on a water,
Or trembling vapour of a boyling pot—
That's not ſo good, it ſhould ha'bin a Crucible,
With molten mettall, ſhe had vnderſtood it.
I cannot talke, but I can loue you, Madame.
Are theſe your Gentlewomen? I loue them too.
And which is miſtreſſe Statute? Miſtreſſe Band?
They all kiſſe cloſe, the laſt ſtucke to my lips.
It was my Ladies Chamber-maid, ſoft-Waxe.
Soft lips ſhe has, I am ſure on't. Mother Mortgage,
I'll owe a kiſſe, till ſhe be yonger, Statute,
Sweet Miſtreſſe Band, and honey, little VVaxe,
We muſt be better acquainted.
We are but ſeruants, Sir.
But whom her Grace is ſo content to grace,
We ſhall obſerue.
Aand with all fit reſpect.
In our poore places.
Being her Graces ſhadowes.
A fine well-ſpoken family. What's thy name?
Broker.
Me thinks my vncle ſhould not need thee;
Who is a crafty Knaue, enough, beleeue it.
Art thou her Graces Steward?
No, her Vſher, Sir.
What, o'the Hall? thou haſt a ſweeping face,
Thy beard is like a broome.
No barren chin, Sir,
I am no Eunuch, though a Gentleman-Vſher.
Thou ſhalt goe with vs. Vncle, I muſt haue
My Princeſſe forth to day.
Whither you pleaſe, Sir,
You ſhall command her.
I will doe all grace
To my new ſeruant.
Thanks vnto your bounty;
He is my Nephew, and my Chiefe, the Point,
Tip, Top, and Tuft of all our family!
But, Sir, condition'd alwaies, you returne
Statute, and Band home, with my ſweet, ſoft Waxe,
And my good Nurſe, here, Mortgage.
O! what elſe?
By Broker.
Do not feare.
She ſhall go wi' you,
Whither you pleaſe, Sir, any where.
I ſee
A Money-Bawd, is lightly a Fleſh-Bawd, too.
Are you aduis'd? Now o'my faith, this Canter
Would make a good graue Burgeſſe in ſome Barne.
Come, thou ſhalt go with vs, vncle.
By no means, Sir.
We'll haue both Sack, and Fidlers.
I'll not draw
That charge vpon your worſhip.
He ſpeakes modeſtly,
And like an Vncle,
But Mas Broker, here,
He ſhall attend you, Nephew; her Graces Vſher,
And what you fancy to beſtow on him,
Be not too lauiſh, vſe a temperate bounty,
I'll take it to my ſelfe.
I will be princely,
While I poſſeſſe my Princeſſe, my Pecunia.
Where is't you eat?
Hard by, at Picklocks lodging.
Old Lickfinger's the Cooke, here in Ram-Alley.
He has good cheare; perhaps I'll come and ſee you.
O, fie! an Alley, and a Cooks-ſhop, groſſe,
'T will ſauour, Sir, moſt rankly of 'hem both.
Let your meat rather follow you, to a tauerne.
A tauern's as vnfit too, for a Princeſſe.
No, I haue knowne a Princeſſe, and a great one,
Come forth of a tauerne.
Not goe in, Sir, though.
She muſt goe in, if ſhe came forth: the bleſſed
Pokahontas (as the Hiſtorian calls her
And great Kings daughters of Virginia)
Hath bin in womb of a tauerne; and beſides,
Your naſty Vncle will ſpoyle all your mirth,
And be as noyſome.
That's true.
No 'faith,
Dine in Apollo with Pecunia,
At braue Duke Wadloos, haue your friends about you,
And make a day on't.
Content 'ifaith:
Our meat ſhall be brought thither. Simon the King,
Will bid vs welcome.
Patron, I haue a ſuite.
What's that?
That you will carry the Infanta,
To ſee the Staple', her Grace will be a grace,
To all the members of it.
I will doe it:
And haue her Armes ſet vp there, with her Titles,
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, the Infanta.
And in Apollo. Come (ſweete Princeſſe) goe.
Broker, be careful of your charge.
I warrant you.
Why, this is duller and duller! intolerable! ſcuruy! neither Diuel nor Foole in this Play! pray God, ſome on vs be not a witch, Goſsip, to foreſpeake the matter thus.
I feare we are all ſuch, and we were old enough: But we are not all old enough to make one witch. How like you the Vice i'the Play.
Which is he?
Three or foure: old Couetouſneſſe, the ſordid Peny-boy, the Money-bawd, who is a fleſh-bawd too, they ſay.
But here is neuer a Fiend to carry him away. Beſides, he has neuer a wooden dagger! I'ld not giue a ruſh for a Vice, that has not a wooden dagger to ſnap at euery body he meetes.
That was the old way, Goſsip, when Iniquity came in like Hokos Pokos, in a Iuglers ierkin, with falſe skirts, like the Knaue of Clubs! but now they are attir'd like men and women o' the time, the Vices, male and female! Prodigality like a young heyre, and his Miſtreſſe Money (whoſe fauours he ſcatters like counters) prank't vp like a prime Lady, the Infanta of the Mines.
I, therein they abuſe an honorable Princeſſe, it is thought.
By whom is it ſo thought? or where lies the abuſe?
Plaine in the ſtiling her Infanta, and giuing her three names.
Take heed, it lie not in the vice of your interpretation: what haue Aurelia, Clara, Pecunia to do with any perſon? do they any more, but expreſſe the property of Money, which is the daughter of earth, and drawne out of the Mines? Is there nothing to be call'd Infanta, but what is ſubiect to exception? Why not the Infanta of the Beggers? or Infanta o'the Gipſies? as well as King of Beggers, and King of Gipſies?
Well, and there were no wiſer then I, I would ſow him in a ſack, and ſend him by ſea to his Princeſſe.
Faith, and hee heard you Cenſure, he would goe neere to ſticke the Aſſes eares to your high dreſsing, and perhaps to all ours for harkening to you.
By'r Lady but he ſhould not to mine, I would harken, and harken, and cenſure, if I ſaw cauſe, for th'other Princeſſe ſake Pokahontas, ſurnam'd the bleſſed, whom hee has abus'd indeed (and I doe cenſure him, and will cenſure him) to ſay ſhe came foorth of a Tauerne, was ſaid like a paltry Poet.
That's but one Goſsips opinion, and my Goſsip Tatle's too! but what ſaies Expectation, here, ſhe ſits ſullen and ſilent.
Troth I expect their Office, their great Office! the Staple, what it will be! they haue talk't on't, but wee ſee't not open yet; would Butter would come in, and ſpread it-ſelfe a little to vs.
Or the butter-box, Buz, the Emiſſary.
When it is churn'd, and diſh't, we ſhall heare of it.
If it be freſh and ſweet butter; but ſay it be ſower and wheyiſh.
Then it is worth nothing, meere pot-butter, fit to be ſpent in ſuppoſitories, or greaſing coach-wheeles, ſtale ſtinking butter, and ſuch I feare it is, by the being barrell'd vp ſo long.
Or ranke Iriſh butter.
Haue patience Goſsips, ſay that contrary to our expectations it proue right, ſeaſonable, ſalt butter.
Or to the time of yeer, in Lent, delicate Almond butter! I haue a ſweet tooth yet, and I will hope the beſt; and ſit downe as quiet, and calme as butter, looke as ſmooth, and ſoft as butter; be merry, and melt like butter; laugh and be fat like butter: ſo butter anſwer my expectation, and be not mad butter; If it be: It ſhall both Iuly and December ſee.
I ſay no more, But— Dixi.
YOu hunt vpon a wrong ſcent ſtill, and thinke
The ayre of things will carry 'hem, but it muſt
Be reaſon and proportion, not fine ſounds,
My couſin Cymball, muſt get you this Lady.
You haue entertain'd a petty-fogger here,
Picklocke, with truſt of an Emiſſaries place,
And he is, all, for the young Prodigall,
You ſee he has left vs.
Come, you doe not know him,
That ſpeake thus of him. He will haue a tricke,
To open vs a gap, by a trap-doore,
When they leaſt dreame on't. Here he comes. What newes?
Where is my brother Buz? my brother Ambler?
The Regiſter, Examiner, and the Clerkes?
Appeare, and let vs muſter all in pompe,
For here will be the rich Infanta, preſently,
To make her viſit. Peny-boy the heyre,
My Patron, has got leaue for her to play
With all her traine, of the old churle, her Guardian.
Now is your time to make all court vnto her;
That ſhe may firſt but know, then loue the place,
And ſhew it by her frequent viſits here:
And afterwards, get her to ſoiourne with you.
She will be weary of the Prodigall, quickly.
Excellent newes!
And counſell of an Oracle!
How ſay you couſin Fitton?
brother Picklock,
I ſhall adore thee, for this parcell of tidings,
It will cry vp the credit of our Office,
Eternally, and make our Staple immortall!
Looke your addreſſes, then, be faire and fit,
And entertaine her, and her creatures, too,
With all the migniardiſe, and quaint Careſſes,
You can put on 'hem.
Thou ſeem'ſt, by thy language,
No leſſe a Courtier, then a man o' Law.
I muſt embrace thee.
Tut, I am Vertumnus,
On euery change, or chance, vpon occaſion,
A true Chamaelion, I can colour for't.
I moue vpon my axell, like a turne-pike.
Fit my face to the parties, and become
Streight, one of them.
Sirs, vp, into your Desks,
And ſpread the rolls vpon the Table, ſo.
Is the Examiner ſet?
Yes, Sir.
Ambler, and Buz,
Are both abroad, now.
Wee'll ſuſtaine their parts.
No matter, let them ply the affayres without,
Let vs alone within, I like that well.
On with the cloake, and you with the Staple gowne,
And keep your ſtate, ſtoupe only to the Infanta;
We'll haue a flight at Mortgage, Statute, Band,
And hard, but we'll bring Wax vnto the retriue:
Each know his ſeuerall prouince, and diſcharge it.
I do admire this nimble ingine, Picklock.
Cuz,
What did I ſay?
You haue rectified my errour!
BY your leaue, Gentlemen, what newes? good, good ſtill?
I' your new Office? Princeſſe, here's the Staple!
This is the Gouernor, kiſſe him, noble Princeſſe,
For my ſake. Thom, how is it honeſt Thom?
How does thy place, and thou? my Creature, Princeſſe?
This is my Creature, giue him your hand to kiſſe,
He was my Barber, now he writes Clericus!
I bought this place for him, and gaue it him.
He ſhould haue ſpoke of that, Sir, and not you:
Two doe not doe one Office well.
'Tis true,
But I am loth to loſe my curteſies.
So are all they, that doe them, to vaine ends,
And yet you do loſe, when you pay you ſelues.
No more o' your ſentences, Canter, they are ſtale,
We come for newes, remember where you are.
I pray thee let my Princeſſe heare ſome newes,
Good Maſter Cymbal.
What newes would ſhe heare?
Or of what kind, Sir?
Any, any kind.
So it be newes, the neweſt that thou haſt,
Some newes of State, for a Princeſſe.
Read from Rome, there.
They write, the King of Spaine is choſen Pope.
How?
And Emperor too, the thirtieth of February.
Is the Emperor dead?
No, but he has reſign'd,
And trailes a pike now, vnder Tilly.
For pennance.
Theſe will beget ſtrange turnes in Chriſtendome!
And Spinola is made Generall of the Ieſuits.
Stranger!
Sir, all are alike true, and certaine.
All the pretence to the fifth Monarchy,
Was held but vaine, vntill the eccleſiaſtique,
And ſecular powers, were vnited, thus,
Both in one perſon.
'T has bin long the ayme
Of the houſe of Auſtria.
See but Maximilian.
His letters to the Baron of Boutterſheim,
Or Scheiter-huyſſen.
No, of Liechtenſtein,
Lord Paul, I thinke.
I haue heard of ſome ſuch thing.
Don Spinola made Generall of the Ieſuits!
A Prieſt!
O, no, he is diſpenc'd with all,
And the whole ſociety, who doe now appeare
The onely Enginers of Chriſtendome.
They haue bin thought ſo long, and rightly too.
Witneſſe the Engine, that they haue preſented him,
To winde himſelfe with, vp, into the Moone:
And thence make all his diſcoueries!
Read on.
And Vittelleſco, he that was laſt Generall,
Being now turn'd Cooke to the ſociety,
Has dreſt his excellence, ſuch a diſh of egges—
What potch'd?
No, powder'd.
All the yolke is wilde fire,
As he ſhall need beleaguer no more townes,
But throw his Egge in.
It ſhall cleare conſume,
Palace, and place; demoliſh and beare downe,
All ſtrengths before it!
Neuer be extinguiſh'd!
Till all become one ruine!
And from Florence,
They write was found in Galileos ſtudy,
A burning Glaſſe (which they haue ſent him too)
To fire any Fleet that's out at Sea—
By Mooneſhine, is't not ſo?
Yes, Sir, i'the water.
His ſtrengths will be vnreſiſtable, if this hold!
Ha'you no Newes againſt him, on the contrary?
Yes, Sit, they write here, one Cornelius-Son,
Hath made the Hollanders an inuiſible Eele,
To ſwimme the hauen at Dunkirke, and ſinke all
The ſhipping there.
Why ha'not you this, Thom?
Becauſe he keeps the Pontificiall ſide.
How, change ſides, Thom. 'Twas neuer in my thought
To put thee vp againſt our ſelues. Come downe,
Quickly.
Why, Sir?
I venter'd not my mony
Vpon thoſe termes: If he may change; why ſo.
I'll ha him keepe his owne ſide, ſure.
Why, let him,
'Tis but writing ſo much ouer againe.
For that I'll beare the charge: There's two Pieces,
Come, do not ſtick with the gentleman.
I'l take none Sir.
And yet he ſhall ha'the place.
They ſhall be ten, then,
Vp, Thom: and th'Office ſhall take 'hem. Keep your ſide, Thom.
Know your owne ſide, doe not forſake your ſide, Thom.
Read.
They write here one Cornelius-Son,
Hath made the Hollanders an inuiſible Eele,
To ſwimme the Hauen at Dunkirke, and ſinke all
The ſhipping there.
But how is't done?
I'll ſhew you Sit.
It is an Automa, runnes vnderwater,
With a ſnug noſe, and has a nimble taile
Made like an auger, with which taile ſhe wrigles
Betwixt the coaſts of a Ship, and ſinkes it ſtreight.
Whence ha'you this newes.
From a right hand I aſſure you,
The Eele-boats here, that lye before Queen-Hyth,
Came out of Holland.
A moſt braue deuice,
To murder their flat bottomes.
I doe grant you:
But what if Spinola haue a new Proiect:
To bring an army ouer in corke-ſhooes,
And land them, here, at Harwich? all his horſe
Are ſhod with corke, and foureſcore pieces of ordinance,
Mounted vpon cork-carriages, with bladders,
In ſtead of wheeles to runne the paſſage ouer
At a ſpring-tide.
Is't true?
As true as the reſt.
He'll neuer leaue his engines: I would heare now
Some curious newes.
As what?
Magick, or Alchimy
Or flying i'the ayre, I care not what.
They write from Libtzig (reuerence to your eares)
The Art of drawing farts out of dead bodies,
Is by the Brotherhood of the Roſie Croſſe,
Produc'd vnto perfection, in ſo ſweet
And rich a tincture—
As there is no Princeſſe,
But may perfume her chamber with th'extraction.
There's for you. Princeſſe.
What, a fart for her?
I meane the ſpirit.
Beware how ſhe reſents it.
And what haſt thou, Thom?
The perpetuall Motion,
Is here found out by an Alewife in Saint Katherines,
At the ſigne o' the dancing Beares.
What, from her tap?
I'll goe ſee that, or elſe I'll ſend old Canter.
He can make that diſcouery.
Yes, in Ale.
Let me haue all this Newes, made vp, and ſeal'd.
The people preſſe vpon vs, pleaſe you, Sir,
Withdraw with your faire Princeſſe. There's a roome
Within, Sir, to retyre too.
No, good Regiſter,
We'll ſtand it out here, and obſerue your Office;
What Newes it iſſues.
'Tis the houſe of fame, Sir,
Where both the curious, and the negligent;
The ſcrupulous, and careleſſe; wilde, and ſtay'd;
The idle, and laborious; all doe meet,
To taſt the Cornu copiae of her rumors,
Which ſhe, the mother of ſport, pleaſeth to ſcatter
Among the vulgar: Baites, Sir, for the people!
And they will bite like fiſhes.
Let's ſee't.
Ha' you in your prophane Shop, any Newes
O'the Saints at Amſterdam?
Yes, how much would you?
Six peny worth.
Lay your mony down, read, Thomas.
The Saints do write, they expect a Prophet. ſhortly,
The Prophet Baal, to be ſent ouer to them,
To calculate a time, and halfe a time,
And the whole time, according to Naömetry.
What's that?
The meaſuring o'the Temple: a Cabal
Found out but lately, and ſet out by Archie,
Or ſome ſuch head, of whoſe long coat they haue heard,
And being black, deſire it.
Peace be with them!
So there had need, for they are ſtill by the eares
One with another.
It is their zeale.
Moſt likely.
Haue you no other of that ſpecies?
Yes,
But dearer, it will coſt you a ſhilling.
Verily,
There is a' nine-pence, I will ſhed no more.
Not; to the good o'the Saints?
I am not ſure,
Tha man is good.
Read, from Conſtantinople,
penny'orth.
They giue out here, the grand Signior
Is tainely turn'd Chriſtian, and to cleare
The controuerſie 'twixt the Pope and him,
Which is the Antichriſt; he meanes to viſit
The Church at Amſterdam, this very Sommer,
And quit all marks o'the beaſt.
Now ioyfull tydings.
Who brought in this? Which Emiſſary?
Buz.
Your countrey-man.
Now, bleſſed be the man,
And his whole Family, with the Nation.
Yes, for Amboyna, and the Iuſtice there!
This is a Doper, a ſhe Anabaptiſt!
Seale and deliuer her her newes, diſpatch.
Ha'you any newes from the Indies? any mirac
Done in Iapan, by the Ieſuites? or in China?
No, but we heare of a Colony of cookes
To be ſet a ſhore o' the coaſt of America,
For the conuerſion of the Caniballs,
And making them good, eating Cbriſtians.
Here comes the Colonell that vndertakes it.
Who? captaine Lickfinger?
Newes, newes my boyes!
I am to furniſh a great feaſt to day,
And I would haue what newes the Office affords.
We were venting ſome of you, of your new project,
Afore 'twas paid for, you were ſomewhat too haſty.
What Lickfinger! wilt thou conuert the Caniballs,
With ſpit and pan Diuinity?
Sir, for that
I will not vrge, but for the fire and zeale
To the true cauſe; thus I haue vndertaken:
With two Lay-brethren, to my ſelfe, no more,
Oeo the broach, th'other o'the boyler,
In one ſixe months, and by plaine cookery,
No magick to't, but old Iaphets phyſicke,
The father of the Europaean Arts,
To make ſuch ſauces for the Sauages,
And cookes their meats, with thoſe inticing ſteemes,
As it would make our Caniball-Chriſtians,
Forbeare the mutuall eating one another,
Which they doe doe, more cunningly, then the wilde
Anthropophagi; that ſnatch onely ſtrangers,
Like my old Patrons dogs, there.
O, my Vncles!
Is dinner ready, Lickfinger?
When you pleaſe, Sir.
I was beſpeaking but a parcell of newes,
To ſtrew out the long meale withall, but 't ſeemes
You are furniſh'd here already.
O, not halfe!
What Court-newes is there? any Proclamations,
Or Edicts to come forth.
Yes, there is one.
That the Kings Barber has got, for aid of our trade:
Whereof there is a manifeſt decay.
A Precept for the wearing of long haire,
To runne to ſeed, to ſow bald pates withall,
And the preſeruing fruitfull heads, and chins,
To help a miſtery, almoſt antiquated.
Such as are bald and barren beyond hope,
Are to be ſeparated, and ſet by
For Vſhers, to old Counteſſes.
And Coachmen.
To mount their boxes, reuerently, and driue,
Like Lapwings, with a ſhell vpo' their heads.
Thorow the ſtreets. Ha' you no Newes o'the Stage?
They'll aske me abou new Playes, at dinner time.
And I ſhould be as dumbe as a fiſh.
O! yes.
There is a Legacy left to the Kings Players,
Both for their various ſhifting of their Scene,
And dext'rous change o'their perſons to all ſhapes,
And all diſguiſes: by the right reuerend
Archbiſhop of Spalato.
He is dead,
That plai'd him!
Then, h'has loſt his ſhare o' the Legacy.
What newes of Gundomar?
A ſecond Fiſtula,
Or an excoriation (at the leaſt)
For putting the poore Engliſh-play, was writ of him,
To ſuch a ſordid vſe, as (is ſaid) he did,
Of cleanſing his poſterior's.
Iuſtice! Iuſtice!
Since when, he liues condemn'd to his ſhare, at Bruxels.
And there ſits filing certaine politique hinges,
To hang the States on, h'has heau'd off the hookes.
What muſt you haue for theſe?
Thou ſhalt pay nothing,
But reckon 'hem in i'the bill. There's twenty pieces,
Her Grace beſtowes vpon the Office, Thom,
Write thou that downe for Newes.
We may well do't,
We haue not many ſuch.
There's twenty more,
If you ſay ſo; my Princeſſe is a Prineceſſe!
And put that too, vnder the Office Seale.
If it will pleaſe your Grace to ſoiourne here,
And take my roofe for couert, you ſhall know
The rites belonging to your blood, and birth,
Which few can apprehend: theſe ſordid ſeruants,
Which rather are your keepers, then attendants,
Should not come neere your preſence. I would haue
You waited on by Ladies, and your traine
Borne vp by perſons of quality, and honour,
Your meat ſhould be ſeru'd in with curious dances,
And ſet vpon the boord, with virgin hands,
Tund to their voices; not a diſh remou'd,
But to the Muſicke, nor a drop of wine,
Mixt, with his water, without Harmony,
You are a Courtier, Sir, or ſomewhat more;
That haue this tempting language!
I'm your ſeruant,
Exellent Princeſſe, and would ha' you appeare
That, which you are. Come forth State, and wonder,
Of theſe our times, dazle the vulgar eyes.
And ſtrike the people blind with admiration.
Why, that's the end of wealth! thruſt riches outward,
And remaine beggers within: contemplate nothing
But the vile ſordid things of time, place, money,
And let the noble, and the precious goe,
Vertue and honeſty; hang 'hem; poore thinne membranes
Of honour; who reſpects them? O, the Fates!
How hath all iuſt, true reputation fall'n,
Since money, this baſe money 'gan to haue any!
Pitty, the Gentleman is not immortall.
As he giues out, the place is, by deſcription.
A very Paradiſe, if you ſaw all, Lady.
I am the Chamber-maid, Sir, you miſtake,
My Lady may ſee all.
Sweet Miſtreſſe Statute, gentle Miſtreſſe Band,
And Mother Mortgage, doe but get her Grace
To ſoiourne here.—
I thanke you gentle Waxe,
If it were a Chattell, I would try my credit.
So it is, for terme of life, we count it ſo.
She meanes, Inheritance to him, and his heyres:
Or that he could aſſure a State, of yeeres:
I'll be his Statute-Staple, Statute-Merchant,
Or what he pleaſe.
He can expect no more.
His couſin Alderman Security,
That he did talke of ſo, e'en now—
Who, is
The very broch o'the bench, gem o'the City.
He and his Deputy, but aſſure his life
For one ſeuen yeeres.
And ſee what we'll doe for him,
Vpon his ſcarlet motion.
And old Chaine,
That drawes the city-eares.
When he ſayes nothing,
But twirles it thus.
A mouing Oratory!
Dumb Rethoricke, and ſilent eloquence!
As the fine Poet ſaies!
Come, they all ſcorne vs,
Doe you not ſee't? the family of ſcorne!
Doe not belieue him! gentle Maſter Picklocke,
They vnderſtood you not: the Gentlewomen,
They thought you would ha' my Lady ſoiourne, with you,
And you deſire but now and then, a viſit?
Yes, if ſhe pleas'd, Sir, it would much aduance
Vnto the Office, her continuall reſidence!
(I ſpeake but as a member)
'Tis inough.
I apprehend you. And it ſhall goe hard,
But I'll ſo worke, as ſome body ſhall worke her!
'pray you change with our Maſter, but a word about it.
Well, Lickfinger, ſee that our meat be ready,
Thou haſt Newes inough.
Something of Bethlem Gabor,
And then I'm gone.
We heare he has deuis'd
A Drumme, to fill all Chriſtendome with the ſound:
But that he cannot drawe his forces neere it,
To march yet, for the violence of the noiſe.
And therefore he is faine by a deſigne,
To carry 'hem in the ayre, and at ſome diſtance,
Till he be married, then they ſhall appeare.
Or neuer; well, God b'w'you (ſtay, who's here?)
A little of the Duke of Bauier, and then—
H'has taken a gray habit, and is turn'd
The Churches Millar, grinds the catholique griſt
With euery wind: and Tilly takes the toll.
Ha'you any newes o'the Pageants to ſend downe?
Into the ſeuerall Counties. All the countrey
Expected from the city moſt braue ſpeeches,
Now, at the Coronation.
It expected
More then it vnderſtood: for, they ſtand mute,
Poore innocent dumb things; they are but wood.
As is the bench and blocks, they were wrought on, yet
If May-day come, and the Sunne ſhine, perhaps,
They'll ſing like Memnons Statue, and be vocall.
Ha'you any Foreſt-newes?
None very wild, Sir,
Some tame there is, out o' the Forreſt of fooles,
A new Parke is a making there, to ſeuer
Cuckolds of Antler, from the Raſcalls. Such,
Whoſe wiues are dead, and haue ſince caſt their heads,
Shall remaine Cuckolds-pollard.
I'll ha' that newes.
And I. 2. And I. 3. And I. 4. And I. 5. And I.
Sir, I deſire to be excus'd; and, Madame:
I cannot leaue my Office, the firſt day.
My Couſin Fitton here, ſhall wait vpon you.
And Emiſſary Picklocke.
And Thom: Clericus?
I cannot ſpare him yet, but he ſhall follow you,
When they haue ordered the Rolls. Shut vp th'Office,
When you ha' done, till two a clocke.
BY your leaue, Clerkes,
Where ſhall we dine to day? doe you know? the Ieerers.
Where's my fellow Fitton?
New gone forth.
Cannot your Office tell vs, what braue fellowes
Doe eat together to day, in towne, and where?
Yes, there's a Gentleman, the braue heire, yong Peny-boy.
Dines in Apollo.
Come, let's thither then,
I ha' ſupt in Apollo!
With the Muſes?
No, Sir.
But with two Gentlewomen, call'd, the Graces.
They' were euer three in Poetry.
This was truth,
Sir, Maſter Fitton's there too!
All the better!
We may haue a ieere, perhaps.
Yes, you'll drink, Doctor.
(If there be any good meat) as much good wine now,
As would lay vp a Dutch Ambaſſador.
If he dine there, he's ſure to haue good meat,
For, Lickfinger prouides the dinner.
Who?
The glory o'the Kitchin? that holds Cookery,
A trade from Adam? quotes his broths, and ſallads?
And ſweares he's not dead yet, but tranſlated
In ſome immortall cruſt, the paſt of Almonds?
The ſame. He holds no man can be a Poet,
That is not a good Cooke, to know the palats,
And ſeuerall taſtes o'the time. He drawes all Arts
Out of the Kitchin, but the Art of Poetry,
which he concludes the ſame with Cookery.
Tut, he maintaines more hereſies then that.
He'll draw the Magiſterium from a minc'd-pye,
And preferre Iellies, to your Iulips, Doctor.
I was at an Olla Podrida of his making,
Was a braue piece of cookery! at a funerall!
But opening the pot-lid, he made vs laugh,
who'had wept all day! and ſent vs ſuch a tickling
Into our noſtrills, as the funerall feaſt
Had bin a wedding-dinner.
Gi'him allowance,
And that but moderate, he will make a Syren
Sing i'the Kettle, ſend in an Arion,
In a braue broth, and of a watry greene,
Iuſt the Sea-colour, mounted on the backe
Of a growne Cunger, but, in ſuch a poſture,
As all the world would take him for a Dolphin.
Hee's a rare fellow, without queſtion! but
He holds ſome Paradoxes.
I, and Pſeudodoxes.
Mary, for moſt, he's Orthodox i'the Kitchin.
And knowes the Clergies taſt!
I, and the Layties!
You thinke not o'your time, we'll come too late,
If we go not preſently.
Away then.
Sirs,
You muſt get o'this newes, to ſtore your Office,
VVho dines and ſups i' the towne? where, and with whom?
'Twill be beneficiall: when you are ſtor'd;
And as we like our fare, we ſhall reward you.
A hungry trade, 'twill be.
Much like D. Humphries,
But, now and then, as th'holeſome prouerb ſaies,
'Twill obſonare famem ambulando.
Shut vp the Office: gentle brother Thomas.
Brother, Nathaniel, I ha'the wine for you.
I hope to ſee vs, one day, Emiſſaries.
Why not? S'lid, I deſpaire not to be Maſter!
HOw now? I thinke I was borne vnder Hercules ſtarre!
Nothing but trouble and tumult to oppreſſe me?
Why come you backe? where is your charge?
I ha' brought
A Gentleman to ſpeake with you?
To ſpeake with me?
You know 'tis death for me to ſpeake with any man.
What is he? ſet me a chaire.
He's the Maſter
Of the great Office.
What?
The Staple of Newes,
A mighty thing, they talke Six thouſand a yeere.
Well bring your ſixe in. Where ha' you left Pecunia?
Sir, in Apollo, they are ſcarce ſet.
Bring ſixe.
Here is the Gentleman.
He muſt pardon me,
I cannot riſe, a diſeas'd man.
By no meanes, Sir,
Reſpect your health, and eaſe.
It is no pride in me!
But paine, paine; what's your errand, Sir, to me?
Broker, returne to your charge, be Argus-eyed,
Awake, to the affaire you haue in hand,
Serue in Apollo, but take heed of Bacchus.
Goe on, Sir.
I am come to ſpeake with you.
'Tis paine for me to ſpeake, a very death,
But I will heare you!
Sir, you haue a Lady,
That ſoiournes with you.
Ha? I am ſomewhat ſhort
In my ſenſe too—
Pecunia.
O' that ſide,
Very imperfect, on—
Whom I would draw
Oftner to a poore Office, I am Maſter of—
My hearing is very dead, you muſt ſpeake quicker.
Or, if it pleaſe you, Sir, to let her ſoiourne
In part with me; I haue a moyety
We will diuide, halfe of the profits.
Ha?
I heare you better now, how come they in?
Is it a certaine buſineſſe, or a caſuall?
For I am loth to ſeeke out doubtfull courſes,
Runne any hazardous paths, I loue ſtreight waies,
A iuſt, and vpright man! now all trade totters.
The trade of money, is fall'n, two i'the hundred.
That was a certaine trade, while th' age was thrifty,
And men good husbands, look'd vnto their ſtockes,
Had their mindes bounded; now the publike Riot
Proſtitutes all, ſcatters away in coaches,
In foot-mens coates, and waiting womens gownes,
They muſt haue veluet hanches (with a pox)
Now taken vp, and yet not pay the vſe;
Bate of the vſe? I am mad with this times manners.
You ſaid e'en now, it was death for you to ſpeake.
I, but an anger, a iuſt anger, (as this is)
Puts life in man. Who can endure to ſee
The fury of mens gullets, and their groines?
What fires, what cookes, what kitckins might be ſpar'd?
What Stewes, Ponds, Parks, Coupes, Garners, Magazines?
What veluets, tiſſues, ſcarfes, embroyderies?
And laces they might lacke? They couet things—
Superfluous ſtill; when it were much more honour
They could want neceſſary! What need hath Nature
Of ſiluer diſhes? or gold chamber-pots?
Of perfum'd napkins? or a numerous family,
To ſee her eate? Poore, and wiſe ſhe, requires
Meate onely; Hunger is not ambitious:
Say, that you were the Emperour of pleaſures,
The great Dictator of faſhions, for all Europe,
And had the pompe of all the Courts, and Kingdomes,
Laid forth vnto the ſhew? to make your ſelfe
Gaz'd, and admir'd at? You muſt goe to bed,
And take your naturall reſt: then, all this vaniſheth.
Your brauery was but ſhowen; 'twas not poſſeſt:
While it did boaſt it ſelfe, it was then periſhing.
This man has healthfull lungs.
All that exceſſe
Appear'd as little yours, as the Spectators.
It ſcarce fills vp the expectation
Of a few houres, that entertaines mens liues.
He has the monopoly of ſole-ſpeaking.
Why, good Sir? you talke all.
Why ſhould I not?
Is it not vnder mine owne roofe? my feeling?
But I came hete to talk with you.
Why, an'I will not
Talke with you, Sir? you are anſwer'd, who ſent for you?
No body ſent for me—
But you came, why then
Goe, as you came, heres no man holds you, There,
There lies your way, you ſee the doore.
This's ſtrange!
'Tis my ciuility, when I doe not relliſh
The party, or his buſineſſe. Pray you be gone, Sir.
I'll ha' no venter in your Ship, the Office
Your Barke of Six, if'twere ſixteene, good, Sir,
You are a rogue.
I thinke I am Sir, truly.
A Raſcall, and a money-bawd.
My ſurnames:
A wretched Raſcall!
You will ouerflow—
And ſpill all.
Caterpiller, moath,
Horſe-leach, and dung-worme—
Still you loſe your labor.
I am a broken veſſell, all runnes out:
A ſhrunke old Dryfat. Fare you well, good Sixe.
A notable tough Raſcall! this old Peny-boy! right City-bred!
In Siluer-ſtreete, the Region of money, a good ſeat for a Vſurer.
He has rich ingredients in him, I warrant you, if they were extracted, a true receit to make an Alderman, an' he were well wrought vpon, according to Art.
I would faine ſee an Alderman in chimia! that is a treatiſe of Aldermanity truely written.
To ſhew how much it differs from Vrbanity.
I, or humanity. Either would appeare in this Peny boy, an' hee were rightly diſtill'd. But how like you the newes? you are gone from that.
O, they are monſtrous! ſcuruy! and ſtale! and too exotick! ill cook'd! and ill diſh'd!
They were as good, yet, as butter could make them!
In a word, they were beaſtly buttered! he ſhall neuer come o' my bread more, nor my in mouth, if I can helpe it. I haue had better newes from the bake-houſe, by ten thouſand parts, in a morning: or the conduicts in Weſtminſter! all the newes of Tutle-ſtreet, and both the Alm'ries! the two Sanctuaries long, and round Wool-ſtaple! with Kings-ſtreet, and Chanon-row to boot!
I, my Goſsip Tatle knew what fine ſlips grew in Gardiners-lane; who kiſt the Butchers wife with the Cowes-breath; what matches were made in the bowling-Alley, and what bettes wonne and loſt; how much grieft went to the Mill and what beſides: who coniur'd in Tutle-fields, and how many? when they neuer came there. And which Boy rode vpon Doctor Lambe, in the likeneſſe of a roaring Lyon, that runne away with him in his teeth, and ha's not deuour'd him yet.
Why, I had it from my maid Ioane Heare-ſay: and ſhee had it from a limbe o'the ſchoole, ſhee ſaies, a little limbe of nine yeere old; who told her, the Maſter left out his coniuring booke one day, and hee found it, and ſo the Fable came about. But whether it were true, or no, we Goſsips are bound to beleeue it, an't be once out, and a foot: how ſhould wee entertaine the time elſe, or finde our ſelues in faſhionable diſcourſe, for all companies, if we do not credit all, and make more of it, in the reporting?
For my part, I beleeue it: and there were no wiſer then I, I would haue ne'er a cunning Schoole-Maſter in England. I meane a Cunning-Man, a Schoole-Maſter; that is a Coniurour, or a Poet, or that had any acquaintance with a Poet. They make all their ſchollers Play-boyes! Is't not a fine ſight, to ſee all our children made Enterluders? Doe wee pay our money for this? wee ſend them to learne their Grammar, and their Terence, and they learne their play-books? well, they talke, we ſhall haue no more Parliaments (God bleſſe vs) but an'wee haue, I hope, Zeale-of-the-land Buzy, and my Goſsip, Rabby Trouble-truth will ſtart vp, and ſee we ſhall haue painfull good Miniſters to keepe Schoole, and Catechiſe our youth, and not teach 'hem to ſpeake Playes, and Act Fables of falſe newes, in this manner, to the ſuper-exation of Towne and Countrey, with a wanion.
Ome, Gentlemen, let's breath from healths a while.
This Lickfinger has made vs a good dinner,
For our Pecunia: what ſhal's doe with our ſelues,
While the women water? and the Fidlers eat?
Let's ieere a little.
Ieere? what's that?
Expect, Sr.
We firſt begin with our ſelues, & then at you,
A game we vſe.
We ieere all kind of perſons
We meete withall, of any rancke or quality,
And if we cannot ieere them, we ieere our ſelues.
A pretty ſweete ſociety! and a gratefull!
'Pray let's ſee ſome.
Haue at you, then Lawyer.
They ſay, there was one of your coate in Bet'lem, lately,
I wonder all his Clients were not there.
They were the madder ſort.
Except, Sir, one
Like you, and he made verſes.
Madrigall,
A ieere.
I know.
But what did you doe, Lawyer?
When you made loue to Miſtreſſe Band, at dinner.
Why? of an Aduocate, he grew the Clyent.
Well play'd, my Poet.
And ſhew'd the Law of nature
Was there aboue the Common-Law.
Quit, quit,
Call you this ieering? I can play at this,
'Tis like a Ball at Tennis.
Very like,
But we were not well in.
'Tis indeed, Sir.
When we doe ſpeake at volley, all the ill
We can one of another.
As this morning,
(I would you had heard vs) of the Rogue your Vncle.
That Mony-bawd.
We call'd him a Coat-card
O'the laſt order.
What's that? a Knaue?
Some readings haue it ſo, my manuſcript
Doth ſpeake it, arlet.
And your ſelfe a Foole
O'the firſt ranke, and one ſhall haue the leading
O'the right-hand file, vnder this braue Commander.
What ſaiſt thou, Canter?
Sir, I ſay this is
A very wholeſome exerciſe, and comely.
Like Lepers, ſhewing one another their ſcabs.
Or flies feeding on vlcers.
What Newes Gentlemen?
Ha' you any newes for after dinner? me thinks
We ſhould not ſpend our time vnprofitably.
They neuer lie, Sir, betweene meales, 'gainſt ſupper
You may haue a Bale or two brought in.
This Canter,
Is an old enuious Knaue!
A very Raſcall!
I ha' mark'd him all this meale, he has done nothing
But mocke, with ſcuruy faces, all wee ſaid.
A ſupercilious Rogue! he lookes as if
He were the Patrico—
Or Arch-prieſt o'Canters,
Hee's ſome primate metropolitan Raſcall,
Our ſhot-clog makes ſo much of him.
The Law,
And he does gouerne him
What ſay you, Gentlemen?
We ſay, we wonder not, your man o' Law,
Should be ſo gracious wi'you; but how it comes,
This Rogue, this Canter!
O, good words.
A fellow
That ſpeakes no language—
But what gingling Gipſies,
And Pedlers trade in—
And no honeſt Chriſtian
Can vnderſtand—
Why? by that argument,
You all are Canters, you, and you, and you,
All the whole world are Canters, I will proue it
In your profeſsions.
I would faine heare this,
But ſtay, my Princeſſe comes, prouide the while,
I'll call for't anone. How fares your Grace?
I hope the fare was good.
Yes, Lickfinger,
And we ſhall thanke you for't and reward you.
Nay, I'll not loſe my argument, Lickfinger;
Before theſe Gentlemen, I affirme,
The perfect, and true ſtraine of poetry,
Is rather to be giuen the quicke Celler,
Then the fat Kitchin.
Heretique, I ſee
Thou art for the vaine Oracle of the Botle.
The hogſhead, Triſmegiſtus, is thy Pegaſus.
Thence flowes thy Muſes ſpring, from that hard hoofe▪
Seduced Poet, I doe ſay to thee,
A Boyler, Range, and Dreſſer were the Fountaines,
Of all the knowledge in the vniuerſe.
And they 'are the Kitchins, where the Maſter-Cooke—
(Thou doſt not know the man, nor canſt thou know him,
Till thou haſt ſeru'd ſome yeeres in that deepe ſchoole,
That's both the Nurſe and Mother of the Arts,
And hear'ſt him read, interpret, and demonſtrate!)
A Maſter-Cooke! Why, he's the man o' men,
For a Profeſſor! he deſignes, he drawes,
He paints, he carues, he builds, he fortifies,
Makes Citadels of curious fowle and fiſh,
Some he dri-diſhes, ſome motes round with broths.
Mounts marrowbones, cuts fifty angled cuſtards,
Reares bulwark pies, and for his outerworkes
He raiſeth Ramparts of immortall cruſt;
And teacheth all the Tacticks, at one dinner:
What Rankes, what Files, to put his diſhes in;
The whole Art Military. Then he knowes,
The influence of the Starres vpon his meats,
And all their ſeaſons, tempers, qualities,
And ſo to fit his reliſhes, and ſauces,
He has Nature in a pot, 'boue all the Chymiſts,
Or airy brethren of the Roſie-croſſe.
He is an Architect, an Inginer,
A Souldiour, a Phyſician, a Philoſopher,
A generall Mathematician.
It is granted.
And that you may not doubt him, for a Poet—
This fury ſhewes, if there were nothing elſe!
And 'tis diuine! I ſhall for euer hereafter,
Admire the wiſedome of a Cooke!
And we, Sir!
O, how my Princeſſe drawes me, with her lookes,
And hales me in, as eddies draw in boats,
Or ſtrong Charybdis ſhips, that ſaile too neere
The ſhelues of Loue! The tydes of your two eyes!
Wind of your breath, are ſuch as ſucke in all,
That doe approach you!
Who hath chang'd my ſeruant?
Your ſelfe, who drinke my blood vp with your beames,
As doth the Sunne, the Sea! Pecunia ſhines
More in the world then he: and makes it Spring
Where e'r ſhe fauours! 'pleaſe her but to ſhow
Her melting wreſts, or bare her yuorie hands,
She catches ſtill! her ſmiles they are Loue's fetters!
Her breſts his apples! her teats Stawberries!
Where Cupid (were he preſent now) would cry
Fare well my mothers milke, here's ſweeter Nectar!
Helpe me to praiſe Pecunia, Gentlemen:
She's your Princeſſe, lend your wits,
A Lady,
The Graces taught to moue!
The Houres did nurſe!
Whoſe lips are the inſtructions of all Louers!
Her eyes their lights, and riualls to the Starres!
A voyce, as if that Harmony ſtill ſpake!
And poliſh'd skinne, whiter then Venus foote!
Young Hebes necke, or Iunoe's armes!
A haire,
Large as the Mornings, and her breath as ſweete,
As meddowes after raine, and but new mowne!
Laeda might yeeld vnto her, for a face!
Hermione for breſts!
Flora, for cheekes!
And Helen for a mouth!
Kiſſe, kiſſe 'hem, Princeſſe.
The pearle doth ſtriue in whiteneſſe, with her necke,
But loſeth by it: here the Snow thawes Snow;
One froſt reſolues another!
O, ſhe has
A front too ſlippery to be look't vpon!
And glances that beguile the ſeers eyes!
Kiſſe, kiſſe againe, what ſaies my man o' warre?
I ſay, ſhe's more, then Fame can promiſe of her.
A Theame, that's ouercome with her owne matter!
Praiſe is ſtrucke blind, and deafe, and dumbe with her!
Shee doth aſtoniſh Commendation!
Well pumpt i'faith old Sailor: kiſſe him too:
Though he be a ſlugge. What ſaies my Poet-ſucker!
He's chewing his Muſes cudde, I doe ſee by him.
I haue almoſt done, I want but e'ne to finiſh.
That's the 'ill luck of all his workes ſtill.
What?
To beginne many works, but finiſh none;
How does he do his Miſtreſſe work?
Imperfect.
I cannot thinke he finiſheth that.
Let's heare▪
It is a Madrigall, I affect that kind
Of Poem, much.
And thence you ha' the name.
It is his Roſe. He can make nothing elſe
I made it to the tune the Fidlers play'd,
That we all lik'd ſo well.
Good, read it, read it.
The Sunne is father of all mettalls, you know,
Siluer, and gold.
I, leaue your Prologues, ſay!
As bright as is the Sunne her Sire,
Or Earth her mother, in her beſt atyre,
Or Mint, the Mid-wife, with her fire,
Comes forth her Grace!
The ſplendour of the wealthieſt Mines!
The ſtamp, and ſtrength of all imperiall lines,
Both maieſty and beauty ſhines,
In her ſweet face!
Looke how a Torch, of Taper light,
Or of that Torches flame, a Beacon bright;
That Mint the Midwife does well.
That's fairely said of Money.
Good!
Now there, I want a line to finiſh, Sir.
Or of that Beacons fire, Moone-light:
So takes ſhe place!
And then I haue a Saraband—
She makes good cheare, ſhe keepes full boards,
She holds a Faire of Knights, and Lords,
A Mercat of all Offices,
And Shops of honour, more or leſſe.
According to Pecunia's Grace,
The Bride hath beauty, blood, and place,
The Bridegrome vertue, valour, wit,
And wiſedome, as he ſtands for it.
'Tis good.
Call in the Fidlers. Nicke, the boy ſhall ſing it,
Sweet Princeſſe, kiſſe him, kiſſe 'hem all, deare Madame,
And at the cloſe, vouchſafe to call them Couſins.
Sweet Couſin Madrigall, and Couſin Fitton,
My Couſin Shunfield, and my learned Couſin.
Al-manach, though they call him Almanack.
Why, here's the Prodigall proſtitutes his Miſtreſſe!
And Picklocke, he muſt be a kinſman too.
My man o' Law will teach vs all to winne,
And keepe our owne. Old Founder.
Nothing, I Sir?
I am a wretch, a begger. She the fortunate.
Can want no kindred, wee, the poore know none.
Nor none ſhall know, by my conſent.
Nor mine,
Sing, boy, ſtand here.
Look, look, how all their eyes
Dance i'their heads (obſerue) ſcatter'd with luſt!
At ſight o' their braue Idoll! how they are tickl'd,
With a light ayre! the bawdy Saruband!
They are a kinde of dancing engines all!
And ſet, by nature, thus, to runne alone
To euery ſound! All things within, withou them,
Moue, but their braine, and that ſtands ſtill! mere monſters
Here, in a chamber, of moſt ſubtill feet!
And make their legs in tune, paſſing the ſtreetes!
Theſe are the gallant ſpirits o'the age!
The miracles o'the time! that can cry vp
And downe mens wits! and ſet what rate on things
Their half-brain'd fancies pleaſe! Now pox vpon 'hem.
See how ſolicitouſly he learnes the Iigge,
As if it were a myſtery of his faith!
A dainty ditty!
O, hee's a dainty Poet!
When he ſets to't!
And a dainty Scholler!
No, no great ſcholler, he writes like a Gentleman.
Pox o'your Scholler.
Pox o'your diſtinction!
As if a Scholler were no Gentleman.
With theſe, to write like a Gentleman, will in time
Become, all one, as to write like an Aſſe,
Theſe Gentlemen? theſe Raſcalls! I am ſicke
Of indignation at 'hem.
How doe you lik't, Sir?
'Tis excellent!
'Twas excellently ſung!
A dainty Ayre!
What ſaies my Lickfinger?
I am telling Miſtreſſe Band, and Miſtreſſe Statute,
What a braue Gentleman you are, and Waxe, here!
How much 'twere better, that my Ladies Grace,
Would here take vp Sir, and keepe houſe with you.
What ſay they?
We could conſent, Sr, willingly.
I, if we knew her Grace had the leaſt liking.
We muſt obey her Graces will, and pleaſure.
I thanke you, Gentlewomen, ply 'hem, Lickfinger.
Giue mother Mortgage, there—
Her doze of Sacke.
I haue it for her, and her diſtance of Hum.
Indeede therein, I muſt confeſſe, deare Couſin,
I am a moſt vnfortunate Princeſſe.
And
You ſtill will be ſo, when your Grace may helpe it.
Who'ld lie in a roome, with a cloſe-ſtoole, and garlick?
And kennell with his dogges? that had a Prince
Like this young Peny-boy, to ſoiourne with?
He'll let you ha' your liberty—
Goe forth,
Whither you pleaſe, and to what company—
Scatter your ſelfe amongſt vs—
Hope of Pernaſſus!
Thy Iuy ſhall not wither, nor thy Bayes,
Thou ſhalt be had into her Graces Cellar,
And there know Sacke, and Claret, all December,
Thy veine is rich, and we muſt cheriſh it.
Poets and Bees ſwarme now adaies, but yet
There are not thoſe good Tauernes, for the one ſort,
As there are Flowrie fields to feed the other.
Though Bees be pleas'd with dew, aske little Waxe
That brings the honey to her Ladyes hiue:
The Poet muſt haue wine. And he ſhall haue it.
BRoker? what Broker?
Who's that? my Vncle!
I am abus'd, where is my Knaue? my Broker?
Your Broker is laid out vpon a bench, yonder,
Sacke hath ſeaz'd on him, in the ſhape of ſleepe.
Hee hath beene dead to vs almoſt this houre.
This houre?
Why ſigh you Sr? 'cauſe he's at reſt?
It breeds my vnreſt.
Will you take a cup
And try if you can ſleepe?
No, cogging Iacke,
Thou and thy cups too, periſh.
O, the Sacke!
The ſacke, the ſacke!
A Madrigall on Sacke!
Or rather an Elegy, for the Sacke is gone.
VVhy doe you this, Sir? ſpill the wine, and raue?
For Brokers ſleeping?
VVhat through ſleepe, and Sacke,
My truſt is wrong'd: but I am ſtill awake,
To waite vpon your Grace, pleaſe you to quit
This ſtrange lewd company, they are not for you.
No Guardian, I doe like them very well.
Your Graces pleaſure be obſeru'd, but you
Statute, and Band, and Waxe, will goe with me.
Truly we will not.
VVe will ſtay, and wait here
Vpon her Grace, and this your Noble Kinſman.
Noble? how noble! who hath made him noble?
VVhy, my moſt noble money hath, or ſhall▪
My Princeſſe, here. She that had you but kept,
And treated kindly, would haue made you noble,
And wiſe, too: nay, perhaps haue done that for you,
An Act of Parliament could not, made you honeſt.
The truth is, Vncle, that her Grace diſlikes
Her entertainment: ſpecially her lodging.
Nay, ſay her iaile. Neuer vnfortunate Princeſſe,
Was vs'd ſo by a Iaylor. Aske my women,
Band, you can tell, and Statute, how he has vs'd me,
Kept me cloſe priſoner, vnder twenty bolts—
And forty padlocks—
All malicious ingines
A wicked Smith could forge out of his yron:
As locks, and keyes, ſhacles, and manacles,
To torture a great Lady.
H'has abus'd
Your Graces body.
No, he would ha' done,
That lay not in his power: he had the vſe
Of our bodies, Band, and Waxe, and ſometimes Statutes:
But once he would ha'ſmother'd me in a cheſt,
And ſtrangl'd me in leather, but that you
Came to my reſcue, then, and gaue mee ayre.
For which he cramb'd vs vp in a cloſe boxe,
All three together, where we ſaw no Sunne
In one ſixe moneths.
A cruell man he is!
H'has left my fellow Waxe out, i'the cold,
Till ſhe was ſtiffe, as any froſt, and crumbl'd
Away to duſt, and almoſt loſt her forme.
Much adoe to recouer me.
Women Ieerers!
Haue you learn'd too, the ſubtill facultie?
Come, I'll ſhew you the way home, if drinke,
Or, too full diet haue diſguis'd you.
Troth,
We haue not any mind, Sir, of returne—
To be bound back to backe—
And haue our legs
Turn'd in, or writh'd about—
Or elſe diſplay'd—
Be lodg'd with duſt and fleas, as we were wont—
And dyeted with dogs dung.
Why? you whores,
My bawds, my inſtruments, what ſhould I call you,
Man may thinke baſe inough for you?
Heare you, vncle.
I muſt not heare this of my Princeſſe ſeruants,
And in Apollo, in Pecunia's roome,
Goe, get you downe the ſtaires: Home, to your Kennell,
As ſwiftly as you can. Conſult your dogges,
The Lares of your family; or beleeue it,
The fury of a foote-man, and a drawer
Hangs ouer you.
Cudgell, and pot doe threaten
A kinde of vengeance.
Barbers are at hand.
Waſhing and ſhauing will enſue.
The Pumpe
Is not farre off; If't were, the ſinke is neere:
Or a good Iordan.
You haue now no money,
But are a Raſcall.
I am cheated, robb'd
Ieer'd by confederacy.
No, you are kick'd
And vſed kindly, as you ſhould be.
Spurn'd,
From all commerce of men, who are a curre.
A ſtinking dogge, in a dublet, with foule linnen.
A ſnarling Raſcall, hence.
Out.
Wel, remember,
I am coozen'd by my Couſin, and his whore!
Bane o'theſe meetings in Apollo!
Goe, Sir,
You will be toſt like Block, in a blanket elſe.
Downe with him, Lickfinger.
Saucy Iacke away,
Pecunia is a whore.
Play him downe, Fidlers,
And drown his noiſe. Who's this!
O Maſter Pyed-mantle!
BY your leaue, Gentlemen.
Her Graces Herald,
No Herald yet, a Heraldet.
What's that?
A Canter.
O, thou ſaid'ſt thou'dſt ſproue vs all ſo!
Sir, here is one will proue himſelfe ſo, ſtreight,
So ſhall the reſt, in time.
My Pedigree?
I tell you, friend, he muſt be a good Scholler,
Can my diſcent. I am of Princely race,
And as good blood, as any is i'the mines,
Runnes through my veines. I am, euery limb, a Princeſſe!
Dutcheſſe O' mynes, was my great Grandmother.
And by the Fathers ſide, I come from Sol.
My Grand-father was Duke of Or, and match'd
In the blood-royall of Ophyr.
Here's his Coat.
I know it, if I heare the Blazon.
He beares
In a field Azure, a Sunne proper, beamy,
Twelue of the ſecond.
How farr's this from canting?
Her Grace doth vnderſtand ti.
She can cant, Sr ▪
What be theſe? Beſants?
Yes, an't pleaſe your Grace.
That is our Coat too, as we come from Or.
What line's this?
The rich mynes of Potoſi.
The Spaniſh mynes i'the Weſt-Indies.
This?
The mynes o' Hungary, this of Barbary.
But this, this little branch.
The Welſh-myne that.
I ha' Welſh-blood in me too, blaze, Sir, that Coat.
She beares (an't pleaſe you) Argent, three leekes vert
In Canton Or, and taſſel'd of the firſt.
Is not this canting? doe you vnderſtand him?
Not I, but it ſounds well, and the whole thing▪
Is rarely painted, I will haue ſuch a ſcrowle,
What ere it coſt me.
VVell, at better leaſure,
We'll take a view of it, and ſo reward you.
Kiſſe him, ſweet Princeſſe, and ſtile him a Couſin.
I will, if you will haue it. Couſin Pyed-mantle.
I loue all men of vertue, from my Princeſſe,
Vnto my begger, here, old Canter, on,
On to thy proofe, whom proue you the next Canter?
The Doctor here, I will proceed with the learned.
VVhen he diſcourſeth of diſſection,
Or any point of Anatomy: that hee tells you,
Of Vena caua, and of vena porta,
The Meſeraicks, and the Meſenterium.
VVhat does hee elſe but cant? Or if he runne
To his Iudiciall Aſtrologie,
And trowle the Trine, the Quartile and the Sextile,
Platicke aſpect, and Partile, with his Hyleg
Or Alchochoden, Cuſpes, and Horroſcope.
Does not he cant? VVho here does vnderſtand him?
This is no Canter, tho!
Or when my Maſter-Maſter
Talkes of his Tacticks, and his Rankes, and Files;
His Bringers vp, his Leaders on, and cries,
Faces about to the right hand, the left,
Now, as you were: then tells you of Redoubts,
Of Cats, and Cortines. Doth not he cant?
Yes, 'faith.
My Eg-chind Laureat, here, when he comes forth
With Dimeters, and Trimeters, Tetrameters,
Pentameters, Hexameters, Catalecticks,
His Hyper, and his Brachy-Catalecticks,
His Pyrrhichs, Epitrites, and Choriambicks.
What is all this, but canting?
A rare fellow!
Some begging Scholler!
A decay'd Doctor at leaſt!
Nay, I doe cheriſh vertue, though in rags.
And you, Mas Courtier.
Now he treats of you,
Stand forth to him, faire.
With all your fly-blowne proiects,
And lookes out of the politicks, your ſhut-faces,
And reſeru'd Queſtions, and Anſwers that you game with, As
Is't a Cleare buſineſſe? will it mannage well?
My name muſt not be vs'd elſe. Here, 'twill daſh.
Your buſineſſe has receiu'd a taint, giue off,
I may not proſtitute my ſelfe. Tut, tut,
That little duſt I can blow off, at pleaſure.
Here's no ſuch mountaine, yet, i'the whole worke!
But a light purſe may leuell. I will tyde
This affayre for you; giue it freight, and paſſage.
And ſuch mynt-phraſe, as 'tis the worſt of canting,
By how much it affects the ſenſe, it has not.
This is ſome other then he ſeemes!
How like you him?
This cannot be a Canter!
But he is, Sir,
And ſhall be ſtill, and ſo ſhall you be too:
We'll all be Canters. Now, I thinke of it,
A noble Whimſie's come into my braine!
I'll build a Colledge, I, and my Pecunia,
And call it Canters Colledge, ſounds it well?
Excellent!
And here ſtands my Father Rector,
And you Profeſſors, you ſhall all profeſſe
Something, and liue there, with her Grace and me,
Your Founders: I'll endow't with lands, and meanes,
And Lickfinger ſhall be my Maſter-Cooke.
What? is he gone?
And a Profeſſor.
Yes.
And read Apicius de reculinaria
To your braue Doxi, and you!
You, Couſin Fitton,
Shall (as a Courtier) read the politicks;
Doctor Al-manack, hee ſhall read Aſtrology,
Shunfield ſhall read the Military Arts.
As caruing, and aſſaulting the cold cuſtard.
And Horace here, the Art of Poetry.
His Lyricks, and his Madrigalls, fine Songs,
Which we will haue at dinner, ſteept in claret,
And againſt ſupper, ſowc't in ſacke.
In troth
A diuine Whimſey!
And a worthy worke,
Fit for a Chronicle!
Is't not?
To all ages.
And Pyed-mantle, ſhall giue vs all our Armes,
But Picklocke, what wouldſt thou be? Thou canſt cant too.
In all the languages in Weſtminſter-Hall,
Pleas, Bench, or Chancery. Fee-Farme, Fee-Tayle,
Tennant in dower, At will, For Terme of life,
By Copy of Court Roll, Knights ſeruice, Homage,
Fealty, Eſcuage, Soccage, or Frank almoigne,
Grand Sergeanty, or Burgage.
Thou appear'ſt,
a Canter. Thou ſhalt read
All Littletons tenures to me, and indeed
All my Conueyances.
And make 'hem too, Sir?
Keepe all your Courts, be Steward o'your lands,
Let all your Leaſes, keepe your Euidences,
But firſt, I muſt procure, and paſſe your mort-maine
You muſt haue licence from aboue, Sir.
Feare not,
Pecunia's friends ſhall doe it.
But I ſhall ſtop it.
Your worſhips louing, and obedient father,
Your painefull Steward, and loſt Officer!
Who haue done this, to try how you would vſe
Pecunia, when you had her: which ſince I ſee,
I will take home the Lady, to my charge,
And theſe her ſeruants, and leaue you my Cloak,
To trauell in to Beggers Buſh! A Seate,
Is built already, furniſh'd too, worth twentie
Of your imagin'd ſtructures, Canters Colledge.
'Tis his Father!
Hee's aliue, me thinks.
I knew he was no Rogue!
Thou, Prodigall,
Was I ſo carefull for thee, to procure,
And plot wi' my learn'd Counſell, Maſter Picklocke,
This noble match for thee, and doſt thou proſtitute,
Scatter thy Mistreſſe fauours, throw away
Her bounties, as they were red-burning coales,
Too hot for thee to handle, on ſuch raſcalls?
Who are the ſcumme, and excrements of men?
If thou had'ſt fought out good, and vertuous perſons
Of theſe profeſſions: I'had lou'd thee, and them,
For theſe ſhall neuer haue that plea 'gainſt me,
Or colour of aduantage, that I hate
Their callings, but their manners, and their vices.
A worthy Courtier, is the ornament
Of a Kings Palace, his great Maſters honour.
This is a moth, a raſcall, a Court-rat,
That gnawes the common-wealth with broking ſuits,
And eating grieuances! So, a true Souldier,
He is his Countryes ſtrength, his Soueraignes ſafety,
And to ſecure his peace, he makes himſelfe.
The heyre of danger, nay the ſubiect of it,
And runnes thoſe vertuous hazards, that this Scarre-crow
Cannot endure to heare of.
You are pleaſant, Sir.
With you I dare be! Here is Pyed-mantle,
'Cauſe he's an Aſſe, doe not I loue a Herald?
Who is the pure preſeruer of deſcents,
The keeper faire of all Nobility,
Without which all would runne into confuſion?
Were he a learned Herald, I would tell him
He can giue Armes, and markes, he cannot honour,
No more then money can make Noble: It may
Giue place, and ranke, but it can giue no Vertue.
And he would thanke me, for this truth. This dog-Leach,
You ſtile him Doctor, 'cauſe he can compile
An Almanack; perhaps erect a Scheme
For my great Madams monkey: when 't has ta'ne
A gliſter, and bewrai'd the Ephemerides.
Doe I deſpiſe a learn'd Phyſician?
In calling him a Quack-Saluer? or blaſt
The euer-liuing ghirlond, alwaies greene
Of a good Poet? when I ſay his wreath
Is piec'd and patch'd of dirty witherd flowers?
Away, I am impatient of theſe vlcers,
(That I not call you worſe) There is no ſore,
Or Plague but you to infect the times. I abhorre
Your very ſcent. Come, Lady, ſince my Prodigall
Knew not to entertaine you to your worth,
I'll ſee if I haue learn'd, how to receiue you,
With more reſpect to you, and your faire traine here.
Farewell my Begger in veluet, for to day,
To morrow you may put on that graue Robe,
And enter your great worke of Canters Colledge,
Your worke and worthy of a Chronicle,
Why? This was the worſt of all! the Cataſtrophe!
The matter began to be good, but now: and he has ſpoyl'd it all, with his Begger there!
A beggerly Iacke it is, I warrant him, and a kin to the Poet.
Like enough, for hee had the chiefeſt part in his play, if you marke it.
Abſurdity on him, for a huge ouergrowne Play-maker! why ſhould he make him liue againe, when they, and we all thought him dead? If he had left him to his ragges, there had beene an end of him.
I, but ſet a beggar on horſe-backe, hee'll neuer linne till hee be a gallop.
The young heyre grew a fine Gentleman, in this laſt Act!
So he did, Goſſip: and kept the beſt company.
And feaſted 'hem, and his Miſtreſſe!
And ſhew'd her to 'hem all! was not iealous!
But very communicatiue, and liberall, and beganne to be magnificent, if the churle his father would haue let him alone.
It was ſpitefully done o' the Poet, to make the Chuffe take him off in his heighth, when he was going to doe all his braue deedes!
To found an Academy!
Erect a Colledge!
Plant his Profeſſors, and water his Lectures.
With wine, goſſips, as he meant to doe, and then to defraud his purpoſes?
Kill the hopes of ſo many towardly young ſpirits?
As the Doctors?
And the Courtiers! I proteſt, I was in loue with Maſter Fitton. He did weare all he had, from the hat-band, to the ſhoe-tye, ſo politically, and would ſtoop, and leere?
And lie ſo, in waite for a piece of wit, like a Mouſe-trap?
Indeed Goſſip, ſo would the little Doctor, all his behauiour was meere gliſter! O' my conſcience, hee would make any parties phyſicke i' the world worke, with his diſcourſe.
I wonder they would ſuffer it, a fooliſh old fornicating Father, to rauiſh away his ſonnes Miſtreſſe.
And all her women, at once, as hee did!
I would ha' flyen in his gypſies face i' faith.
It was a plaine piece of politicall inceſt, and worthy to be brought afore the high Commiſſion of wit. Suppoſe we were to cenſure him, you are the youngeſt voyce, Goſſip Tatle, beginne.
Mary, I would ha' the old conicatcher coozen'd of all he has, i'the young heyres defence, by his learn'd Counſell, Mr Picklocke!
I would rather the Courtier had found out ſome tricke to begge him, from his eſtate!
Or the Captaine had courage enough to beat him.
Or the fine Madrigall-man, in rime, to haue runne him out o' the Countrey, like an Iriſh rat.
No, I would haue Maſter Pyed-mantle, her Graces Herald, to pluck downe his hatchments, reuerſe his coat-armour, and nullifie him for no Gentleman.
Nay, then let Maſter Doctor diſſect him, haue him open'd, and his tripes tranſlated to Lickfinger, to make a probation diſh of.
Agreed! Agreed!
Faith I would haue him flat diſinherited, by a decree of Court, bound to make reſtitution of the Lady Pecunia, and the vſe of her body to his ſonne.
And her traine, to the Gentlemen.
And both the Poet, and himſelfe, to aske them all forgiueneſſe!
And vs too.
In two large ſheetes of paper—
Or to ſtand in a skin of parchment, (which the Court pleaſe)
And thoſe fill'd with newes!
And dedicated to the ſuſtaining of the Staple!
Which their Poet hath let fall, moſt abruptly?
Banckruptly, indeede!
You ſay wittily, Goſſip, and therefore let a proteſt goe out againſt him.
A mourniuall of proteſts; or a gleeke at leaſt!
In all our names▪
For a decay'd wit—
Broken—
Non-ſoluent—
And, for euer, forfet—
To ſcorne, of Mirth?
Cenſure!
Expectation!
Subſign'd. Tatle, Stay, they come againe.
NAy, they are fit, as they had been made for me,
And I am now a thing, worth looking at!
The ſame, I ſaid I would be in the morning.
No Rogue, at a Comitia of the Canters,
Did euer there become his Parents Robes
Better, then I do theſe: great foole! and begger!
Why doe not all that are of thoſe ſocieties,
Come forth, and gratulate mee one of theirs?
Me thinkes, I ſhould be, on euery ſide, ſaluted,
Dauphin of beggers! Prince of Prodigalls!
That haue ſo fall'n vnder the eares, and eyes,
And tongues of all, the fable o'the time,
Matter of ſcorne, and marke of reprehenſion!
I now begin to ſee my vanity,
Shine in this Glaſſe, reflected by the foile!
Where is my Faſhioner? my Feather-man?
My Linnener? Perfumer? Barber? all?
That tayle of Riot, follow'd me this morning?
Not one! but a darke ſolitude about mee,
Worthy my cloake, and patches; as I had
The epidemicall diſeaſe vpon mee:
And I'll ſit downe with it.
My Maſter! Maker!
How doe you? Why doe you ſit thus o'the ground, Sir?
Heare you the newes?
No, nor I care to heare none.
Would I could here ſit ſtill, and ſlip away
The other one and twenty, to haue this
Forgotten, and the day rac'd out, expung'd,
In euery Ephemerides, or Almanack.
Or if it muſt be in, that Time and Nature
Haue decree'd; ſtill, let it be a day
Of tickling Prodigalls, about the gills;
Deluding gaping heires, looſing their loues,
And their diſcretions; falling from the fauours
Of their beſt friends, and parents; their owne hopes;
And entring the ſociety of Canters.
A dolefull day it is, and diſmall times
Are come vpon vs: I am cleare vndone.
How, Thom?
Why? broke! broke! wretchedly broke!
Ha!
Our Staple is all to pieces, quite diſſolu'd!
Ha!
Shiuer'd, as in an earth-quake! heard you not
The cracke and ruines? we are all blowne vp!
Soone as they heard th' Infanta was got from them,
Whom they had ſo deuoured i'their hopes,
To be their Patroneſſe, and ſoiourne with 'hem;
Our Emiſſaries, Regiſter, Examiner,
Flew into vapor: our graue Gouernour
Into a ſubt'let ayre; and is return'd
(As we doe heare) grand-Captaine of the Ieerers.
I, and my fellow melted into butter,
And ſpoyl'd our Inke, and ſo the Office vaniſh'd.
The laſt hum that it made, was, that your Father,
And Picklocke are fall'n out, the man o' Law.
How? this awakes me from my lethargy.
And a great ſuite, is like to be betweene 'hem,
Picklocke denies the Feofement, and the Truſt,
(Your Father ſaies) he made of the whole eſtate,
Vnto him, as reſpecting his mortalitie,
When he firſt laid this late deuice, to try you.
Has Picklock then a truſt?
I cannot tell,
Here comes the worſhipfull—
What? my veluet-heyre,
Turn'd begger in minde, as robes?
You ſee what caſe,
Your, and my Fathers plots haue brought me to.
Your Fathers, you may ſay, indeed, not mine.
Hee's a hard hearted Gentleman! I am ſorie
To ſee his rigid reſolution!
That any man ſhould ſo put off affection,
And humane nature, to deſtroy his owne!
And triumph in a victory ſo cruell!
He's fall'n out with mee, for being yours,
And calls me Knaue, and Traytors to his Truſt,
Saies he will haue me throwne ouer the Barre—
Ha'you deſeru'd it?
O, good heauen knowes
My conſcience, and the ſilly latitude of it!
A narrow minded man! my thoughts doe dwell
All in a Lane, or line indeed; No turning,
Nor ſcarce obliquitie in them. I ſtill looke
Right forward to th'intent, and ſcope of that
Which he would go from now.
Had you a Truſt, then?
Sir, I had ſomewhat, will keepe you ſtill Lord
Of all the eſtate, (if I be honeſt) as
I hope I ſhall. My tender ſcrupulous breſt
Will not permit me ſee the heyre defrauded,
And like an Alyen, thruſt out of the blood,
The Lawes forbid that I ſhould giue conſent,
To ſuch a ciuill ſlaughter of a Sonne.
Where is the deed? haſt thou it with thee?
No,
It is a thing of greater conſequence,
Then to be borne about in a blacke boxe,
Like a Low-countrey vorloffe, or Welſh-briefe.
It is at Lickfingers, vnder locke and key.
O, fetch it hither.
I haue bid him bring it,
That you might ſee it.
Knowes he what brings?
No more then a Gardiners Aſſe, what roots he carries,
I was a ſending my Father, like an Aſſe,
A penitent Epiſtle, but I am glad
I did not, now.
Hang him, an auſtere grape,
That has no iuice, but what is veriuice in him.
I'll ſhew you my letter!
Shew me a defiance!
If I can now commit Father, and Sonne,
And make my profits out of both. Commence
A ſuite with the oldman, for his whole ſtate,
And goe to Law with the Sonnes credit, vndoe
Both, both with their owne money, it were a piece
Worthy my night-cap, and the Gowne I weare,
A Picklockes name in Law. Where are you Sir?
What doe you doe ſo long?
I cannot find
Where I haue laid it, but I haue laid it ſafe.
No matter, Sir, truſt you vnto my Truſt,
'Tis that that ſhall ſecure you, an abſolute deed!
And I confeſſe, it was in Truſt, for you,
Leſt any thing might haue hapned mortall to him:
But there muſt be a gratitude thought on,
And aid, Sir, for the charges of the ſuite,
Which will be great, 'gainſt ſuch a mighty man,
As is our Father, and a man poſſeſt
Of ſo much Land, Pecunia and her friends.
I am not able to wage Law with him,
Yet muſt maintaine the thing, as mine owne right,
Still for your good, and therefore muſt be bold
To vſe your credit for monies.
What thou wilt,
So wee be ſafe, and the Truſt beare it.
Feare not,
'Tis hee muſt pay arrerages in the end.
Wee'l milke him, and Pecunia, draw their creame downe,
Before he get the deed into his hands.
My name is Picklocke, but hee'll finde me a Padlocke.
HOw now? conferring wi'your learned Counſell,
Vpo' the Cheat? Are you o'the plot to coozen mee?
What plot?
Your Counſell knowes there, Mr Picklock,
Will you reſtore the Truſt yet?
Sir, take patience.
And memory vnto you, and bethinke you,
What Truſt? where doſt appeare? I haue your Deed,
Doth your Deed ſpecifie any Truſt? Is't not
A perfect Act? and abſolute in Law?
Seal'd and deliuer'd before witneſſes?
The day and date, emergent.
But what conference?
What othes, and vowes preceded?
I will tell you, Sir,
Since I am vrg'd of thoſe, as I remember,
You told me you had got a growen eſtate,
By griping meanes, ſiniſterly. (P. CA. How!)
And were
Eu'n weary of it; if the parties liued,
From whom you had wreſted it—(P. CA. Ha!)
You could be glad,
To part with all, for ſatisfaction:
But ſince they had yeelded to humanity,
And that iuſt heauen had ſent you, for a puniſhment
(You did acknowledge it) this riotous heyre,
That would bring all to beggery in the end,
And daily ſow'd conſumption, where he went—
You'old coozen both, then? your Confederate, too?
After a long, mature deliberation,
You could not thinke, where, better, how to place it—
Then on you, Raſcall?
What you pleaſe i'your paſſion,
But with your reaſon, you will come about
And thinke a faithfull, and a frugall friend
To be preferr'd.
Before a Sonne?
A Prodigall,
A tubbe without a bottome, as you term'd him;
For which, I might returne you a vow, or two,
And ſeale it with an oath of thankfulneſſe,
I not repent it, neither haue I cauſe, Yet—
Fore-head of ſteele, and mouth of braſſe! hath impudence
Poliſh'd ſo groſſe a lie, and dar'ſt thou vent it?
Engine, compos'd of all mixt mettalls! hence,
I will not change a ſyllab, with thee, more,
Till I may meet thee, at a Barre in Court,
Before thy Iudges.
Thither it muſt come,
Before I part with it, to you, or you, Sir.
I will not heare thee.
Sir, your eare to mee, though.
Not that I ſee through his perplexed plots,
And hidden ends, nor that my parts depend
Vpon the vnwinding this ſo knotted skeane,
Doe I beſeech your patience. Vnto mee
He hath confeſt the truſt.
How? I confeſſe it?
I thou, falſe man.
Stand vp to him, & confront him.
Where? when? to whom?
To me, euen now, and here,
Canſt thou deny it?
Can I eate, or drinke?
Sleepe, wake, or dreame? ariſe, ſit, goe, or ſtand?
Doe any thing that's naturall?
Yes, lye:
It ſeemes thou canſt, and periure: that is naturall!
O me! what times are theſe! of frontleſſe carriage!
An Egge o'the ſame neſt! the Fathers Bird!
It runs in a blood, I ſee!
I'll ſtop your mouth.
With what?
With truth.
With noiſe, I muſt haue witnes.
Where is your witnes? you can produce witnes?
As if my teſtimony were not twenty,
Balanc'd with thine?
So ſay all Prodigalls,
Sicke of ſelfe-loue, but that's not Law, young Scatter-good.
I liue by Law.
Why? if thou haſt a conſcience,
That is a thouſsnd witneſſes.
No, Court,
Grants out a Writ of Summons, for the Conſcience,
That I know, nor Sub-paena, nor Attachment.
I muſt haue witneſſe, and of your producing,
Ere this can come to hearing, and it muſt
Be heard on oath, and witneſſe.
Come forth, Thom,
Speake what thou heard'ſt, the truth, and the whole truth,
And nothing but the truth. What ſaid this varlet?
A rat behind the hangings!
Sir, he ſaid
It was a Truſt! an Act, the which your Father
Had will to alter: but his tender breſt
Would not permit to ſee the heyre defrauded;
And like an alyen, thruſt out of the blood.
The Lawes forbid that he ſhould giue conſent
To ſuch a ciuill ſlaughter of a Sonne—
And talk'd of a gratuitie to be giuen,
And ayd vnto the charges of the ſuite;
Which he was to maintaine, in his owne name,
But for my vſe, he ſaid.
It is enough.
And he would milke Pecunia, and draw downe
Her creame, before you got the Truſt, againe.
Your eares are in my pocket, Knaue, goe ſhake 'hem,
The little while you haue them.
You doe truſt
To your great purſe.
I ha' you in a purſe-net,
Good Maſter Picklocke, wi'your worming braine,
And wrigling ingine-head of maintenance,
Which I ſhall ſee you hole with, very ſhortly.
A fine round head, when thoſe two lugs are off,
To trundle through a Pillory. You are ſure
You heard him ſpeake this?
I, and more.
Much more!
I'll proue yours maintenance, and combination,
And ſue you all.
Doe, doe, my gowned Vulture,
Crop in Reuerſion: I ſhall ſee you coyted
Ouer the Barre, as Barge-men doe their billets.
This 'tis, when men repent of their good deeds,
And would ha'hem in againe—They are almoſt mad!
But I forgiue their Lucida Interualla.
O, Lickfinger? come hither. Where's my writing?
I ſent it you, together with your keyes,
How?
By the Porter, that came for it, from you,
And by the token, you had giu'n me the keyes,
And bad me bring it.
And why did you not?
Why did you ſend a counter-mand?
Who, I?
You, or ſome other you, you put in truſt.
In truſt?
Your Truſt's another ſelfe, you know,
And without Truſt, and your Truſt, how ſhould he
Take notice of your keyes, or of my charge.
Know you the man?
I know he was a Porter,
And a ſeal'd Porter for he bore the badge
On breſt, I am ſure.
I am loſt! a plot! I ſent it!
Why! and I ſent it by the man you ſent
Whom elſe, I had not truſted.
Plague o'your truſt.
I am truſs'd vp among you.
Or you may be.
In mine owne halter, I haue made the Nooſe.
What was it, Lickfinger?
A writing, Sir,
He ſent for't by a token, I was bringing it:
But that he ſent a Porter, and hee ſeem'd
A man of decent carriage.
'Twas good fortune!
To cheat the Cheater, was no cheat, but iuſtice,
Put off your ragges, and be your ſelfe againe,
This Act of piety, and good affection,
Hath partly reconcil'd me to you.
Sir.
No vowes, no promiſes: too much proteſtation
Makes that ſuſpected oft, we would perſwade.
Heare you the Newes?
The Office is downe, how ſhould we?
But of your vncle?
No.
He's runne mad, Sir.
How, Lickfinger?
Stark ſtaring mad, your brother,
H'has almoſt kill'd his maid.
Now, heauen forbid.
But that ſhe's Cat-liu'd, and Squirrill-limb'd,
With throwing bed-ſtaues at her: h'has ſet wide
His outer doores, and now keepes open houſe,
For all the paſſers by to ſee his iuſtice:
Firſt, he has apprehended his two dogges,
As being o'the plot to coozen him:
And there hee ſits like an old worme of the peace,
Wrap'd vp in furres at a ſquare table, ſcrewing,
Examining, and committing the poore curres,
To two old caſes of cloſe ſtooles, as priſons;
The one of which, he calls his Lollard's tower,
Th'other his Blocke-houſe, 'cauſe his two dogs names
Are Blocke, and Lollard.
This would be braue matter
Vnto the Ieerers.
I, If ſo the ſubiect
Were not ſo wretched.
Sure, I met them all,
I thinke, vpon that queſt.
'Faith, like enough:
The vicious ſtill are ſwift to ſhew their natures.
I'll thither too, but with another ayme,
If all ſucceed well, and my ſimples take.
WHere are the priſoners?
They are forth-comming, S•,
Or comming forth at leaſt.
The Rogue is drunke,
Since I committed them to his charge. Come hither,
Neere me, yet neerer; breath vpon me. Wine!
Wine, o'my worſhip! ſacke! Canary ſacke!
Could not your Badge ha'bin drunke with fulſome Ale?
Or Beere? the Porters element? but ſacke!
I am not drunke, we had, Sir, but one pynt,
An honeſt carrier, and my ſelfe.
Who paid for't?
Sir, I did giue it him.
What? and ſpend ſixpence!
A Frocke ſpend ſixpence! ſixpence!
Once in a yeere, Sir,
In ſeuen yeers, varlet! Know'ſt thou what thou haſt done?
What a conſumption thou haſt made of a State?
It might pleaſe heauen, (a luſty Knaue and young)
To let thee liue ſome ſeuenty yeeres longer.
Till thou art foureſcore, and ten; perhaps, a hundred.
Say ſeuenty yeeres; how many times ſeuen in ſeuenty?
Why, ſeuen times ten, is ten times ſeuen, marke me,
I will demonſtrate to thee on my fingers,
Six-pence in ſeuen yeere (vſe vpon vſe)
Growes in that firſt ſeuen yeere, to be a twelue-pence.
That, in the next, two-ſhillings; the third foure-ſhillings;
The fourth ſeuen yeere, eight-ſhillings; the fifth, ſixteen:
The ſixth, two and thirty; the ſeuenth, three-pound foure,
The eighth, ſixe pound, and eyght; the ninth, twelue pound ſixteen;
And the tenth ſeuen, fiue and twenty pound,
Twelue Shillings. This thou art fall'n from, by thy riot!
Should'ſt thou liue ſeuenty yeeres, by ſpending ſix-pence,
Once i'the ſeuen: but in a day to waſt it!
There is a Summe that number cannot reach!
Out o'my houſe, thou peſt o' prodigality!
Seed o'conſumption! hence, a wicked keeper
Is oft worſe then the priſoners. There's thy penny,
Foure tokens for thee. Out, away. My dogges,
May yet be innocent, and honeſt. If not,
I haue an entrapping queſtion, or two more,
To put vnto 'hem, a croſſe Intergatory,
And I ſhall catch 'hem; Lollard? Peace,
What whiſpring was that you had with Mortgage,
When you laſt lick'd her feet? The truth now. Ha?
Did you ſmell ſhee was going? Put downe that. And not,
Not to returne? You are ſilent. good. And, when
Leap'd you on Statute? As ſhe went forth? Conſent.
There was Conſent, as ſhee was going forth.
'Twould haue beene fitter at her comming home,
But you knew that ſhe would not? To your Tower,
You are cunning, are you? I will meet your craft.
Blocke, ſhew your face, leaue your careſſes, tell me,
And tell me truly, what affronts do you know
Were done Pecunia? that ſhe left my houſe?
None, ſay you ſo? not that you know? or will know?
I feare me, I ſhall find you an obſtinate Curre.
Why, did your fellow Lollard cry this morning?
'Cauſe Broker kickt him? why did Broker kicke him?
Becauſe he piſt againſt my Ladies Gowne?
Why, that was no affront? no? no diſtaſt?
You knew o' none. Yo'are a diſſembling Tyke,
To your hole, againe, your Blocke-houſe. Lollard, ariſe,
Where did you lift your legge vp, laſt? 'gainſt what?
Are you ſtruck Dummerer now? and whine for mercy?
Whoſe Kirtle was't, you gnaw'd too? Miſtreſſe Bands?
And Waxe's ſtockings? who did? Blocke beſcumber
Statutes white ſuite? wi' the parchment lace there?
And Brokers Sattin dublet? all will out.
They had offence, offence enough to quit mee.
Appeare Blocke, fough, 'tis manifeſt. He ſhewes it,
Should he for-ſweare't, make all the Affadauits,
Againſt it, that he could afore the Bench,
And twenty Iuries; hee would be conuinc'd.
He beares an ayre about him, doth confeſſe it!
To priſon againe, cloſe priſon. Not you Lollard,
You may enioy the liberty o'the houſe,
And yet there is a quirke come in my head,
For which I muſt commit you too, and cloſe,
Doe not repine, it will be better for you.
THis is enough to make the dogs mad too,
Let's in vpon him.
How now? what's the matter?
Come you to force the priſoners? make a reſcue?
We come to baile your dogs.
They are not baileable,
They ſtand committed without baile, or mainpriſe,
Your baile cannot be taken.
Then the truth is,
We come to vex you.
Ieere you.
Bate you rather.
A bated vſerer will be good fleſh.
And tender, we are told.
Who is the Butcher,
Amongſt you, that is come to cut my throat?
You would dye a calues death faine: but 'tis an Oxes,
Is meant you.
To be fairely knock'd o'the head.
With a good Ieere or two.
And from your iawbone,
Don Aſsinigo?
Shunfield, a Ieere, you haue it.
I doe confeſſe a waſhing blow? but Snarle,
You that might play the third dogge, for your teeth,
You ha' no money now?
No, nor no Mortgage.
Nor Band.
Nor Statute.
No, nor bluſhet Wax.
Nor you no Office, as I take it.
Cymbal,
A mighty Ieere.
Pox o'theſe true ieaſts, I ſay.
He will turne the better ieerer.
Let's vpon him,
And if we cannot ieere him downe in wit,
Let's do't in noyſe.
Content.
Charge, man o'warre.
Lay him, abord.
We'll gi' him a broad ſide, firſt.
Wher's your veniſon, now?
Your red-Deer-pyes?
Wi' your bak'd Turkyes?
and your Partridges?
Your Pheſſants, & fat Swans?
Like you, turn'd Geeſe.
But ſuch as will not keepe your Capitol?
You were wont to ha' your Breams—
And Trouts ſent in?
Fat Carps, and Salmons?
I, and now, and then,
An Embleme, o'your ſelfe, an o're-growne Pyke?
You are a Iack, Sir.
You ha' made a ſhift
To ſwallow twenty ſuch poore Iacks ere now.
If he ſhould come to feed vpon poore-Iohn?
Or turne pure Iack-a-Lent after all this?
Tut, he'll liue like a Graſ-hopper—
On dew.
Or like a Beare, with licking his owne clawes.
I, If his dogs were away.
He'll eat them, firſt,
While they are fat.
Faith, and when they are gone,
Here's nothing to be ſeene beyond.
Except
His kindred, Spiders, natiues o' the ſoyle.
Duſt, he will ha' enough here, to breed fleas.
But, by that time, he'll ha' no blood to reare 'hem.
He will be as thin as a lanterne, we ſhall ſee thorow him,
And his gut colon, tell his Inteſtina—
Rogues, Raſcalls ( baw waw)
He calls his dogs to his ayd.
O! they but riſe at mention of his tripes.
Let them alone, they doe it not for him.
They barke, ſe defendendo.
Or for cuſtome,
As commonly currres doe, one for another.
Arme, arme you, Gentlemen Ieerers, th'old Canter
Is comming in vpon you, with his forces,
The Gentleman, that was the Canter.
Hence.
Away.
What is he?
ſtay not to ask queſtions.
Hee's a flame.
A fornace.
A conſumption,
Kills where hee goes.
See! the whole Couy is ſcatter'd,
'Ware, 'ware the Hawkes. I loue to ſee him flye.
YOu ſee by this amazement, and diſtraction,
What your companions were, a poore, affrighted,
And guilty race of men, that dare to ſtand
No breath of truth: but conſcious to themſelues
Of their no-wit, or honeſty, ranne routed
At euery Pannicke terror themſelues bred.
Where elſe, as confident as ſounding braſſe,
Their tinckling Captaine, Cymbal, and the reſt,
Dare put on any viſor, to deride
The wretched: or with buffon licence, ieaſt
At whatſoe'r is ſerious, if not ſacred.
Who's this? my brother! and reſtor'd to life!
Yes, and ſent hither to reſtore your wits:
If your ſhort madneſſe, be not more then anger,
Conceiued for your loſſe! which I returne you.
See here, your Mortgage, Statute, Band, and Waxe,
Without your Broker, come to abide with you:
And vindicate the Prodigall, from ſtealing
Away the Lady. Nay, Pecunia herſelfe,
Is come to free him fairely, and diſcharge
All ties, but thoſe of Loue, vnto her perſon,
To vſe her like a friend, not like a ſlaue,
Or like an Idoll. Superſtition
Doth violate the Deity it worſhips:
No leſſe then ſcorne doth. And beleeue it, brother
The vſe of things is all, and not the Store;
Surfet, and fulneſſe, haue kill'd more then famine.
The Sparrow, with his little plumage, flyes,
While the proud Peacocke, ouer-charg'd with pennes,
Is faine to ſweepe the ground, with his growne traine,
And load of feathers.
Wiſe, and honour'd brother!
None but a Brother, and ſent from the dead,
As you are to me, could haue altered me:
I thanke my Deſtiny, that is ſo gracious.
Are there no paines, no Penalties decreed
From whence you come, to vs that ſmother money,
In cheſts, and ſtrangle her in bagges.
O, mighty,
Intolerable fines, and mulcts impo'sd!
(Of which I come to warne you) forfeitures
Of whole eſtates, if they be knowne, and taken!
I thanke you Brother for the light you haue giuen mee,
I will preuent 'hem all. Firſt free my dogges,
Leſt what I ha' done to them (and againſt Law)
Be a Premuniri, for by Magna Charta
They could not be committed, as cloſe priſoners,
My learned Counſell tells me here, my Cooke.
And yet he ſhew'd me, the way, firſt.
Who did? I?
I trench the liberty o' the ſubiects?
Peace,
Picklocke, your Gheſt, that Stentor, hath infected you,
Whom I haue ſafe enough in a wooden collar.
Next, I reſtore theſe ſeruants to their Ladie,
With freedome, heart of cheare, and countenance;
It is their yeere, and day of Iubilee.
We thanke you, Sir.
And laſtly, to my Nephew,
I giue my houſe, goods, lands, all but my vices,
And thoſe I goe to cleanſe; kiſſing this Lady
Whom I doe giue him too, and ioyne their hands.
If the Spectators will ioyne theirs, wee thanke 'hem.
And wiſh they may, as I, enioy Pecunia.
And ſo Pecunia her ſelfe doth wiſh,
That ſhee may ſtill be ayde vnto their vſes,
Not ſlaue vnto their pleaſures, or a Tyrant
Ouer their faire deſires; but teach them all
The golden meane: the Prodigall how to liue,
The ſordid, and the couetous, how to dye,
That with ſound mind; this ſafe frugality.
THus haue you ſeene the Makers double ſcope,
To profit, and delight; wherein our hope
Is, though the clout we doe not alwaies hit,
It will not be imputed to his wit:
A Tree ſo tri'd, and bent, as 'twill not ſtart.
Nor doth he often cracke a ſtring of Art,
Though there may other accidents as ſtrange
Happen, the weather of your lookes may change,
Or ſome high wind of miſ-conceit ariſe,
To cauſe an alteration in our Skyes;
If ſo, we'are ſorry that haue ſo miſ-ſpent
Our Time and Tackle, yet he'is confident,
And vow's the next faire day, hee'll haue vs ſhoot
The ſame match o're for him, if you'll come to't.