VVre not our present subject mix with seare,
'Twould much affight us to see all yu heere.
One would suffice us, or no Auditor.
Each to hiselfe an ampe Theater,
Let rude Plbejans thinke so, bt we know
All judgments here from the same Spring doe flow.
All here have but one cnsure, all one brest▪
All sonnes of the same Mother; but the rest
We preccupate their Censure, and ,
What after may be said not to be well,
As in most decent Garments you may see▪
Some gracious Ornaments inweavd bee:
Which serve for litle use▪ but on some day
Destin'd to please himselfe, the wearer may
Without a blush put on, when his best friends
Intend to visit him, so our hope intends
The sacred Muses Progeny to greet,
Which under our Rooe, now the tird time meet,
We will not ope the booke to you, and show
A story word by word, as it doth goe,
But give invention leave to undertake,
Of it's owne straines, some benfit to make:
For though a Tragicke Pn may be confin'd,
Within a studies private Walles, the mind
Must be unbounded, and with inventions steele,
Strike fir from alint Flints —
So free we are from seting any price,
On these our studied Vanities, that advice
Almost ddain'd the whispers of those ngues
Which private fit, though vented publike wrongs▪
To the Patient Patient oft▪ We'il here begin
To be alitle peremptoy, oh that sinne
Of wilfull indiscretion, 'tis no bayes
To make us Garlands of our owne mouthes praie,
Which who affct, may they so Lawrell lacke,
That slanders Thunder may behid their back ▪
Blast them with Clumny, for we vow thy deare
Pay for their paines, that give attention here.
And since it's suffered with kind indulgence
We hope that Kingly Parent's our dfence,
Who would not have his ddling love be knowne,
But unto thoe had off spring of owne,
And for we are assured that here be
No brines so curst with blacke sterilitie.
But of nature they can freely call,
Biths more mature, and Caelestiall,
Their studes ssue, they like kindest Mothers,
With tendr hands will swath the limb of others.
BE dumb those now harsh notes, our
Shall never be acquainted with such ,
Peace (our grand) Captai, se h ,
That would have once confronted hi selfe,
(Acknowledged for a better Deity)
Puts off ambitious burdens, and doth hae
Through bloudy Rivers to make passages,
Whereby his Soule might flote to Aheron,
Wrinkle your browes no more (sterne fates) for we
Scorne to be made the servie Ministers
To cut those threads, at which your selves have trembled▪
ming us the fiercer Destiny.
Yet mst great Amurath thanke those sacred powers,
They have enricht our soules with such a price,
As ha those Heroes whose revengefull Armes,
Sv'd Mars a ten yeares Prentiship at Troy,
re deam'd succeeding times should b possest,
With such an unparalel'd unprized beauty as my Saint:
They would not have prevented so their blisse,
But beene most humble Sutors to the Gods,
To have protrated their then fond spent life,
But to behold this object. Which out-shines
Their . as much as doth the eye
O all the World, dazle the lesser fires.
ove Ile outbrave thee! melt thy selfe in Lust
Embrace at once al starre-made Concubines,
Ile not envie thee, know I have to spare
Beauty enough, to make another Uenus;
And for fond Gods, that have no reward in store
To make me happier, here Ile place my Heaven.
And for thy sake, this shall my Motto be,
I conquered Greece, one Grecian conquered me.
But (gracious Lord) those streames (we see) soone ebbe,
Which with outragios swelling flow to fast,
Forbid ( ucina) this soone kindled fire,
Should ere burne out itselfe 'tis a true Theame,
That nere lastlong, that seemeth most extreame.
Can this rich price of nature, precious jem
Give entertainment to suspecting guests?
Come, come, these armes are curious chaines of love,
With which thou link'st my heart aeternally,
Thy cheeks the royall Paper interlined,
With Natures Rhetorique, and love perswasion,
Stands there attracting still my gazing eye:
This then le read, and here I now will faine,
That these all Antique fables of the Gods,
Are writ in flowing numbers; first thy lip,
Was faire Euroaes which they say made Iove,
Turne a wild Heyfer: next, this sparkling eye
Was the Aemonian Io's; then, this hand
Laedaes, faire Mother to those Stare made Twins,
Thus, thus, Ile Comment on this golden Booke:
Nature nor Art, have taught how to faine:
Fairest, 'twas you first brought me to this vaine:
In loving Combats now I valiant prove,
Let others warre, great murath shall love.
Brave resolution, O the fond thoughts of man,
Awake Enuo! Ile find stratagems:
There shall be Physick, to purge this disease,
Light sores are gently us'd, but such a part,
Must be cut off, least it infect the hart.
Schahi, Our Tutor, we command this nigh
Be solemniz'd with all delightfull sports,
Thy learn'd invention best can thinke upon.
Prepare a Maske, which lively represents,
How once the Gods did love: that shall not teach
Vs by examples, but we'll smile to thinke:
How poore and weake their idle faining was
To our affection. Scahin, be free in wit▪
And suddaine: now come my Kingdomes Pride▪
Hymen would wed himselfe to such a Bride.
Nature, and all those universed powers,
Which shew'd such Admirable Godlike skill,
Inframing this true modell of our selves,
This Man, this thing cal'd man, why doe you thus,
Make him a spectacle of such laughter for you,
When in each man we see a Monarchy?
For, as in states, all fortunes still attend:
So with a Kingdome, with a compleat state
Well govern'd, and well manag'd in himselfe,
Both each man beares, when that best part of man,
(Reason) doth swayand rule each Passion.
Affections are good Servants: but if will
Make them once Master, theyle prove Tyrants still.
No more King now: poore Subject AMVRATH,
Whom I have seene breake through a Troope of Men,
Like lightning from a Cloud: and done those Act,
Which 'ene the Furies would have trembled a:
Treading downe Armies, as if by them he meant
Of dad mens backes to build up staires to Heaven:
Ad now lyeth lurking in a womans armes
in the Lehe of Ignoble lust,
its me for the wanton Enginere
o kepe his so loose thoughts in smoothing tune▪
woman: golden hooke
To thoughts: and when we once are caught▪
o ito the publike view of shame:
Ad we lye bthed in incestuous pleasure
od to laugh and scorne at once.
to sses! could eyther wish
like thoe Creatures, which we say
A frm Putid and corrupted matter;
we should acknowledge our deare being
grasse and flowers: for what else is our tate?
V to the top but then the waight shll fall
Vpon teir head that caus'd it. Worke (my braine)
Tush, bloud, not watr must wash off this staine.
Shine here (my ) and expell the night
More than a thousand starres that grace the Heavens:
Me thinkes, I see the Gods inventing shapes
In which they meane to court thee. Iove he frownes
And is farre more jealous, more suspitious
Of thee, then all the painted Truls, whose eyes
Bedecke the all ennameld Firmament.
Beauty (my Lord) 'tis the worst part of woman.
A weake poore thing, assaulted every houre
By creeping minutes of defacing time:
Asuperfici which each breath of care.
Blasts off: and every humrous of grie,
Which flowes from forth these Fountaines of our eyes▪
Washth away, as rain doth Winters snow.
But those bles guiders of all Nuptiall rites,
Have wrought a better sement to mak fat,
The hearts of Lovers; the tre name of Wife
Guilds o're our thones, with a more constant shape▪
Than can be subjct or to time, or cre:
And in our selve; yea in our owne tru breats▪
We have , dty, carefull Love;
And last and of all, we may have Children▪
Children are Hymns pldges, these shall be
Perpetuall chaines, to linke my Lord ad me.
Art thou a Wman? Goddsse, we ador ▪
And Idolize; what we but loved before;
What Divels have men , whose furious brain
Have oft abus'd that Deity cald Woman:
Dipping thir Ravens quill in Stygian Inke,
To blast such heavenly papr as your faces.
Were all the enticing lusts, damn'd policis,
Prodigious fasinations, usearcht thoughts,
Dissembled teares, brok vowes, loath'd apptites,
Luxurious nd desires.
Were all these of Women qually weighed,
That vertue in thy brest, 'twill out-ballance all
And rcompence th uine of all thy Sexe.
So please our Majesty, L. ready
For entrance with Msque.
Tell him we're wholly ent for xpectation.
Sit, sit (my Queene) Musike exceed your Spheares,
Thike I am Ive, and Godlike please our eares.
Gaze you mortals, gaze you still,
On the Gods now looke your fill.
Iove and Iuno are discending,
Yet her lealousie's not ending,
Mars, sterne Mars, he will not fight,
But with Venus when 'tis Night.
Daphne crownes Apolloes head,
Whom she would embrace in Bed,
Neptune swels his frothy cheeke,
Cause Diana is not meeke.
Gaze you mortals, &c.
Come now my (Sister and Wife) wee'l begin
To court afrsh! Nay, lour not (Heavens Queene)
Heere on this greene we'll a Lavato dane,
What if our haires grow silver, yet our strength,
Is young, and vigorous! Say (fellow Gods)
(Since we are full of Nectar, and our cares,
Lye drencht in our Nepenth ) take your Queene, and be all
Ioviall, Mars for our Daughter Ves!
Apollo joyn with Pallas! Brother of Flouds
mbrace Diana! Gods sometimes merry be:
But in the night, when mortals m not see.
How now (wanton?) Can I no whe goe,
For recration but you fllow me?
Is this your Recreation? Fye! My Lord
Will you be wanton still? For here you came
For some new Harlot, some new Queene for you.
Jun, Wife.
Your Sister, (thunderer,) and not your Wife!
Banisht from Heavn I am; and your Bed,
Resigne them both to Strumpets, Concubines,
And now you com to see a fresh new lasse
In which Pole now or in what part of haven,
Shall she be stellified?
Shall still sinister thoughts wrong our intent,
Wel (Io) wel, you'le ever be a woman,
A very, very woman! But ince she scolds,
Let's hence (yee Gods) lest her infectious breath
Blast the scceeding day: and mortals curse
Her hel-bred jealusie: Calumnious woman
Come scold in heaven! For if Gods liv'd on Earth
Sspitious tongues would blame most innocent mirth.
Wel! love lookt pale! I toucht him to the quicke!
'Tis some new Minin he came downe to see!
Harke (jealousie) know Jun is a woman!
Am I not mad yet? Mistris Bride, adiew:
Jove shal not steale a kisse? My curse is past,
When thou sleep'st first a Bride, mayt sleepe thy last.
Faire Bride I sang thy pithalamy,
And left for thy Nuptials:
Iuno here thundered gainst the Thunderer,
Knowing how thy beauty dazles hers,
She durst not let heavens King once glance a looke,
But threatned with her helbred incantations,
To metamorphise thine unparaleld
And most caelestiall shape into worse formes;
And more prodigiou than ever poysoned charmes.
Wrought on the fabled Concubines of love:
But knw great Queene▪ my Mother Venus vowes
Her everlasting guard to save such beauty,
Lest if thou perish, Nature selfe
Loose he oely patterne of erenity,
But I must hat, Love which the Gods protect,
Can never by neglect.
cahin, thine Art is excellent; but say,
Doe Gods fall out for love amongst themselves?
My Lord, these are but fables: yet to make
The shew more prtinent, and to grace your Queene,
Coceipt tooke leave to put the frowne on Iuo.
My Lords and friends, we shall be ever thankfull
And rest a Debtor to your curtesie.
Not so faire Queen, but durst now ntreat
The Kings detaining from th sweets of Bed▪
There yet remaines one thought upon conceipt,
Which you would doubly grace me to behold.
Our worthy Tutor shall obtaine a Night,
A night ofus, in any case we can!
But then let me informe your Majesty,
That 'tis a warrier shew, which once you loved,
But now are free from.
'Tis best of all, with greedinesse we'l see it,
O how the soule doth gratulate it selfe
When safly it beholds the dangerous state
Of others, and it selfe securely free!
Glad are we still to stand upon the shore,
And see a farre off oters tost in the Sea,
Or in a Gallery at a Fencers stage,
We laugh when mutually each one takes wound;
Sit still ( ) Schin, thy shew in hast;
'Tis best delight, to think on troubles past.
Stay you most worthy fhades▪ brave Hector stay▪
And proud Achilles, know your massi Tombes,
Which have so long orewhelm'd your valiant bones
Yawnes wide to let the imprisoned coarses forth.
I must afresh imbalme your sacred Trunkes,
And swet your memory with most happy oyle,
Of just report, the Gods awakt me Fame
From out the oblivious Sepulchr of sleepe,
To drop that Inke into old Homer pen,
Werewith he curiously hath lin'd your names,
Enfolding them in Everlasting Cedar,
And made them live to all posterity.
Vertue to valour hath his guift assign'd▪
Great men may dye, yet deeds still rest in mind.
Most fortunate young man, whose worth is crown'd
With everlasting Trophies of renowne,
How hath he set thee on the wings of Fame
Which soare i'th middle region of high glory
Propos'd to all, a never dying story.
May it please the (Sonne of Iupiter) to accept
A Present, which our fight enricht us with?
Is it a Band of stubborn Souldirs Captaine?
O no (my Lieg) of exquisite form'd Ladies▪
Darius his wife, the wonder of her Sexe,
Besides a Troope of such shapt Ganimdes,
That love ot equals.
Philoxenus▪ We thanke thee! Yet harke!
There is a secrt we would know of thee,
And you must tell Vs: on your faith you must.
My Lige —
Nay, no Court oyle (by your leave) no flattery▪
We are but man, this very trunke of ours,
Is but a Vessell fild with human bloo
And we trust not that Parasite like ▪
I .
All the destroying vices of fraile man,
I may be subject to, but what base loosenesse,
Or supple Luxury, didst thou ere obscure
So to benumne our sence, that thou shouldst thinke
We could be pleas'd with such effaeminate Presents,
* Know sir our eyes shall have that abstinence
That will not looke on them, on boyes, of women,
Hence then, and present some coward with them,
Give me a spectacle would please the Gods,
And make them bend their Ivorie browes to the Earth,
A man, a Souldier, trong with his wounds,
'Mongst fate and ruine, upright and unshap't,
His minde eing all his guard, his wall, and armour,
And if he fall, till noble wrath remaines,
In his amased Trunke: not ll the darts
Stucke in his sides, making him a one wound,
Aright his courage, but wrath lending weapons,
Himselfe doth seeme a new and horrid Warre,
Nor are those Milke-sops which beguile the time,
With tealing minutes from their Ladies lips
Such as the Gods doe love; foras the Winde
Looseth it's force, if it be not oppos'd
With woods of strong and stubborne planted trees▪
So vertue, if it wake in troden paths
That breakes up honours gap, and makes the way
Through pathes of death, that flame burnes strong
Which is resisted: valor hines in wrong:
Of Alexanders Souldiers be this sed,
Warre was a peace, when he the army led.
Brave Macedon, how truly hast thou weighed,
The reason of mans birth, who is equall borne,
For all the world, as well as for himselfe.
The world's a field to narrow for thy worth!
And although Nature, hath her enacted bounds
For Sea and Earth, nay for the Heavens themselves,
Nor Sea nor Earth, shall coope thy valour up:
Valour of Nature ever this attaines
That it breakes forth, farre, and beyond her chaines,
And this Ile trumpet out. the whole worlds Ball
In which thou art so great, to thee is small;
When men want worlds to hew their vertue in,
That is the crime o'th ods, and not their sinnes:
* 'Tis a decree of a true Souliers mind,
To thinke nought done, when ought is left behind,
On (valiant youth) for, know I will appoint;
A Grecian Prince who so shall steepe his quill
To paint out thy name in Wls of eloquence,
That this thy soorne of Lust shall be
Propos'd to all Kings example to posterity,
Know mortals that the men the Gods most love
In hard and dagerous Arts, they alwayes prove,
When men live brave at first, then fall to crimes,
Their bad I Chronicle to future times:
For, who begins good Arts, and not proceeds
He but goeth backward in all noble deeds.
Death consecrates those men whose awfull end,
Though most men feare, yet all men must commend.
Scahin, the Macedos beholding to the,
And history shall pay you thankes for this▪
Which we rest Debtors for.
Great Prince, such kindnesse of accptance payes:
For things which are but for a Kings delight,
In eeing them, he amply doth requite.
Eumorphe, Love, Queene, Wife, let's haste to Bed!
And may we wish this night aeternall time,
Scahin, good night: good night (kind Gentlemen!)
Thus when we are dead shall we revive oth stage:
One houre can present a Kings whole age.
Observ'd you not the Kings looks? Grew th not pale?
O yes (Lord Scahin) you mut be his Parent?
And snatch him out'h the Gulph he's falling in,
That fayned speech of Alexanders wrought
Like to most purging Physicke, nights then blacke
When 'tis compar'd with day: Boldnesse is cleare,
When 'tis presented before bastard feare.
Ile tell thee (Eurenoses) thou art a Souldier:
And I am both a Souldier, and a Scholler,
And for these two Professions, am both most glorious:
And most meritorious, Palls is for both:
O what Tysiphon, what snaked scourge
Ca make a Scholler, that should never sleepe,
But 'twixt th Pillowes of Pernassus Hils,
And dip his lips in springs of Helicon,
Make him by snoaring on a wanton breast,
And sucke the adulterate and spiced breath
Of a lewd fained woman?
And for a Souldier (Scahin,) let me speake!
We that doe know the use of swords, and fire,
We that doe know, halters can throatle us,
Shall we ere venture on a Womans cruelty?
We that endur no Lords, shall we endure:
A woman to overcome us? Most true Demophoon!
I reverence thy memory, no pewling phrase
Could so euchaine thee to thy Thracin Dame,
But thou wouldst rher perish than she save thee.
Ile not declaime long on that common Theam,
But they have lust lyeth in their fingers ends,
And whilst their sweet-hearts breath stickes in their sheets,
They will admit another. Lucrec in the day
To be a Thais, if the night will not gain-say.
Why (Eurenses) why should we endur
A new Queen now? this Kingdom wants not heires?
We know (should we have more) 'twere dangerous,
But harke! The Queens for Bed, inticing sleepe
With charmes of Musicke: wel, even such a Night▪
May yet prove dismall ere the following Light!
Scahi, let's in:
The first degree to purge such ils as these▪
Is to instruct the patient his disease:
That you have done.
Yea, and wil yet once more
Adventure a new stratagem, just when the King
H'as rid his Chamber, and with covetous hast
Thinks for to clip Elizium, and drinke deepe
Of his long wished delight, I having skil
And uncontroul'd accese, will in disguse
Seeme his deceased Fathers apparition:
And by all tyes of children to their Parents,
Bid him forsake that vile bewitching woman.
An easie Medicine doth and sure wil work,
To rub shrewd wounds, make them but fester more,
Foule Medicines we worse brook, than a foule sore.
Madam make hast The King will be impatient
If h be from you long. O Happinesse.
Why Menthe, then thou deem'st us happy no
Thus to command a world of services,
To have a King my subject; and attended
With these harmonious sounds t'affect our eares?
Yes (truly Madam) 'tis a happinesse.
'Tis, were't Eternal: but I feare a powr
A womans power, doth but make port with us;
Why, were we not once Menthe, a Captive (Wretch?)
Yes Lady▪ now your happinesse the more:
Riches please best, when there wnt want before.
That power which rais'd us from so base, so high,
Can throw us downe againe as suddainly:
Me thiks my life is but a Players Scaene,
In the last Act my part was then to play,
A Captive , nd a ueene to day.
Your Morals (Madam) are too serious▪
Me thinks thee Ornaments should elevate
Your dumpish spiits. Thinke this Bed a place
In which no cie slipping chance hath power;
A Kigs safe Bed is like a guarded Tower.
No ( enthe) no, 'tis not the Bed of state,
Nor the free smile of a well pleased King:
'Tis not the embracing Armes of Emperors,
N all the Gemmes that so inwreath the browes
Can so allure Fortune unto their gaze,
As she should still be constant; O she's blind,
Nor doth she know her selfe where she is kind;
Close, those are Kings, and Queenes whose brest's secure
Like brazen walles, Lust's entrance not endure!
Where impotent ambition not intrudes,
Nor the unstable talke of multitudes;
Fotune sernes such, they happinesse command
More than all gold, all Tagu sand;
As Heaven hath given us no more conspicuous thing
Than forme or beauty: so like a forward spring.
Nothing more short.
Madam, divine of a change; Beliefe
Is too too proe, in entertaining griefe!
Our Lord attends to enter in,
And surely sleepe envyeth his deligt,
For he sits heauy on my drowsie liddes,
Draw all our Curtaies; sleepe beguiles our ears.
(Madam) good night; time helpes suspitious feares!
Drop golden showers, gentle sleepe,
And all the Angels of the Night,
Which doe us in protection keepe,
Make this Queene dreame of delight
Morpheus be kind a little, and be
Deaths now true Image, for 'twill prove
To this poore Queene, that then thou art hee;
Her grave is made i'th Bed of love:
Thus with sweet sweets can Heaven mixe gall,
And marriage turne to Funerall.
Turke, Amurath, slave nay something baser▪
King! For all aery titles which the Gods
Have blasted man withall▪ to make them swell
With puft up honour, and ambitious wind,
This name of King holds greatest antipathy
With manly government▪ for if we waigh▪
'Tis subjects, and not Kings beare all the sway.
Each whispered mur mur from their idle breath,
Condemnes a King to Infamy, to death;
Were there a Metempsucocosis of soules,
And nature should a free Election grant
What things they afterwards would reinforme
The vaine and haughtist minds the Sun ere saw,
Would chuse it's Cottage in some Shepheards flesh,
Nay, be confin'd within some Dog or Cat,
Than Antique like prancke in a Kings gay-clothes▪
Were I no King, and had no Majesty,
I had more than all Kings, blest liberty;
And without rumor might enjoy my choyce,
Not faring Censure of each popular voce;
Poore men may love, and none their wils correct:
But all turne Satyres of a Kings affect!
O my base greatnesse! What disasterovs starre,
Profest it selfe a Midwife at my birth,
To shape me into such prodigious States,
But hence regard of tongues! Were we a Saint,
Some envious tongue would dare our names to taint:
And he from slander is at securest rest,
Not that hath none, but that regards it least.
Open you envious Curtaines here's a sight,
That might commend the act of Love so Chast;
Were now the chariot-guider of the Sunne
Weary on's taske, and would intreat a day
Of Heauen to rest in, here's a radiant Looke,
That might be fixt ith' midst oth' Axletree;
And in despight of darke conspiring Clouds,
She would out-shine Sunne, Moone, and all the Stars,
O, I could court thee now (my sweet) a fresh,
Mixing a kise with every period:
Telling the Lillies how they are but wanne,
Earth in the vernant spring is dull, and darke,
Compar'd with this aspect! the Aeasterne ayre,
Famed with the wings of Mercury and ove,
Infectious, but compar'd with this perfume!
Hence then th'ambition of that furious youth,
Who knew not what a crime his rashnesse was!
I might orecome more Kingdomes; have more dominion
Enthrone my selfe an Emperor! oth' world,
I might! I might! Amurath thou mightst!
The Christians now will scoffe at Mahomet;
Perchance they sent this wretch thus to inchant me!
O my perplexed thoughts! tush Ile to bed
Should the commanding Thunder of the Gods
Prohibite me, or strike me in the act!
Talke on (vaine rumor) fame I dare thy worst!
Call me a Lusty, Lazy, wanton, Coward!
Should I win all the world, my breath once fled,
My bad would still survive, all good be dead.
Eumrphe, sweet, I come! you sacred powers,
Who have bestowed some happinesse on man,
To helpe to passe away this sinful ife,
Grant me a youthfull vigor yet a while,
Full veines, free strength, compleat and manly fence
To know, and taste a beauty most immense!
Amurath, Amurath?
Divel, Divel? What?
Dar'st thou appeare before an Angell (Fiend?)
O Amurath, why doth intemperate Lust
Raging within thy furious youthfull veines,
Burst through thy fathers Tombe? Disturbe his soule?
Know, all the torments that the fabulous age
Dream't, did afflict deceased impious Ghosts,
Hartbiting-hunger, and soule-searching thirst,
The nere consumed, yet ever eaten prey
That the devouring Vulture feeds upon,
Are not such tortures as our off-springs crimes!
They, they sit heavy on us, and no date
Makes our compassionate affection cease.
O thou hereditary Vlcer, hearke
By the name of Father, and by all those cares,
Which brought me to my grave, to make thee great▪
Thou that hast nothing of me but my crowne:
My enterprise surpast the boundlesse Sea,
Cutting the churlish Waves of Hellespont,
When the flood stood which wind for to obey!
Euxinum groan'd beneath my burdenous Ships;
I was the first of all the Turkish Kings
That Europe knew, and the fond Christians plagu
What coward blood ran flowing in my veines,
When thou wert first begot: who marrest all
Thy Fathers acts, by thy untam'd desires,
Wherefore with Stygian curses I will lade thee
First, may she prove a Strumpet to thy Bed
Be her lips poyson, and let her loose embrace,
Be venemous as Scopions! If he conceiv'd,
A Generation from thee, let it be
As ominous as thou hast beene to me!
Rebellious to thy Praecepts, printing care,
Vpon thy aged browes, O may they prove,
As Faeries for to lash thee in thy rest!
But Amurath, if thou canst quench this flame,
If thou wilt cut this Gordian thred, and rend hence,
That putrid Wenne which cleaves unto thy flesh,
Be all thine actions prosperous! Mahomet,
Shal be auspitious unto each designe;
Fortune to shew thee favour shall be proud,
Farewell! if that men doe speake last, before
They dye, take root, then dead mens should take more.
What art thou vanisht? Know (thou carefull spright)
Thou shalt no sooner pierce the wandring Clouds
With unperceived flight, than my resolue
Shall expiate my former Vanity!
Looke on thy sonne thou (aery intellect)
And see him sacrifice to thy command!
Now Titan turne thy breathing curses backe!
Start hence bright day, a sable Cloud invade
This Vniversall Globe, breake every prop,
And every hndge that doth sustaine the Heavens:
For straight must dye a woman, I have named
A crime, that may accuse all Nature guilty.
The Sexe wisely considered, deserves a death;
For thinke this (Amurath) this woman may,
Prostrate he delicate and Ivory limbes,
To some base Page, or Scul, or shrunk up Dwarf:
Or let some Groome lye feeding on her lips,
She may devise some mishapen trick,
To satiate her goatish Amurath,
And from her bended knees at Meditation,
Be taken by some slave toth' deepe of Hell!
Th'art a brave Creature, were thou not a woman:
! Come! thou shalt see my well-kept vow,
And know my hate, which saw me dote but now:
Schahin! ! Captaines ho!
Our Tutor, Eurenoses, Captaines, welcome!
Gallants, I call you to a spectacle:
My breast too narrow to hoard up any joy:
Nay, gaze here (Gentlemen!) give Nature thanks,
For framing such an excellent sence as (Sight)
Whereby such objects are injoy'd as this!
Which of you now imprison not your thought
In envios and silent policy.
My Lord to whatsoever you shall propose,
My sentence shall be free.
And mine. Chase-Il. And mine.
Which of you then dare chalenge to himself,
Such a pathetique a Praerogative,
So stoically evered from affection,
That had he suh a Creature as lyeth here,
One, at whom Nature her selfe stood amazed:
One, whom thse lofty extaies of Poets,
Should they decay, here't must not barely dump
Their dull inventions with similitudes,
Taken from Sunne, Moone, Volets▪ Roses,
And, when their raptures at a period stand;
A silent admiration must supply
Onely name her, and she is all describ'd.
Hyperbole of women, Colour it selfe
Is not more pure, and incontaminate!
Sleep doates on her: and grasps her eye-lids close▪
The sky it selfe hath onely so much blew
As the azure in her veies, bends by reflexe.
Here's breath that would those vapors purifie,
Which from Avernus choakes the flying Birds!
Here's heat would tempt the numb'd Atkenian,
Though all his bloud with age were conjealed yce!
Now, which of you all is so temperate;
That, did he find this Iewel in his Bed
(Vnlesse an Eunuch) could refraine to grapple,
And dally with her? Come! Speake freely all.
Truly (my Lord) I came of mortall Parents
And much confesse me subject to desires;
Freely injoy your Love!
That were she mine, I surely would doe no lesse.
What sayth Eurenses?
My Lord, I ay;
That they may raile at light, that nere saw day;
But, had I such a Creature by my side
Were the world twice enlarged, and all that world
Orecome by me, all volumes writ,
Made cleane and fild up by Rhetorique straines:
Of my great deeds, Historians should spend
Their Inke and Paper in my sole Chronicle,
A thousand such alluring idle charmes,
Could not conjure me from betwixt her armes.
Your sentence Chase Beg?
What need your Grace depend upon our breath?
I vow (my Lord,) if all those scrupulous things
Which burden us with praecepts so praecise,
Those Parents which when they are married once
And past their strength of yeares, thinke their sonnes traight,
Should be as old in every thing as they,
I say my Lord, did my head weare a Crowne
That Queen should be the chiefest jem t'adorne it,
Spite of all hate, that's an unhappy state
When Kings must feare to love, least subjects hate.
Wel spoke three Milk-sops, Shahin! Your Sword!
Now, now be valour in this manly arme
To cut off troupes of thoughts that would invade me!
Thinke you my minde is waxie to be wrought,
By any fashion, Orchnes thy strength,
Here doe I wish as did that Emperour,
That all the heads of that inticing Sexe,
Were upon hers, thus then should one full stroake
Mow them all off.
There, kisse now (Captaines) doe! and clap her cheeke;
This is the face that did so captive me:
These were the lookes that so bewitcht mine eyes▪
Here be the lips, that I but for to touch,
Gave over Fortune, Victory, Fame, and all;
These were two lying mirrors where I lookt
And thought I saw a world of happinee.
Now Tutor, shall our swords be exercised,
In ripping up the breasts of Christians.
Say Generals! Whether is first?
For Thracia!
On then for Thracia, for he surely shall
That conquers first himselfe, soone conquer all.
Thou sacred guider of the arched Heavens,
Who canst collect the scattering starres, and fixe
The Erratique Planet in the constant Pole,
O why shouldst thou take such solicitous care
To keepe the ayre, and Elements in course?
That Winter should uncloth our Mother Earth,
And wrap her in a winding sheet of snow;
That then the spring duly revives her still,
Vnlinds her sinews, fils her cling'd up veynes,
With living dew, and makes her young againe;
Next that, the Nemean terror breathes her flames,
To parch her flaxie haires with furious heat;
Which to allay too, thou op'st the Chataracts,
And watereth the worlds Gardens with blest drops;
Canst thou▪ which canst sustain the ponderous world,
And keepst in true poize, securely sleepe,
Letting a Tyrant (which with a Philip, thus;
Thou mightest sinke to Earth) to baffle thee?
A warrier in thy Fields, I long have beene
To see if in thy sacred providence,
Thou meanst to arme me with thy thunder-bolt,
Yet, yet, it strikes not now, he Gyant-wise,
He dares thee againe; pardon our earnest zeale
What ere's decreed for man by thy behost,
He must performe: and in obedience rest.
Thou, like Spectators when they doe behold
An hardy youth encountring with a Beare▪
Or something terrible; then they give a shout,
So dost thou even applaud thy selfe to see,
Religion striving with Calamity.
Which while it often beares, and still rests true,
It's fence 'gainst all that after shall ensue.
Turke, ile oppose thee still! Heaven has decreed:
That this weake hand, shall make that tyrant bleed.
A man religious, firme, and strongly good
Cannot oth' suddaine be, nor understood.
Rise (Soule!) injoy the prize of thy brave worth!
Scahin! the Present that thou so profest,
Should from the City of Orestias,
Make proud our eyes! then tell me. hast thou slaine
A thousand superstitious Christian soules;
Make them stoope to us; O, I would bath my hands
In their warme bloud to make them supple. (Schahin;)
That they may weild more Speares! our hands are dull,
Our furie's patient! now will I be a Turke,
And to our Prophets altars doe I vow,
That to his yoke I will all necks subdue,
Or in their throates my bloudy sword imbrew.
Then King, to adde fresh oyle unto thy hate,
And make it raise it selfe a greater flame,
See here these Christians heads; thus still shall fall
Before thy fatall hand, these impios slaves;
So long as number's wanting to the sand,
So long as day shall come with Sunne, and night
Be spangled with the twilight dawning starres,
Whilst floods shall fall into the Ocean
Shall Christians tremble at Turkes thundring stroakes.
Soam I Amurath the great King of Turkes,
O how it glads me thus to pash thei braines,
To rend their lockes, to teare these Infidels!
Who thundered when these heads were smitten off?
Starres I could reach you with my lofty hand,
'Tis well enough, enough, (great Amurath)
For now I sit in Orchanes great throne,
And sacrifice due rites to Mahomet;
Yet why enough? Ile on and dung the Earth,
With Christians rotted trunckes, that frō that soyle,
May spring more Cadmean Monsters to orecome thē.
Captaines, what Conntries next shal we make flow,
With Channels of their bloud?
To Servia (my Lord) there are troupes of armes,
Gathered to resist Mahometans.
At Bulgaria, there they set on fire,
The Countries as they passe, 'twere good we haste.
Why they doe well! we like of their desire
To make the flame in which themselves must fry!
Ruine, destruction, famine, and the sword,
Shall all invade them, Sunne stay thou thy flight,
And see the snakes in their owne River drencht,
Whilt with their bloud our furious thirst is quecht!
Whether (Bulgaria) whether must we flye?
The Butcherous Ture's at hand. Blest Sanctity▪
If thou didst ere guard goodnesse, wall our towers?
Bring strength into our Nerves! For in thy cause
Our Brests upon their Rapiers we will run;
We'll with just hope the tyrants rage,
Meet him in the face, fury will de us armes:
There is a power can guard us from al harmes.
Let's be sudain: for we' not find scope,
To see our haps. Who most doth feare, may hope.
Governor, Captaines, hast unto your armes:
The dangers imminent, and the Turke's at hand
(Cobelitz) must we still wade thus deepe
In blood and terror.
Yes (Servia) we must, we should, we ought,
Ease and successe keeps basenesse company,
Shall we not blush to see the register
Of those great Romans, and Heroicke Greekes,
Which did those acts (at which our hearts are struck
Beneath all credence) onely to win fame:
And shall not we for that Eternall name?
To live without all credence even to win fame,
Is not to know life's chiefe, and better parts:
To us of future hopes; calamity
Must helpe to purchase immortality.
Well spoke (true Chistian) they who still live high,
And snoare in prais'd applause nere know to beare,
A contuely, or checke a fate,
Wisely to steere a Ship, or guide an Army,
Vndanted hardinesse is requisite;
(O) then lets to our weapos! make him yeild▪
They which deny all right, ofgive't ith' Field.
Why (Gentlemen) we want no foes to fight,
Nor need we turne our weapons on our selves!
You lazy rogue, what! come in my Cabinet?
Conspiring slave you murmur'd gin's th'allowance,
And wouldt perswade upon a larger pay,
To betray all Garrisons, and turne Tur.
Thou halfe Can-carousing rascall, Ile teare thee,
And those treacherous veines of thine, will you see.
Will you see your Corporall wrong'd?
Well, since I fight for victuals for company,
Vse now your swords and Bucklers.
Treason the next man that speakes or strikes a blow▪
Then shall our Laundresses fight for us.
Why, Amazos! Baudicans, come helpe to scratch!
O Cobelitz, what way shall we appease them?
Out thy Corporal (huswife) hath the itch,
You now will have foule washing, Drab ile teare your mouth;
An inch or two yet wider.
What, souldiers thinke you each distastfull word,
Given ▪mogst your selves so strong an obloquie
That revenge spurs you to each others death?
And will not seeke to wash those blasphemies,
In Seas of their foule blood, which they belcht out.
By our approaching foes, against the Essence
Of the Eternall.
Leave, leave, these factions; cease these Mutinies▪
Harke their Drums take advantage of these stirre ▪
Let us oppose our strength against our foe!
And in our Campe let not one souldier be,
Who will not finde and strike his Enemies.
Now (blest guider and great strength of armes)
If in thy secret and hid decree,
Thou hast not yet appointed the full time,
Wherein thou meanest to tame this tyger,
Who dare murmur against thine hidden will?
Be we slaine now, there's victory in store,
Which when thou pleasest thou't give, & not before.
Give us still strength of patience, not to wish,
A funerall honour unto all the world,
When we are perishing we'l still beleeve,
Those dangers worth our death we undergoe.
Whilst who is ours, is all alike thy foe;
Should fortune loose this day when we are slaine,
Thou canst give hands, and strength, and men again;
On thee we trust then, and on thee beare,
Scorning for Heavens sake to shed a teare.
Bassa! we thanke thy valor and discretion▪
In finding fit occasion to invade
The mutinons Christians! these Captives here
Shall be good presents to our worthy Master.
Generall now trust me these young slaves,
To be full of Valor, they have mettall in them.
Yes; and to his Highnesse shall performe
A service which I long have thought upon,
And which his Turkis Majesty requires;
They'l fit to be a neare attendant guard,
On all occasions to the Emperour;
Therefore they shall be called ▪
By me first instituted, for our Princes safeties sake.
Their vigor and strong hearts becomes such service,
For to orecome them made our soldiers sweat,
Much Turkish blood: the Servians kept the Fight,
With stubborne hard resistance, The Bulgarians
Left the right wing; there set I forward first,
And like a torrent rowl'd destruction on,
Raising huge stormes of bloud, as doth the Whale,
Puffe up the Waves against a mighty Ship;
Me thinkes I see the Rivers of their gore:
Their Leaders trampled on by Turkish Horse,
The body of their army quite disperst;
Themselves all floating in Vermillian pooles,
With their owne weapons hasting to their death.
And such a slaughter did we make of them,
As Nature scarce can ere repaire againe.
One hasting to others death, pulling to ground,
Him that held up, so they each other drown'd.
Still are they confident upon a power,
They know not what, who (as they think) can snatch
Their praecise soules from out the jawes of death.
Yes, such a superstition doth possesse them,
For when they lookt for nothing but their fate,
And danger stood in sweat upon their browes?
They yet scorn'd Mahomt, and prophan'd his rites,
And nought but horror made them to beleeve him;
So many men were fighting on his side:
As might have chang'd my seat, and part ith' world,
(Though Nature stood against) to a new place:
Or carry Sestos whereby Abydos stands,
Or pull downe Atlas with so many hands▪
How like our Captaines the last Victory?
(If any can prophesie of future things)
Me thought I did dreame of this blessed hap,
How Fortune did involue them in their ruine,
And slight from danger, brought them into danger,
Each one astonished with a suddaine feare,
Knew not the danger that was then most neare.
To adde more tryumph, I present my Liege,
With these young Rebels, which you may bring up,
In all the praecepts of our Mahomet:
And for great Emperor, your person wants,
A thing which much ore-Clouds your light of state,
Attendant Ianizarie to a Prince:
These may be so trained up, as to supply
The duty fit for such a Majesty:
Bassa we thanke thy strength: Schahin your counsaile,
And to that end, let them have safe protection.
But we must treat now of a marriage (Lords)
The German Ogy, he who Sceptr swayes
The confines in strong Asia,
By Embassie intreates that he may joyne
His Daughter Htam to our !
Embassador here to our Councell speake,
Your Masters Message.
Please then your Maj. and these reverend heads
To be inform'd my Masters will by me,
In Wedlocke; if your Prince may be combin'd
To the faire Princesse his sole Daughter:
He freely giues the Phrgian territories,
And Bthinia to you for your Dowry;
Cata, Simon, Egregos, Sansale,
Abbettinon, the Ottomans estate,
Which Ottomans, because he not endures,
The Noble Zelzucciom family protests,
To joyne with you in quelling their ambition.
May't please your Majesty to like mine advice
It's good to have allyance with such friends;
Kings that combine themselves are like to shafts,
The ancient Sage propos'd unto his sonne!
Which whilst together they were close compact:
Armes, knees, and his whle strength▪ could never breake;
Take one by one, they with a touch were tract,
So Kings may be orecome that stand alone;
But two such Princes, knit thus hand in hand,
Should Nations totter, they would firmely stand.
Yes Schahin we'll approve what thou sayest;
Then from us carry the great Asians Monarch,
This his kindest greeting:
Tell him the gates of Prusa shall stand ope,
And the glad ayre shall Eccho notes of joy,
To entrtaine her who shall blesse our Land,
With hopefull issue; gredy thoughts expect
Her soone arrivall; and so (Embasador)
Enforme thy Priucesse, when she shall appeare,
A lasting Starre shall shie within our Sphaere!
O Servia, our Cities are turned flames;
Each stayes to hast his owne and others death:
And as though Heaven conspir'd destructiou too,
That raignes downe scalding Sulphure on our heads,
Here one that lyes thicke gasping for his breath,
Is choakt with bloud that runs from's fellowes wounds,
Whilst others for the dead are making Graves,
Themselves are made the coarses that doe fill them!
Nobles, and base, together perish all:
And a drawne sword stickes fast in every rib;
Our stones are dyed Vermillion with our bloud!
Old creatures that are creeping to the graue,
Are thrust on fastr!
Infants but in the of their lives,
And thus kickt off, O most disastrous times,
To love our deaths, and make our life our crimes.
See, see, the ruines of our goodly Walles,
Our Cities smoake hinders the sight of heaven:
The conquerour yet amaz'd measures ou our Townes▪
With eyes of terror, and doth scarce beleeve
He hath orecome us; yet among these fires,
Our dead men are denyed their funerall flames:
Aud those infectious Carkases doe performe,
A second murder on the rest that live!
And all the hope of safety that we have,
Is now to fixe our flattering lips at's feet:
Mercy (perhaps) may wearied slaughter meet.
Wil you doe so? speake for I am determi'nd —
No (worthy Generall) Heaven avert
And rme you with the proofe of better thoughts!
What though a Tyrant strives to terrifie
All Christendome, and would not be beloved?
Let not your feares give impious rage such scope!
As for to bring Religion to prophanesse:
Fortune and Heaven will scorne to try a man,
That hurles his weapons hence and runs away!
How is he worthy of heavens victory;
That, when it frownes, dares not looke u and see?
Me thinks w three are now inviron'd round,
With hosts of Angels, and our powerfull Mars.
Is putting bowes of steele into our hands:
He doth suggest our wrath, and bids us, on!
O what an army 'tis to have a cause
Holy and just; there, there's our strength indeed.
— Tu mente Labantes,
Dirige nos, dubios: Certo Robore firmâ.
If we must dye, the narrow way to blisse,
Shall be made wide for us, the gate wide ope,
And the spread Pallace entertaines with joy.
Meane time, let's looke like men upon our giefe.
Out frowne fate, Despot, Bulgaria, come!
Turke! once more at thee (Tyrant) mortals must,
Command Heavens favor in a cause so just.
Sends our proud father in Law this greeting to us?
Was our sword sheath'd so soone to heare this answer?
My Lord, he bad me tell you that 'twas you
him leave off this great Prophets Warres,
When he was hewing downe the Christians;
Therefore submission hould not now appease him,
Mo▪ though your Wife, his Daughter, hould her selfe,
Vpon her penitent knees be supplyant!
No sooner shall the Tycian splendent Sol,
Open Heavens Casements, and inlarge the day,
But his horse hoofes shall beat your treacherous Earth;
And that you may be warn'd of his approach,
Murder and flames shall be his Prodromo's!
Confederate Princes and my kind allyes,
Shall his proud nosthrils breath those threats on us?
Moreover, my Lord wil or win, or raz,
Iouium and Larenda.
Iconium and Larenda? I? No more?
Had best looke first, how safe his Prusa stands!
Lords, I am mov'd, and will forget my Queene
Was ere the issue of his hated blood!
My splene is tost within; mine entrailes pant,
As, wen the Sea is rais'd with Southerne gusts,
The wind allay'd, yet still the Waves will tremble,
Princes, now binde your selves with such strong chaines,
Your faith and breaths can make; sweare to me all,
To be as firme to me 'gainst Amurath,
As is the skin and lesh unto the Nerves;
We all sweare we will.
Then all here kisse my Sword,
Which shall be steept within the head-mans thrat▪
We'l make him know those will not lye in Warre,
Which may in policie in treat a peace!
Hast thy course (time) and soone reduce the yeare!
Ensignes may Ensignes meet, King,
Great , scornes to avoyd a Turke:
Princes, and Neighbours, muster up your strength,
That we may meet him on his full Cariere!
And let it be Carnia's pride to say,
To overcome him we askt no second day.
Thne O Hymen, thine: O shee,
Whose Beauties verse Calliope,
Sing to Marriage rites an Io,
Io to Hymen.
To thee Apollo is my sute,
Lend me a while thy silver Lute,
O what a woe it is to bring,
A Bride to Bed and never sing.
Io to Hymen.
When she's old, still seemes she young,
When she's weke, to her be strong!
Be Cyprus, both, and Paphos here,
Love, sing with merry cheere.
Io to Hymen.
You Gods of Marriage: sacred Protectoresse
Of lawfull propagations, and blest Love
Be most propitious to these grafted stemmes!
Drop dewing showers of genration on them!
Thinke (Sonne) this day too prodigall of blessing
As, that had uno taskt thee (like Alcides)
To grapple with Stmphallides, or clense
Angelas stables: or like the Trojan Boy,
Sit like a Shepherd on Dardadias Hils,
Such a reward as this faire Queen repayres,
O thou hop'd future off-spring spare thy Parent!
Hurt not this tender wombe, these Ivory worlds,
When you are borne; O be within your limbes,
The Grandsire Amurath, and fathers strength!
Line their faces (Nature) ith their Mothers dye!
And let the Destinies marke the ensuring night
In their Eternall Bookes, with notes most white.
Grant it great Maomet!
Most awfull father and my honored Pinee,
Although it be enacted by the Heavens,
That in these bonds of marriage such curse
Attends on Princes above private men,
That nor affection, nor home-nourisht Love
But tate and policy must elect their Wives.
Which must be fetcht from Countries farre remote!
Yet the protecting Powers have such a care,
Both of their off-springs and their Kingdomes state,
That to what they ordaine, they worke in us
A suddaine willingnesse to make us obey;
For, in this brest, I doe already feele
That there's a kindling a Diviner heat:
Which disobedience never shall extinguish.
And, if there be any felicity
From these uited Loves to be derived
From the weake sexe into the husbands soule,
Then may my Lord make his affection sure,
To be repayd with unattainted Love,
In which a pritty peopl ye shall live,
Wi soft and yeilding curtesie in all
He shall command, my willing armes shall still,
Be ope t'enfold within a Wives embrace,
If any comfort else there be in store,
(Which modesty keeps silent to it selfe)
Cause onely husbands and the night must know't,
My Loyalty shall ever all performe▪
And (though my) Lord should frown, Ile be the ame▪
Greene wood will burne with a continued flame:
Princesse our ardor is already fired,
Yet with no violent temerity;
Such as might feare it's short and soone decaying▪
Thy vertue seemes so to exceed thy Sexe,
And wisdome so farre to out-pace thy yeares,
That, surely (Ptincesse) soone maturity,
Argues in them, hidden Divinity.
Expected (Hymen) here hath bound our hands,
And hearts, with everlasting ligaments▪
Fortunate both we are, and have one blisse
The want of which for ever doth infect,
With anxious cares the sweets of marriage Beds:
Our Parents benediction and consent,
They are the truest Hymens, and should be
To children the best marriage Deity.
Thus then attended with uch sacred charmes
Our last day of content shall never come;
Till we must part by th'unresisted doome,
With a pleas'd error we will age beguile,
All starres on us, an aequall yoke must smile.
Now (Lords) who'le dance
A Turkish measure? Ladies our nerves are shrunke;
And you now fixe the signe of age on me,
You who have bloud still flowing in your veynes,
Be nimble as an Hart: Caper to the phaeres!
O you are light, that wrnt the weight of yeares!
And health to our Bride and her father!
O (Nobles) would this wine were Christians blood,
But that it would Phrenetique humours breed,
And so infect our baines with Superstition!
Auspitious fortunes to great Amurath!
To ope more springs unto this full tide of joy,
Know (potent Emperor) I from Europe bring
Sixe daughters of sixe severall Kings,
Whose Cities we have equall'd to the ground;
And of their Pallaces did torches make,
To light their soules through the blacke Cave of death (Acherō )
Describe (good Captaine) how the dogs were wearied.
So weary were they to indure to indure our swords,
That by impetuous mutiny themselves,
Turn'd on each other; slew their Maisters;
Childrens own hands, tore out their fathers throats.
And each one strove who should be laughtered first;
Here did a brother pash out a Brothers braines,
Some in stinking Quagmires, and deepe Lakes
(Which they had made t'avoyd their excrements)
Ran quicke, and in the lake lay buried.
(Goon Executioner of our most just wrath!)
Nor did it leave till death it selfe was weary▪
Murder grew faint, and each succeeding day,
Shewed us the slaughter of the day before.
'Mongst carkasses and funerals we stood,
Denying those that liv'd such Ceremonies
As i their Temples to the Indian Gods,
With prayers and vowes they dayly offred:
Nor destiny, nor cruelty ere left,
Till they had nothing to worke upon;
For, of so many soules that breath'd
These sixe are all remain'd: which as a Pledge
Of my best service to your Majesty.
I here am bold to yeeld an offer.
Nor shall this present b unrecompenced;
For thy true service, on thee e bestow
All the rich guifts, which all these Asian Lords
Bought to adore these happy Nuptials,
On you faire Bride great Princesse and our Daughter
Doe we bestow thee Virgins (daughters to Kings)
For your attendnce.
We are too much bound unto our Princely Father▪
No (Daughter) no! we hope thou art the spring,
From whence shall flow to all the world a King▪
Captaines and Lords▪ to morrow we must meet,
To thinke of our rebelliious sonne in Law)
Be this time all for comfort and delight,
Short wedding dayes make it seeme long to night.
Here set we downe our miserable load,
O with whom is't that we fight?
With Lydia Lyons, and Hyrcania Beares;
Which grinde us dayly in their ravenous teth?
The Tyrant (as it were destuctions Enginere)
Helpe Nature to destroy the worlds frame quickly,
Alas my Lord that needs not, every day
Is a sufficient heper to decay:
Great workman, who art sparing in thy strength
To bring things to perfectio, a to oretrne
All thy best wokes, thou usest suddaine force,
When mans a Erio! and first coneived
How long 'tis ere he see his native light?
Then borne, with expectation for his growth!
Tenderly nourisht, carefully brought up,
Growne to prfection, what a little thing,
Serves to call on his suddaine ruining?
Come Cobelitz, ▪mongst those demolisht stons
We'll sit as Hecub, at those Troyn Walles:
Our teares shall be false glasses to our eyes:
Through these we'l looke, and thinke we yet may see
Our stately Pinacles, and strong founded holds;
That which one houre can delapidate,
One age can scarce repaire.
No sir, for nothing's hard
To Nature, when she meanes t'consume
A thousand Oakes (which time hath fixt i'th earth,
As Monuments of lasting memory)
Are in a moment turn'd to ashes all;
Things that rise lowly, take a suddaine fall.
What course now Cobelitz, must we still be yoak▪
To misery, and murder? We scarce have roome,
Vpon our bodies to receive more wounds,
And must we still oppose our selves to more?
Yes! We are ready still; a solid minde
Must not be shakt with every blast of Winde!
Pollux, nor Hercules, had none other art,
To get them Mansions in the spangl'd Heavens
Then a true firme resolve; th' Ariatike Sea,
Shall from his currents with tempestuous blasts,
Be sooner heard, than vertue from it's ayme,
Let us but thinke (when we so many see,
Enjoying greater quiet than our selves.)
How many have endur'd more misery;
Ilion, Ilion, what a fate hadst thou?
How fruitfull wert thou in matter for thy foe?
Thus we'll delude our griefe, make our selfe glad,
To think of miseries that others had.
I (Captaine) I! they that furnisht thee
With sentences of comfort, never saw,
Their Cities burnt, their Cuntries desolate!
'Tis easie for Physitians for to tell
Advice to others, when themselves are well!
Tush, tush (my Lord) there's on our side we know,
One that can both, and will our weake hands gide,
One that will strike and thunder; Gyant then,
Looke for a dart! we must not appoint when;
Meane while helpe for to convay this burden henc
Turke, though thy tyranny deny us graves,
Corruption will give them spite of thee!
Nor doe our corps, such Tombes and Cavernes need:
For our owne flesh, still our owne graves to breed:
And, when the Earth receiveth not, when they die;
Heavens Vault ouerwhelmeth them, so their tombe's ith' skie.
Besieged on every side? Iconim taken?
Entrencht within my foes my selfe must lye
Wrapt in my Cities ruine! Turkes come on!
Nay but my Lord, meane you to meet your death?
Let's hast our flight, and trust more to our feet
Then words, or hands —
Why, so much of our bloud
Is already spilt▪ as should the glittering Sunne
Exhale it upward, 'twould obnubulate
It's luster, else to fiery Meteors turne.
Some councell (Lords) he that's amidst the Sea,
When every curled wave doth threat his death
Yet trusts upon the oares of his owne armes,
And sometime the salt fome doth pitty him,
A Wolfe, or Lyon, that hath fild his gorge
With bloudy prey, at last will lye to sleepe,
And the unnaturalst creatures not forget
Their love to those whom they do know their own!
My wife's his Daughter; sice we canot stand
His ury longer▪ she shll sage his wrath.
The boysterous Ocea wh no oppose,
Growth's is lot, whe't hath no foes.
Why then (my Lord) array your selfe in weeds▪
Of a Petitioner: take the Queene along,
And your two children; they may move his eyes;
For, desperate sores aske desperate remedies.
Goe (Lords) goe: fetch some straight. O Heavens!
O fortune they that leane on thy crackt wheele,
And trust a Kingdomes power, and domineere
In a wall'd Pallace, let them looke on me,
And thee (Carmania) greater instances
The world affords not to demonstrate
The fraile estate of proudest Potentates,
Of sturdiest Monarchies: high Pinacles
Are still invaded with the prouder winds;
They must endure the threats of every blast;
The tops of Caucasus and Pindus shake,
With every cracke of thunder; humble Vaults
Are nere toucht with a bolt, ambiguous wings
Hath all the state, that hovers over Kings.
I, I, this vesture fits my miserie!
This badge of poverty must now prevaile,
Where all my Kingdomes power & strength doth faile,
Why should not a propheticke soule attend
On great mens persons, and forewarne their ils?
Raging Bootes doth not so turmoile
The Lybian ford, as Fortune doth great hearts.
Betona and Erynnis scourge us on▪
Should wars and treasons cease, why our owne weight
Would send us to the Earth; as spreading armes
Make the huge trees in tempest for to split.
For as the slaughter-man to pasture goes,
And drags that Oxe home first, whose Bulke is greatest,
The leane he still lets feed: disease takes hold
On bodies that are pampered with best fare;
So doth all ruine chuse the fairest markes:
At which it bends, and strikes it full of shafts,
Ambition made me now that eminent but:
And I that fell by mine owne strength, mut rise
By profest weaknesse; Buckets full sinke downe:
Whilst empty ones danceith' ayr, and cannot drowne.
Come (ords) he out o ▪s way can never range,
Who is at fthest! worst nere finds ill change.
Our hate must not part thus, Ile tell thee (Prince)
That thou hast kindled violent Aetna in our brest,
And such a flame is quencht with nought but blood:
His bloud whose hasty and rebellious blast,
Gave life unto the fire; should Heaven threat us;
Knowes we dare not menace it; are we not Amurat?
(Whose awfull name is even trembled at)
So often dar'd by Pigmy Christians;
Which we will crush to ayre; what haughty thought
Buzz'd thy praesumptuous eares with such vain blasts,
To puffe thee into such impetuous acts?
Or what, durst prompt thee with a thought so fraile,
As made thee covetous of so brave a death?
As this known hand should cause it? know that throat
Shall feele it strangled with some slave brought up
To noght but an Hangman: thy last breath,
Torne from thee by a hand that's worse than death
Why then, Ile (like the Roman Pompey) hide
My dying sight, scorning Imperious lookes
Should grace so base a stroake with sad aspect;
Thus will I muffle up and choake my groanes,
Least a griev'd teare should quite put out the name,
Of lasting courage in Carmanias fame.
What? still stie necked? Is this the true you bg?
prinkled before thy face those Rebll Brats,
Shall have their braines, and their dissected limes,
Hurld for a prey to Kites; for (Lords) 'tis fit
No sparke of such a Mountaine threatning fire,
Be left as unextinct, least it devoure,
And prove more hot unto the Emperie,
Then the blaze did trouble Iov!
First sacrifice those Brats —
(Deare father) let thy fury rush on me!
Within these entrailes sheath thine unsatiate sword,
And let this ominous, and too fruitfull wombe,
Be torne in sunder? For from thence those Babes,
Tooke all their crimes; error made them guilty,
'Twas Natures fault, not theirs; O if affection
Can worke then; now shew a true Fathers Love,
If not, appease those murdering thoughts with me▪
For as pleaded with her sonnes
For their deare Father, so to a Father I
For my deare Babes and husband; husband, father▪
Which shall I first embrace? Victorious father,
Be blt those now sharpe thoughtsllay downe those threats,
Vnlaspe that impious Helmet! fixe to earth
That monumentall Spheare looke on thy child
With pardoning lookes, not with a Warriers eye:
Else shall my brest cover my husbands brest,
And serve as Buckler to receive thy wounds,
Why dost thou doubt? Fearest thou thy Daughters faith?
I feare, for after Daughters perjurie
All Lawes of Natures shall ditastfull be;
Nor will I trust thy children or thy selfe.
No Father 'tis I, feare you him, he you,
I both, but for you both, for both you warre;
So that 'tis best with him that's overcome.
O let me kisse (kind father) first the Earth
On which you tread, then kisse mine husbands cheeke.
Great King embrace these Babes! you are the stocke
On which these Grafts were planted —
True, and when sprouts do rob th tree of sap,
They must be prun'd,
Deare Father, leave such harsh similitudes▪
By my deceased Mother, (to whose wombe
I was a ten months burden:) By your selfe,
(To whom I was a pleasing Inant one)
Pitty my husband, and these tender Infants!
Yes to have them collect a manly strength,
And their first lesson that their Dad hall teach them
Shall be to read my misery.
Sterne Conqueror: but that thy daughter shews,
There nce dwlt good in that oburate brest,
I would not pend a teare to soften thee!
Thou seest my Countries turn'd into a Grave:
My Cities carre the Sunne with fiereer flames,
Which turne them into ashes! all my selfe
So slickt and carved, that my amazed blood
Knowes not through which wound first to take it's way;
If not on me, have mercy on my Babes! —
Which, with thy mercy thou mayst turne to Love.
No sir, we must root out malitious seed:
Nothing sproutes faster, then an envious weed!
We see a little Bullocke, 'mongst an heard
(Whose hores are yet scarce crept from out his front)
Growes on a suddaine tall, and in the Fields,
Frolicks so much, he makes his Father yeild.
A little twig left budding on an lme
(Vngratefully) barres his mother ight from Heaven!
I love not Aladins.
Threat all a Conquerour can, canst threat but death,
And I can die, but if thou wouldst have mercy! —
O see you feete we're prou'd with this hands kisse!
The higher those great powers have rais'd you,
Presse that which lyes below with gentler weigh ▪
To pardon miseries is Fortunes height:
Alas, these Infants, these weake sinewed hands
Can be no terror to these Hectors armes!
Beg (Infants) beg, and teach these tender joynts
To aske for mercy; learne your lisping tongues
To giue due accent to each syllable:
Nothing that Fortune urgeth too, is base;
Put from your thoughts all memory of discent:
Forget the Princely titles of your fathers:
If your owne misery you can feele,
Learne thus of me to weepe, of me to kneele▪
Doe (boyes) and imitate your Parents teaes▪
Which I (like ) shed, when he beheld,
Hctor thrice dragg'd about the rojan Walles.
He that burst ope the gates of Erebus,
And rouz'd the yelling Monster from his Den,
Was conquer'd with a teare! great Monarch learne,
To know how deare a King doth weeping earne.
Good Grandsire see, see how my father cries!
Good mother take my napkin for your eyes!
(Good father) heare, heare how thy daughter pryes:
Thou that know'st how to use sterne Warriers armes,
Learne how to use mild Warriers pitty too!
Alas? can er these ungrowne strengths repaire
Their Fathers batterd Cities? Or can these
These orethrowne Turrets? (Jconium) what small hopes
Hast thou to leane upon? If these be all?
Not halfe so mild hath our misfortune beene
That any can ere feare us: Be pleased —
Rise (my deere child) as Marble against raine,
So I at these obedient showers, melt!
Thus I doe raise thy husbad: thus thy Babes:
Freely admitting you to former state.
But Alad, wake not our wath agaie!
"Patience growes fury that is ofter stirred;
When Conquerours waxe calme, and cease to ate,
The conquered should not dare to reiteate.
Be thou our sonne and friend.
By all the rites of Mahomet I vow it!
Then for to seale uo our love,
Your selfe shall leade a wig in ervia,
In our immediate Wares, we are to meet
The Christians in Cassanoe's Plaines with speed:
Great Amurath nere had time to breath himselfe:
So much, as to have warring with new foes;
No day securely to is Scepter shone,
But one Warres end, still brought another on.
Let now victorious wreathes ingirt our rowes,
Let Angels 'stead of Souldiers wield our armes,
'Gainst him, who that our Cittis might be his
Strives to depopulate, and make them none!
But looke, looke in the ayre (me thinks) I se
An host of Souldiers brandishing their swords;
Each corner of the Heaven shoots thunderbolts,
To naile these impious forces to the Earth.
Souldiers stand to 't! though fortune bandy at's
Let's stand her shockes, like sturdy Rockesith' Sea.
On which the angry foaming Billowes beat,
With frivolous rush: and breake themselves, not thm;
Stand like the undainted countenance oth' sky,
Or, like the Sunne, which when the foolish King▪
Thought to obscure with a Cloud of Darts,
Out lookt them all, our lives are all inchanted,
And more ivulnerate than Thetis sonne.
We shall have hands snd weapons, if the stone,
Of fortune glide from under our weake feet,
And we must fall: yet, let all Christians say,
'Tis she, and not the cause, that wins the day.
We must beleeve Heaven hath a greater care
Of them, whom fortune doth so oft out dare!
Gentlemen, brothers, friends Souldiers, Christians,
We have no reason to command of Heaven
A thing denyed to all mortality.
Nor should we be so impudetly proud,
As in this weake condition to repute
Our selves above the stroake of Lady Chance,
A caution must divine it ever fixt,
That whilt her checkes, equally fall out,
Community should ease their bitternesse.
I could afresh now shed those Princely teares
To thinke suh suddaine raine should attend
Heroicke spirits glittering in bright armes▪
But if the Grecian (when he heard the dreames
Disputd subtilly by Philosophers,
To prove innumerable extant worlds)
Was trucke with pensive, and wept to thinke
He had not yet obtain'd ne for himselfe;
What terror can affright a Christians thoughts
Who knowes there is a world, at liberty
To breath in, when this glasse of life is broke?
Our foes with cirling furie are intrencht;
Pelions of earth and darknesse shall orelade them,
Whilst we shall mount, and these our spirits light,
Shall be yet ponderous to depresse them lower.
Nay, my nthesiasticke soule divines,
That some weake hand shall from the blazing Zone
Snatch Lightning, which shal strike th snarling Cr
With horror and amazement to the Earth!
Which Hell cannot oppose! Turke, Tyrannize!
Stand, yet at legth to fall my sacrifice.
Super-Olympicke vigor will (no doubt)
Squease all thy supercilious rancor out!
Who set the world on fire? How now (ye Heavens)
Grow you so proud that you must needs put on curl'd lockes▪
And cloth your selves in Periigs of fire?
Mahomet (say not but I invoke thee now!)
Command the puny-Christians demi-God
Put out those flashing sparkes, those Ignes ,
Or ile unseate him, or with my Lookes so shake
The taggring props of his weake seated Throne,
That he shall finde he shall have moe to doe
To quell one Amurath, then the whole Gyant brood
Of those same sonnes of Earth then ten Lycaons!
Doe the poore snakes so love their misery
That they would see it by these threatning lights?
Dar ye blaze still? Ile tosse up Buckets full
Of Christians bloud to quench you: by those haires
Drag you beneath the Center: there put out
All your praesaging flames in !
Can you outbrave me with your pidling Lights?
Yawne earth with Casements as wide as hel it selfe▪
Burne Heaven as ardent as the Lemnian flames!
Wake (pale Tysiphon) spend all thy snakes!
Be Eacus, and Minos as severe
As if the Gaole delivery of us all
Were the next Sessions! Ile pull Radamant
By his flaming furres from out his Iron Chaire.
Horror dismall cryes, and yells
Of these thy Grandsires thee fore-tells,
Furies sent of thee to learne
Crimes, which they could nere discerne.
Furies sent, &c.
O Amurathl thy Father's come,
To warne thee of a suddaine doome,
Which in Cassanoe's fields attends
To bring thee to thy Hellish friends.
Which in Cassanoes, &c.
Megaera and Ennio both doe stand,
Trembling, least when thou art damn'd
Chiefe of Furies thou shouldst bee,
And they their snakes resigne to thee.
Chiefe of Furies, &c.
Terror we a while will leave thee,
Till Cocytus Lake receive thee.
Cerberus will quake for feare
Where he a new Turkes fate shall heare.
Cerberus will, &c.
Now who the Divell sent my Grandsires hither?
Had Pluto no taske else to set them too?
He should have bound them to Ixions wheele,
Or bid them roule the stone of Sysiphus:
Beshrew me, but their singing did not please me!
Have they not beene so drunke with Lethe yet
As to forget me? Then can portend no ill
For, should the fates be twining my last threed;
Yet none durst come from Hell to tell me so!
Shall I be scar'd with a Night-walking Ghost;
Or what my working fancy shall present?
Why, I can looke more trrible, then Night,
And command darknesse in the unwilling day:
Make Hecate start: and draw backe her head,
To wrap it in a swarthy vaile of Clouds.
Drop sheets of Sulphure, you prodigious skyes!
Cyclops, run all thy Bullets into Ae,
Then vomit them at once! should Christians
Couch to the bottomlesse abysse of ,
Or hide themselves under Avernaes shade,
This mine arme should fetch them out! Day must performe
What I intend, wrath raines a bloudy storme:
And now 'gins rise the Sunne, which yet not knowes
The misery it shall see on Amuraths Foes,
Lords, Leaders, Captaines:
Your Highnesse up so soone?
He small rest takes,
That dreames on nought but bloudy broyles and death.
Your Grace seemes much distempered: Beds of sweat
Bedew your browes with never wonted palenesse.
Why; see you not? The heavens are turn'd Court Ladies,
And put on other Haire besides their owne:
Canst guesse (learn'd Schahin) what these flames portend?
My Lord, such things as these we mut ,
And wonder at, and yet not search the reason,
Perchance unwholsome fogs exhailed th'Sunne
Are set a blazing by his too neere heate:
But 'tis not lawfull that a mortall eye:
Should dare to penetrate Heavens secrecy.
Doth it not bode a Conquest?
Yes, 'gainst the Christians:
For, unto them it bends sinister lookes,
And frownes upon their army more then ours.
So, so! ome on, ere 'Phosphorus appeare
Let's too't, and so prevent that sluggard Sol!
If we want light, we'll from our Winnards▪
Strike fire enough to scorch the Vniverse▪
Mine armour there!
Now (Mahomet) I implore
Thy promist ayde for this auspitious day!
Toe me aloft, and make me ride on Clouds!
If my horse faile me, those fire breathing jades,
(Which the boy Phaethon kew not how to guide)
Will I plucke out from out the flaming teame,
And hurle my selfe against those condense Spheares,
On which ile sit, and stay their turning Orbes;
The whole vertigious Circle shall stand still,
But to behold me:
So helpe on here, now like Alcides do I girt my selfe,
With well knit sinewes, able to stagger Earth,
And threaten Nature with a second Chaos:
If one impetuous broyle remaine to come
In future ages, set on foote this houre!
How well this weight of steele befits my strength?
Me thinks the Gods stand quivering, and doe feare
(When I am arm'd) another Phegrae's neare!
Chiron shall see his Pindus at my feet!
And, ile climbe to Heaven, and pull it downe,
And kicke the weighty brden of the world,
From off the Babies shoulders that supports it!
For I am safer Buckled 'gainst my foe.
Then stdy Iason who by the inchanted charmes
Medea gave, incountred Vnicornes,
Queld Lyons, struggeld with fiery belching Buls:
Obtain'd a glorious prize, a Fleece, a Fleece
Dipt deepe in tincture of the Christians bloud.
Shall be my spoyle, nay should they hide their heads
In their Gods bosome, here's a sword shall reach thē
Come they shall know no place is free from wrath,
When boyling bloud is stirr'd in Amurath.
Here (mighty Prin) take view of Victory,
And see the field too narrow for thy spoyles!
Erynnus hides her head as if afraid,
To see a slaughter. She durst never hope for,
Earth hath the Carkasses, and denies them Graves,
And lets them be and rot, and fat her wombe,
Scorning to be unto slaves a Tombe.
Where are bcome those ominous Comets now?
What? ar those pissing Candles quit extinct?
Leave their disasterous snuffes no stench behind them?
'Tis something yet, that their God seeth their slaughter.
ending sulphurious Meteors to behold
The blest destruction of these Parasites▪
I knew the Elements would first untye
The Nerves of the Vniverse, then lt me dye!
See (King) here's one worme yet that dare confesse
He breaths and lives, which once this hand crusht downe.
Ha, ha, by Mahomet and we are weary now:
Some Mercy shall lay Victory asleepe.
It will a Lawreat prove to this great strife,
'Mongst all these murdered to give one his life,
So we'll discend.
From what a dismall grave am I awaked,
Intombed within a Golgotha of men;
Have all these Soules prevented me in blisse,
And left me in a dreame of happinesse?
But soft! m thoughts he sayd he would descend!
Then, Heavens one minutes breath, that's all I aske,
And then I shall performe my lifes true taske.
Poore slave, wouldst live?
Yes Turke to see thee dye!
Howle, howle▪ (grim artar) yell (thou gristly Wole)
Force the bloud from out thy gaping Wound!
Dij tibi non mortem, quae cctis pna paratur,
Sed sensum post fata, tu dent (impe) morti.
My spirit makes me not to fele thy weapon!
Hold you (crackt Organs) of my shottered life,
I am not toucht yet! can not mocke my death,
And thike 'tis but a dreame tlls me I am hurt?
Dar'st thou then leave me (bloud?) Canst be so bold
As to forsake these veynes to flow on Earth?
And must, I like th'unhappy Roma, dye
By a slaves hand?
Tyrant, 'tis knowne
He's Lord of others lifes that scornes his owne!
I that could scace ere sleepe, can I ere die?
And will none eare my life when I am dead
Tortures and torments for the murderer!
Ha, ha, ha!
I thanke the (great omnipotent) tha I
Shall ere laugh out the lag end of my life!
Villaine, thy laugh wounds worse then did thy Dagger!
Are you Lethargick (Lords) in cruelty?
Nay, heare me (Turke) now will I prompt their rage
Locke me in the Bull of Phalaris,
Cut off these eye-lids, bid me then out-gaze
The parching Sun-beames; flea this tender ski,
Set nests of Hornets on my rawest flesh,
Let the Siconian Clouds dop brimstone on me,
Powre boyling Lemnos on my greenest wounds,
Put on my shoulder Neus poysoned shirt,
Bind all these bloudy faces to my face
Rocke me Procrates like —
Hell, oh! I cannot brooke your smallest touch,
Ha, ha, each groane is Balsome to my wounds:
I am perfect well!
Rascall dar'st deride us?
Yea? and while your witty furies shall invent
For me, some never heard of punishment;
I see a guard of Saints ready to take me hence.
Take then froe flight, my new rewarded soule,
And seate thee on the winged Seraphims,
Hast to the Empyreum, where thy welcome
Shall be an Haleluia, anthem'd forth
By the Chorus of the Angell-Hierarchy.
Pierce with (swift plumes) the concave paths oth' Moone
Where the black ayre enlightened is with starres.
Stay not to wonder (there) of wandring Signes
At the inhorn'd Gemin, or Amphs Harpe,
At Arctos, or Bootes, or the Beare,
(Which are to plse wizard Astrologers)
Soare higher with the pitch and then looke downe
To lagh at the hard trifles of the world!
Perchance some oft have knowne a better life,
Never did none ere leave it more willingly.
Feare your deaths (Gods) for I have lost my life,
And what I most (complaine) my tyranny!
Soule to detaine thee from thy wished rest
Were but an envious part arise, farewell:
To stay thee to accuse or fate or man
Would shew I were unwilling yet to leave thee
But deare companion hence: cut through the ayre:
Let not the grosensse of my Earth ore-lime
Thy speedy wings, fly without weight of crime.
O now have I and Fortune tryed it out.
With all her best of favours was I crown'd
And suffred her worst threats, whē most she frown'd.
Stay (Soulel) a King, a Turke, commands thee stay!
Sure am but an actor, and must strive
To personate the Tragicke ends of Kings.
And so (o winne applause unto the Scaene)
With fained passion thus must graspe at death!
O but I see pale Nemesis at hand:
Art thou dull fate, and dost not overspread
Gimmerion wings of death throughout the world;
What? Not one Earthquake? One blazing Comet
T'accompany my soule t'his Funerall?
s not this houre the generall period
To nere returning time? Last breath command
A new Dewcalions deluge, that with me
The world may swim to his Eternall Grave,
Cracke hindge that holds this globe, and welcome death,
Wilt thou not stay Soule? Friend not stay with Kings?
Sinke thn, and sinke beneath the Thracian Mou.
Sinke beneath Athos, be the Bsh Waves
Of Acheron thy Tombe, ile want a Grave;
So all parts feare, which first my Corps shall hav;
For in my Grave, ile be the Christians foe.
Here like a Massie Pyramide ile fall,
Ile strive to sinke all the whole fabricke with me,
Quake Pluto, for 'tis I that come
A Turke, a Tyrant, and a Conquerour,
And with this groane, like thunder will I cleave,
The timerous earth, whilst thus my last I breath.
O eafie powers, to give's all at first,
But in their losse they make us most accurst.
The Taper of your Fathers life is spent
We must have light still and adore a Sunne
That next is rising, therefore mighty Prince,
Vpon your shoulders must the load
Of Empire rest.
Why (Lords) we have a Brother
Who, as in the same bloud he tocke a share,
So let him beare his part in Government:
My Lord! within the selfe-same Hemispheare
It's most prodigious when two Sunnes appeare!
One body by one soule must be inform'd.
Kingdomes like (marriage beds) must not indure
Any corrivall! was nere secure
Whilst she contain'da Pompey, and a Caesar.
Like as one Prophet we acknowledge now
So of one King in state we must allow.
You know the Turkish Lawes, Prince be not nice
To purchase Kingdomes, whatsoever the price.
He must be lopt, send for him he must dye.
O happy Baiazet that he was borne
To be a King when thou was Counseller.
Call in our Brother cup,
Why (Lords!) is Amrath so light a weight?
Is this the Truncke oth' Trkish Emperor?
Oh what a heape of thoughts are come to naught
What a light weight is he unto sixe men
Who durst stand under Ossa, and sustaine it:
My Lord, these Meditations fit not you:
You are to take the honour he hath left,
And thinke you of his rising, not his fall!
Let your decree be suddaine, heere's your Brother.
Bother, I could have wished we might have met
At tims of better greeting! Our father hath
Bequeath'd to the Grave these ashes, to us his State.
No have we leysure (yet) to mourne for him
Brothe, you kow our state hath made a Law,
That, he that sits in a Majesticke Chayre,
Must not endure the next succeeding heyre.
Yes, we doe:
And (Brother) doe you thinke 'tis crime enough
To dye, because I am sonne to an Emperour?
My Lord, we know their breathes in him that ay
Of true affection, that he doth much desire
You should be equall in his Kingdome with him:
But still when two great evils are propos'd:
The lesse is to be chosen.
My Lord, your life's but one:
Kings are the threads whereto there are inweaved
Millions of lives, and he that must rule all
Must still be one that is select from all.
Although we speake, yet thinke them not our words,
But what the Land speakes in us! Kings are free▪
And must be impatient of equality.
And is't ene so?
How have thse Dogs fawn'd on me lickt my feet
When Ath yet lived? Felt all my thoughts,
And soothed them to the sight of Empyrie▪
And now the first would set their politique hands
To strangle up that breath, a blast of which
Their nosthrils have suckt up like perfum'd ayre
Well brother well by all men this is spoke,
That heart that cannot bow, may yet be brok.
Brother you must not now stand to upbraid;
They which doe feare the vulgars murmuring tongue,
Must also feare th'authority of a King;
For rulers mut esteeme it happinesse
That with their government they can hate suppresse:
They with too faint a hand the Scepters sway,
Who regard love, or what the people say:
To Kindred we must quite put off respect,
When 'tis so neare it may our Crowne affect.
Then name of Brother doe I thus shake off,
For 'tis in vaine, their mercy to implore
When impios Scatists have decreed before.
Yet King although thou take my life away
See how le dye in better state then thou!
Who like (my Father) after his greatest glor
May fall by some base hand: The Minister
To take my breath, shall be to thy selfe, a King.
Yet give me leave a while▪ to Prophesie,
You that so Puppet-like delude your hopes,
And Miser-draw th ancestry from Kings,
Thinking, that fates dare not appoach your bloud
Till they doe seize you, then you leave this Earth
Not as you went, but by compulsion dragg'd;
Still begging for a morrow from your Grave,
And with such shifts you doe deceive your selves:
As if you could deceive mortality,
No (Brother King) nor all the Glow-worme state,
Which makes thee be a Horse-leach for thy bloud,
Not all the Parasites Minions thou maintaines▪
Nor the restorative Dishes that are found out.
Nor all thy shifts ad trickes can cheat mortality,
Or keepe thee from a▪ death that's worse then mine.
Shoul all this faile, age would professe it selfe
A slow, but a sure Executioner.
O 'tis a hard thing well to temperate
Decaying happinesse in great estate
But this example by me may you gaine:
That at my death I not of Heaven complaine
Pll then, and with my fall pull on thy selfe
Mountaines of burdenous honor which shall curse thee
Death lades the willing by the hand
But spurs them headlong on, that dares command.
Take up this Trunke; and let us first appoin
O Fathers and our Brothers Funerals,
The sencelesse body of that Cafe slave,
Hurle to a Ditch, Posterity shall heare
Our lesse ill Chronicled, but time shall heare
These minutes rather, then repeate their woe.
Now Primacy, on thee ile medi,
Which who enjoy thee, are in blest estate.
Whose age in secure silence fleets away,
Without disturbance to his funerall day;
Nor ponderous nor unquiet honours can
Vexe him but dyes a primate ancient man,
What greater powers threaten inferiour men
A greater power threatens him agen:
And like to wasted Tapers Kigs must spend
Their lives to light up others: So al end.