DRowſie Phoebus come away,
And let out the long'd for day,
Leaue thy Thetis ſilver breaſt,
And ope the caſements of the Eaſt.
Tis Venus calls, away, away,
The waking mortals long for day.
And let them long, tis juſt and right
To ſhut them in eternall night,
Whoſe deeds deſerue no day; lye ſtill,
Ariſe not yet, lye ſtill my Sun,
My night begins when thou art gone.
He wooe thee with a kiſſe to come away.
And I with fourtie for to ſtay.
I'le giue to thee the faire Adonis ſpeare
So thou wilt riſe:
And I to keepe thee here
Will giue a wreath of pearle as faire
As ever Sea-Nymph yet did weare.
Tis Thetis wooes thee ſtay, O ſtay, O ſtay.
Tis Venus wooes thee riſe, O come away.
To which of theſe ſhall I mine eare encline?
Vnto the vpper world repayre.
O no, I'le binde him in my flowing haire.
But ſee fond Mortalls how they gaze
On that ſame pettie blaze?
Thetis adieu, I am no longer thine,
I muſt away, For if I ſtay,
My Deity's quite undone,
They will forget t' adore the riſing Sun.
But what new ſpectacle of wonder's this?
And haue I loſt my wonted Majeſtie
Where with I uſe to ſtrike a generall blindneſſe
Through all the Starres? unto what height of pride
Are they aſpir'd, that thus with open eyes
They dare out-face mee? Call out a powerfull raye
And make thoſe ſaucie ſparkes confeſſe that all
Their luſtre is a debt they owe to me.
Gently, gently, God of light,
Profane not powers that are knowne
To bee greater then thine owne:
Here is not a fire doth ſhine
That is beholding unto thine,
They are of themſelues divine.
And bleſſe them all the Gods. But how come I
To be ſo blinde to day? ſo dull? ſo heavy?
I know them now; Hayle fayreſt Albions King,
Liue ſtill the envie of the world; and thou
Reſplendent Goddeſſe, to view whoſe glorious face
I haue oft times in my ſwift courſe ſtood ſtill;
Be all propitious to thy wiſh'd delights.
And ſince ye haue vouchſaf'd your gracious preſence
Here at the Muſes Groue, command their Patron,
Who here ſtands preſt to ſerue yee.
Will hee obey?
Or elſe let Daphne frowne,
Or Phaeton reſume my Chariot.
Then in their names I doe command thee heere
Lord of the yeere,
To entertaine
This goodly Traine,
Call backe that day of mine
The ſprightly Valentine.
Command me kill a Python, or recall
The Lion or the Crabb: thou art too modeſt
In thy requeſts; tis done, and for to add
A greater honour to this day, behold
I will recall thoſe few ſpent minutes too
Which haue runn out ſince I appear'd, I'le back,
And fetch new rayes that amorous Valentine,
This morning may brighter then euer ſhine.
Ha ha he, here be fine feats. (I hope we ſhall haue a ballad made o'nt before night) ha ha he, the Sun muſt lay aſide all his buſines, & be at leaſure (forſooth) to fetch back St Valentines day for thē, ha ha he. In faith Gentlemen I pity ye, y'ar like to haue a goodly Comoedy here, Plautus his Captiues tranſlated, or ſome ſuch thing I warrant ye: why your Poet cannot endure a woman; and there are likely to be ſweet raptures where the Muſe is not amorous and ſanguine. But let me ſee, now I think o'nt, Ile go fetch him out to ye, & ye ſhall laugh at him moſt miſerably, & the Ladies too; troth do, he deſerues it. He has hired me this Valentines morning, (for ſo ye muſt ſuppoſe it) to lead him out hood-winkt with a black ſcarf, into the fields, becauſe he would not ſee a woman. But Gods me! what haue I forgot? I ſhould haue had mine eares ſtretch'd for it if I had miſs'd it. Yee muſt ſuppoſe the Scene too to be here in England at a country village. Some low homely ſlight ſtuffe 'twill be, I doubt: pray heavens he does not heare me. And here's an other dainty abſurdity too (which I care not much if I tell yee) concerning their cloathes, which as far tranſcend the condition of the perſons, as the court does the country. But that they hope the Court will excuſe, for had it not bin here, they had bin forc'd (they ſay) to keepe the true decorum. But to my charge whom I left at the doore, till I had diſcover'd whether the coaſt were cleare. Come ſir, now you may venture, you haue a proſpect as barren as an Eunuches chin.— O me! why hee's run away. I'le be whipt if he has not ſmelt out my plot of expoſing him to your view. — But heere comes the Prologue, he perhaps brings ſome newes of him; I'le leaue yee to cenſure his legs and cringes.
MOſt ſacred Majeſties, if yee doe wonder,
To be ſaluted by an aged Prologue,
Know that upon theſe temples I doe weae
An Embleme of our Mothers fate, who ſince
Shee has in expectation of your preſence
Numbed the tedious moments, is growne old:
For each expecting minute that has paſs'd
Has ſeem'd an hower, and every hower a yeare.
But will yee ſee what power yee retaine?
Wee by your preſence are made young againe.
FOrtune as yet is kind, well done my boy,
Hold vp your head, a little higher, yet,
And can you weep?
I can, & haue ſome cauſe,
O Lucius!
And ſigh?
I would I could not.
Moſt wretched Iſabella.
Conſtantina.
When ſhal mine eies feed on that bleſſed ſight?
Or when wilt thou with one kinde looke diſſolue
This cloud which now obſcures me? and makes me ſeeme
Another from my ſelfe?
Shee ſtirres not yet
Why Conſtantina.
O my Lucius!
Might I but once more ſee thee, I could goe
Vnto the graue me thinks with ſuch a looke
As ſhould make death enamour'd on me.
Ha?
Not yet? O what a ſleepy girle is this?
But in this houſe I'ue learn'd Pandora liues,
Who now does reape my harveſt: here I hope
I may enjoy at leaſt a ſight of him,
And that is all that ever I muſt hope for.
But I ſhall be obſerv'd.
O now ſhe comes.
Placenta.
Not ſo lowd (take heed) for feare
The Dragon ſhould be waking; haue you yet
Got on your maſculine habit?
Long agoe.
Deſcend then, if your mind be ſtill the ſame,
Before the Sun riſe to betray your flight.
But haue you dreſt the Boy in my apparell?
Tis done, and not a creature but my ſelfe
And the dumbe night are guilty of it.
Well,
I come.
Introth I doe confeſſe I wonder
What ſhould induce this peeviſh girle to take
This ſtrange diſguiſed habit, and forſake
Her vncles houſe, but it is loue forſooth:
Well, be it what it will, I haue procur'd,
By her entreatie, and the gold ſhe gaue mee,
A boy as neere her ſtature as I could,
Whom I haue cloathed in her owne apparell,
And vayled in her ſcarfe. Come on my boy.
You haue not yet forgot, I hope, th' inſtructions
I read to you within. Come, let me ſee
You vent a ſigh now. Excellent: but be ſure
You ſpeake not very often.
Doubt not that:
Th'are ſhallow griefs that make a noiſe.
Well ſaid.
But tell me you, ſir boy, what waſt that made
You leaue the London Players?
Indeed forſooth
I was abuſed there; beſides, that trade
Begins to fayle of late, moſt of your Gallants
Are growne ſo wiſe and frugall, that they chuſe
Rather to ſpend their money on a whore
(Which they call neceſſarie) then on ſuch toyes.
Goe to, you are a wagg. See now ſhe comes.
But ô the Father! what piſmire is this?
Ah, I ſhall ſwound to looke upon her leggs:
Surely one blaſt of wind will breake them quite.
Now out upon her! mine are mill-poſts to them.
Placenta, you doe ſee how much I truſt you,
That put mine honour thus into your hands.
Leade you this picture of mine into my chamber,
And there inſtruct him how he ſhould behaue
Himſelfe, that no ſuſpition of my flight
Be nouriſht by my Vncle, till I bee
Paſt his recalling. So farewell good midwife.
How my left eye-brow beats? I do not like it,
It does preſage no good. My Constantina,
Goe back againe I pray you, in good ſooth
Tis very dangerous thus diſcompanied
To undertake a journey.
All in vaine:
I am reſolv'd either to find my Cleopes,
Or elſe to ſleepe with death clos'd in mine armes.
If it muſt needs be ſo, why then farewell.
I cannot chuſe but weepe: ſweet Conſtantina —
Well, twas the goodeſt Gentlewoman—but ſh 's gone—
Many a deare morſell has ſhee helpt me to—
But we muſt all depart—I doe remember
When ſhee was but a little one, ſhee ever
Was fond of mee —but I muſt be content.
Come on my boy, let not your face ſo much
Be ſeene— when I haue ſhewne her lodging to you,
And left you there— I cannot yet forbeare,
It will not from my heart— I'le goe and viſite
The faire Pandora, that kinde Gentlewoman,
And ſee if that her cloſet can afford
Any good thing to hold the heart. Come boy.
I knew there was a woman in the wind.
I ſmelt her. Stay. —but now ſhe's gone—Ile forward.
Why I am not at leaſure now to take
An ounce of Tobacco in a weeke, they doe
So haunt mee up and downe. And this forſooth
Is our Saint Valentine, wherein our lovers
Doe uſe to imitate Iack-dawes, and Rookes,
Doe bill and couple. But (my ſtarre's be thanked)
I'me now deliver'd from thoſe petulant females.
But ſtay, and let me recollect my ſelfe.
What part about me iſt (I wonder) can
Be guiltie of their ſinne of loving mee?
Introth me thinkes I am not very faire;
A pretty winter countenance I weare
After a cup: and I haue often ſeene
A better noſe dwell better eyes betweene.
As for my legs (not for to flatter them)
Surely I thinke under a boot they might
Become the Court, ſo I refrain'd to play
At Goff— but oh the traytor's apprehended,
I haue him faſt. Oh thou pernicious noſe,
Rebellious member, haue I ſo often rays'd
Thy dull complexion with the ſpirits of ſacke
Vnto that height that thou haſt dar'd t' ourface
The Sun in Cancer, and haue I this reward?
But if I doe not humble thee againe,
Reduce thee to thy former ſtate of paleneſſe
With rot-gut, and cuds-nigs—let me be married.
But whom haue we here?
Tis Lucius one of our loving fooles:
O ho? why then I muſt be tortured,
That's all that I can ſay, I muſt be tortured.
Ah my Endymion, ſeeſt thou yond riſing Sun?
I doe, but what of that?
Why nothing boy
But at his preſence why doe thoſe leſſer-fires
Pluck in their ſhamefac'd heads? doeſt thou not marke
Dull heavie Page? I can but meditate
Vpon the wit of Nature, who by objects
Low and inanimate, as is that Sun—
Now heavens be good unto me, this is call'd
Lovers philoſophy.
does reade unto us
A lecture of her higher myſteries.
What doeſt thou thinke is meant by that ſame Sun?
And thoſe extinguiſht tapers? —he alas
Poore aged wretch but coldly imitates
That which Pandora does unto the life.
Whilſt ſhe is abſent thouſands of petty beauties
Doe twinkle in the night, let her appeare,
And they all vaniſh.
Ha braue, is not this daintie? for all this,
Surely the man would take't unkindly now
If I ſhould goe and tell him he was mad.
Endymion, lend me thine eyes a little;
Doeſt thou deſire to ſee a Mapp, a Modell
Of all the world in briefe and in one word?
View this— why readſt thou not? thy happy lipps
Should thirſt me thinks to haue that bleſſed ayre
Divorce them. reade.
Pandora.
Ah Pandora.
Looke here's the Sun, this place does Iupiter
Poſſeſſe, here Venus, and there Phoebe; marke—
Here is the Earth, but in her bravery,
And ſmiling as when Sol does ſleepe betwixt
The twining Gemini.
Thou daring mortall:
But where in this your Idoll of the world
Is Styx, Cocytus, or the bleſſed place
Of the deare Furies? or the three chapt Dog?
Are they without the verges of the World?
Fortune! how happy were I was this face
Of thine not counterfeite. Speake Endymion:
But art thou ſure that my Neander drew
The faire Conſtantina for his Valentine?
I neuer ſaid it Sir.
How neuer ſaid it?
Onely her name, ſo was Pandora yours.
O too too true preſage of both our fortunes.
But let it be. When I doe violate
That loue, that more then mortall bond, wherewith
My ſoule is ty'd vnto Neander, may
I fall vnpittied, may no gentle ſigh
Be ſpent at my laſt obſequies, may I want
A man to wiſh me againe, would that preuaile.
Without all queſtion this is Magick— oh
How I doe feare a Metamorphoſis.
But I doe feele a pouerty of words
Begin to ceaze mee. Good Endimyon,
Where is my boy Luſcinio? Call him in,
That hee may touch a ſtring which may diſſolue mee
Into a flood of teares—come on my boy,
Oh teach that hollow penſiue Inſtrument
To giue a true relation of my woes
Whilſt I lye here, and with my ſighes keepe time.
O how I ſweate. 300000 feauers
Are now vpon me. O—
Haue pitty (Griefe) I can not pay
The tribute which I owe thee, teares;
Alas thoſe Fountaines are growne dry,
And tis in vaine to hope ſupyly
From others eyes, for each man boares
Enough about him of his owne
To ſpend his ſtock of teares vpon:
O O O. Will it be euer done?
Wooe then the heauens (gentle Loue)
To melt a Cloud for my reliefe
Or wooe the Deepe or wooe the Graue,
Wooe what thou wilt ſo I may haue
Wherewith to pay my debt, for Griefe
Has vow'd, vnleſſe I quickly pay
To take both life and loue away.
Gods, and the World! you euerlaſting Twanger—
Auoyd.
What meanes the Gentleman?
Ile tell you.
The Gentleman does meane for to conſult
With the entrals of your breeches, boy; the Gentleman
Does meane to whip you boy, vnleſſe you ſtraight
Auoyd the place with that ſeducing Fiddle.
And you his Squire his Pandar that procures
This bandy Cockatrice Muſick for him. fly.
How fares it with our Lucius?
As with one
That is of all men the moſt miſerable.
Ah my Pandora, when I record thy name,
(Thy name that's bounded with that ſacred number
As ſhewing all Perfection bides in thee)
Mee thinkes the numerous Orbes dwell in mine eare,
After which ſound all others ſeeme vnpleaſing,
Harſh, voyd of Harmony—Pandora—oh
How ſweete a life had the Camelion
Might hee but euer feede vpon ſuch aires!
Am I not yet transform'd? me thinkes I feele
My ſelfe becoming Wolfe— I am halfe Beare already.
Liue happy ſtill, and when thine aged head
Loaden with yeares Shall bee inueloped
Within this earth, may a perpetuall ſpring
Be on thy Graue.
Shall I put forth my Paw,
And ſo command him ſilence?
But when I
Forget to loue thee or thy memorie,
May my white name be ſtained with the blot
Of baſeneſſe, and I dye without one teare
To waſh it out.
Forget to loue her? — oh
Not for a world. And er't be long we ſhall
Haue ſome decayed piece of Arras, that
Is brought to his laſt ſute, and has no more
Lands for to ſell or morgage for new pluſh
Will begge you for your faire reuenues Sir
—Death Sir I cannot flatter,
Let me not liue a minute if I can.
You looke not like your ſelfe in that ſame paſſion;
It is not man-like; ere I'de looſe a ſigh,
Or ſet my ſoule one ſcruple of a note
The lower for theſe ſcarcrowes in cleane linnen
Theſe chippings of nature: I'de dam my ſelfe
To a thatcht Alchouſe, and St. Kitts Tobacco,
And dabble there eternally:
Ah Anteros, thou art too rough a Surgeon
To handle my wounds.
Pandora, ah Pandora.
Does not this ſound deliciouſly from a man?
Doe not blaſpheame good Anteros; ſhee is
The modell of the world.
Why ſo am I,
And you, and euery man beſides, wee all
Are little worlds.
But my Pandora is
The abſtract of them all; when ſhe was borne,
The whole houſe of heauen did meete, and there decreede
Onely in her mortality ſhould reach
Perfection.
And for heauens cauſe why in her?
Are wee not all made of the ſelfe ſame clay?
And of the ſame ingredients? by the ſame workeman?
'Tis madneſſe Lucius this, it is not loue.
Sir I muſt leaue you.
Nay but ſtay a while,
I haue not finiſht yet. Beſides all this,
If you doe loue her ſo, what hinders then
But you might marry her, ſince (as I heare)
The Girle is not compos'd of adamant
Or flint, but of a ſupple and kinde nature,
And loues you too?
O my deare friend Neander,
Shall I doe this to thee? to ſuch a friend?
Oh I am vndone. Farewell.
But ſee Pandora.
Oh how amaz'd and ſuddaine is the flight
Of all the ſpirits of darkeneſſe, when the day
But ſhowes her face!
What if I take this way?
It may be I ſhall finde them in the grove,
Whither they oft reſort— but ſtay, perchance
They may be in the arbour that doth looke
Into the forreſt.
Oh ye immortall Gods!
Why did ye ſuffer thoſe vaine Lunaticke Poets
So much to antedate the workes of nature,
Who living many ages ſince did write
I know not what of many Nymphs and Graces,
Muſes and Syrens? they are meere fables all;
With my Pandora they had all their birthes,
And when ſhe dyes they'l periſh with her.
Ah?
How like vnto this Dazy was I once
Whilſt I did live recluſe! my innocent heart
Like to this little Globe of gold, enclos'd
VVithin the whiteneſſe of my thoughts, was ſafe
From all the violence that Loue, or ſhame
His childe could doe: but when his warmer beames
Diſplai'd that Ivory guard, and laide me open
Vnto the tyrannie of his aſſaults,
I was — but I will ſighe out all the reſt.
Ah Lucius.
Oh happy name!
Why Lucius?
Neander is as deare to me as hee.
Doſt thou not bluſh to ſpeakt * thou ſhame of woman?
But here he comes, I will addreſſe my ſelfe.
With all the winning Graces that I haue
To entertaine him.
Tis my friend Neander.
Faire Nymph, God ſaue you.
Deareſt loue Neander.
The welcom'ſt man aliue.
Nay but ſweete Lady
Forbeare th' encounter.
Whether do'ſt thou turne
So cruelly from her that loues thee more
Then her owne ſoule? are you not well good Sir?
You ſee I walke, looke freſh, and laugh. (ha, ha, he)
Symptomes of one that is not very ſicke.
But am I thus deſpis'd?
You're troubleſome.
Ha, ha, he, tis pretty, very pretty
* How ſcuruily doth ſorrow laugh? (ha, ha, he)
Moſt excellent, beyond compare (ha ha, he)
Why doe you follow mee?
I doe not fell complexion Lady, nor
Haue I the art to cure the tympany,
I haue no great deuotion to the tub
Nor the hot houſe, as yet, what are you rampant?
But pray thee ſpeake Neander, am I ſo
Deformed growne of late, for to deſerue
All this neglect?
What ſhall I anſwere? Madam,
If you haue ſpoke all that you meane to ſpeake
And haue no greater buſineſſe, I deſire
I may craue pardon, I muſt take my leaue,
I haue affaires expect mee. O miſery!
That which I long for moſt, I fly from fartheſt.
Where ſhall I find my Lucius?
What is hee gone?
Lucius, were you ſo nigh, and not diſcouer'd?
All haile, but whither in ſuch haſte my loue?
If thou doeſt loue mee ſtay a little.
Loue you?
Now all the God's forbid it. I loue you?
My better Angell guard mee from ſuch a ſinne.
Should I loue you, a Thiefe?
A theife?
A theife
I and the worſt of Thieues— * Villaine thou lieſt.
But why a Thiefe? Speake.
My diuining ſoule
Tels mee that Lucius is not farre from hence.
Ha! it is he, I will obſerue a little
Lady, Ile tell you, ſince you doe ſo long
To heare your prayſes trumpeted to the world,
Firſt, thou haſt rob'd thy Father, thine owne Father,
Of all that little ſtock of vertue and goodneſſe
VVhich nature gaue him, and (moſt couetous)
Haſt powr'd it to thy greater heape; beſides
Thou haſt vndone thy Siſter, ſtolne from her
All that was beautifull and louely in her;
That faire maieſtick ſtraightneſſe which attracts
The eyes of thouſands to admire, Was hers;
Thoſe roſie buds that open on your cheekes
Were cropt out of her garden; vpon her ruines
Is that faire Aedifice of thine erected:
Laſt, thou haſt ſtolne from mee and from Neander
(Which are not two that haue deſeru'd the worſt
Of thee in all the world) our happineſſe
All our content, our ioy, our very ſelues.
You ſee how amiable a creature you are,
How well deſeruing loue. Should I loue you?
I'de firſt embrace a Succubus, court the plague,
Or kiſſe a cloude that's big with lightning— (heavens,
Haue yee no thunderbolts in ſtore to ſtrike
This ſacrilegious head that thus blaſpheames
One of your deareſt pieces? —) I loue you?
Whoſe face dreſt vp in that ſame innocent lawne
Showes like a dunghill ſet about with Lillies.
* (Thou art a periur'd wretch) — ſhould I loue you!
Whoſe eyes are like two fired barrells ſet
Vpon a Beacon onely to aſtoniſh
And fright the neighbouring people—* (oh my heart!
It is a hundred thouſand miles betwixt
Thee and my tongue) — what doe you meditate on?
The neareſt way vnto the graue.
The graue?
If thou wouldſt haue the ſhorteſt cut to hell,
To that ſame receptacle of black ſoules,
(Where ſuch as dye for loue doe walke in ſhades
As darke as were their thoughts, whilſt they liu'd here)
Lend me thy hand and I will ſhew it thee.
Let it be ſpeedy then good Lucius.
Why thou art at thy iourneyes end already.
Where's that?
'Mongſt the departed ſoules,
Where the dire furies haue their habitation,
'Tis in this breaſt.
Why doeſt not open then
And let me in? — Oh if they liue ſo here,
Farewell for euer to the vpper world.
Ha? does he embrace her? ſure it cannot be.
Away thou proſtitute, immodeſt, goe.
Who is't dares ſay I muſt not loue this man?
Or you, or I muſt leaue this place.
Stay Lucius.
'Tis I that will be gone, the moſt vnhappy
Of all, on whom nature hath written woman;
Forſaken Conſtantina, thou and I
Will haue a Dialogue in teares anon.
Neander!
Lucius!
I, I, loue on, ha, ha, he, and ſee what yee will get
By that at laſt, I'le loue my ſefe, my ſelfe, ha, ha, he,
This day old Liuely thou art iuſt foureſcore,
Quickly ſome Sack, I haue not yet baptized
Mine eyes this morning as I vſe to doe.
Why boy? ha, ha. I am as luſty now,
As full of actiue ſpirits, as when I wore
But twenty on my back, ha ha, he, this laughing
Surely's reſtoratiue aboue your gold,
Or all your dearer drugges. The very thought
How quaintly I ſhall gull my expecting Schollers
My Neophytes that gape to heare the newes
When I ſhall nod into the graue, does adde
Such vigour to me, that I doe not feele
Not feele the ground I ſtand vpon. But ſee
More Suiters ſtill — Now they begin to flock.
Sir if I may aduiſe you wade no farther
Into this buſineſſe, but deſiſt; I haue
A promiſe (I'le aſſure you) from the Iuſtice.
Sir I may vſe the ſame words vnto you
I haue a promiſe too, but yeſterday
My Father did preſent him with a horſe
Of Robin-red-breaſt's getting — by your leaue.
Nay Sir come on, if you be good at that.—
You haue a promiſe. God-a-mercy horſe. ha, ha, he.
Theſe and ſome dozen more doe dayly haunt
This Cormorants houſe, and all (good men) pretend
It is pure loue vnto his crooked daughter
That drawes them thither, when there's not one of 'em
That would vouchſafe her a looke, nay hardly a thought
Vnleſſe it were for to contemne her; but
There is a thing they call a Parſonage
An impropriate Parſonage which th' well giuen Matrons
Haue reſcued from the Laitie, and returnes
After my death vnto the Church, which liuing
The Iuſtice here has ſold them, but reſeruing
The firſt donation for himſelfe, with which
He intends to put his fooliſh daughter off.
'Twas once my brothers land, but this ſame Hooke
By a golden bayte did pluck it from him: well,
It is no matter, I haue my life in it. Ha, ha, he.
But I will cheate them all, will cozen them.
Why Boy.
Here Sir.
Well ſaid my hony, well ſaid.
Oh how it ſmiles vpon mee! (hum hum) giue it mee
This is mine Antidote 'gainſt the Sithe of time.
He that deſires to liue, let him doe thus —
Drinke Sack i'th morning. Boy, another cup.
How now? another? ſee how he prunes himſelfe.
Boy, there's a teſton for you, ſee you looke
Well to my Nagge — I muſt be generous now.
But let me ſee, I will accoſt him thus.
Sir if it pleaſe your worſhip — (it muſt be ſo)
Theſe Country Iuſtices doe loue a life
For to be worſhipped at euery word,
I come now from my Lady.
(And you may
Returne againe vnto her Ladiſhip
And tell her that old Liuely is not yet
Intended for to dye.
And doe deſire
That as you ſhall approue of my good parts—
Well 't will doe — now I will knock —
But I will open and enter, 'tis a Solaeciſmo
For to be modeſt in ſuch buſineſſes.
Well done my Squire o'th bottles, ſtand you there.
Sir I doe come now from my Lady, ha, ha, he,
And doe deſire, that as you ſhall approue
Of my good parts— ha, ha, he —
Well take the glaſſe, and get you home, hum, hum, hum.
If I can winne the Girle, I'le find a trick
For to diſpatch old Liuely preſently
And with much eaſe; a peice of bread and a pinne
Will doe the cure, or elſe an honeſt burre
Lapt vp in butter.
Here's a precious rogue,
Oh it is Hugo Obligation
The preciſe Scriuener, that theſe three yeares ſpace
Has laboured for orders, this ſame villaine
Sure is the likelieſt man to carry her—
But ſee where Liuely ſtands, Ile not be ſeene.
Being one whom he does vſe in all his Couenants.
But I'le out liue them all, the Knaues. Ile now
Goe taſt a bowle of pure refined ayre
Vpon yond hill.
Yet ſtay a little, who is this? hee's gone.
Once more the coaſt is cleare, now I'le aduenture
Towards the Sheepheards doore: not farre from hence
Hid in a thicket I haue prouided for me
A Sheepheards robes, theſe, if I can preuaile
With this ſame Stipes for to vndertake
A Seruant of my commendation,
Will I ſtreight leape into, and ſo remaine
Diſguiſ'd with him, for (as I vnderſtand)
The family doth conſiſt of himſelfe and's dog,
As for his wife ſhee ſeldome is at home
Being a famous Midwife. Bleſſed houſe!
Surely in ſuch a place Hippolytus
Did hunt away his ſolitary howers.
But I forget (tick tock) why Sheepheard, Stipes. How?
Not yet awake?
Is not this Anteros?
How I was dealt withall by nature when
Shee molded this ſame lumpe of clay together,
And ſeaſon'd it with ſoule, I know not, but
Let mee get out o'th world with obloquy
If euer I could find in all the herd
Of woman-kind yet ſo much excellence
As could procure a ſigh, or kindle in mee
The leaſt ſparke of a deſire.
Tis he, his phraſe
Betrayes him.
I confeſſe like Whelps or Kitlings
Whilſt they are young, and ſuck, and doe not know
The vſe of tongue, they're pretty creatures, and
They may be look'd vpon without the danger
Of either ſtoole or vomit— but—
But— VVell Sir Ruffian, I hope to ſee this Blaſphemy of yours againſt that feathered Deity ſent home with a ſhaft in your boſome for intereſt ere long.
VVhat my little vbiquitary Loueall? my Page of the Smock? my commodity aboue ſtaires? my Court Shittlecocke? toſt from one Lady to an other? The Kernell of thy gloue ſweete lack.
Take ſhell and all.
Why here's a Parcell of mans fleſh of another temper now, that has the art of placeing his affections wiſely, can loue one becauſe ſhee's faire, a ſecond becauſe ſhee's modeſt, and has his packets of reaſons in readineſſe too; if he meetes with a wanton Girle, that property takes him, there is hope of actiuity, ſhee will not fill a bed like Pygmalions Image before hee ſacrificed to Venus: if ſhee bee rude, and ignorant, her harmeleſſe ſimplicity catches him; he loues this for the gracefull writhing of her neck; another becauſe ſhe can vayle her borrowed teeth neatly with her Fanne when ſhee venters at laughter: nothing can ſcape him, euery part of woman is full of limetwigs to him: which though it bee an humour contrary to mine, who care for none, yet I like it farre aboue your whining conſtancy as ſauouring more of the Man.
True. For why ſhould I confine my loue to one Circle? we ſee that laborious creature the Bee, which is often ſet before vs for a Coppy of induſtry, not alwayes droaning vpon one flower, but as ſoone as ſhee has ſuckt the ſweetneſſe from one, throwes her little ayrie body vpon a ſecond, and ſo to a third, till at laſt ſhe comes home with her thighes laden with that pretty ſpoyle.
VVell ſaid my Loueall, I perceiue thou wilt neuer dye for loue then.
No, If I doe, let me lye when I am dead by that Cynick Philoſopher with a ſtaffe in my hand, to fright the beaſt sand fowles from my vnburied carkaſſe. —
But is there any newes I pray thee growne
Vp in this country ſince I went to court?
O tanto e piu.
Firſt Cleopes your ſiſters Louer—
VVhat? he is not dead I hope?
I would he were.
Is gone, has forſooke her.
How?
And ſhe forſooth
Since his departure has betooke her ſelfe
Vnto a veyle, ſilence, and teares; in which
Monaſtick habit ſhee does ſpend her dayes.
I doe but tell you by tradition Sir,
Not from my ſelfe; but this I can aſſure you,
It is with vs the Parentheſis of eating.
Ther's nothing man within mee. After ſuch vowes?
Such proteſtations? but the Gods make Loueall
No creature, if he does not ſuffer for't,
Buy this diſloyalty of his, at a deare rate.
Can you be quiet? next your faire Kinſwoman
Sweete Miſtris Vrſly (who without all queſtion
Was Kitlin to Nib, o'th Queene of Faries Kitchin,
Sent to your Vncle for a Newyeeres gift
Vpon exchange by the Elfe) has the Parſonage
Old Liuely liues in hung on her crooked back;
With which faire baite, your good and vertuous Vncle
Does angle for ſome young and hungry Scholler,
And daily expects the taking of the Gudgeon.
This very houre no leſſe then 6 or 7
Are nibling at it, but the hooke is ſeene;
Your Vncle is not cunning in his fiſhing,
And ſo I pray you tell him —
But ſtay Anteros.
I haue diſcouer'd (vnleſſe mine eyes deceiue me)
A ſtranger thing then is all this you told mee,
What's that i' your hatt? tis not a Valentine
I hope?
But I haue got a counter hope
Againſt that hope of yours; I hope it is.
But art thou turn'd a Louer? haſt thou got
A Miſtris? thou a Miſtris? let me ſee
That I may worſhip that great name, that has
Begot this miracle in thee.
Away,
Keepe backe thoſe common eyes, they be prophane.
By all the lips of honour I muſt ſee't.
Come you haue learn'd ſuch perfum'd oathes at Court,
By all their Feather-men and Tire-women,
Boxes of ſucus, cabinets for ceruſſe —
Nay looke you now— not for a million.
For a farre leſſer ſumme ſweete Sir nay come
I muſt and will.
Death! what a mad man's this?
Why if you muſt and will, then ſee.
What's here?
Rex et regina magnae Britanniae? what's this? what's this?
What are the King and Queene thy Valentines? ha, ha, he.
Yes marry are they; why doe you laugh ſo Loueall?
Who can refraine? ha, ha, he.
For whom ſhould I admire,
Loue, or adore more? I tell thee Iack, I care not
For ſuch poore weake Idolaters that lye proſtrate
To euery little Starre that can but twinkle;
Thoſe petty votaries of Egypt, which
Worſhip this Onion and the Leeke— for mee
I will not bend a knee vnleſſe it be
Vnto the Sun or Moone.
Thou art mad, ſtarke mad,
A citizen of Bedlam.
I am mad,
Yes, Yes, I am. You then that are ſo wiſe
Enioy your wiſedomeneſſe alone—farewell.
Come back ith' name of goodneſſe —Anteros—
My company may infect you Sir, I am mad.
What is my little boy growne ſullen now,
And will not eate its dinner?
Well, what then?
This day my Anteros I will dedicate
To thee and laughter, to morrow I will ſtudy
Some deepe reuenge for my abuſed ſiſter
Vpon that villaine; but no more, thy hand.
Shall wee be merry and laugh each man his rubber?
I'me for you for a ſingle game or ſo.
VVell, ſhall I make a motion then? ſtay you
But here a little.
Call you this a motion?
One word before you trauaile, whether now?
I will returne immediatly.
So you ſhall.
Speake ere you goe.
VVell, if I muſt I wil.
Laſt night it was my chance to ouertake
Vpon the way a brace of fine tame fooles,
Which I haue brought along with me, theſe now
Will I goe fetch vnto thee.
Peraduenture.
Surely the man has Quickſiluer in's heeles.
I pray thee tell me, what are they for creatures?
Wee ſhall looſe time.
Rather ſhall gaine it Sir.
The firſt of them is a fine ſpiced gallant,
One that has beene ſome three yeares in codling
At th' Innes o'th' Court, and (as hee tells me) intends
To lye, and ſoake a while to make him relliſh
In the roſe-water of a Knighthood, ſtrew'd
O're with the Sugar of a yearely rent
Of ſome nine hundred — after the old mans death.
And all this cookery is to pleaſe the pallate
Of ſome nice Minion, who to make her weight
Drags peraduenture ſome three thouſand after her.
The thing (to doe it right) beſide the managing of it's rapier, and a pretty competencie of play parcels, can ſalute you, and take it's leaue of you in French, but ſo miſerably harſh that any one may conclude, hee neuer trauail'd for his language further then Littleton — He —
Is a very aſſe, no more of him; but what's the other?
His kinsman. What hee is now he knowes not himſelfe, elſe he would haue tolde me, but he has beene a Lawyer; Clerke in's dayes, his prattle is altogether about the complections, and hee will reade you a lecture of ſimple bawdery for ſome two houres in your eare if you'l ſuffer him, and after all this, he feeles you by the noſe, and cryes Marke the end on 't.
And is this all? giue me thy hand, I haue a brace of the like creatures at my ſeruice. I will play with thee from a Stiuer to a Guilder, from a Guilder to a Doller, from a Doller to a French crowne, from a French crowne to a pound, from a pound, to a hundred (marke what I ſay) in the way of friendſhip, with thoſe two grand coxcombes thou haſt all to be worded ſo.
You will, are you ſo confident?
Yes marry am I. Onely I will not cloy you with an inuentory of your diſhes before hand, take this in briefe. One of them is a Scholler newly warme in a lambskin, Nephew to old bully Liuely, at whoſe houſe they are both now, the other is an elder brother, and an heire, and he ſhall tell you ſo as ſoone as he ſees you. But ſtay where ſhall our Campus Martius be?
No place Better then this, but ſpeake the houre.
Let me ſee, 'tis iuſt eight now, ſome halfe an houre after nine I will not faile.
To bring your champions with you.
Or elſe I'le make good the place my ſelfe, which I would be loath to doe I tell you.
My firſt worke now is for to ſee my Vncle,
And as I heare my melancholly ſiſter.
That done through the backe doore that leades to th' Stables
(where they are taking order for their horſes.)
I will goe viſite my two creatures and
Prepare them for the Combat.
Cupid if a God thou art,
Transfix this Monſters ſtubborne heart.
But if all thy ſhafts be flowne,
And thy quiuer empty growne,
Here be Ladies that haue eyes
Can furniſh thee with new ſupplies.
Yet winged Archer doe not ſhoot at all,
'Tis pitty that hee ſhould ſo nobly fall.
Heigh hoe —
'Tis a fine morning this as I haue ſeene,
And a moſt early Spring — but daughter Merda,
Why Merda I ſay, why daughter Merda, what,
Haue not the Fleas yet made a breakefaſt of you?
You'le riſe? or doe you meane that Miſtris Vrſely
Shall take you in your bed? ſhee'l not be long
Ere ſhe be here — Oh me! ſhee's here already.
Why Merda, Merda I ſay, goe to,
I, I by'r Lady.
Fa, la, la, la, I haue found ſix Checkſtones in my
Father's yard, all in my Father's yard, and now I
Will goe ſee if Merda will play with me —
Oh Stipes, where is your daughter Merda?
Oh ſweet Miſtris Vrſely, oh that I were a young
Scholler now for your ſake; ha, this is ſhee that
The beggers fight for: come on i' faith young Miſtris,
Which of all the blackcoates doe you loue beſt?
Blackcoates? I care not this for any of them,
I ne're will loue any but Anteros;
But pray you Stipes call your daughter Merda,
Is ſhee not vp yet?
Merda, will you come? or doe you long vntill
I fetch you out — At length forſooth: are
You not aſham'd of this you great Maukin you?
Oh Merda, will you play at Checkſtones with me?
Where is your anſwer, and your curt'ſie Mayden?
If it pleaſe you forſooth, ſay.
If it pleaſe you forſoothſay.
Say? thou filthy harlotry, thou;
Oh here's a Girle brought vp moſt daintily;
Well was it not for ſhame I'de take you vp—
Father, good Father, forgiue me but this once, I'le neuer
Doe ſo any more.
Stipes, you ſhall forgiue her,
I'le make my Father take his houſe from you,
And the North cloſe, vnleſſe —
Thanke your young Miſtris; young Miſtris I
Doe thanke you ſay.
Young Miſtris I doe thanke you ſay.
Againe? but oh the diggers!
What doe I ſee? My Sheepe haue quite diſgreſt
Theyr bounds, and leap't into the ſeuerall.
Whu, whu, why Scab, the laſt, the laſt, there ſcab
'Tis the beſt Curre
That euer mumbled cruſt.
How daintily he catcht that Sherehogge! there,
So, ſo, au, au: why ſo; haup, haup, you roague
But I will follow him.
Come Merda, will you play now?
No, I wo'nt vnleſſe you'le giue me thoſe bracelets.
Take them.
And your gloues to.
Heere, fa, la, la.
Stay while I put them on though.
What ſhall we play for?
Two pinnes a game.
Stake then: heigh ho Anteros!
How many ſhall we make vp?
One and thirty.
Will you haue Winter, or Summer?
— Summer— no Winter.
i, Winter, Winter, Winter:
But you ſaid Summer firſt, I wo'nt play.
Au, but I ſaid Winter afterward though.
Begin then.
One—
So, ſo, you toucht the other ſtone, now I muſt play.
You ly, I did not touch it.
You ly, you did touch it, and you ſhal haue no pins here.
Sh'ant I ſo? but I will though; doe you ſcratch huſſie?
I that I will ſcratch, and bite too.
Giue me my gloues, and bracelets againe.
You may goe looke 'vm, I wo'nt, as long as you gaue
Them me. Giue a thing, and take a thing
That's the Deuills gold-ring.
Well if I don't tell my Father of this, you Puſſe you.
You Munkey.
You Baſtard.
Doe you abuſe one's friends you Iade you?
And you call me Iade you are a Whore.
Doe you call Whore?
I that I will call Whore, well, well, the next time
That you eate any Cheeſecakes at our houſe
You ſhall haue better luck ſhall you.
Your Cheeſecakes? we haue as good of our owne.
Au, hau, you ſhall nere make no durt pyes
With me in our Barne huſſie.
Who cares? then you ſhall gather no more Violets, nor
Primeroſes in our Cloſe.
Your Cloſe? I'le gather there in ſpight of your teeth.
It is my Fathers Cloſe, ſo it is, ſo it is.
Your Father does but hire it — Oh here he comes
Here he comes, here comes my Father,
Now you ſhall ſee.
Au but I'le runne home.
Come on, I am not of that ranke of Patrons
Which ſet to ſale the livings of the Church.
(Oh are you here my daughter? wipe your noſe;)
I take no bonds in ſecret, ſell no horſe
For his price centuple, nor doe I ſend
The eager ſuiters up unto my Lady,
That ſhe might judge which is the better gifted.
(Sir if your father will be bound to pay
The firſt yeeres revenues, you are the man ſhall ſpeed,
A reſervation of mine owne tithes too
Muſt be concluded on before you haue it)
But as a true lover of vertue, doe
Chuſe rather to conferre a double good
Then the leaſt dammage on the man I deale with.
Behold my young and tender daughter here;
I doe confeſſe ſhee's not the rareſt piece
That ever nature drew, nor is it fit
That ſuch as you, who either are, or ſhould be
Wedded unto your Bookes, ſhould haue a lowd
And clamorous beautie to diſturbe your ſtudies.
You need not feare the thought of her perfection.
Will call you from a piece of Greeke to reade
Miracles in her face. Hold up your head,
And tell me now which of this goodly troupe
You haue moſt mind to, for on him will I
Beſtow old Liuely's Parſonage, and thee
In Marriage.
Excellent, excellent good, ha, ha, ha.
I will haue Anteros, Terpanders ſonne.
Let me not heare another ſyllable,
You peeviſh girle, you; you haue Anteros?
What doe you weepe? no more: come on your wayes,
And ſit you downe here by me, while your Suiters
Explaine themſelues and their good parts before you.
Father, huff, huff, I will none of thoſe two men
With the ſhort haire, doe what you can I will not.
Why ſo my daughter? peace.
Huff, huff, —becauſe I know
As well as can be by their lookes, that they
Cannot containe themſelues within an houre,
And you doe know I cannot hold my wa —
Peace thou moſt arrant foole, before your wooers
Thus to proclaime your imperfections?
Ha, ha, he: another bout with my conſerues for that;
This box ſhall add three moneths unto my life,
And this ſame ſlice of Quinces ſeven. I, I,
Begin to pleade, doe, doe.
My ſweeteſt Miſtreſſe,
I will divide this my Oration
Iuſt into three and thirtie parts, all which
With your vouchſafed patience at this time
I will runne through.
The candle of the day
Will burne within the ſocket, ere thou'ſt done;
I pray thee leaue.
No ſir, I will not leaue,
I am not yet arrived at the poynt.
And he doth uſe to tyre all his hearers.
Oh; he hath don't already, don't already
Beſides all this —
Now out upon his lungs,
My dinner will bee ſpoyl'd, the capon burnt,
The beefe as blacke as mummy; this mans breath
Will blaſt them all.
Ha, ha, he.
Haſt thou ta'ne Orders fellow?
If't pleaſe you, no.
Did'ſt e're preach?
Onely one Sermon ſir
For approbation to a female Audience.
But I haue heere letters of commendation
From ſeventeene honeſt men of good report
Amongſt their neighbours.
Spare your paines good ſir.
As for my ſelfe, fayre Gentlewoman,
I cannot but inveigh againſt theſe times
Wherein—
What ſayes hee?
If it pleaſe your Worſhip,
Ha's loſt his voyce with rayling againſt Biſhops,
And the fayre diſcipline of the Church.
Oh villaine,
Command him ſilence.
'Tis a courteſie ſir
You inflict upon him, tis not a puniſhment.
The holy Matrons now will rob their husbands
To contribute to the afflicted Saint.
And think they merit in it. But no more;
I will goe gull them all, and preſently.—
o—o— o—o—oo—ooo—
The longeſt day I ſee will haue his euening,
o—o— o — oo — o — ooo —
But ſee old Liuely; ſtand cloſe and obſerue.
O! now the wiſht for minute does approach
Which I ſo long haue wayted for, and not I
Alone—but let them now enjoy their wiſhes.
o—o —oo— ooo—
I feele my heart-ſtrings crack, and the whole lumpe
Groanes for a ſpeedy diſſolution.
How's this? but yeſterday he was in's ſacke,
Told me he hop'd to liue to eate a Gooſe
Which graz'd upon my graue: ſo ſuddenly?
Haue I no friends about me? muſt I goe
Out of the world in private thus? from home?
Without one friend to take his leaue of me?
Kind Iuſtice Hooke, O that good man Mr. Hooke.
Peace, not a word: what does he name me for?
Would thou waſt here, but to participate
Of my laſt dying breath, I would pronounce thee
Mine heyre in totall.
Beare witneſſe Gentlemen —
Good Mr. Liuely, 'laſſe how fares it with you?
Whoe's that names me?
He whom you ask'd for,
Sacriledge Hooke.
Sacriledge Hooke's mine heyre,
And ſo farewell thou falſe and flattering world.
Alaſſe hee 's dead.
Peace, not ſo lowd for feare you call him back.
Yee all can beare me record I'me his heyre.
Wee can.
Why Robert, Oliver,
Runne to the Church immediately, and cauſe
The bell bee tould with ſpeed: old Mr. Liuely
Is newly dead—Alas, I can but weepe
To view this ſpectacle of mortalitie,
And I haue cauſe to ſpend ſome teares for him— ha ha he.
I doubt he is not fully dead yet Patron,
Shall I make ſure work with him? giue him a knock?
Offer no violence vnto the dead
I charge you, 'tis as bad as ſacriledge,
Which I haue alwayes hated.
So has the Devill.
Sweet Miſtris Vrſely.
Faireſt Lady.
Stay,
No haſte good ſir.
But by your leaue ſweet ſir.
Tis I haue right unto her, ſhee's a creature,
And you are one o'th wicked.
Out thou raſcall that liv'ſt upon thy rayling;
Good Miſtris Vrſely,—
I haue a ſhare therein.
VVhy father, father,
O me, me, me, they'le pull mee into pieces;
O my hand, O my arme, my arme, O my backe.
Ha, ha, he.
Forbeare this rudeneſſe gentlemen, my daughter
Shall haue her choyce; theſe are not wayes to gaine her,
They muſt bee gentle, ſoft behaviours
That winne a woman, not ſuch boyſterous Rhethoricke.—
But harke, the bell doth toll: I'le preſently
Goe ſeize upon his goods and chattell,
Ha?
And will you ſo? but I doe know a tricke
VVorth twenty of that.— I pray good M. Hooke,
VVhom toll's this bell for?
Oh! for my hopes,
VVhat does hee liue againe?
And liues to laugh at thee, and at thy baſeneſſe,
Covetous wretch. Ha, ha, he.
Sir, as I take it I may change my will. Ha, ha, he.
Oh what a knaue is this? a ranke old knaue?
A ſtinking knaue? a knaue in graine? fie, fie,
That I ſhould thus bee gulld? follow me daughter,
And you Gentlemen.
Ha, ha, ha, Away you Ravens,
I'le make yee all goe barefoot yee young villaines.
But let mee now muſter my wits together
Call all my fancies into ranke, and place
Each ſeverall quirke of this my working braine
In its true file.— 'Tis an unheard of loue,
A miracle of Friendſhip this, for two young men,
In th' exaltation of their bloods, both Rivals
In ſuch a beautie, for to plot and ſweat
How to be miſerable, that's how to place
His friend in the fruition of his Loue;
'Tis not within the compaſſe of a faith.
This morning each of them entreated me
In private, that I would invent ſome way
To winne the whole affection of Pandora
Not for himſelfe, but for his friend: which is
(Though in another Idiome) as if
They ſhould haue ſaid, get me a comely rope
My Bully Liuely, and hang me up, or elſe
Provide mee an ounce or two of Mercury,
Which I will take in poſſet drinke and dye.
But Lucius is the man whom I deſire
To pleaſure moſt, therefore I now haue counſaild
Neander for to counterfeit a wedding,
Which being fancied true by Lucius
And the indifferent Gentlewoman, might cauſe
A ſpeedy marriage 'twixt his friend and her.
This does he ſwallow, and now there nothing wants
But—ha? what's here to doe? what Boy is this
That Stipes thus dragges after him?
Why quickly Merda, bring me a chaire out quickly.—
O O you villaine.—Why when?—So, ſo, go to, go to,
Tarry you ſtill my daughter,
That you may heare ſome of your Fathers wiſedome.—
Come on you Crack-rope, what is your buſineſſe, 'pray you,
To lurke thus in my Maſters grounds? you are
A ſcout? one that diſcouers are you not?
It is a pretty Lad, and being dreſt
May eaſilie paſſe for Woman. Well Ile marke
O you're a ſtubborne gallowes, you will anſwere?
O mee vnfortunate; what ſhall I ſay?
Heigh!
An ill yeere on you, you great Maukin you,
Making of Puppets? one of your age and breeding?
You haue an Husband Minion? you a rodde. —
But to returne againe vnto the purpoſe,
Where dwell you ſirrah? will you not anſwere me?
Come on your wayes, I'le haue you to my Maſter.—
Vnhappy wretch! what ſhall I anſwere him?
Nay good Sir ſtay, I'le tell you: oh how I tremble—
Then quickly Sirrah.
Leſt this robuſtious Clowne
Should hale me 'fore my Vncle in this habit.
What's that you mutter on? you haue a tricke
To ſay your prayers backwards? haue you not?
This Lad is mine, I'le take him from the Sheepheard.
Not farre from hence I had both friends and parents.
(Howſoeuer how I want) but cruell Fates
Haue enuied them their liues, and me my friends.
It ſhall be ſo, I'le make a contract ſtraight
Betwixt Neander and this Boy. Now Stipes,
God ſaue you.
Salve Domine. But why put you your Sickle
Into my Harueſt thus? go to, go to,
You're troubleſome— well Sirrah.
Well Sirrah? Slaue,
Thou vnpolliſh'd piece of clay, how dar'ſt thou thus
Vncivilly vſe a young Gentleman
Whoſe friends and kindred I haue knowne to bee
VVorthy of more reſpect then thou of ſcorne,
VVhich both come neare to infinite?
Very good.
And doe you know his friends and kindred then?
VVould thou didſt know thy betters halfe ſo well,
Vntutourd dunghill.— In what ſtate you ſit?
Stand vp, or elſe Ile make thee lye for euer.
Are you in earneſt or in jeſt?
How thinke you?
You great Rigs-norton you, doe you ſtand ſtill
And ſee your onely Father wrong'd thus? ha? —
VVell, if I doe not fit your cap for this
(If it be made of wooll) when you tithe Lambes,
I'le neuer goe to Church more, if th'whole flocke
Has any worſe then other t'ſhall goe hard
But ſome of them ſhall fall vnto your lot.
Alaſſe I doubt he knowes me
His eyes ſo dwell vpon me.
Come my boy,
VVhat will you goe with me?
Thankes to my ſtarres;
He knowes me not.
Boy will you dwell with mee?
Thou ſhalt haue dumpling Boy, enough, and Bacon
Shall be ſo deepe in fatt, that thou maiſt wade
Vp to the chinne in lard: Salute your Maſter.
And kiſſe your maſters daughter that's the next
Thing you muſt practiſe.
You his Maſter, Hempſeed?
Truely me thinkes I could e'ne loue this Boy
'Tis ſuch a pretty thing; Father, I pray you
Good Father, let him dwell with vs.
No more,
Peace, ſo he ſhall.
Hands off you leaſe of Sheepe-skinnes.
No, I will dwell with this old Gentleman.
Well ſaid, ſweet youth.
But on this condition,
That you will uſe me like a Gentleman
Of qualitie and worth, for I muſt tell you
With teares, how e're my fortunes are dejected
Now, I doe come of no meane houſe nor blood.
Feare not my boy, thou ſhalt haue cauſe to thanke me:
Follow; my maids ſhall preſently vnpage him,
And hang woman on his backe.
But I doe hope
That ſome kind God or other will find out
Some meanes for my eſcape; if not (I'ue ſayd it)
This hand ſhall make a paſſage for my ſoule
To leaue this body.
Boy, doe you come?
I come.
VVhat is he gone? — hi-day! what againe?
Let me be hang'd, my dogge and my whole Familie,
My Wife and all, I'le put her in, if I
Doe not ſo 'flict your buttockes Minion;
Ile breake you of this trade of making children
Before your time, if I can find a willow
VVithin a mile of an Oake.
VVhat ſhall I do? oh what ſhall I do? what ſhall I do?
My father's gone to get a rod, what ſhall I doe?
Oh, oh, here comes my mother.—
Placenta, you haue heard my cares, my griefes
And which hath cauſ'd them all, you know my loue,
Now by thoſe tender yeeres, by that firſt raye
Of bleſſed light theſe infant eyes receiu'd
Vpon thoſe vigilant knees, I doe conjure thee
Forſake me not in theſe my miſeries
Mother, Mother, Mother, what ſhall I doe?
What newes with you, you fayrie brat? you changeling?
Daughter to Madam Puſſe the kitchin mayd,
Take that and get you in, or Ile—
Vm vm, vm.
Will you not ſtirre?
Carry that chaire in with you Milderkin.
What would you haue me do?
Y'aue heard my ſickneſſe,
'Tis the phyſician muſt preſcribe the medicine
And not the patient.
Will it ſuffice
If ere the Sunne does ſet you doe embrace
One of your Lovers?
By all my vowes it will;
Nor am I much ſolicitous in the choyce,
So I haue one.
But I muſt haue your helpe,
You muſt not meerely be a patient
In this ſame plot; can you diſſemble thinke you?
I am a woman, and may learne in time.
Well then 'tis thus: you ſee your pampered Louers
(Like two fat Oxen in a Stall) ſtand blowing
Vpon their meat, are nice forſooth, and ſqueamiſh,
Will not fall to, becauſe they're cloyd with dainties,
The onely way for to procure them ſtomacks,
Is to withdraw their fodder; take your loue
Before their eyes, and giue it to another,
Or ſeeme to doe at leaſt, 'twill fetch them back;
And make them lick their lips at you, ſcratch for you:
I know not by what Fate, but true it is,
Wee neuer prize ought right till the departure,
And then our longing's multiplied. Can you fayne
A loue vnto ſome other Gentleman?
And ſeeme quite to neglect them and their ſeruice?
I feare I cannot, 'tis too hard a Prouince:
But what will this aduantage me I pray you?
So much, as nothing you can doe, will more.
A Louer's like a Hunter, if the game
Be got with too much eaſe hee cares not for't;
Shee that is wiſe in this our wayward age
VVill keepe her Louers ſharpe, make them to ceize
Vpon a firebrand for meat.— What ſay you?
Why I will try I ſay.
Try? Oh that I
Had but that beauty in my managing,
In-faith I would not part with a good looke
Vnder a brace of Tens.
Indeede Placenta
As you are now, you'd neede to ſell them deare,
It is a rare commodity, your Shop
Affords not many of them.
For a kiſſe
I'de haue a Lordſhip; a whole Patrimony
For a nights lodging; Come, you Maydens now
Are grown too kinde, too eaſie in your fauours,
A few ſmooth, oyly, verſes now adayes
Bought of ſome Poet, and ſo iuſtly call'd
The Gallants owne that ſends them, where your treſſes
Are termed Sunbeames, and your rubie lips
Congealed Nectar, haue more power to winne you,
Then in my dayes two veluet Petticoates,
Or an hundred acres turn'd into Taffaties.
Speake, can you doe it?
Sure I thinke I can,
If need require.
It is enough, but ſee,
What Striping's this comes here? Ha? 'tis moſt happily
This is Endymion Lucius his Page.
There's not a ſolitary walke, nor Groue
Wherein a Louer may retire himſelfe
Free from the eyes of the prophaner people,
But I haue trauers'd o're to finde my Maſter;
I haue not left a Spring vnqueſtioned,
Or any ſpreading Oake, whole quauering toppe
Is but halfe Phoebus proofe, nor can I heare
Ought of Neander his companion.
Pandora, this ſame Boy was ſent on purpoſe
Vnto this place by ſome kinde Nymph or other
Inhabiting theſe Woods in meere compaſſion
Of thee and of thy miſeries; wee could not
Haue ſtudied for a better Stale then this:
Prepare your ſelfe to faine a loue vnto him.
But ſee Placenta, and my Maſters Loue,
I will enquire of them.
Endymion
All happineſſe.
As much to you Placenta.
And what to me?
What you deſerue faire Lady,
Which is aboue my wiſhes.
But Endymion,
Pri'thee ſweet Lad, let mee entreat a courteſie,
What Country-man are you?
What Country-man?
An Engliſh man I take it.
An Engliſh man?
I rather thinke thou art a Ruſſian
Thou carryeſt ſuch a Winter in thy breaſt.
How canſt thou ſuffer ſuch a winning beauty
To ſtand neglected? without a ſalutation?
Goe to, you ſhame-fac'd foole, goe kiſſe her, goe.
How kiſſe her? it does not become a ſeruant
To be ſo ſawcie with his Maſters Loue.
It rather not becomes Endymion,
A Youth of that ſame molde and ſymetry
To be ſo baſhfull 'fore a Gentlewoman:
As for thy Maſter I diſclaime his loue
As one vnworthy.
How? diſclaime his loue?
And with his loue, all the whole world of men,
Except 'be thee my ſoule: why flyeſt thou mee?
Come on, Come on you little frozen-nothing,
I thinke wee muſt be fayne to make you take
Your loue potion in a horne, you are ſo skittiſh.
Nay but Placenta.—
O moſt redolent!
Aurora's ſpiced bed is not more ſweet,
Not all the odours of the early Eaſt.
You do but mock me.
How? but mock thee ſweet?
By all the Cupids in thy face, I loue thee
Beyond th' expreſſion of a womans tongue.
This was that ſimple one that could not counterfeit.
By this ſame neſt of kiſſes I proteſt—
What would'ſt thou more?
More of your proteſtations.
But canſt thou loue me then?
Indeed faire Lady
I doe not know, I am but newly enter'd
Into this louing trade.
You are a Wagge:
Take her by th' hand and ſtreine it gently, ſo. —
Now kiſſe her fanne and ſigh. — Good, excellent.
(Well I haue ſeene ſome Gallants in my dayes,
Though 'twas my fortune to be married,
To that ſame lob my husband, but no matter;)
Fy on this modeſty, 'tis out of faſhion,
Giue her a greene gowne quickly, ſhee will thanke you.
Will not as much ſattin of the ſame colour
To make her one doe as well?
Come, you'r a foole;
Downe with her, ſhee will diſcard you elſe,
As baſhfull, and vnfit for Ladies ſeruice.—
Ay me! what meane you Sir?
Why there, why ſo;—
Oh for Neander now and Lucius
To view this ſpectacle, this would crack that great
That ſtrong and mighty bond of friendſhip, and
Make them both quarrell for her: nay Endymion,
As ſhee did pluck you downe, ſo 'tis your office
To take her vp, elſe ſhee'l forget her ſelfe
Good ſoule, and ſlumber there eternally.—
Now fie vpon you Sir, you've ſpoyl'd my linnen.
Pray Heauens no body ſaw vs: good Placenta
Reedifie what is amiſſe.
All's well,
All's well, ſaue onely here does want a pin.
But ſtay I'le furniſh you. —
Yes, here's a knot moleſted too.—
Faire Sir,
This may ſeeme lightneſſe in mee.
Rather grauity
Who naturally tend downeward thus.
But Sir,
Let me entreat you for to entertaine
A better faith of her that is your ſeruant,
Giue it the right name Sir, and call it Loue.
I'le call it what you pleaſe faire Gentlewoman.
Hee neuer thinks of's Maſter: well this Boy,
Muſt wee trayne farther with vs till wee meete
With our two icy Louers. Come Pandora
Will you entreate your fayreſt Paramoure
T'accompany vs into the Groue? vvee may
Perchance there meete his Maſter, whom hee ſeekes.
Sweet ſhall I craue?
Not where you may cōmand
So, ſo, I'le now go plant this billing couple
Vnder ſome pleaſant tree, which done I'le goe
And range the fields for Lucius and Neander,
And bring them to behold their cloſe embraces,
This certainely will make them hungry, and bite,
Waken their dull and ſleepy appetite,
VVee neuer prize ought truly, thinke it deare,
Vntill the time of parting does draw neare.—
To the Ladies, Ioy, delight,
And a ſeruant that dares fight;
No neede of painting, but a face
With perpetuity of grace.
To the Lords a gracious eye
If they haue a Miſtris by.
To them both, more then all this,
Theyr Princes happineſſe, and bliſſe.
The day's our owne, we haue the Sun, the winde,
And all that can be call'd aduantages, beare vp.
As I'me a Gentleman, and an elder brother—
St, not a word.
You wrong me Sir, I will ſweare out my ſweare, as
I am a Gentleman I muſt, and will ſweare.
Nay ſweete Maſter Mungrell
Miſtake me not, I doe not goe about,
For to depriue you of that ornament,
That faſhionable quality: I but entreat you,
For to bee frugall in your language, and,
To husband your lungs; you haue an enemy
That will require them all, had you more oathes.
How? Doe you thinke I haue no more? by my—
Oh, hold, hold, hold.
Nay, you ſhall heare mee, by —
O, O, O.
By my— by— my indad law.
By my indad law, you'le ſpoyle all, why you'le ſpend
all before the time. But ſee your adverſaries are at hand.
This is their Captaine, their Conductor. Loue. Stay.
I'ue hit the very punto, this ſame minute,
Do's cut the hower into two equall portions.
You that are growne a Time-obſeruer, you
With that fine pocket Saturne in your hand;
Looke this way.
But are theſe your Champions?
They are my Conqerours, if you pleaſe: but where are your imployments?
They'le bee here immediately.
No more. Loueall, pleaſe you to take notice
Of theſe Gentlemen, they are of ranke, and my friends.
Sweete Sir, my only wiſh is that my fortunes were but of growth, to ſhew in what degree of honour, I hold any whom you ſhall vouchſafe to call a friend. —I thirſt to know you Sir.
Doe not ſweare yet.
Why ſo?
Nay as you pleaſe.
Sir I deſire you to pardon me, I muſt not ſweare yet, my Generall will giue the word when I muſt vent.
'Tis no great matter, if you throw away Cudnig,
Or beſwiggers, or ſome ſuch innocent oath vpon him.
Say you ſo?
When will he come towards me?
Sir may I know your name?
My name Sir? why Sir? I am not aſham'd of my name Sir. My name is Sir M. Mung. Sir. A poore elder brother Sir. And yet not very poore neither Sir. Heire to ſix, or ſeuen hundred a yeare Sir. My father is a Gentleman Sir. I haue an Vncle that is a Iuſtice of Peace Sir. I can borrow his white Mare when I pleaſe ſir. She ſtood him in thirty peeces ſir.
A Mungrell Sir?
Only be ſure you be not daſh'd.
Aſhamed of your name, ſay you? You come of a very great houſe, I'le aſſure you; I know many of the Mungrels that are able to diſpend, yeerely, more then I am willing to ſpeake of at this ime; and which keepe their Sonnes as Gentlemanlike, at the Innes o'th Court wih as good cloathes on their backs, as rich belts, and as faire guilt rapiers, as the beſt Gentlemen o'the Land Sir— O well ſaid, come lift vp brauely now.
Tis a hundred to nothing, but theſe are they, looke to your ſtanding, and be ſure you ſuffer him to offer firſt; you haue the more advantage.
Let me alone, if I doe not vtterly confound him, let mee neuer weare good ſuite of clothes more, I haue not read the Arcadia for nothing.
Anteros, a copie of friends of mine.
Sir I ſhall count my ſelfe fortunate in their acquaintance; Sweete Sir— worthy Sir.
Sans complement Mounſieur, Ie ſuis, voſtre treſhumble varlet.
There's one of his parcels gone, he has but three more in all the world.
Signior mio molto honorifico, per teſta del mio padre, io non he altro, advffirirui, che me ſteſſo, però fate capitale di me, è ſplendetemi per quel chio vaglio.
Do's he ſpeake French Sir?
How thinke you Sir?
Nay but well I meane?
O admirably, take heed what you doe, hee's a great Trauailer I tell you.
Gods mee! is he ſo? I'le not meddle with him then, I would haue tickled him elſe.
Signior, io mi terrei ricco s' io haneſſi ſolamente le decime de i voſtri favori.
Nay Sir I am not ſo well skilled in the language, as I could wiſh I were, for your ſake, I can ſpeake a little Sir, Ʋn peu, Monſeur, tellement quellement.
May I be ſo bo as to beare your name Sir?
My name is Nodale Empty Sir.
An Inns othe Court man Sir?
I haue piſt in ſome greene pots in my dayes Sir.
Wiſ. My name is William Wiſeacres Sir. I am of a Sanguine complexion.
In good time Sir.
Very melancholy ſometimes Sir.
Like enough Sir
Ha, he, he, he—
Ha, ha, ha, he,— O my ſides—
Gods my life! I ſhould looſe it all were my patrimony layd on't. Come on Sir, brace me your inuention to the height, you ſee your Antagoniſt.
To him, ferret him, ferret him.
Noble Sir may I bee ſo ambitious, as to deſire my name, to be enrolled in the Catalogue of your well wiſhers.
I doe honour the very ſhadow of your ſhoe ſtrings.
Your mock'd Sir, hee weares bootes.
And am wholly your's cap a pea.
Pox on 't, I made full account, to haue had that next my ſelfe, how came hee by it trow?
What ſay you Sir?
I ſay Sir, that it is your beſt courſe, to take heede how you make a deed of guift of your ſelfe, for feare ſome of your friends ſuffer for it, for the Phyſnomy of your boot, tels mee, it was neuer made for you, I doe not thinke but you borrowed them.
And I ſay Sir, that it is better to borrow then to take vpon truſt, and neuer pay, as many ſuch gallants as you doe.
Loueall, this heat is done, lets rub, and walke.
Agreed, Maſter Empty, take ſome pitty on the Scholler, let him breath a little, wilt pleaſe you walke?
I am your Seruant.
Well done, 'twas ſmartly followed; but lets walke;
Ha, I don't thinke ne're goe Law, but I haue ſeene you ſome where.
You're beholding to your eyes for that.
It may be ſo.
Loueall, looke, looke, looke, another heate.
Don't you vſe ſometimes about Stamford ſide?
Yes Sir, I haue hunted, and hawked, there abouts Sir in my dayes, and beene in Sara's hee too Sir, I was at the laſt horſe race, Sir, when Veluet-heeles, and Currants run Sir, I haue ſome reaſon to remember it, I am ſure, I was cheated of twenty peeces there, Ile ſweare vnto you Sir as I'me a Gentleman, and an elder Brother, I'me a very foole—
Out you Nullifidian, don't let the Gentleman ſweare, tak't vpon his bare word.
Nay Sir, I'le belieue you without ſwearing.
Nay but conceiue me Sir. I was a very foole (as I ſaid before) to bee drawne in after that manner, I would faine ſee the beſt cheater of them all, gull me of ſo much now.
Well ſir, I deſire your better acquaintance. I haue the beſt wine in Towne for you, pleaſe you to accept.
Thanke you ſir.
I think you & I are much vpon a complexion. He, he, he, you haue loſt your mayden-head. If it pleaſe you Sir to come to my lodging Sir, when you come to London, I ſhall thinke my ſelfe very much bound to you, I haue ſome pretty bookes there to lend you, I haue Ariſtotle's Problemes in Engliſh, and Albertus magnus de ſecretis, I, as I am a liuing ſoule.
Let's take 'em off.
Troth Sir you haue a very neat ſuit there, I am much taken with the proportion of your hoſe, 'tis a deepe French Sir. I haue a Sattin ſuit to make ſhortly, and I would beſtow, ſome twenty dozen of gold lace vpon it, if I could but purchaſe the knowledge of ſuch a Taylour as your's, I ſhould thinke my ſelfe beholding to my Starrs for it.
O your walking faculty, it is the only thing, now adayes your Gentlemen practiſe.
Indeed Sir, I thinke it bee time for you to ſeeke out for a new one, for I thinke your old one will truſt you no longer.
Should you but ſee them walke in Paules, or in the Temple, with what a rauiſhing garbe—you would admire.
He, he, you are ſuch a merry man, but indeed I hold that Tobacco is very good for Phlegmatick complections.
Your hilt a little forwarder; very good, your very rapier ſpeakes French; I proteſt hee ſhowes in the gracefull carriage of his legge, as though he had been a man of fourtie playes, fifteene moutings.
Nay, I ſhall doe well in time.
Gods me! you haue ſtaind your cloake ſir, how will you doe? I doubt the Gentleman that lent you it will be angry.
Thinke you ſo ſir?
Well, there's no remedy, I muſt goe and relieue my Scholler.—Sir, a word in private, do you know that gentleman?
Yes ſir, I haue read Overburies Characters; he is a ſilly fellow in blacke, I take it.
Well ſir, how ever you diſ-eſteeme him, I could wiſh you would take heed of him; I wonder hee did not ſtrike you all this while. Go to, I ſay no more, I hold him to be the ſtouteſt man of his hands in all this ſide o'th countrey.
Is he ſo?
Why he is ſent for far and neere by the valiant of the Pariſhes, to play matches at football: I tell you hee is the onely Hammerſhin this Shire can boaſt of; not a Servingman can keep a legge or an arme whole for him, he ha's a penſion from all the Surgeons within the compaſſe of fortie miles, for breaking of bones.
Nay for my part ſir, let him be as tall a man as he will, I doe not care a for him, (doe you ſee) for I doe not meane to quarrell with him, onely I make account to jeere him a little.
Well, take heed, ſay I.
Nay ſir, I'le take your counſell, I'le go and fetch my rapier I left within, and then let him doe his worſt.
Follow him, follow him, the exalted muſhroome— a whorſon butterflie, he ha's nothing to jeere you for but your borrowed cloake and bootes; and I don't thinke but they bee your owne for all his talking.
No indeed, to tell you the truth, I borrowed them of a Batchelour of our houſe, mine owne lye in limbo at a Barbers ſhop for Tobacco.
But why doſt not beat him man? Gods me! beat him.
Nay, I would haue bin at him, but that I was afraid— They ſay many of 'em are very deſperate fellowes.
Faith, to doe them right, there be many of' um that haue run through the diſcipline of a Bawdy-houſe, & learnt to quarrell there, and haue ſeene the entrailes of a Fence-ſchoole too, and in one word are ſufficiently valiant; but that proues not a generalitie. There are of them (I'le warrant you) as there are of your ſchollers, ſome that weare ſwords, only to ſcare fooles.
Nay ſir, I would haue you to know, that I am neither afraid of him, nor his ſword: but I would not willingly die yet, if I could helpe it.
Fear 't not man, thou ſhalt liue I warrant thee, to ſee thy good name buried before thee. Haue you nothing about you to ſtrike him with?
Yes, I haue the key of my ſtudy dore in my pocket.
O nothing better then that, follow him, to him, to him.
Shall I, i' faith? ſhall I?
Never ſtand, ſhall I? ſhall I? but doe 't.
Ne're goe, and ſo I will: Ile teach him to abuſe any of our cloath againe.
St, Mr Mungrell.
As I'm a Gentleman, and an elder brother—
But how now Anteros? what buſineſſe is this?
Can you but hold your peace, and follow them
With your ſweet William? nay, but will you goe?
You'l looſe the banquet if not preſently.
O, O. —
Would I could looſe my ſelfe, become a Mouſe,
Or flie, that I might find a cabbin here,
To hide my ſelfe from theſe ſame women. O, —
But I will climbe this tree—
I wonder much
Where our two loving friends ſhould lye ſo cloſe;
There's not a place where they doe uſe, but wee
Haue viſited this morning. I doe long
To giue them this moſt pleaſing ſpectacle:
But I will now ſearch the Iuſtice his houſe,
Perchance they may be there.
Endymion,
Another kiſſe; loe thus I will revenge
My ſelfe on thoſe two frozen Lovers; thus,
And thus, and thus — Revenge, how ſweet thou art
Vnto a woman!
O — I am afrayd
They will offend, commit, commit before mee.
And canſt thou loue me, ſweet Endymion?
Behold a taſt what I can doe.
Theſe kiſſes
Haue not that maſculine relliſh yet me thinks,
Which I enjoy'd in the manly embraces
Of Lucius, or Neander.
It is ſtrange,
Not one about this houſe that can inſtruct mee
What ſhould become of them, I wonder at it;
But I am glad that Conſtantina's flight
Is not ſuſpected yet, ſo well that Boy
Doe's perſonate her.
Are they not there Placenta?
St; No. O yes your Vncle is at home.
It will not yet bee dinner time this houre;
You may embrace another walke.
Content;
Endymion, wil't pleaſe you t' accompany us?
Why ſo then— What againe?
You'l leaue your blubbering, Minion, come your waies.
You ſet your minde on ſuch a man? yet more?
You might as well bee in loue with that ſame Sunne,
And ſhould as ſoone enjoy it.
He ſpeakes high,
Pray heavens hee does not looke ſo high, for feare
He ſhould deſcrie me.
Father, I cannot laſt
Out two dayes longer without Anteros.
How's that? now all my ſtarres be mercifull!
It is a viſion ſure, this cannot bee.
Come, you'r a fooliſh girle, he marry you?
That day that hee does marry you, will I
Bring backe to life all that were dead before
The univerſall Deluge.
Nay, Ile helpe
You with a farre better expreſſion, ſir,
That day that hee does marry her, ſhall you
Become an honeſt man; a harder Province
Then to bring all the dead, to life againe.
There are a hundred reaſons (daughter) why
You ſhould not hope it, firſt hee hates all women,
Next if he did not, you that are deform'd,
Lame, and miſhapen, blacke, beſides, ill manner'd.—
(Hee does not ſee the wallet on her back.)
Haue the leſt cauſe to hope.
But there are (father)
Sixe hundred reaſons, why I ſhould loue him.
His manly carriage, his full breaſts, his hayre,
And his fine cloathes, his golden breeches, and—
His traiterous noſe: I, I, 'tis that I know,
'Tis like the Ivy-buſh vnto a Taverne,
Which tells vs there is Wine within; but I
Will take an order with you Sir e're long,
And haue you par'd.
Well I will neuer leaue
My crying (that's reſolu'd) vntill I ſee him.
O! Could I commit a crime e're I was made,
'Gainſt nature worthy ſuch a puniſhment?
It is decreed, I will vnman my ſelfe, immediately.
What ſhall I doe? tis ſtrange—
Well, 't muſt be ſo: I will goe ſeeke Terpander,
And mooue him to this match: moſt of his lands
I haue in mortgage, nay indeed they are
Forfeited to me, for the day is paſt
Wherein hee was bound to pay in the money,
The' advantage of this forfeiture, will I
Threaten to take, vnleſſe hee does compell,
His ſonne to take my daughter, to his wife.
Nay, rather then I will bee diſappointed,
Hee for a portion, ſhall haue in his bonds,
Come daughter, bee of comfort, wee will goe
Directly to Terpander, where I'le vſe
Such arguments, as ſhall enforce him make
His ſonne both loue, and marry you.
Like enough.
'Tis very likely Sir, but that this tree
Does not afford any ſuch fruit, I'd throw
An old ſhooe after you,—ſuch arguments
As ſhall enforce him make his ſonne, both loue,
And marry you—well how his pills may worke
Which the old man, I know not: for my ſelfe
I will prouide a quicke deliuerance.
VVhy ſheepheard? Stipes? now I muſt, and will
Goe forward in this plot, of my diſguiſe.
VVhat make you there?
VVhy nothing Iacke.
Come on, you are a fine fellow, to go and ſet them together by the eares thus, are you not?
But haue they done it finely?
Finely doe you call it? why your Scholler ha's ſo mauld Mr. Noddle with the key of his ſtudy dore, made ſuch a breach in his Pericranium, that without queſtion all his French ends haue taken their flight, through that paſſage; as for my coſen Mr. William, hee's crept into an old hole, behind the hangings, that in the dayes of old, h'as beene the Aſylum, for decayed bootes, and ſhooes out of date, and there lyes hee, all alone, very melancholy.
Ha, ha, he, but how was my Gentleman, and my elder brother imploy'd all this while?
As Gentlemen vſe now adayes, in ſwearing; when he ſaw that hee could not draw his ſword, hee ran vp and downe the roome, and meaſured out the time of the combat with oathes.
Death! that I had but ſeene this.
VVould thou had'ſt: for I haue e'ene taken a ſurfer of them. I pray thee let's inuent ſome way, or other
For to bee rid of them, canſt thou not thinke?
Thinke, thinke, man — thinke— which I'le effect, vnleſſe
All that is called Fortune, doth forſake mee.
See'ſt thou that brace of Cabbins, on each ſide
My Vncle's houſe?
They'r Dog-kennels I take it.
They are, no more, but ſee they come, I'le ſlip
Aſide leſt I bee ſeene.
I wonder what
His brayne is now ſo hot in travaile with.
How now?
Lend mee your hankercher, if you haue one about you Coſen, mine ha's not a dry place in it.
What doe you bleede Mr. Noddle?
Yes Sir a little wild blood, hold that Coſen, vn peu Mounſieur.
Did not you tell mee, all his French ends were gone? vn peu will not forſake him.
Not a word.
A whorſon cowardly ſlaue, to ſtrike a man e're one was aware of him, and to giue one no time, to draw his rapier—
S'me, 'tis ſomewhat deepe I doubt.
Nothing by Hercules Sir, a ſcratch, a ſcratch, well I'le ſay nothing, but by this good blood, that runns—
Faith if you had done as that good blood does, Mr. Noddle, it had beene better for you.
No Sir, I ſcorne it, I am not of that ſtraine i'faith, and that hee ſhall know, the ſempiternall raſcall.
Come on Mr. Wiſeacres, I belieue you and your Kinſeman are much of a complexion.
I am very melancholy at this time.
I but you muſt take heed of theſe fits, they'l ſpoyle you, I heard ſay, that you crept into a priuate, retir'd roome e'ne now, and there converſ'd with ſpiders and crickets, fye vpon it, you muſt labour againſt that humour; but indeed me thinks your Coſen is of a very deepe ſanguine.
Ha, he, you are ſuch a witty man.
Coſen? Yes I am much beholding to my Coſen; I might haue beene kild for him.
Come, come, I like him well for it, the Gentleman does weigh how much the Republ. might bee impeached, by the loſſe of a man.
Republi que ? Repuddingpy. By this light, a man is little better then mad, that will keepe company with ſuch ſnow-heapes, ſuch white-liverd, counterfied lackdawes—but all's one.
I, I betwixt friends, and kinſemen; ye two are all one I know. Your Coſen is very cholerick now.
I but I am very ſeldome ſo, for Albertus Magnus faith —
Now the good Gods! where ſhall I find theſe moſt vnfortunate Gentlemen?
Why how now Iacke? what inauſpicious wind
Ha's rayſ'd this cloudy weather in thy face?
O Anteros, wee are vndone, vndone;
I'le haue this day weare black ith' Calender,
That after ages may beware of it,
It is ſo full of Omen —
Whats the matter? I pray thee ſpeake.
O they bee here, — who's there?
Pray heauens it bee not the Conſtables officious induſtry: how will you doe Sir? You haue ſlaine the Scholler.
I would I had elſe.
Nay Sir, this is neither time nor place for ſuch idle wiſhes, here ha's beene a Surgeon already, that liues hard by, and his ſentence is, that hee cannot liue aboue two howers, hee ſwounded ſix times ſince you left him, it ſeemes you bruiſed him ſo with falling on him, with the hilt of your rapier, that hee bleeds inward — I know not what to ſay to it— I was bewitch'd I thinke, nay thinke, thinke, thinke what courſe you will take, you muſt bee ſuddaine, the officers are ſent for to apprehend you.
Is this in ieſt (I wonder) or in earneſt?
Is he ſo indeed? I pray you tell mee true Sir.
Why, what doe you take mee to bee Sir? haue I this for my loue, and care of your ſafety? as you ſowed, ſo reape for mee; I hope you will belieue your owne ſences, I thinke I ſee the officers comming.
'Sme! what ſhall I doe? Mr. Loveall, nay good Sir, I doe belieue you, I know not which way to take.
Nay there's no ſtirring that way, you'l meet them in the teeth.
What if I goe through the backe dore, and take horſe?
They'l meet you that way too.
Any thing, good Sir, I beſeech you, looke the dore goes, I proteſt twenty Serieants could not haue ſtrucke ſuch a feare into me.
Well, will you truſt your fortunes into my hands?
And liues ſweet Sir.
Quickly then enter heere, I'le ſhut you in untill the ſearch bee paſt: nay will you in? who's there? immediately, good Maſter William.
Nay ſir, I'le go to my horſe if there were twenty Conſtables, they haue nothing to doe with mee, for I am ſure I did not ſtrike a blow, no as I'm a living ſoule. —
Gods mee, what will you doe? were not you in the company with him? that makes you acceſſary; haue you read ſo much law, and know not that? nay, will you in?— Ha, ha, he.
What ſai'ſt thou now my Anteros?
What ſay I?
I ſay thou art an arch-diſſembler,
A workman in the trade: By all that's good,
I ſhould haue been thus gull'd my ſelfe, thou didſt
So ſmoothely act it, with ſuch paſſion,
And anger at their incredulitie.
I was afraid thou would'ſt haue beat the foole,
Becauſe he would not let himſelfe be gull'd
So ſoone as thou wouldſt haue him, but ſtay now—
How ſhall we dreſſe our other brace?
That province
Is yours; as for mine owne, you ſee I haue
Provided for them, and conveniently:
Yet if you will embrace my counſell, write
After the copie I haue ſet you, doe,
Behold a patterne, and ſee (happily)
A cheſt where Stipes in the dayes of old
Ha's kept tame Conies, now uninhabited.
Right, but I feare, 'tis not capacious
Enough for both.
'Tis nothing, looke you here,
See you that fine ſpruce new erected hogſtie
On the other ſide of Stipes houſe?
I doe.
And doe you ſee it may be pinn'd without?
Hiſt, eaſily, ſoftly, I'le fill up the time
With ſome diſcourſe, till you haue fram'd your count'nance.
Wu'd I might ne're ſtirre Mr. Mungrell, if I care a pin for a hundred ſuch, an Inns oth' Court man quoth a? nere goe, I thinke they learne nothing there, but how to ſwagger, and bee proud.
Nay Sir, now I muſt chide you, will you accuſe all, for the default of ſome particulars? by the ſame reaſon, I'le conclude, that all yee Schollers, are coxecombes, becauſe I ſee one that is ſo.
Meaning mee Sir?
Meaning you Sir? pardon mee 'tis meere iniuſtice in you, I'le aſſure you Sir, this whole realme, yeelds not better qualified Gentlemen, and more gentilely parted, then many of them are, and to whom, the common weale is more indebted.
Becauſe hee has got a good ſuit of cloathes vpon his backe (I'le bee hang'd if they bee pay'd for yet) and a ring in 's band ſtring, to play withall when he wants diſcourſe, he thinkes hee may carry the ball on 's toe before him, and that no man muſt dare to meet him.
No more Scholler, you haue met with him ſufficiently, why Anteros, when? and here's a braue Pylades too, that would not ſee his Oreſtes oppreſt by multitude.
Arreſt mee Sir? ſoft, and eaſily Sir, more words to a bargaine; s'duds! I thinke my ſword be mortil'd into a ſnayle, I cannot entreate him out of his ſhell. Arreſt mee Sir? As I'm a Gentleman, and an elder brother, I owe no man a farthing that I meane to pay him. Nay come Sir, I am fleſh'd now i'ſaith.
You will not quarrell with your friends Sir, will you?
Friends Sir? I know not whether you be my friend, or no; I am ſure you vſe no friendly language.
Pri'thee Scholler, tayle off Mr. Mungrell a little, hee'l never leaue now hee has drawne blood once.
Come, you'r a foole; the Gentleman's of worth, and our friend.
Nay I haue done now, I did but try how I could quarrell a little.
Faith Sir, this would haue made a faire ſhow in a Country Ale-houſe.
Nay Sir, as ſoone as my father dyes, (which will not bee long I hope, for hee lyes ſicke now) I'le goe to Londorn, and learne to quarrell there, for a yeare or two, and then come downe againe, and practiſe amongſt my Tenants.
Why Anteros; pray thee releiue mee.
St, not a word, for a million of worlds. Harke you Scholler.
I hope you are not angry?
Angry old Bully? hee had a hard heart, that would be angry with thee.
'Tis as I tell you, his wound ha's beene ſearch'd by a very skilfull Surgeon, and his Pia mater is found to be periſhed, and when that's gone, you know there is ſmall hope.
None at all Sir, I've read it in Magirus, Cozen Mungrell, come hither quickly —
Now, now, how greedily the Scholler ſucks it in.
What's the matter? but is this true?
As true as you'r a Gentleman.
Hee never emptyed a buttry pot after a match at footeball, with greater appetite, then hee devours this gullery.
Take heed what you doe, the leaſt protraction is full of danger.
O the Lord! what will become of vs?
Loveall ſtirre the doore a little — paſſion O mee! there's ſome body at the dore, looke, looke, creepe into this cheſt, I'le ſhut you in.
Any where good Sir.
Where will you hide me ſir? I'le goe into the cheſt too.
Here's hardly roome enough for my ſelfe.
Stay, ſtay, ſtay. In good ſooth Mr. Conſtable here's no ſuch men this way— what ſay you, you three-penny cracke crowne? I tell you, they haue already taken horſe. Here, here, here, creepe in, ſtoope man, ſtoope.
Ha, ha, he.
Why ſo, wee'r now at Liberty, farewell.
My ſiſters wrongs, and ſorrowes call for mee,
And ſhall be anſwered.
Well adiew ſweet Sir.
I muſt bee ſuddaine, or l'me loſt for euer.
By this time ſure my father melts (why ſheepherd.)
The ample benefit, that ſhall acrew
Vnto him by this worthy match, this inſtant
Arriues at 's weather-beaten apprehenſion;
(I doe but know it, am but ſure of it)
O, what a dainty pleaſant thing it is
For to bee free from care! to ſleepe a night,
Without the dreaming of a Creditour,
Or the diſturbance of that gobling Forfeit!
It cannot but be ſo, vpon my ſoule,
Hee trades in this ſame cogitation,
This very minute — Stipes. che ti venga l' cancro.
Well, if hee be aboue ground, I will find him,
Or looſe my ſelfe, I'le ſeeke him in the paſtures.
But why
Doe the wing'd minutes flie
ſo fast away?
Stop your courſe yee haſtie howers,
And ſollicite all the powers
to let you ſtay.
For the earth could ne're ſhew forth
An object of a greater worth.
But why
Doe the wing'd minutes flie
ſo fast away?
It is becauſe that they which follow,
Crowd on to haue a ſight as well as they;
Harke how the ghoſts of paſſed moments groane,
'cauſe they are gone:
And rayle at Fate,
And curſe the date
Of their ſhort liues expir'd ſo ſoone.
Then ſtop your courſe, you haſtie howers,
And ſollicit all the powers
to let you ſtay,
For the earth could ne're ſhew forth
An object of a greater worth.
Ha, ha, he,
I haue diſcovered more then e're Columbus,
Or our owne water-fowle, Drake: my pretty ſtripling,
Which I did take away from Stipes even now,
Is prov'd a woman, prov'd an errant Lady,
That is in queſt after her errant Knight,
Who is enchanted. 'Tis the Neece (forſooth)
Of our good vertuous Iustice, Mr Hooke,
Who has put on this habit for to follow
Her lover Cleopes, who has forſooke her.
All this did ſhee confeſſe to mee in private,
'Soone as ſhe ſaw I had deſcry'd her ſex
And name; but I haue ſtayd her pilgrimage,
Shee's faſt enough, I warrant her, i'th nooſe
Of wedlocke now, to ſtirre in haſte. No ſooner
Did I reade woman in her lookes, but ſtraight
I did command my mayds for to unpage her,
And cooke her in her kind, in her owne ſawce;
Shee's pickeld now in ſome three yards of lawne:
Here ſhee has it, and there ſhee has it, fie, fie.
Was I a young man now againe, and ſhould
Venture on ſuch a diſh to carue, by'r Lady,
I ſhould not know which ſide for to begin on:
Hardly diſtinguiſh breaſt from backe. Well, well,—
Beſhrew my heart the queanes, where e're they had them,
Haue hung good rags about her; ſure they borrow'd them.
This being done, I went unto Neander,
Told him, that I had got a Boy, and dreſt him
Fit for his palate: he rejoyc'd, made haſte
Vnto the contract, and (as kind Fortune would)
That very time a good old merry Vicar
Of my acquaintance came to viſite me.
I crav'd his ayd, and (in one word) I brought her
Vayl'd, but firſt ſoftned by a thouſand threatnings,
If ſhee but mov'd towards a diſcovery.
The good kinde Gentleman thinking her boy,
And therefore in his power when er'e he pleaſe
For to untie the knot, is before witneſſe,
Contracted to her by the Vicar.— Oh for Lucius now.
See where hee comes; but yet how heavily!
How full of earth mee thinks his paces bee!
Hee lookes as though his teeth had playd this fortnight,
Kept Holyday. But I'le accoſt him.—Lucius.
The Gods befriend thee, whoſoe're thou art,
That I am thought worth naming yet, not loſt
Vnto all mankinde quite, though to my ſelfe!
Theſe words doe ſavour of too much diſtractio'n.
You muſt take comfort ſir.
Who 's that dares talke
Of comfort to me? But once name the word
That is exil'd whole Nature? good Mr Liuely
Waſt you that ſpoke?
It was, and I muſt haue you
Remoue this ſame December from your lookes:
I come to make you happy.
Thou art come
To looſe thy labour then; I am below
Both all the loue, and all the ſpight of Fortune,
Shee will not make mee happy, and ſhee cannot
Make mee more wretched then I am. I lye,
Shee may doe both. But ſpeake thou reverend head,
Has ought that 's good befallen my Neander,
That thou dar'ſt venture out that name of happy
So confidently upon me? —ſay.
There has,
But more to you.
What's that?
Good, happineſſe.
How? happineſſe to me? thou ſhould'ſt haue put
The ſpace of fifteene ages 'twixt thoſe words,
They are ſo farre from reconciliation;
Thou haſt no Grammar in thee, know'ſt no concord.
But I haue Muſicke in me, and that's better.
I'le make thee daunce my ſolitary one.
Pandora ſhall be thine to day.
How? mine to day?
Thy wife, thy ſelfe, but in another character.
Vnſpeak't againe, it muſt not be.
It muſt.
Doeſt thou intend to buy me to thee? and
To breake me and my fortunes with a courteſie,
Which I ſhall ne're be able to repay?
Imploy thy art then, all thy quicker plots
To further my Neander in his loue:
Who by how much the more his vertues be
Greater then mine (who hardly haue ſo much
As will redeeme me from the name of vicious)
So much the more will apprehend the benefit,
So much the more reward thee.
Speak no further,
Pandora's thine, ſhee's thine, thine owne, beleeu't.
Hee is already married to another.
I doe confeſſe that I am ſomething fallen
Oft from that height of reaſon which before,
While I had libertie, I did enjoy:
But thou do'ſt wrong me much, if thou do'ſt thinke
That Loue has eaten up all man in mee.
I tell you, I doe know your plots, your drifts,
And all your conſultations, as well
As if I had had a cabbin in your boſome,
And had from thence betrayd them; did not I
Heare when Neander did ſollicite thee
For to procure a Maſculine Bride for him?
Did not I heare thee promiſe him to doe it?
Haſt thou not now perform'd it? are not they
By thy procurement now contracted? ſpeake;
'Tis not ſo eaſie to deceiue the eyes
Of Loue, how e're our franticke Poets ſay
He feeds on nought but Lolium.
Lucius,
As I doe hope to liue, as I doe prize
My lungs, my breath, laughter, and ſacke, (beleeue me)
I haue Neander faſt, hee 's married
To one that is as truely woman, as
Was ſhe that did produce thee, and becauſe
You ſhall be certaine of 't, 'tis Conſtantina.
But canſt thou utter this (without a bluſh?)
Or hath thy many yeeres
Block'd up thoſe channels of thy blood, that now
They are not able to afford that face,
(That ſtarved face of thine, bankrupt of vertue)
The leaſt reliefe? but I'le undoe your plots.
Since you doe force me, I'le confeſſe a ſecret,
Which hitherto I'ue hardly whiſpered
Vnto my privat'ſt thoughts. I am no husband,
No husband (marke you) for Pandora, nor
For any woman living; for kind Nature
Has ſtamped Eunuch on mee from my cradle.
What do I heare?
That wch is true.
An Eunuch!
But ſee Neander comes with his new Bride.
Why doe you weepe and ſigh ſo boy? no more.
Doe you heare that?
But ſee my Lucius.
I muſt quite alter my diſcourſe, my garbe,
And all my actions. Hence dull melancholly,
I now muſt finde a face that muſt out-ſmile
A morne in Iune. Lucius, a thouſand hayles.
Vnhappy Conſtantina! to whom Fate
Neither permits to liue, nor yet to die.
Break off thoſe ſighs you peeviſh girle, or i'le — not yet?
What meanes this ſtrange and ponderous eye?
As though you were to take our Altitudes
Lucius? what? and doe you ſmile? faith ſpeake.
How doeſt thou like my Choyce? perhaps you wonder
At this ſo ſudden match; but (Friend) you ſee
What Love and a faire Gentlewoman can doe.
I am the boldeſt wretch aliue. It cannot,
Cannot be long before he needs muſt know her.
What will become of thee then Liuely? ha?
You muſt be ſure not to unvaile him Sir,
The boy would not be knowne.
What muſe you on
So deepely Lucius? does your firſt ſonnes name
You ſhall beget on the moſt faire Pandora
Perplex you now? come on, I'le anſwer for you,
He ſhall be called Fortunate.
Not ſo,
Rather that name belongs to you Neander,
That ſhall haue no ſuch care to trouble you:
For if my art deceiues me not (faire creature
Your hand) this wife of yours is never likely
For to beare children, but on her backe, or armes.
Why pray thee ſweet?
'Cauſe in this little vale
That lies at the foot of Venus mountaine, here,
I doe diſcover ſomething too much for mother.
Come, come, Neander, theſe are poore devices,
Trickes of the Scene, and ſtale, they will not take.
And you gray haires, me thinks that thou ſhouldſt owe
A greater and more filiall reverence
To the faire Ceremonies of the Church, then thus
To ſtalke with them, to make them ſtales unto
Such baſe ridiculous—
Lucius, doe but heare.
I will not heare thee.
Here's a benefit
Plac'd moſt deſervingly! I doe not like it.
I do not apprehend him.
A faire gowne
Indeed, and ſope, and ſtarch enough, to dazle
The eyes of ſome young countrey heire, that has
Never been drill'd through Drury lane, or Bloomsbury.
But 'pray thee (friend) whoſe daughter haſt thou married?
What may ſhe haue to name?
What ſhall I anſwer?
I am i'th bryers.
Tell him 'tis Conſtantina
Our Iuſtices Neece.
Moſt excellent diſſembler!
As though you know not Conſtantina ſir.
But is this Conſtantina?
True.
'Tis truer;
Somewhat then you doe beleeue it is.
Is this
Iacke Loveall's ſiſter?
'Tis.
But is this ſhee
Whom Cleopes once lov'd, and has forſaken?
O me! why doe I liue and heare that name?
Did you not mark that ſigh? how ſmartly't came?
No, no, I haue not fitted you, I haue not.
'Tis a young Roſcius I tell you. No ſooner
Was Cleopes nam'd, but the arch-villaine ſigh'd,
As if it had been truely Conſtantina.
I doe not like this buſineſſe yet.
Is this
That cryed up wonder? that Fidelia?
A ſodaine change.
Yet at the laſt? 'tis well, I'le giue the word
Vnto Pandora: but with ſpeciall care
That the boy knowes not of his Maſters preſence.
What buſineſſe is't that this ſame Midwifes face
Does fetch and carry thus about I wonder?
Hy, ſhee appeares againe.
All health old man.
Old? and how old? but what's the newes that you
Are rig'd with now? and whither bound I pray you?
Next to that loving payre of friends, whoſe ſorrowes
I haue lamented oft, and amongſt which
I iudge it not the leaſt, that while yee two
Diſcourſe in ſighes, and teares, that wanton mayde
That is the cauſe of all your heauineſſe,
Laſciuiouſly does ſport herſelfe, and melts
In the embraces of an other.
How?
Regardles of your woes, or her owne honour.
Now all the Gods! where is he?
Woman ſpeake,
What is hee for a man?
I know him not,
So farre as to his name; but this mine eyes
Dare witneſſe, tis a compoſition
Of blood and ſpirits not to be deſpis'd.
A feature able enough to tempt; beſides—
Neander, whil'ſt wee ſtriue about the ſhaddow
Wee haue the ſubſtance raviſh'd from vs.
Ha?
It cannot bee, 'tas noe affinitie
With truth; It muſt not bee belieu'd good Lucius.
Can yee retyre your ſelues vnder this tree
A little, and expect? but e're I goe,
Yee ſhall both promiſe as yee'r Gentlemen
To endure the ſight with patience.
Wee will.
It is enough.
But does this woman gull vs?
Or is it reall think'ſt thou?
Harke.
No more.
Can yee belieue it yet? are your eyes yet
Inſtructed?
Tis my boy Endymion,
Now hell and tortures!
Were all odours loſt,
And beggered Nature had not ſweetes enough
T' embalme the dying Phoenix left, from hence
From this ſame lip, Shee might reſtore her ſelfe.
Ah Lucius! muſt he not dye?
Neander,
It is a ſacriledge vnpardonable
To pluck him from that Altar.
Once more ſweet—
Two pendant Cherryes when ſome gentle gale
Makes them to kiſſe, meete not with ſuch a touch!
Villaine, and Traytour dye.
O me! my Maſter.—
What doe you meane? ah.
Alas.—Sweet Gentlemen.—
Did all mankinde inhabit in that breaſt,
I'de put the Gods vnto a ſecond trouble
For to create that ſpecies a new.
Woman forbeare.
I doe not like theſe tumults.
I'le get me home and drinke a cup of Sack.
Neander,—
Lucius,—
Ah by that Monſter of my loue, your friendſhip,
Lucius, by theſe eyes of mine, which thou
A thouſand times and more haſt dar'd to liken
Vnto the brighter ſtarre of Venus, which
Is both the Prologue and the Epilogue
Vnto the glorious Sun: By thine owne eyes
Which are two clearer ſtarres, I doe coniure thee
Forbeare to proſecute ſuch a reuenge
Vpon this innocent Boy: for here I ſweare
By all thoſe bleſſed powers, which know our thoughts,
I neuer lou'd him.
Moſt impudent woman,
Did not our eyes behold it?
O Neander,
Why doe we ſtand thus coldly here? and not
How out a paſſage through this proſtitute
To trauaile to the iuſt deſtruction
Of her baſe Louer, and my baſer vaſſaile?
Rather let all your fury end in me,
See here my naked breſt imploy your valours:
Why doe you ſtand and gaze one on another?
What is the naked boſome of a Virgin
A ſpectacle of ſuch terrour? if it be,
And that the fight of it hath cool'd your blouds,
Then heare me ſpeake: you Lucius may remember
That ancient ſtock of loue, thoſe many vowes,
Thoſe many teares, thoſe many longings, which
Haue paſt betwixt vs: nor can you iuſtly ſtile it
A fault of mine, that Time is now ſo old
And yet does ſee vs two; but partly yours
Partly my athers neereneſſe (for I muſt not
Giue it the name it merits, Couetouſneſſe)
Who ſeeing your ſo feruent loue vnto me,
Did ſtriue to thruſt me out with nothing, or
At leaſt with ſuch a portion, as you lik'd not;
Whilſt thus I wauered, betwixt hope, and feare,
It fortun'd, that this Gentleman Neander
Became your Riuall▪ who had not long beene here,
Not long ſollicited, but I (ſhame of women)
Began to loue yee both, and which is more
I lou'd yee with an equall flame, (but ſee
What Pageants Cupid can play!) it chanc'd
(Contrary to all mens expectations)
That by degrees ſuch a ſtrong tye of friendſhip
Did grow betwixt yee, that each of yee refus'd
(For his friends ſake) what then was proferr'd you,
My loue; whilſt I bewayl'd my miſeries
Vnto this Midwife here, my friend, and grieu'd
At this my harder fortune—Good Placenta
Giue them the reſt.
Then take it in a word.
Suppoſing it the onely way to winne
One of you to her, I counſail'd her to faine
A loue vnto ſome other Gentleman.
Whilſt we were buſie in theſe Conſultations,
As fortune would, your Page Endymion
Came hither (Lucius) to ſeeke his Maſter.
We lay the trayne for him, ſhee courts the Boy,
And he (poore Lad) thinking her ſerious
Was caught immediatly.
But is this true?
Would I could call it falſe—But otherwiſe
Then was expected hath it proſpered.
Placenta, ah Placenta.
Who's that calls me?
Shall I diſcloſe my ſelfe? I am aſham'd.
If it be ſo, Pandora, we craue pardon.
And doe reſtore him life; but now
If thou do'ſt ayme to reach a life ſo happy
So full of all content, that thou may'ſt fit
Within thy Sphere (like Venus) and looke downe
On all thy Sex, and pitty them; loue this man.
Loue this man. For as for my ſelfe I am
Already furniſh'd with a Miſtris, ſee
My wife here— Sweeteſt wife.
Is this your wife?
I judge her happy who ſo e're ſhee is,
Beleeue him not, this is Boy, a villaine
(Whom I, but that—)
Lucius forbeare.
Dreſt vp
In womans Cloathes by that ſame dotard Liuely.
Sweeteſt Neander leaue.
It is a woman.
By all the gods, it is a boy, 'tis falſe.
But for to rob you of all hope of mee
Giue me but care, I am an Eunuch, if
You can endure to haue a frozen ſtatue,
Sleepe by your ſide, whilſt you awake, recount
The tedious minutes of your widdowed nights
And ſigh, and thinke, and thinke, and ſigh againe,
Behold an husband for you, I am he.
O me! an Eunuch?
Hold the Gentlewoman
Ay me! ſhee ſwonnes, ſweeteſt Pandora, ah.
What is the matter?
Ah good Lucius helpe,
Shee's gone — alas good heart. What ſhall I doe?
But ſee ſhee breathes againe.
Ah hony ſweet
Pandora ſpeake.
Ah!
Hands off thou out-ſide of a man; and thou
Ʋxorious creature, I doe craue no ayde
From you, forbeare.
How doe's my ſweeteſt hony?
I am not well Placenta, let vs goe
Into your houſe a while.
Pleaſe you faire Lady
To vſe my ſeruice?
How? Your ſeruice ſir?
You can doe nothing, nor doe I expect it.
But if your loue towards me be worthy, lend mee
Your Page, but for an houre.
Hee is yours.
Then ſir adiew.
Shall I be vanquiſh'd thus
In friendſhip? But I will once more to Liuely.
And ſee what further counſell hee will giue mee,
Faire wife let's goe—Riſe vp you villaine boy;
Lucius farewell.
What is he gone? ſo ſoone?
To's Engineer I know, to his contriuer;
But I will follow them ſo faſt, that not
A ſyllable ſhall paſſe without my Knowledge.
How now you Raſcall? where are your eyes I wonder?
In as a good a headpeece as yours, I warrant you that, for all your fine cloathes, Sands, I thinke my penny as good ſiluer as yours, euery day i'th weeke, I'le tell you but ſo.
A Mayde of eighteene, to play with babes-clouts, well, 'tis no matter, Let that paſſe though, goe to, goe to, 'tis an ill winde that blowes no body good, cry I, ſure roſe o'th right ſide to day, I ſhall haue a ſeruant by and by, and a luſty Knaue too, and here's the chincke, the chincke; as I was getting this rod euen now, for my wiſe daughter, comes me Terpanders ſonne, the angry boy, the ſmoaker of Tobacco, the whorſon which could not endure his mother, Snds I was afraid at firſt to ſee my ſelfe alone with him, he did ſo ſtare with'is rowling eyes, and 'twas no force by'r Lady, for I had fiue good ſhillings in my purſe; But he to put me out of doubt ſalutes me moſt louingly, as thus, Stipes God ſaue you, Saue you Stipes — no, Stipes God ſaue you — Stipes be hang'd — a blockhead, Sdnds J doubt I ſhould make but a ſcuruie Gentleman, I want the trick ont.— But let that paſſe though, I haue the mony here, and preſently, my man will come, which Anteros will ſend me, whom, if I haue not pay'd me euery morning my forty brace of legges and caps —no more.
Why ſo, I me fairely accoutred, as becomes a Sheepheards ſeruant — But ſwig for ſee my Maſter. Here muſt I quite diſrobe my ſelfe of all my former manners, garbe, behauiour, and put the plod o'th Coutry on.—
How now?
What iolly whiſtler haue vve got here trow?
Hi, hi, a dancer too? I, I, by'r Lady
For ought I know, this is the man I ſpoke of,
Or elſe if not, here's one could wiſh hee were.
A ſturdy knaue, a luſty proper knaue.
I like him well, he ha's a backe for burthens.
You Sirrah, you;
What ſay you, you?
I ſay whom doe you ſeeke here you?
I ſeeke a Sheepheard you.
I am a Sheepheard.
But I ſeeke a Sheepheard, whoſe name is Stipes.
I am the man you knaue, you come from Anteros?
Yeas.
To ſerue mee?
Yeas.
In good time, how now ſaucy Iacke? how now proud, prodigall knaue? where are your twenty legs vnto your Maſter? Goe to, Goe to, to worke, begin, well ſaid. Anteros makes legs. 1.2.3.4 5 6. So, ſo, enough, I doe forgiue the reſt. Turne you about, vm, vm, a good ſquat fellow, a well quarterd man, By'r Lady, and if hee had but moanes would make a pretty husband for my daughter Merda.
Has he a daughter? and are there women here? o o o— O I am fallen from heauen into a Colepit!
Why Merda, I ſay, my daughter Merda I ſay, the fooliſh girle's affrayd I know, go to, go to, I will forgiue her. Merda I ſay. But you Sir Squire'oth' dog, what is your name? Hy, which way looke you?
My name is Ieoffry.
I, I, how now? how Ieoffry? a hard name by'r Lady. why when?
O I could creepe into a catskin purſe,
Endure the ſent of a Court-fardingall
For a concealement now.
Good-hony-ſweet-ſugercandy Father, forgiue mee but this time, and if euer I doe ſo any more, I'le neuer bee ſeene neither byde, or hayre againe.
Ho, ho, oho, ho a great lob, ſtand vp.
I doe forgiue you, but on this condition, that for your penance you ſhall weare this rod, ſtucke at your backe till night.
With all my heart good Father ſticke it on.
So: how doeſt thou like my man Chuckin? goe to, looke on him well.
Does hee come a wooing Father? if hee does, I'le run away, and make him beleeue I'me oy.—
Whither now you great baggage? You'l come againe? But ſtay am not I an old foole? an old dotardly foole, that haue not enquir'd what my man can doe yet? Ieoffry.—
Is his name Ieoffry? Father, good father doe, pray you father let him dwell with vs, you know you promis'd me, that you would hire a man, and buy him a Cloake, that he might goe before mee as they doe before Gentlefolkes daughters, when my new gowne was made, I that you did, ſo marry did you.
What haue wee now to doe?
Peace and catch a mouſe.
There's claglocks now 'ith houſe to make him a cloak Sweete—hony—ſugar—comfit father let him.
No more. Ieoffry, how now you ſloutch? how doe you ſtand? Come hither, goe to, goe to, did you euer weare a cloake in your life? anſwer mee roundly.
No not I, I can't tell how.
Ah beggars brat! how now? but I muſt haue you learne, that you may man your young Miſtris there ſometimes. Come on let mee ſee how finely you can doe the feat, walke before her, follow him daughter.
Here's a ſweet office!
You great lobcocke you.
Ile teach you to looke behind you, to ſee whether your charge followes, or no, what? would you bee gadding without your charge?
I, am I arriu'd at this?— whoffer did you ſtrike one?
Doe you prate too? looke you here, marke but mee, I haue ſeene the day, when I could haue ſtinged it before my ſweet heart.—ſhort and thicke cittizen like, you mankin, what? two acres breadth at a ſtride? I, I by'r Lady; Ile cut you ſhort in ſmock-timber, for this minion; is your ſmock ſo wide, with a murren to you? ſhort and thick cittizen like: how now?
Hy, ſtrike vp braue boyes, hy, for our towne.
Hy, for your towne ſay you? you are a company of lazy, lubberly knaues, there's the ſhort and the long on't, ho, ho, boyes, ho, ho boyes? what drabs too? girles too? doxyes too? yee are a company of ſlowbackly Queanes, there's ſauce for your eeles.
Come Kate, croude on.
O, O, the whole torrent of all woman kind is broke in vpon mee, what ſhall I doe?
Cuds, cuds, theſe are Mr. Livelyes men and mayds, that are come to dance vpon the greene. Pray you Father let mee daunce with them.
ou daunce with them? you are a great princockly puplady; there's muſtard for your biefe too, ſince you will needs haue it; 'snds I haue beene a wit in my dayes, there's ſome reliques left yet, goe to, goe to.
Oh Stipes! I pray you let your daughter daunce with vs a little.
Daunce with you? pray you vpſolue me this queſtion, what holy day is this? Latter Lammas? or St. Ginnyes Even?
Come on braue Sheepheard, our Maſter ha given vs leaue to trip it for an hower, or two, I'faith we haue had a wedding at our houſe to day.
A wedding? a wedding? what wedding? vpſolue mee that queſtion.
Betweene a gentleman and a gentlewoman, but what care wee what they bee.
Come on old Grummelſeedes, what muſt we ſtand thrumming of caps all day, vvaiting on your graue ignorance? by the faith of my body, either let your daughter daunce vvith vs, or I'le make your old bones rattle in your skin, I'le lead you a Coranto I'faith.
An Amazon, by heauens an Amazon, a Penthiſeleia.
I, I by'r Lady? are you aviſ'd of that?
Pray you forſooth, good-hony-ſweete-plumpudding father, vvee'l haue but one ſpirt I'faith lavv; Sellengers round in ſippits, or put on thy ſmocke on munday.
But what flap-mouth'd fellow's that behind the tree there?
Now comes my Cue.
Who he? another gates fellow then you take him for, goe to, goe to, it is my man I tell you.
But can bee daunce?
Oh in print, he trips it like a fayry.
Hy, hy, how now? what? tricks? how now?
How now young man? what ſo modeſt? come on, take mee by th' hand.
Take mee Ieoffry. I'le daunce with our Ieoffry, or elſe I won't dance at all, no I won't, law you now.
I can't dance.
Hee's a lying knaue, I ſaw him my ſelfe; to him, to to him, frolick it nimbly whilſt I come back; becauſe 'tis his firſt day he ſhall haue leaue, my daughter too, for halfe an houre, no more. Go to, go to.
But ſtrike it out, we burne day-light.
Ah the Lord! but where's our Ieoffrey?
Cuds me! I doubt the great clowne's run away.
Whoo! hee's got up into the tree there.
Where? where? oh cuds wowkers & ſwowkers, I haue him by the leg: Robin, helpe here Robin.
What a murren ayles you? can't you let one alone?
Come, come, you muſt needs daunce, we want one.
Can't daunce.
Can't you daunce, my little ſhamefac'd one?
Can you kiſſe a pretty wench in a corner?
Let one alone, I can't I tell you, I won't daunce.
I but you ſhall ſirrah, in ſpite of your teeth.
Piſh, 'won't daunce.
Come Merda, you muſt entreat him, hee'l daunce with you I know.
Prithee now Ieoffrey doe, prithee now good Ieoffrey doe, wu'd I might ne're ſtir law, if I don't make you a biſning poſſet, with a great lumpe of hony in't, when my father and mother bee gone to bed, if you will.
Piſh I can't daunce.
Come let the great foole alone, wee'l dance our ſelues.
Prithee now Ieoffrey.
What ſhall I ſay? you'l laugh at one.
Wu'd I was whipt if I doe.
Beſworne I won't.
Nor I on my mayden-head.
Come on then, ſince there is no remedy.
Hi, now every one kiſſe his marrow.
I ne're was miſerable 'till now
Ieoffrey, Ieoffrey.
Why don't you kiſſe your marrow?
I won't, I can't kiſſe.
No can't? wee'l trie that: Robin, hold his tother arme faſt: ſo, ſo, now Merda, now, well ſayd, againe, againe; why ſo then.
They liue in Paradiſe that thraſh.
Tihy.
Tihy, Robin, come hither.
Thoſe happy Paracelſians are in heauen,
That trade by night i'th mineralls of the citie.
What doe you meane to fight Merda?
Ay-me—I forgot the rod.
Fie, why doe you bluſh ſo Merda?
I don't bluſh, you are a lyer.
Fie upon you Merda, a great mayden, and bluſh.
Aw, but you lye though, I did not bluſh, I won't daunce no more with you.
O by any meanes doe not forſake us yet, one daunce more; who was it that ſaid ſhee bluſh'd? ſhee did not bluſh, I know ſhe ſcornes to bluſh; come take your Ieoffrey by the hand againe.
I'm weary, I can't daunce no more.
Weary? faith I'de ſquiffe it; weary? about with it I ſay.
O lazy varlets! is this a time to daunce? you idle perſons; What will you leaue I ſay? looke heere I pray; doe's this ſame ſpectacle agree with turning on the toe, or capring? go to, go to, fie, fie, ah my ſweet lambes, I dare bee ſworne for you, yee thinke no body hurt at this inſtant. Come hither you my nimble skipper, upſolue me this queſtion, what's your 'pinion muſt be done with theſe?
Piſh lets away, ſtrike vp, Stipes adiew.
Farewell Merda.
And you my ninny peaſe-ſtraw-wiſpe that cannot kiſſe.
Stipes farewell, hey.
Stipes farewell? but Stipes cannot farewel, if his affaires goe thus quite arſy varſy; you whorſon crab-fac'd lyzard, you left-leg'd rogue, what is there nothing elſe belongs unto this geare, thinke you, but onely to ſtare on them with your two ſawcers of muſtard? s'duds, either take them up quickly, and to worke about them, or Ile —
This is the ſecond time; this once I'le ſuffer:
But by yon pallace of the Gods I ſweare,
Let him but once more touch me with the top
Of his leaſt finger, and I'le ramme his truncke
Into the center: I haue ſaid it.
Are you muttering? you'l in with them, and diſpatch them; goe you home too, my daughter Merda.
Vm, vm, vm, you might haue let one daunce a little longer, ſo you might, ſo you might; I am not yet hote in my geares.
Are you mumbling too? what my whole family turn'd rebels? s'duds—I promiſe you, I promiſe you, 'tis not my beſt courſe I ſee to beat my man thus often; a ſurly knaue by'r Lady, a ſurly knaue, a ſtrong knaue too, I doe not like his lookes, he has a vineger countenance: but peace and catch a mouſe, cry I.
But ſee, I will enquire; honeſt man, a word.
Honeſt man in your face, whoſoe're owes you; 'sduds, haue I nothing to doe, but to prittle, prattle, with euery one I meet, thinke you?
What an unheard of rudeneſſe haue we here?
Are theſe the manners of the countrey? well.
This is the place, as I am told, wherein
That Lucius liues, who not long ſince prevayl'd
With his faire flattering ſpeeches, for to haue
My ſonne Endymion to be his Page.
But oh yee awfull powers!
I had no father in mee ſhould I ſuffer
Mine onely ſonne to lead a ſervile life
With one that is mine enemy, nay more,
The ruine and ſubverſion of my family.
O daughter Iſabella!
Whilſt thy falſe Lover melts within the armes
Of his new purchac'd Miſtris, thou (poore girle)
Embraceſt ſcorne and povertie, or elſe
(Which I doe rather wiſh were true) cold death.
But I doe heare,
Since my arrivall, of ſome Country people,
That they haue ſeene, ſome fortnight ſince or more,
A pretty boy, lingring about this village
Much about her ſtature, and complexion,
Which did enquire for a Gentleman
That was without a Page; this may be ſhee,
Who for the loue of Lucius, has put on
Some ſtrange diſguiſe. Whom cannot loue transforme?
Ha, ha, he.
Whilſt the poore flye does ſport her ſelfe too long
About the amorous flame, ſhe burnes her wings.
Her counterfeiting of a Loue, is now
Turn'd into earneſt. Endymion's now the man
She ſweares ſhe loues; as for the other two
She has forgot their very names already.
Does not this woman name my ſonne?
Let me ſee, is not this Endymion? it is hee,
And with him a fayre gentlewoman. Ha?
But tell me deareſt, did thy Maſter Lucius.
Once loue thy ſiſter Iſabella ſo,
Whom now he has forſaken?
Yes.
Behold
That treachery repayd him.
See, they kiſſe.
But what old Gentleman is this?
I'le ſhew my ſelfe.
All health to this faire loving couple.
O,—
Why do'ſt thou flie me?
'Tis my father,— father
God ſaue you.
Deareſt ſonne, my beſt of bleſſings.
How haue you done ſir, ſince I ſaw you laſt?
As well as one can doe that has departed
With's onely daughter.
Why, is my ſiſter dead?
I know not that. But I am ſure her credit,
The candor of her name is periſhed.
Good ſir, as how? Inſtruct me.
Ah Endymion,
Since that moſt treacherous Lucius left the Citie
I haue not ſeene her, onely I heare of her,
But little to my comfort.—But no more,
I haue forgot her, and her folly both.
Prepare thy ſelfe (my ſonne) immediatly,
To leaue this place and ſervice; for thy fortunes
(How e're they were before, ſlender and poore)
Muſt not now ſee thee hold a trencher for
A better man then Lucius. Thy old vncle
As he liv'd well, in a ſeaſonable age
Is gone into the graue, and by his will
Hath given to thee eight thouſand pound, and three
Vnto thy ſiſter, (though unworthy) what
Elſe he was worth in lands and goods, is mine.
Pandora, kiſse mee girle, kiſse mee I ſay,
I haue deſerued it, 'twas my invention,
My plot this (girle) th'art happy wench, th'art happy.
Is this your father ſweet?
It is faire Miſtris.
Sir, I congratulate our fortunes with you;
But if you doe deſire to haue my joyes
Full and o'reflow their banks, grant me your leaue
To marry this faire Gentlewoman.
Alas,
This is not in my power Endymion:
But if thou canſt procure her friends conſent—
Sir feare not that, I will entreat my father.
As for a portion, 'tis not thought upon
My ſon, if you be pleas'd.
Sir, I am pleas'd,
Shee is to me moſt deare.
Placenta, runne,
See if my father be within,—I know
(Moſt worthy ſir) that I ſhall win him to it.
But canſt thou tell no newes of Iſabella,
Sweet ſon?
No, none at all ſir.
Ah poore heart!
But 'tis no matter, I'le forget her quite.
Where is thy Mr Lucius?
I know not.
Your father's walk'd abroad with Mis. Vrſely
Your ſiſter, but whither, there's none can tell me.
As yet the plot concerning Conſtantina
Is not deſcri'd.
Moſt reverend ſir, wilt pleaſe you
To walke into the paſtures, peradventure
There we ſhall meet my father.
But I had rather
That I could compaſſe that ſame villaine Lucius,
That he might heare what he deſerues.
Villaine.
I am undone.
Ah me! Neander with his naked ſword!
Ple runne in heere.
Ah!
Let's away good father,
O that thou hadſt
As many liues as haires, that I might be
An age in killing thee, that I might ſcore up
Each paſſing minute with a life: — But ſpeake,
How durſt thou thus abuſe me?
I did not know
Shee was a woman.
No, didſt thou not know it?
But thou ſhalt know thy ſelfe to be a man,
One that can dye.
—O—O—
How poore is this reuenge? haſt thou any children,
Or kinsfolkes (ſpeak) that I may kill them too?
Ha? wilt thou not anſwer? how durſt thou offer this?
Becauſe I loued your friend Lucius
Better then you.
Better then I? that word
Does merit death though thou hadſt beene preſeru'd
White from thy cradle to this houre.—
Doeſt thou loue Lucius? ha?
Yes.
Liue; no, no thou muſt not;
Thou might'ſt haue kil'd my father, broke the vrne
Wherein my mothers aſhes ſleepe, farre cheaper.
But for his ſake, thus much I'le grant thee, chuſe
The manner of thy death—ſhall I take off thy head?
Or hadſt thou rather dye vpon the poynt?
Thinke quickly, nay be inſtant.
Worthy Sir:
Let mee entreate ſome little ſpace to pauſe
I haue not yet determin'd.
Well thou haſt it. But ſee that it bee ſpeedy.
Moſt perfidious. Contemner of all goodneſſe.—
Excellent.
Nay forward, on, wee know you haue a tongue.
Ha? is this Lucius?
Where is my Iſabella,
Whom thou haſt loaden with diſgrace? reſtore mee
Her honour (villaine) her good name.
I muſt
Deferre my iuſt reuenge I ſee a little.
He muſt not know that I am angry, not
How I am gulld.
Thou baſe unworthy man.
Would you could raiſe your voyce a little ſir,
You are not heard.
Thou ſtaine of all mankind.
Thou oweſt thy life unto my Lucius.
I am not now at leaſure for to kill thee.
Nor I for to be kild for a trick I know.
Are you drawne drie ſo quickly, Mr Lickthumbe?
Haue you no more good names in pickle for me?
Nay come ifaith, let's haue an other bout.
But is he gone? he muſt not ſo eſcape me.
Where is my daughter? where is my daughter, raſcall?
Ah Iſabella.
So: but Sir reſolue mee,
Haue yee no Empericks? no Phyſitians
I'th Citty, that you thus doe ſend your mad men
Into the country to be cur'd? but Sir
I'le leaue you.
But I will not ſo leaue you.
You will not?
No, I'le be a torment to thee.
You will? but yet take heed that your ill language
Procures not me to turne Phyſician.
This ſword of mine opens a veine but harſhly,
Doe you heare.
Haue you a deſire to ſee
The glorious heavens Epitome?
Or an abſtract of the Spring?
Adonis garden? or a thing
Fuller of wonder, Natures ſhop diſplay'd,
Hung with the choyceſt pieces ſhe has made?
Here behold it open layd.
Or elſe would you bleſſe your eyes
With a type of paradiſe?
Or behold how Poets faine
Ioue to ſit amidst his traine?
Or ſee (what made Acteon rue)
Diana 'mongst her Virgin crue?
Lift up your eyes and view.
Why ſo then, now we are all alone. We? you great neare,
What haue you pig's in your belly? by'r Lady, If I wiſt
I had, I would not vnkennell this ſecret yet, well if there
Were hog's in my belly too, I ſee that it will out;
This mouth of mine was not cut out for ſecret's—
O wicked ſeruant! lewd daughter!
O Merda, Merda, thou haſt loſt thy ſelfe
For euer, thou haſt defiled my houſe, my good name, my family. As I even now came from my ſheepe, I found my daughter, at her nooning forſooth, faſt a ſlepe vpon her bed, and there was ſhee (as ſhee vſes often) campring to her ſelfe alone in her ſleepe, 'ſcourſing to her ſelfe, but what was her 'ſcourſe thinke you? Not about her huſwifery; not how many hens were with egge, but fie vpon you Ieoffry are you not aſhamed? O! Ah! fie vpon you Ieoffry are you not aſhamed to touch one by the skinne? Ile tell my father (nere moue) if you will not bee quiet. I, I by'r Lady, worſe then this, worſe ſtuffe then this, what ſhall I ſay? without all doubt this left legd-raſcall has dub'd mee Gran-father without Matrimony. But peace and catch a mouſe cry I, ſome wiſer then ſome, old birds will not be catch'd wih ſhaffe. I haue a trick in ſtore if it will take, to be reueng'd ſufficiently—no more. Ieoffry, Why Ieoffry.
What gaping knaue is that?
How now Ieoffry? know you not mee Ieoffry? know you not mee? But let that paſſe though—I'le bee with you anon i'faith for all this geere. Come hither Left-legs, come hither. Peace and catch a mouſe cry I. Did you euer when you were at your old Maſters, learne to ſet a trap, Ieoffry?
Yes a mouſe trap.
O ſirrah, ſirrah; but wee muſt haue to doe with other gates kind of cattell, I meane a fox trap Left-legs, come hither, come hither, looke you here, and learne, for this ſame night muſt I ſend you into the Paſtures to inuite my fine Reynold to morrow to breake-faſt, goe too, goe too, hee is ſomething too familiar with my Lambs, marke you that left-legs? A little nigher I pray you. Helpe me to twiſt this Corde — Well ſaid, be a faithful ſeruant Ieoffry. You know I haue a daughter Ieofry. Peace and catch a Mouſe Ieoffry. You great dunder noſe — Souds— You'e lay both hands to work—A bots on you; you hang on my back to ſee you. Your tother hand in, and draw behind thus, thus looke you here. Ha, ha, he, foh. How ranke he ſmells? but 'tis no matter, I begin to grow old, and 'tis good (they ſay) Againſt the Palſey. Ha, ha, he, he, ho. You villaine, Hee loues Mutton well, that dips his bread in'th wooll. No leſſe then your Maſters daughter Left-legs? Come on in troth, vpſolue me this queſtion is ſhe not tender? is ſhe not delicate? a pretty morſell? does ſhee not relliſh well? a pretty morſell? but I'le teach you ſirrah to play the Maſon, and lay your chips o'th rock where you're deſired Left-legs, where you're deſired. But I am ſomething feeble through my age, And cannot longer hold out 'ſcourſe with you, Without my ſtaff, without my ſupporter, ſir, I pray you doe not ſtirre till my returne, But let me finde yeu here, I haue ſome buſineſſe, Goe to, goe to, I haue ſome buſineſſe with you.
Nay 'tis no matter I deſerue it all,
Troth I doe hope that he will baſt me ſoundly.
Beſhrow his fingers if he does not, ſoundly.
I muſt be in my tricks, forſooth, my tricks:
Haue my devices, and my turnes, my changes.
But torment of all torments! here comes Loueall.
Why this is worſe then fiue and twenty beatings;
O that ſome greedy vndertaker of liues
Would giue me but a double Stiuer now
For mine, that I might cozen him. As ſure
As Death, or Iuſtice Hookes deuouring pawes,
I ſhall be ieer'd to death, immediatly.
It is a ſtrange darke melancholly this
That thus torments my Siſter, I haue beene
An houre with her, and in all that time
Cannot perſwade her troubled ſoule to forme
The leaſt ayre ſhee breathes, into articulate language.
But ſtay what haue wee here?
Now it begin's.
A man tyed to a tree?
I would your tongue
Was tyed as faſt; then there was hope I might
Eſcape with life.
What are you fellow, ſpeake?
You may goe looke, goe meddle with your owne.
So angry 'pray thee? how came thy hands in morgage?
Shall I redeeme them?
Redeeme your owne land's I pray you,
Let me alone or elſe I'le ſpurne yo u— yet
Hee knowes mee not.
Sure I haue ſeene that face.
O, O, O —
Is 't hee or not, ha? Anteros.
No more.
Death not a word.
But heauen and earth man! how
Comes this to paſſe? What has begot this change?
Wilt thou vnty me? I will tell thee all.
But pray thee Anteros.—
But pray thee Iack
Thou wilt vndoe me quite by thy delayes,
Wilt thou vndoe me?
'Tis not a friendly part.
Pox o' that ieaſt, as common as a woman,
Or her Synonomy; wilt thou vnty mee?
'Tis done.
Thou art my Patron Loueall, So.
But ſtay a while, I muſt deſire your ayde
A little further.
What has hee now in hand?
Can you become a peaceable man?
How now?
A Snake, a Snake; hee's young againe, ha, ha, he.
What? Pinkes and Roſes too? Why ſo, hee pluckes
Iune out of 's pocket.
Can you be quiet yet?
And Garters too?
That ſlipper▪ tongue of yours
I doubt will ſpoyle all.
What? and a band? ſo, ſo;
The vayle of Tempe's not ſo freſh, the picture,
The very picture of the Spring, when th' earth
Layes by her freeze-coate, and turnes Forreſter.
Thus far it proſpers, once more your help ſweet Iack,
Nay come, and take me that ſame rope againe,
And binde me as I was before, directly
In the ſame garbe you found me — Doe not ſtand
Gazing, but do 't.
Thou art not mad I hope?
If I be mad, I will not trouble you
For counſaile, nor for Phyſick; nay wilt thou come?
But hold a little, I muſt firſt borrow of you
Your Hat, and Sword.
Which way this plot will looke
I know not— there— come let me ſee your hand's
Since you wil needs.
Why now thou'rt right, thou'rt right,
What will you haue me doe beſides? come on,
Your legges too if you will.
No more, St. harke.
The Sheepheards doore. Trouble vs not good Loueall.
Onely ſtand cloſe and heare.
What ſhould this meane?
Fie Ieoffry, are yeu not aſham'd, to touch one by the skinne? My daughter denies all this moſt ſtifly but I will Ferret-claw my Lobcock i'faith. So, now I am arm'd. Goe to, goe to, come you knaue, where are you?
Ha, ha, he.
Ha? ha? ha? How now by'r Lady? How now? I, I by'r Lady? what's this? What's this? gaudy? gaudy? Fine cloathes? fine cloathes? Ha? has no body ſtole my eyes? let me be ſure of that in the firſt place. Am I Stipes or not? ha? ha? ha? Is this our Ieoffry or not?
Stipes, Stipes I ſay.
This is another voyce an other face
Without all queſtion this is Fayrie Ground;
My man is chang'd.
ha, ha, he.
St. Stip. hi, hi, hi. A ſweard too? a ſweard too? a whiniard too?
Stipes.
Well I will venture to ſpeake what ere come on 't, but ſtay, I'le firſt ſay o're the charme my Mother learnt me.
Beeſt thou deuill gentle, or beeſt thou deuill curſt,
In the name of Saint Swithin doe thy worſt.
There's ſauce for your Ecles what e're you are. Now ſee if I cannot ſhape you an anſwere.
Come nearer to mee.
Are you auis'd of that? older and wiſer, Soft fire makes ſweet Mault, No haſt to hang true men; come nearer quoth you? I am neare enough already for the good you'le doe me I doubt, Come nearer ſay you? No good M. Deuill I am very wel I thank you, goe to, come nearer when you haue a Sweard, a Twybill?
My hands are bound man.
What wil becom of this?
St'. Stip. If your feet were bound too, I'le not truſt you As long as you haue a Sweard by your ſide, a Whiniard.
Do but heare me. Had not you a man to day call'd Ieoffry?
Yes marry had I; what ſay you to that now? Nay I'le keepe my ſelfe out of your clouches I warrant you.
But what's become of that ſame Ieoffry?
Become? become? 'ſpoſe I ſpurd you an anſwere, and ſaid I know not, what can you make of that now? make mee a horſenaile of that.
Doe you deſire to know?
Yes marry doe I. Crack mee that nut now if you be a Gentleman Deuill.—
I am that Ieoffry, but no ſeruant now
Of your's, but mine owne man: and am become
Since your departure, noble, rich, valiant,
Am form'd a new out of the Mint, —behold me.
And this great miracle Obron the Fayry King
Has wrought vpon me.
Oberum? Oberum? you tell me ſtrange things.
But ſhal I tel thee ſtranger things thē theſe?
'Spoſe you did.
And ſuch as ſhall be for thy benefit?—
Would you would elſe. Nay ſtare on with your gogles till Barly comes to ſix pence a buſhell. You know your wages, ſome wiſer then ſome, cry I: I'le keepe farre enough off you: I'le tell you but ſo. Goe to, goe to, I am a crafty colt.
You know I vvas your ſeruant to day.
Well put the caſe.
Poore, ill apparelled.
Put the caſe the ſecond time.
But now you ſee how ſtrangely altered.
Well put the caſe againe.
VVhat vvill you ſay now to the man that ſhall
Pet you into the ſame condition?
Recouer you from rag's and Ruſſet, and
Dye you in ſcarlet: lick that rude lump your body
Into the ſhape, and garbe o'th court? or (once)
Make you a gentleman as I am now?
Would you not thanke him Stipes? ha? would you not thanke him?
Thanke him Mr. Ieoffry? I, with all my heart.
Set him at liberty then that will performe it. Quickly vnlooſe me?
I, I by'r Lady? will you ſo Mr. Ieoffry? will you ſo? goe to, goe to, a gentleman? ſayd you mee ſo? I con you thanke Mr. Ieoffry.
So, now will I vnfold the myſterie.
But firſt you here ſhall promiſe mee that you
Will take noe prentiſes to learne your trade,
When I haue taught you the art; you will impoueriſh
The herald's office, and foreſtall his market.
No truely Mr. Ieoffry.
I am ſatisfied;
Seeſt thou that tree? 'twas made for thy aduancement.
Giue mee thy hands that I may tye them quickly.
Are you avis'd o' that?
What doe you meane?
You'le bee preuented by another—death!
Yonder comes one will be before you—quickly
There's ſuch a vertue (man) in this ſame tree,
That who-ſoere is bound vnto it, ſhall
Bee turn'd immediately to a gentleman.
Nay come.
but is this true?
beleeue your eyes.
Heart of my father, man! youle bee preuented.
A gentleman? ſayd you me ſo? goe to, goe to, Good Maſter Ieoffry quickly—ſo but ſtay. When I'me a gentleman may I not vſe, my old trade of ſheepherd ſtill? I would not leaue it.
O, and incloſe; 'tis all in faſhion.
I, I, by'r Lady? thats well, but ſtay againe.
Nay you are like to ſtay now, I haue you faſt enough
'Sduds, if thou be'ſt a good coniurer make me a knight to. I haue a peſtilent itch after a knighthood.
You muſt take gentleman firſt 'ith way.
Let mee skip gentleman good Mr. Ieoffry, 'duds
I know knights in this countrey that neuer were
Gentlemen—but vpſolue me this queſtion? can you make
My daughter Merda a gentleman too?
A gentlewoman
Stipes I can.
I, I, ſo I meant it— Merda, Merda,
A bots on you, Merda, are you dreaming againe?
O for ſome nimble pated fellow now
To make an Ob'ron of.
Ile furniſh thee.
There is a notable witty bedlam begging
At our back gate iuſt now. I'le fetch him to thee.
If thou do'ſt loue mee, doe.—
Why Merda, you'l come when your nowne father cals?
What doe you ſay Father forſooth?
That 's a good girle. Nay ſhee 's towardly enough, ſhee' quickly learne. Why doe you ſtare ſo on Mr. Ieoffry?
What man is this Father?
Come you'r a foole, let that man alone. Wee ſhall bee gentlefolkes ourſelues my chucken, giue him your hands to ty I ſay, be obedient.
Thou preſently ſhalt ſee thine owne ſweet father,
As fine as hee, and thou my litle Sweet-lipp's
Shalt be a gentlewoman too, goe to, good Ieoffry tye her hands.
How Ieoffry?
Good Mr. Ieoffry.
That's another thing.
Father forſooth ſhall I haue as fine cloth's on as Miſtris Vſly forſooth?
O! ſhe's halfe turn'd already: forſooth and a curtſey at euery word; Mrs. Vrſely? thou ſhalt put Mrs. Ʋrſly into a pint pot.
O the Lord! pray you forſooth Sir who ſoe're you are doe mee quickly forſooth.
But here 's not rope enough.
Take off your garter quickly you Maukin you.
Here forſooth. And father, muſt I take place of my mother when I'm a Gentlewoman?
Good.
Marry ſhalt thou goldy locks, and be a Lady, and contemne her.
Call her the good old country woman too.
Stipes, but one word more and then I'le leaue you
Vnto your new creation—haue you nothing
Within your houſe to couer you? the crowes
Perhaps may bee too impudent and ſaucy
With you, and now you can not helpe your ſelfe you know.
I, I by'r Lady? 'twas well thought vpon,
Good Mr. Ieoffry ſtep into my houſe,
You there ſhall finde my cloake, vſe that.
'Tis of a ſwooping cut, but new be ſure
You doe not ſpeake a word what noiſe ſo ere
You chance to heare, perhaps the fairy King
Will take ſome pawſe, ſtudy a while, conſult
With his Queene Mab about you how to poliſh
And frame you of a purer ſhape then ordinary.
Doe you marke that? St, not a word good Stipes.
Ah ſweet Mr. Ieoffry.
Peace and catch a mouſe cry I.
Come on braue Tom, come on braue Tom, Remember your inſtructions Tom.
Let braue Tom alone. Let braue Tome alone.
A moſt authentick rogue, how he does ſtretch it? paratragoediate?
Newly from a poach'd Trade, and
A broyl a Viper, King of Fayry land
I Ob'ron doe ariſe, to ſee
What mortall Fortune here hath tyed vnto my ſacred Tree.
O Mr. Ieoffry, is that Ob'rum? Pray you let me ſee him. Is this Obrum? 'sduds, hee is but poorely parrelled himſelfe me thinkes.
St. Stip. Peace and catch a mouſe cry I, but once more good Mr. Ieoffry. Let me haue but one ſight more of him. Mr. Ieoffry does hee vſe to giue away his cloathes when hee makes gentlefolkes? 'sduds I doubt he has none left for me.
What doe you meane?
Peace and catch a mouſe cry I.
Good father let mee ſee Obrum too ah, hee has a horne like a Tom of Bedlam.
Peace, I wu'd not for the beſt cow in my yard that he ſhould heare thee.
Beeſt thou ruder then was e're
The halfe excrement of a Beare,
Or rougher then the Northerne winde
Cam'ſt thou of a Satyres kind.
Be whatſoeuer thou can'ſt be
So thou ſhalt remaine for mee.
Did you heare that Stipes?
I, good Maſter Ieoffry, ſtand farther you great baggage and make roome for your rathers' proaching greatneſſe.
But ſee my father,
'Pray thee conuey away the Bedlam any whether, carry him into your houſe againe and ſhoote him out at the back dore.
Anteros, I'le leaue you to your buſines. I'le in and fetch an other hat. Come brae Tom. 'Bed, Let braue Tom alone.
The Iuſtice too, 'tis ſo. Now am I hunted for about a wedding.
Terpander, you haue heard how much this match
May both concerne you and your Sonne, your fortunes:
The greater part of your inheritance
You know is mortgag'd to mee, nay
If I would vſe that rigour of the law
'Tis forfeited and paſt recouery;
Thinke therefore quickly, if you would be free
From all thoſe cares and troubles which afflict
Such as do liue in debt, compell your Son
To marry this my daughter.
I am a witch,
A witch, a witch a rancke, ſtarke ſtinking witch.
It is an ample dowrie I confeſſe,
And litle 'tis agreeing to my nature
To buy a husband at ſo deare a rate,
But I haue ſomething that ſounds father in mee;
And muſt not looſe a daughter, if there bee
A remedy in nature. True it is,
That (by what angry Deity I know not)
Shee has ſo fixt her loue vpon your Son,
That I doe thinke naught but a quick fruition
Can reſcue her from a death.
Good Iuſtice Hooke,
I doe confeſſe your offer's fayre, and would
Accept it willingly, but that—
But what?
I feare my Son will not agree vnto 't.
Sir had you ta'ne an oath vpon the ſame
I would haue borne your ſin, had you beene periur'd.
You know he hates all women.
very good.
Is he not your's, and vnder your command?
Wee fathers make our children refractory,
By being too indulgent over them;
Beſides, I am perſwaded that his vertues
Will not permit him for to contradict
Th' authority of a father.
O ye Gods!
Can ye permit this Villaine to profane
The ſacred name of Vertue thus, who himſelfe
Is nothing elſs but a meere heape of vices?
I ever yet found him obedient,
Nor doe I doubt to win him now: how ever,
I am reſolv'd if he in this ſhall croſſe me,
I'le diſinherit him immediatly.
I? is it come to that already? well
Prepare thy ſelfe now Anteros for th' encounter.
But ſee your ſonne. Tis your beſt courſe at firſt
T' accoſt him gently.
How now my ſon? how fare you?
I am not well ſir.
How not well? your colour
Does not proclaime you very ſicke, but ſay.
Ther's ſomething in my eyes that troubles me.
What's that?
A mote, a woman.
After the old faſhiō ſtill?
Come on my ſon, I haue bin ſeeking of you,
And peradventure you may gueſſe the cauſe.
I would I could not.
Hold up your head my daughter
And ſummon your beſt lookes into your face.
As I did walke even now into my paſture,
I did begin to thinke.
That I was old,
That muſt be next.
That now I'me ſtrucke in yeares.
Good, ſtrucke in yeares;
And could he not as frugally have diſpatcht it
In that one word of old?
And —
That it will be a comfortable ſight
To ſee you marryed before I dye.
That it will be a comfortable ſight
To ſee you marryed before my death.
I told you ſo, it is the common roade
Which they all uſe when they would pin a wife
Vpon the ſon. I wonder all this while
The ſtaffe of's age, propp of his family
Did not come in.
Whileſt I was thinking thus,
Old juſtice Hooke, a Gentleman of rancke,
And of a family not to be deſpiſ'd,
Came to me with his daughter, and deſir'd
Our friendſhip and affinitie; and to be briefe,
We haue concluded 'twixt yee two a marriage,
Which muſt be preſent; as for the portion,
H'as promis'd in the wedding fire to ſacrifice
The Bonds wherein our Lands ſtand forfeited.
A thing beyond my hopes, or your deſerts.
A pox upon that thumbe under the girdle,
There 's miſchiefe ever toward's: I never knew
One of that garbe that prov'd an honeſt man.
'Tis the graue cheating poſture of the citie.
What's that you mutter to your ſelfe? come ſpeake.
I am contented ſir.
Well ſaid my ſon.
But upon this condition, that it ſhall
Be lawfull too for me to ſacrifice
Vnto the aforeſaid fire a certaine trifle
Of mine.
Whats that?
My wife, & your faire daughter.
Out on you traytor.
Sir, by yea and nay
It cannot be afforded cheaper.
Wretch
And profane perſon.
Sai'ſt thou ſo thou villaine?
Haſt thou no more regard into thy father,
Nor to his ſhipwrackt fortun, that thou thus▪
Doeſt ſtudie his undoing plot his ?
But father, if I marry her to day,
When muſt the wooing be? to morrow ſir?
Thou ſhalt not need to wooe her Anteros,
Shee is thine owne already.
Is ſhee ſo?
Would you was hang'd ſir for the nowes.
Piſh, dome,
I will not ſpend an article of ayre
Vpon him more — good Mr Hooke lets goe,
The following houre ſhall ſee him no ſon of mine.
O, mildly ſir.
It is determined
By all the ſtarres, they haue conſulted, plotted
To make me miſerable.
Come Terpander,
You are too harſh with him, I know your ſonne
Does more eſteeme of Vertue and Religion —
Good Maſter Sucriledge, a word in private:
(A little farther, yet a little farther)
How came you by that ſtrange exotick word
You us'd but now? had you'r on intereſt?
Or was it lent you gra of a friend?
What word good Anteros?
Religion,
For I am ſure yet thou never hadſt,
Nor ever wilt haue any of thine owne.
O profane perſon!
This once I ſpeake it.
Wilt haue his daughter?
What ſhall I anſwer him?
I ſhall be diſ-inherited that's certaine.
He melts, Mr Hooke, hee melts, I feele him comming.
Hee is our owne.
But why ſo ſuddenly?
Good ſir, at leaſt giue me ſome time to think.
Never hope it.
But why ſir to day?
Becauſe it pleaſeth him it moſt concernes.
Doe but deferr it till to morrow ſir,
(Could I obtaine but this requeſt, I was happy,
I'de keepe to morrow in another world)
Vntill to morrow? not for an houre: I know
Your diſpoſition ſonne too well for that.
I haue you now, but where you'l be next day,
Hee 's wiſer then your father that does know.
But father, I beſeech you heare.
But ſon
I will not heare, I tell you. Maſter Hooke,
You here doe giue your daughter?
Willingly.
Anteros, receiue thy loving wife.
How now?
You will not urge me?—goe too, doe not doe it.
O that mine armes are now at libertie!
O Stipes, happieſt man aliue, thou haſt
No hands to make a contract, —is there never
A Mouſe-hole hereabouts to creepe into?
But ſtay a while, my paper portion.
The writings.
Take them.
You'r an honeſt man.
Tis right.
Now take your wife.
I wiſh you a Barber ſir.
Is that faire Edifice yours?
It is my ſonne.
Gooder and gooder ſtill; my ſon? then take
My counſell ſir, go to your houſe and purge,
You will be mad elſe preſently; prevent
The current of the humour, for I ſee
(With that poore little reading which I haue
I'th volume of man) by your diſtempered looks,
That ſome ſtrange deepe, and conquering Melancholy
E're long will ſeize you: why doe you follow me
Thus with your braided ware? nay never frowne,
Good Mr Iuſtice, let's haue no Warrants made,
Nor Mittimuſſes with your diſtorted lookes;
Wee haue a forehead too, and can looke grim,
And make as ugly and prodigious faces,
As the moſt ignorant Iustice of you all.
But ſhall I tell you (ſweet Mr Velvet-hoſe)
What I will doe, becauſe you were ſo kind,
For to deliuer in the Bonds for nothing?
Nay ſir, I muſt tranſplant theſe thumbes, before
I can reſolue you: ſo.—Thou 'rt a damn'd raſcall,
And I will cut that throat of thine (doe you marke?)
And when I'ue done, will fillip that morſell, woman,
On an embaſſage to my Hawkes, no more;
By heauens I'le do 't.
Oh Traytor, Miſcreant,
Daughter take heed; Terpander, O Terpander,
He threatens me to cut my throat.
How's that?
Sir, you muſt pardon him, the man is mad.
He ſweares he will make hawkesmeat of my daughter.
On my virginitie ſir, he does me wrong;
I did not charge a ſyllable upon him,
But fell as coolely from me as a dew.
Vpon a drooping field; each word I vented
VVas ſteep'd in an hony-combe. I did but bid him
In a plaine, civill dialect to provide
An other husband for his daughter: for
I doubted that I ſhould not be at leaſure
This brace or two of yeeres to marry her.
And I may tell you ſir, indeed I cannot.
O, O, am undone, cheated and gull'd, undone,
Villaine I'le bind thee to thy good behaviour.
I would you could ſir, I would thank you for't:
But fie M. Hooke, a head of that ſilver dye,
A beard of ſuch an honourable length,
For to bee gull'd? and ſo egregiouſly?
By a young man with ne're a haire o'ns face?
Come ſonne, I doe not like theſe courſes, nor
Doe they become a Gentleman, I'le not haue
That contumely dwell on our family,
That we ſhould uſe ſuch indirect proceedings
For to reedifie our tottering fortunes.
By all the Magicke in the name of Father
I doe conjure thee; by this aged head,
And theſe gray hayres, by thy dead Mothers Vrne,
By all her cares and feares, by what is deareſt
Vnto thy ſoule, I charge thee, take his daughter.
Without all queſtion I am the firſt, the firſt
That ever pietie has made miſerable.
Well Maſter Hooke, you ſee what may be done,
VVhat angry ſpirits a man may lay, while he
Does ſtand ſecure within the circle of father.
Your daughter I will haue; onely know this,
There is another thing which belongs to her,
Which I muſt haue too, that's the Parſonage;
'Twas ever yet allotted for her portion,
And I expect my right.
How? woe is me,
I am undone.
Before I ſtretch forth a paw
Towards her, i'le haue it.
Father, good father let him,
He will go back from's word els.
Well, he ſhall haue it.
Hold: by the vertue of this writing, it
Is lawfull for you (after old Liuelyes death)
For to preſent the firſt Fy, fy, fy, fy.
I had this drawne (alas) for another end.
My law does tell mee it will doe. Come on,
Since there's no remedy, let's even to't.
Yes hangman, I forgiue thee heartily,
'Tis but thy office.
Come Terpander, we
VVill keepe the wedding, at my houſe, but heare you?
The coſt and charges ſhall be yours.
Agreed,
Moſt willingly. Follow me ſonne and daughter.
Come husband Anteros, will you play at chackstones
VVith me?
Follow, follow, follow, follow,
I will bee there immediatly: nay goe.
So, I haue made a fine dayes worke of this:—
Well, there's no remedy, it muſt be ſo.
But I muſt take my leaue in forme: Farewell
Yee chimney gods, protectours of our family;
Stipes.
A bott's vpon you, that ſame tongue
Of yours muſt needs be wagging.
Indeed Father
I did not ſpeake a word, no that I did not.
Wee muſt begin againe now for your tatling,
Did not the Gentleman command vs ſilence?
Stipes adiew, I am exceeding ſorry
I cannot ſtay to ſee you a Gentleman.
Spruce M. Noddle, euen adiew to you.
Good M. Mungrell, kinde Sir Hammerſhin.
Sweet M. William, I am Melancholly
To part with you as I am a liuing ſaule.
Why whether in ſuch haſt?
To baniſhment.
My name is written in the oyſter ſhell;
I am too happy in a wife Iack Loueall,
My fellow Cittizens doe enuie me.
Farewell.
In troth I thanke you hartily,
I hope you'l firſt deliuer back againe
My Sword and Hatt.
By my beſt wiſhes Iack
I thought not of them; 'pray thee take them to thee.
I will take thee my little Cupid-whipper.
You muſt not goe.
Let me alone good Loueall,
Doeſt thou not heare how with an euen gale
That Southweſt winde murmers amongſt the trees?
Within theſe foure and twenty houres I may
Touch on the Belgick ſhore.
The Belgick ſhore?
What wilt thou doe there man?
I'le traile a pike,
Turne Lanceprezado, or Bedee, or any thing
To patch vp a wretched life.
You'l turne a coxcombe.
I neuer ſhall endure to liue a husband
The very name of wife will turne my ſtomack.
I ſhall haue threeſcore vomits in a day.
What wilt thou ſay now Anteros if I ſet thee
As free from this ſame marriage, as the childe
Which ten moneths ſince was but an Embryo?
Thou canſt not.
I can doe it, feare it not.
Thou canſt nor man, 'tis paſt recouery.
What wilt thou giue me if I doe effect it?
Giue thee? I'le ſacrifice my ſelfe vnto thee
My Iupiter, build vp a Temple for thee
Shall take the heauens from Atlas ſhoulders, and
Giue him a Iubile for euer—Speake.
Hee ſhall be at leaſure all the reſt of's life,
For to catch Butterflies— But you doe mock mee,
Farewell.
But ſtay.
Doe but effect it Iack.
And I will ſtraight make warre vpon the Turke,
Giue thee his Diademe and Scepter — Speake.
The Perſian ſhall be the Maſter of thy Horſe,
The Germane I will make thy cup-bearer.
Ha, ha, he. And ſo I ſhall haue all my drink drunk vp,
Thank you for that.
Nay wilt thou ſpeake, or elſe
Let me be gone. — The Dukes of Italy
Shall be thy footboyes.
Here's a braue promiſer!
Why this out does the Court; but do'ſt thou heare?
How wilt thou doe all this?
Nay 'troth I know not,
But I will doe it, and let that ſuffice.
Well then be ſilent. — Placenta the Shepheards wife
Soone as ſhe heard a marriage was in motion
Betwixt my Kinſwoman and your ſelfe, came running
To me in haſt, and cry'd what doe they meane?
It is not fit, nor can it be (vnleſſe
That they will violate the lawes of Nature)
That Anteros ſhould haue this Gentlewoman;
I aske the cauſe, the Midwife anſwereth
Becauſe ſhe is his Siſter.
How? my Siſter?
And is it poſſible that this is true?
True.
Stay.
Nay wil you heare with patience?
Or elſe—
as ſilent as a midnight minute,
Or elſe a Counſellour without a fee,
I'le ſtand and heare, and ſuck it in, and —
Yet?
I'ue done.
Then heare; it ſeem's that Dorothaea
My Vncles wife, ſome ſeuenteene yeares agoe
Suppoſing ſhee had beene with childe, prouided
Such neceſſaries for her, as a woman
That is in her eſtate might ſtand in neede of;
'Twas fam'd about the Country: but at laſt
She found her ſelfe deluded by a tympany,
But fearing leſt ſhe ſhould prove the table talke o'th countrey,
Takes counſell with Placenta for to faigne
A birth, and to that ende employeth her
(Being a Midwife) to procure for money,
The Childe of ſome poore woman new deliver'd.
At the ſame time it fortun'd Anteros
That your mother cryed for Innos helpe,
Which ſhe obtayned, and was deliver'd
Of this your Siſter, whom when ſhe perceiv'd
To be deformed, and diſtort; at length
She was or'ecome by th' Midwife for to part
With her new purchac'd Infant, t'was agreed,
And the birth ſtraight given out to be abortive,
And which is more, beleev'd, and for to colour
The matter o're the better, they did bury
An empty coffin. In the meane time your ſiſter
Was ſecretly convey'd vnto my Aunt,
VVho preſently did faigne to be in travaile,
And was deliver'd in conceit of Her,
VVho but a while agoe vvas call'd your wife.
T'was not long after, but the brace of mothers
Did travaile both together to the dead,
And left my vncle a ſuppoſed daughter.
You have the hiſtory.
And with it heaven,
And immortality: O Loveall, Loveall;
By all the Deityes I could embrace thee
For this thy happy newes, wer't thou a vvoman.
But whats become of all your promiſes?
O tis a taſte, a ſpice of greatneſſe, Iacke,
To promiſe.
And to performe iuſt nothing.
You doe not heare me ſay ſo. VVhat's the matter?
But ſee the wooers are diſcarded quite
My vncle beates them out of doores.
You villaines—
Out of my houſe yee brood of caterpillers.—
Sonne of a hedge and Moone-ſhine; goe—fy, fy, fy.
O miſery beyond— come out you raſcall,
And bring your piping noſe along with you; —
A fire upon this hollow ruffe of yours,
'Tis like your heart—out rogues, and ruffians—
O I am undone.—
Ha, ha, he. Loveall, theſe men are mine;
I am the Patron of the living now,
Doſt thou ſee this?
I heard as much within.
I will behave myſelfe moſt ſcurvily,
Like to ſome ſurly crabbed Patron now,
That has ſome 6, or 7 tyr'd horſes tyed
At dore. How now?
Patron.
What ſayes my Client?
Loveall, I pray thee catechize this box,
Ther's good ſtuffe in 't I warrant thee.
Good Patron.
Heare me Sir, I'le diſpatch it in three words,
This is a tedious Aſſe, and readeth nought
But Engliſh Treatiſes.
Sir, will it pleaſe you
To take particular notice?—
Sir.
But Patron—
Patron.
Who! now the ſent growes hot, 'tis ranck,
The game's in view. Haup,—rate them there—no more
You Sir, that are the ring-leader of this rout.—
Kings be profane.
'Sdeath! what a pack of rogues
Are got together here? what is your name?
Zealous Knowlittle:
Zealous Knowlittle? good;
Of which Vniverſitie?
Of both the Vniverſities.
A very likely thing: good Mr Knowlittle
Separate your ſelfe a little from the people.
With all my heart, I'le ſeparate.
Your name?
My name is Tempest Allmouth ſir.
How? Tempeſt Almouth? where are thy braines man?
He has not any.
Beare him company.
What haue we here? Item, to ſend forth tickets
To all the Brethren that doe inhabite
Within this Shire, to giue them intimation,
That M. Mother-tongue ſtands the first of Iune.
You that are next him?
Arthur Armeſtrong ſir.
You there Colloſſe?
My name is Stutchell Legg.
Troth, and thou art well underlay'd indeed,
A couple of foot-ball players I warrant them.
Item: — a pox upon't, here's bawdery,
Ile rake noe deeper in this puddle. — ſo.
And what muſt we call you?
Ganimede Filpot▪
Thou ſhould'ſt be a good fellow by thy name.
Come on; what glorious title I beſeech you
Has bounteous Nature fixt on you: nay open.
My name is Hugo obligation.
How? Hugo obligation? 'pray thee Loveall
Is not this ſhorne bearde villaine the preciſe Scriveneur,
Would faine turne Prieſt?
The very ſame I take it.
Meddle not with me
Nay doe not hold me.
A whoreſon Inkebottle, and two skins of parchment,
Dares he hope for my ſiſter, and a living?
You ſlave, are Parſonages in this age ſo cheape?
'Pray thee Anteros.
Doe not entreat me Loveall,
He dyes: this hat is not more mortified.
'Pray thee be quiet.
Hang him, a death's too good
For ſuch a raſcall. — Sirrah, 'le cut indentur's
Vpon your skin. And here's another Villayne,
Whoſe very countenance ſpeakes Servingman,
Filpot come hither.
Nay but Anteros.
Death man! our Vniverſities doe ſwarme,
They have more Schollers then they know to ſpend
While they are Sweet: and muſt ſuch Rogues as theſe,
Whoſe height of knowledge, is to ſpit and ſnuffle,
And talke ſome 3. houres non-ſenſe, ſhoulder them
Out of their places? what is 't that makes ſo many
Of our quick witt's turne Ieſuits, and forſake
Both their Religion, and their Country thinke you?
Sirrah noe more then thus, lye and thou dyeſt.
Have not you beene a Serving man ſometimes?
Yes truely ſir, I'le not deny't, I was
A gentlemans butler once.
I told you ſo.
The very chipping's hang in's eye-brow's ſtill.
His face unto this inſtant minute ſhines
With broken beere that was his fees, ſtand by,
And doe not hope ſo large a benefit
From me as to be kill'd, live, live, unhappy.
You M. know little know you whoſe box is this?
Truely 'tis mine, verily.
Away you ſtinkards,
I wilbe viſited no more to day.
Avoyde I ſay. Have I not done it well?
Oh noe, you want the pawles, and the hums,
And the grave thumbe under the girdle too.
Oh, that's for old living brokers, I'me a young one.
You muſt indent then with them, for to keepe you
Some hounds or cocks, and get a handſome wife
To entertaine you.
A wife? a thunderbolt
Is entred me, 'pray thee no more.
How now?
And get you packing too, thou olde impoſtor,
With your diſtorted puppet here; and you
That make the cuſtardes quake where ere you come,
Thou enemy to ſweet meats.
Mr. Hooke
'Twould relliſh more of wiſedome if you did
Beare out this matter coolely. Come my daughter.
O me! the very boy's will laugh at me.
Anteros ſalute your ſiſter, and embrace her.
I am undone againe! what ſhall I doe
Loveall?
What ſhall you doe? why kiſſe her man.
Siſter god ſave you, — and as much to you
My never-to-be-hereafter father in law.
Woe's me! what ſhall I ſay? what ſhall I doe?
I have given in the morgage, and without money.
But what new ſpectacle is this?
Whats heere?
How? the dead body of a gentle-woman?
Is this Neandur?
Hold the cut throat fidlers
Whilſt we doe bring this gentlewoman 'fore the juſtice.
A kind and loving husband ſure, that has.
Made a fayre hand on's wife thus the firſt day.
Ha? what is this I ſee? O trayterous eyes:
Can I believe ye any more? my ſiſter?
Conſtantina?
How's that?
It cannot be.
'Tis ſhe. O partiall heavens! but yet it is not,
'Tis not long ſince I left my ſiſter ſafe
With in her chamber, and in another habit —
By all the powers 'tis ſhe — I doe profane
The god's; it is not ſhe, it is not. — once more.
The twins of Leda were not halfe ſo like.
I'le be reſolv'd immediatly.
Good M. juſtice,
I pray you heare me. As we did daunce even now
In your North field, we found this gentlewoman,
Lying all along (as to ſay) even quite dead,
And this her husband with his naked ſword
Standing hard by her.
Another riddle yet.
Her husband? ha? Why is not this Neander
One of the rivall's in my daughters love?
Ander, or Pander, wee know not that,
But 'tis her husband, that wee'r ſure of
Is he not Robbin?
I that he is our Edward,
We both were preſent when they were detracted.
Subtracted you foole. But as I ſayd before
Seeing him ſtand ſo deſperatly with his ſword
We ſtole behind him, and ſo caught him.
A valiant act believ't. Good ſir, let's goe.
Ah Conſtantina, ah good heart! was this
The journey you intended?
Sir, I beſeech you —
We ſhall be poyſon'd with theſe womens ſighs
'Tis worſe then a Germayne hot-houſe.
Anteros
Stay, we will ſee the end of this.
Fye, fye, Hell is broke looſe upon me: all her furies
Are come at once t'aſſault me.
Ah Cleopes!
She lives againe, O miracle of women!
Where art thou Cleopes?
Oh hated name,
Enough t'infect the world, but that it comes
Out of thoſe lipps.
Speake Conſtantina.
What haue I to doe
With light or heaven? I will not live.
O me!
Shee ſwounds againe.
Why doe you rub her head
And face ſo much, you fooliſh woman you?
Let me alone, I'le find her wound I warrant you.
Forbeare, or I'le find that ſwines face of yours.
I am too bad for hell, they'l not receiue me,
They are afraid I ſhould infect thoſe ſoules,
Thoſe vertuous ſoules which doe inhabit there.
Art thou not ſoftned yet Neander? Ha?
Hadſt thou an heart cut out 'oth Diamond rocke,
Sure this would melt it.
O my Cleopes!
What will you giue ſir, and I will let you
Shift for your ſelfe?
What thou deſerveſt villaine.
Halfe part, or elſe ſhe ſhall not go.
Take halfe.
I will divide my gifts betwixt yee — there.
Thou Temple of Vertue, fayreſt Conſtantina. —
Oh I ſhall die againe if I ſee him.
But will you liue if I doe preſently
Make a divorce betwixt you and Neander?
And place you in the armes of him you ſo
Loue, and adore, your Cleopes?
You cannot.
Thou'rt all divinitie, indeed I cannot.
See where Pandora comes; but now I can.
Behold my Lucius.
Nay, I will ſtill perſiſt to follow thee
Baſeſt of men.
Good father.
Suffer him;
His tongue has learn'd the palſie from his hands;
Alas hee's old, and muſt bee pardon'd for't.
But what imports this multitude? and ſee Neander
With his Boy-bride. Pandora, ſweeteſt Lady —
An other tempeſt! where ſhall I ſhelter me?
By all the joyes in Loue, by all the ſorrowes,
By all his Roſes, and his Worme-wood, take
Thy thoughts from me, and let them doubled fall
Vpon my friend Neander. —Faireſt foule,
Doe but contemplate that moſt curious frame
Of man, in what a pleaſing harmonie
Nature has marryed all thoſe provinces
His limbes together: view but his ſparkling eye,
And reade divinitie there; looke on his hayre,
Survey his face, and fee how Majeſtie
And ſweetneſſe there doe ſtriue for victory,
And ſtill the iſſue's doubtfull.
Lucius,
Thou ſhalt not overcome; diſguiſe farewell.
O thou that art the ſhame of all thy ſexe,
Faire Constantina, yet not halfe ſo faire
As vertuous, here behold thy Cleopes;
Neander's vaniſh'd; why doe you wonder ſo?
I doe confeſſe I lou'd that Gentlewoman,
And for her loue I tooke on this diſguiſe,
And here for thine I put it off againe,
And on my bended knee doe begg my pardon
For all the wrong I'ue done thee
Cleopes!
It is a miracle: but the bonds, the living.
O heavens! 'tis he, moſt happy Conſtantina!
My Cleopes? grant me ſome reſpite joy
Before thou kilſt me — Oh my Cleopes!
Whom doe I embrace? into whoſe armes am I fallen?
O conſtant virgin!
But how ſhall I hereafter
Giue any credit to my ſenſes? O
Placenta, courteous Midwife, pray thee tell mee,
Where am I now? in heaven?
Bridle your paſſion.
Am I my ſelfe? or doe I dreame all this?
Lucius, take truce with wonder, I am Cleopes,
And I doe hope though now I weare that name,
As deare to thee as when I heard Neander.
You may remember when as firſt the beautie
Of fayre Pandora did attract your eyes
To wonder, and to loue, that I was then
A buſie wooer unto Constantina:
But ſo it pleaſed Cupid, that while I
Drew out a languiſhing and luke-warme ſuit
To her, the vigour of Pandora's beames,
(As doth the Sun unto our culinar fire)
Did quite extinguiſh that ſame petty flame.
Thinking it vaine t'attempt her in that ſhape,
I preſently did take ſome diſcontent,
And fain'd a journey into Belgia,
And not long after tooke on this diſguiſe,
And return'd hither; where I haue remain'd
Your Rivall, and capitall friend together:
And (which I wonder at the moſt) unknowne:
You haue my Metamorphoſis. But ſweet,
How cam'ſt thou 'pray thee, unto Mr Liuely?
And by what trickes did he inveagle thee
Vnto this contract, ſince thou didſt not know
That Cleopes was there inviſible?
My better Genius, you ſhall heare within
The ſtory whole, it is too tedious
To be told here.
But now Pandora, why
Stand you ſo dully here, and doe not flie
Into his ſtrict embraces, who alone
Loues you, and who alone deſerues your loue?
Doe I loue her? doe I deſerue her loue?
Haſt thou (ſweet friend) for me forſaken her,
Whom thou didſt prize 'boue thine owne proper ſoule?
And now haſt married her whom thou didſt flie?
And all for my ſake, and ſhall I thus repay thee?
But for her loue thou ne're hadſt been Neander;
And but for mine hadſt been Neander ſtill;
Friend Cleopes, or if thou wilt Neander,
(Vnder both titles moſt belov'd of me)
Was ſhee all Venus; did each hayre of hers
Fetter a Loue, were there as many Cupids
That hover'd o'e her head, as there be lights
VVhich guild yon Marble roofe, by them I ſweare,
By all that's Sacred, by what ever flyes
The touch of mortall eye, I ſweare againe,
I would diſclaime her and her loue for ever.
Troth Lucius, I doe pitie you, that do
Spend ſo much breath unto ſo little end,
VVhat need all theſe deepe proteſtations?
I care not this for all your loue, nor yet
For your friend Ianus there with the two faces;
Nor do I think ye men.
So quickly?
Yes.
I doe confeſſe I am a woman; ſee,
Here is the man has wonne what ye haue loſt;
Stout ſouldiers ſure, that when the Citie gates
VVere open to yee, durſt not enter in.
O Iſabella, 'tis for thy ſake I know
That all theſe miſeries doe happen mee.
(Forgiue mee good Laurentio) Iſabella,
At length I haue experience what it is
To loue an outſide, the meere barke of woman,
And to forſake an inward vertue: but
If once I haue thee in poſſeſſion more —
Follow mee Witch, devill, ſtrumpet, proſtitute.
Ah whither will he drag mee? oh my heart!
What haue yee done with my dead ſiſters body?
Thy ſiſters body now has got a ſoule.
(O my ſweet Cleopes!) moſt welcome brother.
But doth ſhe liue then?
And ſo happily,
As I haue call'd it impudence to wiſh
What I doe now enjoy.
Whom doe I ſee?
My daughter Iſabella?
But is this Cleopes?
I dare not looke upon that wronged face.
It is, and now thy ſiſters husband.
Brother,
All health, all happineſſe.
More then all to you,
Good Cleopes.— But doſt thou liue, my ſiſter?
Why waſt thou dead but now?
Thou ſhalt heare that
Some other time.
Seeſt thou that virgin?
Yes, it is my ſiſter Iſabella.
Peace.
I am undone! my father, and my brother.
Sir, I beſeech you pardon what my loue,
And younger yeeres haue treſpas'd.
Riſe my daughter;
Ioy will not ſuffer mee for to be angry.
Seeſt thou that face?
It is Endymion
My brother.—Brother, God ſaue you.
Siſter!
Thy Brother? 'tis thy traytour that I meane,
That has undone thee and thy name.
'Tis Lucius.
Sir I beſeech you doe not hearken to him.
No more.
A pox upon this honeſty,
It will vndoe us all: 'tis ten to one
But that his tender Conſcience will perſwade him
To pay in the money for all this.
Faire ſoule
Canſt thou forgiue thy Lucius?
Canſt thou loue
Thy Iſabella?
Give me a man dares aske
That queſtion? Good Laurentio let me craue
Your likeing and conſent.
Conſent? to what?
To marry this your daughter.
Marry my daughter?
No periur'd wretch.
Sir I beſeech you grant it.
O Lucius! O happy houre!
Thou haſt her,
And with her ſuch a portion as ſhall pleaſe thee.
I will not heare of Portion, ſhee her ſelfe
Is dowry enough to mee.— O Iſabella!
What? Is the Players boy prov'd woman too?
Father.
I ſay trouble me not—the morgage.
Sir I beſeech you heare me.
Fy, fy, fy.
And let me haue your approbation▪
In this young Gentleman for my husband.
O.
Perhaps ſir you may doubt of his eſtate,
But if you'le credit me, I can inſtruct you,
I am his Father, hee mine onely Sonne,
And (I doe thanke my ſtarrs) our fortun's are
None of the meaneſt. Speake Sir, will you give
Your daughter here, without a portion?
Without a Portion? take her what er'e thou art
So, So, that care is paſt yet, this a little
Help's out with th' other loſſes.
Maſter Hooke,
You ſhall not frowne, ſince all things here doe ſmile;
To morrow I will pay you halfe your mony,
So you will grant me a generall acquittance;
'Tis in my power (you know) and I may chuſe
Whether I'le pay a farthing, but no more,
(There is a thing call'd conſcience within me;
And) you ſhall have it: therefore be frolike Sir.
Thou art an honeſt man. Yee are all honeſt, yee are all honeſt.
All this while have I
Employ'd mine cares about this buſineſſe.
Now ſhow thy ſelfe, and of what houſe thou com'ſt.
All health to this faire company—much ioy—
Much happineſſe — and a young Sonne to you;
Are you at leaſure for to kill me yet?
You ſee I'me come againe.
Let me embrace thee
Thou inſtrument of all our good.
Yes, yes,
I was a foole, knewe nothing, knewe iuſt nothing,
Could not divine a whit, not tell, not tell,
How this ſame geare would come to paſſe, not I;
How doe you like your Liuely now? your Liuely?
Wee will diſcourſe of that within. Terpander,
Sir will it pleaſe you follow? you my Sonne,
Gentl'men y'are all my gueſts to night. Mee
Think's I am growne Peſtilent kinde vpon the ſuddayne,
The Muſicke too, wee will be merry, come,
Nay come, come, take me while the homours hot.
Loueall, a word: nay troupe on, let them troupe.
The newes?
'Faith nothing but to take my leaue,
Bid you far well.
Why ſo? I pray thee ſtay,
You'le in I hope.
What among ſuch a kennell
Of women? noe, adiew.
Nay preethee goe.
Not for the Fay'ry Kingdome.
Mr. Loveall,
Sweet Mr. Loveall.
Anteros.
How now?
As I am a gentleman, and an elder brother, I am almoſt choak'd.
Sweet Mr. Loveall, O Mr. Loveall. 'Tis vtterly againſt my complexion,
To lye here any longer.
Death! our fooles,
Our diſh of buffles: as I hope to proſper
My thoughts had loſt them quite.
I thought not of them.
Good Mr. Loveall are the officers gone?
Anteros, Anteros, is the coaſt cleare yet?
But how ſhall wee diſpoſe of them?
Wee'd beſt
Barrell them vp and ſend them for new England.
A pox there's fooles enow already there.
Let's pickle them for winter Sallads.
No;
They are not capable of Salt, man; rather
Let's get ſome broaken trumpet, or old drumme,
And ſhew them to the people from ſome ſtrange
Beaſts out of Affrick
Father, my gowne is not ſilke yet.
A bots on you.
Harke, there's another egge ſprung, my ſheepheard and his faire daughter.
Loveall, Mr. Loveall, I am of a ſanguine complexion.
Anteros.
Now all the world! what ſhall wee do with them?
But ſtay, a word,—performe it, I'le take order
T' vncaſe vm' to your hands.—
Now quickly Nodle, all is quiet now,—
Come Mr. William — Not a mouſe is ſtirring—
Safe, ſafe, all 's ſafe. Ha, he, he.
I'ue ſpoyl'd my cloathes quite, would I had a bruſh;
How now? wee're gull'd.
I, as I am a liuing ſaule. — marke the end on't.
Who haue wee here? does his ghoſt walke?
Wee are all gee'd I perceiue it plaine now.
Who's that? Mr. Mungrell? is the Scholler aliue againe? I ſhould haue beene very melancholy to haue beene hang'd as I am a liuing ſaule.
If I could get my raepier and a bruſh,
I'de ſteale away.
Would you haue a bruſh? I'le bruſh yee yee villaines,
Nay, Mr. Loueall told me what duſty companions yee were,
And that yee wanted bruſhing, and how yee bad
Abus'd my husband, and my daughter, ty'de them
To a tree, come one your wayes, want yee bruſhing?
Ye raſcalls, I'le bruſh you, would ye be bruſht▪
Come on, lets ſee what cover'd diſh 'haue here now?
Hy day! you lubberly knaue; what Madame Gillian too?
What? is ſhee come now to trouble vs!
My daughter, I doe charge you on my bleſſing
Looke ſcuruily vpon her.
Yes forſooth Father.
Call her not Mother darling, but diſclaime her,
Shee is no wife of mine, ſhee does conſpire
Againſt our gentility daughter, and ſhee lyes;
Call her the plaine old woman, ſweet-lips, doe;
Ile beare you cut in't, doe as your father bids you.
How now?
But forſooth father, my neckercher is not turn'd into Gold yet.
They are both mad of a certaine.
I am a gentleman, and I will be a gentleman, I will encloſe, and I will rayſe rents—I wil be a lower-houſe man, and I will be—
An old cox-combe, and you ſhall be beaten.
But does this ſtand good in law?
Feare not that; I'le find an old ſtatute for it, doubt it not. You are a gentleman? and you will be a gentleman? I'le make you gentle enough e're I haue done with you.
O, O, O.
And you my ſweet lips that wil not call me mother, but looke ſcuruily,
Come on your wayes I haue the common law on my ſide too for this.
Oh mother, I'le neuer bee a gentlewoman more while I liue, nor neuer talke of gold neckerchers, no that I won't truely.
Yes, you ſhall bee a Lower-houſe man, you ſhall; I'le take you downe a Pinne, you'r too high now.
O, O, good wife—O, O, hony wife.
You'l in?
Buz, peace and catch a mouſe cry I.
What is my Scholler return'd? pre'thee goe in Iack Loveall, I'le change but two words with him And follow. Well ſayd, nay looke not ſowerly on the matter.
You haue abus'd mee Sir, and goe to the fence Schoole with mee if you dare, or elſe wrſtle a fall with me.
He giue thee ſatisfaction my rowſer
My Hit-her better, nay put off theſe frownes;
What ſay'ſt thou to my ſiſter, and the Living?
I know you haue heard the newes from out the Cabbin,
And you was once a Suitour to her; ſpeake,
Will that content thee? come you are not the firſt
Has got a Parſonage with fooling Sir,
I will procure it for thee, feare it not:
Nay ſpare your Hatt, it will be tedious,
My thankes ſhall be in Oates.
But Maſter Ieoffry.
Follow Iack Loveall in.
You know I was your Maſter to day.
Well put the caſe.
Poore, and ill parell'd.
Put the caſe againe.
But now you ſee how ſtrangely altered.
Put the caſe the third time.
Are you avis'd of that? I'le n'ere truſt winking beaſt againe for your ſake, I'le tell you but ſo. Did you not tell mee that Obrum would make me a gentleman? Obrum? Obrum? if Obrum has no better tricks then theſe, let Obrum keepe his tricks to coole his porredge, 'sduds I look'd euery minute when Obrum would haue put a greene ſcarlet ſuite vpon my backe like your's, all to bee dawb'd with ſpingle ſpangles; and in the meane time comes my wife with a blacke and blew home ſpun of her owne making. Well that ſame Obrum is a ſembling cony catching knaue, and I know what I could call you too, but for your whiniard, and your ſtaring goggles.
Stipes, no more, advaunce thy duller eye,
Know'ſt thou what all thoſe blazing ſtars portend?
I, I, by'r Lady? how now? 'sduds I thinke fourty Obrums haue beene here, (Maſter Ieoffry is that Obrum that makes gentlefolkes, a Taylor?) one Obrum could neuer haue paynted them thus.
PEace prophane rudeneſſe; what alteration's this?
What meane theſe bended Knees? but are theſe women?
Am a Conuert then? ſo ſuddainely?
Surely ſome Power greater then all that Sex
Is interpos'd, vayl'd in a femall outſide,
Elſe how come I ſo ſupple ioynted, that
Before was ſtiffer then the Rhodian Statue?
There is an Homage due, and I muſt pay't
Spite of my proudeſt nerues. Moſt Sacred Goddeſſe,
Behold a Penitent, that falls thus lowe
Before your feete: as you haue ſhowne your ſelfe
More then a Mortall, in converting me,
Confirme it by your Pardon; 'tis a Vertue
No leſſe deſeruing, and as neere to miracle.
And You great Monarch, that the world may know
How nigh a Kin to heauen and all the Gods
You are in bloud and power, confute that bold
Erronious tenent, prooue the Age of Wonders
Still to endure. What I have promiſed
Vnto this Shepheard (as a miracle)
To be perform'd by Obron and this tree,
Doe you effect; make vs all gentlemen.
Which one Kinde ray ſent from Your gracious eyes
Will doe, and in that confidence wee riſe.