Faire Thameſis, vpon whoſe ſiluer breſt
Arion with his Dolphin new doth reſt.
How I admire thy Glory, State, and Pride,
Vpon this Solemne day thus beautified?
Ganges renowned in all forraigne Lands,
Nor Tgus boaſting of her golden Sands
Can paralell thy Riches; Not Caiſter
Famous for Swannes, nor Po her cleere ſtream'd Siſter:
Winding Meander, nor yet Simois Flood,
Which Fame ſaith, at the Troian Seige van blood.
Swift Rubicon, whoſe memory ſhall laſt,
Becauſe it, Caeſar with his Army poſt.
Choaſpes, that almoſt guirts Perſia round:
Nor Iſſa, by Darius aeath renown'd.
The Amazonian Thermedon, the Nyle
That breeds in it the weeping Crocadile.
The Euphrates, the Volga, and the Ryne,
Nay Iordan too, that waters Paleſtine:
What Paris Some, or Romes ſwift Tyber bee,
The one a Brooke, the other a Ditch to thee▪
And my Crownd Dolphin doth proclaime thee thus,
Th'art the choyſe Darling of Oceanus.
And if thou haſt a Genius, (as t'is gueſt
All Riuers haue?) know wherein th'art moſt bleſt.
Not that thy Bankes are ſo defenc't and ſtable,
Nor within Land th'art ſo far nauigable,
Not for thy Flux and Refluxe, (Ebbs and Tydes)
Or the rich Meddowes bordering round thy ſides.
Not that being pleas'd, th'art ſmooth, being angry, curl'd,
Nor thy rare Bridge not equald through the World.
Not for thoſe goodly Buildings reard ſo bye,
To make thes line to perpetuity.
Not for thy ſpacious Limits and Extents,
(And yet all thoſe vnriuald Ornaments.)
But if I truely ſhall to thee commend,
That bliſſe wherein thou others doſt tranſcend,
Behold this Day the Honour and the State
Of this thy Great and God like Magiſtrate.
Not waited on by Boats made of the Trunks
Of Canes, or hollowed Trees, or petty Iunks,
Or wanton Gondelaes: but Barges, ſtrong,
And richly deckt, who as they plowe along
Thy breſt, with their ſmooth keeles to make their way,
See how the Wind doth with their ſtreamers play,
How beautiful thy Waues how throngd thy ſhoares,
And what a Muſick's when they ſtrike their Oares▪
To ſee them with Graue Magiſtrates ſo Man'd,
Powerfull by Sea, and potent too by Land.
So many Sciences, and Miſteries
Diſtinguiſht into ſeuerall Companies,
In ſundry bottomes: and each Art and Trade
Knowne by the Flags and Pendants here diſplaid.
And London which Metropolis we call,
The Fount and Scaturigo of them all.
Graue Praetor, now this Day to be inueſted
The Head of al theſe, paſſe on vnmoleſted,
In your great Inauguration proceede,
Which to your laſting Honour is decreed.
In your returne baske you ſhall vnderſtand,
Thoſe Triumphs that attend on you by Land.
DOth any wonder, why St. Katherine, ſhee
The Patroneſſe of this faire Companie
Is mounted on a Lyon? Let ſuch know,
That (being a Queeney this kingly beaſt doth owe
Mee duty by intinct: Beſides I come
Both with Virginity and Martyrdome,
Sainted moreouer, and (of theſe) the leaſt
Able to tame the moſt inſulting Beaſt.
But this is hee the billowes doth deuide,
And therefore iuſtly on his backe I ride:
All theſe belonging to this Worthy Trade,
The Lyon, Sea-waues, and the Princely Mayde▪
That for the Armes: note next what I diſplay
In this my Banner here, Serue and obey▪
Rare Morall in this Motto, (if well ſcand)
For Kings are Gods, Viz-gerents, and cōmand
By Sword and Scepter: and by their good Grace
Can preferre others both to power and place.
As you this Day behold this Scarlet worne,
And Sword of Iuſtice thus in publike borne;
The Cap of Maintenance, Coller of Eſses,
(Which Trauellers in all their large progreſſes
Can in no City parallell, that's ſcite
In th' earths deuiſion, knowne quadrupertite:)
So, whoſoeuer ſhall himſelfe oppoſe
Againſt this Magiſtrate, (as one of thoſe
The King deputes as Chiefe) himſelfe hee brings
To bee a rebell to the King of Kings:
Far be it an arch▪traytor in that kind
'Mongſt all theſe goodly Companies, (combind
In mutuall loue and league:) ſhould dare to appeare
In the faire Progreſſe of this Praetors yeare.
Behold, and view who my attendants bee,
Conſtancy, Zeale, Truth, and Humility.
Be conſtant then vnto this Graue Lord Maior,
And the two Shrieues that his aſſiſtants are;
Choſe by the publicke Voyce and Senats Doome,
As Cenſors, and the Tribunes were in Rome;
Doe it in Zeale, in Truth, and all ſubmiſſion,
That their be found no croſse interpoſition
Betwixt Power and Obedience, ſo ſhall all
Arts, Myſteries, and Trades Mechannicali,
Thriue▪ proſper, and increaſe, ſo long as they
Honour the King, the Magiſtrate obey.
I Perſeus, Ioues ſonne, borne of Heauenly Stede,
Mounted vpon a ſwiſt Pegaſian Steede,
Who with his hoofe ſtrooke vp the Muſes Well,
Whence Euthuſiama's and hie Ruptures ſwell.
As through the ayery tract I forc't my way,
Spyde here the Louely Maide Andromeda,
Cheynd to a Rocke, on whom (ſo Fate hath lowerd)
Ready by a Sea-whale to be deuourd.
Know there is figured in this Princely Maide,
Chaſtity, and Innocence, which Diuine ayde
Is ready to aſſiſt ſtill from aboue,
By one or other of the Sonnes of Ioue.
Of which denomination, none, more Grace
Can claime than you, who are in power and place,
And hold this Day in chiefe; then Perſeus like,
Keepe that your Sword still drawne, ready to ſtrike;
Making ſuch Monſters of your Iuſtice taſt,
Who inſidiate the Innocuous and the Chaste.
Obſerue (Graue Sir) the Atmes and Shield I beare,
Such as your ſelfe, and others ought to weare,
Both for Defence and Offence: and in me
Embleam'd, all thoſe prime Vertues that ſhould be
In Perſons of your Power, my Sword reſembles
Vnpartiall Iuſtice, at which guilt ſtill trembles;
My Winged-horſe, Celerity and Speed:
In doing it, that no illegal deed
May paſſe vnſcourged, and there be tooke no reſt,
Vntil reliefe be giuen to the oppreſt.
This Shield that beares the Gorgons head imblaz'd,
Vpon whoſe Snaky locks who euer gaz'd,
Were turn'd to ſtatues of cold ſenſeleſſe ſtone,
Is that (Graue Magiſtrate) you now put on.
Whilſt on your Arme you weare this conſtant Targe,
Bearing your ſelfe vprightly in your Charge.
All ſuch as ſhal in Malice or in Pride
Your Purple State detract from, or deride,
Diſcouer this before them, it hath power
To freeze them into Marble the ſame houre
Striue you to imitate what I haue done,
Since you this day, are Perſeus and Ioues ſonne.
No beaſt of all the Wilderneſſe can vant
Like Srength or Wiſedome with the Elephant.
And therefore, (if conſiderd wel) none may
Better become the Triumphs of this Day.
What Hieroglificke can a man inuent,
Embleame or Symbole, for a Gouernment
In this high nature, apter or more fit
Deuis'd before, or to be thought of yet.
He beares a Caſtle (as this day wee ſee,
But of what ſtrength and puiſſance must you bee
Supporting this great Citty? who must lay
Your ſhoulders to a burden; ſuch as may
Make Atlas ſhrinke bencath it; Temples, Towers
Rialoes, ſpacious Manſions, Suburbe bowers.
A weight to make th'Heſperian Giant droope
And Hercules, (who bore vp Heauen) to ſtoope.
Next, of what Vnderstanding▪ Apprehenſion,
What Iudgement, Knowledge, Wiſedome and Retention?
Of what Fore-ſight? what Body and what Braine?
What an Antomedan to guide the raine
Of Steedes vnmannag'd? what a Palinure
To ſteare this Helme? and ſuch a Barke aſſure
In a Sea troubled, where can be no truſt
In an vnconſtant Surge or angry Guſt?
Yet ſuch an Elephant we hope to finde
Of you, both in th' ability of Minde
And ſtrength of Arme, by that incouragement
The former paſſage of your life hath lent:
Showed in your Iudgement and Experience,
Your Grauity, and vnchang'd Temperance;
All generall Vertues that become ſuch State,
Behouefull in ſo Great a Magiſtrate:
So after Times vnto your Fame ſhall ſtory
How you haue borne vp in her pristine Glory
This flouriſhing City, not once ſhrinking vnder
So great a burden, (to ſucceſsiue wonder)
Since no skild Pilot better could command
By Sea, or expert Charicter by Land.
TWelue houres twice told, diſtinguiſh night and Day,
Twelue Caeſars of the Iulian Line did ſway
Romes Empire, and in cuery caſe of ſtriffe
Where Action's tryde or if concerning life,
Twelue makes the Iury full: the Zodaiacke Lines
Are likewiſe fild by twelue Celeſtiall Signes,
Amongſt which one in your Emblazons borne
Is numbred by the name of Capricorne.
Twelue Sibills we account▪ and they fore-told
Things hapned ſince, although they ſpake of old
By twelue: the bleſt Word in the Church inſtated
Was at the firſt divuldg'd and propagated.
Twelue Companies you are in Chiefe, 13. heere
Preſent that number with thoſe Armes they beare.
And hence the Inundant Scaturigo growes,
Which through our Kingdomes large Dominions flowes,
By founded Schooles, by Colledges, by Trade▪
By Trafficke, by Commerce, by Proiect layd.
For thrifty Bargaine and all competent Gayne,
Asſwell ariſing from the Hand as Brayne.
London the Mother and the Fountaine ſtil'd▪
And you of all her Sonnes new eldeſt Child;
(Heire to her great good Workes) incourage ſtill
Theſe pious Acts, and by Example fill
Voide places with the like, and in this State
You beare, as being now chiefe Magiſtrate:
So order this your numerous Charge, that they
May God, the King, Your ſelfe Serue and Obey.
Now hath the Sun put off his golden beames,
Watring his hot Steeds in cold Iſter ſtreames,
And tyr'd with his dayes trauell, in the Weſt
Tooke vp his Inne: But ere you goe to reſt,
Remember what Arion ſtill proclaimes
In the due honour of the noble Thames.
Next, how your Queene-like Saint directs the way
For you to rule, for others to obey.
Then to be cal'd Ioues Sonne you haue the Grace,
And that in Perſaus figured is your Place.
That in this able Elephant's implyde
Your Strength to beare, your Iudgement to decyde.
Laſt, that you are the Spring and Fountaine made
To water enery Science, Art, and Trade;
Obſeruing thoſe, your Honour ſhall ſhine bright,
And ſo a happy and moſt bleſt good-night.