GRacious and Great, that we so boldly dare,
('Mogst other Playes that now in fashion are)
To present this; writ many yeares agone,
And in that Age, thought second vnto none;
We humbly cave your pardon: we pursue
The story of a rich and famous Jew
Who liu'd in Malta: you shall find him still,
In all his poiects, a sound Macheuill;
And that's is Character: He that hath past
So many Cesures, is now come at last
To haue your princely Eares, grace you him; then
You crown the Action, and renowne the pen.
IT is our feare (dread Soueraigne) we haue bin
Too teious; neither can't be lesse than sinne
To wrong your Princely patience: If we haue,
(Thus lo deiected) we your pardon craue:
And if ought here offend your eare or sight,
We oney Act, and Speake, what others write.
WE passe this Stage,
But by the best of Poets in that ag
The Malta-Jew had being, and was made;
And He, then by the best of Actors play'd:
In Hero and Leander, one did gaine
A lasting memorie: in Tamberlaine,
This Jew, with others many: th' other man
The Attribute of peerelesse, being a man
Whom we may ranke with (doing no one wrong)
Proteus for shapes, and Roseius for a tongue,
So could he speake, so vary; nor is't hate
To merit: in him who doth personate
Our Jew this day, nor is it his ambition
To exceed, or equall, being of condition
More modest; this is all that he intends,
(And that too, at the vrgence of some friends)
To proue his best, and if none here gaine-say it,
The part he hath studied, and intends to play it.
IN Graving, with Pigmalion to contend;
Or Painting, with Apelles; doubtlesse the end
Must be disgrace: our Actor did not so,
He onely aym'd to goe, but not out goe.
Nor thinke that this day any prize was plaid,
Here were no bett at all, no wagers laid;
All the ambition that his mind doth swell,
Is but to heare from you, (by me) 'twas well.
ALbeit the world thinke Macheuill is dead,
Yet was his soule but flowne beyond the Alpes,
And now the Guize is dead, is come from Franc
To view this Land, and frolicke with his friends.
To some perhaps my name is odious,
But such as loue me, gard me from their tongues,
And let them know that I am Macheuill,
And weigh not men, and therefore not mens words:
Admir'd I am of those that hate me most.
Though some speake openly against my bookes,
Yet will they reade me, and thereby attaine
To Peters Chayre: And when they cast me off;
Are poyson'd by my climing followers.
I count Religion but a childish Toy,
And hold there is no sinne but Ignorance.
Birds of the Aire will tell of murders past;
I am asham'd to heare such fooleries:
Many will talke of Title to a Crowne.
What right had Caesar to the Empire?
Might first made Kings, and Lawes were then most sure
When like the Dranus they were writ in blood.
Hence comes it, that a strong built Citadell
Commands much more then letters can import:
Which maxime had Phaleris obseru'd,
H'had neuer bellowed in a brasen Bull
Of great ones enuy; o'th poore petty wites,
Let me be enuy'd and not pittied!
But whither am I bound, I come not, I,
To reade a lecture here in Britaine,
But to present the Tragedy of a Iew,
Who smiles to see how full his bags are cramb'd
Which mony was not got without my meanes.
I craue but this, Grace him as he deserues,
And let him not be entertain'd the worse
Because he fauours me.
So that of thus much that returne was made:
And of the third part of the Persian ships,
Thre was the venture summ'd and satisfied.
As for those Samintes, and the men of Vzz,
That bought my Spanish Oyles, and Wines of Greece,
Here haue I purst their paltry siluerbings.
Fye; what a trouble tis to count this trash.
Well fare the Arabians, who so richly pay,
The things they traffique for with wedge of gold,
Whereof a man may easily in a day
Tell that which may maintaine him all his life.
The needy groome that neuer fingred groat,
Would make a miracle of thus much coyne:
But he whose steele-bard coers are cramb'd full,
And all his life time hath bin tired,
Wearying his fingers ends with telling it,
Would in his age be loath to labour so,
And for a pound to sweat himselfe to death:
Giue me the Merchants of the Indian Mynes,
That trade in mettall of the purest mould;
The wealth Moor, that in the Easterne rockes
Without controule can picke his riches vp,
And in his house heape pearle like pibble-stones:
Receiue them free, and sell them by the weight,
Bags of fiery Opals, Saphires, Amatists,
Iacints, hard Topas, grasse-greene Emeraulds,
Beauteous Rubyes, sparkling Diamonds,
And seildsene costly stones of so great price,
As one of them indifferently rated,
And of a Crrect of this quantity,
May serue in perill of calamity
To ransome great Kings from captiuity.
This is the ware wherein consists my wealth:
And thus me thinkes should men of iudgement frame
Their meanes of traffique from the vulgar trade,
And as their wealth increaseth, so inclose
In mite riches in a little roome.
But now how stands the wind?
Into what corner peeres my Halcions bill?
H, to the East? yes: See how stands the Vanes?
East and by-South: why then I hope my ships
I sent for Egypt and the bordering Iles
Are gotten vp by Nilus winding bankes:
Mine Argosie from Alexandria,
Loaden with Spice and Silkes, now vnder saile,
Are smoothly glding downe by Candie shoare
To Malta, through our Mediterranean sea.
But who comes heare? How now.
Barabas, thy ships are safe,
Riding in Malta Rhode: And all the Merchants
With other Merchandize are safe arriu'd,
And haue sent me to know whether your selfe
Will come and custome them.
The ships are safe thou saist, and richly fraught.
They are.
VVhy then goe bid them come ashore,
And bring with them their bils of entry:
I hope our credit in the Custome-house
Will serue as well as I were present there.
Goe send 'm threescore Camels, thirty Mules,
And twenty Waggons to bring vp the ware.
But art thou master in a ship of mine,
And is thy credit not enough for that?
The very Custome barely comes to more
Then many Merchants of the Towne are worth,
And therefore farre exceeds my credit, Sir.
Goe tell 'em the Iew of Malta sent thee, man.
Tush, who amongst 'em knowes not Barrabas?
I goe.
So then, there's somewhat ome.
Sirra, which of my ships art thou Master off?
Of the Speranza, Sir.
And saw'st thou not mine Argosie at Alexandria
Thou couldst not come from Egypt, or by Caire
But at the entry there into the sea,
Where Nilus payes his tribute to the maine,
Thou needs must saile by Alexandria.
I neither saw them, nor inquir'd of them.
But this we heard some of our sea-men say,
They wondred how you durst with so much wealth
Trust such a crazed Vessell, and so farre.
Tush; they are wise, I know her and her strength:
By goe, goe thou thy wayes, discharge thy Ship,
And bid my Factor bring his loading in.
And yet I wonder at his Argosie,
Thine Argosie from Alexandria,
Know Barabas doth ride in Malta Rhode.
Laden with riches, and exceeding store
Of Persian silkes, of gold, and Orient Perle:
How chance you came not with those other ship
That sail'd by Egypt?
Sir we saw 'em not.
Belike they coasted round by Candie shoare
About their Oyles, or other businesses.
But 'twas ill done of you to come so farre
Without the ayd or conduct of their ships.
Sir, we were wafted by a Spanish Fleet
That neuer let vs till within a league,
That had the Gallies of the Turke in chase.
Oh they were going vp to Sicily: well, goe
And bid the Merchants and my men dispatch
And come ashore, and see the fraught discharg'd.
I goe.
Thus trowles our fortune in by land and Sea,
And thus are wee on enery side inrich'd:
These are the Blessings promis'd to the Iewes,
And herein was old Abrams happinesse:
What more may Heaven doe for earthly man
Then thus to powre out plenty in their laps,
Ripping the bowels of the earth for them,
Making the Sea their seruants, and the winds
To driue their substance with successefull blasts?
Who hateth me but for my happinesse?
Or who is honour'd now but for his wealth?
Rather had I a Iew be hated thus,
Then pittied in a Christian pouerty:
For I can see no fruits in all their faith,
But malice, falshood, and excessiue pride,
Which me thinkes fits not their profession.
Happily some haplesse man hath conscience,
And for his conscience liues in beggery.
They say we are a scatter'd Nation:
I cannot tell, but we haue scambled vp
More wealth by farre then those that brag of faith.
There's Kirriab Iairim, the great Iew of Greece,
Obed in Bairseth, Noes in Portugall,
My selfe in Malta, some in Italy,
Many in France, and wealthy euery one:
I, wealthier farre then any Christian.
I must confesse we come not to be Kings:
That's not our fault: Alas, our number's few,
And Crownes come either by succession
Or vrg'd by force; and nothing violent,
Oft haue I heard tell, can be permanent.
Giue vs a peacefull rule, make Christians Kings,
That thirst so much for Principality.
I haue no charge, nor many children,
But one sole Daughter, whom I hold as deare
As Agamemnon did his Iphigen:
And all I haue is hers. But who comes here?
Tush, tell not me 'twas done of policie.
Come therefore let vs goe to Barrabas;
For he can counsell best in these affaires;
And here he comes.
Why how now Countrymen?
Why flocke you thus to me in multitudes?
What accident's betided to the Iewes?
A Fleet of warlike Gallyes, Barabas,
Are come from Turkey, and lye in our Rhode:
And they this day sit in the Counsell-house
To entertaine them and their Embassie.
Why let 'em come, so they come not to warre;
Or let 'em warre, so we be conquerors:
Nay, let 'em combat, conquer, and kill all,
So they spare me, my daughter, and my wealth.
Were it for confirmation of a League,
They would not come in warlike manner thus.
I feare their comming will afflict vs all.
Fond men, what dreame you of their multitudes?
What need they treat of peace that are in league?
The Turkes and those of Malta are in league.
Tut, tut, there is some other matter in't.
Why, Barabas, they come for peace or warre.
Happily for neither, but to passe along
Towards Venice by the Adriatick Sea;
With whom they haue attempted many times,
But neuer could effect their Stratagem.
And very wisely sayd, it may be so.
But there's a meeting in the Senate-house,
And all the Iewes in Malta must be there.
Vmh; All the Iewes in Malta must be there?
I, like enough, why then let euery man
Prouide him, and be there for fashion-sake.
If any thing shall there concerne our state
Assure your selues I'le looke vnto my selfe.
I know you will; well brethren let vs goe.
Let's take our leaues; Farewell good Barabas.
Doe so; Farewell Zaareth, farewell Temainte.
And Barabas now search this secret out.
Summon thy sences, call thy wits togethre:
These silly men mistake the matter cleane.
Long to the Turke did Malta contribute;
Which Tribute all in policie, I feare,
The Turkes haue let increase to such a summe,
As all the wealth of Malta cannot pay;
And now by that aduantage thinkes, belike,
To seize vpon the Towne: I, that he seekes.
How ere the world goe, I'le make sure for one,
And seeke in time to intercept the worst,
Warily garding that which I ha got.
Ego mihimet sum semper proximas.
Why let 'em enter, let 'em take the Towne.
Now Bassoes, what demand you at our hands?
Know Knights of Malta, that we came from Rhodes
From Cyprus, Candy, and those other Iles
That lye betwixt the Mediterranean seas.
What's Cyprus, Candy, and those other Iles
To vs, or Malta? What at our hands demand ye?
The ten yeares tribute that remaines vnpaid.
Alas, my Lord, the summe is ouergreat,
I hope your Highnesse will consider vs.
I wish, graue Gouernours 'twere in my power
To fauour you, but 'tis my fathers cause,
Wherein I may not, nay I dare not dally.
Then giue vs leaue, great Selim-Calymath.
Stand all aside, and let the Knights determine,
And send to keepe our Gallies vnder-saile,
For happily we shall not tarry here:
Now Gouernours how are you resolu'd?
Thus: Since your hard conditions are such
That you will needs haue ten yeares tribute past,
We may haue time to make collection
Amongst the Inhabitants of Malta for't.
That's more then is in our Commission.
What Callapine a little curtesie.
Let's know their time, perhaps it is not long;
And 'tis more Kingly to obtaine by peace
Then to enforce conditions by constraint.
What respit aske you Gouernours?
But a month.
We grant a month, but see you keep your promise.
Now lanch our Gallies backe againe to Sea,
VVhre wee'll attend the respit you haue tne,
And for the mony send our messenger.
Farewell great Gouernors, and braue Knights of Malta.
And all good fortune wait on Calymath.
Goe one and call those Iewes of Malta hither:
VVere they not summon'd to appeare to day.
They were, my Lord, and here they come.
Haue you determin'd what to say to them?
Yes, giue me leaue, and Hebrwes now come neare.
From the Emperour of Turkey is arriu'd
Great Selim-Calymath, his Highnesse sonne,
To leuie of vs ten yeares tribute past,
Now then here know that it concerneth vs:
Then good my Lord, to keepe your quiet still,
Your Lordship shall doe well to let them haue it.
Soft Barabas, there's more longs too't than so.
To what this ten yeares tribute will amount
That we haue cast, but cannot compasse it
By reason of the warres, that robb'd our store;
And therefore are we to request your ayd.
Alas, my Lord, we are no souldiers:
And what's our aid against so great a Prince?
Tut, Iew, we know thou art no souldier;
Thou art a Merchant, and a monied man,
And 'tis thy mony, Barabas, we seeke.
How, my Lord, my mony?
Thine and the rest.
For to be short, amongst you 'tmust be had,
Alas, my Lord, the most of vs are poore.
Then let the rich increase your portions:
Are strangers with your tribute to be tax'd?
Haue strangers leaue with vs to get their wealth?
Then let them with vs contribute.
How, equally?
No, Iew, like infidels.
For through our sufferance of your hatefull liues,
Who stand accursed in the sight of heauen,
These taxes and afflictions are befal'ne,
And therefore thus we are determined;
Reade there the Articles of our decrees.
First, the tribute mony of the Turkes shall all be
Leuyed amongst the Iewes, and each of them to pay one
Halfe of his estate.
How, halfe his estate? I hope you meane not mine.
Read on.
Secondly, hee that denies to pay, shal straight become
A Christian.
How a Christian? Hum, what's here to doe?
Lastly, he that denies this, shall absolutely lose al he has.
Oh my Lord we will giue halfe.
Oh earth-mettall'd villaines, and no Hebrews born!
And will you basely thus submit your selues
To leaue your goods to their arbitrament?
Why Barabas wilt thou be christned
No, Gouernour, I will be no conuertite.
Then pay thy halfe.
Why know you what you did by this deuice?
Halfe of my substance is a Cities wealth.
Governour, it was not got so easily;
Nor will I part so slightly therewithall.
Sir, halfe is the penalty of our decree,
Either pay that, or we will seize on all.
Corpo di deo; stay, you shall haue halfe,
Let me be vs'd but as my brethren are.
No, Iew, thou hast denied the Articles,
And now it cannot be recall'd.
Will you then steale my goods?
Is theft the ground of your Religion?
No, Iew, we take particularly thine
To saue the ruine of a multitude:
And better one want for a common good,
Then many perish for a priuate man:
Yet Barrabas we will not banish thee,
But here in Malta, where thou gost thy wealth,
Liue still; and if thou canst, get more.
Christians; what, or how can I multiply?
Of nought is nothing made.
From nought at first thou canst to little welth,
From little vnto more, from more to most:
If your first curse fall heauy on thy head,
And make thee poore and scornd of all the world,
'Tis not our fault, but thy inherent sinne.
What? bring you Scripture to confirm your wronge?
reach m not out of my possessions.
Som Iewes are wicked, as all Christians are:
But say the Tribe that I descended of
Were all in generall cast away for sinne,
Shall I be tryed by their transgression?
The man that dealeth righteously shall liue:
And which of you can charge me otherwise?
Out wretched Barabas, sham'st thou not thus
To iustifie thy selfe, as if we knew not
Thy profession? If thou rely vpon thy righteousnesse,
Be patient and thy riches will increase.
Excesse of wealth is cause of covetousnesse:
And couetousnesse, oh 'tis a monstrous sinne.
I, but theft is worse: tush, take not from me then,
For that is theft; and if you rob me thus,
I must be forc'd to steale and compasse more.
Graue Gouernors, list not to his exclames:
Conuert his mansion to a Nunnery,
His house will harbour many holy Nuns.
It shall be so: now Officers haue you done?
I, my Lord, we haue seiz'd vpon the goods
And wares of Barabas, which being valued
Amount to more then all the wealth in Malta.
And of the other we haue seized halfe.
Then wee'll take order for the residue.
Well then my Lord, say, are you satisfied?
You haue my goods, my mony, and my wealth,
My ships, my store, and all that I enioy'd;
And hauing all, you can request no more;
Vnlesse your vnrelenting flinty hearts
Suppresse all pitty in your stony breasts,
And now shall move you to bereave my life.
No, Barabas, to staine our hands with blood
Is farre from vs and our profession.
Why I esteeme the iniury farre lesse,
To take the liues of miserable men,
Then be the causers of their misery,
You haue my wealth the labour of my life,
The comfort of mine age, my childrens hope,
And therefore ne're distinguish of the wrong.
Content thee, Barabas, thou hast nought but right.
Your extreme right does me exceeding wrong:
But take it to you i'th deuils name.
Come, let vs in, and gather of these goods
The mony for this tribute of the Turke.
'Tis necessary that be look'd vnto:
For if we breake our day, we breake the league,
And that will proue but simple policie.
I, policie? that's their profession,
And not simplicity, as they suggest.
The plagues of Egypt, and the curse of heauen,
Earths barrennesse, and all mens hatred
Inflict vpon them, thou great Primas Motor.
And here vpon my knees, striking the earth,
I banne their soules to everlasting paines
And extreme tortures of the fiery deepe,
That thus haue dealt with me in my distresse.
Oh yet be patient, gentle Barabas.
Oh silly brethren, borne to see this day!
Why stand you thus vnmou'd with my laments?
Why weepe you not to thinke vpon my wrongs?
Why pine not I, and dye in this distresse?
Why, Barabas, as hardly can we brooke
The cruell handling of our selues in this:
Thou seest they haue taken halfe our goods.
Why did you yeeld to their extortion?
You were a multitude, and I but one,
And of me onely haue they taken all.
Yet brother Barabas remember Iob,
What tell you me of Iob? I wot his wealth
Was written thus: he had seuen thousand sheepe,
Three thousand Camels, and two hundred yoake
Of labouring Oxen, and fiue hundred
Shee Asses: but for euery one of those,
Had they beene valued at indifferent rate,
I had at home, and in mine Argosie
And other ships that came from Egypt last,
As much as would haue bought his beasts and him,
And yet haue kept enough to liue vpon;
So that not he, but I may curse the day,
Thy fatall birth-day, forlorne Barabas;
And henceforth wish for an eternall night,
That clouds of darknesse may inclose my flesh,
And hide these extreme sorrowes from mine eyes:
For onely I haue toyl'd to inherit here
The months of vanity and losse of time,
And painefull nights haue bin appointed me.
Good Barabas be patient.
I, I pray leave me in my patience.
You that were ne're possest of wealth, are pleas'd with want.
But giue him liberty at least to mourne,
That in a field amidst his enemies,
Doth see his souldiers slaine, himselfe disarm'd,
And knowes no meanes of his recouerie:
I, let me sorrow for this sudden chance,
'Tis in the trouble of my spirit I speake;
Great iniuries are not so soone forgot.
Come, let vs leaue him in his irefull mood,
Our words will but increase his extasie.
On then: but trust me 'tis a misery
To see a man in such affliction:
Farewell Barabas.
I, fare you well.
See the simplicitie of these base saues,
Who for the villaines haue no wit themselues,
Thinke me to be a senselesse lumpe of clay
That will with euery water wash to dirt:
No, Barabas is borne to better chance,
And fram'd of finer mold then common men,
That measure nought but by the present time.
A reaching thought will search his deepest wits,
And cast with cunning for the time to come:
For euils are apt to happen euery day
But whither wends my beauteous Abigall?
Oh what has made my louely daughter sad?
What? woman, moane not for a little losse:
Thy father has enough in store for thee.
Not for my selfe, but aged Barabas:
Father, for thee lamenteth Abigaile:
But I will learne to leaue these fruitlesse teares.
And vrg'd thereto with my afflictions,
With fierce exlaimes run to the Senate-house,
And in the Senate reprehend them all,
And rent their hearts with tearing of my haire,
Till they reduce the wrongs done to my father.
No, Abigail, things past recouery
Are hardly cur'd with exclamations.
Be silent, Daughter, sufferance breeds ease,
And time may yeeld vs an occasion
Which on the sudden cannot serue the turne.
Besides, my girle, thinke me not all so fond
As negligently to forgoe so much
Without prouision for thy selfe and me.
Ten thousand Portagnes, besides great Perles,
Rich costly Iewels, and Stones infinite,
Fearing the worst of this before it fell,
I closely hid.
Where father?
In my house my girle.
Then shall they ne're be seene of Barrabas:
For they haue seiz'd vpon thy house and wares.
But they will giue me leaue once more, I trow,
To goe into my house.
That may they not:
For there I left the Gouernour placing Nunnes,
Displacing me; and of thy house they meane
To make a Nunnery, where none but their owne sect
Must enter in; men generally barr'd.
My gold, my gold, and all my wealth is gone.
You partiall heauens, haue I deseru'd this plague?
What will you thus oppose me, lucklesse Starres,
To make me desperate in my pouerty?
And knowing me impatient in distresse
Thinke me so mad as I will hang my selfe,
That I may vanish ore the earth in ayre,
And leaue no memory that e're I was.
No, I will liue; nor loath I this my life:
And since you leaue me in the Ocean thus
To sinke or swim, and put me to my shifts,
I'le rouse my senses, and awake my selfe.
Daughter, I haue it: thou perceiu'st the plight
Wherein these Christians haue oppressed me:
Be rul'd by me, for in extremitie
We ought to make barre of no policie.
Father, what e're it be to iniure them
That haue so manifestly wronged vs,
What will not Abigall attempt?
Why so; then thus, thou toldst me they haue turn'd my house
Into a Nunnery, and some Nuns are there.
I did.
Then Abigall, there must my girle
Intreat the Abbasse to be entertain'd.
How, as a Nunne?
I, Daughter, for Religion
Hides many mischiefes from suspition.
I, but father they will suspect me there.
Let 'em suspect, but be thou so precise
As they may thinke it done of Holinesse.
Intreat 'em faire, and giue them friendly speech,
And seeme to them as if thy sinnes were great,
Till thou hast gotten to be entertain'd.
Thus father shall I much dissemble.
Tush, as good dissemble that thou neuer mean'st
As first meane truth, and then dissemble it,
A counterfet profession is better
Then vnseene hypocrisie.
Well father, say I be entertain'd,
What then shall follow?
This shall follow then;
There haue I hid close underneath the plancke
That runs along the vpper chamber floore,
The gold and Iewels which I kept for thee.
But here they come; be cunning Abigall.
Then father goe with me.
No, Abigall, in this
It is not necessary I be seene.
For I will seeme offended with thee for't.
Be close, my girle, for this must fetch my gold.
Sisters, we now are almost at the new made Nunnery.
The better; for we loue not to be seene:
'Tis 30 winters long since some of vs
Did stray so farre amongst the multitude.
But, Madam, this house
And waters of this new made Nunnery
Will much delight you.
It may be so: but who comes here?
Grave Abbasse, and you happy Virgins guide,
Pitty the state of a distressed Maid.
What art thou daughter?
The hopelesse daughter of a haplesse Iew,
The Iew of Malta, wretched Barabas;
Sometimes the owner of a goodly house,
Which they haue now turn'd to a Nunnery.
Well, daughter, say, what is thy suit with vs?
Fearing the afflictions which my father feeles,
Proceed from sinne, or want of faith in vs,
I'de passe away my life in penitence,
And be a Nouice in your Nunnery,
To make attonement for my labouring soule.
No doubt, brother, but this proceedeth of the spirit.
I, and of a moving spirit too, brother; but come,
Let vs intreat she may be entertain'd.
Well, daughter, we admit you for a Nun.
First let me as a Novice learne to frame
My solitary life to your streight lawes,
And let me lodge where I was wont to lye,
I doe not doubt by your divine precepts
And mine owne industry, but to profit much.
As much I hope as all I hid is worth.
Come daughter, follow vs.
Why how now Abigall, what mak'st thou
Amongst these hateful Christians?
Hinder her not, thou man of little faith,
For she has mortified her selfe.
How, mortified I
And is admitted to the Sister-hood.
Child of pordition, and thy fathers shame,
What wilt thou doe among these hatefull fiends?
I charge thee on my blessing that thou leaue
These diuels, and their damned heresie.
Father giue me—
Nay backe, Abigall,
And thinke vpon the Iewels and the gold
The boord is marked thus that couers it.
Away accursed from thy fathers sight.
Barabas, although thou art in mis-beleee,
And wilt not see thine owne afflictions,
Yet let thy daughter be no longer blinde.
Blind, Fryer, I wrecke o thy perswasions.
The boord is marked thus † that couers i
For I had rather dye, then see her thus.
Wilt thou forsake mee too in my distresse,
Seduced Daughter, Goe forget nt.
Becomes it Iewes to be so credulos,
To morrow early Il'e be at th doors.
No come not at me, if thou wilt be damn'd,
Forget me, see me not, and so
Farewell, Remember to morrow morning.
Out, out thou wretch.
Whose this? Faire Abigall the rich Iewes daughter
Become a Nun, her fathers sudden fall
Has humbled her and brought her downe to this:
Tut, she were fitter for a tale of loue
Then to be tired out with Orizons:
And better would she farre become a bed
Embraced in a friendly louers armes,
Then rise at midnight to a solemne masse.
Why how now Don Mathias, in a dump?
Beleeue me, Noble Lodowicke, I haue seene
The strangest sight, in my opinion,
That euer I beheld.
What wast I prethe?
A faire young maid scarce 14 yeares of age,
The sweetest flower in Citherea's field,
Cropt from the pleasures of the fruitfull earth,
And strangely metamorphis'd Nun.
But say, What was she?
Why the rich Iewes daughter.
What Barabas, whose goods were lately seiz'd?
Is she so faire?
And matchlesse beautifull;
As had you seene her 'twould haue mou'd your heart,
Tho countermin'd with walls of brasse, to loue,
Or at the least to pitty.
And if she be so faire as you report,
'Twere time well spent to goe and visit her:
How say you, shall we?
I must and will, Sir, there's no remedy.
And so will I too, or it shall goe hard.
Farewell Mathias.
Farewell Lodowicke.
THus like the sad presaging Rauen that tolls
The sicke mans passeport in her hollow beake,
And in the shadow of the silent night
Doth shake contagion from her sable wings;
Vex'd and tormented runnes poore Barabas
With fatall curses towards these Christians.
The incertaine pleasures of swift-footed time
Haue tane their flight, and left me in despaire;
And of my former riches rests no more
But bare remembrance; like a souldiers skarre,
That has no further comfort for his maime.
Oh thou that with a fiery piller led'st
The sonnes of Israel through the dismall shades,
Light Abrahams off-spring; and direct the hand
Of Abigall this night; or let the day
Turne to eternall darkenesse after this:
No sleepe can fasten on my watchfull eyes,
Nor quiet enter my distemper'd thoughts,
Till I haue answer of my Abigall.
Now haue I happily espy'd a time
To search the plancke my father did appoint;
And here behold (vnseene) where I haue found
The gold, the perles, and Iewels which he hid.
Now I remember those old womens words,
Who in my wealth wud tell me winters tales,
And speake of spirits and ghosts that glide by night
About the place where Treasure hath bin hid:
And now me thinkes that I am one of those:
For whilst I liue, here liues my soules sole hope,
And when I dye, here shall my spirit walke.
Now that my fathers fortune were so good
As but to be about this happy place;
'Tis not so happy: yet when we parted last,
He said he wud attend me in the morne.
Then, gentle sleepe, where e're his bodie rests,
Give charge to Morpheus that he may dreame
A golden dreame, and of the sudden walke,
Come and receiue the Treasure I haue found.
Birn para todos, my ga nada no er:
As good goe on, as fit so sadly thus.
But stay, what starre shines yonder in the East?
The Loadstarre of my life, if Abigall.
Who's there?
Who's that?
Peace, Abigal, 'tis I.
Then father here receiue thy happinesse.
Hast thou't?
Here,
Hast thou't?
There's more, and more, and more.
Oh my girle,
My gold, my fortune, my felicity;
Strength to my soule, death to mine enemy;
Welcome the first beginner of my blisse:
Oh Aigal, Abigal, that I had thee here too,
Then my desires were fully satisfied,
But I will practise thy enlargement thence:
Oh girle, oh gold, oh beauty, oh my blsse!
Father, it draweth towards midnight now,
And 'bout this time the Nuns begin to wake;
To aun suspition, therefore, let vs part.
Farewell my oy, and by my fingers take
A kisse from hi that sends it from his soule.
Now Phoebus ope the eye-lids of the day,
And for the Rauen wake the morning Larke,
That I may houer with her in the Ayre;
Singing ore these, as she does ore her young.
Hrmoso Pir, de les Dnirch.
Now Captaine tell vs whither thou art bound?
Whence is thy ship that anchors in our Rhoad?
And why thou cam'st ashore without our leaue?
Governor of Malta, hither am I bound;
My Ship, the flying Dragon, is of Spaine,
And so am I, Delbosco is my name;
Vizadmirall vnto the Catholike King.
'Tis true, my Lord, therefore intreat him well.
Our fraught is Grecians, Turks, and Africk Moores.
For late vpon the coast of Corsica,
Because we vail'd not to the Spanish Fleet,
Their creeping Gallyes had vs in the chase:
But suddenly the wind began to rise,
And then we left, and tooke, and fought at ease:
Some have we fir'd, and many haue we sunke;
But one amongst the rest became our prize:
The Captain's slaine, the rest remaine our slaues,
Of whom we would make sale in Malta here.
Martin del Bosco, I haue heard of thee;
Welcome to Malta, and to all of vs;
But to admit a sale of these thy Turkes
We may not, nay we dare not giue consent
By reason of a Tributary league.
Delbosco, as thou louest and honour'st vs,
Perswade our Gouernor against the Turke;
This truce we haue is but in hope of gold,
And with that summe he craues might we wage warre.
Will Knights of Malta be in league with Turkes,
And buy it basely too for summes of gold?
My Lord, Remember that to Europ's shame,
The Christian Ile of Rhodes, from whence you came,
Was lately lost, and you were stated here
To be at deadly enmity with Turkes
Captaine we know it, but our force is small:
What is the summe that Calymath requires?
A hundred thousand Crownes.
My Lord and King hath title to this Isle,
And he meanes quickly to expell you hence;
Therefore be rul'd by me, and keepe the gold:
I'le write unto his Maiesty for ayd,
And not depart vntill I see you free.
On this condition shall thy Turkes be sold.
Goe Offiers and set them straight in shew.
Bosco, thou shalt be Malta's Generall;
We and our warlike Knights will follow thee
Against these barbarous mis-beleeuing Turkes.
So shall you imitate those you succeed:
For when their hideous force inuiron'd Rhodes,
Small though the number was that kept the Towne,
They fought it out, and not a man uruiu'd
To bring the haplesse newes to Christendome.
So will we fight it out; come, let's away:
Proud-daring Calymath, instead of gold,
Wee'll send the bullets wrapt in smoake and fire:
Claime tribute where thou wilt, we are resolu'd,
Honor is bought with bloud and not with gold.
This is the Market-place, here let 'em stand:
Feare not their sale, for they'll be quickly bought.
Euery ones price is written on his backe,
And so much must they yeeld or not be sold.
Here comes the Iew, had not his goods bin seiz'd,
He'de giue vs present mony for them all.
In spite of these swine-eating Christians,
(Vnchosen Nation, neuer circumciz'd;
Such as poore villaines were ne're thought vpon
Till Titus and Vespasian conquer'd vs.)
Am I become as wealthy as I was:
They hop'd my daughter would ha bin a Nun;
But she's at home, and I haue bought a house
As great and faire as is the Gouernors;
And there in spite of Malta will I dwell:
Hauing Fernezes hand, whose heart I'le haue;
I, and his sonnes too, or it shall goe hard.
I am not of the Tribe of Levy, I,
That can so soone forget an iniury.
We Iewes can fawne like Spaniels when we please;
And when we grin we bite, yet are our lookes
As innocent aud harmelesse as a Lambes.
I learn'd in Florence how to kisse my hand,
Heave vp my shoulders when they call me dogge,
And ducke as low as any bare-foot Fryar,
Hoping to see them starue vpon a stall,
Or else be gather'd for in our Synagogue;
That when the offering-Bason comes to me,
Euen for charity I may spit intoo't.
Here comes Don Lodowick the Gouernor's sonne,
One that I loue for his good fathers sake.
I heare the wealthy Iew walked this way;
I'le seeke him out, and so insinuate,
That I may haue a sight of Abigall;
For Don Mathias tels me she is faire.
Now will I shew my selfe to haue more of the Serpent
Then the Doue; that is, more knaue than foole.
Yond walks the Iew, now for faire Abigall.
I, I, no doubt but shee's at your command.
Barabas, thou know'st I am the Gouernors sonne.
I wud you were his father too, Sir, that's al the harm
I wish you: the slaue looks like a hogs cheek new findg'd.
Whither walk'st thou Barabas?
No further: 'tis a custome held with vs,
That when we speake with Gentiles like to you,
We turne into the Ayre to purge our selues:
For vnto vs the Promise doth belong.
Well, Barabas, canst helpe me to a Diamond?
Oh, Sir, your father had my Diamonds.
Yet I haue one left that will serve your turne:
I meane my daughter:—but e're he shall haue her
I'le sacrifice her on a pile of wood.
I ha the poyson of the City for him, and the
White leprosie.
What sparkle does it give without a foile?
The Diamond that I talke of, ne'r was foild:
But when he touches it, it will be foild:
Lord Lodowicke, it sparkles bright and faire.
Is it square or pointed, pray let me know.
Pointed it is, good Sir,— but not for you.
I like it much the better.
So doe I too.
How showes it by night?
Out shines Cinthia's rayes:
Yeu'le like it better farre a nights than dayes.
And what's the price?
Your life and if you haue it. — Oh my Lord
We will not larre about the price; come to my house
And I will giu't your honour— with a vengeance.
No, Barabas, I will deserue it first.
Good Sir, your father has deseru'd it at my hands,
Who of meere charity and Christian ruth,
To bring me to religious purity,
And as it were in Catechising sort,
To make me mindfull of my mortall sinnes,
Against my will, and whether I would or no,
Seiz'd all I had, and thrust me out a doores,
And made my house a place for Nuns most chast.
No doubt your soule shall reape the fruit of it.
I, but my Lord, the haruest is farre off:
And yet I know the prayers of those Nuns
And holy Fryers, hauing mony for their paines,
Are wondrous; and indeed doe no man good:
And seeing they are not idle, but still doing,
'Tis likely they in time may reape some fruit,
I meane in fulnesse of perfection.
Good Barabas glance not at our holy Nuns.
No, but I doe it through a burning zeale,
Hoping ere long to set the house a fire;
For though they doe a while increase and multiply,
I'le haue a saying to that Nunnery.
As for the Diamond, Sir, I told you of,
Come home and there's no price shall make vs part,
Euen for your Honourable fathers sake.
It shall goe hard but I will see your death,
But now I must be gone to buy a slaue.
And, Barabas, I'le beare thee company.
Come then, here's the marketplace; whats the price
Of this flaue, 200 Crowns? Do the Turke weigh so much?
Sir, that's his price.
What, can he steale that you demand so much?
Belike he has some new tricke for a purse;
And if he has, he is worth 300 plats.
So that, being bought, the Towne-seale might be got
To keepe him for his life time from the gallowes.
The Sessions day is criticall to theeues,
And few or none scape but by being purg'd.
Ratest thou this Moore but at 200 plats?
No more, my Lord.
Why should this Turke be dearer then that Moore?
Because he is young and has more qualities.
What, hast the Philosophers stone? and thou hast,
Breake my head with it, I'le forgiue thee.
No Sir, I can cut and shaue.
Let me see, sirra, are you not an old shauer?
Alas, Sir, I am a very youth.
A youth? I'le buy you, and marry you to Lady vanity
If you doe well.
I will serue you, Sir.
Some wicked trick or other. It may be vnder colour
Of shauing, thou'lt cut my throat for my goods.
Tell me, hast thou thy health well?
I passing well.
So much the worse; I must haue one that's ickly,
And be but for sparing vittles: 'tis not a stone of beef a day
Will maintaine you in these chops; let me see one
That's some what leaner.
Here's a leaner, how like you him?
Where was thou borne?
In Trace; brought vp in Arabia.
So much the better, thou art for my turne,
An hundred Crownes; I'le haue him; there's the coyne.
Then marke him, Sir, and take him hence.
I, marke him, you were best, for this is he
That by my helpe shall doe much villanie.
My Lord farewell: Come Sirra you are mine.
As for the Diamond it shall be yours;
I pray, Sir, be no stranger at my house,
All that I haue shall be at your command.
What makes the Iew and Lodewicke so priuate?
I feare me 'tis about faire Abigall.
Yonder comes Don Mathias, let vs stay;
He loues my daughter, and she holds him deare:
But I haue sworne to frustrate both their hopes,
And be reveng'd upon the —Gouernor.
This Moore is comeliest, is he not? speake son.
No, this is the better, mother, view this well.
Seeme not to know me here before your mother
Lest she mistrust the match that is in hand:
When you haue brought her home, come to my house;
Thinke of me as thy father; Sonne farewell.
But wherefore talk'd Don Lodowick with you?
Tush man, we talk'd of Diamonds, not of Abigal.
Tell me, Mathias, is not that the Iew?
As for the Comment on the Machabees
I haue it, Sir, and 'tis at your command.
Yes, Madam, and my talke with him was
About the borrowing of a booke or two.
Conuerse not with him, he is cast off from heauen.
Thou hast thy Crownes, fellow, come let's away.
Sirra, Iew, remember the booke.
Marry will I, Sir.
Come, I haue made a reasonable market, let's away.
Now let me know thy name, and there withall
Thy birth, condition, and profession.
Faith, Sir, my birth is but meane, my name's Ithimer,
My profession what you please.
Hast thou no Trade? then listen to my words,
And I will teach that shall sticke by thee:
First be thou voyd of these affections,
Compassion, loue, vaine hope, and hartlesse feare,
Be mou'd at nothing, see thou pitty none,
But to hy selfe smile when the Christians moane.
Oh braue, master, I worship your nose for this.
As for my selfe, I walke abroad a nights
And kill sicke people groaning under walls:
Sometimes I goe about and poyson wells;
And now and then, to cherish Christian theeves,
I am content to lose some of my Crownes;
That I may, walking in my Gallery,
See 'em goe pinion'd along by my doore.
Being young I studied Physicke, and began
To practise first vpon the Italian;
There I enric'd the Priests with burials,
And alwayes kept the Sexton's armes in vre
With digging graues and ringing dead mens knels:
And after that was I an Engineere,
And in the warres 'twixt France and Germanie,
Vnder pretence of helping Charles the fifth,
Slew friend and enemy with my stratagems.
Then after that was I an Vsurer,
And with extorting, cozening, forfeiting,
And tricks belonging vnto Brokery,
I fill'd the Iailes with Bankrouts in a yeare,
And with young Orphans planted Hospitals,
And euery Moone made some or other mad,
And now and then one hang himselfe for griefe,
Pinning vpon his breast along great Scrowle
How I with interest tormented him.
But marke how I am blest for plaguing them,
I haue as much coyne as will buy the Towne.
But tell me now, How hast thou spent thy time?
Faith, Master, in setting Christian villages on fire,
Chaining of Eunuches, binding gally-slaues.
One time I was an Hostler in an Inne,
And in the night time secretly-would I steale
To trauellers Chambers, and there cut their throats:
Once at Ierusalem, where the pilgrims kneel'd,
I strowed powder on the Marble stones,
And therewithall their knees would ranckle, so
That I haue laugh'd agood to see the cripples
Goe limping home to Christendome on stilts.
Why this is something: make account of me
As of thy fellow; we are villaines both:
Both circumcized, we hate Christians both:
Be true and secret, thou shalt want no gold.
But stand aide, here comes Don Lodowicke.
Oh Barabas well met; where is the Diamond
You told me of?
I haue it for you, Sir; please you walke in with me:
What, ho, Abigall; open the doore I say.
In good time, father, here are letters come
From Ormus, and the Post stayes here within.
Giue me the letters, daughter, doe you heare?
Entertaine Lodowicke the Gouernors sonne
With all the curtesie you can affoord;
Prouided, that you keepe your Maiden-head.
Vse him as if he were a Philist.
Dissemble, sweare, protest, vow to loe him,
He is not of the seed of Abraham.
I am a little busie, Sir, pray pardon me.
Abigall, bid him welcome for my sake.
For your sake and his own he's welcome hither.
Daughter, a word more; kisse him, speake him faire,
And like a cunning Iew so cast about,
That ye be both made sure e're you come out.
Oh father, Don Mathias is my loue.
I know it: yet I say make loue to him;
Doe, it is requisite it should be so.
Nay on my life it is my Factors hand,
But goe you in, I'le thinke vpon the account:
The account is made, for Lodowicke dyes.
My Factor sends me word a Merchant's fled
That owes me for a hundred Tun of Wine:
I weigh it thus much; I haue wealth enough.
For now by this has he kist Abigall;
And she vowes loue to him, and hee to her.
As sure as heauen rain'd Manna for the Iewes,
So sure shall he and Don Mathias dye:
His father was my chiefest enemie.
Whither goes Don Mathias? stay a while.
Wither but to my faire loue Abigall?
Thou know'st, and heauen can witnesse it is true,
That I intend my daughter shall be thine.
I, Barabas, or else thou wrong'st me much:
Oh heauen forbid I should haue such a thought.
Pardon me though I weepe; the Gouernors sonne
Will, whether I will or no, haue Abigall:
He sends her letters, bracelets, jewels, rings.
Does she receiue them?
Shee? No, Mathias, no, but sends them backe,
And when he comes, she lockes her selfe vp fast;
Yet through the key hole will he talke to her,
While she runs to the widow looking out
When you should come and hale him from the doore
Oh treacherous Lodowicke!
Even now as I came home, he slipt me in,
And I am sure he is with Abigall.
I'le rouze him thence.
Not for all Malta, therefore sheath your sword;
If you loue me, no quarrels in my house;
But stale you in, and seeme to see him not;
I'le giue him such a warning e're he goes
As he shall haue small hopes of Abigall.
Away, for here they come,
What hand in hand, I cannot suffer this.
Mathias, as thou lou'st me, not a word.
Well, let it passe, another time shall serue.
Barabas, is not that the widowes sonne?
I, and take heed, for he hath sworne your death.
My death? what is the base borne peasant mad?
No, no, but happily he stands in feare
Of tht which you, I thinke, ne're dreame vpon,
My daughter here, a paltry silly girle.
Why loues she Don Mathias?
Doth she not with her smiling answer you?
He has my heart, I smile against my will.
Barabas, thou know'st I haue lou'd thy daughter long.
And so has she done you, euen from a child.
And now I can no longer hold my minde.
Nor I the affection that I beare to you
This is thy Diamond, tell me, shall I haue it?
Win it, and weare it, it is yet vnoyl'd,
Oh but I know your Lordship wud disdaine
To marry with the daughter of a Iew:
And yet I'le giue her many a golden crosse
With Christian posies round about the ring.
'Tis not thy wealth, but her that I esteeme,
Yet craue I thy consent.
And mine you haue, yet let me talke to her;
This off-spring of Cain, this Iebusite
That neuer tasted of the Passeouer,
Nor e're shall see the land of Canaan,
Nor our Messias that is yet to come,
This gentle Magot Lodowicke I meane,
Must be deluded: let him haue thy hand,
But keepe thy heart till Don Mathias comes.
What shall I be betroth'd to Lodowicke?
It's no sinne to deceiue a Christian;
For they them slues hold it a principle,
Faith is not to be held with Heretickes;
But all are Hereticks that are not Iewes;
This followes well, and therefore daughter feare not.
I haue intreated her, and she will grant.
Then gentle Abigal plight thy faith to me.
I cannot chuse, seeing my father bids:
Nothing but death shall part my loue and me.
Now haue I that for which my soule hath long'd.
So haue not I, but yet I hope I shall.
Oh wretched Abigal, what hast thee done?
Why on the sudden is your colour chang'd?
I know not, but farewell, I must be gone.
Stay her, but let her not speake one word more.
Mute a the sudden; here's a sudden change.
Oh muse not at it, 'tis the Hebrewes guize,
That maidens new betroth'd should weepe a while
Trouble her not, sweet Lodowicke depart:
Shee is thy wife, and thou shalt be mine heire.
Oh, is't the custome, then I am resolu'd:
But rathe let the brightsome heauens be dim,
And Natures beauty choake with stifeling clouds,
Then my faire Abigal should frowne on me.
There comes the villaine, now I'le be reueng'd.
Be quiet Lodowicke, it is enough
That I haue made thee sure to Abigal.
Well, let him goe.
Well, but for me, as you went in at dores
You had bin stab'd, but not a word on't now;
Here must no speeches passe, nor swords be drawne.
Suffer me, Barabas, but to follow him.
No; so shall I, if any hurt be done,
Be made an accessary of your deeds;
Reuenge it on him when you meet him next.
For this I'le haue his heart.
Doe so; loe here I giue thee Abigall.
What greater gift can poore Mathias haue?
Shall Lodowicke rob me of so faire a loue?
My life is not so deare as Abigall.
My heart misgiues me, that to crosse your loue,
Hee's with your mother, therefore after him.
What, is he gone vnto my mother?
Nay, if you will, stay till she comes her selfe.
I cannot stay; for if my mother come,
Shee'll dye with griefe.
I cannot take my leaue of him for teares:
Father, why haue you thus incenst them both?
What's that to thee?
I'le make 'em friends againe.
You'll make 'em friends? are there not Iewes
Enow in Malta.
But thou must dote vpon a Christian?
I will haue Don Mathias, he is my loue.
Yes, you shall haue him: Goe put her in.
I, I'le put her in.
Now tell me, Ithimore, how lik'st thou this?
Faith Master, I thinke by this
You purchase both their liues; is it not so?
True; and it shall be cunningly perform'd.
Oh, master, that I might haue a hand in this.
I, so thou shalt, 'tis thou must doe the deed:
Take this and beare it to Mathias streight,
And tell him that it comes from Lodowicke.
'Tis poyson'd, is it not?
No, no, and yet it might be done that way:
It is a challenge feign'd from Lodowicke.
Feare not, I'le so set his heart a fire, that he
Shall verily thinke it comes from him.
I cannot choose but like thy readinesse:
Yet be not rash, but doe it cunningly.
As I behaue my selfe in this, imploy me hereafter.
Away then.
So, now will I goe in to Lodowicke,
And like a cunning spirit feigne some lye,
Till I haue set 'em both at enmitie.
SInce this Towne was besieg'd, my gaine growes cold
The time has bin, that but for one bare night
A hundred Duckets haue bin freely giuen:
But now against my will I must be chast.
And yet I know my beauty doth not faile.
From Venice Merchants, and from Padua,
Were wont to come rare witted Gentlemen,
Schollers I meane, learned and liberall;
And now, saue Pilia-borza, comes there none,
And he is very seldome from my house;
And here he comes.
Hold thee, wench, there's something for thee to spend.
'Tis siluer, I disdaine it.
I, but the Iew has gold,
And I will haue it or it shall goe hard.
Tell me, how cam'st thou by this?
Faith, walking the backe lanes through the Gardens
I chanc'd to cast mine eye vp to the Iewes counting-house
Where I saw some bags of mony, and in the night I
Clamber'd vp with my hooks, and as I was taking
My choyce, I heard a rumbling in the house; so I tooke
Onely this, and runne my way: but here's the Iews man.
Hide the bagge.
Looke not towards him, let's away:
Zoon's what a looking thou keep'st,
Thou'lt betraye's anon.
O the sweetest face that euer I beheld! I know she is
A Curtezane by her attire: now would I giue a hundred
Of the Iewes Crownes that I had uch a Concubine.
Well, I haue deliuer'd the challenge in such sort,
As meet they will, and fighting dye; braue sport.
This is the place, now Abigall shall see
Whether Mathias holds her deare or no.
What, dares the villain write in such base terms?
I did it, and reuenge it if thou dar'st.
Oh brauely fought, and yet they thrust not home.
Now Lodowicke, now Mathias, so;
So now they haue shew'd themselues to be tall fellowes.
Part 'em, part 'em.
I, part 'em now they are dead: Farewell, farewell.
What sight is this? my Lodowicke slaine!
These armes of mine shall be thy Sepulchre.
Who is this? my sonne Mathias slaine!
Oh Lodowicke! hadst thou perish'd by the Turke,
Wretched Ferneze might haue veng'd thy death.
Thy sonne slew mine, and I'le reuenge his death.
Looke, Katherin, looke, thy sonne gaue mine these woūds
O leaue to griue me, I am grieu'd enough.
Oh that my sighs could turne to liuely breath;
And these my teares to blood, that he might liue.
Who made them enemies?
I know not, and that grieues me most of all.
My sonne lou'd thine.
And so did Lodowicke him.
Lend me that weapon that did kill my sonne,
And it shall murder me.
Nay Madem stay, that weapon was my son's,
And on that rather should Ferneze dye.
Hold, let's inquire the causers of their deaths,
That we may venge their blood vpon their heads.
Then take them vp, and let them be interr'd
Within one sacred monument of stone;
Vpon which Altar I will offer vp
My daily sacrifice of sighes and teares,
And with my prayers pierce impartiall heauens,
Till they the causers of our smarts,
Which forc'd their hands diuide vnited hearts:
Come, Katherina, our losses equall are,
Then of true griefe let vs take equall share.
Why was there euer seene such villany, so neatly
Plotted, and so well perform'd? both held in hand, and
Flatly both beguil'd.
Why how now Ithimore, why laugh'st thou so?
Oh, Mistresse, ha ha ha.
Why what ayl'st thou?
Oh my master.
Ha.
Oh Mistris! I haue the brauest, grauest, secret, subtil
Bottle-nos'd knaue to my Master, that euer Gentleman had
Say, knaue, why rail'st vpon my father thus?
Oh, my master has the brauest policy.
Wherein?
Why, know you not?
Why no.
Know you not of Mathia & Don Lodowick disaster?
No, what was it?
Why the deuil inuented a challenge, my Mr. writ it,
And I carried it, first to Lodowicke, and imprmis to Mathia.
And then they met, as the story sayes,
In dolefull wise they ended both their dayes.
And was my father furtherer of their deaths?
Am I Ithimore?
Yes.
So sure did your father write, & I cary the chalenge.
Well, Ithimore, let me request thee this,
Goe to the new made Nunnery, and inquire
For any of the Fryars of St. Iaynes,
And say, I pray them come and speake with me.
I pray, mistris, wil you answer me to one question?
Well, sirra, what is't?
A very feeling one; haue not the Nuns fine sport
With the Fryars now and then?
Go to, sirra sauce, is this your question? get ye gon
I will forsooth, Mistris.
Hard-hearted Father, unkind Barabas,
Was this the pursuit of thy policie?
To make me shew them fauour seuerally,
That by my fauour they should both be slaine?
Admit thou lou'dst not Lodowicke for his sinne,
Yet Don Mathias ne're offended thee:
But thou wert set vpon extreme reuenge,
Because the Pryor dispossest thee once,
And couldst not venge it, but vpon his sonne,
Nor on his sonne, but by Mathias meanes;
Nor on Mathias, but by murdering me.
But I perceiue there is no loue on earth,
Pitty in Iewes, nor piety in Turkes.
But here Comes cursed Ithimore with the Fryar.
Virgo, salve.
When ducke you?
Welcome graue Fryar Ithamore begon,
Know, holy Sir, I am bold to sollicite thee.
Wherein?
To get me be admitted for a Nun.
Why Abigal it is not yet long since
That I did labour thy admition,
And then thou didst not like that holy life.
Then were my thoughts so fraile & vnconfirm'd,
And I was chain'd to follies of the world:
But now experience, purchased with griefe,
Has made me see the difference of things.
My sinfull soule, alas, hath pac'd too long
The fatall Labyrinth of misbeleefe,
Farre from the Sonne that giues eternall life.
Who taught thee this?
The Abbasse of the house,
Whose zealous admonition I embrace:
Oh therefore, Iacomi, let me be one,
Although unworthy of that Sister-hood.
Abigal I will, but see, thou change no more,
For that will be most heauy to thy soule.
That was my father's fault.
Thy father's, how?
Nay, you shall pardon me: oh Barabas,
Though thou deseruest hardly at my hands,
Yet neuer shall these lips bewray thy life.
Come, shall we goe?
My duty waits on you.
What, Abigall become a Nunne againe?
False, and vnkinde; what hast thou lost thy father?
And all vnknowne, and vnconstrain'd of me,
Art thou againe got to the Nunnery?
Now here she writes, and wils me to repent.
Repentance? Spurca: what pretendeth this?
I feare she knowes ('tis so) of my deuice
In Don Mathias and Lodovicoes deaths:
If so, 'tis time that it be seene into:
For she that varies from me in beleefe
Giues great presumption that she loues me not;
Or louing, doth dislike of something done:
But who comes here? Oh Ithimore come neere;
Come neere my loue, come neere thy masters life,
My trusty seruant, nay, my second life;
For I haue now no hope but euen in thee;
And on that hope my happinesse is built:
When saw'st thou Abigall?
To day.
With whom?
A Fryar.
A Fryar? false villaine, he hath done the deed.
How, Sir?
Why made mine Abigall a Nunne.
That's no lye, for she sent me for him.
Oh vnhappy day,
False, credulous, inconstant Abigall!
But let 'em goe: And Ithimore, from hence
Ne're shall she grieue me more with her disgrace;
Ne're shall she liue to inherit ought of mine,
Be blest of me, nor come within my gates,
But perish vnderneath my bitter curse
Like Cain by Adam, for his brother's death.
Oh master.
Ithimore, intreat not for her, I am mou'd,
And she is hatefull to my soule and me:
And least thou yeeld to this that I intreat,
I cannot thinke but that thou hat'st my life.
Who I, master? Why I'le run to some rocke and
Throw my selfe headlong into the sea; why I'le doe any
Thing for your sweet sake.
Oh trusty Ithimore; no seruant, but my friend;
I here adopt thee for mine onely heire,
All that I haue is thine when I am dead,
And whilst I liue vse ; spend as my selfe;
Here take my keyes, I'le giue 'em thee anon
Goe buy thee garments: but thou shalt not want:
Onely know this, that thus thou art to doe:
But first goe fetch me in the pot of Rice
That for our supper stands vpon the fire.
I hold my head my master's hungry: I goe Sir.
Thus euery villaine ambles after wealth
Although he ne're be richer then in hope:
But huh't.
Here 'tis, Master.
Well said, Ithimore; what hast thou brought
The Ladle with thee too?
Yes, Sir, the prouerb saies, he that eats with the deuil
Had need of a long spoone, I haue brought you a Ladle.
Very well, Ithimore, then now be secret
And for thy sake, whom I so dearely loue,
Now shalt thou see the death of Abigall,
That thou mayst freely liue to be my heire.
Why, master, wil you poison her with a messe of rice
Porredge that wil preserue life, make her round & plump,
And batten more then you are aware.
I but Ithimore seest thou this?
It is a precious powder that I bought
Of an Italian in Anna once,
Whose operation is to binde infect,
And poyson deeply: yet not appeare
In forty houres after it is tae.
How master?
Thus Ithimore:
This Euen they vse in Malta here ('tis call'd
Saint Iagues Euen) and then I say they vse
To send their Almes vnto the Nunneries:
Among the rest beare this, and set it there;
There's a darke entry where ey take it in,
Where they must neither see the messenger,
Nor make enquiry who hath sent it them.
How so?
Belike there is some Ceremony in't.
There Ithimore must thou goe place this plot:
Stay, let me spice it first.
Pray doe, and let me help you Mr. Pray let me taste first.
Prethe doe: what saist thou now?
Troth Mr. I'm loth such a pot of pottage should be spoyld.
Peace, Ithimore, 'tis better so then spar'd.
Assure thy selfe thou shalt haue broth by the eye.
My purse, my Coffer, and my selfe is thine.
Well, master, I goe.
Stay, first let me stirre it Ithimore.
As fatall be it to her as the draught
Of which great Alexander drunke, and dyed:
And with her let it worke like Borgias wine,
Whereof his sire, the Pope, was poyson'd.
In few, the blood of Hydra, Lerna's bane;
The iouyce of Hebon, and Cocitus breath,
And all the poysons of the Stygian poole
Breake from the fiery kingdome; and in this
Vomit your venome, and inuenome her
That like a fiend hath left her father thus.
What a blessing has he giu'nt? was euer pot of
Rice porredge so sac't? what shall I doe with it?
Oh my sweet Ithimore goe set it downe
And come againe so soone as thou hast done,
For I haue other businesse for thee.
Here's a drench to poyson a whole stable of
Flanders mares: I'le carry't to the Nuns with a powder.
And the horse pestilence to boot; away.
I am gone.
Pay me my wages for my worke is done.
Ile pay thee with a vengeance Ithamore.
Welcome great Bashaws, how fares Cllymath,
What wind drives you thus into Malta rhode?
The wind that bloweth all the world besides,
Desire of gold.
Desire of gold, great Sir?
That's to be gotten in the Westerne Inde:
In Malta are no golden Minerals.
To you of Malta thus saith Calymath:
The time you tooke for respite, is at hand,
For the performance of your promise past;
And for the Tribute-mony I am sent.
Bashaw, in briefe, shalt haue no tribute here,
Nor shall the Heathens liue vpon our spoyle:
First will we race the City wals our selues,
Lay waste the Iland, hew the Temples downe,
And shipping of our goods to Sicily,
Open an entrance for the wastfull sea,
Whose billowes beating the resistlesse bankes,
Shall ouerflow it with their refluence.
Well, Gouernor, since thou hast broke the league
By at denyall of the promis'd Tribute,
Talke not of racing downe your City wals,
You shall not need trouble your selues so farre,
For Selim-Calymath shall come himselfe,
And with brasse-bullets batter downe your Towers,
And turne proud Malta to a wildernesse
For these intolerable wrongs of yours; And so farewell.
Farewell:
And now you men of Malta looke about,
And let's prouide to welcome Calymath:
Close your Port-cullise, charge your Basiliskes,
And as you profitably take vp Armes,
So now couragiously encounter them;
For by this Answer, broken is the league,
And nought is to be look'd for now but warres,
And nought to vs more welcome is then wars.
Oh brother, brother, all the Nuns are sicke,
And Physicke will not helpe them, they must dye.
The Abbasse sent for me to be conest:
Oh what a sad confession will there be?
And so did faire Maria send for me:
I'le to her lodging; hereabouts she lyes.
What, all dead saue onely Abigall?
And I shall dye too, for I feele death comming.
Where is the Fryar that conuerst with me?
Oh he is gone to see the other Nuns.
I sent for him, but seeing you are come
Be you my ghostly father; and first know,
That in this house I liu'd religiously,
Chast, and deuout, much sorrowing for my sinnes,
But e're I came —
What then?
I did offend high heauen so grieuously,
As I am almost desperate for my sinnes:
And one offence torments me more then all.
You knew Mathias and Don Lodowicke?
Yes, what of them?
My father did contract me to 'em both:
First to Don Lodowicke, him I neuer lou'd;
Mathias was the man that I held deare,
And for his sake did I become a Nunne.
So, say how was their end?
Both iealous of my loue, enuied each other:
And by my father's practice, which is there
Set downe at large, the Gallants were both slaine.
Oh monstrous villany:
To worke my peace, this I confesse to thee:
Reueale it not, for then my father dyes.
Know that Confession must not be reueal'd,
The Canon Law forbids it, and the Priest
That makes it knowne, being degraded first,
Shall e condemn'd, and then sent to the fire,
So I haue heard; pray therefore keepe it close,
Death seizeth on my heart, ah gentle Fryar
Conuert my father that he may be sau'd,
And witnesse that I dye a Christian.
I, and a Virgin too, that grieues me most:
But I must to the Iew and exclaime on him,
And make him stand in feare of me.
Oh brother, all the Nuns are dead, let's bury them.
First helpe to bury this, then goe with me
And helpe me to exclaime against the Iew.
Why? what has he done?
A thing that makes me tremble to vnfold.
What ha he crucified a child?
No, but a worse thing: 'twas told me in shrft,
Thou know'st 'tis death and if it be reueal'd.
Come let's away.
THere is no musicke to a Christians knell:
How sweet the Bels ring now the Nuns are dead
That sound at other times like Tinkers pans?
I was afraid the poyson had not wrought;
Or though it wrought, it would haue done no good,
For euery yeare they swell, and yet they lie;
Now all are dead not one remaines aliue.
That's braue Mr. but think you it wil not be known
How can it if we two be secret.
For my part feare you not.
I'de cut thy throat if I did.
And reason too; but here's a royall Monastry hard
By, good master let me poyson all the Monks.
Thou shalt not need, for now the Nuns are dead,
They'll dye with griefe.
Doe you ot sorrow for your daughters death?
No, but I greue because she liu'd so long an Hebrew Catho diabola.
Borne, and would become a Christian.
Look, look, Mr. here come two religious Caterpillers.
I smelt 'em e're they came.
God-a-mercy nose; come let's begone.
Stay wicked Iew, repent, I say, and stay.
Thou hast offended, therefore must be damn'd.
I feare they know we sent the poyson'd broth.
And so doe I, master, therefore speake 'em faire.
Barabas, thou hast —
I, that thou hast —
True, I haue mony, what though I haue?
Thou art a —
I, that thou art a —
What needs all this? I know I am a Iew.
Thy daughter —
I, thy daughter, —
Oh speake not of her, then I dye with griefe.
Remember that —
I, remember that —
I must needs say that I haue beene a great usurer.
Thou hast committed —
Fornication? but that was in another Country:
And besides, the Wench is dead.
I, but Barabas remember Mathias and Don Lodowick.
Why, what of them?
I will not say that by a forged challenge they met.
She has confest, and we are both vndone;
My bosome inmates, but I must dissemble.
Oh holy Fryars, the burthen of my sinnes
Lye heauy on my soule; then pray you tell me,
Is't not too late now to turne Christian?
I haue beene zealous in the Iewish faith,
Hard harted to the poor, a couetous wretch,
That would for Lucars sake haue sold my soule.
A hundred for a hundred I haue ane;
And now for store of wealth may I compare
With all the Iewes in Mata; but what is wealth?
I am a Iew, and therefore am I lost.
Would pennance serue for this my sinne,
I could afford to whip my selfe to death.
And so could I; but pennance will not serue.
To fast, to pray, and weare a shirt of haire,
And on my knees creepe to Ierusalem,
Cellers of Wine, and Sollers full of Wheat,
Ware-houses stuft with spices and with drugs,
Whole Chests of Gold, in Bulloine, and in Coyne,
Besides I know not how much weight in Pearle
Orient and round, haue I within my house;
At Alexandria, Merchandize vnsold:
But yesterday two ships went from this Towne,
Their voyage will be worth ten thousand Crownes.
In Floence, Venice, Antwerpe, London, Ciuill,
Frankeford, Lubecke, Mosco, and where not,
Haue I debts owing; and in most of these,
Great summes of mony lying in the bancho;
All this I'le giue to some religious house
So I may be baptiz'd and liue therein.
Oh good Barabas come to our house.
Oh no, good Barabas come to our house.
And Barabas, you know —
I know that I haue highly sinn'd,
You shall conuert me, you shall haue all my wealth.
Oh Barabas, their Lawes are strict.
I know they are, and I will be with you.
They weare no shirts, and they goe bare-foot too.
Then 'tis not for me; and I am resolu'd
You shall confesse me, and haue all my goods.
Good Barabas come to me.
You see I answer him, and yet he stayes;
Rid him away, and goe you home with me.
I'le be with you to night.
Come to my house at one a clocke this night.
You heare your answer, and you may be gone.
Why goe get you away.
I will not goe for thee.
Not, then I'le make thee goe.
How, dost call me rogue?
Part 'em, master, part 'em.
This is meere frailty, brethren, be content.
Fryar Barnardine goe you with Ithimore.
You know my mind, let me alone with him;
Why does he goe to thy house, let him begone.
I'le giue him something and so stop his mouth.
I neuer heard of any man but he
Malign'd the order of the Iacobines:
But doe you thinke that I beleeue his words?
Why Brother you conuerted Abigall;
And I am bound in charitie to requite it,
And so I will, oh Iocome, faile not but come.
But Barabas who shall be your godfathers,
For presently you shall be shriu'd.
Marry the Turke shall be one of my godfathers,
But not a word to any of your Couent.
I warrant thee, Barabas.
So now the feare is past, and I am safe:
For he that shriu'd her is within my house,
What if I murder'd him e're Iocoma comes?
Now I haue such a plot for both their liues,
As neuer Iew nor Christian knew the like:
One turn'd my daughter, therefore he shall dye;
The other knowes enough to haue my life,
Therefore 'tis not requisite he should liue.
But are not both these wise men to suppose
That I will leaue my house, my goods, and all,
To fast and be well whipt; I'le none of that.
Now Fryar Bernardine I come to you,
I'le feast you, lodge you, giue you faire words,
And after that, I and my trusty Turke —
No more but so: it must and shall be done.
Ithimore, tell me, is the Fryar asleepe?
Yes; and I know not what the reason is
Doe what I can he will not strip himselfe,
Nor goe to bed, but sleepes in his owne cloth
I feare me he mistrusts what we intend.
No, 'tis an order which the Fryars vse:
Yet if he knew our meanings, could he scape?
No, none can heare him, cry he ne're so loud.
Why true, therefore did I place him there:
The other Chambers open towards the street.
You loyter, master, wherefore stay we thus?
Oh how I long to see him shake his heeles.
Come on, sirra, off with your girdle, make a hansom noose;
Fryar awake.
What doe you meane to strangle me?
Yes, 'cause you vse to confesse.
Blame not vs but the prouerb, Confes & be hang'd
Pull hard.
What, will you saue my life?
Pull hard, I say, you would haue had my goods.
I, and our liues too therefore pull amaine.
'Tis neatly done, Sir, here's no print at all.
Then is it as it should be, take him vp.
Nay, Mr. be ul'd by me a little; so, let him leane
Vpon his staffe; excellent, he stands as if he were begging of Bacon.
Who would not thinke but that this Fryar liu'd?
What time a night is't now, sweet Ithimore?
Towards one.
Then will not Iocoma long from hence.
This is the houre wherein I shall proceed;
Oh happy houre, wherein I shall conuert
An Infidell, and bring his gold into our treasury.
But soft, is not this Bernardine? it is;
And vnderstanding I should come this way,
Stands here a purpose, meaning me some wrong,
And intercept my going to the Iew; Bernardine;
Wilt thou not speake? thou think'st I see thee no;
Away I'de wish thee, and let me goe by:
No, wilt thou not? nay then I'le force my way;
And see staffe stands ready for the purpose:
As thou lik'st that, stop me another time.
Why how now Iocoma, what hast thou done?
Why stricken him that would haue stroke at me.
Who is it Bernardine? now out alas, he is slaine.
I, Mr. he's slain; look how his brains drop out on's nose.
Good sirs I haue don't, but nobody knowes it but
You two, I may escape.
So might my man and I hang with you for company.
No, let vs beare him to the Magistrates.
Good Barabas let me goe.
No, pardon me, the Law must haue his course.
I must be forc'd to giue in euidence,
That being importun'd by this Berardin
To be a Christian, I shut him out,
And there he sate: now I to keepe my word,
And giue my goods and substance to your house,
Was vp thus early; with intent to goe
Vnto your Friery, because you staid.
Fie vpon 'em, Mr. will you turne Christian, when
Holy Friars turne deuils and murder one another.
No, for this example I'le remaine a Iew:
Heauen blesse me; what, a Fryar a murderer?
When shall you see a Iew commit the like?
Why a Turke could a done no more.
To morrow is the Sessions; you shall to it.
Come Ithimore, let's helpe to take him hence.
Villaines, I am a sacred person, touch me not.
The Law shall touch you, we'll but lead you, we
'Las I could weepe at your calamity.
Take in the staffe too, for that must be showne:
Law wils that each particular be knowne.
Pilia-borza, didst thou meet with Ithimore?
I did.
And didst thou deliuer my letter?
I did.
And what think'st thou, will he come?
I think so, and yet I cannot tell, for at the reading of
The letter, he look'd like a man of another world.
Why so?
That such a base slaue as he should be saluted by such
A tall man as I am, from such a beautifull dame as you.
And what said he?
Not a wise word, only gaue me a nod, as who shold say, Is it euen so; and so I left him, being driuen to a Non-plus at the critical aspect of my terrible countenance.
And where didst meet him?
Vpon mine owne free-hold within 40 foot of the Gallowes, conning his neck-verse I take it, looking of a Fryars Execution, whom I saluted with an old hempen prouerb, Hidie tibi, cras mihi, and so I left him to the mercy Of the Hangman: but the Exercise being done, see where He comes.
I neuer knew a man take his death so patiently as This Fryar; he was ready to leape off e're the halter was About his necke; and when the Hangman had put on his Hempen Tippet, he made such haste to his prayers, as if Hee had had another Cure to serue; well, goe whither He will, I'le be none of his followers in haste:
And now I thinke on't, going to the execution, a fellow
Met me with a muschatoes like a Rauens wing, and
A Dagger with a hilt like a warming-pan, and he
Gaue me a letter from one Madam Bellamira,
Saluting me in such sort as if he had meant to make
Cleane my Boots with his lips; the effect was, that
I should come to her house, I wonder what the reason is;
It may be she sees more in me than I can find in
My selfe: for she writes further, that she loues me
Euer since she saw me, and who would not requie such
Loue hee's her house, and here she comes, and now
Would I were gone, I am not worthy to looke vpon her.
This is the Gentleman you writ to.
Gentleman, he flouts me, what gentry can be in a
Poore Turke of ten pence? I'le be gone.
Is't not a sweet fac'd youth, Pilia?
Agen, sweet youth; did not you, Sir, bring the sweet
Youth a letter?
I did Sir, and from this Gentlewoman, who as my
Selfe, & the rest of the family, stand or fall at your seruice.
Though womans modesty should hale me backe,
I can with-hold no longer; welcome sweet loue.
Now am I cleane, or rather fouly out of the way.
Whither so soone?
I'le goe steale some mony from my Master to
Make me hansome:
Pray pardon me, I must goe see a ship discharg'd.
Canst thou be so vnkind to leaue me thus?
And ye did but know how she loues you, Sir.
Nay, I care not how much she loues me;
Sweet Allamira, would I had my Masters wealth for thy sake:
And you can haue it, Sir, and if you please.
If 'twere aboue ground I could, and would haue it;
But hee hides and buries it vp as Partridges doe
Their egges, vnder the earth.
And is't not possible to find it out?
By no meanes possible.
What shall we doe with this base villaine then?
Let me alone, doe but you speake him faire:
But you know some secrets of the Iew, which if they were
Reueal'd, would doe him harme.
I, and such as — Goe to, no more,
I'le make him send me half he has, & glad he scapes so too.
Pen and Inke:
I'le write vnto him, we'le haue mony strait.
Send for a hundred Crownes at least.
Ten hundred thousand crownes,— Mr. Barabas.
Write not so submissiuely, but threatning him.
Sirra Barabas, send me a hundred crownes.
Put in two hundred at least.
I charge thee send me 300 by this bearer, and this
Shall be your warrant; if you doe not, no more but so.
Tell him you will confesse.
Otherwise I'le confesse all, vanish and returne in a Twinckle.
Let me alone, I'le vse him in his kinde.
Hang him Iew.
Now, gentle Ithimore, lye in my lap.
Where are my Maids? prouide a running Banquet;
Send to the Merchant, bid him bring me silkes,
Shall Ithimore my loue goe in such rags?
And bid the Ieweller come hither too.
I haue no husband, sweet, I'le marry thee.
Content, but we will leaue this paltry land,
And saile from hence to Greece, to louely Greece,
I'le be thy Iason, thou my golden Fleece;
Where painted Carpets o're the meads are hurl'd,
And Bacchus vineyards ore-spread the world:
Where Woods and Forrests goe in goodly greene,
I'le be Adonis, thou shalt be Loues Queene.
The Meads, the Orchards, and the Primrose lanes,
Instead of Sedge and Reed, beare Sugar Canes:
Thou in those Groues, by Dis aboue,
Shalt liue with me and be my loue.
Whiher will I not goe with gentle Ithimore?
How now? hast thou the gold?
Yes.
But came it freely, did the Cow giue down her milk freely?
At reading of the letter, he star'd & stamp'd, & turnd
Aside, I tooke him by the sterd, & look'd vpon him thus;
Told him he were best to send it, then he hug'd & imbrac'd me
Rather for feare then loue.
Then like a Iew he laugh'd & jeer'd, and told me he
lou'd me for your sake, & said what a faithfull seruant you had bin.
The more villaine he to keep me thus:
Here's goodly 'parrell, is there not?
To conclude, he gaue me ten crownes.
But ten? I'le not leaue him worth a gray groat, giue
Me a Reame of paper, we'll haue a kingdome of gold for't.
Write for 500 Crownes.
Sirra Iew, as you loue your life send me 500 crowns,
And giue the Bearer 100. Tell him I must hau't.
I warrant your worship shall hau't.
And if he aske why I demand so much, tell him,
I scorne to write a line vnder a hundred crownes.
Yo'd make a rich Poet, Sir. I am gone.
Take thou the mony, spend it for my sake.
'Tis not thy mony, but thy selfe I weigh:
Thus Bellamira esteemes of gold;
But thus of thee. — —
That kisse againe; she runs diuision of my lips.
What an eye she casts on me?
It twinckles like a Starre.
Come my deare loue, let's in and sleepe together.
Oh that ten thousand nights were put in one,
That wee might sleepe seuen yeeres together afore
We wake.
Come Amorous wag, first banquet and then sleep.
Barabas send me 300 Crownes.
Plaine Barabas: oh that wicked Curtezane!
He was not wont to call me Barabas.
Or else I will confesse: I, there it goes:
But if I get him Coupe de Gorge, for that
He sent a shaggy totter'd staring slaue,
That when he speakes, drawes out his grisly beard,
And winds it twice or thrice about his eare;
Whose face has bin a grind-stone for mens swords,
His hands are hackt, some fingers cut quite off;
Who when he speakes, grunts like a hog, and looks
Like one that is imploy'd in Catzerie,
And crosbiting such a Rogue
As is the husband to a hundred whores:
And I by him must send three hundred crownes.
Well, my hope is, he will not stay there still;
And when he comes: Oh that he were but here!
Iew, I must ha more gold.
Why wantst thou any of thy tale?
No; but 300 will not serue his turne.
Not serue his turne, Sir?
No Sir; and therefore I must haue 500 more.
I'le rather —
Oh good words, Sir, and send it you were best, see,
There's his letter.
Might he not as well come as send; pray bid him
Come & fetch it, what hee writes for you, ye shall haue streight.
I, and the rest too, or else —
I must make this villaine away: please you dine
With me, Sir, & you shal be most hartily poyson'd.
No god-a-mercy, shall I haue these crownes?
I cannot doe it, I haue lost my keyes.
Oh, if that be all, I can picke ope your locks.
Or climbe vp to my Counting-house window:
You know my meaning.
I know enough, and therfore talke not to me of your
Counting-house, the gold, or know Iew it is in my power to hang thee
I am betraid.
'Tis not 500 Crownes that I esteeme,
I am not mou'd at that: this angers me,
That he who knowes I loue him as my selfe
Should write in this imperious vaine? why Sir,
You know I haue no childe, and vnto whom
Should I leaue all but vnto Ithimore?
Here's many words but no crownes; the crownes.
Commend me to him, Sir, most humbly,
And vnto your good mistris as vnknowne.
Speake, shall I haue 'vm, Sir?
Sir here they are.
Oh that I should part with so much gold!
Here take 'em, fellow, with as good a will —
—As I nd see thee hang'd; oh, loue stops my breath:
Neuer lou'd man seruant as I doe Ithimore.
I know it, Sir.
Pray when, Sir, shall I see you at my house?
Soone enough to your cost, Sir:
Fare you well.
Nay to thine owne cost, villaine, if thou com'st.
Was euer Iew tormented as I am?
To haue a shag-rag knaue to come
300 Crownes, and then 500 Crownes?
Well, I must seeke a meanes to rid 'em all,
And presently: for in his villany
He will tell all he knowes and I shall dye for't. I haue it.
I will in some disguize goe see the slaue,
And how the villaine reuels with my gold.
I'le pledge thee, loue, and therefore drinke it off.
Saist thou me so? haue at it; and doe you heare?
Goe to, it shall be so.
Of that condition I wil drink it vp; here's to thee.
Nay, I'le haue all or none.
There, if thou lou'st me doe not leaue a drop.
Loue thee, fill me three glasses.
Three and fifty dozen, I'le pledge thee,
Knauely spoke, and like a Knight at Armes.
Hey Riuo Castiliano, a man's a man.
Now to the Iew.
Ha to the Iew, and send me mony you were best.
What wudst thou doe if he should send thee none?
Doe nothing; but I know what I know,
He's a murderer.
I had not thought he had been so braue a man.
You knew Mathias and the Gouernors son, he and
I kild 'em both, and yet neuer touch'd 'em.
Oh brauely done.
I carried the broth that poyson'd the Nuns, and he
And I snicle hand too fast, strangled a Fryar.
You two alone.
We two, and 'twas neuer knowne, nor neuer shall
Be for me.
This shall with me vnto the Gouernor.
And fit it should: but first let's ha more gold
Come gentle Ithimore, lye in my lap.
Loue me little, loue me long, let musicke rumble,
Whilst I in thy incoomy lap doe tumble.
A French Musician, come let's heare your skill?
Must tuna my Lute for sound, twang twang first.
Wilt drinke French-man, here's to thee with a —
Pox on this drunken hick-vp.
Gramercy Mounsier.
Prethe, Pilia-borza, bid the Fidler giue me
The posey in his hat there.
Sirra, you must giue my mistris your posey.
A voustre commandemente Madam.
How sweet, my Ithimore, the flowers smell.
Like thy breath, sweet-hart, no violet like 'em.
Foh, me thinkes they stinke like a Holly-Hoke.
So, now I am reueng'd vpon 'em all.
The scent thereof was death, I poyson'd it.
Play, Fidler, or I'le cut your cats guts into chitterlins
Pardona moy, be no in tune yet; so now, now all be in.
Giue him a crowne, and fill me out more wine.
There's two crownes for thee, play.
How liberally the villain giues me mine own gold.
Me thinkes he fingers very well.
So did you when you stole my gold.
How swift he runnes.
You run swifter when yon threw my gold out of
My Window.
Musician, hast beene in Malta long?
Two, three, foure month Madam.
Dost not know a Iew, one Barabas?
Very mush, Mounsier, you no be his man.
His man?
I scorne the Peasant, tell him so.
He knowes it already.
'Tis a strange thing of that Iew, he liues vpon
Pickled Grashoppers, and sau'd Mushrumbs.
What a slaue's this?
The Gouernour feeds not as I doe.
He neuer put on cleane shirt since he was circumcis'd
Oh raskall! I change my selfe twice a day.
The Hat he weares, Iudas left vnder the Elder
When he hang'd himselfe.
'Twas sent me for a present from the great Cham.
A masty slaue he is;
Whether now, Fidler?
Pardona moy, Mounsier, we be no well.
Farewell Fidler: One letter more to the Iew.
Prethe sweet loue, one more, and write it sharp.
No, I'le send by word of mouth now;
Bid him deliuer thee a thousand Crownes, by the same
Token, that the Nuns lou'd Rice, that Fryar Bernardine
Slept in his owne clothes,
Any of 'em will doe it.
Let me alone to vrge it now I know the meaning.
The meaning has a meaning; come let's in:
To vndoe a Iew is charity, and not sinne
NOw, Gentlemen, betake you to your Armes,
And see that Malta be well fortifi'd;
And it behoues you to be resolute;
For Calymath hauing houer'd here so long,
Will winne the Towne, or dye before the wals.
And dye he shall, for we will neuer yeeld.
Oh bring vs to the Gouernor.
Away with her, she is a Curtezane.
What e're I am, yet Gouernor heare me speake;
I bring thee newes by whom thy sonne was slaine:
Mathias did it not, it was the Iew.
Who, besides the slaughter of these Gentlemen,
Poyson'd his owne daughter and the Nuns,
Strangled a Fryar, and I know not what
Mischiefe beside.
Had we but proofe of this.
Strong proofe, my Lord, his man's now at my
Lodging that was his Agent, he'll confesse it all.
Goe fetch him straight, I alwayes fear'd that Iew.
I'le goe alone, dogs do not hale me thus.
Nor me neither, I cannot out-run you Constable, oh my belly.
One dram of powder more had made all sure,
What a damn'd slaue was I?
Make fires, heat irons, let the racke be fetch'd.
Nay stay, my Lord, 'tmay be he will confesse.
Confesse; what meane you, Lords, who should confesse?
Thou and thy Turk; 'twas you that slew my son.
Gilty, my Lord, I confesse; your sonne and Mathias
Were both contracted vnto Abigall,
Forg'd a counterfeit challenge.
Who carried that challenge?
I carried it, I confesse, but who writ it?
Marry euen he that strangled Bernardine, poyson'd the
Nuns, and his owne daughter.
Away with him, his sight is death to me.
For what, you men of Malta, heare me speake;
Shee is a Curtezane and he a theefe,
And he my bondman, let me haue law,
For none of this can preiudice my life:
Once more away with him; you shall haue law.
Deuils doe your worst, I liue in spite of you.
As these haue spoke so be it to their soules:
I hope the poyson'd flowers will worke anon.
Was my Mathias murder'd by the Iew?
Ferueze, 'twas thy sonne that murder'd him.
Be patient, gentle Madam, it was he,
He forged the daring challenge made them fight.
Where is the Iew, where is that murderer?
In prison till the Law has past on him.
My Lord, the Curtezane and her man are dead;
So is the Turke, and Barabas the Iew.
Dead?
Dead, my Lord, and here they bring his body.
This sudden death of his is very strange.
Wonder not at it, Sir, the heauens are iust
Their deaths were like their liues, then think not of 'em
Since they are dead, let them be buried.
For the Iewes body, throw that o're the wals,
To be a prey for Vultures and wild beasts.
So, now away and fortifie the Towne.
What, all alone? well fare sleepy drinke.
I'le be reueng'd on this accursed Towne;
For by my meanes Calymath shall enter in.
I'le helpe to slay their children and their wiues,
To fire the Churches, pull their houses downe,
Take my goods too, and seize vpon my lands:
I hope to see the Gouernour a slaue,
And, rowing in a Gally, whipt to death.
Whom haue we there, a spy?
Yes, my good Lord, one that can spy a place
Where you may enter, and surprize the Towne:
My name is Barabas; I am a Iew.
Art thou that Iew whose goods we heard were sold
For Tribute-mony?
The very same, my Lord:
And since that time they haue hir'd a slaue my man
To accuse me of a thousand villanies:
I was imprison'd, but scap'd their hands.
Didst breake prison?
No, no:
I dranke of Poppy and cold mandrake juyce;
And being asleepe, belike they thought me dead,
And threw me o're the wals so, or how else,
The Iew is here, and rests at your command.
'Twas brauely done: but tell me, Barabas,
Canst thou, as thou reportest, make Malta ours?
Feare not, my Lord, for here against the Truce,
The rocke is hollow, and of purpose digg'd,
To make a passage for the running streames
And common channels of the City.
Now whilst you giue assault vnto the wals,
I'le lead 500 souldiers through the Vault,
And rise with them i'th middle of the Towne,
Open the gates for you to enter in,
And by this meanes the City is your owne.
If this be true, I'le make thee Gouernor.
And if it be not true, then let me dye.
Thou'st doom'd thy selfe, assault it presently.
Now vaile your pride you captiue Christians,
And kneele for mercy to your conquering foe:
Now where's the hope you had of haughty Spaine?
Ferneze, speake, had it not beene much better
To kept thy promise then be thus surpriz'd?
What should I say, we are captiues and must yeeld.
I, villains, you must yeeld, and vnder Turkish yokes
Shall groning beare the burthen of our ire;
And Barabas, as erst we promis'd thee,
For thy desert we make the Gouernor,
Vse them at thy discretion.
Thankes, my Lord.
Oh fatall day to fall into the hands
Of such a Traitor and vnhallowed Iew!
What greater misery could heauen inflict?
'Tis our command: and Barabas, we giue
To guard thy person, these our Ianizaries:
Intreat them well, as we haue vsed thee.
And now, braue Bashawes, come, wee'll walke about
The ruin'd Towne, and see the wracke we made:
Farewell braue Iew, farewell great Barabas.
May all good fortune follow Calymath.
And now, as entrance to our safety,
To prison with the Gouernour and these
Captaines, his consorts and confederates.
Oh villaine, Heauen will be reueng'd on thee.
A way, no more, let him not trouble me.
Thus hast thou gotten, by thy policie,
No simple place, no small authority,
I now am Gouernour of Malta; true,
But Malta hates me, and in hating me
My life's in danger, and what boots it thee
Poore Barabas, to be the Gouernour,
When as thy life shall be at their command?
No, Barabas, this must be look'd into;
And since by wrong thou got'st Authority,
Maintaine it brauely by firme policy,
At least vnprofitably lose it not:
For he that liueth in Authority,
And neither gets him friends, nor fils his bags,
Liues like the Asse that Aesope speaketh of,
That labours with a load of bread and wine,
And leaues it off to snap on Thistle tops:
But Barabas will be more circumspect.
Begin betimes, Occasion's bald behind,
Slip not thine oportunity, for feare too late
Thou seek'st for much, but canst not compasse it
Within here.
My Lord?
I, Lord, thus aues will learne
Now Gouernor stand by there, wait within,
This is the reason that I sent for thee;
Thou seest thy life, and Malta's happinesse,
Are at my Arbitrament; and Barabas
At his discretion may dispose of both:
Now tell me, Gouernor, and plainely too,
What thinkst thou shall become of it and thee?
This; Barabas, since things are in thy power,
I see no reason but of Malta's wracke,
Nor hope of thee but extreme cruelty,
Nor feare I death, nor will I flatter thee.
Gouernor, good words, be not so furious;
'Tis not thy life which can auale me ought,
Yet you doe liue, and liue for me you shall:
And as for Malta's ruine, thinke you no
'Twere slender policy for Barabas
To dispossesse himselfe of such a place?
For sith, as once you said, within this Ile
In Malta here, that I haue got my goods,
And in this City still haue had successe,
And now at length am growne your Governor,
Your selues shall see it shall not be forgot:
For as a friend not knowne, but in distresse,
I'le reare vp Malta now remedilesse.
Will Barabas recouer Malta's losse?
Will Barabas be good to Christians?
What wilt thou giue me, Gouernor, to procure
A dissolution of the slauish Bands
Wherein the Turke hath yoak'd your land and you?
What will you giue me if I render you
The life of Calymath, surprize his men,
And in an out house of the City shut
His souldiers, till I haue consum'd 'em all with fire?
What will you giue him that procureth this?
Doe but bring this to passe which thou pretendest,
Deale truly with vs as thou intimatest,
And I will send amongst the Citizens
And by my letters priuately procure
Great summes of mony for thy recompence:
Nay more, doe this, and liue thou Gouernor still.
Nay, doe thou this, Ferneze, and be free;
Gouernor, I enlarge thee, liue with me,
Goe walke about the City, see thy friends:
Tush, send not letters to 'em, goe thy selfe,
And let me see what mony thou canst make;
Here is my hand that I'le set Malta free:
And thus we cat it: To a solemne feast
I will inuite young Selim-Calymath,
Where be thou present onely to performe
One stratagem that I'le impart to thee,
Wherein no danger shall betide thy life,
And I will warrant Malta free for euer.
Here is my hand, beleeue me, Barabas,
I will be there, and doe as thou desirest;
When is the time?
Gouernor, presently.
For Callymath, when he hath view'd the Towne,
Will take his leaue and saile toward, Ottoman,
Then will I, Barabas, about this coyne,
And bring it with me to thee in the euening.
Doe so, but faile not; now farewell Ferneze
And thus farre roundly goes the businesse:
Thus louing neither, will I liue with both,
Making a profit of my policie;
And he from whom my most aduantage comes,
Shall be my friend.
This is the life we Iewes are vs'd to lead;
And reason too, for Christians doe the like:
Well, now about effecting this deuice:
First to surprize great Selims souldiers,
And then to make prouision for the feast,
That at one instant all things may be done,
My policie detests preuention:
To what euent my secret purpose driues,
I know; and they shall witnesse with their liues.
Thus haue we view'd the City, seene the sacke,
And cau'd the ruines to be new repair'd,
Which with our Bombards shot and Basiliske,
We rent in sunder at our entry:
And now I see the Scituation,
And how secure this conquer'd Iland stands
Inuiron'd with the mediterranean Sea,
Strong contermin'd with other petty Iles;
And toward Calabria back'd by Sicily,
Two lofty Turrets that command the Towne.
When Siracusian Dionisius reign'd;
I wonder how it could be conquer'd thus?
From Barabas, Malta's Gouernor, I bring
A message vnto mighty Calymath;
Hearing his Soueraigne was bound for Sea,
To saile to Turkey, to great Ottamon,
He humbly would intreat your Maiesty
To come and see his homely Citadell,
And banquet with him e're thou leau'st the Ile.
To banquet with him in his Citadell,
I eare me, Messenger, to feast my traine
Within a Towne of warre so lately pillag'd,
Will be too costly and too troublesome:
Yet would I gladly visit Barabas.
For well has Barabas desern'd of vs.
Selim, for that, thus saith the Gouernor,
That he hath in store a Pearle so big,
So precious, and withall so orient,
As be it valued but indifferently,
The price thereof will serue to entertaine
Selim and all his souldiers for a month
Therefore he humbly would intreat your Highnesse
Not to depart till he has feasted you.
I cannot feast my men in Malta wals,
Except he place his Tables in the streets.
Know, Selim, that there is a monastery
Which standeth as an out-house to the Towne;
There will he banquet them, but thee at home,
With all thy Bashawes and braue followers.
Well, tell the Gouernor we grant his suit,
Wee'll in this Summer Euening feast with him.
I shall, my Lord,
And now, bold Bashawes, let vs to our Tents,
And meditate how we may grace vs best
To solemnize our Gouernors great feast.
In this, my Countrimen, be rul'd by me,
Haue speciall care that no man sally forth
Till you shall heare a Culuerin discharg'd
By him that beares the Linstocke, kindled thus;
Then issue out and come to rescue me,
For happily I shall be in distresse,
Or you released of this seruitude.
Rather then thus to liue as Turkish thrals,
What will we not aduenture?
On then, begone.
Farewell graue Gouernor.
How stand the cords? How hang these hinges, fast?
Are all the Cranes and Pulleyes sure?
All fast.
Leaue nothing loose, all leueld to my mind.
Why now I see that you haue Art indeed.
There, Carpenters, diuide that gold amongst you:
Goe swill in bowles of Sacke and Muscadine:
Downe to the Cellr, taste of all my wines.
We shall, my Lord, and thanke you:
And if you like them, drinke your fill and dye:
For so I liue, perish may all the world.
Now Selim-Calymath returne me word
That thou wilt come, and I am satisfied.
Now sirra, what, will he come?
He will; and has commanded all his men
To come ashore, and march through Malta streets,
That thou maist feast them in thy Citadell.
Then now are all things as my wish wud haue 'em,
There wanteth nothing but the Gouernors pelfe,
And see he brings it: Now, Gouernor, the summe.
With free consent a hundred thousand pounds.
Pounds saist thou, Goueror, wel since it is no more
I'le satisfie my selfe with that; nay, keepe it still,
For if I keepe not promise, trust not me.
And Gouernour, now partake my policy:
First for his Army, they are sent before,
Enter'd the Monastery, and vnderneath
In seuerall places are field-pieces pitch'd,
Bombards, whole Barrels full of Gunpowder,
That on the sudden shall disseuer it,
And batter all the stones about their eares,
Whence none can possibly escape aliue:
Now as for Calymath and his consorts,
Here haue I made a dainty Gallery,
The floore whereof, this Cable being cut,
Doth fall asunder; so that it doth sinke
Into a deepe pit past recouery.
Here, hold that knife, and when thou seest he comes,
And with his Bashawes shall be blithely set,
A warning-peece shall be shot off from the Tower,
To giue thee knowledge when to cut the cord,
And fire the house; say, will not this be braue?
Oh excellent! here, hold thee, Barabas,
I trust thy word, take what I promis'd thee.
No, Gouernor, I'le satisfie thee first,
Thou shalt not liue in doubt of any thing.
Stand close, for here they come: why, is not this
A kingly kinde of trade to purchase Townes
By treachery, and sell 'em by deceit?
Now tell me, worldlings, vnderneath the summe,
If greater falshood euer hs bin done.
Come, my Companion-Bashawes, see I pray
How busie Barrabas is there aboue
To entertaine vs in his Gallery;
Let vs salute him, Saue thee, Barabas.
Welcome great Calymath.
How the slaue jeeres at him?
Will't please thee, mighty Selim-Calymath,
To ascend our homely stayres?
I, Barabas, come Bashawes, attend.
Stay, Calymath;
For I will shew thee greater curtesie
Then Barabas would haue affoorded thee.
Sound a charge there.
How now, what means this
Helpe, helpe me, Christians, helpe.
See Calymath, this was deuis'd for thee.
Treason, treason Bashawes, flye.
No, Selim, doe not flye;
See his end first, and flye then if thou canst.
Oh helpe me, Selim, helpe me, Christians.
Gouernour, why stand you all so pittilesse?
Should I in pitty of thy plaints or thee,
Accursed Barabas; base Iew relent:
No, thus I'le see thy treachery repaid,
But wish thou hadst behau'd thee otherwise.
You will not helpe me then?
No, villaine, no.
And villaines, know you cannot helpe me now.
Then Barabas breath forth thy latest fate,
And in the fury of thy torments, striue
To end thy life with resolution:
Know, Gouernor, 'twas I that slew thy sonne;
I fram'd the challenge that did make them meet
Know, Calymath, I aym'd thy ouerthrow,
And had I but escap'd this stratagem,
I would haue brought confusion on you all,
Damn'd Christians, dogges, and Turkish Infidels;
But now begins the extremity of heat
To pinch me with intolerable pangs:
Dye life, flye soule, tongue curse thy ill and dye:
Tell me, you Christians, what doth this portend?
This traine he laid to haue intrap'd thy life;
Now Selim note the vnhallowed deeds of Iewes:
Thus he determin'd to haue handled thee,
But I haue rather chose to saue thy life.
Was this the banquet he prepar'd for vs?
Let's hence, lest further mischiefe be pretended.
Nay, Selim, stay, for since we haue the here,
We will not let thee part so suddenly:
Besides, if we should let thee goe, all's one,
Nor with thy Gallyes couldst thou not get hence,
Without fresh men to rigge and furnish them.
Tush, Gouernor, take thou no care for that,
My men are all aboord,
And doe attend my comming there by this.
Why hardst thou not the trumpet sound a charge?
Yes, what of that?
Why then the house was fir'd,
Blowne vp, and all thy souldiers massacred.
Oh monstrous treason!
A Iewe curtesie:
For he that did by treason worke our fall,
By treason hath deliuered thee to vs:
Know therefore, till thy father hath made good
The ruines done to Malta and to vs,
Thou canst not part: for Malta shall be freed,
Or Selim ne're returne to Ottamen.
Nay rather, Christians, let me goe to Turkey
In person there to meditate your peace;
To keepe me here will nought aduantage you.
Content thee, Calymath, here thou must stay,
And liue in Malia prisoner; for come cal he world
To rescue thee, so will we guard vs now
sooner shall they drinke the Ocean dry,
Then conquer Malta, or endanger vs.
So march away, and let due praise be giuen
Neither to Fate nor Fottune, but to Heauen.