VVEE cannot read in any flouriſhing ſtate,
Whether by King ſward or by optimate,
A greater bleſſing hapning to one Nation,
By two ſuch births beneath one conſtellation.
For being in one moneth, one weeke; ſmall let October.
There was, theſe two bleſt birth-dayes had not met:
Yet hath the powerfull hand of heaven ſo guided,
(Though) by ſmall diſtance of two dayes divided:
Theſe ſtarres who then, their influence had alone
Are now combin'd, fixt in one glorious Throne:
From whoſē joynt rayes another's riſen ſince,
(Luſterd from both) a ſweet and hopefull Prince.
O may be from your vertues ſo much gaine,
That little Charles may prove our Charlemaine.
The Romanes of their birth-dayes had ſuch care,
They kept them ſacred, and not one might dare,
In all their families to worke, but play,
Obſerving that, as an high feſtivall day.
The Emperours birth-dayes were cald Albae, white,
As the ſole luſtre, and their Kingdomes light.
In you: how much doth heaven your Nations bleſſe,
To enjoy two ſuch: the greater, and the leſſe.
When Greece, the chiefe priority might claime
For Arts, and Armes, and held the eminent name
Of Monarchie; They erected divers places,
Some to the Muſes, others to the Graces:
Where Actors ſtrove, and Poets did deviſe
With tongue and pen, to pleaſe the eares and eyes
Of Princely Auditors; The time was, when
To heare, the rapture of one Poets pen,
A Theater hath beene built, By the fates doome,
When th' Empire was removed from thence to Rome.
The potent Caeſars had their Circi, and
Large Amphitheaters: in which might ſtand
And ſit, full foureſcore thouſand, all in view,
And touch of voice: This great Auguſtus knew.
Nay Rome, it's wealth, and potency injoyd,
Till by the barbarous Gothes theſe were deſtroy'd.
But may this ſtructure laſt, and you be ſeene
Here a ſpectator, with your Princely Queene,
In your old age, as in your flouriſhing prime,
To out-ſtrip Auguſtus both in fame and time.
Where is my Sonne December? yong'ſt and laſt
Of twelve? what ſleeping now? now ſnorting faſt?
In this joyes feſtivall? from yeares agone,
Solemnis'd one thouſand ſixe hundred thirty one.
Can neither muſick, ſport, nor myrth awake thee,
But to eleven moneths ſleep muſt thou betake thee?
Why doth not January then appeare,
Before old Janus father of the yeare?
My eldeſt boy? now I remember. Hee,
Is buſied in this annuall Iubilee.
And ſtill the one hand with the other ſhifts,
In giving and receiving New-yeares gifts.
But ſtay; two faces Ianus? one to view
The paſt yeare; th' other, that which ſhall inſue.
Shal't be imputed to thine age or ſloath
To neglect theſe; the glory of them both?
No; fall thus low, to celebrate that throne
In which the two great lights are met in one
Without ecclipſe; This key commands the ſcrew,
That lockes the paſt yeare up, and opes the new,
This ſhuts up all diſaſter, dearth, diſeaſe,
Opening to you all glad things that may pleaſe,
To crowne your bleſſedneſſe, and as that gone.
Hath crown'd you with an Heire (as yet alone)
There's by auſpitious Iove a ſecond breeding,
Our hope, and honour of the yeare ſucceeding.
As in the laſt, may Heaven in this defend them,
Whilſt Ianus with his twelve ſonnes ſhall attend them.
Health, ſtrength, and many a glad new yeare,
A conſtant ſolace, joyfull cheere,
Waite ever on that awfull throne,
Where reſt two Princely hearts, made one.
From which bleſt union, may ſupply
Of iſſue to eternity
Grace and become it: Theſe preſages
Prove fortunate to after ages,
Which long ſucceſſion hence may ſee,
Till time and houres ſhall ceaſe to bee.
Health, joy, peace, plenty, and a flouriſhing ſtate,
A dexter omen; an auſpitious fate,
Attend you ever, like Hiperion ſhine
In his meridian, never to decline.
And may your royall Cynthia who hath run
Sixe annuall courſes with you, and begun,
Now on the ſeventh, who to your Kingdomes Cheere
And your great joy, at this time fills her ſphere,
In a moſt hopefull plenitude: ſo waine
After bleſt iſſue, that your glorious raigne,
May ſee your Sonnes Sonnes Princes of ſuch name,
That the whole world may eccho to their fame.
From her chaſt wombe may ſuch faire daughters ſpring,
That each may prove the conſort to a King.
And both ſurvive to ſee't: this we intreat
May come from her who is ſo good, ſo great.
Thoſe heavenly Guardians that with patents large,
Have in tuition Kings and Kingdomes charge,
Protect you both, that as we daily ſee
Nations, that farre remote and forraigne be
Send hither as to an Oracle to know,
What's for their ſafety beſt: you may ſtill grow
In wiſedome and in power, till your command
May extend it ſelfe ſo farre by Sea and Land,
That through the Chriſtian world it may be ſaid,
All begge of Charles, but he needs no mans ayd.
Exuberant joyes, delights tranſcending waite
About the orbe of this illuſtrious ſtate.
All ſad diſaſters flie beyond thoſe Seas
That ebbe and flow unto th' Antipodes.
Or if they chance to linger by the way,
May they with Mahomet, and Ali ſtay:
But never in theſe Climes find place of reſt
Or ſhelter, where the ſacred truth's profeſt,
But in their ſtead, proſperity and peace,
Aboundance, health, with numerous increaſe
Of royall iſſue 'bout your throne be ſeene,
To glad my ſoveraigne, and rejoyce his Queene:
So ſhall your Nations in bright luſtre ſhine,
Figuring in theſe your Perſons, powers divine.
Miriads of joyes your royall he arts ſurpriſe,
Yea more than any rapture can deviſe,
The heart of man conceive, or tongue expreſſe,
That in your more than common happineſſe,
All your true ſubjects with unanimous voice,
May both in you, and your bleſt ſeed rejoyce.
If Caeſar, greateſt in great Pompeis fall,
As being made the ſoveraigne over all
The (then knowne) world; or if Auguſtus; Hee
Who left his ample name Hereditarie
To all ſucceeding Emperours; If to th' laſt
Of the twelve Caeſars, Theaters were grac't,
And when the Iulian family expir'd
In many ages after were admir'd?
And the more fame from forraigne parts to win,
Adornd without, and beautified within.
If by ſucceſſion we can draw them downe
Through nations, realmes and tongues, even to our own,
Proving theſe flouriſhing Kingdomes proſperd well,
And never faild before theſe ſtructures fell:
Or were ſuppreſt; for 'tis a bad preſage,
(All mirth exil'd) ſtill followes wrack and ſtrage.
If then a factious peeviſh male-content,
Envying a bleſt ſtate; ſhall his malice vent
In bald unlicenc't papers? ſo much daring
As neither Soveraigne, nor the ſubject ſparing:
Aſſuming in a ſtrange libellious ſtraine,
To thinke all wiſedome treaſur'd in his braine?
Be all ſuch fruſtrate in their vaine indeavour,
Whilſt you oh Royall Caeſar live for ever.
Ioves Influent Planet boading power and ſtate
For ever, on this high tribunall waite.
Apolloe's fire, add verdure, to your dayes,
And crown your long raigne with his Daphnes bayes.
Hermes attend you with his peaceful ſtarre,
And Mars protect you in all menacing warre.
May Venus and the Moones bright conſtellations,
With their beſt fulgence ſmile on all your Nations:
But on all male-contents let Saturne lower,
Such as maligne your glory and your power.
Amongſt the Greecians there were annuall feaſts,
To which none were invited as chiefe geſts,
Save Princes and their wives: Amongſt the men
No argument could be deſputed then
But who beſt govern'd; and (as't did appeare)
He was proclaim'd ſole Soveraigne for that yeare,
The Queenes and Ladies argued at that time
For beauty and for vertue, who was prime.
And ſhe had the like honour. Two here be,
For Beauty one, the other Majeſty.
Moſt worthy, did that cuſtome ſtill perſever,
Not for one yeare, but to be ſoveraignes ever.
Still the more glorious that the creatures bee,
They in their native goodneſſe are more free
To things below them: ſo the ſunne wee find
Vnpartially to ſhine on all mankind,
Denying light to none, and you we may
Great King, moſt juſtly call our light, our day,
Whoſe glorious courſe may never be quite runne,
Whilſt earth hath ſoveraigne, or the Heavens a Sunne.
Whom Heaven with all choice graces hath indowed,
Whom even the Angels praiſe and men admire!
On whom your Maker hath his bounty ſhowed,
Where nothing wants that mans heart can deſire,
Your peoples joy, your Peeres ſelected pleaſure.
Your Kingdomes admiration, Nations wonder,
Of forraigne climes the praiſe, of ours the treaſure.
O never may that ſacred union ſunder.
That whilſt we daily of high heaven importune,
You may be in your royall iſſue bleſt,
You may ſtill grow in greatneſſe, fame and fortune,
All which at ſeeming height, be ſtill increaſt.
Prove thou a prophet muſe, ſay 'tis decreed,
All Chriſtendome ſhall flouriſh in your ſeed.
Could we all Panegyries put in one,
That have beene on the ancient Heroes writ,
They might all be conferd on you alone,
And you great Princes juſtly merit it.
O may you in your happy loves perſever,
Diurnally augment, but not decline,
That this your people may admire you ever,
Till heaven that gave you us make you divine.
And that which we of aged Neſtor read,
May of you two be chronicled indeed.
Excellent Princes may you ever bee,
As great as good, each yeare a Iubilee.
That as heavens bounty crownes you with th' increaſe
Of honour, glory, and domeſtick peace.
You, with like liberall hands inſtated here,
May to each ſubject and deſerving Peere:
Like the bright Sunne your glorious favours throw,
To comfort and make flouriſh what's below.
Whilſt we like the woods Quiriſters ſtill ſing
Loud Hymnes to you the Lord of this our ſpring.
You that are Emblemes of that light divine,
Which equally on all eſtates doth ſhine,
The Palace and the Cottage, flower and weed,
Of whoſe bright luſter all have uſe, and need,
Even from the Scarlet, to the Ruſſet: Gray
As well as Purple: Had we power, as they
That are in eminent place; there could not be
Thoſe, ſhould expreſſe more gratitude than we.
The rich may pay in gold, that which he owes,
But we our debt, onely in words and ſhowes.
Yes; ſure 'twas here, where ſome few houres I paſt
The very time that I deſcended laſt.
Yes; here it was, I know it by a face,
To which my Miſtreſſe Pſiche muſt give place.
A preſence; that from Venus takes all power,
And makes each place ſhe comes in, Cupids bower.
Though in their ſeverall ſpheres each Planet tride,
(With all the Gods) to feaſt me and my bride,
With Nector and Ambroſia, yet that waſte
Of god-like fare, could not my palate taſte,
But I muſt all celeſtiall ſweets forbeare,
To review earthly Jove and Juno here.
Whom having ſeene; Haile to you once againe.
Long as the Spheres continue may you raigne
In Majeſty, in power, with iſſue bleſt
Be all theſe, with your fortunate yeares increaſe,
Till Cupid ever young, with time grow old,
And you this Iron age changing to gold,
Repur'd by your two vertues, Theſe, Ethereall
May change to brighter chayres in th' heavens Imperiall
Who ſo unread; doth not of Plato heare
His Annus magnus, and his vertent yeare?
In which the Starres and Planets, Moone and Sunne,
Tyr'd with continuall labour, having runne
So many ages long peregrination,
Each returnes freſh and new to their firſt ſtation.
This is the yeare ſure; rather this the day
Able to turne November into May.
This day's in heaven a Iubilee of joy,
Where Angels ſing in quires Vive la Roy.
This is the royall birth-day of a King,
Then Men with Angels, Iô Poean ſing.
I'had almoſt loſt my ſelfe: when my intent
Was to tell why I come; and from whom ſent;
From one, to whom I'm but a ſhadow; ſhee
The very ſoule of amabilitie.
One that without my quiver and my bow,
Commands the hearts, and eyes of high and low.
Whoſe name inſcrib'd here did you but behold,
I'would change the ſooty Inke to liquid gold.
Of fulgent beauty, but ſo pure a mind,
As if tinctur'd from heaven, and ſo divin'd.
Love from Love am ſent, but ſhe the right,
Then grace great King the Triumphs of loves night.
Now royall Princes let me turne to you,
Daigne from loves mouth to take this nights adieu.
Thinke all theſe Planets that on earth here move,
(Shadowes of theſe celeſtiall ones above)
Breath on you their beſt influences: Vulcan, Hee
Shall henceforth take charge of your Armorie.
Iuno the marriage Queene, ſhall bleſſe your bed,
The Sunne ſhall take the bright beames from his head,
To increaſe your glorious luſter, and the Moone
Attend on you, to make your midnight noone.
Cores with plenty ſhall in rich your ſtore,
And Mercury ſhall flie from ſhore to ſhore
Vpon your errands: prove your happy ranger,
Homebred to eſpy, and foreſee forraigne danger.
Venus with ſweets, and I, with love will charme you,
And after all theſe Jove with power ſhall arme you.
I'have kept you waking long: good night, 'tis late.
Many ſuch birth-dayes may you celebrate.
Renowned King, we to your eares commend
Theſe our unpoliſht labours, harſh and low,
Hoping your grace will like the Sunne extend,
Thoſe glorious beames that make the Cedars grow,
Shine on the baſeſt ſhrubs, his vertue's ſeene
As well in weeds as flowers, for both are greene.
Then let your Majeſty by whoſe aſpect
All theſe ſweetgarden flowers, theſe Trees ſtill flouriſh
The leaſt part of your glorious ſhine reflect
On us: your beames great Brittaines land doth nouriſh.
Still moving in this bright and luminous ſphere,
To joy your Court with many a glad New-yeare.
Mongſt other preſents, high and ſacred King,
This ſolemne day preſented at your ſeat
Their tribute love, your humble vaſſals bring.
But though our gifts be ſmall, our wills are great,
We come, though naked of deſert or merit,
Yet arm'd with wiſhes, and devouteſt prayer,
Truſting you many ages may inherit
That high Tribunall, peace and love prepare,
That this firſt day which enters a new yeare,
On which the two fac't Ianus lookes with joy,
May many ſeaſons hence, with gladſome cheare,
Be hallowed ſtill, that heavens hand may deſtroy
Your enemies: and ſo your friends maintaine.
They many yeares hence may admire your raigne
As all ſmall rivers to the ocean runne,
As to the ſoveraigne of their ſilver ſtreames,
As all leſſe lights doe borrow of the Sunne,
From whom alone they take their golden beames.
So to this glorious Sunne we pay our light,
Without whoſe face we live in endleſſe night.
O you, on your owne earth ſoly divine,
Who fill your faire Court with your beames of grace,
With one ſmall glimmering on our paſtimes ſhine,
The Sun barres none the beauty of his face.
Poets that have like Larkes already ſung,
Vnto the morning of your proſperous raigne,
Shall with an Angels quill and Cherubs tongue,
Your grace and goodneſſe through the world proclaime.
But when you reach the noontyde point, then ſtay,
And in the height of glory ſhine for aye.
Moſt high and ſacred Sir, we now are caſt
ow as the earth, ſtrook mute with feare and terror,
Leſt through our want of judgement we have paſt
Words rudely plac't: or duty mixt with error.
The Shepheards Pipe made of an Oaten Reed,
Cannot compare with great Apollos lyre:
Nor ſhould our Muſe, that no delight can breed
Vnto your high and Princely eares aſpire.
We bring a mite that would preſent a mine,
Our loves we pay, to whom our lives we owe,
Water we bring, who could affoord it wine,
Our art you ſee, our hearts we cannot ſhow.
O if we could! we would inrich this place
With joyes eſſentiall, bleſſings above meaſure.
Heaven, Earth, Ayre, Sea, all powre upon your grace,
Their ſpeciall bounties, and their richeſt treaſure.
In our laſt wiſh all your deſires attaine,
Life, ſafety, health, with a long-laſting raigne.
Where is that rich mans Minion, cal'd Frugality?
What hath he quite hence baniſht Hoſpitality?
In dayes of old, when yea and nay did paſſe
For currant troth, I and old Chriſtenmaſſe
Were of acquaintance; but of late I find
Frugality quick ſighted, my ſelfe blind.
He goes through Court, through Country, City, and
Findes entertainment, for each frugall hand
Still bids him welcome: yet a novice hee:
But I, that am of more antiquity
Than Pauls (alas) by time and age decayd,
Nay almoſt ſince this Cities ground-ſills layd,
Walke up and downe and knock at each mans dore,
And finde the ſame cold welcome as before.
But harke, a Cock crowd, and I heard a Swan
Ecchoing to him, that here did live a man,
Noble, and of that high and ancient ſtraine,
To call back Hoſpitality againe.
Then by the good Lords and kind Ladies leave,
Since their wide Gates ſtand ready to receive
So great a ſtranger, and (in me) theſe gueſts
o oft invited to their annuall feaſts.
This bleſſing take, oh whether in this place,
Or where ſo elſe this bleſt time you ſo grace,
May your warme Chimneyes ſmoke, and hot fires glow,
Whilſt Thames breeds Swans, or Cocks 'gainſt Chriſtmas crow.
e ſee bright day ſucceeds darke night,
iſaſter paſt, then comes delight,
rom ſeeming death reviv'd to tell,
hat here ſhe henceforth meanes to dwell,
hen hoſpitality hath grace,
elight ſhould ever there finde place.
eceive her then your houſhold gueſt,
his night to attend you to your reſt:
nd when your quiet ſleepe is ſpent,
wake you to your more content,
home, abroad, handmaid, and guide:
ether you ſit, lye, walke or ride,
ort, purpoſe ſerious meditation,
d thought, ſtill have to me relation,
d ſo for ever, as this night,
waited on by choiſe delight.
downy Swan though yoakt in Venus Teame,
Yet of all birds that ever lov'd the ſtreame,
Is held to be the chiefeſt: Pallas Owle
In Athens fam'd for many a learned ſcrowle,
Compos'd in Inke and Oyle, th' embleme of watch,
By which the moſt laborious ſtudents catch
At Arts (howe're, benighted) was not more
Famous, in Greece, then on Caiſter ſhore
Your ſacred Bird, which the nine Siſters ſtrove
To make the ſymbole of conjugall love,
With which the Cock, the Bird of Mars combin'd,
A double gardian knot, to be untwin'd
Never: 'Tis now made faſt, ſo intricate,
Not Alexanders ſword, not time, not fate
Can e'ver untye, for what's in vertue laid,
Envie can never blaſt, nor age invade.
In this bleſt ſtate both you, and yours, now ſtand
As firſt diſpos'd, ſo ſtrengthened by that hand,
Which as it makes, protects; you have begun
To grace the City with your preſence: run
That happy courſe ſtill: you and your lov'd wife
Have to dead hoſpitality given new life.
Still cheriſh it: old Chriſtenmaſſe almoſt ſtarv'd
Through baſe neglect, by you hath beene preſerv'd.
O give him ſtill like welcome, that whilſt he
Hath name on earth, you may his harbourer be.
What man can wiſh his bliſſe to crowne,
Or in abundance heaven powre downe.
Health, plenty, ſolace, all delights
That lengthen dayes, or ſhorten nights.
Heavens favour, and the Courts beſt grace,
Attend the great Lord of this place.
Old Chriſtenmaſſe hunger-ſtarv'd and dry,
Who earſt did drinke deepe and far'd hye
You welcome, and with Princely cheere,
Feaſt Ianus father of the yeare.
The ſparing Chuff could be content
To thruſt the twelve dayes into Lent.
You Englands cuſtome, wake from ſleepe,
Which all the Chriſtian world ſtill keepe:
For which may you thus ſtor'd with gueſts
Long celebrate theſe annuall feaſts,
That you and your good Lady may
Together, many a New-yeares day,
Rejoyce in your bleſt Iſſue till
The houres ſhall faile, and time ſtand ſtill.
The ſilver Swan ſoft gliding in the ſtreame,
Cald to the Cocke then pearching on a beame,
And ſaid to him; why, Chanticleere, when I
Move on the waves ſo low, thou ſit'ſt ſo high?
The Cocke replide: O thou my beſt lov'd Siſter
Well knowne in Poe, Meander, and Caiſter,
But, beſt in Thameſis; Doſt thou not know
The reaſon, why we in December crow?
More than before, or after? who againe
Thus anſwer'd: we of nothing can complaine
Being of all the birds that are, moſt white,
Loyall and chaſte, and taking our delight
In rivers onely, bathing there our feete
To make our rare-heard muſick ſound more ſweet.
Yet one thing to reſolve, would make me proud,
To tell why at this time thou ſing'ſt ſo lowd?
Who ſaid: none of our anceſtors but knew
That ever ſince Saint Peters Cock firſt crew,
We are injoyn'd to make lowd proclamation,
Of our moſt bleſſed Saviours Incarnation.
o which the Swan, (then in a Tone much higher)
Said, in this Caroll I will fill the quire:
Which being voyc't, did ſound ſo ſweet and ſhrill,
That where the Swan and Cock were heard, did fill
The ayre with ſuch an eccho, thither came
Vpon that ſummons, both the blind and lame,
Hungry and thirſty, poore, of all eſtates,
And none but fully ſated at theſe gates.
Long may your bounty laſt, and we rejoyce,
To heare both City and the Country voyce
Your Hoſpitality, to your loud fame,
Whilſt Time indures, or Chriſtmas beares a name.
And now great Lord and Lady both prepare,
To know what Sports in agitation are.
Plaine Truth who onely hath the power
To ſteare the way to vertues bower,
By theſe cleare Tapers ſhining bright,
Doth celebrate this joviall night.
But by the Bird of Mars that crowes,
I now perceive the morning growes.
Her love to Phoebus to expreſſe,
And put his ſteeds in glorious dreſſe
Who ſhewes you what chaſte virgins dwell,
Within the boſome of this Cell,
Appeare then O thou treble Trine
Of number, with the Muſes nine.
(Appolloes ſacred daughters) ſtill
Frequent about Pernaſſus hill.
Or if you number them by Threes,
The firſt are the three Charitces,
Handmaides to Venus, Graces ſtil'd,
On whom their Father Iove ſtill ſmil'd.
The ſecond Chorus doth containe
Thoſe beauties, by the Trojan ſwaine
On Ida judg'd: The third we call
The Vertues Theologicall,
Faith, Hope, and Love, haply meet here,
To crowne the parting of the yeare,
With Roſes freſh of Swan-like hew,
Which from a royall Stemme firſt grew,
And the brave Yorkiſts long ſince bore,
Theſe vertues bower, doe beſt decore,
Flowers redolent, which Heralds ſay,
Ianus doth weare, as well as May.
Farre may they ſpread, be ever ſeene,
With milke white leaves, and branches greene,
Folded in amorous twines together,
Which Winter ne're may blaſt or wither.
If any wonder by what magick charme,
Richard the third is ſhrunke up like his arme:
And where in fulneſſe you expected him,
You ſee me onely crawling, like a limme
Or piece of that knowne fabrick, and no more,
(When he ſo often hath beene view'd before.)
Let all ſuch know: a Rundlet ne're ſo ſmall
s call'd a veſſell: being a Tunne; that's all.
Hee's tearm'd a man, that ſhowes a dwarfiſh thing,
No more's the Guard, or Porter to the King.
o Pictures in ſmall compaſſe I have ſeene
Drawne to the life, as neare, as thoſe have beene
Ten times their bigneſſe: Chriſtenmas loaves are bread,
So's your leaſt Manchet: have you never read
Large folio Sheets which Printers over-looke,
And caſt in ſmall, to make a pocket booke?
o Richard is transform'd: if this diſguiſe
how me ſo ſmall a letter for your eyes,
You cannot in this letter read me plaine,
Hee'l next appeare, in texted hand againe.
Great I confeſſe your patience hath now beene,
To ſee a little Richard: who can win,
Or praiſe, or credit? eye, or thinke to excell,
By doing after what was done ſo well?
It was not my ambition to compare,
No envie, or detraction: ſuch things are
In men of more growne livers, greater ſpleene,
But in ſuch lads as I am, ſeldome ſeene.
I doe, but like a child, who ſees one ſwim,
And (glad to learne) will venter after him
Though he be ſoundly duckt for't, or to tell
My mind more plainely, one that faine would ſpell,
In hope to read more perfect: all the gaines
I expect for theſe unprofitable paines,
Is, that you would at parting from this place
Doe but unto my littleneſſe that grace
To ſpie my worth, as I have ſeene dimme eyes
To looke through ſpectacles, or perſpectives,
That in your gracious view I may appeare,
Of ſmall, more great; of coming far off, neare.
Playes have a fate in their conception lent,
Some ſo ſhort liv'd, no ſooner ſhew'd, than ſpent;
But borne to day, to morrow buried, and
Though taught to ſpeake, neither to goe nor ſtand.
This: (by what fare I know not) ſure no merit,
That it diſclaimes, may for the age inherit.
Writing 'bove one and twenty; but ill nurſt,
And yet receiv'd, as well perform'd at firſt,
Grac't and frequented, for the cradle age,
Did throng the Seates, the Boxes, and the Stage
So much; that ſome by Stenography drew
The plot: put it in print: (ſcarce one word trew:)
And in that lameneſſe it hath limp't ſo long,
The Author now to vindicate that wrong
Hath tooke the paines, upright upon its feete
To teach it walke, ſo pleaſe you ſit, and ſee't.
The Princeſſe young Elizabeth y'have ſeene
In her minority, and ſince a Queene.
A Subject, and a Soveraigne: in th' one
A pittied Lady: in the royall Throne
A potent Queene. It now in you doth reſt
To know, in which ſhe hath demeand her beſt.
A Star appearing of bright conſtellation,
More luminous than thoſe of the ſame ſtation,
The powers Coeleſtiall much amaz'd there at
To knovv the cauſe thereof, in Councell ſate,
And ſummond Mercury the winged god
To ſearch and find what wonder it might bode,
Who brought them word that Lacheſis then drew
A thread from Clothoes diſtaffe, which to' his view
Was of ſuch ſplendor, and withall ſo fine,
The ſubſtance gold) and of ſo cloſe a twine,
No edge could ſunder, and that Star (ſo bright)
Roſe five and thirty yeares ſince, as this night.
You are (if time we may compute) by ſtory
In the meridian of your age and glory.
Your Cynthia too that ſhines by you ſo neare,
And now with ſuch rare ſplendor fills her ſphere,
Whoſe birth-dayes almoſt meete, as if that fate
Would adde a double luſtre to your ſtate.
Never may your two golden threds be ſpun.
Whilſt the Moone guides the night, or day the Sun.
What Muſe ſo mute, but both with voice and ſtrings
Will ſtrive to celebrate the births of Kings.
Kings birth-dayes, of ſuch goodneſſe and renowne.
Ceres ſhould fill with plenty, Bacchus Crowne.
Mirth ſhould exceed it's limite, Ioyes abound,
And (after praiſe to heaven giv'n) Healths go round.
No other language then let this night coyne,
But Vive, vive la Roy, vive la Royne.
The bright hayr'd Comets are of all the beſt,
Boading moſt good, when ayming towards the Weſt.
(So Aſtrologians ſay) and when ſuch ſhine,
Groſſe clowds they ſcatter, and the ayre refine.
Now ſuch an one appeares; a glorious thing,
As if the Eagle from her ſpatious wing
Had her prime feather dropt, which to regaine,
She (almoſt) would give Almaigne, Rome, and Spaine.
A feather to be ſtuck in Venus fanne.
The like to it, not Iunoes Peacock can
In all her moon'd traine boaſt: may your fame flie,
Mounted upon thoſe plumes that ſoare moſt hie:
Of which, make two rare preſidents, We intreat,
One of Charles little, th' other Charles the Great.
A numerous fruit, ſprung from a golden Tree,
Such (as old Atlas, was ne're-ſeene by thee
In thine Heſperian orchard) long t' indure
And proſper in the world: now growes mature.
And the faire bloſſoms ready even to ſpread
Their leaves abroad, and top the Eagles Head
(The Roote ſtill ſafe) where-ever ſhall bee ſeene
Scient, tranſplanted, may it ſtill grow greene,
So may none iſſuing from King Iames his Stemme,
But be thought fit to weare a Diadem.
Would you a preſident by which to ſteare
So faire a courſe? you may behold it here.
If you to Honours Apex would attaine,
Let the bright Starres that guide you be Charles waine.